
Ah,	This!
Talks	on	Zen	Stories
Talks	given	from	03/01/80	am	to	10/01/80	am
English	Discourse	series
8	Chapters
Year	published:	1982
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	The	Heart	of	Knowing	is	Now
3	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001030
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
ASCENDING	TO	THE	HIGH	SEAT,	DOGEN	ZENJI	SAID:	"ZEN	MASTER
HOGEN
STUDIED	WITH	KEISHIN	ZENJI.
ONCE	KEISHIN	ZENJI	ASKED	HIM,	JOZA,	WHERE	DO	YOU	GO?'
HOGEN	SAID.	'I	AM	MAKING	PILGRIMAGE	AIMLESSLY.'
KEISHIN	SAID,	'WHAT	IS	THE	MATTER	OF	YOUR	PILGRIMAGE?'
HOGEN	SAID,	'I	DON'T	KNOW.'
KEISHIN	SAID,	'NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE.'
HOGEN	SUDDENLY	ATTAINED	GREAT	ENLIGHTENMENT."
ZEN	IS	JUST	ZEN.	There	is	nothing	comparable	to	it.	It	is	unique	--	unique	in
the	sense	that	it	is	the	most	ordinary	and	yet	the	most	extraordinary	phenomenon
that	 has	 happened	 to	 human	 consciousness.	 It	 is	 the	most	 ordinary	 because	 it
does	not	believe	in	knowledge,	it	does	not	believe	in	mind.	It	is	not	a	philosophy,
not	 a	 religion	either.	 It	 is	 the	 acceptance	of	 the	ordinary	existence	with	 a	 total
heart,	 with	 one's	 total	 being,	 not	 desiring	 some	 other	 world,	 supra-mundane,
supra-mental.	 It	 has	 no	 interest	 in	 any	 esoteric	 nonsense,	 no	 interest	 in
metaphysics	at	all.	It	does	not	hanker	for	the	other	shore;	this	shore	is	more	than
enough.	 Its	 acceptance	 of	 this	 shore	 is	 so	 tremendous	 that	 through	 that	 very
acceptance	 it	 transforms	 this	 shore	 --	 and	 this	 very	 shore	 becomes	 the	 other
shore:	This	very	body	the	buddha;
This	very	earth	the	lotus	paradise.
Hence	it	is	ordinary.	It	does	not	want	you	to	create	a	certain	kind	of	spirituality,	a
certain	kind	of	holiness.	All	that	it	asks	is	that	you	live	your	life	with	immediacy,
spontaneity.
And	then	the	mundane	becomes	the	sacred.
The	great	miracle	of	Zen	is	in	the	transformation	of	the	mundane	into	the	sacred.
And	 it	 is	 tremendously	 extraordinary	 because	 THIS	 way	 life	 has	 never	 been
approached	before,	THIS	way	life	has	never	been	respected	before.
Zen	 goes	 beyond	 Buddha	 and	 beyond	 Lao	 Tzu.	 It	 is	 a	 culmination,	 a
transcendence,	both	of	the	Indian	genius	and	of	the	Chinese	genius.	The	Indian
genius	 reached	 its	highest	peak	 in	Gautam	the	Buddha	and	 the	Chinese	genius
reached	its	highest	peak	in	Lao	Tzu.
And	the	meeting...the	essence	of	Buddha's	teaching	and	the	essence	of	Lao	Tzu's
teaching	merged	 into	one	 stream	so	deeply	 that	 no	 separation	 is	 possible	now.
Even	 to	make	 a	distinction	between	what	 belongs	 to	Buddha	 and	what	 to	Lao
Tzu	is	impossible,	the	merger	has	been	so	total.	It	is	not	only	a	synthesis,	it	is	an
integration.	Out	of	this	meeting	Zen	was	born.	Zen	is	neither	Buddhist	nor	Taoist
and	yet	both.
To	call	Zen	"Zen	Buddhism"	is	not	right	because	it	is	far	more.	Buddha	is	not	so
earthly	as	Zen	is.	Lao	Tzu	is	tremendously	earthly,	but	Zen	is	not	only	earthly:
its	 vision	 transforms	 the	 earth	 into	 heaven.	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 earthly,	 Buddha	 is
unearthly,	Zen	is	both	--
and	in	being	both	it	has	become	the	most	extraordinary	phenomenon.
The	future	of	humanity	will	go	closer	and	closer	to	the	approach	of	Zen,	because
the	meeting	of	 the	East	and	West	 is	possible	only	 through	something	 like	Zen,
which	 is	 earthly	 and	 yet	 unearthly.	 The	West	 is	 very	 earthly,	 the	 East	 is	 very
unearthly.	Who	is	going	to	become	the	bridge?	Buddha	cannot	be	the	bridge;	he
is	 so	 essentially	Eastern,	 the	very	 flavor	of	 the	East,	 the	very	 fragrance	of	 the
East,	 uncompromising.	Lao	Tzu	 cannot	 be	 the	bridge;	 he	 is	 too	 earthly.	China
has	always	been	very	earthly.	China	is	more	part	of	the	Western	psyche	than	of
the	Eastern	psyche.
It	is	not	an	accident	that	China	is	the	first	country	in	the	East	to	turn	communist,
to	become	materialist,	to	believe	in	a	godless	philosophy,	to	believe	that	man	is
only	matter	and	nothing	else.	This	is	not	just	accidental.	China	has	been	earthly
for	 almost	 five	 thousand	 years;	 it	 is	 very	 Western.	 Hence	 Lao	 Tzu	 cannot
become	the	bridge;	he	is	more	like	Zorba	the	Greek.	Buddha	is	so	unearthly	you
cannot	even	catch	hold	of	him	--	how	can	he	become	the	bridge?
When	 I	 look	all	 around,	Zen	 seems	 to	be	 the	only	possibility,	 because	 in	Zen,
Buddha	and	Lao	Tzu	have	become	one.	The	meeting	has	already	happened.	The
seed	is	 there,	 the	seed	of	 that	great	bridge	which	can	make	East	and	West	one.
Zen	is	going	to	be	the	meeting-point.	It	has	a	great	future	--	a	great	past	and	a
great	future.
And	the	miracle	is	that	Zen	is	neither	interested	in	the	past	nor	in	the	future.	Its
total	interest	is	in	the	present.	Maybe	that's	why	the	miracle	is	possible,	because
the	past	and	the	future	are	bridged	by	the	present.
The	present	is	not	part	of	time.	Have	you	ever	thought	about	it?	How	long	is	the
present?
The	past	 has	 a	duration,	 the	 future	has	 a	duration.	What	 is	 the	duration	of	 the
present?
How	 long	 does	 it	 last?	 Between	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future	 can	 you	measure	 the
present?	 It	 is	 immeasurable;	 it	 is	 almost	 not.	 It	 is	 not	 time	 at	 all:	 it	 is	 the
penetration	of	eternity	into	time.
And	Zen	 lives	 in	 the	present.	The	whole	 teaching	 is:	how	to	be	 in	 the	present,
how	to	get	out	of	the	past	which	is	no	more	and	how	not	to	get	involved	in	the
future	which	is	not	yet,	and	just	to	be	rooted,	centered,	in	that	which	is.
The	whole	approach	of	Zen	is	of	immediacy,	but	because	of	that	it	can	bridge	the
past	 and	 the	 future.	 It	 can	 bridge	many	 things:	 it	 can	 bridge	 the	 past	 and	 the
future,	 it	can	bridge	 the	East	and	 the	West,	 it	can	bridge	body	and	soul.	 It	can
bridge	the	unbridgeable	worlds:	this	world	and	that,	the	mundane	and	the	sacred.
BEFORE	WE	ENTER	INTO	this	small	anecdote	it	will	be	Good	to	understand	a
few	things.	The	first:	the	Masters	do	not	tell	the	truth.	Even	if	they	want	to	they
cannot;	it	is	impossible.	Then	what	is	their	function?	What	do	they	go	on	doing?
They	cannot	tell	the	truth,	but	they	can	call	forth	the	truth	which	is	fast	asleep	in
you.	They	can	provoke	it,	they	can	challenge	it.	They	can	shake	you	up,	they	can
wake	you	up.	They	cannot	give	you	God,	truth,	NIRVANA,	because	in	the	first
place	you	already	have	it	all	with	you.
You	are	born	with	it.	It	is	innate,	it	is	intrinsic.	It	is	your	very	nature.	So	anybody
who	 pretends	 to	 give	 you	 the	 truth	 is	 simply	 exploiting	 your	 stupidity,	 your
gullibility.	He	is	cunning	--	cunning	and	utterly	ignorant	too.	He	knows	nothing;
not	even	a	glimpse	of	truth	has	happened	to	him.	He	is	a	pseudo	Master.
Truth	 cannot	 be	 given;	 it	 is	 already	 in	 you.	 It	 can	 be	 called	 forth,	 it	 can	 be
provoked.	A	context	can	be	created,	a	certain	space	can	be	created	 in	which	 it
rises	in	you	and	is	no	more	asleep,	becomes	awakened.
The	function	of	 the	Master	 is	 far	more	complex	 than	you	 think.	 It	would	have
been	far	easier,	simpler,	if	truth	could	be	conveyed.	It	cannot	be	conveyed,	hence
indirect	ways	and	means	have	to	be	devised.
The	New	Testament	has	 the	beautiful	story	of	Lazarus.	Christians	have	missed
the	whole	 point	 of	 it.	 Christ	 is	 so	 unfortunate	 --	 he	 has	 fallen	 into	 the	wrong
company.	Not	even	a	single	Christian	 theologian	has	been	able	 to	discover	 the
meaning	of	the	story	of	Lazarus,	his	death	and	resurrection.
Lazarus	 dies.	 He	 is	 the	 brother	 of	 Mary	 Magdalene	 and	 Martha	 and	 a	 great
devotee	of	Jesus.	Jesus	is	far	away;	by	the	time	he	gets	the	information	and	the
invitation,	"Come	immediately,"	two	days	have	already	passed,	and	by	the	time
he	 reaches	 Lazarus'	 place	 four	 days	 have	 passed.	 But	 Mary	 and	 Martha	 are
waiting	for	him	--	their	trust	is	such.
The	 whole	 village	 is	 laughing	 at	 them.	 They	 are	 being	 stupid	 in	 others'	 eyes
because	they	are	keeping	the	corpse	in	a	cave;	they	are	watching	day	in,	day	out,
guarding	the	corpse.
The	corpse	has	already	started	stinking;	it	is	deteriorating.
The	village	people	are	saying,	"You	are	fools!	Jesus	cannot	do	anything.	When
somebody	is	dead,	somebody	is	dead!"
Jesus	comes.	He	goes	to	the	cave	--	he	does	not	enter	into	the	cave	--	he	stands
outside	 and	 calls	 Lazarus	 forth.	 The	 people	 have	 gathered.	 They	 must	 be
laughing:	"This	man	seems	to	be	crazy!"
Somebody	says	to	him,	"What	are	you	doing?"	He	is	dead!	He	has	been	dead	for
four	days.	In	fact,	to	enter	into	the	cave	is	difficult	--	his	body	is	stinking.	It	is
impossible!
Whom	are	you	calling?"
But,	unperturbed,	Jesus	shouts	again	and	again,	"Lazarus,	come	out!"
And	the	crowd	is	in	for	a	great	surprise:	Lazarus	walks	out	of	the	cave	--	shaken,
shocked,	as	if	out	of	a	great	slumber,	as	if	he	had	fallen	into	a	coma.	He	himself
cannot	believe	what	has	happened,	why	he	is	in	the	cave.
This	 in	 fact	 is	 just	 a	way	of	 saying	what	 the	 function	of	 a	Master	 is.	Whether
Lazarus	was	 really	dead	or	not	 is	not	 the	point.	Whether	 Jesus	was	capable	of
raising	the	dead	or	not	is	not	the	point.	To	get	involved	in	those	stupid	questions
is	absurd.	Only	scholars	can	be	so	foolish.	No	man	of	understanding	will	think
that	this	is	something	historical.	It	is	far	more!	It	is	not	a	fact,	it	is	a	truth.	It	is
not	 something	 that	 happens	 in	 time,	 it	 is	 something	 more:	 something	 that
happens	in	eternity.
You	are	all	dead.	You	are	all	in	the	same	situation	as	Lazarus.	You	are	all	living
in	your	dark	caves.	You	are	all	stinking	and	deteriorating...because	death	is	not
something	 that	 comes	one	day	 suddenly	 --	 you	are	dying	every	day.	Since	 the
day	 of	 your	 birth	 you	 have	 been	 dying.	 It	 is	 a	 long	 process;	 it	 takes	 seventy,
eighty,	ninety	years	to	complete	it.
EACH	MOMENT	 something	 of	 you	 dies,	 something	 in	 you	 dies,	 but	 you	 are
absolutely	unaware	of	the	whole	situation.	You	go	on	as	if	you	are	alive;	you	go
on	living	as	if	you	know	what	life	is.
The	function	of	the	Master	is	to	call	forth:	"Lazarus,	come	out	of	the	cave!	Come
out	of	your	grave!	Come	out	of	your	death!"
The	Master	cannot	give	you	the	truth	but	he	can	call	forth	the	truth.	He	can	stir
something	 in	 you.	He	 can	 trigger	 a	 process	 in	 you	which	will	 ignite	 a	 fire,	 a
flame.	Truth	you	are	--
just	 so	 much	 dust	 has	 gathered	 around	 you.	 The	 function	 of	 the	 Master	 is
negative:	he	has	to	give	you	a	bath,	a	shower,	so	the	dust	disappears.
That's	 exactly	 the	meaning	 of	Christian	 baptism.	 That's	what	 John	 the	Baptist
was	doing	in	the	River	Jordan.	But	people	go	on	misunderstanding.	Today	also
baptism	happens	in	the	churches;	it	is	meaningless.
John	the	Baptist	was	preparing	people	for	an	inner	bath.	When	they	were	ready
he	would	take	them	symbolically	into	the	River	Jordan.	That	was	only	symbolic
--	 just	 as	 your	 orange	 clothes	 are	 symbolic,	 that	 bath	 in	 the	River	 Jordan	was
symbolic	--	symbolic	that	the	Master	can	give	you	a	bath.	He	can	take	the	dust,
the	 dust	 of	 centuries,	 away	 from	 you.	And	 suddenly	 all	 is	 clear,	 all	 is	 clarity.
That	clarity	is	enlightenment.
The	great	Master	Daie	says:	"All	the	teachings	of	the	sages,	of	the	saints,	of	the
masters,	 have	 expounded	 no	 more	 than	 this:	 they	 are	 commentaries	 on	 your
sudden	cry,	'Ah,	This!'"
When	 suddenly	 you	 are	 clear	 and	 a	 great	 joy	 and	 rejoicing	 arises	 in	 you,	 and
your	whole	being,	every	fiber	of	your	body,	mind	and	soul	dances,	and	you	say,
"Ah,	this!	Alleluia!"
a	great	 shout	of	 joy	arises	 in	your	being,	 that	 is	enlightenment.	Suddenly	stars
come	down	from	the	rafters.	You	become	part	of	the	eternal	dance	of	existence.
Auden	says:
Dance	till	the	stars	come	down	from	the	rafters!
Dance,	dance,	dance	till	you	drop!
Yes,	 it	happens	 --	 it	 is	not	 something	 that	you	have	 to	do.	 It	 is	 something	 that
even	if	you	want	not	to	do	you	will	find	it	impossible;	you	will	find	it	impossible
to	resist.	You	will	have	to	dance.
The	beauty	of	this,	the	beauty	of	now,	the	joy	that	existence	is	and	the	closeness
of	it....
Yes,	 stars	 come	 down	 from	 the	 rafters.	 They	 are	 so	 close	 you	 can	 just	 touch
them;	you	can	hold	them	in	your	hands.
Daie	is	right.	He	says:
All	the	teachings	the	sages	expounded	are	no	more	than	commentaries	on	your
sudden	cry,	"AH,	THIS!"
The	whole	heart	 saving	 "Aha!"	And	 the	 silence	 that	 follows	 it,	 and	 the	peace,
and	the	joy,	and	the	meeting,	and	the	merger,	and	the	orgasmic	experience,	 the
ecstasy...!
Masters	 don't	 teach	 the	 truth;	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	 teach	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 transmission
beyond	 scriptures,	 beyond	 words.	 It	 is	 a	 transmission.	 It	 is	 energy	 provoking
energy	in	you.	It	is	a	kind	of	synchronicity.
The	Master	has	disappeared	as	an	ego;	he	is	pure	joy.	And	the	disciple	sits	by	the
side	of	 the	Master	 slowly	 slowly	partaking	of	his	 joy,	of	his	being,	 eating	and
drinking	 out	 of	 that	 eternal,	 inexhaustible	 source:	 AIS	 DHAMMO
SANANTANO.	And	one	day...and	one	cannot	predict	when	that	day	will	come;
it	 is	unpredictable.	One	day	suddenly	 it	has	happened:	a	process	has	 started	 in
you	which	 reveals	 the	 truth	of	your	being	 to	you.	You	come	 face	 to	 face	with
yourself.	God	is	not	somewhere	else:	he	is	now,	here.
The	Masters	 illuminate	 and	confirm	 realization.	They	 illuminate	 in	 a	 thousand
and	 one	ways.	 They	 go	 on	 pointing	 towards	 the	 truth:	 fingers	 pointing	 to	 the
moon.	But	there	are	many	fools	who	start	clinging	to	the	fingers.	By	clinging	to
the	 fingers	you	will	not	 see	 the	moon,	 remember.	There	are	even	greater	 fools
who	 start	 biting	 the	 fingers.	 That	 is	 not	 going	 to	 give	 you	 any	 nourishment.
Forget	the	finger	and	look	at	where	it	is	pointing.
The	Masters	illuminate.	They	shower	great	light	--	they	are	light	--	they	shower
great	light	on	your	being.	They	are	like	a	searchlight:	they	focus	their	being	on
your	 being.	 You	 have	 lived	 in	 darkness	 for	 centuries,	 for	 millions	 of	 lives.
Suddenly	 a	 Master's	 searchlight	 starts	 revealing	 a	 few	 forgotten	 territories	 in
you.	 They	 are	 within	 you;	 the	 Master	 is	 not	 bringing	 them	 --	 he	 is	 simply
bringing	his	light,	he	is	focusing	himself	on	you.	And	the	Master	call	focus	only
when	the	disciple	is	open,	when	the	disciple	is	surrendered,	when	the	disciple	is
ready	 to	 learn,	 not	 to	 argue,	 when	 the	 disciple	 has	 come	 not	 to	 accumulate
knowledge	 but	 to	 know	 truth,	 when	 the	 disciple	 is	 not	 only	 curious	 but	 is	 a
seeker	 and	 is	 ready	 to	 risk	 all.	Even	 if	 life	 has	 to	 be	 risked	 and	 sacrificed	 the
disciple	 is	 ready.	 In	 fact,	 when	 you	 risk	 your	 sleepy	 life,	 you	 sacrifice	 your
sleepy	 life,	 you	 attain	 to	 a	 totally	 different	 quality	 of	 life:	 the	 life	 of	 light,	 of
love,	the	life	which	is	beyond	death,	beyond	time,	beyond	change.
They	illuminate	and	confirm	realization.	First	the	Master	illuminates	the	way,	the
truth	that	is	within	you.	And	secondly:	when	you	realize	it,	when	you	recognize
it....	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 believe	 that	 you	 have	 attained	 it.	 The	most
unbelievable	thing	is	when	realization	of	truth	happens	to	you,	because	you	have
been	told	that	it	is	very	difficult,	almost	impossible,	and	that	it	takes	millions	of
lives	 to	 arrive	 at	 it.	And	you	have	been	 told	 it	 is	 somewhere	 else	 --	maybe	 in
heaven	--	and	when	you	recognize	it	within	yourself,	how	can	you	believe	it?
The	Master	confirms	 it.	He	says,	"Yes,	 this	 is	 it!"	His	confirmation	 is	as	much
needed	as	his	 illumination.	He	begins	by	 illuminating	and	ends	by	confirming.
The	Masters	are	evidence	of	truth,	not	its	proof.
Meditate	over	 the	subtle	difference	between	evidence	and	proof.	The	Master	 is
an	evidence;	he	is	a	witness.	He	has	seen,	he	has	known,	he	has	become.	You	can
feel	it;	the	evidence	can	be	felt.	You	can	come	closer	and	closer;	you	can	allow
the	fragrance	of	the	Master	to	penetrate	to	the	innermost	core	of	your	being.	The
Master	 is	 only	 evidence;	 he	 is	 not	 proof.	 If	 you	 want	 any	 proof...there	 is	 no
proof.
God	 can	 neither	 be	 proved	 nor	 disproved;	 it	 is	 not	 an	 argument.	God	 is	 not	 a
hypothesis,	it	is	not	a	theory:	it	is	experience.	The	Master	is	living	evidence.	But
to	see	it	you	will	need	a	different	approach	than	you	are	accustomed	to.
You	 know	 how	 to	 approach	 a	 teacher,	 how	 to	 approach	 a	 professor,	 how	 to
approach	 a	 priest.	 They	 don't	 require	 much	 because	 they	 simply	 impart
information	which	can	be	done	even	by	a	tape	recorder	or	by	a	computer	or	by	a
gramophone	record	or	by	a	book.
I	WAS	A	STUDENT	 IN	A	UNIVERSITY.	 I	 never	 attended	 the	 classes	 of	my
professors.
Naturally,	 they	were	offended.	And	one	day	 the	head	of	 the	department	 called
me	and	he	 said,	 "Why	have	you	 joined	 the	university?	We	never	 see	you,	you
never	 attend	 any	 classes.	 And	 remember:	 when	 the	 examination	 time	 comes,
don't	ask	for	an	attendance	record	--	because	seventy-five	percent	attendance	is	a
must	to	enter	into	the	examination."
I	took	hold	of	the	hand	of	that	old	man	and	I	said,	"You	come	with	me	--	I	will
show	you	where	I	am	and	why	I	have	entered	the	university."
He	was	a	 little	 afraid	of	where	 I	was	 taking	him	and	why.	And	 it	was	 a	well-
known	fact	that	I	was	a	little	eccentric!	He	said,	"But	where	are	you	taking	me?"
I	 said,	 "I	 will	 show	 you	 that	 you	 have	 to	 give	 me	 one	 hundred	 percent
attendance.	You	come	with	me."
I	 took	him	 to	 the	 library	and	 I	 told	 the	 librarian,	 "You	 tell	 this	old	man	 --	has
there	ever	been	a	single	day	when	I	have	not	been	in	the	library?"
The	librarian	said,	"Even	on	holidays	he	has	been	here.	If	the	library	is	not	open
then	this	student	goes	on	sitting	in	the	garden	of	the	library,	but	he	comes.	And
every	 day	 we	 have	 to	 tell	 him,	 'Now	 please,	 you	 leave,	 because	 it	 is	 closing
time.'"
I	 told	 the	 professor,	 "I	 find	 the	 books	 far	 more	 clear	 than	 your	 so-called
professors.	 And,	 moreover,	 they	 simply	 repeat	 what	 is	 already	 written	 in	 the
books,	so	what	is	the	point	of	going	on	listening	to	them	second-hand?	I	can	look
in	the	books	directly!"
I	told	him,	"If	you	can	prove	that	your	teachers	are	teaching	something	which	is
not	in	the	books,	then	I	am	ready	to	come	to	the	classes.	If	you	cannot	prove	it,
then	keep	it	in	mind	that	you	have	to	give	me	one	hundred	percent	attendance	--
otherwise	I	will	create	trouble!"
And	I	never	went	 to	ask	him;	he	gave	me	one	hundred	percent	attendance.	He
followed	 the	 point;	 it	 was	 so	 simple.	 He	 said,	 "You	 are	 right.	 Why	 listen	 to
second-hand	 knowledge?	 You	 can	 go	 directly	 to	 the	 books.	 I	 know	 those
professors	--	I	myself	am	just	a	gramophone	record.	The	truth	is,"	he	said	to	me,
"that	for	thirty	years	I	have	not	read	anything.	I	just	go	on	using	my	old	notes."
For	thirty	years	he	has	been	teaching	the	same	thing	again	and	again	and	again;
and	in	thirty	years'	time,	millions	of	books	have	been	published.
You	know	how	to	approach	a	 teacher,	you	know	how	to	approach	a	book,	you
know	how	to	approach	dead	information,	but	you	don't	know	how	to	approach	a
Master.	It	is	a	totally	different	way	of	communing.	It	is	not	communication,	it	is
communion	--	because	 the	Master	 is	not	a	proof	but	an	evidence.	He	 is	not	an
argument	for	God,	he	is	a	witness	for	God.	He	does	not	possess	great	knowledge
about	God,	he	knows.	He	is	not	knowledgeable,	he	simply	knows.
Remember,	to	know	ABOUT	is	worthless.	The	word	"about"	means	around.	To
know	 about	 something	means	 to	 go	 on	moving	 in	 circles,	 around	 and	 around.
The	word	"about"
is	beautiful.	Whenever	you	read	"about,"	read	"around."	When	somebody	says,
"I	know	ABOUT	God,"	read:	he	knows	AROUND	God.	He	goes	in	a	circle.	And
real	knowing	is	never	about,	never	around;	it	is	direct,	it	is	a	straight	line.
Jesus	says:	"Straight	is	the	path...."	It	does	not	go	in	circles;	it	is	a	jump	from	the
periphery	 to	 the	 center.	The	Master	 is	 an	 evidence	of	 that	 jump,	 that	 quantum
leap,	that	transformation.
You	have	to	approach	the	Master	with	great	love,	with	great	trust,	with	an	open
heart.
You	are	not	aware	who	you	are.	He	is	aware	who	he	is,	he	is	aware	who	you	are.
The	caterpillar	might	be	said	to	be	unaware	that	it	may	become	a	butterfly.	You
are	 caterpillars	 --	 BODHISATTVAS.	 All	 caterpillars	 are	 Bodhisattvas	 and	 all
BODHISATTVAS	 are	 caterpillars.	 A	 BODHISATTVA	 means	 one	 who	 can
become	a	butterfly,	who	can	become	a	Buddha,	who	is	a	Buddha	in	the	seed,	in
essence.	But	how	can	 the	caterpillar	be	aware	 that	he	can	become	a	butterfly?
The	only	way	 is	 to	 commune	with	butterflies,	 to	 see	butterflies	moving	 in	 the
wind,	in	the	sun.	Seeing	them	soaring	high,	seeing	them	moving	from	one	flower
to	another	flower,	seeing	their	beauty,	their	color,	maybe	a	deep	desire,	a	longing
arises	in	the	caterpillar:	"Can	I	also	be	the	same?"
In	 that	 very	moment	 the	 caterpillar	 has	 started	 awakening,	 a	 process	 has	 been
triggered.
The	Master/disciple	 relationship	 is	 the	 relationship	between	a	 caterpillar	 and	a
butterfly,	a	friendship	between	a	caterpillar	and	a	butterfly.	 the	butterfly	cannot
prove	that	the	caterpillar	can	become	a	butterfly;	there	is	no	logical	way.	But	the
butterfly	can	provoke	a	longing	in	the	caterpillar	--	that	is	possible.
The	Master	helps	you	to	reach	your	own	experience.	He	does	not	give	you	the
Vedas,	the	Koran,	the	Bible;	he	throws	you	to	yourself.	He	makes	you	aware	of
your	inner	sources.
He	makes	you	aware	of	your	own	juice,	of	your	own	godliness.	He	liberates	you
from	 the	 scriptures.	 He	 liberates	 you	 from	 the	 interpretations	 of	 others.	 He
liberates	 you	 from	 all	 belief.	 He	 liberates	 you	 from	 all	 speculation,	 from	 all
guesswork.	 He	 liberates	 you	 from	 philosophy	 and	 from	 religion	 and	 from
theology.	He	liberates	you,	in	short,	from	the	world	of	words	--	because	the	word
is	the	problem.
You	become	so	much	obsessed	with	the	word	"love"	that	you	forget	that	love	is
an	experience,	not	a	word.	You	become	so	obsessed	with	 the	word	"God"	 that
you	forget	 that	God	is	an	experience,	not	a	word.	The	word	"God"	is	not	God,
and	the	word	"fire"	is	not	fire,	and	the	word	"love"	is	not	love	either.
The	 Master	 liberates	 you	 from	 words,	 he	 liberates	 you	 from	 all	 kinds	 of
imaginative	 philosophies.	 He	 brings	 you	 to	 a	 state	 of	 wordless	 silence.	 The
failure	 of	 religion	 and	 philosophy	 is	 that	 they	 all	 become	 substitutes	 for	 real
experience.	Beware	of	it!
Marlene	and	Florence,	two	Denver	secretaries,	were	chatting	over	lunch.
"I	was	raped	last	night	by	a	scholar,"	whispered	Marlene.
"Really?"	said	Florence.	"How	did	you	know	he	was	a	scholar?"
"I	had	to	help	him."
Scholars	 are	 crippled	 people,	 paralyzed,	 hung	 up	 in	 their	 heads.	 They	 have
forgotten	 everything	 except	 words.	 They	 are	 great	 system-makers.	 They
accumulate	beautiful	theories;	they	arrange	them	in	beautiful	patterns,	but	that's
all	 they	 do.	 They	 know	 nothing	 --	 although	 they	 deceive	 others	 and	 deceive
themselves,	too,	that	they	know.
A	man	went	into	a	restaurant	to	have	some	lunch	and	when	the	waiter	came	he
said,	"I	will	have	a	plate	of	kiddlies,	please."
"What?"	said	the	waiter.
"Kiddlies,"	said	the	man.
"What?"	said	the	waiter	again.
So	the	man	picked	up	the	menu	and	pointed	at	what	he	wanted.	"Kiddlies,"	he
repeated	firmly.
"Ah,"	said	the	waiter.	"I	see.	Kidneys.	Why	didn't	you	say	so?"
"But,"	said	the	man,	"I	said	kiddlies,	diddle	I?"
It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 pull	 them	 out.	 They	 live	 in	 their	 own	words.	 They	 have
forgotten	 that	 reality	 has	 anything	 else	 in	 it	 but	words.	 They	 are	 utterly	 deaf,
utterly	blind.	They	 can't	 see,	 they	 can't	 hear,	 they	 can't	 feel.	Words	 are	words.
You	can't	see	them,	you	can't	feel	them,	but	they	can	give	you	great	ego.
A	cannibal	 rushed	 into	his	village	 to	 spread	 the	word	 that	 a	hunting	party	had
captured	a	Christian	theologian.
"Good,"	said	one	of	the	cannibals	enthusiastically,	"I	have	always	wanted	to	try	a
baloney	sandwich."
Beware	 of	 getting	 lost	 in	 philosophy	 and	 religion	 if	 you	 really	want	 to	 know
what	truth	is.
Beware	of	being	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	because	they	are	all	ways	of
being	deaf,	blind,	insensitive.
Three	deaf	British	gentlemen	were	traveling	on	a	train	bound	for	London.
The	first	said,	"Pardon	me,	conductor,	what	station	is	this?"
"Wembley,	sir,"	answered	the	conductor.
"Good	Lord!"	exclaimed	the	second	Englishman.	"I	am	sure	it	is	Thursday."
"So	am	I,"	agreed	the	third.	"Let	us	all	go	into	the	bar	car	and	have	a	drink."
That's	how	it	goes	on	between	professors,	philosophers,	theologians.	They	can't
hear	what	is	being	said.	They	have	their	own	ideas	and	they	are	so	full	of	them,
so	many	thick	layers	of	words,	that	reality	cannot	reach	them.
ZEN	SAYS:	IF	YOU	CAN	DROP	PHILOSOPHIZING,	there	is	a	hope	for	you.
The	 moment	 you	 drop	 philosophizing	 you	 become	 innocent	 like	 a	 child.	 But
remember:	--	the	Zen	emphasis	on	not	knowing	does	not	mean	that	it	emphasizes
ignorance.	Not	knowing	 is	not	 ignorance;	not	knowing	 is	a	state	of	 innocence.
There	is	neither	knowledge	nor	ignorance;	both	have	been	transcended.
An	 ignorant	man	 is	 one	who	 ignores;	 that's	 how	 the	word	 comes.	 The	 root	 is
"ignoring."
The	 ignorant	 person	 is	 one	who	 goes	 on	 ignoring	 something	 essential.	 In	 that
way	 the	knowledgeable	person	 is	 the	most	 ignorant	person,	because	he	knows
about	 heaven	 and	 hell	 and	 he	 knows	 nothing	 about	 himself.	 He	 knows	 about
God,	but	he	knows	nothing	about	who	he	is,	what	 this	consciousness	 inside	 is.
He	is	ignorant	because	he	is	ignoring	the	MOST	fundamental	thing	in	life:	he	is
ignoring	himself.	He	 is	keeping	himself	occupied	with	 the	non-essential.	He	 is
ignorant	--	full	of	knowledge,	yet	utterly	ignorant.
Not	 knowing	 simply	 means	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.	Mind	 can	 be	 knowledgeable,
mind	can	be	ignorant.	If	you	have	little	information	you	will	be	thought	ignorant;
if	 you	 have	 more	 information	 you	 will	 be	 thought	 knowledgeable.	 Between
ignorance	 and	 knowledge	 the	 difference	 is	 that	 of	 quantity,	 of	 degrees.	 The
ignorant	person	is	less	knowledgeable,	that's	all;	the	very	knowledgeable	person
may	 appear	 to	 the	 world	 as	 less	 ignorant,	 but	 they	 are	 not	 different,	 their
qualities	are	not	different.
Zen	 emphasizes	 the	 state	 of	 not	 knowing.	 Not	 knowing	means	 one	 is	 neither
ignorant	 nor	 knowledgeable.	 One	 is	 not	 knowledgeable	 because	 one	 is	 not
interested	 in	 mere	 information,	 and	 one	 is	 not	 ignorant	 because	 one	 is	 not
ignoring	--	one	is	not	ignoring	the	most	essential	quest.	One	is	not	ignoring	one's
own	being,	one's	own	consciousness.
Not	knowing	has	a	beauty	of	its	own,	a	purity.	It	is	just	like	a	pure	mirror,	a	lake
utterly	 silent,	 reflecting	 the	 stars	 and	 the	 trees	 on	 the	 bank.	 The	 state	 of	 not
knowing	is	the	highest	point	in	man's	evolution.
Knowledge	 is	 introduced	 to	 the	mind	 after	 physical	 birth.	Knowing	 is	 always
present,	like	the	heart	knowing	how	to	beat	or	a	seed	knowing	how	to	sprout,	or
a	flower	knowing	how	to	grow,	or	a	fish	knowing	how	to	swim.	And	it	is	quite
different	 from	 knowing	 about	 things.	 So	 please	 make	 a	 distinction	 between
knowledge	and	knowing.
The	 state	 of	 not	 knowing	 is	 really	 the	 state	 of	 knowing	 because	 when	 all
knowledge	and	all	ignorance	have	disappeared	you	can	reflect	existence	as	it	is.
Knowledge	is	acquired	after	your	birth,	but	knowing	comes	with	you.	And	the
more	 knowledge	 you	 acquire,	 the	more	 and	more	 knowing	 starts	 disappearing
because	it	becomes	covered	with	knowledge.
Knowledge	is	exactly	like	dust	and	knowing	is	like	a	mirror.
The	 heart	 of	 knowing	 is	 now.	 Knowledge	 is	 always	 of	 the	 past.	 Knowledge
means	 memory.	 Knowledge	 means	 you	 have	 known	 something,	 you	 have
experienced	something,	and	you	have	accumulated	your	experience.	Knowing	is
of	the	present.	And	how	can	you	be	in	the	present	if	you	are	clinging	too	much	to
knowledge?	That	 is	 impossible;	 you	will	 have	 to	 drop	 clinging	 to	 knowledge.
And	knowledge	is	acquired:	knowing	is	your	nature.	Knowing	is	always	now	--
the	heart	of	knowing	is	now.	And	the	heart	of	now...?
The	word	 "now"	 is	 beautiful.	 The	 heart	 of	 it	 is	 the	 letter	 "O"	which	 is	 also	 a
symbol	 for	 zero.	The	 heart	 of	 now	 is	 zero,	 nothingness.	When	 the	mind	 is	 no
more,	when	you	are	just	a	nothingness,	just	a	zero	--	Buddha	calls	it	exactly	that,
SHUNYA,	the	zero	--	then	everything	that	surrounds	you,	ALL	that	is	within	and
without,	 is	 known,	 but	 known	 not	 as	 knowledge,	 known	 in	 a	 totally	 different
way.	The	same	way	that	the	flower	knows	how	to	open,	and	the	fish	knows	how
to	swim,	and	the	child	knows	in	the	mother's	womb	how	to	grow,	and	you	know
how	to	breathe	--	even	while	asleep,	even	in	a	coma,	you	go	on	breathing	--	and
the	 heart	 knows	 how	 to	 beat.	 This	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 knowing,	 so
intrinsic,	so	internal.	It	is	not	acquired,	it	is	natural.
Knowledge	is	got	in	exchange	for	knowing.	And	when	you	have	got	knowledge,
what	 happens	 to	 knowing?	You	 forget	 knowing.	You	have	 got	 knowledge	 and
you	have	forgotten	knowing.	And	knowing	is	the	door	to	the	divine;	knowledge
is	a	barrier	to	the	divine.	Knowledge	has	utility	in	the	world.	Yes,	 it	will	make
you	more	efficient,	skillful,	a	good	mechanic,	this	and	that;	you	may	be	able	to
earn	in	a	better	way.	All	that	is	there	and	I	am	not	denying	it.	And	you	can	use
knowledge	in	that	way;	but	don't	let	knowledge	become	a	barrier	to	the	divine.
Whenever	knowledge	is	not	needed,	put	it	aside	and	drown	yourself	into	a	state
of	not	knowing	--	which	is	also	a	state	of	knowing,	real	knowing.	Knowledge	is
got	 in	 exchange	 for	 knowing	 and	 knowing	 is	 forgotten.	 It	 has	 only	 to	 be
remembered	--	you	have	forgotten	it.
The	function	of	the	Master	is	to	help	you	RE-member	it.	The	mind	has	to	be	RE-
minded,	 for	 knowing	 is	 nothing	 but	 RE-cognition,	 RE-collection,	 RE-
membrance.	When	you	come	across	some	truth,	when	you	come	across	a	Master,
and	you	see	the	truth	of	his	being,	something	within	you	immediately	recognizes
it.	Not	even	a	single	moment	is	lost.
You	don't	 think	about	it,	whether	it	 is	true	or	not	--	thinking	needs	time.	When
you	listen	to	the	truth,	when	you	feel	the	presence	of	truth,	when	you	come	into
close	communion	with	the	truth,	something	within	you	immediately	recognizes
it,	with	no	argumentation.
Not	 that	 you	 accept,	 not	 that	 you	 believe:	 you	 recognize.	And	 it	 could	 not	 be
recognized	 if	 it	 were	 not	 already	 known	 somehow,	 somewhere,	 deep	 down
within	you.
This	is	the	fundamental	approach	of	Zen.
"Has	your	baby	brother	learned	to	talk	yet?"
"Oh,	 sure,"	 replied	 little	Mike.	 "Now	Mummy	and	Daddy	are	 teaching	him	 to
keep	quiet."
The	 society	 teaches	 you	 knowledge.	 So	 many	 schools,	 colleges,
universities...they	 are	 all	 devoted	 to	 creating	 knowledge,	 more	 knowledge,
implanting	 knowledge	 in	 people.	 And	 the	 function	 of	 the	 Master	 is	 just	 the
opposite:	what	your	society	has	done	to	you	the	Master	has	to	undo.	His	function
is	basically	anti-social,	and	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	The	Master	is	bound	to
be	anti-social.
Jesus,	Pythagoras,	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	they	are	all	anti-social.	Not	that	they	want
to	be	anti-social,	but	the	moment	they	recognize	the	beauty	of	not	knowing,	the
vastness	of	not	knowing,	the	innocence	of	not	knowing,	the	moment	the	taste	of
not	knowing	happens	to	them,	they	want	to	impart	it	to	others,	they	want	to	share
it	with	others.	And	that	very	process	is	anti-social.
People	ask	me	why	the	society	is	against	me.	The	society	is	NOT	against	me	--	I
am	anti-social.	But	I	can't	help	it	--	I	have	to	do	my	thing.	I	have	to	share	what
has	happened	to	me,	and	in	that	very	sharing	I	go	against	the	society.	Its	whole
structure	 is	 rooted	 in	 knowledge,	 and	 the	Master's	 function	 is	 to	 destroy	 both
knowledge	and	ignorance	and	to	bring	you	back	your	childhood.
Jesus	 says:	 Unless	 you	 are	 like	 small	 children	 you	 will	 not	 enter	 into	 the
kingdom	of	God.
The	 society,	 in	 fact,	makes	 you	 uprooted	 from	 your	 nature.	 It	 pushes	 you	 off
your	center.
It	makes	you	neurotic.
Conducting	 a	university	 course,	 a	 famous	psychiatrist	was	 asked	by	 a	 student,
"Sir,	 you	 have	 told	 us	 about	 the	 abnormal	 person	 and	 his	 behavior,	 but	 what
about	the	normal	person?"
"When	we	find	him,"	replied	the	psychiatrist,	"we	cure	him."
The	 society	 goes	 on	 curing	 normal	 people.	 Every	 child	 is	 born	 normal,
remember;	then	the	society	cures	him.	Then	he	becomes	abnormal.	He	becomes
Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian,	Communist,	Catholic...there	are	so	many	kinds
of	 neurosis	 in	 the	world.	You	 can	 choose,	 you	 can	 shop	 for	whatever	 kind	 of
neurosis	you	want.	Society	creates	all	kinds;	all	sizes	and	shapes	of	neurosis	are
available,	to	everybody's	liking.
Zen	 cures	 you	 of	 your	 abnormality.	 It	makes	 you	 again	 normal,	 it	makes	 you
again	ordinary.	It	does	not	make	you	a	saint,	remember.	It	does	not	make	you	a
holy	 person,	 remember.	 It	 simply	makes	 you	 an	 ordinary	 person	 --	 takes	 you
back	to	your	nature,	back	to	your	source.
This	beautiful	anecdote:
ASCENDING	TO	THE	HIGH	SEAT,	DOGEN	ZENJI	SAID:	"ZEN	MASTER
HOGEN
STUDIED	WITH	KEISHIN	ZENJI.
ONCE	KEISHIN	ZENJI	ASKED	HIM,	JOZA,	WHERE	DO	YOU	GO?'
HOGEN	SAID,	'I	AM	MAKING	PILGRIMAGE	AIMLESSLY.'
KEISHIN	SAID,	'WHAT	IS	THE	MATTER	OF	YOUR	PILGRIMAGE?'
HOGEN	SAID,	'I	DON'T	KNOW.'
KEISHIN	SAID,	'NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE.'
HOGEN	SUDDENLY	ATTAINED	GREAT	ENLIGHTENMENT."
NOW	MEDITATE	OVER	EACH	WORD	of	this	small	anecdote;	it	contains	all
the	 great	 scriptures	 of	 the	world.	 It	 contains	more	 than	 all	 the	 great	 scriptures
contain	--	because	it	also	contains	not	knowing.
ASCENDING	TO	THE	HIGH	SEAT...
This	is	just	a	symbolic,	metaphorical	way	of	saying	something	very	significant.
Zen	says	that	man	is	a	ladder.	The	lowest	rung	is	the	mind	and	the	highest	rung
of	the	ladder	is	the	no-mind.	Zen	says	only	people	who	have	attained	to	no-mind
are	 worthy	 enough	 to	 ascend	 to	 the	 high	 seat	 and	 speak	 to	 people	 --	 not
everybody.	It	is	not	a	question	of	a	priest	or	a	preacher.
Christians	 train	 preachers;	 they	 have	 theological	 colleges	where	 preachers	 are
trained.
What	kind	of	foolishness	is	this?	Yes,	you	can	teach	them	the	art	of	eloquence;
you	 can	 teach	 them	 how	 to	 begin	 a	 speech,	 how	 to	 end	 a	 speech.	 And	 that's
exactly	 what	 is	 being	 taught	 in	 Christian	 theological	 colleges.	 Even	 what
gestures	 to	make,	when	 to	make	 a	 pause,	 when	 to	 speak	 slowly	 and	when	 to
become	 loud	 --	 everything	 is	 cultivated.	 And	 these	 stupid	 people	 go	 on
preaching	about	Jesus,	and	they	have	not	asked	a	single	question!
Once	I	visited	a	theological	college.	The	principal	was	my	friend;	he	invited	me.
I	 asked	 him,	 "Can	 you	 tell	 me	 in	 what	 theological	 college	 Jesus	 learned?	 --
because	the	Sermon	on	the	Mount	is	so	beautiful,	he	must	have	learned	in	some
theological	college.	In	what	theological	college	did	Buddha	learn?"
Mohammed	was	absolutely	uneducated,	but	the	way	he	speaks,	the	way	he	sings
in	the	Koran,	is	superb.	It	is	coming	from	somewhere	else.	It	is	not	education,	it
is	not	knowledge.	It	is	coming	from	a	state	of	no-mind.
Little	Johnny	was	the	son	of	the	local	minister.	One	day	his	teacher	was	asking
the	class	what	they	wanted	to	be	when	they	grew	up.
When	it	was	his	turn	to	answer	he	replied,	"I	want	to	be	a	minister	just	like	my
father."
The	teacher	was	impressed	with	his	determination	and	so	she	asked	him	why	he
wanted	to	be	a	preacher.
"Well,"	he	said	thoughtfully,	"since	I	have	to	go	to	church	on	Sunday	anyway,	I
figure	it	would	be	more	interesting	to	be	the	guy	who	stands	up	and	yells	 than
the	one	who	has	to	sit	down	and	listen."
You	can	create	preachers,	but	you	cannot	create	Masters.
In	India,	 the	seat	 from	where	a	Master	speaks	 is	called	VYASPEETHA.	Vyasa
was	one	of	the	greatest	Masters	India	has	ever	produced,	one	of	the	ancientmost
Buddhas.	He	was	so	influential,	his	impact	was	so	tremendous,	that	thousands	of
books	exist	in	his	name	which	were	not	written	by	him.	But	his	name	became	so
important	that	anybody	who	wanted	to	sell	his	book	would	put	Vyasa's	name	on
it	instead	of	putting	his	own	name.
His	name	was	guarantee	enough	 that	 the	book	was	valuable.	Now	scholars	go
crazy	deciding	which	is	the	real	book	written	by	Vyasa.
The	seat	from	where	a	Buddha	speaks	is	called	VYASPEETHA	--	the	seat	of	the
Buddha.
Nobody	else	is	allowed	to	ascend	to	the	seat	unless	he	has	attained	to	no-mind.
ASCENDING	TO	THE	HIGH	SEAT	is	a	metaphor:	it	says	the	man	has	attained
to	 the	 state	of	no-mind,	he	has	attained	 the	 state	of	not-knowing	which	 is	 true
knowing.
...DOGEN	ZENJI	SAID:	"ZEN	MASTER	HOGEN	STUDIED	WITH	KEISHIN
ZENJI.
ONCE	KEISHIN	ZENJI	ASKED	HIM,	JOZA,	WHERE	DO	YOU	GO?'"
This	is	a	Zen	way	of	saying,	"What	is	your	goal	in	life?	Where	are	you	going?"
It	 also	 implies	 another	 question:	 "From	 where	 are	 you	 coming?	 What	 is	 the
source	of	your	life?"
It	 also	 implies,	 "Who	 are	 you?"	 --	 because	 if	 you	 can	 answer	 where	 you	 are
coming	from	and	where	you	are	going	to,	that	means	you	must	know	who	you
are.
The	 three	most	 important	 questions	 are:	 "Who	 am	 I?	From	where	 do	 I	 come?
And	to	where	am	I	going?"
...KEISHIN	ZENJI	ASKED	"JOZA,	WHERE	DO	YOU	GO?"
HOGEN	SAID,	"I	AM	MAKING	PILGRIMAGE	AIMLESSLY."
See	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 answer.	 This	 is	 how	 tremendously	 beautiful	 things
transpire	between	a	Master	and	a	disciple.	He	said:
"I	AM	MAKING	PILGRIMAGE	AIMLESSLY."
If	you	are	going	to	Kaaba,	then	it	is	not	a	pilgrimage	because	there	is	an	aim	in
it;	 if	 you	 are	 going	 to	 Jerusalem	 or	 to	Kashi	 it	 is	 not	 a	 pilgrimage.	Wherever
there	 is	a	goal	 there	 is	ambition,	and	wherever	 there	 is	ambition	 there	 is	mind,
desire.	And	with	desire	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	pilgrimage.
A	pilgrimage	can	only	be	aimless.	See	the	beauty	of	it!	Only	a	Zen	Master	can
approve	 it	 and	 only	 a	 Zen	 disciple	 can	 say	 something	 so	 tremendously
revolutionary.
"I	AM	MAKING	PILGRIMAGE	AIMLESSLY."
The	Master	 asks,	 "Where	are	you	going?"	And	 the	disciple	 says,	 "Nowhere	 in
particular."
Aimlessly,	 just	 like	 a	 dry	 leaf	 in	 the	wind,	wherever	 the	wind	 takes	 it:	 to	 the
north,	 then	 the	 north	 is	 beautiful;	 to	 the	 south,	 then	 the	 south	 is	 beautiful	 --
because	all	is	divine.
Wherever	you	go	you	encounter	him.	There	is	no	need	to	have	any	aim.
The	moment	you	have	any	aim	you	become	tense;	you	become	concentrated	on
the	aim.
The	moment	 you	 have	 any	 aim	 you	 are	 separate	 from	 the	whole.	You	 have	 a
private	 goal,	 and	 to	 have	 a	 private	 goal	 is	 the	 root	 of	 all	 ego.	 Not	 to	 have	 a
private	goal	is	to	be	one	with	the	whole,	and	to	be	one	with	the	whole	is	possible
only	if	you	are	aimlessly	wandering.
A	Zen	person	is	a	wanderer,	aimless,	with	no	goal,	with	no	future.	Moment-to-
moment	 he	 lives	 without	 any	 mind;	 just	 like	 the	 dry	 leaf	 he	 makes	 himself
available	to	the	winds.	He	says	to	the	winds,	"Take	me	wherever	you	want."	If
he	rises	on	the	winds	high	in	the	sky	he	does	not	feel	superior	to	others	who	are
lying	down	on	the	ground.	If	he	falls	 to	the	ground	he	does	not	feel	 inferior	to
others	who	are	rising	on	the	wind	high	in	the	sky.	He	cannot	fail.	He	cannot	ever
be	frustrated.	When	there	 is	no	goal,	how	can	you	fail?	And	when	you	are	not
going	anywhere	in	particular,	how	can	you	be	in	frustration?
Expectation	brings	frustration.	Private	ambitions	bring	failures.
The	Zen	person	is	always	victorious,	even	in	his	failure.
KEISHIN	SAID,	"WHAT	IS	THE	MATTER	OF	YOUR	PILGRIMAGE?"
He	asks	again	to	make	certain,	because	he	may	be	simply	repeating	He	may	have
read	 in	 some	 old	 Zen	 scriptures	 that	 "One	 should	 be	 aimless.	 When	 one	 is
aimless,	life	is	a	pilgrimage."	Hence	the	Master	asks	again:
..."WHAT	IS	THE	MATTER	OF	YOUR	PILGRIMAGE?"
HOGEN	SAID,	"I	DON'T	KNOW."
Now,	if	Hogen	was	only	repeating	some	knowledge	gathered	from	scriptures	or
others,	he	would	have	again	answered	 the	same	 thing,	maybe	paraphrased	 in	a
different	way.	He	would	have	been	like	a	parrot.	The	Master	is	asking	the	same
question,	hut	 the	answer	has	changed,	 totally	changed.	He	simply	says:	 I	don't
know.
How	can	you	know	if	you	are	aimless?	How	can	you	know	when	you	don't	have
any	goal?	How	can	you	be	when	there	is	no	goal?	The	ego	can	exist	only	with
goals,	ambitions,	desires.
HOGEN	SAID,	"I	DON'T	KNOW."
His	answer,	his	 response,	 is	not	parrotlike.	He	has	not	 repeated	 the	same	 thing
again.	The	question	was	the	same,	remember,	but	the	answer	has	changed.	That's
the	difference	between	a	knowledgeable	person	and	a	man	of	knowing,	the	wise
man,	who	functions	out	of	a	state	of	not-knowing.
"I	DON'T	KNOW."
Keishin	must	have	been	tremendously	happy.	He	said:
"NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE."
Knowledge	creates	a	distance	between	you	and	reality.	The	more	you	know,	the
greater	 is	 the	 distance	 --	 so	many	books	 between	you	 and	 reality.	 If	 you	have
crammed	 the	whole	 of	 the	ENCYCLOPEDIA	BRITANNICA,	 then	 there	 is	 so
much	distance	between	you	and	reality.	Unless	reality	tries	to	find	you	through
the	 jungle	 of	 the	 ENCYCLOPEDIA	 BRITANNICA	 or	 you	 try	 to	 find	 reality
through	the	 jungle	of	 the	ENCYCLOPEDIA	BRITANNICA,	 there	 is	not	going
to	be	any	meeting.	The	more	you	know,	the	greater	is	the	distance;	the	less	you
know,	the	thinner	is	the	distance.	If	you	don't	know	at	all	there	is	no	distance	at
all.	Then	you	are	face	to	face	with	reality;	not	even	face	to	face	--	YOU
ARE	IT.	That's	why	the	Master	said:
"NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE."
Remember,	such	a	beautiful	sutra,	so	exquisite,	so	tremendously	significant:
"NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE."
The	moment	 you	don't	 know,	 intimacy	 arises	 between	you	 and	 reality,	 a	 great
friendship	 arises.	 It	 becomes	 a	 love	 affair.	 You	 are	 embracing	 reality;	 reality
penetrates	you,	as	lovers	penetrate	each	other.	You	melt	into	it	like	snow	melting
in	the	sun.	You	become	one	with	it.	There	is	nothing	to	divide.	It	is	knowledge
that	divides;	it	is	not-knowing	that	unites.
Listening	to	this	tremendously	significant	sutra:
"NOT	 KNOWING	 IS	 THE	 MOST	 INTIMATE,"	 HOGEN	 SUDDENLY
ATTAINED
GREAT	ENLIGHTENMENT.
HE	MUST	HAVE	BEEN	VERY	CLOSE,	obviously.	When	he	 said,	 "I	DON'T
KNOW,"
he	must	have	been	just	on	the	borderline.	When	he	said,	"I	AM	MAKING
PILGRIMAGE	AIMLESSLY,"	he	was	 just	one	 step	away	 from	 the	borderline.
When	 he	 said,	 "I	 DON'T	 KNOW,"	 even	 that	 one	 step	 disappeared.	 He	 was
standing	on	the	borderline.
And	when	 the	Master	 said,	when	 the	Master	 confirmed,	 illuminated,	 and	 said,
"NOT
KNOWING	 IS	THE	MOST	 INTIMATE"...when	 the	Master	 patted	him	on	 the
back:
"NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE"....
HOGEN	SUDDENLY	ATTAINED	GREAT	ENLIGHTENMENT.
IMMEDIATELY,	that	very	moment,	he	crossed	the	border.	Immediately	his	last
clinging	disappeared.	Now	he	cannot	even	say,	"I	don't	know."
The	stupid	person	says,	"I	know";	 the	 intelligent	person	comes	to	know	that	"I
don't	 know."	But	 there	 is	 a	 transcendence	 of	 both	when	 only	 silence	 prevails.
Nothing	 can	 be	 said,	 nothing	 can	 be	 uttered.	 Hogen	 entered	 that	 silence,	 that
great	enlightenment,	and	suddenly,	immediately,	without	any	lapse	of	time.
Enlightenment	 is	always	sudden	because	 it	 is	not	an	achievement;	 it	 is	already
the	case.	It	is	only	a	remembering,	it	is	only	a	reminding,	it	is	only	a	recognition.
You	are	already	enlightened;	you	are	just	not	aware	of	it.	It	is	awareness	of	that
which	is	already	the	case.
Meditate	over	this	beautiful	anecdote.	Let	this	sutra	resound	in	your	being:
"NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE."
And	one	never	knows:	sudden	enlightenment	may	happen	to	you	as	it	happened
to	Hogen.	It	is	going	to	happen	to	many	people	here,	because	what	I	am	doing
every	 day	 is	 destroying	 your	 knowledge,	 destroying	 and	 destroying	 all	 your
clingings	and	strategies	of	the	mind.	Any	day	when	your	mind	collapses,	when
you	cannot	hold	it	together	any	more,	there	is	bound	to	be	sudden	enlightenment.
It	is	not	an	attainment,	hence	it	can	happen	in	a	single	moment,	instantly.	Society
has	forced	you	to	forget	it;	my	work	here	is	to	help	you	remember	it.
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Neti	Neti
4	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001040
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
PLEASE,	 IN	 THE	 QUESTION	 "WHO	 AM	 I?"	 WHAT	 DOES	 "I"	 MEAN?
DOES	IT
MEAN	THE	ESSENCE	OF	LIFE?
Hermann	Sander,
"WHO	AM	I?"	IS	NOT	REALLY	A	QUESTION	because	it	has	no	answer	to	it;
it	is	unanswerable.	It	is	a	device,	not	a	question.	It	is	used	as	a	mantra.	When	you
constantly	 inquire	 inside,	 "Who	am	 I?	Who	am	 I?"	you	are	not	waiting	 for	 an
answer.	 Your	 mind	 will	 supply	 many	 answers;	 all	 those	 answers	 have	 to	 be
rejected.	Your	mind	will	say,
"You	are	the	essence	of	life.	You	are	the	eternal	soul.	You	are	divine,"	and	so	on
and	so	forth.	All	those	answers	have	to	be	rejected:	NETI	NETI	--	one	has	to	go
on	saying,
"Neither	this	nor	that."
When	 you	 have	 denied	 all	 the	 possible	 answers	 that	 the	mind	 can	 supply	 and
devise,	when	the	question	remains	absolutely	unanswerable,	a	miracle	happens:
suddenly	the	question	also	disappears.	When	all	the	answers	have	been	rejected,
the	 question	 has	 no	 props,	 no	 supports	 inside	 to	 stand	on	 any	more.	 It	 simply
flops,	it	collapses,	it	disappears.
When	the	question	also	has	disappeared,	then	you	know.	But	that	knowing	is	not
an	 answer:	 it	 is	 an	 existential	 experience.	 Nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about	 it,	 or
whatever	will	be	said	will	be	wrong.	To	say	anything	about	it	is	to	falsify	it.	It	is
the	ultimate	mystery,	inexpressible,	indefinable.	No	word	is	adequate	enough	to
describe	it.	Even	the	phrase
"essence	 of	 life"	 is	 not	 adequate;	 even	 "God"	 is	 not	 adequate.	 Nothing	 is
adequate	to	express	it;	its	very	nature	is	inexpressible.
But	you	know.	You	know	exactly	 the	way	 the	 seed	knows	how	 to	grow	--	not
like	 the	 professor	 who	 knows	 about	 chemistry	 or	 physics	 or	 geography	 or
history,	but	like	the	bud	which	knows	how	to	open	in	the	early	morning	sun.	Not
like	 the	 priest	 who	 knows	 about	 God;	 about	 and	 about	 he	 goes,	 around	 and
around	he	goes.
Knowledge	is	beating	around	the	bush:	knowing	is	a	direct	penetration.	But	the
moment	you	directly	penetrate	into	existence,	you	disappear	as	a	separate	entity.
You	are	no	more.
When	 the	KNOWER	is	no	more	 then	 the	knowing	 is.	And	 the	knowing	 is	not
ABOUT
something	--	you	are	that	knowing	itself.
So	I	cannot	say,	Sander,	what	"I"	means	in	the	question	"Who	am	I?"	It	means
nothing!	 It	 is	 just	 a	device	 to	 lead	you	 into	 the	unknown,	 to	 lead	you	 into	 the
uncharted,	to	lead	you	into	that	which	is	not	available	to	the	mind.	It	is	a	sword
to	cut	the	very	roots	of	the	mind,	so	only	the	silence	of	no-mind	is	left.	In	that
silence	there	is	no	question,	no	answer,	no	knower,	no	known,	but	only	knowing,
only	experiencing.
That's	 why	 the	mystics	 appear	 to	 be	 in	 such	 difficulty	 to	 express	 it.	Many	 of
them	have	 remained	 silent	 out	 of	 the	 awareness	 that	whatsoever	 you	 say	 goes
wrong;	the	moment	you	say	it,	it	goes	wrong.	Those	who	have	spoken,	they	have
spoken	with	the	condition:
"Don't	cling	to	our	words."
Lao	Tzu	says:	"Tao,	once	described,	is	no	more	the	real	Tao."	The	moment	you
say	something	about	 it	you	have	already	falsified	 it,	you	have	betrayed	 it.	 It	 is
such	an	intimate	knowing,	incommunicable.
"Who	 am	 I?"	 functions	 like	 a	 sword	 to	 cut	 all	 the	 answers	 that	 the	mind	 can
manage.	Zen	people	will	say	it	is	a	koan,	just	like	other	koans.	There	are	many
koans,	famous	koans.
One	is:	"Find	out	your	original	face."	And	the	disciple	asks	the	Master,	"What	is
the	 original	 face?"	 And	 the	Master	 says,	 "The	 face	 that	 you	 had	 before	 your
parents	were	born."
And	you	start	meditating	on	 that:	 "What	 is	your	original	 face?"	Naturally,	you
have	 to	 deny	 all	 your	 faces.	Many	 faces	will	 start	 surfacing:	 childhood	 faces,
when	you	were	young,	when	you	became	middle-aged,	when	you	became	old,
when	you	were	healthy,	when	you	were	ill....	All	kinds	of	faces	will	stand	in	a
queue.	They	will	pass	before	your	eyes	claiming,	"I	am	the	original	face."	And
you	have	to	go	on	rejecting.
When	all	the	faces	have	been	rejected	and	emptiness	is	left,	you	have	found	the
original	 face.	 Emptiness	 is	 the	 original	 face.	 Zero	 is	 the	 ultimate	 experience.
Nothingness	--	or	more	accurately	NO-THINGNESS	--	is	your	original	face.
Or	another	famous	koan	is:	"The	sound	of	one	hand	clapping."	The	Master	says
to	the	disciple,	"Go	and	listen	to	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping."	Now	this	 is
patent	 absurdity:	 one	 hand	 cannot	 clap	 and	 without	 clapping	 there	 can	 be	 no
sound.	The	Master	knows	 it,	 the	disciple	knows	 it.	But	when	 the	Master	 says,
"Go	and	meditate	on	it,"	the	disciple	has	to	follow.
He	 starts	 making	 efforts	 to	 listen	 to	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand	 clapping.	 Many
sounds	 come	 to	 his	mind:	 the	 birds	 singing,	 the	 sound	of	 running	water....	He
rushes	 immediately	 to	 the	 Master;	 he	 says,	 "I	 have	 heard	 it!	 The	 sound	 of
running	water	--	isn't	that	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping?"
And	 the	Master	 hits	 him	 hard	 on	 the	 head	 and	 he	 says,	 "You	 fool!	 Go	 back,
meditate	more!"
And	he	goes	on	meditating,	and	the	mind	goes	on	providing	new	answers:	"The
sound	of	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	--	certainly	this	is	the	answer."	He
is	in	such	a	hurry!
Everybody	is	in	such	a	hurry.	Impatiently	he	rushes	to	the	door	of	the	Master,	a
little	bit	apprehensive,	afraid	too,	but	maybe	this	is	the	answer....
And	even	before	he	has	said	a	single	thing	the	Master	hits	him!	He	is	very	much
puzzled	and	he	says,	"This	is	too	much!	I	have	not	even	uttered	a	single	word,	so
how	can	I	be	wrong?	And	why	are	you	hitting	me?"
The	Master	says,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	whether	you	have	uttered	something	or
not.	You	 have	 come	with	 an	 answer	 --	 that	 is	 enough	 proof	 that	 you	must	 be
wrong.	When	 you	 have	 REALLY	 found	 it	 you	 won't	 come;	 there	 will	 be	 no
need.	I	will	come	to	you."
Sometimes	 years	 pass,	 and	 then	 one	 day	 it	 has	 happened,	 there	 is	 no	 answer.
First	 the	 disciple	 knew	 that	 there	 was	 no	 answer	 to	 it,	 but	 it	 was	 only	 an
intellectual	knowing.	Now	he	knows	from	his	very	core:	"There	is	no	answer!"
All	answers	have	evaporated.
And	 the	 sure	 sign	 that	 all	 answers	 have	 evaporated	 is	 only	 one:	 when	 the
question	 also	 evaporates.	 Now	 he	 is	 sitting	 silently	 doing	 nothing,	 not	 even
meditating.	 He	 has	 forgotten	 the	 question:	 "What	 is	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand
clapping?"	It	is	no	more	there.	It	is	PURE	silence.
And	 there	are	ways...there	are	 inner	paths	which	exist	between	a	Master	and	a
disciple.
And	now	the	Master	rushes	towards	the	disciple.	He	knocks	on	his	door.	He	hugs
the	disciple	and	says,	"So	 it	has	happened?	This	 is	 it!	No	answer,	no	question:
this	is	it.	Ah,	this!"
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,
I	FEEL	LIFE	IS	VERY	BORING.	WHAT	SHOULD	I	DO?
Brij	Mohan,
AS	 IT	 IS,	 YOU	 HAVE	 ALREADY	 DONE	 ENOUGH.	 You	 have	 made	 life
boring	--
some	achievement!	Life	 is	 such	a	dance	of	ecstasy	and	you	have	 reduced	 it	 to
boredom.
You	have	done	a	miracle!	What	else	do	you	want	to	do?	You	can't	do	anything
bigger	 than	 this.	 Life	 and	 boring?	 You	 must	 have	 a	 tremendous	 capacity	 to
IGNORE	life.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	telling	you	that	ignorance	means	the	capacity	to	ignore.
You	must	be	ignoring	the	birds,	the	trees,	the	flowers,	the	people.	Otherwise,	life
is	so	tremendously	beautiful,	so	ABSURDLY	beautiful,	that	if	you	can	see	it	as	it
is	you	will	never	stop	laughing.	You	will	go	on	giggling	--	at	least	inside.
Life	 is	 not	 boring,	 but	MIND	 is	 boring.	 And	 we	 create	 such	 a	 mind,	 such	 a
strong	mind,	 like	 a	China	Wall	 around	ourselves,	 that	 it	 does	not	 allow	 life	 to
enter	 into	 us.	 It	 disconnects	 us	 from	 life.	 We	 become	 isolated,	 encapsulated,
windowless.	 Living	 behind	 a	 prison	 wall	 you	 don't	 see	 the	morning	 sun,	 you
don't	see	 the	birds	on	the	wing,	you	don't	see	 the	sky	in	 the	night	full	of	stars.
And,	of	course,	you	start	thinking	that	life	is	boring.
Your	conclusion	is	wrong.	YOU	are	in	a	wrong	space;	you	are	living	in	a	wrong
context.
You	must	be	a	religious	person,	Brij	Mohan,	because	to	make	life	boring	one	has
to	 be	 religious;	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very	 scholarly.	 One	 has	 to	 know	 Christianity,
Hinduism,	Islam.
One	has	to	learn	much	from	the	Vedas	and	the	Koran	and	the	Bible.	You	must	be
very	 well-informed.	 A	 man	 who	 is	 too	 well-informed,	 too	 knowledgeable,
creates	such	a	thick	wall	of	words	--	futile	words,	empty	words	--	around	himself
that	he	becomes	incapable	of	seeing	life.
Knowledge	is	a	barrier	to	life.
Put	 aside	 your	 knowledge!	 And	 then	 look	 with	 empty	 eyes...and	 life	 is	 a
CONSTANT
surprise.	And	I	am	not	talking	about	some	divine	life	--	the	ORDINARY	life	is
so	extraordinary.	In	small	incidents	you	will	find	the	presence	of	God	--	a	child
giggling,	a	dog	barking,	a	peacock	dancing.	But	you	can't	 see	 if	your	eyes	are
covered	with	 knowledge.	 The	 poorest	man	 in	 the	world	 is	 the	man	who	 lives
behind	a	curtain	of	knowledge.
The	poorest	are	those	who	live	through	the	mind.	The	richest	are	those	who	have
opened	the	windows	of	no-mind	and	approached	life	with	the	no-mind.
Brij	Mohan,	this	is	not	only	YOUR	experience;	you	are	not	alone	in	it.	In	fact,
the	 majority	 of	 people	 will	 agree	 with	 you.	 They	 don't	 find	 any	 surprise
anywhere.	 And	 each	moment	 there	 are	 surprises	 and	 surprises	 because	 life	 is
never	the	same;	it	is	constantly	changing,	and	it	takes	such	unpredictable	turns.
How	 can	 you	 remain	 unaffected	 by	 the	 very	 wonder	 of	 it?	 The	 only	 way	 to
remain	 unaffected	 is	 to	 cling	 to	 your	 past,	 to	 your	 experience,	 to	 your
knowledge,	to	your	memories,	to	your	mind.	Then	you	cannot	see	that	which	is;
you	go	on	missing	the	present.
Miss	 the	 present	 and	 you	 live	 in	 boredom.	BE	 in	 the	 present	 and	 you	will	 be
surprised	 that	 there	 is	no	boredom	at	 all.	Start	by	 looking	around	a	 little	more
like	a	child.	Be	a	child	again!	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	being	a	child
again	 --	 a	 rebirth,	 being	 innocent	 again,	 not-knowing.	 That's	 what	 we	 were
saying	 the	 other	 day.	 The	 Master	 said:	 NOT-KNOWING	 IS	 THE	 MOST
INTIMATE.
Yes,	you	must	have	become	very	alienated	from	life,	hence	boredom.	You	have
forgotten	 the	 intimacy,	 the	 immediacy	You	 are	 no	 longer	 bridged.	Knowledge
functions	as	a	wall:	innocence	functions	as	a	bridge.
Start	 looking	 like	 a	 child	 again.	 Go	 to	 the	 seashore	 and	 again	 start	 collecting
seashells.
See	 a	 child	 collecting	 seashells	 --	 as	 if	 he	 has	 found	 a	mine	 of	 diamonds.	 So
thrilled	he	is!
See	a	child	making	sandcastles	and	how	absorbed	he	is,	utterly	lost,	as	if	there	is
nothing	 more	 important	 than	 making	 sandcastles.	 See	 a	 child	 running	 after	 a
butterfly...and	 be	 a	 child	 again.	 Start	 running	 after	 butterflies	 again.	 Make
sandcastles,	collect	seashells.
Don't	 live	as	 if	you	know.	You	know	nothing!	All	 that	you	know	 is	about	and
about.	 The	moment	 you	 KNOW	 something,	 boredom	 disappears.	 Knowing	 is
such	an	adventure	 that	boredom	cannot	exist.	With	knowledge	of	course	 it	can
exist;	with	knowing	it	cannot	exist.
And	 let	me	 remind	you:	 I	 am	not	 talking	about	 some	divine	knowledge,	 some
esoteric	knowledge;	I	am	simply	talking	about	THIS	life.	Just	look	around	with	a
little	more	clarity,	with	a	little	more	transparency...and	life	is	hilarious!
A	downtown	store	featured	a	plaque	in	its	window	reading:	BUY	AMERICAN.
Printed	in	small	letters	at	the	bottom	was:	MADE	IN	JAPAN.
Just	start	looking	around	a	little	more	carefully.
A	German	in	the	Soviet	Zone	reported	to	the	police	that	his	parrot	was	missing.
He	was	asked	whether	the	parrot	talked.
"Yes,"	he	replied,	"but	any	political	opinions	he	expresses	are	strictly	his	own."
Molly,	 aged	 seventy-nine,	 complained	 of	 abdominal	 swelling	 and	 pain	 to	 the
doctor.	He	examined	her	thoroughly,	put	her	through	a	series	of	laboratory	tests,
and	then	announced	the	results.
"The	plain	fact,	madam,"	said	the	medical	man,	"is	that	you	are	pregnant."
"That's	 impossible!"	 said	 Molly.	 "Why,	 I	 am	 seventy-nine	 years	 old	 and	 my
husband,	although	he	still	works,	is	eighty-six!"
The	 doctor	 insisted,	 so	 the	 aging	mother-to-be	 pulled	 over	 his	 desk	 telephone
and	dialed	her	husband's	office.	When	he	was	on	the	line	she	shouted,	"You	old
goat,	you	have	got	me	pregnant!"	"Please,"	quavered	the	old	man,	"who	did	you
say	was	calling?"
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,
I	KNOW	YOU	WANT	US	ALL	TO	RID	OURSELVES	OF	OUR	EGOS	AND
MINDS,	AND	IN	MY	CASE,	I	KNOW	THAT	THIS	IS	VERY	NECESSARY,
BUT	FOR
THOSE	OF	US	WHO	WILL	BE	RETURNING	TO	THE	WEST,	WOULD	NOT
A	 TOTAL	 ABSENCE	 OF	 MIND	 OR	 EGO	 MAKE	 LIFE	 MUCH	 MORE
DIFFICULT?
Prem	Joyce,
WHEN	I	SAY,	"DROP	THE	EGO,	DROP	THE	MIND,"	I	don't	mean	that	you
cannot	use	the	mind	any	more.	In	fact,	when	you	don't	cling	to	the	mind	you	can
use	it	in	a	far	better,	far	more	efficient	way,	because	the	energy	that	was	involved
in	clinging	becomes	available.	And	when	you	are	not	continuously	in	the	mind,
twenty-four	hours	a	day	in	the	mind,	the	mind	also	gets	a	little	time	to	rest.
Do	you	know?	 --	 even	metals	need	 rest,	 even	metals	get	 tired.	So	what	 to	 say
about	this	subtle	mechanism	of	the	mind?	It	 is	the	MOST	subtle	mechanism	in
the	 world.	 In	 such	 a	 small	 skull	 you	 are	 carrying	 such	 a	 complicated
biocomputer	that	no	computer	made	by	man	is	yet	capable	of	competing	with	it.
The	scientists	say	a	single	man's	brain	can	contain	all	the	libraries	of	the	world
and	yet	there	will	be	space	enough	to	contain	more.
And	you	are	continuously	using	it	--	uselessly,	unnecessarily!	You	have	forgotten
how	 to	 put	 it	 off.	 For	 seventy,	 eighty	 years	 it	 remains	 on,	 working,	 working,
tired.	That's	why	people	lose	intelligence:	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	so
tired.	If	the	mind	can	have	a	little	rest,	if	you	can	leave	the	mind	alone	for	a	few
hours	every	day,	 if	once	 in	a	while	you	can	give	 the	mind	a	holiday,	 it	will	be
rejuvenated;	it	will	come	out	more	intelligent,	more	efficient,	more	skillful.
So	I	am	NOT	saying	that	you	are	NOT	to	use	your	mind,	but	don't	be	USED	by
the	mind.
Right	now	the	mind	is	the	master	and	you	are	only	a	slave.
Meditation	makes	you	a	master	and	the	mind	becomes	a	slave.	And	remember:
the	mind	as	a	master	is	dangerous	because,	after	all,	it	is	a	machine;	but	the	mind
as	 a	 slave	 is	 tremendously	 significant,	 useful.	A	machine	 should	 function	 as	 a
machine,	 not	 as	 a	 master.	 Our	 priorities	 are	 all	 upside-down	 --	 your
CONSCIOUSNESS	should	be	the	master.
So	whenever	you	want	to	use	it,	in	the	East	or	in	the	West	--	of	course	you	will
need	it	in	the	marketplace	--	USE	it!	But	when	you	don't	need	it,	when	you	are
resting	at	home	by	the	side	of	your	swimming-pool	or	in	your	garden,	there	is	no
need.	Put	it	aside.	Forget	all	about	it!	Then	just	be.
And	 the	 same	 is	 the	 case	 with	 the	 ego.	 Don't	 be	 identified	 with	 it,	 that's	 all.
Remember	that	you	are	part	of	the	whole;	you	are	not	separate	from	it.
That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 if	 somebody	 is	 stealing	 from	 your	 house	 you	 have
simply	to	watch	--	because	you	are	just	part	of	the	whole	and	he	is	also	part	of
the	whole,	so	what	is	wrong?	And	somebody	is	taking	money	from	your	pocket,
so	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 --	 the	 other's	 hand	 is	 as	 much	 yours	 as	 his!	 I	 am	 not
saying	that.
Remember	that	you	are	part	of	the	whole	so	that	you	can	relax,	merge;	once	in	a
while	you	can	be	utterly	drowned	 in	 the	whole.	And	 that	will	 give	you	a	new
lease	 of	 life.	 The	 inexhaustible	 sources	 of	 the	whole	will	 become	 available	 to
you.	You	will	come	out	of	it	refreshed;	you	will	come	out	of	it	reborn,	again	as	a
child,	full	of	joy,	inquiry,	adventure,	ecstasy.
Don't	get	identified	with	the	ego,	although,	as	far	as	the	world	is	concerned,	you
have	to	function	as	an	ego	--	that	is	only	utilitarian!	You	have	to	use	the	word	"I"
--	use	the	word
"I,"	but	remember	that	it	is	only	a	word.	It	has	a	certain	utility,	and	without	it	life
will	 become	 impossible.	 If	 you	 stop	 using	 the	 word	 "I"	 completely,	 life	 will
become	impossible.	We	know	names	are	only	utilitarian,	nobody	is	born	with	a
name.	But	 I	 am	not	 saying	 to	drop	 the	name	and	 throw	your	passport	 into	 the
river.	Then	you	will	be	in	trouble!	You	NEED	a	name;	that	is	a	necessity	because
you	live	with	so	many	people.
If	you	are	alone	in	the	world,	then	of	course	there	is	no	need	to	carry	a	passport.
If	you	are	alone...for	example,	 if	 the	 third	world	war	happens	and	Joyce	 is	 left
alone,	then	there	will	be	no	need	to	carry	a	passport;	you	can	throw	it	anywhere.
Then	 there	will	be	no	need	 to	have	any	name.	Even	 if	you	have	one	 it	will	be
useless	--	nobody	will	ever	call	you.	Then	there	will	be	no	need	to	even	use	the
word	"I"	because	"I"	needs	a	"thou";	without	a	"thou"	the	"I"	is	meaningless.	It
has	meaning	only	in	the	context	of	others.
So	don't	misunderstand	me.	USE	your	ego,	but	use	it	just	like	you	use	your	shoes
and	 your	 umbrella	 and	 your	 clothes.	When	 it	 is	 raining,	 use	 the	 umbrella,	 but
don't	go	on	carrying	it	unnecessarily.	And	don't	go	to	bed	with	the	umbrella,	and
don't	be	afraid	that	in	a	dream	it	may	rain....	The	umbrella	has	a	utility,	so	use	it
when	 it	 is	 needed;	 but	 don't	 become	 so	 identified	 with	 the	 umbrella	 that	 you
cannot	put	 it	aside.	Use	the	shoes,	use	the	clothes,	use	the	name	--	 they	arc	all
utilities,	not	realities.
In	 the	 world,	 when	 so	 many	 people	 are	 there,	 we	 need	 a	 few	 labels,	 a	 few
symbols,	just	to	demark,	just	to	make	sure	who	is	who.
You	ask	me:	I	KNOW	YOU	WANT	US	ALL	TO	RID	OURSELVES	OF	OUR
EGOS
AND	MINDS....
I	am	not	saying	to	"get	rid";	I	am	simply	saying	to	be	master	of	your	minds.	I	am
not	telling	you	to	be	mindless;	I	am	only	saying:	don't	just	be	minds	--	you	are
far	more.	Be	consciousnesses!	Then	 the	mind	becomes	a	 small	 thing.	You	can
use	it	whenever	needed,	and	whenever	not	needed	you	can	put	it	off.
I	am	using	my	mind	when	I	am	talking	to	you.	The	mind	has	to	be	used;	there	is
no	other	way.	But	 the	moment	 I	 enter	my	 room,	 then	 I	don't	 go	on	using	 it	 --
there	is	no	point.
Then	I	am	simply	silent.	With	you	I	am	using	the	language,	the	words,	but	when
I	am	with	myself	there	is	no	need	for	any	language,	for	any	words.	When	I	am
settled	 into	 myself	 and	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 communication,	 language
disappears.	Then	there	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	consciousness.
Right	now	my	consciousness	is	flowing	through	the	mind,	using	the	mechanism
of	the	mind	to	approach	you.	I	can	reach	for	you	with	my	hand,	but	I	am	not	the
hand.	And	when	I	touch	you	with	my	hand,	the	hand	is	only	a	means;	something
else	is	touching	you	through	the	hand.	The	body	has	to	be	used,	the	mind	has	to
be	used,	the	ego,	the	language,	and	all	kinds	of	things	have	to	be	used.	And	you
are	allowed	to	use	them	with	only	one	condition:	remain	the	master.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 YOU	 ANSWERED	MY	 QUESTION	 ABOUT	 LOVING
THREE
WOMEN.	A	FEW	THINGS	HAVE	HAPPENED	SINCE	THEN.	IN	THE	FIRST
PLACE,	I	MISSED	YOU	BECAUSE	I	WAS	NOT	IN	THE	DISCOURSE	BUT
IN	THE
ARMS	 OF	 THE	 CHOSEN	 ONE,	 WHICH	 TURNED	 OUT	 TO	 BE	 A	 BAD
CHOICE
BECAUSE	 SHE	 RAN	 STRAIGHT	 AWAY	 AND	 INTO	 THE	 ARMS	 OF
SOMEBODY
ELSE	AFTER	SHE	REALIZED	THAT	SHE	WAS	CHOSEN.	THEN,	IN	SPITE
OF
THIS,	THE	LITTLE	COMMUNE	HAS	GROWN	INTO	FIVE	WOMEN	NOW.
ONE
WOMAN	IS	HELL,	BUT	WHAT	TO	SAY	ABOUT	FIVE?	BUT	I	HAVE	GOT
A	 LITTLE	 HELP	 FROM	 MY	 FRIENDS.	 FOR	 INSTANCE,	 HAMID	 HAS
SUGGESTED	I	TURN	GAY	AND	HAS	OFFERED	ME	A	DATE	WITH	HIM.
VIVEK	SUGGESTED
THAT	I	WAIT	UNTIL	THERE	ARE	SEVEN.	BUT	PLEASE,	OSHO,	BEFORE
I	 DISAPPEAR	 INTO	 THE	 SEVENTH	 HELL,	 I	 HAVE	 ALREADY	 LOST
THREE
KILOS	IN	WEIGHT.	YOU	OFFERED	TO	BUY	ME	OUT.	CAN'T	WE	TALK
BUSINESS	NOW?	I	REALLY	MEAN	IT!
Prem	Aditya,
A	 PREACHER	 WAS	 LISTENING	 to	 a	 young	 man	 confess	 his	 sins.	 In	 the
middle	 of	 it	 he	 stopped	 him.	 "Wait	 a	minute,	 young	man,"	 he	 said,	 "you	 ain't
confessin'	--	you	are	braggin'."
Now	you	have	started	bragging!	I	know	perfectly	well...because	I	am	in	contact
with	 your	 three	women	 too.	 I	 also	mean	 business!	You	 don't	 have	 five	 --	 you
have	even	 lost	 the	 three.	And	 today	you	are	here	because	 there	 is	nobody	you
can	be	with!
Hamid	is	generous...but,	remember,	he	is	an	Iranian!
One	day,	back	when	the	draft	was	still	 in	effect	Glascox	received	his	induction
notice.	He	reported	to	his	draft	board	and	confessed	that	he	was	a	homosexual.
"Queer,	huh?"	one	member	grunted.	"Do	you	think	you	could	kill	a	man?"
"Oh,	yes,"	giggled	Glascox,	"but	it	would	take	me	quite	a	while!"
And	let	me	make	you	aware	that	before	you	can	kill	an	Iranian	the	Iranian	will
kill	you!
So	avoid	Hamid	--	he	is	generous,	but	avoid	him!	He	is	also	tired	of	women.	He
has	just	separated	from	Divya,	so	he	must	be	feeling	lonely.
And	Vivek's	suggestion	is	very	esoteric.	She	is	becoming	a	little	esoteric,	by	and
by.
Being	 the	 chief	 medium	 she	 has	 many	 esoteric	 mediums	 under	 her	 so	 she	 is
learning	a	few	esoteric	numbers.	Seven	is	really	dangerous!
And	your	guess	is	right:	seven	women	will	lead	you	to	the	seventh	hell.	And	that
is	 the	 last,	 the	 rock	 bottom;	 you	 cannot	 fall	 below	 that.	 Vivek	 must	 have
suggested	it	so	that	once	you	have	fallen	to	the	rock	bottom	you	start	rising	back
up	because	there	is	nowhere	else	to	go.
And	you	say	you	have	lost	three	kilos	in	weight.	Your	weighing	machine	is	not
functioning	well	--	you	must	have	lost	more!	It	is	really	strange	why	women	are
called	the	weaker	sex	--	they	are	not.	Man	is	the	weaker	sex.
Danny	 discovered	 his	wife	was	 cheating	with	 another	 guy,	 so	 he	went	 to	 this
guy's	wife	and	told	her	about	it.
"I	know	what	we	will	do,"	she	said,	"let's	take	revenge	on	them."
So	they	went	to	a	motel	and	had	revenge	on	them.
She	said,	"Let's	have	more	revenge,"	and	they	kept	having	revenge,	revenge....
Finally	Danny	said,	"That's	enough	revenge	--	I	have	no	more	hard	feelings	left."
Be	a	little	careful	--	this	is	just	the	beginning!
A	couple	wakes	up	after	the	first	night	of	their	honeymoon.	She	sits	up	in	bed,
looks	 at	 her	 husband	who	 is	 Lying	 naked	 next	 to	 her,	 and	 says	 in	 a	 surprised
voice,	"Darling,	did	we	use	him	all	up	in	one	night?"
Aditya,	 this	 happens	 to	 almost	 every	 new	 male	 sannyasin	 in	 the	 beginning:
finding	so	many	women	here	he	goes	crazy.	But	within	a	few	weeks	he	comes	to
his	senses,	and	then	a	totally	reverse	process	sets	in.	First	he	chases	women;	after
a	few	weeks	the	women	start	chasing	men	and	they	start	escaping.
Many	 women	 have	 reported	 to	 me:	 "What	 has	 happened	 here	 to	 male
sannyasins?	 They	 don't	 seem	 to	 be	 much	 interested	 in	 women.	 They	 don't
approach	women,	they	avoid	them.	Rather	than	taking	the	initiative,	they	escape
--	the	moment	they	see	a	woman	chasing	them,	they	escape."
What	happens	in	the	ordinary	world	is	that	man	has	plenty	to	imagine,	fantasize
about,	because	the	society	does	not	allow	you	many	relationships	with	women	--
only	one	woman.	And	you	get	tired,	you	get	bored,	and	your	mind	starts	roaming
around.	 And	 all	 the	 women	 who	 don't	 belong	 to	 you	 look	 tremendously
beautiful,	 just	 stunning	 --	 because	 they	 are	 not	 available.	 Your	 mind	 starts
fancying,	your	mind	goes	into	trips.
Here	it	is	totally	different.	This	commune	lives	in	the	future	now.	It	is	how	it	is
going	 to	 be	 all	 over	 the	 world	 sooner	 or	 later.	 This	 commune	 heralds	 a	 new
consciousness,	a	consciousness	rooted	in	freedom.	Up	to	now	you	have	lived	in
a	deep	slavery,	psychological	slavery.
When	 you	 GET	 freedom,	 in	 the	 beginning	 you	 rush	 into	 it	 madly.	 You	 start
doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 that	 you	 always	 wanted	 to	 do	 but	 you	 were	 not
permitted	to	do.	Then	soon	things	settle.	You	become	aware	that	all	women	are
alike	 just	 as	 all	 men	 are	 alike.	 Maybe	 there	 are	 differences,	 but	 they	 are
peripheral.	 Somebody	 has	 black	 hair	 and	 somebody	 has	 blonde	 hair	 and
somebody	 has	 blue	 eyes	 and	 somebody	 has	 black	 eyes	 --	 just	 peripheral
differences.
But	 as	 you	 become	more	 and	more	 aware	 of	MANY	 people,	 as	 you	 become
related	 to	many	 people,	 one	 thing	 becomes	 absolutely	 clear	 to	 you:	 that	ALL
men	are	alike	--
almost	alike	--	so	are	all	women.	Then	settling	starts.	Then	you	start	settling	with
one	woman,	with	one	man,	in	a	more	intimate	relationship.
That	intimacy	is	not	possible	in	the	outside	world	because	your	mind	will	always
go	on	thinking	that	your	woman,	your	man,	has	not	got	that	which	others	have
got.	And	there	is	no	way	to	find	out	the	truth.	Here	the	way	is	available;	you	can
find	out	the	truth.	And	once	the	truth	is	known	you	start	settling	with	one	person.
And	this	settlement	is	not	enforced;	this	is	not	a	legal	arrangement.	You	will	not
be	punished	if	you	separate;	nobody	is	preventing	you	from	separating.
But,	still,	now	you	start	a	totally	different	kind	of	journey,	a	new	pilgrimage	of
intimacy,	 unimposed	 intimacy.	 And	 now	 you	 see	 that	 the	 deeper	 you	want	 to
enter	 into	 the	other	person,	 the	more	 time	 is	needed,	patience	 is	needed,	many
kinds	of	situations	are	needed.
And	physical	penetration	is	sex,	which	is	a	very	superficial	thing.	Psychological
penetration	 is	 love,	 which	 is	 far	 more	 deep,	 far	 more	 significant,	 far	 more
beautiful,	 far	more	human.	The	 first	 is	animal,	 the	second	 is	human.	And	 then
there	is	a	third	kind	of	penetration:	when	two	consciousnesses	meet,	merge,	melt
into	each	other.	I	call	that	prayer.
Aditya,	 move	 towards	 prayer,	 because	 only	 prayer	 will	 give	 you	 REAL
contentment.
Only	 prayer	 will	 make	 you	 aware	 of	 the	 divinity	 of	 the	 other	 person,	 of	 the
godliness	of	 the	other	person.	And	seeing	 the	godliness	of	 the	other	person,	of
your	beloved,	you	will	become	aware	of	your	own	godliness.
Love	 is	 a	mirror.	A	 real	 relationship	 is	 a	mirror	 in	which	 two	 lovers	 see	 each
other's	faces	and	recognize	God.	It	is	a	path	towards	God.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,
I	AM	BORN	BRITISH	AND	SO	IS	MY	FRIEND!	ANY	HOPE?
Vivek,
NOBODY	IS	BORN	BRITISH.	It	is	a	disease	that	happens	later	on.	We	learn	it;
it	is	not	innate.	Just	like	nobody	is	born	German	or	Indian.	These	are	structures
that	 are	 imposed	 on	 us	 later	 on,	 after	 the	 birth.	 These	 are	 social	 ways	 of
enslaving	your	psyche,	your	being.
Every	society	imposes	certain	forms,	rules,	regulations.	Every	society	gives	you
a	shape,	a	form,	a	face,	a	facade.
Nobody	 is	 British	 and	 nobody	 is	 German	 and	 nobody	 is	 Indian.	 Hence	 these
structures	can	be	dropped,	one	can	slip	out	of	them.
The	 only	 thing	 needed	 is	 awareness.	We	 are	 so	 unaware	 that	we	 become	 one
with	the	structure,	identified	with	it.	We	start	thinking	that	we	ARE	it.	And	that's
where	 the	 disease	 becomes	 a	 permanent	 phenomenon;	 it	 becomes	 chronic.
Otherwise,	 one	 can	 slip	 out	 of	 being	 British	 or	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan	 or
communist	as	easily	as	the	snake	gets	out	of	its	old	skin	and	never	looks	back.
Secondly:	 not	 all	 Britishers	 are	 British,	 not	 all	 Germans	 are	 Germans,	 not	 all
Indians	 are	 Indians.	You	 can	 find	 a	 few	 Indians	 here	 --	my	 sannyasins	 or	my
would-be	sannyasins;	they	are	not	Indians.	They	have	slipped	out	of	the	Indian
prison.	Now,	 there	are	 so	many	Germans	here,	 and	when	 I	go	on	 telling	 jokes
against	Germans	they	laugh	as	relaxedly	as	you	laugh.	They	don't	feel	hurt.
When	I	said	something	against	 the	British,	 the	Britishers	were	 those	who	were
most	 happy.	 They	 were	 happy	 because	 they	 must	 be	 feeling	 jealous	 of	 the
Germans!	I	go	on	hitting	the	Germans	so	much!	I	have	a	certain	soft	corner	for
Haridas,	Govinddas,	etcetera	--	I	go	on	hitting	them!	And	the	Britishers	must	be
feeling	a	little	lost,	lagging	behind!
My	sannyasins	belong	to	no	race,	to	no	country,	to	no	religion.	That's	what	my
sannyas	is	all	about:	getting	out	of	all	kinds	of	prisons,	becoming	simply	human;
declaring	one's	universality,	declaring	that	"The	whole	earth	belongs	to	us."
As	sannyasins	grow	slowly	slowly	into	millions,	we	are	going	to	create	trouble.
When	 I	 have	 got	 enough	 sannyasins	 I	will	 tell	 you,	 "Now	 you	 can	 burn	 your
passports	 and	move	 freely	 from	one	 country	 to	 another	 --	 because	 freedom	of
movement	is	a	birthright."
This	 is	 so	 ugly,	 that	 you	 cannot	 move	 from	 one	 country	 to	 another	 country
easily;	they	create	so	many	barriers.	When	you	pass	the	boundary	of	one	country
to	another	you	 immediately	become	aware	 that	you	have	been	 in	a	prison	and
you	are	entering	into	another	prison.	The	prison	is	big,	so	when	you	are	inside
you	don't	know	about	it.
The	person	who	has	never	left	India	will	not	be	aware	that	he	is	living	in	a	big
prison,	but	when	you	leave	the	country	 then	you	know	how	difficult	 it	 is:	how
you	 are	 tortured	 for	 hours,	 how	 many	 papers	 you	 have	 to	 fill	 in,	 how	 many
things	you	have	to	do	before	you	can	get	over	 the	border.	Then	you	know	that
this	is	a	prison.	And	you	have	to	do	the	same	thing	in	the	other	country.	These
countries	are	big	prisons.
The	 hope	 is	 that	 when	 there	 are	millions	 of	 sannyasins,	 and	we	 have	 created
enough	orange	energy	in	the	world,	we	will	break	all	these	barriers.
But	 remember	 always:	 not	 all	 Germans	 are	 Germans,	 not	 all	 Britishers	 are
British,	not	all	 Indians	are	 Indian.	That	 is	 the	only	hope.	There	are	a	 few	who
ARE	in	the	prison	but	not	part	of	it	--	it	is	just	an	accident	that	they	are	born	in
India,	an	accident	 that	 they	are	born	 in	England;	otherwise	 they	are	 free	souls.
They	are	the	real	hope	for	humanity,	the	real	hope	for	the	future.
This	 English	 sportsman	 had	 been	 abroad	 and	 returned	 to	 his	 home	 without
notice.	While	walking	 through	 the	 corridor	with	 his	 butler,	 he	 looked	 into	 his
bedroom	and	discovered	his	wife	making	love	to	a	strange	man.
"Fetch	my	rifle	at	once!"	he	instructed	his	butler.
In	a	matter	of	minutes	his	rifle	was	brought	to	him.	Raising	it	and	taking	aim,	he
was	tapped	on	the	shoulder	by	the	butler	who	whispered,	"If	I	may	say	so,	sir,
remember	you	are	a	true	sportsman.	Get	him	on	the	rise!"
Now	the	butler	is	not	British,	not	at	all!	--	has	more	sense	of	humor.
Two	Englishmen	were	coming	home	late	at	night	from	a	poker	party.	One	said,
"I	am	always	afraid	when	I	return	home	late	from	a	party	like	this.	I	shut	off	the
engine	of	my	car	a	half	a	block	from	home	and	coast	into	the	garage.	I	take	off
my	 shoes	 and	 sneak	 into	 the	 house.	 I	 am	 as	 quiet	 as	 possible,	 but	 invariably,
about	the	time	I	settle	down	into	bed,	my	wife	sits	up	and	starts	to	berate	me."
The	 other	 man	 said,	 "You	 just	 have	 the	 wrong	 technique.	 I	 never	 have	 any
trouble.	I	barge	into	the	garage,	slam	the	door,	stomp	into	the	house	and	make	a
hell	of	a	racket.
Then	I	go	upstairs	to	the	bedroom,	pat	my	wife	and	say,	'How	about	it,	kid?'	She
always	pretends	she	is	asleep."
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,
NO	 PASSION,	 NO	 JEALOUSY,	 AND	 SO	 MUCH	 LOVING.	 CAN	 IT	 BE
TRUE	THAT
THIS	SUFFERING	IS	OVER?
Prem	Turiya,
THIS	IS	ONE	OF	THE	MOST	FUNDAMENTAL	THINGS	to	be	remembered,
and	you	will	have	to	be	constantly	aware:	you	cannot	take	it	for	granted	that	the
suffering	is	over.
If	you	take	it	for	granted	that	the	suffering	is	over,	the	suffering	will	be	back	by
the	back	door.	You	have	to	be	constantly	alert	and	aware.
Yes,	for	the	moment	there	is	no	jealousy,	no	passion,	and	yet	so	much	loving	--
naturally.
When	 there	 is	 no	 passion	 and	 no	 jealousy,	 all	 the	 energies	 move	 into	 the
direction	of	love.
It	is	the	same	energy	that	becomes	passion,	that	becomes	jealousy.	When	there	is
no	 jealousy,	 no	 passion,	 all	 the	 energy	 is	 available	 for	 the	 flowers	 of	 love	 to
bloom.	But	 don't	 take	 it	 for	 granted.	Don't	 think	 that	 the	 suffering	 is	 over	 for
ever.
Life	is	a	continuous	evolution	and	you	have	to	be	constantly	alert,	otherwise	you
can	fall	back	into	the	old	patterns	very	easily.	And	the	old	patterns	have	persisted
so	 long,	 they	have	become	 so	 ingrained	 in	 your	 blood,	 in	 your	 bones,	 in	 your
very	marrow,	that	one	moment	of	unconsciousness	and	you	are	back.	You	have
to	go	on	being	aware.
Something	 beautiful	 is	 happening...much	more	 is	 going	 to	 happen.	One	 never
knows	how	much	more	is	possible.	We	are	never	aware	of	our	potential	unless	it
becomes	actual.
You	have	seen	a	beautiful	space	of	non-jealous	love.	Passion	is	a	kind	of	fever
and	it	consumes	much	energy.	Fever	naturally	consumes	energy	--	and	passion	is
fever.	 When	 passion	 disappears,	 compassion	 arises.	 And	 compassion	 is	 cool.
Passion	is	hot,	it	burns	you.	Compassion	is	cool	--	not	cold,	remember.	Hatred	is
cold,	 lust	 is	 hot.	Exactly	 between	 the	 two	 is	 the	 golden	mean,	 neither	 hot	 nor
cold.	Then	you	are	in	a	state	of	cool	warmth.	Very	paradoxical	it	seems	--	cool
warmth.	It	is	not	hot,	but	it	is	warm;	it	is	not	cold,	but	it	is	cool.
And	the	real	flower	of	love	opens	up	only	in	that	climate	of	warmth-coolness.	A
warm	coolness	is	the	right	climate	for	the	lotus	of	love	to	blossom.
But	don't	take	it	for	granted.	Never	take	anything	for	granted!	Each	moment	you
have	to	conquer	it	again	and	again.	Life	is	a	continuous	conquest.	It	 is	not	that
once	and	for	all	 it	 is	settled	and	 then	you	can	fall	asleep	and	stay	unconscious
and	there	is	no	worry	left.
Again	you	will	be	back	in	the	same	rut.
Turiya,	I	am	happy	--	I	have	been	watching	you.	You	are	looking	both	warm	and
cool.	 It	 is	 a	 non-ending	 process.	 Be	 alert,	 be	 watchful.	 Don't	 destroy	 this
beautiful	flower	that	is	growing	in	you.
When	you	have	something	precious	you	have	to	be	more	aware.	When	you	have
nothing	to	lose	you	can	be	unconscious,	you	can	fall	asleep;	there	is	no	problem.
But	when	 you	 have	 something	 to	 lose	 --	 and	 this	 is	 something	 precious	 --	 be
more	conscious,	be	more	alert.	You	have	discovered	a	treasure.
The	seventh	question
Question	7
OSHO,
WHAT	IS	INTELLIGENCE?
Govindo,
FIRST,	KNOW	WELL	THAT	INTELLECTUALITY	 is	not	 intelligence.	To	be
intellectual	is	to	be	phony;	it	is	a	pretending	intelligence.	It	is	not	real	because	it
is	not	yours;	it	is	borrowed.	Intelligence	is	the	growth	of	inner	consciousness.	It
has	nothing	to	do	with	knowledge,	it	has	something	to	do	with	meditativeness.
An	intelligent	person	does	not	function	out	of	his	past	experience;	he	functions
in	the	present.	He	does	not	react,	he	responds.	Hence	he	is	always	unpredictable;
one	can	never	be	certain	what	he	is	going	to	do.
A	Catholic,	a	Protestant	and	a	Jew	were	talking	to	a	friend	who	said	he	had	just
been	given	six	months	to	live.
"What	 would	 you	 do,"	 he	 asked	 the	 Catholic,	 "if	 your	 doctor	 gave	 you	 six
months	to	live?"
"Ah!"	 said	 the	Catholic.	 "I	would	 give	 all	my	 belongings	 to	 the	Church,	 take
communion	every	Sunday,	and	say	my	'Hail	Marys'	regularly."
"And	you?"	he	asked	the	Protestant.
"I	would	sell	up	everything	and	go	on	a	world	cruise	and	have	a	great	time!"
"And	you?"	he	said	to	the	Jew.
"Me?	I	would	see	another	doctor."
That	is	intelligence!
Janet,	 a	pert	 secretary,	 sashayed	 into	 the	boss'	office.	 "I	have	 some	good	news
and	some	bad	news,"	she	announced.
"No	jokes,	please,"	said	her	boss.	"Not	on	quarterly	report	day.	Just	give	me	the
good	news."
"Okay,"	declared	the	girl.	"The	good	news	is	that	you	are	not	sterile."
This	is	intelligence!
The	outraged	husband	discovered	his	wife	in	bed	with	another	man.	"What	is	the
meaning	of	this?"	he	demanded.	"Who	is	this	fellow?"
"That	 seems	 like	 a	 fair	 question,"	 said	 the	 wife,	 rolling	 over.	 "What	 is	 your
name?"
That	is	intelligence!
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	I	am	Higher
5	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001050
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
ONE	 DAY	 THE	 KING	 OF	 YEN	 VISITED	 THE	 MASTER	 CHAO	 CHOU,
WHO	DID
NOT	EVEN	GET	UP	WHEN	HE	SAW	HIM	COMING.
THE	KING	ASKED,	 "WHICH	 IS	 HIGHER,	 A	WORLDLY	KING,	 OR	 THE
'KING	OF
DHARMA'?"
CHAO	 CHOU	 REPLIED,	 "AMONG	 HUMAN	 KINGS	 I	 AM	 HIGHER;
AMONG	THE
KINGS	OF	DHARMA	I	AM	ALSO	HIGHER."
HEARING	 THIS	 SURPRISING	 ANSWER,	 THE	 KING	 WAS	 VERY
PLEASED.
THE	NEXT	DAY	A	GENERAL	CAME	TO	VISIT	CHAO	CHOU,	WHO	NOT
ONLY
GOT	UP	FROM	HIS	SEAT	WHEN	HE	SAW	THE	GENERAL	COMING,	BUT
ALSO
SHOWED	 HIM	 MORE	 HOSPITALITY	 IN	 EVERY	 WAY	 THAN	 HE	 HAD
SHOWN
TO	THE	KING.
AFTER	THE	GENERAL	HAD	LEFT,	CHAO	CHOU'S	ATTENDANT	MONKS
ASKED	 HIM,	 "WHY	 DID	 YOU	 GET	 UP	 FROM	 YOUR	 SEAT	 WHEN	 A
PERSON	OF
LOWER	RANK	CAME	TO	SEE	YOU,	YET	DID	NOT	DO	SO	FOR	ONE	OF
THE
HIGHEST	RANK?"
CHAO	CHOU	REPLIED,	"YOU	DON'T	UNDERSTAND.	WHEN	PEOPLE	OF
THE
HIGHEST	QUALITY	COME	TO	SEE	ME,	 I	DO	NOT	GET	UP	FROM	MY
SEAT;	WHEN	THEY	ARE	OF	MIDDLE	QUALITY,	I	DO;	BUT	WHEN	THEY
ARE	OF	THE
LOWEST	QUALITY,	I	GO	OUTSIDE	OF	THE	GATE	TO	RECEIVE	THEM."
MAN	LIVES	IN	A	VERY	UPSIDE-DOWN	STATE.	Hence,	whenever	 there	 is
an	 enlightened	Master,	 his	 actions,	 his	 words,	 his	 behavior,	 all	 appear	 to	 the
ordinary	man	absurd.	Jesus	is	misunderstood	for	the	simple	reason	that	a	man	of
eyes	is	talking	to	the	men	who	are	blind.	Socrates	is	not	understood	for	the	same
reason,	because	he	is	talking	to	people	who	are	utterly	deaf.	And	so	has	been	the
case	 with	 all	 the	 Buddhas	 of	 all	 the	 countries,	 of	 all	 the	 races.	 And,
unfortunately,	this	is	going	to	remain	the	case	forever.	It	is	something	in	the	very
nature	of	things.
Man	 is	 unconscious;	 he	 understands	 the	 language	 of	 unconsciousness	 And
whenever	 somebody	 talks	 from	 the	 peaks	 of	 consciousness	 it	 becomes	 utterly
ununderstandable,	unintelligible.	He	is	so	far	away!	By	the	time	his	words	reach
the	dark	valleys	of	our	unconscious	we	have	distorted	them	to	such	an	extent	that
they	have	no	reference	at	all	to	the	origin	any	more.
The	 Master	 looks	 sometimes	 mad,	 sometimes	 irrational,	 sometimes	 stubborn.
But	the	only	reason	that	he	cannot	behave	like	you,	that	he	cannot	be	part	of	the
crowd	mind,	is	that	he	has	become	awakened	and	the	crowd	is	fast	asleep.
To	understand	a	Master	you	have	to	learn	great	sympathy:	only	that	will	create	a
bridge.
That's	what	 the	 relationship	 of	 a	 disciple	 to	 the	Master	 is.	You	 can	 listen	 to	 a
Master	without	being	a	disciple.	You	will	hear	the	words	but	you	will	miss	the
meaning.	You	will	hear	the	song	but	you	will	miss	the	music.	You	will	hear	the
argument	but	you	will	miss	the	conclusion.	You	will	know	what	he	is	saying	but
you	will	not	be	able	to	see	where	he	is	indicating.
To	 understand	 the	 significance	 --	 which	 is	 wordless	 --	 to	 understand	 the
meaning,	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 relationship	 is	 needed.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 of	 a
speaker	and	the	audience:	it	is	that	of	two	lovers.	It	has	to	be	a	love	affair;	then
only	is	there	sympathy	enough	to	have	a	bridge,	to	have	communication.
And	once	the	sympathy	is	there,	it	is	not	very	far	away	from	empathy.	Sympathy
can	be	transformed	into	empathy	very	easily;	in	fact,	it	changes	into	empathy	of
its	own	accord.
Just	as	you	sow	seeds	and	in	the	right	time	they	sprout	and	the	spring	comes	and
there	 are	 many	 flowers,	 sow	 the	 seeds	 of	 sympathy	 --	 that	 is,	 initiation	 into
disciplehood	--	then	soon	there	will	be	flowers	of	empathy.
In	sympathy	there	 is	still	a	 little	distance.	You	can	hear	--	you	can	hear	a	 little
better	than	before,	you	can	understand	more	clearly	than	before	--	but	still	things
are	in	a	state	of	vagueness:	more	clear	than	before	but	not	absolutely	clear	yet;	in
a	state	of	 twilight.	The	night	 is	no	more	but	 the	sun	has	not	 risen	yet	and	 it	 is
very	misty.	You	can	see	but	can't	decipher	things	accurately.
Empathy	means	now	there	is	no	distance	any	more.	Now	the	disciple	is	drowned
in	 the	Master	 --	 he	 has	 become	 a	 devotee.	Now	 the	Master	 is	 drowned	 in	 the
disciple;	 they	 are	 not	 separate	 entities	 any	more.	 They	 have	 reached	 the	 same
rhythm	of	being,	they	pulsate	in	synchronicity.
Then	 there	 is	 understanding	 and	 that	 understanding	 liberates,	 and	 that
understanding	is	immediate.	You	see	the	Master,	you	look	into	his	eyes,	you	hear
his	 words,	 you	 see	 him	 moving,	 his	 gestures...and	 they	 are	 immediately
understood	without	any	translation	by	the	mind.	The	mind	functions	no	more	as
a	mediator.	It	is	direct	communion	--	not	even	communication	but	communion.
The	first	step	is	that	of	a	student,	curious	but	still	a	spectator,	far	away,	collecting
information,	 knowledge.	 The	 second	 step	 is	 that	 of	 a	 disciple,	 no	 more	 a
spectator	 but	 a	 participant,	 no	more	 interested	 in	 knowledge	 but	 tremendously
interested	in	knowing.
And	the	third	step	is	that	of	a	devotee,	utterly	one	with	the	Master,	partaking	of
his	 being,	 drinking	 out	 of	 his	 inexhaustible	 source,	 drunk	 --	 drunk	 with	 the
divine.
Only	the	devotee	understands	absolutely,	the	disciple	understands	a	little	bit,	the
student	only	hears	mere	words.
Remember,	you	have	to	pass	through	these	stages	too.	And	it	all	depends	on	you:
one	can	remain	a	student	forever.	 If	you	keep	 the	distance,	 if	you	are	afraid	 to
come	close,	you	will	be	here	and	yet	not	here.
Come	 closer	 --	 spiritually	 closer.	 Bring	 your	 beings,	 unafraid,	 closer	 to	 the
Master,	closer	to	his	light.	Yes,	that	light	is	not	only	light,	it	is	fire	too;	it	is	going
to	 consume	 you.	 Be	 consumed,	 because	 in	 that	 fire	 there	 is	 great	 hope	 of	 a
rebirth.
These	small	Zen	stories	on	the	surface	look	like	just	ordinary	anecdotes	--	they
are	not.
They	carry	 immense	 significance.	Before	we	enter	 into	 the	 story,	 a	 few	 things
have	to	be	understood.
The	other	day	there	was	a	question	from	Satsanga.	He	said,	"Osho,	why	are	you
not	a	little	more	diplomatic	with	the	politicians	and	the	priests?	--	because	that
will	save	us	a	lot	of	trouble."
I	can	understand	what	he	means;	I	can	understand	his	worry.	He	would	like	me
to	be	a	little	more	diplomatic	--	but	a	Master	cannot	be	diplomatic.	It	has	never
been	 so,	 it	 is	 impossible.	 Diplomacy	 is	 cunningness,	 diplomacy	 is	 the	 art	 of
Lying.	Diplomacy	is	the	way	of	persuading	others	without	telling	them	the	truth.
Diplomacy	is	a	game.	Politicians	play	the	game;	mystics	cannot	play	it.
A	mystic	 is	one	who	calls	a	spade	a	spade.	He	is	straight,	whatsoever	the	cost.
He	cannot	deceive,	he	cannot	lie,	he	cannot	keep	quiet.	If	he	sees	something	he
will	say	it,	and	he	will	say	it	as	it	is.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say,	sometimes	to	very	prominent	people,	famous	in	some	way
or	other
--	great	authors,	painters,	poets,	politicians,	the	people	who	dominate	this	world,
the	 great	 egoists....	 He	 used	 to	 say	 to	 these	 people	 a	 very	 significant	 thing	 --
remember	it.	Suddenly	he	would	say	to	them,	"You	have	a	very	good	facade."
Now	to	say	to	a	politician,	to	a	president	of	a	country	or	to	a	prime	minister	or	to
a	king,
"You	 have	 a	 very	 good	 facade,"	 is	 to	 invite	 trouble.	 And	 Gurdjieff	 lived	 his
whole	life	in	trouble.	But	there	is	no	other	way.
He	also	used	 to	 say,	more	 than	once....	Whenever	 some	egoist	would	ask	him,
"Do	you	love	me?	Do	you	like	me?"	this	was	his	answer:	"For	what	you	could	be
I	 have	 nothing	 but	 benevolence,	 but	 as	 you	 are	 I	 hate	 you	 --	 back	 to	 your
grandmother!"
This	is	not	diplomacy:	this	is	creating	enemies.
Jesus	must	 have	 been	 a	 really	 great	 artist	 in	 creating	 enemies	 because	 he	was
only	thirty-three	when	he	was	crucified,	and	there	were	only	three	years	of	work
because	he	appeared	at	the	age	of	thirty.	Up	to	that	time	he	was	with	the	mystery
schools,	going	around	the	world	to	Egypt,	to	India,	and	the	possibility	is	even	to
Tibet	and	to	Japan.
Hence	 the	 Bible	 has	 no	 record	 of	 his	 years	 of	 preparation;	 the	 record	 is	 very
abrupt.
Something	about	his	 childhood	 is	 said,	very	 fragmentary.	And	only	once	 is	he
mentioned:	when	 he	was	 twelve	 years	 of	 age	 and	 he	 started	 arguing	with	 the
priests	in	the	temple	--
that's	all.	Then	there	is	a	gap	of	eighteen	years...	nothing	is	mentioned.
Now	 a	man	 like	 Jesus	 cannot	 just	 live	 an	 ordinary	 life	 for	 eighteen	 years	 and
then	suddenly	explode	into	Christhood;	that	is	not	possible.	These	eighteen	years
he	was	moving	with	different	Masters,	with	different	 systems,	getting	 initiated
into	different	mystery	schools,	learning	whatsoever	was	available,	getting	in	tune
with	as	many	Masters	as	possible.
He	appears	at	the	age	of	thirty	and	by	the	age	of	thirty-three	he	is	crucified.	In
three	years	he	really	did	a	good	job!	He	was	quick!	You	cannot	think	that	he	was
diplomatic;	he	was	the	most	undiplomatic	man	ever.
In	fact,	that's	the	way	the	awakened	people	behave.
What	exactly	is	diplomacy,	Satsanga?
"Daddy,	what	is	diplomacy?"	asked	little	Bill,	just	home	from	school.
"Well,	son,	it	is	like	this,"	replied	his	dad.	"If	I	were	to	say	to	your	mother,	'Your
face	would	stop	a	clock,'	 that	would	be	stupidity.	But	 if	I	were	to	say,	 'When	I
look	at	you,	time	stands	still,'	that	is	diplomacy!"
Yes,	 you	would	 like	me	 to	 be	 a	 little	more	 diplomatic;	 that	will	 save	 a	 lot	 of
trouble.	 But	 that	will	 save	 you	 also	 from	 truth,	 remember.	 Truth	 brings	many
troubles.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 so	 because	 people	 live	 in	 lies,	 and	when	you	bring
truth	into	the	world,	their	lies,	their	lives	rooted	in	lies,	react.	A	great	antagonism
is	bound	to	happen.	And	people	as	they	are,	in	their	unconsciousness,	cannot	live
without	lies.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 is	 right.	He	 says,	 "Please,	 don't	 destroy	people's	 lies,	 their
illusions,	because	if	you	destroy	their	illusions	they	will	not	be	able	to	live	at	all;
they	 will	 collapse."	 They	 will	 not	 find	 anything	 worth	 living	 for.	 They	 live
because	of	the	illusions;	the	illusions	keep	on	giving	them	hope.	They	live	in	the
tomorrow	which	never	comes.
They	 live	 in	 their	 ambitions	which	 are	never	 fulfilled;	but	whether	 fulfilled	or
not,	 through	 those	 ambitions	 and	 desires	 and	 illusions	 and	 expectations	 and
hopes	they	can	drag	their	lives	up	to	their	graves.	If	you	destroy	their	illusions,
they	may	simply	drop	dead	here	and	now	because	then	there	would	be	no	point
in	living.
And	whenever	you	think	of	suicide,	remember,	why	are	you	thinking	of	suicide?
Some	hope	has	turned	sour,	some	expectation	has	turned	into	a	frustration,	some
desire	has	proved	 futile.	You	have	become	aware;	even	 in	your	unawareness	a
little	 ray	 of	 awareness	 has	 penetrated	 you.	 You	 have	 seen,	 maybe	 only	 for	 a
moment,	a	glimpse,	 just	 like	 lightning	in	 the	dark	night.	For	a	moment	all	was
light	 and	 you	 have	 seen	 that	 the	 way	 you	 are	 living	 is	 false	 and	 there	 is	 no
fulfillment	if	you	live	in	a	false	way.
Immediately	the	idea	of	suicide	arises	in	you.
More	 and	 more	 people	 are	 committing	 suicide	 today,	 more	 than	 ever.	 More
people	commit	suicide	 in	 the	West	 than	in	 the	East.	 It	 looks	very	strange,	very
illogical.	 It	 should	 not	 be	 so,	 because	 in	 the	East	 people	 are	 starving	 but	 they
don't	 commit	 suicide.	 In	 the	West	 they	 have	 all	 that	man	 has	 always	 desired.
People	 have	 two	 houses	 --	 one	 in	 the	 city,	 one	 in	 the	 mountains	 or	 on	 the
seabeach,	 in	 the	 country.	They	have	 two-car	garages...and	 all	 kinds	of	 gadgets
that	technology	has	made	available.
For	the	first	time,	the	West	has	succeeded	in	being	affluent,	but	more	people	are
committing	suicide	there	than	in	the	East.	Why?	--	for	the	simple	reason	that	the
East	can	still	hope	and	the	West	is	becoming	aware	that	there	is	no	hope.	When
you	don't	have	something	you	can	hope	for	 it;	when	you	have	it,	how	can	you
hope	 any	more?	The	 thing	 is	 there	 and	 nothing	 has	 happened	 through	 it.	You
have	 the	 money,	 you	 have	 a	 good	 wife,	 children,	 husband,	 prestige,
respectability	 --	 and	 suddenly	 you	 become	 aware	 in	 this	 affluence	 that	 deep
down	 you	 are	 hollow,	 poor,	 a	 beggar	 and	 nothing	 else.	 The	 whole	 effort	 of
achieving	 all	 these	 things	 has	 failed.	 Things	 are	 there,	 but	 no	 fulfillment	 has
happened	through	them.	This	is	the	cause	of	more	suicide	in	the	West.
In	 the	West,	 too,	more	Americans	 commit	 suicide	 than	 anybody	 else	 because
they	are	the	most	affluent,	they	are	the	most	in	a	state	of	shock:	"All	the	hopes
for	which	we	have	lived	for	centuries	are	fulfilled,	and	yet	nothing	is	fulfilled."
And	this	 is	going	to	be	so	more	and	more:	more	and	more	people	will	commit
suicide.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 is	 correct:	 the	 ordinary	man	 cannot	 live	without	 illusions.
Don't	take	his	illusions	away	from	him!
And	the	Master	does	exactly	that:	he	tries	to	take	your	illusions	away.	He	creates
a	 situation	 in	 which,	 ordinarily,	 you	 would	 commit	 suicide.	 But	 if	 you	 are
fortunate	enough	to	have	a	communion	with	a	Master,	the	same	situation	creates
sannyas.	It	is	the	same	situation,	the	SAME	crisis!
This	is	my	observation:	that	true	sannyas	happens	only	when	you	have	come	to
the	verge	of	suicide.	When	you	see	that	the	outside	world	is	finished,	then	there
are	 only	 two	 alternatives	 left:	 either	 commit	 suicide	 and	 be	 finished	 because
there	is	nothing	to	live	for	any	more,	or	turn	in.	"The	outer	world	has	failed,	now
let	us	try	the	inner":	that	is	sannyas.	Sannyas	and	suicide	are	two	aspects	of	the
same	coin.	If	you	are	focused	and	obsessed	with	the	outside,	then	suicide;	if	you
are	a	little	loose,	flexible,	then	sannyas.
But	a	Master	cannot	be	diplomatic.	He	has	to	create	this	crisis	in	which	suicide	is
possible	 --	 and	 also	 sannyas,	 also	 transformation,	 also	 a	 new	birth.	But	 a	 new
birth	is	possible	only	when	you	die	to	the	old,	when	you	die	to	the	past.
Cynthia's	fine	figure	had	been	poured	into	a	beautiful	form-fitting	gown	and	she
made	a	point	of	calling	her	date's	attention	to	it	over	and	over	again	through-out
the	evening.
Finally,	over	a	nightcap	in	his	apartment,	he	said,	"You	have	been	talking	about
that	dress	all	evening	long.	You	called	my	attention	to	it	first	when	we	met	for
cocktails,	mentioned	it	again	at	dinner,	and	still	again	at	the	theater.	Now	that	we
are	here	alone	in	my	penthouse,	what	do	you	say	if	we	drop	the	subject?"
This	is	diplomacy!	But	Masters	simply	call	a	spade	a	spade.	Their	truth	is	utterly
nude;	whether	you	like	it	or	not	is	not	the	point.	They	cannot	compromise	with
your	 likings.	 If	 they	start	compromising	with	your	 likings	 they	can't	be	of	any
help	 to	 you.	 To	 compromise	with	 you	means	 to	 compromise	with	 your	 sleep,
your	unconsciousness,	your	mechanicalness.	To	compromise	with	you	means	to
stop	waking	you	up.	That	is	not	possible.
Hence,	Satsanga,	I	cannot	be	diplomatic.	Moreover,	I	am	not	British.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	talking	about	poor	Anurag's	mother	--	a	perfect	British
lady!	--
but	 she	was	 not	 here,	 just	 as	 expected.	 She	 had	 been	 here	 only	 once	 in	many
weeks.	She	simply	goes	on	sitting	in	the	hotel,	utterly	bored	--	as	every	British
person	is	bored!	Poor	Anurag	--	I	call	her	"poor"	because	she	is	going	through
something	really	horrible.	Now	I	have	 to	call	 it	horrible,	 I	can't	be	diplomatic!
She	arranged	so	that	her	mother	could	listen	to	the	tape,	and	after	she	listened	to
the	tape	Anurag	asked	her,	"What	do	you	think	of	it?"
She	said,	"Dear,	I	fell	asleep."
This	is	diplomacy!
People	listen	only	to	that	which	they	want	to	listen	to;	otherwise	they	fall	asleep.
At	least	they	can	think	of	a	thousand	other	things,	and	that	too	is	a	kind	of	sleep
because	they	are	no	longer	listening.
I	have	to	be	hard!	I	have	to	be	as	hard	as	possible	because	your	sleep	is	deep	and
it	has	to	be	shattered.	I	have	to	hit	your	head	with	a	hammer,	otherwise	you	are
not	 going	 to	wake	 up.	 For	 centuries	 you	 have	 been	 asleep;	 sleep	 has	 become
your	nature.	You	have	forgotten	what	awareness	is,	what	to	be	awake	means.
THERE	 ARE	 THREE	 TYPES	 OF	MEN,	 and	 the	 Master	 behaves	 differently
according	to	the	type.	The	highest	type	is	the	man	who	has	tasted	the	joy	of	no-
mind.	 The	 Master	 behaves	 with	 that	 type	 of	 man	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 way,
because	he	knows	he	will	understand.
The	state	of	no-mind	is	the	highest	state.	You	are	at	the	peak	when	you	are	in	the
state	of	no-mind,	when	you	are	absolutely	silent,	when	nothing	stirs	within	you,
no	 idea,	 no	 thought,	 when	 the	 mind	 has	 ceased	 to	 create	 noise,	 the	 constant
noise.	The	mind	is	chattering	so	much	that	it	won't	allow	you	to	hear	anything.
When	 the	mind's	chattering	ceases,	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	become	aware	of	 the
music	of	your	own	being.	And	for	 the	first	 time	you	also	become	aware	of	 the
music	that	this	existence	is.
When	such	a	man	approaches	a	Master,	the	Master	behaves	in	a	totally	different
way	--
because	 he	 knows	 whatsoever	 he	 does	 he	 will	 be	 understood.	 Communion	 is
possible	because	there	is	no	barrier.
The	second	type	of	man	is	the	man	who	lives	in	between,	between	the	first	and
the	third.
He	has	a	meditative	mind	--	not	a	no-mind	yet,	but	a	meditative	mind.	That	is,	he
is	on	the	way.	He	has	learned	how	to	be	a	little	silent,	a	little	more	harmonious
than	others.	The	noise	is	there,	but	it	is	a	distant	noise;	he	has	been	able	to	detach
himself	from	it.	He	has	created	a	little	distance	between	himself	and	his	mind;	he
is	 no	more	 identified	with	 the	mind.	He	does	not	 think,	 "I	 am	 the	mind."	The
mind	is	there,	still	chattering,	still	playing	old	tricks,	but	the	man	is	a	little	alert
not	 to	 be	 a	 slave	 of	 the	mind.	 The	mind	 has	 not	 left	 him,	 but	 the	mind	 is	 no
longer	so	powerful	as	it	ordinarily	is.
In	the	state	of	no-mind,	the	mind	has	left;	the	mind	has	become	tired.	The	mind
has	come	to	realize	that	"This	man	has	gone	beyond	--	beyond	my	powers.	Now
this	 man	 cannot	 be	 exploited	 any	 more.	 This	 man	 has	 become	 utterly
unidentified	with	me.	He	will	use	me	but	I	cannot	use	him."
The	second	 type	of	man,	who	 is	 in	between,	sometimes	 falls	back	 into	 the	old
pattern,	is	USED	by	the	mind,	sometimes	gets	out	of	the	old	pattern.	It	is	hide-
and-seek.	Mind	is	still	not	absolutely	certain	that	it	has	failed;	there	is	still	hope,
because	 once	 in	 a	 while	 the	 man	 starts	 listening	 to	 the	 mind,	 becomes	 again
identified.	The	distance	is	not	great;	the	mind	is	very	close.	Any	moment	--	any
moment	of	unconsciousness	--	and	the	mind	takes	over,	starts	bossing	over	him
again.
This	 is	 the	 second	 type	 of	 man:	 the	 meditative	 man,	 who	 has	 known	 a	 few
glimpses	 of	 the	 eternal.	 Just	 as	 you	 can	 see	 the	Himalayas	 from	 thousands	 of
miles	 away...the	 snow-covered	peaks	 in	 the	 early	morning	 sun	 in	 an	open	 sky,
unclouded	sky,	can	be	seen	from	thousands	of	miles	away.	That	is	one	thing;	and
to	be	on	the	peak,	to	abide	there,	is	quite	another.
The	first	type	of	man	ABIDES	in	no-mind.	The	second	type	of	man	has	glimpses
only	--
of	tremendous	value	of	course,	because	those	glimpses	will	pave	the	way	so	that
he	 can	 reach	 the	 peak.	Once	 you	 have	 seen	 the	 peak,	 even	 from	 thousands	 of
miles	 away,	 the	 invitation	 has	 been	 received.	 Now	 you	 cannot	 remain	 in	 the
world	at	rest,	in	the	old	way.
Something	 starts	 challenging	 you,	 something	 starts	 calling	 you	 forth.	 An
adventure	has	taken	possession	of	you:	you	HAVE	to	travel	to	the	peak.	It	may
take	years,	maybe	lives,	but	the	journey	has	started.	The	first	seed	has	fallen	into
the	heart.
The	Master	behaves	with	the	meditative	man	in	a	different	way,	because	with	the
first,	communion	is	possible,	with	the	second,	communication	is	possible.
And	then	there	is	the	third	type:	the	man	who	lives	identified	with	the	mind,	with
the	ego,	with	whom	even	communication	is	not	possible,	with	whom	there	is	no
way	to	relate.
This	word	"identification"	is	beautiful.	It	means	to	make	something	an	entity,	to
entityfy	 the	"id";	 that	 is	 the	meaning	of	 identification.	When	YOU	become	the
mind	you	have	 become	 a	 thing;	 you	 are	 no	more	 separate.	You	have	 fallen	 in
sleep.	This	is	what	is	called	metaphysical	sleep.	You	have	lost	track	of	your	own
self.	You	have	forgotten	your	reality	and	you	have	become	one	with	something
which	 you	 are	 not.	 To	 become	 one	 with	 something	 that	 you	 are	 not	 is
identification;	and	to	be	that	which	you	are	is	disidentification.
The	first	man	lives	in	disidentification.	He	knows	he	is	not	the	body,	he	is	not	the
mind.
He	 simply	 knows	 he	 is	 only	 awareness	 and	 nothing	 else.	 The	 body	 goes	 on
changing,	 the	mind	 goes	 on	 changing,	 but	 there	 is	 one	 thing	 in	 you	which	 is
unchanging,	 absolutely	 unchanging;	 that	 is	 your	 awareness.	 It	was	 exactly	 the
same	when	you	were	a	child	and	it	will	remain	exactly	the	same	when	you	are	an
old	man.	It	was	the	same	when	you	were	born	and	it	will	be	the	same	when	you
die.	It	was	the	same	before	your	birth,	it	will	be	the	same	after	your	death.	It	is
the	ONLY	 thing	 in	 existence	which	 is	 eternal,	 unchanging,	 the	only	 thing	 that
abides.
And	 only	 this	 eternal	 awareness	 can	 be	 the	 true	 home,	 nothing	 else,	 because
everything	else	is	a	flux.	And	we	go	on	clinging	to	the	changing;	then	we	create
misery,	because	it	changes	and	we	want	it	not	to	change.	We	are	asking	for	the
impossible,	and	because	the	impossible	cannot	happen	we	fall	into	misery	again
and	again.
The	young	man	wants	to	remain	young	forever;	that	is	not	possible.	He	will	have
to	become	old,	the	body	will	have	to	become	old.	And	when	the	body	is	old	he
will	be	miserable.	But	 awareness	 is	 the	 same.	The	body	 is	 just	 like	 the	house;
awareness	is	the	host.	Deep	down	within	your	body	and	mind	complex	there	is	a
totally	different	phenomenon	constantly	happening.	It	is	neither	body	nor	mind;
it	is	something	that	can	observe	body	and	mind	both.	It	is	pure	observation.	It	is
the	witnessing	soul	--
SAKSHIN.	The	 first	 type	of	man	knows	 that	he	 is	unidentified	with	all	 that	 is
changing.
He	is	centered	in	his	reality.	The	third	type	of	man	is	obsessed	with	something
which	he	is	not.	In	fact,	the	majority	of	people	belong	to	the	third	type.	The	third
type	 is	metaphysically	 ill.	 If	 you	 ask	 the	 awakened	 one,	 then	 the	 third	 type	 is
mad,	insane.	To	think	yourself	something	which	you	are	not	is	insanity.
A	man	went	to	a	psychiatrist	and	said,	"Doctor,	you	will	have	to	help	me.	I	can't
help	thinking	that	I	am	a	dog.	I	even	chew	bones,	bark,	and	lie	on	the	mat	in	the
evenings."
Said	the	psychiatrist,	"Just	lie	on	that	couch...."
"I	am	not	allowed	to!"	he	cried.
But	 this	 is	 the	 situation	 of	 the	 ordinary	 humanity.	 Somebody	 has	 become	 a
Hindu,	 somebody	 has	 become	 a	 Mohammedan,	 somebody	 has	 become	 a
Christian.	Somebody	is	Indian,	somebody	is	Chinese,	somebody	is	Italian.	These
are	all	identifications.
Somebody	 thinks	 himself	 white,	 somebody	 thinks	 himself	 black.	 Somebody
thinks	himself	a	man	and	somebody	is	identified	with	being	a	woman.	These	are
all	states	of	deep	unconscious	slumber.
If	you	are	not	the	body,	how	can	you	be	a	man	or	a	woman?	If	you	are	not	the
body,	how	can	you	be	white	or	black?	If	you	are	not	even	the	mind,	how	can	you
be	Christian	or	Hindu?	If	you	are	only	awareness,	then	you	are	only	awareness
and	nothing	else.
Now	this	little	Zen	story:
ONE	 DAY	 THE	 KING	 OF	 YEN	 VISITED	 THE	 MASTER	 CHAO	 CHOU,
WHO	DID
NOT	EVEN	GET	UP	WHEN	HE	SAW	HIM	COMING.
THAT	IS	STRANGE!	First:	now	it	has	become	almost	impossible	for	a	president
or	 a	 prime	minister	 or	 a	 king	 to	 go	 to	 a	Master,	 because	 they	 think	 they	 are
powerful	people.
Why	should	they	go	to	these	poor	people?	What	can	they	give	to	them?	Values
have	changed.
Within	 these	 two	 thousand	 years,	 man's	 values	 have	 gone	 through	 immense
change.	In	the	ancient	days,	the	highest	man	was	not	the	one	who	had	power	but
the	one	who	had	renounced	power.	And	it	seems	significant	that	the	one	who	has
renounced	 power	 should	 be	 thought	 higher;	 it	 is	 a	 very	 ordinary	 desire	 to	 be
powerful.	 The	 man	 who	 has	 been	 able	 to	 renounce	 power	 has	 attained	 to	 a
certain	inner	integrity.	He	has	dropped	a	very	ordinary	ambition;	he	has	become
extraordinary.
In	those	days,	kings	used	to	go	to	seek	advice,	to	search	for	light,	to	sit	at	the	feet
of	somebody	who	had	attained.
This	 king	must	 have	 heard	 of	Chao	Chou.	He	went	 to	 see	 him.	This	 shows	 a
totally	different	priority.	It	 is	very	difficult	now;	it	 is	difficult	because	man	has
become	more	materialistic.	His	mind	is	too	much	concerned	with	what	you	have
rather	 than	with	 what	 you	 are.	 In	 the	 ancient	 days	 the	 value	 was	 not	 in	 your
possessions	but	in	your	being.	The	value	was	not	in	your	things,	not	even	in	your
knowledge	--	because	that	too	is	a	possession	--	but	in	your	being,	in	your	sheer
being,	in	the	purity	of	your	inner	core.	You	may	have	nothing....
Alexander	had	gone	to	see	Diogenes	--	a	naked	man	who	had	nothing.	But	it	is
beautiful	 to	 remember	 that	 even	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 had	 the	 guts	 to	 go	 to
Diogenes,	 the	naked	FAKIR.	For	what	 had	he	gone?	Alexander's	 generals,	 his
prime	minister,	his	ministers,	were	all	against	 it.	They	said,	 "For	what	are	you
going	there?	That	man	has	nothing!"
Alexander	said,	"I	know	it,	that	that	man	has	nothing;	that's	why	I	am	going	to
see	 him,	 because	 I	 have	 heard	 he	 has	 a	 tremendous	 rootedness,	 a	 great
centeredness	--	and	I	want	to	see	a	centered	man.	I	am	just	fragmentary,	I	have
no	center.	I	don't	know	what	it	is	to	have	a	Center	and	I	want	to	see	a	person	who
has	a	center.	He	possesses	nothing	on	the	outside,	but	he	possesses	himself	--	and
that	is	the	real	possession."
ONE	 DAY	 THE	 KING	 OF	 YEN	 VISITED	 THE	 MASTER	 CHAO	 CHOU,
WHO	DID
NOT	EVEN	GET	UP	WHEN	HE	SAW	HIM	COMING.
And	Chao	Chou	did	not	get	up.	That	would	have	been	normal,	expected.	When
the	 king	 comes	 to	 see	 you,	 you	 have	 to	 get	 up	 and	 receive	 him;	 it	 is	 just	 a
formality.
I	have	heard	that	Chuang	Tzu,	a	Taoist	Master,	used	to	be	in	the	service	of	the
King	of	China.	Then	he	left	the	service.	After	a	few	years	the	king	came	to	hear
that	Chuang	Tzu	had	become	enlightened,	so	he	went	to	see	him.
Chuang	Tzu	was	a	man	of	great	manners,	formality,	because	he	had	been	one	of
the	most	important	men	in	the	court	of	the	king.	So	the	king	was	expecting	the
same	court	manners.	When	he	reached	Chuang	Tzu,	he	was	playing	on	his	flute,
both	his	legs	spread	underneath	a	tree,	leaning	against	the	tree.	He	continued	to
play	on	the	flute	with	legs	spread.
The	king	stood	there,	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	He	said,	"Have	you	gone	mad
or	something?	Have	you	forgotten	all	court	manners?"
Chuang	Tzu	laughed	and	he	said,	"I	was	showing	those	manners	because	I	was
still	hankering	for	respectability.	Now	I	don't	hanker	for	anything,	so	why	should
I	care?	You	may	be	the	king,	you	may	be	the	beggar	--	it	is	all	the	same	to	me.
Because	now	 I	 have	no	desires	 any	more,	 it	 does	 not	matter	whether	 the	king
comes	to	me	or	the	beggar."
The	 king	was	 immensely	 impressed;	 he	 understood	 the	 point.	 All	 those	 court
manners	were	nothing	but	ways	of	buttressing	the	king.
You	 buttress	 somebody,	 and	 then	 in	 response	 he	 buttresses	 your	 ego.	 It	 is	 a
mutual	kind	of	arrangement.	You	say	good	things	about	others	and	they	say	good
things	about	you.
Both	are	being	formal	because	both	want	to	hear	good	things	about	themselves.
Chuang	Tzu	said,	"Now	it	 is	up	to	you,	whatsoever	you	think.	You	can	think	I
have	gone	mad,	you	can	think	I	have	fallen	from	grace.	Who	cares?"
Exactly	 the	 same	happened	with	Chao	Chou:	 he	did	not	 even	get	 up	when	he
saw	the	king	coming.	But	this	king	must	have	had	a	totally	different	quality	from
the	king	who	visited	Chuang	Tzu.	Even	Alexander	was	offended	by	Diogenes'
behavior,	because	Diogenes	was	lying	down	naked	on	the	bank	of	a	river	in	the
sand.	It	was	early	morning	-
-	must	have	been	a	morning	like	this,	very	cool	--	and	he	was	taking	a	sunbath.
He	didn't	get	up;	he	remained	lying	down,	taking	a	sunbath.
Alexander	was	 a	 little	 embarrassed	 --	 how	 to	 start	 talking	with	 this	man?	Not
finding	anything	 else,	 he	 said,	 "I	 have	 come	 to	 see	you	 --	 I	 am	Alexander	 the
Great.	Can	I	be	of	any	help	to	you?"
Diogenes	 said,	 "Look,	 if	you	are	 really	great,	you	need	not	go	on	declaring	 it.
That	 simply	 shows	 a	 very	 stupid	 mind.	 That	 shows	 only	 a	 very	 small	 mind,
egoistic.	 To	 declare	 yourself	 great	 simply	 means	 you	 are	 suffering	 from	 an
inferiority	complex!
"And	the	second	thing:	I	don't	need	anything,	but	if	you	really	want	to	help	me
you	can	do	one	thing	--	just	stand	aside,	because	you	are	blocking	the	sun."
That	was	all	that	Diogenes	asked	from	Alexander	the	Great:	"Stand	aside,	don't
come	in	the	way	of	the	sun	and	me."
But	Alexander	could	not	understand	Diogenes.	Of	course	he	was	impressed,	but
in	 a	 totally	 different	 manner.	 He	 was	 impressed	 by	 the	 powerful	 presence	 of
Diogenes	 --	 it	was	 as	 if	 the	whole	bank	was	 full	 of	his	presence,	 as	 if	 he	was
creating	a	Buddhafield.
Although	he	was	armored,	although	he	was	not	at	all	interested	in	mysticism,	he
was	impressed.
But	 this	King	of	Yen	must	have	been	of	 the	 first	 type	 far	higher	 than	 the	king
who	visited	Chuang	Tzu	and	far	higher	than	Alexander.	He	understood	it.
THE	KING	ASKED,	 "WHICH	 IS	 HIGHER,	 A	WORLDLY	KING,	 OR	 THE
'KING	OF
DHARMA'?"
Why	did	he	ask	this	question?	You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	he	asked	it	just
to	see	whether	Chao	Chou	showed	any	so-called	humility	or	not.
The	 religious	 people	 always	 go	 on	 showing	 humbleness:	 "I	 am	 nothing,	 I	 am
nobody."
And	 if	 you	 look	 into	 their	 eyes,	 their	 eyes	 are	 saying	 just	 the	opposite.	 If	 you
watch	 their	 behavior,	 it	 is	 always	 a	projection	of	holier-than-thou.	They	go	on
saying,	"We	are	nothing,"	and	they	go	on	in	a	subtle	way,	in	a	diplomatic	way,
proclaiming,	"We	are	saints."
THE	KING	ASKED,	 "WHICH	 IS	 HIGHER,	 A	WORLDLY	KING,	 OR	 THE
'KING	OF
DHARMA'?"
CHAO	 CHOU	 REPLIED,	 "AMONG	 HUMAN	 KINGS	 I	 AM	 HIGHER;
AMONG	THE
KINGS	OF	DHARMA	I	AM	ALSO	HIGHER."
THE	 REAL	MAN	 OF	 ZEN	 IS	 NOT	 HUMBLE	 in	 the	 ordinary	 sense	 of	 the
word.	He	 simply	 says	whatsoever	 is	 the	 case.	 This	 is	 the	 case!	Chao	Chou	 is
simply	stating	a	truth.
He	is	not	saying	anything	about	himself,	remember.	He	is	simply	stating	a	fact:
"THIS
state	 --	 this	 state	 of	 no-mind	 in	which	 I	 am	 --	 is	 higher,	 higher	 among	human
kings	and	higher	among	Kings	of	Dharma	also	--	because	it	is	the	highest	state."
Once	 Ramakrishna	 was	 given	 a	 painting	 by	 a	 great	 painter	 --	 a	 painting	 of
Ramakrishna	himself,	a	portrait.	Ramakrishna	took	the	painting,	bowed	down	to
the	painting,	touched	the	feet	--	his	own	feet,	it	was	his	own	portrait!	The	painter
was	puzzled:	"Is	that	man	really	mad?"	The	disciples	were	puzzled.
One	disciple	asked,	"Paramahansadeva,	what	are	you	doing,	touching	your	own
feet?"
Ramakrishna	said,	"Right!	You	should	have	reminded	me	before.	I	should	not	do
such	a	thing.	What	will	people	think?	They	will	think	I	am	mad!	But	the	truth	is,
I	completely	forgot	that	this	is	my	picture	--	I	could	only	see	the	ultimate	state	of
consciousness.	 This	 is	 a	 portrait	 of	 SAMADHI,	 not	 of	 Ramakrishna.
Ramakrishna	 is	 irrelevant!	 It	 could	 have	 been	Buddha's	 picture,	 it	 could	 have
been	Krishna's	picture,	it	could	have	been	Jesus'
picture.	It	is	just	an	accident	that	it	is	mine.	It	doesn't	matter.
"But	 the	 painter	 has	 been	 able	 to	 catch	 hold	 of	 something	 very	 subtle;	 he	 has
been	 able	 to	 depict	 something	 which	 is	 indescribable.	 And	 I	 could	 not	 resist
myself	--	I	had	to	bow	down,	I	had	to	touch	the	feet."
Remember,	when	Chao	Chou	says:
"AMONG	 HUMAN	 KINGS	 I	 AM	 HIGHER;	 AMONG	 THE	 KINGS	 OF
DHARMA,	I	AM	ALSO	HIGHER..."
he	is	not	talking	about	himself,	not	at	all.	He	is	talking	about	the	ultimate	state.
He	is	no	more,	so	who	is	there	to	be	humble?	See	the	point:	there	is	nobody	to	be
proud,	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 be	 humble.	Those	 are	 all	 games	 of	 the	 ego	 --	 to	 be
humble	or	to	be	proud.
The	real	man	is	neither	proud	nor	humble;	he	simply	is	not.	Then	whatsoever	he
says	 has	 no	 reference	 to	 his	 personality.	 He	 is	 only	 a	 mirror;	 he	 reflects	 the
ultimate.	Chao	Chou	is	talking	about	the	ultimate.	He	has	become	one	with	the
ultimate.	And	the	king	understood	it.
HEARING	THIS	SURPRISING	ANSWER...
The	answer	is	really	surprising.	When	you	go	to	saints,	they	don't	talk	like	that.
Once	I	was	invited	to	a	religious	conference.	Three	hundred	saints	were	invited
from	all	over	the	country.	I	was	puzzled	why	they	invited	me,	because	I	am	not	a
saint.	It	seems	by	some	mistake....
They	had	made	a	great	platform	for	all	 three	hundred	saints	 to	sit	 together,	but
they	were	not	ready	to	sit	on	the	same	platform,	at	the	same	height,	with	others.
Nobody	was	ready!
They	all	wanted	a	little	higher	place	than	the	others.	Now,	that	was	impossible!
How	can	you	manage	three	hundred	people,	everybody	asking	for	a	little	higher
place	than	the	other?	So	the	stage	was	for	three	hundred	people,	and	thousands
of	 people	 had	 gathered	 to	 listen,	 but	 each	 saint	 talked	 to	 the	 people	 --	 sitting
alone	on	that	big	platform.
It	was	impossible	to	even	bring	them	together.	And	if	you	talk	to	them	they	will
all	say,
"We	 are	 just	 dust	 and	 nothing	 else.	We	 are	 humble	 people,	 servants	 of	 God,
servants	of	humanity."
Even	 once	 a	 year	 some	 of	 them	 would	 wash	 the	 feet	 of	 a	 poor	 man	 --	 all
formality!	 But	 they	 could	 not	 sit	 on	 the	 same	 platform.	 One	 of	 those	 three
hundred	saints	had	brought	his	own	golden	 throne	and	he	wanted	 to	 sit	on	his
golden	 throne.	 Now	 the	 others	 were	 very	 angry.	 They	 said,	 "This	 cannot	 be
allowed!	If	he	sits	on	a	golden	throne,	then	we	also	need	golden	thrones	of	the
same	height."
Can	you	see	what	kind	of	people	these	are?	Are	these	saints	or	monkeys?	Even
monkeys	 are	not	 so	 stupid!	 I	 have	 seen	 them	 just	 sitting	 in	 trees,	 on	 the	 same
branches,	enjoying	themselves.	Nobody	is	worried	about	who	is	higher,	who	is
lower.
But	 if	 you	 talk	 to	 these	 saints...and	 they	 all	 addressed	 the	 audience,	 and	with
great	 humbleness.	 Pious	 egoism!	 Religious	 egoism!	 And	 the	 pious,	 religious
egoism	is	far	more	dangerous	than	any	other.	All	their	behavior,	all	their	talk,	is
only	 a	 beautiful	 facade,	 a	 cultivated	 phenomenon.	 Because	 people	 respect
humbleness	they	are	pretending	to	be	humble	--	in	order	to	be	respected.	You	see
the	 strategy	 and	 the	 cunning	ways	 of	 the	 ego?	And	 these	 are	 the	 people	who
have	reduced	the	whole	of	religion	to	formality.
HEARING	THIS	SURPRISING	ANSWER...
It	was	really	surprising	--	surprising	because	ordinarily	the	religious	people	don't
talk	like	that.	The	king	must	have	expected	that	he	would	say,	"I	am	nobody.	I
am	just	dust	under	your	feet.	I	am	the	servant	of	humanity,	just	a	servant	of	God.
I	am	here	to	serve	others."
But	he	simply	said,	"No.	I	am	higher	than	the	human	kings	and	I	am	higher	than
the	Kings	of	Dharma	too."	He	simply	stated	the	fact.	In	fact,	he	is	showing	great
respect	to	the	king.	By	saying	the	truth	he	is	saying,	"I	understand	that	you	can
understand."
HEARING	 THIS	 SURPRISING	 ANSWER,	 THE	 KING	 WAS	 VERY
PLEASED.
Reading	 this	 sentence	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 you	will	 be	 a	 little	 surprised	why	 the
king	 is	 pleased.	 He	 should	 really	 be	 displeased	 because	 this	 man	 is	 trying	 to
prove	himself	higher	than	everybody	--	not	only	than	him	but	than	other	saints
also.	He	is	saying,	"I	am	greater	than	the	Kings	of	Dharma."
But	he	was	pleased.	Why?	--	for	the	simple	reason	that	this	man	understands	that
the	king	can	understand	--	and	more	respect	than	that	cannot	be	shown.	He	has
said	the	truth	as	it	is,	naked,	utterly	naked,	trusting	that	here	is	a	man	who	will	be
able	 to	understand.	There	 is	no	need	 to	compromise;	 there	 is	no	need	 to	come
down;	there	is	no	need	to	talk	in	a	language	that	HE	can	understand.	You	can	say
the	truth	as	it	is	and	still	you	can	hope	that	he	will	understand.
Chao	Chou	must	have	seen	that	this	man	had	attained	something	of	the	no-mind.
And	whenever	you	come	before	a	Master,	 just	a	 look	 is	enough	and	he	knows
you	 through	 and	 through,	 to	 the	 innermost	 core.	 He	 becomes	 immediately
acquainted	with	you;	no	other	 introduction	 is	needed.	He	can	 see	whether	you
are	asleep	or	awake.	He	can	see	whether	you	are	pretending	or	real.	He	can	see
whether	you	are	pseudo	or	authentic.
He	can	see	where	you	are.
Every	evening	people	come	to	see	me;	they	come	to	touch	my	feet.	Touching	my
feet	has	nothing	to	do	with	me;	that	is	just	an	excuse	for	them	to	bow	down,	to
surrender.	Any	other	excuse	will	do.	If	you	can	manage	you	can	bow	down	to	a
tree,	and	immediately	you	will	see	a	great	uprising	in	yourself,	a	great	uplift.
There	are	a	few	fools	also.	They	will	touch	my	feet,	but	they	are	only	following
a	formality.	There	are	a	few	other	kinds	of	fools	who	will	come	to	touch	my	feet
but	will	not	even	be	able	to	do	it	formally.	They	will	just	sit	there	like	rocks.	I
touch	 their	 heads	not	 to	offend	 them,	otherwise	 it	 is	 not	worth	 it	 because	 it	 is
meaningless.	If	they	are	not	surrendering,	my	touch	cannot	reach	their	hearts,	my
energy	 cannot	 stir	 their	 hearts.	 If	 they	 are	 sitting	 like	 rocks,	 they	 are	 just
touching	my	feet	 in	a	pseudo	way.	Touching	 their	heads	 is	 futile.	Still	 I	 touch,
just	not	to	hurt	them	unnecessarily.	And	they	will	not	understand	even	that.	You
can	hit	only	when	somebody	understands.
Now	Chao	Chou	has	hit	the	king	as	hard	as	possible	by	saying,	"What	are	you?	I
am	higher	than	all	the	kings,	of	this	world	and	the	other	world."	He	has	hit	him
hard	--	must	have	see	the	immense	capacity	of	the	man	to	understand.	And	that's
why	the	king	is	very	pleased:	he	was	not	hoping	that	he	would	be	respected	so
much.
Do	you	see	the	point?	It	is	not	an	ordinary	anecdote.	When	you	read	it,	it	looks
ordinary;	when	you	go	deep	 into	 it	meditatively,	 you	will	 find	 subtle	nuances,
subtle	turns.	Just	this	single	phrase	--	THE	KING	WAS	VERY	PLEASED	--	is
of	immense	importance.	What	is	there	to	be	pleased	about?	The	man	has	hit	him
like	 anything!	But	 there	 is	 something	 to	 be	pleased	 about,	 because	he	 thought
him	worthy	enough	to	hit;	he	thought	him	worthy	enough	to	say	the	truth	as	it	is.
He	belongs	to	the	first	category.
THE	NEXT	DAY	A	GENERAL	CAME	TO	VISIT	CHAO	CHOU,	WHO	NOT
ONLY
GOT	UP	FROM	HIS	SEAT	WHEN	HE	SAW	THE	GENERAL	COMING,	BUT
ALSO
SHOWED	 HIM	 MORE	 HOSPITALITY	 IN	 EVERY	 WAY	 THAN	 HE	 HAD
SHOWN
TO	THE	KING.
AFTER	THE	GENERAL	HAD	LEFT,	CHAO	CHOU'S	ATTENDANT	MONKS
ASKED	 HIM,	 "WHY	 DID	 YOU	 GET	 UP	 FROM	 YOUR	 SEAT	 WHEN	 A
PERSON	OF
LOWER	RANK	CAME	TO	SEE	YOU,	YET	DID	NOT	DO	SO	FOR	ONE	OF
THE
HIGHEST	RANK?"
NOW	THE	ATTENDANT	MONKS	can	see	only	the	outer	shell.	The	general	is
of	a	lower	rank,	the	king	is	of	a	higher	rank	--	they	can	only	see	the	outer	side.
And	they	must	have	been	puzzled:	"Why	did	Chao	Chou	behave	in	such	a	hard
way	with	the	king	and	why	did	he	behave	in	such	a	soft	way	with	the	general?"
CHAO	CHOU	REPLIED,	"YOU	DON'T	UNDERSTAND.	WHEN	PEOPLE	OF
THE
HIGHEST	QUALITY	COME	TO	SEE	ME,	 I	DO	NOT	GET	UP	FROM	MY
SEAT..."
There	 is	 no	need,	 because	 the	highest	 quality	people	have	no	 egos;	 that's	why
they	are	of	the	highest	quality.	If	they	have	no	egos,	there	is	no	need	to	stand	up
or	 to	 show	 great	 respect	 to	 them.	 That	 will	 be	 futile,	 meaningless.	 That	 will
simply	show	that	you	don't	understand.
"WHEN	PEOPLE	OF	THE	HIGHEST	QUALITY	COME	TO	SEE	ME,	 I	DO
NOT	GET
UP	 FROM	MY	 SEAT;	WHEN	 THEY	 ARE	 OF	MIDDLE	 QUALITY,	 I	 DO;
BUT
WHEN	THEY	ARE	OF	THE	LOWEST	QUALITY,	I	GO	OUTSIDE	OF	THE
GATE
TO	RECEIVE	THEM."
THE	WAYS	OF	THE	MASTERS	ARE	STRANGE!	And	to	be	with	a	Master	is
to	be	with	a	mystery.	A	Master	is	a	mystery:	he	lives	on	the	earth	and	yet	he	is
not	part	of	the	earth.	He	is	in	the	body	and	he	is	not	the	body.	He	uses	the	mind
and	he	is	not	the	mind.
He	is	in	time	but	he	belongs	to	the	beyond,	to	eternity.	He	is	as	alive	as	you	are,
but	 in	a	 totally	different	way	because	he	knows	 there	 is	no	birth,	no	death.	He
has	gone	beyond	life	and	death;	he	knows	life	eternal.
From	the	outside	he	is	just	like	you	--	hungry	he	eats,	thirsty	he	drinks,	tired	he
sleeps	--
just	like	you.	But	in	his	innermost	core	he	is	totally	different	because	he	is	in	a
totally	different	world,	in	a	totally	different	space.
And	 to	 understand	 his	 inner	 world	 you	 will	 have	 to	 grow	 into	 your	 own
interiority;	that	is	the	only	way.	You	can	understand	only	so	much.	If	you	move
deep	into	yourself	you	will	understand	the	Master	in	a	deep	way.	The	deeper	you
move	 inside,	 the	 deeper	 you	 will	 understand	 the	 Master.	 To	 understand	 the
Master	 you	will	 have	 to	 go	 deeper	 into	 yourself.	When	 you	 have	 reached	 the
innermost	 core	 of	 your	 being	 you	 will	 know	 the	 Master	 in	 his	 absolute
perfection.	Otherwise,	you	will	misunderstand.
Now,	even	the	attendant	monks	could	not	understand.
CHAO	CHOU	SAID,	"YOU	DON'T	UNDERSTAND."
It	is	VERY	simple!
"WHEN	THE	PEOPLE	OF	THE	HIGHEST	QUALITY	COME	TO	SEE	ME,	I
DO	NOT
GET	UP	FROM	MY	SEAT..."
"In	that	way	I	show	my	respect	to	them.	I	say	to	them,	'I	have	seen	that	you	have
known	something	of	the	no-mind,	that	your	ego	is	no	more	a	solid	phenomenon,
it	is	no	more	substantial;	that	you	don't	hanker	for	respect.	That's	why	I	am	not
showing	you	the	formal	respect.	I	know	that	you	have	gone	beyond	the	form	and
beyond	the	formal.'"
We	 live	 in	 the	 form	and	 in	 the	 formal;	we	change	everything	 into	 a	 formality.
Love	becomes	marriage.	Christ	becomes	the	church.	Buddha	is	reduced	to	stone
statues.	Great	truths	become	ordinary	scriptures	to	be	worshipped.	We	are	really
very	 skillful	 in	 reducing	 every	 higher	 thing	 to	 the	 lowest	 possible.	We	 bring
everything	to	our	level.
Rather	 than	 going	 to	 the	 level	 of	 the	 Buddhas,	 of	 the	 Masters,	 we	 bring	 the
Masters,	 once	 they	 have	 left	 the	world....	 Of	 course,	when	 they	 are	 alive	 you
cannot	bring	them	to	your	level;	they	live	without	any	compromise.	You	have	to
surrender	 to	 them.	But	once	 they	are	gone,	 then	 it	 is	very	easy:	you	can	make
their	 statues	 and	 temples	 and	 you	 can	worship	 them,	 and	 everything	 becomes
formal	--	Sunday	religion	--	comfortable,	convenient,	but	meaningless.
One	Hell's	Angel	 remarked	 to	 another,	 "I	 don't	 see	you	 at	 the	gang	bangs	 any
more.	What	happened?"
"I	got	married,"	said	his	buddy.
"No	 shit,	 man,"	 said	 the	 first	 cycler,	 "is	 legal	 tail	 any	 better	 than	 the	 normal
kind?"
"It	ain't	even	so	good,"	said	the	new	groom,	"but	you	don't	have	to	stand	in	line
for	it."
It	is	comfortable,	it	is	convenient	--	the	legal	tail!	And	man	is	more	interested	in
convenience	 than	 in	 truth,	 more	 interested	 in	 comfort	 than	 in	 truth,	 more
interested	in	security	than	in	transformation.
If	 that	 is	 your	 state	 too	 you	 are	 going	 to	miss	me,	 because	my	 interest	 is	 not
security;	 I	 will	 force	 you	 more	 and	 more	 into	 insecurity.	 My	 interest	 is	 not
convenience;	I	will	force	you	more	and	more	into	rebellion.	My	interest	is	only
one:	truth,	because	it	is	truth	that	liberates;	everything	else	becomes	a	bondage.
THE	HIGHEST	QUALITY	MAN	immediately	becomes	a	devotee.	The	middle
quality	man	 immediately	 becomes	 a	 disciple.	The	 lowest	 quality	man	 remains
for	years,	for	lives,	just	a	student.
Look	 into	 yourself,	where	 you	 are.	Don't	 be	 just	 a	 student	 here.	 This	 is	 not	 a
school;	in	fact,	the	whole	process	is	one	of	de-schooling.	I	am	not	teaching	you
anything;	I	am	here	to	help	you	be	transformed.	I	am	not	giving	you	a	dogma	or
a	creed	or	a	religion;	I	am	not	interested	in	all	these	things.	I	simply	want	to	give
you	that	which	you	already	have	--
it	has	only	to	be	provoked.
You	have	to	become	attuned	to	me,	in	deep	accord,	one	with	me.	Only	then	will
you	be	benefited.	Great	benediction	can	be	yours,	great	blessings	can	be	yours,
but	you	will	have	to	come	out	of	your	small	prisons,	out	of	your	small	minds,	out
of	your	small	egos.	And	you	will	get	only	that	which	you	deserve,	which	you	are
worthy	of.	I	can	go	on	showering	diamonds	on	you,	but	if	you	don't	understand
what	a	diamond	is	you	will	go	on	collecting	colored	stones.
And	people	 are	 really	 so	 asleep	 that	 they	don't	 know	what	 they	 are	doing	 and
they	ask	for	wrong	things.	They	ask	for	respect,	they	ask	for	some	nourishment
for	their	egos.
Many	people	write	letters	 to	me	--	newcomers	--	saying,	"Why	in	your	ashram
isn't	a	little	more	love	shown	to	us	newcomers?	Why	does	everybody	seem	to	be
a	 little	 aloof,	 a	 little	 cool?	 Why	 don't	 people	 seem	 to	 be	 interested	 in
newcomers?	We	come	here	to	find	love,	warmth."
In	 fact,	 behind	 these	 words	 --	 "love,"	 "warmth,"	 etcetera	 --	 all	 that	 they	 are
hankering	for	is	some	kind	of	respect,	some	kind	of	ego	nourishment.	That's	why
people	will	look	cool,	people	will	look	aloof.
We	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 helping	 your	 egos	 because	 we	 don't	 want	 to	 create
greater	hells	for	you.	You	are	already	in	suffering	--	you	have	suffered	enough.
We	want	 to	pull	 you	out	of	your	 egos.	 Just	 a	 small	 thing	can	hurt,	 just	 a	very
small	 thing.	And	we	 have	managed	 things	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 there	 are	many
things	which	are	bound	to	hurt	your	egos.	Unless	you	are	ready	to	drop	them	you
will	escape	from	this	place	sooner	or	later.
Only	those	who	are	ready	to	drop	their	egos	will	become	part	of	this	commune.
And	this	commune	is	happening	after	many	centuries.	There	have	been	Masters
with	 a	 few	 disciples....	My	 effort	 is	 to	 bring	 such	 a	 revolution	 that	 the	whole
consciousness	of	humanity	is	affected	by	it.	Just	individual	enlightenment	is	not
enough.	 We	 have	 to	 start	 a	 process	 of	 enlightenment	 in	 which	 thousands	 of
people	 become	 enlightened	 almost	 simultaneously,	 so	 that	 the	 whole
consciousness	 of	 humanity	 can	 be	 raised	 to	 a	 higher	 level	 because	 that	 is	 the
only	hope	of	saving	it.
Otherwise,	 these	 twenty	 years	 are	 going	 to	 be	 fatal.	Either	we	will	 succeed	 in
transforming	the	consciousness	of	the	whole	of	humanity	and	bring	it	to	a	higher
level	--
at	 least	 to	 the	 second	 level,	 a	meditative	mind,	 for	millions	of	 people,	 and	 for
thousands	of	people	to	the	first	grade,	the	no-mind....	If	we	can	do	it,	that	is	the
only	 possible	 way	 to	 save	 humanity.	 Otherwise,	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 foolish
politicians	so	much	power	has	come	that	ANY	moment	the	third	world	war	can
start,	and	that	will	destroy	the	whole	of	humanity.	And	all	the	work	of	the	ages,
of	all	the	Buddhas,	will	be	simply	destroyed.
Krishna,	 Jesus,	 Lao	 Tzu,	 Buddha,	 Pythagoras,	 Socrates:	 these	 people	 have
worked	 hard	 to	 create	 this	 garden.	 And	 now	 we	 are	 getting	 ready	 to	 burn	 it
totally.
Before	 it	 is	 too	 late...wake	 up!	 At	 least	 move	 to	 the	 second	 state	 of	 mind	 --
meditative	mind	--	then	the	first	will	become	easy.	Being	with	me	don't	be	of	the
third,	because	that	is	not	really	being	with	me.	Only	the	second	is	a	little	bit	with
me	and	is	on	the	way	to	being	totally	with	me.	But	remember,	the	goal	is	to	be	of
the	first:	no-mind	is	the	goal.
From	mind	to	no-mind	is	the	revolution	of	sannyas.
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Dying	Into	the	Master
6	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001060
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 THAT	 JOHN	 THE	 BAPTIST	 NEARLY	 DROWNED	 HIS
DISCIPLES
WHEN	 BAPTIZING	 THEM.	 IS	 THIS	 TRUE?	 IS	 THIS	 TYPE	 OF
EXPERIENCE
SOMETHING	THROUGH	WHICH	A	DISCIPLE	MUST	PASS?
Anand	Navin,
IT	IS	TRUE.	I	KNOW	THIS	FELLOW	John	the	Baptist!	In	fact,	every	Master
has	been	doing	 that.	 It	 is	absolutely	necessary	because	 the	disciple	has	 to	pass
through	a	death	process.	Unless	he	dies	--	dies	to	his	past,	dies	to	his	knowledge,
dies	to	his	beliefs	--	he	cannot	be	reborn.	And	baptism	is	only	symbolic:	it	is	the
symbol	of	death	and	resurrection.
That's	exactly	what	I	am	doing	here.	You	cling	to	your	beliefs	--	political,	social,
religious,	 philosophical	 You	 cling	 to	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 accumulated	 --
although	 it	 is	all	 junk,	although	 it	has	not	given	you	a	 single	glimpse	of	 truth,
you	cling	to	it.
Somebody	has	asked:	"I	was	initiated	by	a	Master	five	years	ago,	and	now	I	am
feeling	 deeply	 interested	 in	 you.	 But	 the	 problem	 is:	 can	 a	 man	 have	 two
Masters?"
If	your	 first	 initiation	has	opened	 the	door	 to	 truth,	 there	 is	no	need	 for	me	 to
work	on	you.	Why	waste	my	time?	I	have	so	many	other	people	to	work	upon.	If
the	first	Master	has	not	been	able	to	open	the	door,	or	you	have	not	allowed	him
to	open	the	door,	or	who	knows	whether	he	was	a	Master	or	not,	then	why	not
drop	him?
One	cannot	have	two	Masters;	that	is	utterly	stupid.	If	the	first	has	done	the	work
then	I	am	not	needed;	if	the	first	has	not	done	the	work,	for	whatever	reason	--	he
may	 be	 a	 pseudo	Master,	 you	may	 have	 been	 a	 pseudo	 disciple....	 Something
must	have	gone	wrong	somewhere.	One	 thing	 is	certain:	 that	 initiation	did	not
work.	He	could	not	drown	you,	he	could	not	kill	you	--	you	are	still	 there.	But
you	don't	want	to	drop	your	old	Master	and	whatsoever	he	has	taught	you.
Now	you	 are	 asking	me:	 "Can	 a	man	 have	 two	Masters?"	 I	 don't	 accept	 such
people	because	this	is	the	wrong	type	of	people.	Sooner	or	later	you	will	go	to	a
third	person	and	you	will	ask:	"Can	a	man	have	three	Masters?"
The	 first	 thing	 to	 remember	 here	 is:	 to	 be	 with	 me	 means	 you	 disconnect
yourself	 from	 your	 past,	 whatsoever	 it	 is	 --	 your	 initiation,	 your	Master,	 your
church,	your	religion.
Unless	you	disconnect	yourself	you	can't	be	with	me.	To	be	with	me	you	have	to
be	reborn;	you	have	to	be	a	new	being,	utterly	fresh	as	the	dewdrops	in	the	early
sun.	 Less	 than	 that	 won't	 do.	 You	 have	 to	 pass	 through	 fire.	 And	 it	 is	 very
difficult	 to	 pass	 through	 fire,	 because	 one	 can	 see	 that	 the	 familiar	 is
disappearing	and	the	promised	is	far	away.
The	promised	 land	may	be,	may	not	 be,	 and	 the	 familiar	 is	 going	out	 of	 your
hands.	And	 the	mind	says,	 "It	 is	better	 to	have	half	 the	bread	 that	you	already
have	than	to	 lose	 it	 for	 the	whole	bread	which	you	don't	have,	which	is	only	a
promise."
A	Master	is	only	a	promise:	a	promise	of	something	that	can	happen,	a	promise
of	your	potential	becoming	actual,	a	promise	of	a	flowering.	But	right	now	you
are	only	a	seed,	and	the	seed	cannot	believe	in	the	promise;	it	is	very	difficult	for
the	seed	to	believe	in	the	promise.	The	seed	would	like	to	remain	a	seed	and	yet
be	 a	 flower.	 So	we	 go	 on	 clinging	 to	 the	 familiar	 beliefs,	 systems	 of	 thought,
ideology.	And	still	we	want	to	be	reborn!
It	is	like	a	child	who	wants	to	cling	to	the	womb	and	yet	wants	to	be	born.	That
is	impossible.	Either	he	has	to	be	in	the	womb	and	die	in	the	womb	--	because
after	nine	months	to	be	in	the	womb	is	going	to	be	sure	death	--	or	he	has	to	take
the	risk,	the	adventure,	of	going	into	the	unknown.
And,	certainly,	the	child	must	feel	the	birth	as	death.	It	is	death	to	his	life	as	he
has	known	it	up	to	now:	for	nine	months	the	darkness,	the	soothing	darkness	of
the	 womb,	 the	 warmth,	 the	 absolutely	 responsibility-free	 existence,	 total	 rest,
relaxation.	And	he	has	been	 floating,	 swimming,	 in	a	body-temperature	 liquid.
He	has	never	lacked	anything;	all	was	supplied	by	the	body	of	the	mother.	Even
before	he	needed	anything	it	was	there,	ready	to	be	given	to	him.	Now	suddenly
he	is	being	thrown	out	of	his	home	into	the	unknown.	Who	knows	what	is	going
to	happen?	He	is	being	uprooted.	He	clings!	It	is	natural	to	cling.
And	that's	exactly	the	situation	when	you	are	with	a	Master:	you	have	lived	in	a
psychological	womb.	When	you	are	with	a	Master	he	starts	pulling	you	out	of
your	 psychological	womb.	 It	 is	 far	more	 difficult	 than	 the	 physical	 process	 of
leaving	the	womb	because	you	feel	closer	to	the	psychological	womb.	You	are	a
Christian,	you	are	a	Hindu,	a	Mohammedan,	and	you	would	like	to	remain	that.
And	still	you	want	to	be	transformed.	Then	you	are	in	a	double	bind,	then	you
are	split.
Two	 Masters	 can	 only	 mean	 a	 deep	 split	 in	 you.	 I	 am	 not	 here	 to	 create
schizophrenia.
No,	one	cannot	have	two	Masters	--	one	is	more	than	enough!
You	have	heard	 rightly,	Navin:...JOHN	THE	BAPTIST	NEARLY	DROWNED
HIS
DISCIPLES	WHEN	BAPTIZING	THEM.
That's	the	only	way	to	baptize.
You	 ask	 me:	 IS	 THIS	 TYPE	 OF	 EXPERIENCE	 SOMETHING	 THROUGH
WHICH	A	DISCIPLE	MUST	PASS?
Yes,	 it	 is	 a	 must.	 Unless	 the	 disciple	 passes	 through	 it	 he	 never	 becomes	 a
devotee.	And	unless	you	become	a	devotee	you	don't	know	what	it	means	to	be
with	a	Master.	It	 is	not	an	intellectual	relationship;	it	 is	a	deep	merger	with	the
being	of	the	Master.	It	is	something	very	existential.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,
I	 THOUGHT	 YOU	 KNEW	 EVERYTHING.	 I	 THOUGHT	 THAT'S	 WHAT
BEING
ENLIGHTENED	IS	ABOUT:	KNOWING.	BUT	YOU	DON'T	KNOW	ABOUT
WOMEN,	AND	THAT	THEY	TRUST	PRECISELY	BECAUSE	THEY	KNOW
EACH
OTHER'S	 HEART.	 WOMEN'S	 HATE	 FOR	 WOMEN	 IS	 A	 MALE	 MYTH
INVENTED
TO	KEEP	WOMEN	SEPARATE	AND	POWERLESS.	WHO	WANTS	TO	BE	A
MAN?
OSHO,	I	AM	TOTALLY	UPSET.	HOW	CAN	YOU	TALK	NONSENSE?	MY
MIND	IS
HAVING	A	FIT	AND	SO	IS	MY	HEART.	WHAT	TO	DO?
Prem	Judy,
YOU	MUST	BE	CARRYING	TOO	MUCH	OF	THE	CRAP	that	 the	Women's
Liberation	Movement	is	creating.	You	are	too	full	of	it.	Next	time	you	come	to
me	I	will	have	to	look	into	your	eyes,	because	when	people	are	too	full	of	crap,
up	 to	 their	 heads,	 their	 eyes	 are	 brown!	 And	 you	 must	 have	 some	 lesbian
tendencies.
You	say:	I	THOUGHT	YOU	KNEW	EVERYTHING.
You	are	absolutely	wrong	--	I	know	nothing.	NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST
INTIMATE.
If	you	have	come	here	with	this	idea,	you	have	come	to	a	wrong	person	and	to	a
wrong	place.	We	celebrate	 ignorance!	We	destroy	all	kinds	of	knowledge.	Our
whole	effort	is	to	bring	innocence	back	to	you,	the	innocence	that	you	had	before
you	 were	 born.	 The	 Zen	 people	 call	 it	 the	 original	 face.	 The	 innocence	 is
intrinsic.	Knowledge	is	given	to	you	by	the	society,	by	the	people	around	you,	by
the	 family.	 Innocence	 is	 yours:	 knowledge	 is	 always	 of	 others.	 The	 more
knowledgeable	you	are,	the	less	you	are	yourself.
Enlightenment	has	nothing	to	do	with	knowledge.	It	is	freedom	from	knowledge,
it	 is	 absolute	 transcendence	of	 knowledge.	 It	 is	 going	beyond	knowing.	That's
why	we	started	this	series	of	talks	with	the	great	sutra:	NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE
MOST	INTIMATE.
An	 enlightened	 person	 is	 one	who	 has	 no	 barrier	 between	 him	 and	 existence.
And	knowledge	is	a	barrier.	Knowledge	divides	you	from	existence;	it	keeps	you
separate.	Not	knowing	unites	you.	Love	 is	a	way	of	 innocence.	 Innocence	 is	a
bridge:	 knowledge	 is	 a	 wall.	 Who	 has	 ever	 heard	 of	 knowledgeable	 people
becoming	 enlightened?	 They	 are	 the	 farthest	 away	 from	 enlightenment.
Enlightenment	grows	only	in	the	soil	of	innocence.
Innocence	means	childlike	wonder,	awe.	The	enlightened	person	 is	one	who	 is
continuously	 wondering	 --	 because	 he	 knows	 nothing,	 so	 everything	 becomes
again	a	mystery.	When	you	know,	things	are	demystified;	when	you	don't	know,
they	are	RE-mystified.	The	more	you	know,	the	less	wonder	is	in	your	heart.	The
more	you	know,	 the	 less	you	feel	 the	great	experience	of	awe.	You	cannot	say
"AH,	THIS!"	You	cannot	be	ecstatic.	The	knowledgeable	person	is	so	burdened
that	 he	 cannot	 dance,	 he	 cannot	 sing,	 he	 cannot	 love.	 For	 the	 knowledgeable
there	is	no	God,	because	God	only	means	wonder,	awe,	mystery.	That's	why,	as
knowledge	has	grown	in	the	world,	God	has	become	further	and	further	away.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 could	 declare	 that	 God	 is	 dead	 because	 of	 his
knowledgeability.	He	was	certainly	a	great	philosopher,	and	philosophy	is	bound
to	come	 to	 the	conclusion	 that	 there	 is	no	God	because	God	simply	means	 the
mysterious,	 the	miraculous.	And	knowledge	 reduces	 every	miracle	 to	 ordinary
laws;	every	mystery	is	reduced	to	formulas.
Ask	 the	 knowledgeable	 person	 "What	 is	 love?"	 and	 he	will	 say,	 "Nothing	 but
chemistry,	 the	 attraction	 between	 male	 and	 female	 hormones.	 It	 is	 no	 more
important	than	a	magnet	attracting	iron	pieces;	it	is	the	same	--	like	negative	and
positive	electricity.	Man	and	woman	are	bio-electricity."
Then	 everything	 is	 destroyed.	 Then	 all	 love	 and	 all	 poetry	 and	 all	 music	 are
reduced	to	nonsense.	The	lotus	is	reduced	to	the	mud.	The	lotus	certainly	grows
out	of	the	mud,	but	the	lotus	is	not	the	mud.	It	is	not	the	sum	total	of	its	parts;	it
is	more	than	the	sum	total	of	the	parts.	That	MORE	is	God,	that	MORE	is	poetry,
that	MORE	 is	 love.	But	 science	 has	 no	 place	 for	 the	 "more."	 Science	 reduces
every	 phenomenon	 to	 a	 mechanical	 thing.	 And	 do	 you	 know	 what	 "science"
means?	"Science"	means	knowledge;	the	actual	word
"science"	means	knowledge.
Religion	is	not	knowledge;	it	is	just	the	opposite	of	knowledge.	It	is	poetry,	it	is
love.	 It	 is	 basically	 absurd.	 Yes,	 you	 can	 say	 that	 I	 am	 talking	 nonsense.	 If
science	is	sense	then	religion	is	nonsense.	But	that's	the	beauty	of	it.
You	say,	Judy:	I	THOUGHT	YOU	KNEW	EVERYTHING.
That	 is	 YOUR	 thought	 --	 and	 I	 am	 not	 here	 to	 oblige	 everybody's	 thought.	 I
cannot	be	according	to	YOUR	thoughts.	I	have	more	than	one	hundred	thousand
sannyasins;	if	I	am	to	fulfill	everybody's	thought	I	will	be	absolutely	torn	apart,
into	 millions	 of	 pieces.	 I	 cannot	 fulfill	 your	 ideas	 about	 me;	 that	 is	 YOUR
mistake.	And	it	is	not	too	late	--	either	drop	that	idea	if	you	want	to	be	here	with
me....
You	ARE	here	with	a	paradoxical	person,	with	a	person	who	is	trying	to	convey
something	 mysterious	 to	 you	 --	 not	 knowledge	 --	 who	 is	 trying	 to	 pour	 his
experience	of	wonder	and	awe	into	your	beings	--	it	is	more	like	wine	than	like
knowledge	--	who	is	trying	to	make	you	intoxicated,	who	is	trying	to	transform
you	into	drunkards.	Yes,	for	the	rational	person	it	will	look	like	nonsense.
That's	what	one	of	the	most	important	thinkers	of	the	West,	Arthur	Koestler,	has
written	about	Zen.	He	calls	it	"all	nonsense."	If	you	look	rationally,	it	is	--	but	is
reason	 the	only	way	 to	approach	 reality?	There	are	other	ways,	 far	deeper,	 far
more	intimate	--	NOT
KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE.
I	 am	not	 a	man	of	 knowledge,	 although	 I	 use	words.	 I	 am	not	 even	 a	man	of
words.
"I	am	a	man	of	few	words.	Will	you	or	won't	you?"
"Your	apartment	or	mine?"	said	the	chick.
"Look,"	 he	 said,	 "if	 there's	 going	 to	 be	 such	 a	 lot	 of	 discussion	 about	 it,	 let's
forget	the	whole	damn	thing!"
I	use	words,	but	I	am	not	a	man	of	words.	It	is	just	out	of	sheer	necessity:	it	is
because	 of	 you	 that	 I	 have	 to	 use	 words,	 because	 you	 won't	 understand	 the
wordless.	I	am	waiting	eagerly	for	the	day	when	I	will	be	able	to	drop	words.	I
am	utterly	tired...because	words	can't	convey	that	which	I	am	and	I	have	to	go	on
trying	to	do	something	which	is	not	possible.
Get	ready	soon	so	that	we	can	sit	in	silence	and	listen	to	the	birds	or	to	the	wind
in	 the	 trees.	 Just	 SITTING	 SILENTLY	 DOING	 NOTHING,	 THE	 SPRING
COMES	AND	THE
GRASS	GROWS	BY	ITSELF.	That	is	going	to	be	my	ultimate	message	and	my
final	work	on	the	earth.
You	 say:	 I	THOUGHT	THAT'S	WHAT	BEING	ENLIGHTENED	 IS	ABOUT:
KNOWING.
You	 cannot	 think	 anything	 about	 enlightenment,	 and	 whatsoever	 you	 think	 is
bound	 to	 be	 wrong.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 knowing;	 it	 is	 a	 state	 of	 not
knowing.
BUT	YOU	DON'T	KNOW	ABOUT	WOMEN	AND	THAT	THEY	TRUST
PRECISELY	BECAUSE	THEY	KNOW	EACH	OTHER'S	HEART.
I	 know	about	 nothing.	What	 to	 say	 about	women?	 --	 I	 don't	 even	know	about
men!	So	don't	be	worried	about	 that.	 If	you	know	what	a	woman	 is	or	what	a
man	 is,	beware	of	your	knowledge,	because	 that	 is	not	 real	knowing;	 it	 is	 just
opinion	 that	 you	 have	 gathered.	 Yes,	 man	 has	 been	 propagating	 ideas	 against
women;	now	women	are	propagating	 ideas	 against	men.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 foolish
thing!	And	we	go	on	doing	this:	we	go	on	moving	from	one	extreme	to	another
extreme.
Now,	 you	 say:	 WOMEN'S	 HATE	 FOR	 WOMEN	 IS	 A	 MALE	 MYTH
INVENTED	TO
KEEP	WOMEN	SEPARATE	AND	POWERLESS.
Man	has	created	many	myths	about	women,	but	now	the	women	are	doing	the
same.
They	 are	 creating	myths	 about	 men	 which	 are	 as	 false	 as	 man's	 myths	 about
women.	 But	 I	 am	 not	 here	 to	 decide	 which	myth	 is	 right	 and	 which	myth	 is
wrong.	I	am	not	here	to	make	you	a	propagandist	for	women	or	against	women.
My	work	consists	in	freeing	you	from	man/woman	duality.
And	now	you	say:	WHO	WANTS	TO	BE	A	MAN?
Judy,	if	you	really	don't	want	to	be	a	man	you	would	not	have	written	this.	It	is
just	 like	 the	ancient	parable	of	 the	fox	who	was	 trying	 to	reach	 the	grapes	and
could	not	reach:	the	grapes	were	too	high.	She	tried	and	tried,	and	failed	again
and	again.	Then	she	looked	around	--	foxes	are	very	cunning	people	--	to	see	if
anybody	was	watching,	any	journalist,	any	photographer.	There	was	nobody,	so
she	walked	away.
But	a	small	hare	was	hiding	in	a	bush.	He	said,	"Aunty,	what	happened?"
The	fox	puffed	her	chest	up	as	big	as	she	could	and	said,	"Nothing.	Those	grapes
are	not	worthwhile.	They	are	not	ripe	yet	--	they	are	sour."
Why	should	you	write:	WHO	WANTS	TO	BE	A	MAN?
Deep	down	somewhere	you	must	be	hankering	to	be	a	man.	Every	man	wants	to
be	a	woman,	every	woman	wants	to	be	a	man,	for	the	simple	reason	that	every
man	is	both	--
man/woman	--	and	every	woman	is	both	--	woman/man.	You	are	born	out	of	the
meeting	of	male	and	female	energies;	half	of	you	belongs	to	your	father	and	half
of	you	belongs	 to	your	mother.	You	are	a	meeting	of	 two	polar	opposites,	 two
energies.
The	 only	 difference	 between	man	 and	woman	 is	 this:	 that	 the	woman	 has	 the
consciousness	of	a	woman	and	the	unconscious	of	a	man,	and	the	man	has	 the
consciousness	of	a	man	and	the	unconscious	of	a	woman.	But	BOTH	are	both!
That's	 why	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 be	 homosexuals,	 lesbians;	 otherwise	 it	 would	 be
impossible.
This	 phenomenon	 has	 been	 happening	 down	 the	 ages;	 it	 is	 nothing	 new.	 The
reason	is	simple:	because	the	man	is	only	half	man	and	half	woman;	the	woman
part	is	hidden	deep	in	the	darkness.	But	the	conscious	part	can	become	tired,	and
when	 the	 conscious	 part	 becomes	 tired	 the	 unconscious	 takes	 over.	 Hence	 he
may	have	 the	body	of	a	man,	but	he	 starts	 functioning	 like	a	woman.	And	 the
same	happens	 to	a	 lesbian:	on	 the	 surface	 she	 is	 a	woman,	but	deep	down	 the
unconscious	 male	 energy	 has	 taken	 possession.	 Things	 have	 become	 upside-
down.	It	will	affect	her	physiology	too.
There	are	a	few	lesbians	here.	Their	physiology	is	bound	to	be	affected	by	their
psychology,	 because	 psychology	 and	 physiology	 are	 not	 two	 separate
phenomena;	 they	 are	 joined	 together.	 Mind	 and	 body	 are	 not	 two;	 you	 are
mindbody.	So	whatsoever	happens	in	your	physiology	affects	your	psychology.
That's	why	hormones	can	be	given	to	you	and	your	psychology	can	be	changed.
Now	we	know	a	man	can	be	changed	into	a	woman,	a	woman	can	be	changed
into	a	man.
And	this	is	MY	observation:	that	in	the	coming	century	millions	of	people	will
change	 their	 sex.	 That	 will	 become	 something	 avant-garde;	 that	 will	 become
something	very	progressive.	That	will	be	a	new	kind	of	 freedom.	Why	 remain
confined	to	being	a	man	your	whole	life	when	you	can	have	both	the	worlds?	If
you	can	afford	 it	you	can	change	your	sex.	For	a	 few	years	you	remain	a	man
and	 you	 look	 at	 the	 world	 from	 the	 male's	 viewpoint,	 and	 then	 you	 go	 for	 a
simple	operation	and	you	are	changed	 into	a	woman;	now	you	can	 look	at	 the
world	through	the	feminine	eyes.	And	it	is	possible	that	a	man	may	change	many
times.	If	the	process	becomes	simpler,	and	it	WILL	become	simpler	--
that's	 the	whole	work	 of	 science:	 to	make	 things	 simpler	 and	 simpler	 --	 if	 the
process	becomes	very	simple,	millions	of	people	are	bound	to	change.
It	will	 release	a	great	 freedom	in	 the	world,	but	a	great	confusion	also,	a	great
chaos	also.
One	day	suddenly	your	husband	comes	home	and	he	is	a	woman!	Or	your	wife
returns	from	a	holiday	and	she	is	no	more	a	woman....
Because	each	is	both,	the	desire	to	be	the	other	is	in	everybody.	Judy,	it	must	be
there	and	very	insistently	there.	Hence	you	are	writing:	WHO	WANTS	TO	BE	A
MAN?	Judy	wants	to	be	a	man!	I	don't	know	about	anybody	else....
And	you	ask	me:	OSHO,	I	AM	TOTALLY	UPSET.
That's	good!	So	I	am	succeeding!	I	want	you	to	be	completely	uprooted,	upset,
disturbed.
I	want	to	create	a	chaos	in	you,	because	only	out	of	chaos	are	stars	born.
You	ask	me:	HOW	CAN	YOU	TALK	NONSENSE?
What	else?!	Sense	cannot	be	talked...only	nonsense	is	left.	So	I	don't	take	it	as	a
criticism
--	it	is	a	compliment!	Many	many	thanks	to	you.	At	least	you	are	talking	some
sense!
You	say:	MY	MIND	IS	HAVING	A	FIT	AND	SO	IS	MY	HEART.	WHAT	TO
DO?
I	don't	 think	anything	can	be	done	now.	It	 is	 too	late.	You	CAN'T	go	back	--	I
will	 haunt	 you!	 --	 you	 can	 only	 go	 ahead.	 Drop	 all	 these	 ideas	 that	 you	 are
carrying	within	yourself,	this	antagonism	about	men.	Drop	all	these	ideas!	I	am
neither	for	men	nor	for	women.	I	am	only	for	transcendence.
And	don't	 take	my	jokes	seriously!	You	are	such	fools	 that	you	can't	even	take
jokes	playfully.	Another	woman	has	written:	"Osho,	you	have	been	talking	 too
much	 against	women.	 The	 other	 day	 you	 called	 them	 'big-mouths'."	Now	 this
woman	simply	proves	that	she	is	a	big-mouth,	nothing	else!	Nobody	else	has	felt
offended.	A	joke	is	a	joke!	But	why	are	you	so	touchy?	Now	this	woman	must
have	a	big	mouth.	At	least	her	husband	must	be	telling	her	again	and	again,	"You
big-mouth,	shut	up!"	And	now	she	comes	here	to	hear	something	beautiful	said
about	her,	and	I	tell	a	joke...and	again	that	big	mouth	comes	in.
Don't	 take	 jokes	 seriously.	 In	 fact,	 don't	 take	 anything	 seriously.	You	miss	 the
point	if	you	start	taking	things	seriously.	Even	scriptures	have	to	be	taken	non-
seriously;	only	 then	can	you	understand.	Understanding	has	 to	be	with	a	deep,
relaxed,	 non-serious,	 playful	 attitude.	When	 you	 become	 serious	 you	 become
tense.	 When	 you	 become	 serious	 you	 become	 closed.	 When	 you	 are	 playful
many	things	can	happen	because	in	playfulness	is	creativity.	In	playfulness	you
can	innovate.
But	your	ideas	are	continuously	there;	you	can't	put	them	aside.
Judy,	 now	nothing	 can	be	 done.	You	 are	 a	 sannyasin.	Now,	 being	 a	 sannyasin
means	you	are	neither	man	nor	woman.	Finished	--	that	game	is	finished!
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,
AREN'T	ALL	PEOPLE	REALLY	THE	SAME?
Sudarsho,
ESSENTIALLY	YES,	 BUT	ACCIDENTALLY	NO.	 At	 the	 center	 yes,	 on	 the
circumference	no.	Essentially	we	are	made	of	the	same	stuff	called	God,	but	on
the	circumference	God	comes	 in	every	shape	and	size,	 in	every	color,	 in	every
form.	There	is	much	difference	And	it	is	beautiful	because	if	people	were	really
the	same,	both	at	the	center	and	on	the	circumference,	the	world	would	be	a	very
boring	 place.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 a	 boring	 place.	 It	 is	 immensely	 interesting;	 it	 is
immensely	beautiful,	rich.	And	the	richness	comes	because	of	variety.
No	 two	persons	are	 the	 same	on	 the	circumference,	 although	everybody	 is	 the
same	at	the	center	--	not	only	people	but	trees	and	rocks,	they	are	also	the	same
at	the	center.	Call	that	center	the	soul	and	it	will	be	easier	for	you	to	understand.
Our	souls	are	the	same,	there	we	meet	and	are	one,	but	our	bodies	and	minds	are
different,	there	we	are	separate.
And	no	effort	should	be	made	to	make	us	similar	on	the	surface.	Down	the	ages
people	have	been	trying	to	do	that;	that	creates	only	fascism.	That's	what	Adolph
Hitler	 was	 trying	 to	 do.	 That's	 what	 happens	 in	 every	 army:	 we	 try	 to	 make
people	similar	even	on	the	surface.	In	the	army	names	disappear,	numbers	take
their	place.	If	a	person	dies	you	read	on	the	board,	"Number	14	has	fallen."	Now,
number	14	has	no	personality.	Anybody	can	replace	number	14,	anybody	can	be
given	number	14;	number	14	is	replaceable.	But	the	person	who	has	died,	is	he
replaceable?	Can	anybody	in	the	world	ever	replace	him?
Who	will	be	the	husband	of	his	wife	and	who	will	be	the	father	of	his	children?
And	who	will	be	the	son	of	his	old	parents?	And	who	will	be	the	friend	of	his
friends?	Number	14
cannot	do	that.	Number	14	is	perfectly	okay	in	the	army;	he	will	carry	the	gun
and	he	will	do	the	same	things	--	the	same	stupid	things	--	that	the	other	number
14	was	doing	before.
But	as	far	as	their	real	personality	is	concerned,	number	14	is	a	different	person.
All	the	military	leaders	of	the	world	have	been	trying	to	force	a	certain	pattern
on	people.
They	would	like	machines,	not	men.	They	would	like	God	to	make	men	the	way
Ford	cars	are	made,	on	an	assembly	 line,	 so	similar	Fords	go	on	coming.	God
does	not	work	with	an	assembly	line;	he	creates	each	individual	with	uniqueness.
So,	 Sudarsho,	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 two	 things.	 One:	 the	 variety,	 the
difference,	and	love	the	variety	and	love	the	difference....
Mohammedans	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 convert	 the	 whole	 world	 to	 one	 religion;
Hindus	have	been	 trying	 to	do	 the	same,	Christians	have	been	doing	 the	same,
Buddhists	have	been	doing	the	same.	The	whole	effort	is	to	make	all	the	world
similar,	so	there	are	all	Christians	and	Christians.	It	will	be	a	poor	world	where
no	 temple	 exists	 and	no	mosque,	where	 there	 are	only	 churches	 and	 churches,
and	the	same	prayer	and	the	same	scripture	and	the	same	silly	Pope...it	won't	be
good!	It	is	beautiful	that	there	are	three	hundred	religions	in	the	world;	more	are
needed.
In	 my	 vision,	 each	 person	 should	 have	 his	 own	 religion.	 There	 should	 be	 as
many	 religions	 as	 there	 are	 people.	 Only	 then	 this	 conflict,	 this	 continuous
conflict,	will	stop,	this	fight	between	religions	will	stop:	when	everybody	has	a
religion	 and	 it	 is	 something	 unique	 like	 your	 signature,	 like	 the	 print	 of	 your
thumb	--	unique.	Then	there	will	be	no	problem,	no	conflict;	nobody	will	try	to
convert	anybody.	You	don't	 try	to	convert	people	saying,	"Make	your	signature
just	as	I	do."	In	fact,	if	somebody	does	it	you	will	inform	the	police:	"This	man	is
trying	to	imitate	me."
Religion	should	be	a	personal,	intimate	phenomenon.	But	there	are	people	who
want	to	change	the	whole	world	into	Christianity	or	communism.	They	want	to
make	the	whole	world	Catholic	or	Mohammedan	or	Hindu.
Mohammedans	say	there	is	only	one	God	and	only	one	prophet	of	God,	that	is
Mohammed.	 Then	God	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 poor	 --	 just	ONE	 prophet?	Can't	 he
create	 more	 prophets?	 Mohammed	 has	 not	 exhausted	 all	 the	 possibilities;
nobody	can	exhaust	them,	neither	Buddha	nor	Jesus.	They	are	all	unique	peaks,
but	no	peak	can	exhaust	all	the	peaks.	The	Himalayas	have	their	own	beauty,	but
it	is	different	from	the	beauty	of	the	Alps;	and	the	Alps	have	their	own	beauty,
but	 it	 is	different	 from	the	beauty	of	 the	Vindhyas.	Each	mountain	has	 its	own
beauty,	 each	 peak	has	 its	 own	beauty,	 and	 it	 contributes	 to	 the	 richness	 of	 the
world.
I	would	not	like	all	people	to	become	Christians	or	Hindus	or	Mohammedans.	I
would	 like	 everybody	 to	 be	 free	 from	 these	 prisons,	 everybody	 to	 be	 just
himself.	This	is	a	fascist	idea,	that	everybody	should	be	like	everybody	else.	And
this	 fascist	 idea	 is	 being	 imposed	 in	 different	 ways	 on	 different	 aspects	 of
humanity.
The	heterosexuals	will	not	allow	anybody	to	be	homosexual.	Why?	Who	are	you
to	 decide?	Who	 has	 given	 you	 the	 right	 to	 decide?	 If	 two	 persons	 are	 feeling
joyous	in	being	homosexual,	it	is	nobody	else's	business	to	interfere.	But	every
society	interferes.
Just	 the	 other	 day	Aditya	 said	Hamid	 had	 suggested	 that	 there	was	 no	 reason
why	he	should	not	think	of	turning	into	a	gay	person.	Hamid	must	have	joked.
And	when	I	talked	about	it	Hamid	was	very	much	disturbed:	"What	will	people
think	about	me	now?"	He	must	have	been	 joking	with	Aditya.	Now	he	 is	very
much	disturbed	about	his	reputation.
And	of	 course,	 he	 is	 our	Ayatollah	Hamidullah	Khomaniac!	 So	 his	 prestige....
Even	Divya	wept	when	she	heard	that	Hamid	had	invited	Aditya!	He	must	have
been	joking	because	Iranians	are	very	much	against	homosexuality.
In	 Iran,	 the	punishment	 for	homosexuality	 is	death	 --	 although	because	of	 this
punishment,	 more	 Iranians	 are	 homosexual	 than	 anybody	 else.	 Because	 when
something	is	so	dangerous,	people	become	interested:	"Naturally	there	must	be
something	in	it.
When	the	punishment	is	death,	that	means	there	must	be	something	higher	than
life	in	it,	more	than	life	in	it.	It	is	worth	taking	the	risk!"
But	why	should	people	be	worried	about	others?	About	everything	 the	 society
remains	alert:	nobody	should	have	his	own	individual	way	about	his	sex,	about
his	 love,	 about	 his	 clothes,	 about	 his	 way	 of	 talking,	 manners.	 Every	 society
imposes	a	fascist	rule	on	its	members.	It	destroys	much	that	is	beautiful.
Sudarsho,	you	ask	me:	AREN'T	ALL	PEOPLE	REALLY	THE	SAME?
Not	as	you	know	them.
The	pretty	co-ed	nervously	asked	the	doctor	to	perform	an	unusual	operation:	the
removal	of	a	large	chunk	of	green	wax	from	her	navel.
Looking	up	from	the	ticklish	task,	the	physician	asked,	"How	did	this	happen?"
"Well,	you	see,	doc,"	said	the	girl,	"my	boyfriend	likes	to	eat	by	candlelight."
Nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it.	 This	 should	 be	 nobody	 else's	 business.	 If	 somebody
wants	 to	 eat	 by	 candlelight	 he	 should	be	 allowed.	And	where	 can	you	put	 the
candle?	The	best	place	seems	to	be	the	navel	--	so	natural
Some	idea!
Abe	and	Me	talked	of	their	no-account	sons.
Abe	said,	"My	no-good	son.	I	give	him	a	job	in	my	clothing	business.	I	give	him
$50,000
a	year,	a	new	car,	a	beautiful	apartment,	and	what	does	he	do?	He	stays	up	all
hours	of	 the	night,	comes	into	work	eleven	or	 twelve	o'clock	and	plays	around
with	the	models	all	afternoon."
"You	think	you've	got	trouble?"	Me	said.	"My	no-good	son	is	worse.	I	give	him	a
job	in	my	clothing	business.	I	pay	him	$50,000	a	year	and	give	him	a	new	car
and	 a	 beautiful	 apartment,	 and	what	 does	 he	 do?	He	 stays	 up	 all	 hours	 of	 the
night,	 comes	 in	eleven	or	 twelve	o'clock	and	plays	around	with	 the	models	all
afternoon!"
"What's	worse	about	that?"	Abe	questioned.
"You	forget,"	Me	replied.	"I	am	in	men's	clothing!"
On	the	circumference	people	are	different,	and	they	SHOULD	be	different,	and
everybody	 should	maintain	his	 individuality	on	 the	circumference.	One	 should
never	compromise	for	any	reason.	Then	only	can	we	create	a	really	democratic
world.	Real	democracy	means	that	the	mob,	the	crowd,	is	no	more	in	control	of
the	individual	life.
Democracy	is	less	a	political	phenomenon	than	a	religious	phenomenon;	it	is	far
more	important	than	politics.	Democracy	is	a	totally	new	vision	of	life.	It	has	not
yet	happened	anywhere;	it	has	yet	to	happen.	Democracy	means	each	individual
has	the	right	to	live	according	to	his	light;	he	should	not	be	prevented.	Unless	he
becomes	 a	 disturbance	 or	 a	 nuisance	 to	 others	 he	 should	 be	 allowed	 every
freedom	in	all	the	aspects	of	life.
That's	 my	 vision	 of	 a	 really	 democratic	 world.	 That's	 how	 I	 would	 like	 my
sannyasins	to	function:	no	interference	in	anybody's	life.	A	great	respect	has	to
be	given	to	the	other.
But	at	the	center,	everybody	is	the	same.	When	you	meditate	you	move	towards
the	center.	In	the	deepest	moments	of	meditation,	all	differences	disappear.	You
are	universal	there,	not	individual.
And	 you	 have	 to	 be	 both:	 individual	 and	 universal.	And	 you	 have	 to	 be	 very
flexible	and	fluid	between	these	two.	It	should	be	as	easy	as	when	you	come	out
of	your	home,	out	of	your	house.	When	it	is	too	cold	inside	you	come	out,	you
sit	in	the	sun.	When	it	becomes	too	hot	you	go	in.	It	creates	no	problem;	you	just
go	in,	you	come	out.	There	is	no	problem	--	it	is	your	house.
A	 person	 should	 be	 capable	 of	 living	 on	 the	 circumference	 and	 at	 the	 center
easily.	He	should	be	able	to	move	from	the	marketplace	to	the	meditative	space
and	from	the	meditative	space	to	the	marketplace	--	with	no	problem,	playfully,
easily,	spontaneously.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,
MOST	OF	MY	EARLY	LIFE	WAS	SPENT	IN	DEADENING	MYSELF	TO
UNBEARABLE	 PUNISHMENT.	 THE	 DEADENING	 WAS	 ENTIRELY
NECESSARY
FOR	ME	TO	SURVIVE	THOSE	TIMES,	BUT	THOSE	DAYS	NO	LONGER
EXIST,	AND	AFTER	THIRTY-TWO	YEARS	I	AM	TERRIFIED	AND	LACK
THE
COURAGE	 TO	 GO	 WITHIN.	 FROM	 WHERE	 IS	 THE	 SOURCE	 OF
FORGIVENESS,	 AND,	 OSHO,	 WHAT	 KIND	 OF	 FOOLISH	 NAME	 HAVE
YOU	GIVEN	ME?
Devaprem,
ALL	NAMES	ARE	FOOLISH.	That	s	why	I	have	to	explain	the	name	to	you,	so
at	 least	 it	 looks	 as	 if	 it	 is	 not	 foolish.	 I	 have	 to	 give	 it	 a	 beautiful
meaning...otherwise	names	are	names!	They	are	just	labels.	"Devaprem"	means
divine	 love.	What	 a	 beautiful	 name	 I	 have	 given	 to	 you!	But,	 still,	 names	 are
names.
There	is	an	ancient	Chinese	ceremony	in	which	the	parents	of	a	child	choose	the
baby's	 name:	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 baby	 is	 born,	 all	 the	 cutlery	 in	 the	 house	 of	 its
parents	 is	 thrown	in	the	air.	The	parents	 then	listen	to	the	falling	knives,	forks,
and	spoons	and	choose	a	name
--	Ping,	Chang,	Tang,	Fung,	Chung....
That's	also	perfectly	right!	That	seems	to	be	a	wise	way	to	find	out	the	name,	as
if	God	himself	has	chosen.	And	that's	how	I	go	on	choosing	your	names.	Do	you
think	 there	 is	much	 esoteric,	 secret	 knowledge	 behind	 it?	Nothing	 of	 the	 sort!
Just	anything,	and	I	make	a	name	out	of	it.	I	don't	even	think	twice.
But	 I	 can	 understand	why	 you	 feel	 that	 the	 name	 does	 not	 fit	 you.	You	 have
become	 a	 closed	 person	 and	 love	 has	 become	 difficult.	 It	 happens	 to	 many
people	--	in	fact,	to	the	majority	of	people,	more	or	less.
The	 child	 has	 to	 become	 unloving,	 unspontaneous.	 He	 has	 to	 deaden	 his
sensitivity	 just	 to	survive	--	every	child,	more	or	 less;	 the	difference	 is	only	of
degrees.	Every	child	has	to	learn	tricks	to	survive.	And	the	basic	trick	is:	never
be	spontaneous.	Be	formal,	never	be	natural,	because	your	spontaneity	is	bound
to	be	punished	and	your	formality	praised,	rewarded.
The	parents	enforce	a	subtle	strategy:	they	create	fear	in	the	child	if	he	says	the
truth.
Nobody	 wants	 the	 child	 to	 say	 the	 truth,	 and	 the	 child	 is	 not	 yet	 capable	 of
Lying.	But	he	has	to	learn.
When	Cleo's	parents	threatened	to	forbid	her	to	see	her	boyfriend	unless	she	told
them	why	he	had	been	there	so	late	the	night	before,	she	began	to	talk.
"Well,	I	took	him...	him	into	the	loving	room,	and..."
"That	is	LIVING,	dear,"	said	the	mother.
"You're	telling	me!"
Children	 are	 careful	 watchers,	 observers	 of	 what	 is	 happening	 all	 around.	 Of
course,	 their	 senses	 are	very	clear,	 unclouded.	They	 see	 the	 truth	 immediately.
You	 cannot	 cheat	 a	 child;	 he	 knows	 it	 immediately,	 intuitively.	 And	 he	 is	 so
innocent	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	him	 to	be	 formal.	But	he	has	 to	be	 formal	 to
survive.	 And	 man's	 child	 is	 very	 helpless.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 man's	 child's
helplessness	that	our	whole	civilization	exists.	We	can	manage,	mold	the	child	in
every	possible	way,	whatsoever	way	we	want.
Children	are	not	supposed	to	say	things	that	they	know.	They	know	much	more
than	they	ever	tell	you.	They	pretend	to	be	innocent	because	you	don't	want	them
to	know	more	than	is	taught	in	the	school,	than	is	taught	by	the	preacher,	than	is
taught	by	you;	and	they	certainly	know	more.	They	move	in	society,	in	life,	with
keen,	 alert	 senses.	 They	 are	watching	 everything,	whatsoever	 is	 happening	 all
around.	But	they	learn	one	thing	sooner	or	later:	that	they	have	to	be	diplomatic	-
-	with	the	grown-ups	you	can't	be	true,	honest,	sincere.
Three	 young	 French	 boys	 were	 spending	 the	 summer	 in	 the	 country.	 One
afternoon	they	were	strolling	through	a	field	when	they	happened	to	see	a	couple
Lying	under	a	tree,	locked	in	a	loving	embrace.
"Mon	dieu,"	exclaimed	 the	youngest	boy,	who	was	only	six,	 "those	people	are
having	a	terrible	fight."
"But	no,	mon	petit,"	replied	the	more	sophisticated	nine-year-old,	"those	people
are	making	love."
"True,"	agreed	the	oldest	boy,	a	lad	of	eleven	years,	"but	what	amateurs!"
But	children	cannot	say	these	things	to	their	parents	or	before	their	parents.	They
know	much	more	 than	you	 think	 they	know.	They	are	 so	alert,	 so	available	 to
life.	They	 are	 so	 open	 and	vulnerable;	 they	go	on	 allowing	 every	 sensation	 to
reach	into	their	being.	But	they	have	to	deaden	themselves	sooner	or	later;	they
have	 to	 become	 stiff,	 they	 have	 to	 become	 closed.	 They	 learn	 one	 thing:	 that
unless	they	follow	their	parents,	their	priests,	their	politicians,	they	will	have	to
suffer	much.	Respectability	is	only	for	those	who	are	obedient.
Devaprem,	 you	 say:	 MOST	 OF	 MY	 EARLY	 LIFE	 WAS	 SPENT	 IN
DEADENING
MYSELF	 TO	 UNBEARABLE	 PUNISHMENT.	 THE	 DEADENING	 WAS
ENTIRELY
NECESSARY	FOR	ME	TO	SURVIVE	THOSE	TIMES,	BUT	THOSE	DAYS
NO
LONGER	 EXIST,	 AND	AFTER	 THIRTY-TWO	YEARS,	 I	 AM	 TERRIFIED
AND
LACK	THE	COURAGE	TO	GO	WITHIN.
Now	there	is	no	need	to	be	terrified;	that	has	to	be	understood.	You	can	snap	out
of	 it!	 It	 is	 just	 an	 old	 habit.	 A	 little	 intelligence...and	 that	 much	 intelligence
everyone	 has.	 If	 you	 had	 the	 intelligence	 in	 childhood	 to	 deaden	 yourself	 to
survive,	you	ARE	an	intelligent	person.
Now,	 the	 parents	 are	 not	 there...nobody	 is	 forcing	 anything	 on	 you,	 nobody	 is
punishing	you.	It	is	just	an	old	fear,	a	memory.	You	can	snap	out	of	it!
You	don't	 need	 primal	 therapy:	 to	 go	 screaming	 against	 your	 parents	 for	 three
years.	That	is	not	going	to	help	--	that	is	simply	stupid.	If	it	takes	three	years	to
shout	 and	 scream	 at	 your	 parents,	 and	 only	 then	will	 you	 come	 out	 of	 it,	 that
means	you	don't	 have	 any	 intelligence.	And	what	 is	 the	guarantee	 that	 just	 by
screaming	 for	 three	 years	 and	 shouting	 at	 your	 parents	 you	 will	 become
intelligent?	I	think	you	will	be	less	intelligent	than	you	were	before	--	three	years
of	 screaming	 and	 shouting?	You	will	 lose	 any	 intelligence	 that	 is	 left	 by	 your
parents	in	you!	There	is	no	need!	One	has	simply	to	see	that	those	days	are	over.
Meditation	is	enough.
Meditation	means	SEEING,	becoming	aware,	that	those	days	are	over,	the	fear	is
no	more	there,	nobody	is	going	to	punish	you.	It	is	just	an	old	habit.	Snap	out	of
it	with	as	little	fanfare	as	possible.	Don't	make	much	fuss	about	it.	Because	you
make	much	fuss	about	it	so	many	therapies	have	evolved.	They	are	just	aids	for
you	so	that	you	can	make	a	fuss	scientifically,	so	that	your	fuss	is	rationalized.
But	they	are	not	needed	by	intelligent	people.
An	intelligent	person	is	one	who	can	see	that	it	is	no	more	night,	it	is	day.	Why
are	you	afraid	of	darkness?	Do	you	need	first	to	scream	for	three	hours	against
the	night	and	the	dark	and	the	fear?	That	will	be	utterly	stupid!	That	will	destroy
the	day.	Why	waste	it?
The	night	is	no	more.
That's	why	in	the	East	we	have	not	developed	any	therapeutic	methods	like	the
West,	for	the	simple	reason	that	we	came	to	understand	one	thing:	that	all	that	is
needed	is	a	little	intelligence	--	and	everybody	has	it.	And	meditation	helps	the
intelligence	to	become	sharp.
Just	 seeing	 is	 enough;	 seeing	 brings	 transformation.	And	when	 transformation
comes	without	any	long	process	it	is	far	deeper.	When	it	takes	a	long	process	that
means	it	will	remain	superficial.
So	I	have	not	come	across	a	single	person	yet	whose	primal	therapy	has	totally
succeeded.	It	can	NEVER	succeed.	Psychoanalysis	has	not	been	able	to	create	a
single	 person	who	 is	 totally	 psychoanalyzed;	 even	 Sigmund	 Freud	was	 not	 in
that	 totality.	Janov	is	not	really	what	he	 is	 talking	about	--	 the	primal	man,	 the
primal	innocence	--	he	is	not.
You	can	see	in	his	face	all	kinds	of	tension,	anguish,	anxiety;	 it	 is	so	apparent.
He	 needs	 a	 few	 more	 years	 of	 screaming;	 and	 then	 too	 I	 don't	 think	 those
tensions	will	disappear.
They	may	even	become	more	subtle,	more	nourished,	because	if	you	scream	for
years,	 remember,	 you	 are	 practicing	 it;	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 practice,	 a	 kind	 of
cultivation	of	 it.	Then	you	become	addicted	 to	 it;	without	 screaming	 for	a	 few
hours	 you	won't	 feel	 good.	 Then	 it	 is	 an	 intoxicating	 process,	 a	 kind	 of	 auto-
hypnosis.	 Yes,	 screaming	 for	 one	 hour	 every	 day	 will	 make	 you	 feel	 a	 little
relaxed,	but	it	is	a	stupid	kind	of	relaxation.
Seeing	is	transformation.	That	is	our	experience	in	the	East.	All	the	Buddhas	in
the	East	have	given	only	one	meditation:	watchfulness,	awareness.
Now,	Devaprem,	you	know,	you	are	aware	of	how	this	fear	has	arisen	in	you:	out
of	thirty	years	of	fear,	continuous	fear	of	punishment,	you	have	become	closed,
encapsulated,	 and	 you	 are	 always	 on	 guard.	 You	 cannot	 relax,	 you	 cannot	 be
true,	you	cannot	be	honest.	You	cannot	say	the	thing	that	you	want	to	say,	you
cannot	do	the	thing	that	you	always	wanted	to	do.	You	KNOW	--	and	now....
It	 was	 right	 in	 those	 years	 --	 you	 behaved	 intelligently.	 Nothing	 was	 wrong,
otherwise	you	would	not	have	survived.	Now	you	have	survived,	get	out	of	it	--
it	is	no	more	needed.	The	disease	is	no	more,	why	go	on	carrying	the	bottles	of
medicines	and	prescriptions?	Do	you	need	a	therapy	to	throw	the	bottles	and	the
prescriptions?	Will	you	go	to	a	therapist	and	say,	"Now	the	disease	is	no	more,
but	I	can't	let	go	of	this	prescription.	I	go	on	carrying	it,	and	these	bottles.	I	don't
need	 them	any	more.	How	 to	drop	 them?"	 Is	any	"how"	needed?	No	"how"	 is
needed.	 Go	 to	 the	 Rotary	 Club	 and	 donate	 them!	 They	 collect	 medicines,
etcetera,	which	are	not	needed	by	anybody	else.
Their	motto	is:	We	serve.	So	help	them	serve	people.
It	 is	 very	 simple	 to	 come	out.	But	why	do	people	make	 so	much	out	 of	 it?	 --
because	that	is	part	of	your	ego.	You	don't	want	it	to	be	so	simple.	Thirty	years
of	 life	 --	 and	 I	 am	making	 a	 joke	of	 it!	You	would	 like	 to	pay	 some	 therapist
good	money	and	you	would	like	to	invest	some	time.	That	feels	good;	it	makes
you	feel	important.
In	fact,	 in	the	West	now	people	brag	that	 they	have	been	in	psychoanalysis	for
three	years	or	seven	years.	And	somebody	else	brags	that	"Psychoanalysis	is	out
of	 date.	 I	 have	 been	 in	 gestalt	 therapy,	 in	 primal	 therapy."	 And	 there	 are
"groupies"	 now	 who	 go	 on	 moving	 from	 one	 group	 to	 another	 group.	 Their
whole	life	consists	of	moving	from	one	group	to	another	group.
Many	groupies	come	to	me	and	they	say,	"We	have	done	ALL	the	groups."	And
they	 say	 it	 in	 the	 same	way	 as	 in	 the	 old	 days	 people	 used	 to	 say,	 "We	 have
fasted,	prayed,	and	we	have	sacrificed	all	our	joys,	and	we	are	saints"	--	 in	the
same	way!	This	 is	 a	new	kind	of	holiness	 that	 is	 arising	 in	 the	world:	 "I	have
passed	through	all	kinds	of	groups."	And	I	look	in	their	eyes	and	they	say,	"And
nothing	has	happened."
They	are	saying,	"My	problems	are	far	more	complex,	far	more	deep-rooted	than
these	 therapies	 can	 go.	 They	 can't	 help	me.	 I	 am	 no	ORDINARY	 person;	my
problems	are	extraordinary."
People	 enjoy	 saying	 it.	 I	 see	a	 light	 in	 their	 eyes	when	 they	 say,	 "Nobody	has
been	able	to	help	me.	Osho,	can	you	help	me?"	They	are	giving	me	a	challenge!
All	that	they	want	is	to	add	one	more	name	to	their	list:	"I	have	been	to	this	guy
too	 and	 he	 cannot	 help.	 My	 problems	 are	 such...not	 ordinary	 problems	 that
anybody	can	help."
People	 brag	 about	 their	 diseases	 too,	 remember.	 They	 may	 just	 have	 some
ordinary	disease,	but	who	wants	to	have	some	ordinary	disease?
Have	you	ever	watched	your	own	reaction?	When	you	go	 to	 the	doctor	with	a
throbbing	 heart,	 thinking	 it	 is	 cancer,	 and	 he	 says,	 "It	 is	 nothing.	 It	 is	 just	 a
common	cold"...have	you	observed?	--	you	feel	a	little	sad.	Just	a	common	cold?
A	desire	arises	to	visit	another	doctor.	you	and	a	common	cold?!	You	are	not	a
common	person,	how	can	you	have	a	common	cold?	Ego	is	such	that	it	thrives
on	every	kind	of	thing,	right	or	wrong.
So	don't	be	much	worried	about	it.	It	is	past,	it	is	finished.	Slip	out	of	it	--	and
without	making	 any	 noise,	without	making	 any	 ceremony	 that	 you	 are	 getting
out	of	it.	Just	start	being	again	alive,	sensitive,	as	you	had	always	been	in	your
childhood.	 That	 is	 your	 nature	 so	 it	 can	 be	 reclaimed	 easily.	What	 you	 have
learned	is	not	your	nature	so	it	can	be	unlearned	very	easily.
The	last	question
Question	5
OSHO,
ARE	ALL	THE	 JOURNALISTS	BLIND?	CAN'T	THEY	SEE	THE	TRUTH?
WHY
ARE	THEY	CONTINUOUSLY	SPREADING	LIES	ABOUT	YOU?
Nisha,
THE	PROFESSION	OF	A	JOURNALIST	 is	 such	 that	 it	 lives	on	 lies.	Truth	 is
not	news;	 lies	are	news,	beautiful	news.	The	bigger	the	lie	 the	better	 the	news,
because	 it	 has	 a	 certain	 quality	 in	 it:	 the	 quality	 of	 creating	 a	 sensation.
Journalism	lives	on	lies.	 If	 journalists	decide	only	to	be	 true,	 there	won't	be	so
many	newspapers,	so	many	magazines.	And	there	will	not	be	much	news	either.
Truth	you	can	write	on	a	postcard.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 in	 heaven	 there	 are	 no	 newspapers	 because	 no	 news	 ever
happens	there.
George	Bernard	Shaw	has	made	a	definition:	"When	a	dog	bites	a	man	it	is	not
news,	but	when	a	man	bites	a	dog	it	is	news."	In	heaven	no	man	bites	a	dog.	In
the	first	place	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	a	dog	there;	in	the	second	place	nobody
is	interested	in	biting	anybody,	so	what	news	can	you	have?
But	 in	 hell	 they	 have	 really	 great	 newspapers	 and	 there	 circulation	 is	 in	 the
millions.	They	have	news	there.	Every	day,	every	moment,	things	are	happening
--	everybody	is	biting	everybody	else.
When	journalists	come	they	come	to	find	something	sensational.	If	they	cannot
find	it	they	have	to	invent	it;	otherwise	their	coming	and	going	has	been	useless.
And	if	a	journalist	goes	back	to	his	office	without	any	news	again	and	again,	his
job	is	gone.
Either	find	something	sensational	or	invent	it.
Journalism	 depends	 on	 invention.	 And	 then	 slowly	 slowly	 a	 journalist	 starts
having	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 approach	 towards	 things:	 he	 immediately	 sees	 the
negative.	He	can't	see	the	positive	because	the	positive	is	not	his	business.
It	is	like	a	shoemaker:	he	looks	only	at	your	shoes,	not	at	your	face.	What	does
he	have	to	do	with	your	face?	In	fact,	looking	at	your	shoe	he	knows	your	whole
biography;	a	real	shoemaker	just	looking	at	your	shoe	can	say	everything	about
your	life	far	more	accurately	than	any	astrologer	can.	The	condition	of	the	shoe
will	show	the	condition,	the	financial	condition,	in	which	you	are.	If	you	have	to
walk	too	much,	that	will	show	that	you	don't	have	a	car,	that	you	don't	have	any
money.	The	shoe	will	say	so	many	things.
The	shoemaker	looks	only	at	the	shoe,	and	the	tailor	looks	only	at	your	clothes,
and	 the	 doctor	 looks	 only	 at	 the	 diseases.	 Bring	 a	 perfectly	 healthy	man	 to	 a
doctor	and	you	will	be	surprised:	he	will	find	many	diseases.
I	have	heard	that	one	doctor	friend	of	Picasso	had	come	to	visit	him.	Picasso	had
just	 finished	 a	 portrait.	 He	 invited	 the	 doctor	 friend	 to	 see	 the	 portrait.	 He
looked;	he	looked	from	this	side	and	from	that	side,	and	then	he	asked	for	a	torch
--	in	the	daytime!
Picasso	 was	 puzzled,	 but	 he	 was	 intrigued	 also	 so	 he	 gave	 him	 a	 torch.	 He
looked	into	the	eyes	of	the	portrait	and	he	said,	"Pneumonia."
A	doctor	is	a	doctor!	His	profession	gives	him	a	certain	eye.
The	journalist	comes	here	with	a	certain	eye,	with	certain	fixed	ideas,	prejudices.
He	comes	to	pick	up	on	something	negative	which	can	become	sensational.	And
then,	of	course,	he	can	find	it;	and	if	he	cannot	find	it	he	can	invent	it.	And	they
look	 only	 from	 the	 outside;	 they	 are	 too	 afraid	 to	 get	 involved	 deeper.	A	 few
journalists	 have	 got	 involved	 --	 once	 they	 get	 involved	 they	 are	 no	 more
journalists.
You	 can	 ask	 Satyananda.	 He	 was	 a	 famous	 journalist	 in	 one	 of	 the	 most
important	magazines	in	Germany,	STERN.	He	got	so	much	involved...he	didn't
function	 here	 like	 a	 journalist.	 He	 tried	 to	 know	 things	 from	 the	 inside.	 He
participated	in	groups,	in	meditations,	and	then...he	became	a	sannyasin.
STERN	 refused	 to	 publish	 his	 story	 because	 they	 said,	 "You	 are	 no	 more	 a
journalist.
Now	 you	 have	 become	 part	 of	 this	 orange	movement,	 so	whatsoever	 you	 say
will	be	favorable."
For	months	he	had	to	insist,	"I	have	worked	hard!"	They	cut	his	story	almost	by
half.
They	destroyed	his	whole	story,	distorted	the	whole	story,	and	only	then	did	they
print	it.
And	he	lost	his	job!
Now	he	has	come	here	forever.	There	are	a	few	other	journalists	also,	at	least	a
dozen.
Subhuti	is	here	and	others	are	here....
A	 journalist	 is	 taught	 by	 his	 profession	 to	 always	 remain	 at	 a	 distance:	 "Look
from	the	outside."	And	from	the	outside	you	can	never	know	how	things	are.
A	pretty	young	woman	was	traveling	in	a	train	across	Texas.	A	dapper	looking
man	walked	up	to	her	and	whispered	something	in	her	ear,	whereupon	she	gave
him	a	stinging	slap	in	the	face.
A	 tall	 Texan	 seated	 across	 the	 aisle	 stood	 up	 and	 asked	 her,	 "Is	 this	 man
molesting	you,	Ma'am?"
"He	certainly	is,"	she	replied.	"He	just	offered	me	ten	dollars	if	I	would	go	with
him	to	his	sleeping	compartment."
Without	hesitation,	the	Texan	pulled	out	his	pistol	and	shot	the	man.
"Good	God!"	cried	the	woman.	"That's	no	reason	to	kill	him!"
"I	will	kill	any	man,"	replied	the	Texan,	"who	tries	to	raise	the	prices	in	Texas."
If	 you	 had	 looked	 only	 from	 the	 outside	 you	would	 never	 have	 thought	 about
this,	what	was	inside	the	mind	of	the	Texan.	You	would	have	thought	him	a	great
saint	or	something.
But	the	journalist	has	to	keep	a	distance.	He	thinks	that	by	keeping	a	distance	he
will	 be	 able	 to	 know	 better.	 No,	 he	 will	 only	 gather	 information,	 bits	 of
information,	 in	fact	 irrelevant,	unconnected	with	each	other,	because	he	has	no
approach	 to	 the	 center.	 And	 he	 is	 going	 to	 distort	 it	 more	 to	 make	 it	 more
sensational.
A	group	of	Rajneesh	sannyasins	in	Bonn,	Germany,	were	taking	a	boatride	down
the	Rhine	river	when	they	noticed	 that	a	well-known	journalist	was	aboard	 the
boat.	They	decided	to	do	something	to	give	sannyasins	a	more	positive	image	in
Germany.	So,	before	 the	eyes	of	 the	 journalist,	 they	stepped	off	 into	 the	water
and	 did	 a	 whirling	 Sufi	 dance	 all	 the	 way	 around	 the	 moving	 boat.	 Then,
completely	dry,	they	climbed	back	onto	the	boat's	deck.
The	 next	 day	 the	 sannyasins	 eagerly	 scanned	 the	 newspaper	 to	 see	 what	 the
journalist	had	written	about	their	fantastic	feat.
There,	 in	 the	back	pages,	 they	 found	a	 small	article	with	 the	headline:	WHEN
WILL
RAJNEESH	SANNYASINS	FINALLY	LEARN	TO	SWIM?
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	See	Right	at	Once
7	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001070
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
DOGO	HAD	A	DISCIPLE	CALLED	SOSHIN.	WHEN	SOSHIN	WAS	TAKEN
IN	AS
A	NOVICE,	IT	WAS	PERHAPS	NATURAL	OF	HIM	TO	EXPECT	LESSONS
IN	ZEN
FROM	 HIS	 TEACHER	 THE	 WAY	 A	 SCHOOLBOY	 IS	 TAUGHT	 AT
SCHOOL.	BUT
DOGO	GAVE	HIM	NO	SPECIAL	LESSONS	ON	THE	SUBJECT,	AND	THIS
BEWILDERED	AND	DISAPPOINTED	SOSHIN.
ONE	DAY	HE	SAID	TO	THE	MASTER,	"IT	IS	SOME	TIME	SINCE	I	CAME
HERE,	 BUT	 NOT	 A	 WORD	 HAS	 BEEN	 GIVEN	 ME	 REGARDING	 THE
ESSENCE	OF	THE
ZEN	TEACHING."
DOGO	REPLIED,	"SINCE	YOUR	ARRIVAL	I	HAVE	EVER	BEEN	GIVING
YOU
LESSONS	ON	THE	MATTER	OF	ZEN	DISCIPLINE."
"WHAT	KIND	OF	LESSON	COULD	IT	HAVE	BEEN?"
"WHEN	YOU	BRING	ME	A	CUP	OF	TEA	IN	THE	MORNING,	I	TAKE	IT;
WHEN
YOU	 SERVE	ME	 A	 MEAL,	 I	 ACCEPT	 IT;	 WHEN	 YOU	 BOW	 TO	ME,	 I
RETURN	IT
WITH	A	NOD.
HOW	ELSE	DO	YOU	EXPECT	TO	BE	TAUGHT	 IN	THE	DISCIPLINE	OF
ZEN?"
SOSHIN	HUNG	HIS	HEAD	FOR	A	WHILE,	PONDERING	THE	PUZZLING
WORDS
OF	THE	MASTER.
THE	 MASTER	 SAID,	 "IF	 YOU	 WANT	 TO	 SEE,	 SEE	 RIGHT	 AT	 ONCE.
WHEN	YOU
BEGIN	TO	THINK,	YOU	MISS	THE	POINT."
Sujata	has	written	to	me:
How	odd	of	god	to	choose	the	Jews!
Sujata,
GOD	 HAS	 A	 TREMENDOUS	 SENSE	 OF	 HUMOR!	 Religion	 remains
something	dead	without	a	sense	of	humor	as	a	foundation	to	it.	God	would	not
have	 been	 able	 to	 create	 the	 world	 if	 he	 had	 no	 sense	 of	 humor.	 God	 is	 not
serious	at	all.	Seriousness	is	a	state	of	disease;	humor	is	health.	Love,	laughter,
life,	they	are	aspects	of	the	same	energy.
But	for	centuries	people	have	been	told	 that	God	is	very	serious.	These	people
were	pathological.	They	created	a	serious	God,	they	projected	a	serious	God,	out
of	 their	own	pathology.	And	we	have	worshipped	 these	people	as	 saints.	They
were	 not	 saints.	 They	 needed	 great	 awakening;	 they	 were	 fast	 asleep	 in	 their
seriousness.	They	needed	laughter
--	 that	 would	 have	 helped	 them	 more	 than	 all	 their	 prayers	 and	 fasting;	 that
would	 have	 cleansed	 their	 souls	 in	 a	 far	 better	 way	 than	 all	 their	 ascetic
practices.	They	did	not	need	more	scriptures,	more	theologies;	they	needed	only
the	capacity	to	laugh	at	the	beautiful	absurdity	of	life.	It	is	ecstatically	absurd.	It
is	not	a	rational	phenomenon;	it	is	utterly	irrational.
Moses	went	up	 the	mountain.	After	a	 long	 time	God	appeared.	"Hello,	Moses.
Good	to	see	you.	Sorry	you	had	to	wait,	but	I	think	you	will	feel	it	was	worth	it
because	I	have	something	very	special	for	you	today."
Moses	thought	for	a	second	and	then	said,	"Oh,	no,	Lord,	really.	Thank	you,	but
I	don't	need	anything	right	now.	Some	other	time	perhaps."
"Moses,	this	is	free,"	said	the	Lord.
"Then,"	said	Moses,	"give	me	ten!"
That's	how	the	Jews	got	the	Ten	Commandments.
Sujata,	Zen	has	something	Jewish	in	it.	It	is	really	very	puzzling	why	Zen	did	not
appear	 in	 the	 Jewish	world.	But	 the	Chinese	 also	 have	 a	 tremendous	 sense	 of
humor.	 Zen	 is	 not	 Indian,	 remember.	 Of	 course,	 the	 origin	 is	 in	 Gautam	 the
Buddha,	 but	 it	went	 through	 a	 tremendous	 transformation	 passing	 through	 the
Chinese	consciousness.
There	are	a	few	very	wise	people	who	think	that	Zen	is	more	a	rebellion	against
the	 Indian	 seriousness	 than	 a	 continuity	 of	 it.	 And	 they	 have	 a	 point	 there;	 a
certain	 truth	 is	 there.	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 more	 Jewish	 than	 Hindu	 --	 he	 can	 laugh.
Chuang	Tzu	has	written	such	beautiful	and	absurd	stories;	nobody	can	conceive
of	an	enlightened	person	writing	such	stories,	which	can	only	be	called,	at	 the
best,	entertainment.	But	entertainment	can	become	the	door	to	enlightenment.
Zen	is	originally	connected	with	Buddha,	but	the	color	and	the	flavor	that	came
to	 it	 came	 through	 Lao	 Tzu,	 Chuang	 Tzu,	 Lieh	 Tzu	 and	 the	 Chinese
consciousness.	And	 then	 it	blossomed	 in	Japan;	 it	 came	 to	 its	ultimate	peak	 in
japan.	Japan	also	has	a	great	quality:	of	taking	life	playfully.	The	consciousness
of	Japan	is	very	colorful.
Zen	could	have	happened	in	the	Jewish	world	too.	Something	like	it	really	DID
happen	--
that	is	Hassidism.	This	story	must	have	come	from	Jewish	sources,	although	it	is
about	 Jesus.	 But	 Christians	 have	 no	 sense	 of	 humor.	 And	 Jesus	 was	 never	 a
Christian,	remember.	He	was	born	a	Jew,	he	lived	as	a	Jew,	he	died	as	a	Jew.
Jesus	is	hanging	on	the	cross	singing,	"Da-di-li-da-dum-dein...."
Suddenly	Peter	hisses	from	underneath,	"Hey,	Jesus!"
Jesus	goes	on,	"Da-di-dum-da-dum-da-dei...."
Peter,	now	more	urgently,	"Hey,	Jesus,	stop	it!"
Jesus	continues	happily	with	"Di-duah-duah...."
Finally	Peter	yells,	"For	God's	sake,	Jesus,	cut	it	out!	Tourists	are	coming!"
Try	 to	understand	Zen	 through	 laughter,	 not	 through	prayer.	Try	 to	understand
Zen	 through	 flowers,	 butterflies,	 sun,	 moon,	 children,	 people	 in	 all	 their
absurdities.	 Watch	 this	 whole	 panorama	 of	 life,	 all	 these	 colors,	 the	 whole
spectrum.
Zen	is	not	a	doctrine,	it	is	not	a	dogma.	It	is	growing	into	an	insight.	It	is	a	vision
--	very	light-hearted,	not	serious	at	all.
Be	light-hearted,	light-footed.	Be	of	light	step.	Don't	carry	religion	like	a	burden.
And	don't	expect	religion	to	be	a	 teaching;	 it	 is	not.	 It	 is	certainly	a	discipline,
but	not	a	teaching	at	all.	Teaching	has	to	be	imposed	upon	you	from	the	outside
and	teaching	can	only	reach	to	your	mind,	never	to	your	heart,	and	never,	never
to	the	very	center	of	your	being.	Teaching	remains	intellectual.	It	is	an	answer	to
human	curiosity,	and	curiosity	is	not	a	true	search.
The	student	remains	outside	the	temple	of	Zen	because	he	remains	curious.	He
wants	to	know	answers	and	there	are	none.	He	has	some	stupid	questions	to	be
answered:	"Who	made	the	world?	Why	did	he	make	the	world?"	And	so	on	and
so	 forth.	 "How	many	 heavens	 are	 there	 and	 how	many	 hells?	And	 how	many
angels	can	dance	on	 the	point	of	a	needle?	And	 is	 the	world	 infinite	or	 finite?
Are	there	many	lives	or	only	one?"	These	are	all	curiosities	--	good	for	a	student
of	philosophy	but	not	good	for	a	disciple.
A	disciple	has	to	drop	curiosity.	Curiosity	is	something	very	superficial.	Even	if
those	 questions	 are	 answered,	 nothing	will	 have	 happened	 to	 your	 being;	 you
will	 remain	 the	 same.	 Yes,	 you	 will	 have	 more	 information,	 and	 out	 of	 that
information	you	will	 create	 new	questions.	Each	question	 answered	brings	 ten
more	new	questions;	the	answer	creates	ten	more	new	questions.
If	 somebody	says,	 "God	created	 the	world,"	 then	 the	question	 is,	 "Why	did	he
create	 the	 world?	 And	 why	 a	 world	 like	 this?	 --	 so	 miserable.	 If	 he	 is
omnipotent,	omniscient,	omnipresent,	could	he	not	see	what	he	was	doing?	Why
did	he	create	pain,	disease,	death?"	Now,	so	many	questions....
Philosophy	is	an	exercise	in	futility.
A	 student	 comes	 out	 of	 curiosity.	 Unless	 he	 becomes	 a	 disciple	 he	 will	 not
become	aware	 that	 curiosity	 is	 a	vicious	circle.	You	ask	one	question,	you	are
given	the	answer,	 the	answer	brings	 ten	more	new	questions,	and	so	on	and	so
forth.	And	the	tree	becomes	bigger	and	bigger;	thicker	and	thicker	is	the	foliage.
And	finally	the	philosopher	has	only	questions	and	no	answers	at	all.
Surrounded	by	all	 those	stupid	questions...stupid	I	call	 them	because	they	have
no	 answers;	 stupid	 I	 call	 them	because	 they	 are	born	out	 of	 childish	 curiosity.
When	one	is	surrounded	by	all	those	questions	and	there	is	no	answer,	one	loses
sharpness,	one	loses	clarity,	one	is	clouded.	And	one	is	no	more	intelligent.	The
more	intellectual	one	becomes,	the	less	intelligent	he	is.
The	professor	who	had	committed	his	wife	to	a	mental	institution	was	talking	to
the	chief	of	staff.	"How	will	we	know	when	my	wife	is	well	again,	doctor?"
"We	have	a	simple	test	we	give	all	our	patients,"	he	replied.	"We	put	a	hose	into
a	trough,	turn	on	the	water,	give	the	patient	a	bucket,	and	tell	him	to	empty	out
the	trough."
"What	does	that	prove?"	inquired	the	professor.
"Elementary,	 sir,"	 the	 doctor	 assured	 him.	 "Any	 sane	 person	 will	 turn	 off	 the
hose."
"Isn't	science	wonderful!"	he	replied.	"I	never	would	have	thought	of	that!"
He	must	be	a	professor	of	philosophy;	he	can't	be	less	than	that.
The	professor	only	knows	questions.	He	 is	 lost	 in	 the	 jungle	of	questions.	The
philosopher	 remains	 immature.	 Maturity	 is	 of	 consciousness,	 not	 of
intellectuality.	It	is	not	of	knowledge,	it	is	of	innocence.
Yes:	NOT	TO	KNOW	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE.	And	to	function	out	of	that
not-knowing	 is	 to	 function	 in	 an	 enlightened	 way.	 To	 respond	 out	 of	 not-
knowing	 is	 to	 respond	 like	 a	 Buddha.	 That	 is	 true	 response	 because	 it	 is	 not
clouded,	 not	 distorted,	 not	 contaminated,	 not	 polluted	 and	 poisoned	 by	 your
mind	and	your	past.	It	is	fresh,	it	is	young,	it	is	new.	It	arises	to	the	challenge	of
the	present.	It	is	always	in	synchronicity	with	the	new,	with	the	present.	And	the
present	is	always	new,	it	is	always	moving	--	it	is	dynamic.	All	your	answers	are
static,	and	life	is	dynamic.
HENCE	ZEN	IS	NOT	INTERESTED	IN	ANSWERS	--	or	in	questions.	It	is	not
interested	in	teaching	at	all.	It	is	not	a	philosophy;	it	is	a	totally	different	way	of
looking	at	things,	at	life,	at	existence,	at	oneself,	at	others.	Yes,	it	is	a	discipline.
Discipline	 simply	 means	 a	 methodology	 of	 becoming	 more	 centered,	 of
becoming	more	alert,	of	becoming	more	aware,	of	bringing	more	meditativeness
to	your	being;	not	functioning	through	the	head,	not	even	through	the	heart,	but
functioning	 from	 the	 very	 core	 of	 your	 being,	 from	 the	 very	 innermost	 core,
from	the	center	of	your	being,	from	your	totality.	It	is	not	a	reaction	--	reaction
comes	from	the	past	--	it	is	a	response.
Response	is	always	IN	the	present,	TO	the	present.
Zen	gives	you	a	discipline	to	become	a	mirror	so	that	you	can	reflect	that	which
is.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	thoughtless	awareness.
The	 first	 thing	 to	 be	 dropped	 is	 curiosity,	 because	 curiosity	 will	 keep	 you
tethered	to	the	futile.	It	will	keep	you	being	a	student;	it	will	never	allow	you	to
become	a	disciple.
Boris,	who	was	from	Russia,	had	been	in	America	only	a	few	months.	He	did	not
speak	English	very	well.
One	 day	 he	was	 asked,	 "Boris,	what	 is	 it	 that	 you	 are	most	 anxious	 to	 see	 in
America?"
"Well,"	replied	Boris,	"I	weesh	most	to	meet	the	most	famous	Mrs.	Beech,	who
had	so	many	sons	in	the	last	war."
Get	 it?	He	must	have	heard	all	 the	Americans	calling	each	other	 "sonofabitch,
sonofabitch..."	 so	 he	 is	 very	much	 interested,	 anxious,	 curious,	 to	 know	 about
Mrs.
Beech,	the	famous	Mrs.	Beech.
Curiosity	 is	 always	 like	 that.	 It	 is	 foolish,	 but	 it	 can	 keep	 you	 tethered	 to	 the
mind.	 And	 don't	 think	 that	 there	 is	 some	 curiosity	 which	 is	 spiritual,
metaphysical.	No,	nothing	like	that	exists;	all	curiosity	is	the	same.	Whether	you
inquire	about	"the	famous	Mrs.	Beech"
or	you	inquire	about	God	it	is	all	the	same.	Inquiry	from	the	mind	will	have	the
same	quality	--	of	childishness.
There	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	esquire	that	arises	from	the	deeper	recesses	of
your	being.
Zen	is	interested	in	discipline,	not	in	teaching.	It	wants	you	to	be	more	alert	so
you	can	see	more	clearly.	It	does	not	give	you	the	answer;	it	gives	you	the	eyes
to	see.	What	 is	 the	use	of	 telling	a	blind	man	what	 light	 is	and	all	 the	 theories
about	light?	It	is	futile.	You	are	simply	being	stupid	by	answering	the	curiosity
of	a	blind	man.	What	 is	urgently	needed	 is	 treatment	of	his	eyes.	He	needs	an
operation,	he	needs	new	eyes,	he	needs	medicine.	That	is	discipline.
Buddha	has	said:	"I	am	a	physician,	not	a	philosopher."	And	Zen	is	absolutely	a
treatment.	It	is	the	greatest	treatment	that	has	come	to	humanity,	out	of	the	work
of	thousands	of	enlightened	people	--	very	refined.	It	can	help	to	open	up	your
eyes.	It	can	help	you	to	feel	again,	to	be	sensitive	to	the	reality.	It	can	give	you
eyes	and	ears.	It	can	give	you	a	soul.	But	it	is	not	interested	in	answers.
Meditate	over	this	beautiful	story:
DOGO	HAD	A	DISCIPLE	CALLED	SOSHIN.	WHEN	SOSHIN	WAS	TAKEN
IN	AS
A	NOVICE,	IT	WAS	PERHAPS	NATURAL	OF	HIM	TO	EXPECT	LESSONS
IN	ZEN
FROM	 HIS	 TEACHER	 THE	 WAY	 A	 SCHOOLBOY	 IS	 TAUGHT	 AT
SCHOOL.
YES,	 IT	 IS	 NATURAL	 IN	 A	WAY,	 because	 that	 s	 how	 we	 are	 conditioned.
Knowledge	 is	 given	 to	 us	 in	 the	 form	 of	 questions	 and	 answers.	 From	 the
primary	 school	 to	 the	 university	 that's	 how	 we	 are	 taught,	 conditioned,
hypnotized.	And	naturally,	after	one	third	of	your	life	is	wasted	in	that	way,	you
become	accustomed	to	it.	Then	you	start	asking	profound	questions	in	the	same
way	as	one	asks,	"How	much	is	two	plus	two?"
You	start	asking	about	love,	life,	God,	meditation	--	in	the	same	way!
In	 fact,	 even	 that	 ordinary	 question	 is	 not	 answerable.	 If	 you	 ask	 the	 real
mathematicians,	even	this	simple	question	"How	much	is	two	plus	two?"	is	not
answerable,	 because	 sometimes	 it	 is	 five	 and	 sometimes	 it	 is	 three.	 It	 is	 very
rarely	 four.	 It	 is	 an	 exception	 that	 two	 plus	 two	 comes	 to	 be	 four,	 very
exceptional,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 two	 things	 are	 never	 the	 same.	 It	 is	 an
abstraction:	you	add	two	and	two	and	you	say	four.
Two	 persons	 and	 two	 persons	 are	 four	 different	 persons,	 so	DIFFERENT	 that
you	 cannot	 create	 an	 abstraction	 out	 of	 them.	 Even	 two	 leaves	 and	 two	 other
leaves	are	so	different	that	you	cannot	simply	call	them	four	leaves;	they	are	not
the	same.	Their	weights	are	different,	their	colors	are	different,	their	shapes	are
different,	their	tastes	are	different.	No	two	things	in	the	world	are	the	same.	So
how	can	two	plus	two	be	four?	It	is	just	an	abstraction;	it	is	lower	mathematics.
Higher	 mathematics	 knows	 that	 this	 is	 only	 utilitarian,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 truth.
Mathematics	is	an	invention	of	man;	it	is	a	workable	lie.
What	 to	 say	 about	 love,	which	 goes	 beyond	 all	mathematics	 and	 all	 logic?	 In
love,	one	plus	one	becomes	one,	not	two.	In	deep	love,	the	twoness	disappears.
Mathematics	is	transcended;	it	becomes	irrelevant.	In	deep	love,	two	persons	are
no	more	 two	persons,	 they	become	one.	They	start	 feeling,	 functioning,	as	one
unit,	 as	 one	 organic	 unity,	 as	 one	 orgasmic	 joy.	 Mathematics	 won't	 do,	 logic
won't	 do,	 chemistry	won't	 do,	 biology	won't	 do,	 physiology	won't	 do.	Love	 is
something	which	has	 to	be	experienced	 in	a	 totally	different	way.	 It	 cannot	be
taught	in	the	ordinary	ways	of	teaching;	it	cannot	become	part	of	pedagogy.
But	the	disciple,	Soshin,	was	a	novice,	a	newcomer.
...IT	WAS	 PERHAPS	NATURAL	OF	HIM	TO	EXPECT	LESSONS	 IN	 ZEN
FROM
HIS	TEACHER	THE	WAY	A	SCHOOLBOY	IS	TAUGHT	AT	SCHOOL.
It	is	natural	in	a	state	of	unconsciousness.
Remember,	there	are	two	natures.	One	is	when	you	are	asleep;	then	many	things
are	natural.	Somebody	insults	you,	you	become	angry,	and	that	is	NATURAL	--
but	 only	 in	 unconsciousness,	 in	 sleep.	 You	 insult	 the	 Buddha,	 he	 does	 not
become	 angry	 --	 that	 is	 higher	 nature,	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 nature.	He	 is
functioning	from	a	different	center	altogether.	He	may	feel	compassion	for	you,
not	anger.	He	functions	through	awareness,	you	function	through	unawareness.
In	sleep	you	cannot	do	anything	of	any	value,	you	cannot	do	anything	valuable.
Whatsoever	you	do	is	all	dream.	You	imagine,	you	think	you	are	doing	good.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 somebody	 asked:	 "I	 want	 to	 do	 good,	 I	 want	 to	 BE	 good.
Osho,	help	me."
I	 cannot	 help	 you	 directly	 to	 do	 good	 or	 to	 be	 good;	 I	 can	 help	 you	 only
indirectly.	I	can	help	you	only	to	be	more	meditative.	And	on	the	surface	it	may
seem	 that	 your	 question	 is	 about	 something	 else	 and	 my	 answer	 is	 totally
different:	you	want	to	be	good	and	I	talk	about	meditation.	How	are	they	related?
If	you	are	asleep	you	may	THINK	you	are	doing	good,	you	may	do	harm.	You
may	THINK	you	are	doing	harm,	you	may	do	good.	In	your	sleep	everything	is
possible.
You	 will	 become	 a	 do-gooder	 --	 and	 do-gooders	 are	 the	 most	 mischievous
people.	We	have	 suffered	much	 from	 these	 do-gooders.	They	 don't	 know	who
they	are,	they	don't	know	any	silent	state	of	consciousness,	 they	are	not	aware,
but	they	go	on	doing	good.
What	to	say	about	good?	A	sleepy	person	cannot	even	be	certain	of	doing	harm.
He	may	think	he	is	doing	harm	and	the	result	may	be	totally	different.
That's	 how	 acupuncture	 was	 discovered.	 A	man	 wanted	 to	 kill	 somebody;	 he
shot	him	with	 an	arrow.	And	 that	man,	 the	victim,	had	 suffered	his	whole	 life
from	a	headache.
The	arrow	hit	him	on	the	leg	and	the	headache	disappeared,	totally	disappeared.
He	was	puzzled.
He	went	 to	his	physician	 saying,	 "You	have	not	been	able	 to	 treat	me	and	my
enemy	has	treated	me.	He	wanted	to	kill	me,	but	something	went	wrong	--	my
headache	has	disappeared.	I	am	grateful	to	him."
Then	 the	 physicians	 started	 thinking	 about	 it,	 how	 it	 happened.	 That's	 what
acupuncturists	go	on	doing	now.
You	 can	 go	 to	Abhiyana.	You	may	 have	 a	 headache	 and	 he	may	 start	 putting
needles	all	over	your	body.	Those	needle	points	were	discovered	because	of	this
accident.	 Five	 thousand	 years	 have	 passed;	 in	 these	 five	 thousand	 years
acupuncture	has	developed	tremendously.	Now	there	is	much	scientific	support
for	it.
In	Soviet	Russia	they	are	working	on	acupuncture	very	seriously	because	it	has
great	 potential:	 it	 can	 cure	 almost	 all	 diseases.	 Those	 needles	 can	 change	 the
currents	of	your	body	electricity.
That	man	must	have	suffered	from	too	much	electricity	in	the	head.	The	arrow
hit	 a	 certain	 meridian,	 a	 certain	 electric	 current	 in	 his	 leg,	 and	 the	 electricity
changed	 its	 course;	 it	 was	 no	 longer	 going	 to	 the	 head.	 Hence	 the	 headache
disappeared.
Now,	the	man	who	wanted	to	do	harm	did	a	great,	beneficial	act	for	the	whole	of
humanity	 --	 not	 only	 for	 that	 man	 --	 because	 in	 these	 five	 thousand	 years,
millions	of	people	have	been	helped	by	acupuncture.	The	whole	credit	goes	 to
that	unknown	person	who	wanted	to	kill.
In	your	unconsciousness	it	 is	difficult	 to	decide	what	the	outcome	will	be.	You
move	in	a	dark	dark	night.	All	is	accidental.
Sindenburg	had	 lived	 a	 virtuous	 life;	 he	was	 even	president	 of	 the	 synagogue.
But	when	he	entered	heaven	the	angel	in	charge	said,	"You	can't	stay	here."
"Why?"	asked	Sindenburg.	"I	always	tried	to	be	a	good	man."
"That	 is	 it,"	explained	 the	angel.	"Everyone	here	was	a	good	man,	but	 they	all
committed	at	least	one	sin.	Since	you	didn't	sin	at	all,	 the	rest	of	the	souls	will
resent	you."
"But,"	protested	Sindenburg,	"isn't	there	something	I	can	do?"
"Well,"	considered	the	angel,	"you	can	have	six	more	hours	on	earth	to	commit	a
sin,	but	you	must	do	somebody	a	real	injury."
Sindenburg	 went	 back	 to	 earth	 and	 suddenly	 he	 saw	 a	 middle-aged	 woman
looking	at	him.	They	started	talking;	she	invited	him	home	with	her.	Soon	they
were	making	love	like	two	teenagers.
Six	hours	later	Sindenburg	said,	"I	am	sorry,	but	I	have	to	go	now."
"Listen!"	cried	the	woman.	"I	never	married	or	even	had	a	man.	You	just	gave
me	the	best	time	I	had	in	my	whole	life.	What	a	good	deed	you	did	today!"
Now	he	came	to	do	some	real	injury	and	what	he	has	really	done	is	a	good	deed.
The	woman	is	immensely	happy	and	grateful.	And	those	six	hours	are	gone;	now
there	is	no	more	time	left.	Again	he	will	be	in	trouble!
In	sleep	you	cannot	do	good	--	you	cannot	even	do	bad!	All	is	accidental.	And
when	a	person	comes	to	a	Master	he	comes	almost	fast	asleep.	He	comes	out	of
curiosity,	accidentally.	He	expects	much,	and	his	expectations	are	natural	in	his
state.
He	expected	LESSONS	IN	ZEN....
Now	that	is	absolutely	foolish:	there	are	no	lessons	in	Zen.	Zen,	in	the	first	place,
is	 not	 a	 teaching	 but	 a	 device	 to	 awaken	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 information,	 it	 is	 not
knowledge.	It	is	a	method	to	shake	you	up,	to	wake	you	up.	Teaching	means	you
are	 fast	 asleep	 and	 somebody	goes	 on	 talking	 about	what	 awakening	 is	 --	 and
you	 go	 on	 snoring	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 talking.	 YOU	 are	 asleep,	 HE	 is	 asleep;
otherwise	he	will	not	talk	to	you.	At	least	when	he	sees	that	you	are	snoring	he
will	not	talk	to	you.
When	 I	 was	 a	 student	 at	 university	 I	 had	 a	 great	 teacher,	 a	 very	 well-known
philosopher.
For	three	years	nobody	had	joined	his	class	--	he	was	the	head	of	the	department.
And	 people	 were	 afraid	 to	 join	 his	 class	 because	 he	 was	 a	 non-stop	 talker.
Sometimes	 two	hours,	 three	 hours,	 four	 hours....And	he	 had	 this	 condition:	 he
would	say	to	every	student,
"If	you	want	to	participate	in	MY	classes,	if	you	want	to	take	MY	subject,	then
this	must	be	remembered:	that	I	can	START	my	lecture	when	the	period	starts,
but	I	cannot	stop	when	the	period	is	over.	Unless	I	am	totally	finished	with	the
subject...and	how	can	 it	 be	managed	within	 forty	minutes?	Sometimes	 it	 takes
two	hours,	sometimes	it	takes	only	half	an	hour.	So	whenever	it	is	finished,	that
is	the	end."
He	also	told	me	the	same.	I	wanted	to	join	his	class	--	I	was	intrigued	by	the	old
man.	 He	 said,	 "Listen!	 Don't	 blame	me	 later	 on.	 Sometimes	 I	 speak	 for	 four
hours;	five	hours	also	I	have	spoken."
I	said,	"You	don't	be	worried	about	that.	I	can	speak	longer	than	you."	And	I	told
him,
"Remember	that	when	I	start	speaking	I	forget	who	is	the	teacher	and	who	is	the
student.
I	don't	care!	So	you	also	keep	it	in	mind	that	if	I	start	speaking	you	cannot	stop
me.
"And	secondly:	the	time	of	your	periods	is	such	that	those	are	the	hours	when	I
sleep.
From	 twelve	 to	 two	 I	must	 sleep;	 that	 I	 have	done	my	whole	 life.	 I	 can	 sleep
longer	 --	 I	 have	 slept	 from	 eleven	 to	 five,	 the	 whole	 day	 --	 but	 this	 much	 is
absolutely	necessary,	that	I	cannot	miss.	So	I	will	sleep	--	you	can	go	on	talking."
He	said,	"How	can	you	sleep	when	I	am	talking?"
I	said,	"I	use	earplugs!	You	go	on	talking.	I	am	not	concerned	with	your	talk	at
all,	 that	 is	up	 to	you.	You	enjoy	 it	 to	your	heart's	content	 --	 I	will	be	sleeping.
And	you	cannot	object	to	that."
He	agreed	to	my	condition,	I	agreed	to	his	condition.	And	that's	how	we	became
great	friends:	he	would	speak	and	I	would	sleep.
Now	this	person	must	be	fast	asleep	himself,	otherwise	why...because	I	was	the
only	student	in	his	class!	To	whom	was	he	talking?	He	was	unburdening	himself.
And	he	was	very	happy	to	find	a	student	who	would	at	least	remain	in	the	class	-
-	although	asleep,	but	at	least	he	was	there.
This	 is	 what	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 whole	 world!	 Priests	 are	 asleep	 talking	 to	 their
congregations.
Professors	are	asleep	talking	to	their	students	--	metaphysically	asleep;	I	am	not
talking	about	the	ordinary	sleep.	Metaphysically	everybody	is	snoring.
Zen	is	not	a	teaching,	because	it	knows	you	are	asleep.	The	primary	thing	is	not
to	teach	you;	the	primary	thing	is	to	wake	you	up.	Zen	is	an	alarm.
But	Soshin	naturally	expected	some	lessons	in	Zen	from	his	teacher	THE	WAY
A	SCHOOLBOY	IS	TAUGHT	AT	SCHOOL.
Remember,	if	Zen	is	not	a	teaching	then	you	cannot	call	the	Zen	Master	a	teacher
either.
He	 is	 not	 a	 teacher,	 he	 is	 a	Master.	And	 there	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 a
teacher	 and	a	Master.	But	when	you	 first	 come	 in	 close	 contact	with	 a	Master
you	 think	 of	 him	 as	 a	 teacher	 --	maybe	 a	 great	 teacher,	 but	 still	 you	 think	 in
terms	 of	 his	 being	 a	 teacher.	And	 the	 reason	 is	 in	 your	 expectation	 that	 he	 is
teaching	something:	that	he	is	teaching	great	philosophy,	that	he	is	teaching	great
truths.
No,	a	real	Master	is	not	a	teacher:	a	real	Master	is	an	awakener.	His	function	is
totally	different	from	a	teacher;	his	function	is	far	more	difficult.	And	only	very
few	people	can	stay	with	a	Master	because	to	wake	up	after	millions	of	lives	is
not	 an	 ordinary	 feat;	 it	 is	 a	miracle.	And	 to	 allow	 somebody	 to	wake	 you	 up
needs	great	trust,	great	surrender.
So	 in	Zen,	 first,	people	are	accepted	only	as	novices,	as	beginners.	Only	when
the	Master	 sees	 some	 quality	 in	 them	which	 can	 be	 awakened,	 when	 he	 sees
something	very	potential,	then	they	are	accepted	and	initiated	into	higher	things.
Otherwise	they	remain	novices	for	years,	doing	small	things:	cleaning	the	floor,
cooking	the	food,	chopping	wood,	carrying	water	from	the	well.	And	the	Master
goes	 on	watching	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 helping	 them	 to	 become	 a	 little	more	 alert
while	 they	 are	 chopping	 wood,	 while	 they	 are	 carrying	 water	 from	 the	 well,
while	they	are	cleaning	the	floor.
You	 will	 see	 here	 in	 this	 commune	 at	 least	 one	 thousand	 sannyasins	 doing
different	 kinds	 of	 things.	When	 Indians	 come	 here	 for	 the	 first	 time	 they	 are
puzzled,	 because	 their	 idea	 of	 an	 ashram,	 of	 a	 religious	 commune,	 is	 totally
different.	People	should	be	sitting	praying,	doing	BHAJAN.	They	can't	conceive
that	people	should	be	working,	cooking	food,	weaving,	doing	pottery,	painting,
photography,	creating	music,	poetry,	dancing.
They	can't	believe	their	eyes	when	they	see	the	commune	for	the	first	time.	They
come	with	 certain	 expectations.	And	 they	want	 you	 to	 look	 serious,	 religious,
holy.	And	you	look	so	joyous!	You	look	so	loving,	so	warm.	They	expect	you	to
be	utterly	cold	--	as	cold	as	corpses.	And	you	are	so	warm	and	so	loving	and	so
alive	that	they	are	shocked	for	the	first	time.
Zen	does	not	believe	that	people	should	just	live	a	holy	life,	a	virtuous	life,	doing
nothing
--	 just	 turning	beads	or	 repeating	 some	mantra.	Zen	believes	 in	 creativity.	Zen
believes	 in	 the	 ordinary	 world.	 It	 wants	 to	 transform	 the	 mundane	 into	 the
sacred.
So	the	first	message	given	to	the	beginners	is	to	start	work	but	be	alert.	And	it	is
easier	 to	be	alert	while	you	are	working	 than	while	you	are	 simply	chanting	a
mantra,	 because	 when	 you	 are	 chanting	 a	mantra	 every	 possibility	 is	 that	 the
mantra	will	function	as	a	tranquilizer.	When	you	repeat	a	single	word	again	and
again	 it	 creates	 sleep	 because	 it	 creates	 boredom.	When	 you	 repeat	 a	 certain
word	 again	 and	 again	 it	 changes	 your	 inner	 chemistry.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the
ancientmost	ways	of	falling	asleep.
If	 you	 cannot	 fall	 asleep	 in	 the	 night,	 if	 you	 suffer	 from	 sleeplessness,	 then
methods	like	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi's	Transcendental	Meditation	are	perfectly
good.	That	method	has	nothing	to	do	with	meditation;	it	is	neither	meditation	nor
transcendental.	 It	 is	 simply	 a	non-medicinal	 tranquilizer.	 It	 is	 good	 as	 far	 as	 it
can	bring	sleep	and	without	any	drug	--	I	appreciate	it	--	but	it	has	nothing	to	do
with	meditation.
You	can	repeat	your	own	name	again	and	again	and	you	don't	need	 to	pay	 the
fees	 to	anybody	and	you	don't	need	any	 initiation.	Just	 repeat	your	own	name;
repeat	 it	 fast	 so	 that	 nothing	 else	 enters	 your	mind,	 only	 your	 name	 resounds.
Repeat	 loudly	inside	so	 that	from	your	 toes	 to	 the	head	it	 is	resounding	inside.
Soon	you	will	get	bored,	fed	up.	And	that	is	the	moment	when	you	start	falling
asleep	because	there	seems	to	be	no	other	escape.
All	mothers	 know	 it.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 ancientmost	methods	women	 have	 been
using	with	 their	 children,	 on	 their	 children.	 They	 didn't	 call	 it	 Transcendental
Meditation;	 they	 used	 to	 call	 it	 "lullaby."	 The	 child	 tosses	 and	 turns,	 but	 the
mother	goes	on	 repeating	 the	same	 line	again	and	again.	And	 finding	no	other
escape	outside,	 the	child	escapes	inside;	 that	means	he	falls	asleep.	He	says,	"I
am	so	fed	up	that	unless	I	fall	asleep,	this	woman	is	not	going	to	stop."	And	soon
he	 learns:	 the	 moment	 he	 falls	 asleep	 the	 woman	 stops,	 so	 it	 becomes	 a
conditioning;	 then	 it	 becomes	 a	 conditioned	 reflex.	 Slowly	 slowly,	 the	woman
just	repeats	the	line	one	or	two	times	and	the	child	is	fast	asleep.
This	you	can	do	to	yourself.	It	is	a	process	of	auto-hypnosis;	good	as	far	as	sleep
is	 concerned	 but	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 meditation.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is	 just	 the
opposite	 of	 meditation,	 because	 meditation	 brings	 awareness	 and	 this	 method
brings	 sleep.	 Hence	 I	 appreciate	 it	 as	 a	 technique	 for	 sleep,	 but	 I	 am	 totally
against	it	if	it	is	taught	to	people	as	a	method	of	meditation.
Soshin	 expected	 LESSONS	 IN	 ZEN	 FROM	 HIS	 TEACHER	 THE	 WAY	 A
SCHOOLBOY	IS	TAUGHT	AT	SCHOOL.
This	 is	 your	 story.	 This	 is	 everybody's	 story.	 Each	 seeker	 comes	 with	 such
expectations.
Sometimes	foolish	people	come	to	me	and	they	ask:	"What	is	your	teaching	in
short?"
Which	of	your	books	contains	your	total	teaching?"
I	have	no	teaching!	That's	why	so	many	books	are	possible.	Otherwise	how	can
so	 many	 books	 be	 possible?	 If	 you	 have	 a	 certain	 teaching,	 then	 one	 or	 two
books	 will	 do.	 That's	 why	 I	 can	 go	 on	 talking	 for	 ever,	 because	 I	 have	 no
teaching.	 Every	 teaching	 will	 sooner	 or	 later	 be	 exhausted;	 I	 cannot	 be
exhausted.	There	is	no	beginning	and	no	end...we	are	always	in	the	middle.	I	am
not	a	teacher.
Everybody	 grows	 physically	 but	 psychologically	 remains	 a	 child.	 Your
psychological	age	is	never	more	than	thirteen,	even	less	than	that.	It	was	a	shock
when	 it	 was	 discovered	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	 First	 World	 War	 that	 man's
average	psychological	age	is	only	twelve	or	thirteen	at	the	most.	That	means	you
may	be	 seventy	 but	 your	mind	 is	 only	 thirteen.	 So	 if	 somebody	 looks	 at	 your
body	you	look	so	old,	so	experienced,	but	if	somebody	looks	into	your	mind	you
are	carrying	the	same	childish	mind	still.
Your	God	is	nothing	but	a	projected	father;	it	is	a	father	fixation.	You	cannot	live
without	 the	 idea	of	 a	 father.	Maybe	your	 actual	 father	 is	 dead	 and	you	 cannot
conceive	of	yourself	without	a	 father.	You	need	an	 imaginary	 father	 in	heaven
who	takes	care	of	you,	who	looks	after	you.	And,	certainly,	the	ordinary	father	is
bound	to	die	one	day	or	other	so	you	need	a	heavenly	father	who	is	eternal,	who
will	never	die,	so	he	will	become	your	safety	and	security.
Once	 somebody	 asked	 George	 Gurdjieff,	 "Why	 do	 all	 the	 religions	 teach:
Respect	your	parents?"
Gurdjieff	said,	"For	a	simple	reason:	if	you	respect	your	parents	you	will	respect
God,	because	God	 is	nothing	but	 the	ultimate	parent.	 If	you	don't	 respect	your
parents	you	will	not	be	bothered	with	God	either.	"
A	great	insight:	God	is	the	great	father;	you	are	just	small	children	searching	for
a	 lost	 father,	 searching	 for	 a	 lost	 childhood,	 searching	 for	 the	 security	 of
childhood.	Your	behavior	is	childish.
A	young	father	was	shopping	at	a	department	store	with	his	daughter	when	the
little	girl	suddenly	said,	"Daddy,	I	gotta	go."
"Not	right	now,"	replied	the	father.
"I	gotta	go	NOW!"	shouted	the	girl.
To	avoid	a	crisis	a	saleslady	stepped	up	and	said,	"That's	all	right,	sir,	I	will	take
her."
The	saleslady	and	the	little	girl	went	off	hurriedly,	hand	in	hand.	On	their	return,
Tony	looked	at	his	daughter	and	said,	"Did	you	thank	the	nice	lady	for	being	so
kind?"
"Why	should	I	thank	her?"	retorted	the	little	girl.	"She	had	to	go	too!"
Just	 watch	 your	 reactions	 and	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:	 they	 are	 childish.	 Your
manners,	 howsoever	 sophisticated	 from	 the	 outside,	 deep	 down	 are	 childish.
Your	prayers,	your	church-going,	are	ALL	childish.
Zen	is	not	concerned	with	your	childish	state	of	mind.	It	has	no	desire	to	nourish
it	any	more.	Its	concern	is	maturity;	it	wants	you	to	become	mature,	it	wants	you
to	become	ripe.	Hence	it	has	no	idea	of	God	--	no	father	in	the	sky.	It	leaves	you
totally	alone	because	only	in	aloneness	is	maturity	possible.	It	leaves	you	totally
in	 insecurity.	 It	 gives	 you	 no	 security,	 no	 guarantee.	 It	 gives	 you	 all	 kinds	 of
insecurities	to	move	into.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	also:	a	quantum	leap	into	insecurity,	a	quantum	leap
into	 the	 unknown,	 because	 only	with	 that	 encounter	will	 you	 become	mature.
And	maturity	is	freedom,	maturity	is	liberation.
BUT	DOGO	GAVE	HIM	NO	SPECIAL	LESSONS	ON	THE	SUBJECT....
There	are	none.
...AND	THIS	BEWILDERED	AND	DISAPPOINTED	SOSHIN.
Naturally.	He	was	expecting	and	expecting	and	waiting,	and	no	special	 lessons
were	given.	He	wanted	a	few	simple	principles	so	he	could	cling	to	them,	so	that
he	could	hold	onto	them,	so	that	they	would	become	his	treasure,	his	knowledge.
And	the	Master	had	not	given	any	special	lesson.	Naturally	he	was	disappointed.
If	 you	 are	 expecting	 anything	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 disappointed.	 Expectation
always	brings	disappointment,	frustration.
ONE	DAY	HE	SAID	TO	THE	MASTER,	"IT	IS	SOME	TIME	SINCE	I	CAME
HERE,	 BUT	 NOT	 A	 WORD	 HAS	 BEEN	 GIVEN	 ME	 REGARDING	 THE
ESSENCE	OF	THE
ZEN	TEACHING.	"
People	 are	 in	 a	 hurry.	 I	 have	 come	 to	 know	people	who	 have	meditated	 three
days,	and	on	the	fourth	day	they	ask,	"Three	days	we	have	been	meditating,	why
has	nothing	happened	yet?"
As	 if	 they	 are	 obliging	 existence	 by	meditating	 for	 so	 long	 --	 three	 days,	 one
hour	 every	 day;	 that	 means	 three	 hours.	 And	 if	 you	 actually	 look,	 in	 their
meditation	 they	 were	 just	 daydreaming;	 with	 closed	 eyes	 they	 were
daydreaming.	They	call	it	meditation!	And	just	because	for	three	days	they	have
been	sitting	for	one	hour	--	with	great	difficulty,	somehow	managing,	great	noise
inside,	no	silence,	no	peace,	no	consciousness,	just	desires,	thoughts,	memories,
imagination,	constant	traffic,	a	crowd	--	then	they	come	on	the	fourth	day	saying,
"Osho,	what	 is	 happening?	Three	days	have	passed	 and	nothing	has	happened
yet."
Time	should	not	be	taken	into	account	at	all	--	three	years,	not	even	three	lives.
You	should	not	think	in	terms	of	time,	because	the	phenomenon	of	meditation	is
non-temporal.	 It	 can	 happen	 any	moment,	 it	 can	 happen	RIGHT	 now;	 it	may
take	years,	it	may	take	lives.	It	all	depends	on	your	intensity,	on	your	sincerity,
and	it	all	depends	on	your	totality.
A	pretty	young	woman	stepped	onto	a	crowded	streetcar,	and	seeing	that	all	the
seats	 were	 taken	 she	 asked,	 "Would	 one	 of	 you	 gentlemen	 make	 room	 for	 a
pregnant	woman?"
A	middle-aged	man	quickly	stood	up	and	gave	her	his	seat.	After	she	was	seated
he	solicitously	asked	her,	"How	long	have	you	been	pregnant?"
"About	fifteen	minutes,	and	God,	am	I	tired!"
Fifteen	minutes	pregnant!	Even	that	is	okay,	but	three	days	of	meditation	is	even
more	stupid.
SOSHIN	SAID	ONE	DAY	TO	THE	MASTER....
There	must	be	some	anger,	frustration,	disappointment.	Has	he	chosen	a	wrong
person	to	be	with?	No	special	teaching	has	been	given	yet	--	and	the	ego	always
wants	something	special.
"IT	IS	SOME	TIME	SINCE	I	CAME	HERE,"	HE	SAID,	"BUT	NOT	A	WORD
HAS
BEEN	 GIVEN	 ME	 REGARDING	 THE	 ESSENCE	 OF	 THE	 ZEN
TEACHING."
In	 the	 first	 place,	 there	 is	 no	 Zen	 teaching	 as	 such.	 Zen	 is	 a	 method	 of
awakening,	not	a	theology.	It	does	not	talk	about	God:	it	forces	you	into	God.	It
hits	you	in	many	ways	so	that	you	can	be	awakened	into	God.	To	be	asleep	is	to
be	 in	 the	world:	 to	 be	 awake	 is	 to	 be	 in	God.	Methods	 are	 there,	 devices	 are
there,	but	no	teaching	at	all.
In	 a	 little	New	Mexico	 town,	 a	 pretty	 young	 tourist	 overheard	 a	 virile	Navajo
saying
"Chance!"	to	every	passing	female.
Finally	 her	 curiosity	 got	 the	 better	 of	 her	 and	 she	walked	 up	 to	 him	 and	 said
"Hello,"	to	which	he	answered	"Chance!	"
"I	thought	all	Indians	said	'How!'	"
"I	know	how	--	just	want	chance!"	he	replied.
All	teachings	are	concerned	about	how	to	do	it,	why	to	do	it,	for	what	purpose,
for	what	goal.	Zen	simply	gives	you	a	chance,	an	opportunity,	a	certain	context,
a	space	in	which	you	can	become	awakened.	And	that's	exactly	my	work	here:	to
create	an	opportunity,	a	space,	a	context,	where	you	are	bound	to	be	awakened,
where	you	cannot	go	on	sleeping	forever.
DOGO	REPLIED,	"SINCE	YOUR	ARRIVAL	I	HAVE	EVER	BEEN	GIVING
YOU
LESSONS	ON	THE	MATTER	OF	ZEN	DISCIPLINE."
"WHAT	KIND	OF	LESSON	COULD	IT	HAVE	BEEN?"
Now	Soshin	is	even	more	puzzled	and	bewildered	because	the	Master	says:
"SINCE	 YOUR	 ARRIVAL	 I	 HAVE	 EVER	 BEEN	 GIVING	 YOU	 LESSONS
ON	THE
MATTER	OF	ZEN	DISCIPLINE."
Strange	are	the	ways	of	the	real	Masters.	Indirect	are	their	ways,	subtle	are	their
ways.
Remember,	he	does	not	say	"on	Zen	teaching";	he	says	"on	Zen	discipline	--	on
the	matter	of	Zen	discipline."
"WHAT	KIND	OF	LESSON	COULD	IT	HAVE	BEEN?"
"WHEN	YOU	BRING	ME	A	CUP	OF	TEA	IN	THE	MORNING,	I	TAKE	IT;
WHEN
YOU	 SERVE	ME	 A	 MEAL,	 I	 ACCEPT	 IT;	 WHEN	 YOU	 BOW	 TO	ME,	 I
RETURN	IT
WITH	A	NOD."
The	Master	 is	 saying,	 "Have	 you	 observed	me?"	 That	 is	 the	 essential	 core	 of
Zen:	watching,	observing,	being	aware.	The	Master	is	saying,	"When	you	bring
a	cup	of	tea	in	the	morning	for	me,	have	you	watched	me	--	how	I	take	it,	with
what	gratitude?	Have	you	watched	me	--	how	I	accept	it	with	great	awareness?	It
is	not	just	tea!"
Nothing	 is	 ordinary	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 Zen;	 everything	 is	 extraordinary	 because
everything	 is	 divine.	 Zen	 Masters	 have	 transformed	 ordinary	 things	 like	 tea-
drinking	into	religious	ceremonies.
The	tea	ceremony	is	a	great	meditation;	it	takes	hours.	In	every	Zen	monastery
there	is	a	separate	place	for	the	tea	ceremony,	a	temple	--	a	temple	for	tea!	And
when	people	are	invited	by	the	Master	they	go	to	the	temple	in	absolute	silence.
The	temple	is	surrounded	by	rocks	or	a	rock	garden.
Sanantano	has	just	now	made	a	small	rock	garden	around	my	room,	with	a	small
waterfall.	He	has	placed	 the	rocks	 in	such	a	beautiful	way	--	he	seems	to	have
the	 insight,	 seems	 to	have	a	 communion	with	 the	 rocks.	The	 rocks	have	come
alive	and	they	don't	seem	to	be	just	put	any	way,	haphazardly;	they	seem	to	be	in
a	deep	harmony.
Now,	Sanantano	is	going	to	create	many	rock	gardens	in	 the	new	commune	so
you	can	sit	by	those	rocks...and	small	bamboo	huts	for	the	tea	ceremony.
And	when	a	person	goes	--	when	the	Master	invites	someone	for	tea	--	he	takes	a
bath,	he	meditates,	he	cools	himself	down.	He	prepares	himself	because	it	is	no
ordinary	occasion:	an	invitation	from	the	Master.	Then	he	walks	the	rocky	path
with	full	awareness,	slowly.
The	closer	he	comes	to	the	temple,	the	more	alert	he	becomes.	He	becomes	alert
to	 the	 birds	 singing.	 He	 becomes	 alert	 to	 the	 flowers,	 their	 colors,	 their
fragrance.	And	as	he	comes	closer	to	the	tearoom	he	starts	hearing	the	noise	of
the	 samovar.	 He	 goes	 in.	 The	 shoes	 have	 to	 be	 left	 outside.	 He	 enters	 very
silently,	 bows	 down	 to	 the	 Master,	 sits	 quietly	 in	 a	 corner	 listening	 to	 the
samovar,	 the	 humming	 sound	 of	 the	 samovar...and	 the	 subtle	 fragrance	 of	 tea
filling	the	room.	It	is	a	prayerful	moment.
Then	 cups	 and	 saucers	 are	 given.	 The	 Master	 himself	 gives	 those	 cups	 and
saucers...the	way	he	gives.	He	pours	the	tea...the	way	he	pours.	Then	they	all	sip
the	tea	silently.	It	has	to	be	sipped	with	tremendous	awareness;	then	it	becomes	a
meditation.
And	 if	 tea-drinking	 can	 become	 a	 meditation,	 then	 anything	 can	 become	 a
meditation	--
cooking	 or	 washing	 your	 clothes,	 any	 activity	 can	 be	 transformed	 into
meditation.	And	 the	 real	 sannyasin,	 the	 real	 seeker,	will	 transform	 all	 his	 acts
into	meditation.	Only	then,	when	meditation	spreads	over	all	your	life,	not	only
when	you	are	awake	in	the	day	--
slowly	 slowly	 it	 starts	 penetrating	 and	 permeating	 your	 being	 in	 sleep	 too	 --
when	it	becomes	just	part	of	you,	like	breathing,	like	your	heartbeat,	then,	only,
have	you	attained	to	the	discipline,	to	the	essential	discipline	of	Zen.
The	Master	said:
"WHEN	YOU	BRING	ME	A	CUP	OF	TEA	IN	THE	MORNING...
"Have	you	observed	or	not?	Are	you	asleep	or	awake?	Can't	you	see	the	way	I
take	it?
When	 you	 serve	 me	 a	 meal...can't	 you	 see	 the	 way	 I	 accept	 it,	 with	 great
gratitude,	as	if	you	have	brought	a	treasure?
"...WHEN	YOU	BOW	TO	ME,	I	RETURN	IT	WITH	A	NOD.
"Have	I	ever	missed?	Has	it	ever	been	noticed	by	you	that	I	have	not	responded
immediately?	 If	 you	 have	 been	 watching,	 then	 this	 is	 the	 real	 matter	 of	 Zen
discipline.	Do	the	same,	do	likewise!
"HOW	ELSE	DO	YOU	EXPECT	TO	BE	TAUGHT	IN	THE	DISCIPLINE	OF
ZEN?"
But	you	don't	watch,	you	don't	see.	You	go	on	rushing,	doing	things	somehow,
mechanically.	And	you	go	on	falling	 into	pitfalls,	 the	SAME	pitfalls	again	and
again.
A	nigger	walks	 into	a	white	bar	with	 three	 friends,	goes	up	 to	 the	barman	and
bets	him	$25	he	can	lick	his	own	eye.
The	barman	thinks,	"God-damned	stupid	nigger,	nobody	can	lick	his	own	eye,"
so	he	bets	him	the	$25.	The	nigger	takes	out	his	glass	eye	and	licks	it	and	then
bets	the	barman	another	$25	he	can	bite	his	other	eye.
The	barman	thinks,	"	Oh	boy,	is	this	nigger	ever	dumb!	Nobody	could	come	in
here	with	two	glass	eyes,"	and	takes	him	up	on	the	bet.	The	nigger	takes	his	false
teeth	out	and	bites	the	other	eye	and	the	barman	turns	red	with	anger:	"Smartass
nigger!"
Then	the	nigger	says,	"I	will	bet	you	another	$25...."
"Wait	a	minute,"	says	the	barman.	"No	way.	You	think	I'm	stupid?"
"Oh,	come	on,"	says	the	nigger.	I'll	bet	you	double	or	nothing	I	can	piss	in	that
shot	glass	on	the	table	on	the	other	side	of	the	room."
The	barman	stops,	ponders	a	while	and	says,	"Okay,	even	a	stupid	god-damned
nigger	couldn't	do	that!	You're	on.	I'll	bet	you	double	or	nothing!"
The	nigger	proceeds	to	piss	all	over	the	bar,	the	floor,	everywhere.	The	barman
starts	 laughing	 like	 hell,	 and	 wiping	 it	 up,	 says,	 "Boy,	 nigger,	 you	 are	 really
dumb	to	think	you	could	piss	that	far!"
And	the	nigger	replies,	"I'm	not	so	dumb	--	see	those	three	dudes	over	there?	I
bet	them	$300	I	could	piss	all	over	the	bar	and	you	would	wipe	it	up	laughing!"
Man	goes	on	doing	 the	 same;	maybe	a	 slightly	different	 situation,	 but	 nothing
very	different.	If	you	are	asleep,	if	you	are	unconscious,	you	cannot	watch,	you
cannot	observe	that	again	another	pitfall...that	again	you	are	going	into	another
mistake,	 another	 error,	 that	 you	 are	 again	 stumbling.	 Maybe	 it	 is	 a	 little	 bit
different,	 because	 in	 life	nothing	 is	 ever	 the	 same,	but	 thousands	of	 times	you
fall	and	still	you	don't	learn	the	single	thing	worth	learning.	You	learn	all	kinds
of	things	in	life	except	the	one	thing	which	can	transform	you,	and	that	is	the	art
of	awareness.
SOSHIN	HUNG	HIS	HEAD	FOR	A	WHILE,	PONDERING	THE	PUZZLING
WORDS
OF	THE	MASTER.
THE	 MASTER	 SAID,	 "IF	 YOU	 WANT	 TO	 SEE,	 SEE	 RIGHT	 AT	 ONCE.
WHEN	YOU
BEGIN	TO	THINK,	YOU	MISS	THE	POINT."
These	are	tremendously	significant	words:
"IF	YOU	WANT	TO	SEE,	SEE	RIGHT	AT	ONCE.	WHEN	YOU	BEGIN	TO
THINK,	YOU	MISS	THE	POINT."
BECAUSE	THINKING	IS	ONLY	A	WAY	OF	MISSING	the	point.	When	you
hear	 the	 truth,	SEE	 it	 immediately.	Don't	 say,	 "I	will	 think	 it	over."	Don't	 take
notes	 saying,	 "Back	 home	 I	 will	 ponder	 over	 it."	 You	 are	 missing	 the	 whole
point!	Truth	has	an	immediacy,	and	you	are	postponing	it	by	thinking.	And	what
can	you	think	about	truth?	And	whatsoever	you	think	is	going	to	be	wrong.	Truth
is	truth	and	untruth	is	untruth.	You	cannot	make	an	untruth	truth	by	thinking	for
years,	and	you	cannot	make	a	truth	untruth	by	thinking	for	years.	Nothing	can	be
done	about	it;	your	thinking	is	absolutely	irrelevant.
See	it.	Seeing	is	relevant;	thinking	is	not	relevant.
That's	why	in	the	East	we	don't	have	any	word	to	translate	the	English	word
"philosophy."	 We	 have	 a	 word,	 DARSHAN,	 which	 is	 ordinarily	 used	 as	 a
translation	for	philosophy	but	it	is	not	right	to	do	that.	DARSHAN	means	seeing,
and	 philosophy	 means	 thinking	 --	 and	 there	 is	 such	 a	 tremendous	 difference,
such	 a	 vast	 difference,	 between	 the	 two.	What	 greater	 difference	 can	 there	 be
between	two	things	--	seeing	and	thinking?
DARSHAN	simply	means	 seeing.	 It	 is	NOT	 thinking,	 it	 is	 awareness.	Silently
alert	 you	 sit	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 Master.	 He	 says	 something	 --	 or	 SHOWS
something	rather	--	and	you	see	it!	If	you	are	silent	and	aware	you	are	bound	to
see	it,	you	cannot	miss	it.	If	you	hang	your	head	and	you	start	thinking,	you	have
forgotten	about	the	Master;	you	are	lost	in	your	own	words.	You	are	translating
the	Master	into	your	own	words	--	and	you	cannot	translate	those	heights,	those
depths.	And	whatsoever	 you	 translate	will	 be	 something	 utterly	 different	 from
what	the	Master	has	said.
Three	Frenchmen,	while	 practicing	 their	English,	 got	 around	 to	 discussing	 the
wife	of	a	friend	who	was	childless.
"She	is	unbearable,"	said	one.
"No,	that	is	the	wrong	word.	She	is	inconceivable."
"No,	 no,	 you	 are	 both	 wrong,"	 said	 the	 third.	 "What	 you	 mean	 is	 she	 is
impregnable."
Now,	 you	 can	 go	 on	 thinking....When	 the	Master	 speaks,	 he	 speaks	 from	 the
heights	 of	 awareness	 --	 and	 you	 listen	 in	 the	 darkness	 of	 your	 valley.	 Don't
translate	and	don't	try	to	figure	it	out,	what	he	is	saying.	Just	listen.
Just	the	other	day	somebody	asked:	"Listening	to	you	unquestioningly,	accepting
it,	isn't	it	a	way	of	being	conditioned	by	you?"
Listening	 silently	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 you	 are	 agreeing	 with	 me.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	 of	 agreement	 or	 disagreement.	 Listening	 silently	 does	 not	 mean	 that
you	 are	 accepting	me	or	 rejecting	me.	 If	 you	 are	 accepting	you	 are	 not	 silent;
activity	 is	 there	 --	 the	 activity	 of	 accepting.	 If	 you	 are	 agreeing	with	me	 that
means	you	 are	 already	 translating	me.	 If	 you	 are	 rejecting	me	 that	 is	 negative
activity;	if	you	accept	me	that	is	positive	activity.	And	to	be	silent	simply	means
no	 activity	 at	 all.	 You	 are	 simply	 here...just	 being	 here,	 only	 available,	 no
question	of	agreeing	or	disagreeing.
And	the	beauty	of	truth	is	that	the	moment	you	hear	the	truth	something	inside
you	 responds,	 says	 yes.	 It	 is	 not	 agreement	 of	 the	mind,	 remember;	 it	 comes
from	your	 totality.	Every	 fiber	of	your	being,	 every	cell	of	your	body,	nods	 in
tremendous	joy,
"Yes!"	Not	that	you	say	yes	--	it	is	not	said,	it	is	not	verbalized	at	all.	It	is	silently
there.
And	when	 you	 hear	 some	 untruth,	 in	 the	 same	way	 there	 is	 a	 no;	 your	whole
being	says
"no."	That	is	not	mental	either.
This	is	a	totally	different	approach.	The	West	has	not	been	able	to	evolve	it	yet;
the	 East	 has	 evolved	 it.	 For	 centuries	 we	 have	 been	 working	 on	 this	 subtle
method,	polishing	it,	polishing	it.	It	has	become	a	mirror.
The	 East	 knows	 how	 to	 just	 sit	 in	 silence,	 without	 agreeing	 or	 disagreeing,
because	we	have	discovered	one	fundamental	 thing:	 that	 truth	is	already	inside
you.	If	you	hear	the	truth	from	the	outside	your	truth	will	be	awakened,	it	will	be
provoked.	Suddenly	you	will	say	"Yes!"	--	as	if	you	had	known	it	already.	It	is	a
recognition,	it	is	a	remembrance.
You	 are	 simply	 being	 reminded	 by	 the	 Master	 about	 that	 which	 you	 have
forgotten.	It	is	not	a	question	of	agreement	or	disagreement	--	no,	not	at	all.
I	am	not	 interested	 in	creating	beliefs	 in	you	and	 I	am	not	 interested	 in	giving
you	any	kind	of	ideology.	My	whole	effort	here	is	--	as	it	has	always	been	of	all
the	Buddhas	since	the	beginnings	of	time	--	to	provoke	truth	in	you.	I	know	it	is
already	there;	it	just	needs	a	synchronicity.	It	just	needs	something	to	trigger	the
process	of	recognition	in	you.
The	Master	 speaks	 not	 to	 give	 you	 the	 truth,	 but	 to	 help	 you	 to	 recognize	 the
truth	that	is	already	within	you.	The	Master	is	only	a	mirror.	You	see	your	own
original	face	in	deep	silence,	sitting	by	his	side.
THE	 MASTER	 SAID,	 "IF	 YOU	 WANT	 TO	 SEE,	 SEE	 RIGHT	 AT	 ONCE.
WHEN	YOU
BEGIN	TO	THINK,	YOU	MISS	THE	POINT."
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Try	it	My	Way
8	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001080
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 AM	 WORKING	 IN	 THE	 WEST	 I	 FEEL	 LIKE	 AN	 ORANGE
WARRIOR,	AND	I	LIKE	IT.	WHEN	I	AM	HERE	I	FEEL	MEDITATIVE,	AND
I	LIKE	IT.	IS	THE
PART	OF	MYSELF	THAT	STILL	NEEDS	TO	FIGHT	AN	OBSTACLE	TO
BECOMING	A	GOOD	DISCIPLE?
Deva	Majid,
A	SANNYASIN	HAS	TO	BE	LIQUID,	FLOWING.	He	has	not	to	be	stonelike,
fixated.
He	has	to	be	like	flowing	water	so	he	can	take	any	form.	Whatsoever	is	the	need
of	the	moment	he	responds	accordingly	--	not	according	to	any	fixed	pattern,	not
according	to	any	A	PRIORI	idea	of	how	a	sannyasin	should	be.	There	is	nothing
like	that	in	MY
vision	of	sannyas.
Never	ask	me	how	a	sannyasin	should	be,	because	that	will	become	a	pattern	and
you	will	act	out	of	the	pattern.	And	any	action	out	of	a	patterned	life	is	wrong.
One	 has	 to	 be	 loose,	 relaxed,	 so	 that	 one	 can	 respond	 to	 the	 situation.	 And
situations	go	on	changing.	In	the	West	it	is	different;	here	it	is	different.
So	when	it	is	needed	to	be	a	warrior,	be	a	warrior;	and	when	it	is	needed	to	be
meditative,	be	meditative.	When	it	is	needed	to	be	an	extrovert,	be	an	extrovert;
and	when	it	is	needed	to	be	an	introvert,	be	an	introvert.	This	fluidity	is	sannyas.
If	you	become	fixated,	then	you	are	no	more	alive	--	you	have	become	obsessed.
Then	you	are	an	extrovert	or	an	introvert,	worldly	or	other-worldly,	but	you	are
no	more	my	sannyasin.
My	sannyasin	is	indescribable,	as	indescribable	as	God	himself,	as	life	itself,	as
love	itself	--	as	inexpressible	as	existence	itself.	A	sannyasin	is	in	total	harmony
with	existence,	so	whatsoever	the	need	of	the	moment,	the	sannyasin	goes	with
the	moment,	flows	with	the	river.	He	does	not	go	upstream;	he	does	not	have	any
idea	of	how	things	should	be.	He	has	no	"ought";	he	has	no	commandments	in
his	mind	to	be	fulfilled,	to	be	followed.
This	is	true	discipline:	discipline	that	brings	freedom,	discipline	that	liberates.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,
I	 CANNOT	 DROP	 THE	 HABIT	 OF	 CHAIN-SMOKING.	 I	 HAVE	 TRIED
HARD	BUT
I	HAVE	FAILED	ALWAYS.	IS	IT	A	SIN	TO	SMOKE?
Gurucharan,
DON'T	MAKE	A	MOUNTAIN	OUT	OF	A	MOLEHILL!	Religious	people	are
very	 skillful	 in	 doing	 that.	 Now,	 what	 are	 you	 really	 doing	 when	 you	 are
smoking?	Just	taking	some	smoke	inside	your	lungs	and	letting	it	out.	It	is	a	kind
of	PRANAYAMA	--	filthy,	dirty,	but	still	a	PRANAYAMA!	You	are	doing	yoga,
in	a	stupid	way.	It	is	not	sin.	It	may	be	foolish	but	it	is	not	a	sin,	certainly.
There	 is	only	one	 sin	 and	 that	 is	unawareness,	 and	only	one	virtue	and	 that	 is
awareness.
Do	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	but	 remain	a	witness	 to	 it,	 and	 immediately	 the
quality	of	your	doing	is	 transformed.	I	will	not	 tell	you	not	 to	smoke;	 that	you
have	 tried.	 You	 must	 have	 been	 told	 by	 many	 so-called	 saints	 not	 to	 smoke:
"Because	if	you	smoke	you	will	fall	into	hell."	God	is	not	so	stupid	as	your	saints
are.	Throwing	somebody	into	hell	just	because	he	was	smoking	cigarettes	will	be
absolutely	unnecessary.
One	morning,	Weintraub	went	to	a	restaurant	and	ordered	bacon	with	his	eggs.
He	was	an	orthodox	Jew	and	his	wife	kept	a	strictly	kosher	home,	but	Weintraub
felt	the	need	just	this	once.
As	Weintraub	was	about	 to	 leave	 the	 restaurant,	he	 stopped	 in	 the	door	 frozen
with	terror.
The	sky	was	filled	with	black	clouds,	there	was	lightning,	and	the	ground	shook
with	the	rumble	of	thunder.
"Can	you	imagine!"	he	exclaimed.	"All	that	fuss	over	a	little	piece	of	bacon!"
But	 that's	what	 your	 so-called	 saints	 have	been	 telling	you	down	 the	 ages,	 for
centuries.
Smoking	is	unhealthy,	unhygienic,	but	not	a	sin.	It	becomes	a	sin	only	if	you	are
doing	 it	 unconsciously	 --	 it	 is	 not	 smoking	 that	 makes	 it	 a	 sin	 but
unconsciousness.
Let	me	 emphasize	 the	 fact.	You	 can	 do	 your	 prayer	 every	 day	 unconsciously;
then	your	prayer	is	a	sin.	You	can	become	addicted	to	your	prayer.	If	you	miss
the	prayer	one	day,	the	whole	day	you	will	feel	something	is	wrong,	something	is
missing,	 some	 gap.	 It	 is	 the	 same	with	 smoking	 or	with	 drinking;	 there	 is	 no
difference	 in	 it.	 Your	 prayer	 has	 become	 a	mechanical	 habit;	 it	 has	 become	 a
master	over	you.	It	bosses	you;	you	are	just	a	servant,	a	slave	to	it.	If	you	don't
do	it,	it	forces	you	to	do	it.
So	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 smoking.	 You	 may	 be	 doing	 your	 Transcendental
Meditation	 every	 day	 regularly,	 and	 it	may	 be	 just	 the	 same.	 If	 the	 quality	 of
unconsciousness	 is	 there,	 if	 mechanicalness	 is	 there,	 if	 it	 has	 become	 a	 fixed
routine,	if	it	has	become	a	habit	and	you	are	a	victim	of	the	habit	and	you	cannot
put	it	aside,	you	are	no	more	a	master	of	yourself,	then	it	is	a	sin.	But	its	being	a
sin	comes	out	of	your	unconsciousness,	not	out	of	the	act	itself.
No	 act	 is	 virtuous,	 no	 act	 is	 a	 sin.	 What	 consciousness	 is	 behind	 the	 act	 --
everything	depends	on	that.
You	say:	I	CANNOT	DROP	THE	HABIT	OF	CHAIN-SMOKING.
I	am	less	interested	in	your	chain-smoking;	I	am	more	interested	in	your	habit.
Any	 habit	 that	 becomes	 a	 force,	 a	 dominating	 force	 over	 you,	 is	 a	 sin.	 One
should	live	more	in	freedom.	One	should	be	able	to	do	things	not	according	to
habits	but	according	to	the	situations.
Life	is	continuously	changing	--	it	is	a	flux	--	and	habits	are	stagnant.	The	more
you	are	surrounded	by	habits,	the	more	you	are	closed	to	life.	You	are	not	open,
you	don't	have	windows.	You	don't	have	any	communication	with	life;	you	go	on
repeating	your	habits.
They	don't	 fit;	 they	 are	 not	 the	 right	 response	 to	 the	 situation,	 to	 the	moment.
They	are	always	lagging	behind,	they	are	always	falling	short.	That's	the	failure
of	your	life.
So	remember:	I	am	against	all	kinds	of	habits.	Good	or	bad	is	not	the	point;	there
is	no	good	habit	as	such,	there	is	no	bad	habit	as	such.	Habits	are	all	bad	because
habit	means	something	unconscious	has	become	a	dominating	factor	in	your	life,
has	become	decisive.	You	are	no	more	the	deciding	factor.	The	response	is	not
coming	out	of	awareness	but	out	of	a	pattern,	structure,	that	you	have	learned	in
the	past.
Two	 members	 of	 the	 Shalom	 Retirement	 Home,	 Blustein	 and	 Levin,	 were
strolling	past	the	home	of	Nelson	Rockefeller.
"If	I	only	had	that	man's	millions,"	sighed	Blustein,	"I	would	be	richer	than	he
is."
"Don't	be	a	dummy,"	said	Levin.	"If	you	had	his	millions	you	would	be	as	rich	as
he	is,	not	any	richer."
"You	are	wrong,"	said	Blustein,	"don't	forget	--	I	could	give	Hebrew	lessons	on
the	side!"
That's	what	he	has	been	doing.	Even	if	he	becomes	Nelson	Rockefeller	he	will
go	 on	 giving	 Hebrew	 lessons	 on	 the	 side.	 That's	 how	 people	 are	 living,	 just
according	to	habits.
I	 have	 seen	many	 rich	 people	 living	very	poor	 lives.	Before	 they	became	 rich
their	 habits	 became	 settled	 --	 and	 their	 habits	 became	 settled	when	 they	were
poor.	That's	why	you	find	so	much	miserliness	in	rich	people;	it	comes	from	the
habits	that	became	ingrained	in	them	when	they	were	poor.
One	of	 the	richest	men	in	the	world	--	not	ONE	of	 the	richest	but	THE	richest
man	in	the	world	it	is	thought	--	was	the	Nizam	of	Hyderabad.	His	collection	of
diamonds	was	the	greatest	in	the	world	because	he	owned	the	diamond	mines	of
Golconda	 which	 have	 provided	 the	 greatest	 diamonds	 to	 the	 world.	 The
Kohinoor	comes	from	Golconda.	It	was	once	in	the	Nizam's	possession.	He	had
so	many	 diamonds	 that	 it	 is	 said	 that	 no	 one	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 calculate
exactly	the	price	of	his	collection.	Thousands	and	thousands	of	diamonds	--	they
were	not	counted,	they	were	weighed!
But	he	was	one	of	the	most	miserly	men	in	the	world.	He	used	a	single	cap	for
thirty	years.	It	was	stinking	but	he	wouldn't	change	it.	He	continued	to	wear	the
same	 coat	 for	 almost	 his	 whole	 life	 and	 he	 would	 not	 give	 it	 to	 be	 washed
because	they	might	destroy	it.
He	was	so	miserly	 --	you	cannot	 imagine	--	 that	he	would	collect	half-smoked
cigarettes	from	the	guests'	ashtrays	and	then	smoke	them.	The	richest	man	in	the
world	 smoking	 cigarette	 butts	 smoked	 by	 others!	 The	 first	 thing	 he	would	 do
whenever	a	guest	 left	was	 to	search	 in	 the	ashtrays	and	collect	 the	ends	of	 the
cigarettes.
When	he	died,	his	greatest	diamond	was	found	in	his	dirty	shoes.	He	was	hiding
it	in	his	shoe!	Maybe	he	had	some	idea	behind	it	--	that	maybe	he	would	be	able
to	take	it	with	him	to	the	other	world.	Maybe	he	was	afraid:	"When	I	am	dead,
people	may	 steal	 it."	 It	 was	 the	 greatest	 diamond;	 he	 used	 that	 diamond	 as	 a
paper-weight	on	his	table.	Before	he	died	he	must	have	put	it	inside	his	shoe.
Even	when	one	is	dying	one	is	moving	in	old	habits,	following	old	patterns.
I	have	heard:
The	 old	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 had	 become	 a	 very	 rich	 man.	 When	 he	 felt	 death
approaching	 he	 decided	 to	 make	 some	 arrangements	 for	 his	 funeral,	 so	 he
ordered	a	beautiful	coffin	made	of	ebony	wood	with	satin	pillows	inside.	He	also
had	a	beautiful	silk	caftan	made	for	his	dead	body	to	be	dressed	in.
The	day	the	tailor	delivered	the	caftan,	Mulla	Nasruddin	tried	it	on	to	see	how	it
would	look,	but	suddenly	he	exclaimed,	"What	is	this!	Where	are	the	pockets?"
Gurucharan,	 smoking	 or	 no	 smoking,	 that	 is	 not	 important.	 Maybe	 if	 you
continue	 to	 smoke	 you	 will	 die	 a	 little	 earlier.	 So	 what?	 The	 world	 is	 so
overpopulated,	you	will	do	some	good	by	dying	a	little	earlier.	Maybe	you	will
have	tuberculosis.	So	what?
Tuberculosis	is	now	almost	like	the	common	cold.	In	fact,	there	is	no	cure	for	the
common	cold	but	there	is	a	cure	for	tuberculosis	I	know	it	because	I	suffer	from
a	common	cold.	To	have	tuberculosis	is	to	be	very	fortunate.
A	man	was	suffering	from	a	common	cold	for	many	years.	All	the	doctors	were
tired	of	the	man	because	nobody	was	able	to	cure	him.	Then	a	new	doctor	came
to	the	town.	All	the	other	doctors	told	the	new	doctor,	"Beware	of	this	man!	He
is	going	to	haunt	you!	He	is	a	nuisance	--	his	cold	cannot	be	cured."
In	fact,	there	is	no	cure	for	the	common	cold.	They	say	that	if	you	take	medicine
it	goes	within	seven	days;	if	you	don't	take	the	medicine	it	goes	in	one	week.
So	the	new	doctor	was	ready	and	the	man	appeared,	as	predicted	by	the	others.
The	 new	 doctor	 said,	 "I	 can	 cure	 it.	 You	 do	 one	 thing"	 --	 it	 must	 have	 been
winter-time,	just	like	this	morning	--	he	told	him,	"You	do	one	thing:	tomorrow,
early	in	the	morning,	before	sunrise,	go	to	the	lake;	swim	in	the	lake	naked,	then
stand	on	the	bank	in	the	cold	wind."
The	 man	 said,	 "Are	 you	 mad	 or	 something?	 How	 is	 that	 going	 to	 cure	 my
common	cold?"
The	doctor	 said,	 "Who	 told	you	 that	 it	 is	going	 to	 cure	your	 common	cold?	 It
will	give	you	influenza,	and	I	can	cure	that!"
So	 it	 is	possible,	Gurucharan,	 that	you	may	die	 two	years	earlier,	you	may	get
tuberculosis	--	but	it	is	not	a	sin.	Don't	be	worried	about	THAT.
If	 you	 really	 want	 to	 do	 something	 about	 your	 life,	 dropping	 smoking	 is	 not
going	to	help
--	because	I	know	people	who	drop	smoking;	then	they	start	chewing	gum.	The
same	old	stupidity!	Or	if	they	are	Indians	they	start	chewing	pan;	it	is	the	same.
You	 will	 do	 something	 or	 other.	 Your	 unconsciousness	 will	 demand	 some
activity,	some	occupation.
It	is	an	occupation.	And	it	is	only	a	symptom;	it	is	not	really	the	problem.	It	is
not	the	root	of	the	problem.
Have	 you	 not	 observed?	 Whenever	 you	 feel	 emotionally	 disturbed	 you
immediately	start	smoking.	It	gives	you	a	kind	of	relief;	you	become	occupied.
Your	mind	is	distracted	from	the	emotional	problem.	Whenever	people	feel	tense
they	start	smoking.	The	problem	is	tension,	the	problem	is	emotional	disturbance
--	the	problem	is	somewhere	else;	smoking	is	just	an	occupation.	So	you	become
engaged	 in	 taking	 the	 smoke	 in	 and	 out	 and	 you	 forget	 for	 the	 time
being...because	mind	cannot	 think	of	 two	 things	 together,	 remember	 it.	One	of
the	fundamentals	of	mind	is:	it	can	think	only	of	one	thing	at	one	time;	it	is	one-
dimensional.	So	if	you	are	smoking	and	thinking	of	smoking,	then	from	all	other
anxieties	you	are	distracted.
That's	 the	whole	 secret	 of	 the	 so-called	 spiritual	mantras:	 they	 are	nothing	but
distractions,	like	smoking.	You	repeat	"Om,	Om,	Om,"	or	"Ram,	Ram,	Ram,"	or
"Allah,	Allah,	 Allah"	 --	 that	 is	 just	 giving	mind	 an	 occupation.	 And	 all	 these
people	who	teach	mantras	say,	"Repeat	it	as	quickly	as	possible,	so	that	between
two	repetitions	there	is	not	even	a	small	gap.	Let	them	overlap	--	so	'Ram	Ram
Ram'	--	don't	leave	a	gap	between	two	Rams,	otherwise	some	thought	may	enter.
Repeat	like	crazy!"
Yes,	it	will	give	you	a	certain	relief	--	the	same	relief	that	comes	from	smoking,
because	your	mind	will	be	distracted	from	the	anxieties	and	the	world.	You	will
forget	about	the	world;	you	have	created	a	trick.	All	mantras	are	tricks,	but	they
are	 spiritual.	 Chain-smoking	 is	 also	 a	 mantra.	 It	 is	 a	 worldly	 mantra;	 non-
religious	you	can	call	it,	secular.
The	real	problem	is	the	habit.
You	say:	I	HAVE	TRIED	HARD	TO	DROP	IT....
You	have	not	tried	to	be	conscious	of	it;	without	trying	to	be	conscious	you	have
tried	 to	drop	 it.	 It	 is	not	possible.	 It	will	 come	back,	because	your	mind	 is	 the
same;	its	needs	are	the	same,	its	problems	are	the	same,	its	anxieties,	tensions	are
the	same,	its	anguish	is	the	same.	And	when	those	anxieties	arise,	what	will	you
do?	Immediately,	mechanically,	you	will	start	searching	for	the	cigarettes.
You	may	have	decided	again	and	again,	and	again	and	again	you	have	failed	--
not	because	smoking	is	such	a	great	phenomenon	that	you	cannot	get	out	of	it,
but	because	you	are	trying	from	the	wrong	end.	Rather	than	becoming	aware	of
the	whole	situation	--
why	you	smoke	in	the	first	place	--	rather	than	becoming	aware	of	the	process	of
smoking,	you	are	simply	trying	to	drop	it.	It	is	like	pruning	the	leaves	of	a	tree
without	cutting	the	roots.
And	my	whole	concern	here	is	to	cut	the	roots,	not	to	prune	the	tree.	By	pruning
the	leaves	and	the	branches	the	tree	will	become	thicker,	the	foliage	will	become
thicker.
You	will	not	destroy	the	tree;	you	will	be	helping	it,	in	fact.	If	you	really	want	to
get	out	of	it	you	will	have	to	look	deeper,	not	into	the	symptoms	but	the	roots.
Where	are	the	roots?
You	 must	 be	 a	 deeply	 anxiety-ridden	 person,	 otherwise	 chain-smoking	 is	 not
possible;	 chain-smoking	 is	 a	 by-product.	 You	 must	 be	 so	 concerned	 about	 a
thousand	and	one	disturbances	 inside,	you	must	be	carrying	such	a	big	 load	of
worries	 on	 your	 heart,	 on	 your	 chest,	 that	 you	 don't	 even	 know	how	 to	 forget
them.	You	don't	know	how	to	drop	them	--	smoking	at	least	helps	you	to	forget
about	them.
You	say:	I	HAVE	TRIED	HARD...
Now	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 The	 hypnotists	 have	 discovered	 a
fundamental	 law;	 they	call	 it	 the	Law	of	Reverse	Effect.	 If	you	 try	hard	 to	do
something	without	understanding	the	fundamentals,	just	the	opposite	will	be	the
result.
It	 is	 like	when	you	 are	 learning	 how	 to	 ride	 on	 a	 bicycle.	You	 are	 on	 a	 silent
road,	no	traffic,	early	in	the	morning,	and	you	see	a	red	milestone	just	standing
there	 by	 the	 side	of	 the	 road	 like	Hanuman.	A	 sixty-foot-wide	 road	 and	 just	 a
small	milestone,	and	you	become	afraid:	you	may	get	to	the	milestone,	you	may
hit	against	the	milestone.	Now	you	forget	about	the	sixty-foot-wide	road.	In	fact,
even	 if	 you	go	blindfolded	 there	 is	 not	much	 chance	of	 your	 encountering	 the
milestone,	crashing	into	the	milestone,	but	with	open	eyes	now	the	whole	road	is
forgotten;	 you	 have	 become	 focused.	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 that	 redness	 is	 very
focusing.	 And	 you	 are	 so	 much	 afraid!	 --	 you	 want	 to	 avoid	 it.	 You	 have
forgotten	that	you	are	on	a	bicycle;	you	have	forgotten	everything.	Now	the	only
problem	for	you	 is	how	to	avoid	 this	stone;	otherwise	you	may	harm	yourself,
you	may	crash	into	it.
Now	 the	crash	 is	 absolutely	 inevitable;	you	are	bound	 to	crash	with	 the	 stone.
And	then	you	will	be	surprised:	'.'1	tried	hard."	In	fact	it	is	BECAUSE	you	tried
hard	that	you	reached	the	stone.	And	the	closer	you	come,	the	harder	you	try	to
avoid	it;	but	the	harder	you	try	to	avoid	it,	the	more	focused	you	become	on	it.	It
becomes	a	hypnotic	force,	it	hypnotizes	you.	It	becomes	like	a	magnet.
It	is	a	very	fundamental	law	in	life.	Many	people	try	avoiding	many	things	and
they	fall	into	the	same	things.	Try	to	avoid	anything	with	great	effort	and	you	are
bound	to	fall	into	the	same	pit.	You	cannot	avoid	it;	that	is	not	the	way	to	avoid
it.
Be	relaxed.	Don't	try	hard,	because	it	is	through	relaxation	that	you	can	become
aware,	not	by	trying	hard.	Be	calm,	quiet,	silent.
I	will	suggest:	smoke	as	much	as	you	want	to	smoke.	It	is	not	a	sin	in	the	first
place.	I	give	you	the	guarantee	--	I	will	be	responsible.	I	take	the	sin	on	myself,
so	 if	 you	meet	God	on	 Judgment	Day	you	 can	 just	 tell	 him	 that	 this	 fellow	 is
responsible.	 And	 I	 will	 stand	 there	 as	 a	 witness	 for	 you	 that	 you	 are	 not
responsible.	So	don't	be	worried	about	its	being	a	sin.	Relax	and	don't	try	to	drop
it	with	effort.	No,	that	is	not	going	to	help.
Zen	believes	in	effortless	understanding.
So	 this	 is	my	suggestion:	 smoke	as	much	as	you	want	 to	 smoke	 --	 just	 smoke
meditatively.	 If	 Zen	 people	 can	 drink	 tea	 meditatively,	 why	 can't	 you	 smoke
meditatively?	In	fact,	tea	contains	the	same	stimulant	as	the	cigarettes	contain;	it
is	 the	 same	 stimulant,	 there	 is	 not	much	 difference.	 Smoke	meditatively,	 very
religiously.	Make	it	a	ceremony.	Try	it	my	way.
Make	 a	 small	 corner	 in	 your	 house	 just	 for	 smoking:	 a	 small	 temple	 devoted,
dedicated	to	the	god	of	smoking.	First	bow	down	to	your	cigarette	packet.	Have
a	 little	chit-chat,	 talk	 to	 the	cigarettes.	 Inquire,	"How	are	you?"	And	 then	very
slowly	take	a	cigarette	out	--
very	slowly,	as	slowly	as	you	can,	because	only	if	you	take	it	very	slowly	will
you	be	aware.	Don't	do	it	in	a	mechanical	way,	as	you	always	do.	Then	tap	the
cigarette	 on	 the	 packet	 very	 slowly	 and	 for	 as	 long	 as	 you	want.	 There	 is	 no
hurry	either.	Then	take	the	lighter,	bow	down	to	the	lighter.	These	are	great	gods,
deities!	Light	is	God,	so	why	not	the	lighter?
Then	 start	 smoking	 very	 slowly,	 just	 like	 VIPASSANA.	 Don't	 do	 it	 like	 a
PRANAYAMA	 --	 quick	 and	 fast	 and	 deep	 --	 but	 very	 slowly.	 Buddha	 says:
Breathe	naturally.	So	you	smoke	naturally:	very	slow,	no	hurry.	If	it	is	a	sin	you
are	in	a	hurry.	If	it	is	a	sin	you	want	to	finish	it	as	soon	as	possible.	If	it	is	a	sin
you	don't	want	to	look	at	it.
You	go	on	reading	the	newspaper	and	you	go	on	smoking.	Who	wants	to	look	at
a	sin?
But	it	is	not	a	sin,	so	watch	it	--	watch	each	of	your	acts.
Divide	your	 acts	 into	 small	 fragments	 so	you	can	move	very	 slowly.	And	you
will	 be	 surprised:	 by	 watching	 your	 smoking,	 slowly	 slowly	 smoking	 will
become	less	and	less.
And	one	day	suddenly...it	is	gone.	You	have	not	made	any	effort	to	drop	it;	it	has
dropped	 of	 its	 own	 accord,	 because	 by	 becoming	 aware	 of	 a	 dead	 pattern,	 a
routine,	a	mechanical	habit,	you	have	created,	you	have	released,	a	new	energy
of	consciousness	 in	you.	Only	 that	energy	can	help	you;	nothing	else	will	ever
help.
And	it	is	not	only	so	with	smoking,	Gurucharan,	it	is	so	with	everything	else	in
life:	don't	try	too	hard	to	change	yourself.	That	leaves	scars.	Even	if	you	change,
your	change	will	remain	superficial.	And	you	will	find	a	substitute	somewhere;
you	will	HAVE	to	find	a	substitute,	otherwise	you	will	feel	empty.
And	when	something	withers	away	of	its	own	accord	because	you	have	become
so	 silently	aware	of	 the	 stupidity	of	 it	 that	no	effort	 is	needed,	when	 it	 simply
falls,	 just	 like	 a	 dead	 leaf	 falling	 from	 a	 tree,	 it	 leaves	 no	 scar	 behind	 and	 it
leaves	no	ego	behind.
If	you	drop	something	by	effort,	it	creates	great	ego.	You	start	thinking,	"Now	I
am	a	very	virtuous	man	because	I	don't	smoke."	If	you	think	that	smoking	is	a
sin,	 naturally,	 obviously,	 if	 you	 drop	 it	 you	will	 think	 you	 are	 a	 very	 virtuous
man.
That's	how	your	virtuous	men	are.	Somebody	does	not	smoke,	somebody	does
not	drink,	somebody	eats	only	once	a	day,	somebody	does	not	eat	 in	the	night,
somebody	has	even	stopped	drinking	water	 in	 the	night...and	 they	are	all	great
saints!	These	are	saintly	qualities,	great	virtues!
We	have	made	religion	so	silly.	It	has	lost	all	glory.	It	has	become	as	stupid	as
people	are.
But	 the	whole	 thing	depends	on	your	attitude:	 if	you	 think	something	 is	a	 sin,
then	your	virtue	will	be	just	the	opposite	of	it.
I	emphasize:	not-smoking	is	not	virtue,	smoking	is	not	sin;	awareness	is	virtue,
unawareness	is	sin.	And	then	the	same	law	is	applicable	to	your	whole	life.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 IN	 DISCOURSE	 YOU	 SAID	 THAT	 SANNYAS	 ONLY
COMES
WHEN	THE	POINT	OF	SUICIDE	HAS	BEEN	REACHED.	BUT	I	DID	NOT
FEEL
SUICIDAL	WHEN	I	TOOK	SANNYAS,	ONLY	IN	DEEP	LOVE	WITH	YOU.
MY
LIFE	 SEEMED	RICH,	 BUT	YOU	HAVE	MADE	 IT	 INFINITELY	RICHER.
AM	I	NOT	A	TRUE	SANNYASIN	BECAUSE	I	DON'T	FEEL	SUICIDAL?
Prem	Sunderam,
AND	WHAT	 IS	 LOVE?	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 suicide	 in	 the	 world!	 Love	 means
committing	suicide:	the	suicide	of	the	ego.	Love	means	dropping	the	ego.	That's
why	 people	 are	 so	much	 afraid	 of	 love.	 They	 talk	 about	 it,	 they	 pretend	 also.
They	manage	to	befool	others	and	themselves	too	that	they	love.	But	they	avoid
love	--	because	love	requires	you	first	to	die;	only	then	are	you	resurrected.
So	 what	 I	 said	 is	 absolutely	 true	 and	 absolutely	 applicable	 to	 you.	 And	 life
certainly	becomes	richer.	The	more	you	die	to	the	ego,	the	richer	your	life	is,	the
more	your	life	is	full	of	overflowing	love	and	joy	and	ecstasy.
No,	you	are	my	 true	 sannyasin	 --	but	 love	 is	 the	ultimate	 in	 suicide.	All	other
suicides	 are	 small	 suicides.	 Somebody	 commits	 suicide;	 that	 is	 only	 physical.
Love	is	psychological	suicide	and	meditation	is	spiritual	suicide.	In	love	you	die
psychologically,	you	drop	the	psychological	ego,	and	in	meditation	you	drop	the
very	idea	of	the	self,	even	of	the	supreme	self.	You	become	a	nothingness...and
in	that	nothingness	blooms	the	white	lotus	of	a	Buddha.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,
HOW	CAN	I	LEARN	THE	SECRETS	OF	LIFE?
Rabindra,
THERE	ARE	NO	SECRETS	 IN	LIFE.	Or	you	can	 say:	 life	 is	 an	open	 secret.
Everything	is	available,	nothing	is	hidden.	All	that	you	need	is	just	eyes	to	see.
It	 is	 like	 a	 blind	man	 asking:	 "I	want	 to	 learn	 the	 secret	 of	 light."	All	 that	 he
needs	 is	 treatment	of	 the	eyes	so	 that	he	can	see.	Light	 is	available,	 it	 is	not	a
secret.	But	he	is	blind	--	for	him	there	is	no	light.	What	to	say	about	light?	For
him	there	is	not	even	darkness	--	because	even	to	see	darkness	eyes	are	needed.
A	blind	man	cannot	see	darkness.	If	you	can	see	darkness	you	can	see	light;	they
are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	The	blind	man	knows	nothing	of	darkness	and
nothing	of	light.	Now	he	wants	to	learn	the	secrets	of	light.
We	can	only	help	him,	not	by	teaching	him	great	truths	about	light	--	they	will	be
useless
--	but	by	operating	on	his	eyes.
That's	exactly	what	is	being	done	here.	This	is	an	operation	theater.	The	moment
you	become	a	sannyasin	you	are	getting	ready	for	 the	operation	table,	and	you
have	to	pass	through	many	surgical	operations.	That's	what	all	the	therapies	are.
And	if	you	survive	all	the	therapies,	then	I	am	there	finally	to	finish	you	off!
The	moment	the	ego	disappears,	all	the	secrets	are	open	secrets.	Life	is	not	like	a
fist;	it	is	an	open	hand.
But	 people	 enjoy	 the	 idea	 that	 life	 has	 secrets	 --	 hidden	 secrets.	 Just	 to	 avoid
their	 blindness	 they	 have	 created	 the	 idea	 of	 hidden	 secrets,	 of	 esoteric
knowledge	which	is	not	available	to	anybody,	or	is	available	only	to	great	adepts
who	live	in	Tibet	or	in	the	Himalayas,	or	who	are	no	more	in	their	bodies,	who
live	only	in	astral	bodies	and	appear	only	to	a	few	chosen	people.	And	all	kinds
of	nonsense	has	been	perpetuated	down	the	ages	for	the	simple	reason	that	you
want	to	avoid	seeing,	recognizing	the	simple	fact	of	your	blindness.	Rather	than
saying,	"I	am	blind,"	you	say,	"Life's	secrets	are	very	hidden;	they	are	not	easily
available.	You	will	need	great	initiation."
Life	is	not	esoteric	at	all.	It	is	written	on	each	leaf	of	each	tree,	on	each	pebble
on	 the	 seashore;	 it	 is	 contained	 in	 each	 ray	 of	 the	 sun	 --	 whatever	 you	 come
across	is	life	in	all	its	beauty.	And	life	is	not	afraid	of	you,	so	why	should	it	hide
itself?	 In	 fact,	 you	 are	 hiding,	 continuously	 trying	 to	 hide	 yourself.	 You	 are
closing	yourself	against	life	because	you	are	afraid	of	life.	You	are	afraid	to	live	-
-	because	life	requires	a	constant	death.
One	has	 to	die	every	moment	 to	 the	past.	That	 is	a	great	 requirement	of	 life	--
simple	if	you	understand	that	the	past	is	no	more.	Slip	out	of	it,	snap	out	of	it!	It
is	finished.	Close	the	chapter,	don't	go	on	carrying	it!	And	then	life	is	available
to	you.
But	you	remain	in	the	past;	the	past	goes	on	hanging	around	you,	the	hangover
never	 ends.	 And	 rather	 than	 coming	 to	 the	 present,	 the	 hangover	 of	 the	 past
pushes	you	towards	the	future.	So	either	you	are	in	the	memories	or	you	are	in
your	imagination.	These	are	the	two	ways	to	miss	life;	otherwise	there	is	no	need
to	miss	life.	Just	drop	out	of	memories	and	out	of	imagination.	Past	is	no	more,
future	is	not	yet;	both	are	non-existential.	All	that	exists	is	the	present,	the	now.
Now	is	God.
Enter	the	doors	of	the	now	and	all	is	revealed	--	instantly	revealed,	immediately
revealed.
Life	is	not	a	miser:	it	never	hides	anything,	it	does	not	hold	anything	back.	It	is
ready	to	give	all,	totally	and	unconditionally.	But	you	are	not	ready.
And	Rabindra,	you	ask:	HOW	CAN	I	LEARN	THE	SECRETS	OF	LIFE?
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 learning;	 it	 is	more	 a	 question	 of	 unlearning.	You	 have
already	 learned	 too	much:	 the	Vedas,	 the	Upanishads,	 the	Gita,	 the	Koran,	 the
Bible,	the	Talmud.
Thousands	of	scriptures	are	there	inside	you,	clamoring,	making	noise,	fighting
with	each	other;	all	kinds	of	ideologies	constantly	trying	to	attract	your	attention.
Your	mind	is	a	mess!	It	is	overcrowded,	it	is	a	multitude.	Unlearn!	All	that	you
have	accumulated	up	to	now	as	knowledge,	unlearn	it.
Zen	 people	 are	 right	 when	 they	 say:	 NOT	 KNOWING	 IS	 THE	 MOST
INTIMATE.
Unlearning	 is	 the	 process	 that	 can	 bring	 you	 to	 that	 beautiful	 space	 of	 not
knowing.	And	then	observe.	Observe	life	without	any	knowledge	interpreting	it.
You	have	become	so	accustomed	to	interpretation.
The	moment	you	see	the	sunset,	immediately,	habitually,	you	repeat	words	that
you	have	heard	from	others:	"What	a	beautiful	sunset!"	You	don't	mean	anything
by	it;	you	are	not	even	looking	at	the	sunset.	You	have	not	allowed	it	to	penetrate
to	your	heart.	You	are	not	feeling	any	wonder.	You	are	not	in	a	state	of	awe.	You
have	not	fallen	on	your	knees.
You	 are	 not	 looking	 with	 unblinking	 eyes,	 absorbing.	 Nothing	 of	 that.	 Just	 a
casual	remark:	"What	a	beautiful	sunset!"	Just	a	way	of	speaking,	a	mannerism,
showing	that	you	are	cultured,	sophisticated,	that	you	know	what	beauty	is,	that
you	have	a	great	aesthetic	sense,	that	you	have	great	sensitivity	towards	nature.
You	are	not	looking	at	the	sunset.	Have	you	ever	looked	at	the	sunset?	If	you	had
looked	you	would	not	have	asked	this	question;	the	sunset	would	have	told	you
all.
Have	you	ever	looked	at	a	roseflower?	Yes,	you	say,	"It	is	beautiful!"	You	may
repeat	the	famous	saying:	"A	rose	is	a	rose	is	a	rose,"	but	you	are	not	seeing	the
rose.	 You	 are	 full	 of	 words,	 all	 kinds	 of	 jargon	 --	 poetic,	 philosophic	 --	 but
between	you	and	the	roseflower	there	is	such	a	wall,	a	China	Wall.	Behind	that
wall	you	are	hiding.
And	you	are	asking:	HOW	CAN	I	LEARN	THE	SECRETS	OF	LIFE?
And	 life	 goes	 on	 utterly	 nude,	 utterly	 naked,	 absolutely	 available.	 All	 that	 is
required	is	a	not-knowing	state,	an	empty	space	which	can	absorb	it,	which	can
receive	it.	Only	when	you	are	in	a	state	of	not	knowing	are	you	a	host,	and	then
life	becomes	a	guest.
Just	 observe,	with	 no	 evaluation.	Don't	 say	 "good,"	 don't	 say	 "bad";	 don't	 say
"beautiful,"
don't	 say	 "ugly."	 Don't	 say	 anything	 at	 all!	Without	 saying	 anything,	 without
bringing	your	mind	in,	just	watch	with	utterly	empty	eyes,	like	a	mirror.	Reflect
the	moon,	the	stars,	the	sun,	the	trees,	the	people,	the	animals,	the	birds.	And	life
will	pour	itself	into	your	being.	And	it	is	an	inexhaustible	source	of	energy.	And
energy	is	delight.
William	Blake	is	right	when	he	says:	Energy	is	delight.	And	when	life	pours	its
energy	into	your	being	it	rejuvenates	you,	it	revitalizes	you;	you	are	constantly
reborn.	 A	 real,	 alive	 person	 is	 born	 again	 and	 again	 every	MOMENT.	 He	 is
fresh,	he	is	always	young.
Even	when	he	dies	he	is	fresh	and	young.	Even	in	the	moment	of	death,	life	is
pouring	more	and	more	energy	into	him.	His	way	of	approaching	life	--	without
mind	--	helps	him	to	see	not	only	life	but	death	too.	And	when	you	are	able	to
see	life,	you	are	able	to	see	death.	And	to	see	death	means	there	is	no	death;	all	is
life,	 and	 eternal,	 beginningless,	 endless.	 And	 you	 are	 part	 of	 this	 infinite
celebration.
Just	watch,	be	alert,	and	function	from	a	state	of	innocence.	Your	question	seems
to	be	knowledgeable.
You	say:	HOW	CAN	I	LEARN	THE	SECRETS	OF	LIFE?
You	are	still	asking	like	a	student,	a	schoolboy.
Life	 is	 ready	 every	moment	 to	 embrace	 you.	YOU	 are	 hiding	 away	 from	 life
because	you	are	afraid.	You	want	life	on	your	terms.	You	want	life	to	be	Hindu
or	Mohammedan	or	Christian,	and	life	cannot	do	that.	You	want	life	according	to
the	Gita	or	the	Koran,	and	life	cannot	do	that.
Don't	 put	 conditions	 on	 life.	 Putting	 conditions	 on	 life	 is	 ugly,	 violent,	 stupid.
Remain	 unconditionally	 open...and	 suddenly	 some	 bells	 in	 your	 heart	 start
ringing,	 in	 tune	with	 the	whole.	A	music	 arises,	 a	melody	 is	born.	You	are	no
more	separate	as	a	learner,	as	a	knower.	Finally	you	are	not	even	separate	as	an
observer;	the	observer	and	the	observed	become	one	ultimately.
That	is	the	moment	of	enlightenment,	of	Buddhahood,	when	you	are	part	of	this
whole,	an	 intrinsic	part,	 inseparable.	Then	you	ARE	life	 --	what	 is	 the	need	 to
learn	anything?
You	ARE	it;	you	are	not	separate	from	it.	Who	is	going	to	learn	and	about	what?
You	 are	 life.	 Then	 experiencing	 arises:	 not	 knowing	 but	 experiencing,	 not
knowledge	but	wisdom.
Raul	was	sitting	against	the	wall	of	his	friend	Pablo's	adobe	shack.	Pablo	came
out	of	the	house	with	a	butterfly	in	his	hand.
"Ay,	Pablo,"	called	Raul.	"Where	are	you	going	with	the	butterfly?"
"I	am	going	to	get	some	butter,"	replied	Pablo.
"Oh,	you	foolish	fellow!"	said	Raul.	"You	cannot	get	butter	with	a	butterfly!"
A	 few	minutes	 later,	 to	 Raul's	 astonishment,	 Pablo	 returned	 with	 a	 bucket	 of
butter.
In	a	little	while	Pablo	came	out,	this	time	carrying	a	jar	of	horseflies.
"Ay,	Pablo,"	called	Raul,	"where	are	you	going	with	them	horseflies?"
"Where	you	think?"	answered	Pablo.	"To	get	horses,	of	course!"
Pablo	returned	in	a	few	minutes	leading	a	pair	of	beautiful	stallions.
"See,	I	told	you!"	said	Pablo	to	the	amazed	Raul.
Ten	minutes	later	Pablo	came	out	clutching	a	handful	of	pussy	willows.
"Ay,	Pablo!"	shouted	Raul.	"Wait	for	me	--	I	go	with	you!"
Just	observe.	Nothing	is	hidden	--	just	observe.	And	slowly	slowly	you	will	start
going	with	life.	Slowly	slowly	you	will	not	remain	separate,	you	will	follow	life.
And	to	follow	life	is	to	be	religious.	Not	to	follow	Christ,	not	to	follow	Buddha,
but	to	follow	life	is	to	be	religious.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,
I	 CAN	 FIND	 THE	 ANSWER	 TO	 ALL	 THE	 QUESTIONS	 I	 ASK	 YOU
WITHIN
MYSELF,	 BUT	 STILL	 I	WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	ASK	YOU	ONE	 --	 JUST	 FOR
FUN,	SIMPLY	TAKING	UP	YOUR	INVITATION.	IS	IT	REALLY	POSSIBLE
FOR	AN
ORDINARY	 PERSON	 LIKE	 MYSELF	 TO	 LIVE	 IN	 THIS	 WORLD,
EARNING	AND
SPENDING,	AND	STILL	BE	IN	THE	STATE	OF	NO-MIND	CONSTANTLY?
Deva	David,
I	WILL	NOT	ANSWER	THIS	QUESTION	--	 just	 for	 fun!	 If	you	can	find	 the
answer	to	all	the	questions,	find	out	the	answer	to	this	one	too!
And	you	don't	 seem	 to	 be	 an	ORDINARY	person	 --	 one	who	 can	 find	 all	 the
answers	to	all	the	questions	within	himself	can't	be	an	ordinary	person,	otherwise
how	will	you	define	the	extraordinary?
No,	 I	will	not	bother	you	with	an	answer	 --	you	 find	 it	within	yourself.	When
you	cannot	find	it,	then	ask	me	again.
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,
CAN'T	ONE	BELIEVE	IN	GOD	WITHOUT	SEEING	HIM?
Surendra	Mohan,
WHO	IS	TELLING	YOU	TO	BELIEVE	IN	GOD?	I	am	against	all	belief.	You
must	 be	 a	 very	 new	 comer	 here.	Belief	 is	 irreligious,	 as	much	 as	 disbelief	 is.
Belief	means	you	don't	know	yet	you	have	accepted	something.	It	is	cowardly	--
you	have	not	inquired.	You	are	pretending,	you	are	a	hypocrite.
All	believers	are	hypocrites	 --	Catholic	and	communist,	 Jainas	and	Jews	--	all.
Believers	 are	 hypocrites.	 They	 don't	 know	 and	 yet	 they	 pretend	 AS	 IF	 they
know.	What	 is	 belief?	 It	 is	 playing	 the	 game	 of	 "as	 if."	And	 the	 same	 is	 true
about	disbelief.
The	communist	knows	NOT	that	 there	 is	no	God,	 just	as	 the	Hindu	knows	not
that	there	is	a	God.	The	Hindu	believes	there	is	a	God,	the	communist	believes
there	is	no	God.
Disbelief	is	also	a	kind	of	belief	--	a	negative	kind	of	belief.	And	that's	why	it	is
so	easy	to	become	a	Hindu	from	being	a	communist	or	a	communist	from	being
a	Hindu.
It	is	a	well-known	fact	that	before	the	Russian	revolution	Russia	was	one	of	the
MOST
religious	 countries	 in	 the	 world.	 Then	 what	 happened?	 After	 ten	 years	 of
revolution,	 the	 whole	 country	 became	 atheistic.	 The	 same	 people	 who	 were
fanatical	 believers	 became	 fanatical	 disbelievers!	 On	 the	 surface	 it	 looks
puzzling,	but	 it	 is	 not.	The	 fanaticism	 is	 the	 same;	nothing	has	 changed.	They
were	fanatic	Christians,	now	they	are	fanatic	communists.	They	believed	madly,
now	they	disbelieve	madly,	their	madness	is	the	same.
And	 their	 belief	 was	 wrong	 because	 they	 had	 not	 experienced	 it,	 and	 their
disbelief	is	wrong	because	they	have	not	yet	experienced	the	ABSENCE	of	God.
Surendra	 Mohan,	 you	 ask	 me:	 CAN'T	 ONE	 BELIEVE	 IN	 GOD	WITHOUT
SEEING
HIM?
In	the	first	place	there	is	no	need	to	believe	in	God.	And	if	you	believe	you	will
never	 be	 able	 to	 know	 him.	 Belief	 will	 become	 a	 barrier;	 belief	 is	 always	 a
barrier.	Belief	means	you	are	carrying	a	prejudice,	and	you	will	not	be	able	 to
see	that	which	is.	You	will	project	your	own	idea.
That's	why	a	Hindu,	when	he	comes	to	a	vision	of	God,	will	see	Krishna	with	the
flute.
He	will	never	see	Christ,	he	will	never	see	Mahavira,	he	will	never	see	Buddha.
And	the	Christian?	He	has	never	seen	Krishna	or	Buddha.	And	a	Jew?	He	has	his
own	 ideas.	So	when	you	see,	what	you	see	 is	not	 really	 the	 real	but	your	own
projection,	your	own	idea.
Remember:	as	long	as	you	have	even	a	single	idea	inside	you,	your	experience	is
going	to	be	distorted	by	it.
MY	 suggestion	 to	MY	 people	 is:	 don't	 carry	 any	 idea	 of	God,	 for	 or	 against.
Don't	 carry	 any	 image	 of	 God.	 In	 fact,	 God	 is	 absolutely	 irrelevant	 --	 be
meditative!	And	meditation	means:	drop	all	 thoughts,	drop	all	 ideologies,	drop
all	knowledge.	Drop	the	mind	itself.
And	 then	 when	 you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind,	 something	 unimaginable,
unbelievable,	unpredictable,	inexpressible,	is.	experienced.	You	can	call	it	God,
you	can	call	it	truth,	you	can	call	it	NIRVANA,	or	whatsoever	you	want	to	call	it.
You	 are	 free	 because	 no	word	 describes	 it,	 hence	 any	word	 is	 as	 good	 as	 any
other.	But	don't	carry	any	belief.
And	what	do	you	mean:	"...without	seeing	him"?	Do	you	think	someday	you	will
see	God?	Is	God	a	person?	That's	how	people	think:	God	is	like	Rama,	always
carrying	 a	 bow	 with	 arrows.	 Now,	 in	 the	 twentieth	 century,	 carrying	 a	 bow
would	look	so	foolish.
Give	him	an	atom	bomb	--	 that	will	 look	far	more	contemporary!	Jesus	on	 the
cross...twenty	centuries	have	passed.	Now	we	have	electric	chairs!	Give	him	an
electric	 chair.	 At	 least	 he	 can	 rest	 on	 the	 chair!	 Still	 you	 go	 on	 giving	 him	 a
cross.	Make	your	ideas	a	little	more	contemporary.	They	are	all	out	of	date.
What	do	you	mean	by	"SEEING	God"?	Is	he	a	person?	Will	you	say	hello	and
will	you	shake	hands	with	him?	God	is	not	a	person,	hence	God	cannot	be	seen
in	that	sense.	God	is	a	presence.
There	is	no	God	but	godliness.	It	is	a	quality,	a	fragrance.	You	experience	it,	you
don't	 see	 it.	 And	when	 you	 experience	 it,	 it	 is	 not	 something	 out	 there	 as	 an
object;	 it	 is	 something	 IN	 HERE,	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 your	 hearts.	 It	 is	 your
subjectivity,	it	is	your	consciousness.
So	there	is	no	question	of	belief	and	there	is	no	question	of	seeing	either.
But	people	are	brought	up	in	all	kinds	of	beliefs	and	they	go	on	seeing	through
their	 prejudices.	 So	 anything	 that	 fits	 with	 their	 prejudices	 enters	 inside;
anything	that	does	not	fit	with	their	prejudice	is	prevented	from	entering.
An	 elephant	 escaped	 from	 the	 local	 zoo	 and	made	 his	way	 into	 the	 vegetable
garden	of	one	of	the	town's	most	prominent	matrons.	Unfortunately	this	lady	had
only	just	returned	from	a	cocktail	party	where	she	had	had	just	a	little	too	much
to	drink.	She	was	not	too	drunk,	however,	to	see	the	beast	in	her	garden,	and	she
had	the	presence	of	mind	to	call	the	police.
"Quick,"	 she	 said,	 "there	 is	 some	 kind	 of	 huge,	 strange	 looking	 animal	 in	my
garden."
"What	is	he	doing?"	asked	the	desk	sergeant.
"He	seems	to	be	picking	lettuce	with	his	tail!"
"Oh,	really?"	replied	the	wary	policeman.	"And	what	is	he	doing	with	it?"
The	lady	peered	out	into	her	garden	once	more	and	then	said,	"Sergeant,	even	if	I
told	you,	you	would	never	believe	it!"
God	has	been	experienced.	Nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	say	exactly	what	that
experience	is.	And	even	if	somebody	tries	to	say	it,	you	are	not	going	to	believe
it.	Your	prejudices,	your	A	PRIORI	ideas,	will	prevent	you.
No,	Surendra	Mohan,	no	need	 to	believe	 in	God;	no	need	even	 to	believe	 that
one	day	you	are	going	to	see	him.	In	fact,	God	is	not	a	religious	subject	at	all	--
you	will	be	surprised	when	you	hear	it	--	God	is	a	philosophic	subject.	It	is	for
those	useless	people	who	go	on	endlessly	into	logic-chopping	and	hair-splitting.
It	is	for	those	people	to	discuss	God.
A	 religious	 person	 is	 not	 interested	 in	God;	 he	 is	more	 interested	 in	 the	 very
source	 of	 his	 being,	who	 he	 is:	 "Who	 am	 I?"	 That	 is	 the	MOST	 fundamental
religious	question	--	not	God,	not	heaven,	not	hell,	but	"Who	am	I?"	And	if	you
can	 find	 the	 truth	 of	 your	 own	 being	 you	will	 have	 found	 all	 the	 truth	 that	 is
necessary	to	know	and	is	worth	knowing.
You	will	have	found	God	and	you	will	have	found	NIRVANA	and	you	will	have
found	 all	 that	 the	 seers,	 the	 rishis,	 the	Buddhas,	 the	 prophets,	 down	 the	 ages,
have	been	telling	you	to	inquire	into.
But	 don't	 make	 a	 philosophical	 inquiry,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 end	 up	 with	 a
conclusion.	And	all	conclusions	are	dangerous	because	once	you	conclude	you
become	 fanatical	 about	 your	 conclusion,	 you	 start	 clinging	 to	 it.	 You	 become
afraid	of	 truth	 --	because	who	knows?	Truth	may	disturb	your	conclusion,	and
your	conclusion	 is	 so	cozy	and	 so	convenient,	 and	 it	has	helped	 to	give	you	a
certain	feeling	of	security.	So	you	go	on	clinging	to	your	conclusion	--	and	your
conclusion	is	your	conclusion.
If	 you	 are	 unaware,	 what	 value	 can	 your	 conclusion	 have?	 Your	 conclusion
cannot	 be	 bigger	 than	 you,	 your	 conclusion	 cannot	 be	 higher	 than	 you.	 Your
conclusion	 will	 be	 as	 high,	 as	 deep,	 as	 you	 are	 high	 and	 you	 are	 deep.	 Your
conclusion	will	only	reflect	you.
God	is	not	a	conclusion.	It	is	not	arrived	at	by	logical	processes	--	by	believing,
by	 discussing,	 by	 analyzing,	 no.	 All	 mind	 processes	 have	 to	 cease.	When	 all
processes	have	ceased,	something	--	call	it	XYZ	--	suddenly	wells	up	within	you.
A	few	qualities	can	be	indicated:	you	will	feel	tremendously	ecstatic,	blissful,	at
home,	at	ease.	For	the	first	time	existence	will	be	your	home.	You	will	not	be	an
outsider,	a	stranger.	For	the	first	time	there	will	be	no	conflict	between	you	and
existence,	no	struggle	for	the	survival	of	the	fittest.	For	the	first	time	you	will	be
in	a	state	of	let-go.	And	in	let-go	wells	up	great	joy.
You	will	be	able	to	sing	the	song	that	you	have	brought	in	your	heart	and	is	still
unsung.
You	will	be	able	to	bloom	into	thousands	of	flowers.	Or	as	in	the	East	we	say:
you	will	 bloom	 into	 a	 thousand-petalled	 lotus	 of	 consciousness,	 of	 awareness.
That	is	God	--	or	better,	godliness.
The	seventh	question
Question	7
OSHO,
I	KNOW	YOU	ARE	AGAINST	MARRIAGE,	BUT	I	STILL	WANT	TO	GET
MARRIED.	CAN	I	HAVE	YOUR	BLESSINGS?
Rakesh,
MEDITATE	OVER	MURPHY'S	MAXIM:	A	fool	and	his	cool	are	soon	parted.
It	 is	 not	 yet	 published	 anywhere,	 but	 Asha	 is	 the	 custodian	 of	 Murphy's
unpublished	manuscripts,	so	she	goes	on	supplying	these	maxims	of	Murphy	to
me.	Meditate	over	it:	A	fool	and	his	cool	are	soon	parted.
That's	 what	 marriage	 is	 going	 to	 be.	 Only	 fools	 think	 in	 terms	 of	 legality;
otherwise,	love	is	enough.	And	I	am	not	against	marriage	--	I	am	for	love.	If	love
becomes	your	marriage,	good;	but	don't	hope	that	marriage	can	bring	love.	That
is	not	possible.	Love	can	become	a	marriage.	You	have	to	work	very	consciously
to	transform	your	love	into	a	marriage.
Ordinarily,	people	destroy	their	love.	They	do	EVERYTHING	to	destroy	it	and
then	 they	suffer.	And	 they	go	on	saying,	 "What	went	wrong?"	They	destroy	 --
they	do	everything	to	destroy	it.
There	 is	 a	 tremendous	 desire	 and	 longing	 for	 love,	 but	 love	 needs	 great
awareness.	Only	then	can	it	reach	its	highest	climax	--	and	that	highest	climax	IS
marriage.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	law.	It	is	a	merging	of	two	hearts	into	totality.
It	is	the	functioning	of	two	persons	in	synchronicity	--	that	is	marriage.
But	people	try	love	and	because	they	are	unconscious...their	longing	is	good,	but
their	 love	 is	 full	 of	 jealousy,	 full	 of	 possessiveness,	 full	 of	 anger,	 full	 of
nastiness.	 Soon	 they	 destroy	 it.	 Hence	 for	 centuries	 they	 have	 depended	 on
marriage.	 Better	 to	 start	 by	 marriage	 so	 that	 the	 law	 can	 protect	 you	 from
destroying	it.	The	society,	 the	government,	 the	court,	 the	policeman,	 the	priest,
they	will	all	force	you	to	live	in	the	institution	of	marriage,	and	you	will	be	just	a
slave.	If	marriage	is	an	institution,	you	are	going	to	be	a	slave	in	it.	Only	slaves
want	to	live	in	institutions.
Marriage	 is	a	 totally	different	phenomenon:	 it	 is	 the	climax	of	 love.	Then	 it	 is
good.	I	am	not	against	marriage	--	I	am	for	the	REAL	marriage.	I	am	against	the
false,	 the	 pseudo,	 that	 exists.	 But	 it	 is	 an	 arrangement.	 It	 gives	 you	 a	 certain
security,	 safety,	 occupation.	 It	 keeps	 you	 engaged.	 Otherwise,	 it	 gives	 you	 no
enrichment,	it	gives	you	no	nourishment.
So,	Rakesh,	if	you	want	to	get	married	according	to	me,	only	then	can	I	give	you
my	blessings.
Learn	 to	 love,	and	drop	all	 that	goes	against	 love.	 It	 is	an	uphill	 task.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	 art	 in	 existence,	 to	 be	 able	 to	 love.	 One	 needs	 such	 refinement,	 such
inner	 culture,	 such	 meditativeness,	 so	 that	 one	 can	 see	 immediately	 how	 one
goes	on	destroying.	If	you	can	avoid	being	destructive,	if	you	become	creative	in
your	relationship;	if	you	support	it,	nourish	it;	if	you	are	capable	of	compassion
for	the	other	person,	not	only	passion....
Passion	alone	is	not	able	to	sustain	love;	compassion	is	needed.	If	you	are	able	to
be	compassionate	towards	the	other;	if	you	are	able	to	accept	his	limitations,	his
imperfections;	if	you	are	able	to	accept	him	the	way	he	is	or	she	is	and	STILL
love	--
then	 one	 day	 a	 marriage	 happens.	 That	 may	 take	 years.	 That	 may	 take	 your
whole	life.
You	 can	 have	 my	 blessings,	 but	 for	 a	 legal	 marriage	 you	 need	 not	 have	 my
blessings	--
and	my	blessings	won't	be	of	any	help	either.	And	beware!	Before	you	jump	into
it,	give	it	a	second	thought.
A	woman	walks	 into	a	pet	shop	and	sees	a	bird	with	a	big	beak.	"What	 is	 that
strange	looking	bird?"	she	asks	the	proprietor.
"That	is	a	gobble	bird,"	he	answers.
"Why	do	you	call	him	a	gobble	bird?"
The	man	says	to	the	bird,	"Gobble	bird,	my	chair!"
The	bird	immediately	starts	pecking	away	and	gobbles	up	the	chair.
"I	will	buy	him,"	the	woman	says.
The	owner	asks	why.
"Well,"	she	says,	"when	my	husband	comes	home	he	will	see	the	bird	and	ask,
'What	is	that?'	I	will	say,	'A	gobble	bird.'	And	then	he	will	say,	'Gobble	bird,	my
foot!'"
Just	be	a	little	aware	before	you	move!	My	blessings	won't	help.	Marriage	is	a
trap	and	your	wife	sooner	or	later	will	find	a	gobble	bird.
Mrs.	Moskowitz	loved	chicken	soup.	One	evening	she	was	spooning	it	up	when
three	of	her	husband's	friends	came	in.	"Mrs.	Moskowitz,"	the	spokesman	said,
"we	are	here	to	tell	you	that	your	husband,	Izzy,	has	been	killed	in	an	automobile
accident."
Mrs.	Moskowitz	continued	eating	her	soup.	Again	they	told	her.	Still	no	reaction.
"Look,"	said	the	puzzled	speaker,	"we	are	telling	you	that	your	husband	is	dead!"
She	 went	 right	 on	 with	 the	 soup.	 "Gentlemen,"	 she	 said	 between	 mouthfuls,
"soon	as	I	am	finished	with	this	chicken	soup,	you	gonna	hear	some	scream!"
Marriage	is	not	love;	it	is	something	else.
A	woman	at	the	grave	of	her	husband	was	wailing,	"Oh,	Joseph,	it	is	four	years
since	you	have	gone,	but	I	still	miss	you!"
Just	then	Grossberg	passed	by	and	saw	the	woman	crying.	"Excuse	me,"	he	said,
"who	are	you	mourning?"
"My	husband,"	she	said.	"I	miss	him	so	much!"
Grossberg	looked	at	the	stone	and	then	said,	"Your	husband?	But	it	says	on	the
gravestone	'Sacred	to	the	memory	of	Golda	Kreps'."
"Oh,	yes,	he	put	everything	in	my	name."
So	 be	 a	 little	 aware	 before	 you	 are	 trapped!	 Marriage	 is	 a	 trap:	 you	 will	 be
trapped	by	the	woman	and	the	woman	will	be	trapped	by	you.	It	is	a	mutual	trap.
And	then	legally	you	are	allowed	to	torture	each	other	forever.	And	particularly
in	this	country,	not	only	for	one	life	but	for	lives	together!	Divorce	is	not	even
allowed	after	you	are	dead.	Next	life	also	you	will	get	the	same	wife,	remember!
And	the	last	question
Question	8
OSHO,
WHAT	IS	GOING	ON?
Anand	Subhuti,
I	AM	SURPRISED,	 because	 that's	 exactly	what	 I	was	 going	 to	 ask	 you	 all!	 I
don't	know.
But:	NOT	KNOWING	IS	THE	MOST	INTIMATE.
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Take	No	Notice
9	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001090
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
THE	ANCIENTS	SAID:
"(SELF-)CULTIVATION	 TAKES	 AN	 UNIMAGINABLE	 TIME	 (WHILE)
ENLIGHTENMENT	IN	AN	INSTANT	IS	ATTAINED."
IF	 THE	 TRAINING	 IS	 EFFICIENT,	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 WILL	 BE
ATTAINED	IN
ONE	FINGERSNAP.
IN	 DAYS	 GONE	 BY	 CH'AN	 MASTER	 HUI	 CHUEH	 OF	 LANG	 YEH
MOUNTAIN,	 HAD	 A	 DISCIPLE	 WHO	 CALLED	 ON	 HIM	 FOR
INSTRUCTION.	THE	MASTER
TAUGHT	 HER	 TO	 EXAMINE	 INTO	 THE	 SENTENCE:	 "TAKE	 NO
NOTICE."
SHE	 FOLLOWED	 HIS	 INSTRUCTION	 STRICTLY	 WITHOUT
BACKSLIDING.
ONE	 DAY	 HER	 HOUSE	 CAUGHT	 FIRE,	 BUT	 SHE	 SAID:	 "TAKE	 NO
NOTICE."
ANOTHER	DAY,	HER	SON	FELL	INTO	THE	WATER	AND	WHEN	A
BYSTANDER	CALLED	HER,	SHE	SAID:	"TAKE	NO	NOTICE."
SHE	OBSERVED	EXACTLY	HER	MASTER'S	INSTRUCTION	BY	LAYING
DOWN
ALL	CASUAL	THOUGHTS.
ONE	DAY,	AS	HER	HUSBAND	LIT	THE	FIRE	TO	MAKE	FRITTERS	OF
TWISTED
DOUGH,	SHE	THREW	INTO	THE	PAN	FULL	OF	BOILING	(VEGETABLE)
OIL	A	BATTER	WHICH	MADE	A	NOISE.
UPON	 HEARING	 THE	 NOISE,	 SHE	 WAS	 INSTANTLY	 ENLIGHTENED.
THEN
SHE	 THREW	 THE	 PAN	 OF	 OIL	 ON	 THE	 GROUND,	 CLAPPED	 HER
HANDS	AND
LAUGHED.
THINKING	 SHE	 WAS	 INSANE,	 HER	 HUSBAND	 SCOLDED	 HER	 AND
SAID:
"WHY	DO	YOU	DO	THIS?	ARE	YOU	MAD?"
SHE	REPLIED:	"TAKE	NO	NOTICE."
THEN	SHE	WENT	TO	THE	MASTER	HUI	CHUEH	AND	ASKED	HIM	TO
VERIFY
HER	ACHIEVEMENT.
THE	 MASTER	 CONFIRMED	 THAT	 SHE	 HAD	 OBTAINED	 THE	 HOLY
FRUIT.
THERE	ARE	TWO	PATHS	TO	THE	ULTIMATE	TRUTH.	The	first	is	of	self-
cultivation	 and	 the	 second	 is	 of	 enlightenment.	The	 first	 is	 basically	wrong.	 It
only	appears	to	be	a	path;	it	is	not.	One	goes	on	and	on	in	circles,	but	one	never
arrives.	The	second	does	not	appear	to	be	a	path	because	there	is	no	space	for	a
path	when	something	happens	 instantly,	when	something	happens	 immediately.
When	something	happens	without	taking	any	time,	how	can	there	be	a	path?
This	paradox	has	to	be	understood	as	deeply	as	possible:	the	first	appears	to	be
the	path	but	is	not;	the	second	appears	not	to	be	a	path	but	is.	The	first	appears	to
be	a	path	because	 there	 is	 infinite	 time;	 it	 is	 a	 time	phenomenon	But	anything
happening	 in	 time	 cannot	 lead	 you	 beyond	 time;	 anything	 happening	 in	 time
only	strengthens	time.
Time	means	mind.	Time	IS	a	projection	of	mind.	It	does	not	exist;	it	is	only	an
illusion.
Only	the	present	exists	--	and	the	present	is	not	part	of	time.	The	present	is	part
of	eternity.	Past	is	time,	future	is	time;	both	are	non-existential.	The	past	is	only
memory	and	the	future	 is	only	 imagination;	memory	and	imagination,	both	are
non-existential.	We	create	the	past	because	we	cling	to	memory;	clinging	to	the
memory	is	the	source	of	the	past.	And	we	create	the	future	because	we	have	so
many	 desires	 yet	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 we	 have	 so	 many	 imaginations	 yet	 to	 be
realized.	 And	 desires	 need	 a	 future	 like	 a	 screen	 onto	 which	 they	 can	 be
projected.
Past	and	future	are	mind	phenomena;	and	past	and	future	make	your	whole	idea
of	time.
Ordinarily	you	 think	 that	 time	 is	divided	 into	 three	divisions:	past,	present	and
future.
That	is	totally	wrong.	That	is	not	how	the	awakened	ones	have	seen	time.	They
say	time	consists	only	of	two	divisions:	past	and	future.	The	present	is	not	part	of
time	at	all;	the	present	belongs	to	the	beyond.
The	first	path	--	the	path	of	self-cultivation	--	is	a	time	path;	it	has	nothing	to	do
with	eternity.	And	truth	is	eternity.
The	second	path	 --	 the	path	of	enlightenment,	Zen	Masters	have	always	called
the	pathless	path	because	it	does	not	appear	to	be	a	path	at	all.	It	cannot	appear
as	a	path,	but	just	for	the	purposes	of	communication	we	will	call	it	"the	second
path,"	arbitrarily.	The	second	path	is	not	part	of	time,	it	is	part	of	eternity.	Hence
it	happens	 instantaneously;	 it	happens	 in	 the	present.	You	cannot	desire	 it,	you
cannot	be	ambitious	for	it.
On	the	first	path,	the	false	path,	all	is	allowed.	You	can	imagine,	you	can	desire,
you	 can	 be	 ambitious.	 You	 can	 change	 all	 your	 worldly	 desires	 into	 other-
worldly	 desires.	 That's	what	 the	 so-called	 religious	 people	 go	 on	 doing.	 They
don't	desire	money	any	more	--
they	are	fed	up	with	it,	tired	of	it,	frustrated	with	it,	bored	with	it	--	but	they	start
desiring	God.	Desire	persists;	it	changes	its	object.	Money	is	no	more	the	object
of	desire	but	God;	pleasure	 is	no	more	 the	object	of	desire	but	bliss.	But	what
bliss	can	you	imagine?
Whatsoever	you	imagine	in	the	name	of	bliss	is	nothing	but	your	idea	of	pleasure
--
maybe	a	little	bit	refined,	cultivated,	sophisticated,	but	it	can't	be	more	than	that.
The	people	who	stop	desiring	worldly	things	start	desiring	heaven	and	heavenly
pleasures.	But	what	are	they?	--	magnified	forms	of	the	same	old	desires,	in	fact
more	dangerous	than	the	worldly	desires,	because	with	the	worldly	desires	one
thing	 is	absolutely	certain:	you	are	bound	to	get	 frustrated	sooner	or	 later.	You
will	 get	 out	 of	 them;	 you	Cannot	 remain	 in	 them	 forever.	 The	 very	 nature	 of
them	is	such	 that	 they	promise	you,	but	 they	never	 fulfill	 their	promises	 --	 the
goods	are	never	delivered.	How	long	can	you	remain	deceived	by	 them?	Even
the	most	stupid	person	has	glimpses,	once	in	a	while,	that	he	is	chasing	illusions
which	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled	 by	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 existence.	 The	 intelligent	 one
comes	to	the	realization	sooner.
But	with	 the	other-worldly	desires	 there	 is	 far	greater	danger	because	 they	are
other-worldly,	and	to	see	them	and	to	experience	them	you	will	have	to	wait	till
death.	They	will	happen	only	after	death	so	you	cannot	be	free	of	them	in	life,
while	you	are	alive.
And	a	man	who	has	lived	unconsciously	his	whole	life,	his	death	is	going	to	be
the	 culmination	 of	 unconsciousness;	 he	 will	 die	 in	 unconsciousness.	 In	 death
also	 he	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 disillusion	 himself.	 And	 the	 person	 who	 dies	 in
unconsciousness	is	born	again	in	unconsciousness.	It	is	a	vicious	circle;	it	goes
on	and	on.	And	the	person	who	is	born	in	unconsciousness	will	repeat	the	same
stupidities	that	he	has	been	repeating	for	millions	of	lives.
Unless	 you	 become	 alert	 and	 aware	 IN	 life,	 unless	 you	 change	 the	 quality	 of
your	living,	you	will	not	die	consciously.	And	only	a	conscious	death	can	bring
you	to	a	conscious	birth;	and	then	a	far	more	conscious	life	opens	its	doors.
Changing	worldly	 desires	 into	 other-worldly	 desires	 is	 the	 last	 strategy	 of	 the
mind	to	keep	you	captive,	to	keep	you	a	prisoner,	to	keep	you	in	bondage.
So	 the	 first	 path	 is	 not	 really	 a	 path	 but	 a	 deception	 --	 but	 a	 very	 alluring
deception.	In	the	first	place,	it	is	SELF-cultivation.	It	is	not	against	the	ego;	it	is
rooted	in	the	refinement	of	 the	ego.	Refine	your	ego	of	all	grossness,	 then	you
become	a	self.	The	ego	is	like	a	raw	diamond:	you	go	on	cutting	it	and	polishing
it	and	then	it	becomes	a	Kohinoor,	very	precious.	That	is	your	idea	of	"self,"	but
it	is	nothing	but	ego	with	a	beautiful	name,	with	a	spiritual	flavor	thrown	in.	It	is
the	same	old	illusory	ego.
The	very	idea	that	"I	am"	is	wrong.	The	whole	is,	God	is	--	I	am	not.	Either	I	can
exist	or	God	can	exist;	we	cannot	both	exist	together	--	because	if	I	exist,	then	I
am	 a	 separate	 entity.	Then	 I	 have	my	own	 existence	 independent	 of	God.	But
God	simply	means	the	total,	the	whole.	HOW	can	I	be	independent	of	it?	How
can	I	be	separate	from	it?	If	I	exist,	I	destroy	the	very	idea	of	totality.
The	people	who	deny	God	are	the	most	egoistic	people.	It	is	not	an	accident	that
Friedrich	Nietzsche	declared	God	dead.	He	was	one	of	the	most	egoistic	persons
possible.
It	was	his	ego	 that	made	him	insane	finally.	Ego	 is	 insanity,	 the	basic	 insanity,
the	most	 fundamental,	out	of	which	all	other	 insanities	arise.	He	said:	 "God	 is
dead	and	man	is	free."	That	sentence	is	significant.	In	one	sentence	he	has	said
the	whole	thing:	Man	can	be	free	only	if	God	is	dead;	if	God	is	alive,	then	man
cannot	be	free,	in	fact	man	cannot	exist.
The	very	idea	that	"I	am"	is	unspiritual.	The	idea	of	the	self	is	unspiritual.
And	what	 is	 self-cultivation?	 It	 is	an	effort	 to	polish;	 it	 is	an	effort	 to	create	a
beautiful	 character,	 to	 drop	 all	 that	 is	 unrespectable	 and	 to	 create	 all	 that	 is
respectable.	That's	why	 in	different	 countries	different	 things	 are	 cultivated	by
the	spiritual	people	--	the	so-called	spiritual.	It	depends	on	the	society;	what	the
society	respects,	that	will	be	cultivated.
In	Soviet	Russia,	before	the	revolution,	there	was	a	Christian	sect	which	believed
that	sexual	organs	should	be	cut,	only	then	are	you	real	Christians.	The	statement
of	Jesus	was	taken	literally.	Jesus	has	said:	Be	eunuchs	of	God.	And	these	fools
followed	it	literally.
Every	year	they	would	gather	in	thousands	and	in	a	mad	frenzy	they	would	cut
their	sexual	organs.	Men	would	cut	their	genital	organs,	women	would	cut	their
breasts.	And	those	who	were	able	to	do	it	were	thought	to	be	saints;	they	were
very	much	respected	--
they	 had	 made	 a	 great	 sacrifice.	 Now,	 anywhere	 else	 they	 would	 have	 been
thought	 utterly	 insane;	 but	 because	 in	 that	 particular	 society	 it	 was	 respected,
they	were	saints.
In	India	you	can	find	many	people	Lying	down	on	beds	of	thorns	or	needles,	and
they	are	thought	to	be	great	sages.	If	you	look	into	their	eyes,	they	are	just	stupid
people.	Lying	down	on	a	bed	of	 thorns	can't	make	one	spiritual.	 It	will	simply
deaden	your	body,	your	sensitivity.	Your	body	will	become	more	and	more	dull;
it	will	not	feel.
That's	how	it	happens.	Your	face	does	not	feel	the	cold	because	it	remains	open;
it	 becomes	 insensitive	 to	 the	 cold.	 Your	 hands	 don't	 feel	 the	 cold	 so	 much
because	they	are	open;	they	become	insensitive	to	the	cold.	Exactly	in	the	same
way	you	can	live	naked.
Only	 for	 the	beginning	 few	months	will	you	 feel	 the	cold;	 slowly	 slowly	your
body	will	adjust.
That's	 how	 the	 Jaina	 monks	 live	 naked.	 And	 their	 followers	 praise	 them	 like
anything;	 they	 think:	 "This	 is	 what	 real	 spirituality	 is.	 Look,	 they	 have	 gone
beyond	the	body!"
They	have	gone	nowhere;	 the	body	has	 just	 become	dull.	And	when	 the	body
becomes	dull	 it	naturally	creates	a	dullness	of	 the	mind	 too,	because	body	and
mind	are	deeply	one.	The	body	is	the	outer	shell	of	the	mind	and	the	mind	is	the
inner	core	of	the	body.
If	 you	 really	 want	 to	 be	 a	 sensitive,	 intelligent	 mind,	 you	 need	 a	 sensitive,
intelligent	body	 too.	Yes,	 the	body	has	 its	own	 intelligence.	Don't	 kill	 it,	 don't
destroy	 it,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 destroying	 your	 intelligence.	 But	 if	 it	 is
respected,	then	it	becomes	something	religious,	spiritual,	holy.
Anything	 that	 the	 society	 respects	 becomes	 a	 nourishment	 for	 your	 ego.	 And
people	 are	 ready	 to	 do	 any	 stupid	 thing.	 The	 only	 joy	 is	 that	 it	 will	 bring
respectability.
Self-cultivation	 is	nothing	but	another	name	for	ego-cultivation.	 It	 is	not	a	real
path.	 In	 fact,	no	 real	path	 is	needed.	 It	 looks	 like	a	 long	 long,	arduous	path;	 it
needs	many	lives.
The	 people	who	have	 been	 preaching	 self-cultivation	 know	perfectly	well	 that
one	 life	 is	not	enough;	otherwise	 they	will	be	exposed.	So	 they	 imagine	many
many	 lives,	 a	 long,	 arduous	 journey	 of	 many	 lives.	 Then	 finally,	 after	 an
unimaginable	 time,	 you	 arrive.	 In	 fact,	 you	 never	 arrive.	 You	 cannot	 arrive
because	you	are	already	there.	Hence	this	very	idea	of	a	path	leading	to	a	goal	is
meaningless.
Try	to	understand	the	paradox;	it	is	very	significant	in	understanding	the	spirit	of
Zen.
ZEN	IS	NOT	A	WAY,	IS	NOT	A	PATH.	Hence	they	call	it	the	gateless	gate,	the
pathless	 path,	 the	 effortless	 effort,	 the	 actionless	 action.	 They	 use	 these
contradictory	terms	just	to	point	towards	a	certain	truth:	that	a	path	means	there
is	a	goal	and	the	goal	has	to	be	in	the	future.	You	are	here,	the	goal	is	there,	and
between	you	and	the	goal	a	path	is	needed,	a	bridge,	to	join	you.	The	very	idea
of	a	path	means	you	have	yet	to	arrive	home,	that	you	are	not	at	home	already.
The	second	path	--	 the	pathless	path,	 the	path	of	enlightenment	--	has	a	 totally
different	 revelation	 to	make,	 a	 totally	 different	 declaration	 of	 immense	 value:
that	 you	 are	 already	 it.	 "AH,	 THIS!"	 There	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 no	 need	 to	 go.
There	is	NO	ONE	to	go.	We	are	already	enlightened.	Then	only	can	it	happen	in
an	instant	--	because	it	is	a	question	of	awakening.
For	 example,	 if	 you	 have	 fallen	 asleep	 and	 you	 are	 dreaming...you	 can	 dream
that	you	are	on	the	moon.	Do	you	think	that	if	somebody	wakes	you	up	you	will
have	to	come	back	from	the	moon?	Then	it	will	 take	time.	If	you	have	already
reached	 the	moon,	 then	you	will	have	 to	come	back	and	 it	will	 take	 time.	The
airship	may	not	be	available	right	now.
There	may	 be	 no	 tickets	 available;	 it	 may	 be	 full.	 But	 you	 can	 be	 awakened
because	it	is	only	a	dream	that	you	are	on	the	moon.	In	fact	you	are	in	your	bed,
in	 your	 home:	 you	 had	 not	 gone	 anywhere.	 Just	 a	 little	 shaking	 and	 you	 are
suddenly	back	--	back	from	your	dreams.
The	world	 is	 only	 a	 dream.	We	 need	 not	 go	 anywhere;	we	 have	 always	 been
here;	we	ARE	here	and	we	are	going	to	be	here.	But	we	can	fall	asleep	and	we
can	dream.
The	All-Indian	National	Guard	was	out	on	maneuvers.	They	were	about	to	begin
a	mock	battle	between	the	"red"	team	and	the	"blue"	team	when	they	received	a
telegram	from	Delhi:	"Because	of	recent	budget	cuts	we	cannot	supply	weapons
or	ammunition,	but	please	continue	with	your	battle	for	training	purposes."
The	General	called	his	troops	together	and	said,	"We	will	simulate	the	battle.	If
you	are	within	a	hundred	yards	of	the	enemy,	point	your	arm	and	shout	'BANG-
BANG'	for	a	rifle.	If	you	are	within	fifty	feet,	throw	your	arms	over	your	head
and	 shout	 'BOOM'	 for	 a	 hand	 grenade.	 If	 you	 are	within	 five	 feet,	wave	 your
arms	and	shout	'SLASH-SLASH'	for	a	bayonet."
Private	 Abul	 was	 put	 on	 scout	 patrol,	 and	 apparently	 all	 the	 action	 went	 in
another	 direction.	He	was	 out	 for	 three	 days	 and	 three	 nights,	 but	 did	 not	 see
another	person.
On	 the	 fourth	 day	Abul	was	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree,	 discouraged,	when	 he	 saw	 a
figure	 coming	 across	 the	 hill	 in	 his	 direction.	 He	 got	 down	 on	 his	 hands	 and
knees	 and	 crawled	 through	 the	mud	 and	weeds,	 as	 he	 had	 been	 trained.	 Sure
enough,	it	was	a	soldier	from	the	other	team.
Abul	raised	his	arm	and	shouted	"BANG-BANG!"	but	he	got	no	response.	So	he
ran	up	closer,	threw	his	arm	over	his	head,	and	shouted	"BOOM!"	very	loudly.
The	 other	 soldier	 did	 not	 even	 turn	 in	 his	 direction.	 So	 he	 ran	 right	 up	 to	 the
soldier	and	shouted	in	his	ear
"SLASH-SLASH!	SLASH-SLASH!"	but	still	he	got	no	reaction.
Abul	was	 angry.	He	 grabbed	 the	 other	 soldier	 by	 the	 arm	 and	 shouted,	 "Hey!
You	 are	 not	 playing	 according	 to	 the	 rules.	 I	 went	 'BANG-BANG,'	 I	 shouted
'BOOM,'	and	 I	came	 right	up	 to	you	and	said	 'SLASH-SLASH,'	and	you	have
not	even	indicated	that	you	have	seen	me	yet."
At	this	point,	the	other	soldier	wheeled	around	to	Abul	and	said	in	a	deep	voice,
"RUMBLE-RUMBLE,	I	am	a	tank!"
This	is	the	situation.	You	are	not	what	you	think	you	are,	you	are	not	what	you
believe	you	are.	All	your	beliefs	are	dreams.	Maybe	you	have	been	dreaming	for
so	long	that	they	appear	almost	like	realities.
So	the	question	is	not	of	self-cultivation:	the	question	is	of	enlightenment.
Zen	believes	in	sudden	enlightenment	because	Zen	believes	that	you	are	already
enlightened;	 just	 a	 certain	 situation	 is	 needed	which	 can	wake	 you	 up.	 Just	 a
little	alarm	may	do	the	work.	If	you	are	a	little	alert,	just	a	little	alarm	and	you
are	suddenly	awake.
And	all	the	dream	with	all	its	long	long	desires,	journeys,	kingdoms,	mountains,
oceans...they	have	all	disappeared	in	a	single	instant.
This	beautiful	story:
THE	ANCIENTS	SAID:
"(SELF-)CULTIVATION	TAKES	AN	UNIMAGINABLE	TIME...."
It	 is	 bound	 to	 take	 an	 unimaginable	 time	 because	 you	 will	 be	 fighting	 with
shadows.	You	cannot	conquer	them,	you	cannot	destroy	them	either.	In	fact,	the
more	you	fight	with	them,	the	more	you	believe	in	their	existence.	If	you	fight
with	 your	 own	 shadow,	 do	 you	 think	 there	 is	 any	 possibility	 of	 your	 ever
becoming	 victorious?	 It's	 impossible.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 because	 the	 shadow	 is
stronger	 than	you	 that	 the	victory	 is	 impossible.	 Just	 the	 contrary:	 the	 shadow
has	NO	power,	it	has	NO	existence,	and	you	start	fighting	with	something	which
is	non-existential	--	how	can	you	win?	You	will	be	dissipating	your	energy.	You
will	become	 tired	and	 the	 shadow	will	 remain	unaffected.	 It	will	not	get	 tired.
You	cannot	kill	it,	you	cannot	burn	it,	you	cannot	even	escape	from	it.	The	faster
you	run,	the	faster	it	comes	behind	you.
The	only	way	 to	get	 rid	of	 it	 is	 to	SEE	 that	 it	 is	not	 there	at	all.	Seeing	 that	a
shadow	 is	 a	 shadow	 is	 liberation.	 Just	 seeing,	 no	 cultivation!	 And	 once	 the
shadows	 disappear,	 your	 life	 has	 a	 luminosity	 of	 its	 own.	Certainly	 there	will
arise	 great	 perfume,	 but	 it	 will	 not	 be	 something	 cultivated;	 it	 will	 not	 be
something	painted	from	the	outside.
That's	the	difference	between	a	saint	and	a	sage.	A	saint	follows	the	path	of	self-
cultivation.	He	practices	non-violence,	like	Mahatma	Gandhi;	he	practices	truth,
truthfulness;	 he	 practices	 sincerity,	 honesty.	 But	 these	 are	 all	 practices.	 And
whenever	you	are	practicing	non-violence,	what	are	you	doing?	What	 is	 really
happening	 inside	 you?	 You	 must	 be	 repressing	 violence.	 When	 you	 are
practicing	--	when	you	HAVE	to	practice	--	truth,	what	does	it	mean?	It	simply
means	untruth	arises	in	you	and	you	repress	it	and	you	go	against	it,	and	you	say
the	truth.	But	the	untruth	has	not	disappeared	from	your	being.	You	can	push	it
downwards	into	the	very	basement	of	your	being;	you	can	throw	it	into	the	deep
darkness	 of	 the	 unconscious.	You	 can	 become	 completely	 oblivious	 of	 it.	You
can	forget	that	it	exists,	but	it	exists	and	it	is	bound	to	function	from	those	deep,
dark	depths	of	your	being	in	such	a	subtle	way	that	you	will	never	be	aware	that
you	are	still	 in	 its	grip	 --	 in	 fact,	 far	more	so	 than	before	because	when	 it	was
consciously	felt	you	were	not	so	much	in	its	grip.	Now	the	enemy	has	become
hidden.
That's	 my	 observation	 of	 Mahatma	 Gandhi.	 He	 observed,	 cultivated	 non-
violence;	but	I	have	looked	deeply	into	his	life	and	he	is	one	of	the	most	violent
men	this	century	has	known.	But	his	violence	is	very	polished;	his	violence	is	so
sophisticated	 that	 it	 looks	almost	 like	non-violence.	And	his	violence	has	 such
subtle	ways	 that	you	cannot	detect	 it	easily.	 It	comes	 from	 the	back	door;	 it	 is
never	at	the	front	door.	You	will	not	find	it	in	his	drawing-room;	it	is	not	there.	It
has	 started	 living	 somewhere	 in	 the	 servants'	quarters	at	 the	back	of	 the	house
where	nobody	ever	goes,	but	it	goes	on	pulling	his	strings	from	there.
For	example,	if	ordinarily	you	are	angry,	you	are	angry	with	the	person	who	has
provoked	it.	Mahatma	Gandhi	would	be	angry	with	himself,	not	with	the	person.
He	would	turn	his	anger	upon	himself;	he	would	make	it	introverted.	Now	it	is
very	difficult	to	detect	it.	He	would	go	on	a	fast,	he	would	become	suicidal,	he
would	start	torturing	himself.	And	in	a	subtle	way	he	would	torture	the	other	by
torturing	himself.
In	his	ashram,	if	somebody	was	found	drinking	tea....	Now	tea	is	so	innocent,	but
it	was	a	sin	in	Mahatma	Gandhi's	ashram.	These	ashrams	exist	by	creating	guilt
in	 people;	 they	 don't	miss	 any	 opportunity	 to	 create	 guilt.	 That	 is	 their	 trade-
secret,	so	no	opportunity	has	to	be	missed.	Even	tea	is	enough;	it	has	to	be	used.
If	somebody	is	found	drinking	tea,	he	is	a	sinner.	He	is	committing	a	crime	--	far
more	 than	 a	 crime,	 because	 a	 sin	 is	 something	 far	 deeper	 than	 a	 crime.	 If
somebody	was	found....
And	people	used	to	drink	tea.	They	would	drink	tea	in	hiding;	they	had	to	hide.
Just	to	drink	tea	they	had	to	be	thieves,	deceivers,	hypocrites!	That's	what	your
so-called	 religions	 have	 done	 to	millions	 of	 people.	 Rather	 than	making	 them
spiritual	they	have	simply	made	them,	reduced	them	to	hypocrites.
They	would	pretend	that	they	didn't	drink	tea,	but	once	in	a	while	they	would	be
found	red-handed.	And	Gandhi	was	searching,	looking;	he	had	agents	planted	to
find	out	who	was	going	against	the	rules.	And	whenever	somebody	was	found	he
would	be	called...and	Gandhi	would	go	on	a	fast	to	punish	himself.
"What	kind	of	logic	is	this?"	you	will	ask.	It	is	a	very	simple	logic.	In	India	it	has
been	followed	for	centuries.	The	trick	is	that	Gandhi	used	to	say,	"I	must	not	yet
be	 a	 perfect	 Master,	 that's	 why	 a	 disciple	 can	 deceive	 me.	 So	 I	 must	 purify
myself.	 You	 could	 deceive	me	 because	 I	 am	 not	 yet	 perfect.	 If	 I	 was	 perfect
nobody	could	deceive	me.	How	can	you	imagine	deceiving	a	perfect	Master?	So
there	is	some	imperfection	in	me."
Look	at	the	humbleness!	And	he	would	torture	himself;	he	would	go	on	a	fast.
Now	Gandhi	is	fasting	because	you	have	taken	a	cup	of	tea.	How	will	YOU	feel?
His	three	days'	fast	for	you,	just	for	a	single	cup	of	tea!	It	will	be	too	heavy	on
you.	 If	he	had	hit	you	on	 the	head	 it	would	not	have	been	so	heavy.	 If	he	had
insulted	you,	punished	you,	told	you	to	go	on	a	fast	for	three	days,	it	would	have
been	 far	 simpler	 --	 and	 far	 more	 compassionate.	 But	 the	 old	 man	 himself	 is
fasting,	 torturing	himself,	and	you	are	condemned	by	every	eye	 in	 the	ashram.
Everybody	 is	 looking	 at	 you	 as	 a	 great	 sinner:	 "It	 is	 because	of	YOU	 that	 the
Master	is	suffering.	And	just	for	a	cup	of	tea?	How	low	you	have	fallen!"
And	 the	 person	 would	 go	 and	 touch	 his	 feet	 and	 cry	 and	 weep,	 but	 Gandhi
wouldn't	listen.	He	had	to	purify	himself.
This	is	all	violence;	I	don't	call	it	non-violence.	It	is	violence	with	a	vengeance,
but	in	such	a	subtle	way	that	it	is	very	difficult	to	detect.	Even	Gandhi	may	not
have	been	aware	at	 all	of	what	he	was	doing	 --	because	he	was	not	practicing
awareness,	he	was	practicing	non-violence.
You	 can	 go	 on	 practicing...then	 there	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 to	 be
practiced.	And	when	will	you	be	able	to	get	out	of	all	that	is	wrong	in	your	life?
It	will	take	an	unimaginable	time.	And	then,	too,	do	you	think	you	will	be	out	of
it?	It	is	not	possible;	you	will	not	be	out	of	it.
I	have	never	seen	anybody	arriving	at	truth	by	self-cultivation.	In	fact,	the	people
who	 go	 for	 self-cultivation	 are	 not	 very	 intelligent	 people	 because	 they	 have
missed	the	most	fundamental	insight:	that	we	are	not	going	anywhere,	that	God
is	 not	 something	 to	 be	 achieved;	 God	 is	 already	 the	 CASE	 in	 you.	 You	 are
pregnant	 with	 God,	 you	 are	made	 of	 the	 stuff	 called	 God.	 Nothing	 has	 to	 be
achieved	--	only	a	certain	awareness,	a	SELF-awareness.
There	is	an	unusual	store	in	New	York	where	one	can	buy	exotic	foods	from	all
over	the	world.
Mulla	Nasruddin	visited	this	store	recently.	He	found	rare	tropical	fruits	from	the
jungles	 of	 South	 America	 and	 many	 strange	 delicacies	 from	 Africa	 and	 the
Middle	East.
In	one	corner	he	found	a	counter	with	several	trays	of	human	brains.	There	were
politicians'	brains	at	$1	per	pound,	engineers'	brains	at	$2	per	pound,	and	there
was	one	tray	Of	saints'	brains	at	$50	per	pounce.
Since	 all	 the	 brains	 looked	 very	 much	 alike,	 he	 asked	 the	 man	 behind	 the
counter,	"Why	do	you	charge	so	much	more	for	the	saints'	brains?"
The	man	peered	out	 from	behind	his	glasses	and	answered,	 "Do	you	have	any
idea	how	many	saints	we	have	to	go	through	to	get	a	pound	of	brains?"
My	observation	of	your	so-called	saints	is	exactly	the	same.	I	don't	think	they	are
very	 intelligent	 people	 --	 basically	 stupid,	 because	 unless	 one	 is	 stupid	 one
cannot	follow	the	path	of	self-cultivation.	It	APPEARS	only	as	a	path;	it	is	not.
And	it	is	tedious	and	it	is	long;	in	fact,	it	is	unending.
You	can	change	one	habit;	it	will	start	asserting	itself	in	something	else.	You	can
close	one	door	and	another	door	immediately	opens.	By	the	time	you	close	that
door	a	third	door	is	bound	to	open	--	because	basically	you	remain	the	same,	the
same	old	unconscious	person.	Trying	to	be	humble	you	will	be	simply	becoming
more	and	more	egoistic	and	nothing	else.	Your	humbleness	will	be	simply	a	new
way	 of	 fulfilling	 your	 ego.	 Deep	 down	 you	 will	 imagine	 yourself	 to	 be	 the
humblest	person	in	the	world	--	there	is	nobody	who	is	more	humble	than	you.
Now,	 this	 is	 ego	 speaking	 a	 new	 language,	 but	 the	meaning	 is	 the	 same.	 The
language	 is	 changed	 but	 the	 meaning	 is	 the	 same;	 translated	 into	 a	 different
language	it	does	not	change.	First	you	were	the	greatest	man	in	the	world,	now
you	 are	 the	 humblest	 man	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 you	 remain	 special,	 you	 remain
extraordinary,	 you	 remain	 superior.	 First	 you	were	 this,	 now	 you	 are	 that,	 but
deep	down	nothing	has	changed.	Nothing	can	ever	change	by	self-cultivation.
A	man	spent	 thousands	of	dollars	going	 from	doctor	 to	doctor	 trying	 to	 find	a
cure	for	his	insomnia.	Finally	a	doctor	was	able	to	help	him.
"You	must	be	terribly	relieved,"	said	one	of	his	friends	sympathetically.
"You	 said	 it!"	 replied	 the	 former	 insomniac.	 "Why,	 sometimes	 I	 lie	 awake	 all
night	thinking	of	how	I	used	to	suffer."
So	what	has	changed?	Self-cultivation	only	gives	you	a	deception:	the	deception
that	something	is	happening,	that	you	are	doing	something,	that	something	great
is	on	the	way;	that	if	not	today,	tomorrow	it	is	going	to	happen.
Hornstein	manufactured	coats,	but	business	was	so	bad	the	poor	man	could	not
sleep.
"Count	sheep,"	advised	Slodnick,	his	friend.	"It	is	the	best-known	cure."
"What	can	I	lose?"	said	Hornstein.	"I	will	try	tonight."
The	next	morning	he	looked	more	bleary-eyed	than	ever.
"What	happened?"	asked	Slodnick.
"Sheep	I	could	count,"	moaned	Hornstein.	"I	counted	up	to	fifty	thousand.	Then
I	 sheared	 the	 sheep	 and	 made	 up	 fifty	 thousand	 overcoats.	 Then	 came	 the
problem	 that	 kept	me	 awake	 all	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 night:	 where	 could	 I	 get	 fifty
thousand	linings?"
No	such	things	are	going	to	help	because	if	the	MIND	is	the	same,	it	will	go	on
creating	 the	 same	 problem	 in	 different	 ways.	 Basically	 the	 roots	 have	 to	 be
transformed;	just	pruning	the	leaves	is	not	going	to	help.	And	self-cultivation	is
only	pruning	of	the	leaves.
THE	ANCIENTS	SAID:
"(SELF-)CULTIVATION	 TAKES	 AN	 UNIMAGINABLE	 TIME	 (WHILE)
ENLIGHTENMENT	IN	AN	INSTANT	IS	ATTAINED."
ENLIGHTENMENT	 IS	 ATTAINED	 IN	 A	 SINGLE	 MOMENT.	 Why?	 --
because	you	are	already	enlightened.	You	have	simply	forgotten	it.	You	have	to
be	reminded,	that's	all.
The	function	of	the	Master	is	to	remind	you,	not	to	give	you	a	path	but	to	give
you	a	 remembrance;	not	 to	give	you	methods	of	 cultivation,	not	 to	give	you	a
character,	virtue,	but	only	awareness,	intelligence,	awakening.
In	a	single	moment	it	can	be	attained	because	you	have	never	lost	it	in	the	first
place.	You	are	dreaming	that	you	are	unenlightened.	You	can	dream	you	are	in
heaven,	you	can	dream	you	are	in	hell.	And	you	know!	--	you	dream	sometimes
you	are	in	heaven	and	sometimes	in	hell.	In	the	morning	you	can	be	in	heaven
and	 by	 the	 evening	 you	 can	 be	 in	 hell.	 One	 moment	 you	 can	 be	 in	 heaven,
another	moment	you	can	be	in	hell.	It	all	depends	on	you.	It	is	something	to	do
with	your	psyche;	it	is	not	something	outside	you.
A	man	died,	arrived	at	the	Pearly	Gates,	and	was	shown	by	St.	Peter	to	a	waiting
room.
He	sat	there,	naturally	anxious	to	know	whether	he	would	be	sent	to	Heaven	or
to	Hell.
The	door	opened	and	a	famous	saint	walked	in.
The	man	rejoiced,	"I	must	be	in	Heaven!"
Just	then	the	door	opened	again	and	a	famous	prostitute	walked	in.	The	man	was
confused.	"In	that	case	I	must	be	in	Hell!"	he	thought.
While	he	was	still	wondering,	the	saint	grabbed	the	prostitute	and	started	making
love	to	her.	The	man,	flabbergasted,	ran	to	St.	Peter	and	asked,	"You	MUST	tell
me:	is	this	Heaven	or	Hell?"
"Can't	you	see?"	answered	St.	Peter.	"It	is	Heaven	for	him	and	Hell	for	her!"
Heaven	and	hell	are	not	geographical;	they	are	not	something	outside	you,	they
are	something	that	belongs	to	your	interiority.	If	you	are	awake,	then	you	are	in	a
totally	 different	 universe;	 it	 is	 as	 if	 in	 your	 awakening	 the	 whole	 existence
becomes	awakened.	It	 takes	a	new	color,	a	new	flavor,	a	new	fragrance.	When
you	are	asleep,	the	whole	existence	sleeps	with	you.	It	all	depends	on	you.
So	 the	 question	 is	 not	 of	 cultivating	 any	 character,	 of	 becoming	 virtuous,	 of
becoming	a	saint.	The	question	is	how	to	come	out	of	dreams,	how	to	come	out
of	the	past	and	the	future,	how	to	be	just	herenow.
That's	what	enlightenment	is...	"AH,	THIS!"
When	 Alice	 was	 at	 the	 Mad	 Hatter's	 tea	 party,	 she	 noticed	 that	 no	 jam	 was
available.	She	asked	for	jam,	and	the	Mad	Hatter	said,	"Jam	is	served	every	other
day."
Alice	protested,	"But	there	was	no	jam	yesterday	either!"
"That's	right,"	said	the	Mad	Hatter.	"The	rule	is:	always	jam	yesterday	and	jam
tomorrow,	never	jam	today...because	today	is	not	every	other	day!"
And	 that's	how	you	are	 living:	 jam	yesterday,	 jam	 tomorrow,	never	 jam	 today.
And	that's	where	jam	is!	So	you	only	imagine;	you	go	on	in	a	drugged,	sleepy
state.	You	have	forgotten	completely	that	this	moment	is	the	ONLY	real	moment
there	is.	And	if	you	want	to	have	any	contact	with	reality,	wake	up	herenow!
Hence	this	strange	idea	of	Zen	that	enlightenment	happens	in	an	instant.	Many
people	become	puzzled:	"How	can	it	happen	in	an	instant?"	Indians	particularly
become	very	puzzled	because	they	have	the	idea	that	first	you	have	to	get	rid	of
all	 the	past	karmas,	and	now	this	foolish	idea	has	reached	to	the	West.	Now	in
the	West	people	are	talking	about	past	karma:	first	you	have	to	get	rid	of	the	past
karma.
Do	you	know	how	long	the	past	is?	It	is	eternity!	And	if	you	are	to	get	rid	of	all
past	 karma	 you	 are	 never	 going	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it	 --	 that	 much	 is	 certain.	 And
meanwhile	you	will	be	creating	other	karmas,	and	the	past	will	go	on	becoming
bigger	and	bigger	every	day.
If	 that	 is	 the	only	way	out	 --	 that	one	has	 to	get	 rid	of	 all	past	karmas	 --	 then
there	is	no	possibility	of	enlightenment.	Then	there	has	never	been	any	Buddha
and	there	is	never	going	to	be	any	Buddha;	it	is	impossible.	Just	think	of	all	the
past	lives	and	all	the	karmas	that	you	have	built	up	--	first	you	have	to	get	rid	of
them.	And	how	are	you	going	to	get	rid	of	them?	In	trying	to	get	rid	of	them	you
will	have	to	create	other	karmas.	And	this	is	a	vicious	circle.
"And	 to	 be	 totally	 enlightened,"	 the	 people	 who	 believe	 in	 the	 philosophy	 of
karma	say,
"not	only	are	you	to	get	rid	of	the	bad	karmas,	you	have	to	get	rid	of	the	good
karmas	too
--	because	bad	karmas	create	iron	chains	and	good	karmas	create	golden	chains.
But	chains	are	chains,	and	you	have	to	get	rid	of	all	kinds	of	chains."	Now	things
become	even	more	complicated.	And	how	can	you	get	rid	of	bad	karmas?	If	you
ask	them	they	say,	"Create	good	karma	to	get	rid	of	bad	karmas."	And	how	can
you	get	rid	of	good	karmas?	Then	the	saints	become	angry.	They	say,	"Stop!	You
are	 arguing	 too	much.	This	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 argument.	Believe,	 trust,	 have
faith!"
It	 is	 not	 really	 a	 question	 of	 getting	 rid	 of	 karmas.	When	 in	 the	morning	 you
wake	up,	do	you	have	to	get	rid	of	all	the	dreams	first?	You	have	been	a	thief	in
the	dreams,	a	murderer,	a	rapist,	or	a	saint...you	can	be	all	kinds	of	 things	 in	a
dream.	Do	you	have	to	get	rid	of	all	those	dreams	first?	The	MOMENT	you	are
awake	you	are	out	of	all	those	dreams	--	they	are	finished!	There	is	no	question
of	getting	rid	of	them.
That	is	the	essential	message	of	Zen:	that	you	need	not	be	worried	about	the	past
karmas;	they	were	all	dream	acts.	Just	wake	up	and	they	are	all	finished.
But	we	are	sleepy	people	and	anything	that	fits	with	our	sleep	has	great	appeal.
We	listen	only	according	to	our	state	of	mind.	The	whole	world	is	asleep.	There
is	 rarely,	once	 in	a	while,	a	person	who	 is	not	asleep,	who	 is	awake.	When	he
speaks	 to	 you	 there	 is	 misunderstanding,	 obviously.	 He	 speaks	 from	 his
standpoint,	 from	his	 awakening,	 and	he	 says,	 "Forget	 all	 about	your	dreams	 --
that	is	all	nonsense!	Good	and	bad,	they	are	all	alike;	saint	and	sinner,	they	are
all	alike.	Simply	wake	up!	Don't	be	worried	that	first	you	have	to	become	a	saint
in	your	dream,	 that	 you	have	 to	 change	your	being	 a	 sinner	 into	being	 a	 saint
first,	 then	 you	 can	wake	up.	Why	go	by	 such	 a	 long	 route?	You	 can	wake	up
directly!	 You	 can	 wake	 up	 while	 you	 are	 committing	 a	 sin;	 while	 you	 are
murdering	somebody	in	your	dream	you	can	wake	up.	There	is	no	problem.
In	fact,	 if	you	are	a	saint	you	may	not	like	to	wake	up.	A	murderer	will	find	it
easier	to	wake	up	because	he	has	nothing	to	lose,	but	the	saint	has	great	prestige
to	lose.	Maybe	he	is	being	garlanded	and	a	Nobel	prize	is	being	given	and	people
are	clapping	and	touching	his	feet...and	suddenly	the	alarm	goes.	Is	this	the	time
for	 the	 alarm?	 Can't	 the	 alarm	 wait	 a	 little	 more?	When	 things	 are	 going	 so
sweetly	and	beautifully	the	alarm	can	wait	a	little.
A	murderer	 has	 nothing	 to	 lose.	He	 is	 already	 suffering;	 he	 is	 in	 a	 deep	 inner
torture.	 In	 fact,	he	will	 feel	 relieved	 if	 the	alarm	goes	off.	He	will	 feel	a	great
freedom	coming	out	of	that	nightmare.
Hence	it	happens	more	often	that	sinners	wake	up	earlier	than	the	saints,	because
the	sinners	go	through	nightmares	and	saints	are	having	such	sweet	dreams.	Who
wants	 to	wake	 up	when	you	 are	 a	 king	with	 a	 golden	 palace	 and	 enjoying	 all
kinds	of	things?
Maybe	you	are	in	paradise	in	your	dream.
But	one	thing	is	certain:	when	you	are	asleep	you	have	a	certain	language	--	the
language	 of	 sleep	 --	 and	 you	 can	 understand	 other	 people	who	 are	 asleep	 and
speak	 the	 same	 language.	 That's	 why	 the	 philosophy	 of	 karma	 became	 so
important,	so	prevalent,	so	dominant.	It	has	ruled	almost	all	the	religions	of	the
world	in	different	ways.
In	 India	 there	 have	 been	 three	 great	 religions:	 Hinduism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism.
They	 disagree	 on	 every	 point	 EXCEPT	 on	 the	 philosophy	 of	 karma;	 they
disagree	on	EVERY
point	possible.	They	disagree	on	the	existence	of	God,	they	disagree	even	on	the
existence	of	the	soul,	they	disagree	on	the	existence	of	the	world,	but	they	don't
disagree	 on	 the	 philosophy	 of	 karma.	 It	 must	 have	 some	 deep	 appeal	 for	 the
sleeping	mind.	And	these	people	cannot	understand	Zen.
When	a	Hindu	pundit	or	a	Jaina	MUNI	comes	to	me	he	is	very	much	puzzled.
He	says,
"Are	 you	 teaching	 instant,	 sudden	 enlightenment?	 Then	 what	 about	Mahavira
who	had	to	struggle	for	many	many	lives	to	become	enlightened?"
I	say	to	them,	"Those	stories	are	invented	by	you.	The	Mahavira	that	YOU	talk
about	 is	 an	 invention	of	your	dream;	you	don't	know	about	 the	 real	Mahavira.
How	can	you	know	about	his	past	lives?	You	don't	even	know	about	YOUR	past
lives!"	And	there	is	not	even	any	agreement	on	his	last	life	amongst	his	followers
--	what	to	say	about	his	past	lives?
On	such	factual	matters...for	example,	whether	he	was	married	or	not:	one	sect
of	Jainas	says	he	was	not	married,	because	to	them	a	man	like	Mahavira	getting
married	looks	insulting,	humiliating.	And	the	other	sect	of	the	Jainas	says	he	was
not	only	married,	but	he	had	a	daughter	too.	Now	that	is	going	too	far	--	having	a
daughter!	That	means	he	must	have	 indulged	 in	sex	--	because	at	 that	 time	the
story	of	Jesus	had	not	happened.
Virgin	birth	was	not	yet	known!
They	can't	agree...the	disciples	can't	agree	about	Mahavira's	 last	 life	on	 factual
matters	like	marriage,	daughter,	etcetera,	and	they	talk	about	his	past	lives!
Anything	that	helps	you	to	go	on	sleeping,	postponing,	appeals.	"Even	Mahavira
had	to	work	hard	for	many	many	lives,	so	how	can	WE	become	enlightened	in
this	life?	It	will	take	many	lives,	so	there	is	no	need	to	do	anything	right	now.	We
can	wait!	And	it	 is	NOT	going	to	happen	right	now	anyway;	it	will	 take	many
many	 lives.	 Meanwhile,	 why	 not	 do	 other	 things?	 Accumulate	 more	 money,
prestige,	power.	Do	other	things:	eat,	drink,	be	merry	--	because	this	is	not	going
to	 happen,	 this	 enlightenment,	 right	 now;	 it	 will	 take	 many	 many	 lives.	 And
meanwhile	you	cannot	just	go	on	sitting	and	waiting;	one	has	to	do	something."
Sleeping	 people	 can	 understand	 a	 language	 which	 appeals	 to	 their	 sleep.	 We
understand	only	that	which	triggers	some	process	in	our	being.
The	Sisters	of	Mercy	were	about	to	be	sent	as	missionaries	out	into	the	world	of
sin.
Mother	Superior	had	one	last	question	to	ask	each	nun	before	deciding	which	of
them	were	best	fitted	for	the	hazardous	tasks	ahead.
"Sister	Agatha,"	 she	asked	 the	 first.	 "What	would	you	do	 if	you	were	walking
along	 a	 deserted	 street	 at	 night	 and	 a	 strange	man	 approached	 you	 and	made
indecent	advances?"
"Oh,	Holy	Mother	of	God!"	gasped	the	nun.	"May	all	the	saints	forbid!	Why,	I
would	get	down	on	my	knees	and	pray	to	the	Holy	Virgin	that	my	soul	might	be
saved."
Mother	 Superior	 noted	 that	 Sister	 Agatha	 might	 be	 better	 suited	 to	 more
domestic	work.
The	 same	 question	 was	 asked	 of	 Sister	 Agnes,	 who	 replied,	 "Why,	 I	 would
punch	him	in	the	nose...and	then	start	running	down	the	street	as	fast	as	I	could,
shouting	'Help,	help!'"
Mother	 Superior	 noted	 Sister	Agnes	 as	 one	 of	 the	 possible	 candidates	 for	 the
missionary	work.
Next	she	asked	Sister	Theresa,	who	began,	"Well,	first	I	would	pull	his	trousers
down...."
Mother	Superior	choked	a	little,	but	Sister	Theresa	continued.	"And	then	I	would
pull	my	dress	up,	and	then...."
"Sister	 Theresa,"	 interrupted	 the	 senior	 nun.	 "Now	what	 kind	 of	 an	 answer	 is
that?"
"Well,"	said	the	other,	"I	just	figure	that	I	can	run	faster	with	my	dress	up	than	he
can	with	his	trousers	down	!"
We	understand	only	that	which	we	CAN	understand.	The	sleeping	humanity	can
understand	 only	 certain	 things;	 it	 can	 HEAR	 only	 certain	 things.	 The	 other
things	 are	 not	 heard	 or	 even	 if	 heard	 they	 are	 not	 understood;	 they	 are
misunderstood.
Zen	has	been	misunderstood	very	much.	You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	even
Buddhists	don't	understand	Zen.
Many	 orthodox	 Buddhists	 have	 come	 to	 me	 asking	 why	 I	 emphasize	 Zen	 so
much,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 the	 main	 Buddhist	 tradition.	 That	 is	 true;	 the	 main
Buddhist	 tradition	 is	 against	 Zen.	 Zen	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 little	 outlandish,	 a	 little
eccentric,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 it	 brings	 such	 a	 totally	 new	 truth	 to	 you:
INSTANT	enlightenment	Never	has	any	other	 religion	emphasized	 it	 so	much:
that	you	are	capable	of	becoming	enlightened	right	now	--	it	is	all	up	to	you.
IF	 THE	 TRAINING	 IS	 EFFICIENT,	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 WILL	 BE
ATTAINED	IN
ONE	FINGERSNAP.
There	is	no	path	as	such,	but	there	is	a	certain	discipline	to	wake	you	up.	That	is
called
"training."	Training	has	nothing	 to	do	with	your	character	but	something	 to	do
with	 your	 consciousness.	 Training	 simply	 means	 a	 certain	 space,	 a	 certain
context	has	 to	be	created	around	you	in	which	awakening	is	easier	 than	falling
asleep	--	just	like	when	you	want	somebody	to	be	awake	you	throw	cold	water
into	his	eyes.	Not	that	you	teach	him	to	be	virtuous,	not	that	you	teach	him	to	be
non-violent	 --	 those	 things	 are	 not	 going	 to	 help	 him	 to	 be	 awake.	 But	 cold
water,	 that	 is	a	 totally	different	phenomenon;	 that	 is	creating	a	context.	Or	you
give	him	a	cup	of	 tea;	 that	helps	him	 to	wake	up.	Or	you	 tell	him	 to	 jog,	 run,
shout;	that	will	help	him	to	wake	up	more	quickly.
All	Zen	methods	are	like	that:	cold	water	thrown	in	your	eyes,	a	hammer	hit	on
your	head.	Zen	 is	 totally	different	 from	other	 religions.	 It	 does	not	 give	you	 a
certain	character;	it	certainly	gives	you	a	context.
IN	 DAYS	 GONE	 BY,	 CH'AN	 MASTER	 HUI	 CHUEH	 OF	 LANG	 YEH
MOUNTAIN,	 HAD	 A	WOMAN	 DISCIPLE	WHO	 CALLED	 ON	 HIM	 FOR
INSTRUCTION.	THE
MASTER	TAUGHT	HER	TO	EXAMINE	INTO	THE	SENTENCE:	"TAKE	NO
NOTICE."
NOW,	THIS	IS	CREATING	A	CONTEXT.	The	Master	told	her	to	meditate	on
this	small	sentence:	"Take	no	notice."	And	it	has	to	be	meditated	on	in	different
situations,	in	all	possible	situations.	It	has	not	to	be	forgotten	any	time;	it	has	to
be	remembered	continuously,	whatsoever	happens.
SHE	 FOLLOWED	 HIS	 INSTRUCTION	 STRICTLY	 WITHOUT
BACKSLIDING.
ONE	 DAY	 HER	 HOUSE	 CAUGHT	 FIRE,	 BUT	 SHE	 SAID:	 "TAKE	 NO
NOTICE."
Now,	this	is	creating	a	context.	This	is	real	training,	this	is	discipline.	The	house
is	on	fire	and	she	remembers	 the	 instruction:	"Take	no	notice."	It	 is	easy	when
the	house	is	not	on	fire	and	everything	is	running	smoothly,	well,	and	you	can	sit
silently	in	a	small	corner	you	have	made	in	the	house	to	meditate	--	then	you	can
say,	"Take	no	notice."	It	is	easy,	but	it	is	not	going	to	wake	you	up;	it	may	even
help	you	to	fall	asleep.	But	when	the	house	is	on	fire	it	is	difficult,	very	difficult.
Your	possessiveness	is	at	stake,	your	life	is	in	danger,	your	security	is	gone,	your
safety	is	gone.	You	may	be	just	a	beggar	the	next	day	on	the	street	with	nothing
left
But	the	woman	must	have	been	a	real	disciple.
SHE	SAID:	"TAKE	NO	NOTICE."
And	not	only	did	she	say	it,	she	took	no	notice.	She	relaxed,	as	if	nothing	was
happening.
And	the	moment	you	can	see	your	house	on	fire	and	can	see	it	as	if	nothing	is
happening,	nothing	happens.	The	house	will	be	burned,	but	you	will	come	out	of
that	experience	for	the	first	time	with	clarity,	with	no	dust	on	your	mirror,	with
great	 insight.	 Everything	 is	 on	 fire!	 The	whole	 life	 is	 on	 fire	 because	 we	 are
dying	every	moment.	Nothing	is	secure,	nothing	is	safe.	We	only	go	on	believing
that	everything	is	secure	and	safe.	In	this	world	of	flux	and	change,	where	death
is	the	ultimate	end	of	everything,	how	can	there	be	any	security?
If	you	can	see	your	own	house	on	fire	and	go	on	meditating	silently,	relaxedly,	in
a	 deep	 let-go	 --	 take	 no	 notice	 --	 you	 will	 come	 out	 of	 it	 a	 totally	 different
person,	with	a	new	consciousness,	reborn.
ANOTHER	DAY,	HER	SON	FELL	INTO	THE	WATER	AND	WHEN	A
BYSTANDER	CALLED	HER,	SHE	SAID,	"TAKE	NO	NOTICE."
Now	even	more	difficult	 --	because	a	house	 is,	 after	 all,	 a	dead	 thing.	We	can
make	 another	 house,	 money	 can	 be	 earned	 again.	 But	 your	 son	 falls	 into	 the
water,	 is	 drowning...this	 is	 a	more	 difficult	 situation,	more	 attachment	 --	 your
own	son.	And	 for	 the	mother,	 the	 son	 is	her	extension,	part	of	her,	part	of	her
soul,	of	her	being.	Still	she	says,	"Take	no	notice."
SHE	OBSERVED	EXACTLY	HER	MASTER'S	INSTRUCTION	BY	LAYING
DOWN
ALL	CASUAL	THOUGHTS.
If	 this	 is	 possible...because	 these	 are	 the	 two	 problems	 in	 the	 world:
possessiveness	 of	 things	 and	 relationship	 with	 people.	 These	 are	 YOUR
problems	 too.	 That's	 where	 people	 are	 asleep:	 either	 they	 are	 possessive	with
things	or	 they	are	 in	heavy	relationships	with	people.	These	are	 the	 two	points
which	keep	you	clouded,	confused,	unaware.
She	 passed	 both	 the	 tests.	 And	 if	 you	 can	 pass	 these	 two	 things:	 if	 you	 can
become	aware	 that	you	possess	nothing....	Use	everything	but	possess	nothing,
and	relate	with	people	but	don't	become	part	of	any	relationship.
Relating	is	one	thing,	relationship	quite	another.	Relating	does	not	take	you	into
any	bondage;	relationship	is	a	bondage.	Love	people,	but	don't	be	jealous,	don't
be	possessive.
Relate	with	as	many	people	as	possible,	but	remain	free	and	let	them	also	be	free
of	you.
Don't	try	to	dominate	and	don't	allow	anybody	to	dominate	you	either.
Use	things,	but	remember:	you	come	into	the	world	with	empty	hands	and	you
will	go	from	the	world	again	with	empty	hands,	so	you	cannot	possess	anything.
If	 these	 two	 insights	 become	 clear	 and	 you	 start	 taking	 no	 note,	 all	 casual
thoughts	will	disappear	from	your	mind.	And	all	thoughts	are	casual,	no	thought
is	 essential.	 The	 essential	 is	 silence;	 thoughts	 are	 all	 casual.	 When	 thoughts
disappear,	the	essential	surfaces.	Great	silence	explodes	in	a	tremendous	melody.
And	that	experience	is	liberating,	that	experience	is	divine.
ONE	DAY,	AS	HER	HUSBAND	LIT	THE	FIRE	TO	MAKE	FRITTERS	OF
TWISTED
DOUGH,	SHE	THREW	INTO	THE	PAN	FULL	OF	BOILING	(VEGETABLE)
OIL	A	BATTER	WHICH	MADE	A	NOISE.
UPON	HEARING	THE	NOISE,	SHE	WAS	INSTANTLY	ENLIGHTENED.
THAT'S	 WHAT	 I	 CALL...if	 you	 are	 ready,	 if	 the	 context	 is	 ready,	 then
ANYTHING	 can	 trigger	 the	 process	 of	 enlightenment	 --	 ANYTHING.	 Just:
UPON	HEARING	THE	NOISE,	SHE	WAS	INSTANTLY	ENLIGHTENED.
Nothing	 special	 was	 happening,	 just	 an	 ordinary	 noise.	 You	 come	 across	 that
kind	of	noise	every	day	many	times	But	if	the	right	context	is	there,	you	are	in	a
right	space...and	she	was	in	a	right	space:	non-possessive,	unrelated	to	anything,
to	 any	 person,	 non-dominating.	 She	 was	 in	 a	 state	 of	 liberation,	 just	 on	 the
borderline.	One	step	more	and	she	would	move	into	the	world	of	the	Buddhas.
And	that	small	step	can	be	caused	by	anything	whatsoever.
UPON	HEARING	THE	NOISE....
That	noise	became	the	last	alarm,	the	last	straw	on	the	back	of	the	camel.
...SHE	WAS	 INSTANTLY	ENLIGHTENED.	THEN	SHE	THREW	THE	PAN
OF	OIL
ON	THE	GROUND,	CLAPPED	HER	HANDS	AND	LAUGHED.
Why	did	 she	do	 that:	CLAPPED	HER	HANDS	AND	LAUGHED?	When	one
becomes	enlightened,	 laughter	 is	 almost	 a	natural	by-product;	 spontaneously	 it
comes	 --	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	we	have	been	 searching	 and	 searching	 for
lives	 for	 something	 which	 was	 already	 there	 inside.	 Our	 whole	 effort	 was
ridiculous!	Our	whole	effort	was	absurd.
One	laughs	at	the	great	cosmic	joke.	One	laughs	at	the	sense	of	humor	that	God
must	have	or	the	existence:	that	we	have	it	with	us	already	and	we	are	searching
for	 it.	 One	 laughs	 at	 one's	 own	 ridiculous	 efforts,	 long	 long	 journeys,
pilgrimages,	 for	 something	which	was	 never	 lost	 in	 the	 first	 place.	Hence	 the
laughter,	hence	the	clapping.
THINKING	 SHE	 WAS	 INSANE,	 HER	 HUSBAND	 SCOLDED	 HER	 AND
SAID...
And	of	course,	anybody	who	is	still	asleep	seeing	somebody	suddenly	becoming
enlightened,	clapping	hands	and	laughing,	is	bound	to	think	that	the	person	has
gone	 insane.	 This	 breakthrough	 will	 look	 to	 the	 sleeping	 person	 like	 a
breakdown;	it	is	not	a	break-down.	But	the	sleeping	person	can't	help	it;	he	can
understand	only	according	to	his	values,	criterions.
...HE	 SCOLDED	HER	AND	SAID:	 "WHY	DO	YOU	DO	THIS?	ARE	YOU
MAD?"
SHE	REPLIED:	"TAKE	NO	NOTICE."
She	 continues:	 her	 meditation	 is	 still	 there.	 She	 is	 following	 her	 Master's
instruction	to	the	very	end.	The	husband	is	calling	her	mad	and	she	says:	"Take
no	notice."
The	 world	WILL	 call	 you	 mad.	 The	 world	 has	 always	 been	 calling	 Buddhas
mad.	Take	no	notice.	It	is	natural;	it	should	be	accepted	as	a	matter	of	course.
THEN	 SHE	 WENT	 TO	 MASTER	 HUI	 CHUEH	 AND	 ASKED	 HIM	 TO
VERIFY	HER
ACHIEVEMENT.
THE	MASTER'S	FUNCTIONS	ARE	MANY.	First:	to	help	you	to	wake	up,	to
provoke	you	into	an	awakening;	to	create	the	situation	in	which	sleep	becomes
more	and	more	difficult	and	awakening	becomes	more	and	more	easy;	and	when
for	 the	first	 time	you	ARE	awakened,	 to	confirm	it,	because	 it	 is	very	difficult
for	 the	 person	 himself.	 The	 territory	 is	 so	 unknown.	 The	 ego	 is	 lost,	 all	 old
values	 are	 gone,	 the	 old	 mind	 is	 no	more	 functioning.	 Everything	 is	 so	 new;
nothing	seems	to	be	continuous	with	the	old.	There	seems	to	be	no	way	to	judge,
evaluate,	be	certain.	One	is	in	deep	awe	and	wonder.	One	does	not	know	what	is
happening,	what	has	happened,	what	it	is	all	about.	One	is	simply	at	a	loss.
Hence	the	last	function	of	the	Master	is	to	confirm,	to	say,	"Yes,	this	is	it."
THE	 MASTER	 CONFIRMED	 THAT	 SHE	 HAD	 OBTAINED	 THE	 HOLY
FRUIT.
Zen	people	call	this	"the	holy	fruit,"	the	fruition,	the	flowering	--	coming	to	the
ultimate	awakening,	coming	to	the	ultimate	experience	of	yourself	and	existence.
But	 remember:	 it	 can	 only	 happen	 in	 the	 moment.	 It	 can	 only	 happen	 in	 the
instant.	It	can	only	happen	now	--	now	or	never.
You	will	 ask:	 "Then	why	all	 these	methods,	 trainings?"	They	 are	 just	 to	 bring
you	 back	 to	 the	 now.	 You	 have	 gone	 too	 far	 away	 in	 the	 memories	 and	 in
imagination.	 They	 are	 not	 to	 create	 any	 cultivation;	 they	 are	 not	 for	 self-
cultivation	but	for	bringing	you	back	home.
Here	 we	 are	 using	 all	 kinds	 of	 methods,	 and	 as	 many	 more	 people	 will	 be
coming	we	will	 be	 devising	 new	methods,	 because	 different	 people	will	 need
different	 methods.	 In	 the	 new	 commune	 we	 are	 going	 to	 have	 all	 possible
methods.	 It	 has	 never	 been	 tried	 on	 such	 a	 scale.	 Every	 religion	 has	 a	 few
methods,	but	we	are	going	to	have	ALL	the	methods	of	all	 the	religions	of	 the
past	and	of	all	the	religions	that	are	going	to	happen	in	the	future.
We	are	going	to	create	a	space	for	ALL	kinds	of	people,	not	for	any	particular
type.	The	old	religions	are	missing	in	that	way.
For	 example,	 only	 a	 particular	 type	 of	 person	 can	 be	 helped	 by	 Mahavira's
methods	--
only	the	type	who	belongs	to	Mahavira's	type	can	be	helped.	It	is	a	very	limited
methodology.	Mahavira	attained	to	the	holy	fruit;	he	taught	the	same	method	by
which	he	attained.	Jesus	had	his	own	method,	Mohammed	had	his	own	method.
So	no	religion	of	the	past	could	be	universal	because	it	belonged	to	a	certain	type
and	only	that	type	could	be	benefited	by	it.
Hence	one	problem	has	arisen:	you	may	be	born	in	a	Jaina	family	and	you	may
not	 be	 of	 the	 same	 type	which	 the	 Jaina	method	 can	 help.	 Then	 you	 are	 in	 a
difficulty;	your	whole	 life	will	be	a	wastage.	You	will	 try	 the	method;	 it	won't
suit	you	--	and	you	will	not	change	your	method.	You	will	think	it	is	because	of
your	past	karmas	that	the	method	is	not	working,	that	it	will	take	time.	You	will
rationalize.	 You	may	 be	 born	 in	 a	Hindu	 family	 and	Hindu	methods	may	 not
work.
There	are	so	many	types	of	people	in	the	world,	and	as	the	world	has	grown	and
people's	consciousnesses	have	grown,	more	and	more	new	types,	more	and	more
crossbreeds	 have	 come	 into	 existence	which	were	 never	 there	 before	 --	which
never	existed	 in	Mahavira's	 time,	which	never	existed	 in	Krishna's	 time.	There
are	many	new	types,	crossbreeds.	And	in	the	future	this	is	going	to	happen	more
and	more;	the	world	is	becoming	a	small	village.
My	effort	is	to	use	all	the	methods	of	the	past,	to	make	them	up-to-date,	to	make
them	contemporary,	and	to	create	new	methods	for	the	future	--	for	the	future	of
humanity.
Hence	what	 I	 am	 teaching	 is	neither	Hinduism	nor	Buddhism	nor	Christianity,
and	yet	I	am	teaching	the	essence	of	all	the	religions.
You	are	here	not	to	cultivate	a	certain	spiritual	ego	but	to	dissolve	all	the	ego,	to
dissolve	all	sleep.	You	are	here	to	wake	up.	The	situation	is	being	created	--	use
this	situation	as	totally	as	possible.
Remember	this	woman	who	was	meditating	on	"Take	no	notice."	Such	totality	is
needed.
The	house	is	on	fire	and	she	says:	"Take	no	notice."	Her	son	falls	into	the	water
and	she	says:	"Take	no	notice."	Her	husband	calls	her	mad	and	she	says:	"Take
no	notice."	Then	such	a	simple	meditation	 --	of	 taking	no	notice	 --	creates	 the
necessary	milieu	in	which	she	becomes	aflame,	afire.	Her	inner	being	explodes.
She	is	no	more	the	same	old	person;	she	is	reborn.	She	is	reborn	as	enlightened.
She	becomes	a	Buddha.
You	are	 all	Buddhas	 --	 sleeping,	 dreaming,	 but	 you	 are	Buddhas	 all	 the	 same.
My	function	is	not	to	MAKE	Buddhas	out	of	you,	because	you	are	already	that,
but	just	to	help	you	remember	it,	to	remind	you.
Ah,	This!
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Not	Knowing	is	the	Most	Intimate
10	January	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8001100
ShortTitle:
AHTHIS08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,
IS	AWARENESS	A	HIGHER	VALUE	THAN	LOVE?
Virendra,
THE	HIGHEST	PEAK	IS	THE	CULMINATION	of	all	 the	values:	 truth,	 love,
awareness,	 authenticity,	 totality.	At	 the	highest	 peak	 they	 are	 indivisible.	They
are	separate	only	 in	 the	dark	valleys	of	our	unconsciousness	They	are	separate
only	when	they	are	polluted,	mixed	with	other	things.	The	moment	they	become
pure	they	become	one;	the	more	pure,	the	closer	they	come	to	each	other.
For	example,	each	value	exists	on	many	planes;	each	value	is	a	ladder	of	many
rungs.
Love	is	lust	--	the	lowest	rung,	which	touches	hell;	and	love	is	also	prayer	--	the
highest	 rung,	which	 touches	 paradise.	And	 between	 these	 two	 there	 are	many
planes	easily	discernible.
In	lust,	love	is	only	one	percent;	ninety-nine	percent	are	other	things:	jealousies,
ego	trips,	possessiveness,	anger,	sexuality.	It	is	more	physical,	more	chemical;	it
has	nothing	deeper	than	that.	It	is	very	superficial,	not	even	skin-deep.
As	you	go	higher,	things	become	deeper;	they	start	having	new	dimensions.	That
which	was	only	physiological	starts	having	a	psychological	dimension	to	it.	That
which	was	nothing	but	 biology	 starts	 becoming	psychology.	We	 share	 biology
with	all	the	animals;	we	don't	share	psychology	with	all	the	animals.
When	 love	 goes	 still	 higher	 --	 or	 deeper,	 which	 is	 the	 same	 --	 then	 it	 starts
having	something	of	the	spiritual	in	it.	It	becomes	metaphysical.	Only	Buddhas,
Krishnas,	Christs,	they	know	that	quality	of	love.
Love	 is	 spread	all	 the	way	and	so	are	other	values.	When	 love	 is	one	hundred
percent	pure	you	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	love	and	awareness;	then
they	are	no	more	two.	You	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	love	and	God
even;	they	are	no	more	two.
Hence	Jesus'	statement	that	God	is	love.	He	makes	them	synonymous.	There	is
great	insight	in	it.
On	 the	 periphery	 everything	 appears	 separate	 from	 everything	 else;	 on	 the
periphery	 existence	 is	many.	 As	 you	 come	 closer	 to	 the	 center,	 the	manyness
starts	melting,	dissolving,	and	oneness	starts	arising.	At	the	center,	everything	is
one.
Hence	your	question,	Virendra,	is	right	only	if	you	don't	understand	the	highest
quality	of	love	and	awareness.	It	is	absolutely	irrelevant	if	you	have	any	glimpse
of	the	Everest,	of	the	highest	peak.
You	ask:	IS	AWARENESS	A	HIGHER	VALUE	THAN	LOVE?
There	is	nothing	higher	and	nothing	lower.	In	fact,	there	are	not	two	values	at	all.
These	 are	 the	 two	 paths	 from	 the	 valley	 leading	 to	 the	 peak.	 One	 path	 is	 of
awareness,	meditation:	 the	path	of	Zen	we	have	been	talking	about	 these	days.
And	the	other	is	the	path	of	love,	the	path	of	the	devotees,	the	BHAKTAS,	the
Sufis.	 These	 two	 paths	 are	 separate	 when	 you	 start	 the	 journey;	 you	 have	 to
choose.	Whichever	you	choose	 is	going	 to	 lead	 to	 the	 same	peak.	And	as	you
come	closer	to	the	peak	you	will	be	surprised:	the	travelers	on	the	other	path	are
coming	closer	to	you.	Slowly	slowly,	the	paths	start	merging	into	each	other.	By
the	time	you	have	reached	the	ultimate,	they	are	one.
The	person	who	follows	the	path	of	awareness	finds	love	as	a	consequence	of	his
awareness,	as	a	by-product,	as	a	shadow.	And	the	person	who	follows	the	path	of
love	 finds	 awareness	 as	 a	 consequence,	 as	 a	 by-product,	 as	 a	 shadow	of	 love.
They	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
And	remember:	if	your	awareness	lacks	love	then	it	is	still	impure;	it	has	not	yet
known	one	hundred	percent	purity.	It	is	not	yet	REALLY	awareness;	it	must	be
mixed	with	unawareness.	It	is	not	pure	light;	there	must	be	pockets	of	darkness
inside	you	still	working,	 functioning,	 influencing	you,	dominating	you.	 If	your
love	 is	without	 awareness,	 then	 it	 is	not	 love	yet.	 It	must	be	 something	 lower,
something	closer	to	lust	than	to	prayer.
So	 let	 it	 be	 a	 criterion	 if	 you	 follow	 the	 path	 of	 awareness,	 let	 love	 be	 the
criterion.	When	your	awareness	suddenly	blooms	into	love,	know	perfectly	well
that	awareness	has	happened,	SAMADHI	has	been	achieved.	If	you	follow	the
path	of	 love,	 then	 let	awareness	 function	as	a	criterion,	as	a	 touchstone.	When
suddenly,	 from	nowhere,	at	 the	very	center	of	your	 love.	a	 flame	of	awareness
starts	arising,	know	perfectly	well...rejoice!	You	have	come	home.
The	second	question
Question	2
WHY,	 OSHO,	 ISN'T	 KNOWLEDGE	 OF	 THE	 SCRIPTURES	 HELPFUL	 IN
FINDING
THE	TRUTH?
Maneeshi,
KNOWLEDGE	IS	NOT	YOURS,	THAT'S	WHY.	It	 is	borrowed.	And	can	you
borrow	 truth?	Truth	 is	 untransferable;	 nobody	 can	give	 it	 to	 you.	Not	 even	 an
alive	Master	 can	 transmit	 it	 to	you.	You	can	 learn,	but	 it	 cannot	be	 taught.	So
what	to	say	about	dead	scriptures,	howsoever	holy	they	may	be?	They	must	have
come	 from	 some	original	 source;	 some	Master,	 someone	 awakened	must	 have
been	at	the	very	source	of	them	--
but	now	they	are	only	words.	They	are	only	words	about	truth,	information	about
truth.
To	be	with	Krishna	is	a	totally	different	matter	from	reading	the	Bhagavad	Gita.
To	be	with	Mohammed,	attuned,	 in	deep	harmony,	overlapping	with	his	being,
allowing	his	being	to	stir	and	move	your	heart,	is	one	thing.	And	just	to	read	the
Koran	 is	 a	 far,	 faraway	 cry;	 it	 is	 an	 echo	 in	 the	mountains.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 truth
itself;	it	is	a	reflection,	a	full	moon	reflected	in	the	lake.	If	you	jump	into	the	lake
you	are	not	going	to	get	to	the	moon;	in	fact,	if	you	jump	into	the	lake	even	the
reflection	will	disappear.	Scriptures	are	only	mirrors	reflecting	faraway	truths.
Now	 the	 Vedas	 have	 existed	 for	 at	 least	 five	 thousand	 years;	 they	 reflect
something	five	thousand	years	old.	Much	dust	has	gathered	on	the	mirror,	much
interpretation,	commentary	--	that's	what	I	mean	by	dust.	Now	you	cannot	know
exactly	what	 the	Vedas	say;	you	know	only	the	commentators,	 the	interpreters,
and	 they	 are	 thousands.	 There	 is	 a	 thick	 wall	 of	 commentaries	 and	 it	 is
impossible	to	just	put	it	aside.	You	will	know	only	ABOUT	truth,	and	not	only
that:	 you	will	 know	 commentaries	 and	 interpretations	 of	 people	who	 have	 not
experienced	at	all.
Knowledge	 is	 imparted	 for	 other	 purposes.	 Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of
imparting	 knowledge	 about	 the	 world	 because	 the	 world	 is	 outside	 you,	 it	 is
objective.	 Science	 is	 knowledge;	 science,	 the	 very	 word,	 means	 exactly
knowledge.	But	religion	is	not	knowledge.
Religion	 is	 experience	 --	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 its	whole	 concern	 is	 your
interiority,	your	subjectivity,	which	is	available	only	to	you	and	to	nobody	else.
You	cannot	invite	even	your	beloved	into	your	inner	being.	There	you	are	utterly
alone	--	and	there	resides	the	truth.
Knowledge	will	 go	 on	 enhancing,	 decorating,	 enriching	 your	memory,	 but	 not
your	 being.	 Your	 being	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon.	 In	 fact,	 knowledge
will	create	barriers.	One	has	to	unlearn	all	that	one	has	learned	--	only	then	does
one	reach	the	being.
One	 has	 to	 be	 innocent	 Not	 knowing	 is	 the	 most	 intimate.	 Knowing	 creates
distance.
You	 ask	me,	Maneeshi:	WHY	 ISN'T	KNOWLEDGE	OF	THE	 SCRIPTURES
HELPFUL
IN	FINDING	THE	TRUTH?
For	the	simple	reason	that	if	you	accumulate	knowledge	you	will	be	starting	to
believe	 in	 conclusions.	 You	 will	 already	 conclude	 what	 truth	 is	 without
KNOWING	 it,	 and	 your	 conclusion	will	 become	 the	 greatest	 hindrance.	Truth
has	 to	 be	 approached	 in	 utter	 nudity,	 in	 utter	 purity,	 in	 silence,	 in	 a	 state	 of
innocence,	 child-like	 wonder	 and	 awe;	 not	 knowing	 already,	 not	 full	 of	 the
rubbish	called	knowledge,	not	full	of	the	Vedas	and	the	Bibles	and	the	Korans,
but	utterly	silent...without	any	thought,	without	any	conclusion,	without	knowing
anything	about	truth.	When	you	approach	in	this	way,	suddenly	truth	is	revealed.
And	 truth	 is	 revealed	 here	 and	 now:	 "AH,	 THIS!"	 A	 great	 rejoicing	 starts
happening	inside	you.
Truth	 is	 not	 separate	 from	 you;	 it	 is	 your	 innermost	 core.	 So	 you	 need	 not	 to
learn	it	from	somebody	else.	Then	what's	the	function	of	the	Masters?
The	 function	 of	 the	Masters	 is	 to	 help	 you	 drop	 your	 knowledge,	 to	 help	 you
unlearn,	 to	help	you	towards	a	state	of	unconditioning.	Your	knowledge	means
you	 will	 be	 always	 looking	 through	 a	 curtain	 and	 that	 curtain	 will	 distort
everything.	And	knowledge	is	dead.
Consciousness	is	needed,	knowing	is	needed,	a	state	of	seeing	is	needed,	but	not
knowledge.	How	can	you	know	the	alive	through	the	dead?
A	man	stepped	into	a	very	crowded	bus.	After	a	while	he	took	out	his	glass	eye,
threw	it	up	in	the	air,	then	put	it	back	in	again.	Ten	minutes	later	he	again	took
out	his	glass	eye,	threw	it	up	in	the	air,	then	put	it	back	in	again.
The	lady	next	to	him	was	horrified.	"What	are	you	doing?"	she	cried.
"I	am	just	trying	to	see	if	there	is	any	room	up	front."
That's	what	knowledge	is:	a	glass	eye.	You	cannot	see	through	it,	it	is	impossible
to	see	through	it.
Drop	 all	 your	 conclusions	 --	 Hindu,	 Christian,	 Mohammedan,	 Jaina,	 Jewish.
Drop	 all	 the	 knowledge	 that	 has	 been	 forced	 upon	 you.	 Every	 child	 has	 been
poisoned	 --	 poisoned	 by	 knowledge,	 poisoned	 by	 the	 parents,	 the	 society,	 the
church,	 the	state.	Every	child	has	been	distracted	from	his	 innocence,	 from	his
not-knowing.	And	 that's	why	every	child,	slowly	slowly,	becomes	so	burdened
that	 he	 loses	 all	 joy	 of	 life,	 all	 ecstasy	 of	 being,	 and	 he	 becomes	 just	 like	 the
crowd,	part	of	the	crowd.
In	fact,	the	moment	a	child	is	perfectly	conditioned	by	you,	you	are	very	happy;
you	 call	 it	 "religious	 education."	 You	 are	 very	 happy	 that	 the	 child	 has	 been
initiated	 into	 the	 religion	 of	 his	 parents.	 All	 that	 you	 have	 done	 is	 you	 have
destroyed	his	capacity	to	know	on	his	own.	You	have	destroyed	his	authenticity.
You	have	destroyed	his	very	precious	innocence.	You	have	closed	his	doors	and
windows.	Now	he	will	 live	an	encapsulated	existence.	He	will	 live	in	his	 inner
darkness,	 surrounded	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 theories,	 systems	 of	 thought,
philosophies,	ideologies.	He	will	be	lost	in	a	jungle	of	words	and	he	will	not	be
able	to	come	out	of	it	easily.
Even	 if	 he	 comes	across	 a	Master,	 if	 he	meets	 a	Buddha,	 then	 too	 it	will	 take
years	 for	him	 to	unlearn	 --	because	 learning	becomes	almost	your	blood,	your
bones,	your	marrow.
And	 to	 go	 against	 your	 own	 knowledge	 seems	 to	 be	 going	 against	 yourself,
against	your	tradition,	against	your	country,	against	your	religion.	It	seems	as	if
you	are	a	traitor,	as	if	you	are	betraying.	In	fact,	your	society	has	betrayed	you,
has	contaminated	your	soul.
Every	 society	has	been	doing	 that	up	 to	now,	and	every	 society	has	been	very
successfully	doing	 it.	That's	why	 it	 is	 so	 rare	 to	 find	a	Buddha;	 it	 is	 so	 rare	 to
escape	from	the	 traps	 the	society	puts	all	around	 the	child.	And	 the	child	 is	so
unaware;	he	can	easily	be	conditioned,	hypnotized.	And	that's	what	goes	on	and
on	in	the	temples,	in	the	churches,	in	the	schools,	colleges,	universities.	They	all
serve	 the	 past;	 they	 don't	 serve	 the	 future.	 Their	 function	 is	 to	 perpetuate	 the
past,	the	dead	past.
My	work	here	is	just	the	opposite.	I	am	not	here	to	perpetuate	the	past;	hence	I
am	against	all	knowledge.	I	am	all	 for	 learning,	but	 learning	means	 innocence,
learning	 means	 openness,	 learning	 means	 receptivity.	 Learning	 means	 a	 non-
egoistic	approach	towards	reality.	Learning	means:	"I	don't	know	and	I	am	ready
--	 ready	 to	 know."	 Knowledge	 means:	 "I	 know	 already."	 Knowledge	 is	 the
greatest	deception	that	society	creates	in	people's	minds.
My	 function	 is	 to	 serve	 the	 future,	 not	 the	 past.	 The	 past	 is	 no	more,	 but	 the
future	is	coming	every	moment.	I	want	you	to	become	innocent,	seers,	knowers	-
-	not	knowledgeable	--	alert,	aware,	not	unconsciously	clinging	to	conclusions.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,
WHY	DOES	IT	TAKE	SO	LONG	FOR	ME	TO	GET	IT?
Pankaja,
IT	 T	 IS	 BECAUSE	 OF	 YOUR	 KNOWLEDGE.	 Pankaja	 has	 written	 many
books;	she	has	been	a	well-known	author.	And	here	I	have	given	her	the	work	of
cleaning.	 In	 the	beginning	 it	was	very	hurtful	 to	her	 ego.	She	must	have	been
hoping	some	day	to	get	a	Nobel	prize!	And	she	has	been	wondering	what	she	is
doing	here.	Her	books	have	been	praised	and	appreciated,	and	rather	than	giving
her	some	work	nourishing	to	her	ego	I	have	given	her	very	ego-shattering	work:
cleaning	the	toilets	of	the	ashram.	It	was	difficult	for	her	to	swallow,	but	she	is	a
courageous	soul,	she	swallowed	it.	And	slowly	slowly	she	has	become	relaxed.
Pankaja,	 it	 is	 not	 special	 to	 you;	 it	 takes	 time	 for	 everybody.	 And	 the	 more
successful	you	have	been	in	life,	the	more	it	takes	for	you	to	get	it,	because	your
very	 success	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 prop,	 a	 new	 prop	 for	 the	 ego	 --	 and	 ego	 is	 the
barrier.	 The	 ego	 has	 to	 be	 shattered,	 uprooted	 totally,	 smashed,	 burned,	 so
nothing	remains	of	it.	It	is	arduous	work,	hard	work.
And	sometimes	it	looks	as	if	the	Master	is	cruel.	But	the	Master	has	to	be	cruel
because	 he	 loves	 you,	 because	 he	 has	 compassion	 for	 you.	 It	 may	 appear
paradoxical	in	the	beginning	--	because	if	you	have	compassion,	then	you	can't
be	 cruel.	 That	 is	 the	 complexity	 of	 the	 work:	 that	 if	 the	 Master	 is	 really
compassionate	he	cannot	sympathize	with	anything	that	nourishes	your	ego.
So	I	have	been	in	every	way	shattering	Pankaja's	ego.	She	has	been	crying	and
weeping	and	freaking	out...but	slowly	slowly	things	have	settled.	The	storm	is	no
more	and	a	great	silence	has	come	in.
In	fact,	if	you	think	of	your	many	past	lives	--	such	a	long	long	sleep,	such	a	long
long	dreaming	--	then	just	being	here	with	me	for	two,	three	years	is	not	a	long
time	if	the	silence	has	started	permeating	your	being.	Even	if	it	happens	in	thirty
years'	time	it	is	happening	soon.
Many	people	come	to	me	and	ask,	"Osho,	when	is	my	satori	going	to	happen?"
I	 say,	 "Very	 soon"	 --	 but	 remember	what	 I	mean	 by	 "very	 soon."	 It	may	 take
thirty	years,	forty	years,	fifty	years,	but	that	is	very	soon.	Looking	at	your	long
long	journey	of	darkness,	if	within	thirty	years	we	can	create	the	light	it	is	really
as	fast	as	it	can	be.
But	things	are	happening	far	more	quickly.	Every	situation	is	being	created	here
so	processes	can	be	quickened.	It	 is	not	too	late,	Pankaja,	 it	 is	 too	early.	And	I
can	see	the	change	happening.	The	spring	is	not	far	away;	the	first	flowers	have
already	appeared.
In	fact,	 this	was	your	vocation,	but	 it	 took	so	many	years	of	your	 life	 to	 reach
me.	What	 you	were	 doing	before	 you	 came	 to	me	was	not	 really	 part	 of	 your
heart;	 it	was	 just	 a	 head	 trip	 --	 hence	 it	was	 not	 a	 fulfillment.	 Successful	 you
could	 become;	 famous,	 yes,	 that	 was	 possible.	 But	 it	 would	 not	 have	 been	 a
contentment,	 it	 would	 not	 have	 been	 a	 deep	 deep	 joy	 --	 because	 unless
something	that	belongs	to	your	heart	starts	growing,	contentment	is	not	possible,
fulfillment	is	not	possible.
Now	 you	 are	 on	 the	 right	 track.	 Now	 things	 will	 happen	 with	 a	 faster	 pace.
Speed	also	is	accumulative.	If	you	have	watched	the	spring,	first	only	one	flower
blooms,	and	then	ten	flowers,	then	hundreds	of	flowers,	and	then	thousands,	and
then	millions....
Just	 like	 that	 it	happens	 in	spiritual	growth	 too.	But	everybody	 is	stumbling	 in
darkness,	groping	in	darkness.	Somebody	becomes	a	poet	not	knowing	whether
that	 is	 his	 vocation,	 his	 heart's	 real	 desire.	Somebody	becomes	 a	musician	not
knowing	whether	that	is	going	to	fulfill	his	life.	Somebody	becomes	a	painter....
And	people	have	to	become	something;	some	earning	is	needed	and	one	has	to
do	 something	 to	 prove	 oneself.	 So	 people	 go	 on	 groping	 and	 they	 become
something.
And	 you	 are	 fortunate,	 Pankaja,	 that	 you	 came	 to	 realize	 that	 what	 you	were
doing	was	not	the	real	thing	for	you.	There	are	many	unfortunate	people	--	after
their	 whole	 lives	 are	 wasted,	 then	 they	 recognize	 that	 they	 have	 been	 into
something	 which	 was	 not	 their	 real	 work.	 They	 were	 doing	 somebody	 else's
work.
I	have	heard	about	a	famous	surgeon,	one	of	the	world's	most	famous	surgeons.
He	was	retiring.	Even	at	the	age	of	seventy-five	his	hands	were	as	young	as	they
had	been	before.
He	was	able	to	do	brain	surgery	even	at	the	age	of	seventy-five;	his	hands	were
not	yet	shaky.
Everybody	 was	 happy	 --	 his	 disciples,	 students,	 colleagues	 --	 and	 they	 were
celebrating.
But	he	was	sad.	Somebody	asked	him,	"Why	are	you	sad?	You	are	 the	world's
most	famous	brain	surgeon.	You	should	be	happy!"
He	 said,	 "Yes,	 I	 should	 be	 happy,	 I	 also	 think	 so,	 but	what	 can	 I	 do?	 I	 never
wanted	to	be	a	famous	surgeon	in	the	first	place.	I	wanted	to	be	a	dancer	--	and	I
am	the	lousiest	dancer	you	can	find.	My	father	FORCED	me	to	be	a	surgeon	--
and	he	was	right	in	a	way,	because	by	dancing	what	can	you	get?	The	very	idea
was	 silly	 in	 his	 eyes,	 so	 he	 forced	me	 to	 be	 a	 surgeon.	 I	 became	 a	 surgeon,	 I
became	 famous.	NOW	 I	 am	 retiring,	 but	 I	 am	 sad	 --	my	whole	 life	 has	 gone
down	the	drain.	I	never	wanted	to	be	a	surgeon	in	the	first	place,	so	who	cares
whether	I	am	famous	or	not?	I	would	have	loved	to	be	just	a	good	dancer,	even	if
unknown,	anonymous	--	that	would	have	been	enough."
While	questioning	a	suspect,	the	police	detective	leafed	through	the	man's	folder.
"I	see	here,"	he	said,	"that	you	have	a	string	of	previous	arrests.	Here	is	one	for
armed	 robbery,	 breaking	 and	 entering,	 sexual	 assault,	 sexual	 assault,	 sexual
assault...."
"Yes,	sir,"	replied	the	felon	modestly,	"it	took	me	a	little	while	to	find	out	what	I
do	best."
Pankaja,	you	came	to	me	in	the	right	time.	Rejoice!	Celebrate!	And	things	have
started	 happening.	 You	 were	 like	 a	 hard	 rock	 when	 you	 came;	 now	 you	 are
becoming	soft	like	a	flower.	The	spring	is	not	far	away.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,
MOST	 RELIGIONS	 HAVE	 A	 NEGATIVE	 ATTITUDE	 TOWARDS	 WORK,
AS	IF	IT
IS	 A	 PUNISHMENT	 AND	 A	 LABOR	 AND	 NOT	 AT	 ALL	 SPIRITUAL.
COULD	YOU
SPEAK	TO	US	MORE	ABOUT	WORKING?
Parmananda,
THE	 BUDDHAS	 HAVE	 ALWAYS	 BEEN	 LIFE-AFFIRMATIVE,	 but	 the
religions	 that	 arose	 afterwards	 have	 all	 been	 life-negative.	 This	 is	 a	 strange
phenomenon,	 but	 there	 is	 something	 which	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 --	 why	 it
happened	in	the	first	place.	And	it	happened	again	and	again.
It	seems	that	the	moment	a	Buddha	speaks	he	is	bound	to	be	misunderstood.	If
you	 don't	 understand	 him,	 that's	 okay,	 but	 people	 don't	 stop	 there:	 they
misunderstand	him	--
because	people	cannot	tolerate	the	idea	that	they	don't	understand.	It	is	better	to
misunderstand	 than	 not	 to	 understand;	 at	 least	 you	 have	 some	 kind	 of
understanding.	All	 the	Buddhas	have	been	misunderstood,	wrongly	 interpreted.
And	whatsoever	they	were	standing	for	has	been	forgotten	as	soon	as	they	were
gone,	and	just	the	opposite	was	organized.
Jesus	 was	 a	 lover	 of	 life,	 a	 very	 affirmative	 person,	 but	 Christianity	 is	 life-
negative.	 The	 seers	 of	 the	Upanishads	were	 absolutely	 life-affirmative	 people,
they	 loved	 life	 tremendously,	 but	 Hinduism	 is	 life-negative,	 Buddhism	 and
Jainism	are	life-negative.
Just	look	at	the	statue	of	Mahavira	and	you	will	see	that	he	must	have	loved	his
body,	he	must	have	loved	life	and	existence.	He	is	so	beautiful!	It	is	said	about
Mahavira	 that	 it	 is	 possible	 that	 never	 before	 and	 never	 again	 has	 a	 more
beautiful	 person	walked	 on	 the	 earth.	But	 look	 at	 the	 Jaina	MUNIS,	 the	 Jaina
monks,	and	you	will	find	them	the	ugliest.
What	has	happened?
Buddha	 is	 very	 life-affirmative.	 Of	 course,	 he	 does	 not	 affirm	 YOUR	 life,
because	your	life	is	not	life	at	all;	it	is	death	in	disguise.	He	CONDEMNS	your
life,	 but	 he	 affirms	 the	 real	 life,	 the	 eternal	 life.	 But	 that's	 how	 he	 was
misunderstood	 His	 condemnation	 of	 your	 false	 life	 was	 taken	 to	 be
condemnation	of	 life	 itself.	And	nobody	bothered	 that	 he	was	 affirming	 life	 --
real	life,	eternal	life,	divine	life,	the	life	of	the	awakened	ones.	That	is	true	life.
What	life	do	YOU	have?	It	is	just	a	nightmarish	experience.	But	the	Buddhists	--
the	Buddhist	monks	and	nuns	--	have	lived	AGAINST	life.
Parmananda,	 it	 is	 because	 of	 this	 misunderstanding,	 which	 seems	 to	 be
inevitable....	 I	 can	 see	 it	 happening	with	me.	Whatsoever	 I	 say	 is	 immediately
misunderstood	all	over	the	world.	I	really	enjoy	it!	Strange,	but	somehow	seems
to	be	natural.	The	moment	you	say	something	you	can	be	sure	that	it	is	going	to
be	 misunderstood,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 people	 are	 going	 to	 interpret	 it
according	to	THEIR	minds.	And	their	minds	are	fast	asleep.	They	are	hearing	in
their	 sleep;	 they	 can't	 hear	 rightly,	 they	 can't	 hear	 the	 whole	 thing.	 Only
fragments	they	hear.
Even	a	man	like	P.D.	Ouspensky,	who	lived	with	Gurdjieff	for	years,	could	not
hear	the	whole	teaching	as	it	was.	When	he	wrote	his	famous	book	IN	SEARCH
OF	THE
MIRACULOUS	and	he	showed	it	to	George	Gurdjieff,	his	Master,	he	said,	"It	is
beautiful,	 but	 it	 needs	 a	 subtitle:	 FRAGMENTS	 OF	 AN	 UNKNOWN
TEACHING."
Ouspensky	said,	"But	why?	--	why	fragments?"
He	said,	"Because	these	are	only	fragments.	What	I	have	told	you	you	have	not
heard	in	its	totality.	And	whatsoever	you	have	written	is	beautiful...."
Ouspensky	was	really	one	of	the	most	skillful	writers	the	world	has	ever	known,
very	artistic,	very	logical,	a	superb	artist	with	words.
So	he	said,	"You	have	written	well,	you	have	written	beautifully,	but	 these	are
only	fragments	--	and	the	fragments	cannot	reveal	the	truth.	On	the	contrary,	they
conceal	it.
So	call	it:	FRAGMENTS	OF	AN	UNKNOWN	TEACHING.	The	teaching	still
remains	unknown.	You	just	had	a	few	glimpses	here	and	there,	and	you	have	put
all	those	glimpses	together,	you	have	somehow	made	a	whole	out	of	them,	but	it
is	not	the	truth,	it	is	not	the	real	teaching."
Ouspensky	 understood	 it.	 Hence	 the	 book	 still	 carries	 the	 subtitle:
FRAGMENTS	OF	AN
UNKNOWN	TEACHING.
What	 to	 say	 about	 ordinary	 people?	 Ouspensky	 cannot	 be	 called	 an	 ordinary
person;	 extraordinarily	 intelligent	 he	 was.	 If	 fact,	 it	 was	 because	 of	 him	 that
Gurdjieff	became	famous	in	the	world;	otherwise	nobody	may	have	heard	about
him.	 His	 own	 writings	 are	 very	 difficult	 to	 understand.	 There	 are	 very	 few
people	in	the	world	who	have	read	HIS
books	 --	 they	are	very	difficult	 to	 read.	Gurdjieff	writes	 in	 such	a	way	 that	he
makes	it	in	every	possible	way	difficult	for	you	to	grasp	what	he	is	saying,	what
he	wants	to	say.
Sentences	go	on	and	on...by	the	time	the	sentence	comes	to	a	full	stop	you	have
forgotten	 the	 beginning!	And	 he	 uses	words	 of	 his	 own	 invention	which	 exist
nowhere;	nobody	knows	what	the	meaning	of	those	words	is.	No	dictionary	has
those	words.	In	fact,	they	never	existed	before;	he	invented	them.
And	he	writes	 in	 such	a	boring	way	 that	 if	 you	 suffer	 from	 insomnia	 they	 are
good,	those	books.	You	read	three...four	pages	at	the	most	you	can	read	and	you
are	bound	to	fall	asleep.	I	have	never	come	across	a	single	person	who	has	read
his	books	from	the	beginning	to	the	end.
When	 for	 the	 first	 time	 his	 first	 book	 was	 published	 --	 ALL	 AND
EVERYTHING	--	one	hundred	pages	were	open	and	the	remaining	nine	hundred
pages	were	not	cut	yet.	And	with	a	note	the	book	was	sold	saying,	"Read	the	first
hundred	pages,	the	introductory	part.	If	you	still	feel	like	reading,	then	you	can
open	 the	 other	 pages.	Otherwise	 return	 the	 book	 and	 take	 your	money	 back."
Even	to	read	those	hundred	pages	is	very	difficult.
It	 was	 a	 device.	 It	 needs	 great	 awareness	 to	 read.	 The	 book	 is	 not	 written	 to
inform	you	about	something;	the	book	is	only	a	device	to	make	you	aware.	You
can	 read	 it	only	 if	you	are	very	conscious,	 if	you	have	decided	consciously,	 "I
have	to	go	through	it	from	the	beginning	to	the	end,	and	I	am	not	going	to	fall
asleep,	 and	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 stop,	 whatsoever	 happens,	 and	 whatsoever	 my
mind	says	I	am	going	to	finish	it."
If	 you	make	 that	 decision...and	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 keep	 it	 for	 one	 thousand
pages	of	such	nonsense.	Yes,	here	and	there	 there	are	beautiful	 truths,	but	 then
you	will	come	across	those	truths	only	if	you	go	through	much	nonsense.	Gems
you	will	find,	but	they	are	few	and	far	between.	Once	in	a	while	you	will	come
across	 a	 diamond,	 but	 for	 that	 you	 will	 have	 to	 read	 fifty,	 sixty	 very	 boring
pages.
I	 have	 seen	 thousands	 of	 books,	 but	Gurdjieff	 is	 extraordinary	Nobody	have	 I
seen	who	can	create	such	boring	stuff.	But	he	is	deliberately	doing	it;	 that	was
his	method.
If	you	went	to	see	him,	the	first	thing	he	would	tell	you	was	to	read	fifty	pages	of
his	book	loudly	in	front	of	him.	That	was	the	greatest	task!	You	don't	understand
a	single	word,	a	single	sentence,	and	it	goes	on	and	on	and	on,	and	he	sits	there
looking	at	you.
You	 have	 to	 finish	 fifty	 pages,	 then	 you	 can	 be	 accepted	 as	 a	 disciple.	 If	 you
cannot	manage	this	simple	feat,	then	you	are	rejected.
Ouspensky	made	him	famous	in	the	world,	but	even	Ouspensky	could	not	get	to
the	very	core	of	his	teaching	--	only	fragments.	And	he	understood	only	in	part.
And	 remember	 always:	 truth	 cannot	 be	 divided	 into	 fragments;	 you	 cannot
understand	only	parts	of	 it.	Either	you	understand	 the	whole	of	 it	or	you	don't
understand	 it	 at	 all.	 But	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 recognize	 the	 fact	 that	 "I	 don't
understand."	And	 knowledgeable	 people	 --	 scholars,	 professors	 --	 they	 cannot
accept	that	they	don't	understand,	so	they	go	on	misinterpreting.
And	the	most	fatal	misinterpretation	has	been	that	all	affirmative	teachings	have
been	 turned	 into	negative	ones.	 In	 fact,	you	 live	 in	a	negative	darkness.	When
Buddha	 speaks	he	 speaks	 from	a	positive	 state	of	 light;	 by	 the	 time	his	words
reach	you	 they	have	 reached	 into	 a	negative	darkness.	Your	negative	darkness
changes	the	color	of	those	words,	the	meaning	of	those	words,	the	connotations
of	 those	words,	 the	nuances	of	 those	words.	And	 then	YOU	create	 the	church.
You	 create	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,	 Mohammedanism,	 Jainism;	 you	 create	 all
kinds	of	"isms"	and	you	create	all	kinds	of	religions.
Yes,	Parmananda,	most	religions	have	a	negative	attitude	towards	work	because
they	are	against	life.	Hence	they	can't	be	FOR	work,	they	can't	be	creative.	They
teach	renunciation	of	life	--	how	can	they	teach	creativity?	And	they	teach	that
life	 is	 a	 punishment,	 so	 how	 can	 they	 say	 life	 is	 spiritual?	 You	 are	 being
punished	for	your	past	life	karmas,	that's	why	you	are	born.	It	is	a	punishment	--
just	as	in	Soviet	Russia	if	you	are	punished	you	are	sent	to	Siberia.
In	 the	days	of	 the	British	Raj	 in	 India,	 if	 somebody	was	 to	be	 really	punished
they	used	to	send	him	to	faraway	islands:	Andaman,	Nicobar.	The	climate	is	bad,
not	 healthy	 at	 all;	 no	 facilities	 to	 live,	 nothing	 grows,	 hard	 work.	 That	 was
punishment.
All	these	life-negative	religions	have	been	telling	you,	directly	or	indirectly,	that
this	earth	 is	 like	Andaman	and	Nicobar,	or	 like	Siberia,	and	you	are	prisoners.
You	 have	 been	 thrown	 here,	 thrown	 into	 life,	 to	 be	 punished.	 This	 is	 utter
nonsense.
Life	is	not	a	prison,	it	is	a	school.	You	are	sent	here	to	learn,	you	are	sent	here	to
grow.
You	are	sent	here	to	become	more	conscious,	more	aware.	This	earth	is	a	great
device	of	God.
This	is	my	approach	towards	life:	life	is	not	a	punishment	but	a	reward.	You	are
rewarded	 by	 being	 given	 a	 great	 opportunity	 to	 grow,	 to	 see,	 to	 know,	 to
understand,	 to	 be.	 I	 call	 life	 spiritual.	 In	 fact,	 to	 me,	 life	 and	 God	 are
synonymous.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,
WHY	 DO	 INDIANS	 THINK	 THEY	 ARE	 MORE	 SPIRITUAL	 THAN
OTHERS?
John,
PLEASE	FORGIVE	THE	POOR	INDIANS.	They	don	 t	have	anything	else	 to
brag	about.	You	can	brag	about	other	things:	money,	power,	atomic	or	hydrogen
bombs,	airplanes,	that	you	have	walked	on	the	moon,	that	you	have	penetrated	to
the	 very	 secrets	 of	 life,	 your	 science,	 technology;	 you	 can	 brag	 about	 your
affluence.	 Poor	 India	 has	 nothing	 else	 to	 brag	 about;	 it	 can	 only	 brag	 about
something	 invisible	 so	 there	 is	no	need	 to	prove	 it.	Spirituality	 is	 such	a	 thing
you	can	brag	about	it	and	nobody	can	prove	it,	nobody	can	disprove	it.
For	thousands	of	years	India	has	suffered	starvation,	poverty,	so	much	so	that	it
has	to	rationalize	it.	It	has	rationalized	it	so	that	to	be	poor	is	something	spiritual.
The	 Indian	 spiritual	man	 renounces	 all	 comforts	 and	 becomes	 poor.	When	 he
becomes	 poor,	 only	 then	 do	 Indians	 recognize	 him	 as	 spiritual.	 If	 he	 does	 not
become	poor,	how	can	he	be	spiritual?
Poverty	 has	 become	 the	 very	 foundation	 of	 Indian	 spirituality.	 The	more	 poor
you	are,	 the	more	spiritual	you	are.	Even	if	you	are	unhealthy,	 that	 is	good	for
being	spiritual;	that	shows	your	antagonism	towards	the	body.	Torture	your	body,
fast,	 don't	 eat,	 don't	 fulfill	 the	 needs	 of	 the	 body,	 and	 you	 are	 doing	 some
spiritual	work.
So	you	will	look	at	Indian	so-called	spiritual	saints	and	many	of	them	will	look
physically	 ill,	 in	 deep	 suffering,	 in	 self-torture;	 their	 faces	 are	 pale	 because	of
fasting.	But	 if	you	ask	 their	disciples	 they	will	say,	"Look,	what	a	golden	aura
around	the	face	of	our	saint!"	I	know	such	people	--	just	a	feverish	aura	around
their	 faces,	 nothing	 else!	But	 their	 disciples	will	 say,	 "A	golden	 aura	 --	 this	 is
spirituality!"
Count	Keyserling	writes	in	his	diary	that	when	he	came	to	India	he	understood
for	 the	 first	 time	 that	 poverty,	 starvation,	 ill	 health,	 these	 are	 necessary
requirements	for	spirituality.	These	are	rationalizations.	And	everybody	wants	to
be	higher	than	the	other,	superior	to	the	other.
Now,	there	is	no	other	way	for	Indians	to	declare	their	superiority.	They	cannot
compete	 in	 science,	 in	 technology,	 in	 industry,	 but	 they	 can	 compete	 in
spirituality.	They	are	more	able	 to	 fast,	 to	 starve	 themselves.	For	 thousands	of
years	they	have	practiced	starvation,	so	they	have	become	very	very	accustomed
to	it;	it	is	easy	for	them.
For	the	American	to	go	on	a	fast	is	very	difficult.	Eating	five	times	a	day	--	that
means	almost	the	whole	day	you	are	eating	--	and	I	am	not	counting	things	that
you	eat	in	between....	For	the	American	it	is	difficult	to	fast,	but	for	the	Indian	it
has	become	almost	natural.	His	body	has	become	accustomed	to	it.	The	body	has
a	tremendous	capacity	to	adjust	itself.
The	Indian	can	sit	in	the	hot	sun,	almost	in	a	state	of	fire	from	the	showering	of
the	sun,	undisturbed.	You	cannot	sit	there	--	you	have	become	accustomed	to	air
conditioning.
The	 Indian	 can	 sit	 in	 the	 cold	weather,	 naked	 in	 the	Himalayas.	YOU	cannot;
you	have	become	accustomed	to	central	heating.	The	body	becomes	accustomed.
And	then	India	can	claim:	"This	is	spirituality.	Come	and	compete	with	us!"	And
you	cannot	compete.	And	certainly,	when	you	cannot	compete,	you	have	to	bow
down	to	the	Indians	and	you	have	to	accept	that	they	must	have	some	clue.	There
is	no	clue,	nothing,	just	a	long	long	history	of	poverty.
In	 a	 cannibal	 village	 in	 the	 heart	 of	Africa,	 the	wife	 of	 the	 chief	 head-hunter
went	 to	 the	 local	 butcher's	 shop	 in	 search	 of	 a	 choice	 rib	 for	 her	 husband's
dinner.	Inspecting	the	goods,	she	asked	the	butcher,	"What	is	that	one?"
The	butcher	replied,	"That	is	an	American	--	seventy	cents	a	pound."
"Well,	then	what	about	that	one?"	asked	the	woman.
The	butcher	replied,	"That	is	an	Italian	--	ninety-five	cents	a	pound.	He	is	a	little
spicy."
"And,"	asked	the	woman,	"what	about	that	one	there	in	the	corner?"
"He	is	an	Indian,'	replied	the	butcher.	"two	dollars	a	pound."
The	woman	gasped,	"Two	dollars	a	pound?	What	makes	him	so	expensive?"
"Well,	lady,"	the	butcher	replied,	"have	you	ever	tried	cleaning	an	Indian?"
But	that	has	become	spirituality.	Do	you	know?	--	Jaina	monks	never	take	a	bath.
To	 take	 a	 bath	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 a	 luxury.	 They	 don't	 clean	 their	 teeth;	 that	 is
thought	 to	be	a	 luxury.	Now,	 to	be	 spiritual	 in	 the	 Jaina	sense	of	 the	 term	you
have	 to	 stop	 taking	 a	 bath,	 cleaning	 your	 teeth,	 even	 combing	 your	 hair,	 even
cutting	your	hair.	 If	 it	becomes	 too	messy,	 too	dirty,	you	have	 to	pull	 it	out	by
hand.	You	can't	use	any	razor	or	any	other	mechanical	device,	because	a	spiritual
person	 should	 be	 independent	 of	 all	machines.	 So	 Jaina	monks	 pull	 their	 own
hair	out.	And	when	a	Jaina	monk	pulls	his	hair	out,	mostly	once	a	year,	 then	a
great	gathering	happens	because	it	is	thought	to	be	something	very	special.
I	 have	been	 to	 such	gatherings.	Thousands	of	 Jainas	gather	 together	 simply	 to
see	this	poor	man,	hungry,	dirty,	pulling	his	hair	out	--	crazy!	And	you	will	see
people	watching	with	 great	 joy	 and	with	 great	 superiority:	 "This	 is	 our	 saint!
Who	ELSE	can	compete	with	us?"
No	nation	is	spiritual.	It	has	not	happened	yet.	One	can	hope	that	it	may	happen
some	day,	but	it	has	not	happened	yet.	In	fact,	only	individuals	can	be	spiritual,
not	nations	And	individuals	have	been	spiritual	all	over	the	world,	everywhere.
But	ignorance	prevents	people	from	recognizing	others'	spirituality.
One	day	 I	was	 talking	 to	an	 Indian	and	 I	 told	him	 that	everywhere	 spirituality
has	been	happening;	it	is	nothing	to	do	with	India	as	such.
He	 said,	 "But	 so	many	 saints	 have	 happened	 here.	Where	 else	 have	 so	many
saints	happened?"
I	said,	"Do	you	know	how	many	saints	have	happened	in	China?	Just	tell	me	a
few	names."
He	had	not	even	heard	of	a	single	name.	He	does	not	know	anything	about	Lao
Tzu,	he	does	not	know	about	Chuang	Tzu,	he	does	not	know	about	Lieh	Tzu.
He	does	not	know	anything	of	the	long	long	tradition	of	Chinese	mysticism.	But
he	knows	about	Nanak,	Kabir,	Mahavira,	Krishna,	Buddha,	so	he	thinks	all	 the
great	 saints	 have	 happened	 only	 in	 India.	 That	 is	 sheer	 stupidity.	 They	 have
happened	 in	 Japan,	 they	 have	 happened	 in	 Egypt,	 they	 have	 happened	 in
Jerusalem.	 They	 have	 happened	 everywhere!	 But	 you	 don't	 know	 --	 and	 you
don't	want	to	know	either.	You	simply	remain	confined	to	your	own	sect.
In	 fact,	you	may	have	 lived	 in	 the	neighborhood	of	 the	Jainas	your	whole	 life,
but	 you	 cannot	 tell	 the	 twenty-four	 names	of	 their	 great	TEERTHANKARAS.
Who	bothers	to	know	about	the	others?	Only	one	name	--	Mahavira	--	is	known;
the	 twenty-three	 other	 names	 are	 almost	 unknown.	 Even	 Jainas	 themselves
cannot	give	the	twenty-four	names	in	exact	sequence.	They	know	three	names:
the	 first,	Adinatha;	 the	 last,	Mahavira;	 and	 the	one	before	Mahavira,	 a	cousin-
brother	of	Krishna,	Neminath.	These	three	are	known;	the	remaining	twenty-one
are	almost	unknown	even	to	the	Jainas.	And	this	is	how	it	is.
Do	you	know	how	many	Hassid	mystics	 have	 attained	 to	God?	Do	you	know
how	many	Zen	Masters	have	attained	to	Buddhahood?	Do	you	know	how	many
Sufis	have	attained	to	the	ultimate	state?	Nobody	cares,	nobody	wants	to	know.
People	live	in	a	small,	cozy	corner	of	their	own	religion	and	they	think	this	is	all.
Neither	 Indians	 nor	 anybody	 else	 is	 specially	 spiritual	 or	 holy.	 Spirituality	 is
something	that	happens	to	individuals.	It	is	the	individual	becoming	aflame	with
God.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	collectivity	--	nation,	race,	church.
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,
WHY	ARE	THE	JEWS	SO	NOTORIOUS	FOR	THEIR	MONEY-GREED?
Narotam,
DO	YOU	I	THINK	OTHERS	ARE	IN	ANY	WAY	DIFFERENT	from	the	Jews?
Unless	love	flowers	in	your	being	you	are	bound	to	remain	greedy.	Greed	is	the
absence	of	love.
If	you	love,	greed	disappears;	if	you	don't	love,	greed	remains.
Greed	 is	 rooted	 in	 fear.	And	of	course,	Jews	have	 lived	 in	 tremendous	fear	 for
centuries.
For	 the	 two	 thousand	 years	 since	 Jesus	 they	 have	 lived	 in	 constant	 fear.	 Fear
creates	 greed.	And	 because	 they	 lost	 their	 nation	 --	 they	 lost	 everything,	 they
became	uprooted,	they	became	wanderers	--	the	only	thing	they	could	trust	was
money;	they	could	not	trust	anybody	else.	Hence,	naturally,	they	became	greedy.
Don't	be	too	hard	on	them	for	that.
They	are	greedy,	maybe	a	little	more	than	others,	but	that	is	only	a	difference	of
quantity,	not	of	quality.
In	 India	 we	 have	MARWARIS,	 who	 are	 the	 Indian	 Jews.	 Jainas	 are	 not	 less
greedy...and	others	too!	Maybe	they	are	not	so	notorious.	Jews	become	notorious
because	whatsoever	they	do,	they	do	with	a	flavor;	whatsoever	they	do,	they	do
without	any	disguise.	They	are	not	very	deceptive	people	 --	 intelligent	but	not
deceptive.	Whatsoever	 they	want	 to	 do,	 they	 do	 it	 directly	And	 they	 are	 very
earthly	 people.	 And	 that	 is	 one	 of	 the	 qualities	 I	 appreciate.	 The	 earth	 is	 our
home	and	we	have	to	be	earthly.
A	real	spirituality	must	be	rooted	in	earthliness.	Any	spirituality	that	denies	the
earth,	 rejects	 the	 earth,	 becomes	 abstract,	 becomes	 airy-fairy.	 It	 has	 no	 more
blood	in	it;	it	is	no	more	alive.	Yes,	Jews	are	very	earth-bound.
And	what	is	wrong	in	having	money?	One	should	not	be	possessive;	one	should
be	 able	 to	 use	 it.	 And	 Jews	 know	 how	 to	 use	 it!	 One	 should	 not	 be	miserly.
Money	 has	 to	 be	 created	 and	 money	 has	 to	 be	 used.	 Money	 is	 a	 beautiful
invention,	 a	 great	 blessing,	 if	 rightly	 used.	 It	 makes	 many	 things	 possible.
Money	is	a	magical	phenomenon.
If	 you	 have	 a	 ten-rupee	 note	 in	 your	 pocket,	 you	 have	 thousands	 of	 things	 in
your	pocket.
You	can	have	anything	with	 those	 ten	 rupees.	You	can	materialize	 a	man	who
will	massage	your	body	the	whole	night!	Or	you	can	materialize	food	or	you	can
materialize	 ANYTHING!	 That	 ten-rupee	 note	 carries	 many	 possibilities.	 You
cannot	carry	all	those	possibilities	with	you	if	there	is	no	note;	then	your	life	will
be	very	limited.	You	can	have	a	man	who	can	massage	your	body,	but	then	that
is	the	only	possibility	you	have	with	you.	If	you	suddenly	feel	hungry	or	thirsty,
then	that	man	cannot	do	anything	else.	But	a	ten-rupee	note	can	do	many	things,
millions	of	things;	it	has	infinite	possibilities.	It	is	one	of	the	greatest	inventions
of	man;	there	is	no	need	to	be	against	it.	I	am	not	against	it.
Use	 it.	 Don't	 cling	 to	 it.	 Clinging	 is	 bad.	 The	 more	 you	 cling	 to	 money,	 the
poorer	the	world	becomes	because	of	your	clinging,	because	money	is	multiplied
if	it	is	always	moving	from	one	hand	to	another	hand.
In	English	we	have	 another	name	 for	money	which	 is	more	 significant	 --	 it	 is
"currency."
That	simply	indicates	that	money	should	always	remain	moving	like	a	current.	It
should	 always	 be	 on	 the	 move	 from	 one	 hand	 to	 another	 hand.	 The	 more	 it
moves	the	better.
For	example,	if	I	have	a	ten-rupee	note	and	I	keep	it	to	myself,	then	there	is	only
one	ten-rupee	note	in	the	world.	If	I	give	it	to	you	and	you	give	it	to	somebody
else	and	each	person	goes	on	giving,	if	it	goes	through	ten	hands	then	we	have	a
hundred	rupees,	we	have	used	a	hundred	rupees'	worth	of	utilities;	the	ten	rupees
is	multiplied	by	ten.
And	 Jews	know	how	 to	use	money;	 nothing	 is	wrong	 in	 it.	Yes,	 greed	 is	 bad.
Greed	means	you	become	obsessed	with	money;	you	don't	use	it	as	a	means,	it
becomes	the	end.
That	 is	 bad,	 and	 it	 is	 bad	 whether	 you	 are	 a	 Jew	 or	 a	 Jaina,	 Hindu	 or
Mohammedan;	it	doesn't	matter.
Four	Jewish	mothers	were	talking,	naturally	of	their	sons.
One	 said,	 "My	 son	 is	 studying	 to	 be	 a	 doctor,	 and	when	 he	 graduates	 he	will
make	$50,000	a	year."
Said	 the	second,	"My	son	 is	 studying	dentistry,	and	when	he	graduates	he	will
make	$100,000	a	year."
The	 third	 said,	 "My	 son	 is	 studying	 to	 be	 a	 psycho-analyst,	 and	 when	 he
graduates	he	will	make	$200,000	a	year."
The	fourth	one	remained	silent.	The	other	ones	asked	her,	"And	what	about	your
son?"
"He	is	studying	to	become	a	rabbi,"	she	answered.
"And	how	much	does	a	rabbi	make?"
"$10,000	a	year."
"$10,000?	Is	this	a	job	for	a	Jewish	boy?"
Gropestein's	 clothing	 store	 stood	 on	 New	 York's	 Lower	 East	 Side.	 One	 day,
Gropestein	went	out	for	lunch	and	left	Salter,	his	new	salesman,	in	charge.
When	he	came	back	Salter	proudly	announced,	"I	sold	that	black	cloth	coat."
"For	how	much?"	asked	Gropestein.
"Ninety-eight	cents,	like	it	said	on	the	tag."
"Ninety-eight	 cents?"	 screamed	 the	 owner.	 "The	 tag	 said	 ninety-eight	 dollars,
you	idiot!"
The	clerk	looked	as	if	he	would	die	of	embarrassment.
"Let	this	be	a	lesson	to	you,"	said	Gropestein.	"But	don't	feel	bad	--	we	made	ten
percent	profit."
A	famous	anti-Semite	was	dying.	He	gathered	his	sons	around	his	deathbed	and
said,
"Sons,	my	last	wish	and	command	is	that	whenever	you	need	anything,	go	buy	it
from	a	Jew	and	give	him	the	first	price	he	asks."
The	 sons	 in	 surprise	 said,	 "Father,	 has	 your	mind	 gone	 crazy	 in	 this	 your	 last
hour?"
"Ah,	no,"	smiled	the	anti-Semite	wickedly,	"he	is	going	to	eat	himself	up	he	has
not	asked	for	more."
The	seventh	question
Question	7
OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	FUTURE	OF	MORALITY	CONCERNING	SEX?
Divendra,
THERE	 IS	 NO	 FUTURE	OF	ANY	MORALITY	 concerning	 sex.	 In	 fact,	 the
very	combination	of	sex	and	morality	has	poisoned	the	whole	past	of	morality.
Morality	became	so	much	sex-oriented	that	it	lost	all	other	dimensions	--	which
are	far	more	important.	Sex	should	not	really	be	so	much	of	a	concern	for	moral
thinking.
Truth,	sincerity,	authenticity,	totality	--	these	things	should	be	the	real	concerns
of	 morality.	 Consciousness,	 meditation,	 awareness,	 love,	 compassion	 --	 these
should	be	the	real	concerns	of	morality.
But	 sex	 and	 morality	 became	 almost	 synonymous	 in	 the	 past;	 sex	 became
overpowering,	overwhelming.	So	whenever	you	say	somebody	 is	 immoral	you
simply	mean	 that	 something	 is	wrong	with	 his	 sexual	 life.	And	when	you	 say
somebody	is	a	very	moral	person,	all	that	you	mean	is	that	he	follows	the	rules
of	 sexuality	 laid	down	by	 the	society	 in	which	he	 lives.	Morality	became	one-
dimensional;	 it	 has	not	been	good.	There	 is	no	 future	 for	 that	morality;	 that	 is
dying.	In	fact,	it	is	dead.	You	are	carrying	a	corpse.
Sex	should	be	more	fun	than	such	a	serious	affair	as	it	has	been	made	in	the	past.
It	 should	be	 like	a	game,	a	play:	 two	persons	playing	with	each	other's	bodily
energies.	If	they	both	are	happy,	it	should	be	nobody	else's	concern.	They	are	not
harming	anybody;	they	are	simply	rejoicing	in	each	other's	energy.	It	is	a	dance
of	two	energies	together.	It	should	not	be	a	concern	of	the	society	at	all.	Unless
somebody	 interferes	 in	 somebody	 else's	 life	 --	 imposes	 himself,	 forces
somebody,	is	violent,	violates	somebody's	life,	then	only	should	society	come	in.
Otherwise	there	is	no	problem;	it	should	not	be	any	concern	at	all.
The	future	will	have	a	totally	different	vision	of	sex.	It	will	be	more	fun,	more
joy,	more	friendship,	more	a	play	than	a	serious	affair	as	it	has	been	in	the	past.
It	has	destroyed	people's	 lives,	has	burdened	them	so	much	--	unnecessarily!	It
has	 created	 so	much	 jealousy,	 possessiveness	 domination,	 nagging,	 quarreling,
fighting,	condemnation	--	for	NO	reason	at	all.
Sexuality	 is	 a	 simple,	 biological	 phenomenon.	 It	 should	not	be	given	 so	much
importance.	 Its	 only	 significance	 is	 that	 the	 energy	 can	 be	 transformed	 into
higher	planes;	 it	can	become	more	and	more	spiritual.	And	the	way	to	make	 it
more	spiritual	is	to	make	it	a	less	serious	affair.
Doctor	Biber	was	perplexed	by	the	case	at	hand.	He	had	given	the	sorority	girl
all	sorts	of	tests,	but	his	results	were	still	inconclusive.	"I	am	not	sure	what	it	is,"
he	finally	admitted.
"You	either	have	a	cold	or	you	are	pregnant."
"I	must	be	pregnant,"	said	the	girl.	"I	don't	know	anybody	who	could	have	given
me	a	cold."
This	is	something	of	the	future.
Clarice	and	Sheffield	were	having	a	mid-afternoon	breakfast.	Their	Park	Avenue
apartment	was	completely	askew	after	a	wild,	all-night	party.
"Dear,	this	is	rather	embarrassing,"	said	Sheffield,	"but	was	it	you	I	made	love	to
in	the	library	last	night?"
"About	what	time?"	asked	Clarice.
Another	story	about	the	future:
The	schoolteacher	was	complaining	rather	bitterly	to	Cornelia	about	the	behavior
of	little	Nathaniel.	"He	is	always	picking	on	boys	smaller	than	he	is	and	beating
them	up,"	she	said.
"My	goodness!"	said	Cornelia,	"That	boy	is	just	like	his	pappy."
"And	 several	 times	 I	 have	 caught	him	 in	 the	 cloak-room	with	one	of	 the	 little
girls,"
continued	the	teacher.
"Just	the	sort	of	thing	his	pappy	would	do."
"Not	only	that,	but	he	steals	things	from	the	other	children."
"The	very	same	as	his	pappy	--	Lord,	I	sure	am	glad	I	didn't	marry	that	man!"
Don't	 be	 worried	 about	 the	 future	 of	 morality	 concerning	 sex.	 It	 is	 going	 to
disappear	completely.	The	future	will	know	a	totally	different	vision	of	sex.	And
once	sex	no	longer	overwhelms	morality	so	powerfully,	morality	will	be	free	to
have	some	other	concerns	which	are	far	more	important.
Truth,	sincerity,	honesty,	 totality,	compassion,	service,	meditation,	 these	should
be	the	real	concerns	of	morality	--	because	these	are	things	which	transform	your
life,	these	are	things	which	bring	you	closer	to	God.
And	the	last	question
Question	8
OSHO,
WHY	DO	YOU	SPEAK	AT	ALL	IF	THE	TRUTH	IS	INEXPRESSIBLE?
Paramahansa,
TAKE	NO	NOTICE!
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Neti	Neti
Chapter	title:	I	am	Higher
Chapter	title:	Dying	Into	the	Master
Chapter	title:	See	Right	at	Once
Chapter	title:	Try	it	My	Way
Chapter	title:	Take	No	Notice
