
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Talks	on	Zen	Stories
Talks	given	from	21/02/76	am	to	29/02/76	am
English	Discourse	series
9	Chapters
Year	published:	1977
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	A	Zen	Story
21	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602210
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
88
mins
GOSA	HOYEN	USED	TO	SAY:
'WHEN	 PEOPLE	 ASK	 ME	 WHAT	 ZEN	 IS	 LIKE	 I	 TELL	 THEM	 THIS
STORY:'
NOTICING	 THAT	 HIS	 FATHER	 WAS	 GROWING	 OLD,	 THE	 SON	 OF	 A
BURGLAR
ASKED	HIS	FATHER	TO	TEACH	HIM	THE	TRADE	SO	THAT	HE	COULD
CARRY
ON	THE	FAMILY	BUSINESS	AFTER	HIS	FATHER	HAD	RETIRED.
THE	 FATHER	 AGREED,	 AND	 THAT	 NIGHT	 THEY	 BROKE	 INTO	 A
HOUSE
TOGETHER.
OPENING	A	LARGE	CHEST	THE	FATHER	TOLD	HIS	 SON	TO	GO	 IN	 _
AND	PICK
OUT	 THE	 CLOTHING.	 AS	 SOON	 AS	 THE	 BOY	 WAS	 INSIDE,	 THE
FATHER
LOCKED	THE	CHEST	AND	THEN	MADE	A	LOT	OF	NOISE	SO	THAT	THE
WHOLE	HOUSE	WAS	AROUSED.	THEN	HE	SLIPPED	QUIETLY	AWAY.
LOCKED	INSIDE	THE	CHEST	THE	BOY	WAS	ANGRY,	TERRIFIED,	AND
PUZZLED	AS	TO	HOW	HE	WAS	GOING	TO	GET	OUT.	THEN	AN	 IDEA
FLASHED	TO	HIM	--	HE	MADE	A	NOISE	LIKE	A	CAT.
THE	FAMILY	TOLD	A	MAID	TO	TAKE	A	CANDLE	AND	EXAMINE	THE
CHEST.
WHEN	THE	LID	WAS	UNLOCKED	THE	BOY	JUMPED	OUT,	BLEW	OUT
THE
CANDLE,	PUSHED	HIS	WAY	PAST	THE	ASTONISHED	MAID,	AND	RAN
OUT.
THE	PEOPLE	RAN	AFTER	HIM.
NOTICING	A	WELL	BY	THE	SIDE	OF	THE	ROAD	THE	BOY	THREW	IN	A
LARGE	 STONE,	 THEN	 HID	 IN	 THE	 DARKNESS.	 THE	 PURSUERS
GATHERED
AROUND	 THE	 WELL	 TRYING	 TO	 SEE	 THE	 BURGLAR	 DROWNING
HIMSELF.
WHEN	THE	BOY	GOT	HOME	HE	WAS	VERY	ANGRY	AT	HIS	 FATHER
AND	HE
TRIED	 TO	 TELL	 HIM	 THE	 STORY;	 BUT	 THE	 FATHER	 SAID:	 'DON'T
BOTHER
TO	TELL	ME	THE	DETAILS,	YOU	ARE	HERE	 --	YOU	HAVE	LEARNED
THE
ART.'
Being	is	one,	the	world	is	many...and	between	the	two	is	the	divided	mind,	the
dual	mind.
It	is	just	like	a	big	tree,	an	ancient	oak:	the	trunk	is	one,	then	the	tree	divides	into
two	 main	 branches,	 the	 main	 bifurcation,	 from	 which	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
bifurcations	of	branches	grow.	The	being	is	just	like	the	trunk	of	the	tree	--	one,
non-dual	--	and	the	mind	is	the	first	bifurcation	where	the	tree	divides	into	two,
becomes	dual,	 becomes	dialectical:	 thesis	 and	 antithesis,	man	 and	woman,	 yin
and	yang,	day	and	night,	God	and	Devil,	yoga	and	Zen.	All	the	dualities	of	the
world	are	basically	in	the	duality	of	the	mind	--	and	below	the	duality	is	oneness
of	 being.	 If	 you	 slip	 below,	 underneath	 the	 duality	 you	will	 find	 one	 --	 call	 it
God,	call	it	nirvana,	or	whatsoever	you	like.
If	you	go	higher	through	the	duality,	you	come	to	the	many	million-fold	world.
This	is	one	of	the	most	basic	insights	to	be	understood	--	that	mind	is	not	one.
Hence,	whatsoever	you	see	through	the	mind	becomes	two.	It	is	just	like	a	white
ray	entering	a	prism;	it	is	immediately	divided	into	seven	colors	and	the	rainbow
is	created.
Before	 it	entered	 the	prism	it	was	one,	 through	the	prism	it	 is	divided.	and	 the
white	color	disappears	into	the	seven	colors	of	the	rainbow.
The	world	is	a	rainbow,	the	mind	is	a	prism,	and	the	being	is	the	white	ray.
Modern	research	has	come	to	a	very	significant	fact,	one	of	the	most	significant
achieved	in	this	century,	and	that	is	that	you	don't	have	one	mind,	you	have	two
minds.	Your	brain	is	divided	into	two	hemispheres:	the	right	hemisphere	and	the
left	hemisphere.	The	right	hemisphere	 is	 joined	with	 the	 left	hand,	and	 the	 left
hemisphere	 is	 joined	with	 the	 right	hand	 --	 crosswise.	The	 right	hemisphere	 is
intuitive,	 illogical,	 irrational,	 poetic,	 platonic,	 imaginative,	 romantic,	mythical,
religious;	and	the	left	hemisphere	is	logical,	rational,	mathematical,	Aristotelian,
scientific,	 calculative.	 These	 two	 hemispheres	 are	 constantly	 in	 conflict	 --	 the
basic	 politics	 of	 the	 world	 is	 within	 you,	 the	 greatest	 politics	 of	 the	 world	 is
within	you.	You	may	not	be	aware	of	 it,	but	once	you	become	aware,	 the	 real
thing	to	be	done	is	somewhere	between	these	two	minds.
The	 left	 hand	 is	 concerned	with	 the	 right	hemisphere	 --	 intuition,	 imagination,
myth,	poetry,	religion	--	and	the	left	hand	is	very	much	condemned.	The	society
is	of	those	who	are	right-handed	--	right-handed	means	left	hemisphere.	Ten	per
cent	 of	 children	 are	 born	 left-handed	 but	 they	 are	 forced	 to	 be	 right-handed.
Children	 who	 are	 born	 left-handed	 are	 basically	 irrational,	 intuitive,	 non-
mathematical,	non-Euclidean...	 they	are	dangerous	for	society	so	it	forces	them
in	every	way	 to	become	right-handed.	 It	 is	not	 just	a	question	of	hands,	 it	 is	a
question	 of	 inner	 politics:	 the	 left-handed	 child	 functions	 through	 the	 right
hemisphere	--	that	society	cannot	allow,	it	is	dangerous,	so	he	has	to	be	stopped
before	things	go	too	far.
It	is	suspected	that	in	the	beginning	the	proportion	must	have	been	fifty-fifty	--
left-handed	children	fifty	per	cent	and	right-handed	children	fifty	per	cent	--	but
the	right-handed	party	has	ruled	so	long	that	by	and	by	the	proportion	has	fallen
to	 ten	per	cent	and	ninety	per	cent.	Even	amongst	you	here	many	will	be	 left-
handed	but	you	may	not	be	aware	of	it.	You	may	write	with	the	right	hand	and
do	 your	 work	 with	 the	 right	 hand	 but	 in	 your	 childhood	 you	 may	 have	 been
forced	to	be	right-handed.	This	is	a	trick	because	once	you	become	right-handed
your	left	hemisphere	starts	functioning.	The	left	hemisphere	is	reason;	the	right
hemisphere	is	beyond	reason,	its	functioning	is	not	mathematical.	It	functions	in
flashes,	it	is	intuitive,	very	graceful	--	but	irrational.
The	left-handed	minority	is	the	most	oppressed	minority	in	the	world,	even	more
than	Negroes,	even	more	than	the	poor	people.	If	you	understand	this	division,
you	will	 understand	many	 things.	With	 the	 bourgeoisie	 and	 the	 proletariat	 the
proletariat	 is	always	 functioning	 through	 the	 right	hemisphere	of	 the	brain:	 the
poor	people	are	more	intuitive.
Go	 to	 the	primitive	people,	 they	are	more	 intuitive.	The	poorer	 the	person,	 the
less	intellectual	--	and	that	may	be	the	cause	of	his	being	poor.	Because	he	is	less
intellectual	he	cannot	compete	in	the	world	of	reason.	He	is	less	articulate	as	far
as	language	is	concerned,	reason	is	concerned,	calculation	is	concerned	--	he	is
almost	a	fool.	That	may	be	the	cause	of	his	being	poor.
The	 rich	 person	 is	 functioning	 through	 the	 left	 hemisphere;	 he	 is	 more
calculative,	arithmetical	 in	everything,	cunning,	clever,	 logical	 --	and	he	plans.
That	may	be	the	reason	why	he	is	rich.
The	bourgeoisie	and	the	proletariat	cannot	disappear	by	communist	revolutions,
no,	 because	 the	 communist	 revolution	 is	 by	 the	 same	 people.	 The	 Czar	 ruled
Russia;	 he	 ruled	 it	 through	 the	 left	 hemisphere	 of	 the	 mind.	 Then	 he	 was
replaced	by	Lenin	who	was	of	the	same	type.	Then	Lenin	was	replaced	by	Stalin
who	was	even	more	of	the	same	type.
The	revolution	is	false	because	deep	down	the	same	type	of	people	are	ruling	--
the	ruler	and	the	ruled	mean	the	same,	and	the	ruled	are	those	of	the	right-sided
hemisphere.	 So	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 in	 the	 outside	 world	 makes	 no	 difference
really,	it	is	superficial.
The	same	applies	to	men	and	women.	Women	are	right-hemisphere	people,	men
are	left-hemisphered.	Men	have	ruled	women	for	centuries.	Now	a	few	women
are	revolting	but	the	amazing	thing	is	that	these	are	the	same	type	of	women.	In
fact	they	are	just	like	men
--	 rational,	 argumentative,	 Aristotelian.	 It	 is	 possible	 that	 one	 day,	 just	 as	 the
communist	revolution	has	succeeded	in	Russia	and	China,	somewhere,	maybe	in
America,	women	can	succeed	and	overthrow	men.	But	by	 the	 time	the	women
succeed,	 the	 women	 will	 no	 more	 be	 women,	 they	 will	 have	 become	 left-
hemisphered.	Because	to	fight,	one	has	to	be	calculative,	and	to	fight	with	men
you	have	to	be	like	men:	aggressive.	That	very	aggressiveness	is	shown	all	over
the	world	in	women's	liberation.	Women	who	have	become	part	of	that	liberation
movement	 are	very	 aggressive,	 they	 are	 losing	 all	 grace,	 all	 that	 comes	out	 of
intuition.	Because	if	you	have	to	fight	with	men	you	have	to	learn	the	same	trick;
if	you	have	to	fight	with	men,	you	have	to	fight	with	the	same	techniques.
Fighting	with	anybody	is	very	dangerous	because	you	become	like	your	enemy.
That	is	one	of	the	greatest	problems	of	humanity.	Once	you	fight	with	somebody,
by	 and	 by	 you	 have	 to	 use	 the	 same	 technique	 and	 the	 same	 way.	 Then	 the
enemy	may	be	defeated	but	by	 the	 time	he	 is	defeated	you	have	become	your
own	enemy.	Stalin	is	more	Czar-like	than	any	Czar,	more	violent	than	any	Czar.
Of	course	it	has	to	be	so:	to	throw	Czars,	very	violent	people	are	needed,	more
violent	 than	 the	Czar	 himself.	Only	 they	will	 become	 the	 revolutionaries,	will
come	 out	 on	 top.	 By	 the	 time	 they	 reach	 there	 they	 have	 become	 Czars
themselves,	 and	 the	 society	 continues	on	 the	 same	way.	 Just	 superficial	 things
change,	deep	down	the	same	conflict	remains.
The	 conflict	 is	 in	 man.	 Unless	 it	 is	 resolved	 there,	 it	 cannot	 be	 resolved
anywhere	else.
The	politics	is	within	you;	it	is	between	the	two	parts	of	the	mind.
A	 very	 small	 bridge	 exists.	 If	 that	 bridge	 is	 broken	 through	 some	 accident,
through	some	physiological	defect	or	something	else,	the	person	becomes	split,
the	person	becomes	two	persons	--	and	the	phenomenon	of	schizophrenia	or	split
personality	happens.	 If	 the	bridge	 is	broken	 --	and	 the	bridge	 is	very	 fragile	 --
then	you	become	two,	you	behave	like	two	persons.	In	the	morning	you	are	very
loving,	 very	 beautiful;	 in	 the	 evening	you	 are	 very	 angry,	 absolutely	 different.
You	don't	remember	your	morning...	how	can	you	remember?	Another	mind	was
functioning	--	and	the	person	becomes	two	persons.	If	this	bridge	is	strengthened
so	much	that	the	two	minds	disappear	as	two	and	become	one,	then	integration,
then	crystallization,	arises.	What	George	Gurdjieff	used	to	call	the	crystallization
of	being	is	nothing	but	these	two	minds	becoming	one,	the	meeting	of	the	male
and	the	female	within,	the	meeting	of	yin	and	yang,	the	meeting	of	the	left	and
right,	the	meeting	of	logic	and	illogic,	the	meeting	of	Plato	and	Aristotle.
If	 you	 can	 understand	 this	 basic	 bifurcation	 in	 your	 tree	 of	 then	 you	 can
understand	all	the	conflict	that	goes	on	around	and	inside	you.
Let	me	tell	you	an	anecdote.
Among	 the	Germans,	 Berlin	 is	 considered	 to	 be	 the	 very	 epitome	 of	 Prussian
brusqueness	and	efficiency,	while	Vienna	 is	 the	essence	of	Austrian	charm	and
slipshoddery.
There	 is	 the	 tale	 of	 a	 Berliner	 visiting	 Vienna	 who	 was	 lost	 and	 in	 need	 of
directions.
What	 would	 such	 a	 Berliner	 do?	 He	 grabbed	 at	 the	 lapel	 of	 the	 first	 passing
Viennese	and	barked	out,	'The	Post	Office.	Where	is	it?'
The	startled	Viennese	carefully	detached	the	other's	fist,	smoothed	his	lapel	and
said	in	a	gentle	manner,
'Sir,	would	it	not	have	been	more	delicate	of	you	to	have	approached	me	politely
and	 to	 have	 said.	 "Sir,	 if	 you	 have	 a	moment	 and	 happen	 to	 know,	 could	 you
direct	me	to	the	Post	Office?"'
The	Berliner	stared	in	astonishment	for	a	moment,	then	growled,	'I	would	rather
be	lost!'
and	stomped	away.
That	very	same	Viennese	was	visiting	Berlin	too	that	year	and	it	turned	out	that
now	it	was	he	who	had	to	search	for	the	Post	Office.	Approaching	a	Berliner	he
said	politely,
'Sir,	 if	you	have	a	moment	and	happen	to	know,	could	you	please	direct	me	to
the	Post	Office?'
With	machine-like	rapidity	the	Berliner	replied,
'About	 face,	 two	 blocks	 forward,	 sharp	 turn	 right,	 one	 block	 forward,	 cross	 a
street,	half	turn	on	the	right,	walk	left	over	railroad	tracks,	pass	news-stand	into
Post	Office	lobby.'
The	 Viennese,	 more	 bewildered	 than	 enlightened,	 nevertheless	 murmured,	 'A
thousand	 thanks,	 kind	 sir,'	 whereupon	 the	 Berliner	 snatched	 furiously	 at	 the
other's	lapel	and	shouted,	'Never	mind	the	thanks,	repeat	the	instructions!'
The	male	mind,	 the	Berliner;	 the	female	mind,	 the	Viennese.	The	female	mind
has	a	grace,	the	male	mind	has	efficiency.	and	of	course,	in	the	long	run,	if	there
is	 a	constant	 fight,	 the	grace	 is	bound	 to	be	defeated	 --	 the	efficient	mind	will
win.	because	the	world	understands	the	language	of	mathematics	not	of	love.	But
the	 moment	 your	 efficiency	 wins	 over	 your	 grace,	 you	 have	 lost	 something
tremendously	 valuable:	 you	 have	 lost	 contact	 with	 your	 own	 being.	 You	may
become	very	efficient,	but	you	will	be	no	more	a	real	person.	You	will	become	a
machine,	a	robot-like	thing.
Because	of	this	here	is	constant	conflict	between	man	and	woman.	They	cannot
remain	 separate,	 they	have	 to	get	 into	 relationship	 again	 and	 again	 --	 but	 they
cannot	 remain	 together	either.	The	 fight	 is	not	outside,	 the	 fight	 is	within	you.
And	this	is	my	understanding:	unless	you	have	resolved	your	inner	fight	between
the	right	and	the	left	hemispheres,	you	will	never	be	able	to	be	peacefully	in	love
--	never	 --	because	 the	 inner	 fight	will	be	 reflected	outside.	 If	you	are	 fighting
inside	 and	 you	 are	 identified	with	 the	 left	 hemisphere,	 the	 reason	 hemisphere,
and	you	are	continuously	trying	to	overpower	the	right	hemisphere,	you	will	try
to	 do	 the	 same	 with	 the	 woman	 you	 fall	 in	 love	 with.	 If	 the	 woman	 is
continuously	fighting	her	own	reason	inside,	she	will	continuously	fight	the	man
she	loves.
All	 relationships	 --	 almost	 all,	 the	 exceptions	 are	negligible,	 can	be	 left	 out	of
account	--
are	ugly.	In	the	beginning	they	are	beautiful;	in	the	beginning	you	don't	show	the
reality;	in	the	beginning	you	pretend.	Once	the	relationship	settles	and	you	relax,
your	 inner	 conflict	 bubbles	 up	 and	 starts	 being	mirrored	 in	 your	 relationship.
Then	come	 fights,	 then	come	a	 thousand	and	one	ways	of	nagging	each	other,
destroying	 each	 other.	 Hence	 the	 attraction	 for	 homosexuality.	 Whenever	 a
society	 becomes	 too	 divided	 between	 man	 and	 woman,	 homosexuality	 erupts
immediately.	 Because	 at	 least	 a	 man	 in	 love	 with	 a	 man	 is	 not	 that	 much	 in
conflict.	 The	 love	 relationship	 may	 not	 be	 very	 satisfying,	 may	 not	 lead	 to
tremendous	 bliss	 and	 orgasmic	 moments,	 but	 at	 least	 it	 is	 not	 so	 ugly	 as	 the
relationship	 between	 a	man	 and	 a	woman.	Women	 become	 lesbians	whenever
the	 conflict	 becomes	 too	much,	 because	 at	 least	 the	 love	 relationship	 between
two	 women	 is	 not	 so	 deep	 in	 conflict.	 The	 same	 meets	 the	 same;	 they	 can
understand	each	other.
Yes,	understanding	is	possible,	but	the	attraction	is	lost,	the	polarity	is	lost	--	it	is
at	 a	 very	 great	 cost.	 Understanding	 is	 possible,	 but	 the	 whole	 tension,	 the
challenge,	is	lost.	If	you	choose	challenge,	then	comes	conflict,	because	the	real
problem	 is	 somewhere	 within	 you.	 Unless	 you	 have	 settled,	 come	 to	 a	 deep
harmony	between	your	female	and	male	mind,	you	will	not	be	able	to	love.
People	come	 to	me	and	 they	ask	how	to	go	deep	 in	a	 relationship,	 I	 tell	 them,
'First	 you	 go	 deep	 in	meditation.	Unless	 you	 are	 resolved	within	 yourself	 you
will	create	more	problems	than	you	already	have.	If	you	move	in	relationship,	all
your	problems	will	be	multiplied.	Just	watch.	The	greatest	and	the	most	beautiful
thing	 in	 the	 world	 is	 love	 but	 can	 you	 find	 anything	 more	 ugly,	 more	 hell-
creating?'
Mulla	Nasruddin	 once	 told	me,	 'Well,	 I	 have	 been	putting	 off	 the	 evil	 day	 for
months	but	I	have	got	to	go	this	time.'
'Dentist	or	doctor?'	I	inquired.
'Neither,'	he	said,	'I	am	getting	married.'
People	 go	 on	 avoiding	marriage,	 people	 go	 on	 putting	 it	 off.	When	 some	 day
they	 find	 it	 impossible	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 only	 then	 they	 relax.	 Where	 is	 the
problem?	Why	 are	 people	 so	 afraid	 of	 getting	 deeply	 involved?	 Involvement
immediately	 creates	 fear;	 commitment	 immediately	 creates	 fear	 --	 and	 the
modern	man	wants	to	have	sex	but	no	love.
A	woman	 told	me	 that	 she	wants	 sex	only	with	 strangers.	Traveling	 in	a	 train,
meeting	 with	 a	 stranger	 --	 that's	 okay	 --	 but	 not	 even	 with	 someone	 who	 is
friendly	 or	 familiar.	 I	 asked,	 'Why?'	 She	 said	 that	 once	 you	 make	 love	 to
someone	who	is	known	to	you,	some	involvement	starts.	In	a	train,	on	a	journey,
you	meet,	make	love,	you	don't	know	even	what	the	other	person's	name	is,	who
he	 is,	 from	where	 he	 comes.	 You	 get	 down	when	 your	 station	 comes	 and	 he
moves	 away,	 forgotten	 forever;	 he	 leaves	 no	 scratch,	 you	 remain	 completely
clean.	You	come	out	of	it	completely	clean	and	unscratched.
I	 can	 understand.	 This	 is	 the	 difficulty	 of	 the	 whole	 modern	 mind.	 All
relationships	 are	 becoming	 by	 and	 by	 casual.	 People	 are	 afraid	 of	 any	 sort	 of
commitment,,	because	 they	have	come	 to	know	at	 least	one	 thing	out	of	bitter
experience	 --	 whenever	 you	 become	 related	 too	much,	 the	 reality	 erupts,	 and
your	inner	conflict	starts	being	reflected	by	the	other	and	then	life	becomes	ugly,
horrible,	intolerable.
It	 happened	 once	 that	 I	was	 sitting	with	 a	 few	 friends	 in	 a	 university	 campus
ground.	One	of	the	professors	said,	'On	the	day	my	wedding	occurred....'
But	the	other	professor	stopped	him	immediately	and	said	'Pardon	the	correction,
but	affairs	such	as	marriages,	receptions,	dinners,	and	things	of	that	nature,	take
place.	It	is	only	calamities	which	occur.	You	see	the	distinction?	Please	don't	say,
"The	day	my	marriage	occurred,	or	the	day	my	wedding	occurred."'
The	other	was	a	professor	of	language	and	of	course	he	was	right.	But	the	first
man	said,
'Yes,	many,	many	things...'	and	again	started,	 'And	as	I	was	saying,	the	day	my
wedding	occurred....It	is	a	calamity.'
If	you	are	outside	of	it,	it	may	look	like	a	beautiful	oasis	in	the	desert	but	as	you
come	close	the	oasis	starts	drying	and	disappearing.	Once	you	are	caught	in	it,	it
is	 an	 imprisonment,	 but	 remember,	 the	 imprisonment	 doesn't	 come	 from	 the
other,	it	comes	from	within	you.
If	 the	 left-hemisphere	 brain	 goes	 on	 dominating	 you,	 you	 will	 live	 a	 very
successful	life	--
so	successful	that	by	the	time	you	are	forty	you	will	have	ulcers;	by	the	time	you
are	forty-five	you	will	have	had	at	least	one	or	two	heart-attacks;	by	the	time	you
are	 fifty	you	will	be	almost	dead	 --	but	 successfully	dead.	You	may	become	a
great	 scientist,	 but	 you	will	 never	 become	a	great	 being.	You	may	 accumulate
enough	of	wealth,	but	you	will	 lose	all	 that	 is	of	worth.	You	may	conquer	 the
whole	 world	 like	 an	 Alexander,	 but	 your	 own	 inner	 territory	 will	 remain
unconquered.
There	 are	 many	 attractions	 to	 follow	 the	 left-hemisphere	 brain	 --	 that	 is	 the
worldly	brain.
It	 is	more	concerned	with	 things:	cars,	money,	houses,	power,	prestige.	That	 is
the	orientation	of	the	man	who	in	India	we	call	a	GRUSTHA,	a	householder.
The	 right-hemisphere	brain	 is	 the	orientation	of	 the	SANNYASIN.	one	who	 is
more	interested	in	his	own	inner	being,	his	 inner	peace,	his	blissfulness,	and	is
less	concerned	about	things.	If	they	come	easily,	good;	if	they	don't	come	that	is
also	 good.	 He	 is	 more	 concerned	 with	 the	 moment,	 less	 concerned	 with	 the
future;	more	concerned	with	the	poetry	of	life,	less	concerned	with	the	arithmetic
of	it.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
Finkelstein	 had	 made	 a	 huge	 killing	 at	 the	 races	 and	 Muscovitz,	 quite
understandably,	was	envious.
'How	did	you	do	it,	Finkelstein?'	he	demanded.
'Easy,'	said	Finkelstein,	'it	was	a	dream.'
'A	dream?'
'Yes;	 I	 had	 figured	out	 a	 three-horse	parley,	but	 I	was	not	 sure	 about	 the	 third
horse.	Then	the	night	before,	I	dreamed	that	an	angel	was	standing	over	the	head
of	my	 bed	 and	 kept	 saying,	 'Blessings	 on	 you,	 Finkelstein,	 seven	 times	 seven
blessings	 on	 you.'	When	 I	woke	 up	 I	 realized	 that	 seven	 times	 seven	 is	 forty-
eight	 and	 that	 horse	 number	 seventy-eight	 was	 Heavenly	 Dream.	 I	 made
Heavenly	 Dream	 the	 third	 horse	 in	 my	 parley	 and	 I	 just	 cleaned	 up,	 simply
cleaned	up.'
Muscovitz	said,	'But	Finkelstein,	seven	times	seven	is	forty-nine!'
And	Finkelstein	said,	'So	you	be	the	mathematician.'
There	 is	 a	 way	 to	 follow	 life	 through	 arithmetic	 and	 there	 is	 another	 way	 to
follow	 life	 through	 dream	 --	 through	 dreams	 and	 visions.	 They	 are	 totally
different.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 somebody	 asked,	 'Are	 there	 ghosts,	 fairies,	 and	 things	 like
that?'	Yes,	there	are	--	if	you	move	through	the	right-hemisphere	brain,	there	are.
If	 you	move	 through	 the	 left-hemisphere	 brain,	 there	 are	 not.	All	 children	 are
right-hemisphered,	they	see	ghosts	and	fairies	all	around,	but	you	go	on	talking
to	them	and	putting	them	in	their	places	and	saying	to	them,	'Nonsense.	You	are
stupid.	 Where	 is	 the	 fairy?	 There	 is	 nothing,	 just	 a	 shadow.'	 By	 and	 by	 you
convince	the	child,	the	helpless	child;	by	and	by	you	convince	him	and	he	moves
from	the	right-hemisphered	orientation	to	the	left-hemisphered	orientation	--	he
has	to.	He	has	to	live	in	your	world:	he	has	to	forget	his	dreams,	he	has	to	forget
all	myth,	he	has	to	forget	all	poetry,	he	has	to	learn	mathematics.
Of	course	he	becomes	efficient	in	mathematics	--	and	becomes	almost	crippled
and	paralyzed	in	life.	Existence	goes	on	getting	farther	and	farther	away	and	he
becomes	just	a	commodity	in	the	market,	his	whole	life	becomes	just	rubbish...
although,	of	course,	valuable	in	the	eyes	of	the	world.
A	SANNYASIN	is	one	who	lives	through	the	imagination,	who	lives	through	the
dreaming	 quality	 of	 his	mind,	who	 lives	 through	 poetry,	who	 poeticizes	 about
life,	who	 looks	 through	visions.	Then	 trees	 are	 greener	 than	 they	 look	 to	 you,
then	birds	are	more	beautiful,	then	everything	takes	a	luminous	quality.	Ordinary
pebbles	become	diamonds;	ordinary	 rocks	 are	no	 longer	ordinary	 --	nothing	 is
ordinary.	 If	 you	 look	 from	 the	 right	 hemisphere,	 everything	 becomes	 Divine,
sacred.	Religion	is	from	the	right	hemisphere.
A	man	was	sitting	with	his	friend	in	a	cafeteria	drinking	tea.	He	studied	his	cup
and	said	with	a	sigh,	'Ah,	my	friend,	life	is	like	a	cup	of	tea.'
The	other	considered	that	for	a	moment	and	then	said,	'But	why?	Why	is	life	like
a	cup	of	tea?'
The	first	man	replied,	'How	should	I	know?	Am	I	a	philosopher?'
The	 right-hemisphere	 brain	 only	 makes	 statements	 about	 facts,	 it	 cannot	 give
you	 reasons.	 If	 you	 ask,	 'Why?'	 it	 can	 only	 remain	 silent,	 there	 comes	 no
response	 from	 it.	 If	 you	 are	walking	 and	 you	 see	 a	 lotus	 flower	 and	 you	 say,
'Beautiful!'	--	and	somebody	says,	'Why?'	what	will	you	do?	You	will	say,	'How
am	 I	 to	 know?	 Am	 I	 a	 philosopher?'	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 statement,	 a	 very	 simple
statement,	 in	 itself	 total,	 complete.	 There	 is	 no	 reason	 behind	 it	 and	 no	 result
beyond	it,	it	is	a	simple	statement	of	fact.	Read	the	Upanishads	--
they	are	simple	statements	of	facts.	They	say,	'God	is.	Don't	ask	why.'	They	will
say,	 'Are	 we	 philosophers?	 How	 are	 we	 to	 know?	 God	 is.'	 They	 say	 God	 is
beautiful,	they	say	God	is	near,	closer	than	your	heart,	but	don't	ask	why	--	they
are	not	philosophers.
Look	at	the	gospels	and	the	statements	of	Jesus	--	they	are	simple.	He	says,	'My
God	is	in	heaven.	I	am	his	son,	he	is	my	father.	Don't	ask	why.'	He	will	not	be
able	to	prove	it	in	a	court,	he	will	simply	say,	'I	know.'	If	you	ask	him	by	whom
he	has	been	told,	by	what	authority	he	says	these	things,	he	will	say,	'It	is	by	my
own	authority.	 I	have	no	other	authority.'	That	 is	 the	problem	when	a	man	like
Jesus	 moves	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 rational	 mind	 cannot	 understand,	 he	 was	 not
crucified	for	any	other	reason.	He	was	crucified	by	the	left	hemisphere	because
he	was	a	right-hemisphere	man.	He	was	crucified	because	of	the	inner	conflict.
Lao	Tzu	says,	 'The	whole	world	seems	to	be	clever,	only	I	am	muddle-headed;
the	whole	world	seems	to	be	certain,	only	I	am	confused	and	hesitant.'	He	is	a
right-hemisphered	man.
The	 right	 hemisphere	 is	 the	 hemisphere	 of	 poetry	 and	 love.	 A	 great	 shift	 is
needed;	 that	 shift	 is	 the	 inner	 transformation.	 Yoga	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 reach	 the
oneness	of	being	through	the	left	hemisphere,	using	logic,	mathematics,	science
and	 trying	 to	go	beyond.	Zen	 is	 just	 the	opposite:	 the	aim	 is	 the	same	but	Zen
uses	the	right	hemisphere	to	go	beyond.
Both	can	be	used,	but	 to	 follow	yoga	 is	a	very,	very	 long	path;	 it	 is	almost	an
unnecessary	struggle	because	you	are	trying	to	reach	from	reason	to	super-reason
which	is	more	difficult.	Zen	is	easier	because	it	 is	an	effort	 to	reach	the	super-
reason	from	irreason.
Irreason	 is	 almost	 like	 super-reason	 --	 there	 are	 no	 barriers.	 Yoga	 is	 like
penetrating	a	wall	and	Zen	is	like	opening	a	door.	The	door	may	not	be	closed	at
all,	you	just	push	it	a	little	and	it	opens.
Now	the	story.	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	among	Zen	anecdotes.	Zen	people
talk	through	stories.	They	have	to	talk	through	stories	because	they	cannot	create
theories	 and	 doctrines,	 they	 can	 only	 tell	 stories.	 They	 are	 great	 story-tellers.
Jesus	 goes	 on	 talking	 in	 parables,	 Buddha	 goes	 on	 talking	 in	 parables,	 Sufi
mystics	go	on	talking	in	parables	--	it	is	not	coincidental.	The	story,	the	parable,
the	 anecdote,	 is	 the	 way	 of	 the	 right	 hemisphere;	 logic	 argument,	 proof,
syllogism,	is	the	way	of	the	left	hemisphere.
Listen	to	it.
GOSO	HOYEN	USED	TO	SAY,	 'WHEN	PEOPLE	ASK	ME	WHAT	ZEN	 IS
LIKE,	I	TELL	THEM	THIS	STORY.'
This	 story	 really	 tells	 what	 Zen	 is	 like	 --	 without	 defining,	 it	 indicates.	 A
definition	is	not	possible	because	Zen	in	its	basic	quality	is	indefinable.	You	can
taste	it	but	you	cannot	define	it;	you	can	live	it	but	language	is	not	sufficient	to
say	it;	you	can	show	it	but	you	cannot	say	it.	But	through	a	story	a	little	bit	can
be	 transferred.	And	this	story	really	 indicates,	 indicates	perfectly	 the	quality	of
what	 Zen	 is	 like.	 This	 is	 just	 a	 gesture,	 don't	 make	 it	 a	 definition,	 don't
philosophize	around	it,	let	it	be	like	lightning,	a	flash	of	understanding.	It	is	not
going	to	increase	your	knowledge	but	it	can	give	you	a	shift,	a	jerk,	a	change	of
gestalt.	You	can	be	thrown	from	one	corner	of	the	mind	to	another...and	that	is
the	whole	point	of	the	story.
NOTICING	THAT	HIS	FATHER	WAS	GROWING	OLD,
THE	 SON	OF	 A	 BURGLAR	ASKED	HIS	 FATHER	 TO	 TEACH	HIM	 THE
TRADE
SO	THAT	HE	COULD	CARRY	ON	THE	FAMILY	BUSINESS
AFTER	HIS	FATHER	HAD	RETIRED.
The	trade	of	a	burglar	is	not	a	scientific	thing:	it	is	an	art.	Burglars	are	as	much
born	as	poets;	you	cannot	 learn,	 learning	won't	 help.	 If	you	 learn,	you	will	 be
caught	 because	 then	 the	 police	 know	more	 than	 you.	 They	 have	 accumulated
centuries	of	learning.	A	burglar	is	a	born	burglar;	he	lives	through	intuition,	it	is
a	 knack;	 he	 lives	 through	 hunches.	 A	 burglar	 is	 feminine,	 he	 is	 not	 a
businessman;	he	is	a	gambler,	he	risks	all	for	almost	nothing;	his	whole	trade	is
of	danger	and	risk.	It	 is	 just	 like	a	religious	man.	Zen	people	say	that	religious
people	are	also	like	burglars:	in	search	of	God	they	are	also	burglars.
There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 reach	 God	 through	 logic	 or	 reason	 or	 accepted	 society,
culture,	civilization.	They	break	 the	wall	 somewhere,	 they	enter	 from	the	back
door	If	in	the	daylight	it	is	not	allowed,	they	enter	in	dark.	If	it	is	not	possible	to
follow	the	crowd	on	the	super-highway,	they	make	their	own	individual	paths	in
the	forest.	Yes,	there	is	a	certain	similarity.	You	can	reach	God	only	if	you	are	a
burglar,	an	artist	of	how	to	steal	the	fire,	how	to	steal	the	treasure.
The	 father	was	 going	 to	 retire	 and	 the	 son	 asked,	 'Before	 you	 retire	 teach	me
your	trade.'
THE	 FATHER	 AGREED,	 AND	 THAT	 NIGHT	 THEY	 BROKE	 INTO	 A
HOUSE
TOGETHER.
OPENING	 A	 LARGE	 CHEST	 THE	 FATHER	 TOLD	 THE	 SON	 TO	 GO	 IN
AND	PICK
OUT	 THE	 CLOTHING.	 AS	 SOON	 AS	 THE	 BOY	 WAS	 INSIDE,	 THE
FATHER
LOCKED	THE	CHEST	AND	THEN	MADE	A	LOT	OF	NOISE	SO	THAT	THE
WHOLE	HOUSE	WAS	AROUSED.	THEN	HE	SLIPPED	QUIETLY	AWAY.
A	real	master	he	must	have	been,	no	ordinary	burglar...
LOCKED	INSIDE	THE	CHEST	THE	BOY	WAS	ANGRY,	TERRIFIED,	AND
PUZZLED...
of	 course,	 naturally,	 what	 type	 of	 teaching	 is	 this?	 He	 had	 been	 thrown	 in	 a
dangerous	situation.
But	that	is	the	only	way	to	teach	something	of	the	unknown;	that	is	the	only	way
to	 teach	 something	 of	 the	 right-hemisphere	 brain.	 The	 left	 hemisphere	 can	 be
taught	in	schools:	learning	is	possible,	discipline	is	possible,	gradual	courses	are
possible.	Then	by	and	by,	moving	from	one	class	to	another,	you	become	masters
of	art	and	science	--	many	things.
But	there	cannot	be	any	schools	for	the	right	hemisphere:	it	is	intuitive,	it	is	not
gradual,	it	is	sudden.	It	is	like	a	flash,	a	lightning	in	the	dark	night.	If	it	happens,
it	happens;	if	it	doesn't	happen,	it	doesn't	happen	--	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.
You	can	only	leave	yourself	in	a	certain	situation	where	there	is	more	possibility
for	it	to	happen.	That's	why	I	say	the	old	man	must	have	been	a	real	master.
LOCKED	INSIDE	THE	CHEST,	THE	BOY	WAS	ANGRY,	TERRIFIED,	AND
--
PUZZLED...
These	are	 the	 three	states	your	 reason	will	pass	 through.	 In	all	my	meditations
the	same	is	being	done	to	you.	Locked	in	a	chest,	with	the	key	thrown	away,	first
you	feel	angry.
Many	SANNYASINS	come	to	me	and	they	say	they	feel	very	angry	with	me.	I
can	understand,	it	is	natural	--	I	am	forcing	them	into	situations	where	their	old
mind	cannot	function.	That	is	the	root	cause	of	anger.	They	simply	feel	impotent,
their	 old	mind	 cannot	 function,	 they	 cannot	make	 anything	 out	 of	 it.	What	 is
happening?	And	when	you	 feel	a	 situation	where	your	mind	 is	 simply	useless,
you	feel	angry	towards	me	--	angry	and	then	terrified.	Then	one	understands	the
whole	 situation	 and	 all	 that	 you	 have	 learned	 seems	 absolutely	 useless...hence
fear.
Now	there	was	no	 logical	way	 to	get	out	of	 that	chest:	 it	was	 locked	 from	 the
outside,	 the	father	had	made	a	noise,	 the	whole	house	was	awake,	people	were
moving	around,	searching,	and	the	father	had	escaped.	Now	is	there	any	logical
way	to	get	out	of	 this	chest?	Logic	simply	fails,	 reason	is	of	no	use.	What	can
you	think?	Mind	suddenly	stops	-
-	and	that	is	what	the	father	is	doing,	that	is	what	it	is	all	about.	He	is	trying	to
force	 the	 son	 into	 a	 situation	where	 the	 logical	mind	 stops,	 because	 a	 burglar
does	 not	 need	 a	 logical	mind.	 If	 he	 follows	 a	 logical	mind	 he	will	 be	 caught
sooner	or	later	by	the	police	because	they	also	follow	the	same	logic.
It	happened	in	the	second	world	war.	For	three	years	Adolph	Hitler	continued	to
win,	and	the	reason	was	that	he	was	illogical..	All	the	other	countries	that	were
fighting	with	him	were	fighting	logically.	Of	course,	they	had	a	great	science	of
war,	military	 training	 and	 this	 and	 that,	 and	 they	 had	 experts	who	would	 say,
'Now,	Hitler	is	going	to	attack	from	this	side.'	And	if	Hitler	was	also	in	his	senses
he	 would	 have	 done	 that	 because	 that	 was	 the	 weakest	 point	 in	 the	 enemy's
defense.	Of	course	the	enemy	has	to	be	attacked	where	he	is	the	weakest	--	it	is
logical.	So	they	would	be	expecting	Hitler	at	 the	weakest	point,	 they	would	be
gathering	around	 the	weakest	point	 and	he	would	hit	 anywhere,	unpredictably.
He	would	not	even	follow	his	own	generals'	advice.
He	had	an	astrologer	who	would	suggest	where	to	attack.	Now	this	is	something
never	done	before	--	a	war	is	not	run	by	astrologers.	Once	Churchill	understood,
once	 the	 spies	 came	with	 the	 report	 that	 they	were	 not	 going	 to	win	with	 this
man	 because	 he	 was	 absolutely	 illogical;	 that	 a	 foolish	 astrologer	 who	 didn't
know	anything	about	war,	who	had	never	been	on	the	front,	was	deciding	things,
deciding	by	 the	 stars	 --	what	 have	 stars	 got	 to	 do	with	 a	war	 going	on	on	 the
earth?	--	then	Churchill	immediately	appointed	a	royal	astrologer	to	the	king	and
they	 started	 following	 the	 royal	 astrologer.	 Then	 things	 started	 falling	 in	 line
because	now	two	fools	were	predicting....	Things	became	easier.
If	a	burglar	is	going	to	follow	Aristotle	he	will	be	caught	sooner	or	later	because
the	 same	 Aristotelian	 logic	 is	 followed	 by	 the	 police.	 Just	 few	 days	 before,
Vedanta	did	 a	beautiful	 thing:	 he	 escaped	with	 the	 ashram	 jeep.	Of	 course	 the
police	had	to	be	informed.
Everybody	 was	 expecting	 that	 he	 would	 go	 towards	 Chanda,	 because	 he	 had
been	saying	 that	he	wanted	 to	go	 to	Chanda	and	 re-open	an	old	ashram	which
used	to	be	there	--
Kailash.	 Had	 he	 gone	 towards	 there	 the	 police	 may	 not	 have	 follow,	 but	 the
police	were	thinking	logically	and	they	said,	 'If	he	had	been	saying	that	he	was
going	towards	Chanda	he	will	not	go	to	Chanda	now	because	he	will	be	afraid	he
will	 be	 caught	 on	 that	 road.	He	 is	 not	 going	 there.'	 So	 they	were	 not	worried
about	that	road	and,	of	course,	Vedanta	was	caught	in	Lonavalla.	He	was	going
towards	Bombay.	But	the	police	also	followed	the	same	logic.
If	you	go	through	logic,	then	anybody	who	follows	the	logical	method	can	catch
you	anywhere.
A	burglar	has	to	be	unpredictable,	logic	is	not	possible.	He	has	to	be	illogical	--
so	much	 so	 that	 nobody	 can	 predict	 him.	 But	 illogic	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 your
whole	energy	moves	through	the	right	hemisphere.
LOCKED	INSIDE	THE	CHEST,	THE	BOY	WAS	ANGRY,	TERRIFIED,	AND
PUZZLED	AS	TO	HOW	HE	WAS	GOING	TO	GET	OUT.
'How?'	is	a	logical	question.	Hence	he	was	terrified	because	there	was	no	way	--
'How?'
was	simply	impotent.	Then	an	idea	flashed	to	him.	Now	this	 is	a	shift:	only	 in
dangerous	situations	where	the	left	hemisphere	cannot	function,	does	it,	as	a	last
resort.	allow	the	right	hemisphere	to	have	its	say.	When	it	cannot	function,	when
it	feels	 that	now	there	is	no	go,	now	it	 is	defeated,	 then	it	says	why	not	give	a
chance	 to	 the	 oppressed,	 to	 the	 imprisoned	 part	 of	 the	mind?	Give	 that	 too	 a
chance.	Maybe...there	can	be	no	harm.
THEN	AN	IDEA	FLASHED	ON	HIM	--	HE	MADE	A	NOISE	LIKE	A	CAT.
Now	this	is	not	logical.	Making	a	noise	like	a	cat?	Simply	an	absurd	idea.	But	it
worked.
THE	FAMILY	TOLD	A	MAID	TO	TAKE	A	CANDLE	AND	EXAMINE	THE
CHEST.
WHEN	THE	LID	WAS	UNLOCKED	THE	BOY	JUMPED	OUT,	BLEW	OUT
THE
CANDLE,	PUSHED	HIS	WAY	PAST	THE	ASTONISHED	MAID,	AND	RAN
OUT.
THE	PEOPLE	RAN	AFTER	HIM.
NOTICING	A	WELL	BY	THE	SIDE	OF	THE	ROAD	THE	BOY	THREW	IN	A
LARGE	 STONE,	 THEN	 HID	 IN	 THE	 DARKNESS.	 THE	 PURSUERS
GATHERED
AROUND	 THE	 WELL	 TRYING	 TO	 SEE	 THE	 BURGLAR	 DROWNING
HIMSELF.
This	 too	is	not	of	 the	 logical	mind.	Because	 the	 logical	mind	needs	 time	--	 the
logical	mind	needs	time	to	proceed,	to	think,	to	argue	this	way	and	that,	all	the
alternatives	--	and	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	alternatives.	When	you	are	in	a
situation	 there	 is	 no	 time	 to	 think.	 If	 people	 are	 pursuing	 you	 --	 how	 can	 you
think?	Thinking	is	good	when	you	are	sitting	in	an	armchair.	With	your	closed
eyes	you	can	philosophize	and	think	and	argue,	for	this	and	against	that,	pro	and
con;	but	when	people	are	pursuing	you	and	your	 life	 is	 in	danger	you	have	no
time	to	think	--	one	lives	in	the	moment,	one	simply	becomes	spontaneous.	It	is
not	 that	 he	 decided	 to	 throw	 the	 stone,	 it	 simply	 happened.	 It	 was	 not	 a
conclusion,	he	was	not	thinking	about	doing	it,	he	simply	found	himself	doing	it.
He	 threw	a	stone	 in	 the	well	and	hid	himself	 in	 the	darkness,	and	 the	pursuers
stopped,	thinking	the	burglar	had	drowned	himself	in	the	well.
WHEN	THE	BOY	GOT	HOME	HE	WAS	VERY	ANGRY	AT	HIS	 FATHER
AND	HE
TRIED	 TO	 TELL	 HIM	 THE	 STORY;	 BUT	 THE	 FATHER	 SAID:	 'DON'T
BOTHER
TO	TELL	ME	THE	DETAILS,	YOU	ARE	HERE	YOU	HAVE	LEARNED	THE
ART.'
What	is	the	point	of	telling	the	details?	They	are	useless.	Details	are	useless	as
far	as	 intuition	 is	 concerned	because	 intuition	 is	never	a	 repetition.	Details	 are
meaningful	 as	 far	 as	 logic	 is	 concerned.	 So,	 logical	 people	 go	 on	 into	minute
details	 so	 that	 if	 the	 same	 situation	 happens	 again	 they	will	 be	 in	 control	 and
they	will	know	what	to	do.
But	in	the	life	of	a	burglar	the	same	situation	never	happens	again.	And	in	real
life	also	the	same	situation	never	happens	again.	If	you	have	conclusions	in	your
mind	you	will	become	almost	dead,	you	will	not	be	responding.	In	life,	response
is	 needed,	 not	 reaction:	 you	 have	 to	 act	 out	 of	 nowhere,	 with	 no	 conclusions
inside.	With	no	center	you	have	to	act	--	you	have	to	act	into	the	unknown	from
the	unknown.
And	this	 is	what	Goso	Hoyen	used	to	say	when	people	asked	him	what	Zen	is
like.	This	story	he	would	tell.
Zen	is	exactly	like	burglary:	it	is	an	art,	it	is	not	a	science;	it	is	feminine,	it	is	not
male;	it	is	not	aggressive,	it	is	receptive;	it	is	not	a	well-planned	methodology;	it
is	a	spontaneity.
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 theories,	 hypotheses,	 doctrines,	 scriptures;	 it	 has
something	to	do	with	only	one	thing	--	that	is,	awareness.
What	 happened	 in	 that	moment	when	 the	boy	was	 inside	 the	 chest?	 In	 such	 a
danger	you	cannot	be	sleepy,	in	such	a	danger	your	consciousness	becomes	very
sharp,	has	to.	Life	is	at	stake,	you	are	totally	awake	--	that's	how	one	should	be
totally	awake	each	moment.
And	when	you	are	totally	awake,	this	shift	happens:	from	the	left	hemisphere	the
energy	 moves	 to	 the	 right	 hemisphere.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 alert,	 you	 become
intuitive;	 flashes	come	to	you,	 flashes	 from	the	unknown,	out	of	 the	blue.	You
may	not	follow	them	--	then	you	will	miss	much.
In	fact	all	the	great	discoveries	in	science	come	from	the	right	hemisphere	also,
not	 from	 the	 left.	You	must	 have	 heard	 about	Madam	Curie,	 the	 only	woman
who	got	a	Nobel	Prize.	She	had	been	working	hard	for	three	years	on	a	certain
mathematical	problem	but	could	not	solve	it.	She	worked	hard.	argued	from	this
way	and	that,	but	there	was	no	way.
One	night.	 tired.	 exhausted.	 she	 fell	 asleep	 --	 and	while	 she	was	 falling	asleep
then	 too	she	was	 trying	 to	 solve	 the	problem.	 In	 the	night	 she	awoke.	walked,
wrote	the	answer	on	some	paper.	came	back.	and	went	to	sleep.	In	the	morning
she	found	the	answer	there	on	the	table	but	she	could	not	believe	who	had	done
it.	Nobody	could	do	it!	The	servant	--
you	could	not	expect	him	to	do	it;	he	did	not	know	anything	about	mathematics.
She	remembered	well	 that	 last	night	she	had	tried	her	best	and	could	not	do	it.
What	had	happened?	Then	she	tried	to	remember	--	because	the	handwriting	was
hers.	 She	 tried	 to	 remember...and	 then	 a	 faint	 remembrance	 came:	 as	 if	 in	 a
dream	she	had	walked	to	the	table	and	written.
From	where	had	this	answer	come?	It	could	not	be	from	the	left	hemisphere.	the
left	 had	 been	working	 hard	 for	 three	 years.	 And	 there	was	 no	 process	 on	 the
paper,	just	the	conclusion.	If	it	had	come	from	the	left	there	would	have	been	a
process,	it	goes	step	by	step.	But	this	was	like	a	flash	--	the	same	kind	of	flash
that	had	happened	to	the	boy	in	the	chest.	The	left	hemisphere,	tired,	exhausted,
helpless,	sought	the	help	of	the	right	hemisphere.
Whenever	you	are	in	such	a	corner	that	your	logic	fails,	don't	be	desperate,	don't
become	hopeless.	Those	moments	may	prove	the	greatest	blessings	in	your	life:
those	 are	 the	moments	 that	 the	 left	 allows	 the	 right	 to	 have	 its	way.	Then	 the
feminine	part,	the	receptive	part.	gives	you	an	idea.	If	you	follow	it.	many	doors
will	be	opened.	But	it	is	possible	you	may	miss	it;	you	may	say.	'What	nonsense!'
This	boy	could	have	missed.	The	idea	is	not	very	normal,	regular,	logical.	Make
a	noise	 like	 a	 cat?	For	what?	He	 could	have	 asked,	 'Why?	 and	 then	he	would
have	missed.	But	he	could	not	ask	because	the	situation	was	such	that	there	was
no	other	way.	So	he	thought,
'Let	us	try.	What	is	wrong	in	it?'	He	used	the	clue.
The	father	was	right.	He	said,	'Don't	go	into	details.	they	are	not	important.	You
are	back	home,	you	have	learned	the	art.'
The	whole	art	is	how	to	function	from	the	feminine	part	of	the	mind.	because	the
feminine	 is	 joined	with	 the	Whole	 and	 the	male	 is	not	 joined	with	 the	Whole.
The	 male	 is	 aggressive,	 the	 male	 is	 constantly	 in	 struggle	 --	 the	 feminine	 is
constantly	in	surrender,	in	deep	trust.	Hence	the	feminine	body	is	so	beautiful,	so
round.	There	is	a	deep	trust	and	a	deep	harmony	with	nature.	A	woman	lives	in
deep	surrender	--	a	man	is	constantly	fighting,	angry,	doing	this	and	that,	trying
to	prove	something,	trying	to	reach	somewhere.	A	woman	is	happy,	not	trying	to
reach	 anywhere.	Ask	women	 if	 they	would	 like	 to	 go	 to	 the	moon.	They	will
simply	be	 amazed.	For	what?	What	 is	 the	 point?	Why	 take	 such	 trouble?	The
home	 is	 perfectly	 good.	 The	woman	 is	 not	 interested	 in	what	 is	 happening	 in
Vietnam	and	what	is	happening	in	Korea	and	what	is	happening	in	Israel	She	is
at	 the	 most	 interested	 in	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 the	 neighborhood,	 at	 the	 most
interested	in	who	has	fallen	in	love	with	whom,	who	has	escaped	with	whom...
in	gossips	not	in	politics.	She	is	more	interested	in	the	immediate,	here	now,	and
that	gives	her	a	harmony,	a	grace.	Man	is	constantly	trying	to	prove	something.
and	 if	 you	 want	 to	 prove	 of	 course	 you	 have	 to	 fight	 and	 compete	 and
accumulate.
Once	a	woman	 tried	 to	get	Dr.	 Johnson	 to	 talk	with	her	but	he	seemed	 to	 take
very	little	notice	of	her.
'Why,	Doctor,'	she	said	archly,	'I	believe	you	prefer	the	company	of	men	to	that
of	women.'
'Madam,'	replied	Johnson,	'I	am	very	fond	of	the	company	of	ladies.	I	like	their
beauty,	I	like	their	delicacy,	I	like	their	vivacity,	and	I	like	their	silence.'
Man	has	been	forcing	woman	to	be	silent,	not	only	outside,	inside	also	--	forcing
the	feminine	part	to	keep	quiet.	Just	watch	within	you.	If	the	feminine	part	says
something	you	immediately	jump	upon	it	and	you	say,	'Logical?	Absurd!'	People
come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 say.	 'The	 heart	 says	 we	 would	 like	 to	 become
SANNYASINS	but	the	head	says	no...'
Dr.	Johnson,	trying	to	keep	the	woman	silent.	The	heart	is	feminine.
You	miss	much	in	your	life	because	the	head	goes	on	talking;	it	does	not	allow.
And	the	only	quality	in	the	head	is	that	it	is	more	articulate,	cunning,	dangerous,
violent.	Because	of	its	violence	it	has	become	the	leader	inside,	and	that	inside
leadership	 has	 become	 an	 outside	 leadership	 for	 man.	 Man	 has	 dominated
women	in	the	outside	world	also;	the	grace	is	dominated	by	violence.
I	 was	 invited	 to	 a	 school	 for	 a	 certain	 function.	 There	 was	 a	 rally	 of	 school-
children	and	in	the	rally	the	procession	had	been	arranged	according	to	height	--
from	the	shortest	up	to	the	tallest.	But	the	pattern	was	broken,	I	noticed,	by	the
first	boy	heading	 the	procession.	He	was	a	gangling	youth	who	 looked	a	head
taller	than	the	rest.	'Why	is	he	at	the	front?'
I	asked	a	young	girl,	'Is	he	the	leader	of	the	school,	the	captain,	or	something	like
that?'
'No,'	she	whispered,	'he	pinches.'
The	 male	 mind	 goes	 on	 pinching,	 creating	 trouble.	 Trouble-makers	 become
leaders.	 In	 the	 schools,	 all	wise	 teachers	choose	 the	greatest	 trouble-makers	as
captains	of	the	classes	and	the	schools	--	the	trouble-makers.	the	criminals.	Once
they	 are	 in	 a	 powerful	 post	 their	 whole	 energy	 for	 trouble-making	 becomes
helpful	for	the	teacher.	They	start	creating	discipline	--	the	same	ones.
Just	watch	the	politicians	in	the	world:	when	one	party	is	in	power	the	opposite
party	 goes	 on	 creating	 trouble	 in	 the	 country.	 They	 are	 the	 law-breakers,	 the
revolutionaries.
And	 the	 party	 which	 is	 in	 power	 goes	 on	 creating	 discipline.	 Once	 they	 are
thrown	out	of	power,	they	will	create	trouble.	and	once	the	opposite	party	comes
into	power	they	become	the	guardians	of	discipline.
They	are	all	trouble-makers.
The	 male	 mind	 is	 a	 trouble-making	 phenomenon	 --	 hence	 it	 overpowers.	 it
dominates.
But	deep	down.	although	you	may	attain	power,	you	miss	life	--	and	deep	down,
the	 feminine	 mind	 continues.	 Unless	 you	 fall	 back	 to	 the	 feminine	 and	 you
surrender.	 unless	 your	 resistance	 and	 struggle	 become	 surrender.	 you	 will	 not
know	what	real	life,	and	the	celebration	of	it,	is.
I	have	heard	one	anecdote.
An	American	scientist	once	visited	the	offices	of	the	great	Nobel	prize-winning
physicist,	Niels	Bohr,	in	Copenhagen,	and	was	amazed	to	find	that	over	his	desk
was	 a	 horseshoe,	 securely	 nailed	 to	 the	 wall	 with	 the	 open	 end	 up	 in	 the
approved	manner	so	it	would	catch	the	good	luck	and	not	let	it	spill	out.
The	American	said	with	a	nervous	laugh,	'Surely	you	don't	believe	the	horseshoe
will	bring	you	good	 luck,	do	you,	Professor	Bohr?	After	all,	 as	a	 level-headed
scientist....'
Bohr	 chuckled,	 'I	 believe	 in	 no	 such	 thing,	 my	 good	 friend,	 not	 at	 all.	 I	 am
scarcely	 likely	 to	 believe	 in	 such	 foolish	 nonsense.	However,	 I	 am	 told	 that	 a
horseshoe	will	bring	you	good	luck	whether	you	believe	in	it	or	not.'
Look	a	little	deeper,	and	just	underneath	your	logic	you	will	find	fresh	waters	of
intuition,	fresh	waters	of	trust,	flowing.
Yoga	 is	 a	way	 to	 use	 reason	 to	 reach	God	 --	 of	 course	 very	 difficult,	 and	 the
longest	path.
If	you	follow	Patanjali	you	are	trying	to	do	that	which	can	happen	without	doing;
you	 are	 trying	 hard	 to	 do	 something.	You	 are	 trying	 to	 pull	 yourself	 by	 shoe-
strings	--	to	pull	yourself	up.
Zen	is	the	way	of	the	spontaneous	--	the	effortless	effort,	the	way	of	intuition.
A	Zen	Master,	 Ikkyu,	a	great	poet,	has	said:	 I	can	see	clouds	a	 thousand	miles
away,	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines.
This	is	what	Zen	is	all	about.	You	cannot	see	clouds	a	thousand	miles	away	with
the	logical	mind.	The	logical	mind	is	like	glass,	 too	dirty,	 too	covered	with	the
dust	of	ideas,	theories,	doctrines.	But	you	can	see	clouds	a	thousand	miles	away
with	 the	 pure	 glass	 of	 intuition,	with	 no	 thoughts	 --	 just	 pure	 awareness.	 The
mirror	is	clean	and	the	clarity	supreme.
You	cannot	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines	with	the	ordinary	logical	mind.	How
can	you	hear	the	ancient	music?	Music	once	gone	is	gone	forever.
But	I	tell	you,	Ikkyu	is	right.	You	can	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines	--	I	have
heard	it	--
but	 a	 shift,	 a	 total	 change,	 a	 change	 of	 gestalt,	 is	 needed.	 Then	 you	 can	 see
Buddha	preaching	again	and	you	can	hear	Buddha	speaking	again.	You	can	hear
the	ancient	music	 in	 the	pines	because	 it	 is	eternal	music,	 it	 is	never	 lost.	You
have	 lost	 the	 capacity	 to	 hear	 it.	 The	 music	 is	 eternal;	 once	 you	 regain	 your
capacity,	suddenly	it	is	there	again.
It	has	always	been	there,	only	you	were	not	there.	Be	here	now	and	you	can	also
see	clouds	a	thousand	miles	away,	and	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines.
Change	more	 and	more	 towards	 the	 right	 hemisphere,	 become	more	 and	more
feminine,	more	and	more	loving,	surrendering,	trusting,	more	and	more	closer	to
the	Whole.	Don't	try	to	be	an	island	--	become	part	of	the	continent.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	A	thousand	and	one	bifurcations
22	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602220
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
101
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
YOU	TOLD	ME	THAT	MY	MIND	IS	IMMATURE.	WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN
TO
HAVE	A	MIND	THAT	IS	MATURE?
To	 think	 that	you	know	 is	 to	be	 immature.	To	 function	 from	knowledge,	 from
conclusion,	 is	 to	 be	 immature.	 To	 function	 from	 no-knowledge,	 from	 no
conclusion,	from	no	past,	is	maturity.
Maturity	is	deep	trust	in	your	own	consciousness;	immaturity	is	a	distrust	in	your
own	 consciousness.	 When	 you	 distrust	 your	 consciousness	 you	 trust	 your
knowledge,	 but	 that	 is	 a	 substitute	 and	 a	 very	 poor	 substitute	 at	 that.	 Try	 to
understand	this	--	it	is	important.
You	have	been	 living,	 you	have	 experienced	many	 things;	 you	have	 read,	 you
have	 listened,	 you	have	 thought.	Now	all	 those	 conclusions	 are	 there.	When	a
certain	situation	arises.	you	can	function	in	two	ways.	You	can	function	through
all	 the	 accumulated	 past,	 according	 to	 it	 --	 that's	 what	 I	mean	 by	 functioning
through	 a	 center.	 through	 conclusions,	 through	 experience,	 stale,	 dead	 --	 then
whatsoever	 you	 do	 your	 response	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 a	 response,	 it	 will	 be	 a
reaction.	And	to	be	reactionary	is	to	be	immature.
Or,	 if	 you	 can	 function	 right	 now,	 here	 in	 this	 moment,	 through	 your
consciousness,	through	your	being	aware,	putting	aside	all	that	you	have	known
--	 this	 is	 what	 I	 call	 functioning	 through	 no-knowledge,	 this	 is	 functioning
through	innocence.	And	this	is	maturity.
I	was	reading	one	anecdote.
It	 seemed	 to	 Mr.	 Smith	 that	 now	 that	 his	 son	 had	 turned	 thirteen,	 it	 was
important	to	discuss	those	matters	which	an	adolescent	ought	to	know	about	life.
So	he	called	the	boy	into	the	study	one	evening.	shut	the	door	carefully,	and	said
with	impressive	dignity.
'Son,	I	would	like	to	discuss	the	facts	of	life	with	you.'
'Sure	thing,	Dad.'	said	the	boy.	'What	do	you	want	to	know?'
The	mind	is	immature	when	it	is	not	ready	to	learn.	The	ego	feels	very	fulfilled
if	it	need	not	learn	anything	from	anybody;	the	ego	feels	very	enhanced	if	it	feels
that	it	already	knows.	But	the	problem	is	that	life	goes	on	changing,	it	is	never
the	 same;	 it	 goes	 on	 flowing,	 it	 is	 a	 flux.	And	 your	 knowledge	 is	 always	 the
same.	Your	 knowledge	 is	 not	 evolving	with	 life,	 it	 is	 stuck	 somewhere	 in	 the
past,	and	whenever	you	react	 through	it	you	will	miss	the	point	because	it	will
not	 be	 exactly	 the	 right	 thing	 to	 do.	 Life	 has	 changed	 but	 your	 knowledge
remains	the	same.	and	you	act	out	of	this	knowledge.	That	means	you	face	today
with	your	yesterday's	knowledge.	You	will	never	be	able	to	be	alive.	The	more
you	function	through	knowledge,	the	more	immature	you	become.
Now	let	me	tell	you	a	paradox:	every	child	who	is	innocent	is	mature.
Maturity	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 age	 because	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
experience;	 maturity	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with	 responsiveness,	 freshness,
virginity,	innocence.	So	when	I	use	the	word	'mature'	I	don't	mean	that	when	you
become	more	experienced	you	will	be	more	mature.	That's	what	people	usually
mean	 when	 they	 use	 the	 word	 --	 I	 don't	 mean	 that.	 The	 more	 you	 gather
knowledge,	the	more	your	mind	will	become	immature;	and	by	the	time	you	are
seventy	or	eighty,	you	will	be	completely	immature	because	you	will	have	a	stale
past	 to	 function	 through.	 Watch	 a	 small	 child...knowing	 nothing,	 having	 no
experience,	he	functions	here	and	now.
That's	why	children	can	learn	more	than	aged	people.	Psychologists	say	that	if	a
child	 is	 not	 forced	 to	 learn,	 not	 forced	 to	 discipline	 himself,	 he	 can	 learn	 any
foreign	language	in	three	months.	Just	left	to	himself	with	people	who	know	the
language	he	will	catch	it	 in	 three	months.	But	 if	you	force	him	to	learn,	 it	will
take	 almost	 three	 years,	 because	 the	 more	 you	 force,	 the	 more	 he	 starts
functioning	through	whatsoever	he	learns,	through	yesterday's	knowledge.	If	he
is	left	to	himself	he	moves	freely,	spontaneously;	learning	comes	easy,	by	itself,
on	its	own	accord.
By	 the	 time	 the	child	 reaches	 the	year	eight	he	has	 learned	almost	seventy	per
cent	 of	whatsoever	 he	 is	 going	 to	 learn	 in	 his	whole	 life.	He	may	 live	 eighty
years,	but	by	the	time	he	is	eight	he	has	learned	seventy	per	cent	--	he	will	learn
only	 thirty	per	cent	more,	 and	every	day	his	 capacity	 to	 learn	will	be	 less	and
less	and	less.	The	more	he	knows,	the	less	he	learns.	When	people	use	the	word
'maturity'	they	mean	more	knowledge;	when	I	use	the	word	'maturity'	I	mean	the
capacity	 to	 learn.	 Not	 to	 know	 but	 to	 learn	 --	 and	 they	 are	 different,	 totally
different,	diametrically	opposite	things.	Knowledge	is	a	dead	thing;	the	capacity
to	learn	is	an	alive	process	--	you	simply	remain	capable	of	learning,	you	simply
remain	 available,	 you	 simply	 remain	 open,	 ready	 to	 receive.	 Learning	 is
receptivity.	 Knowledge	 makes	 you	 less	 receptive	 because	 you	 go	 on	 thinking
that	 if	you	already	know,	what	 is	 there	 to	 learn?	When	you	already	know.	you
miss	much;	when	you	don't	know	anything	you	cannot	miss	anything.
Socrates	 said	 in	his	old	 age,	 'Now	 I	know	nothing!'	That	was	maturity.	At	 the
very	end	he	said,	'I	know	nothing.'
Life	is	so	vast.	How	can	this	tiny	mind	know?	At	the	most,	glimpses	are	enough.
Even	 they	 are	 too	 much.	 Existence	 is	 so	 tremendously	 vast	 and	 infinite,
beginningless,	endless...	how	can	this	 tiny	drop	of	consciousness	know	it?	It	 is
enough	 even	 that	 a	 few	 glimpses	 come,	 a	 few	 doors	 open,	 a	 few	 moments
happen	when	you	come	in	contact	with	existence.	But	those	moments	cannot	be
turned	into	knowledge.
And	your	mind	tends	to	do	it	--	then	it	becomes	more	and	more	immature.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 that	 you	 should	 be	 capable	 of	 learning	 and	 your	 learning
capacity	should	never	be	burdened	by	knowledge,	never	be	covered	by	dust.	The
mirror	of	learning	should	remain	clean	and	fresh	so	it	can	go	on	reflecting.
The	mind	can	function	in	two	ways.	It	can	function	like	a	camera:	once	exposed,
finished
--	 the	 film	 immediately	 becomes	 knowledgeable	 and	 it	 loses	 its	 learning
capacity.
Exposed	once	and	it	already	knows	--	now	it	is	useless;	now	it	is	not	capable	of
learning	more.	 If	you	expose	 it	again	and	again	 it	will	become	more	confused.
That's	why	people	who	know	too	much	are	always	afraid	of	learning...	because
they	will	become	confused.
They	 are	 already	 exposed	 films.	 Then	 there	 is	 another	 type	 of	 learning	 --
learning	like	a	mirror.	Expose	the	mirror	for	a	thousand	and	one	times,	it	makes
no	difference	--	if	you	come	in	front	of	the	mirror,	you	are	reflected:	if	you	go,
the	reflection	goes.	The	mirror	never	accumulates.
The	 film	 in	 the	camera	 immediately	accumulates	 --	 it	 catches	hold,	 clings,	but
the	mirror	simply	mirrors:	you	come	in	front,	you	are	in	it;	you	go,	you	are	gone.
This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 remain	mature.	 Every	 child	 is	 born	mature	 and	 almost	 all
people	 die	 immature.	 This	 will	 look	 very	 paradoxical	 but	 this	 is	 so.	 Remain
innocent	and	you	will	remain	mature.
The	 second	 thing	 is	 that	 the	 immature	mind	 is	 always	 interested	 in	 trivia.	The
immature	 mind	 is	 always	 interested	 in	 things:	 money,	 houses,	 cars,	 power,
prestige...all	trivia,	all	rot.	The	mature	mind	is	interested	in	existence,	in	being,
in	life	itself.	So	when	I	say	to	you	that	you	have	an	immature	mind	I	mean	you
are	still	interested	in	things,	not	in	persons;	still	interested	in	the	outside,	not	in
the	 inside;	 still	 interested	 in	 objects,	 not	 in	 subjectivity;	 still	 interested	 in	 the
finite,	not	interested	in	the	infinite.
Just	 watch	 your	mind	 --	 where	 it	moves,	 what	 its	 fantasies	 are.	 If	 you	 find	 a
valuable	diamond	on	the	road	and	just	 there	by	its	side	a	rose	has	flowered,	 in
what	will	you	be	interested?	In	the	rose	or	in	the	diamond?	You	will	not	be	able
to	 see	 the	 rose	 if	 you	 are	 interested	 in	 the	 diamond;	 you	will	 simply	miss	 the
rose,	it	is	valueless.	Your	eyes	will	be	too	clouded	by	the	diamond,	your	whole
mind	will	become	focused	on	the	diamond,	and	you	will	miss	another	diamond
which	was	more	alive	--	the	rose.
In	 the	Hindu	 paradise	 they	 say	 roses	 are	 not	 ordinary	 roses,	 they	 are	made	 of
diamonds.	I	don't	know,	but	I	have	seen	roses.	If	you	can	see	roses	here	exactly
on	this	earth,	they	are	made	of	diamonds	--	so	why	go	far	away?	Not	in	paradise
but	here	now,	once	you	know	how	to	see	a	rose	there	is	nothing	comparable	to	it.
And	once	you	can	see	the	rose	you	may	forget	completely	about	the	diamond.
It	 happened	 that	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 came	 to	 me	 one	 day.	 He	 was	 very	 much
worried	and	he	said,	'Ah,	poor	Mr.	Jones.	Did	you	hear,	Osho,	what	happened	to
him?	He	tripped	at	 the	 top	of	 the	stairs,	 fell	down	the	whole	flight,	banged	his
head	and	died.'
Shocked,	I	said,	'Died?'
'Died,'	he	repeated	with	emphasis,	'and	broke	his	glasses	too!'
The	immature	mind	is	more	interested	in	glasses	than	in	life	and	death	and	love;
more	interested	in	things,	like	houses	and	cars.	When	I	tell	you	that	you	have	an
immature	mind,	I	mean	you	are	still	 interested	in	 that	which	is	worthless,	non-
essential.	At	the	most	it	can	be	used,	at	the	most	it	can	become	a	decoration	in
life,	 but	 it	 cannot	 replace	 life,	 it	 cannot	 substitute	 life,	 it	 cannot	 become	 life
itself.
And	 there	are	many	people	who	have	made	 it	a	 life.	 I	know	a	few	rich	people
who	live	such	beggarly	lives	--	one	cannot	imagine	it.
I	used	to	know	a	man	in	Delhi	who	had	six	bungalows,	all	out	on	rent.	And	he
lived	in	a	small	dark	cell	with	no	children	and	no	wife.
I	asked	him	once,	'You	have	enough.	Why	do	you	go	on	living	in	this	small	dark
cell?
Why	have	you	imposed	this	imprisonment	upon	yourself?	What	penance	are	you
doing?'
He	said,	 'None.	 I	have	always	 lived	 this	way	and	 it	 is	perfectly	beautiful.	And
people	are	living	in	those	six	bungalows.'
He	goes	to	those	bungalows	only	to	collect	rent.
I	asked	him,	'Why	have	you	never	married?'
'I	am	a	poor	man	and	women	are	very	costly.	I	could	not	afford	it,'	he	said.
If	 you	meet	 that	man	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 recognize	 that	 he	 owns	 six	 big
houses	and	earns	a	 lot	of	money.	What	has	happened	 to	 this	man?	He	 is	more
interested	in	money	than	he	is	in	himself,	he	is	more	interested	in	money	than	he
is	 in	 love,	 he	 is	more	 interested	 in	 the	 power	 that	money	 brings	 --	 but	 he	 has
never	shared	anything	with	anybody.
These	 people	 are	 not	 rare,	 they	 are	 very	 common.	 Everybody	 has	 such	 a
tendency	inside.
And	 people	 go	 on	 rationalizing.	 Man	 is	 very	 clever	 --	 he	 says,	 'This	 is	 not
miserliness.
Don't	misunderstand	me.	I	am	a	simple	man.	I	live	a	simple	life.	I	am	a	religious
man,	and	a	simple	life	is	beautiful.'
If	 you	 are	 too	 interested	 in	 things	 you	 are	 immature.	 Shift	 your	 attention.
Become	more	and	more	interested	in	people	rather	than	in	yourself.
I	 have	 a	 SANNYASIN	 here,	 Nisha.	 She	 always	 falls	 in	 love	 with	 beggarly
people	and	she	is	tremendously	rich.	Just	a	few	days	before,	she	came	and	asked
'Why,	Osho,	do	I	go	on	falling	in	 love	with	beggarly	people	--	people	who	are
almost	on	the	street?'	I	know	the	reason...	with	a	beggarly	man	she	need	not	be
worried	about	her	money.	And	she	thinks	that	she	helps	these	people	--	by	food,
by	 small	 things	 --	 in	 fact	 she	has	never	 fallen	 in	 love.	She	 is	 so	much	 in	 love
with	money	that	she	cannot	fall	in	love	with	persons.	She	purchases	these	people
for	money	--	they	are	without	any	cost,	without	any	risk.	And	they	feel	obliged
because	she	gives	food,	clothing,	shelter	--	they	feel	obliged,	so	they	pretend	that
they	 love	her,	and	she	goes	on	pretending	 that	she	has	 fallen	 in	 love.	This	 is	a
way	to	protect	the	money	and	this	is	a	way	to	remain	closed,	miserly.
And	she	is	suffering,	in	pain,	but	she	cannot	see	the	point.	She	has	to	learn	how
to	share.
If	you	know	how	to	share,	you	are	mature;	if	you	don't	know	how	to	share,	you
are	immature.
This	sharing	goes	on	on	all	levels,	in	all	directions,	in	all	dimensions.	So	one	of
the	most	basic	things	to	understand	is	the	more	you	share	something,	the	more	it
grows	in	you.
Share	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 and	 it	 will	 grow;	 cling	 to	 it,	 become	 afraid	 of
sharing,	of	friendship,	of	love,	and	it	will	shrink'.	Life	knows	only	one	law	and
that	law	is	of	expansion	and	sharing.
Look	 at	 nature.	 Nature	 is	 such	 a	 spendthrift.	 When	 one	 flower	 is	 needed,	 a
thousand	and	one	flowers	will	bloom.	When	you	make	love	to	a	woman	or	to	a
man,	in	each	orgasm	millions	of	cells	are	released.	One	would	have	been	enough
because	 at	 the	 most	 one	 child	 can	 be	 conceived,	 but	 millions	 of	 cells	 are
released.	One	man	can	populate	the	whole	earth	--	 just	one	man!	One	ordinary
man	has	at	least	four	thousand	intercourses	in	his	life	--	one	ordinary	man	--	and
in	 each	 intercourse	millions	of	 cells	 are	 released.	The	whole	world,	 the	whole
population	that	exists	right	now,	can	be	produced	by	one	man.
And	yet	the	man	will	become	the	father	of	only	two	or	three,	if	in	the	West;	or
twelve,	 fourteen,	 fifteen,	 if	 in	 the	 East	 --	 that's	 all.	 For	 fifteen	 persons	 to	 be
conceived,	millions	of	cells	are	released.
Nature	 is	 a	 spendthrift.	Where	one	 flower	 is	 needed	 it	 produces	millions.	One
tree	will	 produce....	Look	 at	 the	Gulmohr	 --	millions	 of	 seeds	 are	 ready.	They
will	 all	 fall	 down	and	 a	 few,	one,	 two,	 four,	 five,	 ten,	 twenty,	 a	 hundred,	may
become	 trees.	Why	 so	many	 seeds?	God	 is	 not	 a	miser.	 If	 you	 ask	 for	 one	he
gives	millions.	Just	ask!	Jesus	has	said,
'Knock	 and	 the	 doors	 shall	 be	 opened	 unto	 you,	 ask	 and	 it	 shall	 be	 given.'
Remember,	if	you	ask	for	one,	millions	will	be	given.
The	moment	 you	 become	miserly	 you	 are	 closed	 to	 the	 basic	 phenomenon	 of
life:	 expansion,	 sharing.	 The	 moment	 you	 start	 clinging	 to	 things,	 you	 have
missed	the	target
--	you	have	missed.	Because	things	are	not	the	target,	you,	your	innermost	being,
is	the	target	--	not	a	beautiful	house,	but	a	beautiful	you;	not	much	money,	but	a
rich	you;	not	many	things,	but	an	open	being,	available	to	millions	of	things.
When	I	say	you	are	immature,	I	mean	you	are	too	concerned	with	things	and	you
have	not	yet	learned	that	life	consists	of	consciousness	--	of	beings,	not	of	things.
Things	 are	 to	 be	 used,	 they	 are	 needed,	 but	 don't	 start	 living	 by	 them.	 Man
cannot	 live	by	bread	alone	--	once	 living	by	bread	alone,	 things	alone,	you	are
already	dead.
And	the	third	thing:	maturity	is	always	spontaneous.	It	does	not	plan,	it	makes	no
rehearsals.
People	 come	 to	 me....	 Just	 the	 other	 night	 somebody	 was	 there.	 He	 said,	 'I
prepare	 so	many	 questions	 when	 I	 come	 to	 see	 you.	 but	 when	 I	 come	 here	 I
forget.	What	do	you	do	to	me?'	I	am	not	doing	anything	at	all.	It	 is	YOU.	The
moment	you	prepare	something	you	are	already	saying	that	it	 is	false.	The	real
thing	need	not	be	prepared.	In	life.
rehearsals	are	not	needed,	they	are	needed	in	a	drama.	A	drama	is	a	false	thing.	If
you	prepare	your	questions	it	means	that	those	questions	are	not	yours.	If	you	are
thirsty	and	you	come	to	me,	will	you	forget	that	you	are	thirsty	and	you	would
like	your	thirst	to	be	quenched?	How	can	you	forget?	In	fact,	when	you	reach	the
side	 of	 a	 river	 thirst	 will	 burn	 more	 intensely.	 The	 moment	 you	 see	 water
flowing,	 and	 hear	 the	 sound	 of	 gurgling,	 immediately	 all	 that	 you	 have	 been
suppressing	 will	 bubble	 up,	 it	 will	 respond,	 your	 whole	 being	 will	 say,	 'I	 am
thirsty!'	If	you	are	thirsty	you	will	not	forget.
But	you	prepare	questions.	You	prepare	yourself	to	go	to	the	river	and	say,	'I	am
very	thirsty.'	What	is	the	point	of	preparing?	If	you	are	thirsty,	you	are;	if	you	are
not,	by	the	time	you	reach	to	the	river,	you	will	forget	about	it.
When	 I	 say	 you	 are	 immature	 I	 mean	 that	 you	 prepare	 your	 questions,	 your
inquiries.
They	are	mind	 things.	 they	don't	come	from	your	heart,	 they	are	not	related	 to
you,	they	have	no	roots	in	you.
It	is	related	in	George	Bernard	Shaw's	life	that	once,	at	the	opening	of	one	of	his
plays,	he	stepped	forward	at	its	conclusion	with	obvious	complaisance,	to	accept
the	rousing	plaudits	of	the	crowd.	There	was	one	dissenter,	however,	who	seized
the	occasion	of	a	 lull	 in	 the	applause	 to	call	out	 in	stentorian	 tones,	 'Your	play
stinks!'
There	 was	 a	 momentary	 horrified	 silence,	 but	 Shaw,	 unperturbed,	 exclaimed
from	the	stage,	'My	friend,	I	agree	with	you	completely,	but	what	are	we	two'	--
here	he	waved	his	hand	over	the	audience	--	'against	the	great	majority?'
And	applause	returned	more	loudly	than	ever.
You	 cannot	 prepare	 something	 like	 that,	 it	 is	 impossible	 It	 is	 a	 spontaneous
response	--
hence	 the	 beauty	 of	 it.	You	 cannot	 prepare	 for	 such	 things.	And	 life	 is	 such	 a
continuous	thing:	either	you	act	or	you	miss.	Later	on,	you	will	find	a	thousand
and	one	answers	--
you	could	have	said	this,	you	could	have	said	that	--	but	they	are	of	no	use.
Mark	Twain	was	coming	back	home	with	his	wife	 from	a	 lecture	hall.	He	had
just	delivered	a	beautiful	talk.	His	wife	had	not	been	present,	she	had	just	come
to	pick	him	up.
On	the	way	she	asked,	'How	was	the	lecture?'
Mark	 Twain	 said,	 'Which	 one?	 The	 one	 that	 I	 prepared,	 or	 the	 one	 that	 I
delivered,	or	the	one	that	I	am	thinking	now	that	I	should	have	delivered?	Which
one?'
If	you	prepare,	this	is	going	to	be	so.	Remain	conscious,	alert,	aware,	and	act	out
of	your	 spontaneity.	And	not	only	will	 others	 see	 the	 alive	 response	of	 it,	 you
also	will	be	thrilled	by	your	own	response.	Not	only	will	others	be	surprised,	you
will	also	be	surprised	yourself.
I	call	a	mind	mature	which	retains	the	capacity	to	be	surprised.	A	mind	is	mature
if	it	goes	on	continuously	being	surprised.	by	others,	by	himself,	by	everything.
Life	is	a	constant	wonder:	he	has	no	ready-made	plans	or	ready-made	responses
for	it,	he	never	knows	what	is	going	to	happen,	he	moves	into	the	unknown	each
moment.	And	he	never	jumps	ahead	of	himself,	he	never	lags	behind	himself,	he
remains	simply	himself,	wherever	he	is.
And,	the	last	and	most	basic	thing:	when	I	say	that	you	have	an	immature	mind,
basically	I	mean	that	you	have	a	mind.	Mind	as	such	is	immature;	only	no-mind
is	mature.
Maturity	has	nothing	 to	do	with	mind	because	mind	means	all	 that	you	know;
mind	 means	 your	 experiences,	 mind	 means	 your	 past,	 your	 rehearsals,	 your
preparations.	 All	 these	 things	 are	 implied	 in	 the	 word	 'mind.'	 Mind	 is	 not
something	 in	 particular,	 it	 is	 the	 whole	 accumulation,	 all	 the	 junk,	 the	 whole
heap,	of	your	dead	past.
When	 I	 say,	 'Be	mature,'	 I	mean	become	a	no-mind.	 If	 you	act	 spontaneously,
you	will	act	out	of	no-mind.	If	you	remain	capable	of	learning,	you	will	remain
capable	of	being	a	no-mind	again	and	again	and	again	--	the	mind	will	never	be
accumulated.	If	you	are	capable	of	remaining	alert-and	spontaneous,	able	to	be
surprised	 by	 life	 and	 by	 yourself,	 you	will	 become	by	 and	 by	more	 and	more
interested	 in	 the	 interior-most	 life,	 in	 the	 core	of	 life.	When	you	 see	 a	person,
you	will	not	see	just	the	body,	your	gaze	will	become	penetrating,	your	gaze	will
become	 like	 an	 x-ray.	 It	will	 catch	 hold	 of	 the	 person	 --	 of	 the	 consciousness
there,	of	 the	 inner	 light	 there	 in	 the	other	person.	The	body	 is	 just	an	abode	--
you	will	meet	 the	 person,	 you	will	 shake	 hands,	 but	 not	 only	 hands,	 you	will
shake	the	person,	you	will	meet	the	person.	And	in	your	own	life,	by	and	by,	you
will	become	aware	that	the	body	is	just	the	outermost	garment:	you	have	to	take
care	of	it,	it	is	not	to	be	neglected,	it	is	valuable,	but	it	is	not	the	end.	You	are	the
master,	not	the	servant.	And	by	and	by,	the	more	you	penetrate	withinwards,	you
will	 see	 that	 the	mind	 also	 is	 an	 innermost	 garment	 --	more	 valuable	 than	 the
body	but	not	more	valuable	than	you.	You	remain	the	supreme	value.
Once	 you	 know	your	 supreme	 value,	 you	 have	 become	mature;	 and	 once	 you
know	 your	 supreme	 value,	 you	 know	 the	 supreme	 value	 of	 all:	 all	 beings	 are
Buddhas	--	nobody	is	less	than	that;	the	whole	of	life	is	Divine;	you	are	always
walking	on	holy	ground.
It	 is	said	that	when	Moses	went	to	the	hill	 to	meet	his	God,	the	bush	was	afire
and	 from	 behind	 the	 bush	 he	 heard,	 'Stop!	 Take	 your	 shoes	 off.	 This	 is	 holy
ground.'	 I	have	always	 liked	 it,	 loved	 it.	But	all	ground	 is	holy	ground	and	all
bushes	are	afire	with	God.	If	you	have	not	seen	this	yet	you	have	missed	much.
Look	 again.	 All	 bushes	 are	 afire	 with	 God	 and	 from	 every	 bush	 comes	 the
commandment,	'Stop	and	take	your	shoes	off.	It	is	holy	ground	you	are	walking
on.	All	ground,	the	whole	earth,	the	whole	existence	is	sacred.
Once	you	have	that	feeling	entering	you,	I	will	call	you	mature	--	not	before	that.
A	mature	mind	is	a	religious	mind.
The	second	question:
Question	2
WHY	DO	I	MAKE	MOUNTAINS	OUT	OF	MOLEHILLS?
Because	 the	 ego	 does	 not	 feel	 good,	 at	 ease,	 with	 molehills	 --	 it	 wants
mountains.	 Even	 if	 it	 is	 a	misery,	 it	 should	 not	 be	 a	molehill,	 it	 should	 be	 an
Everest.	Even	if	it	is	miserable,	the	ego	doesn't	want	to	be	ordinarily	miserable	--
it	wants	to	be	extraordinarily	miserable!
Bernard	 Shaw	 is	 reported	 to	 have	 said,	 'If	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 be	 the	 first	 in
heaven,	I	would	like	to	go	to	hell...but	I	would	like	to	be	the	first.'	In	Christianity
there	 is	 only	 one	 hell	 and	Bernard	 Shaw	 never	 knew	 that	 in	 India	we	 have	 a
concept	of	seven	hells.	If	he	had	heard	about	Hindu	hells	he	would	have	chosen
the	seventh,	because	in	the	fifth	he	would	have	felt	humiliated,	others	are	still	far
ahead	 of	 him	 in	 the	 seventh	 --	 the	 real	 sinners,	 the	 great	 sinners,	 are	 in	 the
seventh!
Either	this	way	or	that	--	but	one	wants	to	be	the	first.	Hence	one	goes	on	making
mountains	out	of	molehills.
One	 woman	 hypochondriac	 died.	 The	 whole	 town	 felt	 relieved,	 the	 whole
medical	 profession	 felt	 relieved,	 because	 she	 was	 a	 constant	 trouble	 to	 many
people's	heads,	everywhere,	all	around.	The	family,	the	doctors,	the	physicians	--
she	had	troubled	everybody	and	nobody	was	of	any	help.	And	she	relished	the
idea	that	nobody	knew	anything	about	the	sort	of	disease	she	was	suffering	from
--	it	was	an	extraordinary	disease.	In	fact	there	was	no	disease.
Then	 she	 died,	 and	 it	 was	 almost	 a	 celebration	 in	 the	 town.	 But	 when	 they
opened	the	will,	she	had	written	in	her	will	that	her	request	had	positively	to	be
fulfilled.	Her	request	was	that	a	carved	tombstone	had	to	be	put	on	her	tomb	with
these	words	inscribed	on	it:	Now	will	you	believe	I	was	sick?
In	this	way	she	would	haunt	the	whole	town	again.
People	 go	 on	 and	 on,	 creating	 big	 problems	 out	 of	 nothing.	 I	 have	 talked	 to
thousands	 of	 people	 about	 their	 problems	 and	 I	 have	 not	 come	 across	 a	 real
problem	 yet!	 All	 problems	 are	 bogus	 --	 you	 create	 them.	 Because	 without
problems	 you	 feel	 empty...	 then	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 do,	 nothing	 to	 fight	 with,
nowhere	to	go.	People	go	from	one	guru	to	another,	from	one	master	to	another,
from	 one	 psychoanalyst	 to	 another,	 from	 one	 encounter	 group	 to	 another,
because	 if	 they	 don't	 go,	 they	 feel	 empty,	 and	 they	 suddenly	 feel	 life	 to	 be
meaningless.	You	create	problems	so	that	you	can	feel	that	life	is	a	great	work,	a
growth,	and	you	have	to	struggle	hard.
The	ego	can	exist	only	when	it	struggles,	 remember	--	when	it	 fights.	And	if	 I
tell	you,
'Kill	three	flies	and	you	will	become	enlightened,	you	will	not	believe	me.	You
will	say,
'Three	 flies?	 There	 doesn't	 seem	 to	 be	 much	 to	 that.	 And	 I	 will	 become
enlightened?	That	doesn't	seem	to	be	likely.	If	I	say	you	will	have	to	kill	seven
hundred	lions,	of	course	that	looks	more	like	it!
The	greater	the	problem,	the	greater	the	challenge	--	and	with	challenge	your	ego
arises,	soars	high.	You	create	problems.	Problems	don't	exist.
And	now	if	you	allow	me,	 there	are	not	even	molehills.	That	 too	 is	your	 trick.
You	say,
'Yes,	 there	 may	 not	 be	 mountains,	 but	 molehills?'	 No,	 not	 even	 molehills	 are
there	--
those	 are	 your	 creations.	 First	 you	 create	 molehills	 out	 of	 nothing,	 then	 you
create	mountains	 out	 of	molehills.	And	 the	 priests	 and	 the	 psychoanalysts	 and
the	gurus,	they	are	happy	because	their	whole	trade	exists	because	of	you.	If	you
don't	 create	 molehills	 out	 of	 nothing	 and	 you	 don't	 make	 your	 molehills	 into
mountains,	what	will	be	the	point	of	gurus	helping	you?	First	you	have	to	be	in	a
shape	to	be	helped.
The	 real	 masters	 have	 been	 saying	 something	 else.	 They	 have	 been	 saying,
'Please	look	what	you	are	doing,	what	nonsense	you	are	doing.	First	you	create	a
problem,	then	you	go	in	search	of	a	solution.	Just	watch	why	you	are	creating	the
problem,	just	exactly	in	the	beginning,	when	you	are	creating	the	problem,	is	the
solution	 --	 don't	 create	 it!'	 But	 that	won't	 appeal	 to	 you	 because	 then	 you	 are
suddenly	thrown	flat	upon	yourself.
Nothing	to	do?	No	enlightenment?	No	satori?	No	samadhi?	And	you	are	deeply
restless,	empty,	trying	to	stuff	yourself	with	anything	whatsoever.
You	don't	have	any	problems	--	only	this	much	has	to	be	understood.
This	very	moment	you	can	drop	all	problems
because	they	are	your	creations.	Have	another	look	at	your	problems:	the	deeper
you	look,	the	smaller	they	will	appear.	Go	on	looking	at	them	and	by	and	by	they
will	 start	 disappearing.	 Go	 on	 gazing	 and	 suddenly	 you	 will	 find	 there	 is
emptiness	--	a	beautiful	emptiness	surrounds	you.	Nothing	to	do,	nothing	to	be,
because	you	are	already	that.
Enlightenment	is	not	something	to	be	achieved,	it	is	just	to	be	lived.	When	I	say
that	I	achieved	enlightenment,	I	simply	mean	that	I	decided	to	live	it.	Enough	is
enough!	And	 since	 then	 I	 have	 lived	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 decision	 that	 now	 you	 are	 not
interested	 in	 creating	 problems	 --	 that's	 all.	 It	 is	 a	 decision	 that	 now	 you	 are
finished	with	all	this	nonsense	of	creating	problems	and	finding	solutions.
All	 this	 nonsense	 is	 a	 game	 you	 are	 playing	 with	 yourself:	 you	 yourself	 are
hiding	and	you	yourself	are	seeking,	you	are	both	the	parties.	And	you	know	it!
That's	why	when	I	say	it	you	smile,	you	laugh.	I	am	not	talking	about	anything
ridiculous	--	you	understand	it.	You	are	laughing	at	yourself.	Just	watch	yourself
laughing,	just	look	at	your	own	smile
--	you	understand	it.	It	has	to	be	so	because	it	is	your	own	game:	you	are	hiding
and	waiting	for	yourself	to	be	able	to	seek	and	find	yourself.
You	can	find	yourself	right	now	because	it	is	you	that	is	hiding.	That's	why	Zen
masters	go	on	hitting.	Whenever	somebody	comes	and	says,	'l	would	like	to	be	a
Buddha,	 the	 master	 gets	 very	 angry.	 Because	 he	 is	 asking	 nonsense,	 he	 IS	 a
Buddha.	 If	 Buddha	 comes	 to	 me	 and	 asks	 how	 to	 be	 a	 Buddha,	 what	 am	 I
supposed	to	do?	I	will	hit	his	head.
'Whom	do	you	think	you	are	befooling?	You	are	a	Buddha.'
Don't	make	unnecessary	 trouble	 for	yourself.	And	understanding	will	dawn	on
you	if	you	watch	how	you	make	a	problem	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger,	how
you	 spin	 it,	 and	 how	you	 help	 the	wheel	 to	move	 faster	 and	 faster	 and	 faster.
Then	 suddenly	 you	 are	 at	 the	 top	 of	 your	misery	 and	 you	 are	 in	 need	 of	 the
whole	world's	sympathy.
One	sannyasin,	Marga,	wrote	me	a	letter.	She	said,	'Osho,	I	feel	very	sad	because
when	 you	 talk,	 you	 look	 at	 everyone	 except	 me.'	 Now,	 I	 am	 not	 looking	 at
anybody,	but	I	have	got	eyes,	so	they	have	to	be	somewhere.	It	is	not	that	I	am
looking	at	somebody,	I	am	not	looking	at	anybody.	And	you	can	see	in	my	eyes
that	they	are	empty,	they	are	vacant.	But	if	you	are	trying	to	find	your	reflection
in	them	and	you	don't,	great	sadness	comes	to	you.	Now	there	is	a	new	problem.
Now	the	ego	feels	hurt	--	looking	at	everybody	else	except	you!	Just	watch	how
you	have	made	yourself	an	exception;	extraordinary	you	have	become.	I	look	at
everybody,	the	ordinary	mass,	except	you.	You	have	become	unique.	If	I	look	at
Marga	 --	which	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 do!	 Since	 I	 received	 her	 letter,	 I	 am	 never
going	to	look	at	her	--	if	I	look	at	her	then	the	ego	can	have	another	trip:	that	I
look	only	at	her.	Then	that	will	create	a	problem!
You	 are	 a	 great	 problem-creator...	 just	 understand	 this	 and	 suddenly	 problems
disappear.
You	are	perfectly	in	shape;	you	are	born	perfect,	that	is	the	whole	message.	You
are	 born	 perfect;	 perfection	 is	 your	 innermost	 nature.	You	 have	 just	 to	 live	 it.
Decide,	and	live	it.
But	if	you	are	not	yet	fed	up	with	the	game	you	can	continue,	but	don't	ask	why.
You	 know.	 The	 why	 is	 simple:	 the	 ego	 cannot	 exist	 in	 emptiness,	 it	 needs
something	to	fight	with.	Even	a	ghost	of	your	imagination	will	do,	but	you	need
to	fight	with	someone.	The	ego	exists	only	in	conflict,	the	ego	is	not	an	entity,	it
is	a	tension.	Whenever	there	is	a	conflict,	the	tension	arises	and	the	ego	exists;'
when	there	is	no	conflict	 the	tension	disappears	and	the	ego	disappears.	Ego	is
not	a	thing	--	it	is	just	a	tension.
And	 of	 course	 nobody	wants	 small	 tensions,	 everybody	wants	 big	 tensions.	 If
your	own	problems	are	not	enough,	you	start	 thinking	about	humanity	and	 the
world	 and	 the	 future...	 socialism,	 communism,	 and	 all	 that	 rubbish.	 You	 start
thinking	about	it	as	if	the	whole	world	depends	on	your	advice.	Then	you	think,
'What	is	going	to	happen	in	Israel?
What	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 in	Africa?'	And	 you	 go	 on	 advising,	 and	 you	 create
problems.
People	become	very	excited,	they	cannot	sleep	because	there	is	some	war	going
on.	They	become	very	excited.	Their	own	life	is	so	ordinary	that	they	will	have
to	reach	extraordinariness	from	some	other	source.	The	nation	is	in	difficulty	so
they	become	identified	with	the	nation.	The	culture	is	in	difficulty,	the	society	is
in	difficulty	--	now	there	are	big	problems	and	you	become	identified.	You	are	a
Hindu	and	the	Hindu	culture	is	in	difficulty;	you	are	a	Christian	and	the	church	is
in	 difficulty.	The	whole	world	 is	 at	 stake.	Now	you	 become	 big	 through	 your
problem.
The	ego	needs	some	problems.	If	you	understand	this,	in	the	very	understanding
the	mountains	 become	molehills	 again,	 and	 then	 the	molehills	 also	 disappear.
Suddenly	 there	 is	 emptiness,	 pure	 emptiness	 all	 around.	 This	 is	 what
enlightenment	is	all	about	--	a	deep	understanding	that	there	is	no	problem.
Then,	with	no	problem	to	solve,	what	will	you	do?	Immediately	you	start	living.
You	will	eat,	you	will	 sleep,	you	will	 love,	you	will	have	a	chit-chat,	you	will
sing,	you	will	dance
--	what	else	is	there	to	do?	You	have	become	a	God,	you	have	started	living.
If	 there	 is	 any	God,	 one	 thing	 is	 certain:	 he	will	 not	 have	 any	problems.	That
much	 is	 certain.	 Then	 what	 is	 he	 doing	 with	 all	 his	 time?	 No	 problems,	 no
psychiatrist	 to	 consult,	 no	 gurus	 to	 go	 and	 surrender	 to...	what	 is	God	 doing?
What	will	he	do?	He	must	be	getting	crazy,	whirling.	No,	he	is	living;	his	life	is
totally	full	with	life.	He	is	eating,	sleeping,	dancing,	having	a	love	affair	--	but
without	any	problems.
Start	 living	 this	 moment	 and	 you	 will	 see	 that	 the	 more	 you	 live,	 the	 less
problems	 there	 are.	 Because	 now	 that	 your	 emptiness	 is	 flowering	 and	 living
there	 is	 no	 need.	When	 you	 don't	 live,	 the	 same	 energy	 goes	 sour.	 The	 same
energy	which	would	have	become	a	flower,	is	stuck;	not	being	allowed	to	bloom
it	becomes	a	thorn	in	the	heart.	It	is	the	same	energy.
Force	 a	 small	 child	 to	 sit	 in	 the	 corner	 and	 tell	 him	 to	 become	 completely
immobile,	 unmoving.	Watch	what	 happens...just	 a	 few	minutes	 before,	 he	was
perfectly	at	ease,	flowing;	now	his	face	will	become	red	because	he	will	have	to
strain,	hold	himself.	His	whole	body	will	become	rigid	and	he	will	try	to	fidget
here	 and	 there	 and	 he	will	want	 to	 jump	 out	 of	 himself.	You	 have	 forced	 the
energy	 --	 now	 it	 has	 no	 purpose,	 no	meaning,	 no	 space	 to	move,	 nowhere	 to
bloom	and	flower;	it	is	stuck,	frozen,	rigid.	The	child	is	suffering	a	short	death,	a
temporary	death.	Now	if	you	don't	allow	the	child	to	run	again	and	move	around
the	 garden	 and	 play,	 he	 will	 start	 creating	 problems,	 he	 will	 fantasize;	 in	 his
mind	he	will	Create	problems	and	start	fighting	with	those	problems.	He	will	see
a	big	dog	and	he	will	get	afraid,	or	he	will	see	a	ghost	and	he	will	have	to	fight
and	escape	from	him.	Now	he	 is	creating	problems.	The	same	energy	 that	was
just	a	moment	before	flowing	all	around,	in	all	directions,	is	stuck	and	becoming
sour.
If	people	can	dance	a	little	more,	sing	a	little	more,	be	a	little	more	crazy,	their
energy	will	be	flowing	more,	and	their	problems	will	by	and	by	disappear.	Hence
I	insist	so	much	on	dance.	Dance	to	orgasm;	let	the	whole	energy	become	dance,
and	suddenly	you	will	see	that	you	don't	have	any	head	--	the	stuck	energy	in	the
head	is	moving	all	around,	creating	beautiful	patterns,	pictures,	movement.	And
when	 you	 dance	 there	 comes	 a	moment	when	 your	 body	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 rigid
thing,	it	becomes	flexible,	flowing.
When	 you	 dance	 there	 comes	 a	moment	when	 your	 boundary	 is	 no	 longer	 so
clear;	you	melt	and	merge	with	the	cosmos,	the	boundaries	are	mixing.
Watch	a	dancer	 --	you	will	see	 that	he	has	become	an	energy	phenomenon,	no
longer	in	a	fixed	form,	no	longer	in	a	frame.	He	is	flowing	out	of	his	frame,	out
OT	his	 form,	and	becoming	more	alive,	more	and	more	alive.	But	only	 if	you
dance	yourself	will	you	know	what	really	happens.	The	head	inside	disappears;
again	you	are	a	child.	Then	you	don't	create	any	problems.
Live,	dance,	eat,	sleep,	do	things	as	totally	as	possible.	And	remember	again	and
again:	 whenever	 you	 catch	 yourself	 creating	 any	 problem,	 slip	 out	 of	 it,
immediately.	Once	you	get	into	the	problem	then	a	solution	will	be	needed.	And
even	if	you	find	a	solution,	out	of	that	solution	a	thousand	and	one	problems	will
arise	again.	Once	you	miss	the	first	step	you	are	in	the	trap.	Whenever	you	see
that	 now	 you	 are	 slipping	 into	 a	 problem,	 catch	 hold	 of	 yourself,	 run,	 jump,
dance,	 but	 don't	 get	 into	 the	 problem.	 Do	 something	 immediately	 so	 that	 the
energy	that	was	creating	the	problems	becomes	fluid,	unfrozen,	melts,	goes	back
to	the	cosmos.
Primitive	people	don't	have	many	problems.	I	have	come	across	primitive	groups
in	India	who	say	they	don't	dream	at	all.	Freud	would	not	be	able	to	believe	that
it	is	possible.
They	don't	dream,	but	if	sometimes	somebody	dreams	--	it	is	a	rare	phenomenon
--	the	whole	village	fasts,	prays	to	God.	Something	has	gone	wrong,	something
wrong	has	happened...	a	man	has	dreamed.
It	never	happens	in	their	tribe	because	they	live	so	totally	that	nothing	is	left	in
the	head	to	be	completed	in	the	sleep.	Whatsoever	you	leave	incomplete	has	to
be	completed	in	your	dreams;	whatsoever	you	have	not	lived	remains	as	a	hang-
over	and	completes	 itself	 in	 the	mind	--	 that's	what	a	dream	is.	The	whole	day
you	go	on	thinking.	The	thinking	simply	shows	that	you	have	more	energy	than
you	use	for	living;	you	have	more	energy	than	your	so-called	life	needs.
You	are	missing	real	life.	Use	more	energy.	Then	fresh	energies	will	be	flowing.
Just	 don't	 be	 a	 miser.	 Use	 them	 today;	 let	 today	 be	 complete	 unto	 itself;
tomorrow	will	 take	care	of	 itself,	don't	be	worried	about	 tomorrow.	The	worry,
the	 problem,	 the	 anxiety,	 all	 simply	 show	 one	 thing:	 that	 you	 are	 not	 living
rightly,	that	your	life	is	not	yet	a	celebration,	a	dance,	a	festivity.	Hence	all	the
problems.
If	you	live,	ego	disappears.	Life	knows	no	ego,	it	knows	only	living	and	living
and	living.
Life	knows	no	self,	no	center;	life	knows	no	separation.	You	breathe	--	life	enters
into	 you;	 you	 exhale	 you	 enter	 into	 life.	 There	 is	 no	 separation.	You	 eat,	 and
trees	enter	into	you	through	the	fruit.	Then	one	day	you	die,	you	are	buried	in	the
earth,	and	 the	 trees	suck	you	up	and	you	become	fruits.	Your	children	will	eat
you	again.	You	have	been	eating	your	ancestors	--	the	trees	have	converted	them
into	 fruits.	You	 think	you	are	a	vegetarian?	Don't	be	deceived	by	appearances.
We	are	all	cannibals.
Life	is	one,	it	goes	on	moving.	It	comes	into	you;	it	passes	through	you.	In	fact
to	 say	 that	 it	 comes	 into	you	 isn't	 right,	because	 then	 it	 seems	as	 if	 life	comes
into	you,	and	 then	passes	out	of	you.	You	don't	exist	 --	only	 this	 life's	coming
and	going	does.	You	don't	exist	--	only	life	exists	in	its	tremendous	forms,	in	its
energy,	in	its	millions	of	delights.
Once	you	understand	this,	let	that	understanding	be	the	only	law.
And	start	living	as	Buddhas	from	this	very	moment.	If	you	decide	otherwise,	it	is
for	 you	 to	 decide	 --	 but	 as	 I	 see	 it,	 it	 is	 a	 decision:	 'I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 befool
myself	anymore.
Now	I	start	living	as	a	Buddha,	in	emptiness.	I	will	not	try	to	find	unnecessary
occupations.	I	dissolve.'
The	third	question:
Question	3
I	NOTICE	THAT	DEEP	DOWN	I	WANT	TO	BE	LOVED,	ACCEPTED,	LIKE
THE
GREATEST	MAN	ON	EARTH,	THAT	I	WANT	TO	BE	THE	MOST	FAMOUS
PERSON.	AND	I	FEEL	HURT	WHEN	SOMEONE	REJECTS	ME.	WHAT	TO
DO
WITH	THESE	DREAMS?
If	you	understand	 that	 they	are	dreams	 then	wash	your	 face	and	have	a	cup	of
tea.	What	is	there	to	be	done	about	it?	Dreams	are	dreams	--	why	be	bothered?
But	you	don't	understand	that	they	are	dreams.	This	is	borrowed.	You	know	that
they	are	not	dreams	--	that	s	why	you	are	worried.	Otherwise	why	be	worried?	If
in	a	dream	you	see	that	you	have	fallen	ill,	when	you	wake	up	in	the	morning	do
you	go	to	the	doctor?
In	my	dream	I	was	very	ill	and	now	some	medication	is	needed.	You	never	go.
You	realize	it	was	a	dream	--	finished!	What	is	the	point	of	going	to	a	doctor?
But	you	have	not	 yet	 understood	 that	 these	 are	dreams.	These	 are	 realities	 for
you	--
hence	the	problem.
I	NOTICE	THAT	DEEP	DOWN	I	WANT	TO	BE	LOVED.	 If	you	want	 to	be
loved	--
love!	Because	whatsoever	 you	 give	 is	 returned	 back.	 If	 you	want	 to	 be	 loved
forget	about	wanting	to	be	loved,	and	in	a	thousand	ways	love	will	come	to	you.
Life	 reflects,	 life	 resounds,	 life	echoes	whatsoever	you	 throw	at	 life.	So	 if	you
want	to	be	loved	forget	about	wanting	and	being	loved	--	that	is	not	the	point	at
all	then.	Then	simple	is	the	rule
--	love.
And	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 accepted	 like	 the	 greatest	 man	 on	 earth,	 then	 start
accepting	everybody	as	the	greatest	man	on	earth.	Otherwise	how	are	they	going
to	accept	you	as	the	greatest?	They	are	also	on	the	same	trip.	They	are	not	going
to	accept	you	as	the	greatest	because	then	what	will	happen	to	them?	If	you	are
the	greatest,	then	who	are	they?	Nobody	wants	to	be	anything	else.
Once	it	happened,	a	friend	of	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	talking	to	Mulla	Nasruddin.
They	had	met	after	many	--	years.	Both	were	bitter	rivals;	both	were	poets.	Both
started	to	boast	about	the	progress	they	had	made	in	their	careers.
'You	have	no	idea,	Nasruddin,	how	many	people	read	my	poetry	now,'	bragged
the	friend.	'My	readers	have	doubled.'
'My	God,	my	God!'	cried	Nasruddin.	'I	had	no	idea	you	got	married!'
Everybody	is	on	the	same	trip.	If	you	want	people	to	accept	you	as	the	greatest
man	on	earth,	let	this	be	the	rule:	whatsoever	you	want	others	to	do	for	you,	do
for	 them.	But	 that	 is	 the	 trouble.	The	ego	wants	you	 to	be	 the	greatest	man	on
earth	--	nobody	else.	Then	you	will	feel	hurt.	Because	all	are	on	the	same	trip	--
can't	you	understand	 the	simple	point?	They	are	also	waiting	for	you	to	accept
them	as	the	greatest	man.
I	heard	Mulla	Nasruddin	once.	He	was	delivering	a	political	speech.
He	Said,	 'It	is	with	some	trepidation	that	I	address	an	audience	of	people	all	of
whom	are	smarter	than	I	am...	all	of	them	put	together,	that	is.'
Everybody	is	trying	to	be	at	the	top	of	the	world	--	then	you	are	in	competition
with	 the	 whole	 world.	 Remember,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 defeated.	 One	 man
fighting	against	the	whole	world	--	that	is	the	situation.
If	you	see	the	point,	there	are	two	ways.	One,	forget	about	this	trip,	be	ordinary,
simple,	whatsoever	you	are.	There	is	no	need	to	be	great,	the	only	need	is	to	be
real.	Great	is	the	wrong	goal.	To	be	real....	I	have	come	across	a	hip	slogan:	Be
realistic	--	plan	for	a	miracle.	Yes.	that	s	how	it	is.	If	you	ale	really	realistic,	you
start	living	the	miracle.	And	the	miracle	is:	if	you	are	real,	you	don't	want	to	be
bothered	with	competition,	comparison.	Who	bothers?	You	enjoy	your	food,	you
enjoy	your	breathing,	you	enjoy	the	sunlight,	you	enjoy	the	stars,	you	enjoy	life,
you	enjoy	being	alive	--	you	are	perfectly	in	tune.	in	harmony	with	the	Whole.
What	is	the	point	of	being	a	great	man?	The	great	men,	the	so-called	great	men,
are	almost	always	phony	--	they	have	to	be.	They	cannot	be	real	persons.	They
are	plastic.	Because	they	have	chosen	a	wrong	goal:	to	be	great	is	an	ego	goal;	to
be	real	is	existential.
If	you	want	 to	be	great	you	will	be	 in	 continuous	conflict.	And	of	 course	you
will	 be	 hurt	 by	 everybody.	Not	 that	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 hurt	 you,	 they	 are
doing	their	own	trip.
You	are	unnecessarily	coming	in	their	way.
Get	 out	 of	 this	 rat	 race.	 Sit	 under	 the	 tree	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 road;	 it	 is
tremendously	beautiful	and	silent.	Otherwise	be	ready	to	be	hurt.
One	 politician	 used	 to	 come	 to	 me.	 Once	 he	 was	 the	 president	 of	 the	 Indian
National	Congress	--	a	great	man	in	India.
And	he	told	me,	'I	am	such	a	simple	man.	Why	do	people	go	on	spreading	nasty
things	about	me?	Why	do	people	want	to	hurt	me?'
I	 told	 him,	 'Nobody	wants	 to	 hurt	 you.	You	 are	 unnecessarily	 coming	 in	 their
way.	They	also	want	to	be	president	of	great	parties	--	you	are	standing	in	their
way.	They	have	to	push	you	away.'	I	told	him,	'You	just	remember	what	you	did
to	the	president	before	you.
The	same	thing	they	are	trying	to	do	with	you	--	leg-pulling.'
Once	you	are	in	a	power	post	you	are	continuously	being	pulled	and	pushed.	It
has	to	be	so.
Ramakrishna	used	to	tell	a	beautiful	story.
A	 bird	was	 flying	with	 a	 dead	mouse	 and	 twenty	 or	 thirty	 birds	were	 chasing
him.	The	bird	was	very	much	worried.
'I	am	not	doing	anything	to	them,	I	am	just	carrying	my	dead	mouse.	They	are	all
after	me.'
And	 they	hit	 him	hard	 and	 in	 the	 conflict,	 in	 the	 struggle,	 the	bird	opened	his
mouth	 and	 the	mouse	 dropped.	 Immediately	 they	 all	 flew	 towards	 the	mouse;
they	all	forgot	about	him.
Then	he	sat	upon	a	tree	and	brooded.
They	were	not	against	him,	 they	were	also	on	the	same	trip	--	 they	wanted	the
mouse.
If	people	are	hurting	you,	open	your	mouth.	You	must	be	carrying	a	dead	mouse!
Drop	it!
And	 then	 sit	 --	 if	 you	 can,	 sit	 on	 the	 tree	 or	 under	 the	 tree	 and	 brood.	 And
suddenly	 you	 will	 see	 that	 they	 have	 forgotten	 about	 you.	 They	 are	 not
concerned.	They	never	were	concerned.	The	ego	is	a	dead	mouse.
Jones'	 oldest	 daughter	 had	 just	 given	 birth	 to	 a	 beautiful	 baby	 and	 Jones	was
being	congratulated.
He	looked	downcast,	however,	and	a	friend	said,	'What's	the	matter,	Jones?	Don't
you	like	the	idea	of	being	a	grandfather?'
Jones	heaved	an	enormous	sigh.	'No,'	he	said,	'I	don't,	but	that	doesn't	bother	me
so	much.
It	is	just	that	it	is	so	humiliating	to	have	to	go	to	bed	with	a	grandmother.'
Just	watch	your	mind	--	how	it	creates	problems.	The	woman	remains	the	same
but	now	she	has	become	a	grandmother	--	and	one	feels	humiliated.
It	 is	your	 idea	 that	 is	giving	you	humiliation.	 If	you	are	 really	concerned	with
your	own	well-being	 then	nobody	 is	 hurting	you	 --	 just	 your	own	 ideas.	Drop
them.
Or,	 two,	 it	 you	 feel	 good	 with	 them,	 don't	 be	 worried	 about	 the	 hurts.	 Carry
them.	But	you	have	a	decision	inside.	If	you	want	the	ego	trip,	if	you	want	to	be
the	greatest	man	in	the	world,	then	everybody	is	going	to	prove	that	you	are	the
worst	man	in	the	world.
Then	have	courage	and	heart	to	suffer	all	that.	It	is	futile,	but	if	you	choose	that
way,	 it	 is	your	choice.	 If	you	really	want	your	well-being	and	your	 inner	calm
and	 silence	 and	 bliss,	 then	 these	 hurts	 are	 indicative:	 you	 are	 carrying	 some
wrong	ideas	within	you.
Drop	those	ideas.
The	last	question:,
Question	4
I	DON'T	HAVE	A	QUESTION	--	JUST	A	FEELING	OF	HOPELESSNESS.	 I
CAN'T
BELIEVE	MY	QUESTIONS,	I	HAVE	A	FEELING	THEY	COME	FROM
SOMETHING	BRITTLE	AND	UNREAL.
I	 DON'T	 HAVE	A	 QUESTION	 --	 JUST	 A	 FEELING	OF	 HOPELESSNESS.
How	does	hopelessness	arise?	You	must	be	hoping	too	much;	it	comes	out	of	too
much	hope.
If	 you	 don't	 hope,	 all	 hopelessness	 disappears.	 If	 you	 expect	 too	 much,
frustration	is	bound	to	come.	if	you	are	trying	to	succeed,	you	are	bound	to	fail.
Whatsoever	you	want	to	try	too	hard,	just	the	opposite	will	happen.
You	 must	 have	 been	 trying	 too	 hard	 to	 fulfill	 some	 hope	 then	 hopelessness
comes.	If	you	really	want	to	get	rid	of	hopelessness	--	and	everybody	wants	that
--	 then	get	 rid	of	hope.	Drop	all	hope	and	 suddenly	you	will	 see	 that	with	 the
hope,	 hopelessness	 has	 disappeared.	 Then	 one	 comes	 to	 an	 inner	 tranquillity
where	no	hope	exists	--	and	no	hopelessness.	One	is	simply	calm	and	quiet	and
collected	--	a	deep	reservoir	of	energy,	a	pool	of	energy,	cool.
But	 for	 that	 you	 have	 to	 sacrifice	 hope.	 The	 question	 shows	 that	 you	 are	 still
hoping....
Go	a	little	more	deeper	and	further:	if	you	are	really	hopeless,	hopelessness	will
disappear.
Let	me	tell	it	to	you	another	way.	Whenever	a	person	says	that	he	is	hopeless	he
simply	says	he	is	still	clinging	to	the	same	hope	which	has	proved	to	be	futile,	of
which	 there	 is	 no	 indication	 of	 being	 fulfilled	 at	 all.	 One	 goes	 on	 holding	 it,
hoping	against	all	hope.
Then	hopelessness	continues.
Don't	hope	for	anything.	There	 is	no	need	because	all	 that	you	can	hope	for	 is
already	given.	What	more	can	you	hope	for?
You	are	here,	everything	is	here	--	just	being	is	all.	But	you	don't	appreciate,	you
are	asking	for	some	dead	mouse,	some	power	trip,	some	ego	trip,	some	success
in	 the	 eyes	of	 the	world.	Those	 are	not	going	 to	be	 fulfilled,	 even	Alexanders
have	failed.	Even	Alexander	dies	a	poor	man,	a	beggar,	because	everything	that
you	 accumulate	 is	 snatched	 back	 from	 you,	 you	 go	 empty-handed.	 Empty-
handed	you	come;	empty-handed	you	go.
So	why	bother	 about	 success,	 riches,	 power	 --	material	 or	 spiritual?	 Just	 be....
And	 being	 is	 the	 greatest	 miracle.	 Turn	 within	 yourself	 --	 what	 Buddha	 calls
PARABVRUTTI.
Turn	yourself	a	complete	turn,	a	total	turn,	and	suddenly	you	are	so	full	of	joy,
you	don't	need	anything.	In	fact	you	have	so	much	that	you	would	like	to	shower
it	on	others.
But	things	go	on	moving	from	one	extreme	to	another.	You	hope	--	then	by	and
by	the	pendulum	moves	towards	hopelessness.	If	you	are	too	much	in	love	with
life,	by	and	by	you	move	towards	suicide.	If	you	are	too	religious,	by	and	by	you
move	 and	 become	 anti-religious.	 The	 pendulum	 goes	 on	 moving	 towards	 the
opposite.
Somewhere	 in	 the	middle	one	has	 to	stop.	And	if	you	stop	 in	 the	middle,	 time
stops	with	 you.	And	when	 time	 stops,	 all	 hope,	 all	 desires	 have	 stopped.	You
start	living.	Now,	now	is	the	only	time	and	here	is	the	only	space.
Let	me	tell	you	one	story.	It	is	a	very	beautiful	Jewish	anecdote.
Young	Sammy	Moskowitz	had	just	bought	himself	a	motor	scooter,	but	he	had
been	brought	up	in	orthodox	fashion	and	wasn't	the	least	bit	sure	whether	it	was
fitting	for	an	orthodox	Jew	to	ride	one.	He	thought	that	the	best	way	out	would
be	 to	 get	 his	 reverend	 rabbi	 to	 teach	 him	 a	 barucha	 --	 a	 traditional	 prayer	 of
blessing	--	to	intone	over	the	motor	scooter	before	he	drove	it.	Surely	that	would
make	it	proper	for	him	to	use	it.
He	 therefore	 approached	 his	 rabbi	 and	 said,	 'Rabbi,	 I	 have	 bought	 a	 motor
scooter	and	I	wish	to	know	if	you	could	teach	me	a	barucha	to	say	over	it	each
morning.'
The	rabbi	said,	'What	is	a	motor	scooter?'
Sammy	explained,	and	 the	rabbi	shook	his	head.	 'As	far	as	 I	know,	 there	 is	no
appropriate	barucha	for	 the	occasion	and	I	strongly	suspect	 that	 riding	a	motor
scooter	is	a	sin.	I	forbid	you	to	use	it.'
Sammy	 was	 very	 downhearted	 for	 from	 his	 very	 soul	 he	 longed	 to	 drive	 his
motor	scooter,	which	had	set	him	back	a	considerable	sum.	A	thought	occurred
to	him.	Why	not	seek	a	second	and	perhaps	more	liberal	opinion	--	from	a	rabbi
who	was	not	orthodox,	but	merely	conservative?
He	found	a	conservative	rabbi,	who,	unlike	the	orthodox	rabbi	earlier	consulted,
was	 not	 in	 the	 traditional	 long	 coat	 at	 all	 but	 wore	 a	 dark	 business	 suit.	 The
conservative	rabbi	said,	What	is	a	motor	scooter?'
Sammy	explained.
The	rabbi	thought	for	a	while,	then	said,	'I	suppose	there's	nothing	wrong	about
riding	a	motor	scooter,	but	still	 I	don't	know	of	any	appropriate	barucha	and	 if
your	conscience	hurts	you	without	one,	then	don't	drive	it.'
He	 journeyed	 out	 to	 the	 suburbs	 and	 met	 Rabbi	 Richmond	 Ellis,	 in	 his
knickerbockers,	about	to	leave	for	the	golf-links	on	his	motor	scooter.
Sammy	grew	terribly	excited,	'It's	all	right	for	a	Jew	to	ride	a	motor	scooter?'	he
said.	'I've	got	one	but	I	didn't	know.'
'Sure,	kid,'	said	the	rabbi.	'Nothing	wrong	with	the	motor	scooter	at	all.	Ride	it	in
good	health.'
'Then	give	me	a	barucha	for	it.'
The	reformed	rabbi	thought,	then	said,	'What's	a	barucha?'
The	orthodox	doesn't	know	what	 a	motor	 scooter	 is	 and	 the	progressive	 is	not
aware	of	what	a	barucha	is.
From	religion,	too	much	dogmatic	religion,	people	become	too	irreligious.	When
they	leave	the	church,	they	move	to	the	prostitute.
Somewhere	a	deep	balance	is	needed.	Just	between	the	two,	exactly	between	the
two,	is	transcendence.
So,	you	have	 lived	with	hope	--	now	the	hope	has	 failed	and	you	are	 living	 in
hopelessness.	Now,	 let	hopelessness	also	 fail;	you	drop	hope	and	hopelessness
together.
You	just	transcend	that	attitude	which	lives	in	the	future.	Live	here	now!	Living
in	hope	is	living	in	the	future,	which	is	really	postponing	life.	It	is	not	a	way	of
living,	but	a	way	of	suicide.	There	is	no	need	for	any	hope	and	there	is	no	need
to	 feel	 hopeless.	 Live	 here	 now.	Life	 is	 tremendously	 blissful,	 it	 is	 showering
here	 and	 you	 are	 looking	 somewhere	 else.	 It	 is	 just	 in	 front	 of	 your	 eyes,	 but
your	eyes	have	moved	far	away,	 they	 look	at	 the	horizon.	 It	 is	within	you,	but
you	are	not	there.
I	 am	not	 for	 hope;	 I	 am	not	 for	 hopelessness.	 I	 am	 against	 all	 extremism.	All
excess	is	futile.
Buddha	 used	 to	 say,	 'My	 path	 is	 the	 middle	 path.'	 That	 is	 the	 path	 of
transcendence.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	The	Halo	of	Yakushi-Buddha
23	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602230
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
83
mins
ONE	 WINTER	 DAY,	 A	 MASTERLESS	 SAMURAI	 CAME	 TO	 EISAI'S
TEMPLE
AND	MADE	 AN	 APPEAL:	 'I'M	 POOR	 AND	 SICK,'	 HE	 SAID,	 'AND	MY
FAMILY	IS
DYING	OF	HUNGER.	PLEASE	HELP	US,	MASTER.'
DEPENDENT	AS	HE	WAS	ON	WIDOWS'	MITES,	EISAI'S	LIFE	WAS	VERY
AUSTERE,	AND	HE	HAD	NOTHING	TO	GIVE.
HE	 WAS	 ABOUT	 TO	 SEND	 THE	 SAMURAI	 OFF	 WHEN	 HE
REMEMBERED	THE
IMAGE	 OF	 YAKUSHI-BUDDHA	 IN	 THE	 HALL.	 GOING	 UP	 TO	 IT	 HE
TORE	OFF
ITS	HALO	AND	GAVE	 IT	TO	THE	SAMURAI.	 'SELL	THIS,'	SAID	EISAI,
'IT
SHOULD	 TIDE	 YOU	 OVER.'	 THE	 BEWILDERED	 BUT	 DESPERATE
SAMURAI	TOOK	THE	HALO	AND	LEFT.
'MASTER!'	 CRIED	 ONE	 OF	 EISAI'S	 DISCIPLES,	 'THAT'S	 SACRILEGE!
HOW
COULD	YOU	DO	SUCH	A	THING?'
'SACRILEGE?	 BAH!	 I	 HAVE	 MERELY	 PUT	 THE	 BUDDHA'S	 MIND,
WHICH	IS
FULL	OF	LOVE	AND	MERCY,	TO	USE,	SO	TO	SPEAK.	 INDEED,	 IF	HE
HIMSELF
HAD	HEARD	THAT	POOR	SAMURAI	HE'D	HAVE	CUT	OFF	A	LIMB	FOR
HIM.'
MEDITATION	is	a	flower	and	compassion	is	its	fragrance.
Exactly	like	that	it	happens.	The	flower	blooms	and	the	fragrance	spreads	on	the
winds	in	all	directions,	to	be	carried	to	the	very	ends	of	earth.	But	the	basic	thing
is	the	blooming	of	the	flower.
Man	is	also	carrying	a	potentiality	for	flowering	within	him.	Until	and	unless	the
inner	 being	 of	 man	 flowers,	 the	 fragrance	 of	 compassion	 is	 not	 possible.
Compassion	cannot	be	practiced.	It	is	not	a	discipline.	You	cannot	manage	it.	It
is	beyond	you.	If	you	meditate,	one	day,	suddenly,	you	become	aware	of	a	new
phenomenon,	 absolutely	 strange	 --	 from	 your	 being	 compassion	 is	 flowing
towards	the	whole	of	existence;	undirected,	unaddressed,	it	is	moving	to	the	very
ends	of	existence.
Without	meditation,	 energy	 remains	passion;	with	meditation,	 the	 same	energy
becomes	compassion.	Passion	and	compassion	are	not	two	energies,	they	are	one
and	 the	 same	 energy.	 Once	 it	 passes	 through	 meditation,	 it	 is	 transformed,
transfigured;	 it	 becomes	 qualitatively	 different.	 Passion	 moves	 downwards,
compassion	moves	upwards;	passion	moves	 through	desire,	compassion	moves
through	desirelessness;	passion	is	an	occupation	to	forget	the	miseries	in	which
you	 live,	 compassion	 is	 a	 celebration,	 it	 is	 a	 dance	 of	 attainment,	 of
fulfillment...you	 are	 so	 fulfilled	 that	 you	 can	 share.	Now	 there	 is	 nothing	 left;
you	have	 attained	 the	 destiny	 that	 you	were	 carrying	 for	millennia	within	 you
like	an	unflowered	potentiality,	just	a	bud.	Now	it	has	flowered	and	it	is	dancing.
You	have	attained,	you	are	 fulfilled,	 there	 is	no	more	 to	attain,	nowhere	 to	go,
nothing	to	do.
Now	what	will	happen	 to	 the	energy?	You	start	 sharing.	The	same	energy	 that
was	 moving	 through	 the	 dark	 layers	 of	 passion,	 now	 moves	 with	 light	 rays
upwards,	uncontaminated	by	any	desire,	uncontaminated	by	any	conditioning.	It
is	 uncorrupted	 by	 any	 motivation	 --	 hence	 I	 call	 it	 fragrance.	 The	 flower	 is
limited	but	not	the	fragrance.
The	flower	has	limitations	it	is	rooted	somewhere	in	bondage.	but	fragrance	has
no	bondage.	It	simply	moves,	rides	on	the	winds;	it	has	no	moorings	in	the	earth.
Meditation	is	a	flower.	It	has	roots.	It	exists	in	you.	Once	compassion	happens,	it
is	not	rooted;	it	simply	moves	and	goes	on	moving.	Buddha	has	disappeared	but
not	his	compassion.	The	flower	will	die	sooner	or	later	--	it	is	part	of	earth	and
the	 dust	 will	 return	 unto	 dust	 --	 but	 the	 fragrance	 that	 has	 been	 released	will
remain	 forever	 and	 forever.	 Buddha	 has	 gone,	 Jesus	 has	 gone,	 but	 not	 their
fragrance.	 Their	 compassion	 still	 continues	 and	 whoever	 is	 open	 to	 their
compassion	will	immediately	feel	its	impact,	will	be	moved	by	it,	will	be	taken
on	a	new	journey,	on	a	new	pilgrimage.
Compassion	is	not	limited	to	the	flower	--	it	comes	from	the	flower	but	it	is	not
of	 the	 flower.	 It	 comes	 through	 the	 flower,	 the	 flower	 is	 just	 a	 passage.	 but	 it
comes	really	from	the	beyond.	It	cannot	come	without	the	flower	--	the	flower	is
a	 necessary	 stage	 --	 but	 it	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 flower.	Once	 the	 flower	 has
bloomed,	compassion	is	released.
This	insistence,	this	emphasis,	has	to	be	deeply	understood,	because	if	you	miss
the	point	you	can	start	practicing	compassion	but	then	it	is	not	real	fragrance.	A
practiced	compassion	 is	 just	 the	same	passion	with	a	new	name.	It	 is	 the	same
desire-contaminated,	 motivation-corrupted	 energy	 and	 it	 can	 become	 very
dangerous	to	other	people	--	because	in	the	name	of	compassion	you	can	destroy,
in	the	name	of	compassion,	you	can	create	bondage.	It	is	not	compassion,	and	if
you	practice	it,	you	are	being	artificial,	formal	--	in	fact	a	hypocrite.
The	 first	 thing	 to	 be	 remembered	 continuously	 is	 that	 compassion	 cannot	 be
practiced.	It	is	this	point	where	all	the	followers	of	all	the	great	religious	teachers
have	missed.
Buddha	 attained	 compassion	 through	 meditation	 --	 now	 Buddhists	 go	 on
practicing	 compassion.	 Jesus	 attained	 compassion	 through	 meditation	 --	 now
Christians,	the	Christian	missionaries,	go	on	practicing	love,	compassion,	service
to	humanity	but	their	compassion	has	proved	to	be	a	very	destructive	force	in	the
world.	Their	compassion	has	created	only	wars;	their	compassion	has	destroyed
millions	of	people.	They	end	up	in	deep	imprisonments.
Compassion	frees	you,	gives	you	freedom,	but	that	compassion	has	to	come	only
through	meditation,	there	is	no	other	way	to	it.	Buddha	has	said	that	compassion
is	 a	 by-product,	 a	 consequence.	 You	 cannot	 catch	 hold	 of	 the	 consequence
directly,	 you	 have	 to	 move;	 you	 have	 to	 produce	 the	 cause,	 and	 the	 effect
follows.	 So	 if	 you	 really	want	 to	 understand	what	 compassion	 is	 you	 have	 to
understand	what	meditation	is.	Forget	all	about	compassion;	it	comes	on	its	own
accord.
Try	to	understand	what	meditation	is.	Compassion	can	become	a	criterion	as	to
whether	 the	 meditation	 was	 right	 or	 not.	 If	 the	 meditation	 has	 been	 right,
compassion	 is	 bound	 to	 come	 --	 it	 is	 natural;	 it	 follows	 like	 a	 shadow.	 If	 the
meditation	has	been	wrong	then	compassion	will	not	follow.	So	compassion	can
work	as	a	criterion	as	to	whether	the	meditation	has	been	really	right	or	not.	And
a	meditation	can	be	wrong.	People	have	a	wrong	notion	that	all	meditations	are
right;	It	 is	not	so.	Meditations	can	be	wrong.	For	example,	any	meditation	that
leads	you	deep	 into	 concentration	 is	wrong	 --	 it	will	 not	 result	 in	 compassion.
You	will	become	more	and	more	closed	rather	than	becoming	open.
If	 you	 narrow	 down	 your	 Consciousness	 concentrate	 on	 something,	 and	 you
exclude	the	whole	of	existence	and	become	one-pointed,	it	will	create	more	and
more	tension	in	you.
Hence	 the	word	 'attention'.	 It	means	 'at-tension'.	Concentration,	 the	very	sound
of	the	word,	gives	you	a	feeling	of	tenseness.
Concentration	has	its	uses	but	it	is	not	meditation.	In	scientific	work,	in	scientific
research,	in	the	science	lab,	you	need	concentration.	You	have	to	concentrate	on
one	problem	and	exclude	everything	else	--	so	much	so	that	you	almost	become
unmindful	of	the	remaining	world.	The	only	problem	that	you	are	concentrating
upon	is	your	world.
That's	why	scientists	become	absent-minded.	People	who	concentrate	too	much
always	become	absent-minded	because	they	don't	know	how	to	remain	open	to
the	whole	world.
I	was	reading	an	anecdote.
'I	have	brought	a	 frog,'	 said	a	 scientist,	 a	professor	of	 zoology,	beaming	at	his
class,	'fresh	from	the	pond,	in	order	that	we	might	study	its	outer	appearance	and
later	dissect	it.'
He	carefully	unwrapped	the	package	he	carried	and	inside	was	a	neatly	prepared
ham	sandwich.	The	good	professor	looked	at	it	with	astonishment.
'Odd!'	he	said,	'I	distinctly	remember	having	eaten	my	lunch.
That	goes	on	happening	to	scientists.	They	become	one-pointed	and	their	whole
mind	becomes	narrow.	Of	course,	a	narrow	mind	has	 its	use:	 it	becomes	more
penetrating,	it	becomes	like	a	sharp	needle,	it	hits	exactly	the	right	point,	but	it
misses	the	great	life	that	surrounds	it.
A	Buddha	is	not	a	man	of	concentration,	he	is	a	man	of	awareness.	He	has	not
been	 trying	 to	 narrow	 down	 his	 consciousness;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 he	 has	 been
trying	 to	 drop	 all	 barriers	 so	 that	 he	 becomes	 totally	 available	 to	 existence.
Watch...existence	 is	 simultaneous.	 I	 am	 speaking	 here	 and	 the	 traffic	 noise	 is
simultaneous.	The	 train,	 the	birds	 the	wind	blowing	through	the	 trees	--	 in	 this
moment	 the	whole	 of	 existence	 converges.	You	 listening	 to	me,	 I	 speaking	 to
you,	and	millions	of	things	going	on	--	it	is	tremendously	rich.
Concentration	makes	you	one-pointed	at	a	very	great	cost:	ninety-nine	per	cent
of	life	is	discarded.	If	you	are	solving	a	mathematical	problem,	you	cannot	listen
to	the	birds	--
they	will	be	a	distraction.	Children	playing	around,	dogs	barking	in	the	street	--
they	will	be	a	distraction.	Because	of	concentration,	people	have	tried	to	escape
from	life	--	 to	go	to	 the	Himalayas,	 to	go	to	a	cave,	 to	remain	 isolated,	so	 that
you	can	concentrate	on	God.
But	God	is	not	an	object.	God	is	this	wholeness	of	existence,	this	moment;	God
is	 the	 totality.	 That's	 why	 science	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 know	God.	 The	 very
method	 of	 science	 is	 concentration	 and	 because	 of	 that	 method,	 science	 can
never	know	God.
It	can	know	more	and	more	minute	details.	First	the	molecule	was	thought	to	be
the	 last	 particle,	 then	 it	 was	 divided.	 Then	 an	 even	 tinier	 part,	 the	 atom,	was
known,	 then	 concentration	divided	 that	 also.	Now	 there	 are	 electrons,	 protons,
neutrons	 --	 sooner	 or	 later	 they	 are	 also	 going	 to	 be	 divided.	 Science	 goes	 on
from	the	smaller	to	the	smaller,	and	the	bigger,	the	vast,	is	completely	forgotten.
The	whole	 is	 completely	 forgotten	 for	 the	 part.	 Science	 can	 never	 know	God
because	of	concentration.	So	when	people	come	to	me	and	they	say,	'Osho,	teach
us	 concentration,	 we	want	 to	 know	God,:	 I'm	 simply	 puzzled.	 They	 have	 not
understood	the	basics	of	the	search.
Science	 is	 one-pointed;	 the	 search	 is	 objective.	 Religion	 is	 simultaneity;	 the
object	is	the	whole,	the	total.	To	know	the	total,	that	is,	to	know	God,	you	will
have	 to	have	 a	 consciousness	which	 is	 open	 from	everywhere	 --	 not	 confined,
not	standing	in	a	window.
Otherwise	 the	 frame	 of	 the	 window	will	 become	 the	 frame	 of	 existence.	 Just
standing	under	the	sun	in	the	open	sky	--	that	is	what	meditation	is.	Meditation
has	no	frame:	it	is	not	a	window,	it	is	not	a	door.	Meditation	is	not	concentration,
it	is	not	attention	--
meditation	is	awareness.
So	 what	 to	 do?	 Repeating	 a	 mantra,	 doing	 transcendental	 meditation,	 is	 not
going	to	help.
Transcendental	meditation	has	become	very	important	in	America	because	of	the
objective	approach,	because	of	the	scientific	mind.	Now	it	is	the	only	meditation
on	 which	 scientific	 work	 can	 be	 done.	 It	 is	 exactly	 concentration	 and	 not
meditation,	so	it	is	comprehensible	for	the	scientific	mind.	In	the	universities,	in
the	 science	 laboratories,	 in	 psychological	 research	 work,	 much	 is	 being	 done
about	TM,	because	it	is	not	meditation.
It	is	concentration,	a	method	of	concentration;	it	falls	under	the	same	category	as
scientific	concentration;	there	is	a	link	between	the	two.	But	it	has	nothing	to	do
with	meditation.	Meditation	is	so	vast,	so	tremendously	infinite,	that	no	scientific
research	is	possible.	Only	compassion	will	show	whether	the	man	has	achieved
or	not.	Alpha	waves	won't	be	of	much	help	because	they	are	still	of	the	mind	and
meditation	is	not	of	the	mind
--	it	is	something	beyond.
So,	let	me	tell	you	a	few	basic	things.	One,	meditation	is	not	concentration	but
relaxation
--	 one	 simply	 relaxes	 into	 oneself.	 The	 more	 you	 relax,	 the	 more	 you	 feel
yourself	open,	vulnerable,	 the	more	you	are	less	rigid,	you	are	more	flexible	--
and	suddenly	existence	starts	penetrating	you.	You	are	no	longer	like	a	rock,	you
have	openings.	Relaxation	means	allowing	yourself	to	fall	into	a	state	where	you
are	 not	 doing	 anything,	 because	 if	 you	 are	 doing	 something,	 tension	 will
continue.	It	is	a	state	of	non-doing.	You	simply	relax	and	you	enjoy	the	feeling
of	 relaxation.	Relax	 into	yourself,	 just	 close	your	eyes,	 and	 listen	 to	all	 that	 is
happening	all	around.	No	need	to	feel	anything	as	distraction.	The	moment	you
feel	it	is	a	distraction,	you	are	denying	God.	This	moment	God	has	come	to	you
as	a	bird.	Don't	deny.	He	has	knocked	at	your	door	as	a	bird.	The	next	moment
he	 has	 come	 as	 a	 dog	 --	 barking,	 or	 as	 a	 child	 crying	 and	 weeping,	 or	 as	 a
madman	laughing.
Don't	deny;	don't	 reject;	 accept	 --	because	 if	you	deny	you	will	become	 tense.
All	denials	create	 tension.	Accept.	 If	you	want	 to	relax,	acceptance	 is	 the	way.
Accept	whatsoever	is	happening	all	around;	let	it	become	an	organic	whole.	It	is
--	you	may	know	it	or	you	may	not	know	it.	Everything	 is	 inter-related.	These
birds,	these	trees,	this	sky,	this	sun,	this	earth,	you,	me	--	all	are	related.	It	is	an
organic	 unity.	 If	 the	 sun	 disappears,	 the	 trees	 will	 disappear;	 if	 the	 trees
disappear,	the	birds	will	disappear;	if	the	birds	and	trees	disappear,	you	cannot	be
here,	you	will	disappear.	It	is	an	ecology.	Everything	is	deeply	related	with	each
other.
So	 don't	 deny	 anything,	 because	 the	 moment	 you	 deny,	 you	 are	 denying
something	 in	 you.	 If	 you	 deny	 these	 singing	 birds	 then	 something	 in	 you	 is
denied.
Once	it	happened	that	it	was	spring.	The	weather	was	delightful	and	I	was	sitting
on	a	park	bench.	I	enjoyed	the	spring,	the	birds,	the	air	and	the	sun.	I	listened	to
the	melodious	chirping	of	numerous	birds.
A	stranger	was	also	sitting	on	the	same	bench.	I	turned	to	him	and	said	to	him,	'Is
not	the	music	of	the	birds	delightful?'
But	 he	 must	 have	 been	 a	 religious	 man.	 He	 was	 doing	 some	mantra.	 He	 felt
disturbed.	He	felt	as	if	I	had	interfered.
He	 scowled	 and	 said,	 'How	 the	 devil	 can	 I	 hear	what	 you	 are	 saying	 over	 the
damned	noise	of	those	stupid	birds?'
But	if	you	deny,	reject,	if	you	feel	distracted,	if	you	feel	angry,	you	are	rejecting
something	 within	 you.	 Just	 listen	 again	 to	 the	 birds	 without	 any	 feeling	 of
distraction,	anger,	and	suddenly	you	will	see	that	the	bird	within	you	responds.
Then	 those	 birds	 are	 not	 there	 as	 strangers,	 intruders	 --	 suddenly	 the	 whole
existence	becomes	 a	 family.	 It	 is,	 and	 I	 call	 a	man	 religious	who	has	 come	 to
understand	that	the	whole	existence	is	a	family.	He	may	not	go	to	any	church,	he
may	not	worship	in	any	temple,	he	may	not	pray	at	any	mosque	or	gurudwara	--
that	doesn't	matter.	That	is	almost	irrelevant.	If	you	do,	good,	it	 is	okay;	if	you
don't	 that	 is	 even	 better.	 But	 one	 who	 has	 understood	 the	 organic	 unity	 of
existence	 is	 constantly	 in	 the	 temple,	 is	 constantly	 facing	 the	 sacred	 and	 the
Divine.
But	if	you	are	doing	some	stupid	mantra	you	will	think	these	birds	are	stupid.	If
you	are	repeating	some	nonsense	within	you,	or	thinking	some	trivia	--	you	may
call	it	philosophy,	religion	--	then	these	birds	become	distractions.	Their	sounds
are	 simply	 Divine.	 They	 don't	 say	 anything,	 they	 are	 simply	 bubbling	 with
delight.	Their	song	has	no	meaning	except	an	overflowing	of	energy.	They	want
to	 share	with	 existence,	with	 the	 trees,	with	 the	 flowers,	with	 you.	They	 have
nothing	to	say;	they	are	just	being	there,	themselves.
If	 you	 relax,	 you	 accept;	 acceptance	 of	 existence	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 relax.	 If
small	things	disturb	you	then	it	is	your	attitude	that	is	disturbing	you.	Sit	silently;
listen	to	all	that	is	happening	all	around,	and	relax;	accept,	relax	--	and	suddenly
you	will	 feel	 immense	energy	arising	 in	you.	That	energy	will	be	 felt	 first	 is	a
deepening	of	your	breath.
Ordinarily	 your	 breath	 is	 very	 shallow	 and	 sometimes	 if	 you	 try	 to	 have	 deep
breaths,	if	you	start	doing	PRANAYAM,	you	start	forcing	something,	you	make
an	effort.	That	effort	is	not	needed.	You	simply	accept	life,	relax,	and	suddenly
you	 will	 see	 that	 your	 breath	 is	 going	 deeper	 than	 ever.	 Relax	 more	 and	 the
breath	goes	deeper	in	you.	It	becomes	slow,	rhythmic,	and	you	can	almost	enjoy
it;	it	gives	a	certain	delight.	Then	you	will	become	aware	that	breath	is	the	bridge
between	you	and	the	whole.	Just	watch.	Don't	do	anything.
And	when	 I	 say	watch,	 don't	TRY	 to	watch,	 otherwise	 you	will	 become	 tense
again,	 and	 you	 will	 start	 concentrating	 on	 the	 breath.	 Simply	 relax,	 remain
relaxed,	loose,	and	look...because	what	else	can	you	do?	You	are	there,	nothing
to	be	done,	everything	accepted,	nothing	to	be	denied,	rejected,	no	struggle,	no
fight	no	conflict,	breathing	going	deep	--	what	can	you	do?	You	simply	watch.
Remember,	simply	watch.	Don't	make	an	effort	 to	watch.	This	 is	what	Buddha
has	called	VIPASSANA	--	the	watching	of	the	breath,	awareness	of	the	breath	--
or	SATIPATTHANA	--	remembering,	being	alert	of	the	life	energy	that	moves	in
breath.	 Don't	 try	 to	 take	 deep	 breaths,	 don't	 try	 to	 inhale	 or	 exhale,	 don't	 do
anything.	You	simply	relax	and	let	the	breathing	be	natural	--	going	on	its	own,
coming	on	its	own	--	and	many	things	will	become	available	to	you.
The	 first	 thing	will	be	 that	breathing	can	be	 taken	 in	 two	ways	because	 it	 is	 a
bridge.	One	part	of	it	is	joined	with	you,	another	part	is	joined	with	existence.	So
it	can	be	understood	 in	 two	ways.	You	can	 take	 it	 as	a	voluntary	 thing.	 If	you
want	to	inhale	deeply,	you	can	inhale	deeply;	if	you	want	to	exhale	deeply,	you
can	exhale	deeply.	You	can	do	something	about	it.	One	part	is	joined	with	you.
But	 if	 you	 don't	 do	 anything,	 then	 too	 it	 continues.	 No	 need	 for	 you	 to	 do
anything	and	it	continues.	It	is	non-voluntary	also.
The	other	part	 is	 joined	with	existence	 itself.	You	can	 think	of	 it	 as	 if	you	are
taking	it	in,	you	are	breathing	it,	or	you	can	think	in	just	the	opposite	way	--	that
it	is	breathing	you.
And	 the	 other	way	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 because	 that	will	 lead	 you	 into	 deep
relaxation.	It	is	not	that	you	are	breathing,	but	existence	is	breathing	you.	It	is	a
change	of	 gestalt,	 and	 it	 happens	on	 its	 own.	 If	 you	go	on	 relaxing,	 accepting
everything,	relaxing	into	yourself,	by	and	by,	suddenly,	you	become	aware	that
you	are	not	taking	these	breaths	--	they	are	coming	and	going	on	their	own.	And
so	gracefully.	With	such	dignity.	With	such	rhythm.
With	such	harmonious	 rhythm.	Who	 is	doing	 it?	Existence	 is	breathing	you.	 It
comes	into	you,	goes	out	of	you.	Each	moment	it	rejuvenates	you,	each	moment
it	makes	you	alive	again	and	again	and	again.
Suddenly	you	see	breathing	as	a	happening...	and	this	is	how	meditation	should
grow.
And	this	you	can	do	anywhere,	in	the	marketplace	also,	because	that	noise	is	also
Divine.
And	if	you	listen	silently,	even	in	the	marketplace	you	will	see	a	certain	harmony
in	 the	 noise.	 It	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 distraction.	You	 can	 see	many	 things	 if	 you	 are
silent	--
tremendous	waves	of	energy	moving	all	around.	Once	you	accept,	wherever	you
go	you	will	feel
The	bird	 is	not	 important	but	you	will	 feel	 something	 tremendously	great,	you
will	feel	something	holy,	something	luminous,	something	mysterious.	A	miracle
is	constantly	happening	all	around	you	but	you	go	on	missing	it.
Once	 meditation	 settles	 in	 you	 and	 you	 fall	 into	 rhythm	 with	 existence,
compassion	is	a	consequence.	Suddenly	you	feel	you	are	in	love	with	the	whole
and	the	other	is	no	longer	the	other	--	God.	in	the	other	also	you	live.	And	the
tree	 is	 no	 longer	 just	 'the	 tree	 there',	 somehow	 it	 is	 related	 to	 you.	Everything
becomes	 inter-related.	You	 touch	 a	 leaf	 of	 grass	 and	 you	 have	 touched	 all	 the
stars	because	everything	is	related.	It	cannot	be	otherwise.
Existence	is	organic.	It	is	one.	It	is	a	unity.
Because	we	are	not	aware	we	don't	see	what	we	go	on	doing	to	ourselves.	One
thing	happens	and	something	which	you	have	never	thought	that	it	was	related	to
starts	happening.
Just	 the	 other	 night	 I	 was	 reading	 something	 about	 smell.	 The	 sensation,	 the
capacity	 of	 smell,	 has	 almost	 disappeared	 from	 humanity.	 Animals	 are	 very
sharp.	A	horse	can	smell	for	miles.	A	dog	can	smell	more	than	a	man.	Just	by	the
smell	the	dog	knows	that	his	master	is	coming,	and	after	many	years	the	dog	will
again	 recognize	 the	 smell	 that	 is	 his	 master's	 smell.	 Man	 has	 completely
forgotten.
What	 has	 happened	 to	 smell?	 What	 calamity	 has	 happened	 to	 smell?	 There
seems	to	be	no	reason	why	smell	has	been	so	suppressed	No	culture	anywhere
has	 consciously	 suppressed	 it	 but	 it	 has	 become	 suppressed.	 It	 has	 become
suppressed	because	of	sex.
Now,	 the	whole	 of	 humanity	 lives	with	 sex	 deeply	 suppressed	 --	 and	 smell	 is
connected	with	 sex.	Before	making	 love,	 a	 dog	will	 smell	 the	partner	 because
unless	he	smells	a	harmony	deep	down	between	the	two	bodies,	he	will	not	make
love.	Once	the	smell	is	fitting	then	he	knows	that	now	the	bodies	are	in	tune	and
they	can	fit	and	they	can	become	a	song	--	even	for	a	moment	a	unity	is	possible.
Because	 sex	 has	 been	 suppressed	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 smell	 has	 become
suppressed.	The	very	word	has	become	a	little	condemnatory.	If	I	say	to	you,	'Do
you	hear?'	or	if	I	say	to	you,	'Do	you	see?'	you	don't	feel	offended.	So,	if	I	say,
'Do	you	smell?'	one	should	not	feel	offended,	it	is	the	same	language.	Smell	is	a
capacity;	 just	 like	 seeing	 and	hearing,	 smelling	 is	 a	 capacity.	When	 I	 ask,	 'Do
you	smell?'	one	feels	offended	because	one	has	completely	forgotten	that	it	is	a
capacity.
There	is	a	famous	anecdote	about	an	English	thinker,	Dr.	Johnson.	He	was	sitting
in	a	stagecoach	and	a	lady	entered.	She	said	to	Dr.	Johnson,	'Sir,	you	smell!'
But	he	was	a	man	of	language,	letters,	a	grammarian.	He	said,	'No,	madam.	You
smell.	I	stink!'
Smell	is	a	capacity.	 'You	smell.	I	stink.'	Linguistically	he	is	right.	That's	how	it
should	 be	 if	 you	 follow	 grammar.	 But	 the	 very	 word	 has	 become	 very
condemnatory.	What	 has	 happened	 to	 smell?	Once	 you	 suppress	 sex,	 smell	 is
suppressed.
You	 can	 read	 in	 the	 scriptures	 that	 people	 say,	 'I	 saw	 God.	 Nobody	 says,	 'I
smelled	God.'
What	 is	 wrong	 in	 it?	 If	 eyes	 are	 right	 then	 why	 is	 nose	 wrong?	 In	 the	 Old
Testament	it	is	said	that	your	face	is	beautiful	and	your	taste	is	beautiful,	but	not
your	 smell.	Smell	 is	 not	 talked	 about.	We	 talk	 about	God's	 beatific	 vision,	we
never	talk	about	his	beatific	smell.
One	sense	is	completely	crippled	--	and	if	you	cripple	one	sense	then	one	part	of
the	mind	is	crippled.	If	you	have	five	senses	then	your	mind	has	five	parts.	One
fifth	of	the	mind	is	crippled	and	one	never	knows.	That	means	one	fifth	of	life	is
crippled.
The	 implications	 are	 tremendous.	 If	 you	 touch	 a	 small	 thing	 somewhere	 it
reverberates	 all	 over.	 Accept	 everything.	 I	 was	 talking	 to	 you	 a	 few	 minutes
before	about	repressing	sex:	because	of	repressing	sex,	smell	has	been	repressed,
and	because	of	repressing	sex	your	breathing	has	become	shallow	--	because	if
you	breathe	deep,	your	breathing	massages	the	sex	center	inside.	People	come	to
me	and	 say,	 'If	we	 really	breathe,	we	 feel	more	 sexual.'	 If	you	make	 love	 to	a
woman	 your	 breathing	 will	 become	 very	 deep.	 If	 you	 keep	 your	 breathing
shallow	you	will	not	be	able	 to	achieve	orgasm.	The	breathing	hits	hard,	deep
down	in	the	sex	center;	from	the	within	it	massages	the	sex	center.
Because	sex	has	been	repressed,	and	because	breathing	is	repressed	people	have
become	 incapable	of	meditation.	Now	 look	at	 the	whole	 thing.	What	nonsense
we	have	done!
Repressing	 sex	 we	 have	 repressed	 breathing	 and	 breathing	 is	 the	 only	 bridge
between	you	and	the	whole.
Gurdjieff	is	right	when	he	says	that	almost	all	religions	have	behaved	in	such	a
way	that	they	seem	to	be	against	God.	They	talk	about	God	but	they	seem	to	be
basically	 against	 God.	 The	 way	 they	 have	 behaved	 is	 against	 God.	 Now	 that
breathing	is	repressed,	the	bridge	is	broken.	You	can	only	breathe	shallowly	you
never	 go	 deep,	 and	 if	 you	 cannot	 go	 deep	 in	 yourself,	 you	 cannot	 go	 deep	 in
existence.
Buddha	 makes	 breathing	 the	 very	 foundation.	 A	 deep,	 relaxed	 breathing,	 an
awareness	of	 it,	 gives	you	 such	 tremendous	 silence,	 relaxation,	 that	by	and	by
you	simply	merge,	melt,	disappear.	You	are	no	longer	a	separate	island,	you	start
vibrating	with	the	whole.	Then	you	are	not	a	separate	note	but	part	of	this	whole
symphony.	Then	compassion	arises.
Compassion	 arises	 only	 when	 you	 can	 see	 that	 everybody	 is	 related	 to	 you.
Compassion	arises	only	when	you	see	that	you	are	a	member	of	everybody	and
everybody	 is	 a	 member	 of	 you.	 Nobody	 is	 separate.	 When	 the	 illusion	 of
separation	drops,	compassion	arises.	Compassion	is	not	a	discipline.
In	the	human	experience,	the	relationship	between	a	mother	and	her	child	is	the
closest	 to	compassion.	People	call	 it	 love	but	 it	should	not	be	called	 love.	 It	 is
more	like	compassion	than	love	because	it	has	no	passion	in	it.	A	mother's	love
for	the	child	is	closest	to	compassion.	Why?	Because	the	mother	has	known	the
child	in	herself;	he	was	a	member	of	her	being.	She	has	known	the	child	as	part
of	herself	and	even	if	the	child	is	born	and	is	growing	the	mother	goes	on	feeling
a	subtle	rhythm	with	the	child.	If	 the	child	feels	 ill,	a	 thousand	miles	away	the
mother	will	immediately	feel	it.	She	may	not	be	aware	of	what	has	happened	but
she	will	become	depressed;	she	may	not	be	aware	that	her	child	is	suffering	but
she	 will	 start	 suffering.	 She	 will	 make	 some	 rationalization	 about	 why	 she	 is
suffering	--	her	stomach	is	not	okay,	she	has	a	headache,	or	something	or	other	--
but	 now	 depth	 psychology	 says	 that	 the	 mother	 and	 the	 child	 always	 remain
joined	 together	with	subtle	energy,	waves,	because	 they	go	on	vibrating	on	 the
same	wavelength.	The	 telepathy	 is	 easier	between	a	mother	and	 the	child	 than
between	 anybody	 else.	 Or,	 between	 twins	 --	 between	 twins	 telepathy	 is	 very
easy.
Many	 experiments	 on	 telepathy	 have	 been	 done	 in	 Soviet	 Russian	 --	 not	 of
course	for	religion,	they	are	trying	to	find	out	if	telepathy	can	be	used	as	a	war
technique.	They	will	be	able	to	use	it	because	they	are	finding	clues:	 twins	are
very	 telepathic.	 If	 one	 twin	 has	 a	 cold	 a	 thousand	miles	 away	 the	 other	 starts
having	 a	 cold.	They	 vibrate	 on	 the	 same	wavelength,	 they	 are	 affected	 by	 the
same	things	within	seconds.	Because	they	have	both	lived	in	the	same	womb	as
part	of	each	other;	they	have	existed	in	the	mother's	womb	together.
A	mother's	 feeling	 for	 the	child	 is	more	of	compassion	because	she	 feels	he	 is
her	own.
I	was	reading	an	anecdote.
During	 the	 preliminary	 inspection	 of	 a	Boy	 Scout	Camp,	 the	 director	 found	 a
large	umbrella	hidden	in	the	bedroll	of	a	 tiny	scouter,	obviously	not	one	of	 the
items	of	equipment	listed.	The	director	asked	the	lad	to	explain.	The	tenderfoot
did	so	neatly	by	asking,	'Sir,	did	you	ever	have	a	mother?'
Mother	means	compassion,	mother	means	feeling	for	 the	other	as	one	feels	for
oneself.
When	a	person	moves	deeply	in	meditation	and	attains	to	samadhi,	he	becomes	a
mother.
Buddha	is	more	like	a	mother	than	like	a	father.	The	Christian	association	with
the	word
'father'	 is	 not	 very	 meaningful	 or	 beautiful.	 To	 call	 God	 'father'	 looks	 a	 little
male-orientated.	If	there	is	any	God	he	can	only	be	a	mother,	not	a	father.
'Father'	 is	 so	 institutional.	A	 father	 is	 an	 institution.	 In	 nature	 a	 father	 doesn't
exist.	If	you	ask	a	linguist	he	will	say	that	the	word	'uncle'	is	older	than	the	word
'father.'	Uncles	 came	 first	 into	 existence	 because	 nobody	 knew	who	 the	 father
was.	 Once	 private	 property	 was	 fixed,	 once	 marriage	 became	 a	 private
ownership,	the	institution	of	father	entered	into	human	life.	It	 is	very	fragile,	 it
can	disappear	 any	day.	 If	 the	 society	 changes,	 the	 institution	 can	disappear,	 as
many	other	institutions	have	disappeared.	But	mother	is	going	to	remain.	Mother
is	natural.
In	 the	East,	many	people,	many	 traditions,	have	called	God,	 the	mother.	Their
approach	seems	to	be	more	relevant.	Watch	Buddha,	his	face	seems	more	like	a
woman	 than	 like	 a	man.	 In	 fact,	 because	 of	 that	we	 have	 not	 depicted	 him	 as
having	a	beard	or	mustache.
Mahavir,	Buddha,	Krishna,	Ram	--	you	never	see	any	mustache	or	beard	on	their
faces.
Not	that	they	were	lacking	in	some	hormones	they	must	have	had	beards,	but	we
have	 not	 depicted	 them	 because	 that	 would	 give	 their	 faces	 a	more	male-like
appearance.	 In	 the	East	we	don't	bother	much	about	facts,	but	we	bother	much
about	relevance,	significance.
Of	course,	the	statues	of	Buddha	that	you	have	seen	are	all	false,	but	in	the	East
we	 don't	 worry	 about	 that.	 The	 significance	 is	 that	 Buddha	 has	 become	more
womanly,	more	feminine.	That	is	what	I	was	telling	you	about,	the	first	day:	the
shift	from	the	left	hemisphere	of	the	brain	to	the	right	hemisphere	of	the	brain,
from	the	male	to	the	female,	the	shift	from	the	aggressive	to	the	passive,	the	shift
from	 the	 positive	 to	 the	 negative,	 the	 shift	 from	 effort	 to	 effortlessness.	 A
Buddha	is	more	feminine,	more	motherly.	 If	you	really	become	a	meditator	by
and	by	you	will	see	many	changes	in	your	being	and	you	will	feel	more	like	a
woman	 than	 like	 a	man	 --	more	 graceful,	more	 receptive,	 non-violent,	 loving.
And	 a	 compassion	 will	 arise	 continuously	 from	 your	 being;	 it	 will	 be	 just	 a
natural	fragrance.
Ordinarily	whatsoever	 you	 call	 compassion	 goes	 on	 hiding	 your	 passion	 in	 it.
Even	 if	 you	 sometimes	 feel	 sympathetic	 towards	 people,	 watch,	 dissect,	 go
deeper	into	your	feeling	and	somewhere	you	will	find	some	motivation.	In	acts
which	 look	 very	 compassionate,	 deep	 down	 you	 will	 always	 find	 some
motivation.
Once	 it	 happened	 that	 a	 man	 called	 Louie	 came	 back	 home.	 He	 was	 very
shocked	to	find	his	wife	in	the	arms	of	another	man.	He	rushed	out	of	the	room
crying,	'I	am	getting	my	shotgun.'
His	wife	dashed	after	him	despite	her	unclothed	state,	seized	him	and	shouted,
'You	fool,	what	are	you	getting	excited	about?	It	was	my	lover	who	paid	for	the
new	furniture	we	recently	got,	my	new	clothes,	 the	extra	money	you	 thought	 I
earned	sewing,	the	little	luxuries	we	have	been	able	to	buy	--	they	all	came	from
him!'
But	Louie	wrenched	away	and	continued	upstairs.
'No	shotgun,	Louie!'	yelled	his	wife.
'What	shotgun?'	called	back	Louie.	'I	am	getting	a	blanket.	That	poor	fellow	will
catch	cold,	Lying	there	like	that.'
Even	if	you	feel,	or	you	think	you	feel,	or	you	pretend	that	you	feel,	compassion,
just	go	deep	and	analyze	it	and	you	will	always	find	some	other	motivation	in	it.
It	cannot	be	pure	compassion	and	if	it	is	not	pure	it	is	not	compassion.	Purity	is	a
basic	ingredient	in	compassion,	otherwise	it	is	something	else	--	it	is	more	or	less
a	formality.	We	have	learned	how	to	be	formal:	how	to	behave	with	your	wife,
how	 to	 behave	 with	 your	 husband,	 how	 to	 behave	 with	 your	 children,	 with
friends,	 with	 your	 family.	 We	 have	 learned	 everything.	 Compassion	 is	 not
something	which	 can	 be	 learned;	when	 you	 have	 unlearned	 ail	 formalities,	 all
etiquette	and	manners,	it	arises	in	you.	It	is	very	wild;	it	doesn't	taste	of	etiquette,
of	formality,	they	are	all	dead	things	compared	to	it.	It	is	very	alive,	it	is	a	flame
of	love.
At	 the	 twelfth	 hole	 of	 a	 hotly-contested	 match,	 the	 grounds	 overlooked	 the
highway	 and	 as	 Smith	 and	 Jones	 approached	 the	 green,	 they	 saw	 a	 funeral
procession	making	its	way	along	the	road.
At	 this,	 Smith	 stopped,	 took	 off	 his	 hat,	 placed	 it	 over	 his	 heart,	 and	 bent	 his
head	till	the	procession	disappeared	around	the	bend.
Jones	was	 astonished	 and	 after	Smith	 had	 replaced	his	 hat	 and	 returned	 to	 his
game,	he	said,	'That	was	delicate	and	respectful	of	your	Smith.'
Ah,	well,'	said	Smith,	'I	could	not	do	less.	I	had	been	married	to	the	woman	for
twenty	years,	after	all.'
Life	has	become	plastic,	artificial,	formal,	because	you	have	to	do	certain	things
that	you	do.	You	of	course	reluctantly	follow	duties	but	if	you	miss	much	of	life,
it	is	natural,	because	life	is	possible	only	if	you	are	alive,	intensely	alive.	If	your
own	flame	has	become	covered	by	formalities,	duties,	rules,	which	you	have	to
fulfill	reluctantly,	you	can	only	drag.	You	may	drag	comfortably,	your	life	may
be	a	life	of	convenience,	but	it	cannot	be	really	alive.
A	really	alive	life	is,	in	a	way,	chaotic.	In	a	way,	I	say,	because	that	chaos	has	its
own	discipline.	It	has	no	rules	because	it	need	not	have	any	rules.	It	has	the	most
basic	rule	in-built	in	it	--	it	need	not	have	any	external	rules.
Now	the	Zen	story.
ONE	 WINTER	 DAY,	 A	 MASTERLESS	 SAMURAI	 CAME	 TO	 EISAI'S
TEMPLE
AND	MADE	AN	APPEAL:	 'I	AM	POOR	AND	SICK,'	HE	SAID,	 'AND	MY
FAMILY
IS	DYING	OF	HUNGER.	PLEASE	HELP	US,	MASTER.'	DEPENDENT	AS
HE	WAS
ON	WIDOWS'	MITES,	EISAI'S	LIFE	WAS	VERY	AUSTERE,	AND	HE	HAD
NOTHING	TO	GIVE.
HE	 WAS	 ABOUT	 TO	 SEND	 THE	 SAMURAI	 OFF	 WHEN	 HE
REMEMBERED	THE
IMAGE	 OF	 YAKUSHI-BUDDHA	 IN	 THE	 HALL.	 GOING	 UP	 TO	 IT	 HE
TORE	OFF
ITS	HALO	AND	GAVE	 IF	TO	THE	SAMURAI.	 'SELL	THIS,'	SAID	EISAI,
'IT
SHOULD	 TIDE	 YOU	 OVER.'	 THE	 BEWILDERED	 BUT	 DESPERATE
SAMURAI	TOOK	THE	HALO	AND	LEFT.
'MASTER!'	 CRIED	 ONE	 OF	 EISAI'S	 DISCIPLES,	 'THAT'S	 SACRILEGE!
HOW
COULD	YOU	DO	SUCH	A	THING?'
'SACRILEGE?	 BAH!	 I	 HAVE	 MERELY	 PUT	 THE	 BUDDHA'S	 MIND,
WHICH	IS
FULL	OF	LOVE	AND	MERCY,	TO	USE,	SO	TO	SPEAK.	 INDEED,	 IF	HE
HIMSELF
HAD	 HEARD	 THAT	 POOR	 SAMURAI	 HE	 WOULD	 HAVE	 CUT	 OFF	 A
LIMB	FOR
HIM.'
A	very	simple	story,	but	very	significant.	First,	even	when	you	have	nothing	to
give,	look	again.	You	will	always	find	something	to	give.	Even	when	you	have
nothing	 to	 give,	 you	 can	 always	 find	 something	 to	 give.	 It	 is	 a	 question	 of
attitude.	If	you	cannot	give	anything,	at	least	you	can	smile;	if	you	cannot	give
anything,	 at	 least	 you	 can	 sit	 with	 the	 person	 and	 hold	 his	 hand.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	giving	something,	it	is	a	question	of	giving.
This	Eisai	was	 a	poor	monk	as	Buddhist	monks	are.	His	 life	was	very	austere
and	he	had	nothing	to	give.	Ordinarily,	it	is	an	absolute	sacrilege	to	take	the	halo
off	Buddha's	statue	and	give	it	away.	No	so-called	religious	person	could	think
of	 it.	 Only	 somebody	 who	 is	 really	 religious	 would	 --	 that's	 why	 I	 say
compassion	knows	no	rules,	compassion	is	beyond	rules.	It	is	wild.	It	follows	no
formalities.
Then	 suddenly	 the	 Master	 remembered	 the	 image	 of	 Buddha	 in	 the	 hall.	 In
Japan,	 in	 China,	 they	 put	 a	 gold	 halo	 around	 the	 head	 of	 the	 Buddha,	 just	 to
show	the	aura	around	his	head.	Suddenly	the	Master	remembered	it	--	every	day
he	must	have	worshipped	the	same	statue.
GOING	 UP	 TO	 IT	 HE	 TORE	 OFF	 ITS	 HALO	 AND	 GAVE	 IT	 TO	 THE
SAMURAI.
'SELL	 THIS,'	 SAID	 EISAI,	 'IT	 SHOULD	 TIDE	 YOU	 OVER.'	 THE
BEWILDERED
BUT	DESPERATE	SAMURAI	TOOK	THE	HALO	AND	LEFT.
Even	the	samurai	was	bewildered.	He	had	not	expected	this.	Even	he	must	have
thought	 that	 this	was	 sacrilege.	What	 type	of	man	 is	 this?	He	 is	 a	 follower	 of
Buddha	and	he	has	destroyed	the	statue.	Even	to	touch	the	statue	is	sacrilege	and
he	has	taken	away	the	halo.
This	 is	 the	difference	between	a	 real	 religious	person	and	a	 so-called	 religious
person.
The	 so-called	 religious	 person	 always	 Looks	 to	 the	 rule;	 he	 always	 thinks	 of
what	is	proper	and	what	is	not	proper.	But	a	really	religious	person	lives	it.	There
is	nothing	proper	and	improper	for	him.	Compassion	is	so	infinitely	proper	that
whatsoever	you	do	through	compassion	becomes	proper	automatically.
'MASTER!'	 CRIED	 ONE	 OF	 EISAI'S	 DISCIPLES,	 'THAT'S	 SACRILEGE
HOW
COULD	YOU	DO	SUCH	A	THING?'	Even	a	disciple	understands	 that	 this	 is
not	right.
Something	 improper	 has	 been	 done.	 'SACRILEGE?	BAH!	 I	HAVE	MERELY
PUT	THE
BUDDHA'S	MIND	WHICH	 IS	 FULL	OF	 LOVE	AND	MERCY,	 TO	GOOD
USE,	SO
TO	 SPEAK.	 INDEED,	 IF	 HE	 HIMSELF	 HAD	 HEARD	 THAT	 POOR
SAMURAI	HE
WOULD	HAVE	CUT	OFF	A	LIMB	FOR	HIM.'
To	 understand	 is	 something	 other	 than	 just	 to	 follow.	When	 you	 follow,	 you
become	 almost	 blind;	 then	 there	 are	 rules	 which	 have	 to	 be	 kept.	 If	 you
understand,	then	too	you	follow,	but	you	are	no	longer	blind.	But	each	moment
decides,	 each	moment	your	consciousness	 responds,	 and	whatsoever	you	do	 is
right.
One	of	 the	most	beautiful	stories	 in	Zen	is	about	a	Zen	master	who	asked,	one
winter	 night,	 to	 be	 allowed	 to	 stay	 in	 a	 temple.	He	was	 shivering	 because	 the
night	 was	 cold	 and	 snow	 was	 falling	 outside.	 Of	 course,	 the	 temple	 priest
sympathized	 and	 told	 him,	 'You	 can	 stay,	 but	 only	 for	 the	 night,	 because	 this
temple	is	not	a	sarai.	In	the	morning	you	will	have	to	go.'
In	 the	middle	of	 the	night	 the	priest	 suddenly	heard	a	noise.	He	came	 running
and	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	The	monk	was	sitting	around	a	fire	which	he	had
made	inside	the	temple.	And	one	Buddha	statue	was	missing.
In	Japan	they	make	wooden	Buddhas.
The	priest	asked,	'Where	is	the	statue?'
The	Master	 showed	him	 the	 fire	 and	he	 said,	 'I	was	 shivering	 and	 it	was	very
cold.'
The	priest	said,	'You	seem	to	be	mad!	Don't	you	see	what	you	have	done?	It	was
a	Buddha	statue.	You	have	burnt	Buddha!
The	Master	looked	in	the	fire,	which	was	disappearing,	and	poked	the	fire	with	a
stick.
The	priest	asked,	'What	are	you	doing?'
He	said,	'I	am	trying	to	find	the	bones	of	the	Buddha.
The	 priest	 said,	 'You	 are	 certainly	mad.	 It	 is	 a	wooden	Buddha.	 There	 are	 no
bones	in	it.'
Then	the	monk	said,	'The	night	is	still	long	and	it	is	getting	even	colder,	why	not
bring	these	two	other	Buddhas	also?'
Of	 course,	 he	 had	 to	 be	 thrown	out	 of	 the	 temple	 immediately.	This	man	was
dangerous.
When	 he	was	 being	 thrown	 out	 he	 said,	 'What	 are	 you	 doing	 throwing	 a	 live
Buddha	out?
For	a	wooden	Buddha?	The	alive	Buddha	was	suffering	so	much	I	had	to	show
compassion.	 If	 Buddha	 was	 alive	 he	 would	 have	 done	 the	 same.	 He	 would
himself	have	given	all	those	three	statues	to	me.	I	know	it.	I	know	from	my	very
heart	that	he	would	have	done	the	same!'
But	who	was	 there	 to	 listen	 to	him?	He	was	 thrown	out	 into	 the	snow	and	 the
doors	were	closed.
In	 the	 morning,	 when	 the	 priest	 went	 out,	 he	 saw	 the	 Master	 sitting	 near	 a
milestone	with	a	few	flowers	on	top	of	it,	worshipping	it.	The	priest	came	again
and	said,	'What	are	you	doing	now?	Worshipping	a	milestone?'
The	 Master	 said,	 'Whenever	 the	 time	 to	 pray	 comes,	 I	 create	 my	 Buddhas
anywhere,	because	they	are	always	all	around.	This	milestone	is	as	good	as	your
wooden	Buddhas	inside!'
It	 is	a	question	of	attitude.	When	you	look	with	worshipful	eyes	 then	anything
becomes	Divine.
And	 remember,	 the	 story	 about	 Eisai	 is	 easy	 to	 remember	 because	 the
compassion	 is	shown	towards	somebody	else.	This	story	 is	even	more	difficult
and	complex	to	understand	because	the	compassion	is	shown	towards	oneself.	A
real	 man	 of	 understanding	 is	 neither	 hard	 towards	 others	 nor	 hard	 towards
himself	because	 it	 is	one	and	 the	same	energy.	A	real	man	of	understanding	 is
not	 a	 masochist;	 he	 is	 not	 a	 sadist,	 he	 is	 not	 a	 masochist.	 A	 real	 man	 of
understanding	 simply	 understands	 that	 there	 is	 no	 separation	 --	 all	 including
himself	is	Divine.	And	he	lives	out	this	understanding.
To	live	out	of	understanding	is	compassion.	Never	try	to	practice	it,	simply	relax
deep	into	meditation.	Be	in	a	state	of	let-go	in	meditation	and	suddenly	you	will
be	 able	 to	 smell	 the	 fragrance	 that	 is	 coming	 from	your	own	 innermost	depth.
Then	the	flower	blossoms	and	compassion	spreads.	Meditation	is	the	flower	and
compassion	is	its	fragrance.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Be	a	light	unto	yourself
24	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602240
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
94
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
IS	 ZEN	 THE	 PATH	 OF	 SURRENDER?	 THEN	 HOW	 COME	 THE	 BASIC
TEACHING
OF	BUDDHA	IS	'BE	A	LIGHT	UNTO	YOURSELF'?
The	essential	surrender	happens	within	you,	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	anybody
outside	you.	The	basic	surrender	is	a	relaxation,	a	trust	--	so	don't	be	misguided
by	the	word.
Linguistically,	 surrender	 means	 to	 surrender	 to	 somebody,	 but	 religiously,
surrender	 simply	means	 trust,	 relaxing.	 It	 is	 an	attitude	 rather	 than	an	act:	you
live	through	trust.
Let	me	explain.	You	swim	in	water	--	you	go	to	the	river	and	swim.	What	do	you
do?
You	 trust	water.	A	good	 swimmer	 trusts	 so	much	 that	 he	 almost	 becomes	 one
with	the	river.	He	is	not	fighting,	he	does	not	grab	the	water,	he	is	not	stiff	and
tense.	If	you	are	stiff	and	tense	you	will	be	drowned;	if	you	are	relaxed	the	river
takes	 care.	 That's	 why	 whenever	 somebody	 dies,	 the	 dead	 body	 floats	 on	 the
water.	This	is	a	miracle.	Amazing!
The	alive	person	died	and	was	drowned	by	the	river,	and	the	dead	person	simply
floats	on	the	surface.	What	has	happened?	The	dead	person	knows	some	secret
about	 the	 river	 which	 the	 alive	 person	 did	 not	 know.	 The	 alive	 person	 was
fighting.	 The	 river	was	 the	 enemy.	He	was	 afraid,	 he	 could	 not	 trust.	 But	 the
dead	 person,	 not	 being	 there,	 how	 could	 he	 fight?	 The	 dead	 person	 is	 totally
relaxed	with	no	tension	--	suddenly	the	body	surfaces.
The	river	takes	care.	No	river	can	drown	a	dead	person.
Trust	means	you	are	not	fighting;	surrender	means	you	don't	think	of	life	as	the
enemy	but	as	 the	friend.	Once	you	 trust	 the	river,	suddenly	you	start	enjoying.
Tremendous	delight	arises:	splashing,	swimming,	or	just	floating,	or	diving	deep.
But	you	are	not	separate	from	the	river,	you	merge,	you	become	one.
Surrender	means	to	live	the	same	way	in	life	as	a	good	swimmer	swims	in	the
river.	Life	 is	a	river.	Either	you	can	fight	or	you	can	float;	either	you	can	push
the	 river	 and	 try	 to	 go	 against	 the	 c.	 or	 you	 can	 float	 with	 the	 river	 and	 go
wherever	the	river	leads	you.
Surrender	 is	 not	 towards	 somebody;	 it	 is	 simply	 a	 way	 of	 life.	 A	 God	 is	 not
needed	 to	 surrender	 to.	 There	 are	 religions	 which	 believe	 in	 God,	 there	 are
religions	which	don't	 believe	 in	God,	 but	 all	 religions	believe	 in	 surrender.	So
surrender	is	the	real	God.
Even	 the	 concept	of	God	can	be	discarded.	Buddhism	does	not	believe	 in	 any
God,	Jainism	does	not	believe	in	any	God	--	but	they	are	religions.	Christianity
believes	in	God,	Islam	believes	in	God,	Sikhism	believes	in	God	--	they	are	also
religions.	 The	 Christian	 teaches	 surrender	 to	 God;	 God	 is	 just	 an	 excuse	 to
surrender.	 It	 is	 a	help,	because	 it	will	 be	difficult	 for	you	 to	 surrender	without
any	 object.	 The	 object	 is	 just	 an	 excuse	 so	 that	 in	 the	 name	 of	 God	 you	 can
surrender.	Buddhism	says	simply	surrender	--
there	is	no	God.	You	relax.	It	is	not	a	question	of	some	object,	it	is	a	question	of
your	own	subjectivity.	Relax,	don't	fight.	Accept.
The	 belief	 in	God	 is	 not	 needed.	 In	 fact,	 the	word	 'belief'	 is	 ugly.	 It	 does	 not
show	trust,	 it	does	not	show	faith	--	belief	 is	almost	 the	very	opposite	of	faith.
The	word	'belief'	comes	from	a	root	'lief'	--	 'lief'	means	to	desire,	to	wish.	Now
let	me	 explain	 it	 to	 you.	You	 say,	 'I	 believe	 in	God	 the	 compassionate.'	What
exactly	 are	 you	 saying?	 You	 are	 saying,	 'I	 wish	 there	 was	 a	 God	 who	 is
compassionate.'	Whenever	you	say,	 'I	believe,'	you	say,	 'I	 intensely	desire.'	But
you	don't	know.
If	you	know,	there	is	no	question	of	belief.	Do	you	believe	in	the	trees	here?	Do
you	believe	in	the	sun	which	arises	every	morning?	Do	you	believe	in	the	stars?
There	is	no	question	of	belief.	You	know	that	the	sun	is	there,	that	the	trees	are
there.	 Nobody	 believes	 in	 the	 sun	 --	 if	 he	 did,	 you	 would	 say	 he	 is	 mad.	 If
somebody	 came	 and	 said,	 'I	 believe	 in	 the	 sun,'	 and	 tried	 to	 convert	 you,	 you
would	say,	'You	have	gone	mad!'
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
A	 certain	 lady,	 Lady	Lewis,	was	 appointed	 ambassador	 to	 Italy	 by	 the	United
States	of	America.	She	was	a	recently	converted	Catholic,	and,	of	course,	when
people	 become	 converted,	 they	 are	 very	 enthusiastic.	 And	 she	 was	 boring
everybody.	Whosoever	she	came	into	contact	with,	she	would	try	and	make	him
a	Catholic.
The	story	goes	that	when	she	went	to	Italy	as	the	ambassador,	she	went	to	see	the
Pope.	A	long	discussion	followed	--	it	went	on	and	on.	A	press	reporter	slipped
closer	and	closer,	just	to	hear	what	was	going	on.	The	Pope	had	never	given	so
much	 time	 to	 anybody,	 and	 the	 discussion	 seemed	 to	 be	 very	 heated	 and	 hot.
Something	was	going	on.	When	the	Pope	talks	so	long	to	the	ambassador	of	the
richest	and	the	strongest	nation	in	the	world,	there	is	going	to	be	some	news.
Just	 to	 overhear,	 he	 came	 closer	 and	 closer.	He	 could	 hear	 only	 one	 sentence.
The	Pope	was	saying	in	a	faltering	English,	'Lady,	you	don't	understand	me.	I	am
already	a	Catholic!'
She	was	trying	to	convert	the	Pope!
If	 somebody	 comes	 and	 says	 to	 you,	 'Believe	 in	 the	 sun,'	 you	will	 say,	 'I	 am
already	a	Catholic.	I	already	believe.	You	don't	be	worried	about	it.'	You	know.
Somebody	 asked	 Shri	 Aurobindo,	 'Do	 you	 believe	 in	God?'	 He	 said,	 'No.'	 Of
course	 the	 questioner	 was	 very	 shocked.	 He	 had	 come	 from	 far	 away,	 from
Germany,	and	he	was	a	great	seeker	of	God	and	he	was	hoping	for	much.	Then
this	man	simply	says	a	flat	no.	He	said,	'But	I	was	thinking	that	you	have	known
him.'	Aurobindo	said,	'Yes,	I	have	known	him,	but	I	don't	believe	in	him.'
Once	you	know,	what	is	the	point	of	belief?	Belief	is	in	ignorance.	If	you	know,
you	know.	And	it	is	good	that	if	you	don't	know,	know	that	you	don't	know	--	the
belief	can	deceive	you.	The	belief	can	create	an	atmosphere	in	your	mind,	where,
without	knowing,	you	start	 thinking	 that	you	know.	Belief	 is	not	 trust,	 and	 the
more	 strongly	 you	 say	 that	 you	believe	 totally,	 the	more	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 the
doubt	within	you.
Trust	knows	no	doubt.	Belief	 is	 just	 repressing	doubt;	 it	 is	a	desire.	When	you
say,	'I	believe	in	God,'	you	say,	'I	cannot	live	without	God.	It	will	be	too	difficult
to	exist	 in	 this	darkness,	surrounded	by	death,	without	a	concept	of	God.'	That
concept	helps.	One	doesn't	 feel	alone;	one	doesn't	 feel	unprotected,	 insecure	 --
hence	belief.
Martin	 Luther	 has	 written,	 'My	 God	 is	 a	 great	 fortress.'	 These	 words	 cannot
come	from	a	man	who	trusts.	'My	God	is	a	great	fortress'?	Martin	Luther	seems
to	be	on	the	defensive.
Even	God	is	just	a	fortress	to	protect	you,	to	make	you	feel	secure?	Then	it	is	out
of	fear.
The	thinking	that	'God	is	my	greatest	fortress',	is	born	out	of	fear,	not	out	of	love.
It	is	not	of	trust.	Deep	down	there	is	doubt	and	fear.
Trust	is	simple.	It	is	just	like	a	child	trusts	in	his	mother.	It	is	not	that	he	believes
--	belief	has	not	yet	 entered.	You	were	 a	 small	 child	once.	Did	you	believe	 in
your	 mother	 or	 did	 you	 trust	 her?	 The	 doubt	 has	 not	 arisen	 so	 what	 is	 the
question	of	belief?	Belief	comes	only	when	the	doubt	has	entered;	doubt	comes
first.	Later	on,	 to	suppress	 the	doubt,	you	catch	hold	of	a	belief.	Trust	 is	when
doubt	disappears;	trust	is	when	doubt	is	not	there.
For	instance,	you	breathe.	You	take	a	breath	in;	then	you	exhale,	you	breathe	out.
Are	you	afraid	of	breathing	out,	because	who	knows,	it	may	not	come	back?	You
trust.	You	 trust	 it	will	 come.	Of	 course	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 to	 trust,	what	 is	 the
reason?	Why	should	it	come	back?	You	can	at	the	most	say	that	in	the	past	it	has
been	happening	so	--	but	that	is	not	a	guarantee.	It	may	not	happen	in	the	future.
If	you	become	afraid	of	breathing	out	because	it	may	not	come	back,	 then	you
will	hold	your	breath	in.	That's	what	belief	is	--
clinging,	holding.	But	 if	you	hold	your	breath	 in,	your	 face	will	go	purple	and
you	will	feel	suffocated.	And	if	you	go	on	doing	that,	you	will	die.
All	beliefs	suffocate	and	all	beliefs	help	you	not	to	be	really	alive.	They	deaden
your	being.
If	 you	 exhale,	 you	 trust	 in	 life.	 The	 Buddhist	 word	 'nirvana'	 simply	 means
exhaling,	breathing	out	 --	 trusting.	Trust	 is	 a	very,	very	 innocent	phenomenon.
Belief	is	of	the	head;	trust	is	of	the	heart.	One	simply	trusts	life	because	you	are
out	of	life,	you	live	in	life,	and	you	will	go	back	again	to	the	source.	There	is	no
fear.	 You	 are	 born,	 you	 live,	 you	 will	 die;	 there	 is	 no	 fear.	 You	 will	 be	 born
again,	you	will	live	again,	you	will	die.	The	same	life	that	has	given	you	life	can
always	give	you	more	life,	so	why	be	afraid?	Why	cling	to	beliefs?	Beliefs	are
man-made;	trust	is	God-made.	Beliefs	are	philosophical;	trust	has	nothing	to	do
with	 philosophy.	 Trust	 simply	 shows	 that	 you	 know	 what	 love	 is.	 It	 is	 not	 a
concept	 of	 God	 who	 is	 sitting	 somewhere	 in	 heaven	 and	 manipulating	 and
managing.
Trust	needs	no	God,	the	infinite	life,	this	totality,	is	more	than	enough.	Once	you
trust,	you	relax.	That	relaxation	is	surrender.
Now,	 IS	 ZEN	 THE	 PATH	 OF	 SURRENDER?	 Yes.	 Religion,	 as	 such,	 is
surrendering,	 relaxing.	Don't	 cling	 to	 anything.	 Clinging	 shows	 that	 you	 don't
trust	life.
Every	evening,	Mohammed	used	to	distribute	whatsoever	he	had	collected	in	the
day.
All!	Not	even	a	single	pai	would	he	save	for	the	tomorrow	because	he	said	that
the	 same	 source	 that	 had	 given	 today,	 would	 give	 to	 him	 tomorrow.	 If	 it	 has
happened	today,	why	be	untrusting	about	tomorrow?	Why	save?
But	when	he	was	dying	and	he	was	very	 ill,	his	wife	became	worried.	Even	at
midnight	a	physician	may	be	needed,	so	that	evening	she	saved	five	rupees,	five
dinars.	She	was	afraid.	'Nobody	knows	--	he	may	become	too	ill	in	the	night,	and
some	medicine	may	be	needed	and	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	where	would	I	go?
Or	 a	 doctor	may	 be	 needed	 and	 the	 fee	 would	 have	 to	 be	 given.'	 Not	 saying
anything	to	Mohammed,	she'd	saved	five	dinars.
Near	about	midnight,	Mohammed	opened	his	eyes	and	he	said,	 'I	feel	a	certain
distrust	around	me.	It	seems	something	has	been	saved.'
The	wife	became	very	much	afraid	and	she	said,	 'Excuse	me,	but	 thinking	 that
something	may	be	needed	in	the	night,	I	have	saved	just	five	dinars.'
Mohammed	said,	'You	go	out	and	give	it	to	somebody.'
She	said,	'In	the	middle	of	the	night	who	is	going	to	be	there?'
Mohammed	said,	'You	just	listen	and	let	me	die	peacefully,	otherwise	I	will	feel
guilty,	guilty	against	my	God.	And	if	he	asks	me.	I	will	feel	ashamed	that	at	the
last	moment	I	died	in	deep	distrust.	You	go	out!'
The	wife	went	out,	unbelieving	of	course,	but	a	beggar	was	standing	there.
When	she	came	back,	Mohammed	said,	'Look,	he	manages	well,	and	if	we	need
something,	then	a	donor	will	be	standing	outside	the	door.	Don't	be	worried.'
Then	he	pulled	up	his	blanket	and	died	immediately,	relaxed	totally.
Clinging	to	anything,	anything	whatsoever,	shows	distrust.	If	you	love	a	woman
or	 a	man,	 and	you	 cling,	 that	 simply	 shows	 that	 you	don't	 trust.	 If	 you	 love	 a
woman	and	you	say,	'Tomorrow	also,	will	you	love	me	or	not?'	you	don't	trust.	If
you	go	 to	 the	court	 to	get	married,	you	don't	 trust.	Then	you	 trust	more	 in	 the
court,	in	the	police,	in	the	law,	than	in	love.	You	are	preparing	for	tomorrow.	If
this	woman	or	this	man	tries	to	deceive	you	tomorrow	or	leaves	you	in	the	ditch,
you	can	get	support	from	the	court	and	the	police,	and	the	law	will	be	with	you
and	 the	whole	 society	will	 support	 you.	You	 are	making	 arrangements,	 afraid.
But	if	you	really	love,	love	is	enough,	more	than	enough.
Who	bothers	 about	 tomorrow?	But	deep	down	 there	 is	 doubt.	Even	while	you
think	you	are	in	love,	doubt	continues.
It	 is	 reported	 that	 when	 Jesus	 was	 resurrected	 after	 his	 crucifixion,	 the	 first
person	 to	 see	 him	 back	 alive	 was	 Mary	 Magdalene.	 She	 had	 loved	 him
tremendously.	She	 ran	 towards	him.	 In	 the	New	Testament	 it	 is	 said	 that	 Jesus
said,	 'Don't	 touch	me.'	I	became	a	little	suspicious	because	Jesus	saying,	 'Don't
touch	 me,'	 does	 not	 look	 right.	 Something	 somewhere	 has	 gone	 wrong.	 Of
course	it	is	okay	if	a	pope	says,	'Don't	touch	me,'	but	a	Jesus	saying,	'Don't	touch
me.'	Almost	impossible.	So	I	tried	to	find	the	original.	In	the	original	the	Greek
word	can	mean	both	touch	or	cling.	Then	I	found	the	key.	Jesus	says,
'Don't	cling	to	me,'	not	'Don't	touch	me,	but	the	translators	have	interpreted	it	as,
'Don't	touch	me.'	The	interpreter	has	entered	his	own	mind	in	it.	Jesus	must	have
said,	 'Don't	cling	to	me,'	because	if	there	is	trust,	there	is	no	clinging	if	there	is
love,	 there	is	no	clinging.	You	simply	share	without	any	clinging;	you	share	in
deep	relaxedness.
Surrendering	means	surrendering	to	life;	surrendering	to	the	source	from	where
you	come	and	to	where	one	day	you	will	go	back	again.	You	are	just	like	a	wave
in	the	ocean:	You	come	out	of	the	ocean,	you	go	back	to	the	ocean.	Surrendering
means	 trusting	 in	 the	ocean	--	and	of	course,	what	can	a	wave	do	except	 that?
The	wave	has	to	trust	the	ocean	and	whether	you	trust	or	not,	you	remain	part	of
the	ocean.	Non-trusting,	you	will	create	anxiety	--	that's	all.	Nothing	will	change.
only	you	will	become	anxious.	tense,	desperate.
If	you	trust,	you	flower.	you	bloom.	you	celebrate.	knowing	well	that	deep	down
is	your	mother,	 the	ocean.	When	 tired,	 you	will	 go	back	and	 rest	 in	her	being
again.	When	rested,	you	will	come	back	again	to	have	a	taste	of	the	sky	and	the
sunlight	and	the	stars.
Surrendering	is	 trusting	and	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	concept	of	any	God,
any	ideology	of	any	God.	It	is	an	attitude.
Then	you	can	understand	the	meaning	of	Buddha	s	last	utterance.	Be	a	light	unto
yourself.	 When	 he	 says.	 Be	 a	 light	 unto	 yourself.	 he	 means:	 if	 you	 have
surrendered	to	life	you	have	become	a	light	unto	yourself.	Then	life	leads	you.
Then	you	always	live	in	enlightenment.	When	he	says.	'Be	a	light	unto	yourself,
he	is	saying	don	t	follow	anybody,	don't	cling	to	anybody.	Learn	from	everybody
but	 don't	 cling	 to	 anybody.	 Be	 open,	 vulnerable,	 but	 remain	 on	 your	 own,
because	finally	the	religious	experience	cannot	be	a	borrowed	experience.	It	has
to	 be	 existential;	 it	 has	 to	 be	 your	 own.	 Only	 then	 it	 is	 authentic.	 If	 I	 say
something	and	you	believe	in	it,	 it	 is	not	going	to	help.	If	I	say	something	and
you	search,	and	you	surrender,	and	you	trust,	and	you	also	experience	the	same	-
-	 then	 it	 has	 become	 a	 light	 unto	 yourself.	 Otherwise	 my	 words	 will	 remain
words;	at	the	most	they	can	become	beliefs.	Unless	you	experience	the	truth	of
them,	 they	cannot	become	 trust,	 they	cannot	become	your	own	 truth.	My	 truth
cannot	 become	 yours,	 otherwise	 it	 would	 have	 been	 very	 cheap.	 If	 my	 truth
could	be	yours	then	there	would	be	no	problem.
That	is	the	difference	between	a	scientific	truth	and	a	religious	truth.	A	scientific
truth	can	be	borrowed.	A	scientific	truth,	once	known,	becomes	everybody	else's
property.
Albert	 Einstein	 discovered	 the	 theory	 of	 relativity.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for
everybody	to	discover	it	again	and	again	and	again.	That	would	be	foolish.	Once
discovered,	it	has	become	public.	Now	it	is	everybody's	theory.	Once	discovered,
once	proved,	now	even	a	school	child	can	learn	it.	Now	no	genius	is	needed	--
you	need	not	be	an	Albert	Einstein.
Just	a	mediocre	mind	will	do;	just	an	ordinary	mind	will	do.	You	can	understand
it	and	it	is	yours.	Of	course,	Einstein	had	to	work	for	years	--	then	he	was	able	to
discover	it.	You	need	not	work.	If	you	are	ready	to	understand	and	put	your	mind
to	it,	in	just	a	few	hours	you	will	understand.
But	 the	 same	 is	 not	 true	 about	 religious	 truth.	 Buddha	 discovered,	 Christ
discovered,	 Nanak	 and	 Kabir	 discovered,	 but	 their	 discovery	 cannot	 become
your	 discovery.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 rediscover	 it	 again.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 move
again	 from	ABC;	you	cannot	 just	believe	 in	 them.	That	won't	help.	But	 that	 is
what	humanity	has	been	doing:	mistaking	religious	truth	for	scientific	truth.	It	is
not	scientific	truth,	it	can	never	become	a	public	property.	Each	individual	has	to
come	to	it	alone,	each	individual	has	to	come	to	it	again	and	again.	It	can	never
become	available	in	the	market.	You	will	have	to	pass	through	the	hardship;	you
will	have	to	seek	and	search	and	follow	the	same	path.	A	shortcut	cannot	even	be
made.	You	will	have	 to	pass	 through	 the	same	austerities	as	Buddha,	 the	same
difficulties	 as	 the	Buddha;	 you	will	 have	 to	 suffer	 the	 same	 calamities	 on	 the
path	as	the	Buddha	and	you	will	have	to	be	in	the	same	hazards	as	the	Buddha.
And	one	day,	when	the	clouds	disappear,	you	will	dance	and	be	as	ecstatic	as	the
Buddha.
Of	 course,	 when	 an	 Archimedes	 discovers	 something,	 he	 runs	 naked	 in	 the
streets,
'Eureka!	I	have	found	it!'	You	can	understand	Archimedes	within	minutes,	within
seconds,	but	you	will	not	be	ecstatic	--	otherwise	every	school	child	would	run
naked	 in	 the	 streets,	 crying,	 'Eureka!'	Nobody	has	done	 that	 since	Archimedes
did	it.	 It	happened	only	once.	For	Archimedes	it	was	a	discovery;	since	then	it
has	become	public	property.
But	it	is	good	that	the	religious	truth	cannot	be	transferred	to	you	otherwise	you
would	 never	 achieve	 the	 same	 ecstasy	 as	Buddha	 or	 Jesus	 or	Krishna.	Never,
because	you	would	learn.	it	in	a	school	textbook	--	any	fool	could	transfer	it	to
you.	Then	the	whole	orgasmic	experience	will	be	lost.
It	 is	good	that	religious	experience	has	to	be	experienced	individually.	Nobody
can	 lead	you	 there.	People	can	 indicate	 the	way	but	 those	 indications	are	very
subtle	--	don't	take	them	literally.	Buddha	said,	 'Be	a	light	unto	yourself.'	He	is
saying,	'Remember,	my	truth	cannot	be	your	truth;	my	light	cannot	be	your	light.
Imbibe	 the	 spirit	 from	me,	 become	more	 thirsty	 from	me,	 let	 your	 search	 be
intense	and	be	totally	devoted	to	it,	learn	the	devotion	of	a	truth-seeker	from	me
--	but	the	truth,	the	light,	will	burn	within	you.	You	will	have	to	kindle	it	within
you.'	You	cannot	borrow	truth,	it	cannot	be	transferred,	it	is	not	a	property.	It	is
such	a	subtle	experience	that	it	cannot	even	be	expressed.	It	is	inexpressible.	One
at	the	most	tries	to	give	a	few	hints.
The	second	question:
Question	2
PLEASE	 EXPLAIN	 THE	 NATURE	 OF	 THE	 EXPERIENCES	 WE	 CALL
BOREDOM
AND	RESTLESSNESS.
Boredom	and	restlessness	are	deeply	related.	Whenever	you	feel	boredom,	then
you	feel	restlessness.	Restlessness	is	a	by-product	of	boredom.
Try	to	understand	the	mechanism.	Whenever	you	feel	bored	you	want	to	move
away	from	that	situation.	If	somebody	is	saying	something	and	you	are	getting
bored,	you	 start	 becoming	 fidgety.	This	 is	 a	 subtle	 indication	 that	you	want	 to
move	from	this	place,	from	this	man,	from	this	nonsense-talk.	Your	body	starts
moving.	Of	course,	because	of	politeness	you	suppress	it,	but	the	body	is	already
on	 the	move	 --	because	 the	body	 is	more	authentic	 than	 the	mind,	 the	body	 is
more	honest	and	sincere	than	the	mind.	The	mind	is	trying	to	be	polite,	smiling.
You	say,	'How	beautiful,'	but	inside	you	are	saying,
'How	 horrible!	 I	 have	 listened	 to	 this	 story	 so	many	 times	 and	 he	 is	 telling	 it
again!'
I	 have	 heard	 about	 Albert	 Einstein's	 wife,	 Frau	 Einstein.	 A	 friend	 of	 Albert
Einstein	used	to	come	many	times	and	Einstein	would	tell	some	anecdotes,	some
jokes,	 and	 they	 would	 laugh.	 But	 the	 friend	 became	 curious	 about	 one	 thing:
whenever	he	came,	and	whenever	Einstein	started	telling	jokes....
Einstein	was	a	Jew,	and	Jews	have	the	best	jokes	in	the	world.	Because	they	have
suffered	so	long	they	have	lived	by	jokes.	Their	life	has	been	so	miserable	that
they	 had	 to	 tickle	 themselves	 --	 hence	 they	 have	 the	most	 beautiful	 jokes.	No
other	country.	no	other	race,	can	compete	with	them.	In	India	we	don't	have	good
jokes	 at	 all	 because	 the	 country	has	 lived	very	peacefully	 --	no	need	 to	 tickle.
Humor	is	needed	when	one	is	in	constant	danger;	one	needs	to	laugh	at	anything.
Any	excuse	will	do	to	laugh.
....Einstein	 would	 tell	 some	 joke,	 some	 anecdote,	 some	 story	 and	 they	 both
would	laugh.
But	 the	 friend	 became	 curious	 because	 whenever	 Einstein	 would	 start	 saying
something,	the	wife	would	immediately	start	knitting	or	doing	something.
So	 he	 asked,	 'The	moment	Einstein	 starts	 telling	 some	 joke,	why	 do	 you	 start
knitting?'
The	wife	said,	'If	I	don't	do	anything,	it	will	be	tremendously	difficult	for	me	to
tolerate	 because	 I	 have	 heard	 that	 joke	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 times.	 You	 come
sometimes	--	I	am	always	here.	Whenever	anybody	comes	he	tells	the	same	joke.
If	I	didn't	do	something	with	my	hands,	I	would	become	so	fidgety	that	it	will	be
almost	 impolite.	So	I	have	to	do	something	so	that	I	can	move	my	restlessness
into	work	and	I	can	hide	behind	the	work.'
Whenever	you	feel	bored	you	will	feel	restless.	Restlessness	is	an	indication	of
the	body;	the	body	is	saying,	'Move	away	from	here.	Go	anywhere,	but	don't	be
here.'	But	the	mind	goes	on	smiling	and	the	eyes	go	on	sparkling,	and	you	go	on
saying	 that	you	are	 listening	and	you	have	never	heard	 such	a	beautiful	 thing.
The	mind	is	civilized;	the	body	is	still	wild.	The	mind	is	human;	the	body	is	still
animal.	 The	 mind	 is	 false;	 the	 body	 is	 true.	 The	 mind	 knows	 the	 rules	 and
regulations	--	how	to	behave	and	how	to	behave	rightly	--	so	even	if	you	meet	a
bore	you	say,	 'I	am	so	happy,	so	glad	to	see	you!'	And	deep	down,	if	you	were
allowed,	you	would	kill	 this	man.	He	tempts	you	to	murder.	Then	you	become
fidgety,	then	you	feel	restlessness.
If	you	listen	to	the	body	and	run	away,	the	restlessness	will	disappear.	Try	it.	Try
it.	 If	 somebody	 is	 boring	 you	 simply	 start	 jumping	 and	 running	 around.	 See.
Restlessness	will	 disappear	 because	 restlessness	 simply	 shows	 that	 the	 energy
does	not	want	to	be	here.
The	energy	is	already	on	the	move;	the	energy	has	already	left	this	place.	Now
you	follow	energy.
So	the	real	thing	is	to	understand	boredom	not	restlessness.	Boredom	is	a	very,
very	 significant	 phenomenon.	 Only	 man	 feels	 bored,	 no	 other	 animal.	 You
cannot	 make	 a	 buffalo	 bored.	 Impossible.	 Only	man	 gets	 bored	 because	 only
man	is	conscious.
Consciousness	is	the	cause.	The	more	sensitive	you	are,	the	more	alert	you	are,
the	more	conscious	you	are,	the	more	you	will	feel	bored.	In	more	situations	you
will	feel	bored.	A	mediocre	mind	does	not	feel	so	bored.	He	goes	on;	he	accepts;
whatsoever	is,	is	okay;	he	is	not	so	alert.	The	more	alert	you	become,	the	more
fresh,	the	more	you	will	feel	as	if	some	situation	is	just	a	repetition,	as	if	some
situation	is	just	getting	hard	on	you,	as	if	some	situation	is	just	stale.	The	more
sensitive	you	are,	the	more	bored	you	will	become.
Boredom	 is	 an	 indication	 of	 sensitivity.	 Trees	 are	 not	 bored,	 animals	 are	 not
bored,	rocks	are	not	bored	--	because	they	are	not	sensitive	enough.	This	has	to
be	one	of	the	basic	understandings	about	your	boredom	--	that	you	are	sensitive.
But	Buddhas	 also	 are	 not	 bored.	You	 cannot	 bore	 a	Buddha.	Animals	 are	 not
bored	and	Buddhas	are	not	bored,	 so	boredom	exists	as	a	middle	phenomenon
between	 the	 animal	 and	 the	 Buddha.	 For	 boredom	 a	 little	 more	 sensitivity	 is
needed	 than	 is	given	 to	 the	animal.	And	if	you	want	 to	get	beyond	it	 then	you
have	to	become	totally	sensitive.	Then	again	the	boredom	disappears.	But	in	the
middle	 the	 boredom	 is	 there.	 If	 you	 become	 animal-like,	 then	 boredom
disappears.	So	you	will	find	that	people	who	live	a	very	animalistic	life	are	less
bored.	 Eating,	 drinking,	marrying	 --	 they	 are	 not	 very	 bored,	 but	 they	 are	 not
sensitive.	 They	 live	 at	 the	 minimum.	 They	 live	 only	 with	 that	 much
consciousness	 as	 is	 needed	 for	 a	 day-to-day	 routine	 life.	 You	 will	 find	 that
intellectuals,	 people	who	 think	 too	much,	 are	more	 bored,	 because	 they	 think.
And	because	of	their	thinking	they	can	see	that	something	is	just	repetition.
Your	 life	 is	 repetition.	Every	morning	you	get	up	almost	 the	same	way	as	you
have	been	getting	up	all	your	life.	You	take	your	breakfast	almost	the	same	way.
Then	you	go	 to	 the	office	 --	 the	same	office,	 the	same	people,	 the	same	work.
Then	you	come	home	--	the	same	wife.	If	you	get	bored	it	is	natural.	It	is	very
difficult	 for	 you	 to	 see	 any	 newness	 here;	 everything	 seems	 to	 be	 old,	 dust-
covered.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
Mary	Jane,	the	very	good	friend	of	a	wealthy	broker,	opened	the	door	cheerfully
one	day,	and	then	quickly	attempted	to	close	it	when	she	discovered	the	person
on	the	threshold	to	be	her	lover's	wife.
The	wife	leaned	against	the	door	and	said,	'Oh,	let	me	in,	dear.	I	don't	intend	to
make	a	scene,	just	to	have	a	small	friendly	discussion.'
With	 considerable	 nervousness	 Mary	 Jane	 let	 her	 enter,	 then	 said	 cautiously,
'What	do	you	want?'
'Nothing	 much'	 said	 the	 wife,	 looking	 about.	 'I	 just	 want	 the	 answer	 to	 one
question.	Tell	me	dear,	just	between	us,	what	do	you	see	in	that	dumb	jerk?'
The	 same	 husband	 every	 day	 becomes	 a	 dumb	 jerk;	 the	 same	 wife	 every
day...you	almost	forget	how	she	looks.	If	you	are	told	to	close	your	eyes	and	to
remember	your	wife's	face,	you	will	find	it	impossible	to	remember.	Many	other
women	will	come	in	your	mind,	the	whole	neighborhood,	but	not	your	wife.	The
whole	relationship	has	become	a	continuous	repetition.	You	make	love,	you	hug
your	wife,	you	kiss	your	wife,	but	 these	are	all	empty	gestures	now.	The	glory
and	the	glamour	has	disappeared	long	before.	A	marriage	is	almost	finished	by
the	 time	 the	honeymoon	 is	 over,	 then	you	go	on	pretending.	But	 behind	 those
pretensions	 a	 deep	 boredom	 accumulates.	Watch	 people	walking	 on	 the	 street
and	 you	will	 see	 them	 completely	 bored.	 Everybody	 is	 bored,	 bored	 to	 death.
Look	at	their	faces	--	no	aura	of	delight.	Look	at	their	eyes	--	dust-covered,	no
glimmer	of	 inner	happiness.	They	move	from	the	office	 to	 the	home,	 from	the
home	to	the	office,	and	by	and	by	the	whole	life	becomes	a	mechanical	routine,	a
constant	 repetition.	And	 one	 day	 they	 die...	 almost	 always	 people	 die	without
ever	having	been	alive.
Bertrand	Russell	is	reported	to	have	said,	'When	I	remember,	I	cannot	find	more
than	 a	 few	 moments	 in	 my	 life	 when	 I	 was	 really	 alive,	 aflame.'	 Can	 you
remember?	How	many	moments	 in	your	 life	were	you	really	aflame?	Rarely	it
happens.	One	dreams	about	 those	moments,	one	 imagines	 those	moments.	one
hopes	for	those	moments	--	but	they	never	happen.	Even	if	they	happen,	sooner
or	 later	 they	also	become	repetitive.	When	you	fall	 in	 love	with	a	woman	or	a
man	 you	 feel	 a	miracle,	 but	 by	 and	 by	 the	miracle	 disappears	 and	 everything
settles	into	a	routine.
Boredom	is	 the	consciousness	of	 repetition.	Because	animals	cannot	 remember
the	past,	they	cannot	feel	bored.	They	cannot	remember	the	past,	so	they	cannot
feel	 bored.	They	 cannot	 remember	 the	 past,	 so	 they	 cannot	 feel	 the	 repetition.
The	buffalo	goes	on	eating	the	same	grass	every	day	with	the	same	delight.	You
cannot.	How	can	you	eat	the	same	grass	with	the	same	delight?	You	get	fed	up.
Hence	people	try	to	change.	They	move	into	a	new	house,	they	bring	a	new	car
home,	they	divorce	the	old	husband,	 they	find	a	new	love	affair,	but	again	that
thing	 is	going	 to	become	 repetitive	 sooner	or	 later.	Changing	places,	 changing
persons,,	changing	partners,	changing	houses,	 is	not	going	to	do	anything.	And
whenever	a	society	becomes	very	bored,	people	start	moving	from	one	town	to
another.	 from	one	 job	 to	another,	 from	one	wife	 to	another,	but	sooner	or	 later
they	realize	that	this	is	all	nonsense	because	the	same	thing	is	going	to	happen
again	 and	 again	 with	 every	 woman,	 with	 every	 man,	 with	 every	 house,	 with
every	car.
What	 to	 do	 then?	 Become	 more	 conscious.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 changing
situations;	 transform	your	being,	become	more	conscious.	 If	you	become	more
conscious	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 each	moment	 is	 new;	 but	 for	 that,	 very
much	energy,	tremendous	energy	of	consciousness	is	needed.
The	wife	is	not	the	same	--	remember.	You	are	in	an	illusion.	Go	back	home	and
look	 again	 at	 your	wife	 --	 she	 is	 not	 the	 same.	Nobody	 can	 be	 the	 same.	 Just
appearances	deceive.	These	trees	are	not	the	same	as	they	were	yesterday.	How
can	they	be?	They	have	grown.	Many	leaves	have	fallen,	new	leaves	have	come.
Look	at	the	almond	tree.
How	many	new	leaves	have	come!	Every	day	the	old	are	falling	and	the	new	are
coming.
But	you	are	not	that	much	conscious.
Either	 have	 no	 consciousness	 --	 then	 you	 cannot	 feel	 repetition	 --	 or	 have	 so
much	consciousness	 that	 in	 each	 repetition	you	 can	 see	 something	new.	These
are	the	two	ways	to	get	out	of	boredom.
Changing	outside	things	is	not	going	to	help.	It	is	just	like	arranging	the	furniture
in	your	room	again	and	again.	Whatsoever	you	do	--	you	can	put	it	this	way	or
that	way	--	is	the	same	furniture.	There	are	many	housewives	who	continuously
think	about	how	to	manage	things,	how	to	put	things,	where	to	put	them,	where
not	 to	put	 --	 and	 they	go	on	changing.	But	 it	 is	 the	 same	 room,	 it	 is	 the	 same
furniture.	How	long	will	you	deceive	in	this	way?
A	brief	television	skit	I	once	saw	was	of	a	caveman	and	a	cavewomen	who	were
kissing	wildly	and	hysterically.	They	broke	apart	only	to	say,	'Gee,	this	is	great!'
then	they	turned	to	kissing	again.
Finally	 the	 cavewoman	 pulled	 away	 to	 say,	 'Listen.	 Do	 you	 suppose	 this
wonderful	thing	we	have	discovered	means	that	we	are	married?'
The	caveman	bent	his	small	mind	to	the	matter	and	finally	said,	'Yes,	I	guess	we
are	married.	Now	let	us	kiss	some	more.'
Whereupon	the	cavewoman	put	her	hand	to	her	head	and	said	in	sudden	anguish,
'Oh,	I	have	such	a	headache!'
Two	persons	meet,	strangers	--	everything	is	wonderful,	beautiful.	But	sooner	or
later	 they	 become	 acquainted	with	 each	 other.	 That's	what	marriage	means.	 It
means	 that	now	 they	are	 settling,	now	 they	would	 like	 to	make	 it	 a	 repetition.
Then	the	same	kissing	and	the	same	hugging	is	no	longer	beautiful;	it	becomes
almost	a	duty.
A	man	came	home	and	found	his	friend	kissing	his	wife.	He	took	the	friend	into
another	 room.	 The	 friend	 was	 trembling	 with	 fear.	 Now	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be
something!	The	friendship	will	be	broken.
The	husband	seemed	to	be	very	angry,	but	he	was	not.	He	closed	the	door	and
asked	the	friend,	'Just	tell	me	one	thing.	I	HAVE	to	--	but	why	were	you	kissing?'
'I	HAVE	to,	but	why	were	you	kissing?'	By	and	by	everything	settles,	newness
disappears,	 and	 you	 don't	 have	 that	 much	 consciousness	 or	 that	 quality	 of
consciousness	which	can	go	on	finding	the	new	again	and	again.	For	a	dull	mind,
everything	 is	 old;	 for	 a	 totally	 alive	mind	 there	 is	 nothing	 old	 under	 the	 sun.
Cannot	be.	Everything	is	in	flux.
Every	person	is	in	flux,	is	river-like.	Persons	are	not	dead	things.	How	can	they
be	the	same?	Are	you	the	same?	Between	when	you	came	this	morning	to	listen
to	me	and	when	you	went	back	home,	a	lot	has	happened.	Some	thoughts	have
disappeared	 from	 your	 mind,	 other	 thoughts	 have	 entered.	 You	 may	 have
attained	to	a	new	insight.	You	cannot	go	the	same	as	you	had	come.	The	river	is
continuously	flowing;	it	looks	the	same	but	it	is	not	the	same.	The	old	Heraclitus
has	said	that	you	cannot	step	twice	into	the	same	river	because	the	river	is	never
the	same.
One	thing	is	that	you	are	also	not	the	same,	and	another	thing	is	that	everything
is	changing....	but	then	one	has	to	live	at	the	peak	of	consciousness.	Either	live
like	a	Buddha	or	live	like	a	buffalo,	then	you	will	not	be	bored.	Now	the	choice
is	yours.
I	have	never	seen	anybody	 the	same.	You	come	to	me	--	how	many	 times	you
have	come	to	me	--	but	I	never	see	the	old.	I'm	always	surprised	by	the	newness
that	you	bring	every	day.	You	may	not	be	aware	of	it.
Remain	capable	of	being	surprised.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
A	man	entered	a	bar,	deep	in	private	thoughts	of	his	own.	He	turned	to	a	woman
just	passing	and	said,	'Pardon	me,	Miss,	do	you	happen	to	have	the	time?'
In	a	strident	voice	she	responded,	'How	dare	you	make	such	a	proposition	to	me!'
The	 man	 snapped	 to	 attention	 in	 surprise	 and	 was	 uncomfortably	 aware	 that
every	pair	of	eyes	in	the	place	had	turned	in	their	direction.	He	mumbled,	'I	just
asked	the	time,	Miss.'
In	 a	 voice	 even	 louder	 the	 woman	 shrieked.	 'I	 will	 call	 the	 police	 if	 you	 say
another	word!'
Grabbing	his	drink	and	embarrassed	very	nearly	 to	death,	 the	man	hastened	 to
the	far	end	of	the	room	and	huddled	at	a	table,	holding	his	breath	and	wondering
how	soon	he	could	sneak	out	the	door.
No	more	than	half	a	minute	had	passed	when	the	woman	joined	him.	In	a	quiet
voice	 she	 said,	 'I'm	 terribly	 sorry,	 sir,	 to	 have	 embarrassed	 you,	 but	 I	 am	 a
psychology	student	at	the	University	and	I	am	writing	a	thesis	on	the	reaction	of
human	beings	to	sudden,	shocking	statements.'
The	man	stared	at	her	for	three	seconds,	then	he	leaned	back	and	bellowed,	'You
will	do	all	that	for	me,	all	night,	for	just	two	dollars?'
And	it	is	said	that	the	woman	fell	down	unconscious.
Maybe	we	don't	allow	our	consciousness	to	rise	higher	because	then	life	would
be	a	constant	surprise	and	you	might	not	be	able	to	manage	it.	That's	why	you
have	settled	for	a	dull	mind,	there	is	some	investment	in	it.	You	are	not	dull	for
no	 reason,	 you	 are	 dull	 for	 a	 certain	 purpose	 --	 if	 you	 were	 really	 alive	 then
everything	would	 be	 surprising	 and	 shocking.	 If	 you	 remain	 dull	 then	 nothing
surprises	you,	nothing	is	shocking.	The	more	dull	you	are,	the	more	life	seems	to
be	 dull	 to	 you.	 If	 you	 become	more	 aware,	 life	will	 also	 become	more	 alive,
livelier,	and	there	is	going	to	be	difficulty.
You	 always	 live	 with	 dead	 expectations.	 Every	 day	 you	 come	 home	 and	 you
expect	 certain	 behavior	 from	 your	 wife.	 Now	 look	 how	 you	 create	 your	 own
misery:	you	expect	a	certain	fixed	behavior	from	your	wife	and	then	you	expect
your	wife	to	be	new.	You	are	asking	the	impossible.	If	you	really	want	your	wife
to	remain	continuously	new	to	you,	don't	expect.	Come	home	always	ready	to	be
surprised	and	shocked,	 then	 the	wife	will	be	new.	But	she	has	 to	 fulfill	certain
expectations.	We	 never	 allow	 our	 total	 flux-like	 freshness	 to	 be	 known	 to	 the
other.	We	go	on	hiding,	we	don't	expose,	because	 the	other	may	not	be	able	 to
understand	it	at	all.	And	the	wife	also	expects	the	husband	to	behave	in	a	certain
way,	and,	of	course,	they	manage	the	roles.	We	are	not	living	life,	we	are	living
roles.	 The	 husband	 comes	 home;	 he	 forces	 himself	 into	 a	 certain	 role.	By	 the
time	he	enters	the	house,	he	is	no	more	an	alive	person	--	he	is	just	a	husband.
A	 husband	means	 a	 certain	 type	 of	 expected	 behavior.	 The	 woman	 there	 is	 a
wife,	and	the	man	there	is	a	husband.	Now	when	these	two	persons	meet	there
are	really	four	persons:	the	husband	and	wife,	which	are	not	real	persons	--	just
personas,	masks,	false	patterns	expected	behavior,	duties,	and	all	that	--	and	the
real	persons	hiding	behind	the	masks.
Those	real	persons	feel	bored.
But	you	have	invested	much	in	your	persona,	in	your	mask.	If	you	really	want	a
life	which	has	no	boredom	 in	 it,	drop	all	masks,	be	 true.	Sometimes	 it	will	be
difficult,	I	know,	but	it	is	worth	it.	Be	true.	If	you	feel	like	loving	your	wife,	love
her,	otherwise	say	you	don't	feel	like	it.	What	is	happening	right	now	is	that	the
husband	goes	on	making	love	to	the	wife,	and	goes	on	thinking	of	some	actress.
In	imagination	he	is	not	making	love	to	this	woman,	in	imagination	he	is	making
love	 to	 some	 other	woman.	And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 the	wife.	 Then	 things
become	boring	because	they	are	no	more	alive.
The	intensity,	the	sharpness,	is	lost.
It	happened	on	a	railway	platform.	Mr.	Johnson	had	weighed	himself	on	one	of
those	old-fashioned	penny	machines	that	delivered	a	card	with	a	fortune	printed
on	it.
The	 formidable	Mrs.	 Johnson	 plucked	 it	 from	 her	 husband's	 fingers	 and	 said,
'Let	 me	 see	 that.	 Oh,	 it	 says	 you	 are	 firm	 and	 resolute,	 have	 a	 decisive
personality,	are	a	leader	of	men,	and	are	attractive	to	women.'
Then	she	turned	over	the	card,	studied	it	for	a	moment	and	said,	'And	they	have
got	the	weight	wrong	as	well'
No	woman	can	believe	that	her	husband	is	attracted	to	other	women.	There	is	the
whole	point,	the	whole	crux.	If	he	is	not	attracted	to	other	women,	how	can	she
expect	that	he	will	be	attracted	to	herself?	If	he	is	attracted	to	other	women	only
then	can	he	be	attracted	to	her,	because	she	is	also	a	woman.	The	wife	wants	him
to	 be	 attracted	 to	 her	 and	 not	 attracted	 to	 anybody	 else.	 Now	 this	 is	 asking
something	absurd.	It	is	as	if	you	are	saying,
'You	 are	 allowed	 to	 breathe	 only	 in	 my	 presence	 and	 when	 you	 go	 near
somebody	else,	you	are	not	allowed	to	breathe.	How	dare	you	breathe	anywhere
else?'	Just	breathe	when	the	wife	is	there,	just	breathe	when	the	husband	is	there,
and	don't	breathe	anywhere	else.
Of	course,	if	you	do	that	you	will	be	dead	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	breathe	in
front	of	your	wife	also.
Love	has	to	be	a	way	of	life.	You	are	to	be	loving.	Only	then	can	you	love	your
wife	and	your	husband.	But	the	wife	says,	'No,	you	should	not	look	at	anybody
else	with	 a	 loving	 eye.'	Of	 course	 you	manage	 because	 if	 you	 don't	 it	 creates
such	 nuisance....	 But	 by	 and	 by	 the	 glimmer	 in	 your	 eyes	 disappears.	 If	 you
cannot	 look	 anywhere	 else	with	 love,	 by	 and	by	you	 cannot	 look	 at	 your	own
wife	with	 love	 --	 it	 disappears.	 The	 same	 has	 happened	 to	 her.	 The	 same	 has
happened	to	 the	whole	of	humanity.	Then	life	 is	a	boredom;	then	everybody	is
waiting	 for	 death;	 then	 there	 are	 people	 continuously	 thinking	 of	 committing
suicide.
Marcel	has	said	somewhere	that	the	only	metaphysical	problem	facing	humanity
is	suicide.	And	it	 is	so,	because	people	are	so	bored.	It	 is	simply	amazing	why
they	 don't	 commit	 suicide;	 how	 they	 go	 on	 living.	 Life	 doesn't	 seem	 to	 give
anything,	all	meaning	seems	to	be	lost,	but	still	people	go	on	dragging	somehow,
hoping	that	some	day	some	miracle	will	happen	and	everything	will	be	put	right.
It	never	happens.	You	have	to	put	it	right;	nobody	else	is	going	to	put	it	right.	No
Messiah	 is	 to	 come.	Don't	wait	 for	 any	Messiah.	You	 have	 to	 be	 a	 light	 unto
yourself.
Live	more	authentically.	Drop	the	masks;	they	are	a	weight	on	your	heart.	Drop
all	falsities.	Be	exposed.	Of	course	it	is	going	to	be	troublesome	but	that	trouble
is	worth	 it	 because	 only	 after	 that	 trouble	will	 you	 grow	 and	 become	mature.
And	 then	nothing	 is	holding	 life.	Each	moment	 life	 reveals	 its	newness.	 It	 is	a
constant	 miracle	 happening	 all	 around	 you	 only	 you	 are	 hiding	 behind	 dead
habits.
Become	a	Buddha	if	you	don't	want	to	be	bored.	Live	each	moment	as	fully	alert
as	possible,	because	only	in	full	alertness	will	you	be	able	to	drop	the	mask.	You
have	 completely	 forgotten	 what	 your	 original	 face	 is.	 Even	 when	 you	 stand
before	 the	mirror	 in	 your	 bathroom	 and	 you	 are	 alone,	 nobody	 is	 there,	 even
standing	before	the	mirror	you	don't	see	your	original	face	in	the	mirror.	There
too	you	go	on	deceiving.
Existence	 is	 available	 for	 those	who	are	available	 to	existence.	And	 then	 I	 tell
you,	there	is	no	boredom.	Life	is	infinite	delight.
The	third	question:
Question	3
I	 FEEL	 SO	MUCH	RESISTANCE	AGAINST	MEDITATION	AND	 I	DON'T
HAVE
THIS	DESIRE	FOR	GOD	THAT	YOU	SPEAK	ABOUT.	IS	THIS	THE	RIGHT
PLACE
FOR	ME?
If	you	feel	much	resistance	against	meditation	 it	simply	shows	that	deep	down
you	are	alert	that	something	is	going	to	happen	which	will	change	your	total	life.
You	are	afraid	of	being	reborn.	You	have	invested	too	much	in	your	old	habits,	in
the	old	personality,	in	the	old	identity.
Meditation	is	nothing	but	trying	to	clean	your	being.	trying	to	become	fresh	and
young,	 trying	 to	 become	 more	 alive	 and	 more	 alert.	 If	 you	 are	 afraid	 of
meditation	it	means	you	are	afraid	of	life,	you	are	afraid	of	awareness,	and	the
resistance	comes	because	you	know	that	if	you	move	into	meditation,	something
is	bound	 to	happen.	 If	you	are	not	 resisting	at	 all	 it	may	be	because	you	don't
take	meditation	 very	 seriously.	 you	 don't	 take	meditation	 very	 sincerely.	 Then
you	can	play	around.	What	is	there	to	be	afraid	of?
It	is	exactly	because	you	are	resisting	that	this	is	the	right	place	for	you.	This	is
precisely	the	right	place	for	you.	The	resistance	shows	that	something	is	going	to
happen.	One	never	resists	without	any	cause.
You	 must	 be	 living	 a	 very	 dead	 life.	 Now	 you	 are	 afraid	 that	 something	 is
becoming	alive,	something	 is	changing.	You	resist.	Resistance	 is	an	 indication,
resistance	 is	 a	 very	 clear	 indication	 that	 you	 have	 suppressed	 much.	 Now	 in
meditation	that	suppression	will	surface,	it	will	be	released.	You	would	also	like
to	be	released	of	the	burden	but	in	that	burden	there	are	investments.
For	example,	you	may	be	carrying	pebbles	in	your	hands	but	you	think	they	are
diamonds.	And	then	I	 tell	you,	 'Clean	yourself.	Drop	these	pebbles.	They	have
become	a	burden	and	you	cannot	move	because	of	them.'	You	would	like	to	be
unburdened	but	then	you	are	afraid	that	your	diamonds	will	be	lost.	And	they	are
not	diamonds.	Look	again	at	your	diamonds.	If	they	were	really	diamonds,	you
should	be	happy.	If	they	were	really	diamonds,	you	would	not	have	come	to	me
at	ail.	There	 is	no	need.	 If	you	have	come,	 it	 shows	 that	you	are	seeking.	You
may	say	that	you	are	not	interested	in	God	--	I	am	also	not	interested	in	God	--
but	you	are	interested	in	yourself.	Are	you	interested	in	yourself?
Forget	all	about	God.	If	you	are	interested	in	yourself.	then	this	is	precisely	the
place	for	you.	 If	you	are	 interested	 in	your	own	being,	 in	your	own	wholeness
and	health;	if	you	are	interested	in	becoming	a	blossomed	flower,	then	forget	all
about	God	--	because	in	that	blossoming	you	will	know	what	God	is.	When	your
fragrance	 is	 released	 then	 you	 will	 know	 what	 God	 is.	 God	 is	 your	 ultimate
flowering,	your	final	flowering;	your	destiny	fulfilled	is	what	God	is	all	about.
A	woman	seeing	Turner's	pictures	said	once,	'Making	a	lot	of	fuss	over	him,	are
they	not?
I	never	saw	anything	in	him	myself.'
And	another	woman	said	to	Turner	himself,	 'But	you	know,	Mr.	Turner	I	never
see	sunsets	like	yours.'
She	received	the	mild	yet	devastating	reply,	'No.	Don't	you	wish	you	could?'
When	a	Turner	paints	 a	 sunset	of	 course	he	 sees	a	 sunset	 in	a	 totally	different
way	to	you.
He	brings	all	his	sensitivity,	his	whole	being,	to	see	it.	In	fact,	you	may	not	have
ever	seen	a	sunset	 the	way	a	painter	 looks	at	 it.	Turner	says	rightly,	 'Don't	you
wish	you	could?'
I'm	here.	I	know	you	can't	see	what	I	am	talking	about,	but	don't	you	wish	you
could?	I	know	that	many	things	I	am	saying	are	almost	nonsense	to	because	to
see	 them	 you	will	 have	 to	 attain	 different	 eyes,	 you	will	 have	 to	 clarify	 your
being;	 to	 see	 them	 you	 will	 have	 to	 pacify	 your	 turmoil	 within.	 I	 know	 you
cannot	see	the	green	that	I	am	seeing	in	the	trees.	Your	green	is	bound	to	be	very
dusty	because	your	eyes	are	full	of	dust.
It	happened	once,	that	a	man	was	staying	with	a	friend	at	somebody's	house.	The
host	and	the	guest	were	standing	near	the	window	--	the	window	was	closed	--
and	in	the	neighbor's	house,	clothes	were	hanging	out	to	be	dried.
The	host	said,	'These	people	are	very	dirty.	Look	at	their	clothes.'
The	man	looked,	he	came	closer	to	the	window	and	he	said,	 'Those	clothes	are
not	dirty.
Your	window	glass	is	covered	with	dust.'
They	opened	the	windows	and	it	was	so.	Those	clothes	were	not	dirty.
Life	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful.	 It	 is	 Divine.	 When	 we	 say	 'Life	 is	 God'	 we
simply	say	that	life	is	so	tremendously	beautiful	that	one	feels	a	reverence	for	it.
That's	 all.	Life	 is	 so	 tremendously	beautiful	 that	 one	 feels	 like	worshipping	 it.
That's	 all	we	mean	when	we	 say	 'Life	 is	God.'	When	we	 say	 'Life	 is	God'	we
only	mean,	'Don't	see	that	life	is	ordinary.
It	is	extraordinary.	There	is	tremendous	potentiality.	Just	open	your	eyes.'	I	have
never	seen	a	person	who	is	not	interested	in	God	--	although	he	may	not	know	it
--	because	I	have	never	seen	a	person	who	is	not	interested	in	happiness.	If	you
are	 interested	 in	 happiness,	 you	 are	 interested	 in	God;	 if	 you	 are	 interested	 in
being	blissful,	you	are	interested	in	God.
Forget	 all	 about	 God.	 You	 just	 try	 to	 be	 blissful,	 and	 one	 day,	 when	 you	 are
dancing	in	your	inner	bliss.	when	the	inner	juices	are	flowing,	suddenly	this	life
is	no	 longer	ordinary.	Everywhere	some	unknown	force	 is	hiding	and	you	will
see	God	 in	 the	 flowers	 and	 in	 the	 stones	 and	 in	 the	 stars.	 I	 talk	 to	you	 just	 to
plant	a	seed,	a	song,	a	star.	If	you	can	become	happy,	you	become	religious.	A
happy	person	is	a	religious	person	--	let	that	be	the	definition.	A	religious	person
is	not	one	who	goes	to	the	church	or	the	temple	if	he	is	unhappy,	he	cannot	be
religious.	A	 religious	 person	 is	 happy.	Wherever	 he	 is,	 he	 is	 in	 the	 temple.	A
happy	 person	 carries	 his	 temple	 around	 him.	 I	 know	 it	 because	 I	 have	 been
carrying	it.	I	need	not	go	to	any	temple.	Where	I	am	is	my	temple.	It	is	a	climate.
It	is	my	own	inner	juice	overflowing.	God	is	nothing	but	you	realized,	reached,
fulfilled.
Yes.	I	say	to	you,	I	have	never	seen	a	man	who	is	not	interested	in	God.	There
cannot	be.
That	man	is	not	possible.	Even	people	who	say	they	don't	believe	in	God,	who
are	atheists,	are	not	uninterested	in	God.	They	are	interested.	Their	denying,	their
saying	 that	 they	 don't	 believe	 may	 be	 just	 a	 trick	 of	 the	 mind	 to	 protect
themselves;	 because	 once	 you	 allow	 yourself	 to	 be	 possessed	 by	 God	 you
disappear,	only	God	remains.	So	people	who	are	afraid	of	being,	of	disappearing,
of	moving	 into	 non-being,	 people	who	 are	 too	 egoistic	 and	 cannot	 allow	 their
drop	to	drop	into	the	ocean,	say	there	is	no	ocean.	That	is	the	trick	of	their	mind
so	 that	 they	 can	 protect	 themselves.	 They	 are	 fearful	 people,	 afraid,	 scared	 of
life.
If	 you	 are	 interested	 in	 being	 happy,	 this	 is	 the	 place	 for	 you.	 And	 you	 are
already	here.
Nobody	has	brought	you,	nobody	has	forced	you,	you	have	come	on	your	own.
Some	inner	search	that	you	may	not	be	aware	of	has	brought	you	here.	Maybe
something	is	in	the	heart	and	your	head	does	not	know	anything	about	it.	There
are	 desires	 of	which	 the	 head	 is	 completely	 unaware	 --	 the	 head	 is	 concerned
only	with	rubbish.	The	heart	may	have	brought	you	here.
Break	 that	 resistance	 --	and	when	you	are	here,	be	 really	here.	Don't	miss	 this
opportunity.
In	 the	 New	 Testament	 the	 Greek	 word	 for	 sin	 is	 'antinomic'	 or	 'anomeia'.	 It
means	to	miss	the	point;	or,	as	in	archery,	to	miss	the	mark.	The	word	'sin'	comes
from	a	root	which	means	to	miss	the	point,	to	miss	the	mark.	If	you	are	here	and
you	miss	me,	that	will	be	a	sin.	If	you	are	here	then	why	waste	time?	Be	totally
here.	Drop	 the	 resistance.	Or	 if	you	cannot	be	 totally	here,	 then	go	away	from
here.	But	go	totally	away.	Then	never	again	remember	me,	otherwise	that	will	be
a	sin.
The	word	 'sin'	 is	 beautiful.	 It	 has	 been	 badly	 corrupted	 by	Christianity.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	guilt,	nothing	to	do	with	something	bad,	evil.	It	has	nothing	to
do	with	morality	but	it	has	something	to	do	with	consciousness.	If	you	are	here,
be	 consciously	 and	 totally	 here;	 your	 unconscious	 heart	 has	 brought	 you	here.
Groping	 in	 the	 dark	 you	 have	 come	 to	 me,	 now	 don't	 miss	 this	 opportunity.
Either	 be	 totally	 here,	 or	 go	 away.	 Turn	 your	 back	 against	 me	 and	 never
remember	me	again;	because	going	away,	if	you	remember	me,	then	you	will	not
be	 totally	 there	 --	wherever	you	are	going.	Wherever	you	are,	be	 totally	 there,
that's	the	only	way	to	open	the	secrets	and	mysteries	of	life.
And	don't	be	worried	about	whether	you	are	interested	in	the	concept	of	God	or
not.	In	fact,	people	who	are	too	interested	in	the	concept	of	God	will	not	be	able
to	know	him.
I	have	come	across	a	very	beautiful	book,	written	somewhere	in	the	Middle	Ages
by	a	certain	man	known	as	Dionysius	Exegius.	His	book	is	'Theologica	Mystica'.
He	says	in	that	book	that	the	highest	knowledge	of	God	is	through	what	he	calls
in	Greek	 'agnostos',	 which	means	 unknowing.	You	must	 have	 heard	 the	word
'agnostic',	 it	comes	from	the	same	root,	agnostos.	Agnostos	means	unknowing.
And	this	Dionysius	says	that	God	is	known	only	by	unknowing.	No	need	to	be
worried	about	the	concept;	no	need	to	accumulate	knowledge,	theories,	doctrines
about	God;	forget	all	about	the	word	and	the	theory.	You	be	simply	interested	in
your	happiness,	in	your	bliss,	and	one	day	you	will	find	God	has	entered	in	you.
It	is	another	name	for	ultimate	bliss.
The	last	question:
Question	4
OSHO,	I	HAVE	THIS	IDEA	THAT	YOU	DON'T	REALLY	EXIST.	WHEN	WE
THINK	THAT	THERE	IS	SOMEONE	WHO	LIVES	IN	YOUR	HOUSE	AND
WHO
MAKES	 THINGS	 HAPPEN	 TO	 US,	 IT	 IS	 NOT	 REALLY	 YOU	 AT	 ALL.
COULD
YOU	TELL	US	WHAT	THIS	IS	AND	BY	THE	WAY,	WHO	IS	GIVING	THE
DISCOURSE	EVERY	MORNING?
I	don't	know.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	The	Ultimate	Secrets	of	Swordsmanship
25	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602250
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
83
mins
YAGYU	YAJIMA	NO	KAMI	MUNENORI	WAS	A	TEACHER	OF
SWORDSMANSHIP	TO	THE	SHOGUN.
ONE	OF	THE	PERSONAL	GUARDS	OF	THE	SHOGUN	CAME	TO	TAJIMA
NO
KAMI	ONE	DAY	ASKING	TO	BE	TRAINED	IN	SWORDPLAY.
'AS	I	OBSERVE,	YOU	SEEM	TO	BE	A	MASTER	OF	THE	ART	YOURSELF,'
SAID
THE	TEACHER.	 'PLEASE	TELL	ME	TO	WHAT	SCHOOL	YOU	BELONG
BEFORE
WE	ENTER	INTO	THE	RELATIONSHIP	OF	TEACHER	AND	PUPIL.'
THE	 GUARDSMAN	 SAID:	 'L	 DO	 NOT	 BELONG	 TO	 ANY	 SCHOOL,	 I
HAVE
NEVER	STUDIED	THE	ART.'
'IT	 IS	 NO	 USE	 TRYING	 TO	 FOOL	 ME,'	 SAID	 THE	 TEACHER.	 'MY
JUDGING	EYE
NEVER	FAILS.'
'I	 AM	 SORRY	 TO	 DEFY,	 YOUR	 HONOUR,'	 SAID	 THE	 GUARD,	 'BUT	 I
REALLY
KNOW	NOTHING.'
'IF	YOU	SAY	SO	THEN	IT	MUST	BE	TRUE,	BUT	I	AM	SURE	THAT	YOU
ARE
THE	MASTER	OF	SOMETHING,	SO	TELL	ME	ABOUT	YOURSELF.'
'THERE	 IS	ONE	THING,'	 SAID	THE	GUARD.	 'WHEN	 I	WAS	A	CHILD	 I
THOUGHT
THAT	 A	 SAMURAI	 SHOULD	 NEVER	 BE	 AFRAID	 OF	 DEATH,	 SO	 I
GRAPPLED
WITH	 THE	 PROBLEM,	 AND	 NOW	 THE	 THOUGHT	 OF	 DEATH	 HAS
CEASED	TO
WORRY	ME.'
'THAT'S	IT!'	EXCLAIMED	THE	TEACHER.	'THE	ULTIMATE	SECRETS	OF
SWORDSMANSHIP	LIE	IN	BEING	RELEASED	FROM	THE	THOUGHT	OF
DEATH.	YOU	NEED	NO	TECHNICAL	TRAINING,	YOU	ARE	ALREADY	A
MASTER.'
THE	ocean	is	not	only	hidden	behind	the	waves,	 it	 is	also	manifesting	itself	 in
the	waves.
It	is	there	on	the	surface	as	much	as	it	is	in	the	depth.	The	depth	and	the	surface
are	not	two	separate	things:	they	are	two	polarities	of	the	same	phenomenon.	The
center	comes	to	the	circumference;	it	is	as	much	on	the	circumference	as	it	is	at
the	center.
God	 is	 not	 only	 the	 unmanifest,	 it	 is	 also	 the	 manifest.	 God	 is	 not	 only	 the
Creator,	God	is	also	the	creation.	God	is	as	much	in	his	world	as	he	is	in	himself.
Just	 the	 other	 night,	 a	 new	 sannyasin	 asked	me,'	Osho,	 can	 you	 show	me	 the
Divine	 form?'	 I	 told	him,	 'All	 forms	are	Divine.	 I	have	not	 seen	a	 single	 form
which	is	not	Divine.	The	whole	existence	is	Divine	--	don't	divide	it	into	profane
and	sacred.'
All	the	time,	what	else	am	I	doing?	Showing	the	Divine	form.	What	else	are	you
doing?
Showing	the	Divine	form.	What	else	is	happening	all	over	existence?	The	Divine
is	spread	everywhere.	It	is	as	much	in	the	small	as	it	is	in	the	great;	it	is	as	much
in	a	grass	leaf	as	in	a	faraway	great	star.
But	the	mind	thinks	in	dualities.	It	thinks	God	is	hidden,	then	it	tries	to	deny	the
manifest	and	seek	the	unmanifest.	Now	you	are	creating	an	unnecessary	conflict
for	yourself.	God	is	here,	now	--	as	much	as	anywhere	else.	God	is	as	much	in
the	seeker	as	in	the	sought.
He	is	manifesting	himself.	That's	why	I	say	that	the	ocean	is	in	the	waves.	Dig
deep	into	the	waves,	dig	deep	into	the	form,	and	you	will	find	the	formless.
If	you	cannot	see	this	it	doesn't	mean	that	God	is	not	manifested,	it	only	means
that	you	are	still	blind.	You	have	still	not	got	the	eyes	that	can	see	the	obvious.
God	is	the	obvious.
And	 this	 is	 so	 on	 every	 level	 of	 being:	 whatsoever	 you	 are,	 you	 go	 on
broadcasting	it	around	you.	You	cannot	hide	it.	Nothing,	absolutely	nothing,	can
be	hidden.	There	 is	a	Zen	saying	 that	nothing	whatsoever	 is	hidden	 --	 from	of
old,	all	is	as	clear	as	daylight.
But	all	is	not	as	clear	as	daylight	for	you.	That	doesn't	mean	the	daylight	is	not
there	--	it	simply	means	you	are	standing	with	closed	eyes.	Open	your	eyes,	just
a	little,	and	the	darkness	starts	disappearing.	Open	your	eyes,	and	wherever	you
are,	immediately	you	will	be	able	to	see	as	deep	as	existence	is.
Once	your	eyes	are	open,	everything	becomes	transparent.
When	you	see	me,	you	just	see	the	surface,	the	waves.	When	you	hear	me,	you
only	hear	 the	words,	 not	 the	 silence	hidden	behind	 them.	You	 see	 exactly	 that
which	 is	 of	 no	worth	 and	 you	miss	 all	 that	 is	 of	 any	worth	 and	 significance.
When	I	see	you,	it	is	not	the	form,	it	is	not	the	image	that	you	see	in	the	mirror.
When	I	see	you,	I	see	YOU.
And	 you	 are	 broadcasting	 yourself	 in	 your	 every	 gesture,	 in	 your	 every
movement.	The	way	 you	walk,	 the	way	 you	 talk,	 the	way	 you	 stay	 silent	 and
don't	 talk,	 the	way	 you	 eat,	 the	way	 you	 sit	 --	 everything	 is	manifesting	 you.
Anybody	who	is	perceptive	will	be	able	 to	see	whether	you	are	dark	inside,	or
whether	you	have	kindled	the	flame.
It	is	as	easy	as	if	you	pass	by	a	house	in	the	night,	a	dark	night,	and	the	house	is
lighted	inside.	Is	it	in	any	way	difficult	to	know	it	is	lighted?	No,	because	from
the	windows	 and	 from	 the	 doors	 you	 can	 see	 the	 light	 coming	 out.	Or,	 if	 the
house	is	in	darkness	and	there	is	no	light	burning	inside,	then	of	course,	you	see
it.	It	is	obvious.
The	same	is	happening	in	you.	Whatsoever	you	are	 is	being	broadcasted	every
moment.
Your	 neurosis	 is	 broadcasted;	 your	 enlightenment	 also.	 Your	 meditation	 is
broadcasted;	your	madness	also.	You	cannot	hide	it.	All	efforts	to	hide	yourself
are	futile.	They	are	stupid,	ridiculous.
I	was	reading	a	book	by	Edmund	Carpenter.	He	was	working	on	a	sociological
project,	 a	 research	 project,	 in	 Borneo.	He	writes:	 'In	 a	 small	 town	 in	Borneo,
professional	 clerks	 sit	 before	 open	 windows,	 reading	 and	 writing.	 Because
people	are	illiterate	and	they	cannot	read	and	write,	for	their	letters,	documents,
or	any	other	thing,	they	need	the	help	of	professional	writers	and	readers.	And	I
was	 very	 surprised	 because	 I	 noticed	 one	who	was	 plugging	 his	 ears	with	 his
fingers	while	 he	 read	 aloud.	 I	 inquired	 and	was	 told	 that	 this	was	 done	 at	 the
request	of	the	writer	who	did	not	want	to	share	his	letter	with	the	reader!'
So	the	reader	was	plugging	his	ears	with	his	fingers	and	reading	the	letter	loudly!
But	 this	 is	 what	 is	 happening	 in	 everybody's	 life.	 You	 go	 on	 hiding,	 but
everything	 is	 being	 declared,	 continuously,	 loudly.	 Everything	 is	 being
broadcasted;	 you	 are	 a	 continuous	 broadcasting	 station.	 Even	 while	 you	 are
asleep,	you	are	broadcasting.	If	a	Buddha	comes	to	you	while	you	are	asleep	he
will	be	able	to	see	who	you	are.	Even	in	your	sleep	you	will	be	making	gestures,
faces,	 movements,	 uttering	 something.	 And	 all	 those	 things	 will	 indicate
something	 about	you,	 because	 the	 sleep	 is	 yours	 and	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 carry	your
signature.
If	one	becomes	a	little	alert,	one	stops	hiding.	It	 is	futile,	 it	 is	ridiculous.	Then
one	 simply	 relaxes.	 Because	 of	 your	 hiding	 you	 remain	 tense,	 continuously
afraid	 that	 somebody	 may	 know	 about	 you.	 You	 never	 expose	 yourself,	 you
never	 live	 in	 the	nude...spiritually	 I	mean.	You	never	 live	 in	 the	nude,	you	are
always	afraid.	That	fear	cripples	you	and	paralyses	you.
Once	you	understand	that,	everything	is	bound	to	be	declared.	it	is	already	being
declared;	that	the	center	is	coming	to	the	circumference	every	moment,	and	the
ocean	is	waving	in	the	waves;	that	God	is	everywhere,	spread	all	over	existence,
and	you	are	spread	all	over	your	activities	--	there	is	no	point	in	hiding.	Nothing
whatsoever	is	hidden	from	of	old;	everything	is	as	clear	as	daylight.	Then	why
bother?
Then	 one	 relaxes	 --	 the	 anxiety,	 the	 tension,	 the	 anguish,	 disappear.	 Suddenly
you	become	vulnerable,	no	more	closed;	suddenly	you	are	open;	suddenly	you
become	inviting.	And	this	is	the	point	to	be	understood:	once	you	are	exposed	to
others,	only	then	will	you	be	exposed	to	yourself.	If	you	are	hiding	from	others,
whatsoever	 you	 are	 hiding	 from	 others	 will	 by	 and	 by	 be	 thrown	 into	 the
basement	of	your	unconscious	mind.
Others	will	not	know	about	it	and	by	and	by	you	will	also	forget	about	it.
But	whenever	you	come	within	the	vision	of	a	perceptive	man,	everything	will
be	revealed.	That	is	one	of	the	basic	reasons	why,	in	the	East,	the	relationship	of
a	disciple	to	a	master	is	so	valued:	because	the	master	is	just	like	a	ray	of	light,
an	x-ray,	and	the	disciple	exposes	himself.	And	the	more	the	master	penetrates
and	knows	about	the	disciple	the	more	the	disciple	by	and	by	becomes	aware	of
his	own	hidden	treasures.
Trying	to	hide	himself	from	others,	he	has	become	such	an	expert	in	hiding	that
he	hides	from	himself	also.
You	don't	know	much	about	yourself;	you	know	just	a	fragment	about	yourself,
just	the	tip	of	the	iceberg.	Your	knowledge	about	yourself	is	very	limited	--	not
only	 limited,	 it	 is	 almost	 irrelevant!	 It	 is	 so	 partial,	 it	 is	 so	 fragmentary	 that
unless	you	put	it	in	the	context	with	your	whole	being	it	carries	no	meaning.	It	is
almost	meaningless.
That's	why	you	go	on	 living	without	knowing	yourself.	And	how	can	one	 live
without	knowing	oneself?	And	you	go	on	projecting	things	on	others	which	have
nothing	to	do	with	others;	 they	may	be	just	hidden	inside	you.	But	you	project
them	on	others.
Somebody	 looks	Like	an	egoist	 to	you	 --	you	may	be	 the	egoist,	 and	 it	 is	you
projecting.
Somebody	looks	very	angry.	The	anger	may	be	inside	you	and	the	other	is	just
like	a	screen	--	it	is	you	projecting.
Unless	you	know	yourself	exactly,	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	what	is	real	and
what	 is	 projection.	And	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 know	 about	 others	 also.	 Self-
knowledge	becomes	the	door	of	all	knowledge;	it	is	the	very	base.	Without	that
foundation	 all	 knowledge	 is	 just	 knowledge	 in	 appearance;	 deep	 down	 it	 is
ignorance.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
Mistress	Jones,	deeply	troubled,	was	consulting	a	psychiatrist.
'My	husband,'	she	said,	'is	convinced	he	is	a	chicken.	He	goes	around	scratching
constantly,	and	sleeps	on	a	large	bar	of	wood	he	has	fixed	up	as	a	perch.'
'I	see,'	said	the	psychiatrist	thoughtfully.	 'And	how	long	has	your	husband	been
suffering	from	this	fixation?'
'For	nearly	two	years	now.'
The	psychiatrist	frowned	slightly	and	said,	'But	why	have	you	waited	till	now	to
seek	help?'
Mistress	Jones	blushed	and	said,	'Ah	well,	it	was	so	nice	having	a	steady	supply
of	eggs!'
Now	this	woman	is	neurotic	--	but	she	thinks	her	husband	is	neurotic!	Whenever
you	 think	 something	 about	 somebody	 else	 --	watch.	Don't	 be	 in	 a	 hurry.	 First
look	within.	The	cause	may	be	inside	you.	But	you	don't	know	yourself	so	you
go	 on	 confusing	 your	 own	 projections	 with	 outer	 realities.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
know	anything	real	unless	you	have	known	yourself.	And	the	only	way	to	know
oneself	is	to	live	a	life	of	vulnerability.
openness.	 Don't	 live	 in	 a	 closed	 cell.	 Don't	 hide	 yourself	 behind	 your	 mind.
Come	out.
Once	you	come	out	you	will	become	by	and	by	aware	of	millions	of	 things	 in
you.	 You	 are	 not	 a	 one-room	 apartment,	 you	 have	 many	 rooms	 --	 you	 are	 a
palace.	But	you	have	become	accustomed	 to	 living	on	 the	porch	and	you	have
forgotten	the	palace	completely.
Many	 treasures	 are	 hidden	 in	 you,	 and	 those	 treasures	 constantly	 go	 on
knocking,	inviting.	But	you	are	almost	deaf.
This	blindness,	 this	deafness,	 this	 insensitivity,	has	 to	be	broken	--	and	nobody
else	 can	 do	 it.	 If	 somebody	 else	 tries,	 you	will	 feel	 offended,	 you	will	 feel	 a
trespassing.	11
happens	every	day.	If	I	try	to	help	you,	you	feel	you	have	been	trespassed	upon;
if	I	try	to	say	something	true	about	you,	you	feel	offended,	you	feel	humiliated,
you	feel	hurt,	your	pride	is	hurt.	You	want	 to	listen	to	lies	about	yourself	from
me;	you	want	to	listen	to	something	which	helps	your	already-fixed	image.	You
have	a	very	golden	image	about	yourself	which	is	false.	It	has	to	be	shattered	to
pieces,	because	once	it	is	shattered,	the	reality	will	arise.	If	it	is	not	shattered	you
will	go	on	clinging	to	it.
You	think	you	are	religious,	you	think	you	are	a	great	seeker	--	you	may	not	be
religious	at	all.	You	may	be	simply	afraid	of	life.	In	your	temples	and	churches
cowards	are	hiding,	afraid	of	life.	But	to	accept	that	one	is	afraid	of	life	is	very
humiliating	so	they	say	they	are	not	afraid	of	life,	they	have	renounced:	'Life	is
not	 worth	 anything.	 Life	 is	 only	 for	 mediocre	 minds.'	 They	 have	 renounced
everything	for	God;	they	are	searching	for	God.
But	 watch.	 They	 are	 trembling.	 On	 their	 knees	 they	 are	 praying	 --	 but	 their
prayer	 is	 not	 of	 love,	 their	 prayer	 is	 not	 of	 celebration,	 their	 prayer	 is	 not	 a
festivity.	Their	prayer	 is	out	of	 fear.	And	 fear	corrupts	everything;	nobody	can
approach	God	through	fear.
You	have	to	approach	truth	through	fearlessness,	but	if	you	are	hiding	your	fear
behind	 religiousness	 then	 it	will	 be	very	difficult	 to	 shatter	 it.	You	are	greedy,
miserly,	but	you	go	on	saying	that	you	live	a	very	simple	life.	If	you	are	hiding
behind	the	rationalization	of	simplicity,	then	it	is	very	difficult	to	see	that	you	are
a	miser.
A	miser	 misses	 tremendously.	 Because	 life	 is	 for	 those	 who	 share,	 life	 is	 for
those	who	 love,	 life	 is	 for	 those	who	are	not	 too	 clinging	 to	 things	 --	 because
then	they	become	available	to	persons.
To	cling	to	a	thing	is	to	cling	to	something	which	is	below	you.	And	if	you	go	on
clinging	to	things	which	are	below	you,	how	can	you	soar	high?	It	 is	as	if	you
are	clinging	to	rocks	and	trying	to	fly	in	the	sky.	Or	you	are	carrying	rocks	on	the
head	and	 trying	 to	climb	Everest.	You	have	 to	 throw	them.	You	have	 to	 throw
those	rocks.	You	will	have	to	unburden	yourself.
Edmund	 Hillary,	 the	 first	 man	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 top	 of	 Everest,	 says	 in	 his
autobiography,
'As	we	started	reaching	closer	and	closer,	 I	had	 to	 leave	more	and	more	 things
behind.	At	the	last	moment,	I	had	to	leave	almost	everything,	because	everything
became	such	a	burden.'
The	higher	you	reach,	the	more	unburdened	you	need	to	be.	So	a	miser	cannot
soar	high.
A	miser	cannot	soar	in	love,	or	in	prayer,	or	in	God.	He	remains	clinging	to	the
earth,	he	almost	remains	rooted	in	the	earth.	Trees	cannot	fly.	If	you	want	to	fly,
you	 need	 to	 be	 uprooted.	 You	 need	 to	 be	 like	 a	 white	 cloud,	 with	 no	 roots
anywhere	--	a	wanderer.
But	you	 can	hide	your	miserable	 self.	And	you	 can	hide	your	diseases	behind
good,	beautiful	terms	and	words.	You	can	be	very	articulate	and	you	can	be	very
rationalizing.
All	these	have	to	be	broken.
And	if	you	go	on	hiding,	then	not	only	do	you	hide	your	diseases,	you	hide	your
treasures	also.	This	hiding	becomes	a	fixation,	it	becomes	a	habit,	an	obsession.
But	I	tell	you,	before	a	perceptive	man,	before	a	Master	who	has	known	himself,
you	will	be	completely	x-rayed.	You	cannot	hide	from	somebody	who	has	eyes.
You	can	hide	from	yourself,	you	can	hide	from	the	world,	but	you	cannot	hide
from	somebody	who	has	come	to	know	what	clarity	is,	what	perception	is.
For	such	a	man,	you	are	absolutely	on	the	surface.
I	have	heard	about	an	American	couple	who	were	strolling	along	 the	banks	of
the	Seine	under	 the	 shadows	of	Notre	Dame.	He	was	 lost	 in	 silence.	She	 said
finally,	'What	are	you	thinking	about,	darling?'
'I	was	 thinking,	dear,	 that	 if	anything	happened	 to	either	of	us,	 I	would	 like	 to
spend	the	rest	of	my	life	in	Paris.'
He	may	not	be	aware	of	what	he	is	saying;	he	may	have	uttered	this	in	absolute
unawareness.	Let	me	 repeat	 it.	He	 says,	 'I	was	 thinking,	 dear,	 that	 if	 anything
happened	to	either	of	us,	I	would	like	to	spend	the	rest	of	my	life	in	Paris.'	He
wants	the	wife	to	die	although	he	is	not	saying	it	clearly.	But	he	has	said	it.
We	continuously	broadcast,	in	many	ways.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 President	 Ford	 gave	 a	 party	 in	 honor	 of	 the	 Egyptian
ambassador	 to	 the	 States.	 But	 then	 when	 he	 was	 giving	 the	 toast	 he	 forgot
completely	 and	 something	 from	 the	 unconscious	 bubbled	 up	 --	 a	 slip	 of	 the
tongue,	we	say,	but	it	is	not	just	a	slip	of	the	tongue.	He	raised	the	glass	and	said,
'In	honor	of	the	great	nation	of	Israel.'	To	Egyptians!	Then	of	course	he	tried	to
mend	it,	to	patch	it	--	but	it	was	too	late.	Deep	down,	he	wants	Israel	to	win	over
the	Egyptians;	from	the	unconscious	it	bubbled	up,	surfaced.
It	 happened	 at	 a	 party:	 a	 man	 was	 leaving,	 but	 he	 was	 very	 diffident.	 He
murmured	to	the	hostess,	'The	meal	was	delicious	what	there	was	of	it.'
Noting	the	hurt	expression	on	his	hostess'	face,	the	guest	blushed	and	hastened	to
say,
'Ah,	ah.	And	there	was	plenty	of	food,	such	as	it	was.'
These	 are	 unconscious	 assertions;	 they	 come	 out	 of	 you	when	 you	 are	 not	 on
guard.
Ordinarily,	 you	 are	 on	guard.	That's	why	people	 are	 so	 tense:	 continuously	on
guard,	 guarding	 themselves.	 But	 there	 are	 moments	 when	 the	 tension	 is	 too
much	and	one	relaxes;	one	has	to	relax,	one	cannot	be	on	guard	for	twenty-four
hours.	In	those	moments,	things	surface.
You	are	truer	when	you	have	drunk	a	little	too	much,	and	things	start	surfacing
from	your	unconscious.	Under	 the	 influence	of	 alcohol	you	are	 truer	 than	you
ordinarily	 are,	 because	 the	 alcohol	 relaxes	 the	 guard.	 Then	 you	 start	 saying
things	you	always	wanted	 to	say,	and	you	are	not	worried	about	anything,	and
you	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 leave	 any	 impression	 --	 you	 are	 simply	 being	 true.
Drunkards	 are	 beautiful	 persons:	 truer,	 more	 authentic.	 It	 is	 ironical	 that	 only
drunkards	are	authentic.
The	more	you	are	clever	and	cunning,	 the	more	inauthentic	you	become.	Don't
hide	 behind	 screens.	 Come	 out	 in	 the	 sunshine.	And	 don't	 be	 afraid	 that	 your
image	will	be	shattered.	The	image	that	you	are	afraid	of	being	shattered	is	not
worth	keeping	--	it	is	better	to	shatter	it	on	your	own.	Take	a	hammer	and	shatter
it.
That's	what	being	a	SANNYASIN	means:	you	take	a	hammer	in	your	hands	and
you	 shatter	 the	old	 image.	And	 then	you	 start	 a	 new	 life	 from	ABC,	 from	 the
very	beginning	again,	as	if	you	are	born	again.	It	is	a	rebirth.
Then	by	and	by,	 if	you	 relax,	and	 if	you	are	not	 too	much	worried	about	your
image	in	the	eyes	of	others,	your	own	authentic	face,	your	original	face,	comes
into	being	--	the	face	that	you	had	before	you	were	born,	and	the	face	that	you
will	 again	have	when	you	are	dead,	 the	original	 face,	 not	 the	 cultivated	mask.
With	that	original	face	you	will	see	God	everywhere,	because	with	the	original
face	you	can	meet	with	the	original,	with	the	reality.
With	a	mask,	you	will	meet	only	other	masks;	with	a	mask,	there	can	be	never
any	dialogue	with	reality;	with	a	mask,	you	remain	in	the	relationship	of	'I'	and
'it'.	The	reality	remains	behind	it.	When	the	mask	is	removed	and	you	have	come
back	home,	a	tremendous	transformation	happens.	The	relationship	with	reality
is	no	more	one	of	'I/it',	it	is	of	'I/Thou'.	That	'Thou'	is	God.
The	reality	takes	on	a	personality:	you	become	alive	there,	reality	becomes	alive
there.	It	has	always	been	alive	--	just	you	were	dead.	It	 is	as	if	you	have	taken
chloroform:	 when	 you	 come	 back,	 and	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 chloroform
disappears	by	and	by,	how	do	you	feel?	It	is	a	beautiful	experience!	If	you	have
never	been	to	the	surgeon's	table,	go,	just	for	the	experience!	For	a	few	moments
you	 are	 completely	 in	 oblivion	 --	 and	 then	 consciousness	 arises.	 Suddenly,
everything	becomes	alive,	fresh.	You	are	coming	out	of	the	womb.	Exactly	the
same	happens	when	you	decide	to	live	an	authentic	life.	Then	for	the	first	time
you	 understand	 that	 now	 you	 are	 born.	 Just	 before...you	 were	 thinking	 and
dreaming	that	you	were	alive	--	but	you	were	not.
A	 great	 mathematician,	 Herr	 Gauss,	 was	 keeping	 vigil	 while	 his	 wife	 lay	 ill
upstairs.	 And	 as	 time	 passed,	 he	 found	 himself	 beginning	 to	 ponder	 a	 deep
problem	in	mathematics.
People	have	grooves	in	their	mind	and	they	move	in	the	same	grooves	again	and
again.	A	mathematician	has	a	certain	track.	The	wife	is	going	to	die,	the	doctors
have	said	that	this	is	going	to	be	the	last	night,	he	is	keeping	vigil	--	but	the	mind
started	 moving,	 in	 its	 old	 pattern	 of	 course.	 He	 has	 started	 thinking	 about	 a
mathematical	problem.	Just	 see.	The	wife	will	no	 longer	be	 there,	 it	 is	 the	 last
night,	 but	 the	 mind	 is	 creating	 a	 screen	 of	 mathematics.	 He	 has	 completely
forgotten	about	the	wife;	he	has	moved,	he	has	gone	far	away	on	a	journey.
As	 time	 passed	 he	 found	 himself	 beginning	 to	 ponder	 a	 deep	 problem	 in
mathematics.	He	drew	pen	and	paper	to	himself	and	began	to	draw	diagrams.	A
servant	approached	and	said	deferentially.	Herr	Gauss.	your	wife	is	dying.
And	Gauss,	never	looking	up,	said,	'Yes,	yes.	But	tell	her	to	wait	till	I'm	through.
Even	 the	 great	 minds	 are	 as	 much	 unconscious	 as	 you	 are.	 As	 far	 as
consciousness	is	concerned,	great,	small,	and	mediocre,	all	sail	in	the	same	boat.
Even	the	greatest	mind	lives	under	chloroform.
Come	out	of	it.	Make	yourself	more	alert.	Bring	yourself	together.	Let	one	thing
become	 a	 centering,	 a	 constant	 centering	 in	 you	 --	 and	 that	 is	 alertness,
awareness.	 Do	 whatsoever	 you	 do,	 but	 do	 it	 consciously.	 And	 by	 and	 by
consciousness	accumulates	and	it	becomes	a	reservoir	of	energy.
Now,	the	Zen	story.
YAGYU	TAJIMA	NO	KAMI	MUNENORI	WAS	A	TEACHER	OF
SWORDSMANSHIP	TO	THE	SHOGUN.
In	Zen,	and	only	in	Zen,	something	of	great	import	has	happened.	That	is,	they
don't	make	any	distinction	between	ordinary	 life	and	religious	 life;	 rather,	 they
have	bridged	them	both.	And	they	have	used	very	ordinary	skills	as	UPAYA,	as
methods	for	meditation.	That	is	something	of	tremendous	import.	Because	if	you
don't	 use	ordinary	 life	 as	 a	method	 to	meditation,	 your	meditation	 is	 bound	 to
become	something	of	an	escape.
In	India	it	has	happened,	and	India	has	suffered	badly.	The	misery	that	you	see
all	 around,	 the	 poverty,	 the	 horrible	 ugliness	 of	 it,	 is	 because	 India	 always
thought	 religious	 life	 to	be	separate	 from	ordinary	 life.	So	people	who	became
interested	 in	God,	 they	 renounced	 the	world.	People	who	became	 interested	 in
God,	they	closed	their	eyes,	sat	in	the	caves	in	the	Himalayas,	and	tried	to	forget
that	the	world	existed.	They	tried	to	create	the	idea	that	 the	world	is	simply	an
illusion,	illusory,	a	MAYA,	a	dream.	Of	course,	life	suffered	much	because	of	it.
All	the	greatest	minds	of	this	country	became	escapists,	and	the	country	was	left
to	the	mediocres.	No	science	could	evolve;	no	technology	could	evolve.
But	 in	 Japan,	Zen	has	done	 something	very	beautiful.	That's	why	 Japan	 is	 the
only	country	where	East	and	West	are	meeting:	Eastern	meditation	and	Western
reason	 are	 in	 a	 deep	 synthesis	 in	 Japan.	 Zen	 has	 created	 the	 whole	 situation
there.	 In	 India	 you	 could	 not	 conceive	 that	 swordsmanship	 could	 become	 an
UPAYA,	a	method	for	meditation,	but	in	Japan	they	have	done	it.	And	I	see	that
they	have	brought	something	very	new	to	religious	consciousness.
Anything	 can	 be	 converted	 into	 a	 meditation	 because	 the	 whole	 thing	 is
awareness.	 And	 of	 course,	 in	 swordsmanship	 more	 awareness	 is	 needed	 than
anywhere	else	because	life	will	be	at	stake	every	moment.	When	fighting	with	a
sword	you	have	to	be	constantly	alert	--	a	single	moment's	unconsciousness	and
you	will	be	gone.	In	fact,	a	real	swordsman	does	not	function	out	of	his	mind,	he
cannot	function	out	of	his	mind	--
because	mind	takes	time.	It	thinks,	calculates.	And	when	you	are	fighting	with	a
sword,	 where	 is	 time?	 There	 is	 no	 time.	 If	 you	 miss	 a	 single	 fragment	 of	 a
second	in	thinking,	the	other	will	not	miss	the	opportunity:	the	other's	sword	will
penetrate	into	your	heart	or	cut	off	your	head.
So	 thinking	 is	 not	 possible.	 One	 has	 to	 function	 out	 of	 no-mind,	 one	 has	 to
simply	function,	because	the	danger	is	so	much	that	you	cannot	afford	the	luxury
of	thinking.
Thinking	needs	an	easy	chair.	You	just	relax	in	the	easy	chair	and	you	go	off	on
mind	trips.
But	when	you	are	fighting	and	life	is	at	stake	and	the	swords	are	shining	in	the
sun	 and	 at	 any	 moment	 a	 slight	 unawareness	 and	 the	 other	 will	 not	 lose	 the
opportunity,	 you	will	 be	gone	 forever,	 there	 is	 no	 space	 for	 thought	 to	 appear,
one	has	to	function	out	of	no-thought.	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about.
if	you	can	function	out	of	no-thought,	if	you	can	function	out	of	no-mind,	if	you
can	function	as	a	total	organic	unity,	not	out	of	the	head,	if	you	can	function	out
of	your	guts....	It	can	happen	to	you.	You	are	walking	one	night	and	suddenly	a
snake	crosses	the	path.	What	do	you	do?	Do	you	sit	there	and	think	about	it?	No,
suddenly	you	 jump	out	of	 the	way.	 In	fact	you	don't	decide	 to	 jump,	you	don't
think	in	a	logical	syllogism	that:	here	is	a	snake;	and	wherever	there	is	a	snake
there	is	danger;	therefore,	ergo,	I	should	jump.
That	 is	 not	 the	way!	You	 simply	 jump!	 The	 action	 is	 total.	 The	 action	 is	 not
corrupted	by	 thinking,	 it	 comes	out	 of	 your	very	 core	of	 being,	 not	 out	 of	 the
head.	Of	course,	when	you	have	 jumped	out	of	 the	danger	you	can	sit	under	a
tree	and	think	about	the	whole	thing	--	that's	another	matter!	Then	you	can	afford
the	luxury.
The	house	catches	fire.	What	do	you	do?	Do	you	think	whether	to	go	out	or	not
to	go	out
--	to	be	or	not	to	be?	Do	you	consult	a	scripture	about	whether	it	is	right	to	do	it?
Do	you	sit	silently	and	meditate	upon	it?	You	simply	get	out	of	the	house.	And
you	will	not	be	worried	about	manners	and	etiquette	--	you	will	jump	out	of	the
window.
Just	 two	nights	ago	a	girl	entered	here	at	 three	o'clock	 in	 the	night	and	started
screaming	in	the	garden.	Asheesh	jumped	out	of	his	bed,	ran	--	and	only	then	he
realized	that	he	was	naked.	Then	he	came	back.	That	was	an	act	out	of	no-mind,
without	any	thought.	He	simply	jumped	out	of	the	bed.	Thought	came	later	on.
Thought	followed,	lagged	behind.
He	 was	 ahead	 of	 thought.	 Of	 course,	 it	 caught	 hold	 of	 him	 so	 he	 missed	 an
opportunity.	It	would	have	become	a	satori	--	but	he	came	back	and	put	on	his
gown.	Missed!
Swordsmanship	 became	 one	 of	 the	UPAYAS,	 one	 of	 the	 basic	methodologies.
Because	the	very	thing	is	so	dangerous	that	it	doesn't	allow	thinking.	It	can	lead
you	towards	a	different	type	of	functioning,	a	different	type	of	reality,	a	separate
reality.	You	know	of	only	one	way	to	function:	to	think	first	and	then	to	function.
In	 swordsmanship,	 a	 different-type	 of	 existence	 becomes	 open	 to	 you:	 you
function	first	and	then	you	think.
Thinking	 is	 no	 longer	 primary,	 and	 this	 is	 the	 beauty..	 when	 thinking	 is	 not
primary,	you	cannot	err.
You	have	heard	the	proverb:	it	is	human	to	err.	Yes,	it	is	true.	It	is	human	to	err
because	the	human	mind	is	prone	to	err.	But	when	you	function	out	of	no-mind
you	 are	 no	 longer	 human,	 you	 are	 Divine	 and	 then	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of
erring.	Because	the	total	never	errs,	only	the	part;	only	the	part	goes	astray.	God
never	 errs,	 he	 cannot	 err.	He	 is	 the	Whole.	When	you	 start	 functioning	 out	 of
nothingness,	with	 no	 syllogism,	with	 no	 thinking,	with	 no	 conclusions	 --	 your
conclusions	 are	 limited,	 they	 depend	 on	 your	 experience,	 and	 you	 can	 err	 --
when	 you	 put	 aside	 all	 your	 conclusions,	 you	 are	 putting	 aside	 all	 limitations
also.	Then	you	function	out	of	your	unlimited	being,	and	it	never	errs.
It	is	said	that	sometimes	it	has	happened	in	Japan	that	two	Zen	people	will	fight
who	 have	 both	 attained	 to	 satori	 through	 swordsmanship.	 They	 cannot	 be
defeated.	Nobody	can	be	victorious	because	they	both	never	err.	Before	the	other
attacks,	 the	first	has	already	made	preparations	 to	 receive	 it.	Before	 the	other's
sword	moves	to	cut	off	his	head,	he	is	already	prepared	to	defend	the	attack.	And
the	same	happens	with	his	attack.	Two	Zen	people	who	have	attained	 to	satori
can	go	on	fighting	for	years,	but	it	is	impossible	--	they	cannot	err.	Nobody	can
be	defeated	and	nobody	can	be	victorious.
YAGYV	TAJIMA	NO	KAMI	MUNENORI	WAS	A	TEACHER	OF
SWORDSMANSHIP	TO	THE	SHOGUN.
ONE	OF	THE	PERSONAL	GUARDS	OF	THE	SHOGUN	CAME	TO	TAJIMA
NO
KAMI	ONE	DAY	ASKING	TO	BE	TRAINED	IN	SWORDSPLAY.
'AS	I	OBSERVE,	YOU	SEEM	TO	BE	A	MASTER	OF	THE	ART	YOURSELF,'
SAID
THE	TEACHER.
AS	 I	 OBSERVE...'	 said	 the	 Master.	 When	 Buddha	 was	 alive,	 one	 of	 his
contemporaries	was	Mahavir.	Between	the	disciples	of	the	two	there	has	been	a
great	 discussion	 ever	 since.	 The	 discussion	 is	 about	 an	 enlightened	 person's
awareness.	Mahavir's	followers,	Jainas,	say	that	whenever	a	person	has	become
enlightened,	 he	 always	 knows	 everything	 of	 the	 past,	 of	 the	 present,	 of	 the
future.	 He	 has	 become	 omniscient.	 He	 knows	 everything.	 He	 has	 become	 a
mirror	to	the	whole	of	the	reality.
Buddha's	followers	say	that	that	is	not	so.	They	say	that	he	becomes	capable	of
knowing	anything	if	he	observes.	If	he	tries	to	focus	on	anything,	he	will	be	able
to	know	everything	about	it.	But	it	does	not	happen	as	the	followers	of	Mahavir
say	--	that	whether	he	focuses	or	not,	he	knows.
To	 me	 also,	 the	 Buddhist	 standpoint	 seems	 to	 be	 better	 and	 more	 scientific.
Otherwise	a	man	 like	Buddha	would	go	almost	mad.	 Just	 think	of	 it:	knowing
everything	of	the	past,	and	the	present,	and	the	future.	No,	that	doesn't	seem	to
be	right.	The	Buddhist	attitude	seems	to	be	more	right:	he	has	become	capable	of
knowing.
Now,	whenever	he	wants	 to	use	 the	 capacity,	 he	 focuses,	 he	 throws	his	 ray	of
light,	he	puts	something	in	the	flow	of	his	meditation	--	and	that	thing	becomes
revealed	to	him.
Otherwise	it	would	be	impossible	for	him	to	rest.	Even	in	the	night	he	would	be
continuously	 knowing,	 knowing	 the	 past,	 and	 the	 present,	 and	 the	 future.	And
not	only	of	himself,	of	the	whole	world!	Just	think	of	the	sheer	impossibility	of
it.	No.	That's	not	possible.
'AS	I	OBSERVE...'	said	the	Master.	The	disciple	has	come	and	he	has	asked	to
be	trained	in	swordplay.	The	Master	said,	'As	I	observe...'	He	focuses	his	ray	of
light,	his	torch,	towards	this	disciple.	Now	this	disciple	is	under	his	meditation.
He	goes	 through	and	 through	--	 the	disciple	becomes	 transparent.	That	 is	what
happens	when	 you	 come	 to	 a	Master:	 simply	 his	 light	 penetrates	 you	 to	 your
very	 core....'YOU	 SEEM	 TO	 BE	 A	 MASTER	 OF	 THE	 ART	 YOURSELF,'
SAID	 THE	 TEACHER.	 He	 could	 not	 find	 anything	 wrong	 in	 this	 man.
Everything	was	 as	 it	 should	 be,	 in	 tune,	 humming.	 This	man	was	 a	 beautiful
song;	he	had	already	achieved.
'PLEASE	 TELL	 ME	 TO	 WHAT	 SCHOOL	 YOU	 BELONG	 BEFORE	 WE
ENTER
INTO	THE	RELATIONSHIP	OF	TEACHER	AND	PUPIL.'
That	 is	 the	highest	 relationship	 in	 the	world	--	greater	 than	a	 love	relationship,
greater	 than	 any	 relationship.	Because	 the	 surrender	 has	 to	 be	 total.	Even	 in	 a
love	 relationship	 the	 surrender	 is	 not	 total,	 surrender	 is	 partial.	 the	 divorce	 is
possible.	But	in	fact,	if	you	have	once	become	a	disciple	of	a	Master,	if	you	have
really	 become	 a	 disciple,	 if	 you	 have	 been	 accepted,	 if	 you	 have	 surrendered,
there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 divorce.	 There	 is	 no	 going	 back;	 it	 is	 a	 point	 of	 no
return.	Then	the	two	persons	are	no	more	there.	They	exist	like	one,	two	aspects
of	one,	but	they	are	not	two.
So	the	Master	says,	'Before	we	enter	into	the	relationship	of	teacher	and	pupil,	I
would	like	to	know	where	you	learned	this	art.	How	have	you	become	so	tuned?
You	are	already	a	Master.'
THE	GUARDSMAN	SAID,	'I	DO	NOT	BELONG	TO	ANY	SCHOOL,	I	HAVE
NEVER	STUDIED	THE	ART.'
'IT	 IS	 NO	 USE	 TRYING	 TO	 FOOL	 ME,'	 SAID	 THE	 TEACHER.	 'MY
JUDGING	EYE
NEVER	FAILS.'
Now,	 listen	 to	 this	paradox:	 the	 judging	eye	arises	only	when	you	have	 left	all
judgment.
In	meditation	 you	 have	 to	 leave	 all	 judging:	what	 is	 good,	what	 is	 bad	 --	 you
have	to	drop	all	that	division.	You	simply	look.	You	look	without	any	judgment,
without	 any	 condemnation,	 without	 any	 appreciation.	 You	 don't	 evaluate,	 you
simply	look.	The	look	becomes	pure.
When	this	look	has	happened	to	you	and	has	become	an	integrated	thing	in	your
being.
you	attain	 to	 a	 capacity	which	never	 fails.	Once	you	have	become	one	 insider
and	 gone	 beyond	 morality,	 dualism	 --	 good	 and	 bad.	 sin	 and	 virtue,	 life	 and
death,	beautiful	and	ugly	--	once	you	have	gone	beyond	 the	dualisms	of	mind,
you	attain	to	the	judging	eye.
This	 is	 the	paradox:	all	 judgment	has	 to	be	 left,	 then	you	attain	 to	 the	 judging
eye.	Then	it	never	fails.	You	simply	know	it	is	so,	and	there	is	no	alternative	to
it.	It	is	not	a	choice	on	your	part,	it	is	not	a	decision,	it	is	a	simple	revelation	that
it	is	so.
IT	 IS	 NO	 USE	 TRYING	 TO	 FOOL	 ME,'	 SAID	 THE	 TEACHER.	 'MY
JUDGING	EYE
NEVER	FAILS.'
'I	 AM	 SORRY	 TO	 DEFY,	 YOUR	 HONOR,'	 SAID	 THE	 GUARD,	 'BUT	 I
REALLY
KNOW	NOTHING.'
'IF	YOU	SAY	SO,	THEN	IT	MUST	BE	TRUE,	BUT	I	AM	SURE	YOU	ARE
THE
MASTER	OF	SOMETHING....'
Now	 this	 point	 has	 to	 be	 understood:	 it	 makes	 no	 difference	 what	 you	 are	 a
Master	 of,	 the	 taste	 of	 Mastery	 is	 the	 same,	 the	 flavor	 is	 the	 same.	 You	 can
become	a	Master	of	archery,	or	you	can	become	a	Master	of	swordsmanship,	or
you	 can	 become	 a	 Master	 Just	 of	 the	 ordinary	 tea	 ceremony	 --	 it	 makes	 no
difference.	The	real	thing	is	that	you	have	become	a	Master.	The	art	has	gone	so
deep	 that	 you	 are	 not	 carrying	 it	 anymore;	 the	 art	 has	 gone	 so	 deep	 that	 now
there	is	no	need	to	think	about	it	--	it	has	become	simply	your	nature.
'...BUT	 I	 AM	 SURE	 THAT	 YOU	 ARE	 THE	MASTER	 OF	 SOMETHING...
Maybe	you	aren't	a	Master	of	swordsmanship,	but	you	are	a	Master	'...SO	TELL
ME	ABOUT
YOURSELF.'	 'THERE	IS	ONE	THING,'	SAID	THE	GUARD.	 'WHEN	I	WAS
A	CHILD	I	THOUGHT	THAT	A	SAMURAI	SHOULD	NEVER	BE	AFRAID
OF
DEATH,	 SO	 GRAPPLED	 WITH	 THE	 PROBLEM.	 AND	 NOW	 THE
THOUGHT	OF
DEATH	HAS	CEASED	TO	WORRY	ME.'
But	that	is	what	the	whole	of	religion	is	all	about.	If	death	no	longer	bothers	you,
you	 have	 become	 a	 Master.	 If	 you	 have	 tasted	 something	 of	 the	 deathless,
something	of	your	innermost	nature	--	you	have	known	something	of	the	eternal.
To	 know	 the	 deathless	 is	 the	whole	 business	 of	 life.	 Life	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to
know	the	deathless.
'...AND	NOW	THE	THOUGHT	OF	DEATH	HAS	CEASED	TO	WORRY	ME.
'THAT'S	IT!'	EXCLAIMED	THE	TEACHER.	'THE	ULTIMATE	SECRETS	OF
SWORDSMANSHIP	LIE	IN	BEING	RE/EASED	FROM	THE	THOUGHT	OF
DEATH.
YOU	 NEED	 NO	 TECHNICAL	 TRAINING,	 YOU	 ARE	 ALREADY	 A
MASTER.'
When	 you	 are	 fighting	with	 a	 sword,	 if	 you	 are	 afraid	 of	 death,	 thinking	will
continue.
Now	let	me	tell	you	one	basic	truth:	thinking	is	out	of	fear.
All	 thinking	 is	 out	 of	 fear.	 The	more	 you	 become	 afraid,	 the	more	 you	 think.
Whenever	 there	 is	 no	 fear,	 thinking	 stops.	 If	 you	 have	 fallen	 in	 love	 with
someone,	 there	 are	 moments	 with	 your	 beloved	 or	 your	 lover	 when	 thinking
stops.	Just	sitting	by	the	lake,	doing	nothing,	holding	hands,	looking	at	the	moon
or	 the	 stars,	 or	 just	 gazing	 into	 the	 darkness	 of	 the	 night,	 sometimes	 thoughts
stop	because	there	is	no	fear.	Love	dispels	fear	just	as	light	dispels	darkness.
If	even	for	a	moment	you	have	been	in	love	with	someone,	fear	disappears	and
thinking	stops.	With	fear,	thinking	continues.	The	more	you	are	afraid,	the	more
you	have	to	think
--	 because	 by	 thinking	 you	will	 create	 security;	 by	 thinking,	 you	will	 create	 a
citadel	around	you;	by	thinking	you	will	manage,	or	try	to	manage,	how	to	fight.
A	swordsman,	if	he	is	afraid	of	death,	cannot	be	a	real	swordsman	because	the
fear	will	make	him	tremble.	With	just	a	slight	trembling	inside,	a	slight	thinking
inside,	he	will	not	be	able	to	act	out	of	no-mind.
There	is	a	story.
A	man	in	China	became	the	greatest	archer.	He	asked	the	king,	 'Declare	me	as
the	greatest	archer	of	the	country.'	The	king	was	just	going	to	decide	and	declare
him	when	an	old	servant	of	the	king	said,	'Wait,	sir.	I	know	a	man	who	lives	in
the	forest	who	never	comes	to	the	town.	He	is	a	greater	archer.	So	let	this	young
man	go	 to	him	and	 learn	 from	him	 for	 at	 least	 three	years.	He	does	not	know
what	 he	 is	 demanding.	 He	 is	 like	 a	 camel	 who	 has	 not	 yet	 come	 across	 a
mountain.	Archers	don't	live	in	the	capitals,	the	real	archers	are	in	the	mountains.
I	know	one,	and	I	know	for	certain	that	this	man	is	nothing.'
Of	course,	the	man	was	sent.	He	went.	He	could	not	believe	that	there	could	be	a
greater	archer	than	him.	But	he	found	the	old	man	and,	he	was!	For	three	years
he	learned	from	him.	Then	one	day,	when	he	had	learned	everything,	the	thought
arose	in	him	that,	'If	I	kill	this	old	man,	then	I	will	be	the	greatest	archer.'
The	old	man	had	gone	to	cut	wood	and	he	was	coming	back	carrying	wood	on
his	head.
The	young	man	hid	behind	a	tree,	waiting	to	kill	him.	He	shot	an	arrow.	The	old
man	took	a	small	piece	of	wood	and	threw	it.	It	struck	the	arrow	and	the	arrow
turned	back	and	wounded	the	young	man	very	deeply.	The	old	man	came,	took
out	 the	 arrow,	 and	 said,	 'I	 knew	 this.	 I	 knew	 that	 some	day	or	other	you	were
going	to	do	this.	That's	why	I	have	not	taught	you	this	secret.	Only	one	secret	I
have	kept	for	myself.	There	is	no	need	to	kill	me,	I	am	not	a	competitor.	But	one
thing	I	must	tell	you	--	my	Master	is	still	alive,	and	I	am	nothing	before	him.	You
will	 have	 to	 go	 deeper	 into	 the	 mountains.	 He	 is	 a	 man	 of	 one	 hundred	 and
twenty	years,	very	old	--	but	while	he	is	alive,	nobody	can	pretend	and	nobody
should	even	 think	of	declaring.	You	must	be	with	him	for	at	 least	 thirty	years.
And	he	is	very	old,	so	go	fast!	Find	the	old	man!'
The	 young	 man	 traveled,	 now	 very	 desperate.	 It	 seemed	 to	 be	 impossible	 to
become	the	greatest	archer	 in	 the	country.	He	found	the	old	man.	He	was	very
ancient,	one	hundred	and	twenty	years	old,	completely	bent,	he	could	not	stand
upright.	But	the	young	man	was	surprised	because	there	was	no	bow,	no	arrow,
with	him.	And	he	asked,	'Are	you	the	old	man	who	is	the	greatest	archer?'
The	old	man	said,	'Yes.'
'But	where	are	your	bow	and	arrows?'
The	old	man	said,	'Those	are	playthings.	Real	archers	don't	need	them	once	they
have	learned	the	art.	They	are	just	devices	to	learn;	once	you	have	learned,	you
throw	them.	A	great	musician	will	throw	his	instrument	because	he	has	learned
what	music	is.	How	to	carry	the	instrument	is	foolish,	childish.'
And	 the	old	man	 said,	 'But	 if	 you	 are	 really	 interested	 in	becoming	an	 archer,
then	come	with	me.'
He	took	him	to	a	precipice.	A	rock	was	there	overlooking	a	very	deep	valley.	The
old	man	went	ahead	of	 the	young	man	and	stood	 just	at	 the	very	edge.	With	a
slight	trembling	he	would	topple	down	into	the	valley.	He	called	the	young	man
to	 come	 close	 to	 him.	 He	 started	 perspiring,	 he	 started	 trembling,	 it	 was	 so
dangerous	to	be	there.
At	 just	 two	 feet	 away	he	 said,	 'I	 cannot	 come	 that	 close.'	The	old	man	 started
laughing	and	he	said,	'If	you	tremble	so	much	with	fear,	how	can	you	become	an
archer?	Fear	must	disappear	totally,	with	no	trace	left	behind.'
The	young	man	said,	'But	how	can	it	be?	I	am	afraid	of	death.'
The	 old	man	 said,	 'Drop	 the	 idea	 of	 death.	 Find	 someone	who	 can	 teach	 you
what	a	deathless	life	is	and	you	will	become	the	greatest	archer	--	never	before.'
Fear	 creates	 trembling;	 fear	 creates	 thinking.	 Thinking	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 inner
trembling.	When	one	becomes	unwavering,	the	flame	of	consciousness	remains
there,	undistracted,	untrembling.
'THAT'S	IT!'	EXCLAIMED	THE	TEACHER.	'THE	ULTIMATE	SECRETS	OF
SWORDSMANSHIP	 ARE	 IN	 BEING	 RELEASED	 FROM	 THE	 THOUGHT
OF
DEATH.	YOU	NEED	NO	TECHNICAL	TRAINING,	YOU	ARE	ALREADY	A
MASTER.'
But	he	was	not	aware	of	his	own	mastery.	He	may	have	been	hiding	many	other
things	and	because	of	 that	he	was	hiding	his	 treasures	also.	Once	exposed	 to	a
Master,	 he	 became	 alert.	 And	 the	 Master	 said,	 'There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any
techniques.	You	are	already	a	Master.'
As	I	see	in	you,	everybody	is	carrying	the	deathless	within	him.	You	may	know
it,	you	may	not	know	it,	that	is	not	the	point	--	but	you	are	carrying	it	within	you.
It	is	already	there,	it	is	already	the	case.	Just	a	slight	understanding	of	it	and	your
life	can	be	transformed.	And	then	there	is	no	need	of	any	techniques;	religion	is
not	technology	Everybody	is	born	with	a	secret	treasure	but	goes	on	living	as	if
he	were	born	a	beggar.
Everybody	is	born	an	emperor	but	goes	on	living	like	a	beggar.	Realize	it!	And
the	realization	will	come	to	you	only	if	by	and	by	you	drop	your	fear.
So	whenever	fear	comes	to	you,	don't	suppress	it,	don't	repress	it,	don't	avoid	it,
don't	get	occupied	in	something	so	that	you	can	forget	about	it.	No!	When	fear
comes,	watch	 it.	Be	 face	 to	 face	with	 it.	Encounter	 it.	Look	deep	 into	 it.	Gaze
into	the	valley	of	fear.	Of	course	you	will	perspire,	and	you	will	tremble,	and	it
will	be	like	a	death,	and	you	will	have	to	live	it	many	times.	But	by	and	by,	the
more	your	eyes	become	clear,	the	more	your	awareness	becomes	alert,	the	more
your	focus	is	there	on	the	fear,	the	fear	will	disappear	Like	a	mist.
And	once	fear	disappears,	sometimes,	even	for	only	a	moment,	suddenly	you	are
deathless.
There	is	no	death.	Death	is	the	greatest	illusion	there	is,	the	greatest	myth	--	a	lie.
For	 even	 a	 single	 moment,	 if	 you	 can	 see	 that	 you	 are	 deathless.	 then	 no
meditation	is	needed.
Then	 live	 that	 experience,	 then	 act	 out	 of	 that	 experience,	 and	 the	 doors	 of
eternal	life	are	open	for	you.
Much	is	being	missed	because	of	fear.	We	are	too	attached	to	the	body	and	we	go
on	creating	more	and	more	fear	because	of	that	attachment.	The	body	is	going	to
die,	the	body	is	part	of	death,	the	body	is	death	--	but	you	are	beyond	the	body.
You	 are	 not	 the	 body;	 you	 are	 the	 bodiless.	 Remember	 it.	 Realize	 it.	Awaken
yourself	 to	 this	 truth	 --	 that	you	are	beyond	 the	body.	You	are	 the	witness,	 the
seer.	 Then	 death	 disappears	 and	 fear	 disappears,	 and	 there	 arises	 the
tremendously	glorious	life	--	what	Jesus	calls	'life	abundant,'	or	'the	kingdom	of
God.'	The	kingdom	of	God	is	within	you.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Madmen	and	Devotees
26	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602260
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
78
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
WHAT'S	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	A	MADMAN	AND	A	DEVOTEE?
Not	much.	And	yet	much.	Both	are	mad	but	their	madness	has	a	totally	different
quality	 to	 it;	 the	 center	 of	madness	 is	 different.	The	madman	 is	mad	 from	 the
head;	the	devotee	is	mad	from	the	heart.
The	madman	 is	mad	because	of	a	 failure.	His	 logic	 failed	He	could	not	go	on
with	 the	 head	 anymore,	 any	 longer.	 There	 comes	 a	 point	 for	 the	 logical	mind
where	breakdown	 is	a	must,	because	 logic	goes	well	up	 to	a	certain	 limit	 then
suddenly	it	is	no	longer	real,	then	it	is	no	longer	true	to	reality.
Life	 is	 illogical.	 It	 is	 wild.	 In	 life,	 contradictions	 are	 not	 contradictions	 but
complementaries.	Life	does	not	believe	in	the	division	of	either/or,	life	believes
in	both.
The	 day	 becomes	 night,	 the	 night	 becomes	 day.	 They	 melt	 and	 merge.
Boundaries	 are	 not	 clear.	 Everything	 is	 overlapping	 everything	 else:	 you	 are
overlapping	into	your	beloved,	your	beloved	is	overlapping	into	you.	Your	child
is	still	a	part	of	you	and	yet	he	is	independent.	Boundaries	are	blurred.
Logic	 makes	 clear-cut	 boundaries.	 For	 clarity	 it	 dissects	 life	 into	 two,	 into	 a
duality.	Then	clarity	 is	achieved	but	aliveness	 is	 lost.	At	 the	cost	Of	aliveness,
logic	achieves	clarity.
So	if	you	are	a	mediocre	mind,	you	may	never	go	mad.	That	means	you	are	just
lukewarmly	 logical,	 and	much	 that	 is	 illogical	goes	on	existing	 in	you	 side	by
side.	But	if	you	are	really	logical,	then	the	ultimate	result	can	be	only	madness.
The	more	logical	you	are	 the	more	you	will	be	 intolerant	of	anything	illogical.
And	life	is	illogical.	So	you	will	become	by	and	by	intolerant	of	life	itself;	you
will	become	more	and	more	closed.	You	will	deny	life,	you	will	not	deny	logic.
Then	finally	you	break	down	--	this	is	the	failure	of	logic.
Almost	all	the	great	philosophers	who	are	logical,	go	mad.	If	they	don't	go	mad,
they	 are	 not	 great	 philosophers.	 Nietzsche	 went	 mad;	 Bertrand	 Russell	 never
went	mad	He	is	not	such	a	great	philosopher,	he	is	in	a	way	mediocre.	He	goes
on	living	with	his	commonsense	--	he	is	a	commonsensical	philosopher,	he	does
not	 move	 to	 the	 very	 extreme.	 Nietzsche	 moved	 to	 the	 very	 extreme	 and,	 of
course,	then	There	is	the	abyss.
Madness	 is	 the	 failure	 of	 the	 head	 and	 in	 life	 there	 are	millions	 of	 situations
where	suddenly	the	head	is	irrelevant.
I	was	reading	an	anecdote.
A	 woman	 telephoned	 the	 builder	 of	 her	 new	 house	 to	 complain	 about	 the
vibrations	that	shook	the	structure	when	a	train	passed	by,	three	streets	away.
'Ridiculous!'	he	told	her.	'I	will	be	along	to	check	it.'	'Just	wait	until	a	train	comes
along,'
said	 the	 woman,	 when	 the	 builder	 arrived	 for	 his	 inspection.	 'Why,	 it	 nearly
shakes	me	out	of	bed.	Just	lie	down	there.	You	will	see.'
The	 builder	 had	 just-stretched	 himself	 out	 on	 the	 bed,	 when	 the	 woman's
husband	came	home.
'What	are	you	doing	on	my	wife's	bed?'	the	husband	demanded.
The	 terrified	 builder	 shook	 like	 a	 leaf.	 'Would	 you	 believe	 I	 am	waiting	 for	 a
train?'	he	said.
There	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 situations	 where	 life	 comes	 in	 its	 total
illogicalness.
Suddenly	your	logical	mind	stops	--	it	cannot	function.	If	you	watch	life	you	will
find	you	act	 illogically	every	day;	and	 if	you	 insist	 too	much	on	 logic	 then	by
and	by	you	will	get	paralyzed,	by	and	by	you	will	be	thrown	away	from	life,	by
and	by	you	will	feel	a	certain	deadness	settling	in	you.
One	day	or	other	this	situation	has	to	explode	--	the	division	of	either/or	breaks
down.
Division	as	such	is	false.	Nothing	is	divided	in	life.	Only	in	your	head	is	 there
division;	 only	 in	 your	 head	 are	 there	 clear-cut	 boundaries.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 you	have
made	 a	 small	 clearing	 in	 a	 forest	 --	 clean,	with	 a	 boundary	wall,	with	 a	 lawn,
with	 a	 few	 rosebushes,	 and	 everything	 perfectly	 i.,	 order.	 But	 beyond	 the
boundary	the	forest	is	there	--	waiting.	If	you	don't	care	about	your	garden	for	a
few	 days,	 the	 forest	 will	 enter	 in.	 If	 you	 leave	 your	 garden	 untended,	 after	 a
while	the	garden	will	disappear	--	and	the	forest	will	be	there.
Logic	 is	 man-made,	 like	 an	 English	 garden	 --	 not	 even	 like	 a	 Zen	 Japanese
garden	--
clean-cut.
Every	 day	 there	 is	 a	 difficulty....	 Mukta	 looks	 after	 my	 garden.	 She	 is	 my
gardener.	And	she	goes	on	cutting.	I	go	on	telling	her,	'Don't	cut!	Let	it	be	like	a
forest!'	But	what	can	she	do?	She	hides	from	me	that	she	is	cutting,	and	planning
and	managing	because	she	cannot	allow	the	garden	to	become	a	forest.	It	should
be	in	boundaries.
The	 logical	 mind	 is	 like	 a	 small	 garden,	 man-made,	 and	 life	 is	 wild	 forest.
Sooner	or	later	you	will	come	against	life	and	then	your	mind	will	boggle,	will
fall	down	flat.	Stretch	your	mind	 to	 the	very	extreme	of	 logic	and	you	will	go
mad.
It	 happened	 at	 an	 airport	 Moskowitz	 met	 his	 business	 rival,	 Levinson,	 at	 the
airport,	and	asked	him	with	an	elaborate	pretense	of	casualness,	'And	where	do-
you	happen	to	be	going,	Levinson?'
Levinson,	just	as	casually.	responded,	'Chicago.'
'Ah!'	said	Moskowitz,	shaking	his	finger	triumphantly.	 'Now	I	have	caught	you
in	a	flat-footed	lie.	You	tell	me	Chicago	because	you	want	me	to	think	you	are
going	to	St.	Louis,	but	I	talked	to	your	partner	only	this	morning,	and	I	happen	to
know	you	are	going	to	Chicago,	you	liar!'
The	logical	mind	goes	on	weaving	and	spinning	its	own	theories,	its	own	ideas,
and	tries	to	make	the	reality	fit	accordingly.	The	reality	should	follow	your	idea	-
-	that	is	what	a	logical	mind	is.	The	effort	is	that	the	reality	should	be	a	shadow
to	 your	 ideology,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 possible.	 You	 are	 trying	 the	 impossible.	 It	 is
implausible.	 It	 cannot	 happen.	 Ideology	 has	 to	 follow	 reality,	 and	 when	 the
situation	 comes	where	 you	 have	 to	 follow	 reality,	 the	whole	 structure	 of	 your
mind	staggers,	the	whole	structure	of	your	mind	simply	drops	down	--	it	proves
to	be	a	house	of	playing-cards.	A	small	wind	of	reality	and	the	palace	disappears.
That	is	madness.
What	 is	 the	madness	of	 a	devotee?	The	center	of	 the	devotee's	madness	 is	his
heart;	the	center	of	ordinary	madness	is	the	head.	The	ordinary	madness	happens
from	the	failure	of	the	head	and	the	devotee's	madness	happens	from	the	success
of	 his	 heart	 When	 logic	 fails	 --	 ordinary	 madness;	 when	 love	 succeeds	 --
extraordinary	madness;	the	madness	of	a	devotee.
Love	 is	 illogical.	 Love	 is	 irrational.	 Love	 is	 life.	 Love	 comprehends	 all
contradictions	in	it.	Love	is	even	capable	of	comprehending	its	own	opposite	--
hate.	Have	you	not	observed	it?	You	go	on	hating	the	same	person	you	love.	But
love	is	bigger.	It	is	so	big	that	even	hate	can	be	allowed	to	have	its	play.	In	fact,
if	you	really	love,	hate	is	not	a	distraction;	on	the	contrary,	it	gives	color,	spice.	It
makes	the	whole	affair	more	colorful	-
-	like	a	rainbow.	Even	hate	is	not	the	opposite	for	a	loving	heart.	He	can	hate	and
continue	loving.	Love	is	so	great	that	even	hate	can	be	allowed	to	have	its	own
say.
Lovers	 become	 intimate	 enemies.	 They	 go	 on	 fighting.	 In	 fact,	 if	 you	 ask
psychoanalysts,	psychiatrists	and	psychologists,	they	will	say	that	when	a	couple
stops	 fighting,	 love	has	also	 stopped.	When	a	couple	no	 longer	bother	even	 to
fight,	have	become	 indifferent	 to	 each	other,	 then	 love	has	 stopped.	 If	you	are
still	 fighting	with	your	wife	or	your	husband,	your	boyfriend	or	girlfriend,	 that
simply	shows	that	life	is	still	running	in	it,	it	is	still	a	live	wire,	still	hot.	When
love	is	no	longer	there	and	everything	is	dead,	then	there	is	no	fight.	Of	course!
For	 what	 to	 fight?	 It	 is	 meaningless.	 One	 settles	 into	 a	 sort	 of	 coldness;	 one
settles	into	a	sort	of	indifference.
Love	 is	 like	 wild	 life	 --	 hence	 Jesus'	 saying	 that	 God	 is	 love.	What	 does	 he
mean?	He	means	that	if	you	love	you	will	know	many	things	which	are	qualities
of	God	that	he	comprehends	opposites,	that	even	the	Devil	is	allowed	to	have	his
say,	 that	 there	 is	no	problem	with	 the	opposite,	 that	 the	enemy	 is	also	a	 friend
and	deep	down	related	and	connected,	that	death	is	not	against	life,	but	that	death
is	part	of	life	and	life	is	part	of	death.
The	 whole	 is	 bigger	 than	 all	 the	 opposites,	 and	 it	 is	 not	 just	 a	 total	 of	 the
opposites	--	it	is	more	than	the	total.	This	is	the	higher	mathematics	of	the	heart.
Of	course	a	man	of	 love	will	 look	mad.	He	will	 look	mad	 to	you	because	you
function	from	the	head	and	he	functions	from	the	heart;	the	languages	are	totally
different.
For	 example,	 Jesus	was	 crucified.	The	 enemies	were	waiting	 for	 him	 to	 curse
them,	and	they	were	a	little	afraid;	the	friends	were	waiting	for	him	to	do	some
miracle,	 that	 all	 the	 enemies	would	 fall	 dead.	And	what	did	he	do?	He	did	 an
almost	mad	thing.	He	prayed	to	God	to	forgive	these	people	because	they	didn't
know	what	 they	were	doing.	This	 is	 the	madness	of	 love.	 It	 is	unexpected	 that
when	you	are	being	killed	you	pray	that	these	people	should	be	forgiven	because
they	 don't	 know	 what	 they	 are	 doing.	 They	 are	 completely	 unconscious.
Sleepwalkers.	Whatsoever	they	are	doing	is	not	their	responsibility	because	how
can	you	throw	responsibility	on	somebody	who	is	asleep?
They	are	unconscious	--	forgive	them.
This	is	the	miracle	that	happened	that	day	but	nobody	could	see	that	miracle;	it
was	sheer	madness.
Love's	language	is	so	foreign	to	the	head.	Head	and	heart	are	the	farthest	poles	of
reality.
There	is	no	greater	distance	between	any	other	two	points	as	there	is	between	the
head	and	the	heart,	reason	and	love,	logic	and	life.	If	a	person	is	mad	because	of
his	love,	his	madness	is	not	a	disease.	In	fact,	he	is	the	only	healthy	person,	he	is
the	only	whole	person,	he	is	the	only	holy	person	--	because	through	his	heart	he
has	again	become	bridged	with	life.
Now	he	is	no	longer	fighting;	there	is	no	more	conflict.	He	is	surrendered,	he	is
in	a	let-go.	He	trusts	life,	he	has	faith,	and	he	knows	that	nothing	wrong	is	going
to	 happen.	 He's	 not	 afraid.	 Even	 in	 death	 he	 will	 go	 laughing	 and	 singing,
ecstatic,	 because	 even	 in	 death	God	 is	waiting	 for	 him.	Death	 also	 becomes	 a
door.	Of	course	to	the	logical	mind	this	man	looks	mad	and	he	is	mad,	in	a	sense,
because	whatsoever	he	is	doing	is	beyond	the	comprehension	of	reason.	But	to
me,	he	is	not	mad.	Ask	Jesus	--	to	him	he	is	not	mad.
Ask	Buddha	--	to	him	he	is	not	mad.	In	fact,	he's	the	only	sane	person,	because
now	he	no	 longer	 thinks,	he	 lives;	now	he	 is	no	 longer	divided,	but	 total;	now
there	is	no	duality	in	him	--	he	is	a	unity.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	'yoga'	--	that	which	unites.	That	is	the	meaning
of	 the	 word	 'religion'	 also	 --	 that	 which	makes	 you	 one,	 that	 which	 puts	 you
again	together	--
'religere'.	You	are	no	longer	split.
Otherwise,	ordinarily,	you	are	not	one	person,	you	are	many	persons.	You	are	a
crowd.
You	 don't	 know	 what	 your	 left	 hand	 is	 doing	 and	 what	 your	 right	 hand	 is
planning	to	do.
In	the	morning	you	don't	know	what	you	are	going	to	do	in	the	evening.	You	say
one	 thing	 but	 you	 wanted	 to	 say	 something	 else,	 and	 you	 will	 go	 on	 saying
something	 else	 still.	 You	 are	 not	 a	 unity.	 You	 are	 a	 crowd.	 There	 are	 many
persons	inside	you	revolving	in	a	wheel	and	each	becomes,	for	a	time	being,	the
king.	And	in	that	moment,	the	king	asserts	things	which	he	cannot	fulfill	because
by	the	time	the	moment	to	fulfill	comes,	he	will	no	longer	be	a	king.
You	fall	in	love	with	a	woman	and	you	say,	'I	will	love	you	forever	and	forever.'
Wait!
What	are	you	saying?	Now,	at	this	moment,	a	certain	part	of	your	personality	is
on	 the	 throne	and	 that	part	 says,	 'I	will	 love	you	 forever	and	 forever.'	But	 just
half	an	hour	later	you	may	repent.	And	just	a	few	days	later,	you	will	completely
forget	what	you	had	said.
The	woman	 is	not	going	 to	 forget	 it.	She	will	 remember.	She	will	 remind	you
again	and	again	about	what	you	have	said	--	that	you	would	love	her	forever	and
forever,	and	what	has	happened	to	your	love?	You	will	feel	guilty	and	you	will
feel	impotent	and	helpless	because	you	cannot	do	anything.	Now	you	know	you
should	not	have	talked	about	the	future,	but	at	that	moment	you	could	not	resist
yourself;	 at	 that	moment	 it	 looked	 as	 if	 you	would	 be	 loving	 her	 forever	 and
forever;	at	that	moment	it	was	a	truth	but	the	part	of	the	mind	that	asserted	it	is
no	longer	the	emperor.	Now	there	are	other	minds.	Another	part	is	sitting	on	the
throne	and	he	loves	another	woman,	he	chooses	another	woman.
Whatsoever	you	promise,	you	are	not	going	to	fulfill	it.
A	man	of	understanding	never	promises	because	he	knows	his	helplessness.	He
will	say,
'l	would	like	to	love	you	forever	and	forever	but	who	knows?	I	may	not	be	the
same	 the	next	day.'	He	will	 feel	humble;	he	will	not	 feel	confident.	Only	fools
feel	confident.
People	of	understanding	hesitate	because	they	know	there	is	a	crowd	inside	them
--	they	are	not	one.
That's	why	it	is	said	in	all	the	old	scriptures	that	if	a	good	thought	comes	to	you,
do	it	immediately.	because	the	next	moment	you	may	not	like	to	do	it	at	all.	And
if	a	bad	thought	comes	to	you,	postpone	it	a	little.	If	anything	good	arises	in	you,
don't	miss	the	moment.	Do	it!	If	you	feel	it	is	good	you	can	do	it	again	tomorrow
but	do	it	right	now,	don't	postpone.	But	the	ordinary	mind	goes	on	doing	just	the
opposite:	 whatsoever	 good	 arises	 in	 you,	 you	 postpone	 it	 for	 tomorrow,	 and
whatsoever	bad	arises	in	you,	you	do	it	immediately.	If	you	are	angry,	you	will
be	angry	right	now,	you	cannot	postpone	it.	But	if	you	are	feeling	compassion,
you	 will	 say,	 'What	 is	 the	 hurry?	 Tomorrow.'	 That	 tomorrow	 never	 comes.
Tomorrow	is	non-existential.
Ordinarily,	a	man	 is	a	crowd;	 in	 fact,	we	should	not	use	 'the	mind'	 in	singular.
We	should	not	say	that	you	have	a	mind,	that	is	wrong.	Only	rare	persons	have	a
mind.	You	have	minds.	You	are	poly-psychic.	The	heart	 --	 this	 is	 the	beautiful
thing	--	the	heart	is	always	one.	It	does	not	know	the	duality;	it	is	not	a	crowd.	It
is	 a	 unity.	 The	 closer	 you	 come	 to	 the	 heart,	 the	 one	 arises	 and	 the	 many
disappear,	 far	away.	The	heart	needs	no	promise;	even	without	promising,	 it	 is
going	to	fulfill.
The	mind	goes	on	making	promises	but	it	never	fulfills	them.	In	fact,	it	promises
just	to	create	an	illusion	because	it	knows	it	is	not	going	to	fulfill	anything.	So	at
least	 create	 an	 illusion	 by	 promising	 --	 'I	will	 love	 you	 forever	 and	 ever.'	 The
heart	will	never	say	 that	but	 it	will	do	 it.	And	when	you	can	do	 it,	what	 is	 the
point	of	saying	it?	There	is	no	need.
The	man	of	love	is	mad,	mad	to	the	logical	mind	--	but	he	is	not	ill.
In	the	Western	madhouses,	there	are	many	people	who	are	not	mad.	If	they	had
been	in	the	Eastern	countries	they	may	even	have	been	worshipped.	In	the	West
the	 clarity	 does	 not	 yet	 exist	 that	 a	 man	 can	 be	 mad	 head-oriented	 or	 heart-
oriented.	A	heart-oriented	madman	is	not	a	madman	he	is	a	God's	man;	or,	he	is
mad	in	such	a	different	way	that	he	needs	to	be	worshipped,	revered,	respected.
There	is	no	need	to	treat	him,	there	is	no	need	to	put	him	in	an	asylum	there	is	no
need	to	give	him	shocks.	But	things	go	to	the	extreme	always.
In	the	East	it	has	happened	that	many	mad	people	have	been	worshipped	--	those
who	 were	 mad	 from	 the	 head.	 They	 were	 simply	 crazy	 --	 but	 they	 were
worshipped	because	we	have	worshipped	the	madman	of	the	heart	and	it	is	very
difficult	 for	 the	ordinary	common	masses	 to	make	the	distinction.	They	almost
look	alike.
Now	in	the	West	the	opposite	is	happening.	People	who	would	have	been	saints
in	the	past...	just	think	if	Jesus	came,	was	born	in	America	today.	Where	would
he	 be?	Or	 Saint	 Francis	 of	Assisi	 --	 where	would	 he	 be?	 In	 some	madhouse.
Jews	treated	Jesus	very	well.
They	 killed	 him,	 but	 they	 never	 put	 him	 in	 a	 madhouse.	 That	 was	 more
respectful.
But	now,	 in	 the	modern	world,	 if	he	came	back	 to	 somewhere	 in	 the	West,	he
would	 be	 in	 a	 madhouse,	 Lying	 down	 on	 some	 Freudian	 couch,	 being	 given
some	 electric	 shocks,	 drugged	 --	 because	 psychoanalysts	 say	 that	 he	 was
neurotic,	his	personality	was	neurotic,	he	was	mad	Of	course	the	things	that	he
said	looked	mad.	He	said,	'I	am	the	Son	of	God.'
What	nonsense!	Son	of	God?	Megalomania!	What	is	he	talking	about?	He	is	not
in	 his	 senses.	 He	 lives	 in	 a	 dream.	 He	 talks	 about	 the	 kingdom	 of	 God.	 All
nonsense.	Fairy	tales.	Good	for	children's	books,	but	immature.	He	chose	a	better
time	to	come.
Saint	Francis	of	Assisi	would	certainly	be	in	a	madhouse.	talking	to	trees,	saying
to	the	almond	tree,	'Sister,	how	are	you?'	--	if	he	were	here,	he	would	have	been
caught.	What	 are	 you	doing?	Talking	 to	 an	 almond	 tree?	Sister,	 sing	 to	me	of
God',	he	says	 to	 the	almond	tree.	And	not	only	 that,	he	hears	 the	song	that	 the
sister	almond	tree	sings!	Crazy!
Needs	 treatment.	He	 talks	 to	 the	 river	and	 to	 the	 fish	 --	and	he	claims	 that	 the
fish	 respond	 to	 him.	He	 talks	 to	 stones	 and	 rocks	 --	 is	 there	 any	need	 for	 any
more	proof	that	he	is	mad?
He	 is	mad	 but	wouldn't	 you	 like	 to	 be	mad	 like	 Saint	 Francis	 of	Assisi?	 Just
think	--	the	capacity	to	hear	the	almond	tree	singing,	and	the	heart	that	can	feel
brothers	and	sisters	in	trees,	the	heart	that	can	talk	to	the	rock,	the	heart	that	sees
God	everywhere,	all	around,	in	every	form....	It	must	be	a	heart	of	utmost	love	--
utter	love	reveals	that	mystery	to	you.
But	for	the	logical	mind,	of	course	these	things	are	nonsense.
To	me,	or	to	anybody	who	has	known	how	to	look	at	life	through	the	heart,	these
are	the	only	meaningful	things.	Become	mad,	if	you	can,	become	mad	from	the
heart.
Now	the	last	thing	about	this	question.	If	your	head	comes	to	a	breakdown,	don't
be	worried.	Use	this	opportunity	of	a	de-structured	state.	In	that	moment,	don't
be	worried	that	you	are	going	mad;	in	that	moment,	slip	into	the	heart.
Someday,	 in	 the	 future,	 when	 psychology	 really	 comes	 of	 age,	 whenever
somebody	goes	mad	from	the	head	we	will	help	him	to	move	towards	the	heart	-
-	because	an	opportunity	opens	 in	 that	moment.	The	breakdown	can	become	a
breakthrough.	The	old	structure	is	gone,	now	he	is	no	longer	in	the	clutches	of
reason,	he	is	free	for	a	moment.	The	modern	psychology	tries	to	go	on	adjusting
him	back	to	the	old	structure.	All	modern	efforts	are	adjustive:	how	to	make	him
normal	again.	The	real	psychology	will	do	something	else.
The	 real	 psychology	 will	 use	 this	 opportunity	 because	 the	 old	 mind	 has
disappeared,	there	is	a	gap.	Use	this	interval	and	lead	him	towards	another	mind
--	that	is,	the	heart.	Lead	him	towards	another	center	of	his	being.
When	you	drive	a	car	you	change	gears.	Whenever	you	change	 the	gear,	 there
comes	a	moment	when	the	gear	moves	through	neutral;	 it	has	to	move	through
the	neutral	gear.
Neutral	gear	means	no	gear.	From	one	gear	 to	another,	a	moment	comes	when
there	is	no	gear.	When	one	mind	has	failed,	you	are	in	a	neutral	state.	Just	now
you	are	again	as	if	you	are	born.	Use	this	opportunity	and	lead	the	energy	away
from	 the	 old	 rotten	 structure	 which	 is	 falling.	 Leave	 the	 ruin.	 Move	 into	 the
heart.	Forget	reason	and	let	love	be	your	center,	your	target.	Each	breakdown	can
become	 a	 breakthrough,	 and	 each	 possibility	 for	 the	 failure	 of	 the	 head	 can
become	a	success	for	the	heart	--	the	failure	of	the	head	can	become	a	success	for
the	heart.
The	second	question:
Question	2
ONCE	 AT	 DARSHAN	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 OF	 A	 VISITOR	 THAT	 HE
WOULD	BE	A	GOOD	SANNYASIN.	WHAT	IS	A	GOOD	SANNYASIN?
First,	 what	 is	 a	 SANNYASIN?	 A	 SANNYASIN	 is	 one	 who	 has	 come	 to
understand	the	futility	of	so-called	worldly	life.	A	SANNYASIN	is	one	who	has
understood	one	thing	--
that	something	needs	to	be	done	immediately	about	his	own	being.	If	he	goes	on
drifting	 in	 the	 old	 way,	 he	 will	 lose	 the	 whole	 opportunity	 of	 this	 life.	 A
SANNYASIN	is	one	who	has	become	alert	that	up	to	now	he	has	lived	wrongly,
has	 moved	 in	 wrong	 directions.	 has	 been	 too	 concerned	 with	 things	 and	 not
concerned	with	himself,	has	been	too	concerned	with	worldly	prestige	and	power
and	 has	 not	 been	 concerned	 about	 who	 he	 is.	 A	 SANNYASIN	 is	 one	 who	 is
turning	 towards	himself,	PARABVRUTTI.	A	SANNYASIN	 is	 a	miracle	 --	 the
energy	is	moving	back	towards	oneself.
Ordinarily,	the	energy	is	moving	away	from	you	--	towards	things,	targets,	in	the
world.
The	energy	 is	moving	away	from	you,	hence	you	feel	empty.	The	energy	goes
away,	never	comes	back;	you	go	on	throwing	away	energy.	By	and	by	you	feel
dissipated,	 frustrated.	Nothing	comes	back.	By	and	by	you	 start	 to	 feel	 empty.
The	 energy	 is	 just	 oozing	 out	 every	 day	 --	 and	 then	 comes	 death.	 Death	 is
nothing	else	but	that	you	are	exhausted	and	spent.	The	greatest	miracle	in	life	is
to	understand	this,	and	to	turn	the	energy	towards	home.	It	is	a	turning-in.	This
turning-in,	PARABVRUTTI,	is	SANNYAS.
It	 is	not	 that	you	 leave	 the	world.	You	 live	 in	 the	world	 --	 there	 is	no	need	 to
leave	 anything,	 or	 go	 anywhere	 else.	 You	 live	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 in	 a	 totally
different	way.	Now	you	 live	 in	 the	world	but	you	 remain	centered	 in	yourself;
your	energy	goes	on	returning	to	yourself.
You	are	no	longer	out-going:	you	have	become	in-going.	Of	course	you	become
a	 pool	 of	 energy,	 a	 reservoir,	 and	 energy	 is	 delight,	 sheer	 delight.	 Just	 energy
there,	overflowing,	and	you	are	in	delight,	and	you	can	share,	and	you	can	give
in	love.	This	is	the	difference.
If	you	put	your	energy	into	greed,	it	never	comes	back;	if	you	put	your	energy
into	 love,	 it	 comes	back	 a	 thousand-fold.	 If	 you	put	 your	 energy	 into	 anger,	 it
never	comes	back.	It	leaves	you	empty,	exhausted,	spent.	If	you	use	your	energy
in	compassion,	it	comes	back	a	thousand-fold.
So	now	 I	will	 tell	 you	what	 a	 good	SANNYASIN	 is.	 I	 don't	mean	 a	moral	 or
immoral	 SANNYASIN.	My	word	 'good'	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	morality.	 It	 is
something	to	do	with	what	Buddha	calls	AES	DHAMMO	SANANTANO,	what
Buddha	calls	the	eternal	law	of	life.
A	good	man	 is	an	understanding	man.	A	good	man	 is	alert,	 aware	 --	 that's	 all.
Awareness	is	the	only	value	for	me	--	all	else	is	meaningless.	Awareness	is	the
only	value	for	me.	So	when	I	say	a	good	SANNYASIN,	I	mean	a	SANNYASIN
who	is	aware.	Of	course,	when	you	are	aware,	you	behave	according	to	the	law,
the	fundamental	 law.	When	you	are	unaware,	you	go	on	destroying	yourself	 --
you	go	on	being	suicidal.
If	 you	 behave	 according	 to	 the	 fundamental	 law,	 you	 will	 be	 enriched
tremendously.
Your	life	will	become	richer	and	richer	every	moment.	You	will	become	a	king.
You	may	 remain	a	beggar	 in	 the	outside	world,	but	you	will	become	a	king,	a
pinnacle	of	inner	richness.	What	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	God	will	be	within
you.	 You	 will	 become	 a	 king	 of	 the	 kingdom	 that	 is	 within	 you.	 But	 more
awareness	is	needed.
So	 don't	misunderstand	me.	When	 I	 say	 a	 good	 SANNYASIN	 I	 don't	 use	 the
word	 in	any	moralistic	sense.	 I	use	 it	 in	a	more	 fundamental	sense,	because	 to
me,	morality	 is	 just	a	by-product	of	awareness,	and	 immorality	 is	a	shadow	of
unawareness.	I	am	not	concerned	with	shadows	and	by-products;	I	am	concerned
with	 the	 fundamental,	 with	 the	 essential.	 Be	 aware	 and	 you	 will	 be	 good;	 be
unaware	and	you	will	be	bad.
I	have	heard	a	small	anecdote.
An	 old	 farmer	 was	 watching	 his	 young	 son.	 Luke,	 lighting	 the	 wick	 of	 the
hurricane	lamp	prior	to	departing	for	the	evening.
'What	is	the	lantern	for?'	he	asked.
Said	his	son	casually,	'I	am	off	courting	Dad,	don't	worry,	I	will	pay	for	the	oil.'
'Dang	me!'	 said	 the	 father,	 'When	 I	was	 a	 courting,	 I	 never	 took	me	 no	 lamp
along,	son.'
'That	figures,'	came	the	reply.	'Look	what	you	got!'
If	you	don't	take	the	lamp	of	awareness	with	you,	you	are	going	to	create	a	hell
around	you.	Light	your	 lamp	wherever	you	go	--	courting,	not	courting,	 that	 is
not	the	point.
Wherever	 you	 go,	 whatsoever	 you	 do,	 always	 do	 it	 in	 the	 inner	 light,	 with
awareness.
And	don't	be	worried	about	moralities	--	about	concepts,	about	what	is	good	and
what	is	bad.	Good	follows	your	inner	light	just	like	a	shadow.	You	take	care	of
the	inner	light.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about	--	to	become	more	alert.	Live	the	same	life,
just	change	your	alertness	--	make	it	more	intense.	Eat	the	same	food,	walk	the
same	path,	live	in	the	same	house,	be	with	the	same	woman	and	the	children,	but
be	 totally	 different	 from	 your	 inside.	 Be	 alert!	Walk	 the	 same	 path,	 but	 with
awareness.	If	you	become	aware,	suddenly	the	path	is	no	more	the	same,	because
you	 are	 no	more	 the	 same.	 If	 you	 are	 aware,	 the	 same	 food	 is	 not	 the	 same,
because	you	are	not	the	same,	the	same	woman	is	not	the	same,	because	you	are
not	the	same.	Everything	changes	with	your	inner	change.
If	 somebody	 changes	 his	within,	 the	without	 changes	 totally.	My	definition	of
the	world	is	this	--	you	must	be	living	in	a	deep	inner	darkness,	hence	the	world.
If	you	 light	your	 inner	 lamp,	 suddenly	 the	world	disappears,	 and	 there	 is	only
God.	The	world	and	the	God	are	not	two	things	but	two	perceptions	of	the	same
energy.	 If	 you	 are	 unaware,	 the	 energy	 appears	 to	 you	 to	 be	 as	 the	world,	 the
SANSARA;	if	you	are	alert,	the	same	energy	appears	as	God.	The	whole	thing
depends	on	your	 inner	awareness	or	unawareness.	That	 is	 the	only	change,	 the
only	transformation,	the	only	revolution,	that	has	to	be	made.
The	third	question:
Question	3
I	FEEL	SICK	WITH	COWARDICE.
There	must	be	a	desire	not	to	be	a	coward	--	that	desire	creates	the	problem.	If
you	 are	 a	 coward,	 you	 are	 a	 coward.	 Accept	 it.	 What	 can	 you	 do	 about	 it?
Whatsoever	you	do	will	create	more	problems,	more	complexities.
And	who	is	not	a	coward?	When	life	is	constantly	in	danger	of	death,	how	is	it
possible	not	 to	be	a	coward?	k	 is	 impossible!	When	any	moment	you	can	die,
and	life	can	be	taken	away	from	you,	how	is	it	possible,	in	face	of	such	danger,
to	be	brave?.	You	can	pretend,	you	can	manage	to	show	that	you	are	brave	--	but
deep	 down	 you	 are	 going	 to	 remain	 a	 coward.	 It	 is	 natural.	 Just	 look	 at	 the
tininess	of	human	beings:	so	tiny,	and	existence	is	so	vast.	We	are	not	even	like
drops	fighting	against	such	an	ocean.	How	is	it	possible	not	to	be	a	coward?
Try	to	understand	it.	Accept	it.	It	is	natural.	Don't	create	a	goal	against	it	because
that	goal	is	coming	out	of	your	cowardice.	That	goal	is	not	going	to	help	you.	At
the	most	you	can	become	very	tense	and	pretend	that	you	are	not	a	coward.	You
can	move	to	the	opposite	extreme	just	to	prove	to	the	world	and	to	yourself	that
you	are	not	a	coward.
That's	what	your	generals	and	your	great	leaders	are	doing	--	just	trying	to	prove
to	the	world	 that	 they	are	not	cowards.	And	because	of	 their	efforts,	 the	whole
world	has	suffered	tremendously.	Please,	don't	try	any	foolish	thing	like	that.	Just
accept.	It	is	helplessness.	One	has	to	accept	it.	Once	you	accept	it,	and	you	start
understanding	 it,	 you	will	 see	 that	 by	 and	 by	 it	 disappears.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you
become	 brave	 --	 but	 one	 day	 you	 simply	 find	 that	 through	 acceptance	 it
disappears.
There	 is	 no	 fight;	 it	 disappears.	 There	 is	 no	 resistance;	 you	 accept	 it	 and	 it
disappears.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 become	 brave,	 you	 simply	 become	 more
understanding.	Bravery	is	not	a	goal,	but	you	have	been	taught	from	your	very
childhood,	 'Be	 brave!'	 so	 you	 go	 on	 trying	 to	 be	 brave.	 That	 creates	 much
anxiety	and	tension.	You	are	trembling	everywhere	inside
--	and	on	the	outside	you	are	like	a	stone	statue.	Divided.
This	 has	 created	much	misery	 in	 you.	The	goals	 that	 have	 been	 taught	 to	 you
from	your	childhood	are	foolish,	are	simply	not	based	on	reality.	It	 is	as	if	you
say	to	a	small	leaf	on	a	tree,	'When	strong	winds	come,.	don't	shake,	don't	waver,
don't	 tremble	 --	 that	 is	 cowardice.'	 But	 what	 can	 a	 small	 leaf	 do?	When	 the
strong	wind	comes,	it	shakes;	the	whole	tree	shakes.	But	trees	are	not	so	foolish.
They	won't	listen	to	you	--	they	go	on	doing	their	thing.
Have	 you	 watched	 two	 dogs	 fighting?	 They	 don't	 start	 fighting	 immediately.
First	they	move	in	a	mock	fight;	both	start	barking.	That	is	just	a	game	to	gauge,
to	judge,	who	is	more	strong.	They	are	not	going	to	fight	 immediately	because
that	 is	foolish,	stupid;	 that	 is	done	only	by	human	beings.	First	 they	will	 try	to
bark	at	each	other,	jump	at	each	other,	show	their	totality	--	the	one	will	show:	'I
am	this,'	and	the	other	will	show:	'I	am	this.'	Then	immediately	they	judge	--	that
judgment	needs	nobody	else	to	convince	them.
Immediately	one	feels	 that	he	 is	weaker,	and	he	puts	his	 tail	down	and	moves.
'This	is	finished.	What	is	the	point	of	fighting?	I	am	weaker	and	you	are	stronger
and	the	stronger	is	going	to	win!	The	point	is	lost.'	It	is	not	that	he	is	a	coward	--
he	is	simply	wise.	I	don't	call	this	cowardness.
Human	beings	will	stick	--	even	if	you	feel	that	you	are	weak.	The	more	you	feel
that	you	are	weak,	the	more	you	will	be	afraid	to	leave.	People	will	say	you	are	a
coward,	 so	 you	must	 fight....	 and	 you	will	 be	 beaten	 badly	 and	 unnecessarily
hurt.	There	is	no	point.	It	is	a	simple	calculation	--	and	the	stronger	one	doesn't
go	and	show	the	other	dogs	that	he	has	won.	No,	the	thing	is	simply	dropped.	He
also	knows	that	he	is	stronger,	so	what	is	the	point?	He	doesn't	go	on	advertising
that	he	has	won.	No,	the	fight	is	dropped,	he	forgets	all	about	it.
But	 in	 the	 human	 situation	 the	 whole	 thing	 has	 taken	 a	 very	 wrong	 shape,
because	you	have	been	 taught	wrong	goals.	Each	child	 should	be	 taught	 to	be
true	to	life.	If	there	is	fear,	then	be	afraid.	Why	hide	it?	Why	pretend	that	you	are
not	 afraid?	 If	you	want	 to	 cry,	 cry.	Why	be	afraid	of	 tears?	But	we	have	been
taught	 not	 to	 cry,	 particularly	 men.	 With	 small	 children	 the	 mother	 will	 say,
'Don't	be	a	sissy.	Don't	start	crying.	That	is	only	for	girls.'	And	the	boy	becomes
hard.	Look,	men	cannot	cry.	They	have	missed	one	of	the	most	beautiful	things
in	life.	Nature	has	not	made	any	difference	between	man	and	woman;	man	has	as
many	 tear-glands	 as	 woman,	 so	 the	 thing	 is	 proved	 --	 there	 is	 no	 difference.
Tears	are	needed.	They	are	cleansing.	But	how	to	cry?	What	will	people	say?
They	will	 say,	 'You,	and	crying?	Your	wife	has	died	and	you	are	crying?	Be	a
man.	Be	brave.	Bear	it.	Don't	cry.'
But	you	understand?	 If	you	don't	 cry,	by	and	by	your	 smile	will	be	corrupted,
because	everything	is	joined	together.	If	you	cannot	cry,	you	cannot	laugh;	if	you
don't	allow	your	tears	to	flow	naturally,	you	will	not	be	able	to	allow	your	smiles
to	flow	naturally.
Everything	will	become	unnatural,	everything	will	become	strained,	everything
will	become	a	forced	thing,	you	will	move	almost	in	a	diseased	way	and	you	will
never	 be	 at	 ease	 with	 yourself.	 That	 is	 what	 has	 happened,	 and	 now	 you	 are
miserable.
Life	 consists	 of	 flowing.	 If	 you	 are	 a	 coward,	 be	 a	 coward.	 Be	 honestly	 a
coward.	And	I	tell	you	there	is	nobody	else	who	is	not	a	coward.	And	it	is	good
that	 people	 are	 not	 that	way;	 otherwise,	 even	while	 they	 are	 so	 helpless,	 they
would	 feel	 so	 egoistic.	 If	 they	 were	 not	 cowards	 they	 would	 be	 almost	 dead
stones	--	they	would	not	be	alive	--	just	egos,	frozen.	Don't	be	bothered.	Accept
it.	If	it	is	there,	it	is	there	--	a	fact	of	life.	Try	to	understand	it	And	don't	listen	to
others;	you	are	still	being	manipulated	by	others.
I	was	reading	an	anecdote.
Mistress	 Jones	 pursued	 her	 small	 husband	 through	 the	 crowds	 at	 the	 zoo
brandishing	 her	 umbrella	 and	 emitting	 cries	 of	 menace.	 The	 frightened	 Mr.
Jones,	noticing	the	lock	on	the	lions'	cage	had	not	quite	caught,	wrenched	it	off,
flew	into	the	cage,	slammed	the	door	shut	again,	pushed	the	astonished	lion	hard
against	the	door,	and	peered	over	its	shoulder.
His	frustrated	wife	shook	her	umbrella	at	him	and	yelled	furiously,	'Come	out	of
there,	you	coward!'
This	man	a	coward?
But	each	husband	is	a	coward	in	the	eyes	of	the	wife.	In	others'	eyes,	you	are	a
coward.
Don't	trust	the	opinion	of	others	too	much.	if	you	feel	yourself	to	be	a	coward,
close	 your	 eyes,	 meditate	 on	 it.	 Ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 is	 others'	 opinion	 --	 the
wife,	brandishing	her	umbrella,	'Come	out,	you	coward!'	Ninety-nine	per	cent	is
others'	opinion	--	drop	it;	one	per	cent	is	reality	--	accept	it;	and	don't	create	any
antagonistic	 goal.	Accept	 it	 and	 then	 you	will	 see	 that	 cowardice	 is	 no	 longer
cowardice.	 Rejected,	 it	 becomes	 cowardice	 --	 the	 very	 word	 'cowardice'	 is	 a
condemnation	--	accepted,	it	becomes	humbleness,	helplessness.	That's	how	it	is.
We	have	to	be	humble,	we	are	not	the	whole.	We	are	the	parts	of	a	tremendously
vast	whole	--	very	tiny	parts,	atomic	parts,	small	leaves	on	a	big	tree.
It	is	good	to	tremble	sometimes.	Nothing	wrong	in	it.	It	helps	you	to	shake	off
the	dust.
You	become	again	fresh.
My	whole	point	is:	accept	life	as	it	is	and	don't	try	to	change	it	into	something
else.	 Don't	 try	 to	 change	 your	 violence	 into	 non-violence;	 don't	 try	 to	 change
your	 cowardice	 into	 bravery;	 don't	 try	 to	 change	 your	 sex	 into	 celibacy;	 don't
create	the	opposite.	Rather,	try	to	understand	the	fact	of	violence	and	by	and	by
you	will	become	non-violent.
Understand	the	fact	of	cowardice	and	cowardice	will	disappear.	Understand	the
fact	of	sex	and	you	will	find	a	new	quality	arising	in	it	which	goes	beyond	it.	But
always	move	through	the	fact,	never	against	it.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
MY	FATHER	 IS	OBSESSED	WITH	GENEALOGY.	 IS	THERE	ANYTHING
TO
SUCH	PURSUITS?
Must	be,	otherwise	why	should	your	father	be	obsessed?	He	may	have	taken	a
wrong	route,	but	there	must	be	something	in	it.	Even	when	people	go	astray,	they
go	astray	for	a	certain	reason	--	although	they	may	not	be	aware	of	it.
For	example,	let	me	tell	you	an	anecdote	first.
Young	 Willie,	 aged	 eight,	 came	 to	 his	 father	 one	 morning	 and	 said,	 'Daddy,
where	did	I	come	from?'
Willie's	father	felt	a	sinking	sensation	in	his	stomach	for	he	knew	he	was	now	up
against	it.	He	was	a	modern	parent	and	realized	a	question	like	that	deserved	a
full	 and	 frank	 answer.	 He	 found	 a	 quiet	 spot	 and	 for	 the	 next	 half	 hour,	 he
carefully	 indoctrinated	Willie	 into	what	 are	 euphemistically	 called	 the	 facts	 of
life,	managing	to	be	quite	explicit.
Willie	listened	with	fascinated	absorption,	and	when	it	was	over,	the	father	said,
'Well,	Willie,	does	that	answer	your	question?'
'No,'	said	Willie,	'it	does	not.	Johnny	Brown	came	from	Cincinnatti,	where	did	I
come	from?'
If	your	father	is	interested	in	genealogy	he	has	misunderstood	his	inquiry.	This	is
a	natural	question	in	everybody's	being:	from	where	do	we	come?	From	where?
From	 what	 source?	 Now,	 if	 you	 get	 into	 genealogy,	 you	 are	 not	 getting
anywhere.	The	basic	question	is	religious;	 it	has	nothing	to	do	with	genealogy.
The	basic	question	is:	who	is	the	ultimate	father,	or	ultimate	mother?	Now	this	is
pointless.	I	have	a	father,	and	my	father	had	a	father,	and	of	course	this	goes	on
and	on	and	you	can	go	on	searching	and	you	can	make	a	big	tree	of	your	family,
but	it	is	pointless	because	the	question	remains	the	same	-
-	who	is	the	first?
Searching	into	genealogy,	you	cannot	come	to	the	first.	Always	the	question	will
remain	-
-	from	whom?	I	can	move	a	hundred	generations	back,	or	a	thousand	generations
back,	 but	 the	 question	 remains	 the	 same;	 it	 is	 not	 solved.	 From	where?	 From
where?	From	what	source	has	life	arisen?
Your	 father	has	missed;	he	has	misinterpreted	a	 religious	 inquiry.	He	has	been
thinking	that	it	is	a	question	of	genealogy.	It	is	not.
This	question,	 'From	where	do	I	come?'	has	to	be	asked	because	unless	I	know
that,	it	is	impossible	to	know	who	I	am.
There	are	two	ways	to	know	it.	Either	you	ask,	'From	where	do	I	come?'	That	is
the	way	of	the	Christian,	the	Mohammedan	and	the	Judaic	religion.	If	you	know
from	where	you	come,	what	 the	ultimate	source	 is,	what	God	is,	 then	you	will
know	who	you	are.	Or,	the	Indian	religions	have	a	different	way	of	solving	it	--
and	a	better	and	more	scientific	way.
Hinduism,	 Jainism,	Buddhism	 --	 they	 say	 it	 is	difficult	 to	 say	 from	where	you
come.
There	is	more	possibility	 that	you	may	be	lost	 in	 thinking	and	in	philosophical
doctrines.
The	better	question	is,	'Who	am	l?'	If	you	know	this,	you	will	know	from	where
you	 come.	So	 they	 say	 forget	 all	 about	God.	They	 are	 not	worried	 about	who
created	 the	world;	 they	 are	worried	 about,	 'Who	 am	 l?'	 In	 a	way	 that	 is	more
scientific,	 because	 if	 I	 can	 understand	 the	 quality	 of	 my	 being.	 that	 will
immediately	 give	me	 the	 key	 to	 understand	 the	whole	 and	what	 it	 is.	 If	 I	 can
understand	myself...	Because	the	source	must	be	existing	in	some	way	within	me
still.	The	tree	goes	on	still	existing	in	the	seed.	If	you	can	understand	the	seed,
you	will	be	able	to	know	the	tree;	in	the	fruit	the	whole	tree	exists.
If	we	can	understand	ourselves....	Of	course	this	is	the	closest	approach	possible
because	I	am	closer	to	me	than	anything	else.	Just	close	your	eyes	and	you	reach
into	yourself.
The	only	problem	is	how	to	drop	the	thoughts	--	then	suddenly	you	start	sinking
into	your	being.	From	there	is	the	door	to	the	whole,	to	the	source.
When	you	go	back	home,	tell	your	father	that	genealogy	is	not	going	to	help.	He
must	have	some	religious	inquiry	within	him	which	he	has	misunderstood.	Once
he	is	made	aware	of	It,	his	inquiry	will	be	on	the	right	lines.
It	is	happening	in	the	West	because	religion	is	no	longer	an	accepted	inquiry;	it	is
a	rejected	inquiry.	So	people	go	on	seeking	religious	inquiries	through	vicarious
ways.	You	cannot	accept	directly	that	you	are	seeking	God	--	people	will	 think
you	 are	 mad!	 'It	 is	 foolish.	 What	 are	 you	 talking	 about?	 You	 are	 not	 a
contemporary	then.	God	is	dead,	have	you	not	heard?	What	are	you	doing?'	But
the	desire	arises	to	know	the	source,	and	you	cannot	accept	it	in	religious	ways
because	religious	ways	are	no	longer	accepted	by	the	modern	mind.	So	you	have
to	search	for	it	in	a	vicarious	way.	Then	you	start	asking	about	genealogy.
Religion	 is	 a	 valid	 inquiry;	 whether	 society	 accepts	 it	 or	 rejects	 it,	 it	 doesn't
matter.	Man	 is	 a	 religious	 animal	 and	 is	going	 to	 remain	 that	way.	Religion	 is
something	natural.	To	ask	from	where	you	come	is	relevant;	to	ask,	'Who	am	l?'
is	going	to	remain	relevant	always.	But	the	modern	mind	has	created	a	climate	of
atheism	so	you	cannot	ask	such	questions.	If	you	ask,	people	laugh.	If	you	talk
about	such	things,	people	feel	bored	If	you	start	inquiring	in	these	ways,	people
think	 you	 are	 slipping	 out	 of	 your	 sanity.	 Religion	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 welcome
inquiry.
Tell	your	father.	And	of	course,	genealogy	will	remain	an	obsession	because	this
is	 not	 the	 right	 inquiry;	 but	 once	 his	 consciousness	 shifts	 to	 the	 religious
dimension	 he	 will	 be	 released	 from	 the	 obsession	 --	 and	 then	 something	 is
possible.	Something	of	 tremendous	 import	 is	possible.	He	wants	 to	know	who
the	 real	 father	 is,	 who	 has	 fathered	 existence,	 or,	 who	 is	 still	 mothering
existence?.
The	last	question:	Listen	to	it	very	carefully.	It	is	very	important.
Question	5
OSHO,	HOW	DO	YOU	MANAGE	IT	--	TO	HAVE	ALWAYS	THE	RIGHT
ANECDOTE	AT	THE	RIGHT	MOMENT?
Let	me	answer	you	by	an	anecdote.
A	 king,	 passing	 through	 a	 small	 town,	 saw	what	 he	 took	 to	 be	 indications	 of
amazing	marksmanship.	On	trees,	barns	and	fences	there	were	numbers	of	bull's-
eyes,	each	with	a	bullet-hole	in	the	exact	center.	He	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	It
was	superb	marksmanship,	almost	a	miracle	of	achievement.	He	himself	was	a
good	marksman,	and	he	had	known	many	great	marksmen	in	his	life,	but	never
anything	 like	 this.	 He	 asked	 to	 meet	 the	 expert	 shot.	 It	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 a
madman.
'This	 is	 sensational!	How	 in	 the	world	do	you	do	 it?'	 he	 asked	 the	madman.	 'I
myself	am	a	good	shot,	but	nothing	compared	 to	your	skill	and	art.	Please	 tell
me.'
'Easy	as	pie!'	said	the	madman	and	laughed	uproariously.	'I	shoot	first	and	draw
the	circles	in	later!'
Dig?!	I	choose	the	anecdotes	first,	and	then	draw	the	circles!	I	am	just	like	that
madman.
There	are	other	people	who	use	anecdotes	to	illustrate	some	theoretical	point.	I
do	just	the	opposite.	I	use	theoretical	points	to	illustrate	the	anecdotes.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	The	Proper	State	of	Mind
27	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602270
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
87
mins
WHEN	WOLVES	WERE	DISCOVERED	IN	THE	VILLAGE	NEAR	MASTER
SHOJU'S	TEMPLE,	SHOJU	ENTERED	THE	GRAVEYARD	NIGHTLY	FOR
ONE
WEEK	 AND	 SAT	 IN	 ZAZEN.	 THIS	 PUT	 A	 STOP	 TO	 THE	 WOLVES'
PROWLING.
OVERJOYED,	 THE	 VILLAGERS	 ASKED	 HIM	 TO	 DESCRIBE	 THE
SECRET	RITES
HE	HAD	PERFORMED.
'I	DIDN'T	HAVE	TO	RESORT	TO	SUCH	THINGS,'	HE	SAID,	'NOR	COULD
I	HAVE
DONE	 SO.	 WHILE	 I	 WAS	 IN	 ZAZEN	 A	 NUMBER	 OF	 WOLVES
GATHERED
ROUND	 ME,	 LICKING	 THE	 TIP	 OF	 MY	 NOSE,	 AND	 SNIFFING	 MY
WINDPIPE,	 BUT	 BECAUSE	 I	 REMAINED	 IN	 THE	 RIGHT	 STATE	 OF
MIND,	I	WASN'T
BITTEN.
AS	I	KEEP	PREACHING	TO	YOU,	THE	PROPER	STATE	OF	MIND	WILL
MAKE	IT
POSSIBLE	 FOR	 YOU	 TO	 BE	 FREE	 IN	 LIFE	 AND	 DEATH,
INVULNERABLE	TO
FIRE	 AND	 WATER.	 EVEN	 WOLVES	 ARE	 POWERLESS	 AGAINST	 IT.	 I
SIMPLY
PRACTICE	WHAT	I	PREACH.'
WHAT	is	meditation?	Is	it	a	technique	that	can	be	practiced?	Is	it	an	effort	that
you	have	to	do?	Is	it	something	which	the	mind	can	achieve?	It	is	not.
All	 that	 the	 mind	 can	 do	 cannot	 be	 meditation	 --	 it	 is	 something	 beyond	 the
mind,	 the	 mind	 is	 absolutely	 helpless	 there.	 The	 mind	 cannot	 penetrate
meditation;	 where	mind	 ends,	 meditation	 begins.	 This	 has	 to	 be	 remembered,
because	in	our	life,	whatsoever	we	do,	we	do	through	the	mind;	whatsoever	we
achieve,	 we	 achieve	 through	 the	 mind.	 And	 then,	 when	 we	 turn	 inwards,	 we
again	start	thinking	in	terms	of	techniques,	methods,	doings,	because	the	whole
of	 life's	 experience	 shows	 us	 that	 everything	 can	 be	 done	 by	 the	 mind.	 Yes.
Except	meditation,	everything	can	be	done	by	 the	mind;	everything	 is	done	by
the	mind	 except	meditation.	Because	meditation	 is	 not	 an	 achievement	 --	 it	 is
already	 the	case,	 it	 is	your	nature..	 It	has	not	 to	be	achieved;	 it	has	only	 to	be
recognized,	 it	 has	 only	 to	 be	 remembered.	 It	 is	 there	waiting	 for	 you	 --	 just	 a
turning	in,	and	it	is	available.	You	have	been	carrying	it	always	and	always.
Meditation	is	your	intrinsic	nature	--	it	is	you,	it	is	your	being,	it	has	nothing	to
do	with	 your	 doings.	You	 cannot	 have	 it,	 you	 cannot	 not	 have	 it,	 it	 cannot	 be
possessed.	It	is	not	a	thing.	It	is	you.	It	is	your	being.
Once	you	understand	what	meditation	 is	 things	become	very	 clear.	Otherwise,
you	can	go	on	groping	in	the	dark.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	clarity,	not	a	state	of	mind.	Mind	is	confusion.	Mind	is
never	clear.	 It	cannot	be.	Thoughts	create	clouds	around	you	--	 they	are	subtle
clouds.	 A	 mist	 is	 created	 by	 them,	 and	 the	 clarity	 is	 lost.	 When	 thoughts
disappear,	 when	 there	 are	 no	more	 clouds	 around	 you,	 when	 you	 are	 in	 your
simple	beingness,	clarity	happens.	Then	you	can	see	far	away;	then	you	can	see
to	the	very	end	of	existence;	then	your	gaze	becomes	penetrating	--	to	the	very
core	of	being.
Meditation	is	clarity,	absolute	clarity,	of	vision.	You	cannot	 think	about	 it.	You
have	to	drop	thinking.	When	I	say,	'You	have	to	drop	thinking,'	don't	conclude	in
a	hurry,	because	I	have	to	use	language.	So	I	say,	'Drop	thinking,'	but	if	you	start
dropping,	you	will	miss,	because	again	you	will	reduce	it	to	a	doing.
'Drop	 thinking'	 simply	 means:	 don't	 do	 anything.	 Sit.	 Let	 thoughts	 settle
themselves.	Let	mind	drop	on	its	own	accord.	You	just	sit	gazing	at	the	wall,	in	a
silent	 corner,	 not	 doing	 anything	 at	 all.	 Relaxed.	 Loose.	 With	 no	 effort.	 Not
going,	anywhere.	As	 if	you	are	falling	asleep	awake	--	you	are	awake	and	you
are	relaxing	but	the	whole	body	is	falling	into	sleep.	You	remain	alert	inside	but
the	whole	body	moves	into	deep	relaxation.
Thoughts	settle	on	their	own	accord,	you	need	not	jump	amongst	them,	you	need
not	try	to	put	them	right.	It	is	as	if	a	stream	has	become	muddy...what	do	you	do?
Do	you	jump	in	it	and	start	helping	the	stream	to	become	clear	You	will	make	it
more	muddy.	You	simply	sit	on	the	bank.	You	wait.	There	is	nothing	to	be	done.
Because	whatsoever	you	do	will	make	the	stream	more	muddy	If	somebody	has
passed	 through	 a	 stream	 and	 the	 dead	 leaves	 have	 surfaced	 and	 the	 mud	 has
arisen,	just	patience	is	needed.	You	simply	sit	on	the	bank.	Watch,	indifferently.
And	as	the	stream	goes	on	flowing,	the	dead	leaves	will	be	taken	away,	and	the
mud	will	 start	 settling	 because	 it	 cannot	 hang	 forever	After	 a	while,	 suddenly
you	will	become	aware	--	the	stream	is	crystal-clear	again.
Whenever	a	desire	passes	through	your	mind	the	stream	becomes	muddy.	So	just
sit.
Don't	try	to	do	anything.	In	Japan	this	'just	sitting'	is	called	zazen;	just	sitting	and
doing	nothing.	And	one	day,	meditation	happens.	Not	that	you	bring	it	to	you;	it
comes	to	you.
And	when	it	comes,	you	immediately	recognize	it;	it	has	been	always	there	but
you	were	not	looking	in	the	right	direction.	The	treasure	has	been	with	you	but
you	were	occupied	 somewhere	 else:	 in	 thoughts,	 in	 desires,	 in	 a	 thousand	 and
one	 things.	You	were	not	 interested	 in	 the	only	one	 thing...	 and	 that	was	your
own	being.
When	energy	turns	 in	--	what	Buddha	calls	PARABVRUTTI:	 the	coming	back
of	 your	 energy	 to	 the	 source	 --	 suddenly	 clarity	 is	 attained.	Then	 you	 can	 see
clouds	a	thousand	miles	away,	and	you	can	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines.	Then
everything	is	available	to	you.
Before	we	enter	this	beautiful	Zen	story,	a	few	things	about	the	mind	have	to	be
understood.	Because	 the	more	you	understand	 the	mechanism	of	 the	mind,	 the
more	the	possibility	is	that	you	will	not	interfere.	The	more	you	understand	how
the	mind	 functions,	 the	 more	 the	 possibility	 is	 that	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 sit	 in
zazen;	that	you	will	be	able	just	to	sit,	sit	and	do	nothing;	that	you	will	be	able	to
allow	meditation	to	happen.	It	is	a	happening.
But	 the	 understanding	 of	 the	mind	will	 be	 helpful,	 otherwise	 you	may	 go	 on
doing	 something	which	helps	 the	mind	 to	continue	 to	 function,	which	goes	on
giving	cooperation	to	the	mind.
The	first	thing	about	the	mind	is	that	it	is	a	constant	chattering.	Whether	you	are
talking	or	not,	it	goes	on	doing	some	inner	talk;	whether	you	are	awake	or	asleep
the	inner	talk	continues	as	an	undercurrent.	You	may	be	doing	some	work	but	the
inner	talk	continues;	you	are	driving,	or	you	are	digging	a	hole	in	the	garden,	but
the	inner	talk	continues.
The	 mind	 is	 constantly	 talking.	 If	 the	 inner	 talk	 can	 drop	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment	you	will	be	able	to	have	a	glimpse	of	no-mind.	That's	what	meditation	is
all	about.	The	state	of	no-mind	is	the	right	state.	It	is	your	state.
But	how	to	come	to	an	interval	where	the	mind	stops	the	inner	chattering?	If	you
try,	 again	 you	 will	 miss.	 But	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 try.	 In	 fact	 the	 interval	 is
continuously	happening	--	just	a	little	alertness	is	needed.	Between	two	thoughts
there	is	an	interval;	between	two	words	even,	there	is	a	gap.	Otherwise	the	words
will	run	into	each	other;	otherwise	thoughts	will	overlap	each	other.	They	don't
overlap.
Whatsoever	you	say....	You	say,	 'A	rose	is	a	rose	is	a	rose.'	Between	two	words
there	is	a	gap;	between	'a'	and	'rose'	there	is	a	gap,	howsoever	small,	howsoever
invisible,	howsoever	non-perceptible.	But	the	gap	is	there,	otherwise,	'a'	will	run
into	 'rose'.	With	just	a	little	alertness,	just	a	little	watchfulness,	you	can	see	the
gap:	 a-rose-is-a-rose-is-arose.	 The	 gap	 is	 continuously	 occurring;	 after	 each
word	the	gap	is	recurring.
The	gestalt	has	to	be	changed.	Ordinarily	you	look	at	the	words,	you	don't	look
at	 the	gaps.	You	look	at	 the	 'a',	you	look	at	 the	 'rose',	but	you	don't	 look	at	 the
gap	between	 the	 two.	Change	your	 attention.	Have	you	 seen	children's	books?
There	are	many	pictures	which	you	can	look	at	in	two	ways:	if	you	look	one	way
there	 is	an	old	woman,	but	 if	you	go	on	 looking,	suddenly	 the	picture	changes
and	a	young	beautiful	woman	can	be	seen.
The	same	lines	make	both	faces	--	of	an	old	woman	and	a	young	woman.	If	you
go	 on	 looking	 at	 the	 young	 face,	 again	 it	 changes,	 because	 the	 mind	 cannot
remain	constant	at	anything	--	it	is	a	flux.	And	if	you	go	on	looking	again	at	the
old	face,	it	will	change	back	to	a	young	face.
One	thing	you	will	notice:	when	you	see	the	old	face,	you	cannot	see	the	young
face	 though	you	know	it	 is	hidden	somewhere	--	you	have	known	it,	you	have
seen	 it.	 And	 when	 you	 see	 the	 young	 face,	 the	 old	 face	 cannot	 be	 seen;	 it
disappears	although	you	know	it	is	there.
You	 cannot	 see	 both	 together.	 They	 are	 contradictory.	 They	 cannot	 be	 seen
together.
When	 you	 see	 the	 figure,	 the	 background	 disappears;	 when	 you	 see	 the
background,	 the	 figure	 disappears.	Mind	 has	 a	 limited	 capacity	 to	 know	 --	 it
cannot	 know	 the	 contradictory.	 That	 s	 why	 it	 cannot	 know	 God	 --	 God	 is
contradictory;	that	s	why	it	cannot	know	the	innermost	core	of	your	being	--	it	is
contradictory.	it	comprehends	all	contradictions,	it	is	paradoxical.
The	mind	can	see	only	one	thing	at	a	time.	and	the	opposite	is	not	possible	at	the
same	 time.	When	you	see	 the	opposite.	 the	 first	disappears.	The	mind	goes	on
looking	 at	 the	words	 so	 it	 cannot	 see	 the	 silences	 that	 come	 after	 each	word.
Change	the	focus.	Just	sitting	silently.	start	looking	in	the	gaps.	Not	with	effort,
no	need	to	strain.	Relaxed	--	just	easy	--	in	a	playful	mood	--	just	as	fun.	No	need
to	 be	 religious	 about	 it	 otherwise	 you	 become	 serious,	 and	 once	 you	 become
serious	it	is	very	difficult	to	move	from	words	to	no-words.	It	is	very	easy	if	you
remain	loose,	flowing,	non-serious,	playful	--	as	if	it	is	just	a	fun.
Millions	 of	 people	miss	meditation	 because	meditation	 has	 taken	 on	 a	 wrong
connotation.
It	looks	very	serious,	looks	gloomy,	has	something	of	the	church	in	it,	looks	as	if
it	is	only	for	people	who	are	dead,	or	almost	dead,	who	are	gloomy,	serious,	have
long	 faces,	who	have	 lost	 festivity,	 fun,	playfulness,	 celebration.	These	are	 the
qualities	of	meditation.	A	really	meditative	person	is	playful:	life	is	fun	for	him,
life	 is	 a	 LEELA,	 a	 play.	 He	 enjoys	 it	 tremendously.	 He	 is	 not	 serious.	 He	 is
relaxed.
Sit	 silently,	 relaxed,	 loose,	 and	 just	 allow	 your	 attention	 to	 flow	 towards	 the
gaps.	Slip	from	the	edges	of	words	into	the	intervals.	Let	intervals	become	more
prominent	 and	 allow	words	 to	 fade	 away.	 It	 is	 just	 as	 if	 you	 are	 looking	 at	 a
blackboard,	and	I	put	a	small	white	dot	on	it:	you	can	see	either	the	dot,	then	the
blackboard	goes	far	away.	or	you	can	see	the	blackboard,	then	the	dot	becomes
secondary,	 a	 shadow	 phenomenon.	 You	 can	 go	 on	 changing	 your	 attention
between	the	figure	and	the	background.
Words	 are	 figures;	 silence	 is	 the	 background.	 Words	 come	 and	 go;	 silence
remains.	When	you	were	born	you	were	born	as	a	 silence	 --	 just	 intervals	 and
intervals,	gaps	and	gaps.
Infinite	emptiness	you	came	with,	unbounded	emptiness	you	brought	with	you	in
life	--
then	you	started	collecting	words.
That's	why	if	you	go	back	in	your	memory,	if	you	try	to	remember,	you	cannot
go	past	the	age	of	four.	Because	before	the	age	of	four	you	were	almost	empty;
words	 started	 collecting	 in	 your	 memory	 after	 the	 age	 of	 four.	 Memory	 can
function	 only	where	words	 function,	 emptiness	 leaves	 no	 trace	 on	 you.	 That's
why	when	you	go	back	and	you	try	to	remember,	you	can	remember,	at	the	most,
the	age	of	four.	Or,	if	you	were	very	intelligent,	then	your	remembering	can	go
back	 to	 the	 age	 of	 three.	But	 there	 comes	 a	 point	where	 suddenly	 there	 is	 no
memory.	Up	to	that	time	you	were	an	emptiness	--	pure,	virgin,	uncorrupted	by
words.	 You	were	 pure	 sky.	 The	 day	 you	 die,	 again	 your	words	will	 drop	 and
scatter;	 you	will	move	 into	 another	world	 or	 into	 another	 life	 again	with	 your
emptiness.
Emptiness	is	your	self.
I	have	heard	that	Shankara	used	to	tell	 the	following	story	of	a	pupil	who	kept
asking	his	Master	about	 the	nature	of	 the	ultimate	self.	Each	 time	 the	question
came,	the	Master	would	turn	a	deaf	ear	--	until	finally	he	turned	on	his	pupil	one
day	and	said,	'I	am	teaching	you,	but	you	do	not	follow.	The	self	is	silence.'
Mind	means	words;	 self	means	 silence.	Mind	 is	nothing	but	all	 the	words	 that
you	have	accumulated;	silence	is	that	which	has	always	been	with	you,	it	is	not
an	accumulation.
That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 self.	 It	 is	 your	 intrinsic	 quality.	On	 the	 background	 of
silence	you	go	on	accumulating	words,	and	the	words	in	total	are	known	as	the
mind.	Silence	is	meditation.	It	is	a	question	of	changing	the	gestalt,	shifting	the
attention	from	words	into	silence	--	which	is	always	there.
Each	word	 is	 like	 a	 precipice:	 you	 can	 take	 a	 jump	 into	 the	 valley	 of	 silence.
From	each	word	you	can	slip	into	silence...	 that	 is	 the	use	of	a	mantra.	Mantra
means	 repeating	 a	 single	word	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.	When	you	 repeat	 a
single	word	again	and	again	and	again,	you	get	bored	with	that	word	because	the
novelty	is	lost.	You	get	fed	up	with	that	word,	you	want	to	get	rid	of	that	word.
Boredom	helps.	 It	 helps	 you	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the	word	 --	 now	you	 can	 slip	more
easily	into	silence.
The	 silence	 is	 always	 there	 by	 the	 corner.	 If	 you	 go	 on	 repeating	Ram,	Ram,
Ram...	how	long	can	you	repeat	it?	Sooner	or	later	you	feel	fed	up,	bored.	The
use	of	a	mantra	to	create	such	boredom	that	you	want	to	get	rid	of	it,	is	beautiful,
because	 then	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way	 than	 to	 slip	 into	 silence.	 Leave	 the	 word
behind	and	move	into	the	gap;	use	the	word	as	a	jumping-board	and	jump	into
the	abyss.
If	words	change	--	ordinarily	they	do	change,	of	course	--	you	are	never	fed	up.
A	new	word	is	always	attractive;	a	new	idea	is	always	attractive;	a	new	dream,	a
new	 desire,	 is	 always	 attractive.	 But	 if	 you	 can	 see	 that	 the	 mind	 is	 simply
repeating	the	same	thing	again	and	again	and	again,	either	you	fall	asleep	or	you
jump	into	silence	--	these	two	are	the	possibilities.	And	I	know	that	most	people
who	chant	mantras	fall	into	sleep	That	too	is	a	possibility	which	we	have	known
for	centuries.	Mothers	know	it	well.	When	a	child	is	not	falling	asleep,	they	do	a
mantra	 --	 they	 call	 it	 a	 lullaby.	 They	 repeat	 just	 two	 or	 three	 words	 in	 a
monotonous	 tone	 and	 the	 child	 starts	 feeling	 sleepy.	 Go	 on	 repeating	 and	 the
child	 gets	 bored,	 and	 he	 cannot	 escape,	 he	 cannot	 go	 anywhere,	 so	 the	 only
escape	is	into	sleep.	He	says,	'Go	on	repeating.	I	am	going	to	sleep!'	And	he	falls
asleep.
Many	 chanters	 of	 mantras	 fall	 asleep	 --	 hence	 the	 use	 of	 Transcendental
Meditation	 for	 people	 who	 suffer	 from	 sleeplessness,	 hence	 its	 appeal	 in
America.	Insomnia	has	become	a	normal	thing.	The	more	insomnia	is	there,	the
more	will	be	the	appeal	of	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi,	because	people	need	some
tranquilizers.	A	mantra	is	a	prefect	tranquilizer,	but	that	is	not	its	real	use.	There
is	nothing	wrong	in	it	--	if	it	gives	you	good	sleep,	good,	but	that	is	not	its	real
use.
It	is	as	if	you	are	using	an	airplane	like	a	bullock-cart.	You	can	use	it.	You	can
put	the	airplane	behind	bullocks,	and	use	it	as	a	bullock-cart	--	nothing	wrong	in
it,	it	will	serve	a	little	purpose,	but	that	is	not	its	use.	You	could	soar	very	high
with	it.
A	mantra	has	to	be	used	with	full	awareness	that	this	is	to	create	boredom,	and
you	are	 to	 remember	not	 to	 fall	asleep.	Otherwise,	you	miss.	Don't	 fall	asleep.
Go	on	 repeating	 the	mantra	and	don't	 allow	yourself	 to	 fall	 into	 sleep.	So	 it	 is
better	 if	you	repeat	 the	mantra	standing,	or	repeat	 it	walking,	so	 that	you	don't
fall	asleep.
One	of	the	great	disciples	of	Gurdjieff,	P.	D.	Ouspensky,	was	dying.	The	doctors
told	 him	 to	 rest	 but	 he	 would	 not	 --	 instead	 he	 continued	 walking	 the	 whole
night.	 They	 thought	 he	 had	 gone	 crazy.	 He	 was	 dying,	 his	 energy	 was
disappearing	 --	 what	 was	 he	 doing?	 This	 was	 the	 time	 to	 rest;	 he	 would	 die
sooner	if	he	went	on	walking.	But	he	would	not	stop.
Somebody	asked,	'What	are	you	doing?'
He	said,	'I	would	like	to	die	alert,	awake.	I	don't	want	to	die	asleep	--	otherwise	I
will	miss	the	beauty	of	death.'
And	he	died	walking.
That	is	the	way	to	do	a	mantra.	Walk.
If	you	go	 to	Bodh-Gaya,	where	Gautama	Buddha	attained	enlightenment,	near
the	 Bodhi	 tree	 you	 will	 find	 a	 small	 path.	 On	 that	 path	 Buddha	 walked
continuously.	For	one	hour	he	would	meditate	under	 the	 tree,	and	 then	for	one
hour	he	would	walk.
When	his	disciples	asked,	'Why?'	he	would	say,	'Because	if	I	sit	too	much	under
the	tree,	then	sleepiness	starts	coming.'
The	moment	 sleepiness	 starts	coming,	one	has	 to	walk,	because	otherwise	you
will	 slip	 into	 sleep,	 and	 the	 whole	 mantra	 is	 lost.	 The	 mantra	 is	 to	 create
boredom,	 the	mantra	 is	 to	 create	 a	 fed-up-ness	 so	 that	 you	 can	 jump	 into	 the
abyss.	If	you	move	into	sleep	the	abyss	is	missed.
All	 Buddhist	 meditations	 alternate.	 You	 do	 them	 sitting	 --	 but	 when	 you	 feel
drowsiness	 setting	 in	 immediately	 you	 get	 up	 and	 start	 doing	 them	 walking.
Then	the	moment	you	see	that	 the	sleepiness	has	disappeared,	sit	again,	do	the
meditation	again.	If	you	go	on	doing	this,	a	moment	comes	when	suddenly	you
slip	 out	 of	 the	 words,	 just	 like	 a	 snake	 who	 slips	 out	 of	 his	 old	 skin.	 And	 it
happens	very	naturally.	There	is	no	effort	to	it.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 remember	 about	mind	 is:	 it	 is	 a	 constant	 chattering.	That
chattering	keeps	 it	alive,	 that	chattering	 is	a	food	for	 it,	without	 that	chattering
the	mind	cannot	continue.	So	drop	out	of	the	clutches	of	the	mind	--	that	is,	drop
out	of	inner	chattering.
You	 can	 do	 this	 by	 forcing	 yourself,	 but	 then	 again	 you	miss.	 You	 can	 force
yourself	not	 to	 talk	 inside,	 just	as	you	can	 force	yourself	not	 to	 talk	outside	 --
you	can	keep	a	forced	silence.	In	the	beginning	it	is	difficult,	but	you	can	go	on
insisting	and	you	can	force	the	mind	not	to	talk.	It	is	possible.	If	you	go	to	the
Himalayas,	you	will	find	many	people	who	have	attained	to	it,	but	you	will	find
dullness	on	 their	 faces,	not	 intelligence.	The	mind	has	not	been	 transcended,	 it
has	 been	 simply	 dulled.	 They	 have	 not	 moved	 into	 alive	 silence,	 they	 have
simply	forced	the	mind	and	controlled	it.	It	is	as	if	a	child	has	been	forced	to	sit
in	 the	 corner	 and	 not	 to	 move.	Watch	 him.	 He	 feels	 restless,	 but	 he	 goes	 on
controlling	 himself,	 afraid..	 He	 represses	 his	 energy	 otherwise	 he	 will	 be
punished.
If	this	goes	on	for	as	long	as	it	does	--	in	schools	children	are	sitting	for	five	or
six	hours	-
-	 by	 and	 by	 they	 are	 dulled,	 their	 intelligence	 is	 lost.	 Every	 child	 is	 born
intelligent	 and	 almost	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 of	 people	 die	 stupid.	 The	 whole
education	dulls	the	mind	--
and	you	can	do	it	yourself	also.
You	will	find	religious	people	almost	stupid	although	you	may	not	see	it	because
of	 your	 ideas	 about	 them.	 But	 if	 you	 have	 open	 eyes,	 go	 and	 look	 at	 your
SANNYASINS	 --	you	will	 find	 them	stupid	 and	 idiotic;	 you	will	 not	 find	 any
sign	of	intelligence	or	creativity.
India	has	suffered	very	much	because	of	these	people.	They	have	created	such	an
uncreative	state	that	India	has	lived	at	the	minimum.	Paralysis	is	not	meditation.
It	happened	once	in	a	church	that	the	preacher	shouted	at	the	revival,	'Let	all	you
husbands	who	have	troubles	on	your	minds,	stand	up!'
Every	man	in	the	church	rose	to	his	feet	except	one.
'Ah!'	exclaimed	the	preacher.	'You	are	one	in	a	million!'
'It	is	not	that.	I	cannot	get	up,'	said	the	man.	'I	am	paralyzed.'
Paralysis	is	not	meditation;	paralysis	is	not	healthy.	You	can	paralyze	the	mind	--
there	are	millions	of	tricks	available	to	paralyze	it.	People	lie	on	a	bed	of	thorns.
If	you	continuously	lie	on	a	bed	of	thorns,	your	body	becomes	insensitive.	It	is
not	a	miracle.
You	are	simply	desensitizing	your	body.	When	the	body	loses	aliveness	there	is
no	problem	--	 it	 is	not	a	bed	of	 thorns	for	you	at	all.	You	may	by	and	by	even
start	 feeling	comfortable.	 In	 fact,	 if	you-are	given	a	good	comfortable	bed	you
will	not	be	able	to	sleep	on	it.	This	is	paralyzing	the	body.
There	 are	 similar	methods	 to	 paralyze	 the	mind.	You	 can	 fast.	 Then	 the	mind
goes	 on	 saying	 that	 the	 body	 is	 hungry	 but	 you	 don't	 supply	 food,	 you	 don't
listen	to	the	mind.	By	and	by	the	mind	becomes	dull.	The	body	goes	on	feeling
the	hunger	but	the	mind	does	not	report	it.	Because	what	is	the	point?	There	is
nobody	to	listen,	there	is	nobody	to	respond.	Then	a	certain	paralysis	happens	in
the	mind.	Many	people	who	go	on	long	fasts	think	they	have	attained	meditation.
It	 is	 not	 meditation,	 it	 is	 just	 low	 energy,	 paralysis,	 insensitivity.	 They	 are
moving	like	dead	corpses.	They	are	not	alive.	Remember,	meditation	will	bring
you	 more	 and	 more	 intelligence,	 infinite	 intelligence,	 a	 radiant	 intelligence.
Meditation	will	make	you	more	alive	and	sensitive;	your	life	will	become	richer.
Look	at	the	ascetics:	their	life	has	become	almost	as	if	it	is	not	life.	These	people
are	not	meditators.	They	may	be	masochists,	torturing	themselves	and	enjoying
the	torture...the	mind	is	very	cunning,	 it	goes	on	doing	things	and	rationalizing
them.	Ordinarily	you	are	violent	 towards	others	but	mind	 is	very	cunning	 --	 it
can	 learn	 non-violence,	 it	 can	 preach	 non-violence.	 then	 it	 becomes	 violent
towards	 itself.	And	 the	 violence	 that	 you	do	on	 your	 own	 self	 is	 respected	 by
people	because	they	have	an	idea	that	to	be	an	ascetic	is	to	be	religious.	That	is
sheer	nonsense.
God	 is	not	an	ascetic,	otherwise	 there	would	be	no	flowers,	 there	would	be	no
green	trees,	only	deserts.	God	is	not	an	ascetic,	otherwise	there	would	be	no	song
in	life,	no	dance	in	life	--	only	cemeteries	and	cemeteries.	God	is	not	an	ascetic;
God	enjoys	life.	God	is	more	Epicurean	than	you	can	imagine.	If	you	think	about
God,	 think	 in	 terms	 of	Epicurus.	God	 is	 a	 constant	 search	 for	more	 and	more
happiness,	joy,	ecstasy.	Remember	that.
But	 mind	 is	 very	 cunning.	 It	 can	 rationalize	 paralysis	 as	 meditation;	 it	 can
rationalize	dullness	as	transcendence;	it	can	rationalize	deadness	as	renunciation.
Watch	out.	Always	remember	 that	 if	you	are	moving	 in	 the	right	direction	you
will	 go	 on	 flowering.	Much	 fragrance	 will	 come	 out	 of	 you	 and	 you	 will	 be
creative.	And	you	will	be	sensitive	 to	 life,	 to	 love,	and	 to	everything	 that	God
makes	available	to	you.
Have	 a	 very	 penetrating	 eye	 inside	 your	mind	 --	 see	what	 its	motivations	 are.
When	you	do	 something,	 immediately	 look	 for	 the	motivation,	 because	 if	 you
miss	 the	motivation,	 the	mind	 goes	 on	 befooling	 you	 and	 goes	 on	 saying	 that
something	else	was	the	motivation.	For	example:	you	come	home	angry	and	you
beat	 your	 child.	 The	mind	will	 say,	 'It	 is	 just	 for	 his	 own	 sake,	 to	make	 him
behave.'	This	is	a	rationalization.	Go	deeper...	You	were	angry	and	you	wanted
somebody	with	whom	you	could	be	angry.	You	could	not	be	angry	with	the	boss
in	 the	 office,	 he	 is	 too	 strong	 for	 that.	 And	 it	 is	 risky	 and	 economically
dangerous.	 No,	 you	 needed	 somebody	 helpless.	 Now	 this	 child	 is	 perfectly
helpless,	he	depends	on	you;	he	cannot	react,	he	cannot	do	anything,	he	cannot
pay	you	back	in	the	same	coin.	You	cannot	find	a	more	perfect	victim.
Look.	Are	you	angry	with	the	child?	If	you	are,	then	the	mind	is	befooling	you.
The	mind	goes	on	befooling	you	twenty-four	hours	a	day	and	you	cooperate	with
it.	Then	in	the	end	you	are	in	misery,	you	land	in	hell.	Watch	every	moment	for
the	right	motivation.	If	you	can	find	the	right	motivation,	the	mind	will	become
more	and	more	incapable	of	deceiving	you	And	the	further	away	you	are	from
deception,	the	more	you	will	be	capable	of	moving	beyond	mind,	the	more	you
will	become	a	master.
I	have	heard.
One	 scientist	was	 saying	 to	 his	 friend,	 'I	 don't	 see	why	 you	 insisted	 that	 your
wife	 wear	 a	 chastity	 belt	 while	 we	 were	 away	 at	 the	 convention.	 After	 all,
between	us	as	old	buddies,	with	Emma's	face	and	figure,	who	would?'
'I	know,	I	know,'	replied	the	other.	'But	when	I	get	back	home,	I	can	always	say	I
lost	the	key.'
Look,	watch	for	the	unconscious	motivation.	The	mind	goes	on	bullying	you	and
bossing	you	because	you	are	not	capable	of	seeing	its	real	motivations.	Once	a
person	 becomes	 capable	 of	 seeing	 real	motivations,	meditation	 is	 very	 close...
because	then	the	mind	no	longer	has	a	grip	on	you.
The	mind	 is	 a	mechanism.	 It	 has	no	 intelligence.	The	mind	 is	 a	bio-computer.
How	can	it	have	any	intelligence?	It	has	skill,	but	it	has	no	intelligence;	it	has	a
functional	utility,	but	 it	has	no	awareness.	 It	 is	a	 robot;	 it	works	well	but	don't
listen	to	it	too	much	because	then	you	will	lose	your	inner	intelligence.	Then	it	is
as	if	you	are	asking	a	machine	to	guide	you,	lead	you.	You	are	asking	a	machine
which	has	nothing	original	in	it	--	cannot	have.
Not	a	single	thought	in	the	mind	is	ever	original,	it	is	always	a	repetition.	Watch.
Whenever	mind	says	something,	see	 that	 it	 is	again	putting	you	 into	a	 routine.
Try	to	do	something	new	and	the	mind	will	have	less	grip	on	you.
People	 who	 are	 in	 some	 way	 creative	 are	 always	 easily	 transformed	 into
meditators,	and	people	who	are	uncreative	in	their	life	are	the	most	difficult.	If
you	live	a	repetitive	life	the	mind	has	too	much	control	over	you	--	you	cannot
move	away	from	it,	you	are	afraid.
Do	something	new	every	day.	Don't	listen	to	the	old	routine.	In	fact,	if	the	mind
says	 something,	 tell	 it,	 'This	 we	 have	 been	 doing	 always.	 Now	 let	 us	 do
something	else.'
Even	small	changes...	in	the	way	you	have	always	been	behaving	with	your	wife
--	just	small	changes;	in	the	way	you	always	walk	--	just	small	changes;	the	way
you	always	talk
--	small	changes.	And	you	will	find	that	the	mind	is	losing	its	grip	on	you,	you
are	becoming	a	little	freer.
Creative	persons	get	more	easily	 into-meditation	and	go	deeper.	Poets,	painter,
musicians,	dancers,	can	get	into	meditation	more	easily	than	businessmen	--	they
live	a	routine	life,	absolutely	uncreative.
I	have	heard	about	a	father	who	was	giving	advice	to	his	son.	The	father,	a	noted
playboy	in	his	younger	days,	was	discussing	his	son's	forthcoming	marriage.
'My	boy,'	he	 said,	 'I	have	got	 just	 two	pieces	of	advice	 to	give	you.	Make	 it	 a
point	to	reserve	the	right	to	one	night	a	week	out	with	the	boys.'
He	paused.	His	son	asked	for	the	second	piece	of	advice	and	then	he	said,	'Don't
waste	it	on	the	boys!'
He	is	transferring	his	own	routine,	his	own	ways	to	his	son.	The	old	mind	goes
on	giving	advice	to	the	present	consciousness	--	 the	father	giving	advice	to	the
son.
Each	 moment	 --	 you	 are	 new,	 reborn,	 the	 consciousness	 is	 never	 old.	 The
consciousness	is	always	the	son	and	the	mind	is	always	the	father.	The	mind	is
never	new	and	the	consciousness	is	never	old	--	and	the	mind	goes	on	advising
the	 son.	 The	 father	 will	 create	 the	 same	 pattern	 in	 the	 son,	 then	 the	 son	 will
repeat	the	same	thing.
You	have	lived	in	a	certain	way	up	to	now	--	don't	you	want	to	live	in	a	different
way?
You	 have	 thought	 in	 a	 certain	 way	 up	 to	 now	 --	 don't	 you	 want	 some	 new
glimpses	in	your	being?	Then	be	alert	and	don't	listen	to	the	mind.
Mind	is	your	past	constantly	trying	to	control	your	present	and	your	future.	It	is
the	 dead	 past	 which	 goes	 on	 controlling	 the	 alive	 present.	 Just	 become	 alert
about	it.
But	what	is	the	way?	How	does	the	mind	go	on	doing	it?	The	mind	does	it	with
this	method:	 it	 says,	 'If	you	don't	 listen	 to	me,	you	will	not	be	as	efficient	as	 I
am.	If	you	do	an	old	thing	you	can	be	more	efficient	because	you	have	done	it
before.	 If	 you	 do	 a	 new	 thing	 you	 cannot	 be	 so	 efficient.'	 The	mind	 goes	 on
talking	like	an	economist.	an	efficiency	expert;	it	goes	on	saying,	'This	is	easier
to	do.	Why	do	it	the	hard	way?	This	is	the	way	of	least	resistance.'
Remember,	 whenever	 you	 have	 two	 things,	 two	 alternatives,	 choose	 the	 new
one,	choose	the	harder,	choose	the	one	in	which	more	awareness	will	be	needed.
At	 the	 cost	 of	 efficiency	 always	 choose	 awareness,	 and	 you	 will	 create	 the
situation	in	which	meditation	will	become	possible.	These	are	all	just	situations.
Meditation	will	happen.	I	am	not	saying	that	just	by	doing	them	you	will	get	to
meditation	--	but	they	will	be	helpful.	They	will	create	the	necessary	situation	in
you	without	which	meditation	cannot	happen.
Be	less	efficient	but	more	creative.	Let	that	be	the	motive.	Don't	be	bothered	too
much	about	utilitarian	ends.	Rather,	constantly	remember	that	you	are	not	here	in
life	to	become	a	commodity;	you	are	not	here	to	become	an	utility,	that	is	below
dignity;.	you	are	not	here	just	to	become	more	and	more	efficient	--	you	are	here
to	 become	 more	 and	 more	 alive;	 you	 are	 here	 to	 become	 more	 and	 more
intelligent;	you	are	here	to	become	more	and	more	happy,	ecstatically	happy.	But
that	is	totally	different	from	the	ways	of	the	mind.
A	woman	received	a	report	from	the	school.
'Your	 little	 boy	 is	 very	 intelligent,'	 said	 the	 teacher's	 note	 accompanying	 the
report	card,
'but	 he	 spends	 entirely	 too	 much	 time	 playing	 with	 the	 girls.	 However,	 I	 am
working	on	a	plan	to	break	him	of	the	habit.'
The	mother	signed	the	report	and	sent	it	back	with	this	note:	'Let	me	know	if	it
works,	and	I	will	try	it	out	on	his	father.'
People	are	constantly	searching	for	cues	to	control	others,	cues	which	can	give
you	more	profit	--	profitable	cues.	If	you	are	after	cues	on	how	to	control	others,
you	will	be	in	the	control	of	the	mind	always.	Forget	about	controlling	anybody.
Once	you	drop	 the	 idea	of	controlling	others	--	husband	or	wife,	son	or	father,
friend	 or	 foe	 --	 once	 you	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 controlling	 others,	 the	mind	 cannot
have	the	grip	on	you	because	it	becomes	useless.
It	 is	 useful	 in	 controlling	 the	 world;	 it	 is	 useful	 in	 controlling	 society....	 A
politician	 cannot	 meditate.	 Impossible!	 Even	 more	 impossible	 than	 for	 a
businessman.	 A	 politician	 is	 at	 the	 very	 other	 end.	 He	 cannot	 meditate.
Sometimes	 politicians	 come	 to	 me.	 They	 are	 interested	 in	 meditation	 but	 not
exactly	 in	meditation	 --	 they	 are	 too	 tense	 and	 they	want	 a	 certain	 relaxation.
They	come	 to	me	and	 they	ask	 if	 I	 can	help	 them,	because	 they	are	 too	 tense,
their	work	is	such.	and	constant	conflict,	leg-pulling,	rat-racing,	continues.	They
ask	 for	 something	 so	 that	 they	 can	 have	 a	 little	 peace.	 I	 tell	 them	 that	 it	 is
impossible.
They	 cannot	meditate.	 The	 ambitious	mind	 cannot	meditate	 because	 the	 basic
foundation	of	meditation	 is	 to	be	non-ambitious.	Ambition	means	 the	 effort	 to
control	others.	That	is	what	politics	is:	 the	effort	 to	control	the	whole	world.	If
you	want	to	control	others	you	will	have	to	listen	to	the	mind,	because	the	mind
enjoys	violence	very	much.
And	 you	 cannot	 try	 new	 things	 --	 they	 are	 too	 risky.	You	 have	 to	 try	 the	 old
things	again	and	again.	If	you	listen	to	the	lessons	of	history,	they	are	amazing.
in	1917,	Russia	went	 through	a	great	 revolution,	one	of	 the	greatest	 in	history.
But	somehow	the	revolution	failed.	When	the	communists	came	into	power,	they
became	 almost	 like	 the	 czars	 --	worse,	 even.	 Stalin	 proved	more	 terrible	 than
Peter	the	Terrible.
He	killed	millions	of	people.	What	happened?	Once	they	came	into	power,	to	do
something,	new	was	too	risky.	It	might	not	work,	it	has	never	worked	before	so
who	knows?	Try	the	old	methods	which	have	always	been	useful.	They	had	to
learn	from	the	czars.
Every	 revolution	 fails	 because	 once	 a	 certain	 group	 of	 politicians	 comes	 into
power,	 it	 has	 to	 use	 the	 same	 methods.	 The	 mind	 is	 never	 for	 the	 new,	 it	 is
always	 for	 the	 old.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 control	 others,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
meditate...about	that	one	point	be	absolutely	certain.
The	mind	 lives	 in	 a	 sort	 of	 sleep,	 it	 lives	 in	 a	 sort	 of	 unconscious	 state.	 You
become	 conscious	 only	 very	 rarely.	 If	 your	 life	 is	 in	 tremendous	 danger	 you
become	conscious;	otherwise	you	are	not	conscious.	The	mind	goes	on	moving,
sleepy.	Stand	by	the	side	of	the	road	and	watch	people	and	you	will	see	shadows
of	dreams	on	their	faces.	Somebody	talks	to	himself,	or	makes	gestures	--	if	you
look	at	him	you	will	be	able	 to	see	 that	he	 is	somewhere	else,	not	here	on	 the
road.	It	is	as	if	people	are	moving	in	deep	sleep.
Somnambulism	 is	 the	 ordinary	 state	 of	 the	 mind.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 become	 a
meditator,	you	have	to	drop	this	sleepy	habit	of	doing	things.	Walk,	but	be	alert.
Dig	a	hole,	but	be	alert.
Eat,	but	while	eating	don't	do	anything	--	just	eat.	Each	bite	should	be	taken	with
deep	 alertness,	 chew	 it	with	 alertness.	Don't	 allow	yourself	 to	 run	 all	 over	 the
world.	Be	here,	now.	Whenever	you	catch	your	mind	going	somewhere	else....	It
is	always	going	somewhere	else,	it	never	wants	to	be	here.	Because	if	the	mind
is	here	it	is	no	longer	needed;	right	in	the	present	there	is	no	need	for	the	mind	--
consciousness	is	enough.	The	mind	is	needed	only	there,	somewhere	else	in	the
future,	 in	 the	past,	but	never	here.....Whenever	you	become	alert	 that	 the	mind
has	 gone	 somewhere	 else	 --	 you	 are	 in	 Poona	 and	 the	 mind	 has	 gone	 to
Philadelphia	 --	 immediately	 become	 alert.	 Give	 yourself	 a	 jerk.	 Come	 back
home.	Come	to	the	point	where	you	are.	Eating,	eat;	walking,	walk;	don't	allow
this	mind	to	go	all	over	the	world.
It	is	not	that	this	will	become	meditation,	but	it	will	create	a	situation.
The	party	was	in	full	gear	and	a	man	decided	to	call	up	a	friend	and	invite	him	to
join	the	fun.	He	dialed	the	wrong	number	and	apologized	to	the	sleepy	voice	that
answered.	On	the	next	try	he	got	the	same	voice.
'I	am	terribly	sorry,'	he	said,	'I	dialed	very	carefully.	Can't	understand	how	I	got
the	wrong	number.'
'Neither	can	I,'	said	the	sleepy	voice.	'Especially	since	I	have	no	phone.'
People	 are	 living	 almost	 asleep,	 and	 they	 have	 learned	 the	 trick	 of	 how	 to	 do
things	without	disturbing	their	sleep.	If	you	become.	a	little	alert,	you	will	catch
yourself	red-handed	many	times	doing	things	that	you	never	wanted	to	do,	doing
things	that	you	know	you	are	going	to	repent,	doing	things	that	you	had	decided,
just	 the	other	day,	never	 to	do	 again.	And	you	 say	many	 times,	 'I	 did	 it,	 but	 I
don't	 know	how	 it	 happened.	 It	 happened	 in	 spite	 of	me.'	How	can	 something
happen	in	spite	of	you?
It	is	possible	only	if	you	are	asleep.	And	you	go	on	saying	that	you	never	wanted
it,	but	somewhere	deep	down	you	must	have	wanted	it.
Just	the	other	day,	Paritosh	sent	me	a	very	beautiful	joke	--	one	of	the	rare	ones,
a	jewel	of	the	finest	water.	Listen	to	it	carefully.
It	was	after	the	last	war	and	a	journalist	was	interviewing	the	Reverend	Mother
of	a	convent	in	Europe.
'Tell	me,'	said	the	journalist,	 'what	happened	to	you	and	your	nuns	during	those
terrible	years?	How	did	you	survive?'
'Well,	first	of	all,'	said	the	Reverend	Mother,	'the	Germans	invaded	our	country,
seized	the	convent,	raped	all	the	nuns	--	except	sister	Anastasia	--	took	our	food
and	left.	Then	came	the	Russians.	Again	 they	seized	 the	convent,	 raped	all	 the
nuns	--	except	Sister	Anastasia	--	took	our	food	and	left.	Then	again	the	Russians
were	driven	out	and	the	Germans	came	back	again,	seized	the	convent,	raped	all
the	nuns	--	except	Sister	Anastasia	--	took	our	food	and	left.'
The	 journalist	 made	 the	 required	 sympathetic	 noises,	 but	 was	 curious	 about
Sister	Anastasia.	 'Who	 is	 this	Sister	Anastasia?'	he	asked.	 'Why	did	she	escape
these	terrible	happenings?'
'Ah,	well,'	replied	the	Reverend	Mother,	'Sister	Anastasia	does	not	like	that	kind
of	thing.'
Even	rape	is	your	desire;	that	too	happens	because	you	want	it.	It	may	look	too
extreme,	but	psychoanalysts	say	it	is	so.	And	I	also	observe	it	is	so.	Without	your
cooperation,	 even	 rape	 is	 not	 possible.	A	deep	desire	of	 being	 raped	 is	 hidden
somewhere.	In	fact,	it	is	very	rare	to	find	a	woman	who	has	not	fantasized	about
herself	 being	 raped,	who	 has	 not	 dreamed	 of	 herself	 being	 raped.	Deep	 down
rape	shows	that	you	are	beautiful,	desired	--
desired	wildly.	It	is	an	historical	fact	that	when	one	of	the	most	beautiful	women
of	Egypt	died	her	dead	body	was	raped,	the	mummy.	If	the	spirit	of	that	woman
knew	about	it,	she	must	have	felt	 tremendously	happy.	Just	 think...a	dead	body
being	raped.
You	may	deny	it.	Just	a	few	days	ago	a	woman	came	to	me.	She	had	been	raped
in	Kabul.
And	she	was	telling	her	whole	story	with	such	relish	that	I	said	to	her,	'You	must
have	been	cooperating.'	She	said,	'What	are	you	saying?'	She	felt	hurt!	I	told	her
not	to	feel	hurt.	'You	are	enjoying	the	whole	story,'	I	said.	'Close	your	eyes,	and
be	true.	At	least	once,	be	true	to	me.	Have	you	enjoyed	it?'	She	said,	 'What	are
you	 saying?	Rape	 --	 and	me	 enjoying	 it?	 I	 am	a	Catholic,	 a	Christian!'	 I	 said,
'Still,	 you	 close	 your	 eyes.	 It	 makes	 no	 difference	 whether	 you	 are	 Catholic,
Hindu,	or	Buddhist	 --	still	 just	close	your	eyes	and	meditate.'	She	relaxed.	She
was	a	really	sincere	woman.	Then	her	face	changed	and	she	opened	her	eyes	and
said,	 'I	think	you	are	right.	I	enjoyed	it.	But	please	don't	say	it	to	anybody!	My
husband	is	going	to	come	to	--	see	you	soon	--	never	mention	it!
Just	 watch	 your	 mind:	 on	 the	 surface	 it	 says	 something,	 but	 deep	 down,
simultaneously,	 it	 is	 planning	 something	 else.	 Be	 a	 little	more	 alert	 and	 don't
move	in	sleep.
The	nagging	old	 lady	had	been	 in	 bed	 for	 a	week	on	doctor's	 orders.	Nothing
suited	her.
She	 complained	 about	 the	 weather,	 the	 medicine,	 and	 especially	 about	 her
husband's	cooking.
One	day	after	 taking	 in	her	breakfast	 tray	and	cleaning	up	 the	kitchen,	 the	old
man	sat	down	in	his	den.	She	heard	the	scratching	of	his	pen.
'What	are	you	doing	now?'	she	called.
'Writing	a	letter.'
'Who	are	you	writing	to?'
'Cousin	Ann.'
'What	are	you	writing	to	her	about?'
'I	 am	 telling	 her	 you	 are	 sick,	 but	 the	 doctors	 say	 you	will	 be	 okay	 soon,	 and
there	is	no	danger.'
And	then	he	asked,	after	a	small	pause,
'How	do	you	spell	cemetery?	With	a	'c'	or	with	an	's'?'
On	 the	 surface,	 one	 thing	 deep	 down,	 something	 exactly	 the	 opposite.	 He	 is
hoping	against	hope;	he	is	hoping	against	doctors.	On	the	surface	he	will	go	on
saying	that	she	is	going	to	be	okay	again	soon	--	but	deep	down	he	is	hoping	that
somehow	she	will	die.
And	he	will	not	accept	 the	 fact,	even	 to	himself.	That's	how	you	go	on	hiding
from	yourself.
Stop	these	tricks.	Be	sincere	with	your	mind,	and	the	grip	that	your	mind	has	on
you	will	be	lost.
Now	this	small	anecdote.
WHEN	WOLVES	WERE	DISCOVERED	IN	THE	VILLAGE	NEAR	MASTER
SHOJU'S	TEMPLE,	SHOJU	ENTERED	THE	GRAVEYARD	NIGHTLY	FOR
ONE
WEEK	 AND	 SAT	 IN	 ZAZEN.	 THIS	 PUT	 A	 STOP	 TO	 THE	 WOLVES'
PROWLING.
OVERJOYED,	 THE	 VILLAGERS	 ASKED	 HIM	 TO	 DESCRIBE	 THE
SECRET	RITES
HE	HAD	PERFORMED.
'I	DIDN'T	HAVE	TO	RESORT	TO	SUCH	THINGS,'	HE	SAID,	'NOR	COULD
I	HAVE
DONE	 SO.	 WHILE	 I	 WAS	 IN	 ZAZEN	 A	 NUMBER	 OF	 WOLVES
GATHERED
AROUND	 ME,	 LICKING	 THE	 TIP	 OF	 MY	 NOSE,	 AND	 SNIFFING	 MY
WINDPIPE,	 BUT	 BECAUSE	 I	 REMAINED	 IN	 THE	 RIGHT	 STATE	 OF
MIND,	I	WASN'T
BITTEN.
AS	I	KEEP	PREACHING	TO	YOU,	THE	PROPER	STATE	OF	MIND	WILL
MAKE	IT
POSSIBLE	 FOR	 YOU	 TO	 BE	 FREE	 IN	 LIFE	 AND	 DEATH,
INVULNERABLE	TO
FIRE	 AND	 WATER.	 EVEN	 WOLVES	 ARE	 POWERLESS	 AGAINST	 IT.	 I
SIMPLY
PRACTICE	WHAT	I	PREACH.'
A	simple	story,	but	very	meaningful.	The	Master	simply	went	 to	 the	graveyard
and	 sat	 there	 for	 one	week	 --	 not	 doing	 anything,	 not	 even	 praying,	 not	 even
meditating.	 He	 simply	 sat	 there	 in	 meditation	 --	 not	 meditating,	 just	 in
meditation.	He	simply	sat	there.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	zazen.	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	words	to	be
used	 for	 meditation:	 it	 simply	 means	 just	 sitting,	 doing	 nothing.	 'Za'	 means
sitting.	He	simply	sat	 there.	And	this	sitting	--	when	the	mind	is	not	 there,	and
thoughts	are	not	there,	when	there	is	no	stirring,	and	the	consciousness	is	like	a
cool	pool	of	water	with	no	ripples	--	is	the	right	state.	Miracles	happen	on	their
own	accord.
The	Master	said,
WHILE	I	WAS	IN	ZAZEN	A	NUMBER	OF	WOLVES	GATHERED	AROUND
ME,	 LICKING	 THE	 TIP	 OF	MY	NOSE,	 AND	 SNIFFING	MY	WINDPIPE,
BUT	BECAUSE
I	REMAINED	IN	THE	RIGHT	STATE	OF	MIND,	I	WASN'T	BITTEN.'
A	very	fundamental	law	of	life	is	that	if	you	become	afraid,	you	give	energy	to
the	 other	 to	 make	 you	 more	 afraid.	 The	 very	 idea	 of	 fear	 in	 you	 creates	 the
opposite	idea	in	the	other.
Each	thought	has	a	negative	and	positive	polarity	just	like	electricity.	If	you	have
the	negative	pole,	on	the	other	side	a	positive	pole	is	created.	It	is	automatic.	If
you	are	afraid,	the	other	immediately	feels	a	desire	arising	in	him	to	oppress	you,
to	torture	you.
If	you	are	not	afraid,	the	desire	in	the	other	simply	disappears	And	it	is	not	only
so	with	man,	it	is	so	even	with	wolves.	With	animals	it	is	also	the	same.
If	you	can	remain	in	the	right	state	--	that	is,	undistracted,	silent,	just	a	witness	to
everything,	 to	whatsoever	 is	happening,	with	no	 idea	arising	 in	you	 --	 then	no
idea	will	arise	in	others	around	you.
There	is	an	old	Indian	story.
In	the	Hindu	heaven,	there	is	a	tree	called	'Kalptaru.'	It	means	the	wish-fulfilling
tree.	By	accident	a	traveler	arrived	there	and	he	was	so	tired	that	he	sat	under	the
tree.	And	he	was	hungry	so	he	thought,	'If	somebody	was	here,	I	would	ask	for
food.	But	there	seems	to	be	nobody.'
The	moment	the	idea	of	food	appeared	in	his	mind,	food	suddenly	appeared	and
he	was	so	hungry	that	he	didn't	bother	to	think	about	it.	He	ate	it.	Then	he	started
feeling	sleepy,	and	he	thought,	'If	there	was	a	bed	here....'	And	the	bed	appeared.
But	 lying	on	the	bed	the	 thought	arose	 in	him,	 'What	 is	happening?	I	don't	see
anybody	here.	Food	has	come,	a	bed	has	come	--	maybe	there	are	ghosts	doing
things	to	me!'
Suddenly	ghosts	appeared..
Then	he	became	afraid	and	he	thought,	'Now	they	will	kill	me!'	And	they	killed
him!
In	 life	 the	 law	 is	 the	 same:	 if	 you	 think	 of	 ghosts,	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 appear.
Think	 and	you	will	 see.	 If	 you	 think	of	 enemies,	 you	will	 create	 them;	 if	 you
think	of	friends,	they	will	appear.	If	you	love,	love	appears	all	around	you;	if	you
hate,	hate	appears.
Whatsoever	you	go	on	thinking	is	being	fulfilled	by	a	certain	law.
If	you	don't	think	anything,	then	nothing	happens	to	you.
The	Master	 simply	 sat	 there	 in	 the	 graveyard.	 The	 wolves	 came,	 but	 finding
nobody	there	they	sniffed.	They	must	have	sniffed	to	see	whether	this	man	was
thinking	or	not.	They	circled	around.	They	watched.	But	there	was	nobody,	just
emptiness.	What	to	do	with	emptiness?
This	emptiness,	this	silence,	this	bliss,	cannot	be	destroyed.	Not	even	wolves	are
that	bad.
They	felt	the	sacredness	of	this	emptiness	and	they	disappeared.
The	villagers	 thought	 that	 this	man	had	done	some	secret	 rites,	but	 the	Master
said,	'I	have	not	done	anything,	nor	could	I	have	done	so.	I	simply	sat	there	and
everything	changed.'
This	anecdote	is	a	parable.	If	you	sit	in	this	world,	silently,	if	you	live	silently,	as
an	 alive	 nothingness,	 the	 world	 will	 become	 a	 paradise.	 The	 wolves	 will
disappear.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 do	 anything	 else.	 Just	 the	 right	 state	 of	 your
consciousness	and	everything	is	done.
There	are	two	laws.	One	law	is	of	the	mind.	With	the	law	of	the	mind	you	go	on
creating	 hell	 around	 you;	 friends	 become	 foes,	 lovers	 prove	 enemies,	 flowers
become	thorns.	Life	becomes	a	burden.	One	simply	suffers	life.	With	the	law	of
mind,	you	live	in	hell	wherever	you	live.	If	you	slip	out	of	the	mind,	you	have
slipped	out	of	that	law,	and	suddenly	you	live	in	a	totally	different	world.	That
different	world	is	nirvana.	That	different	world	is	God.
Then	without	doing,	everything	starts	happening.
So	let	me	say	it	in	this	way:	if	you	want	to	do,	you	will	live	in	the	ego,	and	the
wolves	will	surround	you,	and	you	will	be	constantly	in	trouble.	If	you	drop	the
ego,	if	you	drop	the	idea	of	being	a	doer,	if	you	simply	relax	into	life	and	are	in	a
let-go,	you	are	again	back	 in	 the	world	of	God,	back	 in	 the	Garden	of	Eden	--
Adam	has	come	back	home.
Then	things	happen.
The	Christian	story	says	that	there	was	no	need	for	Adam	to	do	anything	in	the
Garden	of	Eden.	Everything	was	available.	But	 then	he	 fell	 from	grace	and	he
was	thrown	out.	He	became	knowledgeable,	he	became	an	egoist,	and	since	then
humanity	has	been	suffering.
Each	person	has	 to	come	back	to	 the	Garden	of	Eden	again.	The	doors	are	not
closed.
'Knock,	and	they	shall	be	opened	unto	you.	Ask,	and	it	shall	be	given.'	But	one
has	 to	 turn	 back.	 The	 path	 is	 from	 doing	 towards	 happening,	 from	 the	 ego
towards	no-ego,	from	mind	towards	no-mind.	No-mind	is	what	meditation	is	all
about.	That	different	world	is	nirvana.	That	different	world	is	God.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Three	Mysteries
28	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602280
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
95
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
CAN	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	FACING	THE	DEATH	OF	EACH	MOMENT	AND
LETTING	GO?
Death	is	already	happening.	Whether	you	face	it	or	not,	whether	you	look	at	it	or
not,	it	is	already	there.
It	is	just	like	breathing.	When	a	child	is	born,	he	inhales.	he	breathes	in	for	the
first	time.
That	 is	 the	beginning	of	 life.	And	when	one	day	he	becomes	old,	dies,	he	will
exhale.
Death	always	happens	with	exhalation	and	birth	with	inhalation.	But	exhalation
and	 inhalation	 are	happening	continuously.	With	 each	 inhalation	you	are	born;
with	each	exhalation	you	die.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 death	 is	 not	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future,
waiting	for	you,	as	it	has	been	always	pictured.	It	is	part	of	life;	it	is	an	ongoing
process	--	not	in	the	future,	here,	now.
Life	and	death	are	two	aspects	of	existence.	simultaneously	happening	together.
Ordinarily,	you	have	been	taught	to	think	of	death	as	being	against	life.	Death	is
not	against	life	--	life	is	not	possible	without	death.	Death	is	the	very	ground	on
which	life	exists.	Death	and	life	are	like	two	wings:	the	bird	cannot	fly	with	one
wing,	 and	 the	 being	 cannot	 be	 without	 death.	 So	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 a	 clear
understanding	of	what	we	mean	by	death.
Death	is	an	absolutely	necessary	process	for	life	to	be.	It	is	not	the	enemy,	it	is
the	friend.
And	 it	 is	 not	 there	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future,	 it	 is	 here,	 now.	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to
happen,	it	has	been	always	happening.	Since	you	have	been	here	it	has	been	with
you.	 With	 each	 exhalation	 it	 happens	 --	 a	 little	 death,	 a	 small	 death	 --	 but
because	of	fear	we	have	put	it	in	the	future.
The	mind	always	tries	to	avoid	things	which	it	cannot	comprehend,	and	death	is
one	of	the	most	incomprehensible	mysteries.	There	are	only	three	mysteries:	life,
death	and	love.
All	these	three	are	beyond	mind.
So	mind	takes	life	for	granted;	then	there	is	no	need	to	inquire.	That	is	a	way	of
avoiding.
You	never	think,	you	never	meditate	on	life;	you	have	simply	accepted	it,	taken
it	for	granted.	It	is	a	tremendous	mystery.	You	are	alive,	but	don't	think	that	you
have	known	life.
For	death,	mind	plays	another	 trick:	 it	postpones	 it.	To	accept	 it	here	and	now
would	be	a	constant	worry,	so	the	mind	puts	it	somewhere	in	the	future	--	then
there	is	no	hurry.
When	it	comes,	we	will	see.
And	for	 love,	mind	has	created	substitutes	which	are	not	 love.	Sometimes	you
call	 your	 possessiveness	 your	 love;	 sometimes	 you	 call	 your	 attachment	 your
love;	 sometimes	 you	 call	 your	 domination	 your	 love	 --	 these	 are	 ego	 games.
Love	has	nothing	to	do	with	them.
In	fact,	because	of	these	games,	love	is	not	possible.
Between	life	and	death,	between	the	two	banks	of	life	and	death,	flows	the	river
of	love.
And	 that	 is	possible	only	 for	a	person	who	does	not	 take	 life	 for	granted,	who
moves	 deep	 into	 the	 quality	 of	 being	 alive	 and	 becomes	 existential,	 authentic.
Love	is	for	the	person	who	accepts	death	here	and	now	and	does	not	postpone	it.
Then	between	these	two	a	beautiful	phenomenon	arises:	the	river	of	love.
Life	and	death	are	like	two	banks.	The	possibility	is	there	for	the	river	of	love	to
flow,	but	it	 is	only	a	possibility.	You	will	have	to	materialize	it.	Life	and	death
are	 there,	but	 love	has	 to	be	materialized	 --	 that	 is	 the	goal	of	being	a	human.
Unless	love	materializes,	you	have	missed	--	you	have	missed	the	whole	point	of
being.
Death	is	already	happening	--	so	don't	put	it	in	the	future.	If	you	don't	put	it	in
the	future	there	is	no	question	of	defending	yourself.	If	it	is	already	happening	--
and	 it	 has	 been	 already	 happening	 always	 --	 then	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
protecting	yourself	against	death.
Death	has	not	killed	you,	it	has	been	happening	while	you	were	still	alive.	It	is
happening	 just	 now	 and	 life	 is	 not	 destroyed	 by	 it;	 in	 fact,	 because	 of	 it,	 life
renews	 itself	 each	moment.	When	 the	old	 leaves	 fall,	 they	make	 space	 for	 the
new	 leaves	 to	 come.	When	 the	old	 flowers	disappear,	 the	new	 flowers	 appear.
When	one	door	 closes,	 another	 immediately	opens.	Each	moment	you	die	 and
each	moment	there	is	resurrection.
Once	a	Christian	missionary	came	to	me	and	he	asked,	'Do	you	believe	in	Jesus
Christ's	resurrection?'
I	 told	 him	 that	 there	 was	 no	 need	 to	 go	 so	 far.	 Each	 moment	 everybody	 is
resurrected.	But	he	could	not	understand.	 It	 is	difficult	 for	people	who	are	 too
much	into	their	ideology.
He	said,	'But	do	you	believe	that	he	was	crucified?	Is	this	not	just	a	myth,	or	is	it
a	reality?	What	do	you	think?'
I	said	to	him	again	that	everybody	is	crucified	every	moment.	That	is	the	whole
meaning	of	Jesus'	crucifixion	and	his	resurrection.	Whether	it	is	historical	or	not
does	not	matter	a	bit.	It	is	simply	irrelevant	to	think	whether	it	happened	or	not	--
it	is	HAPPENING.
Each	moment	the	past	is	crucified,	the	old	leaves	disappear.	And	each	moment	a
new	being	arises	in	you,	resurrects.	It	is	a	constant	miracle.
The	 second	 thing	 to	understand	 about	 death	 is	 that	 death	 is	 the	only	 certainty.
Everything	else	is	uncertain:	it	may	happen,	it	may	not	happen.	Death	is	certain
because	 in	 birth	 half	 of	 it	 has	 already	 happened,	 so	 the	 other	 end	 must	 be
somewhere,	the	other	pole	must	be	somewhere	in	the	dark.	You	have	not	come
across	 it	 because	you	are	 afraid;	you	don't	move	 in	 the	dark.	But	 it	 is	 certain!
With	birth,	death	has	become	a	certainty.
Once	 this	 certainty	 penetrates	 your	 understanding,	 you	 are	 relaxed.	Whenever
something	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 then	 there	 is	 no	 worry.	 Worry	 arises	 out	 of
uncertainty.
Watch.	 A	 man	 is	 dying	 and	 he	 is	 very	 worried.	 The	 moment	 death	 becomes
certain	 and	 the	 doctors	 say,	 'Now	 you	 cannot	 be	 saved,'	 he	 is	 shocked.	 A
shivering	 goes	 through	 his	 being.	 But	 then	 things	 settle,	 and	 immediately	 all
worries	disappear.	 If	 the	person	 is	allowed	 to	know	that	he	 is	going	 to	die	and
that	death	is	certain,	with	that	certainty	a	peace	a	silence,	comes	to	his	being.
Every	person	who	is	dying	has	the	right	to	know	it.	Doctors	go	on	hiding	it	many
times,	 thinking,	 'Why	 disturb?'	 But	 uncertainty	 disturbs;	 certainty,	 never.	 This
hanging	in-between,	this	being	in	limbo,	wondering	whether	one	is	going	to	live
or	die	--	this	is	the	root	cause	of	all	worry.	Once	it	is	certain	that	you	are	going	to
die	 then	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 do.	 Then	 one	 simply	 accepts	 it.	 And	 in	 that
acceptance,	 a	 calmness,	 a	 tranquillity	 happens.	 So	 if	 the	 person	 is	 allowed	 to
know	that	he	is	going	to	die	in	the	moment	of	death	he	becomes	peaceful.
In	the	East	we	have	been	practicing	that	for	millennia.	Not	only	that,	in	countries
like	Tibet	particular	techniques	were	evolved	to	help	a	man	to	die.	They	called	it
BARDO
TODO.	When	 a	 person	was	 dying,	 friends,	 relatives	 and	 acquaintances	would
gather	together	around	him	to	give	him	the	absolute	certainty	that	he	was	going
to	die,	and	to	help	him	to	relax.
Because	if	you	can	die	in	total	relaxation,	the	quality	of	death	changes	and	your
new	birth	somewhere	will	be	of	a	higher	quality.	The	quality	of	birth	is	decided
by	death.	And	then,	in	turn,	the	quality	of	birth	will	decide	the	quality	of	another
death.	 That's	 how	 one	 goes	 higher	 and	 higher,	 that's	 how	 one	 evolves.	 And
whenever	a	person	becomes	absolutely	certain	about	death	a	flame	arises	on	his
face	 --	 you	 can	 see	 it.	 In	 fact,	 a	miracle	 happens:	 he	 becomes	 alive	 as	 he	 has
never	been	before.
There	 is	 a	 saying	 in	 India	 that	 before	 a	 flame	 dies,	 it	 becomes	 tremendously
intense.	Just	for	a	moment	it	flares	up	to	totality.	I	was	reading	a	small	anecdote.
Once	 there	 were	 two	 little	 worms.	 The	 first	 was	 lazy	 and	 improvident,	 and
always	 stayed	 in	 bed	 late.	 The	 other	 was	 always	 up	 early,	 going	 about	 his
business.	The	early	bird	caught	 the	 early	worm.	Then	along	came	a	 fisherman
with	a	flashlight,	and	caught	the	night	crawler.	Moral:	You	can't	win.
Death	is	certain.	Whatsoever	you	do	--	get	up	early	or	not	--	death	is	certain.	It
has	already	happened,	that's	why	it	is	certain;	it	is	already	happening,	that's	why
it	is	certain.
So	why	wait	for	the	moment	when	you	are	dying	on	your	bed?	Why	not	make	it
certain	right	now?
Just	watch.	If	I	say	death	is	certain,	can't	you	feel	fear	disappearing	within	you?
Can't	you	feel	that	with	the	very	idea	--	and	it	is	just	an	idea	right	now,	not	your
experience	 --	with	 just	an	 idea	 that	death	 is	certain,	you	are	calm	and	quiet.	 If
you	can	experience	it....	And	you	can,	because	it	is	a	fact.	I	am	not	talking	about
theories;	I	don't	deal	in	theories.	This	is	a	simple	fact.	Just	open	your	eyes	and
watch	it.	And	don't	try	to	avoid	it;	there	is	no	way	to	avoid	it.	In	avoiding,	you
miss.	Accept	it.	Embrace	it.	And	live	with	the	consciousness	that	each	moment
you	die	and	each	moment	you	are	born.	Allow	it	 to	happen.	Don't	cling	 to	 the
past	--	it	is	no	more,	it	is	already	gone.	Why	go	on	carrying	dead	things?	Why	be
so	 burdened	with	 corpses?	Drop	 them.	And	 you	will	 feel	weightlessness;	 you
will	feel	unburdened.
And	 once	 you	 drop	 the	 past	 the	 future	 drops	 on	 its	 own	 accord,	 because	 the
future	is	nothing	but	a	projection	of	the	past.	In	the	past	you	had	some	pleasures;
now	the	mind	projects	those	same	pleasures	into	the	future.	In	the	past	you	had
some	sufferings;	now	the	mind	projects	a	future	in	which	those	sufferings	are	not
allowed	 to	 happen.	 That's	 what	 your	 future	 is.	 What	 else	 is	 your	 future?
Pleasures	 that	 you	 enjoyed	 in	 the	past	 are	projected	 and	miseries	 are	dropped.
Your	future	is	a	more	colorful	and	modified	past,	repainted,	renovated,	but	it	is
the	past.	Once	the	past	drops,	suddenly	the	future	drops	--
and	then	you	are	left	here	and	now;	then	you	are	in	existence,	you	are	existential,
and	that	is	the	only	way	to	be.	All	other	ways	are	just	to	avoid	life.	The	more	you
avoid	life,	the	more	you	become	afraid	of	death.
A	person	who	is	really	living	is	not	in	any	way	afraid	of	death.	If	you	are	living
rightly	you	are	finished	with	death,	you	are	already	too	grateful,	fulfilled.	But	if
you	have	not	lived,	then	the	constant	worry	continues,	 'I	have	not	lived	yet	and
death	is	coming.	And	death	will	stop	all;	with	death	there	will	be	no	future.'	So
one	becomes	apprehensive,	afraid,	and	tries	to	avoid	death.
In	trying	to	avoid	death,	one	goes	on	missing	life.	Forget	about	that	avoidance.
Live	life.
In	living	life,	death	is	avoided.	In	living	life,	you	become	so	fulfilled	that	if	this
very	moment	death	comes	and	the	future	stops,	you	will	be	ready.	You	will	be
happily	ready.
You	have	lived	your	life;	you	have	delighted	in	existence;	you	have	celebrated	it;
you	 are	 contented.	 There	 is	 no	 complaint,	 no	 grumbling;	 you	 don't	 have	 any
grudge.	You	welcome	death.	And	unless	 you	 can	welcome	death,	 one	 thing	 is
certain	--	you	have	not	lived.
I	have	heard	one	anecdote.
Two	 Hungarian	 noblemen	 fell	 into	 a	 deadly	 quarrel.	 But	 since	 neither	 was
anxious	to	risk	his	life	with	either	sword	or	pistol,	a	bloodless	duel	was	decided
upon.	Each	was	 to	 speak	a	number,	 and	 the	one	presenting	 the	higher	number
would	be	adjudged	the	winner.
The	 seconds	 were	 of	 course	 at	 hand,	 and	 the	 excitement	 and	 suspense	 were
extreme	as	the	two	noblemen,	seated	at	opposite	ends	of	a	long	table,	bent	to	the
task	of	thinking	of	a	high	number.	The	challenged	party	who	had	the	privilege	of
going	 first.	 thought	 long	 and	 hard.	 The	 veins	 on	 his	 temples	 swelled,	 and	 the
perspiration	stood	out	on	his	forehead.
'Three,'	he	said	finally.
The	other	duelist	said	at	once,	'Well,	that	beats	me.'
When	you	are	afraid	of	death	even	the	number	three	is	the	ultimate.	When	you
are	afraid	of	death	you	go	on	finding	excuses	for	how	to	go	on	living.	Whether
your	life	means	anything	or	not	one	simply	goes	on	finding	excuses	to	prolong
it.
In	the	West	now,	there	is	a	craze	about	how	to	prolong	life.	That	simply	shows
that	 somewhere	 life	 is	being	missed.	Whenever	a	 country	or	 a	 culture	 --	 starts
thinking	about	how	to	prolong	life,	it	simply	shows	one	thing	--	that	life	is	not
being	 lived.	 If	 you	 live	 life,	 then	 even	 a	 single	 moment	 is	 enough.	 A	 single
moment	can	be	equal	to	eternity.	It	is	not	a	question	of	length,	it	is	a	question	of
depth;	it	is	not	a	question	of	quantity,	it	is	a	question	of	quality.
Just	 think:	 would	 you	 like	 one	moment	 of	 Buddha's	 life	 or	 would	 you	 like	 a
thousand	 years	 of	 your	 own	 life?	Then	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 understand	what	 I
mean	about	the	quality,	the	intensity,	the	depth.	In	a	single	moment	fulfillment	is
possible:	you	can	bloom	and	blossom.	But	you	may	not	bloom	for	one	thousand
years,	you	may	remain	hiding	in	the	seed.
This	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 scientific	 attitude	 towards	 life	 and	 the
religious	attitude.	The	scientific	attitude	 is	concerned	with	prolongation	--	how
to	prolong	life.	It	is	not	concerned	with	significance.	So	you	can	find	old	people
in	hospitals,	particularly	in	the	West,	just	hanging	on.	They	want	to	die	but	the
culture	won't	allow	them.	They	are	fed	up	with	just	being	alive;	they	are	simply
vegetating.	There	is	no	significance,	no	meaning,	no	poetry,	because	everything
has	 disappeared,	 and	 they	 are	 a	 burden	 to	 themselves.	 They	 are	 asking	 for
euthanasia	but	society	does	not	allow	it.	Society	is	so	afraid	of	death	that	it	does
not	allow	death	even	for	people	who	are	ready	to	die.
The	very	word	'death'	is	a	taboo	word,	more	taboo	than	sex.	Sex	has	by	and	by
become	almost	 accepted.	Now	death	 also	needs	 a	Freud	 to	make	 it	 by	 and	by
accepted.	 Now	 death	 also	 needs	 a	 Freud	 to	 make	 it	 accepted	 so	 that	 it	 is	 no
longer	a	taboo	and	people	can	talk	about	it	and	share	their	experiences	about	it.
Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 hide	 it	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 force	 people	 to	 live
against	 themselves.	 In	 hospitals,	 in	 old	 people's	 homes,	 people	 are	 simply
hanging	on	because	the	society,	the	culture,	the	law,	won't	allow	them	to	be.
If	they	ask	that	they	should	be	allowed	to	die,	it	 looks	as	if	they	are	asking	for
suicide.
They	are	not	asking	for	suicide.	In	fact,	they	have	become	dead	corpses;	they	are
a	living	suicide	and	they	are	asking	to	be	rid	of	it.	The	length	is	not	the	meaning.
How	long	you	live	is	not	the	point	--	how	deep	you	live,	how	intensely	you	live,
how	totally	you	live	--
the	quality	--	is.
Science	 is	 concerned	 about	 quantity;	 religion	 is	 concerned	 about	 quality.
Religion	is	concerned	with	the	art	of	how	to	live	life	and	how	to	die	life.	Seven
years,	seventy	years	or	seven	hundred	years	--	what	difference	will	it	make?	You
will	go	on	repeating	the	same	vicious	circle	again	and	again	and	again.	You	will
simply	get	more	and	more	bored.
So	change	 the	 focus	of	your	being.	Learn	how	 to	 live	 each	moment	 and	 learn
how	 to	 die	 each	 moment.	 Both	 are	 together.	 If	 you	 know	 how	 to	 die	 each
moment,	you	will	be	able	to	live	each	moment	--	fresh,	young,	virgin.	Die	to	the
past.	Don't	allow	it	to	interfere	with	your	present.	The	moment	you	have	passed
it,	let	it	be	no	longer	there.	It	is	no	longer	there;	it	only	goes	on	in	your	memory,
it	 is	 just	 a	 remembrance.	 Let	 this	 remembrance	 also	 be	 released.	 This
psychological	hang-up	should	not	be	allowed.
I	am	not	saying	that	you	should	forget	everything	that	you	know.	I	am	not	saying
that	 all	memory	 is	bad.	 It	has	 technical	uses.	You	have	 to	know	how	 to	drive,
you	have	to	know	where	your	home	is,	you	have	to	recognize	your	wife	and	your
children.	But	 those	 are	 not	 psychological	 hang-ups.	When	 you	 come	 home	 of
course	 you	 recognize	 that	 this	 is	 your	wife.	 This	 is	 factual	memory	 --	 useful,
enhances	life,	facilitates	it.	But	if	you	come	home	and	you	look	at	your	wife	with
all	the	past	experiences	with	her,	then	that	is	a	psychological	hang-up.	Yesterday
she	was	angry...	now	again	you	look	with	that	memory	in-between;	your	eyes	are
clouded	 by	 that	memory.	 The	 day	 before	 yesterday	 she	was	 sad	 or	 nasty	 and
nagging	--	now	if	you	look	through	all	these	psychological	impressions	then	you
are	not	looking	at	the	woman	who	is	right	now	standing	in	front	of	you.	You	are
looking	at	someone	who	is	not	there	you	are	seeing	someone	who	doesn't	exist,
you	are	looking	at	a	ghost	--	she	is	not	your	wife.	And	she	may	also	be	looking
at	you	in	the	same	way.
So	ghosts	meet,	 and	 realities	 remain	 separate;	ghosts	 are	married,	 and	 realities
are	divorced.	Then	these	two	ghosts	will	make	love,	these	two	ghosts	will	fight,
quarrel,	and	do	a	thousand	and	one	things,	and	the	realities	will	be	far,	far	away.
There	will	be	no	contact;	realities	will	not	have	any	connection.	Then	there	can
be	no	communication,	there	can	be	no	dialogue.	Only	realities	can	love.	Ghosts
can	only	make	impotent	gestures
--	movements,	but	with	no	life	in	them.
Drop	the	past	each	moment.	Remember	to	drop	it.	Just	as	you	clean	your	house
every	 morning,	 every	 moment	 clean	 your	 inner	 house	 of	 the	 past.	 All
psychological	memories	have	 to	be	dropped.	 Just	keep	 factual	 things	and	your
mind	will	be	very,	very	clean	and	clear.
Don't	move	ahead	of	yourself	into	the	future	because	that	is	not	possible	to	do.
The	 future	 remains	unknown;	 that	 is	 its	beauty,	 that	 is	 its	grandeur,	glory.	 If	 it
becomes	known	 it	will	 be	 useless,	 because	 then	 the	whole	 excitement	 and	 the
whole	surprise	will	be	lost.
Don't	 expect	 anything	 in	 the	 future.	 Don't	 corrupt	 it.	 Because	 if	 all	 your
expectations	 are	 fulfilled	 then	 too	 you	 will	 be	 miserable...	 because	 it	 is	 your
expectation	and	it	is	fulfilled.
You	 will	 not	 be	 happy	 about	 it.	 Happiness	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 surprise;
happiness	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 something	 happens	 which	 you	 had	 never
expected,	when	something	takes	you	completely	unawares.	If	your	expectations
are	fulfilled	a	hundred	per	cent,	you	will	be	living	as	if	you	are	in	the	past,	not	in
the	 future.	You	come	home	and	you	expected	your	wife	 to	 say	 something	and
she	does.	And	you	expected	your	child	to	behave	in	a	certain	way	and	the	child
does.	 Just	 think	 --	 you	 will	 be	 constantly	 in	 boredom.	 Nothing	 will	 happen.
Everything	will	be	 just	 a	 repetition,	 as	 if	you	are	 seeing	 something	which	you
have	seen	before,	hearing	something	which	you	have	heard	before.
Continuously	you	will	see	that	it	is	a	repetition	of	something.	and	repetition	can
never	be	satisfying.	The	new,	the	novel,	the	original,	is	needed.
So	if	your	expectations	are	fulfilled.	you	will	remain	completely	unfulfilled.
And	if	your	expectations	are	not	fulfilled.	then	you	feel	frustrated.	Then	you	feel
constantly	as	if	you	propose	and	God	goes	on	disposing;	you	feel	that	God	is	the
enemy;	you	feel	as	if	everybody	is	against	you	and	everybody	is	working	against
you.	If	your	expectations	are	never	fulfilled	you	will	feel	frustrated.
Just	meditate	upon	your	expectations:	if	they	are	fulfilled	you	will	feel	bored,	if
they	 are	 not	 fulfilled	 you	will	 feel	 cheated.	You	will	 feel	 as	 if	 a	 conspiracy	 is
going	on	against	you.	as	 if	 the	whole	existence	 is	 conspiring	against	you.	You
will	feel	exploited,	you	will	feel	rejected,	you	will	not	be	able	to	feel	at	home.
And	the	whole	problem	arises	because	you	expect.
Don't	go	ahead	into	the	future.	Drop	expectations.
Once	you	drop	expectations	you	have	learned	how	to	live.	Then	everything	that
happens	 fulfills	 you,	whatsoever	 it	 is.	 For	 one	 thing,	 you	 never	 feel	 frustrated
because	 in	 the	 first	 place	 you	 never	 expected.	 So	 frustration	 is	 impossible.
Frustration	is	a	shadow	of	expectation.	With	the	expectation	dropped,	frustration
drops	on	its	own	accord.
You	cannot	frustrate	me,	because	I	never	expect	anything.	Whatsoever	you	do,	I
will	say,
'Good.'	I	always	say,	'Good,'	except	for	only	a	few	times	when	I	say,	'Very	good.'
Once	expectations	are	not	 there	you	are	 free	 to	move	 into	 the	unknown	and	 to
accept	the	unknown	--	whatsoever	it	brings.	And	to	accept	it	with	deep	gratitude.
Complaints	 disappear;	 grumbling	 disappears;	 whatsoever	 the	 situation,	 you
always	 feel	 accepted,	 at	 home.	 Nobody	 is	 against	 you,	 existence	 is	 not	 a
conspiracy	against	you	--	it	is	your	home.
The	second	 thing:	when	everything	happens	unexpectedly,	everything	becomes
new.	It	brings	a	freshness	to	your	life;	a	fresh	breeze	is	continuously	blowing	and
it	does	not	allow	dust	to	gather	on	you.	Your	doors	and	your	windows	are	open:
in	 comes	 sunshine,	 in	 comes	 the	 breeze,	 in	 comes	 the	 fragrance	 of	 flowers	 --
everything	unexpected.	You	never	asked	for	it,	and	existence	goes	on	showering
it	on	you.	One	feels	God	Is.
The	proposition	'God	is',	is	not	a	proposition;	it	is	a	statement	of	someone	who
has	lived	unexpectedly,	without	any	expectations,	who	has	lived	in	wonder.	God
is	not	a	logical	hypothesis;	it	is	an	exclamation	of	joy.	It	is	just	like,	'Aha!'	--	It
doesn't	mean	anything	more.	It	simply	means,	'Aha!'	so	beautiful,	so	wonderful,
so	new,	so	novel,	and	beyond	anything	that	you	could	have	dreamed.	Yes,	life	is
more	adventurous	than	any	adventure	that	you	can	imagine.	And	life	is	pregnant,
always	pregnant,	with	the	unknown.
Once	you	expect,	everything	is	destroyed.	Drop	the	past;	 that	is	the	way	to	die
each	moment.	Never	 plan	 for	 the	 future;	 that	 is	 the	way	 to	 allow	 life	 to	 flow
through	you.	And	then	you	remain	in	an	unfrozen	state,	flowing.	This	is	what	I
call	a	sannyasin	--	no	past,	no	future,	just	at	this	moment	alive,	intensely	alive,	a
flame	burning	 from	both	 the	ends,	a	 torch	burning	 from	both	 the	ends.	This	 is
what	let-go	is.
The	second	question:
Question	2
A	SHORT	TIME	AGO	I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	YOU	SAW	YOURSELF
STANDING	IN	THE	MARKETPLACE	WITH	A	BOTTLE	OF	ALCOHOL	IN
YOUR
HAND.	TODAY	L	WAS	REFUSED	DARSHAN	BECAUSE	ALCOHOL	WAS
ON	MY
BREATH.
This	is	from	Vedanta.
What	 I	 say	and	what	you	hear	are	not	necessarily	 the	same.	My	alcohol	 is	my
alcohol;	your	alcohol	is	your	alcohol.	When	I	am	talking	about	alcohol,	I	am	not
talking	about	your	alcohol.	I	am	talking	about	the	alcohol	of	Buddhas.	Yes,	they
are	drunk	--	drunk	with	the	Divine.
But	I	can	understand.	You	go	on	hearing	that	which	you	want	to	hear.	You	don't
hear	 me;	 you	 manipulate.	 You	 manage	 to	 hear	 whatsoever	 you	 want	 to	 hear.
Your	unconscious	goes	on	interfering,	it	goes	on	confusing	you.	Yes,	I	said	that	I
am	in	the	marketplace	and	not	only	in	the	marketplace,	but	with	a	bottle	in	my
hand.	This.	is	an	old	Zen	saying.
Zen	says	that	one	who	has	finally	understood	himself	comes	back	to	the	world	--
and	 comes	 completely	 drunk.	 But	 why	 a	 bottle	 in	 the	 hand?	 The	 meaning	 is
clear.	Not	only	 is	he	drunk,	he	has	 something	 to	offer	 to	you	also.	That	 is	 the
meaning	of	the	bottle	in	the	hand.	If	you	are	ready,	he	can	also	make	you	drunk	-
-	he	has	something	to	offer	you.	It	is	not	only	that	he	is	drunk,	he	can	share	his
drunkenness	with	you.	Hence	 the	bottle.	He	has	an	 invitation,	an	 invitation	for
you.	That's	why	he	has	come	to	the	marketplace.
You	go	to	the	marketplace	to	get	something,	he	has	come	to	the	marketplace	to
give	something.	He	has	found	something,	and	this	finding	is	such	that	it	has	to
be	shared.
Sharing	is	its	intrinsic	nature.	You	cannot	keep	your	bliss	to	yourself	--	it	would
be	like	a	flower	trying	to	keep	its	fragrance	to	itself	or	a	star	trying	to	keep	its
light	to	itself.	It	is	not	possible.	When	there	is	light	it	spreads,	it	goes	to	others;	it
helps	 even	 those	 who	 are	 not	 even	 prepared	 to	 take	 its	 help.	 The	 fragrance
disperses	into	the	winds	for	friends	and	for	foes	alike.
Once	 a	man	has	 attained,	 he	 has	 to	 share.	Not	 that	 he	 has	 to	 do	 something	 to
share;	 he	 simply	 finds	 himself	 sharing	 because	 he	 cannot	 do	 otherwise.	 He
moves	 to	 the	marketplace	where	 people	 are	 --	 where	 people	 are	 stumbling	 in
darkness,	he	brings	his	light	to	them;	where	people	are	thirsty,	he	brings	his	own
drunkenness	to	be	shared	with	them.
Yes,	I	am	drunk	and	I	have	a	bottle	in	my	hand	--	can't	you	see	it!	But	it	is	not
your	bottle.	But	people	have	an	unconscious	tendency	to	hear	something	which
is	not	said.
I	have	heard	one	anecdote.
A	cavewoman	came	running	to	her	husband	in	the	greatest	possible	agitation.
'Wok!'	 she	 called	 out.	 'Something	 terrible	 has	 just	 happened.	 A	 saber-toothed
tiger	has	just	gone	into	my	mother's	cave	and	she	is	in	there.	Do	something!	Do
something!'
Wok	 looked	up	 from	 the	macedon	drumstick	which	he	was	gnawing	and	 said,
'Why	should	I	do	I	something?	What	the	devil	do	I	care	what	happens	to	a	saber-
toothed	tiger?'
It	 is	 not	 necessarily	 that	 you	 don't	 hear	 that	 which	 is	 said,	 your	 unconscious
continuously	 colors	whatsoever	 you	 hear,	 It	 continuously	 interprets	 in	 its	 own
ways.	 The	words	may	 be	 the	 same,	 but	 a	 slight	 jerk	 to	 the	meaning,	 a	 slight
turning,	and	everything	changes.
After	ten	years	of	marriage,	a	man	was	consulting	a	marriage	counselor.
'When	I	first	married,'	he	said,	'I	was	very	happy.	When	I	would	come	at	night,
my	 little	 dog	 would	 race	 around	 barking,	 and	 my	 wife	 would	 bring	 me	 my
slippers.	Now,	after	all	 these	years,	when	I	come	home,	my	dog	brings	me	my
slippers,	and	my	wife	barks	at	me.'
'What	 is	 the	 complaint?'	 asked	 the	 counselor.	 'You	 are	 still	 getting	 the	 same
service!'
Yes,	the	service	is	the	same,	but	still,	not	the	same.	You	may	hear	my	words	and
you	may	think	the	meaning	is	the	same	--	it	is	not.	So	please	be	careful.	Handle
my	words	 very	 carefully;	 they	 are	 very	 delicate.	And	 before	 you	 decide	what
they	mean,	don't	be	in	a	hurry.	Meditate.	Otherwise	not	only	will	you	miss,	you
may	misunderstand,	and	not	only	will	my	words	not	be	able	 to	help	you,	 they
can	be	harmful.
The	third	question:
Question	3
IS	IT	POSSIBLE	FOR	A	POLITICIAN	TO	BE	ENLIGHTENED?
Never	heard	of	it.	It	has	never	happened.	There	are	intrinsic	problems.	The	very
dimension	the	politician	moves	in	is	against	enlightenment.
A	 few	 things	 have	 to	 be	 understood.	 Politics	 is	 a	 diametrically	 opposite
phenomenon	to	religion.	A	scientist	can	easily	become	religious;	his	approach	is
different	 but	 not	 opposite.	 He	 may	 have	 been	 working	 with	 matter,	 with	 the
objective	world,	but	his	working	is	a	sort	of	meditation.	He	needs	a	certain	space
in	 his	 consciousness,	 a	 silent	 space,	 to	 work	 and	 to	 discover.	 It	 is	 not	 very
difficult	to	move	from	the	objective	towards	subjectivity	because	the	same	space
can	be	used	for	the	inner	journey.
A	 poet	 can	 very	 easily	 become	 religious	 --	 he	 is	 very	 close,	 very,	 very	 close;
almost	 in	 the	 neighborhood.	 A	 painter	 or	 a	 sculptor	 can	 very	 easily	 become
religious;	they	are	already	religious,	unknowingly.	They	are	already	worshippers
though	 they	have	not	 yet	worshipped.	They	may	not	 have	 thought	 about	God.
they	 may	 not	 have	 consciously	 been	 religious	 at	 all,	 they	 may	 not	 go	 to	 the
church	or	to	the	temple	they	may	not	be	concerned	with	the	Bible	and	the	Koran
and	 the	 Gita	 --	 but	 that	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 A	 painter	 goes	 on	 seeing	 something
Divine	in	nature:	colors	are	Divine	for	him.	A	poet	goes	on	feeling	something	of
the	religious	romance	all	around.	All	creative	arts	are	very	closely	related	--
any	moment	consciousness	can	dawn,	any	ray	can	become	a	transformation.
But	a	politician	moves	in	a	diametrically	opposite	direction.	His	whole	training
is	against	religion.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:
The	Congressman	had	delivered	a	stirring	speech	against	a	controversial	bill.	He
was	promptly	buried	in	mountains	of	mail	from	back	home	as	constituents	wrote
condemning	his	stand.	Next	day	he	was	back	on	his	feet	in	the	house,	this	time
making	a	speech	in	favor	of	the	bill.	When	he	finished,	a	colleague	collared	him.
'Yesterday,'	 said	 the	 colleague,	 'you	 made	 an	 eloquent	 explanation	 of	 the
principles	which	motivated	your	stand.	I	wonder,	what	has	happened	to	change
your	mind?'
'Someday,'	 said	 the	 Congressman,	 'you	 will	 learn	 that	 there	 comes	 a	 time	 in
every	man's	life	when	he	must	rise	above	mere	principles.'
A	 politician	 is	 an	 opportunist;	 in	 fact,	 he	 has	 no	 principles.	 He	 talks	 about
principles,	but	he	has	no	principles.	He	pretends	that	he	has	principles	but	if	he	is
a	politician	worth	the	name,	he	cannot	have	any	principles.	Those	principles	are
just	to	fool	people.	He	is	on	an	ego	trip.	He	uses	all	sorts	of	principles.
I	have	heard	about	one	politician.	In	an	election	campaign	he	was	speaking	in	his
constituency.	 There	 was	 a	 great	 controversy	 about	 prohibition:	 about	 whether
alcohol	should	be	totally	prohibited	or	not.	When	he	was	speaking,	a	man	stood
up	and	asked,
'What	is	your	stand	on	prohibition?'
Now	he	became	a	little	shaky	because	half	the	population	was	for	it	and	half	was
against	it.	And	he	could	see	that	half	the	crowd	was	for	it	and	half	the	crowd	was
against	it.
Whatsoever	he	said	was	going	to	lose	half	 the	votes.	It	was	really	difficult.	He
was	in	a	dilemma.
And	then	he	said,	'You	are	all	my	friends.	Please	raise	their	hands	those	who	are
in	favor	and	those	who	are	against.'	Half	the	people	raised	their	hands	in	favor,
and	half	against.
Then	he	said,	 'Good.	I	am	with	my	friends.	I	am	all	for	my	friends.	You	are	all
my	friends	and	I	am	for	you.'
Now	he	is	saying	neither	yes	nor	no.
The	 trip	 is	 of	 the	 ego:	 how	 to	 become	more	 powerful,	 how	 to	 control	 others.
Religion	is	just	the	opposite.	It	is	not	in	any	way	an	ego	trip	--	one	has	to	lose	the
ego.	And	one	is	not	trying	to	be	powerful.	In	fact,	one	is	trying	to	understand	the
total	helplessness	of	the	part	against	the	whole;	one	is	learning	how	to	surrender,
not	 how	 to	 conquer;	 and	 one	 is	 not	 concerned	 with	 others,	 one	 is	 totally
concerned	with	himself.	If	this	much	is	possible,	that
'I	can	become	aware	of	my	own	being'	it	is	enough,	more	than	enough.
The	 politician	 is	 concerned	 with	 the	 outside	 world,	 he	 is	 an	 extrovert.	 The
religious	person	is	an	introvert.	He	is	not	concerned	with	things,	with	the	world
with	situations;	he	is	concerned	with	the	quality	of	his	consciousness.	A	religious
person	is	trying	to	find	out	how	to	be	fulfilled;	a	politician	is	trying	to	show	to
the	world	that	he	is	somebody.	He	may	not	be	fulfilled	but	he	pretends	that	he	is
fulfilled;	 he	 has	 opted	 for	 pretensions,	 hypocrisy.	 He	 simply	wants	 the	 whole
world	to	know	that	he	is	somebody	special.
extraordinary,	very	happy.	Deep	inside	he	may	be	carrying	a	hell	but	he	believes
that	if	he	can	fool	everybody	else,	he	will	be	able	to	fool	himself.	That	dream	is
never	fulfilled.
You	 can	 fool	 everybody	 else	 by	 smiling	 a	 false	 smile,	 but	 how	 can	 you	 fool
yourself?
Deep	down	you	know	that	everything	is	getting	cold	and	dead;	deep	down	you
know	 that	 everything	 is	 empty,	 in	 vain.	 But	 one	 goes	 on	 thinking,	 'If	 I	 can
convince	 everybody	 else	 that	 I	 am	 somebody,	 then	 somehow	 I	will	 be	 able	 to
convince	myself	that	I	am	somebody.
The	politician	 is	a	 liar.	He's	 trying	 to	 lie	 --	 to	himself	and	 to	 the	whole	world.
The	religious	dimension	is	the	dimension	of	being	true,	authentic.
Once	 it	happened	 that	 a	man	entered	a	bar	and	 said,	 'Bartender,	 I	want	you	 to
meet	my	dog.	He	talks.	I	will	sell	him	to	you	for	only	ten	dollars.'
'Who	do	you	think	you	are	kidding?'	said	the	bartender.
The	dog,	tears	in	his	eyes	looked	up.	 'Please	buy	me,'	he	said.	 'This	man	treats
me	cruelly.
He	never	gives	me	a	bone.	He	never	bathes	me.	He	is	always	kicking	me	around.
And	 once	 I	 was	 the	 richest	 trick-dog	 in	 the	 country.	 I	 performed	 before
presidents	and	kings.
My	name	was	in	the	papers	every	day,	and....'
'So	he	does	 talk,'	 said	 the	bartender.	 'But	why	 sell	 a	valuable	dog	 like	 that	 for
only	ten	dollars?'
'Because,'	said	the	customer,	'l	hate	liars.'
A	 politician	 is	 a	 liar,	 and	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 convince	 himself	 through	 convincing
others.
A	politician	is	almost	mad	--	mad	for	power.	Many	people	are	in	the	madhouses
in	 the	 world:	 somebody	 thinks	 he	 is	 Adolph	 Hitler,	 somebody	 thinks	 he	 is
Napoleon,	somebody	thinks	he	is	Ford	or	Mao	Tse	Tung.	They	are	in	the	jails,	or
in	 the	madhouses,	 or	 in	 the	 hospitals,	 because	we	 think	 they	 have	 gone	mad.
Somebody	thinking	that	he	is	Adolph	Hitler	is	thought	to	be	mad,	but	what	about
Adolph	Hitler	himself?	The	only	difference	is	this:	-this	man,	this	madman	who
thinks	himself	to	be	Adolph	Hitler,	has	not	been	able	to	prove	it,	that's	all.	He's
innocent.	His	madness	is	just	innocence.	Adolph	Hitler	proved	to	the	world	that,
yes,	he	is.	Adolph	Hitler	is	more	mad	than	this	man.	His	madness	was	such	that
he	proved	to	the	whole	world	that	he	was	somebody	and	if	he	could	not	create,
then	he	could	destroy.
There	 are	 only	 two	 possibilities.	 you	 can	 be	 a	 creator,	 then	 you	 feel	 a	 certain
fulfillment	--
that	comes	to	a	mother	when	she	gives	birth	to	a	child,	that	comes	to	a	poet	when
poetry	 is	 born,	 that	 comes	 to	 a	 sculptor	 when	 he	 has	 created	 something	 a
beautiful	 piece	 in	marble,	 in	 stone,	 in	wood.	Whenever	 you	 create	 something,
you	feel	enhanced;	you	reach	towards	peaks.	you	get	high.
All	 people	 who	 are	 creative	 are	 close	 to	 religion.	 Religion	 is	 the	 greatest
creativity	because	it	is	an	effort	to	give	birth	to	yourself,	to	become	a	father	and
mother	 to	yourself,	 to	be	born	again,	 to	be	 reborn	 through	meditation,	 through
awareness.	Poetry	 is	good,	painting	is	good	--	but	when	you	give	birth	 to	your
own	 consciousness,	 there	 is	 no	 comparison.	 Then	 you	 have	 given	 birth	 to	 the
ultimate	poetry,	the	ultimate	music,	the	ultimate	dance.	This	is	the	dimension	of
creativity.	On	the	rung	of	creativity,	religion	is	the	last.	It	is	the	greatest	art,	the
ultimate	art	--	that's	why	I	call	it	'the	ultimate	alchemy'.
On	the	opposite	end	of	the	ladder	is	destruction.	People	who	cannot	be	creative
become	 destructive	 because	 through	 destruction	 they	 can	 have	 a	 vicarious
feeling	 that	 they	 are	 powerful.	 When	 Hitler	 destroyed	 millions	 of	 people,	 of
course	he	had	 a	very	powerful	 feeling	 that,	 'I	 am	 somebody.	 I	 can	destroy	 the
whole	world.'	He	was	almost	ready	to	destroy	the	whole	world	--	he	had	almost
destroyed	it.
A	politician	is	a	destructive	mind.	He	may	talk	about	the	nation,	the	country;	he
may	 talk	 about	 utopias,	 socialism,	 communism,	 but	 basically	 a	 politician	 is	 a
destructive	mind.
And	a	destructive	mind	cannot	become	enlightened.
First,	 the	 whole	 energy	 should	 move	 towards	 Construction,	 towards	 creation.
Then	only	is	there	the	possibility	that	by	and	by	you	participate	in	the	ultimate
creation	--	 that	 is	nirvana,	 the	ultimate	creation,	 in	which	you	are	born	Divine,
infinite,	unlimited.	Then	you	expand,	you	spread	all	over	existence;	then	you	are
no	longer	a	wave,	you	have	become	the	ocean.
The	politician	can	never	become	enlightened.	I	am	not	saying	that	the	politician
cannot	move	towards	enlightenment	--	he	can.	But	as	he	moves,	he	will	have	to
drop	politics.	A	politician	 is	 also	 a	 human	being,	 but	 he	will	 have	 to	drop	 the
politics,	and	by	the	 time	he	comes	to	meditate	he	will	be	no	more	a	politician.
Remaining	 a	 politician,	 a	 politician	 cannot	 become	 enlightened.	 But	 his
humanity	is	there.	Even	a	Hitler	can	become	a	Buddha	--	some	day.	One	hopes
he	will.	 Some	 day,	 far	 away	 in	 the	 future,	 even	 an	Adolph	Hitler	 is	 going	 to
become	a	Buddha;	that	is	his	potentiality.	But	then,	by	that	time,	he	will	not	be
an	Adolph	Hitler.
Nuclear	war	had	come	and	gone.	Only	one	tiny	monkey	in	one	isolated	part	of
the	 world	 remained	 alive.	 After	 weeks	 of	 wandering	 about,	 he	 finally	 came
across	a	little	female	monkey.	He	threw	his	arms	around	her	in	greeting.
'I	am	starved,'	he	said.	'Have	you	found	anything	to	eat?'
'Well,'	she	said.	'I	found	this	little	old	apple.'
'Oh,	no,	you	don't!'	he	snapped.	'We	are	not	going	to	start	that	all	over	again!'
Even	monkeys	are	worried	about	humanity.	And	I	have	heard	monkeys	talking.
They	 don't	 believe	 in	 Darwin,	 they	 don't	 say	 that	 man	 has-evolved	 out	 of
monkeys,	 they	don't	 think	 that	man	 is	a	developed	 form	--	 they	 think	man	has
fallen	 from	 the	 monkeys.	 Of	 course	 --	 fallen	 from	 the	 trees,	 fallen	 from	 the
height,	fallen	from	the	monkeys.
And	 this	 is	 true	 in	 a	way,	because	man	has	up	 to	now	 remained	political.	The
whole	history	up	to	now	has	been	political;	no	civilization	has	yet	existed	which
has	been	religious	--	not	even	Indian	civilization.	Not	a	single	nation	has	become
like	a	being	which	is	religious	--	only	rare	individuals,	here	and	there,	far	apart.
Somewhere	a	Buddha,	a	 Jesus,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu	 --	 islands.	Otherwise,
ordinarily,	the	main	current	of	humanity	has	remained	political.
Politics	 is	 basically	 ambition.	 Politics	 is	 basically	 wrong	 because	 ambition	 is
wrong.	You	are	not	to	become	somebody,	says	religion,	you	are	already.	You	are
not	to	become	powerful	--	you	are	already.	You	are	extensions	of	God.	You	need
not	be	worried	about	being	powerful	and	being	somebody	on	a	throne;	those	are
all	 stupid	games,	childish,	very	 juvenile,	 immature.	And	you	cannot	 find	more
immature	people	than	politicians.
In	fact,	in	a	better	world,	politicians	will	be	kept	in	madhouses,	and	mad	people
will	 be	 allowed	 to	 move	 into	 the	 world.	 Those	 mad	 people	 have	 not	 done
anything	 wrong.	 They	 may	 be	 a	 little	 off	 the	 track	 but	 they	 have	 not	 been
harmful.	Politicians	are	dangerously	mad	people,	tremendously	dangerous.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 before	 Richard	 Nixon	 renounced	 his	 throne,	 he	 called	 a
meeting	of	his	colleagues	and	he	threatened	that	he	had	the	power	to	go	into	the
other	 room,	 push	 a	 button,	 and	 the	whole	world	 could	 be	 destroyed	 in	 twenty
minutes.
And,	yes,	he	had	that	power.	Millions	of	atom	bombs	are	ready	--	a	button	has
just	 to	be	pushed.	The	power	of	 the	atom	and	H-bombs	already	made	 is	seven
times	more	 than	 is	 needed	 to	 destroy	 this	 earth	 --	 seven	 times	morel	We	have
become	 so	 skilled,	 super-skilled,	 in	 destruction	 that	 seven	 earths	 of	 this	 size
could	be	destroyed.	And	nobody	can	say	--	any	day	any	president	of	America,	or
Soviet	Russia,	or	China,	can	go	mad.
And	politicians	are	almost	mad...any	day,	anybody	can	push	the	button.	It	is	now
only	 a	question	of	pushing	 a	button.	And	everybody	has	mad	moments,	 angry
moments.	The	threat	is	very,	very	real.
Politics	has	been	the	disease	of	humanity,	the	cancer	of	consciousness.
Drop	all	politics	within	you.	And	remember,	when	I	am	talking	about	politicians,
I	don't	mean	particularly	those	people	who	are	in	politics	--	I	mean	all	those	who
are	ambitious.
Wherever	ambition	is,	politics	comes	in;	wherever	you	are	trying	to	get	ahead	of
somebody,	politics	comes	in;	wherever	you	are	trying	to	dominate	somebody	--
maybe	 your	 wife,	 or	 your	 husband	 --	 politics	 comes	 in.	 Politics	 is	 a	 very
common	disease,	like	the	common	cold.
The	last	question:
Question	4
SINCE	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 HERE,	 I	 HAVE	 LOST	 MY	 ABILITY	 TO
CONCENTRATE.	IT
IS	 HARD	 FOR	 ME	 TO	 UTTER	 A	 LOGICAL	 SENTENCE.	 AND	 I	 HAVE
BECOME
VERY	FORGETFUL.	I	FEEL	MYSELF	AS	A	STUPID	CHILD.	IS	THAT	THE
WAY
TO	ME	INTELLIGENCE	YOU	TALK	ABOUT?
The	ability	 to	concentrate	 is	not	something	 to	 feel	blessed	about.	 It	 is	a	 frozen
state	of	mind,	a	very	narrow	state	of	mind.	Useful,	of	course,	useful	--	for	others.
Useful	 in	 scientific	 inquiry,	 useful	 in	 business,	 useful	 in	 the	market,	 useful	 in
politics	 --	 but	 absolutely	 useless	 for	 yourself.	 If	 you	 become	 too	 attuned	with
concentration	you	will	become	very,	very	tense.	Concentration	is	a	tense	state	of
mind;	 you	 will	 never	 be	 relaxed.	 Concentration	 is	 like	 a	 torch,	 focused,	 and
consciousness	is	like	a	lamp,	unfocused.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	teach	you	consciousness,	not	concentration.	And	this
is	the	point	to	be	remembered:	if	you	become	conscious,	any	moment	you	want
to	concentrate	on	a	particular	problem,	you	can.	It	is	not	a	problem.	But	if	you
become	 too	 focused	with	 concentration	 the	 vice	 versa	 is	 not	 true:	 you	 cannot
relax.	A	relaxed	mind	can	always	concentrate.	easily,	there	is	no	trouble	about	it.
But	a	focused	mind	becomes	obsessed.
narrow.	It	is	not	easy	for	it	to	relax	and	leave	the	tension.	It	remains	tense.
If	you	meditate.	first	concentration	will	disappear	and	you	will	be	feeling	a	little
at	a	loss.
But	if	you	go	on,	by	and	by	you	will	attain	to	an	unfocused	state	of	light	--	that's
what	meditation	 is.	Once	meditation	 is	attained.	concentration	 is	child's	play	--
whenever	you	need	 to,	you	can	concentrate.	There	will	be	no	problem	about	 it
and	it	will	be	easy	and	without	any	tension.
Right	now,	you	are	being	used	by	society.	Society	wants	efficient	people.	 It	 is
not	 worried	 about	 your	 soul,	 it	 is	 worried	 about	 your	 productivity.	 I	 am	 not
worried	about	your	productivity:	man	has	already	 too	much,	more	 than	he	can
enjoy	--	 there	 is	no	need	 to	go	on	producing	more.	Now	there	 is	more	need	 to
play	 around	more	 and	 there	 is	 more	 need	 to	 be	 more	 conscious.	 Science	 has
developed	 enough.	 Now,	 whatsoever	 science	 is	 doing	 is	 almost	 futile.	 Now,
going	 to	 the	moon	 is	 simply	 useless.	But	 tremendous	 energy	 is	wasted.	Why?
Because	 scientists	 are	 now	obsessed	 --	 they	 have	 to	 do	 something.	They	 have
learned	 a	 trick	 of	 concentration	 and	 they	 have	 to	 do	 something.	They	 have	 to
produce,	they	have	to	go	on	producing	something	--	they	cannot	relax.	They	will
go	 to	 the	 moon,	 they	 will	 go	 to	 Mars,	 and	 they	 will	 persuade	 people	 that
whatsoever	 they	 are	 doing	 is	 tremendously	 important.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 useless.
But	this	happens.
Once	you	become	trained	in	a	certain	thing,	you	go	on	in	that	line,	blind,	unless
a	 cul	 de	 sac	 comes	 and	 you	 cannot	 go	 on	 anymore.	But	 life	 is	 infinite.	There
comes	no	cul	de	sac.
You	can	go	on	and	on	and	on.
And	now	scientific	activity	has	almost	become	ridiculous.
Religious	activity	is	totally	different.	It	is	not	worried	about	being	more	efficient;
the	whole	point	is	how	to	be	more	joyful,	how	to	be	more	celebrating.	So	if	you
90	with	me,	by	and	by,	concentration	will	relax.	And	in	the	beginning	you	will
feel	 afraid	 because	 you	 will	 see	 your	 skill	 disappearing,	 your	 efficiency
disappearing.	You	will	feel	you	are	losing	something	that	you	have	gained	with
so	much	effort.	In	the	beginning	it	will	happen.	The	ice	is	melting	and	becoming
water.	 The	 ice	 was	 solid,	 something	 concentrated;	 now	 it	 is	 water	 --	 loose,
relaxed,	 flowing	 in	 all	 directions.	But	 anytime	you	 need	 ice,	 the	water	 can	 be
turned	into	ice	again.	There	is	no	problem	--	just	a	little	more	cooling	is	needed.
This	is	my	own	experience.	Whatsoever	I	say,	I	say	from	my	own	experience	--
the	 same	has	 happened	 to	me.	First,	 concentration	disappeared;	 but	 now	 I	 can
concentrate	 on	 anything.	 There	 is	 no	 problem.	 But	 I	 don't	 remain	 in
concentration;	 I	 can	concentrate	 and	 relax	 --	whenever	 the	need	arises.	 Just	 as
whenever	the	need	arises,	you	walk;	you	don't	sit	on	the	chair	and	go	on	moving
your	Legs.	There	are	a	 few	people	who	go	on	moving	because	 they	cannot	 sit
relaxed	--	you	will	call	this	man	restless!
Legs	 in	perfect	order	are	needed	so	 that	whenever	you	need	 to,	you	can	walk,
you	 can	 run.	 But	 when	 there	 Is	 no	 need,	 you	 can	 relax,	 and	 the	 legs	 will	 no
longer	be	functioning.
But	your	concentration	has	become	almost	as	focused	as	if	you	are	continuously
preparing	 for	 an	Olympic!	Runners	 in	 an	Olympic	 cannot	 relax.	They	have	 to
run	a	particular	amount	every	morning	and	evening;	they	are	continuously	on	the
go.	If	they	relax	for	a	few	days	they	will	lose	their	skill.	But	I	call	all	Olympics
political,	ambitious,	foolish.	There	is	no	need.
Competition	is	foolish.	There	is	no	need.	If	you	enjoy	running	--	perfectly	good.
Run.	 and	 enjoy.	 But	 why	 compete?	 What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 competition?
Competition	 brings	 illness,	 unhealthiness;	 competition	 brings	 jealousy,	 and	 a
thousand	and	one	diseases.
Meditation	will	allow	you	to	concentrate	whenever	the	need	arises,	but	if	there	is
no	need	you	will	remain	relaxed,	flowing	in	all	directions	like	water.
IT	IS	HARD	FOR	ME	TO	UTTER	A	LOGICAL	SENTENCE.
Feel	 blissful,	 blessed.	 What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 uttering	 logical	 sentences!	 Utter
nonsense;	 make	 sounds,	 gibberish,	 like	 birds...	 Like	 trees!	 (At	 this	 moment	 a
nearby	tree	decided,	with	the	help	of	a	passing	breeze,	to	illustrate	Osho's	words
by	shaking	its	branches	and	causing	hundreds	of	leaves	to	fall	with	loud	rustling
sounds	 to	 the	 ground.)	 Look!	 This	way!	 Is	 this	 logical?	 The	 tree	 is	 enjoying.
Delighting.	Simply	shedding	away	the	past.
Delight.	Sing.	Utter	 sounds.	Forget	 all	 logic!	And	by	and	by	you	will	 become
more	alive.
Less	logical	of	course	that	is	the	price	one	has	to	pay	--	but	you	become	dead	if
you	become	more	logical	and	you	become	more	alive	if	you	become	less	logical.
Life	 is	 the	 goal,	 not	 logic.	What	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do	 with	 logic?	 If	 you	 are
hungry,	logic	is	not	going	to	feed	you;	if	you	need	love,	logic	is	not	going	to	hug
you;	if	you	are	thirsty,	logic	will	tell	you	that	water	is	H20!	It	is	not	going	to	give
you	water,	real	water.	No.	It	simply	functions	in	formulas,	maxims.
Look	at	life,	and	by	and	by	you	will	understand	that	life	has	its	own	very	logical
logic.	Be	attuned	to	it	and	that	will	become	the	door	for	your	ecstasy,	samadhi,
nirvana.
AND	I	HAVE	BECOME	VERY	FORGETFUL.
Perfectly	 good!	 If	 you	 can	 forget,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 remember	 more.
Forgetfulness	 is	a	great	capacity	--	 it	simply	means	getting	 the	past	dusted	off.
There	 is	no	need	 to	 remember	 everything	 that	happens	because	almost	ninety-
nine	per	cent	of	it	is	trivia.
What	do	you	go	on	remembering?
Just	think...	what	do	you	go	on	remembering?	Write	it	down	and	just	look	at	it.	It
is	trivia.
What	 goes	on	 in	 your	mind?	You	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 show	 it	 to	 your	 intimate
friend	because	he	will	think	you	are	mad.	This	goes	on	in	your	mind?
It	is	good.	Forget.	Forgetfulness	is	a	great	capacity	because	it	will	allow	you	to
remember.	It	is	part	of	remembrance.	The	useless	has	to	be	forgotten	so	that	the
useful	 is	 remembered	 --	 and	 the	 useful	 is	 very,	 very	 small,	 the	 useless	 i5	 too
much.	In	twenty-four	hours,	millions	of	bits	of	information	are	collected	by	the
mind.	If	you	collect	them	and	remember	them	all,	you	will	be	mad.
I	 have	heard	 about	 a	man.	He	was	once	presented	 to	 the	Governor-General	 in
India	 because	 he	 was	 a	 man	 of	 rare	 memory.	 He	 knew	 only	 one	 language,
Rajasthani-Hindi.	He	was	a	poor	man,	uneducated,	but	if	you	told	him	anything
in	any	language,	he	would	never	forget	 it.	But	he	would	repeat	 it	 like	a	parrot,
not	knowing	what	it	meant.
To	the	Governor-General's	palace	he	was	called,	and	the	Governor-General	was
surprised	 to	 hear	 about	 his	 capacity.	 Thirty	 other	 persons	 were	 called,	 and	 in
thirty	 languages	 they	uttered	a	 few	sentences.	 It	was	arranged	 in	 the	 following
manner:	the	man	would	go	to	the	first	person,	and	the	first	person	would	say	the
first	word	of	his	sentence.	Then	he	would	go	to	another	person	and	he	would	say
the	first	word	of	his	sentence,	in	another	language.	Then	he	will	go	to	the	third.
In	this	way	he	would	go	to	thirty	people.	Then	he	would	come	back	to	the	first
who	would	now	say	his	second	word.	This	was	repeated	--
many	 rounds,	 many	 hours	 it	 took.	 And	 then	 he	 repeated	 all	 the	 sentences
separately.
The	Governor-General	was	simply	puzzled.	He	could	not	believe	it.
But	this	man	went	mad.
This	much	memory	is	dangerous.	This	type	of	person	is	almost	always	idiotic.
Too	 much	 memory	 is	 not	 a	 good	 sign;	 it	 simply	 says	 that	 you	 have	 a	 very
mechanical	mind.	It	is	not	a	sign	of	intelligence.	Hence	you	hear	so	many	stories
of	 absent-mindedness	 about	 great	 scientists,	 philosophers.	 They	 are	 people	 of
great	 memory,	 and	 great	 intelligence	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 great	 memory.
Memory	 is	 mechanical,	 intelligence	 is	 non-mechanical	 --	 they	 are	 totally
different.
So	 don't	 be	 worried.	 It	 is	 good.	 The	 memory	 is	 relaxing,	 many	 things	 will
disappear,	 space	will	 be	 created	 in	 you.	And	 in	 that	 space	you	will	 be	 able	 to
become	more	brilliant,	more	intelligent,	more	understanding.	Intelligence	means
understanding;	 memory	 means	 a	 quality,	 a	 mechanical	 quality	 of	 repetition.
Parrots	 have	 good	 memories.	 Don't	 be	 worried	 about	 your	 memory.	 In	 the
beginning	 it	 happens:	 you	 have	 accumulated	 much	 rubbish	 and	 when	 you
meditate	that	rubbish	starts	disappearing,	falling	away.
AND	I	FEEL	MYSELF	A	STUPID	CHILD.
That	is	the	way,	the	way	to	the	kingdom	of	God.	Lao	Tzu	says,	'Be	like	an	idiot
in	 this	world	so	 that	you	can	understand	 the	 illogical	ways	of	Tao.'	 Jesus	says,
'Be	like	a	child	--
because	only	those	who	are	like	children	will	be	able	to	enter	into	the	kingdom
of	God.'
Don't	 be	worried	 about	 those	 things;	 the	 non-essential	 is	 dropping	 away.	 Feel
happy	 and	 grateful.	 Once	 the	 rubbish	 has	 dropped,	 the	 real	 will	 arise;	 non-
essential	 gone,	 the	 essential	 will	 arise.	 This	 is	 the	way	 to	 reach	 to	 one's	 own
source.
But	many	 times	you	will	get	 scared	because	you	are	 losing	your	grip	on	what
you	have	valued	up	till	now.	But	I	can	tell	you	only	one	thing:	I	have	traveled	the
same	 path	 and	 have	 passed	 through	 the	 same	 phases.	 They	 are	 phases	 --	 they
come	 and	 go.	 And	 your	 consciousness	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more	 purified,
virgin	--	pure,	uncorrupted.	That	uncorrupted	consciousness	is	God.
Ancient	Music	in	the	Pines
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	You	Have	My	Marrow
29	February	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7602290
ShortTitle:
ANCIEN09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
87
mins
AFTER	 NINE	 YEARS,	 BODHIDHARMA,	 THE	 FIRST	 ZEN	 PATRIARCH,
WHO
TOOK	ZEN	TO	CHINA	FROM	INDIA	IN	THE	SIXTH	CENTURY,	DECIDED
THAT
HE	 WISHED	 TO	 RETURN	 HOME.	 HE	 GATHERED	 HIS	 DISCIPLES
AROUND	HIM
TO	TEST	THEIR	PERCEPTION.
DOFUKU	SAID:	'IN	MY	OPINION	TRUTH	IS	BEYOND	AFFIRMATION	OR
NEGATION,	 FOR	 THIS	 IS	 THE	 WAY	 IT	 MOVES.'	 BODHIDHARMA
REPLIED:
'YOU	HAVE	MY	SKIN.'
THE	NUN	SOJI	SAID:	'IN	MY	VIEW,	IT	IS	LIKE	ANANDA'S	INSIGHT	OF
THE
BUDDHA-LAND	 --	 SEEN	 ONCE	 AND	 FOREVER.'	 BODHIDHARMA
ANSWERED:
'YOU	HAVE	MY	FLESH.'
DOIKU	SAID:	 'THE	FOUR	ELEMENTS	OF	LIGHT,	AIRINESS,	FLUIDITY,
AND
SOLIDITY,	ARE	EMPTY,	AND	THE	FIVE	SKANDHAS	ARE	NO-THINGS.
IN	MY
OPINION	 NO-THING	 IS	 REALITY.'	 BODHIDHARMA	 COMMENTED:
'YOU	HAVE
MY	BONES.'
FINALLY,	 EKA	 BOWED	 BEFORE	 THE	 MASTER	 AND	 REMAINED
SILENT.
BODHIDHARMA	SAID:	'YOU	HAVE	MY	MARROW.'
I	can	see	clouds	a	thousand	miles	away,	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines.
Of	what	music	 have	 I	 been	 talking	 to	 you?	 The	Hindu	mystics	 have	 called	 it
AUMKAR,	 the	 ultimate	 sound	 or,	 even	 better,	 they	 have	 called	 it	 the
ANAHATA,	 the	soundless	 sound	 --	 the	sound	 that	 is	uncreated,	 the	 sound	 that
has	always	been	there,	the	sound	of	existence	itself.	It	 is	surrounding	you;	it	 is
within	you,	without	you;	you	are	made	of	it.
Just	 as	modern	 physics	 says	 that	 everything	 is	made	 of	 electricity,	 so	 Eastern
mystics	 have	 said	 that	 everything	 is	 made	 of	 sound.	 On	 one	 thing	 modern
physics	 and	 ancient	mystics	 agree.	Modern	 physics	 says	 sound	 is	 nothing	 but
electricity,	and	ancient	mystics	say	electricity	is	nothing	but	sound.
It	 seems	 that	 if	 you	 observe	 the	 eternal	music	 from	 the	 outside,	 as	 if	 it	 is	 an
object,	then	it	appears	like	electric	energy.	If	you	feel	it,	introspectively,	not	as	an
object	but	as	your	very	being,	as	your	subjectivity.	 then	 it	 is	heard	as	sound	--
ANAHATA;	then	it	is	heard	as	music.	This	music	is	constantly	there,	you	need
not	do	anything	else	except	listen	to	it.
Listening	is	all	that	meditation	is	about	--	how	to	listen	to	that	which	is	already
there.
In	a	small	school	it	happened	that	a	small	boy	sitting	in	the	rear	of	the	classroom
appeared	to	be	daydreaming.
'Johnny,'	asked	the	teacher,	'do	you	have	trouble	hearing?'
'No	ma'am,'	he	replied,	'I	have	trouble	listening.'
I	 know	 you	 can	 hear,	 there	 is	 no	 trouble	 about	 it	 --	 but	 you	 cannot	 listen.
Listening	 is	 totally	 different	 from	 hearing.	 Listening	 means	 hearing	 without
mind;	 listening	 means	 hearing	 without	 any	 interference	 of	 your	 thoughts;
listening	means	 hearing	 as	 if	 you	 are	 totally	 empty.	 If	 you	 have	 even	 a	 small
trembling	of	thinking	inside,	waves	of	subtle	thoughts	surrounding	you,	you	will
not	be	able	to	listen,	although	you	will	be	able	to	hear.	And	to	listen	to	the	music,
the	ancient	music,	the	eternal	music,	one	needs	to	be	totally	quiet	--	as	if	one	is
not.	When	you	are,	you	can	hear;	when	you	are	not,	you	can	listen.
How	not	to	be	is	the	whole	problem	of	religion:	how	to	be	in	such	a	deep	silence
that	 being	 becomes	 almost	 equivalent	 to	 non-being,	 that	 there	 remains	 no
difference	between	being	and	non-being,	that	the	boundaries	between	being	and
non-being	disappear.	You	are,	and	yet	in	a	certain	sense	you	are	not;	you	are	not
and	yet	in	a	certain	sense,	for	the	first	time,	you	are.
When	 thought	 is	 not	 disturbing	 you....	 Thoughts	 are	 like	 ripples	 on	 the	 lake,
silence	is	like	no	ripples	on	the	lake.	Just	being.	Suddenly	you	become	aware	of
a	music	 that	 has	 always	 surrounded	 you.	 Suddenly	 it	 enters	 from	 everywhere.
You	are	overwhelmed.	You	are	possessed.
This	 is	 the	 first	 thing	 to	understand.	You	will	not	be	able	 to	know-truth	unless
you	have	become	capable	of	 listening	to	 the	ancient	music	of	AUMKAR.	This
music	is	the	very	heartbeat	of	existence;	this	music	is	the	very	door	of	existence.
You	will	not	be	able	to	enter	the	temple	of	God	--	but	this	music	is	the	bridge.
Only	on	 this	music,	 riding	on	 this	music,	will	 you	enter	him.	The	kingdom	of
God	 is	 available	 only	 to	 those	 who	 have	 become	 capable	 of	 listening	 to	 the
eternal	music.
It	 has	 been	 heard;	 I	 have	 heard	 it,	 you	 can	 hear	 it.	Nobody	 except	 yourself	 is
barring	the	path;	nobody	is	hindering,	If	you	are	missing,	you	are	missing	only
on	your	own	account.
There	is	not	a	wall	between	you	and	the	music;	even	if	there	is	felt	to	be	a	wall	it
is	only	of	your	own	thoughts.	And	even	then	the	music	goes	on	penetrating	you.
You	may	not	listen	to	it	but	it	goes	on	massaging	your	whole	being,	it	goes	on
nourishing	 you,	 it	 goes	 on	 giving	 you	 life,	 it	 goes	 on	 rejuvenating	 you.	 Your
heart	throbs	in	the	same	rhythm	as	the	heart	of	the	whole.
Whenever	your	heart	falls	out	of	line	with	the	whole	you	are	in	trouble,	you	are
ill;	whenever	the	heart	is	in	rhythm	with	the	whole	you	are	healthy.	Let	this	be
the	 definition	 of	 health.	 Whenever	 there	 is	 no	 conflict	 between	 you	 and	 the
whole,	 not	 even	 a	 rumor	 of	 conflict,	 you	 are	 healthy.	 To	 be	 whole	 is	 to	 be
healthy.	 To	 be	whole	 is	 to	 be	 holy.	 And	what	 is	 the	 way	 to	 be	 holy,	 healthy,
whole?	Your	heart	should	beat	in	the	same	rhythm	as	the	heart	of	the	whole.	You
should	not	 fall	out	of	 line,	out	of	 step.	 It	 is	 a	great	cosmic	dance.	 It	 is	 a	great
harmony.	When	 you	 sit	 still,	 silent,	 not	 doing	 anything,	meditative,	 prayerful,
suddenly	 you	 start	 merging	 into	 the	 whole.	 You	 come	 closer	 and	 closer	 and
closer	 and	 your	 steps	 are	 no	 longer	 heard	 as	 separate	 from	 the	 whole.	 You
become	part	of	this	great	symphony.	Suddenly	you	are	healthy,	holy,	whole.
How	to	come	to	this	tuning	with	the	whole?	Why	are	you	missing	it?
You	are	constantly	in	discord,	you	have	many	contradictions	within	you.	Those
contradictions	go	on	like	a	tug	of	war	within	continuously,	day	and	night,	awake
and	asleep.	You	are	constantly	pulled	into	opposite	directions.	This	tense	state	of
affairs	does	not	allow	you	to	listen.
Even	when	you	are	in	love	you	go	on	fighting.	Even	in	love,	you	don't	fall	into
step	with	the	whole.	Even	lovers	go	on	fighting	with	each	other;	otherwise	love
can	become	a	door	to	the	ancient	music.	Hence	Jesus	says	that	God	is	Love.	If
you	 love	 somebody	 at	 least	 drop	 all	 conflict	with	 him,	 or	with	 her,	with	 your
child,	with	your	wife,	with	your	brother,	 friend,	with	your	Master	 --	drop!	But
even	there	conflict	continues;	a	subtle	way	of	fight	continues.	Because	you	are
constantly	 in	 conflict	 within	 yourself,	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 going	 to	 be	 an
extension	 of	 the	 same	 conflict,	 a	 reflection	 of	 the	 same	 disharmony.	 This	 is
making	you	incapable	of	listening.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
In	 Eastern	 Europe,	 half	 a	 century	 ago,	when	marriages	were	 still	 arranged	 by
marriage-brokers,	 young	 Samuel	 had	 been	 introduced	 to	 the	 young	woman	 of
whom	the	marriage-broker	had	sung	a	gorgeous	hymn	of	praise.
After	a	short	interview,	Samuel	motioned	the	marriage-broker	into	a	corner	and
said	to	him,	in	a	furious	whisper,	'What	is	this	woman	you	have	brought	me?	She
is	ugly.	She	has	a	cast	in	one	eye.	She's	unintelligent	and	she	has	bad	breath.'
The	marriage-broker	said,	'But	why	are	you	whispering?	She's	deaf	also.'
God	is	whispering.	God	is	a	whisper.	And	you	are	deaf	and	God	cannot	shout.
He	 is	 incapable	 of	 it	 because	 he	 cannot	 be	 aggressive,	 because	 he	 cannot
interfere,	 because	 he	 cannot	 trespass,	 because	 he	 respects	 your	 freedom.	 He
whispers	 and	 you	 are	 deaf.	 The	 whole	 of	 existence	 is	 a	 whisper	 --	 it	 is	 very
subtle.	Unless	you	are	tuned,	unless	you	have	become	capable	of	listening	to	the
whisper,	you	will	not	be	able	 to	understand	--	you	will	not	be	able	 to	hear	 the
music.
And	you	have	become	very	gross.	You	cannot	even	hear	if	God	starts	shouting.
Jesus	told	his	disciples,	'Go	to	the	house-tops	and	shout	from	there.	Tell	people
what	has	happened	to	you.'	He	had	to	tell	his	disciples	to	shout	because	people
are	 deaf;	 A	 great	 sensitivity	 is	 needed.	 To	 be	 religious	 is	 to	 be	 tremendously
sensitive...	and	now	comes	the	irony:	religions	have	made	you,	on	the	contrary,
more	 insensitive.	 They	 have	made	 you	 almost	 gross	 by	 their	 constant	 talk	 of
conflict,	 struggle,	 fight,	 ascetic	 methods;	 they	 have	 made	 religion	 a	 battle-
ground	 also.	 Jainas	 call	 their	Teerthankara,	Mahavir.	Mahavir	means	 the	 great
warrior.	As	if	there	is	a	constant	war	with	truth,	as	if	truth	has	to	be	conquered....
No,	truth	is	not	to	be	conquered;	you	are	to	be	conquered	by	truth.	Truth...	just	to
think	in	terms	of	conquering	it	is	absurd.	You	have	to	surrender	to	it.	If	you	fight
with	your	methods,	yogas,	 techniques,	you	will	 become	more	and	more	gross.
You	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 feel	 subtle,	 delicate	 experiences	 that	 are	 constantly
happening	all	around	you.
Have	you	watched?	If	you	are	a	musician,	your	ears	become	very,	very	sensitive.
If	 you	 are	 a	 painter,	 your	 eyes	 become	 tremendously	 sensitive.	 Then	 you	 see
colors	others	have	never	seen.	Then	green	is	not	just	green:	there	are	a	thousand
and	one	shades	of	green.
Then	each	leaf	of	a	tree	is	different	--	has	a	different	shade	of	green,	is	unique,	is
individual.	 If	 you	 are	 a	 poet,	 then	 each	word	 has	 its	 own	 romance;	 then	 each
word	has	 its	own	subtle	music,	a	poetry	around	 it.	There	are	poetic	words	and
there	 are	 non-poetic	 words.	 If	 you	 are	 a	 poet	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 seeing
poetry	everywhere	--	wherever	you	look,	you	look	with	the	eyes	of	a	poet.	You
see	something	else	which	cannot	be	seen	except	by	you.	Whatsoever	you	do,	you
become	more	sensitive	about	it.
Religion	needs	total	sensitivity	of	all	the	senses:	of	the	eyes,	of	the	nose,	of	the
ears,	 of	 the	 taste,	 of	 the	 touch,	 because	 religion	 is	 not	 a	 part	 of	 life,	 it	 is	 the
whole.	You	 can	 have	 a	musical	 ear	 and	 you	may	 not	 have	 eyes	 at	 all.	 In	 fact
blind	people	have	better	musical	ears	because	their	whole	energy	starts	moving
through	the	ears.	Their	ears	become	very,	very	sensitive	because	the	eyes	are	not
there,	and	through	eyes	moves	eighty	per	cent	of	your	energy.	Eyes	closed,	the
energy	moves	 through	 the	ears.	Blind	people	become	very,	very	musical.	They
start	listening	to	subtle	sounds	of	which	you	have	never	been	aware.
A	blind	person	starts	recognizing	people	by	the	sound	of	their	footsteps.
I	 used	 to	 go	 to	 a	 blind	 man.	 Whenever	 I	 would	 enter	 his	 room	 he	 would
immediately	 recognize	 me.	 So	 I	 asked	 him,	 'How	 do	 you	 do	 it?'	 He	 said,
'Because	of	your	footsteps.
Your	footsteps	are	different	from	anybody	else's.
Each	 thing	 is	 different	 --	 just	 as	 your	 thumb	 impressions	 are	 different	 from
anybody	else's	in	the	world,	past,	present,	or	future,	in	exactly	the	same	way	the
sound	of	your	footsteps	is	different,	unique.	Nobody	has	walked	that	way	before,
and	nobody	is	going	to	walk	that	way	again.	But	we	cannot	recognize	people	by
their	foot-sounds	--	impossible.
The	ear	can	be	very,	very	sensitive	--	 then	you	become	a	musician.	If	 the	eyes
are	very	sensitive,	you	become	an	artist,	a	painter,	a	sculptor.	But	religion	is	your
total	being.	You	become	sensitive	in	all	the	ways	possible.	All	the	doors	of	your
house	have	to	be	opened	so	the	sun	can	come	in	and	the	sunshine	can	come	in;
so	 the	 fresh	breeze	can	come	 in	 and	keep	you	constantly	 alive	 and	young	and
pure	and	vital.	Be	sensitive	if	you	want	to	be	religious.
What	I	am	saying	is	almost	the	opposite	to	what	you	have	been	trained	to	look
for.	 If	you	go	 to	your	 religious	people,	 the	so-called	saints,	you	will	 find	 them
almost	dull.	They	are	not	 sensitive;	 in	 fact,	 they	are	afraid	of	 sensitivity.	They
have	been	trying	to	eat	food	without	tasting	it:	they	call	it	ASSWAB.	They	have
made	 it	 a	 great	method.	Mahatma	Gandhi	 used	 to	 teach	his	 disciples:	 'Eat	 but
without	 tasting.'	 Now	 if	 you	 do	 that,	 by	 and	 by	 you	 will	 lose	 the	 delicate
sensitivity	of	your	tongue.	Then	you	will	not	be	able	to	taste	God.	If	you	cannot
taste	food,	how	can	you	taste	God?	God	is	food	also	and	in	food,	God	is	hidden.
The	Upanishads	say:	ANNAM	BRAHM	--	Food	IS	Brahma.	Now	if	you	cannot
taste	food	--	you	can	dull	your	tongue,	your	tongue	can	become	almost	dead,	you
can	 simply	 go	 on	 stuffing	 yourself	 without	 tasting	 --	 then	 you	 are	 losing	 one
dimension	 of	 reaching	 to	God.	Then	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 understand	when
Jesus	says,	'I	am	your	food,	eat	me.'	Impossible	to	think	of	it	--	you	will	eat	Jesus
also	without	tasting	him.
Islam	 became	 afraid	 of	 music	 because	 music	 has	 tremendous	 power	 over
humanity	and	 it	 is	good	 that	 it	has.	Wherever	 religion	 sees	 that	 something	has
tremendous	power	over	humanity,	 religion	becomes	competitive,	 jealous.	Food
has	tremendous	power	over	humanity.	There	are	many	people	who	live	to	eat	--
who	don't	eat	to	live.	Religion	became	afraid.	Their	God	became	jealous	of	food.
A	competition	arose.	They	said	kill	this	sensitivity	of	taste,	otherwise	people	will
choose	food	rather	than	choosing	God.
Music	has	 tremendous	power.	 It	 can	possess.	 It	 can	 almost	make	you	ecstatic.
alcoholic.
Islam	became	afraid.	Music	was	debarred.	Music	was	 thought	 to	be	 irreligious
because	 the	 ecstasy	 should	 come	 from	God	 not	 from	music	 --	 as	 if	 the	music
comes	from	somewhere	else.
It	 happened	 in	 an	 Emperor's	 court	 that	 a	 musician	 came.	 He	 was	 a	 very	 rare
genius,	and	he	said,	 'I	will	play	on	my	veena,	on	my	instrument,	only	with	one
condition:	that	nobody	should	move	his	head	while	I	am	playing.	Nobody	should
move	his	body.	People	should	become	like	stone	statues.'
The	 Emperor	 whom	 he	 told	 that	 this	 condition	 had	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 was	 a
madman.	He	said,	'Don't	you	be	worried.	If	somebody	moves	his	head,	his	head
will	be	cut	off	immediately.'
The	whole	 town	was	made	 alert	 --	 that	 if	 they	 came	 to	 listen	 to	 the	musician,
know	well	 that	 it	was	risky.	Come	prepared,	don't	move,	particularly	 the	head.
Thousands	 of	 people	 wanted	 to	 come.	 They	 had	 long	 cherished	 the	 idea	 of
hearing	 this	musician,	and	now	he	had	come	with	such	a	dangerous	condition,
almost	absurd.	Who	has	ever	heard	of	any	musician	asking	for	such	a	condition
to	 be	 fulfilled?	 In	 fact,	musicians	 become	happy	when	 people	 sway,	 and	 their
heads	move	and	their	body	energy	starts	a	subtle	dance.
They	 feel	 happy	 because	 their	 music	 is	 possessing	 people,	 their	 music	 is
effective	people	are	moved.
Emotion	is	a	movement;	hence	the	word	'emotion'.	It	comes	from	motion.
When	 people	 are	 moved,	 thrilled,	 stirred,	 a	 musician	 feels	 happy,	 rewarded,
appreciated.
So	what	type	of	man	was	this?	Only	a	very	few	people	came.	Only	people	who
were	madly	in	love	with	music,	who	said,	 'Okay,	at	 the	most	we	can	be	killed,
but	this	man	has	to	be	heard.'	Just	a	very	few	people	came.
The	King	had	made	arrangements:	soldiers	were	standing	all	around	with	naked
swords.
Then	the	musician	started	playing	on	his	veena.	For	half	an	hour	nobody	moved.
People	were	like	yogis	--	sitting	like	stone	Buddhas,	unmoving,	as	if	dead.	Then
suddenly	 the	 people	 were	 possessed.	 As	 the	 musician	 entered	 deeper.	 deeper,
deeper.	a	few	heads	started	moving	and	swaying.	Then	a	few	more.
When	 the	 musician	 finished	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night,	 many	 persons	 were
caught.	They	were	 to	be	beheaded.	but	 the	musician	said,	 'No.	No	need	 to	kill
them.	In	fact	these	are	the	only	people	who	have	the	capacity	to	listen.	Don't	kill
them.	The	others	who	have	remained	like	statues	have	to	be	thrown	out.	Now	I
will	sing	only	for	these	people.	These	are	the	real	listeners.'
The	King	said,	'I	don't	understand.'
The	musician	said,	 'It	 is	simple.	 If	you	cannot	be	possessed	so	much	that	even
life	becomes	irrelevant,	you	are	not	possessed.	If	you	cannot	risk	life,	then	music
is	secondary	and	life	is	primary.'
A	 moment	 comes	 when	 you	 can	 risk	 life;	 then	 music	 becomes	 primary,	 then
music	 becomes	 ultimate.	 Then	 you	 hear	 the	 ancient	music	 in	 the	 pines	 --	 not
before	it.
But	 religions	have	killed	your	 sensitivities.	 Islam	killed	 the	ear;	Hinduism	and
Jainism.
they	have	been	killing	the	taste.	And	all	the	religions	have	been	against	the	eyes.
There	 are	 stories	 of	 saints	 who	 plucked	 out	 their	 eyes	 because	 they	 became
afraid	Eyes	can	lead	them	into	desire,	into	passion.
In	India	a	story	is	told	about	Surdas.	He	was	moving	from	a	town	when	he	saw	a
beautiful	woman.	He	 became	 possessed.	 Then	 he	 felt	 guilty	 so	 he	went	 home
and	plucked	his	eyes	out.
But	eyes	are	not	the	culprit.	In	fact,	to	see	a	beautiful	woman	--	nothing	is	wrong
in	it.	If	you	really	see	a	beautiful	woman,	and	you	have	really	sensitive	eyes,	you
will	 see	a	glimpse	of	God	 there	 --	because	all	beauty	 is	his.	All	 forms	are	his.
Surdas	 goes	 on	 singing	 about	 the	 beauty	 of	Krishna	but	 if	Krishna's	 beauty	 is
God's,	what	 about	 that	woman	whose	 beauty	 attracted	 him?	By	whom	 did	 he
become	hypnotized?	God	is	hypnotic.	Plucking	out	your	eyes	is	a	crime	against
God.
If	Surdas	ever	did	it,	then	he	is	no	longer	a	saint	to	me.	He	may	be	a	great	poet
but	 not	 a	 saint.	 But	 I	 have	 been	 moving	 deeply	 into	 his	 poetry	 and	 I	 feel
somehow	the	story	seems	to	be	fabricated.	It	must	be	a	creation	of	the	priests,	of
the	 so-called	 religious,	 the	 mediocre,	 the	 stupid,	 who	 don't	 understand	 life.
Otherwise,	every	sensitivity	leads	to	him,	all	roads	go	to	him	--	where	else	can
they	go?	If	the	problem	arises,	it	is	not	of	the	eyes...
the	 problem	 is	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 enough	 eyes.	 Then	 a	 woman	 looks	 like	 a
woman.	You	don't	have	enough	eyes.
If	it	happens	to	you,	my	suggestion	is,	clean	your	eyes;	become	more	sensitive;
train	 your	 eyes;	 let	 your	 eyes	 be	 more	 and	 more	 pure,	 unclouded	 --	 and	 the
woman	will	 start	 transforming	 into	divineness,	 and	 the	man	will	 become	God,
and	the	trees	will	disappear	and	they	will	be	green	flames	of	the	Divinity,	and	the
rivers	will	disappear	and	they	will	be	nothing	but	constant	flow	of	his	energy.
All	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 against	 your	 senses.	 I'm	 not	 against,	 because	 my
understanding	 is:	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 against,	 you	 are	 against	 God,	 because
every	door	opens	towards	him	and	every	path	leads	to	him.	Enhance	your	senses.
Become	more	alive	in	your	senses.	Let	your	sensitivity	be	total	and	from	every
dimension	you	will	have	his	glimpses.
Because	 of	 these	 wrong	 and	 foolish	 teachings	 you	 are	 constantly	 in	 conflict
within	yourself.	Because	of	 these	foolish	teachings	you	love	a	woman	and	you
also	feel	guilty	because	you	love	her,	because	somehow	it	looks	like	a	sin.	You
love	a	woman	and	you	hate	her	 also.	because	 she	 is	 the	 cause	of	your	 sin.	Of
course	you	will	take	revenge.	How	can	you	forgive	the	woman	who	has	drawn
you	into	the	mud	--	as	the	religious	people	say?	How	can	you	forgive	her?
Listen	 to	 your	 saints.	 Nobody	 seems	 to	 have	 forgiven	 the	woman.	 Even	 after
they	have	become	great	saints	they	go	on	taking	revenge.	Still	somewhere	deep
in	the	unconscious	the	woman	is	lingering.	They	are	still	afraid.	Then	there	is	a
constant	fight,	a	quarrel.
even	in	love.	So	what	to	say	of	other	things?
Love	 is	 closest	 to	God	because	 in	 love	you	 tall	 in	 tune	with	 another	being;	 in
love	 you	 are	 no	 more	 a	 solitary	 instrument.	 A	 small	 symphony	 is	 created
between	 two	persons.	Then	 the	 children	 are	 born	 and	 the	 symphony	has	more
members.	It	is	becoming	an	orchestra:	children,	family,	friends.	You	are	no	more
alone;	you	have	become	part	of	something	bigger	than	you.	And	this	has	to	go
on	 growing	 so	 that	 one	 day	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 your	 family.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	when	 Jesus	 says,	 'God,	my	 father.'	His	 actual	word	 is	not	 'father',	 his
actual	 word	 is	 ABBA	 --	 closer.	 'Father'	 also	 looks	 a	 little	 clinical,	 smells	 of
institutionalization.	ABBA,	BAPU	--	they	are	so	close,	so	intimate.	A	bridge	has
happened,	God	is	not	a	faraway	thing.	'God	is	ABBA	and	I	am	his	son.	I	am	his
continuity.	 If	 he	 is	my	past,	 I	 am	his	 future.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	 a	 son	 the
same	river	flows.
A	moment	 comes.	 if	 you	go	on	growing	 in	your	 sensitivity,	when	your	 family
grows	and	the	whole	existence	becomes	your	home.	Right	now,	even	your	home
is	not	your	home;	even	in	your	home,	you	are	not	at	home.
I	have	heard	of	an	anecdote.
In	some	of	the	more	remote	sections	of	Tennessee	there	are	still	a	few	counties
without	 any	 telephone.	The	Tennessee	State	Forest	Service	 recently	 installed	a
telephone	in	one	of	these	counties	and	linesmen	tried	to	get	a	native	to	converse
with	his	wife,	then	in	a	small	town	some	thirty	miles	distant.
After	much	persuasion,	Uncle	Joe	put	the	receiver	to	his	ear.	Just	at	that	moment,
there	was	a	terrific	thunderclap	and	the	old	man	was	knocked	to	his	knees.
As	he	climbed	to	his	feet,	he	turned	and	said,	'That's	her	all	right.	That	sure	is	my
old	woman.'
Even	 in	 your	 home	 you	 are	 not	 at	 home.	 The	 very	 word	 'wife'	 creates	 some
uneasiness	 in	you;	 the	very	word	 'husband'	 creates	 some	uneasiness	 in	you.	 In
Urdu,	the	word	for	husband	is	KASAM	--	it	also	means	the	enemy.	The	original
root	from	where	it	comes	is	Arabic.	In	Arabic,	KASAM	means	the	enemy,	and	in
Urdu,	 it	means	 the	husband.	Both	are	 true;	both	are	 the	meanings	of	 the	 same
word.
Even	people	we	love,	we	don't	love	enough.	In	our	love	also,	hatred	goes	on	and
on	and	continues.	We	are	never	one,	we	are	never	a	unity;	we	are	a	divided	self,
divided	 against	 ourselves.	 This	 dividedness	 creates	 confusion,	 conflict,	 noise,
and	because	of	this	noise	it	is	difficult	to	listen	to	the	eternal	music.
If	 you	 go	 on	 continuously	 listening	 to	 this	 noise	 within	 you,	 by	 and	 by	 you
completely	forget	that	something	else	also	exists	by	the	side,	by	the	corner.	This
inner	noise	becomes	your	whole	 life.	The	whole	day	you	are	 listening	 to	your
inner	 noise	 --	 a	 feverish	 state.	 In	 the	 night	 also	 you	 are	 listening	 to	 the	 same
noise.
Of	 course,	 this	 noise	 goes	 on	 creating	 layers	 upon	 layers	 around	 you.	 You
become	 almost	 insulated;	 you	 become	 like	 a	 capsule,	 closed	 from	 every	 side.
You	don't	live	in	my	world,	you	don't	live	in	your	wife's	world,	you	didn't	live	in
your	child's	world	--	you	live	in	your	own	world,	in	a	capsule.	Your	child	lives	in
his	world;	your	wife	lives	in	her	world.
In	the	world	there	are	as	many	worlds	as	there	are	persons.	Everybody	is	closed,
into	himself,	and	goes	on	projecting	things	out	of	these	noises,	goes	on	hearing
things	which	have	not	been	uttered,	goes	on	seeing	 things	which	are	not	 there,
and	goes	on	believing	that	whatsoever	he	is	seeing	is	true.	Whatsoever	you	have
seen	up	to	now	is	not	true,	it	cannot	be;	because	your	eyes	are	not	functioning	as
pure	 receptivities,	 they	 are	 functioning	 more	 as	 protectors.	 You	 go	 on	 seeing
things	 that	 you	 want	 to	 see;	 you	 go	 on	 believing	 in	 things	 that	 you	 want	 to
believe.	Humanity	lives	in	a	sort	of	neurosis.
I	 have	heard	 that	 once	 a	man	asked	 a	psychiatrist,	 'In	 simple,	 everyday	 terms,
without	any	of	that	scientific	jargon,	what	is	the	difference	between	a	psychotic
and	a	neurotic?'
'Well,'	said	the	psychiatrist,	after	thinking	a	moment.	'you	could	put	it	this	way.	A
psychotic	 thinks	 two	 plus	 two	 equals	 five.	 The	 neurotic	 knows	 perfectly	well
that	two	plus	two	equals	four,	but	it	worries	the	hell	out	of	him.'
There	are	two	types	of	people	in	the	world:	the	psychotic	and	the	neurotic.	The
psychotic	has	arrived,	he	has	got	the	conclusions.	He	is	the	dogmatic	person.	He
says,	'Only	MY
religion	 is	 the	 true	 religion.'	 He	 says,	 'Only	 MY	 God	 is	 the	 true	 God.'	 He's
absolutely	 certain.	 He	 is	 very	 dangerous.	 His	 certainty	 is	 not	 because	 of	 his
experience,	 his	 certainty	 is	 because	 deep	 down	 he	 is	 very	much	 uncertain,	 in
deep	conflict,	 turmoil.	How	to	avoid	it?	He	clings	 to	a	conclusion.	He	will	not
listen	 to	 anything	 going	 against	 his	 ideology.	 He	 may	 be	 a	 communist,	 or	 a
Catholic,	or	a	Hindu,	or	a	Jaina	--	it	makes	no	difference.	The	psychotic	person
has	already	arrived,	he	has	conclusions.	He's	no	longer	growing,	he's	no	longer
learning,	he's	no	longer	listening	--	he	lives	out	of	his	conclusions.	He	of	course
misses	life,	because	life	is	a	process,	there	is	no	conclusion	to	it.	Life	is	always
in	 the	middle,	 there	 is	no	beginning	and	no	end	to	 it.	And	life	 is	 tremendously
vast.	All	dogmas	can	have	a	certain	truth	about	them	but	no-dogma	is	the	truth.
Cannot	be.	Life	is	so	big	that	no	dogma	can	comprehend	it	in	its	totality.
So	 a	 really	 intelligent	 person	 is	 hesitant.	 He's	 never	 dogmatic.	 He's	 ready	 to
learn,	ready	to	listen.
So	many	people	come	here.	Whenever	I	see	somebody	who,	while	 listening	 to
me,	is	trying	to	compare	notes	with	his	conclusions,	I	know	he's	in	deep	trouble.
And	I	can	see	from	your	faces	whether	you	are	comparing	notes	or	listening	to
me.	Sometimes	you	nod	your	head;	you	say,	'Right,	you	are	perfectly	right,	this
is	also	my	principle.'	You	agree	with	me,	not	because	you	are	listening	to	me	--
in	fact	you	are	happy	because	you	feel	I	am	agreeing	with	you.	Sometimes	your
head	says,	 'No.'	You	may	not	even	be	aware	of	what	you	are	doing.	 It	may	be
just	unconscious.	But	the	gesture	is	bringing	something	from	your	unconscious.
You	 say,	 'No,	 I	 cannot	 agree	 with	 this.	 This	 is	 against	 my	 conclusion.	 This
doesn't	fit	with	me.'	Then	you	are	not	listening.	You	are	psychotic.	You	may	not
be	 in	much	 trouble	 and	 you	may	 not	 need	 a	 psychiatrist	 yet,	 but	 that	 doesn't
matter	 much	 --	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 degrees.	 Any	 day	 you	 can	 be	 in	 a
psychiatric	hospital.	You	are	getting	ready	for	it	--	preparing.
And	then	there	is	the	neurotic	person.	He's	continuously	in	conflict	--	even	small
things	he	cannot	decide.	The	psychotic	has	decided	even	ultimate	things	and	the
neurotic	cannot	decide	even	small	things.	What	dress	to	wear	today?	Have	you
watched	women	 standing	 there	before	 their	 cupboards	 so	puzzled?	They	bring
one	sari	and	put	it	back	--	and	they	bring	--	and	put	back....	What	dress	to	wear
today?	To	help	you	out	of	such	neurosis,	I	give	you	one	color	--	orange.	Free.	No
need	to	worry.	No	alternatives	left.
Both	are	in	trouble:	the	one	who	has	decided	for	ultimate	things,	he	has	stopped
learning;	and	the	one	who	cannot	decide	for	trivia,	he	cannot	learn,	because	he	is
in	such	a	hell,	such	a	confusion.
In	my	village,	just	in	front	of	my	house,	lives	a	goldsmith.	He	is	the	--	sort	of	the
person	you	will	call	neurotic.	He	will	lock	his	door,	he	will	go	a	few	steps,	and
then	come	back	again	and	shake	the	lock	just	to	see	whether	he	has	locked	it	or
not.
It	has	become	a	joke	in	the	whole	town.	He	may	be	in	the	market	and	somebody
will	say,
'Have	you	locked	your	door,	or	not?'
Now	it	is	impossible.	He	will	stop	whatsoever	he	is	doing,	he	will	say,	 'Wait,	I
will	be	coming,'	and	he	will	run	back.
One	day	he	was	taking	his	bath	in	the	river	and	somebody	said	something	about
the	door.
He	jumped	out	and	naked	he	ran	towards	his	home.
I	 have	 watched	 him.	 He	 will	 come	 back	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.	 It	 has
become	 almost	 impossible	 for	 him	 to	 do	 anything	 else.	 The	 lock....	 Just	 think
about	his	misery.
Ordinarily,	 you	 are	 both.	 these	 are	 extreme	 cases.	Ordinarily	 you	 are	 both.	 In
certain	ways	you	are	psychotic:	you	have	decided	the	ultimate,	that	Jesus	is	the
only	Son	of	God,	 the	only	begotten	Son	 --	 this	 is	 psychosis.	Then	what	 about
Buddha	and	what	about	Lao	Tzu	and	what	about	Zarathustra?	In	certain	matters
you	have	decided	and	in	certain	matters	you	are	completely	in	confusion.	A	part
of	your	being	is	neurotic	and	a	part	of	your	being	is	psychotic.	And	because	of
this	madness	you	cannot	hear	the	ancient	music	which	is	always	there.
Meditation	is	 to	get	out	of	your	psychosis	and	to	get	out	of	your	neurosis;	 it	 is
simply	to	slip	out	of	them.	So	you	don't	have	any	ultimate	conclusion	with	you
on	 one	 hand;	 and	 on	 another	 hand	 you	 are	 not	 worried	 about	 trivia.	 You	 are
simply	 silent.	 You	 are	 simply	 being	 yourself,	 with	 no	 decision,	 with	 no
conclusion,	with	no	center,	and	not	worried	about	small	things.	If	you	can	be	in	a
state	 where	 no	 thought	 interferes	 with	 your	 being,	 no	 thought	 passes	 by,
suddenly	you	are	overwhelmed.
Now	this	beautiful	anecdote	 --	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	 in	 the	history	of	Zen.
And,	of	course,	it	belongs	to	the	first	Zen	patriarch,	Bodhidharma.	Bodhidharma
is	the	genius	of	the	absurd.	Nobody	has	ever	surpassed	him.
When	he	reached	China,	the	Emperor	came	to	receive	him.	Rumors	had	arrived
that	a	great	man	was	coming	--	and	he	was	a	great	man,	one	of	the	greatest.	The
Emperor	came,	but	when	he	saw	Bodhidharma,	he	repented.	He	started	thinking,
'It	would	have	been	better	if	I	had	not	come.	This	man	seems	to	be	almost	mad!'
Bodhidharma	was	coming	with	one	shoe	on	his	foot	and	one	shoe	on	his	head.
Even	the	Emperor	started	feeling	embarrassed	to	receive	such	a	man,	and	when
they	were	alone	he	asked,	very	politely,	why	he	did	this.
Bodhidharma	said,	'This	is	just	the	beginning.	I	have	to	prepare	my	disciples.	If
you	 cannot	 accept	 this	 much	 contradiction,	 you	 will	 be	 incapable	 of
understanding	me,	because	I	am	all	contradictions.	The	shoe	is	just	symbolic.	In
fact	I	wanted	to	put	my	feet	on	my	head.'
Bodhidharma	 took	 Zen	 from	 India	 to	 China.	 He	 planted	 the	 seed	 of	 Zen	 in
China.	He	started	a	great	phenomenon	on	its	way.	He	is	the	father	and,	of	course,
Zen	has	carried	 the	qualities	of	Bodhidharma	all	 these	centuries.	Zen	 is	one	of
the	most	absurd	religions	-
-	 in	 fact,	 a	 religion	has	 to	be	absurd	because	 it	 cannot	be	 logical.	 It	 is	beyond
logic.
I	was	reading	an	anecdote.	When	I	read	it	I	remembered	Bodhidharma.	Listen	to
it.
A	great	zoologist	informed	a	colleague	that	he	was	trying	to	cross	a	parrot	with	a
mountain	lion.
'No!'	exclaimed	the	other.	'What	do	you	expect	to	get?'
'I	don't	know	exactly,'	the	scientist	admitted.	'but	I	will	tell	you	this	--	if	it	starts
talking	you	had	better	listen.'
Reading	this	anecdote,	suddenly	Bodhidharma	surfaced	in	me.	He	was	the	man
who	was	 also	 a	 lion.	 Ordinarily	 he	 would	 not	 speak	 but	 his	 silence	 was	 also
terrible	 and	 terrific.	 He	 would	 look	 into	 your	 eyes	 absolutely	 silent,	 and	 he
would	go	like	a	cold	shudder	through	your	spine.	Or	he	would	speak	--	then	too
he	was	like	thunder.	Find	a	picture	of	Bodhidharma	and	look:	very	ferocious	and
still	very	sweet.	A	parrot	crossed	with	a	lion	--
very	sweet	and	very	ferocious.
The	whole	Zen	discipline	has	carried	the	same	quality	with	 it.	Zen	masters	are
very	 hard	 on	 the	 outside	 and	very	 sweet	 on	 the	 inside.	Once	you	have	 earned
their	love	they	are	as	sweet	as	honey,	but	you	will	have	to	pass	through	hardship.
Bodhidharma,	for	nine	years	while	he	was	in	China,	sat	facing	a	wall,	gazing	at	a
wall.	He	was	known	in	China	as	the	man,	the	ferocious	man,	who	gazed	at	the
wall	 for	 nine	 years.	 It	 is	 said	 that	 his	 legs	 withered	 away	 --	 sitting	 and	 just
looking	 at	 the	wall.	 People	would	 come	 and	 they	would	 try	 to	 persuade	 him,
'Look	at	us.	Why	are	you	looking	at	the	wall?'	And	he	would	say,
'Because	you	are	also	like	a	wall.	When	somebody	comes	who	is	really	not	like	a
wall,	I	will	look.'	Then	one	day	his	successor	came.	And	the	successor	cut	off	his
hand	and	gave	it	to	Bodhidharma	and	said,	'Look	this	way,	otherwise	I	am	going
to	 cut	 off	my	 head.'	He	 turned,	 immediately	 about-turned,	 and	 said.	 'Wait!	 So
you	have	come.	I	was	waiting	for	nine	years	for	you.'
After	nine	years	he	came	back	to	India.	When	he	was	coming	back,	this	incident
happened.
AFTER	 NINE	 YEARS,	 BODHIDHARMA,	 THE	 FIRST	 ZEN	 PATRIARCH,
WHO
TOOK	ZEN	TO	CHINA	FROM	INDIA	IN	THE	SIXTH	CENTURY,	DECIDED
HE
WISHED	TO	RETURN	HOME.	HE	GATHERED	HIS	DISCIPLES	AROUND
HIM	TO
TEST	 THEIR	 APPERCEPTION...what	 they	 had	 learned	 from	 him,	 and	 what
they	knew	about	truth.
So	he	asked,	 'What	 is	 truth?	Tell	me	 in	short.'	The	 first	disciple,	Dofuku,	said,
'IN	MY
OPINION	TRUTH	IS	BEYOND	AFFIRMATION	OR	NEGATION,	FOR	THIS
IS	THE
WAY	IT	MOVES.'	BODHIDHARMA	REPLIED:	'YOU	HAVE	MY	SKIN.'
What	 the	 disciple	 said	 was	 true,	 but	 not	 truth.	 It	 was	 not	 wrong,	 but	 it	 was
philosophical.
It	 was	 not	 experiential,	 it	 was	 not	 existential.	 He	 said,	 'In	my	 opinion...'	 as	 if
truth	depends	on	your	opinion.
Truth	is	independent	of	all	opinions.	What	you	think	about	truth	is	irrelevant;	in
fact,	because	you	think,	you	will	not	be	able	to	know	what	is.	That	which	is	can
be	known	only	when	all	thinking	stops.	when	all	opinions	are	thrown	away,	put
aside.	So	I	say,
'True,	but	not	truth.'	The	opinion	is	not	wrong,	it	is	well-informed,	but	if	is	still
an	 opinion;	 Dofuku	 has	 not	 experienced	 it	 himself.	 He	 seems	 to	 be	 of	 the
philosophical	bent.
He	 has	 been	 speculating,	 thinking,	 weaving	 and	 spinning	 theories.
BODHIDHARMA	REPLIED:	'YOU	HAVE	MY	SKIN.'
If	 it	 had	 been	 just	 philosophical,	 Bodhidharma	would	 not	 have	 said	 even	 this
much.	 But	 he	 said,	 'You	 have	 my	 skin	 --	 the	 most	 outermost	 part.	 the	 very
circumference	 of	 my	 being.'	 Why?	 Because	 he	 said	 that	 truth	 is	 beyond
affirmation	or	negation	It	can	neither	be	said	about	truth	that	it	is,	nor	can	it	be
said	 that	 it	 is	 not.	 He	 has	 some	 insight.	 He	 has	 groped	 in	 the	 dark	 through
thinking,	logic,	but	he	has	come	to	a	certain	insight.	And	that	insight	is	beautiful.
Nothing	can	be	said	about	truth.	You	cannot	say,	'God	is,'	you	cannot	say,	'God	is
not.'	Because	if	you	say,	'God	is,'	you	will	make	God	like	a	thing	--	as	a	table	is,
the	house	is.	Then	God	will	become	an	ordinary	commodity,	an	ordinary	thing.
And	then,	as	linguistic	philosophers	say,	the	table	can	be	destroyed.	Whatsoever
'is',	 can	become	 'is	not'.	The	house	can	be	demolished.	The	 tree	 is	here	 today;
tomorrow	it	may	not	be.	So	what	about	God?	If	you	use	the	word	'is',	then	what
about	God?	Can	God	be	in	a	situation	where	he	is	not?	Because	wherever	'is'	is
used,	'is	not'	is	the	possibility	also.
No,	it	cannot	be	said	that	'God	is'	but	can	we	say	the	opposite,	'God	is	not'?	That
too	is	not	possible	because,	it	he	is	not,	what's	the	point	of	saying	'God	is	not'?
Who	are	you	denying,	and	for	what?	It	he	is	not,	he	is	not.	What	is	the	point	of
denial?
And	people	deny	so	passionately.	that	their	very	passion	says.	'He	must	be.	God
must	be.'
Look	at	the	atheists	who	say.	'No.	There	is	no	God.'	They	are	ready	to	tight.	For
something	which	is	not,	who	fights?	Why	are	you	worried?	I	know	atheists	who
have	been	thinking	their	whole	life	and	trying	to	prove	that	God	is	not.	Why	are
you	 wasting	 your	 life	 for	 something	 which	 is	 not?	 For	 centuries	 people	 have
been	writing	books.	 and	arguing	and	discussing	about	God	 is	not.	But	why	be
concerned?	It	seems	that	God	is.	in	some	way.	and	you	cannot	rest	at	ease	unless
you	prove	that	he	is	not	--	otherwise	he	will	go	on	challenging	you.	He	will	go
on	 calling	 you.	 invoking	 you.	 so	 to	 put	 yourself	 at	 ease	 you	 have	 to	 create	 a
philosophy	that	he	is	not.	This	is	rationalization.
And	then	God	is	so	vast....	Call	it	truth,	as	Bodhidharma	would	like.	Buddhists
don	t	like	the	word	God.	and	they	do	rightly,	because	the	word	IS	50	corrupted
and	so	many	people	have	used	it	with	such	wrong	connotations	that	it	has	almost
become	a	dirty	word.	Truth	must	be	both,	because	 in	 truth	 existence	 and	non-
existence	must	meet.	Existence	cannot	be	alone	--	it	needs	non-existence	by	the
side.	 Just	 as	 the	 day	 needs	 the	 night,	 just	 as	 life	 needs	 death,	 existence	 needs
non-existence.	So	the	ultimate	must	comprehend	both...that	is	what	Dofuku	said.
But	it	is	still	philosophical	--	on	the	right	track,	but	still	philosophical,	just	on	the
periphery.	BODHIDHARMA	REPLIED:	'YOU	HAVE	MY
SKIN.'
It	 happened	 that	 Pierre	 Laplace	 was	 a	 mathematician,	 an	 astronomer,	 who	 in
Napoleon's	time	wrote	a	ponderous	five-volume	work	on	celestial	mechanics.	In
it,	using	Newton's	law	of	gravity,	he	painstakingly	worked	out	the	motions	of	the
solar	system	in	finest	detail.
Napoleon,	who	 fancied	 himself	 (with	 only	 partial	 justification)	 an	 intellectual,
leafed	through	the	early	volumes,	and	said	to	Laplace,	'I	see	no	mention	of	God
in	your	explanation	of	the	motions	of	the	planets.'
'I	had	no	need	of	that	hypothesis,	sir,'	said	the	scientist	politely.
Another	astronomer,	Legrange,	hearing	of	 the	remark,	 is	 reported	 to	have	said,
'But	it	is	a	beautiful	hypothesis	just	the	same.	It	can	be	used	to	explain	so	many
things.'
To	the	philosophical	mind	God	remains,	at	the	most,	a	beautiful	hypothesis.	Not
a	truth,	but	a	helpful	hypothesis	which	can	be	used	in	explaining	many	things;	at
the	most,	a	help	to	explanation	--	just	a	theoretical	need,	not	an	existential	need.
When	 a	 philosopher	 talks	 about	 God,	 the	 God	 is	 cold,	 the	 God	 is	 not	 warm
enough.	You	 cannot	 love	 that	God,	 you	 cannot	worship	 that	God,	 you	 cannot
pray	 to	 that	 God,	 you	 cannot	 surrender	 yourself	 to	 that	 God	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a
hypothesis.	How	 can	 you	 surrender	 to	 the	 theory	 of	H20?	Or	 to	 the	 theory	 of
relativity?	How	can	you	surrender,	how	can	you	raise	a	temple	to	the	theory	of
relativity?	 Howsoever	 beautiful	 it	 is,	 it	 cannot	 be	 revered,	 it	 cannot	 be
worshipped,	you	cannot	pray	to	it.	It	remains	a	hypothesis,	a	tool	in	your	hands
to	explain	a	few	things	which	cannot	be	explained	otherwise.	But	a	hypotheses
can	be	discarded	any	moment;	whenever	you	can	find	a	better	hypothesis,	it	can
be	discarded.	Truth	is	not	a	hypothesis	-
-	it	is	a	lived	experience.
That's	why	Bodhidharma	said,	'You	have	only	my	skin.'	Skin	goes	on	changing.
Every	 seven	 years	 your	whole	 skin	 has	 gone	 through	 change.	You	 don't	 have
even	a	single	cell	of	the	same	skin.	If	you	live	for	seventy	years,	ten	times	your
skin	would	have	changed.
Skin	 is	your	outermost	part.	 It	can	be	replaced	very	easily.	 It	 is	being	replaced
every	moment.	It	is	just	the	bag	in	which	you	are	--	it	is	not	very,	very	essential.
It	is	not	your	being	--	just	the	outer	wall	of	your	abode.
THE	 NUN	 SOJI	 SAID:	 --	 the	 second	 disciple	 'IN	 MY	 VIEW,	 IT	 IS	 LIKE
ANANDA'S
INSIGHT	OF	THE	BUDDHA-LAND	--	SEEN	ONCE	AND	FOREVER.'
BODHIDHARMA	ANSWERED:	'YOU	HAVE	MY	FLESH.'
A	little	better	than	the	first	--	deeper	than	the	skin	is	flesh.	A	little	better	because
this	is	no	more	a	philosophical	standpoint;	it	comes	closer	to	experience,	but	the
experience	i8
borrowed.	She	says,	'IN	MY	VIEW,	IT	IS	LIKE	ANANDA'S	INSIGHT	OF	THE
BUDDHA-LAND.'
Ananda	was	 the	 chief	 disciple	 of	 Buddha	who	 lived	with	 him	 for	 forty	 years
continuously,	 like	 a	 shadow	 following	 him.	 So	 the	 nun	 said	 that	 truth	 is	 like
Ananda's	 insight	 of	 the	Buddha-land	 --	 of	 that	 land	 of	 paradise,	 land	 of	 light.
Once	seen	it	is	seen	forever.	Then	you	can	never	forget	about	it;	it	is	a	point	of
no	return.	Once	known,	it	is	known	forever;	then	you	cannot	fall	from	it.
But,	 the	 experience	 is	 not	 her	 own.	 The	 insight	 is	 Ananda's.	 She	 is	 still
comparing.	 Her	 answer	 is	 theological,	 not	 philosophical	 --	 theological,	 as	 a
Christian	 theologian	 goes	 on	 talking	 about	 the	 experience	 of	 Jesus,	 and	 a
Buddhist	goes	on	 talking	about	 the	experience	of	Buddha,	and	a	Jaina	goes	on
talking	 about	 the	 experience	 of	 Mahavir.	 It	 is	 second-hand,	 not	 first-hand;
leaning	more	 towards	 the	 existential,	 but	 still	 theological;	more	 contemplative
than	the	first	--	the	first	is	more	speculative,	the	second	is	more	contemplative	--
better,	but	yet	far	away.
Then	 the	 third	 disciple,	 Doiku,	 said,	 'THE	 FOUR	 ELEMENTS	 OF	 LIGHT,
AIRINESS,	 FLUIDITY,	 AND	 SOLIDITY,	 ARE	 EMPTY,	 AND	 THE	 FIVE
SKANDHAS	ARE	NOTHINGS.	IN	MY	OPINION	NO-THING	IS	REALITY.'
BODHIDHARMA	COMMENTED:	'YOU	HAVE	MY	BONES.'
Still	deeper,	but	not	yet	home.	The	statement	is	true	but	it	is	still	a	statement.	The
truth	is	said	better	than	the	other	two	but	it	is	still	said	--	and	the	truth	cannot	be
said.	Once	you	say	it,	you	falsify	it.	The	very	saying	makes	it	false.	He's	right.
The	four	elements	of	light,	airiness,	fluidity	and	solidity	--	that	means	the	whole
existence	are	empty.	There	is	no	substance	in	them.	It	is	just	like	a	dream;	it	is	of
the	same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	--
maya,	illusory.	No-thing	is	reality.	Nothingness	is	reality.	Right...but	he	is	trying
to	say	something	which	cannot	be	said.
Wittgenstein	 has	 said	 that	 it	 is	 better	 to	 keep	 silent	 where	 saying	 is	 going	 to
falsify.	 Keep	 quiet	 if	 it	 cannot	 be	 said	 because	 whatsoever	 you	 say	will	 be	 a
betrayal	of	the	truth.
BODHIDHARMA	COMMENTED:	'YOU	HAVE	MY	BONES.'	You	have	come
very,	very	close,	but	still	missed.
FINALLY,	 EKA	 BOWED	 BEFORE	 THE	 MASTER	 AND	 REMAINED
SILENT.
BODHIDHARMA	SAID:	 'YOU	HAVE	MY	MARROW'	 --	 you	 have	my	 very
soul.
Eka	bowed	before	 the	Master.	That	was	his	statement	 --	bowing	down	 in	deep
gratefulness,	a	gesture	of	thankfulness,	and	then	remaining	silent.	This	is	the	true
statement	and	it	is	not	a	statement	at	all.	It	is	only	through	silence	that	truth	can
be	 said	 because	 it	 is	 only	 through	 silence	 that	 the	 truth	 is	 heard.	 It	 is	 through
silence	that	one	comes	to	hear	the	ancient	music	in	the	pines.	And	only	through
silence	can	you	say	it	without	betraying	it.
Eka	 did	 two	 things.	 He	 bowed	 down	 --	 that	 is	 a	 gesture;	 a	 gesture	 of	 deep
reverence,	respect,	gratefulness,	gratitude.	That	moment	Bodhidharma	could	see
an	emptiness	bowing	down	before	him.	There	 is	nobody	 in	 this	 fourth	disciple
Eka,	he	 is	 just	emptiness	within.	He	 is	what	 the	 third	was	saying	--	emptiness,
nothingness.	He	has	 the	experience	of	what	 the	second	was	saying	--	Ananda's
Buddha-land.	He	is	what	the	first	was	trying	to	utter	philosophically:	beyond	yes
and	no.	Only	silence	is	beyond	negation	and	affirmation;	only	silence	is	neither
atheistic	nor	 theistic;	only	silence	 is	 religious;	only	silence	 is	 sacred.	To	Show
that	sacredness	of	silence	he	bowed	down	and	then	he	kept	silent.	He	really	said
it	without	saying	it.	That	is	the	only	way	to	say	it	and	there	is	no	other	way.
BODHIDHARMA	 SAID,	 'YOU	 HAVE	 MY	 MARROW'	 --	 you	 have	 my
innermost	core	of	being.
I	can	see	clouds	a	thousand	miles	away,	hear	ancient	music	in	the	pines.	You	can
also	hear	it.	It	is	your	birthright.	If	you	miss	it,	only	you,	and	ONLY	you	will	be
responsible	 for	 it.	 Listen	 in	 the	 pines....	 Just	 listen.	 In	 this	 very	moment	 it	 is
there.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 just	 like	 Eka,	 in	 deep	 gratefulness,	 in	 silence.	 It	 is
immediately	 here	 and	 it	 has	 never	 been	 otherwise.	 A	 turning-in	 is	 needed,
PARABVRUTTI.
Someone	asked	Buddha,
'What	is	the	greatest	miracle?'
He	said,	'PARABVRUTTI,	turning	in.'
Turn	in,	tune	in,	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	clouds	a	thousand	miles	away	and
you	will	be	able	to	hear	the	ancient	music	in	the	pines.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	A	Zen	Story
Chapter	title:	The	Halo	of	Yakushi-Buddha
Chapter	title:	Madmen	and	Devotees
Chapter	title:	Three	Mysteries
Chapter	title:	You	Have	My	Marrow
