
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Talks	on	Zen
Talks	given	from	31/10/74	am	to	10/11/74	am
English	Discourse	series
11	Chapters
Year	published:	1974
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Flower	shower
31	October	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7410310
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
87
mins
SUBHUTI	WAS	ONE	OF	BUDDHA'S	DISCIPLES.	HE	WAS	ABLE	TO
UNDERSTAND	 THE	 POTENCY	 OF	 EMPTINESS	 --	 THE	 VIEWPOINT
THAT
NOTHING	 EXISTS	 EXCEPT	 IN	 ITS	 RELATIONSHIP	 OF	 SUBJECTIVITY
AND
OBJECTIVITY.
ONE	DAY,	WHEN	SUBHUTI	WAS	SITTING	UNDER	A	TREE	IN	A	MOOD
OF
SUBLIME	EMPTINESS,	FLOWERS	BEGAN	TO	FALL	AROUND	HIM.	'WE
ARE
PRAISING	YOU	FOR	YOUR	DISCOURSE	ON	EMPTINESS,'	THE	GODS
WHISPERED	TO	HIM.	'BUT	I	HAVE	NOT	SPOKEN	OF	EMPTINESS,'	SAID
SUBHUTI.	 'YOU	HAVE	NOT	 SPOKEN	OF	 EMPTINESS,	WE	HAVE	NOT
HEARD
EMPTINESS,'	RESPONDED	THE	GODS.	'THIS	IS	TRUE	EMPTINESS.'
AND	BLOSSOMS	SHOWERED	UPON	SUBHUTI	LIKE	RAIN.
Yes,	 it	 happens.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 metaphor,	 it	 is	 a	 fact	 --	 so	 don't	 take	 this	 story
metaphorically.
It	is	literally	true...	because	the	whole	of	existence	feels	happy,	blissful,	ecstatic
when	even	one	individual	soul	achieves	the	ultimate.
We	are	part	of	the	whole	and	the	whole	is	not	indifferent	to	you,	cannot	be.	How
can	a	mother	be	indifferent	 to	a	child	--	her	own	child?	It	 is	 impossible.	When
the	 child	grows	 the	mother	 also	grows	with	him.	When	 the	 child	 is	 happy	 the
mother	is	also	happy	with	him.	When	the	child	dances,	something	in	the	mother
also	dances.	When	the	child	is	ill	the	mother	is	ill.	When	the	child	is	miserable
the	mother	 is	miserable...	 because	 they	are	not	 two,	 they	are	one.	Their	hearts
beat	in	a	rhythm.
The	whole	 is	 your	mother.	 The	whole	 is	 not	 indifferent	 to	 you.	 Let	 this	 truth
penetrate	as	deeply	as	possible	 in	your	heart,	because	even	 this	awareness	 that
the	whole	 feels	 happy	with	 you	will	 change	 you.	 Then	 you	 are	 not	 alienated,
then	you	are	not	a	foreigner	here.
Then	 you	 are	 not	 a	 homeless	wanderer,	 then	 this	 is	 a	HOME.	And	 the	whole
mothers	you,	 cares	 about	you,	 loves	you.	So	 it	 is	 natural	 that	when	 somebody
becomes	 a	 buddha,	 when	 somebody	 reaches	 the	 ultimate	 peak,	 the	 whole
existence	 dances,	 the	 whole	 existence	 sings,	 the	 whole	 existence	 celebrates.
Literally	true	it	 is.	It	 is	not	a	metaphor,	remember;	otherwise	you	will	miss	the
whole	point.
Blossoms	shower,	and	then	they	go	on	showering	--	they	never	stop.
The	blossoms	that	showered	for	Buddha	are	still	showering.	The	blossoms	that
showered	for	Subhuti	are	still	showering.	You	cannot	see	them,	not	because	they
are	 not	 showering	 but	 because	 you	 are	 not	 capable	 of	 seeing	 them.	 Existence
goes	on	celebrating	infinitely	for	all	the	buddhas	that	have	happened,	for	all	the
buddhas	that	are	happening,	and	for	all	the	buddhas	that	will	happen	--	because
for	existence,	past,	future	and	present	don't	exist.
It	is	a	continuity.	It	is	eternity.	Only	the	now	exists,	infinite	now.
They	are	still	showering,	but	you	cannot	see	them.	Unless	they	shower	for	you,
you	CANNOT	see	them;	and	once	you	see	them	showering	for	you,	you	will	see
that	they	have	been	showering	for	every	buddha,	for	every	enlightened	soul.
The	 first	 thing:	 existence	 CARES	 what	 happens	 to	 you.	 Existence	 is
continuously	 praying	 that	 the	 ultimate	 should	 happen	 to	 you.	 In	 fact	 you	 are
nothing	but	a	hand	extended	by	the	whole	to	reach	the	ultimate.	You	are	nothing
but	 a	wave	 coming	 from	 the	whole	 to	 touch	 the	moon.	You	 are	 nothing	but	 a
flower	opening,	so	that	the	whole	is	filled	with	fragrance	through	you.
If	you	can	drop	yourself,	those	flowers	can	shower	this	very	morning	--	this	very
moment.	Gods	are	always	ready,	their	hands	are	always	full	with	flowers.	They
simply	 watch	 and	 wait.	 Whenever	 somebody	 becomes	 a	 Subhuti,	 empty,
whenever	somebody	is	absent,	suddenly	the	flowers	start	showering.
This	is	one	of	the	basic	facts.	Without	it	there	is	no	possibility	of	trust;	without	it
there	 is	no	possibility	of	your	ever	 reaching	 the	 truth.	Unless	 the	whole	helps,
there	is	no	possibility	for	you	to	reach	--	how	can	you	reach?	And	ordinarily,	our
minds	 think	 just	 the	opposite.	We	 think	of	 the	whole	 as	 the	 enemy,	not	 as	 the
friend,	never	as	the	mother.
We	think	about	the	whole	as	if	the	whole	is	trying	to	destroy	us.	We	look	at	the
whole	through	the	door	of	death,	not	through	the	door	of	birth.	It	looks	as	if	the
whole	 is	 against	 you,	 fighting	 you,	 not	 allowing	 you	 to	 reach	 your	 goals	 and
aims,	not	allowing	you	to	be	fulfilled.	Hence	you	go	on	constantly	warring	with
it.	And	 the	more	 you	 fight,	 the	more	 your	misconception	 proves	 to	 be	 true	 --
because	if	you	fight,	your	own	fight	is	reflected	through	the	whole.
The	whole	 supports	 you,	 remember.	Even	when	 you	 fight,	 the	whole	 supports
you;	even	when	you	fight	and	you	are	wrong,	the	whole	supports	you.	This	is	a
second	truth	to	be	understood	well.	If	you	don't	understand,	it	will	be	difficult	for
you	to	proceed	further.
Even	if	you	fight	with	the	whole,	 the	whole	supports	you	--	because	the	whole
cannot	 do	 anything	 other	 than	 support.	 If	 you	 go	wrong,	 still	 the	whole	 cares
about	 you.	Even	 if	 you	 go	wrong,	 the	whole	moves	with	 you.	 If	 a	 child	 goes
wrong,	the	mother	still	cares.	If	the	child	becomes	a	thief	and	is	ill,	the	mother
will	still	care.	She	cannot	give	poison	to	the	child.	If	the	child	goes	completely
wrong,	astray,	 the	mother	will	 still	pray	 for	him.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	Jesus'
story	of	the	two	brothers.
One	went	away	--	and	not	only	away	but	astray	--	from	the	father,	and	wasted	his
part	 of	 the	 heritage	 and	 became	 a	 beggar,	 a	 gambler,	 a	 drunkard.	 The	 other
remained	 with	 the	 father,	 helped	 the	 business,	 worked	 on	 the	 farm	 and	 the
gardens,	 increased	 the	 heritage,	 helped	 in	 every	way,	 served	 in	 a	 surrendering
spirit	to	the	father.	And	then	suddenly	the	news	came	that	the	other	brother	had
become	a	beggar,	that	he	was	begging	on	the	streets,	and	the	father's	whole	heart
started	aching	 for	him,	and	all	his	prayers	were	 for	him.	He	completely	 forgot
the	 one	 who	 was	 near;	 he	 remembered	 only	 the	 one	 who	 was	 distant.	 In	 his
dreams	 at	 night	 the	 other	 was	 present,	 but	 not	 the	 one	 who	 was	 close	 and
working	for	him,	who	was	good	in	every	way.
And	then	one	day	the	beggar	son	came	back	and	the	father	arranged	a	big	feast.
The	good	son	was	coming	home	from	the	farm	and	somebody	told	him,	'Look	at
the	injustice	of	your	father!	You	love	him,	you	care	for	him	and	serve	him	and
you	have	remained	with	him,	been	absolutely	good,	moral,	never	done	anything
against	 his	wish,	 but	 never	was	 a	 feast	 arranged	 for	you.	The	 fattest	 lamb	has
been	murdered	for	your	brother	who	has	gone	astray.	He	is	coming	like	a	beggar,
and	the	whole	house	is	celebrating!'
The	son,	the	good	son,	felt	very	hurt:	this	was	absurd!	He	went	back	home	angry.
He	talked	to	his	father:	 'What	are	you	doing?	Never	has	a	feast	been	given	for
me	--	and	 I	have	been	serving	you,	and	what	has	 this	other	 son	done	 for	you?
Just	 wasted	 the	 heritage,	 gambled	 everything,	 and	 now	 he	 has	 come	 home	 a
beggar!'
The	father	said,	'Yes,	because	you	are	so	close	and	you	are	so	good	and	you	are
so	happy,	 I	need	not	worry	about	you.	But	 the	one	who	has	gone	astray	 --	my
prayers	follow	him	and	my	love	follows	him.'
And	Jesus	used	to	tell	this	story	again	and	again	to	his	disciples,	because,	as	he
said,	 God	 can	 forget	 the	 saints,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 remember	 them,	 but	 God
cannot	forget	the	sinners.
If	he	is	a	father	--	and	I	tell	you	he	is	not	a	father,	he	is	a	mother;	a	father	is	not
such	a	deep	phenomenon	as	a	mother.	That's	why	Hindus	call	him	the	mother	--
God	is	mother,	a	mothering.	And	Jesus	said	whenever	it	happens	that	a	shepherd
is	coming	back	home	and	a	sheep	is	lost,	he	leaves	all	the	sheep	in	the	forest,	in
the	dark	night,	and	goes	to	search	and	seek	for	the	lost	one.	And	when	the	lost
sheep	is	found,	he	carries	the	lost	sheep	on	his	shoulders	and	he	rejoices	and	he
comes	back	home	feeling	very	happy,	because	one	who	was	lost	has	been	found.
Whenever	it	happens	--	we	are	all	lost	sheep	--
whenever	a	sheep	is	found	again,	the	shepherd	rejoices.	Flowers	start	showering.
Deities,	gods,	are	not	persons	in	the	East,	they	are	natural	forces.	Everything	has
been	 personified	 just	 to	 give	 a	 heart	 to	 it,	 a	 heartbeat	 --	 just	 to	make	 it	more
caring.	 So	 Hindus,	 Buddhists,	 they	 have	 converted	 all	 the	 natural	 forces	 into
gods,	 and	 they	 are	 right!	 When	 Subhuti	 attained	 to	 emptiness,	 gods	 started
showering.
And	the	meaning	 is	very	beautiful:	 the	sun	 is	a	god	for	Hindus	and	Buddhists,
the	sky	 is	a	god;	every	 tree	has	 its	own	god,	deity.	The	air	 is	god,	 the	earth	 is
god.	Everything	has	a	heart	--	that	is	the	meaning.	Everything	feels	--	that	is	the
meaning.	Nothing	 is	 indifferent	 to	 you	 --	 that	 is	 the	meaning.	And	when	 you
attain,	everything	celebrates.	Then	the	sun	shines	in	a	different	way;	the	quality
has	changed.
To	 those	who	are	 ignorant	everything	 remains	 the	same.	The	sun	shines	 in	 the
old	way	because	the	change	of	quality	is	very	subtle	and	only	one	who	is	empty
can	feel	it.	It	is	not	gross,	the	ego	cannot	feel	it;	the	gross	is	the	field	of	the	ego.
The	subtle	can	be	felt	only	when	there	 is	no	ego,	because	it	 is	so	subtle	 that	 if
you	are	there	you	will	miss	it.
Even	your	presence	will	be	enough	disturbance.
When	one	is	totally	empty	the	quality	of	the	sun	immediately	changes.	It	has	a
welcoming	poetry	about	it.	Its	warmth	is	not	only	warmth,	it	has	become	a	love	-
-	 a	 loving	 warmth.	 The	 air	 is	 different,	 it	 lingers	 a	 little	 more	 around	 you,	 it
touches	 you	 with	 more	 feeling,	 as	 if	 it	 has	 got	 hands.	 The	 touch	 is	 totally
different;	now	the	touch	has	a	sensitivity	around	it.	The	tree	will	flower,	but	not
in	 the	 same	 way.	 Now	 the	 flowers	 are	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 tree	 as	 if	 they	 are
jumping.
It	 is	 said	 that	 whenever	 Buddha	 passed	 through	 a	 forest,	 trees	 would	 start
blossoming	even	when	it	was	not	the	season	for	them.	It	has	to	be	so!	Man	can
err	in	recognizing	Buddha	but	how	can	trees	err?	Man	has	a	mind	and	the	mind
may	miss,	but	how	can	the	trees	miss?	--	they	don't	have	any	minds,	and	when	a
buddha	walks	in	a	forest	they	start	blossoming.	It	is	natural,	it	has	to	be	so!	It	is
not	 a	 miracle.	 But	 you	 may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 see	 those	 flowers,	 because	 those
flowers	are	not	 really	physical.	Those	 flowers	are	 the	FEELINGS	of	 the	 trees.
When	Buddha	passes	 the	 tree	 trembles	 in	a	different	way,	 throbs	 in	a	different
way,	 is	no	 longer	 the	same.	This	 is	 the	meaning.	The	whole	cares	 for	you,	 the
whole	is	your	mother.
Now	try	to	understand	this	parable	--	one	of	the	best.
SUBHUTI	WAS	ONE	OF	BUDDHA'S	DISCIPLES.
Buddha	 had	 thousands	 of	 disciples.	 Subhuti	 was	 just	 one	 of	 them,	 nothing
special	 about	 him.	Really	 nobody	knows	much	 about	Subhuti,	 this	 is	 the	 only
story	 about	 him.	 There	 were	 great	 disciples,	 well	 known,	 famous	 --	 great
scholars,	 princes.	 They	 had	 big	 kingdoms,	 and	 when	 they	 left	 them	 and
renounced	and	became	disciples	of	Buddha,	they	had	a	name	around	them.	But
flowers	didn't	shower	on	them.	Flowers	chose	this	Subhuti	who	was	just	one	of
the	disciples,	nothing	special	about	him.
Only	then	do	flowers	shower;	otherwise	you	also	can	become	special	around	a
buddha	--
and	you	can	miss!	You	can	feel	egoistic	about	being	near	a	buddha	too,	you	can
create	a	hierarchy;	you	can	say,	 'I	am	not	an	ordinary	disciple,	I	am	something
special.	I	am	just	next	to	Buddha.	Others	are	just	ordinary,	a	crowd,	but	I	am	not
a	crowd;	I	have	a	name,	an	identity	of	my	own.	Even	before	I	came	to	Buddha	I
was	somebody'	--	and	they	remain	somebody.
Sariputta	came	to	Buddha.	When	he	came	it	was	with	five	hundred	disciples	of
his	own.
He	was	a	master	--	of	course	an	unenlightened	master,	knowing	nothing,	and	still
feeling	that	he	knew	because	he	was	a	great	scholar.	He	knew	all	the	scriptures.
He	 was	 born	 a	 brahmin	 and	 a	 very	 talented	 one,	 a	 genius.	 From	 his	 very
childhood	he	was	known	for	his	great	memory	--	he	could	memorize	anything.
Only	 once	 he	 had	 to	 read	 a	 scripture,	 and	 it	was	 already	memorized.	He	was
known	all	over	 the	country;	when	he	came	 to	Buddha	he	was	 somebody.	That
somebodiness	became	the	barrier.
These	gods	 seem	 to	be	very	 irrational	 --	 they	have	chosen	a	disciple,	Subhuti,
who	was	just	one	in	the	crowd,	nothing	special	about	him.	These	gods	seem	to
be	crazy!	They	should	have	chosen	Sariputta,	he	was	the	man	to	be	chosen.	But
they	 have	 not	 chosen	 him.	 They	 have	 not	 chosen	 Ananda,	 Buddha's	 cousin-
brother,	Buddha's	shadow	continuously	for	forty	years	--	for	forty	years,	not	for	a
single	moment	was	he	away	from	Buddha.	He	slept	in	the	same	room;	he	moved
with	Buddha,	continuously	by	his	side.	He	was	the	most	well	known	person.	All
the	 stories	 that	 Buddha	 told	 he	 starts	 by	 telling	 them	 to	 Ananda.	 He	 says,
'Ananda,	it	happened	this	way';	'Ananda,	once	it	happened.'	'Ananda'
and	'Ananda'	and	'Ananda'	--	he	goes	on	repeating	his	name.	But	these	gods	are
crazy,	they	have	chosen	Subhuti	--	a	nobody!
Remember,	 only	 nobodies	 are	 chosen	 --	 because	 if	 you	 are	 somebody	 in	 this
world	you	are	nobody	in	the	other	world.	If	here	you	are	a	nobody,	you	become
somebody	in	the	other	world.	Values	differ.	Here,	gross	things	are	valued;	there,
subtle	things	are	valued.
And	the	most	subtle,	the	subtlest,	is	NOT	TO	BE.	Subhuti	lived	in	the	crowd	--
nobody	 even	 knew	 his	 name	 --	 and	 when	 this	 news	 came	 that	 flowers	 were
showering	 on	 Subhuti	 everybody	 wondered,	 'Who	 is	 this	 Subhuti?	 We	 never
heard	about	him.	Has	it	happened	by	some	accident?	Have	the	gods	chosen	him
wrongly?'	--	because	there	were	many	who	were	higher	in	the	hierarchy.	Subhuti
must	have	been	the	last.	This	is	the	only	story	about	Subhuti.
Try	to	understand	it	well.	When	you	are	near	a	great	master	be	a	nobody.	Gods
are	crazy,	they	will	chose	you	only	when	you	are	not.	And	if	you	try	to	be,	the
more	you	succeed	in	being	somebody,	the	more	you	will	miss.	This	is	what	we
are	doing	in	the	world	and	this	we	start	doing	around	a	buddha	also.	You	crave
for	 riches.	Why?	 --	 because	 with	 riches	 you	 become	 someone.	 You	 crave	 for
prestige	 and	 power.	 Why?	 --	 because	 with	 power	 and	 prestige	 you	 are	 not
ordinary.	You	crave	for	learning,	scholarship,	knowledge.	Why?
--	because	with	knowledge	you	have	something	to	be	proud	of.
But	gods	will	not	chose	you	that	way.	They	have	their	own	way	of	choosing.	If
you	 are	 yourself	 beating	 your	 drum	 too	 much,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 gods	 to
shower	flowers	on	you
--	 you	 are	 throwing	 flowers	 upon	 yourself;	 there	 is	 no	 need.	When	 you	 stop
being	proud	about	anything	suddenly	the	whole	existence	starts	being	proud	of
you.	Jesus	says,	'Those	who	are	first	in	this	world	will	be	the	last	in	the	kingdom
of	my	God,	and	those	who	are	last	will	be	the	first.'
It	happened	once	that	a	very	rich	man	died	on	the	same	day	a	beggar	in	the	town
also	died.	The	name	of	 the	beggar	was	Lazarus.	The	rich	man	went	directly	 to
hell	 and	Lazarus	directly	 to	heaven.	The	 rich	man	 looked	up	and	 saw	Lazarus
sitting	 near	 God,	 and	 he	 cried	 to	 heaven,	 'It	 seems	 that	 something	 has	 gone
wrong.	I	should	be	there	and	this	beggar	Lazarus	should	be	here!'
God	laughed	and	he	said,	 'Those	who	are	last	shall	become	the	first,	and	those
who	are	first	shall	become	the	last.	You	have	enjoyed	being	first	enough,	now	let
Lazarus	enjoy	a	little.'
And	the	rich	man	was	feeling	very	hot	--	of	course	in	hell	you	don't	have	any	air-
conditioning	 yet	 --	 burning	 hot.	He	was	 feeling	 very	 thirsty	 and	 there	was	 no
water.	So	he	again	cried	and	said,	'God,	please	at	least	send	Lazarus	with	a	little
water,	I	am	feeling	very	thirsty.'
And	God	said,	 'Lazarus	was	thirsty	many	times,	nearly	dying	at	your	door,	and
you	never	gave	him	anything.	He	was	dying,	hungry	at	your	door	and	there	was
a	feast	every	day,	and	many	were	invited,	but	he	was	always	chased	away	from
the	 door	 by	 your	 servants	 because	 guests	 were	 coming,	 powerful	 guests,
politicians,	 diplomats,	 rich	 men,	 and	 a	 beggar	 standing	 there	 would	 look
awkward.	Your	 servants	 chased	 him	 away	 and	 he	was	 hungry,	 and	 the	 people
who	were	invited	were	not	hungry.	You	never	looked	at	Lazarus.
Now	it	is	impossible.'
And	it	is	said	Lazarus	laughed.
This	became	a	deep	 story	 for	many	many	Christian	mystics	 to	ponder	over.	 It
became	 just	 like	 a	 zen	 koan,	 and	 in	monasteries	 Christian	mystics	 have	 been
asking	again	and	again	why	Lazarus	laughed.
He	laughed	at	the	absurdity	of	things.	He	never	knew	that	a	nobody	like	Lazarus
--	a	 leper,	 a	beggar,	would	ever	enter	heaven.	He	could	never	believe	 that	 this
had	happened.
And	he	could	not	believe	the	other	thing	either	--	that	a	rich	man,	the	richest	in
the	town,	should	go	to	hell.	He	laughed.
And	 Lazarus	 still	 laughs.	 And	 he	 will	 laugh	 when	 you	 die	 also:	 if	 you	 are	 a
somebody	he	will	laugh,	because	you	will	be	thrown	out.	If	you	are	nobody,	just
ordinary,	he	will	laugh	because	you	will	be	received.
In	 this	world,	because	egos	exist,	all	valuations	belong	to	 the	ego.	 In	 the	other
world,	 the	 other	 dimension,	 valuation	 belongs	 to	 egolessness.	Hence	Buddha's
emphasis	on	no-selfness	--	ANATTA.	He	said,	'Don't	even	believe	"I	am	a	soul"
because	that	too	can	become	a	subtle	ego.	Don't	say	"AHAM	BRAHMASMI	--	I
am	Brahma,	 I	 am	 the	ultimate	 self."	Don't	 say	even	 that,	because	 the	 I	 is	very
tricky.	It	can	deceive	you.	It	HAS
deceived	you	for	many	many	lives.	It	can	go	on	deceiving	you.	Simply	say	"I	am
not"
and	 remain	 in	 that	NOTNESS,	 remain	 in	 that	nothingness	 --	become	empty	of
the	self.'
One	has	to	get	rid	of	the	self.	Once	the	self	is	thrown	away,	nothing	is	lacking.
You	start	overflowing	and	blossoms	start	falling	on	you.
SUBHUTI	WAS	ONE	OF	BUDDHA'S	DISCIPLES.	Remember,	ONE	OF.
HE	WAS	ABLE	TO	UNDERSTAND	THE	POTENCY	OF	EMPTINESS.
He	was	 just	one	of	many,	 that's	why	he	was	able	 to	understand	 the	potency	of
emptiness.
Nobody	talked	about	him,	nobody	knew	about	him.	He	walked	with,	he	followed
Buddha	on	many	many	paths	in	his	travels.	Nobody	knew	that	he	was	also	there;
if	 he	 had	 died	 nobody	 would	 have	 become	 aware.	 If	 he	 had	 escaped	 nobody
would	have	known,	because	nobody	ever	knew	that	Subhuti	was	there.	He	knew,
by	and	by,	being	nobody,	he	knew	THE	POTENCY	OF	EMPTINESS.
What	is	the	meaning	of	it?	...	Because	the	more	he	became	a	nonentity,	the	more
he	 felt	 that	 Buddha	 was	 coming	 closer	 to	 him.	 Nobody	 else	 was	 aware,	 but
Buddha	was	aware.
Everybody	 wondered	 when	 these	 flowers	 showered	 on	 him,	 but	 it	 was	 not	 a
surprise	to	Buddha.	When	it	was	reported	to	him	that	something	had	happened	to
Subhuti,	 Buddha	 said,	 'I	 was	 waiting.	 Any	 moment	 it	 was	 going	 to	 happen,
because	he	has	erased	himself	so	much;	any	day	it	was	going	to	happen.	There	is
no	surprise	in	it	for	me.'
HE	WAS	ABLE	TO	UNDERSTAND	THE	POTENCY	OF	EMPTINESS
-	by	being	empty!	You	don't	know	the	power	of	emptiness.	You	don't	know	the
power	of	being	totally	absent	within.	You	know	only	the	poverty	of	the	ego.
But	 try	 to	 understand.	With	 ego	 have	 you	 ever	 felt	 really	 powerful?	With	 ego
you	always	 feel	 impotent.	That's	why	 the	 ego	 says,	 'Make	your	 empire	 a	 little
bigger	so	that	you	can	feel	you	are	powerful:	no,	 this	house	won't	do,	a	bigger
house	is	needed;	no,	this	much	bank	balance	won't	do,	a	bigger	bank	balance	is
needed;	 no,	 this	much	 fame	won't	 do,	 a	 little	more.'	 The	 ego	 always	 asks	 for
more.	Why?	If	it	is	powerful,	why	go	on	asking	for	more?	The	very	craving	for
more	 says,	 shows,	 that	 the	 ego	 feels	 impotent.	You	have	 a	million	 rupees	 and
you	 are	 impotent.	 The	 ego	 says,	 'No,	 one	 million	 won't	 do,	 have	 ten	 million
rupees.'	 And	 I	 tell	 you	 --	 with	 ten	 million	 rupees	 you	 will	 be	 tenfold	 more
impotent,	that's	all.	And	then	the	ego	will	say,	'No,	this	won't	do....'
NOTHING	 will	 do	 with	 ego.	 Everything	 proves	 only	 that	 you	 are	 impotent,
powerless.
The	more	power	you	gain	 the	more	powerless	you	 feel	 in	 contrast.	The	 richer
you	become	the	poorer	you	feel.	The	more	healthy	you	are,	 the	more	afraid	of
death;	the	younger,	the	more	you	feel	old	age	is	coming	nearer.	The	opposite	is
just	around	the	corner,	and	if	you	have	a	little	understanding,	the	opposite	is	just
reaching	you	--	around	your	neck.	The	more	beautiful	you	are,	the	more	you	feel
the	inner	ugliness.
Ego	 has	 never	 felt	 powerful.	 It	 only	 dreams	 of	 power,	 it	 thinks	 of	 power,	 it
contemplates	 on	 power	 --	 but	 those	 are	 simply	 dreams	 and	 nothing	 else.	And
dreams	are	there	just	to	hide	the	impotence	that	is	within	you.	But	dreams	cannot
hide	the	reality.	Whatsoever	you	do,	from	here	or	from	there,	from	a	 loophole,
again	the	reality	comes	in	and	shatters	all	dreams.
Ego	is	 the	most	 impotent	 thing	 in	 the	world.	But	nobody	realizes	 it,	because	 it
goes	 on	 asking	 for	 more,	 it	 never	 gives	 you	 a	 space	 to	 look	 at	 the	 situation.
Before	you	become	aware,	it	pushes	you	further	and	further	somewhere.	Always
the	 goal	 is	 somewhere	 near	 the	 horizon.	 And	 it	 is	 so	 near	 you	 think,	 By	 the
evening	I	will	reach.
The	evening	never	comes;	the	horizon	remains	always	at	the	same	distance.	The
horizon	is	an	illusion;	all	the	goals	of	ego	are	just	illusions.	But	they	give	hope,
and	you	go	on	feeling,	 'Some	day	or	other	I	will	become	powerful.'	Right	now
you	 remain	powerless,	 impotent,	 inferior,	 but	 in	 the	 future,	 in	 the	hope,	 in	 the
dream,	you	become	powerful.	You	must	be	aware	that	many	times,	just	sitting	on
your	chair,	you	start	daydreaming:	you	have	become	the	emperor	of	 the	whole
world	or	the	president	of	the	United	States,	and	immediately	you	start	enjoying
it.	 Everybody	 looks	 at	 you,	 you	 have	 become	 the	 focal	 point	 of	 everyone's
attention.	Even	that	dream	gives	you	exhilaration,	intoxication.	If	you	dream	that
way,	you	will	walk	in	a	different	way.
This	is	how	it	 is	happening	to	everybody:	your	potency	remains	in	the	dreams,
YOU
remain	impotent.	The	truth	is	 just	 the	opposite:	when	you	don't	seek,	 it	comes;
when	you	don't	ask	it	is	given;	when	you	don't	hanker	it	is	there;	when	you	don't
go	to	the	horizon,	suddenly	you	realize	that	it	has	been	always	yours	--	you	never
lived	it.	It	is	there	inside,	and	you	seek	it	outside.	It	is	there	within	you	and	you
go	without.	You	are	carrying	 it:	 the	suprememost	power,	 the	divine	 itself,	 is	 in
you.	And	you	are	looking	here	and	there	like	a	beggar.
HE	WAS	ABLE	TO	UNDERSTAND	THE	POTENCY	OF	EMPTINESS.
Just	being	empty,	you	will	understand	--	there	is	no	other	way	of	understanding.
Whatsoever	you	want	 to	understand,	be	 that,	because	 that	 is	 the	only	way.	Try
being	an	ordinary	man,	nobody,	with	no	name,	no	identity,	with	nothing	to	claim,
with	no	power	to	enforce	on	others,	with	no	effort	to	dominate,	with	no	desire	to
possess,	just	being	a	nonentity.	Try	it	--	and	see	how	powerful	you	become,	how
filled	with	energy	and	overflowing,	so	powerful	that	you	can	share	your	power,
so	blissful	that	you	can	give	it	to	many,	to	millions.	And	the	more	you	give,	the
more	you	are	enriched.	The	more	you	share,	 the	more	 it	grows.	You	become	a
flood.
HE	WAS	ABLE	TO	UNDERSTAND	THE	POTENCY	OF	EMPTINESS	--	just
by	being	nobody	--	THE	VIEWPOINT	THAT	NOTHING	EXISTS	EXCEPT	IN
ITS
RELATIONSHIP	OF	SUBJECTIVITY	AND	OBJECTIVITY.
This	 is	one	of	 the	deepest	meditations	Buddha	discovered.	He	 says	everything
exists	in	relation,	it	is	a	relativity;	it	is	not	an	absolute,	substantial	thing.
For	 example:	 you	 are	 poor,	 I	 am	 rich.	 Is	 it	 a	 substantial	 thing	 or	 just	 a
relationship?	I	may	be	poor	in	relation	to	somebody	else,	and	you	may	be	rich	in
relation	to	somebody	else.
Even	a	beggar	can	be	rich	 in	 relation	 to	another	beggar;	 there	are	 rich	beggars
and	poor	beggars.	A	rich	man	in	comparison	to	a	richer	man	is	a	poor	man.	You
are	 poor	 --	 is	 your	 poverty	 existential	 or	 just	 a	 relationship?	 It	 is	 a	 relative
phenomenon.	If	there	is	nobody	to	be	related	to,	which	will	you	be,	a	poor	man
or	a	rich	man?
Think...	suddenly	the	whole	of	humanity	disappears	and	you	are	left	alone	on	the
earth:	which	will	you	be,	poor	or	 rich?	You	will	be	simply	YOU,	not	 rich,	not
poor	--	because	how	to	compare?	There	is	no	Rockefeller	to	compare	with,	there
is	no	beggar	to	compare	with.	Will	you	be	beautiful	or	ugly	when	you	are	alone?
You	will	be	neither,	you	will	be	simply	you.	With	nothing	to	compare	with,	how
can	you	be	ugly	or	beautiful?	So	with	beauty	and	ugliness,	richness	and	poverty
and	with	all	things.	Will	you	be	wise	or	a	fool?
Foolish	or	wise?	Neither!
So	Buddha	 says	 all	 these	 things	 exist	 in	 relationship.	They	 are	 not	 existential,
they	 are	 just	 concepts.	 And	 we	 are	 so	 bothered	 about	 these	 things	 which	 are
NOT.	 You	 are	 too	 bothered	 if	 you	 are	 ugly.	 You	 are	 too	 bothered	 if	 you	 are
beautiful.	The	worry	is	created	by	something	which	is	not.
A	relative	thing	is	NOT.	It	is	just	a	relationship,	as	if	you	have	drawn	a	design	in
the	 sky,	 a	 flower	 of	 air.	 Even	 a	 bubble	 in	 water	 is	 more	 substantial	 than
relativities.	 Who	 are	 you	 if	 you	 are	 alone?	 Nobody.	 Somebodiness	 comes	 in
relationship	with	somebody.
That	means,	 just	 to	be	nobody	 is	 to	be	 in	nature;	 just	 to	be	nobody	 is	 to	be	 in
existence.
And	you	are	alone,	remember.	The	society	exists	only	outside	you.	Deep	within
you	are	alone.	Close	your	eyes	and	see	whether	you	are	beautiful	or	ugly;	both
the	concepts	disappear,	 inside	 there	 is	no	beauty,	no	ugliness.	Close	your	 eyes
and	 contemplate	 who	 you	 are.	 Respected,	 not	 respected?	 Moral,	 immoral?
Young,	old?	Black,	white?	A	master	or	a	slave?	Who	are	you?	Close	your	eyes
and	in	your	aloneness	every	concept	drops.
You	cannot	be	anything.	Then	emptiness	arises.	All	concepts	nullified,	only	your
existence	remains.
This	 is	one	of	 the	deepest	meditations	Buddha	discovered:	To	be	nobody.	And
this	has	not	to	be	forced.	You	are	not	to	THINK	that	you	are	nobody,	you	have	to
realize	it;	otherwise	your	nobodiness	will	be	too	heavy.	You	are	not	to	think	that
you	are	nobody,	you	have	to	simply	realize	that	all	things	that	you	think	you	are,
are	relative.
And	truth	is	absolute,	it	is	not	relative.	Truth	is	not	relative:	it	does	not	depend
on	anything,	it	is	simply	there.	So	find	out	the	truth	within	you	and	don't	bother
about	 relationships.	 They	 differ,	 interpretations	 differ.	 And	 if	 interpretations
change,	you	change.
Something	is	in	fashion	--	if	you	use	it	you	are	modern,	appreciated.	Something
has	gone	out	of	fashion	--	if	you	use	it	you	are	out	of	date,	you	are	not	respected.
Fifty	years	before,	 that	was	in	fashion	and	you	would	have	been	modern.	Fifty
years	later	on	it	may	come	again	in	fashion	and	then	again	you	will	be	modern.
Right	now	you	are	out	of	date.
But	who	are	you	--	changing	fashions,	changing	concepts,	relativities?
One	of	my	friends	was	a	communist,	but	a	very	rich	man	--	and	he	never	felt	the
contradiction.	He	was	 a	bourgeois,	well	 fed,	 never	worked	with	his	hands.	He
had	many	 servants;	 he	 belonged	 to	 an	 old	 royal	 family.	 And	 then	 he	went	 to
Russia	 in	 1940.	When	 he	 came	 back	 he	 told	 me,	 'Wherever	 I	 went,	 I	 started
feeling	 guilty	 there	 --	 because	whenever	 I	 shook	 hands	with	 anybody,	 I	 could
feel	 immediately	 that	 the	 other	 felt	 that	my	hands	 didn't	 carry	 any	marks	 of	 a
laborer.	 They	 are	 not	 proletarian,	 they	 are	 bourgeois:	 soft,	 feminine.	 And
immediately	 the	other	person's	 face	would	change,	 and	he	would	 let	go	of	my
hand	as	if	I	was	untouchable.'	He	told	me,	'In	India,	whenever	I	shake	hands	with
anybody	 my	 hands	 are	 appreciated.	 They	 are	 beautiful,	 feminine,	 artistic.	 In
Russia,	I	felt	so	guilty	about	my	hands	that	I	even	started	to	think	how	to	destroy
their	softness,	so	that	nobody	would	look	at	me	as	an	exploiter	--	a	bourgeois,	a
rich	man.'	...
Because	there,	labor	has	become	a	value.	If	you	are	proletarian	in	Russia	you	are
somebody;	 if	 you	 are	 a	 rich	man	 you	 are	 a	 sinner.	Anything	 is	 just	 a	 relative
concept.
In	 India,	we	have	 respected	BHIKKHUS,	SWAMIS,	SANNYASINS.	And	 that
has	been	so	in	China	also	--	before	Mao.	A	man	who	renounced	the	world	was
the	most	 respected	man	 and	 the	 society	 cared	 about	 him.	 He	was	 the	 highest
peak	 of	 humanity.	 And	 then	 communism	 came	 to	 China	 and	 thousands	 of
monasteries	have	been	destroyed	completely,	and	all	 the	monks,	respected	men
of	 the	past,	have	become	sinners.	They	have	 to	work.	You	can	eat	only	 if	you
work,	 and	 begging	 is	 exploitation.	 It	 has	 been	 prohibited	 by	 the	 law;	 now
nobody	can	beg.
If	Buddha	were	born	in	China,	it	would	be	very	difficult	for	him	now.	He	would
not	be	allowed	to	beg,	he	would	be	thought	an	exploiter.	Even	if	Marx	were	born
in	China	or	Russia	he	would	be	in	difficulty	because	his	whole	life	he	never	did
anything	other	than	read	in	the	British	Museum.	He	was	not	a	proletarian,	he	was
not	a	laborer	--	and	his	friend	and	collaborator,	Friedrich	Engels,	was	a	very	rich
man.	They	are	worshipped	like	gods	there.	But	if	Friedrich	Engels	came	to	visit
Russia,	he	would	be	in	difficulty.	He	never	worked,	he	lived	on	others'	labor,	and
he	helped	Marx;	without	his	help	Marx	could	not	have	written	Das	Kapital	or	the
Communist	Manifesto.
But	now	it	is	different;	in	Russia,	he	would	be	in	difficulty	now,	the	fashion	has
changed.
Concepts	 change.	Remember	 this,	 that	 that	which	 changes	 is	 relative	 and	 that
which	remains	unchanging	is	absolute	--	and	your	being	is	absolute;	it	is	not	part
of	relativity.
...	 THE	 VIEWPOINT	 THAT	 NOTHING	 EXISTS	 EXCEPT	 IN	 ITS
RELATIONSHIP
OF	SUBJECTIVITY	AND	OBJECTIVITY.
If	 you	 understand	 this	 standpoint	 well,	 contemplate	 on	 it,	 meditate	 on	 it,
suddenly	you	are	illuminated	within	and	you	see	that	everything	is	empty.
ONE	DAY,	WHEN	SUBHUTI	WAS	SITTING	UNDER	A	TREE	IN	A	MOOD
OF
SUBLIME	EMPTINESS....
Remember	the	words	SUBLIME	EMPTINESS,	because	sometimes	you	also	feel
empty	-
-	 but	 that	 is	 not	 sublime.	 Sometimes	 you	 also	 feel	 empty,	 but	 not	 ecstatic
emptiness	 --	a	depression,	a	negative	emptiness,	not	a	positive	emptiness.	This
distinction	has	to	be	remembered.
A	 negative	 emptiness	means	 you	 are	 feeling	 a	 failure,	 not	 understanding.	You
have	tried	to	achieve	something	in	the	world	and	you	have	not	achieved	it.	You
feel	 empty	 because	 the	 thing	 you	 desired	 you	 couldn't	 get;	 the	 woman	 you
wanted	you	couldn't	get	 --	you	feel	empty.	The	man	you	were	after	escaped	--
you	 feel	 empty.	The	 success	 that	was	 in	your	dreams	could	not	happen	 --	you
feel	 empty.	 This	 emptiness	 is	 negative.	 This	 is	 a	 sadness,	 a	 depression,	 a
frustrated	 state	of	mind.	 If	you	are	 feeling	empty	 that	way,	 remember,	 flowers
will	 not	 shower	 on	 you.	Your	 emptiness	 is	 not	 real,	 not	 positive.	You	 are	 still
after	 things,	 that's	why	 you	 are	 feeling	 empty.	You	 are	 still	 after	 the	 ego;	 you
wanted	to	be	somebody	and	could	not.	It	is	a	failure,	not	an	understanding.
So	remember,	if	you	renounce	the	world	through	a	failure	it	is	not	renunciation,
it	is	not	sannyas,	it	is	not	true.	If	you	renounce	the	world	through	understanding,
that	 is	 totally	 different.	 You	 don't	 renounce	 it	 as	 a	 sad	 effort,	 with	 frustration
within,	failure	all	around.
You	 don't	 do	 it	 like	 a	 suicide,	 remember.	 If	 your	 sannyas	 is	 a	 suicide,	 then
flowers	will	not	shower	on	you	--	then	you	are	leaving....
You	must	have	heard	Aesop's	fable....
A	fox	was	passing,	and	there	were	grapes,	but	the	vine	was	high	on	a	tree.	She
tried	and	 tried	and	 jumped	but	 they	were	beyond	her	 reach.	So	she	went	away
saying,	 'They	are	not	worth	anything,	they	are	not	yet	sweet	and	ripe.	They	are
sour.'	She	couldn't	reach.
But	it	is	difficult	for	the	ego	to	realize,	'I	am	a	failure.'	Rather	than	recognizing,	'I
have	failed,	they	were	beyond	my	reach,'	the	ego	will	say,	'They	were	not	worth
anything.'
Your	many	sannyasins,	so-called	saints,	are	just	like	that	Aesop's	fox.	They	have
renounced	 the	world	not	because	 they	understood	 the	 futility	of	 it	 but	because
they	were	failures	and	it	was	beyond	their	reach	--	and	they	are	still	filled	with
grudge	 and	 complaint.	 You	 go	 to	 them	 and	 they	 will	 still	 be	 against,	 saying,
'Wealth	is	dirt;	and	what	is	a	beautiful	woman?	--	nothing	but	bones	and	blood!'
Who	are	they	trying	to	convince?
They	are	trying	to	convince	themselves	the	grapes	are	sour	and	bitter.
Why	 talk	 about	 women	 when	 you	 have	 left	 the	 world?	 And	 why	 talk	 about
wealth	 when	 you	 are	 not	 concerned	 with	 it?	 A	 deep	 concern	 still	 exists.	 You
cannot	accept	the	failure	yet	and	understanding	has	not	arisen.
Whenever	you	are	against	something,	remember,	understanding	has	not	arisen	--
because	 in	understanding	 for	 and	against	both	disappear.	 In	understanding	you
are	 not	 inimical	 to	 the	 world.	 In	 understanding	 you	 are	 not	 condemning	 the
world	and	the	people	there.	If	you	go	on	condemning,	your	condemnation	shows
that	somewhere	there	is	a	wound,	and	you	are	feeling	jealous	--	because	without
jealousy	there	can	be	no	condemnation.	You	condemn	people	because	somehow,
somewhere,	unconsciously	you	feel	they	are	enjoying	themselves	and	you	have
missed.	You	go	on	saying	this	world	is	 just	a	dream,	but	 if	 it	 is	really	a	dream
then	why	insist	that	it	is	a	dream?	Nobody	insists	about	dreams.
In	the	morning	you	wake	up	and	you	know	your	dream	was	a	dream	--	finished.
You	don't	go	telling	people	that	whatsoever	they	are	is	a	dream.
Remember	one	 trick	of	 the	mind:	you	 try	 to	 convince	people	 about	 something
just	to	convince	yourself,	because	when	the	other	feels	convinced	you	feel	okay.
If	you	go	and	 tell	people	 that	sex	 is	sin	and	 they	are	convinced	or	 they	cannot
refute	 you,	 you	 become	 happy.	 You	 have	 convinced	 yourself.	 Looking	 into
others'	eyes,	you	are	trying	to	cover	your	own	failure.
Negative	 emptiness	 is	 useless.	 It	 is	 simply	 the	 absence	 of	 something.	 Positive
emptiness	is	presence	of	something,	not	absence;	 that's	why	positive	emptiness
becomes	a	power.
Negative	emptiness	becomes	a	sad,	depressed	state	of	mind	--	you	simply	cave
yourself	 inwards,	 that's	 all.	 Feeling	 a	 failure,	 feeling	 dejected,	 feeling
everywhere	the	wall	that	you	cannot	cross,	feeling	impotent,	you	denounce,	you
condemn.
But	this	is	not	a	growth,	this	is	a	regression.	And	deep	inside	you	cannot	flower,
because	only	understanding	flowers,	never	depression,	and	if	you	cannot	flower,
existence	 is	not	going	 to	shower	flowers	on	you.	Existence	simply	responds	 to
you:	whatsoever	 you	 are,	 existence	 gives	 you	more	 of	 that.	 If	 you	 have	many
flowers	within	your	being	flowering,	a	million	times	more	flowers	will	shower
on	you.	If	you	have	a	deep	depression,	the	existence	helps	that	too	--	a	million
times	more	depression	will	come	to	you.	Whatsoever	you	are	will	knock	at	your
door.	Whatsoever	you	are	will	be	given	to	you	more	and	more.
So	 be	 careful	 and	 be	 alert.	 And	 remember,	 a	 sublime	 emptiness	 is	 a	 positive
phenomenon.	One	is	not	a	failure,	one	simply	looks	at	the	thing	and	understands
that	dreams	cannot	be	 fulfilled.	And	 then	one	never	 feels	 sad,	one	 feels	happy
that	 one	 has	 come	 to	 this	 understanding	 that	 dreams	 cannot	 be	 fulfilled.	 One
never	feels	depressed,	hopeless,	one	feels	simply	happy	and	blissful	because	one
has	come	to	an	understandinG:	Now	I	will	not	try	the	impossible,	now	I	will	not
try	the	futile.	And	one	NEVER	says	that	the	object	of	desire	is	wrong;	when	you
are	 in	 positive	 sublime	 emptiness,	 you	 say	 desire	 is	 wrong,	 not	 the	 object	 of
desire	--	this	is	the	difference.	In	negative	emptiness	you	say	the	object	of	desire
is	wrong,	so	change	the	object!	If	it	is	wealth,	money,	power	--	drop	it!	Make	the
object	God,	liberation,	heaven	--	change	the	object!
If	 emptiness	 is	 perfect	 and	 sublime	 and	 positive	 you	 don't	 see	 the	 object	 as
wrong,	you	simply	see	that	desire	is	futile;	objects	are	okay,	but	desire	is	futile.
Then	you	don't	change	your	desire	from	one	object	to	another	object,	you	simply
drop	the	desire	itself.
Nondesiring,	 you	 flower.	Desiring,	 you	 become	more	 and	more	 paralyzed	 and
dead.
ONE	DAY,	WHEN	SUBHUTI	WAS	SITTING	UNDER	A	TREE	IN	A	MOOD
OF
SUBLIME	EMPTINESS....
...	 Empty	 but	 happy,	 empty	 but	 filled;	 empty	 but	 not	 lacking,	 empty	 but
overflowing;	empty	but	at	ease,	at	home.
...	FLOWERS	BEGAN	TO	FALL	AROUND	HIM.
He	was	surprised	--	because	he	was	nobody.	He	never	expected	it.	If	you	expect,
they	never	shower;	if	you	don't	expect,	they	shower	--	but	then	you	are	surprised.
Why?
Subhuti	must	have	thought	something	had	gone	wrong.	Showering	on	Subhuti,	a
nobody,	no	one,	and	that	too	when	he	was	empty?	Not	even	thinking	of	God,	not
even	 thinking	 of	 liberation,	 not	 even	 meditating	 --	 because	 when	 you	 are
meditating	 you	 are	 not	 empty,	 you	 are	 doing	 something	 and	 filled	 with	 your
effort	--	not	doing	anything?	Subhuti	must	have	become	alert	that	something	had
gone	wrong:	 The	 gods	 have	 gone	 crazy.	Why	 these	 flowers,	 and	 it	 is	 not	 the
season?	He	must	 have	 looked	 at	 the	 tree	 and	 he	must	 have	 looked	 at	 himself
again.	On	ME,	flowers	are	showering?	He	could	not	believe	it.
Remember,	 whenever	 the	 ultimate	 happens	 to	 you,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 --
because	you	never	expected	 it;	you	were	not	waiting	for	 it	even,	you	were	not
hoping.	And	 those	who	are	expecting	and	waiting	and	hoping	and	praying	and
desiring	 --	 it	never	happens	 to	 them	because	 they	are	so	 tense.	They	are	never
empty,	never	relaxed.
The	 universe	 comes	 to	 you	 when	 you	 are	 relaxed,	 because	 then	 you	 are
vulnerable,	open	-
-	all	doors	open.	From	anywhere,	God	is	welcome.	But	you	are	not	praying,	and
you	are	not	asking	for	him	to	come;	you	are	not	doing	anything.	When	you	are
not	 doing	 anything,	 just	 in	 a	 mood	 of	 sublime	 emptiness,	 you	 become	 the
temple,	and	he	comes.
IN	 A	 MOOD	 OF	 SUBLIME	 EMPTINESS,	 FLOWERS	 BEGAN	 TO	 FALL
AROUND
HIM....
He	looked	all	around	--	what	is	happening?
'WE	ARE	PRAISING	YOU	FOR	YOUR	DISCOURSE	ON	EMPTINESS,'	THE
GODS
WHISPERED	TO	HIM.
He	couldn't	believe	it.	He	was	never	expecting	it.	He	couldn't	believe	that	he	was
worthy,	or	he	was	capable,	or	he	had	grown.
'WE	ARE	PRAISING	YOU	FOR	YOUR	DISCOURSE	ON	EMPTINESS,'	THE
GODS
WHISPERED	TO	HIM.
They	 have	 to	 whisper.	 They	 must	 have	 looked	 at	 the	 amazed	 eyes	 of	 this
Subhuti,	so	surprised.	They	said,	'We	are	praising	you.	Don't	be	so	surprised	and
don't	be	so	amazed.
Be	at	ease!	We	are	just	praising	you	for	your	discourse	on	emptiness.'
'BUT	I	HAVE	NOT	SPOKEN	OF	EMPTINESS,'
SAID	SUBHUTI	--	'I	have	not	spoken	anything!'
'YOU	HAVE	NOT	SPOKEN	OF	EMPTINESS,	WE	HAVE	NOT	HEARD
EMPTINESS,'	RESPONDED	THE	GODS.	'THIS	IS	TRUE	EMPTINESS.'
AND	BLOSSOMS	SHOWERED	UPON	SUBHUTI	LIKE	RAIN.
Try	 to	 understand.	 They	 said,	 'WE	 ARE	 PRAISING	 YOU	 FOR	 YOUR
DISCOURSE
ON	EMPTINESS,'	and	he	was	not	talking	to	anybody,	there	was	nobody.	He	was
not	talking	to	himself	because	he	was	empty,	not	divided.	He	was	not	talking	at
all,	 he	was	 simply	 there.	Nothing	was	 being	 done	 on	 his	 part	 --	 no	 clouds	 of
thought	were	passing	through	his	mind,	no	feelings	arising	in	his	heart:	he	was
simply	as	if	not.	He	was	simply	empty.
And	the	gods	said,	'WE	ARE	PRAISING	YOU	FOR	YOUR	DISCOURSE	ON
EMPTINESS.'
So	 he	 was	 more	 surprised	 and	 he	 said,	 'What?	 I	 HAVE	 NOT	 SPOKEN	 OF
EMPTINESS,	I	have	not	said	anything!'
They	 said,	 'You	 have	 not	 spoken	 and	 we	 have	 not	 heard.	 THIS	 IS	 TRUE
EMPTINESS.'
For	you	cannot	discourse	on	emptiness,	you	can	only	be	empty;	that	is	the	only
discourse.
Everything	else	can	be	 talked	about,	 everything	else	can	become	a	 sermon,	an
object	of	sermon,	everything	else	can	be	discussed,	argued	--	but	not	emptiness,
because	the	very	effort	to	say	anything	about	it	destroys	it.	The	moment	you	say
it,	it	is	not	there.	Even	a	single	word	is	enough	and	the	emptiness	is	lost.	Even	a
single	word	can	fill	you,	and	the	emptiness	disappears.
No,	nothing	can	be	said	about	 it.	Nobody	has	ever	said	anything	about	 it.	You
can	just	be	empty	and	that	is	the	discourse.	BEING	is	the	discourse.
Emptiness	can	never	become	an	object	of	thought,	thoughtlessness	is	its	nature.
So	the	gods	said,	'You	have	not	said	anything	and	we	have	not	heard.	That	is	the
beauty	of	it!
That's	why	we	are	praising	you.	Rarely	does	it	happen	that	somebody	is	simply
empty.
This	 is	 true	 emptiness'	 --	 and	 he	 was	 not	 even	 aware	 that	 it	 was	 emptiness,
because	if	you	are	aware,	something	foreign	has	entered	into	it:	you	are	divided,
you	are	split.	When	one	 is	 really	empty,	 there	 is	nothing	other	 than	emptiness,
not	 even	 the	 awareness	 of	 emptiness.	 Not	 even	 the	 witness	 is	 there.	 One	 is
perfectly	alert,	one	 is	not	asleep	--	but	 the	witness	 is	not	 there.	 It	goes	beyond
witnessing,	 because	whenever	 you	witness	 something	 there	 is	 a	 slight	 tension
inside,	 a	 subtle	 effort,	 and	 then	 emptiness	 is	 something	 else	 and	 you	 are
something	else.	You	witness	it,	you	are	not	empty;	then	emptiness	is	again	just	a
thought	in	the	mind.
People	come	to	me	and	say,	'I	have	experienced	one	moment	of	emptiness.'	And
I	 tell	 them,	 'If	 you	 have	 experienced	 it	 then	 forget	 about	 it,	 because	who	will
experience	it?
The	 experiencer	 is	 enough,	 enough	 of	 a	 barrier.	 Who	 will	 experience	 it?'
Emptiness	cannot	be	experienced,	it	is	not	an	experience	because	the	experiencer
is	 not	 there:	 the	 experiencer	 and	 the	 experience	 have	 become	 one.	 It	 is	 an
EXPERIENCING.
Allow	me	to	coin	this	word:	it	is	an	EXPERIENCING.	It	is	a	process,	undivided
--	both	 the	poles	have	disappeared,	both	 the	banks	have	disappeared,	 and	only
the	river	exists.
You	 cannot	 say,	 'I	 experienced,'	 because	 you	 were	 not	 there	 --	 how	 can	 you
experience	it?
And	once	you	enter	 it	you	cannot	make	it	a	past	experience,	you	cannot	say,	 'I
experienced,'	for	then	it	becomes	a	past	memory.
No,	emptiness	can	never	become	a	memory,	because	emptiness	can	never	leave	a
trace.	It	cannot	leave	any	footprints.	How	can	emptiness	become	a	past	memory?
How	can	you	say	'I	experienced'?	It	is	always	in	the	now,	it	is	experiencING.	It	is
neither	past	nor	future,	it	is	always	an	ongoing	process.	Once	you	enter	you	have
entered.	You	cannot	even	say,	'I	experienced'	--	that's	why	Subhuti	was	not	even
aware	of	what	was	happening.	He	was	not	 there.	Any	distinction	between	him
and	 the	 universe	 was	 not	 there.	 No	 distinction,	 all	 boundaries	 dissolved.	 The
universe	started	melting	 in	him,	he	melted	 into	 the	universe:	merging,	melting,
oneness.	And	the	gods	said,	'This	is	true	emptiness.'
AND	BLOSSOMS	SHOWERED	UPON	SUBHUTI	LIKE	RAIN.
This	last	line	has	to	be	understood	very	very	carefully,	because	when	somebody
says	that	you	are	empty,	immediately	the	ego	can	come	back	--	because	you	will
become	 aware,	 and	 you	 will	 feel	 something	 has	 been	 achieved.	 Suddenly	 the
gods	will	make	you	aware	that	you	are	empty.
But	Subhuti	 is	 rare,	extraordinarily	 rare.	Even	 though	 the	gods	shouted	around
him,	whispered	in	his	ears,	and	the	flowers	were	showering	on	him	like	rain,	he
didn't	bother.
He	simply	kept	silent.	They	said,	'You	have	spoken,	you	have	given	a	discourse!'
He	listened	without	coming	back.	They	said,	'You	have	not	spoken,	we	have	not
heard.	THIS
IS	TRUE	EMPTINESS!'	There	was	no	ego	saying,	'The	true	happiness	happened
to	me.
Now	I	have	become	enlightened'	--	otherwise	he	would	have	missed	at	the	last
point.	And	immediately	flowers	would	have	stopped	showering,	if	he	had	come
back.	No,	he	must	have	closed	his	eyes	and	he	must	have	thought,	 'These	gods
are	mad	and	these	flowers	are	dreams	--	don't	bother.'
The	emptiness	was	so	beautiful	 that	now	nothing	could	be	more	beautiful	 than
that.	 He	 simply	 remained	 in	 his	 sublime	 emptiness	 --	 that's	 why	 blossoms
showered	upon	Subhuti	as	rain.	Now	they	were	not	falling	a	few	here	and	a	few
there,	now	they	were	showering	like	rain.
This	 is	 the	 only	 story	 about	 Subhuti,	 nothing	 is	 said	 about	 him	 anymore.
Nowhere	 is	he	mentioned	again.	But	 I	 tell	you	 the	 flowers	are	 still	 showering.
Subhuti	is	no	longer	under	any	tree	--	because	when	one	becomes	really,	totally
empty,	one	dissolves	into	the	universe.
But	the	universe	still	celebrates	it.	The	flowers	go	on	showering.
But	you	will	be	able	to	know	them	only	when	they	shower	for	you.	When	God
knocks	 at	 your	 door	 only	 then	 do	 you	 know	 that	 God	 is,	 never	 before.	 All
arguments	are	futile,	all	discourses	not	 to	the	point,	unless	God	knocks	at	your
door.	Unless	it	happens	to	YOU,	nothing	can	become	a	conviction.
I	talk	about	Subhuti	because	this	happened	to	me,	and	this	is	not	a	metaphor;	it	is
literal.	 I	 had	 read	 about	 Subhuti	 before,	 but	 I	 thought,	 'It	 is	 a	 metaphor	 --
beautiful,	 poetic.'	 I	 had	never	 even	a	 slight	notion	 that	 this	happens	 actually.	 I
never	thought	that	this	was	a	realistic	phenomenon,	a	real	thing	that	happens.
But	now	I	 tell	you	it	happens.	 It	happened	to	me,	 it	can	happen	to	you...	but	a
sublime	emptiness	is	needed.
And	never	be	confused.	Don't	ever	think	that	your	negative	emptiness	can	ever
become	sublime.	Your	negative	emptiness	is	like	darkness;	sublime	emptiness	is
like	 light,	 it	 is	 like	 a	 rising	 sun.	 Negative	 emptiness	 is	 like	 death.	 Sublime
emptiness	is	like	life,	eternal	life.	It	is	blissful.
Allow	that	mood	to	penetrate	you	deeper	and	deeper.	Go	and	sit	under	trees.	Just
sit,	 not	 doing	 anything.	 Everything	 stops!	 When	 you	 stop,	 everything	 stops.
Time	will	not	be	moving,	as	if	suddenly	the	world	has	come	to	a	peak	and	there
is	no	movement.	But	don't	bring	 in	 the	 idea,	 'Now	I	am	empty,'	otherwise	you
will	 miss.	 And	 even	 if	 gods	 start	 showering	 flowers	 on	 you,	 don't	 pay	 much
attention.
And	now	you	know	the	story,	don't	even	ask	why.	Subhuti	had	to	ask,	you	need
not.	And	even	if	they	whisper	by	themselves,	'We	have	heard	true	emptiness	and
the	discourse	on	 it,'	 don't	bother,	 and	 the	 flowers	will	 shower	 like	 rain	on	you
too.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	The	brash	student
1	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411010
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
89
mins
WHEN	YAMAOKA	WAS	A	BRASH	STUDENT	HE	VISITED	THE	MASTER
DOKUON.
WANTING	TO	 IMPRESS	THE	MASTER	HE	SAID:	 'THERE	 IS	NO	MIND,
THERE	IS
NO	BODY,	THERE	 IS	NO	BUDDHA.	THERE	 IS	NO	BETTER,	THERE	 IS
NO
WORSE.	THERE	IS	NO	MASTER,	THERE	IS	NO	STUDENT.	THERE	IS	NO
GIVING,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 RECEIVING.	 WHAT	WE	 THINK	WE	 SEE	 AND
FEEL	IS
NOT	REAL.	NONE	OF	THESE	SEEMING	THINGS	REALLY	EXISTS.'
DOKUON	 HAD	 BEEN	 SITTING	 QUIETLY	 SMOKING	 HIS	 PIPE,	 AND
SAYING
NOTHING.	 SUDDENLY	 HE	 PICKED	 UP	 HIS	 STAFF	 AND	 GAVE
YAMAOKA	A	TERRIBLE	WHACK.
YAMAOKA	JUMPED	UP	IN	ANGER.
DOKUON	 SAID:	 'SINCE	 NONE	 OF	 THESE	 THINGS	 REALLY	 EXISTS,
AND	ALL
IS	 EMPTINESS,	 WHERE	 DOES	 YOUR	 ANGER	 COME	 FROM?	 THINK
ABOUT	IT.'
KNOWLEDGE	IS	NOT	OF	MUCH	HELP.	Only	being	can	become	the	vehicle
for	the	other	shore.
You	can	go	on	thinking,	accumulating	information	--	but	those	are	paper	boats,
they	won't	help	in	an	ocean	voyage.	If	you	remain	on	the	shore	and	go	on	talking
about	them,	it	is	okay	--	paper	boats	are	as	good	as	real	boats	if	you	never	go	for
the	 voyage;	 but	 if	 you	 go	 for	 the	 voyage	 with	 paper	 boats	 then	 you	 will	 be
drowned.	And	words	are	nothing	but	paper	boats	--	not	even	that	substantial.
And	when	we	accumulate	knowledge,	what	do	we	do?	Nothing	changes	inside.
The	 being	 remains	 absolutely	 unaffected.	 Just	 like	 dust,	 information	 gathers
around	you	 --	 just	 like	 dust	 gathering	 around	 a	mirror:	 the	mirror	 remains	 the
same,	only	it	loses	its	mirroring	quality.	What	you	know	through	the	mind	makes
no	difference	--	your	consciousness	remains	the	same.	In	fact	it	becomes	worse,
because	 accumulated	 knowledge	 is	 just	 like	 dust	 around	 your	 mirroring
consciousness;	the	consciousness	reflects	less	and	less	and	less.
The	more	you	know,	the	less	aware	you	become.	When	you	are	completely	filled
with	 scholarship,	 borrowed	 knowledge,	 you	 are	 already	 dead.	 Then	 nothing
comes	to	you	as	your	own.	Everything	is	borrowed	and	parrotlike.
Mind	IS	a	parrot.	I	have	heard	--	it	happened	in	the	days	of	Joseph	Stalin	--	that	a
man,	 a	 very	 prominent	 communist,	 came	 to	 the	 Moscow	 police	 station	 and
reported	 that	 his	 parrot	was	missing.	 Because	 this	man	was	 a	 very	 prominent
communist,	 the	 chief	 at	 the	police	 station	 inquired	 about	 the	parrot,	 for	 it	was
significant	and	had	to	be	searched	for.
In	his	inquiries	he	asked,	'Does	the	parrot	talk?'
The	communist,	the	comrade,	felt	a	slight	fear,	and	then	he	said,	 'Yes,	he	talks.
But	note	it	down:	whatsoever	political	opinions	he	has,	they	are	completely	his
own.'
But	how	can	a	parrot	have	opinions	of	its	own?	A	parrot	cannot	have	opinions	of
its	own
--	and	neither	can	mind,	because	mind	 is	a	mechanism.	A	parrot	 is	more	alive
than	 a	mind.	Even	 a	 parrot	may	have	 some	opinions	 of	 its	 own,	 but	 the	mind
cannot.	Mind	is	a	computer,	a	biocomputer.	It	accumulates.	It	is	never	original,	it
cannot	be.	Whatsoever	it	has	is	borrowed,	taken	from	others.
You	become	original	only	when	you	transcend	mind.	When	the	mind	is	dropped,
and	the	consciousness	faces	existence	directly,	immediately,	moment	to	moment
in	contact	with	existence,	you	become	original.	Then	for	 the	first	 time	you	are
authentically	your	own.
Otherwise	all	ideas	are	borrowed.	You	may	quote	scriptures,	you	may	know	by
heart	all	the	Vedas,	the	Koran,	the	Gita,	The	Bible,	but	that	makes	no	difference	-
-	they	are	not	your	own.	And	knowledge	that	is	not	your	own	is	dangerous,	more
dangerous	than	ignorance,	because	it	is	a	hidden	ignorance,	and	you	will	not	be
able	 to	 see	 that	 you	 are	 deceiving	 yourself.	 You	 are	 carrying	 false	 coins	 and
thinking	that	you	are	a	rich	man,	carrying	false	stones	and	thinking	that	they	are
Kohinoors.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 your	 poverty	 will	 be	 revealed.	 Then	 you	 will	 be
shocked.
This	happens	whenever	you	die,	whenever	death	comes	near.	 In	 the	shock	that
death	 gives	 to	 you,	 suddenly	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 have	 not	 gained
anything	--	because	only	that	is	gained	which	is	gained	in	being.
You	have	 accumulated	 fragments	of	 knowledge	 from	here	 and	 there,	 you	may
have	become	a	great	encyclopedia,	but	that	is	not	the	point;	and	particularly	for
those	who	are	in	search	of	truth,	that	is	a	barrier,	not	a	help.	Knowledge	has	to	be
transcended.
When	there	is	no	knowledge,	knowing	happens,	because	knowing	is	your	quality
--	 the	 quality	 of	 consciousness.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 mirror:	 the	 mirror	 reflects
whatsoever	 is	 there;	 consciousness	 reflects	 the	 truth	 that	 is	 always	 in	 front	 of
you,	just	at	the	tip	of	your	nose.
But	 the	mind	 is	 in	 between	 --	 and	 the	mind	 goes	 on	 chattering,	 and	 the	 truth
remains	just	in	front	of	you	and	the	mind	goes	on	chattering.	And	you	go	with
the	mind.	You	miss.
Mind	is	a	great	missing.
Before	we	enter	this	beautiful	anecdote,	a	few	more	things.	First:	knowledge	is
borrowed,	realize	this.	The	very	realization	becomes	a	dropping	of	it.	You	don't
have	to	do	anything.
Simply	 realize	 that	 whatsoever	 you	 know	 you	 have	 heard,	 you	 have	 not
KNOWN	it.	You	have	read	it,	you	have	not	realized	it;	 it	 is	not	a	revelation	to
you,	it	 is	a	conditioning	of	the	mind.	It	has	been	taught	to	you	--	you	have	not
learned	it.	Truth	can	be	learned,	cannot	be	taught.
Learning	means	being	responsive	to	whatsoever	is	around	you	--	that	which	is,	to
be	responsive	to	it.	This	is	a	great	learning,	but	not	knowledge.
There	is	no	way	to	find	truth	--	except	through	finding	it.	There	is	no	short	cut	to
it.	You	cannot	borrow,	you	cannot	steal,	you	cannot	deceive,	to	get	to	it.	There	is
simply	no	way	unless	you	are	without	any	mind	within	you	--	because	mind	is	a
wavering,	 mind	 is	 a	 continuous	 trembling;	 mind	 is	 never	 unmoving,	 it	 is	 a
movement.	Mind	is	just	like	a	breeze,	continuously	flowing,	and	the	flame	goes
on	wavering.	When	mind	 is	not	 there	 the	breeze	stops,	and	 the	flame	becomes
unmoving.	When	your	consciousness	is	an	unmoving	flame,	you	know	the	truth.
You	have	to	learn	how	not	to	follow	the	mind.
Nobody	can	give	you	the	truth,	nobody,	not	even	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Krishna	--
nobody	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you.	And	 it	 is	 beautiful	 that	 nobody	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you,
otherwise	it	would	become	a	commodity	in	the	market.	If	it	can	be	given,	then	it
can	be	sold	also.	If	it	can	be	given,	then	it	can	be	stolen	also.	If	it	can	be	given
then	you	can	take	it	from	your	friend,	borrow	it.	It	 is	beautiful	 that	 truth	is	not
transferable	 in	 any	 way.	 Unless	 YOU	 reach	 it,	 you	 cannot	 reach.	 Unless	 you
BECOME	it,	you	never	have	it.	In	fact,	it	is	not	something	you	can	have.	It	is	not
a	commodity,	a	thing,	a	thought.	You	can	BE	it,	but	you	cannot	have	it.
In	the	world,	in	THIS	world,	we	can	have	everything	--	everything	can	become
part	 of	 our	 possessions.	 Truth	 can	 never	 be	 possessed,	 because	 there	 are	 two
commodities	 which	 can	 be	 possessed:	 thoughts	 and	 things.	 Things	 can	 be
possessed,	thoughts	can	be	possessed	--	truth	is	neither.	Truth	is	being.	You	can
become	it,	but	you	cannot	possess	it.
You	 cannot	 have	 it	 in	 your	 safe,	 you	 cannot	 have	 it	 in	 your	 book,	 you	 cannot
have	it	in	your	hand.	When	you	have	it,	you	ARE	it.	You	become	truth.	It	is	not	a
concept,	it	is	a	being	itself.
Second	 thing	 to	 remember:	 this	 is	 a	human	 tendency,	 to	 try	 to	 show	you	have
that	which	you	don't	have.	 If	you	have	 it,	you	don't	 try	 to	 show	 it,	 there	 is	no
point.	 If	 you	don't	 have	 it	 you	 try	 to	 show	 it,	 as	 if	 you	have	 it.	 So	 remember,
whatsoever	you	want	to	show	to	people,	that	is	the	thing	you	don't	have.
If	you	go	 to	a	 rich	man's	house,	become	his	guest	 --	nothing	changes;	 if	he	 is
really	rich	nothing	changes,	he	simply	accepts	you.	Go	to	a	poor	man's	house	--
he	 changes	 everything.	 He	 may	 borrow	 furniture	 from	 his	 neighbor,	 a	 carpet
from	somebody	else,	curtains	from	somebody	else.	He	would	like	to	impress	you
that	he	is	rich.	If	you	are	not	rich	you	would	like	to	impress	people	that	you	are
rich.	 And	 if	 you	 don't	 know,	 you	 would	 like	 people	 to	 think	 that	 you	 know.
Whenever	you	want	to	impress	somebody,	remember	this:	it	is	a	human	tendency
to	impress,	because	nobody	wants	to	look	poor	--
and	more	so	where	things	of	the	other	world	are	concerned.
You	can	be	a	poor	man	as	far	as	things	of	this	world	are	concerned,	that	is	not
much	of	a	poverty;	but	as	far	as	God,	the	soul,	liberation,	truth	are	concerned	--
it	is	too	much	to	bear,	to	be	poor	is	too	much	to	bear.	You	would	like	to	impress
people	 that	 you	 have	 something,	 and	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 impress	 them	 as	 far	 as
things	of	this	world	are	concerned,	because	those	things	are	visible.	It	is	easy	to
impress	people	about	things	of	the	other	world	because	they	are	not	visible.	You
can	impress	people	that	you	know,	without	knowing.
The	problem	arises	because	when	you	impress	others,	there	is	a	possibility	that
you	may	be	impressed	yourself	by	their	eyes	and	their	convictions	that	you	have
something.	If	many	people	are	convinced	that	you	know,	by	and	by	YOU	will	be
convinced	that	you	know	--	there	is	the	problem,	because	deceiving	others	is	not
much	of	a	problem.	But	if	you	are	deceived	by	your	own	effort,	then	it	will	be
almost	 impossible	 to	bring	you	out	of	your	sleep,	because	you	 think	 it	 is	not	a
sleep	at	all!	You	think	you	are	fully	awake.	It	will	be	difficult	to	bring	you	out	of
your	ignorance	because	you	think	you	are	enlightened	already.	It	will	be	difficult
to	bring	you	out	of	your	disease	because	you	believe	 that	you	are	healthy	and
whole	already!
The	 greatest	 barrier	 that	 stands	 between	 you	 and	 the	 truth	 is	 that	 you	 have
convinced	yourself	via	others	that	you	already	have	it.	So	it	 is	a	vicious	circle.
First:	you	 try	 to	convince	others	 --	 and	you	CAN	convince	others	because	 the
thing	is	invisible.	Second:	others	don't	have	it	either,	so	they	don't	know.	If	you
go	 and	 start	 talking	 about	God,	 and	 go	 on	 talking,	 sooner	 or	 later	 people	will
start	thinking	that	you	know	about	God	--
because	 they	 don't	 know	 either.	 Except	 for	 the	 word	 god	 they	 don't	 know
anything	 about	 it,	 and	 you	 can	 be	 very	 clever	 and	 cunning,	 cunning	 about
theories	and	philosophies,	argumentative.	And	 if	you	go	on	and	on,	 just	out	of
sheer	boredom	they	will	say,	'Yes,	we	believe	that	you	know,	but	be	finished.'
I	have	heard,	once	it	happened:	there	was	one	great	mystic,	Baal	Shem,	a	Jew,	a
Hassid.
A	scholar	came	to	see	him,	a	pretender	--	and	all	scholars	are	pretenders,	because
by
'scholar'	 I	mean	someone	who	knows	something	 through	 the	scriptures,	words,
language,	who	has	not	encountered	 the	reality	himself	 --	and	he	started	 talking
about	 old	 prophets,	 and	 the	 Old	 Testament,	 and	 commenting	 about	 them...
everything	borrowed	of	 course,	 unoriginal;	 foolish	 on	his	 part	 because	 he	was
talking	to	a	man	who	KNOWS.
Baal	Shem	listened	out	of	compassion,	and	then	in	the	end	he	said,	'Too	bad,	too
bad;	had	the	great	Maimonides	known	you....'
Maimonides	is	a	Jewish	philosopher,	a	very	great	philosopher,	so	the	pretender
was	 very	 happy,	 overjoyed	 with	 this	 compliment,	 that	 had	 great	 Maimonides
known	him....	So	he	asked,	'I	am	so	happy	that	you	recognize	me	and	you	have
given	me	recognition.	Just	one	thing	more:	why	do	you	say,	"Too	bad,	too	bad;
had	 the	 great	Maimonides	 known	 you...?"	What	 do	 you	mean?	 Please	 tell	me
this	--	what	do	you	mean?'
Said	Baal	Shem,	'Then	you	would	have	bored	him,	not	me.'
Just	 out	 of	 sheer	 boredom	 people	 start	 believing,	 'Yes,	 you	 know	 --	 but	 keep
quiet.'	And,	moreover,	you	don't	know,	you	are	as	ignorant	as	they.	There	is	only
one	 difference:	 you	 are	 more	 articulate,	 you	 have	 read	 more,	 you	 have
accumulated	a	little	more	dust,	and	they	cannot	argue,	and	you	can	put	them	in
their	places	and	make	them	silent.	They	HAVE	TO	believe	that	you	know,	and	it
doesn't	make	any	difference	to	them	whether	you	know	it	or	not.
Be	happy	if	you	think	you	know,	but	you	are	creating	such	a	stone	wall	it	will	be
difficult	 for	 you	 to	 break	 it	 --	 because	 if	 you	 convince	 others,	 you	 become
convinced	 that,	 Yes,	 I	 know.	 That's	 how	 there	 are	 so	many	 so-called	masters.
They	don't	know	anything,	but	they	have	followers,	and	because	of	the	followers
they	are	convinced	that	they	know.
Take	away	their	followers	and	you	will	see	their	confidence	is	gone.
Deep	 down,	 depth	 psychologists	 say	 that	 people	 accumulate	 followers	 just	 to
convince	themselves	that	they	know.	Without	followers,	how	will	you	convince
yourself?	There	is	no	way	--	you	are	alone!	And	it	is	difficult	to	deceive	oneself
directly,	it	is	easy	to	deceive	oneself	via	others.	When	you	talk	to	someone	and
you	see	the	light	in	his	eyes,	you	are	convinced	that	you	must	have	something,
otherwise,	 'Why	 did	 this	 light	 come	 to	 his	 eyes,	 his	 face?	He	was	 impressed.'
That's	why	we	hanker	so	much	to	impress	people.
The	mind	wants	to	impress	people	so	that	it	can	be	impressed	via	them,	and	can
then	believe	 in	 its	borrowed	knowledge	as	 if	 it	 is	a	 revelation.	Beware	of	 this.
This	is	one	of	the	trickiest	traps.	Once	you	fall	into	it,	it	will	be	difficult	for	you
to	come	out.
A	sinner	can	 reach	 the	 truth	more	easily	 than	a	 scholar,	because	a	 sinner	 feels
deep	down	that	he	is	guilty,	he	can	repent,	and	he	feels	he	has	done	something
wrong.	You	cannot	 find	a	 sinner	who	 is	basically	happy.	He	 feels	 the	guilt;	he
has	done	something	wrong	and	he	repents	in	the	unconscious;	he	wants	to	undo
whatsoever	he	has	done	to	bring	about	the	balance	in	his	life,	and	some	day	or
other	he	will	bring	the	balance.	But	if	you	are	a	scholar,	a	man	of	words,	theories
and	philosophies,	a	great	pundit,	then	it	is	difficult,	because	you	never	feel	guilt
about	your	scholarship,	you	feel	happy	and	egoistic	about	it.
Remember	 one	 thing:	 whatsoever	 gives	 you	 a	 feeling	 of	 ego	 is	 a	 barrier;
whatsoever	gives	you	a	feeling	of	egolessness	is	the	Way.
If	you	are	a	sinner	and	you	feel	guilty,	that	means	your	ego	is	shaken.	Through
sin	 you	 cannot	 accumulate	 ego.	 It	 has	 happened	many	 times	 that	 a	 sinner	 has
taken	the	jump	in	a	moment	and	has	become	a	saint.	It	happened	to	Valmiki,	an
Indian	 saint,	 the	 first	 to	 tell	 the	 story	 of	 Rama.	 Valmiki	 was	 a	 robber	 and	 a
murderer,	 and	 in	 a	 single	 moment	 the	 transformation	 happened.	 It	 has	 never
happened	like	that	to	any	pundit	ever	--	and	India	is	a	great	country	of	pundits:
the	brahmins,	the	scholars.	You	cannot	compete	with	Indian	scholars	--	they	have
a	long	heritage	of	thousands	of	years,	and	they	have	lived	on	words	and	words
and	words.	But	it	has	never	happened	that	a	scholar	in	a	single	moment	took	a
jump,	exploded,	was	broken	from	the	past	and	became	totally	new.	It	has	never
happened	 that	 way.	 But	 it	 has	 happened	many	 times	with	 sinners,	 in	 a	 single
moment,	because	deep	down	they	were	never	able	to	make	arrangements	in	their
ego	with	whatsoever	 they	were	 doing.	Whatsoever	 they	were	 doing	was	 ego-
shattering	--	and	ego	is	the	wall,	the	stone	wall.
If	you	feel	you	are	a	moralist,	a	puritan,	you	will	create	a	subtle	ego.	If	you	think
you	are	a	knower,	you	will	create	a	subtle	ego.	Remember,	there	is	no	sin	except
the	 ego,	 so	 don't	 accumulate	 it;	 and	 it	 is	 always	 accumulated	 through	 false
things,	 because	 real	 things	 always	 shatter	 it.	 If	 you	 REALLY	 know,	 the	 ego
disappears;	if	you	don't	know,	it	accumulates	and	becomes	bigger	and	bigger	and
stronger.	If	you	are	really	a	pure	man,	a	religious	man,	ego	disappears;	but	if	you
are	 a	 puritan,	 a	moralist,	 then	 ego	 is	 strengthened.	 This	 should	 always	 be	 the
criterion	to	judge	whether	whatsoever	you	are	doing	is	good	or	wrong:	judge	it
by	the	ego.	If	ego	is	strengthened,	then	it	is	wrong:	drop	it	as	soon	as	you	can,
drop	it	immediately!	If	ego	is	not	strengthened,	it	is	good.
If	you	go	to	the	temple	every	day,	or	to	church	every	Sunday,	and	you	feel	ego	is
strengthened,	don't	go	to	church	--	stop;	don't	go	to	the	temple,	it	is	not	helping
you,	it	is	a	poison.	If	you	feel	by	going	to	church	that	you	are	religious,	you	are
something	 extraordinary,	 greater,	 purer	 than	 others,	 holier-than-thou,	 if	 this
attitude	comes	to	you,	holier-than-thou,	then	drop	it,	because	this	attitude	is	the
only	sin	in	the	world	that	exists.
All	else	is	child's	play.	This	is	the	only	sin	--	this	attitude	of	holier-than-thou.
Do	 only	 that	 which	 doesn't	 strengthen	 your	 ego,	 and	 sooner	 or	 later	 you	will
become	enlightened,	because	when	the	ego	is	not,	if	even	for	a	single	moment	it
leaves	you	--
suddenly	 the	eyes	open	and	you	have	seen	 it.	Once	seen,	 it	 is	never	 forgotten.
Once	glimpsed,	 it	becomes	such	a	powerful	magnet	 in	your	life	 that	 it	goes	on
drawing	you	nearer	 and	nearer	 to	 the	 center	 of	 the	world.	Sooner	 or	 later	 you
will	be	merged	into	it.
But	 the	ego	 resists,	 the	ego	 resists	 surrender.	 It	 resists	 love,	 it	 resists	prayer,	 it
resists	meditation,	 it	resists	God.	Ego	is	a	resistance,	a	fight	against	 the	whole;
that's	why	 it	 is	 a	 sin.	And	 ego	 is	 always	 interested	 in	 impressing	 people.	 The
more	 you	 can	 impress	 people,	 the	 more	 ego	 gets	 food.	 This	 is	 a	 fact.	 If	 you
cannot	 impress	 anybody,	 the	 supports	 are	 withdrawn	 and	 the	 ego	 starts
trembling.	It	has	no	base	in	reality,	it	depends	on	others'	opinions.
Now	try	to	enter	this	anecdote:	The	Brash	Student.
This	is	a	contradiction,	because	a	student	cannot	be	brash,	and	if	he	is,	he	cannot
be	a	student.	A	student	cannot	be	impudent,	he	cannot	be	rude,	he	cannot	be	an
egoist.	 If	 he	 is	 he	 cannot	 be	 a	 student,	 because	 to	 be	 a	 student	 means	 to	 be
receptive,	to	be	ready	to	learn.	And	what	is	readiness	to	learn?	Readiness	to	learn
means:	I	know	that	I	am	ignorant.	If	I	KNOW	that	I	know,	how	can	I	learn?	The
doors	are	closed,	I	am	not	ready	to	learn;	really,	I	am	ready	to	teach.
It	happened	once	in	a	zen	monastery:	a	man	came;	he	wanted	to	be	initiated.	The
master	 said,	 'We	 have	 two	 categories	 of	 initiates	 here.	 I	 have	 five	 hundred
inmates	in	the	ashram,	in	the	monastery,	and	we	have	two	categories:	one	is	that
of	disciple,	and	one	that	of	master.	So	which	category	would	you	like	to	join?'
The	man	was	 absolutely	 new,	 he	 even	 felt	 a	 little	 hesitation.	He	 said,	 'If	 it	 is
possible	then	I	would	like	to	be	initiated	as	a	master.'
The	master	 was	 just	 joking.	 He	 was	 just	 joking	 --	 and	 wanted	 to	 look	 to	 the
deeper	unconscious.
Everybody	would	 like	 to	 be	 a	master,	 and	 even	 if	 you	 become	 a	 disciple	 you
become	one	only	as	a	means,	just	as	a	means	to	become	a	master:	you	have	to
pass	through	it,	it	is	a	compulsion;	otherwise	how	can	you	become	a	master?	So
you	have	to	be	a	disciple,	but	the	search	of	the	ego	is	to	be	the	master.	The	ego
would	like	to	teach,	not	to	learn,	and	even	if	you	learn	it	is	learning	with	the	idea
of	how	to	get	ready	to	teach.
You	listen	to	me.	With	listening	I	have	two	categories	also:	you	can	listen	like	a
disciple;	 you	 can	 listen	 like	 a	 would-be	master.	 If	 you	 listen	 like	 a	 would-be
master	you	will	miss,	because	you	cannot	listen	with	that	attitude.	If	you	are	just
waiting,	getting	ready,	and	wondering	how	to	jump	into	being	a	master	and	teach
others,	you	cannot	be	receptive.
You	can	learn	only	if	you	are	a	disciple	with	no	thought	of	becoming	a	master.
This	was	one	of	the	oldest	traditions	in	the	East	--	that	a	person	would	not	start
teaching	unless	his	master	told	him	to.
There	was	one	disciple	of	Buddha	who	remained	for	many	years	with	him;	his
name	was	 Purna.	He	 became	 enlightened,	 and	 he	 still	 remained	with	Buddha.
After	his	enlightenment	he	would	also	come	every	day	in	the	morning	to	listen	to
Buddha.	He	himself	was	now	a	buddha;	nothing	was	 lacking,	he	stood	now	in
his	own	right,	but	he	continued	to	come.
One	day	Buddha	asked	Purna,	'Why	do	you	go	on	coming?	Now	you	can	stop.'
And	Purna	said,	'Unless	you	say	so,	how	can	I	stop?	If	you	say	so,	it	is	okay.'
Then	 he	 stopped	 coming	 to	 Buddha's	 lectures,	 but	 he	 remained	 just	 like	 a
shadow	moving	with	the	SANGHA,	with	the	order.	Then	after	a	few	years,	again
Buddha	said,	'Purna,	why	do	you	go	on	following	me?	You	go	and	teach	people!
You	need	not	be	here	with	me.'
And	Purna	said,	 'I	was	waiting.	When	you	say	so,	I	will	go.	I	am	a	disciple,	so
whatsoever	 you	 say	 I	will	 do.	 If	 you	 say	 so,	 it's	 okay.	 So	where	 should	 I	 go?
Which	direction	should	I	go?	Whom	should	I	teach?	You	simply	direct	me	and	I
will	follow!	I	am	a	follower.'
This	man	must	have	listened	to	Buddha	totally,	because	even	when	he	becomes
enlightened	 he	 remains	 a	 disciple.	 And	 there	 are	 people	 who	 are	 absolutely
ignorant	--
and	they	are	already	'masters'.	Even	if	they	are	listening,	they	are	listening	with
an	attitude	 that	sooner	or	 later	 they	have	 to	 teach.	You	 listen	 just	 to	 tell	others
what	you	have	learned!	Drop	that	idea	completely	from	the	mind,	because	if	that
idea	is	there,	if	the	would-be	master	is	there,	the	disciple	cannot	exist	with	that
idea;	they	never	coexist.
A	disciple	is	simply	a	disciple.	One	day	it	happens	that	he	becomes	a	master	--
but	 that	 is	 not	 the	 end,	 that	 is	 just	 a	 consequence.	 Just	 by	being	 a	 learner	 one
becomes	 wise.	 That	 is	 a	 consequence,	 not	 the	 goal.	 If	 you	 learn	 simply	 to
become	wise	you	will	never	learn,	because	to	be	wise	is	an	ego-goal,	an	ego-trip.
And	 if	 you	 are	 just	 waiting	 to	 ripen,	 mature,	 and	 become	 a	 master,	 and	 this
disciplehood	is	just	a	passage	to	be	passed	through
--	the	sooner	the	better,	it	has	to	be	finished,	you	are	not	happy	in	it,	you	would
like	 to	end	 it	 --	 then	you	are	not	a	disciple,	and	you	will	never	be	a	master.	 ...
Because	when	a	disciple	ripens,	he	becomes	a	master	spontaneously.	That	is	not
a	goal	to	be	followed,	it	happens	as	a	byproduct.
The	brash	student	--	impudent,	rude,	thinking	that	he	already	knows...	and	that	is
the	only	impudence	that	can	happen	to	a	mind:	that	you	already	know.
WHEN	YAMAOKA	WAS	A	BRASH	STUDENT	HE	VISITED	THE	MASTER
DOKUON.
WANTING	TO	IMPRESS	THE	MASTER	HE	SAID....
These	Yamaokas	come	to	me	almost	every	day.	I	have	met	many,	this	Yamaoka
is	a	type.
They	come	to	me	and	sometimes	I	enjoy	it	very	much.
Once	 it	 happened:	 a	 man	 came;	 he	 talked	 for	 one	 hour	 --	 talked	 the	 whole
Vedanta,	and	he	had	been	asking	for	an	interview	for	many	days,	writing	letters
to	me,	and	he	had	traveled	far,	and	he	had	been	saying	that	he	would	like	to	ask	a
few	questions.	When	he	came	he	forgot	about	the	questions,	he	started	giving	me
answers	--	and	I	had	not	asked	anything.	For	one	hour	he	talked	and	talked	and
talked,	there	was	not	even	a	gap	so	I	could	interrupt	him.	No,	he	wouldn't	listen
even,	so	I	had	to	say	yes,	yes,	yes.	And	I	listened	to	him	and	enjoyed	it,	and	after
one	hour	he	said,	'Now	I	will	have	to	go,	my	time	is	finished	--	but	I	learned	so
many	 things	 from	you.	And	 I	will	 remember	 this	meeting	 for	 ever	 and	 ever.	 I
will	cherish	this	memory	--	and	you	have	solved	all	my	problems.'
Really,	this	was	his	problem:	that	he	wanted	to	talk	and	say	things	and	give	some
knowledge	to	me.	And	he	was	very	happy	because	I	 listened.	He	remained	the
same,	but	he	went	away	happy.
People	come	to	me	and	they	say	that	of	course	they	know	that	 'All	is	Brahma.'
India	 is	 burdened	 too	 much	 with	 knowledge,	 and	 fools	 have	 become	 greater
fools	because	of	 that	burden,	because	 they	all	know,	and	 they	 talk	as	knowers.
They	say	that	all	is	Brahma,	that	reality	is	nondual,	and	then	in	the	end	they	ask,
'My	mind	is	very	tense.	Can	you	suggest	something?'
If	you	know	that	existence	is	nondual,	if	you	know	that	the	two	does	not	exist,
how	can	you	be	 troubled	and	 tense?	If	you	know	this,	all	 trouble	has	gone,	all
worry	dissolved,	anguish	disappears!	But	 if	you	say	 to	 them,	 'You	don't	know,'
they	won't	listen.	And	if	you	just	go	on	listening	to	them,	in	the	end	the	real	will
come	out	automatically.
In	 a	 court,	 it	 happened:	 a	man	was	 charged	with	 stealing	 a	pocket	watch.	The
man	whose	watch	was	stolen	was	a	little	short	sighted,	his	eyes	were	weak	and
he	could	see	only	with	specs.	He	had	forgotten	his	specs	somewhere,	and	then	on
the	street	this	man	cut	his	pocket	and	took	the	watch.	When	the	judge	inquired,
'Can	you	recognize	this	man,	that	this	is	the	man	who	has	taken	your	watch?'	the
robbed	man	said,	'It	is	difficult,	because	my	eyes	are	weak,	and	without	specs	I
cannot	see	rightly,	everything	is	a	little	blurred.	So	I	cannot	say	exactly	whether
it	is	this	man	or	not,	but	my	watch	is	stolen	and	I	feel	it	is	this	man.'
But	 because	 there	 was	 no	 other	 eyewitness	 or	 anything,	 and	 it	 could	 not	 be
proved,	the	magistrate	had	to	free	the	man.	He	said,	'Now	you	can	go,	now	you
are	free.'
But	 the	man	looked	a	little	puzzled.	The	judge	said,	 'Now	you	can	go,	you	are
free!'	The	man	 still	 looked	puzzled,	 and	 the	 judge	 asked,	 'Do	you	want	 to	 ask
anything?'
He	said,	'Yes,	can	I	have	the	watch?	Can	I	keep	it?'
This	is	what	is	happening....	People	go	on	talking,	and	if	you	go	on	listening	to
them,	 in	 the	end	you	will	 find	all	 their	Vedanta	 is	useless,	 in	 the	end	 they	ask
something	which	shows	the	reality.	The	other	was	just	language,	verbalization.
This	Yamaoka	 visited	 the	master	Dokuon	 --	Dokuon	was	 an	 enlightened	man,
one	of	the	most	loved	in	Japan,	one	of	the	most	respected.
WANTING	TO	IMPRESS	THE	MASTER	HE	SAID....
When	you	want	 to	 impress	a	master	you	are	a	 fool,	you	are	a	perfectly	 stupid
man.	 You	 may	 want	 to	 impress	 the	 whole	 world,	 but	 don't	 try	 to	 impress	 a
master;	at	least	there,	open	your	heart.	Don't	talk	nonsense;	at	least	there,	be	true.
If	 you	 go	 to	 a	 doctor	 you	 expose	 all	 your	 diseases	 to	 him,	 you	 allow	 him	 to
diagnose,	 to	 examine,	 you	 tell	 everything,	whatsoever	 is	 there,	 you	 don't	 hide
anything.	If	you	hide	from	a	doctor,	then	why	go	to	him	in	the	first	place?	Go	on
hiding!	But	how	do	you	expect	him	to	help	you	if	you	hide?
To	 a	 doctor	 you	 tell	 everything	 about	 the	 body,	 to	 a	 master	 you	 have	 to	 tell
everything	of	the	soul;	otherwise	no	help	is	possible.	When	you	go	to	a	master,
go	completely!	Don't	create	a	barrier	of	words	between	you	and	him.	Say	only
whatsoever	you	know.	If	you	don't	know	anything	say	'I	don't	know.'
When	P.D.Ouspensky	 came	 to	Gurdjieff	 he	was	 a	great	 scholar,	 already	world
famous	--
more	 known	 in	 the	 world	 than	 Gurdjieff	 himself.	 Gurdjieff	 was	 an	 unknown
fakir	 in	 those	 days;	 he	 became	 known	 through	 Ouspensky.	 Ouspensky	 had
written	a	great	book	before	he	met	Gurdjieff.	The	book	is	really	rare	because	he
talks	as	if	he	knows,	and	he	is	such	an	articulate	man	that	he	can	deceive.	The
book	is	Tertium	Organum	--	third	canon	of	thought,	and	really	one	of	the	rarest
books	in	the	world.	Even	ignorance	can	sometimes	do	things;	if	you	are	skillful
you	can	do	things,	even	in	your	ignorance.
Ouspensky	claims	 in	 that	book	--	and	his	claim	is	 right	 --	 that	 there	exist	only
three	 real	 books	 in	 the	 world:	 one	 is	 Aristotle's	 Organum,	 the	 first	 canon	 of
thought;	second	is	Bacon's	Novum	Organum,	new	canon	of	thought,	that	is	the
second	canon	of	 thought;	and	 the	 third	 is	his	Tertium	Organum,	 third	canon	of
thought.	And	really	these	three	books	are	rare.	All	the	three	authors	are	ignorant,
none	of	them	knows	anything	about	truth,	but	they	are	very	articulate	men.	They
really	 have	 done	 miracles:	 without	 knowing	 about	 truth	 they	 have	 written
beautiful	 books.	 They	 have	 almost	 come	 around,	 approximately	 they	 have
reached.
Ouspensky	was	a	name;	when	he	came	to	Gurdjieff,	Gurdjieff	was	nobody.	Of
course	he	came	with	the	knowledge	that	Gurdjieff	was	a	man	of	being	--	a	man
of	no	knowledge	really,	but	of	very	substantial	being.	What	did	he	do?	He	did
something	 beautiful:	 he	 remained	 silent.	 Ouspensky	 waited	 and	 waited	 and
waited,	 became	 fidgety,	 started	 perspiring	 before	 this	 man	 because	 he	 simply
remained	silent,	looking	at	him,	and	it	was	so	awkward,	and	his	eyes	were	very
very	penetrating	--	if	he	wanted	to	he	could	BURN
you	with	his	eyes;	and	his	face	was	such	that,	if	he	wanted	to,	he	could	simply
shake	you	out	of	your	being	with	his	face.	If	he	looked	in	you,	you	would	feel
very	uneasy.	He	remained	like	a	statue,	and	Ouspensky	started	trembling,	a	fever
came	 over	 him.	 Then	 he	 asked,	 'But	 why	 are	 you	 silent?	Why	 don't	 you	 say
something?'
Gurdjieff	said,	 'First	one	thing	has	to	be	decided,	decided	absolutely;	only	then
will	I	say	even	a	single	word.	Go	into	the	other	room,	you	will	find	a	piece	of
paper	 there;	 write	 on	 it	 whatsoever	 you	 know,	 and	 also	 that	 which	 you	 don't
know.	 Make	 two	 columns:	 one	 of	 your	 knowledge,	 one	 of	 your	 ignorance,
because	whatsoever	you	know	I	need	not	talk	about.	We	are	finished	with	it;	you
know	 it,	 there's	 no	 need	 to	 talk	 of	 it.	Whatsoever	 you	 don't	 know,	 I	 will	 talk
about.'
Ouspensky	 has	 reported	 that	 he	 went	 into	 that	 room,	 sat	 on	 a	 chair,	 took	 the
paper	 and	 the	 pencil	 --	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 his	 life	 realized	 that	 he	 didn't
know	anything.	This	man	destroyed	his	whole	knowledge	because,	for	the	first
time	with	awareness,	he	was	going	to	write:	I	know	God.	How	to	write	that?	--
because	he	didn't	know.	How	to	write:	I	know	truth?
Ouspensky	was	authentic.	He	came	back	after	half	an	hour,	gave	a	blank	sheet	to
Gurdjieff	and	said,	'Now	you	start	work.	I	don't	know	anything.'
Gurdjieff	 said,	 'How	 could	 you	 write	 Tertium	 Organum?	 You	 don't	 know
anything	--	and	you	have	written	the	third	canon	of	thought!'
It's	as	if	people	go	on	writing	in	their	sleep,	go	on	writing	in	their	dreams;	as	if
they	don't	know	what	they	are	doing,	they	don't	know	what	is	happening	through
them.
WANTING	TO	IMPRESS	THE	MASTER,	YAMAOKA	SAID,	'THERE	IS	NO
MIND,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 BODY,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 BUDDHA.	 THERE	 IS	 NO
BETTER,	THERE	IS
NO	WORSE.	THERE	IS	NO	MASTER,	THERE	IS	NO	STUDENT.	THERE	IS
NO
GIVING,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 RECEIVING.	 WHAT	WE	 THINK	WE	 SEE	 AND
FEEL	IS
NOT	REAL.	NONE	OF	THESE	SEEMING	THINGS	REALLY	EXISTS.'
This	is	the	highest	teaching,	the	ultimate	truth.	This	is	the	essence	of	the	whole
tradition	 of	 Buddha	 --	 that	 Buddha	 says	 everything	 is	 empty.	 That's	 what	 we
were	 talking	 about	 when	 I	 discussed	 Sosan	 with	 you:	 everything	 is	 empty,
everything	 is	 just	 relative,	 nothing	 exists	 absolutely.	 This	 is	 the	 highest
realization,	but	you	can	read	it	in	a	book.	If	you	read	it	in	a	book	and	say	it,	it	is
simply	stupid.
'THERE	IS	NO	MIND,	THERE	IS	NO	BODY,	THERE	IS	NO	BUDDHA.'
Buddha	has	said,	'I	am	not.'	But	when	Buddha	says	it,	it	means	something.	When
Yamaoka	says	it,	it	means	nothing.	When	Buddha	says	it,	it	is	very	significant:	'I
am	not.'
He	 says,	 'Even	 I	 am	 not,	 so	 be	 more	 alert	 --	 you	 cannot	 be.'	 'This	 is	 my
realization,'	he	says.	'Personality	is	just	like	a	wave,	or	a	line	drawn	on	the	water.
It	is	a	form,	and	form	is	continuously	changing.	The	form	is	not	truth.	Only	the
formless	can	be	the	true.	Only	the	unchanging	can	be	true.'	And	Buddha	says,	'It
may	take	seventy	years	for	your	form	to	disappear,	but	it	disappears	--	and	that
which	was	not	one	day,	and	again	one	day	will	not	be,	cannot	BE	in	the	middle.	I
was	not,	one	day;	I	will	not	be,	one	day.	On	two	sides,	nothing	--	and	just	in	the
middle,	 I	 am?	 This	 is	 not	 possible.	 How,	 between	 two	 nonexistences,	 can
existence	 exist?	 How,	 between	 two	 emptinesses,	 can	 there	 be	 something
substantial?	It	must	be	a	false	dream.'
Why,	in	the	morning,	do	you	say	that	the	dream	was	false?	It	was,	but	why	do
you	say	it	was	false?	What	is	the	criterion	of	its	being	false	or	true?	How	do	you
judge?	And	in	the	morning	everybody	says,	'I	dreamed,	and	the	dream	was	false.'
Dream	means	'the	false'	--
but	why?	This	is	the	criterion:	that	in	the	evening	it	was	not	there,	when	I	went
to	sleep	it	was	not	there,	when	I	again	came	up	out	of	sleep	it	was	not	there,	so
how	 can	 it	BE	 in	 the	middle?	The	 room	 is	 real,	 the	 dream	 is	 false	 --	 because
when	you	went	into	sleep	the	room	was	there,	and	when	you	came	out	of	sleep
the	room	was	there.	The	room	is	real,	the	dream	is	false,	because	the	dream	has
two	nothingnesses	around	it,	and	between	two	nothingnesses,	nothing	can	exist.
But	the	room	continues,	so	you	say	that	the	room	is	real,	the	world	is	real,	and
the	dream	is	false.
A	buddha	has	awakened	out	of	this	world	and	he	sees	that,	just	like	the	dream,
your	world	is	also	false.	He	has	awakened	out	of	this	great	dream	which	we	call
world,	and	then	he	says,	'It	was	not	there,	now	again	it	is	not	there,	so	how	could
it	be	in	the	middle?'
Hence	Buddhas,	Shankaras,	go	on	saying,	 'The	world	is	 illusory,	 it	 is	a	dream.'
But	you	cannot	say	it;	you	cannot	just	take	the	words	and	repeat	them.
This	 Yamaoka	 must	 have	 listened,	 must	 have	 learned,	 read,	 studied.	 He	 is
repeating	like	a	parrot:	'THERE	IS	NO	MIND,	THERE	IS	NO	BODY,	THERE
IS	NO	BUDDHA.
THERE	 IS	 NO	 BETTER,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 WORSE'	 --	 because	 they	 are	 all
relative.
Remember,	 Buddha	 calls	 anything	 relative	 'false',	 anything	 absolute	 'true'.
Absoluteness	is	the	criterion	of	truth,	relativity	is	the	criterion	of	a	dream.
Try	to	understand	this,	because	this	is	basic.	You	say	your	friend	is	tall.	What	do
you	mean?	He	can	only	be	said	to	be	taller	not	tall	--	taller	than	somebody.	He
may	be	a	pygmy	before	somebody	else,	so	tallness	is	not	in	him.	Tallness	is	just
a	relationship,	a	relative	phenomenon.	In	comparison	to	somebody	he	is	taller,	in
comparison	to	somebody	else	he	may	be	a	pygmy.	So	what	is	he	--	is	he	a	pygmy
or	a	tall	man?	No,	these	two	things	are	relativities.	In	himself	what	is	he	--	tall	or
a	 pygmy?	 In	 himself	 he	 is	 neither	 tall	 nor	 a	 pygmy.	That's	why	Buddha	 says,
'The	better	does	not	exist,	the	worse	does	not	exist.'
Who	is	a	sinner	and	who	is	a	saint?	Look!	--	if	there	are	only	saints	in	the	world
will	there	be	any	saint?	If	all	are	sinners	in	the	world	will	there	be	any	sinners?
The	 sinner	 exists	because	of	 the	 saint,	 the	 saint	 exists	because	of	 the	 sinner	 --
they	are	 relativities.	So	 if	you	want	 to	be	a	 saint	you	will	 create	a	 sinner;	you
cannot	be	a	saint	without	there	being	sinners.	So	be	aware,	don't	become	a	saint,
because	if	you	become	a	saint	that	means	somewhere	the	other	polarity	will	have
to	exist.
Saints	are	false,	sinners	are	false.	Who	are	you	in	yourself?	If	you	are	alone,	are
you	a	sinner	or	a	saint?	Then	you	are	neither.	Look	into	that	reality	which	you
are,	 unrelated	 to	 anything	 else;	 look	 into	 yourself	without	 relation	 --	 then	 you
will	 come	 to	 the	 absolute	 truth;	 otherwise	 everything	 is	 just	 a	 relative	 term.
Relativities	are	dreams.
Reality	is	not	a	relativity,	it	is	an	absoluteness.	Who	ARE	you?
If	you	go	inside	and	you	say,	'I	am	light,'	you	are	dreaming	again,	because	what
can	light	mean	without	darkness?	Light	needs	darkness	to	be	there!	If	you	say,
'Inside	I	am	blissful,'	again	you	are	dreaming,	because	bliss	needs	misery	to	be
there.	 You	 cannot	 use	 any	 term	 because	 all	 terms	 are	 relativities.	 That's	 why
Buddha	says	 that	we	cannot	use	any	 term	--	because	 inside	 there	 is	emptiness.
Also,	this	'emptiness'	is	not	against
'fullness';	 this	 is	 just	 to	say	 that	all	 terms	are	empty.	 In	absolute	 truth,	no	 term
applies,	you	cannot	say	anything.
Buddha	would	not	 be	 in	 agreement	with	Hindus	 in	 saying	 that	 reality	 is	SAT-
CHIT-ANANDA,	 because	 he	 says	 that	 SAT	 exists	 because	 of	 ASAT,	 CHIT
exists	 because	 of	 ACHIT,	 ANANDA	 exists	 because	 of	 DUKKHA.	 Sat	 is
existence;	God	cannot	be	said	to	be	existential	because	then	nonexistence	would
be	 needed,	 and	 where	 will	 nonexistence	 exist?	 God	 cannot	 be	 said	 to	 be
consciousness,	because	then	unconsciousness	would	be	needed,	and	where	will
unconsciousness	 exist?	 God	 cannot	 be	 said	 to	 be	 bliss,	 because	 then	 misery
would	be	needed.
Buddha	says	whatsoever	word	you	use	 is	useless,	because	 the	opposite	will	be
needed.
Look	into	yourself	--	then	you	cannot	use	language,	only	silence.	Only	through
silence	 can	 reality	 be	 indicated.	 And	 when	 he	 says,	 'All	 terms	 are	 empty,	 all
words	 are	 empty,	 all	 things	 are	 empty,	 all	 thoughts	 are	 empty,'	 he	means	 this
because	they	are	relative	--
relativity	is	a	dream.
THERE	IS	NO	BETTER,	THERE	IS	NO	WORSE.	THERE	IS	NO	MASTER,
THERE
IS	 NO	 STUDENT.	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 GIVING,	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 RECEIVING.
WHAT	WE
THINK	WE	SEE	AND	FEEL	 IS	NOT	REAL.	NONE	OF	THESE	SEEMING
THINGS
REALLY	EXISTS.
This	 is	 the	 most	 profound	 teaching	 of	 Buddha,	 so	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be
remembered:	you	can	repeat	the	most	profound	words	ever	uttered,	and	you	can
still	be	a	stupid	man.	This	Yamaoka	IS	stupid.	He's	repeating	exactly	 the	same
words	as	Buddha.
Words	 carry	 your	 being.	 When	 Buddha	 says	 the	 same	 words,	 they	 have	 a
different	 significance,	 a	 different	 fragrance.	The	words	 carry	 something	 of	 the
Buddha,	 something	 of	 his	 being:	 the	 aroma,	 the	 taste,	 of	 his	 inner	 being.	 The
music	of	his	 inner	harmony	 is	carried	by	 those	words.	When	Yamaoka	 repeats
them	 they	 are	 dead,	 stale,	 they	 don't	 carry	 any	 fragrance.	 They	 will	 carry
something:	they	will	carry	Yamaoka	and	his	bad	odor.
Remember,	 just	by	repeating	 the	Gita,	don't	 think	anything	 is	going	 to	happen,
although	 the	 words	 are	 the	 same,	 and	 Krishna	 said	 the	 same	 words	 you	 are
repeating.	 All	 over	 the	 world	 thousands	 of	 Christian	 missionaries	 go	 on
repeating	the	same	words	that	Jesus	spoke.	Those	words	are	dead.	It	is	better	not
to	repeat	them,	because	the	more	you	repeat	them,	the	more	stale	they	become.	It
is	better	not	to	touch	them,	because	your	very	touch	is	poisonous.	It	is	better	to
wait.	When	YOU	attain	 to	a	Christ-consciousness,	or	a	Krishna-consciousness,
or	a	Buddha-consciousness,	then	you	will	begin	to	flower,	then	things	will	start
coming	out	of	you	--	never	before.	Don't	be	a	gramophone	record...
because	then	you	can	only	repeat,	but	that	doesn't	mean	anything.
DOKUON	HAD	BEEN	SITTING	QUIETLY	SMOKING	HIS	PIPE....
A	 very	 beautiful	 man	 --	 he	 didn't	 even	 bother.	 He	 didn't	 interrupt,	 he	 simply
continued	smoking	his	pipe.
Remember,	only	zen	masters	can	smoke	a	pipe,	because	they	are	not	pretenders.
They	 don't	 bother	 what	 you	 think	 about	 them	 --	 they	 don't	 bother!	 They	 are
people	at	 ease	with	 themselves.	You	cannot	 think	of	a	 Jaina	MUNI	smoking	a
pipe,	or	a	Hindu	SANNYASIN	smoking	a	pipe	--	impossible.	These	are	men	of
rules,	 regulations,	 they	 have	 forced	 themselves	 into	 disciplines.	 No	 need	 to
smoke	a	pipe	if	you	don't	want	to,	but	if	you	want	to,	then	don't	force	something
dead	upon	yourself,	because	that	desire	will	remain	hidden	somewhere,	and	that
desire	will	disturb.	And	why?	If	you	want	 to	smoke	a	pipe,	why	not	smoke	it?
What	is	wrong	in	it?	You	are	as	false	as	the	pipe	and	the	smoke,	and	the	smoke
and	the	pipe	are	as	true	as	you.
But	why	not?	Deep	down	you	want	to	be	extraordinary,	not	ordinary.	Smoking	a
pipe	 will	 make	 you	 very	 ordinary.	 This	 is	 what	 ordinary	 people	 are	 doing:
smoking	a	pipe,	drinking	tea	and	coffee,	and	laughing	and	joking	--	this	is	what
ordinary	people	are	doing.
You	are	a	great	saint	--	how	can	you	do	ordinary	things	in	an	ordinary	way?	You
are	extraordinary.
To	 pose	 extraordinariness	 you	 drop	 many	 things.	 Nothing	 is	 bad	 in	 dropping
them	 --	 if	 you	 don't	 like	 them,	 it's	 okay.	 There's	 no	 need	 to	 force	 yourself	 to
smoke	a	pipe	just	to	say	that	you	are	ordinary,	no	need...	because	this	is	how	the
mind	goes!	No	need	to	do	anything	if	you	don't	want	to,	but	if	you	want	to	then
don't	pose,	don't	try	to	have	a	mask	of	seriousness.	Then	be	simple.	Nothing	is
wrong	if	you	are	simple;	everything	is	wrong	if	you	are	not	simple.
This	man	Dokuon	must	have	been	a	simple	man:
DOKUON	HAD	BEEN	SITTING	QUIETLY	SMOKING	HIS	PIPE
very	meditative,	just	relaxing,	listening	to	this	pretender	--
AND	SAYING	NOTHING.	 SUDDENLY,	HE	PICKED	UP	HIS	 STAFF	AND
GAVE
YAMAOKA	A	TERRIBLE	WHACK.
Zen	masters	carry	a	staff	for	such	people.	They	are	very	gentle	people,	but	very
authentic,	and	there	are	people	who	will	not	listen	to	words,	who	can	listen	only
to	a	whack.	If	you	talk	to	them,	they	won't	listen,	they	will	talk	still	more.	They
need	shock	treatment.
SUDDENLY,	 HE	 PICKED	 UP	 HIS	 STAFF	 AND	 GAVE	 YAMAOKA	 A
TERRIBLE
WHACK.
YAMAOKA	JUMPED	UP	IN	ANGER.
DOKUON	 SAID:	 'SINCE	 NONE	 OF	 THESE	 THINGS	 REALLY	 EXISTS,
AND	ALL
IS	 EMPTINESS,	 WHERE	 DOES	 YOUR	 ANGER	 COME	 FROM?	 THINK
ABOUT	IT.'
Dokuon	has	created	a	situation,	and	only	situations	are	revealing.	He	could	have
said,
'Whatsoever	 you	 are	 saying	 is	 just	 borrowed	 information.'	 That	wouldn't	 have
made	much	difference	because	the	man	sitting	before	him	was	fast	asleep.	Just
talking	would	not	 have	brought	 him	out	 of	 it;	 it	may	have	helped	him	 to	 stay
asleep	more,	he	may	have	started	arguing.	Rather	 than	doing	 that,	Dokuon	did
the	right	thing;	he	hit	hard	with	the	staff	--	suddenly,	because	Yamaoka	was	not
ready	for	it,	it	came	unexpectedly.	It	was	so	sudden	that	he	could	not	arrange	his
character	 accordingly,	 he	 could	 not	manage	 a	 false	 pose.	 For	 a	moment	 --	 the
whack	was	 so	 sudden	 --	 the	mask	 slipped,	 and	 the	 real	 face	came	out.	 Just	by
talking	 this	 would	 not	 have	 been	 possible.	 Dokuon	 must	 have	 been	 very
compassionate.
Just	for	a	single	moment	anger	peeped,	the	real	came	out	--	because	if	everything
is	empty,	how	can	you	be	angry?	Where	can	the	anger	come	from?	Who	will	be
angry	 if	 even	 a	 Buddha	 is	 not,	 you	 are	 not,	 nothing	 is	 there,	 only	 emptiness
exists?	How,	in	emptiness,	is	anger	possible?
What	Dokuon	is	doing	is	bringing	this	Yamaoka	to	being	from	knowledge;	that's
what	 he	 is	 doing	 by	 whacking.	 A	 situation	 is	 needed	 because	 in	 a	 situation
suddenly	you	become	real,	whatsoever	you	are.	If	words	are	allowed,	if	Dokuon
talks	 and	 says,	 'This	 is	wrong	 and	 that	 is	 right,'	 he	 helps	 the	 continuity	 of	 the
mind.	Then	a	dialogue	will	be	there,	but	of	no	use.	He	gives	a	shock,	he	brings
you	back	to	your	reality.	Suddenly	all	thinking	disappears;	Yamaoka	is	Yamaoka,
not	a	buddha.	He	was	talking	like	a	buddha,	and	just	by	a	hit,	buddha	disappears
and	in	comes	Yamaoka	--	angry.
DOKUON	 SAID:	 'SINCE	 NONE	 OF	 THESE	 THINGS	 REALLY	 EXISTS,
AND	ALL
IS	EMPTINESS,	Yamaoka,	WHERE	DOES	YOUR	ANGER	COME	FROM?
THINK	ABOUT	IT.'
'Don't	talk	about	Buddha;	and	don't	talk	about	reality,	and	don't	talk	about	truth	--
think	about	this	anger	and	from	where	it	comes.'
If	 you	 really	 think	 about	 anger,	 from	 where	 it	 comes,	 you	 will	 reach	 to
emptiness.
Next	time,	when	you	feel	angry...	or	if	you	cannot,	then	come	to	me,	I	will	give
you	a	whack.	 I	go	on	giving,	but	my	whacks	are	more	subtle	 than	Dokuon's.	 I
don't	 use	 a	 real	 staff	 --	 it	 is	 not	 needed;	 you	 are	 so	 unreal,	 a	 real	 staff	 is	 not
needed.	 I	need	not	physically	give	you	a	whack,	but	 spiritually	 I	go	on	giving
them.	 I	 go	 on	 creating	 situations	 in	 which	 I	 try	 to	 bring	 you	 back	 to	 your
Yamaokahood	from	your	buddhahood,	because	that	Yamaoka	is	real	within	you,
buddha	 is	 just	 a	 mask.	 And	 remember,	 Yamaoka	 has	 to	 live,	 not	 the	 mask;
Yamaoka	 has	 to	 breathe,	 not	 the	 mask;	 Yamaoka	 has	 to	 digest	 food,	 not	 the
mask;	Yamaoka	will	fall	in	love,	Yamaoka	will	be	angry,	Yamaoka	will	have	to
die,	not	the	mask	--	so	it	is	better	that	you	are	freed	from	the	mask	and	brought
back	to	your	Yamaokahood.
Remember,	 buddha	 cannot	 be	 a	 mask.	 If	 Yamaoka	 goes	 on	 going	 deeper	 in
himself,	he	will	 find	buddha	 there.	And	how	 to	go	deeper	 in	yourself?	Follow
anything	that	comes	from	within;	follow	it	back,	regress	back.	Anger	has	come?
--	 close	 your	 eyes;	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 moment,	 because	 anger	 has	 come	 from
within...	 from	 the	 very	 center	 of	 your	 being	 it	 comes,	 so	 just	 look	backwards,
move,	just	see	where	it	is	coming	from,	from	where.
What	 you	 would	 do	 ordinarily	 --	 and	 what	 this	 Yamaoka	 could	 have	 done	 --
would	 be	 to	 think	 that	 the	 anger	 has	 been	 created	 because	 of	 this	 Dokuon:
because	 he	 whacked	 you,	 that's	 why	 anger	 was	 created.	 You	 would	 look	 at
Dokuon	as	the	source.	Dokuon	is	not	the	source;	he	may	have	whacked	you	but
he	 is	 not	 the	 source	 --	 if	 he	 whacked	 Buddha	 anger	 would	 not	 come	 --	 it	 is
Yamaoka.
Go	back,	don't	 look	outside	 for	 the	source,	otherwise	 this	beautiful	moment	of
anger	will	be	lost	--	and	your	life	has	become	so	false	that	within	a	second	you
will	put	on	your	mask	again,	and	you	will	smile,	and	you	will	say,	'Yes,	Master,
you	did	a	very	good	thing.'
The	 false	 will	 come	 in	 soon,	 so	 don't	 miss	 the	moment.	When	 the	 anger	 has
come,	it	is	just	a	split	second	before	the	false	comes.	And	anger	is	true;	it	is	truer
than	what	you	are	saying	--	the	words	of	Buddha	are	false	in	your	mouth.	Your
anger	is	true	because	it	belongs	to	you,	all	that	belongs	to	you	is	true.	So	find	the
source	 of	 this	 anger,	 where	 it	 is	 coming	 from.	 Close	 your	 eyes	 and	 move
inwards;	 before	 it	 is	 lost	 go	 backwards	 to	 the	 source	 --	 and	 you	 will	 reach
emptiness.	Go	backwards	more,	go	inwards	more,	move	deeper,	and	a	moment
comes	 when	 there	 is	 no	 anger.	 Inside,	 at	 the	 center,	 there	 is	 no	 anger.	 Now,
buddha	will	not	be	a	face,	a	mask.	Now	something	real	has	been	penetrated.
From	where	 does	 the	 anger	 come?	 It	 never	 comes	 from	your	 center,	 it	 comes
from	the	ego	--	and	ego	is	a	false	entity.	If	you	go	deeper	you	will	find	it	comes
from	the	periphery,	not	 from	the	center.	 It	cannot	come	from	the	center:	at	 the
center	is	emptiness,	absolute	emptiness.	It	comes	only	from	the	ego,	and	ego	is	a
false	entity	created	by	the	society,	it	is	a	relativity,	an	identity.	Suddenly	you	are
whacked,	and	the	ego	feels	hurt,	anger	is	there.	If	you	help	somebody,	smile	at
somebody,	bow	down	to	somebody,	and	he	smiles,	that	smile	is	coming	from	the
ego.	If	you	appreciate,	give	compliments	 to	somebody,	 if	you	say	to	a	woman,
'How	beautiful	you	are!'	 and	she	 smiles,	 that	 smile	 is	coming	 from	 the	ego.	 ...
Because	 at	 the	 center	 there	 is	 neither	 beauty	 nor	 ugliness,	 at	 the	 center	 there
exists	 absolute	 emptiness,	 ANATTA,	 no-selfness	 --	 and	 that	 center	 has	 to	 be
achieved.
Once	 you	 know	 it,	 you	 move	 as	 a	 nonbeing.	 Nobody	 can	 make	 you	 angry,
nobody	 can	 make	 you	 happy,	 unhappy,	 miserable.	 No!	 In	 that	 emptiness	 all
dualities	 dissolve:	 happy,	 unhappy,	 miserable,	 blissful	 --	 all	 dissolve.	 This	 is
buddhahood.	This	is	what	happened	under	the	bodhi	tree	to	Gautam	Siddhartha.
He	 reached	 emptiness.	 Then	 everything	 is	 silent.	 You	 have	 gone	 beyond
opposites.
A	master	is	to	help	you	to	go	to	your	inner	emptiness,	the	inner	silence,	the	inner
temple;	and	the	master	has	to	devise	methods.	Only	zen	masters	beat;	sometimes
they	throw	a	person	out	of	the	window,	or	they	jump	on	him.	Because	you	have
become	 so	 false,	 such	drastic	methods	 are	needed	 --	 and	 in	 Japan	particularly,
because	Japan	is	so	false.
In	 Japan,	 a	 smile	 is	 a	 painted	 smile.	 Everybody	 smiles	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 habit,	 a
beautiful	 habit	 as	 far	 as	 the	 society	 is	 concerned,	 because	 in	 Japan,	 if	 you	 are
driving	and	you	hit	a	person	on	a	Tokyo	road,	something	will	happen	which	can
never	happen	anywhere	else:	the	person	will	smile	and	bow	down	and	thank	you.
Only	in	Japan	can	this	happen,	nowhere	else.	He	will	say,	'This	is	my	fault,'	and
you	will	 say,	 'This	 is	my	fault,'	 if	you	are	Japanese.	Both	will	 say,	 'This	 is	my
fault,'	and	both	will	bow	down	and	smile	and	go	their	ways.	In	a	way	it	is	good,
because	what	is	the	use	of	being	angry	and	shouting	at	each	other	and	creating	a
crowd	--	what	is	the	use?
From	their	very	childhood	the	Japanese	are	conditioned	to	always	smile	--	that's
why	in	the	West	they	are	thought	to	be	very	sly	people:	you	cannot	rely	on	them
because	you	don't	know	what	they	are	feeling.	You	cannot	know	what	a	Japanese
feels,	he	never	allows	anything	to	come	out.
This	 is	 one	 extreme:	 everything	 false,	 painted.	 So	 zen	 masters	 had	 to	 devise
these	drastic	methods,	because	only	through	them	would	the	Japanese	mask	fall
down;	otherwise	it	is	fixed,	it	has	almost	become	their	skin,	as	if	grafted	on	the
skin.
This	is	happening	to	the	whole	world	now,	not	only	Japan.	Degrees	may	differ,
but	now	this	is	the	whole	world.	Everybody	laughs,	smiles:	neither	the	laugh	is
true,	nor	the	smile.
Everybody	says	good	things	about	each	other:	nobody	believes	in	them,	nobody
feels	that	way;	it	has	become	social	etiquette.
Your	personality	is	a	social	phenomenon.	Your	being	is	buried	deep	down	under
this	personality.	You	need	a	shock,	so	that	the	personality	is	thrown	open,	or	for
some	 moments	 you	 are	 identified	 with	 it	 no	 more	 and	 you	 reach	 the	 center.
There,	everything	is	empty.
The	whole	art	of	meditation	is,	how	to	leave	the	personality	easily,	move	to	the
center,	 and	be	not	 a	person.	 Just	 to	be	and	not	be	a	person	 is	 the	whole	art	of
meditation,	the	whole	art	of	inner	ecstasy.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	The	temper
2	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411020
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
94
mins
A	ZEN	STUDENT	CAME	TO	BANKEI	AND	SAID:	'MASTER,	I	HAVE	AN
UNGOVERNABLE	TEMPER	 --	HOW	CAN	 I	CURE	 IT?'	 'SHOW	ME	THIS
TEMPER,'
SAID	BANKEI,	 'IT	SOUNDS	FASCINATING.'	 'I	HAVEN'T	GOT	 IT	RIGHT
NOW,'
SAID	 THE	 STUDENT,	 'SO	 I	 CAN'T	 SHOW	 IT	 TO	 YOU.'	 'WELL	 THEN,'
SAID
BANKEI,	'BRING	IT	TO	ME	WHEN	YOU	HAVE	IT.'	 'BUT	I	CAN'T	BRING
IT	JUST
WHEN	I	HAPPEN	TO	HAVE	IT,'	PROTESTED	THE	STUDENT.	'IT	ARISES
UNEXPECTEDLY,	AND	I	WOULD	SURELY	LOSE	IT	BEFORE	I	GOT	IT	TO
YOU.'
'IN	THAT	CASE,'	SAID	BANKEI,	'IT	CANNOT	BE	PART	OF	YOUR	TRUE
NATURE.	 IF	 IT	WERE,	 YOU	 COULD	 SHOW	 IT	 TO	ME	 AT	 ANY	 TIME.
WHEN
YOU	WERE	BORN	YOU	DID	NOT	HAVE	IT,	AND	YOUR	PARENTS	DID
NOT
GIVE	IT	TO	YOU	--	SO	IT	MUST	COME	INTO	YOU	FROM	THE	OUTSIDE.
I	 SUGGEST	 THAT	 WHENEVER	 IT	 GETS	 INTO	 YOU,	 YOU	 BEAT
YOURSELF
WITH	 A	 STICK	 UNTIL	 THE	 TEMPER	 CAN'T	 STAND	 IT,	 AND	 RUNS
AWAY.'
THE	TRUE	NATURE	IS	your	eternal	nature.	You	cannot	have	it	and	not	have	it,
it	is	not	something	that	comes	and	goes	--	it	is	you.	How	can	it	come	and	go?	It
is	your	BEING.	 It	 is	your	very	 foundation.	 It	 cannot	BE	sometimes,	and	NOT
BE	sometimes;	it	is	always	there.
So	this	should	be	the	criterion	for	a	seeker	of	truth,	nature,	tao:	that	we	have	to
come	to	the	point	in	our	being	which	remains	always	and	always	--	even	before
you	were	born	it	was	there,	and	even	when	you	are	dead	it	will	be	there.	It	is	the
center.	 The	 circumference	 changes,	 the	 center	 remains	 absolutely	 eternal;	 it	 is
beyond	 time.	Nothing	 can	 affect	 it,	 nothing	 can	modify	 it,	 nothing	 really	 ever
touches	it;	it	remains	beyond	all	reach	of	the	outside	world.
Go	 to	 the	 sea,	 and	watch	 the	 sea.	Millions	 of	waves	 are	 there,	 but	 deep	 in	 its
depth	the	sea	remains	calm	and	quiet,	deep	in	meditation;	the	turmoil	is	just	on
the	surface,	just	on	the	surface	where	the	sea	meets	the	outside	world,	the	winds.
Otherwise,	 in	 itself,	 it	 always	 remains	 the	 same,	 not	 even	 a	 ripple;	 nothing
changes.
It	 is	 the	 same	 with	 you.	 Just	 on	 the	 surface	 where	 you	 meet	 others	 there	 is
turmoil,	anxiety,	anger,	attachment,	greed,	lust	--	just	on	the	surface	where	winds
come	and	touch	you.	And	if	you	remain	on	the	surface	you	cannot	change	this
changing	phenomenon;	it	will	remain	there.
Many	people	try	to	change	it	THERE,	on	the	circumference.	They	fight	with	it,
they	try	not	to	let	a	wave	arise.	And	through	their	fight	even	more	waves	arise,
because	when	the	sea	fights	with	the	wind	there	will	be	more	turmoil:	now	not
only	 will	 the	 wind	 help	 it,	 the	 sea	 will	 also	 help	 --	 there	 will	 be	 tremendous
chaos	on	the	surface.
All	 the	 moralists	 try	 to	 change	 man	 on	 the	 periphery.	 Your	 character	 is	 the
periphery:	 you	 don't	 bring	 any	 character	 into	 the	 world,	 you	 come	 absolutely
characterLESS,	a	blank	sheet,	and	all	 that	you	call	your	character	 is	written	by
others.	 Your	 parents,	 society,	 teachers,	 teachings	 --	 all	 are	 conditionings.	 You
come	as	a	blank	sheet,	and	whatsoever	is	written	on	you	comes	from	others;	so
unless	you	become	a	blank	sheet	again	you	will	not	know	what	nature	 is,	you
will	not	know	what	Brahma	is,	you	will	not	know	what	tao	is.
So	the	problem	is	not	how	to	have	a	strong	character,	the	problem	is	not	how	to
attain	 no-anger,	 how	 not	 to	 be	 disturbed	 --	 no,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 problem.	 The
problem	is	how	to	change	your	consciousness	from	the	periphery	to	the	center.
Then	suddenly	you	see	 that	you	have	always	been	calm.	Then	you	can	 look	at
the	periphery	from	a	distance,	and	the	distance	is	so	vast,	infinite,	that	you	can
watch	 as	 if	 it	 is	 not	 happening	 to	 you.	 In	 fact,	 it	 never	 happens	 to	 you.	 Even
when	you	are	completely	 lost	 in	 it,	 it	never	happens	 to	you:	 something	 in	you
remains	 undisturbed,	 something	 in	 you	 remains	 beyond,	 something	 in	 you
remains	a	witness.
So	 the	 whole	 problem	 for	 the	 seeker	 is	 how	 to	 shift	 his	 attention	 from	 the
periphery	to	the	center;	how	to	be	merged	with	that	which	is	unchanging,	and	not
to	be	 identified	with	 that	which	is	 just	a	boundary.	On	the	boundary	others	are
very	influential,	because	on	the	boundary	change	is	natural.	The	periphery	will
go	on	changing	--	even	a	buddha's	periphery	changes.
The	 difference	 between	 a	 buddha	 and	 you	 is	 not	 a	 difference	 of	 character	 --
remember	this;	it	is	not	a	difference	of	morality,	it	is	not	a	difference	in	virtue	or
nonvirtue,	it	is	a	difference	in	where	you	are	grounded.
You	are	grounded	on	the	periphery,	a	buddha	is	grounded	in	the	center.	He	can
look	at	his	own	periphery	from	a	distance;	when	you	hit	him	he	can	see	it	as	if
you	have	hit	 somebody	else,	because	 the	center	 is	SO	distant.	 It's	 as	 if	he	 is	a
watcher	on	the	hills	and	something	is	happening	in	the	valleys	and	he	can	see	it.
This	is	the	first	thing	to	be	understood.
Second	 thing:	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 control,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 transform.	 It	 is
VERY	easy	to	control.	You	can	control	your	anger,	but	what	will	you	do?	--	you
will	 suppress	 it.	 And	 what	 happens	 when	 you	 suppress	 a	 certain	 thing?	 The
direction	of	 its	movement	 changes:	 it	was	going	out,	 and	 if	you	 suppress	 it,	 it
starts	going	in	--	just	its	direction	changes.
And	for	anger	to	go	out	was	good,	because	the	poison	needs	to	be	thrown	out.	It
is	bad	for	the	anger	to	move	within,	because	that	means	your	whole	body	mind
structure	will	 be	 poisoned	 by	 it.	 And	 then	 if	 you	 go	 on	 doing	 this	 for	 a	 long
time...	 as	 everybody	 has	 been	 doing,	 because	 the	 society	 teaches	 control,	 not
transformation.	The	society	says,	 'Control	yourself,'	and	through	controlling	all
the	negative	 things	have	been	 thrown	deeper	 and	deeper	 into	 the	unconscious,
and	then	they	become	a	constant	 thing	within	you.	Then	it	 is	not	a	question	of
your	being	angry	sometimes	and	sometimes	not	--	you	are	simply	angry.
Sometimes	you	explode,	and	sometimes	you	don't	 explode	because	 there	 is	no
excuse,	or	you	have	 to	find	an	excuse.	And	remember,	you	can	find	an	excuse
anywhere!
A	man,	one	of	my	friends,	wanted	to	divorce	his	wife,	so	he	went	to	a	lawyer,	an
expert	 on	 marriage	 affairs,	 and	 he	 asked	 the	 lawyer,	 'On	 what	 grounds	 can	 I
divorce	my	wife?'
The	lawyer	looked	at	him	and	said,	'Are	you	married?'
The	man	said,	'Of	course,	yes.'
The	lawyer	said,	'Marriage	is	enough	grounds.	There	is	no	need	to	seek	any	other
grounds.	 If	you	want	a	divorce,	 then	marriage	 is	 the	only	 thing	 that	 is	needed,
because	it	will	be	impossible	to	divorce	a	woman	if	you	are	not	married.	If	you
are	married	--
enough!'
And	this	is	the	situation.	You	ARE	angry.	Because	you	have	suppressed	so	much
anger,	 now	 there	 are	 no	 moments	 when	 you	 are	 not	 angry;	 at	 the	 most,
sometimes	you	are	less	angry,	sometimes	more.	Your	whole	being	is	poisoned	by
suppression.	You	eat	with	anger	--	and	it	has	a	different	quality	when	a	person
eats	without	anger:	it	is	beautiful	to	watch	him,	because	he	eats	nonviolently.	He
may	be	eating	meat,	but	he	eats	nonviolently;	you	may	be	eating	just	vegetables
and	fruits,	but	if	anger	is	suppressed,	you	eat	violently.
Just	through	eating,	your	teeth,	your	mouth	release	anger.	You	crush	the	food	as
if	this	is	the	enemy.	And	remember:	whenever	animals	are	angry,	what	will	they
do?	Only	two	things	are	possible	--	they	don't	have	weapons	and	they	don't	have
atom	bombs,	what	can	 they	do?	Either	with	 their	nails	or	with	 their	 teeth	 they
will	do	violence	to	you.
These	are	the	natural	weapons	of	the	body	--	nails	and	teeth.	It	is	very	difficult	to
do	anything	with	your	nails,	because	people	will	say,	'Are	you	an	animal?'	So	the
only	 thing	 remaining	 to	 you	 through	 which	 you	 can	 express	 your	 anger	 or
violence	 easily	 is	 the	 mouth	 --	 and	 that	 too	 you	 cannot	 use	 to	 bite	 anybody.
That's	why	we	say,	'a	bite	of	bread,'
'a	bite	of	food,'	'a	few	bites.'
You	 eat	 food	 violently,	 as	 if	 the	 food	 is	 the	 enemy.	And	 remember,	when	 the
food	is	the	enemy,	it	does	not	REALLY	nourish	you,	it	nourishes	all	that	is	ill	in
you.	 People	 with	 deep	 suppressed	 anger	 eat	 more;	 they	 go	 on	 gathering
unnecessary	fat	in	the	body	--	and	have	you	observed	that	fat	people	are	almost
always	smiling?	Unnecessarily,	even	if	there	is	no	cause,	fat	people	always	go	on
smiling.	Why?	This	 is	 their	 face,	 this	 is	 the	mask:	 they	 are	 so	much	 afraid	 of
their	anger	and	their	violence	that	they	have	to	keep	a	smiling	face	continuously
on	themselves	--	and	they	go	on	eating	more.
Eating	more	IS	violence,	anger.	And	then	this	will	move	in	every	way,	in	every
arena	of	your	life:	you	will	make	love,	but	it	will	be	more	like	violence	than	like
love,	it	will	have	much	aggression	in	it.	Because	you	never	observe	one	another
making	love,	you	don't	know	what	is	happening,	and	you	cannot	know	what	is
happening	to	you	because	you	are	almost	always	so	much	in	aggression.
That's	why	 deep	 orgasm	 through	 love	 becomes	 impossible	 --	 because	 you	 are
afraid	 deep	 down	 that	 if	 you	move	 totally	without	 control,	 you	may	 kill	 your
wife	 or	 kill	 your	 beloved,	 or	 the	wife	may	 kill	 the	 husband	 or	 the	 lover.	You
become	so	afraid	of	your	own	anger!
Next	time	you	make	love,	watch:	you	will	be	doing	the	same	movements	as	are
done	when	you	are	aggressive.	Watch	the	face,	have	a	mirror	around	so	you	can
see	what	is	happening	to	your	face!	All	the	distortions	of	anger	and	aggression
will	be	there.
In	 taking	 food,	 you	 become	 angry:	 look	 at	 a	 person	 eating.	 Look	 at	 a	 person
making	love
--	the	anger	has	gone	so	deep	that	even	love,	an	activity	totally	opposite	to	anger,
even	 that	 is	 poisoned;	 eating,	 an	 activity	 absolutely	 neutral,	 even	 that	 is
poisoned.	Then	you	just	open	the	door	and	there	is	anger,	you	put	a	book	on	the
table	and	there	is	anger,	you	put	off	the	shoes	and	there	is	anger,	you	shake	hands
and	there	is	anger	--	because	now	you	are	anger	personified.
Through	suppression,	mind	becomes	split.	The	part	that	you	accept	becomes	the
conscious,	and	the	part	that	you	deny	becomes	the	unconscious.	This	division	is
not	 natural,	 the	 division	 happens	 because	 of	 repression.	 And	 into	 the
unconscious	 you	 go	 on	 throwing	 all	 the	 rubbish	 that	 society	 rejects	 --	 but
remember,	whatsoever	you	throw	in	there	becomes	more	and	more	part	of	you:	it
goes	into	your	hands,	into	your	bones,	into	your	blood,	into	your	heartbeat.	Now
psychologists	say	that	almost	eighty	percent	of	diseases	are	caused	by	repressed
emotions:	so	many	heart	failures	means	so	much	anger	has	been	repressed	in	the
heart,	so	much	hatred	that	the	heart	is	poisoned.
Why?	Why	 does	man	 suppress	 so	much	 and	 become	 unhealthy?	 Because	 the
society	teaches	you	to	control,	not	to	transform,	and	the	way	of	transformation	is
totally	different.
For	one	thing,	it	is	not	the	way	of	control	at	all,	it	is	just	the	opposite.
First	thing:	in	controlling	you	repress,	in	transformation	you	express.	But	there	is
no	 need	 to	 express	 on	 somebody	 else	 because	 the	 'somebody	 else'	 is	 just
irrelevant.	Next	 time	you	feel	angry	go	and	run	around	 the	house	seven	 times,
and	after	 it	sit	under	a	 tree	and	watch	where	the	anger	has	gone.	You	have	not
repressed	it,	you	have	not	controlled	it,	you	have	not	thrown	it	on	somebody	else
--	because	if	you	throw	it	on	somebody	else	a	chain	is	created,	because	the	other
is	as	foolish	as	you,	as	unconscious	as	you.	If	you	throw	it	on	another,	and	if	the
other	is	an	enlightened	person,	there	will	be	no	trouble;	he	will	help	you	to	throw
and	release	it	and	go	through	a	catharsis.	But	the	other	is	as	ignorant	as	you
--	if	you	throw	anger	on	him	he	will	react.	He	will	throw	more	anger	on	you,	he
is	repressed	as	much	as	you	are.	Then	there	comes	a	chain:	you	throw	on	him,	he
throws	on	you,	and	you	both	become	enemies.
Don't	 throw	 it	on	anybody.	 It	 is	 the	same	as	when	you	 feel	 like	vomiting:	you
don't	go	and	vomit	on	somebody.	Anger	needs	a	vomit.	You	go	to	the	bathroom
and	 vomit!	 It	 cleanses	 the	whole	 body	 --	 if	 you	 suppress	 the	 vomit	 it	will	 be
dangerous,	 and	 when	 you	 have	 vomited	 you	 will	 feel	 fresh,	 you	 will	 feel
unburdened,	unloaded,	good,	healthy.
Something	was	wrong	in	the	food	that	you	took	and	the	body	rejects	it.	Don't	go
on	forcing	it	inside.
Anger	 is	 just	 a	mental	 vomit.	 Something	 is	wrong	 that	 you	have	 taken	 in	 and
your	whole	psychic	being	wants	to	throw	it	out,	but	there	is	no	need	to	throw	it
out	on	somebody.
Because	people	throw	it	on	others,	society	tells	them	to	control	it.
There	is	no	need	to	throw	anger	on	anybody.	You	can	go	to	your	bathroom,	you
can	go	on	a	long	walk	--	it	means	that	something	is	inside	that	needs	fast	activity
so	 that	 it	 is	 released.	Just	do	a	 little	 jogging	and	you	will	 feel	 it	 is	 released,	or
take	a	pillow	and	beat	the	pillow,	fight	with	the	pillow,	and	bite	the	pillow	until
your	 hands	 and	 teeth	 are	 relaxed.	Within	 a	 five-minute	 catharsis	 you	will	 feel
unburdened,	 and	 once	 you	 know	 this	 you	 will	 never	 throw	 it	 on	 anybody,
because	that	is	absolutely	foolish.
The	 first	 thing	 in	 transformation	 then	 is	 to	 express	 anger,	 but	not	on	 anybody,
because	 if	you	express	 it	 on	 somebody	you	cannot	 express	 it	 totally.	You	may
like	to	kill,	but	it	is	not	possible;	you	may	like	to	bite,	but	it	is	not	possible.	But
that	can	be	done	to	a	pillow.
A	pillow	means	 'already	enlightened';	 the	pillow	 is	enlightened,	a	buddha.	The
pillow	will	not	react,	and	the	pillow	will	not	go	to	any	court,	and	the	pillow	will
not	 bring	 any	 enmity	 against	 you,	 and	 the	 pillow	 will	 not	 DO	 anything.	 The
pillow	will	be	happy,	and	the	pillow	will	laugh	at	you.
The	second	thing	to	remember:	be	aware.	In	controlling,	no	awareness	is	needed;
you	 simply	 do	 it	 mechanically,	 like	 a	 robot.	 The	 anger	 comes	 and	 there	 is	 a
mechanism	--
suddenly	 your	 whole	 being	 becomes	 narrow	 and	 closed.	 If	 you	 are	 watchful
control	may	not	be	so	easy.
Society	never	teaches	you	to	be	watchful,	because	when	somebody	is	watchful,
he	 is	wide	 open.	That	 is	 part	 of	 awareness	 --	 one	 is	 open,	 and	 if	 you	want	 to
suppress	something	and	you	are	open,	it	is	contradictory,	it	may	come	out.	The
society	 teaches	 you	 how	 to	 close	 yourself	 in,	 how	 to	 cave	 yourself	 in	 --	 don't
allow	even	a	small	window	for	anything	to	go	out.
But	remember:	when	nothing	goes	out,	nothing	comes	in	either.	When	the	anger
cannot	go	out,	you	are	closed.	If	you	touch	a	beautiful	rock,	nothing	goes	in;	you
look	 at	 a	 flower,	 nothing	 goes	 in:	 your	 eyes	 are	 dead	 and	 closed.	 You	 kiss	 a
person	--	nothing	goes	in,	because	you	are	closed.	You	live	an	insensitive	life.
Sensitivity	grows	with	awareness.	Through	control	you	become	dull	and	dead	--
that	 is	part	of	 the	mechanism	of	control:	 if	you	are	dull	and	dead	 then	nothing
will	 affect	 you,	 as	 if	 the	 body	 has	 become	 a	 citadel,	 a	 defense.	 Nothing	 will
affect	you,	neither	insult	nor	love.
But	this	control	is	at	a	very	great	cost,	an	unnecessary	cost;	then	it	becomes	the
whole	effort	in	life:	how	to	control	yourself	--	and	then	die!	The	whole	effort	of
control	 takes	all	your	energy,	and	then	you	simply	die.	And	the	 life	becomes	a
dull	and	dead	thing;	you	somehow	carry	it	on.
The	society	teaches	you	control	and	condemnation,	because	a	child	will	control
only	 when	 he	 feels	 something	 is	 condemned.	 Anger	 is	 bad;	 sex	 is	 bad;
everything	that	has	to	be	controlled	has	to	be	made	to	look	like	a	sin	to	the	child,
to	look	like	evil.
Mulla	Nasruddin's	son	was	growing	up.	He	was	 ten	years	of	age	and	so	Mulla
thought:	Now,	this	is	the	time.	He	is	old	enough	and	the	secrets	of	life	must	be
revealed	to	him.	So	he	called	him	into	his	study	and	gave	him	the	lowdown	on
sex	among	birds	and	bees.
And	 then	 in	 the	 end	 he	 told	 him,	 'When	 you	 feel	 your	 younger	 brother	 is	 old
enough,	you	tell	the	whole	thing	to	him	also.'
Just	a	few	minutes	after,	when	he	was	passing	by	the	rooms	of	the	kids,	he	heard
the	older	one,	the	ten-year-old	one,	already	at	work.	He	was	telling	the	younger:
'Look,	you	know	what	people	do,	 that	stuff	people	do	when	they	want	 to	get	a
child,	a	baby?	Well,	Dad	says	birds	and	bees	do	the	same	darn	thing.'
A	 deep	 condemnation	 enters	 about	 all	 that	 is	 alive.	And	 sex	 is	 the	most	 alive
thing	--	has	to	be!	It	is	the	source.	Anger	is	also	a	most	alive	thing,	because	it	is	a
protective	force.	If	a	child	cannot	be	angry	at	all,	he	will	not	be	able	to	survive.
You	have	to	be	angry	in	certain	moments.	The	child	has	to	show	his	own	being,
the	child	has	to	stand	in	certain	moments	upon	his	own	ground;	otherwise	he	will
have	no	backbone.
Anger	 is	 beautiful;	 sex	 is	 beautiful.	 But	 beautiful	 things	 can	 go	 ugly.	 That
depends	on	you.	If	you	condemn	them,	they	become	ugly;	if	you	transform	them,
they	 become	 divine.	 Anger	 transformed	 becomes	 compassion	 --	 because	 the
energy	is	the	same.	A	buddha	is	compassionate:	from	where	does	his	compassion
come?	This	is	the	same	energy	that	was	moving	in	anger;	now	it	is	not	moving	in
anger,	 the	same	energy	 is	 transformed	 into	compassion.	From	where	does	 love
come?	A	Buddha	is	loving;	a	Jesus	is	love.	The	same	energy	that	moves	into	sex
becomes	love.
So	 remember,	 if	 you	 condemn	a	natural	 phenomenon	 it	 becomes	poisonous,	 it
destroys	you,	it	becomes	destructive	and	suicidal.	If	you	transform	it,	it	becomes
divine,	 it	 becomes	 a	 God-force,	 it	 becomes	 an	 elixir;	 you	 attain	 through	 it	 to
immortality,	to	a	deathless	being.	But	transformation	is	needed.
In	transformation	you	never	control,	you	simply	become	more	aware.	Anger	is
happening:	 you	 have	 to	 be	 aware	 that	 anger	 is	 happening	 --	 watch	 it!	 It	 is	 a
beautiful	phenomenon	--	energy	moving	within	you,	becoming	hot!
It	 is	 just	 like	electricity	 in	 the	clouds.	People	were	always	afraid	of	electricity;
they	thought	in	olden	days,	when	they	were	ignorant,	that	this	electricity	was	the
god	 being	 angry,	 being	 threatening,	 trying	 to	 punish	 --	 creating	 fear	 so	 that
people	would	become	worshippers,	 so	 that	people	would	 feel	 that	 the	god	was
there	and	he	would	punish	them.
But	now	we	have	domesticated	 that	god.	Now	that	god	runs	 through	your	 fan,
through	your	air	conditioner,	through	the	fridge:	whatsoever	you	need,	that	god
serves.	 That	 god	 has	 become	 a	 domestic	 force,	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 angry	 and	 no
longer	threatening.	Through	science	an	outer	force	has	been	transformed	into	a
friend.
The	same	happens	through	religion	for	inner	forces.
Anger	 is	 just	 like	electricity	 in	your	body:	you	don't	know	what	 to	do	with	 it.
Either	you	kill	somebody	else	or	you	kill	yourself.	The	society	says	 if	you	kill
yourself	it	is	okay,	it	is	your	concern,	but	don't	kill	anybody	else	--	and	as	far	as
society	 goes	 that	 is	 okay.	 So	 either	 you	 become	 aggressive	 or	 you	 become
repressive.
Religion	says	both	are	wrong.	The	basic	thing	that	is	needed	is	to	become	aware
and	to	know	the	secret	of	this	energy,	anger,	this	inner	electricity.	It	is	electricity
because	 you	 become	hot;	when	 you	 are	 angry	 your	 temperature	 goes	 hot,	 and
you	 cannot	 understand	 the	 coolness	 of	 a	 buddha,	 because	 when	 anger	 is
transformed	 into	 compassion	 everything	 is	 cool.	 A	 deep	 coolness	 happens.
Buddha	is	never	HOT;	he	is	always	cool,	centered,	because	he	now	knows	how
to	 use	 the	 inner	 electricity.	 Electricity	 is	 hot	 --	 it	 becomes	 the	 source	 of	 air
conditioning.	Anger	is	hot	--	it	becomes	the	source	of	compassion.
Compassion	 is	 an	 inner	 air	 conditioning.	 Suddenly	 everything	 is	 cool	 and
beautiful,	 and	nothing	can	disturb	you,	and	 the	whole	existence	 is	 transformed
into	a	friend.	Now	there	are	no	more	enemies...	because	when	you	look	through
the	 eyes	 of	 anger,	 somebody	 becomes	 an	 enemy;	 when	 you	 look	 through	 the
eyes	 of	 compassion,	 everybody	 is	 a	 friend,	 a	 neighbor.	 When	 you	 love,
everywhere	is	God;	when	you	hate,	everywhere	is	the	devil.	It	is	your	standpoint
that	is	projected	onto	reality.
Awareness	is	needed,	not	condemnation	--	and	through	awareness	transformation
happens	 spontaneously.	 If	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 your	 anger,	 understanding
penetrates.
Just	watching,	with	no	judgment,	not	saying	good,	not	saying	bad,	just	watching
in	 your	 inner	 sky.	 There	 is	 lightning,	 anger,	 you	 feel	 hot,	 the	 whole	 nervous
system	 shaking	 and	 quaking,	 and	 you	 feel	 a	 tremor	 all	 over	 the	 body	 --	 a
beautiful	moment,	because	when	energy	functions	you	can	watch	it	easily;	when
it	is	not	functioning	you	cannot	watch.
Close	your	eyes	and	meditate	on	it.	Don't	fight,	just	look	at	what	is	happening	--
the	whole	sky	filled	with	electricity,	so	much	lightning,	so	much	beauty	--	just	lie
down	on	the	ground	and	look	at	the	sky	and	watch.	Then	do	the	same	inside.
Clouds	 are	 there,	 because	without	 clouds	 there	 can	 be	 no	 lightning	 --	 DARK
clouds	are	there,	thoughts.	Somebody	has	insulted	you,	somebody	has	laughed	at
you,	somebody	has	said	this	or	that...	many	clouds,	dark	clouds	in	the	inner	sky
and	much	lightning.	Watch!
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 scene	 --	 terrible	 also,	 because	 you	 don't	 understand.	 It	 is
mysterious,	and	if	mystery	is	not	understood	it	becomes	terrible,	you	are	afraid
of	it.	And	whenever	a	mystery	is	understood,	it	becomes	a	grace,	a	gift,	because
now	you	have	the	keys	--	and	with	keys	you	are	the	master.
You	don't	control	it,	you	simply	become	a	master	when	you	are	aware.	And	the
more	you	become	aware,	the	more	inwards	you	penetrate,	because	awareness	is
a	 going-inwards,	 it	 always	 goes	 inwards:	more	 aware,	more	 in;	 totally	 aware,
perfectly	in;	less	aware,	more	out;	unconscious	--	you	are	completely	out,	out	of
your	house	wandering	around.
Unconsciousness	 is	 a	 wandering	 outside;	 consciousness	 is	 a	 deepening	 of	 the
inside.
So	look!	--	and	when	anger	 is	not,	 it	will	be	difficult	 to	 look:	what	 to	 look	at?
The	sky	is	so	vacant,	and	you	are	not	yet	capable	of	looking	at	emptiness.	When
anger	 is	 there,	 look,	watch,	 and	 soon	 you	will	 see	 a	 change.	 The	moment	 the
watcher	comes	in,	the	anger	has	already	started	becoming	cool,	the	heat	is	lost.
Then	you	can	understand	that	the	heat	is	given	by	you;	your	identification	with	it
makes	it	hot,	and	the	moment	you	feel	it	is	not	hot,	the	fear	is	gone,	and	you	feel
unidentified	with	 it,	 different,	 a	 distance.	 It	 is	 there,	 lightning	 around	you,	 but
you	are	not	it.	A	hill	starts	rising	upwards.	You	become	a	watcher:	down	in	the
valley,	much	lightning...	distance	grows	more	and	more...	and	a	moment	comes
when	 suddenly	 you	 are	 not	 joined	 to	 it	 at	 all.	 The	 identity	 is	 broken,	 and	 the
moment	the	identity	breaks,	IMMEDIATELY	the	whole	hot	process	becomes	a
cool	process	--	anger	becomes	compassion.
Sex	is	a	hot	process,	love	is	not.	But	all	over	the	world	people	always	talk	about
warm	 love.	Love	 is	not	warm;	 love	 is	absolutely	cool,	but	not	cold	 --	 it	 is	not
cold	because	it	is	not	dead.	It	is	cool,	just	like	a	cool	breeze.	But	it	is	not	hot,	not
warm.	Because	 of	 the	 identification	with	 sex,	 the	 conception	 has	 come	 to	 the
mind	that	love	should	be	warm.
Sex	 IS	 hot.	 It	 is	 electricity,	 and	 you	 are	 identified	with	 it.	 The	more	 love,	 the
more	 coolness	 --	 you	 may	 even	 feel	 cool	 love	 as	 cold;	 that	 is	 your
misunderstanding,	because	you	feel	love	has	to	be	hot.	It	cannot	be.	The	SAME
energy,	when	not	identified	with,	becomes	cool.	Compassion	is	cool,	and	if	your
compassion	is	still	hot,	understand	it	is	not	compassion.
There	are	people	who	are	 too	hot,	and	 they	 think	 they	have	much	compassion.
They	want	to	transform	the	society,	they	want	to	change	the	structure,	they	want
to	 do	 this	 and	 that,	 they	 want	 to	 bring	 a	 utopia	 into	 the	 world:	 the
revolutionaries,	the	communists,	the	utopians	--	and	they	are	very	hot.
And	they	think	they	have	compassion	--	no,	they	have	only	anger.	The	object	has
changed.	 Now	 their	 anger	 has	 a	 new	 object,	 a	 very	 impersonal	 object	 --	 the
society,	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 society,	 the	 state,	 the	 situation.	 They	 are	 very	 hot
people.	Lenin,	or	Stalin,	or	Trotsky	--	they	are	hot	people	but	they	are	not	against
anybody	 in	 particular,	 they	 are	 against	 a	 structure.	 Gandhi	 is	 a	 hot	 person	 --
against	the	British	Empire.	The	object	is	impersonal,	that's	why	you	cannot	feel
that	he	is	angry	--	but	he	IS	angry.	He	wants	to	change	something	in	the	outside
world,	and	wants	to	change	it	so	immediately	that	he	is	impatient,	fighting.	The
fighting	 may	 choose	 nonviolence	 as	 the	 means,	 but	 the	 fighting	 IS	 violence.
Fight	as	such	is	violence.	You	can	choose	nonviolent	means	to	fight	--
women	 have	 always	 chosen	 them.	Gandhi	 did	 nothing	 else,	 he	 simply	 used	 a
feminine	trick.
If	a	husband	wants	to	fight,	he	will	beat	his	wife;	and	if	the	wife	wants	to	fight,
she	will	beat	herself.	This	is	as	old	as	woman	--	and	woman	is	older	than	man!
She	will	 start	 beating	 herself;	 that	 is	 her	 way	 to	 fight.	 She	 is	 violent,	 violent
against	herself.	And	remember,	beating	a	woman	you	will	feel	guilty,	and	sooner
or	 later	 you	 will	 have	 to	 come	 down	 and	 make	 a	 compromise.	 But	 beating
herself,	she	never	feels	guilty.	So	either	you	beat	a	woman	and	you	feel	guilty,	or
she	beats	herself	and	then	also	you	feel	guilty	--
that	you	created	the	situation	in	which	she	is	beating	herself.	In	both	cases	she
wins.
The	British	Empire	was	defeated	because	it	was	a	male	aggressive	force,	and	the
British	Empire	could	not	understand	this	feminine	fight	of	Gandhi's:	he	will	fast
unto	death	--
and	then	the	whole	British	mind	will	feel	guilty.	Now	you	cannot	kill	this	man,
because	he	is	not	fighting	in	any	way	with	you,	he	is	simply	purifying	his	own
soul	--	the	old	feminine	trick,	but	it	worked.	There	was	only	one	way	to	defeat
Gandhi,	and	that	was	impossible.	It	was	for	Churchill	to	go	on	a	fast	unto	death,
and	that	was	impossible.
Either	 you	 are	 hot	 against	 someone	 in	 particular	 or	 just	 hot	 against	 some
structure	in	general,	but	the	heat	remains.
A	Lenin	is	not	compassion,	cannot	be.	Buddha	is	compassion	--	not	fighting	at
all	with	anything,	simply	being	and	allowing	things	to	be	as	they	are;	they	move
on	their	own.
Societies	change	on	their	own,	there	is	no	need	to	change	them;	they	change	as
trees	change	in	season.	Societies	change	on	their	own	--	old	societies	die	on	their
own,	there	is	no	need	to	destroy	them!	And	new	societies	are	born	just	like	new
children,	new	babies,	on	their	own.	There	is	no	need	to	force	an	abortion,	it	goes
on	automatically	by	itself.
Things	move	and	change.	And	this	is	the	paradox:	that	they	go	on	moving	and
changing	 and	 still	 in	 a	 sense	 they	 remain	 the	 same	 --	 because	 there	 will	 be
people	who	are	poor,	and	there	will	be	people	who	are	rich;	there	will	be	people
who	 are	 helpless,	 powerless,	 and	 there	 will	 be	 people	 who	 have	 power	 over
them.	 Classes	 cannot	 disappear	 --	 that	 is	 not	 in	 the	 nature	 of	 things.	 Human
society	can	never	become	classless.
Classes	can	change.	Now	in	Russia,	 there	are	not	 the	poor	and	the	rich	but	 the
governed	and	the	governors	--	they	are	there	now.	Now	a	new	class	division	has
arisen:	the	bureaucrats	and	the	ordinary	people,	the	managers	and	the	managed	--
the	same,	it	makes	no	difference.	If	now	Tamerlane	was	born	in	Soviet	Russia,
he	 would	 become	 the	 prime	 minister.	 If	 Ford	 was	 born	 in	 Soviet	 Russia,	 he
would	become	the	general	secretary	of	 the	communist	party,	he	would	manage
from	there.
Situations	 go	 on	 changing,	 but	 in	 a	 subtle	 sense	 they	 remain	 the	 same.	 The
managers,	 the	managed;	 the	governors,	 the	governed;	 the	rich,	 the	poor	--	 they
remain.	You	 cannot	 change	 it,	 because	 society	 exists	 through	 contradiction.	A
real	 man	 of	 compassion	 will	 be	 cool;	 he	 cannot	 be	 a	 revolutionary	 really,
because	revolution	needs	a	very	hot	mind	and	heart	and	body.
No	control,	no	expression	on	others,	more	awareness	--	and	then	consciousness
shifts	from	the	periphery	to	the	center.
Now	try	to	understand	this	beautiful	anecdote.
A	ZEN	STUDENT	CAME	TO	BANKEI	AND	SAID:	'MASTER,	I	HAVE	AN
UNGOVERNABLE	TEMPER	--	HOW	CAN	I	CURE	IT?'
He	has	accepted	one	thing,	that	he	has	an	ungovernable	temper;	now	he	wants	to
cure	it.
Whenever	there	is	a	disease,	first	try	to	find	whether	there	is	really	disease	or	a
misunderstanding,	because	if	there	is	a	real	disease	then	it	can	be	cured,	but	if	it
is	not	a	real	disease,	just	a	misunderstanding,	then	no	medicine	will	help.	Rather,
on	the	contrary,	every	medicine	that	is	given	to	you	will	be	harmful.	So	first	be
perfectly	 clear	 about	 a	 disease,	whether	 it	 is	 there	 or	 not,	 or	whether	 you	 are
simply	imagining	it,	or	whether	you	are	simply	thinking	that	 it	 is	 there.	It	may
not	be	 there	 at	 all;	 it	may	be	 simply	a	misunderstanding.	And	 the	way	man	 is
confused,	many	of	his	diseases	don't	exist	at	all	--
he	simply	believes	they	are	there.
You	also	are	in	the	same	boat,	so	try	to	understand	this	story	very	deeply;	it	may
be	helpful	to	you.
The	student	said,
'MASTER,	I	HAVE	AN	UNGOVERNABLE	TEMPER	--	HOW	CAN	I	CURE
IT?'
The	disease	is	accepted,	he	does	not	doubt	it;	he	is	asking	for	the	cure.	Never	ask
for	 the	cure.	First	 try	 to	 find	out	whether	 the	disease	exists	or	not.	First	move
into	the	disease	and	diagnose	it,	decipher	it,	scrutinize	it;	move	into	the	disease
first	before	you	ask	for	a	cure.
Don't	accept	any	disease	just	on	the	surface,	because	the	surface	is	where	others
meet	you,	and	the	surface	is	where	others	reflect	in	you,	and	the	surface	is	where
others	color	you.	It	may	not	be	a	disease	at	all,	 it	may	be	 just	 the	reflection	of
others.
It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 silent	 lake,	 and	 you	 stand	 on	 the	 bank	 of	 the	 lake	 with	 your
orange	 robe,	 and	 the	water	 near	 you	 looks	orange,	 reflects	 you.	The	 lake	may
think	 that	 it	has	become	orange.	How	to	get	 rid	of	 it?	Where	 to	 find	 the	cure?
Whom	to	ask?
Don't	go	 to	 the	experts	 immediately.	First	 try	 to	 find	out	whether	 it	 is	 really	a
disease	or	just	a	reflection.	Just	being	alert	will	do	much:	many	of	your	diseases
will	simply	disappear	without	any	cure,	no	medicine	is	needed.
'SHOW	ME	THIS	TEMPER,'	SAID	BANKEI,	'IT	SOUNDS	FASCINATING.'
A	man	like	Bankei	 immediately	starts	working	on	 the	disease,	not	on	 the	cure.
He	is	not	a	psychoanalyst;	a	psychoanalyst	starts	working	for	the	cure	--	and	that
is	the	difference.
Now	new	trends	in	psychiatry	are	coming	up	which	start	working	on	the	disease,
not	on	the	cure.	New	trends	are	developing:	they	are	nearer	to	reality,	and	nearer
to	zen,	and	nearer	to	religion.	Within	this	century	psychiatry	will	take	on	a	more
religious	color,	and	then	it	will	not	be	just	a	therapy,	it	will	REALLY	become	a
healing	force	--	because	therapy	thinks	of	a	cure,	and	a	healing	force	brings	your
consciousness	to	the	disease.
Out	of	 a	hundred	diseases,	ninety-nine	will	disappear	 simply	by	bringing	your
consciousness	 to	 them.	 They	 are	 false	 diseases;	 they	 exist	 because	 you	 are
standing	 with	 your	 back	 towards	 them.	 Face	 them,	 and	 they	 go,	 and	 they
disappear.	 That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 encounter	 --	 and	 encounter	 groups	 can	 be
helpful,	because	the	whole	message	is	how	to	encounter	things	as	they	are.	Don't
think	of	cure,	don't	think	of	medicine,	don't	think	of	what	to	do;	the	real	thing	is,
first,	to	know	what	is	there.
Mind	has	deceived	you	 in	so	many	ways	 that	a	disease	appears	on	 the	surface
but	there	is	no	disease	deep	down;	or	a	disease	appears	on	the	surface,	but	you
move	within	and	you	 find	 there	are	other	diseases,	and	 that	was	 just	a	 trick	 to
deceive	you,	that	was	not	the	real	disease.
A	 man	 came	 to	 me	 and	 he	 said,	 'My	 mind	 is	 very	 much	 disturbed.	 I	 am
continuously	tense,	anxiety	is	there,	I	cannot	sleep.	So	give	me	some	technique
of	meditation	--	how	to	be	silent	and	at	peace.'
I	asked	him,	'What	is	really	the	problem?	Do	you	really	want	to	be	at	peace	with
yourself?'
He	said,	 'Yes,	I	am	a	seeker,	and	I	have	been	to	Sri	Aurobindo's	ashram,	and	I
have	 been	 to	 Sri	 Raman's	 ashram,	 and	 I	 have	 been	 everywhere,	 and	 nothing
helps.'
So	 I	 asked	 him,	 'Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 about	 it	 --	 that	 when	 nothing	 helps
maybe	 the	 disease	 is	 false?	 Or	 that	 you	 have	 labeled	 it	 falsely?	 Or	 that	 the
container	contains	something	else	which	is	not	written	on	it?	You	easily	accept
that	Sri	Aurobindo	failed,	Sri	Raman	failed,	and	you	have	moved	all	around....'
And	he	was	feeling	very	victorious	 that	everybody	had	failed,	and	nobody	had
been	 able	 to	 help,	 that	 everybody	was	 bogus.	And	 then	 I	 told	 him,	 'Sooner	 or
later	you	will	go	and	say	the	same	about	me	also,	because	I	don't	see	that	you	are
a	spiritual	seeker,	I	don't	see	that	you	are	really	interested	in	being	at	peace	with
yourself.	 Just	 tell	me,	what	 is	 your	 anxiety?	What	 is	 your	 tension?	 Just	 go	on
telling	me	what	thoughts	come	continuously	to	you,	and	why	you	go	on	thinking
about	them.'
He	said,	'Not	many,	only	one	thought:	I	had	a	son,	he	is	still	alive	--	but	no	more
a	son	to	me.	I	have	thrown	him	out.	I	am	a	rich	man,	and	he	had	fallen	in	love
with	a	girl	not	of	my	caste,	and	economically	also	below	my	status,	uneducated.
And	I	told	the	boy,	"If	you	want	to	marry	this	girl	then	never	come	back	to	this
house."	And	he	never	 came	back.'And	now	 I	 am	getting	old.	The	boy	 lives	 in
poverty	with	 the	girl,	 and	 I	continuously	 think	about	 the	boy,	and	THIS	 is	my
trouble.	You	give	me	some	technique	of	meditation.'
I	said:	 'How	will	this	technique	of	meditation	help?	--	because	the	technique	of
meditation	will	not	bring	the	boy	home.	And	this	is	such	a	simple	thing,	there	is
no	need	to	go	to	Aurobindo,	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	Sri	Raman	or	come	to	me.
A	sword	is	not	needed	for	your	problem,	a	needle	will	do.	You	are	looking	for
swords,	and	then	swords	prove	failures	because	you	need	only	a	needle.	This	is
not	a	spiritual	problem,	just	ego.
Why	 shouldn't	 one	 fall	 in	 love	 with	 a	 girl	 who	 is	 economically	 below	 one's
status?	Is	love	something	economical?	Something	to	think	of	in	terms	of	finance,
economics,	money,	wealth,	status?'
I	told	him	one	story:	One	marriage	agent	came	to	a	young	man	and	told	him,	'I
have	got	a	very	beautiful	girl,	just	exactly	fit	for	you.'
The	boy	said,	'Don't	bother	me.	I	am	not	interested.'
The	marriage	agent	said,	 'I	know,	but	don't	be	worried,	I	have	another	girl	who
will	bring	five	thousand	rupees	in	dowry.'
The	young	man	said,	'Stop	talking	nonsense.	I	am	not	interested	in	money	either!
You	simply	go.'
The	man	said,	'I	know.	You	don't	bother!	If	five	thousand	is	not	enough,	I	have
another	girl	who	will	bring	twenty-five	thousand	rupees	in	dowry.'
The	boy	said,	'You	simply	get	out	of	my	room,	because	if	ever	I	get	married,	it	is
for	me	to	think	about,	it	is	not	a	question	for	an	agent	to	settle.	You	simply	get
out	of	it!	Don't	make	me	angry!'
The	agent	said,	 'Okay,	now	I	understand.	You	are	not	 interested	 in	beauty,	you
are	 not	 interested	 in	 money.	 I	 have	 a	 girl	 who	 comes	 from	 a	 family	 of	 long
tradition,	 a	 very	 famous	 family	 --	 everybody	 knows	 about	 it,	 and	 four	 prime
ministers	have	come	from	that	family	in	the	past.	So	you	are	interested	in	family,
right?'
Now	 by	 this	 time	 the	 boy	 was	 very	 very	 angry	 and	 he	 wanted	 to	 physically
throw	this	man	out.	And	when	by	physically	forcing	him	he	was	just	 throwing
him	out	of	the	door,	he	said,	'If	I	ever	get	married	it	will	be	for	love	and	nothing
else.'
The	agent	said,	'Then	why	in	the	first	place	didn't	you	tell	me?	I	have	those	kinds
of	girls	too.'
I	told	this	man	this	story.
Love	 is	not	manageable,	 it	 is	 simply	 something	 that	happens,	 and	 the	moment
you	 try	 to	manage	 it	 everything	misfires.	 So	 I	 told	 that	man,	 'Just	 go	 and	 ask
your	son's	forgiveness
--	that's	what	is	needed.	No	meditation	technique,	no	Aurobindo,	no	Raman,	no
Osho,	nobody	can	help	you.	Simply	go	to	your	boy	and	ask	his	forgiveness!	--
that's	what	 is	 needed.	Accept	 and	welcome	him	back.	 It	 is	 just	 the	 ego	 that	 is
troubling	 you.	And	 if	 EGO	 is	 troubling	 you	 then	 the	 disease	 is	 different.	You
seek	meditation,	and	you	think	through	meditation	silence	will	be	possible?	No.'
Meditation	 can	 be	 a	 help	 only	 to	 that	 person	 who	 has	 come	 to	 a	 right
understanding	with	his	 inner	diseases,	when	he	has	 come	 to	understand	which
disease	 is	 false,	which	 disease	 is	wrongly	 identified,	 and	which	 disease	 is	 not
there	at	all	--	the	container	is	empty.
When	 one	 has	 come	 to	 an	 understanding,	 a	 deep	 understanding	with	 all	 one's
diseases,	 then	ninety-nine	percent	of	 the	diseases	disappear	 --	because	you	can
do	 something	 and	 they	 disappear.	 Then	 only	 one	 thing	 remains,	 and	 that	 one
thing	 is	 spiritual	 search....	A	deep	 anguish,	 unrelated	 to	 this	world,	 not	 related
with	anything	in	this	world:	son,	father,	money,	prestige,	power	--	nothing.	It	is
not	related	to	them,	it	is	simply	existential.	Deep	down,	if	you	can	pinpoint	it,	it
is	 HOW	 TO	 KNOW	ONESELF.	Who	 am	 I?	 Then	 this	 anguish	 becomes	 the
search.	Then	meditation	can	help	 --	never	before	 it.	Before	 it,	 other	 things	are
needed:	needles	will	do,	why	carry	a	sword	unnecessarily?	And	where	needles
will	do,	swords	will	be	failures.	This	is	what	is	happening	to	millions	of	people
all	around	the	world.
This	Bankei	is	a	master.	He	immediately	got	to	the	point,	to	the	business.
'SHOW	ME	THIS	TEMPER,'	said	he,'IT	SOUNDS	FASCINATING.'
It	sounds	fascinating,	really.	Why	does	this	Bankei	say	it	sounds	fascinating?	--
because	the	whole	thing	is	false.	This	boy,	this	student	has	never	looked	within.
He	is	seeking	for	a	method	and	he	has	not	diagnosed	what	his	disease	is.
'I	 HAVEN'T	 GOT	 IT	 RIGHT	 NOW,'	 SAID	 THE	 STUDENT,	 'SO	 I	 CAN'T
SHOW	IT
TO	YOU.'
You	cannot	manage	to	bring	about	anger,	can	you?	If	I	tell	you:	'Be	angry	right
now,'
what	will	you	do?	Even	if	you	act,	even	if	you	manage	somehow	to	pretend,	it
will	 not	 be	 anger,	 because	 deep	 down	 you	 will	 remain	 cool	 and	 acting.	 It
happens!	What	does	it	mean,	'it	happens'?	It	means	it	happens	only	when	you	are
unconscious.	If	you	TRY	to	bring	it,	you	are	conscious.	It	cannot	happen	when
you	 are	 conscious,	 it	 can	 happen	 only	 when	 you	 are	 unconscious.
Unconsciousness	is	a	MUST	--	without	it	anger	cannot	happen.	But	still,	the	boy
said:
'I	HAVEN'T	GOT	IT	RIGHT	NOW,	SO	I	CAN'T	SHOW	IT	TO	YOU.'	'WELL
THEN,'
SAID	BANKEI,	 'BRING	 IT	TO	ME	WHEN	YOU	HAVE	 IT.'	 'BUT	 I	CAN'T
BRING	IT
JUST	WHEN	 I	 HAPPEN	 TO	 HAVE	 IT,'	 PROTESTED	 THE	 STUDENT.	 'IT
ARISES
UNEXPECTEDLY,	AND	I	WOULD	SURELY	LOSE	IT	BEFORE	I	GOT	IT	TO
YOU.'
Now,	Bankei	has	put	him	on	the	right	path.	He	has	already	moved	along,	he	is
already	nearing	the	goal,	because	he	is	now	becoming	aware	of	things	of	which
he	 was	 never	 aware.	 The	 first	 thing	 he	 becomes	 aware	 of	 is	 that	 he	 cannot
produce	it	right	now.	It	cannot	be	produced;	it	happens	when	it	happens	--	it	is	an
unconscious	force,	you	cannot	bring	it	about	consciously.	That	means	if	he	goes
further,	 the	 next	 step	 will	 be	 that	 he	 remains	 conscious,	 and	 if	 you	 remain
conscious	it	cannot	happen.
Even	while	anger	is	happening,	if	you	suddenly	become	conscious	it	drops.	Try
it.	Just	 in	the	middle,	when	you	are	feeling	very	hot	and	would	like	to	commit
murder,	 suddenly	 become	 aware,	 and	 you	will	 feel	 something	 has	 changed:	 a
gear	inside	--	you	can	feel	the	click.	Something	has	changed,	now	it	is	no	more
the	 same	 thing.	Your	 inner	 being	 has	 relaxed.	 It	may	 take	 time	 for	 your	 outer
layer	 to	 relax,	 but	 the	 inner	 being	 has	 already	 relaxed.	 The	 cooperation	 is
broken;	now	you	are	not	identified.
Gurdjieff	used	to	play	a	very	beautiful	trick	on	his	disciples.	You	are	sitting	here,
and	 he	will	 create	 a	 situation;	 he	will	 tell	 you,	 'Somebody,	A,	 is	 coming,	 and
when	he	comes	I	will	behave	rudely	with	him,	very	rudely	--	and	you	all	have	to
help	me.'
Then	A	comes	and	Gurdjieff	laughs	and	he	says,	'You	are	looking	a	perfect	fool!'
--	and	everybody	looks	at	the	man	and	shows	him	that	everybody	agrees.	Then
Gurdjieff	will	say	nasty	things	about	this	man,	and	everybody	nods	and	feels	in
agreement.	The	man	gets	angrier	and	angrier,	and	Gurdjieff	will	go	on	and	on,
and	 everybody	 nods	 as	 if	 there	 is	 complete	 agreement,	 and	 the	man	 becomes
hotter	and	hotter	--	and	then	he	explodes.
And	when	he	explodes,	suddenly	Gurdjieff	says	'Stop	and	look!'
Something	inside	relaxes.	Immediately	the	man	understands	he	has	been	moved
into	a	situation,	he	has	become	angry	--	and	the	moment	he	realizes	that	this	is	a
situation,	 that	Gurdjieff	has	played	a	 trick,	 the	gear	changes:	he	becomes	alert,
aware.	The	body	will	take	a	little	time	to	cool	down,	but	deep	at	the	center,	there
everything	is	cool	and	he	can	look	at	himself	now.
The	 student	 is	 already	 on	 the	 path	 --	 Bankei	 has	 put	 him	 immediately	 on	 the
path.	The	 first	 thing	he	has	become	aware	of	 is:	 'I	 cannot	 show	 it	 to	you	 right
now,	because	it	is	not	there.'
'WELL	THEN,	BRING	IT	TO	ME	WHEN	YOU	HAVE	IT.'
A	second	step	has	been	taken.
'BUT	 I	 CAN'T	 BRING	 IT	 JUST	 WHEN	 I	 HAPPEN	 TO	 HAVE	 IT,'
PROTESTED	THE
STUDENT.	'IT	ARISES	UNEXPECTEDLY.'
'I	 don't	 know	 when	 it	 will	 arise.	 I	 may	 be	 very	 far	 away,	 you	 may	 not	 be
available,	and,	moreover,	even	if	I	bring	it	to	you,	by	the	time	I	reach	you	it	will
not	be	there.'	He	has	already	arrived	at	a	deep	understanding.
You	cannot	bring	anger	to	me,	can	you?	...	Because	in	the	very	effort	to	bring	it,
you	will	become	aware.	If	you	are	aware,	the	grip	is	lost;	it	starts	subsiding.	By
the	time	you	have	reached	me	it	will	be	no	more.
And	 it	was	easier	 to	 reach	Bankei;	 it	 is	difficult	 to	 reach	me,	you	will	have	 to
pass	through	Mukta.	By	the	time	the	appointment	is	given	and	by	the	time	you
reach	me,	it	will	not	be	there.	Hence	the	appointment	--	because	otherwise	you
will	bring	problems	unnecessarily.	They	drop	automatically	by	themselves	--	and
if	they	persist,	then	they	are	WORTH	bringing	to	me.
By	 the	 time	you	 come	 to	me	you	will	 have	 already	passed	over	 it;	 and	 if	 you
understand,	 that	means	 that	 things	 that	 come	and	go	are	not	worth	paying	any
attention	to	--	 they	come	and	go.	You	always	remain,	 they	come	and	go.	YOU
are	the	thing	to	be	more	attentive	about,	not	things	that	come	and	go	--	they	are
like	seasons,	climate	changes:	in	the	morning	it	was	different,	in	the	evening	it	is
again	different.	It	changes.	Find	out	that	which	doesn't	change.
The	student	has	already	reached	a	beautiful	understanding.	He	says:
'UNEXPECTEDLY	IT	ARISES,	AND	I	WOULD	SURELY	LOSE	IT	BEFORE
I	GOT
IT	TO	YOU.'	 'IN	THAT	CASE,'	SAID	BANKEI,	 'IT	CANNOT	BE	PART	OF
YOUR
TRUE	NATURE.'
...	Because	true	nature	is	always	there.	It	never	arises	and	never	sets,	it	is	always
there.
Anger	 arises,	 goes;	 hate	 arises,	 goes;	 your	 so-called	 love	 arises,	 goes.	 Your
nature	is	always	there.
So	don't	be	too	bothered	and	concerned	with	all	that	comes	and	goes;	otherwise
you	can	 remain	concerned	with	 it	 for	years	and	years,	and	 lives	and	 lives,	and
you	will	never	come	to	the	point.
That's	why	Freudian	psychoanalysis	never	serves	much	purpose.	The	patient	lies
down	on	 the	 couch	 for	years	 together	 --	 three	years,	 four	years,	 five	years,	 he
goes	 on	 talking,	 talking	 about	 things	 that	 come	 and	go.	Remember,	 the	whole
Freudian	analysis	is	concerned	with	things	that	come	and	go:	what	happened	in
your	childhood,	what	happened	 in	your	youth,	what	happened	 in	your	sex	 life,
what	happened	in	your	relations	with	others	--	it	goes	on	and	on!	It	is	concerned
with	 what	 happened,	 not	 to	 whom	 it	 happened	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 difference
between	Bankei	and	Freud.
If	you	are	concerned	with	what	happened	then...	so	much	has	happened.	Even	in
twenty-four	hours	so	much	happens	that	if	you	relate	it,	it	will	take	years	--	and
you	go	on	relating.	It	 is	 just	 like	talking	about	the	weather	for	your	whole	life,
how	it	has	been:	sometimes	very	hot,	sometimes	very	cloudy,	sometimes	rainy,
sometimes	this	and	that.
But	what	is	the	point	of	it	all?
And	what	happens?	How	does	the	psychoanalysis	help	a	patient?	It	helps	a	little.
It	simply	gives	time,	that's	all.	For	two	years	you	are	continuously	talking	about
things	that	happened.	These	two	years,	or	one	year,	or	even	more,	just	give	you
time;	the	wound	heals	automatically,	you	become	readjusted	again.	Of	course,	a
certain	 understanding	 also	 arises,	 the	 understanding	 that	 arises	 when	 you	 go
backwards,	and	come	forwards,	move	 like	a	shuttle	 in	your	memory.	A	certain
understanding	arises	because	you	have	to	watch	your	memories.	Because	of	this
watching...	but	that	is	not	the	main	thing.
Freud	 is	 not	 concerned	 with	 your	 witnessing.	 He	 thinks	 that	 just	 by	 relating,
telling	your	past,	bringing	it	out	through	words,	verbalization,	something	deep	is
changing.	 Nothing	 deep	 is	 changing.	 A	 little	 garbage	 is	 thrown	 out.	 Nobody
listened	 to	 you,	 and	 Freud	 and	 his	 psychoanalysts	 are	 listening	 to	 you	 so
attentively.	Of	course,	you	have	to	pay	for	it.
They	are	professional	 listeners.	They	help	in	a	way,	because	you	would	like	 to
talk	to	someone	intimately	--	even	that	helps.	That's	why	people	talk	about	their
miseries;	 they	 feel	 a	 little	 relaxed,	 somebody	 has	 heard	 patiently,	 with
compassion.	But	now	nobody	listens,	nobody	has	that	much	time.
Bertrand	Russell	 has	written	 a	 small	 story.	 In	 the	 coming	 century,	 the	 twenty-
first	century,	 there	will	be	a	great	profession	of	professional	 listeners.	 In	every
neighborhood,	 every	 four	 or	 five	 houses	 there	 will	 be	 a	 house	 with	 a	 sign:
Professional	 Listener	 --	 that	 is	what	 psychoanalysis	 is	 --	 because	 nobody	will
have	time,	everybody	will	be	in	such	a	hurry.	The	wife	will	not	be	able	to	talk	to
the	husband,	the	husband	will	not	be	able	to	talk	to	the	wife,	people	will	make
love	through	phone	calls,	or	will	see	each	other	on	the	television	screen.	That	is
going	to	happen,	because	what	is	the	use	of	going	to	meet	a	friend	when	you	can
see	him	on	the	television	screen,	he	can	see	you?	Phones	will	have	screens	also
so	that	you	can	see	your	friend	talking	to	you,	he	can	see	you	talking,	so	what	is
the	 point?	 ...	Because	what	will	 you	 do	 just	 sitting	 in	 front	 of	 each	 other	 in	 a
room?	It	is	happening	already:	the	distance	is	covered	by	the	telephone	and	the
television.
Contact	will	be	lost,	so	professional	listeners	will	be	needed.
You	go	to	psychoanalysts	and	they	listen	like	a	friend.	Of	course	you	have	to	pay
--	and	psychoanalysis	is	the	most	costly	thing	in	the	world	now,	only	very	rich
people	 can	 afford	 it.	 People	 boast	 about	 it:	 'I	 have	 been	 in	 psychoanalysis	 for
five	years.	How	many	years	have	you	been	in	it?'	Poor	people	cannot	afford	it.
But	 the	 Eastern	 methods	 of	 meditation	 have	 a	 different	 attitude:	 they	 are	 not
concerned	 with	 what	 happened	 to	 you,	 they	 are	 concerned	 with	 to	 whom	 it
happened.	Find	out:	to	whom?
Lying	down	on	a	Freudian	couch	you	are	concerned	with	the	objects	of	the	mind.
Sitting	 in	a	zen	monastery	you	are	concerned	with	 to	whom	it	happened	--	not
the	objects	but	the	subject.
'IN	THAT	CASE,'	SAID	BANKEI,	'IT	CANNOT	BE	PART	OF	YOUR	TRUE
NATURE.	 IF	 IT	 WERE,YOU	 COULD	 SHOW	 IT	 TO	 ME	 AT	 ANY	 TIME.
WHEN
YOU	WERE	BORN	YOU	DID	NOT	HAVE	IT,	AND	YOUR	PARENTS	DID
NOT
GIVE	IT	TO	YOU	--	SO	IT	MUST	COME	INTO	YOU	FROM	THE	OUTSIDE.
I	 SUGGEST	 THAT	 WHENEVER	 IT	 GETS	 INTO	 YOU,	 YOU	 BEAT
YOURSELF
WITH	 A	 STICK	 UNTIL	 THE	 TEMPER	 CAN'T	 STAND	 IT,	 AND	 RUNS
AWAY.'
He	is	simply	joking	--	don't	start	doing	it,	don't	take	the	stick	literally.
In	 zen,	 awareness	 is	 called	 the	 stick	 by	which	 you	 beat	 yourself.	 There	 is	 no
other	way	to	beat	yourself,	because	if	you	take	an	ordinary	stick	the	body	will	be
beaten,	not	you.	You	can	kill	the	body,	but	not	YOU.	To	beat	with	a	stick	means:
when	you	feel	angry,	continuously	be	aware;	bring	awareness	to	it,	become	alert,
conscious,	 and	 beat	 with	 the	 stick	 of	 awareness	 continuously	 inside,	 UNTIL
THE	TEMPER	CAN'T	STAND	IT	AND
RUNS	AWAY.	The	only	 thing	 that	 the	 temper	CAN'T	 stand	 is	 awareness.	 Just
beating	 your	 body	 won't	 do.	 That's	 what	 people	 have	 been	 doing	 --	 beating
others'	bodies	or	their	own.	That's	not	Bankei's	meaning	--	he	is	joking,	and	he	is
indicating	 a	 symbolic	 term	 zen	 people	 use	 for	 awareness:	 the	 stick	 one	 has	 to
beat	oneself	with.
In	the	zen	tradition,	when	a	master	dies	he	gives	his	stick,	the	staff,	to	his	chief
disciple,	to	him	whom	he	chooses	as	his	heir,	he	who	is	going	to	replace	him.	He
gives	him	the	stick,	the	staff,	that	he	carried	his	whole	life.	The	meaning	is	that
he	to	whom	this	stick	is	given	has	attained	to	the	inner	stick	--	to	awareness.	To
receive	the	stick	of	the	master	is	the	greatest	gift,	because	he	accepts	through	it,
agrees,	recognizes,	that	now	your	inner	stick	is	born;	you	have	become	aware	of
what	happens	to	you,	to	WHOM	it	happens.	The	distinction	is	there.	The	gap	has
come	in,	the	space	is	there;	now	the	periphery	and	your	center	are	not	identified.
Said	 Bankei,	 'I	 SUGGEST	 THAT	 WHENEVER	 IT	 GETS	 INTO	 YOU,	 this
anger,	it	must	be	coming	from	outside.	You	didn't	have	it	when	you	were	born;
nobody,	not	your	parents	or	anybody,	presented	it	to	you	as	a	gift,	so	from	where
is	 it	 coming?	 It	must	be	 coming	 from	outside,	 the	periphery	must	be	 touching
other	peripheries.	From	there,	you	must	be	getting	the	ripples	and	the	waves.	So
be	conscious'	--	because	the	moment	you	are	conscious	you	are	suddenly	thrown
to	the	center.
Be	unconscious	and	you	live	on	the	periphery.
Be	conscious	and	you	are	thrown	to	the	center.
And	from	the	center	you	can	see	what	is	happening	on	the	periphery.	Then	if	two
people	 touch	 on	 the	 periphery,	 then	 two	 people	 will	 create	 trouble	 on	 the
periphery,	but	it	will	not	be	any	trouble	for	you.	You	can	laugh,	you	can	enjoy	it,
you	can	say,	'It	sounds	fascinating.'
It	 happened:	Buddha	was	 passing	 near	 a	 village;	 a	 few	 people	 came	 and	 they
abused	him	very	badly,	said	nasty	things,	used	vulgar	words	--	and	he	just	stood
there.	 They	 got	 a	 little	 puzzled,	 because	 he	was	 not	 reacting.	 Then	 somebody
from	the	crowd	asked,	'Why	are	you	silent?	Answer	what	we	are	saying!'
Buddha	 said,	 'You	 came	 a	 little	 late.	 You	 should	 have	 come	 ten	 years	 ago,
because	then	I	would	have	reacted.	But	now	I	am	not	there	where	you	are	doing
these	things	to	me;	a	distance	has	arisen.	Now	I	have	moved	to	the	center	where
you	cannot	touch	me.	You	came	a	little	 late.	I	am	sorry	for	you,	but	I	enjoy	it.
Now	I	am	in	a	hurry,	because	in	the	other	village	where	I	am	going,	people	will
be	waiting	for	me.	If	you	are	not	yet	finished,	then	I	will	pass	back	by	the	same
route.	You	can	come	again.	IT	SOUNDS
FASCINATING.'
They	were	puzzled.	What	to	do	with	such	a	man?	Another	from	the	crowd	asked,
'Really,	are	you	not	going	to	say	anything?'
Buddha	said,	'In	the	village	I	have	come	from	just	now,	people	came	with	many
sweets	to	present	to	me,	but	I	take	things	only	when	I	am	hungry,	and	I	was	not
hungry,	so	I	gave	them	back	their	sweets.	I	ask	you,	what	will	they	do?'
So	the	man	said,	'Of	course,	they	will	go	in	the	village	and	give	those	sweets	as
PRASAD
to	people.'
So	Buddha	started	laughing	and	he	said,	'You	are	really	in	trouble,	you	are	in	a
mess	--
what	will	 you	do?	You	brought	 these	 vulgar	words	 to	me,	 and	 I	 say	 I	 am	not
hungry	--	so	now	take	them	back!	And	I	feel	very	sorry	for	your	village,	because
people	will	get	such	vulgar	things,	vulgar	words	in	their	prasad.'
When	you	are	 at	 the	 center,	 IT	SOUNDS	FASCINATING	 --	you	can	enjoy	 it.
When	you	are	cool	you	can	enjoy	the	whole	world.	When	you	are	hot	you	cannot
enjoy	 it,	because	you	get	so	much	 into	 it;	you	are	 lost,	you	get	 identified.	You
become	so	messed	up	in	it,	how	can	you	enjoy	it?
This	may	 sound	 paradoxical,	 but	 I	 tell	 you:	 only	 a	 buddha	 enjoys	 this	world.
Then	everything	sounds	fascinating.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	What	is	the	way?
3	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411030
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
95
mins
A	MASTER	WHO	LIVED	AS	A	HERMIT	ON	A	MOUNTAIN	WAS	ASKED
BY	A	MONK:	'WHAT	IS	THE	WAY?'	'WHAT	A	FINE	MOUNTAIN	THIS	IS,'
THE
MASTER	 SAID	 IN	 REPLY.'I	 AM	 NOT	 ASKING	 YOU	 ABOUT	 THE
MOUNTAIN,'
SAID	THE	MONK,	'BUT	THE	WAY.'
THE	MASTER	REPLIED:	'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	CANNOT	GO	BEYOND	THE
MOUNTAIN,	MY	SON,	YOU	CANNOT	REACH	THE	WAY.'
THE	WAY	 IS	 EASY	 --	 but	 you	 are	 the	 mountain	 and	 beyond	 lies	 the	 Way.
Crossing	yourself	is	very	difficult.	Once	you	are	on	the	Way	there	is	no	problem,
but	the	Way	is	very	far	from	you.
And	 you	 are	 such	 a	mass	 of	 contradictions!	One	 fragment	 of	 you	 goes	 to	 the
east,	another	goes	to	the	west	--	you	are	not	moving	in	one	direction.	You	cannot
as	 you	 are,	 because	 to	 move	 in	 one	 direction	 you	 need	 an	 inner	 unity,	 a
crystallized	being.	As	you	are	you	are	a	crowd,	with	many	selves,	with	no	unity.
At	the	most,	if	you	make	some	arrangement,	as	everybody	has	to	make	--	if	you
control	yourself,	at	the	most	you	can	become	an	assembly,	not	a	crowd;	and	then
too	you	will	be	the	Indian	assembly,	not	the	British:	at	the	most	the	majority	of
your	fragments	can	move	in	one	direction,	but	the	minority	will	always	be	there,
going	somewhere	else.
So	even	a	very	controlled	man,	disciplined,	a	man	of	character,	of	thinking,	that
man	too	never	reaches	the	Way.	He	may	be	able	to	adjust	to	the	society,	but	he	is
also	unable	to	reach	the	Way	from	where	the	door	towards	the	divine	opens.
You	are	really	a	mountain.
The	 first	 thing	 to	 be	 understood	 is	 that	 the	 crowd	 must	 go.	 The	 polypsychic
existence	must	become	unipsychic;	you	must	be	one.	That	means	you	must	be
thoughtless,	because	 thoughts	are	a	crowd;	 they	divide	you,	and	every	 thought
pulls	you	apart.	They	create	chaos	within	you	and	they	are	always	contradictory.
Even	when	you	decide,	the	decision	is	always	against	some	part	within	you,	it	is
never	total.
I	have	heard	it	happened:	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	very	ill	--	tense,	psychiatrically
ill.	And	the	illness	was	that	he	became,	by	and	by,	absolutely	unable	to	make	any
decision	--	not	big	decisions	at	that,	but	small	ones	also:	whether	to	take	a	bath
or	 not,	whether	 to	wear	 this	 tie	 or	 that,	whether	 to	 take	 a	 taxi	 to	 the	 office	 or
drive	 the	 car	 --	 not	 big	 ones,	 small	 decisions,	 but	 he	 became	 unable	 to	make
them	so	he	was	put	in	a	psychiatric	hospital.
Six	months	of	treatment	and	everything	settled,	and	the	doctors	felt	that	now	he
was	okay.	They	said	one	day,	'Now,	Nasruddin,	you	are	absolutely	okay.	You	can
go	 back	 in	 the	 world,	 take	 your	 job,	 start	 working	 and	 functioning.	 We	 are
completely	 satisfied	 that	 now	 there	 is	 nothing	 wrong.'	 But	 seeing	 a	 slight
indecision	on	Nasruddin's	part	the	doctor	said,	'Don't	you	feel	that	now	you	are
ready	to	go	into	the	world	and	start	working	and	functioning?'
Nasruddin	said,	'Yes	and	no.'
But	 this	 is	 the	situation.	Whether	you	are	 ill	or	healthy	 is	not	 the	question,	 the
difference	is	only	of	degree	--	but	this	remains	the	problem	deep	inside:	yes	and
no,	both.
You	love	a	person?	--	yes,	and	deep	down	is	hidden	the	no.	Sooner	or	later	when
you	get	bored	and	fed	up	with	the	yes,	the	no	will	come	up	and	you	will	hate	the
person,	the	same	person	you	loved.	You	like	something	but	the	dislike	is	hidden;
sooner	or	later	you	will	dislike	this	same	thing.
You	were	mad	when	you	loved,	when	you	liked;	and	you	will	be	mad	when	you
hate	and	dislike.	As	you	are	--	yes	and	no,	both	--	how	can	you	move	towards	the
divine?	 The	 divine	 needs	 total	 commitment,	 nothing	 less	will	 do.	 But	 how	 to
commit	totally?	--	you	are	not	a	total	being!	This	is	the	mountain.
The	 path	 is	 easy,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 on	 the	 path;	 and	 all	 the	 techniques,	 all	 the
methods	 in	 the	world,	and	all	 the	masters,	 to	be	exact,	 they	don't	give	you	 the
path	 --	 the	path	 already	 exists.	Their	methods	 and	 techniques	 simply	 lead	you
towards	 the	 path;	 THEY	 are	 not	 paths.	 They	 create	 small	 pathways	 on	 the
mountain	so	you	can	go	beyond	--	because	the	path	is	THERE;	there	is	no	need
to	 create	 a	path,	 it	 already	exists.	But	you	are	 lost	 in	 a	 forest.	You	have	 to	be
brought	to	the	path.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 is:	 the	more	divided	you	are,	 the	 farther	away	 from	 the	Way
you	will	be;	the	more	undivided,	the	nearer	the	path.
Thoughts	 divide	 because	 they	 always	 carry	 the	 opposite	 within	 them:	 love
carries	 hate,	 friendship	 carries	 enmity,	 liking	 carries	 disliking.	 Sosan	 is	 right
when	he	says:	'A	slight	distinction	between	like	and	dislike,	a	slight	movement	in
your	being	of	like	and	dislike,	and	heaven	and	earth	are	set	apart.'	No	distinction
--	and	you	have	reached,	because	with	no	distinction	you	are	one.
So	the	first	thing	to	remember	is	how	to	drop	thoughts	and	become	thoughtless	--
thoughtless	 but	 alert,	 because	 in	 deep	 sleep	 also	 you	 become	 thoughtless,	 and
that	won't	do.	It	 is	good	for	the	body,	 that	 is	why	after	a	deep	sleep	your	body
feels	rejuvenated.	But	the	mind	remains	tired	even	in	the	morning,	because	the
mind	continues	its	activity.	The	body	relaxes,	though	it	too	cannot	relax	totally
because	of	the	mind;	but	still,	it	relaxes.
So	in	the	morning	the	body	is	okay,	at	least	workably	okay	--	but	the	mind	feels
tired,	even	in	the	morning.	You	go	to	bed	tired,	you	get	up	in	the	morning	more
tired	because	the	mind	was	continuously	working,	dreaming,	thinking,	planning,
desiring;	the	mind	was	continuously	working.
In	 deep	 sleep	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 when	 you	 are	 absolutely	 unconscious	 you
become	one.
This	same	oneness	is	needed	with	a	conscious	and	alert	mind.	As	you	are	in	deep
sleep	--
no	thought,	no	distinction	of	good	and	bad,	heaven	and	hell,	God	and	the	devil,
no	 distinction	 of	 any	 sort,	 you	 simply	ARE,	 but	 unconscious	 --	 this	 has	 to	 be
attained	while	you	are	alert	and	conscious.	Samadhi,	the	final,	the	ultimate,	the
utter	meditation,	is	nothing	but	deep	sleep	with	full	consciousness.
Deep	 sleep	 you	 attain,	 so	 the	 only	 thing	 to	 be	 attained	 is	 more	 and	 more
consciousness.	 If	you	can	add	more	consciousness	 to	your	deep	sleep	you	will
become	 enlightened.	 The	 mountain	 is	 transcended	 and	 the	 path	 opens	 --	 one
thing.
Second	thing:	you	carry	the	past	within	you	--	that	creates	multiplicity.	You	were
a	child,	the	child	is	still	hidden	in	you,	and	sometimes	you	can	still	feel	the	child
kicking;	in	certain	moments	you	regress	and	become	the	child	again.	You	were
once	young,	now	you	are	old;	 that	young	man	 is	hidden	 there,	 and	 sometimes
even	an	old	man	starts	being	as	foolish	as	a	young	man.
You	carry	the	whole	past,	every	moment	of	it,	and	you	have	been	many	things!
From	the	womb	up	to	now	you	have	been	millions	of	persons,	and	they	are	all
carried	 within	 you,	 layer	 by	 layer.	 You	 have	 grown,	 but	 the	 past	 has	 not
disappeared;	it	may	be	hidden,	but	it	is	there	--	and	it	is	not	only	in	the	mind,	it	is
even	 in	 the	 body.	 If,	 when	 you	 were	 a	 small	 child	 and	 you	 were	 angry	 and
someone	said,	 'Stop!	Don't	be	angry,'	and	you	stopped,	 that	anger	 is	still	being
carried	by	your	hand.	It	has	to	be	so	because	energy	is	indestructible,	and	unless
you	 relax	 that	 hand	 it	 will	 persist,	 unless	 you	 do	 something	 consciously	 to
complete	the	circle	of	that	energy	which	became	anger	in	a	certain	moment	fifty
years	back	or	sixty	years	back,	you	will	carry	it	within	you,	and	it	will	color	all
your	actions.
You	can	touch	somebody,	but	the	touch	won't	be	pure:	the	whole	past	is	carried
by	the	hand;	all	repressed	anger,	all	repressed	hatred	is	there.	Even	if	in	love	you
touch	a	person	your	touch	is	not	pure,	love	cannot	be	--	because	where	will	that
anger	go	which	is	carried	by	the	hand?
Wilhelm	Reich	worked	very	much	on	this	somatic	repression.	The	body	carries
the	 past,	 the	mind	 carries	 the	 past;	 because	 of	 this	 loaded	 state	 you	 cannot	 be
here	and	now.	You	have	to	come	to	terms	with	your	past.
So	meditation	 is	not	only	a	question	of	doing	something	here	and	now;	before
that	is	possible	you	have	to	come	to	terms	with	your	past	--	you	have	to	dissolve
all	hangovers,	and	there	are	millions	of	them.
Even	when	one	becomes	old	he	is	also	a	child,	a	young	man,	and	all	that	he	has
ever	been	is	there,	because	you	don't	know	how	to	die	every	moment.
That	 is	 the	 whole	 art	 of	 life	 --	 to	 die	moment	 to	moment	 so	 that	 there	 is	 no
hangover.
A	relationship	has	finished	--	you	don't	carry	it,	you	simply	die	to	it!	What	can
you	do?
Something	was	happening	and	now	 it	 is	not	happening.	You	accept	 it	 and	you
die	to	it	--
you	simply	DROP	IT	with	 full	awareness,	and	 then	you	are	 renewed	 in	a	new
moment.
Now	you	are	not	carrying	the	past.
You	are	a	child	no	more,	but	watch	yourself	and	you	will	feel	the	child	is	there	--
and	 that	 child	 creates	 trouble!	 If	 you	 were	 really	 a	 child	 there	 would	 be	 no
trouble,	but	you	are	young	or	old....
I	have	heard:	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	hospitalized.	He	was	eighty	--	and	then	came
his	birthday,	and	he	was	waiting	 for	his	 three	 sons	 to	bring	him	some	present.
They	 came	 of	 course,	 but	 they	 had	 not	 brought	 anything	 --	 because	 he	 was
eighty	 years	 old!	A	 child	 feels	 happy	with	 a	 present,	 but	 an	 old	man?	 Eighty
years	old!	His	eldest	son	was	sixty.	So	they	didn't	think	about	it	at	all,	but	when
they	 came	 and	 Mulla	 looked	 and	 they	 were	 empty-handed,	 he	 felt	 angry,
frustrated,	and	he	said,	'What!	Have	you	forgotten	your	old	father,	your	poor	old
father's	birthday?	It	is	my	birthday!'
The	child...	at	that	moment	you	could	have	looked	into	his	eyes,	and	this	eighty-
year-old	man	was	not	there,	just	a	child	waiting	for	some	toys.
One	son	said,	'Forgive	us,	we	forgot	completely.'
Mulla	 Nasruddin	 said,	 'I	 reckon	 I	 will	 forgive	 you,	 because	 it	 seems	 this
forgetfulness	runs	in	our	family.	Really,	I	forgot	to	marry	your	mother.'	He	was
really	angry.
So	 they	 all	 three	 shrieked	 in	 unison,	 and	 they	 said,	 'What!	 Do	 you	mean	 we
are...?'
He	said,	'Yes!	--	and	damned	cheap	ones	at	that!'
The	child	continues	somewhere	in	you:	when	you	weep	you	can	find	him,	when
you	laugh	you	can	find	him,	when	somebody	gives	you	a	present	you	can	find
him,	when	somebody	forgets	to,	you	can	find	him,	when	somebody	appreciates
you,	you	can	find	him;	when	somebody	condemns	you,	you	can	find	him	--	it	is
very	 difficult	 to	 be	 really	 mature.	 One	 can	 never	 be	 mature	 unless	 the	 child
simply	 dies	 within	 you,	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 part	 of	 you	 --	 otherwise	 it	 will	 go	 on
influencing	your	actions,	your	relationships.
And	 this	 is	 not	 only	 true	 for	 the	 child,	 every	moment	 of	 the	 past	 is	 there	 and
influencing	 your	 present	 --	 your	 present	 is	 so	 loaded.	 And	millions	 of	 voices
from	 the	 body	 and	 the	mind	 go	 on	manipulating	 you;	 how	 can	 you	 reach	 the
path?
You	are	a	mountain.	This	mountain	has	 to	be	dissolved.	What	 to	do?	It	can	be
dissolved	consciously	--	one	thing	is	to	live	your	past	again,	consciously.
This	 is	 the	 mechanism	 of	 consciousness:	 whenever	 you	 live	 something
consciously	 it	 never	 becomes	 a	 loaded	 thing	 on	 you;	 try	 to	 understand	 this.	 It
never	becomes	a	burden	on	you	if	you	live	it	consciously.
If	you	go	to	the	market	to	purchase	something	and	you	move	consciously,	walk
consciously,	 purchase	 the	 thing	 consciously,	with	 full	 remembrance,	mindfully
come	back	home,	this	will	never	be	a	part	of	your	memory.	I	don't	mean	that	you
will	forget	it	-
-	 it	will	not	be	a	load.	If	you	want	to	remember	it,	you	can	remember	it,	but	 it
will	not	be	constantly	 forcing	your	attention	 towards	 it,	 it	will	not	be	a	 loaded
thing.
Whatsoever	 you	 do	 consciously	 is	 lived	 through	 and	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 hangover.
Whatever	you	live	unconsciously	becomes	a	hangover,	because	you	never	live	it
totally	--
something	 remains	 incomplete.	 When	 something	 is	 incomplete	 it	 has	 to	 be
carried	--	it	waits	to	be	completed.
You	were	a	child,	and	somebody	had	broken	your	toy,	and	you	were	crying;	and
your	 mother	 consoled	 you,	 diverted	 your	 mind	 somewhere	 --	 gave	 you	 some
sweets,	 talked	 about	 something	 else,	 told	you	 a	 story,	 diverted	you	 --	 and	you
were	going	to	cry	and	weep,	and	you	forgot.	That	has	remained	incomplete;	it	is
there,	and	any	day	whenever	somebody	snatches	a	toy	from	you	--	it	may	be	any
toy,	it	may	be	a	girlfriend,	and	somebody	snatches	her	--	you	start	weeping	and
crying.	And	you	can	find	the	child	there,	incomplete.	It	may	be	a	post:	you	are
mayor	of	 the	 town	and	 somebody	 snatches	 the	post,	 a	 toy,	 and	you	are	 crying
and	weeping	again.
Find	out...	regress	into	the	past,	move	through	it	again,	because	there	is	no	other
way	now;	 the	past	 is	 there	no	more,	so	 if	something	has	remained	hanging	 the
only	way	is	to	relive	it	in	the	mind,	move	backwards.
Every	night	make	it	a	point	to	go	backwards	for	one	hour,	fully	alert,	as	if	you
are	living	the	whole	thing	again.	Many	things	will	bubble	up,	many	things	will
call	your	attention	--
so	don't	 be	 in	 a	hurry,	 and	don't	 pay	half-attention	 to	 anything	 and	 then	move
again	 because	 that	 will	 again	 create	 incompleteness.	Whatsoever	 comes,	 give
total	attention	to	it.	Live	it	again.	And	when	I	say	live	it	again	I	mean	LIVE	it
again	 --	 not	 just	 remember,	 because	 when	 you	 remember	 a	 thing	 you	 are	 a
detached	observer;	that	won't	help.
RELIVE	IT!
You	are	a	child	again.	Don't	 look	as	 if	you	are	standing	apart	and	 looking	at	a
child	as	his	toy	is	being	snatched.	No!	BE	the	child.	Not	outside	the	child,	inside
the	child	--	be	again	the	child.	Relive	the	moment:	somebody	snatches	 the	 toy,
somebody	destroys	it,	and	you	start	crying	--	and	cry!	Your	mother	is	trying	to
console	you	--	go	 through	the	whole	 thing	again,	but	now	don't	be	diverted	by
anything.	Let	the	whole	process	be	completed.
When	it	is	completed,	suddenly	you	will	feel	your	heart	is	less	heavy;	something
has	dropped.
You	wanted	 to	 say	 something	 to	your	 father;	 now	he	 is	 dead,	 now	 there	 is	 no
way	to	tell	him.	Or	you	wanted	to	ask	his	forgiveness	for	a	certain	thing	you	did
which	he	didn't	like,	but	your	ego	came	in	and	you	couldn't	ask	his	forgiveness;
now	he	is	dead,	now	nothing	can	be	done.	What	 to	do?	--	and	it	 is	THERE!	It
will	go	on	and	on	and	destroy	all	your	relationships.
I	am	very	much	aware	of	that	because	to	be	a	master	is	to	be	in	a	certain	sense	a
father	--
it	is	to	be	many	things	but	very	importantly	it	is	in	a	certain	sense	to	be	a	father.
When	people	 come	 to	me,	 if	 they	 are	 loaded	with	 their	 relationship	with	 their
father,	 then	 it	becomes	very	difficult	 to	be	 related	 to	me	because	 I	always	 feel
their	 father	comes	 in.	 If	 they	have	hated	 their	 father	 they	will	hate	me,	 if	 they
wanted	to	fight	with	their	father,	they	will	fight,	if	they	love	their	father	they	will
love	me,	if	they	respected	their	father	they	will	respect	me,	if	they	respected	him
just	superficially	and	deep	down	they	had	a	disrespect,	it	will	be	the	same	with
me	--	and	the	whole	thing	starts	working.
If	you	are	conscious,	you	can	watch.	Go	back.	Now	your	father	is	no	more	but
for	the	eyes	of	the	memory	he	is	still	there.	Close	your	eyes;	again	be	the	child
who	has	committed	 something,	done	 something	against	 the	 father,	wants	 to	be
forgiven	but	cannot	gather	courage	--	now	you	can	gather	courage!	You	can	say
whatsoever	you	wanted	to	say,	you	can	touch	his	feet	again,	or	you	can	be	angry
and	hit	him	--	but	be	finished!	Let	the	whole	process	be	completed.
Remember	one	basic	law:	anything	that	is	complete	drops,	because	then	there	is
no	 meaning	 in	 carrying	 it;	 anything	 that	 is	 incomplete	 clings,	 it	 waits	 for	 its
completion.
And	this	existence	is	really	always	after	completion.	The	whole	existence	has	a
basic	tendency	to	complete	everything.	It	does	not	like	incomplete	things	--	they
hang,	they	wait;	and	there	is	no	hurry	for	existence	--	they	can	wait	for	millions
of	years.
Move	backwards.	Every	night	for	one	hour	before	you	go	to	sleep,	move	into	the
past,	relive.	Many	memories	by	and	by	will	be	unearthed.	With	many	you	will	be
surprised	 that	 you	were	not	 aware	 that	 these	 things	 are	 there	 --	 and	with	 such
vitality	and	 freshness,	 as	 if	 they	had	 just	happened!	You	will	be	again	a	child,
again	a	young	man,	a	lover,	many	things	will	come.	Move	slowly,	so	everything
is	completed.	Your	mountain	will	become	smaller	 and	 smaller	 --	 the	LOAD	 is
the	 mountain.	 And	 the	 smaller	 it	 becomes,	 the	 freer	 you	 will	 feel.	 A	 certain
quality	of	 freedom	will	 come	 to	you,	and	a	 freshness,	 and	 inside	you	will	 feel
you	have	touched	a	source	of	life.
You	will	be	always	vital	 --	even	others	will	 feel	 that	when	you	walk	your	step
has	changed,	it	has	a	quality	of	dance;	when	you	touch,	your	touch	has	changed	-
-	it	is	not	a	dead	hand,	it	has	become	alive	again.	Now	life	is	flowing	because	the
blocks	have	disappeared;	now	there	is	no	anger	in	the	hand,	love	can	flow	easily,
unpoisoned,	in	its	purity.	You	will	become	more	sensitive,	vulnerable,	open.
If	you	have	come	to	terms	with	the	past	suddenly	you	will	be	here	and	now	in
the	present,	because	then	there	is	no	need	to	move	again	and	again.
Go	on	moving	every	night.	By	and	by	memories	will	come	up	before	your	eyes
and	they	will	be	completed.	Relive	them;	completed,	suddenly	you	will	feel	they
drop.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 more	 to	 be	 done,	 the	 thing	 is	 finished.	 Less	 and	 less
memories	will	come	as	the	time	moves.	There	will	be	gaps	--	you	would	like	to
live,	 nothing	 is	 coming	 --	 and	 those	gaps	 are	 beautiful.	Then	 a	 day	will	 come
when	you	will	not	be	able	 to	move	backwards	because	everything	is	complete.
When	you	cannot	move	backwards,	only	then	do	you	move	forwards.
There	 is	 no	 other	way.	And	 to	move	 forwards	 is	 to	 reach	 the	 path:	 the	whole
consciousness	moving	ahead	every	moment	into	the	unknown.
But	your	legs	are	being	pulled	back	continuously	by	the	past,	the	past	is	heavy
on	you;	how	can	you	move	into	the	future,	and	how	can	you	be	in	the	present?
The	 mountain	 is	 really	 big,	 it	 is	 a	 Himalaya,	 uncharted,	 unmapped;	 nobody
knows	how	to	pass	through	it	-
-	 and	everybody	 is	 such	a	different	Himalaya	 that	you	can	never	make	a	map,
because	it	differs	with	everybody.	You	have	your	Himalayas	to	carry,	others	have
their	Himalayas	to	carry,	and	with	these	mountains,	when	you	meet	with	people
there	is	only	clash	and	conflict.
The	whole	life	becomes	just	a	struggle,	a	violent	struggle,	and	everywhere	you
can	 see	and	 feel	 and	hear	 the	clash.	Whenever	 somebody	comes	near,	you	are
tense	and	the	other	is	also	tense	--	both	are	carrying	their	Himalayas	of	tension
and	 sooner	or	 later	 they	will	 clash.	You	may	 call	 it	 love	but	 those	who	know,
they	say	it	is	a	clash.	Now	there	is	going	to	be	misery.
Be	finished	with	the	past.	As	you	become	more	free	from	the	past,	the	mountain
starts	disappearing.	And	then	you	will	attain	a	unison:	you	will	become,	by	and
by,	one.
Now,	try	to	understand	this	parable:	What	is	the	Way?
A	MASTER	WHO	LIVED	AS	A	HERMIT	ON	A	MOUNTAIN	WAS	ASKED
BY	A	MONK:	'WHAT	IS	THE	WAY?'
Every	 word	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 because	 every	 word	 carries	 meaning:	 A
MASTER	WHO	LIVED	AS	A	HERMIT	ON	A	MOUNTAIN....
It	 has	been	happening	always,	 that	 a	Buddha	moves	 to	 the	mountains,	 a	 Jesus
moves	to	the	mountains,	a	Mahavira	goes	into	the	mountains.	Why	do	they	move
to	the	mountains,	to	the	loneliness?	Why	do	they	become	solitaries?	Just	to	face
their	inner	mountains	immediately	and	directly.	In	society	it	is	difficult	because
the	whole	energy	is	wasted	in	day-to-day	work	and	routine	and	relationship;	you
don't	have	enough	time,	you	don't	have	enough	energy	to	encounter	yourself	--
you	are	finished	in	encountering	others!	You	are	so	very	occupied	--	and	to	come
face	to	face	with	oneself	a	very	unoccupied	life	 is	needed,	because	it	 is	such	a
tremendous	phenomenon	 to	 face	oneself.	You	will	need	all	your	energies.	 It	 is
such	an	absorbing	job,	it	cannot	be	done	half-heartedly.
Seekers	 have	 always	 moved	 into	 solitary	 existence,	 just	 to	 face	 oneself.
Wherever	they	go
--	 just	 to	 face	 oneself;	 to	 make	 it	 uncomplicated,	 because	 in	 relationship	 it
becomes	 complicated	 because	 the	 other	 brings	 his	 or	 her	 miseries	 and
mountains.	You	are	already	 loaded	 --	 and	 then	comes	 the	other!	And	 then	you
clash,	then	things	become	more	complex.	Then	it	is	two	diseases	meeting,	and	a
very	complicated	disease	 is	 created	out	of	 it.	Everything	becomes	entwined,	 it
becomes	 a	 riddle.	 You	 are	 already	 a	 riddle	 --	 it	 is	 better	 to	 solve	 it	 first	 and
THEN	move	 in	 relationship,	 because	 if	 you	 are	 not	 a	mountain,	 then	 you	 can
help	somebody.
And	remember,	two	hands	are	needed	to	make	a	sound,	and	two	mountains	are
needed	for	a	clash.	If	you	are	a	mountain	no	more,	now	you	are	capable	of	being
related.	Now	the	other	may	try	to	create	a	clash,	but	it	cannot	be	created	because
there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 creating	 a	 sound	with	 one	 hand.	 The	 other	will	 start
feeling	foolish	--	and	that	is	the	dawn	for	wisdom.
You	can	help	if	you	are	unburdened;	you	cannot	help	if	you	are	not	unburdened.
You	can	become	a	husband,	you	can	become	a	father,	a	mother,	and	you	will	be
burdening	 others	 with	 your	 burdens	 also.	 Even	 small	 children	 carry	 your
mountains;	 they	 are	 crushed	 under	 you	 --	 it	 has	 to	 be	 so	 because	 you	 never
bother	to	have	a	clarity	about	your	being	before	you	become	related.
That	must	be	the	basic	responsibility	of	every	alert	being:	Before	I	move	in	any
relationship	I	must	be	unburdened.	I	should	not	carry	a	hangover;	only	then	can	I
help	 the	other	 to	grow.	Otherwise	I	will	exploit,	and	 the	other	will	exploit	me!
Otherwise	I	will	 try	 to	dominate	and	 the	other	will	 try	 to	dominate	me.	And	 it
will	not	be	a	relationship,	it	cannot	be	love,	it	will	be	a	subtle	politics.
Your	marriage	is	a	subtle	politics	of	domination.	Your	fatherhood,	motherhood,
is	a	subtle	politics.	Look	at	mothers,	just	simply	watch!	--	and	you	will	feel	they
are	 trying	 to	 dominate	 their	 small	 children.	 Their	 aggression,	 their	 anger,	 is
thrown	on	 them	--	 they	have	become	objects	of	catharsis,	and	by	 this	 they	are
already	 burdened.	 They	 will	 move	 in	 life	 carrying	 mountains	 from	 the	 very
beginning,	and	they	will	never	know	that	 life	 is	possible	without	carrying	such
loaded	 heads;	 and	 they	 will	 never	 know	 the	 freedom	 that	 comes	 with	 an
unloaded	being.	They	will	never	know	that	when	you	are	not	 loaded	you	have
wings	and	you	can	fly	into	the	sky	and	into	the	unknown.
And	God	is	available	only	when	you	are	unburdened.	But	they	will	never	know.
They	will	knock	at	the	doors	of	temples	but	they	will	never	know	where	the	real
temple	exists.
The	real	temple	is	freedom:	dying	moment	to	moment	to	the	past	and	living	the
present.
And	freedom	to	move,	to	move	into	the	dark,	into	the	unknown	--	that	is	the	door
to	the	divine!
A	MASTER	WHO	LIVED	AS	A	HERMIT	ON	A	MOUNTAIN...	alone.
You	 must	 make	 a	 distinction	 between	 two	 words:	 lonely	 and	 alone.	 In	 the
dictionary	 they	 carry	 the	 same	meaning,	 but	 those	who	 have	 been	meditating,
they	know	the	distinction.
They	are	not	 the	 same,	 they	are	as	different	 as	possible.	Loneliness	 is	 an	ugly
thing;	 loneliness	 is	a	depressive	 thing	 --	 it	 is	a	 sadness;	 it	 is	an	absence	of	 the
other.	Loneliness	 is	 the	 absence	of	 the	other	 --	 you	would	 like	 the	other	 to	be
there,	but	 the	other	 is	not,	 and	you	 feel	 that	 and	you	miss	 them.	YOU	are	not
there	 in	 loneliness,	 the	 absence	 of	 the	 other	 is	 there.	 Alone?	 --	 it	 is	 totally
different.	YOU	are	 there,	 it	 is	your	presence;	 it	 is	a	positive	phenomenon.	You
don't	miss	 the	other,	you	meet	yourself.	Then	you	are	alone,	alone	like	a	peak,
tremendously	beautiful!	Sometimes	you	even	feel	a	terror	--	but	it	has	a	beauty.
But	 the	 presence	 is	 the	 basic	 thing:	 you	 are	 present	 to	 yourself.	 You	 are	 not
lonely,	you	are	with	yourself.	Alone,	you	are	not	lonely,	you	are	with	yourself.
Lonely,	you	are	simply	lonely	--	there	is	no	one.	You	are	not	with	yourself	and
you	are	missing	the	other.
Loneliness	is	negative,	an	absence;	aloneness	is	positive,	a	presence.
If	 you	 are	 alone,	 you	 grow,	 because	 there	 is	 space	 to	 grow	 --	 nobody	 else	 to
hamper,	nobody	else	to	obstruct,	nobody	else	to	create	more	complex	problems.
Alone	you	grow,	and	as	much	as	you	want	to	grow	you	can	grow	because	there
is	no	limit,	and	you	are	happy	being	with	yourself,	and	a	bliss	arises.	There	is	no
comparison:	 because	 the	 other	 is	 not	 there	 you	 are	 neither	 beautiful	 nor	 ugly,
neither	rich	nor	poor,	neither	this	nor	that,	neither	white	nor	black,	neither	man
nor	 woman.	 Alone,	 how	 can	 you	 be	 a	 woman	 or	 a	 man?	 Lonely,	 you	 are	 a
woman	or	a	man,	because	 the	other	 is	missing.	Alone,	you	are	no	one,	empty,
empty	of	the	other	completely.
And	 remember,	when	 the	 other	 is	 not,	 the	 ego	 cannot	 exist:	 it	 exists	with	 the
other.	Either	present	or	absent,	the	other	is	needed	for	ego.	To	feel	'I'	the	other	is
needed,	a	boundary	of	the	other.	Fenced	from	the	neighbors	I	feel	'I'.	When	there
is	no	neighbor,	no	fencing,	how	can	you	feel	 'I'?	You	will	be	there,	but	without
any	ego.	The	ego	is	a	relationship,	it	exists	only	in	relationship.
Alone	the	master	lived	--	a	hermit	means	alone	--	on	a	mountain,	facing	himself,
meeting	himself	at	every	corner.	Wherever	he	moves	he	is	encountering	himself
--	not	burdened	with	the	other,	so	knowing	well	what	he	is,	who	he	is.
Things	start	solving	 themselves	 if	you	can	be	alone,	even	 things	 like	madness.
Just	 the	 other	 night	 I	was	 talking	 to	 a	 few	 friends.	 In	 the	West	 if	 a	man	 goes
crazy,	 mad,	 insane,	 neurotic,	 much	 treatment	 is	 given;	 too	 much	 really	 --	 for
years!	And	the	result	is	almost	nothing.	The	man	remains	the	same.
I	have	heard,	once	it	happened:	a	psychiatrist	was	treating	a	woman	who	had	an
obsession	 --	 the	obsession	 is	called	kleptomania,	 stealing	 things.	She	was	very
rich,	there	was	no	need,	just	a	psychological	obsession.	It	was	impossible	for	her
not	to	steal:	wherever	she	found	an	opportunity	she	would	steal,	even	worthless
things:	a	needle,	a	button.	She	was	treated	for	years.
After	 the	 five-year-long	 treatment	 --	 thousands	 of	 dollars	 had	 gone	 down	 the
drain	 --	 after	 five	 years	 the	 psychiatrist	 who	 was	 treating	 her,	 the	 Freudian
psychoanalyst,	 asked,	 'Now	 you	 look	 normal,	 and	 now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
continue	the	treatment.	You	can	drop	out	of	it.	What	do	YOU	feel?'
She	 said,	 'I	 feel	 perfect.	 I	 feel	 fine.	 Everything	 is	 good.	 Before	 you	 started
treatment	I	always	used	to	feel	guilty	about	stealing	things	--	now	I	steal,	but	I
never	feel	guilty.
Fine!	Everything	is	good.	You	really	did	it.	You	helped	me	a	lot.'
This	is	all	that	happens.	You	simply	become	accustomed,	attuned	to	your	illness,
that's	all.
In	the	East,	particularly	in	Japan	--	because	of	zen	--	a	totally	different	treatment
has	existed	for	at	least	one	thousand	years.	In	zen	monasteries...	these	are	not	in
any	way	hospitals,	not	meant	for	ill	people,	but	in	a	village,	if	a	zen	monastery
exists,	it	is	the	only	place;	if	someone	goes	mad	or	neurotic,	where	to	go?	In	the
East	always	they	bring	the	neurotic	people	to	the	master	because	if	he	can	treat
normal	people,	why	not	neurotics?
The	difference	is	only	of	degree.
So	they	will	bring	the	neurotic	people	 to	 the	zen	monastery,	 to	 the	master,	and
they	will	say,	'What	to	do?	You	take	charge	of	him.'	And	he	will	take	charge.
And	the	treatment	is	really	unbelievable!	The	treatment	is	--	no	treatment	at	all.
The	man	has	to	be	given	a	solitary	cell	somewhere	at	the	back	of	the	monastery,
in	a	corner;	the	neurotic	has	to	live	there.	He	will	be	given	food,	every	facility	--
that's	all.	And	he	has	to	live	with	himself.	Within	three	weeks,	only	three	weeks,
with	no	treatment,	the	neurosis	disappears.
Now	many	Western	 psychiatrists	 are	 studying	 this	 as	 a	miracle.	 This	 is	 not	 a
miracle.
This	is	simply	giving	the	man	a	little	space	to	sort	it	out,	that's	all!	Because	he
was	normal	a	few	days	before,	he	can	be	normal	again.	Something	has	become
too	heavy	on	him	and	he	needs	space,	that's	all.	And	they	will	not	pay	him	much
attention,	because	if	you	pay	a	neurotic	person	much	attention,	as	it	is	being	paid
in	the	West,	he	is	never	going	to	be	back	to	normal	again	because	nobody	paid
him	so	much	attention	before.	He	 is	never	going	 to	be	back	 the	same,	because
then	nobody	bothered	about	him,	and	now	great	psychoanalysts	are	bothering	--
great	 doctors,	 names,	 world-famous	 names,	 and	 they	 talk	 to	 him	 or	 her:	 the
patient	 lying	 on	 a	 couch	 resting,	 and	 a	 great	 name	 just	 sitting	 behind,	 and
whatsoever	 he	 or	 she	 says	 is	 listened	 to	 carefully,	 every	 word.	 So	 much
attention!	The	neurosis	becomes	an	investment,	because	people	NEED	attention.
A	 few	 people	 start	 behaving	 foolishly	 because	 then	 the	 society	 gives	 them
attention.	 In	every	old	country,	 in	every	village,	you	will	 find	a	village	 fool	 --
and	 he	 is	 not	 a	mediocre	man,	 he	 is	 very	 intelligent.	 Fools	 are	 almost	 always
intelligent,	 but	 they	have	 learned	 a	 trick:	 people	 pay	 them	attention,	 they	 feed
them,	everybody	knows	them,	they	are	already	famous	without	holding	any	post
--	 the	whole	 village	 looks	 after	 them.	Wherever	 they	 pass,	 they	 are	 like	 great
leaders,	a	crowd	follows	them:	children	jumping	and	throwing	things	at	them	--
and	they	enjoy	it!	They	are	great	ones	in	the	town,	and	they	know	that	this	being
a	fool	is	an	investment,	a	good	one!	And	the	village	takes	care	of	them:	they	are
well	fed,	well	clothed	--	they	have	learned	the	trick.	No	need	to	work,	no	need	to
do	anything	--	just	be	a	fool	and	it	is	enough!
If	 a	 neurotic	 person...	 and	 remember	 ego	 IS	 neurosis	 and	 ego	 needs	 attention;
pay	it	attention,	and	ego	feels	good.	Many	people	have	murdered	simply	to	get
the	 attention	 of	 the	 newspapers,	 because	 only	 when	 they	murder	 can	 they	 be
covered	 by	 headlines.	 They	 become	 suddenly	 very,	 very	 important	 --	 their
pictures	are	given,	their	names,	their	biographies	are	covered:	suddenly	they	are
not	nobodies,	they	have	become	somebodies.
Neurosis	is	a	deep	hankering	after	attention,	and	if	you	give	it	attention,	you	feed
it	--
that's	why	psychoanalysis	has	been	a	complete	failure.
In	 zen	 monasteries	 they	 treat	 a	 person	 within	 three	 weeks:	 in	 Freudian
psychoanalysis	they	cannot	treat	him	in	thirty	years,	because	they	miss	the	very
point.	 But	 in	 zen	 monasteries	 no	 attention	 is	 given	 to	 the	 neurotic	 person,
nobody	thinks	that	he	is	somebody	important	--	they	simply	leave	him	alone,	that
is	the	only	treatment.	He	has	to	sort	out	his	own	things;	nobody	bothers.	Within
three	weeks	he	comes	out	absolutely	normal.
Solitariness	has	a	healing	effect,	it	is	a	healing	force.	Whenever	you	feel	that	you
are	getting	messed	up,	don't	try	to	solve	it	there.	Move	away	from	society	for	a
few	days,	for	at	least	three	weeks,	and	just	remain	silent,	just	watching	yourself,
feeling	yourself,	just	being	with	yourself,	and	you	will	have	a	tremendous	force
available	 which	 heals.	 Hence,	 in	 the	 East,	 many	 people	 have	 moved	 to	 the
mountains,	 to	 the	forests,	 somewhere	alone,	somewhere	where	 there	 is	nobody
else	to	be	bothered	with.	Only	oneself...	so	one	can	feel	oneself	directly,	and	you
can	see	what	is	happening	within.
Nobody	 is	 responsible	 for	you	except	yourself,	 remember.	 If	you	are	mad	you
are	mad	--
you	have	to	sort	it	out:	it	is	your	deed!	This	is	what	Hindus	say:	your	karma.	The
meaning	is	very	deep.	It	is	not	a	theory.	They	say,	whatsoever	you	are	it	is	your
own	 work,	 so	 sort	 it	 out!	 Nobody	 else	 is	 responsible	 for	 you,	 only	 you	 are
responsible.
So	go	into	solitary	confinement	--	to	sort	out	things,	meditate	on	your	own	being
and	your	problems.	And	this	is	the	beauty:	even	if	you	can	just	be	quiet,	living
with	 yourself	 for	 a	 few	 days,	 things	 settle	 automatically,	 because	 an	 unsettled
state	 is	 not	 natural.	 An	 unsettled	 state	 is	 unnatural,	 you	 cannot	 prolong	 it	 for
long.	It	needs	effort	to	prolong	it.
Simply	 relax	 and	 let	 things	 be,	 and	 watch,	 and	 make	 no	 effort	 to	 change
anything,	remember;	if	you	try	to	make	any	change	you	will	continue	the	same
because	the	very	effort	will	continue	to	disturb	things.
It	 is	 just	 like	sitting	by	 the	side	of	a	 river:	 the	 river	 flows,	 the	mud	settles,	 the
dead	leaves	go	to	the	sea;	by	and	by	the	river	becomes	absolutely	clean	and	pure.
You	need	not	go	into	it	to	clean	it	--	if	you	go,	you	will	muddle	it	more.	Simply
watch,	and	things	happen.
This	 is	 what	 the	 theory	 of	 karma	 is:	 that	 you	 have	 messed	 yourself	 up;	 now
move	alone.
So	 you	 need	 not	 throw	 your	 problems	 on	 others,	 you	 need	 not	 throw	 your
diseases	on	others	--	you	simply	move	alone;	suffer	them	in	silence,	watch	them.
Just	sit	by	the	bank	of	the	river	of	your	mind.	Things	settle!	When	things	settle
you	have	a	clarity,	 a	perception.	Then	move	back	 into	 the	world	 --	 if	you	 feel
like	it.	That	too	is	not	a	necessity,	that	too	should	not	be	an	obsession.	Nothing
should	be	an	obsession,	neither	the	world	nor	the	mountain.
Whatsoever	 you	 feel	 is	 natural,	 whatsoever	 you	 feel	 is	 good	 and	 heals	 you,
whatsoever	 you	 feel	 you	 are	 whole	 in,	 not	 divided	 --	 that	 is	 the	 path.	 The
mountain	is	crossed.	You	have	reached	the	path	--	now	follow	it,	now	flow	into
it!
The	mountain	is	the	problem.	The	path	is	available	when	you	have	crossed	the
mountain.
And	 you	 have	 accumulated	 this	 mountain	 in	 many	 lives	 --	 your	 karmas,
whatsoever	you	have	done.	It	is	now	heavy	on	you.
A	MASTER	WHO	LIVED	AS	A	HERMIT	ON	A	MOUNTAIN	WAS	ASKED
BY	 A	 MONK	 --	 a	 seeker	 --	 'WHAT	 IS	 THE	 WAY?'	 'WHAT	 A	 FINE
MOUNTAIN	THIS	IS,'
THE	MASTER	SAID	IN	REPLY.
Looks	 absurd	 --	 because	 the	 man	 is	 asking	 about	 the	Way	 and	 the	 master	 is
saying	 something	 about	 the	mountain.	 Looks	 absolutely	 irrational,	 outlandish,
because	the	man	has	not	asked	anything	about	the	mountain.
Remember,	this	is	my	situation.	You	ask	about	A,	I	talk	about	B;	you	ask	about
the	Way,	and	I	talk	about	the	mountain.	If	you	love	me,	only	then	can	you	feel;	if
you	simply	listen	to	me,	I	am	absurd	--	because	I	am	not	talking	relevantly.	If	I
talk	relevantly	I	cannot	help	you;	that	is	the	problem.	If	I	say	something	which
seems	relevant	to	you	it	will	not	be	of	much	help,	because	YOU	are	the	problem;
and	if	I	talk	relevantly	that	means	I	adjust	to	you.	Even	if	to	you	I	look	relevant,
it	means	something	has	gone	wrong.	I	have	to	be	irrelevant	by	the	nature	of	the
phenomenon	itself.
I	will	look	absurd,	irrational.	And	this	gap	between	the	question	and	the	answer
can	only	be	bridged	if	you	have	trust.	Otherwise	it	cannot	be	bridged	--	how	to
bridge	 it?	 The	 gap	 between	 the	 seeker	 and	 the	 master,	 the	 disciple	 and	 the
master,	 the	 gap	 between	 the	 question	 and	 the	 answer	 --	 because	 you	 question
about	the	Way	and	the	answer	is	given	about	the	mountain	--	how	to	bridge	it?
Hence	 trust	 becomes	 very	 very	 significant;	 not	 knowledge,	 not	 logic,	 not
argumentative	 capacity	 --	 no,	 but	 a	 deep	 trust	which	 can	 bridge	 the	 irrelevant
answer,	which	can	see	through	the	irrelevance	deeply	and	can	catch	a	glimpse	of
the	relevancy.
'WHAT	A	FINE	MOUNTAIN	THIS	IS,'	THE	MASTER	SAID	IN	REPLY.'I	AM
NOT
ASKING	YOU	ABOUT	 THE	MOUNTAIN,'	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 'BUT	 THE
WAY.'
He	sticks	to	his	question.	If	you	stick	you	will	miss	--	because	YOU	are	wrong,
your	 question	 cannot	 be	 right;	 that's	 impossible!	 How	 can	 you	 ask	 a	 right
question?	If	you	can	ask	a	right	question	the	right	answer	is	not	very	far	away,	it
is	hidden	there.	If	you	can	ask	a	right	question	you	are	already	right!	And	with	a
mind	which	is	already	right,	how	can	the	answer	remain	hidden?	No,	whatsoever
you	ask,	whatsoever	you	say,	carries	YOU.
It	happened:	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	getting	 fatter	and	 fatter,	 stouter	and	stouter.
The	doctor	advised	a	diet.
After	two	months	Mulla	went	to	see	the	doctor.	The	doctor	said,	'My	God!	It	is	a
miracle!
You	 are	 even	 fatter	 than	 before	 --	 I	 cannot	 believe	my	 eyes!	Are	 you	 strictly
following	the	diet	I	gave	you?	Are	you	eating	only	that	which	I	prescribed	and
nothing	else?'
Nasruddin	said,	'Nothing	whatever!	Of	course	I'm	following	your	diet.'
The	doctor	couldn't	believe	it.	He	said,	'Tell	me,	Nasruddin,	nothing	whatever?'
Nasruddin	said,	'Of	course!	Except	my	regular	meals.'	Regular	meals	PLUS	the
diet	the	doctor	has	prescribed.
But	this	has	to	be	so.	Your	mind	moves	in	whatsoever	you	do,	you	ask,	you	think
--	 it	 colors	 everything.	You	cannot	 ask	a	 right	question.	 If	you	can	ask	a	 right
question	there	is	no	need	to	ask,	because	the	right	is	the	thing,	not	the	question
and	not	the	answer.	If	YOU
are	right,	you	ask	the	right	question	--	suddenly	the	right	answer	is	there.	If	you
can	ask	a	right	question	you	simply	have	no	need	to	go	anywhere;	just	close	your
eyes	and	ask	the	right	question	and	you	will	find	the	right	answer	there.
The	problem	is	not	with	the	right	answer,	the	problem	is	not	with	the	Way;	the
problem	is	the	mountain,	the	problem	is	the	mind,	the	problem	is	YOU.
'WHAT	A	 FINE	MOUNTAIN	 THIS	 IS,'	 THE	MASTER	 SAID	 IN	 REPLY.	 'I
AM	NOT
ASKING	YOU	ABOUT	 THE	MOUNTAIN,'	 SAID	 THE	MONK,	 'BUT	 THE
WAY.'
THE	MASTER	REPLIED,	'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	CANNOT	GO	BEYOND	THE
MOUNTAIN,	MY	SON,	YOU	CANNOT	REACH	THE	WAY.'
Many	things	to	be	understood	--	to	be	felt,	rather.
THE	MASTER	REPLIED,	'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	CANNOT	GO	BEYOND	THE
MOUNTAIN,	MY	SON,	YOU	CANNOT	REACH	THE	WAY.'
Why	 suddenly	 'my	 son'?	 Up	 to	 now	 the	 master	 has	 not	 used	 a	 single	 loving
word;	why	 suddenly	 'my	son'?	Because	now	 the	 trust	will	be	needed,	 and	you
cannot	create	trust	in	a	person	just	by	saying	something,	even	if	it	is	the	absolute
truth.	 A	 trust	 can	 be	 created	 only	 if	 the	 master	 is	 loving,	 because	 only	 love
creates	trust.	On	the	side	of	the	disciple	a	trust,	SHRADDHA,	is	needed,	a	deep
faith	is	needed.	But	the	faith	arises	only	when	the	master	says	'my	son.'
Now	 the	 thing	 is	moving	 differently.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 intellectual	 relationship,	 it	 is
becoming	 one	 of	 the	 heart.	Now	 the	master	 is	 becoming	more	 a	 father	 than	 a
master;	 now	 the	 master	 is	 moving	 towards	 the	 heart.	 He	 is	 making	 a	 heart
relationship	now.
If	 you	 ask	 head-oriented	 questions	 and	 the	master	 goes	 on	 answering	 them,	 it
may	 be	 a	 dialogue	 on	 the	 face	 of	 it,	 but	 it	 cannot	 be	 a	 dialogue.	 You	 can
crisscross	but	you	cannot	meet	that	way.	When	people	talk,	listen	to	them:	they
crisscross	 each	 other	 but	 they	 never	 meet.	 This	 is	 not	 a	 dialogue!	 They	 both
remain	rooted	in	themselves,	they	never	make	any	effort	to	reach	the	other.	'My
son'	is	an	effort	on	the	part	of	the	master	to	reach	the	monk.	He	is	preparing	the
way	for	the	disciple	to	trust.
But	 then	 again	 a	 problem	 arises	 because	 the	 disciple	 can	 think,	 'This	 is	 too
much!	 I	 have	 not	 come	 here	 in	 search	 of	 love,	 I	 have	 come	 here	 in	 search	 of
knowledge.'	But	a	master	cannot	give	you	knowledge.	He	can	give	you	wisdom,
and	wisdom	comes	only	through	the	vehicle	of	love.	Hence	suddenly	the	master
says,
'MY	SON,	 SO	LONG	AS	YOU	CANNOT	GO	BEYOND	THE	MOUNTAIN
YOU
CANNOT	REACH	THE	WAY.'
One	thing	more	he	said:
'WHAT	A	FINE	MOUNTAIN	THIS	IS.'
To	an	enlightened	person	even	madness	is	beautiful.	To	an	unenlightened	person
even	enlightenment	is	not	beautiful.	The	whole	attitude	changes.	He	says,	'What
a	 fine	 mountain.'	 To	 an	 enlightened	 person	 even	 your	 neurosis	 is	 a	 beautiful
thing,	he	accepts	that	also;	it	has	to	be	transcended,	but	not	destroyed.	One	has	to
go	beyond	it,	but	it	also	is	beautiful	while	it	lasts.	One	has	to	reach	somewhere
else,	but	the	goal	is	not	the	thing	--
the	thing	is:	each	moment,	living	the	goal	here	and	now.
For	 an	 enlightened	 person	 everything	 is	 beautiful	 and	 for	 an	 unenlightened
person	everything	is	ugly.	For	an	unenlightened	person	there	are	two	categories:
less	ugly,	more	ugly.	No	beauty	exists.	Whenever	you	say	to	a	person,	'You	are
beautiful,'	in	fact	you	are	saying,	'You	are	less	ugly.'	Watch	when	you	say	it	again
and	 then	 find	 out	 what	 you	 really	 mean.	 Do	 you	 really	 mean	 beautiful?	 --
because	that	is	impossible	for	your	mind;	your	mind	cannot	see	beauty,	you	are
not	so	perceptive.	At	the	most	you	can	manage	to	say	that	this	person	is	less	ugly
than	 others	 --	 and	 less	 ugly	 can	 become	more	 ugly	 any	 moment,	 with	 just	 a
change	of	mood.
Your	friend	is	nothing	but	the	person	least	inimical	towards	you.	You	have	to	be
that	way	because	your	mind	 is	 so	messed	up,	 it	 is	 such	a	 chaos;	 everything	 is
muddled,	murky,	you	cannot	see	direct.	Your	eyes	are	covered	with	millions	of
layers,	 it	 is	 really	 a	miracle	how	you	manage	 even	 to	 see;	 you	 are	 completely
blind.
You	 cannot	 hear,	 you	 cannot	 see,	 you	 cannot	 touch,	 you	 cannot	 smell.
Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 it	 is	 impure;	 many	 things	 come	 into	 it.	 You	 love,	 and
millions	 of	 things	 are	 there:	 immediately	 you	 start	 being	 possessive,	 and	 you
never	know	that	being	possessive	is	part	of	hate,	not	part	of	love.	Love	can	never
possess.	Love	is	giving	freedom	to	the	other.
Love	 is	 an	 unconditional	 gift,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 bargain.	 But	 to	 your	 mind	 love	 is
nothing	but	less	hate,	that's	all.	At	the	most	you	think,	'I	can	tolerate	this	person;
I	cannot	tolerate	that	person	so	I	cannot	love	him.	This	person	I	can	tolerate.'	But
the	valuation	remains	negative.
When	 you	 are	 enlightened	 the	 valuation	 becomes	 positive.	Then	 everything	 is
beautiful;	 even	your	mountain,	your	neurosis	 is	beautiful	 --	 even	a	madman	 is
something	beautiful.
God	may	have	gone	a	little	astray	and	sinned,	but	it	is	God.
So	nothing	can	be	wrong	 for	an	enlightened	person.	Everything	 is	 right	 --	 less
right,	 more	 right.	 The	 difference	 between	 the	 devil	 and	 God	 is	 nothing,	 the
difference	 is	 only	 of	 less	 and	 more.	 God	 and	 the	 devil	 are	 not	 two	 poles,
enemies.
Hindus	have	beautiful	words;	no	other	country	has	been	so	understanding	about
words.
Sanskrit	is	really	something	which	exists	nowhere	else	--	very	perceptive	people!
The	English	word	devil	comes	from	the	same	root	as	DEVA;	deva	means	god.
Devil	and	god	come	from	the	same	root:	DEV.	Dev	means	light;	from	the	same
dev	comes	the	devil;	and	from	the	same	dev	comes	deva,	DEVATA,	the	divine.
The	 words	 divine	 and	 devil	 come	 from	 the	 same	 Sanskrit	 root	 dev.	 It	 is	 one
phenomenon.	Your	 seeing	may	 be	 different,	 your	 standpoint	may	 be	 different,
but	 it	 is	 one	 phenomenon.	 An	 enlightened	 person	 will	 say	 even	 to	 the	 devil:
'How	beautiful!	How	divine!	How	wonderful!'
It	 happened:	 one	 Mohammedan	 mystic	 woman,	 Rabiya	 al-Adabia,	 changed
many	lines	in	her	Koran.	Wherever	it	is	said,	'Hate	the	devil,'	she	crossed	it	out.
Then	once	another	mystic,	Hassan,	was	staying	with	Rabiya,	and	on	the	journey
he	had	forgotten	his	own	copy	of	the	Koran	somewhere,	and	in	the	morning,	for
morning	prayers,	he	needed	it.	So	he	asked	for	Rabiya's	copy;	Rabiya	gave	it	to
him.	He	was	a	little	surprised	in	the	beginning	because	the	Koran	had	collected
so	much	dust	 --	 that	meant	 it	was	not	used	every	day.	 It	was	not	used	at	all	 it
seemed;	 for	many	months	 it	 had	 not	 been	 used	 --	 but	 he	 thought	 it	would	 be
impolite	 to	 say	 something	 so	 he	 opened	 the	 Koran	 and	 started	 his	 morning
prayer.
Then	he	was	surprised	even	more,	even	shocked,	because	NOBODY	can	correct
the	Koran,	and	there	were	many	corrections.	Wherever	it	is	said,	'Hate	the	devil,'
Rabiya	had	simply	crossed	it	out	completely,	rejected	it.
He	couldn't	pray,	he	was	disturbed	so	much:	 this	Rabiya	had	gone	heretic,	 she
had	become	an	atheist,	or	what?...	because	it	is	impossible	for	a	Mohammedan	to
conceive	that	you	can	correct	the	Koran.	It	is	God's	word,	nobody	can	correct	it.
That's	why	 they	 say	 that	 now	 no	more	 prophets	will	 be	 coming,	 because	 if	 a
prophet	 comes	 again	 and	he	 says	 something	which	 is	 not	 in	 the	Koran,	 it	will
create	trouble.	So	the	doors	have	been	closed	after	Mohammed	--	he	is	the	last
prophet.
And	they	are	very	clever.	They	say	there	have	been	many	other	prophets	in	the
past:	he	 is	not	 the	 first,	but	he	 is	 the	 last.	And	now	no	more	messages	will	be
coming	from	God	--	he	has	given	the	final	one	with	Mohammed.	So	how	dare
this	woman	Rabiya!	She	 is	 correcting	 the	Koran?	He	 couldn't	 pray,	 he	was	 so
much	disturbed.	He	finished	somehow,	went	to	Rabiya.
Rabiya	was	an	enlightened	woman.	Very	few	women	have	become	enlightened
in	the	whole	world;	Rabiya	is	one	of	them.	Looking	at	Hassan	she	said,	'It	seems
you	couldn't	do	your	prayer.	 It	seems	the	dust	on	the	Koran	disturbed	you.	So,
you	 are	 still	 attached	 to	 things	 like	 dust?	And	 it	 seems	my	 corrections	 in	 the
Koran	must	have	shocked	you	very	much.'
Hassan	said,	'How...	how	could	you	know?'
Rabiya	said,	'I	passed	by	when	you	were	praying	and	I	felt	all	around	you	much
disturbance;	it	was	not	a	prayerful	prayer	at	all.	It	was	so	neurotic,	the	vibrations
--	so	what	is	the	matter?	Tell	me	and	be	finished	with	it!'
Hassan	said,	'Now	that	you	have	started	yourself,	don't	think	I	am	impolite,	but	I
couldn't	believe	a	woman	like	you	could	correct	the	Koran!'
Rabiya	said,	 'But	 look	first	at	my	difficulty:	 the	moment	 I	came	 to	 realize,	 the
moment	 I	came	face	 to	 face	with	 the	divine,	after	 that,	 in	every	 face	 I	can	see
that	same	face.	No	other	face	is	possible.	Even	if	the	devil	comes	to	stand	before
me,	I	see	the	same	face.	So	how	can	I	hate	the	devil	now	that	I	have	realized	the
face	 of	 the	 divine	 that	 I	 have	 come	 to	 see?	 Now	 every	 face	 is	 his.	 I	 had	 to
correct,	and	if	ever	I	meet	Mohammed	I	have	to	tell	him	frankly	that	these	words
are	not	good.	They	may	be	good	for	the	ignorant	because	they	divide;	but	they
are	not	good	for	those	who	know,	because	they	cannot	divide.'
Hence	the	master	says:
'WHAT	A	FINE	MOUNTAIN	THIS	IS.'
Everything	is	beautiful	and	divine	for	a	man	who	knows.
'I	AM	NOT	ASKING	YOU	ABOUT	THE	MOUNTAIN,'	SAID	THE	MONK,
'BUT
THE	WAY.'
Have	you	ever	observed	 that	you	never	ask	any	question	about	yourself,	about
the	mountain,	you	always	ask	about	the	Way?	People	come	to	me	and	they	ask,
'What	to	do?
How	to	reach	God?	How	to	become	enlightened?'	They	never	ask,	'What	to	BE?'
They	never	ask	anything	about	themselves,	as	if	they	are	absolutely	okay	--	only
the	path	is	missing.	What	do	you	think?	You	are	absolutely	okay,	only	the	path	is
missing?	So	somebody	can	say,	'Go	to	the	right	and	then	turn	to	the	left	and	you
are	on	the	path'?
It's	not	so	simple.	The	path	is	just	in	front	of	you.	You	are	not	missing	the	path	at
all.	You	have	never	missed	it,	nobody	CAN	miss	it	--	but	you	cannot	look	at	it
because	you	are	a	mountain.
It	is	not	a	question	of	finding	the	Way,	it	is	a	question	of	finding	yourself,	who
you	are.
When	you	know	yourself,	the	Way	is	there;	when	you	don't	know	yourself,	the
Way	is	not	there.
People	go	on	asking	about	the	Way,	and	there	are	millions	of	ways	proposed	--
but	 there	 cannot	 be.	 There	 is	 only	 one	 Way.	 The	 same	 Way	 passes	 before
Buddha's	 eyes,	 and	 the	 same	Way	 passes	 before	 Lao	 Tzu,	 and	 the	 same	Way
before	Jesus.	Millions	are	the	travelers	but	the	Way	is	one,	the	same.	That	is	the
tao,	the	dhamma,	the	logos	of	Heraclitus	--	it	is	one.
Millions	are	the	travelers	but	the	Way	is	one.	There	are	not	a	million	ways,	and
you	are	not	missing	 it;	but	you	always	ask	about	 the	Way,	and	you	always	get
entangled	in	the	ways	because	when	you	ask,	when	foolish	people	ask,	there	are
more	 foolish	 people	 to	 answer	 them.	 If	 you	 ask	 and	 insist	 on	 an	 answer,	 then
somebody	has	to	supply	it	--	this	is	the	law	of	economics.	You	demand,	and	there
will	be	a	supply.	You	ask	a	foolish	question	and	a	foolish	answer	will	be	given
because	don't	think	that	you	are	the	ultimate	fool	--	there	are	better	ones.	Smaller
ones	become	disciples	and	better	ones	become
'masters'.	You	ask,	and	they	supply	the	answer.
Then	there	are	millions	of	ways,	and	always	in	conflict.	A	Mohammedan	saying
is:	You	cannot	reach	through	that	way	because	it	never	leads	anywhere,	it	goes
into	a	cul-de-sac.
Come	 to	 our	 way!	 --	 and	 if	 you	 don't	 listen	 we	 will	 kill	 you.	 Christians	 are
persuading:	Come	to	our	way!	They	are	cleverer	than	Mohammedans;	they	don't
kill	really;	they	bribe,	they	seduce,	they	give	you	bread,	they	give	you	hospitals,
they	 give	 you	medicine,	 and	 they	 say,	Come	 our	way!	Where	 are	 you	 going?
They	are	merchants,	 and	 they	know	how	 to	bribe	people;	 they	have	converted
millions,	just	by	giving	things	to	them.	There	are	Hindus,	they	go	on	saying:	We
possess	 the	 whole	 truth	 --	 and	 they	 are	 so	 arrogant	 they	 don't	 bother	 even	 to
convert	anybody,	remember:	You	are	fools,	you	need	not	be	converted.	They	are
so	arrogant,	and	they	think:	We	know	the	Way.	If	you	want	to	you	can	come.	We
are	not	going	to	bribe	you	or	kill	you	--	you	are	not	that	important.	You	can	come
if	you	want,	but	we	are	not	going	to	make	any	effort.
And	 then	 there	 are	 three	 hundred	 religions	 in	 the	 world,	 and	 each	 religion
thinking:	This	is	the	only	Way,	THE	Way.	All	others	are	false.
But	the	question	is	not	of	the	Way,	the	question	is	not:	Which	Way	is	true?	The
question	 is:	Have	 you	 crossed	 the	mountain?	The	 question	 is:	Have	 you	 gone
beyond	 YOU?	 The	 question	 is:	 Can	 you	 look	 at	 yourself	 from	 a	 distance,	 a
watcher?	Then,	the	one	Way.
Mohammed	and	Mahavira	and	Krishna	and	Christ	--	they	all	walked	on	the	same
Way.
Mohammed	 is	 different	 from	Mahavira,	 Krishna	 is	 different	 from	 Christ,	 but
they	walk	on	the	same	Way	--	because	the	Way	cannot	be	many:	how	can	many
lead	to	one?	Only	the	one	can	lead	you	to	the	one.
So	don't	ask	about	the	Way	and	don't	ask	about	the	method.	Don't	ask	about	the
medicine.
First	 ask	 about	 the	 disease	 that	 you	 are.	A	 deep	 diagnosis	 is	 needed	 first,	 and
nobody	can	diagnose	it	for	you.	You	have	created	it	and	only	the	creator	knows
all	 the	 nooks	 and	 corners.	 You	 have	 created	 it,	 so	 only	 you	 know	 how	 these
complexities	arise,	and	only	YOU	can	solve	them.
A	real	master	simply	helps	you	to	come	to	yourself.	Once	you	are	there,	the	way
opens.
The	way	cannot	be	given	but	you	can	be	thrown	upon	yourself.	And	then	the	real
conversion	happens:	not	a	Hindu	becoming	a	Christian	or	a	Christian	becoming
a	Hindu,	but	 an	outward-moving	energy	becomes	 an	 inward-moving	energy	 --
that	is	conversion.
You	become	an	 inward-looking.	The	whole	 attention	moves	 inwards,	 and	 then
you	 see	 the	whole	 complexity	 --	 the	mountain.	And	 if	 you	 simply	watch	 it,	 it
starts	dissolving.
In	the	beginning	it	looks	like	a	mountain;	in	the	end	you	will	feel	that	it	was	just
a	molehill.	But	you	never	looked	at	it	because	it	was	at	the	back	of	you,	and	it
became	so	big.	When	you	face	it,	immediately	it	decreases,	becomes	a	molehill,
you	can	laugh	about	it.	Then	it	is	no	longer	a	burden.	You	can	even	enjoy	it	and
sometimes	can	go	in	it	for	a	morning	walk.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Is	he	dead?
4	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411040
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
102
mins
AT	THE	DEATH	OF	A	PARISHIONER,	MASTER	DOGO,	ACCOMPANIED
BY	HIS
DISCIPLE	ZENGEN,	VISITED	THE	BEREAVED	FAMILY.
WITHOUT	 TAKING	 TIME	 TO	 EXPRESS	 A	 WORD	 OF	 SYMPATHY,
ZENGEN
WENT	UP	TO	THE	COFFIN,	RAPPED	ON	IT,	AND	ASKED	DOGO:'IS	HE
REALLY
DEAD?'	 'I	 WON'T	 SAY,'	 SAID	 DOGO.'WELL?'	 INSISTED	 ZENGEN.'I'M
NOT
SAYING,	AND	THAT'S	FINAL,'	SAID	DOGO.
ON	 THEIR	 WAY	 BACK	 TO	 THE	 TEMPLE	 THE	 FURIOUS	 ZENGEN
TURNED	ON
DOGO	 AND	 THREATENED:	 'BY	 GOD,	 IF	 YOU	 DON'T	 ANSWER	 MY
QUESTION,	 WHY	 I'LL	 BEAT	 YOU.'	 'ALL	 RIGHT,'	 SAID	 DOGO,	 'BEAT
AWAY.'
A	MAN	OF	HIS	WORD,	ZENGEN	SLAPPED	HIS	MASTER	A	GOOD	ONE.
SOME	TIME	 LATER	DOGO	DIED,	 AND	ZENGEN,	 STILL	ANXIOUS	 TO
HAVE
HIS	 QUESTION	 ANSWERED,	 WENT	 TO	 THE	 MASTER	 SEKISO,	 AND,
AFTER
RELATING	WHAT	HAD	HAPPENED,	ASKED	THE	SAME	QUESTION	OF
HIM.
SEKISO,	AS	IF	CONSPIRING	WITH	THE	DEAD	DOGO,	WOULD	NOT
ANSWER.'BY	 GOD!'	 CRIED	 ZENGEN.	 'YOU	 TOO?'	 'I'M	 NOT	 SAYING,'
SAID
SEKISO,	'AND	THAT'S	FINAL.'
AT	THAT	VERY	INSTANT	ZENGEN	EXPERIENCED	AN	AWAKENING.
LIFE	CAN	BE	KNOWN,	death	also	--	but	nothing	can	be	said	about	them.	No
answer	will	be	true;	it	cannot	be	by	the	very	nature	of	things.	Life	and	death	are
the	deepest	mysteries.	It	would	be	better	to	say	that	they	are	not	two	mysteries,
but	two	aspects	of	the	same	mystery,	two	doors	of	the	same	secret.	But	nothing
can	be	said	about	them.
Whatever	you	say,	you	will	miss	the	point.
Life	 can	be	 lived,	 death	 also	 can	be	 lived.	They	 are	 experiences	 --	 one	has	 to
pass	through	them	and	know	them.	Nobody	can	answer	your	questions.	How	can
life	be	answered?	or	death?	Unless	YOU	live,	unless	YOU	die,	who's	going	to
answer?
But	many	answers	have	been	given	--	and	remember,	all	answers	are	false.	There
is	nothing	 to	choose.	 It	 is	not	 that	one	answer	 is	correct	and	other	answers	are
incorrect;	all	answers	are	incorrect.	There	is	nothing	to	choose.	Experience,	not
answers,	can	answer.
So	this	is	the	first	thing	to	be	remembered	when	you	are	near	a	real	mystery,	not
a	 riddle	 created	 by	man.	 If	 it	 is	 a	 riddle	 created	 by	man	 it	 can	 be	 answered,
because	then	it	is	a	game,	a	mind	game	--	you	create	the	question,	you	create	the
answer.	But	 if	you	are	 facing	something	which	you	have	not	created,	how	can
you	answer	it,	how	can	the	human	mind	answer	it?	It	is	incomprehensible	for	the
human	 mind.	 The	 part	 cannot	 comprehend	 the	 whole.	 The	 whole	 can	 be
comprehended	by	becoming	whole.	You	can	jump	into	it	and	be	lost	--	and	there
will	be	the	answer.
I	will	tell	you	one	anecdote	Ramakrishna	loved	to	tell.	He	used	to	say:	Once	it
happened	that	there	was	a	great	festival	near	a	sea,	on	the	beach.	Thousands	of
people	were	gathered	there	and	suddenly	they	all	became	engrossed	in	a	question
--	whether	the	sea	is	immeasurable	or	measurable;	whether	there	is	a	bottom	to	it
or	not;	 fathomable	or	unfathomable?	By	chance,	one	man	completely	made	of
salt	was	also	 there.	He	said,	 'You	wait,	and	you	discuss,	and	 I	will	go	 into	 the
ocean	and	find	out,	because	how	can	one	know	unless	one	goes	into	it?'
So	 the	 man	 of	 salt	 jumped	 into	 the	 ocean.	 Hours	 passed,	 days	 passed,	 then
months	passed,	and	people	started	 to	go	 to	 their	homes.	They	had	waited	 long
enough,	and	the	man	of	salt	was	not	coming	back.
The	man	of	salt,	 the	moment	he	entered	 the	ocean,	started	melting,	and	by	 the
time	he	reached	the	bottom	he	was	not.	He	came	to	know	--	but	he	couldn't	come
back.	And	those	who	didn't	know,	 they	discussed	 it	 for	a	 long	 time.	They	may
have	arrived	at	some	conclusions,	because	the	mind	loves	to	reach	conclusions.
Once	a	conclusion	is	reached,	mind	feels	at	ease	--	hence	so	many	philosophies
exist.	All	philosophies	exist	to	fulfill	a	need:	the	mind	asks	and	the	mind	cannot
remain	 with	 the	 question,	 it	 is	 uneasy;	 to	 remain	 with	 the	 question	 feels
inconvenient.	An	answer	is	needed	--	even	if	it	is	false	it	will	do;	mind	is	put	at
rest.
To	go	and	take	a	jump	into	the	sea	is	dangerous.	And	remember,	Ramakrishna	is
true:	we	are	all	men	of	salt	as	far	as	the	ocean	is	concerned	--	the	ocean	of	life
and	death.	We	are	men	of	salt,	we	will	melt	into	it	because	we	come	out	of	it.	We
are	made	by	it,	of	it.	We	will	melt!
So	mind	is	always	afraid	of	going	into	the	ocean;	it	is	made	of	salt,	it	is	bound	to
dissolve.	 It	 is	 afraid,	 so	 it	 remains	 on	 the	 bank,	 discussing	 things,	 debating,
arguing,	 creating	 theories:	 all	 false	 --	 because	 they	 are	 based	 on	 fear.	 A
courageous	 man	 will	 take	 the	 jump,	 and	 he	 will	 resist	 accepting	 any	 answer
which	is	not	known	by	himself.
We	 are	 cowards,	 that's	 why	 we	 accept	 anybody's	 answer:	 Mahavira,	 Buddha,
Christ	--	we	accept	their	answers.	Their	answers	cannot	be	our	answers.	Nobody
else's	knowledge	can	be	yours	--	they	may	have	known,	but	their	knowledge	is
just	information	for	you.	YOU
will	have	to	know.	Only	when	it	 is	your	own	is	it	knowledge;	otherwise	it	will
not	give	you	wings.	On	the	contrary,	it	will	hang	on	your	neck	like	stones,	you
will	become	a	slave	to	it.	You	will	not	achieve	liberation,	you	will	not	be	set	free
by	it.
Says	Jesus,	'Truth	liberates.'	Have	you	seen	anybody	being	liberated	by	theories?
Experience	 liberates,	yes,	but	 theories	 about	 every	experience?	No,	never!	But
the	mind	is	afraid	to	 take	the	jump,	because	mind	is	made	of	 the	same	stuff	as
the	universe;	if	you	take	the	jump	you	will	be	lost.	You	will	come	to	know,	but
you	will	know	only	when	you	are	not.
The	 salt	man	 came	 to	 know.	He	 touched	 the	 very	 depth.	He	 reached	 the	 very
center	but	he	couldn't	come	back.	Even	if	he	could,	how	would	he	relate...?	Even
if	 he	 comes,	 his	 language	 will	 belong	 to	 the	 center,	 to	 the	 depth,	 and	 your
language	belongs	to	the	bank,	to	the	periphery.
There	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 communication.	 He	 cannot	 say	 anything
meaningfully,	 he	 can	 only	 remain	 silent	meaningfully,	 significantly.	 If	 he	 says
something	 he	 himself	will	 feel	 guilty,	 because	 he	will	 immediately	 know	 that
whatsoever	he	knows	has	not	been	transferred	through	the	words;	his	experience
is	 left	behind.	Only	words	have	gone	 to	you,	dead,	stale,	empty.	Words	can	be
communicated	but	not	truth.	It	can	only	be	indicated.
The	salt	man	can	say	to	you,	'You	also	come'	--	he	can	give	you	an	invitation	--
'and	take	a	jump	with	me	into	the	ocean.'
But	you	are	very	clever.	You	will	say,	'First	answer	the	question;	otherwise	how
do	 I	 know	 that	 you	 are	 right?	 Let	me	 first	 consider	 and	 think	 and	 brood	 and
ponder,	 then	 I	 will	 follow.	When	my	mind	 is	 convinced,	 then	 I	 will	 take	 the
jump.'
But	 mind	 is	 never	 convinced,	 cannot	 be	 convinced.	 Mind	 is	 nothing	 but	 a
process	 of	 doubt;	 it	 can	 never	 be	 convinced,	 it	 can	 go	 on	 arguing	 infinitely,
because	whatsoever	you	say	it	can	create	an	argument	around	it.
Once	I	was	traveling	with	Mulla	Nasruddin.	At	a	station,	at	a	stop,	a	newcomer
came	into	the	compartment	--	he	may	have	known	Nasruddin.	He	said,	 'Hello.'
They	greeted	each	other	and	then	he	said,	'How	are	you,	Nasruddin?'
Nasruddin	said,	'Fine!	Absolutely	fine!'
Then	the	man	said,	'And	how	is	your	wife?'
Nasruddin	said,	'She	is	also	fine,	thank	you.'	'And	how	are	your	children?'
Nasruddin	said,	'They	are	all	very	well,	thank	you.'
I	was	surprised.	When	the	man	left	at	another	stop,	I	asked	Nasruddin,	'What	is
the	matter?	--	because	I	know	well	that	you	don't	have	a	wife,	you	don't	have	any
children.'
Nasruddin	said,	'I	also	know	--	but	why	create	an	argument?'
Many	times	buddhas	have	nodded	to	you,	just	not	to	create	any	argument.	They
have	remained	silent	just	not	to	create	any	argument.	They	have	not	said	much,
but	whatsoever	 they	have	said	has	created	enough	argument	around	it.	You	are
like	that.	You	will	weave	theories,	you	will	spin	philosophies,	and	you	will	get
so	engrossed	in	them	that	you	will	completely	forget	that	the	ocean	is	just	near.
You	will	completely	forget	that	the	ocean	exists.
Philosophers	 completely	 forget	what	 life	 is.	They	go	on	 thinking	 and	 thinking
and	 thinking	 and	 going	 astray,	 because	mind	 is	 a	 distance	 from	 the	 truth.	The
more	you	are	in	the	mind,	the	farther	away	you	are	from	the	truth;	the	less	in	the
mind,	the	nearer.	If	there	is	no	mind,	even	for	a	single	moment,	you	have	taken
the	jump	--	but	then	you	become	one	with	the	ocean.
So	the	first	thing	to	remember	is,	if	it	is	a	question	created	by	you,	not	relating	to
the	 existential	 mystery	 of	 the	 universe,	 then	 it	 can	 be	 answered.	 Really,	 only
mathematical	 questions	 can	 be	 answered.	 That's	 why	 mathematics	 is	 such	 a
clear-cut	science,	because	the	whole	thing	is	created	by	man.	Mathematics	does
not	exist	in	the	universe,	that's	why	mathematics	is	the	purest	science	--	you	can
be	certain	about	it;	you	have	created	the	whole	game.
Trees	 are	 there,	 but	 not	 one	 tree,	 two,	 three	 trees,	 four	 trees	 --	 numbers	 don't
exist	there.
You	create	the	numbers,	you	create	the	very	base,	and	then	you	ask,	'How	many?
If	 two	 are	 added	 to	 two,	 what	 is	 the	 conclusion,	 what	 is	 the	 result?'	 you	 can
answer	'Four,'	and	that	answer	will	be	true	because	you	have	created	the	whole
game,	 all	 the	 rules:	 two	 and	 two	make	 four.	 But	 in	 existence	 that	 is	 not	 true
because	in	existence	no	arithmetic	exists	-
-	 it	 is	a	wholly	man-made	affair.	So	you	can	go	on	and	on	and	create	as	many
mathematics,	as	many	arithmetics,	as	you	like.
Once	people	thought	that	there	was	only	one	mathematics;	now	they	know	there
can	be	many,	 because	man	can	 create	 them.	Once	people	knew	 that	 there	was
only	one	geometry
--	Euclid's;	now	they	know	that	you	can	create	as	many	geometries	as	you	want,
because	 they	 are	 man-created.	 So	 now	 there	 is	 Euclidean	 geometry	 and	 non-
Euclidean	geometry.
Many	mathematicians	 have	 played	 with	 numbers.	 Leibnitz	 worked	 with	 three
digits:	 one,	 two,	 three.	 In	Leibnitz'	mathematics,	 two	plus	 two	 cannot	 be	 four,
because	the	four	doesn't	exist:	one,	two,	three	--	only	three	digits	are	there,	so	in
Leibnitz'	mathematics	two	plus	two	will	become	ten,	because	after	three	comes
ten.	The	four	doesn't	exist.
Einstein	 worked	 with	 two	 digits:	 one	 and	 two,	 so	 two	 plus	 two	 in	 Einstein's
mathematics	will	be	eleven.	And	 they	are	all	 right,	because	 the	whole	game	 is
man-made.	It	is	up	to	you.
There	is	no	inner	necessity	to	believe	in	nine	or	ten	digits,	except	that	man	has
ten	fingers,	so	people	started	counting	on	the	fingers.	That's	why	ten	became	the
basic	unit	all	over	the	world;	otherwise	there	is	no	necessity.
Mathematics	is	a	thought	product:	you	can	ask	a	question	and	a	right	answer	can
be	 given	 to	 you	 --	 but	 except	 for	 mathematics	 everything	 moves	 into	 the
mysterious.	 If	 it	 belongs	 to	 life,	no	answer	can	be	given.	And	whatsoever	you
say	will	be	destructive	because	the	whole	cannot	be	said.	Words	are	so	narrow,
tunnel-like;	you	cannot	force	the	sky	into	them,	it	is	impossible.
Second	thing	 to	remember:	when	you	ask	something	of	a	master	--	a	master	 is
not	 a	philosopher,	he	 is	not	 a	 thinker;	he	knows,	he	 is	 a	 seer	 --	when	you	ask
something	of	a	master,	don't	look	for	and	don't	wait	for	his	answer,	because	he	IS
the	answer.	When	you	ask	something,	don't	be	attentive	towards	the	answer;	be
attentive	towards	the	master,	because	HE	is	the	answer.	He	is	not	going	to	give
you	any	answer;	his	presence	is	the	answer.	But	there	we	miss.
You	go	and	you	ask	a	question;	your	whole	mind	is	attentive	to	the	question	and
you	are	waiting	for	the	answer	--	but	the	master,	his	whole	being,	his	presence	is
the	answer.	If	you	look	at	him,	if	you	watch	him,	you	will	receive	an	indication	-
-	his	silence,	the	way	he	looks	at	you	in	that	moment,	the	way	he	walks,	the	way
he	behaves,	the	way	he	remains	silent	or	talks.	The	master	is	the	answer,	because
it	lies	in	an	indication.	The	master	can	show	you	the	truth,	but	cannot	say	it.	And
your	mind	is	always	obsessed	with	the	answer:	'What	is	he	going	to	say?'
If	 you	go	 to	 a	master,	 learn	 to	be	 attentive	 to	his	 presence;	 don't	 be	 too	head-
oriented	--
and	don't	insist,	because	every	answer	can	be	given	only	when	the	time	is	ripe.
Don't	insist,	because	it	is	not	a	question	of	your	insistence;	a	right	thing	can	be
given	 only	 when	 you	 are	 ready,	 when	 you	 are	 ripe.	 So	 when	 you	 are	 near	 a
master	you	can	ask	a	question	-
-	but	then	wait.	You	have	asked,	then	he	knows.	Even	if	you	have	not	asked,	he
knows	what	is	troubling	you	within.	But	he	cannot	give	you	anything	right	now	-
-	you	may	not	be	ready;	and	if	you	are	not	ready	and	something	is	given	it	will
not	 reach	you,	because	only	 in	 a	 certain	 readiness	 can	 certain	 things	penetrate
you.	When	you	are	ripe	you	can	understand.	When	you	are	ready,	you	are	open,
receptive.	The	answer	will	be	given,	but	not	in	words;	the	master	will	reveal	it	in
many	ways.	He	can	do	it.	He	can	devise	many	methods	 to	 indicate	 it,	but	 then
you	will	have	to	be	ready.
Just	because	you	have	asked	a	question	doesn't	mean	that	you	are	ready.	You	can
ask	 a	 question	 --	 even	 children	 can	 raise	 questions	 so	mysterious	 that	 even	 a
buddha	will	 be	 unable	 to	 answer	 them.	But	 just	 because	 you	 have	 asked,	 just
because	you	are	articulate	enough	to	form	a	question,	does	not	mean	that	you	are
ready,	because	questions	come	out	of	many	many	sources.	Sometimes	you	are
simply	curious.	A	master	is	not	there	to	fulfill	your	curiosities,	because	they	are
childish.	Sometimes	you	really	never	meant	it.	Just	by	the	way	you	asked,	you
showed	you	were	not	concerned	and	you	are	not	going	to	use	the	answer	in	any
way.	Somebody	is	dead	and	you	simply	ask	the	question,	'What	is	death?'	-
-	and	by	the	next	moment	you	have	forgotten	it.
Curiosity	is	one	thing	--	it	is	childish	and	no	master	is	going	to	waste	his	breath
on	 your	 curiosities.	When	 you	 ask	 a	 certain	 thing	 it	 may	 be	 just	 intellectual,
philosophic;	 you	 are	 interested,	 but	 intellectually	 --	 you	would	 like	 an	 answer
just	 to	 become	 more	 knowledgeable,	 but	 your	 being	 will	 remain	 unaffected.
Then	 a	 master	 is	 not	 interested,	 because	 he	 is	 interested	 only	 in	 your	 being.
When	you	ask	a	question	in	such	a	way	as	 if	your	 life	and	death	depend	on	it,
then	if	you	don't	receive	the	answer	you	will	miss,	your	whole	being	will	remain
hungry	for	it;	you	are	thirsty,	your	whole	being	is	ready	to	receive	it,	and	if	the
answer	is	given	you	will	digest	it,	it	will	become	your	blood	and	your	bones	and
move	into	the	very	beat	of	your	heart;	only	then	will	a	master	be	ready	to	answer
you.
You	 ask	 a	 question...	 then	 the	master	will	 try	 to	 help	 you	 to	 become	 ready	 to
receive	the	answer.	Between	your	question	and	the	master's	answer	there	may	be
a	great	gap.	You	ask	today	and	he	may	answer	you	after	twelve	years,	because
you	have	to	be	ready	to	receive	it;	you	have	to	be	open,	not	closed,	and	you	have
to	be	ready	to	absorb	it	to	the	very	depth	of	your	being.
Now	try	to	understand	this	parable:
AT	THE	DEATH	OF	A	PARISHIONER,	MASTER
DOGO,	 ACCOMPANIED	 BY	 HIS	 DISCIPLE	 ZENGEN,	 VISITED	 THE
BEREAVED
FAMILY.
WITHOUT	 TAKING	 TIME	 TO	 EXPRESS	 A	 WORD	 OF	 SYMPATHY,
ZENGEN
WENT	UP	TO	THE	COFFIN,	RAPPED	ON	IT,	AND	ASKED	DOGO:	'IS	HE
REALLY
DEAD?'
The	first	thing:	when	death	is	there	you	have	to	be	very	respectful	because	death
is	 no	 ordinary	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 the	 most	 extraordinary	 phenomenon	 in	 the
world.	Nothing	is	more	mysterious	than	death.	Death	reaches	to	the	very	center
of	existence,	and	when	a	man	is	dead	you	are	moving	on	sacred	ground:	it	is	the
holiest	moment	 possible.	No,	 ordinary	 curiosities	 cannot	 be	 allowed.	They	 are
disrespectful.
In	the	East	particularly,	death	is	respected	more	than	life	--	and	the	East	has	lived
long	 to	come	 to	 this	conclusion.	 In	 the	West	 life	 is	more	 respected	 than	death;
hence	so	much	tension,	so	much	worry	and	so	much	anguish,	so	much	madness.
Why?	If	you	respect	life	more,	you	will	be	afraid	of	death,	and	then	death	will
look	antagonistic,	 the	 enemy;	 and	 if	 death	 is	 the	 enemy	you	will	 remain	 tense
your	whole	life,	because	death	can	happen	any	moment.	You	don't	accept	it,	you
reject	it	--	but	you	cannot	destroy	it.	Death	cannot	be	destroyed.	You	can	reject
it;	you	can	deny	it;	you	can	be	afraid,	scared,	but	 it	 is	 there,	 just	at	 the	corner,
always	with	you	like	a	shadow.	You	will	be	trembling	your	whole	life	--	and	you
ARE	trembling.	And	in	the	fear,	in	all	fears	if	searched	deeply,	you	will	find	the
fear	of	death.
Whenever	 you	 are	 afraid,	 something	 has	 given	 you	 an	 indication	 of	 death.	 If
your	bank	goes	bankrupt	and	you	are	filled	with	fear	and	 trembling,	anxiety	--
that	 too	 is	 anxiety	 about	 death,	 because	 your	 bank	 balance	was	 nothing	 but	 a
security	 against	 death.	 Now	 you	 are	 more	 open,	 vulnerable.	 Now	 who	 will
protect	you	 if	death	knocks	at	 the	door?	If	you	become	ill,	 if	you	become	old,
then	who	is	going	to	take	care	of	you?	The	guarantee	was	there	in	the	bank,	and
the	bank	has	gone	bankrupt.
You	cling	to	prestige,	power,	position,	because	when	you	have	a	position	you	are
so	significant	that	you	are	more	protected	by	people.	When	you	are	not	in	power,
you	become	so	impotent	that	nobody	bothers	in	any	way	who	you	are.	When	you
are	 in	 power	 you	 have	 friends,	 family,	 followers;	when	 you	 are	 not	 in	 power,
everybody	 leaves.	 There	 was	 a	 protection,	 somebody	 was	 there	 to	 care;	 now
nobody	 cares.	 Whatsoever	 you	 are	 afraid	 of,	 if	 you	 search	 deeply	 you	 will
always	find	the	shadow	of	death	somewhere.
You	 cling	 to	 a	 husband,	 you	 are	 afraid	 he	may	 leave;	 or	 you	 cling	 to	 a	wife,
afraid	she	may	leave	you.	What	is	the	fear?	Is	it	really	the	fear	of	a	divorce,	or	is
it	a	fear	of	death?
It	 is	a	 fear	of	death...	because	 in	divorce	you	become	alone.	The	other	gives	a
protection,	 a	 feeling	 that	 you	 are	 not	 alone,	 somebody	 else	 is	 with	 you.	 In
moments	when	somebody	else	will	be	needed,	you	will	have	somebody	to	look
to.	But	the	wife	has	left,	or	the	husband	has	left,	and	now	you	are	left	alone,	a
stranger.	Who	will	protect	you?	Who	will	care	for	you	when	you	are	ill?
When	people	are	young	they	do	not	need	a	wife	or	a	husband	so	much,	but	when
they	are	old	their	need	is	more.	When	you	are	young	it	is	a	sexual	relationship.
The	older	you	become	 the	more	 it	becomes	a	 life	 relationship,	because	now	 if
the	other	leaves	you,	immediately	death	is	there.	Wherever	you	are	afraid,	try	to
explore,	and	you	will	find	death	hiding	somewhere	behind.	All	fear	is	of	death.
Death	is	the	only	fear	source.
In	the	West	people	are	very	scared,	worried,	anxious,	because	you	have	to	fight
continuously	 against	 death.	You	 love	 life,	 you	 respect	 life	 --	 that's	why	 in	 the
West	 old	 people	 are	 not	 respected.	 Young	 people	 are	 respected,	 because	 old
people	have	moved	further	towards	death	than	you;	they	are	already	in	its	grip.
Youth	 is	 respected	 in	 the	West	 --	 and	 youth	 is	 a	 transitory	 phenomenon,	 it	 is
already	passing	from	your	hands.
In	 the	East	 old	men	 are	 respected,	 because	 in	 the	East	 death	 is	 respected;	 and
because	in	the	East	death	is	respected,	there	is	no	fear	about	death.	Life	is	just	a
part;	 death	 is	 the	 culmination.	Life	 is	 just	 the	 process;	 death	 is	 the	 crescendo.
Life	 is	 just	 the	moving;	death	 is	 the	 reaching.	And	both	are	one!	So	what	will
you	respect	more,	the	way	or	the	goal?
The	process	or	the	flowering?
Death	 is	 the	 flower,	 life	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 tree.	 And	 the	 tree	 is	 there	 for	 the
flower,	the	flower	is	not	there	for	the	tree.	The	tree	should	be	happy	and	the	tree
should	dance	when	the	flower	comes.
So	 in	 the	 East	 death	 is	 accepted;	 not	 only	 accepted,	 welcomed.	 It	 is	 a	 divine
guest.	When	it	knocks	at	the	door,	it	means	the	universe	is	ready	to	receive	you
back.
In	the	East	we	respect	death.	And	this	young	man	Zengen	just	came	in	without
even	expressing	a	word	of	sympathy	or	respect.	He	simply	became	curious.	Not
only	that,	he	was	very	disrespectful	--	he	tapped	on	the	coffin	and	asked	Dogo,
'Is	he	 really	dead?'	His	question	 is	beautiful,	but	not	 in	 the	 right	moment.	The
question	is	right	but	 the	moment	he	has	chosen	is	wrong.	To	be	curious	before
death	is	childish;	one	has	to	be	respectful,	silent.	That	is	the	only	way	to	have	a
rapport	with	the	phenomenon.
When	somebody	dies	it	is	really	something	very	deep	happening.	If	you	can	just
sit	 there	 and	 meditate	 many	 things	 will	 be	 revealed	 to	 you.	 Questioning	 is
foolish.	When	death	is	there,	why	not	meditate?	Questioning	may	be	just	a	trick
to	 avoid	 the	 thing,	 it	may	 be	 just	 a	 safety	measure	 so	 as	 not	 to	 look	 at	 death
directly.
I	 have	watched	when	 people	 go	 to	 burn	 or	 to	 cremate	 somebody	 --	 they	 start
talking	 too	 much	 there.	 At	 the	 cremation	 ground	 they	 discuss	 many
philosophical	 things.	 In	my	childhood	 I	 loved	very	much	 to	 follow	everybody.
Whosoever	died,	I	would	be	there.
Even	my	parents	became	very	much	afraid;	they	would	say,	'Why	do	you	go?	We
don't	even	know	that	man.	There	is	no	need	to	go.'
I	would	say,	'That	is	not	the	point.	The	man	is	not	my	concern.	Death...	it	is	such
a	beautiful	phenomenon,	and	one	of	 the	most	mysterious.	One	should	not	miss
it.'	 So	 the	moment	 I	 heard	 that	 somebody	 had	 died	 I	 would	 be	 there,	 always
watching,	waiting,	witnessing	what	was	happening.
And	I	watched	people	discussing	many	things,	philosophical	problems	such	as:
What	 is	death?	And	somebody	would	say:	 'Nobody	dies.	The	 innermost	self	 is
immortal.'	They	would	discuss	the	Upanishads,	the	Gita,	and	quote	authorities.	I
started	 feeling:	 'They	are	 avoiding.	By	 just	becoming	engaged	 in	 a	discussion,
they	are	avoiding	the	phenomenon	that	is	happening.	They	are	not	looking	at	the
dead	man.	And	the	thing	is	there!	Death	is	there,	and	you	are	discussing	it!	What
fools!'
You	have	to	be	silent.	If	you	can	be	silent	when	death	is	there	you	will	suddenly
see	many	 things,	 because	 death	 is	 not	 just	 a	 person	 stopping	 breathing.	Many
things	are	happening.	When	a	person	dies,	his	aura	starts	subsiding.	 If	you	are
silent	you	can	feel	it	-
-	an	energy	force,	a	vital	energy	field,	subsiding,	getting	back	to	the	center.
When	a	 child	 is	 born	 just	 the	opposite	happens.	When	a	 child	 is	born	 an	 aura
starts	 spreading;	 it	 starts	near	 the	navel.	 Just	 as	when	you	 throw	a	pebble	 in	a
lake,	ripples	start
--	they	go	on	spreading,	go	on	spreading	--	when	a	child	is	born	breath	is	like	a
pebble	 in	 the	 lake;	 when	 the	 child	 breathes	 the	 navel	 center	 is	 hit.	 The	 first
pebble	has	been	thrown	in	the	silent	lake,	and	the	ripples	go	on	spreading.
Your	whole	life	you	go	on	spreading.	Nearabout	the	age	of	thirty-five	your	aura
is	 completed,	 at	 its	 peak.	Then	 it	 starts	 subsiding.	When	 a	 person	dies	 it	 goes
back	to	the	navel.	When	it	reaches	the	navel,	it	becomes	a	concentrated	energy,	a
concentrated	light.
If	you	are	silent	you	can	feel	it,	you	will	feel	a	pull.	If	you	sit	near	a	dead	man
you	will	feel	as	if	a	subtle	breeze	is	blowing	towards	the	dead	man	and	you	are
being	pulled.	The	dead	man	is	contracting	his	whole	life,	the	whole	field	that	he
was.
Many	 things	 start	 happening	 around	 a	 dead	 man.	 If	 he	 loved	 a	 person	 very
deeply,	that	means	he	had	given	a	part	of	his	life	energy	to	that	person,	and	when
a	person	dies,	 immediately	that	part	 that	he	had	given	to	another	person	leaves
that	person	and	moves	to	the	dead	man.	If	you	die	here	and	your	lover	lives	in
Hong	Kong,	something	will	 leave	your	 lover	 immediately	--	because	you	have
given	a	part	of	your	life	and	that	part	will	come	back	to	you.	That's	why	when	a
loved	one	dies	you	feel	 that	something	has	left	you	also,	something	in	you	has
died	also.	A	deep	wound,	a	deep	gap	will	exist	now.
Whenever	 a	 lover	dies,	 something	 in	 the	beloved	also	dies,	because	 they	were
deeply	 involved	with	each	other.	And	 if	you	have	 loved	many,	many	people	 --
for	example,	if	a	person	like	Dogo	dies,	or	a	buddha	--	from	all	over	the	universe
energy	moves	 back	 to	 the	 center.	 It	 is	 a	 universal	 phenomenon	 because	 he	 is
involved	in	many	many	lives,	millions	of	lives,	and	from	everywhere	his	energy
will	come	back.	The	vibrations	 that	he	has	given	 to	many	will	 leave,	 they	will
move	 to	 the	 original	 source,	 they	will	 become	 again	 a	 concentration	 near	 the
navel.
If	you	watch	you	will	feel	ripples	coming	back	in	a	reverse	order,	and	when	they
are	 totally	 concentrated	 in	 the	 navel,	 you	 can	 see	 a	 tremendous	 energy,	 a
tremendous	light-force.	And	then	that	center	leaves	the	body.	When	a	man	'dies',
that	is	simply	a	stopping	of	the	breath,	and	you	think	he	is	dead.	He	is	not	dead;
that	takes	time.	Sometimes,	if	the	person	has	been	involved	in	millions	of	lives,
it	 takes	 many	 days	 for	 him	 to	 die	 --	 that's	 why	 with	 sages,	 with	 saints,
particularly	in	the	East,	we	never	burn	their	bodies.	Only	saints	are	not	burned;
otherwise	 everybody	 is	 burned,	 because	 others'	 involvement	 is	 not	 so	 much.
Within	minutes	the	energy	gathers,	and	they	are	no	more	part	of	this	existence.
But	with	saints,	the	energy	takes	time.	Sometimes	it	goes	on	and	on	--	that's	why
if	you	go	to	Shirdi,	to	Sai	Baba's	town,	you	will	still	feel	something	happening,
still	the	energy	goes	on	coming;	he	is	so	much	involved	that	for	many	people	he
is	still	alive.	Sai	Baba's	tomb	is	not	dead.	It	is	still	alive.	But	the	same	thing	you
will	not	feel	near	many	tombs	--
they	 are	 dead.	 By	 'dead'	 I	mean	 they	 have	 accumulated	 all	 their	 involvement,
they	have	disappeared.
When	I	am	dead,	don't	bury	my	body,	don't	burn	it,	because	I	will	be	involved	in
you,	many	of	you.	And	if	you	can	feel,	then	a	sage	remains	alive	for	many	years,
sometimes	thousands	of	years	--	because	life	is	not	only	of	the	body.	Life	is	an
energy	phenomenon.
It	depends	on	the	involvement,	on	how	many	persons	he	was	involved	in.	And	a
person	like	Buddha	is	not	only	involved	with	persons,	he	is	involved	even	with
trees,	birds,	animals;	his	involvement	is	so	deep	that	if	he	dies	his	death	will	take
at	least	five	hundred	years.
Buddha	 is	 reported	 to	have	said,	 'My	religion	will	be	a	 live	force	for	only	five
hundred	years.'	And	the	meaning	is	here,	because	he	will	be	a	live	force	for	five
hundred	 years.	 It	 will	 take	 five	 hundred	 years	 for	 him	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the
involvement	totally.
When	death	happens,	be	silent.	Watch!
All	over	the	world,	whenever	you	pay	respect	to	a	dead	man,	you	become	silent,
you	 remain	 silent	 for	 two	minutes	 --	without	 knowing	why.	This	 tradition	 has
been	continued	all	over	the	world.	Why	silence?
The	tradition	is	meaningful.	You	may	not	know	why,	you	may	not	be	aware,	and
your	 silence	may	 be	 filled	with	 inner	 chattering,	 or	 you	may	 do	 it	 just	 like	 a
ritual	--	that	is	up	to	you.	But	the	secret	is	there.
WITHOUT	 TAKING	 TIME	 TO	 EXPRESS	 A	 WORD	 OF	 SYMPATHY,
ZENGEN
WENT	UP	TO	THE	COFFIN,	RAPPED	ON	IT,	AND	ASKED	DOGO:	'IS	HE
REALLY
DEAD?'
His	 question	 is	 right,	 but	 the	 time	 is	 not	 right.	 He	 has	 chosen	 the	 wrong
opportunity.	This	 is	not	 the	moment	 to	 talk	about	 it,	 this	 is	 the	moment	 to	BE
with	it.	And	the	man	who	is	dead	must	have	been	someone	very	deep;	otherwise
Dogo	would	not	be	going	to	pay	his	respects.	Dogo	is	an	enlightened	man.	The
disciple	 who	 is	 dead	 must	 have	 been	 something.	 And	 Dogo	 was	 there	 to	 do
something	more	for	him.	A	master	can	help	you	when	you	are	alive;	a	master	can
help	you	when	you	are	dead	even	more	--	because	in	death	a	deep	surrendering
happens.
In	 life	 you	 are	 always	 resisting,	 fighting,	 even	 with	 your	 master;	 not
surrendering,	or	surrendering	half-heartedly	--	which	means	nothing.	But	when
you	are	dying,	surrendering	is	easier,	because	death	and	surrender	are	the	same
process.	When	 the	whole	 body	 is	 dying,	 you	 can	 surrender	 easily.	 To	 fight	 is
difficult,	resistance	is	difficult.
Already	your	resistance	is	being	broken,	your	body	is	moving	into	a	let-go;	that
is	what	death	is.
Dogo	was	 there	 for	 something	 special,	 and	 this	disciple	 asked	a	question.	The
question	is	right	but	the	time	is	not	right.
'I	 WON'T	 SAY,'	 SAID	 DOGO.'WELL?'	 INSISTED	 ZENGEN.'I'M	 NOT
SAYING,	AND
THAT'S	FINAL,'	SAID	DOGO.
First	 thing:	 what	 can	 be	 said	 about	 death?	 How	 can	 you	 say	 anything	 about
death?	It	is	not	possible	for	any	word	to	carry	the	meaning	of	death.	What	does
this	word	'death'
mean?	 In	 fact	 it	 means	 nothing.	What	 do	 you	 mean	 when	 you	 use	 the	 word
death?	It	is	simply	a	door	beyond	which	we	don't	know	what	happens.	We	see	a
man	 disappearing	 inside	 a	 door;	we	 can	 see	 up	 to	 the	 door,	 and	 then	 the	man
simply	disappears.	Your	word	death	can	give	only	the	meaning	of	the	door.	But
what	happens	really,	beyond	the	door?	-
-	because	the	door	is	not	the	thing.
The	 door	 is	 to	 be	 passed	 through.	 Then	what	 happens	 to	 one	who	 disappears
through	the	door	that	we	cannot	see	beyond?	What	happens	to	him?	And	what	is
this	door?	 Just	 a	 stopping	of	 the	breath?	 Is	 the	breath	 the	whole	of	 life?	Don't
you	have	 anything	more	 than	 the	 breath?	Breath	 stops...	 body	deteriorates...	 if
you	are	body	and	breath	alone,	then	there	is	no	problem.	Then	death	is	nothing.
It	is	not	a	door	to	anything.	It	is	simply	a	stopping,	not	a	disappearance.	It	is	just
like	a	clock.
The	clock	is	tick-ticking,	working,	then	it	stops;	you	don't	ask	where	the	tick-tick
has	gone	--	that	would	be	meaningless!	It	has	gone	nowhere.	It	has	not	gone	at
all,	it	has	simply	stopped;	it	was	a	mechanism	and	something	has	gone	wrong	in
the	mechanism	--
you	 can	 repair	 the	mechanism,	 then	 it	will	 tick-tick	 again.	 Is	 death	 just	 like	 a
clock	stopping?	Just	like	that?
If	 so,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 mystery,	 it	 is	 nothing	 really.	 But	 how	 can	 life	 disappear	 so
easily?	Life	is	not	mechanical.	Life	is	awareness.	The	clock	is	not	aware	--	you
can	 listen	 to	 the	 tick-tick,	 the	 clock	 has	 never	 listened	 to	 it.	You	 can	 listen	 to
your	own	heartbeat.	Who	is	this	listener?	If	only	the	heartbeat	is	life,	then	who	is
this	 listener?	 If	 breath	 is	 the	 only	 life,	 how	 can	 you	be	 aware	 of	 your	 breath?
That's	why	all	Eastern	techniques	of	meditation	use	breath	awareness	as	a	subtle
technique	 --	 because	 if	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 breathing,	 then	 who	 is	 this
awareness?	It	must	be	something	beyond	breath	because	you	can	look	at	it	and
the	looker	cannot	be	the	object.	You	can	witness	it;	you	can	close	your	eyes	and
you	 can	 see	 your	 breath	 going	 in	 and	 coming	 out.	 Who	 is	 this	 seer,	 the
witnessing?	It	must	be	a	separate	force	that	does	not	depend	on	breathing.	When
the	 breathing	 disappears	 it	 is	 the	 stopping	 of	 a	 clock,	 but	 where	 does	 this
awareness	go?
Where	does	this	awareness	move	to?
Death	is	a	door,	it	is	not	a	stopping.	Awareness	moves	but	your	body	remains	at
the	door
--	 just	as	you	have	come	here	and	 left	your	shoes	at	 the	door.	The	body	is	 left
outside	 the	 temple,	and	your	awareness	enters	 the	 temple.	 It	 is	 the	most	subtle
phenomenon,	 life	 is	 nothing	 before	 it.	 Basically	 life	 is	 just	 a	 preparation	 for
dying,	 and	only	 those	are	wise	who	 learn	 in	 their	 life	how	 to	die.	 If	you	don't
know	how	to	die	you	have	missed	the	whole	meaning	of	life:	it	is	a	preparation,
it	is	a	training,	it	is	a	discipline.
Life	 is	not	 the	end,	 it	 is	 just	a	discipline	 to	 learn	 the	art	of	dying.	But	you	are
afraid,	you	are	 scared,	at	 the	very	word	death	you	start	 trembling.	That	means
you	have	not	yet	known	life,	because	life	never	dies.	Life	cannot	die.
Somewhere	you	have	become	identified	with	the	body,	with	the	mechanism.	The
mechanism	is	to	die,	 the	mechanism	cannot	be	eternal,	because	the	mechanism
depends	 on	 many	 things;	 it	 is	 a	 conditioned	 phenomenon.	 Awareness	 is
unconditional,	it	doesn't	depend	on	anything.	It	can	float	like	a	cloud	in	the	sky,
it	has	no	roots,	it	is	not	caused,	it	is	never	born	so	it	can	never	die.
Whenever	someone	dies	you	have	to	be	meditative	near	them,	because	a	temple
is	 just	 near	 and	 it	 is	 holy	ground.	Don't	 be	 childish,	 don't	 bring	 curiosities,	 be
silent	so	you	can	watch	and	see.	Something	very	very	meaningful	is	happening	--
don't	miss	the	moment.
And	when	death	is	there,	why	ask	about	it?	Why	not	look	at	it?	Why	not	watch
it?	Why	not	move	with	it	a	few	steps?
'I	 WON'T	 SAY,'	 SAID	 DOGO.'WELL?'	 INSISTED	 ZENGEN.'I'M	 NOT
SAYING,	AND
THAT'S	FINAL,'	SAID	DOGO.
ON	THEIR	WAY	BACK	TO	THE	TEMPLE,	THE
FURIOUS	ZENGEN	TURNED	ON	DOGO	AND	THREATENED:	 'BY	GOD,
IF	YOU
DON'T	ANSWER	MY	QUESTION,	WHY	I'LL	BEAT	YOU!'
This	is	possible	in	zen,	that	even	a	disciple	can	beat	the	master,	because	zen	is
very	 true	 to	 life	 and	 very	 authentic.	 A	 zen	 master	 does	 not	 create	 the
phenomenon	 around	 him:	 'I	 am	 holier	 than	 you.'	 He	 does	 not	 say,	 'I	 am	 so
superior.'	 How	 can	 one	 who	 has	 achieved	 say,	 'I	 am	 superior	 and	 you	 are
inferior'?	The	disciple	can	think	that	he	is	superior,	but	the	master	cannot	claim
any	superiority,	because	superiority	is	only	claimed	by	inferiority.
Superiority	 is	 only	 claimed	by	 the	 ego	which	 is	 impotent,	 inferior.	 Strength	 is
claimed	 only	 by	weakness:	when	 you	 are	 uncertain	 you	 claim	 certainty,	when
you	are	ill	you	claim	health,	when	you	don't	know	you	claim	knowledge.	Your
claims	are	simply	to	hide	the	truth.	A	master	claims	nothing.	He	cannot	say,	'I	am
superior.'	It	is	foolish.	How	can	a	wise	man	say,	'I	am	superior'?
So	a	zen	master	even	allows	this	--	a	disciple	to	hit	him	--	and	he	can	enjoy	the
whole	thing.	Nobody	else	in	the	world	has	done	that;	that's	why	zen	masters	are
rare	--	you	cannot	find	rarer	flowers	than	them.	The	master	is	so	superior	really
that	he	allows	you	even	 to	hit	him;	his	superiority	 is	not	challenged	by	 it.	You
cannot	challenge	him	in	any	way	and	you	cannot	bring	him	down	in	any	way.	He
is	no	more	there.	He	is	an	empty	house.	And	he	knows	that	a	disciple	can	only
be	foolish.	Nothing	else	is	expected	because	a	disciple	is	ignorant.
Compassion	 is	 needed.	 And	 in	 ignorance	 a	 disciple	 is	 bound	 to	 go	 on	 doing
things,	 things	 which	 are	 not	 proper,	 because	 how	 can	 an	 improper	 person	 do
proper	things?	And	if	you	force	proper	things	on	an	improper	person,	he	will	be
crippled,	his	freedom	will	be	cut.
And	a	master	 is	 to	help	you	 to	be	free	 --	so	hitting	 is	allowed.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	not
irreverence;	in	fact	the	disciple	also	loves	the	master	so	much,	so	intimately,	that
he	can	come	so	close.	Even	hitting	a	person	is	a	sort	of	intimacy	--	you	cannot
hit	just	anybody.
Sometimes	it	happens	that	even	a	child	hits	his	father,	or	a	child	slaps	his	mother.
No	antagonism	is	meant,	it	is	just	that	the	child	accepts	the	mother	so	deeply	and
so	intimately	that	he	doesn't	feel	that	anything	is	improper.	Andthe	child	knows
he	will	be	forgiven,	so	there	is	no	fear.
A	master	forgives	infinitely,	unconditionally.
The	disciple	was	very	angry	because	he	had	asked	a	very	meaningful	question	--
it	looked	meaningful	to	him.	He	couldn't	conceive	why	Dogo	should	behave	so
obstinately	and	say,	 'No!'	--	and	not	only	that,	he	said,	 'This	 is	final!	And	I	am
not	going	to	say	anything	more.'
When	you	ask	a	question	you	ask	because	of	your	ego,	and	when	the	answer	is
not	 given	 the	 ego	 feels	 hurt.	 The	 disciple	was	 hurt;	 his	 ego	was	 disturbed,	 he
couldn't	believe	it	--
and	 this	must	 have	 happened	before	many	people.	They	were	 not	 alone,	 there
were	many	 others,	 there	 must	 have	 been	 --	 when	 someone	 dies	 many	 people
gather	there.	And	before	those	people	the	master	said,	'No,	and	this	is	final!	I	am
not	going	 to	 say	anything.'	They	all	must	have	 thought,	 'This	disciple	 is	 just	 a
fool,	asking	irrelevant	questions.'
Zengen	must	have	felt	angry,	he	must	have	been	boiling.	When	he	found	himself
alone	with	the	master	going	back	to	the	monastery	he	said:
'BY	 GOD,	 IF	 YOU	 DON'T	 ANSWER	 MY	 QUESTION,	 WHY	 I'LL	 BEAT
YOU!'	'ALL
RIGHT,'	SAID	DOGO,	'BEAT	AWAY.'
Be	finished	with	it!	If	you	are	angry,	then	be	finished	with	it.
A	master	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 bring	 all	 that	 is	 in	 you	 out,	 even	 your	 negativity.
Even	if	you	are	going	to	hit	him	he	will	allow	you	to.	Who	knows	--	in	hitting
the	master	you	may	become	aware	of	your	negativity;	you	may	become	aware	of
your	 illness,	 your	 disease,	 your	 madness.	 Hitting	 the	 master	 may	 become	 a
sudden	enlightenment	--	who	knows.
And	a	master	is	to	help	you	in	every	way.	So	Dogo	said:
'ALL	RIGHT'	--	go	ahead	--	'BEAT	AWAY.'
A	MAN	OF	HIS	WORD,	ZENGEN	SLAPPED	HIS	MASTER	A	GOOD	ONE.
SOME	TIME	 LATER	DOGO	DIED,	 AND	ZENGEN,	 STILL	ANXIOUS	 TO
HAVE
HIS	 QUESTION	 ANSWERED,	 WENT	 TO	 THE	 MASTER	 SEKISO,	 AND,
AFTER
RELATING	WHAT	HAD	HAPPENED,	ASKED	THE	SAME	QUESTION	OF
HIM.
SEKISO,	 AS	 IF	 CONSPIRING	 WITH	 THE	 DEAD	 DOGO,	 WOULD	 NOT
ANSWER.
All	masters	are	always	in	a	secret	conspiracy.	If	they	are	masters	at	all,	they	are
always	 together	 --	 even	 if	 they	 contradict	 each	 other,	 they	 belong	 to	 the	 same
conspiracy;	 even	 if	 they	 say	 sometimes	 that	 the	 other	 is	 wrong,	 they	 are	 in	 a
conspiracy.
Buddha	 and	 Mahavira	 were	 contemporaries	 and	 they	 moved	 in	 the	 same
province,	Bihar.
It	 is	known	as	Bihar	because	of	 them:	BIHAR	means	 their	 field	of	movement,
they	walked	all	over	that	part.	Sometimes	they	were	in	the	same	village.
Once	it	happened	that	they	were	staying	in	the	same	roadside	inn	--	half	the	inn
was	engaged	by	Buddha	and	half	by	Mahavira	--	but	they	never	met	each	other
and	 continuously	 they	 refuted	 each	 other.	 Disciples	 used	 to	 move	 from	 one
master	 to	 the	 other.	 It	 has	 remained	 a	 problem	 --	 why?	 Buddha	 would	 even
laugh,	he	would	joke	about	Mahavira.	He	would	say,	'That	fellow!	So	he	claims
that	he	is	enlightened?	He	claims	that	he	is	all-knowing?	But	I	have	heard	that	he
says	 it	once	happened	 that	he	knocked	at	a	door	 to	beg	food	and	 there	was	no
one	inside,	and	I	have	heard	that	he	claims	that	he	is	all-knowing!	And	even	this
much	he	didn't	know	--	that	the	house	was	vacant?'
He	goes	on	joking.	He	says,	'Once	Mahavira	was	walking	and	he	stepped	on	the
tail	of	a	dog.	Only	when	the	dog	jumped	and	barked	did	he	know	that	 the	dog
was	there,	because	it	was	morning	and	dark.	And	that	fellow	says	that	he	is	all-
knowing?'	And	he	goes	on	 joking.	He	cuts	many	 jokes	against	Mahavira;	 they
are	beautiful.
They	 are	 in	 a	 conspiracy,	 Buddha	 and	 Mahavira,	 and	 this	 has	 not	 been
understood,	 neither	 by	 Jainas	 nor	 by	Buddhists	 --	 they	have	missed	 the	whole
point.	 They	 think	 they	 are	 against	 each	 other,	 and	 Jainas	 and	 Buddhists	 have
remained	against	each	other	for	these	two	thousand	years.
They	are	not	against	each	other!	They	are	playing	roles,	and	 they	are	 trying	 to
help	 people.	 They	 are	 two	 different	 types.	 Somebody	 can	 be	 helped	 by
Mahavira,	and	somebody	else	can	be	helped	by	Buddha.	The	person	who	can	be
helped	by	Buddha	cannot	be	helped	by	Mahavira	--	that	person	has	to	be	taken
away	from	Mahavira.	And	the	person	who	can	be	helped	by	Mahavira	cannot	be
helped	by	Buddha	--	that	person	has	to	be	taken	away	from	Buddha.	That's	why
they	talk	against	each	other;	it	is	a	conspiracy.
But	 everybody	 should	 be	 helped,	 and	 they	 are	 two	 different	 types,	 absolutely
different	types.
How	can	 they	be	against	each	other?	Nobody	who	ever	became	enlightened	 is
against	 any	 other	 enlightened	 person,	 cannot	 be.	 He	 may	 talk	 as	 if	 it	 is	 so
because	he	knows	the	other	will	understand.	Mahavira	is	never	reported	to	have
said	 anything	about	 the	 jokes	 that	Buddha	was	 telling	here	 and	 there.	He	kept
completely	 silent.	 That	 was	 his	 way.	 By	 being	 completely	 silent,	 not	 even
refuting,	 he	 was	 saying,	 'Leave	 that	 fool	 to	 himself!'	 --	 by	 being	 completely
silent,	not	saying	anything.
Every	day	reports	would	come,	people	would	come	and	they	would	say,	'He	has
said	 this,'	 and	 Mahavira	 would	 not	 even	 talk	 about	 it.	 And	 that	 was	 fitting,
because	he	was	very	old,	thirty	years	older	than	Buddha;	it	was	not	good	for	him
to	come	down	and	fight	with	a	young	man	--	this	is	how	young	fools	are!	But	he
was	 the	 same	 as	Buddha	 against	 other	 teachers	who	were	 older	 than	 him.	He
would	talk	about	them,	talk	against	them,	argue	against	them.
They	 are	 in	 a	 conspiracy.	 They	 have	 to	 be	 --	 because	 you	 cannot	 understand.
They	 have	 to	 divide	 paths,	 because	 you	 cannot	 understand	 that	 life	 exists
through	 opposites.	 They	 have	 to	 choose	 opposites.	 They	 have	 to	 stick	 to	 one
thing,	and	then	they	have	to	say,	FOR
YOU,	'Remember	that	all	others	are	wrong'	--	because	if	they	say	everybody	is
right	you	will	be	more	confused.	You	are	already	confused	enough.	If	they	say,
'Yes,	I	am	right.
Mahavira	 is	 also	 right,	 Buddha	 is	 also	 right	 --	 everybody	 is	 right,'	 you	 will
immediately	 leave	 them;	 you	will	 think:	 'This	man	 can't	 help,	 because	we	 are
already	confused.	We	don't	know	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong,	and	we	have
come	to	this	man	to	know	exactly	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.'
So	masters	stick	to	something	and	they	say,	'This	is	right	and	everything	else	is
wrong,'
knowing	all	along	that	there	are	millions	of	ways	to	reach	the	Way;	knowing	all
along	that	there	are	millions	of	paths	which	reach	the	final	path.	But	if	they	say
that	millions	of	paths	reach,	you	will	be	simply	confused.
This	 disciple	Zengen	was	 in	 trouble,	 because	his	Master	Dogo	died.	He	never
expected	 that	 this	was	going	 to	happen	so	 soon.	Disciples	always	 feel	 in	great
difficulty	when	masters	die.	When	masters	are	there,	they	fool	around	and	waste
time.	When	masters	are	dead,	then	they	are	in	a	real	fix	and	difficulty	--	what	to
do?	So	Zengen's	question	remained,	the	problem	remained,	the	puzzle	was	as	it
was	before.	The	disciple	had	not	yet	come	to	know	what	death	is,	and	Dogo	had
died.
He	went	to	another	master,	Sekiso,	and	after	relating	the	whole	thing,	what	had
happened,	asked	the	same	question	of	him.
SEKISO,	AS	IF	CONSPIRING	WITH	THE	DEAD	DOGO,	WOULD	NOT
ANSWER.'BY	 GOD!'	 CRIED	 ZENGEN.	 'YOU	 TOO?'	 'I'M	 NOT	 SAYING,'
SAID
SEKISO,	'AND	THAT'S	FINAL.'
They	are	doing	 something.	They	are	 creating	 a	 situation.	They	are	 saying,	 'Be
silent	before	death.	Don't	ask	questions,	because	when	you	ask	you	come	to	the
surface,	you	become	superficial.	These	questions	are	not	questions	to	be	asked.
These	questions	are	to	be	penetrated,	lived,	meditated	on.	You	have	to	move	into
them.	 If	you	want	 to	know	death	 --	die!	That	 is	 the	only	way	 to	know.	 If	you
want	to	know	life	--	live!'
You	 are	 alive	 but	 not	 living,	 and	 you	will	 die	 and	 you	will	 not	 die...	 because
everything	 is	 lukewarm	 in	 you.	 You	 live?	 --	 not	 exactly;	 you	 just	 drag.
Somehow,	somehow	you	pull	yourself	along.
Live	as	intensely	as	possible!	Burn	your	candle	of	life	from	both	ends!	Burn	it	so
intensely...	 if	 it	 is	 finished	 in	 one	 second	 it	 is	 okay,	 but	 at	 least	 you	will	 have
known	what	it	 is.	Only	intensity	penetrates.	And	if	you	can	live	an	intense	life
you	will	have	a	different	quality	of	death,	because	you	will	die	intensely.	As	life
is,	so	will	the	death	be.
If	you	live	dragging,	you	will	die	dragging.	You	will	miss	life,	and	you	will	miss
death	also.	Make	life	as	intense	as	possible.	Put	everything	at	stake.	Why	worry?
Why	 be	 worried	 about	 the	 future?	 THIS	 moment	 is	 there.	 Bring	 your	 total
existence	into	it!	Live	intensely,	totally,	wholly,	and	this	moment	will	become	a
revelation.	And	if	you	know	life,	you	will	know	death.
This	 is	 the	secret	key:	 if	you	know	 life,	you	will	know	death.	 If	you	ask	what
death	is,	it	means	you	have	not	lived	--	because	deep	down	they	are	one.	What	is
the	secret	of	life?
The	secret	of	life	is	death.	If	you	love,	what	is	the	secret	of	love?	Death.	If	you
meditate,	what	is	the	secret	of	meditation?	Death.
Whatsoever	happens	that	is	beautiful	and	intense	always	happens	through	death.
You	die.
You	simply	bring	yourself	totally	in	it	and	die	to	everything	else.	You	become	so
intense	that	you	are	not	there,	because	if	you	are	there	then	the	intensity	cannot
be	total;	then	two	are	there.	If	you	love	and	the	lover	is	there,	then	love	cannot
be	intense.	Love	so	deeply,	so	totally,	that	the	lover	disappears.	Then	you	are	just
an	energy	moving.	Then	you	will	know	love,	you	will	know	life,	you	will	know
death.
These	three	words	are	very	meaningful:	love,	life,	and	death.	Their	secret	is	the
same,	and	if	you	understand	them	there	is	no	need	to	meditate.	It	is	because	you
don't	 understand	 them	 that	 meditation	 is	 needed.	 Meditation	 is	 just	 a	 spare
wheel.	If	you	really	love,	it	becomes	meditation.	If	you	don't	love,	then	you	will
have	to	meditate.	If	you	really	live,	it	becomes	meditation.	If	you	don't	live,	then
you	will	have	to	meditate;	then	something	else	will	have	to	be	added.
But	this	is	the	problem:	if	you	cannot	love	deeply,	how	can	you	meditate	deeply?
If	you	cannot	live	deeply,	how	can	you	meditate	deeply?	...	Because	the	problem
is	 neither	 love	 nor	meditation	 nor	 death,	 the	 problem	 is:	How	 to	move	 to	 the
depth?	Deepness	is	the	question.
If	you	move	deeply	in	ANYTHING,	life	will	be	on	the	periphery	and	death	will
be	 in	 the	 center.	 Even	 if	 you	watch	 a	 flower	 totally,	 forgetting	 everything,	 in
watching	the	flower	you	will	die	in	the	flower.	You	will	experience	a	merging,	a
melting.	Suddenly	you	will	feel	you	are	not,	only	the	flower	is.
Live	each	moment	as	if	this	is	the	last	moment.	And	nobody	knows	--	it	may	be
the	last.
Both	the	masters	were	trying	to	bring	Zengen	an	awareness.	When	Sekiso	heard
the	 disciple	 telling	 him	 the	whole	 story	 he	 also	 said,	 'No.	 I'M	NOT	 SAYING
AND	THAT'S
FINAL.'	He	repeated	the	same	words	Dogo	had	said.	The	first	time	the	disciple
missed,	but	not	the	second	time.
AT	THAT	VERY	INSTANT,	ZENGEN	EXPERIENCED	AN	AWAKENING.
A	 satori	 happened...	 suddenly	 lightning...	 he	 became	 aware.	 The	 first	 time	 he
missed.	 It	 is	almost	always	so.	The	first	 time	you	will	miss,	because	you	don't
know	what	is	happening.	The	first	time,	the	old	habits	of	the	mind	will	not	allow
you	to	see;	 that's	why	the	second	master,	Sekiso,	simply	repeated	the	words	of
Dogo	--	simply	repeated.	He	did	not	change	even	a	single	word.	The	very	line	is
the	same:
'I'M	NOT	SAYING,'	HE	SAID,	'AND	THAT'S	FINAL.'
He	again	created	the	same	situation.
It	was	easy	 to	 fight	with	a	Dogo,	 it	 is	not	easy	 to	 fight	with	Sekiso.	He	 is	not
Zengen's	master.	It	was	easy	to	hit	Dogo,	it	will	not	be	possible	to	hit	Sekiso.	It
is	enough	that	he	answers.	It	is	his	compassion;	he	is	not	bound	to	answer.
An	 intimacy	 was	 there	 between	 Dogo	 and	 this	 disciple,	 and	 sometimes	 it
happens	when	you	are	very	intimate	that	you	can	miss	--	because	you	take	things
for	granted.
Sometimes	a	distance	is	needed;	it	depends	on	the	person.
A	 few	people	 can	 learn	 only	when	 a	 distance	 is	 there,	 a	 few	people	 can	 learn
only	when	there	is	no	distance	--	there	are	these	two	types	of	people.	Those	who
can	 learn	 from	 a	 distance,	 they	 will	 miss	 a	 master;	 they	 will	 miss	 their	 own
master,	but	he	prepares	them.
Many	of	you	are	here	who	have	worked	in	many	lives	with	many	other	masters.
You	have	missed	 them,	but	 they	have	prepared	you	 to	 reach	me.	Many	of	you
will	miss	me,	but	I	will	have	prepared	you	to	reach	somebody	else.	So	nothing	is
lost,	no	effort	is	wasted.
Dogo	created	the	situation,	Sekiso	fulfilled	it.
AT	THAT	VERY	INSTANT	ZENGEN	EXPERIENCED	AN	AWAKENING.
What	happened?	Hearing	again	the	same	words...	is	there	a	certain	conspiracy?
Why	the	same	words	again?	Suddenly	he	became	aware:	My	question	is	absurd,
I	 am	asking	 something	which	 cannot	 be	 answered.	 It	 is	 not	 the	master	who	 is
denying	the	answer,	it	is	my	very	question,	the	nature	of	it.
A	silence	 is	needed	before	death,	before	 life,	before	 love.	 If	you	 love	a	person
you	sit	silently	with	the	person.	You	would	not	like	to	chatter,	you	would	like	to
just	 hold	 their	 hand	 and	 live	 and	be	 silent	 in	 that	moment.	 If	 you	 chatter,	 that
means	you	are	 avoiding	 the	person	 --	 love	 is	not	 really	 there.	 If	you	 love	 life,
chattering	will	drop,	because	every	moment	is	so	filled	with	life	that	there	is	no
way,	no	space	to	chatter.	Each	moment	life	is	flooding	you	so	vitally	--	where	is
the	 time	 to	 gossip	 and	 chatter?	 Each	moment	 you	 live	 totally,	 mind	 becomes
silent.	Eat,	and	eat	so	totally	--	because	life	is	entering	you	through	food	--	that
mind	becomes	silent.	Drink,	and	drink	 totally:	 life	 is	entering	 through	water,	 it
will	 quench	 your	 thirst;	 move	 with	 it	 as	 it	 touches	 your	 thirst,	 as	 the	 thirst
disappears.
Be	silent	and	watch.	How	can	you	chatter	when	you	are	drinking	a	cup	of	tea?
Warm	life	is	flowing	within	you.	Be	filled	with	it.	Be	respectful.
Hence,	in	Japan,	tea	ceremonies	exist,	and	every	house	worth	calling	a	house	has
a	tearoom	just	like	a	temple.	A	very	ordinary	thing,	tea	--	and	they	have	raised	it
to	 a	 very	 holy	 status.	 When	 they	 enter	 the	 tearoom,	 they	 enter	 in	 complete
silence,	as	if	it	is	a	temple.	They	sit	silently	in	the	tearoom.	Then	the	kettle	starts
singing,	 and	 everybody	 listens	 silently,	 as	 you	 are	 listening	 to	 me:	 the	 same
silence.	And	the	kettle	goes	on	singing	millions	of	songs,	sounds,	OMKAR	--	the
very	mantra	of	life	--	and	they	listen	silently.	And	then	the	tea	is	poured.	They
touch	their	cups	and	saucers.	They	feel	grateful	that	this	moment	is	again	given
to	 them.	Who	knows	if	 it	will	come	again	or	not?	Then	they	smell	 the	 tea,	 the
aroma,	and	they	are	filled	with	gratitude.	Then	they	start	sipping.
And	 the	 taste...	and	 the	warmth...	and	 the	 flow...	and	 the	merging	of	 their	own
energy	with	the	energy	of	the	tea...	it	becomes	a	meditation.
Everything	can	become	a	meditation	if	you	live	it	totally	and	intensely.	And	then
your	life	becomes	whole.
Suddenly,	 listening	 to	 the	 same	 words	 again,	 Zengen	 came	 to	 realize,	 'I	 was
wrong	 and	 my	 master	 was	 right.	 I	 was	 wrong	 because	 I	 thought:	 He	 is	 not
answering;	he	is	not	paying	attention	to	my	question;	he	is	not	caring	about	me
at	all	and	my	inquiry.	My	ego	was	hurt.	But	I	was	wrong	--	he	was	not	hitting	my
ego.	I	was	not	at	all	in	the	question.
The	very	nature	of	death	is	such....'	Suddenly	he	was	awakened.
This	 is	 called	 satori.	 It	 is	 a	 special	 enlightenment.	 In	 no	 other	 language	 does
there	 exist	 a	 word	 equivalent	 to	 satori.	 It	 is	 a	 specially	 zen	 thing.	 It	 is	 not
samadhi;	it	is	samadhi.	It	is	not	samadhi	because	it	can	happen	in	very	ordinary
moments:	drinking	tea,	 taking	a	walk,	 looking	at	a	flower,	 listening	to	 the	frog
jumping	in	the	pond.	It	can	happen	in	very	ordinary	moments,	so	it	is	not	like	the
samadhi	about	which	Patanjali	talks.
Patanjali	would	simply	be	surprised	 that	a	 frog	 jumps	 into	 the	pond	and	at	 the
sound	 of	 it	 somebody	 becomes	 enlightened.	 Patanjali	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to
believe	that	a	dry	leaf	drops	from	the	tree,	zigzags,	moves	on	the	wind	a	little,
then	falls	 to	the	ground	and	goes	fast	asleep	--	and	somebody	sitting	under	the
tree	 attains	 enlightenment?	 No,	 Patanjali	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 believe	 it:
'Impossible,	 because,'	 he	will	 say,	 'samadhi	 is	 something	 exceptional;	 samadhi
comes	 after	much	 effort,	millions	of	 lives.	And	 then	 it	 happens	 in	 a	 particular
posture	--	SIDDHASAN.	It	happens	in	a	particular	state	of	body	and	mind.'
Satori	is	samadhi	and	yet	not	samadhi.	It	is	a	glimpse,	and	a	glimpse	in	the	very
ordinary	 of	 the	 extraordinary:	 samadhi	 happening	 in	 ordinary	 moments.	 A
sudden	 thing	also	--	 it	 is	not	gradual,	you	don't	move	 in	degrees.	 It	 is	 just	 like
water	coming	to	boiling	point,	to	one	hundred	degrees	--	and	then	the	jump,	and
the	water	becomes	vapor,	merges	into	the	sky,	and	you	cannot	trace	where	it	has
gone.	Up	 to	 ninety-nine	 degrees	 it	 is	 boiling	 and	 boiling	 and	 boiling,	 but	 not
evaporating.	From	the	ninety-ninth	degree	it	can	fall	back,	it	was	only	hot.	But	if
it	passes	the	hundredth	degree,	then	there	is	a	sudden	jump.
The	 situation	 is	 the	 same	 in	 the	 story.	 With	 Dogo,	 Zengen	 became	 hot,	 but
couldn't	evaporate.	It	was	not	enough,	he	needed	one	more	situation,	or	he	may
have	 been	 in	 need	 of	 many	 more	 situations.	 Then	 with	 Sekiso	 --	 the	 same
situation,	and	suddenly	something	is	hit.	Suddenly	the	focus	changes,	the	gestalt.
Up	to	this	point	he	had	been	thinking	that	it	was	his	question	to	which	Dogo	had
not	replied.	He	had	been	egocentric.	He	had	been	thinking,	'It	is	I	who	have	been
neglected	by	my	master.	He	was	not	careful	enough	about	me	and	my	inquiries.
He	didn't	pay	enough	attention	to	me	and	my	inquiry.'
Suddenly	 he	 realizes:	 'It	was	 not	 I	who	was	 neglected,	 or	 that	 the	master	was
indifferent,	or	that	he	didn't	pay	attention.	No,	it	was	not	me	--	it	is	the	question
itself.	It	cannot	be	answered.	Before	the	mysteries	of	life	and	death,	one	has	to
be	silent.'	The	gestalt	changes.	He	can	see	the	whole	thing.	Hence,	he	attains	a
glimpse.
Whenever	the	gestalt	changes	you	attain	a	glimpse.	That	glimpse	is	satori.	It	 is
not	final,	you	will	lose	it	again.	You	will	not	become	a	buddha	by	satori;	that's
why	 I	 say	 it	 is	 a	 samadhi	 and	 yet	 not	 a	 samadhi.	 It	 is	 an	 ocean	 in	 a	 teacup.
Ocean,	yes,	and	yet	not	the	ocean	--	samadhi	in	a	capsule.	It	gives	you	a	glimpse,
an	 opening...	 as	 if	 you	 are	moving	 in	 a	 dark	 night,	 in	 a	 forest,	 lost;	 you	 don't
know	where	you	are	moving,	where	the	path	is,	whether	you	are	moving	in	the
right	direction	or	not	 --	and	 then	suddenly	 there	 is	 lightning.	 In	a	moment	you
see	everything!	Then	the	light	disappears.	You	cannot	read	in	lightning,	because
it	 lasts	 only	 a	 moment.	 You	 cannot	 sit	 under	 the	 sky	 and	 start	 reading	 in
lightning.	No,	it	is	not	a	constant	flow.
Samadhi	is	such	that	you	can	read	in	its	light.	Satori	is	like	lightning	--	you	can
see	a	glimpse	of	the	whole,	all	that	is	there,	and	then	it	disappears.	But	you	will
not	be	the	same	again.	It	is	not	final	enlightenment,	but	a	great	step	towards	it.
Now	you	know.	You	have	had	a	glimpse,	now	you	can	search	for	more	of	it.	You
have	tasted	it,	now	buddhas	will	become	meaningful.
Now	if	Zengen	meets	Dogo	again	he	will	not	hit	him,	he	will	fall	at	his	feet	and
ask	for	his	forgiveness.	Now	he	will	weep	millions	of	tears,	because	now	he	will
say,	 'What	 compassion	Dogo	had,	 that	 he	 allowed	me	 to	hit	 him;	 that	 he	 said,
"Okay,	you	go	ahead.
Beat	away!"'	If	he	meets	Dogo	again,	Zengen	will	not	be	the	same.	He	has	now
tasted	something	which	has	changed	him.	He	has	not	attained	the	final	thing	--
the	final	thing	will	be	coming	--	but	he	has	got	the	sample.
Satori	is	the	sample	of	Patanjali's	samadhi.	And	it	is	beautiful	that	the	sample	is
possible,	because	unless	you	taste	it	how	can	you	move	towards	it?	Unless	you
smell	it	a	little,	how	can	you	be	attracted	and	pulled	towards	it?	The	glimpse	will
become	a	magnetic	force.
You	 will	 never	 be	 the	 same	 again.	 You	 will	 know	 something	 is	 there	 and
'whether	I	find	it	or	not	--	that	is	up	to	me.'	But	trust	will	arise.	Satori	gives	trust
and	starts	a	movement,	a	vital	movement	in	you,	towards	the	final	enlightenment
that	is	samadhi.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	The	art	of	archery
5	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411050
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
86
mins
LIEH-TZU	EXHIBITED	HIS	SKILL	IN	ARCHERY	TO	PO-HUN	WU-JEN.
WHEN	 THE	 BOW	 WAS	 DRAWN	 TO	 ITS	 FULL	 LENGTH,	 A	 CUP	 OF
WATER	WAS
PLACED	ON	HIS	ELBOW	AND	HE	BEGAN	TO	SHOOT.
AS	 SOON	 AS	 THE	 FIRST	 ARROW	 WAS	 LET	 FLY,	 A	 SECOND	 WAS
ALREADY
ON	 THE	 STRING,	 AND	 THEN	 A	 THIRD	 ONE	 FOLLOWED.	 IN	 THE
MEANTIME
HE	STOOD	UNMOVED	LIKE	A	STATUE.
PO-HUN	WU-JEN	SAID:	'THE	TECHNIQUE	OF	SHOOTING	IS	FINE,	BUT
IT	IS
NOT	THE	TECHNIQUE	OF	NON-SHOOTING.	LET	US	GO	UP	TO	A	HIGH
MOUNTAIN	AND	STAND	ON	A	PROJECTING	ROCK,	AND	THEN	YOU
TRY
AND	SHOOT.'
THEY	 CLIMBED	 UP	 A	 MOUNTAIN.	 STANDING	 ON	 A	 ROCK	 THAT
PROJECTED
OVER	 A	 PRECIPICE	 TEN	 THOUSAND	 FEET	 HIGH,	 PO-HUN	 WU-JEN
MOVED
BACKWARDS	UNTIL	ONE	THIRD	OF	HIS	FEET	WERE	OVERHANGING
THE
EDGE.	HE	THEN	MOTIONED	LIEH-TZU	TO	COME	FORWARD.
LIEH-TZU	 FELL	 DOWN	 ON	 THE	 GROUND	 WITH	 PERSPIRATION
FLOWING
DOWN	TO	HIS	HEELS.
SAID	 PO-HUN	WU-JEN:	 'THE	 PERFECT	MAN	 SOARS	UP	 ABOVE	 THE
BLUE
SKY,	OR	DIVES	DOWN	TO	THE	YELLOW	SPRINGS,	OR	WANDERS	ALL
OVER
THE	 EIGHT	 LIMITS	 OF	 THE	 WORLD,	 YET	 SHOWS	 NO	 SIGN	 OF
CHANGE	IN	HIS
SPIRIT.	BUT	YOU	BETRAY	A	SIGN	OF	TREPIDATION,	AND	YOUR	EYES
ARE
DAZED.	HOW	CAN	YOU	EXPECT	TO	HIT	THE	TARGET?'
ACTION	NEEDS	SKILL.	But	no-action	also	needs	skill.	The	skill	of	action	is
just	on	the	surface;	the	skill	of	no-action	is	at	the	very	core	of	your	being.	The
skill	of	action	can	be	learned	easily;	it	can	be	borrowed;	you	can	be	educated	in
it	because	it	is	nothing	but	technique.	It	is	not	your	being,	it	is	just	an	art.
But	 the	 technique,	or	 the	skill,	of	no-action	 is	not	 technique	at	all.	You	cannot
learn	it	from	somebody	else,	it	cannot	be	taught;	it	grows	as	you	grow.	It	grows
with	your	inner	growth,	it	is	a	flowering.	From	the	outside,	nothing	can	be	done
to	it;	something	has	to	evolve	from	the	inside.
The	skill	of	action	comes	from	without,	goes	within;	the	skill	of	no-action	comes
from	within,	flows	without.	Their	dimensions	are	totally	different,	diametrically
opposite.	So	first	try	to	understand	this,	then	we	will	be	able	to	enter	this	story.
For	example,	you	can	be	a	painter	just	by	learning	the	art;	you	can	learn	all	that
can	 be	 taught	 in	 art	 schools.	 You	 can	 be	 skillful,	 and	 you	 can	 paint	 beautiful
pictures,	you	can	even	become	a	renowned	figure	in	the	world.	Nobody	will	be
able	 to	 know	 that	 this	 is	 just	 technique,	 unless	 you	 come	 across	 a	master;	 but
YOU	will	always	know	that	this	is	just	technique.
Your	hands	have	become	skillful,	your	head	knows	the	know-how,	but	your	heart
is	not	flowing.	You	paint,	but	you	are	not	a	painter.	You	create	a	work	of	art	but
you	are	not	an	artist.	You	do	it,	but	you	are	not	in	it.	You	do	it	as	you	do	other
things	 --	but	you	are	not	a	 lover.	You	are	not	 involved	 in	 it	 totally;	your	 inner
being	remains	aloof,	indifferent,	standing	by	the	side.	Your	head	and	your	hands,
they	 go	 on	 working,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 there.	 The	 painting	 will	 not	 carry	 your
presence,	it	will	not	carry	YOU.	It	may	carry	your	signature,	but	not	your	being.
A	master	will	immediately	know,	because	this	painting	will	be	dead.	Beautiful...
you	can	decorate	a	corpse	also,	you	can	paint	 a	corpse	also,	you	can	even	put
lipstick	on	 the	 lips	 and	 they	will	 look	 red,	 but	 lipstick,	 howsoever	 red,	 cannot
have	the	warmth	of	flowing	blood.	Those	lips	--	painted,	but	no	life	in	them.
You	can	create	a	beautiful	painting,	but	it	will	not	be	alive.	It	can	be	alive	only	if
you	 flow	 in	 it;	 that's	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 master	 when	 he	 paints	 and	 an
ordinary	painter.
The	ordinary	painter	really	always	imitates	because	the	painting	is	not	growing
within	him.	It	is	not	something	with	which	he	is	pregnant.	He	will	imitate	others,
he	will	have	to	look	for	ideas;	he	may	imitate	nature	--	that	makes	no	difference.
He	may	look	at	a	tree	and	paint	it,	but	the	tree	has	not	grown	within	him.
Look	at	van	Gogh's	trees.	They	are	absolutely	different	--	you	cannot	find	trees
like	 that	 in	 the	world	of	nature.	They	are	 totally	different;	 they	are	van	Gogh's
creations,	he	is	living	through	the	trees.	They	are	not	these	ordinary	trees	around
you,	he	has	not	copied	them	from	nature,	he	has	not	copied	them	from	anybody
else.	If	he	had	been	a	god	then	he	would	have	created	those	trees	in	the	world.	In
the	painting	he	is	the	god,	he	is	the	creator.	He	is	not	even	imitating	the	creator
of	the	universe;	he	is	simply	being	himself.
His	trees	are	so	high	they	grow	and	touch	the	moon	and	stars.
Somebody	asked	van	Gogh,	'What	type	of	trees	are	these?	Where	did	you	get	the
idea	from?'
Van	Gogh	said:	'I	don't	go	getting	ideas	from	anywhere	--	these	are	my	trees!	If	I
was	the	creator	my	trees	would	touch	the	stars,	because	my	trees	are	desires	of
the	earth,	dreams	of	the	earth	--	to	touch	the	stars;	earth	trying	to	reach,	to	touch
the	stars	--	hands	of	the	earth,	dreams	and	desires	of	the	earth.'
But	these	trees	are	not	imitations.	These	are	van	Gogh	trees.
A	creator	has	something	to	give	to	the	world,	something	he	is	pregnant	with.	Of
course,	 even	 for	 a	 van	 Gogh	 technique	 is	 needed,	 because	 hands	 are	 needed.
Even	van	Gogh	cannot	paint	without	hands	--	if	you	cut	off	his	hands	what	will
he	 do?	He	 also	 needs	 technique,	 but	 technique	 is	 just	 a	way	 to	 communicate.
Technique	is	just	the	vehicle,	the	medium.	The	technique	is	not	the	message,	the
medium	 is	 not	 the	 message.	 The	 medium	 is	 simply	 a	 vehicle	 to	 carry	 the
message.	He	HAS	a	message;	every	artist	is	a	prophet	--
has	 to	be!	Every	artist	 is	 a	 creator	 --	has	 to	be,	he	has	 something	 to	 share.	Of
course,	technique	is	needed.	If	I	have	to	say	something	to	you,	words	are	needed,
but	if	I	am	saying	only	words,	then	there	is	no	message;	then	this	whole	thing	is
just	a	chattering.
Then	I	am	throwing	garbage	on	others.	But	if	words	carry	my	silence,	if	words
carry	my	wordless	message	to	you,	only	then	is	something	being	said.
When	something	is	to	be	said,	it	has	to	be	said	in	words,	but	that	which	has	to	be
said	 is	 not	 words.	When	 something	 has	 to	 be	 painted	 it	 has	 to	 be	 painted	 by
colors	 and	 brush	 and	 canvas,	 and	 the	 whole	 technique	 is	 needed	 --	 but	 the
technique	is	not	the	message.
Through	 the	 medium	 the	 message	 is	 given	 but	 the	 medium	 in	 itself	 is	 not
enough.
A	 technician	 has	 the	 medium,	 he	 may	 have	 the	 perfect	 medium,	 but	 he	 has
nothing	to	deliver,	he	has	no	message.	His	heart	is	not	overflowing.	He	is	doing
something	with	the	hand	and	with	the	head,	because	the	learning	is	in	the	head,
and	 the	know-how,	 the	 skill,	 is	 in	 the	hand.	Head	and	hand	cooperate,	but	 the
heart	remains	aloof,	untouched.	Then	painting	will	be	there,	but	without	a	heart.
There	will	be	no	beat	in	it,	there	will	be	no	pulse	of	life	in	it,	no	blood	will	flow
in	it;	very	difficult	to	see	--	you	can	see	only	if	you	know	the	difference	within
yourself.
Take	 another	 example,	which	will	 be	 easier	 to	 understand.	You	 love	 a	 person:
you	kiss,	you	hold	his	or	her	hand	in	your	hand,	you	embrace,	you	make	love.
All	these	things	can	be	done	to	a	person	you	don't	love	--	exactly	the	same	kiss,
exactly	the	same	embrace,	the	same	way	of	holding	hands;	the	same	gestures	in
making	love,	the	same	movements	--
but	you	don't	love	the	person.	What	will	be	the	difference?	--	because	as	far	as
action	 is	 concerned	 there	 is	 no	 difference:	 you	 kiss,	 and	 you	 kiss	 in	 the	 same
way,	as	perfectly	the	same	as	possible.	The	medium	is	there,	but	the	message	is
not	there.	You	are	skillful,	but	your	heart	is	not	there.	The	kiss	is	dead.	It	is	not
like	a	bird	on	the	wing,	it	is	like	a	dead	stone.
You	 can	make	 the	 same	movements	while	making	 love,	 but	 those	movements
will	be	more	like	yoga	exercises.	They	will	not	be	love.	You	go	to	a	prostitute;
she	 knows	 the	 technique	 --	 better	 than	 your	 beloved.	 She	 has	 to	 know,	 she	 is
professionally	skillful	--
but	you	will	not	get	love	there.	If	you	meet	the	prostitute	on	the	street	the	next
day,	 she	will	 not	 even	 recognize	you.	She	will	 not	 even	 say	hello,	 because	no
relationship	exists.	 It	was	not	 a	 contact,	 the	other	person	was	not	 there.	While
making	 love	 to	you,	 she	may	have	been	 thinking	about	her	 lover.	She	was	not
there!	She	 cannot	 be;	 prostitutes	 have	 to	 learn	 the	 technique	of	 how	not	 to	 be
there	--	because	the	whole	thing	is	so	ugly.
You	cannot	sell	love,	you	can	sell	the	body.	You	cannot	sell	your	heart,	you	can
sell	your	 skill.	For	a	prostitute	making	 love	 is	 just	 a	professional	 thing.	She	 is
doing	it	for	the	money,	and	she	has	to	learn	how	not	to	be	there,	so	she	will	think
of	her	lover;	she	will	think	of	a	thousand	and	one	things	but	not	about	you	--	the
person	who	is	present	there	--
because	to	think	about	the	person	who	is	there	will	create	a	disturbance.	She	will
not	be	there...	absent!	She	will	make	movements,	she	is	skillful	in	that,	but	she	is
not	involved.
This	 is	 the	 point	 of	 this	 anecdote.	 You	 can	 become	 so	 perfect	 that	 you	 can
deceive	the	whole	world,	but	how	will	you	deceive	yourself?	And	if	you	cannot
deceive	yourself,	you	cannot	deceive	an	enlightened	master.	He	will	see	through
all	the	tricks	that	you	have	created	around	you.	He	will	see	that	you	are	not	there
in	your	technique;	if	you	are	an	archer	you	may	hit	the	target	perfectly,	but	that	is
not	 the	 point.	 Even	 a	 prostitute	 brings	 you	 to	 orgasm,	 she	 hits	 the	 target	 as
perfectly	as	possible,	sometimes	even	more	perfectly	than	your	own	beloved;	but
that	 is	 not	 the	 point	 --	 because	 although	 a	 person	 remains	 incomplete,	 a
technique	can	easily	become	complete.
A	person	remains	incomplete	unless	he	becomes	enlightened.	You	cannot	expect
perfection	from	a	person	before	enlightenment,	but	you	can	expect	perfection	in
a	skill.
You	cannot	expect	perfection	in	 the	being,	but	 in	 the	doing	it	can	be	expected,
there	is	no	problem	about	it.	An	archer	can	hit	the	target	without	ever	missing	it	-
-	 and	 may	 not	 be	 in	 it.	 He	 has	 learned	 the	 technique,	 he	 has	 become	 a
mechanism,	a	robot.	It	is	simply	done	by	the	head	and	the	hand.
Now,	let	us	try	to	penetrate	this	story,	The	Art	of	Archery.	In	Japan	and	in	China,
meditation	has	been	taught	through	many	skills	--	that	is	the	difference	between
Indian	meditation	and	Chinese	and	Buddhist	and	Japanese	meditation.	In	India,
meditation	has	been	 taken	away	 from	all	 action	 in	 life.	 It,	 in	 itself,	 is	 the	 total
thing.	That	created	a	difficulty	--	that's	why	in	India,	religion	by	and	by	died.	It
created	a	difficulty,	and	the	difficulty	is	this:	if	you	make	meditation	the	whole
thing,	 then	 you	 become	 a	 burden	 on	 the	 society.	 Then	 you	 cannot	 go	 to	 your
shop,	you	cannot	go	to	the	office,	you	cannot	work	in	the	factory	--	meditation
becomes	 your	 whole	 life,	 you	 simply	 meditate.	 In	 India,	 millions	 of	 people
simply	existed	meditating;	they	became	a	burden	on	the	society,	and	the	burden
was	too	much.	Some	way	or	other,	the	society	had	to	stop	it.
Even	now,	today,	almost	ten	million	sannyasins	exist	in	India.	Now	they	are	not
respected.	Only	 a	 few...	 not	 even	 ten	 in	 those	 ten	million	 are	 respected.	 They
have	 become	 just	 beggars.	 Because	 of	 this	 attitude	 --	 that	 when	 you	 do
meditation,	when	religion	becomes	your	life,	then	there	is	only	religion,	then	you
drop	all	life	and	you	renounce	--	Indian	meditation	has	been,	in	a	way,	anti-life.
You	can	tolerate	a	few	persons	but	you	cannot	tolerate	millions,	and	if	the	whole
country	become	meditators,	then	what	will	you	do?	And	if	meditation	cannot	be
available	for	each	and	every	person	--
that	means	 even	 religion	 exists	 only	 for	 the	 few,	 even	 in	 religion	 class	 exists,
even	God	is	not	available	to	all?	No,	that	cannot	be.	God	is	available	to	all.
In	 India,	 Buddhism	 died.	 Buddhism	 died	 in	 India,	 the	 country	 of	 its	 source,
because	Buddhist	monks	became	a	heavy	burden.	Millions	of	Buddhist	monks	--
the	country	could	not	tolerate	them,	it	was	impossible	to	support	them,	they	had
to	disappear.
Buddhism	 completely	 disappeared;	 the	 greatest	 flowering	 of	 Indian
consciousness	and	it	disappeared,	because	you	cannot	exist	like	a	parasite.	A	few
days,	okay;	a	few	years,	okay.	India	tolerated	it	--	it	is	a	great	tolerating	country,
it	tolerates	everything	--	but	then	there	is	a	limit.	Thousands	of	monasteries	filled
with	 thousands	 of	 monks	 --	 it	 became	 impossible	 for	 this	 poor	 country	 to
continue	to	support	them.	They	had	to	disappear.	In	China,	in	Japan,	Buddhism
survived,	 because	Buddhism	 took	 a	 change,	 it	 passed	 through	 a	mutation	 --	 it
dropped	 the	 idea	 of	 renouncing	 life.	 Rather,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 it	 made	 life	 an
object	of	meditation.
So	whatsoever	you	do,	you	can	do	meditatively	 --	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 leave	 it.
This	was	a	new	growth,	this	is	the	base	of	zen	Buddhism:	life	is	not	to	be	denied.
A	zen	monk	goes	on	working;	he	will	work	in	the	garden,	he	will	work	on	the
farm,	and	he	lives	on	his	own	labor.	He	is	not	a	parasite,	he	is	a	lovely	person.
He	need	not	bother	about	the	society,	and	he	is	MORE	free	from	the	society	than
the	one	who	has	renounced.	How	can	you	be	free	from	the	society	if	you	have
renounced	it?	Then	you	become	a	parasite,	not	free	--
and	a	parasite	cannot	have	freedom.
This	is	my	message	also:	be	in	the	society	and	be	a	sannyasin.	Don't	become	a
parasite,	don't	become	dependent	on	anybody,	because	every	sort	of	dependence
ultimately	will	make	you	a	slave.	It	cannot	make	you	a	MUKTA,	it	cannot	make
you	an	absolutely	free	person.
In	Japan,	in	China,	they	started	to	use	many	things,	skills,	as	an	object,	as	a	help,
as	a	 support	 to	meditation.	Archery	 is	one	of	 them	 --	 and	archery	 is	beautiful,
because	it	is	a	very	subtle	skill,	and	you	need	much	alertness	to	be	skillful	in	it.
LIEH-TZU	EXHIBITED	HIS	SKILL	IN	ARCHERY	TO	PO-HUN	WU-JEN.
Po-Hun	 Wu-Jen	 was	 an	 enlightened	 master.	 Lieh-Tzu	 himself	 became
enlightened	 later	 on,	 this	 story	 belongs	 to	 the	 days	 of	 his	 seeking.	 Lieh-Tzu
himself	 became	 a	 master	 in	 his	 own	 right,	 but	 this	 is	 a	 story	 from	 before	 he
became	enlightened.
LIEH-TZU	EXHIBITED....
The	 desire	 to	 exhibit	 is	 the	 desire	 of	 an	 ignorant	mind.	Why	 do	 you	want	 to
exhibit?	Why	do	you	want	people	to	know	you?	What's	the	cause	of	it?	And	why
do	you	make	it	so	significant	in	your	life,	the	exhibition,	that	people	should	think
that	 you	 are	 somebody	 very	 significant,	 important,	 extraordinary	 --	 WHY?
Because	you	don't	have	a	self.	You	have	only	an	ego	--	a	substitute	for	the	self.
Ego	is	not	substantial.	Self	is	substantial,	but	that	is	not	known	to	you	--	and	a
man	cannot	live	without	the	feeling	of	'I'.	It	is	difficult	to	live	without	the	feeling
of	'I'.	Then	from	what	center	will	you	work	and	function?	You	need	an	'I'.	Even
if	 it	 is	 false	 it	will	be	helpful.	Without	an	 'I'	you	sill	 simply	disintegrate!	Who
will	be	the	integrator,	the	agent	within	you?	Who	will	integrate	you?	From	what
center	will	you	function?
Unless	 you	 know	 the	 self,	 you	will	 HAVE	 to	 live	with	 an	 ego.	 Ego	means	 a
substitute	self,	a	false	self;	you	don't	know	the	self,	so	you	create	a	self	of	your
own.	 It	 is	 a	mental	 creation.	And	 for	 anything	 that	 is	 false,	 you	have	 to	make
supports.	Exhibition	gives	you	support.
If	 somebody	 says,	 'You	 are	 a	 beautiful	 person,'	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 you	 are
beautiful.	 If	 nobody	 says	 so,	 it	 will	 be	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 feel	 that	 you	 are
beautiful;	you	will	start	suspecting,	doubting.	If	you	even	say	to	an	ugly	person
continuously,	'You	are	beautiful,'
the	 ugliness	 will	 drop	 from	 his	 mind,	 he	 will	 start	 feeling	 he	 is	 beautiful	 --
because	the	mind	depends	on	others'	opinions,	it	accumulates	opinions,	depends
on	them.
The	ego	depends	on	what	people	say	about	you:	the	ego	feels	good	if	people	feel
good	about	you;	 if	 they	 feel	bad,	 the	ego	 feels	bad.	 If	 they	don't	give	you	any
attention,	 the	 supports	 are	withdrawn;	 if	many	people	 give	 you	 attention,	 they
feed	your	ego	--	that's	why	so	much	attention	is	asked	for	continuously.
Even	a	small	child	asks	for	attention.	He	may	go	on	playing	silently,	but	a	guest
comes...
and	 the	mother	 has	 said	 to	 the	 child	 that	when	 the	 guest	 comes,	 he	 has	 to	 be
silent:	'Don't	create	any	noise,	and	don't	create	any	disturbance'	--	but	when	the
guest	 comes,	 the	 child	HAS	 to	 do	 something	 because	 he	 also	wants	 attention.
And	he	wants	more,	because	he	is	accumulating	an	ego	--	just	growing.	He	needs
more	 food	 and	 he	 has	 been	 told	 to	 keep	 silence	 --	 that	 is	 impossible!	He	will
HAVE	to	do	something.	Even	if	he	has	to	harm	himself,	he	will	fall.	Harm	can
be	tolerated,	but	attention	must	be	paid	to	him,	everybody	must	pay	attention,	he
MUST	become	the	center	of	attention!
Once	I	stayed	in	a	home.	The	child	there	must	have	been	told	that	while	I	was
there	he	was	not	to	make	any	trouble,	he	had	to	remain	quiet	and	everything.	But
the	 child	 could	 not	 remain	 quiet,	 he	 wanted	 my	 attention	 also,	 so	 he	 started
creating	noise,	 running	here	and	 there,	 throwing	 things.	The	mother	was	angry
and	she	told	him	many	times,	admonished	him:	'Listen,	I	am	going	to	beat	you	if
you	go	on	doing	this.'	But	he	wouldn't	listen.	Then	finally	she	said	to	the	child,
'Listen,	go	to	that	chair	and	sit	there	NOW!'
From	the	very	gesture	the	child	understood,	'Now	it	is	too	much	and	she	is	going
to	beat	me,'	so	he	went	to	the	chair,	sat	there	on	the	chair,	glared	at	his	mother
and	said,	very	meaningfully,	'Okay!	I	am	SITTING,	on	the	outside	--	but	on	the
inside	I	am	standing.'
From	childhood	 to	 the	 final,	 ultimate	day	of	your	death,	you	go	on	asking	 for
attention.
When	a	person	is	dying	the	only	idea	that	is	in	his	mind,	almost	always,	is,	'What
will	people	say	when	I	am	dead?	How	many	people	will	come	to	give	me	the	last
goodbye?
What	will	be	published	in	the	newspapers?	Is	any	newspaper	going	to	write	an
editorial?'
These	 are	 the	 thoughts.	 From	 the	 very	 beginning	 to	 the	 last	 we	 look	 at	 what
others	say.	It	must	be	a	deep	need.
Attention	 is	 food	 for	 the	ego;	only	a	person	who	has	attained	 to	 the	self	drops
that	need.
When	you	have	a	center,	your	own,	you	need	not	ask	for	others'	attention.	Then
you	can	live	alone.	Even	in	the	crowd	you	will	be	alone,	even	in	the	world	you
will	be	alone,	you	will	move	in	the	crowd,	but	alone.
Right	now	you	cannot	be	alone.	Right	now	if	you	go	to	the	Himalayas	and	move
into	a	dense	forest,	sitting	under	a	tree,	you	will	wait	for	somebody	to	pass	by,	at
least	somebody	who	can	carry	the	message	to	the	world	that	you	have	become	a
great	hermit.
You	will	wait,	you	will	open	your	eyes	many	times	to	see	--	has	somebody	come
yet	or	not?	...	Because	you	have	heard	the	stories	that	when	somebody	renounces
the	world,	the	whole	world	comes	to	his	feet,	and	up	to	now	nobody	has	reached
--	no	newspaper	man,	no	reporters,	no	cameramen,	nobody!	You	cannot	go	to	the
Himalayas.	 When	 the	 need	 for	 attention	 drops	 you	 are	 in	 the	 Himalayas
wherever	you	are.
LIEH-TZU	EXHIBITED	HIS	SKILL	IN	ARCHERY....
Why	 'exhibit'?	 He	 was	 still	 concerned	 with	 the	 ego,	 he	 was	 still	 looking	 for
attention,	 and	 he	 showed	his	 skill	 to	Po-Hun	Wu-Jen	who	was	 an	 enlightened
master,	a	very	old	man.
The	story	says	he	was	almost	ninety	--	very,	very	old	--	when	Lieh-Tzu	went	to
see	him.
Why	 to	 Po-Hun?	 --	 because	 he	 was	 a	 renowned	master,	 and	 if	 he	 says,	 'Yes,
Lieh-Tzu,	you	are	 the	greatest	archer	 in	 the	world,'	 it	will	be	such	a	vital	 food
that	one	can	live	on	it	for	ever	and	ever.
WHEN	 THE	 BOW	 WAS	 DRAWN	 TO	 ITS	 FULL	 LENGTH,	 A	 CUP	 OF
WATER	WAS
PLACED	ON	HIS	ELBOW	AND	HE	BEGAN	TO	SHOOT	--
and	even	a	single	drop	of	water	would	not	come	out	of	the	full	cup	placed	on	his
elbow,	and	he	was	shooting!
AS	 SOON	 AS	 THE	 FIRST	 ARROW	 WAS	 LET	 FLY,	 A	 SECOND	 WAS
ALREADY
ON	 THE	 STRING,	 AND	 THEN	 A	 THIRD	 ONE	 FOLLOWED.	 IN	 THE
MEANTIME
HE	STOOD	UNMOVED	LIKE	A	STATUE.
Great	skill	 --	but	Po-Hun	Wu-Jen	was	not	 impressed,	because	the	moment	you
want	to	exhibit	you	have	missed.	The	very	effort	to	exhibit	shows	that	you	have
not	attained	to	the	self,	and	if	you	have	not	attained	to	the	self	you	can	stand	like
a	statue	on	the	outside	-
-	 in	 the	 inside	you	will	be	 running,	 following	many	many	motivations,	desires
and	dreams.	Outside,	you	may	be	unmoving;	inside,	all	sorts	of	movements	will
be	 going	 on	 there	 together,	 simultaneously;	 in	 many	 directions	 you	 must	 be
running.	Outside	you	can	become	a	statue	--	that	is	not	the	point.
It	 is	 said	of	Bokuju:	he	went	 to	his	master	and	 for	 two	years	he	sat	before	his
master,	near	him,	just	like	a	statue,	a	marble	statue	of	Buddha.	At	the	beginning
of	the	third	year	the	master	came,	gave	Bokuju	a	whack	with	his	staff,	and	told
him:	 'You	 stupid!	We	 have	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	Buddha	 statues	 here,	we	 don't
need	any	more!'	 --	 because	his	master	 lived	 in	 a	 temple	where	 there	were	one
thousand	 and	 one	 Buddha	 statues.	 He	 said,	 'There	 are	 enough!	What	 are	 you
doing	here?'
Statues	are	not	needed,	but	a	different	state	of	being.	It	is	very	easy	to	sit	silently
on	the	outside	--	what	is	difficult	in	it?	Just	a	little	training	is	needed.	I	have	seen
one	man,	very	much	respected	in	India,	who	has	been	standing	for	ten	years	--	he
even	sleeps	standing.
His	 legs	 have	become	 so	 thick	 and	 swollen	 that	 now	he	 cannot	 bend	his	 legs.
People	respect	him	very	much,	but	when	I	went	to	see	him	he	wanted	to	see	me
alone,	 and	 then	 he	 asked:	 'Tell	 me	 how	 to	 meditate.	 My	 mind	 is	 very	 much
disturbed.'
Ten	 years	 standing	 like	 a	 statue!	 --	 he	 has	 not	 sat,	 he	 has	 not	 slept,	 but	 the
problem	 remains	 the	 same:	 how	 to	 meditate,	 how	 to	 become	 silent	 inside.
Unmoving	outside,	many	movements	inside.	There	may	be	even	more	than	there
are	with	you,	because	your	energy	 is	divided;	much	energy	 is	needed	for	body
movements.	But	a	man	who	stands	without	moving	--	his	whole	energy	moves
inwards	in	the	mind,	he	becomes	inside	MAD.	But	people	respect	him	--	and	that
has	become	an	exhibition.	Ego	is	fulfilled	but	the	self	is	nowhere	to	be	found.
PO-HUN	WU-JEN	SAID:	'THE	TECHNIQUE	OF	SHOOTING	IS	FINE'	--	you
did	 well,	 beautiful!	 --	 'BUT	 IT	 IS	 NOT	 THE	 TECHNIQUE	 OF	 NON-
SHOOTING.'
This	may	be	 a	 little	 bit	 difficult	 because	 in	 zen	 they	 say	 that	 the	 technique	 of
shooting	is	just	the	beginning,	to	know	HOW	to	shoot	is	just	the	beginning;	but
to	know	how	NOT	 to	 shoot,	 so	 that	 the	 arrow	shoots	by	 itself,	 is	 to	know	 the
end.
Try	to	understand:	when	you	shoot,	the	ego	is	there,	the	doer.	And	what	is	the	art
of	non-shooting?	The	arrow	shoots	 in	 that	 too,	 it	 reaches	 the	 target	 in	 that	 too,
but	the	target	is	not	the	point.	It	may	even	miss	the	target	--	that	is	not	the	point.
The	point	 is,	 inside	 there	should	be	no	doer.	The	SOURCE	is	 the	point.	When
you	 put	 an	 arrow	 on	 the	 bow,	 you	 should	 not	 be	 there;	 you	 should	 be	 as	 if
nonexistent,	absolutely	empty,	and	the	arrow	shoots	by	itself.	No	doer	inside	--
then	there	can	be	no	ego.	You	are	so	much	one	with	the	whole	process	that	there
is	no	division.	You	are	lost	in	it.	The	act	and	the	actor	are	not	two	--	not	even	the
slight	distinction	of	'I	am	the	doer	and	this	is	my	action.'	It	takes	many	years	to
attain.	 And	 if	 you	 don't	 understand,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 attain	 it;	 if	 you
understand	the	thing,	you	create	the	possibility.
Herrigel,	a	German	seeker,	worked	for	three	years	with	his	master	in	Japan.	He
was	an	archer,	when	he	 reached	Japan	he	was	already	an	archer,	and	a	perfect
one,	because	a	hundred	percent	of	his	targets	were	hit	by	the	arrow;	there	was	no
question	of	it.	When	he	arrived	he	was	already	an	archer	just	like	Lieh-Tzu.	But
the	master	laughed.	He	said,
'Yes,	you	are	skilled	in	shooting,	but	what	about	non-shooting?'
Herrigel	said,	'What	is	this	non-shooting?	--	never	heard	of	it.'
The	master	said,	'Then	I	will	teach	you.'
Three	 years	 passed;	 he	 became	more	 and	more	 skillful	 and	 the	 target	 became
nearer	and	nearer	and	nearer.	He	became	absolutely	perfect,	 there	was	nothing
lacking.	And	he	was	worried	because...	and	this	is	the	problem	for	the	Western
mind:	 the	 East	 looks	 mysterious,	 illogical,	 and	 the	 East	 is.	 He	 couldn't
understand	 this	master;	was	he	 a	madman?	 ...	Because	now	he	was	 absolutely
perfect,	 the	master	 could	 not	 find	 a	 single	 fault,	 and	 he	went	 on	 saying,	 'No!'
This	 is	 the	problem:	 the	gulf	between	 the	Eastern	and	 the	Western	approaches
towards	life.	The	master	goes	on	saying	no,	goes	on	rejecting.
Herrigel	started	getting	frustrated.	He	said,	'But	where	is	the	fault?	Show	me	the
fault	and	I	can	learn	how	to	go	beyond	it.'
The	 master	 said,	 'There	 is	 no	 fault.	 YOU	 are	 faulty.	 There	 is	 no	 fault,	 your
shooting	is	perfect	--	but	that	is	not	the	point.	YOU	are	faulty;	when	you	shoot,
YOU	are	there,	you	are	too	much	there.	The	arrow	reaches	the	target,	that's	right!
--	but	that	is	not	the	point.
WHY	are	 you	 there	 too	much?	Why	 the	 exhibition?	Why	 the	 ego?	Why	 can't
you	simply	shoot	without	being	there?'
Herrigel,	of	course,	continued	arguing,	'How	can	one	shoot	without	being	there?
Then	who	will	shoot?'	--	a	very	rational	approach:	then	who	will	shoot?
And	 the	 master	 would	 say,	 'Just	 look	 at	 me.'	 And	 Herrigel	 also	 felt	 that	 his
master	 had	 a	 different	 quality,	 but	 that	 quality	 is	 mysterious	 and	 you	 cannot
catch	it.	He	felt	it	many	times:	that	when	the	master	shoots	it	is	really	different,
as	 if	 he	 becomes	 the	 arrow,	 the	 bow,	 as	 if	 the	master	 is	 there	 no	more;	 he	 is
completely	one,	undivided.
Then	he	started	asking	how	to	do	this.	The	master	said,	'This	is	not	a	technique.
You	have	to	understand,	and	you	have	to	soak	yourself	 into	that	understanding
more	and	more,	and	sink	into	it.'
Three	years	lost,	and	then	Herrigel	understood	that	this	was	not	possible.	Either
this	man	is	mad,	or	it	is	not	possible	for	a	Westerner	to	attain	this	non-shooting:	I
have	wasted	three	years,	now	it	is	time	to	go.
So	he	asked	the	master	straight;	the	master	said,	'Yes,	you	can	go.'
Herrigel	 asked,	 'Can	 you	 give	 me	 a	 certificate	 stating	 that	 for	 three	 years	 I
learned	with	you?'
The	master	 said,	 'No,	 because	 you	 have	 not	 learned	 anything.	 You	 have	 been
three	 years	 with	 me,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 learned	 anything.	 All	 that	 you	 have
learned	you	 could	 have	 learned	 in	Germany	 also.	There	was	no	need	 to	 come
here.'
The	 day	 he	 was	 to	 leave	 he	 just	 went	 to	 say	 goodbye,	 and	 the	 master	 was
teaching	other	disciples,	and	demonstrating.	It	was	just	morning,	and	the	sun	was
rising	and	there	were	birds	singing;	and	Herrigel	was	now	unworried	because	he
had	decided,	 and	once	 the	 decision	 is	 taken	 the	worry	disappears.	He	was	not
worried.	For	these	three	years	he	was	tense	in	the	mind	--	how	to	attain?	How	to
fulfill	 the	 conditions	 of	 this	 madman?	 But	 now	 there	 was	 no	 worry.	 He	 had
decided,	he	was	leaving,	he	had	booked;	by	the	evening	he	would	leave	and	all
this	nightmare	would	be	left	behind.	He	was	just	waiting	for	the	master	so	that
when	he	was	finished	with	his	disciples	he	could	say	goodbye	and	a	thank	you
and	leave.
So	he	was	sitting	on	a	bench.	For	the	first	time,	suddenly	he	felt	something.	He
looked	at	the	master.	The	master	was	pulling	the	string	of	the	bow	and,	as	if	he
was	 not	walking	 towards	 the	master,	 he	 suddenly	 found	 himself	 standing	 and
walking	from	the	bench.	He	reached	 the	master,	 took	 the	bow	from	his	hand...
the	arrow	left	the	bow,	and	the	master	said,	'Good,	fine,	you	have	attained!	Now
I	can	give	you	a	certificate.'
And	Herrigel	says:	'Yes,	that	day	I	attained.	I	now	know	the	difference.	That	day
something	happened	by	itself	--	I	was	not	the	shooter,	I	was	not	there	at	all.	I	was
just	 sitting	on	 the	bench	 relaxed.	There	was	no	 tension,	no	worry,	no	 thinking
about	it.	I	was	not	concerned.'
Remember	this,	because	you	are	also	near	a	madman.	It	is	very	difficult	to	fulfill
my	 conditions.	 It	 is	 almost	 impossible	 --	 but	 it	 is	 possible	 also.	 And	 it	 will
happen	only	when	you	have	done	everything	that	you	can	do,	and	you	come	to
the	point	to	say	goodbye,	when	you	come	to	the	point	where	you	would	like	to
leave	me	 and	 go	 away.	 It	will	 come	 to	 you	 only	when	 you	 come	 to	 the	 point
where	you	think,	'Drop	all	these	meditations	and	everything.	The	whole	thing	is
nightmarish.'	 Then	 there	 is	 no	worry.	But	 don't	 forget	 to	 come	 to	me	 and	 say
goodbye;	otherwise	you	may	leave	without	attaining.
Things	 start	 happening	when	you	 are	 finished	with	 effort,	when	 the	 effort	 has
been	made	totally	--	of	course,	Herrigel	was	total	in	his	effort;	that's	why	in	three
years	he	could	finish	the	whole	thing.	If	you	are	partial,	fragmentary,	your	effort
is	 not	 total,	 then	 three	 lives	may	 not	 be	 enough.	 If	 you	 are	 lukewarm	 in	 your
effort	 then	 you	 will	 never	 come	 to	 a	 point	 when	 the	 whole	 effort	 becomes
useless.
Be	total	in	the	effort.	Learn	the	whole	technique	that	is	possible	to	do	meditation.
Do	 everything	 that	 you	 can	 do.	 Don't	 withhold	 anything.	 Don't	 try	 to	 escape
from	anything;	do	it	wholeheartedly.	Then	there	comes	a	point,	a	peak,	where	no
more	can	be	done.
When	you	come	to	the	point	where	no	more	can	be	done	and	you	have	done	all,
and	I	go	on	saying,	'No,	this	is	not	enough!'	--	my	'no'	is	needed	to	bring	you	to
the	total,	to	the	final,	to	the	peak	from	where	no	more	doing	is	possible.
And	you	don't	know	how	much	you	can	do.	You	have	tremendous	energy	which
you	are	not	using;	you	are	using	only	a	 fragment.	And	 if	you	are	using	only	a
fragment,	then	you	will	never	come	to	the	point	where	Herrigel	reached	--	I	call
that	the	Herrigel	point.
But	he	did	well.	He	did	whatsoever	could	be	done;	on	his	part	he	was	not	saving
anything.	Then	 the	 boiling	point	 comes.	At	 that	 boiling	point	 is	 the	 door.	The
whole	 effort	 becomes	 so	 useless,	 so	 futile:	 you	 are	 not	 reaching	 anywhere
through	it,	so	you	drop	it.	A	sudden	relaxation...	and	the	door	opens.
Now	you	can	meditate	without	being	a	meditator.	Now	you	can	meditate	without
even	meditating.	Now	you	can	meditate	without	your	ego	being	there.	Now	you
become	the	meditation	--	there	is	no	meditator.	The	actor	becomes	the	action,	the
meditator	becomes	meditation;	the	archer	becomes	the	bow,	the	arrow	--	and	the
target	 is	 not	 there	 outside	 somewhere	 hanging	 on	 a	 tree.	 The	 target	 is	 YOU,
inside	you	--	the	source.
This	is	what	Po-Hun	Wu-Jen	said.	He	said:
'THE	TECHNIQUE	OF	SHOOTING	IS	FINE'	--
of	course	Lieh-Tzu	was	a	good	shot,	a	perfect	archer
--	'BUT	IT	IS	NOT	THE	TECHNIQUE	OF	NON-SHOOTING.	LET	US	GO	UP
TO	A	HIGH	MOUNTAIN	AND	STAND	ON	A	PROJECTING	ROCK,	AND
THEN	YOU
TRY	AND	SHOOT.'
What	 is	 he	bringing	Lieh-Tzu	 to?	The	outside	 is	 perfect	 but	 the	 source	 is	 still
trembling.
The	 action	 is	 perfect	 but	 the	 being	 is	 still	 shaking.	 The	 fear	 is	 there,	 death	 is
there;	he	has	not	known	himself	yet.	He	is	not	a	knower;	whatsoever	he	is	doing
is	just	from	the	head	and	the	hand:	the	third	H	is	still	not	in	it.	Remember	always
to	have	all	 the	three	H's	together	--	 the	hand,	the	heart	and	the	head.	You	have
learned	 the	 three	R's,	 now	 learn	 the	 three	H's.	And	 always	 remember	 that	 the
head	is	so	cunning	that	it	can	deceive	you,	it	can	give	you	the	feeling,	'Okay,	all
the	 three	H's	 are	 there,'	 because	 as	 a	 skill	 develops,	 as	 you	 become	more	 and
more	technically	perfect,	the	head	says,	'What	else	is	needed?'
Head	means	the	West,	heart	means	the	East.	The	head	says,	'Everything	is	okay.'
Herrigel	 is	 head,	 the	 master	 is	 the	 heart	 --	 and	 the	 master	 looks	 mad.	 And
remember:	for	the	head,	the	heart	always	looks	mad.	The	head	always	says,	'You
keep	quiet.	Don't	come	in,	otherwise	you	will	create	a	mess.	Let	me	tackle	 the
whole	thing.	I	have	learned	everything,	I	know	the	arithmetic,	and	I	know	how
to	 deal	 with	 this.'	 And	 technically	 the	 head	 is	 always	 correct.	 The	 heart	 is
technically	always	wrong,	because	the	heart	knows	no	technique,	it	knows	only
the	feeling,	it	knows	only	the	poetry	of	being.	It	knows	no	technique,	it	knows
no	grammar,	it	is	a	poetic	phenomenon.'LET	US	GO	TO	A	HIGH
MOUNTAIN,'
said	the	old	master	--	very	very	old,	ninety	years	old	--
'AND	 STAND	 ON	 A	 PROJECTING	 ROCK	 AND	 THEN	 YOU	 TRY	 AND
SHOOT.'
Then	we	will	see.
THEY	 CLIMBED	 UP	 A	 MOUNTAIN.	 STANDING	 ON	 A	 ROCK	 THAT
PROJECTED
OVER	A	PRECIPICE	TEN	THOUSAND	FEET	HIGH....
And	 remember,	 that	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 head	 and	 the	 heart:	 ten
thousand	feet	high	is	the	heart,	on	a	projecting	rock	overlooking	a	ten	thousand
foot	deep	valley....
Whenever	 you	 move	 nearer	 to	 the	 heart	 you	 will	 feel	 dizzy.	 With	 the	 head,
everything	is	on	level	ground;	it	is	a	highway,	concrete.	With	the	heart	you	move
into	the	forest	--	no	highways,	ups	and	downs,	everything	mysterious,	unknown,
hidden	in	a	mist;	nothing	is	clear,	it	is	a	labyrinth;	it	is	not	a	highway,	it	is	more
like	a	puzzle.	Ten	thousand	feet	high!
Somewhere	Nietzsche	has	reported	that	once	it	happened	that	he	suddenly	found
himself	 ten	 thousand	 feet	 high,	 ten	 thousand	 feet	 high	 from	 time	 --	 as	 if	 time
were	a	valley,	and	he	found	himself	ten	thousand	feet	high	and	away	from	time
itself.	The	day	he	reported	this	in	his	diary	is	the	day	he	went	mad.	The	day	he
reported	this	in	his	diary	is	the	day	his	madness	came	in.
It	is	a	very	dizzy	point;	one	can	go	mad.	As	you	move	nearer	towards	the	heart,
you	will	 feel	 you	 are	moving	 nearer	madness.	 'What	 am	 I	 doing?'	 Things	 get
dizzy.	 The	 known	 leaves	 you	 behind,	 the	 unknown	 enters.	 All	 maps	 become
useless,	 because	 no	maps	 exist	 for	 the	 heart;	 all	maps	 exist	 for	 the	 conscious
mind.	It	is	a	clear-cut	thing;	in	it,	you	are	secure.	That's	why	love	gives	you	fear,
death	gives	you	fear,	meditation	gives	you	fear.
Whenever	you	are	moving	towards	the	center,	fear	grips	you.
THEY	 CLIMBED	 UP	 A	 MOUNTAIN.	 STANDING	 ON	 A	 ROCK	 THAT
PROJECTED
OVER	 A	 PRECIPICE	 TEN	 THOUSAND	 FEET	 HIGH,	 PO-HUN	 WU-JEN
MOVED
BACKWARDS	--
not	 forwards;	 on	 this	 projecting	 rock	 ten	 thousand	 feet	 high	 he	 moved
backwards.
PO-HUN	 WU-JEN	 MOVED	 BACKWARDS	 UNTIL	 ONE	 THIRD	 OF	 HIS
FEET
WERE	 OVERHANGING	 THE	 EDGE	 --	 and	 backwards.	 HE	 THEN
MOTIONED	LIEH-TZU	TO	COME	FORWARD.
It	is	said	that	this	ninety-year-old	man	was	almost	bent;	he	couldn't	stand	erect,
he	was	very	very	old.	This	bent	old	man,	half	of	his	feet	overhanging	the	edge	--
not	even	looking	that	way,	backwards.
HE	THEN	MOTIONED	LIEH-TZU	TO	COME	FORWARD.
That	is	where	I	am	standing	and	calling	you	to	come	forward.
LIEH-TZU	FELL	DOWN	ON	THE	GROUND.
He	would	 not	 come	 near	 him.	Wherever	 he	 was	 standing,	 far	 away	 from	 the
projecting	precipice,	Lieh-Tzu	fell	down	on	the	ground.
The	 very	 idea	 of	 coming	 closer	 to	 this	 old	 madman	 who	 is	 just	 standing,
overhanging	death;	any	moment	he	will	fall	and	will	not	be	found	ever....
....	WITH	PERSPIRATION	FLOWING	DOWN	TO	HIS	HEELS.
Lieh-Tzu	fell	down	on	the	ground	with	perspiration	flowing	down	to	his	heels.
Remember,	 first	perspiration	comes	 to	 the	head.	When	 the	fear	starts,	 first	you
perspire	on	the	head;	the	heels	are	the	last	thing.	When	fear	enters	so	deep	in	you
that	not	only	is	the	head	perspiring,	but	the	heels	are	perspiring,	then	the	whole
being	is	filled	with	fear	and	trembling.	Lieh-Tzu	could	not	stand	--	he	could	not
stand	even	the	idea	of	coming	nearer	to	the	old	master.
SAID	 PO-HUN	WU-JEN:	 'THE	 PERFECT	MAN	 SOARS	UP	 ABOVE	 THE
BLUE
SKY,	OR	DIVES	DOWN	TO	THE	YELLOW	SPRINGS,	OR	WANDERS	ALL
OVER
THE	 EIGHT	 LIMITS	 OF	 THE	 WORLD,	 YET	 SHOWS	 NO	 SIGN	 OF
CHANGE	IN	HIS
SPIRIT.'
'Lieh-Tzu,	why	are	you	perspiring	so	much?	To	the	very	heels?	And	why	have
you	fallen	there	on	the	ground,	dazed?	Why	this	change	in	spirit?	Why	are	you
shaking	so	much?
Why	this	trembling?	What	is	the	fear?	--	because	a	perfect	man	has	no	fear!'
Perfection	is	fearlessness...	because	a	perfect	man	knows	there	is	no	death.	Even
if	this	old	Po-Hun	Wu-Jen	falls,	he	knows	he	cannot	really	fall;	even	if	the	body
shatters	into	millions	of	pieces	and	nobody	can	find	it	again,	he	knows	he	cannot
die.	He	will	remain	as	he	is.	Only	something	on	the	periphery	will	disappear;	the
center	remains,	remains	always	as	it	is.
Death	 is	 not	 for	 the	 center.	 The	 cyclone	 is	 only	 on	 the	 periphery,	 the	 cyclone
never	 reaches	 the	 center.	 Nothing	 ever	 reaches	 the	 center.	 The	 perfect	man	 is
centered,	he	is	rooted	in	his	being.	He	is	fearless.	He	is	not	unafraid	--	no!	He	is
not	a	brave	man	--	no!
He	is	simply	fearless.	A	brave	man	is	one	who	has	fear,	but	goes	against	his	fear;
and	a	coward	is	one	who	also	has	fear,	but	goes	with	his	fear.	They	don't	differ,
the	 brave	 and	 cowards,	 they	 don't	 differ	 basically,	 they	 both	 have	 fears.	 The
brave	is	one	who	goes	on	in	spite	of	the	fear,	the	coward	is	one	who	follows	his
fear.	But	a	perfect	man	is	neither;	he	is	simply	fearless.	He	is	neither	a	coward,
nor	 is	 he	 brave.	 He	 simply	 knows	 that	 death	 is	 a	 myth,	 death	 is	 a	 lie	 --	 the
greatest	lie;	death	does	not	exist.
Remember,	for	a	perfect	man	death	does	not	exist	--	only	life,	or	God,	exists.	For
you,	God	does	not	exist,	only	death	exists.	The	moment	you	feel	deathlessness
you	have	 felt	 the	divine.	The	moment	you	 feel	deathlessness	you	have	 felt	 the
very	source	of	life.
'THE	 PERFECT	 MAN	 SOARS	 UP	 ABOVE	 THE	 BLUE	 SKY,	 OR	 DIVES
DOWN	TO
THE	YELLOW	SPRINGS,	OR	WANDERS	ALL	OVER	THE	EIGHT	LIMITS
OF	THE
WORLD,	YET	SHOWS	NO	SIGN	OF	CHANGE	IN	HIS	SPIRIT.'
Change	may	happen	on	the	periphery	but	in	his	spirit	there	is	no	change.	Inside
he	remains	unmoving.	Inside	he	remains	eternally	the	same.
'BUT	YOU	BETRAY	A	SIGN	OF	TREPIDATION,	AND	YOUR	EYES	ARE
DAZED,	LIEH-TZU.HOW	CAN	YOU	EXPECT	TO	HIT	THE	TARGET?'
...	Because	if	you	are	trembling	within,	howsoever	exactly	you	hit	the	target,	it
cannot	 be	 exact	 because	 the	 trembling	 inside	will	make	 your	 hand	 tremble.	 It
may	be	invisible,	but	it	will	be	there.	For	all	outward	purposes	you	may	have	hit
the	target,	but	for	inward	purposes	you	have	missed.	How	can	you	hit	the	target?
So	 the	 basic	 thing	 is	 not	 to	 hit	 the	 target,	 the	 basic	 thing	 is	 to	 attain	 a	 non-
trembling	being.	Then	whether	you	hit	the	target	or	not	is	secondary.	That	is	for
children	to	decide,	and	child's	play.
This	is	the	difference	between	the	art	of	shooting	and	the	art	of	non-shooting.	It
is	 possible	 that	 this	master,	 old	master,	may	miss	 the	 target,	 it	 is	 possible;	 but
still,	he	knows	the	art	of	non-shooting.	Lieh-Tzu	will	never	miss	the	target,	but
still	he	has	missed	the	real	target,	he	has	missed	himself.
So	 there	 are	 two	points:	 the	 source	 from	where	 the	 arrow	moves,	 and	 the	 end
where	 the	 arrow	 reaches.	 Religion	 is	 always	 concerned	 with	 the	 source	 from
where	all	the	arrows	move.	Where	they	reach	is	not	the	point;	the	basic	thing	is
from	where	they	move	--
because	 if	 they	 move	 from	 a	 non-trembling	 being	 they	 will	 attain	 the	 target.
They	have	already	attained,	because	in	the	source	is	the	end,	in	the	beginning	is
the	end,	in	the	seed	is	the	tree,	in	the	alpha	is	the	omega.
So	the	basic	thing	is	not	to	be	worried	about	the	result;	the	essential	thing	is	to
think,	to	meditate,	about	the	source.	Whether	my	gesture	is	a	perfect	love	gesture
or	not	is	not	the	point.	Whether	love	is	flowing	or	not,	that	is	the	point.	If	love	is
there	it	will	find	its	own	technique,	if	love	is	there	it	will	find	its	own	skill.	But	if
love	is	not	there,	and	you	are	skilled	in	the	technique,	the	technique	cannot	find
its	love	--	remember	this.
The	center	will	always	 find	 its	periphery,	but	 the	periphery	CANNOT	find	 the
center.
The	being	will	always	find	its	morality,	 its	character,	but	 the	character	will	not
find	its	being.	You	cannot	move	from	without	towards	within.	There	is	only	one
way:	energy	flows	from	within	towards	without.	The	river	cannot	move	if	there
is	no	source,	no	originating	source.	Then	the	whole	thing	would	be	false.	If	you
have	the	source,	the	river	will	move,	and	it	will	attain	to	the	ocean	--	there	is	no
problem.	 Wheresoever	 it	 goes,	 it	 will	 reach	 the	 target.	 If	 the	 source	 is
overflowing,	you	will	attain;	and	if	you	are	simply	playing	with	techniques	and
toys,	you	will	miss.
In	the	West	particularly,	technology	has	become	so	important	that	it	has	entered
even	in	human	relationship.	Because	you	know	too	much	about	techniques,	you
are	trying	to	convert	everything	into	technology.	That's	why	books,	thousands	of
books,	 are	 published	 every	 year	 about	 love	 --	 the	 technique,	 how	 to	 attain
orgasm,	how	to	make	love.	Even	love	has	become	a	technological	problem	and
orgasm	a	technological	thing,	it	has	to	be	solved	by	technicians.	If	love	has	also
become	a	technological	problem	then	what	is	left?
Then	nothing	is	left,	 then	the	whole	life	is	just	a	technology.	Then	you	have	to
know	 the	 know-how	 --	 but	 you	 miss;	 you	 miss	 the	 real	 target	 which	 is	 the
source.
Technique	 is	good	as	 far	 as	 it	 goes,	but	 it	 is	 secondary.	 It	 is	nonessential.	The
essential	 is	 the	 source	 and	 one	must	 first	 look	 for	 the	 source	 --	 and	 then	 the
technique	can	come.	It	is	good	that	you	learn	technique,	it	is	good!	People	come
to	me	 and	 I	 see	 they	 are	 always	 concerned	 with	 technique.	 They	 ask	 how	 to
meditate.	They	don't	ask,	'What	is	meditation?'	'How?'	--	they	ask	HOW	to	attain
peace.	They	never	ask,	'What	is	peace?'	As	if	they	already	know.
Mulla	Nasruddin	killed	his	wife	and	then	there	was	a	case	in	the	court.	The	judge
said	to	Nasruddin,	'Nasruddin,	you	go	on	insisting	again	and	again	that	you	are	a
peaceloving	man.	What	type	of	peaceloving	man	are	you?	You	killed	your	wife!'
Nasruddin	 said,	 'Yes,	 I	 repeat	 again	 that	 I	 am	 a	 peaceloving	 man.	 You	 don't
know:	when	I	killed	my	wife	such	peace	descended	on	her	face,	and	for	the	first
time	 in	 my	 house	 there	 was	 peace	 all	 over.	 And	 I	 still	 insist	 that	 I	 am	 a
peaceloving	man.'
Technique	 kills.	 It	 can	 give	 you	 a	 peace	 which	 belongs	 to	 death,	 not	 to	 life.
Method	 is	 dangerous,	 because	 you	may	 forget	 the	 source	 completely	 and	 you
may	become	obsessed	with	 the	method.	Methods	 are	good	 if	 you	 remain	 alert
and	you	remain	conscious	that	they	are	not	the	end,	they	are	only	the	means.	Too
much	obsession	with	 them	 is	 very	harmful,	 because	you	 can	 forget	 the	 source
completely.
This	is	the	point.	This	old	master,	Po-Hun	Wu-Jen,	showed	Lieh-Tzu	one	of	the
secrets.
Lieh-Tzu	himself	became	an	enlightened	man,	he	himself	became	what	this	old
man	was	at	that	moment:	backwards,	moving	towards	the	precipice	ten	thousand
feet	high	and	half	his	feet	hanging	over	--	and	a	very	old	body,	ninety	years	old,
and	 still	 no	 trembling	 came	 to	 the	 old	 man;	 not	 a	 slight	 change,	 not	 even	 a
tremor!	 Inside	 he	 must	 have	 been	 totally	 fearless.	 Inside	 he	 must	 have	 been
rooted,	grounded	 in	himself,	centered.	Remember	 this	always,	because	 there	 is
always	a	possibility	of	becoming	a	victim	of	techniques	and	methods.
The	 ultimate	 comes	 to	 you	 only	when	 all	 techniques	 have	 been	 dropped.	 The
ultimate	 happens	 to	 you	only	when	 there	 is	 no	method,	 because	 only	 then	 are
you	 open.	The	 ultimate	will	 knock	 at	 your	 door	 only	when	 you	 are	 not	 there.
When	you	are	absent,	you	are	ready,	because	when	you	are	absent	only	then	is
there	 a	 space	 for	 the	ultimate	 to	 enter	 into	you.	Then	you	become	a	womb.	 If
YOU	are	there	you	are	always	too	much;	there	is	not	even	a	slight	gap,	space,	for
the	 ultimate	 to	 enter	 into	 you	 --	 and	 the	 ultimate	 is	VAST.	You	have	 to	 be	 so
vastly	 empty,	 so	 infinitely	 empty	 --	 only	 then	 is	 there	 a	 possibility	 of	 the
meeting.
That's	why	 I	go	on	 saying	you	will	never	be	able	 to	meet	God,	because	when
God	comes	you	will	not	be	there.	And	until	you	are,	he	cannot	come.	You	are	the
barrier.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Temple	fire
6	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411060
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
96
mins
WHILE	 TOKAI	 WAS	 A	 VISITOR	 AT	 A	 CERTAIN	 TEMPLE,	 A	 FIRE
STARTED
UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR.
A	 MONK	 RUSHED	 INTO	 TOKAI'S	 BEDROOM,	 SHOUTING:	 'A	 FIRE,
MASTER,	A	FIRE!'	 'OH?'	SAID	TOKAI,	SITTING	UP.	'WHERE?'	'WHERE?'
EXCLAIMED	THE
MONK.	'WHY,	UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR	--	GET	UP	AT	ONCE.'	'THE
KITCHEN,	 EH?'	 SAID	 THE	 MASTER	 DROWSILY.	 'WELL,	 TELL	 YOU
WHAT,	WHEN	IT	REACHES	THE	PASSAGEWAY,	COME	BACK	AND	LET
ME	KNOW.'
TOKAI	WAS	SNORING	AGAIN	IN	NO	TIME.
THE	WHOLE	 IGNORANCE	OF	MIND	 consists	 in	 not	 being	 in	 the	 present.
Mind	is	always	moving:	into	the	future,	or	into	the	past.	Mind	is	never	here	and
now.	It	cannot	be.
The	very	nature	of	mind	 is	such	 that	 it	cannot	be	 in	 the	present,	because	mind
has	to	think,	and	in	the	present	moment	there	is	no	possibility	to	think.	You	have
to	see,	you	have	to	listen,	you	have	to	be	present,	but	you	cannot	think.
The	present	moment	is	so	narrow	that	there	is	no	space	to	think	about.	You	can
be,	 but	 thoughts	 cannot	 be.	 How	 can	 you	 think?	 If	 you	 think,	 it	 means	 it	 is
already	past,	the	moment	has	gone.	Or	you	can	think	if	it	has	not	come	yet,	it	is
in	the	future.
For	 thinking	 space	 is	 needed,	 because	 thinking	 is	 like	 a	walk	 --	 a	walk	of	 the
mind,	 a	 journey.	Space	 is	needed.	You	can	walk	 into	 the	 future,	you	can	walk
into	the	past,	but	how	can	you	walk	in	the	present?	The	present	is	so	close,	really
not	 even	 close	 --	 the	 present	 is	 YOU.	 Past	 and	 future	 are	 parts	 of	 time;	 the
present	 is	YOU,	it	 is	not	part	of	 time.	It	 is	not	a	 tense:	 it	 is	not	at	all	a	part	of
time,	it	doesn't	belong	to	time.	The	present	is	you;	past	and	future	are	out	of	you.
The	mind	cannot	exist	 in	 the	present.	 If	you	can	be	here,	 totally	present,	mind
will	 disappear.	 Mind	 can	 desire,	 can	 dream	 --	 dream	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
thoughts.	 It	 can	 move	 to	 the	 very	 end	 of	 the	 world,	 it	 can	 move	 to	 the	 very
beginning	of	the	world,	but	it	cannot	be	here	and	now	--	that	is	impossible	for	it.
The	whole	ignorance	consists	in	not	knowing	this.	And	then	you	worry	about	the
past,	which	is	no	more	--	it	 is	absolutely	stupid!	You	cannot	do	anything	about
the	past.	How	can	you	do	anything	about	the	past	which	is	no	more?	Nothing	can
be	done,	it	has	already	gone;	but	you	worry	about	it,	and	worrying	about	it,	you
waste	yourself.
Or	you	think	about	the	future,	and	dream	and	desire.	Have	you	ever	observed?	--
the	future	never	comes.	It	cannot	come.	Whatsoever	comes	is	always	the	present,
and	 the	 present	 is	 absolutely	 different	 from	 your	 desires,	 your	 dreams.	 That's
why	 whatsoever	 you	 desire	 and	 dream	 and	 imagine	 and	 plan	 for	 and	 worry
about,	 never	 happens.	 But	 it	 wastes	 you.	You	 go	 on	 deteriorating.	 You	 go	 on
dying.	Your	 energies	 go	on	moving	 in	 a	 desert,	 not	 reaching	 any	goal,	 simply
dissipating.	And	then	death	knocks	at	your	door.
And	 remember:	death	never	knocks	 in	 the	past,	 and	death	never	knocks	 in	 the
future;	death	knocks	in	the	present.
You	 cannot	 say	 to	 death,	 'Tomorrow!'	 Death	 knocks	 in	 the	 present.	 Life	 also
knocks	in	the	present.	God	also	knocks	in	the	present.	Everything	that	is	always
knocks	in	the	present,	and	everything	that	is	not	is	always	part	of	past	or	future.
Your	mind	is	a	false	entity	because	it	never	knocks	in	the	present.	Let	this	be	the
criterion	of	reality:	whatsoever	is,	is	always	here	and	now;	whatsoever	is	not	is
never	a	part	of	the	present.	Drop	all	that	which	never	knocks	in	the	now.	And	if
you	move	in	the	now,	a	new	dimension	opens	--	the	dimension	of	eternity.
Past	and	future	move	in	a	horizontal	line:	A	moves	to	B,	B	to	C,	C	to	D,	in	a	line.
Eternity	moves	vertically:	A	moves	deeper	into	the	A,	higher	into	the	A,	not	to
B;	A	goes	on	moving	deeper	and	higher,	both	ways.	 It	 is	vertical.	The	present
moment	 moves	 vertically,	 time	 moves	 horizontally.	 Time	 and	 present	 never
meet.	And	you	are	the	present:	your	whole	being	moves	vertically.	The	depth	is
open,	the	height	is	open,	but	you	are	moving	horizontally	with	the	mind.	That's
how	you	miss	God.
People	come	to	me	and	they	ask	how	to	meet	God,	how	to	see,	how	to	realize.
That	 is	not	 the	point.	The	point	 is:	how	are	you	missing	him?	--	because	he	 is
here	and	now,	knocking	at	your	door.	It	cannot	be	otherwise.	If	he	is	the	real,	he
must	be	here	and	now.
Only	unreality	is	not	here	and	now.	He	is	already	at	your	door	--	but	YOU	are
not	there.
You	are	never	at	home.	You	go	on	wandering	into	millions	of	words,	but	you	are
never	at	home.	There	you	are	never	 found,	and	God	comes	 to	meet	you	 there,
reality	surrounds	you	 there,	but	never	 finds	you	 there.	The	 real	question	 is	not
how	you	should	meet	God;	the	real	question	is	how	you	should	be	at	home,	so
that	when	God	knocks	 he	 finds	 you	 there.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 your	 finding
him,	it	is	a	question	of	him	finding	you.
So	it	is	a	real	meditation.	A	man	of	understanding	does	not	bother	about	God	or
that	 type	 of	matter,	 because	 he	 is	 not	 a	 philosopher.	 He	 simply	 tries	 to	 be	 at
home,	meditates	on	how	to	stop	worrying	about	the	future	and	the	past,	thinking
about	 future	and	past;	he	meditates	on	how	to	settle	here	and	now,	how	not	 to
move	 from	 this	moment.	 Once	 you	 are	 in	 this	moment,	 the	 door	 opens.	 This
moment	is	the	door!
I	was	staying	once	with	a	Catholic	priest	and	his	family.	It	happened	one	evening
that	I	was	sitting	with	the	family:	the	priest,	his	wife,	and	their	young	child	who
was	 playing	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 the	 room	with	 a	 few	 blocks,	making	 something.
Then	suddenly	the	child	said,	 'Now	everybody	be	quiet,	because	I	have	made	a
church.	The	church	is	ready,	now	be	silent.'
The	father	was	very	happy	that	the	boy	understood	that	in	a	church	one	has	to	be
quiet.
To	 encourage	 him	 he	 said,	 'Why	 is	 it	 one	 needs	 to	 be	 quiet	 in	 a	 church?'
'Because,'	said	the	boy,	'the	people	are	asleep.'
The	 people	 are	 really	 asleep,	 not	 only	 in	 the	 church,	 but	 on	 the	 whole	 earth,
everywhere.
They	are	asleep	in	the	church	because	they	come	asleep	from	out-side.	They	go
out	 of	 the	 church,	 they	 move	 in	 sleep	 --	 everybody	 is	 a	 sleepwalker,	 a
somnambulist.	And	this	is	the	nature	of	sleep:	that	you	are	never	here	and	now,
because	if	you	are	here	and	now	you	will	be	awake!
Sleep	means	you	are	in	the	past,	sleep	means	you	are	in	the	future.	Mind	is	the
sleep,	 mind	 is	 a	 deep	 hypnosis	 --	 fast	 asleep.	 And	 you	 try	 many	 ways,	 but
nothing	seems	to	help	you	--	because	anything	done	in	your	sleep	will	not	be	of
much	help,	because	if	you	do	it	in	sleep	it	will	not	be	more	than	a	dream.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 once	 a	 man	 came	 to	 a	 psychoanalyst,	 a	 very	 absentminded
psychoanalyst	 --	 and	 everybody	 is	 absentminded	 because	 mind	 is	 absent-
mindedness,	not	at	home;	that's	what	absent-mindedness	means.	A	man	went	to
this	very	absentminded	psychoanalyst	and	told	him.	'I	am	in	great	trouble.	I	have
knocked	at	the	doors	of	all	types	of	doctors	but	nobody	could	help	me,	and	they
say	that	nothing	is	wrong.	But	I	am	in	trouble.	I	snore	so	loudly	in	my	sleep	that
I	wake	myself	up.	And	this	happens	so	many	times	in	the	night:	the	snoring	is	so
loud	that	I	wake	myself	up!'
Without	exactly	 listening	 to	what	 this	man	was	saying,	 the	psychoanalyst	said,
'This	is	nothing.	A	simple	thing	can	change	the	whole	matter.	You	simply	sleep
in	another	room'.
You	understand?	--	this	is	exactly	what	everybody	is	doing.	You	go	on	changing
rooms,	 but	 sleep	 continues,	 snoring	 continues,	 because	 you	 cannot	 leave	 it	 in
another	room.	It	is	not	something	separate	from	you;	it	is	you,	it	is	your	mind,	it
is	your	whole	accumulated	past,	your	memory,	your	knowledge	--	what	Hindus
call	 SAMSKARAS,	 all	 the	 conditionings	 that	 make	 your	 mind.	 You	 go	 in
another	room,	they	follow	you	there.
You	can	change	your	 religion:	you	can	become	a	Christian	 from	a	Hindu,	you
can	become	a	Hindu	from	a	Christian	--	you	change	rooms.	Nothing	will	come
of	it.	You	can	go	on	changing	your	masters	--	from	one	master	to	another,	from
one	ashram	to	another:	nothing	will	be	of	much	help.	You	are	changing	rooms;
and	the	basic	thing	is	not	to	change	rooms	but	to	change	YOU.	The	room	is	not
concerned	with	your	snoring;	the	room	is	not	the	cause,	YOU	are	the	cause.	This
is	the	first	thing	to	be	understood;	then	you	will	be	able	to	follow	this	beautiful
story.
Your	mind,	as	it	is,	is	asleep.	But	you	cannot	feel	how	it	is	asleep	because	you
look	quite	awake,	with	open	eyes.	But	have	you	ever	seen	anything?	You	look
wide	awake	with	your	open	ears,	but	have	you	ever	heard	anything?
You	 are	 listening	 to	me	 so	 you	will	 say,	 Yes!	 But	 are	 you	 listening	 to	me	 or
listening	to	your	mind	inside?	Your	mind	is	constantly	commenting.	I	am	here,
talking	 to	 you,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 there	 listening	 to	 me.	 Your	 mind	 constantly
comments,	 'Yes,	it	 is	right,	I	agree';	 'I	don't	agree,	this	is	absolutely	false';	your
mind	 is	 standing	 there,	 constantly	commenting.	Through	 this	commentary,	 this
fog	of	the	mind,	I	cannot	penetrate	you.
Understanding	comes	when	you	are	not	interpreting,	when	you	simply	listen.
In	a	small	school	the	teacher	found	that	one	boy	was	not	listening.	He	was	very
lazy	and	fidgety,	restless.	So	she	asked:	'Why?	Are	you	in	some	difficulty?	Are
you	not	able	to	hear	me?'
The	boy	said,	'Hearing	is	okay,	listening	is	the	problem.	'
He	made	a	really	subtle	distinction.	He	said,	'Hearing	is	okay,	I	am	hearing	you;
but	 LISTENING	 is	 the	 problem'	 --	 because	 listening	 is	 more	 than	 hearing;
listening	 is	 hearing	 with	 full	 awareness.	 Just	 hearing	 is	 okay,	 sounds	 are	 all
around	you	--	you	hear,	but	you	are	not	listening.	You	have	to	hear,	because	the
sounds	will	go	on	knocking	at	your	eardrum;	you	have	to	hear.	But	you	are	not
there	 to	 listen,	 because	 listening	 means	 a	 deep	 attention,	 a	 rapport	 --	 not	 a
constant	 commentary	 inside,	 not	 saying	 yes	 or	 no,	 not	 agreeing,	 disagreeing,
because	if	you	agree	and	disagree,	in	that	moment	how	can	you	listen	to	me?
When	 you	 agree,	what	 I	 said	 is	 already	 past;	when	 you	 disagree,	 it	 is	 already
gone.	 And	 in	 the	 moment	 you	 nod	 your	 head	 inside,	 say	 no	 or	 yes,	 you	 are
missing	--	and	this	is	a	constant	thing	inside	you.
You	cannot	listen.	And	the	more	knowledge	you	have	the	more	difficult	listening
becomes.	Listening	means	 innocent	 attention	 --	 you	 simply	 listen.	There	 is	 no
need	to	be	in	agreement	or	disagreement.	I	am	not	in	search	of	your	agreement
or	disagreement.	I	am	not	asking	for	your	vote,	I	am	not	seeking	your	following,
I	am	not	in	any	way	trying	to	convince	you.
What	 do	 you	 do	when	 a	 parrot	 starts	 screeching	 in	 a	 tree?	Do	 you	 comment?
Yes,	then	too	you	say,	'Disturbing.'	You	cannot	listen	even	to	a	parrot.	When	the
wind	is	blowing	through	the	trees	and	there's	the	rustling	noise,	do	you	listen	to
it?	Sometimes,	maybe;	it	catches	you	unawares.	But	then	too	you	comment,	'Yes,
beautiful!'
Now	watch:	whenever	you	comment,	you	fall	asleep.	The	mind	has	come	in,	and
with	 the	 mind	 the	 past	 and	 future	 enter.	 The	 vertical	 line	 is	 lost	 --	 and	 you
become	horizontal.	The	moment	mind	enters	you	become	horizontal.	You	miss
eternity.
Simply	 listen.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 say	 yes	 or	 no.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be
convinced	or	not	convinced.	Simply	listen,	and	the	truth	will	be	revealed	to	you	-
-	 or	 the	 untruth!	 If	 somebody	 is	 talking	 nonsense,	 if	 you	 simply	 listen	 the
nonsense	will	be	revealed	to	you	--
without	 any	 commentary	 from	 the	mind.	 If	 somebody	 is	 speaking	 the	 truth,	 it
will	be	revealed	to	you.	Truth	or	untruth	is	not	an	agreement	or	a	disagreement
of	your	mind,	 it	 is	 a	 feeling.	When	you	are	 in	 total	 rapport,	you	 feel,	 and	you
simply	feel	that	it	is	true	or	it	is	untrue	--	and	the	thing	is	finished!	No	worrying
about	it,	no	thinking	about	it!	What	can	thinking	do?
If	you	have	been	brought	up	in	a	certain	way,	if	you	are	a	Christian,	or	a	Hindu,
or	 a	Mohammedan,	 and	 I	 am	 saying	 something	 which	 happens	 to	 agree	 with
your	upbringing,	you	will	say	yes.	If	it	doesn't	happen	so,	you	will	say	no.	Are
YOU	here	or	is	only	the	upbringing	here?	And	upbringing	is	just	accidental.
The	mind	 cannot	 find	what	 is	 true,	 the	mind	 cannot	 find	what	 is	 untrue.	 The
mind	can	reason	about	it,	but	all	reasoning	is	based	on	conditioning.	If	you	are	a
Hindu	 you	 reason	 in	 one	 way,	 if	 you	 are	 a	 Mohammedan	 you	 reason	 in	 a
different	 way.	 And	 every	 type	 of	 conditioning	 rationalizes.	 It	 is	 not	 really
reasoning:	you	rationalize.
Mulla	Nasruddin	became	very	aged;	he	attained	one	hundred	years.	A	reporter
came	 to	 see	 him,	 because	 he	 was	 the	 oldest	 citizen	 around	 those	 parts.	 The
reporter	said,
'Nasruddin,	 there	are	a	few	questions	I	would	like	to	ask.	One	is,	do	you	think
you	will	be	able	to	live	a	hundred	years	more?'
Nasruddin	said,	'Of	course,	because	a	hundred	years	ago	I	was	not	so	strong	as	I
am	now.'
A	hundred	years	before,	he	was	a	child,	just	born,	so	he	said:	 'A	hundred	years
ago	I	was	not	so	strong	as	I	am	now,	and	if	a	small	child,	helpless,	weak,	could
survive	for	a	hundred	years,	why	shouldn't	I?'
This	 is	 rationalization.	 It	 looks	 logical,	 but	 it	 misses	 something.	 It	 is	 a	 wish-
fulfillment.
You	would	like	to	survive	longer,	so	you	create	a	rationale	around	it:	you	believe
in	the	immortality	of	the	soul.	You	have	been	brought	up	in	a	culture	which	says
that	the	soul	is	eternal.	If	somebody	says,	'Yes,	the	soul	is	eternal,'	you	nod,	you
say,	'Yes,	that's	right.'
But	 that's	 not	 right	 --	 or	 wrong.	 You	 say	 yes	 because	 it	 is	 a	 deep-rooted
conditioning	 in	 you.	 There	 are	 others:	 half	 the	 world	 believes	 --	 Hindus,
Buddhists	and	Jainas	believe	--
that	 the	 soul	 is	 eternal,	 and	 there	 are	 many	 rebirths.	 And	 half	 the	 world	 --
Christians,	Mohammedans,	Jews,	believe	the	soul	is	not	eternal	and	there	is	no
rebirth,	only	one	life	and	then	the	soul	dissolves	into	the	ultimate.
Half	the	world	believes	this,	half	the	world	believes	that,	and	they	all	have	their
own	arguments,	they	all	have	their	own	rationalizations.	Whatsoever	you	want	to
believe,	you	will	believe,	but	deep	down	your	desire	will	be	 the	cause	of	your
belief,	not	reason.	Mind	looks	rational,	but	it	is	not.	It	is	a	rationalizing	process:
whatsoever	you	want	to	believe,	the	mind	says	yes.	And	where	does	that	wanting
come	from?	It	comes	from	your	upbringing.
Listening	is	a	totally	different	affair,	it	has	a	totally	different	quality	to	it.	When
you	 LISTEN,	 you	 cannot	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 or	 a	 Mohammedan,	 or	 a	 Jaina,	 or	 a
Christian.	When	you	listen	you	cannot	be	a	theist	or	an	atheist;	when	you	listen
you	can't	 listen	 through	 the	skin	of	your	 -isms	or	scriptures	 --	you	have	 to	put
them	all	aside;	you	simply	listen.
I'm	 not	 asking	 you	 to	 agree,	 don't	 be	 afraid!	 Simply	 listen,	 not	 bothered	 by
agreement	or	disagreement,	and	then	a	rapport	happens.
If	the	truth	is	there,	suddenly	you	are	drawn	--	your	whole	being	is	drawn	as	if
by	 a	 magnet.	 You	 melt	 and	 merge	 into	 it,	 and	 your	 heart	 feels	 'This	 is	 true,'
without	 any	 reason,	 without	 any	 arguments,	 without	 any	 logic.	 This	 is	 why
religions	say	reason	is	not	the	way	to	the	divine.	They	say	it	is	faith,	they	say	it	is
trust.
What	 is	 trust?	Is	 it	a	belief?	No,	because	belief	belongs	 to	 the	mind.	Trust	 is	a
rapport.
You	 simply	 put	 aside	 all	 your	 defense	 measures,	 your	 armor;	 you	 become
vulnerable.
You	listen	to	something,	and	you	listen	so	totally	that	the	feeling	arises	in	you	as
to	whether	it	is	true	or	not.	If	it	is	untrue,	you	FEEL	it.	Why	does	this	happen?	If
it	is	true,	you	feel	it.	Why	does	this	happen?
It	happens	because	truth	resides	in	you.	When	you	are	totally	nonthinking	your
inner	truth	can	feel	wherever	truth	is	--	because	like	always	feels	out	like:	it	fits.
Suddenly	everything	fits,	everything	falls	in	a	pattern	and	the	chaos	becomes	a
cosmos.	The	words	fall	in	line...	and	a	poetry	arises.	Then	everything	simply	fits.
If	you	are	in	rapport,	and	the	truth	is	there,	your	inner	being	simply	agrees	with	it
--	but	it	is	not	an	agreement.	You	feel	a	tuning.	You	become	one.	This	is	trust.	If
something	 is	 wrong,	 it	 simply	 falls	 from	 you	 --	 you	 never	 pay	 it	 a	 second
thought,	you	never	look	at	it	a	second	time:	there	is	no	meaning	in	it.	You	never
say,	'This	is	untrue';	it	simply	doesn't	fit	--	you	move!	If	it	fits,	it	becomes	your
home.	If	it	doesn't	fit,	you	move.
Through	 listening	 comes	 trust.	But	 listening	needs	hearing	plus	 attention.	And
you	are	fast	asleep	--	how	can	you	be	attentive?	But	even	fast	asleep	a	fragment
of	attention	remains	floating	in	you;	otherwise	there	would	be	no	way.	You	may
be	 in	 a	 prison,	 but	 possibilities	 always	 exist	 --	 you	 can	 come	 out.	Difficulties
may	 be	 there,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 impossible,	 because	 prisoners	 have	 been	 known	 to
escape.	A	Buddha	escapes,	a	Mahavira	escapes,	a	Jesus	escapes	--	they	were	also
prisoners	 like	 you.	 Prisoners	 have	 escaped	 before	 --	 prisoners	 have	 always
escaped.	 There	 remains	 somewhere	 a	 door,	 a	 possibility;	 you	 simply	 have	 to
search	for	it.
If	 it	 is	 impossible,	 if	 there	 is	 no	 possibility,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 The
problem	arises	because	the	possibility	is	there	--	you	are	a	little	alert.	If	you	were
absolutely	unalert,	then	there	would	be	no	problem.	If	you	were	in	a	coma,	then
there	would	be	no	problem.	But	you	are	not	in	a	coma;	you	are	asleep	--	but	not
totally.	A	gap,	a	leakage	exists.	You	have	to	find	within	yourself	that	possibility
of	being	attentive.
Sometimes	you	become	attentive.	 If	 somebody	comes	 to	hit	 you,	 the	 attention
comes.	If	you	are	in	danger,	if	you	are	passing	through	a	forest	at	night	and	it	is
dark,	you	walk	with	a	different	quality	of	attention.	You	are	awake;	thinking	is
not	 there.	 You	 are	 fully	 in	 rapport	 with	 the	 situation,	 with	 whatsoever	 is
happening.	Even	if	a	leaf	creates	a	sound	you	are	fully	alert.	You	are	just	like	a
hare,	or	a	deer	--	they	are	always	awake.	Your	ears	are	bigger,	your	eyes	are	wide
open,	you	are	 feeling	what	 is	happening	all	around	because	danger	 is	 there.	 In
danger	your	sleep	is	less,	your	awareness	is	more,	the	gestalt	changes.
If	somebody	puts	a	dagger	 to	your	heart	and	 is	 just	going	 to	push	 it	 in,	 in	 that
moment	there	is	no	thinking.	Past	disappears,	future	disappears:	you	are	here	and
now.
The	possibility	 is	 there.	 If	you	make	 the	effort	you	will	 catch	 the	one	 ray	 that
exists	 in	 you,	 and	 once	 you	 catch	 the	 one	 ray,	 the	 sun	 is	 not	 very	 far;	 then
through	the	ray	you	can	reach	the	sun	--	the	ray	becomes	the	path.
So	remember:	find	attention,	let	it	become	a	continuity	in	you	twenty-four	hours
a	day,	whatsoever	you	do.	Eat,	but	try	to	be	attentive:	eat	with	awareness.	Walk,
but	walk	with	awareness.	Love,	but	love	fully	aware.	Try!
It	cannot	become	total	just	in	one	day,	but	even	if	one	ray	is	caught,	you	will	feel
a	deep	 fulfillment	 --	because	 the	quality	 is	 the	same	whether	you	attain	 to	one
ray	or	the	whole	sun.	Whether	you	taste	a	drop	of	water	from	the	ocean	or	the
whole	ocean,	the	salty	taste	is	the	same	--	and	the	taste	becomes	your	satori,	the
glimpse.
Here,	listening	to	me,	be	alert.	Whenever	you	feel	that	you	have	gone	again	into
sleep,	 bring	 yourself	 back:	 just	 shake	 a	 little	 and	 bring	 yourself	 back.	 When
walking	on	the	street,	if	you	feel	you	are	walking	in	a	sleep,	shake	a	little,	give	a
little	shake	to	the	whole	body.	Be	alert.	This	alertness	will	remain	only	for	a	few
moments;	again	you	will	lose	it,	because	you	have	lived	in	a	sleep	for	so	long,	it
has	become	such	a	habit,	that	you	cannot	see	how	you	can	go	against	it.
I	 was	 traveling	 once	 from	Calcutta	 to	 Bombay	 in	 a	 plane,	 and	 one	 child	was
creating	 a	 great	 nuisance,	 running	 from	 one	 corner	 of	 the	 aisle	 to	 the	 other,
disturbing	everybody	--
and	 then	 the	 stewardess	 came	with	 tea	 and	 coffee.	 The	 boy	 ran	 into	 her,	 and
everything	was	 a	mess.	Then	 the	mother	of	 the	 child	 said,	 'Now	 listen,	 I	 have
told	you	many	times	--
why	don't	you	go	outside	and	play	there?'
Just	old	habit.	She	was	sitting	just	by	my	side	and	was	not	aware	of	what	she	had
said.	 I	 listened	as	she	spoke,	and	she	never	became	alert	 to	what	she	had	said.
Only	 the	 child	made	 her	 alert.	He	 said,	 'What	 do	 you	mean?	 If	 I	 go	 out	 I	 am
finished!'
A	child	is	more	attentive	of	course,	because	he	has	less	habits.	A	child	is	more
alert	because	he	has	less	armor	around	him,	he	is	less	imprisoned.	That's	why	all
religions	say	that	when	a	man	becomes	a	sage	he	has	some	quality	of	a	child:	the
innocence.	Then	habits	drop.	...	Because	habits	are	your	prison,	and	sleep	is	the
greatest	habit.
Now,	try	to	enter	in	this	parable	with	me.
WHILE	 TOKAI	 WAS	 A	 VISITOR	 AT	 A	 CERTAIN	 TEMPLE,	 A	 FIRE
STARTED
UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR.
A	 MONK	 RUSHED	 INTO	 TOKAI'S	 BEDROOM,	 SHOUTING,	 'A	 FIRE,
MASTER,	A	FIRE!'	 'OH?'	SAID	TOKAI,	SITTING	UP.	'WHERE?'	'WHERE?'
EXCLAIMED	THE
MONK.	'WHY,	UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR	--	GET	UP	AT	ONCE.'	'THE
KITCHEN,	 EH?'	 SAID	 THE	 MASTER	 DROWSILY.	 'WELL,	 TELL	 YOU
WHAT,	WHEN	IT	REACHES	THE	PASSAGEWAY,	COME	BACK	AND	LET
ME	KNOW.'
TOKAI	WAS	SNORING	AGAIN	IN	NO	TIME.
Tokai	 was	 a	 great	 zen	 master,	 enlightened,	 living	 in	 total	 awareness,	 and
whenever	you	live	in	total	awareness	you	live	moment	to	moment.	You	cannot
plan,	even	for	the	next	moment	you	cannot	plan	--	because	who	knows,	the	next
moment	may	never	 come!	And	how	can	you	plan	 it	 beforehand,	 because	who
knows	what	the	situation	will	be	in	the	next	moment?	And	if	you	plan	too	much
you	may	miss	it,	the	freshness	of	it.
Life	is	such	a	flux,	nothing	remains	the	same,	everything	moves.	Heraclitus	has
said	 that	you	cannot	step	 twice	 in	 the	same	river	 --	how	can	you	plan?	By	 the
time	you	are	stepping	the	second	time,	much	water	has	flowed,	it	is	not	the	same
river.	 Planning	 is	 possible	 if	 the	 past	 repeats	 itself.	But	 the	 past	 never	 repeats
itself,	repetition	never	happens	--	even	if	you	see	something	repeating	itself	it	is
just	because	you	cannot	see	the	whole.
Heraclitus	again:	he	says,	every	day	the	sun	is	new.	Of	course,	you	will	say,	it	is
the	same	sun	--	but	it	cannot	be	the	same,	there	is	no	possibility	of	its	being	the
same.	Much	has	changed:	the	whole	sky	is	different,	the	whole	pattern	of	stars	is
different,	 the	 sun	 itself	 has	 become	 older.	 Now	 scientists	 say	 that	 within	 four
million	years	the	sun	will	die,	its	death	is	coming	near	--	because	the	sun	is	an
alive	phenomenon	and	it	is	very	old,	it	has	to	die.
Suns	are	born,	they	live	--	and	they	die.	Four	million	years	for	us	is	very	long;
for	the	sun	it	 is	 just	nothing,	 it	 is	as	if	 the	next	moment	it	 is	going	to	die.	And
when	the	sun	dies,	the	whole	solar	family	will	disappear,	because	the	sun	is	the
source.	Every	day	the	sun	is	dying,	and	becoming	older	and	older	and	older	--	it
cannot	 be	 the	 same.	 Every	 day	 energy	 is	 lost	 --	 a	VAST	 amount	 of	 energy	 is
being	thrown	in	the	rays.	The	sun	is	less	every	day,	exhausted.	It	is	not	the	same,
it	cannot	be	the	same.
And	when	the	sun	rises,	it	rises	upon	a	different	world,	and	the	onlooker	also	is
not	the	same.	Yesterday	you	may	have	been	filled	with	love;	then	your	eyes	were
different,	 and	 the	 sun	of	 course	 looked	different.	You	were	 so	 filled	with	 love
that	 a	 certain	 quality	 of	 poetry	was	 around	 you,	 and	 you	 looked	 through	 that
poetry	 --	 the	 sun	may	have	 looked	 like	 a	 god,	 as	 it	 looked	 to	 the	 seers	 of	 the
Vedas.	 They	 called	 the	 sun,	 God	 --	 they	must	 have	 been	 filled	with	 so	much
poetry.	They	were	poets,	 in	 love	with	existence;	 they	were	not	scientists.	They
were	not	 in	 search	of	what	matter	was,	 they	were	 in	 search	of	what	 the	mood
was.	 They	worshipped	 the	 sun.	 They	must	 have	 been	 very	 happy	 and	 blissful
people,	because	you	can	worship	only	when	you	feel	a	blessing;	you	can	worship
only	when	you	feel	that	your	whole	life	is	a	blessing.
Yesterday	 you	 may	 have	 been	 a	 poet,	 today	 you	 may	 not	 be	 a	 poet	 at	 all	 --
because	every	moment	 the	 river	 is	 flowing	within	you.	You	are	also	changing.
Yesterday	things	were	fitting	into	each	other,	today	everything	is	a	mess:	you	are
angry,	you	are	depressed,	you	are	sad.	How	can	 the	sun	be	 the	same	when	 the
onlooker	 has	 changed?	 Everything	 changes,	 so	 a	 man	 of	 understanding	 never
exactly	plans	for	the	future,	cannot	--	but	he	is	more	ready	than	you	to	meet	the
future.	This	is	the	paradox.	You	plan,	but	you	are	not	so	ready.
In	 fact,	 planning	 means	 that	 you	 feel	 so	 inadequate,	 that's	 why	 you	 plan	 --
otherwise,	why	plan?	A	guest	is	coming,	and	you	plan	what	you	are	going	to	say
to	him.	What	nonsense!
When	the	guest	comes	can't	you	be	spontaneous?	But	you	are	afraid,	you	don't
believe	in	yourself,	you	have	no	trust;	you	plan,	you	go	through	a	rehearsal.	Your
life	 is	 an	 acting,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 real	 thing,	 because	 a	 rehearsal	 is	 needed	 only	 in
acting.	 And	 remember:	 when	 you	 are	 going	 through	 a	 rehearsal,	 whatsoever
happens	will	be	an	acting,	not	the	real	thing.
The	guest	has	not	arrived	and	you	are	planning	already	what	you	will	say,	how
you	will	 garland	 him,	 how	 you	 are	 going	 to	 respond;	 you	 are	 already	 saying
things.	The	guest,	in	the	mind,	has	already	arrived	--	you	are	talking	to	him.	In
fact,	by	 the	 time	 the	guest	arrives	you	will	be	 fed	up	with	him.	 In	 fact,	by	 the
time	 the	guest	arrives	he	has	already	been	with	you	 too	 long	--	you	are	bored,
and	whatsoever	 you	 say	will	 not	 be	 true	 and	 authentic.	 It	will	 not	 come	 from
you,	it	will	come	from	the	memory.	It	will	not	pop	up	from	your	existence,	it	will
come	 from	 the	 rehearsal	 that	 you	 have	 been	 having.	 It	 will	 be	 false	 --	 and	 a
meeting	will	not	be	possible,	because	how	can	a	false	man	meet?	And	it	may	be
the	 same	 with	 your	 guest:	 he	 was	 also	 planning,	 he	 also	 is	 fed	 up	 with	 you
already.	 He	 has	 talked	 too	 much	 and	 now	 he	 would	 like	 to	 be	 silent,	 and
whatsoever	he	says	will	be	out	of	the	rehearsal.
So	wherever	two	persons	meet,	there	are	four	persons	meeting	--	at	least;	more
are	possible.	Two	real	ones	are	in	the	background,	two	false	ones	meeting	each
other	 and	 encountering.	Everything	 is	 false,	 because	 it	 comes	out	 of	 planning.
Even	when	 you	 love	 a	 person	 you	 plan,	 and	 go	 through	 a	 rehearsal	 --	 all	 the
movements	that	you	are	going	to	make,	how	you	are	going	to	kiss,	the	gestures	-
-	and	everything	becomes	false.	Why	don't	you	trust	yourself?	When	the	moment
comes,	why	don't	you	trust	your	spontaneity?	Why	can't	you	be	real?
The	 mind	 cannot	 trust	 the	 moment;	 it	 is	 always	 afraid,	 that's	 why	 it	 plans.
Planning	means	fear.	It	is	fear	that	plans,	and	by	planning	you	miss	everything	--
everything	that	is	beautiful	and	true,	everything	that	is	divine,	you	miss.	Nobody
has	ever	reached	God	with	a	plan,	nobody	can	ever	reach.
WHILE	 TOKAI	 WAS	 A	 VISITOR	 AT	 A	 CERTAIN	 TEMPLE,	 A	 FIRE
STARTED
UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR.
The	 first	 thing:	 fire	 creates	 fear,	 because	 it	 is	 death.	 And	 if	 even	 fire	 cannot
create	 fear,	nothing	can	create	 fear.	But	 even	 fire	 cannot	 create	 fear	when	you
have	encountered	death,	when	you	know	that	death	doesn't	exist;	otherwise,	the
moment	you	hear	the	word
'Fire!'	 you	 are	 in	 a	 panic.	 No	 need	 for	 there	 to	 be	 a	 real	 fire,	 just	 somebody
coming	 running	here	and	saying,	 'Fire!'	 and	you	will	be	 in	a	panic.	Somebody
may	jump	out	of	it,	and	may	kill	himself	--	and	there	was	no	fire.	Just	the	word
fire	can	give	you	panic.
You	live	with	words.	Somebody	says	'Lemon'	--	and	juice	starts	flowing	in	your
mouth.
Somebody	says,	 'Fire!'	--	and	you	are	here	no	more,	you	have	already	escaped.
You	live	with	words,	not	with	realities.	You	live	with	symbols,	not	with	realities.
And	all	symbols	are	artifices,	they	are	not	real.
I	have	heard,	overheard	really:	an	old	woman	was	teaching	a	younger	one	how
to	 cook	 a	 certain	 thing.	 She	 was	 explaining,	 and	 then	 she	 said,	 'Six	 glugs	 of
molasses.'	 The	 younger	 woman	 said,	 'Six	 what?'	 The	 older	 woman	 said:	 'Six
glugs.'
The	 younger	 woman	was	 puzzled	 and	 asked	 again,	 'What	 is	 this	 "glug"?	 I've
never	heard	of	it	before.'
The	older	woman	said,	'My	God!	You	don't	know	such	a	simple	thing?	Then	it's
difficult	to	teach	you	cookery!'
The	younger	one	said,	'Be	kind	and	just	tell	me	what	this	"glug"	is.'
The	older	woman	said:	'You	tip	the	jug;	when	it	sounds	"glug"	that	is	one.	Five
more	like	it	--	six	glugs!'
But	the	whole	of	language	is	just	like	that.	No	word	really	means	anything.	The
meaning	 is	 given	 by	 us	 by	 mutual	 contract.	 That	 is	 why	 three	 thousand
languages	 exist	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 three	 thousand	 realities	 are	 not	 there.	 The
whole	of	language	is	just	like	'glug'.
You	can	create	your	own	private	 language,	 there	 is	no	problem.	Lovers	always
create	their	private	language:	they	start	using	words	--	nobody	understands	what
they	 are	 saying,	 but	 THEY	 understand.	Words	 are	 symbolic.	 The	 meaning	 is
given,	 the	meaning	is	not	really	 there.	When	somebody	says,	 'Fire!'	 there	 is	no
fire	in	the	word,	there	cannot	be.
When	somebody	says	God,	 in	 the	word	god	 there	 is	no	God	--	cannot	be.	The
word	god	is	not	God.	When	somebody	says	love,	the	word	love	is	not	love.
When	somebody	says,	'I	love	you,'	don't	be	deceived	by	the	words.	But	you	will
be	deceived,	because	nobody	looks	at	reality;	people	look	only	at	words.	When
somebody	says,	'I	love	you,'	you	think:	Yes,	he	loves	me;	or:	Yes,	she	loves	me.
You	are	getting	into	a	trap	and	you	will	be	in	difficulty.	Just	look	at	the	reality	of
this	man	or	this	woman.
Don't	 listen	 to	 the	words,	 listen	 to	 the	 reality.	Be	 in	 rapport	with	 the	 reality	of
this	person	and	understanding	will	arise	as	to	whether	whatsoever	he	is	saying	is
only	words,	or	whether	it	carries	some	content	also.	And	depend	on	the	content,
never	depend	on	 the	word;	otherwise	sooner	or	 later	you	will	be	frustrated.	So
many	lovers	are	frustrated	in	the	world	--	ninety	percent!	The	word	is	the	cause.
They	believed	in	the	word	and	they	didn't	look	at	the	reality.
Remain	unclouded	by	 the	words.	Keep	your	 eyes	clean	 from	 the	words.	Don't
allow	them	to	settle	in	your	eyes	and	in	your	ears;	otherwise	you	will	 live	in	a
false	 world.	 Words	 are	 false	 in	 themselves;	 they	 become	 meaningful	 only	 if
some	truth	exists	in	the	heart	from	where	the	words	are	coming.
WHILE	 TOKAI	 WAS	 A	 VISITOR	 AT	 A	 CERTAIN	 TEMPLE,	 A	 FIRE
STARTED
UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR.
Fire	is	fear,	fire	is	death	--	but	not	the	word	fire.
A	 MONK	 RUSHED	 INTO	 TOKAI'S	 BEDROOM,	 SHOUTING:	 'A	 FIRE,
MASTER,	A	FIRE!'
He	was	excited,	death	was	near.
'OH?'	SAID	TOKAI,	SITTING	UP.	'WHERE?'
You	cannot	excite	a	master,	even	if	death	is	there,	because	excitement	belongs	to
the	 mind.	 And	 you	 cannot	 surprise	 a	 master,	 even	 if	 death	 is	 there,	 because
surprise	also	belongs	to	the	mind.	Why	can't	you	surprise	a	master?	--	because	he
never	 expects	 anything.	 How	 can	 you	 surprise	 a	 man	 who	 never	 expects
anything?	Because	you	expect,	and	then	something	else	happens,	that's	why	you
are	surprised.	 If	you	are	walking	on	 the	street	and	you	see	a	man	coming,	and
suddenly	 he	 becomes	 a	 horse,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised,	 amazed:	 what	 has
happened?	But	even	 this	will	not	surprise	a	man	 like	Tokai,	because	he	knows
life	is	a	flux	--	everything	is	possible:	a	man	can	become	a	horse	even,	a	horse
can	become	a	man.	This	is	what	has	been	already	happening	many	times:	many
horses	have	become	men,	and	many	men	have	become	horses.	Life	moves	on!
A	 master	 remains	 without	 any	 expectation,	 you	 cannot	 surprise	 him.	 To	 him
everything	 is	 possible,	 and	 he	 is	 not	 closed	 to	 any	 possibility.	He	 lives	 in	 the
moment	 totally	 open;	 whatsoever	 happens,	 happens.	 He	 has	 no	 plan	 to	 meet
reality,	no	protection.	He	accepts.
If	 you	 expect	 something,	 you	 cannot	 accept.	 If	 you	 accept	 everything,	 you
cannot	expect.
If	you	accept	and	you	don't	expect,	you	cannot	be	surprised	--	and	you	cannot	be
excited.
Excitement	is	a	fever,	it	is	a	disease;	when	you	get	excited	your	whole	being	is
feverish,	you	are	hot.	You	may	like	it	sometimes	because	there	are	two	types	of
fever:	one	 that	comes	out	of	pleasure	and	one	 that	comes	out	of	pain.	The	one
that	you	like	you	call	pleasure,	but	it	is	also	a	fever,	excitement;	and	the	one	you
dislike	 you	 call	 pain,	 disease,	 illness	 --	 but	 both	 are	 excitements.	 And	 try	 to
observe:	they	go	on	changing	into	each	other.
You	 love	 a	 woman;	 you	 get	 excited	 and	 you	 feel	 a	 certain	 pleasure,	 or	 you
interpret	it	as	pleasure.	But	let	that	woman	remain	there	and	sooner	or	later	the
excitement	 goes.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 a	 boredom	 creeps	 in,	 you	 feel	 fed	 up,	 you
would	 like	 to	 escape,	 you	 would	 like	 to	 be	 alone.	 And	 if	 the	 woman	 still
continues,	now	the	negative	enters.	You	are	not	only	bored,	you	are	in	a	negative
fever	now;	you	feel	ill,	you	feel	nauseous.
Look:	your	 life	 is	 just	 like	a	rainbow.	It	carries	all	 the	colors	--	and	you	go	on
moving	from	one	color	to	another.	It	carries	all	 the	extremes,	all	 the	opposites:
from	pleasure	 you	move	 to	 pain,	 from	pain	 you	move	 to	 pleasure.	 If	 the	 pain
goes	on	too	long,	you	may	even	start	getting	a	certain	pleasure	out	of	 it.	 If	 the
pleasure	 lasts	 too	 long,	you	will	 certainly	get	pain	out	of	 it.	Both	are	 states	of
excitement,	both	are	fevers.	A	man	of	understanding	is	without	fever.	You	cannot
excite	him,	you	cannot	 surprise	him.	Even	 if	death	 is	 there	he	will	 coolly	ask,
'Where?'	 And	 this	 question	 'Where?'	 is	 very	 beautiful,	 because	 a	 man	 of
enlightenment	is	always	concerned	with	the	here.	He	is	not	concerned	with	there,
he	is	not	concerned	with	then,	he	is	concerned	only	with	now.	Now,	here,	is	his
reality;	then,	there,	is	your	reality.
'A	FIRE,	MASTER,	A	FIRE!'	'OH?'	SAID	TOKAI,	SITTING	UP,	'WHERE?'
He	wants	to	know:	there	or	here.
'WHERE?'	EXCLAIMED	THE	MONK.
...	Because	he	couldn't	believe	it,	 that	when	there	is	a	fire	somebody	could	ask
such	a	stupid	question.	One	should	simply	 jump	out	of	 the	window,	get	out	of
the	house;	 this	 is	no	 time	 for	 subtle	 arguments.'WHERE?'	EXCLAIMED	THE
MONK.	'WHY,	UNDER
THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR	--	GET	UP	AT	ONCE.'	 'THE	KITCHEN,	EH?'	SAID
THE
MASTER	 DROWSILY.	 'WELL,	 TELL	 YOU	 WHAT,	 WHEN	 IT	 REACHES
THE
PASSAGEWAY,	COME	BACK	AND	LET	ME	KNOW.'
When	it	reaches	here,	then	come	and	let	me	know.	If	it	is	there,	it	is	none	of	my
concern.
The	anecdote	is	very	revealing.	Anything	there	is	not	a	concern;	only	when	it	is
here	does	it	become	real.
A	master	cannot	plan	for	the	future.	Of	course	he	is	ready:	whatsoever	happens,
he	will	respond	--	but	he	cannot	go	through	a	rehearsal,	and	he	cannot	plan...	and
he	cannot	move	before	the	reality	has	come.	He	will	say,	 'Let	the	reality	come,
let	 the	 moment	 knock	 at	 my	 door,	 and	 then	 we	 will	 see.'	 Unburdened	 with
rehearsals,	plans,	he	 is	always	spontaneous	--	and	whatsoever	he	does	with	his
spontaneity	is	always	right.
Remember	 this	 criterion	 always:	whatsoever	 comes	 out	 of	 your	 spontaneity	 is
right.
There	exists	no	other	criterion	of	right	and	wrong.	Whatsoever	comes	out	of	the
moment,	your	alive	response	to	it	is	good.	Nothing	else	is	good	--	there	exists	no
other	criterion	for	good	and	bad.
But	you	are	afraid.	Because	of	your	 fear	you	create	morality.	Because	of	your
fear	 you	 create	 distinctions	 between	 right	 and	 wrong.	 But	 don't	 you	 see	 that
sometimes	a	situation	 is	different,	and	 the	right	becomes	wrong	and	the	wrong
becomes	right?	But	you	remain	dead.	You	don't	look	at	the	situation.	You	simply
go	on	following	your	right	and	wrong	and	the	conceptions	around	it.	That's	why
you	become	a	misfit.	Even	trees	are	wiser	than	you	--	they	are	not	misfits.	Even
animals	are	better	than	you	--	they	are	not	misfits.	Even	clouds	are	worthier	than
you	--	 they	are	not	misfits.	The	whole	of	existence	fits	 together;	only	man	is	a
misfit.	Where	has	he	gone	wrong?
He	has	gone	wrong	with	his	mental	distinctions	--	this	is	right	and	that	is	wrong	-
-	 and	 in	 life	 such	 fixed	 things	 cannot	 be	 useful.	 Something	 is	 wrong	 this
moment,	 next	moment	 it	 becomes	 right.	 Something	 is	 right	 this	moment,	 next
moment	it	is	right	no	more.	What	will	you	do?	You	will	be	constantly	in	a	state
of	fear	and	worry,	an	inner	tension.
So	 the	 foundational	 teaching	 of	 all	 those	 who	 have	 known	 is:	 be	 alert	 and
spontaneous,	and	whatsoever	happens	out	of	your	spontaneous	alertness	is	right,
and	 whatsoever	 happens	 out	 of	 your	 sleep,	 unconsciousness,	 is	 wrong.
Whatsoever	 you	 do	 unconsciously	 is	 wrong	 --	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 with
awareness	 is	 right.	Right	 and	wrong	 is	not	 a	distinction	between	objects;	 right
and	wrong	is	a	distinction	between	consciousnesses.
For	 example,	 there	 exists	 a	 Jaina	 sect	 in	 India:	TERAPANTH.	Mahavira	 said,
'Don't	 interfere	 in	 anybody's	 karma.	 Let	 him	 fulfill	 it'	 --	 a	 beautiful	 thing.	He
says	really	the	exact	thing	that	hippies	are	now	saying	in	the	West:	do	your	own
thing.	From	 the	other	 side	Mahavira	 says	 the	 same	 thing:	 'Don't	 interfere	with
anybody's	 thing.	 Let	 him	 do	 his	 karma,	 let	 him	 fulfill	 it.	 Don't	 interfere.
Interference	 is	 violence;	 when	 you	 interfere	 with	 somebody's	 karma	 you	 are
doing	a	violence,	you	are	throwing	that	man	from	his	own	path.	Don't	interfere.'
A	beautiful	thing!
But	how	things	can	go	wrong,	even	beautiful	things!	The	terapanth,	this	one	sect
of	 the	Jainas,	concluded	 that	 if	 somebody	 is	dying	by	 the	side	of	 the	 road	you
simply	go	on,	you	don't	touch	him,	you	don't	give	him	any	medicine,	you	don't
give	 him	water	 if	 he	 is	 crying,	 'I	 am	 thirsty!'	Don't	 give	 him	water	 because	 --
don't	 interfere	 with	 anybody's	 karma.	 Logical!	 --	 because	 if	 he	 is	 suffering
because	 of	 his	 past	 karmas,	 then	 who	 are	 you	 to	 interfere?	 He	 must	 have
accumulated	a	certain	karma	to	suffer	in	this	life	from	thirst	and	die	from	it.	Who
are	you	to	give	him	water?	You	simply	neglect	him,	you	go	on.
I	was	talking	to	one	of	the	leaders	of	the	terapanth	monks,	and	I	told	him,	'And
have	you	ever	considered	the	possibility	that	it	may	be	your	karma	to	give	him
water?'
You	are	not	interfering	with	his	karma,	but	you	are	interfering	with	your	own.	If
the	desire	arises	to	help	him,	what	will	you	do?	The	desire	shows	that	it	is	your
karma	 to	 give	 him	 water.	 If	 you	 resist	 that	 desire	 and	 go	 on	 because	 of	 the
principle,	 you	 are	 not	 being	 spontaneous	 --	 so	what	 to	 do?	 If	 you	make	 dead
principles	heavy	on	your	head,	you	will	always	be	in	trouble,	because	life	does
not	 believe	 in	 your	 principles;	 life	 has	 its	 own	 laws.	 But	 they	 are	 not	 your
principles	and	your	philosophies.
Be	spontaneous.	If	you	feel	like	helping,	don't	bother	about	what	Mahavira	has
said.	If	you	feel	like	helping,	help.	Do	your	thing.	If	you	don't	feel	like	helping,
don't	help.
Whatsoever	 Jesus	may	 have	 said,	 that	 by	 helping	 people	 you	will	 help	me	 --
don't	bother,	because	sometimes	the	help	may	be	dangerous.	A	man	is	ready	to
kill	 somebody,	 and	 he	 says	 to	 you,	 'Give	 me	 water,	 because	 I	 am	 feeling	 so
thirsty,	and	I	cannot	go	on	this	long	journey	to	kill	that	man'	--	what	will	you	do?
...	 Because	 if	 you	 give	 him	 water,	 you	 help	 him	 in	 murder.	 Decide!	 --	 but
NEVER	decide	before	the	moment	because	all	such	decisions	will	go	false.	One
never	knows	what	type	of	situation	will	be	there.
In	old	Indian	scriptures	there	is	a	story:	A	murderer	came	to	a	crossroads	where	a
monk	was	 sitting	meditating.	He	was	 following	a	man.	He	had	already	hit	 the
man	hard	but	he	escaped,	the	victim	escaped,	and	he	was	following	him.	At	the
crossroads	he	was	puzzled;	he	asked	the	monk	who	was	meditating	under	a	tree,
'Have	 you	 seen	 a	 man	 with	 blood	 flowing,	 passing	 by	 here?	 If	 so,	 which
direction	has	he	gone?'	--	because	it	was	a	crossroads.
What	 should	 this	monk	 do?	 If	 he	 tells	 the	 truth,	 that	 the	man	 has	 gone	 to	 the
north,	he	will	become	a	part	of	the	murder.	If	he	says	that	he	has	not	gone	to	the
north,	 he	 has	 gone	 to	 the	 south,	 he	 will	 be	 telling	 a	 lie.	What	 should	 he	 do?
Should	he	 tell	 the	 truth,	and	allow	 the	murder,	or	should	he	become	a	 liar	and
stop	it?	What	should	he	do?
There	have	been	many	answers.	I	have	none.
Jainas	 say	 that	 even	 if	 it	 is	 going	 to	be	 an	untruth,	 let	 him	be	untrue,	 because
violence	 is	 the	 greatest	 sin.	 They	 have	 their	 own	 valuation	 --	 violence	 is	 the
greatest	sin,	untruth	comes	next.	But	Hindus	say	no,	untruth	comes	first,	so	 let
him	be	true;	he	has	to	tell	the	truth	and	let	things	happen,	whatsoever	happens.
Gandhi	 said	 --	 Gandhi	 had	 his	 own	 answer	 about	 this	 --	 HE	 said,	 'I	 cannot
choose	 between	 these	 two	 because	 both	 are	 supreme	 values,	 and	 there	 is	 no
choice.	So	I	will	tell	him	the	truth,	and	I	will	stand	in	his	way,	and	I	will	tell	him,
"First	kill	me,	and	then	follow	that	man."'
It	appeals,	Gandhi's	answer	appeals,	seems	to	be	better	than	both	the	Hindu's	and
the	 Jaina's	 --	 but	 look	 at	 the	whole	 situation:	 the	man	 is	 going	 to	 commit	 one
murder	and	Gandhi	is	forcing	him	to	commit	two.	So	what	about	HIS	karma?
So	what	to	do?	I	have	no	answer.	Or	my	answer	is:	don't	decide	beforehand,	let
the	moment	come	and	let	the	moment	decide,	because	who	knows?	--	the	victim
may	 be	 a	man	who	 is	worth	murdering.	Who	 knows?	 --	 the	 victim	may	 be	 a
dangerous	man,	and	if	he	survives	he	may	murder	many.	Who	knows	what	the
situation	will	be	because	it	will	never	be	the	same	again	--	and	you	cannot	know
the	situation	beforehand.
Don't	 decide.	 But	 your	 mind	 will	 feel	 uneasy	 without	 a	 decision	 because	 the
mind	 needs	 clear-cut	 answers.	 Life	 has	 none,	 no	 clear-cut	 answers.	 Only	 one
thing	is	certain:	be	spontaneous	and	alert	and	aware,	and	don't	follow	any	rule.
Simply	be	spontaneous	--	and	whatsoever	happens,	 let	 it	happen.	If	you	feel	 in
that	 moment	 like	 taking	 the	 risk	 of	 losing	 truth,	 lose	 it.	 If	 you	 feel	 in	 that
moment	that	that	man	is	not	worth	it,	then	let	the	violence	happen,	or	if	you	feel,
'That	man	is	worth	more	than	me,'	stand	in	between.
Millions	of	possibilities	will	be	there.	Don't	fix	it	beforehand.	Just	be	aware	and
alert	 and	 let	 things	 happen.	 You	 may	 not	 wish	 to	 say	 anything.	 Why	 not	 be
silent?	 Don't	 tell	 any	 untruth,	 don't	 help	 the	 man	 in	 violence,	 don't	 force	 the
murderer	to	commit	two	murders.
Why	not	be	silent?	Who	is	forcing	you?
But	let	the	moment	decide:	that	is	what	all	the	awakened	ones	have	said.
But	if	you	listen	to	ordinary	moralists	they	will	tell	you	that	life	is	dangerous,	to
go	 with	 a	 decision;	 otherwise	 you	 may	 do	 something	 wrong.	 And	 I	 tell	 you
whatsoever	 you	 do	 through	 a	 decision	 will	 be	 wrong,	 because	 the	 whole
existence	is	not	following	your	decisions;	the	whole	existence	moves	in	its	own
way.	 You	 are	 a	 part	 of	 it	 --	 how	 can	 you	 decide	 for	 the	 whole?	You	 have	 to
simply	 be	 there	 and	 feel	 the	 situation	 and	 do	 whatsoever	 you	 can	 do	 with
humbleness,	with	every	possibility	of	it	being	wrong.
Don't	be	 such	an	egoist	as	 to	 think,	 'Whatsoever	 I	do	will	be	 right.'	Then	who
will	do	the	wrong?	Don't	be	such	an	egoist	that	you	think,	'I	am	moral,	and	the
other	is	immoral.'	The	other	is	also	you.	You	are	also	the	other.	We	are	one.	The
murderer	and	the	victim	are	not	two.
But	don't	decide.	 Just	be	 there;	 feel	 the	whole	situation,	be	 in	 rapport	with	 the
whole	 situation,	 and	 let	 your	 inner	 consciousness	 do	 whatsoever	 comes.	 You
should	 not	 be	 the	 doer,	 you	 should	 be	 just	 a	 witness.	 A	 doer	 has	 to	 decide
beforehand,	a	witness	need	not.
That	 is	 the	whole	message	of	Krishna	and	 the	Gita.	Krishna	 says:	 Just	 see	 the
whole	situation,	and	don't	follow	moralists'	dead	rules.	See	the	situation	and	act
as	 a	 witness;	 don't	 be	 a	 doer.	 And	 don't	 be	 bothered	 what	 the	 result	 will	 be,
nobody	 can	 say	 what	 the	 result	 will	 be.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	 no	 result,	 cannot	 be,
because	it	is	an	infinity.
For	example,	Hitler	was	born.	If	the	mother	had	killed	this	child	all	the	courts	in
the	world	would	have	 found	her	 a	murderess.	She	would	have	been	punished.
But	now	we	know	it	would	have	been	better	to	kill	Hitler	than	to	leave	him	alive,
because	he	killed	millions.	So	did	Hitler's	mother	do	right	in	not	murdering	this
child?	Was	she	right	or	was	she	wrong?	Who	is	to	decide?	And	how	could	that
poor	mother	know	that	this	boy	was	going	to	murder	so	many	people?
Who	 is	 to	 decide?	And	how	 to	decide?...	 and	 it	 is	 an	 infinite	 sequence.	Hitler
killed	 many,	 but	 who	 can	 decide	 whether	 those	 were	 the	 right	 persons	 to	 be
killed	 or	 not	 killed?	Who	will	 ever	 decide	 and	who	will	 ever	 know?	Nobody
knows.	Who	knows,	perhaps	God	sends	Hitler-like	people	to	kill	all	 those	who
are	wrong,	because	 somehow	or	other	God	 is	 involved	 in	everything!	He	 is	 in
the	right	and	he	is	in	the	wrong.
The	man	who	dropped	the	atom	bomb	on	Hiroshima	--	was	he	right	or	wrong?
Because	of	his	bomb	the	second	world	war	stopped.	Of	course,	the	whole	city	of
one	hundred	thousand	people	dropped	dead	immediately.	But	if	the	atom	bomb
had	not	been	dropped	on	Hiroshima,	 the	war	would	have	continued,	and	many
more	 lakhs	of	people	would	have	died.	And	if	Japan	could	have	survived	only
one	year	more,	she	could	have	invented	the	atom	bomb	--	and	then	they	would
have	dropped	it	on	New	York,	on	London.	Who	is	to	decide,	and	how	to	decide,
whether	the	man	who	dropped	the	bomb	was	right	or	wrong?
Life	 is	 so	 entangled,	 entwined,	 and	 every	 event	 leads	 to	 other	 events;	 and
whatsoever	 you	 do,	 you	 will	 disappear,	 but	 whatsoever	 you	 did,	 the
consequences	will	continue	forever	and	forever.	They	cannot	end.	Even	a	small
act	 --	 you	 smile	 at	 a	 person,	 and	 you	 have	 changed	 the	 whole	 quality	 of
existence,	because	that	smile	will	decide	many	things.
It	happened:	 I	was	 reading	Greta	Garbo's	biography.	She	was	an	ordinary	girl,
working	with	a	barber,	just	soaping	people's	faces,	and	she	would	have	remained
the	 same	 because	 she	 was	 already	 twenty-two,	 and	 then	 one	 American	 film
director	accidentally	came	to	that	barber's	shop	--	there	were	twenty	shops	in	that
town	--	and	when	she	was	soaping	his	face	he	smiled,	looking	at	the	girl	in	the
mirror,	and	said,	'How	beautiful!'	And	everything	changed.
This	was	 the	 first	man	 to	 say	 to	Greta	Garbo,	 'How	 beautiful!'	 --	 nobody	 had
ever	said	it	before,	and	she	never	thought	herself	beautiful,	because	how	can	you
think	yourself	beautiful	if	nobody	says	so?
The	whole	 night	 she	 could	 not	 sleep.	 The	 next	morning	 she	 searched	 out	 the
director,	where	he	was	staying,	and	she	asked,	'Do	you	REALLY	think	that	I	am
beautiful?'
The	director	may	have	made	the	remark	casually,	who	knows!	But	when	a	girl
comes	 searching	 for	 you	 and	 asks,	 'Really?	 What	 you	 told	 me,	 you	 really
MEANT	it?'...	so	the	director	said,	'Yes,	you	ARE	beautiful!'
Then	Greta	Garbo	said,	'Then	why	not	give	me	some	work	in	your	film,	in	some
film	you	are	making?'	Now	things	started.	And	Greta	Garbo	became	one	of	the
most	famous	actresses.
Very	small	things	move	around,	and	they	go	on	moving.	It	is	just	like	throwing	a
small	pebble	in	a	lake.	Such	a	small	pebble,	and	then	ripples	go	on	and	on	and
on	--	and	they	will	go	on	to	the	very	end.	By	the	time	they	reach	the	shore,	long
before	it,	the	pebble	has	settled	deep	into	the	bottom,	is	lost.
That	pebble	will	change	the	whole	quality	of	existence,	because	it	is	all	one	net;
it	 is	 just	 like	 a	 spider's	 web:	 you	 touch	 it	 anywhere,	 shake	 it	 a	 little,	 and	 the
whole	web	ripples.
Everywhere	it	is	felt.	You	smile	at	a	person	--	and	the	whole	world	is	a	spider's
web	--
and	the	whole	God	is	changed	through	that	smile.
But	 how	 to	 decide?	 Krishna	 says	 you	 need	 not	 be	 bothered	 with	 decision,
because	it	is	such	a	vast	thing	that	you	will	never	be	able	to	make	a	decision.	So
don't	 think	 about	 the	 result,	 simply	 respond	 to	 the	 situation.	 Be	 spontaneous,
alert;	be	a	witness	and	not	a	doer.
A	 MONK	 RUSHED	 INTO	 TOKAI'S	 BEDROOM,	 SHOUTING:	 'A	 FIRE,
MASTER,	A	FIRE!'	 'OH?'	SAID	TOKAI,	SITTING	UP.	'WHERE?'	'WHERE?'
EXCLAIMED	THE
MONK.	'WHY,	UNDER	THE	KITCHEN	FLOOR	--	GET	UP	AT	ONCE.'	'THE
KITCHEN,	 EH?'	 SAID	 THE	 MASTER	 DROWSILY.	 'WELL,	 TELL	 YOU
WHAT,	WHEN	IT	REACHES	THE	PASSAGEWAY,	COME	BACK	AND	LET
ME	KNOW.'
When	it	has	become	part	of	the	present,	then	let	me	know.	It	is	still	in	the	future	-
-	don't	bother	me.
TOKAI	WAS	SNORING	AGAIN	IN	NO	TIME.
This	 is	 the	 quality	 of	 an	 enlightened	 person:	 so	 relaxed	 that	 although	 a	 fire	 is
burning	 in	 the	 kitchen,	 the	 house	 is	 catching	 fire	 --	 everybody	 is	 excited	 and
running	around,	nobody	knows	what	is	going	to	happen,	everything	is	a	mess	--
he	can	relax	and	go	to	sleep	again.
He	was	snoring	in	no	time.
This	 non-tenseness	 must	 come	 out	 of,	 has	 to	 come	 out	 of,	 a	 deep	 trust	 that
whatsoever	 happens	 is	 good.	 He	 is	 not	 worried	 --	 even	 if	 he	 dies	 he	 is	 not
worried;	even	if	the	fire	comes	and	burns	him	he	is	not	worried,	because	he	is	no
more.	The	ego	is	not	there;	otherwise	there	will	be	fear,	there	will	be	worry,	there
will	be	a	future,	there	will	be	planning,	there	will	be	a	desire	to	escape,	to	save
oneself.	He	is	not	worried;	he	simply	falls	back	into	sleep,	relaxed.
There	is	no	possibility	of	relaxation	if	you	have	a	mind	and	an	ego;	the	ego	is	the
center	of	 the	mind.	You	will	be	 tense,	you	will	 remain	 tense.	How	to	relax?	Is
there	 any	way	 to	 relax?	There	 is	 no	way	unless	 understanding	 is	 there.	 If	 you
understand	the	nature	of	the	world,	the	nature	of	the	very	existence,	then	who	are
you	to	worry,	and	why	be	in	a	worried	state	continuously?
Nobody	asked	you	about	being	born,	nobody	is	going	to	ask	you	when	the	time
comes	for	you	to	be	taken	away.	Then	why	be	worried?	Birth	happened	to	you;
death	will	happen	to	you;	who	are	you	to	come	in	between?
Things	 are	 happening.	 You	 feel	 hunger,	 you	 feel	 love,	 you	 feel	 anger	 --
everything	happens	 to	you,	you	are	not	a	doer.	Nature	 takes	care.	You	eat	and
nature	 digests	 it;	 you	 need	 not	 bother	 about	 it,	 about	 how	 the	 stomach	 is
functioning,	 how	 the	 food	 is	 going	 to	 become	blood.	 If	 you	become	 too	 tense
about	it	you	will	have	ulcers	--	and	king-size	ulcers,	not	ordinary	ones.	No	need
to	worry.
The	whole	is	moving.	The	vast	ocean,	the	infinite	is	moving.	You	are	just	a	wave
in	it.
Relax,	and	let	things	be.
Once	you	know	how	to	let	go,	you	have	known	all	that	is	worth	knowing.	If	you
don't	know	how	to	let	go,	whatsoever	you	know	is	worthless,	it	is	rubbish.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Tozan's	five	pounds
7	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411070
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
102
mins
THE	 MASTER	 TOZAN	 WAS	 WEIGHING	 SOME	 FLAX	 IN	 THE
STOREROOM.
A	MONK	CAME	UP	TO	HIM	AND	ASKED:	'WHAT	IS	BUDDHA?'
TOZAN	SAID:	'THIS	FLAX	WEIGHS	FIVE	POUNDS.'
RELIGION	IS	NOT	CONCERNED	with	philosophical	questions	and	answers.
To	go	on	looking	this	way	is	stupid,	and	a	sheer	waste	of	life,	time,	energy	and
consciousness,	because	you	can	go	on	asking	and	answers	can	be	given	 --	but
from	answers	only	more	questions	will	come	out.	If	in	the	beginning	there	was
one	 question,	 in	 the	 end,	 through	 many	 answers,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 million
questions.
Philosophy	 solves	 nothing.	 It	 promises,	 but	 never	 solves	 anything	 --	 all	 those
promises	remain	unfulfilled.	Still	it	goes	on	promising.	But	the	experience	which
can	 solve	 the	 riddles	 of	 the	 mind	 cannot	 be	 attained	 through	 philosophical
speculation.
Buddha	was	absolutely	against	philosophy	--	 there	has	never	been	a	man	more
against	philosophy	than	Buddha.	Through	his	own	bitter	experience	he	came	to
understand	that	all	those	profundities	of	philosophy	are	just	superficial.	Even	the
greatest	philosopher	remains	as	ordinary	as	anyone.	No	problem	has	been	solved
by	him,	not	even	touched.
He	carries	much	knowledge,	many	answers,	but	he	remains	the	same	in	his	old
age	--	no	new	life	happens	 to	him.	And	the	crux,	 the	core	of	 the	matter	 is	 that
mind	is	a	question-raising	faculty:	 it	can	raise	any	sort	of	question,	and	 then	 it
can	befool	itself	by	answering	them.	But	YOU	are	the	questioner,	and	YOU	are
the	one	who	solves	them.
Ignorance	 creates	 questions,	 and	 ignorance	 creates	 answers	 --	 the	 same	 mind
creating	 both	 parts.	 How	 can	 a	 questioning	 mind	 come	 to	 an	 answer?	 Deep
down,	the	mind	itself	is	the	question.
So	philosophy	 tries	 to	 answer	questions	of	 the	mind,	 and	 religion	 looks	 at	 the
very	base.
The	mind	 is	 the	 question,	 and	 unless	mind	 is	 dropped	 the	 answer	will	 not	 be
revealed	to	you	--	mind	won't	allow	it,	mind	is	the	barrier,	the	wall.	When	there
is	 no	mind	 you	 are	 an	 experiencing	 being;	 when	 the	mind	 is	 there	 you	 are	 a
verbalizing	being.
In	a	small	school	it	happened:	there	was	a	very	stupid	child;	he	never	asked	any
questions	and	also	the	teacher	neglected	him.	But	one	day	he	was	very	excited
when	the	 teacher	was	explaining	a	certain	problem	of	arithmetic,	writing	some
figures	 on	 the	 board.	 The	 child	 was	 very	 excited,	 raising	 his	 hand	 again	 and
again;	he	wanted	to	ask	something.
When	 the	 teacher	 finished	with	 the	 problem,	 she	washed	 the	 figures	 from	 the
board,	and	was	very	happy	that	for	the	first	time	this	child	was	so	excited	as	to
ask	something,	and	she	said,	'I	am	happy	that	you	are	ready	to	ask	something.	Go
ahead	--	ask!'
The	child	stood,	and	he	said,	 'I	am	very	worried,	and	the	question	comes	again
and	again	to	me	but	I	couldn't	gather	the	courage	to	ask.	Today	I	have	decided	to
ask:	where	do	these	damn	figures	go	when	you	wash	them	off?'
The	question	is	very	philosophical;	all	questions	are	like	this.	Many	ask	where	a
buddha	 goes	 when	 he	 dies;	 the	 question	 is	 the	 same.	 Where	 is	 God?	 --	 the
question	is	the	same.
What	 is	 truth?	 --	 the	 question	 is	 the	 same.	 But	 you	 cannot	 feel	 the	 stupidity
hidden	in	them,	because	they	look	very	profound,	and	they	have	a	long	tradition
--	people	have	always	been	asking	them,	and	people	whom	you	think	very	great
have	been	concerned	with	them:	theorizing,	finding	answers,	creating	systems...
but	the	whole	effort	is	useless	because	only	experience	can	give	you	the	answer,
not	 thinking.	And	if	you	go	on	thinking	you	will	become	more	and	more	mad,
and	the	answer	will	still	be	far	away	--	farther	away	than	ever.
Buddha	 says:	 When	 the	 mind	 stops	 questioning,	 the	 answer	 happens.	 It	 is
because	you	are	so	much	concerned	with	questions	that	the	answer	cannot	enter
you.	 You	 are	 in	 such	 trouble,	 you	 are	 so	 disturbed,	 so	 very	 tense,	 the	 reality
cannot	 enter	 into	 you	 --	 you	 are	 shaking	 so	much	 inside,	 trembling	with	 fear,
with	 neurosis,	 with	 stupid	 questions	 and	 answers,	 with	 systems,	 philosophies,
theories;	you	are	so	filled	up.
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	 passing	 through	 a	 village	 in	 his	 car.	Many	 crowds	were
gathered	at	many	spots,	and	he	was	worried	--	what	is	the	matter?	Nobody	was
on	 the	 streets,	 everybody	 was	 gathered	 somewhere	 or	 other.	 Then	 he	 saw	 a
policeman,	and	he	stopped	him	and	asked,	 'What	 is	 the	matter?	Has	something
gone	 wrong?	 What	 has	 happened?	 I	 don't	 see	 people	 anywhere,	 working,
moving,	in	the	shops...	they	are	gathered	in	many	crowds!'
The	policeman	could	not	believe	his	ears;	he	said,	'What	are	you	asking?	There
has	 been	 an	 earthquake	 just	 now!	Many	 houses	 have	 fallen,	many	 people	 are
dead!'	 Then	 the	 policeman	 said,	 'I	 cannot	 believe	 that	 you	 couldn't	 feel	 the
earthquake!'
Nasruddin	said,	'Because	of	alcohol	I	am	always	shaking	so	much,	my	hands	are
so	jittery,	that	I	missed	it.'
If	an	earthquake	is	going	on	inside	you	continuously,	then	a	real	earthquake	will
not	 be	 capable	 of	 entering	 you.	When	 you	 are	 silent	 and	 still,	 then	 the	 reality
happens.	And	questioning	is	a	trembling	inside.	Questioning	means	doubt,	doubt
means	trembling.
Questioning	means	you	don't	trust	anything	--	everything	has	become	a	question,
and	when	 everything	 is	 a	 question	 there	will	 be	very	much	 anxiety.	Have	you
observed	yourself?	Everything	becomes	a	question.	If	you	are	miserable,	it	is	a
question:	Why?
Even	if	you	are	happy,	it	is	a	question:	Why?	You	cannot	believe	yourself	being
happy.
People	come	to	me	when	meditation	goes	deeper	and	they	have	glimpses,	 they
come	to	me	very	disturbed	because,	they	say,	something	is	happening,	and	they
cannot	 believe	 that	 it	 is	 happening	 to	THEM,	 that	 a	 bliss	 can	 happen	 --	 there
must	be	some	deception.
People	 have	 said	 to	 me,	 'Are	 you	 hypnotizing?	 --	 because	 something	 is
happening!'	 They	 cannot	 believe	 that	 they	 can	 be	 blissful,	 somebody	must	 be
hypnotizing	 them.	 They	 cannot	 believe	 that	 they	 can	 be	 silent	 --	 impossible!
'Why?	Why	am	I	silent?	Somebody	is	playing	a	trick!'
Trust	is	not	possible	for	a	questioning	mind.	Immediately	experience	is	there,	the
mind	creates	a	question:	Why?	The	flower	is	there	--	if	you	trust,	you	will	feel	a
beauty,	a	blooming	of	beauty;	but	the	mind	says:	Why?	Why	is	this	flower	called
beautiful?	What	 is	 beauty?	 --	 you	 are	 going	 astray.	You	 are	 in	 love,	 the	mind
asks:	Why,	what	is	love?
It	 is	 reported	 that	Saint	Augustine	said,	 'I	know	what	 time	is,	but	when	people
ask	me,	everything	is	lost,	I	cannot	answer.	I	know	what	love	is,	but	you	ask	me:
What	is	love?	--
and	I	am	at	a	loss,	I	cannot	answer.	I	know	what	God	is,	but	you	ask,	and	I	am	at
a	loss.'
And	 Augustine	 is	 right,	 because	 profundities	 cannot	 be	 asked,	 cannot	 be
questioned.	You	cannot	put	a	question	mark	on	a	mystery.	If	you	put	a	question
mark,	the	question	mark	becomes	more	important;	then	the	question	covers	the
whole	mystery.	And	if	you	 think	 that	when	you	have	solved	 the	question,	 then
you	will	live	the	mystery,	you	will	never	live	it.
Questioning	is	irrelevant	in	religion.	Trust	is	relevant.	Trust	means	moving	into
the	 experience,	 into	 the	 unknown,	without	 asking	much	 --	 going	 through	 it	 to
know	it.
I	tell	you	about	a	beautiful	morning	outside,	and	you	start	questioning	me	about
it	here,	walled	in	a	room,	enclosed,	and	you	would	like	your	every	question	to	be
answered	before	you	take	a	step	outside.	How	can	I	 tell	you	if	you	have	never
known	 what	 morning	 is?	 How	 can	 I	 tell	 you?	 Only	 that	 can	 be	 told	 through
words	which	you	already	know.
How	can	I	tell	you	that	there	is	light,	beautiful	light	falling	through	the	trees,	and
the	whole	sky	is	filled	with	light,	the	sun	has	risen,	if	you	have	always	lived	in
darkness?	If	your	eyes	are	accustomed	only	to	the	dark,	how	can	I	explain	to	you
that	the	sun	has	risen?
You	will	ask:	What	do	you	mean?	Are	you	trying	to	deceive	us?	We	have	lived
all	 our	 lives	 and	 we	 have	 never	 known	 anything	 like	 light.	 First	 answer	 our
questions,	and	then,	if	we	are	convinced,	we	can	come	out	with	you;	otherwise	it
seems	you	are	leading	us	astray,	astray	from	our	sheltered	life.
But	how	can	the	light	be	told	of	if	you	don't	know	about	it?	But	that's	what	you
are	 asking:	Convince	 us	 about	God,	 then	we	will	meditate,	 then	we	will	 pray,
then	we	will	search.	How	can	we	search	before	the	conviction	is	there?	How	can
we	go	on	a	search	when	we	don't	know	where	we	are	going?
This	 is	 distrust	 --	 and	 because	 of	 this	 distrust	 you	 cannot	 move	 into	 the
unknown.	 The	 known	 clings	 to	 you,	 and	 you	 cling	 to	 the	 known	 --	 and	 the
known	is	 the	dead	past.	It	may	feel	cozy	because	you	have	lived	in	it,	but	 it	 is
dead,	 it	 is	 not	 alive.	The	 alive	 is	 always	 the	unknown,	knocking	 at	 your	door.
Move	with	it.	But	how	can	you	move	without	trust?	And	even	doubting	persons
think	that	they	have	trust.
Once	 it	 happened:	Mulla	Nasruddin	 told	me	 that	he	was	 thinking	of	divorcing
his	wife.	I	asked,	'Why?	Why	so	suddenly?'
Nasruddin	said,	'I	doubt	her	fidelity	towards	me.'
So	I	told	him,	'Wait,	I	will	ask	your	wife.'
So	I	 told	his	wife,	 'Nasruddin	is	 talking	around	town	and	creating	a	rumor	that
you	are	not	faithful,	and	he	is	thinking	of	divorce,	so	what	is	the	matter?'
His	wife	said,	'This	is	too	much.	Nobody	has	ever	insulted	me	like	that	--	and	I
tell	you,	I	have	been	faithful	to	him	dozens	of	times!'
It	is	not	a	question	of	dozens	of	times	--	you	also	trust,	but	dozens	of	times.	That
trust	 cannot	 be	 very	 deep,	 it	 is	 just	 utilitarian.	You	 trust	whenever	 you	 feel	 it
pays.	 But	 whenever	 the	 unknown	 knocks	 you	 never	 trust,	 because	 you	 don't
know	whether	 it	 is	 going	 to	 pay	 or	 not.	 Faith	 and	 trust	 are	 not	 a	 question	 of
utility	--	they	are	not	utilities,	you	cannot	use	them.	If	you	want	to	use	them,	you
kill	them.	They	are	not	utilitarian	at	all.	You	can	enjoy	them,	you	can	be	blissful
about	them	--	but	they	don't	pay.
They	don't	pay	in	the	terms	of	this	world;	on	the	contrary,	the	whole	world	will
look	at	you	as	a	fool,	because	the	world	thinks	someone	wise	if	he	doubts,	 the
world	thinks	someone	wise	if	he	questions,	the	world	thinks	someone	wise	only
when	he	moves	a	step	with	conviction,	and	before	he	 is	convinced	he	will	not
move.	This	is	the	cunning	and	the	cleverness	of	the	world	--	and	the	world	calls
such	people	wise!
They	 are	 fools	 as	 far	 as	Buddha	 is	 concerned,	 because	 through	 their	 so-called
wisdom	they	are	missing	the	greatest,	and	the	greatest	cannot	be	used.	You	can
merge	with	it,	you	cannot	use	it.	It	has	no	utility,	it	is	not	a	commodity;	it	is	an
experience,	it	is	an	ecstasy.
You	cannot	sell	it,	you	cannot	make	a	business	out	of	it	--	rather,	on	the	contrary,
you	are	lost	in	it	completely.	You	will	never	be	the	same	again.	In	fact	you	can
never	come	back	-
-	 it	 is	a	point	of	no	 return:	 if	you	go,	you	go.	You	cannot	go	back,	 there	 is	no
going	back.
It	is	dangerous.
So	 only	 very	 courageous	 people	 can	 enter	 on	 the	 path.	 Religion	 is	 not	 for
cowards.	But	you	will	find	in	churches,	temples,	mosques	--	cowards:	they	have
destroyed	 the	whole	 thing.	 Religion	 is	 only	 for	 the	 very	 very	 courageous,	 for
those	who	can	 take	 the	most	dangerous	 step	 --	 and	 the	most	dangerous	 step	 is
from	the	known	towards	the	unknown;	the	most	dangerous	step	is	from	the	mind
to	no-mind,	from	questioning	to	no-questioning,	from	doubt	to	trust.
Before	we	enter	this	small	but	beautiful	anecdote	--	it	is	just	like	a	diamond:	very
small	but	very	valuable	--	a	few	more	things	are	to	be	understood.	One:	you	will
be	able	to	understand	it	only	when	you	can	take	a	jump,	when	you	can	bridge,
somehow,	 the	 known	 with	 the	 unknown,	 mind	 with	 no-mind.	 Second	 thing:
religion	 is	 not	 at	 all	 a	 question	 of	 thinking;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 RIGHT
thinking,	that	if	you	think	rightly	you	will	become	religious	--	no!	Whether	you
think	 rightly	 or	 wrongly	 you	will	 remain	 unreligous.	 People	 think	 that	 if	 you
think	rightly	you	will	become	religious;	people	 think	that	 if	you	think	wrongly
you	will	go	astray.
But	 I	 tell	you,	 if	you	 think,	you	will	go	astray	 --	 rightly	or	wrongly	 is	not	 the
point.	If	you	DON'T	think,	only	then	are	you	on	the	path.	Think	and	you	miss.
You	have	already	gone	off	on	a	long	journey,	you	are	no	longer	here,	now;	the
present	is	missed	--	and	reality	is	only	in	the	present.
With	mind,	 you	 go	 on	missing.	Mind	 has	 a	mechanism	 --	 it	moves	 in	 circles,
vicious	circles.	Try	to	observe	your	own	mind:	has	it	been	on	a	journey,	or	just
moving	in	circles?	Have	you	really	been	moving,	or	just	moving	in	a	circle?	You
repeat	 the	 same,	 again	 and	 again.	 The	 day	 before	 yesterday	 you	 were	 angry,
yesterday	 you	 were	 angry,	 today	 you	 have	 been	 angry	 --	 and	 there	 is	 every
possibility	that	tomorrow	you	are	going	to	be	angry;	and	do	you	feel	that	anger	is
different?	The	day	before	yesterday	it	was	the	same,	yesterday	it	was	the	same,
today	it	is	the	same	--	the	anger	is	the	same.	Situations	may	differ,	excuses	may
differ,	but	the	anger	is	the	same!	Are	you	moving?	Are	you	going	somewhere?	Is
there	any	progress?	Are	you	reaching	some	goal,	getting	nearer?
You	are	moving	in	a	circle,	reaching	nowhere.	The	circle	may	be	very	big,	but
how	can	you	move	if	you	move	in	a	circle?
I	overheard	once,	walking	in	the	afternoon,	I	heard	coming	from	the	inside	of	a
small	 house	 a	 child	 whining	 and	 saying,	 'Mum,	 I	 am	 fed	 up	 with	 moving	 in
circles.'
The	mother	said,	 'Either	you	shut	up,	or	 I	will	nail	your	other	foot	 to	 the	floor
also.'
But	you	are	not	yet	fed	up.	One	foot	is	nailed	to	the	earth,	and	like	the	child	you
are	moving	in	circles.	You	are	like	a	broken	gramophone	record	--	the	same	line
repeats	 itself,	 it	 goes	 on	 repeating.	 Have	 you	 ever	 listened	 to	 a	 broken
gramophone	record?
Listen!	--	it	is	like	Maharishi	Mahesh	Yogi's	transcendental	meditation,	TM:	you
repeat	one	 thing,	Ram,	Ram,	Ram,	Ram,	Ram...	 you	go	on	 repeating.	You	get
bored;	through	boredom	you	feel	sleepy.	Sleep	is	good!	After	the	sleep	you	feel
fresh	--	but	this	is	not	going	towards	truth	at	all,	 it	 is	just	getting	a	good	sleep,
through	 a	 trick.	But	 this	TM	you	 are	 doing	 continuously;	 your	whole	 life	 is	 a
TM,	repeating,	moving	in	the	same	groove	again	and	again	and	again.
Where	 are	 you	 going?	 Whenever	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 this	 you	 will	 think
simply:	What	has	been	happening?	You	will	feel	very	strange,	shocked,	that	your
whole	life	has	been	a	misuse.	You	have	not	moved	a	single	inch.	The	sooner	the
better	--	if	you	realize	this,	the	sooner	the	better,	because	through	this	realization
something	is	possible.
Why	this	repetition?	Mind	is	repetitive,	it	is	a	broken	record;	the	very	nature	of	it
is	 just	 like	 a	 broken	 record.	 You	 cannot	 change	 it.	 A	 broken	 record	 can	 be
repaired,	 mind	 cannot	 be,	 because	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 to	 repeat;
repetition	is	the	nature	of	the	mind.
At	 the	most	you	can	make	bigger	circles,	 and	with	bigger	 circles	you	can	 feel
that	 there	 is	 some	 freedom;	 with	 bigger	 circles	 you	 can	 deceive	 yourself	 that
things	are	not	repeating.
Somebody's	 circle	 is	 just	 twenty-four	hours.	 If	 you	are	 clever	you	can	make	a
circle	of	 thirty	days;	 if	you	are	even	more	clever	you	can	make	a	circle	of	one
year;	if	you	are	even	more	clever	you	can	make	a	circle	of	a	whole	life	--	but	the
circle	remains	the	same.	It	makes	no	difference.	Bigger	or	smaller,	you	move	in
the	same	groove,	you	come	back	to	the	same	point.
Because	of	 this	understanding,	Hindus	have	called	 life	a	wheel	 --	your	 life,	of
course,	not	a	buddha's	life.	A	buddha	is	one	who	has	jumped	out	of	the	wheel.
You	cling	 to	 the	wheel,	you	feel	very	secure	 there	 --	and	 the	wheel	moves	on;
from	 birth	 to	 death	 it	 completes	 a	 circle.	 Again	 birth,	 again	 death.	 The	 word
SANSAR,	the	word	Hindus	use	for	this	world,	means	the	wheel.	It	moves	in	the
same	groove.	You	come	and	go,	and	you	do	much	--	to	no	avail.	Where	do	you
miss?	You	miss	in	the	first	step.
The	nature	of	the	mind	is	repetition,	and	the	nature	of	life	is	no	repetition.	Life	is
always	new,	ALWAYS.	Newness	is	the	nature	of	life,	Tao;	nothing	is	old,	cannot
be.	Life	never	repeats,	it	simply	becomes	new	every	day,	new	every	moment	--
and	mind	is	old;	hence	mind	and	life	never	meet.	Mind	simply	repeats,	life	never
repeats	--	how	can	mind	and	life	meet?	That's	why	philosophy	never	understands
life.
The	whole	effort	of	religion	is:	how	to	drop	the	mind	and	move	into	life,	how	to
drop	 the	 repetitive	 mechanism	 and	 how	 to	 enter	 the	 evernew,	 evergreen
phenomenon	of	existence.
This	is	the	whole	point	of	this	beautiful	story,	TOZAN'S	FIVE	POUNDS.
THE	 MASTER	 TOZAN	 WAS	 WEIGHING	 SOME	 FLAX	 IN	 THE
STOREROOM.	 A	 MONK	 CAME	 UP	 TO	 HIM	 AND	 ASKED:	 'WHAT	 IS
BUDDHA?'
TOZAN	SAID:	'THIS	FLAX	WEIGHS	FIVE	POUNDS.'
Many	things:	first,	a	zen	master	is	not	a	recluse,	he	has	not	renounced	life;	rather,
on	the	contrary,	he	has	renounced	the	mind	and	entered	life.
There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 sannyasins	 in	 the	 world:	 one	 type	 renounces	 life	 and
enters	the	life	of	the	mind	completely	--	these	are	the	anti-life	people,	escaping
from	 the	 world	 towards	 the	 Himalayas,	 Tibet.	 They	 renounce	 life	 to	 be
completely	 absorbed	 in	 the	 mind	 --	 and	 they	 are	 in	 the	 majority,	 because	 to
renounce	life	is	easy;	to	renounce	mind	is	difficult.
What	is	the	difficulty?	If	you	want	to	escape	from	here,	you	can	escape!	You	can
leave	 your	 wife,	 your	 children,	 your	 house,	 your	 job	 --	 really	 you	 will	 feel
unburdened,	because	your	wife	has	become	a	burden,	the	children	have	become
a	burden,	and	the	whole	thing,	working	every	day,	earning...	you	are	fed	up!	You
will	feel	unburdened.
And	what	will	you	do	in	the	Himalayas?	The	whole	energy	will	become	mind:
you	will	 repeat	Ram,	Ram,	Ram,	you	will	 read	 the	Upanishads	and	 the	Vedas,
and	you	will	think	profound	truths.	You	will	think	about	where	the	world	came
from,	 where	 the	 world	 is	 going,	 who	 created	 the	 world,	 why	 he	 created	 the
world,	what	is	good	and	what	is	evil.
You	will	contemplate,	 think	 --	great	 things!	Your	whole	 life	energy	which	was
engaged	in	other	things	will	be	freed	from	them	now	and	will	be	absorbed	in	the
mind.	You	will	become	a	mind.
And	 people	will	 pay	 you	 respect	 because	 you	 renounced	 life.	You	 are	 a	 great
man!	 Fools	 will	 recognize	 you	 as	 a	 great	 man:	 fools	 can	 recognize	 you	 only
because	 you	 are	 the	 greatest	 of	 them	 and	 they	 will	 pay	 respect,	 they	 will
prostrate	themselves	at	your	feet	--
you	have	done	a	great	miracle!
But	what	has	happened?	You	renounced	life	just	to	be	the	mind.	You	renounced
the	whole	body	just	to	be	the	head	--	and	the	head	was	the	problem!	You	saved
the	 disease,	 and	 you	 renounced	 everything.	 Now	 the	 mind	 will	 become	 a
cancerous	growth.	 It	will	do	JAPA,	mantra,	austerities	 --	 it	will	do	everything;
and	 then	 it	 will	 become	 a	 ritual.	 That's	 why	 religious	 people	move	 in	 rituals:
ritual	means	a	repetitive	phenomenon.	Every	morning,	every	day	they	have	to	do
their	prayer:	a	Mohammedan	does	five	prayers	in	a	day	--	wherever	he	is,	he	is
to	do	the	prayer	five	times;	a	Hindu	goes	on	doing	the	same	ritual	every	day	for
his	 whole	 life;	 Christians	 have	 to	 go	 to	 church	 every	 Sunday...	 just	 a	 ritual!
Because	mind	likes	repetition,	mind	creates	a	ritual.
In	your	ordinary	life	also,	mind	creates	a	ritual.	You	love,	you	meet	friends,	you
go	 to	 parties...	 everything	 is	 a	 ritual,	 has	 to	 be	 done,	 repeated.	 You	 have	 a
program	for	all	the	seven	days,	and	the	program	is	fixed	--	and	this	has	been	so
always.	You	 have	 become	 a	 robot,	 not	 alive.	Mind	 is	 a	 robot.	 If	 you	 give	 too
much	attention	 to	 the	mind	 it	will	absorb	all	your	energy;	 it	 is	a	cancer,	 it	will
grow,	it	will	spread	all	over.
But	a	zen	master	belongs	to	the	other	category	of	sannyasin.	He	belongs	to	my
category	of	sannyasin.	A	zen	master	has	always	been	a	neo-sannyasin	--	hence	I
love	to	talk	about	them;	I	have	a	deep	affinity	with	them.	They	renounce	mind
and	 they	 live	 life;	 they	 don't	 renounce	 life	 and	 live	mind	 --	 just	 the	 contrary.
They	 simply	 renounce	mind	because	 it	 is	 repetitive	 --	 and	 they	 live	 life.	They
may	be	 living	 the	 life	of	a	householder;	 they	may	have	a	wife,	 they	may	have
children;	they	will	work	on	the	farm,	they	will	work	in	the	garden,	they	will	dig
holes,	they	will	weigh	flax	in	the	storeroom....
A	Hindu	cannot	think	why	an	enlightened	man	should	weigh	flax	--	why?	Why
such	 an	 ordinary	 activity?	 But	 a	 zen	 master	 renounces	 mind,	 lives	 life	 in	 its
totality.	He	drops	mind	and	becomes	simple	existence.
So	the	first	thing	to	remember:	if	you	renounce	mind	and	live	life	you	are	a	true
sannyasin;	if	you	renounce	life	and	live	mind	you	are	an	untrue	sannyasin,	you
are	a	pseudo-sannyasin.	And	remember	well,	to	be	pseudo	is	always	easier;	to	be
real	is	always	difficult.	To	live	with	a	wife	and	to	be	happy	is	really	difficult;	to
live	with	children	and	to	be	blissful	is	really	difficult.	To	work	in	a	shop,	in	an
office,	in	a	factory	and	to	be	ecstatic	is	the	real	difficulty.
To	 leave	 everything	 and	 just	 sit	 under	 a	 tree	 and	 feel	 happy	 is	 not	 difficult	 --
anybody	will	 feel	 that	way.	Nothing	 to	do,	you	can	be	detached;	everything	 to
do,	you	become	attached.	But	when	you	do	everything	AND	remain	unattached,
when	you	move	with	the	crowd,	in	the	world	and	yet	alone,	then	something	real
is	happening.
If	you	don't	feel	anger	when	you	are	alone,	that	is	not	the	point.	When	you	are
alone	you	will	not	feel	anger	because	anger	is	a	relationship,	it	needs	somebody
to	be	angry	towards.	Unless	you	are	mad	you	will	not	feel	anger	when	you	are
alone;	it	will	be	inside	but	it	will	not	find	any	way	to	come	out.	When	the	other
is	there,	not	to	be	angry	THEN
is	the	point.	When	you	don't	have	any	money,	any	things,	any	house	--	if	you	are
unattached,	what	is	the	difficulty	in	it?	But	when	you	have	everything	and	you
remain	unattached	--	a	beggar	in	the	palace	--	then	something	very	deep	has	been
attained.
And	 remember,	 and	 always	 keep	 it	 in	 your	 heart:	 truth,	 love,	 life,	meditation,
ecstasy,	bliss,	all	that	is	true	and	beautiful	and	good,	always	exists	as	a	paradox:
in	the	world,	and	not	of	it;	with	people,	yet	alone;	doing	everything,	and	being
inactive;	 moving	 and	 not	 moving;	 living	 an	 ordinary	 life,	 and	 yet	 not	 being
identified	with	 it;	 working	 as	 everybody	 else	 is	 working,	 yet	 remaining	 aloof
deep	down.	Being	 in	 the	world	and	not	of	 the	world,	 that	 is	 the	paradox.	And
when	 you	 attain	 this	 paradox,	 the	 greatest	 peak	 happens	 to	 you:	 the	 peak
experience.
It	is	very	easy	to	move	into	a	simple	existence	either	in	the	world	and	attached	or
out	 of	 the	world	 and	 detached	 --	 both	 are	 simple.	But	 the	 greater	 comes	 only
when	 it	 is	 a	 complex	 phenomenon.	 If	 you	 move	 to	 the	 Himalayas	 and	 are
unattached,	you	are	a	single	note	of	the	music;	if	you	live	in	the	world	and	are
attached,	again	you	are	a	single	note	of	the	music.	But	when	you	are	in	the	world
AND	beyond	 it,	and	you	carry	your	Himalaya	 in	 the	heart,	you	are	a	harmony
not	a	single	note.	An	accord	happens,	including	all	discordant	notes,	a	synthesis
of	 the	opposites,	a	bridge	between	two	banks.	And	the	highest	 is	possible	only
when	life	is	most	complex;	only	in	complexity	the	highest	happens.
If	you	want	to	be	simple	you	can	choose	one	of	the	alternatives	--	but	you	will
miss	the	complexity.	If	you	cannot	be	simple	in	complexity,	you	will	be	like	an
animal,	an	animal	or	someone	 in	 the	Himalayas	 living	a	 renounced	 life	 --	 they
don't	go	to	a	shop,	they	don't	work	in	a	factory,	they	don't	have	wives,	they	don't
have	children....
I	have	observed	many	people	who	have	renounced	life.	I	have	lived	with	them,
observed	them	deeply;	they	become	like	animals.	I	don't	see	in	them	something
of	 the	supreme	happening;	rather,	on	 the	contrary,	 they	have	fallen	back.	Their
life	is	less	tense	of	course	because	an	animal's	life	is	less	tense,	they	don't	have
worries	because	no	animal	has	worries.	In	fact	they	go	on	falling,	they	regress;
they	become	like	vegetables	--	they	vegetate.	If	you	go	to	them	you	will	see	that
they	ARE	simple,	no	complexity	exists	--	but	bring	them	back	to	the	world	and
you	will	 find	 them	more	 complex	 than	 you,	 because	when	 the	 situation	 arises
they	will	be	in	difficulty.	Then	everything	that	is	suppressed	will	come	out.	This
is	a	sort	of	suppression.	Don't	regress,	don't	move	backwards	--	go	ahead.
A	child	IS	simple,	but	don't	become	a	child,	become	mature.	Of	course	when	you
become	absolutely	mature,	 a	 childhood	happens	again,	but	 that	 is	qualitatively
different.	A	sage	is	again	a	child,	but	not	childish.	A	sage	has	again	the	flower,
the	fragrance,	the	newness	of	a	child,	but	a	deep	difference	is	also	there:	a	child
has	many	 repressed	 things	 in	 him	 and	whenever	 the	 opportunity	 is	 given	 they
will	come	out	.	Sex	will	come	out,	anger	will	come	out	--	he	will	move	into	the
world	and	become	attached	and	lost.	He	has	those	seeds	within	him.	A	sage	has
no	seeds,	he	cannot	be	lost.	He	cannot	be	lost	because	he	is	no	more.	He	carries
nothing	within	him.
Zen	 masters	 have	 lived	 a	 very	 ordinary	 life	 --	 very	 otherworldly,	 but	 in	 the
world.	They	are	more	beautiful	people	than	any	Hindu	sannyasin,	they	are	more
beautiful	 than	any	Catholic	monk.	 In	 fact,	nothing	 like	zen	exists	on	 the	earth,
because	they	have	attained	to	the	highest	paradox.
THE	 MASTER	 TOZAN	 WAS	 WEIGHING	 SOME	 FLAX	 IN	 THE
STOREROOM.
An	enlightened	person,	a	buddha,	weighing	flax?	You	would	have	simply	turned
away.
Why	 ask	 any	 question	 of	 this	 man?	 --	 if	 he	 knew	 anything	 he	 would	 not	 be
weighing	flax.
Because	 you	 have	 a	 concept	 of	 a	 saint,	 a	 sage,	 as	 something	 extraordinary,
beyond	you,	somewhere	in	the	sky	sitting	on	a	golden	throne,	you	cannot	reach
him.	He	is	very	different	--	whatsoever	you	are,	he	is	just	the	opposite.
A	 zen	 master	 is	 not	 that	 way.	 He	 is	 in	 no	 way	 extraordinary	 --	 and	 yet
extraordinary.	He	lives	the	very	ordinary	life	just	like	you,	and	yet	he	is	not	you.
He	is	not	somewhere	in	the	sky,	he	is	HERE,	but	still	beyond	you.	Weighing	flax
--	but	just	the	same	as	Buddha	under	a	bodhi	tree.	In	India	nobody	can	conceive
of	Mahavira	weighing	flax	or	Buddha	weighing	flax	--	impossible!	It	would	look
almost	 profane.	 What	 is	 Buddha	 doing	 in	 a	 storeroom?	 Then	 what	 is	 the
difference	between	you	and	him?	You	also	weigh	flax,	he	is	also	weighing	flax,
so	what	is	the	difference?
The	difference	is	not	outward	--	and	outward	differences	don't	make	any	change.
You	 can	 go	 and	 sit	 under	 a	 bodhi	 tree	 --	 nothing	will	 happen.	And	when	 the
inside	 changes,	 why	 be	 bothered	 with	 the	 outside?	 Carry	 on	 whatsoever	 you
were	doing.	Carry	on	whatsoever	is	given	to	you.	Carry	on	whatsoever	the	whole
wills.
THE	 MASTER	 TOZAN	 WAS	 WEIGHING	 SOME	 FLAX	 IN	 THE
STOREROOM.
A	MONK	CAME	UP	TO	HIM	AND	ASKED:	'WHAT	IS	BUDDHA?'
In	Buddhism	that	is	the	greatest	question	to	be	asked	--	just	like	what	is	truth?	or
what	is	God?	--	because	in	Buddhism	God	is	not	a	concept,	Buddha	is	God;	no
other	god	exists.
Buddha	is	 the	highest	reality,	 the	highest	peak;	nothing	is	beyond	it.	The	truth,
God,	the	absolute,	Brahma	--	whatsoever	name	you	give	to	it,	Buddha	is	THAT.
So	when	a	monk	asks,	'What	is	Buddha?'	he	is	asking	what	is	truth?	what	is	Tao?
what	 is	Brahma?	what	 is	 that	 one	 among	 the	many?	what	 is	 the	basic	 reality?
what	is	the	very	central	core	of	existence?	--	he	is	asking	all	that.
TOZAN	SAID:	'THIS	FLAX	WEIGHS	FIVE	POUNDS.'
Absurd.	 Irrelevant.	 It	 seems	 to	 be	 completely	 pointless	 because	 the	 man	 was
asking,
'What	is	Buddha?'	And	this	Tozan	seems	to	be	a	madman.	He	is	not	talking	about
Buddha	at	all,	he	has	not	answered	the	question	at	all	--	and	yet	he	has	answered.
This	 is	 the	 paradox.	 If	 you	 start	 living	 this	 paradox	 your	 life	 will	 become	 a
symphony;	it	will	become	a	higher	and	higher	synthesis	of	all	the	opposites.	In
YOU,	then,	all	opposites	will	dissolve.
TOZAN	SAID:	'THIS	FLAX	WEIGHS	FIVE	POUNDS.'
One	thing	he	said:	that	this	very	ordinary	life	is	Buddha,	this	very	ordinary	life	is
truth,	this	very	ordinary	life	is	Brahma,	is	the	kingdom	of	God.	There	is	no	other
life	except	this;	there	is	no	that,	only	THIS	exists.	Hindus	say,	'THAT	exists,	this
is	illusion';	Tozan	said,	 'This	is	true,	that	is	illusion.	This	very	moment	is	truth,
and	don't	ask	for	any	extraordinary	thing.'
Seekers	always	ask	for	something	extraordinary,	because	ego	feels	fulfilled	only
when	 something	 extraordinary	 is	 given.	 You	 come	 to	 a	 master	 and	 you	 ask
questions,	and	if	he	says	such	things	you	will	think	he	is	mad,	or	joking,	or	not	a
man	worthy	to	be	asked.
You	will	simply	escape.	Why?	--	because	he	shatters	your	ego	completely.	You
were	asking	Buddha,	you	were	desiring	Buddha,	you	would	like	to	be	a	buddha
yourself;	hence	the	question.	And	this	man	says:	What	nonsense	you	are	asking!
Not	even	worth	answering!	This	flax	weighs	five	pounds.	This	is	more	important
than	any	buddha.	This	moment,	this	flax,	is	the	whole	of	existence.	In	this	five
pounds	of	flax	is	centered	the	whole	being	of	the	world	--	here	and	now.	Don't
go	astray;	don't	ask	philosophical	questions.	Look	at	this	moment.
Tozan	did	a	wonderful	thing.	Tozan	is	a	buddha.	Tozan	weighing	flax	is	Buddha
weighing	flax	--	and	reality	is	one!	Tozan	is	Buddha,	and	the	flax	is	also	Buddha;
and	in	that	moment	it	weighed	five	pounds.	That	was	the	truth,	 the	facticity	of
the	moment.	But	if	you	are	filled	with	philosophy	you	will	think	this	man	is	mad
and	you	will	go	away.
This	happened	to	Arthur	Koestler,	one	of	the	keenest	intellects	in	the	West.	He
missed	 the	 whole	 point	 completely.	 When	 he	 went	 to	 Japan	 to	 study	 zen	 he
thought:	These	people	are	simply	mad	--	or	else	 they	are	 joking,	not	serious	at
all.	He	wrote	a	book,	Against	 zen.	 It	 looks	absurd.	 It	 is.	He	 is	wrong,	and	yet
right.	It	IS	absurd.	If	you	don't	know	the	language	of	zen	it	is	absurd;	if	you	are
identified	too	much	with	logical	thinking,	it	is	absurd.	It	is	illogical	--	what	more
illogical	thing	can	you	find:	somebody	asking,	'What	is	Buddha?'	and	somebody
answering,	'This	flax	weighs	five	pounds'?
You	ask	about	the	sky	and	I	answer	about	the	earth;	you	ask	about	God	and	I	talk
about	 a	 rock	 --	 no	meeting.	And	 yet	 there	 is	 a	meeting	 --	 but	 very	 perceptive
eyes	are	needed,	not	intellectually	keen	but	feelingfully	perceptive;	not	identified
with	reasoning	but	waiting	to	look,	watching,	witnessing	what	is	happening;	not
already	prejudiced,	but	open.
Koestler	is	prejudiced...	a	very	keen	intellect,	can	work	out	things	very	logically
in	 the	 tradition	of	Aristotle,	but	does	not	know	anything,	does	not	know	at	 all
that	there	exists	an	absolutely	non-Aristotelian	world	of	zen,	where	two	plus	two
are	 not	 necessarily	 four;	 sometimes	 they	 are	 five,	 sometimes	 they	 are	 three	 --
anything	 is	 possible.	No	 possibility	 is	 destroyed,	 all	 possibilities	 remain	 open,
infinitely	open.	And	every	time	two	and	two	meet,	something	else	happens.	The
world	remains	open,	unknown;	you	cannot	exhaust	it.
Look:	superficially	this	man	is	mad,	but	deeply	you	cannot	find	a	saner	man	than
this	Tozan.	But	Koestler	will	miss,	and	Koestler	is	a	keen	intellect,	very	logical;
only	a	few	people	can	compete	with	him	in	keen	intelligence,	but	he	misses.	In
this	world	intelligence	is	a	means,	 in	that	world	intelligence	becomes	a	barrier.
Don't	be	too	wise,	otherwise	you	will	miss	the	real	wisdom.	Look	at	this	Tozan
without	 any	 prejudice,	 without	 any	 mind	 of	 your	 own.	 Simply	 look	 at	 the
phenomenon,	what	is	happening?
A	 disciple	 monk	 asks,	 'What	 is	 Buddha?'	 --	 and	 a	 zen	 master	 lives	 in	 the
moment,	he	is	always	here	and	now,	he	is	always	at	home	--	whenever	you	come
you	 will	 find	 him	 there,	 he	 is	 never	 absent	 from	 there	 --	 he	 remains	 in	 this
moment.	The	trees,	the	sky,	the	sun,	the	rocks,	the	birds,	the	people	--	the	whole
world	is	concentrated	in	this	moment!
This	moment	is	vast.	It	 is	not	just	a	tick	of	your	clock;	this	moment	is	infinite,
because	 in	 this	moment,	everything	 is.	Millions	of	stars,	many	new	stars	being
born,	many	old	stars	going	to	die,	this	whole	infinite	expanse	of	time	and	space
meets	 in	 this	 moment.	 So	 how	 to	 indicate	 this	 moment?	 --	 and	 Tozan	 was
weighing	flax	--	how	to	indicate	this	moment,	how	to	bring	this	monk	here	and
now?	How	to	put	his	philosophic	inquiry	aside?	How	to	shock	him	and	awaken
him	to	this	moment,	and	in	this	moment?
This	 is	 a	 shock	 --	 because	 he	must	 have	 been	 inquiring	 about	 Buddha	 in	 his
mind,	 thinking:	 'What	 is	 the	 reality	of	 a	buddha?	What	 is	 truth?'	And	he	must
have	been	expecting	some	profound	answer,	something	very	superb:	'This	master
is	 enlightened,	 so	 he	must	 say	 something	 very	 valuable.'	He	 could	 never	 have
expected	 that	 it	was	going	 to	 be	 such	 an	ordinary	 thing,	 such	 an	ordinary	 and
absurd	answer.	He	must	have	been	shocked.
In	that	shock	you	can	be	awake	for	a	moment,	a	fraction	of	a	moment.	When	you
are	 shocked	 thinking	 cannot	 continue.	 If	 the	 answer	 is	 anything	 relevant,
thinking	can	continue,	because	that	is	what	mind	asks	--	relevancy.	If	something
is	said	which	is	relevant	to	the	question,	thinking	can	continue;	if	something	is
said	which	is	absolutely	absurd,	discontinuous,	is	not	to	the	point	at	all,	the	mind
cannot	continue.	Suddenly	the	mind	is	shocked,	and	the	continuity	broken.	Soon
it	will	start	again,	because	the	mind	will	say:	This	is	absurd!
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	 being	 analyzed	 by	 a	 psychiatrist.	After	many	months	 of
analysis,	many	meetings,	the	psychiatrist	said,	as	Mulla	lay	on	the	couch:	'This	is
what	I	feel,	this	is	what	I	conclude:	you	need	to	fall	in	love,	you	need	a	beautiful
feminine	object.	Love	is	your	need.'
Mulla	said,	'Between	me	and	you,	don't	you	think	love	is	silly?'
The	psychiatrist	said,	'Between	me	and	you?	--	it	would	be	absurd!'
For	a	moment	he	must	have	been	shocked,	but	only	for	a	moment.	If	you	cannot
find	 relevancy,	 the	 mind	 will	 say	 immediately:	 This	 is	 absurd!	 If	 you	 find
relevancy,	 the	 continuity	 continues.	 If	 there	 is	 something	 absurd,	 for	 a	 split
second	there	is	a	discontinuity,	the	mind	is	not	able	to	cope	with	what	has	been
said.	But	immediately	it	recovers,	it	will	say	it	is	absurd;	continuity	restarts.
But	 the	 shock,	 and	 the	 assertion	 of	 the	 mind	 that	 it	 is	 absurd,	 are	 not
simultaneous;	there	is	a	gap.	In	that	gap	satori	is	possible.	In	that	gap	you	can	be
awakened,	 you	 can	 have	 a	 glimpse.	 It	 would	 have	 been	 wonderful	 if	 the
opportunity	could	have	been	used;	wonderful	 is	 this	man	Tozan,	 incomparable.
You	cannot	find	such	a	man	anywhere	else.
And	what	a	spontaneous	answer!	Not	prefabricated,	not	in	any	way	readymade;
nobody	had	said	that	ever	before,	and	there	is	no	point	in	saying	it	now.	Nobody
has	ever	said,
'THIS	FLAX	WEIGHS	FIVE	POUNDS'	in	answer	to	a	question	about	Buddha:
'What	is	Buddha?'
Tozan	is	spontaneous,	he	does	not	answer	from	the	memory;	otherwise	he	knows
the	scriptures,	he	was	a	great	scholar	before	he	became	enlightened....	He	knows
by	heart	 and	has	 chanted	 all	Buddha's	words,	 he	has	 discussed	philosophy	 for
many	years;	he	knows	what	the	monk	is	asking,	he	knows	what	he	is	expecting	-
-	but	he	is	simply	spontaneous,	weighing	flax.
Just	 try	 to	 imagine	 and	 see	 Tozan	weighing	 flax.	 In	 that	moment	 what	 could
indicate	 more	 spontaneously	 the	 reality	 of	 the	 moment,	 the	 facticity	 of
existence?	He	simply	said,
'THIS	FLAX	WEIGHS	FIVE	POUNDS'	--	and	finished!	He	doesn't	say	anything
about	Buddha;	there	is	no	need.	This	is	buddhahood.	This	being	spontaneous	is
buddhahood.
This	being	true	to	the	moment	is	buddhahood.
What	he	says	is	just	part	of	it;	what	he	leaves	unsaid	is	the	whole.	If	you	awaken
in	 that	moment	you	will	 see	Buddha	weighing	flax	 --	and	 the	 flax	weighs	 five
pounds.	What	is	he	indicating?	He	is	not	saying	much,	but	he	is	showing	much,
and	 by	 not	 saying	 much	 he	 is	 creating	 a	 possibility:	 you	 may,	 for	 a	 single
moment,	be	aware	of	the	whole	existence	that	is	there	concentrated	in	this	Tozan.
Whenever	 a	 buddha	 happens	 in	 the	world,	 the	whole	 existence	 finds	 a	 center
there.	Then	all	 the	 rivers	 fall	 in	him,	and	all	 the	mountains	bow	down	 to	him,
and	all	 the	stars	move	around	him.	Whenever	 there	 is	an	enlightened	man,	 the
whole	existence	converges	on	his	being.	He	becomes	the	center.
Tozan	 weighing	 flax	 in	 that	 moment	 was	 the	 buddha:	 the	 whole	 existence
converging,	flowing	into	Tozan,	and	Tozan	weighing	flax	--	and	the	flax	weighed
five	pounds.	This	moment	is	so	real:	if	you	awaken,	if	you	open	your	eyes,	satori
is	possible.	Tozan	is	spontaneous;	he	has	no	readymade	answers;	he	responds	to
the	moment.
Next	 time	 if	you	come	 to	Tozan	 the	same	answer	cannot	be	given,	will	not	be
given,	because	Tozan	may	not	be	weighing,	or	may	be	weighing	something	else,
or	may	 be	 even	weighing	 flax,	 but	 the	 flax	may	 not	weigh	 five	 pounds.	Next
time	 the	 answer	will	 be	 different.	 If	 you	 come	 again	 and	 again,	 each	 time	 the
answer	will	be	different.	This	is	the	difference	between	a	scholar	and	a	man	of
knowledge.	A	scholar	has	fixed	answers.	If	you	come,	whenever	you	come,	he
has	a	readymade	answer	for	you.	You	ask,	and	he	will	give	you	the	answer,	and
the	answer	will	always	be	the	same	--	and	you	will	feel	he	is	very	consistent.	He
is.
There	was	once	a	case	against	Mulla	Nasruddin	in	the	court,	and	the	judge	asked
his	age.
He	said,	'Forty	years.'
The	 judge	 looked	 surprised	 and	 he	 said,	 'Nasruddin,	 four	 years	 ago	 you	were
here,	and	I	asked	that	 time	also	what	 is	your	age,	and	you	told	me	forty	years.
Now	this	is	absolutely	inconsistent	--	how	can	you	still	be	forty?'
Nasruddin	said,	 'I	am	a	man	of	consistency.	Once	forty,	 I	 remain	forty	always.
When	 I	 have	 answered	 once,	 I	 have	 answered	 for	 ever!	 You	 cannot	 lead	 me
astray.	I	am	forty,	and	whenever	you	ask	you	will	get	 the	same	answer.	I	am	a
man	who	is	always	consistent.'
A	consistent	man	is	dead.	If	you	are	dead,	only	then	can	you	remain	forty.	Then
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 change.	 A	 dead	man	 never	 grows	 --	 and	 you	 cannot	 find
persons	more	dead	than	pundits,	scholars,	men	of	information.
An	enlightened	man	lives	in	the	moment:	you	ask,	he	replies	--	but	he	has	got	no
fixed	replies.	He	IS	the	reply.	So	whatsoever	happens	in	that	moment	happens;
he	does	not	manipulate	it,	he	does	not	think	about	it,	about	what	you	are	asking.
You	simply	ask,	and	his	whole	being	responds.	In	this	moment	it	happened	that
Tozan	was	weighing	flax,	and	in	this	moment	it	happened	that	the	flax	weighed
five	pounds,	and	when	this	monk	asked,
'What	 is	 Buddha?'	 in	 Tozan's	 being	 five	 pounds	 was	 the	 reality.	 He	 was
weighing;	 in	 Tozan's	 being	 five	 pounds	 was	 the	 fact.	 He	 simply	 said:	 Five
pounds	of	flax.
Looks	 absurd	 on	 the	 surface.	 If	 you	 go	 deeper,	 deeper,	 you	 find	 a	 relevancy
which	is	not	a	logical	relevancy,	and	you	find	a	consistency	which	is	not	that	of
the	mind,	but	of	the	being.	Understand,	try	to	understand	the	difference.	If	next
time	you	come	and	Tozan	is	digging	a	hole	in	the	garden,	and	you	ask,	'What	is
Buddha?'	--	he	will	give	you	the	answer.	He	will	say,	'Look	at	this	hole,'	he	will
say,	'It	is	ready;	now	the	tree	can	be	planted.'	Next	time,	if	you	come	again,	and
if	he	is	going	for	a	walk	with	his	walking	stick,	he	may	say,	'This	walking	stick.'
Whatsoever	is	in	the	moment	will	be	the	reply,	because	a	buddha	lives	moment
to	moment	--	and	if	you	start	living	moment	to	moment,	you	become	a	buddha.
This	is	the	answer:	live	moment	to	moment	and	you	become	a	buddha.	A	buddha
is	one	who	lives	moment	to	moment,	who	does	not	live	in	the	past,	who	does	not
live	in	the	future,	who	lives	here	now.	Buddhahood	is	a	quality	of	being	present
here	 and	 now	 --	 and	 buddhahood	 is	 not	 a	 goal,	 you	 need	 not	 wait,	 you	 can
become	just	here	and	now.
Talking,	 I	 am	 a	 buddha,	 because	 only	 talk	 is	 happening.	 If	 only	 listening	 is
happening	there	at	the	other	end	with	you,	you	are	a	buddha	in	listening.	Try	to
catch	 a	 glimpse	 of	 the	 moment,	 this	 moment.	 This	 moment	 Tozan	 is	 not
weighing	flax;	Tozan	is	talking	to	you.	This	moment	you	have	not	asked,	'What
is	Buddha?'	but	the	question	is	there	whether	you	ask	it	or	not.	The	question	goes
around	 and	 around	 in	 the	mind:	What	 is	 truth?	what	 is	Buddha?	what	 is	Tao?
Whether	you	ask	it	or	not	it	is	the	question.	YOU
are	the	question.
In	 this	moment	you	can	awake.	You	can	 look,	you	can	shake	 the	mind	a	 little,
create	 a	 discontinuity,	 and	 suddenly	 you	 understand...	 what	 Arthur	 Koestler
misses.	 If	 you	 are	 also	 too	 intelligent,	 you	will	miss.	Don't	 be	 too	 intelligent,
don't	try	to	be	too	clever,	because	there	is	a	wisdom	which	is	attained	by	those
who	become	 fools;	 there	 is	 a	wisdom	which	 is	 attained	by	 those	who	become
like	madmen;	there	is	a	wisdom	which	is	attained	only	when	you	lose	your	mind.
Tozan	 is	 beautiful.	 If	 you	 can	 see,	 and	 if	 you	 can	 see	 that	 the	 answer	 is	 not
absurd,	 you	 have	 seen	 it,	 you	 have	 understood	 it.	 But	 if	 the	 understanding
remains	 intellectual	 it	will	not	be	of	much	use.	 I	have	explained	 it	 to	you,	you
have	 understood	 it,	 but	 if	 the	 understanding	 remains	 intellectual	 --	 you
understand	with	the	mind	--	again	you	miss.
Koestler	may	be	against	zen	and	you	may	be	for	it,	but	you	both	miss.	It	is	not	a
question	of	being	for	or	against;	it	is	a	question	of	a	nonmental	understanding.	If
it	 arises	 from	 your	 heart,	 if	 you	 feel	 it,	 not	 think	 it,	 if	 it	 touches	 your	 whole
being,	if	it	penetrates,	is	not	just	a	verbal	thing,	not	a	philosophy,	but	becomes	an
experience,	it	will	transform	you.
I	am	talking	about	these	stories	just	to	shock	you	out	of	your	mind,	just	to	bring
you	down	a	little	towards	the	heart	--	and	if	you	are	ready,	then	still	further	down
towards	the	navel.
The	 further	 down	 you	 go,	 the	 deeper	 you	 reach...	 and,	 ultimately,	 depth	 and
height	are	the	same	thing.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Deaf,	dumb	and	blind
8	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411080
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
114
mins
GENSHA	 COMPLAINED	 TO	 HIS	 FOLLOWERS	 ONE	 DAY:	 'OTHER
MASTERS
ARE	ALWAYS	CARRYING	ON	ABOUT	THE	NECESSITY	OF	SAVING
EVERYONE	--	BUT	SUPPOSE	YOU	MEET	UP	WITH	SOMEONE	WHO	IS
DEAF,	DUMB	AND	BLIND:	HE	COULDN'T	SEE	YOUR	GESTURES,	HEAR
YOUR
PREACHING,	OR,	FOR	THAT	MATTER,	ASK	QUESTIONS.	UNABLE	TO
SAVE
HIM,	YOU'D	PROVE	YOURSELF	A	WORTHLESS	BUDDHIST.'
TROUBLED	BY	THESE	WORDS,	ONE	OF	GENSHA'S	DISCIPLES	WENT
TO
CONSULT	 THE	 MASTER	 UMMON	 WHO,	 LIKE	 GENSHA,	 WAS	 A
DISCIPLE	OF
SEPPO.'BOW	PLEASE,'	SAID	UMMON.
THE	MONK,	THOUGH	TAKEN	BY	SURPRISE,	OBEYED	THE	MASTER'S
COMMAND	--	THEN	STRAIGHTENED	UP	IN	EXPECTATION	OF	HAVING
HIS
QUERY	ANSWERED.
BUT	INSTEAD	OF	AN	ANSWER,	HE	GOT	A	STAFF	THRUST	AT	HIM.	HE
LEAPT
BACK.'WELL,'	SAID	UMMON,	'YOU'RE	NOT	BLIND.	NOW	APPROACH.'
THE	MONK	DID	AS	HE	WAS	BIDDEN.	'GOOD,'	SAID	UMMON,	'YOU'RE
NOT
DEAF	 EITHER.	 WELL,	 UNDERSTAND?'	 'UNDERSTAND	 WHAT	 SIR?'
SAID	THE
MONK.'AH,	YOU'RE	NOT	DUMB	EITHER,'	SAID	UMMON.
ON	HEARING	THESE	WORDS	THE	MONK	AWOKE	AS	FROM	A	DEEP
SLEEP.
JESUS	USED	TO	SAY	to	his	disciples,	and	not	only	once	but	many	 times,	 'If
you	have	eyes	--	look!	If	you	have	ears,	then	hear	me!'	They	had	eyes	just	like
you	and	they	had	ears	just	like	you.	Then	Jesus	must	have	meant	something	else
--	not	these	ears,	not	these	eyes.
There	is	a	different	way	of	seeing	the	world	and	a	different	way	of	hearing	--	a
different	way	of	being.	When	you	have	 that	different	quality	of	seeing,	God	 is
seen;	when	you	have	that	different	way	of	hearing,	God	is	heard;	and	when	you
have	that	different	quality	of	being,	you	become	God	yourself.	As	you	are,	you
are	deaf,	dumb,	blind	--	almost	dead.
Deaf	to	God,	dumb	to	God,	blind	to	God,	dead	to	God.
Nietzsche	has	declared	that	God	is	dead.	In	fact,	when	YOU	are	dead,	how	can
God	be	alive	to	you?	God	is	dead	because	you	are	dead.	You	can	know	God	only
when	you	live	abundantly,	when	your	life	becomes	an	overflowing,	when	it	is	a
flood.	In	that	overflowing	moment	of	bliss,	life	and	vitality,	for	the	first	time	you
know	what	God	is,	because	God	is	the	most	luxurious	overflowing	phenomenon.
God	 is	 not	 a	necessity	 in	 this	world.	Scientific	 laws	 are	 a	necessity	 --	without
them	 the	 world	 cannot	 be.	 God	 is	 not	 a	 necessity	 that	 way.	Without	 him	 the
world	 can	 be,	 but	 it	 will	 be	 worthless.	 Without	 him	 you	 can	 exist,	 but	 your
existence	will	be	just	a	vegetable	existence.	Without	him	you	can	vegetate,	you
cannot	be	really	alive.
God	is	not	a	necessity	--	you	can	be	there,	but	your	being	there	will	not	be	of	any
meaning,	it	will	not	carry	any	meaning	at	all.	It	will	have	no	poetry,	it	will	have
no	 song,	 it	 will	 have	 no	 dance	 to	 it.	 It	 will	 not	 be	 a	 mystery.	 It	 may	 be	 an
arithmetic,	it	may	be	a	business,	but	it	cannot	be	a	love	affair.
Without	God	all	that	is	beautiful	disappears,	because	the	beautiful	comes	only	as
an	overflowing	--	it	is	a	luxury.	Watch	a	tree:	if	you	have	not	watered	it	well,	if
the	 tree	 is	not	getting	nourishment	 from	the	soil,	 the	 tree	can	exist	but	 flowers
will	not	come.
Existence	will	be	there,	but	futile!	It	would	have	been	better	not	to	be,	because	it
will	be	a	constant	frustration.	Flowers	come	to	the	tree	only	when	the	tree	has	so
much	that	it	can	share,	and	the	tree	has	so	much	nourishment	that	it	can	flower	--
flowering	is	a	luxury!
The	tree	has	so	much	that	it	can	afford	it.
And	 I	 tell	 you	 that	 God	 is	 the	most	 luxurious	 thing	 in	 the	world.	 God	 is	 not
necessary	--
you	can	live	without	him.	You	can	live	very	well,	but	you	will	miss	something,
you	will	feel	an	emptiness	in	the	heart.	You	will	be	more	like	a	wound	than	like
an	alive	force.
You	will	suffer;	there	cannot	be	any	ecstasy	in	your	life.
But	 how	 to	 find	 this	meaning,	 this	 ecstasy?	You	will	 need	 a	 different	way	 of
looking.
Right	now	you	are	blind.	Of	course	you	can	see	matter,	but	matter	is	a	necessity.
You	can	see	the	tree	very	well	but	you	miss	the	flowers;	and	even	if	you	can	see
the	 flowers,	you	miss	 the	 fragrance.	Your	eyes	can	see	only	 the	surface	 --	you
miss	the	center,	the	very	core.	Hence	Jesus	goes	on	saying	that	you	are	a	blind
man,	you	are	deaf	--	and	you	have	to	be	dumb,	because	if	you	have	not	seen	him
what	 is	 there	 to	 say?	 If	 you	 have	 not	 heard	 him	what	 is	 there	 to	 convey	 and
communicate?	 If	 that	poetry	has	not	happened	what	 is	 there	 to	 sing?	You	may
make	gestures	from	your	mouth,	but	nothing	will	come	out	of	it	because	nothing
is	there	in	the	first	place.
When	a	man	like	Jesus	speaks	he	is	POSSESSED;	something	greater	 than	him
speaks	 through	 him.	 When	 a	 man	 like	 Buddha	 speaks	 he	 is	 not	 Gautam
Siddhartha	who	was	 born	 a	 son	 to	 a	 king;	 no,	 he	 is	 no	 longer	 that.	 He	 is	 no
longer	 the	 body	 you	 can	 see	 and	 touch,	 he	 is	 not	 even	 the	mind	 that	 you	 can
comprehend	 and	 understand.	 Something	 of	 the	 beyond	 has	 entered,	 something
which	 is	 not	 of	 time	 and	 space	 has	 come	 into	 time	 and	 space.	 A	miracle	 has
happened.	 HE	 is	 not	 speaking	 to	 you,	 he	 is	 just	 a	 vehicle;	 something	 else	 is
flowing	through	him,	he	is	just	a	medium.	He	carries	to	you	something	from	the
unknown	 shore.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 sing	 --	 when	 ecstasy	 has	 happened.
Otherwise	you	can	go	on	singing,	but	it	will	be	superficial.	You	may	make	much
noise,	 but	 noise	 is	 not	 speaking.	 You	may	 use	 many	 words,	 but	 they	 will	 be
empty.	You	may	talk	too	much,	but	in	fact	how	can	you	TALK?
When	it	happened	to	Mohammed,	the	first	day	when	he	came	in	contact	with	the
divine,	he	fell	on	the	ground,	started	shivering	and	shaking	and	perspiring	--	and
the	morning	was	as	cold	as	this	morning.	He	was	alone,	and	from	the	very	pores
of	the	soles	of	his	feet	he	started	perspiring;	he	was	afraid.	Something	unknown
had	touched	him	and	he	was	scared	to	death.	He	came	running	home	and	went	to
bed.	His	wife	was	very	afraid.
Many	 blankets	were	 put	 on	 him	 but	 still	 he	 continued	 shivering	 and	 his	wife
asked,	'What	has	happened?	Your	eyes	look	dazed	--	and	why	don't	you	speak?
Why	have	you	gone	dumb?'
And	Mohammed	is	reported	to	have	said,	'For	the	first	time	something	is	there	to
say.	Up	to	now	I	have	been	a	dumb	man;	there	was	nothing	to	say,	I	was	making
gestures	from	the	mouth.	I	was	talking	but	only	my	lips	were	moving,	there	was
nothing	to	say.	Now	there	is	something	I	have	to	say	--	that's	why	I	am	trembling
so	much.	I	am	pregnant	with	the	unknown,	with	the	divine.	Something	is	going
to	take	birth.'
And	this	brings	suffering,	as	every	mother	knows.	If	you	have	to	give	birth	to	a
child	you	have	to	pass	through	many	painful	days,	and	when	the	birth	happens
there	is	much	suffering.	When	life	enters,	it	is	a	struggle.
For	 three	 days,	 it	 is	 said,	Mohammed	 remained	 in	 his	 bed,	 absolutely	 dumb.
Then,	by	and	by,	just	as	a	small	child	starts	talking,	he	started	talking.	And	then
the	Koran	was	born.
You	are	dumb.	You	may	be	saying	too	many	things,	but	remember	--	you	talk	too
much	just	to	hide	that	dumbness.	You	talk	not	to	communicate,	you	talk	just	to
hide	 --	 to	 hide	 the	 fact	 that	 you	 are	 dumb.	 Next	 time	 you	 start	 talking	 with
someone,	WATCH:	why	are	you	 talking?	Why	are	you	 so	verbal?	What	 is	 the
need?	 Suddenly	 you	will	 become	 aware	 that	 the	 fear	 is,	 if	 I	 remain	 quiet	 the
other	will	 think	I	am	dumb.	So	you	 talk	 just	 to	hide	 this	 fact	 --	and	you	know
there	is	nothing	to	say,	yet	you	go	on	talking.
I	once	stayed	with	a	family	and	I	was	sitting	with	the	man	of	the	house,	my	host,
when	the	son	came	in,	a	small	child,	and	he	asked	his	father	if	he	would	answer
a	few	questions.	The	father	said,	'I	am	engaged;	you	go	and	ask	your	mother.'
The	child	said,	'But	I	don't	want	to	know	that	much!	Because	if	she	starts	talking
there	is	no	end	to	it,	and	I	have	to	do	my	homework	--	and	I	don't	want	to	know
THAT	much!'
People	go	on	talking	and	talking	and	talking	and	without	knowing	why	they	are
talking	--
for	what?	What	is	there	to	convey?	It	is	just	to	hide	their	dumbness.	People	go
on	moving	from	here	to	there,	from	this	town	to	that;	they	go	on	traveling,	and
go	 for	 holidays	 to	 the	Himalayas	 and	 to	 Switzerland	 --	why	 all	 this	 traveling,
moving?	They	want	to	feel	they	are	alive.
But	 movement	 is	 not	 life.	 Of	 course	 life	 has	 a	 very	 deep	 movement,	 but
movement	is	not	life.	You	can	go	on	moving	from	one	town	to	another,	and	you
can	cover	the	whole	earth,	but	that	movement	is	not	life.	Life	is	of	course	a	very
subtle	movement	--	the	movement	from	one	state	of	consciousness	to	another.
When	 people	 get	 stuck	 they	 start	 moving	 outwardly.	 Now	 the	 American	 has
become	the	bona	fide	traveler;	he	travels	all	over	the	world	from	this	corner	to
that	--	because	the	American	consciousness	is	stuck	somewhere	so	badly	that	if
you	remain	in	one	place	you	will	feel	you	have	gone	dead.	So	move!	Move	from
one	wife	to	another,	move	from	one	job	to	another,	move	from	one	neighborhood
to	another,	move	from	one	town	to	another	-
-	never	in	the	history	of	man	has	this	happened.	In	America	the	average	time	for
a	person	to	stay	 in	a	 town	is	 three	years;	people	move	on	within	 three	years	--
and	this	is	just	the	average,	there	are	people	who	are	moving	every	month.	They
go	on	changing	--	dresses,	cars,	houses,	wives,	husbands	--	everything.
I	have	heard	that	once	one	Hollywood	actress	was	introducing	her	child	to	a	new
husband.	She	said,	'Now,	meet	your	new	father.'
The	child	said,	'Hello,	I	am	happy	to	meet	you!	Would	you	like	to	give	me	your
signature	in	my	visitors'	book?'	--	because	he	had	met	so	many	new	fathers.
Everything	has	to	be	changed	just	to	feel	that	you	are	alive.	A	hectic	search	for
life.	Of	 course,	 life	 IS	 a	movement,	 but	 not	 from	one	 place	 to	 another;	 it	 is	 a
movement	from	one	state	 to	another.	 It	 is	a	DEEP	inward	movement	from	one
consciousness	to	another	consciousness,	to	the	higher	realms	of	being.	Otherwise
you	are	dead.	As	you	are,	you	are	dead.	Hence	Jesus	goes	on	saying,	'Listen!	--	if
you	have	ears.	See!	--	if	you	have	eyes.'
This	has	to	be	understood	first,	then	this	story	will	become	easier.
Then	the	second	thing:	why	are	you	so	dead?	Why	are	you	so	dumb,	blind,	deaf?
There	must	be	 something,	 there	must	be	 some	 investment	 in	 it	 --	otherwise	 so
many	people,	millions	of	 them,	could	not	be	 in	such	a	state.	 It	must	be	paying
you	 something,	 you	 must	 be	 getting	 something	 out	 of	 it,	 otherwise	 how	 is	 it
possible	 that	Buddhas	 and	Krishnas	 and	Christs	go	on	 saying,	 'Don't	 be	blind,
don't	be	deaf,	don't	be	dumb,	don't	be	dead!	Be	alive!	Be	alert,	awake!'	 --	and
nobody	 listens	 to	 them?	Even	 if	 they	 appeal	 intellectually,	 you	 never	 listen	 to
them.	Even	if	you	feel	in	certain	sublime	moments	of	life	that	they	are	right,	you
never	 follow	 them.	 Even	 if	 sometimes	 you	 decide	 to	 follow,	 you	 always
postpone	it	 for	 tomorrow	--	and	then	tomorrow	never	comes.	What	 is	 the	deep
investment	in	it?
Just	the	other	night	I	was	talking	to	a	friend.	He	is	a	very	educated	man,	cultured
--	has	moved	all	over	the	world,	has	lived	in	the	Soviet	Union	and	the	UK	and
the	United	States,	has	been	to	China,	and	this	and	that.	Listening	to	him	I	felt	he
is	completely	dead!
And	then	he	asked	me,	'What	solution	would	you	suggest?	--	because	life	has	so
many	sufferings	and	miseries,	so	many	injustices,	so	many	things	that	hurt	you.
How	 to	 live	 life	 so	 that	you	don't	 feel	hurt,	 so	 that	 life	 cannot	 create	 so	many
wounds	in	your	being	--
what	to	do?'
So	I	told	him	there	are	two	ways:	one	--	which	is	easier	but	at	a	very	great	cost	--
one	is	 to	become	dead,	 to	become	as	 insensitive	as	possible.	 ...	Because	if	you
are	 insensitive,	 if	 you	grow	a	 thick	 skin	 around	you,	 an	 armor,	 then	you	don't
bother	much,	nobody	can	hurt	you.	Somebody	insults	you	and	you	have	such	a
thick	skin	that	 it	never	enters.	There	 is	 injustice,	but	you	simply	never	become
aware	of	it.
This	is	the	mechanism	of	your	deadness.	If	you	are	more	sensitive,	you	will	be
hurt	more.
Then	every	small	thing	will	become	a	pain,	a	misery,	and	it	will	be	impossible	to
live	--
and	 one	 has	 to	 live.	There	ARE	problems,	 and	 there	 are	millions	 of	 people	 --
there	 is	 violence	 all	 around,	 there	 is	misery	 all	 around.	 You	 pass	 through	 the
street	and	beggars	are	there;	you	have	to	be	insensitive	otherwise	it	will	become
a	misery,	a	heavy	weight	on	you.	Why	these	beggars?	What	have	they	done	to
suffer	this?	And	somehow	deep	down	you	will	feel:	I	am	also	responsible.	You
simply	pass	by	the	beggar	as	if	you	are	deaf,	dumb,	blind	--	you	don't	look.
Have	you	ever	LOOKED	AT	a	beggar?	You	may	have	seen	a	beggar,	but	you
have	never	looked	at	him.	You	have	never	encountered	him,	you	have	never	sat
with	him,	you	have	never	taken	his	hand	in	your	hand	--	it	would	be	too	much.
So	open	--	there	is	danger.
And	you	have	to	think	about	your	wife,	not	about	this	beggar;	you	have	to	think
about	your	children	--	and	you	are	not	concerned!	So	whenever	there	is	a	beggar,
watch:	 your	 speed	 increases,	 you	 walk	 faster	 and	 don't	 look	 that	 way.	 If	 you
really	look	at	a	beggar	you	will	feel	the	whole	injustice	of	life;	you	will	feel	the
whole	misery	--	and	it	will	be	too	much.	It	will	be	impossible	to	tolerate	it,	you
will	have	to	do	something	and	what	can	you	do?	You	feel	so	helpless;	you	have
your	own	problems	too,	and	you	have	to	solve	them.
You	see	a	dying	man,	what	can	you	do?	You	see	a	crippled	child,	what	can	you
do?	Just	the	other	day	one	sannyasin	came	to	me	and	he	said	he	was	very	much
disturbed,	because	on	the	road	when	he	was	passing	a	truck	almost	killed	a	dog.
The	dog	was	already	not	in	good	shape;	two	legs	must	have	been	crushed	before.
With	only	two	legs	the	dog	was	trying	to	live,	and	then	this	truck	again	crushed
him.	The	sannyasin	 took	pity,	 felt	compassion,	he	 took	 the	dog	 in	his	hands	 --
and	then	he	saw	there	was	a	hole	in	its	back	and	millions	of	worms.	He	wanted
to	help,	but	how	to	help?	And	he	became	so	disturbed	that	he	couldn't	sleep;	he
had	 nightmares	 and	 continuously	 the	 dog	was	 haunting	 him:	 'I	 have	 not	 done
anything	--	I	have	to	do	something.	But	what	to	do?'	The	idea	came	to	his	mind
to	kill	the	dog	because	that	was	the	only	thing	that	could	be	done	now.	With	so
many	worms,	maggots,	the	dog	could	not	live.	And	its	life	would	be	misery,	so	it
was	 better	 to	 kill	 it.	But	 to	 kill	 --	wouldn't	 that	 be	 violence?	Wouldn't	 that	 be
murder?
Wouldn't	that	be	a	karma?	So	what	to	do?	You	cannot	help.	Then	the	best	way	is
to	be	insensitive.
There	are	dogs	and	there	are	trucks,	and	things	go	on	happening,	you	go	on	your
way,	you	don't	look	around.	It	is	dangerous	to	look,	so	you	never	use	your	eyes
one	hundred	percent	--	scientists	say	only	two	percent.	Ninety-eight	percent,	you
close	your	eyes.
Ninety-eight	percent,	you	close	your	ears	--	you	don't	listen	to	everything	that	is
happening	all	around.	Ninety-eight	percent	you	don't	live.
Have	you	ever	observed	how	you	always	 feel	 fear	whenever	you	are	 in	a	 love
relationship	 or	 whenever	 love	 stays?	 Suddenly	 a	 fear	 takes	 over,	 because
whenever	you	love	a	person	you	surrender	to	the	person.	And	surrendering	to	a
person	 is	dangerous	because	 the	other	may	hurt	you.	Your	protection	 is	down.
You	don't	have	any	armor.
Whenever	 you	 love	 you	 are	 open	 and	 vulnerable,	 and	 who	 knows,	 how	 to
believe	in	the	other?...	because	the	other	is	a	stranger.	You	may	have	known	the
other	 for	 many	 years	 but	 that	 makes	 no	 difference.	 You	 don't	 even	 know
yourself,	how	can	you	know	the	other?	The	other	is	a	stranger.	And	to	allow	the
other	to	enter	into	your	intimate	life	means	to	allow	him	to	hurt	you.
People	have	become	afraid	of	love;	it	is	better	to	go	to	a	prostitute	than	to	have	a
beloved.
It	is	better	to	have	a	wife	than	to	have	a	beloved,	because	a	wife	is	an	institution.
Your	wife	cannot	hurt	you	more	because	you	never	loved	her.	It	was	arranged:
your	father	and	mother	and	the	astrologer...	everybody	was	involved	except	you.
It	is	an	arrangement,	a	social	arrangement.	Not	much	is	involved.	You	take	care
of	 her,	 you	 arrange	 for	 her	 food	 and	 shelter.	 She	 takes	 care;	 she	 arranges	 the
house,	the	food,	she	looks	after	the	children	-
-	 it	 is	 an	 arrangement,	 a	 business-like	 thing.	 Love	 is	 dangerous,	 it	 is	 not	 a
business,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 bargain.	 You	 give	 power	 to	 the	 other	 person	 in	 love,
COMPLETE	power	over	you.
The	fear:	the	other	is	a	stranger	and	who	knows...?	Whenever	you	trust	anybody,
fear	grips.
People	come	to	me	and	they	say,	'We	surrender	to	you,'	but	I	know	they	cannot.
It	 is	almost	 impossible.	They	have	never	 loved,	how	can	 they	surrender?	They
are	 speaking	 without	 knowing	 what	 they	 are	 saying.	 They	 are	 almost	 asleep.
They	are	talking	in	their	sleep,	they	don't	mean	it,	because	surrender	means	that
if	 I	 say,	 'Go	on	 top	of	 the	hill	and	 jump!'	you	cannot	 say	no.	Surrender	means
total	power	has	been	given	to	the	other:	how	can	you	give	that?
Surrender	is	just	like	love.	That's	why	I	say	only	lovers	can	become	sannyasins	-
-	because	they	know	a	 little	of	how	to	surrender.	Love	is	 the	first	step	 towards
the	divine,	surrender	is	the	last.	And	two	steps	is	the	whole	journey.
But	you	are	afraid.	You	would	 like	 to	have	your	own	control	on	your	 life:	not
only	that	--
you	 would	 like	 to	 control	 the	 other's	 life	 also.	 Hence	 the	 continuous	 quarrel
between	husbands	and	wives	and	lovers	--	constant	quarrel,	conflict.	What	is	the
conflict?	The	conflict	is:	Who	will	dominate	whom?	Who	will	possess	whom?	It
has	to	be	settled	first.
This	 is	 not	 a	 surrender	 but	 a	 domination	 --	 just	 the	 opposite.	 Whenever	 you
dominate	 a	 person	 there	 is	 no	 fear.	Whenever	 you	 love	 a	 person	 there	 is	 fear,
because	 in	 love	you	 surrender	 and	you	give	 total	 power	 to	 the	other.	Now	 the
other	can	hurt,	 the	other	can	reject,	 the	other	can	say	NO.	That's	why	you	 live
only	 two	percent,	not	one	hundred	percent.	Ninety-eight	percent	you	are	dead,
insensitive.	And	 insensitivity,	deadness,	 is	very	much	 respected	by	 the	 society.
The	more	you	are	insensitive,	the	more	society	will	respect	you.
It	is	said,	it	happened	in	Lokmanya	Tilak's	life	--	one	of	the	great	Indian	leaders.
He	lived	 in	Poona,	 just	 this	 town,	and	before	Gandhi	 took	over	and	dominated
the	scene	he	was	the	topmost	man	in	India	--	it	is	said	about	him	that	he	was	a
man	of	discipline,	and	men	of	discipline	are	always	dead	because	discipline	 is
nothing	 but	 how	 to	 deaden	 yourself.	 His	 wife	 died,	 and	 he	 was	 sitting	 in	 his
office	where	he	published	a	newspaper,	KESARI	--	it	is	still	published	--	when
somebody	reported,	'Your	wife	has	died,	come	home!'	Hearing	this,	he	looked	at
the	clock	at	the	back	and	he	said,	'But	it	is	not	yet	time.
I	only	leave	my	office	at	five.'
Look	at	the	whole	thing.	What	type	of	intimacy,	what	type	of	love,	what	type	of
caring	 and	 sharing	was	 there?	 This	man	 cares	 about	 his	work,	 this	man	 cares
about	time,	but	not	about	love.	It	seems	almost	impossible	that	when	somebody
says	your	wife	is	dead,	to	look	at	the	clock	and	then	to	say,	'It	is	not	yet	time.	I
leave	 my	 office	 only	 at	 five.'	 And	 the	 wonder	 of	 wonders	 is	 that	 all	 his
biographers	appreciate	this	incident	very	much.
They	say,	'This	is	devotion	to	the	country!	This	is	how	a	disciplined	man	should
be.'	 They	 think	 this	 is	 nonattachment.	 This	 is	NOT	 nonattachment,	 this	 is	 not
devotion	to	anything.
This	is	simply	deadness,	an	insensitivity.	And	one	who	is	insensitive	towards	his
wife,	how	can	he	be	sensitive	to	the	whole	country?	Impossible.
Remember,	if	you	cannot	love	a	person	you	cannot	love	humanity.	That	may	be	a
trick.
Those	who	cannot	love	persons	--	because	it	is	very	dangerous	to	love	a	person	-
-	 they	 always	 think	 they	 love	 humanity.	Where	 is	 humanity?	 Can	 you	 find	 it
anywhere?	 It	 is	 just	 a	word.	Humanity	 exists	 nowhere.	Wherever	 you	 go	 you
will	 find	 a	 person	 existing.	 Life	 is	 persons,	 not	 humanity.	 Life	 is	 always
personified,	it	exists	as	an	individual.	Society,	country,	humanity,	are	just	words.
Where	 is	 society?	 Where	 is	 the	 country,	 the	 motherland?	 You	 cannot	 love	 a
mother,	and	you	love	a	motherland?	You	must	be	deceiving	somewhere.	But	the
word	is	good,	beautiful:	motherland.	You	need	not	bother	about	the	motherland,
because	the	motherland	is	not	a	person,	it	is	a	fiction	in	your	mind.
It	is	your	own	ego.
You	can	love	humanity,	you	can	love	the	motherland,	you	can	love	society,	and
you	are	not	capable	of	 loving	a	person	 --	because	a	person	creates	difficulties.
Society	 will	 never	 create	 a	 difficulty	 because	 it	 is	 just	 a	 word.	 You	 need	 not
surrender	to	it.	You	can	dominate	the	word,	the	fiction,	but	you	cannot	dominate
a	 person.	 Even	 with	 a	 small	 child	 it	 is	 impossible,	 you	 cannot	 dominate	 him
because	he	has	his	own	ego,	he	has	his	own	mind,	he	has	his	own	ways.	 It	 is
almost	impossible	to	dominate	life	but	words	can	be	easily	dominated	--	because
you	are	alone	there.
People	who	cannot	love	a	person	start	 loving	God.	They	don't	know	what	they
are	doing.
To	 talk	 to	 a	person,	 to	 communicate	 to	 a	person,	 is	 a	difficult	matter.	 It	 needs
skill,	 it	 needs	 a	 very	 loving	 heart,	 it	 needs	 a	 very	 KNOWING	 heart,
understanding	 heart.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 touch	 a	 person,	 because	 to	 touch	 a
person	is	to	move	in	a	dangerous	arena	--
life	 is	 throbbing	 there	 also.	 And	 each	 person	 is	 so	 unique	 that	 you	 cannot	 be
mechanical	about	it.	You	have	to	be	very	alert	and	watchful.	You	have	to	become
more	sensitive	if	you	love	a	person;	only	then	does	understanding	arise.
But	to	love	a	god	who	is	somewhere	sitting	in	the	sky,	it	is	a	monologue.	Go	to
the	churches	--	people	are	talking	to	no	one.	They	are	as	crazy	as	people	you	will
find	 in	 the	 madhouses,	 but	 that	 madness	 is	 accepted	 by	 the	 society	 and	 this
madness	is	not	accepted,	that	is	the	only	difference.	Go	to	a	madhouse;	you	will
find	people	talking	alone,	nobody	is	 there.	They	talk,	and	not	only	do	they	say
something,	 they	 answer	 also.	 They	 make	 it	 LOOK	 like	 a	 dialogue;	 it	 is	 a
monologue.	Then	go	to	the	churches	and	the	temples;	there	people	are	talking	to
God.	That	 too	 is	a	monologue,	and	 if	 they	really	go	mad	 they	start	doing	both
things:	 they	 say	 something	 and	 they	 answer	 also,	 and	 they	 feel	 that	 God	 has
answered.
You	cannot	do	that	unless	you	have	learned	how	to	love	a	person.	If	you	love	a
person,	by	and	by	the	person	becomes	the	door	to	the	whole.	But	one	has	to	start
with	the	person,	with	the	small,	with	the	atomic.	You	cannot	take	the	jump.	The
Ganges	cannot	simply	jump	into	the	ocean,	it	has	to	start	in	the	Gangotri,	just	a
small	 stream;	 then	 wider	 and	 wider	 and	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 it	 goes,	 and	 then
finally	it	merges	with	the	ocean.
The	Ganga,	 the	Ganges	of	 love,	also	has	 to	start	 just	 like	a	 small	 stream,	with
persons,	then	it	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	Once	you	know	the	beauty
of	it,	the	beauty	of	surrender,	the	beauty	of	insecurity,	the	beauty	of	being	open
to	all	that	life	gives	--
bliss	and	suffering	both	--	then	you	get	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger	and	expand,
and	the	consciousness	finally	becomes	an	ocean.	Then	you	fall	into	God,	into	the
divine.	But	because	of	fear	you	create	insensitivity	--	and	the	society	respects	it.
Society	does	not	want	you	to	be	very	alive	because	alive	people	are	rebellious.
Look	at	 a	 small	 child:	 if	 he	 is	 really	 alive	he	will	 be	 rebellious,	 he	will	 try	 to
have	 his	 own	 way.	 But	 if	 he	 is	 a	 dumb	 imbecile,	 an	 idiot,	 somehow	 stuck
somewhere	and	not	growing,	he	will	sit	in	the	corner	perfectly	obedient.	You	tell
him	to	go,	he	goes;	you	tell	him	to	come,	he	comes.	You	tell	him	to	sit	down,	he
sits;	you	tell	him	to	stand,	he	stands.	He	is	perfectly	obedient	because	he	has	no
personality	of	his	own.	The	society,	 the	family,	 the	parents,	will	 like	this	child.
They	will	say,	'Look,	he	is	so	obedient.'
I	heard	once:	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	talking	to	his	son;	he	had	come	with	a	report
card	from	his	school.	Mulla	was	expecting	 that	he	would	receive	an	A,	and	he
had	received	a	D;	in	fact	he	was	the	last	in	the	class.	So	Nasruddin	said,	'Look,
you	never	obey	me,	whatsoever	 I	 say	you	disobey;	now	this	has	 resulted.	And
look	at	the	neighbors'	child	--
he	 always	 receives	 an	A,	 always	 stands	 first	 in	 the	 class.'	The	 child	 looked	 at
Nasruddin	and	said,	'But	that's	a	different	matter	--	he	has	talented	parents.'	This
child	is	very	alive,	but	he	has	his	own	ways.
Obedience	 has	 a	 certain	 dumbness	 about	 it,	 disobedience	 a	 sharp	 intelligence
about	it.
But	 obedience	 is	 respected	 because	 obedience	 gives	 less	 inconvenience.	 Of
course	that's	right	--	disobedience	creates	inconvenience.	You	would	like	a	dead
child	because	he	will	not	create	any	inconvenience.	You	would	not	like	an	alive
child	--	the	more	alive,	the	more	danger	there	is.
Parents,	societies,	schools,	they	all	force	obedience,	they	dull	you;	and	then	they
respect	those	people.	That's	why	in	life	you	never	see	people	who	stand	first	in
schools,	 universities;	 in	 life	 they	 are	 simply	 lost.	You	 never	 find	 them	 in	 life,
where	they	go...	they	prove	themselves	very	talented	in	school,	but	somehow	in
life	they	are	lost.	It	seems	that	the	ways	of	school	are	different	from	the	ways	of
life.	Somehow	life	loves	lively	people	-
-	 the	 more	 lively,	 the	 more	 rebellious:	 people	 with	 their	 own	 consciousness,
being,	and	personality;	people	who	have	 their	own	ways	 to	 fulfill;	people	who
are	not	dead.	Schools	prefer	 just	 the	opposite.	The	whole	 society	helps	you	 to
become	dumb,	deaf,	blind,	dead.
In	 the	 monasteries	 you	 will	 find	 dead	 people	 worshipped	 as	 saints.	 Go	 to
Varanasi:	you	will	find	people	lying	down	on	beds	of	thorns,	nails	--	and	they	are
worshipped	like	gods.
And	what	have	they	achieved?	If	you	look	at	their	faces	you	will	not	find	more
stupid	 faces	 anywhere.	 A	 person	 lying	 on	 a	 bed	 of	 nails	 or	 thorns	 has	 to	 be
STUPID.	In	the	first	place	to	choose	this	way	of	life	one	has	to	be	stupid.	And
then	what	will	he	do,	what	can	he	do	by	lying	on	the	nails?	He	has	to	make	his
whole	body	insensitive.	That's	 the	only	way:	he	must	not	feel	 it.	By	and	by	he
becomes	thicker-skinned,	then	it	doesn't	matter.
Then	he	becomes	a	rock,	completely	dead.	And	the	whole	society	worships	him:
he	 is	a	sage,	he	has	attained	something.	What	has	he	attained?	He	has	attained
more	 deadness	 than	 you.	 Now	 the	 nails	 do	 not	 matter	 because	 the	 body	 has
become	dead.
You	may	not	know,	but	if	you	ask	physiologists	they	say	there	are	already	many
spots	in	the	body	which	are	not	alive;	they	call	them	dead	spots.	On	your	back
there	are	many	dead	spots.	Just	give	a	needle	to	one	of	your	friends,	or	your	wife
or	your	husband,	 and	 tell	him	 to	push	 the	needle	 in	your	back	on	many	spots.
You	will	 feel	 some	 spots	 and	 some	 you	will	 not	 feel.	 Some	 spots	 are	 already
dead,	so	when	the	needle	is	pushed	in	you	don't	feel	it.	Those	people,	they	have
done	one	 thing:	 they	have	made	 their	whole	 body	 a	 dead	 spot.	But	 this	 is	 not
growing,	 this	 is	 regression.	They	are	becoming	more	material	 rather	 than	more
divine,	because	to	be	divine	means	to	be	perfectly	sensitive,	to	be	perfectly	alive.
So	I	told	that	man	that	there	is	one	way,	and	that	is	to	be	dead:	that	is	easier,	that
is	what	everyone	is	doing.	People	differ	in	degrees,	but	in	their	own	ways	they
are	doing	that.
You	return	 to	your	home	afraid	of	your	wife;	you	become	deaf,	you	don't	hear
what	she	says.	You	start	reading	your	newspaper,	and	you	put	your	newspaper	in
such	a	way	 that	 you	don't	 see	her.	What	 she	 says	you	 simply	become	deaf	 to,
otherwise	you	 feel,	How	can	 I	 live	 if	 I	 listen	 to	her?	You	don't	 see	 that	 she	 is
crying	or	weeping.	Only	when	she	makes	it	almost	impossible	for	you,	then	you
look	--	and	that	look	is	so	angry.
You	 go	 to	 the	 office,	 you	 move	 through	 the	 traffic,	 everywhere	 you	 have	 to
create	a	certain	deadness	around	you.	You	think	it	protects	--	it	does	not	protect,
it	only	kills.	Of	course	you	will	suffer	less,	but	less	blessings	will	come	to	you,
less	bliss	also.	When	you	become	dead,	suffering	is	less	because	you	cannot	feel
it;	blissfulness	is	less	because	you	cannot	feel	it.	A	person	who	is	in	search	of	a
higher	blissfulness	has	to	be	ready	to	suffer.
This	may	look	a	paradox	to	you:	that	a	man	of	the	status	of	a	buddha,	a	man	who
is	awakened,	IS	blissful	--	absolutely	--	and	also	suffers	absolutely.	Of	course	he
is	blissful	inside,	the	flowers	go	on	showering	there,	but	he	suffers	for	everybody
all	 around.	He	 has	 to,	 because	 if	 you	 have	 sensitivity	 for	 blessings	 to	 become
available	to	you,	suffering	will	also	become	available	to	you.	One	has	to	choose.
If	you	choose	not	to	suffer,	you	don't	want	to	suffer,	then	you	will	not	attain	to
blissfulness	 either	 --	 because	 they	 both	 come	 by	 the	 same	 door;	 this	 is	 the
problem.	You	can	close	your	door	in	fear	of	the	enemy,	but	the	friend	also	comes
by	 the	 same	 door.	 And	 if	 you	 lock	 it	 completely	 and	 block	 it	 completely,	 so
afraid	 of	 the	 enemy,	 then	 the	 friend	 cannot	 come	 either.	 God	 has	 not	 been
coming	 to	 you,	 your	 doors	 are	 closed.	You	may	 have	 closed	 them	 against	 the
devil,	but	when	doors	are	closed	they	are	closed.	And	one	who	needs,	feels	the
hunger,	 the	 thirst	 to	 meet	 the	 divine,	 has	 to	 meet	 the	 devil	 also.	 You	 cannot
choose	one,	you	have	to	meet	both.
If	you	are	alive,	death	will	be	a	great	phenomenon	to	you.	If	you	live	totally	you
will	die	totally;	if	you	live	two	percent	you	will	die	two	percent.	As	life,	so	will
be	death.	If	the	door	is	open	for	God	it	is	open	for	the	devil	also.
You	have	heard	many	stories	but	I	don't	feel	that	you	have	understood:	whenever
God	happens	 the	devil	happens	 just	before	him,	because	whenever	 the	door	 is
open	the	devil	rushes	in	first.	He	is	always	in	a	hurry.	God	is	not	in	a	hurry.
So	with	Jesus	 --	when	he	attained	 to	 the	 final	enlightenment	 the	devil	 tempted
him	for	forty	days.	When	he	was	meditating,	fasting	in	his	aloneness,	when	Jesus
was	 disappearing	 and	 he	 was	 creating	 a	 place	 for	 Christ	 to	 come,	 the	 devil
tempted	him.
Those	 forty	days	 the	devil	was	continuously	by	his	 side.	And	he	 tempted	very
beautifully	and	very	politically;	he	is	the	greatest	politician,	all	other	politicians
are	his	disciples.
Very	diplomatically	he	said,	 'Right,	 so	now	you	have	become	 the	prophet,	and
you	know	that	in	the	scriptures	it	is	said	that	whenever	God	chooses	a	man,	and
a	man	becomes	a	messiah,	a	prophet,	he	becomes	infinitely	powerful.	Now	you
are	powerful.	If	you	want	you	can	jump	from	this	hill	and	angels	will	be	standing
in	 the	 valley.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 really	 a	 messiah,	 fulfill	 whatever	 is	 said	 in	 the
scriptures	--	jump!'
The	 temptation	was	great	 and	he	was	quoting	 scriptures.	Devils	 always	quote,
because	 to	 convince	you	 a	 scripture	 has	 to	 be	brought	 in.	Devils	 know	all	 the
scriptures	by	heart.
Jesus	laughed	and	said,	'You	are	right	but	in	the	same	scripture	it	is	said	that	you
should	not	test	God.'
Then	one	day	when	he	was	feeling	very	hungry...	thirty	days	of	fasting,	the	devil
always	sitting	by	his	side...	before	God	comes,	the	devil	comes;	the	moment	you
open	the	door	he	is	just	standing	there,	and	he	is	always	first	in	the	queue.	God
always	lags	behind	because	he	is	not	in	a	hurry,	remember:	God	has	eternity	to
work,	 the	devil	has	not	eternity	to	work	--	moments	only.	If	he	loses,	he	loses,
and	once	a	man	becomes	divine,	he	will	not	be	hurt	any	more...	so	he	has	to	find
weak	moments	when	Jesus	is	disappearing	and	Christ	has	not	entered.	That	gap
is	the	moment	where	he	can	enter.
Then	the	devil	said,	'But	it	is	said	in	the	scriptures	that	when	a	man	is	chosen	by
God	he	can	turn	even	stones	into	bread.	So	why	are	you	suffering?	And	PROVE
this,	 because	 the	world	will	 be	 benefited	 by	 this.'	 This	 is	 diplomacy.	He	 said,
'The	world	will	be	benefited	by	this.'
It	seems	that's	how	the	devil	has	convinced	your	Satya	Sai	Baba.	The	world	will
be	benefited	by	this	because	when	you	turn	stones	into	bread,	people	will	know
that	you	are	the	man	of	God.	They	will	come	running,	then	you	can	help	them.
Otherwise	who	will	come	and	who	will	listen	to	you?
Jesus	said,	'You	are	right.	I	can	turn	--	but	not	I,	God	can	turn	stones	into	bread.
But	whenever	 he	 needs	 to	 he	will	 tell	me,	 you	 need	 not	 bother.	Why	 are	 you
taking	so	much	trouble?'
Whenever	you	enter	into	meditation	the	first	man	you	will	find	on	the	gate,	the
moment	you	open	 the	door,	will	 be	 the	devil,	 because	 it	 is	 in	 fear	of	him	you
have	closed	the	door.
And	remember...	but	first	I	will	tell	you	an	anecdote,	then	you	will	understand.
In	a	shop	they	had	declared	a	special	concession	for	Christmas,	particularly	for
ladies'
clothes	and	dresses,	so	there	was	a	crowd	of	ladies.	One	man	had	come	because
his	wife	was	 ill,	and	she	forced	him	to	go	because	 this	was	not	a	chance	to	be
lost.	So	he	stood,	gentlemanly,	 for	one	hour,	but	he	couldn't	 reach	 the	counter.
You	know	ladies,	their	way
--	screaming,	shouting	at	each	other,	moving	from	anywhere,	no	queue;	and	the
man	was	 thinking	of	a	queue,	 so	he	 stood.	When	one	hour	passed	and	he	was
nowhere	near	the	counter,	 then	he	started	shoving	and	shouting	and	screaming,
and	he	started	forcibly	to	enter	the	crowd	and	reach	the	counter.
One	old	lady	shouted,	'What!	What	are	you	doing?	Be	a	gentleman!'
The	man	said,	'For	one	hour	I	have	been	a	gentleman.	Now	I	must	behave	like	a
lady!
Enough!'
Remember,	the	devil	never	behaves	like	a	gentleman,	he	behaves	like	a	lady.	He
is	always	first	in	the	queue.	And	God	is	a	gentleman.	It	is	difficult	for	him	to	be
first	 in	 the	 queue	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 open	 the	 door,	 the	 devil	 enters.	 And
because	of	 your	 fear	 of	 him,	 you	 remain	 closed.	But	 if	 the	 devil	 cannot	 enter,
God	also	cannot.	When	you	become	vulnerable,	you	become	vulnerable	for	both
God	and	the	devil	--	light	and	dark,	life	and	death,	love	and	hate	--	you	become
available	for	both	opposites.
You	have	chosen	not	to	suffer,	so	you	are	closed.	You	may	not	be	suffering	but
your	 life	 is	a	boredom,	because	although	you	don't	 suffer	as	much	as	you	will
suffer	 if	 you	 are	 open,	 there	 is	 no	 blessing	 either.	 The	 door	 is	 closed	 --	 no
morning,	 no	 sun,	 no	moon	 enters,	 no	 sky	 enters,	 no	 fresh	 air,	 everything	 has
gone	 stale.	And	 in	 fear	 you	 are	 hiding	 there.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 house	where	 you	 are
living;	you	have	already	converted	it	into	a	grave.
Your	cities	are	graveyards,	your	houses	are	graves.	Your	whole	way	of	life	is	that
of	a	dead	man.
Courage	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 open	 --	 courage	 to	 suffer,	 because	 blessing	 only
becomes	possible	then.
Now	we	should	try	to	understand	this	beautiful	anecdote:	DEAF,	DUMB	AND
BLIND.
GENSHA	 COMPLAINED	 TO	 HIS	 FOLLOWERS	 ONE	 DAY:	 'OTHER
MASTERS
ARE	ALWAYS	CARRYING	ON	ABOUT	THE	NECESSITY	OF	SAVING
EVERYONE	--	BUT	SUPPOSE	YOU	MEET	UP	WITH	SOMEONE	WHO	IS
DEAF,	 DUMB	 AND	 BLIND?	 HE	 COULDN'T	 SEE	 YOUR	 GESTURES,
HEAR	YOUR
PREACHING,	OR,	FOR	THAT	MATTER,	ASK	QUESTIONS.	UNABLE	TO
SAVE
HIM,	YOU'D	PROVE	YOURSELF	A	WORTHLESS	BUDDHIST.'
Masters	generally	don't	complain,	but	when	they	complain	it	means	something.
This	is	not	only	Gensha	complaining,	it	is	all	the	masters	complaining.	But	this
is	 their	experience,	and	wherever	you	move	you	find	deaf	and	dumb	and	blind
people,	 because	 the	 whole	 society	 is	 that	 way.	 And	 how	 to	 save	 them?	 They
cannot	 see,	 they	 cannot	 hear,	 they	 cannot	 feel,	 they	 cannot	 understand	 any
gesture.	If	you	try	too	much	to	save	them	they	will	escape.	They	will	think:	This
man	is	after	something,	he	wants	to	exploit	me,	or	he	must	have	some	scheme.	If
you	don't	do	very	much	for	them	they	feel:	This	man	is	not	for	me	because	he	is
not	caring	enough.	And	whatsoever	is	done	they	cannot	understand.
This	is	not	Gensha's	complaint,	because	enlightened	persons	never	complain	for
themselves.	 This	 complaint	 is	 general,	 it	 is	 how	 it	 happens.	 A	 Jesus	 feels	 the
same	way,	 a	Buddha	 feels	 the	 same	way.	Wherever	you	go,	 you	have	 to	meet
people	who	are	deaf,	dumb,	blind.	You	make	gestures	--	they	cannot	see;	or	even
worse,	they	see	something	else.	You	talk	to	them	--	they	cannot	understand,	and
even	worse,	they	misunderstand.
You	say	something	else,	they	understand	something	else	again,	because	meaning
cannot	be	given	through	words.	Only	words	can	be	communicated,	meaning	has
to	be	supplied	by	the	listener.
I	say	a	word;	I	mean	one	thing.	But	if	ten	thousand	people	are	listening	there	will
be	 ten	 thousand	meanings,	 because	 each	will	 listen	 from	HIS	mind,	 from	HIS
prejudice,	 from	HIS	 concept	 and	 philosophy	 and	 religion.	He	will	 listen	 from
HIS	 conditioning	 and	 his	 conditioning	 will	 supply	 the	 meaning.	 It	 is	 very
difficult,	 almost	 impossible.	 It	 is	 just	 as	 if	 you	 go	 to	 a	madhouse	 and	 talk	 to
people.	How	will	you	feel?	That's	what	Gensha	feels,	that's	the	complaint.
That's	my	complaint	also.	Working	with	you,	I	always	feel	a	block	comes.	Either
your	eyes	are	blocked,	or	your	ears	are	blocked,	or	your	nose	is	blocked,	or	your
heart	 is	 blocked;	 somewhere	 or	 other,	 something	 is	 blocked,	 a	 stonelike	 thing
comes.	And	 it	 is	difficult	 to	penetrate	because	 if	 I	do	 too	much	 to	penetrate	 it,
you	become	afraid	--	why	am	I	interested	so	much?	If	I	don't	do	too	much,	you
feel	 neglected.	 This	 is	 how	 an	 ignorant	 mind	 works.	 Do	 this	 and	 he	 will
misunderstand,	do	that	and	he	will	misunderstand.	One	thing	is	certain:	he	will
misunderstand.
GENSHA	 COMPLAINED	 TO	 HIS	 FOLLOWERS	 ONE	 DAY:	 'OTHER
MASTERS
ARE	ALWAYS	CARRYING	ON	ABOUT	THE	NECESSITY	OF	SAVING
EVERYONE.'
Buddha	has	 said	 that	when	you	are	 saved,	 the	only	 thing	 to	do	 is	 save	others.
When	YOU
have	attained	the	only	thing	to	do	is	to	spread	it	to	others,	because	everybody	is
struggling.	Everybody	is	on	the	path	stumbling,	everybody	is	moving	knowingly,
unknowingly,	and	you	have	attained.	Help	others.
And	that	is	a	necessity	also,	an	inner	necessity	of	energies,	because	a	man	who
has	become	enlightened	will	have	to	live	a	few	years,	because	enlightenment	is
not	 a	 destiny;	 it	 is	 not	 fixed,	 it	 is	 not	 caused.	 When	 it	 happens	 it	 is	 not
necessarily	at	 the	moment	when	 the	body	dies.	There	 is	no	necessity	 for	 these
two	 happenings	 to	 be	 together.	 Really,	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible,	 because
enlightenment	 is	a	sudden	uncaused	phenomenon.	You	work	 for	 it	but	 it	never
happens	 through	 your	 work.	 Your	 work	 helps	 to	 create	 the	 situation	 but	 it
happens	through	something	else	--	that	something	else	is	called	grace.	It	is	a	gift
from	God,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 byproduct	 of	 your	 efforts;	 they	don't	 cause	 it.	Of	 course
they	create	a	situation:	I	open	the	door	and	the	light	enters.	But	the	light	is	a	gift
from	the	sun.	I	cannot	create	light	just	by	opening	the	door.	Opening	of	the	door
is	not	a	cause	to	it.	Non-opening	of	the	door	was	a	hindrance	but	opening	of	the
door	is	not	a	cause	--	I	cannot	cause.	If	you	open	the	door	and	it	is	night,	light
will	not	enter.	Opening	the	door	is	not	creating	light,	but	by	closing	the	door	you
hinder.
So	 all	 the	 efforts	 that	 you	make	 towards	 realization	 are	 just	 to	 open	 the	 door.
Light	comes	when	it	comes.	You	have	to	remain	with	an	open	door	so	whenever
it	comes,	whenever	it	knocks	at	your	door,	it	finds	you	there	and	the	door	is	open
so	it	can	enter.	It	is	always	a	gift	--	and	it	has	to	be	so,	because	if	you	can	attain
the	ultimate	through	your	efforts	it	will	be	an	absurdity.	A	limited	mind	making
efforts	--	how	can	it	find	the	infinite?	A	finite	mind	making	efforts	--	all	efforts
will	be	finite.	How	can	 the	 infinite	happen	through	finite	efforts?	The	 ignorant
mind	 is	 making	 efforts	 --	 those	 efforts	 are	 made	 in	 ignorance;	 how	 can	 they
change,	transform	into	enlightenment?	No,	it	is	not	possible.
You	make	efforts;	they	are	necessary,	they	prepare	you,	they	open	the	door	--	but
the	 happening	 happens	 when	 it	 happens.	 You	 remain	 available.	 God	 knocks
many	times	at	your	door,	the	sun	rises	every	day.	And	remember,	nowhere	else	is
it	said	what	I	would	like	to	say	to	you,	although	it	will	be	a	help.	It	is	not	said
because	if	you	misunderstand	it	can	become	a	hindrance.	There	is	a	day	for	God
and	there	is	a	night	also.	If	you	open	the	door	in	the	night,	the	door	will	remain
open	but	God	will	not	come.	There	is	a	day	--	if	you	open	the	door	in	the	right
moment,	immediately	God	comes.
And	it	has	to	be	so,	because	the	whole	of	existence	has	opposites.	God	is	also	in
a	rest	period	when	he	sleeps.	If	you	open	the	door	then	he	will	not	come.	There
is	 a	moment	when	he	 is	 awake,	when	he	 is	moving	 --	 it	 has	 to	be	 so	because
every	 energy	 moves	 through	 two	 opposites,	 rest	 and	 movement,	 and	 God	 is
infinite	 energy!	He	 has	movements	 and	 he	 has	 a	 rest.	 That's	 why	 a	master	 is
needed.
If	you	do	 it	on	your	own	you	may	be	working	hard	and	nothing	 is	happening,
because	you	are	not	working	at	the	right	moment.	You	are	working	in	the	night;
you	open	the	door	and	only	darkness	enters.	Afraid,	you	close	it	again.	You	open
the	door	and	there	is	nothing	but	vast	emptiness	all	around.	You	become	afraid,
you	close	 it	again,	and	once	you	see	 that	emptiness,	you	will	never	 forget	 it	 --
and	you	will	be	so	afraid	that	it	will	take	many	years	for	you	to	gather	courage
again	to	open	it.	...	Because	once	you	see	the	infinite	abyss,	when	God	is	asleep,
when	God	is	in	rest,	if	you	see	that	moment	of	infinite	negativity	and	abyss	and
darkness,	you	will	be	scared	--	so	much	so	that	for	many	years	you	will	not	make
another	attempt.
And	 I	 feel	 people	 are	 afraid,	 they	 are	 afraid	 of	 going	 into	meditation	 --	 and	 I
know	that	somewhere	in	their	past	life	they	have	made	some	effort	and	they	had
a	 glimpse	 of	 the	 abyss	 at	 the	 wrong	 moment.	 They	 may	 not	 know	 it	 but
unconsciously	it	is	there,	so	whenever	they	come	near	the	door	and	they	put	their
hand	on	the	knob	and	it	becomes	possible	to	open	the	door,	they	become	afraid.
They	come	back	exactly	 from	 that	moment,	 run	back	 --	 they	don't	open	 it.	An
unconscious	 fear	grips.	 It	 has	 to	be	 so,	 because	 for	many	 lives	you	have	been
struggling	and	striving.
Hence	the	necessity	of	the	master	who	knows,	who	has	attained,	and	who	knows
the	right	moment.	He	will	tell	you	to	make	all	the	efforts	when	it	is	the	night	of
God.	And	he	will	not	tell	you	to	open	the	door.	He	will	tell	you	to	prepare	in	the
night,	prepare	as	much	as	you	can,	be	ready,	and	when	the	morning	strikes	and
the	first	rays	have	entered	he	will	tell	you	to	open	the	door.	Sudden	illumination!
Then	it	is	totally	different	because	when	the	light	is	there	it	IS	totally	different.
When	 God	 is	 awake	 then	 the	 emptiness	 is	 not	 there.	 It	 is	 a	 fulfillment;	 it	 is
perfect	 fulfillment.	 Everything	 is	 full,	 more	 than	 full	 --	 it	 is	 everflowing
perfection.	 It	 is	 the	 peak,	 not	 the	 abyss.	 If	 you	 open	 the	 door	 in	 the	 wrong
moment,	it	is	the	abyss.	You	will	get	dizzy,	so	dizzy	that	for	many	lives	together
you	will	never	attempt	it.	But	only	one	who	knows,	only	one	who	has	become
one	with	God,	only	one	who	knows	when	 the	night	 is,	 and	when	 the	day,	 can
help,	because	now	they	happen	in	him	also	--	he	has	a	night,	he	has	a	day.
Hindus	had	a	glimpse	of	 this	and	 they	have	a	beautiful	hypothesis:	 they	call	 it
Brahma's	day,	God's	day.	When	the	creation	is	there	they	call	it	God's	day	--	but
the	 creation	 has	 a	 time	 limit,	 and	 the	 creation	 dissolves	 and	 Brahma's	 night,
God's	night,	 starts.	Twelve	hours	of	Brahma's	day	 is	 the	whole	creation.	Then,
tired,	the	whole	existence	disappears	into	nonexistence.	Then	for	twelve	hours	it
is	Brahma's	night.	For	us	it	is	millions	and	millions	of	years,	for	God	it	is	twelve
hours	--	his	day.
Christians	 also	 had	 a	 theory,	 or	 a	 hypothesis	 --	 because	 I	 call	 all	 religious
theories	 hypotheses,	 for	 nothing	 is	 proved,	 nothing	 can	 be	 proved	by	 the	 very
nature	of	the	thing.
They	say	God	created	the	world	in	six	days,	then	on	the	seventh	day	he	rested.
That's	 why	 Sunday	 is	 a	 rest	 day,	 a	 holiday.	 Six	 days	 he	 created,	 and	 on	 the
seventh	day	he	rested.
They	had	a	glimpse	that	even	God	must	rest.
These	are	both	hypotheses,	both	beautiful,	but	you	have	to	find	the	essence	of	it.
The	 essence	 is	 that	 every	day	God	also	has	 a	night	 and	 a	day.	And	every	day
there	is	a	right	moment	to	enter	and	a	wrong	moment;	in	the	wrong	moment	you
will	be	against	 the	wall,	 in	the	right	moment	you	simply	enter.	Because	of	 this
those	who	have	knocked	at	the	wrong	moment	say	that	to	attain	enlightenment	is
a	gradual	thing,	you	attain	it	by	degrees;	and	those	who	have	come	to	the	door	in
the	right	moment	say	enlightenment	is	sudden,	it	happens	in	a	moment.	A	master
is	needed	to	decide	when	is	the	right	moment.
It	 is	 reported	 that	 Vivekananda	 started	 his	 disciplehood	 and	 then	 one	 day	 he
attained	the	first	glimpse.	You	can	call	it	SATORI,	the	zen	word	for	SAMADHI,
because	 it	 is	a	GLIMPSE,	not	a	permanent	 thing.	 It	 is	 just	as	 if	clouds	are	not
there	in	the	sky	--	the	sky	is	clear	and	from	a	distance	of	one	thousand	miles	you
have	a	glimpse	of	Everest	in	all	its	glory,	but	then	the	sky	becomes	cloudy	and
the	glimpse	is	again	lost.	It	is	not	attainment,	you	have	not	reached	Everest,	you
have	not	reached	the	top;	from	thousands	of	miles	you	had	a	glimpse	--	 that	 is
satori.	Satori	is	a	glimpse	of	samadhi.	Vivekananda	had	a	satori.
In	Ramakrishna's	ashram	there	were	many	people,	many	people	were	working.
One	man,	his	name	was	Kalu,	a	very	simple	man,	a	very	innocent	man,	was	also
working	 in	his	own	way	 --	 and	Ramakrishna	accepted	EVERY	way.	He	was	a
rare	man;	he	accepted	every	technique,	every	method,	and	he	said	everybody	has
to	 find	 his	 own	way,	 there	 is	 no	 superway.	 And	 this	 is	 good,	 otherwise	 there
would	 be	 such	 a	 traffic	 jam!	 So	 it	 is	 good,	 you	 can	 walk	 on	 your	 own	 path.
Nobody	else	is	there	to	create	any	trouble	or	make	it	crowded.
That	Kalu	was	a	very	simple	man.	He	had	at	least	one	hundred	gods	--	as	Hindus
are	 lovers	of	many	gods,	one	 is	not	enough	for	 them.	So	 they	will	put	 in	 their
worship	place	 this	god,	 that	god,	whatsoever	 they	can	 find;	 they	will	 even	put
calendars	 there.	 There	 is	 nothing	 wrong	 in	 it;	 if	 you	 love	 it,	 it	 is	 okay.	 But
Vivekananda	was	a	 logician,	 a	very	keen	 intellect.	He	always	argued	with	 this
innocent	man	and	he	could	not	answer.
Vivekananda	 said,	 'Why	 this	 nonsense?	One	 is	 enough,	 and	 the	 scriptures	 say
that	he	is	one,	so	why	these	one	hundred	and	one	gods?'	And	they	were	all	sorts
of	 shapes,	 and	 Kalu	 had	 to	 work	 with	 these	 gods	 at	 least	 three	 hours	 in	 the
morning	and	three	in	the	evening	--	the	whole	day	was	gone,	because	with	every
god	 he	 had	 to	 work,	 and	 however	 fast	 he	 worked	 it	 took	 three	 hours	 in	 the
morning	 and	 three	 in	 the	 evening.	 But	 he	 was	 a	 very	 very	 silent	 man	 and
Ramakrishna	loved	him.
Vivekananda	 always	 argued,	 'Throw	 these	 gods!'	 When	 he	 had	 a	 glimpse	 of
satori	he	felt	very	powerful.	Suddenly	the	idea	came	to	him	that	in	this	power,	if
he	simply	sent	a	telepathic	message	to	Kalu	--	he	was	worshipping	in	his	room,
this	was	time	for	worship	-
-	to	take	all	his	gods	to	the	Ganges	and	throw	them,	it	would	happen.
He	 simply	 sent	 a	message.	Kalu	was	 really	 a	 simple	man.	He	gathered	 all	 his
gods	into	a	bed	sheet	and	carried	them	towards	the	Ganges.
From	the	Ganges	Ramakrishna	was	coming,	and	he	said,	'Wait!	This	is	not	you
who	is	going	to	throw	them.	Go	back	to	your	room	and	put	them	in	their	place.'
But	Kalu	said,
'Enough!	Finished!'
Ramakrishna	said,	'Wait	and	come	with	me!'
He	 knocked	 at	 Vivekananda's	 door.	 Vivekananda	 opened	 the	 door	 and
Ramakrishna	said,
'What	have	you	done?	This	is	not	good	and	this	is	not	the	right	moment	for	you.
So	I	will	take	your	key	of	meditation	and	will	keep	it	with	me.	When	the	right
moment	comes	I	will	give	it	to	you.'	And	for	his	whole	life	Vivekananda	tried	in
millions	of	ways	to	attain,	but	he	couldn't	get	that	glimpse	again.
Just	before	he	died,	three	days	before,	Ramakrishna	appeared	in	a	dream	and	he
gave	him	the	key.	He	said,	'Now	you	can	take	the	key.	Now	the	right	moment	is
here	and	you	can	open	the	door.'
And	the	next	day	in	the	morning	he	had	the	second	glimpse.
A	master	 knows	when	 it	 is	 the	 right	 time.	He	 helps	 you,	 prepares	 you	 for	 the
right	moment,	and	he	will	give	you	the	key	when	the	right	moment	is	there;	then
you	simply	open	the	door	and	the	divine	enters	--	because	if	you	open	the	door
and	darkness	enters	it	will	look	like	death,	not	like	life.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	this
but	you	will	get	scared,	and	you	can	get	so	scared	that	you	may	carry	that	fear
for	ever	and	ever.
Buddha	 says	 that	 whenever	 you	 attain,	 start	 helping	 others,	 because	 all	 your
energies	that	were	moving	into	desire...	now	that	door	is	finished,	that	travel	is
no	more,	 that	 trip	 is	no	more;	now	let	all	your	energies	which	were	moving	 in
desiring,	VASANA,	become	compassion,	let	them	become	KARUNA.	And	there
is	only	one	compassion	--	how	to	help	the	other	 to	attain	 the	ultimate,	because
there	is	nothing	else	to	be	attained.	All	else	is	rubbish.	Only	the	divine	is	worth
attaining.	 If	 you	 attain	 that	 you	 have	 attained	 all;	 if	 you	 miss	 that	 you	 have
missed	all.
When	 one	 becomes	 enlightened	 he	 lives	 for	 a	 few	 years	 before	 the	 body
completes	its	circle.	Buddha	lived	on	for	forty	years	because	the	body	had	got	a
momentum:	from	the	parents	the	body	had	got	chromosomes,	from	his	own	past
karma	the	body	had	got	a	life	circle.	He	was	to	live	eighty	years,	enlightened	or
not.	If	enlightenment	became	possible	or	if	it	happened,	then	too	he	had	to	live
eighty	 years.	 It	 happened	 nearabout	 when	 he	 was	 forty;	 he	 lived	 forty	 years
more.	What	to	do	with	the	energies	now?	Now	there	is	no	desire,	no	ambition.
And	you	have	 infinite	energies	flowing.	What	 to	do	with	 those	energies?	They
can	be	moved	into	compassion.	Now	there	is	no	need	for	meditation	either;	you
have	 attained,	 you	 are	 overflowing	 --	 now	you	 can	 share.	Now	you	 can	 share
with	millions,	you	can	give	it	to	them.
So	 Buddha	 has	 made	 this	 a	 part	 of	 his	 basic	 teaching.	 He	 calls	 the	 first	 part
DHYANA,	 meditation,	 and	 the	 second	 part	 PRAJNA,	 wisdom	 attainment.
Through	meditation	you	reach	to	prajna.	These	are	your	inward	phenomena,	two
parts:	you	meditated,	now	you	have	attained.	Now	to	balance	it	with	the	outer	--
because	a	man	of	enlightenment	is	always	balanced.	Outside,	when	there	was	no
meditation	inside,	there	was	desire.	Now	there	is	wisdom	inside,	there	should	be
compassion.	The	outer	energies	should	become	compassion;	 the	 inner	energies
have	 become	 wisdom,	 enlightenment.	 Enlightenment	 inside,	 compassion
outside.	The	perfect	man	is	always	balanced.	So	Buddha	says	go	on	and	on	and
help	to	save	people.
Gensha	complained:	how	to	do	it	 if	you	come	to	somebody	who	is	deaf,	dumb
and	blind?
--	and	you	almost	always	come	across	such	people	because	only	they	are	there.
You	 don't	 come	 across	 a	 buddha,	 and	 a	 buddha	 doesn't	 need	 you.	 You	 come
across	an	ignorant	person,	not	knowing	what	to	do,	not	knowing	where	to	move.
How	to	help	him?
TROUBLED	BY	THESE	WORDS,	ONE	OF	GENSHA'S	DISCIPLES	WENT
TO
CONSULT	THE	MASTER	UMMON.
Ummon	 was	 a	 brother	 disciple	 to	 Gensha	 --	 they	 were	 disciples	 to	 the	 same
teacher,	Seppo.	So	what	 to	 do?	Gensha	has	 said	 such	 a	 troubling	 thing	 to	 this
man:	how	to	help	people?	He	went	to	Ummon.
Ummon	is	a	very	famous	master.	Gensha	was	a	very	silent	one.	But	Ummon	had
thousands	of	disciples	and	he	had	many	devices	to	work	with	them.	And	he	was
a	man	 like	Gurdjieff	 --	he	would	create	 situations,	because	only	 situations	 can
help.	If	words	can't	help	because	you	are	dumb,	you	are	deaf	--	words	can't	help.
If	you	are	blind,	gestures	are	useless.	Then	what	to	do?	Only	situations	can	help.
If	you	are	blind,	 I	cannot	show	you	 the	door	 just	by	gesture	because	you	can't
see.	I	cannot	tell	you	about	the	door	because	you	are	deaf	and	you	cannot	listen.
Really,	you	cannot	even	ask	the	question,	'Where	is	the	door?'	--	because	you	are
dumb.	What	to	do?	I	have	to	create	a	situation.
I	can	take	hold	of	your	hand,	I	can	take	you	by	my	hand	towards	the	door.	No
gesture,	no	word.	I	have	to	DO	something;	I	have	to	create	a	situation	in	which
the	dumb,	the	deaf	and	the	blind	can	move.
TROUBLED	BY	THESE	WORDS,	ONE	OF	GENSHA'S	DISCIPLES	WENT
TO
CONSULT	THE	MASTER	UMMON.
...	Because	he	knew	well	that	Gensha	wouldn't	say	much;	he	was	not	a	man	of
many	 words	 and	 he	 never	 created	 any	 situation;	 he	 would	 say	 things	 and	 he
would	keep	quiet.
People	had	to	go	to	other	masters	to	ask	what	he	meant.	He	was	a	different	type,
a	 silent	 type	of	man,	 like	Ramana	Maharshi;	he	would	not	 say	much.	Ummon
was	like	Gurdjieff.
He	was	also	not	a	man	of	words,	but	he	would	create	situations,	and	he	would
use	words	only	to	create	situations.
HE	WENT	TO	CONSULT	THE	MASTER	UMMON	WHO,	LIKE	GENSHA,
WAS	A	DISCIPLE	OF	SEPPO.
And	 Seppo	 was	 totally	 different	 from	 both.	 It	 is	 said	 he	 never	 spoke.	 He
remained	completely	silent.	So	there	was	no	problem	for	him	--	he	never	came
across	a	deaf,	dumb	and	blind	man	because	he	never	moved.	Only	people	who
were	in	search,	only	people	whose	eyes	were	slightly	opening,	only	people	who
were	 deaf	 but	 if	 you	 spoke	 loudly	 they	 could	 hear	 something...	 so	 that's	 why
many	people	became	enlightened	near	Seppo	because	only	those	who	were	just
borderline	cases	reached	him.
This	 Ummon	 and	 this	 Gensha,	 these	 two	 disciples	 became	 enlightened	 with
Seppo,	a	totally	silent	man	--	he	would	simply	sit	and	sit	and	do	nothing.	If	you
wanted	to	learn	you	could	be	with	him,	if	you	didn't	want	to	you	could	go.	He
would	not	say	anything.
YOU	had	to	learn,	HE	would	not	teach.	He	was	not	a	teacher,	but	many	people
learned.
The	disciple	went	to	Ummon.
'BOW	PLEASE,'	SAID	UMMON.
He	 started	 immediately,	 because	people	who	 are	 enlightened	don't	waste	 time,
they	simply	jump	to	the	point	immediately.
'BOW	PLEASE,'	SAID	UMMON.
THE	MONK,	THOUGH	TAKEN	BY	SURPRISE....
...	Because	this	is	no	way!	You	don't	order	anybody	to	bow.	And	there	is	no	need
--	if	somebody	wants	to	bow	he	will	bow,	if	he	wants	to	pay	you	respect,	he	will
pay	it.	If	not,	then	not.	What	type	of	man	is	this	Ummon?	He	says	'Bow	please'
before	the	monk	has	asked	anything;	he	has	just	entered	his	room,	and	Ummon
says	'Bow	please.'
THE	MONK,	THOUGH	TAKEN	BY	SURPRISE,	OBEYED	THE	MASTER'S
COMMAND	--	THEN	STRAIGHTENED	UP	IN	EXPECTATION	OF	HAVING
HIS
QUERY	ANSWERED.
BUT	INSTEAD	OF	AN	ANSWER,	HE	GOT	A	STAFF	THRUST	AT	HIM.	HE
LEAPT
BACK.'WELL,'	SAID	UMMON,	'YOU'RE	NOT	BLIND.	NOW	APPROACH.'
He	said:	You	can	see	my	staff,	 so	one	 thing	 is	certain,	you	are	not	blind.	Now
approach.
THE	 MONK	 DID	 AS	 HE	 WAS	 BIDDEN.	 'GOOD,'	 SAID	 UMMON,	 'SO
YOU'RE	NOT
DEAF	EITHER.'
You	can	listen:	I	say	approach	and	you	approach.
'WELL,	UNDERSTAND?'	'UNDERSTAND	WHAT	SIR?'	SAID	THE	MONK.
What	is	he	saying?	He	says:
'WELL,	 UNDERSTAND?'	 'UNDERSTAND	 WHAT	 SIR?	 SAID	 THE
MONK.'AH,	YOU'RE	NOT	DUMB	EITHER,'	SAID	UMMON.	ON	HEARING
THESE	WORDS
THE	MONK	AWOKE	AS	FROM	A	DEEP	SLEEP.
What	happened?	What	is	Ummon	pointing	to?	First,	he	is	saying	that	if	it	is	not	a
problem	to	you	why	be	worried?	There	are	people	who	come	to	me....
A	very	rich	man	came,	one	of	the	richest	in	India,	and	he	said,	'What	about	poor
people,	how	will	you	help	poor	people?'	So	I	told	him,	'If	you	are	a	poor	person,
then	ask;	otherwise	 let	 the	poor	ask.	How	 is	 it	 a	problem	 to	you?	You	are	not
poor,	so	why	create	a	problem	out	of	it?'
Once	Mulla	 Nasruddin's	 child	 asked	 him	 --	 I	 was	 present,	 and	 the	 child	 was
working	 very	 strenuously,	 grumbling	 of	 course,	 on	 his	 homework,	 and	 then
suddenly	 he	 looked	 at	 Nasruddin	 and	 said,	 'Gee	 Dad,	 what	 is	 this	 education
stuff?	Of	what	use	is	all	this	education	stuff	anyway?'
Nasruddin	said,	 'Well,	 there	 is	nothing	 like	education.	 It	makes	you	capable	of
worrying	about	everybody	else	in	the	world	except	you.'
There	is	nothing	like	education.	All	your	education	simply	makes	you	capable	of
worrying	about	situations	everywhere	in	the	world,	about	everyone	except	you	--
about	all	 the	 troubles	 that	are	 in	 the	world.	They	have	always	been	 there,	 they
will	always	be	there.	It	 is	not	because	you	are	here	that	troubles	are	there.	You
were	not	and	they	were	there;	you	will	not	be	soon	and	they	will	remain	there.
They	 change	 their	 colors	 but	 they	 remain.	The	very	 scheme	of	 the	universe	 is
such	 that	 it	 seems	 that	 through	 trouble	 and	 misery	 something	 IS	 growing.	 It
seems	to	be	a	step,	it	seems	to	be	a	necessary	schooling,	a	discipline.
The	first	thing	Ummon	is	pointing	out	is:	You	are	neither	blind,	nor	dumb,	nor
deaf,	so	why	are	you	concerned	and	why	are	you	 troubled?	YOU	have	eyes	--
why	 waste	 time	 thinking	 about	 blind	 men?	Why	 not	 look	 at	 your	 master?	 --
because	blind	men	will	be	 there	always,	your	master	will	not	be	 there	always.
And	you	can	think	and	worry	about	blind	and	deaf	people,	how	to	save	them,	but
the	man	who	can	save	you	will	not	be	there	for	ever.	So	you	be	concerned	about
yourself.
My	 experience	 is	 also	 that	 people	 are	 concerned	 about	 others.	Once	 one	man
brought	to	me	even	exactly	the	same	question.	He	said,	'We	can	listen	to	you	but
what	 about	 those	who	 can't	 come	 to	 listen,	what	 to	 do?	We	 can	 read	 you,'	 he
said,	'but	what	about	those	who	cannot	read?'
They	appear	relevant,	but	they	are	absolutely	irrelevant.	Because	why	are	YOU
worried?
And	if	you	are	worried	in	such	a	way	then	you	can	never	become	enlightened,
because	a	person	who	goes	on	wasting	and	dissipating	his	energy	on	others	never
looks	at	himself.
This	 is	a	 trick	of	 the	mind	 to	escape	 from	oneself	 --	you	go	on	 thinking	about
others	and	you	feel	very	good	because	you	are	worrying	about	others.	You	are	a
great	 social	 reformer	 or	 a	 revolutionary	 or	 a	 utopian,	 a	 great	 servant	 of	 the
society	--	but	what	are	you	doing?	You	are	simply	avoiding	the	basic	question:	it
is	with	YOU	that	something	has	to	be	done.
Forget	the	whole	society,	and	only	then	can	something	be	done	to	you;	and	when
you	are	saved	you	can	start	saving	others.	But	before	that,	please	don't	think	--	it
is	impossible.
Before	 you	 are	 healed,	 you	 cannot	 heal	 anyone.	 Before	 YOU	 are	 filled	 with
light,	 you	 cannot	 help	 anyone	 to	 enkindle	 his	 own	 heart.	 Impossible	 --	 only	 a
lighted	flame	can	help	somebody.	First	become	a	lighted	flame	--	this	is	the	first
point.
And	the	second	point	is,	Ummon	created	a	situation.	He	could	have	said	this	but
he	is	not	saying	it;	he	is	creating	a	situation,	because	only	in	a	situation	are	you
totally	involved.	If	I	say	something	only	intellect	is	involved.	You	listen	from	the
head;	 but	 your	 legs,	 your	 heart,	 your	 kidneys,	 your	 liver,	 your	 totality	 is	 not
involved.	But	when	the	monk	got	a	staff	thrust	at	him	he	jumped	totally.	Then	it
was	total	action;	then	not	only	the	head	and	the	legs,	the	kidneys,	the	liver,	but
the	whole	of	him	JUMPED.
That's	 the	whole	 point	 of	my	meditation	 techniques:	 the	whole	 of	 you	 has	 to
shake,	 jump,	 the	whole	of	you	has	 to	dance,	 the	whole	of	you	has	 to	move.	 If
you	simply	sit	with	closed	eyes	only	the	head	is	involved.	You	can	go	on	and	on
inside	the	head	--	and	there	are	many	people	who	go	on	sitting	for	years	together,
just	with	closed	eyes,	repeating	a	mantra.	But	a	mantra	moves	in	the	head,	your
totality	is	not	involved	--	and	your	totality	is	involved	in	existence.	Your	head	is
only	as	much	in	God	as	your	liver	and	kidneys	and	your	feet.	You	are	totally	in
him,	and	just	the	head	cannot	realize	this.
Anything	 intensely	 active	 will	 be	 helpful.	 Inactive,	 you	 can	 simply	 go	 on
rambling	inside	the	mind.	And	they	have	no	end,	the	dreams,	the	thoughts,	they
have	no	end.	They	go	on	infinitely.
Kabir	 has	 said:	 There	 are	 two	 infinities	 in	 the	 world	 --	 one	 is	 ignorance	 and
another	is	God.	Two	things	are	endless	--	God	is	endless,	and	ignorance.	You	can
go	on	repeating	a	mantra,	but	it	will	not	help	unless	your	whole	life	becomes	a
mantra,	unless	you	are	completely	involved	it	it	--	no	holding	back,	no	division.
That's	what	Ummon	did.	The	monk	got	a	staff	thrust	at	him.
HE	LEAPT	BACK.'WELL,'	SAID	UMMON,	'YOU'RE	NOT	BLIND.	NOW
APPROACH.'
THE	 MONK	 DID	 AS	 HE	 WAS	 BIDDEN.	 'GOOD,	 YOU'RE	 NOT	 DEAF
EITHER.'
What	is	he	pointing	at?	He	is	pointing	at	this:	'You	can	understand,	so	why	waste
time?'
Then	 he	 asks,	 'WELL,	 UNDERSTAND?'	 Ummon	was	 finished.	 The	 situation
was	complete.	But	the	disciple	was	not	yet	ready,	had	not	yet	got	the	point.	He
asked,
'UNDERSTAND	WHAT	 SIR?'	 The	 whole	 thing	 was	 there	 now.	 Ummon	 had
said	whatsoever	was	to	be	said.	And	he	had	created	a	situation	where	thoughts
were	not:	when	 somebody	pushes	a	 staff	 at	you,	you	 jump	without	 thought.	 If
you	think	you	cannot	 jump,	because	by	the	time	you	have	decided	to	jump	the
staff	will	have	hit	you.	There	is	no	time.
Mind	needs	time,	thinking	needs	time.	When	somebody	pushes	a	staff	at	you,	or
suddenly	you	 find	 a	 snake	on	 a	path,	 you	 jump!	You	don't	 think	about	 it,	 you
don't	 make	 a	 logical	 syllogism,	 you	 don't	 say:	 Here	 is	 a	 snake;	 a	 snake	 is
dangerous;	death	is	possible;	I	must	jump.	You	don't	follow	Aristotle	there.	You
simply	put	aside	all	Aristotle	--	YOU	JUMP!
You	 don't	 care	 what	 Aristotle	 says,	 you	 are	 illogical.	 But	 whenever	 you	 are
illogical	you	are	total.
That's	what	Ummon	has	said.	You	jump	totally.	If	you	can	jump	totally,	why	not
meditate	totally?	When	a	staff	is	thrust	at	you,	you	jump	without	caring	about	the
world.
You	don't	ask,	'That's	okay,	but	what	about	a	blind	man?	If	you	push	a	staff,	how
will	 it	 help	 a	 blind	 man?'	 You	 don't	 ask	 a	 question	 --	 you	 simply	 jump;	 you
simply	 avoid.	 In	 that	 moment	 the	 whole	 world	 disappears,	 only	 you	 are	 the
problem.	And	the	problem	is	THERE	--	you	have	to	solve	it	and	come	out	of	it.
'UNDERSTAND?'
--	that's	what	Ummon	asked.	The	point	is	complete.
'UNDERSTAND	WHAT	SIR?'	SAID	THE	MONK.
He	has	still	not	got	it.
'AH,	YOU'RE	NOT	DUMB	EITHER'	--	you	can	speak	also.
ON	HEARING	THESE	WORDS	THE	MONK	AWOKE	AS	FROM	A	DEEP
SLEEP.
A	whole	situation	--	nonverbal,	illogical,	total.	As	if	someone	has	shaken	him	out
of	his	 sleep.	He	awoke;	 for	a	moment	everything	became	clear.	For	a	moment
there	was	 lightning,	 there	was	 no	 darkness.	 Satori	 happened.	Now	 the	 taste	 is
there.	 Now	 this	 disciple	 can	 follow	 the	 taste.	 Now	 he	 has	 known,	 he	 cannot
forget	it	ever.	Now	the	search	will	be	totally	different.	Before	this	it	was	a	search
for	something	unknown	--	and	how	can	you	search	for	an	unknown?	And	how
can	you	put	down	your	 total	 life	 for	 it?	But	now	 it	will	be	 total,	now	 it	 is	not
something	unknown	--	a	glimpse	has	been	given	to	him.
He	has	tasted	the	ocean,	maybe	out	of	a	teacup	but	the	taste	is	the	same.	Now	he
KNOWS.	 It	was	 really	a	 small	 experience	 --	 a	window	opened,	but	 the	whole
sky	was	there.	Now	he	can	move	out	of	the	house,	come	out	under	the	sky	and
live	in	it.	Now	he	knows	that	the	question	is	individual.
Don't	make	 it	 social.	The	question	 is	YOU,	and	when	I	say	you	I	mean	YOU,
each	 individual;	not	you	as	a	group,	not	you	as	a	society.	When	I	mean	you,	 I
mean	simply	you,	the	individual	--	and	the	trick	of	the	mind	is	to	make	it	social.
The	 mind	 wants	 to	 worry	 about	 others	 --	 then	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 You	 can
postpone	 your	 own	 problem;	 that's	 how	you	 have	 been	wasting	 your	 lives	 for
many	lives.	Don't	waste	it	any	more.
I	have	been	pushing	these	talks,	subtler	ones	than	with	Ummon,	but	if	you	don't
listen	to	me	I	may	have	to	find	grosser	things.
Don't	 think	 about	 others.	 First	 solve	 YOUR	 problem,	 then	 you	 will	 have	 the
clarity	to	help	others	also.	And	nobody	can	help	unless	he	is	enlightened	himself.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Seeing	double
9	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411090
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS10
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
88
mins
A	MASTER	WAS	ASKED	BY	A	CURIOUS	MONK:	 'WHAT	IS	THE	WAY?'
'IT	IS
RIGHT	BEFORE	YOUR	EYES,'	SAID	THE	MASTER.'WHY	DO	I	NOT	SEE
IT	FOR
MYSELF?'	 ASKED	 THE	 MONK.'BECAUSE	 YOU	 ARE	 THINKING	 OF
YOURSELF,'
SAID	THE	MASTER.'WHAT	ABOUT	YOU,'	 SAID	THE	MONK,	 'DO	YOU
SEE	IT?'
THE	MASTER	SAID:	'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	SEE	DOUBLE,	SAYING	I	DON'T,
AND
YOU	DO,	AND	SO	ON,	YOUR	EYES	ARE	CLOUDED.'	'WHEN	THERE	IS
NEITHER	 I	 NOR	 YOU,	 CAN	 ONE	 SEE	 IT?'	 SAID	 THE	 MONK.'WHEN
THERE	IS
NEITHER	 I	 NOR	 YOU,	 WHO	 IS	 THE	 ONE	 WHO	 WANTS	 TO	 SEE	 IT?'
REPLIED
THE	MASTER.
YES,	THE	WAY	IS	RIGHT	before	your	eyes.	But	your	eyes	are	not	right	before
the	way
--	they	are	closed,	closed	in	a	very	subtle	manner.	They	are	clouded.	Millions	of
thoughts	are	closing	them,	millions	of	dreams	are	floating	on	them;	whatsoever
you	have	 seen	 is	 all	 there,	whatsoever	 you	have	 thought	 is	 all	 there.	And	you
have	lived	long	--	many	lives,	and	you	have	thought	much,	and	it	is	all	gathered
there	 in	your	 eyes.	But	because	 thoughts	 cannot	be	 seen	you	 see	your	 eyes	 as
clear.	The	clarity	is	not	there.	Millions	of	layers	of	thought	and	dreams	are	there
in	your	eyes.	The	Way	 is	 right	before	you.	All	 that	 is,	 is	 right	before	you.	But
you	are	not	here.	You	are	not	in	that	still	moment	where	eyes	are	totally	empty,
unclouded,	and	you	SEE,	and	you	see	that	which	is.
So	the	first	thing	to	be	understood	is:	how	to	attain	unclouded	eyes,	how	to	make
eyes	empty	so	 that	 they	can	reflect	 truth,	how	not	 to	be	continuously	 in	a	mad
rush	within;	how	not	to	be	continuously	thinking	and	thinking	and	thinking,	how
to	relax	thought.
When	 thought	 is	 not,	 seeing	happens;	when	 thought	 is,	 you	go	on	 interpreting
and	you	go	on	missing.
Don't	be	an	interpreter	of	reality,	be	a	visionary.	Don't	think	about	it,	see	it!
What	to	do?	One	thing:	Whenever	you	look,	just	be	the	look.	Try.	It	is	going	to
be	 difficult,	 difficult	 just	 because	 of	 old	 habit.	 But	 try.	 It	 happens.	 It	 has
happened	to	many,	why	not	you?	You	are	no	exception.	The	universal	law	is	as
available	to	you	as	to	a	buddha	or	to	anybody.	Just	make	a	little	effort.
You	see	a	flower:	 then	just	see,	don't	say	anything.	The	river	 is	flowing:	sit	on
the	 bank	 and	SEE	 the	 river,	 but	 don't	 say	 anything.	Clouds	 are	moving	 in	 the
sky:	 lie	 down	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 SEE,	 and	 don't	 say	 anything.	 Just	 don't
verbalize!
This	 is	 the	 deepest	 habit,	 to	 verbalize;	 this	 is	 your	 whole	 training	 --	 to	 jump
immediately	to	words	from	reality,	to	immediately	start	making	words:	'beautiful
flower,'	'lovely	sunset.'	If	it	is	lovely,	let	it	be	lovely!	--	why	bring	in	this	word?
If	it	is	beautiful,	do	you	think	your	word	'beautiful'	will	make	it	more	beautiful?
On	 the	 contrary,	 you	 missed	 an	 ecstatic	 moment.	 The	 verbalization	 came	 in.
Before	you	could	have	seen	you	moved,	moved	in	an	inner	wandering.	If	you	go
too	far	away	in	this	wandering	you	become	mad.
What	is	a	madman?	He	who	never	comes	to	reality,	who	always	wanders	in	his
own	world	of	words	 --	 and	he	has	wandered	 so	 far	 that	 you	cannot	bring	him
back.	He	is	not	with	the	reality,	but	are	YOU	with	the	reality?	You	are	not	either.
The	difference	 is	only	of	degree.	A	madman	has	wandered	very	far,	you	never
wandered	that	far	--	 just	 in	the	neighborhood	--	and	you	come	again	and	again
and	touch	reality	and	go	again.
You	have	a	small	touch,	a	small	contact	somewhere,	uprooted,	but	still	one	root
seems	to	be	there	in	the	reality.	But	that	root	is	very	fragile;	any	moment	it	can
be	 broken,	 any	 accident	 --	 the	 wife	 dies,	 the	 husband	 escapes,	 you	 become
bankrupt	 in	 the	 market	 --	 and	 that	 fragile	 root	 is	 broken.	 Then	 you	 go	 on
wandering	and	wandering;	 then	 there	 is	no	coming	back,	 then	you	never	 touch
reality.	This	is	the	state	of	the	madman,	and	the	normal	man	is	different	only	in
degree.
And	 what	 is	 the	 state	 of	 a	 buddha,	 an	 enlightened	 man,	 a	 man	 of	 Tao,	 of
understanding,	awareness?	He	is	deeply	rooted	in	reality,	he	never	wanders	from
it	--	just	the	opposite	of	a	madman.
You	are	 in	 the	middle.	From	that	middle	either	you	can	move	 towards	being	a
madman	or	you	can	move	 towards	being	a	buddha.	 It	 is	up	 to	you.	Don't	give
much	energy	to	thoughts,	 that's	suicidal;	you	are	poisoning	yourself.	Whenever
thinking	starts,	if	it	is	unnecessary	--	and	ninety-nine	percent	of	it	is	unnecessary
--	immediately	bring	yourself	back	to	reality.	Anything	will	help:	even	the	touch
of	the	chair	you	are	sitting	on,	or	the	touch	of	the	bed	you	are	lying	on.	Feel	the
touch	--	it	is	more	real	than	your	thoughts	about	God,	it	is	more	godly	than	your
thoughts	about	God	because	it	is	a	real	thing.
Touch	it,	feel	the	touch,	be	the	touch,	be	here	and	now.	You	are	eating?	--	taste
the	food	well,	the	flavor.	Smell	it	well,	chew	it	well	--	you	are	chewing	reality!
Don't	go	wandering	in	thoughts.	You	are	taking	a	bath?	--	enjoy	it!	The	shower	is
falling	on	you?	-
-	 feel	 it!	 Become	 more	 and	 more	 a	 FEELING	 center	 rather	 than	 a	 thinking
center.
And	yes,	the	way	is	right	before	your	eyes.	But	feeling	is	not	allowed	much.	The
society	brings	you	up	as	a	thinking	being	not	as	a	feeling	being,	because	feeling
is	unpredictable;	no	one	knows	where	it	will	lead,	and	society	cannot	leave	you
on	 your	 own.	 It	 gives	 you	 thoughts:	 all	 the	 schools,	 colleges	 and	 universities
exist	as	centers	to	train	you	for	thinking,	to	verbalize	more.	The	more	words	you
have,	the	more	talented	you	are	thought;	the	more	articulate	you	are	with	words
and	words,	the	more	educated	you	are	thought.	It	will	be	difficult,	because	thirty,
forty,	 fifty,	 sixty	years	 of	 training...	 but	 the	 sooner	you	begin	 the	better.	Bring
yourself	back	to	reality.
That	 is	 the	meaning	of	 all	 sensitivity	groups.	 In	 the	West	 they	have	become	a
focal	 point	 and	 all	 those	 who	 are	 interested	 in	 consciousness,	 extension	 of
consciousness,	have	to	be	interested	in	sensitivity	groups,	in	training	to	be	more
sensitive.	 And	 you	 need	 not	 go	 anywhere	 to	 learn	 it,	 the	 whole	 of	 life	 is
sensitivity.	Twenty-four	hours	a	day	the	reality	is	just	before	you,	around	you	--
it	surrounds	you;	you	breathe	it	in,	you	eat	it.	Whatsoever	you	do	you	have	to	do
with	reality.
But	the	mind	moves	far	away.	There	exists	a	gap	between	your	being	and	your
mind	--
they	are	not	together,	the	mind	is	somewhere	else.	You	have	to	be	here	in	reality
because	when	 you	 eat	 you	 have	 to	 eat	 real	 bread;	 thinking	 about	 bread	won't
help.	When	you	take	a	bath	you	have	to	take	a	real	bath;	thinking	about	it	is	of
no	 use.	When	 you	 breathe	 you	 have	 to	 breathe	 real	 air;	 just	 thinking	 about	 it
won't	do.	Reality	surrounds	you	from	everywhere,	is	bumping	you	from	all	sides
--	wherever	you	go	you	encounter	it.
That	is	the	meaning	of:	The	way	is	right	in	front	of	your	eyes.	It	is	everywhere
because	nothing	else	can	be	--	only	the	real	IS.
Then	what	is	the	problem?	Why	then	do	people	go	on	seeking	and	seeking	and
seeking	and	never	find	it?	Where	does	the	problem	exist?	What	is	the	basic	core
of	the	whole	trouble?	The	trouble	is,	mind	can	be	in	thoughts.	The	possibility	for
mind	being	 in	 thoughts	 is	 there.	The	body	 is	 in	 reality,	but	 the	mind	can	be	 in
thoughts	--	and	that	is	 the	duality.	And	all	your	religions	have	been	in	favor	of
the	mind	and	not	in	favor	of	the	body.	That	has	been	the	greatest	block	that	has
ever	existed	in	this	world.	They	poison	the	whole	mind	of	humanity;	they	are	for
the	mind,	not	for	the	reality.
If	I	tell	you:	When	you	are	eating,	eat	with	taste,	and	eat	so	deeply	that	the	eater
is	 forgotten,	 simply	 become	 the	 process	 of	 eating	 --	 you	 will	 be	 surprised
because	no	religious	man	will	say	a	thing	like	that.	Religious	people	have	been
teaching:	Eat	without	 taste	 --	ASWAD;	 they	have	made	a	great	 thing	out	of	 it,
the	training	for	no-taste.
In	Gandhi's	ashram	 they	had	eleven	 rules.	One	of	 them	was	aswad,	no	 taste	 --
eat,	but	without	taste,	kill	the	taste	completely.	Drink	--	but	without	taste.	Make
your	 life	 as	 insensitive	 as	possible.	Deaden	your	body	completely,	 so	 that	 you
become	a	pure	mind.
You	will	become	so	--	but	this	is	how	people	go	towards	madness.
I	teach	you	just	the	contrary,	just	the	opposite.	I	am	not	against	life	--	and	life	is
the	way.
I	affirm	life	in	its	totality.	I	am	not	a	negator,	I	am	not	a	denier	--	and	I	want	you
to	bring	your	mind	back	to	reality.	Your	body	is	more	real	than	your	mind.	You
can	befool	with	 the	mind,	you	cannot	befool	with	 the	body.	The	body	 is	more
rooted	in	the	world;	 the	body	is	more	existential	 than	your	mind.	Your	mind	is
just	mental.	 It	 thinks,	 it	 spins	words,	 it	 creates	 systems	 --	 and	 all	 systems	 are
foolish.
Once	it	happened,	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	gambling	in	a	horse	race.	First	race	he
lost;	second,	he	lost;	 third	--	he	went	on	losing,	and	two	ladies	 just	by	his	side
sitting	in	a	box	were	continuously	winning	every	race.
Then	at	 the	seventh	he	could	not	contain	his	curiosity.	What	system	were	 they
following?
Every	race,	and	it	was	now	the	seventh,	they	had	been	winners	and	he	had	been	a
loser,	 and	 he	 had	 been	working	 so	 hard	 at	 it.	 So	 he	 gathered	 courage,	 leaned
over,	and	asked	the	ladies:	'You	are	doing	well?'
They	said,	'Yes,'	very	happily,	they	were	beaming	with	happiness.
So	he	whispered:	'Can	you	tell	me	about	your	system?	Just	a	hint.'
One	lady	said	laughingly,	'We	have	a	lot	of	systems!	But	today	we	have	decided
for	long	tails.'
But	all	systems	and	all	philosophies	are	just	like	that	--	long	tails.	No	system	is
true	 to	 reality	because	no	 system	CAN	be	 true	 to	 reality.	 I	 am	not	 saying	 that
some	system	can	be	--	no.	NO	system	can	be	true	to	reality	because	all	systems
are	 fabrications	 of	 the	 mind,	 verbalizations,	 your	 interpretations,	 your
projections	--	mind	working	on	reality.
That's	how	a	system	is	born;	all	systems	are	false.
Reality	needs	no	system.	Reality	needs	a	clarity	of	vision.	To	look	at	it	needs	no
philosophy,	it	is	right	here	and	now.	Before	you	start	moving	into	a	philosophy	it
is	 there;	when	you	come	back	 it	will	be	 there	and	will	have	always	been	 there
with	you	--	and	you	were	thinking	about	it.	Thinking	about	it	is	the	way	to	miss
it.
If	you	are	a	Hindu	you	will	miss,	if	you	are	a	Christian	you	will	miss,	if	you	are
a	Mohammedan	you	will	miss;	every	'ism'	is	a	way	of	missing.	If	you	have	the
Koran	 in	your	head	you	will	miss,	 if	you	have	 the	Gita	 in	your	head	you	will
miss;	whatsoever	scripture	you	carry	--	scripture	is	mind,	and	reality	doesn't	fall
in	 line	 with	 the	 mind,	 reality	 does	 not	 bother	 about	 your	 mind	 and	 your
fabrications.
Beautiful	 theories	 you	 spin,	 beautiful	 arguments	 you	 give,	 logical
rationalizations	 you	 find.	 You	 work	 hard.	 You	 go	 on	 refining	 your	 theories,
polishing	 them,	but	 they	are	 just	 like	bricks:	you	go	on	rubbing,	polishing,	but
they	can	never	become	a	mirror.	But	I	say:	Maybe	bricks	can	become	a	mirror,
but	the	mind	can	NEVER	become	a	mirror	to	reality.
The	mind	is	a	destroyer.	The	moment	it	enters,	everything	becomes	cloudy.
Please	don't	be	a	philosopher,	and	don't	be	an	addict	of	any	system.	It	is	easy	to
bring	an	alcoholic	back,	it	is	easy	to	bring	back	a	person	who	has	gone	deep	into
drugs;	it	is	difficult	to	bring	a	system-addict	back.	And	there	exist	organizations
like	 Alcoholics	 Anonymous	 for	 alcoholics	 and	 other	 organizations	 for	 drug
addicts,	 but	 there	 exists	 no	 organization	 for	 people	who	 have	 become	 system-
addicts	--	and	there	cannot	be,	because	whenever	there	is	an	organization,	it	itself
is	a	system.
I	 am	 not	 giving	 you	 a	 system.	 My	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 bring	 you	 out	 of	 your
systematizing	mind.	If	you	can	become	again	a	child,	if	you	can	look	at	reality
without	any	preconceptions	about	it,	you	will	attain.	It	 is	simple,	 it	 is	ordinary,
nothing	 is	 special	 about	 it.	Reality	 is	 nothing	 special	 and	 extraordinary	 --	 it	 is
there,	it	is	everywhere.	Only	your	mind	is	an	unreal	thing.	Mind	creates	illusion,
MAYA,	mind	creates	dreams	--	and	then	you	are	clouded	in	them.	And	you	are
trying	to	do	the	impossible,	that	which	cannot	be	done:	you	are	trying	to	find	the
real	 through	 the	mind.	You	 lose	 the	 real	 through	 the	mind,	 you	 cannot	 find	 it
through	the	mind.	You	have	to	drop	the	mind	completely.
Yes,	the	way	is	right	before	your	eyes	--	but	you	are	not	there.
First	 thing:	 mind	 won't	 help.	 Try	 to	 understand	 it:	 mind	 won't	 help,	 it	 is	 the
barrier.	And	 the	 second	 thing:	your	over-concern	about	yourself	 is	 the	greatest
barrier.	 It	 has	 been	 my	 constant	 observation	 that	 people	 who	 meditate	 miss
because	 they	 are	 concerned	 too	much	 in	 themselves.	 They	 are	 too	 egocentric.
They	 may	 pretend	 humbleness	 and	 they	 may	 even	 want	 to	 know	 how	 to	 be
egoless,	 but	 they	 are	 the	most	 egocentric	 people;	 they	 are	 only	worried	 about
themselves,	they	are	only	concerned	with	themselves.
To	be	worried	about	others	 is	stupid;	 to	be	worried	about	oneself	 is	even	more
stupid	--
because	to	be	worried	IS	stupidity;	it	makes	no	difference	about	whom	you	are
worried.
And	people	who	are	worried	 about	others,	 you	will	 feel	 they	are	 always	more
healthy.
So	 in	 the	 West	 psychoanalysts	 help	 people	 to	 think	 about	 others	 and	 drop
thinking	 about	 themselves.	 Psychologists	 go	 on	 teaching	 people	 how	 to	 be
extroverts	and	not	to	be	introverts,	because	an	introvert	becomes	ill,	an	introvert
becomes	in	reality	perverted.	He	thinks	continuously	about	himself,	he	becomes
enclosed.	 He	 remains	 with	 his	 frustrations,	 worries,	 anxieties,	 anguish,
depressions,	anger,	jealousy,	hate,	this	and	that	--
and	 he	 only	 worries.	 Think	 what	 type	 of	 anguish	 he	 lives	 in,	 continuously
worried	about	things:	Why	am	I	angry?	How	should	I	become	non-angry?	Why
do	I	hate?	How	should	I	transcend	it?	Why	am	I	depressed?	How	to	attain	bliss?
--	he	 is	continuously	worried,	and	 through	this	worry	he	creates	 the	very	same
things	he	is	worried	about.	It	becomes	a	vicious	circle.
Have	you	ever	observed	that	whenever	you	want	to	go	beyond	a	depression	the
depression	 deepens?	 Whenever	 you	 want	 not	 to	 be	 angry	 you	 become	 more
angry.
Whenever	 you	 are	 sad	 and	 you	 don't	want	 to	 be	 sad	 any	more,	more	 sadness
descends	on	you	--	have	you	not	observed	it?	It	happens	because	of	the	Law	of
the	Reverse	Effect.	If	you	are	sad	and	you	want	not	to	be	sad,	what	will	you	do?
You	will	look	at	sadness,	you	will	try	to	suppress	it,	you	will	be	attentive	to	it	--
and	attention	is	food.
Psychoanalysts	have	found	a	clue.	That	clue	is	not	very	meaningful	in	the	end;	it
cannot	lead	you	to	reality,	it	can	at	the	most	make	you	NORMALLY	unhealthy.
It	can	make	you	adjusted	--	it	is	a	sort	of	adjustment	to	the	people	around	you.
They	say:	Be	concerned	with	others'	worries,	help	people,	serve	people.
Rotarians,	 members	 of	 Lions	 Clubs	 and	 others,	 they	 always	 say:	 We	 serve.
Those	are	the	extroverts.	But	you	will	feel	that	people	who	are	in	social	service,
those	who	are	concerned	with	others	and	are	less	concerned	with	themselves	are
happier	than	people	who	are	concerned	too	much	with	themselves.
Too	much	 concern	with	 oneself	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 disease.	And	 then	 the	 deeper	 you
move	within
--	you	are	opening	a	Pandora's	Box:	many	things	bubble	up	and	there	seems	to
be	no	end	to	it.	You	are	surrounded	by	your	own	anxieties	and	you	go	on	playing
with	your	wounds,	you	go	on	touching	them	again	and	again	to	see	whether	they
are	healed	or	not.
You	have	become	a	pervert.
What	 to	do?	There	seem	to	be	only	 two	ways:	either	be	an	extrovert	 --	but	by
being	 an	 extrovert	 you	 can	 NEVER	 become	 a	 buddha,	 because	 if	 you	 are
worried	 about	 others,	 this	worrying	 about	 others	may	 be	 an	 escape.	 It	 is.	You
cannot	look	at	your	own	worries	when	you	are	worried	about	others.	Your	focus
is	others,	you	are	 in	 a	 shadow.	But	how	will	your	 inner	being	grow	 this	way?
You	will	 look	more	happy,	you	may	 look	as	 if	you	are	enjoying	 life	more,	but
how	are	you	going	to	grow?	How	will	your	inner	being	come	to	that	point	where
it	becomes	light?	If	you	are	not	concerned	with	it	at	all,	it	is	not	going	to	grow.
To	 be	 an	 extrovert	 is	 good	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 you	 remain	 healthy	 --	 you	 don't
become	a	pervert.	To	be	an	introvert	is	dangerous.	If	you	move	wrongly,	you	will
become	a	pervert	and	 the	wrong	movement	 is	 that	you	become	 too	concerned.
Then	what	to	do?
Treat	yourself	as	if	you	also	are	the	other;	don't	be	too	concerned.
And	you	ARE	the	other.	Your	body	is	other,	why	not	my	own	body	also?	Your
mind	is	other,	why	not	my	own	mind?	The	question	is	only	distance:	your	body
is	 five	 feet	 away	 from	me,	my	 body	 is	 a	 little	 closer,	 that's	 all.	 Your	mind	 is
there,	my	mind	is	here	--	the	difference	is	of	distance.	But	my	mind	is	as	other	as
your	mind,	and	my	body	is	as	far	away	from	me	as	your	body.	And	if	this	whole
world	is	not	a	concern	to	me,	why	make	myself	a	concern?	Why	not	leave	both
and	be	neither	extrovert	nor	introvert?	--	this	is	my	message.
If	 you	 cannot	 follow	 this	 then	 it	 is	 better	 to	 follow	 the	 psychoanalysts.	Be	 an
extrovert,	be	unconcerned;	you	will	not	grow	but	at	least	you	will	not	suffer	so
much	as	an	introvert	suffers.	But	don't	be	an	introvert	and	don't	play	with	your
wounds.	Don't	be	concerned	too	much.	Don't	be	so	selfish	and	don't	be	so	self-
centered.	Look	at	yourself	from	a	distance;	the	distance	is	there,	you	only	have
to	try	it	once	and	you	will	feel	it.	You	are	also	the	other.
When	your	body	 is	 ill	 it	 is	 as	 if	 somebody	else's	body	 is	 ill:	 do	whatsoever	 is
needed	but	don't	be	 too	concerned,	because	that	overmuch	concern	is	a	greater
illness	than	the	body's.	If	you	have	a	fever	go	to	the	doctor,	 take	the	medicine,
take	care	of	 the	body,	and	 that's	all.	Why	be	concerned	 too	much?	Why	create
another	fever	--	which	no	doctor	can	treat?	This	fever	in	the	body	can	be	treated,
but	if	you	become	too	concerned	another	fever	is	created.	That	fever	is	deeper,
no	doctor	can	help	with	it.
And	 this	 is	 the	 problem:	 the	 body	may	become	well	 soon,	 but	 the	 other	 fever
may	continue;	and	the	other	fever	may	go	on	continuing,	and	you	may	feel	that
the	body	is	still	ill.	This	happens	every	day:	the	disease	disappears	from	the	body
but	not	from	the	mind	and	the	mind	carries	it	on.	It	has	happened	many	times.
Once	somebody	was	telling	me	about	his	friend	who	is	a	drunkard	--	he	walks	on
crutches,	he	cannot	walk	without	them.	For	many	years	he	has	been	walking	on
crutches	-
-	 some	accident	 some	 twenty	years	ago.	Then	one	day	he	had	 taken	 too	much
drink;	he	forgot	 the	crutches	and	went	out	 for	a	walk.	After	one	hour	he	came
running	back	in	a	panic;	he	said,	'Where	are	my	crutches?	I	cannot	walk	without
them!	 I	must	have	 taken	 too	much.'	But	 if	while	you	are	drunk	you	can	walk,
why	not	when	you	are	not	drunk?
All	 over	 the	 world	 many	 cases	 are	 reported	 about	 paralysis.	 Somebody	 is
paralyzed	and	then	the	house	catches	fire	and	everybody	runs	out,	and	the	man
who	was	paralyzed	and	who	couldn't	get	out	of	his	bed	--	everything	was	done	in
the	bed	--	he	also	runs	out,	because	he	forgets.	The	house	is	on	fire,	he	forgets
completely	 that	 he	 is	 paralyzed.	 In	 that	 forgetfulness	 he	 is	 not	 paralyzed.	And
outside	the	house	the	family	looks	at	him	and	says,	 'What	are	you	doing?	How
can	you	run?'	--	and	he	falls	down;	remembering	comes	back.
You	may	be	creating	many	diseases,	not	because	the	body	is	ill	but	because	the
mind	carries	the	seed.	So	once	a	disease	happens	the	mind	carries	the	seed	and
goes	on	projecting	it	again	and	again	and	again.	Many	diseases,	ninety	percent,
have	their	origin	in	the	mind.
Too	much	concern	about	yourself	is	the	greatest	disease	possible.	You	cannot	be
happy,	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 yourself.	 How	 can	 you	 enjoy?	 So	 many	 problems
inside!	 Problems	 and	 problems	 and	 problems	 and	 nothing	 else!	 --	 and	 there
seems	to	be	no	solution.	What	to	do?	You	go	crazy.	Everybody,	inside,	IS	crazy.
I	 have	 heard	 --	 it	 happened	 in	Washington	 --	 one	man	 suddenly	 climbed	 up	 a
pole,	 a	 flagpole.	 A	 crowd	 gathered,	 policemen	 came,	 and	 the	man	 shouted	 as
loudly	as	he	could,	uttered	profane	words,	then	came	down.
Immediately	he	was	caught	by	the	police	and	they	asked	the	person,	 'What	are
you	doing	here?'
The	man	said,	'Don't	disturb	me.	If	I	don't	do	such	a	crazy	thing	now	and	then	I
will	go	mad,	I	will	go	nuts.	I	tell	you,	don't	stop	me.	If	I	do	such	a	thing	now	and
then	everything	runs	smoothly.	And	I	did	not	think	that	anybody	would	be	able
to	 know,	 because	 where	 so	 much	 craziness	 is	 going	 on	 all	 around,	 who	 will
bother?'
You	also	need	to	become	mad	now	and	then	--	that's	how	anger	happens:	anger	is
a	temporary	madness.	If	you	don't	allow	a	leakage	now	and	then	you	will	gather
so	 much	 you	 will	 explode,	 you	 will	 go	 nuts.	 But	 if	 you	 are	 continuously
concerned	with	this	you	are	already	nuts.
This	has	been	my	observation,	that	people	who	meditate,	pray,	seek	and	search
for	 the	 truth	 are	more	 prone	 to	 neurosis	 than	 other	 people.	And	 the	 reason	 is:
they	are	concerned	with	themselves	too	much,	too	egocentric,	just	continuously
thinking	 of	 this	 and	 that,	 this	 block,	 that	 block,	 this	 anger,	 that	 sadness,
headache,	backache,	stomach,	legs...	they	are	continuously	moving	inside.	They
are	 never	 okay,	 they	 cannot	 be,	 because	 the	 body	 is	 a	 vast	 phenomenon	 and
many	things	go	on.
And	 if	 nothing	 is	 happening	 then	 too	 they	 are	 worried:	 why	 is	 nothing
happening?	 And	 immediately	 they	 have	 to	 create	 something	 because	 that	 has
become	 their	 constant	 business,	 occupation;	 otherwise	 they	 feel	 lost.	What	 to
do?	Nothing	is	happening!	How	is	it	possible	that	nothing	is	happening	to	me?
They	feel	their	ego	only	when	something	is	happening	--	maybe	it	is	depression,
sadness,	anger,	an	illness,	but	if	something	is	happening	they	are	okay,	they	can
feel	themselves.
Have	you	seen	children?	They	pinch	themselves	to	feel	that	they	are.	The	child
remains	in	you	--	you	would	like	to	pinch	and	see	whether	you	are	or	not.
It	 is	 said	 about	Mark	Twain	 that	 once	 at	 a	 dinner	 party	 he	was	 suddenly	 in	 a
panic	and	he	said,	'Sorry,	I	will	have	to	leave,	and	you	will	have	to	call	a	doctor.
It	seems	my	right	leg	has	become	paralyzed.'
The	 lady	 sitting	 by	 his	 side	 started	 laughing	 and	 said,	 'Don't	 be	worried,	 you
have	been	pinching	MY	leg.'
Then	Mark	Twain	said,	'Once	twenty	years	ago	a	doctor	said	to	me,	"Some	day
or	other	your	right	side	will	get	paralyzed,"	so	since	then	I	have	been	pinching
myself;	I	always	feel,	twenty	or	thirty	times	a	day,	whether	it	has	gone.	Just	now
I	was	pinching	and'	...	he	was	pinching	somebody	else's	leg.
But	 why	 go	 on	 pinching?	Why	 be	 concerned	 with	 paralysis?	 It	 is	 more	 of	 a
disease	if	you	have	to	pinch	your	leg	thirty	times	a	day	for	twenty	years.	Count
it.	This	is	worse	than	paralysis!	Paralysis	happens	once;	this	is	happening	thirty
times	a	day	for	twenty	years.
They	 say	a	brave	man	dies	once	and	cowards	die	millions	of	 times	 --	because
they	go	on	pinching	and	feeling	whether	they	are	dead	yet	or	not.
Your	diseases	help	you	to	retain	your	ego.	You	feel	that	something	is	happening	-
-	of	course	not	bliss,	not	ecstasy,	but	sadness	and	'Nobody	is	as	sad	as	I	am,'	and
'Nobody	is	as	blocked	as	I	am,'	and	'Nobody	has	such	a	migraine	as	I	have	got.'
You	feel	superior	there,	everybody	else	is	inferior.
If	you	are	concerned	too	much	with	yourself	remember,	you	will	not	attain.	This
over-concern	will	enclose	you,	and	the	Way	is	right	before	your	eyes.	You	have
to	open	your	eyes,	not	close	them.
Now	try	to	understand	this	parable.
A	MASTER	WAS	ASKED	BY	A	CURIOUS	MONK:	'WHAT	IS	THE	WAY?'
The	first	thing	is	to	understand	that	the	monk	is	curious,	not	a	seeker.	If	you	are	a
seeker	 you	 inquire	 in	 a	 different	 way.	 You	 inquire	 with	 your	 being,	 you	 put
yourself	at	stake,	you	become	a	gambler.	If	you	are	simply	curious	it	is	just	like
an	itch;	you	feel	a	subtle	itch	in	the	mind	but	it	is	nothing,	you	are	not	REALLY
concerned	with	 it,	 not	 sincere	 about	 it	 --	 whatsoever	 the	 answer	 you	will	 not
bother.	 It	 will	 not	 change	 you.	 And	 a	 curious	 man	 is	 a	 superficial	 man.	 You
cannot	ask	such	questions	out	of	curiosity,	you	have	 to	ask	 them	out	of	a	very
authentic	 search.	 And	 when	 you	 go	 to	 a	 master	 you	 feel	 you	 have	 to	 ask
something;	otherwise	you	will	be	thought	foolish.
Many	people	come	 to	me	and	 I	know	from	where	 they	are	asking.	Sometimes
they	 are	 simply	 curious:	 because	 they	 have	 come,	 now	 they	 have	 to	 ask;
otherwise	 they	 will	 be	 thought	 foolish.	 And	 by	 asking	 they	 prove	 they	 ARE
foolish,	because	if	 the	question	has	not	really	arisen	in	you,	if	 the	question	has
not	become	a	deep	inquiry,	if	the	question	does	not	put	everything	at	stake,	if	the
problem	is	not	a	problem	of	life	and	death,	if	you	are	not	ready	to	be	transformed
by	the	answer,	you	are	foolish	if	you	ask.	And	if	you	are	not	questioning	from
the	heart,	 it	 is	difficult	 to	give	any	answer,	and	even	if	an	answer	 is	given	you
will	misunderstand	it.
The	monk	was	 a	 curious	monk,	 that's	why	 in	 this	 parable	 he	 does	 not	 awake.
Otherwise...
we	have	been	studying	many	parables;	when	the	search	is	true,	in	the	end	satori
happens,	a	certain	enlightenment	comes.	Suddenly	a	disciple	becomes	alert,	as	if
someone	has	shaken	him	out	of	his	sleep.	A	clarity	comes.	Maybe	only	for	a	split
second,	but	clouds	disperse	and	the	vast	sky	is	seen.	The	clouds	will	come	again
--	that's	not	the	problem,	but	now	you	know	what	real	sky	is	and	you	will	carry
this	 seed	within	 you.	Rightly	 taken	 care	 of,	 this	 seed	will	 become	 a	 tree,	 and
thousands	will	be	able	to	find	rest	and	shelter	under	you.	But	if	you	are	curious,
nothing	will	 happen.	 If	 you	 are	 curious,	 the	 question	 has	 not	 come	 out	 of	 the
heart.	It	is	an	intellectual	itch	--	and	in	mind,	seeds	cannot	be	sown.
Jesus	has	a	parable	--	he	was	continuously	talking	about	it.	A	farmer	went	to	sow
seeds.
He	 just	 threw	them	here	and	 there.	Some	fell	on	 the	road;	 they	never	sprouted
because	the	road	was	hard	and	the	seeds	could	not	penetrate	the	soil,	they	could
not	move	in	the	deeper,	darker	realm	of	the	soil.	...	Because	only	there	does	birth
happen,	only	in	the	deep	dark	does	God	start	working.	The	work	is	secret	work,
it	is	hidden.
Some	 fell	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 road;	 they	 sprouted,	 but	 animals	 destroyed	 them.
Only	some	fell	on	the	right	soil;	 they	not	only	sprouted,	they	grew	to	their	full
height,	they	flowered,	they	came	to	fulfillment,	and	one	seed	came	to	be	millions
of	seeds.
If	you	ask	from	curiosity,	you	are	asking	from	the	road.	The	head	is	just	a	road	--
it	has	to	be,	it	has	such	a	constant	traffic.	It	has	to	be	very	hard,	almost	concrete.
Even	on	your	roads	the	traffic	is	not	so	much	as	in	your	head.	So	many	thoughts
going	here	and	there	at	fast	speed!	We	have	not	yet	been	able	to	invent	a	faster
vehicle	 than	 thought	 --	 our	 fastest	 vehicles	 are	 nothing	 before	 thought.	 Your
astronauts	 may	 reach	 the	 moon,	 but	 they	 cannot	 reach	 it	 with	 the	 speed	 of
thought,	 they	 will	 take	 time;	 you	 can	 simply	 immediately	 reach	 the	 moon	 in
thought.	 For	 thought,	 it	 is	 as	 if	 space	 does	 not	 exist:	 one	moment	 you	 can	 be
here,	 next	moment	 in	London	 and	 the	 next	 in	New	York,	 and	 hop	 around	 the
world	many	times	within	a	second.	So	much	traffic...	the	road	is	almost	concrete;
throw	something	there,	it	will	never	sprout.
Curiosity	 comes	 from	 the	 head.	 It	 is	 asking	 a	master	 something	 just	 as	 if	 you
have	encountered	him	in	the	market	and	you	ask	him.	I	know	such	people.	I	was
traveling	so	much	it	was	a	problem	to	avoid	such	people.	Even	on	the	platform	--
I	 am	going	 to	 catch	 a	 train	 and	 they	 are	 accompanying	me	 and	 they	will	 ask,
'What	about	God?	Does	God	exist	or	not?'	These	people	are	curious	and	they	are
foolish!	Never	ask	a	question	out	of	curiosity,	because	it	is	useless,	wasting	your
time	and	others'.
If	 somebody	 had	 asked	 this	master	 the	 question	 right	 from	 the	 heart,	 the	 end
would	 have	 been	 different.	 The	 man	 would	 have	 flowered	 into	 satori,	 there
would	 have	 been	 a	 fulfillment.	 But	 there	 is	 no	 end	 like	 that	 because	 the	 very
beginning	 was	 wrong.	 A	 master	 gives	 you	 an	 answer	 out	 of	 compassion,
knowing	 well	 that	 you	 are	 curious	 --	 but	 maybe,	 who	 knows,	 even	 accidents
happen;	sometimes	curious	people	also	become	authentically	interested,	nobody
knows.
A	MASTER	WAS	ASKED	BY	A	CURIOUS	MONK:	 'WHAT	IS	THE	WAY?'
'IT	IS
RIGHT	BEFORE	YOUR	EYES,'	SAID	THE	MASTER.
This	 is	 absurd	because	 if	 it	 is	 really	 right	before	 the	 eyes	 then	why	do	people
seek,	why	do	people	inquire?	And	why	can't	they	see	for	themselves?
A	few	things	to	be	understood.	One:	the	closer	a	thing,	the	more	difficult	it	is	to
see	it	--
the	closest	almost	impossible,	because	eyes	need	a	certain	space,	perspective,	to
see.	I	can	see	you,	but	if	I	go	on	coming	closer	and	closer	and	closer	everything
will	be	blurred;	your	face	will	be	blurred,	lines	will	lose	their	shape.	And	if	I	go
on	coming	and	coming	and	just	put	my	eyes	on	your	face,	nothing	will	be	seen	--
your	face	will	become	a	wall.
But	still	I	can	see	a	little	because	a	little	distance	will	be	there.
Not	even	that	much	distance	exists	between	you	and	the	real.	It	is	just	touching
your	eyes.
It	 is	 just	 touching	 your	 skin	 --	 not	 only	 that,	 it	 is	 penetrating	 the	 skin.	 It	 is
moving	in	your	blood.	It	is	beating	in	your	heartbeat.	It	is	you.	The	Way	is	not
only	in	front	of	your	eyes,	the	way	is	YOU.	You	are	one	with	it.	The	traveler	is
not	different	from	the	Way,	not	in	reality;	they	are	one.
So	 how	 to	 see	 it?	 No	 perspective,	 no	 space...?	 Unless	 you	 attain	 to	 a	 clear
intelligence,	to	a	clarity	of	understanding,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	it.	Unless
you	become	so	intensely	aware,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	it.	The	distance	is	not
there,	 so	 ordinary	ways	 of	 looking	AT	will	 not	 do;	 you	 need	 an	 extraordinary
awareness,	to	be	so	extraordinarily	alert	that	nothing	is	asleep	in	you.	Suddenly
the	door	opens.	The	Way	is	there	--	you	ARE
the	Way.	But	 you	miss	 because	 it	 is	 there	 already.	 It	 has	 always	 been	 there	 --
before	you	were	born.	You	were	born	on	the	Way,	in	the	Way,	for	the	Way,	of	the
Way	--	because	the	Way	is	the	reality.
Remember,	this	Way	doesn't	go	to	a	goal;	this	Way	IS	the	goal.	So	in	fact	there	is
no	 traveling,	 just	 staying	 alert,	 just	 being	 still,	 silent,	 not	 doing	 anything.	 Just
becoming	a	clarity,	an	awareness,	a	silent	cool	understanding.
'IT	IS	RIGHT	BEFORE	YOUR	EYES,'	SAID	THE	MASTER.'WHY	DO	I	NOT
SEE	IT
FOR	MYSELF?'	ASKED	THE	MONK.
When	 you	 are	 curious,	 every	 answer	 will	 create	 another	 question,	 because
curiosity	can	never	be	satisfied.	Inquiry	can	be	satisfied,	inquiry	can	come	to	an
end,	to	a	conclusion;	never	curiosity,	because	you	bring	again	the	same	curious
mind	to	 the	answer,	again	a	new	question	comes	out	of	 it.	You	can	satisfy	one
who	is	really	in	inquiry,	you	cannot	satisfy	one	who	is	simply	asking:	'WHY	DO
I	NOT	SEE	IT	FOR	MYSELF?'
Another	 thing:	 a	 curious	 person	 deep	 down	 is	 not	 concerned	 with	 reality,	 is
concerned	 only	 with	 himself.	 He	 says,	 'WHY	 DO	 I	 NOT	 SEE	 IT	 FOR
MYSELF?	Why	can	you	 see	 it	 and	why	can't	 I	 see	 it?	 I	 cannot	believe	you,	 I
cannot	trust,	and	if	it	is	right	in	front	of	my	eyes	then	why	can't	I	see	it?'
'BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	THINKING	OF	YOURSELF,'	SAID	THE	MASTER.
The	Way	is	there,	and	you	are	thinking	about	yourself:	'Why	can't	I	see?'	Nobody
can	see	who	is	filled	so	much	with	the	ego.	Put	it	aside,	because	the	ego	means
your	 whole	 past,	 all	 that	 you	 have	 experienced,	 all	 that	 you	 have	 been
conditioned	 for,	 all	 that	 you	 have	 known,	 studied,	 collected,	 gathered	 --
information,	scripture,	knowledge	--	all	that	is	your	ego,	the	whole	lot,	and	if	you
are	concerned	with	it,	you	cannot	see	it.'WHAT	ABOUT
YOU?'	SAID	THE	MONK.
Whatsoever	a	master	says,	every	answer	could	lead	to	a	satori	--	if	the	person	is
right.
Just	the	first	thing,	when	he	said,	'IT	IS	RIGHT	BEFORE	YOUR	EYES,'	would
have	become	an	enlightenment	if	the	right	person	had	been	there.	But	he	missed;
otherwise	the	next	statement	would	have	been	an	understanding.
'WHY	DO	I	NOT	SEE	IT	FOR	MYSELF?'	HE	ASKED.'BECAUSE	YOU	ARE
THINKING	OF	YOURSELF.'
But	 no.	 Curiosity	 cannot	 be	 satisfied,	 it	 never	 comes	 to	 an	 end.	 Suddenly,
whenever	you	touch	somebody's	'I',	he	jumps	on	you.	He	said:
'AND	WHAT	ABOUT	YOU...	DO	YOU	SEE	IT?'
Ego	always	feels:	If	I	cannot	see	it,	how	can	anybody	else	see	it?	The	ego	can
never	feel	that	anybody	else	can	be	egoless:	impossible.	And	if	you	can	feel	this
your	ego	has	already	started	dying.	If	you	can	feel	that	somebody	can	be	egoless,
already	the	grip	is	loosening.	The	ego	won't	allow	you	to	feel	that	anybody	has
EVER	been	without	an	ego.
And	because	of	your	ego	you	go	on	projecting	egos	on	others.
Many	books	have	been	written	about	Jesus	--	more	 than	about	anybody	else	--
and	 many	 books	 try	 to	 prove	 that	 Jesus	 must	 have	 been	 a	 very	 deep	 egoist
because	he	goes	on	saying,	'I	am	the	son	of	God;	I	and	my	father	are	one.'	He	is
saying:	 I	 am	 God.	 Many	 psychoanalysts	 have	 tried	 to	 explain	 that	 he	 was
neurotic.	How	can	you	say	you	are	God?
You	must	be	an	egoist.
And	that's	how	Jews	felt	when	Jesus	was	alive.	They	also	felt:	 this	man	is	 just
mad	with	his	ego!	What	is	he	saying	--	that	he	is	God,	or	the	only	son	of	God?
Claiming	so	much	for	himself!	And	they	mocked.	They	mocked,	they	laughed.
And	 when	 they	 crucified	 Jesus	 their	 behavior	 with	 him	 is	 simply
incomprehensible.	They	put	a	crown	of	thorns	on	his	head	and	said,	'You,	King
of	the	Jews,	son	of	God,	you	and	your	father	are	one	--	remember	us	when	we
also	come	to	your	Kingdom	of	God.'	They	forced	him	to	carry	his	cross.	He	was
weak,	the	cross	was	very	heavy	--	they	had	made	it	very	heavy	knowingly,	and
they	forced	him	just	like	an	ordinary	criminal	to	carry	his	own	cross.	And	he	was
feeling	thirsty,	because	where	he	was	crucified	it	was	a	hill;	the	hill	is	known	as
Golgotha.	 It	 was	 uphill,	 he	 was	 carrying	 his	 big	 cross,	 heavy	 cross;	 he	 was
perspiring,	feeling	thirsty,	and	people	were	mocking	all	around	and	making	jokes
about	him,	 and	 they	 said,	 'Look	 --	 the	King	of	 the	 Jews!	Look!	The	man	who
claims	that	he	is	the	son	of	God.'
Many	 had	 gathered	 there	 just	 to	 enjoy	 it	 --	 it	 was	 a	 sort	 of	 amusement,	 a
merriment.	The	whole	town	had	gathered	there	just	to	throw	stones	at	this	man.
Why	were	they	taking	such	a	revenge?	--	because	they	felt	that	this	man	had	hurt
their	egos.	He	claimed	that	he	was	God	himself.	They	couldn't	understand	 that
this	man	had	no	ego	at	all;	hence	the	claim.	The	claim	was	not	coming	from	the
ego,	the	claim	was	simply	a	reality.	When	YOUR	ego	drops	you	are	also	a	god.
But	one	can	claim	from	the	ego.	All	our	claims	are	from	the	ego,	so	we	cannot
see	how	a	person	can	claim	without	the	ego.	Krishna	in	the	Gita	says	to	Arjuna,
'Come	to	my	feet.
Leave	 all,	 and	 surrender	 to	 me.'	 Hindus	 are	 not	 so	 bold,	 and	 they	 are	 very
mannerly;	they	have	not	written	that	this	man	is	an	egoist.	But	in	the	West	many
have	felt	the	same	as	with	Jesus:	What	manner	of	man	is	this	who	says,	'Come	to
my	feet!'	Our	egos	cannot	feel	that	when	Krishna	is	saying	to	Arjuna,	'Come	to
my	feet,'	 there	 is	no	one	 inside.	 It	 is	coming	 to	nobody's	 feet.	But	egos	cannot
see	this.	You	can	see	only	that	which	you	are,	you	cannot	see	that	which	you	are
not.
Immediately	 the	monk	 said,	 'And	what	 about	 you?'	 He	 feels	 hurt	 because	 the
master	 has	 said,	 'Because	 you	 are	 thinking	 of	 yourself,	 that's	 why	 you	 are
missing	the	way	--	and	it	is	right	in	front	of	you.'	Now	this	man	is	reacting.	He
would	like	to	hurt	the	master	also.	He	says,
'WHAT	ABOUT	YOU...	DO	YOU	SEE	IT?'
He	wanted,	he	expected	 --	because	of	his	own	ego	 --	 that	 this	man	would	say,
'Yes,	 I	 see	 it,'	 and	 then	 everything	would	have	been	 easy.	He	 could	have	 said,
'Then	you	are	also	concerned	with	your	I;	how	can	you	see	 it?	You	also	assert
your	ego	--	how	can	you	see	it?	We	are	just	the	same.'	And	he	would	have	gone
away	happy,	because	the	account	would	have	been	closed	with	this	man.
But	 you	 cannot	 close	 your	 account	 with	 a	 master.	 He	 never	 fulfills	 your
expectation.	He	is	simply	unpredictable.	You	cannot	get	him	caught	in	your	trap
because	his	ways	always	change.	Your	mind	cannot	give	you	the	answer	which
he	is	going	to	give.
THE	MASTER	SAID:	'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	SEE	DOUBLE,	SAYING	I	DON'T,
AND
YOU	DO,	AND	SO	ON,	YOUR	EYES	ARE	CLOUDED.'
The	master	 has	 not	 said	 anything	 about	 himself.	 If	 there	 had	 been	 an	 Arjuna
there	the	master	would	have	said,	'Yes,	I	see	it	--	and	please,	don't	you	go	around
and	around,	come	to	my	feet.'	But	this	man	was	no	Arjuna	--	just	a	curious	man,
not	really	interested.
It	was	just	a	problem,	not	a	question.	He	is	not	going	to	change	himself	in	any
way.	At	the	most	he	will	have	a	little	more	information,	he	will	become	a	little
more	knowledgeable.
That's	why	 the	master	 says,	 'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	SEE	DOUBLE,	 SAYING	 I
DON'T,	 AND	 YOU	 DO,	 AND	 SO	 ON,	 YOUR	 EYES	 ARE	 CLOUDED'	 --
because	the	monk's	eyes	are	clouded	by	'I'	and	'you'.	They	are	one	phenomenon,
try	to	understand	this.	I	and	you	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin:	this	side	I,	that
side	 you.	 If	 I	 drops,	 you	 drop.	 If	 I	 is	 there	 no	more,	 you	 are	 there	 no	more,
because	when	the	coin	drops	both	the	aspects	drop	together.	I	--	that	is	one	pole,
thou	--	that	is	another	pole;	they	both	drop	or	they	both	remain.	If	you	are,	then
all	around	you	is	a	crowd,	a	milling	crowd	of	I's,	you's;	if	you	are	not,	the	whole
crowd	has	disappeared	as	if	it	was	just	a	nightmare	--	it	was	--	and	simply	silence
exists,	in	which	there	is	no	division,	not	even	this	one	of	I	and	thou.
That's	why	zen	people	never	talk	about	God,	because,	they	say,	'if	we	talk	about
God	we	will	 have	 to	 say	 thou.'	 Buddha	 never	 talked	 about	God,	 and	 he	 said,
'Don't	pray,	because	your	prayer	will	continue	the	division,	the	duality,	the	dual
vision	--	I	and	thou.'
At	the	very	peak	also	you	will	carry	the	same	disease,	in	subtle	ways:	you	will
say	I,	you	will	say	thou.	Howsoever	lovingly	you	say	it,	the	division	exists,	and
with	the	division	the	love	is	not	possible.	That	is	the	difference	between	Jewish
thinking	and	Jesus'	way	of	thinking.
Martin	Buber	has	written	a	book,	 I	 and	Thou.	He	 is	one	of	 the	most	profound
Jewish	 thinkers	 --	but	he	 remains	a	 thinker.	He	may	 talk	about	mysticism,	but
that	 talk	 is	 also	 one	 of	 a	 thinker	 and	 philosopher,	 because	 at	 the	 very	 end	 he
retains	the	old	division,	I	and	thou.	Now	the	thou	is	not	here,	in	this	world,	but
God	has	become	the	thou,	but	the	old	division	persists.
Jews,	Mohammedans	 have	 always	 denied	 that	 you	 can	 become	 one	with	God
just	because	of	that	fear	that	the	I	may	claim	that	it	has	become	God.	They	have
retained	the	division.
They	 say	 that	you	can	come	closer	 and	closer	 and	closer,	 but	you	will	 remain
you	and	he	will	remain	he.	You	will	remain	an	I	and	he	has	to	be	addressed	as
thou.
And	 that	 is	 the	 trouble	 that	 Jesus	created,	because	he	 said,	 'I	 and	my	 father	 in
heaven	are	one.'	He	dropped	the	division	of	I	and	thou.	That	has	been	the	trouble
with	Mohammedans	 in	 India	 --	 they	 couldn't	 understand	 the	Upanishads,	 they
couldn't	understand	the	Hindu	teaching	that	you	are	the	same	as	him.	Drop	the	I
and	he	is	no	more	a	thou.	In	fact,	suddenly	the	poles	disappear	and	the	energy	is
one.	Here	I	disappear,	there	you	disappear,	and	the	energy	is	one.
Sometimes	in	deep	love	glimpses	happen	when	neither	you	are	an	I	nor	is	your
lover	or	beloved	a	thou	--	but	sometimes	only,	it	is	very	rare,	when	two	energies
simply	 meet	 and	 you	 cannot	 find	 the	 division,	 where	 they	 are	 divided.	 They
mingle	 and	 meet	 and	 merge	 and	 become	 one;	 you	 cannot	 feel	 where	 the
boundary	 is,	 suddenly	 the	 boundary	 has	 disappeared.	 That's	 why	 love	 creates
fear.
Deep	love	creates	deep	fear.	It	looks	like	death	because	the	I	disappears,	the	you
disappears	 --	 and	 it	 IS	 a	 sort	 of	 death.	And	when	YOU	die,	 only	 then	do	you
enter	into	the	divine.	But	then	the	divine	is	no	more	a	God,	you	cannot	address
him;	hence	no	prayer	exists	in	Buddhism.	So	Christians	can't	believe	what	type
of	religion	Buddhism	is:	no	prayer?'How	can	you	pray?'	Buddha	said.	 'Because
the	prayer	can	be	possible	only	with	a	division	--	I	praying,	thou	listening	--	how
can	you	pray?'
In	 Buddhism	 only	 meditation	 exists.	 Try	 to	 understand	 the	 difference:	 prayer
continues	 with	 the	 old	 division	 of	 I	 and	 thou,	 meditation	 drops	 the	 division.
Prayer	 has	 to	 lead	 finally	 to	meditation.	 Prayer	 cannot	 be	 the	 final	 thing.	 It	 is
beautiful,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 the	 ultimate.	 The	 ultimate	 can	 only	 be	 this:	when	 both
have	 disappeared	 and	 only	 oneness	 exists.	 Tremendous...	 vast!	 You	 become
afraid	 of	 it!	 All	 the	 cozy	 divisions	 of	 I	 and	 thou	 disappear.	 All	 relationship
disappears	--	that	is	the	fear;	that's	what	Buber	is	afraid	of.
He's	afraid	 that	 if	 there	 is	no	I	and	no	 thou,	 the	whole	phenomenon	will	be	so
tremendous	 and	 so	 terrible	 and	 fear-creating...	 because	 no	 relationship	 is
possible.
Relationship	 gives	 you	 a	 home;	 relationship	 gives	 you	 a	 feeling	 of	 coziness;
relationship	 gives	 you	 something	which	 does	 not	 look	 like	 a	 TREMENDUM,
which	is	not	fear-creating.	Meditation	has	to	be	the	ultimate,	because	prayer	can
never	lead	to	the	nondual	-
-	and	this	is	what	the	master	is	saying.	He	says:
'SO	LONG	AS	YOU	SEE	DOUBLE,	SAYING	I	DON'T,	AND	YOU	DO,	AND
SO	ON,	YOUR	EYES	ARE	CLOUDED.'
Division	 is	 the	 clouding.	 Through	 division	 is	 the	 mist	 in	 the	 eyes,	 through
division	 is	 the	dust	 in	 the	 eyes,	 through	division	your	 eyes	 are	murky,	 cloudy,
distorted.	Drop	the	division	and	the	Way	is	there.
But	 a	 curious	 mind	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 and	 on.	 The	 monk	 could	 have	 become
enlightened	at	 that	moment,	 because	enlightenment	 is	nothing	but	 a	 clarity,	 an
understanding.	Such	profound	truths	--	and	the	seeds	go	on	missing,	because	the
man	is	just	a	highway,	the	man	is	not	a	right	soil.	He	said	again:
'WHEN	THERE	IS	NEITHER	I	NOR	YOU,	CAN	ONE	SEE	IT?'
Look:	avoid	this	tendency	of	being	curious.	He	is	not	listening	at	all,	he	has	not
understood	a	single	word,	he	has	not	felt	anything	--	he	goes	on	and	on,	and	on
the	same	surface,	at	the	same	level,	not	even	an	inch	deeper.	His	questioning	is
not	 an	 inquiry	 now,	 rather	 a	 reaction:	 whatsoever	 the	 master	 says,	 he	 reacts.
Whenever	this	happens	it	means	that	when	the	master	is	speaking	he	is	thinking
at	that	moment	also,	preparing	the	next	question.	He	is	not	listening.
'WHEN	THERE	IS	NEITHER	I	NOR	YOU,	CAN	ONE	SEE	IT?'
He	 will	 again	 be	 expecting.	 Whenever	 you	 ask	 a	 question	 of	 someone	 you
already	have	an	expected	answer.	 If	 it	 fits	with	your	expected	answer,	 then	 the
man	is	right;	if	it	doesn't	fit,	then	this	man	is	talking	nonsense.
Never	come	to	me	with	your	expected	answers,	because	if	you	already	have	the
answer	 then	 there	 is	 no	need	 to	 ask.	And	 this	 is	 the	difference	 --	 if	 you	 ask	 a
question	without	 any	 expected	 answer,	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 hear	 the	 answer;	 if
you	have	a	subtle	expectation	that	THIS	is	going	to	be	the	answer,	if	your	mind
has	already	given	you	an	answer,	you	will	not	be	able	to	listen.	You	will	simply
be	listening	either	to	be	confirmed	that	your	answer	is	right,	or	to	be	confirmed
that	this	man	is	wrong	--	but	in	either	case	you	are	right.
Never	ask	a	question	with	the	feeling	that	you	are	right.	If	you	are	right	there	is
no	 need	 to	 ask.	 Always	 ask	 the	 question	 from	 the	 position	 of	 a	 man	 who	 is
ignorant,	knowing	well	that	'I	don't	know,'	so	how	can	you	expect,	how	can	you
create	 an	 answer?	Knowing	 perfectly	 that	 'I	 don't	 know,'	 ask	 --	 and	 you	 are	 a
right	soil,	and	the	seeds	will	fall	in	it,	and	a	large	crop	will	be	possible.
Asked	the	man	again:
'WHEN	THERE	IS	NEITHER	I	NOR	YOU,	CAN	ONE	SEE	IT?'
He's	trying	to	put	this	master	in	a	corner,	as	mind	always	tries	--	because	now	he
must	say	yes.	If	he	says	yes	then	the	curious	mind	can	ask	again,	'Then	who	will
see	 it	 if	 there	 is	neither	 I	nor	you?'	And	 if	you	say,	 'Yes,	 then	 the	Way	can	be
seen,'	 then	the	question	will	arise	automatically,	 'Then	who	will	see	it?	When	I
am	not	there	and	you	are	not	there,	then	who	will	see	it?'
But	you	cannot	put	an	enlightened	man	into	a	corner.	You	can	put	another	mind
into	a	corner,	then	you	can	play	a	game	of	chess,	but	a	man	who	has	no	mind	--
you	 cannot	 put	 him	 in	 a	 corner	 and	 you	 cannot	 defeat	 him,	 because	 he	 is	 not
there.	His	victory	is	absolute.	With	him,	either	you	are	defeated	or	you	escape.
His	 victory	 is	 absolute	 because	 he	 is	 no	 longer	 there	 --	who	 can	 be	 defeated?
Who	can	be	forced	into	a	corner?
This	is	a	beautiful	corner.	This	man	must	have	been	a	professor	or	a	logician	or	a
pundit.
He	has	really	brought	 the	master	 to	a	corner	within	 three	questions	--	 if	a	man
were	there	he	would	have	been	put	in	a	corner.	But	because	a	master	is	not,	how
can	you	 force	him	 into	a	corner?	He	 is	 the	whole	 sky.	How	can	you	 force	 the
whole	sky	into	a	corner?	All	corners	exist	in	him,	but	you	cannot	force	him	into
a	corner.
THE	MASTER	SAID,	 'WHEN	THERE	 IS	NEITHER	 I	NOR	YOU,	WHO	 IS
THE	ONE
WHO	WANTS	TO	SEE	IT?'
Really,	when	you	see...	you	see	only	when	you	are	not.	When	you	are	not,	there
is	no	question	of	trying	to	see,	wanting	to	see,	desiring	to	see.	Who	will	desire?
When	YOU
are	 not,	 who	 bothers	 about	 the	 Way?	 The	 Way	 has	 already	 happened.	 Who
bothers	about	God?	--	it	is	already	the	case!
Here	 you	 disappear	 and	 there	 everything	 is	 ready,	 everything	 that	 you	 ever
sought,	 everything	 that	 you	 were	 seeking,	 every	 inquiry	 fulfilled.	 Here	 you
dissolve	and	all	answers	disappear	and	all	queries	dissolve.	Suddenly	the	truth	is
there.
Your	dissolution	is	the	truth.	Your	 'not	being	there'	is	the	Way.	Your	absence	is
the	presence	of	God.
And	The	Flowers	Showered
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	Not	mind,	not	buddha,	not	things
10	November	1974	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7411100
ShortTitle:
FLOWRS11
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
87
mins
A	MONK	ASKED	NANSEN:	'IS	THERE	A	TEACHING	NO	MASTER	EVER
PREACHED	BEFORE?'
NANSEN	SAID:	'YES	THERE	IS.'	'WHAT	IS	IT?'	ASKED	THE	MONK.
NANSEN	REPLIED:	 'IT	 IS	NOT	MIND,	 IT	 IS	NOT	BUDDHA,	 IT	 IS	NOT
THINGS.'
THE	 'TEACHINGS'	 OF	 THE	 AWAKENED	 ONES	 are	 not	 teachings	 at	 all
because	 they	cannot	be	 taught	 --	 so	how	 to	call	 them	 teachings?	A	 teaching	 is
that	which	can	be	taught.
But	 nobody	 can	 teach	 you	 the	 truth.	 It	 is	 impossible.	 You	 can	 learn	 it,	 but	 it
cannot	be	taught.	It	has	to	be	learned.	You	can	absorb	it,	you	can	imbibe	it,	you
can	live	with	a	master	and	allow	it	to	happen	but	it	cannot	be	taught.	It	is	a	very
indirect	process.
Teaching	 is	 direct:	 something	 is	 said.	 Learning	 is	 indirect:	 something	 is
indicated,	not	said	--	rather,	something	is	shown.	A	finger	is	raised	towards	the
sun,	but	the	finger	is	not	the	point;	you	have	to	leave	the	finger	and	look	at	the
sun,	or	at	the	moon.	A	master	teaches	but	the	teaching	is	just	like	the	finger:	you
have	 to	 leave	 it	and	 look	where	 it	 indicates	--	 the	dimension,	 the	direction,	 the
beyond.
A	 teacher	 teaches,	 a	master	LIVES	 --	 you	 can	 learn	 from	his	 life,	 the	way	he
moves,	the	way	he	looks	at	you,	the	way	he	touches	you,	the	way	he	is.	You	can
imbibe	it,	you	can	allow	it	to	happen,	you	can	remain	available,	you	can	remain
open	and	vulnerable.	There	is	no	way	to	say	it	directly,	that's	why	those	who	are
very	intellectual	miss	it	--	because	they	know	only	one	way	of	learning	and	that
is	direct.	They	ask,	What	is	truth?	--	and	they	expect	an	answer.
This	 is	 what	 happened	 when	 Pontius	 Pilate	 asked	 Jesus,	 'What	 is	 truth?'	 and
Jesus	remained	silent	--	not	even	a	flicker,	as	if	the	question	had	not	been	asked,
as	if	there	was	no	Pontius	Pilate	standing	before	him	and	asking.	Jesus	remained
the	 same	 as	 he	was	 before	 the	 question	was	 raised,	 nothing	 changed.	 Pontius
Pilate	must	 have	 thought	 this	man	 a	 little	mad,	 because	 he	 had	 asked	 a	 direct
question:	'What	is	truth?'	and	this	man	remained	silent	as	if	he	had	not	heard.
Pontius	 Pilate	 was	 a	 viceroy,	 a	 well-educated,	 cultured,	 cultivated	man;	 Jesus
was	a	son	of	a	carpenter,	uneducated,	uncultivated.	It	was	as	 if	 two	poles	were
meeting,	 two	 opposite	 poles.	 Pontius	 Pilate	 knew	 all	 philosophy	 --	 he	 had
learned	it,	he	knew	all	the	scriptures.	This	man	Jesus	was	absolutely	uneducated,
in	fact	he	knew	nothing	--	or,	he	knew	ONLY	nothing.	Standing	before	Pontius
Pilate,	 totally	silent,	he	replied	--	but	 the	reply	was	indirect:	he	raised	a	finger.
That	total	silence	was	the	finger	raised	towards	truth.	But	Pontius	Pilate	missed.
He	 thought,	 This	man	 is	 crazy.	 Either	 he	 is	 deaf,	 cannot	 hear,	 or	 he	 does	 not
know,	 is	 ignorant	 --	 that's	why	 he	 is	 silent.	But	 silence	 can	 be	 a	 finger	 raised
towards	truth	--	that	is	incomprehensible	to	the	intellectual	Pontius	Pilate.
He	missed.	The	greatest	opportunity!	He	may	be	still	wandering	somewhere	in
search	of
'What	is	truth?'	On	that	day	truth	was	standing	before	him.	Could	he	be	silent	for
a	 moment?	 Could	 he	 be	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 Jesus,	 not	 asking?	 just	 looking,
watching,	waiting?	Could	he	imbibe	Jesus	a	little?	Could	he	allow	Jesus	to	work
upon	him?	The	opportunity	was	there	--	and	Jesus	indicated	it.	But	Pontius	Pilate
missed.
Intellect	will	always	miss	 the	 teaching	of	 the	awakened	ones,	because	 intellect
believes	in	the	direct	way,	and	you	cannot	hit	truth	in	such	a	direct	way.	It	is	a
very	subtle	phenomenon,	delicate,	the	most	delicate	possible;	you	have	to	move
very	cautiously,	you	have	to	move	very	indirectly.	You	have	to	feel	it	--	it	comes
through	the	heart,	it	never	comes	through	the	head.	Teaching	comes	through	the
head,	learning	happens	through	the	heart.
Remember	my	emphasis.	It	is	not	the	master	who	teaches,	it	is	the	disciple	who
learns.	It	is	up	to	you	--	to	learn	or	not	to	learn;	it	is	not	up	to	me	to	teach	or	not
to	 teach.	A	master	 cannot	 help	 himself:	 because	 of	 the	way	 he	 is,	 he	 goes	 on
teaching.	His	every	moment,	his	every	breath	is	a	teaching,	his	whole	being	is	a
teaching,	 a	 message.	 The	 message	 is	 not	 different	 from	 the	 master.	 If	 it	 is
different	 then	the	master	 is	simply	a	 teacher,	not	a	master;	 then	he	is	repeating
words	 of	 others.	 Then	 he	 is	 not	 awakened	 himself,	 then	 he	 has	 a	 borrowed
knowledge;	inside	he	remains	as	ignorant	as	the	student.	There	is	no	difference
in	their	being,	they	differ	in	their	knowledge.
A	teacher	and	a	student	are	on	the	same	level	as	far	as	their	being	is	concerned;
as	 far	 as	 their	 knowledge	 is	 concerned	 they	 are	 different:	 the	 teacher	 knows
more,	the	student	knows	less.	Some	day	the	student	will	know	more,	he	himself
will	 become	 a	 teacher,	 he	 can	 even	 come	 to	 know	 more	 than	 the	 teacher	 --
because	 it	 is	 the	 horizontal	 line	 of	 accumulation.	 If	 you	 accumulate	 more
knowledge,	information,	you	can	become	a	teacher,	but	not	a	master.
A	master	 is	 truth.	 He	 does	 not	 know	ABOUT	 truth,	 he	 has	 become	 it,	 so	 he
cannot	help	himself.	 It	 is	not	 a	question	of	 to	 teach	or	not	 to	 teach,	 it	 is	not	 a
choice.	Even	if	he	is	fast	asleep,	he	goes	on	teaching.	Buddha	fast	asleep	--	you
simply	 sit	 near	 him,	 you	 can	 learn	 much;	 you	 can	 even	 become	 enlightened,
because	the	way	he	sleeps	is	totally	different.
The	quality	differs	because	 the	being	differs.	Buddha	eating	 --	you	 just	watch,
and	 he	 is	 giving	 a	message.	 The	message	 is	 not	 separate,	 that's	why	 I	 say	 he
cannot	help	himself.
He	IS	the	message.
You	cannot	 ask	 the	question,	 'What	 is	 truth?'	Anyway,	he	will	 not	 answer	you
directly.
He	may	laugh	or	he	may	offer	you	a	cup	of	tea,	or	he	may	hold	your	hand	and	sit
silently,	or	he	may	take	you	for	a	morning	walk	into	the	woods,	or	he	may	say,
'Look!	This	mountain	is	beautiful!'	But	whatsoever	he	is	doing	is	an	indirect	way
of	indicating,	indicating	towards	his	being.
All	that	is	beautiful,	true,	good,	is	like	happiness	--	I	say	'like	happiness'	because
you	may	be	able	 to	understand	 that.	You	have	known	something	of	happiness.
Maybe	you	have	 lived	 very	miserably,	 as	 people	 live.	But	 sometimes,	 even	 in
spite	of	yourself,	moments	happen	when	happiness	enters	you	--	you	are	 filled
with	an	unknown	silence,	an	unknown	bliss;	suddenly	those	moments	come.	You
cannot	find	a	man	who	has	not	had	a	few	moments	of	happiness	in	his	life.
But	have	you	observed	one	thing?	--	whenever	they	come	they	come	indirectly.
Suddenly	 they	 happen,	 unexpectedly	 they	 happen.	 You	 were	 not	 waiting	 for
them,	you	were	doing	something	else,	and	suddenly	you	become	aware.	If	you
are	waiting	 for	 them,	 expecting	 them,	 they	 never	 come;	 if	 you	 are	 directly	 in
search,	you	will	miss.
Somebody	says,	 'When	I	go	swimming	in	the	river	I	feel	much	happiness.'	You
are	also	in	search	of	it;	you	say,	'Then	I	will	come	also,'	and	you	follow.	You	are
seeking	 happiness	 --	 you	 are	 not	 concerned	 with	 swimming	 directly,	 you	 are
concerned	 directly	 with	 happiness.	 Swimming	 is	 just	 a	 means.	 You	 swim	 for
hours;	you	are	tired,	you	wait,	you	expect	--	and	you	are	frustrated.	Nothing	is
happening,	 the	bliss	 is	not	 there,	and	you	 tell	your	 friend:	 'You	deceived	me.	 I
have	been	swimming	for	hours,	feel	completely	tired,	and	not	a	single	moment
of	happiness	has	happened.'
No,	it	cannot	happen.	When	you	are	lost	in	swimming	so	completely	that	there	is
nobody,	 the	 boat	 is	 empty,	 there	 is	 nobody	 in	 the	 house,	 the	 host	 is	 silent,
swimming	 is	 so	deep	 that	 the	swimmer	 is	 lost	 in	 it	and	you	simply	swim,	you
play	with	the	river,	and	the	rays	of	the	sun	and	the	morning	breeze,	and	you	are
simply	lost	in	it...	and	there	is	happiness!
Swimming	 by	 the	 bank,	 swimming	 all	 over	 the	 river,	 spreading	 all	 over
existence,	jumping	from	one	ray	to	another	ray	of	light	--	every	breeze	brings	it.
But	 if	 you	expect	you	miss,	 because	 expectation	 leads	you	 into	 the	 future	 and
happiness	is	in	the	present.	It	is	not	a	result	of	any	activity;	it	is	a	consequence,	it
is	a	byproduct.	You	are	so	deeply	involved,	it	happens.
It	is	a	consequence,	remember,	it	is	not	a	result;	a	result	can	be	expected.	If	you
put	two	plus	two,	the	four,	the	result,	can	be	expected;	it	is	already	there	in	the
two	 plus	 two,	 it	 will	 come	 out.	 The	 result	 can	 be	 expected	 if	 things	 are
mechanical,	mathematical.	But	a	consequence	is	not	a	mechanical	thing,	it	is	an
organic	 phenomenon.	 It	 happens	 only	when	 you	 are	 not	 expecting.	 The	 guest
comes	to	your	door	and	knocks	when	you	were	not	thinking	about	the	guest	at
all.	 It	always	comes	 like	a	stranger,	 it	always	surprises	you.	You	suddenly	feel
something	 has	 happened	 --	 and	 if	 you	 start	 thinking	 about	what	 is	 happening,
you	will	 immediately	miss.	 If	 you	 say,	 'How	wonderful!	 How	 beautiful!'	 it	 is
already	gone;	the	mind	is	back.	Again	you	are	in	the	same	misery,	thrown	back.
One	has	to	learn	deeply	that	all	that	is	beautiful	is	indirect.	You	cannot	make	an
attack	 upon	 it,	 you	 cannot	 be	 aggressive	 with	 it;	 you	 cannot	 snatch	 from
existence.	If	you	are	violent	and	aggressive,	you	will	not	find	it.
Move	 towards	 it	 like	a	drunkard,	not	knowing	where,	not	knowing	why,	 like	a
drunkard	-
-	lost	completely,	you	move	towards	it.
All	meditations	 are	 subtle	ways	 to	make	 you	 drunk,	 subtle	ways	 to	make	 you
drunkards	of	the	unknown,	drunkards	of	the	divine.	Then	you	are	no	longer	there
with	 your	 conscious	mind	 functioning,	 then	 you	 are	 not	 there	 expecting,	 then
you	are	not	there	planning	for	the	future.	You	are	NOT.	And	when	you	are	not,
suddenly	 flowers	 start	 showering	 on	 you,	 flowers	 of	 bliss.	 Just	 like	 Subhuti,
empty...	 you	 are	 surprised!	 You	 were	 never	 expecting,	 you	 never	 knew!	 You
never	felt	that	you	ever	deserved	it;	that's	how	it	is	felt	--	like	a	grace,	because	it
is	not	something	YOU	have	brought	on,	it	is	something	which	has	happened.
So	one	thing:	truth	cannot	be	taught,	bliss	cannot	be	given	to	you,	ecstasy	cannot
be	 purchased	 in	 the	 market.	 But	 your	 mind	 continuously	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of
getting,	 purchasing,	 collecting,	 finding;	 your	 mind	 never	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of
happening	 because	 you	 cannot	 control	 happening	 --	 everything	 else	 you	 can
control.
I	have	heard:	Once	a	man	became	suddenly	rich.	Of	course,	when	it	happened	he
collected	all	those	things	he	had	always	been	desiring	--	a	very	big	house,	a	big
car,	swimming	pool,	this	and	that.	And	then	he	sent	his	daughter	to	college.	He
had	always	wanted	to	be	educated	but	he	could	not	be;	now	he	wanted	to	fulfill
all	his	desires,	and	whatsoever	HE	couldn't	do	he	wanted	his	children	to	do.	But
after	a	 few	days	 the	dean	of	 the	college	wrote	a	 letter	 to	him,	and	 in	 the	 letter
wrote:	'To	be	frank,	we	cannot	admit	your	girl	to	the	college	because	she	has	no
capacity	to	learn.'
The	 father	 said,	 'Just	 capacity?	Don't	 bother!	 I	will	 purchase	 the	 best	 capacity
available	in	the	market	for	her.'
How	 can	 you	 purchase	 capacity?	 But	 a	 man	 who	 has	 become	 suddenly	 rich
thinks	 only	 in	 terms	 of	 purchasing.	 You	 think	 in	 terms	 of	 power	 --	 power	 to
purchase,	 power	 to	 get	 something.	 Remember,	 truth	 cannot	 be	 got	 through
power;	it	comes	when	you	are	humble.	You	have	nothing	to	purchase	it	with,	it
cannot	be	purchased.	And	 it	 is	good	 that	 it	 cannot	be	purchased;	otherwise	no
one	would	be	able	to	give	the	cost.	It	is	good	that	it	HAPPENS;	otherwise	how
would	 you	 purchase	 it?	 All	 that	 you	 have	 is	 rubbish.	 Because	 it	 cannot	 be
purchased,	that's	why	sometimes	it	can	happen.	It	is	a	gift.	It	is	a	sharing	of	the
divine	with	you	 --	but	 the	divine	can	 share	only	when	you	allow.	Hence	 I	 say
you	can	learn	it	but	it	cannot	be	taught.
In	fact	in	the	spiritual	world	there	are	only	disciples,	not	masters.	Masters	ARE
there	but	 they	are	 inactive,	passive	 forces.	They	cannot	DO	anything,	 they	are
just	there	--	like	a	flower:	if	nobody	comes,	the	flower	will	go	on	spreading	its
fragrance	into	emptiness.	It	cannot	help	itself.	The	whole	thing	is	decided	by	the
disciple:	 how	 to	 learn?	 how	 to	 learn	 from	 a	 flower?	 And	 a	 flower	 shows
something	 but	 doesn't	 say	 it.	 It	 cannot	 be	 said.	How	 can	 the	 flower	 say	what
beauty	is?	--	the	flower	IS	beauty.	You	have	to	gain,	attain,	eyes	to	see,	a	nose	to
smell,	 ears	 to	 hear	 the	 subtle	 sound	 that	 comes	 to	 the	 flower	when	 the	 breeze
passes	by.	And	you	need	a	heart	 to	feel	 the	 throbbing	of	 the	flower,	because	 it
throbs	also	--	everything	alive	throbs,	the	whole	existence	throbs.
You	may	not	have	observed	this	because	it	is	impossible	before	you	go	into	deep
meditation;	 you	 cannot	 observe	 the	 fact	 that	 the	whole	universe	breathes.	And
just	as	you	expand	and	shrink	the	whole	existence	shrinks	and	expands.	Just	as
you	inhale	and	the	chest	fills,	and	then	you	exhale	and	the	air	goes	out	and	the
chest	shrinks,	the	same	rhythm	exists	in	existence.	The	whole	existence	breathes,
expands,	 inhales,	 exhales	 --	 and	 if	 you	 can	 find	 the	 rhythm	 of	 existence	 and
become	one	with	the	rhythm,	you	have	attained.
The	whole	art	of	ecstasy,	meditation,	samadhi,	is:	How	to	become	one	with	the
rhythm	 of	 the	 universe.	 When	 it	 exhales,	 you	 exhale.	 When	 it	 inhales,	 you
inhale.	 You	 live	 in	 it,	 are	 not	 separate,	 are	 one	 with	 it.	 Difficult,	 because	 the
universe	is	vast.
A	master	is	the	whole	universe	in	miniature.	If	you	can	learn	how	to	inhale	with
the	master	and	how	to	exhale	with	the	master,	if	you	can	learn	simply	that,	you
will	learn	all.
At	 the	 moment	 when	 Pontius	 Pilate	 asked,	 'What	 is	 truth?'	 if	 he	 had	 known
anything,	even	the	ABC	of	disciplehood,	the	next	thing	would	have	been	to	just
close	 his	 eyes	 and	 inhale	 and	 exhale	with	 Jesus...	 just	 inhale	 and	 exhale	with
Jesus.	 The	 way	 he	 inhales,	 you	 inhale,	 and	 in	 the	 same	 rhythm;	 the	 way	 he
exhales,	you	exhale,	and	in	the	same	rhythm	-
-	 and	 suddenly	 there	 is	 oneness:	 the	 disciple	 has	 disappeared,	 the	 master	 has
disappeared.
In	 that	 oneness	 you	 know	what	 truth	 is	 because	 in	 that	 oneness	 you	 taste	 the
master.
And	now	you	have	the	key	--	and	this	has	not	been	given	either,	remember,	it	has
been	 learned	by	you.	 It	 has	not	been	given	 to	you;	 it	 cannot	be	given,	 it	 is	 so
subtle.	And	with	this	key	now	every	lock	can	be	opened.	It	is	a	master	key,	no
ordinary	key	 --	 it	 doesn't	 open	one	 lock,	 it	 opens	all	 locks.	Now	you	have	 the
key,	and	once	you	have	the	key	you	use	it	with	the	universe.
Kabir	 has	 said,	 'Now	 I	 am	 in	 much	 difficulty.	 God	 and	 my	 guru,	 the	 whole
existence	and	my	master,	are	standing	before	me;	now	to	whom	do	I	bow	first?
To	 whose	 feet	 now	 do	 I	 go	 first?	 I	 am	 in	 deep	 trouble!'	 And	 then	 he	 says,
'Forgive	me,	 God.	 I	 will	 have	 to	 go	 to	my	master's	 feet	 first,	 because	 he	 has
shown	you	to	me.	I	come	to	you	through	him.	So	even	if	you	are	standing	before
me,	excuse	me,	I	have	to	touch	my	master's	feet	first.'
Beautiful...	 this	 has	 to	 be	 so,	 because	 the	 master	 becomes	 the	 door	 to	 the
unknown,	he	becomes	the	key	to	the	whole	existence.	He	is	the	truth.
Learn	how	to	be	in	the	presence	of	the	master,	how	to	breathe	with	him,	how	to
silently	allow	him	to	move	in	you,	how	to	silently	merge	into	him,	because	the
master	 is	 nothing	 but	 God	 who	 has	 knocked	 at	 your	 door.	 He	 is	 the	 whole
universe	concentrated.	Don't	ask	questions,	LIVE	with	him.
Now	try	to	penetrate	this	story	--	small,	but	very	significant.
A	MONK	ASKED	NANSEN:	'IS	THERE	A	TEACHING	NO	MASTER	EVER
PREACHED	BEFORE?'
Whatsoever	has	been	preached	 is	not	 the	 teaching;	 the	 real	 teaching	has	never
been	preached,	it	cannot	be	told.
Buddha	said	to	Mahakashyap,	 'To	all	others	I	have	told	that	which	can	be	told,
and	 to	 you	 I	 give	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 told,	 cannot	 be	 said.'	 Now	 for	 two
thousand	years	followers	of	Buddha	have	been	asking	again	and	again	and	again:
What	was	given	to	Mahakashyap?	What	was	given	to	Mahakashyap,	what	was
the	teaching	that	Buddha	never	told	to	anybody,	that	even	Buddha	said	cannot	be
told	because	words	will	not	be	able	to	carry	it?
Words	are	so	narrow,	the	vastness	of	truth	cannot	be	forced	into	them	--	and	they
are	so	superficial,	how	can	they	carry	the	depth?	It	 is	 just	 like	this:	How	can	a
wave	on	the	ocean	carry	the	depth	of	the	ocean?	It	cannot.	By	the	very	nature	of
things	it	is	impossible	because	if	a	wave	exists	it	has	to	exist	on	the	surface.	The
wave	cannot	go	to	the	depth	because	if	it	goes	to	the	depth	it	is	a	wave	no	more.
The	wave	exists	only	 in	 touch	with	 the	winds	 --	 it	has	 to	be	on	 the	 surface,	 it
cannot	 go	 to	 the	 depth.	 And	 the	 depth	 cannot	 come	 to	 the	 wave	 because	 the
moment	 it	 comes	 to	 the	 surface	 it	 itself	 becomes	 the	wave,	 it	 is	 no	more	 the
depth.
This	is	the	problem.	The	truth	is	the	center	and	the	words	exist	on	the	surface,	on
the	periphery	--	where	people	meet,	where	the	wind	and	the	ocean	meet,	where
the	question	and	the	answer	meet,	where	the	master	and	disciple	meet;	just	there
on	the	surface	words	exist.	Truth	cannot	come	to	the	surface,	it	is	the	very	depth,
and	the	words	cannot	go	to	the	truth,	they	are	the	very	surface.
So	what	to	do?	All	that	can	be	said	will	be	just	so-so;	it	will	not	be	true,	it	will
not	be	untrue,	it	will	be	just	in	the	middle	--	and	very	dangerous,	because	if	the
disciple	has	not	 been	 in	 tune	with	 the	master	he	will	misunderstand.	 If	 he	has
been	 in	 tune	with	 the	master,	 only	 then	will	 he	 understand	 because	 then	 there
exists	a	rapport.
Understanding	is	not	a	question	of	keen	intelligence;	understanding	is	a	question
of	 deep	 rapport.	 Understanding	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 reason,	 intellect,	 logic.
Understanding	is	a	question	of	deep	sympathy,	or	even	of	deep	empathy;	hence
the	 central	 significance	 of	 trust,	 faith.	 Understanding	 happens	 through	 faith,
because	 in	 faith	you	 trust,	 in	 trust	 you	become	 sympathetic,	 in	 trust	 rapport	 is
possible	--	because	you	are	not	defensive,	you	leave	the	doors	open.
THIS	 MONK	 ASKED	 NANSEN:	 'IS	 THERE	 A	 TEACHING	 NO	MASTER
EVER
PREACHED	BEFORE?'
Yes,	 there	is	a	 teaching;	 in	fact	ALL	the	teaching	is	 there	which	no	master	has
ever	preached	before.	Then	why	do	masters	go	on	preaching?	Why	is	it	Buddha
went	on	talking	for	forty	years?	Why	do	I	go	on	talking,	whether	you	listen	or
not?	Why	do	they	talk?	If	that	which	is	to	be	learned	cannot	be	said,	then	why	do
they	go	on	talking?
Talking	 is	 just	 a	 bait.	 Through	 talking	 you	 are	 caught,	 you	 cannot	 understand
anything	else.	Talking	is	just	giving	sweets	to	children.	Then	they	start	coming	to
you,	 blissfully	 unaware	 that	 talking	 is	 not	 the	 point;	 blissfully	 unaware	 they
come	for	the	sweets,	they	come	for	the	toys.	They	are	happy	with	the	toys.	But
the	master	knows	that	once	they	start	coming,	by	and	by	the	toys	can	be	taken
away,	 and	 by	 and	 by	 they	will	 start	 loving	 the	master	without	 the	 toys	 --	 and
once	that	happens,	words	can	be	dropped.
Whenever	a	disciple	is	ready,	words	can	be	dropped.	They	are	just	a	way	to	bring
you	closer	because	you	cannot	understand	anything	except	words.	If	somebody
speaks,	you	understand;	if	somebody	is	silent	you	cannot	understand.	What	will
you	understand?
Silence	is	just	a	wall	for	you,	you	cannot	find	your	way	in	it.	And	silence	carries
a	deep	fear	also,	because	it	is	deathlike.	Words	are	lifelike,	silence	is	deathlike.	If
somebody	 is	 silent	 you	 start	 feeling	 afraid	 and	 scared	 --	 if	 somebody	 goes	 on
being	silent	you	will	try	to	escape	from	there	because	it	is	too	much,	the	silence
becomes	so	heavy	for	you.
Why?	--	because	YOU	cannot	be	silent,	and	if	you	cannot	be	silent	you	cannot
understand	silence.	You	are	a	chattering;	inside	a	monkey	is	sitting,	continuously
chattering.	 Somebody	 has	 defined	 man	 as	 nothing	 but	 a	 monkey	 with
metaphysics,	with	some	philosophy,	that's	all.	And	that	philosophy	is	nothing	but
a	better	way	of	chattering,	more	systematic,	more	logical,	but	still	chattering.
A	master	has	to	talk	to	bring	you	nearer.	The	nearer	you	come,	the	more	he	will
drop	it.
Once	you	are	in	the	grip	of	his	silence	there	is	no	need	to	talk.	Once	you	know
what	silence	is,	once	you	have	become	silent,	a	new	rapport	exists.	Now	things
can	be	said	without	any	saying,	messages	can	be	given	without	ever	giving	them
--	 without	 him	 giving	 them	 you	 can	 receive	 them.	 Now	 the	 phenomenon	 of
discipleship	has	happened.
One	of	 the	most	 beautiful	 phenomena	 in	 the	world	 is	 that	 of	 being	 a	 disciple,
because	now	you	know	what	 rapport	 is.	Now	you	breathe,	 inhale,	 exhale	with
the	 master;	 now	 you	 lose	 your	 boundaries	 and	 become	 one	 with	 him.	 Now
something	of	his	heart	starts	flowing	towards	you;	now	something	of	him	comes
into	you.
A	MONK	ASKED	NANSEN:	'IS	THERE	A	TEACHING	NO	MASTER	EVER
PREACHED	BEFORE?'
Nansen	is	one	of	the	most	famous	zen	masters.	Many	stories	are	told	about	him;
one	 I	have	been	 telling	you	many	 times.	 I	will	 repeat	 it	 again,	because	 stories
like	that	are	to	be	repeated	again	and	again,	so	that	you	can	imbibe	them.	They
are	a	sort	of	nourishment.
Every	day	you	have	 to	 take	nourishment;	 you	won't	 say,	 'Yesterday	morning	 I
took	breakfast	so	now	there	is	no	need.'	Every	day	you	have	to	eat;	you	don't	say,
'Yesterday	I	took	food,	now	what	is	the	need?'
These	stories	--	they	are	a	nourishment.	There	exists	a	special	word	in	India,	it
cannot	be	 translated.	 In	English	 the	word	 reading	exists,	 in	 India	we	have	 two
words	for	it:	one	means	reading,	the	other	means	the	reading	of	the	same	thing
again	and	again.	You	read	the	same	thing	again	and	again	and	again	--	it	is	like	a
part.	 Every	 day	 you	 read	 the	 Gita	 in	 the	 morning;	 then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 reading,
because	you	have	read	it	many	times.	Now	it	is	a	sort	of	nourishment.	You	don't
read	it,	you	EAT	it	every	day.
It	is	also	a	great	experiment,	because	every	day	you	will	come	to	new	shades	of
meaning,	 every	 day	 new	 nuances.	 The	 same	 book,	 the	 same	words,	 but	 every
day	you	feel	some	new	depth	has	opened	unto	you.	Every	day	you	feel	you	are
reading	something	new,	because	the	Gita,	or	books	like	that,	have	a	depth.	If	you
read	 them	once	 you	will	move	 on	 the	 surface;	 if	 you	 read	 them	 twice,	 a	 little
deeper;	thrice	--	you	go	on.	A	thousand	times,	and	then	you	will	understand	that
you	can	never	exhaust	these	books,	it	is	impossible.	The	more	you	become	alert,
aware,	the	more	your	consciousness	grows	deeper	--	that	is	the	meaning.
I	 will	 repeat	 this	 story	 of	 Nansen.	 A	 professor	 came	 to	 him,	 a	 professor	 of
philosophy....
Philosophy	is	a	disease,	and	it	is	like	a	cancer:	no	medicine	exists	for	it	yet,	you
have	 to	go	 through	surgery,	a	great	operation	 is	needed.	And	philosophy	has	a
similar	type	of	growth,	a	canceric	growth:	once	it	is	in	you	it	goes	on	growing	by
itself,	and	it	takes	all	your	energies.	It	is	a	parasite.	You	go	on	becoming	weaker
and	 weaker	 and	 it	 becomes	 stronger	 and	 stronger	 and	 stronger.	 Every	 word
creates	another	word	--	and	it	can	go	on	infinitely.
A	 philosopher	 came	 to	 Nansen.	 Nansen	 lived	 on	 a	 small	 hill,	 and	 when	 the
philosopher	came	uphill	he	was	tired	and	perspiring.	The	moment	he	entered	the
hut	of	Nansen	he	said,	'What	is	truth?'
Nansen	said,	'Truth	can	wait	a	little.	There	is	no	hurry.	Right	now	you	need	a	cup
of	tea,	you	are	so	tired!'	Nansen	went	in	and	prepared	a	cup	of	tea.
This	 can	 happen	 only	 with	 a	 zen	 master.	 In	 India	 you	 cannot	 think	 of
Shankaracharya	 preparing	 tea	 for	 you.	 For	 YOU	 --	 and	 Shankaracharya
preparing	tea?	Impossible!	Or	think	of	Mahavira	preparing	tea	for	you...	absurd!
But	with	 a	 zen	master	 this	 can	 happen.	 They	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 attitude:
they	LOVE
life.	They	are	not	anti-life;	they	affirm	life,	they	are	not	against	it	--	and	they	are
ordinary	people,	and	they	say	that	to	be	ordinary	is	the	most	extraordinary	thing.
They	live	a	really	simple	life.	When	I	say	a	REALLY	simple	life	I	mean	not	an
imposed	simplicity.	In	India	you	can	find	such	impostors	all	over	--	simplicity	is
imposed.	They	may	be	naked,	completely	naked,	but	 they	are	not	simple;	 their
nakedness	is	very	complex.	Their	nakedness	is	not	the	nakedness	of	a	child;	they
have	 cultivated	 it,	 and	 how	 can	 a	 cultivated	 thing	 be	 simple?	 They	 have
disciplined	 themselves	 for	 it,	 and	how	can	 a	 disciplined	 thing	be	 simple?	 It	 is
very	complex.
Your	clothes	are	not	so	complex	as	the	nakedness	of	a	Jaina	DIGAMBER	monk.
He	has	struggled	for	it	for	many	years.	They	have	five	steps	--	you	have	to	fulfill
each	step	by	and	by,	and	then	you	attain	to	nakedness.	It	is	an	achievement,	and
how	can	an	achievement	be	 simple?	 If	you	work	 for	 it	 for	many	years,	 if	 you
make	 every	 effort	 to	 achieve	 it,	 how	 can	 it	 be	 simple?	A	 simple	 thing	 can	 be
achieved	here	and	now,	immediately,	there	is	no	need	to	work	for	it.
Nakedness	when	simple	is	a	majestic	phenomenon;	you	simply	drop	clothes.	It
happened	 to	Mahavira	 --	 it	was	simple.	When	he	 left	his	house	he	had	clothes
on;	 then,	 passing	 by	 a	 rosebush,	 his	 shawl	 got	 caught	 in	 the	 thorns,	 so	 he
thought:	 It	 is	 evening	 time	 and	 the	 rosebush	 is	 going	 to	 sleep,	 it	 will	 be
disturbing	to	remove	it.	So	he	tore	off	half	of	the	shawl	that	was	entangled	in	the
thorns	and	left	it	there.	It	was	evening	time	and	the	gesture	was	beautiful.	It	was
not	 for	 nakedness	 he	 did	 it,	 it	was	 for	 that	 rosebush.	And	 the	 next	 day	 in	 the
morning,	with	the	half-shawl	left,	half	naked,	a	beggar	asked	him	for	something
--	and	he	had	nothing	else	to	give.	How	to	say	no	when	you	still	have	something
left	 to	 give	 --	 that	 half-shawl?	 So	 he	 gave	 it	 to	 the	 beggar.	 This	 nakedness	 is
something	 superb,	 simple,	 ordinary;	 it	 happened,	 it	 was	 not	 practiced.	 But	 a
Jaina	monk	practices	it.
Zen	monks	are	very	simple	people.	They	live	an	ordinary	life	as	everybody	else.
They	don't	make	differences,	because	all	differences	are	basically	egoistic.	And
this	game	you	can	play	 in	many	ways,	but	 the	game	remains	 the	same:	higher
than	you.	The	game	remains	the	same:	I	have	more	money,	I	am	higher	than	you;
I	have	more	education,	I	am	higher	than	you;	I	am	more	pious,	I	am	higher	than
you;	 I	 am	more	 religious,	 I	 am	higher	 than	you;	 I	have	 renounced	more,	 I	 am
higher	than	you.
Nansen	went	in,	prepared	tea,	came	out,	gave	the	cup	into	the	professor's	hand,
poured	 tea	 from	his	kettle.	The	cup	was	 full.	Up	 to	 that	moment	 the	professor
waited	because	up	 to	 that	moment	 everything	was	 rational:	 a	 tired	man	comes
and	you	feel	compassion	for	him	and	you	prepare	tea.	Of	course	it	is	as	it	should
be.	 Then	 you	 fill	 the	 cup	 --	 that	 too	 is	 okay.	 But	 then	 something	 irrational
happened.
Nansen	went	on	pouring,	the	cup	was	overflowing.	Then	the	professor	became	a
little	surprised:	What	is	this	man	doing?	Is	he	mad?	But	still	he	waited	--	he	was
a	well	 disciplined	man,	 he	 could	 tolerate	 little	 things	 like	 that.	Maybe	 a	 little
crazy...	 but	 then	 the	 saucer	 was	 also	 completely	 full,	 and	 Nansen	 went	 on
pouring.
Now	 this	 was	 too	 much.	 Now	 something	 had	 to	 be	 done	 and	 said,	 and	 the
professor	shrieked,	'Stop!'	--	because	now	the	tea	was	overflowing	on	the	floor.
'What	are	you	doing?	Now	this	cup	cannot	contain	any	more	tea.	Can't	you	see	a
simple	thing	like	this?
Are	you	mad?'
Nansen	 started	 laughing	 and	 said,	 'That's	what	 I	was	 also	 thinking:	Are	YOU
mad?	--
because	 you	 can	 see	 that	 the	 cup	 is	 full	 and	 it	 will	 not	 contain	 a	 single	 drop
more,	 but	 you	 cannot	 see	 that	 your	 head	 is	 full	 and	 it	 cannot	 contain	 a	 single
drop	 of	 truth	 more.	 Your	 cup	 is	 full	 in	 the	 head,	 your	 saucer	 is	 full	 and
everything	is	flowing	on	the	floor	--	look!
Your	philosophy	all	over	my	hut	and	you	can't	see	it?	But	you	are	a	reasonable
man;	at	least	you	could	see	the	tea.	Now	see	the	other	thing.'
This	Nansen	helped	many	people	in	different	ways	to	awake,	created	many	sorts
of	situations	for	people	to	awake.
A	MONK	ASKED	NANSEN:	'IS	THERE	A	TEACHING	NO	MASTER	EVER
PREACHED	BEFORE?'
NANSEN	SAID:	'YES	THERE	IS.'	'WHAT	IS	IT?'	ASKED	THE	MONK.
NANSEN	REPLIED:	 'IT	 IS	NOT	MIND,	 IT	 IS	NOT	BUDDHA,	 IT	 IS	NOT
THINGS.'
Now,	 if	 no	master	 has	 ever	 said	 it	 how	 can	Nansen	 say	 it?	 The	 questioner	 is
foolish,	asking	a	stupid	question.	If	nobody	has	said	it,	how	can	Nansen	say	it?	If
buddhas	 have	 kept	 silent	 about	 it,	 if	 buddhas	 have	 not	 uttered	 a	 single	 word,
could	not	utter,	then	how	can	Nansen?	But	Nansen	would	like	to	help	even	this
stupid	man.
And	 there	 are	 only	 stupid	 men	 all	 around,	 because	 unless	 you	 become
enlightened	you	 remain	 stupid.	So	 stupidity	 is	 not	 a	 condemnation,	 it	 is	 just	 a
state,	a	fact.	A	man	who	is	not	enlightened	will	remain	stupid	--	there	is	no	other
way.	And	if	he	feels	himself	wise,	then	he	is	more	stupid.	If	he	feels	that	he	is
stupid,	then	wisdom	has	started	--	then	he	has	started	awakening.	If	you	feel	you
are	 ignorant,	 then	 you	 are	 not	 stupid;	 if	 you	 feel	 you	 know	 you	 are	 perfectly
stupid	 --	 not	 only	 stupid	 but	 grounded	 in	 it	 so	 much	 that	 there	 seems	 no
possibility	for	you	to	come	out	of	it.
Nansen	would	 like	 to	 help	 this	 stupid	man,	 because	 there	 are	 no	 others;	 that's
why	 he	 speaks,	 he	 answers.	 But	 he	 has	 to	 use	 all	 negatives;	 he	 says	 nothing
positive.	 He	 uses	 three	 negatives.	 He	 says:'IT	 IS	 NOT	 MIND,	 IT	 IS	 NOT
BUDDHA,	IT	IS	NOT
THINGS.'
You	cannot	say	the	truth	but	you	can	say	what	it	is	not.	You	cannot	say	what	it	is
but	you	can	indicate	it	negatively.	Via	negativa:	saying	what	it	is	not.	This	is	all
that	 masters	 have	 done.	 If	 you	 insist	 that	 they	 say	 something,	 they	 will	 say
something	 negative.	 If	 you	 can	 understand	 their	 silence,	 you	 understand	 the
affirmative.	If	you	cannot	understand	their	silence	but	insist	on	words,	they	will
say	something	negative.
Understand	 this:	 words	 can	 do	 a	 negative	 job;	 silence	 can	 do	 a	 positive	 job.
Silence	is	the	most	positive	thing	and	language	is	the	most	negative.	When	you
speak	 you	 are	moving	 in	 the	 negative	world;	when	 you	 remain	 silent	 you	 are
moving	into	the	positive.	What	is	truth?	Ask	the	Upanishads,	ask	the	Koran,	The
Bible,	the	Gita;	they	all	say	what	it	is	not.
What	is	God?	They	all	say	what	he	is	not.
Three	things	he	denies:	one	--	it	is	not	things,	the	world;	it	is	not	that	which	you
see,	it	is	not	that	which	is	all	around	you.	It	is	not	that	which	can	be	seen	by	the
mind,	which	the	mind	can	comprehend	--	it	is	not	objects.	And	second:	it	is	not
the	mind,	it	is	not	the	subject;	neither	this	world	around	you	nor	this	mind	within
you.	No,	these	two	things	are	not	the	teaching,	are	not	the	truth.
But	 the	 third	 thing	 only	 buddhas	 have	 denied,	 only	 very	 perfect	masters	 have
denied,	and	that	third	thing	is:	IT	IS	NOT	BUDDHA.
And	what	is	Buddha?
The	world	of	 things	 is	 the	 first	boundary	around	you,	 then	 the	world	of	mind,
thoughts:	 things	 the	 first	 boundary,	 thoughts	 the	 second	 boundary	 --	 of	 course
closer,	nearer	you.
You	can	draw	 three	 concentric	 circles:	 first	 circle,	 the	world	of	 things;	 second
circle,	 the	 world	 of	 thoughts;	 and	 then	 remains	 the	 third	 --	 and	 Buddha	 has
denied	 that	 also	 --	 the	 self,	 the	 witnessing,	 the	 soul,	 the	 consciousness,	 the
buddha.	Only	Buddha	denies	that.
All	 others	 have	 known	 that:	 Jesus	 knows	 it,	 Krishna	 knows	 it,	 but	 they	 don't
deny	it	because	that	would	be	too	much	for	you	to	understand.	So	they	deny	two
things:	 they	 say	 this	world	 is	 illusory,	 and	 the	mind	 that	 looks	at	 this	world	 is
also	 illusory.	Mind	 and	 world	 are	 one	 phenomenon,	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same
coin.	 The	 mind	 creates	 the	 dream;	 the	 dream	 is	 illusory,	 and	 the	 mind,	 the
source,	is	also	illusory.	But	they	say	that	the	third
--	witnessing,	you	in	your	deep	consciousness	where	you	are	only	a	witness,	not
a	 thinker,	where	no	 thought	exists,	no	 thing	exists,	only	you	exist	 --	 they	don't
deny	that.
Buddha	has	denied	that	also.
He	says,	'No	world,	no	mind,	no	soul.'	That	is	the	highest	teaching	--	because	if
things	 are	not,	 how	can	 thoughts	be?	 If	 thoughts	 are	not	how	can	you	witness
them?	If	the	world	is	illusory	then	the	mind	that	looks	at	the	world	can't	be	real.
The	mind	 is	 illusory.	Then	 the	witness	 that	 looks	at	 the	mind	 --	how	can	 it	be
real?	Buddha	goes	to	the	deepest	core	of	existence.	He	says,	All	that	you	are	is
unreal;	your	things,	your	thoughts	and	you	--	all	is	unreal.
But	these	are	three	negatives.	Buddha's	path	is	the	negative	path,	his	assertions
are	 negative.	 That's	 why	 Hindus	 called	 him	 a	 NASTIK;	 they	 called	 him	 an
atheist,	an	absolute	nihilist.	But	he	is	not.	When	all	these	three	things	are	denied,
that	which	remains	is	truth.	When	things	disappear,	thoughts	disappear,	and	the
witnessing	disappears	--
these	 three	 things	 that	 you	know	 --	when	 all	 these	 three	 disappear,	 that	which
remains	is	truth.	And	that	which	remains	liberates,	that	which	remains	is	nirvana,
is	enlightenment.
Buddha	 is	 very	very	deep;	 nobody	has	gone	deeper	 than	 that	 in	 saying.	Many
people	have	reached	in	being	but	Buddha	has	tried	to	be	perfect	in	saying	also.
He	 never	 asserts	 a	 single	 positive.	 If	 you	 ask	 about	 any	 positive	 he	 simply
remains	silent.	He	never	says	God	is,	he	never	says	the	soul	is;	in	fact	he	never
uses	 the	word	 is.	You	 ask	 and	 he	will	 use	 the	word	 not.	No	 is	 his	 answer	 for
everything.	And	 if	 you	 can	understand,	 if	 you	 can	 feel	 a	 rapport,	 you	will	 see
that	he	is	right.
When	 you	 deny	 everything,	 that	 doesn't	mean	 you	 have	 destroyed	 everything.
That	 only	means	you	have	destroyed	 the	world	 that	 you	had	 created.	The	 real
remains	 because	 the	 real	 cannot	 be	 denied.	 But	 you	 cannot	 assert	 it.	 You	 can
know	it	but	you	cannot	state	it.
When	you	deny	all	these	three,	when	you	transcend	all	these	three,	you	become	a
buddha.
You	are	enlightened.
Buddha	 says	 you	 are	 awakened	 only	when	 these	 three	 sleeps	 are	 broken.	One
sleep	is	the	sleep	with	things:	many	people	are	asleep	there,	that	is	the	grossest
sleep.	Millions	of	people,	ninety-eight	percent	of	 the	people	are	asleep	 there	--
the	first	and	grossest	sleep,	the	sleep	with	things.	One	goes	on	thinking	about	his
bank	 balance,	 one	 goes	 on	 thinking	 about	 the	 house,	 about	 clothes,	 about	 this
and	that	--	and	one	lives	in	that.	There	are	people	who	only	study	catalogues	for
things....
I	have	heard	one	story:	One	religious	man	was	staying	overnight	in	a	family.	In
the	morning,	as	was	his	habit,	he	wanted	The	Bible	to	read	a	little	and	to	pray	a
little.	The	small	child	of	the	house	was	passing	through	the	room	so	he	asked	the
kid,	he	said,	'Bring	that	book'	--	because	he	thought	the	child	may	not	understand
what	book	The	Bible	was,	so	he	said,	'Bring	that	book	which	your	mother	reads
every	day.'	The	child	brought	the	Whole	Earth	Catalogue,	because	that	was	the
book	the	mother	read	every	day.
People,	ninety-eight	percent	of	them,	are	asleep	in	things.	Try	to	find	out	where
you	are	asleep,	because	the	work	has	to	start	there.	If	you	are	asleep	with	things,
then	you	have	to	start	from	there.	Drop	that	sleep	with	things.
Why	 do	 people	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 things?	 I	 used	 to	 stay	 in	 a	 house	 in
Calcutta.	The	woman	there	must	have	had	at	least	one	thousand	saris,	and	every
day	it	was	a	problem....
When	I	was	there	her	husband	and	I	would	be	sitting	in	the	car	and	her	husband
would	go	on	honking	and	she	would	say,	'I	am	coming!'	--	and	it	was	difficult	for
her	to	decide	which	sari	to	wear.	So	I	asked,	'Why	is	this	a	problem	every	day?'
So	she	took	me	and	showed	me,	and	she	said,	'You	would	also	be	puzzled.	I	have
got	one	 thousand	saris	and	 it	 is	difficult	 to	decide	which	one	 to	choose,	which
will	suit	the	occasion.'
Have	you	seen	people?...	from	the	very	morning	they	start	cleaning	their	car,	as
if	that	is	their	Bible	and	their	God.	'Things'	is	the	first	sleep,	the	grossest.	If	you
are	 attached	 too	much	 to	 things	 and	 continuously	 thinking	 of	 things,	 you	 are
asleep	 there.	You	 have	 to	 come	 out	 of	 that.	You	 have	 to	 look	 at	what	 type	 of
attachments	you	have,	where	you	cling,	and	for	what.	What	are	you	going	to	get
there?
You	may	increase	your	things,	you	may	accumulate	a	vast	empire,	but	when	you
die	you	will	go	without	 things.	Death	will	bring	you	out	of	your	sleep.	Before
death	does,	it	is	better	to	bring	yourself	out;	then	there	will	be	no	pain	in	death.
Death	 is	 so	 painful	 because	 this	 first	 sleep	 has	 to	 be	 broken;	 you	 are	 to	 be
snatched	away	from	things.
Then	there	is	the	second	sleep,	the	sleep	of	the	mind.	There	are	people	who	are
not	concerned	with	things	--	only	one	percent	of	people	--	who	are	not	concerned
with	things	but	who	are	concerned	with	the	mind.	They	don't	bother	about	what
type	of	clothes	they	use	--	artists,	novelists,	poets,	painters;	they	are	not	worried
about	things	in	general,	they	live	in	the	mind.	They	can	go	hungry,	they	can	go
naked,	they	can	live	in	a	slum,	but	they	go	on	working	in	the	mind.	The	novel
they	are	writing...	and	they	go	on	thinking,	I	may	not	be	immortal	but	my	novel
that	I	am	going	to	write	is	going	to	be	immortal;	the	painting	that	I	am	doing	is
going	to	be	immortal.	But	when	you	cannot	be	immortal,	how	can	your	painting
be	immortal?	When	you	are	to	perish,	when	you	are	to	die,	everything	that	you
create	will	die,	because	how	is	 it	possible	 that	 from	death	something	 immortal
can	be	born?
Then	there	are	people	who	go	on	thinking	of	philosophy,	thoughts,	oblivious	of
things,	 not	 worried	much	 about	 them.	 It	 happened	 once:	 Immanuel	 Kant	 was
coming	to	his	class.
He	was	a	perfect	timekeeper,	never	missed	a	single	appointment,	would	never	be
late;	at	exactly	the	right	time	he	would	enter.	He	never	cared	about	his	clothes,
about	 his	 house,	 or	 food,	 or	 anything	 --	 never	 worried	 about	 it,	 never	 got
married;	 just	a	servant	would	do,	because	that	was	not	much	of	a	problem	and
the	servant	can	do	the	food	and	take	care	of	the	house.	He	never	needed	a	wife	or
someone	who	was	intimate,	a	friend	--	no;	a	servant	was	okay	as	far	as	the	world
of	 things	was	concerned.	The	servant	was	 really	 the	master,	because	he	would
purchase	 everything,	 he	 would	 take	 care	 of	 the	 money	 and	 the	 house	 and
everything.
Immanuel	Kant	lived	like	a	stranger	in	that	house.	It	is	said	that	he	never	looked
at	 the	 house,	 he	 never	 knew	 how	 many	 rooms	 the	 house	 had,	 what	 type	 of
furniture;	even	if	you	were	to	show	him	something	which	had	been	in	his	room
for	thirty	years	he	would	not	be	able	to	recognize	it.	But	he	was	concerned	much
with	 thoughts	 --	 he	 lived	 in	 the	world	 of	 thoughts,	 and	many	 stories	 are	 told,
beautiful	 stories,	 because	 a	man	who	 lives	 in	 the	world	 of	 thoughts	 is	 always
absentminded,	absentminded	in	the	world	of	things,	because	you	cannot	live	in
two	worlds.
He	was	going	to	his	class;	the	road	was	muddy	and	one	of	his	shoes	got	stuck,	so
he	left	it	there,	went	to	the	class	with	one	shoe.	Somebody	asked,	'Where	is	your
other	shoe?'
He	said,	'It	got	stuck	just	on	the	way.	It	is	raining	and	it	was	muddy.'
But	the	man	who	had	asked	said,	'Then	you	could	have	got	it	back.'
Said	Immanuel	Kant,	'There	was	a	series	of	thoughts	in	my	mind	and	I	didn't	like
to	 interfere	with	 it.	 If	 I	had	got	concerned	with	 the	shoe,	 the	 track	would	have
been	 lost,	 and	 such	 beautiful	 thoughts	were	 there	 that	who	 cares	whether	 you
come	to	the	class	with	one	shoe	or	two!'	The	whole	college	laughed,	but	he	was
not	concerned.
Once	 it	 happened:	 he	 came	 back	 after	 his	 evening	 walk...	 he	 used	 to	 have	 a
walking-stick,	and	he	was	so	absorbed	in	his	thought	that	he	did	everything	that
was	done	every	day,	but	forgot	something.	He	was	so	absentminded	that	he	put
the	walking-stick	on	the	bed	where	he	used	to	put	himself,	and	he	himself	stood
in	the	corner	of	the	room	where	he	used	to	put	the...	got	a	little	mixed-up!
After	two	hours	the	servant	became	aware	that	the	light	was	on	--	so	what	was
the	matter?	He	 looked	 through	 the	window,	 and	 Immanuel	Kant	was	 standing
with	 closed	 eyes	 in	 the	 corner	 and	 the	 walking-stick	 was	 fast	 asleep	 on	 the
pillow.	A	man	who	is	asleep	too	much	in	the	mind	will	be	absentminded	in	the
world.	Philosophers,	poets,	men	of	literature,	painters,	musicians	--	 they	are	all
fast	asleep	there.
And	then	there	is	a	third	sleep:	monks,	those	who	have	renounced	the	world,	and
not	only	the	world	but	also	the	mind,	who	have	been	meditating	for	many	years
and	they	have	stopped	the	thought	process.	Now	no	thoughts	move	in	their	inner
sky,	now	no	things	are	there;	they	are	not	concerned	with	things,	not	concerned
with	thoughts.	But	a	subtle	ego,	the	'I'	--	now	they	call	it	ATMAN,	the	soul,	the
self,	the	Self	with	a	capital	'S'	--	is	their	sleep;	they	are	asleep	there.
Buddha	says	sleep	has	to	be	broken	on	these	three	layers,	and	when	all	the	sleeps
are	 broken,	 nobody	 is	 awake,	 only	 awakening	 is	 there;	 nobody	 is	 enlightened,
only	 enlightenment	 is	 there	 --	 just	 the	 phenomenon	of	 awareness,	without	 any
center....
An	enlightened	person	cannot	 say	 'I';	 even	 if	he	has	 to	use	 it	he	never	 says	 it,
even	 if	 he	 has	 to	 use	 it	 he	 cannot	mean	 it.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 verbal	 thing,	 has	 to	 be
followed	because	of	 the	 society	and	 the	 language	game.	 It	 is	 just	a	 rule	of	 the
language;	otherwise	he	has	no	'I'
feeling.
The	world	of	things	disappears	--	then	what	happens?	When	the	world	of	things
disappears,	 your	 attachment	 to	 things	 falls,	 your	 obsession	 with	 things	 falls.
Things	don't	disappear;	on	the	contrary,	 things	for	 the	first	 time	appear	as	 they
are.	Then	you	are	not	clinging,	obsessed;	then	you	are	not	coloring	them	in	your
own	desires,	 in	your	own	hopes	and	frustrations	--	no.	Then	the	world	 is	not	a
screen	for	your	desires	to	be	projected	on.	When	your	desires	drop,	the	world	is
there,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 totally	 new	 world.	 It	 is	 so	 fresh,	 it	 is	 so	 colorful,	 it	 is	 so
beautiful!	But	 a	mind	 attached	 to	 things	 cannot	 see	 it	 because	 eyes	 are	 closed
with	attachment.	A	totally	new	world	arises.
When	 the	 mind	 disappears,	 thoughts	 disappear.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 become
mindLESS;	on	the	contrary	you	become	mindFUL.	Buddha	uses	this	word	'right
mindfulness'	 millions	 of	 times.	 When	 the	 mind	 disappears	 and	 thoughts
disappear	you	become	mindful.	You	do	things	--	you	move,	you	work,	you	eat,
you	sleep,	but	you	are	always	mindful.	The	mind	is	not	there,	but	mindfulness	is
there.	What	is	mindfulness?	It	is	awareness.	It	is	perfect	awareness.
And	when	 the	self	disappears,	 the	ego,	 the	atman,	what	happens?	It	 is	not	 that
you	are	lost,	you	are	no	more	--	no.	On	the	contrary,	for	the	first	time	you	ARE.
But	now	you	are	not	separate	from	existence.	Now	you	are	an	island	no	more;
you	have	become	the	whole	continent,	you	are	one	with	the	existence.
But	 those	 are	 the	 positive	 things	 --	 they	 cannot	 be	 said.	 Hence,	 Nansen	 said,
'Yes,	there	is	a	teaching	which	no	master	has	ever	preached,	because	it	cannot	be
preached,	and	that	teaching	is:
'IT	IS	NOT	MIND,	IT	IS	NOT	BUDDHA,	IT	IS	NOT	THINGS.'
That	teaching	is	emptiness,	that	teaching	is	absolute	nothingness.	And	when	you
are	not,	suddenly	the	whole	existence	starts	flowering	on	you.	The	whole	ecstasy
of	existence	converges	on	you	--	when	you	are	not.
When	 you	 are	 not,	 the	 whole	 existence	 feels	 ecstatic	 and	 celebrates;	 flowers
shower	on	you.	They	have	not	showered	yet	because	you	ARE,	and	they	will	not
shower	 until	 you	 dissolve.	 When	 you	 are	 empty,	 no	 more,	 when	 you	 are	 a
nothingness,	SHUNYATA,	suddenly	 they	start	showering.	They	have	showered
on	 Buddha,	 on	 Subhuti,	 on	 Nansen;	 they	 can	 shower	 on	 YOU	 --	 they	 are
waiting.	 They	 are	 knocking	 at	 the	 door.	 They	 are	 ready.	 Just	 the	moment	 you
become	empty,	they	start	falling	on	you.
So	remember	it:	the	final	liberation	is	not	YOUR	liberation,	the	final	liberation	is
FROM
YOU.	Enlightenment	is	not	yours,	cannot	be.	When	you	are	not,	it	is	there.	Drop
yourself	in	your	totalness:	the	world	of	things,	the	world	of	thoughts,	the	world
of	 the	self;	all	 three	 layers,	drop.	Drop	 this	 trinity;	drop	 this	TRIMURTI,	drop
these	 three	 faces,	 because	 if	 you	 are	 there	 then	 the	 one	 cannot	 be.	 If	 you	 are
three,	how	can	the	one	be?
Let	 all	 three	 disappear	 --	God,	 the	Holy	Ghost	 and	 the	 Son;	Brahma,	Vishnu,
Mahesh	--
all	 the	 three,	 let	 them	 drop!	 Let	 them	 disappear.	 Nobody	 remains	 --	 and	 then
everything	is	there.
When	nothing	happens,	the	all	happens.
You	are	nothing...	the	all	starts	showering	on	you.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Flower	shower
Chapter	title:	The	brash	student
Chapter	title:	The	temper
Chapter	title:	The	art	of	archery
Chapter	title:	Temple	fire
Chapter	title:	Tozan's	five	pounds
Chapter	title:	Seeing	double
