
Be	Still	and	Know
Responses	to	Disciples	Questions
Talks	given	from	01/09/79	am	to	10/09/79	am
English	Discourse	series
10	Chapters
Year	published:	1981
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Always	on	the	Rocks
1	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909010
ShortTitle:
BESTIL01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 MEDITATIVENESS	 AND	 SCIENCE	 ARE	 DIFFICULT	 TO
RECONCILE.
YET	 PAINTING	 A	 PICTURE,	 WRITING	 A	 POEM,	 AND	 SOLVING	 A
SCIENTIFIC
PROBLEM	ALL	BRING	THE	SAME	JOY.	THE	SAME	JOY!
WHY	IS	IT	SO	DIFFICULT	TO	BE	MEDITATIVE	AND	A	SCIENTIST?
WHY	 HAS	 THERE	 NEVER	 BEEN	 A	 SOCIETY	 IN	 WHICH	 THE	 INNER
AND	THE
OUTER	 SCIENCES,	 THE	 SCIENCE	 OF	 GENTLENESS	 AND	 LOVE	 AND
THE
SCIENCE	OF	AGGRESSION	AND	DEATH,	LIVE	IN	HARMONY?
Ananda	Prabhu,
THE	VERY	EFFORT	TO	RECONCILE	THE	POLAR	opposites	is	wrong	--	you
will	 never	 succeed	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 like	 trying	 to	 reconcile	 day	 and	 night,	 it	 is	 like
trying	to	reconcile	life	and	death.	You	need	not	reconcile	them,	you	have	only	to
see	that	they	ARE
reconciled.	Day	and	night	are	moving	perfectly	in	rhythm;	life	and	death	are	like
two	wings	of	existence.
Once	you	see	that	the	polar	opposites	can't	exist	separately,	once	you	have	seen
that	 reconciliation	 is	 not	 needed	 at	 all,	 that	 they	 are	 already	 reconciled,	 that
awareness	will	help	you	to	move	from	one	pole	to	another	without	any	problem.
They	are	totally	different	phenomena	--	polar	opposites,	but	all	polar	opposites
are	also	complementaries.
Science	is	concentration:	it	is	mind,	it	is	effort.
Meditation	or	religion	is	a	totally	different	world:	it	is	relaxation,	it	is	let-go	--	it
is	not	concentration	at	all.	It	is	not	one-pointedness,	it	is	no-pointedness.	So	how
can	 you	 reconcile	 them?	How	do	 you	 reconcile	work	 and	 rest?	But	 you	work
hard	in	the	day,	and	at	night	the	rest	comes	of	its	own	accord.	You	have	earned
it;	your	hard	work	brings	rest.
Philosophically	reconciliation	is	not	possible:	work	cannot	be	rest,	rest	cannot	be
work.	If	you	try	to	create	a	synthesis	you	will	destroy	both,	the	beauty	of	both.
Work	is	work,	rest	is	rest.	But	work	done	well	brings	rest,	and	if	you	have	rested
well	in	the	night;	in	the	morning	you	will	feel	so	vital,	so	alive,	so	full	of	energy,
that	 work	 is	 needed.	 Rest	 brings	 work,	 work	 brings	 rest	 --	 it	 is	 a	 circle.
Reconciliation	 is	 already	 there:	 day	 brings	 night,	 night	 brings	 day;	 life	 brings
death,	 death	 brings	 life.	 They	 are	 half-circles;	 with	 both	 together	 the	 circle	 is
perfect	 and	 complete.	 But	 please	 don't	 try	 to	 reconcile	 them	 in	 theory,	 in
philosophy.
In	existence	watch,	and	see	how	polar	opposites	are	functioning	together,	hand	in
hand,	as	complementaries.	That	has	not	been	done	yet;	in	fact,	humanity	was	not
mature	 enough	 to	 do	 it	 up	 to	 now.	 Everything	 needs	 a	 particular	 time,	 a
particular	maturity,	in	which	to	be	done.
The	 East	 has	 lived	 religiously	 --	 that	 is	 one	 pole	 --	 and	 because	 IT	 has	 lived
religiously	 it	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 produce	 science.	 The	 West	 has	 lived
scientifically,	and	because	of	its	science	it	has	lost	track	of	religion.	Now	for	the
first	time,	the	East	is	no	more	East	and	the	West	is	no	more	West.	The	earth	is
becoming	one:	the	earth	is	becoming	one.	global	village.	This	is	the	time	when
the	reconciliation	can	be	seen,	can	be	understood.
Man	is	entering	into	a	new	phase;	a	new	consciousness	is	to	dawn.	For	at	least
ten	 thousand	 years,	 as	 far	 as	 consciousness	 is	 concerned,	 nothing	 new	 has
happened.	There	have	been	Buddhas	and	 there	have	been	Albert	Einsteins,	but
we	 are	 still	waiting	 for	 a	Buddha	who	 is	 also	 an	Albert	Einstein	 or	 an	Albert
Einstein	 who	 is	 also	 a	 Buddha.	 The	 day	 is	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer.	 Albert
Einstein	in	his	last	days	was	very	much	interested	in	meditation,	in	religion.	His
last	days	were	full	of	wonder.	He	said	in	his	old	age,	"I	used	to	think	when	I	was
young	that	sooner	or	later	all	the	mysteries	of	existence	would	be	solved,	and	I
worked	hard.	But	now	I	can	say	that	the	more	we	know,	the	more	existence	turns
out	 to	 be	mysterious.	The	more	we	know,	 the	 less	we	know	and	 the	more	we
become	aware	of	the	vastness...."
Science	has	not	been	able	to	demystify	existence.	Now	this	is	recognized	not	by
ordinary	technicians	but	by	geniuses,	because	they	are	the	pioneers;	they	can	see
the	dawn	very	close	by,	they	are	the	prophets.	Albert	Einstein	says	that	science
has	failed	in	demystifying	existence,	that	on	the	contrary	it	has	mystified	things
even	more.
For	 example,	 it	was	 so	 easy	 in	 the	old	days,	 just	 a	 hundred	years	 ago,	 for	 the
scientist	 to	 say	 that	 all	 is	matter.	Now	matter	 has	 disappeared;	 in	 neo-physics
there	is	no	entity	called	matter.	The	deeper	the	physicist	went	into	the	world	of
matter,	 the	more	matter	was	 not	 to	 be	 found	 at	 all:	 it	 is	 pure	 energy.	How	 to
define	 energy	 now?	 Is	 it	 material?	 Energy	 cannot	 be	 material;	 energy	 is
something	 totally	 different	 from	 matter.	 Matter	 is	 static,	 energy	 is	 dynamic;
matter	 is	 a	 noun,	 energy	 is	 a	 verb.	 Matter	 is	 measurable.	 That	 is	 exactly	 the
meaning	of	the	word	'matter':	it	comes	from	'measure',	the	root	means
'measurable'.	Matter	 can	 be	measured,	 that's	why	 it	 is	 called	matter.	Energy	 is
immeasurable,	 it	cannot	be	called	matter.	And	as	 the	physicist	has	entered	 into
the	world	of	energy,	he	has	become	more	and	more	puzzled;	never	before	has	he
been	so	puzzled.
Mystics	have	always	been	in	awe	before	existence.	The	physicist	is	for	the	first
time	 in	 awe,	 because	 he	 has	 for	 the	 first	 time	 touched	 something	 very	 vital
otherwise	he	was	just	looking	from	the	outside.	A	stone	is	just	a	stone	from	the
outside.	The	physicist	now	knows	 that	 the	stone	 is	not	 just	a	stone:	 it	contains
universes.	 A	 single	 small	 pebble	 that	 you	 can	 hold	 in	 your	 hand	 contains	 so
much	atomic	energy	that	the	whole	universe	can	grow	out	of	it,	contains	so	much
atomic	 energy	 that	 the	whole	 universe	 can	 be	 destroyed	 by	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 a
pebble	any	more	and	it	is	not	solid	any	more.	You	are	holding	it	in	your	hand	and
you	know	 it	 is	 solid,	but	your	knowing	 is	no	 longer	 scientific.	 It	 only	appears
solid;	 it	 is	 liquid.	And	 it	 looks	 so	 available,	manipulatable;	 you	 can	 do	 things
with	 it.	But	you	don't	know	its	mysteries	which	are	not	manipulatable,	and	 the
mysteries	are	really	immense	--	almost	as	immense	as	the	mystery	of	God	itself.
The	 modern	 physicist	 is	 using	 the	 language	 of	 the	 mystics	 for	 the	 first	 time.
Eddington	said,	"The	universe	no	longer	 looks	 like	a	 thing	but	 like	a	 thought."
This,	 from	the	mouth	of	a	scientist,	a	Nobel	prize-winner	--	 the	universe	 looks
like	 a	 thought	 and	 not	 like	 a	 thing?	 That	 means	 the	 universe	 is	 more
consciousness	 than	matter.	And	matter	 has	 been	 analyzed,	 our	 penetration	 has
become	deeper;	we	have	come	across	atoms,	electrons,	neutrons	 --	and	we	are
utterly	mystified,	at	a	loss	even	to	express	what	we	have	come	across.	We	don't
have	the	language,	the	right	language	for	it,	because	we	have	never	known	it.
Now	the	right	language	has	to	be	found	in	the	words	of	the	mystics:	a	Buddha
will	be	helpful,	a	Lao	Tzu	will	be	helpful	And	scientists	ARE	looking	into	 the
words	of	 the	Buddhas	 to	 find	 the	 right	 language,	because	 these	 are	 the	people
who	 have	 been	 talking	 about	 paradox,	 mystery.	 And	 now	 science	 is	 coming
across	paradoxes.
The	greatest	paradox	is	that	the	electron	behaves	in	such	a	mysterious	way	that
the	scientist	has	no	language	to	express	it.	It	behaves	simultaneously	as	a	particle
and	as	a	wave.	This	is	impossible,	inconceivable	for	the	mind.	Either	something
is	a	particle	or	it	is	a	wave;	the	same	thing	cannot	be	both	at	the	same	time.
You	 know	Euclidean	 geometry:	 either	 something	 is	 a	 point	 or	 something	 is	 a
line;	 one	 thing	 cannot	 be	 a	 point	 and	 a	 line	 together	 at	 the	 same	 time.	A	 line
means	 many	 points	 following	 each	 other	 in	 sequence;	 a	 single	 point	 cannot
function	like	a	line.	But	that's	now	electrons	are	functioning	--	simultaneously	as
a	point	and	as	a	line,	as	a	particle	and	as	a	wave.	What	to	make	of	it?	How	to	say
it?
The	scientist	 is	dumb.	Now	he	knows	 that	 the	mystics,	who	have	always	been
talking	in	paradoxes,	who	have	been	saying	God	is	far	away	and	very	close	by,
must	be	saying	something	through	their	experience.	The	mystics	who	used	to	say
that	 life	and	death	are	one,	not	 two,	for	 the	first	 time	are	becoming	relevant	 to
the	 scientist's	 mind.	 A	 new	 science	 is	 arising	 which	 says	 it	 is	 a	 science	 of
uncertainty.	NO	more	certainty!	Certainty	seems	to	be	too	gross.
Mahavira,	twenty-five	centuries	ago,	used	to	make	each	of	his	statements	with	a
'perhaps'.	If	you	asked	him,	"Is	there	a	God?"	he	would	say,	"Perhaps."	In	those
days	it	was	not	understood	at	all	--	because	how	can	you	say,	"Perhaps"?	Either
God	is	or	is	not.
It	seems	so	simple	and	so	logical:	"If	God	is,	God	is;	if	he	is	not,	he	is	not.	What
do	you	mean	by	'perhaps'?"
Now	 it	 can	 be	 understood.	Mahavira	was	 using	 the	 same	 language	 in	 religion
that	 is	 being	 used	 by	 Albert	 Einstein	 in	 physics.	 Albert	 Einstein	 calls	 it	 the
theory	of	relativity.
Mahavira	has	called	his	philosophy	exactly	 the	 same:	SAPEKSHAWAD	--	 the
theory	of	relativity.	Nothing	is	certain,	everything	is	flexible,	fluid.	The	moment
you	have	said	something,	it	is	no	longer	the	same.	Things	don't	exist,	Mahavira
says,	but	only	events.
That's	what	modern	science	is	saying,	that	there	are	no	things	in	the	world,	but
only	events.	And	we	cannot	say	anything	absolutely,	we	cannot	say,	"This	is	so."
Whenever	 somebody	says	absolutely,	 "This	 is	 so,"	he	 is	behaving	 foolishly.	 In
the	past	he	was	thought	to	be	a	man	of	knowledge;	the	more	certain	he	was,	the
more	 it	was	 thought	 that	he	knew.	The	uncertain	person,	 the	hesitating	person,
was	thought	to	be	ignorant.
That's	 why	Mahavira	 could	 not	 influence	 the	 world	 very	 much;	 he	 came	 too
early,	 he	 arrived	 before	 his	 time.	 Now	 is	 the	 time	 for	 him	 --	 now	 he	 will	 be
understood	by	the	scientist,	by	the	highest	intelligence	in	the	world.	But	he	was
talking	 to	 people,	 the	 ordinary	 masses,	 who	 could	 not	 understand	 his
SYADAWAD	--	his	perhaps-ism.	People	wanted	certain	knowledge:	"Is	 there	a
God?"	And	Mahavira	would	say,	"Perhaps.	Yes	--
in	one	way	it	can	be	said	yes,	and	in	another	it	can	be	said	no.	And	both	are	right
together,	simultaneously."
Now	the	time	has	come.	Ananda	Prabhu,	don't	try	to	reconcile	things	--	that	will
be	a	false	phenomenon.	Just	watch,	just	look	deep	into	things	as	they	are.	They
are	 already	 reconciled;	 there	 is	 no	 conflict	 in	 existence.	 All	 contraries	 are
complementaries.
YOU	 SAY:	 MEDITATIVENESS	 AND	 SCIENCE	 ARE	 DIFFICULT	 TO
RECONCILE.
If	you	 try	 to	reconcile	 them	it	 is	not	only	difficult	but	 impossible.	 It	cannot	be
done.	You	will	go	mad	--	the	very	effort	to	reconcile	them	will	drive	you	crazy.
Avoid	such	an	effort.	Rather,	on	the	contrary,	simply	watch.
Life	 is	 paradoxical.	 It	 is	 already	 a	 synthesis	 of	 paradoxes;	 the	 opposites	 are
already	meeting	 in	 it.	All	 that	we	need	 is	 a	 pure	mirror-like	 consciousness,	 so
that	 whatsoever	 life	 is	 it	 is	 reflected.	 And	 you	 will	 see	 in	 that	 reflection	 the
meeting	of	the	opposites:	the	meeting	of	East	and	West,	the	meeting	of	religion
and	science.
YOU	 SAY:	 YET	 PAINTING	 A	 PICTURE,	 WRITING	 A	 POEM,	 AND
SOLVING	A	 SCIENTIFIC	 PROBLEM	ALL	 BRING	 THE	 SAME	 JOY.	 THE
SAME	JOY!
Yes,	they	can	--	because	art	is	just	in	the	middle	between	both,	equidistant	from
religion	and	science.	Art	has	the	qualities	of	both.	One	aspect	of	art	is	scientific,
the	 technological	 aspect.	Hence	 the	 scientist	 can	paint	 and	enjoy	painting,	 and
will	have	the	same	joy;	and	the	mystic	can	also	paint	and	will	have	the	same	joy
as	in	prayer,	as	in	meditation	--
although	 both	 are	 doing	 the	 same	 thing,	 the	 mystic's	 painting	 will	 be	 totally
different	from	the	scientist's	painting.
You	can	 look:	modern	painting	 in	 the	West	 is	 too	much	under	 the	 influence	of
technology.	It	has	lost	beauty;	it	is	no	longer	helpful	in	bringing	you	to	the	divine
presence	that	permeates	existence.	On	the	contrary,	it	simply	reflects	the	insane
mind	of	man.	Looking	at	Western	painting	you	will	feel	dizzy,	nauseous,	ill.
Zen	Masters	have	also	painted,	but	their	painting	is	totally	different.	Watching	a
Zen	painting	you	will	feel	uplifted;	a	feeling	of	subtle	joy	will	arise	in	you.	You
would	like	to	dance	or	sing	or	play	on	your	flute.	Zen	painting	comes	from	the
other	 side,	 the	mystic's	 side.	 Picasso,	 Dali,	 and	 others	 come	 from	 the	 side	 of
science.	Now,	there	is	no	similarity	between	a	Picasso	painting	and	the	painting
of	 a	 Zen	Master,	 no	 similarity.	 They	 are	 two	 totally	 different	worlds,	 and	 the
reason	is	that	the	painters	are	different.
Yes,	 Ananda	 Prabhu,	 you	may	 be	 feeling	 the	 same	 joy	 in	 painting,	 writing	 a
poem,	 and	 solving	 a	 scientific	 problem.	 It	 is	 all	 mind.	 Solving	 a	 scientific
problem	is	mind;	your	poem	will	also	be	more	or	less	mathematical,	 logical.	It
will	have	only	the	form	of	poetry	but	its	spirit	will	be	prose.
That's	why	in	the	West	poetry	is	dying,	painting	has	become	ugly,	sculpture	is	no
longer	representative	of	nature.	Something	is	immensely	missing:	the	spirit,	the
very	spirit	of	art	is	missing.	Looking	at	a	Zen	painting	you	will	be	overwhelmed;
something	from	the	beyond	Will	start	showering	on	you.
Have	you	watched	a	Zen	painting	closely?	There	are	a	 few	 things	you	will	be
surprised	 to	see.	Human	figures	are	very	small,	 so	small	 that	 if	you	don't	 look
minutely	 you	 will	 miss	 them.	 Trees	 are	 big,	 mountains	 are	 big,	 the	 sun	 and
moon,	rivers	and	waterfalls	are	big,	but	human	beings	are	very	small.
In	Western	painting	 the	human	being	 is	very	big;	he	covers	 the	whole	canvas.
Now	this	is	not	right,	this	is	not	proportionate,	this	is	not	true.	The	human	being
covering	the	whole	canvas	is	very	egoistic	--	but	the	painter	IS	egoistic.	The	Zen
Master	is	right:	man	is	only	a	tiny	part	in	this	great	universe.	The	mountains	are
big	and	 the	waterfalls	are	big	and	 the	 trees	are	big	and	 the	stars	and	 the	moon
and	the	sun	--	and	where	is	man?
Just	the	other	day	I	was	looking	at	a	Zen	painting.	The	men	were	so	small,	two
small	 figures	 crossing	 a	 bridge,	 that	 I	 would	 have	 missed	 them	 because	 tall
mountains	 and	 trees	 were	 covering	 the	 whole	 painting.	 But	 there	 was	 a	 note
underneath	the	painting	saying,
"Please	 don't	miss:	 there	 are	 two	 human	 figures	 on	 the	 bridge."	 I	 had	 to	 look
very	closely
--	yes,	 they	were	 there,	 two	human	 figures,	very	 small,	walking	hand	 in	hand,
passing	 over	 the	 bridge.	 This	 is	 the	 right	 proportion;	 this	 is	 a	 non-egoistic
painting.
In	Western	 paintings	 you	will	 find	 the	whole	 canvas	 covered.	 In	Zen	 painting
only	a	 small	part	of	 the	canvas	 is	 covered,	 and	 the	 remaining	part	 is	 empty.	 It
looks	like	a	wastage:	if	you	are	going	to	make	such	a	small	painting,	why	not	use
a	small	canvas?
Why	use	such	a	big	canvas	which	covers	the	whole	wall,	and	just	in	the	corner
make	a	small	painting?	But	the	Zen	people	say	that's	how	things	are:	"Emptiness
is	so	much	all	around.	The	whole	sky	is	empty	--	how	can	we	leave	out	the	sky?
If	we	leave	out	the	sky	the	painting	will	be	untrue."
Now	no	Western	painting	has	that	vision,	that	we	are	surrounded	by	emptiness:
the	 earth	 is	 very	 small,	 humanity	 a	 very	 small	 part	 of	 the	 earth,	 and	 infinite
emptiness	all	around....
To	be	true,	to	be	existentially	true,	the	emptiness	cannot	be	left	outside;	it	has	to
be	there.
This	is	a	different	vision,	from	a	different	side.
Zen	painting	is	not	done	in	the	Western	way.	In	Western	painting	you	will	find
that	the	painter	goes	on	improving:	over	one	coat	of	paint	there	will	be	another
coat	 of	 paint	 and	 still	 another	 coat	 of	 paint,	 and	 he	 goes	 on	 improving	 and
touching	up	and	doing	things.
Zen	painters	cannot	do	that;	that	is	impossible.	They	use	a	certain	kind	of	paper,
rice-paper,	on	which	you	can	make	only	one	stroke.	You	cannot	correct	 it;	you
have	to	leave	it	as	it	is.	The	paper	is	so	thin	that	if	you	try	to	correct	it	the	whole
thing	will	be	lost.	Why	is	rice-paper	being	used?	So	that	the	mind	has	nothing	to
do	--	the	mind	is	constantly	trying	to	improve,	to	make	things	better.	It	has	to	be
from	the	heart,	a	single	stroke.	If	your	heart	is	full	of	it,	it	will	come	right.	But
you	cannot	correct	it;	correction	comes	from	the	mind.
Zen	 painting	 is	 never	 corrected;	 if	 you	 correct	 it	 your	 correction	 will	 always
show	that	you	are	not	a	Master.	It	has	to	come	out	of	your	meditativeness,	your
silence.	Your	feeling	of	the	moment	is	spread	on	the	rice-paper.
Art	is	just	in	the	middle,	equidistant	from	science	and	religion.	It	can	be	both.	It
can	be	scientific	art,	as	it	is	in	the	West	--	that's	what	you	mean,	Ananda	Prabhu.
It	can	be	 religious	art:	you	don't	know	anything	about	 that	yet,	because	before
you	can	know	anything	about	it	you	will	have	to	know	what	meditation	is.
Meditation	is	not	a	state	of	concentration;	it	is	not	a	state	of	mind	at	all.	It	is	a
state	of	total	mindlessness	--	and	not	a	state	of	sleep	either.	No	mind,	no	sleep;
no	mind,	but	total	awareness.	Out	of	that	awareness	you	bring	a	different	quality
to	music,	to	painting,	to	poetry.	And	out	of	that	meditativeness	you	can	bring	a
totally	different	quality	to	science	too.	But	before	that	can	happen	we	will	need
large	numbers	of	meditative	people	around	the	earth.
That's	what	my	work	is.	That's	what	I	am	trying	to	do	here:	to	create	meditators.
That	 is	 the	 first	 requirement.	 If	 we	 want	 to	 bring	 a	 new	 world	 vision	 where
science	and	religion	can	meet,	we	will	have	to	create	the	foundation	first;	only
then	can	the	temple	be	raised	on	it.	Meditation	has	to	be	the	foundation.
And	 don't	 try	 to	 reconcile	 things:	 just	 become	 more	 meditative.	 In	 your
meditation	is	reconciliation,	because	in	your	meditation	you	become	able	to	see
that	the	contradictions	are	only	apparent,	that	the	contraries	are	only	enemies	on
the	surface	but	deep	down	they	are	friends.	It	is	like	two	friends	playing	chess:
on	the	surface	they	are	enemies,	but	deep	down	they	are	friends.	That's	why	they
are	playing	chess	--	they	are	friends;	but	because	they	are	playing	chess	they	are
pretending	to	be	enemies.
This	is	the	LEELA	of	existence,	the	play	of	existence.	God	has	divided	himself
into	two,	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	play	hide-and-seek.	k	is	a	very	beautiful
play	if	you	understand	it	as	play.	Don't	take	it	too	seriously	because	then	you	will
not	be	able	to	see	the	playfulness	of	it.
You	 ask	 me:	 WHY	 IS	 IT	 SO	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 BE	 MEDITATIVE	 AND	 A
SCIENTIST?
It	is	not.	To	be	meditative	is	difficult	for	everybody;	it	is	not	only	a	question	of
the	 scientist.	 Ananda	 Prabhu	 is	 a	 scientist.	 But	 it	 is	 the	 same	 difficulty	 as	 a
businessman	will	feel,	it	is	the	same	difficulty	as	the	carpenter	will	feel.	It	is	not
just	 something	 new	 to	 the	 scientist.	 Maybe	 quantitatively	 it	 is	 a	 little	 more
difficult,	 because	 his	whole	mind	 knows	 only	 one	way	 of	 functioning,	 that	 of
concentration.	He	knows	only	one	way	to	use	the	mind:	to	focus	it	on	a	certain
object.	And	meditation	means	remaining	unfocussed,	just	remaining	open,	open
for	everything.
While	 listening	 to	 me	 you	 can	 listen	 in	 two	 ways.	 The	 scientific	 way	 is	 to
concentrate	--
what	I	am	saying,	concentrate	on	it.	That	means	close	your	mind	to	everything
else:	 the	airplane	passes	by,	and	 the	 train	makes	a	noise,	and	 the	 traffic	on	 the
road	and	 the	birds	 singing	 in	 the	 trees...close	your	mind	 to	everything.	 Just	 let
there	be	only	a	small	keyhole	available	to	me;	listen	only	to	me.	That's	how	the
scientist	listens;	he	looks	through	a	keyhole	into	existence.
The	 mystic	 comes	 out	 of	 the	 room,	 stands	 under	 the	 sky,	 utterly	 open	 to
everything.	That	is	the	other	way	of	listening,	the	way	a	meditator	listens.	Then
you	go	on	listening	to	me,	and	the	chirping	of	the	birds	goes	on	as	a	background
to	it.	And	what	I	am	saying	the	chirping	of	the	birds	cannot	disturb	--	no,	not	at
all.	 It	 enhances	 its	 beauty;	 it	 gives	 it	 color,	 it	 gives	 it	music	And	not	 only	 the
chirping	of	 the	birds	but	 the	airplane	passing	by	and	sudden	noise	create	more
silence	in	contrast.
When	the	airplane	has	passed	by,	you	are	suddenly	listening	to	me	on	a	deeper
level.	And	while	the	airplane	is	passing	and	the	noise	is	there,	you	listen	to	both.
You	 don't	 become	 disturbed.	 You	 don't	 say	 inside,	 "This	 stupid	 airplane	 is
disturbing	me."	 The	 airplane	 cannot	 disturb	 you.	 But	 if	 you	 say	 inside,	 "This
stupid	plane	is	disturbing	me,"	your	SAYING	it	will	be	a	disturbance;	when	you
are	saying	it	you	will	lose	track	of	me.	The	airplane	cannot	disturb	you,	but	your
reaction	to	it	is	bound	to.
Listening	 meditatively	 means	 all	 that	 is	 is	 accepted,	 welcomed.	 In	 all	 its
multiplicity	 the	universe	 is	 received.	You	are	 simply	open	 from	all	 sides	 to	all
that	is	happening.	And	you	will	be	surprised'	It	brings	such	a	great	silence,	such
exquisite	silence,	such	profound	silence.
Concentration	 tires	 you,	 meditation	 never	 tires	 you.	 But	 it	 is	 difficult	 for
everybody,	not	only	for	the	scientist	--	because	we	have	become	accustomed	to	a
certain	pattern	of	looking	at	things.	You	will	have	to	melt	your	pattern;	you	will
have	to	become	a	little	more	liquid,	fluid,	and	meditation	will	come	to	you.	Don't
be	worried	about	it	being	difficult	for	the	scientist;	that	idea	can	create	difficulty.
Once	you	have	accepted	the	idea	that	it	is	difficult	then	it	will	be	difficult.	Don't
bring	that	idea;	that	will	become	auto-hypnotic,	it	will	become	a	suggestion.	It	is
not	 difficult:	meditation	 is	 the	 simplest	 and	 the	 easiest	 thing	 in	 the	world.	We
have	 just	 become	 accustomed	 to	 concentration.	 We	 have	 been	 told	 since
childhood	 to	 concentrate:	 from	 the	 primary	 school	 to	 the	 university	 we	 have
been	trained	for	concentration.	This	is	a	kind	of	habituation;	it	takes	a	little	time
to	drop	the	old	habit	and	to	learn	something	which	is	not	a	habit	but	your	very
nature.
YOU	SAY:	WHY	HAS	THERE	NEVER	BEEN	A	SOCIETY	IN	WHICH	THE
INNER
AND	 THE	 OUTER	 SCIENCES,	 THE	 SCIENCE	 OF	 GENTLENESS	 AND
LOVE	AND
THE	SCIENCE	OF	AGGRESSION	AND	DEATH,	LIVE	IN	HARMONY?
Now	 the	 time	 has	 come.	 Everything	 can	 happen	 only	 at	 a	 particular	 time.
Religion	 has	 come	 to	 its	 ultimate	 peak	 in	 the	 Buddhas;	 now	 science	 is	 also
coming	to	an	ultimate	peak.
And	only	when	two	things	have	grown	is	a	meeting	possible.
A	seed	cannot	meet	a	tree;	the	seed	will	have	to	become	a	tree.	Only	then,	high
in	the	winds,	in	the	clouds,	can	they	whisper	to	each	other,	can	they	fall	in	love
with	each	other,	can	they	embrace	each	other,	hug	each	other	--	can	they	have	a
dialogue.	 But	 a	 seed	 cannot	 have	 a	 dialogue	 with	 a	 grown-up	 tree;	 it	 is
impossible.	The	seed	will	not	know	the	language,	the	tree	will	not	understand	the
language	of	the	seed.
Religion	has	been	 in	 a	mature	 state	 for	 almost	 five	 thousand	years.	Science	 is
still	 growing,	 coming	 to	 maturity.	 Hence	 I	 say	 this	 time	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
precious	times.
You	are	fortunate	to	be	alive	today,	because	something	immensely	great	is	going
to	happen	--	and	that	is	the	meeting	of	science	and	religion,	the	meeting	of	West
and	East,	the	meeting	of	the	extrovert	mind	and	the	introvert	mind.	It	will	create
the	new	man	who	will	be	able	 to	move	easily	 to	 the	outside	or	 into	 the	 inside,
who	will	be	able	to	move	easily	into	the	extrovert	world	of	science	and	into	the
introvert	world	of	religion	--	just	as	you	move	outside	your	house	into	the	garden
and	back	into	the	house.	It	is	not	a	problem;	you	don't	need	any	reconciliation.
You	need	not	make	a	great	effort	each	time	you	come	out	of	your	house	onto	the
lawn	--	you	simply	come	out!	 It	 is	 feeling	cold	 inside,	and	 the	sun	 is	beautiful
and	warm	outside:	you	come	onto	the	lawn,	you	sit	on	the	lawn.	Later	on	when	it
becomes	too	hot	you	simply	move	in	because	there	is	coolness	inside.
Just	as	easily	as	you	come	out	of	your	house	and	go	in,	a	total	man	will	be	able
to	move	into	science	and	religion;	the	inner	and	outer	will	both	be	his.
Carl	 Gustav	 Jung	 has	 divided	 human	 beings	 into	 two:	 the	 extroverts	 and	 the
introverts.
His	 categorization	 is	 relevant	 for	 the	 past	 but	 will	 be	 utterly	 useless	 for	 the
future,	 because	 the	 future	 man	 will	 be	 BOTH	 together.	 In	 the	 past,	 we	 have
always	been	categorizing	in	this	way,	but	the	future	man	will	not	be	a	man	and
will	not	be	a	woman.	I	am	not	saying	biologically	--	biologically	the	woman	will
be	 a	woman,	 and	 the	man	will	 be	 a	man	 --	 but	 spiritually	 the	 future	man	will
have	 as	 many	 feminine	 qualities	 as	 the	 woman,	 and	 the	 woman	 will	 have	 as
many	masculine	qualities	 as	 the	man.	Spiritually	 they	will	 never	be	 labeled	as
man	or	woman	any	more.	And	that	will	be	the	real	liberation
--	 not	 only	 the	 liberation	 of	 women,	 but	 the	 liberation	 of	 men	 too:	 liberation
from	 straitjackets,	 liberation	 from	 imprisoning	 categories,	 liberation	 from	 all
labels.
Man	is	not	going	to	be	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian;	man	is	not	going	to	be
Indian,	German,	English;	man	is	not	going	to	be	white	or	black.	Not	that	colors
will	disappear	--
the	white	man	will	be	white	and	the	black	will	be	black	--	but	these	will	become
irrelevant,	trivial,	meaningless;	they	will	not	be	decisive.	The	new	man	will	have
a	 universal	 consciousness,	 and	 the	 foundation	 will	 be	 laid	 by	 the	 meeting	 of
science	and	religion.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	CAN	BUDDHA	OR	CHRIST	BE	CREATED	OR	DEVELOPED	OUT
OF
EVERY	COMMON	HUMAN	BEING?	OR	IS	BUDDHA	OR	CHRIST	ONLY
BORN
AS	SUCH?	EVERY	MAN	IS	BUDDHA,	EVERY	MAN	IS	CHRIST:	I	FEEL	IT
IS	NOT
TRUE.
Bal	Krishna	Bharti,
THE	 BUDDHA	 OR	 THE	 CHRIST	 CANNOT	 BE	 CREATED	 because	 the
Buddha	is	your	intrinsic	nature.	It	need	not	be	created.	It	has	not	to	be	developed
either;	it	is	already	there,	it	is	already	the	case.	It	has	only	to	be	unfolded,	it	has
to	be	discovered.
The	treasure	is	there;	you	have	to	find	the	key	to	unlock	the	door.	The	treasure	is
not	to	be	created,	the	treasure	is	not	to	be	developed;	you	only	have	to	find	the
right	 key.	You	 have	 forgotten	 about	 the	 key	 --	 the	 key	 is	 also	with	 you.	God
provides	you	with	everything	that	is	needed	on	the	journey;	you	come	absolutely
prepared.	 But	 society	 disturbs	 every	 child,	 distorts	 every	 child,	 because	 a
Buddha	 or	 a	 Christ	 is	 useless	 to	 the	 society;	 they	 don't	 serve	 any	 utilitarian
purpose.
What	can	you	do	with	a	Buddha?	What	purpose	is	he	going	to	serve?	He	will	be
a	 beautiful	 flower,	 but	 flowers	 don't	 serve	 any	 purpose.	 Flowers	 have	 to	 be
enjoyed,	 appreciated,	 loved.	 You	 can	 dance	 around	 them,	 you	 can	 drink	 their
beauty,	but	they	are	not	commodities	in	the	marketplace.	What	can	you	do	with
the	full	moon?	You	cannot	sell	it,	you	cannot	purchase	it,	you	cannot	be	profited
by	it.	You	cannot	have	a	bigger	bank	balance	because	of	the	full	moon.
Hence	 the	 society	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 a	 Buddha	 or	 a	 Christ.	 Buddha	 is	 a	 full
moon,	a	Buddha	is	a	lotus	flower,	a	Buddha	is	a	bird	on	the	wing.	The	Buddha	is
a	 poem,	 the	Buddha	 is	 a	 song,	 the	Buddha	 is	 a	 celebration.	 Because	 they	 are
utterly	beyond	utility,	 the	society	is	not	 interested	in	them;	it	 is	really	afraid	of
these	people.	It	wants	you	to	be	slaves,	to	be	cogs	in	the	wheel	of	the	society.	It
wants	you	to	be	servants	to	the	vested	interests.	It	does	not	want	you	to	be	rebels
--	and	a	Buddha	is	bound	to	be	a	rebel.
A	Buddha	cannot	 follow	stupid	commandments	given	by	 the	politicians	or	 the
moralists	 or	 the	 puritans	 or	 the	 priests.	 And	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 are
exploiting	 humanity,	 oppressing	 humanity.	 They	 start	 destroying	 every
possibility	of	every	human	child	ever	becoming	a	Buddha.	They	start	crippling,
they	 start	 poisoning.	 And	 down	 the	 centuries	 they	 have	 learnt	 many	 ways	 to
poison.	 It	 is	 a	miracle	 that	 once	 in	 a	 while	 a	 child	 has	 escaped	 --	 must	 have
somehow	been	a	mistake	on	the	part	Of	the	priests	and	the	politicians	that	a	child
escaped	from	the	trap	and	became	a	Buddha.
Bal	 Krishna,	 every	 man	 is	 born	 to	 be	 a	 Buddha,	 every	 man	 has	 the	 seed	 of
Buddhahood	in	him.	But	I	can	understand	your	question.
You	say:	I	FEEL	IT	IS	NOT	TRUE.
Yes,	 if	 you	 look	 at	 the	masses	 it	 doesn't	 seem	 to	 be	 true.	 If	 it	were	 true	 there
would	be	many	Buddhas,	but	one	rarely	hears	about	a	Buddha.	We	only	know
that	somewhere,	twenty-five	centuries	ago,	a	certain	Siddhartha	Gautam	became
Buddha.	Who	knows	whether	it	is	true	or	not?	It	may	be	just	a	myth,	a	beautiful
story,	a	consolation,	an	opium	for	the	masses,	to	keep	them	hoping	that	one	day
they	 will	 also	 become	 Buddhas.	 Who	 knows	 whether	 Buddha	 is	 a	 historic
reality?
And	 so	many	 stories	have	been	woven	around	 the	Buddha	 that	he	 looks	more
like	 a	mythological	 figure	 than	 a	 reality.	When	 he	 becomes	 enlightened,	 gods
come	from	heaven,	play	beautiful	music,	dance	around	him.	Now	how	can	this
be	 history?	 And	 flowers	 shower	 on	 him	 from	 the	 sky	 --	 flowers	 of	 gold	 and
silver,	flowers	of	diamonds	and	emeralds.	Who	can	believe	that	this	is	history?
This	 is	 not	 history,	 true,	 I	 agree.	 This	 is	 poetry.	 But	 it	 symbolizes	 something
historical,	because	something	so	unique	has	happened	in	Buddha	that	there	is	no
other	way	to	describe	it	than	to	bring	poetry	in.	Real	flowers	have	not	showered
on	Buddha,	but	whenever	 somebody	becomes	enlightened	 the	whole	 existence
rejoices	--	because	we	are	not	separate	from	it.
When	 you	 have	 a	 headache	 your	whole	 body	 suffers,	 and	when	 the	 headache
goes	 your	 whole	 body	 feels	 good,	 a	 well-being.	 We	 are	 NOT	 separate	 from
existence.	 And	 until	 you	 are	 a	 Buddha	 you	 are	 a	 headache	 --	 a	 headache	 to
yourself,	 a	 headache	 to	 others,	 a	 headache	 to	 the	 whole	 existence.	 You	 are	 a
thorn	 in	 the	 flesh	of	existence.	When	 the	headache	disappears,	when	 the	 thorn
becomes	a	 flower,	when	one	man	becomes	a	Buddha,	a	great	pain	 that	he	was
creating	for	himself	and	others	disappears.
Certainly	--	I	vouch	for	it,	I	am	a	witness	to	it	--	certainly	the	who]e	existence
rejoices,	dances,	sings.	How	to	say	it?	It	is	nothing	visible;	photographs	cannot
be	taken	of	it.
Hence	the	poetry;	hence	these	metaphors,	symbols,	similes.
It	is	said	that	when	Buddha	was	born	his	mother	immediately	died.	It	may	not	be
a	 historical	 fact,	 it	may	 be.	But	my	 feeling	 is	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 historical	 fact	 --
because	it	is	said	that	whenever	a	Buddha	is	born,	the	mother	immediately	dies.
That	 is	 not	 true.	There	have	been	many	Buddhas	 --	 Jesus'	mother	 did	not	 die,
Mahavira's	mother	did	not	die,	Krishna's	mother	did	not	die.	Maybe	Siddhartha
Gautam's	mother	died,	but	it	cannot	be	said	that	whenever	a	Buddha	is	born	the
mother	dies,	not	historically.
But	 I	know	it	has	some	significance	of	 its	own	which	 is	not	historical.	By	 'the
mother'	is	not	really	meant	the	mother;	by	'the	mother'	is	meant	your	whole	past.
You	 are	 reborn	 when	 you	 become	 a	 Buddha;	 your	 whole	 past	 functions	 as	 a
womb,	the	mother.	And	the	moment	a	Buddha	is	born,	the	moment	you	become
enlightened,	your	whole	past	dies.
That	death	is	necessary.
Now,	THIS	 IS	absolutely	 true.	 It	 happened	with	Mahavira,	with	Krishna,	with
Jesus;	 it	 has	 happened	 always.	To	 say	 it,	 it	 is	 said	 that	whenever	 a	Buddha	 is
born	the	mother	dies.
You	will	have	to	be	very	very	sympathetic	to	understand	these	things.
I	can	understand	that	it	is	difficult,	looking	at	the	greater	part	of	humanity,	to	see
that	 there	 is	 any	 possibility	 of	 every	 human	 being	 becoming	 a	 Christ	 or	 a
Buddha.	Looking	at	a	seed	can	you	believe	that	one	day	it	can	become	a	lotus?
Just	looking	at	the	seed,	dissecting	the	seed,	will	you	be	able	to	infer,	conclude,
that	each	seed	is	going	to	become	a	lotus?	There	seems	to	be	no	relationship	at
all.	The	seed	looks	nothing,	and	when	you	dissect	it	you	find	nothing	in	it,	only
emptiness.	Still	each	seed	carries	a	lotus	within	it	--
and	each	human	being	carries	the	Buddha	within	him.
YOU	 ASK	 ME:	 CAN	 BUDDHA	 OR	 CHRIST	 BE	 CREATED	 OR
DEVELOPED...?
No,	 they	 cannot	 be	 created	 and	 they	 cannot	 be	 developed:	 they	 have	 to	 be
discovered,	they	have	to	be	uncovered.	they	are	already	there.	You	just	have	to
reach	your	innermost	core	and	you	will	find	the	Buddha	enshrined,	you	will	find
the	 Christ.	 Christ	 and	 Buddha	 mean	 the	 same:	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of
consciousness.
And	you	say:...OUT	OF	EVERY	COMMON	HUMAN	BEING?
I	 have	 never	 come	 across	 a	 single	 common	human	being.	 I	 have	 come	 across
thousands	 of	 people,	 I	 have	 looked	 into	 the	 depths	 of	 thousands	 of	 different
people,	 but	 I	 have	never	 come	 across	 a	 common,	 ordinary	man.	Every	human
being	 is	 unique,	 extraordinary,	 uncommon,	 exceptional.	 God	 never	 creates
common	human	beings,	God	only	creates	unique	consciousnesses	.
Drop	this	idea	of	a	common	human	being.	This	is	an	insult	to	humanity.
And	you	say:	IS	BUDDHA	OR	CHRIST	ONLY	BORN	AS	SUCH?
No.	Nobody	is	born	as	such.	We	are	all	born	alike.	That	too	is	again	a	trick	of	the
mind	to	avoid	growing.	If	it	is	settled	that	a	Buddha	is	born	as	a	Buddha,	and	a
Christ	is	the	ONLY	begotten	son	of	God,	and	Krishna	is	a	reincarnation	of	God,
this	 is	 a	 beautiful	 strategy	 to	 avoid:	 "Then	 what	 can	 we	 do?	 If	 we	 are	 not
Buddhas	 it	 is	 not	 our	 fault	 --	we	 are	 not	BORN	 like	 that.	And	 if	Buddha	 is	 a
Buddha,	 so	what?	He	 is	BORN	 a	Buddha.	No	 credit	 to	 him;	 he	 has	 not	 done
anything	special.	If	we	were	born	like	Buddha	we	would	be	Buddhas	too.	But	we
are	born	as	COMMON	human	beings."
This	 is	 a	 strategy.	 Very	 cunning	 is	 the	 mind,	 and	 subtle	 is	 its	 cunningness:
beware	of	it.
Nobody	 is	 born	 as	 a	 Buddha	 yet	 everybody	 brings	 the	 potential	 of	 being	 a
Buddha.	And	don't	say,	"I	feel	it	is	not	true"	--	because	how	can	you	feel	unless
you	have	become	a	Buddha?	You	can	only	infer,	you	can	only	think,	you	cannot
feel.
Listen	 to	 me!	 I	 FEEL	 that	 everybody	 can	 become	 a	 Buddha.	 And	 I	 feel	 it
because	I	was	also	a	common	human	being...and	then	suddenly	 this	explosion,
then	suddenly	this	light,	 then	suddenly	this	meditativeness	blossomed.	You	can
also	 become	 a	Buddha;	 it	 is	 your	 birthright.	Don't	 be	 tricked	 by	 your	mind	 --
remain	alert,	aware.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	I	FIND	MYSELF	MOSTLY	ATTRACTED	TO	WOMEN	AND	VERY
RARELY	DEEPLY	TO	A	MAN.	 I	 AM	A	 LITTLE	BOTHERED	ABOUT	 IT.
COULD
YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	IT?
Ma	Prem	Loka,
SEX	HAS	BEEN	CALLED	THE	ORIGINAL	SIN	 --	 it	 is	 neither	 original	 nor
sin.	Even	before	Adam	and	Eve	 ever	 ate	 the	 fruit	 from	 the	 tree	 of	 knowledge
they	 were	 having	 sex,	 and	 all	 the	 other	 animals	 in	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden	 were
having	 sex.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	 happened	 after	 the	 eating	 of	 the	 fruit	 of
knowledge	was	awareness:	they	became	aware	of	it.	And	by	becoming	aware	of
it	they	became	ashamed.
Why	 did	 they	 become	 ashamed?	 From	 where	 did	 this	 shame	 come?	 They
became	 ashamed	 because	 they	 saw	 that	 they	 were	 behaving	 just	 like	 other
animals.	 But	 what	 is	 wrong	 in	 behaving	 just	 like	 other	 animals?	 Man	 is	 an
animal	 too.	 But	 the	 ego	 came	 in:	 the	 fruit	 of	 knowledge	 created	 the	 ego.	 It
created	 superiority,	 the	 idea	 of	 superiority:	 "We	 are	 superior	 human	 beings.
These	 foolish	 animals,	 if	 they	 do	 certain	 things	 they	 can	 be	 forgiven.	 But	we
cannot	be	forgiven	--	this	is	below	our	dignity."
Sex	is	such	a	fundamental	activity	in	nature	that	the	ego	of	man	started	trying	to
get	rid	of	it.
The	first	thing	I	would	like	you	to	remember:	sex	is	natural.	There	is	no	need	to
make	any	effort	 to	get	rid	of	 it	 --	although	I	know	a	moment	comes	when	you
transcend	it,	 that	is	something	totally	different.	It	 is	not	by	your	effort	 that	you
can	get	rid	of	it;	 if	you	try	to	get	rid	of	it	you	will	fall	a	victim	of	perversions.
Because	for	centuries	man	has	been	trying	to	get	rid	of	sex	he	has	created	many
kinds	 of	 perversions.	 Homosexuality	 has	 arisen	 because	 we	 have	 deprived
people	of	heterosexuality.	Homosexuality	was	born	as	a	 religious	phenomenon
in	 the	monasteries	because	we	 forced	monks	 to	 live	 together	 in	one	place	 and
nuns	to	live	in	one	place,	and	we	separated	them	by	great	walls.
Still	 now	 there	 are	 Catholic	monasteries	 in	 Europe	where	 for	 twelve	 hundred
years	 not	 a	 single	 woman	 has	 entered	 --	 not	 even	 a	 six-months	 baby,	 female
baby,	has	been	allowed	 to	enter.	What	kind	of	people	are	 living	 there	who	are
afraid	of	a	six-month-old	girl?
What	 kind	 of	 people?	Must	 have	 become	 very	much	 perverted,	must	 be	 very
much	afraid	they	might	do	something.	They	cannot	trust	themselves.
Homosexuality	is	BOUND	to	happen.	It	happens	only	in	monasteries	and	in	the
army	--
because	these	are	the	two	places	where	we	don't	allow	men	and	women	to	mix.
Or	it	happens	in	boys'	and	girls'	hostels;	there	also	we	don't	allow	them	to	mix.
The	whole	phenomenon	of	homosexuality	 is	a	by-product	of	 this	whole	 stupid
upbringing.
Homosexuality	will	disappear	from	the	world	the	day	we	allow	men	and	women
to	meet	naturally.
From	their	very	childhood	we	start	separating	them.	If	a	boy	is	playing	with	girls
we	condemn	him.	We	say,	"What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	a	sissy?	You	are	a	boy,
you	are	a	man!	Be	a	man,	don't	play	with	girls!"	If	a	boy	is	playing	with	dolls	we
immediately	condemn	him:	"This	is	for	girls."
If	a	girl	is	trying	to	climb	a	tree	we	stop	her	immediately:	"This	is	not	right;	this
is	against	feminine	grace."	And	if	a	girl	tries	and	persists	and	is	rebellious	she	is
called	 a	 tomboy;	 she	 is	 not	 respected.	We	 start	 creating	 these	 ugly	 divisions.
Girls	enjoy	climbing	trees;	it	is	such	a	beautiful	experience.	And	what	is	wrong
in	playing	with	dolls?	A	boy	can	carry	dolls,	because	in	life	he	will	have	to	meet
dolls	and	then	he	will	be	at	a	loss	as	to	what	to	do!
Loka,	 this	 whole	 phenomenon	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 you	 personally.	 It	 is	 a
social	disease	spread	all	over	the	world.
Two	English	gentlemen	of	the	old	school	were	discussing	old	acquaintances	one
evening	 in	 their	 London	 club.	 "What,"	 asked	 one,	 "ever	 became	 of	 old
Cholmondeley?"
"Why,	didn't	you	hear?	Cholmondeley	went	 to	Africa	on	a	game	hunt,	and,	by
Jove,	the	chap	took	up	with	an	ape!"
"An	ape?	Is	the	old	boy	queer?"
"Heavens,	no!	It	was	a	female	"
If	it	is	a	female,	even	though	an	ape,	it	is	perfectly	okay.
We	 create	 these	 conditionings	 so	 deeply	 that	 out	 of	 so	 much	 conditioning
sometimes	 people	 start	 revolting	 against	 them.	 Sex	 should	 be	 taken	 VERY
naturally	 --	 we	 have	 been	 taking	 IT	 very	 seriously.	 Either	 we	 condemn	 IT	 as
ugly,	 animalistic,	 or	we	 raise	 it	 to	 something	divine,	but	we	never	 accept	 it	 as
human	and	we	never	accept	it	as	fun.
Basically	it	is	fun,	it	is	a	good	sport!	And	humanity	is	going	to	remain	burdened
with	ugly	nonsense	 if	we	don't	accept	 its	beauty	as	a	sport.	 It	 is	good	physical
activity	too,	and	the	best	of	exercises.
You	 can	 ask	 the	 heart	 specialists.	Now	 they	 say	 sexual	 activity	 prevents	 heart
attacks.
One	thing	is	certain,	that	no	man	has	ever	had	a	heart	attack	while	making	love.
In	 every	other	 kind	of	 activity	 heart	 attacks	have	happened,	 but	 never	making
love.	 Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 that	 anybody	 had	 a	 heart	 attack	 making	 love	 and
died?	No,	never.	It	is	a	natural	physical	activity,	and	fun,	a	good	sport.
If	you	take	it	non-seriously,	then	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	even	if	you	are
attracted	to	women.	Don't	be	worried	--	because	your	worry	is	not	going	to	help.
It's	 perfectly	 okay.	 In	 a	 really	 free	 world	 which	 is	 unconditioned	 by	 the
primitive,	 ignorant	past,	 in	a	 really	enlightened	world,	we	will	accept	all	 these
things.	Yes,	once	in	a	while	you	may	love	a	woman	or	a	man.	Nothing	is	wrong
in	it,	because	inside	you	both	are	there.	Each	man	is	both	a	man	and	a	woman,
and	each	woman	is	both	a	woman	and	a	man,	because	you	are	born	out	of	 the
meeting	of	one	man	and	one	woman.	So	half	of	you	comes	from	your	father	and
half	 of	 you	 comes	 from	 your	 mother;	 part	 of	 you	 is	 man	 and	 part	 of	 you	 is
woman.
So	 there	 is	nothing	much	 to	be	worried	about.	 It	may	be	 that	your	man	part	 is
attracted	 towards	other	women,	but	because	biologically	you	are	a	woman	you
feel	afraid.	No	need	to	be	afraid!	Take	things	easily	--	that	is	my	basic	approach.
Take	 it	 easy.	 And	 by	 taking	 things	 easy	 one	 can	 go	 beyond	 them	 more
comfortably,	conveniently,	quickly,	 than	by	 taking	 things	 seriously.	 If	you	 take
them	 seriously	 you	 become	 entangled	 with	 them,	 you	 become	 burdened	 with
them.
And	this	is	not	such	a	big	problem.	There	are	bigger	problems,	Loka.
The	famous	Greek	shipowner,	Ori	Oristotle,	was	having	a	house	built	on	a	large
piece	 of	 land	 in	Greece.	He	 said	 to	 the	 architect,	 "Don't	 disturb	 that	 tree	 over
there,	because	directly	under	that	tree	is	where	I	had	my	first	love."
"How	sentimental,	Mr.	Oristotle,"	said	the	architect	"Right	under	that	tree?"
"Yes,"	 continued	 Ori	 Oristotle.	 "And	 don't	 touch	 that	 tree	 over	 there	 either,
because	 that	 is	where	 her	mother	 stood	watching	while	 I	was	 having	my	 first
love	affair."
"Her	mother	just	stood	there	while	you	were	screwing	her	daughter?"	asked	the
architect.
"Yes,"	said	the	Greek	shipowner.
"But,	Mr.	Oristotle,	what	did	her	mother	say?"
"Baaa."
There	 are	 greater	 problems,	Loka.	Your	 problem	 is	 nothing	 --	 at	 least	 you	 are
attracted	to	other	women,	at	least	to	other	human	beings.	Perfectly	okay.	A	little
outlandish,	 but	 not	 too	 serious.	 Things	 like	 that	 have	 been	 happening	 always.
Now	 people	 have	 become	 more	 courageous	 and	 they	 ask	 questions	 --
particularly	 in	 the	West	people	have	become	more	honest.	Now	no	Indian	will
ask	such	a	question	--	not	 that	 things	 like	 that	are	not	happening	in	India,	 they
are	happening,	but	no	Indian	will	have	courage	enough	to	ask	such	a	question.
Loka,	you	asked	the	question.	I	am	happy.	This	is	sincerity,	this	is	authenticity.
One	should	be	able	to	expose	oneself	as	one	is.	The	West	is	becoming	freer;	the
East	is	very	much	repressed.	And	because	the	East	is	very	much	repressed	it	will
take	a	longer	time	for	the	East	to	get	rid	of	its	perversions.	The	West	is	going	to
transcend	sooner.
When	 the	 Queen	 had	 her	 baby,	 she	 was	 being	 offered	 congratulations	 by
hundreds	of	people	when	a	certain	gentleman	walked	by.
"What	do	you	do	for	a	living?"
"I'm	a	photographer,"	he	replied.
"Isn't	that	remarkable?"	said	the	Queen.	"My	brother-in-law	is	a	photographer!"
"Isn't	that	remarkable,"	he	said.	"My	brother-in-law	is	a	queen."
Things	like	that	are	always	happening	everywhere.	It	is	part	of	the	human	scene.
So	don't	make	much	fuss	about	it,	and	don't	get	disturbed.
You	say:	I	FIND	MYSELF	MOSTLY	ATTRACTED	TO	WOMEN	AND	VERY
RARELY	DEEPLY	TO	A	MAN.
Good	--	at	least	you	find	yourself	attracted	to	somebody.	There	is	a	possibility	of
love.
There	 are	 people	 so	 dull,	 so	 dead,	 so	 insensitive,	 that	 they	 only	 feel	 attracted
towards	money,	or	political	power,	or	fame.	You	are	in	a	far	better	situation;	at
least	 you	 are	 not	 in	 love	 with	 money.	 Even	 Ori	 Oristotle	 was	 in	 a	 far	 better
situation	than	the	people	who	are	in	love	with	money.	But	these	people	are	not
thought	to	be	perverted.	They	are	the	REAL	perverts:	money	is	their	whole	life,
their	devotion;	money	is	their	god.
You	 are	 attracted	 to	 women:	 perfectly	 good.	 Go	 deep	 into	 relationship	 with
women.	 If	 you	make	 an	 anxiety	 out	 of	 it	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 go	 deep	 in
relationship	 with	 a	 woman.	 If	 you	 go	 deep	 in	 relationship	 with	 women,	 my
understanding	is	that	sooner	or	later	you	will	find	that	this	relationship	cannot	be
very	fulfilling,	because	two	women	are	alike.	And	a	relationship	needs	a	certain
tension	to	be	fulfilling,	a	certain	polarity	to	be	fulfilling.	Two	women	in	love,	or
two	men	in	love,	will	have	a	good	relationship,	but	it	will	not	be	very	spicy.	It
will	be	a	little	dull,	monotonous,	a	little	boring.
But	 if	 you	 go	 deeply,	 only	 then	will	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 these	 things.	Your
anxiety	will	not	allow	you	to	go	deep,	and	then	your	whole	life	you	will	remain
interested	and	attracted	towards	women.
My	approach	about	all	problems	is	that	if	anything	is	there,	go	DEEPLY	into	it,
so	either	you	find	the	treasure,	if	it	has	any	treasure,	or	you	find	that	it	is	empty.
In	 both	 cases	 you	 are	 enriched.	 If	 you	 find	 the	 treasure,	 of	 course	 you	 are
enriched.	If	you	find	it	is	empty,	you	are	finished	with	it.
Two	women	in	relationship	can't	have	a	very	great	love	affair.	It	will	remain	on
plain	ground;	it	will	not	have	heights	and	it	will	not	have	depths.	So	people	who
are	afraid	of	heights	and	depths	will	find	it	very	comfortable,	convenient.	Hence
the	homosexuals	are	called	'gay'	people.	They	look	gay;	they	look	far	more	gay
than	heterosexuals.
Heterosexuals	are	always	going	 into	 turmoils	 --	more	conflict,	more	 fight,	 less
understanding.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 so,	 because	 two	women	 can	 understand	 each
other	 far	better	 than	one	man	and	one	woman	can	understand	each	other.	Two
men	can	understand	each	other	far	better	because	they	are	of	the	same	type,	but
the	spark	will	be	missing.
Yes,	a	certain	gayness	will	be	there,	but	NOT	great	poetry,	not	great	romance	--
mild.
The	relationship	will	be	homeopathic.	It	will	not	have	adventure,	surprises:	safe,
secure,	more	understanding,	less	conflict,	less	nagging.
With	a	man	and	a	woman	there	ARE	problems	--	problems	of	misunderstanding.
They	 live	 in	 totally	 different	 worlds;	 they	 are	 two	 different	 poles	 of
consciousness.	 The	 woman	 thinks	 intuitively,	 the	 man	 thinks	 intellectually,
hence	 there	 is	 no	 meeting.	 The	 woman	 simply	 jumps	 to	 conclusions	 without
going	 into	any	process	of	 thought.	And	 the	man	goes	step	by	step,	comes	 to	a
conclusion.	The	man	tries	hard	to	come	to	a	conclusion	and	the	woman	simply
jumps	to	the	conclusion.	She	has	an	intuitive	feeling.	Hence	you	cannot	deceive
a	woman,	particularly	not	your	wife.	That	IS	impossible;	nobody	has	ever	been
able	 to	 do	 it.	 She	 will	 immediately	 see	 through	 you	 --	 through	 and	 through,
because	her	way	of	seeing	is	not	your	way	of	seeing.	She	comes	from	the	back
door,	and	you	don't	know	that	you	have	a	back	door	too.	You	arrange	everything
at	 the	 front	door	and	she	comes	 from	the	back	door	and	knows	all	 the	 ins	and
outs.
The	husband	comes	home	prepared.	What	he	is	going	to	say,	how	he	is	going	to
answer	--
he	rehearses	everything.	And	the	moment	he	looks	at	the	woman	all	rehearsing
goes	 to	 the	winds	 and	 he	 is	 almost	 like	 a	 small	 child,	 stuttering.	 Even	 a	 very
great	person	 like	Napoleon	was	very	much	afraid	of	women.	His	own	wife	he
was	very	much	afraid	of,	because	she	would	see	through	and	through	him.
Man's	mind	goes	zigzag,	woman	goes	direct	like	an	arrow.	She	does	not	listen	to
what	you	say,	she	looks	into	your	eyes.	She	listens	to	HOW	you	say	it.	She	sees
your	 trembling	hand,	 she	 sees	 your	 eyes	 are	 trying	 to	 avoid	her.	She	does	not
listen	to	what	you	are	saying;	that	is	irrelevant	--	she	knows	that	that	is	a	story;
you	have	managed	to	put	it	together	on	the	way	from	the	pub	to	the	house.	But
she	has	more	attunement	with	your	body	language.	And	your	body	language	is
more	authentic,	because	you	cannot	yet	manage	to	control	it,	manage	to	deceive
by	it.	Even	great	actors	are	not	able	to	manage	the	body	language.
For	example,	 if	 somebody	 talks	 about	women,	you	may	be	a	 celibate	 and	you
may	 be	 against	 all	 relationship	 and	 all	 sex	 --	 that	 is	 all	 in	 your	 head	 --	 but
somebody	 can	 go	 on	 watching	 your	 eyes.	 Try	 this	 on	 some	 friend	 who	 is	 a
BRAHMACHARIN,	 a	 celibate,	 against	 all	 relationship	 and	 sex,	 and	 all	 those
ugly	things	--	just	try	this	on	him.	Just	start	describing	Sophia	Loren	naked:	all
the	curves	and	the	beautiful	body.	And	don't	 listen	to	what	he	says,	 look	at	his
eyes.	His	 pupils	will	 become	 big	 --	 that	 he	 cannot	 control,	 that	 is	 beyond	 his
control.	The	moment	you	say,	"Sophia	Loren!"	his	eyes	are	no	more	the	same.
Watch	how	he	 is	moving	his	body:	he	will	sit	erect.	 If	he	was	 leaning	back	he
will	come	forward,	closer,	to	listen.	Although	he	is	saying,	"Nonsense!	What	are
you	talking	about?
This	 is	 all	 dirty,"	 he	 is	 all	 alert.	 Just	 now	he	was	 yawning;	 now	he	 no	 longer
yawns.
This	I	have	tried.	Whenever	I	see	that	somebody	is	yawning	somewhere,	I	know
now	a	 joke	 is	needed	--	and	immediately	 the	yawning	disappears.	Even	Sheela
comes	 back	 from	 her	 sleep!	 Once	 she	 is	 certain	 that	 now	 I	 am	 going	 to	 talk
metaphysics	she	falls	asleep,	she	goes	to	sleep,	she	takes	a	rest.	But	the	moment
I	start	a	joke,	even	in	her	sleep	she	remains	that	much	alert:	immediately	she	is
back.
The	body	has	its	own	language	just	as	the	mind	has	its	own	language.	The	spirit
also	has	 its	own	 language.	A	man	and	woman	are	bound	 to	be	 in	conflict,	but
that	conflict	takes	them	far	away	and	again	and	again	creates	situations	for	mini
honeymoons.
A	 homosexual	 relationship	 is	 a	 little	 saccharine	 --	 too	 sweet,	 a	 little	 bit
nauseating.	But	 a	man/woman	 relationship	 is	 always	on	 the	 rocks.	You	cannot
fall	asleep,	the	other	will	not	allow	it.	They	go	on	goading	each	other.	And	they
are	such	different	worlds;	THAT	is	the	attraction.
Loka,	 go	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible	 in	 your	 relationships	 with	 women	 --	 don't	 be
worried.
Soon	you	will	see	that	there	is	a	different	kind	of	relationship	that	can	exist	only
between	polar	opposites.	Then	go	into	a	deep	relationship	with	a	man,	because
only	by	going	deep	in	relationship	with	a	man	will	you	be	able	to	know	that	all
relationships	 fall	 short.	 Even	 the	man/woman	 relationship	 falls	 short;	 it	 never
brings	you	the	contentment	it	promises.
And	only	by	your	own	experience	--	not	by	what	Buddhas	say,	not	by	what	I	say
--	 only	 by	 your	 own	 experience	 will	 you	 one	 day	 be	 able	 to	 go	 beyond	 all
relationships.	Then	you	can	be	happy	alone.	And	the	person	who	can	be	happy
alone	is	REALLY	an	individual.	If	your	happiness	depends	on	the	other,	you	are
a	slave;	you	are	not	yet	free,	you	are	in	bondage.
When	you	are	happy	alone,	when	you	can	live	with	yourself,	there	is	no	intrinsic
necessity	to	be	in	relationship.	That	does	not	mean	that	you	will	not	relate.	But
to	relate	is	one	thing,	and	to	be	in	relationship	is	quite	another.	Relationship	is	a
kind	of	bondage,	relating	is	sharing.	You	will	relate	with	many	people,	you	will
share	 your	 joy	 with	 many	 people,	 but	 you	 will	 not	 depend	 on	 anyone	 in
particular	and	you	will	not	allow	anybody	else	to	depend	on	you.	You	will	not	be
dependent,	and	you	will	not	allow	anybody	 to	be	dependent	on	you.	Then	you
live	out	of	freedom,	out	of	joy,	out	of	love.
You	say:	I	AM	A	LITTLE	BOTHERED	ABOUT	IT.
Don't	be	bothered	about	it	at	all,	not	even	a	little.	En	joy	it.	It	is	not	your	fault.
You	have	been	brought	up	by	Christians,	 Jainas,	Hindus,	Buddhists	 --	 it	 is	not
your	 fault.	 What	 can	 you	 do?	 You	 come	 into	 a	 world	 which	 is	 already
conditioned,	and	you	come	so	 innocent,	 so	clean,	unaware	of	what	 is	going	 to
happen	 to	 you.	 And	 your	 parents	 start	 writing	 on	 you,	 and	 the	whole	 society
starts	writing	things	on	you.	It	is	not	your	fault,	it	is	simply	symptomatic	of	an	ill
society.
We	 have	 to	 transform	 the	 society.	 But	 the	 only	 way	 to	 transform	 it	 is	 to
transform	individuals;	 there	is	no	other	way,	 there	is	no	shortcut.	Enjoy	it,	 it	 is
good	--	not	enough	but	still	good.	It	will	lead	you	into	heterosexual	relationship;
that	is	a	little	better.	Even	that	is	not	going	to	satisfy.	Then	that	will	lead	you	into
meditativeness,	 into	 solitude,	 into	 that	beauty,	 that	benediction,	which	happens
only	when	you	are	alone.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	learning	how	to	be	alone	and	yet	joyous.
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	No	Sin,	No	Virtue
2	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909020
ShortTitle:
BESTIL02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO	DOES	WITNESSING	ALWAYS	BRING	JOY?	THE	MOMENTS	THAT
I	CALL	WITNESSING	SOMETIMES	FEEL	DISTANT	--	ALMOST	COLD	IN
THEIR
NEUTRALITY.	 OTHER	 TIMES	 IT	 IS	 LIKE	 SPROUTING	 WINGS	 AND
SOARING
IN	JOY	OVER	THE	OPEN	SEA.
Deva	Abhiyana,
THE	 STATE	OF	WITNESSING	 IS	 NEITHER	 COLD	NOR	 hot.	 It	 is	 neither
happiness	nor	unhappiness.	It	is	neither	dark	nor	light.	It	is	neither	life	nor	death.
The	Upanishads	say	NETI	NETI	--	neither	this	nor	that.
If	you	 feel	 joy	you	have	already	become	 identified;	witnessing	 is	gone.	 If	you
feel	 sad	 you	 are	 no	more	 a	witness;	 you	 have	 forgotten	witnessing,	 you	 have
become	involved.
You	 are	 colored	 by	 your	 psychology	 of	 the	 moment.	 Joy,	 sadness,	 all	 these
qualities,	 are	part	of	your	psychology.	And	witnessing	 is	 a	 transcendence;	 it	 is
not	psychological.
The	whole	art	of	meditation	consists	in	witnessing.	Then	what	does	it	bring?	At
the	most	we	can	say	 it	brings	 total	peace;	 it	 simply	brings	eternal	silence.	You
cannot	define	it	as	joy.	The	moment	you	define	it	as	joy	you	have	fallen	into	the
world	of	duality	again.
Then	you	have	become	part	of	what	is	passing,	you	have	started	clinging	to	it.
The	state	of	witnessing	remains	indefinable.	That's	why	Buddha	has	not	used	the
word
'bliss'	at	all,	because	it	can	give	you	a	wrong	idea	--	because	in	your	mind	bliss
will	 mean	 happiness.	 That's	 how	 you	 are	 going	 to	 translate	 it,	 to	 interpret	 it.
Buddha	has	not	used	the	word	'bliss',	he	has	not	used	the	word	'God'.
The	 word	 that	 he	 has	 used	 is	 'absolute	 void'	 --	 SHUNYAM.	 There	 will	 be
nothing	left,	just	absolute	silence,	absolute	emptiness	--	but	not	emptiness	in	the
English	meaning	of	the	word.	SHUNYAM	has	a	totally	different	connotation;	it
has	 been	 translated	 and	 can	 only	 be	 translated	 as	 emptiness.	 But	 emptiness	 is
negative,	 emptiness	means	 something	 is	 missing,	 emptiness	means	 loneliness.
Emptiness	is	not	a	life	quality	but	a	death	quality.
SHUNYAM	IS	not	negative;	 it	 is	not	even	positive,	how	can	 it	be	negative?	It
simply	 means	 you	 are	 alone	 --	 not	 lonely,	 but	 alone.	 You	 are	 not	 missing
anything.	You	 are	 spacious,	 there	 is	 great	 space	 in	 you,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 empty	 of
something.	On	the	contrary,	it	is	utter	plenitude.	It	is	full	of	emptiness	--	if	you
allow	me	the	expression	It	is	FULL	of	emptiness,	but	one	is	fulfilled.
SHUNYAM	IS	blossoming	in	you.	There	is	great	peace	but	not	joy,	because	joy
becomes	positive;	but	not	sadness,	because	sadness	becomes	Negative.	Peace	is
exactly	the	middle,	neither	cold	nor	hot.	It	is	not	neutrality,	it	is	not	indifference.
It	is	not	a	state	where	you	turn	your	back	towards	something,	you	are	no	more
interested	No,	there	is	no	question	of	disinterest,	indifference	or	neutrality.	You
are	utterly	there,	absolutely	there,	totally	there,	but	like	a	mirror,	just	reflecting
whatsoever	is	the	case.
Joy	passes	by	and	the	mirror	reflects	it,	but	the	mirror	does	not	become	joy	itself;
it	never	becomes	identified.	And	sadness	comes	like	a	cloud,	a	dark	cloud,	and
passes	by,	and	the	mirror	reflects	it.	The	mirror	has	no	prejudice	against	it.	The
mirror	 is	 not	 favorable	 to	 joy	 and	 unfavorable	 to	 sadness.	 The	mirror	 has	 no
liking,	 no	disliking;	 it	 simply	 reflects	whatsoever	 is	 the	 case.	 It	 is	 not	 neutral,
otherwise	 it	will	 not	 reflect;	 it	 does	 not	 turn	 its	 back	 towards	 things.	 It	 is	 not
indifferent,	 because	 indifference	 again	means	 you	 are	 already	 prejudiced;	 you
have	 a	 certain	 conclusion.	 It	 is	 not	 disinterested	 and	 you	 cannot	 say	 it	 is
interested	-either.	It	is	a	transcendence.
Abhiyana,	 don't	 get	 identified	 with	 the	 joy	 that	 comes	 --	 watch	 it.	 Remain	 a
watcher	 on	 the	 hills,	 a	 mirror.	 Reflect	 it	 but	 don't	 cling	 to	 it.	 A	 bird	 on	 the
wing...and	the	lake	reflects	it.
The	Zen	people	say	this	is	the	state	of	Buddha-hood.	The	bird	has	no	mind	to	be
reflected	in	the	lake	and	the	lake	has	no	mind	to	reflect	the	bird,	but	the	bird	on
the	wing...and	the	lake	reflects	it.	You	see	the	point:	the	bird	has	no	mind	to	be
reflected	and	the	lake	has	no	mind	to	reflect	the	bird,	but	the	bird	IS	reflected.	It
simply	happens	that	the	lake	is	there	and	the	bird	is	on	the	wing...the	reflection	is
bound	to	happen	--	it	is	natural!	The	bird	is	gone;	the	lake	does	not	miss	the	bird,
it	does	not	hanker	for	it,	it	does	not	long	for	it,	it	does	not	hope	that	it	will	come
again.	 It	 does	 not	 go	 into	 the	 past,	 into	 the	 memories,	 or	 into	 the	 future
projections.	The	bird	has	flown;	it	never	thinks	of	the	lake	again,	it	never	desires
to	be	there	again.	One	day	it	may	be	there	again,	and	again	it	will	be	reflected,
but	no	relationship	is	created.	The	HAPPENING	IS	there	but	no	relationship	is
there.
This	 is	what	 I	 call	 relating,	 not	 relationship.	 It	 is	 a	 fluid	 phenomenon.	This	 is
witnessing.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 IS	 IT	 ABSOLUTELY	 INEVITABLE	 THAT	 A	 BUDDHA	 WILL
ALWAYS	BE
MISUNDERSTOOD?
Prem	Madira,
YES,	 IT	 IS	ABSOLUTELY	INEVITABLE.	 It	 can't	 be	otherwise.	A	Buddha	 is
bound	 to	be	misunderstood.	 If	a	Buddha	 is	not	misunderstood	 then	he	 is	not	a
Buddha	 at	 all.	Why	 is	 it	 so?	 --	 because	 the	 Buddha	 lives	 in	 a	 state	 which	 is
beyond	mind,	and	we	live	IN
minds.	 To	 translate	 something	 from	 the	 beyond	 to	 the	 mind	 is	 the	 most
impossible	thing	in	the	world.	It	can	t	be	done,	although	every	Buddha	has	tried
to	do	it.	That	too	is	inevitable;	no	Buddha	can	avoid	it.
The	Buddha	HAS	to	say	 the	unsayable,	he	has	 to	express	 the	 inexpressible,	he
has	to	define	the	indefinable.	He	has	to	do	this	absurd	act,	because	the	moment
he	 reaches	 beyond	 the	 mind	 great	 compassion	 arises.	 He	 can	 see	 people
stumbling	in	the	dark,	he	can	see	people	suffering	unnecessarily	--	creating	their
own	nightmares,	creating	their	own	hell	and	drowning	in	their	own	created	hells.
How	can	he	avoid	feeling	compassion?
And	the	moment	compassion	arises	he	wants	to	communicate	to	them	that	this	is
your	own	doing,	that	you	can	get	out	of	it;	that	there	is	a	way	out	of	it,	that	there
is	a	state	beyond	it;	that	life	is	not	what	you	think	it	is	--	your	thinking	about	life
is	 just	 like	 the	 thinking	 of	 a	 blind	man	 about	 light.	 The	 blind	man	 can	 go	 on
thinking	about	light,	but	he	will	never	be	able	to	come	to	a	true	conclusion.	His
conclusions	may	be	very	logical,	but	still	they	will	miss	the	experience.	Light	is
an	experience;	you	don	t	need	logic	for	it	--
what	you	need	is	eyes.
Buddha	has	eyes	--	and	eyes	are	attained	only	when	you	have	gone	beyond	the
mind,	when	you	have	become	a	witness	of	the	mind,	when	you	have	attained	to	a
higher	state	than	psychology;	when	you	know	that	you	are	not	your	thoughts,	not
your	body,	when	you	know	that	you	are	only	knowing	--	the	energy	that	reflects,
the	energy	that	is	capable	of	seeing:	that	you	are	pure	seeing.
Once	Buddha	was	asked,	Who	are	you?"	He	was	such	a	beautiful	man	and	the
Buddhahood	had	conferred	 such	grace	on	him,	 that	many	 times	he	was	asked,
Who	are	you?"	He	looked	like	an	emperor	or	a	god	who	had	come	from	heaven,
and	he	lived	like	a	beggar!	Again	and	again	he	was	asked,	"Who	are	you?"	And
the	man	who	was	asking	was	a	great	scholar.	He	said,	"Are	you	from	the	world
of	gods?	Are	you	a	god?"
Buddha	said,	"No."
"Then	are	you	a	GANDHARVA?
GANDHARVAS	are	the	musicians	of	the	gods.	Buddha	had	such	music	around
him	--
the	music	 of	 silence,	 the	 sound	 of	 no	 sound,	 one	 hand	 clapping	 --	 that	 it	was
natural	to	ask	him,	"Are	you	a	GANDHARVA,	a	celestial	musician?"
Buddha	said,	"No."
And	 the	man	went	 on	 asking.	There	 are	many	 categories	 in	Hindu	mythology
from	 gods	 to	 man.	 Then	 finally	 he	 asked,	 "Are	 you	 a	 great	 king,	 a
CHAKRAVARTIN,	one	who	rules	over	the	whole	world?"
And	Buddha	said,	"No."
Annoyed,	the	scholar	asked,	"Are	you	a	man,	or	not	even	that?"
Buddha	said.	'Don't	be	annoyed,	but	what	can	I	do?	I	have	to	state	the	truth	as	it
is.	I	am	not	a	man	either."
Now	 the	 scholar	 was	 very	 very	 angry,	 enraged.	 He	 said,	 Then	 are	 you	 an
animal?"
Buddha	said,	"No,	not	an	animal,	not	a	tree,	not	a	rock."
Then	who	are	you?	the	man	asked.
Buddha	said,	I	am	awareness,	just	pure	awareness,	just	a	mirror	reflecting	all	that
is.	'
When	this	moment	arrives,	great	compassion	happens	Buddha	has	said	that	those
who	know	are	bound	 to	 feel	 compassion	 for	 those	who	don't	know.	They	start
trying	to	help.
And	the	first	thing	that	has	to	be	done	is	to	communicate	to	people	who	are	blind
that	eyes	are	possible,	 that	you	are	not	really	blind	but	only	keeping	your	eyes
closed.	You	 can	 open	 your	 eyes.	You	 are	 not	 born	 blind,	 you	 have	 only	 been
taught	to	remain	blind.
Your	 society	 teaches	 you	 to	 be	 blind	 because	 the	 society	 needs	 blind	 people.
They	 are	 good	 slaves	 because	 they	 are	 always	 dependent	 on	 the	 leaders,
politicians,	pundits,	priests.	They	are	very	convenient	people,	they	never	create
any	trouble.	They	are	never	rebels.	They	are	obedient,	always	ready	to	submit	to
any	kind	of	nonsense,	to	any	stupid	politician,	to	any	stupid	priest.
And	 in	 fact,	who	 else	wants	 to	 be	 a	 politician	 except	 stupid	 people,	 and	who
wants	 to	 be	 a	 priest	 except	 stupid	 people?	 These	 are	 the	 dimensions	 for	 the
mediocre,	for	the	inferior.
Those	who	are	suffering	from	an	inferiority	complex,	they	become	politicians	--
just	to	prove	that	they	are	not	inferior,	to	the	world	and	to	themselves.
The	society,	the	establishment,	wants	you	to	be	blind.	From	the	very	beginning	it
teaches	every	child:	"You	are	blind";	it	conditions	every	child:	"You	are	blind."
Your	whole	educational	system	is	nothing	but	a	conspiracy	against	every	child	--
to	keep	you	blind.	It	does	not	teach	you	meditation,	because	meditation	is	the	art
of	opening	your	eyes.
When	 somebody	 arrives	 at	 awareness	 he	 naturally	 feels	 great	 compassion.	All
around	he	sees	that	people	who	have	eyes	--	who	have	inbuilt	capacities	to	see
the	 truth,	 who	 are	 from	 their	 very	 birth	 capable	 of	 becoming	 Buddhas,
enlightened	ones,	awakened	ones	--
are	 suffering.	 And	 the	 whole	 suffering	 is	 ridiculous!	 It	 need	 not	 be	 so.
Compassion	happens	and	compassion	starts	communicating.	But	communication
is	difficult,	impossible.
Buddha	 speaks	 from	 the	 hilltop	 and	 you	 live	 in	 the	 dark	 valleys	 where	 light
never	 reaches.	 He	 talks	 in	 words	 of	 light;	 by	 the	 time	 they	 reach	 you	 their
meaning	changes.	By	the	time	your	mind	catches	hold	of	them	it	colors	them	in
its	own	color.
It	 is	 not	 only	 so	 about	 Buddhas	 --	 even	 ordinary	 communication	 seems	 to	 be
impossible.
The	 husband	 cannot	 communicate	 with	 his	 wife,	 the	 parents	 cannot
communicate	 with	 their	 children,	 the	 teachers	 cannot	 communicate	 with	 their
students.	What	to	say	about	Buddhas?	People	who	exist	on	the	same	level,	even
THEY	cannot	communicate,	because	words	are	tricky	things.	You	say	one	thing,
but	 the	 moment	 it	 reaches	 the	 other	 person	 then	 it	 is	 in	 his	 power	 how	 to
interpret	it.
The	Queen	was	 traveling	 in	England's	 back	 country	when	 she	 saw	 a	man,	 his
wife,	and	a	flock	of	children.	Impressed,	the	Queen	asked,	"Are	all	of	these	your
children?"
"Yes,	Your	Highness,"	answered	the	man.
"How	many	children	do	you	have?"	asked	the	English	sovereign.
Sixteen,	was	the	reply.
"Sixteen	children,"	repeated	Her	Highness.	"We	should	give	you	a	knighthood."
"He	has	one,"	piped	up	the	lady,	"but	he	won't	wear	it.
Or,	if	you	have	missed,	another	story	for	you:
Thor,	the	Germanic	god	of	thunder,	was	feeling	restless	so	he	decided	to	have	a
weekend	 fling.	 Taking	 a	 handful	 of	 jewels	 from	 the	 Valhalla	 petty	 cash
department	he	slipped	down	to	earth,	got	himself	an	elegant	disco	suit	and	a	few
gold	chains,	and	began	hitting	the	Saturday	night	dance	bars.
After	a	big	night	on	the	town	he	finally	took	home	the	most	beautiful	woman	he
had	seen	and	spent	the	rest	of	the	night	and	morning	satisfying	his	heroic	libido.
When	he	got	out	of	bed	and	began	dressing	he	realized	that	the	exhausted	girl	on
the	bed	lacked	his	godly	sexual	stamina.	By	way	of	explanation,	he	leaned	down
over	her	and	whispered,	"Honey,	I	think	you	should	know	--	I	am	Thor."
Wide-eyed,	 the	 girl	 exclaimed,	 'Thor!	 You	 big	 thon-of-a-bitch,	 I	 can't	 even
thtand	up!"
Ordinary	 communication,	 very	 mundane	 communication,	 even	 in	 the
marketplace,	is	difficult.	And	a	Buddha	wants	to	communicate	to	you	something
which	he	has	found	in	a	state	of	no-mind,	which	he	has	found	when	all	thoughts
disappear,	which	he	has	found	when	even	he	himself	is	no	more	--	when	the	ego
evaporates,	when	there	is	utter	silence,	absolute	peace,	the	sky	is	without	clouds.
Now	 how	 to	 bring	 this	 infinite	 experience	 into	 words?	 No	 word	 is	 adequate
enough	--
hence	the	misunderstanding.
Yes,	 Madira,	 it	 is	 absolutely	 inevitable	 that	 a	 Buddha	 will	 always	 be
misunderstood.	 Only	 those	 few	 people	 can	 understand	 a	 Buddha	 who	 are
disciples	and	devotees.
By	disciple	is	meant	one	who	has	put	aside	all	his	prejudices,	one	who	has	put
aside	all	his	thoughts,	and	is	ready	to	listen	--	not	to	his	own	mind	and	his	mind	s
interpretations,	 but	 to	 the	words	of	Buddha;	who	 is	 not	 in	 a	 state	of	 argument
with	the	Buddha,	who	is	not	inside	thinking	about	what	Buddha	is	saying,	who
listens	to	a	Buddha	as	you	listen	to	classical	music,	who	listens	to	a	Buddha	as
you	listen	to	the	sound	of	running	water,	who	listens	to	Buddha	as	you	listen	to
the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	or	the	cuckoo	calling	from	the	distance.
That	 is	 the	 state	 of	 a	 disciple,	 or	 if	 you	 rise	 a	 little	 higher	 and	 become	 a
devotee....
A	devotee	is	one	who	has	not	only	dropped	his	mind	but	has	brought	his	heart	in,
who	listens	from	the	heart	--	not	from	logic	but	from	love.	The	disciple	is	on	the
way	to	being	a	devotee.	The	disciple	is	the	beginning	of	being	a	devotee,	and	the
devotee	is	the	fulfillment	of	being	a	disciple.
Only	 these	 few	 people	 understand	 a	Buddha.	And	 in	 understanding	 a	Buddha
they	are	 transformed,	 transported	 into	another	world	 --	 the	world	of	 liberation,
nirvana,	light,	love,	benediction.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 JESUS	 SAID	 THAT	 HIS	 SACRIFICE	 ON	 THE	 CROSS	WAS	 FOR
THE
SALVATION	OF	THE	WORLD	FROM	THE	SINS	OF	MAN.
PLEASE	WOULD	YOU	COMMENT	ON	THIS.
Anand	Geetam,
THE	 FIRST	 THING	 TO	 BE	 UNDERSTOOD	 about	 a	 man	 like	 Jesus	 is	 that
whatsoever	the	church	that	is	bound	to	grow	around	such	a	man	says	about	him,
it	is	bound	to	be	wrong.	What	the	Christian	church	says	about	Christ	cannot	be
true.	In	fact	the	Christian	priest	does	not	represent	Christ	at	all.	He	is	the	same
old	 rabbi	 in	 new	 garments,	 the	 same	 old	 rabbi	who	was	 responsible	 for	 Jesus
murder.	The	Pope	is	not	a	different	kind	of	person.
It	 makes	 no	 difference	 whether	 it	 is	 a	 Jewish	 establishment	 or	 a	 Christian
establishment	or	a	Hindu	establishment;	all	establishments	function	in	the	same
way.
Jesus	 is	 a	 rebel,	 just	 as	 Buddha	 is	 or	 Lao	 Tzu	 is.	 When	 the	 church	 starts
establishing	 itself	 it	 starts	 destroying	 the	 rebelliousness	 of	 Jesus,	 Buddha,
because	 rebellion	 cannot	 go	with	 an	 establishment.	 It	 starts	 imposing	 its	 own
ideas	 --	 once	 Jesus	 is	 gone	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 impose	 your	 own	 ideas.	 It	 starts
selecting	what	to	keep	in	the	Bible	and	what	not	to	keep.
Many	things	have	been	dropped,	many	things	have	not	been	included	in	it.	For
example,	the	Gospel	of	Thomas	has	not	been	included	in	the	New	Testament.	It
was	just	discovered	a	few	years	ago	--	and	it	is	the	MOST	important	gospel.	The
four	gospels	 that	have	been	 included	are	nothing	compared	 to	 it,	but	 it	 is	very
rebellious.
It	seems	Thomas	has	simply	reported	Jesus	without	polluting,	contaminating,	his
message.	That	must	have	been	the	reason	why	the	gospel	has	not	been	included
in	the	authorized	version	of	the	New	Testament.	And	those	gospels	which	have
been	 included,	 they	 have	 also	 been	 edited.	 For	 centuries	 conferences	went	 on
editing	them,	destroying	them,	distorting	them.
I	know	Jesus	because	 I	know	meditation.	My	knowing	of	 Jesus	 is	not	 through
the	 Bible,	 it	 is	 not	 through	 Christian	 theology.	 I	 know	 Jesus	 directly.	 I	 know
Jesus	because	I	know	myself;	that	s	my	way	of	knowing	all	the	Buddhas.
The	moment	you	know	your	own	Buddhahood	you	have	come	to	know	all	 the
Buddhas;	 the	 experience	 is	 the	 same.	 All	 differences	 are	 in	 the	 mind;	 the
moment	 you	 transcend	 mind	 there	 are	 no	 differences	 left.	 How	 can	 there	 be
differences	in	absolute	void?	Two	voids	can	only	be	exactly	the	same.	Minds	are
bound	to	be	different	because	they	consist	of	thoughts.	When	there	are	clouds	in
the	sky	then	each	cloud	is	different,	but	when	there	are	no	clouds	at	all	then	the
sky	is	one	and	the	same.
I	 don't	 know	 Jesus	 through	 Christian	 theology;	 I	 know	 him	 directly.	 And	my
knowing	is	that	he	cannot	talk	in	terms	of	sacrifice	--	first	thing,	the	very	first.	A
man	like	Jesus	does	not	talk	in	terms	of	sacrifice;	it	is	celebration,	not	sacrifice.
He	 is	 going	 to	meet	 his	 God	 dancing,	 singing.	 It	 is	 not	 sacrifice;	 he	 is	 not	 a
martyr.	The	Christian	church	tries	to	make	him	the	greatest	martyr,	the	greatest
man	who	has	sacrificed	himself	 for	 the	salvation	of	 the	world	from	the	sins	of
man.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 it	 is	 not	 sacrifice	 --	 sacrifice	 looks	business-like	 --	 it	 is
celebration!	Jesus	is	celebrating	his	life	and	his	death.
Secondly:	nobody	can	solve	the	problems	of	others,	nobody	can	be	the	salvation
of	 the	world.	And	you	can	see	 it:	 the	world	 is	still	 the	same.	Twenty	centuries
have	 passed	 and	 Christian	 priests	 go	 on	 talking	 nonsense,	 that	 he	 sacrificed
himself	for	the	salvation	of	the	world.	But	where	is	the	salvation	of	the	world?
Either	he	failed,	he	could	not	manage...
that	they	cannot	accept,	that	he	failed.	Then	what	happened?	The	world	seems	to
be	 exactly	 the	 same	 --	 nothing	 has	 changed!	 Humanity	 remains	 in	 the	 same
misery.	But	Jesus	cannot	have	said,	I	have	come	for	the	salvation	of	the	world.
But	it	happens	always	when	a	church	starts	establishing	itself	that	it	has	to	create
such	ideas,	otherwise	who	is	going	to	listen	to	the	priests?	Jesus	is	salvation	--
not	only	that	but	the	ONLY	salvation!
Just	the	other	night	I	was	looking	at	a	book:	JESUS,	THE	ONLY	WAY.	Why	the
only	way?	 Is	Buddha	 not	 a	way?	 Is	 Lao	Tzu	 not	 a	way?	 Is	 Zarathustra	 not	 a
way?	Is	Moses	not	a	way?	Is	Mohammed	not	a	way?	There	are	infinite	ways	to
reach	God.	Why	make	God	so	poor?	--	only	one	way?
But	 the	Christian	 priest	 is	 not	 interested	 in	God:	 he	 is	 interested	 in	 creating	 a
business.	He	has	 to	 claim	 that	 Jesus	 is	 the	ONLY	way,	 that	 all	 other	ways	 are
wrong.	He	is	in	search	of	customers.
That's	why	every	religion	creates	fascists	and	fanatics.	EVERY	religion	claims,
My	way	is	the	only	right	way	--	only	through	me	can	you	arrive	at	God.	If	you
go	 on	 some	 other	 way	 you	 are	 destined	 for	 hell,	 you	 are	 doomed."	 This	 is	 a
fascist	 way	 of	 thinking	 and	 this	 creates	 fanatics.	 And	 all	 religious	 people	 are
fanatics,	and	the	world	has	suffered	very	much	from	this	fanatical	approach.	It	is
TIME,	ripe	time	now,	to	drop	all	kinds	of	fascist	and	fanatical	attitudes.
Jesus	is	a	way,	but	the	way	has	to	be	walked.	The	way	can	go	on	lying	there;	it	is
not	going	to	help	you.	Just	by	being	there,	just	by	being	crucified,	Jesus	cannot
be	 the	salvation	of	 the	world	 --	otherwise	 it	would	have	happened!	Then	what
are	we	doing	now?	Then	what	are	the	priests	doing	now?	What	is	the	Pope	doing
now?
Just	 the	other	day	somebody	asked:	 'Osho,	have	you	heard?	The	new	Pope	has
done	a	miracle?
Yes,	I	have	heard:	he	has	made	a	blind	man	lame.	What	else	can	these	popes	do?
What	are	these	popes	doing	now?	The	world's	salvation	has	happened!	Now	no
religion	is	needed	and	no	church	is	needed.	Even	Christ	is	not	needed	any	more!
The	work	is	finished.	I	have	heard:
One	young	man	came	from	medical	college	with	a	gold	medal;	he	had	 topped
the	university.	His	 father	was	also	a	physician.	The	father	said,	"Now	that	you
have	come	I	would	like	 to	go	to	 the	mountains	for	a	rest.	For	years	I	have	not
taken	even	a	single	holiday.	Now	you	look	after	my	practice	and	for	one	month	I
would	like	to	go	to	the	mountains."
So	the	old	man	went	to	the	mountains.	After	one	month	when	he	came	back	the
young	doctor	received	the	father	at	the	airport	and	said,	 'Dad,	do	you	know?	--
the	 old	 woman	 whom	 you	 have	 been	 treating	 for	 thirty	 years	 and	 could	 not
manage	to	cure	--	I	have	cured	her	within	one	month!	'
The	 father	simply	hit	his	head	with	his	hand	and	said,	You	have	destroyed	 the
whole	business!	It	is	because	of	her	that	you	could	go	to	medical	college.	And	I
was	 hoping	 that	 your	 younger	 brother	would	 also	 become	 a	 doctor.	You	 fool!
What	 have	 you	 done?	 That	 woman	 was	 our	 business!	 You	 have	 finished	 my
whole	life	s	career!
If	 Jesus	 has	 REALLY	 done	 the	 work	 of	 salvation,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 point	 in
Mohammed	coming	 --	Mohammed	came	after	 Jesus.	Then	 there	 is	no	point	 in
Nanak,	the	founder	of	Sikhism,	coming,	no	point	in	Kabir	coming.	He	has	closed
the	shop!	But	it	has	not	happened.
Buddha	says:	Buddhas	can	only	point	the	way."
But	 the	 fanatic	 disciples	 always	want	 to	 claim....	What	 to	 say	 about	 Jesus?	 --
even	Jainas	claim	that	Mahavira	came	to	the	world	for	the	salvation	of	humanity.
Now	it	may	be	a	little	bit	relevant	with	Jesus	because	he	speaks	in	such	a	way
that	he	can	be	very	easily	misinterpreted,	but	Mahavira	is	VERY	clear.	He	says
in	absolutely	definite	 terms	 that	nobody	can	save	another:	"I	have	not	come	 to
save	anybody.	If	I	can	save	myself,	that	is	enough."	Even	a	man	like	Mahavira
who	has	 stated	 this	 absolutely,	 his	disciples	 --	 the	 Jaina	MUNIS	and	 the	 Jaina
monks	and	the	Jaina	pundits	--	go	on	claiming	that	he	came	for	the	salvation	of
humanity.
Why	 are	 people	 after	 humanity?	 And	 how	 can	 you	manage	 it?	 You	 have	 not
created	the	misery	for	the	world	so	how	can	you	destroy	it?	If	Jesus	is	the	cause
of	the	misery	of	the	world,	then	certainly	he	can	withdraw	it.	If	HE	is	the	person
who	has	imprisoned	you,	he	can	open	the	gates,	unlock	the	doors	and	tell	you	to
leave,	and	you	are	free.	But	he	is	not	the	person	to	do	it.	You	have	done	it;	your
hell	is	created	by	you.	What	can	Jesus	do	about	it?
But	this	stupid	logic	has	gone	very	deep	in	the	mind	of	humanity	--	for	a	certain
reason.
We	 always	 want	 somebody	 else	 to	 be	 responsible	 --	 for	 our	 misery,	 for	 our
happiness,	we	always	want	somebody	else	to	be	responsible.	We	don't	want	to	be
responsible!	To	avoid	responsibility	we	become	trapped	in	these	kinds	of	ideas.
Now,	Christians	say	Adam	and	Eve	committed	the	original	sin	and	the	whole	of
humanity	is	suffering.	It	is	so	patently	foolish!	Scientists	say	that	humanity	has
existed	 for	millions	 of	 years.	Millions	 of	 years	 ago,	 a	 couple,	Adam	and	Eve,
committed	a	sin	and	we	are	suffering	for	it.	Can	you	think	of	a	more	ridiculous
thing?	 --	 that	 you	 are	 imprisoned	 because	 millions	 of	 years	 ago	 somebody
committed	a	crime.	You	did	not	commit	it,	how	can	you	suffer	for	it?	And	what
original	sin	are	they	talking	about?	It	is	neither	original	nor	sin!	What	Adam	did
was	a	simple	phenomenon:	he	disobeyed	the	father.
Every	child	has	to	disobey	the	father.	Unless	a	child	disobeys	the	father	he	never
becomes	mature.	 It	 is	nothing,	original,	 it	 is	very	simple	and	natural.	 It	 is	very
psychological.	 There	 comes	 an	 age	 when	 every	 child	 has	 to	 say	 NO	 to	 the
parents.	If	he	does	not	say	no	to	the	parents	he	will	not	have	a	spine;	he	will	be
spineless.	If	he	cannot	say	no	to	the	parents,	he	will	be	a	slave	his	whole	life.	He
will	never	attain	to	individuality.
Adam	and	Eve	did	not	commit	any	sin;	they	simply	became	mature.	They	said
no,	they	disobeyed.	When	your	child	goes	behind	the	house	and	starts	smoking
don't	be	worried	too	much;	he	is	simply	disobeying	you	That	is	part	of	growth.	If
he	never	disobeys	you,	be	worried.	Take	him	to	the	psychoanalyst	--	something
is	 wrong	 with	 him.	 If	 he	 ALWAYS	 obeys	 you	 then	 he	 has	 no	 soul;	 he	 is
abnormal,	he	is	not	normal.
Be	 happy	when	 your	 child	 disobeys	 you.	 Thank	God	 that	 now	 he	 has	 started
moving	towards	becoming	an	individual.	It	is	only	by	disobeying,	rebelling,	that
a	child	attains	authentic	individuality.	If	parents	are	wise	they	will	be	happy.
And	 I	 think	God	 cannot	 be	 so	 foolish	 as	Christian	priests	 are.	God	must	 have
been	happy	the	day	Adam	and	Eve	disobeyed;	he	must	have	rejoiced.	He	must
have	 sung	a	 song	 saying,	 "Now	my	children	 are	be-coming	mature."	 I	CAN'T
see	him	being	 annoyed.	 I	 can't	 conceive	 a	God	who	cannot	 understand	 such	 a
simple	psychological	phenomenon.
You	have	to	give	your	God	a	little	more	intelligence	than	Sigmund	Freud!	It	is
such	 a	 simple	 fact	 of	 life	 that	 each	 child	 has	 to	 disobey.	 It	 is	 not	 sin	 --
disobedience	is	not	sin.
And	what	 is	 original	 about	 it?	 It	 is	 nothing	unique	and	 it	 did	not	only	happen
millions	of	years	ago:	it	happens	each	time	a	child	starts	growing.	You	will	see	it
happening	in	your	child	somewhere	near	the	age	of	three	or	four	the	child	starts
asserting	his	freedom.
That's	why	 if	you	want	 to	 remember	your	 life	you	can	 remember	only	back	 to
the	age	of	four	or	at	 the	most	 three;	beyond	that	all	 is	dark.	Why?	You	had	no
individuality,	hence	no	memory.	You	attained	your	first	 individuality	when	you
were	three	or	four.	Girls	attain	at	nearabout	three,	boys	attain	at	nearabout	four;
they	are	always	lagging	behind,	and	this	is	going	to	be	their	whole	life	pattern.
Apparently	the	husband	is	walking	ahead,	but	deep	down	he	is	always	behind	the
wife.
I	have	heard	a	story:
The	great	King	Akbar	once	asked	his	ministers,	"My	wife	was	saying	to	me	that
all	my	ministers	are	hen-pecked.	Is	it	true?	I	want	to	know	the	truth	and	please
don't	try	to	deceive	me.	If	I	find	that	you	have	deceived	me,	then	death	will	be
the	 penalty.	 So	 stand	 in	 a	 row	 on	 the	 right	 all	 those	 who	 are	 hen-pecked
husbands,	and	on	the	left	those	who	are	not."
All	 except	 one	 moved	 to	 the	 line	 of	 hen-pecked	 husbands	 --	 embarrassed,
hesitating,	 but	 they	did	not	want	 to	be	 false	 to	 the	King.	They	knew	perfectly
well,	"He	will	go	into	deep	research,	and	sooner	or	 later,	 if	he	calls	our	wives,
we	will	be	caught.	So	it	is	better	to	say	it	once	and	finish	it."
But	one	man,	whom	the	King	had	never	thought	very	heroic,	who	was	the	most
cowardly,	was	standing	alone.	The	King	said,	"I	am	happy.	At	least	there	is	one
person	who	is	not	hen-pecked."
The	man	 said,	 "Wait!	Don't	misunderstand	me.	When	 I	was	 coming	 from	my
home	my	 wife	 said,	 'Avoid	 crowds.	 That's	 why	 I	 am	 standing	 here	 --	 just	 to
avoid	 the	crowd.	 If	 she	comes	 to	know	 that	 I	was	 standing	 in	 the	crowd	 there
will	be	difficulty,	sir,	and	I	don't	want	any	difficulties."
Nearabout	 the	age	of	 three	or	four	That's	why	I	say	this	parable	of	Adam	and-
Eve	 has	 so	 many	 aspects;	 I	 am	 never	 tired	 of	 talking	 about	 it	 from	 different
angles.	 It	was	Eve	who	was	 the	 first	 to	disobey	 --	 that	means	one	year	 ahead.
Adam	came	to	his	senses	a	little	later;	in	fact	he	was	persuaded	by	Eve.
If	the	world	is	really	left	free	then	women	will	seduce	men,	not	men	women;	that
will	be	the	natural	course.	And	in	fact	that's	exactly	what	happens	right	now,	but
in	a	very	subtle	way.	The	woman	seduces	the	male,	but	seduces	in	such	a	subtle
way	that	the	gross	male	mind	cannot	understand	it.	The	gross	male	mind	thinks,
I	am	taking	all	the	initiative,"	and	the	woman	goes	on	laughing	deep	down;	she
knows	 who	 is	 pulling	 the	 strings.	 She	 never	 takes	 a	 single	 step	 on	 her	 own
visibly;	you	cannot	see	it.	She	always	allows	the	man	to	approach	her;	she	can
wait.	She	trusts	her	own	capacity	to	pull	the	man.	She	does	not	want	to	wag	her
tail;	she	always	manages,	persuades	the	man	to	wag	his	tail.
That's	 what	 happened:	 Eve	 ate	 the	 fruit	 first,	 disobeyed	God,	 and	 then	Adam
followed.
This	is	not	something	that	happened	once;	it	happens	always.	It	happens	to	every
child	 and	 it	 is	 good	 that	 it	 happens.	 It	 is	 nearabout	 four	 that	 the	 child	 starts
feeling	a	kind	of	individuality	of	his	own;	he	starts	defining	himself.
Lanahan,	an	 Irish	political	prisoner,	 escaped	 from	 jail	by	digging	a	 tunnel	 that
opened	into	a	school	playground.	As	he	emerged	in	the	open	air	Lanahan	could
not	help	shouting	at	a	small	girl,	I	am	free,	I	am	free!"
"That's	nothing,"	said	the	girl,	"I	am	four."
There	 is	a	 time	when	 the	child	wants	 to	declare	 to	 the	world	 that	"I	am	here!"
that	I	am!"
He	 wants	 to	 define	 himself,	 and	 the	 only	 way	 to	 define	 himself	 is	 by
disobedience.	So	 there	 is	 nothing	original	 about	 it	 and	nothing	 like	 sin;	 it	 is	 a
simple	process	of	growth.
And	because	Christianity	has	been	denying	it	as	a	simple	process	of	growth,	 it
has	not	helped	humanity	to	become	mature.
All	the	religions	have	been	trying	to	keep	humanity	immature,	juvenile,	childish.
They	are	all	afraid	that	once	humanity	becomes	mature	then	they	will	not	be	of
any	 value;	 they	will	 lose	 all	 luster.	 They	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 exploit	 a	mature
humanity;	they	can	exploit	only	children.
So	what	 sin	 has	 humanity	 committed	 so	 that	 Jesus	 is	 needed	 to	 come	 for	 the
salvation	of	the	world?
I	would	 like	 to	make	 it	 absolutely	 clear	 to	you	 that	 there	 is	 no	need	 for	ANY
salvation.
Secondly:	if	there	is	any	need	you	feel,	it	can't	be	done	by	anybody	else	except
you	yourself.	Thirdly:	you	are	not	living	in	sin;	you	are	living	in	nature	--	but	if
nature	is	condemned	you	start	feeling	guilty.	And	that	is	the	trade-secret	of	the
priests:	to	make	you	feel	guilty.
I	don't	think	Jesus	said	that	his	sacrifice	on	the	cross	was	for	the	salvation	of	the
world	from	the	sins	of	man.	Priests	must	have	imposed	their	ideas	on	Jesus.	The
New	Testament	was	written	centuries	afterwards,	 and	 then	 for	 centuries	 it	was
edited,	changed,	and	the	words	that	Jesus	spoke	were	in	a	language	which	is	no
more	 alive	 --	 Aramaic.	 It	 was	 not	 even	 Hebrew	 --	 a	 dialect	 of	 Hebrew,	 but
different	in	many	ways.
When	Jesus'	words	were	translated	--	first	into	Latin	--	a	great	change	happened:
they	 lost	 their	 original	 quality,	 the	 flavor.	 They	 lost	 something	 very	 essential:
their	 soul.	And	when	 from	Latin	 they	were	 translated	 into	English,	 something
was	again	lost.	For	example,	a	few	words	you	can	meditate	over:	'Repentance'	is
one	of	the	key	words	because	Jesus	uses	it	again	and	again,	says	to	his	disciples:
Repent!	Repent	ye,	because	the	Day	of	Judgment	is	very	close.	He	repeats	it	so
many	times	that	it	must	have	been	of	tremendous	value	to	him.	But	what	does	it
mean	--	'repent'?	Ask	the	Christian	priest;	he	will	say,
"This	 is	 a	 simple	word;	everybody	knows	what	 it	means:	 repent	 for	your	 sins,
repent	 for	your	guilt,	 repent	 for	all	 that	you	have	done."	And	 the	priest	can	be
helpful;	 he	 can	 help	 you	 in	 the	ways	 of	 repentance.	But	 the	word	 'repent'	 has
nothing	to	do	with	repentance.
Jesus'	word	for	repent	simply	means	'return';	it	does	not	mean	repentance	at	all.
'Turn	in'
it	means,	'return	to	the	source',	it	means,	'return	to	your	own	being'.	That's	what
meditation	 is	 all	 about:	 returning	 to	 the	 source,	 returning	 to	 the	 center	 of	 the
cyclone,	returning	to	your	very	being.
Now	you	can	see	the	difference.	When	you	use	the	English	word	'repent'	it	has
something	very	ugly	about	it:	sin,	guilt,	the	priest,	confession;	this	is	the	climate
of	the	English	word
'repent'.	But	the	Aramaic	word	simply	means	return	to	the	source,	return!	Return,
don't	waste	time.
And	that's	how	it	is	with	almost	all	key	words.
It	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to	 understand	 Jesus	 through	 the	 priests.	 The	 only	 pure
way,	the	only	possible	way,	is	to	go	in,	return	inside.	There	you	will	meet	Christ-
consciousness.
The	only	way	to	understand	Christ	is	to	become	a	Christ.	Never	be	a	Christian	--
be	 a	 Christ!	 Never	 be	 a	 Buddhist	 --	 be	 a	 Buddha!	 Never	 be	 a	 Hindu	 --	 be	 a
Krishna!	And	if	you	want	to	be	a	Krishna,	Christ	or	Buddha,	then	you	need	not
go	into	the	scriptures	and	you	need	not	ask	the	scholars:	you	will	have	to	ask	the
mystics	how	to	go	in.
That's	exactly	what	I	am	doing	here:	helping	you	to	become	aware	of	yourself.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 know	 yourself	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:	 you	 have	 never
committed	a	sin.	Sin	is	the	invention	of	the	priest	to	create	guilt	in	you.
You	don't	need	any	salvation.	All	that	you	need	is	a	little	shaking	up	so	you	can
wake	up.
You	don	 t	need	priests.	You	certainly	need	awakened	people,	because	only	 the
awakened	ones	can	shake	those	who	are	fast	asleep	and	dreaming.	And	humanity
needs	to	be	free	of	guilt,	 free	of	 the	idea	of	sin,	free	of	 the	idea	of	repentance.
Humanity	needs	innocence,	and	the	priests	don't	allow	you	to	be	innocent;	they
corrupt	your	minds.
Beware	of	the	priests.	They	are	the	people	who	crucified	Jesus	--	how	can	they
interpret	Jesus?	They	are	the	people	who	have	always	been	against	the	Buddhas
--	and	the	irony	is	that	finally	they	become	the	interpreters.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO	WHY	CAN'T	I	TOLERATE	PEOPLE	WHO	BELONG	TO	OTHER
RELIGIONS?
Maria,
IT	 IS	BECAUSE	OF	YOUR	UPBRINGING.	You	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 as	 a
fascist,	 as	 a	 fanatic	 --	 as	Christians,	Hindus,	 Jainas,	Mohammedans;	 you	 have
not	 been	 brought	 up	 as	 human	 beings.	 You	 are	 hypnotized	 from	 your	 very
childhood;	you	are	 living	 in	 a	kind	of	hypnosis.	To	 live	 as	 a	Christian	or	 as	 a
Mohammedan	is	to	live	in	a	hypnosis,	is	not	to	live	really.
That's	why	 you	 cannot	 tolerate	 people	who	 belong	 to	 other	 religions,	 because
deep	 down	 you	 know	 they	 are	wrong,	 they	 are	 stupid,	 they	 are	 committing	 a
great	crime.	They	have	to	be	put	right,	they	have	to	be	brought	under	your	flag,
into	your	 flock	 --	because	only	 Jesus	 saves	or	only	Buddha	 saves.	You	cannot
tolerate	them	because	they	look	like	pretenders.
To	a	Christian,	 a	Buddhist	 is	 a	pretender,	 because	God	has	only	one	 son.	 It	 is
very	strange
--	why	should	God	have	only	one	son?	Is	he	in	favor	of	birth	control?	But	Jesus
is	 the	 only-begotten	 son	 of	 God,	 and	 the	 Buddhists	 claim	 that	 Buddha	 has
arrived,	 that	 he	 has	 attained.	 It	 becomes	 intolerable,	 the	 very	 idea.	 It	 creates
suspicion	in	you,	it	creates	doubt.	Maybe	the	Buddhists	are	right,	and	you	don	t
want	to	see	this	doubt	inside	yourself,	because	doubt	is	heavy	and	doubt	disturbs
your	peace	and	doubt	disturbs	your	sleep.
Hence	you	would	not	like	to	read	the	Buddhist	scriptures,	you	would	not	like	to
read	the	Koran,	you	would	not	like	to	read	Mahavira,	because	their	words	can	be
dangerous.	 Or	 even	 if	 you	 read	 them	 you	 will	 read	 them	 as	 ordinary	 books,
because	 there	 is	 only	 one	 holy	 book,	 the	 Bible,	 or	 only	 one	 holy	 book,	 the
Koran.	Your	book	is	the	only	holy	book	and	all	other	books	are	unholy.
There	are	many	things	involved	in	this	attitude,	Maria.	And	this	is	not	only	your
attitude:	 this	 is	 the	 attitude	 of	 the	 greater	 masses.	 It	 is	 good	 that	 you	 have
become	aware	of	it.
You	 ask	 me:	 WHY	 CAN'T	 I	 TOLERATE	 PEOPLE	 WHO	 BELONG	 TO
OTHER
RELIGIONS?
First:	they	create	doubt	in	you,	they	create	suspicion,	skepticism,	about	your	own
beliefs.
And	 you	 are	 so	 settled	with	 your	 beliefs,	 they	 are	 so	 consoling;	 they	 are	 like
tranquilizers.
And	 the	 person	 who	 lives	 in	 a	 different	 way,	 behaves	 in	 a	 different	 way,
worships	a	different	God,	meditates	in	a	different	way,	prays	in	a	different	way,
certainly	 creates	 doubt.	Maybe	 he	 is	 right	 --	 who	 knows?	You	 certainly	 don't
know.	Whatsoever	you	have	been	told	has	been	told	by	others;	it	is	not	your	own
knowing	so	you	don't	have	any	trust	in	it.
You	 have	 repressed	 your	 doubts	 deep	 down	 inside	 yourself;	 those	 doubts	 are
alive,	 very	 much	 alive.	 They	 are	 ready	 to	 explode	 any	 moment	 --	 any
opportunity	 and	 they	 will	 surface.	 The	 people	 of	 other	 religions	 become	 an
opportunity	for	the	doubts	to	surface.
In	Jaina	scriptures	it	is	written	that	if	you	are	on	a	road	being	followed	by	a	mad
elephant	and	you	come	across	a	Hindu	temple,	you	can	enter	the	temple	and	save
your	 life,	but	 it	 is	better	not	 to	enter	 the	 temple	and	be	crushed	underneath	 the
elephant,	be	killed	by	 the	elephant.	Not	 to	enter	 into	 the	Hindu	temple	even	 to
save	 your	 life!	 It	 is	 better	 to	 be	 killed	 but	 to	 remain	 a	 Jaina,	 then	 heaven	 is
absolutely	guaranteed.
And	 the	 same,	 exactly	 the	 same,	 is	written	 in	Hindu	 scriptures	 too,	 about	 the
Jainas:	don't	enter	a	Jaina	temple.	It	is	better	to	die,	be	killed	by	a	mad	elephant,
than	be	saved	by	going	inside	a	Jaina	temple.	Why?	--	because	the	Jaina	priest
may	be	saying	something	there,	you	may	hear	something.	That	may	disturb	you,
may	create	doubt	inside	you.	And	doubt	is	dangerous,	the	door	to	hell;	belief	is
the	door	to	heaven.
The	 first	 thing,	Maria:	people	who	are	not	 like	you	 --	not	only	 religiously,	but
people	who	dress	differently	from	you	--	even	they	are	not	liked.
That's	why	my	disciples	are	disliked	by	the	so-called	Indian	society	.	The	reason
is	 not	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 anything	 wrong;	 the	 reason	 is	 simply	 that	 you	 are
different.	And	that	is	the	problem:	nobody	likes	the	different	person.	People	like
you	 to	be	 like	 them,	exactly	 like	 them.	Dress	 like	 them,	behave	 like	 them,	use
the	same	language,	go	to	the	same	temple	--	and	then	you	are	accepted,	because
you	don't	create	doubt.
Now	my	disciples	are	bound	to	create	doubt,	my	sannyasins	are	bound	to	create
doubt.
They	are	behaving	in	a	totally	different	way	they	are	behaving	with	freedom,	and
the	slaves	are	bound	to	get	disturbed.	Slaves	of	tradition,	slaves	of	orthodoxies,
they	are	bound	to	get	disturbed.
Just	 seeing	 a	 young	man	 and	 a	 young	woman	walking	 together	 holding	hands
and	it	is	enough	to	disturb	the	Hindu	mind.	It	has	repressed	so	much	that	all	that
repression	 starts	 coming	 up.	 They	would	 also	 like	 to	 walk	 hand-in-hand	with
their	beloveds	but	they	cannot.	If	THEY	cannot	then	they	cannot	allow	anybody
else	to	do	the	same.
In	 the	West	 if	you	are	walking	hand-in-hand	with	a	woman	no	problem	arises,
because	 the	 society	 is	 also	 the	 same.	But	walk	 hand-in-hand	with	 a	man,	 two
men	walking	hand-in-hand,	and	people	start	looking	at	you.	Something	is	wrong
--	you	look	homosexual,	you	look	gay.	It	is	dangerous!
Now	homosexuals	have	been	one	of	 the	 tortured	minorities	 in	 the	world,	 very
much	tortured.	In	some	countries	they	are	killed.	In	some	countries,	for	example
in	Iran,	if	it	is	found	that	two	persons	are	living	as	homosexuals	or	lesbians,	then
the	 only	 punishment	 is	 death.	What	 nonsense!	 They	 have	 not	 committed	 any
crime	against	anybody,	they	have	not	harmed	anybody!	Two	men	living	together,
or	two	women	living	together,	this	should	be	nobody	else's	business.	But	there	is
a	 great	 fear	 of	 homosexuality,	 and	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 homosexuality	 has	 been
repressed	down	the	ages.
In	 fact,	 in	 every	 person	 homosexuality	 is	 repressed,	 because	 there	 are	 four
stages.	First	the	child	is	auto-erotic,	then	the	child	becomes	homosexual,	then	the
child	 becomes	 heterosexual,	 and	 the	 fourth	 and	 the	 ultimate	 state	 is	 that	 of
brahmacharya	--	the	person	goes	beyond	sex.
Each	child	passes	the	stage	of	homosexuality.	If	he	passes	it	naturally	there	will
be	no	 repression,	but	because	he	 is	not	 allowed	 to	pass	 it	 naturally,	 repression
happens;	then	a	hangover	remains.	Now	these	people	who	kill	homosexuals	are
really	homosexuals	themselves	--	repressed	homosexuals	--	they	cannot	tolerate
it.
It	is	so	about	everything:	you	cannot	see	the	things	that	you	are	doing.
For	example	in	India	--	just	the	other	day	somebody	asked:	I	was	saying	good-
bye	to	my	girlfriend;	we	hugged	and	kissed	and	we	were	caught	by	the	police.	It
took	two	hours	for	us	to	manage	somehow	to	get	out	of	the	trouble.	They	were
going	 to	put	 us	 in	 jail	 and	 they	were	 trying	 to	 take	us	 to	 the	 court,	 to	make	 a
case....	Now,	kissing	in	a	public	place!
The	questioner	has	asked,	And	I	see	Indians	pissing	in	public	places	and	nobody
objects.
Kissing	is	objectionable,	pissing	is	not?"
You	don't	know:	this	country	belongs	to	Morarji	Desai.	Pissing	is	a	holy	act!	If
you	 are	 pissing	 in	 a	 public	 place	 you	 are	 doing	 something	 great	 --	 you	 are
making	the	earth	holy.
It	is	not	urine:	it	is	water	of	life!
In	India	you	can	piss	in	a	public	place,	you	can	go	and	defecate	anywhere.	The
whole	country	is	a	latrine!	But	that	is	allowed.	Nobody	takes	any	note	of	it.	Only
Westerners	when	 they	come	 to	 India,	 they	note	 it.	They	 immediately	note	 it	 --
what	is	happening?
Just	coming	 from	Santa	Cruz	airport	 to	Bombay,	 the	whole	way	on	both	 sides
people	are	defecating	--	but	NO	Indian	takes	any	note	of	it!
We	only	see	things	which	are	not	accepted	by	us.	We	only	see	things	which	are
strange.
The	Indian	has	lived	in	the	same	way	for	centuries;	he	is	not	taking	any	note.	It
is	just	the	natural	way;	no	question	arises	in	his	mind.
You	 see	 beggars	 on	 the	 street.	All	 the	Westerners	 go	 on	writing	 letters	 to	me:
"We	 feel	 very	much	 disturbed."	And	 no	 Indian	 seems	 to	 be	 disturbed	 at	 all	 --
what	is	the	matter?
The	Indians	accept	 the	beggars;	 that	 is	accepted.	They	are	suffering	 from	their
past	 karmas;	 nobody	 else	 is	 responsible	 for	 it.	A	 beautiful	 strategy,	 a	 defense,
they	have	created	out	of	this	theory,	that	everybody	has	to	suffer	according	to	his
past	 lives.	 These	 people	 must	 have	 done	 something	 wrong,	 something	 really
ugly;	now	they	are	suffering.
Every-body	has	to	pay	for	their	past,	so	there	is	no	question	of	compassion.
In	 fact	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 there	 is	 a	 Jaina	 sect	 in	 India,
TERAPANTH,	whose	head	 is	Acharya	Tulsi;	 this	sect	believes	you	should	not
help	 the	 beggar	 because	 by	 helping	 the	 beggar	 you	will	 be	 disturbing	 his	 life
pattern.	If	you	help	him	then	he	will	have	to	suffer	some	other	time.	He	HAS	to
suffer!	If	a	man	has	fallen	into	a	well	don't	take	him	out,	because	if	you	take	him
out	he	will	fall	into	another	well	some	day	--	so	what	is	the	point?	Let	him	suffer
and	 let	him	be	 finished	with	 the	karma	so	he	 is	 free	 from	 it	 --	one	 thing.	And
secondly,	if	you	save	this	man	from	the	well,	if	you	take	him	out	and	he	goes	and
kills	somebody	then	you	are	also	responsible	for	the	murder.	If	you	had	not	taken
him	out	 of	 the	well	 he	would	 not	 have	 committed	 the	murder	 --	 so	 fifty-fifty.
Then	beware:	 in	some	other	 life	you	will	have	 to	suffer	also.	You	will	have	 to
fall	in	some	well
--	maybe	not	so	deep....
So	on	two	grounds	Acharya	Tulsi	and	his	sect	teach:	don't	help	anybody.	And	if
you	look,	the	logic	is	there.	If	the	theory	of	karma	is	right	then	Acharya	Tulsi's
conclusion	 is	 very	 logical;	 the	 logical	 conclusion	 cannot	 be	 doubted.	 But	 the
theory	itself	is	an	invention;	you	don	t	suffer	for	your	karmas	in	your	next	lives.
Life	is	immediate:	if	you	put	your	hand	in	the	fire	you	will	be	burnt	right	now,
not	 in	 your	 next	 life.	 Each	 karma	 is	 immediately	 finished.	 You	 immediately
suffer	 or	 you	 immediately	 enjoy	 the	 bliss,	 but	 there	 is	 no	waiting.	 The	whole
theory	 is	 nonsense.	To	 try	 to	 postpone	 for	 other	 lives	 is	 a	 strategy	 --	 political,
social.
Indians	can	accept	the	beggars	but	they	cannot	accept	a	couple	kissing	good-bye.
But	why	should	you	be	so	much	worried?	If	kissing	is	something	bad,	they	may
be	suffering	from	their	past	karmas	--	let	them	suffer!	Why	should	you	interfere?
But	interference	is	there	because	you	are	sexually	suppressed.	Indian	society	is
very	much	sexually	suppressed;	it	cannot	accept	people	who	are	sexually	free.
So,	Maria,	 it	 is	not	only	a	question	of	religion	--	 it	 is	a	question	of	everything.
The	different	person	creates	doubt,	 the	different	person	creates	suspicion	about
whether	what	you	are	doing	is	right	or	wrong.	You	want	to	destroy	the	different
person	so	that	you	can	suppress	your	doubt	again	--	one	thing.
Secondly:	a	person	belonging	to	a	different	religion	hurts	your	ego;	you	would
like	your	religion	to	be	the	suprememost,	the	only	religion.	It	hurts	your	ego	that
there	are	other	religions	also	claiming	the	same	supremacy
You	have	a	double-bind	mind:	for	yourself	you	think	in	one	way,	for	others	in	a
totally	different	way.	If	you	claim	your	Bible	as	the	holy	book,	you	don't	allow
Mohammedans	 to	 claim	 their	 book	 as	 the	 holy	 book.	And	 the	Mohammedans
don't	 allow	 the	Hindus	 to	 call	 their	Vedas	 the	holy	book.	And	 the	people	who
believe	in	the	Vedas	--	the	Hindus	--
they	 laugh	 at	 the	 nonsense	 of	 calling	 the	Koran	 or	 the	Bible	 holy	 books.	 The
Vedas	is	the	only	holy	book	--	because	the	Vedas	are	written	by	God	himself;	all
other	books	are	written	by	human	beings.	Maybe	they	contain	something	good,
but	 written	 by	 human	 beings	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 fallible	 --	 the	 Vedas	 are
infallible.
This	is	the	way	of	the	ego.
Mrs.	Keen	and	Mrs.	Monahan	were	sitting	on	their	stoop	watching	the	apartment
across	the	street,	which	was	rented	by	a	young	Italian	girl.	As	a	steady	stream	of
men	entered	and	left	at	half-hour	intervals	they	kept	saying,	She	is	a	slut.	She	is
no	good.	She	is	a	disgrace	to	the	neighborhood!"
Then	after	ten	visitors,	Father	Gilhooley,	the	neighborhood	priest,	went	in.	"Oh
my!"	said	Mrs.	Keen.	'The	poor	girl	must	be	sick.
Now	you	see	the	change!	Immediately	a	different	standard	is	applied.
Walsh	 stumbled	out	of	 a	 saloon	and	 into	a	church	he	 thought	was	a	cathedral,
and	 fell	 asleep.	 The	 sexton	 soon	 woke	 him	 and	 told	 him	 they	 were	 closing.
"They	don't	close	cathedrals,"	said	Walsh.
"This	is	not	a	cathedral,"	said	the	sexton.	"It	is	a	Presbyterian	church."
Walsh	looked	around	and	saw	stained-glass	windows	of	St.	Luke,	St.	Mark	and
St.
Thomas.
"And	since	when,"	asked	the	Irishman,	"did	the	saints	become	Presbyterians?"
All	the	saints	belong	to	YOUR	religion!
Mahavira	 and	 Neminath	 are	 not	 even	mentioned	 by	 Hindu	 books	 --	 not	 even
mentioned.
A	 man	 like	 Mahavira	 remains	 unmentioned	 in	 Hindu	 books.	 Jesus	 is	 not
mentioned	in	any	Jewish	book.	A	man	like	Jesus	remains	unmentioned?
You	apply	double	standards.	For	your	own	religion	you	have	one	valuation,	for
the	others,	different	valuations.	You	don't	weigh	on	the	same	weighing	machine.
This	is	the	way	of	the	ego;	it	is	always	doing	it	in	every	dimension	of	life.
And	 let	 me	 repeat	 again:	 each	 religion	 creates	 fascism	 in	 you.	 Each	 religion
creates	Adolph	Hitlers	because	of	this	idea	that	"My	way	is	the	only	right	way."
And	when	you	are	a	fascist	and	when	you	are	a	fanatic	you	are	murderous.	You
may	 not	 murder,	 but	 deep	 down	 you	 are	 murderous.	 You	 may	 not	 murder
anybody,	 but	 one	 thing	 is	 certain:	 you	will	murder	 your	 qualities	 of	 love	 and
compassion	and	brotherhood.
A	group	of	young	men	 --	all	 Irish	Catholics	 --	go	 into	a	pub.	They	don't	greet
Abbie,	one	of	the	men	already	standing	at	the	bar.	Paddy,	one	of	the	young	Irish
fellows,	asks	his	friends	why	they	don't	greet	Abbie.	"Oh,	he	is	a	Jew,"	they	say,
"and	Jews	are	awful	people.	They	killed	our	Lord	Jesus	Christ."
Paddy	is	very	upset	 to	hear	 this	and	goes	over	 to	Abbie	and	starts	beating	him
up.
"Stop,	stop!"	shouts	Abbie.	"What	are	you	doing	this	for?"
"I'm	doing	it	because	Jews	tortured	Jesus	and	killed	him."
"Yes,	I	know,"	says	Abbie,	"but	it	is	nothing	to	do	with	me.	That	happened	two
thousand	years	ago."
Paddy	gives	him	another	blow	and	says,	"I	don't	care.	I	only	heard	it	ten	minutes
ago!"
I	don't	want	you	to	be	tolerant	of	other	religions.	Mahatma	Gandhi	used	to	teach
people:
"Be	tolerant	of	other	religions."	But	if	you	become	tolerant	of	other	religions	that
simply	means	intolerance	persists	underground.
I	don't	teach	tolerance;	tolerance	is	ugly.	It	is	better	to	be	knowingly	intolerant;
at	least	the	disease	is	on	the	surface	and	sooner	or	later	you	will	become	aware
of	it	--	as	Maria	has	become	aware	of	it.	If	you	become	tolerant,	as	Gandhians
have	become	tolerant,	 then	 the	disease	goes	deep	 into	 the	unconscious.	On	 the
surface	you	are	very	polite,	sweet,	and	you	say	good	things,	 that	 the	Bible	and
the	Gita,	they	say	the	same	thing:	ALLAH
ISHWAR	TERE	NAM	SABKO	SANMATI	DE	BHAGWAN	--	all	are	names	of
the	same	God,	and	 let	God	give	understanding	 to	all."	You	go	on	saying	 these
things,	but	deep	down	it	is	not	so.
Mahatma	Gandhi	his	whole	life	prayed	morning	and	evening	saying	that	Allah
and	Ram	are	the	names	of	the	same	God.	But	when	he	was	shot	in	Delhi...by	a
Poonaite,	remember!	Beware	of	the	Poonaites!	The	man	who	murdered	Gandhi,
Nathuram	 Godse,	 was	 a	 Poonaite;	 Poona	 is	 one	 of	 the	 strongholds	 of	 Hindu
orthodoxy.	I	have	knowingly	chosen	a	place	to	create	trouble	for	you!
When	Gandhi	was	shot	dead	he	didn't	say	Allah.	The	last	words	were	"Ram	--
Hey	Ram!
Oh	 Ram!"	 He	 forgot	 all	 about	 Allah.	 His	 whole	 life...but	 still	 deep	 down	 he
knows	that	he	is	a	Hindu.	The	Gita	he	says	is	his	mother.	And	who	is	his	father	--
the	Koran?	That	 he	never	 says	 anything	 about.	The	Gita	 is	 his	mother	but	 the
Koran	is	not	his	father.	And	he	chooses	words	from	the	Koran	which	are	really
nothing	but	echoes	of	the	Gita,	and	he	also	chooses	words	from	the	Bible	which
are	echoes	from	the	Gita.	He	is	REALLY
clinging	to	the	Gita;	the	Gita	is	the	criterion.	Whatsoever	is	in	the	Gita	is	right;	if
it	 is	 in	 the	Koran,	 then	 too	 it	 is	 right	 because	 it	 is	 in	 the	Gita.	He	 leaves	 out
everything	that	goes	against	the	Gita.	This	is	tolerance....
I	don't	 teach	 tolerance.	 I	 teach	 freedom	from	all	 the	nonsense	of	being	Hindu,
Mohammedan,	Christian.	Be	 free	 from	 all	 prejudices.	Be	 just	 a	 human	 being!
And	 in	 that	 freedom	you	will	 find	 great	 joy,	 and	 in	 that	 freedom.	 for	 the	 first
time	you	will	 feel	 love	 for	other	human	beings,	compassion,	brotherhood.	You
will	 start	 feeling	 the	whole	 universe	 as	 your	 family,	 your	 commune.	 And	 not
only	 with	 human	 beings	 --	 when	 the	 fascist	 in	 you	 has	 disappeared	 and	 the
fanatic	is	gone,	even	with	the	trees	and	the	birds	and	the	animals	you	will	have	a
communion.	You	will	be	constantly	in	a	beautiful	dialogue	with	existence.
Maria,	 drop	 all	 this	 nonsense.	 To	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 to	 be	 a	Mohammedan,	 to	 be	 a
Christian,	 to	be	a	 Jaina,	 to	be	a	Buddhist,	 these	are	 stupid	hangovers	 from	 the
past.	Be	finished	with	them,	and	in	a	single	blow	--	not	slowly,	not	gradually.	See
the	 point	 and	 be	 finished	with	 them	RIGHT	 now,	 this	 very	moment!	Because
who	knows?	 --	 tomorrow	may	 come,	may	not	 come.	Who	knows?	 --	 the	 next
moment	may	 come,	may	 not	 come.	 This	 is	 the	 only	moment	 available.	 Rebel
against	all	nonsense!	Be	free!
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	No	Question,	No	Answer
3	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909030
ShortTitle:
BESTIL03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 ALL	 QUESTIONS	 SEEM	 TO	 BE	 POINTLESS.	 ONLY	 THE
ANSWERLESS
QUESTION	OF	LIFE	REMAINS.
Anand	Ali,
IT	IS	SO.	ALL	QUESTIONS	NOT	only	seem	to	be	pointless,	they	are.	In	your
mind	there	is	still	a	lurking	doubt.	Hence	you	say:
ALL	QUESTIONS	SEEM	TO	BE	POINTLESS.
It	is	not	a	question	that	they	SEEM,	that	they	APPEAR	--	they	are.	The	moment
you	understand	that	they	are	pointless,	even	the	answerless	question	of	life	will
not	remain.
Then	 there	 is	 mystery	 --	 no	 questions,	 no	 answers.	 Then	 there	 is	 tremendous
mystery.
One	is	not	trying	to	solve	it	because	it	is	not	a	problem.	One	is	not	seeking	for
any	answer	because	it	is	not	a	question.	One	starts	LIVING	it.	And	the	day	you
start	living	life	as	a	mystery	you	have	entered	into	God.
Life	 understood	 as	 a	 question	 creates	 science;	 life	 understood	 as	 a	 mystery
creates	religion.
And	you	say:	ONLY	THE	ANSWERLESS	QUESTION	OF	LIFE	REMAINS.
If	it	is	answerless,	how	can	it	be	a	question?	A	question	Is	always	a	question	in
reference	to	an	answer;	an	answer	is	only	an	answer	in	reference	to	a	question.
They	 are	 together,	 halves	 of	 one	whole.	 If	 one	REALLY	disappears,	 the	 other
disappears	automatically.
That's	why	I	say	there	is	a	lurking	doubt	in	you:	"Maybe	there	is	some	question
which	is	NOT	pointless.	Maybe	I	have	still	 to	find	it.	Maybe	my	questions	are
pointless,	maybe	 the	questions	 that	 I	 know	ARE	pointless,	 but	who	knows?	 --
there	may	be	a	valid	question,	a	real	question."
There	is	none.
When	 this	becomes	a	 trust	 in	you	and	no	 lurking	doubt	 remains...because	 it	 is
doubt	that	creates	the	question,	it	is	doubt	that	becomes	a	question.	When	there
is	no	doubt	left,	when	you	know	that	nothing	can	be	known,	that	knowledge	is
impossible;	when	you	come	to	the	same	understanding	as	happened	to	Socrates	-
-	"I	know	only	one	 thing,	 that	 I	know	nothing"	--	 if	 that	 innocence	happens	 to
you,	 then	 nothing	 is	 left,	 not	 even	 an	 answerless	 question.	 The	 very	 word
'question'	becomes	irrelevant.
A	silence	is	left,	a	deep	silence	and	a	great	joy,	a	benediction	is	left.	Life	flows
through	you,	passes	through	you,	not	creating	any	question.	You	simply	live	it.
This	is	simplicity	--	not	the	cultivated	simplicity	of	a	SADHU	or	a	monk.	This	is
the	 simplicity	 of	 innocence,	 uncultivated.	 One	 has	 great	 wonder	 about
everything,	one	 lives	 in	awe.	One	can	worship	a	 tree,	one	can	worship	a	 rock,
because	the	moment	questions	are	gone	and	your	heart	is	full	of	the	mysterious
and	the	miraculous,	your	whole	life	becomes	a	prayer,	a	worship.
It	is	so	tremendously	unbelievable	that	we	are	alive	--	for	no	reason	at	all!	--	that
we	are	breathing,	that	we	can	see,	that	we	can	taste,	that	we	can	hear,	that	we	can
love,	 that	 our	 hearts	 are	 beating,	 that	 life	 is	 passing	 through	 us,	 that	 life	 has
chosen	us	as	its	vehicles.
Just	to	know	it	is	enough	to	be	grateful,	just	to	feel	it	is	enough	to	be	prayerful.
No	God	 is	needed	 to	pray	 to.	 If	you	pray	 to	a	God	your	prayer	 is	 false.	When
there	 is	 simply	 prayer,	 not	 addressed	 to	 anyone	 in	 particular,	 a	 kind	 of
prayerfulness,	 a	 state	 of	 praying...not	 a	 prayer	 to	 any	 God,	 Hindu,	 Christian,
Mohammedan,	because	they	are	all	manufactured	by	the	mind	of	man,	they	are
not	 true.	 ALL	 Gods	 are	 false.	 They	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 false	 because	 they	 are
answers	to	certain	questions	--	and	questions	are	false,	questioning	is	false,	and
the	Gods	are	answers	to	certain	questions.
Somebody	asks,	"Who	created	the	world?"	Now	that	question	becomes	a	thorn
in	the	flesh;	the	mind	cannot	rest	at	ease	unless	an	answer	is	found.	You	have	to
invent	an	answer	just	to	console	yourself.	Either	you	do	it	or	some	cunning	priest
will	do	it	for	you	on	your	behalf,	will	say,	"God	created	the	world."	The	question
was	false	--	how	can	a	false	question	lead	to	a	right	answer?	The	very	premise
was	false,	hence	the	conclusion	is	false.
And	 people	 are	 so	 stupid	 that	 they	 accept	 such	 an	 answer:	 "God	 created	 the
world."	And	they	don	t	ask	"Who	created	God?"	Yes,	sometimes	small	children
ask	 that:	 "Who	 created	 God?"	 Then	 we	 immediately	 hush	 them	 up.	 We	 say,
"Wait!	You	are	too	young	for	such	deep	mysteries.	When	you	become	grown-up
you	will	know."	As	if	you	have	known	by	becoming	grown-up.	But	you	cannot
accept	your	ignorance.
You	are	untrue	even	to	children.	You	are	untrue,	deceiving	dishonest.	insincere,
even	to	innocent	children.	You	go	on	pretending	as	if	you	know	and	you	go	on
telling	 them	 that	 they	 will	 also	 know	 when	 they	 are	 grown-up,	 more
experienced.	 And	 they	 will	 repeat	 the	 same	 stupidity	 to	 their	 own	 children.
That's	 how	 stupidities	 are	 perpetuated	 for	 centuries	 Ask	 a	 question	 and
somebody	is	bound	to	supply	an	answer.	If	nobody	supplies	one,	YOU	are	going
to	invent	one	yourself.	This	is	not	true	religion;	a	religion	that	is	based	on	a	false
answer	is	not	true	religion.	And	all	the	Gods	have	been	created	in	the	same	way,
and	all	the	scriptures	too	--	just	to	console	you,	just	to	keep	you	in	a	false	state	of
knowledge,	 because	 you	 are	 so	 afraid	 of	 being	 innocent,	 you	 are	 so	 afraid	 of
being	ignorant.
Remember:	ignorance	is	not	stupidity,	knowledge	is.	Ignorance	is	innocence.	No
question,	no	answer...one	simply	 lives	moment-to-moment.	And	one	is	grateful
because	the	universe	is.	One	is	grateful	because	the	sun	rises	and	the	birds	sing
and	the	flowers	bloom	and	the	clouds	float	and	in	the	night	the	sky	becomes	full
of	 stars.	 One	 is	 simply	 grateful	 because	 there	 are	 mountains	 and	 rivers	 and
oceans	and	deserts.	One	is	simply	grateful	because	there	are	animals	and	human
beings.	 Such	 an	 incredible	 existence,	 so	 far	 out!	 Such	 a	 celebration,	 so
psychedelic,	so	colorful!	Such	a	dance	of	energy!
When	feeling	it	you	simply	bow	down,	you	simply	bow	down	on	the	earth.	Not
in	a	temple,	not	in	a	mosque,	not	in	a	GURUDWARA,	not	in	a	church	--	they	are
all	man-made.	When	 you	 simply	 bow	down	before	 the	 sky,	 before	 the	 sunset,
with	no	motive...what	can	you	ask	from	a	sunset?	You	cannot	ask	for	money,	you
cannot	ask	for	power,	you	cannot	ask	for	prestige.	It	will	 look	so	stupid!	What
can	you	ask	from	a	tree?
But	when	you	go	into	a	temple,	into	a	church,	you	start	asking	for	these	things.
Your	prayer	is	rooted	in	some	motive,	and	a	prayer	rooted	in	any	motive	is	ugly,
a	prayer	addressed	to	somebody	is	ugly.
But	just	a	prayerfulness,	a	thankfulness,	a	pure	gratitude...the	sheer	joy	that	we
are	part	of	such	a	mysterious	existence!
Anand	Ali,	you	are	very	close	to	understanding	that	all	questions	are	pointless,
but	you	have	not	yet	touched	the	target;	you	are	going	round	and	round.
You	say:	ALL	QUESTIONS	SEEM	TO	BE	POINTLESS.
Why	 do	 you	 use	 the	 word	 'seem'?	 There	 is	 still	 some	 possibility:	 "Maybe,
perhaps	there	is	a	question	that	is	not	known	to	me	yet	which	is	not	pointless."
Hence	your	second	statement:
ONLY	THE	ANSWERLESS	QUESTION	OF	LIFE	REMAINS.
Although	you	say	it	is	answerless,	still	you	call	it	a	question.	Be	very	watchful
about	words.	Be	very	careful	what	you	say,	how	you	say	it	--	because	it	shows
your	 state	 of	 consciousness.	 You	 are	 very	 close,	 missing	 the	 target	 only	 by
inches.	 But	 whether	 you	 miss	 the	 target	 by	 inches	 or	 by	 miles	 it	 makes	 no
difference	--	you	miss	it	all	the	same.
Become	a	little	more	alert.	Let	all	questions	go,	and	all	answers.	Remain	in	that
silence	that	is	left	behind.	Become	that	silence,	BE	that	silence.
C.	E.	Bignall	says:
Where	shall	wisdom	be	found.
be	still	and	know.
seek	the	strength	of	no	desire.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	TRUE	WISDOM?
Prem	Samadhi,
WISDOM	CANNOT	BE	TRUE	OR	UNTRUE.	Wisdom	is	simply	wisdom.	It	is
truth.
There	is	no	possibility	of	there	ever	being	an	untrue	wisdom.	All	knowledge	is
untrue:	all	wisdom	is	true.	Knowledge	is	borrowed,	hence	it	is	untrue.	It	is	yours,
that's	why	 is	 it	untrue.	 It	may	have	been	 true	 to	 the	person	who	 imparted	 it	 to
you.
The	Buddha	talking	to	his	disciples	is	talking	wisdom,	but	the	moment	it	reaches
the	disciples	it	becomes	knowledge.	Wisdom	falls	from	its	heights	to	the	level	of
the	listeners	and	becomes	knowledge.
Hence	Buddhas	have	always	been	very	much	aware	that	they	impart	something
of	their	presence,	something	of	their	silence,	something	of	their	joy,	rather	than
imparting	 their	 wisdom.	 Even	 if	 they	 have	 to	 talk,	 they	 talk	 only	 in	 order	 to
persuade	you	to	be	silent.
Even	 if	 they	 use	 words,	 those	 words	 are	 used	 to	 create	 a	 wordless	 state	 of
consciousness	in	you.
So	the	first	 thing,	Prem	Samadhi:	wisdom	as	such	is	 truth,	 it	cannot	be	untrue.
Just	as	light	is	light	and	cannot	be	dark,	just	as	life	is	life	and	cannot	be	death,
just	as	logic	is	love	and	cannot	be	hate.	If	it	is	hate,	it	is	not	love.
Wisdom	 is	 intrinsically	 true	 because	 it	 is	 an	 existential	 experience.	 It	 is	 not
something	known	from	others,	it	is	not	something	gathered	from	the	scriptures;
it	is	something	that	grows	in	your	heart.	It	is	a	growth,	not	an	accumulation.	It	is
experience,	not	information.
Knowledge	makes	you	learned:	wisdom	makes	you	innocent.	Knowledge	is	very
ego-fulfilling,	very	ego-strengthening.	The	ego	feeds	on	knowledge;	it	is	the	best
tonic	for	the	ego.	But	wisdom	happens	only	when	ego	has	disappeared;	wisdom
appears	only	on	the	death	of	the	ego.	The	death	of	the	ego	is	the	birth	of	wisdom.
Mind	 is	 interested	 in	 knowledge	 not	 in	wisdom,	 because	 for	wisdom	you	will
have	to	create	a	space	called	no-mind.	And,	naturally,	mind	is	afraid	of	your	ever
becoming	interested	in	wisdom,	because	mind	does	not	want	to	commit	suicide.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 suicide	 of	 the	 mind,	 so	 is	 meditation,	 so	 is	 wisdom.	 These	 are
different	 names	 for	 the	 same	 phenomenon,	 different	 aspects	 of	 the	 same
diamond.
Knowledge	depends	on	words.	You	can	easily	become	knowledgeable	by	sitting
in	a	library,	but	you	cannot	become	wise	that	way.	To	become	wise	you	will	have
to	be	in	communion	with	a	wise	man.	For	knowledge	all	that	is	required	of	you
is	 that	you	should	be	a	 student,	 that	you	should	be	 full	of	questions,	 inquiries;
you	 should	 be	 able	 to	 learn	 from	 scriptures,	 books,	 teachers,	 universities,
libraries.	 Your	 memory	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 rich,	 your	 biocomputer
becomes	full	of	information,	but	wisdom	is	not	arrived	at	that	way.
Wisdom	is	more	or	less	a	love	affair	with	Master.	One	has	to	be	a	disciple,	not
only	a	student.	The	student	keeps	a	distance	from	the	Master.	For	him	the	Master
is	only	a	teacher;	he	is	interested	in	the	Master	because	of	his	teaching.	Really	he
is	 interested	in	 the	 teaching,	not	 in	 the	being	of	 the	Master.	The	disciple	 is	not
interested	 in	 teaching	 because	 one	 thing	 he	 has	 come	 to	 understand:	 that
knowledge	can	be	taught	but	wisdom	can	only	be	caught.
Wisdom	is	contagious.	You	have	to	be	available	to	a	Master,	to	his	being.	He	has
become	afire,	your	candle	of	 the	heart	 is	still	unlit;	 if	you	become	available	 to
the	 fire	 of	 the	Master	 you	 can	 also	 become	 a	 lit	 candle,	 you	 can	 also	 become
aflame.
To	 be	 aflame	 with	 silence,	 with	 joy,	 is	 wisdom.	 It	 is	 not	 through	 logic	 but
through	 love.	 It	 is	 not	 through	 words	 but	 through	 a	 wordless	 state	 called
meditation	or	a	state	of	no-mind,	satori,	samadhi.
Beware	 of	 learning,	 otherwise	 you	 may	 never	 become	 wise.	 To	 be
knowledgeable	is	very	easy;	it	is	not	risky,	it	is	safe.	To	move	into	the	dimension
of	 wisdom	 is	 risky;	 it	 is	 going	 into	 the	 unknown,	 into	 the	 uncharted.	 Great
courage	is	needed,	guts	are	needed.
And	when	you	have	tasted	something	of	wisdom,	knowledge	looks	so	stupid,	so
utterly	stupid.	But	if	you	have	not	tasted	anything	of	wisdom,	knowledge	seems
to	be	of	tremendous	value.
Zalewski	 got	 a	 job	 as	 a	 delivery	 boy	 in	 a	 pet	 shop.	 One	 day	 he	 was	 told	 to
deliver	a	pet	rabbit	to	Mrs.	Caldwell,	Route	2	--	Box	4.
"You	better	write	that	down	in	case	I	forget	it,"	said	the	boy.
Slipping	 the	address	 into	his	pocket,	Zalewski	 started	off	on	his	 errand.	Every
few	minutes	he	glanced	at	the	address	and	said,	"I	know	where	I	am	going:	Mrs.
Caldwell,	Route	2	--	Box	4."
Everything	went	smoothly	until	he	hit	a	huge	hole	in	the	road.	The	truck	landed
in	a	ditch	and	the	rabbit	began	to	run	for	its	life	across	an	open	field.
Zalewski	 stood	 there	 laughing	 uproariously.	 A	 passerby	 stopped	 and	 asked,
"What's	so	funny?"
"Did	you	see	 that	crazy	 rabbit	 running	across	 that	 field?"	said	 the	Polack.	 "He
does	not	know	where	he	is	going	because	I	have	got	the	address	in	my	pocket."
That	is	the	state	of	the	knowledgeable	man:	he	has	got	the	address	in	his	pocket.
He	knows	where	God	is,	he	knows	where	heaven	is,	he	knows	where	hell	is.	He
knows	everything	--	all	is	in	his	pocket.	He	carries	scriptures,	AND	he	believes
in	the	letter	and	he	misses	the	spirit.	He	goes	on	believing	in	words,	he	believes
too	much	in	the	words.
And	words	are	useful	if	you	can	understand	the	spirit	that	is	hidden	behind	them,
that	is	not	so	apparent,	not	so	visible.
In	the	hands	of	a	meditative	person	words	can	become	of	infinite	value,	because
they	can	be	indicators.	But	in	the	hands	of	non-meditators	words	are	dangerous,
very	dangerous,	because	the	spirit	is	completely	missed	and	one	starts	believing
in	the	hollow,	empty	word,	and	one	starts	following	the	word.
That	is	what	is	happening	to	the	Christians,	to	the	Hindus,	to	the	Mohammedans,
to	the	Jainas,	to	the	Buddhists	--	all	are	believers	in	words.	Somebody	believes	in
the	Koran	and	somebody	in	the	Gita	and	somebody	in	the	Bible,	and	they	ALL
are	missing	the	spirit.
Because	to	know	the	spirit	of	the	Bible,	you	will	have	to	come	to	certain	inner
spaces	where	you	become	acquainted	with	Moses,	with	Jesus....	Unless	you	have
a	direct,	inner	contact	with	Moses	and	Jesus	you	will	not	understand	the	Bible.
But	following	the	word	you	may	look	Very	important	--	to	people	who	are	just
like	you,	not	different	in	any	way.	They	also	believe	in	words,	you	also	believe
in	words;	both	live	in	the	same	kind	of	ignorance.	This	is	not	wisdom.
Wisdom	 is	 an	 interior	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 the	 discovery	 of	 the	 spirit	 of	 all	 the
Buddhas.
And	there	is	no	need	to	go	into	the	history	of	the	Buddhas.	You	have	only	to	go
within	 yourself,	 because	 you	 contain	 the	 whole	 past	 of	 existence,	 the	 infinite
past,	and	you	also	contain	the	infinite	future.
A	mailman	was	delivering	his	mail	during	 the	Christmas	season.	At	one	house
the	door	was	opened	by	a	beautiful	woman	wearing	a	sheer	negligee.
"Would	you	like	to	come	in?"	cooed	the	woman.
"Sure,"	replied	the	startled	mailman.
She	led	him	up	to	her	bedroom	and	made	love	to	him.	When	they	were	finished
she	got	 up	 and	handed	 the	man	 a	 dollar.	 "Why	 the	dollar?"	 asked	 the	puzzled
mailman.	"Well,"
replied	 the	woman,	 "when	 I	 asked	my	 husband	what	 to	 give	 the	mailman	 for
Christmas	he	said	'Just	give	him	a	buck	and	fuck	him!'"
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 GURDJIEFF	 TALKS	 ABOUT	 THREE	 ASPECTS	 OF	 BEING:
ESSENCE,	 FALSE	 PERSONALITY	AND	 TRUE	 PERSONALITY	 --	 FALSE
PERSONALITY
BEING	A	FALSE,	CONDITIONED	VEHICLE	FOR	OUR	REAL	ESSENCE,
AND
TRUE	PERSONALITY	BEING	THAT	WHICH	CAN	BE	DEVELOPED	AND
CONVEYS	AND	PROTECTS	OUR	REAL	SELF.
PRIMITIVE	 PEOPLES	 LIVE	 IN	 THE	 ESSENCE	 STATE	 LIKE	 ANIMALS.
THEY
ARE	 BEAUTIFUL	 BUT	 NOT	 ENLIGHTENED.	 IF	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 IS
NATURAL
AND	OUR	BIRTHRIGHT,	WHY	ARE	NOT	THE	PRIMITIVE	PEOPLES
ENLIGHTENED,	OR	ARE	THEY?
I	 HEAR	 YOU	 TELL	 US	 TO	 ACCEPT	 THE	 ANIMAL	 THAT	 WE	 ARE,
RETURN	TO
ESSENCE.	 I	 HAVE	 READ	 GURDJIEFF	 SAYING	 YOU	 MUST	 BECOME
YOUR
TRUE	 SELF	 --	 THE	 MASTER.	 HE	 SAID	 BEWARE	 OF	 BEING
SWALLOWED	BY
THE	 ANIMAL.	 GIVE	 IT	 SOME	 CIGARETTES	 OR	 ICE	 CREAM	 AND	 IT
WILL	BE
CALMED.
WHAT	IS	TRUE	PERSONALITY	AND	WHAT	IS	ITS	RELATIONSHIP	TO
ESSENCE?
Paul	Maniloff,
THERE	 IS	 NO	 PERSONALITY.	 Personality	 as	 such	 is	 false.	 The	 word
'personality'	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 It	 comes	 from	 'persona';	 persona	 means	 a
mask.	In	ancient	Greek	drama	the	actors	used	to	wear	masks;	those	masks	were
called	persona	--	persona	because	the	sound	was	coming	from	behind	the	mask.
'Sona'	means	sound.	The	masks	were	apparent	to	the	audience	and	from	behind
the	mask	the	sound	was	coming.	From	that	word
'persona'	has	come	the	word	'personality'.
All	 personality	 is	 false.	Good	personality,	 bad	personality,	 the	personality	of	 a
sinner	 and	 the	 personality	 of	 a	 saint	 --	 all	 are	 false.	You	 can	wear	 a	 beautiful
mask	or	an	ugly	mask,	it	doesn't	make	any	difference.
The	real	thing	is	your	essence.	But	the	question	is	relevant.	If	essence	is	the	real
thing,	as	I	say,	then	Maniloff	asks:
PRIMITIVE	 PEOPLES	 LIVE	 IN	 THE	 ESSENCE	 STATE	 JUST	 LIKE
ANIMALS.
THEY	ARE	BEAUTIFUL	BUT	NOT	ENLIGHTENED.
It	 is	 true	 --	 they	 cannot	 be	 enlightened.	 For	 them	 to	 become	 enlightened,	 first
they	 will	 have	 to	 create	 a	 personality.	 Enlightenment	 is	 dropping	 of	 the
personality;	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 personality	 to	 drop.	 You	 will	 feel	 a	 little
puzzled:	Why	can't	one	become	enlightened	when	one	has	no	personality?
Personality	is	also	a	necessary	part	of	growth.	It	is	like	if	you	catch	hold	of	a	fish
in	the	sea	and	you	throw	it	on	the	shore;	the	fish	jumps	back	into	the	sea.	Now
for	the	first	time	it	will	know	that	it	has	always	lived	in	the	sea;	for	the	first	time
it	 will	 know	 that	 "The	 sea	 is	 my	 life."	 Up	 to	 now,	 before	 it	 was	 caught	 and
thrown	on	the	shore,	it	may	not	have	ever	thought	of	the	sea	at	all;	it	may	have
been	utterly	oblivious	of	the	sea.	To	know	something,	first	you	have	to	lose	it.
To	be	aware	of	paradise,	first	you	have	to	lose	it.	Unless	it	is	lost	AND	regained
you	will	not	understand	the	beauty	of	it.
Adam	and	Eve	had	 to	 lose	 the	Garden	of	Eden;	 that	 is	part	of	natural	growth.
Only	Adam	leaving	the	beautiful	Garden	of	God	can	become	a	Christ	one	day	--
he	can	come	back.
Adam	 leaving	Eden	 is	 just	 like	 the	 fish	being	caught	 and	 thrown	on	 the	 shore
and	Jesus	is	the	fish	jumping	back	into	the	sea.
The	 primitive	 people	 cannot	 become	 enlightened.	 They	 are	 beautiful,
spontaneous,	natural,	but	utterly	unaware	of	what	they	are;	they	don't	have	any
awareness.	 They	 live	 joyously	 but	 their	 joy	 is	 unconscious.	 First	 they	 have	 to
lose	 it.	They	have	 to	become	civilized,	 educated,	knowledgeable;	 they	have	 to
become	 a	 culture,	 a	 civilization,	 a	 religion.	 They	 have	 to	 lose	 all	 their
spontaneity,	 they	have	 to	 forget	 all	 about	 their	 essence,	 and	 then	 suddenly	one
day	they	start	missing	it.	It	is	bound	to	happen.
That	is	happening	all	over	the	world,	and	it	is	happening	in	such	great	measure
because	this	is	the	first	time	that	humanity	has	really	become	civilized.
The	more	civilized	a	country	is,	the	more	is	the	feeling	of	meaninglessness.	The
backward	 countries	 still	 don't	 have	 that	 feeling,	 they	 can't	 have.	 To	 have	 that
feeling	of	inner	emptiness,	meaninglessness,	absurdity,	one	has	to	become	very
civilized.
Hence	I	am	all	in	favor	of	science,	because	it	helps	the	fish	to	be	thrown	on	the
shore.
And	once	on	the	hot	shore,	in	the	hot	sand,	the	fish	starts	feeling	thirsty.	It	had
never	 felt	 thirsty	 before.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 it	 misses	 the	 ocean	 around,	 the
coolness,	the	life-giving	waters.	It	is	dying.
That	is	the	situation	of	the	civilized	man,	the	educated	man:	he	is	dying.	Great
inquiry	is	born.	One	wants	to	know	what	should	be	done,	how	one	can	enter	into
the	ocean	of	life	again.
In	 the	 backward	 countries,	 for	 example	 in	 India,	 there	 is	 no	 such	 feeling	 of
meaninglessness.	 Even	 though	 a	 few	 Indian	 intellectuals	 write	 about	 it,	 their
writing	has	no	depth	because	it	does	not	correspond	to	the	situation	of	the	Indian
mind.	A	few	Indian	intellectuals	write	about	meaninglessness,	absurdity,	almost
in	 the	 same	way	as	Soren	Kierkegaard,	 Jean-Paul	Sartre,	 Jaspers,	Heidegger....
They	have	read	about	these	people	or	they	may	have	visited	the	West,	and	they
start	talking	about	meaninglessness,	nausea,	absurdity,	but	it	sounds	phony.
I	have	talked	to	Indian	intellectuals	--	they	sound	very	phony	because	it	is	NOT
their	 OWN	 feeling;	 it	 is	 borrowed.	 It	 is	 Soren	 Kierkegaard	 speaking	 through
them,	it	is	Friedrich	Nietzsche	speaking	through	them;	it	is	not	their	own	voice.
They	are	not	 really	 aware	of	what	Soren	Kierkegaard	 is	 saying;	 they	have	not
suffered	the	same	anguish.	The	feeling	is	alien,	foreign;	they	have	learnt	it	like
parrots.	They	talk	about	it,	but	their	whole	life	says	and	shows	something	else.
What	they	say	and	what	their	life	shows	are	diametrically	opposite.
It	is	very	very	rare	that	any	Indian	intellectual	ever	commits	suicide	--	I	have	not
heard	of	it	--	but	many	Western	intellectuals	HAVE	committed	suicide.	It	is	very
rare	 to	come	across	an	 Indian	 intellectual	who	goes	mad;	 it	 is	 a	very	common
phenomenon	 in	 the	 West,	 many	 intellectuals	 have	 gone	 mad.	 The	 real
intellectuals	have	almost	inevitably	gone	mad;	it	is	their	life	experience.
The	 civilization	 all	 around,	 the	 over-developed	 personality,	 have	 become	 an
imprisonment.	They	are	being	killed	by	it.	The	very	weight	of	civilization	is	too
much	 and	 unbearable.	 They	 are	 feeling	 suffocated,	 they	 can't	 breathe.	 Even
suicide	seems	to	be	a	liberation,	or	if	they	cannot	commit	suicide	then	madness
seems	 to	 be	 an	 escape.	 At	 least	 by	 becoming	 mad	 one	 forgets	 all	 about
civilization,	 one	 forgets	 all	 about	 the	 nonsense	 that	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 name	 of
civilization.	Madness	is	an	escape	from	civilization.
Do	you	know	that	primitive	people	don't	go	mad?	It	is	only	the	civilized	man's
privilege.
Primitive	people	don't	commit	suicide;	again	it	is	the	civilized	man's	privilege.
But	 to	 feel	 that	 life	 is	 utterly	meaningless	 is	 to	 be	on	 a	 crossroads:	 either	 you
choose	suicide	or	you	choose	sannyas;	either	you	choose	madness	or	you	choose
meditation.	It	is	a	great	turning-point!
Maniloff,	ALL	personality	is	false.	There	is	an	essence	inside	which	is	not	false,
which	you	bring	with	your	birth,	which	has	always	been	there.
Somebody	 asks	 Jesus:	 "Do	 you	 know	 anything	 about	 Abraham?"	 And	 Jesus
says,	"Before	Abraham	ever	was,	I	am."
Now	what	 an	 absurd	 statement,	 but	 also	of	 tremendous	 significance.	Abraham
and	Jesus	-
-	 there	 is	 a	 big	 gap	 between	 them;	 Abraham	 preceded	 Jesus	 by	 almost	 three
thousand	years.	And	Jesus	says,	"Before	Abraham	ever	was,	I	am."	He	is	talking
about	the	essence.
He	is	not	talking	about	Jesus,	he	is	talking	about	the	Christ.	He	is	talking	about
the	eternal.	He	is	not	talking	about	the	personal,	he	is	talking	about	the	universal.
The	Zen	people	 say	 that	unless	you	come	 to	know	your	original	 face	 that	you
had	before	your	father	was	ever	born,	you	will	not	become	enlightened.	What	is
this	original	face?
Even	before	your	 father	was	born	you	had	 it,	and	you	will	have	 it	again	when
you	have	died	and	your	body	has	been	burnt	and	nothing	is	left	except	ashes	--
then	you	will	have	it	again.
What	 is	 this	 original	 face?	 The	 essence	 --	 call	 it	 the	 soul,	 the	 spirit,	 the	 self.
These	are	words	 signifying	 the	 same	 thing.	You	are	born	as	 an	essence,	but	 if
you	are	left	as	an	essence	without	the	society	creating	a	personality	for	you,	you
will	remain	animal-like.	It	has	happened	to	some	people.
Just	six	months	ago,	again	one	child	was	found	somewhere	in	North	India	near
the	Himalayas,	 a	child	of	eleven	years	who	had	been	brought	up	by	wolves,	 a
wolf-child	 --	a	human	child	brought	up	by	wolves.	Of	course	wolves	can	only
give	 the	personality	of	a	wolf;	 so	 the	child	was	human,	 the	essence	was	 there,
but	he	had	the	personality	of	a	wolf.
Many	times	it	has	happened.	Wolves	seem	to	be	capable	of	bringing	up	human
children;	they	seem	to	have	a	certain	love,	compassion,	for	human	children.	But
these	 children	 are	 not	 enlightened.	 They	 don't	 have	 any	 of	 the	 corruption	 that
human	 society	 is	 bound	 to	 give;	 their	 beings	 are	 not	 polluted,	 they	 are	 pure
essence.	They	are	like	the	fish	in	the	ocean	--	they	don't	know	who	they	are.	And
it	 is	 very	 difficult	 once	 they	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 by	 animals	 to	 give	 them	 a
human	personality;	it	is	too	hard	a	job.
Almost	all	the	children	have	died	in	that	effort.	They	cannot	learn	human	ways,
it	 is	 too	 late	 now.	 Their	 mold	 is	 cast;	 they	 have	 already	 become	 fixed
personalities.	They	have	 learnt	how	 to	be	wolves.	They	 run	 like	wolves	on	all
fours	and	they	are	strong	like	wolves.	You	cannot	fight	with	a	wolf-child;	he	will
kill	you,	he	will	eat	you	raw.	They	are	cannibals!	They	don't	know	any	morality,
they	 don't	 know	 any	 religion.	 They	 are	 not	 Hindu,	 Christian,	 Mohammedan.
They	don't	bother	about	God	--	they	have	never	heard	of	him.	All	that	they	know
is	the	life	of	a	wolf.
If	human	personality	is	a	barrier,	it	is	a	barrier	only	if	you	cling	to	it.	It	has	to	be
passed	through:	it	is	a	ladder,	it	is	a	bridge.	One	should	not	make	one's	house	on
the	bridge,	true,	but	one	has	to	pass	over	the	bridge.
Human	 personality	 is	 partial.	 In	 a	 better	 society	 we	 will	 give	 children
personalities	 but	 also	 the	 capacity	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 them.	 That	 is	what	 is	missing
right	 now:	 we	 give	 them	 personalities,	 too	 tight	 personalities,	 so	 that	 they
become	encapsulated,	 imprisoned,	and	we	never	give	 them	a	way	 to	get	 rid	of
them.	It	is	like	giving	a	child	steel	clothes	and	not	giving	him	any	idea	of	how	to
unlock,	how	to	throw	the	clothes,	one	day	when	he	is	becoming	bigger.
What	we	are	doing	with	human	beings	is	exactly	what	was	done	in	ancient	China
with	the	feet	of	women.	From	the	very	childhood	girls	were	given	iron	shoes	so
that	their	feet	never	grew,	they	remained	very	small.	Small	feet	were	loved	very
much,	they	were	appreciated	very	much.	Only	aristocratic	families	could	afford
them,	 because	 it	 was	 almost	 impossible	 for	 the	 woman	 to	 do	 anything.	 The
woman	could	not	even	walk	 rightly;	 the	 feet	were	 too	small	and	 the	body	was
big.	The	feet	were	crippled;	she	had	to	walk	with	a	support.	Now	a	poor	woman
could	not	afford	it,	so	small	feet	was	the	symbol	of	the	aristocracy.
We	can	laugh	at	it,	but	we	go	on	doing	the	same	thing.	Now	in	the	West	women
are	walking	on	such	absurd	shoes,	such	high	heels!	It	 is	okay	if	you	do	such	a
thing	 in	 a	 circus,	 but	 such	 high	 heels	 are	 not	 for	 walking.	 But	 they	 are
appreciated,	because	when	a	woman	walks	on	very	high	heels	she	becomes	more
sexually	 attractive:	 her	 buttocks	 stand	 out	 more	 prominently.	 And	 because
walking	is	difficult,	her	buttocks	move	more	than	they	would	do	ordinarily.	But
this	is	accepted,	then	it	is	okay.	Other	societies	will	laugh	at	it!
All	 over	 the	 world	 women	 are	 using	 bras	 and	 they	 think	 that	 it	 is	 very
conventional	and	traditional.	My	sannyasins	are	not	using	bras,	and	that	is	one	of
the	greatest	criticisms	against	 them	from	the	Hindus.	 In	 fact	 the	bra	makes	 the
woman	look	more	sexual;	it	is	just	to	give	her	body	a	shape	that	she	has	not	got.
It	 is	 to	help	her	so	 that	 the	breasts	can	stand	out	and	can	look	very	young,	not
sagging.	 And	 these	 Hindu	 women	 think	 they	 are	 being	 very	 religious	 and
orthodox.	They	are	simply	befooling	themselves	and	nobody	else	--	the	bra	is	a
sexual	symbol.
Just	 like	 the	bra,	 there	are	 societies	 in	Africa,	 a	 few	primitive	 societies,	which
use	strange	 things.	Lips	are	made	bigger	and	 thicker.	From	the	very	childhood
weights	 are	 hung	 on	 the	 lips	 so	 that	 they	 become	 very	 thick,	 big.	 That	 is	 a
symbol	of	a	very	sexual	woman	--
thicker	and	bigger	lips	can	of	course	give	a	better	kiss!
In	 some	primitive	 societies	 the	man	even	used	 to	wear	 a	 certain	 sheath	on	his
genital	organs	to	make	them	look	bigger,	just	as	women	are	using	bras.	Now	we
laugh	at	such	foolish	people,	but	it	is	the	SAME	story.	Even	the	younger	people
all	over	the	world	are	using	very	tight	pants	--	that	is	just	to	show	their	genitals.
But	once	a	thing	is	accepted,	nobody	takes	any	note	of	it.
Civilization	should	not	become	a	tight	enclosure.	It	is	absolutely	necessary	that
you	should	have	a	personality,	but	you	should	have	a	personality	which	can	be
put	on	and	off	easily,	just	like	loose	garments,	not	made	of	steel.	Just	cotton	will
do,	so	that	you	can	put	them	off	and	on;	you	need	not	continuously	wear	them.
That's	what	I	call	a	man	of	understanding:	he	who	lives	in	his	essence,	but	as	far
as	the	society	is	concerned	he	moves	with	a	personality.	He	uses	the	personality;
he	is	the	master	of	his	own	being.
The	society	needs	a	certain	personality.	If	you	bring	your	essence	into	the	society
you	 will	 be	 creating	 trouble	 for	 yourself	 and	 for	 others.	 People	 will	 not
understand	your	essence;	your	truth	may	be	too	bitter	for	them,	your	truth	may
be	too	disturbing	for	them.
There	is	no	need!	You	need	not	go	naked	in	the	society;	you	can	wear	clothes.
But	I	have	heard	about	a	nun	who	used	to	take	her	bath	with	clothes	on.	When
other	 nuns	 came	 to	 hear	 about	 it	 they	 asked,	 "What	 nonsense!	Why	 can't	 you
undress	in	your	bathroom?	There	is	nobody	looking."
She	 said,	 "No,	 but	 the	 Bible	 says	 God	 is	 watching	 everywhere."	 So	 the	 nun
cannot	even	undress	in	the	bathroom	because	God	is	watching	--	as	if	God	is	a
peeping	Tom!	And	if	God	can	watch	even	behind	locked	doors,	can't	he	watch
inside	your	clothes?	He	can	watch	 there	 too!	 If	walls	 cannot	prevent	him,	 just
your	garments,	how	can	they	prevent	him?
One	should	be	able	to	be	naked	in	one's	own	house,	playing	with	one's	children;
sipping	tea	on	a	summer	morning	in	the	garden,	on	the	lawn,	one	should	be	able
to	be	naked.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 to	 your	 office	 naked	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need!	 Clothes	 are
perfectly	good;	there	is	no	necessity	to	expose	yourself	 to	each	and	everybody.
That	 will	 be	 exhibitionism,	 that	 will	 be	 another	 extreme.	 One	 extreme	 is	 that
people	cannot	even	go	 to	bed	without	clothes	on;	another	extreme	is	 that	 there
are	 Jaina	 DIGAMBARA	 monks	 moving	 naked	 in	 the	 marketplace,	 or	 naked
Hindu	SADHUS.	And	strange	 is	 the	 thing:	 that	 these	Jainas	and	 these	Hindus,
they	object	to	MY	people	because	they	are	not	wearing	proper	clothes.
Now,	 in	 a	 hot	 country	 like	 India	 people	 coming	 from	 the	West	 find	 it	 really
difficult	to	wear	too	many	clothes.	It	looks	so	absurd	to	the	Western	seeker	who
comes	here	to	see	Indians	with	ties	and	coats.	It	looks	so	absurd!	It	is	okay	in	the
West	 --	 it	 is	 too	 cold	 and	 the	 tie	 is	 protective	 --	 but	 in	 India	 it	 is	 an	 effort	 to
commit	suicide.	In	the	West	 it	 is	okay	to	have	your	shoes	and	socks	on,	but	 in
India?	 But	 imitative	 people!	 They	 are	 moving	 the	 whole	 day	 with	 shoes	 and
socks	on	in	a	hot	country	like	India.	The	Western	dress	in	India	is	not	relevant	--
tight	pants	and	coat	and	tie	and	hat	--	it	simply	makes	you	look	ridiculous.	India
needs	loose	garments.	But	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	other	extreme,	that	you
start	running	naked,	bicycling	naked	into	the	marketplace.	It	will	unnecessarily
create	trouble	for	you	and	for	others.
But	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 the	 people	 who	 have	 always	 worshipped	 naked
SADHUS
and	have	never	raised	any	problem,	for	them	I	am	creating	a	trouble.	For	them	I
look	 as	 if	 I	 am	 a	 dangerous	 person	 because	 my	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 wearing
proper	clothes.
One	 should	 be	 natural,	 and	by	 being	 natural	 I	mean	one	 should	 be	 capable	 of
putting	on	the	personality	when	needed,	in	society.	It	functions	like	a	lubricant,	it
helps,	because	 there	are	 thousands	of	people.	Lubricants	are	needed,	otherwise
people	 will	 be	 constantly	 in	 conflict,	 clashing	 against	 each	 other.	 Lubricants
help;	they	keep	your	life	smooth.
Personality	is	good	when	you	are	communicating	with	others,	but	personality	is
a	barrier	when	you	start	communing	with	yourself.	Personality	is	good	when	you
are	relating	with	human	beings;	personality	 is	a	barrier	when	you	start	 relating
with	existence	itself,	with	God.
Maniloff,	 to	me	there	are	only	two	things:	the	essence	and	the	personality.	The
personality	is	good	as	a	means,	the	essence	is	the	end.	And	personalities	are	not
real	and	unreal.
You	ask:	WHY	ARE	NOT	THE	PRIMITIVE	PEOPLE	ENLIGHTENED?
They	are	not	enlightened	because	 they	don't	have	any	personalities	yet.	Unless
you	have	a	personality	you	cannot	drop	it.	Unless	you	have	a	properly	developed
mind	you	cannot	enter	into	the	state	of	no-mind.	Unless	you	have	an	ego,	well-
formed,	mature,	you	cannot	surrender.
These	 things	 look	 like	 puzzles	 but	 they	 are	 not.	 If	 you	 just	 contemplate	 over
these	things,	they	are	very	simple	to	understand.	What	do	you	have	to	surrender
if	you	don't	have	any	ego?	Hence,	first	the	ego	has	to	be	developed.	But	the	ego
should	 be	 developed	 and	 side	 by	 side	 another	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 developed:	 the
capacity	to	drop	the	ego.	Man	has	to	learn	this	paradox	so	when	the	need	arises
you	can	drop	the	ego.	Then	you	are	always	the	master,	and	the	mastery	is	always
of	the	essence.	But	if	you	don't	have	any	personality	you	will	not	be	the	master,
because	you	don't	have	any	slave	to	be	a	master	of.	The	essence	and	personality
are	both	needed,	then	the	essence	can	be	the	master.
It	 is	not	so	ordinarily:	the	personality	becomes	the	master	and	essence	is	either
completely	 reduced	 to	 a	 slave	 or	 completely	 forgotten	 and	 thrown	 into	 the
basement	of	your	unconsciousness.	The	education	is	faulty.
MY	vision	of	a	right	education	is	to	teach	people	how	to	grow	the	ego	and	how
to	be	able	to	drop	it;	how	to	become	great	minds	and	yet	be	ready	any	moment	to
put	 the	mind	 aside.	You	 should	be	 able	 to	 just	 put	 your	 personality,	 your	 ego,
your	mind,	on	and	off,	because	these	are	good	things	if	you	can	use	them.	But
you	 should	 know	 the	mechanism,	 how	 to	 put	 them	 off.	 Right	 now	 you	 know
only	how	to	put	them	on.
I	am	reminded:
Sigmund	Freud	 somewhere	 remembers	 that	 a	 friend	 came	 to	 visit	 him	 from	 a
very	 very	 faraway	 village.	They	 had	 studied	 together	 in	 primary	 school;	 since
then	they	had	not	met.	Electricity	had	just	then	come;	just	a	few	months	before,
electricity	had	come	to	Vienna	where	Sigmund	Freud	lived.	He	forgot	to	tell	the
friend	how	to	put	off	the	light	in	the	night	and	the	friend	was	almost	going	mad
in	the	night	because	he	could	not	sleep	--
the	light	was	too	much.	And	he	tried	every	possible	way	that	he	could	conceive
to	blow	it	out.
He	even	stood	on	a	table	and	studied	the	lamp,	how	to	blow	it	out.	But	you	can't
blow	it	out!	He	tried	every	possible	way.	He	could	not	sleep	the	whole	night	and
because	of	his	ego	he	could	not	wake	Sigmund	Freud	and	ask	him	what	 to	do
with	this	light.	All	that	he	knew	about	was	kerosene	lamps.	But	an	electric	bulb
functions	in	a	different	way;	it	is	not	a	kerosene	lamp.
In	the	morning	Freud	asked,	"You	look	tired,	your	eyes	are	red.	What	happened?
Couldn't	you	sleep?"
And	the	man	confessed.	He	said,	"No,	I	could	not	sleep,	and	now	I	have	to	tell
you.	I	wanted	not	to	tell	you	because	I	wanted	not	to	appear	so	stupid	that	I	don't
know	how	 to	 put	 off	 the	 light,	 but	 I	 tried	my	best.	The	whole	 night	 I	 tried	 to
figure	it	out,	how	to	put	it	off,	but	I	could	not."
Freud	took	him	in	the	room.	He	said,	"It	is	very	simple:	this	is	the	button"	--	the
button	was	behind	the	door	so	he	could	not	see	it;	even	if	he	had	seen	it	he	would
not	have	 thought	 that	 the	button	had	any	connection	with	 the	 light	 --	"you	 just
put	it	on	and	off	with	the	button."
Our	situation	is	like	that:	our	society	puts	on	the	ego,	the	personality,	and	nobody
ever	 teaches	 us	 how	 to	 put	 it	 off.	 So	 day	 in,	 day	 out,	we	 are	 burdened	 by	 it,
tortured	by	it,	goaded	by	it.	We	become	slaves	of	something	false.
I	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 drop	 your	 personality	 forever;	 I	 simply	 want	 you	 to	 be
capable	 of	 putting	 it	 off	 when	 it	 is	 not	 needed.	 This	 is	 the	 whole	 art	 of	 real
religion:	to	teach	you	how	to	put	the	mind	off	and	how	to	put	it	on.
Talking	to	you,	I	have	to	put	my	mind	on,	otherwise	how	can	I	talk?	The	heart
cannot	talk,	the	being	cannot	talk,	the	essence	knows	no	language.	I	have	to	use
the	personality.
But	the	moment	I	have	said,	"Enough	for	today,"	you	may	not	know	but	that	is
how	I	put	it	off.	I	tell	you	the	secret!	It	is	not	to	you	that	I	am	saying	enough	for
today;	I	am	saying	to	my	own	mind,	"Enough	for	today.	Now	go	to	sleep."
You	also	say,	Maniloff:	I	HEAR	YOU	TELL	US	TO	ACCEPT	THE	ANIMAL
THAT
WE	 ARE,	 RETURN	 TO	 ESSENCE.	 I	 HAVE	 READ	 GURDJIEFF	 SAYING
YOU
MUST	BECOME	YOUR	TRUE	SELF	--	THE	MASTER.	HE	SAID	BEWARE
OF
BEING	SWALLOWED	BY	THE	ANIMAL.
He	is	right!	--	beware	of	being	swallowed	by	the	animal.	But	why	not	swallow
the	animal	yourself?	Otherwise	you	will	have	 to	be	constantly	alert	 and	aware
and	on	guard,	because	the	animal	will	be	there.	And	the	animal	is	the	animal:	if
the	animal	finds	you	off	guard,	it	will	jump	upon	you.
So	 I	don't	 say	only	beware	of	 the	animal	 and	go	on	persuading	 the	animal,	 as
Gurdjieff	says.	You	say	that	he	says:
"GIVE	 IT	 SOME	 CIGARETTES	 OR	 ICE	 CREAM	 AND	 IT	 WILL	 BE
CALMED.	"
It	 is	 not	 so	 easy!	 It	will	 not	 be	 calmed	 by	 SOME	 ice	 cream	 --	 it	will	 ask	 for
more.	It	always	asks	for	more.	It	will	not	be	calmed	by	SOME	cigarettes;	it	will
go	on	asking	for	more.	And	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	cigarettes	and	ice	cream,
otherwise	the	problem	would	not	have	been	very	complex.
It	asks	for	money,	it	asks	for	power;	it	wants	to	be	the	president	of	the	country,
the	prime	minister	of	the	country.	The	animal	has	strange	ideas	to	be	fulfilled!	It
wants	all	 the	women	of	 the	world;	 it	can't	be	satisfied	with	one.	The	animal	 is
mad,	the	animal	is	insane!	The	animal	is	simply	animal;	it	has	no	understanding
--	you	cannot	expect	understanding	from	it.	Don't	believe	that	it	will	be	calmed
just	by	giving	it	some	cigarettes	and	ice	cream	--	don't	be	so	simplistic.	It	will	go
on	demanding	new	things	and	more	things,	and	there	is	no	end	to	its	demanding.
If	you	try	to	persuade	it	in	this	way	you	will	never	be	able	to	persuade	it.
Why	not	swallow	the	animal	yourself?	Eat	it	and	be	finished	with	it!	That's	my
idea.	Why	not	make	ice	cream	out	of	the	animal?	Why	not	make	cigars	out	of	it
and	smoke	it	and	be	finished	with	it?
That's	why	I	say	don't	repress	--	because	if	you	repress,	the	animal	is	there.	I	say
go	deep	into	the	very	spirit	of	the	animal.	Enjoy	it!	That's	what	I	mean	when	I
say	eat	it.	Be	capable	of	digesting	it	and	you	will	be	more	mighty	by	digesting	it.
Your	 sex	 digested	 will	 release	 so	 much	 energy	 that	 you	 can	 attain	 to
superconsciousness.	Hence	 I	 say	 'from	 sex	 to	 superconsciousness'.	Your	 greed
digested	will	become	your	love.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	the	English	word	'love'	comes	from	a	Sanskrit
word	LOBHA;	LOBHA	means	greed.	It	may	have	been	just	a	coincidence	that
the	 English	 word	 'love'	 grew	 out	 of	 LOBHA;	 LOBHA	means	 greed.	 But	 my
feeling	is	it	cannot	be	just	coincidence;	there	may	be	something	more	mysterious
behind	it,	there	may	be	some	alchemical	reason	behind	it.	In	fact	greed	digested
becomes	love.	It	is	greed,	LOBHA,	digested	well,	which	becomes	love.
Love	is	sharing;	greed	is	hoarding.	Greed	only	wants	and	never	gives,	and	love
knows	 only	 giving	 and	 never	 asks	 for	 anything	 in	 return;	 it	 is	 unconditional
sharing.	There	may	be	some	alchemical	reason	that	LOBHA	has	become	'love'	in
the	English	language.
LOBHA	becomes	love	as	far	as	inner	alchemy	is	concerned.
Swallow	the	animal!	That	is	the	way	to	transform	it.	That	is	the	way	to	transmute
lower	energies	into	higher	energies.
You	are	given	a	great	opportunity.	You	have	been	thrown	out	of	the	sea	--	this	is
the	 opportunity;	 expelled	 from	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden	 --	 this	 is	 the	 opportunity.
Adam	can	become	Christ	 if	he	uses	 the	opportunity	well.	Use	 the	opportunity:
eat	 the	 animal,	 digest	 the	 animal.	 Don't	 try	 to	 cut	 it	 off,	 otherwise	 you	 will
become	poorer.	Don't	try	to	destroy	it	as	your	so-.called	saints	have	been	doing
down	 the	 ages,	 otherwise	 you	will	 be	 dull	 and	 dead,	 insipid.	Don't	 repress	 it,
otherwise	it	will	take	revenge	--	the	animal	is	animal.	One	day	it	will	jump	upon
you	with	such	vengeance	that	you	will	be	destroyed	by	it.
And	 don't	 try	 to	 persuade	 it	 because	 it	 cannot	 be	 persuaded.	 Its	 demands	 are
infinite,	 its	 thirst	 cannot	 be	 quenched	 by	 anything.	 Give	 it	 anything	 and	 it
immediately	asks	for	something	more.	The	'more'	is	its	very	way	of	living.
So	don't	 befool	yourself	 that	 cigarettes	 and	 ice	 cream	and	 things	 like	 that	will
help	the	animal	to	subside	and	to	be	calmed.	No,	you	will	need	great	insight	into
the	animal,	you	will	need	great	acquaintance	with	the	animal.	You	will	need	very
deep	 awareness	 of	 the	working	 of	 the	 animal.	 And	 you	will	 have	 to	 digest	 it
slowly	slowly,	gradually,	so	that	one	day	the	animal	becomes	part	of	your	being.
The	 animal	 has	 great	 energy,	 that's	 why	 it	 is	 called	 animal.	 'Anima'	 means
aliveness,	power,	vitality;	 'animal'	means	one	who	 is	vital.	The	 saints	cut	 their
roots	 from	 the	 animal;	 they	 became	 non-vital.	 That's	why	 they	 have	 not	 been
able	to	transform	the	whole	world	--	they	were	not	even	able	to	transform	their
own	 selves.	They	became	 impotent.	Rather	 than	becoming	more	potent,	 rather
than	 becoming	 omnipotent,	 they	 became	 impotent.	 Hence	 I	 am	 not	 for
suppression.
I	 am	 for	 understanding,	 I	 am	 for	 transformation.	 And	 if	 the	 animal	 is
transformed	and	absorbed	by	 the	essence,	you	will	 feel	great	power,	great	 fire.
Your	life	will	become	such	a	passionate	affair	with	existence,	you	will	have	such
intensity,	that	each	moment	will	give	you	the	joy	of	an	eternity.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	BEFORE,	WHEN	I	WAS	CLEVER,	I	WAS	REALLY	STUPID.	NOW	I
AM
NO	LONGER	CLEVER,	 BUT	 STILL	 FEEL	 STUPID.	 IN	 FACT,	 THIS	 IS	 A
STUPID
LETTER...DOES	THAT	MEAN	I'M	STILL	CLEVER?	OR	DO	SOME	PEOPLE
WHEN
THEY	 DROP	 THEIR	 CLEVERNESS	 FIND	 THAT	 THEY	 ARE	 SIMPLY
STUPID?
PS:	 I	ALWAYS	WANTED	TO	WRITE	AN	 IMPRESSIVE	QUESTION,	BUT
SEEM
TO	HAVE	WAITED	TOO	LONG.	A	JOKE	TO	ILLUSTRATE	MY	PROBLEM:
A	 MAN	 TELEPHONES	 HIS	 DOCTOR:	 "DOCTOR,	 YOU	 KNOW	 THOSE
PILLS	YOU
PRESCRIBED	 FOR	MY	MUSCULAR	WEAKNESS...WELL,	 I	 CAN'T	 GET
THE	TOP
OFF	THE	BOTTLE."
Devageet,
YOU	ARE	IN	A	BEAUTIFUL	MESS!	Remain	this	way.
No	need	to	figure	it	out,	whether	you	are	clever	or	stupid;	whatsoever	you	are,	it
is	perfectly	okay.	Trying	to	figure	it	out	is	an	unnecessary	effort.	If	one	is	stupid,
one	is	stupid	--	so	what?!	How	does	it	matter?	If	one	is	clever,	one	is	clever	--	so
what!	How	does	it	matter?
But	we	have	always	been	 thinking	 in	 terms	of	 comparison.	Man	 is	very	much
conditioned	to	create	hierarchies:	who	is	clever,	who	is	stupid,	who	is	beautiful,
who	is	ugly...We	can't	accept	people	as	they	are.
And	if	you	start	figuring	it	out	you	WILL	be	in	trouble	--	because	nothing	can	be
figured	out.	Life	is	mysterious.	If	you	are	clever	you	are	stupid;	if	you	know	you
are	stupid	you	are	clever....	Now	you	will	be	moving	in	a	circle;	there	will	be	no
end	to	it.	It	will	be	like	a	dog	chasing	its	own	tail:	the	more	the	dog	chases	the
tail,	the	more	the	tail	will	jump	--
with	 the	dog,	of	course,	because	 it	 is	 the	dog's	 tail.	And	the	dog	can	go	crazy!
Sometimes	you	can	watch	dogs	going	crazy,	just	chasing	their	tails.	Philosophers
are	like	dogs	chasing	their	tails.
Devageet,	don't	be	a	philosopher.	Such	problems	have	arisen	in	philosophy	many
times.
They	 say	 that	 before	 Socrates	 there	was	 a	 great	 school	 of	 sophists	 in	Greece;
they	 used	 to	 train	 people	 in	 sophistry.	 Before	 philosophy,	 sophistry	 was	 the
dominant	 thing	 in	 people's	 minds;	 the	 sophist	 was	 thought	 to	 be	 the	 real
intellectual.	 And	 the	 fundamental	 of	 sophistry	 was	 that	 nothing	 is	 true	 and
nothing	is	false.
You	 can	 try	 anything,	 and	 you	 can	 prove	 anything	 right	 and	 you	 can	 prove
anything	 wrong.	 Something	 can	 be	 proved	 right	 and	 the	 same	 thing	 can	 be
proved	wrong,	it	all	depends	on	what	you	want	to	prove.
Logic	is	a	whore!	--	logic	can	go	with	anybody.	So	whenever	someone	wins	in
an	argument	it	does	not	prove	that	he	has	the	truth.	It	only	proves	that	he	is	more
clever	 in	 logical	gymnastics,	 that's	 all;	 he	may	not	have	 the	 truth	 at	 all.	When
someone	is	defeated	in	logic,	argumentation,	it	does	not	prove	that	he	does	not
have	 the	 truth;	 it	may	be	simply	 that	he	 is	not	 logically	skillful.	So	 there	 is	no
truth,	no	untruth;	it	is	only	a	game.
Sophistry	was	a	game,	and	the	sophists	used	to	teach	people,	whosoever	wanted
to	 learn	 the	game	 --	 the	 aristocracy,	 the	 rich	people,	 particularly,	 loved	 it	 very
much.	It	was	like	a	chess	game.
It	happened	to	a	great	sophist:
A	young	man	came	and	he	 said,	 "I	have	heard	much	about	you	 --	you	are	 the
greatest	 sophist	 master	 in	 the	 country.	 If	 you	 trust	 so	 much	 in	 your	 own
intelligence,	this	is	my	proposal:	that	I	will	pay	half	of	your	fees	right	now	and
the	other	half	I	will	pay	only	when	I	win	in	an	argument."
The	master	was	 so	 trustful	 of	 his	 own	 skill,	 he	 said,	 "Perfectly	 okay.	You	 can
give	half	my	fees	now	and	half	I	will	take	when	you	win	your	first	argument.	It
is	bound	to	happen
--	you	are	going	to	win.	Never	have	my	students	been	defeated	anywhere."
But	the	young	man	was	also	really	clever.	He	learnt	the	whole	art,	but	he	never
argued	 with	 anybody.	 The	 master	 was	 puzzled	 about	 what	 to	 do:	 "Unless	 he
argues	and	wins,	half	of	the	fee	is	gone,	and	if	he	never	argues..."	and	he	used	to
avoid.	The	master	told	many	other	disciples,	"Create	some	argument	with	him."
But	he	would	always	say,	"Yes,	you	are	 right."	Whatsoever	you	said	he	would
say,	 "Yes,	you	are	 right."	He	would	never	argue.	The	master	was	at	 a	 loss:	 "It
seems	as	if	the	disciple	is	winning	and	I	am	being	defeated."
So	 the	master	 put	 a	 case	 in	 the	 court:	 "This	 disciple	 has	 not	 paid	 half	my	 fee
which	is	due	to	me,	and	the	court	should	force	this	young	man	to	give	me	my	fee
which	 he	 has	 promised."	 Now	 the	master	 thought,	 "If	 I	 win	 In	 the	 court,	 the
court	will	 order	 the	 young	man	 to	 give	my	 fee	 and	 I	will	 get	 the	 fee.	 If	 I	 am
defeated	in	the	court,	then	too	nothing	is	lost	--	outside	the	court	I	will	say	to	the
young	man,	"You	have	won	your	first	argument,	now	give	me	the	other	half	of
my	fee.
But	 the	disciple	belonged	 to	 this	 same	master.	He	 said,	 "Okay.	 If	 I	win	 in	 the
court	 I	 will	 say	 this	 will	 be	 an	 insult	 to	 the	 court	 if	 I	 pay	 you	 now.	 If	 I	 am
defeated	in	the	court,	how	can	I	pay	you?	--	because	my	first	argument,	and	I	am
defeated!"
And	 this	 is	 how	 it	 happened.	 The	 court	 decided	 that	 the	 young	man	 is	 right,
because	unless	he	wins	how	can	he	pay?
The	master	said,	"Okay.	So	he	has	won	his	first	case	--	I	want	my	fee."
The	young	man	said,	"How	can	I	give	it?	I	have	won	the	case	and	it	will	be	an
insult	 to	 the	 court	 now.	 I	 cannot	 go	 against	 the	 court,	 against	 the	 law	 of	 the
country."
How	to	decide	it?	It	is	impossible,	it	can't	be	decided.
Another	story	is	told:
A	young	man	from	Sicily	came	to	Athens	and	told	Socrates,	"All	men	in	Sicily
lie."
Socrates	looked	at	the	young	man	and	said,	"You	come	from	Sicily?"
He	said,	"Yes."
"Are	you	lying?"
Now	the	problem	arises:	if	he	is	lying	then	what	he	is	saying	is	not	true;	if	he	is
NOT
lying,	then	too	what	he	is	saying	is	not	true	--	because	one	man	from	Sicily	is	not
lying,	is	saying	a	truth.	In	either	case	it	will	be	impossible	to	figure	it	out,	where
we	stand.
You	ask,	Devageet:	WHEN	I	WAS	CLEVER,	I	WAS	REALLY	STUPID.	NOW
I	AM
NO	LONGER	CLEVER,	 BUT	 STILL	 FEEL	 STUPID.	 IN	 FACT,	 THIS	 IS	 A
STUPID
LETTER...DOES	THAT	MEAN	I	AM	STILL	CLEVER?
Forget	about	it!	You	are	in	a	beautiful	mess	--	remain	in	it.	There	is	no	need	to
decide	because	we	are	not	labeling	people	here,	who	is	clever	and	who	is	stupid.
The	whole	effort	here	is:	who	lives	in	the	mind	and	who	lives	out	of	the	mind....
The	stupid	and	the	clever	both	live	in	the	mind,	because	cleverness	or	stupidity,
both	are	qualities	of	the	mind.	It	does	not	matter	whether	you	are	clever	or	you
are	stupid.	You	are	in	the	mind,	that	is	the	real	thing.	Slip	out	of	the	mind.	Slip
out	of	cleverness	and	stupidity	both!	And	 the	best	way	 to	 slip	out	 is	not	 to	be
bothered	 by	 these	 things	 because	 if	 you	 are	 bothered	 by	 these	 things	 you	will
remain	entangled.
Slip	 out	 of	 the	mind!	 Be	 a	 no-mind,	 neither	 clever	 nor	 stupid.	 Then	 you	will
know	what	truth	is,	then	you	will	know	what	bliss	is.
And	the	last	question
Question	5
OSHO,	ARE	YOU	REALLY	THE	FIRST	BUDDHA	WHO	JOKES?
Gangatar,
I	 AM	 NOT	 ONLY	 THE	 FIRST	 BUDDHA	 WHO	 JOKES,	 but	 the	 last
too...because	 I	 am	going	 to	 tell	 all	 the	 jokes!	 I	 am	not	going	 to	 leave	a	 single
joke	untold!
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	You	Are	Ancient	Pilgrims
4	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909040
ShortTitle:
BESTIL04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 I	HAVE	WORN	THE	MALA	FOR	LESS	THAN	A	MONTH,	BUT	 I
UNDERSTAND	 HOW	 FEELING	 YOU	 IS	 IMPORTANT.	 BUT	 THESE
FEELINGS
ARE	MIXED	UP.	 I	RESPECT	AND	LOVE	YOU,	BUT	 I	DON'T	LOOK	AT
YOU	AS
HIS	HOLINESS.	STRANGE,	BUT	I	LOOK	AT	YOU	AS	A	BUDDHA.	ONLY
THAT,	WITHOUT	ANYTHING	ADDED	OR	TAKEN	AWAY	FROM	YOUR
BEING.	AND
WHAT	 A	 BUDDHA	 IS	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW.	 HOW	 COME	 I	 LOVE	 YOU,
RESPECT	YOU
BECAUSE	 YOU	 ARE	 MY	MASTER.	 BUT...LOVE?	 ALSO	 I	 SEE	 THAT	 I
CAN	PLAY
WITH	YOU	WITH	JOY	AND	YOU	ARE	SO	FAR	AWAY.	OR	SO	CLOSE?
RESPECT,	LOVE,	JOY	--	ARE	THEY	THE	SAME?
Anand	Mario,
IT	IS	GOOD	THAT	YOU	CANNOT	THINK	OF	ME	AS	HIS	Holiness,	because
I	am	neither	His	Holiness	nor	His	Unholiness.	It	is	good	and	beautiful	that	you
think	of	me	as	a	Buddha,	because	that's	exactly	what	I	am	--	simply	a	Buddha.
A	Buddha	means	one	who	is	awake.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	holiness,	nothing
to	 do	with	 unholiness.	Holiness,	 unholiness,	 both	 are	 dreams;	 for	 dreams	 you
have	to	be	asleep.	A	Buddha	is	awake;	all	dreams	have	disappeared.	A	Buddha	is
not	a	saint,	is	not	a	sinner	either.	A	Buddha	is	not	God	and	is	not	a	devil	either.
All	 dualities	 are	 irrelevant	 as	 far	 as	Buddha	 is	 concerned.	Buddha	 is	 simply	 a
witness	of	all	the	mystery	that	surrounds	you	within	and	without.
Mario,	 it	 is	absolutely	 right,	you	are	moving	 in	 the	 right	direction.	 If	you	start
looking	at	me	as	a	Buddha,	 that	 is	a	 fundamental	 step	 to	understanding	me.	 If
you	think	of	me	as	a	saint	you	have	misunderstood	me.
That's	one	of	the	fundamental	problems	with	Indians	who	come	here:	they	start
thinking	about	me	as	a	saint.	Then	a	 thousand	and	one	problems	arise	because
they	have	certain	ideas	about	how	a	saint	should	be	They	have	a	thousand	and
one	expectations:	how	I	should	live,	what	I	should	eat,	how	I	should	talk,	what	I
should	say	and	what	I	should	not	say.
I	am	not	a	saint,	hence	I	cannot	fulfill	any	of	their	expectations.	Then	they	feel
very	frustrated	and	out	of	frustration	they	become	enraged.	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	me;	 it	 is	 their	own	minds,	 their	own	expectations.	 I	am	not	here	 to	 fulfill
anybody's	expectations;	 I	am	here	 to	be	myself,	 simply	 to	be	myself.	 I	am	not
here	to	be	somebody	else's	carbon	copy.
A	Jaina	comes	and	thinks	in	terms	of	Mahavira	and	compares	me	with	Mahavira
--
certainly	I	am	not	a	Mahavira.	The	Christian	comes	with	the	idea	of	Christ	and
starts	comparing	me	with	Christ	--	certainly	I	am	not	a	Christ	either.	I	am	simply
myself.	You	can	understand	me	only	ii	you	drop	all	comparisons,	 if	you	forget
all	 the	 ideas	 that	 have	 been	 imposed	 on	 your	mind.	 If	 you	 simply	 look	 at	me
without	any	prejudice	things	will	be	very	clear.
Mario,	it	is	good	that	a	great	clarity	is	coming	to	you.	But	still	somewhere	deep
down	 in	 the	unconscious	 there	 are	 hangovers,	 hence	you	 are	 puzzled.	You	 are
puzzled	because	you	cannot	understand:	"How	come	I	love	you?"	Because	saints
are	 to	be	respected,	not	 loved.	They	are	so	high,	 there	 in	 the	heavens,	and	you
are	so	 low,	how	can	you	 love	 them?	Love	means	equality.	Love	means	we	are
standing	 on	 the	 same	 plane.	 Saints	 are	 so	 holy	 and	 you	 are	 so	 unholy!	 Yes,
respect	is	okay,	but	love?	--	seems	to	be	impossible.
These	are	hangovers.
But	I	would	like	to	say	to	you:	'respect'	is	an	ugly	word;	it	has	more	letters	than
four,	 but	 actually	 it	 is	 a	 four-letter	word.	 Respect	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 ugly	 in	 two
ways:	if	you	respect	somebody	you	degrade	yourself	into	inferiority;	unless	you
start	feeling	inferior	to	somebody	you	cannot	respect	them.	Hence	all	your	saints
go	on	condemning	you;	unless	you	are	condemned	they	cannot	be	respected.	The
respect	from	your	side	is	dependent	on	the	condemnation	from	their	side.	They
call	you	sinners,	only	then	can	you	call	 them	saints.	They	condemn	everything
that	you	do:	your	eating,	your	drinking,	your	living....
Your	whole	life,	in	every	minute	detail,	has	to	be	condemned.	All	that	is	natural
has	to	be	condemned;	then	their	unnatural	lives	become	very	respectable.
All	the	saints	--	the	so-called	saints	I	mean	--	have	been	condemning	humanity
down	 the	 ages.	And,	 slowly	 slowly,	 hearing	 for	 centuries	 that	 you	 are	 sinners
you	have	become	sinners.	They	have	conditioned	you	into	such	inferiority	that	it
has	 almost	 become	 a	 reality.	 You	 have	 started	 fulfilling	 what	 they	 have	 been
saying	about	you.
If	you	want	a	man	to	be	a	criminal,	go	on	telling	him	that	he	is	a	criminal.	Go	on
repeating	it	and	he	will	slowly	be	hypnotized.	And	if	everybody	repeats	that	he
is	a	criminal	he	will	start	believing	that	it	must	be	so:	"How	can	so	many	people
be	wrong?
And	how	can	so	many	SAINTS	be	wrong?	 I	must	be	a	criminal."	And	once	a
person	 accepts	 that	 he	 is	 a	 criminal	 he	 becomes	 one.	 He	 starts	 behaving	 to
PROVE	 that	 he	 is	 a	 criminal.	How	can	he	prove	 the	 saints	wrong?	The	 saints
have	to	be	proved	right,	and	the	only	way	to	prove	them	right	is	 to	behave	the
way	 they	 say	 you	 are.	 Their	 saintliness	 depends	 on	 your	 being	 sinners.	 The
greater	you	are	in	your	sin,	the	higher	is	their	saintliness.	I	am	not	a	saint!
And	 because	 they	 have	 to	 condemn	 your	 natural	 instincts	 THEY	 become
unnatural,	pathological	They	start	standing	on	their	heads	just	to	show	that	they
are	totally	different	from	you.	If	you	enjoy	eating,	they	hate	eating.	If	you	love
beauty,	they	condemn	beauty.
If	you	are	enchanted	With	the	world,	 they	call	 the	world	illusion,	MAYA;	they
say	 it	 does	 not	 exist	 at	 all.	 If	 you	 love	 your	 body,	 they	 destroy	 their	 bodies.
Whatsoever	YOU	do	they	have	to	do	just	the	opposite,	because	that	is	the	only
way	to	prove	their	superiority.
Your	so-called	saints	have	created	a	very	insane	humanity.	They	have	turned	you
insane	 and	 they	 have	 turned	 themselves	 insane.	 And	 because	 they	 have	 to	 be
unnatural	they	are	sitting	on	volcanoes.	They	have	repressed	all	that	is	natural	--
and	 nature	 wants	 to	 assert	 itself.	 They	 are	 in	 a	 constant	 civil	 war;	 they	 are
fighting	with	 themselves.	 And	whatsoever	 they	 are	 fighting	with	 is	 becoming
stronger	 every	 day,	 because	 the	more	 you	 fight	with	 something	 the	more	 you
have	 to	 pay	 attention	 to	 it.	 Their	 minds	 become	 focused.	 If	 they	 repress	 sex,
twenty-four	hours	of	their	day	there	is	an	undercurrent	of	sexuality.	If	they	fast,
they	think	only	of	food	and	nothing	else.
These	insane	people,	pathological	people,	have	been	very	dominant	in	the	past.
It	 is	 because	 of	 these	 people	 that	 the	 earth	 has	 become	 a	 hell;	 they	 have
transformed	the	whole	of	humanity	into	an	ugly	mess.
I	am	not	a	saint.	I	am	simply	a	man	just	like	you,	with	only	one	small	difference
--	and	that	difference	does	not	make	me	superior	to	you,	remember	it.	It	does	not
make	you	inferior	to	me,	remember	it.	Never	for	a	single	moment	forget	that	you
may	be	asleep	and	I	may	be	awake,	but	one	day	1	was	asleep	just	like	you	and
one	day	you	can	be	awake	just	 like	me.	Sleep	and	waking	are	as	much	YOUR
potential	as	they	are	MY	potential.
Sleep	 and	 waking	 are	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin,	 and	 how	 can	 one	 side	 be
superior	to	the	other	side?	Both	sides	are	of	the	same	coin.	You	are	asleep,	I	am
awake,	but	this	does	not	make	me	superior	in	any	way.
In	fact,	Buddha	has	said	 that	 the	day	he	became	a	Buddha,	 the	day	he	became
enlightened,	 the	 whole	 universe	 became	 enlightened	 with	 him.	What	 does	 he
mean?	 He	 means	 the	 day	 he	 became	 enlightened	 he	 became	 aware	 that
EVERYBODY	can	become	enlightened.	This	is	nothing	special;	it	is	an	ordinary
quality	of	every	being.	You	may	not	use	it	--	that	is	YOUR	choice;	you	may	not
actualize	your	potential	--	that	is	YOUR
decision	and	you	are	free	to	decide	that	way.	You	may	choose	to	remain	asleep,
but	you	are	not	committing	any	sin.	You	are	not	doomed	 just	because	you	are
asleep.	Any	moment	you	can	decide	to	wake	up.
It	is	your	freedom	to	be	a	Buddha	or	not	to	be	a	Buddha	--	and	if	you	like	sleep
and	the	dreams	it's	perfectly	okay	with	me.	I	respect	your	freedom.
You	 can	 love	 me.	 You	 cannot	 love	 your	 saints;	 they	 are	 too	 far	 away.	 I	 am
standing	just	by	your	side!	I	am	not	sitting	on	a	golden	throne	somewhere	high
in	the	heavens;	I	am	walking	on	the	earth	with	you,	I	am	as	earthly	as	you	are.
Just	a	little	difference	--	I	say	difference,	not	superiority	--	and	the	difference	is
that	I	am	no	more	asleep,	no	more	dreaming.
And	you	can	come	out	of	your	dreams	THIS	VERY	MOMENT,	because	dreams
cannot	hold	you;	they	cannot	keep	you	imprisoned	in	themselves.	You	can	burst
forth	 from	 them.	 You	 are	 an	 imprisoned	 splendor,	 but	 you	 are	 imprisoned
through	your	own	choice.
You	have	gone	into	the	prison	through	your	own	choice	--	this	is	your	decision.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	of	a	Zen	monk	who	used	to	steal	small	things.	He	was
a	 great	 enlightened	 Master	 and	 he	 used	 to	 steal	 small	 things	 --	 somebody's
cigarette	case	or	somebody's	shoes	--	and	then	he	would	be	caught	and	he	would
be	sent	to	prison.	His	disciples	were	very	much	puzzled;	he	had	many	disciples,
and	they	asked	him	again	and	again,	"Why	do	you	DO	such	things?	And	we	are
here	ready	--	how	many	cigarette	boxes	do	you	want,	how	many	shoes	do	you
want?	We	can	bring	as	many	as	you	want.	Why	do	you	steal?"
He	would	laugh	and	never	say	anything,	but	he	continued	in	his	own	way.	In	the
end	when	he	was	dying	his	disciples	asked,	"Now	tell	us:	what	was	the	secret?
There	must	be	something!"
He	said,	"There	is	nothing	much	in	it;	it	is	a	simple	phenomenon.	I	wanted	to	go
to	jail	again	and	again	to	help	the	people	who	were	inside	to	come	out,	and	that
was	the	only	way	--	stealing	small	things,	then	getting	caught.	I	had	to	manage
both:	first	stealing	things	and	then	getting	caught.	And	then	the	magistrate	would
send	me	for	six	months	to	jail	and	for	those	six	months	I	would	try	to	help	the
people	who	were	inside	to	come	out.
And	I	am	happy,	 tremendously	happy,	 that	 I	have	helped	many	to	come	out	of
jail."
Now	this	man	is	going	knowingly,	consciously;	it	is	his	choice.	Even	in	the	jail
he	 is	 a	 free	 man.	 He	 is	 not	 imprisoned	 by	 anybody	 else;	 he	 has	 imprisoned
himself,	for	a	certain	purpose.
So	is	the	case	with	you:	you	have	imprisoned	yourself.	This	simply	proves	your
freedom.
Any	day,	if	you	want	to	get	out	of	it,	you	can	get	out	of	it.	I	go	on	hammering
only	one	thing	on	your	head	again	and	again:	 that	 there	 is	another	choice	also,
please	don't	forget.
You	have	chosen	to	be	in	sleep,	you	can	choose	to	be	awake.	You	have	lived	in
sleep	 for	many	many	 lives,	 you	 have	 seen	 all	 that	 sleep	makes	 possible,	 now
please	see	what	awakening	can	give	to	you.
I	 have	 seen	 both	 and	 I	 tell	 you	 that	 sleep	 cannot	 give	 you	 anything;	 it	 only
promises	 but	 never	 delivers	 any	 goods.	 Sleep	 can	 give	 you	 only	 dreams,
hallucinations;	sleep	cannot	fulfill	you.	I	have	known	both,	you	have	known	only
one.	 Those	who	 have	 known	 both,	 listen	 to	what	 they	 are	 saying.	And	 if	 you
come	close	to	them	you	are	BOUND	to	fall	in	love	with	them.
It	 is	not	a	question	of	 respect;	 respect	 is	a	 formality.	You	respect	 the	Christian
priest,	 you	 respect	 the	 Hindu	 mahatma,	 you	 respect	 the	 Jaina	 MUNI,	 YOU
respect	 the	 Catholic	 monk,	 you	 respect	 the	 Pope.	 You	 don't	 respect	 Christ	 or
Buddha	or	Krishna	--	you	love	them.
Respect	is	very	ordinary;	it	brings	no	revolution	in	your	life.	It	is	a	trick	of	the
mind.	The	mind	says,	"Look	how	much	I	respect	the	holy	people!"	and	there	it	is
finished.	Now	what	more	can	you	do?	You	can	respect	them,	sometimes	you	can
go	and	touch	their	feet
--	it	becomes	a	formality.
In	India	it	is	such	a	formality	that	it	has	lost	its	beauty,	its	tremendous	power	to
transform	people.	People	go	on	touching	each	and	everybody's	feet.	Children	are
taught	from	the	very	beginning	to	touch	everybody's	feet.
In	my	childhood	it	was	so.	Any	Tom,	Harry,	Dick	who	would	come	to	my	house,
if	 he	was	 aged	my	 father	would	 say,	 "Touch	 his	 feet."	 I	was	 always	 puzzled:
"Why?	 I	don't	 see	anything	 in	 the	man,	 I	have	no	 feeling	 for	him."	But	 it	 is	 a
formality,	it	is	a	social	obligation.	You	have	to	do	it.
So	finally	I	made	it	a	point	--	why	wait	 for	my	father	 to	say	 it?	Anybody	who
came,	I	would	touch	his	feet	before	he	ever	said	to.	Then	he	started	telling	me,
"You	need	not	touch	everybody's	feet."	I	said,	"Why	make	any	distinction?	And
why	 give	 you	 the	 trouble	 of	 telling	 me	 again	 and	 again?	 Now	 I	 will	 touch
everybody's	 feet,	 whosoever	 comes.	 It	 doesn't	 matter	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 physical
exercise!	It	is	good	for	the	body	--	just	bowing	down	and	standing	up	again	and
again.	And	 the	whole	 day	 people	 are	 coming,	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 people.	And
they	feel	happy,	so	it	is	good	--	they	enjoy	it."
In	India	it	is	just	a	formality;	it	means	nothing.	Respect	means	nothing.	And	it	is
dangerous	 too,	 because	 when	 you	 respect	 somebody,	 deep	 down	 you	 start
imitating	 because	 you	 would	 also	 like	 to	 be	 respected,	 the	 ego	 wants	 to	 be
respected.	So	whomsoever	you	respect,	sooner	or	later,	unconsciously,	you	will
start	 imitating	 him,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 get	 respect	 from	 people.
Respect	creates	in	you	a	desire	to	imitate;	you	become	carbon	copies.
It	is	good,	Mario,	that	you	love	me.	Forget	the	word	'respect';	love	is	absolutely
right.
And	don't	be	puzzled.
You	 say:	 HOW	 COME	 I	 LOVE	 YOU?	 I	 RESPECT	 YOU	 BECAUSE	 YOU
ARE	MY
MASTER.
Yes,	respect	always	has	a	 'because';	love	has	no	 'because'.	Love	is	simply	there
for	no	reason	at	all.	Respect	is	logical;	you	can	say	why	you	respect	a	person:	he
eats	 only	 once	 a	 day;	 he	 has	 renounced	 the	 world,	 his	 wife,	 children,	 family,
everything;	he	sleeps	for	only	three	hours	or	maybe	he	remains	awake	the	whole
night;	 he	 is	 continuously	 chanting	 the	 name	 of	 God...things	 like	 this.	 Or	 he
serves	the	poor,	or	he	goes	to	the	ill	people	and	serves	them.
What	will	happen	if	poverty	disappears?	It	will	be	a	great	loss	to	your	saints!	In
fact,	you	will	not	believe	it	--	one	of	the	very	respected	Hindu	saints,	Karpatri,
has	 written	 a	 book	 AGAINST	 socialism,	 and	 the	 reasons	 that	 he	 has	 given
against	socialism	are	all	so	stupid.
The	MOST	stupid	reason	of	all	of	them	is	that	socialism	will	destroy	poverty;	it
will	 create	 equal	 distribution	 of	 property	 and	 possessions.	And	 if	 there	 are	 no
more	poor	people,	whom	will	you	serve?	And	without	service,	how	can	you	be	a
saint?	Without	service	there	will	be	no	virtue.
This	is	a	great	argument!	This	means	poverty	is	needed,	very	essentially	needed
-	needed	for	 the	existence	of	 the	saints.	 Ill	people	are	needed,	 lepers	and	blind
and	 lame	 and	 deaf	 people	 are	 needed,	 otherwise	 whom	 will	 the	 missionaries
serve?	And	without	serving	you	cannot	reach	heaven;	service	is	the	ladder.	So	let
people	be	poor!
And	when	these	people	serve	poor	people,	you	respect	them.	In	fact	they	are	the
causes	 of	 poverty	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 poverty	 can	 be	 removed	 any	 day;	 now
science	has	made	all	the	technology	available	that	can	remove	poverty	from	the
earth	 absolutely.	 But	 then	 how	 will	 Christian	 missionaries	 be	 able	 to	 convert
poor	people	to	Christianity?
In	India,	not	even	a	single	rich	person	has	been	converted	 to	Christianity,	only
poor	 people,	 very	 poor	 people.	 And	 they	 are	 converted	 to	 Christianity	 not
because	 they	 love	Christ	but	because	 they	 love	bread	and	butter.	The	Christian
missionaries	 can	 supply	 them	 with	 a	 little	 food,	 clothes,	 shelter,	 a	 school,	 a
hospital.	Now	Christian	missionaries	will	not	like	it	at	all	if	poverty	disappears
from	the	world,	neither	will	the	Hindu	saints	like	it.
Karpatri	 also	 argues	 the	 old	 Hindu	 argument	 that	 the	 poor	 people	 are	 poor
because	they	are	suffering	from	their	past	karmas.	If	you	make	them	rich,	if	you
distribute	the	property	and	the	land	to	the	poor,	you	will	be	interfering	with	their
past	 karmas.	 And	 this	 is	 not	 good,	 this	 is	 a	 sin,	 to	 interfere	 with	 somebody's
karma.	Let	 them	 suffer	 --	 they	 deserve	 suffering!	Helping	 the	 poor	 to	 become
rich	 is	 almost	 like	 breaking	 the	 walls	 of	 the	 prison	 and	 letting	 the	 prisoners
escape	 --	 you	 will	 be	 doing	 something	 very	 illegal.	 The	 poor	 people	 are
suffering,	and	 the	 rich	people	are	 rich	because	 they	were	virtuous	 in	 their	past
lives.	Any	effort	to	take	their	money	from	them	is	going	against	the	law	of	life,
the	law	of	karma.	You	are	going	against	God!
Socialism	is	against	religion	according	to	Karpatri	and	the	other	so-called	saints.
This	is	a	very	strange	world!	But	all	these	things	go	on	because	we	are	asleep.
If	you	become	a	 little	bit	 alert	 and	 start	 looking	around	you	will	 be	 surprised:
your	saints	need	psychoanalysis,	your	saints	need	psychological	treatment.	They
are	utterly	ill!	And	because	they	are	repressing	all	 their	desires,	sooner	or	later
they	start	living	a	double	life.
They	start	living	two	lives	together:	one	on	the	surface,	the	saintly,	and	the	real
underground,	from	the	back	door.	And	you	go	on	respecting	the	masks.
It	 is	 good,	Mario.	 I	 don't	 expect	 your	 respect	 for	 me,	 no,	 not	 at	 all.	 Love	 is
enough,	love	is	right,	because	love	gives	you	equality	with	me.	And	as	far	as	I
am	concerned	I	see	you	as	equals	--	not	only	you,	but	the	trees	and	the	birds	and
the	 animals	 and	 the	 rocks.	 The	 whole	 existence	 is	 a	 brotherhood.	 Nobody	 is
higher	and	nobody	is	lower;	there	is	no	hierarchy.	It	is	only	ONE	God	expressing
itself	 in	 millions	 of	 forms.	 How	 can	 there	 be	 any	 hierarchy?	 There	 is	 no
BRAHMIN	and	no	SUDRA.
You	say:	I	RESPECT	YOU	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	MY	MASTER.
Forget	the	respect!	Love	me	because	I	am	your	Master	--	and	not	for	any	formal
reason,	because	to	be	a	disciple	can	never	be	formal;	it	can	only	be	of	the	heart.
You	 say:	ALSO	 I	 FEEL	THAT	 I	CAN	PLAY	WITH	YOU	WITH	 JOY	AND
YOU	ARE
SO	FAR	AWAY.	OR	SO	CLOSE?
Both	are	true;	simultaneously	I	am	far	away	and	very	close	--	very	close	because
the	awakening	is	just	the	other	side	of	the	coin,	and	very	far	because	awakening
takes	you	into	a	totally	different	world	from	sleep.	Sleep	takes	you	into	dreams,
awakening	into	reality.	To	be	awake	is	the	door	to	God.	Yes,	I	am	far	away	and
yet	very	close	by.
You	also	ask:	RESPECT,	JOY,	LOVE	--	ARE	THEY	THE	SAME?
No,	they	are	not	the	same	--	certainly	respect	and	love	are	not	the	same.	Respect
is	a	poor	substitute	for	love,	a	plastic	substitute	for	the	real	rose.	It	may	appear
like	the	rose	but	it	is	not.	It	has	no	roots	in	the	earth,	no	juices	flow	through	it.	It
has	no	contact	with	 the	sun	and	 the	wind	and	 the	 rain.	 It	 is	disconnected	 from
existence.	 It	 is	 simply	 a	 plastic	 flower,	 looks	 like	 a	 rose	 --	 it	 is	 an	 imitation.
Respect	is	a	plastic	flower,	love	is	a	real	rose.
And	joy	never	arises	out	of	respect.	In	fact,	out	of	respect	a	little	sadness	arises.
If	 you	 have	 observed	 closely,	 whenever	 you	 respect	 somebody	 you	 feel
humiliated.	You	may	not	look	at	your	humiliation	because	it	hurts,	but	whenever
you	 respect	 somebody	 there	 is	 humiliation	 --	 because	 if	 somebody	 is	 superior
you	ARE	inferior,	and	the	inferiority	hurts.	You	can	avoid	it,	you	may	not	see	it,
you	may	keep	it	at	 the	back,	you	may	forget	all	about	 it,	but	 it	 is	 there.	 If	you
search	for	it	you	will	always	find	it	lurking	in	the	darkness	of	your	unconscious.
Respect	cannot	give	you	joy,	but	love	certainly	gives	you	joy.	Joy	is	a	by-product
of	love,	the	aura	of	love.	Wherever	love	is	there	is	joy,	there	is	silence,	there	is
benediction.
Anybody	can	see	 it	here.	You	are	sitting	 in	such	silence!	You	may	be	 the	only
commune	 on	 the	 whole	 of	 the	 earth	 sitting	 in	 such	 silence,	 in	 such	 love	 --
engulfed,	encompassed,	by	something	of	the	beyond.
Others	 who	 don't	 know	 about	 love,	 may	 misunderstand	 your	 love	 as	 respect
because	they	know	only	respect.	Those	who	have	never	seen	any	real	rose	may
think	that	the	plastic	flower	is	the	real	rose.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 an	 old	 woman	 who	 went	 to	 see	 an	 exhibition	 of	 Picasso
paintings.	 She	 was	 very	 much	 puzzled	 looking	 at	 a	 painting;	 the	 cost	 was
millions	 of	 dollars.	 She	 said	 to	 her	 husband,	 "This	 is	 madness!	 This	 painting
millions	of	dollars?	And	in	fact	it	is	a	copy	of	a	calendar	that	has	been	hanging
in	my	bathroom	for	years!"
The	calendar	is	a	copy,	but	 the	woman	has	known	the	calendar	for	years.	Now
the	real	painting	 looks	 like	a	copy	of	 the	calendar	 --	"And	millions	of	dollars?
This	man	must	be	mad	who	is	asking	millions	of	dollars!	I	can	give	the	calendar
free	to	anybody.	I	am	fed	up	with	it,	because	for	years	I	have	been	looking	at	it!"
Those	 who	 don't	 know	 real	 roses	 and	 have	 always	 known	 the	 plastic,	 if	 you
bring	them	to	a	rosebush	they	will	think	that	these	are	plastic	flowers	attached	to
the	bush.
People	 who	 come	 from	 the	 outside,	 seeing	 you	 sitting	 with	 me	 in	 deep
communion,	in	deep	love,	your	hearts	beating	with	my	heartbeat,	will	think	that
you	are	in	deep	respect.
It	is	not	respect	at	all!	It	is	the	real	thing,	not	the	synthetic	flower.	It	is	happening
--	it	is	a	rare	opportunity.
When	there	is	somebody	awake,	many	people	who	are	groping	in	their	sleep	to
be	awake,	 longing	 in	 their	 sleep	 to	be	awake,	 start	moving	 towards	 the	 source
wherever	 awakening	 has	 happened.	 That's	 how	 you	 have	 arrived	 here	 from
faraway	countries.	You	may	not	even	be	aware	of	how	you	have	reached	here;
you	may	think	it	is	just	accidental.	It	is	not.
Many	many	lives	of	longing	to	find	a	Buddha,	to	find	a	Christ,	have	brought	you
here.
You	are	ancient	pilgrims.	Now	you	have	found	the	opportunity.
Mario,	 you	 are	 fortunate	 to	 love,	 fortunate	 to	 feel	 the	 joy	 of	 love,	 fortunate
because	this	love	is	going	to	become	a	door	to	the	divine.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	PRAYER?
Deva	Tatva,
PRAYER	IS	ONE	OF	THE	INDEFINABLES,	because	prayer	is	the	fragrance	of
love.
Even	love	is	indefinable.	Love	is	a	flower,	tangible,	you	can	see	it,	you	can	touch
it,	you	can	smell	it,	you	can	feel	it.	You	can	close	your	eyes	and	you	can	touch
the	 texture	 of	 the	 flower,	 the	 softness	 of	 it,	 you	 can	 see	 the	 beauty	 of	 it;	 it	 is
visible.	But	prayer	 is	 the	 fragrance	 released	 to	 the	winds,	offered	 to	 the	sky.	 It
becomes	even	more	indefinable	because	you	cannot	see	it,	you	cannot	touch	it.
You	can	only	have	a	very	subtle	relationship	with	it,	not	one	of	words,	not	one	of
philosophy,	not	one	of	theology	--	only	the	silence	of	your	heart,	the	utter	silence
of	your	heart,	can	have	a	little	glimpse	of	it,	of	what	it	is.
What	goes	on	in	the	name	of	prayer	is	not	prayer;	it	is	desire	disguised.	You	go
to	 the	 temple	or	 to	 the	 church	and	you	pray	 to	God;	your	God	 is	part	of	your
imagination.	Your	God	is	not	true	God;	it	is	a	Christian	God,	it	is	a	Hindu	God,	it
is	a	Mohammedan	God.
And	how	can	God	be	Christian,	Hindu	or	Mohammedan?	 It	 is	a	God	 that	you
have	created,	or	your	priests	on	behalf	of	you.	It	is	a	toy,	it	is	not	true.
Bowing	down	before	 a	 statue	made	by	man,	manufactured	by	man	 --	 and	you
think	you	are	 in	prayer?	You	are	simply	being	stupid,	you	are	simply	showing
utter	 ignorance.	This	statue	has	been	purchased	in	 the	marketplace,	and	God	is
not	a	commodity	and	God	cannot	be	made.	It	 is	God	who	has	made	us	--	how
can	we	make	God?	But	we	are	worshipping,	praying	to	man-made	Gods.
And	what	are	your	prayers?	They	are	also	your	desires.	You	want	this,	you	want
that;	you	are	trying	to	use	God	as	a	means.	You	have	been	told	certain	prayers
from	your	very	childhood	and	you	have	crammed	it	all;	you	have	been	forced	to
cram	it.	It	has	become	a	habit,	a	mechanical	routine;	you	go	on	repeating	it	but
your	heart	is	not	in	it.	Your	prayer	is	a	corpse,	it	breathes	no	more.
Yes,	when	Jesus	called	God	'Abba'	he	meant	it.	When	you	call	God	'Father'	you
don't	mean	anything.	And	between	'Abba'	and	'Father'	there	is	a	great	difference.
'Father'	 is	 an	 institution,	 legal,	 social;	 'Abba'	 is	 a	 heart-to-heart	 relationship.
Jesus	looked	at	existence	as	the	source	of	our	life.
A	 disciple	 asks	 Jesus,	 "What	 is	 prayer?"	 Jesus	 falls	 on	 his	 knees	 and	 starts
praying.	The	disciple	says,	"I	am	asking	what	prayer	is,	I	am	not	asking	you	to
pray!"
And	 Jesus	 says,	 "There	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 I	 can	 pray,	 you	 can	 participate.	 I
INVITE	you	to	be	a	part	of	my	prayer.	I	cannot	say	what	prayer	is,	but	I	can	go
into	prayer	--	because	prayer	is	a	state	of	being,	not	something	that	you	do."
Leo	Tolstoy	has	written	a	beautiful	story:
Three	men	became	very	famous	saints	in	Russia.
The	highest	priest	of	the	country	was	very	much	disturbed	--	obviously,	because
people	were	not	coming	to	him,	people	were	going	to	those	three	saints,	and	he
had	 not	 even	 heard	 their	 names.	And	 how	 could	 they	 be	 saints?	 --	 because	 in
Christianity	a	saint	is	a	saint	only	when	the	church	recognizes	him	as	a	saint.	The
English	word	'saint'	comes	from	'sanction';	when	the	church	sanctions	somebody
as	a	saint,	then	he	is	a	saint.	What	nonsense!	that	a	saint	has	to	be	certified	by	the
church,	by	the	organized	religion,	by	the	priests	--	as	if	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
inner	growth	but	some	outer	recognition;	as	if	it	is	a	title	given	by	a	government,
or	a	degree,	an	honorary	degree,	conferred	by	a	university.
The	 high	 priest	 was	 certainly	 very	 angry.	 He	 took	 a	 boat	 because	 those	 three
saints	 used	 to	 live	 on	 the	 far	 side	 of	 a	 lake.	He	went	 in	 the	 boat.	Those	 three
saints	 were	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree.	 They	 were	 very	 simple	 people,	 peasants,
uneducated.	They	touched	the	feet	of	the	highest	priest,	and	the	priest	was	very
happy.	He	thought,	"Now	I	will	put	them	right	--
these	 are	 not	 very	 dangerous	 people.	 I	 was	 thinking	 they	 would	 be	 rebels	 or
something."
He	asked	them,	"How	did	you	become	saints?"
They	said,	"We	don't	know!	We	don't	know	that	we	are	saints	either.	People	have
started	calling	us	saints	and	we	go	on	trying	to	convince	 them	that	we	are	not,
we	are	very	simple	people,	but	they	don't	listen.	The	more	we	argue	that	we	are
not,	the	more	they	worship	us!	And	we	are	not	very	good	at	arguing	either."
The	priest	was	very	happy.	He	said,	"What	is	your	prayer?	Do	you	know	how	to
pray?"
They	looked	at	each	other.	The	first	said	 to	 the	second,	"You	say."	The	second
said	to	the	third,	"You	say,	please."
The	priest	said,	"Say	what	your	prayer	is!	Are	you	saying	Our	Lord's	Prayer	or
not?"
They	said,	"To	be	frank	with	you,	we	don't	know	any	prayer.	We	have	invented	a
prayer	of	our	own	and	we	are	very	embarrassed	--	how	to	say	it?	But	if	you	ask
we	have	to	say	it.	We	have	heard	that	God	is	a	trinity:	the	Father,	the	Son	and	the
Holy	Ghost.	We	are	three	and	he	is	also	three,	so	we	have	made	a	small	prayer	of
our	own:	'You	are	three,	we	are	three:	Have	mercy	on	us!'	"
The	priest	said,	"What	nonsense!	Is	this	prayer?	You	fools,	I	will	teach	you	the
right	prayer."	And	he	recited	The	Lord's	Prayer.
And	 those	 three	poor	people	said,	"Please	 repeat	 it	once	more,	because	we	are
uneducated,	we	may	forget."
He	repeated	it	and	they	asked,	"Once	more	--	we	are	three,	repeat	it	at	least	three
times."
So	he	repeated	it	again,	and	then	very	happy,	satisfied,	he	went	back	in	his	boat.
Just	in	the	middle	of	the	lake	he	was	surprised,	his	boatman	was	surprised:	those
three	 poor	 people	 were	 coming	 running	 on	 the	 water!	 And	 they	 said,	 "Wait!
Please	one	more	time	--	we	have	forgotten	the	prayer!"
Now	it	was	the	turn	of	the	priest	to	touch	their	feet,	and	he	said,	"Forget	what	I
have	said	to	you.	Your	prayer	has	been	heard,	my	prayer	has	not	been	heard	yet.
You	continue	as	you	are	continuing.	I	was	utterly	wrong	to	say	anything	to	you.
Forgive	me!"
Prayer	is	a	state	of	simplicity.	It	is	NOT	of	words	but	of	silence.
Martin	 Buber,	 the	 great	 Jewish	 philosopher,	 has	 said	 that	 prayer	 is	 an	 I/thou
relationship.
It	 is	 not.	He	 does	 not	 know	 anything	 about	 prayer.	An	 I/thou	 relationship?	 In
prayer	 there	 is	 no	 I	 and	 in	 prayer	 there	 is	 no	 thou.	A	prayer	 is	 not	 a	 dialogue
between	I	and	thou;	a	prayer	is	a	merger.	The	I	disappears	into	the	thou,	the	thou
disappears	into	the	I.	There	is	nobody	to	say	anything	and	there	is	nobody	to	say
anything	to.
The	river	disappearing	into	the	ocean	is	prayer.	The	dewdrop	slipping	from	the
lotus	leaf	into	the	lake	is	prayer.	Seeing	the	early	morning	sun	and	you	are	silent,
and	something	starts	rising	in	you	too	--	that	is	prayer.	A	bird	on	the	wing,	and
YOU	 are	 on	 the	 wing;	 you	 forget	 that	 you	 are	 separate	 --	 THAT	 is	 prayer.
Wherever	separation	disappears,	prayer	appears.	When	you	become	one	with	the
whole	of	existence,	that	is	prayer.
Ego	is	a	state	of	no-prayer:	egolessness	is	a	state	of	prayer.	It	is	not	a	dialogue,	it
is	not	even	a	monologue.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	words;	it	is	wordless	silence.
It	is	an	open,	silent	sky;	with	no	clouds,	no	thoughts.	In	prayer	you	are	not	Hindu
or	Christian	or	Mohammedan.	In	prayer	you	are	not:	in	prayer	God	is.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	DIPLOMACY?
Sandeep,
DIPLOMACY	 IS	A	BEAUTIFUL	NAME	 for	 all	 kinds	of	 cunningness.	 It	 is	 a
beautiful	label	for	all	that	is	ugly.	It	is	an	effort	to	cover	human	violence,	human
stupidity,	human	cunningness,	behind	a	beautiful	word.	Diplomacy	is	simply	an
effort	 to	dominate.	 It	may	be	between	persons,	 it	may	be	between	 religions,	 it
may	be	between	countries	--	it	does	not	matter.	Even	husbands	and	wives	are	in	a
diplomatic	relationship,	parents	and	children	are	in	a	diplomatic	relationship.	It
is	not	only	in	politics,	it	is	in	our	whole	life.
When	you	see	 somebody	and	you	 feel,	 "Now	my	whole	day	 is	wasted;	 seeing
this	bastard	early	in	the	morning	is	a	perfect	indication	that	something	wrong	is
going	 to	happen,	 some	calamity	 is	going	 to	happen	 to	me,"	but	you	say	 to	 the
man,	"Hello!	How	are	you?
Glad	to	see	you!"	--	that	is	diplomacy.
Diplomacy	 has	 entered	 into	 our	 blood.	 When	 you	 don't	 love	 your	 wife	 and
pretend	that	you	love	her,	it	is	diplomacy.	When	without	any	love	you	hug	your
children,	 just	because	 it	has	 to	be	done,	because	Dale	Carnegie	says	so:	HOW
TO	WIN	FRIENDS	AND
INFLUENCE	PEOPLE....
Dale	Carnegie	is	the	prophet	of	the	modern	age.	Dale	Carnegie's	book,	HOW	TO
WIN
FRIENDS	 AND	 INFLUENCE	 PEOPLE,	 has	 sold	 next	 only	 to	 the	 Bible.	 It
seems	 to	 be	 even	 more	 important	 than	 the	 Bible,	 because	 the	 Bible	 is	 being
distributed	free	by	the	Christian	missionaries	and	Dale	Carnegie's	book	you	have
to	purchase.	And	what	he	teaches	is	simply	diplomacy.
He	 says	 that	 even	 if	you	don't	mean	 it,	 at	 least	 a	 few	 times	 in	 the	day	 remind
your	wife	how	much	you	 love	her.	That's	enough,	because	people	don't	bother
about	love;	people	live	in	words.	If	you	say,	"I	love	you,"	that's	enough.	If	you
go	on	repeating,	"I	love	you,"
that	 becomes	 a	 proof	 that	 you	 really	 love.	This	 is	 a	 very	 ugly	 state	 of	 affairs.
Humanity	has	fallen	so	low	that	Dale	Carnegie	becomes	the	prophet.
Diplomacy	is	not	only	political,	not	any	more	--	it	has	entered	into	every	arena	of
life.
And	 wherever	 it	 enters	 it	 brings	 pseudoness,	 falsity;	 it	 destroys	 authenticity,
sincerity,	honesty.	It	makes	you	say	things	which	you	don't	mean,	it	makes	you
do	things	which	you	don't	mean.	It	makes	you	many	instead	of	one;	you	become
a	 crowd.	You	 go	 on	 carrying	many	masks	with	 you	 because	 you	 never	 know
which	mask	will	be	needed	in	a	certain	situation.
And	not	 only	 has	man	become	diplomatic	 --	 even	 animals	who	 live	with	man
become	diplomatic,	dogs	become	diplomatic.	Watch	a	dog....	A	stranger	comes
to	your	house,	knocks	on	the	door.	The	dog	starts	two	things:	he	starts	barking
and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 he	 wags	 his	 tail.	 This	 is	 diplomacy!	 because	 he	 is	 not
certain	whether	 the	man	who	has	knocked	on	 the	door	 is	 really	a	 friend	of	 the
master	or	not	--	it	is	better	to	keep	your	feet	in	both	the	boats,	then	whatsoever
turns	out	to	be	right	you	can	withdraw	from	the	wrong	one.	Then	you	come	out
of	the	house	and	the	dog	sees	that	the	stranger	is	a	friend;	the	barking	stops	and
the	tail	continues	to	wag.
Man	contaminates	everything;	even	innocent	people	like	dogs	are	corrupted	by
human	contact.	You	start	 teaching	small	children	 to	be	diplomatic.	On	 the	one
hand	you	go	on	telling	them,	"Be	true,	be	sincere	be	honest,"	and	then	one	day	a
man	comes	 to	 the	door	and	you	 tell	your	 son,	 "Go	and	say	 that	daddy	 is	out."
Now	the	boy	is	puzzled.	What	to	do?
My	own	way	in	my	childhood	was	to	go	out	and	say	to	the	man,	"Daddy	says	he
is	out."
What	else	to	do?	One	has	to	be	true	and	one	has	to	be	obedient	too.	Now	either	I
can	be	true	or	I	can	be	obedient....
Small	 children,	 we	 start	 corrupting	 their	minds.	We	 corrupt	 animals,	 and	 it	 is
possible	one	day	we	will	discover	 that	we	even	corrupt	 trees,	because	 they	are
also	very	sensitive.
Living	with	man	they	must	be	learning	all	kinds	of	things	from	humanity.
Alfie	 and	 Dan,	 two	 Cockney	 pub	 crawlers,	 were	 in	 their	 cups	 one	 afternoon
when	Alfie	pointed	to	a	woman	sitting	at	the	end	of	the	bar.	"Hey!"	he	said,	That
woman	looks	like	Queen	Elizabeth!"
"Nah,"	replied	Dan.	"What	would	the	Queen	be	doing	in	a	pub	in	hogtown?"
"I	am	telling	you	it	is	her,"	insisted	Alfie.	"Can't	you	see	the	resemblance?"
"Look,	that	ain't	the	Queen,"	said	Dan.	"And	I	am	willing	to	bet	five	on	it."
"You	are	on!"	came	the	reply.	"I	will	go	ask	her."	He	walked	over	to	the	woman
sitting	at	the	bar	and	said,	"I	beg	your	pardon,	are	you	the	Queen?"
"Get	lost,	you	little	runt,"	growled	the	woman,	before	I	kick	your	ass	across	the
room!"
He	returned	to	his	seat.	"Well?"	his	friend	asked.
"Well,	she	didn't	say	she	was	and	she	didn't	say	she	wasn't."
This	is	diplomacy!
A	religious	person	has	to	drop	all	diplomacy.	He	has	to	be	authentic,	sincere;	he
has	to	be	as	he	is:	no	pretensions,	no	false	personalities,	no	facades;	 just	being
utterly	nude	as	you	are,	utterly	naked	in	your	reality.
The	 moment	 you	 can	 gather	 that	 much	 courage	 you	 will	 be	 so	 filled	 with
joy...you	cannot	believe	right	now,	you	cannot	even	conceive	right	now,	because
it	 is	our	falsities	which	are	 like	parasites	on	our	being;	 they	go	on	sucking	our
blood.	 The	more	 falsities	 you	 create	 around	 yourself,	 the	more	miserable	 you
become,	the	more	you	are	in	a	hell.
To	live	in	falsities	is	to	live	in	hell:	to	live	authentically	is	to	be	in	heaven.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 TO	 ME	 IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 THE	 CHRISTIAN	 CONCEPT	 OF	 THE
SOUL	IS
THE	SAME	AS	WHAT	YOU	MEAN	BY	THE	REAL	 I,	THE	ONE	WHO	IS
THE
WATCHER.	WHY	DIDN'T	JESUS	SPEAK	ABOUT	THE	POSSIBILITY	OF
REINCARNATION	OF	THE	SOUL?	THIS	SEEMS	TO	BE	A	DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN	 EASTERN	 AND	 WESTERN	 RELIGIONS.	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY
SOMETHING
ABOUT	IT?
Jaap-Willem,
JESUS	KNEW	PERFECTLY	WELL	about	reincarnation.
There	 are	 indirect	 hints	 spread	 all	 over	 the	 gospels.	 Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was
saying,	quoting	Jesus:	"I	am	before	Abraham	ever	was."	And	Jesus	says,	"I	will
be	coming	back."
And	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	indirect	references	to	reincarnation.	He	knew
about	it	perfectly	well,	but	there	is	some	other	reason	why	he	did	not	talk	about
it,	why	he	did	not	preach	it.
Jesus	 had	 been	 to	 India	 and	 he	 had	 seen	 what	 had	 happened	 because	 of	 the
theory	of	reincarnation.	In	India	for	almost	five	thousand	years	before	Jesus	the
theory	was	taught.
And	 it	 is	 a	 truth,	 it	 is	not	only	a	 theory;	 the	 theory	 is	based	 in	 truth.	Man	has
millions	of	lives.	It	was	taught	by	Mahavira,	by	Buddha,	by	Krishna,	by	Rama;
all	the	Indian	religions	agree	upon	it.	You	will	be	surprised	to	know:	they	don't
agree	on	anything	else	except	this	theory.
Hindus	believe	in	God	and	the	soul.	Jainas	don't	believe	in	God	at	all	but	only	in
the	soul.
And	Buddhists	don't	believe	in	the	soul	or	God	either.	But	about	reincarnation	all
three	agree	--	even	Buddhists	agree,	who	don't	believe	in	the	soul.	A	very	strange
thing...then	who	 reincarnates?	Even	THEY	could	not	deny	 the	phenomenon	of
reincarnation,	 although	 they	could	deny	 the	existence	of	 the	 soul;	 they	 say	 the
soul	does	not	exist	but	reincarnation	exists.	And	it	was	very	difficult	for	them	to
prove	reincarnation	without	the	soul;	it	seems	almost	impossible.	But	they	found
a	way	 --	of	 course	 it	 is	very	 subtle	 and	very	difficult	 to	 comprehend,	but	 they
seem	to	be	closer,	the	closest	to	the	truth.
It	is	easy	to	understand	that	there	is	a	soul	and	when	you	die	the	body	is	left	on
the	earth	and	the	soul	enters	into	another	body,	into	another	womb;	it	is	a	simple,
logical,	 mathematical	 thing.	 But	 Buddha	 says	 there	 is	 no	 soul	 but	 only	 a
continuum.	It	is	like	when	you	kindle	a	candle	in	the	evening	and	in	the	morning
when	you	are	blowing	it	out	a	question	can	be	asked	of	you:	Are	you	blowing
out	 the	same	light	 that	you	started	 in	 the	evening?	No,	 it	 is	not	 the	same	light,
and	yet	a	continuity	is	there.	In	the	night	when	you	lit	the	candle...	that	flame	is
no	more	 there,	 that	 flame	 is	 continuously	disappearing;	 it	 is	being	 replaced	by
another	flame.	The	replacement	is	so	quick	that	you	can't	see	the	gaps,	but	with
sophisticated	scientific	instruments	it	is	possible	to	see	the	gaps:	one	flame	going
out,	another	coming	up,	that	going	out,	another	coming	up.	There	are	bound	to
be	small	intervals,	but	you	can't	see	them	with	bare	eyes.
Buddha	 says	 that	 just	 as	 the	 candle	 flame	 is	 not	 the	 same	 --	 it	 is	 changing
constantly,	 although	 in	 another	 sense	 it	 is	 the	 same	 because	 it	 is	 the	 same
continuum	--	exactly	like	that,	there	is	no	soul	entity	in	you	like	a	thing	but	one
like	a	flame.	It	is	continuously	changing,	it	is	a	river.
Buddha	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 nouns,	 he	 only	 believes	 in	 verbs,	 and	 I	 perfectly
agree	with	him.	He	has	come	closest	to	the	truth;	at	least	in	his	expression	he	is
the	most	profound.
But	why	did	Jesus,	Moses,	Mohammed	--	 the	sources	of	all	 the	 three	religions
that	have	been	born	outside	India	--	not	talk	about	reincarnation	directly?	For	a
certain	 reason,	 and	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 Moses	 was	 aware...	 because	 Egypt	 and
India	have	been	in	constant	contact.	It	is	suspected	that	once	Africa	was	part	of
Asia	and	that	the	continent	has	slowly	shifted	away.	India	and	Egypt	were	joined
together,	hence	there	are	so	many	similarities.
And	 it	 is	not	strange	 that	South	 India	 is	black;	 it	has	partly	Negro	blood	 in	 its
veins,	it	is	negroid	--	not	totally,	but	if	Africa	was	joined	with	Asia	then	certainly
the	 mingling	 of	 the	 Aryans	 with	 the	 Negroes	 must	 have	 happened,	 and	 then
South	India	became	black.
Moses	 must	 have	 been	 perfectly	 aware	 of	 India.	 You	 will	 be	 surprised	 that
Kashmir	claims	that	both	Moses	and	Jesus	are	buried	there.	The	tombs	are	there,
one	tomb	for	Moses	and	one	tomb	for	Jesus.	They	saw	what	happened	to	India
through	the	theory	of	reincarnation.
Because	of	 the	 theory	of	reincarnation	India	became	very	 lethargic;	 there	 is	no
hurry.
India	 has	 no	 time	 sense,	 not	 even	 now.	 Even	 though	 everybody	 is	 wearing	 a
wristwatch	 there	 is	no	 time	sense.	 If	 somebody	says,	 "I	will	be	coming	at	 five
o'clock	in	the	evening	to	see	you,"	it	can	mean	anything.	He	may	turn	up	at	four,
he	may	turn	up	at	six,	he	may	not	turn	up	at	all	--	and	it	is	not	taken	seriously!	It
is	not	that	he	is	not	fulfilling	his	promise	--	there	is	no	time	sense!	How	can	you
have	time	sense	when	eternity	is	available?	When	there	are	so	many	many	lives,
why	be	in	such	a	hurry?	One	can	go	on	slowly;	one	is	bound	to	reach	some	day
or	other.
The	theory	of	reincarnation	made	India	very	lethargic,	dull.	It	made	India	utterly
time-unconscious.	 It	 helped	 people	 to	 postpone.	 And	 if	 you	 can	 postpone	 for
tomorrow,	 then	 today	 you	 will	 remain	 the	 same	 as	 you	 have	 been	 and	 the
tomorrow	never	comes.	And	India	knows	how	to	postpone	not	only	to	tomorrow
but	even	to	the	next	life.
Moses	and	Jesus	both	visited	India,	both	were	aware.	Mohammed	never	visited
India	but	was	perfectly	aware,	because	he	was	very	close	to	India	and	there	was
constant	traffic	between	India	and	Arabia.	They	decided	that	it	was	better	to	tell
people,	"There	is	only	one	life,	this	is	the	LAST	chance	--	the	first	and	the	last	--
if	you	miss	 it,	you	miss	 forever."	This	 is	a	device	 to	create	 intense	 longing,	 to
create	such	intensity	in	people	that	they	can	be	transformed	easily.
Then	the	question	arises:	Were	Mahavira,	Buddha	and	Krishna	not	aware?	Were
they	 not	 aware	 that	 this	 theory	 of	 reincarnation	 would	 create	 lethargy?	 They
were	 trying	 a	 totally	 different	 device.	And	 each	device	has	 its	 time;	 once	 it	 is
used...it	cannot	be	used	forever.
People	become	accustomed	to	it.	When	Buddha,	Mahavira	and	Krishna	tried	the
device	of	reincarnation	they	were	trying	it	from	a	totally	different	angle.
India	 was	 a	 very	 rich	 country	 in	 those	 days.	 It	 was	 thought	 to	 be	 the	 golden
country	 of	 the	world,	 the	 richest.	 And	 in	 a	 rich	 country	 the	 real	 problem,	 the
greatest	problem,	is	boredom.	That	is	happening	now	in	the	West.	Now	America
is	in	the	same	situation,	and	boredom	has	become	the	greatest	problem.	People
are	utterly	bored,	so	bored	that	they	would	like	to	die.
Krishna,	Mahavira	 and	Buddha	 used	 this	 situation.	 They	 told	 people,	 "This	 is
nothing,	 one	 life's	 boredom	 is	 nothing.	 You	 have	 lived	 for	 many	 lives,	 and
remember,	if	you	don't	listen	you	are	going	to	live	many	more	lives;	you	will	be
bored	again	and	again	and	again.	It	is	the	same	wheel	of	life	and	death	moving."
They	painted	boredom	in	such	dark	colors	that	people	who	were	already	bored
with	even	one	life	became	really	very	deeply	involved	with	religion.	One	has	to
get	rid	of	life	and	death;	one	has	to	get	out	of	 this	wheel,	 this	vicious	circle	of
birth	and	death.	Hence	it	was	relevant	in	those	days.
Then	India	became	poor.	Once	the	country	became	poor	boredom	disappeared.	A
poor	man	is	never	bored,	remember;	only	a	rich	man	can	afford	boredom,	it	is	a
rich	man's	privilege.	It	is	impossible	for	a	poor	man	to	feel	boredom;	he	has	no
time.	The	whole	day	he	is	working;	when	he	comes	home	he	is	so	tired	he	falls
asleep.	He	 need	 not	 have	many	many	 entertainments	 --	 television	 and	movies
and	 music	 and	 art	 and	 museums	 --	 he	 need	 not	 have	 all	 these	 things,	 he
CANNOT	 have	 them.	 His	 only	 entertainment	 is	 sex:	 a	 natural	 thing,	 inbuilt.
That's	why	poor	countries	go	on	reproducing	more	children	than	rich	countries	--
the	only	entertainment.
If	 you	 want	 to	 reduce	 the	 population	 of	 poor	 countries,	 give	 them	 more
entertainment.
Give	them	television	sets,	give	them	radios,	movies	--	something	that	can	keep
them	distracted	from	sex.
I	have	heard	about	American	couples	that	 they	become	so	much	obsessed	with
the	 television	 that	even	while	making	 love	 they	go	on	watching	 the	 television.
Love	becomes	secondary,	 television	becomes	primary.	They	don't	want	 to	miss
the	program	that	is	going	on.
A	poor	country	knows	only	one	entertainment	because	it	cannot	afford	any	other;
it	can	afford	only	the	natural,	inbuilt	one.	So	a	poor	country	goes	on	producing
people;	it	becomes	more	and	more	crowded.	And	they	are	not	fed	up	with	life.
What	life	do	they	have?	First	you	have	to	have	life	to	be	fed	up	with	it.	You	have
to	have	money	to	be	fed	up	with	it.	You	have	to	have	many	women	to	be	fed	up
with	them.	You	have	to	have	many	experiences	of	the	world	to	be	finished	with
it.
The	moment	India	became	poor	the	theory	of	reincarnation	became	an	escape,	a
hope	--
rather	than	a	boredom	it	became	a	hope,	a	possibility	to	postpone.	"I	am	poor	in
this	life.
Nothing	to	be	worried	about;	there	are	many	lives.	Next	life	I	am	going	to	strive
a	little	harder	and	I	will	be	richer.	This	life	I	have	got	an	ugly	woman.	Nothing	to
be	worried	about;	it	 is	only	a	question	of	one	life.	Next	time	I	am	not	going	to
make	 the	 same	mistake	 again.	This	 time	 I	 am	 suffering	 from	my	past	 karmas.
This	life	I	will	not	commit	any	wrong	things	so	that	I	can	enjoy	the	coming	life."
It	became	postponement.
Jesus	saw	it,	that	the	device	was	no	longer	working	in	the	way	it	was	meant	to
work.	The	situation	had	changed.	Now	Jesus	had	to	create	another	device:	there
is	only	one	life	--	so	if	you	want	to	be	religious,	if	you	want	to	meditate,	if	you
want	to	become	a	sannyasin,	BE	ONE	RIGHT	NOW	--	because	the	tomorrow	is
not	reliable.	There	may	be	no	tomorrow.
Hence	the	West	has	become	too	conscious	of	time;	everybody	is	in	a	hurry.	This
hurry	is	because	of	Christianity.	The	device	has	again	failed.	No	device	can	work
forever.
My	own	 experience	 is	 that	 a	 particular	 device	works	 only	while	 the	Master	 is
alive,	because	he	is	the	soul	of	it;	he	manages	it	in	such	a	way	that	it	works	once
the	 Master	 is	 gone,	 the	 device	 falls	 out	 of	 use	 or	 people	 start	 finding	 new
interpretations	for	it.
Now	 in	 the	West	 the	 device	 has	 failed	 utterly;	 now	 it	 has	 become	 a	 problem.
People	are	 in	 a	 constant	hurry,	 tension,	 anxiety,	because	 there	 is	only	one	 life.
Jesus	wanted	them	to	remember:	because	there	is	one	life,	remember	God.	And
what	are	they	doing?	Seeing	that	there	is	only	one	life	they	want	to	drink,	eat	and
be	merry,	because	there	is	no	other	life.	So	indulge	as	much	as	you	can.	Squeeze
the	whole	juice	of	life	right	now!	And	who	cares	about	what	will	happen	on	the
Judgment	Day?	Who	knows	whether	the	Judgment	Day	is	there	or	not?
The	professor	at	a	girls'	college	was	a	really	dirty	old	man.	He	could	not	give	a
lecture	 without	 making	 some	 kind	 of	 obscene	 remark.	 Eventually	 the	 girls
decided	that	 the	next	 time	he	did	 it	 they	would	all	get	up	from	their	desks	and
leave	the	classroom.
The	 next	 morning	 the	 professor	 entered	 the	 room	 and	 started	 in	 right	 away:
"Hey,	 girls,	 I	 heard	 that	 just	 yesterday	 a	 ship	 came	 into	 the	 harbor	with	 thirty
Negro	sailors	on	deck.
Just	imagine,	girls,	thirty	huge	Negro	pricks...."
At	this	point	the	whole	class	got	up	and	started	to	go	out	of	the	room.
"Hey,	girls,"	shouted	the	professor	after	them,	"no	need	to	hurry.	They	are	gonna
stay	here	for	another	two	weeks."
A	great	hurry	has	arisen	in	the	West	about	everything,	because	there	is	no	other
life.
Mary	and	John	are	both	living	in	a	big	apartment-house	in	New	York	City.	One
day	they	meet	and	instantly	fall	in	love	with	each	other,	but	they	don't	make	any
contact.	This	goes	on	 for	 six	months	until	 John	 just	 can't	 bear	 the	 tension	any
more	and	asks	her	to	come	to	his	apartment	for	a	drink.	Hesitatingly	she	says	yes
and	as	soon	as	they	reach	his	flat	they	close	the	door	behind	them	and	rush	into
the	bedroom	and	throw	themselves	on	the	bed.
After	a	few	minutes	John	explains	with	a	hoarse	voice,	"Listen,	I	am	very	sorry,
but	if	I	had	known	that	you	were	a	virgin	I	would	have	taken	more	time."
Mary	replies,	"Well,	if	I	had	known	that	you	had	more	time,	I	would	have	taken
my	pants	off!"
Such	a	hurry!	Speed	 is	 the	mania,	 faster	and	 faster.	Nobody	 is	bothered	where
you	are	going,	but	you	have	to	go	fast;	invent	speedier	vehicles.
And	 this	whole	 thing	has	 happened	because	 of	 the	 device.	 It	worked	 in	 Jesus'
time.	He	was	continuously	telling	his	people,	"Beware!	The	Day	of	Judgment	is
very	close	by.
You	are	going	to	see	the	end	of	the	world	in	your	very	own	life	and	there	is	no
other	life.
And	 if	 you	 miss	 you	 will	 be	 thrown	 into	 hell	 for	 eternity!"	 He	 was	 simply
creating	a	psychological	atmosphere.	It	worked	when	he	was	alive	and	it	worked
for	 a	 few	more	 days	when	 he	was	 gone.	 It	 continued	 to	work	 for	 a	 few	 days
because	of	the	closest	disciples	who	had	something	of	the	climate	of	Jesus	with
them,	some	aura,	but	then	it	created	just	the	opposite	effect.
It	has	created	the	MOST	worldly	civilization	the	world	has	ever	known.	And	the
desire	was	 that	 the	 idea	of	one	 life	would	make	people	so	alert	and	aware	 that
they	would	seek	and	search	for	God	and	they	would	drop	ALL	other	desires	and
ALL	other	occupations.
Their	whole	life	would	become	one-pointedly	a	search,	an	inquiry,	for	God.	That
was	 the	 idea	 behind	 the	 device.	 But	 the	 ultimate	 result	 is	 that	 people	 have
become	absolutely	worldly,	because	there	is	no	other	life,	only	one	life	--	enjoy	it
the	most	you	can!	Enjoy	it,	don't	postpone	it	for	tomorrow.
The	 Indian	 device	 failed	 because	 people	 became	 lethargic.	 It	 worked	 with
Buddha.	 He	 really	 created	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 movements	 in	 the	 world.
Thousands	of	people	renounced	their	lives,	became	sannyasins.	That	means	they
devoted	 their	whole	energy	 to	 the	 search	 for	 truth,	because	he	created	 such	an
atmosphere	of	boredom	that	you	would	be	bored	if	you	missed.
But	what	happened	 later	on	was	 just	 the	opposite.	 It	 is	 always	going	 to	be	 so.
The	 Masters	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 misunderstood.	 And	 people	 are	 so	 cunning,	 so
diplomatic,	they	can	always	find	ways	to	destroy	the	whole	device.
Jesus	knows	perfectly	that	life	is	eternal,	reincarnation	is	a	fact.	He	mentions	it
in	indirect	ways,	maybe	to	his	very	close	disciples	he	mentions	it,	but	not	to	the
masses	--	for	a	simple	reason:	he	has	seen	that	it	failed	in	India,	something	else
has	to	be	tried.
I	 am	 creating	many	 devices	 because	 others	 have	 failed.	 I	 know	perfectly	well
that	my	 devices	will	 function	 only	while	 I	 am	 here;	 they	 are	 bound	 to	 fail	 as
every	other	device	has	failed.	I	am	not	living	in	any	fool's	paradise	thinking	that
my	devices	will	remain	as	I	create	them	forever.	When	I	am	not	there,	people	are
going	to	distort	them.	But	that	is	natural,	it	has	to	be	accepted;	there	is	nothing	to
worry	about.
Hence	 those	who	 are	 here,	 please	 be	 alert	 and	 use	 these	 devices	 as	 deeply	 as
possible.
While	I	am	here	these	devices	will	function	perfectly	well.	In	my	hands	they	can
be	 great	 situations	 for	 inner	 transformation,	 but	 once	 my	 hands	 are	 no	 more
visible	these	same	devices	will	be	in	the	hands	of	the	pundits	and	the	scholars,
and	then	the	same	story	will	be	repeated	as	it	has	been	in	the	past.
Beware,	be	watchful.	Don't	waste	time.
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Watch	This!	Stranger	than	Fiction
5	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909050
ShortTitle:
BESTIL05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 YOU	 TALKED	YESTERDAY	OF	 CHILDREN	ASSERTING	 THEIR
EGOS
AND	REBELLING	AGAINST	THEIR	PARENTS,	OF	BEING	ABLE	TO	SAY
NO!
AND	THUS	CREATING	A	SPINE,	AN	INDIVIDUALITY,	A	FREEDOM.
OSHO,	DO	WE	NOW	COME	TO	YOU	AND	SAY	YES!	SO	THAT	WE	CAN
DROP
THAT	 EGO?	 BY	 DOING	 SO,	 WHAT	 WILL	 HAPPEN	 TO	 OUR
INDIVIDUALITY,	FREEDOM	AND	SPINE?
Nitin	Bharti,
IF	THE	EGO	 IS	LIKE	A	LADDER:	 you	 have	 to	 use	 it	 but	 you	 cannot	make
your	house	on	it.	Or,	the	ego	is	like	a	boat:	you	can	use	it	to	go	to	the	other	shore
but	then	you	need	not	carry	it	on	your	head	for	your	whole	life.	It	has	something
essential	 to	do,	but	 it	should	not	become	a	burden	forever;	when	its	purpose	is
fulfilled	it	has	to	be	dropped.
Just	as	a	child	needs	to	say	no,	the	mature	person	one	day	needs	to	say	yes.	If	the
child	cannot	say	no	to	the	parents,	to	the	authorities,	to	the	teachers,	if	the	child
is	unable	to	disobey,	he	will	not	attain	to	any	individuality;	he	will	not	have	any
form,	 shape.	 He	 will	 be	 just	 part	 of	 the	 mob	 mind,	 the	 crowd.	 He	 will	 be
impotent;	 he	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 stand	 on	 his	 own.	He	will	 not	 have	 any	 self-
respect.	He	will	remain	hotchpotch,	an	ugly	mess.
He	will	not	 really	be	born;	he	will	 remain	 in	a	psychological	womb	his	whole
life,	ungrown-up.	He	has	to	learn	how	to	disobey.	And	the	wise	parents	will	help
him	 to	 disobey	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 disobeying	 does	 not	 distort	 him.	They	will
give	him	opportunities	to	disobey,	they	will	give	him	opportunities	to	say	no.
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	biblical	parable.	God	said	to	Adam,	"Don't	eat
the	fruit	of	 this	 tree,	 the	tree	of	knowledge.	If	you	eat	 the	fruit	of	 this	 tree	you
will	be	expelled	 from	paradise."	 It	 is	 a	great	 temptation!	 It	 is	giving	Adam	an
opportunity	to	disobey.
And	also	God	said	to	Adam,	"If	you	eat	the	fruit	of	this	tree	you	will	become	a
mortal;	right	now	you	are	immortal.	Secondly,	if	you	eat	the	fruit	of	this	tree	you
will	 become	 like	 gods,	 all-knowing."	 You	 see	 the	 temptation,	 the	 multi-
dimensional	temptation?	First:
"You	will	 be	 able	 to	 become	 like	 gods,	 all-knowing."	Who	would	 not	 like	 to
become	like	gods,	all-knowing?	And	the	second,	the	danger,	the	risk:	"If	you	eat
from	this	tree	you	will	become	mortal;	death	will	start	happening	to	you."	Now	it
is	a	challenge!	Danger	always	attracts,	and	death	is	the	greatest	danger.
God	did	not	leave	any	possibility	for	Adam	to	remain	obedient.	There	must	have
been	millions	of	trees	in	the	Garden	of	Eden	and	only	one	tree	of	knowledge;	if
Adam	had	been	left	alone,	on	his	own	he	might	not	have	discovered	it	up	to	now.
But	 God	 didn't	 leave	 it	 up	 to	 him;	 he	 pointed	 out	 the	 tree	 and	 created	 the
temptation.	You	think	the	serpent	did	it?	If	the	serpent	did	it,	then	he	must	have
been	in	the	service	of	God.
A	 small	 child	was	 telling	 his	mother...the	mother	 had	 asked,	 "What	 have	 you
been	taught	today	in	Sunday	school?"
He	 said,	 "We	 have	 been	 told	 the	 biblical	 story	 of	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 and	 their
expulsion.
Adam	and	Eve	were	told	not	to	eat	 the	fruit	of	the	tree	of	knowledge,	 then	the
servant	of	God	came	and	tempted	them."
The	mother	said,	"Servant?	You	must	have	misunderstood	--	it	is	not	servant,	it
is	serpent!"
But	my	feeling	is	that	the	child	is	right:	the	serpent	must	have	been	in	the	service
of	 God,	 must	 have	 been	 in	 the	 secret	 police	 department	 of	 God,	 the	 FBI	 or
something	like	that.
And	in	all	civilizations	the	serpent	has	always	represented	wisdom.	Jesus	says:
"Be	wise	like	serpents	and	innocent	 like	doves."	Wise	like	serpents?	God	must
have	used	the	most	wise	animal	to	convey	the	message,	the	temptation,	to	Adam
and	Eve.
The	message	was	given	to	Eve,	not	to	Adam;	since	then	it	has	been	always	so.
The	salesman	comes	 to	 the	wife	not	 to	 the	husband.	The	moment	 the	husband
leaves	 for	 the	 office	 the	 salesman	 comes	 and	knocks	 on	 the	 door,	 because	 the
woman	can	be	 tempted	more	easily.	The	husband	will	argue,	will	be	stubborn,
will	not	listen,	but	the	wife	is	easily	tempted.
One	 advertising	 company	 was	 told	 by	 a	 big	 manufacturer	 of	 television	 sets,
"Find	 out	 some	 new	 way	 to	 tempt	 people	 to	 purchase	 our	 product."	 The
advertising	 company	 suggested,	 "Send	 letters	 to	 all	 the	 addresses	 given	 in	 the
telephone	directory.	The	letters	should	be	in	the	husbands'	names	but	on	top	of
the	letters	there	should	be	a	note	in	red	letters:	'Personal.	Private.	Not	to	be	read
by	anybody	else.'	Then	the	wives	are	bound	to	read	them;	then	you	cannot	miss."
And	 once	 they	 read	 them,	 once	 THEY	 are	 impressed...all	 husbands	 are
henpecked	 --	 universally	 so,	 categorically	 so.	 To	 be	 a	 husband	 and	 to	 be
henpecked	 are	 synonymous,	 and	 I	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 it.	 It	 has	 been	 so
since	Adam;	that	is	the	way	things	are.
Once	Eve	was	convinced,	tempted,	Adam	followed	suit.
If	parents	are	really	wise	they	will	create	opportunities	for	the	children	to	say	no
--	 and	 beautiful	 opportunities.	 Right	 now,	 unknowingly,	 they	 give	 ugly
opportunities.	For	example,	you	say	to	the	child,	"Don't	smoke	cigarettes."	This
is	an	ugly	opportunity	because	 the	child	WILL	smoke	--	you	have	 tempted	 the
child	to	smoke	cigarettes.	You	should	have	told	him	something	better	--	"Don't
go	out	in	the	sun.	Don't	climb	the	tree."
But	 you	 say	 to	 the	 children,	 "Don't	 eat	 ice	 cream."	 You	 should	 say	 to	 them,
"Don't	eat	fruit"	--	that	will	be	a	wise	temptation!	"Eat	as	much	ice	cream	as	you
want,	but	don't	eat	fruit."	Give	them	such	a	temptation	as	leads	them	to	say	no	to
you	 but	 does	 not	 harm	 their	 lives;	 otherwise	 they	 will	 remain	 deformed	 their
whole	lives.
Two	old	men	--	one	was	seventy,	the	other	was	eighty	--	were	talking.	They	were
talking	about	 the	most	embarrassing	moments	 in	 their	 lives.	The	seventy-year-
old	man	 said,	 "I	have	never	 told	anybody,	but	you	are	my	bosom	 friend	and	 I
know	you	will	keep	it	a	secret.	The	most	embarrassing	moment	of	my	life	was
when	 I	was	 caught	 looking	 through	 the	 keyhole	 of	 a	 bathroom	when	 a	 young
woman	was	taking	a	bath."
The	other	said,	"Forget	all	about	it	--	each	child	does	that.	There	is	nothing	to	be
so	much	embarrassed	about."
And	the	old	man	said,	"I	know	--	but	it	was	yesterday."
Once	wrong	 habits	 are	 formed	 they	 continue;	 they	 remain	 like	 hangovers	 and
they	become	more	and	more	 ingrained,	more	and	more	deep	 they	go	 into	your
unconscious.
Nitin,	I	am	perfectly	in	favor	of	creating	an	ego	in	the	child,	because	without	an
ego	the	child	will	remain	a	part	of	the	parents;	he	will	never	be	an	individual	on
his	own.	But	 the	no	 and	 the	no-saying	 creates	only	 a	 superficial	 individuality;
because	no	is	negative	it	cannot	create	REAL	individuality.
The	 superficial	 individuality	 is	 called	 personality;	 the	 ego	 gives	 you	 a
personality.	But	it	is	better	than	having	nothing	at	all	at	least	it	gives	you	a	sense
of	your	being,	it	defines	you.	But	don't	remain	in	it	forever;	it	is	a	passing	phase,
a	stepping-stone.	From	the	personality	you	have	to	reach	individuality.	From	the
superficial	 individuality	 you	 have	 to	 attain	 to	 a	 core	 individuality.	 That	 is
possible	only	by	saying	yes.	But	yes	is	significant	only	when	you	have	become
able	 to	 say	 no.	 If	 you	 say	 yes	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 your	 yes	 carries	 no
meaning	at	all;	it	is	meaningless.	If	you	are	capable	of	saying	no	then	your	yes
has	meaning,	as	much	meaning	as	your	no	has	strength.
Hence	 the	 society	 teaches	 you	 a	 false,	 superficial	 personality.	 But	 when	 you
come	to	a	Buddha,	to	a	Jesus,	to	a	Krishna,	to	a	Mahavira	--	to	a	MASTER,	to	a
real	Master	--	he	will	teach	you	how	to	say	yes.	He	will	take	away	your	no,	he
will	take	away	your	personality.
The	personality	 is	 like	 the	 shell	of	an	egg	 --	 the	ego	 is	 the	 shell	of	 the	egg.	 It
protects	the	life	within	for	the	time	being	only;	beyond	that	it	will	be	destructive.
The	egg	has	to	be	broken	one	day	so	the	bird	can	come	out.	No	only	creates	a
shell	around	you.	It	is	good,	it	is	needed,	it	is	protective,	but	one	day	you	have	to
come	out	of	it.	That's	the	function	of	religion.
Hence	religion	is	possible	only	in	a	civilized,	cultured,	sophisticated	society.	The
more	educated	 the	 society	 is,	 cultured,	 civilized,	 the	higher	 the	 religion	 that	 is
possible.	 The	 primitive	 people	 also	 have	 religion,	 but	 their	 religion	 is	 not	 yet
religion;	 it	 is	magic,	 it	 is	 ritual.	Hence	 they	have	not	produced	Buddhas.	They
are	good	people,	simple,	beautiful,	innocent....
You	can	go	around	India;	there	are	many	tribes	still,	aboriginals,	very	beautiful
people.	I	have	been	to	them,	I	have	lived	with	them,	I	have	enjoyed	their	beauty
and	 their	 innocence.	 But	 they	 have	 never	 created	 a	 Buddha	 in	 their	 whole
history;	at	the	most	they	create	magicians.	Their	religion	consists	only	of	rituals,
formalities;	 it	 never	 attains	 to	 the	 heights	 of	 prayer	 and	 meditation;	 it	 never
reaches	 to	 the	heights	of	a	Patanjali	or	a	Lao	Tzu	or	a	Mohammed.	They	have
not	produced	any	Koran,	Upanishads,	Bible;	they	cannot.	They	are	people	who
have	not	yet	said	no,	they	are	people	who	have	not	yet	disobeyed.	They	have	not
eaten	the	fruit	of	knowledge,	they	are	simply	ignorant.
Eat	the	fruit	of	knowledge!	Become	knowledge-able,	and	one	day	renounce	your
knowledge.	 Then	 wisdom	 is	 born.	 Wisdom	 is	 not	 ignorance;	 wisdom	 is
renunciation	of	knowledge	--	but	first	the	knowledge	is	required.
Before	you	can	become	a	Christ	you	will	have	 to	become	a	disobedient	Adam
and	Eve,	 otherwise	Christ	 is	 not	 possible.	Christ	 is	 the	 higher	 stage	 of	Adam.
Adam	says	no,	creates	a	personality;	Christ	says	yes,	drops	 the	old	personality
and	attains	to	a	new	individuality	which	is	eternal.	By	saying	no	Adam	becomes
a	 mortal;	 by	 saying	 yes	 Christ	 becomes	 an	 immortal.	 By	 saying	 no	 Adam
becomes	only	apparently	a	god;	by	saying	yes	Christ	REALLY	becomes	a	god.
The	process	is	paradoxical,	hence	the	question.	I	can	understand	your	question,
Nitin:	WHAT	WILL	HAPPEN	TO	OUR	INDIVIDUALITY,	FREEDOM	AND
SPINE?
The	spine,	the	individuality,	the	freedom,	that	is	created	by	no	is	only	a	transitory
process.	You	have	to	go	beyond	it;	it	is	a	boat	that	has	to	be	left	behind.	When
you	have	reached	the	roof	you	leave	the	ladder;	it	is	a	bridge	to	be	crossed.
Now	learn	how	to	say	yes.	No	you	know	perfectly	well.	In	fact,	Nitin	has	come
from	Africa	 to	 be	 here	with	me	 forever	 --	 against	 his	 parents.	 This	 was	 your
ultimate	 no!	Those	who	 come	 to	me,	 they	 have	 to	 come	 against	 their	 parents,
because	parents	are	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	Christians,	Buddhists,	Jainas...I	am
nobody!	Coming	 to	me,	 a	Christian	will	 become	 a	 non-Christian	 and	 a	Hindu
will	 become	 a	 non-Hindu	 and	 a	 Mohammedan	 will	 become	 a	 non-
Mohammedan.
I	am	not	creating	a	new	religion	here,	but	a	new	man,	a	new	consciousness.	I	am
not	creating	a	new	philosophy	or	 theology,	but	 a	new	vision,	 a	new	humanity.
You	have	to	come	out	of	your	old,	rotten	ideologies.	Hence	parents	are	bound	to
be	against	you;	they	will	not	like	you	to	be	here.	I	can	understand	them	--	they
are	worried	about	you,	they	care	for	you.	Their	worry	is	utterly	wrong,	but	still	it
shows	their	care	and	their	love.
They	would	 like	you	 to	 remain	 in	 the	 fold	 in	which	 they	 and	 their	 forefathers
have	always	lived.	They	are	worried	you	may	go	astray	--	they	have	not	attained
to	anything	by	being	in	the	fold,	but	still	they	would	like	you	to	be	in	the	fold.	It
is	safer,	familiar,	more	secure.
Nitin	 has	 come	 with	 his	 wife	 against	 the	 desires	 of	 his	 parents;	 that	 was	 the
ultimate	no.
Now	 I	 will	 teach	 you	 how	 to	 say	 the	 ultimate	 yes.	 The	 function	 of	 the	 no	 is
complete;	 if	 you	go	on	 saying	no	here	 too,	 then	you	are	misunderstanding	me
completely.	 I	am	not	your	 father,	 I	am	not	your	mother!	 I	have	 to	 take	 this	no
away	from	you	and	create	yes.
The	work	of	the	no	is	complete;	now	you	need	a	higher	flight,	now	you	need	a
higher	 altitude	 of	 being.	 That	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 yes,	 because	 yes	 is
positive.
No	 gives	 you	 a	 negative	 kind	 of	 individuality,	 yes	 gives	 you	 a	 positive
individuality.	 A	 negative	 individuality	 is	 not	 real	 individuality,	 it	 is	 only
personality,	 a	mask	 --	 good	 in	 its	 own	 time.	But	 remember	 always	 that	 every
means	has	 to	be	 transcended	some	day	or	other.	 If	you	want	 to	reach	 the	goal,
one	day	you	will	have	to	leave	the	way.
Buddha	used	to	say,	"Once	I	saw	five	fools	carrying	a	boat	on	their	heads	in	the
marketplace.	I	asked	them,	'What	is	the	matter	with	you?	Why	are	you	carrying
this	boat?'
"They	said,	'This	boat	helped	us	to	come	from	the	other	shore	to	this	shore;	this
boat	has	helped	our	lives.
If	this	boat	had	not	been	available...	on	the	other	shore	there	were	wild	animals,
and	if	we	had	had	to	remain	there	even	only	for	one	night	we	would	be	dead	by
now.	We	can	never	forget	the	great	blessing	that	the	boat	has	bestowed	upon	us.
Out	of	sheer	thankfulness	we	will	carry	the	boat	forever	on	our	heads!'"
Buddha	said,	"This	is	 the	way	of	the	stupid	people.	They	carry	scriptures,	 they
carry	ideologies,	they	carry	philosophies,	on	their	heads.	Rather	than	becoming	a
help,	the	boat	has	become	a	hindrance.	It	would	have	been	better	if	they	had	died
on	the	other	shore;	at	least	they	would	have	been	saved	carrying	this	weight	their
whole	lives.	Now	this	WEIGHT	will	kill	them!"
No	is	good,	but	nobody	can	live	in	the	no,	nobody	can	make	a	home	out	of	the
no.	No	 is	 suicidal	 --	 use	 it,	 but	 go	 beyond	 it.	Be	 alert	 and	 conscious	 that	 you
don't	become	encaged	in	the	no-saying.	Attain	to	yes;	use	no	as	a	stepping-stone.
By	being	part	of	 this	commune	you	have	 to	 learn	how	to	say	yes	with	 totality.
That	is	trust,	that	is	surrender,	that	is	faith.	That's	what	will	become	a	bridge,	the
final	 bridge	 between	 you	 and	 God.	 It	 will	 not	 destroy	 your	 freedom;	 it	 will
simply	make	your	freedom	positive.
There	 are	 three	 kinds	 of	 freedom.	 One	 is	 'freedom	 from';	 that	 is	 a	 negative
freedom:	freedom	from	the	father,	 freedom	from	the	mother,	 freedom	from	the
church,	freedom	from	the	society.	That	is	a	negative	kind	of	freedom	--	freedom
from	--	good	in	the	beginning,	but	that	can't	be	the	goal.	Once	you	are	free	from
your	 parents,	what	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do?	Once	 you	 are	 free	 from	your	 society
then	you	will	be	at	loss.	You	will	lose	all	meaning	and	significance	because	your
whole	life	had	meaning	in	saying	no.	Now	whom	to	say	no	to?
A	young	man	came	to	me;	he	wanted	to	marry	a	girl.	He	was	a	brahmin,	a	very
high-caste	brahmin,	very	 respected	 in	 the	city,	and	he	wanted	 to	marry	a	Parsi
girl.	The	parents	were	obviously	against	 it,	absolutely	against	 it.	They	had	told
him	that	 if	he	married	 that	girl	 they	would	disown	him	--	and	he	was	 the	only
son.	The	more	 stubborn	 the	 parents	 became,	 the	more	 the	 young	man	became
determined	to	marry	the	girl.	He	had	come	to	ask	my	advice.
I	said,	"Just	meditate	for	three	days	on	one	thing:	are	you	really	interested	in	the
girl	or	are	you	simply	interested	in	saying	no	to	your	parents?"
He	said,	"Why	do	you	say	this	to	me?	I	LOVE	the	girl,	I	am	absolutely	in	love!"
I	said,	"If	you	say	so,	then	get	married.	But	I	don't	see	any	love	in	your	eyes,	I
don't	 see	 any	 love	 in	 your	 heart.	 I	 don't	 see	 any	 fragrance	 of	 love.	 I	 only	 see
some	negative	aura	around	you,	a	black	aura	around	your	face.	 It	says	you	are
determined	to	go	against	your	parents	--	the	girl	is	only	an	excuse."
But	he	wouldn't	listen.	If	he	was	not	going	to	listen	to	his	parents,	how	was	he
going	 to	 listen	 to	me?	 He	 got	married.	 After	 six	months	 he	 came	 to	 see	me,
crying	and	weeping.
He	fell	at	my	feet	and	said,	"You	were	right	--	I	don't	love	that	woman,	that	love
was	false.	You	were	right,	your	diagnosis	was	right.	Now	that	I	have	got	married
to	her	and	I	have	denied	my	parents'	order,	all	love	has	disappeared."
This	is	'freedom	from'.	This	is	not	much	of	a	freedom,	but	better	than	nothing.
The	 second	 kind	 of	 freedom	 is	 'freedom	 for';	 that	 is	 positive	 freedom.	 Your
interest	 is	 not	 in	denying	 something,	 rather	you	want	 to	 create	 something.	For
example,	you	want	to	be	a	poet,	and	just	because	you	want	to	be	a	poet	you	have
to	say	no	to	your	parents.	But	your	basic	orientation	is	that	you	want	to	be	a	poet
and	your	parents	would	like	you	to	be	a	plumber.	"Better	be	a	plumber!	That	is
far	more	paying,	 far	more	economical,	 far	more	respectable	 too.	Poet?!	People
will	think	you	are	crazy!	And	how	are	you	going	to	live?
And	 how	 are	 you	 going	 to	 support	 your	wife	 and	 your	 children?	 Poetry	 can't
pay!"
But	if	you	are	for	poetry,	ready	to	risk	all,	 this	is	a	higher	freedom,	better	than
the	first.	It	is	positive	freedom	--	'freedom	for'.	Even	if	you	have	to	live	a	life	of
poverty	you	will	be	happy,	you	will	be	cheerful.	Even	if	you	have	to	chop	wood
to	 remain	 a	 poet	 you	will	 be	 utterly	 blissful,	 fulfilled,	 because	 you	 are	 doing
what	you	wanted	to	do,	you	are	doing	your	own	thing.	This	is	positive	freedom.
And	 then	 there	 is	 a	 third	 freedom,	 the	 highest;	 in	 the	 East	 we	 have	 called	 it
MOKSHA	--
the	 ultimate	 freedom,	 which	 goes	 beyond	 both	 the	 negative	 and	 the	 positive.
First	 learn	 saying	no,	 then	 learn	 saying	yes,	 and	 then	 just	 forget	 both,	 just	 be.
The	third	freedom	is	not	freedom	against	something,	not	for	something,	but	just
freedom.	One	is	simply	free	--
no	 question	 of	 going	 against,	 no	 question	 of	 going	 for.	 'Freedom	 from'	 is
political,	hence	all	political	 revolutions	fail	 --	when	 they	succeed.	 If	 they	don't
succeed	they	can	go	on	hoping,	but	the	moment	they	succeed	they	fail,	because
then	they	don't	know	what	to	do.
That	 happened	 in	 the	 French	 Revolution,	 that	 happened	 in	 the	 Russian
Revolution...that	happens	to	every	revolution.	A	political	revolution	is	 'freedom
from'.	 Once	 the	 Czar	 is	 gone,	 then	 you	 are	 at	 a	 loss:	What	 to	 do	 now?	Your
whole	 life	was	devoted	 to	 fighting	 the	Czar;	you	know	only	one	 thing,	how	to
fight	 the	 Czar.	 Once	 the	 Czar	 is	 gone	 you	 are	 at	 a	 loss;	 your	 whole	 skill	 is
useless.	 You	 will	 find	 yourself	 very	 empty.	 'Freedom	 for'	 is	 artistic,	 creative,
scientific.	And	'just	freedom'	is	religious.
Nitin,	before	I	can	teach	you	MOKSHA	--	just	freedom,	neither	for	nor	against,
NETI	 NETI,	 neither	 this	 nor	 that,	 but	 pure	 freedom,	 just	 the	 fragrance	 of
freedom	--	before	I	can	teach	it	to	you,	you	will	have	to	know	the	positive	one:
'freedom	for'.
Hence	the	commune.	It	is	a	creative	commune;	we	are	going	to	be	creative	in	a
thousand	and	one	ways.	 In	every	possible	way	we	are	going	 to	be	creative,	 so
that	you	can	learn	how	to	say	yes	to	life.
When	 the	 yes	 has	 destroyed	 your	 no,	 both	 can	 be	 thrown	 away.	 That	 is	 the
ultimate	in	joy,	in	freedom,	in	realization.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 IS	 LIFE	 NOT	 SOMETIMES	 FAR	 MORE	 SURPRISING	 THAN
FICTIONS
THEMSELVES?
Praghosh,
NOT	ONLY	SOMETIMES	BUT	ALWAYS.	Fictions	are	only	reflections	of	life	-
-	how	can	they	be	more	surprising?	No	fiction	is	so	fictitious	as	life	itself;	life	is
made	of	the	stuff	called	dreams.	Hence	the	mystic	says	life	is	illusion,	MAYA,	a
mirage.	It	is	a	mystery,	unfathomable,	infinite,	beginningless,	endless.
So	 I	will	 not	 say	 that	 only	 sometimes	 it	 is	 surprising;	 each	moment	 of	 it	 is	 a
surprise,	but	you	don't	feel	it.	You	feel	it	only	once	in	a	while	when	something
really	extraordinary	happens	and	you	are	 shocked	 into	wakefulness.	Only	 then
do	you	understand	that	life	is	far	more	surprising	--	because	you	are	fast	asleep.
Unless	something	out	of	the	way,	very	outlandish,	far	out,	happens,	and	you	are
shaken	and	shocked	 into	a	 little	bit	of	awareness,	only	 then	do	you	see	what	a
miracle	life	is,	how	much	surprise	it	contains.
But	to	the	Buddhas	each	moment	of	it	 is	a	surprise,	because	it	 is	each	moment
new,	 renewing	 itself.	 Everything	 is	 extraordinary	 if	 you	 are	 alert,	 if	 you	 are
sensitive	 enough,	 if	 you	 are	 open	 enough.	 Then	 the	 whole	 of	 life,	 from	 the
mundane	to	the	sacred,	from	the	lowest	to	the	highest,	the	whole	of	life	is	such	a
mystery	 that	you	are	always	 in	 for	a	surprise.	 It	depends	on	your	sensitivity,	 it
depends	on	your	awareness,	it	depends	how	conscious	you	are.
A	 Zen	 Master	 was	 asked,	 "What	 did	 you	 use	 to	 do	 before	 you	 became
enlightened?"
He	 said,	 "I	 used	 to	 chop	wood	and	carry	water	 from	 the	well	 for	my	Master's
house."
The	inquirer	asked,	"And	now	that	you	have	become	enlightened,	what	do	you
do?"
He	said,	"I	chop	wood	and	carry	water."
The	inquirer	was	obviously	puzzled.	"Then	what	is	the	difference?	You	used	to
chop	wood	 and	 carry	water,	 you	 still	 chop	wood	 and	 still	 carry	water	 --	 then
what	is	the	difference?"
The	Master	laughed.	He	said,	"The	difference	is	infinite!	Before	I	simply	used	to
chop	wood	not	knowing	the	beauties	that	surrounded	me.	Now	chopping	wood	is
not	 the	 same	because	 I	 am	not	 the	 same.	My	eyes	 are	not	 the	 same,	my	heart
beats	in	a	different	rhythm	--	my	heart	beats	with	the	heart	of	the	whole.	There	is
a	synchronicity,	there	is	harmony.
"Carrying	water	from	the	well	is	the	same	from	the	outside,	but	my	interior	has
become	 totally	different.	 I	 am	a	new	man,	 I	 am	born	again!	Now	 I	 can	 see	 in
depth,	 I	 can	 see	 into	 the	 very	 core	 of	 things,	 and	 each	 pebble	 has	 become	 a
diamond,	and	each	song	of	a	bird	is	nothing	but	a	call	from	God,	and	whenever	a
flower	blooms,	God	blooms	for	me.
Looking	 into	people's	eyes	 I	am	looking	 into	God's	eyes.	Yes,	on	 the	surface	I
am	carrying	on	the	same	activity,	but	because	I	am	not	the	same	the	world	is	not
the	same."
Start	becoming	a	 little	more	alert	and	watch	 things,	and	you	will	be	surprised.
Life	is	mysterious,	unexplainable	--	life	is	absurd.	You	cannot	prove	anything	for
or	against.
Tertullian	 says:	 I	 believe	 in	 God	 because	 God	 is	 absurd	 --	 CREDO	 QUIA
ABSURDUM.
WHY	do	I	believe	in	God?	--	because	God	is	absurd!	No	logic	can	prove	him,	no
logic	can	disprove	him.	It	is	a	love	affair.	And	life	is	very	hilarious	because	it	is
very	ridiculous	too.
If	you	become	a	little	alert	you	will	find	love,	light,	laughter,	everywhere!
It	is	said	that	when	Hotei	attained	enlightenment	he	started	laughing.	He	lived	at
least	 thirty	 years	 afterwards;	 he	 continued	 laughing	 for	 thirty	 years.	 Even	 in
sleep	his	disciples	would	hear	him	giggling.	His	whole	message	to	the	world	was
laughter;	he	would	go	from	one	town	to	another	just	laughing.	He	would	stand	in
one	marketplace,	 then	 in	 another,	 just	 laughing,	 and	 people	would	 gather.	His
laughter	 had	 something	 of	 the	 beyond	 --	 a	Buddha's	 laughter.	He	 is	 known	 in
Japan	as	'the	laughing	Buddha'.
His	 laughter	was	 so	 contagious	 that	 whosoever	 heard	 it	 would	 start	 laughing.
Soon	the	whole	marketplace	would	be	laughing;	crowds	would	gather	and	laugh
and	they	would	ask	him,	"Just	give	us	a	few	instructions."
He	would	say,	"Nothing	more,	this	is	enough.	If	you	can	laugh,	if	you	can	laugh
totally,	it	is	meditation."
Laughter	 was	 his	 device.	 It	 is	 said	 many	 people	 became	 enlightened	 through
Hotei's	laughter.	That	was	his	only	meditation:	to	laugh	and	help	people	laugh.
Just	watch	life,	and	you	will	be	surprised.
A	 Scot,	 an	 Italian	 and	 a	 Jewish	 man	 were	 dining	 together	 in	 an	 expensive
restaurant.
When	the	bill	arrived,	the	Scotsman	promptly	declared	that	he	would	take	it.
Now	this	is	impossible!	"The	Scotsman	promptly	declared	that	he	would	take	it."
Can	 you	 believe	 it?	 Is	 it	 possible?	 It	 has	 never	 happened,	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to
happen	--	but	that	day	it	happened.
The	next	day	the	newspapers	carried	the	headline:	"JEWISH	VENTRILOQUIST
SHOT
IN	RESTAURANT."
McLeod	and	his	wife	visited	one	of	the	circus	airfields	where	they	charge	fifty
dollars	for	a	plane	ride	just	around	the	town.	Naturally	he	would	not	spend	the
money	until	the	pilot	approached	him.
"I	will	take	you	and	your	wife	up	for	nothing,"	he	said.	"It	will	be	a	rough	ride	--
but	 if	 you	 and	your	wife	 let	 out	 one	 single	word,	 one	 sound,	while	we	 are	up
there,	then	it	is	double."
McLeod	accepted	the	challenge	and	up	they	went.	It	really	was	a	rough	ride	--
dives,	loops,	turnovers.	Finally	they	landed.
"You	win,"	said	the	pilot.	"Not	a	word	out	of	you."
"No,"	said	the	Scotsman.	"But	I	almost	did	speak	when	my	wife	fell	out."
Just	 look	 at	 people!	 And	 each	 person	 is	 a	 fiction,	 and	 each	 person	 carries	 so
many	 stories	 in	 his	 heart.	Love	people,	 search	 in	 their	 souls,	 and	you	will	 not
need	 to	go	 to	 the	movies	 and	you	will	 not	need	 to	 read	novels.	EACH	person
contains	many	novels	and	many	movies,	but	we	don't	listen	to	people.	We	don't
see	people	face	to	face,	we	don't	hold	their	hands,	we	don't	allow	them	to	open
their	hearts.
For	 the	 first	 time	 humanity	 has	 become	 very	 closed.	 Each	 person	 is	 living	 a
windowless	 life,	 completely	 encapsulated.	 Open	 up!	 Throw	 your	 doors	 and
windows	open.	Let	wind	and	rain	and	sun	come	in	Let	people	enter	into	you	and
you	 enter	 into	 people's	 lives.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 the
tremendous	mystery	of	life.	And	to	be	aware	of	the	mystery	of	life	is	to	be	aware
of	God.
One	day	King	Arthur	decided	to	go	in	search	of	the	Holy	Grail,	but	he	hesitated
to	leave	his	knight,	Sir	Lancelot,	with	his	wife,	Queen	Guinevere,	so	he	went	to
ask	the	wise	Merlin	for	advice.	Merlin	told	him	to	give	him	a	few	days	to	think	it
over.
A	few	days	 later	King	Arthur	returned	 to	see	Merlin	who	proudly	showed	him
his	new	invention	--	a	chastity	belt.	Puzzled,	King	Arthur	looked	at	it	and	said,
"But	this	is	no	good	--	it	has	the	hole	in	the	wrong	place!	"
Merlin	said,	"No,	no!	You	just	watch	this."	And	he	picked	up	a	pencil	and	put	it
in	the	hole.	The	pencil	snapped	in	half.
King	Arthur	was	absolutely	delighted	and	departed	with	the	belt.	After	putting	it
on	 his	 wife	 he	 set	 off	 in	 search	 of	 the	 Holy	 Grail,	 his	 mind	 at	 peace	 about
Guinevere	and	Sir	Lancelot.
Many	weeks	later	he	returned	--	and	immediately	lined	up	all	his	knights	in	the
castle	courtyard	and	told	them	to	pull	down	their	trousers.	Lo	and	behold,	all	the
knights	were	castrated	except	the	one	at	the	end	of	the	line,	Sir	Lancelot.
King	Arthur,	distraught	at	having	mistrusted	his	gallant	knight	--	the	only	one	to
have	upheld	the	honor	of	Queen	Guinevere	--	went	up	to	him	and	said,	"I	give
you	my	humble	apologies.	You	are	the	knight	that	I	mistrusted	the	most,	but	in
fact	you	are	the	most	loyal.	I	will	grant	you	anything	that	you	ask	for.	Say	what
it	is	that	you	desire."
And	Sir	Lancelot	went,	"Mm	mm	mm...."
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 IN	 A	 LECTURE	 YOU	 SPOKE	 ABOUT	 NON-IDENTIFICATION,
THAT	ONE
SHOULD	BECOME	A	WITNESS.	BUT	IN	THE	WEST	MANY	PEOPLE	ARE
ALIENATED,	THEY	CANNOT	GET	INVOLVED.	THEY	ARE	SIMPLY
INDIFFERENT	 TO	 EVERYTHING.	 THAT	 IS	 ALSO	 MY	 EXPERIENCE.
PLEASE
CAN	 YOU	 MAKE	 CLEAR	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 NON-
IDENTIFICATION
AND	ALIENATION?
Nicolaas,
THE	 DIFFERENCE	 IS	 VERY	 CLEARCUT,	 but	 subtle	 and	 delicate	 To	 be
indifferent	means	to	be	dead;	it	does	not	mean	that	you	are	a	witness,	it	simply
means	you	are	disconnected	from	life	and	all	the	sources	that	nourish	you.	You
are	only	uprooted;	that	is	alienation.
Uproot	a	tree	and	it	will	start	dying.	Its	greenness	will	be	gone,	soon	the	foliage
will	wither	away,	flowers	will	not	come	any	more.	The	spring	will	come	and	go
but	the	tree	will	know	nothing	of	it;	it	has	become	alienated	from	existence.	It	is
no	longer	rooted	in	the	earth,	it	is	no	longer	related	to	the	sun,	it	no	longer	has
any	bridge.	It	is	surrounded	by	walls,	all	bridges	are	broken.
That's	what	 has	 happened	 to	 the	modern	man:	 he	 is	 an	 uprooted	 tree.	He	 has
forgotten	how	to	relate	with	existence,	he	has	forgotten	how	to	whisper	with	the
clouds	 and	 the	 trees	 and	 the	 mountains.	 He	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 the
language	of	silence...	because	it	is	the	language	of	silence	that	becomes	a	bridge
between	you	and	the	universe	that	surrounds	you.	The	universe	knows	no	other
language.	On	the	earth	there	are	 three	thousand	languages;	existence	knows	no
language	except	the	language	of	silence.
An	English	general	was	talking	to	a	German	general	after	the	Second	World	War.
The	German	was	very	puzzled;	he	said,	"We	had	the	best	equipped	army	in	the
world,	the	best	war	technology,	the	greatest	leader	that	history	has	ever	known,
the	best	of	generals,	and	such	a	devoted	army.	Why?	--	why	couldn't	we	win?	It
seems	 simply	 Impossible	 that	 we	 have	 been	 defeated!	 It	 is	 unbelievable	 --
although	it	has	happened	--	but	we	cannot	believe	it!"
The	English	general	 laughed	and	said,	"There	 is	one	 thing	you	have	 forgotten:
before	 starting	 any	 battle	 we	 used	 to	 pray	 to	 God;	 that	 is	 the	 secret	 of	 our
victory."
The	German	said,	"But	we	also	used	to	pray	to	God,	every	morning!"
The	English	general	 laughed	and	he	said,	"We	know	that	you	used	to	pray,	but
you	pray	in	German	and	we	pray	in	English	--	and	who	told	you	that	God	knows
German?"
Everybody	 thinks	his	 language	 is	 the	 language	of	God.	Hindus	 say	Sanskrit	 is
the	holy	language,	the	divine	language	--	DEVA	VANI	--	God	understands	only
Sanskrit.	 And	 ask	 the	 Mohammedans	 --	 then	 God	 understands	 only	 Arabic;
otherwise,	why	should	he	have	revealed	the	Koran	in	Arabic?	And	ask	the	Jews	-
-	then	God	understands	only	Hebrew.
God	 understands	 no	 language	 because	 God	 means	 this	 total	 existence.	 God
understands	only	silence	--	and	we	have	forgotten	silence.
Nicolaas,	because	we	have	forgotten	silence,	forgotten	the	art	of	meditation,	we
have	become	alienated.	We	have	become	small,	dirty,	muddy	pools	and	we	don't
know	how	 to	go	and	be	one	with	 the	ocean.	We	go	on	becoming	dirtier	 every
day,	 shallower	 every	 day,	 because	 the	water	 goes	 on	 evaporating.	We	 are	 just
muddy,	our	life	has	no	clarity.	Our	eyes	cannot	see	and	our	hearts	cannot	feel.
This	 state	 is	 the	 state	 of	 indifference;	 it	 is	 a	 negative	 state.	 The	mystics	 have
called	it	'the	dark	night	of	the	soul'.	It	is	not	witnessing,	it	is	just	the	opposite	of
witnessing.
When	I	say	be	a	witness	I	am	not	saying	become	uprooted	from	life.	I	am	saying
live	life	in	all	its	multi-dimensionality,	and	YET	remain	aware.	Drink	the	juices
of	 life,	 but	 remember	 that	 while	 you	 are	 drinking	 the	 juices	 of	 life	 there	 is	 a
consciousness	 in	 you	 beyond	 all	 action,	 all	 doing.	 Drinking,	 eating,	 walking,
sleeping,	are	all	acts,	and	there	is	a	consciousness	in	you	which	simply	reflects,	a
mirrorlike	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 not	 indifference.	 The	mirror	 is	 not	 indifferent	 to
you,	 otherwise	 why	 should	 it	 bother	 to	 reflect	 you	 at	 all?	 It	 is	 immensely
interested	in	you,	it	reflects	you,	but	it	does	not	become	attached.	The	moment
you	are	gone,	you	are	gone;	 the	mirror	does	not	 remain	 remembering	you;	 the
mirror	now	reflects	that	which	is	in	front	of	it.
A	witnessing	 consciousness	 lives	 in	 life	 but	 with	 tremendous	 non-attachment,
with	 great	 non-possessiveness;	 it	 possesses	 nothing.	 It	 lives	 totally,	 it	 lives
passionately,	but	still	knowing	that	"I	don't	possess	anything."
The	witnessing	consciousness	is	not	an	island	separate	from	the	ocean;	it	is	ONE
with	 the	 ocean.	But	 still	 a	miracle,	 a	 paradox:	 even	 being	 one	with	 the	 ocean
there	is	a	part	that	remains	above	the	ocean	like	the	tip	of	the	iceberg.	That	part
is	 your	witnessing	 soul.	 To	 create	 it	 is	 the	 greatest	 treasure	 in	 the	world;	 one
becomes	 a	Buddha	by	 creating	 it	Falling	 into	 indifference	you	become	 simply
unconscious,	you	go	into	a	coma.	You	lose	all	joy	in	life;	the	celebration	of	life
stops	for	you.	Then	you	don't	exist,	you	only	vegetate.	Then	you	are	not	a	man
but	only	a	cabbage	--	and	that	too	uprooted.	You	become	more	and	more	rotten
every	day,	you	stink;	no	fragrance	comes	out	of	you.	The	same	energy	that	could
have	 become	 fragrance	 passing	 through	 a	witnessing	 soul	 becomes	 a	 stinking
phenomenon	by	becoming	indifferent.
But	 I	 can	 understand	 your	 question,	 Nicolaas.	 From	 the	 outside	 sometimes
indifference	and	witnessing	may	appear	alike.	This	has	been	one	of	the	greatest
calamities	 --	 because	 they	APPEAR	 alike.	Hence	 true	 sannyas	was	 lost	 and	 a
phony	 sannyas	 became	 predominant.	 I	 call	 sannyas	 phony	 if	 it	 lives	 in
indifference.
The	phony	sannyas	is	escapist.	It	teaches	you	not	to	enjoy	,life,	it	teaches	you	not
to	love	music,	it	teaches	you	not	to	cherish	beauty.	It	teaches	you	to	destroy	all
the	 sources	 that	beautify	your	existence.	 It	 teaches	you	 to	escape	 to	 the	caves,
ugly	caves,	to	turn	your	back	towards	the	world	that	God	has	given	as	a	gift	to
you.
The	phony	sannyas	is	not	only	against	the	world,	it	is	against	God	too,	because
to	be	against	the	world	is	to	be	against	the	creator	of	the	world.	If	you	hate	the
painting	you	are	bound	to	hate	the	painter.	If	you	dislike	the	dance,	how	can	you
like	 the	 dancer?	 God	 is	 the	 painter,	 the	 world	 is	 his	 painting.	 God	 is	 the
musician,	the	world	is	his	music.	God	is	the	dancer,	NATARAJ,	and	the	world	is
his	dance.	If	you	renounce	the	world,	indirectly	you	are	renouncing	God.
The	phony	 sannyas	 is	 escapist;	 cheap	 it	 is,	 easy	 it	 is.	 It	 is	very	easy	 to	escape
from	the	world	and	live	in	a	cave	and	feel	holy	--	because	there	is	no	opportunity
for	you	to	be	unholy,	no	challenge.	Nobody	insults	you,	nobody	criticizes	you.
There	is	nobody	present,	so	you	can	think	that	now	there	is	no	anger	in	you,	you
can	feel	that	now	there	is	no	ego	in	you.	Come	back	to	the	world!...
I	know	people	who	have	lived	for	thirty	years	in	the	Himalayas,	and	when	they
come	back	to	the	world	they	are	surprised	to	find	that	they	are	the	same	people,
nothing	has	changed.	Thirty	years	of	Himalayas	 --	 a	 sheer	wastage!	But	while
they	were	 in	 the	Himalayas	 they	were	 thinking	 they	 had	 become	 very	 sacred,
very	 holy,	 they	 had	 become	 great	 saints.	 And	 there	 were	 reasons	 for	 them	 to
think	so,	because	no	anger,	no	ego,	no	greed...	there	is	nothing	to	possess	so	you
feel	 non-possessive,	 nobody	 to	 compete	 with	 so	 you	 feel	 non-competitive,
nobody	hurts	your	ego	so	you	don't	feel	the	ego	at	all.
Things	are	felt	only	when	there	 is	some	hurt.	For	example,	you	feel	your	head
only	 when	 there	 is	 a	 headache.	When	 the	 headache	 disappears,	 the	 head	 also
disappears	 from	 your	 consciousness;	 you	 cannot	 feel	 your	 head	 without	 a
headache.	You	become	headless	when	there	is	no	headache.
Living	in	the	Himalayan	cave	you	have	escaped	from	all	the	hurts	of	the	world
which	make	you	aware	again	and	again	of	the	ego,	of	the	anger,	of	the	greed,	of
jealousy....
Coming	back	into	the	world	you	will	find	everything	is	back	again	--	and	back
with	 a	 vengeance,	 because	 for	 thirty	 years	 it	 has	 been	 accumulating.	You	will
bring	a	bigger	ego	than	you	had	ever	taken	with	you	to	the	Himalayas.
The	sannyas	that	teaches	indifference	is	phony.
The	sannyas	that	teaches	you	how	to	live	in	the	world	and	yet	float	above	it	like
a	lotus	flower,	like	a	lotus	leaf,	remaining	in	the	water	and	yet	untouched	by	the
water,	remaining	in	the	world	and	yet	not	allowing	the	world	to	enter	into	you,
being	in	the	world	yet	not	being	OF	the	world,	that	is	true	renunciation.
That	 true	 renunciation	 comes	 through	 witnessing;	 it	 is	 not	 indifference.
Indifference	will	make	you	alienated,	being	alienated	you	will	feel	meaningless,
joyless,	accidental.
Feeling	 accidental,	 the	 desire	 to	 commit	 suicide	 will	 arise,	 is	 bound	 to	 arise.
Why	 go	 on	 living	 a	meaningless	 life?	Why	 go	 on	 repeating	 the	 same	 rut,	 the
same	routine,	every	day?	If	there	is	no	meaning,	why	not	end	it	all,	why	not	be
finished	with	it	all?
Hence	many	many	more	people	are	committing	suicide	every	day,	many	many
people	are	going	mad	every	day.	The	rate	of	suicide	and	madness	is	increasing.
Psychoanalysis	seems	to	be	of	no	help.	Psychoanalysts,	in	fact,	commit	suicide
more,	go	mad	more,	than	any	other	profession.
Nothing	seems	to	help	the	modern	man	--	because	the	indifference	is	too	heavy;
it	has	created	a	dark	cloud	around	him.	He	cannot	see	beyond	his	own	nose;	he	is
suffocating	 in	his	 lonely	world.	The	walls	 are	 so	 thick,	 thicker	 than	 the	China
Wall,	that	even	when	you	love	you	are	hidden	behind	your	wall,	your	beloved	is
hidden	behind	her	wall.	There	are	two	China	Walls	between	you.	You	shout,	but
no	communication	seems	to	be	possible.
You	 say	 one	 thing,	 something	 else	 is	 understood;	 she	 says	 something,	 you
understand	 something	 else.	 Husbands	 and	 wives	 sooner	 or	 later	 come	 to	 one
understanding:	that	it	is	better	not	to	talk.	It	is	better	to	keep	silent,	because	the
moment	you	utter	a	word	misunderstanding	is	bound	to	follow.
All	communication	has	disappeared	from	the	world.	Everybody	is	living	a	lonely
life	--
lonely	 in	 the	 crowd;	 the	 crowd	 is	 becoming	bigger	 and	bigger	 every	day.	The
world	population	is	exploding;	there	have	never	been	so	many	human	beings	as
there	are	today
--	and	man	has	never	been	so	lonely.	Strange!	Why	are	we	so	lonely	amidst	such
a	crowd?	Communication	has	failed.
Gaffney	 staggered	 into	 a	 bar	 crying.	 "What	 happened?"	 asked	 Brady	 the
bartender.
"I	did	a	horrible	thing,"	sniffed	the	drunk.	"Just	a	few	hours	ago	I	sold	my	wife
to	someone	for	a	bottle	of	Scotch."
"That's	awful,"	said	Brady.	"Now	she	is	gone	and	you	want	her	back,	right?"
"Right,"	said	Gaffney,	still	crying.
"You	 are	 sorry	 you	 sold	 her	 because	 you	 realized	 too	 late	 that	 you	 love	 her,
right?"
"Oh,	no,"	said	the	Irishman,	"I	want	her	back	because	I	am	thirsty	again!"
It	is	becoming	more	and	more	difficult	to	understand	people,	because	such	thick,
dense	 indifference	 surrounds	 everybody	 that	 even	 if	 you	 shout	 you	 can't	 be
heard,	 or	 they	 hear	 something	which	 you	 have	 not	 said	 at	 all.	 They	 hear	 that
which	they	want	to	hear	or	they	hear	that	which	they	CAN	hear.	They	hear	not
what	is	said	but	what	their	mind	interprets.
Two	black	teenage	girls	wandered	into	a	photographer's	shop	in	Alabama	to	have
their	photos	taken.
The	photographer	sat	them	down	and	then	busied	himself	under	the	black	cloth
behind	his	camera.
"What's	he	doin'?"	whispered	one	girl	to	her	friend.
"He's	gonna	focus,"	she	whispered	back.
"What,	both	of	us?"
D'Angelo,	 the	 immigrant,	 had	 to	 travel	 by	 train	 from	 New	 York	 to	 Raleigh,
North	Carolina.	When	he	was	met	by	a	cousin	it	was	obvious	that	D'Angelo	was
in	a	very	bad	mood.
"What	happened?"	asked	his	relative.
"Ah,	 that	 goddamn-a	 conductor	 he	 tell-a	 me	 no	 do	 this	 and	 no	 do	 that!"
exclaimed	 the	 Italian.	 "I	 take	 out-a	 my	 sand-a-wich	 and	 he	 say,	 'No	 --	 inna
dining	car.'	I	start-a	drink-a	some	vino	and	he	say,	'No	--	inna	cluba	car.'	So	I	go
inna	club-a	car,	meet-a	girl,	and	she	take-a	me	back	to	her	empty	compartment
and	 then	 the	 goddamn	 conductor	 he	 come	 along	 ana	 yell,	 'No'foka	 Virginia,
no'foka	Virginia!'"
You	 understand	 that	which	 you	 can	 understand.	Your	mind	 is	 always	 there	 to
interpret,	and	the	interpretation	is	yours.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	what	you	have
been	 told	 People	 are	 becoming	more	 and	more	 lonely,	 and	 out	 of	 desperation
they	 are	 trying	 every	 possible	 way	 to	 communicate.	 Nothing	 seems	 to	 help.
Nothing	can	help	unless	they	start	learning	the	art	of	silence.	Unless	a	man	and
woman	know	what	silence	is,	unless	 they	can	sit	 together	 in	deep	silence,	 they
cannot	merge	into	each	other's	being.	Their	bodies	may	penetrate	each	other,	but
their	souls	will	remain	far	apart.	And	when	souls	meet	there	is	communion,	there
is	understanding.
Indifference	makes	you	dull,	makes	you	mediocre,	makes	you	unintelligent.	 If
you	are	indifferent	your	sword	will	lose	all	sharpness.	That's	how	it	happens	to
the	monks	in	the	monasteries.	Look	at	their	faces,	in	their	eyes,	and	you	can	see
that	something	is	dead.
They	are	like	corpses	walking,	doing	things	robotlike	because	those	things	have
to	be	done.	They	are	not	really	involved;	they	have	become	utterly	incapable	of
getting	involved	in	anything.
This	is	a	very	sad	situation,	and	if	it	continues,	man	has	no	future.	If	it	continues,
then	the	third	world	war	is	bound	to	happen	--	so	that	we	can	commit	a	global
suicide;	so	there	is	no	need	to	commit	suicide	retail,	we	can	commit	it	wholesale.
In	one	single	moment	the	whole	earth	can	die.
Hence	meditation	has	 become	 something	 absolutely	needed,	 the	only	hope	 for
humanity	 to	 be	 saved,	 for	 the	 earth	 to	 still	 remain	 alive.	 Meditation	 simply
means	the	capacity	to	get	involved	yet	remain	unattached.	It	looks	paradoxical	--
all	great	truths	ARE
paradoxical.	 You	 have	 to	 experience	 the	 paradox;	 that	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to
understand	it.
You	can	do	a	thing	joyously	and	yet	just	be	a	witness	that	you	are	doing	it,	that
you	are	not	the	doer.
Try	with	small	 things,	Nicolaas,	and	you	will	understand.	Tomorrow	when	you
go	for	a	morning	walk,	enjoy	the	walk	--	 the	birds	in	the	trees	and	the	sunrays
and	the	clouds	and	the	wind.	Enjoy,	and	still	remember	that	you	are	a	mirror;	you
are	reflecting	the	clouds	and	the	trees	and	the	birds	and	the	people.
This	 self-remembering	 Buddha	 calls	 sammasati	 --	 right	 mindfulness.
Krishnamurti	calls	it
'choiceless	awareness',	the	Upanishads	call	it	'witnessing',	Gurdjieff	calls	it	'self-
remembering',	but	they	all	mean	the	same.	But	it	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to
become	 indifferent;	 if	you	become	 indifferent	you	 lose	 the	opportunity	 to	self-
remember.
Go	on	 a	morning	walk	 and	 still	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 not	 it	You	 are	 not	 the
walker	but	the	watcher	And	slowly	slowly	you	will	have	the	taste	of	it	--	it	is	a
taste,	it	comes	slowly.	And	it	is	the	most	delicate	phenomenon	in	the	world;	you
cannot	get	it	in	a	hurry.
Patience	is	needed.
Eat,	taste	the	food,	and	still	remember	that	you	are	the	watcher.	In	the	beginning
it	will	create	a	little	trouble	in	you	because	you	have	not	done	these	two	things
together.	 In	 the	 beginning,	 I	 know,	 if	 you	 start	 watching	 you	 will	 feel	 like
stopping	eating,	or	if	you	start	eating	you	will	forget	watching.
Our	consciousness	 is	one-way	 --	 right	now,	as	 it	 is	 --	 it	goes	only	 towards	 the
target.	 But	 it	 can	 become	 two-way:	 it	 can	 eat	 and	 yet	watch.	You	 can	 remain
settled	in	your	center	and	you	can	see	the	storm	around	you;	you	can	become	the
center	 of	 the	 cyclone.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 miracle	 that	 can	 happen	 to	 a
human	 being,	 because	 that	 brings	 freedom,	 liberation,	 truth,	 God,	 bliss,
benediction.
The	last	question
Question	4
OSHO,	CAN	YOU	ALSO	MAKE	MISTAKES?
Darshan,
NOT	A	FEW	BUT	MANY...PLENTY!	because	I	don't	 take	anything	seriously.
So	many	 times	my	sannyasins	write	 to	me,	"Osho..."	Subhuti	wrote	 just	a	 few
days	ago;	when	I	said	that	Napoleon	was	obsessed	with	food,	he	wrote	to	me,	"Is
it	Napoleon	or	Nero?"
Who	cares;	Subhuti?	Whichever	you	 like!	Sometimes	 I	 say	Nero,	 sometimes	 I
say	Napoleon.	I	am	not	a	very	learned	mm,	and	I	am	absolutely	happy	in	being
utterly	unlearned.
The	other	day	somebody	wrote:	 "You	said	 that	 the	gospels	were	written	a	 few
centuries	 after	 Jesus.	 This	 is	 not	 correct!"	But	 I	 have	 not	 told	 you	 that	 this	 is
correct!	If	it	is	incorrect	it	makes	no	difference	to	me.	He	has	also	written	--	must
be	a	 learned	man!...you	have	 fallen	 in	wrong	company!	 --	he	has	also	written:
"You	said	that	it	was	translated	into	Latin	first."	To	me	Latin	and	Greek	are	all
the	same!	I	don't	understand	Latin,	I	don't	understand	Greek,	so	all	that	I	meant
was	that	it	was	translated	into	something	that	I	don't	understand!
Teertha	understands	 it	perfectly	well.	He	has	written	a	story.	He	has	written	 to
me:	Osho,	I	was	walking	down	M.G.	Road	one	day	when	I	saw	a	very	strange
sight:	 there	was	 this	man,	 right	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	 road,	moving	his	 arms	as
though	he	was	rowing	a	boat.	(Demonstrate,	but	mind	the	microphone!)
I	watched	for	a	while,	and	eventually	had	to	call	out	to	him	to	find	out	what	was
going	on.
"What	are	you	doing?"	I	shouted.
"Rowing	a	boat,	of	course!"	he	replied.
"But	you	are	not	in	a	boat"	I	called	back.
"I	 am	 not?!"	 he	 yelled,	 looking	 panic-stricken;	 and	 then	 started	 swimming	 as
hard	as	he	could.	(Demonstrate,	but	mind	the	microphone.)
Now	he	knows	that	I	can	hit	the	microphone	--	and	he	is	much	more	concerned
about	the	microphone!
I	 can	 commit	 mistakes	 a-plenty,	 but	 I	 am	 not	 deterred	 by	 them,	 I	 go	 on
committing	them	-
-	because	 if	 I	 start	 thinking	 that	no	mistake	has	 to	be	committed	 then	 I	cannot
relate	 to	 you	 what	 I	 want	 to	 relate.	 Then	 I	 will	 have	 to	 be	 absolutely	 silent,
because	the	truth	that	I	have	known	can	only	be	related	if	I	am	ready	to	commit
many	mistakes.	Then	too	it	is	not	related	as	it	is.
A	 telephone	 operator	 in	 San	Francisco	 says	 that	 the	 city's	Chinatown	 receives
fewer	calls	than	any	other	area	of	similar	size	in	the	city.	And	with	a	straight	face
she	 explained	 the	 reason:	 "I	 guess	 there	 are	 so	many	people	 named	Wing	 and
Wong	that	people	are	afraid	they	will	wing	the	wong	number."
I	am	not	afraid	--	I	go	on	winging	the	wong	number!	And	it	is	not	only	that	I	can
commit	mistakes...the	world	 is	 proof	 enough	 that	God	 also	 commits	mistakes.
Otherwise,	 do	you	 think	you	would	have	had	 any	 chance	of	 being	here	 in	 the
world?
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	speaking	to	Morarjibhai	Desai.	Seeing	Mulla	Nasruddin	in
orange,	 Morarjibhai	 Desai	 was	 obviously	 annoyed.	 He	 said	 to	 Nasruddin,
"Mulla,	what	turned	you	on	to	Rajneesh?"
'The	 day	 I	 saw	 him	walking	 out	with	 his	 hands	 folded,	 I	 knew	 then	 that	God
exists,"
replied	Mulla.
Morarji,	looking	at	Mulla	from	the	corner	of	his	eye,	asked,	"Hmmm,	and	what
do	you	feel	when	you	see	me?"
Mulla	said,	"That	God	can	also	make	mistakes."
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Only	Now
6	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909060
ShortTitle:
BESTIL06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	CAN	YOU	CLEAR	THIS	CONFUSION	IN	ME?	THE	OTHER	DAY
AT
DISCOURSE	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	DIFFERENT	WAYS	AND	PATHS
TO
GOD.	 THE	 CHRISTIAN	 FEELS	 HIS	 IS	 THE	 ONLY	WAY,	 THE	MOSLEM
FEELS
HIS	 IS	 THE	ONLY	WAY,	 AND	 SO	ON.	 NOW	ALL	OF	US	 HERE,	 YOUR
ENTIRE
FOLLOWING	--	DON'T	WE	TOO	BELIEVE	THAT	YOURS	IS	THE	MOST
APPEALING	AND	THEREFORE	THE	ONLY	WAY?	THEN	WHAT	IS	THE
DIFFERENCE?	 I	 CANNOT	 SEEM	 TO	 FIGURE	 IT	 OUT	 AND	 YET	 I	 AM
SURE
THERE	IS	DIFFERENCE.
GOD	IS	NOT	A	GOAL,	hence	there	can	be	no	way	to	God.	All	ways	are	wrong.
God	is	right	now,	this	very	moment.	God	is	always	in	the	present,	now	and	here,
and	always	now	and	here.	There	can	be	no	way	to	God.
The	very	idea	of	the	way	is	fallacious.	The	way	means	you	have	postponed;	the
way	 leads	 to	 tomorrow,	 and	 the	 tomorrow	 never	 comes.	 The	 way	means	 you
have	projected	 into	 the	 future:	God	 is	 somewhere	 else	 and	you	have	 to	 travel.
Then	religion	becomes	a	journey.	And	religion	is	not	a	journey,	it	is	already	the
case.
God	has	not	to	happen	to	you.	God	has	happened	because	you	are	alive.	What	is
life?
Who	is	breathing	in	you	and	who	is	conscious	in	you?	God	is	not	to	be	known,
God	is	the	knower.	God	is	not	the	object	that	you	have	to	see,	God	is	the	SEER
in	you.	This	is	the	most	fundamental	thing	I	would	like	you	to	remember.
What	I	am	teaching	here	is	not	a	way,	it	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	Hence
I	am	not	creating	a	religion,	I	am	not	creating	a	sect	--	I	am	simply	waking	you
up	to	the	reality	of	God.	Even	while	you	are	asleep	God	is	within	and	without;
even	in	your	sleep	you	are	in	God.
It	is	like	if	a	man	is	asleep	and	it	is	spring	and	the	flowers	are	blooming	and	the
birds	are	singing	and	the	trees	are	green,	celebrating	--	but	the	man	is	asleep.	He
is	unaware	of	the	spring,	he	is	unaware	of	the	flowers,	of	the	birds'	songs;	he	is
unaware	of	 everything	 that	 is	 happening.	But	 that	 does	not	mean	 that	 it	 is	 not
happening.	He	may	be	unaware,	he	may	be	asleep,	but	the	spring	has	come,	it	is
there.	Any	moment	the	man	can	open	his	eyes;	any	situation	may	help	him	to	be
awake.	And	suddenly	he	will	be	surprised	that	there	was	no	need	to	go	anywhere
--	all	was	already	here.
That	s	how	it	happens	when	a	man	really	wakes	up	--	not	that	one	has	to	travel
somewhere.	All	traveling	is	dreaming,	all	pilgrimage	is	dreaming,	desiring.	And
your	 so-called	 religions	 have	 made	 God	 a	 goal,	 and	 your	 mind	 is	 perfectly
satisfied	with	that	because	mind	can	exist	only	if	there	is	a	goal.	The	mind	needs
a	tension,	the	mind	needs	a	way	to	remain	tense.	If	there	is	a	goal	then	mind	can
remain	desiring	--	unfulfilled,	frustrated,	hoping	one	day	to	get	it.
This	is	how	mind	can	nourish	itself,	and	it	can	dream	about	the	joys	of	finding
God	and	the	beauties	and	the	blessings.	It	can	create	paradise	in	imagination	--
and	 all	 these	 are	 simply	 dreams	 of	 the	 mind.	 The	 moment	 you	 think	 of	 the
future,	you	have	slipped	out	of	reality	and	fallen	into	the	ditch	of	dreaming.	My
effort	here	is	to	bring	you	out	of	your	sleep	and	dreaming.
Zareen,	 I	 am	not	 teaching	a	way,	 so	you	cannot	claim	 that	my	way	 is	 the	best
way	--	it	is	not	a	way	at	all.	You	cannot	say	that	this	is	the	only	way,	because	I
am	saying	 there	 is	no	way	at	 all.	 I	 am	simply	 trying	 to	make	you	alert	 to	 that
which	is	already	there.	It	is	beating	in	your	heart,	it	is	God	beating	in	your	heart.
It	 is	pulsating	 in	your	being;	 every	 fiber	of	your	body,	of	your	being,	 is	 alive.
That	aliveness	is	God.
God	is	not	a	person	but	only	the	presence.	Feel	it	now!	If	you	can	ever	feel	it	you
can	only	feel	it	now	--	now	or	never.	Hence	I	don't	give	any	opportunity	for	your
mind.	You	would	like	me	to	say	something	about	how	to	find	God,	where	to	find
God,	where	to	go.
You	will	be	perfectly	happy	if	I	give	you	ways,	goals,	faraway,	distant	goals;	you
will	 be	 tremendously	 happy.	Why?	Because	 the	 goal	 helps	 you	 to	 remain	 the
same	as	you	are,	the	goal	helps	you	to	remain	asleep	and	dreaming.	It	becomes	a
new	dream,	a	new	desire,	a	new	ambition:	How	to	attain	God?	It	becomes	a	new
ego	trip.
I	am	shattering	your	egos,	because	your	egos	are	a	kind	of	shell	that	surrounds
you	 and	 keeps	 you	 oblivious	 of	 the	 reality.	 It	 keeps	 you	 encapsulated	 within
yourself,	does	not	allow	you	to	open	your	eyes	and	see	what	is	happening.
God	is	 this	 total	existence	happening.	Be	silent	and	know.	There	is	nowhere	to
go,	there	is	nothing	to	achieve,	no	ambition	has	to	be	fulfilled.	God	has	already
decided	to	be	inside	you;	that's	why	you	are	alive.
So,	 Zareen,	 don't	 get	 unnecessarily	 confused.	 I	 am	 not	 proposing	 a	 way	 in
competition	 with	 the	Mohammedan	 and	 the	 Christian	 and	 the	 Hindu	 and	 the
Parsi.	What	I	am	saying	has	nothing	to	do	with	Hinduism,	Jainism,	Buddhism.
What	I	am	saying	is	simply	a	statement,	a	naked,	bare	statement	of	the	fact	that
YOU	ARE	GOD!	already,	as	you	are.
Nothing	has	to	be	changed	at	all.	Only	one	thing	has	to	happen	and	that	is	not	a
change	really	but	just	 the	other	side	of	you.	One	side	is	sleep,	 the	other	side	is
awakening.	 One	 side	 of	 you,	 one	 aspect	 of	 your	 coin,	 is	 sleep,	 darkness,	 the
night	part;	the	other	side	is	the	day	part.	Just	wake	up...and	you	will	'he	surprised
that	 there	was	no	need	to	desire	anything.	God	has	already	given	it	 to	you.	He
has	 given	 himself:	 he	 lives	 in	 you,	 he	 resides	 in	 you.	 If	 I	 can	 help	 you	 to
remember	this,	that's	all.
Zareen,	that's	why	you	feel	the	difference	but	you	cannot	figure	it	out.	This	is	the
difference.	All	 religions	 are	ways;	 all	 religions	 are	new	directions	 for	 the	 ego,
new	 projections,	 new	 desires,	 and	 sometimes	 far	 more	 dangerous	 than	 the
ordinary	desire	 is.	A	man	desiring	money	 is	not	 in	 such	a	mess	as	a	man	who
desires	God,	because	money	can	be	FOUND	by	desiring;	money	can	ONLY	be
found	by	 desiring,	 and	God	 can	 never	 be	 found	by	desiring.	God	 can	 only	 be
found	by	non-desiring.
So	miserable	is	the	man,	most	miserable	is	the	man	who	desires	God.	The	man
who	 is	 greedy	 for	money	 is	 not	 in	 such	 a	 great	mess;	 he	 is	 far	more	 sane	 --
because	money	can	be	found	only	if	you	desire	and	work	hard	for	 it,	compete,
struggle.	If	you	desire	political	power,	then	be	madly	after	it;	that	is	the	only	way
to	attain	it.	It	will	not	come	if	you	go	on	sitting	IN	your	room	waiting	for	it;	it
will	never	knock	on	your	door.	You	can	wait	for	millions	of	lives	--	nobody	will
come	and	knock	on	your	door	and	say	to	you	that	you	have	been	chosen	to	be
the	prime	minister	of	the	country	or	the	president.	You	will	have	to	fight	for	it,
you	will	have	to	be	very	violent,	aggressive;	only	then	is	it	possible.
But	if	you	go	in	search	of	God	you	will	miss.	The	very	search	will	be	the	cause
of	your	missing.	Where	are	you	going?	He	is	inside	and	you	are	going	outside.
All	going	is	going	outside.	Go	to	Jerusalem	or	Kaaba	or	Kashi	or	Girnar	or	Bodh
Gaya:	 wherever	 you	 go,	 it	 is	 outside.	 All	 going	 is	 extrovert.	 Ingoing	 is	 not	 a
going	at	all.
What	is	ingoing?	When	you	don't	go	outside,	you	are	in.	It	is	not	really	a	going
at	all;	not	even	a	single	step	has	to	be	taken.	There	is	no	space	inside	where	you
can	walk	and	go	in.
When	it	is	said,	"Go	in,"	it	is	said	only	metaphorically.	What	is	actually	meant	is:
Stop	 going	 out.	 Stop	 completely,	 a	 full	 point,	 no	 more	 going	 outside.	 Then
suddenly	you	are	in
--	where	 else	 can	 you	 be	when	 you	 are	 not	 going	 outside?	When	 you	 are	 not
going	 to	 Kaaba	 and	 to	 Jerusalem	 and	 to	 Kashi,	 where	 will	 you	 be?	 You	will
simply	 be	 inside,	 you	will	 find	 yourself	 inside.	Your	 outgoing	was	 preventing
you	from	finding	yourself.
Stop	 seeking:	 that	 is	 the	 only	way	 to	 find	God.	Stop	desiring:	 that	 is	 the	 only
way	to	find	God.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 an	 insight,	 not	 a	 religion.	 And	 you	 are	 not	 my	 followers,
remember,	 Zareen.	 Nobody	 here	 is	 my	 follower	 --	 -friends,	 of	 course,	 but
nobody	 is	 a	 follower.	 The	 orange	 color	 creates	 the	 illusion	 that	 people	 are
following	me.	Just	to	avoid	that,	I	cannot	wear	orange	myself.	I	love	the	color,
but	 if	 I	 start	 wearing	 orange	 then	 it	 will	 become	 a	 logical	 proof	 that	 you	 are
following	me.	Certainly,	you	are	not	following	me;	I	am	a	white	person,	you	are
orange	people	--	what	connection	can	there	be?
You	are	not	my	 followers	but	 friends.	And	because	 I	 love	orange,	out	of	your
love	you	have	accepted	 it.	 It	 is	not	a	uniform;	 it	 is	not	 that	by	wearing	orange
you	become	part	of	a	certain	sect	or	church.	There	is	no	church,	no	sect.	Because
I	 love	 orange,	 just	 out	 of	 love	 for	me	 you	 are	wearing	 orange.	 That	 is	 just	 a
gesture	of	love,	nothing	else.
Zareen,	you	are	not	my	follower,	nobody	is.	But	certainly	you	have	chosen	to	be
with	me.
That	is	your	choice.	You	have	fallen	in	love	with	a	madman,	and	when	you	fall
in	 love	with	 a	madman	a	 little	bit	 of	madness	 is	bound	 to	 enter	 in	your	heart.
That's	what	 is	happening	here.	 I	am	drunk,	 I	am	making	you	drunk.	What	else
can	 I	do?	But	 this	 is	not	 a	 religion.	Hence	you	can	 love	me	and	you	can	 love
Jesus,	and	there	is	no	conflict.	In	fact	by	loving	me	you	are	bound	to	love	Jesus.
By	 loving	me	you	will	 find	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 real	 taste	of	 Jesus.	By	being
with	me	you	can	love	Buddha.	In	fact	for	the	first	time	you	will	have	an	insight
of	what	Buddha	 is.	By	being	with	me,	 in	communion	with	me,	you	will	be	 in
communion	with	Zarathustra,	with	Lao	Tzu,	with	Mahavira,	with	Mohammed.
But	this	is	a	totally	different	approach	I	become	the	door,	and	when	you	enter	in
me	you	find	all	the	Buddhas	--	because	it	is	like	the	ocean:	you	can	taste	it	from
anywhere,	 it	 is	salty.	If	you	taste	me,	you	have	tasted	all	 the	Buddhas;	 it	 is	 the
SAME
taste.
You	 cannot	 find	Mohammed	 in	 the	 Koran,	 and	 you	 cannot	 find	 Jesus	 in	 the
Bible.	 You	 cannot	 become	 really	 religious	 by	 becoming	 part	 of	 a	 church	 --
Catholic,	 Protestant	 --	 it	 is	 impossible.	These	 are	 the	mischievous	 people	who
have	 been	 creating	 a	 very	 ugly	 humanity.	You	 can	 be	 a	 Jew	 only	 if	 you	 hate
Jesus.	You	can	be	with	Moses	only	if	you	are	not	with	Jesus;	that	is	a	condition.
And	if	you	are	with	Jesus	then	you	cannot	be	with	Buddha;	that's	a	condition.
That's	why	they	go	on	claiming,	"This	is	the	ONLY	way"	--	so	even	the	idea	that
there	are	other	possible	ways	drops	from	your	mind.	You	are	conditioned	in	such
a	 way	 by	 every	 religion	 that	 "This	 is	 the	 only	 truth	 THE	 ONLY	 truth,	 THE
truth,"	 and	 the	 conditioning	 becomes	 so	 strong,	 steel-like,	 that	 it	 becomes
impossible	for	you	to	think	that	there	can	be	other	ways,	absolutely	impossible.
Unless	 you	 are	 very	 intelligent,	 alert,	 watchful,	 unless	 you	 look	 at	 your
conditioning	and	become	a	witness,	it	is	impossible.
I	was	born	in	a	Jaina	family	and,	naturally,	just	as	everybody	else	is	conditioned,
the	 conditioning	 was	 imposed	 on	 me.	 But	 I	 was	 continuously	 watchful,
continuously	 alert,	 hence	 I	 was	 not	 caught	 by	 the	 conditioning.	 And	 the
conditioning	is	so	subtle	that	once	you	are	caught	in	it	you	become	incapable	of
thinking,	seeing;	anything	that	goes	against	your	conditioning,	you	become	deaf
to	it.
For	 example,	 a	 Jaina	 cannot	 think	 that	 Jesus	 is	 enlightened	 --	 impossible.	His
conditioning	 will	 not	 allow	 him.	 And	 his	 conditioning	 is	 very	 logical	 in	 his
mind,	and	you	cannot	argue	with	him.	He	will	say,	"Jesus	eats	meat:	how	can	an
enlightened	person	eat	meat?"	And	how	are	you	going	to	convince	him?	He	has
some	logic	there.
Jesus	drinks	wine.	He	not	only	drinks	wine	but	he	also	turns	the	whole	sea	into
wine	so	the	whole	world	can	become	drunk.	It	is	a	beautiful	story,	Jesus	turning
the	whole	sea	into	wine.	Can	an	enlightened	person	do	that?	Not	according	to	the
Jainas.	If	there	was	a	sea	full	of	wine	the	Jaina	TEERTHANKARA	would	come
and	do	 the	miracle	and	 turn	 it	 into	water	 --	 and	pure	water,	mind	you,	 filtered
water.	And	that	too	you	are	allowed	to	drink	only	in	the	day,	not	in	the	night.	If
you	are	really	a	Jaina	you	won't	drink	it	at	night,	not	even	water.
My	grandmother	would	not	even	allow	poor	tomatoes	in	the	house,	because	they
look	like	meat	--	just	the	appearance!	Only	when	she	died	could	tomatoes	enter
into	the	house.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 Jainas	 don't	 eat	 potatoes.	 Now,	 what	 have	 these	 poor
potatoes	done?	But	their	ideas:	anything	that	grows	under	the	earth	has	not	to	be
eaten;	only	things	that	grow	in	the	open,	in	the	sun,	because	anything	that	grows
in	 darkness	 creates	 darkness	 in	 you.	 Logic!	 It	 is	 TAMAS;	 it	 will	 create
TAMASIC	 energy	 in	 you;	 it	 will	 create	 a	 certain	 energy	 that	 will	 pull	 you
towards	 the	 earth,	 downwards.	 The	 potato	 is	 a	 secret	 agent	 of	 the	 earth	 --
beware!	Eat	things	that	grow	upwards	towards	the	sun;	they	will	help	you	to	be
uplifted,	 your	 energy	 will	 be	 sattvic,	 pure.	 You	 will	 be	 under	 the	 law	 of
levitation.	The	potato	pulls	you	downwards,	it	is	heavy.
And	 once	 you	 are	 conditioned	 from	 your	 very	 childhood,	 that's	 how	 it	 starts
appearing.
Then	 eat	 a	 potato	 and	 you	w	 ill	 feel	 very	 heavy	 and	 pulled	 downwards	 --	 all
these	things	will	happen	and	then	you	will	know	that	the	teaching	is	right.
Up	to	my	eighteenth	year	I	had	not	eaten	in	 the	night.	Then	I	went	with	a	few
friends	to	see	a	fort,	far	away	in	the	jungles.	They	were	all	Hindus,	and	the	fort
was	such	a	beauty	that	the	whole	day	they	were	not	interested	in	preparing	food.
I	 was	 the	 only	 Jaina,	 and	 I	 could	 not	 insist,	 because	 thirty	 people	 were	 not
interested	in	cooking	food	in	the	day.	So	I	kept	quiet.	In	the	night	they	cooked
food.	 Now,	 the	 whole	 day's	 wandering	 in	 the	 forest,	 in	 the	 ruins	 of	 that	 old
ancient	 castle	 --	 I	was	 tired,	 hungry;	 I	 had	 never	 known	 such	 hunger.	But	my
eighteen	years'	conditioning:	you	cannot	eat	in	the	night....
And	then	they	started	preparing	beautiful	food,	and	the	smell	of	the	food	and	so
close	by....	And	they	all	started	persuading	me;	they	said.	"Nobody	is	here,	and
nobody	will	tell	your	family,	your	parents.	Nobody	will	ever	know."	I	resisted	--
but	the	more	I	resisted,	the	more	I	was	tempted.	Finally	I	yielded,	I	ate.	The	food
was	delicious,	but	the	whole	night	I	suffered	hell.	I	vomited	at	least	seven	times.
That	eighteen	years'	conditioning	is	not	an	easy	thing	to	get	rid	of.	 I	could	not
digest	 that	 food;	my	whole	body	 revolted.	Until	 all	 the	 food	was	 thrown	out	 I
could	not	sleep.	And	then	it	was	certainly	a	proof	that	whatsoever	I	had	been	told
was	right.
But	those	thirty	people,	 they	slept	well.	I	had	only	one	consolation	--	 that	 they
would	all	suffer	in	hell.	The	whole	night	I	was	preparing	for	their	hell,	as	bad	a
hell	 as	 possible.	 I	 was	 suffering	 my	 hell,	 and	 they	 were	 sound	 asleep	 and
snoring.	I	was	consoling	myself,
"It's	okay	--	just	a	few	days	more,	then	I	will	be	in	paradise	and	you	will	be	in
hellfire.
Then	 you	will	 know.	 The	 pleasures	 of	 this	 life	 are	momentary,"	 I	 was	 telling
myself.
Your	so-called	religions	only	condition	you	against	other	 religions.	They	make
you	 antagonistic,	 they	 create	 conflict.	 They	 don't	 allow	 you	 to	 create	 a
brotherhood,	they	don't	allow	you	to	create	a	humanity.
Godfarb	was	invited	to	a	birthday	party	for	the	parish	priest.	Wanting	to	show	his
desire	to	be	a	good	member	of	the	community,	he	went	to	a	jewelry	store	to	get
the	good	father	a	birthday	present.
"What	would	you	recommend?"	asked	Godfarb	of	the	store	clerk.
"How	about	this	lovely	crucifix	with	Christ	on	it?"
"Do	you	think	he	would	like	that?"
"Absolutely."
"How	much	is	it?"
"One	hundred	and	fifty	dollars."
"One	hundred	and	fifty	dollars!"	exclaimed	Godfarb.	"Have	you	got	one	without
the	acrobat	on	it?"
Jesus	 looks	 like	 an	 acrobat	 --	 if	 you	 are	 a	 Jew,	 that's	 how	 it	 is.	 To	 a	 Jaina.
Mohammed	is	not	even	worthy	of	being	counted	among	the	saints	--	what	to	say
about	 the	messengers	of	God?	According	to	the	Buddhists,	even	Mahavira,	 the
TEERTHANKARA	of	the	Jainas,	is	not	worthy	of	being	counted	as	a	holy	man,
not	 even	 a	 moral	 man,	 because	 he	 moves	 naked	 --	 this	 is	 utter	 immorality.
Buddhists	cannot	forgive	him.	This	is	exhibitionism,	this	is	neurosis;	the	man	is
pathological!
You	 have	 been	 given	 ideas	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religions.	 I	 am	not	 giving	 you	 any
idea;	I	am	trying	to	take	all	ideas	away	from	you.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 there	 was	 a	 question	 saying:	 "Osho,	 sometimes	 you	 give
wrong	information	to	US."	SOMETIMES?	My	whole	effort	here	is	to	destroy	all
the	information	that	you	have.	All	information	is	wrong.	So	I	am	not	interested
in	giving	you	RIGHT	information,	because	all	information	has	to	be	taken	out.
You	 have	 to	 be	 left	 without	 information.	When	 you	 are	 without	 information,
without	knowledge,	not	knowing	what	is	what,	in	that	state	of	not-knowing	you
bloom.	God	starts	opening	up	within	your	being.
I	am	not	teaching	a	way,	I	am	not	giving	you	a	system	of	thought,	a	philosophy	-
-	 just	 the	 contrary.	 I	 am	 against	 all	 knowledge,	 all	 philosophy,	 all	 systems	 of
thought,	 all	 theologies,	 all	 religions.	 And	 by	 dropping	 all,	 you	 can	 be	 in
communion	with	me.	It	is	a	communion,	not	a	following.
A	communion	means	I	respect	you,	I	love	you	as	equals.	You	are	NOT	inferior,
just	asleep!	Your	sleep	does	not	make	you	inferior	at	all,	your	sleep	simply	gives
you	dreams.
In	fact,	when	Buddha	became	enlightened	somebody	asked	him,	"What	have	you
gained?"
He	said,	"I	have	not	gained	anything,	but	I	have	lost	many	things.	I	have	lost	my
desires,	my	dreams,	my	 sleep,	my	anger,	my	greed,	my	ambition,	my	ego	 --	 I
have	 lost	 so	 many	 things.	 And	 I	 have	 gained	 nothing,	 nothing	 at	 all.	 But	 by
losing	all	those	things	I	have	come	home.	I	have	become	just	myself	--	a	purity,	a
clarity,	a	cloudless	sky."
I	am	not	giving	you	anything;	on	the	contrary	I	am	taking	things	away	from	you.
In	fact,	if	you	think	in	terms	of	things,	you	are	far	superior	to	me,	because	you
have	 many	 more	 things	 which	 I	 don't	 have.	 You	 have	 a	 big	 ego...I	 cannot
compete	with	 you.	You	 have	 great	 greed,	 possessiveness,	 jealousy,	 anger.	You
have	a	thousand	and	one	things.	I	am	a	poor	man	compared	to	you,	very	poor,
nothing	to	claim	--	or	ONLY	nothing	to	claim.
And	if	you	are	courageous	enough,	you	are	going	to	become	a	nothing	yourself
sooner	or	later.
Zareen,	I	am	not	teaching	a	way,	I	am	not	giving	you	a	goal.	I	am	taking	all	ways
away,	all	goals	away.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHY	DON'T	YOU	GIVE	YOUR	DISCIPLES	A	CERTAIN	MODE	OF
CONDUCT?	 ISN'T	 A	 MORAL	 CHARACTER	 NECESSARY	 FOR	 A
SPIRITUAL
LIFE?
Mahendra	Singh,
MY	 WHOLE	 EFFORT	 is	 to	 give	 you	 a	 consciousness,	 not	 a	 character.
Consciousness	is	the	real	thing,	character	the	false	entity.	Character	is	needed	by
those	who	don't	have	consciousness.	If	you	have	eyes,	you	don't	need	a	walking-
stick	to	find	your	way,	 to	grope	your	way.	If	you	can	see	you	don't	ask	others,
"Where	 is	 the	 doer?"	 Character	 is	 needed	 because	 people	 are	 unconscious.
Character	is	just	a	lubricant;	it	helps	you	to	run	your	life	in	a	smooth	way.
George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 character	 is	 like	 a	 buffet.	 Buffers	 are	 used	 in
railway	 trains;	 between	 two	 compartments	 there	 are	 buffers.	 If	 something
happens,	 those	 two	 compartments	 cannot	 clash	 with	 each	 other;	 these	 buffers
prevent	 them	 from	 clashing	 with	 each	 other.	 Or	 it	 is	 like	 springs:	 cars	 have
springs	so	you	can	move	smoothly	--	even	on	an	Indian	road.	Those	springs	go
on	absorbing	the	shocks;	they	are	called	shock	absorbers.
That's	what	character	is:	it	is	a	shock	absorber.	People	are	told	to	be	humble.	If
you	learn	how	to	be	humble	it	is	a	shock	absorber.	By	learning	how	to	be	humble
you	will	 be	 able	 to	 protect	 yourself	 against	 other	 people's	 egos.	They	will	 not
hurt	you	so	much;	you	are	a	humble	man.	If	you	are	egoistic	you	are	bound	to	be
hurt	again	and	again.	The	ego	is	very	sensitive,	so	you	cover	up	your	ego	with	a
blanket	of	humbleness.	 It	helps,	 it	gives	you	a	kind	of	smoothness,	but	 it	does
not	transform	you.
My	 work	 consists	 of	 transformation.	 This	 is	 an	 alchemical	 school:	 I	 want	 to
transform	 you	 from	 unconsciousness	 into	 consciousness,	 from	 darkness	 into
light.	 I	 cannot	 give	 you	 a	 character;	 I	 can	 only	 give	 you	 insight,	 awareness.	 I
would	like	you	to	live	moment-tomoment,	not	according	to	a	set	pattern	given	by
me	 or	 given	 by	 the	 society,	 the	 church,	 the	 state.	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 live
according	 to	 your	 own	 small	 light	 of	 awareness,	 according	 to	 your	 own
consciousness.	Be	responsive	to	each	moment.
Character	means	you	have	a	certain	ready-made	answer	for	all	the	questions	of
life,	 so	 whenever	 a	 situation	 arises	 you	 respond	 according	 to	 the	 set	 pattern.
Because	 you	 respond	 according	 to	 the	 ready-made	 answer	 it	 is	 not	 a	 true
response,	it	is	only	a	reaction.
The	man	 of	 character	 reacts,	 the	man	 of	 consciousness	 responds:	 he	 takes	 the
situation	in,	he	reflects	the	reality	as	it	is,	and	out	of	that	reflection	he	acts.	The
man	of	character	reacts,	the	man	of	consciousness	acts.	The	man	of	character	is
mechanical;	 robotlike	 he	 functions.	 He	 has	 a	 computer	 in	 his	 mind,	 full	 of
information;	 ask	 him	 anything	 and	 a	 ready-made	 answer	 rolls	 down	 from	 his
computer.
A	man	of	consciousness	simply	acts	in	the	moment,	not	out	of	the	past	and	out	of
the	memory.	His	response	has	a	beauty,	a	naturalness,	and	his	response	is	true	to
the	 situation.	 The	 man	 of	 character	 always	 falls	 short,	 because	 life	 is
continuously	changing;	 it	 is	never	 the	 same.	And	your	 answers	 are	 always	 the
same,	they	never	grow	--	they	can't	grow,	they	are	dead.
You	have	been	told	a	certain	thing	in	your	childhood;	it	has	remained	there.	You
have	grown,	life	has	changed,	but	that	answer	that	was	given	by	your	parents	or
by	your	teachers	or	by	your	priests	is	still	there.	And	if	something	happens	you
will	function	according	to	that	answer	which	was	given	to	you	fifty	years	before.
And	 in	 fifty	 years	 so	 much	 water	 has	 gone	 down	 the	 Ganges;	 it	 is	 a	 totally
different	life.
Heraclitus	says:	You	cannot	step	in	the	same	river	twice.	And	I	say	to	you:	You
cannot	step	in	the	same	river	even	once,	the	river	is	so	fast-flowing.
Character	is	stagnant;	it	is	a	dirty	pool	of	water.	Consciousness	is	a	river.
Mahendra	Singh,	that's	why	I	don't	give	my	people	ANY	code	of	conduct.	I	give
them	 eyes	 to	 see,	 a	 consciousness	 to	 reflect,	 a	 mirrorlike	 being	 to	 be	 able	 to
respond	to	any	situation	that	arises.	I	don't	give	them	detailed	information	about
what	to	do	and	what	not	to	do;	I	don't	give	them	ten	commandments.	And	if	you
start	giving	them	commandments	then	you	cannot	stop	at	ten,	because	life	is	far
more	complex.
In	Buddhist	scriptures	there	are	thirty-three	thousand	rules	for	a	Buddhist	monk.
Thirty-three	 thousand	 rules!	 For	 every	 possible	 situation	 that	 may	 ever	 arise,
they	 have	 given	 a	 ready-made	 answer.	 But	 how	 are	 you	 going	 to	 remember
thirty-three	 thousand	 rules	 of	 conduct?	And	 a	man	who	 is	 cunning	 enough	 to
remember	thirty-three	thousand	rules	of	conduct	will	be	clever	enough	to	find	a
way	out	always;	if	he	does	not	want	to	do	a	certain	thing	he	will	find	a	way	out.
If	he	wants	to	do	a	certain	thing	he	will	find	a	way	out.
I	have	heard	about	a	Christian	saint:	somebody	hit	him	on	his	face,	because	just
that	day	in	his	morning	discourse	he	had	said,	"Jesus	says	if	somebody	slaps	you
on	one	cheek,	give	him	the	other."	And	the	man	wanted	to	try	it,	so	he	hit	him,
really	hit	him	hard	on	one	cheek.	And	the	saint	was	really	true,	true	to	his	word:
he	gave	him	the	other	cheek.
But	that	man	was	also	something:	he	hit	even	harder	on	the	other	cheek.	Then	he
was	surprised:	the	saint	jumped	on	the	man,	started	beating	him	so	hard	that	the
man	said,
"What	are	you	doing?	You	are	a	saint,	and	just	this	morning	you	were	saying	that
if	somebody	hits	you	on	one	cheek,	give	him	the	other."
He	said,	"Yes	--	but	I	don't	have	a	third	cheek.	And	Jesus	stops	there.	Now	I	am
free;	now	I	will	do	what	I	want	to	do.	Jesus	has	no	more	information	about	it."
It	happened	exactly	like	that	in	Jesus'	life	also.	Once	he	told	a	disciple,	"Forgive
seven	times."	The	disciple	said,	"Okay."	The	way	he	said,	"Okay,"	Jesus	became
suspicious;	he	said,	"Seventy-seven	times	I	say."
The	disciple	was	a	little	disturbed,	but	he	said,	"Okay	--	because	numbers	don't
end	at	seventy-seven.	What	about	seventy-eight?	Then	I	am	free,	then	I	can	do
what	I	want	to	do!"
How	many	rules	can	you	make	for	people?	It	is	stupid,	meaningless.	That's	how
people	are	 religious,	and	still	 they	are	not	 religious:	 they	always	find	a	way	 to
get	out	of	 those	 rules	of	 conduct	 and	commandments.	They	can	always	 find	 a
way	through	the	back	door.
And	 character	 can	 at	 the	most	 give	 you	 only	 a	 skin-deep,	 pseudo	mask	 --	 not
even	skin-deep:	just	scratch	your	saints	a	little	bit	and	you	will	find	the	animal
hidden	behind.	On	the	surface	they	look	beautiful,	but	only	on	the	surface.
I	 don't	want	 you	 to	 be	 superficial;	 I	want	 you	 to	REALLY	change.	But	 a	 real
change	happens	through	the	center	of	your	being,	not	through	the	circumference.
Character	 is	painting	 the	circumference,	consciousness	 is	 transformation	of	 the
center.
Once	a	carpenter	was	working	in	a	church	and	he	hit	his	thumb	with	a	hammer.
"Fuck's	sake!"	he	yelled.
The	Vicar	happened	to	be	passing	and	heard	him.	"You	cannot	use	that	kind	of
language	here.	This	is	a	house	of	God,"	he	admonished.
"Pardon,	 Vicar,	 but	 what's	 a	 man	 to	 say	 when	 he	 whacks	 his	 thumb	 with	 a
hammer?"
"You	can	say,	'God	preserve	me,'	or	'Jesus	help	me,'"	suggested	the	Vicar.
Later,	when	the	carpenter	was	sawing	a	piece	of	wood,	he	sawed	right	through
his	 finger,	which	dropped	 to	 the	 floor.	 "God	preserve	me!"	cried	 the	carpenter,
and	the	finger	jumped	back	upon	the	hand	and	healed	itself.
"Fuck's	sake!"	exclaimed	the	Vicar.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 ONCE	 SOMEONE	 ASKED	 ME	 THE	 MEANING	 OF	 THE
CHRISTIAN	 GOD,	 AND	 I	 ANSWERED	 SPONTANEOUSLY,	 "LOVE,
TRUST,	FEAR	OF	DEATH."
AT	 THAT	 TIME,	 AFTER	 YEARS	 OF	 A	WELL-CONDITIONED	OUTSIDE
LIFE
AND	A	REPRESSED	INNER	WORLD,	LOVE	AND	TRUST	HAPPENED	TO
ME	AS
AN	 INTENSE	 INNER	OPENING	AND	AN	OVERFLOWING	OF	ENERGY.
IT
HAPPENED	JUST	WHEN	I	HEARD	OF	YOU	AND	STARTED	DOING	THE
MEDITATIONS.	FROM	THE	OUTSIDE	IT	SEEMED	LIKE	MADNESS,	BUT
IN	ALL
THE	CRAZINESS	I	GOT	A	CLEAR,	STRONG	FEELING	OF	AN	ENERGY
WHICH
MOVES	ME	SOMEWHERE	I	HAVE	SEARCHED	FOR	ALL	THE	TIME.
ON	 THE	 OTHER	 SIDE,	 GREAT	 FEAR	 CAME	 UP.	 FEAR	 OF	 DEATH,
CONNECTED
WITH	A	CHILDHOOD	PICTURE	OF	AN	ANCIENT	GOD	WHO	HAD	THE
POWER
TO	PUNISH	HUMAN	BEINGS	WITH	DEATH	AND	ETERNAL	DARKNESS.
THIS
FEELING	 OF	 FEAR	 STILL	 CREATES	 A	 CERTAIN	 HEAVINESS	 IN	 MY
MIND
AND	STOPS	THE	NATURAL	FLOW	OF	ENERGY.
OSHO,	CAN	YOU	SPEAK	ABOUT	FEAR	AND	DEATH.
Anand	Marita,
THE	ORDINARY	GOD	is	nothing	but	a	projection	of	your	fear.	It	is	not	love,	it
is	 not	 trust	 --	 because	 love	knows	nothing	of	 fear,	 and	 trust	 knows	nothing	of
fear.	Just	as	light	has	never	seen	darkness,	love	and	trust	have	never	met	fear	But
in	 all	 the	 languages	 of	 the	 world	 there	 are	 expressions	 like	 'godfearing';	 the
religious	person	is	known	as
'godfearing'.	That	is	sheer	nonsense.	A	religious	person	cannot	be	godfearing,	he
can	only	be	godloving.	If	he	is	godfearing	he	is	not	religious	yet.	How	can	you
fear	God?
But	your	priests	 have	made	 so	much	 fuss	 about	hell,	 punishment,	 karma;	 they
have	made	so	much	fuss	about	a	God	who	is	a	very	angry	God	--	if	you	disobey
him	 he	will	 throw	 you	 into	 hellfire,	 and	 for	 eternity.	 It	 is	 the	 priest's	work	 to
create	 fear	 in	 you,	 because	 once	 fear	 is	 there	 you	 can	 be	 exploited.	A	 fearful
person	will	go	to	the	church,	to	the	mosque,	to	the	temple,	but	he	is	not	going	to
God,	he	is	going	to	the	priest	really,	and	the	priest	exploits	his	fear.
A	really	religious	person	has	a	totally	different	approach	towards	life:	it	is	not	of
fear,	it	is	of	tremendous	love.	His	God	comes	out	of	his	love,	his	God	is	nothing
but	 another	 name	 for	 his	 total	 love.	 His	 God	 is	 another	 name	 for	 his	 total
orgasmic	joy	with	existence.
And	that's	what	is	happening	to	you,	Marita.	Here,	being	with	me,	a	sannyasin,
meditating,	love	is	arising,	trust	is	arising.	But	at	the	same	time	you	are	feeling
fear.	This	fear	is	totally	different;	it	is	not	the	fear	created	by	the	priests,	because
I	don't	create	any	fear	in	you.	And	it	is	not	the	fear	of	death	either,	because	you
don't	know	anything	about	death	--	how	can	you	be	afraid	of	something	you	don
t	know	at	all?	To	be	afraid	you	have	to	be	at	least	acquainted	a	little	bit	--	you
cannot	be	afraid	of	the	absolutely	unknown,	and	death	is	absolutely	unknown.
It	 is	not	 fear	of	death	either.	 It	 is	 something	else	which	you	have	not	yet	been
able-to	figure	out	--	it	is	the	fear	of	a	dying	ego	which	appears	like	death.	It	is	a
death	in	a	way,	because	you	are	so	much	identified	with	the	ego,	with	the	idea	of
'I',	that	when	the	'I'
starts	evaporating	you	feel	as	if	you	are	dying	--	obviously.	Your	identification	is
disappearing,	you	are	passing	through	an	identity	crisis.	Don't	cling	to	the	ego,
let	it	go	--
because	 the	 death	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 your	 death.	 The	 death	 of	 the	 ego,	 on	 the
contrary,	is	your	real	birth.
Marita,	you	are	coming	closer	and	closer	to	the	birth,	to	the	real	birth.	You	will
be	reborn.
But	you	can	be	 reborn	only	when	death	 is	gone,	when	ego	 is	gone.	With	ego,
death	also	disappears,	remember	--	because	you	have	never	died.	How	can	you
die?	You	 are	 not	 born	 either.	You	 are	God!	You	 are	 divine	 energy!	You	 have
been	here	forever,	and	you	will	be	here	forever.	Birth	and	death	are	only	of	the
body	and	 the	mind,	 and	between	 the	body	and	 the	mind	exists	 the	 ego.	 It	 is	 a
creation,	 a	 conspiracy	 of	 body/mind:	 When	 the	 ego	 disappears	 your	 death
disappears	too.	Once	the	ego	is	gone,	you	will	be	surprised	that	you	are	eternal,
that	 you	 have	 been	 here	 always	 and	 always,	 and	 you	will	 be	 here	 always	 and
always.	You	are	part	of	the	truth	which	cannot	die.
Marita,	you	are	coming	close	to	something	immensely	valuable.	But	your	mind
is	creating	a	problem;	it	is	saying	to	you	that	it	is	fear	of	death.	It	is	not	fear	of
death,	it	is	fear	of	ego	disappearing.	Allow	it	to	go.
I	say	to	you:	This	is	how	it	has	happened	to	me.	This	is	how	it	is	happening	to
many	 of	my	 people.	 This	 is	 how	 it	 has	 always	 happened	 to	 all	 the	 Buddhas,
down	the	ages:	the	ego	dies	--	but	everybody	hesitates	before	the	ego	dies.	We
are	 so	much	 identified	with	 it	 that	 the	 death	 of	 the	 ego	 appears	 as	 if	WE	 are
dying.	We	are	not	dying.
It	 is	 like	when	 the	 child	 is	 getting	 ready	 to	 be	 born	when	 nine	months	 in	 the
mother's	womb	are	over.	The	child	must	be	feeling	a	great	 fear	 --	because	 this
was	his	life.	This	nine	months'	womb	life,	this	is	the	only	life	he	knows.	And	he
is	being	 thrown	out	of	 the	womb:	he	must	be	 feeling	 like	he	 is	being	expelled
from	the	Garden	of	Eden.	He	clings;	he	does	not	want	to	get	out	of	the	womb.
He	is	afraid	of	the	unknown.
But	 nature	 does	 not	 allow	 him	 to	 succeed.	 He	 can	 cling	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 and
create	 pain	 for	 the	mother	 --	 because	 he	 clings	 to	 the	womb	and	 the	womb	 is
ready	 to	expel	 the	child	because	he	 is	 ready	 to	go	 into	 the	wider	world.	He	 is
now	mature	enough;	 there	 is	no	need	 for	him	 to	be	protected	 in	a	womb.	And
what	kind	of	life	can	one	have	in	a	womb?
There	is	no	life	at	all.	Twenty-four	hours	the	child	is	asleep;	he	is	as	if	in	a	coma.
But	still	this	is	the	only	life	he	knows,	hence	the	clinging.
Marita,	you	know	only	one	life,	the	life	of	the	ego.	It	is	not	much	of	a	life	--	it	is
only	 suffering,	 misery,	 sleep,	 dream	 --	 but	 that's	 the	 only	 life	 you	 know.	 A
moment	comes	when	one	becomes	mature	through	meditation	and	you	have	to
be	expelled	out	of	the	ego.
That	 is	 the	second	birth.	 In	 India	we	call	such	a	person	DVIJ	--	 twice-born.	A
Buddha	 is	 a	 DVIJ.	 One	 birth	 is	 from	 the	mother,	 the	 physical,	 the	 biological
birth.	Another	birth	is	through	the	Master,	the	spiritual	birth,	the	religious	birth.
Marita,	feel	blessed.	You	are	coming	closer	to	a	very	vital	point,	a	turning-point
in	your	life.	Don't	cling	to	the	ego	--	relay,	let	go.	Let	the	ego	disappear;	it	is	not
you.	And	then	for	the	first	time	you	will	know	who	you	are.	For	the	first	time	the
mystery	of	your	being	will	be	revealed	to	you.	And	from	there	onwards	you	start
living;	before	that	you	were	just	sleeping.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 WHY	 DO	 YOU	 SPEAK	 A	 STRANGE	 KIND	 OF	 ENGLISH?	 --
ALTHOUGH	I	LOVE	IT.
Shivananda,
I	DON'T	KNOW	ENGLISH	AT	ALL.	In	fact	I	don	t	know	any	language	really.
That's	why	 I	 can	go	on	 speaking	 so	 easily,	 unafraid,	 unworried,	 undeterred	by
languages	grammar,	etcetera.	 I	am	not	a	great	orator.	 I	 simply	go	on	saying	 to
you	whatsoever	happens	in	the	moment.
That's	 why	 sometimes	 Napoleon	 turns	 into	 Nero,	 Nero	 turns	 into	 Napoleon;
Greek	becomes	Latin,	Latin	becomes	Greek.	You	are	listening	to	a	drunkard!	It
is	a	miracle	that	I	can	utter	a	few	sensible	words	and	you	can	make	some	sense
out	of	it.
Sometimes	 I	 even	 laugh	 about	 what	 I	 have	 said	 to	 you.	 Just	 the	 other
day...whenever	I	see	Pradeepa	bowing	her	head	down,	 then	I	know	that	 I	must
have	told	something	wrong.
Just	a	few	days	ago	I	was	saying	'cropping	the	reap'	instead	of	'reaping	the	crop'.
Pradeepa	is	my	criterion:	then	I	just	look	at	her	and	I	know	I	have	done	it	again.
But	what	more	can	you	expect	from	someone	who	is	utterly	drunk?
An	elderly	gentleman	with	a	walrus	mustache,	frock	coat,	and	bowler	hat	jiggled
the	telephone	receiver.	"I	say,	operator,"	he	said,	"I	want	to	talk	to	Sir	Reginald
Barrett	in	Grosvenor	Square,	London."
"I'm	afraid	I	can't	hear	you,	sir,"	said	the	operator.
"Sir	Reginald	Barrett,	Grosvenor	Square,	London,"	said	the	party.
"I	still	can't	hear	you,"	said	the	operator.	"I	guess	you	are	English,	aren't	you?"
"My	dear	madam,"	said	the	gentleman,	"if	I	were	any	more	English	I	could	not
talk	at	all."
Fortunately	 I	 don't	 know	 much	 English.	 Hence	 I	 can	 talk	 undeterred	 by	 any
linguistic	barriers.	This	is	not	English	English,	this	is	not	American	English,	this
is	not	even	Indian	English	--	it	is	simply	Rajneesh	English.	It	HAS	to	be	strange.
And	what	about	my	Italian!
Scene:	Father	visiting	his	son	in	jail.
Father:	"You-a	no-a	good-a	bumma,	you!	I	raise	you	to	be-a	a	good-a	kid-a!"
Son:	"Please,	Father,	don't	talk	like	that."
Father:	"I'm-a	ashame-a.	You-a,	you-a	no	good-a	son!"
Son:	"Father,	please,	don't	talk	that	way."
Father:	"Why-a	I	no	talk-a	this-a	way?"
Son:	"Because	you	are	not	Italian!"
I	 am	neither	 Italian	nor	English	nor	 Indian	nor	Chinese,	 and	 I	 have	 to	 talk	 all
these	languages.	So	I	go	on	winging	the	wong	number.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,	WHO	ARE	YOU?
Samadhi,
I	DON'T	KNOW	AT	ALL.	If	some	time	you	come	to	know,	please	tell	me.
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,	 THE	 DEVIL	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 AS	 POPULAR	 AS	MAO	 TSE	 TUNG
THESE
DAYS.	WHY?	WHY	IS	THE	DEVIL	SO	ATTRACTIVE?
Bodhi,
THE	DEVIL	 IS	NOTHING	BUT	THE	OTHER	SIDE	OF	God.	 The	 religions
have	been	praising	God	and	 condemning	 the	Devil,	 and	 the	Devil	 is	 the	other
side	of	God.	The	word
'devil'	 is	beautiful;	 it	 comes	 from	a	Sanskrit	 root	which	means	divine.	 'Divine'
and	'devil'
both	 come	 from	 the	 same	 root,	 DEV:	 in	 Sanskrit	 it	 becomes	 DEVADATA	 --
gods.	The	Devil	and	the	Divine,	both	are	the	same	--	but	if	you	repress	one	part
of	God,	one	aspect	of	his	being,	sooner	or	later	it	is	going	to	assert	itself.
Now	there	are	churches,	in	the	West	particularly,	churches	devoted	to	the	Devil.
Disciples	of	 the	Devil	are	growing,	mushrooming	all	over	 the	world.	The	First
Church	 of	 Satan	 is	 there	 in	America,	where	 people	 gather	 and	worship	Satan.
Satan	 means	 'devil',	 that	 is	 Arabic	 for	 'devil'.	 All	 kinds	 of	 bizarre	 things	 are
going	on	in	the	world,	but	the	reason	for	them	and	the	responsibility	is	that	of	the
priests.	 For	 centuries	 they	 have	 been	 repressing	 God's	 aspects.	 You	 cannot
repress	anything	forever;	sooner	or	later	it	will	assert	itself.
In	 the	 East,	 particularly	 in	 India,	 there	 is	 no	 Devil	 worship	 at	 all.	 It	 cannot
happen	--
because	 we	 have	 accepted	 it,	 we	 have	 never	 rejected	 it.	 The	 Indian	 trinity,
TRIMURTI,	 the	 three	 faces	 of	 God,	 have	 to	 be	 understood.	 Brahma,	 Vishnu,
Mahesh:	these	are	the	three	faces	of	God.	Brahma	is	the	creator	God,	the	aspect
that	creates,	Vishnu,	the	aspect	that	maintains	the	world,	the	existence,	keeps	it
running,	and	Mahesh,	the	destroyer	who	destroys	the	world.
Now,	Christians	cannot	conceive	of	Mahesh	as	God.	God	has	 to	be	always	 the
creator.
The	Christian	concept	of	God	as	creator	makes	it	a	very	limited	one.	Then	whose
responsibility	is	it	to	destroy	things?	--	because	there	is	destruction	too,	and	no
creation	 is	 possible	 without	 destruction.	 Creation	 is	 possible	 only	 through
destruction.	God	gives	life
--	and	who	gives	death?	Somebody	has	to	be	responsible	for	death	too,	but	God
cannot	be	responsible	for	death.
Christians	 are	 so	 afraid;	 their	 God	 is	 partial.	 The	 Indian	 idea	 of	God	 is	more
total:	with	one	hand	he	creates,	with	the	other	hand	he	destroys	too.	He	is	good
and	he	is	bad	too;	he	is	light	and	darkness	both,	life	and	death	both.	And	if	God
is	both,	then	only	can	God	be	transcendental.	When	you	are	both,	you	transcend
both.
You	ask	me:	THE	DEVIL	SEEMS	TO	BE	AS	POPULAR	AS	MAO	TSE	TUNG
THESE
DAYS.	WHY?	WHY	IS	THE	DEVIL	SO	ATTRACTIVE?
It	is	because	of	a	long	long	repression	through	Christianity.	The	Devil	aspect	of
God	has	been	completely	denied.	Now	after	twenty	centuries	of	repression	it	has
become	very	strong,	it	has	gathered	too	much	energy	--	it	 is	exploding	all	over
the	place.	 It	 is	 certainly	becoming	more	 and	more	 attractive.	God	 seems	 to	be
poor	compared	to	the	Devil.
Christians,	 particularly	 the	 priests,	 have	 been	 talking	 so	much	 about	God	 that
they	 have	 made	 the	 word	 almost	 sickening,	 nauseating.	 They	 have	 talked	 so
much	about	God	and	 their	God	 is	so	sweet,	only	sweetness	 is	allowed	 to	God.
Their	God	has	no	salt;	it	is	pure	white	sugar,	which	is	another	name	for	poison.
So	the	Christian	God	has	created	a	kind	of	diabetes	all	over	the	world.	It	is	false
because	it	is	partial,	and	the	other	part	will	take	revenge.
God	has	to	be	accepted	in	its	totality.	This	whole	existence	is	divine:	don't	reject
anything.	Everything	is	good	in	its	place.	Salt	 is	needed	as	much	as	sweetness.
Even	bitterness	has	 its	own	place,	 its	own	 joy,	 its	own	 taste.	The	 thorn	on	 the
rosebush	has	its	own	function;	it	is	a	bodyguard	to	the	rose,	it	protects	the	rose.
Don't	deny	it,	don't	prune	all	the	thorns,	otherwise	the	roses	will	die.
Life	exists	through	polar	opposites.	And	this	has	been	a	fallacious	step,	that	we
have	 chosen	 only	 one	 pole:	God	 is	 only	 positive	 Then	 the	 negative	 has	 to	 be
given	to	some	entity,	some	fictitious	entity,	the	Devil.	The	Devil	does	not	exist.
There	is	no	hell,	all	is	paradise.	Yes,	there	are	two	situations:	you	can	fall	asleep
in	the	paradise	or	you	can	be	awake,	but	there	is	no	hell.
I	deny	hell	absolutely.	And	if	there	is	misery	in	life,	it	is	part	of	life.	If	there	is
death,	it	is	a	process	of	life,	it	is	a	renewal	of	life;	it	gives	you	a	new	body,	a	new
model.	The	old	rotten	body	is	taken	away	and	you	are	given	a	fresh	new	model.
Death	is	not	against	life	but	in	the	service	of	life.	Even	what	we	know	as	bad	is
in	the	service	of	good.	Yes,	if	you	are	wise	enough	you	can	transform	poison	into
medicine.	And	if	you	are	foolish	even	medicine	can	be	dangerous,	it	can	become
poison.
The	West	will	have	to	change	its	idea	of	God.	And	the	Western	idea	is	no	longer
Western
--	 it	 has	 spread	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 Christian	 missionaries	 have	 done	 such
mischief;	 they	 have	 drowned	 all	 other	 kinds	 of	 religion;	 almost	 half	 the	 earth
they	have	changed	into	Christianity.	They	have	destroyed	all	variety.	They	have
given	a	very	singular,	one-dimensional	idea	of	God	to	humanity.	And	their	idea
of	 God	 is	 very	 juvenile,	 it	 is	 not	 even	 mature.	 And	 their	 idea	 of	 God	 is
anthropocentric,	it	is	made	in	the	image	of	man.
And	 they	have	been	 trying	hard	 to	make	God	a	great	 saint.	Their	whole	effort
has	 created	 this	 situation:	 the	 denied	 part	 is	 ready	 now	 to	 explode.	 Denial	 is
always	dangerous;	repression	is	dangerous.	We	have	to	pay	tremendously	for	it.
Accept	both	the	polarities.	The	negative	and	the	positive	are	both	needed	for	the
electricity	to	happen;	the	good	and	bad	are	both	needed	for	the	world	to	go	on;
they	are	like	the	two	wheels	of	a	bullock	cart.	The	sinner	and	the	saint	are	both
needed.	That's	my	approach	I	love	the	sinner	as	much	as	the	saint	--	and	if	I	have
to	choose,	if	I	am	forced	to	choose,	I	will	choose	the	sinner	rather	than	the	saint,
because	the	sinner	is	at	least	authentic.	You	cannot	find	a	pseudo-sinner	--	have
you	ever	heard	the	word	'pseudo-sinner'?	Pseudo-saints	are	there;	in	fact	ninety-
nine	point	nine	percent	of	saints	are	pseudo	--	because	there	is	rarely	a	Jesus	or	a
Buddha.	That	phenomenon	is	very	rare;	WE
have	made	it	rare.	We	have	made	it	almost	impossible	for	anybody	to	be	a	Jesus
or	a	Buddha;	we	create	all	kinds	of	hurdles.	And	even	if	somebody	becomes	a
Jesus,	we	don't	tolerate	him	--	we	kill	the	man	the	moment	we	become	aware....
Jesus	lived	only	three	years	as	Christ.	For	thirty	years	he	was	in	preparation,	in
meditation,	 in	search.	After	 thirty	years	when	he	attained	his	satori,	he	went	to
the	marketplace	and	started	giving	the	message	that	he	had	attained.	It	took	three
years	for	 it	 to	become	known	to	people	that	 this	man	had	attained.	They	killed
him	immediately.
When	 Mansoor	 attained	 godhood	 he	 declared,	 "Ana'l	 Haq!	 am	 God!"	 His
Master,	Junaid,	said,	"Keep	quiet.	I	know,	you	know,	that's	enough.	No	need	to
tell	it	to	anybody	--
otherwise	you	will	be	in	danger	and	you	will	create	danger	for	me	and	for	other
disciples	also.	Yes,	I	accept,"	said	Junaid,	"I	can	see	you	have	attained.	But	let	it
be	a	secret	between	me	and	you."
But	Mansoor	 could	 not	 keep	 it	 a	 secret;	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 keep	 it	 a	 secret.
Nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	keep	it	a	secret.	There	would	be	moments	when	he
was	 in	 deep	 ecstasy	 and	 he	would	 start	 shouting	 again	 "I	 am	God!"	 Soon	 the
news	 spread.	The	priests	went	 to	 the	king	and	 they	 said,	 "This	 is	 sacrilegious.
This	man	has	to	be	destroyed,	this	man	has	to	be	killed!"
First	 you	 don't	 allow	 anybody	 to	 become	 a	 Jesus	 or	 Mansoor,	 and	 if	 one
somehow	escapes	from	your	bondage	and	becomes	one	you	kill	him.	And	you
go	on	preaching	something	which	is	absurd,	pseudo.	You	create	a	saint	against
the	sinner;	he	is	bound	to	be	pseudo	because	he	has	not	absorbed	the	sinner	into
himself.	He	has	no	foundation	--
he	 is	 a	 house	 without	 any	 foundation,	 he	 is	 a	 house	made	 on	 the	 sands.	 The
sinner	 becomes	 the	 foundation.	Unless	 the	 sinner	 is	 absorbed	 and	 transformed
you	 will	 not	 find	 a	 true	 Buddha.	 Your	 saints	 are	 pseudo,	 bogus.	 only	 on	 the
surface,	pretenders.
If	I	am	forced	to	choose	I	will	choose	the	sinner,	because	the	sinner	has	all	the
energies	 which	 can	 be	 transformed	 into	 a	 saint.	 But	 the	 saint	 has	 cut	 himself
from	all	 the	 sources	of	 energies;	he	has	become	a	plastic	 flower.	He	 is	 almost
hopeless;	his	case	is	hopeless.
This	calamity	has	happened	--	 this	Devil	becoming	too	attractive	--	because	of
the	 priests	 denying	God	 all	 reality,	making	God	 an	 abstraction.	God	 is	 not	 an
abstraction,	God	is	not	a	person;	God	is	the	total	harmony	of	existence.	And	in
that	harmony,	 in	 that	orchestra,	all	 the	 instruments	are	 involved	 --	 the	bad,	 the
dark,	the	death,	they	also	have	to	play	their	parts.	They	become	the	background,
they	become	the	context.
You	don't	see	stars	in	the	day	--	why?	Do	you	think	all	the	stars	disappear?	They
are	there	in	the	sky;	they	have	not	disappeared.	It	would	be	too	much	work	every
morning	 to	 disappear	 and	 every	 evening	 to	 come	 back;	 it	 would	 create
unnecessary	 trouble.	 They	 are	 there!	 Just	 because	 of	 the	 sunlight,	 the
background	is	missing	in	which	you	could	see	them.	When	the	night	comes	and
the	darkness	comes,	the	background	becomes	available.
In	 the	dark	night	 they	shine	forth.	The	darker	 the	night,	 the	more	shining	stars
and	the	more	stars	you	will	be	able	to	see.
God	is	both	--	the	darkest	depth	and	the	lightest	height.	Once	this	is	accepted	the
Devil	 loses	 all	 attraction,	 the	Devil	 dies.	The	Devil	 becomes	 a	 fertile	 land	 for
God	 to	grow;	 the	Devil	 becomes	 a	 fertilizer.	You	can	 accumulate	 fertilizers	 in
your	 house,	 you	 can	 accumulate	 manure	 in	 your	 house,	 and	 your	 house	 will
stink.	 Spread	 the	manure	 in	 the	 garden,	 and	 the	 same	manure	will	 sprout	 into
beautiful	flowers,	the	same	manure	will	release	great	fragrance.	Manure	has	not
to	 be	 accumulated	 in	 the	 basement	 of	 your	 house,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 spread	 in	 the
garden,	in	the	open,	in	the	sun.
We	have	been	repressing	anger,	greed,	sex	--	everything	that	has	been	thought	to
be	bad	in	some	way	we	have	been	repressing	in	the	basement	of	our	being,	in	the
unconscious.
And	 that's	 why	 every	 human	 being	 is	 stinking.	 Bring	 it	 into	 the	 light!	 Let	 it
become	manure,	let	it	be	a	fertilizing	phenomenon	in	your	life,	and	you	will	have
great	 flowers	 blossoming	 in	 you.	 You	will	 attain	 to	 the	 one-thousand-petalled
lotus.
The	last	question
Question	7
OSHO,	WHY	ARE	YOU	AGAINST	 THE	 PUNDITS	AND	THE	 LEARNED
PEOPLE?
AREN'T	THEY	THE	EXPERTS	THAT	ARE	RUNNING	THE	WORLD?
Madira,
HAVE	A	LOOK	AT	THE	WORLD	--	and	certainly	they	are	running	the	world!
that's	why	 the	world	 is	 in	 a	mess.	 The	 knowledgeable	 people	 are	 running	 the
world	and	they	are	the	most	ignorant	people	--	knowledgeable	about	superficial
things.	And	sometimes	these	knowledgeable	people	are	so	ridiculous.
Once	I	was	talking	on	Mahavira.	A	great	scholar,	well-known	all	over	the	world,
particularly	on	Mahavira,	came	to	listen	to	me.	After	the	discourse	he	stood	up
and	he	said,	"I	have	one	question	to	ask.	My	question	is:	Mahavira	and	Buddha
were	contemporaries	--	who	was	older	and	who	was	younger?	I	have	spent	thirty
years	of	research	on	this	project,	but	I	have	not	been	able	to	come	to	a	clear-cut
decision.	 A	 few	 scriptures	 say	 Buddha	 was	 older	 and	 a	 few	 scriptures	 say
Mahavira	was	older,	and	 there	seems	 to	be	no	way	 to	decide.	 I	am	very	much
impressed,"	 he	 said,	 "by	what	 you	 said	 about	Mahavira.	Can	 you	 throw	 some
light	on	my	problem?"
I	said,	"You	wasted	thirty	years	of	your	life!	How	does	it	matter	who	was	older
and	who	was	 younger?	What	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do	 if	 you	 come	 to	 a	 clear-cut
conclusion?	 One	 thing	 is	 certain:	 whosoever	 was	 younger	 or	 older,	 you	 have
wasted	your	 life	 --	 thirty	years!	 In	 these	 thirty	years	you	could	have	become	a
Buddha	 or	 a	 Mahavira.	 Mahavira	 became	 a	 Mahavira	 in	 twelve	 years'
meditation,	Buddha	became	a	Buddha	in	six	years'	meditation."
I	 said	 to	 the	man,	 "If	 you	had	worked	on	meditation	 you	would	 have	 become
Buddha	 five	 times!	Thirty	 years	wasted	 --	 and	Buddha	 became	Buddha	 in	 six
years.	 You	 would	 have	 been	 a	 Buddha	 five	 times	 over.	 And	 don't	 ask	 such
foolish	questions;	it	doesn't	matter."
But	that's	how	knowledgeable	people	are	concerned.	He	was	very	angry	at	me,
he	became	very	antagonistic	to	me.	He	started	writing	articles	against	me.	Now
he	 is	 dead.	 So	 first	 he	 was	 wasting	 his	 life	 in	 searching	 for	 who	 was	 older,
Buddha	or	Mahavira,	and	then	he	wasted	his	life	in	writing	articles	against	me.
The	poor	man,	I	really	feel	sorry	for	him.
The	learned	people	know	only	the	superficial,	which	has	no	significance.
Carruthers	 was	 visiting	 a	 small	 English	 town	 to	 do	 business.	 As	 his	 first
appointment	was	not	until	twelve	noon	he	decided	to	play	a	round	of	golf	early
in	the	morning.	The	golf	course	was	right	on	the	edge	of	town,	and	he	was	first
off.
He	sliced	his	 first	ball,	 and	 it	went	over	 the	hedge	 that	 ran	parallel	 to	 the	 first
fairway.	He	did	not	bother	 to	go	and	 look	 for	 it;	he	played	another	ball	which
went	straight	down	the	middle.
On	 returning	 to	 the	 club	 house	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 game	 the	 club	 professional
approached	him	 saying,	 "Excuse	me,	 sir,	were	you	by	 any	 chance	 the	 first	 off
this	morning?"
"Yes,	I	was,"	replied	the	businessman.
"And	did	you	slice	your	first	ball	over	the	hedge	to	the	right?"
"Yes,	I	did,	as	a	matter	of	fact,	old	man,"	replied	the	businessman.
"Well,"	said	the	professional,	"that	hedge	runs	parallel	to	a	very	busy	street,	and
your	ball	landed	on	the	head	of	a	cyclist.	The	cyclist	swerved	into	the	middle	of
the	road,	and	in	order	to	miss	the	cyclist	a	car	swerved	in	front	of	a	bus;	and	in
order	 to	miss	 the	 car,	 shopfront	 of	 a	 jeweler's.	The	 shop	 collapsed,	 and	 in	 the
process	a	lot	of	very	valuable	jewelry	has	disappeared."
"Oh,	my	God!"	cried	the	businessman,	shaking	at	the	knees.	"What	shall	I	do?"
"Oh,	no	problem,	old	man,"	said	the	professional.	"Just	make	sure	that	you	keep
your	right	hand	a	little	further	round	the	handle,	and	everything	will	be	fine."
That's	 how	 the	 professional,	 the	 expert,	 the	 knowledgeable	 person,	works.	He
knows	 everything	 about	 the	 meaningless,	 the	 insignificant;	 he	 goes	 into
insignificant	details	and	he	goes	on	missing	the	central	thing.
I	am	not	against	the	pundits	and	the	learned	people,	I	am	simply	compassionate
towards	them.
Semyonov,	 a	 local	 party	 secretary,	 stopped	 Kagonovich	 on	 the	 street.
"Comrade,"	 he	 asked,	 "why	 don't	 you	 come	 for	 ideological	 instruction	 every
Tuesday	and	Thursday	evening?"
"I	don't	need	it,"	said	Kagonovich.
"Who	was	Karl	Marx?"	asked	Semyonov.
"I	don't	know."
"Who	was	Vladimir	Lenin?"
"I	don't	know."
Semyonov	went	on	and	on.	Finally	Kagonovich	interrupted,	"You	ask	me	who	is
this	and	who	is	that.	Let	me	ask	you!	Who	is	Rudolf	Ulyanov?"
"I	don't	know,"	replied	the	secretary.
"Ah!"	 said	 Kagonovich.	 "But	 I	 know	 that	 one.	 While	 you	 are	 at	 ideological
instruction	every	Tuesday	and	Thursday	night,	Rudolf	Ulyanov	is	screwing	your
wife!"
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Thanks	for	the	Compliment!
7	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909070
ShortTitle:
BESTIL07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 I	 KNOW	THAT	YOU	 LOVE	CONTRADICTIONS.	 A	 LOT	OF	 IT	 I
CAN
ACCEPT	 NOW	 AS	 TWO	 SIDES	 OF	 ONE	 COIN.	 BUT	 TODAY	 AFTER
LECTURE
SOME	QUESTIONS	STILL	AROSE.
ON	 THE	 ONE	 SIDE	 YOU	 SAY	 THE	 GOOD	 AND	 THE	 BAD	 ARE	 TWO
SIDES	OF
THE	 SAME	COIN	AND	BOTH	HAVE	TO	BE	AND	THE	ONE	CAN'T	BE
WITHOUT
THE	OTHER.	ON	THE	OTHER	SIDE	YOU	WANT	TO	CREATE	A	BETTER
WORLD	WITH	YOUR	SANNYASINS.
ON	THE	ONE	SIDE	YOU	TELL	US	NOT	TO	THINK	 IN	TERMS	OF	THE
FUTURE.
ON	THE	OTHER	SIDE	YOU	ARE	TALKING	ABOUT	THE	COMING	THIRD
WORLD	WAR.
ON	THE	ONE	SIDE	YOU	TELL	US	NOT	TO	WISH	ANYTHING.	ON	THE
OTHER
SIDE	IT	SEEMS	YOU	WANT	TO	AVOID	THE	THIRD	WORLD	WAR.
ON	THE	ONE	SIDE	YOU	SAY	THINGS	ARE	OKAY	AS	THEY	ARE,	THERE
IS	NO
GOAL,	 NOTHING	 TO	 ACHIEVE,	 TO	 CHANGE.	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 SIDE:
WHAT
ARE	YOU	DOING	HERE?	WHAT	ARE	WE	DOING	HERE?
I	CAN	FEEL	THERE	IS	AN	ANSWER,	BUT	I	CAN'T	POINT	IT	OUT.	CAN
YOU?
Anand	Suresh,
IT	IS	NOT	THAT	I	LOVE	CONTRADICTIONS:	life	is	contradictory.	Existence
itself	is	possible	only	through	contradictions.	It	is	the	mind	that	has	been	trained
in	 Aristotelian	 logic	 that	 becomes	 disturbed	 because	 of	 contradictions.	 The
Aristotelian	 logic	gives	you	a	 linear	mind,	 a	one-dimensional	mind.	 It	 says:	A
can	only	be	A	and	can	never	be	B,	and	B
can	only	be	B	and	can	never	be	A,	and	for	two	thousand	years	our	minds	have
been	conditioned	by	this	logic.
This	 logic	 never	 had	 any	 sway	 over	 the	mystics,	 and	 now	 even	 scientists	 are
escaping	from	the	Aristotelian	prison.	If	you	want	to	be	true	to	life	you	cannot	be
a	follower	of	Aristotle;	to	be	true	to	life	you	will	have	to	say	things	as	they	are.
If	you	want	to	be	true	to	Aristotle	then	you	will	have	to	repress	a	few	things	of
life,	deny,	at	least	avoid,	not	look	at	them,	choose	only	what	fits	with	your	logic.
The	whole	world	has	 existed	up	 to	now	according	 to	one-dimensional	 logic	 --
and	existence	is	multi-dimensional,	it	is	rooted	in	contradictions.	In	fact,	to	call	it
a	contradiction	is	again	to	use	a	word	from	Aristotle.
The	 mystics	 use	 the	 word	 'paradox',	 not	 'contradiction'.	 In	 the	 very	 word
'contradiction'
there	is	condemnation:	something	is	wrong,	something	has	to	be	put	right.	But	a
paradox	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon:	nothing	has	to	be	put	right.	A	paradox
is	a	mystery,	elusive,	inexplicable.
Existence	 is	 a	mystery.	Mathematics	 is	 incapable	 of	 understanding	 it;	mind	 is
utterly	 impotent	 in	 understanding	 it,	 because	mind	 knows	 only	 one	 way.	 The
Aristotelian	way	 is	 the	mind's	way.	And	 anybody	who	 knows	 life	 knows	 that
Aristotle	has	been	a	calamity,	the	greatest	that	has	ever	existed	in	the	world.	And
he	 is	 the	 father	of	modern	philosophy,	 the	 father	of	modern	science!	But	 there
are	revolts	against	him.	Mystics	have	always	been	revolting,	now	physicists	are
revolting.
According	to	Aristotle	 there	is	no	mystery:	everything	is	explainable	in	 logical
terms	--
that	 is	 his	 fundamental	 tenet.	 And	 my	 fundamental	 tenet	 is:	 nothing	 is
explainable	 in	 terms	 of	 logic.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 explain	 life	 in	 terms	 of	 logic	 you
destroy	life.
It	 is	 as	 if	 to	 explain	 the	 beauty	 of	 a	 rose	 you	 take	 the	 rose	 to	 the	 chemist	 to
dissect	 it,	 to	 analyze	 it,	 and	 to	 find	 out	 where	 the	 beauty	 is.	 The	 chemist	 is
capable	 of	 analyzing	 the	 rose,	 but	 he	 will	 find	 only	 chemicals,	 not	 beauty.
Beauty	will	evaporate.	Beauty	was	in	the	paradox	of	the	rose.	It	should	NOT	be
according	to	logic	--	hence	logic	is	very	blind.
Your	problem,	Suresh,	is	that	you	suffer	from	Aristotelitis.	It	is	one	of	the	most
deep-rooted	diseases.
You	say:	I	KNOW	THAT	YOU	LOVE	CONTRADICTIONS.
It	is	not	so	that	I	love	contradictions.	What	can	I	do?	Contradictions	are	there!	If
I	 have	 to	 be	 true	 to	 the	 totality	 of	 existence	 I	 have	 to	 love	 them,	 otherwise
something	will	 have	 to	 be	 denied.	 And	 the	moment	 you	 deny	 something	 you
miss	 something	 immensely	 valuable,	 and	 the	 denial	 will	 never	 allow	 you	 to
know	the	whole.	And	only	the	whole	is	true;	the	parts	are	only	parts.	They	have
some	 meaning	 only	 in	 the	 context	 of	 the	 whole;	 in	 themselves	 they	 are
meaningless.
That's	why	science	has	created	great	meaninglessness	in	the	world.	It	was	bound
to	happen;	it	 is	a	by-product	of	scientific	methodology.	Science	tries	to	explain
everything	cleanly,	with	no	vagueness;	it	wants	to	reduce	everything	to	clear-cut
categories.	And	it	has	succeeded,	but	in	its	success	man	and	his	spirit	has	failed.
The	success	of	science	is	rooted	in	Aristotle,	but	man's	failure	--	the	failure	of	his
joy,	the	failure	of	his	love,	the	failure	of	his	capacity	to	sing,	dance	and	celebrate
--	is	also	rooted	in	Aristotle.	But	there	are	clear-cut	signs	of	revolt,	particularly
within	these	last	thirty,	forty	years	--	many	great	scientists	have	revolted	against
Aristotle.	The	first	one	to	revolt	was	Albert	Einstein.
Aristotle	 is	very	absolutistic:	A	is	absolutely	A	and	never	B,	man	is	absolutely
man	and	never	a	woman.	He	believes	in	the	absolutes,	and	Einstein	brought	the
idea	of	relativity.
He	said	absolutes	don't	exist;	 there	are	only	relative	things.	A	man	is	relatively
more	a	man	than	a	woman	and	a	woman	is	relatively	more	a	woman	than	a	man,
but	the	question	is	not	one	of	absolute	distinction	--	they	overlap.	And	you	may
be	a	man	in	the	morning	and	you	may	not	be	a	man	by	the	evening;	you	may	be
a	woman	in	the	evening	and	you	may	not	be	a	woman	by	the	morning.	You	are
not	one-sided,	you	have	many	sides.
Have	 you	 not	 seen	 a	woman	 in	 anger?	 Then	 she	 is	more	masculine	 than	 any
male.	And	have	you	not	 seen	a	man	when	he	 is	 in	 love?	 --	his	 tenderness,	his
feminineness.	 He	 is	 MORE	 feminine	 than	 any	 woman	 can	 ever	 be.	 When	 a
woman	 is	 in	 anger,	 enraged,	 her	whole	 denied	 part	 starts	 functioning,	 and	 the
denied	part	is	very	vital	and	alive	because	it	has	never	been	used.
I	have	heard	a	future	story:
A	 man	 went	 into	 a	 hospital	 to	 purchase	 a	 brain;	 because	 his	 own	 was	 not
functioning	well	 he	wanted	 to	 replace	 it.	 The	 surgeon	 took	 him	 around;	 there
were	many	brains	available.
He	showed	him	the	brain	of	a	scientist,	the	price	only	a	hundred	rupees;	the	brain
of	a	great,	famous,	well-known	mathematician,	and	the	price	only	two	hundred
rupees;	and	the	brain	of	a	great	general,	and	the	price	only	three	hundred	rupees	-
-	so	on	and	so	forth.
And	then	he	came	to	the	brain	of	a	great	political	leader,	and	the	price-	was	ten
thousand	rupees!
The	customer	was	a	little	puzzled.	He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?	Do	you	mean
that	 the	 politician	 has	 a	 greater	 brain	 than	 a	 great,	 Nobel	 prize-winning
scientist?"
The	surgeon	said,	"Please	don't	misunderstand	us.	It	is	not	that	the	politician	has
a	greater	brain	than	the	scientist	or	the	general	or	the	mathematician	or	the	poet,
but	this	is	a	brain	which	has	never	been	used.	It	is	brand	new,	hence	the	price!"
Whatsoever	 is	not	used	and	denied	 in	you	 remains	very	vital.	Hence	a	woman
enraged	is	far	more	dangerous	than	a	man;	and	if	you	have	been	in	relationship
with	a	woman	you	know	 it	 perfectly	well	 --	 she	 can	drive	you	crazy!	because
that	is	the	denied	part,	the	unused	part.	When	it	is	used	it	has	vitality,	newness.
And	when	a	man	is	tender,	loving,	he	is	more	tender	and	loving	than	a	woman.
He	can	be	more	womanly	because	that	is	his	denied	part.
Carl	Gustav	Jung	accepted	that	man	is	bi-sexual:	no	man	is	simply	man	and	no
woman	 is	 simply	 woman.	 Man	 has	 a	 woman	 part,	 a	 very	 intrinsic	 part,	 and
woman	has	a	man	inside	her,	very	intrinsic.	Now	this	is	a	totally	different	world:
old	categories	lose	meaning,	old	absolutes	disappear.
And	then	came	the	theory	of	uncertainty	--	because	up	to	now	science	was	aware
only	of	the	superficial	world	of	matter.	It	has	not	penetrated	into	the	mysteries	of
matter	 as	mystics	 have	 done	 in	 the	 inner	world;	 they	 have	 penetrated	 into	 the
mysteries	 of	 consciousness.	 And	 when	 they	 penetrated	 the	 mysteries	 of
consciousness	they	became	aware	that	it	is	not	Aristotelian	at	all.	Sometimes	A
is	A	and	sometimes	A	is	B;	and	not	only	that	--	that	sometimes	A	is	B	--	there	are
times	when	A	is	both	A	and	not	A	simultaneously.
Mahavira	 said	 that;	his	philosophy	 is	known	as	SAPTABHANGI	 --	 sevenfold.
He	 must	 have	 appeared	 a	 very	 strange	 man.	 You	 asked	 one	 question	 and	 he
would	 always	 answer	 your	 one	 question	 with	 seven	 answers,	 because	 his
philosophy	was	sevenfold.	He	said,	"I	have	come	to	see	the	seven	aspects	of	the
inner	 world."	 You	 asked	 him,	 "Does	 God	 exist?"	 and	 he	 would	 say,	 "First:
perhaps	he	exists.	Second:	perhaps	he	does	not.	Third:	perhaps	he	exists	and	yet
does	not	exist.	And	fourth:	perhaps	he	neither	exists	nor	does	not	exist."	And	so
on	and	so	forth.	He	would	give	you	seven	answers.	You	would	leave	him	more
confused	than	you	had	come.	That's	why	he	could	not	influence	many	people.
His	 religion	 remained	 one	 of	 the	 smallest	 although	 it	 had	 the	 potential	 of
becoming	one	of	the	greatest	religions	of	the	world.
But	now	the	days	of	Mahavira	are	coming:	Albert	Einstein	has	made	the	way	for
it.	As	the	physicist	entered	deeper	into	the	mysteries	of	matter	he	was	very	much
puzzled	--
Aristotle	works	no	more,	helps	no	more.	On	the	contrary,	if	you	remain	hung	up
with	Aristotle	you	have	to	deny	a	few	things	which	you	cannot	deny	--	they	are
there!
For	example:	matter	does	not	exist	at	the	deepest	level	of	matter;	matter	is	only
apparent,	it	is	MAYA.	Shankara	said	it	thousands	of	years	ago:	it	is	illusion.	By
'illusion'	he	does	not	mean	that	it	does	not	exist;	by	'illusion'	he	simply	means	it
APPEARS	to	exist	--
something	ELSE	exists.	Don't	be	deceived	by	the	appearance.	And	the	scientist
found	himself	entering	more	 into	 the	world	of	Shankara	 than	 into	 the	world	of
Aristotle.	Matter	disappears,	 there	 is	only	energy	--	energy	moving	so	fast	 that
you	cannot	see	its	movement	and	it	gives	you	the	idea	of	solid	matter.
Nothing	 is	 solid,	 everything	 is	 liquid.	 And	 when	 there	 is	 nothing	 solid,	 what
meaning	 can	 the	 word	 'liquid'	 have?	 Then	 a	 new	 problem	 arises:	 if	 there	 is
nothing	 solid,	 what	 do	 you	 mean	 by	 'liquid'?	 Liquidity	 had	 meaning	 only	 in
reference	 to	 solidity;	 the	moment	 solidity	disappears,	 liquidity	disappears...and
you	are	dumb,	in	awe.
Only	energy	is,	and	the	ways	of	energy	are	very	paradoxical,	very	mystic.	One
particle	 of	 energy	 jumps	 from	 its	 place	 to	 another	 place;	 it	 is	 continuously
lumping.	 It	 IS	 taking	 quantum	 leaps.	 The	 term	 'quantum	 leap'	 comes	 from
QUANTA.	 'Quanta'	 means	 the	 ultimate	 particle	 of	 energy,	 and	 'quantum	 leap'
means	a	very	different	leap	from	what	you	understand	by	the	word	'leap'.
When	the	ultimate	particle	of	energy	jumps	from	place	A	to	B	the	phenomenon
is	very	mysterious:	it	simply	disappears	from	A	and	appears	at	B	and	you	cannot
find	it	anywhere	in	between.	You	come	from	your	place	to	me;	you	will	be	found
in	between.
How	can	you	just	jump	from	your	place	to	my	place?	Even	if	you	jump,	you	will
have	 to	 pass	 through.	 Even	 if	 you	 take	 the	 fastest	 plane,	 still	 you	 will	 be	 in
between.	But	 the	 ultimate	 particle	 of	matter	 simply	disappears	 from	one	place
and	appears	at	another	place	and	you	cannot	find	it	in	between	at	all.	Now	what
to	make	out	of	it?	It	should	not	be	so,	but	it	is	so.
First	 scientists	 figured,	 "We	 must	 be	 missing	 it	 --	 maybe	 we	 don't	 have
sophisticated	 enough	 instruments.	 How	 can	 it	 be?"	 The	 old	 Aristotle	 was
haunting	 them:	 "It	MUST	be	 somewhere	 in	between."	But	now	we	have	more
sophisticated	instruments	--	 it	simply	disappears.	It	becomes	unmanifest	 in	one
place	 and	becomes	manifest	 again	 in	 another	 place.	What	 happens	 in	 between
nothing	 can	 be	 known	 about,	 because	 it	 becomes	 unmanifest;	 it	 simply
disappears	 from	existence.	 It	moves	 into	a	 totally	different	dimension	which	 is
not	known	at	all	and	may	never	be	known	at	all,	because	it	is	the	unknowable.
And	 it	was	 thought	always,	according	 to	Aristotle	and	Euclid,	 that	a	point	can
never	be	a	line.	It	was	found	by	the	physicists	that	the	point	can	be	both	together:
it	can	be	a	particle	and	a	wave,	it	can	be	a	point	and	a	line.	Euclidean	geometry
used	 to	 say	 --	 you	must	 have	 read	 it	 at	 school	 --	 that	 two	 parallel	 lines	 never
meet.	 Now	 there	 is	 something	 like	 non-Euclidean	 geometry	 which	 says	 they
meet.	What	to	make	out	of	it?	Euclidean	geometry	says	you	can	draw	a	straight
line:	a	straight	line	is	the	shortest	distance	between	two	points	--	a	well-known
definition,	 every	 schoolboy	 knows	 about	 it.	 But	 non-Euclidean	 geometry	 has
come	with	great	force	and	is	changing	the	whole	course	of	scientific	thinking.
Non-Euclidean	 geometry	 says	 you	 CANNOT	 draw	 a	 straight	 line	 at	 all;	 it	 is
impossible	 to	draw	a	straight	 line.	Why?	--	because	you	are	sitting	on	an	earth
which	 is	 round.	So	whatsoever	you	draw,	 it	appears	straight	because	you	don't
know	 that	 you	 are	 sitting	 on	 a	 round	 globe.	 Go	 on	 drawing	 the	 line,	 go	 on
drawing	the	line,	and	soon	you	will	see	that	it	becomes	a	circle,	because	it	will
cover	the	whole	earth.	And	a	straight	line	cannot	be	a	part	of	a	circle,	obviously;
if	it	is	a	part	of	a	circle	it	is	not	straight.	No	straight	line	can	create	a	circle,	but
every	straight	line	that	you	know,	if	drawn	to	its	ultimate,	will	become	part	of	a
circle.	Then	it	is	an	are,	not	a	straight	line.
And	 the	whole	 universe	 is	 circular.	 The	whole	 universe,	 all	 the	movement,	 is
circular;	everything	is	a	circle.	Straight	lines	are	not	possible;	they	are	imaginary
lines.
Mystics	 have	 always	 talked	 in	 paradoxes;	 now	 physicists	 are	 talking	 in
paradoxes.	 And	 the	 reason	 is	 the	 same:	 mystics	 entered	 reality	 through	 their
being	and	came	across	the	mystery;	physicists	are	coming	across	the	same	reality
from	another	door	--	the	outward	door.
I	 am	 not	 in	 love	 with	 contradictions	 --	 they	 can't	 be	 helped.	 Existence	 is	 a
paradox.
You	 say:	 A	 LOT	 OF	 IT	 I	 CAN	 ACCEPT	 NOW	 AS	 TWO	 SIDES	 OF	 ONE
COIN.
That	is	again	a	hangover	from	Aristotle.	I	have	to	say	to	you	many	times,	just	not
to	disturb	you	 too	much	 too	early,	 that	 these	are	 two	aspects	of	 the	same	coin.
Then	it	becomes	a	little	acceptable	to	you.	You	can	accept	that	one	coin	can	have
two	aspects	and	they	must	be	facing	in	opposite	directions.	You	can	accept	the
negative	and	the	positive,	you	can	accept	the	dark	night	and	the	bright	day,	you
can	 accept	 life	 and	 death,	 as	 two	 sides	 of	 one	 coin.	But	when	 I	 am	 using	 the
simile	of	the	coin	I	am	not	really	being	true	to	the	reality;	I	am	compromising	--
compromising	with	your	Aristotelian	mind.
Sooner	or	later,	when	you	become	more	accustomed,	when	you	start	seeing	the
paradoxicalness,	I	will	not	say	to	you	that	they	are	two	aspects,	two	sides	of	one
coin.
The	negative	is	the	positive	and	the	positive	is	the	negative.	Life	and	death	are
not	two	sides	of	one	coin	--	life	IS	death.	But	that	will	be	a	little	more	difficult	to
accept,	although	the	truth	is	so.	The	day	you	were	born	you	started	dying.	The
process	may	be	completed	in	seventy	years,	that	is	another	thing	--	that	it	takes
time	 --	 but	 time	 matters	 not.	 The	 day	 you	 were	 born	 you	 started	 dying	 --
IMMEDIATELY.	 It	 is	not	 the	other	 side	of	 the	 coin,	 it	 is	 the	 same	 side	of	 the
coin.	Life	is	death,	and	day	is	night,	and	love	is	hate,	and	friendship	is	enmity.
Then	it	becomes	more	difficult.
But	if	I	look	at	your	difficulty,	then	I	cannot	take	you	into	the	world	of	truth.	I
have	to	persuade	you	slowly	slowly,	so	first	I	say,	"These	are	two	aspects	of	the
same	coin."	The	day	I	feel	that	now	you	are	ready	to	accept	the	paradox	without
questioning	I	will	say,
"Life	 is	 death."	 I	 will	 not	 say	 that	God	 and	 the	Devil	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 one
energy,	I	will	say	God	IS	the	Devil	--	two	names	of	the	SAME	energy,	not	two
aspects.
You	 say:	 A	 LOT	 OF	 IT	 I	 CAN	 ACCEPT	 NOW	 AS	 TWO	 SIDES	 OF	 ONE
COIN.
That	is	not	understanding,	just	acceptance.	Listening	to	me	again	and	again	you
start	figuring	out	that	it	must	be	that	each	phenomenon	has	two	sides.	It	is	not	a
question	 of	 sides.	And	 each	 phenomenon	 has	many	 dimensions,	 not	 only	 two
sides.
BUT	 TODAY,	 you	 say,	 AFTER	 LECTURE	 SOME	 QUESTIONS	 STILL
AROSE.	ON
THE	ONE	SIDE	YOU	SAY	THE	GOOD	AND	THE	BAD	ARE	TWO	SIDES
OF	THE
SAME	 COIN	 AND	 BOTH	 HAVE	 TO	 BE	 AND	 THE	 ONE	 CAN'T	 BE
WITHOUT	THE
OTHER.	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 SIDE	 YOU	 WANT	 TO	 CREATE	 A	 BETTER
WORLD
WITH	YOUR	SANNYASINS.
Certainly!	A	 better	world	will	 be	 a	world	where	 good	 and	 bad	 are	 absolutely
accepted	and	absorbed.	I	don't	mean	by	using	the	word	 'better'	 that	 it	will	be	a
good	world	against	the	bad.	My	concept	of	a	better	world	is	a	world	which	will
be	multi-dimensional,	a	world	which	will	accept	the	earth	and	the	sky	so	totally
that	the	sky	is	not	higher	and	the	earth	is	not	lower;	which	will	accept	the	body
and	the	soul	so	wholly	that	there	is	no	question	of	who	should	be	the	master.
I	have	said	to	you	many	times,	"Let	consciousness	be	the	master	of	the	body	and
mind."
That	is	just	to	persuade	you	towards	a	quantum	leap.	I	know	you	cannot	take	that
leap	immediately;	you	will	have	to	be	seduced	into	it.
The	better	world	will	be	where	 the	duality	of	body	and	 spirit	 is	dissolved:	 the
body	 becomes	 the	manifest	 spirit	 and	 the	 spirit	 becomes	 the	 unmanifest	 body,
they	are	both	one.	How	can	one	of	 these	 two	be	 the	master?	The	very	 idea	of
twoness	 is	wrong,	 so	 there	cannot	be	anybody	who	 is	 the	master	and	anybody
else	who	is	the	slave.	You	are	one	entity.
I	 talk	 to	you	 in	 terms	of	 'from	sex	 to	super-consciousness'	because	you	cannot
understand	 right	 now	 unless	 some	 hierarchy	 is	 brought	 to	 you.	 'From	 sex	 to
superconsciousness'	--
even	 that	 becomes	 very	 difficult	 for	 rotten,	 old	minds,	 orthodox,	 conventional
people	 to	 understand	 why	 I	 say	 'from	 sex	 to	 superconsciousness'.	 But	 please
don't	 tell	 others:	 sex	 is	 superconsciousness!	 Not	 'from	 sex	 to
superconsciousness',	but	sex	is	superconsciousness.
There	 is	no	higher,	no	lower,	 there	 is	no	 'from'	and	no	 'to';	 there	 is	no	journey,
you	are	already	there	as	you	are.
But	to	assert	such	pregnant	truths	I	have	to	prepare	you.
My	vision	of	a	better	world	is	not	the	vision	of	a	good	world,	where	people	are
virtuous,	 have	 good	 character,	 don't	 cheat	 each	 other,	 don't	 lie,	 are	 very
compassionate	towards	each	other,	very	loving,	great	servants	of	humanity.	That
is	not	my	vision	of	a	better	world.	That	has	been	the	vision	for	centuries,	and	it
has	not	been	fulfilled	because	it	cannot	be	fulfilled	in	the	very	nature	of	things.	It
is	not	possible	--	you	have	been	denying	the	bad	part.
For	me,	 a	 real	 sannyasin	will	 neither	 be	 good	 nor	 bad	 in	 the	 old	 sense	 of	 the
words.	He	will	simply	be.	And	whatsoever	he	is	in	a	certain	moment,	he	will	be
totally	in	it.	If	he	is	angry	his	anger	will	be	total;	if	he	is	loving	his	love	will	be
total.
The	 old	 idea	 of	 a	 good	man	was	 that	 he	would	 never	 be	 angry.	 That	 brought
repression	into	the	world	--	and	once	you	are	repressed	you	go	on	and	on	living
with	your	repressed	part.	The	repressed	part	remains	a	burden	because	it	has	not
been	absorbed.	Once	absorbed	it	releases	great	energy	in	you.	It	makes	you	vital,
it	makes	you	passionate,	it	makes	you	throbbing	with	infinite	life.	Repressed	you
are	divided	in	two,	you	are	cut	into	two;	you	live,	but	your	life	is	only	so-so.
Sisters	Maria	Theresa	and	Mary	Elizabeth	were	walking	down	a	street	when	they
were	grabbed	by	two	men,	dragged	into	an	alley	and	raped.	Twenty	minutes	later
the	nuns	continued	their	stroll.
"What	is	Father	going	to	say,"	said	Sister	Maria	Theresa,	"when	we	tell	him	we
have	been	raped	twice?"
"What	do	you	mean,	twice	?"	asked	her	companion.
"Well,	we	are	coming	back	this	way,	aren't	we?"
Repress	something	and	it	will	come	by	the	back	door.	It	will	find	its	way:	it	will
control	you	from	the	unconscious.	You	cannot	get	rid	of	it	so	easily,	in	fact	there
is	no	way	to	get	rid	of	it.	It	is	PART	of	you,	such	an	organic	part	that	you	cannot
be	alive	if	you	cut	it	off.
That's	why	 your	 saints	 look	 so	 dead,	 and	 the	 deadlier	 they	 are,	 the	more	 you
respect	them.
Just	a	few	days	ago	a	man	came	to	me	and	he	was	talking	about	a	saint,	Devraha
Baba,	who	is	known	in	the	North	of	India	as	the	ageless	saint,	because	at	 least
this	much	is	certain,	that	he	is	a	hundred	and	fifty	years	old,	maybe	more.	Now
that	is	his	only	great	quality,	nothing	else!	The	man	was	very	much	impressed.
He	said,	"I	am	a	disciple	of	Devraha	Baba."
I	asked	him,	"What	is	great	in	it,	to	live	a	hundred	and	fifty	years?	Many	animals
live	 that	 long,	 many	 trees	 live	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 There	 are	 trees	 four
thousand	years	old.
There	 are	 animals	 who	 easily	 live	 a	 hundred	 years,	 a	 hundred	 and	 fifty,	 two
hundred	years."
And	I	told	the	man	about	an	experiment.	Scientists	have	discovered	about	rats....
First	 they	work	 on	 rats	 because	 they	 have	 found	 one	 thing:	 that	men	 and	 rats
behave	similarly.
They	are	 the	most	ancient	companions:	wherever	man	is	found,	rats	are	found,
and	wherever	 rats	 are	 found,	man	 is	 found.	Their	 companionship	 seems	 to	 be
eternal.	Only	two	are	man's	eternal	companions:	rats	and	cockroaches!	Wherever
man	is,	these	two	things	are	always	there.	And	rats	behave	very	similarly.
Many	experiments	have	been	done	on	 rats.	 If	you	give	 them	half	 their	normal
food	they	live	double.	If	you	give	them	double	their	normal	food	they	live	only
half	the	span	of	their	life.
Now	these	people	like	Devraha	Baba,	Jaina	monks,	they	are	living	on	half	their
normal	food.	They	eat	only	once,	and	that	too	in	a	very	miserly	way,	yet	they	can
live	double.
How	does	it	happen?	--	because	when	you	don't	get	enough	food	your	life	flame
burns	 low;	 instead	 of	 gaining	 intensity	 it	 starts	 gaining	 length.	 In	 colder
countries	 people	 live	 longer	 than	 in	 the	 hotter	 countries,	 because	 in	 colder
countries	you	cannot	live	so	passionately	so	intensely;	the	cold	prevents	you.	In
hotter	countries	you	are	more	passionate.
Hence	it	is	not	strange	that	the	first	book	on	sexology	was	written	in	India:	the
KAMA	SUTRA	of	Vatsyayana,	and	it	is	not	strange	that	the	most	strange	sexual
stories	 have	 been	written	 in	 the	 very	 hot	 countries	 like	Arabia.	The	 reason	 is:
when	the	sun	is	hot	you	also	live	in	a	hot	way.	When	there	is	no	sun	and	it	is	all
cloudy,	your	life	also	burns	low.
Food	is	fuel:	 if	you	eat	 less	you	will	be	thin,	 if	you	eat	 less	you	will	have	less
sexual	desire,	if	you	eat	less	you	will	have	less	possibility	of	being	angry,	if	you
eat	less	you	will	live	at	a	very	minimum	level	of	life.	You	can	live	long,	but	this
is	not	life.	Then	why	not	get	frozen	in	a	deep	freeze?	Then	you	can	live	forever!
And	 that	 was	 one	 of	 the	 reasons	 why	 the	 escapist	 monks	 found	 it	 a	 great
attraction	to	go	to	the	Himalayan	caves;	it	is	a	natural	way	of	living	a	frozen	life.
And	not	only	did	 they	escape	 to	 the	Himalayas,	 they	also	 tried	 to	 live	without
clothes,	 naked	 or	 almost	 naked.	 If	 your	 body	 remains	 too	 cold	 your	 blood	 is
nothing	but	frozen;	then	you	can	live	long,	but	length	has	no	value.	time	has	no
value,	 and	 length	 is	 in	 time.	 Depth	 has	 value,	 and	 depth	 is	 a	 totally	 different
matter.
When	I	say	 'a	better	world'	I	don't	mean	people	will	be	living	for	 two	hundred
years,	 three	 hundred	 years,	 because	 they	 will	 be	 great	 saints.	 I	 simply	 mean
people	WILL	 be	 living	 passionately,	 totally,	 wholly.	 Even	 if	 they	 live	 a	 very
short	life	their	life	will	be	a	fulfillment.
My	idea	of	a	better	world	is	not	your	idea	of	a	better	world,	Suresh.	Listening	to
me	 always	 remember:	 my	 words	 have	 MY	 meaning,	 and	 become	 capable	 of
separating	your	meaning	from	my	meaning.
You	say:	ON	THE	ONE	SIDE	YOU	TELL	US	NOT	TO	THINK	IN	TERMS	OF
THE
FUTURE.	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 SIDE	 YOU	 ARE	 TALKING	 ABOUT	 THE
COMING
THIRD	WORLD	WAR.
For	me	there	is	no	future,	no	past;	all	is	present.	To	you	I	say,	"Don't	think	of	the
future,"
because	if	you	think	of	the	future	you	will	miss	the	present.	I	am	SO	rooted	in
the	 present	 that	 it	 is	 only	 the	 present	 that	 extends	 into	 the	 past	 and	 into	 the
future.
It	 is	 like	you	are	hiding	 in	your	room	and	 looking	from	the	keyhole	at	what	 is
happening	outside.	You	 see	 a	man	 suddenly	 appearing	 from	nowhere,	 because
just	 a	 moment	 before	 he	 was	 not	 there	 because	 he	 was	 not	 in	 front	 of	 your
keyhole	 --	he	was	 in	 the	 future.	Now	suddenly	he	appears	before	 the	keyhole;
you	can	see	him	for	a	moment	and	then	he	is	gone	again.	Now	he	is	in	the	past.
But	I	am	outside	the	room.	When	for	you	he	was	in	the	future,	for	me	he	was	in
the	present;	when	for	you	he	has	again	become	in	the	past,	he	is	still	for	me	in
the	present.
Once	 you	 have	 known	 how	 to	 live	 in	 the	 present	 then	 all	 is	 present.	 So	 if	 I
sometimes	talk	about	past	or	about	future,	don't	misunderstand	me.	For	me	there
is	no	past	and	no	future	but	only	the	present.	I	live	in	the	present.
For	 you	 the	 third	world	war	 is	 in	 the	 future;	 for	me	 it	 is	 already	 there,	 it	 has
arrived.	It	may	take	a	little	time	to	come	before	you	can	see	it,	before	it	comes	in
front	of	your	keyhole,	but	then	it	will	be	too	late,	then	nothing	can	be	done	about
it.
And	 you	 say:	 ON	 THE	 ONE	 SIDE	 YOU	 TELL	 US	 NOT	 TO	 WISH	 FOR
ANYTHING.
ON	 THE	 OTHER	 SIDE	 IT	 SEEMS	 YOU	WANT	 TO	 AVOID	 THE	 THIRD
WORLD
WAR.
I	 don't	 want	 to	 avoid	 anything,	 not	 even	 the	 third	 world	 war,	 but	 I	 want	 to
become	a	help	to	you	so	that	you	can	be	aware	of	it.	And	the	third	world	war	can
be	 used	 as	 a	 device	 for	 your	 awareness.	 If	 you	 become	 alert	 that	 this	 earth	 is
going	to	die,	your	life	will	be	transformed.
Jesus	used	to	say	again	and	again:	"Watch,	beware!	The	Day	of	Judgment	is	very
close	 by.	 In	 your	 life,	 this	 very	 life	 you	 will	 see	 it	 happening!"	 It	 has	 not
happened	up	to	now,	but	it	was	a	device	Jesus	was	creating	a	situation	in	which
people	could	become	aware	that	the	time	is	very	short	and	much	has	to	be	done,
and	we	should	not	go	on	playing	with	stupid	games	--	money,	power,	prestige.
It	happened	in	the	life	of	a	great	mystic,	Eknath:	A	man	used	to	come	to	him	for
years,	must	have	been	a	man	of	a	very	philosophic	bent.	He	would	ask	Eknath
again	and	again,
"I	 cannot	 believe	 that	 a	 man	 can	 be	 so	 innocent	 as	 you,	 so	 saintly,	 so	 holy.
Sometimes	great	doubts	arise	in	me	--	maybe	you	are	holy	only	on	the	surface;
maybe	deep	inside	your	mind	you	still	desire	things	that	we	desire,	you	are	still
ambitious.	Maybe	your	ambition	is	very	subtle	and	we	cannot	see	it;	maybe	deep
down	 in	 your	 dreams	 you	 still	 commit	 sin.	 Help	me	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 this	 doubt,
because	this	has	become	a	barrier	between	me	and	you."
Eknath	would	laugh	and	would	never	answer.
One	day	early	in	the	morning	the	man	came	and	he	said,	"I	could	not	sleep	the
whole	night.	Now	it	is	too	much	--	it	is	becoming	a	nightmare!	Seeing	you	I	see
such	 beauty,	 such	 grace,	 that	 I	 cannot	 believe	 it	 is	 possible	 in	 a	 human	 body.
Seeing	you	I	believe	God	is,	but	the	moment	I	go	home	doubt	starts	sprouting,
mushrooming:	 'How	 can	 it	 be?	 After	 all	 he	 is	 also	 made	 of	 body	 and	 mind.
Maybe	there	is	still	some	sexual	desire	hidden	in	his	unconscious.'"
That	day	Eknath	did	not	laugh.	On	the	contrary,	he	looked	very	serious	and	sad.
He	said,
"Friend,	 today	 I	 have	 to	 impart	 something	 very	 essential,	 urgent,	 to	 you.	And
before	 I	discuss	your	question	 I	would	 like	 to	 say	what	 I	have	 to	give	 to	you,
because	I	may	forget.	If	I	go	on	discussing	with	you	I	may	not	remember."
The	man	said,	"What	is	it?	What	is	that	which	is	so	urgent?"
Eknath	said,	"Just	the	other	day	by	chance	I	looked	at	your	hand,	and	your	life
line	 is	 finished.	 Just	 a	 little	 fragment	 is	 left,	 seven	 days	 at	 the	most.	 Today	 is
Sunday	--	I	don't	think	you	will	be	able	to	survive	next	Sunday.
By	next	Sunday	evening	you	will	be	gone.	Now	you	can	ask	your	question."
The	man	stood	up.	He	said,	"What	question?	I	will	come	again."
Eknath	 said,	 "Wait!	Why	 is	 there	 so	 much	 hurry?	 It	 is	 enough	 time	 --	 seven
days."
The	man	 said,	 "You	 say	 it	 is	 enough	 time?	 --	 seven	 days?	 I	 can't	waste	 it	 on
stupid	 doubts!	 And	 what	 am	 I	 to	 do	 about	 you?	 Whether	 you	 suffer	 from
sexuality	or	sin,	that	is	your	business.	I	am	going	home!"
Eknath	 tried	 to	 hold	 him	 but	 he	 escaped.	 He	 said,	 "I	 have	 no	 time	 for
philosophical	matters	any	more!"
Just	a	moment	before	when	he	had	come	he	was	so	strong,	so	young	--	and	just	a
moment	afterwards	when	he	was	going	down	the	steps	of	the	temple	of	Eknath
he	was	shaking	and	trembling.	He	had	to	take	the	support	of	the	wall.
He	went	home,	he	gathered	his	family,	and	he	said,	"Only	seven	days	are	left	and
I	am	going	to	die.	Tell	all	my	friends	and	all	my	enemies	to	come	--	I	would	like
to	 forgive	 and	be	 forgiven.	Only	 seven	days	 are	 there,	 so	what	 is	 the	 point	 of
quarreling	 with	 people	 and	 fighting	 and	 competing?	 Finished,	 the	 game	 is
finished!"
He	laid	himself	on	the	bed.	He	became	so	weak	that	he	could	not	get	up	from	the
bed.	He	was	 fed	on	 the	bed	and	continuously	he	was	chanting,	 "Rama,	Rama,
Rama,	Rama,"
remembering	God	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 his	 life.	And	 every	 day	 he	was	 asking,
"How	many	days	 are	 still	 left?"	And	as	 the	 seventh	day	 started	 coming	 closer
and	closer	he	became	more	and	more	oblivious	of	the	world.	He	started	looking
at	 people	 indifferently,	 he	 started	 forgetting	 people's	 names,	 their	 faces.	 He
stopped	recognizing	people:	he	stopped	recognizing	his	own	wife	and	children,
his	own	father	and	mother!
And	 the	 seventh	day	came	and	he	was	crying,	 and	he	was	chanting	 the	whole
day	and	asking	again	and	again,	"How	far	is	the	sunset?	--	because	Eknath	has
said,	'The	moment	the	sun	sets,	you	are	finished!'	Exactly	at	sunset	I	am	going	to
die."
And	the	sun	was	coming	down	every	moment,	coming	closer	and	closer	to	the
western	 horizon.	 Just	 a	 few	 minutes	 more...and	 Eknath	 arrived.	 The	 whole
family	started	crying	and	weeping.	Eknath	said,	'Wait!	Let	me	see	the	person!"
Eknath	went	there,	shook	the	man.	It	was	very	difficult	for	the	man	to	recognize
even	Eknath	--	and	he	used	to	call	him	his	Master,	and	for	at	least	twenty	years
he	 had	 been	 sitting	 in	 SATSANG	with	 him,	 in	 communion	with	 him.	And	 he
could	not	recognize	him!
Eknath	said,	"Can't	you	recognize	me?	I	am	Eknath,	your	Master!"
Then	a	little	recognition	arose	and	he	said,	"Yes,	vaguely.	I	am	in	a	very	cloudy
state.
How	far	is	the	sun	from	the	western	horizon?"
Eknath	said,	"Forget	all	this	nonsense!	I	have	come	to	ask	you	one	question:	in
these	 seven	 days	what	was	 going	 on	 inside	 you?	 Sex,	 greed,	 anger,	 jealousy?
What	was	going	on	inside	you?	I	have	come	to	ask	that	question."
The	man	said,	"I	am	dying	and	you	are	talking	philosophy!	Death	was	so	close
to	 me	 that	 I	 could	 only	 remember	 God.	 I	 don't	 remember	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment	that	sex	was	there,	greed	was	there,	enmity	was	there,	anger	was	there.
No,	they	had	all	disappeared."
Eknath	said,	"You	are	not	going	to	die	--	get	up!	This	was	just	an	answer	to	your
question.	The	day	I	became	aware	 that	death	 is,	 since	 that	day	my	 inner	being
has	 changed.	 How	 does	 it	 matter	 whether	 death	 is	 to	 come	 in	 seven	 days	 or
seventy	years?
Once	you	become	aware	 that	 this	 life	 is	going	to	slip	out	of	your	hands,	 it	has
already	slipped!	Then	you	have	to	prepare	for	the	other	shore,	then	you	have	to
prepare	for	something	beyond."
The	 third	world	war	 is	coming	closer,	but	 I	am	not	 interested	 in	avoiding	 it	or
bringing	it.
Who	cares?	My	whole	interest	 is	 in	you,	and	I	want	you	to	become	aware	that
this	earth	is	not	going	to	live	for	long.	If	this	becomes	an	awareness	in	you	it	will
be	a	transforming	force.	And	if	millions	of	people	are	transformed	in	this	way,
this	earth	may	be	saved	--
but	that	will	be	just	a	payoff,	a	consequence.
I	am	not	desiring	that	the	world	should	be	saved.	It	is	such	a	stupid	world,	it	is
such	a	stupid	humanity	--	if	it	is	gone	it	is	good!	I	am	not	very	much	interested	in
saving	this	stupid	lot	--	they	have	lived	here	for	millions	of	years	and	they	have
proved	only	a	burden	and	a	corruption,	they	have	polluted	everything.
But	I	am	certainly	interested	in	using	this	as	a	device,	which	is	far	more	potential
than	 Jesus'	 statement	 that	 the	 Day	 of	 Judgment	 is	 close,	 because	 that	 is	 an
abstraction.	But	the	third	world	war	IS	coming	closer	every	day,	because	Russia
is	preparing,	America	is	preparing;	they	go	on	piling	up	atomic	bombs,	hydrogen
bombs,	death	bombs,	and	 they	go	on	 inventing	new	ways	 for	killing	humanity
instantly.	So	it	is	a	very	very	real	danger.
Why	not	 use	 it	 as	 a	 device?	 It	 can	 shake	 you	 up,	 it	 can	wake	 you	 up.	And	 if
millions	of	people	become	meditators,	 there	 is	a	possibility	 the	world	war	may
not	happen.	But	 that	 is	not	my	interest.	My	interest	 is	 to	save	people	--	people
who	are	worth	saving.
And	 the	 last	 thing	 you	 ask:	 ON	 THE	 ONE	 SIDE	 YOU	 SAY	 THINGS	 ARE
OKAY	AS
THEY	ARE,	THERE	IS	NO	GOAL,	NOTHING	TO	ACHIEVE,	TO	CHANGE.
ON
THE	OTHER	SIDE:	WHAT	ARE	YOU	DOING	HERE?
Just	explaining	this	to	you:	that	there	is	no	goal,	that	there	is	nothing	to	achieve,
that	everything	is	good	as	it	is.
I	will	tell	you	a	Sufi	story:
There	is	a	story	told	by	Sufis	about	a	man	who	read	that	certain	dervishes,	on	the
orders	of	their	Master,	never	touched	meat	and	did	not	smoke.	Since	this	tends	to
fit	in	with	certain	well-established	beliefs,	especially	in	the	West,	this	man	made
his	way	to	the	ZAWIA	--	assembly	place	--	of	the	illuminated	ones,	to	sit	at	their
feet.	They	were	all	over	ninety	years	old.
Sure	enough,	there	they	were,	not	a	spot	of	nicotine	or	shred	of	animal	protein
among	 them,	 and	 our	 hero	 gasped	 with	 delight	 as	 he	 sat	 drinking	 in	 the
unpolluted	 air	 and	 tasting	 the	 bean-curd	 soup	which	 they	 provided.	He	 hoped
that	he	would	at	least	live	to	a	hundred.
Suddenly	one	of	them	whispered,	"Here	comes	the	great	Master!"	And	all	stood
up	as	the	venerable	sage	came	in.	He	smiled	benignly	and	went	into	the	house,
heading	for	his	quarters.	He	did	not	look	a	day	over	fifty.
"How	old	is	he,	and	what	does	he	eat?"	asked	the	enraptured	visitor.
"He	is	one	hundred	and	fifty	years	old,	and	I	don't	suppose	any	of	us	will	reach
that	venerable	age	and	station,"	wheezed	one	of	the	ancients.	"But,	of	course,	he
is	allowed	 twenty	cigars	and	 three	 steaks	a	day,	 since	he	 is	now	beyond	being
affected	by	frivolities	and	temptations!"
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story.	 There	 comes	 a	 moment	 when	 a	 man	 goes	 beyond	 all
duality	--	then	he	is	allowed	everything.
I	can	talk	about	the	future	because	I	live	in	the	present	--	it	is	allowed!	And	I	can
talk	about	saving	the	world	from	the	third	world	war	because	I	have	no	desires
left	--	it	is	allowed.	I	can	go	on	teaching	you	day	in,	day	out,	year	in,	year	out,
saying	 continuously,	 hammering	 continuously:	 "There	 is	 no	 goal,	 no	 purpose,
nothing	to	achieve."	Still	it	is	allowed	to	me	to	teach	you.
Why	is	it	allowed	to	me	to	teach	you?	--	because	I	am	not	a	teacher	any	more.
And	I	am	not	giving	you	a	doctrine,	and	I	am	not	giving	you	a	character,	and	I
am	not	giving	you	a	discipline.	I	am	simply	imparting	my	joy	that	has	happened
to	me.	With	me	all	is	okay	--
third	world	war	or	 no	world	war.	 If	 the	 third	world	war	happens	 I	will	 be	 the
same,	if	it	doesn't	happen	I	am	the	same.
If	the	third	world	war	happens,	if	you	are	alive	and	I	am	alive,	I	will	continue	the
morning	 discourse,	 the	 evening	 darshan...everything	 will	 continue.	 The	 third
world	war	will	go	on	destroying	the	earth	and	I	will	go	on	doing	my	own	thing,
not	being	bothered	by	it	at	all.	It	does	not	matter.
Suresh,	drop	the	Aristotelian	mind.	Only	then	will	you	be	able	to	understand	me
well,	to	understand	me	at	all.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	I	HAVE	BEEN	SO	MUCH	CONDITIONED	AS	A	CATHOLIC	THAT	I
SEE
NO	HOPE	FOR	MYSELF:	CAN	YOU	STILL	HELP	ME?
Maria,
CATHOLIC	OR	COMMUNIST,	Mohammedan	or	Maoist,	Jaina	or	Jew,	it	makes
no	difference,	 it	 is	all	 the	same.	Of	course,	Catholics	do	it	more	systematically
than	Hindus,	more	scientifically.	They	have	developed	a	great	expertise	for	how
to	condition	people.
But	all	the	religions	are	doing	it	more	or	less,	all	the	societies	are	doing	it	in	their
own	way:	everybody	is	conditioned.
The	moment	 you	 are	 born,	 conditioning	 starts,	 from	 your	 very	 first	 breath;	 it
cannot	be	 avoided.	The	parents	will	 condition	you,	 the	 children	you	play	with
will	condition	you,	the	neighborhood	will	condition	you,	the	school,	the	church,
the	 state.	 And	 consciously	 not	 much	 conditioning	 is	 being	 done,	 but
unconsciously	 the	 child	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 accumulating	 it.	 The	 child	 learns	 by
imitating.
So	 don't	 be	 worried.	 This	 is	 the	 normal	 situation	 in	 the	 world:	 everybody	 is
conditioned.
And	everybody	has	to	come	out	of	the	conditioning.	It	is	difficult.	It	is	not	like
undressing
--	it	is	like	peeling	your	skin.	It	is	hard,	it	is	arduous,	because	we	have	become
identified	 with	 our	 conditioning.	 We	 know	 ourselves	 only	 as	 Catholics,
communists,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans,	 Christians.	 And	 the	 greatest	 fear	 of
dropping	 the	 conditioning	 is	 the	 fear	 that	 you	may	 fall	 into	 an	 identity	 crisis.
Hence	sannyas.
Sannyas	is	 just	a	device	to	help	you	so	that	you	don't	start	feeling	that	you	are
falling	into	an	abyss,	a	bottomless	abyss.	I	take	away	your	conditionings	--	you
will	feel	very	empty	-
-	I	have	to	give	you	something	to	play	with	for	the	time	being.	Sannyas	is	that
toy	to	play	with	for	 the	time	being.	But	sannyas	is	given	to	you	in	such	a	way
that	it	never	becomes	a	conditioning;	it	remains	fun,	it	remains	sport	--	involved
yet	you	remain	a	witness	to	it.
Maria,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	drop	 the	 conditioning,	because	 that	 is	your	whole	past,
your	mind,	your	ego,	all	that	you	are.	But	if	you	are	ready,	if	you	are	courageous,
if	 you	 have	 guts	 enough	 to	 come	 along	 with	 me	 it	 is	 possible,	 it	 is	 not
impossible.
The	 local	procurer	 in	Mexico	grabbed	 the	distraught	 tourist	 stepping	down	 the
gangplank.
"I	got	a	nice	young	girl	for	you	--	twelve	years	old,	a	virgin."
When	the	tourist	refused	the	procurer	said,	"Then	I	got	a	nice	young	boy	for	you,
twelve	years	old,	a	virg	--	"
"Look!"	roared	the	tourist,	"I	don't	want	a	young	girl,	I	don't	want	a	young	boy...
I	just	want	the	American	consul!"
"Hmmm!"	murmured	the	procurer,	"A	little	difficult,	but	I	try."
It	is	a	little	difficult,	but	I	try.	Maria,	give	me	a	chance	to	try!	It	has	happened	to
so	many	people.	 I	have	so	many	Marias!	Become	part	of	 this	happening,	don't
remain	a	spectator.
Join	the	dance!	My	invitation	is	for	all,	my	invitation	is	unconditional.
Whatever	conditioning	you	have	got	can	be	dropped,	because	it	has	been	forced
on	 you	 from	 the	 outside	 --	 and	 because	 it	 has	 been	 forced	 on	 you	 from	 the
outside	it	can	be	taken	away	from	you	from	the	outside.
I	 cannot	 give	 you	God,	 I	 cannot	 give	 you	 truth,	 I	 cannot	 give	 you	 your	 inner
core,	but	I	can	take	all	the	rubbish	that	has	been	heaped	upon	you.	And	once	that
rubbish	is	removed,	God	starts	becoming	alive	in	you.	Once	all	the	obstacles	are
removed,	 the	 spring	 of	 your	 life	 starts	 flowing,	 the	 innocence	 is	 regained.
Innocence	 regained	 is	 paradise	 regained;	 you	 enter	 again	 into	 the	 Garden	 of
Eden.
And	one	thing	is	certain,	Maria,	that	you	are	not	contented	with	being	a	Catholic.
How	can	anybody	who	has	any	intelligence	be	contented	with	being	a	Catholic
or	a	Hindu	or	a	Jaina	or	a	Buddhist?	All	these	sects	are
dead!	It	was	beautiful	when	Jesus	walked	on	the	earth;	to	have	followed	a	few
steps	with	him	would	have	been	a	tremendous	transformation.	Those	few	people
were	 fortunate	who	 broke	 bread	with	 him,	 drank	wine	with	 him	 --	must	 have
laughed,	danced,	sung,	celebrated.	Those	few	people	were	real	Christians.
How	can	you	be	a	Christian	if	Christ	is	missing?	And	how	can	you	be	a	Buddhist
if	Buddha	is	not	present?
A	Master	 is	absolutely	necessary	 for	 the	disciple	 to	go	 through	 the	mutation.	 I
am	available,	my	heart	is	open	for	you.	Please	come	in!	And	all	the	junk	that	you
are	carrying	will	be	dropped.	Difficult	it	is	always,	but	not	impossible.	I	can	save
at	least	the	essential	core	and	that	is	the	real	thing.	If	I	can	save	your	very	center,
then	let	the	circumference	remain	Catholic,	communist,	Hindu	or	Mohammedan
--	it	cannot	affect	you.
There	 was	 this	 King	 Edward	 potato	 who	 one	 night	 decided	 that	 he	 fancied	 a
night	out	on	the	town.	So	he	jumped	in	the	tub	and	had	a	scrub,	put	on	his	best
red	jacket	and	went	up	West.
Sitting	in	a	bar	he	spied	this	luscious	young	tomato,	so	he	thought	to	himself,	"I
fancy	that	--	I	will	chat	it	up!"
In	the	corner	of	 the	pub	was	a	bunch	of	punk	carrots	--	green	hair,	everything.
One	of	 them	 turns	 to	 the	other	 and	 says,	 "Hey,	yon	potato	 is	 chatting	up	your
tomato!"
The	other	says,	"I	am	not	having	that.	We	will	get	him	at	chucking	out	time!"
So	come	closing	time	they	get	this	potato	outside.	What	a	mess!	They	kick	in	his
eyes,	rip	up	his	jacket	--	totally	mash	him	up!
When	he	wakes	up	in	the	hospital	the	surgeon	says,	"I	have	got	good	news	and
bad	news	for	you."
So	the	potato	says,	"Well,	let	me	have	the	good	first."
The	surgeon	says,	"We	managed	to	save	your	eyes.
"And	what	is	the	bad?"
"You	will	be	a	cabbage	for	the	rest	of	your	life!"
I	can	save	your	eyes,	and	 that's	what	matters.	Then	you	can	be	a	cabbage	or	a
Catholic,	whatsoever	you	want.	On	the	circumference	you	can	be	anything,	but
at	the	center	become	consciousness,	become	a	witness.	Your	being	a	Catholic	or
Hindu	or	Mohammedan	is	a	content	of	your	consciousness.	Don't	get	identified
with	 the	 content;	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 the	 watcher.	 There	 is	 Catholic
upbringing,	 there	 is	 Mohammedan	 conditioning,	 there	 is	 Hindu	 hypnosis	 --
watch!	 They	 are	 separate	 from	 you.	 You	 are	 a	 pure	 consciousness,	 a	 mirror,
reflecting	all	that	has	been	put	upon	you	from	the	outside.
Once	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 separate	 you	 are	 free	 from	 all	 conditioning,	 and
then	you	can	use	your	conditioning.	I	am	not	saying	to	become	unnecessarily	a
nuisance	 in	 your	 society;	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 to	 get	 into	 unnecessary	 trouble	 for
yourself	and	others.	You	can	go	on	acting	being	a	Catholic	--	it	is	beautiful!	You
can	go	to	the	church	every	Sunday	and	enjoy	it,	but	remember	that	you	are	not	a
Catholic	--	the	Catholic	upbringing	is	just	on	the	circumference.	You	are	only	a
witness.
Be	a	witness	in	the	church,	be	a	witness	in	the	temple,	be	a	witness	while	you	are
reading	 the	Gita	 and	 be	 a	witness	while	 you	 are	 reading	 the	Bible	 --	 and	 this
witnessing	will	become	the	foundation	of	your	liberation.
The	third	question	Sarjano,
Question	3
OSHO,	ONCE	I	THOUGHT	ABOUT	ENERGY	AS	IF	ENERGY	WAS	MINE
AND	I	LIKED	TO	THINK	THAT	I	HAD	A	LOT	OF	ENERGY.	NOW	I	HAVE
REALIZED
THAT	 I	 AM	 ONLY	 A	 PASSAGE,	 A	 MEDIUM,	 A	 VEHICLE	 FOR	 THE
ENERGY	OF
THE	 DIVINE.	 SO	 HOW	 COME	 THAT	 SOMETIMES	 I	 AM	 SO	 FULL	 OF
ENERGY
AND	 OVERFLOWING	 FROM	 EACH	 PORE,	 FEELING	 THAT	 IT	 IS
IMPOSSIBLE
TO	 CONTAIN	 THAT	 MUCH	 AND	 I	 WILL	 EXPLODE	 --	 AND	 AFTER	 A
FEW
HOURS	I	AM	EMPTY	WITH	NO	ENERGY	EVEN	TO	SAY	THAT	I	WOULD
LIKE
TO	HAVE	MORE	ENERGY?	IS	THERE	NO	WAY	TO	KEEP	THE	FLOW	OF
ENERGY	 CONSTANT?	 AND	 AGAIN,	 SOMETIMES	 I	 FEEL	 SUCH
APPETITE	FOR
LIFE	THAT	LITERALLY	I	AM	GOING	AROUND	HUGGING	EVERYBODY,
AND	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	HUG	TREES	AND	STARS	AND	FLOWERS,	AND
THEN	AFTER
A	FEW	HOURS	I	FEEL	THAT	LIFE	IS	NO	LONGER	WORTH	LIVING	AND
IT	IS
ONLY	OUT	OF	RESPECT	FOR	LIFE	THAT	I	DON'T	KILL	MYSELF.	BUT	I
START
ASKING	GOD,	"PLEASE,	TAKE	BACK	YOUR	LIFE	--	IT	IS	TOO	PAINFUL
AND
BORING."	 IS	 THERE	 SOME	 RELATION	 BETWEEN	 THESE
PHENOMENA?
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	TALK	MORE	ABOUT	ENERGY?
YOU	ARE	COMING	CLOSER	TO	THE	POINT,	to	the	target	of	understanding,
but	you	have	not	come	exactly	to	the	point	yet;	you	are	missing	only	by	inches.
You	say:	ONCE	I	THOUGHT	ABOUT	ENERGY	AS	IF	ENERGY	WAS	MINE
AND	I	LIKED	TO	THINK	THAT	I	HAD	A	LOT	OF	ENERGY.	NOW	I	HAVE
REALIZED...
Still	 that	 'I'	 continues;	before	 it	was	 identified	with	energy,	now	it	 is	 identified
with	realization.
NOW	 I	 HAVE	 REALIZED,	 you	 say,	 THAT	 I	 AM	 ONLY	 A	 PASSAGE,	 A
MEDIUM,	A	VEHICLE	FOR	THE	ENERGY	OF	THE	DIVINE.
To	be	a	passage	means	you	are	no	more.	You	cannot	 realize	 that	 "I	am	only	a
passage,"
otherwise	you	are	still	there	--	and	if	you	are	there	you	cannot	be	a	passage.	You
have	 to	 disappear	 completely.	 Nobody	 remains	 there	 to	 realize	 that	 "I	 am	 a
passage"	--	then	you	are	a	passage.
That's	why	this	problem	is	arising.	Sometimes	you	are	less	and	sometimes	you
are	more:	when	you	are	 less,	more	energy	 is	 flowing;	when	you	are	more,	 the
flow	 stops.	When	you	 are	 a	 little	more	 there	 as	 a	 realizer,	 as	 a	 spiritual	 being
who	has	understood	the	flow	of	energy,	when	you	are	there	identified	with	this
new	 idea	 of	 being	 a	 passage	 and	 a	 medium,	 energy	 disappears	 because	 you
obstruct	it.	Sometimes	when	you	are	not	there	--
not	even	as	a	realizer,	not	even	as	a	medium,	when	simply	you	are	not	there	--
the	energy	starts	flowing.
You	 ask:	 SO	 HOW	 COME	 THAT	 SOMETIMES	 I	 AM	 SO	 FULL	 OF
ENERGY...?
Whenever	 you	 are	 not,	 you	 are	 full	 of	 energy;	 whenever	 you	 are,	 energy
disappears.	God	can	 exist	 only	 in	your	 absence;	 you	cannot	 coexist	with	God.
But	you	are	still	there	in	a	subtle	way.
You	ask:	HOW	COME	THAT	SOMETIMES	I	AM	SO	FULL	OF	ENERGY...?
Who	is	this	'I	am'?	You	are	enjoying	this:	"I	am	so	full	of	energy."	Energy	comes
when	you	are	not,	 and	 immediately	you	 jump	 in	and	you	say,	 "I	am	so	 full	of
energy,"	and	energy	starts	disappearing.
You	say:...OVERFLOWING	FROM	EACH	PORE,	FEELING	THAT	IT	IS
IMPOSSIBLE	TO	CONTAIN	THAT	MUCH...?
Who	is	there	to	contain?	Who	is	there	to	count	how	much	it	is?	Who	is	there	to
weigh?	In	a	subtle	way	you	are	hiding	by	the	side	or	looking	from	the	corner	of
your	eye.
A	guest	had	come	to	Mulla	Nasruddin's	house.	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	giving	him
food.
The	guest	was	 saying,	 "Now	 it	 is	 enough	 --	 I	have	 taken	 five	PURIS,	now	no
more."
Nasruddin	said,	"Five?	You	have	taken	eleven,	but	who	is	counting?"
This	is	also	counting!	Who	is	there	to	contain?	You	jump	in	--	it	always	happens.
Not	 only	 with	 you,	 Sarjano,	 it	 happens	 with	 everybody.	Whenever	 those	 rare
moments	 come	 when	 you	 are	 not,	 energy	 flows,	 suddenly	 the	 mind	 recoils,
comes	 back,	 feels	 great:	 "So	 much	 energy,	 impossible	 to	 contain!"	 And
immediately	you	fall	to	the	opposite	polarity.
You	say:...AND	AFTER	A	FEW	HOURS	I	AM	EMPTY,	WITH	NO	ENERGY
EVEN
TO	SAY	THAT	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	HAVE	MORE	ENERGY?	IS	THERE	NO
WAY
TO	KEEP	THE	FLOW	OF	ENERGY	CONSTANT?
Who	wants	to	keep	the	flow	of	energy	constant?	Just	see	the	point:	it	is	you.	The
old	habit	goes	on	coming	back	in	new	ways.
Rosenfeld,	a	New	York	men's	clothing	manufacturer,	was	returning	to	America
after	a	business	trip	to	Israel.	On	the	way	back	he	decided	to	stop	off	in	Rome
and	take	in	the	sights.
Two	weeks	 later	 he	 finally	 arrived	home.	 "How	was	 the	 trip?"	 asked	his	 sales
manager.
"Fantastic!"	replied	Rosenfeld.	"In	Israel	I	sold	a	thousand	more	suits	than	any	of
us	expected.	Then	I	stopped	off	in	Rome	and	saw	all	the	historical	sights.	I	got	in
with	a	sightseeing	group	and	we	had	an	audience	with	the	Pope."
"The	Pope	himself?	You	don't	say!"	exclaimed	the	sales	manager.	"What	does	he
look	like?"
"Oh,"	said	Rosenfeld,	"I	would	say	about	a	forty-four	short."
A	 tailor	 is	 a	 tailor,	 a	 businessman	 is	 a	 businessman.	 Even	 if	 he	 goes	 to	 see	 a
Buddha	he	will	come	with	this	information	--	a	forty-four	short.
They	say	that	a	shoemaker	never	looks	at	people's	faces,	he	goes	on	looking	at
their	shoes.	In	fact,	that	is	his	only	way	to	judge	about	people.	Seeing	the	shoe
he	knows	whether	you	have	money	in	your	pocket	or	not.	He	knows	how	things
are	 going	 in	 your	 life,	 whether	 you	 are	 happy	 or	 unhappy.	 In	 fact,	 a	 good
shoemaker	can	predict	everything	about	you	 just	by	 looking	at	your	shoes;	 the
psychoanalysis	of	the	shoe	will	show	everything	about	you.
Old	 habits,	 Sarjano,	 and	 it	 is	 so	 with	 everybody....The	 'I'	 is	 the	 most	 ancient
habit;	for	millions	of	lives	we	have	carried	it,	so	I	comes	again	and	again.	You
will	have	to	be	a	little	more	watchful,	a	little	more	alert.	Who	wants	to	keep	the
flow	of	energy	constant?	--
Exactly	the	same	entity	that	wants	the	flow	to	remain	constant	is	the	cause	of	it
not	being	constant.	Be	a	little	more	alert.
Mrs	Hatton	wanted	to	scare	her	husband	out	of	his	terrible	drinking	habit.	One
night	she	dressed	up	like	the	Devil	and	waited	for	him	in	an	alley.
Soon	 the	 bar	 closed	 for	 the	 night	 and	 Hatton	 staggered	 towards	 home.	 Mrs.
Hatton	jumped	out	at	him	and	yelled,	"Yah!	I	am	the	Devil!"
Hatton	held	out	his	hand	and	said,	"How	da	ya	do?	I	married	your	sister!"
This	is	awareness	--	even	drunk!
Learn	 a	 little	 more	 awareness,	 be	 aware.	 The	 'I'	 will	 come	 in	 many	 forms,
shapes,	 disguises.	 It	 can	 become	 spiritual,	 it	 can	 become	 holy,	 it	 can	 become
saintly,	godly.	It	can	try	every	possible	way	to	save	itself.
When	you	are	feeling	full	of	energy	you	are	not,	hence	great	love	arises.	The	ego
poisons	love;	you	start	hugging	people,	trees.	People	have	complained	to	me	and
trees	too,	because	they	may	not	be	in	the	same	energy	space	as	you	are,	Sarjano.
Be	a	little	watchful!
But	 I	 know,	 when	 the	 energy	 flows	 one	 is	 constantly	 in	 a	 sharing	 state;	 one
would	 like	 to	 share	 with	 everybody,	 even	 with	 trees	 and	 rocks.	 But	 when	 it
disappears	 you	 will	 feel	 very	 very	 empty,	 so	 empty	 that	 you	 would	 like	 to
commit	suicide.	This	happens	only	when	you	reach	a	peak	of	energy,	and	then
coming	back	to	the	valley	is	very	disturbing.
People	who	live	in	the	valley	and	never	go	to	the	peak	never	think	of	suicide.
That's	 why	 in	 poor	 countries	 suicide	 is	 rare,	 in	 primitive	 countries	 absolutely
non-existent.	Animals	don't	commit	suicide	--	they	never	go	to	the	peak.	Because
they	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 the	 peak	 they	 never	 feel	 the	 ugliness,	 the
darkness	of	the	valley.
Because	they	have	never	smelt	the	fragrance	of	the	divine	they	can	never	smell
the	stinking	existence	that	they	are	living.
So	this	 is	going	to	happen	to	every	sannyasin:	you	will	reach	peaks	of	 joy	and
then	when	you	fall	from	the	peaks	the	only	desire	will	be	to	be	finished	with	it
all.	But	the	fall	is	not	happening	on	its	own	--	you	are	the	cause	of	it,	it	can	be
stopped.
And	the	only	way	to	stop	it	is:	when	you	are	on	the	peak,	enjoy	the	peak,	enjoy
the	sunlit	peak,	 the	pure	air,	 the	whispering	of	 the	clouds,	 the	closeness	of	 the
stars,	 enjoy	 that;	 and	when	 you	 fall	 into	 the	 valley,	 enjoy	 the	 darkness	 of	 the
valley,	the	dangers	of	the	valley	--
and	don't	bring	yourself	in	--	both	are	good.	In	fact,	the	valley	will	allow	you	a
little	rest	so	that	you	can	again	be	ready	to	go	to	the	peak.	The	valley	is	a	kind	of
sleep;	it	is	needed	after	a	day's	hard	work.	Tomorrow	morning	you	will	be	again
rejuvenated,	you	can	again	track	your	path	towards	the	peak.
Enjoy	 both	 --	 and	 you	 can	 enjoy	 both	 if	 the	 'I'	 disappears.	 And	 if	 the	 'I'
disappears	--	I	would	like	to	give	you	the	real	mystic	statement	about	it	--	if	the
'I'	disappears	there	is	no	peak,	no	valley;	everything	is	the	same.	Wherever	you
are,	 God	 is	 flowing	 through	 you;	 wherever	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of
blessedness.	Wherever	you	are,	not	only	are	YOU
blessed,	you	bless	the	whole	existence	too.
The	last	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 ARE	ALL	 ENLIGHTENED	MASTERS	RASCALS	 LIKE	YOU?	 TO
ME,	 YOUR	 RASCALINESS	 IS	 EVEN	 MORE	 PREDOMINANT	 THAN
YOUR	 JOKE-TELLING.	 ARE	 YOU	 TRYING	 TO	 TRICK	 US	 ALL	 INTO
ENLIGHTENMENT.
Satya,
A	thousand	and	one	thanks	for	the	compliment!
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Just	For	Your	Sake
8	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909080
ShortTitle:
BESTIL08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 IN	 THE	 WEST	 MANY	 GROUP-PSYCHOANALYSTS,	 SUCH	 AS
BION,	 EZRIEL,	 ANZIEN,	 PICHON-PRIVIERE,	 TREAT	 A	 GROUP	 AS	 A
UNITY	AND
THEY	ANALYZE	THE	GROUP	MENTALITY,	MOOD	AND	RESISTANCES,
BUT
NOT	 AS	 INDIVIDUALS.	 FOR	 THEM,	 AS	 A	 MAN	 IS	 MADE	 OF	 MANY
ASPECTS
AND	 PARTS,	 BUT	 IS	 A	 UNITY,	 SO	 A	 GROUP	 IS	 MADE	 OF	 MANY
PERSONS	BUT
IS	A	UNITY	TOO.
HERE	WITH	YOU,	THE	IMPORTANCE	OF	THE	GROUP	IS	VERY	MUCH
STRESSED	 IN	 THERAPY,	 WORK,	 MEDITATION,	 ENERGY	 DARSHAN;
ON	THE
OTHER	 HAND	 GREAT	 IMPORTANCE	 IS	 GIVEN	 TO	 INDIVIDUALITY.
OSHO,	 PLEASE,	 HAS	 A	 GROUP	 A	 KIND	 OF	 UNIQUE	 SOUL	 BEYOND
INDIVIDUALS,	OR	IS	IT	ONLY	A	BUNCH	OF	PEOPLE	OCCASIONALLY
GATHERED
TOGETHER?	ARE	DIFFERENT	SOCIAL	AND	ETHICAL	IMPLICATIONS
CONCERNED	IN	SUCH	A	CASE?	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Ramadas,
THIS	 IS	 ONE	 OF	 THE	 FUNDAMENTALS	 OF	 FASCISM,	 that	 individuals
don't	exist,	only	groups	are	real.	But	then	the	problem	arises:	where	will	you	put
the	full	point?	If	the	group	is	real	and	individuals	are	not	real,	or	are	just	parts	of
the	group,	then	the	church	is	far	more	real	--	it	is	a	bigger	group;	then	the	nation
is	far	more	real	because	it	is	an	even	bigger	group;	then	the	whole	of	humanity	is
still	 more	 real	 because	 it	 is	 an	 even	 bigger	 group.	 And	 the	 individual	 is
completely	lost.	And	whenever	there	is	a	conflict	between	the	individual	and	the
group,	of	course	 the	 individual	has	 to	sacrifice	himself	 --	because	he	 is	unreal.
He	exists	only	as	a	part	of	the	group.
This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 destroy	 revolution	 completely,	 totally.	 This	 is	 not
psychoanalysis;	 this	 is	 trying	 to	 bring	 fascism	 from	 the	 back	 door.	But	 all	 the
societies	love	fascism.	No	society	wants	individuals,	because	the	very	existence
of	the	individual	is	a	question	mark	on	many	things	the	society	goes	on	doing.
An	 individual	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 a	 rebel.	 An	 individual	 is	 a	 non-conformist,	 he
cannot	conform.	He	can	say	yes	only	to	things	which	he	feels	are	worth	saying
yes	 to,	 but	 it	 depends	on	his	own	 feeling,	his	own	 intuitive	understanding,	his
own	intelligence.	He	cannot	be	forced	to	yield.	He	can	surrender	out	of	love,	but
he	cannot	be	made	to	surrender;	he	would	rather	die	than	surrender.	He	cannot
be	an	obedient	slave	--	not	that	he	does	not	know	how	to	obey.	When	he	feels	for
something,	 when	 he	 is	 committed	 to	 something,	 involved	 with	 something,	 he
obeys,	 he	obeys	 totally,	 but	he	 is	 really	obeying	his	own	 inner	 light;	 he	 is	 not
following	any	commandments	from	the	outside.
To	 be	 an	 individual	 is	 to	 be	 non-political.	 The	 whole	 of	 politics	 depends	 on
people	who	are	not	individuals,	who	are	only	phony	individuals,	who	appear	to
be	separate	but	are	not	separate	--	dependent	on	the	group,	utterly	dependent,	for
their	safety,	security,	respectability,	power,	prestige:	for	their	ego.
The	 real	 individual	 has	 no	 ego,	 hence	 he	 need	 not	 depend	 on	 the	 society	 he
society	 gives	 you	 the	 ego,	 and	 if	 you	want	 to	 be	 on	 an	 ego	 trip	 you	 have	 to
depend	on	people;	only	they	can	nourish	your	ego.	The	individual	knows	his	real
self,	hence	he	needs	no	ego.
But,	Ramadas,	the	individual	will	not	go	to	a	psychoanalyst;	there	is	no	need	for
him.	To	be	an	individual	is	to	be	whole	and	healthy.
The	problem	arises...psychoanalysis	has	become	very	important	and	significant
because	we	have	taken	away	people's	individuality.	We	have	given	them	phony
egos	 which	 DON'T	 satisfy.	 They	 are	 like	 unnourishing	 food	 --	 colorful,
appealing,	but	not	giving	you	any	nourishment.
And	 the	man	who	 lives	with	 the	 ego	 is	 always	missing	 himself;	 he	 is	 always
feeling	empty,	meaningless.	He	wants	 to	fill	his	being	with	something:	he	may
become	obsessed	with	food	just	as	a	way	to	feel	full;	he	can	eat	too	much,	he	can
become	obsessed	with	food.	Or	he	can	become	obsessed	with	money,	with	gold,
with	 power.	 These	 are	 all	 ways	 to	 somehow	 feel	 significant.	 But	 nothing
succeeds,	everything	fails.	You	can	hope	only	while	 things	are	far	away;	when
you	achieve	them,	suddenly	you	see	you	have	been	chasing	shadows.
You	are	not	feeling	empty	because	you	don't	have	much	money.	You	are	feeling
empty	because	you	have	not	yet	encountered	your	real	self,	you	have	not	come
to	your	authentic	 individuality.	Meditation	is	 the	way	to	 individuality.	It	makes
you	a	light	unto	yourself.
No,	 an	 individual	 is	 not	 a	 part;	 an	 individual	 is	 a	 universe	 in	 himself.	But	 no
society	wants	 individuals,	hence	 for	 centuries	 individuality	has	been	destroyed
and	a	plastic	thing	has	replaced	it.	That	plastic	thing	is	called	'personality'.
People	are	very	much	confused	about	personality	and	individuality.	They	think
personality	 is	 individuality.	 It	 is	 not	 --	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 the	 barrier.	You	will	 never
attain	 to	 individuality	 if	 you	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 drop	 your	 personality.	 Here	 the
group	 therapies,	 meditations,	 work,	 this	 communion...all	 is	 devised	 in	 such	 a
way	 that	 it	 destroys	 your	 personality,	 the	 plastic	 self,	 and	 throws	 you	 back	 to
your	real	individuality.
Individuality	 is	 born	 with	 you,	 it	 is	 your	 being.	 Personality	 is	 a	 social
phenomenon,	it	is	given	to	you.	When	you	are	sitting	in	a	cave	in	the	Himalayas
you	don't	have	any	personality,	but	you	have	individuality.	Personality	can	exist
only	in	reference	to	others.
The	more	people	know	you,	the	more	personality	you	have	--	hence	the	desire	to
have	 name	 and	 fame.	 The	 more	 people	 respect	 you,	 the	 more	 you	 enjoy	 the
personality;	it	becomes	strengthened.
Hence	a	great	 longing	 for	 respectability.	You	can	attain	 it	 through	money,	you
can	attain	it	by	renouncing	money.	You	can	attain	it	by	eating	too	much	or	you
can	 attain	 it	 by	 eating	 too	 little,	 by	 fasting.	You	 can	 attain	 it	 by	 accumulating
things	or	you	can	attain	 it	 by	 accumulating	knowledge.	But	 the	whole	 idea	 is:
you	are	 looking	 in	 the	others'	eyes	 to	see	how	they	are	feeling	about	you.	You
can	 become	 very	 virtuous,	 very	 moral,	 just	 to	 attain	 a	 personality,	 but	 the
personality	is	not	going	to	fulfill	you.	And	down	the	centuries	the	individuality
has	been	destroyed,	people	are	carrying	personalities	.
In	these	group-psychotherapies	about	which	you	are	asking	me,	and	the	people
like	Bion,	Ezriel,	Anzien,	Pichon-Priviere,	and	their	psychoanalysis	--	who	goes
to	these	people?
The	people	who	have	lost	contact	with	their	beings,	the	people	who	are	too	much
confined	 to	 their	 personalities	 and	have	 no	 idea	 of	 any	 individuality.	They	 ate
ready	 to	become	part	of	a	group.	They	feel	very	at	ease	 in	becoming	part	of	a
group,	 because	 the	 moment	 they	 become	 part	 of	 a	 group	 they	 have	 no
responsibility.	 They	 can	 relax,	 they	 have	 no	 anxiety.	Now	 the	 group	 takes	 the
responsibility.
That's	why	people	are	Hindus	and	Christians	and	Mohammedans.	Why?	Why	do
people	 belong	 to	 rotten,	 utterly	 out-of-date,	 so-called	 ideologies?	 For	 a	 single
reason:	it	gives	you	security,	a	feeling	that	you	belong,	that	there	are	people	who
are	with	you	--	you	are	not	alone.	The	Christian	knows	that	millions	of	people
are	Christians.	The	Hindu	knows	that	he	is	not	alone,	millions	of	people	are	with
him	--	how	can	he	be	wrong?	How	can	millions	of	people	be	wrong?	He	must	be
right!	 He	 knows	 nothing	 of	 what	 is	 right	 and	 what	 is	 wrong,	 but	 the	 crowd
around	him	gives	him	the	feeling	that	he	does	--	a	false	feeling,	obviously.
Truth	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 crowd;	 truth	 has	 always	 been	 attained	 by
individuals.	A	Buddha	attains	it,	a	Jesus,	a	Mohammed,	a	Moses,	a	Zarathustra.
But	they	attain	to	truth	when	they	are	absolutely	alone	in	their	deep	meditative
states,	when	they	forget	all	about	the	world	and	the	other,	when	they	are	no	more
obsessed	by	the	other	in	any	possible	way,	when	they	are	utterly	alone	drowning
in	 their	own	consciousness	and	 reaching	 the	very	bottom	core	of	 it.	Then	 they
know	what	truth	is.
But	the	crowd	keeps	you	away	from	yourself.	The	crowd	is	an	escape	from	your
real	being.	The	crowd	makes	it	possible	for	you	to	remain	interested	in	others;	it
never	allows	you	any	self-encounter.
The	groups	in	this	commune	have	a	totally	different	orientation.	It	is	not	to	force
you	to	become	part	of	the	group.	On	the	contrary,	the	group	is	just	a	help	for	you
to	drop	your	personality	and	BE	 individuals.	 If	by	dropping	your	 individuality
you	become	part	of	a	group,	you	are	committing	suicide.	And	that's	what	these
people	are	helping	people	to	do.
People	 are	 tired	 of	 themselves;	 they	 want	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 If	 they	 cannot
commit	 suicide	 physiologically,	 at	 least	 psychologically	 they	 can	 commit	 it.
They	 may	 not	 be	 courageous	 enough	 to	 really	 commit	 suicide,	 hence	 these
group-psychoanalysts	 are	 giving	 them	 ways	 to	 commit	 psychological	 suicide:
"Become	part	of	the	group."
Becoming	part	of	the	group	you	are	no	more	anxious,	no	more	burdened.	For	a
few	days	while	you	are	in	the	group	you	feel	a	certain	kind	of	relaxation;	out	of
the	group	you	will	be	back	in	your	personality.	Hence	you	will	need	the	groups
again	and	again;	after	a	few	days,	a	few	weeks,	you	will	again	feel	to	participate
in	a	group.	Now	the	group	becomes	like	an	intoxicant	which	helps	you	to	forget
yourself.
This	is	not	the	purpose	here.	Here	the	purpose	is	totally	different:	you	have	to	be
helped	to	stand	on	your	own	feet,	to	be	yourself.
You	ask	me:	IN	THE	WEST	MANY	GROUP-PSYCHOANALYSTS	TREAT	A
GROUP	AS	A	UNITY.	.
No	 group	 can	 ever	 be	 a	 unity;	 a	 group	 can	 at	 the	 most	 be	 a	 union.	 And	 the
difference	 between	 union	 and	 unity	 is	 great.	 In	 unity	 you	 become	 one,	 you
dissolve	 yourself	 completely,	 you	 are	 no	more	 separate.	 In	 union	 you	 remain
separate	but	you	are	together	for	a	certain	purpose.	Once	the	purpose	is	fulfilled
the	union	disappears.	But	 the	unity,	once	attained,	never	disappears	 --	 it	 is	not
purposive.
With	people	you	need	only	unions	with	God	you	need	unity.
Even	a	love	affair	is	a	union	not	a	unity,	a	friendship	is	a	union	not	a	unity.	Once
the	purpose	 is	 fulfilled	 the	 love	affair	will	disappear.	You	may	cling	 for	a	 fear
days	just	out	of	a	sense	of	gratitude,	out	of	a	sense	of	responsibility,	duty,	out	of
a	sense	of	all	the	promises	that	you	have	given	in	the	past	--	you	may	cling	for	a
few	days,	but	that	clinging	cannot	go	on	for	long.	Sooner	or	later	it	is	finished,
the	purpose	is	fulfilled.
Unity	means	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	 finish	 it;	 it	 can	only	be	with	God.	Unity	with
God,	 union	 with	 people.	 In	 unity	 you	 become	 one,	 inseparably	 one,	 but	 in	 a
group	you	are	not	inseparably	one.	It	is	a	temporary	commitment:	you	can	drop
out	of	it	any	moment,	you	can	say	no	any	moment;	you	still	remain	capable	of
separating	yourself.	Remember	the	difference	between	unity	and	union.
When	a	group,	a	psychotherapeutic	group,	meets	together,	it	is	a	kind	of	union.
You	 have	met	 for	 a	 certain	 purpose	 for	 a	 few	 days:	 to	 help	 each	 other,	 to	 be
helped	by	the	wisdom	of	the	psychoanalyst	--	if	he	has	any....	He	may	not	have
any.	 His	 psychotherapy	 may	 be	 just	 an	 escape	 for	 him	 to	 avoid	 his	 own
problems.
It	happens	many	times:	listening	to	other	people's	problems	you	can	easily	forget
your	own	problems.	Getting	involved	with	other	people's	anxieties	you	can	avoid
your	own	anxieties;	they	look	very	small	compared	to	other	people's	problems.
You	can	even	feel	a	little	good	inside:	"My	problems	are	not	so	great."	Listening
to	other	people's	problems	you	become	focused	on	others.
Your	 so-called	 psychoanalysts,	 more	 or	 less,	 are	 simply	 avoiding	 their	 own
problems	--
because	I	know	them!	Many	of	 them	have	become	sannyasins,	many	more	are
on	the	way.	They	are	in	the	same	misery,	in	the	same	mess,	as	you	are.	But	they
are	knowledgeable,	 they	 are	 experts,	 they	have	 studied.	They	can	help	 a	 little,
they	 can	 supply	 a	 kind	 of	 expertise;	 maybe	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 help	 IS	 possible.
Sometimes	they	may	not	be	able	to	give	you	any	help,	but	they	may	function	as
a	placebo.
A	placebo	 literally	means	 'that	which	pleases';	 it	 is	a	medical	 term.	Sometimes
there	 are	 people	 who	 come	 to	 the	 physicians	 who	 have	 no	 problems,	 no	 real
problems,	just	imaginary	problems.	They	are	given	placeboes	--	just	sugar	pills	-
-	 they	 have	 no	medicinal	 quality	 in	 them,	 but	 the	 patient	 believes	 that	 he	 has
been	 given	 a	 great	medicine.	 His	 illness	 is	 imaginary;	 he	 needs	 an	 imaginary
medicine.	 A	 real	 medicine	 will	 create	 some	 trouble.	 Taking	 those	 imaginary
medicines	he	is	helped,	he	feels	good.
Sometimes	 it	 happens:	 the	 moment	 the	 doctor	 comes	 to	 see	 you,	 half	 your
disease	is	already	gone.	He	has	not	given	you	any	medicine,	but	he	just	comes
smiling,	 holds	 your	 hand,	 and	 now	you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 an
authority.	 That's	 enough	 to	 feel	 relief.	 And	 his	 smile,	 and	 his	 authoritative
manner,	and	all	the	gadgets	that	he	brings	--
the	cardiogram,	the	stethoscope,	the	thermometer	--	and	a	few	things	he	does	on
your	body...	and	then	he	smiles	and	says,	"Don't	be	worried.	This	will	be	gone
within	two	days."	Half	of	it	is	already	gone!
Hence	a	doctor	has	to	take	big	fees.	If	he	takes	no	fee	from	you,	you	will	not	be
helped.
The	 bigger	 the	 fee,	 the	 greater	 the	 doctor!	 When	 you	 come	 to	 the	 highest
authority,	certainly	you	know	you	are	going	to	be	helped,	it	is	going	to	happen.
This	man	is	a	magician	--	whomsoever	he	touches	he	cures!	This	very	belief	is
medicinal,	and	then	any	medicine	will	do.	Much	depends	on	the	physician	and
his	demeanor.
These	 group-psychotherapists	 --	 and	 there	 are	 now	many	 kinds	 all	 around	 the
world	--
they	 are	 a	 kind	 of	 placebo.	You	 feel	 good	 knowing	 that	 somebody	 knows;	 he
may	know,	he	may	not	know.	My	own	observation	is	that	they	are	much	more	in
a	mess	 than	you	are,	 but	 they	have	 found	a	way.	The	psychoanalysis	may	not
help	you	but	it	helps	them.
I	have	heard:
A	young	woman	entered	 into	 the	office	of	a	psychoanalyst.	The	psychoanalyst
immediately	said,	"Undress!"
The	woman	said,	"But	I	have	no	physical	problem;	it	is	a	question	of	my	mind."
The	psychoanalyst	said,	"Did	you	hear	me	or	not?	Undress!	If	you	don't	want	to
undress,	get	out!	Then	I	won't	take	the	case	at	all."
Now	 what	 do	 you	 do	 when	 some	 authority	 says	 "Undress"?	 You	 undress!
Reluctantly	 the	 woman	 did	 it.	 And	 the	 psychoanalyst	 jumped	 on	 the	 woman,
made	 love	 to	her,	and	when	 they	were	off	 the	couch	he	said	 to	her,	 "Now	this
takes	care	of	my	problem	--	what	is	your	problem?"
Blind	people	are	being	led	by	other	blind	people!
I	am	not	a	psychoanalyst.	I	am	not	here	to	treat	your	minds	and	cure	them.	I	am
here	to	bring	you	out	of	your	minds	--	healthy,	unhealthy,	neurotic,	non-neurotic,
it	doesn't	matter.	I	don't	take	any	note	of	your	mind,	what	kind	of	mind	you	have.
ANY	kind	of	mind...you	have	to	be	taken	out	of	it!	So	I	don't	go	into	the	details,
I	 simply	 start	 hammering!	Once	 you	 are	 out	 of	 your	mind,	 once	 you	 have	 an
awareness	that	you	are	a	witness	of	your	mind,	the	mind	disappears	with	all	its
diseases.
And	in	fact,	to	tell	you	the	truth,	MIND	is	the	disease.	It	is	not	a	question	of	ill
minds	and	healthy	minds	--	there	are	no	healthy	minds	at	all.	MIND	AS	SUCH
is	the	disease!
But	 these	 people	 --	 psychoanalysts,	 psychotherapists,	 psychiatrists	 --	 they	 are
fixing	your	minds.	They	may	help	a	little	bit,	but	 their	whole	effort	 is	 to	make
you	well-adjusted	to	the	society.	Now	the	real	problem	is:	Is	the	society	healthy?
Is	 the	 society	natural?	 Is	 the	 society	 as	 it	 should	be?	 If	 the	 society	 ITSELF	 is
insane,	helping	you	to	be	adjusted	to	this	insane	society	is	not	a	real	help.
And	as	 I	 see	 it,	 the	people	who	become	psychologically	 ill	 are	more	 sensitive
people	 than	 the	 others.	 The	 others	 who	 are	 never	 psychologically	 ill	 are	 not
healthy	but	only	insensitive	people,	dull.	They	don't	have	much	intelligence,	they
can't	see	the	problems	of	life.	That's	why	they	remain	undisturbed.
Those	who	feel	the	problems	of	life,	those	who	see	the	ugliness	we	have	created
all	around,	the	violence,	the	war,	the	way	we	have	lived	up	to	now,	against	each
other,	 destructive	 to	 nature,	 to	 people,	 to	 birds,	 to	 animals...	 the	way	we	 have
behaved	up	to	now	is	absolutely	insane!	Those	who	are	more	sensitive	amongst
us,	 they	 become	 disturbed	 because	 they	 can	 feel.	 The	 less	 sensitive	 are	 not
disturbed	because	they	can't	feel;	they	have	rocklike	hearts.	They	look	sane.
It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	world!	 The	 really	 sensitive	 people	 become	 insane	 and	 the
utterly	 insane	 people	 look	 sane,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 have	 grown	 a
stonelike	shell	around	their	beings;	they	can't	feel	anything.	They	go	on	dragging
their	lives	in	the	normal	way.	The	normal	is	not	really	normal,	it	is	only	average.
To	be	normal	is	very	rare.
A	 Buddha	 is	 normal,	 a	 Jesus	 is	 normal.	 But	 ask	 Sigmund	 Freud	 --	 Sigmund
Freud	 thinks	 Jesus	 is	 neurotic!	Now	whom	 are	 you	 going	 to	 choose,	 Jesus	 or
Sigmund	Freud?	Who	is	neurotic?
Sigmund	 Freud	 is	 utterly	 neurotic,	 very	 much	 afraid	 of	 death	 --	 and	 he	 calls
Jesus	 neurotic,	who	goes	 to	 his	 death	with	 a	 prayer	 on	his	 lips,	who	 can	pray
from	the	cross,
"God,	 forgive	 these	 people	 because	 they	 know	not	what	 they	 are	 doing."	This
man	is	neurotic?	And	Sigmund	Freud?	--	it	is	reported	that	at	least	three	times-
in	his	life	he	fainted,	fell	into	a	coma,	became	unconscious,	just	at	the	mention	of
the	word	'death'	--
just	 at	 the	 mention	 of	 the	 word.	 Nobody	 was	 crucifying	 him!	 And	 Jesus	 is
neurotic?!
Mansoor	is	neurotic?	When	his	hands	were	cut	he	laughed.	He	looked	at	the	sky
and	said,
"You	cannot	befool	me!"	and	had	a	hearty	laugh.
Somebody	 in	 the	 crowd	asked,	 "Why	are	you	 laughing?	Have	you	gone	mad?
They	are	killing	you!	They	have	cut	your	hands,	now	they	will	cur	your	feet,	and
then	they	will	cut	your	tongue	and	they	will	destroy	your	eyes!"
No	man	was	 ever	 tortured	 so	much	 as	Mansoor,	 not	 even	 Jesus,	 not	 Socrates.
Part	by	part	he	was	killed	very	cruelly	killed,	but	he	laughed	to	the	last.
He	said,	"I	am	laughing	because	you	are	not	killing	me;	the	man	you	are	killing
is	not	me.
That's	why	I	am	laughing	--	you	are	killing	the	body	and	I	am	NOT	the	body.	It
is	 so	 ridiculous!	 I	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 you	 would	 be	 so	 foolish,	 and	 I	 am
telling	God,	looking	upwards	to	the	sky:	You	cannot	befool	me.	Even	if	you	have
come	in	the	form	of	the	murderers,	I	recognize	you	--	because	only	God	exists
and	nobody	else.	Today	he	has	come	in	the	form	of	murderers,	as	death	--	it	 is
my	ultimate	test."
This	person	 is	neurotic?	And	 just	 the	mention	of	 the	word	 'death'	 is	enough	 to
make	Freud	tremble	and	fall	from	his	chair	and	faint!	And	this	is	the	founder	of
psychoanalysis!
Psychoanalysts	 are	 avoiding	 their	 own	 problems.	 Except	 a	 man	 enters	 into
meditation,	he	goes	on	avoiding	his	problems.
You	 ask	 me,	 Ramadas:	 HERE	 WITH	 YOU,	 THE	 IMPORTANCE	 OF	 THE
GROUP	IS
VERY	MUCH	STRESSED	IN	THERAPY...
Yes,	 but	 always	 as	 a	 union,	 not	 as	 unity.	 It	 is	 a	 temporary	 arrangement,	 an
experiment.
You	 are	 not	 to	 become	 one	with	 the	 group.	You	 have	 to	 function	 in	 harmony
with	the	group,	but	you	remain	the	individual.	Just	like	in	an	orchestra	different
instruments	 are	 being	 played,	 but	 each	 instrument	 remains	 different,	 unique.
Each	contributes	 to	 the	whole,	but	you	can	contribute	 to	 the	whole	only	if	you
are	separate,	otherwise	who	is	going	to	contribute	and	to	whom?
In	an	orchestra	 the	flute-player	 is	contributing,	 the	guitarist	 is	contributing,	 the
pianist	is	contributing	--	but	the	pianist	is	a	pianist	and	the	flute-player	is	a	flute-
player.	 The	 flute	 is	 a	 flute	 and	 the	 piano	 is	 a	 piano;	 they	 retain	 their
individualities.	 But	 for	 the	moment	 they	 have	 joined	 hands	 together	 --	 it	 is	 a
union	not	a	unity.	The	flute	has	not	become	part	of	the	piano-	if	it	does	become
the	whole	beauty	will	be	lost.
Here	in	the	groups,	Ramadas,	the	emphasis	is	that	you	should	be	individuals	and
yet	capable	of	functioning	in	harmony	with	others.	That's	what	is	happening	on	a
greater	scale	in	the	whole	commune:	everybody	should	remain	an	individual,	yet
be	capable	of	participating	in	the	communal	life	--	participating	in	the	work,	in
the	play,	 in	 the	music,	of	 the	commune.	But	 it	 is	not	expected	 that	you	should
destroy	 your	 individuality;	 that	will	 be	 suicidal,	 that	will	 be	 a	murder.	On	 the
contrary,	the	whole	effort	is	to	sharpen	your	individuality,	to	give	you	more	and
more	 uniqueness	 The	 more	 meditative	 you	 become,	 the	 more	 unique,
incomparable,	you	become.
The	Buddha	is	a	peak:	part	of	the	infinite	universe	but	not	part	in	the	sense	that
he	is	replaceable;	not	like	a	part	in	a	car	that	you	can	replace.	He	is	unique,	he	is
irreplaceable;	 nobody	 can	 replace	 him.	 The	 higher	 you	 rise	 in	 awareness,	 the
more	you	are	 in	 tune	with	 the	universe,	and	at	 the	same	 time	 the	more	unique
you	go	on	becoming.	Hence	the	uniqueness	of	a	Buddha	in	contrast	to	Jesus,	the
uniqueness	of	Mohammed	in	contrast	to	Mahavira.	Where	else	can	you	find	such
unique	individuals?
But	we	have	 lived	 in	a	 society	which	destroys	 individuality	and	gives	us	 false
toys	in	the	name	of	individuality	--	gives	us	a	personality.	This	personality	is	a
burden,	and	you	are	always	ready,	absolutely	willing,	to	put	this	burden	aside.
In	group	therapies	you	can	do	that,	you	can	put	the	personality	aside	--	you	don't
do	 anything	 about	 your	 individuality	 and	 you	 put	 the	 personality	 aside.	 Then
what	 do	 you	 become?	 You	 are	 simply	 drowned	 in	 the	 group	 mind,	 you	 start
functioning	as	a	part	of	the	group.	You	don't	attain	to	a	soul	--	in	fact	you	lose
much.	Of	course!	Because	the	personality	is	discarded,	the	anxiety	that	was	there
is	no	longer	felt;	but	this	is	not	a	way	to	get	rid	of	anxiety	--	it	will	come	back.
How	 long	 can	 you	 live	 in	 a	 group?	 Sooner	 or	 later	 you	 will	 be	 back	 in	 the
society	and	there	you	will	again	cling	to	the	personality,	it	will	be	needed.	And
soon	 the	 desire	 will	 arise	 to	 go	 to	 another	 group	 for	 a	 few	 days	 to	 put	 the
personality	 aside	 so	 you	 can	 feel	 free	 --	 but	 that	 freedom	 is	 at	 a	 great	 cost.
Freedom	 is	 god	 only	 if	 it	 happens	 around	 the	 center	 of	 your	 individuality;
otherwise	it	is	not	helpful,	it	is	harmful.
The	group	that	takes	your	individuality	awaits	destroys	you,	destroys	something
very	essential	in	you.	It	functions	like	an	intoxicant.
You	say,	Ramadas:	ON	THE	OTHER	HAND,	HERE	GREAT	IMPORTANCE	IS
GIVEN	TO	INDIVIDUALITY	TOO.
Yes,	in	the	group	you	learn	how	to	be	in	tune	with	others	and	at	the	same	time
you	 learn	how	 to	 remain	yourself.	 It	 is	 a	paradoxical	 process:	 remain	yourself
mole	 and	 more	 and	 yet	 become	 a	 great	 contribution	 to	 the	 orchestra	 of	 life.
Between	these	two	poles	your	real	being	will	become	more	and	more	sharpened.
YOU	 SAY:	OSHO,	 PLEASE,	HAS	A	GROUP	A	KIND	OF	UNIQUE	 SOUL
BEYOND
INDIVIDUALS?
No,	but	a	group	can	have	a	mind	--	not	a	soul.	A	group	can	easily	have	a	mind;
that's	how	people	are.	All	the	Mohammedans	have	a	certain	kind	of	mind.
I	was	a	student	at	a	university	and	I	was	staying	with	one	of	my	professors.	He
loved	me	tremendously.	Not	only	did	he	love	me	--	he	was	a	rare	man,	very	old,
must	have	been	almost	of	the	same	age	as	my	father	--	he	not	only	loved	me,	he
respected	me	to.	I	had	to	tell	him	again	and	again,	"I	am	just	your	student	--	you
need	not	be	so	respectful	 towards	me."	It	was	embarrassing	for	me	sometimes,
because	whenever	I	would	enter	the	room	he	would	stand	up,	even	if	there	were
other	people.	Once	the	Vice	Chancellor	was	present;	I	entered	the	room,	he	stood
up.	 The	 Vice	 Chancellor	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes!	 I	 had	 to	 ask	 the	 Vice
Chancellor	to	forgive	me,	"It	is	all	my	fault	--	I	should	not	have	entered!"
I	was	staying	with	the	professor.	It	was	a	winter	morning;	in	the	sun	outside	on
the	 lawn	 I	was	 reading	a	book.	The	professor's	mother	came	 --	very	old,	must
have	been	eighty	she	asked	me,	"What	are	you	reading?"
Just	 to	 tease	 her,	 because	 she	 was	 a	 fanatical	 Hindu	 I	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 holy
Koran."
That	old	woman	simply	forgot	that	she	was	eighty!	She	snatched	the	book	away
from	me,	threw	it	away,	outside	on	the	road,	and	told	me,	"How	dare	you	bring
such	a	book	in	MY
house!"
I	 said,	 "Now	you	have	committed	 a	 sin.	 It	was	not	 the	holy	Koran,	 it	was	 the
Bhagavad	Gita	--	I	was	just	joking!	"
She	ran,	brought	the	book,	touched	it	seven	times	with	her	head,	cried	and	wept,
and	I	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	It	is	the	holy	Koran!	I	am	just	teasing	you!"
She	 threw	 the	 book	 in	 the	 fire!	 I	 told	 her,	 "You	 have	 the	 mind	 of	 a
Mohammedan."
Mohammedans	 have	 a	 very	 obstinate,	 stubborn	 mind.	 Hindus	 also	 have	 an
obstinate,	stubborn	mind	--	but	it	is	not	so	tight,	it	is	a	little	loose.	The	reason	is
that	 so	 many	 Buddhas	 have	 happened	 in	 this	 country	 and	 they	 have	 been
hammering	 on	 the	 society,	 they	 have	 made	 it	 loose	 in	 many	 places.	 But
Mohammedans	have	not	known	anybody	else	except	Mohammed.
That's	what	 has	 happened	 to	Catholics.	 The	word	 'catholic'	means	 one	who	 is
very	liberal,	but	that	is	not	the	case	--	Catholics	are	worse	than	communists!
Just	the	other	day	a	friend	from	Rome	sent	me	a	letter	saying	that	the	new	Pope
has	 released	 a	 five-page	 epistle,	 very	 stern,	 very	 hard,	 cruel.	 And	 the	 friend
writes,	 "It	 seems	 that	 the	 epistle	 has	 been	written	 keeping	YOU	 in	mind."	Of
course	the	name	is	nor	mentioned,	but	whatsoever	is	said	seems	to	show	that	the
Pope	 must	 have	 some	 idea	 of	 me	 in	 his	 mind.	 He	 must	 be	 reading	 THE
MUSTARD	SEED,	COME	FOLLOW	ME...
because	 he	 says,	 "There	 are	 people	 now	 on	 the	 earth	 who	 are	 claiming	 that
THEIR
interpretation	of	Jesus	is	more	right	than	the	Vatican's	interpretation.	Beware	of
these	 people!	 Don't	 even	 listen	 to	 them	 and	 don't	 read	 them.	 If	 you	 read	 and
listen	to	them	you	are	bound	for	eternal	hell."
Now	these	people	create	a	certain	mind	--	but	not	a	soul.	Catholics	have	a	certain
mind,	Mohammedans	have	a	certain	mind,	Hindus	have	a	certain	mind.	People
who	have	no	individuality	start	having	a	certain	mind	--	the	mob	mind.
In	the	army	you	will	find	there	are	no	individuals.	The	whole	effort	in	the	army
is	to	destroy	the	individual	and	give	you	a	uniform,	a	number.	Now,	to	give	you
a	number	 is	a	subtle	way	of	destroying	your	 individuality:	a	name	gives	you	a
uniqueness,	'No.	11'
takes	all	individuality	from	you.
RAMADAS	is	a	totally	different	matter	--	if	Ramadas	dies,	a	person	dies;	if	No.
11	dies,	who	cares?	Ramadas	cannot	be	replaced	by	anybody	else,	but	No.	11?	--
there	is	no	problem.	You	can	fix	'No.	11'	on	anybody	and	he	becomes	No.	11.
In	 the	 army,	 scientifically,	 technologically,	 the	 individuality	 is	 destroyed.	Your
name	disappears,	you	become	a	number.	Your	hair	is	cut	in	the	same	way.	You
are	 forced	 to	 follow	 stupid	orders	year	 in,	 year	out:	 left	 turn,	 right	 turn,	 about
turn...for	what?!
Once	a	philosopher	got	recruited	into	the	army.	The	first	thing	was	the	morning
parade,	and	 the	captain	 said,	 "Right	 turn!"	Everybody	 turned	 towards	 the	 right
except	the	philosopher.
The	captain	said,	"Are	you	deaf?"
He	 said,	 "No.	 I	 can	 hear	 you	 are	 saying,	 'Right	 turn,'	 but	 why?	 I	 cannot	 do
anything	unless	I	can	explain	to	myself	the	reason."
Now	you	don't	say	such	things	in	the	army	--	and	the	professor	was	very	well-
known.
The	captain	said,	"This	will	be	difficult.	I	myself	don't	know	why,	but	this	has	to
be	done,	and	for	three	hours	every	morning.	And	not	only	right	turn	--	left	turn,
about	 turn,	 go	 forward,	 come	back	 --	 and	 I	 don't	 know	why.	And	 nobody	 has
ever	asked	--	people	simply	do	it!	This	is	a	training	in	obedience."
The	professor	said,	"Then	it	is	impossible	for	me!"
He	was	given	another	job,	in	the	kitchen,	something	that	he	could	do	creating	no
problem	for	others.	He	was	given	a	 full	bag	of	peas	and	 told	 to	sort	 them	out,
smaller	 ones	 on	 one	 side	 and	 bigger	 ones	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 After	 two	 hours
when	the	captain	came,	the	philosopher	was	sitting	in	the	Rodin	posture	--	with
his	hand	on	his	chin	in	great	thought
--	and	the	peas	were	exactly	there	as	they	had	been	left.
The	captain	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	Have	you	not	started	yet?"
He	said,	"How	can	I	start?	--	because	there	are	a	few	big	ones	and	a	few	smaller
ones	and	a	few	which	are	in	between.	Unless	I	know	exactly	where	those	which
are	in	between	go,	how	can	I	start?"
He	had	to	be	discharged	immediately	from	the	army!	This	type	of	person	is	not
needed	in	the	army,	and	they	can	become	contagious.
In	 the	army	 there	 is	no	 'why'.	You	are	 simply	 told	 to	do	 such	a	 thing	and	you
have	to	do	it.	In	fact;	the	more	stupid	a	thing	it	is,	the	better	it	prepares	you	for
the	work	of	the	army.
Following	stupid	orders	for	years,	one	day	they	say,	"Shoot	this	man!"	and	you
shoot	the	man,	robotlike,	without	asking	why	--	you	have	forgotten	how	to	ask
why.	In	the	army,	the	group	mind	arises	--	not	a	group	soul,	remember.
The	 soul	 is	 always	 individual;	 mind	 is	 always	 group.	 ANY	 mind,	 watch
carefully,	and	you	will	find	it	belongs	to	some	group.	If	you	believe	in	God,	that
means	you	belong	to	a	certain	group	which	believes	in	God;	they	have	given	the
idea,	the	conditioning,	to	you.
What	are	your	beliefs?	From	where	do	 they	come?	They	come	from	the	social
mind	--
from	the	church,	from	the	state;	you	can	find	the	source	from	where	they	come.
You	 can	watch	 your	mind	 and	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 all	 that	 you	 carry	 in
your	 mind	 and	 think	 is	 yours	 is	 NOT	 yours.	 It	 has	 all	 come	 from	 different
sources	 --	 from	parents,	 teachers,	 priests,	 politicians	 --	 others	 have	 given	 it	 to
you.	 There	 is	 something	 like	 a	 Hindu	 mind	 and	 there	 is	 something	 like	 a
Mohammedan	 mind	 and	 something	 like	 a	 Jaina	 mind	 and	 something	 like	 a
Buddhist	mind	--	but	there	is	no	Buddhist	soul,	there	is	no	Christian	soul.
Minds,	 Ramadas,	 certainly	 belong	 to	 groups.	 And	 it	 can	 happen	 that	 if	 you
participate	 in	 a	 psychotherapy	group	you	may	become	part	 of	 the	mind	of	 the
group	leader,	the	ideology.
It	 happens	 --	 it	 is	 now	 a	 well-known	 fact	 --	 if	 you	 go	 to	 a	 Freudian
psychoanalyst,	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 start	 bringing	 dreams	which	 are	 needed	 for
Freudian	 psychoanalysis.	You	 start	 adjusting	 to	 the	 psychoanalyst.	 It	 is	 a	 very
subtle	process.	If	you	go	to	the	Jungian	psychoanalyst	you	bring	other	kinds	of
dreams	 to	 him.	 If	 you	 go	 to	 the	Adlerian,	 again	 different	 kind	 of	 dreams	 you
dream	 as	 if	 somehow	 you	 start	 buttressing	 the	 ego	 of	 the	 psychoanalyst.	 He
buttresses	your	ego,	you	buttress	his	ego;	it	becomes	a	mutual	arrangement.	He
interprets	 your	 foolish	 dreams	 in	 such	 great	 detail	 and	 brings	 such	 beautiful
meanings	to	them,	such	profound	significance	to	them,	that	naturally	you	would
love	 to	 bring	 more	 and	 more	 dreams	 of	 the	 same	 kind	 --	 which	 make	 HIM
happy!
When	the	doctor	comes	 to	see	you,	you	want	 to	make	him	happy.	 If	he	makes
you	happy,	 it	 is	a	natural	understanding	 that	you	want	 to	 tell	 the	doctor,	"Your
medicine	is	helping	--
I	am	getting	better."	And	you	are	not	lying!	You	are	not	consciously,	deliberately,
cheating	him.	This	is	a	simple	process	of	becoming	part	of	another	mind.	In	the
army	it	is	very	very	prominent	but	in	the	society	also	it	is	very	prominent.
Sergeant	Major	MacGregor	walked	into	a	Glasgow	drugstore	and	took	a	beat-up
condom	out	 of	 his	 kilt.	 "How	much,	mon,"	 he	 asked	 the	 proprietor,	 "would	 it
cost	to	fix	this?"
"Let	us	see,"	murmured	the	druggist.	"I	could	launder	and	disinfect	it,	heat-weld
the	holes	and	tears	and	insert	a	new	elastic	in	the	top.	That	would	cost	you	two
shillings,	the	same	price	as	a	new	one."
MacGregor	said	that	he	would	think	it	over.
He	returned	the	next	day.	"You	have	convinced	me,	mon,"	he	announced.	"The
regiment	has	decided	to	replace."
The	regiment....
In	 the	army	you	will	 find	 it	absolutely	clear-cut	 that	 the	people	have	 lost	 their
minds.	The	regiment	has	the	mind.	And	on	a	smaller	scale	the	same	is	the	case	in
the	society.
But	my	 effort	 here,	Ramadas,	 is	 to	 create	 individuals.	And	 the	 soul	 is	 always
individual;	it	cannot	be	given	to	you	by	anybody.	It	is	already	in	you:	it	has	to	be
discovered.
In	 a	 group,	 function	 as	 a	 union	 but	 never	 as	 a	 unity.	 In	 a	 group,	 drop	 your
personality	but	never	your	 individuality.	Say	yes,	but	remain	capable	of	saying
no.
The	no	has	not	to	be	killed	completely.	If	you	become	utterly	incapable	of	saying
no,	your	yes	is	meaningless.
What	 I	 am	 doing	 here	 is	 not	 psychoanalysis;	 it	 is	 alchemy,	 pure	 and	 simple
alchemy.	 It	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 transform	your	 being	 from	 the	 level	 of	mind	 to	 the
level	of	the	soul.	It	is	a	journey,	a	pilgrimage.
The	greatest	adventure	that	can	happen	to	a	human	being	is	the	movement	from
mind	to	no-mind,	the	movement	from	personality	to	individuality.	The	no-mind
has	an	individuality:	the	mind	is	social.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	HELL?	IS	THERE	REALLY	SUCH	A	PLACE?
RELIGION	HAS	SURVIVED	UP	TO	NOW	because	of	your	fear	and	greed	--
the	false	religion	I	mean,	of	course.	The	true	religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	fear
and	greed.	In	fact,	the	true	religion	means	transcending	fear	and	greed.	Fear	and
greed	are	not	two	things,	they	are	one.	Fear	standing	on	its	head	becomes	greed;
it	is	one	energy,	two	poles	of	the	same	energy.
The	priests	must	have	discovered	it	very	early,	that	man	can	be	dominated	easily
if	he	is	made	afraid.	They	created	hell.	It	is	imaginary,	it	is	pure	imagination	--
there	is	no	place	like	hell.	Of	course,	there	is	a	SPACE	like	hell,	but	no	place.
Hell	 is	 not	 geographical,	 it	 is	 psychological.	 It	 is	 not	 somewhere	 down
underneath	 the	 earth.	 If	 you	 dig	 a	 hole	 from	 here	 and	 you	 go	 on	 digging	 and
digging,	you	will	reach	America,	and	the	American	will	come	to	India.	And	the
American	 believes	 somewhere	 down	 in	 the	 earth	 there	 is	 hell	 and	 the	 Indian
believes	somewhere	down	in	the	earth...	and	the	earth	is	round!
And	there	is	no	heaven	either	--	that	is	to	satisfy	your	greed.	Hell	is	to	create	fear
and	heaven	is	to	create	greed.	And	these	are	the	two	strategies	of	the	priests	to
dominate	you,	to	oppress	you,	to	exploit	you.
One	day	a	great	Sufi	mystic	Rabiya	was	seen	running	in	the	marketplace,	with	a
burning	 torch	 in	 one	 hand	 and	 a	 pot	 full	 of	 water	 in	 the	 other	 hand.	 People
stopped	her	and	they	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	Where	are	you	going?	We	have
heard	stories	about	you,	that	you	are	a	little	crazy,	but	this	is	going	too	far!"
She	said,	"Don't	stop	me!	I	am	going	to	burn	your	heaven	--	this	torch	is	for	that
--	and	I	am	going	 to	drown	your	hell	 --	 this	water	 is	 for	 that.	And	unless	your
hell	and	heaven	are	 taken	away	from	you	you	will	not	 find	God,	because	God
cannot	be	found	by	those	who	live	in	fear	or	those	who	live	in	greed."
So	 the	 first	 thing,	 Krishna	 Deva:	 there	 is	 no	 hell,	 no	 heaven,	 as	 places
somewhere.	 But	 still	 they	 exist	 --	 in	 a	 totally	 different	way:	 they	 exist	within
you:	 Whenever	 you	 are	 in	 anger	 you	 are	 in	 hell,	 but	 that	 is	 psychology	 not
geography.	And	whenever	you	are	 in	 love	you	are	 in	heaven;	 that	 too	 is	again
psychology	not	geography.
The	Western	 religions	 know	only	 two	words:	 heaven	 and	hell.	The	East	 has	 a
third	word	also:	MOKSHA.	That	means	absolute	freedom	from	both	heaven	and
hell.	 That	 means	 transcending	 psychology.	 No	 fear,	 no	 greed,	 no	 mind...	 and
suddenly	you	enter	into	the	world	of	eternity,	immortality,	into	the	world	of	God.
You	carry	your	hell	within	you	and	you	carry	your	heaven	within	you,	and	each
moment	it	is	up	to	you	to	be	in	hell	or	in	heaven.
I	have	heard	about	a	great	saint	who	was	never	known	to	be	sad.	He	was	nearing
ninety	years	of	age	but	he	was	always	happy,	always	cheerful,	always	bubbling
with	 joy,	 like	 a	 small	 child	 overflowing	with	 joy.	 People	 gathered;	 they	were
celebrating	his	ninetieth	birthday,	and	maybe	this	was	going	to	be	the	last	so	all
the	disciples	had	come	from	faraway	places.	They	asked	him,	"We	have	only	one
question	 --	 and	 soon	 you	may	 leave	 us,	 your	 body	 is	 getting	 older	 and	 older.
Before	 you	 leave,	 please	 satisfy	 our	 inquiry:	What	 is	 the	 secret	 of	 your	 joy?
Nobody	has	ever	seen	you	sad."
The	old	man	laughed.	He	said,	"There	is	not	much	of	a	secret	in	it.	Early	in	my
life	 I	 discovered	 that	 it	 is	 up	 to	me	 to	 be	 in	 hell	 or	 to	 be	 in	 heaven,	 so	 every
morning	 when	 I	 wake	 up,	 the	 first	 thing	 I	 ask	myself	 is:	 'What	 do	 you	 want
today?	 --	heaven	or	hell?'	And	 I	 always	decide	 for	heaven!	That	 is	my	 simple
secret."
A	whole	bus-load	of	women	from	the	Hadassah	and	the	United	Jewish	Appeal
overturned	 on	 a	 Miami	 freeway	 and	 everybody	 was	 killed.	 In	 Heaven,	 Saint
Peter,	 without	 thinking,	 assigned	 them	 to	 Hell	 They	 had	 hardly	 been	 there	 a
week,	 however,	 when	 Satan	 phoned	 Peter	 and	 demanded	 that	 he	 remove	 the
women	to	Heaven.	They	were	a	disrupting	influence.
"Why,	what	have	they	done?"	asked	Peter.
"They	have	banded	together,	collected	money,	and	employed	engineers	to	install
air-conditioning."
If	you	have	intelligence,	awareness,	even	in	hell	you	can	manage	to	air-condition
it.
That's	what	I	am	doing.	Can't	you	see	the	hell	all	around?	But	somehow	I	have
got	a	few	people	banded	together	and	we	are	trying	to	create	a	small	heaven	of
our	own.	What	to	do?	People	have	decided	to	live	in	hell,	they	are	not	ready	to
listen,	then	the	only	wise	choice	is:	we	can	create	our	own	heaven.	And	if	we	can
create	our	own	heaven,	that	will	become	an	example,	a	model,	that	this	way	also
one	can	live.
When	people	come	for	the	first	time	to	our	commune	they	are	surprised.	Just	the
other	 day	 a	 young	priest	wrote	 a	 letter	 to	me,	 a	Catholic	 priest,	who	now	has
become	interested	in	me,	and	wants	 to	get	married,	and	wants	 to	get	rid	of	 the
Catholic	 church.	He	 has	written	 a	 letter	 to	me	 saying,	 "I	 have	 heard	 that	 you
have	got	 the	most	beautiful	people	 in	 the	whole	of	 the	world	around	you.	Can
you	find	a	wife	for	me?"
I	have	 told	Laxmi	 to	write	 to	him,	"Why	one?	Just	come	here.	And	I	need	not
find	any	wife	for	you	--	the	women	will	chase	you,	they	will	find	you!"
We	have	got	the	most	alive	lot	of	women	in	the	whole	of	the	world	here.
Heaven	and	hell	are	not	realities	but	ways	of	living.	You	can	live	in	jealousy	--
that's	how	people	live.	You	can	live	in	competition,	you	can	live	in	conflict,	you
can	 live	 in	ambition.	That's	how	you	have	been	brought	up	 to	 live.	This	 is	 the
way	to	hell!
A	Zen	Master	was	asked	by	the	Emperor	of	Japan....	The	Emperor	had	come	and
asked	the	same	question,	Krishna	Deva.	Maybe	you	are	the	reincarnation	of	the
same	Emperor!
Because	the	Japanese	tend	to	be	reborn	in	India	--	this	is	the	land	of	their	Master,
Buddha.	Every	Japanese	keeps	the	desire	to	come	to	India	some	day.	If	they	die
without	coming	in	this	life,	they	are	reborn	here.	They	die	with	the	desire.
The	Emperor	reached	the	Zen	Master	and	asked	him,	"What	is	hell	and	what	is
heaven?"
The	Zen	Master	looked	at	the	Emperor	and	said	"You	son-of-a-bitch!	Have	you
looked	at	your	face	in	the	mirror	lately?	I	have	never	seen	such	a	dirty-looking
fellow	before!"
The	Emperor	was	enraged!	He	had	not	expected	such	a	thing	from	such	a	great
saint.	 You	 don't	 know	 great	 saints!	You	 know	 only	 small,	 puny	 saints.	A	 real
saint	is	not	a	cat,	he	is	a	tiger!
The	Emperor	was	so	enraged	that	he	pulled	his	sword	out	of	its	sheath.	He	was
going	 to	 cut	 the	 head	of	 the	Master.	 Just	 as	 the	 sword	was	 coming	 closer,	 the
Master	said,	"Wait!
You	are	entering	hell.	This	is	the	gate	to	hell."
The	way	the	Master	said	"Wait!"	was	so	powerful	that	the	Emperor's	hand	was
stopped	in	 the	middle,	and	he	understood	--	"True!"	He	threw	the	sword	away,
fell	at	the	feet	of	the	Master,	and	the	Master	laughed	and	said,	"This	is	the	way	to
heaven!	 You	 have	 already	 experienced	 both	 within	 a	 single	 moment.	 The
distance	is	not	far."
Whenever	 you	 are	 surrendered	 to	 existence,	 whenever	 you	 live	 in	 trust,	 love,
prayer,	joy,	celebration,	you	are	in	heaven.
But	what	I	am	doing	here	is	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	both	--	because	the	person
who	lives	in	heaven	can	fall	into	hell	any	moment.	They	are	not	far	away,	they
are	very	close	by...just	 a	 small	 fence	and	 that	 too	 is	 tattered	because	 it	 is	very
old.	And	for	centuries	there	has	been	an	argument	as	to	who	should	repair	it.	The
Devil	 is	not	ready.	Why	should	he	be	worried	about	it?	Nobody	wants	to	enter
hell!	If	 it	 is	God'	worry	that	hell	people	may	enter	 into	heaven,	 then	he	should
repair	it.	But	God	is	a	miser,	and	they	go	on	quarreling.
One	day	it	happened:	God	said,	"If	you	don't	repair	the	fence	--	which	has	really
been	destroyed	by	your	people	and	your	nuisance	on	the	other	side,	our	people
have	not	done	anything	--	I	am	going	to	court!"
The	Devil	said,	"You	can	go,	but	where	are	you	going	to	find	an	advocate?	They
are	all	here	on	my	side!	Go	to	court!"
Hell	is	a	state	of	mind	when	you	live	in	plenty	and	yet	you	live	in	poverty,	when
life	is	such	a	blessing	and	yet	you	live	in	sadness.	When	the	flowers	bloom	you
don't	bloom.
When	the	stars	shine	you	don't	shine.	When	the	clouds	are	in	the	sky	floating	in
freedom	don't	 enjoy	 the	 freedom.	When	 the	 cuckoo	 calls	 from	a	 distant	wood
and	you	 remain	deaf.	When	 the	peacock	dances	you	don't	 dance.	This	 is	 hell!
And	you	are	the	creator	of	it.
Mahatma	 Gandhi	 died	 and	 went	 to	 heaven.	 He	 was	 royally	 welcomed	 by	 St.
Peter	as	a	great	saint	and	told	that	any	request	of	his	would	be	granted.	Gandhi
said,	"All	my	life	I	have	been	non-violent.	Now	I	would	 like	 to	 live	a	 life	 like
Adolph	Hitler."
That	seems	to	be	absolutely	psychological,	right.	If	you	live	a	repressed	life	this
is	going	to	happen.	Adolph	Hitler	would	like	to	live	like	Mahatma	Gandhi,	and
Mahatma	Gandhi	would	like	to	live	like	Adolph	Hitler;	the	rejected,	the	denied
part	will	take	revenge.	So	I	see	a	point	in	this	fictitious	story.
St.	Peter	replied,	"This	is	too	horrible	a	wish	to	be	granted	--	but	we	will	let	you
see	Hitler	in	hell.	That	will	give	you	an	idea	and	you	may	drop	your	desire."
Gandhi	was	 taken	 to	 hell	 where	 he	 saw	Hitler	 surrounded	 by	 beautiful	 naked
dancing	girls	 and	many	bottles	of	wine.	 "How	can	 this	be	hell?"	 cried	Gandhi
"This	is	heaven!"
"Of	course	it	is	hell,"	said	St.	Peter.	"The	bottles	all	have	holes	and	the	women
don't!"
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 WHY	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 ONE	 BECOMES	 SO	 ATTACHED	 TO	 THE
PHYSICAL
PECULIARITIES	OF	A	MASTER:	HIS	BEAUTY,	HIS	GENTLENESS,	HIS
LANGUAGE,	 HIS	MISPRONUNCIATION	 --	 SO	 THAT	 ALONGSIDE	 THE
AWE
AND	RESPECT	HE	INSPIRES	THERE	GROWS	SUCH	A	FEELING	OF
TENDERNESS	AND	FAMILIARITY?	IF	THIS	IS	A	DEVICE	I	WANT	TO	BE
CAUGHT	BY	IT	FOREVER.
Prem	Nirada,
LOVE	AFFAIR	IS	A	LOVE	AFFAIR!	It	is	not	logical.	When	you	love	a	person,
you	 love	 his	 wholeness,	 you	 love	 him	 as	 he	 is.	 And	 to	 be	 with	 a	Master	 the
ONLY	 way	 is	 to	 fall	 in	 total	 love.	 Hence	 you	 start	 liking	 everything	 of	 the
Master	--	yes,	even	his	mispronunciations!	Of	course	it	is	easy	to	love	his	beauty,
his	grace,	his	wisdom,	but	that	is	not	enough	--	unless	you	start	loving	him	in	his
totality....
I	know	that	if	sometimes	I	don't	mispronounce	a	few	words,	you	miss	--	when	I
mispronounce	I	can	see	the	joy!
Vivek	goes	on	telling	me	every	day,	"Don't	say	'aunt',	it	is	'ain't'."	And	whenever
I	come	across	it,	just	to	be	compassionate	to	you,	I	again	say	'aunt'.
And	there	is	one	more	difficulty:	there	are	a	few	things	I	cannot	figure	out.	My
whole	 life	 I	 have	 been	 unable	 to	 figure	 out	 what	 is	 left	 and	what	 is	 right.	 In
school	when	 I	 used	 to	 go	 to	 the	 parade	 I	 used	 to	write	 on	my	hands,	 "This	 is
right,	 this	 is	 left."	 So	 whenever	 this	 question	 of	 'aunt'	 and	 'ain't'	 arises	 I	 am
puzzled	--	whether	it	is	'aunt'	or	'ain't',	or	vice	versa!
Yes,	it	is	a	device.	If	you	can't	love	me	in	my	totality	you	will	miss	me.
A	 man	 with	 a	 rosary	 around	 his	 neck,	 wearing	 a	 hooded	 cloak	 and	 sandals,
carrying	 a	 begging	 bowl	 and	 with	 a	 long	 white	 beard,	 was	 surrounded	 by	 a
crowd	in	a	certain	town.
They	clamored	for	his	blessings	and	he	led	them	to	the	top	of	a	hill	where	he	sat
in	silence	for	several	hours.
Finally	someone	approached	timidly	and	asked	him	to	address	them.
"I	know	that	you	have	all	been	waiting	for	 the	words	of	 the	Great	Teacher	so-
and-so,"	he	said,	"and	I	hope	that	his	visit	to	this	town,	which	is	now	over,	has
conferred	the	customary	blessings	upon	it.	But	MY	own	job	is	now	finished,	as
he	will	have	passed	through	the	streets	in	our	absence...."
"Then	who	are	you?"	shouted	a	frenzied	worshipper.
"Me?	Oh,	I	am	the	decoy...."
He	was	just	a	device	of	the	Master,	so	that	the	foolish	people	could	go	with	him
outside	 the	 town	 and	 the	 Master	 could	 pass	 through	 the	 town	 unhindered,
undisturbed	--	or	would	be	met	only	by	those	who	had	eyes.	All	those	who	were
blind	 followed	 this	 man	 because	 they	 could	 only	 see	 the	 outer	 garb.	 He
LOOKED	like	a	Master,	they	followed	him.	Only	a	very	few	people	must	have
remained	in	the	town,	who	were	not	deceived	by	the	personality.
My	mind	is	just	a	mechanism.	For	me	now	it	is	absolutely	useless:	it	is	just	for
your	 sake	 that	 I	go	on	 feeding	 it	 a	 little	bit.	 Just	 for	your	 sake	 I	 am	speaking,
otherwise	now	there	is	no	point	for	me.	In	fact	there	is	no	point	for	me	even	to
breathe!	It	is	only	for	you	that	I	am	breathing,	speaking,	living.	Those	who	have
eyes	will	be	able	to	see	it.
EVERYTHING	IS	a	device.	Remember	it:	you	have	to	SEE	the	device	to	grow
beyond	it.
And	 as	 far	 as	 the	 pronunciation	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is	 a	 miracle	 that	 I	 don't
mispronounce	 all	 the	 words,	 or	 that	 even	 when	 I	 mispronounce	 you	 can	 still
understand...because	language	is	very	alien	to	my	being	now	--	not	English,	but
my	own	mother	tongue	is	alien.	I	have	become	a	stranger	to	my	own	mind;	the
distance	 is	 infinite	 between	me	 and	 the	 mind.	 I	 am	 surprised	myself	 that	 the
mind	goes	on	 functioning.	What	 I	 have	known	has	been	known	 in	 silence;	 no
language	can	express	it.
And	from	my	very	childhood	I	was	not	interested	in	any	subject	that	was	taught
in	the	school	--	hence	my	poor	history!	I	was	always	puzzled	why	these	stupid
names	have	to	be	remembered.	Why,	for	what	sin,	are	we	punished,	to	remember
the	names	of	some	people,	dates,	exact	dates,	exact	names...?	And	all	that	these
people	have	done	is	ugly!
History	 is	 bunk!	Why	 should	we	 be	 punished?	 So	 I	was	 never	 present	 in	 the
history	class.
I	was	never	interested	in	language,	any	language.
My	whole	interest	was	from	the	very	beginning,	how	to	transcend	mind.	Neither
history	can	help,	nor	geography,	nor	mathematics,	nor	 language	 --	nothing	can
help.	All	 these	 things	 are	 irrelevant.	My	whole	 being	was	moving	 in	 a	 totally
different	direction.
So	it	is	just	a	miracle	happening,	that	I	go	on	speaking	to	you,	conveying	to	you
something	 which	 cannot	 be	 conveyed,	 expressing	 something	 which	 is
inexpressible,	saying	the	unsayable.	And	you	have	to	forgive	many	things.
Landers	and	his	girlfriend	were	dining	at	the	famous	House	of	Hung	Lo.	Landers
said	to	the	waiter,	"Bling	us	some	flied	lice."
The	waiter	left	and	returned	with	won	ton	soup.	They	ate	it,	and	Landers	again
said	to	the	waiter,	"We	want	flied	lice."
This	time	the	waiter	brought	them	two	orders	of	egg	roll.	As	the	waiter	walked
away,	Landers	called	loud	enough	for	everyone	in	the	restaurant	to	hear,	"How
about	the	flied	lice?"
The	Chinese	waiter	came	back	to	the	table	and	said,	"Can't	you	pronounce	fried
rice,	you	plick?"
Somehow	 I	 am	 managing....	 So	 if	 I	 manage	 and	 say	 'fried	 rice',	 then	 I	 slip
somewhere	else
--	'you	plick'!	you	have	to	forgive	me.
But	everything	 is	a	device,	 remember...and	as	you	get	closer	and	closer	 to	me,
more	and	more	subtle	devices	will	be	used.	The	day	is	not	far	off	when	we	will
be	simply	sitting	in	silence	and	there	will	be	no	question	of	language,	words	Get
ready	 for	 it,	 because	 that	which	 I	REALLY	want	 to	 communicate	 can	only	be
communicated	in	silence.
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	He	Died	in	Samadhi
9	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909090
ShortTitle:
BESTIL09
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	 WOULD	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 YOUR	 FATHER'S
DEATH
YESTERDAY?
Vivek,
IT	WAS	NOT	A	DEATH	AT	ALL.	Or	it	was	the	total	death.	And	both	mean	the
same	 thing.	 I	was	 hoping	 that	 he	would	 die	 in	 this	way.	He	 died	 a	 death	 that
everybody	should	be	ambitious	for:	he	died	in	samadhi,	he	died	utterly	detached
from	the	body	and	the	mind.
I	 went	 to	 see	 him	 only	 three	 times	 during	 this	 whole	 month	 he	 was	 in	 the
hospital.
Whenever	I	felt	 that	he	was	just	on	the	verge,	I	went	 to	see	him.	The	first	 two
times	I	was	a	little	afraid	that	if	he	died	he	would	have	to	be	born	again;	a	little
attachment	to	the	body	was	there.	His	meditation	was	deepening	every	day,	but	a
few	chains	with	the	body	were	still	intact,	were	not	broken.
Yesterday	 I	went	 to	 see	him:	 I	was	 immensely	happy	 that	 now	he	 could	die	 a
right	death.
He	was	 no	more	 concerned	with	 the	 body.	Yesterday,	 early	 in	 the	morning	 at
three	o'clock,	he	attained	his	first	glimpse	of	 the	eternal	 --	and	 immediately	he
became	aware	that	now	he	was	going	to	die.	This	was	the	first	time	he	had	called
me	to	come;	the	other	two	times	I	had	gone	on	my	own.	Yesterday	he	called	me
to	come	because	he	was	certain	that	he	was	going	to	die.	He	wanted	to	say	good-
bye,	and	he	said	 it	beautifully	--	with	no	 tears	 in	 the	eyes,	with	no	 longing	for
life	any	more.
Hence,	in	a	way	it	is	not	a	death	but	a	birth	into	eternity.	He	died	in	time	and	was
born	into	eternity.	Or	it	is	a	total	death	--	total	in	the	sense	that	now	he	will	not
be	 coming	 any	 more.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 ultimate	 achievement;	 there	 is	 nothing
higher	than	it.
He	left	the	world	in	utter	silence,	in	joy,	in	peace.	He	left	the	world	like	a	lotus
flower	--
it	was	worth	celebrating.	And	these	are	the	occasions	for	you	to	learn	how	to	live
and	how	to	die.	Each	death	should	be	a	celebration,	but	 it	can	be	a	celebration
only	if	it	leads	you	to	higher	planes	of	existence.
He	died	enlightened.	And	that's	how	I	would	like	each	of	my	sannyasins	to	die.
Life	 is	ugly	if	you	are	unenlightened,	and	even	death	becomes	beautiful	 if	you
are	enlightened.
Life	 is	 ugly	 if	 you	 are	 unenlightened	 because	 it	 is	 a	 misery,	 a	 hell.	 Death
becomes	a	door	to	the	divine	if	you	are	enlightened;	it	is	no	more	a	misery,	it	is
no	more	 a	 hell.	 In	 fact,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is	 getting	 out	 of	 all	 hell,	 out	 of	 all
misery.
I	am	immensely	glad	that	he	died	the	way	he	died.	Remember	it:	as	meditation
deepens,	you	become	farther	and	farther	away	from	your	body-mind	composite.
And	when	meditation	reaches	its	ultimate	peak,	you	can	see	everything.
Yesterday	morning	he	was	absolutely	aware	of	death,	that	it	had	come.	And	he
called	me.
This	was	the	first	time	he	had	called	me,	and	the	moment	I	saw	him	I	saw	that	he
was	no	more	in	the	body.	All	the	pains	of	the	body	had	disappeared.	That's	why
the	doctors	were	puzzled:	the	body	was	functioning	in	an	absolutely	normal	way.
This	was	 the	 last	 thing	 the	doctors	could	have	 imagined,	 that	he	could	die.	He
could	have	died	any	day	before.
He	was	 in	deep	pain,	 there	were	many	complexities	 in	 the	body:	his	heart	was
not	functioning	well,	his	pulse	was	missing;	there	were	blood	clots	in	the	brain,
in	the	leg,	in	the	hand.
Yesterday	 he	 was	 absolutely	 normal.	 They	 checked,	 and	 they	 said	 it	 was
impossible;	now	 there	was	no	problem,	no	danger.	But	 this	 is	how	 it	happens.
The	day	of	the	danger,	according	to	the	physicians,	didn't	prove	dangerous.	The
first	 twenty-four	hours	when	he	was	admitted	to	the	hospital	one	month	before
were	the	most	dangerous;	they	were	afraid	that	he	would	die.	He	didn't	die.	Then
for	the	next	twenty-four	hours	they	were	still	hesitant	 to	say	whether	he	would
be	saved	or	not.	A	suggestion	had	even	come	from	a	surgeon	to	cut	the	leg	off
completely,	because	if	blood	clots	started	happening	in	other	places	it	would	be
impossible	to	save	him.
But	 I	 was	 against	 cutting	 off	 the	 leg,	 because	 one	 has	 to	 die	 one	 day	 --	 why
distort	 the	 body	 and	 why	 create	 more	 pain?	 And	 just	 living	 in	 itself	 has	 no
meaning,	 just	 lengthening	 the	 life	 has	 no	 meaning.	 I	 said	 no.	 They	 were
surprised.	And	when	he	survived	for	almost	four	weeks	they	thought	I	was	right,
that	 there	 had	 been	 no	 need	 to	 cut	 off	 the	 leg;	 the	 leg	 was	 coming	 back,
becoming	alive	again.	He	had	started	walking	also,	which	Dr.	Sardesai	thought
was	a	miracle.	They	had	not	hoped	for	that	much,	that	he	would	be	able	to	walk.
Yesterday	 he	was	 perfectly	 normal,	 everything	 normal.	 And	 that	 gave	me	 the
indication	 that	 now	 death	 was	 possible.	 If	 meditation	 happens	 before	 death,
everything	becomes	normal.	One	dies	in	perfect	health,	because	one	is	not	really
dying	but	entering	into	a	higher	plane.	The	body	becomes	a	stepping-stone.
He	was	meditating	for	years.	He	was	a	rare	man	--	it	is	very	rare	to	find	a	father
like	him.
A	father	becoming	a	disciple	of	his	own	son:	it	is	rare.	Jesus'	father	did	not	dare
to	become	a	disciple,	Buddha's	 father	hesitated	 for	years	 to	become	a	disciple.
But	 he	 was	meditating	 for	 years.	 Three	 hours	 each	 day,	 in	 the	morning	 from
three	to	six,	he	was	sitting	in	meditation.	Yesterday	also,	in	the	hospital	also,	he
continued.
Yesterday	it	happened.	One	never	knows	when	it	will	happen.	One	has	to	go	on
digging...one	 day	 one	 comes	 across	 the	 source	 of	 water,	 the	 source	 of
consciousness.
Yesterday	it	happened;	it	happened	in	right	time.	If	he	had	left	his	body	just	one
day	before	he	would	have	been	back	in	the	body	again	soon	--	a	 little	clinging
was	there.	But	yesterday	the	slate	was	completely	clean.	He	attained	to	no-mind,
he	died	like	a	Buddha.
What	more	can	one	have	than	Buddhahood?
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	all	to	live	like	Buddhas	and	die	like	Buddhas.	The
death	of	a	Buddha	is	both!	It	is	not	a	death,	because	life	is	eternal.	Life	does	not
begin	with	birth	and	does	not	end	with	death.	Millions	of	 times	you	have	been
born	and	died;	they	are	all	small	episodes	In	the	eternal	pilgrimage.	But	because
you	are	unconscious	you	cannot	see	that	which	is	beyond	birth	and	death.
As	 you	 become	 more	 conscious,	 you	 can	 see	 your	 original	 face.	 He	 saw	 his
original	face	yesterday.	He	heard	the	one	hand	clapping,	he	heard	the	soundless
sound.	Hence	it	is	not	a	death:	it	is	attaining	life	eternal.	On	the	other	hand	it	can
be	called	a	total	death	--	total	death	in	the	sense	that	he	will	not	be	coming	any
more.
Rejoice!
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	 WHEN	 HEARING	 THE	 STORY	 OVER	 DINNER	 OF	 DADU	 AND
TWO	OF
HIS	 DISCIPLES,	 RAJJAB	 AND	 SUNDERO.	 I	 WAS	 BAFFLED	 BY	 HOW
DEEPLY
AFFECTED	 THEY	 BOTH	 WERE	 BY	 THE	 DEATH	 OF	 THEIR	 MASTER.
ONE,	 RAJJAB,	 NEVER	 OPENED	 HIS	 EYES	 AGAIN,	 AND	 THE	 OTHER,
SUNDERO,	 DIED	 IN	 THE	 SAME	 BED	 AS	 HIS	 MASTER,	 DADU.	 HOW
CAN	AN
ENLIGHTENED	 PERSON	 BE	 SO	 AFFECTED	 BY	 THE	 DEATH	 OF	 HIS
MASTER
OR	BELOVED	ONE?
Ambubhai	Diwanji,
IT	IS	ONE	OF	THE	MOST	BEAUTIFUL	STORIES.	There	is	no	parallel	to	it	in
the	 whole	 history	 of	 religion,	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 You	 have
misunderstood	 it	 totally;	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	misunderstand	 it.	 Apparently,	what
you	have	understood	is	what	is	understood	by	people	who	read	the	story.
The	question	arises:	why	are	 two	enlightened	persons	so	much	affected	by	 the
death	 of	 their	Master?	They	 are	 not	 affected	 at	 all!	 It	 is	 not	 happening	 out	 of
misery;	it	is	a	totally	different	dimension.
Rajjab	never	opened	his	eyes	again.	He	was	asked	once	why	he	had	closed	his
eyes.	He	said,	"Because	I	have	seen	the	most	beautiful	thing	in	the	world	--	now
there	is	nothing	else	to	see!"
Dadu	was	the	most	beautiful	flower.	Now	what	is	the	point	of	keeping	your	eyes
open?
for	 what?	 If	 you	 have	 the	 Kohinoor	 with	 you,	 you	 will	 not	 go	 on	 collecting
pebbles	 on	 the	 seashore	 --	 or	will	 you?	Rajjab	 is	 not	 affected.	 It	 is	 not	 out	 of
sadness	 that	he	closes	his	eyes;	 there	 is	not	a	single	 tear	 in	his	eyes.	He	 is	not
weeping,	he	is	not	crying.
With	closed	eyes	he	continued	to	dance	and	sing	the	songs	of	Dadu.	But	he	said,
"Once	 you	 have	 seen	 God	 in	 human	 form,	 then	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 worth
seeing.	I	would	like	the	impact	of	my	Master	on	my	eyes	to	be	the	last	and	the
most	penetrating.	I	would	not	like	it	to	be	covered	by	dust."
Ambubhai,	 then	 the	whole	 story	 takes	a	 totally	different	 turn.	 It	 is	 tremendous
love.	It	is	not	an	attachment	to	the	Master's	body,	it	is	great	understanding.
Once	you	have	 seen	 a	Master...and	Rajjab	 lived	very	 very	 close	 to	Dadu.	The
day	he	became	an	initiate	he	was	very	small,	just	seven	years	old.	He	had	come
with	his	parents	 to	participate	 in	a	religious	festival;	he	was	not	even	aware	of
Dadu.	 Dadu	was	 also	 there	 at	 the	 festival.	 The	 parents	 had	 gone	 to	 pay	 their
formal	respects,	because	it	was	known	in	the	country	that	Dadu	was	enlightened.
They	didn't	believe,	but	this	country	is	very	traditional	and	formal:	if	people	hear
that	 somebody	 is	enlightened,	whether	 they	believe	or	not	 they	at	 least	go	and
touch	his	feet.	Maybe	he	is,	then	why	miss	the	opportunity?	If	he	is	not,	you	are
not	losing	anything	by	touching	his	feet.	This	is	cunningness,	businesslike!
The	parents	had	gone;	Rajjab	followed	the	parents.	The	parents	touched	his	feet,
but	Rajjab	was	transformed.	The	moment	he	saw	Dadu	he	recognized	something
from	 his	 past	 lives.	 This	man	was	 not	 new,	 this	 quality	was	 not	 new.	He	 had
known	him	before.
That	 almost	 always	 happens	 if	 you	 have	 lived	 with	 a	 Master	 before	 --
immediately	a	recognition!
He	fell	at	his	feet.	The	parents	tried	to	persuade	him	to	come	back	with	them.	He
said,	"I	have	found	my	real	parents.	Now	you	can	go."	He	touched	the	feet	of	his
parents	and	said,	 "Just	as	you	have	 touched	 the	 feet	of	Dadu	 formally,	 I	 touch
your	feet	and	say	good-bye."	A	seven-year-old	child!	Must	have	had	a	maturity
of	many	lives	behind	him.
The	parents	cried	and	wept,	but	Rajjab	said,	"It	is	impossible!	I	have	found	the
man	--	I	cannot	leave	him	even	for	a	single	moment!"
And	 from	 that	 time,	 for	 twenty	 years,	 he	 was	 in	 the	 service	 of	 the	 Master;
looking	 after	 his	 needs,	 sleeping	 in	 the	 same	 room,	 continuously	 on	 guard	 for
what	he	needed.
And	the	day	Dadu	died	Rajjab	simply	closed	his	eyes.	It	was	closing	eyes	to	the
world.
He	was	saying,	Now	there	is	nothing	more	to	see.	I	have	seen	that	which	is	really
worth	seeing.	Now	why	waste	your	eyes	and	why	collect	dust?	Once	you	have
mirrored	God	then	there	is	nothing	else	--	you	have	seen	the	ultimate."
It	was	not	out	of	attachment,	Ambubhai,	that	Rajjab	closed	his	eyes;	it	was	out
of	great	understanding.	And	he	was	not	unhappy.	He	danced,	he	sang	songs,	as
long	as	he	lived	--
but	with	closed	eyes,	so	that	he	could	still	see	the	Master	inside.	Twenty	years'
continuous	communion	with	the	Master...the	Master	had	almost	become	a	part	of
his	 soul!	 By	 closing	 his	 eyes	 he	 was	 still	 keeping	 company	 with	 the	Master.
Don't	misunderstand	him.
Rajjab	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	disciples	ever.
And	 what	 happened	 to	 Sundero,	 another	 disciple?	 When	 Dadu	 died	 he	 laid
himself	down	on	the	same	bed	and	remained	on	the	same	bed;	he	never	left	the
bed	again.	The	Master	had	slept	on	it	his	whole	life:	it	was	full	of	his	vibe,	it	was
full	 of	 his	 presence,	 it	 was	 soaked	 with	 him.	 He	 would	 not	 leave	 the	 bed.
"Why?"	people	would	ask	him.
And	Sundero	would	 say,	 "There	 is	nowhere	 to	go.	 I	have	arrived	 --	 this	 is	my
home.	This	 is	my	MOKSHA,	 this	 is	my	heaven.	And	 I	would	 like	 to	LIVE	 in
this	beautiful	space	that	 the	Master	has	created	in	this	bed,	and	I	would	like	to
die	here."
It	is	becoming	so	attuned	with	the	Master	that	you	don't	feel	your	life	and	your
death	as	separate	from	him;	that	is	the	meaning	of	it.
Sundero	was	so	attuned	with	the	Master's	life	that	it	used	to	happen	sometimes
that	he	would	speak	in	Dadu's	name.	And	he	was	told	by	people,	"You	are	not
Dadu!"
Then	he	would	say,	"Yes,	forgive	me.	I	forget!	But	if	you	ask	in	reality,	then	I	am
Dadu	-
-	I	have	become	one	with	my	Master."
That	 is	 the	ultimate	state	of	disciplehood:	when	 the	disciple	becomes	one	with
the	Master.	He	used	to	say	that	he	was	Dadu.	He	has	written	songs	in	which	his
name	is	not	given	but	Dadu's	name	--	and	people	think	that	is	not	good.	And	the
scholars	go	on	discarding	all	that	has	been	written	by	Sundero;	they	think	that	is
not	from	Dadu.
But	I	say	to	you:	it	IS	from	Dadu!	Sundero	has	become	just	a	hollow	bamboo	on
the	lips	of	Dadu.	Sundero	exists	no	more	as	a	separate	entity.	That	is	the	ultimate
goal	 of	 a	 disciple:	when	 the	 disciple	 and	Master	meet	 and	merge	 and	 become
one.	Sundero	has	become	one	with	the	Master,	hence	he	has	every	right	to	sign
'Dadu'.	He	signs	his	poems	as	Dadu,	not	as	Sundero	 --	and	 I	TOTALLY	agree
with	him!	And	I	would	like	the	scholars	to	be	a	little	more	sensitive.
These	 things	 are	 not	 for	 scholarship,	 these	 things	 are	 not	 for	 learned	 people.
These	 things	 are	 for	 lovers!	 Only	 lovers	 can	 understand	 these	 things.	 Such	 a
beautiful	phenomenon:	that	a	disciple	cannot	sign	his	name,	he	has	forgotten.
Sometimes	people	would	come	 to	 invite	Dadu	and	Sundero	would	say,	"Yes,	 I
will	come."
And	 they	would	 say,	 "But	we	 have	 not	 come	 to	 invite	 you,	we	 have	 come	 to
invite	Dadu!"
Sundero	would	 say,	 "But	who	 am	 I?	Why	 give	 trouble	 to	 the	 old	man?	 I	 can
come	--	 I	am	his	younger	 form.	 I	can	 travel	 long	distances	more	easily	 --	why
create	trouble	for	him?"
And	Dadu	sometimes	used	 to	send	Sundero.	People	would	 invite	Dadu	and	he
would	send	Sundero.	And	people	were	very	much	puzzled:	"We	have	invited	the
Master,	not	 the	disciple."	But	 they	were	not	able	 to	understand	 that	 the	Master
and	 the	 disciple,	 at	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 their	 love	 affair,	 disappear	 into	 each
other.
Hence,	 the	day	Dadu	died,	Sundero	did	not	say	a	single	word	about	his	death,
did	 not	 go	 to	 the	 funeral	 at	 all.	 Everybody	 left	 for	 the	 funeral.	 Thousands	 of
disciples	had	gathered,	and	they	were	crying	and	weeping	and	they	were	in	great
misery.	 And	 what	 did	 Sundero	 do?	 He	 entered	 into	 the	 bed	 of	 the	 Master,
covered	himself	with	his	blanket	--	became	Dadu.	When	people	came	back	they
thought,	"This	is	sacrilegious!"	They	told	Sundero,
"This	is	not	right	--	you	are	going	mad!	Have	you	gone	crazy	or	something?	This
is	the	Master's	bed	--	you	get	out!"
He	said,	"But	I	am	no	more.	Sundero	has	died.	Have	you	not	gone	to	his	funeral?
You	 have	 gone,	 you	 have	 burnt	 him!	 I	 am	 Dadu.	 Now	 Dadu	 will	 function
through	me."
That's	why,	Ambujibhai,	he	never	left	the	bed,	not	even	for	a	single	moment.	He
lived	on	the	bed,	he	died	on	the	same	bed	--	because	he	had	become	the	Master.
I	 call	 this	 game	 the	mad	 game!	By	 'mad'	 I	mean:	M	 represents	Master	 and	D
represents	disciple	--	 'Master-And-Disciple	Game'	--	it	is	a	MAD	game!	Unless
you	also	become	mad	you	will	not	understand	it.
And	Ambujibhai,	I	am	happy	to	see	that	some	madness	is	entering	into	you.	You
are	on	the	way.	You	will	not	be	out	of	this	Buddhafield	for	long.	I	can	see	you
approaching	 closer	 and	 closer.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 the	 color	 orange	 is	 going	 to	 be
your	color	too	--	and	I	hope	that	before	you	leave	the	body	this	happens.
Become	Rajjab,	become	Sundero!	Don't	think	about	them	--	these	people	are	not
to	be	contemplated	upon.	These	people	are	to	be	lived!	It	is	only	by	living	that
one	can	understand	such	tremendous	phenomena.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	IF	YOU	WERE	IN	A	DESERT	INSTEAD	OF	BEING	HERE,	WOULD
YOU
FEEL	THE	SAME?
Anand	Dasi,
I	AM	IN	THE	DESERT!	Where	do	you	think	I	am?
This	is	the	desert!	To	live	with	unconscious	people	is	to	live	in	a	desert.	To	live
with	people	who	are	not	blooming,	flowering,	is	to	live	in	a	desert.	It	is	a	human
desert	--	far	more	empty	than	any	desert	can	ever	be.
To	become	enlightened	amongst	unenlightened	people	is	to	live	in	a	desert.	That
is	 the	fate	of	all	 the	Buddhas.	I	say	one	thing,	you	understand	something;	else.
Constant	 misinterpretation	 is	 bound	 to	 happen,	 because	 I	 talk	 from	 a	 totally
different	plane.	 I	 talk	out	of	a	 fullness	and	you	receive	only	 through	 the	mind.
You	receive	only	the	words	--
and	words	cannot	convey	my	message.
My	 message	 can	 be	 conveyed	 to	 you	 only	 if	 you	 really	 become	 committed,
involved,	in	the	energy	field	that	I	am	creating,	if	you	really	become	a	plant	in
my	garden,	 if	you	allow	me	to	destroy	your	ego	--	because	that	 is	how	growth
begins.	The	death	of	the	ego	is	the	beginning	of	growth.	Just	as	the	seed	has	to
die	 in	 the	 soil,	 the	 ego	 has	 to	 die	 in	 the	Master.	Once	 your	 ego	 is	 completely
gone,	you	are	a	beautiful	tree,	with	much	foliage,	greenery,	flowers,	fragrance.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 make	 this	 desert	 a	 garden.	 And	 there	 is	 every	 possibility	 of
succeeding,	 because	 people	 ARE	 getting	 ready.	 Hesitating,	 which	 is	 natural;
waiting,	 thinking,	which	 is	 natural.	 But	 you	 cannot	 be	 here	 long	 thinking	 and
waiting;	sooner	or	later	the	quantum	leap....	You	cannot	go	on	misunderstanding
me	for	ever.
If	you	just	remain	here,	even	if	you	misunderstand	my	words,	I	am	working	on
you	--	not	through	the	mind;	I	am	playing	on	the	instrument	of	your	heart.	Words
are	just	to	keep	you	engaged	so	that	I	can	enter	into	your	heart.
Yes,	the	work	of	a	Master	is	like	a	thief.
There	is	a	Zen	story;	Zen	Masters	have	loved	it	tremendously.	When	you	come
across	 it	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	will	 feel	puzzled	about	 the	story	 --	 it	 is	about	a
master	thief.
A	man	was	known	as	a	master	 thief	 in	 Japan;	he	was	well-known,	 famous,	all
over	the	country.	And,	of	course,	he	was	a	master	thief	so	nobody	had	ever	been
able	 to	 catch	 hold	 of	 him.	 He	 was	 never	 caught	 red-handed	 --	 although
everybody	knew	that	he	was	the	one	who	had	stolen	--	even	from	the	treasury	of
the	 king	 he	 had	 been	 stealing.	 And	 he	 was	 always	 leaving	 marks	 of	 his	 so
everybody	would	know	who	had	been	there.
In	 fact,	 it	 had	 become	 the	 fashion	 to	 BRAG	 about	 it,	 if	 the	master	 thief	 had
thought	you	worthy	to	steal	something	from.	It	became	an	aristocratic	bragging!
People	would	brag,	saying,	"Last	night	the	master	thief	has	been	to	our	house."
But	the	man	was	getting	older,	and	one	day	his	young	son	said	to	him,	"Now	you
are	getting	older,	teach	me	your	art!"
The	 father	 said,	 "Then	 come	with	me	 tonight	 --	 because	 this	 is	 not	 something
that	can	be	 taught.	You	can	only	 imbibe	 the	spirit	of	me;	 if	you	are	 intelligent
enough	you	can	catch	it.	I	cannot	TEACH	it	to	you,	but	you	can	catch	it.	I	cannot
give	it	to	you,	but	you	can	get	it.	We	will	see.	You	come	tonight	with	me."
Naturally	 the	 son	was	afraid	 --	 the	 first	 time!	The	wall	was	broken,	 they	went
into	 the	 palace.	 Even	 in	 his	 old	 age	 the	 father's	 hands	 were	 like	 a	 surgeon's,
unwavering,	unshaking,	although	he	was	becoming	very	old	--	with	no	fear,	as	if
he	was	working	in	his	own	home,	breaking	the	wall.	He	did	not	even	look	here
and	there	he	was	so	certain	of	his	art.	And	the	young	man	was	trembling	--	it	was
a	cold	winter	night	and	he	was	perspiring!	But	the	father	was	doing	everything
silently.
Then	 the	 father	entered	 into	 the	house.	The	son	 followed,	his	knees	 trembling,
and	he	was	feeling	he	might	fall	any	moment.	He	was	losing	all	consciousness
because	the	fear	was	such...if	they	were	caught,	then?
The	 father	was	moving	 in	 the	 dark	 house	 as	 if	 it	was	 his	 house	 and	 he	 knew
everything	 about	 the	 house,	 and	 even	 in	 the	 dark	 he	 could	 move	 without
stumbling	 against	 the	 furniture,	 against	 the	 doors.	 Making	 no	 noise	 at	 all,
noiselessly,	he	 reached	 into	 the	 innermost	chamber	of	 the	palace.	He	opened	a
cupboard	and	 told	 the	son	 to	go	 in	and	find	whatsoever	was	valuable.	The	son
entered	it.	The	father	locked	the	door,	shouted,	"A	thief!	A	thief!	Wake	up!"	and
escaped	through	the	hole	that	they	had	dug	in	the	wall.
Now	this	was	too	much!	The	son	could	not	under-stand	it.	Now	he	is	locked	in
the	 cupboard,	 trembling,	perspiring,	 and	 the	whole	house	 is	 awake,	people	 are
searching	for	 the	 thief.	"What	kind	of	 father	 is	 this?	He	has	murdered	me!"	he
thought.	 "And	what	 kind	 of	 teaching	 is	 this?"	 This	 is	 the	 last	 thing	 he	would
have	ever	imagined:	he	has	created	a	living	nightmare	for	him!	Now	he	is	certain
to	be	caught!	And	he	has	locked	the	door	from	the	outside;	he	cannot	even	open
the	door	and	escape.
After	one	hour	he	reached	home	--	the	son	--	and	the	father	was	fast	asleep	and
snoring!
He	threw	aside	his	blanket	and	said,	"What	kind	of	nonsense	is	this?!"
The	father	said,	"So	you	are	back!	No	need	to	tell	the	whole	story	--	you	also	go
to	sleep.
Now	you	know	the	art,	we	need	not	discuss	it."
But	the	son	said,	"I	have	to	tell	you	the	whole	story,	what	happened."
The	father	said,	"If	you	want	to	tell	it	you	can,	otherwise	I	don't	require	it.	Just
that	 you	 have	 come	 is	 enough	 proof!	Now	 from	 tomorrow	 night	 you	 start	 on
your	own.	You	have	got	the	intelligence,	the	awareness	that	a	thief	needs.	I	am
immensely	happy	with	you!"
But	 the	son	was	so	overflowing,	he	wanted	 to	 relate	 the	whole	 thing	--	he	had
done	such	a	great	job.	He	said,	"Just	listen,	otherwise	I	will	not	be	able	to	sleep
at	all.	I	am	so	excited!
You	almost	killed	me!"
The	father	said,	"It	 is	hard,	but	that's	how	a	master	has	to	act	many	times.	Tell
me	the	whole	story.	What	happened?"
He	said,	"Out	of	nowhere	--	not	from	my	intellect,	certainly	not	from	my	mind	--
this	has	happened."
The	father	said,	"This	is	 the	key	to	all	mastery	in	all	 the	fields	of	life,	whether
you	are	a	thief	or	a	meditator,	whether	you	are	a	lover	or	a	scientist	or	a	painter
or	a	poet,	 it	doesn't	matter.	Whatsoever	 the	 field,	 this	 is	 the	master	key	 --	 that
nothing	happens	from	the	head,	everything	happens	from	somewhere	below.	Call
it	intuition,	call	it	no-mind,	call	it	meditation	--	these	are	names,	different	names
for	the	same	thing.	It	has	started	functioning,	I	can	see	it	on	your	face;	I	can	see
the	 aura	 around	 you.	You	 are	 going	 to	 become	 a	master	 thief!	And	 remember
through	being	a	master	thief	I	have	attained	to	meditation.	So	remember:	this	is
the	way	for	you	to	attain	meditation."
The	 son	 said,	 "When	 I	was	 standing	 inside	 that	 damned	 cupboard	 and	 people
were	searching	for	the	thief,	a	woman	servant	came	with	a	candle	in	her	hand;	I
could	see	from	the	keyhole.	Something	from	nowhere...I	started	making	noises
as	if	I	was	a	cat	--	and	I	have	never	done	it	before!	The	woman	servant,	thinking
that	 there	was	a	cat	 in	 the	cupboard,	unlocked	 it.	As	she	unlocked	 it	 --	 I	don't
know	how	I	did	it	and	who	did	it	--	it	happened!	I	blew	the	candle	out,	pushed
the	woman	away,	and	ran!	People	followed	me	-
-	 the	 whole	 house	 was	 awake,	 the	 neighborhood	 was	 awake.	 And	 they	 were
coming	closer	and	closer	and	I	was	on	the	verge	of	being	caught.
Then	suddenly	I	came	across	a	well.	I	saw	a	rock	just	by	the	side	of	the	well	--	I
don't	 believe	 that	 I	 have	 that	 much	 strength	 to	 pick	 that	 rock	 up	 now,	 but	 it
happened."
When	you	are	 in	 such	situations	your	whole	energy	becomes	available	 to	you.
You	don't	 live	 only	 on	 the	 superficial	 level.	When	 life	 is	 at	 stake,	 your	whole
energy	becomes	available.
"I	moved	the	rock,	picked	up	the	rock	--	I	cannot	believe	that	I	could	even	shake
it	now!	-
-	and	threw	it	in	the	well,	then	ran	away.	The	noise,	the	sound	of	the	rock	falling
in	 the	well...and	 all	 the	people	who	were	 following	me	 stopped	 following	me.
They	surrounded	the	well;	they	thought	I	had	jumped	into	the	well.	That's	how	I
am	back	home."
The	father	said,	"Now	you	can	go	to	sleep.	I	am	finished!	Never	ask	me	anything
again.
Now	you	start	on	your	own.
The	work	of	a	Master	 is	a	difficult	work.	He	has	 to	shout	 from	the	peaks,	and
you	are	crawling	in	the	dark	valleys	of	life.	You	are	living	in	your	graves,	and	he
has	 to	 shout	 from	 eternal	 life.	 Misunderstanding	 is	 natural;	 because	 of	 that
misunderstanding	every	Buddha	lives	in	a	desert.
A	couple	were	applying	for	a	marriage	license.
"Your	name?"
"Ole	Olson."
"And	yours?"
"Lena	Olson."
"Any	connection?"
The	bride	blushed.	"Only	once.	He	jumped	me."
"Any	connection?"	and	the	woman's	mind	immediately	 interprets	 it	 in	her	own
way,	the	only	way	she	can.
Monsieur	Foucard	was	visiting	London	for	 the	first	 time.	While	walking	about
he	felt	nature	calling	and	looked	around	for	a	public	latrine	like	those	in	Paris.
He	could	not	find	one	and,	in	desperation,	stepped	into	a	dark	building	entrance.
Immediately	 a	 bobby	 tapped	 him	 from	 behind,	 "You	 can't	 do	 that	 here,	 you
know!"
Later	 he	 tried	 to	 go	 behind	 a	 tree,	 but	 another	 bobby	 stopped	 him.	 In	 a	 few
minutes	he	was,	again	prevented	by	a	policeman.	Finally	he	noticed	a	shingle:
"Dr.	Dingley,	Urologist".	Dashing	into	the	office,	Foucard	said,	"Doctor,	I	cannot
--	how	you	say?	--
relieve	myself."
The	doctor	handed	him	a	bottle	and	told	him	to	step	behind	the	screen.	In	a	few
seconds	the	Frenchman	cried,	"Doctor,	another	container,	s'il	vous	plait!"
The	 doctor	 handed	 him	 one,	 and	 in	 a	 few	minutes	 had	 to	 repeat	 the	 process.
When	the	now	happy	Frenchman	stepped	out,	the	doctor	asked,	"My	good	man,
who	told	you	that	you	could	not	relieve	yourself?"
"Ze	entire	London	Police	Department!"
It	is	natural.	I	speak	from	one	world,	you	listen	from	a	different	world.	Between
me	and	you	there	 is	a	great	desert.	 If	you	allow,	 it	can	become	a	garden	--	but
only	 if	 you	 allow;	 it	 cannot	 be	 imposed	 on	 you.	 You	 cannot	 be	 forced;	 great
things	 never	 happen	 through	 enforcement.	 You	 cannot	 be	 regimented,	 you
cannot	 be	 ordered,	 commanded.	All	 commandments	 have	 failed.	Religion	has,
not	succeeded	because	the	priests	have	been	ordering	people:	"Do	this,	don't	do
that."
I	cannot	say	to	you:	"Do	this,	don't	do	that."	I	can	only	relate	my	understanding
to	 you.	 I	 can	open	my	heart.	 I	 can	go	on	playing	on	my	 flute.	 If	 you	become
enchanted	by	it	--	yes
'enchanted'	is	the	word	--	if	you	become	allured	by	it,	if	you	become	completely
oblivious	 of	 yourself,	 your	 past,	 your	mind,	 your	 ideas,	 your	 prejudices,	 your
upbringing,	if	my	presence	can	help	you	to	unburden,	your	seed	will	fall	in	the
soil.
The	soil	is	ready,	the	spring	has	come.	Now	it	is	up	to	you	--	it	is	ALL	up	to	you!
A	little	courage,	and	the	desert	can	be	transformed	into	a	garden.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	YOU	SAID	TODAY	THAT	THERE	 IS	NOTHING	LIKE	A	 'GROUP
SOUL',	 BUT	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 STRONGLY	 FEELING	 SOMETHING	 LIKE
THAT	IN	THE
COMMUNE.	NOT	ONLY	THAT,	BUT	THIS	FEELING	OF	A	COLLECTIVE
SOUL
IS	 BECOMING	MORE	 AND	MORE	 INTENSE	 AND	 ATTUNED	 DAY	 BY
DAY.	IT
IS	 SOMETHING	 NEW	 FOR	 ME,	 AND	 VERY	 BEAUTIFUL,	 AND
ACTUALLY	L
EXPERIENCE	 IT	 AS	 THE	 MOST	 BEAUTIFUL	 THING	 THAT	 IS
HAPPENING	FOR
ME	HERE.	I	KNOW	THAT	EACH	OF	US	HAS	TO	AWAKEN	ALONE,	BUT	I
FEEL
THAT	THIS	 'COLLECTIVE	SOUL'	 IS	A	TREMENDOUS	HELP,	AT	LEAST
FOR	US
NOT	TO	CREATE	OTHER	DREAMS....	AM	I	DREAMING	NOW	OF	A
'COLLECTIVE	SOUL'?
Sarjano,
NO,	IT	IS	A	FACT,	you	just	don	t	know	the	right	word	for	it.	'Collective	soul'	is
not	the	right	term;	it	is	very	misleading.	Soul	can	only	be	individual.	Then	what
is	happening	here	in	this	commune?	Anybody	who	enters	the	ashram	for	the	first
time	immediately	becomes	aware	of	something.	He	can	see	it	on	people's	faces,
he	can	see	it	in	their	walk,	he	can	see	it	in	the	way	they	are	working.	He	can	see
that	it	is	no	ordinary	humanity.
Some	grace	he	can	feel,	some	joy	permeating	the	whole	place,	some	playfulness,
some	 sense	of	humor.	And	people	 are	working	 seven	days	 a	week.	Nobody	 is
looking	at	the	clock...except	the	Indians!
People	 are	 enjoying	 the	work:	 it	 is	 play,	 it	 is	 creativity.	They	 are	 not	 tired.	 In
fact,	the	deeper	they	go	into	this	creativity,	the	more	nourished	they	feel	he	more
energy	is	released	in	them.
Anybody	can	see	that	something	is	there	like	an	inner	connection	that	connects
all	the	sannyasins	into	one	whole.	It	is	not	a	collective	soul,	it	is	only	falling	into
the	 same	 rhythm.	 I	 have	 a	 rhythm.	The	 closer	 you	 come	 to	me,	 the	more	you
start	falling	into	the	same	rhythm.	Then	my	breath	and	your	breath	synchronize,
then	my	heart	and	your	heart	synchronize.
And	 all	 the	 sannyasins	 are	 getting	 synchronized	with	me;	 hence	 they	 are	 also
synchronized,	 as	 a	 consequence,	with	 each	other.	 It	 is	 a	 synchronicity.	 It	 is	 an
orchestra.
We	are	all	playing	different	instruments,	but	in	harmony,	in	accord.
That	harmony,	Sarjano,	you	are	calling	the	'collective	soul'.	It	is	not	a	collective
soul.	An	army	has	a	collective	mind,	no	soul	at	all,	because	soul	can	never	be
collective.	Soul	is	always	individual.	It	is	found	in	your	deepest	aloneness;	there
is	no	other	way	to	find	it.
But	 n	 a	 commune...this	 is	 the	 chemistry	 of	 a	 commune,	 that	 it	 helps	 you	 to
become	harmonious	with	others.	And	the	more	harmonious	you	are	with	others,
the	closer	you	come	to	your	own	soul,	because	harmony	brings	you	closer	to	the
soul.	When	 a	 person	 is	 absolutely	 in	 harmony	 with	 the	 universe	 he	 becomes
enlightened.
A	paradox	to	be	remembered:	the	Buddha	is	one	who	is	absolutely	in	harmony
with	 the	 universe,	 and	 yet	 a	 Buddha	 is	 one	 who	 is	 an	 absolutely	 unique
individual.	 He	 plays	 his	 flute	 or	 his	 guitar,	 but	 he	 plays	 his	 flute	 or	 guitar	 in
absolute	accord	with	the	whole.	He	does	not	go	in	his	own	egoistic	way	--	he	is
not	an	idiot.
Remember:	 either	 you	 are	 a	 Buddha	 or	 you	 are	 an	 idiot!	 The	 word	 'idiot'	 is
beautiful;	 it	 simply	means:	doing	something	privately.	Literally	 it	means	doing
something	 privately;	 hence	 the	 words	 like	 'idiosyncrasy'.	 The	 idiot	 does	 not
mean	a	fool;	the	idiot	is	far	more	potent	a	word	than	the	fool.	The	idiot	simply
means	one	who	is	trying	to	live	through	his	ego,	who	is	playing	his	instrument
AGAINST	the	whole	and	trying	to	succeed.	He	is	an	idiot:	he	is	going	to	fail,	he
is	doomed	to	fail.	His	life	will	never	know	any	blessing,	any	benediction.
Sarjano,	your	feeling	is	right,	you	are	just	using	a	wrong	word.	Yes,	a	harmony
IS	being	created.	I	am	in	tune	with	the	universe.	You	don't	know	what	the	tune	of
the	universe	 is;	 it	 is	 invisible.	Right	now	you	cannot	connect	yourself	with	 the
universal	rhythm	directly.
But	am	in	tune	with	the	universe	--	call	 it	God,	nirvana,	enlightenment	--	I	am
utterly	lost	in	it.	I	have	no	song	of	my	own	to	sing;	I	am	singing	the	song	of	the
universe.	YOU	can	fall	in	tune	with	me.
That	is	how	you	become	a	disciple:	when	you	find	somebody	with	whom	falling
in	love	brings	joy.	Falling	in	love	is	falling	in	tune	with	somebody.
Your	ordinary	love	affairs	are	ugly,	because	you	are	both	in	discord.	Your	love
affair	is	superficial.	Because	you	like	the	blonde	hair	of	a	girl,	or	the	shape	of	the
nose,	or	 the	color	of	 the	eyes,	or	 the	curves	of	 the	body...and	you	 fall	 in	 love.
Now	curves	of	the	body,	color	of	the	eyes,	the	blonde	hair,	are	not	going	to	last
long.	Sooner	or	later	you	will	be	fed	up	with	them	--	the	same	curve,	the	same
eyes,	the	same	nose	--	sooner	or	later	you	will	stop	seeing	them.	This	is	not	love!
Hence	 conflict	 arises	 immediately.	 All	 so-called	 love	 affairs	 are	 nothing	 but
conflicts	disguised	--	jealousies,	possessiveness,	domination,	ego	trips.
But	when	you	fall	in	love	with	a	Master	it	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	You
feel	 the	 rhythm	of	 the	Master;	 and	 slowly	 slowly	your	heart	 feels	 the	 call	 and
you	enter	into	an	adventure.	Slowly	slowly,	more	and	more	people	enter	into	that
adventure...a	commune	is	created.
First	the	Buddha:	BUDDHAM	SHARNAM	GACHCHHAMI	--	I	go	to	the	feet
of	the	Buddha.	Then	the	disciples	arise,	those	who	have	gone	to	the	feet	of	the
Buddha:	SANGHAM	SHARNAM	GACHCHHAMI.	Then	many	many	disciples
gather,	 and	 they	 start	 feeling	 attuned	 not	 only	 with	 the	 Buddha	 but	 a	 certain
attunement	 with	 each	 other	 also	 arises	 naturally:	 they	 are	 all	 attuned	 to	 one
center,	hence	they	start	feeling	an	attunement	with	each	other.	A	brotherhood,	a
sisterhood,	arises;	that	is	the	SANGHA	--
the	commune.
And	when	you	have	fallen	in	love	with	a	Buddha	and	have	fallen	in	love	with	a
commune,	 the	 ultimate	 surrender	 arises:	 DHAMMAM	 SHARNAM
GACHCHHAMI.
Then	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 neither	 the	 Buddha	 nor	 the	 commune:	 behind	 the
Buddha	 is	 the	 universal	 law,	 the	 ultimate	 law	 --	 DHAMMA.	 Buddha	 only
represents	 the	 ultimate	 law	 in	 a	 visible	 form;	 his	 commune	 represents	 it	 in	 an
even	grosser	way.
These	are	the	three	shelters.	First	you	take	shelter	in	the	Buddha,	then	you	take
shelter	 in	 the	 commune,	 and	 then	 you	 take	 shelter	 in	 the	 ultimate	 law.	This	 is
what	is	happening	here.
Sarjano,	 you	 are	moving	 in	 the	 right	 direction;	 your	 feeling	 is	 perfectly	 right.
Intuitively	 you	 are	 right,	 just	 intellectually	 you	 are	 using	 a	wrong	word.	Drop
that	word!
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,	 I	 NEVER	WANT	WHAT	 I	 GET;	 I	 REJECT	 IT.	 I	 ALWAYS	WANT
WHAT	IS
NOT	 GIVEN	 TO	 ME;	 THIS	 I	 TRY	 TO	 GET.	 I	 NEVER	 FEEL	 SATISFIED
WITH
WHAT	I	HAVE,	I	ALWAYS	WANT	SOMETHING	ELSE.	AND	I	NEVER	SAY
WHAT	I	REALLY	WANT.	L	SUFFER	MUCH	FROM	THIS	BUT,	IT	SEEMS,
NOT
ENOUGH	AS	I	STILL	CLING	TO	IT.	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING
ABOUT	THIS?
Mandiro,
THIS	 IS	THE	WAY	THE	WORLD	IS	MADE.	The	world	 is	 a	great	device	of
God.	 Just	 as	 Masters	 create	 small	 devices	 for	 the	 disciples,	 God	 creates	 the
ultimate	device	for	all	beings.	The	world	is	a	device.
It	was	Christmas	time	and	a	professor,	a	professor	of	philosophy	and	logic,	went
to	a	toyshop	with	his	wife	to	purchase	something	beautiful,	a	new	toy,	for	their
only	child	as	a	Christmas	gift.	They	tried	many	toys	but	they	were	all	old,	a	little
bit	modified	here	and	there.	The	shopkeeper,	seeing	that	they	were	not	satisfied,
went	inside	the	store	and	brought	out	an	absolutely	new	toy	they	had	never	seen
before.	It	was	a	jigsaw	puzzle.
He	said,	"This	is	the	latest	and	the	best	--	you	MUST	like	it."
They	tried	to	fit	the	jigsaw	puzzle	together.	First	the	wife	tried	--	ladies	first.	She
failed,	 she	could	not	 figure	 it	out.	The	husband	 laughed	 --	 the	male	chauvinist
laughter!	--	and	he	said,	"Wait!	I	will	do	it."	And	he	was	a	logician,	a	professor
of	philosophy;	if	he	cannot	do	it,	then	who	will	be	able	to	do	it?	He	tried	hard.
First	 he	 was	 very	 much	 inspired	 and	 finally	 he	 was	 simply	 perspiring	 --	 the
whole	inspiration	became	perspiration!	He	was	drenched	in	perspiration.	And	a
crowd	had	gathered,	and	there	was	no	way	to	figure	it	out.	The	puzzle	remained
a	puzzle,	became	more	and	more	puzzling.
Finally	he	asked	the	shopowner,	"What	kind	of	jigsaw	puzzle	is	this?	If	I	cannot
do	it	--	I	am	the	Head	of	the	Department	of	Logic	in	the	University,	mathematics
is	my	hobby	--	if	I	cannot	do	it,	then	how	do	you	hope	that	a	five-year-old	child
will	be	able	to	do	it?"
The	shopkeeper	said,	"Who	told	you	that	anybody	can	do	it?	This	toy	represents
the	world.	It	is	made	in	such	a	way	that	it	cannot	be	fixed.	This	is	just	a	lesson
for	the	child	about	how	the	world	is!"
Do	whatsoever	you	 like	 --	EVERYTHING	fails.	And	when	I	 say	everything,	 I
mean	EVERYTHING.	But	 it	 takes	millions	of	 lives	 for	people	 to	arrive	at	 this
point,	because	in	one	life	you	cannot	try	all	there	is.	You	try	a	few	things;	they
fail,	but	the	hope	remains:	maybe	you	have	not	tried	the	right	things.
You	 earn	money,	 you	 become	 the	 richest	man	 in	 the	world	 --	 you	 become	 an
Andrew	Carnegie.	And	at	 the	peak,	when	you	have	become	the	richest	man	 in
the	world,	suddenly	you	see	your	whole	life	has	been	a	wastage.	Money	is	there,
but	there	is	no	contentment	inside	--	and	life	has	gone	down	the	drain.
You	can	see	the	misery	of	an	Andrew	Carnegie.	When	he	was	dying,	somebody
who	was	writing	a	biography	said	to	him,	"You	must	be	the	most	contented	man
in	the	world."
He	said,	"Contented?	I	am	the	MOST	discontented	man	in	the	world!	Don't	you
know	I	am	the	wealthiest	man	in	the	world?	That	is	my	discontent.	Now	I	know
there	is	no	more	to	wealth:	all	that	is	possible	I	have	attained,	and	yet	I	am	dying
empty.	My	 life	 has	 been	 just	 a	 wastage.	 Next	 time,	 if	 God	 gives	 me	 another
opportunity,	I	am	not	going	to	try	money	any	more	--	it	has	failed."
But	the	hope	is	there	--	he	will	try	politics...?
Those	who	attain	 to	political	 power,	 they	 fail.	But	 then	 they	 think	maybe	 it	 is
knowledge:
"We	should	try	knowledge."	And	so	on	and	so	forth....
Mandiro,	remember:	the	world	is	made	as	a	device	by	God.	EVERYTHING	here
is	bound	to	fail.	You	can	hope	and	you	try,	but	nothing	is	going	to	succeed.	The
day	 you	 understand	 that	 nothing	 is	 going	 to	 succeed	 is	 the	 day	 of	 great
transformation.	That	is	the	day	sannyas	is	born.
In	Detroit,	brothels	are	now	automatized.	One	puts	twenty	dollars	in	a	slot	and	a
door	opens.
A	 politician	 decides	 to	 have	 a	 go.	 He	 puts	 in	 the	 twenty	 bucks	 and	 the	 door
opens.	He	 finds	himself	 in	 a	 corridor	with	 two	doors:	 one	 reads	 "Blonde",	 the
other	reads
"Brunette".	 He	 chooses	 the	 door	 with	 "Blonde"	 written	 on	 it.	 He	 then	 finds
himself	in	another	corridor	with	two	doors:	one	reads	"Tall"	and	the	other	reads
"Small".	He	opens	the	door	with	"Tall"	written	on	it	and	finds	himself	in	another
corridor	 with	 two	 doors:	 one	 reads	 "Big	 Tits",	 the	 other	 reads	 "Small	 Tits"
Immediately	he	chooses	the	door	with
"Big	Tits"	on	 it,	 and	 finds	himself	 in	another	corridor	with	 two	doors,	 the	one
reading
"Small	 Ass",	 the	 other	 "Large	 Ass".	 He	 rushes	 through	 the	 door	 with	 "Small
Ass"	written	on	it,	and	again	finds	himself	in	a	corridor	with	two	doors,	one	with
"Real	Screw"	on	it,	the	other	"Fancy	Fuck".	He	throws	himself	on	the	door	with
"Real	Screw"	on	it...and	finds	himself	in	the	street	on	the	other	side	of	the	same
building!
But	you	can	try	other	ways.	You	will	ALWAYS	find	that	you	end	up	in	the	street
on	the	other	side	of	the	building!
The	whole	 of	 life	 is	 like	 that...otherwise	 there	would	 have	 been	 no	 reason	 for
sannyas.
There	would	have	been	no	reason	for	religion	to	exist	at	all.	Religion	exists	only
because	 the	world	 fails.	 It	 is	 the	 failure	of	 the	world	 that	brings	you	 to	 a	new
awareness:	that	if	the	cherished	goal	cannot	be	found	in	the	world,	then	let	us	try
it	inwards.
Mandiro,	 THERE	 you	 have	 not	 tried	 yet.	 Move	 inwards!	 Contentment	 is	 a
quality	of	your	center;	it	is	not	found	on	the	circumference.	Fulfillment	is	when
you	have	arrived	at	your	real,	authentic	being;	it	is	not	found	in	the	ego.
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,	WHEN	WE	DON'T	UNDERSTAND	YOU	RIGHTLY,	HOW	DO	YOU
FEEL?
Virendra,
I	SIMPLY	FEEL	THAT	YOU	DON'T	UNDERSTAND	ME	--	and	that	is	that!	It
is	not	a	question	of	feeling	anything	else.	I	say,	"Two	plus	two	is	four,"	and	you
don't	understand
--	 so	 I	 understand	 that	 you	 don't	 understand.	 I	 try	 again	 next	 day.	 I	 go	 on
hammering,
"Two	plus	two	is	four."	If	you	understand,	good;	if	you	don't	understand,	good.	It
is	not	a	question	of	FEELING.	I	don't	 feel	hurt,	 I	don't	 feel	frustrated,	because
from	the	very	beginning	I	am	not	EXPECTING	you	to	understand.
Frustration	comes	 through	expectation.	 If	 I	am	expecting	 that	you	are	going	 to
understand,	then,	of	course,	when	you	don't	understand	there	will	be	frustration,
deep	frustration.	If	I	am	hoping	that	you	are	going	to	behave	in	this	way	and	you
don't,	 then	certainly	I	will	 feel	hurt.	You	have	disobeyed,	you	have	not	proved
worthy	enough,	you	have	not	risen	to	the	occasion.	But	I	have	no	expectation	at
all,	of	anybody.
So	whatsoever	you	do,	I	go	on	giggling	and	seeing	it	all.	If	you	misunderstand
then	I	say,
"Old	man,	try	again!"	What	ELSE	can	be	done?	And	this	is	not	a	new	situation;
this	has	been	always	so	and	this	is	going	to	be	always	so.
In	 fact,	 to	 expect	 that	 people	 should	 understand	 you	 is	 a	 subtle	 desire	 to
dominate	them.
Why?	 If	 they	don't	want	 to	understand	you	 it	 is	perfectly	okay.	 It	 is	 their	 life!
They	don't	want	to	go	in	a	certain	way	--	it	is	their	choice	and	they	are	free.
Hence	I	never	give	detailed	information	about	how	you	should	live	--	although
YOU	go	on	asking	me:	what	you	should	eat,	when	you	should	go	to	bed,	when
should	you	get	up	in	the	morning....	You	go	on	asking	about	these	stupid	details.
And	these	stupid	details	have	been	given	by	your	great	--	so-called	great	--	saints
down	the	ages.	I	don't	give	you	one	single	detail.
I	simply	give	you	my	insight,	I	SHARE	my	insight.	I	open	up	my	heart	before
you.	 If	 you	 can	partake	of	 anything,	 I	 am	obliged,	 I	 am	 thankful	 that	 in	 some
way	 my	 love,	 my	 understanding,	 helped	 you	 to	 become	 more	 loving,	 more
understanding.	But	misunderstanding	is	accepted.
Krishnamurti	gets	very	angry	 --	 sometimes	even	hits	his	head	 --	when	he	 sees
that	people	are	not	understanding	him.	Why	be	so	worried	about	it?	He	is	taking
things	 too	 seriously,	 he	 is	 not	 playful.	 You	 can	 ask	 me	 the	 same	 question	 a
thousand	 and	 one	 times;	 am	 not	 going	 to	 be	 angry.	 Each	 time	 you	 ask	 the
question	I	am	happily	ready	to	share	whatsoever	is	possible.
Why	 is	 Krishnamurti	 so	 serious?	 He	 was	 brought	 up	 by	 wrong	 people:	 the
theosophists.
They	are	very	serious	people.	They	had	made	a.	very	mysterious	philosophy	out
of	all	the	religions	of	the	world,	a	kind	of	synthesis.	It	is	not	a	synthesis,	it	is	just
hocus-pocus,	fragments	from	one	place	and	a	few	fragments	from	another	place.
They	were	 very	 serious	 people,	 and	 they	wanted	Krishnamurti	 to	 become	 the
'World	Teacher'.
Now,	how	can	you	become	the	 'World	Teacher'?	There	has	never	been	a	world
teacher	 and	 there	will	 never	 be.	Unless	 the	world	 decides	 to	 be	 your	 disciple,
how	can	you	be	a	world	teacher?
In	 India	 there	 are	 many.	 All	 the	 shankaracharyas	 are	 called	 JAGATGURU	 --
world	teachers.	I	know	one	shankaracharya	who	has	only	one	disciple!	I	asked,
"What	kind	of	world	teacherhood	is	this?"
He	 looked	 a	 little	 embarrassed.	 I	 told	 him,	 "Don't	 feel	 so	 embarrassed.	 I	 will
suggest	a	way	out	to	you."
In	Hindi,	JAGATGURU	means	world	teacher.	JAGAT	means	the	world,	GURU
means	teacher.
I	told	him,	"You	do	one	thing	--	you	start	calling	your	disciple	Jagat	--	and	then
you	become	 JAGATGURU!	Don't	 feel	 so	 embarrassed;	 there	 is	 always	a	way.
One	can	wriggle	out	of	 laws	and	words	and....	Call	him	Jagat,	and	you	are	 the
guru,	certainly!"
Theosophists	 wanted	 Krishnamurti	 to	 be	 a	 JAGATGURU	 --	 a	 world	 teacher.
And	 they	 tried	 hard.	They	 could	 not	make	 him	do	 it,	 because	 he	was	 a	 really
intelligent	 person.	 If	 he	 had	 been	 just	 a	 little	 less	 intelligent	 he	 would	 have
become	a	JAGATGURU,	a	world	teacher.	But	he	wriggled	his	way	out.	But	even
though	he	has	come	out	of	 their	grip,	 the	scars	are	 left.	The	seriousness	 is	still
there;	he	is	not	playful,	he	has	no	sense	of	humor.
I	am	not	serious!	What	I	am	saying	to	you	is	said	out	of	playfulness.	It	is	more	a
gossiping	than	a	gospel!
Watson,	 a	 Clevelander	 in	 Paris,	 was	 unable	 to	 find	 a	 bordello,	 so	 he	 asked	 a
gendarme	to	give	him	directions.	The	policeman	did	not	understand	English	very
well.	Watson	 tried	 pidgin	English	 and	 pointing.	 "Me,"	 he	 said,	 pointing	 to	 his
chest.
"Ah!	You	wish	to	eat?"	said	the	gendarme.
"No,	no!"	said	Watson.	He	tried	again,	taking	out	a	twenty-dollar	bill.
"Ah!	You	wish	to	gamble?"
"No,	 no,	 no!"	 shouted	 the	 American	 in	 disgust,	 and	 he	 unzipped	 and	 zipped
himself.
"Ah,	oui,	oui!"	said	the	gendarme.
"Wee-wee,	my	ass!	Where	the	hell	is	the	nearest	whorehouse?"
I	 am	 talking	 a	 different	 language,	 you	 understand	 a	 different-language	 --	 but
there	is	no	need	to	make	much	fuss	about	it.	It	is	natural.
A	hippie	was	walking	along	the	road	when	he	saw	a	big	rock	by	the	side	of	the
road,	wobbling.	Being	 a	 strong	hippie,	 he	picked	up	 the	 rock	 to	 see	what	was
underneath.	To	his	surprise,	out	jumped	a	leprechaun!	"To	be	sure,	I	am	grateful
to	ye,	lad!"	he	cried.
"And	in	return	for	your	kindness	I	will	grant	you	three	magic	wishes."
"Far	 out!"	 drawled	 the	 hippie.	 "Hey	man,	well,	 I	wanna	be	 uptight,	 outa	 sight
and	in	the	groove,	baby!"
"Okay!"	said	the	leprechaun,	and	turned	him	into	a	Tampax.
There	is	no	problem	when	you	misunderstand	me	or	don't	understand	me	--	there
is	 no	 problem.	 I	 simply	 enjoy,	whether	 you	 understand	 or	misunderstand.	My
enjoyment	remains	undisturbed.
And	 I	 am	 not	 a	 messiah,	 and	 I	 am	 not	 a	 missionary.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 here	 to
establish	 a	 church	 or	 to	 give	 a	 doctrine	 to	 the	world,	 a	 new	 religion,	 no.	My
effort	 is	 totally	 different:	 a	 new	 consciousness	 not	 a	 new	 religion,	 a	 new
consciousness	not	a	new	doctrine.	Enough	of	doctrines	and	enough	of	religions!
Man	needs	a	new	consciousness.
And	 the	 only	way	 to	 bring	 consciousness	 is	 to	 go	 on	 hammering	 from	 all	 the
sides	so	that	slowly	slowly	chunks	of	your	mind	go	on	dropping.	The	statue	of	a
Buddha	 is	 hidden	 in	 you.	 Right	 now	 you	 are	 a	 rock.	 If	 I	 go	 on	 hammering,
cutting	 chunks	 out	 of	 you,	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 Buddha	 will	 emerge.	 It	 takes
time....
And	there	is	no	hurry	either.	I	am	not	in	a	hurry,	because	the	problem	with	hurry
is:	the	more	you	are	in	a	hurry,	the	more	the	whole	thing	is	delayed.	And	if	you
are	not	in	a	hurry	at	all,	things	start	happening	sooner.	I	can	wait	for	ever,	I	can
wait	 infinitely.	But	 the	miracle	 is:	 if	you	can	wait	 infinitely,	 things	can	happen
instantly.
RIGHT	NOW	the	Buddha	can	pop	up	in	your	consciousness;	suddenly	a	bud	can
open	and	become	a	flower.	And	one	never	knows	when	it	is	going	to	happen	so
one	has	to	simply	go	on	working.	And	the	work	should	never	be	thought	of	as
work	but	as	worship.
Working	with	you	I	am	worshipping	you.	Talking	to	you	I	am	loving	you	--	not
giving	you	a	doctrine	but	my	heart.	Handle	it	with	care.
Be	Still	and	Know
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Me,	Enlightened?
10	September	1979	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7909100
ShortTitle:
BESTIL10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question
Question	1
OSHO,	TODAY	WHEN	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	YOUR	FATHER,	FOR	THE
FIRST
TIME	 IT	 BECAME	 VERY	 CLEAR	 AND	 CLOSE	 FOR	 ME	 THAT
EVERYBODY,	I	ALSO,	CAN	BECOME	ENLIGHTENED.	ALTHOUGH	YOU
HAVE	SAID	SO	MANY
TIMES	THAT	WE	ARE	ALL	BUDDHAS	IN	THE	CENTER,	I	ALWAYS	FELT
IT
VERY	VERY	FAR	AWAY.	SUDDENLY	ALL	YOUR	TEACHING	FROM	THE
LAST
TWO	AND	A	 HALF	 YEARS	 BECAME	 IMMEDIATE,	MAYBE	 BECAUSE
YOUR
FATHER	 WAS	 KIND	 OF	 CLOSE	 FOR	 ME.	 I	 SAW	 HIM	 IN	 HIS	 HOUSE
EATING	 A	 CHAPATI,	 SAW	 HIM	 TAKING	 HIS	 MORNING	 WALK
THROUGH	THE	ASHRAM	-
-	 AND	 HE	 BECAME	 ENLIGHTENED!	 TOO	 MUCH!	 I	 WANT	 TO	 TELL
YOU	THAT
I	HAD	A	GREAT	REALIZATION	IN	LECTURE.
Deva	Kanchha,
GREAT	TRUTHS	TAKE	TIME	TO	SINK	IN.	And	this	is	the	greatest	of	all,	that
you	all	are	potentially	Buddhas.	It	is	impossible	for	your	mind	to	accept	it.	You
can	accept	somebody	far	away,	a	Siddhartha	Gautam,	being	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus
Christ,	 a	Zarathustra,	 a	Lao	Tzu.	They	are	 so	 far	 away,	millions	of	 light	years
away;	 they	 have	 become	 mythological.	 They	 are	 no	 more	 thought	 to	 be	 real
persons.	They	have	 lost	all	 substance,	 they	have	become	pure	shadows	--	pure
poetry	with	no	words,	pure	 silence	with	no	 sound.	You	can	 imagine	 them,	but
you	cannot	feel	them.
Hence,	 although	 I	 go	 on	 repeating	 again	 and	 again	 that	 you	 can	 become	 a
Buddha...in	fact	you	ARE	a	Buddha,	unaware	of	the	fact.	On	the	circumference
maybe	 there	 is	 a	 great	 storm,	 just	 as	 on	 the	 surface	 the	 sea	 is	 stormy	 --
sometimes	more,	sometimes	less,	but	there	are	always	waves,	bigger	or	smaller;
there	 is	 always	 turbulence,	 disturbance.	 But	 at	 the	 depth	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a
ripple:	all	is	silence.
You	 are	 the	 center	 of	 the	 cyclone,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 your	 center.	And
down	the	ages	priests	have	condemned	you	so	much	that	 it	has	become	almost
impossible	 for	 you	 to	 conceive	 of	 yourself	 as	 a	 Buddha.	 The	 priests	 have
condemned	 you	 according	 to	 your	 circumference;	 they	 know	 only	 your
circumference.	 In	 fact	 they	 are	 interested	 only	 in	 condemning	 you,	 so
whatsoever	they	can	condemn	they	see	very	predominantly	in	you.
They	choose	that	which	can	be	condemned,	because	through	condemnation	you
are	 reduced	 to	 slaves:	 slaves	 of	 religion	 --	 Catholic,	 Protestant,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan,	 Jaina,	 Buddhist;	 and	 slaves	 of	 societies,	 cultures,	 civilizations,
political	ideologies	--
communist,	fascist,	Gandhian.
The	only	way	to	reduce	you	to	a	slave	is	to	condemn	you	so	badly	that	you	lose
all	self-respect.	And	it	can	be	done	because	your	circumference	is	there,	and	you
also	 are	 aware	 only	 of	 the	 circumference.	 You	 are	 fast	 asleep	 snoring	 at	 the
center.	Only	at	the	circumference	are	you	a	little	bit	awake,	and	that	too	because
of	the	disturbance,	noise.
In	the	marketplace	you	are	a	little	bit	more	alert.	When	you	sit	silently	in	your
meditation	room	you	start	falling	asleep,	because	the	only	kind	of	alertness	that
you	know	is	that	which	is	created	by	the	noise	around	you.	You	know	only	one
kind	of	awareness,	which	is	pathological	because	it	is	out	of	disturbance,	not	out
of	stillness.
That's	why	it	 is	one	of	 the	basic	experiences	of	all	meditators	 that	 the	moment
they	start	meditating	they	start	falling	asleep.	Hence	the	Zen	Master	has	to	walk
amongst	 his	 disciples	 with	 a	 stick	 in	 his	 hand:	 whenever	 he	 sees	 somebody
asleep,	he	hits	him	immediately.	The	hit	you	can	understand,	because	it	is	on	the
circumference.	Suddenly	the	energy	rushes	upwards	in	your	spine,	and	you	are
awake,	alert.	The	Zen	tradition	says	that	when	the	Master	hits	you,	bow	down	to
him	in	deep	respect.	He	has	obliged	you;	he	has	taken	great	trouble	to	hit	you.
You	know	only	one	kind	of	alertness	--	when	you	are	hit,	when	you	are	in	some
danger,	 when	 you	 are	 in	 some	 accident.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 that	 people	 go
mountain	climbing,	because	when	they	are	climbing	mountains	and	the	danger	is
great	 they	become	a	little	alert.	It	 is	because	of	 this	 that	people	compete	in	car
races,	because	the	speedier	the	car	goes,	the	more	danger	is	close	by:	death	can
happen	any	moment,	you	HAVE	to	become	alert.
Danger	has	an	attraction.	The	only	attraction	of	danger	is	that	you	become	a	little
alert,	but	this	is	a	superficial	kind	of	alertness.	Real	alertness	has	to	happen	at	the
center,	otherwise	you	can	remain	alert	on	the	circumference	because	of	the	noise,
disturbance,	but	it	is	coming	from	others,	it	is	not	your	own,	and	your	center	can
go	on	sleeping.
I	go	on	telling	you	this	again	and	again.	Why	do	r	say	it	again	and	again?	So	that
it	 can	 sink	 in	 and	 can	 reach	 your	 center.	 It	 takes	 time,	 and	 it	 takes	 a	 right
moment.
My	father's	disappearance	 from	 the	body	may	have	been	 the	 right	moment	 for
you,	Kanchha.	Yes,	he	was	a	simple	man,	just	like	anybody	else.	So	was	Buddha
and	 so	was	Mahavira	 and	 so	was	 Jesus	 --	 simple	 people,	 innocent	 people.	He
was	not	in	any	way	extraordinary;	that	was	his	extraordinariness.	I	have	known
him	from	my	very	childhood
--	so	simple,	so	innocent,	anybody	could	deceive	him.
He	used	to	believe	anybody.	I	have	seen	many	people	cheating	him,	but	his	trust
was	immense;	he	never	distrusted	human	beings	although	he	was	cheated	many
times.	 It	was	so	simple	 to	see	 that	people	were	cheating	him	 that	even	when	 I
was	a	small	child	I	used	to	say	to	him,	"What	are	you	doing?	This	man	is	simply
cheating	you!"
Once	he	built	a	house	and	a	contractor	was	cheating	him.	I	told	him,	"This	house
is	not	going	to	stand,	it	will	fall,	because	the	cement	is	not	in	the	right	proportion
and	 the	wood	 that	 is	being	used	 is	 too	heavy."	But	he	wouldn't	 listen;	he	said,
"He	is	a	good	man,	he	cannot	cheat	us."
And	that's	what	actually	happened;	the	house	could	not	stand	the	first	rains.	He
was	 not	 there,	 he	was	 in	Bombay.	 I	 sent	 him	 a	 telegram	 telling	 him,	 "What	 I
have	 been	 telling	 you	 has	 happened:	 the	 house	 has	 fallen."	 He	 did	 not	 even
answer.	He	came	when	he	was	supposed	to	come,	after	seven	days,	and	he	said,
"Why	 did	 you	 unnecessarily	 waste	 money	 on	 the	 telegram?	 The	 house	 had
fallen,	so	it	had	fallen!	Now	what	can	I	do?	That	contractor	wasted	ten	thousand
rupees	and	you	wasted	almost	ten	rupees	unnecessarily	--
those	could	have	been	saved.
And	the	first	thing	that	he	did	was	to	celebrate	that	we	had	not	moved	--	because
we	had	been	going	to	move	within	two	or	three	weeks.	He	celebrated:	"God	is
gracious,	he	saved	us.	He	made	the	house	fall	before	we	had	moved	into	it."	So
he	invited	the	whole	village.
Everybody	was	just	unable	to	understand:	"Is	this	a	moment	to	celebrate?"	Even
the	 contractor	was	 called	 invited,	 because	 he	 had	 done	 a	 good	 job:	 before	we
moved,	the	house	fell.
He	was	 a	 simple	man.	And	 if	 you	 look	 deep	 down,	 everybody	 is	 simple.	The
society	makes	you	complex,	but	you	are	born	simple	and	innocent.	Everybody	is
born	a	Buddha;	the	society	corrupts	you.
And	the	function	of	a	Master	is	to	take	away	all	the	corruption	that	the	society
has	worked	 on	 you.	 the	 function	 of	 the	Master	 is	 to	 undo	 that	 the	 society	 has
done	to	you,	and	you	will	be	a	Buddha	again.
The	 child	 when	 he	 is	 born	 functions	 from	 the	 center;	 we	 teach	 him	 how	 to
function	from	the	circumference.	That	is	our	whole	educational	system	all	over
the	world:	 teaching	 the	child	how	to	function	from	the	circumference.	We	pull
him	 away	 from	 his	 center,	 we	 make	 him	 more	 and	 more	 accustomed	 to	 the
circumference,	 to	 living	 on	 the	 circumference...	 twenty-five	 years	 of
conditioning,	 education:	 good	 names	we	 have	 given	 to	 ugly	 things.	We	 call	 it
education	--	it	is	not	education,	nothing	can	be	a	greater	mis-education.
The	very	word	'education'	means	drawing	something	out,	to	draw	something	out.
When	 you	 draw	 water	 out	 of	 the	 well	 it	 is	 education.	 Just	 like	 that,	 when
something	 is	 drawn	 outwards	 from	 your	 center	 it	 is	 education.	But	 this	 is	 not
what	is	going	on	in	the	name	of	education;	it	is	forcing	things	upon	you.	It	is	not
bringing	your	center	to	function.	It	is	not	sharpening	your	center;	it	is	dulling	it,
making	it	more	and	more	sleepy,	dozy.
The	 society	 succeeds	 the	 day	 your	 center	 goes	 into	 a	 coma	 and	 your
circumference	remains	functioning.	Then	you	are	a	robot,	a	machine,	no	more	a
man.
Because	 we	 function	 from	 the	 circumference	 Buddhas	 look	 so	 unreal	 --	 of
course,	 because	 they	 function	 from	 a	 totally	 different	 center.	That's	why	 I	 say
that	unless	you	are	in	contact	with	a	living	Buddha,	you	will	never	believe	that
YOU	can	become	a	Buddha.
But	a	living	Buddha	also,	slowly	slowly,	appears	far	away.	It	is	because	of	your
mind	working;	it	is	a	strategy	of	the	mind	to	save	itself	from	going	through	that
revolution.	So	you	create	a	distance	--	it	is	imaginary.
There	is	no	distance	between	me	and	you,	not	at	all.	I	am	just	a	neighbor	to	you;
not	even	a	fence	divides	me	from	you.	But	you	cannot	believe	it,	because	that	is
too	dangerous	 for	you,	 for	your	established	pattern	of	 life.	You	can't	allow	me
too	close;	you	will	create	a	distance.
Pradeepa	has	asked	a	question:	"Osho,	when-ever	you	quote	Lao	Tzu	as	saying,
'Everybody	 is	 clear,	 only	 I	 am	 muddleheaded,'	 I	 love	 it,	 because	 I	 am	 also
muddleheaded.
But	 there	 must	 be	 some	 difference	 between	 my	 muddleheadedness	 and	 Lao
Tzu's."
There	 is	 none,	 Pradeepa.	 But	 you	 cannot	 believe	 it.	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 exactly	 as
muddleheaded	 as	 Pradeepa.	 Lao	 Tzu	 will	 agree	 with	 me,	 Pradeepa	 will	 not
agree.	 There	 is	 the	 problem:	 how	 can	 Pradeepa	 agree	 that	 her
muddleheadness...?	 Lao	 Tzu	 must	 be	 meaning	 something	 very	 mysterious,
something	of	a	totally	different	dimension.
No.	Lao	Tzu	is	simply	saying	there	is	no	need	to	be	a	great	genius	to	know	God.
God	 is	 available	 to	 all,	 unconditionally	 to	 all,	 categorically	 to	 all.	You	 do	 not
have	to	fulfill	certain	conditions,	you	do	not	have	to	rise	to	a	certain	level.	God	is
available	 to	you	as	you	are,	because	God	has	BECOME	you.	There	 is	nobody
ELSE	inside	you.	Just	a	look....
So	it	is	beautiful	in	a	commune,	because	when	you	live	in	a	commune	you	live
with	people	not	knowing	whether	 this	man	is	going	 to	become	a	Buddha;	 then
one	day	suddenly	the	lotus	opens:	that	man	has	become	a	Buddha.	It	gives	you
great	courage.	You	know	this	man,	he	is	just	 like	you.	You	have	been	drinking
tea	with	him,	gossiping	with	him,	reading	the	same	newspaper,	 listening	to	 the
same	 radio,	 looking	 at	 the	 same	 TV,	 you	 have	 been	 to	 the	 same	movie.	 You
know	him,	 inside	 and	out;	 he	was	 just	 like	you.	 If	HE	can	become	a	Buddha,
then	 why	 not	 YOU?	 In	 fact,	 his	 becoming	 a	 Buddha	 becomes	 the	 greatest
uplifting	force	in	your	life.
That	 is	 the	beauty	of	a	commune,	because	many	many	people	with	whom	you
were	working	will	one	day	become	Buddhas.	Somebody	was	working	under	you
...for	example,	one	day	Deeksha	 finds	 that	 the	man	who	has	been	washing	 the
pots	has	become	a	Buddha!	Then	Deeksha	can	believe	 that	"Although	I	am	an
Italian,	and	nobody	has	ever	heard	of	any	Italian	becoming	a	Buddha,	still	I	can
become	one."
Have	you	ever	heard	about	any	Italian...?	At	least	have	not	heard	of	it.	But	it	is
going	 to	happen	here,	because	 this	 commune	 is	ninety	percent	 Italian:	you	eat
Italian	 food,	 you	 drink	 Italian	 water	 --	 everybody	 is	 turning	 ninety	 percent
Italian.	My	effort	in	creating	a	commune	is	simply	to	make	you	alert	and	aware
that	 one	 day	 the	 cobbler	 of	 the	 ashram	 becomes	 enlightened,	 another	 day	 the
guard	 becomes	 enlightened,	 and	 people	 go	 on	 blossoming.	 Each	 blossoming
brings	 new	 courage,	 new	 inspiration,	 and	 in	 that	 courage	 and	 inspiration	 your
spring	comes	closer	to	you.	A	great	self-respect	arises,	and	a	trust:
"God	has	not	 forsaken	us.	 If	people	 like	me	are	becoming	Buddhas,	 then	I	am
also	 on	 the	way.	 Sooner	 or	 later...."	And	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 sooner	 than	 later	 --
because	 if	 so	many	people	 start	 flowering,	 then	 the	 season	has	 come	 and	 it	 is
time	not	to	resist.	It	is	time	not	to	fight	any	more,	but	to	be	in	a	let-go.
The	second	question
Question	2
OSHO,	WHAT	EXACTLY	DO	YOU	MEAN	BY	SAYING	 "BE	 STILL	AND
KNOW"
AND	ALSO	"SEEK	THE	STRENGTH	OF	NO-DESIRE"?
BE	 STILL	 AND	 KNOW	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fundamental	 sutras	 of	 the	 inner
alchemy.	But	 by	 being	 still	 is	 not	meant	 that	 you	 have	 to	 force	 stillness	 upon
yourself.	A	forced	stillness	is	not	true	stillness.	One	can	sit	like	a	Buddha,	almost
like	a	 statue,	absolutely	still,	 and	yet	deep	down	 there	may	be	great	 turmoil,	 a
thousand	and	one	thoughts	rushing.
There	may	be	great	traffic	in	the	mind.	The	body	can	be	forced	to	sit	silently	for
hours,	and	you	can	also	learn	tricks	to	still	the	mind.
For	example,	if	you	chant	any	mantra	for	hours,	any	name	of	God,	if	you	simply
go	on	chanting	"Allah,	Allah,	Allah,"	it	functions	like	a	tranquilizer.	Repetition
of	 a	 single	 word	 or	 a	 single	 mantra	 creates	 a	 certain	 melody	 in	 your	 mind
soothing,	very	soothing,	very	calming.	And	a	kind	of	stillness	will	be	felt	which
is	not	the	true	kind	--	because	the	sound	of	a	certain	mantra	is	simply	changing
the	chemistry	of	your	mind.	The	change	is	not	alchemical,	it	is	chemical.
Sound	is	chemistry.	Hence	music	can	help	you	to	become	still.	And,	moreover,
when	 a	 certain	 word	 OR	 A	 mantra	 Is	 repeated	 constantly,	 you	 become
hypnotized	by	it.	That's	the	secret	of	all	hypnosis.	You	look	at	a	flame,	a	candle
flame,	constantly	--	what	are	you	doing?	You	are	repeating	the	flame	through	the
eyes,	again	and	again	and	again.	 It	 is	a	 repetition,	 it	 is	a	mantra	 --	 through	 the
eyes.	Or	you	can	repeat	a	mantra	inside	yourself;	that	is	through	the	ear,	through
the	 sound.	 Any	 sense	 can	 be	 used.	 Perfume,	 incense	 can	 be	 used;	 the	 same
incense	can	hypnotize	you.
Hypnosis	 means	 going	 into	 deep	 sleep,	 artificial	 sleep.	 That's	 exactly	 the
meaning	of	the	word	'hypnosis':	a	sleep	deliberately	created.	It	can	be	through	a
tranquilizer,	it	can	be	through	a	soothing	silence,	sound,	music,	perfume,	incense
--	there	can	be	a	thousand	and	one	ways,	but	you	will	become	hypnotized.	And,
hypnotized,	you	will	feel	a	kind	of	stillness	which	is	not	true.
And	 also,	 if	 you	 repeat	 a	 certain	mantra	 again	 and	 again,	 you	will	 feel	 bored.
Boredom	 also	 brings	 sleep.	 That's	 why	 doctors	 suggest	 to	 people	who	 cannot
sleep	that	 they	count	sheep	from	one	to	a	hundred,	and	then	backwards	from	a
hundred	 --	 ninety-nine,	 ninety-eight,	 back	 to	 one	 --	 and	 then	 go	 up	 the	 ladder
again...go	on	coming	up	and	down.	How	long	can	you	do	 it?	Somewhere	after
going	three	or	four	 times	up	and	down	the	 ladder	you	will	 fall	asleep.	It	 is	 the
most	ancient	formula	for	falling	asleep:	count	sheep	from	one	to	a	hundred	and
then	come	back	--	because	it	is	such	a	boring	job	that	you	lose	all	interest	in	it.
And	the	moment	you	lose	all	interest	in	it,	there	is	nowhere	to	escape	except	in
sleep.
Mothers	know	it	perfectly	well.	Hence	the	lullaby:	the	mother	goes	on	repeating
a	single	note	again	and	again	and	the	child	falls	asleep.	And	children	have	their
own	mantras:	they	can	suck	on	their	thumbs	--	that	is	a	mantra.	The	child	goes
on	sucking	on	the	thumb;	it	is	very	consoling,	soothing.	He	believes	that	it	is	the
breast	of	 the	mother,	and	he-falls	asleep.	Children	 invent	 their	own	methods	--
the	teddy	bear,	or	just	the	corner	of	the	blanket,	and	the	child	holds	it;	if	you	take
the	blanket	away	from	him	he	cannot	sleep.
Even	grownups	are	not	really	grownups;	they	have	their	own	ritual	of	going	into
sleep.
For	example,	if	every	day	you	clean	your	teeth	before	going	to	sleep,	try	it	one
day	without	cleaning	the	teeth	and	you	will	be	surprised:	you	cannot	fall	asleep.
Something	 is	 missing.	 You	 have	 created	 a	 mantra.	 You	 change	 the	 dress,	 a
different	dress	than	you	use	in	the	daytime...you	go	into	a	subtle	ritual.
A	 few	people	who	are	 religious,	 so-called	 religious,	 they	will	 do	 some	prayer.
That	too	is	a	ritual.	Grownups	are	not	really	grownups;	they	have	grown	in	age,
but	 not	 psychologically,	 not	 spiritually.	 The	world	 is	 full	 of	 children	 of	many
ages:	one	year,	two	years,	up	to	seventy,	eighty,	ninety	--	all	children.
I	am	not	talking	about	their	stillness.	When	I	say	"Be	still	and	know"	I	mean	a
stillness	that	comes	out	of	understanding,	not	out	of	any	kind	of	hypnosis.	And
out	 of	 understanding	 the	 first	 thing	 that	 happens	 is:	 "Seek	 the	 strength	 of	 no-
desire."	The	more	you	 look	 into	your	 life,	you	will	 find	your	 life	 is	 in	 a	mess
because	of	desiring.
Why	are	you	in	such	a	storm	continuously?	It	is	because	of	the	desire	--	not	only
one	desire	but	a	thousand	and	one	desires.	And	no	desire	can	ever	be	fulfilled,	no
desire	 has	 ever	 been	 fulfilled.	 Desire	 as	 such	 is	 incapable	 of	 being	 fulfilled,
intrinsically	 it	 is	 unfulfillable.	 Hence	 each	 desire	 creates	 turmoil,	 expectation,
hope,	 then	 frustration,	hopelessness.	And	you	have	a	 thousand	and	one	desires
surrounding	you,	and	you	go	on	supporting	your	own	enemies.
When	you	look	in,	when	you	watch,	you	become	aware	that	desire	is	the	cause
of	 your	whole	misery.	 Seeing	 it,	 desiring	 disappears	 --	 JUST	BY	SEEING	 IT,
desiring	disappears.	Seeing	that	desire	never	leads	anywhere,	but	that	you	go	on
moving	in	circles	and	desire	goes	on	goading	you	in	the	same	repetitive	patterns,
seeing	 this	 --	 not	 because	 I	 am	 saying	 it,	 but	 seeing	 it	 on	 your	 own	 --	 desire
disappears.	And	 the	disappearance	of	desire	 is	 the	 stillness,	 the	 real	 stillness,	 I
am	talking	about.
It	 brings	 two	 things	 to	 you:	 great	 strength,	 because	 all	 the	 energy	 that	 was
involved	 in	a	 thousand	and	one	desires	 is	 released.	Now	energy	no	more	 leaks
from	you;	you	don't	have	any	holes	for	it	to	leak	from.	You	become	a	reservoir
of	great	energy.	And	the	second	thing:	because	now	there	is	no	noise	of	desires
clashing,	conflicting	with	each	other,	there	is	no	civil	war	going	on...what	to	do?
to	be	or	not	to	be?	to	do	this	or	to	do	that?	When	there	is	no	conflict,	no	desire,
when	all	the	storm	is	gone,	the	silence	that	follows	the	storm,	that	is	the	stillness
I	am	talking	about.
Be	still	and	know.
And	I	am	not	saying	that	by	being	still	you	will	be	ready	to	know	--	no.	Just	by
being	 still	 you	will	 know.	Being	 still	 and	 knowing	 are	 the	 same	phenomenon,
because	when	you	are	still	 like	a	mirror,	a	still	 lake,	no	ripples,	then	the	whole
firmament,	the	whole	sky,	is	reflected	in	the	lake.	The	stars	come	down,	and	the
moon,	and	the	clouds	--	all	are	reflected	in	tremendous	beauty	in	the	lake.	When
your	 consciousness	 becomes	 a	 still	 mirror,	 a	 still	 lake,	 a	 silent	 reservoir	 of
energy,	God	is	reflected	in	it.
You	will	 not	 attain	 to	 knowledge,	 remember.	You	will	 become	wise,	 you	will
become	a	Buddha.	You	will	not	become	a	great	scholar,	a	great	pundit,	a	great
theologian	or	a	philosopher.	You	will	be	a	Buddha.	You	will	have	an	 innocent
kind	of	knowing:	you	will	know	how	to	live,	you	will	know	how	to	die,	you	will
know	how	to	 love	--	you	will	know	the	real	art	of	 life.	And	the	real	art	of	 life
consists	only	of	 three	 things:	how	 to	 live,	how	 to	 love,	how	 to	die.	And	 these
things	you	will	not	know	from	scriptures;	these	things	you	will	know	from	your
innermost	core.
I	 call	 this	 education.	 "Be	 still	 and	 know,	 seek	 the	 strength	 of	 no-desire."	 It	 is
desire	 that	 is	making	you	weak,	 it	 is	no-desire	 that	will	make	you	strong.	 It	 is
desire	 that	 is	 creating	 continuous	 storms	 in	 you,	 it	 is	 no-desire	 that	will	 bring
stillness	--	and	a	stillness	that	comes	on	its	own	is	authentic;	it	is	not	a	kind	of
hypnosis.	It	is	not	through	mantra,	it	is	not	through	any	device,	it	is	not	through
any	trick.	You	are	not	trying	to	pretend	to	be	still:	you	are	simply	still.	This	will
give	you	a	new	birth,	you	will	be	reborn.
Jesus	says:	"Unless	you	are	born	again,	you	shall	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of
God."	I	say	the	same	to	you	--	but	the	rebirth	is	a	state	of	no-desire,	a	state	of	no-
mind,	a	state	of	total	stillness.
The	third	question
Question	3
OSHO,	 I	 ALWAYS	 THINK	 OF	 COMMITTING	 SUICIDE,	 AND	WONDER
WHAT
YOU	WOULD	SAY	ABOUT	MY	DEATH?
Prashant,
I	AM	REMINDED	OF	A	BEAUTIFUL	ANECDOTE:
The	minister,	who	 got	 himself	 a	 little	mixed	 up	 now	 and	 again,	was	 standing
over	the	open	casket	of	the	dearly	departed,	Joe	Hall.
"Our	friend	Joe	Hall	is	not	dead,"	he	orated.	"Only	the	shell	is	here	to	be	buried;
the	nut	has	departed."
Why	 should	 you	 think	 of	 suicide?	 Are	 you	 a	 nut	 or	 something?	 If	 you	 have
become	a	sannyasin	you	have	already	committed	suicide.	Sannyas	is	a	suicide	--
the	 real	 one.	 It	 is	 not	 destroying	 the	 body,	 because	 destroying	 the	 body	 is	 not
going	 to	 help;	 you	will	 be	 immediately	 born	 again	 somewhere	 in	 some	 other
womb.	It	will	only	be	renewing	the	body;	it	is	not	real	suicide.
Sannyas	 is	 real	 suicide,	 because	 it	 destroys	 the	mind,	 it	 takes	 you	 beyond	 the
mind.	And	if	you	are	beyond	the	mind	you	will	not	be	born	again.	Why	be	born
again	and	again?
Why	go	on	in	this	vicious	circle?
I	know	you	are	bored	with	 life.	 If	you	are	 really	bored,	 then	meditation	 is	 the
way,	not	suicide	--	because	suicide	will	bring	you	to	the	SAME	life,	maybe	an
uglier	life	than	you	have	right	now,	because	suicide	will	create	its	own	ugliness
in	you.	To	commit	suicide	is	such	an	ungrateful	act	towards	God.	He	gives	you
life	as	an	opportunity	to	grow,	and	you	throw	away	the	opportunity.
And	 unless	 you	 grow,	 unless	 you	 grow	 and	 become	 a	 Buddha,	 you	 will	 be
thrown	back	into	life	again	and	again.	Millions	of	times	it	has	happened	before:
it	is	time	now	you	should	become	aware.	Don't	miss	this	opportunity.
Being	 here	with	me,	 learn	 the	 real	 art	 of	 suicide.	 The	 real	 art	 consists	 not	 in
destroying	the	body...the	body	is	beautiful,	the	body	has	not	done	any	wrong.	It
is	the	ugly	mind.
The	body	 is	beautiful,	 the	soul	 is	beautiful,	but	between	 the	body	and	 the	soul
there	is	something	which	is	neither	body	nor	soul.	This	in-between	phenomenon
is	the	mind.
It	is	mind	that	goes	on	dragging	you	back	into	the	womb.	When	you	die,	if	you
commit	suicide	you	will	be	thinking	of	life.	Committing	suicide	means	you	are
thinking	of	life.
You	are	bored,	 fed	up	with	 life;	you	would	 like	a	 totally	different	kind	of	 life,
that's	 why	 you	 are	 committing	 suicide	 --	 not	 that	 you	 are	 really	 against	 life.
THIS	 life	 you	 are	 against.	Maybe	 you	 don't	want	 to	 be	 the	way	 you	 are:	 you
would	like	to	be	an	Alexander,	a	Napoleon,	an	Adolph	Hitler;	maybe	you	want
to	be	the	richest	man	in	the	world,	and	you	are	not.	This	life	has	failed,	and	you
would	like	to	be	famous,	successful	--	destroy	it!
People	commit	suicide	not	because	they	are	really	finished	with	life	but	because
life	is	not	fulfilling	their	demands.	But	no	life	ever	fulfills	anybody's	demands.
You	will	always	go	on	missing	something	or	other:	if	you	have	money,	you	may
not	 be	 beautiful;	 if	 you	 are	 beautiful,	 you	 may	 not	 be	 intelligent;	 if	 you	 are
intelligent,	you	may	not	have	money.
Once	a	man	stopped	Andrew	Carnegie,	who	had	gone	for	a	morning	walk	in	the
garden.
Andrew	Carnegie	was	 the	 richest	man	 in	America;	 the	man	who	 stopped	 him
was	 looking	 like	 the	 very	 incarnation	 of	 a	 beggar.	And	 the	man	 said,	 "Please
don't	be	deceived	by	my	appearance.	I	am	an	author,	I	have	also	written	a	book."
Andrew	Carnegie	asked,	"What	kind	of	book	have	you	written?"	The	man	said,
"I	have	written	a	book	entitled	ONE	HUNDRED	WAYS	TO	BECOME	RICH."
Andrew	Carnegie	could	not	stop	himself	laughing.	He	said,	"ONE	HUNDRED
WAYS
TO	BECOME	RICH?	And	you	are	a	beggar!	What	kind	of	book	is	this?"
The	 beggar	 started	 laughing,	 and	 he	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 hundredth	 way	 of
becoming	rich	--
it	is	included	in	my	book."
The	beggar	also	thinks	of	becoming	rich,	writes	books	about	how	to	become	rich
--	even	thinks	that	by	begging	he	will	become	rich.	But	Andrew	Carnegie	is	not
happy	either;	he	was	one	of	 the	most	unhappy	men	ever	born	on	 the	earth.	He
lived	in	unhappiness,	he	died	in	unhappiness.	The	day	he	died	somebody	asked,
"You	must	 be	 dying	 fully	 contented	 --	 because	 you	 are	 leaving	 such	 a	 lot	 of
money	behind	you.	You	are	the	richest	man	in	the	world."
Andrew	Carnegie	opened	his	eyes	and	said,	very	sadly	said,	"I	am	not	fulfilled	in
my	desires.	My	target	was	far	higher	--	I	have	not	been	able	to	reach	it.	I	could
accumulate	only	ten	percent	of	my	target."
But	even	if	you	achieve	one	hundred	percent	of	your	 target,	how	is	 it	going	to
help?	One	is	going	to	remain	unfulfilled.	Each	life	you	will	find	the	same	thing
repeated;	forms	change,	but	the	discontent	remains.
People	think	that	those	who	commit	suicide	are	against	life	--	they	are	not.	They
are	too	lusty	for	life,	they	have	great	lust	for	life;	and	because	life	is	not	fulfilling
their	lust,	in	anger,	in	despair,	they	destroy	themselves.
Prashant,	I	will	teach	you	the	right	way	to	commit	suicide.	Not	the	destruction	of
the	body;	the	body	is	a	beautiful	gift	from	God.	The	mind	is	not	a	gift	from	God;
the	mind	is	a	conditioning	by	the	society.	The	soul	 is	a	gift,	 the	body	is	a	gift,
and	sandwiched	between	the	two,	the	society	has	played	tricks	with	you:	it	has
created	 your	 mind.	 It	 gives	 you	 ambition,	 it	 gives	 you	 jealousy,	 competition,
violence,	 it	 gives	 you	 all	 kinds	 of	 ugly	 diseases.	 But	 this	 mind	 can	 be
transcended,	this	mind	can	be	put	aside.	This	mind	is	not	a	must.
I	am	sitting	before	you	and	I	say	it	through	my	own	experience,	I	say	it	on	my
own	authority:	that	mind	can	be	put	aside.	It	is	so	simple,	you	just	have	to	know
the	knack	of	it.
And	remember,	whenever	I	say	that	I	say	it	on	my	own	authority	I	am	not	saying
that	 I	 am	 saying	 it	 AUTHORITATIVELY.	 Those	 two	 expressions	 are	 totally
different.	When	something	is	said	AUTHORITATIVELY	it	is	a	commandment;
you	have	to	believe	in	it.
If	you	don't	believe	in	it	you	will	suffer,	here	or	hereafter.	The	priest	speaks	with
authoritativeness,	the	politician	speaks	with	authoritativeness.
A	 realized	man	 speaks	 not	 with	 authoritativeness	 but	 on	 his	 own	 authority	 --
because	he	KNOWS	it.	 I	am	not	saying	follow	me,	 I	am	not	saying	believe	 in
me.	I	am	simply	stating	a	fact:	that	I	have	KNOWN	it	this	way,	it	has	happened
to	me...it	can	happen	to	you.
Life	is	very	precious	and	the	greatest	treasure	is	hidden	in	it	--	and	that	treasure
is	of	becoming	a	witness.
A	real	story	for	you,	Prashant:
One	day	in	1928	Bucky	Fuller	stood	on	the	shore	of	Lake	Michigan	and	planned
to	throw	himself	in.	He	was	ready	to	give	up	because	he	was	a	failure	financially,
by	the	standards	of	the	upper	middle	class	which	he	had	been	born	into.
As	a	construction	engineer	he	had	not	succeeded.	And	because	his	daughter	had
just	died	of	polio,	the	whole	universe	did	not	make	any	sense	to	him	and	he	was
ready	 to	 throw	himself	 in.	He	stopped	himself	and	said,	 "Wait,	 I	can't	be	sure.
Maybe	there	 is	something	I	can	do	in	 this	universe	 that	 is	 important."	He	said,
"Well,	what	can	I	do?	Let	us	see	what	a	man	of	average	intelligence	can	do	if	he
starts	 questioning	 everything	 that	 is	 taken	 for	 granted	 and	 starts	 looking	 for
alternatives."
I	don't	know	if	he	ever	was	a	man	of	only	average	intelligence	--	IN	FACT	NO
ONE
EVER	 IS	 --	 but	 by	questioning	 everything	he	 came	 to	 realize,	 as	he	 said,	 that
when	 you	 don't	 accept	 anything	 except	 that	 which	 can	 be	 experimentally
verified,	 you	 are	 overwhelmed	 by	 the	 inherent	 integrity	 and	 rationality	 of	 the
universe.	 The	 most	 incomprehensible	 thing	 about	 the	 universe	 is	 that	 it	 is
comprehensible,	as	Einstein	said.
And	that	gives	you	faith	in	the	sane,	sound	center	of	the	universe	we	mentioned
earlier.
As	Ezra	Pound	wrote	in	the	death-cells	at	Pisa,	looking	at	the	stars,	out	of	all	this
beauty	something	must	come."
Now	Bucky	Fuller	is	one	of	the	most	wise	men	in	the	West	--	not	yet	a	Buddha,
but	 on	 the	 way,	 very	 close.	 And	 the	 art	 that	 has	 brought	 him	 so	 close	 to
becoming	a	Buddha	is	 the	art	of	questioning	everything	that	 is	accepted	by	the
society:	it	is	the	art	of	becoming	an	inquirer.
Transform	your	 life,	 Prashant,	 into	 a	 quest.	Question	 the	 values	 that	 you	 have
accepted.
Question	all	that	you	have	been	brought	up	to	believe	in.	Question	the	way	you
have	 lived	 up	 to	 now.	 Question	 your	mechanicalness,	 question	 your	 robotlike
existence.
Yes,	something	drastic	has	to	be	done,	but	it	is	not	suicide.	It	won't	help,	it	won't
change	you;	 you	will	 be	 back	 again	 in	 another	womb	 somewhere.	Millions	of
stupid	couples	are	making	 love	every	moment.	Beware!	You	will	be	caught	 in
some	net	somewhere.	And	you	will	get	only	what	you	deserve,	remember;	you
can't	get	more	than	you	deserve.	You	get	the	womb	that	is	right	for	you.
And	 dying	 in	 suicide	 is	 dying	 in	 such	 anguish,	 because	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	most
unnatural	things	to	do,	most	abnormal	things	to	do.	No	animal	commits	suicide,
no	tree	ever	commits	suicide	--	only	man.	Only	man	can	go	that	insane.	Nature
knows	nothing	of	suicide;	it	is	man's	invention.	It	is	the	most	ugly	act.	And	when
you	do	something	ugly	to	yourself	you	cannot	hope	that	you	will	get	a	better	life.
You	will	die	in	an	ugly	state	of	mind	and	you	will	enter	an	uglier	womb.
But	what	is	the	need	to	commit	suicide?	Just	question:	you	must	have	lived	in	a
wrong	 way,	 that's	 why	 life	 has	 not	 become	 a	 song.	 You	 must	 have	 lived
foolishly,	stupidly,	unintelligently;	that's	why	life	has	not	attained	to	celebration.
You	cannot	dance	with	joy	with	the	stars	and	with	the	flowers	and	with	the	wind
and	with	the	rain,	because	you	have	lived	with	wrong	kinds	of	ideas	imposed	on
you	by	the	same	kind	of	people	as	you	are.
It	is	a	perpetual	phenomenon;	stupidity	goes	on	perpetuating	itself.	Parents	go	on
giving	 stupidity	 to	 their	 children	 and	 the	 children	 in	 their	 turn	will	 hand	 over
their	 stupidity	 to	THEIR	children.	This	 is	 the	heritage.	This	 is	called	 tradition,
heritage,	culture...	great	names!
Question	 all	 that	 you	 have	 lived	without	 questioning	 up	 to	 now,	 and	 your	 life
will	 have	 a	 new	 intelligence	 arising	 in	 it.	 Your	 life	 will	 become	 more	 sharp
Sheela	has	asked	a	question:	"Osho,	you	say	 'Drop	the	mind.'	The	more	I	drop
the	mind,	the	sharper	and	sharper	my	brain	is	becoming."	She	is	puzzled	There	is
no	need	to	be	puzzled:	the	brain	is	a	totally	different	thing	from	the	mind.	The
mind	is	given	by	the	society,	the	brain	is	part	of	your	body.	The	brain	is	neither
Hindu	 nor	 Mohammedan	 nor	 Christian;	 the	 mind	 is	 a	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,
Christian.	The	brain	 is	simply	a	beautiful	biocomputer.	The	more	you	drop	 the
mind,	 the	sharper	your	brain	will	be,	 the	more	intelligent.	It	 is	 the	mind	that	 is
creating	your	mediocrity.
Sheela,	 you	 need	 not	 be	 puzzled	 by	 it:	 this	 is	 how	 it	 is	 going	 to	 happen.	The
more	and	more	people	drop	their	minds,	the	more	and	more	they	will	be	able	to
function	 intelligently,	because	 the	brain	will	be	unburdened.	The	brain	will	not
be	expected	to	carry	unnecessary	luggage.
Right	now	your	brain	 is	carrying	so	much	rubbish!	That	 it	 functions	at	all	 is	a
miracle.
Just	 look	 how	much	 rubbish	 you	 are	 carrying:	 of	 being	 a	Hindu,	 of	 being	 an
Indian,	of	being	a	Japanese,	of	being	a	Buddhist,	of	being	this,	of	being	that,	a
fascist,	 a	 communist...religious	 ideologies,	 philosophical	 ideologies,	 political
ideologies.	They	are	heaped	upon	you,	layer	upon	layer.	Your	brain	has	lost	all
its	 functioning.	 Once	 the	 mind	 is	 dropped,	 the	 brain	 will	 come	 to	 its	 total
functioning.
And	every	being	is	born	intelligent.	It	 is	society	that	creates	unintelligence.	No
child	is	born	unintelligent.	Have	you	ever	seen	a	bird	which	is	unintelligent	or	a
bird	which	 is	wise,	 intelligent?	All	 birds	 are	 alike.	Have	 you	 seen	 a	 rosebush
which	is	foolish	or	a	rosebush	which	is	a	genius?	All	rosebushes	are	alike.	So	are
all	human	beings:	they	come	with	the	same	potential	but	fall	into	different	gangs.
These	 are	 all	 gangs:	 Indians,	Chinese,	British,	American.	These	 are	 all	 gangs,
and	 politicians	 are	 the	 criminals.	 Then	 there	 are	 religious	 gangs....	 And	 their
whole	effort	is	not	to	allow	your	intelligence	to	function,	because	an	intelligent
person	is	bound	to	become	rebellious.
Prashant,	question	your	values.	If	you	have	been	a	Catholic,	question	it;	 if	you
have	 been	 a	 Protestant,	 question	 it;	 if	 you	 have	 been	 a	 Hindu,	 question	 it.
Question	 all	 that	 you	 have	 lived	 up	 to	 now;	 something	 is	 basically	 wrong
somewhere.
Ezra	Pound	is	right.	And	do	you	know	from	where	he	is	writing	this?	From	his
death-cell!	"Out	of	all	this	beauty	something	must	come."	Ezra	Pound	in	a	dark
cell,	 just	waiting	 for	 death	 to	 come,	 can	write	 such	 a	 tremendously	 important
sutra:	"Out	of	all	this	beauty	something	must	come."
The	birds	singing,	and	the	trees,	and	the	flowers...this	infinite	universe	--	is	it	the
place	to	commit	suicide?	It	is	the	place	to	dance,	to	sing,	to	celebrate,	to	love	and
to	be	loved.
And	if	you	can	love	this	existence,	if	you	can	feel	blessed	with	this	existence,	I
promise	you	that	when	you	die	you	will	not	be	coming	back	again...because	you
will	have	learnt	the	lesson.	God	never	sends	anybody	back	to	the	school	if	once
they	have	learnt	their	lesson.
If	you	can	learn	to	rejoice,	you	will	be	accepted.	Doors	of	higher	mysteries	will
be	opened	 to	you.	You	will	 be	welcomed	 into	 the	 innermost	mysteries	 of	 life.
That's	what	I	call	the	true	art	of	committing	suicide:	my	name	for	it	is	sannyas.
The	fourth	question
Question	4
OSHO,	 SUDDENLY	 THERE	 YOU	 WERE	 YESTERDAY	 JUST	 BENDING
OVER
YOUR	FATHER,	AND	 I	 FELT	SUCH	LOVE	AND	 JOY	AND	CLOSENESS
SEEING
YOU	IN	THIS	NATURAL	SITUATION	THAT	IT	 IS	HAUNTING	ME.	 IT	 IS
AS	 IF	 A	 DOOR	 OPENED	 AND	 I	 SAW	 SOMETHING	 THROUGH	 IT,
SOMETHING
FAMILIAR	AND	TREMENDOUS,	AND	NOW	IT	IS	GONE.	WHAT	WAS	IT?
Somendra,
IT	 IS	NOT	GONE,	 and	 it	will	 never	 go.	Things	 like	 this	 come,	 and	 come	 for
ever.	They	are	not	momentary	glimpses.	Your	heart	opened	suddenly;	it	needed
such	a	situation	for	the	opening.	I	immediately	felt	something	happening	in	your
heart	 --	 a	 great	 cry	 arose	 in	 your	 heart,	 you	 exploded	 into	 a	 totally	 different
plane.
It	 is	 not	 gone,	 it	 can't	 go.	 It	 is	 there.	 It	will	 come	 now	 in	 different	 situations,
appear	in	different	situations.	You	are	just	keeping	your	back	towards	the	door;
the	door	is	open.
But	more	and	more	often	you	will	encounter	the	door.	Once	it	happens	you	know
it	is	there,	you	cannot	avoid	it.	The	mind	will	say	it	is	gone;	the	mind	would	like
to	persuade	you	that	it	is	gone.	And	the	mind	will	ask	questions	about	it	so	that
the	whole	thing	can	become	intellectual.
It	 is	 the	mind	which	 is	asking	"What	was	 it?"	The	heart	knows;	 the	mind	asks
and	 knows	 nothing.	 The	 heart	 has	 known	 what	 it	 was,	 but	 the	 heart	 and	 its
knowing	 is	 so	 deep	 that	 it	 cannot	 be	 conveyed	 to	 the	mind.	And	mind	 feels	 a
little	puzzled.
And	 it	 has	 not	 happened	only	 to	 you,	 it	 has	 happened	 to	many	people.	 It	was
such	a	situation.	Many	people	had	suddenly	cried	--	not	out	of	sadness,	no.	There
was	 celebration	 in	 their	 tears;	 they	 could	 not	 contain	 it.	 It	 was	 a	 spiritual
experience	for	many	of	the	sannyasins.
And	it	will	remain	with	you	--	don't	ask	what	it	was.	There	are	things	one	should
not	ask	questions	about,	because	questions	drag	 them	to	 the	 level	of	 the	mind.
There	are	things	which	should	be	left	as	they	are:	mysterious,	miraculous.	With
wonder,	with	 awe,	 accept	 The	moment	 the	 question	mark	 is	 put,	 the	 plane	 of
experience	 changes.	 The	 question	 mark	 brings	 them	 to	 the	 mind.	 The	 heart
knows	no	questioning,	 it	knows	only	how	 to	 trust.	 In	 that	moment,	Somendra,
you	loved,	you	trusted.	In	that	moment,	you	were	so	blissful	you	could	have	died
laughing.
But	to	die	laughing	is	one	thing;	it	is	easier.	To	live	laughing	is	far	more	difficult.
Now	that	is	the	task,	now	that	should	be	your	SADHANA.	Live	with	that	vision.
Yes,	many	times	you	will	forget	about	it	--	but	it	is	there.	Just	a	little	groping	and
you	will	find	the	door	again.
Don't	 let	 it	 become	 just	 a	memory	 in	 the	mind.	Let	 it	 remain	 a	 reality.	 It	 IS	 a
reality,	 but	 mind	 will	 try	 to	 make	 it	 a	 memory.	 Once	 something	 is	 made	 a
memory,	the	mind	can	put	it	in	the	safe	deposit,	in	the	biocomputer,	and	you	can
forget	all	about	it.	Once	in	a	while	you	can	remember,	and	later	on	you	will	start
feeling,	 "Maybe	 it	 happened	 --	 or	 did	 I	 just	 imagine	 it?	 Maybe	 it	 was	 just
because	of	 the	whole	situation	and	 the	 impact	of	 it	 that	 I	 felt	something	which
was	not	really	happening	in	my	heart."	These	things	mind	goes	on	doing.
Somendra,	be	careful	about	the	mind.	Mind	will	drag	you	many	times	from	the
very	 door	 of	God.	Mind	 is	 your	 basic	 enemy.	Listen	 to	 the	 heart,	 because	 the
heart	is	the	friend.
The	fifth	question
Question	5
OSHO,	 THIS	 IS	 NOT	 A	 QUESTION,	 RATHER	 A	 STATEMENT	 WHICH
SHOULD
NOT	 OFFEND	 YOU	 AT	 ALL.	 KRISHNAMURTI	 SAID	 LATELY	 IN
SAANEN,	 SWITZERLAND:	A	ROSE	 IS	NOT	LIKELY	TO	BLOOM	NEXT
TO	A	GUIDEPOST.
I	LOVE	ROSES,	BUT	ALSO	OTHER	FLOWERS.
Hilke	Schmitz,
FIRST,	 THERE	 IS	 NOTHING	 that	 can	 ever	 offend	 me.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 to
offend	me;	it	is	impossible	because	only	the	ego	can	be	offended.	If	the	wound
of	the	ego	is	there	then	small	things	offend.	But	there	is	no	wound	any	more;	I
am	absolutely	healed	and	whole.
The	 ego	 is	 very	 touchy	 because	 it	 is	 a	wound.	Once	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 there	 you
cannot	offend	that	person	--	impossible.
So	the	first	thing	for	you	to	remember:	you	can	make	any	kind	of	statement	you
like,	but	you	cannot	offend	me.	Try,	and	try	again!
Secondly,	you	say:
KRISHNAMURTI	SAID:	A	ROSE	IS	NOT	LIKELY	TO	BLOOM	NEXT	TO	A
GUIDEPOST.
Roses	bloom	everywhere,	and	unless	you	know	that	they	can	even	bloom	ON	the
guidepost,	let	alone	by	the	side,	roses	can	bloom	even	on	the	guidepost	--	unless
you	know	it,	you	know	nothing.
A	Zen	story:
A	 disciple	 came	 to	 the	Master.	 He	 had	 gone	 to	 see	 a	 polo	 game.	 The	Master
asked	him,
"Tell	me	a	few	things.	Were	the	riders	on	the	horses	tired?"
The	disciple	said,	"Yes,	at	the	end	of	the	game	they	looked	tired."
Secondly	the	Master	said,	"Were	the	horses	tired	?"
The	disciple	said,	"Yes,	a	little	bit,	not	as	much	as	the	riders,	but	even	the	horses
were	tired."
Then	 the	 Master	 said,	 "The	 last	 and	 the	 final	 question:	 were	 the	 posts,	 the
wooden	posts	which	are	needed	in	the	game,	were	they	tired	too?"
Now	this	was	too	much!	The	disciple	hesitated	a	little.
The	Master	said,	"Go	into	your	room	and	meditate	over	 it.	Tomorrow	morning
you	can	answer."
The	whole	night	he	could	not	sleep;	he	tossed	and	turned.	"The	wooden	posts	--
how	can	they	be	tired?	What	a	stupid	question	to	ask!	But	when	the	Master	asks,
it	can't	be	stupid;	there	must	be	something	in	it."	The	whole	night	he	tried	hard.
Early	 in	 the	morning	as	 the	 sun	was	 rising	he	 rushed	 to	 the	Master,	 fell	 at	his
feet,	and	he	said,	"Yes,	Master,	they	were	tired."
The	 Master	 said,	 "I	 am	 happy.	 Your	 going	 to	 the	 polo	 game	 has	 not	 been
useless."	Others	who	were	 present,	 they	 could	 not	 understand	what	was	 going
on.	Wooden	posts	tired?!
Somebody	asked	the	Master,	"What	nonsense	is	this?	How	can	wooden	posts	be
tired?"
And	the	Master	said,	"If	wooden	posts	cannot	be	tired	then	nobody	can	be	tired,
because	this	whole	existence	is	one."
If	man	gets	tired,	if	horses	get	tired,	then	wooden	posts	also	get	tired.	The	whole
existence	is	a	manifestation	of	one	energy.
I	know	why	Krishnamurti	has	made	 that	 statement.	But	my	own	suggestion	 is
unless	you	come	to	know	that	roses	can	bloom	not	only	next	to	a	guidepost,	they
can	even	bloom	ON	the	guidepost,	you	have	not	known	anything.
And	thirdly	you	say:
I	LOVE	ROSES,	BUT	ALSO	OTHER	FLOWERS.
Why	only	roses	and	why	only	flowers?	Love	should	be	unaddressed.	Love	need
not	 be	 oriented	 towards	 the	 other.	 Love	 oriented	 towards	 the	 other	 is	 not	 true
love,	love	as	relationship	is	not	true	love.	Love	as	a	state	of	being	is	true	love.
One	can	love	a	woman,	one	can	love	a	man,	one	can	love	one's	children,	one	can
love	one's	parents,	one	can	love	roses,	one	can	love	other	flowers,	one	can	love	a
thousand	and	one	things	--	but	these	are	all	relationships.
Learn	how	to	be	love!	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	to	whom	your	love	is	addressed,
it	 is	 simply	 a	 question	 of	 your	 being	 loving.	 Sitting	 alone,	 still	 love	 goes	 on
flowing.
Absolutely	alone,	still,	what	can	you	do?	Just	as	you	breathe...you	don't	breathe
for	your	wife;	 it	 is	not	a	relationship.	You	don't	breathe	for	your	children;	 it	 is
not	a	relationship.
You	simply	breathe!	--	it	is	life.	Just	as	breathing	is	life	for	the	body,	love	is	the
life	of	the	soul	--	one	is	simply	love!	And	then	only	does	one	know	that	love	is
God.
Jesus	says:	"God	is	love."	I	say	to	you:	"Love	is	God."	The	words	are	the	same,
but	 the	 significance	 is	 very	 different.	 Jesus	 says:	 "God	 is	 love."	 Then	 love
becomes	only	one	of	the	qualities	of	God.	He	is	wise	also,	powerful	also,	a	judge
also,	and	many	things	more.
Amidst	all	those	qualities	he	is	love	too.	Jesus'	statement	was	very	revolutionary
in	those	days,	but	not	any	more.
I	 say:	 "Love	 is	 God."	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 God	 having	 many	 other
qualities.	 In	 fact	 God	 disappears	 --	 love	 itself	 becomes	God.	 Love	 is	 the	 real
thing.	God	is	the	name	given	by	the	theologians	to	something	they	know	nothing
about.	There	is	no	God;	the	whole	existence	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	love.
But	 if	 you	 love	 the	 word	 'God'	 it's	 perfectly	 okay,	 you	 can	 call	 it	 God.	 But
remember	always	it	is	LOVE,	and	you	will	know	this	love	only	when	love	has
become	a	state	of	your	being,	a	simple	state	of	your	being.
The	sixth	question
Question	6
OSHO,	WHY	DO	I	HATE	HOMOSEXUALS?
Sargam,
DEEP	DOWN	YOU	MUST	BE	A	HOMOSEXUAL,	otherwise	why	should	you
hate	 them?	 Hate	 is	 love	 upside-down,	 hate	 is	 love	 doing	 SIRSHASAN	 --
headstand.	 Hate	 knows	 yoga	 postures.	 And	 do	 you	 think	 you	 are	 a	 different
person	 just	by	standing	on	your	head?	Many	fools	 think	 that	way:	standing	on
their	heads	they	think	they	are	yogis;	otherwise	they	were	just	ordinary	people.
Now,	standing	on	their	heads	they	are	special	people;	distorting	their	bodies	they
think	they	are	coming	closer	to	God.	They	may	be	useful	in	a	circus,	but	it	has
nothing	to	do	with	spirituality	--	otherwise	 the	people	 in	circuses	would	be	the
most	enlightened	people	in	the	world.	You	have	seen	girls	in	circuses	doing	such
postures	--	almost	unbelievable,	as	if	 they	are	not	made	of	blood	and	bone	and
flesh	but	of	rubber.	Do	you	think	they	become	enlightened?
Hate	 is	 a	 trick:	 you	 hate	 because	 you	want	 to	 repress.	 And	 hate	 is	 not	 good,
because	it	does	not	harm	the	other,	it	simply	harms	you.
There	are	millions	of	people	who	hate	homosexuals.	That	simply	means	millions
of	people	have	the	capacity	of	becoming	homosexuals	if	the	opportunity	is	given
to	them.
They	 have	 a	 deep	 longing	 for	 the	 forbidden	 fruit.	 Just	 to	 keep	 themselves	 in
control,	they	create	a	great	wall	of	hatred.
Sargam,	 that	may	be	 the	case;	or	 it	may	be	a	 simple,	ordinary	phenomenon	of
life	that	we	don't	like	people	who	are	not	like	us.	People	who	are	unlike	us	we
hate.	Why?	--	because	they	create	suspicion	in	us.	Hindus	hate	Mohammedans	--
not	that	there	is	anything	specific	to	hate	in	Mohammedans.	Mohammedans	hate
Hindus	--	not	that	there	is	anything	special	in	Hindus	which	has	to	be	hated.	But
whosoever	is	not	like	us	has	to	be	hated	because	he	is	a	stranger,	an	outsider,	and
the	outsider	creates	fear.	And	who	knows?
--	 maybe	 he	 is	 right.	 To	 protect	 yourself	 from	 this	 doubt	 you	 create	 a	 safety
measure;	that	hate	functions	as	safety,	a	shelter.
It	is	not	a	question	of	homosexuality.	If	you	don't	dress	like	other	people,	as	they
dress,	they	hate	you,	they	don't	like	you.
Now	my	sannyasins	are	in	great	trouble	all	over	the	world.	Just	a	few	days	ago
many	 letters	 have	 come	 that	 in	 Australia,	 the	 school,	 college,	 university
authorities	 are	 very	 much	 disturbed	 by	 my	 orange-people,	 because	 many
teachers,	 many	 professors,	 have	 become	 sannyasins.	 And	 a	 problem	 is	 being
created	by	the	parents	and	their	leagues.	The	problem	is	being	created	that	these
orange	people	and	 their	presence	may	corrupt	 their	children,	so	 the	parents	are
against	them.	The	Catholic	priest	comes	in	his	robe;	he	is	accepted,	he	does	not
corrupt.	But	my	sannyasins,	just	because	they	are	coming	in	orange	robes,	can	be
a	dangerous	influence.
Anybody	who	is	not	behaving	like	you,	not	living	like	you,	is	hated.	This	is	your
experience	in	Poona	too.	The	people	are	not	really	in	any	way	HARMED	by	you
--	my	 sannyasins	 are	 the	most	 harmless	 people	 you	 can	 find	 anywhere	 --	 but
people	are	against	you	just	because	you	look	different.
The	 homosexual	 has	 a	 very	 different	 lifestyle,	 and	 you	 are	 heterosexual.	 He
belongs	to	another	religion,	he	has	another	politics,	he	is	not	a	man	like	you.	The
moment	somebody	says	that	he	is	gay,	a	gap	arises,	a	great	gap.	Now	how	can
you	communicate?
But	 all	 these	 fears	 have	 to	 be	 dropped;	 these	 are	 all	 defense	 measures.	 They
simply	 show	 that	 you	 are	 not	 yet	 settled	 in	 your	 being	 --	 afraid	 any	 outside
influence	may	take	you	away,	off	your	ground.
A	 little	 Hollywood	 fruit	 was	 following	 a	 husky,	 good-looking	 man	 down	 the
street	murmuring,	"My,	what	a	pretty	man!"	Unable	to	resist	temptation,	he	went
up	and	felt	his	ass.
The	man	swung	round.	"What	the	hell	is	coming	off	here?	Beat	it,	will	you?"
Sadly	the	queer	retired,	but	kept	following,	and	unable	to	control	himself,	felt	his
ass	again.
"I	thought	I	told	you	to	beat	it,"	the	man	snarled.
A	third	time,	however,	the	queer	could	not	resist,	and	lovingly	felt	the	attractive
can.	The	man	swung	round	and	knocked	him	to	the	ground.
The	injured	fruit	looked	up	at	the	big	brute	and	said	sarcastically,	"Tourist!"
It	 is	 not	 only	 that	 YOU	 hate	 the	 homosexual,	 the	 homosexual	 also	 hates	 the
heterosexual;	he	also	thinks	that	he	does	not	belong	to	him.
We	have	created	unnecessary	labels.	We	have	put	labels	on	every	man,	and	not
one	label
--	a	thousand	and	one	labels	on	every	man.	Remove	all	the	labels!	Man	is	simply
man	--
homosexual,	heterosexual,	autosexual,	doesn't	matter	--	man	is	simply	man.
Respect	man,	 love	man.	Respect	his	 individuality,	 respect	his	differences.	And
that	is	possible	only	if	you	respect	your	individuality.	That	is	possible	only	if	you
are	grounded	in	your	own	being	and	you	are	unafraid.
I	would	like	a	world	utterly	fearless,	where	all	labels	can	be	removed.
Once	it	happened:
I	entered	an	air-conditioned	train	compartment	 in	Bombay.	The	only	passenger
in	my	cabin	 immediately	fell	on	 the	floor	and	 touched	my	feet	 --	 -a	 traditional
Hindu	SASHTANG	when	your	whole	body	touches	the	floor.	I	told	him,	"Wait,
wait!	I	am	not	a	Hindu!
But	 he	 had	 already	 touched	my	 feet.	He	was	 shaken;	 he	 said,	 "Then	who	 are
you?"
I	told	him,	"Can't	you	see	my	beard?	I	am	a	Mohammedan!	"
He	 said,	 "My	 God!	 And	 I	 have	 touched	 your	 feet!	 Why	 didn't	 you	 say	 so
before?"
I	said,	"But	you	didn't	give	me	any	time.	The	moment	I	entered	you	jumped	in
such	a	hurry.	Excuse	me,	but	 I	am	a	Mohammedan.	You	can	go	 to	 the	Ganges
and	take	a	dip	and	you	will	be	purified."
But	now	the	thing	was	that	we	had	to	live	in	the	same	compartment	for	twenty-
four	hours.	And	he	was	very	much	worried	about	what	he	had	done	--	such	a	sin,
never	heard	of	before.	And	he	 said,	 "Do	you	know?	 I	 am	 the	highest	brahmin
caste,	and	I	thought	that	you	were	a	mahatma."
I	said,	"Just	a	little	difference	between	a	mahatma	and	a	Mohammed.	My	name
is	Mohammed."
But	he	would	look	at	me	again	and	again	--	pretending	to	read	his	newspaper	but
he	 would	 look	 again	 and	 again.	 He	 was	 making	 sure	 --	 I	 didn't	 look	 like	 a
Mohammedan.
Finally	he	said,	"You	are	joking!	You	don't	look	like	a	Mohammedan."
I	said,	"So	you	have	got	it!"
He	jumped	again,	 touched	my	feet,	and	said,	"I	was	watching	you	--	you	don't
look	like	a	Mohammedan.	The	very	vibe	is	that	of	the	purest	saint."
I	said,	"If	 it	satisfies	you,	perfectly	good,	but	if	you	ask	MY	opinion,	now	you
will	have	to	 take	 two	dips!	In	fact,	 I	AM	a	Mohammedan!	I	was	 just	 trying	to
help	you,	to	console	you;	I	was	not	hoping	that	you	would	touch	my	feet	again."
The	man	was	angry.	He	called	the	conductor	immediately	and	he	said,	"Change
my	compartment!	I	cannot	sleep	in	this	compartment	--	twenty-four	hours	with
this	 man	 will	 be	 a	 torture,	 a	 hell.	 I	 don't	 know	 what	 kind	 of	 man	 he	 is.
Sometimes	he	says	he	is	Hindu,	sometimes	he	says	he	is	Mohammedan."
I	told	him,	"The	fact	is,	I	am	simply	crazy"
He	said,	"That's	right!	So	you	are	not	Mohammedan?	It	is	better	to	be	crazy	than
to	be	a	Mohammedan.	Just	crazy	but	Hindu?"
I	said,	"Of	course!	I	am	a	Hindu	of	the	highest	brahmin	caste,	but	a	little	crazy.
Once	in	a	while	this	idea	comes	to	me	that	I	am	Mohammed	--	but	I	am	not!	"
A	third	time	he	touched	my	feet!
People	 live	 by	 labels....	Drop	 all	 labels	 from	your	 being	 and	 drop	 labels	 from
others'
beings.	Look	at	people	as	they	are,	don't	bring	labels.	Then	we	will	have	a	better
humanity,	a	more	human	humanity.
The	last	question
Question	7
OSHO,	 EACH	 DAY	 YOU	 GET	 MORE	 AND	 MORE	 CRAZY.	 IN	 THE
DAYTIME
WHEN	 I	 THINK	 OF	 YOU,	 I	 START	 LAUGHING	 AND	 THINK	WHAT	 A
CRAZY,	BEAUTIFUL	MASTER	I	HAVE.	OSHO,	I	JUST	LOVE	YOU.
Prem	Akal,
JUST	A	CRAZY	JOKE	FOR	YOU:
Karpinsky	went	to	Rabbi	Roth	for	advice.	"Rabbi,"	he	said,	"I	am	ruined.	I	am	a
salesman,	a	respectable	married	man,	but	my	life	is	ruined."
"What	happened?"	asked	the	Rabbi.
"I	was	in	Mobile,	Alabama,	coming	home	from	dinner	in	a	restaurant,	and	this
big	black	man	dragged	me	by	the	neck	and	said	to	me,	'You	are	gonna	suck	me
off,	 you	 mocky	 son-of-a-bitch,	 or	 I	 am	 gonna	 bust	 your	 head!'	 Rabbi,	 I	 am
ruined!"
"No,	no,"	said	the	Rabbi.	"The	Talmud	rules	that	a	man	can	do	anything	but	spit
on	the	Bible	to	save	his	life."
"No,	Rabbi,	I	am	ruined,"	moaned	Karpinsky.	"I	liked	it!"
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Always	on	the	Rocks
Chapter	title:	You	Are	Ancient	Pilgrims
Chapter	title:	Only	Now
Chapter	title:	Just	For	Your	Sake
Chapter	title:	He	Died	in	Samadhi
