

CONTENTS
Title	Page
Introduction:	What	Is	Love?
PART	I.	The	Journey	from	“Me”	to	“We”
Understanding	the	Nature	and	Nurture	of	Love
Beyond	Dependency	and	Domination—Breaking	Out	of	the	Shell	of	the	Ego
The	Natural	Stages	of	Life	and	Loving
The	Candle	of	Awareness
PART	II.	Love	Is	a	Breeze
Making	the	Most	of	Romance
Nonsense	Ideas	in	Your	Head
“Love	Hurts”	and	Other	Misunderstandings
Attraction	and	Opposition
Dropping	Out	of	the	Lonely	Hearts	Club
Soul	Mates	or	Cell	Mates?
Love	and	the	Art	of	Non-doing
PART	III.	From	Relationship	to	Relating—Love	as	a	State	of
Being
“Love”	Is	a	Verb
Couples	Counseling—Insights	for	Living	and	Growing	in	Love
Only	Love	Remains
About	the	Author
OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort
For	More	Information
Also	by	Osho
Copyright
INTRODUCTION:	WHAT	IS	LOVE?
It	is	unfortunate	that	we	have	to	ask	this	question.	In	the	natural	course	of	things
everybody	would	 know	what	 love	 is.	But	 in	 fact	 nobody	 knows,	 or	 only	 very
rarely	 does	 somebody	 know,	what	 love	 is.	 Love	 has	 become	 one	 of	 the	 rarest
experiences.	Yes,	it	is	talked	about.	Films	and	stories	are	written	about	it,	songs
are	composed	about	 it,	on	 the	 television	shows	you	will	see	 it,	on	 the	radio,	 in
magazines—a	 great	 industry	 exists	 to	 supply	 you	 with	 ideas	 of	 what	 love	 is.
Many	 people	 are	 involved	 in	 the	 industry	 of	 helping	 people	 understand	 what
love	is.	But	still	love	remains	an	unknown	phenomenon.	And	it	should	be	one	of
the	most	known.
It	 is	 almost	 like	 somebody	 asking,	 “What	 is	 food?”	 Would	 you	 not	 be
surprised	if	somebody	came	and	asked	you	that	question?	Only	if	somebody	has
been	 starved	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 and	 has	 never	 tasted	 food	 would	 the
question	be	relevant.	It	is	the	same	with	the	question	“What	is	love?”
Love	 is	 the	 food	 of	 the	 soul,	 but	 you	 have	 been	 starved.	Your	 soul	 has	 not
received	love	at	all,	so	you	don’t	know	the	taste.	So	the	question	is	relevant,	but
it	is	unfortunate.	The	body	has	received	food	so	the	body	continues;	but	the	soul
has	not	received	food	so	the	soul	is	dead,	or	is	not	born	yet,	or	is	always	on	its
deathbed.
When	we	are	born	we	are	born	fully	equipped	with	the	capacity	to	love	and	to
be	loved.	Each	child	is	born	full	of	love	and	knows	perfectly	what	it	is.	There	is
no	need	to	tell	a	child	what	love	is.	But	the	problem	arises	because	the	mother
and	 the	 father	 don’t	 know	what	 love	 is.	No	 child	 receives	 the	 parents	 that	 he
deserves—no	 child	 ever	 receives	 the	 parents	 that	 he	 deserves;	 those	 parents
simply	don’t	exist	on	the	earth.	And	by	the	time	this	child	becomes	a	parent,	he
too	will	have	lost	the	capacity	to	love.
I	have	heard	about	a	small	valley	where	children	were	born	and	within	three
months	they	all	became	blind.	It	was	a	small,	primitive	society,	and	a	fly	existed
there	 which	 caused	 an	 infection	 and	 blindness	 in	 the	 eyes,	 so	 the	 whole
community	 had	 gone	 blind.	 Every	 child	 was	 born	 with	 eyes	 that	 functioned
perfectly	well,	but	within	three	months	at	the	most	they	had	gone	blind	because
of	 these	 flies.	 Now,	 somewhere	 later	 in	 life	 those	 children	 must	 have	 asked,
“What	 are	 eyes?	What	 do	 you	 mean	 when	 you	 use	 the	 word	 ‘eye’?	What	 is
vision?	What	is	seeing?	What	do	you	mean?”	And	the	question	would	have	been
relevant.	 Those	 children	 had	 been	 born	 with	 sight,	 but	 they	 had	 lost	 it
somewhere	on	the	way	of	their	growth.
That’s	what	has	happened	to	 love.	Every	child	 is	born	with	as	much	love	as
one	can	contain,	with	more	love	than	one	can	contain,	with	overflowing	love.	A
child	 is	 born	 as	 love;	 a	 child	 is	made	 of	 the	 stuff	 called	 love.	But	 the	 parents
cannot	 give	 love.	 They	 have	 their	 own	 hangovers—their	 parents	 never	 loved
them.	The	parents	can	only	pretend.	They	can	talk	about	love.	They	can	say,	“We
love	 you	 very	 much,”	 but	 what	 they	 actually	 do	 is	 unloving.	 The	 way	 they
behave,	 the	way	 they	 treat	 the	child	 is	 insulting;	 there	 is	no	respect.	No	parent
respects	the	child.	Who	ever	thinks	of	respecting	a	child?	A	child	is	not	thought
to	be	a	person	at	all.	A	child	is	thought	of	as	a	problem.	If	he	keeps	quiet,	he	is
good;	if	he	does	not	scream	or	cause	any	mischief,	good;	if	he	simply	keeps	out
of	the	parents’	way,	perfectly	good.	That’s	what	a	child	should	be.	But	there	is	no
respect	and	there	is	no	love.
The	parents	have	not	known	what	love	is.	The	wife	has	not	loved	the	husband,
the	husband	has	not	loved	the	wife.	Love	does	not	exist	between	them—instead
there	 is	 domination,	 possessiveness,	 jealousy,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 poisons	 that
destroy	 love.	Just	as	a	certain	poison	can	destroy	your	vision,	so	 the	poison	of
possessiveness	and	jealousy	destroys	love.
Love	is	a	fragile	flower.	It	has	to	be	protected,	it	has	to	be	strengthened,	it	has
to	 be	 watered;	 only	 then	 does	 it	 become	 strong.	 And	 the	 child’s	 love	 is	 very
fragile—naturally,	because	the	child	is	fragile,	his	body	is	fragile.	Do	you	think	a
child	left	on	his	own	will	be	able	to	survive?	Just	think	how	helpless	the	human
child	is—if	a	child	is	left	on	his	own,	it	is	next	to	impossible	that	he	will	survive.
He	will	die,	and	that	is	what	is	happening	to	love.	Love	is	left	alone,	untended.
The	parents	can’t	love,	they	don’t	know	what	love	is,	they	have	never	flowed
in	love.	Just	think	of	your	own	parents—and	remember,	I	am	not	saying	that	they
are	responsible.	They	are	victims	just	as	you	are	victims;	their	own	parents	were
the	same.	And	so	on…you	can	go	back	to	Adam	and	Eve	and	God	the	father!	It
seems	that	even	God	the	father	was	not	very	respectful	to	Adam	and	Eve.	That’s
why	from	the	very	beginning	he	started	commanding	them,	“Do	this”	and	“Don’t
do	 that.”	He	 started	doing	 the	 same	 rubbish	 that	 all	parents	do.	 “Don’t	 eat	 the
fruit	of	 this	 tree.”	And	when	Adam	had	eaten	 the	 fruit,	 the	 father	God	was	 so
angry	in	reaction	that	he	threw	Adam	and	Eve	out	of	heaven.
That	expulsion	is	always	there,	and	each	parent	threatens	to	expel	the	child,	to
throw	him	out.	“If	you	don’t	listen,	if	you	don’t	behave,	you	will	be	thrown	out.”
Naturally	 the	 child	 is	 afraid.	 Thrown	 out?	 Into	 the	wilderness	 of	 this	 life?	He
starts	 compromising.	 The	 child	 by	 and	 by	 becomes	 twisted,	 and	 he	 starts
manipulating.	 He	 does	 not	 want	 to	 smile,	 but	 if	 the	 mother	 is	 nearby	 and	 he
wants	milk,	he	smiles.	Now	this	is	politics—the	beginning,	the	ABC	of	politics.
Deep	 down	 the	 child	 starts	 hating	 the	 parents	 because	 he	 is	 not	 respected;
deep	 down	 he	 starts	 feeling	 frustrated	 because	 he	 is	 not	 loved	 as	 he	 is.	He	 is
expected	 to	 do	 certain	 things,	 and	 only	 then	 will	 he	 be	 loved.	 Love	 has
conditions;	he	is	not	worthy	as	he	is.	First	he	has	to	become	worthy,	only	then
will	the	parents’	love	be	given.	So	to	become	“worthy”	the	child	starts	becoming
false;	 he	 loses	 any	 sense	 of	 his	 own	 intrinsic	 value.	His	 respect	 for	 himself	 is
lost,	and	by	and	by	he	starts	feeling	that	he	is	guilty.
Many	times	the	idea	comes	to	the	mind	of	a	child,	“Are	these	my	real	parents?
Is	it	possible	they	have	adopted	me?	Maybe	they	are	deceiving	me,	because	there
seems	to	be	no	love.”	A	thousand	and	one	times	he	sees	the	anger	in	their	eyes,
the	 ugly	 anger	 on	 the	 faces	 of	 his	 parents,	 and	 for	 such	 small	 things	 that	 he
cannot	understand	the	proportion	of	anger	caused	by	these	small	things.	Just	for
very	small	things	he	sees	the	parents’	rage—he	cannot	believe	it,	it	is	so	unjust
and	unfair!	But	he	has	to	surrender,	he	has	to	bow	down,	he	has	to	accept	it	as	a
necessity.	By	and	by,	his	capacity	for	love	is	killed.
Love	 grows	 only	 in	 love.	 Love	 needs	 a	 milieu	 of	 love—that	 is	 the	 most
fundamental	thing	to	be	remembered.	Only	in	a	milieu	of	love	does	love	grow;	it
needs	the	same	kind	of	pulsation	around.	If	the	mother	is	loving,	if	the	father	is
loving—not	only	 to	 the	child,	 if	 they	are	 loving	 to	each	other	 too,	 if	 the	home
has	an	atmosphere	where	love	flows—the	child	will	start	functioning	as	a	love-
being,	and	he	will	never	ask	the	question,	“What	is	love?”	He	will	know	it	from
the	very	beginning,	it	will	become	his	foundation.
But	that	doesn’t	happen.	It	is	unfortunate,	but	it	has	not	happened	up	to	now.
And	children	learn	the	ways	of	their	parents—their	nagging,	their	conflict.	Just
go	 on	watching	 yourself.	 If	 you	 are	 a	woman,	watch—you	may	 be	 repeating,
almost	 identically,	 the	ways	your	mother	used	 to	behave.	Watch	yourself	when
you	are	with	your	boyfriend	or	your	husband:	What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	not
repeating	a	pattern?	If	you	are	a	man,	watch:	What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	not
behaving	just	like	your	father?	Are	you	not	doing	the	same	nonsense	that	he	used
to	do?	Once	upon	a	time	you	were	surprised—“How	can	my	father	do	this?”—
and	now	you	are	doing	the	same.	People	go	on	repeating;	people	are	imitators.
The	human	being	is	a	monkey.	You	are	repeating	your	father	or	your	mother,	and
that	has	to	be	dropped.	Only	then	will	you	know	what	love	is,	otherwise	you	will
remain	corrupted.
I	cannot	define	what	love	is	because	there	is	no	definition	of	love.	It	is	one	of
those	 indefinables	 like	 birth,	 like	 death,	 like	God,	 like	meditation.	 It	 is	 one	of
those	indefinables—I	cannot	define	it.	I	cannot	say	that	“this	 is	 love,”	I	cannot
show	it	to	you.	It	is	not	a	visible	phenomenon.	It	cannot	be	dissected,	cannot	be
analyzed;	it	can	only	be	experienced,	and	only	through	experience	do	you	know
what	it	is.	But	I	can	show	you	the	way	to	experience	it.
The	 first	 step	 is,	 get	 rid	 of	 your	 parents.	 And	 by	 that	 I	 don’t	 mean	 any
disrespect	 toward	your	parents,	no.	 I	will	be	 the	 last	person	 to	 say	 that.	And	 I
don’t	mean	you	should	get	rid	of	your	physical	parents,	I	mean	you	have	to	get
rid	of	your	parental	voices	inside,	your	program	inside,	your	tapes	inside.	Efface
them…and	you	will	be	simply	surprised	that	if	you	get	rid	of	your	parents	from
your	 inner	 being,	 you	 become	 free.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	will	 be	 able	 to	 feel
compassion	for	your	parents,	otherwise	not;	you	will	remain	resentful.
Every	person	 feels	 resentful	 toward	his	or	her	parents.	How	can	you	not	be
resentful	when	they	have	done	so	much	harm	to	you?	And	they	have	not	harmed
you	knowingly—they	wished	all	good	for	you,	they	wanted	to	do	everything	for
your	well-being.	But	what	 can	 they	do?	 Just	 by	wanting	 something,	 it	 doesn’t
happen.	Just	by	good	wishes,	nothing	happens.	They	were	well-wishers,	 that	 is
true;	there	is	no	doubt	about	it;	every	parent	wants	the	child	to	have	all	the	joys
of	life.	But	what	can	they	do?	They	have	not	known	any	joy	themselves.	They
are	robots,	and	knowingly,	or	unknowingly,	deliberately	or	unintentionally,	they
will	create	an	atmosphere	in	which	their	children	will	sooner	or	later	be	turned
into	robots.
If	 you	 want	 to	 become	 a	 human	 being	 and	 not	 a	 machine,	 get	 rid	 of	 your
parents.	And	you	will	have	 to	be	watchful.	 It	 is	hard	work,	arduous	work;	you
cannot	do	it	instantly.	You	will	have	to	be	very	careful	in	your	behavior.	Watch
and	 see	when	your	mother	 is	 there,	 functioning	 through	you—stop	 that,	move
away	 from	 it.	 Do	 something	 absolutely	 new	 that	 your	mother	 could	 not	 even
have	 imagined.	 For	 example,	 your	 boyfriend	 is	 looking	 at	 some	 other	woman
with	 great	 appreciation	 in	 his	 eyes.	Now,	watch	what	 you	 are	 doing.	Are	 you
doing	 the	 same	 as	 your	mother	 would	 have	 done	when	 your	 father	 looked	 at
another	woman	appreciatively?	If	you	do	that,	you	will	never	know	what	love	is,
you	will	 simply	 be	 repeating	 a	 story.	 It	 will	 be	 the	 same	 act	 being	 played	 by
different	actors,	that’s	all;	the	same	rotten	act	being	repeated	again	and	again	and
again.	Don’t	be	an	imitator,	get	out	of	it.	Do	something	new.	Do	something	that
your	mother	 could	 not	 have	 conceived	 of.	Do	 something	 new	 that	 your	 father
could	not	have	conceived	of.	This	newness	has	to	be	brought	to	your	being,	then
your	love	will	start	flowing.
So	the	first	essential	is	getting	rid	of	your	parents.
The	second	essential	 is	 this:	People	 think	 that	 they	can	 love	only	when	 they
find	a	worthy	partner—nonsense!	You	will	never	find	one.	People	think	they	will
love	only	when	they	find	a	perfect	man	or	a	perfect	woman.	Nonsense!	You	will
never	find	them,	because	perfect	women	and	perfect	men	don’t	exist.	And	if	they
exist,	they	won’t	bother	about	your	love.	They	will	not	be	interested.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 man	 who	 remained	 a	 bachelor	 his	 whole	 life
because	 he	 was	 in	 search	 of	 a	 perfect	 woman.	 When	 he	 was	 seventy,
somebody	 asked,	 “You	 have	 been	 traveling	 and	 traveling—from	 New
York	to	Kathmandu,	from	Kathmandu	to	Rome,	from	Rome	to	London	you
have	 been	 searching.	 Could	 you	 not	 find	 a	 perfect	 woman?	 Not	 even
one?”
The	old	man	became	very	sad.	He	said,	“Yes,	once	I	did.	One	day,	long
ago,	I	came	across	a	perfect	woman.”
The	 inquirer	 said,	 “Then	 what	 happened?	 Why	 didn’t	 you	 get
married?”
Sadly,	 the	old	man	said,	“What	 to	do?	She	was	 looking	 for	a	perfect
man.”
And	remember,	when	two	beings	are	perfect,	their	love	need	is	not	the	same	as
your	love	need.	It	has	a	totally	different	quality.
You	don’t	understand	even	the	love	that	is	possible	for	you,	so	you	will	not	be
able	to	understand	the	love	that	happens	to	a	Buddha,	or	the	love	that	is	flowing
from	a	Lao	Tzu	toward	you—you	will	not	be	able	to	understand	it.
First	you	have	to	understand	the	love	that	is	a	natural	phenomenon.	Even	that
has	 not	 happened.	 First	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 the	 natural,	 and	 then	 the
transcendental.	 So	 the	 second	 thing	 to	 remember	 is,	 never	 be	 in	 search	 of	 a
perfect	man	or	a	perfect	woman.	That	idea	too	has	been	put	into	your	mind—that
unless	you	find	a	perfect	man	or	a	perfect	woman	you	will	not	be	happy.	So	you
go	on	looking	for	the	perfect,	and	you	don’t	find	it,	so	you	are	unhappy.
To	flow	and	grow	in	love	needs	no	perfection.	Love	has	nothing	to	do	with	the
other.	A	loving	person	simply	loves,	just	as	an	alive	person	breathes	and	drinks
and	 eats	 and	 sleeps.	 Exactly	 like	 that,	 a	 really	 alive	 person,	 a	 loving	 person,
loves.	You	don’t	say,	“Unless	there	is	perfect	air,	unpolluted,	I	am	not	going	to
breathe.”	 You	 go	 on	 breathing	 even	 in	 Los	 Angeles;	 you	 go	 on	 breathing	 in
Mumbai.	 You	 go	 on	 breathing	 everywhere,	 even	 when	 the	 air	 is	 polluted,
poisoned.	You	go	on	breathing!	You	cannot	afford	not	to	breathe	just	because	the
air	is	not	as	it	should	be.	If	you	are	hungry	you	eat	something,	whatever	it	is.	In	a
desert,	if	you	are	dying	of	thirst	you	will	drink	anything.	You	will	not	insist	on
having	 Coca-Cola,	 anything	 will	 do—any	 drink,	 just	 water,	 even	 dirty	 water.
People	are	known	to	have	drunk	their	own	urine.	When	one	is	dying	of	thirst	one
does	 not	 bother	 with	 what	 it	 is,	 one	 will	 drink	 anything	 to	 quench	 the	 thirst.
People	 have	 killed	 their	 camels	 in	 the	 desert	 to	 drink	 water—because	 camels
store	 water	 inside	 them.	 Now	 this	 is	 dangerous,	 because	 now	 the	 person	 will
have	to	walk	for	miles.	But	they	are	so	thirsty	that	first	things	come	first—first
the	water;	otherwise	they	will	die.	Without	water,	even	if	the	camel	is	still	there,
what	are	they	going	to	do?	The	camel	will	have	to	take	a	corpse	to	the	next	town,
because	without	water	they	will	die.
An	alive	and	loving	person	simply	loves.	Love	is	a	natural	function.
So	 the	second	 thing	 to	 remember	 is,	don’t	ask	 for	perfection;	otherwise	you
will	 not	 find	 any	 love	 flowing	 in	 you.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 you	 will	 become
unloving.	 People	 who	 demand	 perfection	 are	 very	 unloving	 people,	 neurotic.
Even	if	they	can	find	a	lover	they	demand	perfection,	and	the	love	is	destroyed
because	of	that	demand.
Once	a	man	loves	a	woman	or	a	woman	loves	a	man,	demands	immediately
enter.	The	woman	starts	demanding	that	the	man	should	be	perfect,	just	because
he	loves	her.	As	if	he	has	committed	a	sin!	Now	he	has	to	be	perfect,	now	he	has
to	 drop	 all	 his	 limitations—suddenly,	 just	 because	 of	 this	 woman?	 Now	 he
cannot	 be	 human?	 Either	 he	 has	 to	 become	 superhuman	 or	 he	 has	 to	 become
phony,	false,	a	cheat.
Naturally,	 to	become	superhuman	is	very	difficult,	so	people	become	cheats.
They	start	pretending	and	acting	and	playing	games.	In	the	name	of	love	people
are	 just	 playing	 games.	 So	 the	 second	 thing	 to	 remember	 is	 never	 to	 demand
perfection.	You	have	no	 right	 to	demand	anything	 from	anybody.	 If	 somebody
loves	 you,	 be	 thankful,	 but	 don’t	 demand	 anything—because	 the	 other	 has	 no
obligation	 to	 love	 you.	 If	 somebody	 loves,	 it	 is	 a	 miracle.	 Be	 thrilled	 by	 the
miracle.
But	people	are	not	thrilled.	For	small	things	they	will	destroy	all	possibilities
of	 love.	They	are	not	 interested	much	 in	 love	and	 the	 joy	of	 it.	They	are	more
interested	in	other	ego	trips.
Be	 concerned	 with	 your	 joy.	 Be	 utterly	 concerned	 with	 your	 joy,	 be	 only
concerned	with	 your	 joy.	 Everything	 else	 is	 non-essential.	 Love—as	 a	 natural
function,	 just	 as	 you	 breathe.	 And	 when	 you	 love	 a	 person,	 don’t	 start
demanding;	otherwise	from	the	very	beginning	you	are	closing	the	doors.	Don’t
expect	anything.	If	something	comes	your	way,	feel	grateful.	If	nothing	comes,
there	is	no	need	for	it	to	come,	there	is	no	necessity	for	it	to	come.	You	cannot
expect	it.
But	 watch	 people,	 see	 how	 they	 take	 each	 other	 for	 granted.	 If	 your	 wife
prepares	 food	 for	 you,	 you	 never	 thank	 her.	 I’m	 not	 saying	 that	 you	 have	 to
verbalize	your	thanks,	but	 it	should	be	in	your	eyes.	But	you	don’t	bother,	you
take	it	for	granted—that	is	her	work.	Who	told	you	that?
If	your	husband	goes	and	earns	money,	you	never	thank	him.	You	don’t	feel
any	gratitude.	“That’s	what	a	man	should	do.”	That’s	your	mind.	How	can	love
grow?	 Love	 needs	 a	 climate	 of	 love,	 love	 needs	 a	 climate	 of	 gratitude,
thankfulness.	 Love	 needs	 a	 non-demanding	 atmosphere,	 non-expecting
atmosphere.	This	is	the	second	thing	to	remember.
And	 the	 third	 thing	 is:	Rather	 than	 thinking	how	 to	get	 love,	 start	giving.	 If
you	give,	you	get.	There	is	no	other	way.	People	are	more	interested	in	how	to
grab	 and	 get.	 Everybody	 is	 interested	 in	 getting	 and	 nobody	 seems	 to	 enjoy
giving.	People	give	very	reluctantly—if	ever	they	give,	they	give	only	to	get,	and
they	 are	 almost	 businesslike.	 It	 is	 a	 bargain.	 They	 always	 go	 on	 watching	 to
make	 sure	 they	 get	 more	 than	 they	 give—then	 it	 is	 a	 good	 bargain,	 good
business.	And	the	other	is	doing	the	same.
Love	 is	 not	 a	 business,	 so	 stop	being	businesslike.	Otherwise	you	will	miss
your	life	and	love	and	all	 that	 is	beautiful	 in	 it—because	all	 that	 is	beautiful	 is
not	 at	 all	 businesslike.	Business	 is	 the	ugliest	 thing	 in	 the	world—a	necessary
evil,	but	existence	knows	nothing	of	business.	Trees	bloom,	it	is	not	a	business;
the	stars	shine,	it	is	not	a	business	and	you	don’t	have	to	pay	for	it	and	nobody
demands	 anything	 from	 you.	 A	 bird	 comes	 and	 sits	 at	 your	 door	 and	 sings	 a
song,	and	the	bird	will	not	ask	you	for	a	certificate	or	some	sign	of	appreciation.
He	has	sung	the	song	and	then	happily	he	flies	away,	leaving	no	traces	behind.
That’s	how	love	grows.	Give,	and	don’t	wait	to	see	how	much	you	can	grab.
Yes,	 it	 comes,	 it	 comes	a	 thousandfold,	but	 it	 comes	naturally.	 It	 comes	on	 its
own,	 there	 is	no	need	 to	demand	 it.	When	you	demand,	 it	never	comes.	When
you	demand,	you	have	killed	it.	So	give.	Start	giving.
In	the	beginning	it	will	be	hard,	because	your	whole	life	you	have	been	trained
not	 to	 give	 but	 to	 get.	 In	 the	 beginning	 you	will	 have	 to	 fight	with	 your	 own
armor.	Your	musculature	has	become	hard,	your	heart	has	become	 frozen,	you
have	become	cold.	In	the	beginning	it	will	be	difficult,	but	each	step	will	lead	to
a	further	step,	and	by	and	by	the	river	starts	flowing.
First	 get	 rid	 of	 your	 parents.	 In	 getting	 rid	 of	 your	 parents	 you	 get	 rid	 of
society,	 in	 getting	 rid	 of	 your	 parents	 you	 get	 rid	 of	 civilization,	 education,
everything—because	your	parents	represent	all	that.	You	become	an	individual.
For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 part	 of	 the	 mass,	 you	 have	 an	 authentic
individuality.	 You	 are	 on	 your	 own.	 This	 is	 what	 growth	 is.	 This	 is	 what	 a
grown-up	person	should	be.
A	grown-up	person	 is	one	who	needs	no	parents.	A	grown-up	person	 is	one
who	needs	nobody	 to	cling	 to	or	 lean	upon.	A	grown-up	person	 is	one	who	 is
happy	 in	 his	 aloneness—his	 aloneness	 is	 a	 song,	 a	 celebration.	 A	 grown-up
person	is	one	who	can	be	with	himself	happily.	His	aloneness	is	not	loneliness,
his	solitariness	is	solitude,	it	is	meditative.
One	day	you	had	 to	come	out	of	your	mother’s	womb.	 If	you	had	 remained
there	 longer	 than	nine	months	you	would	have	been	dead—not	only	you,	your
mother	 would	 also	 have	 been	 dead.	 One	 day	 you	 had	 to	 come	 out	 of	 your
mother’s	womb;	then	one	day	you	had	to	come	out	of	your	family	atmosphere,
another	 womb,	 to	 go	 to	 school.	 Then	 one	 day	 you	 had	 to	 come	 out	 of	 your
school	atmosphere,	another	womb,	 to	go	 into	 the	 larger	world.	But	deep	down
you	are	still	a	child.	You	are	still	in	the	womb!	Layers	upon	layers	of	womb	are
there	and	that	womb	has	to	be	broken.
This	 is	 what	 in	 the	 East	 we	 have	 called	 the	 second	 birth.	When	 you	 have
attained	to	a	second	birth,	you	are	completely	free	of	parental	impressions.	And
the	beauty	is	that	only	such	a	person	feels	grateful	to	the	parents.	The	paradox	is
that	only	such	a	person	can	forgive	his	parents.	He	feels	compassion	and	love	for
them,	 he	 feels	 tremendously	 for	 them	 because	 they	 have	 also	 suffered	 in	 the
same	way.	He	is	not	angry,	no,	not	at	all.	He	may	have	tears	in	his	eyes	but	he	is
not	angry,	and	he	will	do	everything	to	help	his	parents	to	move	toward	such	a
plenitude	of	aloneness,	such	a	height	of	aloneness.
Become	 individuals,	 that’s	 the	 first	 thing.	The	 second	 thing	 is,	 don’t	 expect
perfection	 and	 don’t	 ask	 and	 don’t	 demand.	 Love	 ordinary	 people.	Nothing	 is
wrong	 with	 ordinary	 people.	 Ordinary	 people	 are	 extraordinary!	 Each	 human
being	is	so	unique;	have	respect	for	that	uniqueness.
Third,	give,	and	give	without	any	condition—then	you	will	know	what	love	is.
I	cannot	define	it.	I	can	show	you	the	path	to	grow	it.	I	can	show	you	how	to	put
in	 a	 rosebush,	 how	 to	water	 it,	 how	 to	 give	 fertilizers	 to	 it,	 how	 to	 protect	 it.
Then	 one	 day,	 out	 of	 the	 blue,	 comes	 the	 rose,	 and	 your	 home	 is	 full	 of	 the
fragrance.	That’s	how	love	happens.
PART	I
The	Journey
			from	“Me”
					to	“We”
Understanding	the	Nature	and
									Nurture	of	Love
Love	 cannot	 be	 learned,	 it	 cannot	 be	 cultivated.	 The
cultivated	love	will	not	be	love	at	all.	It	will	not	be	a	real	rose,	it
will	 be	 a	 plastic	 flower.	When	 you	 learn	 something,	 it	 means
something	comes	 from	 the	outside;	 it	 is	not	 an	 inner	growth.
And	love	has	to	be	your	inner	growth	if	it	is	to	be	authentic	and
real.
Love	 is	 not	 a	 learning	 but	 a	 growth.	 What	 is	 needed	 on
your	 part	 is	 not	 to	 learn	 the	 ways	 of	 love	 but	 to	 unlearn	 the
ways	 of	 un-love.	 The	 hindrances	 have	 to	 be	 removed,	 the
obstacles	 have	 to	 be	 destroyed—then	 love	 is	 your	 natural,
spontaneous	being.	Once	the	obstacles	are	removed,	the	rocks
thrown	 out	 of	 the	 way,	 the	 flow	 starts.	 It	 is	 already	 there—
hidden	 behind	 many	 rocks,	 but	 the	 spring	 of	 love	 is	 already
there.	It	is	your	very	being.
BEYOND	DEPENDENCY
AND	DOMINATION
Breaking	Out	of	the	Shell	of	the	Ego
I	have	been	always	surprised	by	the	number	of	people	who	come	to	me
and	say	they	are	afraid	of	love.	What	is	the	fear	of	love?	It	is	because	when	you
really	 love	 somebody	 your	 ego	 starts	 slipping	 away	 and	melting.	 You	 cannot
love	with	 the	 ego;	 the	 ego	becomes	 a	 barrier,	 and	when	you	want	 to	 drop	 the
barrier	between	yourself	and	the	other,	the	ego	says,	“This	is	going	to	be	a	death.
Beware!”
The	 death	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 your	 death;	 the	 death	 of	 the	 ego	 is	 really	 your
possibility	of	 life.	The	ego	 is	 just	a	dead	crust	around	you,	 it	has	 to	be	broken
and	thrown	away.	It	comes	into	being	naturally—just	as	a	traveler	collects	dust
on	his	clothes,	on	his	body,	and	he	has	to	take	a	bath	to	get	rid	of	the	dust.	As	we
move	 through	 time,	 the	dust	of	our	experiences,	our	knowledge,	of	 the	 life	we
have	lived,	of	the	past,	collects.	That	dust	becomes	the	ego.	It	accumulates	and
becomes	a	crust	around	you,	which	has	to	be	broken	and	thrown	away.	One	has
to	take	a	bath	every	day,	in	fact	every	moment,	so	that	this	crust	never	becomes	a
prison.
It	will	be	helpful	to	understand	where	the	ego	comes	from,	to	understand	the
roots.
A	 child	 is	 born	 and	 is	 absolutely	 helpless,	 particularly	 the	 human	 child.	He
cannot	survive	without	others’	help.	Most	children	of	the	animals,	the	trees,	the
birds,	can	survive	without	 the	parents,	can	survive	without	a	society,	without	a
family.	 Even	 if	 sometimes	 help	 is	 needed,	 it	 is	 very	 little—a	 few	 days,	 at	 the
most	a	few	months.	But	a	human	child	 is	so	helpless	 that	he	has	 to	depend	on
others	for	years.	It	is	there	that	the	root	has	to	be	sought.
Why	 does	 helplessness	 create	 the	 human	 ego?	 The	 child	 is	 helpless,	 he
depends	on	others,	but	the	ignorant	mind	of	the	child	interprets	this	dependence
as	if	he	is	the	center	of	the	whole	world.	The	child	thinks,	“Whenever	I	cry,	my
mother	 runs	 immediately;	 whenever	 I	 am	 hungry,	 I	 just	 have	 to	 give	 an
indication	 and	 the	 breast	 is	 given.	Whenever	 I	 am	 wet,	 just	 a	 slight	 cry	 and
somebody	comes	and	changes	my	clothes.”	The	child	 lives	 like	an	emperor.	In
fact	 he	 is	 absolutely	 helpless	 and	 dependent,	 and	 the	 mother	 and	 father,	 the
family	and	his	caretakers,	are	all	helping	him	to	survive.	They	are	not	dependent
on	the	child,	the	child	is	dependent	on	them.	But	the	mind	of	the	child	interprets
this	as	if	he	is	the	center	of	the	whole	world,	as	if	the	whole	world	exists	just	for
him.
And	 the	 world	 of	 the	 child	 is,	 of	 course,	 very	 small	 in	 the	 beginning.	 It
consists	of	the	mother,	the	caretaker,	the	father	on	the	fringe—this	is	the	child’s
whole	 world.	 These	 people	 love	 the	 child.	 And	 the	 child	 becomes	 more	 and
more	egoistic.	He	feels	himself	to	be	the	very	center	of	all	existence,	and	in	that
way	the	ego	is	created.	Through	dependence	and	helplessness,	the	ego	is	created.
In	fact	the	child’s	real	situation	is	just	the	contrary	from	what	he	thinks;	there
is	no	real	justification	to	create	such	an	ego.	But	the	child	is	absolutely	ignorant,
he	is	not	capable	of	understanding	the	complexity	of	the	thing.	He	cannot	know
that	he	is	helpless,	he	thinks	he	is	the	dictator!	And	then	for	his	whole	life	he	will
try	to	remain	the	dictator.	He	will	become	a	Napoleon,	an	Alexander,	an	Adolf
Hitler—your	 presidents,	 prime	 ministers,	 dictators,	 are	 all	 childish.	 They	 are
trying	 to	achieve	 the	same	 thing	 they	experienced	as	children;	 they	want	 to	be
the	center	of	the	whole	existence.	With	them	the	world	should	live	and	die;	the
whole	world	is	their	periphery	and	they	are	the	center	of	it;	the	very	meaning	of
life	is	hidden	in	them.
The	child,	of	course,	naturally	finds	this	interpretation	correct,	because	when
the	 mother	 looks	 at	 him,	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 mother	 he	 sees	 that	 he	 is	 the
significance	of	her	 life.	When	the	father	comes	home,	 the	child	feels	 that	he	 is
the	very	meaning	of	the	father’s	life.	This	lasts	for	three	or	four	years—and	the
years	at	the	beginning	of	life	are	the	most	important;	never	again	will	there	be	a
time	in	a	person’s	life	with	the	same	potential.
Psychologists	say	 that	after	 the	 first	 four	years	 the	child	 is	almost	complete.
The	whole	pattern	is	fixed;	throughout	the	rest	of	life	you	will	repeat	the	same
pattern	 in	 different	 situations.	 And	 by	 the	 seventh	 year	 the	 child	 has	 all	 his
attitudes	confirmed,	his	ego	 is	 settled.	Now	he	moves	out	 into	 the	world—and
then	 everywhere	 he	 encounters	 problems,	millions	 of	 problems!	Once	 you	 are
out	of	the	circle	of	the	family,	problems	will	arise—because	nobody	else	bothers
about	 you	 in	 the	 same	 way	 your	 mother	 bothered	 about	 you;	 nobody	 is	 as
concerned	 about	 you	 as	 your	 father	 was.	 Instead,	 everywhere	 you	 find
indifference,	and	the	ego	is	hurt.
But	now	the	pattern	is	set.	Whether	it	hurts	or	not,	the	child	cannot	change	the
pattern—it	has	become	the	very	blueprint	of	his	being.	He	will	play	with	other
children	and	try	to	dominate	them.	He	will	go	to	school	and	try	to	dominate,	to
come	first	in	his	class,	to	become	the	most	important	student.	He	might	believe
he	is	superior	but	he	finds	that	all	the	other	children	believe	the	same	way.	There
is	conflict,	there	are	egos,	there	is	fighting,	struggle.
Then	this	becomes	the	whole	story	of	 life:	 there	are	millions	of	egos	around
you,	 just	 like	yours,	and	everybody	 is	 trying	 to	control,	maneuver,	dominate—
through	 wealth,	 power,	 politics,	 knowledge,	 strength,	 lies,	 pretensions,
hypocrisies.	Even	 in	 religion	and	morality,	everybody	 is	 trying	 to	dominate,	 to
show	the	rest	of	the	world	that	“I	am	the	center	of	the	world.”
This	is	the	root	of	all	problems	between	people.	Because	of	this	concept,	you
are	always	in	conflict	and	struggle	with	somebody	or	other.	Not	that	others	are
enemies	to	you—everybody	else	is	just	like	you,	in	the	same	boat.	The	situation
is	the	same	for	everybody	else;	they	have	been	brought	up	in	the	same	way.
There	 exists	 a	 certain	 school	 of	 psychoanalysts	 in	 the	 West	 who	 have
proposed	that	unless	children	are	brought	up	without	their	fathers	and	mothers,
the	world	will	never	be	at	peace.	I	don’t	support	them,	because	then	children	will
never	be	brought	up	in	any	way!	Those	psychologists	have	something	of	truth	in
their	proposal,	but	it	is	a	very	dangerous	idea.	Because	if	children	are	brought	up
in	 nurseries	 without	 fathers	 and	 mothers,	 without	 any	 love,	 with	 total
indifference,	they	may	not	have	the	problems	of	the	ego	but	they	will	have	other,
even	more	damaging	and	dangerous	problems.
If	a	child	is	brought	up	in	total	indifference	he	will	have	no	center.	He	will	be
a	 hotchpotch,	 clumsy,	 not	 knowing	who	 he	 is.	 He	will	 not	 have	 any	 identity.
Afraid,	 scared,	 he	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 take	 even	 a	 single	 step	 without	 fear,
because	nobody	has	loved	him.	Of	course,	the	ego	will	not	be	there,	but	without
it	he	will	have	no	center.	He	will	not	become	a	buddha;	he	will	be	just	dull	and
crippled,	always	feeling	afraid.
Love	 is	 needed	 to	 make	 you	 feel	 fearless,	 to	 make	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 are
accepted,	that	you	are	not	useless,	that	you	cannot	be	discarded	in	the	junkyard.
If	children	are	brought	up	in	a	situation	where	love	is	lacking,	they	will	not	have
egos,	 that’s	 true.	Their	 life	will	 not	have	 so	much	 struggle	 and	 fight.	But	 they
will	not	be	able	to	stand	up	for	themselves	at	all.	They	will	be	always	in	flight,
escaping	from	everybody,	hiding	in	caves	 in	 their	own	being.	They	will	not	be
buddhas,	they	will	not	be	radiant	with	vitality,	they	will	not	be	centered,	at	ease,
at	 home.	 They	 will	 simply	 be	 eccentric,	 off-center.	 That	 will	 not	 be	 a	 good
situation	either.
So	 I	 don’t	 support	 these	 psychologists.	Their	 approach	would	 create	 robots,
not	human	beings—and	robots	of	course	have	no	problems.	Or,	they	may	create
human	beings	who	are	more	like	animals.	There	will	be	less	anxiety,	less	ulcers,
less	cancer,	but	that	is	not	worth	achieving	when	it	means	that	you	cannot	grow
to	 a	 higher	 peak	 of	 consciousness.	 Instead	 you	would	 be	 falling	 downward;	 it
will	 be	 a	 regression.	 Of	 course,	 if	 you	 become	 an	 animal	 there	 will	 be	 less
anguish,	because	there	will	be	less	consciousness.	And	if	you	become	a	stone,	a
rock,	 there	 will	 be	 no	 anxiety	 at	 all	 because	 there	 is	 nobody	 inside	 to	 feel
anxious,	 to	 feel	 anguish.	But	 this	 is	not	worth	achieving.	One	has	 to	be	 like	a
god,	not	 like	a	rock.	And	by	that	I	mean	it	 to	have	absolute	consciousness	and
still	have	no	worries,	no	anxieties,	no	problems;	 to	enjoy	 life	 like	 the	birds,	 to
celebrate	 life	 like	 birds,	 to	 sing	 like	 birds—not	 through	 regression	 but	 by
growing	to	the	optimum	of	consciousness.
The	child	gathers	ego—it	is	natural,	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	One	has	to
accept	it.	But	later	on,	there	is	no	need	to	keep	carrying	it.	That	ego	is	needed	in
the	beginning	for	the	child	to	feel	that	he	is	accepted,	loved,	welcomed—that	he
is	an	 invited	guest,	not	an	accident.	The	father,	 the	mother,	 the	family,	and	 the
warmth	around	the	child	help	him	to	grow	strong,	rooted,	grounded.	It	is	needed,
the	ego	gives	him	protection—it	is	good,	it	is	just	like	the	shell	of	a	seed.	But	the
shell	 should	 not	 become	 the	 ultimate	 thing,	 otherwise	 the	 seed	 will	 die.	 The
protection	 can	 go	 on	 too	 long,	 then	 it	 becomes	 a	 prison.	 The	 protection	must
remain	a	protection	while	it	is	needed,	and	when	the	moment	comes	for	the	hard
shell	of	the	seed	to	die	into	the	earth,	it	should	die	naturally	so	that	the	seed	can
sprout	and	life	can	be	born.
The	ego	 is	 just	 a	protective	 shell—the	child	needs	 it	because	he	 is	helpless.
The	child	needs	it	because	he	is	weak;	the	child	needs	it	because	he	is	vulnerable
and	there	are	millions	of	forces	all	around.	He	needs	protection,	a	home,	a	base.
The	whole	world	may	be	indifferent	but	he	can	always	look	toward	home,	and
from	there	he	can	gather	significance.
But,	with	 significance	 comes	 the	 ego.	The	 child	becomes	 egoistic,	 and	with
this	ego	arise	all	 the	problems	you	 face.	This	ego	will	not	allow	you	 to	 fall	 in
love.	This	ego	would	like	everybody	to	surrender	to	you;	it	will	not	allow	you	to
surrender	 to	 anybody—and	 love	 happens	 only	when	you	 surrender.	When	 you
force	somebody	else	to	surrender	it	is	hateful,	destructive.	It	is	not	love.	And	if
there	 is	 no	 love,	 your	 life	will	 be	without	warmth,	without	 any	poetry	 in	 it.	 It
may	 be	 prose,	 mathematical,	 logical,	 rational.	 But	 how	 can	 one	 live	 without
poetry?
Prose	 is	 okay,	 rationality	 is	 okay,	 it	 is	 utilitarian,	 needed—but	 living	 just
through	reason	and	logic	can	never	be	a	celebration,	can	never	be	festive.	And
when	life	is	not	festive,	it	is	boring.	Poetry	is	needed—but	for	poetry	you	need
surrender.	You	need	to	throw	off	this	ego.	If	you	can	do	it,	if	you	can	put	it	aside
even	 for	 a	 few	moments,	 your	 life	will	 have	 glimpses	 of	 the	 beautiful,	 of	 the
divine.
Without	poetry	you	cannot	really	live,	you	can	only	exist.	Love	is	poetry.	And
if	love	is	not	possible,	how	can	you	be	prayerful,	meditative,	aware?	It	becomes
almost	impossible.	And	without	a	meditative	awareness,	you	will	remain	just	a
body;	you	will	never	become	aware	of	the	innermost	soul.	Only	in	prayerfulness,
in	a	deep	meditation	and	silence	do	you	reach	the	peaks.	That	prayerful	silence,
that	meditative	awareness	is	the	highest	peak	of	experience—but	love	opens	the
door.
Carl	Gustav	Jung,	after	a	lifetime	of	studying	thousands	of	people—thousands
of	 cases	 of	 people	 who	 were	 ill,	 psychologically	 crippled,	 psychologically
confused—said	 that	 he	 had	 never	 come	 across	 a	 psychologically	 ill	 person
whose	real	problem	after	 the	fortieth	year	 is	not	spiritual.	There	 is	a	rhythm	in
life,	and	in	your	forties	a	new	dimension	arises,	 the	spiritual	dimension.	If	you
cannot	tackle	it	rightly,	if	you	don’t	know	what	to	do,	you	will	become	ill,	you
will	 become	 restless.	The	whole	 of	 human	growth	 is	 a	 continuity.	 If	 you	miss
one	 step,	 it	 becomes	 discontinuous.	 The	 child	 gathers	 ego—and	 if	 he	 never
learns	to	put	the	ego	aside	he	cannot	love,	cannot	be	at	ease	with	anybody.	The
ego	 will	 be	 constantly	 in	 fight.	 You	 may	 be	 sitting	 silently,	 but	 the	 ego	 is
constantly	 fighting,	 just	 looking	out	 for	ways	 to	dominate,	 to	be	dictatorial,	 to
become	the	ruler	of	the	world.
This	 creates	 problems	 everywhere.	 In	 friendship,	 sex,	 love,	 in	 the	 society—
everywhere	you	are	in	conflict.	There	is	even	conflict	with	the	parents	who	have
given	this	ego	to	you.	It	is	rare	that	a	son	forgives	his	father,	rare	that	a	woman
forgives	her	mother.	It	happens	very	rarely.
George	Gurdjieff	 had	 a	 sentence	 on	 the	wall	 of	 the	 room	where	 he	 used	 to
meet	with	people.	The	sentence	was	 this:	“If	you	are	not	yet	at	ease	with	your
father	and	mother,	then	go	away.	I	cannot	help	you.”	Why?	Because	the	problem
has	arisen	there	and	it	has	to	be	solved	there.	That’s	why	all	the	old	traditions	say
love	your	parents,	 respect	your	parents	as	deeply	as	possible—because	 the	ego
arises	 there,	 that	 is	 the	 soil.	 Solve	 it	 there,	 otherwise	 it	 will	 haunt	 you
everywhere.
Psychoanalysts	have	also	come	to	the	conclusion	that	all	they	do	is	bring	you
back	to	the	problems	that	existed	between	you	and	your	parents	and	try	to	solve
them	 somehow.	 If	 you	 can	 solve	 your	 conflict	 with	 your	 parents,	many	 other
conflicts	will	simply	disappear	because	they	are	based	on	the	same	fundamental
conflict.
For	example,	a	man	who	is	not	at	ease	with	his	father	cannot	be	at	ease	with
the	 boss	 in	 the	 office—never,	 because	 the	 boss	 is	 a	 father	 figure.	 That	 small
conflict	with	your	parents	continues	 to	be	 reflected	 in	all	your	 relationships.	 If
you	 are	 not	 at	 ease	 with	 your	 mother,	 you	 cannot	 be	 at	 ease	 with	 your	 wife
because	 she	 will	 be	 the	 representative	 woman;	 you	 cannot	 be	 at	 ease	 with
women	as	such,	because	your	mother	is	the	first	woman,	she	is	the	first	model	of
a	 woman.	 Wherever	 a	 woman	 is,	 your	 mother	 is,	 and	 a	 subtle	 relationship
continues.
Ego	 is	 born	 in	 the	 relationship	with	 the	 father	 and	mother,	 and	 it	 has	 to	 be
tackled	there.	Otherwise	you	will	go	on	cutting	branches	and	leaves	of	the	tree,
and	the	root	remains	untouched.	If	you	have	settled	with	your	father	and	mother,
you	have	become	mature.	Now	 there	 is	no	ego.	Now	you	understand	 that	you
were	helpless,	now	you	understand	that	you	depended	on	others,	that	you	were
not	the	center	of	the	world.	In	fact,	you	were	completely	dependent;	you	could
not	have	survived	otherwise.	Understanding	 this,	 the	ego	by	and	by	 fades	and,
once	you	are	not	in	conflict	with	life,	you	become	loose	and	natural,	you	relax.
Then	 you	 float.	 Then	 the	 world	 is	 not	 filled	 with	 enemies,	 it	 is	 a	 family,	 an
organic	unity.	The	world	 is	not	against	you,	you	can	float	with	 it.	Finding	 that
the	ego	is	nonsense,	finding	that	the	ego	has	no	grounds	to	exist,	finding	that	the
ego	 is	 just	 a	 childish	 dream,	misconceived	 in	 ignorance,	 one	 simply	 becomes
egoless.
There	are	people	who	come	to	me	and	they	ask,	“How	to	fall	in	love?	Is	there
a	way?”	How	to	fall	in	love?	They	ask	for	a	way,	a	method,	a	certain	technique.
They	don’t	understand	what	 they	are	asking.	Falling	in	 love	means	that	now
there	is	no	way,	no	technique,	no	method.	That’s	why	it	is	called	“falling	in”—
you	are	no	longer	the	controller,	you	simply	fall	in.	That’s	why	people	who	are
very	head-oriented	will	say	love	is	blind.	Love	is	the	only	eye,	the	only	vision—
but	 they	will	say	 love	 is	blind,	and	 if	you	are	 in	 love	 they	will	 think	you	have
gone	mad.	It	looks	mad	to	the	head-oriented	person,	because	the	mind	is	a	great
manipulator.	Any	situation	in	which	control	is	lost	looks	dangerous	to	the	mind.
But	there	is	a	world	of	the	human	heart,	there	is	a	world	of	the	human	being
and	consciousness	where	no	technique	is	possible.	All	technologies	are	possible
with	 matter;	 with	 consciousness	 no	 technologies	 are	 possible	 and	 in	 fact,	 no
control	 is	 possible.	 The	 very	 effort	 to	 control	 or	 to	 make	 a	 thing	 happen	 is
egoistic.
THE	NATURAL	STAGES	OF	
LIFE	AND	LOVING
People	 have	 asked	 me,	 what	 is	 the	 right	 way	 to	 provide	 a	 loving
atmosphere	 that	 can	 help	 a	 child	 grow	 without	 interfering	 in	 his	 natural
potentiality.
Every	way	to	help	a	child	is	wrong.	The	very	idea	of	helping	is	not	right.	The
child	needs	your	love,	not	your	help.	The	child	needs	nourishment,	support,	but
not	your	help.	The	natural	potential	of	the	child	is	unknown,	so	there	is	no	way
to	help	him	rightly	to	attain	his	natural	potential.	You	cannot	help	when	the	goal
is	 unknown;	 all	 that	 you	 can	 do	 is	 not	 interfere.	 And	 in	 fact,	 in	 the	 name	 of
“help”	 everybody	 is	 interfering	with	 everybody	 else;	 and	 because	 the	 name	 is
beautiful,	nobody	objects.	Of	course	the	child	is	so	small,	so	dependent	on	you,
he	cannot	object.
All	 the	people	around	are	 just	 like	you:	 they	have	also	been	helped	by	 their
parents,	the	way	you	have	been	helped.	Neither	they	have	attained	their	natural
potential,	nor	have	you.	The	whole	world	is	missing	out	in	spite	of	all	the	help
from	 parents,	 from	 the	 family,	 from	 relatives,	 from	 the	 neighbors,	 teachers,
priests.	In	fact	everybody	is	so	burdened	with	help	that	under	its	weight,	what	to
say	of	attaining	natural	potential,	one	cannot	even	attain	unnatural	potential!	One
cannot	move;	the	weight	on	everybody’s	shoulders	is	Himalayan.
All	 the	people	around	you	have	been	helped,	greatly	helped	 to	be	what	 they
are.	You	have	been	helped;	now	you	want	to	help	the	children,	too?	All	that	you
can	do	is	to	be	loving,	nourishing.	Be	warm,	be	accepting.	The	child	brings	an
unknown	potential,	and	there	is	no	way	to	figure	out	what	he	is	going	to	be.	So
there	is	no	possibility	to	suggest,	“In	this	way	you	should	help	the	child.”	Each
child	is	unique,	so	there	cannot	be	a	general	discipline	for	every	child.
The	 right	way	 is	 not	 to	 help	 the	 child	 at	 all.	 If	 you	 have	 real	 courage	 then
please	don’t	help	the	child.	Love	him,	nourish	him.	Let	him	do	what	he	wants	to
do.	Let	him	go	where	he	wants	to	go.	Your	mind	will	be	tempted	again	and	again
to	interfere,	and	with	good	excuses.	The	mind	is	very	clever	in	rationalizing:	“If
you	don’t	interfere	there	may	be	danger;	the	child	may	fall	into	the	well	if	you
don’t	stop	him.”	But	I	say	to	you,	it	is	better	to	let	him	fall	into	the	well	than	to
help	him	and	destroy	him.
It	 is	a	very	rare	possibility	that	 the	child	falls	 into	the	well—and	then	too,	 it
does	not	mean	death;	he	can	be	taken	out.	And	if	you	are	really	so	concerned,	the
well	can	be	covered;	but	don’t	help	the	child,	and	don’t	interfere.	The	well	can
be	 fenced,	 but	 don’t	 interfere	 with	 the	 child.	 Your	 real	 concern	 should	 be	 to
remove	all	dangers	but	don’t	interfere	with	the	child;	let	him	go	on	his	way.
You	will	have	to	understand	some	significant	growth	patterns.	Life	has	seven-
year	cycles,	it	moves	in	seven-year	cycles	just	as	the	earth	makes	one	rotation	on
its	axis	in	twenty-four	hours.	Now	nobody	knows	why	not	twenty-five,	why	not
twenty-three.	There	is	no	way	to	answer	it;	it	is	simply	a	fact.	So	don’t	ask	me
why	 life	moves	 in	 seven-year	 cycles.	 I	 don’t	 know.	This	much	 I	 know,	 that	 it
moves	 in	 seven-year	 cycles,	 and	 if	 you	 understand	 those	 cycles	 you	 will
understand	a	great	deal	about	human	growth.
The	first	seven	years	are	the	most	important	because	the	foundation	of	life	is
being	laid.	That’s	why	all	the	religions	are	very	much	concerned	about	grabbing
children	as	quickly	as	possible.	Those	first	seven	years	are	the	years	when	you
are	conditioned,	 stuffed	with	all	kinds	of	 ideas	which	will	go	on	haunting	you
your	whole	life,	which	will	go	on	distracting	you	from	your	potentiality,	which
will	 corrupt	 you,	which	will	 never	 allow	you	 to	 see	 clearly.	They	will	 always
come	like	clouds	before	your	eyes	and	they	will	make	everything	confused.
Things	 are	 clear,	 very	 clear—existence	 is	 absolutely	 clear—but	 your	 eyes
have	gathered	layers	upon	layers	of	dust.	And	all	that	dust	has	been	arranged	in
the	 first	 seven	 years	 of	 your	 life	when	 you	were	 so	 innocent,	 so	 trusting,	 that
whatsoever	was	told	to	you,	you	accepted	as	truth.	And	whatever	has	gone	into
your	 foundation,	 later	 on	 it	 will	 be	 very	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 uncover:	 it	 has
become	 almost	 part	 of	 your	 blood,	 bones,	 your	 very	 marrow.	 You	 will	 ask	 a
thousand	other	questions	but	you	will	never	ask	about	 the	basic	foundations	of
your	belief.
The	first	expression	of	 love	toward	the	child	is	 to	leave	his	first	seven	years
absolutely	 innocent,	 unconditioned,	 to	 leave	 him	 for	 seven	 years	 completely
wild,	a	pagan.	He	should	not	be	converted	to	Hinduism,	to	Mohammedanism,	to
Christianity.	Anybody	who	 is	 trying	 to	 convert	 a	 child	 to	 some	 religion	 is	 not
compassionate,	 he	 is	 cruel:	 he	 is	 contaminating	 the	 very	 soul	 of	 a	 new,	 fresh
arrival.	 Before	 the	 child	 has	 even	 asked	 questions	 he	 has	 been	 answered	with
ready-made	 philosophies,	 dogmas,	 ideologies.	 This	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 situation.
The	child	has	not	asked	about	God,	and	you	go	on	teaching	him	about	God.	Why
so	much	impatience?	Wait!
If	 the	child	someday	shows	interest	 in	God	and	starts	asking,	 then	try	 to	 tell
him	not	only	your	idea	of	God—because	nobody	has	any	monopoly.	Put	before
him	all	the	ideas	of	God	that	have	been	presented	to	different	people	by	different
ages,	by	different	 religions,	 cultures,	 civilizations.	Put	before	him	all	 the	 ideas
about	God,	 and	 tell	 him,	 “You	 can	 choose	 among	 these,	whichever	 appeals	 to
you.	Or	you	can	invent	your	own,	if	nothing	suits	you.	If	everything	seems	to	be
flawed,	and	you	think	you	can	come	up	with	a	better	idea,	then	invent	your	own.
Or	if	you	find	that	there	is	no	way	to	invent	an	idea	without	loopholes,	then	drop
the	whole	thing;	there	is	no	need.”
A	 person	 can	 live	 without	 God;	 there	 is	 no	 intrinsic	 necessity.	 Millions	 of
people	have	 lived	without	God,	so	God	 is	nothing	 that	 is	 inevitably	needed	by
anybody.	 You	 can	 tell	 the	 child,	 “Yes,	 I	 have	my	 idea;	 and	 that	 too	 is	 in	 the
combination	of	all	sorts	of	ideas	in	this	collection.	You	can	choose	that,	but	I	am
not	saying	that	my	idea	is	the	right	idea.	It	appeals	to	me;	it	may	not	appeal	to
you.”
There	 is	 no	 inner	 necessity	 that	 the	 son	 should	 agree	 with	 the	 father,	 the
daughter	 should	agree	with	 the	mother.	 In	 fact	 it	 seems	 far	better	 that	children
should	not	agree	with	the	parents.	That’s	how	evolution	happens.	If	every	child
agrees	with	the	father	then	there	will	be	no	evolution,	because	each	new	father
will	agree	with	his	own	father,	and	everybody	will	be	where	God	left	Adam	and
Eve—naked,	outside	 the	gate	of	 the	Garden	of	Eden.	Everybody	will	be	 stuck
there.
Because	 sons	 and	 daughters	 have	 disagreed	with	 their	 fathers	 and	mothers,
with	their	whole	tradition,	human	beings	have	evolved.	This	whole	evolution	is	a
tremendous	 disagreement	with	 the	 past.	 And	 the	more	 intelligent	 you	 are,	 the
more	you	are	going	to	disagree.	But	parents	appreciate	the	child	who	agrees	and
they	condemn	the	child	who	disagrees.
Up	to	seven	years,	if	a	child	can	be	left	innocent,	uncorrupted	by	the	ideas	of
others,	 then	to	distract	him	from	his	potential	growth	becomes	impossible.	The
child’s	 first	 seven	years	 are	 the	most	vulnerable.	And	 they	are	 in	 the	hands	of
parents,	teachers,	priests.	How	to	save	children	from	parents,	priests,	teachers	is
a	question	of	such	enormous	importance	that	it	seems	almost	impossible	to	find
out	 how	 to	 do	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 helping	 the	 child.	 It	 is	 a	 question	 of
protecting	the	child.	If	you	have	a	child,	protect	the	child	from	yourself.	Protect
the	 child	 from	 others	 who	 can	 influence	 him:	 at	 least	 up	 to	 the	 age	 of	 seven
years,	protect	him.	The	child	is	just	like	a	small	plant,	weak,	soft;	just	a	strong
wind	can	destroy	it,	any	animal	can	eat	 it	up.	You	can	put	a	protective	fencing
around	it	but	that	is	not	imprisoning,	you	are	simply	protecting.	When	the	plant
is	bigger,	the	fencing	will	be	removed.
Protect	 the	child	from	every	kind	of	 influence	so	that	he	can	remain	himself
and	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 seven	 years,	 because	 then	 the	 first	 cycle	 will	 be
complete.	 By	 seven	 years	 he	 will	 be	 well	 grounded,	 centered,	 strong	 enough.
You	don’t	know	how	strong	a	seven-year-old	child	can	be	because	you	have	not
seen	 uncorrupted	 children;	 you	 have	 seen	 only	 corrupted	 children.	 They	 carry
the	fears,	the	cowardliness	of	their	fathers,	their	mothers,	their	families.	They	are
not	their	own	selves.
If	a	child	remains	uncorrupted	for	seven	years	you	will	be	amazed	when	you
meet	 such	 a	 child.	He	will	 be	 as	 sharp	 as	 a	 sword.	His	 eyes	will	 be	 clear,	 his
insight	will	be	clear.	And	you	will	see	a	tremendous	strength	in	him	which	you
cannot	find	even	in	a	seventy-year-old	adult,	because	the	foundations	are	shaky
in	that	adult.
With	a	weak	foundation,	as	the	building	goes	on	becoming	higher	and	higher,
the	foundation	becomes	more	and	more	shaky.	So	you	will	see	that	 the	older	a
person	becomes,	 the	more	afraid.	When	you	are	young	you	may	be	an	atheist;
when	you	become	old	you	start	believing	in	God.	Why	is	that?	When	you	were
below	thirty	you	were	a	hippie.	You	had	the	courage	to	go	against	the	society,	to
behave	in	your	own	way:	to	have	long	hair,	to	have	a	beard,	to	roam	around	the
world	 and	 take	 all	 kinds	 of	 risks.	 But	 by	 the	 time	 you	 are	 forty,	 all	 that	 has
disappeared.	You	will	be	 in	some	office	 in	a	suit,	clean	shaven,	well	groomed.
Nobody	will	even	be	able	to	recognize	that	you	are	an	exhippie.
Where	 have	 all	 the	 hippies	 disappeared	 to?	 First	 you	 see	 them	with	 a	 great
force,	then	they	become	just	like	spent	cartridges,	impotent,	defeated,	depressed,
trying	 to	make	something	out	of	 life,	 feeling	 that	all	 those	years	of	hippiedom
were	a	waste.	Others	have	gone	far	ahead:	somebody	has	become	the	president,
somebody	has	become	the	governor,	and	people	start	thinking,	“We	were	stupid;
we	were	just	playing	the	guitar	and	the	whole	world	passed	us	by.”	They	repent.
It	is	really	difficult	to	find	an	old	hippie.
So	if	you	are	a	parent	you	will	need	this	much	courage	not	to	interfere.	Open
doors	 to	unknown	directions	 to	 the	child	so	he	can	explore.	He	does	not	know
what	he	has	in	him,	nobody	knows.	He	has	to	grope	in	the	dark.	Don’t	make	him
afraid	of	darkness,	don’t	make	him	afraid	of	failure,	don’t	make	him	afraid	of	the
unknown.	Give	 him	 support.	When	 he	 is	 going	 on	 an	 unknown	 journey,	 send
him	with	all	your	support,	with	all	your	love,	with	all	your	blessings.	Don’t	let
him	be	affected	by	your	fears.	You	may	have	fears,	but	keep	 them	to	yourself.
Don’t	unload	those	fears	on	the	child	because	that	will	be	interfering.
After	seven	years,	the	next	cycle	of	seven	years,	from	seven	to	fourteen,	is	a
new	addition	 to	 life.	The	child	begins	 to	 experience	 the	 first	 stirring	of	 sexual
energies.	But	this	is	only	a	kind	of	rehearsal.
To	be	a	parent	is	a	difficult	job,	so	unless	you	are	ready	to	take	that	difficult
job,	don’t	become	a	parent.	People	simply	go	on	becoming	fathers	and	mothers
not	knowing	what	they	are	doing.	You	are	bringing	a	new	life	into	existence;	all
the	care	in	the	world	will	be	needed.
Now	when	 the	child	starts	playing	out	his	 sexual	 rehearsals,	 that	 is	 the	 time
when	parents	interfere	the	most,	because	they	have	been	interfered	with.	All	that
they	know	 is	what	has	been	done	 to	 them,	 so	 they	 simply	go	on	doing	 that	 to
their	children.	Societies	don’t	allow	sexual	rehearsal,	or	at	least	have	not	allowed
it	up	to	now,	and	that	too	only	in	very	advanced	countries.	Now	boys	and	girls
are	at	least	educated	in	the	same	schools.	But	in	a	country	like	India,	even	today
in	most	places	coeducation	starts	only	at	the	university	level.	The	seven-year-old
boy	and	the	seven-year-old	girl	cannot	be	in	the	same	boarding	school.	And	this
is	the	time	for	them—without	any	risk,	without	the	girl	getting	pregnant,	without
any	 problems	 arising	 for	 their	 families—this	 is	 the	 time	when	 they	 should	 be
allowed	all	playfulness.	Yes,	it	will	have	a	sexual	color	to	it,	but	it	is	rehearsal;	it
is	not	the	real	drama.	And	if	you	don’t	allow	them	even	the	rehearsal	and	then
suddenly	one	day	the	curtain	opens,	and	the	real	drama	starts!	The	actors	don’t
know	what	is	going	on;	not	even	a	prompter	is	there	to	tell	them	what	to	do.	You
have	messed	up	their	lives	completely.
Those	 seven	 years	 in	 the	 second	 cycle	 in	 life	 are	 significant	 as	 a	 time	 for
rehearsal.	Children	will	meet,	mix,	play,	become	acquainted.	And	that	will	help
humanity	to	drop	almost	90	percent	of	its	perversions.	If	children	from	seven	to
fourteen	are	allowed	 to	be	 together,	 to	 swim	 together,	 to	be	naked	before	each
other,	 90	 percent	 of	 perversions	 and	 90	 percent	 of	 pornography	 will	 simply
disappear.	 Who	 will	 bother	 about	 it?	 When	 a	 boy	 has	 known	 so	 many	 girls
naked,	what	interest	can	a	magazine	like	Playboy	have	for	him?	When	a	girl	has
seen	 so	many	boys	naked,	 I	 don’t	 see	 that	 there	 is	 any	possibility	 of	 curiosity
about	the	other;	it	will	simply	disappear.	They	will	grow	together	naturally,	not
as	two	different	species	of	animals.
Right	 now	 that’s	 how	 they	 grow,	 as	 if	 they	 are	 two	 different	 species	 of
animals.	 They	 don’t	 belong	 to	 one	 humankind;	 they	 are	 kept	 separate.	 A
thousand	 and	 one	 barriers	 are	 created	 between	 them	 so	 they	 cannot	 have	 any
rehearsal	for	their	sexual	life	which	is	going	to	come.	Because	this	rehearsal	is
missing,	that’s	why	in	people’s	actual	sex	life	foreplay	is	missing.	And	foreplay
is	 so	 important—far	more	 important	 than	actual	 sexual	 contact,	because	actual
sexual	 contact	 lasts	 only	 for	 a	 few	moments.	 It	 is	 not	 nourishment,	 it	 simply
leaves	you	in	a	limbo.	You	were	hoping	for	so	much,	and	nothing	comes	out	of
it.
In	 Hindi	 we	 have	 a	 proverb:	Kheela	 pahad	 nikli	 chuhia.	 “You	 dug	 out	 the
whole	 mountain	 and	 you	 found	 one	 rat.”	 After	 all	 the	 effort—going	 to	 the
movies	and	going	 to	 the	disco,	going	 to	 the	restaurant	and	 talking	all	kinds	on
nonsense	which	 neither	 you	 nor	 the	 other	wants	 to	 do,	 but	 both	 are	 talking—
digging	the	mountain,	and	in	the	end,	just	a	rat!	Nothing	is	so	frustrating	as	sex.
Just	the	other	day	somebody	brought	me	an	advertisement	for	a	new	car,	and
in	the	advertisement	they	had	a	beautiful	sentence	that	I	liked.	The	sentence	was:
“It	 is	 better	 than	 sex.”	 I	 don’t	 care	 about	 the	 car,	 but	 the	 advertisement	 was
beautiful!	Certainly	 if	 you	 look	 around	you,	 you	will	 find	 a	 thousand	 and	one
things	 better	 than	 sex.	 Sex	 is	 just	 a	 rat,	 and	 that	 after	 so	 much	 huffing	 and
puffing,	 so	much	perspiration,	 in	 the	 end	both	 feel	 cheated.	The	 reason	 is	 that
you	don’t	know	the	art	of	sex;	you	know	only	the	middle	point.	It	is	as	if	you	see
a	film	just	in	the	middle	for	a	few	seconds.	Naturally	you	can’t	make	any	sense
of	it;	the	beginning	is	missing	and	the	end	is	missing.	Perhaps	you	simply	saw	an
interval	where	there	was	nothing	going	on.
The	man	feels	ashamed	after	sex;	he	turns	over	and	goes	to	sleep.	He	simply
cannot	 face	 the	woman.	He	 feels	 ashamed,	 that’s	why	he	 turns	 to	his	 side	and
goes	 to	sleep.	The	woman	weeps	and	cries	because	 this	was	not	what	she	was
hoping	for.	This	is	all?	Then	what	is	this	whole	drama	all	about?	But	the	reason
is	because	the	rehearsal	part	of	your	life	has	been	canceled	by	your	society.	You
don’t	know	what	foreplay	is.
Foreplay	is	really	the	most	satisfying	part	in	sex.	Foreplay	is	more	loving.	Sex
is	 simply	 a	 biological	 climax,	 but	 the	 climax	 of	 what?	 You	 have	 missed
everything	that	could	have	made	it	a	climax.	Do	you	think	you	suddenly	reach
the	climax,	missing	all	the	rungs	of	the	ladder?	You	have	to	move	up	the	ladder,
rung	by	rung,	only	then	can	you	reach	the	climax.	Everybody	heads	straight	for
the	climax.
But	most	people’s	sexual	life	is	nothing	but	a	kind	of	relief.	Yes,	for	a	moment
you	 feel	 relieved	 of	 a	 burden,	 just	 like	 a	 good	 sneeze.	 How	 good	 it	 feels
afterwards!	But	for	how	long?	How	long	can	you	feel	good	after	a	sneeze?	How
many	seconds,	how	many	minutes	can	you	brag	that	“I	had	such	a	sneeze,	it	was
great.”	 As	 the	 sneeze	 is	 gone,	 with	 it	 goes	 all	 the	 joy,	 too.	 It	 was	 simply
something	bothering	you.	You	are	finished	with	that	botheration,	now	there	is	a
little	relaxation.	That’s	the	sexual	life	of	most	of	the	people	in	the	world.	Some
energy	 was	 bothering	 you,	 was	 making	 you	 heavy;	 it	 was	 turning	 into	 a
headache.	Sex	gives	you	relief.
But	 the	 way	 children	 are	 brought	 up	 is	 almost	 butchering	 their	 whole	 life.
Those	 seven	 years	 of	 sexual	 rehearsal	 are	 absolutely	 essential.	Girls	 and	 boys
should	 be	 together	 in	 schools,	 in	 hostels,	 in	 swimming	 pools	 and	 beds.	 They
should	rehearse	for	the	life	that	is	going	to	come;	they	have	to	get	ready	for	it.
And	there	is	no	danger,	there	is	no	problem	if	a	child	is	given	total	freedom	to
explore	his	growing	sexual	energy	and	is	not	condemned,	repressed.	But	that	is
what	is	being	done.	It	 is	a	very	strange	world	in	which	you	are	living.	You	are
born	of	sex,	you	will	live	for	sex,	your	children	will	be	born	out	of	sex—and	sex
is	 the	 most	 condemned	 thing,	 the	 greatest	 sin.	 And	 all	 your	 religions	 go	 on
putting	this	crap	in	your	mind.
People	 all	 around	 the	 world	 are	 full	 of	 everything	 rotten	 that	 you	 can
conceive,	for	 the	simple	reason	that	 they	have	not	been	allowed	to	grow	in	the
natural	way.	They	 have	 not	 been	 allowed	 to	 accept	 themselves.	They	 all	 have
become	ghosts.	They	are	not	authentically	real	people,	they	are	only	shadows	of
someone	they	could	have	been.
The	 second	 cycle	 of	 seven	 years	 is	 immensely	 important	 because	 it	 will
prepare	 you	 for	 the	 coming	 seven	 years.	 If	 you	 have	 done	 your	 homework
rightly,	 if	 you	 have	 played	 with	 your	 sexual	 energy	 just	 in	 the	 spirit	 of	 a
sportsman—and	during	 those	 years,	 that	 is	 the	 only	 spirit	 you	will	 have—you
will	not	become	a	pervert,	and	all	kinds	of	strange	things	will	not	come	to	your
mind.	Instead	you	will	be	moving	naturally	with	the	other	sex,	 the	other	sex	is
moving	 with	 you.	 There	 will	 be	 no	 hindrance,	 and	 you	 will	 not	 be	 doing
anything	wrong	against	anybody.	Your	conscience	will	be	clear	because	nobody
has	 put	 into	 your	 head	 ideas	 of	what	 is	 right,	 what	 is	 wrong:	 you	 are	 simply
being	whatever	you	are.
Then	from	fourteen	to	twenty-one,	your	sex	matures.	And	this	is	significant	to
understand:	 if	 the	 rehearsal	 has	 gone	 well,	 in	 the	 seven	 years	 when	 your	 sex
matures	a	very	strange	thing	happens	that	you	may	not	have	ever	thought	about,
because	you	have	not	been	given	the	chance.	I	said	to	you	that	the	second	seven-
year	 cycle,	 from	seven	 to	 fourteen,	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	 foreplay.	The	 third
seven-year	cycle	will	give	you	a	glimpse	of	afterplay.	You	are	still	together	with
girls	or	boys,	but	now	a	new	phase	starts	in	your	being:	you	start	falling	in	love.
It	is	still	not	a	biological	interest.	You	are	not	interested	in	producing	children,
you	are	not	interested	in	becoming	husbands	and	wives,	no.	These	are	the	years
of	 romantic	 play.	 You	 are	 more	 interested	 in	 beauty,	 in	 love,	 in	 poetry,	 in
sculpture,	which	are	all	different	phases	of	romanticism.	And	unless	a	person	has
some	 romantic	quality	he	will	never	know	what	afterplay	 is.	Sex	 is	 just	 in	 the
middle.	The	longer	the	foreplay,	the	better	the	possibility	of	reaching	the	climax;
the	better	the	possibility	of	reaching	the	climax,	the	better	opening	for	afterplay.
And	 unless	 a	 couple	 knows	 afterplay	 they	 will	 never	 know	 what	 sex	 in	 its
completion	is.
Now	there	are	sexologists	who	are	teaching	foreplay.	A	taught	foreplay	is	not
the	real	thing,	but	they	are	teaching	it;	at	least	they	have	recognized	the	fact	that
without	foreplay	sex	cannot	reach	the	climax.	But	they	are	at	a	loss	how	to	teach
afterplay,	because	when	a	man	has	reached	the	climax	he	is	no	longer	interested.
He	is	finished,	the	job	is	done.	For	afterplay	to	happen	it	needs	a	romantic	mind,
a	poetic	mind,	a	mind	 that	knows	how	to	be	 thankful,	how	to	be	grateful.	The
person,	 the	woman	 or	 the	man	who	 has	 brought	 you	 to	 such	 a	 climax,	 needs
some	 gratitude:	 afterplay	 is	 your	 gratitude.	 And	 unless	 there	 is	 afterplay	 it
simply	means	your	sex	is	incomplete;	and	incomplete	sex	is	the	cause	of	all	the
troubles	that	a	human	being	goes	through.	Sex	can	become	orgasmic	only	when
afterplay	and	foreplay	are	completely	balanced.	Just	in	their	balance	the	climax
turns	into	orgasm.
And	the	word	“orgasm”	has	to	be	understood.	It	means	that	your	whole	being
—body,	mind,	soul,	everything—becomes	involved,	organically	involved.	Then
it	becomes	a	moment	of	meditation.	To	me,	if	your	sex	does	not	become	finally	a
moment	of	meditation,	you	have	not	known	what	 sex	 is.	You	have	only	heard
about	it,	you	have	read	about	it;	and	the	people	who	have	been	writing	about	it
know	nothing	 about	 it.	 I	 have	 read	 hundreds	 of	 books	 on	 sexology	 by	 people
who	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 great	 experts,	 and	 they	 are	 “experts,”	 but	 they	 know
nothing	about	the	innermost	shrine	where	meditation	blossoms.	Just	as	children
are	born	from	ordinary	sex,	meditation	is	born	out	of	extraordinary	sex.
Animals	can	produce	children;	there	is	nothing	special	about	it.	It	is	only	man
who	 can	 produce	 the	 experience	 of	 meditation	 as	 the	 center	 of	 his	 orgasmic
feeling.	This	 is	possible	only	if	from	the	ages	of	fourteen	to	 twenty-one	young
people	are	allowed	to	have	romantic	freedom.
From	twenty-one	 to	 twenty-eight	 is	 the	 time	when	 they	can	settle.	They	can
choose	 a	 partner.	 And	 they	 are	 capable	 of	 choosing	 now;	 through	 all	 the
experience	 of	 the	 past	 two	 cycles	 of	 their	 growth	 they	 can	 choose	 the	 right
partner.	There	is	nobody	else	who	can	do	it	for	you.	It	is	something	that	is	more
like	a	hunch—not	arithmetic,	not	astrology,	not	palmistry,	not	I	Ching,	nothing
else	 is	 going	 to	 do.	 It	 is	 a	 hunch.	 After	 coming	 in	 contact	 with	 many,	 many
people,	 suddenly	 something	 clicks	 that	 had	 never	 clicked	 with	 anybody	 else.
And	it	clicks	with	so	much	certainty,	and	so	absolutely,	you	cannot	even	doubt	it.
Even	if	you	try	to	doubt	it,	you	cannot,	the	certainty	is	so	tremendous.	With	this
click	you	settle.
Between	 twenty-one	 and	 twenty-eight—somewhere,	 if	 everything	 goes
smoothly	in	the	way	I	am	talking	about,	without	interference	from	others—then
you	 settle.	 And	 the	 most	 pleasant	 period	 of	 life	 comes	 from	 twenty-eight	 to
thirty-five—the	most	 joyous,	 the	most	 peaceful	 and	 harmonious,	 because	 two
persons	start	melting	and	merging	into	each	other.
From	thirty-five	to	forty-two,	a	new	step,	a	new	door	opens.	If	up	to	the	age	of
thirty-five	 you	 have	 felt	 deep	 harmony,	 an	 orgasmic	 feeling,	 and	 you	 have
discovered	meditation	through	it,	then	from	thirty-five	to	forty-two	you	will	help
each	other	go	more	and	more	 into	 that	meditation	without	 sex,	because	at	 this
point	sex	starts	looking	childish,	juvenile.
The	age	of	forty-two	is	the	time	when	a	person	should	be	able	to	know	exactly
who	 he	 is.	 From	 forty-two	 to	 forty-nine	 he	 goes	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into
meditation,	more	and	more	into	himself,	and	helps	the	partner	in	the	same	way.
The	partners	become	friends.	There	 is	no	more	“husband”	and	no	more	“wife”
that	time	has	passed.	It	has	given	its	richness	to	your	life;	now	there	is	something
growing	 that	 is	 even	 higher	 than	 love.	 That	 is	 friendliness,	 a	 compassionate
relationship	 to	 help	 the	 other	 to	 go	 deeper	 into	 himself	 or	 herself,	 to	 become
more	 independent,	 to	 become	 more	 alone,	 just	 like	 two	 tall	 trees	 standing
separate	 but	 still	 close	 to	 each	other,	 or	 two	pillars	 in	 a	 temple	 supporting	 the
same	roof—standing	so	close,	but	also	so	separate	and	independent	and	alone.
From	 forty-nine	 to	 fifty-six	 this	 aloneness	 becomes	 your	 focus	 of	 being.
Everything	 else	 in	 the	 world	 loses	 meaning.	 The	 only	 remaining	 meaningful
thing	is	this	aloneness.
From	 fifty-six	 to	 sixty-three	 you	 become	 absolutely	 what	 you	 are	 going	 to
become:	the	potential	blossoms,	and	from	sixty-three	to	seventy	you	start	getting
ready	to	drop	the	body.	Now	you	know	you	are	not	the	body,	you	know	you	are
not	 the	 mind	 either.	 The	 body	 was	 known	 as	 separate	 from	 you	 somewhere
around	the	time	when	you	were	thirty-five.	That	the	mind	is	separate	from	you
was	known	near	the	time	when	you	were	forty-nine.	Now,	everything	else	drops
except	 the	 witnessing	 self.	 Just	 the	 pure	 awareness,	 the	 flame	 of	 awareness
remains	with	you—and	this	is	the	preparation	for	death.
Seventy	is	the	natural	life	span	for	human	beings.	And	if	things	move	in	this
natural	 course	 then	 one	 dies	 with	 tremendous	 joy,	 with	 great	 ecstasy,	 feeling
immensely	blessed	that	life	has	not	been	meaningless,	that	at	least	one	has	found
his	 home.	 And	 because	 of	 this	 richness,	 this	 fulfillment,	 one	 is	 capable	 of
blessing	the	whole	of	existence.	Just	to	be	near	such	a	person	at	the	time	of	death
is	a	great	opportunity.	You	will	 feel,	 as	 the	person	 leaves	 the	body,	as	 if	 some
invisible	flowers	are	falling	upon	you.	Although	you	cannot	see	them,	you	can
feel	them.	It	is	sheer	joy,	so	pure	that	even	to	have	a	little	taste	of	it	is	enough	to
transform	your	whole	life.
THE	CANDLE	OF	AWARENESS
A	 questioner	 has	 asked,	 “How	 to	 start	 the	 journey	 towards	 love?”
Once	you	ask	the	question	the	journey	has	already	started;	you	are	in	the	journey.
This	has	to	be	recognized—unconsciously,	you	are	in	the	journey:	that’s	why	it
feels	as	if	you	have	to	start	it.	Recognize	it,	become	conscious	about	it,	and	the
very	recognition	becomes	the	beginning.
You	 are	 always	 moving,	 going	 somewhere—knowingly,	 unknowingly,
willingly,	 unwillingly,	 but	 you	 are	 going—some	 great	 force	 is	 constantly
working	within	 you.	Existence	 is	 evolving,	 it	 is	 constantly	 creating	 something
within	you.	So	the	question	is	not	how	to	start	the	journey;	the	question	is	how	to
recognize	it.	It	is	there,	but	your	recognition	is	not	there.
For	example,	 trees	die,	but	 they	don’t	know	that.	Birds	and	animals	die,	but
they	don’t	know.	Only	human	beings	know	that	they	have	to	die,	and	even	that
knowledge	 is	 very	 cloudy,	 not	 clear.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 the	 case	 with	 life—the
birds	are	alive,	but	they	don’t	know	that	they	are	alive.	How	can	you	know	life	if
you	don’t	know	death?	How	can	you	know	that	you	are	alive	if	you	don’t	know
that	you	are	going	to	die?	Both	recognitions	come	together.	Birds,	animals,	trees
are	alive,	but	they	don’t	recognize	that	they	are	alive.
The	 human	 being	 recognizes,	 a	 little,	 that	 he	 is	 going	 to	 die,	 but	 that
recognition	remains	cloudy,	hidden	by	thick	smoke.	And	the	same	is	true	about
life:	you	are	alive,	but	you	don’t	know	exactly	what	being	alive	means.	That	too
is	cloudy,	not	clear.	When	I	say	recognition,	I	mean	becoming	alert	to	what	this
life	energy	is,	which	is	already	on	the	way.	To	become	aware	of	one’s	own	being
is	the	beginning	of	the	journey	towards	love.	To	come	to	a	point	where	you	are
so	absolutely	alert	that	not	even	a	fragment	of	darkness	exists	around	you	is	the
end	 of	 the	 journey.	 In	 fact,	 the	 journey	 never	 starts	 and	 never	 ends.	 You	will
continue	 even	 after	 that,	 but	 then	 the	 journey	 will	 have	 a	 totally	 different
meaning,	a	totally	different	quality	to	it:	it	will	be	sheer	delight.	Right	now	it	is
sheer	misery.
“How	 to	 start	 the	 journey	 towards	 love?”	 Become	 more	 alert	 about	 your
actions,	about	your	relationships,	about	your	movements.	Whatever	you	do,	even
an	ordinary	thing	like	walking	on	the	street,	try	to	become	alert.	Try	to	take	your
steps	with	full	awareness.	Buddha	used	to	say	to	his	disciples:	When	you	take	a
step	with	 the	right	 foot,	 remember,	now	this	 is	 the	right	 foot;	when	you	 take	a
step	 with	 the	 left,	 remember,	 now	 this	 is	 the	 left.	 When	 you	 breathe	 in,
remember,	“Now	I	am	breathing	in.”	When	you	breathe	out,	remember,	“Now	I
am	breathing	out.”	Not	that	you	have	to	verbalize	it.	Not	that	you	have	to	say	in
words	“I	am	breathing	in,”	but	just	becoming	alert	that	now	the	breath	is	going
in.	I	am	speaking	to	you	so	I	have	to	use	words,	but	when	you	are	becoming	alert
you	need	not	use	words,	because	words	are	part	of	the	smoke.	Don’t	use	words,
just	 feel	 the	 breath	 going	 in	 and	 filling	 your	 lungs	 then	 being	 emptied.	 Just
watch,	and	soon	you	will	come	to	a	recognition,	a	great	recognition	that	it	is	not
simply	breathing	that	goes	in	and	out,	it	is	life	itself.	Each	breath	that	comes	in	is
life	 infusing	 its	 energy	 into	you.	Each	breath	going	out	 is	 a	momentary	death.
With	each	breath	you	die	and	you	are	reborn.	Each	breath	is	a	crucifixion	and	a
resurrection.
And	when	you	watch	it,	you	will	come	to	know	a	beautiful	feeling	of	trust.
When	 you	 breathe	 out,	 there	 is	 no	 certainty	 that	 you	 will	 ever	 be	 able	 to
breathe	 in	 again.	 Where	 is	 the	 certainty?	 Who	 has	 guaranteed	 it?	 Who	 can
guarantee	 that	you	will	be	able	 to	breathe	 in	again?	But	somehow	a	deep	 trust
exists;	you	know	that	you	will	breathe	again.	Otherwise	breathing	would	become
impossible.	If	you	became	so	afraid—“Who	knows	if	I	let	my	breath	out,	and	if	I
go	through	this	small	death,	what	is	the	certainty	that	I	will	be	able	to	breathe	in
again?	If	I	can’t	breathe	in	again,	then	it	is	better	not	to	breathe	out”—then	you
would	die	immediately!	If	you	stop	breathing	out,	you	will	die.	But	you	don’t	do
that,	because	a	deep	trust	exists.	That	trust	is	part	of	life,	is	part	of	love.	Nobody
has	taught	it	to	you.
When	a	child	starts	walking	for	the	first	time,	tremendous	trust	exists	in	him
that	 he	 will	 be	 able	 to	 walk.	 Nobody	 has	 taught	 him.	 He	 has	 just	 seen	 other
people	walk,	that’s	all.	But	how	can	he	come	to	a	conclusion	that	“I	will	be	able
to	walk”?	He	is	so	tiny.	People	are	so	big,	giants	compared	to	him,	and	he	knows
that	whenever	he	stands	he	falls	down—but	still	he	tries.	Trust	is	in-built.	It	is	in
your	every	cell	of	 life.	The	child	 tries,	and	many	times	he	will	 fall;	he	will	 try
again	and	again	and	again.	One	day,	trust	wins	over	and	he	starts	walking.
If	 you	watch	your	breath	you	will	 become	aware	of	 a	 deep	 layer	 of	 trust,	 a
subtle	trust	in	life—no	doubt,	no	hesitation.	If	you	walk,	and	walk	with	alertness,
by	 and	 by	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 not	 walking,	 you	 are	 “being
walked	by.”	It	is	a	very	subtle	feeling,	that	life	is	moving	through	you,	not	that
you	are	moving.	When	you	feel	hungry,	if	you	are	aware	you	will	see	that	it	is
life	feeling	hungry	within	you,	not	you.
Becoming	more	 alert	will	make	you	 conscious	 of	 the	 fact	 that	 there	 is	 only
one	 thing	 you	 have	 that	 you	 can	 call	 yours	 and	 that	 is	witnessing.	Everything
else	 belongs	 to	 the	 universe;	 only	 witnessing	 belongs	 to	 you.	 But	 when	 you
become	aware	of	witnessing,	 even	 the	 idea	of	being	“I”	 is	dissolved.	That	 too
does	not	belong	to	you.	That	was	part	of	the	darkness,	part	of	the	cloudiness	that
had	gathered	around	you.	In	the	clear	light,	when	the	sky	is	open	and	the	clouds
have	 disappeared	 and	 the	 sun	 is	 bright,	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any	 idea	 of
being	“I.”	Then,	simply	witnessing	is;	nothing	belongs	to	you.	That	witnessing	is
the	goal	of	the	journey.
How	to	start	the	journey?	Start	becoming	more	and	more	a	witness.	Whatever
you	do,	do	 it	with	deep	alertness;	 then	even	small	 things	become	sacred.	Then
cooking	or	cleaning	become	sacred;	they	become	worship.	It	is	not	a	question	of
what	you	are	doing;	the	question	is	how	you	are	doing	it.	You	can	clean	the	floor
like	a	robot,	a	mechanical	thing;	you	have	to	clean	it,	so	you	clean	it.	Then	you
miss	something	beautiful.	Then	you	waste	 those	moments	 in	only	cleaning	 the
floor.	Cleaning	the	floor	could	have	been	a	great	experience	and	you	missed	it.
The	floor	is	clean	now,	but	something	that	could	have	happened	within	you	has
not	happened.	If	you	had	been	aware,	not	only	the	floor	but	you	would	have	felt
a	deep	cleansing.
Clean	 the	 floor	 full	 of	 awareness,	 luminous	with	 awareness.	Work	 or	 sit	 or
walk,	 but	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 a	 continuous	 thread:	 make	 more	 and	 more
moments	of	your	life	luminous	with	awareness.	Let	the	candle	of	awareness	burn
in	each	moment,	in	each	act.	The	cumulative	effect	is	what	enlightenment	is.	The
cumulative	effect,	all	the	moments	together,	all	small	candles	together,	become	a
great	source	of	light.
PART	II
Love	Is	a	Breeze
Making	the	Most	of	Romance
Don’t	 think	 that	 love	has	 to	be	permanent,	 and	 it	will
make	your	love	life	more	beautiful	because	you	will	know	that
today	you	are	together,	and	tomorrow	perhaps	you	will	have	to
part.
Love	 comes	 like	 a	 fresh,	 fragrant	 breeze	 into	 your	 home,
fills	 it	 with	 freshness	 and	 fragrance,	 remains	 as	 long	 as
existence	allows	it,	and	then	moves	out.	You	should	not	try	to
close	 all	 your	 doors,	 or	 the	 same	 fresh	 breeze	 will	 become
absolutely	stale.	 In	 life,	 everything	 is	changing	and	change	 is
beautiful;	 it	 gives	 you	 more	 and	 more	 experience,	 more	 and
more	awareness,	more	and	more	maturity.
NONSENSE	IDEAS	IN	YOUR	HEAD
Love	is	the	only	religion,	the	only	god,	the	only	mystery	that	has	to	be
lived,	understood.	When	 love	 is	understood,	you	have	understood	all	 the	sages
and	 all	 the	mystics	 of	 the	world.	 It	 is	 not	 anything	difficult.	 It	 is	 as	 simple	 as
your	heartbeats	or	your	breathing.	It	comes	with	you,	it	is	not	given	to	you	by	the
society.	And	 this	 is	 the	 point	 that	 I	want	 to	 emphasize:	 love	 comes	with	 your
birth,	 but	 of	 course	 it	 is	 undeveloped	 as	 everything	 else	 is	 undeveloped.	 The
child	has	to	grow.
The	society	takes	the	advantage	of	the	gap.	The	child’s	love	will	take	time	to
grow;	meanwhile	 the	 society	 goes	 on	 conditioning	 the	mind	 of	 the	 child	with
ideas	about	love	which	are	false.	By	the	time	you	are	ready	to	explore	the	world
of	 love,	you	are	 filled	with	so	much	 rubbish	about	 love	 that	 there	 is	not	much
hope	for	you	to	be	able	to	find	the	authentic	and	discard	the	false.
For	 example,	 every	 child	 everywhere	 has	 been	 told	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
ways	that	love	is	eternal:	once	you	love	a	person	you	love	the	person	always.	If
you	love	a	person	and	later	on	you	feel	 that	you	don’t	 love,	 it	only	means	you
never	loved	the	person	in	the	first	place.	Now	this	is	a	very	dangerous	idea.	It	is
giving	you	 an	 idea	 of	 a	 permanent	 love	 and	 in	 life	 nothing	 is	 permanent.	The
flowers	blossom	in	the	morning	and	by	the	evening	they	are	gone.
Life	 is	a	continuous	 flux;	everything	 is	changing,	moving.	Nothing	 is	 static,
nothing	is	permanent.	You	have	been	given	the	idea	of	a	permanent	love	which
is	 going	 to	 destroy	 your	whole	 life.	You	will	 expect	 permanent	 love	 from	 the
poor	woman,	and	the	woman	will	expect	permanent	love	from	you.
Love	becomes	secondary,	permanence	becomes	primary.	And	 love	 is	 such	a
delicate	 flower	 that	you	cannot	 force	 it	 to	be	permanent.	You	can	have	plastic
flowers;	 that’s	 what	 people	 have—marriage,	 their	 family,	 their	 children,	 their
relatives,	 everything	 is	 plastic.	 Plastic	 has	 one	 very	 spiritual	 thing:	 it	 is
permanent.	Real	love	is	as	uncertain	as	your	life	is	uncertain.	You	cannot	say	that
you	will	be	here	 tomorrow.	You	cannot	even	say	 that	you	are	going	 to	survive
the	next	moment.	Your	life	is	continuously	changing—from	childhood	to	youth,
to	middle	age,	to	old	age,	to	death,	it	goes	on	changing.
A	real	love	will	also	change.
It	 is	 possible	 that	 if	 you	 are	 enlightened	 your	 love	 has	 gone	 beyond	 the
ordinary	laws	of	life.	It	is	neither	changing	nor	permanent;	it	simply	is.	It	is	no
more	a	question	of	how	to	love;	you	have	become	love	itself,	so	whatever	you	do
is	 loving.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 specifically	 do	 something	which	 is	 love;	whatever
you	do,	your	love	starts	pouring	through	it.	But	before	enlightenment	your	love
is	going	to	be	the	same	as	everything	else;	it	will	change.
If	you	understand	 that	 it	will	change,	 that	once	 in	a	while	your	partner	may
become	 interested	 in	 somebody,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 understanding	 and	 loving
and	caring	and	allowing	her	to	go	the	way	her	being	feels—this	is	a	chance	for
you	to	prove	to	your	partner	that	you	love	her.	You	love	her;	even	if	she	is	going
to	love	somebody	else,	that	is	irrelevant.	With	understanding,	it	is	possible	that
your	love	may	become	a	lifelong	affair,	but	remember	it	will	not	be	permanent.
It	will	have	its	ups	and	downs,	it	will	have	changes.
It	 is	 so	simple	 to	understand.	When	you	started	 loving	you	were	 too	young,
with	no	experience;	how	can	your	love	remain	the	same	when	you	have	become
a	mature	 person?	Your	 love	will	 also	 attain	 to	 some	maturity.	 And	when	 you
have	 become	old	 your	 love	will	 have	 a	 different	 flavor	 to	 it.	 Love	will	 go	 on
changing,	and	once	in	a	while	love	will	just	need	an	opportunity	for	change.	In	a
healthy	society	it	will	be	possible	to	take	that	opportunity,	yet	your	relationship
with	someone	will	not	be	broken.
But	it	is	also	possible	that	you	may	have	to	change	your	lovers	many	times	in
life.	There	is	no	harm	in	it.	In	fact,	by	changing	your	lovers	many	times	in	life
you	will	be	enriched,	and	 if	 the	whole	world	 follows	what	 I	am	saying	 to	you
about	love,	the	whole	world	will	be	enriched.
But	a	wrong	idea	has	destroyed	all	possibility.	The	moment	your	partner	looks
at	somebody,	 just	 looking,	his	eyes	show	his	attraction	and	you	freak	out.	You
have	to	understand	that	if	the	man	drops	being	interested	in	beautiful	women	on
the	street,	beautiful	actresses	in	the	movies,	that’s	what	you	want;	you	want	him
not	 to	 be	 interested	 in	 anything	 except	 you.	 But	 you	 don’t	 understand	 human
psychology.	 If	he	 is	not	 interested	 in	women	on	 the	 street,	 in	 the	movies,	why
will	 he	 be	 interested	 in	 you?	 His	 interest	 in	 women	 is	 a	 guarantee	 that	 he	 is
interested	in	you,	that	there	is	still	a	possibility	that	your	love	can	go	on	and	on.
But	we	are	doing	just	 the	opposite.	Men	are	trying	to	arrange	it	so	that	 their
women	should	not	be	interested	in	anybody	other	than	them;	they	should	be	the
woman’s	only	focus,	her	total	concentration.	The	woman	is	asking	the	same,	and
both	are	driving	each	other	mad.	Concentration	on	one	person	is	bound	to	lead
you	into	madness.
For	a	lighter	life,	for	a	more	playful	life,	you	need	to	be	flexible.	You	have	to
remember	that	freedom	is	the	highest	value	and	if	love	is	not	giving	you	freedom
then	it	is	not	love.
Freedom	is	a	criterion:	anything	that	gives	you	freedom	is	right,	and	anything
that	destroys	your	 freedom	 is	wrong.	 If	you	can	 remember	 this	 small	 criterion
your	 life,	 slowly,	 will	 start	 settling	 on	 the	 right	 path	 about	 everything:	 your
relationships,	your	meditations,	your	creativity,	whatever	you	are.
Dropping	 old	 concepts,	 ugly	 concepts.	 For	 example	 in	 India,	 millions	 of
women	have	died	by	being	burned	alive	in	the	funeral	pyre	with	their	husbands.
It	shows	that	the	possessiveness	of	the	husband	is	so	much	that	not	only	does	he
want	 to	possess	 the	woman	while	he	 is	alive,	he	 is	afraid	of	what	will	happen
when	he	is	dead!	He	will	not	be	able	to	do	anything	then,	so	it	is	better	to	take
the	woman	with	him.
And	 you	 can	 see	 that	 this	 was	 applied	 only	 to	 women—not	 a	 single	 man
jumped	 into	 the	 funeral	 pyre	 of	 a	woman	 in	 ten	 thousand	 years.	What	 does	 it
mean?	Does	 it	mean	 that	only	women	 love	men	and	men	do	not	 love	women?
Does	it	mean	that	the	woman	has	no	life	of	her	own?	Only	the	husband’s	life	is
her	life;	when	the	husband	is	dead,	she	has	to	be	dead?
Such	 nonsense	 ideas	 have	 settled	 in	 our	 heads.	 You	 have	 to	 do	 continuous
cleaning.	Whenever	you	see	some	nonsense	in	your	head,	clean	it,	throw	it	away.
If	you	are	clear	and	clean	in	the	mind	you	will	be	able	to	find	solutions	for	every
problem	that	arises	in	your	life.
I	 have	 recently	 realized	 that	 I	 can’t	 even	 see	 a	man,	 let	 alone	 love
him.	I	have	accepted	my	mother’s	angry	conditioning	towards	men.
When	 a	 man	 comes	 to	 me	 with	 his	 love,	 I	 run	 away,	 which
encourages	him	to	chase	me.	This	game	I	play	is	so	ugly.	Please	help
me	 to	 drop	 this	 garbage,	 to	 be	 able	 to	 see	men	 and	 to	 know	 their
beauty,	their	gifts,	their	love.
If	you	really	want	to	drop	this	garbage	you	have	to	be	aware	that	your	mother	is
in	that	garbage,	and	that	will	hurt	you.	You	have	been	poisoned	by	your	mother.
Out	of	a	hundred	problems	and	troubles,	almost	90	percent	of	them	are	because
of	your	mothers	because	the	child	grows	in	the	mother’s	womb.	Even	while	he	is
in	the	womb,	the	mother’s	moods	and	emotions	affect	him.	If	the	mother	remains
constantly	angry,	sad,	gloomy,	frustrated;	if	she	does	not	want	the	child	and	the
husband	has	forced	her	to	have	a	child;	if	she	is	having	the	child	unwillingly,	all
these	things	are	going	to	affect	the	basic	fabric	of	the	child’s	mind.	The	child	is
in	the	making;	it	is	not	only	the	flesh	and	blood	of	the	mother	that	influences	the
child,	he	will	also	be	influenced	by	her	psychology.
So	while	a	mother	is	pregnant	she	has	to	be	very	careful	because	a	new	life	is
being	 created	 inside	 her.	 Anything	 she	 is	 going	 to	 do—fighting	 with	 the
husband,	 fighting	 with	 the	 neighbors,	 or	 being	 frustrated	 for	 any	 reason—is
poisoning	 the	 child’s	mind	 from	 the	 very	 roots.	 Even	 before	 he	 is	 born	 he	 is
already	prejudiced.
It	is	not	only	your	mother	who	is	angry	with	men.	The	vast	majority	of	women
are	angry	with	 their	husbands.	The	same	 is	 true	about	husbands;	most	of	 them
are	 angry	with	 their	wives.	But	 the	 father’s	 anger	 does	 not	 affect	 the	 child	 so
much,	because	 the	child	starts	 inside	 the	mother’s	womb,	starts	growing	 in	 the
shadow	of	the	mother,	not	in	the	shadow	of	the	father.	The	father	remains	only	a
casual	visitor.	In	the	morning	he	may	give	the	child	a	kiss,	pat	him,	and	go	to	the
office.	 In	 the	 evening	 he	 may	 come	 and	 have	 a	 little	 talk	 with	 the	 child;
otherwise,	the	whole	day	long	the	child	is	learning	everything	from	the	mother.
That’s	why	every	language	is	called	the	“mother	 tongue,”	because	the	father
has	no	chance	to	speak	to	the	child	when	the	mother	is	present!	Mother	speaks,
father	listens—the	child	learns	the	language	from	the	mother.	And	it	is	not	only
the	language	but	all	her	attitudes.
But	life	as	we	have	lived	it	up	to	now	is	mostly	managed	by	men.	It	is	a	man-
made	society	and	for	centuries	it	has	had	no	place	for	women.	That’s	why	it	is	so
strange	that	women	are	not	in	sympathy	with	other	women.	But	their	minds	are
also	conditioned	in	such	a	way	that	they	are	sympathetic	to	the	man.
Once	in	a	while	 it	also	happens,	as	 it	has	happened	with	 the	questioner,	 that
deep	down	a	woman	carries	her	mother’s	feelings.	The	mother	has	been	against
men—and	 I	 don’t	 see	 why	 she	 should	 not	 be;	 there	 is	 every	 reason.	 It	 is
absolutely	well	 founded,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	 human	 society	 or	 create	 a
better	future.
The	 past	 is	 past.	 You	 should	 start	 looking	 at	 men	 with	 fresh	 eyes—and
particularly	in	this	place,	where	our	whole	effort	is	to	expose	the	conditioning,	to
dehypnotize	 ourselves.	All	 the	 rubbish	 that	 you	 are	 carrying	 has	 to	 be	 thrown
away;	you	have	to	become	unburdened	and	light	so	that	you	can	gain	your	own
understanding,	your	own	insight.
And	 the	women	 in	 this	 community	 are	 not	 uneducated.	You	 are	 financially
capable	of	being	independent—and	as	intelligent	as	any	man.	There	is	no	need
for	you	to	be	angry	against	men.	If	your	mother	was	angry—perhaps	she	was	not
educated,	perhaps	she	was	not	financially	able	to	be	independent.	She	wanted	to
fly	in	the	open	sky	but	she	was	encaged.	You	are	not.
This	is	one	of	the	reasons	why	I	cannot	communicate	to	the	vast	majority	of
the	people	of	India:	because	the	man	will	not	be	willing	to	listen	to	me;	it	goes
against	his	domination,	his	power.	And	the	woman	cannot	understand	me;	she	is
not	 educated.	Even	 if	 she	 can	understand	me,	 she	 is	 not	 financially	 able	 to	be
independent;	 she	 cannot	 revolt	 against	 the	man-made	 society.	 In	most	 parts	 of
India	there	is	nothing	like	a	women’s	liberation	movement—not	even	the	talk	of
it.	No	woman	ever	thinks	that	there	is	any	possibility	of	liberation.	She	has	lost
all	hope.
But	your	 situation	 is	different.	You	come	 from	a	country	where	women	can
receive	 an	 education,	 and	 education	 makes	 you	 financially	 able	 to	 be
independent.	 You	 need	 not	 be	 a	 housewife;	 it	 is	 not	 necessary	 for	 you	 to	 be
married.	You	can	live	with	someone	you	love	without	any	marriage.
The	woman	has	to	fight	for	it,	the	woman	has	to	make	marriage	an	absolutely
personal	affair	 in	which	 the	government,	 the	state,	 the	society,	nobody	has	any
business	to	interfere.
You	are	in	a	totally	different	space	than	your	mother.	Now,	carrying	her	anger
and	her	conditioning	is	simply	stupid.	Just	forgive	her	and	forget	her,	because	if
you	 go	 on	 having	 this	 conditioning	 of	 anger	 against	men,	 you	will	 never	 feel
complete,	 because	 a	 woman	 or	 a	 man	 who	 is	 incapable	 of	 loving	 remains
incomplete,	frustrated.
As	it	is,	it	creates	a	vicious	circle.	Your	anger	prevents	you	from	love,	because
love	 means	 dropping	 anger	 against	 men	 and	 moving	 to	 the	 diametrically
opposite	polarity—instead	of	anger,	love;	instead	of	hate,	love.	A	quantum	leap
needs	courage.	The	vicious	circle	is	that	because	of	your	angry	conditioning	you
cannot	love	men,	and	because	you	cannot	love	men	you	become	more	and	more
frustrated,	and	your	frustration	makes	you	more	angry—this	is	the	vicious	circle.
Anger	brings	frustration;	frustration	makes	you	more	angry,	more	violent,	more
against	men.	That	 brings	more	 anger,	 and	 the	 circle	 goes	 on	 becoming	deeper
and	deeper.	To	get	out	of	it	becomes	almost	impossible.
You	 have	 to	 begin	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.	 The	 first	 thing	 is	 to	 try	 and
understand	that	your	mother	lived	in	a	different	situation.	Perhaps	her	anger	was
justified.	Your	situation	is	different,	and	carrying	your	mother	within	your	mind
is	 simply	 unreasonable.	 You	 have	 to	 live	 your	 life;	 you	 are	 not	 to	 live	 your
mother’s	life.	She	suffered;	now	why	do	you	want	to	make	more	suffering	in	the
world?	Why	do	you	want	to	be	a	martyr?
Have	every	compassion	towards	your	mother—I	am	not	saying	to	get	angry	at
your	mother	that	she	conditioned	you.	That	will	be	again	keeping	you	in	anger,
just	changing	the	object	from	men	to	the	mother.	No,	you	need	to	drop	the	anger
completely.	Your	mother	 needs	 your	 compassion;	 she	must	 have	 suffered,	 and
that	created	anger	in	her.	But	you	are	not	suffering.	You	can	put	your	anger	aside
and	 you	 have	 a	 fresh	 look	 at	men.	 If	 their	 forefathers	 have	 caused	women	 to
suffer	 it	 is	 beyond	 their	 power	 to	 undo	 it.	What	 has	 happened,	 has	 happened.
Now	 they	 can	 feel	 a	 deep	 apology	 in	 their	 hearts	 for	 what	 man	 has	 done	 to
women.	These	types	of	men	are	a	different	category	of	people.
I	 am	 trying	 to	 create	 every	 possibility	 for	 the	 emergence	 of	 a	 new	 kind	 of
human	being	who	is	not	contaminated	by	the	past,	who	is	discontinuous	with	the
past.	It	is	a	difficult	job;	it	is	almost	like	hitting	my	head	against	the	wall.	But	I
am	determined	to	go	on	hitting—I	trust	in	my	head!	And	the	wall	is	very	old	and
ancient.	 It	may	hurt	me,	but	 it	has	 to	 fall	 some	day;	 its	 time	 is	 finished.	 It	has
already	lived	more	than	its	life	span.
So	meditate	more,	and	be	aware	when	your	mother’s	voice	starts	speaking	to
your	mind.	Slowly,	slowly	put	that	voice	to	sleep.	Don’t	listen	to	it;	it	will	spoil
your	whole	life.	You	have	to	learn	how	to	love.	And	when	he	is	loved,	the	man
becomes	more	polite,	nicer,	a	gentleman.	He	 loses	his	corners,	becomes	softer.
Through	love,	the	woman	starts	blossoming;	otherwise	she	remains	a	closed	bud.
Only	in	love,	when	the	sun	of	love	rises,	she	opens	her	petals.	Only	in	love	her
eyes	 start	 having	 a	 different	 depth,	 a	 different	 shine;	 her	 face	 starts	 having	 a
joyous	 outlook.	 She	 has	 a	 deep	 transformation	 through	 love;	 she	 comes	 to
maturity,	of	age.
So	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 conditioning	 that	 your	mother	 unconsciously	 has	 given	 to
you.	You	have	accepted	it	unconsciously.	The	way	to	get	rid	of	it	 is	to	become
conscious	of	it.	It	is	a	good	beginning	that	you	have	asked.	This	is	the	beginning
of	consciousness—just	the	very	ABC.	You	have	to	go	far	to	change	your	mind
completely,	to	be	fresh,	unconditioned,	open	and	vulnerable.
And	because	of	this	conditioning	you	have	been	playing	this	ugly	game,	that
whenever	 a	 man	 comes	 to	 you	 with	 his	 love,	 you	 run	 away,	 which	 naturally
encourages	 him	 to	 chase	 you.	 That	 you	 enjoy,	 that	 he	 is	 chasing	 you.	 Every
woman	enjoys	that.	It	is	ugly,	and	you	are	not	aware	of	its	deeper	implications.	It
means	you	are	the	prey;	the	man	is	the	hunter	and	he	is	chasing	game.	You	are
allowing	supremacy	to	the	man,	unknowingly.	It	has	been	traditionally	given	to
you	 that	 the	 initiative	 in	 love	 should	 be	 taken	 by	 men,	 not	 by	 women;	 it	 is
against	a	woman’s	grace.	Those	are	all	rotten	ideas—why	be	number	two	from
the	 very	 beginning?	 If	 you	 love	 a	man,	why	wait?	 I	 know	many	women	who
have	waited	 for	 years	 because	 they	wanted	 the	man	 to	 take	 the	 initiative.	But
they	have	fallen	in	love	with	such	men	who	were	not	going	to	take	the	initiative.
I	 know	 one	woman	 in	Bombay	who	was	 in	 love	with	 J.	Krishnamurti.	Her
whole	 life	 she	 remained	 unmarried,	 waiting	 for	 J.	 Krishnamurti	 to	 take	 the
initiative.	She	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	women	but	J.	Krishnamurti	is	utterly
fulfilled	 within	 himself,	 he	 does	 not	 need	 anybody	 else	 to	 complete	 him.
Obviously,	he	never	took	any	initiative.	And	the	woman,	out	of	the	conditioning
of	 thousands	 of	 years,	 of	 course	 could	 not	 take	 the	 initiative;	 that	 is	 against
feminine	grace,	that	is	“primitive.”
There	 is	 really	 no	 reason	 for	 the	 woman	 to	 wait	 for	 the	 man	 to	 take	 the
initiative.	If	a	woman	feels	love	for	someone,	she	should	take	the	initiative	and
she	 should	 not	 feel	 humiliated	 if	 the	man	 is	 not	 willing.	 This	 will	 give	 them
equality.	These	are	small	things	that	will	make	the	liberation	of	women	possible.
But	the	woman	has	been	always	trying	to	be	“game.”	She	attracts	the	man,	she
tries	in	every	way	to	attract	him	by	her	beauty,	by	her	clothes,	her	perfume,	her
hairdo—all	 that	 she	 can	 manage.	 She	 attracts	 the	 man,	 and	 once	 the	 man	 is
attracted,	then	she	starts	running	away.	But	she	does	not	run	too	fast,	either.	She
goes	on	looking	back,	to	see	whether	that	fellow	is	coming	or	not.	If	he	is	left	far
behind,	she	waits.	When	he	comes	close	again	she	starts	running.
This	 is	stupid;	 love	should	be	a	clean	affair.	You	love	someone,	you	express
your	love	and	tell	the	other	person,	“You	are	not	obliged	to	say	yes;	your	no	will
be	perfectly	respected.	It	is	just	my	desire.	You	need	not	unwillingly	say	yes	to
me,	because	 that	yes	 is	dangerous	unless	you	also	 feel	 love	 for	me.	Only	 then
can	our	life	become	a	completion.”
A	woman	and	a	man	in	love	can	move	into	meditation	very	easily.	Meditation
and	love	are	such	close	phenomena	that	if	you	move	into	meditation,	your	love
energies	 start	 overflowing.	 If	 you	 really	 fall	 in	 love	with	 someone	who	 loves
you,	 your	 meditative	 energies	 start	 growing;	 they	 are	 very	 deeply	 joined
experiences.	Hence	I	am	in	favor	of	both.
I	have	heard	you	speak	about	the	ego	and	how,	with	awareness,	one
can	 see	 that	 it	 does	 not	 exist.	 But	 I	 realize	 that	 I	 never	 put	much
emphasis	 on	 awareness.	 Can	 you	 please	 show	 the	 way	 to	 become
more	aware?
Love	 is	 enough	 unto	 itself,	 if	 your	 love	 is	 not	 the	 ordinary,	 biological
instinctive	love.	If	it	is	not	part	of	your	ego,	if	it	is	not	a	power	trip	to	dominate
someone—if	your	love	is	just	a	pure	joy,	rejoicing	in	the	being	of	the	other	for
no	 reason	 at	 all,	 a	 sheer	 joy—awareness	will	 follow	 this	 pure	 love	 just	 like	 a
shadow.	You	need	not	worry	about	awareness.
There	 are	 only	 two	ways:	 either	 you	 become	 aware,	 then	 love	 follows	 as	 a
shadow;	or	you	become	so	loving	that	awareness	comes	of	its	own	accord.	They
are	 two	 sides	of	 the	 same	coin.	You	need	not	bother	 about	 the	other	 side;	 just
keep	hold	of	one	side	and	the	other	side	cannot	escape!	The	other	side	is	bound
to	come.
And	the	path	of	love	is	easier,	rosier,	innocent,	simple.
The	path	of	awareness	is	a	little	arduous.	Those	who	cannot	love,	for	them	I
suggest	 the	path	of	awareness.	There	are	people	who	cannot	 love—their	hearts
have	become	stones.	Their	upbringing,	their	culture,	their	society	has	killed	the
very	capacity	 to	 love	because	 this	whole	world	 is	not	 run	by	 love,	 it	 is	 run	by
cunningness.	 To	 succeed	 in	 this	 world	 you	 don’t	 need	 love,	 you	 need	 a	 hard
heart	and	a	sharp	mind.	In	fact,	you	don’t	need	the	heart	at	all.
In	 this	world,	 the	people	of	 the	heart	are	crushed,	exploited,	oppressed.	This
world	is	run	by	the	cunning,	by	the	clever,	by	the	heartless,	and	the	cruel.	So	the
whole	society	is	managed	in	such	a	way	that	every	child	starts	losing	his	heart,
and	his	energy	starts	moving	directly	towards	the	head.	The	heart	is	ignored.
I	have	heard	an	ancient	parable	from	Tibet,	that	in	the	beginning	of	time	the
heart	 used	 to	 be	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle	 part	 of	 the	 body.	 But	 because	 of
continuously	 being	 pushed	 aside,	 out	 of	 the	 way,	 now	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 in	 the
middle	of	the	body.	Now	the	poor	fellow	waits	by	the	side	of	the	road—“If	some
day	you	need	me,	 I	 am	here”—but	 it	 gets	no	nourishment,	no	encouragement.
Instead	it	gets	all	kinds	of	condemnation.
If	 you	 do	 something	 and	 you	 say,	 “I	 did	 it	 because	 I	 felt	 like	 doing	 it,”
everybody	is	going	to	laugh:	“Felt?	Have	you	lost	your	head?	Give	your	reason,
your	logic	for	doing	it.	Feeling	is	not	a	reason	to	do	anything.”
Even	if	you	fall	in	love,	you	have	to	find	reasons	why	you	have	fallen	in	love:
because	the	woman’s	nose	is	beautiful,	her	eyes	have	such	depth,	her	body	is	so
proportionate.	 These	 are	 not	 the	 reasons.	 You	 have	 never	 added	 up	 all	 these
reasons	on	your	calculator	and	then	found	that	this	woman	seems	to	be	worthy	of
falling	in	love	with:	“Fall	in	love	with	this	woman—exactly	the	right	length	of
nose,	the	right	kind	of	hair,	the	right	color,	the	right	proportion	of	the	body.	What
more	do	you	want?”
But	this	is	not	the	way	that	anybody	ever	falls	in	love.	You	fall	in	love.	Then
just	to	satisfy	the	idiots	around	you	that	you	are	not	a	fool,	you	have	calculated
everything	 and	 only	 then	 you	 have	 taken	 the	 step.	 It	 is	 a	 reasonable,	 rational,
logical	step.
Nobody	hears	the	heart.
And	 the	 mind	 is	 so	 chattering,	 so	 continuously	 chattering—yakkety-yak,
yakkety-yak—that	even	if	the	heart	sometimes	says	something,	it	never	reaches
to	you.	 It	 cannot	 reach.	The	bazaar	 in	your	head	 is	 buzzing	 so	much	 that	 it	 is
impossible,	 absolutely	 impossible	 for	 the	 heart.	 Slowly,	 the	 heart	 stops	 saying
anything.	Not	heard	again	and	again,	ignored	again	and	again,	it	falls	silent.
The	head	runs	 the	show	in	 the	society;	otherwise,	we	would	have	 lived	 in	a
totally	different	world—more	loving,	less	hate,	less	war,	no	possibility	of	nuclear
weapons.	The	heart	will	never	give	support	for	any	destructive	technology	to	be
developed.	The	heart	will	never	be	in	the	service	of	death.	It	is	life:	it	throbs	for
life,	it	beats	for	life.
Because	of	the	whole	conditioning	of	the	society,	the	method	of	awareness	has
to	be	chosen,	because	awareness	appears	to	be	very	logical	and	rational.	But	if
you	can	love,	then	there	is	no	need	to	go	on	a	long,	arduous	route	unnecessarily.
Love	is	the	shortest	way,	the	most	natural—so	easy	that	it	is	possible	even	for	a
small	child.	It	needs	no	training.	You	are	born	with	the	quality	of	it,	if	it	is	not
corrupted	by	others.
But	love	should	be	pure.	It	should	not	be	impure.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	the	English	word	“love”	comes	from	a	very
ugly	root	in	Sanskrit.	It	comes	from	lobh.	Lobh	means	“greed.”
And	 as	 far	 as	 ordinary	 love	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 greed.	 That’s	why
there	are	people	who	love	money,	who	love	houses;	 there	are	people	who	love
this,	who	love	that.	Even	if	they	love	a	woman	or	a	man,	it	is	simply	their	greed;
they	want	to	possess	everything	beautiful.	It	is	a	power	trip.	Hence,	you	will	find
lovers	 continuously	 fighting,	 fighting	 about	 such	 trivia	 that	 they	 both	 feel
ashamed	“about	what	 things	we	go	on	fighting!”	In	 their	silent	moments	when
they	are	alone,	they	wonder,	“Do	I	become	possessed	by	some	evil	spirit?	Such
trivia,	so	meaningless!”	But	it	is	not	a	question	of	trivia;	it	is	a	question	of	who
has	power,	who	is	more	dominant,	whose	voice	is	heard.
Love	cannot	exist	in	such	circumstances.
I	have	heard	a	story:	In	the	life	of	one	of	the	great	emperors	of	India,	Akbar,
there	 is	 a	 small	 story.	 He	 was	 very	 much	 interested	 in	 all	 kinds	 of	 talented
people,	and	from	all	over	India	he	had	collected	nine	people,	 the	most	 talented
geniuses,	who	were	known	as	the	“nine	jewels	of	Akbar’s	court.”
One	day,	 just	gossiping	with	his	vice-councillors,	he	 said,	 “Last	night	 I	was
discussing	with	my	wife.	She	is	very	insistent	that	every	husband	is	henpecked.	I
tried	 hard,	 but	 she	 says,	 ‘I	 know	many	 families,	 but	 I	 have	 never	 found	 any
husband	who	is	not	henpecked.’	What	do	you	think?”	he	asked	the	councillors.
One	of	the	councillors,	Birbal,	said,	“Perhaps	she	is	right,	because	you	could
not	prove	it.	You	yourself	are	a	henpecked	husband;	otherwise,	you	could	have
given	her	a	good	beating,	 then	and	 there	proving	 that	you	are	 the	husband	and
you	are	in	charge.”
Akbar	 said,	 “That	 I	 cannot	do,	because	 I	have	 to	 live	with	her.	 It	 is	 easy	 to
advise	somebody	else	to	beat	his	wife.	Can	you	beat	your	wife?”
Birbal	said,	“No,	I	cannot.	I	simply	accept	that	I	am	a	henpecked	husband,	and
your	wife	is	right.”
But	Akbar	said,	“It	has	to	be	proved,	one	way	or	another.	Surely	in	the	capital
there	must	be	at	least	one	husband	who	is	not	henpecked.	There	is	no	rule	in	the
world	 that	has	no	exception,	and	 this	 is	not	a	 scientific	 rule	at	all.”	He	said	 to
Birbal,	 “You	 take	my	 two	beautiful	Arabian	horses”—one	was	black,	one	was
white—“and	go	around	the	capital.	If	you	can	find	a	man	who	is	not	henpecked,
you	can	give	him	the	choice:	whichever	horse	he	wants	is	a	present	from	me.”
They	were	valuable.	In	those	days	horses	were	very	valuable,	and	these	were	the
most	beautiful	horses.
Birbal	said,	“It	is	useless,	but	if	you	say	so	I	will	go.”
He	went,	 and	everybody	was	 found	 to	be	henpecked.	 It	was	 so	easy	 to	 see!
Birbal	would	 just	 call	 the	 person	 and	 his	wife	 to	 their	 front	 door	 and	 ask	 the
husband,	“Are	you	henpecked	or	not?”
The	man	would	look	at	his	wife	and	say,	“You	should	have	asked	when	I	was
alone.	This	is	not	right,	it	will	create	unnecessary	trouble.	Just	for	a	horse	I	am
not	going	 to	destroy	my	 life.	You	 take	your	horses,	 I	don’t	want	 either	one	of
them.”
But	 then	he	came	upon	one	man	who	was	sitting	 in	 front	of	his	house,	with
two	 persons	massaging	 him.	He	was	 a	 champion	wrestler,	 a	 very	 strong	man.
Birbal	 thought,	 “Perhaps	 this	 man—he	 could	 kill	 anybody,	 even	 without	 any
weapons.	If	he	just	got	hold	of	your	neck	you	would	be	finished!”	Birbal	said,
“Can	I	ask	you	a	question?”
The	man	stood	up	and	said,	“Question?	What	question?”
Birbal	asked	him,	“Are	you	henpecked?”
That	 man	 said,	 “First,	 let	 us	 greet	 each	 other,	 a	 handshake.”	 He	 crushed
Birbal’s	hand	and	said,	“I	will	not	 let	go	of	your	hand	until	 tears	 start	 coming
from	your	eyes!	You	dare	to	ask	me	such	a	question?”
Birbal	 was	 nearly	 dying—he	 himself	 was	 almost	 a	 man	 of	 steel,	 but	 tears
started	coming,	and	he	said,	“Just	let	go	of	me!	You	are	not	henpecked!	Clearly	I
have	just	come	to	the	wrong	place	to	ask	such	a	thing.	But	where	is	your	wife?”
The	man	pointed	and	said,	“Look,	she	is	there,	cooking	my	breakfast.”	A	very
small	woman	was	cooking	his	breakfast.
The	woman	was	 so	 small	 and	 the	man	was	 so	big	 that	Birbal	 thought	 there
really	was	a	possibility	that	perhaps	this	man	was	not	henpecked.	He	could	kill
this	 woman!	 So	 he	 said,	 “Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 any	 further	 into
investigation.	You	can	choose	either	horse	from	these	two,	black	and	white,	as	a
reward	from	the	king	for	the	man	who	is	not	henpecked.”
And	 just	 at	 that	moment,	 that	 small	 woman	 said,	 “Don’t	 choose	 the	 black!
Choose	the	white,	or	I	will	make	your	life	a	hell!”
The	man	 said,	 “No,	 no,	 I	was	 anyway	 going	 to	 choose	 the	white.	You	 just
keep	quiet.”
And	Birbal	said,	“You	get	neither	white	nor	black.	It	 is	all	finished,	you	lost
the	game.	Even	you	are	a	henpecked	husband.”
There	 is	a	continuous	fight	 for	domination.	Love	cannot	blossom	in	such	an
atmosphere.	 The	man	 is	 fighting	 in	 the	world	 for	 all	 kinds	 of	 ambitions.	 The
woman	is	fighting	the	man	because	she	is	afraid:	he	is	out	of	the	house	the	whole
day.	“Who	knows?	He	may	be	having	affairs	with	other	women.”	She	is	jealous,
suspicious;	 she	 wants	 to	 be	 sure	 that	 this	 man	 remains	 controlled.	 So	 in	 the
house	 the	man	 is	 fighting	with	 the	wife,	 in	 the	 outside	 he	 is	 fighting	with	 the
world.	Where	do	you	think	the	flower	of	love	can	blossom?
The	flower	of	love	can	blossom	only	when	there	is	no	ego,	when	there	is	no
effort	to	dominate,	when	one	is	humble,	when	one	is	trying	not	to	be	somebody
but	is	ready	to	be	nobody.	Then	awareness	will	come	of	its	own	accord,	and	this
is	the	most	beautiful	way,	the	most	innocent	way:	a	path	full	of	flowers,	a	path
that	passes	through	beautiful	lakes,	rivers,	groves,	greenery.
If	 you	 can	 easily	 be	heartful,	 forget	 all	 about	 awareness;	 it	will	 come	of	 its
own	accord.	Each	step	of	love	will	bring	its	own	awareness.	This	love	will	not
be	falling	in	love;	I	call	it	rising	in	love.
How	 is	 it	 possible	 for	 a	 woman	 to	 be	 in	 love	 and	 still	 centered	 in
herself	and	in	her	own	individuality?
The	question	has	many	implications.
First,	 you	 do	 not	 understand	 what	 being	 centered	means.	 Second,	 you	 also
have	 no	 experience	 of	 the	 phenomenon	 of	 love.	 I	 can	 say	 this	 with	 absolute
authority,	because	your	question	supplies	all	the	evidence	for	what	I	am	saying.
Love	and	centering	are	one	phenomenon,	they	are	not	two.	If	you	have	known
love,	you	cannot	be	anything	but	centered.
Love	means	coming	to	be	at	ease	with	existence.	It	may	be	through	a	lover,	it
may	be	through	a	friend,	or	it	may	be	simply	direct	and	immediate—through	the
sunrise,	the	sunset.	The	very	experience	of	love	will	make	you	centered.	This	has
been	 the	 whole	 philosophy	 of	 devotees	 down	 through	 the	 ages.	 Love	 is	 their
science;	centering	is	the	result.
But	 there	 are	 people—and	 there	 are	 only	 two	kinds	of	 people—who	have	 a
dominant	 reasoning,	 logic.	 Their	 heart	 is	 undeveloped.	 And	 there	 are	 people
whose	heart	is	blossoming	and	now	reason,	rationality	only	function	as	servants
to	the	heart.	Man’s	misery	is	that	he	is	trying	to	do	the	impossible:	he	is	trying	to
force	the	heart	to	serve	the	mind,	which	is	impossible.	This	is	your	chaos,	this	is
your	mess.
The	question	has	 arisen	out	 of	 the	ordinary	 experience	 called	 love.	 It	 is	 not
love,	it	is	only	called	love—just	a	glimpse,	just	a	small	taste,	which	is	not	going
to	be	a	nourishment.	On	the	contrary,	it	is	going	to	become	a	pathological	state
because	one	moment	 you	 are	 high	 and	 everything	 is	 just	 far	 out,	 and	 the	next
moment	all	is	dark,	you	cannot	believe	that	there	has	been	anything	significant	in
your	 life.	 All	 those	 moments	 of	 love	 appear	 to	 have	 happened	 in	 dreams,	 or
perhaps	you	have	imagined	them.	And	these	dark	moments	are	absolutely	joined
with	the	beautiful	moments.
This	is	the	dialectic	of	human	mind.	It	functions	through	opposites.	You	will
love	 a	man	and	you	will	 love	 the	man	 for	 absolutely	wrong	 reasons.	You	will
love	the	man	or	the	woman	because	you	are	carrying	within	you	an	image	of	the
other.	The	boy	has	got	it	from	the	mother	and	the	girl	has	got	it	from	the	father.
All	 lovers	 are	 searching	 for	 their	 mothers,	 their	 fathers—in	 the	 final	 analysis
they	are	all	searching	for	the	womb	and	its	beautiful,	relaxed	state.
Psychologically,	 the	 eternal	 quest	 for	 moksha,	 ultimate	 liberation,
enlightenment,	 can	 be	 reduced	 to	 the	 basic	 psychological	 fact	 that	 man	 has
already	known	 the	most	beautiful,	 the	most	peaceful	 state	before	he	was	born.
Now,	 if	 something	 greater	 does	 not	 happen	 in	 his	 life,	 some	 exposure	 to	 the
divine,	to	the	universal,	he	is	going	to	remain	miserable	because—unconsciously
—every	moment	there	is	judgment.
He	 knows	 he	 has	 lived	 for	 nine	 months	 and,	 remember,	 for	 a	 child	 in	 the
mother’s	womb,	nine	months	are	almost	eternity	because	he	does	not	know	how
to	 count,	 he	 does	 not	 have	 any	 clock.	Each	moment	 is	 enough	 unto	 itself.	He
does	not	know	there	is	going	to	be	another	moment	afterwards,	so	each	moment
is	 a	 surprise.	 And	 with	 no	 worry,	 with	 no	 tension	 about	 food,	 about	 clothes,
about	 shelter,	 he	 is	 absolutely	 at	 ease,	 relaxed,	 centered.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to
distract	him	from	the	center.
There	is	nobody	there	even	to	say	hello.
This	 experience	 of	 nine	 months	 of	 being	 centered,	 of	 immense	 joy,	 peace,
aloneness…the	 other	 is	 no	more	 there;	 you	 are	 the	world,	 you	 are	 the	whole.
Nothing	is	missing,	everything	is	supplied	by	nature	without	any	effort	on	your
part.	 But	 life	 confronts	 you	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 way—antagonistically,
competitively.	 Everybody	 is	 your	 enemy,	 because	 everybody	 is	 in	 the	 same
market;	everybody	is	your	enemy	because	everybody	has	 the	same	desires,	 the
same	ambition.	You	are	bound	to	come	into	conflict	with	millions	of	people.
It	 is	because	of	 this	 inner	antagonism	that	all	 the	cultures	of	 the	world	have
created	 a	 certain	 system	 of	 etiquette,	 familiarity,	 formality,	 and	 they	 have
emphasized	it	continuously	to	 the	child:	“You	have	to	respect	your	father.”	All
the	cultures	all	over	the	world	throughout	the	whole	of	history,	why	are	they	all
insisting	to	the	child,	“You	should	respect	your	father”?	There	is	some	suspicion
that	 if	he	is	 left	alone,	 the	child	is	not	going	to	respect	 the	father;	 that	much	is
certain,	 simple	 logic.	 In	 fact,	 the	 child	 is	 going	 to	 hate.	 Every	 girl	 hates	 her
mother.
To	hide	it—because	it	will	be	very	difficult	to	live	in	a	society	where	all	your
wounds	are	uncovered	and	everybody	is	walking	around	with	uncovered	wounds
—a	certain	ethos,	a	morality,	a	certain	style	of	life	has	to	cover	it,	and	to	show
just	 the	 opposite,	 that	 you	 love	 your	 mother,	 that	 you	 love	 and	 respect	 your
father.	Deep	down	just	the	opposite	is	the	case.
You	have	been	divided	into	two	parts	by	the	society.	The	false	part	has	been
given	all	respect,	because	the	false	is	created	by	the	society.	The	real	 is	denied
any	 respectability,	 because	 the	 real	 comes	 from	 nature,	 which	 is	 beyond	 the
control	of	any	society,	culture,	or	civilization.	Each	child	has	to	be	trained	in	lies,
has	to	be	programmed	in	such	a	way	that	he	will	be	subservient	to	the	society,	a
docile	slave.
All	 societies	 are	 breaking	 the	 very	 spine	 of	 every	 child	 so	 he	 becomes
spineless.	He	cannot	raise	his	voice,	he	cannot	question	anything.	His	life	is	just
not	his	own.	He	loves,	but	his	love	is	false.	From	the	very	beginning	he	was	told
to	love	his	mother	“because	she	is	your	mother”—as	if	being	a	mother	has	some
intrinsic	 quality	 or	 some	 obligation	 that	 you	 should	 love	 her.	 But	 it	 has	 been
accepted	that	the	mother	should	be	loved.
My	emphasis	is	that	the	mother	should	be	loving,	and	no	child	should	ever	be
told	to	love	somebody	unless	it	happens	on	its	own.	Yes,	the	mother,	the	father,
the	 family	 can	 create	 a	milieu	without	 saying	 anything;	 the	whole	 energy	 can
generate,	can	trigger	your	own	forces	of	love.
But	never	say	to	anybody	that	love	is	a	duty.	It	is	not.	Duty	is	a	false	substitute
for	 love.	When	 you	 cannot	 love,	 society	 goes	 on	 supplying	 duties.	 They	may
appear	 to	be	 love,	but	 inside	 there	 is	nothing	 loving	 in	 it;	on	 the	contrary,	 it	 is
only	social	formality.	And	you	become	so	accustomed	to	social	formalities	that
you	forget	completely	that	there	are	things	which	are	waiting	to	happen	in	your
life	but	you	are	so	occupied	that	you	don’t	give	space,	you	don’t	allow	love	to
blossom	in	you.
Hence,	you	don’t	know	that	centering	and	love	are	one	thing.
Centering	 is	more	 appealing	 to	 the	 intellectual.	Nothing	 has	 to	 be	 believed;
there	is	nobody	else	to	whom	you	have	to	surrender.
It	is	because	of	the	other	that	every	love	affair	becomes	a	tragedy.
In	Indian	literature	there	are	no	tragedies.	In	my	student	days	I	was	asking	my
professors,	 “Why	 are	 tragedies	missing	 in	 Indian	 literature?”	And	not	 a	 single
teacher	or	professor	was	able	to	say	something	significant	about	it.
They	 simply	 shrugged	 their	 shoulders	 and	 they	 said,	 “You	 are	 strange;	 you
find	 such	questions.	 I	 have	been	 in	 this	university	 for	 thirty	years	 and	nobody
has	asked.”
I	said,	“To	me	 it	 seems	very	obvious	 that	 the	question	has	deep	roots	 in	 the
culture.”	In	all	other	countries	except	India	there	are	tragedies—beautiful	stories,
novels,	fiction—but	in	India	they	are	missing.	And	the	reason	is	India	is	a	more
ancient	 land	 than	 any	 other	 land.	 It	 has	 learned	many	 things	 from	 experience,
and	one	of	them	is	that	which	should	not	be,	should	not	be	talked	about;	hence,
there	should	be	no	tragedy.
Their	logic	can	be	understood.	If	man	feels	that	life	is	everywhere	a	comedy,
then	there	is	a	possibility	he	might	continue	deceiving	himself.	He	might	never
tell	anybody	his	problems	because	he	thinks	nobody	has	problems.	Why	become
a	laughingstock?	Something	is	wrong	with	you,	just	keep	quiet.	There	is	no	point
in	exposing	yourself	 to	a	cruel	society	 that	will	simply	 laugh	at	you	and	prove
that	you	are	an	idiot	and	you	don’t	know	how	to	live.
But	it	is	not	so	simple.	It	is	not	a	question	just	of	knowing	how	to	live.	It	is	a
question	 first	 of	 dropping	 all	 that	 is	 false	 in	 you.	 The	 false	 comes	 from	 the
outside.	And	when	all	 that	 is	false	is	dropped	and	you	are	utterly	naked	before
existence,	the	real	will	start	growing	in	you.	This	is	the	situation	which	has	to	be
fulfilled	 for	 the	 real	 to	 grow,	 to	 blossom,	 and	 to	 bring	 you	 to	 the	 ultimate
meaning	and	truth	of	life.
It	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	You	 can	 start	 either	 from	 centering—the	moment
you	are	centered	you	will	suddenly	find	immense	love	overflowing—or	you	can
start	from	love.	And	the	moment	your	love	is	without	any	jealousy,	without	any
conditionings,	but	 just	a	sharing	of	 the	dance	of	 the	heart,	you	will	experience
centering.
They	 are	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 Centering	 is	 a	 more	 intellectual,
scientific	 method.	 Love	 has	 a	 different	 source	 in	 you—your	 heart.	 It	 is	 more
poetic,	 it	 is	more	aesthetic,	 it	 is	more	 sensitive,	 it	 is	more	 feminine,	 it	 is	more
beautiful.	And	it	is	easier	than	centering.
My	suggestion	is,	first	drop	all	false	ideas	about	love.	Let	something	real	grow
in	you,	and	centering	will	be	coming,	enlightenment	will	be	coming.	But	if	you
find	 it	 very	 difficult	 to	 start	with	 love,	 then	 don’t	 feel	 despair.	You	 can	move
directly	through	centering.	You	can	call	it	meditation,	you	can	call	it	awareness.
But	 in	 each	 case,	 the	 ultimate	 result	 is	 the	 same:	 you	 are	 centered	 and
overflowing	with	love.
“LOVE	HURTS”	AND	OTHER	MISUNDERSTANDINGS
Love	never	hurts	anybody.	And	if	you	feel	you	have	been	hurt	by	love,
it	 is	something	else	 in	you,	not	your	 loving	quality,	 that	 feels	hurt.	Unless	you
see	 this	you	will	go	on	moving	 in	 the	same	circles	again	and	again.	What	you
call	love	can	hide	many	unloving	things	in	you;	the	human	mind	has	been	very
clever,	cunning,	 in	deceiving	others	and	in	deceiving	itself,	 too.	The	mind	puts
beautiful	labels	on	ugly	things,	it	tries	to	cover	your	wounds	with	flowers.	This
is	one	of	the	first	things	you	have	to	go	into,	if	you	want	to	understand	what	love
is.
“Love”	 as	 people	 ordinarily	 use	 the	word	 is	 not	 love;	 it	 is	 lust.	And	 lust	 is
bound	 to	cause	hurt,	because	 to	desire	somebody	as	an	object	 is	 to	offend	 that
person.	It	is	an	insult,	it	is	violent.	When	you	move	with	lust	toward	somebody,
how	long	can	you	pretend	it	is	love?	Something	that	is	superficial	will	look	like
love,	but	scratch	a	little	bit	and	hidden	behind	it	is	sheer	lust.	Lust	is	animalistic.
To	look	at	anybody	with	lust	is	to	insult,	humiliate,	is	to	reduce	the	other	person
to	a	thing,	to	a	commodity.	No	person	ever	likes	to	be	used;	that’s	the	most	ugly
thing	you	can	do	to	anybody.	No	person	is	a	commodity,	no	person	is	a	means
toward	any	end.
This	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 lust	 and	 love.	 Lust	 uses	 the	 other	 person	 to
fulfill	some	of	your	desires.	The	other	is	only	used,	and	when	the	use	is	complete
you	can	throw	the	other	person	away.	It	has	no	more	use	to	you;	its	function	is
fulfilled.	This	is	the	most	immoral	act	in	existence,	using	the	other	as	a	means.
Love	is	just	the	opposite	of	it:	respecting	the	other	as	an	end	unto	himself	or
herself.	When	you	love	someone	as	an	end	unto	himself,	then	there	is	no	feeling
of	hurt;	you	become	enriched	through	it.	Love	makes	everybody	rich.
Secondly,	love	can	only	be	true	if	there	is	no	ego	hiding	behind	it;	otherwise
love	becomes	only	an	ego	trip.	It	is	a	subtle	way	to	dominate.	And	one	has	to	be
very	 conscious	 because	 this	 desire	 to	 dominate	 is	 very	 deep-rooted.	 It	 never
comes	naked;	it	always	comes	hidden	beneath	beautiful	garments,	decorated.
Parents	never	say	that	their	children	are	their	possessions,	they	never	say	that
they	want	 to	dominate	 the	children,	but	 that’s	actually	what	 they	do.	They	say
they	want	to	help,	they	say	they	want	them	to	be	intelligent,	to	be	healthy,	to	be
blissful,	but—and	that	“but”	is	a	great	but—it	has	to	be	according	to	their	ideas.
Even	 their	 children’s	 happiness	 has	 to	 be	 decided	 by	 the	 parents’	 ideas;	 the
children	have	to	be	happy	according	to	the	parents’	expectations.
Children	 have	 to	 be	 intelligent,	 but	 at	 the	 same	 time	 obedient,	 too.	 This	 is
asking	 for	 the	 impossible!	 The	 intelligent	 person	 cannot	 be	 obedient;	 the
obedient	 person	 has	 to	 lose	 some	 of	 his	 intelligence.	 Intelligence	 can	 say	 yes
only	when	it	feels	deep	agreement	with	you.	It	cannot	say	yes	just	because	you
are	 bigger,	 more	 powerful,	 authoritative—a	 father,	 a	 mother,	 a	 priest,	 a
politician.	It	cannot	say	yes	just	because	of	the	authority	that	you	carry	with	you.
Intelligence	 is	 rebellious,	 and	 no	 parents	 would	 like	 their	 children	 to	 be
rebellious.	Rebellion	will	be	against	their	hidden	desire	to	dominate.
Husbands	 say	 they	 love	 their	 wives,	 but	 it	 is	 just	 domination.	 They	 are	 so
jealous,	 so	possessive,	how	can	 they	be	 loving?	Wives	go	on	saying	 they	 love
their	 husbands,	 but	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day	 they	 are	 creating	 hell;	 in	 every
possible	way	they	are	reducing	the	husband	to	something	ugly.	The	henpecked
husband	is	an	ugly	phenomenon.	And	the	problem	is	that	first	the	wife	reduces
the	husband	to	a	henpecked	husband	and	then	she	loses	interest	in	him,	because
who	can	remain	interested	in	a	henpecked	husband?	He	seems	to	be	worthless;
he	does	not	seem	to	be	man	enough.
First	the	husband	tries	to	make	the	wife	just	his	possession,	and	once	she	is	a
possession	he	loses	interest.	There	is	some	hidden	logic	in	it:	his	whole	interest
was	to	possess;	now	that	is	finished,	and	he	would	like	to	try	some	other	woman
so	he	can	again	go	on	another	trip	of	possession.
Beware	of	these	ego	numbers.	Then	you	will	be	hurt,	because	the	person	you
are	 trying	 to	 possess	 is	 bound	 to	 revolt	 in	 some	 way	 or	 other,	 is	 bound	 to
sabotage	your	 tricks,	your	strategies	because	nobody	 loves	anything	more	 than
freedom.	Even	love	is	secondary	to	freedom;	freedom	is	the	highest	value.	Love
can	be	 sacrificed	 for	 freedom,	 but	 freedom	cannot	 be	 sacrificed	 for	 love.	And
that’s	what	we	have	been	doing	for	centuries,	sacrificing	freedom	for	love.	Then
there	is	antagonism,	conflict,	and	every	opportunity	is	used	to	hurt	each	other.
Love	in	its	purest	form	is	a	sharing	of	joy.	It	asks	nothing	in	return,	it	expects
nothing;	 hence	 how	 can	 you	 feel	 hurt?	 When	 you	 don’t	 expect,	 there	 is	 no
possibility	of	being	hurt.	Then	whatsoever	comes	is	good,	and	if	nothing	comes,
that	 too	 is	 good.	 Your	 joy	 was	 to	 give,	 not	 to	 get.	 Then	 one	 can	 love	 from
thousands	of	miles	away;	there	is	no	need	even	to	be	physically	present.
Love	is	a	spiritual	phenomenon;	lust	is	physical.	Ego	is	psychological;	love	is
spiritual.	You	will	have	to	learn	the	very	alphabet	of	love.	You	will	have	to	start
from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 from	 scratch;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 hurt	 again	 and
again.	And	remember,	only	you	can	help	yourself;	nobody	else	is	responsible.
How	can	anybody	help	you?	Nobody	else	can	destroy	your	ego.	If	you	cling
to	it,	nobody	can	destroy	it;	 if	you	have	invested	in	it,	nobody	can	destroy	it.	I
can	only	share	my	understanding	with	you.	The	buddhas	can	only	show	the	way;
then	 you	 have	 to	 go,	 then	 you	 have	 to	 follow	 the	way.	Nobody	 can	 lead	 you,
holding	your	hand.
That’s	 what	 you	 would	 like:	 you	 would	 like	 to	 play	 the	 game	 of	 being
dependent.	And	remember,	 the	person	who	plays	 the	game	of	being	dependent
will	take	revenge.	Soon	he	would	like	in	some	way	for	the	other	to	be	dependent
on	him	or	on	her.	 If	 the	wife	 is	dependent	on	the	husband	for	money,	 then	she
will	 try	 to	make	 the	husband	dependent	on	her	 for	other	 things.	 It	 is	 a	mutual
arrangement.	 They	 both	 become	 crippled,	 they	 both	 become	 paralyzed;	 they
cannot	 exist	 without	 each	 other.	 Even	 the	 idea	 that	 the	 husband	 was	 happy
without	the	wife	hurts	her,	that	he	was	laughing	with	the	guys	in	the	club	hurts
her.	She	is	not	interested	in	his	happiness;	in	fact	she	cannot	believe	it:	“How	did
he	dare	to	be	happy	without	me?	He	has	to	depend	on	me!”
The	husband	does	not	 feel	good	 that	 the	wife	was	 laughing	with	 somebody,
was	enjoying,	was	cheerful.	He	wants	all	her	cheerfulness	to	be	totally	possessed
by	him;	it	is	his	property.	The	dependent	person	will	make	you	dependent	also.
Fear	is	never	love,	and	love	is	never	afraid.	There	is	nothing	to	lose	for	love.
Why	should	love	be	afraid?	Love	only	gives.	It	is	not	a	business	transaction,	so
there	is	no	question	of	 loss	or	profit.	Love	enjoys	giving,	 just	as	flowers	enjoy
releasing	their	fragrance.	Why	should	they	be	afraid?	Why	should	you	be	afraid?
Remember,	fear	and	love	never	exist	together;	they	cannot.	No	coexistence	is
possible.	Fear	is	just	the	opposite	of	love.
People	ordinarily	think	hate	is	the	opposite	of	love.	That	is	wrong,	absolutely
wrong.	 Fear	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 love.	Hate	 is	 love	 standing	 on	 its	 head;	 it	 is	 a
headstand	but	it	is	not	opposite	to	love.	The	person	who	hates	simply	shows	that
somewhere,	he	still	loves.	The	love	has	gone	sour,	but	it	is	still	there.	Fear	is	the
real	opposite.	Fear	means	that	now	the	whole	love	energy	has	disappeared.
Love	is	outgoing,	fearlessly	reaching	to	the	other,	tremendously	trusting	that	it
will	 be	 received—and	 it	 is	 always	 received.	 Fear	 is	 shrinking	within	 yourself,
closing	yourself,	closing	all	the	doors,	all	the	windows	so	that	no	sun,	no	wind,
no	rain	can	reach	you,	you	are	so	afraid.	You	are	entering	into	your	grave	alive.
Fear	 is	a	grave,	 love	 is	a	 temple.	 In	 love,	 life	comes	 to	 its	ultimate	peak.	 In
fear,	life	falls	to	the	level	of	death.	Fear	stinks,	love	is	fragrant.	Why	should	you
be	afraid?
Be	afraid	of	your	ego,	be	afraid	of	your	lust,	be	afraid	of	your	greed,	be	afraid
of	your	possessiveness;	be	afraid	of	your	 jealousy—but	 there	 is	no	question	of
being	 afraid	 of	 love.	 Love	 is	 divine!	 Love	 is	 like	 light.	 When	 there	 is	 light,
darkness	cannot	exist.	When	there	is	love,	fear	cannot	exist.
Love	can	make	a	great	celebration	out	of	your	 life,	but	only	 love—not	 lust,
not	ego,	not	possessiveness,	not	jealousy,	not	dependence.
I	think	I	understand	what	you	mean	when	you	say	it	is	not	love	that
hurts.	Nevertheless,	 the	kind	of	 love	you	are	talking	about	 is	not	so
easy	 to	 find.	 So	 the	 process	 of	 learning	 and	 growing	 into	 a	 more
mature	 love	 is	 often	very	painful.	 Is	pain	 just	 an	 inevitable	part	 of
growth?
Growth	is	painful	because	you	have	been	avoiding	a	thousand	and	one	pains
in	 your	 life.	 By	 avoiding	 them	 you	 cannot	 destroy	 them,	 they	 go	 on
accumulating.	You	go	on	swallowing	your	pains	and	they	remain	in	your	system.
That’s	why	growth	is	painful:	when	you	start	growing,	when	you	decide	to	grow,
you	have	 to	 face	all	 the	pains	 that	you	have	 repressed.	You	cannot	 just	bypass
them.
You	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 in	 a	wrong	way.	Unfortunately,	 until	 now,	 not	 a
single	society	has	existed	on	the	earth	which	has	not	been	repressive	of	pain.	All
societies	depend	on	repression.	Two	things	they	repress:	one	is	pain,	another	is
pleasure.	And	they	repress	pleasure	also	because	of	pain.	Their	reasoning	is	that
if	 you	 are	 not	 too	 happy	 you	will	 never	 become	 too	 unhappy;	 if	 great	 joy	 is
destroyed	you	will	never	be	in	deep	pain.	To	avoid	pain,	they	avoid	pleasure.	To
avoid	death,	they	avoid	life.
And	the	logic	has	something	in	it.	Both	grow	together;	if	you	want	to	have	a
life	of	ecstasy	you	will	have	 to	accept	many	agonies.	 If	you	want	 the	peaks	of
the	Himalayas	then	you	will	also	have	the	valleys.	But	nothing	is	wrong	with	the
valleys;	your	approach	just	has	to	be	different.	You	can	enjoy	both—the	peak	is
beautiful,	 so	 is	 the	 valley.	And	 there	 are	moments	when	 one	 should	 enjoy	 the
peak	and	there	are	moments	when	one	should	relax	in	the	valley.
The	 peak	 is	 sunlit,	 it	 is	 in	 a	 dialogue	with	 the	 sky.	 The	 valley	 is	 dark,	 but
whenever	you	want	to	relax	you	have	to	move	into	the	darkness	of	the	valley.	If
you	want	to	have	peaks	you	will	need	to	grow	roots	into	the	valley:	the	deeper
your	roots	go,	the	higher	your	tree	will	grow.	The	tree	cannot	grow	without	roots
and	the	roots	have	to	move	deep	into	the	soil.
Pain	and	pleasure	are	intrinsic	parts	of	life.	People	are	so	much	afraid	of	pain
that	they	repress	it,	they	avoid	any	situation	that	brings	pain,	they	go	on	dodging
pain.	And	finally	they	stumble	upon	the	fact	that	if	you	really	want	to	avoid	pain
you	will	have	 to	avoid	pleasure,	 too.	That’s	why	your	monks	avoid	pleasure—
they	 are	 afraid	 of	 it.	 In	 fact	 they	 are	 simply	 avoiding	 all	 possibilities	 of	 pain.
They	know	that	if	you	avoid	pleasure	then	naturally	great	pain	is	not	possible;	it
comes	only	as	a	 shadow	of	pleasure.	Then	you	walk	on	 the	plain	ground;	you
never	move	on	 the	peaks	and	you	never	 fall	 into	 the	valleys.	But	 then	you	are
part	of	the	living	dead,	then	you	are	not	alive.
Life	 exists	 between	 this	 polarity.	 This	 tension	 between	 pain	 and	 pleasure
makes	 you	 capable	 of	 creating	 great	music;	music	 exists	 only	 in	 this	 tension.
Destroy	 the	polarity	and	you	will	be	dull,	you	will	be	stale,	you	will	be	dusty.
You	won’t	 have	 any	meaning	 and	you	will	 never	 know	what	 splendor	 is.	You
will	have	missed	life.	One	who	wants	to	know	life	and	live	life	has	to	accept	and
embrace	 death.	 They	 come	 together,	 they	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 a	 single
phenomenon.
That’s	why	growth	is	painful.	You	have	to	go	into	all	those	pains	that	you	have
been	avoiding.	It	hurts.	You	have	to	go	through	all	those	wounds	that	somehow
you	have	managed	not	to	look	at.	But	the	deeper	you	go	into	pain,	the	deeper	is
your	capacity	to	go	into	pleasure.	If	you	can	go	into	pain	to	the	uttermost	limit,
you	will	be	able	to	touch	heaven.
I	 have	heard	 that	 a	 seeker	 came	 to	 a	Zen	master	 and	 asked,	 “How	shall	we
avoid	heat	and	cold?”
Metaphorically,	he	is	asking,	“How	should	we	avoid	pleasure	and	pain?”	That
is	the	Zen	way	of	talking	about	pleasure	and	pain,	“heat	and	cold.”
“How	shall	we	avoid	heat	and	cold?”
The	master	answered,	“Be	hot,	be	cold.”
To	be	free	of	pain	the	pain	has	to	be	accepted,	inevitably	and	naturally.	Pain	is
pain—a	simple,	painful	fact.	Suffering,	however,	 is	only	and	always	the	refusal
of	pain,	the	claim	that	life	should	not	be	painful.	It	is	the	rejection	of	a	fact,	the
denial	of	 life	 and	of	 the	nature	of	 things.	Death	 is	 the	mind	 that	minds	dying.
Where	there	is	no	fear	of	death,	who	is	there	to	die?
Man	is	unique	among	creatures	in	his	knowledge	of	death	and	in	his	laughter.
The	miracle	is	that	then,	he	can	even	create	out	of	death	something	new:	he	can
die	laughing!	And	if	you	can	die	laughing,	only	then	will	you	give	a	valid	proof
that	you	must	have	lived	laughing.	Death	is	the	final	statement	of	your	whole	life
—the	conclusion,	the	concluding	remark.	How	you	have	lived	will	be	shown	by
your	death,	how	you	die.
Can	you	die	laughing?	Then	you	were	a	grown-up	person.	If	you	die	crying,
weeping,	 clinging,	 then	 you	were	 a	 child.	 You	were	 not	 grown	 up,	 you	were
immature.	 If	 you	 die	 crying,	weeping,	 clinging	 to	 life,	 that	 simply	 shows	 you
have	been	avoiding	death	and	you	have	been	avoiding	life	too,	with	all	its	pains.
Growth	is	facing	the	reality,	encountering	the	fact,	whatever	it	is.	And	let	me
repeat:	pain	is	simply	pain;	there	is	no	suffering	in	it.	Suffering	comes	from	your
desire	 that	 the	pain	should	not	be	 there,	 that	 there	 is	something	wrong	 in	pain.
Watch,	witness,	and	you	will	be	surprised.	You	have	a	headache:	the	pain	is	there
but	suffering	is	not	there.	Suffering	is	a	secondary	phenomenon,	pain	is	primary.
The	headache	is	there,	the	pain	is	there;	it	is	simply	a	fact.	There	is	no	judgment
about	 it.	You	don’t	call	 it	good	or	bad,	you	don’t	give	 it	any	value;	 it	 is	 just	a
fact.
The	rose	is	a	fact,	so	is	the	thorn.	The	day	is	a	fact,	so	is	the	night.	The	head	is
a	fact,	so	is	the	headache.	You	simply	take	note	of	it.
Buddha	taught	his	disciples	that	when	you	have	a	headache	simply	say	twice,
“Headache,	headache.”	Take	note,	but	don’t	evaluate,	don’t	say,	“Why?	Why	has
this	headache	happened	 to	me?	It	 should	not	happen	 to	me.”	The	moment	you
say,	“It	should	not”	you	bring	suffering	in.	Now	suffering	is	created	by	you,	not
by	 the	headache.	Suffering	 is	your	antagonistic	 interpretation,	suffering	 is	your
denial	of	the	fact.
And	the	moment	you	say,	“It	should	not	be”	you	have	started	avoiding	it,	you
have	 started	 turning	 yourself	 away	 from	 it.	 You	would	 like	 to	 be	 occupied	 in
something	so	 that	you	can	 forget	 it.	You	 turn	 the	 radio	or	 the	 television	on,	or
you	 go	 to	 the	 club,	 or	 you	 start	 reading.	 You	 divert	 yourself,	 you	 distract
yourself.	 Now	 that	 pain	 has	 not	 been	 witnessed;	 you	 have	 simply	 distracted
yourself.	That	pain	will	be	absorbed	by	your	system.
Let	 this	 key	 be	 very	 deeply	 understood:	 if	 you	 can	 witness	 your	 headache
without	 taking	 any	 antagonistic	 attitude,	without	 avoiding	 it,	without	 escaping
from	it;	if	you	can	just	be	there,	meditatively	there—“Headache,	headache”—if
you	can	just	simply	see	it,	the	headache	will	go	in	its	time.	I	am	not	saying	that	it
will	go	miraculously,	that	just	by	your	seeing	it	will	go.	It	will	go	in	its	time.	But
it	will	not	be	absorbed	by	your	system,	it	will	not	poison	your	system.	It	will	be
there,	you	will	take	note	of	it,	and	it	will	be	gone.	It	will	be	released.
When	you	witness	a	certain	thing	in	yourself,	it	cannot	enter	into	your	system.
It	 always	 enters	 when	 you	 avoid	 it,	 when	 you	 escape	 from	 it.	When	 you	 are
absent,	 then	 it	 enters	 into	 your	 system.	Only	when	 you	 are	 absent	 can	 a	 pain
become	part	of	your	being—if	you	are	present,	your	very	presence	prevents	 it
from	becoming	part	of	your	being.
And	if	you	can	go	on	taking	note	of	your	pains	you	will	not	be	accumulating
them.	You	have	not	been	taught	the	right	clue,	so	you	go	on	avoiding.	Then	you
accumulate	so	much	pain,	you	are	afraid	 to	 face	 it,	you	are	afraid	 to	accept	 it.
Growth	becomes	painful;	it	is	because	of	wrong	conditioning.	Otherwise	growth
is	not	painful,	growth	is	utterly	pleasant.
When	the	tree	grows	and	becomes	bigger	do	you	think	there	is	pain?	There	is
no	pain.	Even	when	a	child	is	born,	if	the	mother	accepts	it	there	will	be	no	pain.
But	 the	mother	 rejects	 it;	 the	mother	 is	 afraid.	She	becomes	 tense,	 she	 tries	 to
hold	the	child	inside,	which	is	not	possible.	The	child	is	ready	to	go	out	into	the
world,	 the	 child	 is	 ready	 to	 leave	 the	 mother.	 He	 is	 ripe,	 the	 womb	 cannot
contain	him	anymore.	If	the	womb	contains	him	any	longer	the	mother	will	die
and	 the	 child	will	 die.	 But	 the	mother	 is	 afraid.	 She	 has	 heard	 that	 it	 is	 very
painful	to	give	birth	to	a	child—birth	pangs,	birth	pain—she	is	afraid.	And	out	of
fear	she	becomes	tense	and	closed.
For	others—and	in	primitive	societies	those	people	still	exist—childbirth	is	so
simple,	with	no	pain	at	all.	On	 the	contrary,	you	will	be	surprised,	 the	greatest
ecstasy	happens	to	the	woman	in	childbirth—not	pain,	not	agony	at	all,	but	the
greatest	 ecstasy.	 No	 sexual	 orgasm	 is	 so	 satisfying	 and	 so	 tremendous	 as	 the
orgasm	that	happens	to	the	woman	when	she	gives	birth	to	a	child	naturally.	The
whole	 sexual	 mechanism	 of	 the	 woman	 pulsates	 as	 it	 cannot	 pulsate	 in	 any
lovemaking.	The	child	is	coming	from	the	deepest	core	of	the	woman.	No	man
can	 ever	 penetrate	 a	 woman	 to	 that	 core.	 And	 the	 pulsation	 arises	 from	 the
inside.	The	pulsation	is	a	must;	 that	pulsation	will	come	like	waves,	great	 tidal
waves	of	 joy.	Only	that	will	help	the	child	to	come	out,	only	that	will	help	the
passage	 to	 open	 for	 the	 child.	 So	 there	will	 be	 great	 pulsation	 and	 the	whole
sexual	being	of	the	woman	will	have	tremendous	joy.
But	what	actually	has	happened	to	humanity	is	 just	 the	opposite:	 the	woman
comes	to	feel	the	greatest	agony	of	her	life.	And	this	is	a	mind	creation,	this	is
wrong	upbringing.	The	physical	birth	can	be	natural	if	you	accept	it,	and	so	it	is
with	your	birth	as	a	loving	being.	Growth	means	you	are	being	born	every	day.
Birth	does	not	end	the	day	you	were	born;	on	that	day	it	simply	starts,	it	is	only	a
beginning.	The	day	you	 left	 the	womb	of	your	mother	you	were	not	born,	you
just	started	being	born;	that	was	just	the	beginning.	And	a	person	goes	on	being
born	 till	 he	 dies.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 are	 born	 in	 a	 single	 moment.	 Your	 birth
process	continues	for	seventy,	eighty,	ninety	years,	however	long	you	live.	It	is	a
continuum.
And	 every	 day	 you	 will	 feel	 joy:	 growing	 new	 leaves,	 new	 foliage,	 new
flowers,	new	branches,	rising	higher	and	higher	and	touching	new	altitudes.	You
will	be	getting	deeper,	higher;	you	will	be	reaching	to	peaks.	Growth	will	not	be
painful.
But	 growth	 is	 painful—it	 is	 because	 of	 you,	 your	wrong	 conditioning.	You
have	been	taught	not	 to	grow;	you	have	been	taught	to	remain	static,	you	have
been	 taught	 to	 cling	 to	 the	 familiar	 and	 the	 known.	That’s	why	 each	 time	 the
known	disappears	 from	your	hands	you	 start	 crying.	A	 toy	has	been	broken,	 a
pacifier	has	been	taken	away.
Remember,	 only	 one	 thing	 is	 going	 to	 help	 you,	 and	 that	 is	 awareness—
nothing	else.	Growth	will	remain	painful	if	you	don’t	accept	life	and	love	in	all
its	ups	and	downs.	The	summer	has	to	be	accepted	and	the	winter,	too.
This	is	what	I	call	meditation.	Meditation	is	when	you	are	emptied	of	all	that
is	old	and	told	and	done	to	death.	Then	you	see.	Or	rather,	then	there	is	seeing,
the	birth	of	the	new.	But	you	will	have	to	go	through	many	pains,	many	agonies.
It	 is	 because	 you	 have	 lived	 in	 a	 certain	 society,	 in	 a	 certain	 culture—Hindu,
Mohammedan,	Christian,	Indian,	German,	Japanese.	These	are	different	ways	of
avoiding	 pain	 and	 nothing	 else.	 You	 have	 been	 part	 of	 a	 culture,	 that’s	 why
growth	is	painful,	because	the	culture	tries	to	make	you	not	grow;	it	wants	you	to
remain	 juvenile.	 It	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	move	 psychologically	 as	 you	move
physiologically.
In	the	First	World	War	and	then	again	in	the	Second	World	War,	psychologists
became	aware	of	a	very	strange	fact:	that	man’s	average	mental	age	is	not	more
than	 twelve	 or	 thirteen.	 Even	 the	 man	 who	 is	 seventy,	 his	 mental	 age	 is
somewhere	 between	 ten	 and	 thirteen.	What	 does	 it	mean?	 It	 simply	means	 he
stopped	 growing	 at	 ten;	 the	 body	 continued	 but	 the	mind	 stopped.	No	 society
allows	grown-up	minds.	Why?	Because	grown-up	minds	are	dangerous	for	 the
social	structure;	they	are	rebellious.	They	are	dangerous	for	the	social	structure
because	 they	 will	 see	 all	 the	 kinds	 of	 stupidities	 that	 go	 on	 in	 the	 name	 of
culture,	society,	nation.
Now	see:	the	earth	is	one,	and	man	still	remains	divided.	All	the	problems	of
humanity	can	be	solved	if	nations	disappear.	There	is	no	problem,	actually	there
is	no	problem;	 the	basic	problem	is	created	by	 the	boundaries	of	nations.	Now
the	technology	exists	that	can	feed	all	the	people	of	the	world,	there	is	no	need
for	any	starvation.	But	that	is	not	possible,	because	those	boundaries	won’t	allow
it.
A	grown-up	person	will	be	able	 to	 see	all	 this	nonsense,	 a	grown-up	person
will	be	able	to	see	it	through	and	through.	A	grown-up	person	cannot	be	reduced
to	a	slave.
Take	hold	of	your	being.	Face	your	pains	and	throw	off	all	kinds	of	bondages,
because	only	by	being	 free	of	all	bondages	will	you	be	able	 to	sing	your	song
and	dance	your	dance.
In	spring,	hundreds	of	flowers;	in	autumn,	a	harvest	moon.
In	summer,	a	refreshing	breeze;	in	winter,	snow.
If	useless	things	do	not	hang	in	your	mind,
Any	season	is	a	good	season.
It	 is	 a	Zen	 saying.	 “If	useless	 things	don’t	hang	 in	your	mind…”	Growth	 is
painful	 because	 you	 are	 carrying	 so	 many	 useless	 things	 in	 your	 mind.	 You
should	 have	 dropped	 them	 long	 before.	But	 you	 have	 not	 been	 taught	 to	 drop
anything,	 you	 have	 only	 been	 taught	 to	 hold	 on	 to	 everything—meaningful,
meaningless.	 Because	 you	 are	 carrying	 so	many	 hang-ups,	 growth	 is	 difficult.
Otherwise	growth	will	be	so	smooth,	just	like	a	bud	opens	into	a	flower.
My	 girlfriend	 told	me	 I	 am	 a	 little	 boring,	 very	 dependent,	 and	 a
victim.	 Then	 I	 felt	 guilty	 and	 depressed	 and	 utterly	 unworthy.	 I
began	 to	 feel	 inside	 me	 a	 big	 no:	 towards	 existence,	 life,	 love.
Meanwhile	I	observed	in	me	this	destructive	energy	and	I	felt	that	I
somehow	enjoyed	it!	Is	it	possible	to	use	this	energy	in	some	creative
way?
Your	 question	 is	 an	 example	 of	 the	 stupid	 conclusions	 that	 mind	 comes	 to.
Perhaps	you	may	not	have	looked	into	it	and	its	contradictions.	I	would	like	to
go	 into	 the	 very	 psychology	 of	 such	 questions.	They	 are	 not	 only	within	 you,
they	are	within	many.	You	are	courageous	to	expose	yourself.
The	 exposure	 begins,	 “My	 girlfriend	 told	 me	 I	 am	 a	 little	 boring.”	 Your
girlfriend	is	very	compassionate,	because	each	man	finally	becomes	very	boring,
not	 “a	 little”	 boring.	 Do	 you	 realize	 the	 fact	 that	 what	 you	 call	 love	 is	 a
repetition,	the	same	stupid	gymnastics	again	and	again?	And	in	this	whole	stupid
game	 the	 man	 is	 the	 loser.	 He	 is	 dissipating	 his	 energy,	 perspiring,	 huffing,
puffing,	and	the	girl	keeps	her	eyes	closed,	thinking,	“It	is	a	question	only	of	two
or	three	minutes	and	this	nightmare	will	be	finished.”
People	 are	 so	 noninventive,	 they	 take	 it	 for	 granted	 that	 going	 through	 the
same	act	again	and	again	is	making	them	more	interesting.	That’s	why	I	say	your
girlfriend	is	very	compassionate;	she	only	told	you	that	you	are	a	little	boring.	I
say	to	you,	you	are	utterly	boring.
When	 the	 Christian	 missionaries	 came	 to	 the	 East,	 the	 Eastern	 people
discovered	 that	 they	 knew	 only	 one	 posture	 of	 making	 love:	 the	 woman
underneath	and	those	ugly	beasts	on	top	of	the	delicate	woman.	That’s	where	it
got	the	name	“the	missionary	position.”
India	 is	 an	 ancient	 land	 and	 the	 birthplace	 of	 many	 sciences,	 particularly
sexology.	 A	 book	 of	 tremendous	 importance,	 by	 Vatsyayana,	 has	 been	 in
existence	for	five	thousand	years.	The	name	of	the	book	is	Kama	Sutra,	hints	for
making	 love.	 And	 it	 comes	 from	 a	 man	 of	 deep	 meditation—he	 has	 created
eighty-four	 positions	 for	 lovemaking.	 Naturally	 the	 positions	 should	 change;
otherwise	you	 are	 bound	 to	 be	boring.	Vatsyayana	 recognizes	 the	 fact	 that	 the
same	lovemaking	position	creates	boredom,	a	feeling	of	utter	stupidity,	because
you	are	always	doing	the	same	thing.	He	invented	eighty-four	postures	to	make
the	 love	 lives	 of	 couples	 a	 little	 interesting.	 Nobody	 in	 the	 whole	 world	 has
written	a	book	of	the	caliber	of	Kama	Sutra.	But	it	could	only	have	come	from	a
man	of	immense	clarity,	of	deep	meditativeness.
What	is	your	lovemaking?	If	you	look	at	your	lovemaking,	you	yourself	will
feel	 that	 it	 is	 all	 boring.	 And	 particularly	 for	 the	 woman	 it	 is	 more	 boring,
because	the	man	is	finished	in	two	or	three	minutes	and	the	woman	has	not	even
started.	And	all	around	the	world,	cultures	have	enforced	in	the	minds	of	women
that	 they	are	not	supposed	even	 to	enjoy	or	move	or	be	playful—that	 is	called
“dirty”	prostitutes	do	it,	not	ladies.	Ladies	have	to	lie	down	almost	dead	and	let
that	old	guy	do	whatsoever	he	wants	to	do.	So	it	is	nothing	new,	there	is	nothing
new	even	to	see.
You	 should	 not	 take	 it	 as	 a	 personal	 insult.	 Your	 girlfriend	 is	 telling	 you
something	really	sincere	and	honest.	Have	you	given	her	orgasmic	joy?	Or	have
you	only	used	her	to	throw	out	your	sexual	energy?	Have	you	reduced	her	into	a
commodity?	She	has	been	conditioned	 to	accept	 it,	but	 this	mere	“acceptance”
cannot	be	joyful.
You	make	love	on	the	same	bed	where	you	fight	every	day.	In	fact	fighting	is
the	preface:	throwing	pillows,	shouting	at	each	other,	arguing	about	everything,
and	 then,	 feeling	 tired,	 some	 negotiation	 is	 needed.	 Your	 love	 is	 only	 a
negotiation.	If	you	are	a	man	of	aesthetic	sensibility,	your	love	chamber	should
be	a	sacred	place,	because	 it	 is	 in	 that	 love	chamber	 that	 life	 is	born.	It	should
have	 beautiful	 flowers,	 incense,	 fragrance;	 you	 should	 enter	 into	 it	 with	 deep
respect.
And	love	should	not	be	just	an	abrupt	thing	where	you	just	grab	the	woman.
This	 hit-and-run	 affair	 is	 not	 love.	 Love	 should	 have	 a	 preface	 of	 beautiful
music,	of	dancing	together,	of	meditating	together.	And	it	should	not	be	a	mind
thing,	that	the	whole	time	you	are	thinking	of	how	to	get	her	to	make	love	and
then	 go	 to	 sleep.	 It	 should	 be	 a	 deeper	 involvement	 of	 your	whole	 being,	 not
projected	 by	 the	 mind	 but	 coming	 spontaneously.	 Beautiful	 music,	 fragrance,
you	 are	 dancing	 hand	 in	 hand,	 you	 have	 again	 become	 small	 children	 playing
with	flowers.	If	spontaneously,	lovemaking	happens	in	this	sacred	atmosphere	it
will	have	a	different	quality.
You	 should	 understand	 that	 the	 woman	 is	 capable	 of	 multiple	 orgasms,
because	she	does	not	lose	any	energy.	Man	is	capable	of	only	one	orgasm	and	he
loses	energy,	looks	depressed.	Even	the	next	morning	you	can	see	his	hangover,
and	 as	 he	 goes	 on	 growing	 older	 it	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 difficult.	 This
difference	has	to	be	understood.	The	woman	is	on	the	receptive	end—she	has	to
be,	because	in	nature’s	plan	she	is	to	become	a	mother,	she	needs	more	energy.
But	 her	 orgasm	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 way	 of	 happening.	 Man’s	 sexuality	 is
local,	 like	 local	 anesthesia.	A	woman’s	body	 is	 sexual	 all	 over,	 and	unless	her
whole	 body	 starts	 trembling	 with	 joy,	 each	 cell	 of	 her	 body	 starts	 becoming
involved,	she	cannot	have	an	orgasmic	explosion.
So	it	is	not	only	in	your	case	that	the	man	is	boring,	it	is	the	case	for	almost
ninety-nine	percent	of	women	around	the	world.	The	whole	situation	has	 to	be
changed.	The	woman	should	not	be	under	the	man.	In	the	first	place	it	is	ugly—
the	man	has	a	stronger	body,	the	woman	is	more	fragile.	She	should	be	on	top	of
the	man,	not	the	man	on	top	of	her.
Secondly,	 the	man	 should	 remain	 silent,	 inactive,	 so	 that	 his	 orgasm	 is	 not
finished	within	two	minutes.	If	you	are	silent	and	let	the	woman	go	crazy	on	top
of	your	chest	it	will	give	her	good	exercise	and	it	will	bring	her	to	an	explosion
of	orgasmic	energy.	It	takes	time	for	her	whole	body	to	warm	up,	and	if	you	are
too	active	there	is	no	time.	You	meet,	but	the	meeting	is	not	of	beauty,	of	love,
but	just	utilitarian.
Try	with	your	girlfriend	what	I	am	saying.	You	be	the	inactive	partner	and	let
her	be	the	active	partner.	Allow	her	to	be	uninhibited.	She	has	not	to	behave	like
a	lady,	she	has	to	behave	like	an	authentic	woman.	The	“lady”	is	just	created	by
men;	the	woman	is	created	by	existence.	And	you	have	to	fill	 the	gap	between
her	 orgasms.	 The	 gap	 can	 be	 filled	 in	 only	 one	 way,	 that	 you	 remain	 very
inactive,	silent,	and	enjoy	her	going	crazy.	And	she	will	have	multiple	orgasms.
You	should	end	the	game	with	your	orgasm,	but	you	should	not	begin	with	it.
Then	 your	 girlfriend	 will	 not	 call	 you	 a	 little	 boring.	 You	 will	 be	 a	 really
interesting,	 wonderful	 guy	 who	 is	 behaving	 like	 a	 lady!	 And	 keep	 your	 eyes
closed	so	that	she	is	not	inhibited	by	your	eyes.	So	she	can	do	anything—moving
her	 hands,	 her	 body,	moaning,	 groaning,	 shouting.	 You	 are	 not	 allowed	 to	 be
alive,	you	simply	remain	silent.	Then	she	will	be	mad	after	you!	Right	now	you
must	be	behaving	stupidly,	as	most	of	the	men	in	the	world	do.
Your	 girlfriend	 is	 giving	 you	 good	 advice,	 and	 you	 in	 your	 stupidity	 are
thinking	that	she	is	condemning	you.	When	she	says,	“You	are	dependent	and	a
victim,”	I	can	see	even	through	your	question	that	she	is	right.	A	victim	you	are,
just	as	every	human	being	is	a	victim—a	victim	of	stupid	ideologies,	which	have
created	strange	guilt	feelings	and	do	not	allow	you	to	be	playful.	Although	you
may	be	making	love,	you	know	you	are	committing	a	sin	and	hell	is	not	far	off.
While	making	love,	make	it	a	meditative	process.	Your	whole	presence	has	to
be	 there,	 showering	 on	 the	 woman	 you	 love.	 The	 woman	 has	 to	 be	 there,
showering	all	her	beauty	and	grace	on	her	lover.	Then	you	will	not	be	a	victim,
otherwise	you	are,	because	love	is	not	accepted	by	your	idiotic	religions	to	be	a
natural	and	playful	experience.	They	condemn	it.	Some	of	them	have	made	it	a
condition	that	unless	you	leave	the	woman	you	will	never	attain	to	truth.	And	the
conditioning	 has	 been	 going	 on	 for	 so	 long	 that	 it	 has	 almost	 become	 a	 truth,
although	it	is	an	absolute	lie.
You	are	a	victim	of	 traditions	and	you	are	certainly	dependent.	When	I	 read
your	 question	 further	 you	 will	 see	 how	 you	 are	 dependent,	 dependent	 on	 a
girlfriend	who	tells	you	that	you	are	boring,	not	very	juicy,	and	a	victim.
Your	 dependence	 shows	 further:	 “Then	 I	 felt	 very	 guilty	 and	 depressed	 and
utterly	unworthy.”	If	your	girlfriend,	by	saying	such	simple	truths,	can	make	you
feel	guilty	and	depressed	and	utterly	unworthy,	 she	certainly	 seems	 to	be	your
master.	“I	began	 to	 feel	 inside	me	a	big	no.”	And	 this	 is	where	your	girlfriend
has	been	kind,	not	to	say	to	you,	“You	are	a	little	bit	of	an	idiot	too.”
You	are	saying,	“I	began	to	feel	inside	me	a	big	no	towards	existence.”	Now
what	 has	 existence	 done—towards	 life,	 towards	 love”?	 This	 shows	 your	 utter
idiocy.	Rather	than	listening	to	your	girlfriend	who	was	saying	sincerely	that	you
are	boring,	just	a	little,	you	should	have	asked	her,	“In	what	way	can	I	become	a
little	more	interesting?	Do	you	have	any	suggestions?”	That	would	have	been	an
intelligent	step.
But	instead	of	asking	the	girl	you	started	having	“a	big	no:	towards	existence,
life,	love.”	But	I	understand	the	reason.	Perhaps	you	may	not	be	able	to	explain
it,	 but	 I	 can	 see	 the	 underlying	 reason	 for	 your	 big	 “no.”	You	believe	 in	 your
girlfriend	 too	 much.	 Naturally,	 you	 could	 not	 ask	 her;	 that	 would	 show	 your
dependence.	You	must	be	afraid	to	make	much	fuss	about	these	things	with	her,
because	 girlfriends	 are	 not	 your	 permanent	wives;	 no	 law	prevents	 them	 from
moving	with	 someone	who	 is	more	 juicy.	 And	 everybody	 in	 the	 beginning	 is
juicy,	 but	 just	 a	 few	 days	 together	 and	 the	 whole	 juice	 dries	 out.	 You	 start
looking	 around	 for	 some	 other	 woman,	 for	 some	 other	man,	 because	 they	 all
look	juicier.
You	will	repeat	the	same	thing	life	after	life;	you	have	done	it	already,	without
understanding	 the	 foundation.	 Living	 with	 one	 man	 more	 than	 a	 week	 the
problem	arises	of	how	to	get	rid	of	him.	He	is	also	thinking	about	how	to	get	rid
of	you.	But	it	does	not	look	right	to	either	of	you,	so	you	start	creating	trouble	so
that	 somehow	 some	 other	 idiot	 may	 become	 interested	 in	 your	 girlfriend,
because	 you	 both	 go	 on	 seeing	 that	 other	 girls	 are	more	 juicy,	 other	men	 are
more	juicy.	It	 is	an	old	story	that	the	grass	on	the	other	side	of	the	fence	looks
greener	than	your	own	grass.	Distance	creates	that	phenomenon.
Any	woman	may	 look	 to	 you	more	 interesting	 than	your	wife;	 she	 is	 just	 a
pain	in	the	neck.	But	what	you	don’t	know	is	that	all	these	women	are	following
the	same	philosophy.	For	one	or	two	days	they	are	so	wonderful,	and	once	they
have	caught	hold	of	you	the	real	story	starts—they	start	becoming	a	pain	in	the
neck.	The	same	is	true	about	men.	Meeting	a	woman	on	the	beach,	in	the	park,
by	the	side	of	a	river,	he	pretends	to	be	Alexander	the	Great,	walks	like	a	lion.
And	within	two	days	the	same	fellow	is	reduced	to	a	rat.
Nobody	talks	about	the	reality	of	why	this	is	happening,	why	so	many	people
are	unnecessarily	made	miserable.	This	society	will	never	be	happy	if	we	don’t
allow	people	to	move	and	not	get	stuck	in	marriages,	not	get	stuck	in	their	own
promises.
Out	of	freedom	meet	with	each	other,	and	the	moment	you	feel	that	you	have
explored	the	whole	topography	of	the	woman	and	the	woman	knows	that	she	has
experienced	whatever	is	possible	to	experience	in	the	man,	then	it	is	time	to	say
good-bye	 to	 each	 other	 in	 deep	 friendliness.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 hang	 around
each	other’s	neck.
A	world	completely	free	from	any	contracts	between	man	and	woman	will	be
immensely	 lovely,	 beautiful,	 unboring,	 interesting.	 But	 we	 have	 created
institutions,	 and	 to	 live	 in	 an	 institution	 is	 not	 a	 very	 great	 experience.	 Your
marriage	is	an	institution,	although	the	newer	generation	is	moving	a	little	more
freely,	 before	 settling	 after	 the	 age	 of	 thirty.	 I	 have	 been	 looking	 around	 the
world	to	find	a	hippie	who	is	at	least	thirty-five	years	old.	I	have	not	found	any.
Around	 thirty,	 all	 hippies	 disappear;	 they	 become	 just	 the	 same	 conservative
people	whom	they	were	fighting	against	before.
Seeing	 the	 situation	 that	 living	 in	 institutions	 is—marriage,	 community,
society,	 Lions	 Club,	 Rotary	 Club—you	 cannot	 live	 joyously,	 you	 have
experimented.	This	is	the	first	time	in	history	that	we	have	a	younger	generation.
I	 don’t	 mean	 that	 in	 the	 past	 there	 were	 not	 young	 people,	 but	 there	 was	 no
“younger	generation.”	A	small	child,	seven	years	old,	would	start	following	the
father’s	business,	would	start	going	 to	 the	fields,	 taking	care	of	 the	cows;	or	 if
the	father	was	a	carpenter,	the	child	would	start	helping	him.	At	the	age	of	seven
he	had	already	joined	the	society.
For	 the	 first	 time	 in	history	 there	 is	a	generation	which	can	be	authentically
called	 younger,	 and	 which	 has	 created	 a	 generation	 gap.	 Schools	 are	 there,
colleges	are	there,	universities,	and	it	takes	twenty-five	years,	twenty-six	years	to
come	out	of	the	university	with	a	postgraduate	degree.	But	by	that	time	you	are
no	 longer	 young.	 By	 that	 time	 you	 start	 having	 responsibilities:	 profession,
family,	marriage.
But	 during	 the	 time	 that	 you	 spend	 in	 the	 universities,	 before	 entering	 life,
there	 is	 a	 long	gap	 in	which	you	 are	 not	 engaged	 in	 any	utilitarian,	 purposive
activity.	That	has	created	the	generation	gap.	Men	and	women	become	sexually
mature—women	by	 the	age	of	 thirteen,	men	by	 the	age	of	 fourteen—and	 they
will	be	married	perhaps	ten	or	twelve	years	afterwards.	These	twelve	years	have
made	girlfriends	and	boyfriends	possible.
It	 is	 a	great	opportunity	 for	 the	 future	 to	understand	 the	whole	phenomenon
and	 its	 psychology.	 You	 have	 the	 choice	 to	 change	 the	 old	 habits,	 to	 create
trouble	but	drop	old	habits.	Every	man	needs	to	be	aware	of	many	women.	Every
woman	needs	the	experience	of	many	other	men	before	deciding	to	marry.	Their
experience	will	help	them	to	find	the	right	person	with	whom	they	can	melt	and
merge	without	any	difficulty.
“Meanwhile,”	you	are	saying,	“I	observed	in	me	this	destructive	energy	and	I
felt	 that	 I	 somehow	 enjoyed	 it!”	 Everybody	 has	 destructive	 energy,	 because
energy,	if	left	to	itself,	is	bound	to	be	destructive	unless	it	is	used	with	awareness
and	becomes	creative.	But	the	most	important	thing	that	you	are	saying	is	that,
“Somehow	I	enjoyed	it.”
Then	how	are	you	going	to	change	it?	With	anything	that	you	enjoy	you	are
bound	to	remain	on	the	same	level;	you	cannot	change	it,	because	you	may	not
enjoy	 the	 change.	 And	 all	 this	 has	 come	 to	 your	 mind	 only	 because	 your
girlfriend	told	you	that	you	are	“a	little	boring,	very	dependent,	and	a	victim.”
You	have	energy.	To	enjoy	destructive	energy	is	suicidal,	to	enjoy	destructive
energy	as	destructive	is	in	the	service	of	death.	If	you	are	aware	of	it	you	have	to
go	through	a	transformation.	Use	your	energy	creatively;	perhaps	that	will	make
you	less	boring,	more	interesting,	less	dependent,	less	of	a	victim.	And	the	most
important	 part	will	 be	 that	 you	will	 not	 feel	 guilty	 and	depressed.	No	 creative
person	feels	depressed	and	guilty.	His	participation	 in	 the	universe	 through	his
creative	actions	makes	him	tremendously	fulfilled	and	gives	him	dignity.	That	is
the	very	birthright	of	every	human	being,	but	very	few	people	claim	it.
Moreover,	 this	 big	 “no”	 will	 become	 a	 big	 “yes”	 if	 the	 energy	moves	 into
creative	 dimensions.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 difficulty,	 it	 is	 so	 easy	 to	 use	 energy	 in
creative	 fields.	 Paint,	 do	 gardening,	 grow	 flowers,	 write	 poetry,	 learn	 music,
dance.	Learn	anything	that	changes	your	destructive	energy	into	creative	energy,
and	immediately	the	big	no	will	become	even	a	bigger	yes.	Then	you	will	not	be
angry	at	existence,	you	will	be	grateful.	You	will	not	be	against	life.
How	can	a	creative	person	be	against	life,	love?	It	is	impossible,	it	has	never
happened.	 It	 is	 only	 the	 uncreative	 people	who	 are	 against	 everything.	And	 if
you	 can	 be	 creative,	 life-affirmative,	 you	will	 have	moved	 in	 the	 direction	 of
becoming	an	authentic,	sincere,	celebrating	individual.
Your	girlfriend	has	raised	very	 important	questions	for	your	 life.	The	easiest
way	would	be	to	change	the	girlfriend,	but	I	suggest	that	she	is	certainly	a	friend
to	you	and	that	whatever	she	has	said	is	absolutely	sincere,	authentic.	Be	grateful
to	her	 and	 start	 changing	 things.	The	day	your	girlfriend	 accepts	 you	 as	 alive,
interesting,	will	 be	 a	 great	 day	 in	 your	 life.	 So	 don’t	 be	 a	 coward	 and	 change
girlfriends	 just	because	 this	one	creates	 trouble	 in	your	mind,	and	you	want	 to
find	some	other	one.
You	are	fortunate	to	find	a	very	compassionate	woman.	Your	next	choice	will
be	very	difficult;	she	will	make	you	feel	absolutely	guilty	and	unworthy,	because
what	have	you	done	to	be	worthy?	What	have	you	done	not	to	be	boring?	What
have	you	done	to	declare	your	independence?	What	have	you	done	not	 to	be	a
victim?	 It	 is	 time	 you	 should	 do	 it.	 You	 will	 remain	 always	 grateful	 to	 your
girlfriend.
And	I	would	 like	 to	 tell	your	girlfriend,	“Go	on	hitting	 this	 fellow	until	you
are	 satisfied	 that	 he	 is	 not	 boring	 but	 full	 of	 life,	 utterly	 interesting,	 playful,
celebrating.	You	may	lose	him	somewhere	on	the	path	of	life,	but	you	will	have
prepared	him	for	some	other	woman;	otherwise	the	way	he	is	now	he	is	going	to
torture	many	women	and	torture	himself.”
I	am	trying	to	prepare	the	future	man,	who	will	respect	the	woman	as	equal	to
himself,	who	will	give	opportunity	for	her	growth	as	he	takes	opportunity	for	his
own	growth.	And	there	will	not	be	any	kind	of	bondage.	If	two	persons	can	live
in	love	their	whole	life,	nobody	is	going	to	disturb	them.	But	there	is	no	need	of
any	marriage	and	there	is	no	need	of	any	divorce.	Love	should	be	an	absolute	act
of	freedom.
But	you	have	also	been	 told	 for	 thousands	of	years	 that,	 “If	you	 really	 love
then	 your	 love	 has	 to	 be	 permanent.”	 I	 don’t	 see	 that	 anything	 in	 life	 has	 the
quality	of	being	permanent.	Love	cannot	be	an	exception.	So	don’t	expect	 that
love	has	to	be	permanent.	It	will	make	your	love	life	more	beautiful,	because	you
know	today	you	are	 together,	 tomorrow	perhaps	you	will	have	 to	depart.	Love
comes	 like	 a	 fresh,	 fragrant	 breeze	 into	 your	 home,	 fills	 it	with	 freshness	 and
fragrance,	remains	as	long	as	existence	allows	it	and	then	moves	out.	You	should
not	try	to	close	all	your	doors	or	the	same	fresh	breeze	will	become	absolutely
stale.
That’s	what	people’s	 lives	have	become—stale,	ugly—and	 the	reason	 lies	 in
their	 idea	 of	 permanent	 love.	 In	 life	 everything	 is	 changing.	 And	 change	 is
beautiful;	 it	 gives	 you	more	 and	more	 experience,	more	 and	more	 awareness,
more	and	more	maturity.
All	the	joy	and	fun	has	gone	out	of	my	relationship,	although	I	feel
the	love	is	still	there	and	I	don’t	really	want	us	to	break	up.	How	can
we	put	that	joy	and	fun	back	into	our	relationship?
There	is	some	misunderstanding	in	your	mind.	The	joy	is	not	gone,	joy	has	never
been	 there—it	 was	 something	 else.	 It	 is	 excitement	 that	 has	 gone,	 but	 you
thought	 that	excitement	was	 joy.	The	 joy	will	come	now;	when	 the	excitement
subsides,	 only	 then	 does	 joy	 come.	 Joy	 is	 a	 very	 silent	 phenomenon;	 it	 is	 not
excitement	at	all,	it	is	not	feverish	at	all.	It	is	tranquil,	calm	and	cool.
But	this	misunderstanding	is	not	unique	to	you;	it	has	become	very	prevalent.
People	 think	 that	 excitement	 is	 joy.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 intoxication;	 one	 feels
occupied,	 tremendously	occupied.	In	that	occupation	one	forgets	one’s	worries,
problems,	 anxieties.	 It	 is	 like	 drinking	 alcohol:	 you	 forget	 your	 problems,	 you
forget	yourself,	and	at	least	for	the	moment	you	are	far,	far	away	from	yourself.
That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 excitement:	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 inside,	 you	 are	 outside
yourself;	 you	 have	 escaped	 from	 yourself.	 But	 because	 of	 this	 being	 outside
yourself,	sooner	or	later	you	become	tired.	You	miss	the	nourishment	that	comes
from	your	innermost	core	when	you	are	close	to	it.
So	no	excitement	can	be	permanent;	it	can	only	be	a	moment’s	phenomenon,	a
momentary	thing.	All	honeymoons	end;	they	have	to	end,	otherwise	you	will	be
killed!	If	you	remain	excited	you	will	go	berserk.	It	has	to	subside,	you	have	to
be	nourished	within	yourself	again.	One	cannot	remain	awake	for	many	nights	in
a	row.	For	one	night,	two	nights,	three	nights	it	is	okay,	but	if	you	remain	awake
for	too	many	nights	you	will	start	feeling	tired,	utterly	tired	and	exhausted.	And
you	will	start	feeling	dull	and	dead	too;	you	will	need	rest.	After	each	excitement
there	is	a	need	for	rest.	In	rest	you	recapitulate,	you	recover;	then	you	can	move
into	excitement	again.
But	excitement	is	not	joy,	it	is	just	an	escape	from	misery.
Try	to	understand	it	very	clearly:	excitement	is	just	an	escape	from	misery.	It
gives	only	a	false	and	superficial	experience	of	joy.	Because	you	are	no	longer
miserable	you	 think	you	are	 joyous;	not	 to	be	miserable	 is	equivalent	 to	being
joyous.	Real	joy	is	a	positive	phenomenon.	Not	to	be	miserable	is	just	a	kind	of
forgetfulness.	The	misery	is	waiting	back	home	for	you,	and	whenever	you	come
back	it	will	be	there.
When	excitement	disappears,	one	 starts	 thinking,	 “Now	what	 is	 the	point	of
this	love?”	What	people	call	“love”	dies	with	excitement,	and	that	is	a	calamity.
In	fact,	love	had	never	been	born.	It	was	just	a	love	of	excitement;	it	was	not	real
love.	 It	 was	 just	 an	 effort	 to	 move	 away	 from	 yourself.	 It	 was	 a	 search	 for
sensation.
You	 rightly	 use	 the	word	 “fun”	 in	 your	 question;	 it	was	 fun,	 but	 it	was	 not
intimacy.	When	excitement	disappears	and	you	just	start	feeling	loving,	love	can
grow;	now	the	feverish	days	are	over.	This	is	the	true	beginning	of	love.
To	me,	 the	 true	 love	 begins	when	 the	 honeymoon	 is	 over.	But	 by	 that	 time
your	mind	thinks	that	all	is	over,	finished:	“Search	for	another	woman,	search	for
another	man.	Now	what	is	the	point	in	continuing?	There	is	no	more	fun!”
If	you	go	on	loving	now,	love	will	take	on	a	depth,	it	will	become	intimacy.	A
quality	 of	 grace	 will	 arise	 in	 it.	 It	 will	 have	 a	 subtlety	 now,	 it	 will	 not	 be
superficial.	 It	will	 not	be	 fun,	 it	will	 be	meditation,	 it	will	 be	prayerfulness.	 It
will	help	you	to	know	yourself.	The	other	will	become	a	mirror,	and	through	her
you	will	 be	 able	 to	know	yourself.	Now	 is	 the	 time,	 the	 right	 time	 for	 love	 to
grow	because	all	the	energy	that	was	being	channeled	into	excitement	will	not	be
wasted:	it	will	be	poured	into	the	very	roots	of	love,	and	the	tree	will	be	able	to
have	great	foliage.
If	you	can	go	on	growing	in	this	intimacy,	which	is	no	longer	excitement,	then
joy	will	arise:	 first	excitement,	 then	 love,	 then	 joy.	Joy	 is	 the	ultimate	product,
the	fulfillment.	Excitement	 is	 just	a	beginning,	a	 trigger;	 it	 is	not	 the	end.	And
those	who	finish	things	at	excitement	will	never	know	what	 love	is,	will	never
know	the	mystery	of	 love,	will	never	come	to	know	the	 joy	of	 love.	They	will
know	 sensations,	 excitement,	 passionate	 fever,	 but	 they	 will	 never	 know	 the
grace	that	is	love.	They	will	never	know	how	beautiful	it	is	to	be	with	a	person
with	 no	 excitement	 but	 with	 silence,	 with	 no	 words,	 with	 no	 effort	 to	 do
anything.	Just	being	together,	sharing	one	space,	one	being,	sharing	each	other,
not	 thinking	of	what	 to	do	and	what	 to	say,	where	 to	go	and	how	to	enjoy;	all
those	things	are	gone.	The	storm	is	over	and	there	is	silence.
And	it	is	not	that	you	will	not	make	love,	but	it	will	not	be	a	“making”	really;
it	will	 be	 love	happening.	 It	will	 happen	out	 of	 grace,	 out	 of	 silence,	 out	 of	 a
rhythm;	it	will	arise	from	your	depths,	it	will	not	be	of	the	body,	really.	There	is
a	sex	that	is	spiritual,	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	body.	Although	the	body
partakes	in	it,	participates	in	it,	 it	 is	not	 the	source	of	it.	Then	sex	takes	on	the
color	of	Tantra—and	only	then.
So	my	suggestion	is:	watch	yourself.	Now	that	you	are	coming	closer	 to	 the
temple	 don’t	 escape.	 Go	 into	 it.	 Forget	 excitement,	 it	 is	 just	 childish.	 And
something	beautiful	is	ahead.	If	you	can	wait	for	it,	if	you	have	patience	and	can
trust	in	it,	it	will	come.
ATTRACTION	AND	OPPOSITION
There	are	a	few	very	fundamental	things	to	be	understood.
First,	a	man	and	a	woman	are	on	the	one	hand	halves	of	the	other,	and	on	the
other	hand,	opposite	polarities.	Their	being	opposites	attracts	them	to	each	other.
The	farther	away	 they	are,	 the	deeper	will	be	 the	attraction;	 the	more	different
from	each	other	they	are,	the	more	will	be	the	charm	and	beauty	and	attraction.
But	there	lies	the	whole	problem.	When	they	come	close,	they	want	to	come
closer,	 they	 want	 to	 merge	 into	 each	 other,	 they	 want	 to	 become	 one,	 a
harmonious	 whole,	 but	 their	 whole	 attraction	 depends	 on	 opposition,	 and	 the
harmony	will	depend	on	dissolving	 the	opposition.	Unless	a	 love	affair	 is	very
conscious,	it	is	going	to	create	great	anguish,	great	trouble.
All	lovers	are	in	trouble.	The	trouble	is	not	personal;	it	is	in	the	very	nature	of
things.
They	 would	 not	 have	 been	 attracted	 to	 each	 other—they	 call	 it	 “falling	 in
love.”	 They	 cannot	 give	 any	 reason	 why	 they	 have	 such	 a	 tremendous	 pull
toward	each	other.	They	are	not	even	conscious	of	the	underlying	causes;	hence
a	 strange	 thing	 happens:	 the	 happiest	 lovers	 are	 those	who	 never	meet!	 Once
they	meet,	the	same	opposition	that	created	the	attraction	becomes	a	conflict.	On
each	 small	 point,	 their	 attitudes	 are	 different,	 their	 approaches	 are	 different.
Although	they	speak	the	same	language,	they	cannot	understand	each	other.
One	 of	 my	 friends	 was	 talking	 to	 me	 about	 his	 wife	 and	 their	 continuous
conflict.	I	said,	“It	seems	you	cannot	understand	each	other.”
He	said,	“What	to	say	about	understanding	her,	I	cannot	even	stand	her!”	And
it	was	 a	 love	marriage,	 not	 arranged.	 The	 parents	 of	 both	were	 opposed	 to	 it;
they	 belonged	 to	 two	 different	 religions,	 their	 societies	 were	 opposed	 to	 any
intermarriage	between	them.	But	they	fought	against	everybody	and	got	married,
only	to	find	that	they	had	entered	into	a	constant	struggle.
The	way	the	male	mind	looks	at	the	world	is	different	from	the	female	mind.
For	 example,	 the	 male	 mind	 is	 interested	 in	 faraway	 things:	 in	 the	 future	 of
humanity,	in	the	faraway	stars,	whether	there	are	living	beings	on	other	planets
or	 not.	 A	 feminine	 mind	 simply	 giggles	 at	 the	 whole	 nonsense.	 She	 is	 only
interested	in	a	small,	close	circle	around	her—in	the	neighbors,	in	the	family,	in
who	 is	cheating	on	his	wife,	whose	wife	has	 fallen	 in	 love	with	 the	chauffeur.
Her	interest	is	local	and	human.	She	is	not	worried	about	reincarnation;	neither	is
she	concerned	about	life	after	death.	The	feminine	concerns	are	more	pragmatic,
more	concerned	with	the	present,	with	the	here	and	now.
A	man	 is	never	here	and	now,	he	 is	always	somewhere	else.	He	has	strange
preoccupations:	reincarnation,	life	after	death,	life	on	other	planets.
If	both	partners	are	conscious	of	the	fact	that	it	is	a	meeting	of	opposites,	that
there	is	no	need	to	make	it	a	conflict,	then	it	is	a	great	opportunity	to	understand
the	 totally	 opposite	 point	 of	 view	 and	 absorb	 it.	 Then	 the	 life	 of	 a	 man	 and
woman	 together	 can	 become	 a	 beautiful	 harmony.	Otherwise,	 it	 is	 continuous
fight.
There	are	holidays.	One	cannot	continue	to	fight	twenty-four	hours	a	day;	one
needs	a	little	rest	too,	a	rest	to	get	ready	for	a	new	fight.
But	it	is	one	of	the	strangest	phenomena	that	for	thousands	of	years	men	and
women	have	been	living	together,	yet	they	are	strangers.	They	go	on	giving	birth
to	 children,	 but	 still	 they	 remain	 strangers.	 The	 feminine	 approach	 and	 the
masculine	approach	are	so	opposed	to	each	other	that	unless	a	conscious	effort	is
made,	unless	it	becomes	your	meditation,	there	is	no	hope	of	having	a	peaceful
life.
It	is	one	of	my	deep	concerns:	how	to	make	love	and	meditation	so	involved
in	 each	 other	 that	 each	 love	 affair	 automatically	 becomes	 a	 partnership	 in
meditation,	and	each	meditation	makes	you	so	conscious	that	you	need	not	fall	in
love,	you	can	rise	in	love.	You	can	find	a	friend	consciously,	deliberately.	Your
love	will	deepen	as	your	meditation	deepens,	and	vice	versa:	as	your	meditation
blossoms,	your	love	will	also	blossom.	But	it	is	on	a	totally	different	level.
But	most	couples	are	not	connected	in	meditation.	They	never	sit	silently	for
one	hour	together	just	to	feel	each	other’s	consciousness.	Either	they	are	fighting
or	 they	are	making	 love,	but	 in	both	cases,	 they	are	 related	with	 the	body,	 the
physical	part,	the	biology,	the	hormones.	They	are	not	related	with	the	innermost
core	of	the	other.	Their	souls	remain	separate.
In	 the	 temples	 and	 in	 the	 churches	 and	 in	 the	 courts,	 only	 your	 bodies	 are
married.	Your	souls	are	miles	apart.	While	you	are	making	love	to	your	partner,
even	in	those	moments	neither	are	you	there,	nor	is	your	partner	there.	Perhaps
the	man	 is	 thinking	of	Cleopatra,	 some	movie	actress.	And	perhaps	 that’s	why
every	woman	keeps	 her	 eyes	 closed:	 not	 to	 see	 her	 husband’s	 face,	 not	 to	 get
disturbed.	She	is	thinking	of	Alexander	the	Great,	Ivan	the	Terrible,	and	looking
at	her	husband,	everything	falls	apart.	He	looks	just	like	a	mouse.
Even	in	those	beautiful	moments	which	should	be	sacred,	meditative,	of	deep
silence—even	then	you	are	not	alone	with	your	beloved.	There	is	a	crowd.	Your
mind	is	thinking	of	somebody	else,	your	partner’s	mind	is	thinking	of	somebody
else.	 Then	 what	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 just	 robotlike,	 mechanical.	 Some	 biological
force	is	enslaving	you,	and	you	call	it	love.
I	 have	heard	 that	 early	 in	 the	morning,	 a	 drunkard	on	 the	beach	 saw	a	man
doing	pushups.	The	drunkard	walked	around	him,	looked	very	closely	from	here
and	from	there,	and	finally	said,	“I	should	not	interfere	in	such	an	intimate	affair,
but	I	have	to	tell	you	that	your	girlfriend	has	gone!”
That	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 situation.	When	 you	 are	making	 love,	 is	 your	woman
really	there?	Is	your	man	really	there?	Or	are	you	just	doing	a	ritual,	something
which	has	to	be	done,	a	duty	to	be	fulfilled?
If	 you	 want	 a	 harmonious	 relationship	 with	 your	 partner,	 you	 will	 have	 to
learn	 to	 be	 more	 meditative.	 Love	 alone	 is	 not	 enough.	 Love	 alone	 is	 blind;
meditation	gives	it	eyes.	Meditation	gives	it	understanding.	And	once	your	love
is	both	love	and	meditation,	you	become	fellow	travelers.	Then	it	is	no	longer	an
ordinary	 relationship.	 Then	 it	 becomes	 a	 friendliness	 on	 the	 path	 towards
discovering	the	mysteries	of	life.
Man	alone,	woman	alone,	will	find	the	journey	very	tedious	and	very	long,	as
they	have	 found	 it	 in	 the	 past.	Because	 seeing	 this	 continuous	 conflict,	 all	 the
religions	decided	that	those	who	wanted	to	seek	should	renounce	the	other—the
monks	should	be	celibate,	the	nuns	should	be	celibate.	But	in	five	thousand	years
of	history,	how	many	monks	and	how	many	nuns	have	become	realized	souls?
You	cannot	even	give	me	names	enough	to	count	on	ten	fingers.	And	there	have
been	millions	 of	monks	 and	 nuns	 of	 all	 religions:	 Buddhist,	Hindu,	Christian,
Mohammedan.	What	has	happened?
The	path	is	not	so	long,	the	goal	is	not	that	far	away.	But	even	if	you	want	to
go	to	your	neighbor’s	house	you	will	need	both	your	legs.	Just	jumping	on	one
leg,	how	far	can	you	go?
Men	 and	 women	 together	 in	 deep	 friendship,	 in	 a	 loving,	 meditative
relationship,	 as	 organic	 wholes,	 can	 reach	 the	 goal	 any	 moment	 they	 want.
Because	 the	 goal	 is	 not	 outside	 you;	 it	 is	 the	 center	 of	 the	 cyclone,	 it	 is	 the
innermost	part	of	your	being.	But	you	can	find	it	only	when	you	are	whole,	and
you	cannot	be	whole	without	the	other.
Man	and	woman	are	 two	parts	of	one	whole.	So	rather	 than	wasting	 time	in
fighting,	 try	 to	 understand	 each	 other.	 Try	 to	 put	 yourself	 in	 the	 place	 of	 the
other;	 try	 to	see	as	a	man	sees,	 try	 to	see	as	a	woman	sees.	And	four	eyes	are
always	 better	 than	 two	 eyes.	 You	 have	 a	 full	 view;	 all	 four	 directions	 are
available	to	you.
But	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered:	that	without	meditation,	love	is	destined
to	fail;	there	is	no	possibility	of	its	being	a	success.	You	can	pretend	and	you	can
deceive	others,	but	you	cannot	deceive	yourself.	You	know	deep	down	 that	all
the	promises	love	had	given	to	you	have	remained	unfulfilled.
Only	with	meditation	does	 love	 start	 taking	on	new	colors,	new	music,	new
songs,	new	dances,	because	meditation	gives	you	 the	 insight	 to	understand	 the
polar	opposite,	and	in	that	very	understanding	the	conflict	disappears.
All	 the	 conflict	 in	 the	 world	 is	 because	 of	 misunderstanding.	 You	 say
something,	 your	 wife	 understands	 something	 else.	 Your	 wife	 says	 something,
you	understand	something	else.	I	have	seen	couples	who	have	lived	together	for
thirty	or	forty	years;	still,	they	seem	to	be	as	immature	as	they	were	on	their	first
day	 together.	 Still	 the	 same	 complaint:	 “She	 doesn’t	 understand	 what	 I	 am
saying.”	 Forty	 years	 being	 together	 and	 you	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 figure	 out
some	way	that	your	wife	can	understand	exactly	what	you	are	saying,	and	you
can	understand	exactly	what	she	is	saying?
But	I	think	there	is	no	possibility	for	it	to	happen	except	through	meditation,
because	 meditation	 gives	 you	 the	 qualities	 of	 silence,	 awareness,	 a	 patient
listening,	a	capacity	to	put	yourself	in	the	other’s	position.
Things	are	not	impossible,	but	we	have	not	tried	the	right	medicine.
I	would	 like	 you	 to	 be	 reminded	 that	 the	word	 “medicine”	 comes	 from	 the
same	 root	 as	 “meditation.”	 Medicine	 cures	 your	 body;	 meditation	 cures	 your
soul.	Medicine	heals	the	material	part	of	you;	meditation	heals	the	spiritual	part
of	you.
People	 are	 living	 together	 and	 their	 spirits	 are	 full	 of	wounds;	 hence,	 small
things	hurt	them	so	much.
Mulla	 Nasruddin	 was	 asking	 me,	 “What	 to	 do?	 Whatever	 I	 say	 I	 am
misunderstood,	and	immediately	there	is	trouble.”
I	said,	“Try	one	thing:	just	sit	silently,	don’t	say	anything.”
The	next	day,	I	saw	him	in	more	despair	than	ever.	I	said,	“What	happened?”
He	 said,	 “I	 should	 not	 ask	 you	 for	 advice.	 Every	 day	we	 used	 to	 fight	 and
quarrel,	but	it	was	just	verbal.	Yesterday,	because	of	your	advice,	I	got	beaten!”
I	said,	“What	happened?”
He	 said,	 “I	 just	 sat	 there	 silent.	 She	 asked	 many	 questions,	 but	 I	 was
determined	 to	 remain	 silent.	 She	 said,	 ‘So	 you	 are	 not	 going	 to	 speak?’	 I
remained	silent.	So	she	started	hitting	me	with	things!	And	she	was	very	angry.
She	said,	‘Things	have	gone	from	bad	to	worse.	At	least	we	used	to	talk	to	each
other;	 now	 even	 we	 are	 not	 on	 speaking	 terms!’	 The	 whole	 neighborhood
gathered,	 and	 they	 all	 started	 asking,	 ‘What	 happened?	 Why	 aren’t	 you
speaking?’	 And	 somebody	 suggested:	 ‘It	 seems	 he	 is	 possessed	 by	 some	 evil
spirit.’
“I	 thought,	my	God,	now	 they	are	going	 to	 take	me	 to	 some	 idiot	who	will
beat	me	and	try	 to	drive	 the	evil	spirit	out.	 I	said,	 ‘Wait!	I’m	not	possessed	by
any	evil	spirit,	I’m	simply	not	speaking	because	to	say	anything	triggers	a	fight:
I	 say	 something,	 then	 she	 has	 to	 say	 something,	 and	 then	 I	 have	 to	 say
something,	and	nobody	knows	where	it	is	going	to	end.’	I	was	simply	meditating
silently,	doing	no	harm	to	anybody,	and	suddenly	 the	whole	neighborhood	was
against	me!”
People	 are	 living	without	 any	 understanding.	 Hence,	 whatsoever	 they	 do	 is
going	to	end	in	disaster.
If	you	love	a	man,	meditation	will	be	the	best	present	that	you	can	give	to	him.
If	you	love	a	woman,	then	the	Kohinoor	is	nothing;	meditation	will	be	a	far	more
precious	gift,	and	it	will	make	your	life	sheer	joy.
We	are	potentially	capable	of	sheer	joy,	but	we	don’t	know	how	to	manage	it.
Alone,	we	are	at	the	most	sad.	Together,	it	becomes	really	hell.
Even	a	man	like	Jean-Paul	Sartre,	a	man	of	great	intelligence,	has	to	say	that
the	other	is	hell,	that	to	be	alone	is	better,	you	cannot	make	it	with	the	other.	He
became	so	pessimistic	that	he	said	it	is	impossible	to	make	it	with	the	other,	the
other	is	hell.	Ordinarily,	he	is	right.
With	meditation	the	other	becomes	your	heaven.	But	Jean-Paul	Sartre	had	no
idea	of	meditation.
That	is	the	misery	of	Western	man.	Western	man	is	missing	the	flowering	of
life	 because	 he	 knows	 nothing	 about	 meditation,	 and	 Eastern	 man	 is	 missing
because	he	knows	nothing	of	love.	And	to	me,	just	as	man	and	woman	are	halves
of	one	whole,	so	are	love	and	meditation.	Meditation	is	man;	love	is	woman.	In
the	meeting	of	meditation	and	 love	 is	 the	meeting	of	man	and	woman.	And	 in
that	meeting,	we	 create	 the	 transcendental	 human	being,	which	 is	 neither	man
nor	woman.	And	unless	we	create	the	transcendental	man	on	the	earth,	there	is
not	much	hope.
You	have	 spoken	about	 the	ultimate	harmony	 to	be	 found	 in	what
seem	to	be	opposites,	but	I	feel	that	hate	destroys	love	and	anger	kills
compassion.	When	these	extremes	are	fighting	inside	me,	how	can	I
find	the	harmony?
You	are	caught	in	a	misunderstanding.	If	hate	destroys	love	and	anger	destroys
compassion	then	there	is	no	possibility	for	love	or	compassion	to	exist.	Then	you
are	caught,	then	you	cannot	get	out	of	it.	You	have	lived	with	hate	for	millions	of
lives,	 so	 it	 must	 have	 destroyed	 love	 already.	 You	 have	 lived	 with	 anger	 for
millions	of	lives,	so	it	must	have	murdered	compassion	already.
But	 look,	 love	 is	 still	 there.	Hate	comes	and	goes,	and	 love	survives.	Anger
comes	 and	 goes,	 and	 compassion	 survives.	 Hate	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 destroy
love;	night	has	not	been	able	to	destroy	the	day,	and	darkness	has	not	been	able
to	murder	the	light.	No,	they	survive.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 love	 and	 compassion	 have	 not	 been
destroyed.	 The	 second	 thing,	 to	 understand	 the	 harmony	 of	 opposites,	will	 be
possible	only	later	on,	when	you	really	love.
You	have	not	really	loved,	that	is	the	trouble.	Not	hate;	hate	is	not	the	trouble,
the	 trouble	 is	 that	 you	 have	 not	 really	 loved.	Darkness	 is	 not	 the	 trouble,	 the
trouble	 is	 that	 you	don’t	 have	 light.	 If	 light	 is	 there,	 darkness	 disappears.	You
have	not	loved.	You	fantasize,	you	imagine,	you	dream,	but	you	have	not	loved.
Love!	 And	 I’m	 not	 saying	 that	 just	 by	 loving,	 the	 hate	 will	 immediately
disappear—no.	Hate	will	fight	against	you,	because	everybody	wants	to	survive.
Hate	will	struggle.	The	more	you	love,	the	stronger	hate	will	come	back	with	its
struggle.	But	you	will	be	surprised	to	discover	that	the	hate	comes	and	goes.	It
doesn’t	kill	your	love;	rather,	it	makes	love	stronger.	Love	can	absorb	hate	also.
If	you	love	a	person,	in	some	moments	you	can	hate	the	same	person.	But	that
doesn’t	destroy	love,	it	brings	a	richness	to	love.
What	is	hate	in	fact?	It	is	a	tendency	to	go	away.	What	is	love?	A	tendency	to
come	 closer.	Hate	 is	 a	 tendency	 to	 separate,	 a	 tendency	 to	 divorce.	 Love	 is	 a
tendency	 to	marry,	 to	 come	near,	 to	 become	closer,	 to	 become	one.	Hate	 is	 to
become	 two,	 independent.	 Love	 is	 to	 become	 one,	 interdependent.	Whenever
you	hate,	you	go	away	from	your	lover,	from	your	beloved.	But	in	ordinary	life
going	away	is	needed	to	come	back	again.
It	 is	 just	 like	 when	 you	 eat:	 You	 are	 hungry,	 so	 you	 eat;	 then	 hunger	 goes
because	you	have	eaten.	When	you	love	a	person	it	is	like	food.	Love	is	food—
very	subtle,	spiritual,	but	it	is	food	and	it	nourishes	you.	When	you	love	a	person
the	 hunger	 subsides;	 you	 feel	 satiated,	 then	 suddenly	 the	 impulse	 to	 go	 away
arises	and	you	separate.	But	then	you	will	feel	hungry	again;	you	would	like	to
come	nearer,	closer,	to	love,	to	fall	into	each	other.	You	eat,	then	for	a	few	hours
you	 forget	about	 food;	you	don’t	go	on	sitting	 in	 the	kitchen,	you	don’t	go	on
sitting	in	the	restaurant.	You	go	away;	then	after	a	few	hours	suddenly	you	start
coming	back.	Hunger	is	arising.
Love	has	two	faces,	one	of	hunger	and	one	of	satiety.	You	misunderstand	love
as	only	hunger.	Once	you	understand	that	there	is	no	hate,	but	only	a	situation	to
create	hunger,	then	hate	becomes	part	of	love.	Then	it	enriches	love.	Then	anger
becomes	part	of	compassion,	it	enriches	compassion.	A	compassion	without	any
possibility	of	anger	will	be	impotent,	it	will	have	no	energy	in	it.	A	compassion
with	the	possibility	of	anger	has	strength,	stamina.	A	love	without	the	possibility
of	hate	will	become	stale.	Then	the	partnership	will	look	like	an	imprisonment,
you	 cannot	 get	 away.	A	 love	with	 hate	 has	 a	 freedom	 in	 it;	 it	 never	 becomes
stale.
In	 the	 mathematics	 of	 life,	 divorces	 happen	 because	 every	 day	 you	 go	 on
postponing	them.	Then	divorce	goes	on	accumulating	and	one	day	the	marriage
is	completely	killed	by	it,	destroyed	by	it.	If	you	understand	me,	I	would	suggest
to	you	not	to	wait:	every	day	divorce	and	remarry.	It	should	be	a	rhythm	just	like
day	and	night,	hunger	and	satiety,	summer	and	winter,	 life	and	death.	It	should
be	like	that.	In	the	morning	you	love,	in	the	afternoon	you	hate.	When	you	love
you	really	love,	you	totally	love;	when	you	hate	you	really	hate,	you	totally	hate.
And	suddenly	you	will	find	the	beauty	of	it:	the	beauty	is	in	the	totality.
A	 total	 hate	 is	 also	beautiful,	 as	 beautiful	 as	 total	 love;	 a	 total	 anger	 is	 also
beautiful,	as	beautiful	as	total	compassion.	The	beauty	is	in	totality.	Anger	alone
becomes	 ugly,	 hate	 alone	 becomes	 ugly—it	 is	 just	 the	 valley	without	 the	 hill,
without	the	peak.	But	with	the	peak	the	valley	becomes	a	beautiful	scene.	From
the	peak	the	valley	becomes	lovely,	from	the	valley	the	peak	becomes	lovely.
You	move;	your	 life	 river	moves	between	 these	 two	banks.	And,	by	and	by,
the	more	and	more	you	understand	the	mathematics	of	life,	you	won’t	think	that
hate	 is	against	 love.	It	 is	complementary.	You	won’t	 think	that	anger	 is	against
compassion;	it	is	complementary.	Then	you	don’t	think	that	rest	is	against	work,
it	is	complementary;	or	that	night	is	against	day;	it	is	complementary.	They	make
a	perfect	whole.
Because	you	have	not	 loved,	 you	 are	 afraid	of	 hate.	You	are	 afraid	because
your	love	is	not	strong	enough.	Hate	could	destroy	it.	You	are	not	certain,	really,
whether	you	love	or	not;	that’s	why	you	are	afraid	of	hate	and	anger.	You	know
that	it	may	completely	shatter	the	whole	house.	You	are	not	certain	whether	the
house	really	exists	or	is	just	imagination,	an	imaginary	house.	If	it	is	imagination
the	hate	will	destroy	it;	if	it	is	real	the	hate	will	make	it	stronger.	After	the	storm
a	 silence	 descends.	 After	 hate,	 lovers	 are	 again	 fresh	 to	 fall	 into	 each	 other
completely	fresh,	as	if	they	are	meeting	for	the	first	time	again.	Again	and	again
they	meet,	again	and	again	for	the	first	time.
Lovers	are	always	meeting	for	the	first	time.	If	you	meet	a	second	time,	then
love	is	already	getting	old,	stale.	It	is	getting	boring.	Lovers	always	fall	in	love
every	day,	fresh,	young.	You	look	at	your	woman	and	you	cannot	even	recognize
that	you	have	seen	her	before—so	new!	You	look	at	your	man	and	he	seems	to
be	a	stranger;	you	fall	in	love	again.
Hate	does	not	destroy	love,	it	only	destroys	the	staleness	of	it.	It	is	a	cleaning,
and	if	you	understand	it	you	will	be	grateful	to	it.	And	if	you	can	be	grateful	to
hate	also,	you	have	understood;	now	nothing	can	destroy	your	love.	Now	you	are
for	 the	 first	 time	 really	 rooted;	 now	 you	 can	 absorb	 the	 storm	 and	 can	 be
strengthened	through	it,	can	be	enriched	through	it.
Don’t	look	at	life	as	a	duality,	don’t	look	at	life	as	a	conflict—it	is	not.	I	have
known—it	is	not.	I	have	experienced—it	is	not.	It	is	one	whole,	one	piece,	and
everything	fits	in	it.	You	have	just	to	find	out	how	to	let	them	fit,	how	to	allow
them	to	fit.	Allow	them	to	fit	into	each	other.	It	is	a	beautiful	whole.
And	if	you	ask	me,	if	there	were	a	possibility	of	a	world	without	hate	I	would
not	choose	it;	it	would	be	absolutely	dead	and	boring.	It	might	be	sweet,	but	too
sweet;	you	would	hanker	for	salt.	If	a	world	were	possible	without	anger	I	would
not	choose	 it,	because	 just	 compassion	without	anger	would	have	no	 life	 in	 it.
The	 opposite	 gives	 the	 tension,	 the	 opposite	 gives	 the	 temper.	When	 ordinary
iron	 passes	 through	 fire	 it	 becomes	 steel;	without	 fire	 it	 cannot	 become	 steel.
And	 the	 higher	 the	 degree	 of	 temperature,	 the	 greater	 will	 be	 the	 temper,	 the
strength,	of	the	steel.	If	your	compassion	can	pass	through	anger,	the	higher	the
temperature	of	 the	anger	 the	greater	will	be	 the	 temper	and	 the	strength	of	 the
compassion.
Buddha	is	compassionate.	He	is	a	warrior.	He	comes	from	the	kshatriya	race,
a	samurai.	He	must	have	led	a	very	angry	life—and	then	suddenly,	compassion.
The	 Jain	master	Mahavir	 comes	 from	 a	 kshatriya	 clan.	 On	 the	 face	 of	 it	 this
looks	 absurd,	 but	 it	 has	 a	 certain	 consistency	 to	 it:	 all	 the	 great	 teachers	 of
nonviolence	 have	 come	 from	 the	 warrior	 races.	 They	 talk	 about	 nonviolence,
compassion;	 they	 have	 lived	 violence,	 they	 know	what	 violence	 is,	 they	 have
passed	 through	 it.	Only	a	kshatriya,	 a	warrior,	who	has	 lived	 through	 fire,	 has
such	a	strong	compassion	or	the	possibility	for	it.
So	 remember,	 if	 inside	your	heart	 these	extremes	are	 fighting,	don’t	choose.
Allow	them	both	 to	be	 there.	Be	a	big	house,	have	enough	room	inside.	Don’t
say,	“I	will	have	only	compassion,	not	anger;	 I	will	have	only	 love,	not	hate.”
You	will	be	impoverished.
Have	 a	 big	 heart,	 let	 them	both	 be	 there.	There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 create	 a	 fight
between	 them;	 there	 is	 no	 fight.	 The	 fight	 comes	 from	 your	mind,	 from	 your
teachings,	 upbringing,	 conditioning.	 The	 whole	 world	 goes	 on	 saying	 to	 you,
“Love,	 don’t	 hate.”	 How	 can	 you	 love	 without	 hate?	 Jesus	 says,	 “Love	 your
enemies.”	And	I	tell	you,	“Hate	your	lovers	also.”	Then	it	becomes	a	complete
whole.	Otherwise	 Jesus’	 saying	 is	 incomplete.	He	 says,	 “Love	 your	 enemies.”
You	 only	 hate	 your	 enemies,	 and	 he	 says	 you	 should	 love	 them	 also.	 But	 the
other	part	is	missing.	I	tell	you,	hate	your	friends	also;	hate	your	lovers	also,	and
don’t	be	afraid.	Then	by	and	by	you	will	see	there	is	no	difference	between	the
enemy	and	 the	 friend,	because	you	hate	and	 love	 the	enemy	and	you	 love	and
hate	the	friend.	It	will	be	only	a	question	of	the	coin	upside	down	or	downside
up.	Then	the	friend	is	the	enemy	and	the	enemy	is	the	friend.	Then	distinctions
simply	disappear.
Don’t	 create	 a	 fight	 inside,	 allow	 them	 both	 to	 be	 there.	 They	 both	will	 be
needed.	Both	will	give	you	two	wings;	only	then	can	you	fly.
DROPPING	OUT	OF	THE	LONELY	HEARTS	CLUB
A	very	intricate,	complex	thing	has	to	be	understood:	If	you	are	not	in
love,	you	are	lonely.	If	you	are	in	love,	really	in	love,	you	become	alone.
Loneliness	 is	 sadness;	 aloneness	 is	 not	 sadness.	 Loneliness	 is	 a	 feeling	 of
incompleteness.	 You	 need	 someone	 and	 the	 needed	 one	 is	 not	 available.
Loneliness	is	darkness,	with	no	light	in	it.	A	dark	house,	waiting	and	waiting	for
someone	to	come	and	kindle	the	light.
Aloneness	 is	 not	 loneliness.	 Aloneness	 means	 the	 feeling	 that	 you	 are
complete.	Nobody	is	needed,	you	are	enough.	And	this	happens	in	love.	Lovers
become	 alone.	 Through	 love	 you	 touch	 your	 inner	 completeness.	 Love	makes
you	 complete.	 Lovers	 share	 each	 other,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 their	 need,	 that	 is	 their
overflowing	energy.
Two	 persons	who	 have	 been	 feeling	 lonely	 can	make	 a	 contract,	 can	 come
together.	They	are	not	lovers,	remember.	They	remain	lonely	but	now,	because	of
the	presence	of	the	other,	they	don’t	feel	the	loneliness,	that’s	all.	They	somehow
deceive	themselves.	Their	love	is	nothing	but	a	deception	to	deceive	themselves:
“I	am	not	lonely,	somebody	else	is	there.”
Because	two	lonely	persons	are	meeting,	their	loneliness	basically	is	doubled,
or	even	multiplied.	That’s	what	happens	ordinarily.	You	feel	lonely	when	you	are
alone,	and	when	you	are	in	relationship	you	feel	miserable.	This	is	an	everyday
observation.	When	people	are	not	in	a	relationship	they	feel	lonely,	and	they	are
searching	 for	 somebody	 to	 be	 related	 to.	When	 they	 are	 related	 to	 somebody,
then	the	misery	starts;	then	they	feel	it	was	better	to	be	alone—this	is	too	much.
What	 happens?	 Two	 lonely	 people	 meet—that	 means	 two	 gloomy,	 sad,
miserable	people	meet—and	 the	misery	 is	multiplied.	How	can	 two	uglinesses
become	beautiful?	How	can	 two	 lonelinesses	coming	 together	bring	a	sense	of
completion,	totality?	Not	possible.	They	exploit	each	other,	they	somehow	try	to
deceive	 themselves	 through	 being	 related	 to	 each	 other,	 but	 that	 deception
doesn’t	 go	 far.	 By	 the	 time	 the	 honeymoon	 is	 finished,	 the	 marriage	 is	 also
finished.	It	is	just	a	temporary	illusion.
Real	 love	 is	 not	 a	 search	 to	 combat	 loneliness.	 Real	 love	 is	 to	 transform
loneliness	 into	aloneness,	 to	help	 the	other.	 If	you	 love	a	person,	you	help	 that
person	to	be	alone.	You	don’t	try	to	fill	him	or	her.	You	don’t	try	to	complete	the
other	in	some	way	by	your	presence.	You	help	the	other	to	be	alone,	to	be	so	full
out	of	her	or	his	own	being	that	you	will	not	be	needed.
When	 a	 person	 is	 totally	 free,	 then	 out	 of	 that	 freedom	 sharing	 is	 possible.
Then	he	gives	much,	but	not	as	a	need;	he	gives	much,	but	not	as	a	bargain.	He
gives	much	because	he	has	much.	He	gives	because	he	enjoys	giving.
Lovers	 are	 alone,	 and	 a	 real	 lover	 never	 destroys	 your	 aloneness.	 He	 will
always	be	totally	respectful	toward	your	individuality,	toward	your	aloneness.	It
is	sacred.	He	will	not	interfere	in	it,	he	will	not	try	to	intrude	on	that	space.
But	 ordinarily,	 lovers,	 so-called	 lovers,	 are	 very	much	 afraid	 of	 the	 other’s
aloneness,	 independence.	They	are	very	much	afraid,	because	 they	 think	 if	 the
other	is	independent	then	they	will	not	be	needed,	then	they	will	be	discarded.	So
the	woman	 goes	 on	 trying	 to	manage	 things	 so	 that	 her	 husband	 or	 boyfriend
remains	dependent.	He	should	be	always	in	need	of	her,	so	that	she	can	remain
valuable.	And	the	man	goes	on	trying	in	every	way	to	manage	the	same,	so	that
he	 remains	valuable.	The	 result	 is	 a	 bargain,	 not	 love,	 and	 there	 is	 continuous
conflict,	 struggle.	 The	 struggle	 is	 based	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 everybody	 needs
freedom.
Love	allows	freedom;	not	only	allows,	but	strengthens	freedom.	And	anything
that	destroys	freedom	is	not	love.	It	must	be	something	else.	Love	and	freedom
go	 together,	 they	are	 two	wings	of	 the	same	bird.	Whenever	you	see	 that	your
love	 is	 going	 against	 your	 freedom,	 then	 you	 are	 doing	 something	 else	 in	 the
name	of	love.
Let	 this	 be	your	 criterion:	 freedom	 is	 the	 criterion;	 love	gives	you	 freedom,
makes	 you	 free,	 liberates	 you.	 And	 once	 you	 are	 totally	 yourself,	 you	 feel
grateful	to	the	person	who	has	helped	you.	That	gratefulness	is	almost	religious.
You	 feel	 in	 the	other	person	 something	divine.	He	has	made	you	 free,	 she	has
made	you	free,	and	love	has	not	become	possessiveness.
When	 love	 deteriorates	 it	 becomes	 possessiveness,	 jealousy,	 struggle	 for
power,	politics,	domination,	manipulation—a	thousand	and	one	things,	all	ugly.
When	love	soars	high,	to	the	purest	sky,	it	is	freedom,	total	freedom.
If	you	are	 in	 love,	 the	 love	 I	am	 talking	about,	your	very	 love	will	help	 the
other	 to	 be	 integrated.	 Your	 very	 love	will	 become	 a	 cementing	 force	 for	 the
other.	 In	 your	 love	 the	 other	 will	 come	 together	 as	 a	 whole,	 unique	 and
individual,	because	your	love	will	give	freedom.	Under	the	shade	of	your	love,
under	the	protection	of	your	love,	the	other	will	start	growing.
All	 growth	 needs	 love,	 but	 unconditional	 love.	 If	 love	 has	 conditions	 then
growth	cannot	be	total,	because	those	conditions	will	come	in	the	way.
Love	unconditionally,	don’t	ask	anything	in	return.	Much	comes	back	to	you
on	its	own—that’s	another	thing—but	don’t	be	a	beggar.	In	love,	be	an	emperor.
Just	give	it	and	see	what	happens:	a	thousandfold	it	comes	back.	But	one	has	to
learn	the	knack.	Otherwise	one	remains	a	miser;	one	gives	a	little	and	waits	for
something	 to	 come	 back,	 and	 that	waiting	 and	 expectation	 destroys	 the	whole
beauty	of	it.
When	 you	 are	 waiting	 and	 expecting,	 the	 other	 feels	 that	 you	 are	 being
manipulative.	 He	 may	 say	 it	 or	 not,	 but	 he	 feels	 you	 are	 manipulating.	 And
wherever	 you	 feel	 the	 other	 is	 trying	 to	 manipulate	 you,	 you	 want	 to	 rebel
against	it	because	it	goes	against	the	inner	need	of	the	soul,	because	any	demand
from	the	outside	dis-integrates	you.	Any	demand	from	the	outside	divides	you.
Any	demand	from	the	outside	 is	a	crime	against	you,	because	your	 freedom	is
polluted.	 Then	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 sacred.	 You	 are	 no	 longer	 the	 end,	 you	 are
being	 used	 as	 a	 means.	 And	 the	 most	 immoral	 act	 in	 the	 world	 is	 to	 use
somebody	as	a	means.
Each	being	 is	an	end	unto	himself.	Love	 treats	you	as	an	end	unto	yourself.
You	are	not	to	be	dragged	into	any	expectations.
So	there	are	a	few	things	to	be	remembered.	One	is	to	love,	but	not	as	a	need
—as	 a	 sharing.	 Love,	 but	 don’t	 expect;	 give.	 Love,	 but	 remember	 your	 love
should	not	become	an	imprisonment	for	the	other.	Love,	but	be	very	careful;	you
are	moving	 on	 sacred	 ground.	 You	 are	 going	 into	 the	 highest,	 the	 purest	 and
holiest	temple.	Be	alert!	Drop	all	impurities	outside	the	temple.	When	you	love	a
person,	love	the	person	as	if	the	person	is	a	god,	not	less	than	that.	Never	love	a
woman	as	a	woman	and	never	love	a	man	as	a	man,	because	if	you	love	a	man	as
a	man	your	love	is	going	to	be	very	ordinary.	Your	love	is	not	going	to	be	more
than	lust.	If	you	love	a	woman	as	a	woman,	your	love	is	not	going	to	soar	very
high.	Love	a	woman	as	a	goddess,	then	love	becomes	worship.
In	Tantra,	the	man	who	is	going	to	make	love	to	the	woman	has	to	worship	her
for	months	as	a	goddess.	He	has	to	visualize	in	the	woman	the	mother-goddess.
When	 the	visualization	has	become	total,	when	no	 lust	arises,	when	seeing	 the
woman	sitting	naked	before	him	he	simply	feels	thrilled	with	a	divine	energy	and
no	lust	arises,	the	very	form	of	the	woman	becomes	divine,	and	all	thoughts	stop
and	only	reverence	is	felt—only	then	he	is	allowed	to	make	love.
It	looks	a	little	absurd	and	paradoxical.	When	there	is	no	need	to	make	love,
then	he	is	allowed	to	make	love.	When	the	woman	has	become	a	goddess,	then
he	is	allowed	to	make	love	because	now	love	can	soar	high,	love	can	become	a
climax,	a	crescendo.	Now	it	will	not	be	of	the	earth,	it	will	not	be	of	this	world;
it	will	not	be	of	two	bodies,	it	will	be	of	two	beings.	It	will	be	a	meeting	of	two
existences.	Two	souls	will	meet,	merge,	and	mingle,	and	both	will	come	out	of	it
tremendously	alone.
Aloneness	 means	 purity.	 Aloneness	 means	 that	 you	 are	 just	 yourself	 and
nobody	else.	Aloneness	means	that	you	are	pure	gold;	just	gold	and	nothing	else,
just	 you.	Love	makes	you	 alone.	Loneliness	will	 disappear,	 but	 aloneness	will
arise.
Loneliness	is	a	state	when	you	are	ill	with	yourself,	bored	with	yourself,	tired
of	 yourself,	 and	 you	 want	 to	 go	 somewhere	 and	 to	 forget	 yourself	 in	 being
involved	with	 somebody	else.	Aloneness	 is	when	you	are	 thrilled	 just	by	your
being.	You	are	blissful	just	by	being	yourself.	You	need	not	go	anywhere.	Need
has	disappeared,	you	are	enough	unto	yourself.	But	now,	a	new	 thing	arises	 in
your	being.	You	have	so	much	that	you	cannot	contain	it.	You	have	to	share,	you
have	 to	 give.	 And	 whoever	 accepts	 your	 gift,	 you	 will	 feel	 grateful	 that	 the
person	has	accepted.
Lovers	 feel	 grateful	 that	 their	 love	 has	 been	 accepted.	 They	 feel	 thankful,
because	they	were	so	full	of	energy	and	they	needed	someone	to	pour	that	energy
into.	 When	 a	 flower	 blooms	 and	 releases	 its	 fragrance	 to	 the	 winds	 it	 feels
grateful	to	the	winds.	The	fragrance	was	growing	more	and	more	heavy	on	the
flower,	it	was	becoming	almost	a	burden.	It	is	just	as	if	a	woman	is	pregnant	and
nine	months	have	passed	and	the	child	is	not	being	born,	is	delaying.	Now	she	is
so	burdened;	she	wants	to	share	the	child	with	the	world.
That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 birth.	 Up	 to	 now	 the	woman	 has	 been	 carrying	 the
child	within	herself,	it	was	nobody	else’s	but	her	own.	But	now	it	is	too	much;
she	 cannot	 contain	 it.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 shared;	 the	 child	 has	 to	 be	 shared	with	 the
world.	 The	 mother	 has	 to	 drop	 her	 miserliness.	 Once	 the	 child	 is	 out	 of	 the
womb,	it	is	no	longer	only	the	mother’s;	by	and	by	the	child	will	go	away,	and
far	away.	It	will	become	part	of	the	great	world.
The	same	happens	when	a	cloud	comes	full	of	rainwater	ready	to	shower,	and
when	it	showers,	rains,	the	cloud	feels	unburdened	and	happy	and	grateful	to	the
thirsty	earth	because	it	accepted	the	rain.
There	are	two	types	of	love.	One	is	the	love	that	happens	when	you	are	feeling
lonely:	as	a	need,	you	go	 to	 the	other.	The	other	 love	arises	when	you	are	not
feeling	lonely,	but	alone.	In	the	first	case	you	go	to	get	something;	in	the	second
case	you	go	to	give	something.	A	giver	is	an	emperor.
Love	that	arises	out	of	aloneness	is	not	ordinary	love.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with
lust,	on	the	contrary	it	is	the	greatest	transformation	of	lust	into	love.	And	love
makes	you	individual.	If	it	doesn’t	make	you	individual,	if	it	tries	to	make	you	a
slave,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 love;	 it	 is	 hate	 pretending	 love.	 Love	 of	 this	 type	 kills,
destroys	the	individuality	of	the	other.	It	makes	you	less	of	an	individual,	it	pulls
you	 down.	 You	 are	 not	 enhanced,	 you	 don’t	 become	 graceful.	 You	 are	 being
pulled	into	the	mud,	and	everybody	who	is	tangled	up	in	that	kind	of	relationship
starts	feeling	that	he	is	settling	with	something	dirty.
Love	should	give	you	 freedom;	never	 settle	 for	 less.	Love	should	make	you
completely	 free,	 a	 wanderer	 in	 the	 sky	 of	 freedom,	 with	 no	 roots	 attached
anywhere.	Love	is	not	an	attachment;	lust	is.
Meditation	and	love	are	the	two	ways	to	attain	to	the	individuality	I	am	talking
about.	Both	 are	 very	 deeply	 related.	 In	 fact	 they	 are	 both	 aspects	 of	 the	 same
coin:	 love	and	meditation.	If	you	meditate,	sooner	or	 later	you	will	come	upon
love.	If	you	meditate	deeply,	sooner	or	later	you	will	start	feeling	a	tremendous
love	 arising	 in	 you	 that	 you	 have	 never	 known	 before:	 a	 new	 quality	 to	 your
being,	a	new	door	opening.	You	have	become	a	new	flame	and	you	want	to	share
now.
If	 you	 love	 deeply,	 by	 and	 by	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 that	 your	 love	 is
becoming	more	and	more	meditative.	A	subtle	quality	of	 silence	 is	 entering	 in
you.	Thoughts	are	disappearing,	gaps	appearing,	silences.	You	are	touching	your
own	depth.
Love	makes	you	meditative	 if	 it	 is	on	 the	 right	 lines.	Meditation	makes	you
loving	if	it	is	on	the	right	lines.
	
The	darkness	of	loneliness	cannot	be	fought	directly.	It	is	something	essential	for
everyone	to	understand,	that	there	are	a	few	fundamental	things	which	cannot	be
changed.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 fundamentals:	 you	 cannot	 fight	 with	 darkness
directly,	with	loneliness	directly,	with	the	fear	of	isolation	directly.	The	reason	is
that	all	these	things	do	not	exist;	they	are	simply	absences	of	something,	just	as
darkness	is	the	absence	of	light.
You	can	go	on	 fighting	with	 this	 darkness	your	whole	 life	 and	you	will	 not
succeed,	but	just	a	small	candle	is	enough	to	dispel	it.	You	have	to	work	for	the
light	 because	 it	 is	 positive,	 existential;	 it	 exists	 on	 its	 own.	 And	 once	 light
comes,	anything	that	was	its	absence	automatically	disappears.
Loneliness	is	similar	to	darkness.
You	don’t	know	your	aloneness.	You	have	not	experienced	your	aloneness	and
its	 beauty,	 its	 tremendous	 power,	 its	 strength.	 Loneliness	 and	 aloneness	 in	 the
dictionaries	 are	 synonymous,	 but	 existence	 does	 not	 follow	 your	 dictionaries.
And	 nobody	 has	 yet	 tried	 to	make	 an	 existential	 dictionary	which	will	 not	 be
contradictory	to	existence.
Loneliness	 is	 an	 absence,	 because	 you	 don’t	 know	your	 aloneness.	There	 is
fear.	You	feel	 lonely	so	you	want	 to	cling	 to	something,	 to	somebody,	 to	some
relationship,	just	to	hold	on	to	the	illusion	that	you	are	not	lonely.	But	you	know
you	are,	hence	the	pain.	On	the	one	hand	you	are	clinging	to	something	that	is
not	for	real,	which	is	just	a	temporary	arrangement—a	relationship,	a	friendship.
And	while	 you	 are	 in	 the	 relationship	 you	 can	 create	 a	 little	 illusion	 to	 forget
your	loneliness.
But	this	is	the	problem:	although	you	can	forget	for	a	moment	your	loneliness,
just	 the	 next	moment	 you	 suddenly	 become	 aware	 that	 the	 relationship	 or	 the
friendship	 is	 nothing	 permanent.	Yesterday	you	did	 not	 know	 this	man	or	 this
woman,	you	were	strangers.	Today	you	are	friends;	who	knows	about	tomorrow?
Tomorrow	you	may	be	strangers	again,	hence	the	pain.
The	 illusion	gives	a	certain	solace,	but	 it	cannot	create	 the	reality	so	 that	all
fear	disappears.	 It	 represses	 the	 fear,	 so	on	 the	surface	you	 feel	good—at	 least
you	try	to	feel	good.	You	pretend	to	feel	good	to	yourself:	how	wonderful	is	the
relationship,	how	wonderful	is	the	man	or	the	woman.	But	behind	the	illusion—
and	the	illusion	is	so	thin	that	you	can	see	behind	it—there	is	pain	in	the	heart,
because	 the	 heart	 knows	 perfectly	 well	 that	 tomorrow	 things	 may	 not	 be	 the
same,	and	they	are	not	the	same.
Your	 whole	 life’s	 experience	 supports	 that	 things	 go	 on	 changing.	 Nothing
remains	stable;	you	cannot	cling	to	anything	in	a	changing	world.	You	wanted	to
make	your	friendship	something	permanent	but	your	wanting	is	against	the	law
of	change,	and	that	law	is	not	going	to	make	exceptions.	It	simply	goes	on	doing
its	own	thing.	It	will	change,	everything	will	change.	Perhaps	in	the	long	run	you
will	 understand	 one	 day	 that	 it	 was	 good	 that	 it	 did	 not	 listen	 to	 you,	 that
existence	did	not	bother	about	you	and	just	went	on	doing	whatever	it	wanted	to
do,	not	according	to	your	desire.
It	may	take	a	little	time	for	you	to	understand.	You	want	this	friend	to	be	your
friend	forever,	but	tomorrow	he	turns	into	an	enemy.	Or	simply,	“You	get	lost!”
and	he	is	no	longer	with	you.	Somebody	else	fills	the	gap	who	is	a	far	superior
being.	 Then	 suddenly	 you	 realize	 it	 was	 good	 that	 the	 other	 one	 got	 lost;
otherwise	you	would	have	been	stuck	with	him.	But	still	the	lesson	never	goes	so
deep	that	you	stop	asking	for	permanence.
You	will	 start	 asking	 for	 permanence	with	 this	man,	with	 this	woman:	 now
this	 should	 not	 change.	 You	 have	 not	 really	 learned	 the	 lesson	 that	 change	 is
simply	 the	very	 fabric	of	 life.	You	have	 to	understand	 it	 and	go	with	 it.	Don’t
create	illusions;	they	are	not	going	to	help.	And	everybody	is	creating	illusions
of	different	kinds.
I	used	to	know	one	man	who	said,	“I	trust	only	money,	nothing	else.”
I	said,	“You	are	making	a	very	significant	statement.”
He	 said,	 “Everybody	changes.	You	cannot	 rely	on	anybody.	And	as	you	get
older,	only	your	money	is	yours.	Nobody	cares,	not	even	your	son,	not	even	your
wife.	 If	 you	 have	money	 they	 all	 care,	 they	 all	 respect	 you	 because	 you	 have
money.	If	you	don’t	have	money	you	become	a	beggar.”
His	saying	 that	 the	only	 thing	 in	 the	world	 to	 trust	 is	money	comes	out	of	a
long	 experience	 of	 life,	 of	 getting	 cheated	 again	 and	 again	 by	 the	 people	 he
trusted.	And	 he	 thought	 they	 loved	 him	 but	 they	were	 all	 around	 him	 for	 the
money.
“But,”	I	told	him,	“at	the	moment	of	death	money	is	not	going	to	be	with	you.
You	can	have	an	illusion	that	at	least	money	is	with	you,	but	as	your	breathing
stops,	money	 is	no	 longer	with	you.	You	have	earned	something	but	 it	will	be
left	 on	 this	 side;	 you	 cannot	 carry	 it	 beyond	 death.	 You	 will	 fall	 into	 a	 deep
loneliness	which	you	have	been	hiding	behind	the	facade	of	money.”
There	are	people	who	are	after	power,	but	the	reason	is	the	same:	when	they
are	 in	power	so	many	people	are	with	 them,	millions	of	people	are	under	 their
domination.	They	 are	 not	 alone.	They	 are	 great	 political	 and	 religious	 leaders.
But	power	changes.	One	day	you	have	 it,	another	day	 it	 is	gone,	and	suddenly
the	whole	illusion	disappears.	You	are	 lonely	as	nobody	else	 is,	because	others
are	at	least	accustomed	to	being	lonely.	You	are	not	accustomed,	your	loneliness
hurts	you	more.
Society	has	tried	to	make	arrangements	so	you	can	forget	loneliness.	Arranged
marriages	are	just	an	effort	so	that	you	know	your	wife	is	with	you.	All	religions
resist	 divorce	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 if	 divorce	 is	 allowed	 then	 the	 basic
purpose	marriage	was	invented	for	is	destroyed.	The	basic	purpose	was	to	give
you	a	companion,	a	lifelong	companion.
But	even	 though	a	wife	will	be	with	you	or	a	husband	will	be	with	you	 for
your	whole	 life,	 that	does	not	mean	 that	 love	 remains	 the	 same.	 In	 fact,	 rather
than	giving	you	a	companion,	they	give	you	a	burden	to	carry.	You	were	lonely,
already	in	trouble,	and	now	you	have	to	carry	another	person	who	is	lonely.	And
in	 this	 life	 there	 is	no	hope,	because	once	 love	disappears	you	both	are	 lonely,
and	both	have	to	tolerate	each	other.	Now	it	is	not	a	question	of	being	enchanted
by	each	other;	at	the	most	you	can	patiently	tolerate	each	other.	Your	loneliness
has	not	been	changed	by	the	social	strategy	of	marriage.
Religions	have	tried	to	make	you	a	member	of	an	organized	body	of	religion
so	you	are	always	in	a	crowd.	You	know	that	there	are	millions	of	Catholics;	you
are	not	alone,	millions	of	Catholics	are	with	you.	Jesus	Christ	is	your	savior.	God
is	 with	 you.	 Alone	 you	 may	 have	 been	 wrong,	 doubt	 may	 have	 arisen,	 but
millions	 of	 people	 cannot	 be	 wrong.	 A	 little	 support,	 but	 even	 that	 is	 gone
because	 there	 are	 millions	 who	 are	 not	 Catholics.	 There	 are	 the	 people	 who
crucified	Jesus,	there	are	people	who	don’t	believe	in	God.	And	their	number	is
not	 less	 than	 Catholics,	 it	 is	 more.	 There	 are	 other	 religions	 with	 different
concepts.	 It	 is	 difficult	 for	 an	 intelligent	 person	 not	 to	 doubt.	 You	 may	 have
millions	 of	 people	 following	 a	 certain	 belief	 system,	 but	 still	 you	 cannot	 be
certain	that	they	are	with	you,	that	you	are	not	lonely.
God	was	a	device,	but	all	devices	have	failed.	It	was	a	device….	when	nothing
else	is	there,	at	least	God	is	with	you.	He	is	always	everywhere	with	you.	In	the
dark	 night	 of	 the	 soul,	 he	 is	with	 you,	 so	 don’t	 be	worried.	 It	was	 good	 for	 a
childish	humanity	 to	be	deceived	by	 this	concept,	but	you	cannot	be	deceived.
This	God	who	is	always	everywhere—you	don’t	see	him,	you	can’t	talk	to	him,
you	can’t	touch	him.	You	don’t	have	any	evidence	for	his	existence	except	your
desire	that	he	should	be	there.	But	your	desire	is	not	a	proof	of	anything.
God	is	only	a	desire	of	the	childish	mind.	Man	has	come	of	age,	and	God	has
become	meaningless.	The	hypothesis	has	lost	its	grip.
What	 I	 am	 trying	 to	 say	 is	 that	 every	 effort	 that	 has	 been	 directed	 toward
avoiding	 loneliness	 has	 failed,	 and	 will	 fail,	 because	 it	 is	 against	 the
fundamentals	of	 life.	What	 is	needed	is	not	something	in	which	you	can	forget
your	 loneliness.	What	 is	 needed	 is	 that	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 your	 aloneness,
which	is	a	reality.	And	it	is	so	beautiful	to	experience	it,	to	feel	it,	because	it	is
your	freedom	from	the	crowd,	from	the	other.	It	is	your	freedom	from	the	fear	of
being	lonely.
Just	 the	 word	 “lonely”	 immediately	 reminds	 you	 that	 it	 is	 like	 a	 wound:
something	is	needed	to	fill	it.	There	is	a	gap	and	it	hurts,	something	needs	to	be
put	into	that	gap.	The	very	word	“aloneness”	does	not	have	the	same	sense	of	a
wound,	 of	 a	 gap	 that	 has	 to	 be	 filled.	Aloneness	 simply	means	 completeness.
You	are	whole;	there	is	no	need	of	anybody	else	to	complete	you.
So	try	to	find	your	innermost	center,	where	you	are	always	alone,	have	always
been	alone.	In	life,	in	death,	wherever	you	are	you	will	be	alone.	But	it	is	so	full;
it	is	not	empty,	it	is	so	full	and	so	complete	and	so	overflowing	with	all	the	juices
of	 life,	with	 all	 the	 beauties	 and	 benedictions	 of	 existence	 that	 once	 you	 have
tasted	aloneness	 the	pain	 in	 the	heart	will	disappear.	 Instead,	 a	new	 rhythm	of
tremendous	sweetness,	peace,	joy,	bliss,	will	be	there.
It	does	not	mean	that	a	person	who	is	centered	in	his	aloneness,	complete	in
himself,	cannot	make	friends.	In	fact,	only	that	person	can	make	friends,	because
now	it	is	no	longer	a	need,	it	is	just	sharing.	You	have	so	much	you	can	share.
And	 when	 you	 share,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 clinging.	 You	 flow	 with
existence,	you	flow	with	life’s	change,	because	it	doesn’t	matter	with	whom	you
share.	It	can	be	the	same	person	tomorrow—the	same	person	for	your	whole	life
—or	 it	 can	 be	 different	 persons.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 contract,	 it	 is	 not	 a	marriage;	 it	 is
simply	out	of	your	fullness	that	you	want	to	give.	So	whoever	happens	to	be	near
you,	you	give.	And	giving	is	such	a	joy.
Begging	 is	 such	 a	misery.	Even	 if	 you	 get	 something	 through	 begging,	 you
will	 remain	miserable.	 It	 hurts.	 It	 hurts	 your	 pride,	 it	 hurts	 your	 integrity.	But
sharing	makes	you	more	centered,	more	 integrated,	more	proud—but	not	more
egoistic,	 simply	 proud	 that	 existence	 has	 been	 compassionate	 to	 you.	 It	 is	 not
ego;	it	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon,	a	recognition	that	existence	has	allowed
you	 something	 for	which	millions	 of	 people	 are	 trying	 but	 at	 the	wrong	 door.
You	happen	to	be	at	the	right	door.
You	 are	 proud	 of	 your	 blissfulness	 and	 all	 that	 existence	 has	 given	 to	 you.
Fear	disappears,	darkness	disappears,	the	pain	disappears,	the	desire	for	the	other
disappears.	You	can	love	a	person,	and	if	the	person	loves	somebody	else	there
will	 not	 be	 any	 jealousy,	 because	 you	 loved	 out	 of	 so	much	 joy.	 It	was	 not	 a
clinging,	you	were	not	holding	the	other	person	in	prison.	You	were	not	worried
that	 the	other	person	may	slip	out	of	your	hands,	 that	somebody	else	may	start
having	a	love	affair.	When	you	are	sharing	your	joy,	you	don’t	create	a	prison	for
anybody.	 You	 simply	 give.	 You	 don’t	 even	 expect	 gratitude	 or	 thankfulness
because	you	are	not	giving	 to	get	anything,	not	even	gratitude.	You	are	giving
because	you	are	so	full	you	have	to	give.
So	 I	 will	 not	 tell	 you	 to	 do	 anything	 about	 your	 loneliness.	 Look	 for	 your
aloneness.	 Forget	 loneliness,	 forget	 darkness,	 forget	 pain.	 These	 are	 just	 the
absence	of	aloneness,	and	the	experience	of	aloneness	will	dispel	them	instantly.
And	the	method	is	the	same:	just	watch	your	mind,	be	aware.	Become	more	and
more	conscious,	so	finally	you	are	only	conscious	of	yourself.	That	is	the	point
where	you	become	aware	of	aloneness.
And	 always	 look	 to	 see	 if	 anything	 that	 you	 are	 facing	 as	 a	 problem	 is	 a
negative	thing	or	a	positive	thing.	If	it	is	a	negative	thing	then	don’t	fight	with	it;
don’t	bother	about	it	at	all.	Just	look	for	the	positive	of	it,	and	you	will	be	at	the
right	 door.	 Most	 of	 the	 people	 in	 the	 world	 miss	 because	 they	 start	 fighting
directly	with	the	negative	door.	There	is	no	door;	there	is	only	darkness,	there	is
only	absence.	And	the	more	they	fight	the	more	they	find	failure,	the	more	they
become	 dejected,	 pessimistic,	 and	 ultimately	 they	 decide	 that	 life	 has	 no
meaning,	 that	 it	 is	 simply	 torture.	 Their	mistake	 is	 that	 they	 entered	 from	 the
wrong	door.
So	before	you	face	a	problem,	just	look	at	it—is	it	an	absence	of	something?
And	the	truth	is	that	all	your	problems	are	the	absence	of	something.	Once	you
have	found	what	they	are	the	absence	of,	then	go	after	the	positive.	The	moment
you	find	the	positive	you	have	found	the	light,	and	the	darkness	is	finished.
Why	is	it	I	feel	fully	alive	only	when	I	am	in	love?	I	tell	myself	that	I
should	be	able	to	spark	myself	without	the	other,	but	so	far	no	luck.
Is	this	some	stupid	Waiting	for	Godot	game	I	am	playing	with	myself?
When	the	last	love	affair	ended	I	swore	to	myself	I	was	not	going	to
let	 the	 same	 old	 deadening	 process	 happen,	 but	 here	 I	 am	 again
feeling	half	alive,	waiting	for	“him”	to	come.
One	remains	 in	need	of	 the	other	up	 to	 that	point,	up	 to	 that	experience,	when
one	enters	into	one’s	own	innermost	core.	Unless	one	knows	oneself	one	remains
in	the	need	of	the	other.	But	the	need	of	the	other	is	very	paradoxical;	its	nature
is	paradoxical.	When	you	are	alone	you	feel	lonely,	you	feel	the	other	is	missed;
your	life	seems	to	be	only	half.	It	 loses	joy,	 it	 loses	flow,	flowering;	it	remains
undernourished.	If	you	are	with	the	other,	then	a	new	problem	arises	because	the
other	starts	encroaching	on	your	space.	He	starts	imposing	conditions	upon	you,
he	starts	demanding	things	from	you,	he	starts	destroying	your	freedom,	and	that
hurts.
So	when	you	are	with	somebody,	only	for	a	few	days	when	the	honeymoon	is
still	there,	and	the	more	intelligent	you	are,	the	shorter	will	be	the	honeymoon,
remember.	 Only	 for	 utterly	 dull	 people	 it	 can	 be	 a	 long	 affair;	 for	 insensitive
people	 it	can	be	a	 lifelong	thing.	But	 if	you	are	 intelligent,	sensitive,	soon	you
will	 realize	 what	 you	 have	 done.	 The	 other	 is	 destroying	 your	 freedom,	 and
suddenly	you	become	aware	that	you	need	your	freedom	because	freedom	is	of
immense	value.	And	you	decide	never	again	to	bother	with	the	other.
Again	when	 you	 are	 alone	 you	 are	 free,	 but	 something	 is	missing,	 because
your	aloneness	is	not	true	aloneness;	it	 is	only	loneliness,	 it	 is	a	negative	state.
You	forget	all	about	 freedom.	Free	you	are,	but	what	 to	do	with	 this	 freedom?
Love	is	not	there,	and	both	are	essential	needs.
And	up	to	now	humanity	has	lived	in	such	an	insane	way	that	you	can	fulfill
only	one	need:	either	you	can	be	free,	but	then	you	have	to	drop	the	idea	of	love.
That’s	what	monks	and	nuns	of	all	the	religions	have	been	doing:	drop	the	idea
of	love,	you	are	free;	there	is	nobody	to	hinder	you,	there	is	nobody	to	interfere
with	you,	nobody	to	make	any	demands,	nobody	to	possess	you.	But	then	their
life	becomes	cold,	almost	dead.
You	can	go	to	any	monastery	and	look	at	the	monks	and	the	nuns:	their	life	is
ugly.	It	stinks	of	death;	it	is	not	fragrant	with	life.	There	is	no	dance,	no	joy,	no
song.	All	songs	have	disappeared,	all	joy	is	dead.	They	are	paralyzed—how	can
they	dance?	They	are	crippled—how	can	they	dance?	There	is	nothing	to	dance
about.	 Their	 energies	 are	 stuck,	 they	 are	 no	 longer	 flowing.	 For	 the	 flow	 the
other	is	needed;	without	the	other	there	is	no	flow.
So	 the	 majority	 of	 humanity	 has	 decided	 for	 love	 and	 dropped	 the	 idea	 of
freedom.	But	then	people	are	living	like	slaves.	Man	has	reduced	the	woman	into
a	thing,	a	commodity,	and	of	course	 the	woman	has	done	the	same	in	her	own
subtle	way:	she	has	made	all	the	husbands	henpecked.
I	have	heard:
In	New	York	 a	 few	 henpecked	 husbands	 joined	 hands	 together.	 They
made	 a	 club	 to	 protest,	 to	 fight—Men’s	 Liberation	 Movement,	 or
something	like	that!	And	of	course	they	chose	one	of	the	most	henpecked
husbands	the	president	of	the	club.
The	 first	meeting	 happened,	 but	 the	 president	 never	 turned	 up.	 They
were	all	worried.	They	rushed	to	his	home	and	they	asked	him,	“What	is
the	matter?	Have	you	forgotten?”
He	said,	“No,	but	my	wife	won’t	allow	me.	She	says,	‘You	go	out,	and	I
will	never	allow	you	back	in!’	And	that	much	risk	I	cannot	take.”
The	man	has	 reduced	 the	woman	 to	a	slave	and	 the	woman	has	 reduced	 the
man	 to	 a	 slave.	 And	 of	 course	 both	 hate	 the	 slavery,	 both	 resist	 it.	 They	 are
constantly	fighting;	any	small	excuse	and	the	fight	starts.
But	the	real	fight	is	somewhere	else	deep	down;	the	real	fight	is	that	they	are
asking	 for	 freedom.	 They	 cannot	 say	 it	 so	 clearly,	 they	 may	 have	 forgotten
completely.	For	thousands	of	years	this	is	the	way	people	have	lived.	They	have
seen	 their	 fathers	 and	 mothers	 living	 in	 the	 same	 way,	 they	 have	 seen	 their
grandparents	 living	 in	 the	 same	 way.	 This	 is	 the	 way	 people	 live;	 they	 have
accepted	it,	and	their	freedom	is	destroyed.
It	is	as	if	we	are	trying	to	fly	in	the	sky	with	one	wing.	A	few	people	have	the
wing	of	love	and	a	few	people	have	the	wing	of	freedom,	but	both	are	incapable
of	flying.	Both	the	wings	are	needed.
You	are	 asking,	 “Why	 is	 it	 I	 feel	 fully	 alive	only	when	 I	 am	 in	 love?”	 It	 is
perfectly	natural;	 there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.	 It	 is	how	it	should	be.	Love	is	a
natural	 need;	 it	 is	 like	 food.	 If	 you	 are	 hungry,	 of	 course	you	will	 feel	 a	 deep
unease.	Without	love	your	soul	is	hungry;	love	is	a	soul	nourishment.	Just	as	the
body	needs	food,	water,	air,	the	soul	needs	love.	But	the	soul	also	needs	freedom,
and	it	is	one	of	the	strangest	things	that	we	have	not	accepted	this	fact	yet.
If	 you	 love	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 destroy	 your	 freedom.	 They	 both	 can	 exist
together;	there	is	no	antagonism	between	them.	It	is	because	of	our	foolishness
that	we	have	created	the	antagonism.	Hence,	the	monks	think	the	worldly	people
are	fools,	and	the	worldly	people	deep	down	know	that	the	monks	are	fools;	they
are	missing	all	the	joys	of	life.
A	great	priest	was	asked,	“What	is	love?”
The	 priest	 said,	 “A	word	made	 up	 of	 two	vowels,	 two	 consonants,	 and	 two
fools!”
That	is	their	condemnation	of	love.	Because	all	the	religions	have	condemned
love,	 they	 have	 praised	 freedom	 very	 much.	 In	 India	 we	 call	 the	 ultimate
experience	moksha;	moksha	means	absolute	freedom.
You	say:	“I	tell	myself	that	I	should	be	able	to	spark	myself	without	the	other,
but	 so	 far	 no	 luck.”	 It	 will	 remain	 so,	 it	 will	 not	 change.	 You	 should	 rather
change	your	conditioning	about	love	and	freedom.	Love	the	person,	but	give	the
person	total	freedom.	Love	the	person,	but	from	the	very	beginning	make	it	clear
that	you	are	not	selling	your	freedom.
And	 if	 you	 cannot	 make	 it	 happen	 in	 this	 community,	 here	 with	 me,	 you
cannot	make	 it	 happen	 anywhere	 else.	Here	we	 are	 experimenting	with	many
things,	and	one	of	the	dimensions	of	our	experiment	is	to	make	love	and	freedom
possible	together,	to	support	their	coexistence	together.	Love	a	person	but	don’t
possess,	and	don’t	be	possessed.	Insist	for	freedom,	and	don’t	lose	love!	There	is
no	need.	There	 is	no	natural	 enmity	between	 freedom	and	 love;	 it	 is	 a	 created
enmity.	Of	course	for	centuries	it	has	been	so,	so	you	have	become	accustomed
to	it;	it	has	become	a	conditioned	thing.
An	 old	 farmer	 down	 South	 could	 barely	 speak	 above	 a	 whisper.
Leaning	 on	 a	 fence	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 country	 road	 he	 was	 watching	 a
dozen	 razorbacks	 in	 a	 patch	 of	woodland.	 Every	 few	minutes	 the	 hogs
would	 scramble	 through	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 fence,	 tear	 across	 the	 road	 to
another	 patch	 of	 woodland,	 and	 immediately	 afterward	 scurry	 back
again.
“What’s	 the	 matter	 with	 them	 hogs	 anyway?”	 a	 passing	 stranger
asked.
“There	ain’t	nothing	the	matter	with	them,”	the	old	farmer	whispered
hoarsely.	“Them	hogs	belongs	to	me	and	before	I	lost	my	voice	I	used	to
call	 them	to	 their	 feed.	After	 I	 lost	my	voice	 I	used	 to	 tap	on	 this	 fence
rail	with	my	stick	at	feeding	time.”
He	paused	and	shook	his	head	gravely.	“And	now,”	he	added,	“them
cussed	 woodpeckers	 up	 in	 them	 trees	 has	 got	 them	 poor	 hogs	 plumb
crazy!”
Just	conditioning!	That’s	what	is	happening	to	humanity.
One	of	the	disciples	of	Pavlov,	the	pioneer	and	developer	of	the	theory	of	the
conditioned	reflex,	was	trying	an	experiment	along	the	same	lines.	He	bought	a
puppy	and	decided	to	condition	him	to	stand	up	and	bark	for	his	food.	He	held
the	 pup’s	 food	 just	 out	 of	 reach,	 barked	 a	 few	 times,	 then	 set	 it	 on	 the	 floor
before	him.	The	idea	was	that	the	pup	would	associate	standing	up	and	barking
with	getting	his	food	and	learn	to	do	so	when	hungry.
This	went	on	for	about	a	week,	but	the	little	dog	failed	to	learn.	After	another
week	the	man	gave	up	the	experiment	and	simply	put	the	food	down	in	front	of
the	dog,	but	the	pup	refused	to	eat	it.	He	was	waiting	for	his	master	to	stand	and
bark!	Now	he	had	become	conditioned.
It	 is	 only	 a	 conditioning,	 it	 can	 be	 dropped.	 You	 just	 need	 a	 little
meditativeness.	 Meditation	 simply	 means	 the	 process	 of	 unconditioning	 the
mind.	Whatever	 the	 society	 has	 done	 to	 you	has	 to	 be	 undone.	When	you	 are
unconditioned	you	will	be	able	to	see	the	beauty	of	love	and	freedom	together;
they	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	If	you	really	love	the	person	you	will	give
him	or	her	absolute	freedom—that’s	a	gift	of	love.	And	when	there	is	freedom,
love	 responds	 tremendously.	When	 you	 give	 freedom	 to	 somebody	 you	 have
given	the	greatest	gift,	and	love	comes	rushing	towards	you.
You	ask	me:	“Is	this	some	stupid	Waiting	for	Godot	game	I	am	playing	with
myself?”	No.
“When	the	last	love	affair	ended,	I	swore	to	myself	I	was	not	going	to	let	the
same	 old	 deadening	 process	 happen,	 but	 here	 I	 am	 again	 feeling	 half	 alive,
waiting	 for	 ‘him’	 to	 come.”	 But	 just	 by	making	 a	 vow,	 just	 by	 deciding,	 you
cannot	change	yourself.	You	have	to	understand.	Love	is	a	basic	need,	as	basic
as	 freedom,	so	both	have	 to	be	 fulfilled.	And	a	person	who	 is	 full	of	 love	and
free	 is	 the	most	beautiful	phenomenon	in	 the	world.	And	when	two	persons	of
such	beauty	meet,	their	relationship	is	not	a	relationship	at	all.	It	is	a	relating.	It
is	a	constant,	riverlike	flow.	It	is	continuously	growing	towards	greater	heights.
The	ultimate	height	of	love	and	freedom	is	the	experience	of	the	divine.	In	it
you	will	find	both	tremendous	love,	absolute	love,	and	absolute	freedom.
I	am	always	afraid	of	being	alone,	because	when	I	am	alone	I	start	to
wonder	who	I	am.	It	feels	that	if	I	inquire	deeper,	I	will	find	out	that
I	am	not	the	person	who	I	have	believed	I	was	for	the	past	twenty-six
years,	but	 a	being,	present	 at	 the	moment	of	birth	and	maybe	also
the	moment	 before.	 For	 some	 reason,	 this	 scares	me	 completely.	 It
feels	 like	 a	 kind	 of	 insanity,	 and	 makes	 me	 lose	 myself	 in	 outside
things	in	order	to	feel	safer.	Who	am	I,	and	why	the	fear?
It	 is	not	only	your	 fear,	 it	 is	everybody’s	 fear.	Because	nobody	 is	what	he	was
supposed	to	be	by	existence.
The	 society,	 the	culture,	 the	 religion,	 the	education	have	all	been	conspiring
against	 innocent	 children.	 They	 have	 all	 the	 powers,	 the	 child	 is	 helpless	 and
dependent.	So	whatsoever	they	want	to	make	out	of	him,	they	manage	to	do	it.
They	don’t	allow	any	child	to	grow	to	his	natural	destiny.	Their	every	effort	is	to
make	human	beings	into	utilities.
Who	knows,	 if	a	child	 is	 left	on	his	own	to	grow,	whether	he	will	be	of	any
use	to	the	vested	interests	or	not?	The	society	is	not	prepared	to	take	the	risk.	It
grabs	 the	 child	 and	 starts	 molding	 him	 into	 something	 that	 is	 needed	 by	 the
society.	 In	 a	 certain	 sense,	 it	 kills	 the	 soul	 of	 the	 child	 and	 gives	 him	 a	 false
identity,	so	that	he	never	misses	his	soul,	his	being.
The	false	identity	is	a	substitute.	But	that	substitute	is	useful	only	in	the	same
crowd	which	 has	 given	 it	 to	 you.	 The	moment	 you	 are	 alone,	 the	 false	 starts
falling	apart	and	the	repressed	real	starts	expressing	itself.
Hence	the	fear	of	being	lonely.	Nobody	wants	to	be	lonely,	everybody	wants
to	belong	to	a	crowd—not	only	one	crowd,	but	many	crowds.	A	person	belongs
to	 a	 religious	 crowd,	 a	 political	 party,	 a	 rotary	 club,	 and	 there	 are	many	other
small	groups	 to	belong	 to.	One	wants	 to	be	supported	 twenty-four	hours	a	day
because	the	false,	without	support,	cannot	stand.	The	moment	one	is	alone,	one
starts	feeling	a	strange	craziness.
That’s	 what	 you	 have	 been	 asking	 about	 because	 for	 twenty-six	 years	 you
believed	yourself	to	be	somebody,	and	then	suddenly	in	a	moment	of	being	alone
you	start	feeling	you	are	not	that.	It	creates	fear;	then	who	are	you?	And	twenty-
six	years	of	suppression—it	will	take	some	time	for	the	real	to	express	itself.	The
gap	 between	 the	 two	 has	 been	 called	 by	 the	 mystics	 “the	 dark	 night	 of	 the
soul”—a	very	appropriate	expression.	You	are	no	more	the	false,	and	you	are	not
yet	the	real.	You	are	in	a	limbo,	you	don’t	know	who	you	are.
Particularly	 in	 the	 West—and	 the	 questioner	 comes	 from	 the	 West—the
problem	 is	 even	 more	 complicated.	 Because	 they	 have	 not	 developed	 any
methodology	to	discover	the	real	as	soon	as	possible,	so	that	the	dark	night	of	the
soul	 can	 be	 shortened.	 The	 West	 knows	 nothing	 as	 far	 as	 meditation	 is
concerned.	And	meditation	is	only	a	name	for	being	alone,	silent,	waiting	for	the
real	to	assert	itself.	It	is	not	an	act,	it	is	a	silent	relaxation	because	whatever	you
do	will	come	out	of	your	false	personality.	All	your	doing	for	twenty-six	years
has	come	out	of	it;	it	is	an	old	habit.
Habits	die	hard.
There	 was	 one	 great	 mystic	 in	 India,	 Eknath.	 He	 was	 going	 for	 a	 holy
pilgrimage	with	all	his	disciples.	It	was	almost	three	to	six	months’	journey.
One	man	came	to	him,	fell	at	his	feet,	and	said,	“I	know	I	am	not	worthy.	You
know	it	too,	everybody	knows	me.	But	I	know	your	compassion	is	greater	than
my	unworthiness.	Please	accept	me	also	as	one	of	the	members	of	the	group	that
is	going	on	the	holy	pilgrimage.”
Eknath	said,	“You	are	a	thief,	and	not	an	ordinary	thief,	but	a	master	thief.	You
have	never	been	caught,	 and	everybody	knows	 that	you	are	a	 thief.	 I	 certainly
feel	 like	 taking	 you	 with	me,	 but	 I	 also	 have	 to	 think	 about	 those	 fifty	 other
people	who	are	going	with	me.	You	will	have	to	give	me	a	promise—and	I	am
not	asking	for	more,	just	for	these	three	to	six	months’	time	while	we	are	on	the
pilgrimage:	you	will	not	steal.	After	that,	it	is	up	to	you.	Once	we	are	back	home,
you	are	free	from	the	promise.”
The	 man	 said,	 “I	 am	 absolutely	 ready	 to	 promise,	 and	 I	 am	 tremendously
grateful	for	your	compassion.”
The	other	fifty	people	were	suspicious.	To	trust	in	a	thief…,	but	they	could	not
say	anything	to	Eknath,	he	was	the	master.
The	pilgrimage	 started,	 and	 from	 the	very	 first	 night	 there	was	 trouble.	The
next	morning	there	was	chaos:	somebody’s	coat	was	missing,	somebody’s	shirt
was	 missing,	 somebody’s	 money	 was	 gone.	 And	 everybody	 was	 shouting,
“Where	is	my	money?”	and	they	were	all	telling	Eknath,	“We	were	worried	from
the	very	beginning	that	you	were	taking	this	man	with	you.	A	lifelong	habit—.”
But	 then	 they	 started	 looking,	 and	 they	 found	 that	 things	 were	 not	 stolen.
Somebody’s	 money	 was	 missing,	 but	 it	 was	 found	 in	 somebody	 else’s	 bag.
Somebody	else’s	coat	was	missing,	but	it	was	found	in	somebody	else’s	luggage.
Everything	was	found,	but	it	was	an	unnecessary	trouble—every	morning!	And
nobody	 could	 conceive	what	 can	 be	 the	meaning	 of	 it?	Certainly	 it	 is	 not	 the
thief,	because	nothing	was	actually	stolen.
The	 third	 night,	 Eknath	 remained	 awake	 to	 see	 what	 was	 going	 on.	 In	 the
middle	of	the	night,	the	thief—just	out	of	habit—woke	up,	started	taking	things
from	one	place	 to	another	place.	Eknath	 stopped	him	and	said,	 “What	are	you
doing?	Have	you	forgotten	your	promise?”
He	said,	“No,	I	have	not	forgotten	my	promise.	I	am	not	stealing	anything,	but
I	have	not	promised	that	I	will	not	move	things	from	one	place	to	another	place.
After	six	months	I	have	to	be	a	 thief	again;	 this	 is	 just	practice.	And	you	must
understand,	 it	 is	a	 lifelong	habit,	you	cannot	drop	it	 just	 like	that.	Just	give	me
time.	You	should	understand	my	problem	also.	For	three	days	I	have	not	stolen	a
single	thing—it	is	just	like	fasting!	This	is	just	a	substitute,	I	am	keeping	myself
busy.	This	is	my	business	time,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	so	it	is	very	hard	for
me	just	to	lie	down	on	the	bed	awake.	And	so	many	idiots	are	sleeping	and	I	am
not	doing	any	harm	to	anybody.	In	the	morning	they	will	find	their	things.”
Eknath	said,	“You	are	a	strange	man.	You	see	that	every	morning	there	is	such
chaos,	and	one	or	two	hours	unnecessarily	are	wasted	in	finding	where	you	have
put	things,	whose	property	has	gone	into	whose	luggage.	Everybody	has	to	open
everything	and	ask	everybody…‘To	whom	does	this	belong?’”
The	thief	said,	“This	much	concession	you	have	to	give	to	me.”
Twenty-six	 years	 of	 a	 false	 personality	 imposed	 by	 people	 who	 you	 loved,
whom	you	respected,	and	they	were	not	intentionally	doing	anything	bad	to	you.
Their	 intentions	 were	 good,	 just	 their	 awareness	 was	 nil.	 They	 were	 not
conscious	people:	your	parents,	your	teachers,	your	priests,	your	politicians	were
not	conscious	people,	they	were	unconscious.	And	even	a	good	intention	in	the
hands	of	an	unconscious	person	turns	out	to	be	poisonous.
So	whenever	you	are	alone,	a	deep	fear	arises	because	suddenly	the	false	starts
disappearing.	 And	 the	 real	 will	 take	 a	 little	 time.	 You	 have	 lost	 it	 twenty-six
years	back.	You	will	have	 to	give	 some	consideration	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 a	gap	of
twenty-six	years	has	to	be	bridged.
In	fear	that	“I	am	losing	myself,	my	senses,	my	sanity,	my	mind,	everything,”
because	the	self	that	has	been	given	to	you	by	others	consists	of	all	these	things
—it	looks	like	you	will	go	insane.	You	immediately	start	doing	something	just	to
keep	yourself	engaged.	 If	 there	are	no	people,	at	 least	 there	 is	some	action.	So
the	false	remains	engaged	and	does	not	start	disappearing.
Hence,	people	find	it	the	most	difficult	on	holidays.	For	five	days	they	work,
hoping	that	on	the	weekend	they	are	going	to	relax.	But	the	weekend	is	the	worst
time	in	 the	whole	world.	More	accidents	happen	on	the	weekend,	more	people
commit	suicide,	more	murders,	more	stealing,	more	rape.	Strange,	these	people
were	engaged	for	five	days	and	there	was	no	problem.	But	the	weekend	suddenly
gives	them	a	choice,	either	to	be	engaged	in	something	or	to	relax,	but	relaxing
is	fearsome;	the	false	personality	disappears.	Keep	engaged,	do	anything	stupid.
People	are	running	toward	the	beaches,	bumper	to	bumper,	miles-long	traffic.
And	 if	 you	 ask	 them	 where	 they	 are	 going,	 they	 are	 “getting	 away	 from	 the
crowd”	 and	 the	 whole	 crowd	 is	 going	 with	 them!	 They	 are	 going	 to	 find	 a
solitary,	silent	space—all	of	 them.	In	fact,	 if	 they	had	remained	home	it	would
have	been	more	solitary	and	silent,	because	all	the	idiots	have	gone	in	search	of	a
solitary	place.	And	they	are	rushing	like	mad,	because	two	days	will	be	finished
soon,	they	have	to	reach	don’t	ask	where!	And	on	the	beaches,	you	can	see.	Not
even	marketplaces	 are	 so	 crowded.	 Strangely	 enough,	 people	 are	 feeling	 very
much	at	ease,	taking	a	sunbath.	Ten	thousand	people	on	a	small	beach	taking	a
sunbath,	relaxing.
The	 same	person	on	 the	 same	beach	 alone	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 relax.	But	 he
knows	thousands	of	other	people	are	relaxing	all	around	him.	The	same	people
were	in	the	offices,	the	same	people	were	in	the	streets,	the	same	people	were	in
the	marketplace,	now	these	people	are	on	the	beach.
The	crowd	is	an	essential	for	the	false	self	to	exist.	The	moment	it	 is	lonely,
you	 start	 freaking	 out.	 This	 is	 where	 one	 should	 understand	 a	 little	 bit	 of
meditation.
Don’t	be	worried,	because	that	which	can	disappear	is	worth	disappearing.	It
is	meaningless	to	cling	to	it—it	is	not	yours,	it	is	not	you.	You	are	the	one	when
the	false	has	gone	and	the	fresh,	the	innocent,	the	unpolluted	being	will	arise	in
its	place.
Nobody	else	can	answer	your	question	“Who	am	I?”—you	will	know	it.
All	meditative	techniques	are	a	help	to	destroy	the	false.	They	don’t	give	you
the	real—the	real	cannot	be	given.	That	which	can	be	given	cannot	be	real.	The
real	you	have	got	already;	just	the	false	has	to	be	taken	away.
Meditation	is	just	a	courage	to	be	silent	and	alone.	Slowly,	you	start	feeling	a
new	quality	to	yourself,	a	new	aliveness,	a	new	beauty,	a	new	intelligence,	which
is	not	borrowed	from	anybody,	which	is	growing	within	you.	It	has	roots	in	your
existence.	And	if	you	are	not	a	coward,	it	will	come	to	fruition,	to	flowering.
Only	 the	brave,	 the	 courageous,	 the	people	who	have	guts	 can	be	 religious.
Not	 the	 churchgoers:	 these	 are	 the	 cowards.	 Not	 the	 Hindus,	 not	 the
Mohammedans,	 not	 the	 Christians:	 they	 are	 against	 searching.	 It	 is	 the	 same
crowd,	and	they	are	trying	to	make	their	false	identity	more	consolidated.
You	were	born.	You	have	come	into	the	world	with	life,	with	consciousness,
with	 tremendous	 sensitivity.	 Just	 look	 at	 a	 small	 child.	 Look	 at	 his	 eyes,	 the
freshness.	All	that	has	been	covered	by	a	false	personality.
There	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	You	can	lose	only	that	which	needs	to	be	lost.
And	 it	 is	 good	 to	 lose	 it	 soon,	 because	 the	 longer	 it	 stays,	 the	 stronger	 it
becomes,	 and	 one	 does	 not	 know	 anything	 about	 tomorrow.	 Don’t	 die	 before
realizing	 your	 authentic	 being.	Only	 those	 few	 people	 are	 fortunate	who	 have
lived	with	authentic	being	and	who	have	died	with	authentic	being	because	they
know	that	life	is	eternal,	and	death	is	a	fiction.
Then	move	out	 of	 it!	One	 should	 always	be	watchful,	 because	 if	 one	 is	 not
feeling	 happy	 in	 any	 situation,	 in	 any	mood,	 then	 one	 should	 come	 out	 of	 it.
Otherwise	that	becomes	your	habit,	and	by	and	by	you	lose	sensitivity.	You	will
go	 on	 being	 miserable	 and	 living	 in	 it,	 which	 simply	 shows	 a	 very	 deep
insensitivity.
There	is	no	need!	If	you	are	not	feeling	good	in	isolation,	then	come	out	of	it.
Meet	with	people,	enjoy	company,	talk	and	laugh,	but	when	you	feel	you	are	fed
up	with	it,	move	into	isolation	again.
Always	 remember	 to	 judge	everything	by	your	 inner	 feeling	of	bliss.	 If	you
are	 feeling	blissful,	 everything	 is	 all	 right.	 If	 you	 are	not	 feeling	blissful,	 then
whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing,	 something	 somewhere	 is	 wrong.	 The	 longer	 you
remain	 in	 it,	 the	more	 it	 becomes	 just	 an	 unaware	 thing,	 and	 you	 completely
forget	that	it	is	through	your	cooperation	that	the	miserable	feeling	continues.	It
needs	your	cooperation;	it	cannot	exist	itself.
Human	 growth	 requires	 that	 one	 moves	 from	 one	 polarity	 to	 another.
Sometimes	being	alone	is	perfectly	good:	one	needs	one’s	own	space,	one	needs
to	forget	the	whole	world,	and	to	be	oneself.	The	other	is	absent	so	you	have	no
boundary	 to	 yourself.	 The	 other	 creates	 your	 boundary,	 otherwise	 you	 are
infinite.
Living	with	people,	moving	in	the	world,	in	society,	by	and	by	one	begins	to
feel	 confined,	 limited,	 as	 if	 there	 are	 walls	 all	 around.	 It	 becomes	 a	 subtle
imprisonment,	 and	 one	 needs	 to	 move.	 One	 needs	 sometimes	 to	 be	 perfectly
alone	so	that	all	boundaries	disappear,	as	if	the	other	does	not	exist	at	all,	and	the
whole	 universe	 and	 the	 whole	 sky	 exists	 only	 for	 you.	 In	 that	 moment	 of
aloneness	one	realizes	for	the	first	time	what	infinity	is.
But	 then	 if	 you	 live	 in	 it	 too	 much,	 by	 and	 by	 the	 infinity	 bores	 you,	 it
becomes	 tasteless.	 There	 is	 purity	 and	 silence,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 ecstasy	 in	 it.
Ecstasy	always	comes	through	the	other.	One	then	starts	feeling	hungry	for	love,
and	wants	to	escape	from	this	aloneness,	this	vast	expanse	of	space.	One	wants	a
cozy	place	surrounded	by	others,	so	that	one	can	forget	oneself.
This	is	the	basic	polarity	of	life,	 love	and	meditation.	People	who	try	to	live
through	love	and	relationships	alone,	by	and	by	become	very	limited.	They	lose
infinity	and	purity,	and	 they	become	superficial.	Always	 living	 in	 relationships
means	always	living	on	the	boundary	where	you	can	meet	the	other.	So	you	are
always	standing	at	the	gate,	and	you	can	never	move	into	your	palace,	because
only	at	 the	gate	is	the	meeting-point	where	the	other	passes	by.	So	people	who
only	 live	 in	 love,	 by	 and	 by	 become	 superficial.	 Their	 life	 loses	 depth.	 And
people	who	 live	only	 in	meditation	will	become	very	deep,	but	 their	 life	 loses
color,	loses	the	ecstatic	dance,	the	orgasmic	quality	of	being.
Real	humanity,	 the	humanity	of	 the	 future,	will	 live	with	both	 the	polarities
together,	and	to	share	that	understanding	is	my	whole	effort.	One	should	be	free
to	move	from	one	to	another,	with	neither	polarity	becoming	a	confinement.	You
should	 not	 be	 afraid	 of	 the	marketplace,	 nor	 too	 afraid	 of	 the	monastery.	You
should	 be	 free	 to	move	 from	 the	marketplace	 to	 the	monastery,	 and	 from	 the
monastery	to	the	marketplace.
This	 freedom,	 this	 flexibility	 of	 movement,	 I	 call	 sannyas.	 The	 bigger	 the
swing,	the	richer	your	life.	There	are	attractions	to	remaining	with	just	one	of	the
polarities	 because	 then	 life	 is	 simpler.	 If	 you	 just	 remain	 with	 people,	 in	 the
crowd,	it	is	simple.	Complexity	comes	with	the	contradictory,	the	opposite	pole.
If	you	become	a	monk	or	you	go	to	the	Himalayas	and	just	live	there,	life	is	very
simple.	But	a	simple	life	which	has	no	complexity	in	it	loses	much	richness.
Life	 should	 be	 both	 complex	 and	 simple.	 One	 has	 to	 seek	 this	 harmony
continuously;	otherwise	life	becomes	of	one	note,	a	single	note.	You	can	go	on
repeating	it,	but	no	orchestra	can	be	created	out	of	it.
So	 whenever	 you	 feel	 that	 something	 is	 now	 becoming	 troublesome,
immediately	 move	 before	 you	 become	 unaware.	 Never	 make	 anywhere	 your
home,	 neither	 relationships	 nor	 aloneness.	 Remain	 flowing	 and	 homeless,	 and
don’t	abide	at	any	polarity.	Enjoy	it,	delight	in	it,	but	when	it	is	finished	move	to
the	other:	make	it	a	rhythm.
You	work	in	the	day,	by	night	you	rest,	so	that	again	by	the	next	day	you	are
ready	to	work,	energy	regained.	Just	think	of	a	man	who	goes	on	working	all	day
and	all	night,	or	who	goes	on	sleeping	day	and	night—what	kind	of	a	 life	will
that	be?	One	will	be	a	madness,	 the	other	 a	 coma.	Between	 the	 two	 there	 is	 a
balance,	a	harmony.	Work	hard	so	that	you	can	relax.	Relax	deeply	so	that	you
become	capable	of	working,	of	being	more	creative.
Please	 help	me!	My	boyfriend	has	 been	 in	Goa	 for	 five	weeks	 and
I’ve	had	such	a	good	 time	enjoying	 the	 freedom	and	 independence,
no	need	to	face	my	jealousy	and	possessiveness,	just	floating	through
the	day.	Now	 it	 looks	as	 if	he	 is	 coming	back	 soon	and	 I’m	getting
nervous	already,	wondering	what	he	is	doing,	how	it	is	going	to	be,	if
he	 found	 somebody	 else,	 et	 cetera.	 What	 is	 this	 attachment	 to	 a
particular	 person	 which	 creates	 all	 these	 comfortable	 and	 very
uncomfortable	feelings?	I’m	not	really	a	meditative	type,	but	is	there
any	 possibility	 to	 go	 beyond	 this	 attachment	 of	 the	 heart	 and	 feel
free,	or	is	the	only	way	to	live	it,	go	through	it,	and	suffer	and	enjoy
the	whole	thing?
I	 know	 your	 boyfriend:	 he	 will	 make	 anybody	 happy	 if	 he	 goes	 to	 Goa	 and
remains	 there	 forever!	He	 is	a	challenge,	 so	 if	you	are	becoming	nervous,	 it	 is
natural.	And	don’t	be	worried	about	his	getting	involved	with	any	girl,	because
no	girl	will	get	involved	with	him.
I	have	 thought	about	him	and	I	 think	 that	only	you	can	manage	him.	He’s	a
crackpot	but	you	love	him.	You	cannot	love	a	simple	human	being.	You	are	born
for	each	other:	neither	can	you	 find	another	boyfriend	nor	can	he	 find	another
girlfriend.	 So	 don’t	 be	 worried	 about	 possessiveness	 or	 anything.	 You	 can	 be
absolutely	non-possessive,	still	he	will	be	your	boyfriend.	Where	else	can	he	go?
You	are	in	a	good,	secured,	guaranteed,	insured	condition.
In	the	first	place,	it	is	a	miracle	that	you	have	found	him.	When	I	heard	about
it	 for	 the	 first	 time	 I	 said,	 “My	God!	 Now	 something	mysterious	 is	 going	 to
happen.	 These	 two	 people	 together	 are	 going	 to	 create	 so	much	 trouble.”	But
still,	he’s	attached	to	you,	you	are	attached	to	him.	Mostly	your	love	is	fighting,
and	when	you	are	tired	of	fighting	you	love	also,	but	that	is	only	when	you	are
both	tired.	He	will	also	be	feeling	nervous,	because	he	has	to	come	back.	I	had
suggested	to	him	that	he	go	away	for	a	few	weeks.	He	left	immediately,	the	very
moment	he	 received	my	message:	“Go	 to	Goa.”	He	did	not	wait	even	a	single
day!	He	must	 have	 enjoyed	 those	 five	weeks	 the	 same	way	you	have	 enjoyed
them.	Now	you	are	feeling	nervous,	and	he	will	be	feeling	nervous	because	those
weeks	will	finally	come	to	an	end.
But	 deep	 down	 you	 are	 also	 feeling	 happy	 that	 he	 is	 coming	 back,	 and	 the
same	will	be	his	situation.	Let	him	come.	He’s	just	your	old	boyfriend:	you	know
him	 every	 bit,	 he	 knows	 you	 every	 bit.	All	 the	 fights	 are	well	 known,	 all	 the
problems	are	well	known.	There	is	no	need	to	feel	nervous	because	there	is	not
going	to	be	anything	new.	It	is	just	the	same	old	chap,	so	let	him	come	back	and
start	life	again	in	the	same	old	way.
It	 is	something	to	be	understood:	 the	girlfriend	you	get	or	 the	boyfriend	you
get,	 you	 deserve.	 You	 don’t	 get	 any	 boyfriend	 or	 girlfriend	 whom	 you	 don’t
deserve;	 those	 kinds	 of	 relationships	 only	 last	 for	 one	 or	 two	 days.	 But	 your
relationship	has	a	history	and	it	is	going	to	last	to	the	very	end,	so	relax	and	take
it	easily!
You	 deserve	 him,	 he	 deserves	 you.	 And	 once	 you	 see	 the	 point	 that	 you
deserve	 each	 other	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 grudge,	 any	 complaining,	 any
grumbling.	You	 are	 strong	 enough,	 because	 that	 crackpot	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to
make	even	a	dent	in	you.	He	has	been	doing	all	kinds	of	neurotic	things.	But	he
does	not	know	that	you	are	a	psychotic,	and	neurotics	and	psychotics	make	good
marriages.	They	fit	perfectly.
One	psychoanalyst	was	asked—because	those	two	words	look	so	similar,	and
the	 difference	 is	 known	 only	 to	 the	 experts—the	 psychoanalyst	 was	 asked,
“What	is	the	difference	between	neurosis	and	psychosis?”
He	said,	“The	psychotic	thinks	two	plus	two	are	five	and,	whatever	you	do,	he
never	changes	his	mind.	He’s	determined	and	committed	to	his	viewpoint.	The
neurotic	knows	that	two	plus	two	are	four	but	feels	very	nervous—why	are	they
four?”
Perfect	marriages	happen	only	in	heaven,	but	once	in	a	while	on	the	earth	too.
You	and	your	boyfriend	are	a	perfect	combination.	So	let	the	poor	fellow	come,
start	hammering	each	other	in	the	old	way.	You	are	accustomed	and	well	trained,
he	is	accustomed	and	well	trained.	One	feels	worried	about	a	new	girlfriend;	one
never	knows	what	she	is	going	to	do—freak	out	in	the	middle	of	the	night?	One
is	 nervous	 about	 the	 new	 boyfriend,	 because	 one	 cannot	 predict	what	 kind	 of
man	he’s	going	to	prove	to	be.
You	are	certain.	 In	 this	certainty	you	should	relax	and	 let	him	come.	 I	don’t
see	that	 there	 is	any	problem.	You	are	both	perfectly	happy	in	your	misery;	all
people	 are	 perfectly	 happy	 in	 their	miserable	 relationships!	That’s	why	 after	 a
five	weeks’	separation	you	feel	good.	If	 the	separation	is	for	a	longer	time	you
will	start	missing	him.
I	have	given	just	enough	time	so	that	you	can	enjoy	freedom	and	he	can	enjoy
freedom,	and	in	the	right	moment,	when	you	start	missing	each	other,	he’s	back.
Just	wait!
And	 he’s	 not	 a	 dangerous	 person;	 he	 cannot	 harm	 you.	 He’s	 very	 good	 at
heart,	just	a	little	loose	in	his	head.	But	to	have	a	boyfriend	who	is	a	little	loose
in	the	head	is	better	than	to	have	a	boyfriend	who	is	a	little	tight	in	the	head.	I
know	it	is	no	ordinary	relationship:	you	both	are	extraordinary.
SOUL	MATES	OR	CELL	MATES?
We	are	all	living	lives	according	to	fictions,	poetries,	film	stories.	That
has	given	humanity	a	wrong	impression,	the	impression	that	when	there	is	love
everything	will	fit,	 that	there	will	be	no	conflict.	For	centuries	poets	have	been
giving	the	idea	that	lovers	are	made	for	each	other.
Nobody	 is	 made	 for	 anybody	 else.	 Everybody	 is	 different	 from	 everybody
else.	 You	 may	 love	 a	 person	 without	 knowing	 that	 you	 love	 the	 person	 only
because	 there	 is	 so	 much	 difference	 between	 you,	 so	 much	 distance.	 The
distance	 is	 a	 challenge,	 the	 distance	 is	 an	 adventure;	 the	 distance	 makes	 the
woman	 or	 the	 man	 worth	 getting	 hold	 of.	 But	 things	 as	 they	 appear	 from	 a
distance	are	not	the	same	when	they	come	close.
When	 you	 are	 just	 courting	 a	 man	 or	 a	 woman,	 everything	 is	 beautiful,
everything	fits	because	both	want	everything	to	fit.	Anything	that	does	not	fit	is
not	allowed	to	surface;	it	is	repressed	in	the	unconscious.	So	lovers	sitting	on	the
beach	looking	at	the	moon	do	not	know	each	other	at	all.	The	marriage	is	almost
finished	before	the	honeymoon	is	finished.
In	the	East	where	the	tradition	of	arranged	marriage	is	still	followed,	there	is
nothing	 like	 a	 honeymoon;	 they	 don’t	 give	 the	 chance	 for	 the	marriage	 to	 be
finished	so	soon.	Couples	go	on	living	together	and	never	feel	that	things	are	not
fitting,	 that	 something	 is	missing.	There	 is	no	chance	at	all	 for	 that	 to	happen.
Husbands	and	wives	do	not	choose	for	 themselves;	marriages	are	organized	by
the	 parents,	 by	 the	 astrologers,	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 people	 except	 the	 two	who	 are
going	to	be	married.
Even	 after	 they	 get	 married,	 the	 couple	 cannot	 see	 each	 other	 alone	 in	 the
daylight,	they	can	only	meet	each	other	deep	in	the	darkness	of	the	night.	They
live	with	their	families,	and	those	families	are	so	big	that	 they	can	talk	only	in
whispers;	 fighting	 is	 out	 of	 the	 question.	 Throwing	 clothes	will	 not	 work;	 no
woman,	no	man	in	these	traditional	communities	knows	that	clothes	have	to	be
thrown,	otherwise	what	kind	of	love	affair	do	you	have?	Or	that	plates	have	to	be
broken,	or	that	you	have	to	argue	over	each	and	every	thing.	You	say	one	thing
and	the	woman	understands	something	else;	she	says	something,	you	understand
something	else.
But	 in	 the	 modern	 marriages	 based	 on	 love	 affairs,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 no
communication.	 And	 it	 starts	 with	 the	 honeymoon,	 because	 there	 for	 the	 first
time	 you	 are	 together	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day.	Now	 you	 cannot	 pretend;	 you
have	to	be	real.	You	cannot	act.	When	you	live	together	you	have	to	be	real	to
the	 other	 person;	 you	 cannot	 hide,	 you	 cannot	 have	 any	 secrets.	And	we	have
been	 given	 the	 idea	 from	 our	 very	 childhood	 that	 between	 wife	 and	 husband
there	is	always	harmony,	everything	is	always	fitting,	 they	are	always	together,
always	loving,	no	fight.	That	whole	ideology	is	the	problem.
I	would	like	to	tell	you	the	truth.	The	truth	is	that	both	the	persons,	whoever
they	are,	are	different	individuals.	If	you	love	somebody	you	have	to	understand
that	the	person	you	love	is	not	your	shadow,	is	not	your	reflection	in	the	mirror,
has	 his	 or	 her	 own	 individuality.	 Unless	 you	 have	 a	 big	 enough	 heart	 to
accommodate	 somebody	 who	 is	 different	 from	 you,	 who	 may	 have	 different
ideas	 about	 different	 things,	 you	 should	 not	 get	 into	 unnecessary	 trouble.	 It	 is
better	to	become	a	monk	or	a	nun.	Why	bother?	Why	create	hell	for	yourself	and
the	other?
But	the	hell	is	created	because	you	expect	heaven.
I	am	telling	you	to	accept	 that	 this	 is	 the	situation:	 the	person	is	going	to	be
different.	You	are	not	the	master,	neither	is	the	other	the	master;	both	are	simply
partners	who	have	decided,	in	spite	of	all	differences,	to	be	together.	And	in	fact,
differences	add	spice	to	your	love.	If	you	can	find	a	person	who	is	just	like	you,
you	will	not	find	much	attraction.	The	other	person	has	to	be	different,	distant,	a
mystery	that	invites	you	to	explore.
With	two	mysteries	meeting	together,	once	they	drop	the	idea	that	they	have	to
agree	on	everything,	 there	 is	no	question	of	any	fight.	The	fight	arises	because
you	want	agreement.
If	you	are	living	just	 like	two	friends,	she	has	her	own	ideas,	you	have	your
own	ideas,	she	respects	your	ideas,	you	respect	her	ideas;	she	has	her	way,	you
have	your	own	way	and	nobody	is	trying	to	impose	on	and	indoctrinate	the	other.
Then	there	is	no	question	of	fight.	And	then	there	is	no	question	that	things	are
not	fitting.	Why	should	they	be	fitting?
Why	 should	 there	 be	 any	 feeling	 that	 something	 is	 missing?	 Nothing	 is
missing;	 it	 is	 just	 that	 your	 idea	 of	 harmony	 is	 not	 there.	 Harmony	 is	 not
something	very	great,	it	is	boring.	Once	in	a	while,	even	if	you	fight,	once	in	a
while	 even	 if	 you	get	 really	 hot,	 that	 does	not	mean	 that	 love	disappears;	 that
simply	 means	 love	 is	 capable	 of	 absorbing	 even	 disagreements,	 fights,
overcoming	all	 these	hindrances.	But	 the	old	 ideology	gets	 in	 the	way	of	your
understanding.
I	am	reminded	of	the	old	biblical	story	which	is	not	told	very	much	because	it
is	very	dangerous.	First,	God	made	one	man	and	one	woman.	But	as	you	know
by	looking	at	the	world,	God	does	not	seem	to	be	very	intelligent.	Here,	nothing
is	fitting;	from	the	very	beginning	you	can	see	it.	He	made	man	and	woman,	two
persons,	and	gave	them	a	small	bed,	not	a	double	bed.
The	very	first	night,	at	the	beginning	of	time,	was	the	night	of	a	tremendous
fight	because	 the	woman	wanted	 to	sleep	on	 the	bed.	The	man	thought	 that	he
should	sleep	on	the	bed	and	she	should	sleep	on	the	floor.	The	whole	night	they
went	on	fighting,	hitting	each	other,	throwing	things,	and	in	the	morning	the	man
said	to	God,	“I	asked	you	to	give	me	a	companion	but	I	did	not	ask	you	to	give
me	an	enemy.	If	this	is	your	idea	of	a	companion,	then	I	want	to	tell	you	I	was
better	 off	 alone.	 I	 don’t	 want	 this	 woman;	 there	 is	 never	 going	 to	 be	 peace
between	us.”
Now	 the	 simple	 thing	 would	 have	 been	 to	 ask	 for	 a	 double	 bed.	 I	 don’t
understand	what	kind	of	God	that	was,	and	what	 these	 idiots	were	asking.	The
simple	solution	was	a	double	bed,	or	two	single	beds,	if	things	were	getting	that
bad.	But	instead	of	that	Adam	said,	“I	don’t	want	this	woman;	she	is	trying	to	be
equal	to	me.”	The	male	chauvinist	idea	arose	that	very	night.
So	 God	 dismantled	 the	 woman—naturally,	 because	 God	 is	 also	 a	 male
chauvinist.	Her	name	was	Lilith.	He	dismantled	her	just	the	way	you	dismantle
any	mechanism.	He	destroyed	 the	woman	and	said,	“Now	I	will	make	another
woman	who	will	 be	 lower	 than	you	 and	will	 never	 ask	 for	 equality.”	Then	he
made	 the	second	woman,	who	was	Eve,	by	 taking	one	of	 the	ribs	 from	Adam.
Out	of	Adam’s	rib	he	made	the	woman,	so	 that	she	could	ask	for	equality;	she
was	nothing	but	a	rib.
It	is	said	that	every	night	when	Adam	would	come	back	home	and	go	to	sleep,
Eve	would	count	his	ribs	because	she	was	always	afraid	that	if	he	lost	anther	rib,
that	would	mean	another	woman	was	also	somewhere	around.
There	is	no	need	for	more	than	friendship.	Love	has	to	be	a	friendly	affair	in
which	nobody	 is	 superior,	 in	which	nobody	 is	going	 to	decide	about	 things,	 in
which	both	 are	 fully	 aware	 that	 they	 are	 different,	 that	 their	 approach	 towards
life	 is	 different,	 that	 they	 think	differently,	 and	 still,	with	 all	 these	differences,
they	love	each	other.
Then	you	will	not	find	any	problems.	Problems	are	created	by	us.
Don’t	 try	 to	 create	 something	 superhuman.	 Be	 human,	 accept	 the	 other
person’s	 humanity	with	 all	 the	 frailty	 humanity	 is	 prone	 to.	 Your	 partner	will
commit	 mistakes	 just	 as	 you	 commit	 mistakes,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 learn.	 To	 be
together	is	a	great	learning:	of	forgiving,	forgetting,	understanding	that	the	other
is	as	human	as	you	are.	Just	a	little	forgiveness.
There	 is	 an	old	proverb:	 “To	err	 is	human	and	 to	 forgive	 is	divine.”	 I	don’t
agree.	To	err	is	human	and	to	forgive	is	also	human.	To	forgive	is	divine?—then
you	are	 raising	 it	 too	high,	 beyond	human	 reach.	Bring	 it	within	human	 reach
and	learn	to	forgive.	Learn	to	enjoy	forgiveness,	learn	to	offer	an	apology;	you
don’t	lose	anything	when	you	can	say	to	your	partner,	“I’m	sorry,	I	was	wrong.”
But	nobody	wants	 to	 say,	“I	was	wrong.”	You	want	 to	be	always	 right.	The
man	 tries	 to	 prove	 through	 arguments	 that	 he	 is	 right,	 and	 the	 woman	 tries
through	emotions	to	prove	that	she	is	right—screaming,	crying,	weeping,	tears.
And	most	often	she	wins!	The	man	becomes	afraid	of	the	neighbors,	and	just	to
cool	 her	 down—because	 the	 children	 may	 wake	 up—he	 says,	 “Cool	 down,
perhaps	you	are	right.”	But	deep	down	he	still	believes	he	is	right.
To	be	understanding	means	that	you	can	be	wrong,	the	woman	may	be	right.	It
is	not	a	guarantee	that	just	by	being	man	you	have	the	power	and	authority	to	be
right;	 neither	 has	 the	woman.	 If	we	were	 just	 a	 little	more	 human	 and	 a	 little
more	friendly,	and	we	could	say	 to	each	other,	“I	am	sorry.”	And	what	are	 the
things	you	are	fighting	for?	So	small,	so	trivial	that	if	somebody	asks	you	to	tell
them	about	it	you	will	feel	embarrassed.
Just	drop	the	idea	that	everything	has	to	fit,	drop	the	idea	that	there	is	going	to
be	total	harmony	because	those	are	not	good	ideas.	If	everything	fits	you	will	get
bored	with	each	other;	if	everything	is	harmonious	you	will	lose	the	whole	juice
of	the	relationship.	It	is	good	that	things	don’t	fit.	It	is	good	that	there	is	always	a
gap	 so	 there	 is	 always	 something	 to	 explore,	 something	 to	 cross	 over,	 some
bridge	to	be	made.	The	whole	life	can	be	a	tremendous	exploration	of	each	other
if	 we	 accept	 the	 differences,	 the	 basic	 uniqueness	 of	 each	 individual,	 and	 we
make	love	not	a	kind	of	slavery	but	a	friendship.
Try	friendship,	try	friendliness;	and	remember	always,	there	is	nothing	that	is
going	to	disturb	you.	When	you	see	a	beautiful	woman,	you	feel	attracted;	you
should	understand	that	when	your	wife	sees	a	beautiful	man,	she	must	be	feeling
attracted.	 If	 you	 are	 understanding,	 you	 will	 both	 discuss,	 lovingly,	 what	 a
beautiful	woman	she	was,	and	what	a	beautiful	man	he	was.
But	right	now	the	situation	is	 that	you	can	see	from	miles	away	whether	the
couple	 coming	 is	married	or	 unmarried.	With	 the	married	 couple,	 the	husband
moves	very	cautiously	and	very	carefully;	he	does	not	look	here	and	there,	as	if
he	has	got	some	neck	problem.	And	 the	wife	 is	watching	where	he	 is	 looking,
what	he	is	looking	at,	and	taking	note	of	everything.	This	is	ugly.
I	was	traveling—I	was	going	to	Kashmir—and	in	my	compartment	there	was
a	 beautiful	 woman.	 Her	 husband	was	 coming	 to	 her	 at	 every	 station	with	 ice
cream,	and	with	bananas,	apples.	In	Kashmir,	the	fruits	are	really	good.
I	asked	the	woman,	“How	long	have	you	been	married?”
She	said,	“Seven	years.”
I	said,	“Don’t	lie	to	me.”
She	said,	“What	do	you	mean?	Why	should	I	lie	to	you?”
I	 said,	 “This	man	 has	 been	 coming	 to	 you	 at	 every	 station	 and	 bringing	 all
these	things.	So	it’s	clear	to	me	that	he	is	not	your	husband.”
She	said,	“How	did	you	come	to	know?”
I	 said,	 “If	 he	 was	 your	 husband,	 especially	 if	 you	 had	 been	married	 seven
years,	 then	 once	 he	 had	 dropped	 you	 off	 in	 this	 compartment,	 only	 at	 the	 last
stop—if	you	were	fortunate—would	he	come	back	to	get	you;	for	the	rest	of	the
journey	he	would	be	gone.	Why	should	he	come	to	you	at	every	station	with	all
these	treats?”
She	said,	“Strange,	but	you	are	right.	He	is	not	my	husband;	he	 is	a	friend’s
husband,	but	he	loves	me.	And	what	you	are	saying	about	husbands	is	true.	That
has	happened	between	me	and	my	husband.	We	live	 together	but	we	are	miles
apart;	I	am	thinking	to	divorce	him.”
I	said,	“Don’t	do	that.	Go	on	living	with	him	and	go	on	loving	this	man,	and
don’t	 let	 this	man	 divorce	 his	wife.	 She	 is	 probably	 already	 seeing	 somebody
else,	so	don’t	be	worried.	Existence	takes	care	of	things.	But	if	you	divorce	your
husband	and	get	married	to	this	man,	you	will	not	get	these	ice	creams	and	fruits
and	all	this	attention	and	love;	all	of	that	will	disappear.”
If	 you	 are	 just	 friendly	 and	 don’t	 make	 your	 friendliness	 a	 legal	 affair	 of
husband	and	wife,	things	will	be	far	better	because	then	you	are	not	a	burden	to
anybody,	 not	 a	 bondage.	 There	will	 be	 no	 question	 of	 having	 to	 fit	with	 each
other.	You	can	have	your	individuality	totally	free	from	each	other,	and	yet	be	in
love.
And	 really	 to	 be	 totally	 different	 in	 your	 individuality	 creates	 the	 best
possibility	of	love.
Whenever	 I	 am	 in	 love	 with	 a	 man,	 for	 that	 time	 no	 other	 man
attracts	me.	But	for	the	man,	it’s	not	the	same.	Though	he	is	happy
and	satisfied,	and	wants	to	keep	the	relationship	with	me,	he	has	his
short	 love	 affairs	 every	 few	 months.	 I	 understand	 the	 different
nature	of	man	and	woman.	I	also	understand	every	love	relationship
has	its	peaks	and	valleys.	Still,	sadness	in	me	keeps	on	coming.	I	give
a	 long	 rope	 to	 the	man.	My	 friends	 say	 I	make	myself	 so	available
that	I	let	the	man	take	me	for	granted	and	I	lose	my	self-respect.	I’m
not	clear.	I	don’t	expect	anything	from	him.	Would	you	please	like	to
comment?
There	are	many	 things	 in	your	question.	First,	you	have	a	misunderstanding
about	man’s	nature.	You	think,	as	many	people	in	the	world	think,	that	a	man	is
polygamous	and	a	woman	 is	monogamous,	 that	 the	woman	wants	 to	 live	with
one	man,	to	love	one	man,	to	devote	and	dedicate	herself	totally	to	one	man,	but
man	is	different	in	nature.	He	wants	to	love	other	women	too,	at	least	once	in	a
while.
The	reality	is	that	both	are	polygamous.	The	woman	has	been	conditioned	by
man	for	 thousands	of	years	 into	 thinking	 that	she	 is	monogamous.	And	man	is
very	cunning;	he	has	exploited	the	woman	in	many	ways.	One	of	the	ways	is	that
he	 has	 been	 telling	 her	 that	 men	 are,	 by	 nature,	 polygamous.	 All	 the
psychologists,	 all	 the	 sociologists	 are	 agreed	 upon	 the	 fact	 that	 men	 are
polygamous,	and	none	of	them	says	the	same	thing	about	women.
My	 own	 understanding	 is	 that	 both	 are	 polygamous.	 If	 a	 woman	 does	 not
behave	 in	 a	 polygamous	 way,	 it	 is	 nurture,	 not	 nature.	 She	 has	 been	 utterly
conditioned	so	long	that	the	conditioning	has	gone	into	her	very	blood,	into	her
bones,	into	her	very	marrow.	For	centuries	the	woman	had	to	depend	financially
on	the	man,	and	the	man	has	cut	her	wings,	he	has	curtailed	her	freedom,	he	has
undermined	her	 dependence	upon	herself.	He	has	 taken	her	 responsibilities	 on
his	 shoulders,	 showing	 great	 love,	 saying,	 “You	 need	 not	 be	 worried	 about
yourself,	I	will	take	care.”	But	in	the	name	of	love,	he	has	taken	the	freedom	of
the	 woman.	 For	 centuries	 women	 were	 not	 allowed	 to	 be	 educated,	 to	 be
qualified	 in	 any	 way	 in	 any	 craft,	 in	 any	 skill;	 she	 had	 to	 be	 financially
dependent	on	the	man.	He	has	taken	away	even	her	freedom	of	movement;	she
could	not	move	freely	the	way	man	moves;	she	was	confined	to	the	house.	The
house	was	almost	her	imprisonment.
And	 in	 the	 past	 particularly,	 she	 was	 always	 pregnant	 because	 out	 of	 ten
children,	nine	children	used	to	die.	To	have	two	or	three	living	children	a	woman
had	to	be	continually	pregnant	the	whole	time	she	was	capable	of	reproducing.	A
pregnant	woman	 becomes	 even	more	 dependent	 financially,	 the	man	 becomes
her	caretaker.	The	man	was	knowledgeable,	the	woman	knew	nothing.	She	was
kept	ignorant	because	knowledge	is	power;	that’s	why	women	were	deprived	of
knowledge.	And	 because	 it	 has	 been	 a	man’s	world,	 they	 all	 agreed	 as	 far	 as
keeping	the	woman	enslaved	was	concerned.
She	 has	 been	 told	 that	 it	 is	 her	 nature	 to	 be	monogamous.	There	was	 not	 a
single	 psychoanalyst,	 not	 a	 single	woman	 sociologist	 to	 refute	 this	 and	 ask,	 if
man	 is	 polygamous	 then	why	 should	woman	be	monogamous?	Man	made	 the
way	for	his	polygamy	by	creating	prostitutes.	It	was	an	accepted	fact	in	the	past
that	 no	 wife	 would	 have	 objected	 if	 her	 husband,	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 visited	 a
prostitute.	It	was	thought	that	it	is	just	natural	for	man.
I	say	to	you	that	both	are	polygamous.	The	whole	existence	is	polygamous,	it
has	 to	 be	 so—monogamy	 is	 boredom.	 However	 beautiful	 a	 woman	 may	 be,
however	beautiful	 a	man	may	be,	you	become	 tired—the	 same	geography,	 the
same	topography.	How	long	do	you	have	to	see	the	same	face?	So	it	happens	that
years	pass,	 and	 the	husband	has	not	 looked	attentively	 at	 his	wife	 for	 a	 single
moment.
In	 the	new	world,	 there	 should	be	no	marriage,	only	 lovers.	And	as	 long	as
they	are	pleased	to	be	together,	they	can	be	together;	and	the	moment	they	feel
that	they	have	been	together	too	long,	a	little	change	will	be	good.	There	is	no
question	of	sadness,	no	question	of	anger,	just	a	deep	acceptance	of	nature.	And
if	you	have	loved	a	man	or	a	woman,	you	will	want	to	give	the	other	person	as
much	freedom	as	possible.
If	love	cannot	give	freedom,	then	it	is	not	love.
You	 say,	 “Sadness	 in	me	keeps	 on	 coming.	 I	 give	 a	 long	 rope	 to	 the	man.”
Now,	the	very	idea	is	wrong.	Is	your	man	a	dog	that	you	give	him	a	long	rope?
You	cannot	give	freedom,	freedom	is	everybody’s	birthright.	The	very	idea,	“I’m
giving	a	long	rope”—still	the	rope	is	in	your	hand!	You	are	the	giver	of	freedom.
You	 cannot	 give	 freedom;	 you	 can	 only	 accept	 the	 freedom	 of	 the	 other
person.	You	 cannot	 keep	 one	 end	 of	 the	 rope	 in	 your	 hand,	watching	 the	 dog
pissing	on	this	tree,	pissing	on	that	tree.	You	think	that	is	freedom?	No,	the	very
idea	 is	 wrong.	 The	 other	 person	 has	 his	 freedom;	 you	 have	 your	 freedom.
Neither	 does	 he	 need	 to	 have	 one	 end	 of	 the	 rope	 in	 his	 hand,	 nor	 do	 you;
otherwise,	 both	 are	 chained.	His	 rope	 is	 going	 to	 be	your	 chains,	 your	 rope	 is
going	to	be	his	chains.	And	you	think	you	give	“enough	rope.”	You	think	you	are
being	very	generous!
Freedom	is	not	something	that	has	to	be	given	to	another	person.	Freedom	is
something	that	has	to	be	recognized	as	the	birthright	of	the	other	person.
The	freedom	of	a	person	you	love	will	not	hurt	you.	It	hurts	because	you	don’t
use	your	own	 freedom.	 It	 is	 not	his	 freedom	 that	hurts;	what	hurts	 is	 that	 you
have	 been	 incapacitated	 by	 centuries	 of	 wrong	 conditioning—you	 cannot	 use
your	own	freedom.	Man	has	taken	your	whole	freedom,	that	is	the	real	problem.
Your	 freedom	has	 to	 be	 returned	 to	 you,	 and	 it	will	 not	 hurt;	 in	 fact	 you	will
enjoy	it.
Freedom	is	such	a	joyful	experience.	Your	lover	is	enjoying	freedom,	you	are
enjoying	freedom;	in	freedom	you	meet,	in	freedom	you	part.	And	perhaps	life
may	bring	you	together	again.
When	your	man	becomes	interested	in	another	woman,	it	does	not	mean	that
he	no	longer	loves	you;	it	simply	means	just	a	change	of	taste.	Once	in	a	while,
you	like	to	go	to	the	pizza	place.	That	does	not	mean	that	you	have	renounced
your	old	food,	but	once	in	a	while,	it	is	perfectly	good.	In	fact,	after	visiting	the
pizza	place,	you	go	back	to	your	own	table	more	joyously.	It	takes	a	few	days	for
you	 to	 forget	 the	 experience,	 and	 then	 again	 one	 day	 you	 again	 want	 pizza.
These	affairs	don’t	mean	much.	One	cannot	live	on	pizza	alone.
Couples	who	love	each	other	should	have	a	few	love	affairs	once	in	a	while.
Those	 love	 affairs	 will	 renew	 their	 relationship,	 will	 refresh	 it.	 You	will	 start
seeing	beauty	again	in	your	wife.	You	may	start	fantasies,	dreams	of	having	your
wife	again.	You	will	realize	that	you	misunderstood	her	before;	this	time	you	are
not	going	to	misunderstand.	And	the	same	is	true	about	your	husband.
In	my	 idea	 of	 a	 loving	 community,	 people	will	 be	 absolutely	 free	 to	 say	 to
their	partner:	“I	would	like	two	days	holiday,	and	you	are	also	free;	you	need	not
sit	 in	 the	 house	 and	 boil.”	 If	 you	 want	 to	 meditate,	 that	 is	 another	 thing;
otherwise	you	have	been	 interested	 in	 the	neighbor’s	wife	 too	 long.	The	green
grass	on	the	other	side	of	the	fence—you	wanted	to	explore	it	for	so	long,	now
your	wife	is	giving	you	a	chance!	You	should	say,	“You	are	great!	Just	go	for	a
holiday	and	enjoy	it.	And	I’m	going	to	the	neighbor’s	house,	the	grass	is	greener
there.”	But	in	two	days,	you	will	find	that	grass	is	grass,	and	your	own	lawn	was
far	better.
But	 an	 authentic	 experience	 is	 needed,	 and	when	 after	 two	 days,	 you	meet
again	it	will	be	the	beginning	of	a	new	honeymoon.	Why	not	have	honeymoons
every	month?	Why	be	satisfied	with	one	honeymoon	in	one	life?	That	is	strange,
and	absolutely	unnatural.	And	love	is	not	something	bad	or	evil	so	that	you	have
to	prevent	your	wife	loving	somebody	else.	It	is	just	fun;	there	is	not	much	to	be
bothered	about.	If	she	wants	to	play	tennis	with	somebody,	let	her	play!	I	don’t
think	that	making	love	has	more	significance	than	playing	tennis.	In	fact,	tennis
is	far	cleaner.
You	say,	“I	don’t	expect	anything	 from	him.”	Even	 in	your	no-expectations,
there	 are	 hidden	 expectations	 unspoken.	 And	 they	 are	 more	 subtle,	 and	more
binding.	Simply,	one	has	to	accept	a	simple	fact:	your	partner	is	a	stranger;	it	is
just	 an	 accident	 that	 you	 are	 together	 and	 you	 never	 expect	 anything	 from
strangers.
Love	as	much	as	you	can.	Never	think	of	the	next	moment;	and	if	your	lover
goes	 somewhere	 else,	 you	 are	 also	 free.	 And	 don’t	 deceive	 yourself;	 can	 any
woman	say	that	while	she	is	in	love	with	one	person,	she	does	not	get	attracted
to	 other	 people?	Maybe	 it	 is	 a	 repressed	 desire,	maybe	 she	 never	 allows	 it	 to
surface;	but	 it	 is	 impossible	not	 to,	because	there	are	so	many	beautiful	people
around.	You	have	chosen	only	one	stranger	amongst	many	strangers.
Keep	freedom	as	a	higher	value	than	love	itself.	And	if	it	is	possible—and	it	is
possible	 because	 it	 is	 natural—your	 life	 will	 not	 be	 a	 misery.	 It	 will	 be	 a
continuous	excitement,	a	continuous	exploration	of	new	human	beings.	We	are
all	strangers:	nobody	is	a	husband,	nobody	is	a	wife.	Some	idiot	registrar	cannot,
just	by	putting	his	seal	on	a	paper,	make	you	a	husband	and	wife.	And	once	that
man	has	put	the	seal,	if	you	want	to	separate	you	have	to	go	to	another	idiot—
bigger	idiots—and	wait	for	months	or	years	to	be	separated.	Strange!	It	is	your
private	affair;	it	is	no	business	of	any	registrar,	no	business	of	any	judge.	Why	do
you	go	on	giving	your	freedom	to	the	hands	of	others?
You	say,	“My	friends	say	I	make	myself	so	available	that	I	let	the	man	take	me
for	granted,	 and	 I	 lose	my	self-respect.”	Your	 friends	don’t	understand	a	 thing
and	they	are	not	your	friends	either	because	their	advice	is	that	of	enemies.
One	 should	make	 oneself	 absolutely	 available.	 Your	 friends	 are	 telling	 you
that	when	 your	man	wants	 to	make	 love	 to	 you,	 one	 day	 you	 should	 say	 you
have	a	headache.	Another	day,	you	should	say	you	are	 too	 tired;	 the	 third	day,
you	are	not	in	the	mood.	Keep	the	man	hanging	around.	“Don’t	give	that	much
rope”—just	 a	 little	 rope,	 and	 a	 beautiful	 bell	 around	his	 neck	with	 your	 name
written	on	it,	saying,	“Beware,	personal	property.”
What	do	you	mean	by	“availability?”	You	should	be	available	 to	 the	person
you	 love,	 and	 if	 once	 in	 a	 while	 he	 feels	 to	 change,	 enjoy	 and	 let	 him	 go
joyously.	That	will	bring	self-respect	to	you,	and	dignity.
A	divorced	woman,	frustrated	with	married	life,	ran	an	ad	in	the	local
newspaper	that	read,	“Looking	for	a	man	who	won’t	beat	me,	who	won’t
run	around	on	me,	and	who	is	a	fantastic	lover.”
After	one	week,	her	doorbell	rings.	She	goes	to	the	door,	opens	it,	and
sees	no	one	there.	She	closes	the	door,	and	is	about	to	walk	away	when
the	bell	rings	again.
Opening	 the	door	once	again,	 she	 sees	no	one	 there,	but	happens	 to
look	 down	 and	 notices	 a	man	with	 no	 arms	 and	 no	 legs	 sitting	 on	 the
doorstep.
“I’m	here	to	answer	your	ad,”	he	says.
The	woman	does	not	know	quite	what	to	do,	what	to	say.
So	the	man	continues,	“As	you	can	see,	I	can’t	beat	you,	and	it	will	be
impossible	for	me	to	run	around	on	you.”
“Yes,	I	can	see	that,”	said	the	woman,	“but	the	ad	also	said	I	wanted	a
‘fantastic	lover.’”
The	man	smiles	and	says,	“I	rang	the	doorbell,	didn’t	I?”
Although	 I	 am	deeply	 satisfied	 and	nourished	by	my	 regular	 food,
still	from	time	to	time	I	feel	a	strong	pull	towards	other	dishes,	and
enjoy	 Italian	pizzas,	French	wine,	or	Japanese	 sushi.	 It’s	not	 that	 I
don’t	 want	 to	 eat	 out	 occasionally,	 but	 I’d	 like	 to	 feel	 it	 is	 in	 my
hands	 whether	 I	 do	 or	 not,	 and	 not	 be	 a	 victim	 of	 this	 hormonal
conspiracy.	Can	 you	please	 give	me	 a	 clue	 how	 to	 go	 beyond	 these
biological	pulls?
If	 one	 allows	 nature	 without	 any	 inhibitions	 to	 take	 its	 own	 course,	 one
transcends	biology,	body,	mind,	without	any	effort.	But	we	are	full	of	inhibitions.
Even	 the	 so-called	 young	 people,	 who	 think	 that	 they	 have	 disowned
repressions,	are	 in	a	very	subtle	way	repressive.	 If	you	are	repressive	 then	you
cannot	transcend	biological	pulls	naturally,	without	any	effort.	So,	the	first	thing
to	be	remembered	is	that	nature	is	right.
All	the	old	traditions	have	been	telling	you	that	nature	is	not	right.	You	have	to
divide	nature	 into	 right	and	wrong.	But	nature	 is	 indivisible.	So	while	you	are
dividing	it,	you	are	simply	making	an	impossible	effort.	The	whole	of	nature	has
to	be	accepted	with	great	joy	and	gratitude.	Biology	is	not	your	bondage,	but	a
certain	stage	of	growth.
Life	 taken	 with	 insight	 and	 understanding	 helps	 you	 to	 go	 beyond	 itself
without	asking	you	for	any	discipline,	any	effort,	any	arduous	conflict.	We	are
children	 of	 nature.	 But	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 created	 one	 thing	 certainly:	 a
divided	mind,	a	schizophrenic	man	who	is	pulled	 in	 two	directions.	They	have
all	given	you	moralities.
The	 natural	 man	 needs	 no	 morality.	 Easy	 is	 right.	 To	 be	 natural,	 to	 be
spontaneous	 is	 right	and	 transcendence	comes	on	 its	own.	The	people	who	are
split	against	themselves—that	biology	is	something	to	be	transcended,	that	body
is	something	to	be	fought,	that	mind	is	something	to	be	dropped—anybody	who
is	entangled	in	all	these	conflicts	will	never	transcend.
One	should	go	more	easily.	 It	 is	not	a	war	field.	Your	 life	 is	an	autonomous
growth.	 The	 first	 need	 is	 of	 a	 total	 acceptance	 with	 no	 reluctance,	 no
unwillingness,	no	subtle	condemnation	anywhere	in	your	mind.
You	are	saying,	“Although	I	am	deeply	satisfied	and	nourished	by	my	regular
food….”	You	say	you	are	deeply	satisfied,	but	you	don’t	understand	the	nuances
of	being	deeply	 satisfied.	 It	 becomes	a	kind	of	death.	To	be	alive	one	needs	a
little	discontent,	a	 little	restlessness.	 If	you	are	deeply	satisfied,	 from	that	deep
satisfaction	arises	your	desire	to	change	your	food	once	in	a	while.
Man	is	a	creature	of	evolution	and	growth.	Being	deeply	satisfied	brings	a	full
stop	to	your	life.	Your	partner	has	an	individuality,	a	grace,	a	loving	heart,	and	it
is	very	easy	to	be	satisfied	with	her;	she	is	not	a	quarreling	type,	a	fighting	type.
She	herself	is	at	ease,	and	anybody	who	loves	her	will	find	himself	soon	at	ease.
A	harmony	 arises	 but	 harmony	 on	 the	 one	 hand	 is	 beautiful,	 and	 on	 the	 other
hand	is	boring.
Perhaps	you	have	never	thought	that	satisfaction	is	a	kind	of	death.	It	means
you	are	ready	to	repeat	the	same	every	day,	that	you	have	forgotten	to	change,	to
evolve.
“…Still	from	time	to	time	I	feel	a	strong	pull	towards	other	dishes,	and	enjoy
Italian	 pizzas,	 French	 wine,	 or	 Japanese	 sushi.”	 It	 is	 absolutely	 natural.	 The
problem	 is	 arising	because	of	your	conditionings	 that	when	you	are	absolutely
satisfied	 with	 a	 woman,	 why	 should	 you	 ask?	 Why	 should	 the	 desire	 for
somebody	 else	 even	 arise	 in	 you?	 It	 arises	 because	 of	 your	 deep	 satisfaction.
Deep	 satisfaction	 starts	 deadening	 you;	 nothing	 new,	 no	 excitement,	 no
possibility	of	“No,”	always	“Yes.”	On	the	one	hand	it	is	very	sweet;	on	the	other,
it	is	too	sweet.
Hence,	 the	 desire	 arises	 once	 in	 a	 while	 to	 have	 some	 affair	 with	 another
woman.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 natural.	 If	 your	 partner	were	 a	 fighting	 type,	 nagging
type,	bitchy,	this	desire	would	not	have	arisen	so	much	because	she	would	never
have	allowed	you	to	be	satisfied.	She	would	have	kept	you	always	unsatisfied;
she	would	have	remained	a	stranger	to	you,	still	to	be	explored.	I	know	her.	She
has	been	open	 to	you,	available	 to	you;	 she	has	not	been	holding	secrets	 from
you.	That	 is	 not	 her	 fault,	 that	 is	 her	 beauty.	But	 even	 the	most	 beautiful	 rose
flowers	 have	 their	 thorns,	 even	 the	 most	 satisfying	 situations	 have	 their
problems.
Because	you	are	 too	 satisfied,	you	 start	 asking	 for	 a	 change	of	 taste:	 Italian
pizzas,	French	wine,	or	 Japanese	 sushi.	Nothing	 is	wrong	 in	 it.	The	whole	old
conditioning	goes	against	what	I	am	saying	to	you,	but	if	you	are	intelligent,	you
will	see	the	point.
Accept	it,	but	don’t	keep	it	a	secret	from	your	lover.	Don’t	let	her	down.	Don’t
make	her	feel	that	she	is	not	enough	for	you.	Say	to	her,	“You	are	too	satisfying,
and	my	mind	wants	a	little	change	of	atmosphere,	some	excitement	so	that	I	can
feel	 that	 I	 am	still	 alive.”	And	 remember,	whatever	you	 take	 for	yourself,	 you
have	to	give	her	too.	It	has	not	to	be	one-sided,	not	that	only	you	go	to	the	pizza
place,	 or	 find	 a	 Chinese	 restaurant;	 you	 allow	 her	 also.	 Not	 only	 allow.	 The
woman	has	been	 repressed	by	man	so	much	 that	you	will	have	 to	pull	her	out
from	her	conditionings.	You	will	have	to	help	her	to	move,	once	in	a	while,	into
new	pastures.	If	you	can	do	that	you	will	not	only	be	accepting	your	nature;	you
will	also	be	helping	her	to	find	out	her	nature.
As	 a	 man,	 you	 are	 also	 guilty	 because	 it	 is	 the	 man	 who	 has	 forced	 the
woman,	made	her	monogamous.	 In	 fact,	 she	needs	 to	move	with	other	 people
more	than	you	do.	The	most	astounding	research	about	men	and	women	is	that	a
man	 can	 have	 only	 one	 orgasm,	 the	 woman	 can	 have	 multiple	 orgasms.	 The
reason	is	simple:	because	in	orgasm,	a	man	loses	energy,	he	will	need	to	recover
for	 some	 time,	 according	 to	 his	 age,	 to	 have	 another	 orgasm.	But	 the	woman
does	 not	 lose	 any	 energy.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 her	 first	 orgasm	 gives	 her	 a	 deep
incentive	 to	 have	 more	 orgasms,	 and	 she	 is	 capable	 of	 at	 least	 half	 a	 dozen
orgasms	in	a	single	night.
Because	of	this	fact,	man	became	so	afraid	that	he	prevented	the	woman	from
knowing	the	fact	that	anything	like	orgasm	exists.	So	he	is	very	quick	in	making
love.	The	woman	will	take	a	little	longer	time:	man’s	sexuality	is	local,	genital;
woman’s	 sexuality	 is	 spread	 all	 over	 her	 body.	 If	 a	man	wants	 her	 to	 have	 an
orgasm	 he	 has	 to	 play	 with	 her	 whole	 body,	 the	 foreplay,	 so	 her	 whole	 body
starts	throbbing	with	energy.
But	 once	 she	 has	 had	one	 orgasm,	 she	 knows	 the	 taste,	 and	 she	 knows	 that
now	she	can	have	deeper	orgasms.	But	the	man	is	simply	impotent	after	the	first
orgasm,	at	least	for	a	few	hours.	He	cannot	do	anything	else,	he	just	turns	over
and	 goes	 to	 sleep.	 The	 poor	 boy	 is	 finished.	 And	 every	 woman	 weeps,	 cries
because	she	has	not	even	come	and	her	lover	is	finished!
To	prevent	 the	woman	from	having	the	knowledge	of	orgasm—for	centuries
the	woman	was	not	allowed	even	to	know	the	beauty	and	the	pleasure	of	orgasm
—man	also	has	had	to	prevent	himself	from	having	orgasm.	All	that	he	knows	is
ejaculation;	ejaculation	is	not	orgasm.	Ejaculation	is	simply	throwing	out	energy:
one	 feels	 more	 relaxed,	 the	 tensions	 of	 the	 energy	 are	 gone,	 and	 one	 snores
better.
The	 woman	 has	 become	 aware	 of	 orgasm	 only	 in	 the	 last	 century	 and	 the
whole	 credit	 goes	 to	 the	movement	 of	 psychoanalysis.	 In	 the	more	 traditional
Eastern	countries,	98	percent	of	women	are	still	unaware	that	there	is	anything	in
making	 love,	 because	 she	 gets	 no	 juice,	 no	 experience.	 She	 in	 fact	 hates	 the
whole	 affair.	 Ejaculation	 is	 not	 her	 need,	 it	 is	 man’s	 need;	 but	 both	 have
remained	deprived	of	sex	and	its	ultimate	orgasmic	experiences.
But	 the	 trouble	 is,	 how	 to	manage	 it?	Anything	 looks	 very	 immoral.	 Either
you	have	to	invite	all	your	friends,	so	that	five	or	six	friends	make	love,	one	by
one,	to	the	woman.	Then	she	will	be	satisfied,	but	that	looks	very	hurting	to	the
ego.	Or	you	have	 to	provide	her	with	an	electric	vibrator.	But	once	she	knows
the	 vibrator,	 you	 are	 useless	 because	 the	 vibrator	 gives	 her	 such	 tremendous
orgasmic	experiences	that	you	cannot	give.
It	seems	there	has	been	some	mistake	by	nature	itself:	men	and	women	are	not
equal	 in	 their	 orgasmic	 capacity.	 You	 are	 fully	 satisfied,	 but	 have	 you	 ever
bothered	whether	your	beloved	has	found	even	a	single	orgasm?	Because	she	has
not	found	a	single	orgasm,	she	can	remain	devoted	to	you,	monogamous.	But	if
she	knows	what	orgasmic	experience	is,	she	will	also	want,	once	in	a	while,	to
be	with	another	man.
If	 you	 really	 love	 your	 woman,	 you	 will	 help	 her	 to	 come	 out	 of	 her	 old
conditionings,	which	 are	 far	 deeper,	 because	man	 himself	 is	 responsible.	Man
himself	does	not	have	those	conditionings;	his	morality	is	very	superficial	and	a
hypocrisy.	 But	 the	 woman’s	 morality	 has	 gone	 very	 deep.	 Man	 has	 been
enforcing	 it	 from	 the	 very	 childhood.	 If	 you	 feel	 to	 change	 it,	 it	 is	 your
responsibility;	 and	particularly	 a	man	of	 your	 understanding	 should	 be	 able	 to
see	what	I	am	saying.	It	is	your	responsibility	to	bring	Neelam	also	out	into	the
sun,	into	the	rain,	into	the	wind,	so	that	she	can	drop	all	her	conditionings.	You
have	to	help	her;	you	have	to	teach	her	how	to	enjoy	the	pizza	place,	and	not	go
on	 eating	 the	 Punjabi	 food	 her	 whole	 life.	 How	 to	 enjoy	 Japanese	 food	 or
Chinese	 food?	 If	men	 and	women	 really	 love	 each	 other,	 they	will	 help	 each
other	to	be	unconditioned	from	the	past.
Man	does	not	have	many	conditionings,	and	they	are	superficial.	He	can	drop
them	 very	 easily,	 the	 way	 you	 drop	 your	 clothes.	 The	 woman	 has	 been
conditioned	so	much	that	it	is	not	like	dropping	her	clothes,	it	is	like	peeling	her
skin.	It	is	hard,	and	unless	you	really	love	a	woman	you	will	not	be	able	to	help
her	 much.	 It	 will	 be	 very	 difficult,	 on	 her	 own,	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 all	 those
conditionings,	so	help	her.	Give	her	also	the	taste	that	in	the	world	there	are	so
many	 other	 foods;	 there	 are	 many	 more	 beautiful	 men	 other	 than	 you.	 Your
woman	 should	 know	 all	 of	 them.	 It	 is	 part	 of	 your	 love	 that	 your	 woman
becomes	more	and	more	rich	in	her	experiences.	And	the	richer	she	is,	she	will
not	only	give	you	satisfaction;	she	will	start	giving	you	excitement	and	ecstasy.
You	say,	“It’s	not	that	I	don’t	want	to	eat	out	occasionally,	but	I’d	like	to	feel	it
is	in	my	hands	whether	I	do	or	not….”	It	is	in	your	hands,	but	it	can	be	in	your
hands	only	 if	 it	 is	 in	 the	hands	of	your	partner,	 too.	As	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned
there	should	be	equal	opportunity	for	both.	Not	that	you	are	the	master	and	your
woman	 is	 your	 slave;	 that	 she	 can	 remain	 satisfied	with	you,	 and	you	 can	go,
once	 in	 a	while,	 fooling	 around	 the	 neighborhood.	She	has	 every	 right	 to	 fool
around	in	the	same	neighborhood!	And	there	is	no	need	to	feel	guilty;	you	have
to	help	her	not	to	feel	guilty.
The	 woman’s	 liberation	 will	 be	 the	 man’s	 liberation,	 too;	 their	 slavery	 is
together.	Because	you	don’t	 allow	your	woman	 to	 be	 free,	 how	can	 she	 allow
you	 to	 be	 free?	Freedom	has	 to	 be,	 from	both	 sides,	 a	 precious	 value—loved,
recognized,	respected.
You	say	“…and	not	be	a	victim	of	this	hormonal	conspiracy.”	If	you	want	to
get	beyond	the	hormones	and	the	biology,	live	it	totally,	exhaust	it.
My	 own	 understanding	 is	 that	 by	 the	 age	 of	 fourteen	 your	 hormones	 start
working,	and	if	you	allow	them	total	freedom,	if	you	go	with	them	joyously	by
the	 age	 forty-two,	 they	will	 like	 to	 go	 to	 rest.	And	 this	 transcendence	will	 be
natural;	 it	 will	 not	 be	 a	 celibacy	 imposed.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 sacred	 celibacy	 that	 is
coming	 to	 you	 from	 the	 beyond,	 because	 you	 have	 lived	 your	 life	 totally	 and
now	nothing	in	the	ordinary	life	interests	you.	Your	interest	is	in	higher	values,
for	a	deeper	 search	about	 life,	 about	 truth,	 about	creativity.	You	have	passed	a
childish	 age.	By	 the	 age	 of	 forty-two,	 according	 to	me,	 a	man	 really	 becomes
adult,	but	only	if	he	lives	naturally.	If	he	lives	half-heartedly	then	it	will	take	a
longer	time,	maybe	forty-nine	years,	maybe	seventy-five.	Maybe	even	when	he
is	dying	he	is	thinking	only	of	sex	and	nothing	else;	he	never	transcends	it.
You	are	both	understanding	people	and	can	see	things	without	screens	on	your
eyes,	clearly.	Love	each	other	totally,	and	occasionally	allow	each	other	freedom.
But	it	has	to	be	on	both	sides.	And	it	is	not	going	to	destroy	your	love;	it	is	going
to	 make	 it	 richer,	 deeper,	 more	 fulfilling,	 more	 orgasmic.	 And	 those	 few
occasions	when	you	are	on	holiday	from	each	other	will	not	take	you	away	from
each	other;	 they	will	 go	on	bringing	you	 closer	 to	 each	other.	Don’t	 have	 any
secret,	be	absolutely	open,	and	allow	the	other	person	also	to	be	absolutely	open,
and	respect	openness.	Never,	even	by	your	gestures,	make	the	other	person	feel
guilty.	That	is	the	greatest	crime	humanity	has	been	committing,	making	people
guilty.	If	the	other	feels	guilty	because	of	very	deep	rooted	conceptions,	help	her
to	be	free	of	the	guilt.
Love	 lived	 in	an	atmosphere	of	 freedom	will	 transcend	sex	naturally,	easily,
effortlessly.	Love	will	remain,	sex	will	be	gone,	and	then	love	has	a	purity	and	a
beauty	and	a	sacredness	of	its	own.
Sitting	on	a	bus	in	New	York,	a	prim	old	lady	was	shocked	to	overhear
an	Italian	say	to	another,	“Emma	come-a	first.	I	come-a	next.	Two	ass-a
come-a	 together.	 I	 come-a	 again.	 Two	 ass-a	 come-a	 together	 again.	 I
come-a	once	more.	Peepee	twice.	Then	I	come-a	for	the	last	time.”
When	 the	 Italian	 was	 finished,	 the	 red-faced	 old	 maid	 turned	 to	 a
policeman	 sitting	 nearby,	 and	 said,	 “Are	 you	 not	 going	 to	 arrest	 that
terrible	old	man?”
“What	for?”	asked	the	policeman.	“For	spelling	Mississippi?”
Take	 life	 more	 joyously	 and	 more	 jokingly.	 Let	 your	 whole	 life	 become	 a
beautiful	 joke.	 There	 is	 nothing	 wrong	 in	 nature,	 and	 to	 be	 natural	 is	 to	 be
religious.
You	both	 are	 intelligent,	 and	 I	 hope	 that	 you	will	 prove	my	hypothesis	 that
you	can	love	each	other,	and	yet	once	in	a	while	have	different	affairs—joyously,
not	reluctantly.	Not	because	I	am	saying	it,	but	out	of	your	own	understanding.
It	 doesn’t	 seem	 like	 I’ll	 ever	 be	 able	 to	 go	 beyond	 the	 biological,
sexual	attraction	that	you	say	is	“lust”	and	grow	into	the	kind	of	love
you	are	talking	about.	How	does	it	happen?	Where	do	I	start?
Sex	is	a	subtle	subject,	delicate,	because	centuries	of	exploitation,	corruption,
centuries	 of	 perverted	 ideas	 and	 conditioning,	 are	 associated	 with	 the	 word
“sex.”	The	very	word	is	loaded,	it	is	one	of	the	most	loaded	words	in	existence.
You	say	“God”	and	 it	 seems	empty.	You	say	“sex”	and	 it	 seems	 too	 loaded.	A
thousand	 and	 one	 things	 arise	 in	 the	 mind:	 fear,	 perversion,	 attraction,	 a
tremendous	 desire,	 and	 a	 tremendous	 anti-desire	 also.	 They	 all	 arise	 together.
“Sex”—the	very	word	creates	confusion,	chaos.	It	is	as	if	somebody	has	thrown
a	 rock	 in	 a	 silent	 pool,	 and	 millions	 of	 ripples	 arise	 just	 from	 the	 word!
Humanity	has	lived	under	the	influence	of	very	wrong	ideas.
So	the	first	thing	to	consider	is,	why	do	you	ask	how	to	go	beyond	your	sexual
feelings?	Why	do	you	want	 in	 the	 first	place	 to	 transcend	your	 sexuality?	You
are	 using	 a	 beautiful	 term—“go	 beyond”—but	 out	 of	 a	 hundred	 possibilities,
ninety-nine	are	that	you	mean,	“How	to	repress	my	sexual	feelings?”
A	person	who	has	understood	that	sex	can	be	transcended	is	not	even	worried
about	 going	 beyond	 it,	 because	 transcendence	 comes	 through	 experience.	You
cannot	 manage	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 have	 to	 do.	 You	 simply	 pass
through	 many	 experiences,	 and	 those	 experiences	 make	 you	 more	 and	 more
mature.
Have	you	watched	that	at	a	certain	age,	sex	becomes	important?	Not	that	you
make	it	important.	It	is	not	something	that	you	make	happen;	it	happens.	At	the
age	of	fourteen,	or	somewhere	near	there,	suddenly	your	energy	is	flooded	with
sex.	 It	 happens	 as	 if	 floodgates	 have	 been	 opened	 in	 you.	 Subtle	 sources	 of
energy	 that	 were	 not	 open	 before	 have	 become	 open,	 and	 your	 whole	 energy
becomes	sexual,	colored	with	sex.	You	think	sex,	you	sing	sex,	you	walk	sex—
everything	 becomes	 sexual.	 Every	 act	 is	 colored.	 This	happens;	 you	 have	 not
done	anything	about	it.	It	is	natural.	And	transcendence	is	also	natural.	If	sex	is
lived	totally,	with	no	condemnation,	with	no	idea	of	getting	rid	of	it,	then	at	the
age	of	forty-two—just	as	at	the	age	of	fourteen	the	door	to	sex	gets	opened	and
the	whole	energy	becomes	sexual,	at	the	age	of	forty-two	or	near	about—those
floodgates	start	to	close	again.	And	that	too	is	as	natural	as	sex	becoming	alive;
it	starts	disappearing.
Sexuality	is	transcended	not	by	any	effort	on	your	part.	If	you	make	any	effort
that	will	be	 repressive,	because	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	you.	 It	 is	 inbuilt—in
your	body,	in	your	biology.	You	are	born	as	sexual	beings;	nothing	is	wrong	in	it.
That	 is	 the	only	way	to	be	born.	To	be	human	is	 to	be	sexual.	When	you	were
conceived,	your	mother	and	your	father	were	not	praying,	they	were	not	listening
to	some	priest’s	sermon.	They	were	not	in	church,	they	were	making	love.	Even
to	think	that	your	mother	and	father	were	making	love	when	you	were	conceived
seems	to	be	difficult,	 I	know,	but	 they	were	making	 love;	 their	sexual	energies
were	meeting	 and	merging	 into	 each	 other.	 Then	 you	were	 conceived;	 in	 that
deep	sexual	act	you	were	conceived.	The	first	cell	was	a	sexual	cell,	and	then	out
of	that	cell	other	cells	have	arisen.	But	each	cell	remains	sexual,	basically.	Your
whole	body	is	sexual,	made	of	sex	cells.	Now	they	are	millions.
Remember	it:	you	exist	as	a	sexual	being.	Once	you	accept	it,	the	conflict	that
has	been	created	down	through	the	centuries	starts	to	dissolve.	Once	you	accept
it	 deeply,	with	no	 ideas	 in	 between,	when	 sex	 is	 thought	 of	 as	 simply	natural,
then	you	live	 it.	You	don’t	ask	how	to	go	beyond	eating,	you	don’t	ask	how	to
transcend	breathing,	because	no	religion	has	taught	you	to	transcend	breathing.
That’s	why;	otherwise	you	would	be	asking,	“How	to	go	beyond	breathing?”	But
you	don’t	ask,	you	simply	breathe!	You	are	a	breathing	animal.	You	are	a	sexual
animal,	 also.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 difference.	 Fourteen	 years	 of	 your	 life,	 in	 the
beginning,	are	almost	non-sexual,	or	at	the	most	there	is	just	rudimentary	sexual
play,	which	is	not	really	sexual—just	preparing,	rehearsing,	that’s	all.	By	the	age
of	fourteen,	the	energy	is	ripe.
Watch:	a	child	 is	born	and	 immediately,	within	 just	a	 few	seconds,	 the	child
has	 to	breathe;	otherwise	he	will	die.	Then	breathing	 remains	 for	 the	whole	of
life,	because	it	has	come	at	 the	very	first	step	of	 life.	It	cannot	be	transcended.
Maybe	 before	 you	 die,	 then,	 just	 a	 few	 seconds	 before,	 it	 will	 stop,	 but	 not
before	that.
Always	 remember	 it:	 both	 ends	 of	 life,	 the	 beginning	 and	 end,	 are
symmetrical.	The	child	 is	born,	he	 starts	breathing	within	a	matter	of	 seconds.
When	 the	 person	 is	 old	 and	 dying,	 the	 moment	 he	 stops	 breathing,	 within	 a
matter	of	seconds	he	will	be	dead.
Sex	enters	at	a	 relatively	 late	stage:	For	 twelve,	 fourteen	years	 the	child	has
lived	without	 sex.	And	 if	 the	 society	 is	 not	 too	 repressed	 and	 hence	 obsessed
with	sex,	a	child	can	live	completely	oblivious	to	the	fact	that	sex,	or	anything
like	sex,	exists.	The	child	can	remain	absolutely	innocent.	That	innocence	is	also
not	 possible	 nowadays,	 because	 people	 are	 so	 repressed.	 When	 repression
happens,	 then	 side	 by	 side	 obsession	 also	 happens.	 On	 the	 one	 side	 there	 are
priests,	who	 go	 on	 condemning	 sex,	 and	 then	 there	 are	 anti-priests,	 like	Hugh
Hefner	and	others,	who	go	on	making	sexuality	more	and	more	glamorous.	The
priest	 and	 Hugh	 Hefner	 exist	 together	 as	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 When
churches	 disappear,	 only	 then	 Playboy	 magazines	 will	 disappear,	 not	 before.
They	 are	 partners	 in	 the	 same	 business!	 They	 look	 like	 enemies,	 but	 don’t	 be
deceived	by	that.	They	talk	against	each	other,	but	that’s	how	things	work.
I	have	heard	about	two	men	who	went	out	of	business,	they	had	gone	broke,
so	they	decided	on	a	new	and	very	simple	business.	They	started	traveling	from
one	town	to	another.	First	one	would	enter,	and	in	the	night	he	would	throw	coal
tar	 on	 people’s	 windows	 and	 doors.	 After	 two	 or	 three	 days	 the	 second	 man
would	come	to	the	same	town.	He	would	advertise	that	he	could	clean	any	kind
of	 dirt	 from	 the	 outside	 of	 people’s	 homes,	 even	 coal	 tar,	 and	 people	 all	 over
town	would	hire	him.	During	that	time	the	other	would	be	doing	his	half	of	the
business	in	another	town.	This	way,	they	started	earning	lots	of	money.
This	is	what	is	happening	between	the	church	and	the	people	who	are	creating
pornography.
I	have	heard:
Pretty	 Miss	 Keenan	 sat	 in	 the	 confessional.	 “Father,”	 she	 said,	 “I
want	to	confess	that	I	let	my	boyfriend	kiss	me.”
“Is	that	all	you	did?”	asked	the	priest,	very	interested.
“Well,	no.	I	let	him	put	his	hand	on	my	leg,	too.”
“And	then	what?”
“And	then	I	let	him	pull	down	my	panties.”
“And	 then,	 and	 then…?”	 questioned	 the	 priest,	 panting	 with
excitement.
“And	then	my	mother	walked	into	the	room.”
“Ah,	shit,”	sighed	the	priest.
It	 is	 together;	 they	 are	 partners	 in	 a	 conspiracy.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 too
repressed,	 you	 start	 finding	 a	 perverse	 interest.	 A	 perverted	 interest	 is	 the
problem,	not	 sex.	Now	 this	 priest	 is	 neurotic.	Sex	 is	 not	 the	problem,	but	 this
man	is	in	trouble.
Sisters	Margaret	Alice	and	Francis	Catherine	were	out	walking	along
a	 side	 street.	 Suddenly	 they	were	 grabbed	 by	 two	men,	 dragged	 into	 a
dark	 alley,	 and	 raped.	 “Father,	 forgive	 them,”	 said	 Sister	 Margaret
Alice,	“for	they	know	not	what	they	do.”
“Shut	up!”	cried	Sister	Catherine,	“this	one	does.”
This	 is	bound	to	be	 the	situation.	So	never	carry	a	single	 idea	against	sex	in
your	mind,	otherwise	you	will	never	be	able	to	go	beyond	it	into	love.	The	only
people	 who	 can	 go	 beyond	 “mere	 biological	 sexual	 attraction”	 are	 those	who
accept	sex	very	naturally.	It	is	difficult,	I	know,	because	you	are	born	in	a	society
that	 is	 neurotic	 about	 sex.	 Either	 condemning	 it	 or	 glamorizing	 it,	 but	 it	 is
neurotic	all	the	same.	It	is	very	difficult	to	get	out	of	this	neurosis,	but	if	you	are
a	little	alert	you	can	get	out	of	it.
So	 the	 real	 thing	 is	 not	 how	 to	 transcend	 sex,	 but	 how	 to	 transcend	 this
perverted	 ideology	of	 the	 society—this	 fear	 of	 sex,	 this	 repression	of	 sex,	 this
obsession	with	sex.
Sex	 is	beautiful.	Sex	 in	 itself	 is	a	natural,	 rhythmic	phenomenon.	 It	happens
when	the	child	is	ready	to	be	conceived,	and	it	is	good	that	it	happens;	otherwise
life	would	not	exist.	Life	exists	through	sex;	sex	is	its	medium.	If	you	understand
life,	if	you	love	life,	you	will	know	that	sex	is	sacred,	holy.	Then	you	live	it,	then
you	delight	in	it;	and	as	naturally	as	it	has	come,	it	goes	of	its	own	accord.	By
the	age	of	forty-two,	or	somewhere	near	there,	your	interest	in	sex	as	such	starts
disappearing	as	naturally	as	it	had	come	into	being.
But	 it	 doesn’t	 happen	 that	 way.	 Instead,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 when	 I	 say
forty-two.	You	know	people	who	are	seventy,	eighty,	and	yet	they	have	not	gone
beyond	their	obsession	with	sex.	You	know	“dirty	old	men.”	They	are	victims	of
the	 society	 because	 they	 could	 not	 be	 natural.	 It	 is	 a	 hangover,	 because	 they
repressed	their	sexuality	when	they	should	have	enjoyed	and	delighted	in	 it.	 In
those	 moments	 of	 sexual	 delight	 they	 were	 not	 totally	 in	 it.	 They	 were	 not
orgasmic,	they	were	half-hearted.
Whenever	you	are	half-hearted	in	anything,	it	lingers	longer.	If	you	are	sitting
at	your	table	and	eating,	and	if	you	eat	only	half-heartedly	then	your	hunger	will
remain.	Then	you	will	continue	to	think	about	food	the	whole	day.	You	can	try
fasting	and	you	will	see:	you	will	continuously	think	about	food!	But	if	you	have
eaten	well,	 and	when	 I	 say	 that,	 I	 don’t	mean	only	 that	 you	have	 stuffed	your
stomach.	Then	it	is	not	necessarily	the	case	that	you	have	eaten	well.	You	might
have	stuffed	yourself,	but	eating	well	is	an	art.	It	is	not	just	stuffing	yourself,	it	is
a	great	art—to	taste	the	food,	to	smell	the	food,	to	touch	it,	chew	it,	to	digest	the
food,	and	to	digest	it	as	divine.	It	is	divine;	it	is	a	gift.
Hindus	say,	Anam	Brahma,	food	is	divine,	a	gift	from	God.	With	deep	respect
you	eat,	and	while	eating	you	forget	everything	else,	because	eating	is	prayer.	It
is	 existential	 prayer.	 You	 are	 eating	 God,	 and	 God	 is	 going	 to	 give	 you
nourishment.	It	is	a	gift	to	be	accepted	with	deep	love	and	gratitude.
And	you	don’t	stuff	the	body,	because	stuffing	the	body	is	being	antagonistic
to	the	body.	It	is	the	other	pole.	There	are	people	who	are	obsessed	with	fasting,
and	there	are	people	who	are	obsessed	with	stuffing	themselves.	Both	are	wrong,
because	in	both	ways	the	body	loses	balance.	A	real	lover	of	the	body	eats	only
to	 the	point	where	 the	body	feels	perfectly	quiet,	balanced,	 tranquil;	where	 the
body	feels	to	be	neither	leaning	to	the	left	nor	to	the	right,	but	just	in	the	middle.
It	is	an	art	to	understand	the	language	of	the	body,	to	understand	the	language	of
your	 stomach,	 to	 understand	 what	 is	 needed	 and	 to	 give	 only	 that	 which	 is
needed,	and	to	give	that	in	an	artistic	way,	in	an	aesthetic	way.
Animals	eat,	man	eats—what	is	the	difference?	Man	makes	a	great,	aesthetic
experience	out	of	 eating.	What	 is	 the	point	of	having	a	beautiful	dining	 table?
What	is	the	point	of	having	candles	burning	there?	What	is	the	point	of	asking
friends	to	come	and	participate?	It	is	to	make	it	an	art,	not	just	stuffing	yourself.
But	 these	 are	 outward	 signs	 of	 the	 art;	 the	 inward	 signs	 are	 to	 understand	 the
language	of	your	body	and	to	listen	to	it,	to	be	sensitive	to	its	needs.	Then	you
eat,	and	the	whole	day	you	will	not	think	of	food	at	all.	Only	when	the	body	is
hungry	again	will	the	remembrance	come.	Then	it	is	natural.
With	sex	the	same	happens.	If	you	have	no	“anti”	attitude	about	it,	 then	you
take	 it	 as	 a	 natural,	 divine	 gift.	 With	 great	 gratitude	 you	 enjoy	 it;	 with
prayerfulness	you	enjoy	it.
Tantra	 says	 that	before	you	make	 love	 to	a	woman	or	 to	a	man,	you	should
first	pray	because	it	is	going	to	be	a	divine	meeting	of	energies.	A	fragrance	of
godliness	 will	 surround	 you.	 Wherever	 two	 lovers	 are,	 there	 is	 godliness.
Wherever	 two	lovers’	energies	are	meeting	and	mingling,	 there	 is	 life,	alive,	at
its	best—a	divine	energy	surrounds	you.	Churches	are	empty,	but	love	chambers
are	full	of	godliness.	If	you	have	tasted	love	the	way	Tantra	says	to	taste	it,	if	you
have	known	love	the	way	Tao	says	to	know	it,	then	by	the	time	you	reach	forty-
two,	sex	starts	disappearing	of	its	own	accord.	And	you	say	good-bye	to	it	with
deep	 gratitude,	 because	 you	 are	 fulfilled.	 It	 has	 been	 delightful,	 it	 has	 been	 a
blessing;	you	say	good-bye	to	it.
And	forty-two	is	the	age	for	meditation,	the	right	age.	Sex	disappears	and	that
overflowing	energy	is	no	longer	there.	One	becomes	more	tranquil.	Passion	has
gone	 and	 now	 compassion	 arises.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	more	 fever;	 one	 is	 not	 so
interested	in	 the	“other.”	With	sex	disappearing,	 the	other	 is	no	longer	a	focus.
One	starts	returning	to	one’s	own	source;	the	return	journey	starts.
Sex	is	transcended	not	by	your	effort.	It	happens	if	you	have	lived	it	totally.	So
my	 suggestion	 is,	 drop	 all	 condemnation,	 all	 anti-life	 attitudes	 and	 accept	 the
facts:	 sex	 is,	 so	who	 are	 you	 to	 deny	 it?	And	who	 is	 trying	 to	 deny	 it,	 to	 go
beyond	it?	It	is	just	the	ego.
Remember,	sex	creates	the	greatest	problem	for	the	ego.	There	are	two	types
of	people:	very	egoistic	people	are	always	against	sex;	humble	people	are	never
against	 it.	But	who	 listens	 to	 humble	 people?	 In	 fact,	 humble	 people	 don’t	 go
around	preaching,	only	egoists.
Why	 is	 there	 a	 conflict	 between	 sex	 and	 ego?	Because	 sex	 is	 something	 in
your	life	where	you	cannot	be	egoistic,	where	the	other	becomes	more	important
than	you.	Your	woman,	your	man,	becomes	more	important	 than	you.	In	every
other	 case,	 you	 remain	 the	 most	 important.	 In	 a	 love	 relationship	 the	 other
becomes	very,	very	 important,	 tremendously	 important.	You	become	a	 satellite
and	the	other	becomes	the	nucleus;	and	the	same	is	happening	for	the	other:	you
become	the	nucleus	and	he	or	she	becomes	a	satellite.	It	is	a	reciprocal	surrender.
Both	are	surrendering	to	the	god	of	love,	and	both	become	humble.
Sex	 is	 the	only	 energy	 that	 gives	 you	hints	 that	 there	 is	 something	 that	 you
cannot	control.	Money	you	can	control,	politics	you	can	control,	the	market	you
can	control,	knowledge	you	can	control,	 science,	morality,	all	 these	 things	you
can	 control.	 Somewhere,	 sex	 brings	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 world;	 you	 cannot
control	 it.	And	 the	 ego	 is	 a	 great	 controller.	 It	 is	 happy	 if	 it	 can	 control;	 it	 is
unhappy	if	it	cannot	control.	So	there	is	a	conflict	between	the	ego	and	sex.
Remember,	 it	 is	 a	 losing	 battle.	 The	 ego	 cannot	 win	 it	 because	 ego	 is	 just
superficial.	Sex	is	very	deep-rooted.	Sex	is	your	life;	ego	is	just	your	mind,	your
head.	 Sex	 has	 roots	 all	 over	 you;	 ego	 has	 roots	 only	 in	 your	 ideas—very
superficial,	just	in	the	head.
So	who	is	trying	to	go	beyond	biological,	sexual	attraction?	The	head	is	trying
to	control	sex.	If	you	are	too	much	in	the	head	then	you	want	to	go	beyond	your
sexual	feelings	because	sex	brings	you	down	to	the	guts.	It	does	not	allow	you	to
remain	hanging	in	the	head.	Everything	else	you	can	manage	from	there;	sex	you
cannot	manage	from	there.	You	cannot	make	love	with	your	head.	You	have	to
come	down,	you	have	to	descend	from	your	heights,	you	have	to	come	closer	to
earth.
Sex	is	humiliating	to	the	ego,	so	egoistic	people	are	always	against	sex.	They
go	on	finding	ways	and	means	to	transcend	it.	They	can	never	transcend	it.	They
can,	at	the	most,	become	perverted.	Their	whole	effort	from	the	very	beginning
is	doomed	to	failure.
I	have	heard:
A	 boss	 was	 interviewing	 applicants	 to	 replace	 his	 private	 secretary
who	was	 resigning	 because	 of	 expectant	motherhood.	 The	 boss’s	 right-
hand	man	 sat	with	 him	 as	 he	 looked	 the	 applicants	 over.	 The	 first	 girl
was	a	beautiful,	buxom	blond.	She	turned	out	to	be	intelligent,	and	had
excellent	 secretarial	 skills.	 The	 second	 was	 a	 dark-haired	 beauty	 who
was	even	more	intelligent	and	proficient	than	the	first.	The	third	one	was
cross-eyed,	had	buck	teeth,	weighed	one	hundred	and	ninety	pounds,	and
had	 almost	 no	 skills.	 After	 interviewing	 all	 three	 candidates,	 the	 boss
informed	his	associate	that	he	was	hiring	the	third	applicant.
“But	why?”	asked	the	astonished	employee.
“Well,”	boomed	the	boss,	“in	the	first	place,	she	looks	very	intelligent
to	me!	In	the	second	place,	it	is	none	of	your	damned	business,	and	in	the
third	place,	she	is	my	wife’s	sister.”
So	you	may	pretend	that	you	have	won	over	sex,	but	an	undercurrent	remains.
You	may	rationalize,	you	may	find	reasons,	you	may	pretend,	you	may	create	a
hard	 shell	 around	 you,	 but	 deep	 down	 the	 real	 reason,	 the	 reality,	 will	 stand
untouched:	 “She	 is	 my	 wife’s	 sister”—that	 is	 the	 real	 reason.	 “She	 looks
intelligent”—that	 is	 just	 a	 rationalization.	 “And	 it	 is	 none	 of	 your	 damned
business”—that	 is	 being	 annoyed	 and	 irritated	 because	 you	 are	 afraid	 that	 the
other	may	find	out	the	real	case!	But	the	real	case	will	explode	no	matter	what
you	do;	you	cannot	hide	it,	it	is	not	possible.
So	 you	 can	 try	 to	 control	 sex,	 but	 an	 undercurrent	 of	 sexuality	 will	 run
through	 your	 being,	 and	 it	 will	 show	 itself	 in	 many	 ways.	 Out	 of	 all	 your
rationalizations,	it	will	again	and	again	raise	its	head.
I	will	not	suggest	that	you	make	any	effort	to	go	beyond	your	sexuality.	What
I	 suggest	 is	 just	 the	 contrary:	 forget	 about	 going	 beyond	 it.	 Move	 into	 it	 as
deeply	as	you	can.	While	the	energy	is	there,	move	as	deeply	as	you	can,	love	as
deeply	as	you	can,	and	make	an	art	of	it.	It	is	not	just	to	be	“done.”
That	is	the	whole	meaning	of	Tantra,	making	an	art	of	lovemaking.	There	are
subtle	nuances,	which	only	people	who	enter	with	a	great	aesthetic	sense	will	be
able	to	know.	Otherwise,	you	can	make	love	for	your	whole	life	and	still	remain
unsatisfied	 because	 you	 don’t	 know	 that	 real	 satisfaction	 is	 something	 very
aesthetic.	It	is	like	a	subtle	music	arising	in	your	soul.	If	through	sex	you	fall	into
harmony,	 if	 through	love	you	become	non-tense	and	relaxed,	 if	 love	is	not	 just
throwing	out	energy	because	you	don’t	know	what	else	to	do	with	it,	if	it	is	not
just	 a	 relief	 but	 a	 relaxation,	 if	 you	 relax	 into	 your	 partner	 and	 your	 partner
relaxes	 into	you,	 if	 for	 a	 few	 seconds,	 for	 a	 few	moments	or	 a	 few	hours	you
forget	who	you	are	and	you	are	completely	lost	in	oblivion,	you	will	come	out	of
it	purer,	more	innocent,	more	virgin.	And	you	will	have	a	different	type	of	being:
at	ease,	centered,	rooted.
If	this	happens,	one	day	suddenly	you	will	see	that	the	flood	has	gone	and	it
has	left	you	very,	very	rich.	You	will	not	be	sorry	that	it	has	gone.	You	will	be
thankful,	 because	now	 richer	worlds	 open.	When	 sex	 leaves	you,	 the	doors	 of
meditation	open.	When	sex	leaves	you,	then	you	are	not	trying	to	lose	yourself	in
the	other.	You	become	capable	of	losing	yourself	in	yourself.	Now	another	world
of	orgasm,	inner	orgasm,	of	being	with	oneself,	arises.
But	that	arises	only	through	being	with	the	other.	One	grows,	matures	through
the	other.	Then	a	moment	comes	when	you	can	be	alone,	 tremendously	happy.
There	is	no	need	for	any	other.	The	need	has	disappeared	but	you	have	learned
much	through	it,	you	have	 learned	much	about	yourself.	The	other	became	the
mirror.	And	you	have	not	broken	 the	mirror!	You	have	 learned	so	much	about
yourself,	now	there	is	no	need	to	look	into	the	mirror.	You	can	close	your	eyes
and	you	can	see	your	 face	 there.	But	you	would	not	be	able	 to	see	 that	 face	 if
there	had	been	no	mirror	from	the	very	beginning.
Let	your	woman	be	your	mirror;	let	your	man	be	your	mirror.	Look	into	your
partner’s	eyes	and	see	your	face;	move	into	your	partner	to	know	yourself.	Then
one	day	 the	mirror	will	not	be	needed.	But	you	will	not	be	against	 the	mirror!
You	will	be	so	grateful	to	it,	how	can	you	be	against	it?	You	will	be	so	thankful,
how	can	you	be	against	it?	Then,	transcendence	happens.
Transcendence	 is	 not	 repression.	Transcendence	 is	 a	 natural	 growth	 of	 your
being;	you	grow	above,	you	go	beyond,	just	as	a	seed	breaks	and	a	sprout	starts
rising	above	the	ground.	When	sex	disappears,	the	seed	disappears.
In	 sex,	 you	 were	 able	 to	 give	 birth	 to	 somebody	 else,	 a	 child.	 When	 sex
disappears,	the	whole	energy	starts	giving	birth	to	yourself.	This	is	what	Hindus
have	 called	 dwija,	 the	 twice-born.	 One	 birth	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 by	 your
parents,	the	other	birth	is	waiting.	It	has	to	be	given	to	you	by	yourself.	You	have
to	father	and	mother	yourself.	Then	your	whole	energy	is	turning	in—it	becomes
an	inner	circle.
Right	now	it	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	make	an	inner	circle.	It	will	be	easier
to	 connect	 it	 with	 another	 pole—a	 woman	 or	 a	 man—and	 then	 the	 circle
becomes	complete.	Then	you	can	enjoy	the	blessings	of	the	circle.	But	by	and	by
you	will	be	able	 to	make	the	 inner	circle,	because	inside	you	also	you	are	man
and	woman,	woman	and	man.	Nobody	 is	 just	man	and	nobody	 is	 just	woman,
because	 you	 come	 from	 the	 communion	 of	 a	 man	 and	 a	 woman.	 Both	 have
participated;	your	mother	has	given	something	to	you	and	you	father	has	given
something	to	you.	Fifty-fifty,	they	have	contributed	to	you.	Both	are	there.	There
is	a	possibility	that	both	can	meet	inside	you.	Again	your	father	and	mother	can
love	inside	you.	Then	your	reality	will	be	born.	Once	they	met	when	your	body
was	born;	now,	if	they	can	meet	inside	you,	your	soul	will	be	born.
That’s	what	transcendence	of	sex	is;	it	is	a	higher	sex.
Let	 me	 tell	 you	 this:	 when	 you	 transcend	 sex,	 you	 reach	 to	 a	 higher	 sex.
Ordinary	 sex	 is	 gross,	 higher	 sex	 is	 not	 gross	 at	 all.	Ordinary	 sex	 is	 outward-
moving,	higher	sex	is	inward-moving.	In	ordinary	sex,	two	bodies	meet,	and	the
meeting	happens	on	the	outside.	In	higher	sex,	your	own	inner	energies	meet.	It
is	not	physical,	 it	 is	spiritual,	 it	 is	Tantra.	Tantra	 is	 transcendence.	If	you	don’t
understand	this	and	you	go	on	fighting	with	sex…
The	question	has	been	asked	by	a	woman	whom	 I	know	 is	passing	 through
some	critical	moments	in	her	mind.	She	would	like	to	be	independent,	but	it	 is
too	early.	She	would	like	not	to	be	bothered	by	anybody	else	but	it	is	too	early,
and	it	is	too	egoistic.	Right	now	transcendence	is	not	possible,	only	repression	is
possible.	And	if	you	repress	now,	in	your	old	age	you	will	repent	because	then
things	become	messed	up.
Each	thing	has	 its	own	right	 time.	Each	 thing	has	 to	be	done	 in	 its	moment.
While	young,	don’t	be	afraid	of	love,	and	don’t	be	afraid	of	sex.	If	you	are	afraid
while	you	are	young,	 in	old	age	you	will	become	obsessed;	and	then	it	will	be
difficult	to	move	deeply	into	love,	and	the	mind	will	remain	obsessed.
It	 is	 my	 understanding	 that	 people,	 if	 they	 have	 lived	 rightly,	 lovingly,
naturally,	then	by	the	forty-second	year	they	start	going	beyond	sex.	If	they	have
not	lived	naturally	and	they	have	been	fighting	with	sex,	then	forty-two	becomes
their	most	dangerous	time—because	by	the	time	they	are	forty-two	their	energies
are	declining.	When	you	are	young	you	can	repress	something	because	you	are
energetic.	Look	at	the	irony	of	it!	A	young	person	can	repress	his	or	her	sexuality
very	easily	because	young	people	have	the	energy	to	repress	it.	They	can	just	put
it	 down	 and	 sit	 on	 it.	 When	 the	 energies	 are	 declining,	 then	 that	 repressed
sexuality	will	assert	itself	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	control	it.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote:
A	 sixty-five-year-old	 man	 visited	 the	 office	 of	 his	 son,	 who	 was	 a
doctor,	and	asked	for	something	that	would	increase	his	sexual	potential.
The	 son	 gave	 his	 father	 a	 shot,	 and	 then	 refused	 to	 accept	 a	 fee.
Nevertheless,	the	old	man	insisted	on	giving	him	ten	dollars.	A	week	later
the	old	man	was	back	for	another	injection,	and	this	time	handed	his	son
twenty	dollars.
“But	Pop,	the	shots	are	only	ten	dollars.”
“Take	it!”	said	Stein.	“The	extra	ten	is	from	Momma.”
That	will	continue.	So	before	that	happens	to	you,	please	be	finished	with	it.
Don’t	wait	for	old	age,	because	then	things	go	ugly.	Then	everything	goes	out	of
season.
I	know	my	love	stinks,	so	why	do	I	cling	to	the	smell?
We	 live	according	 to	 the	past.	Our	 lives	 are	 rooted	 in	 the	dead	past,	we	are
conditioned	by	the	past.	The	past	is	very	powerful,	that’s	why	you	go	on	living
in	a	certain	pattern;	even	if	it	stinks,	you	will	go	on	repeating	it.	You	don’t	know
what	 else	 to	 do,	 you	 have	 become	 conditioned	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 mechanical
phenomenon.	And	this	is	not	only	so	with	you,	it	is	so	with	almost	every	human
being	unless	he	or	she	becomes	a	buddha.
To	become	a	buddha	means	 to	get	 rid	of	 the	past	and	 to	 live	 in	 the	present.
The	past	is	immense,	huge,	enormous.	For	millions	of	lives	you	have	lived	in	a
certain	way.	Now	you	may	have	 become	 aware	 that	 your	 love	 stinks,	 but	 that
awareness	is	also	not	very	deep;	it	is	very	superficial.	If	it	becomes	really	deep,
if	it	penetrates	to	the	very	core	of	your	being,	you	will	immediately	jump	out	of
it.
If	your	house	 is	on	fire,	you	will	not	ask	anybody	how	to	get	out	of	 it.	You
will	not	consult	 the	Encyclopedia	Britannica,	 nor	will	you	wait	 for	 some	wise
man	 to	 come	 and	 tell	 you.	 You	will	 not	 consider	 whether	 it	 is	 appropriate	 to
jump	out	of	the	window	or	not,	you	won’t	bother	about	any	of	that.	Even	if	you
are	 taking	 a	 bath,	 naked,	 you	will	 jump	 naked	 out	 of	 the	window!	You	won’t
even	bother	about	clothes.	When	 the	house	 is	on	 fire,	your	 life	 is	 at	 risk;	now
everything	else	is	secondary.
If	your	love	stinks—if	this	has	really	become	your	experience—then	you	will
come	out	of	it.	You	will	not	simply	ask	a	question,	you	will	jump	out	of	it.
But	 I	 think	 it	 is	 just	 an	 intellectual	 idea,	 because	 each	 time	you	 are	 in	 love
some	misery	arises.	Each	time	there	is	some	conflict,	some	struggle,	some	fight,
some	 jealousy,	 some	possessiveness.	So	you	have	started	 taking	an	 intellectual
standpoint:	“My	love	stinks,	so	why	do	I	cling	to	the	smell?”	Because	it	 is	not
yet	really	an	existential	experience	for	you.
And	 it	 is	 your	 own	 smell!	 One	 becomes	 accustomed	 to	 one’s	 own	 smell.
That’s	 why	 when	 people	 are	 alone	 they	 don’t	 experience	 that	 smell,	 they
experience	it	only	when	they	are	together	with	somebody	else.	When	you	are	in
love,	 then	 you	 start	 showing	your	 real	 face.	Love	 is	 a	mirror.	The	 other	 starts
functioning	as	a	mirror.	Every	relationship	becomes	a	mirror.	Alone,	you	don’t
experience	your	own	 smell,	 you	 cannot;	 one	becomes	 immune	 to	 it.	You	have
lived	with	it	so	long,	how	can	you	smell	it?	It	is	only	with	the	other	that	you	start
feeling	 that	he	 stinks	 and	he	 starts	 feeling	 that	you	 stink.	And	 the	 fight	 starts.
That	is	the	story	of	all	the	couples	all	over	the	world.
“Where	are	you	going	with	that	goat,	Juan?”	asked	the	policeman.
“I’m	taking	him	home	to	keep	as	a	pet!”	replied	Juan.
“In	the	house?”
“Sure	thing.”
“But	what	about	the	smell?”
“So	what?	He	ain’t	gonna	mind	the	smell!”
Your	own	smell	is	not	disturbing	to	you.	In	fact,	if	it	suddenly	disappears	you
will	feel	a	little	jolted,	you	will	feel	a	little	uprooted.	You	will	not	feel	like	your
natural	self;	you	will	feel	something	has	gone	wrong.	If	you	love	and	there	is	no
jealousy,	you	will	start	wondering	whether	you	love	or	not.	What	kind	of	love	is
this?	There	seems	to	be	no	jealousy!
Yes,	 your	 love	 stinks,	 as	 everybody	 else’s	 love	 stinks,	 but	 you	 feel	 it	 only
when	you	are	in	relationship.	You	have	not	yet	felt	that	it	really	has	something	to
do	 with	 you.	 Deep	 down	 you	 still	 feel	 it	 must	 be	 something	 wrong	 with	 the
other.	That’s	how	the	mind	functions:	it	throws	the	responsibility	on	the	other.	It
accepts	itself	and	it	is	always	finding	faults	in	others.
Several	people	are	sitting	in	the	front	row	of	a	movie	theater.	The	show
has	 already	 begun	when	 suddenly	 there	 is	 a	 terrible	 smell.	One	 of	 the
spectators	turns	to	the	man	sitting	beside	him	and	asks,	“Did	you	shit	in
your	trousers?”
The	man	beside	him	answers,	“Yes,	why?”
People	 accept	 themselves	 totally!	Whatever	 they	 are	 doing	 is	 right:	 “Why?
What	 is	wrong	 in	 it?”	They	are	his	 trousers,	 so	who	are	you	 to	 interfere?	And
freedom	is	everybody’s	birthright!
If	your	love	stinks,	then	try	to	find	out	what	exactly	it	is	that	stinks.	It	is	not
love,	it	is	something	else.	Love	itself	has	a	fragrance;	it	can’t	stink,	it	is	a	lotus
flower.	Something	else	must	be	in	it—jealousy,	possessiveness.	But	you	have	not
mentioned	jealousy	and	possessiveness.	You	are	hiding	them.	Love	never	stinks,
it	cannot;	 that	 is	not	 the	nature	of	love.	Please	try	to	see	exactly	what	it	 is	 that
creates	 the	 trouble.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 to	 repress	 it.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a
clarity	about	it,	what	it	is.
If	it	is	jealousy,	then	I	would	only	suggest	one	thing:	be	more	watchful	of	your
jealousy.	When	it	arises	next	time,	rather	than	getting	angry	close	your	doors,	sit
silently,	sit	in	meditation	and	watch	your	jealousy.	See	exactly	what	it	is.	It	will
surround	you	like	smoke,	dirty	smoke.	It	will	suffocate	you.	You	would	like	to
go	out	and	do	something,	but	don’t	do	anything.	Just	be	in	a	state	of	non-doing,
because	anything	done	in	a	moment	of	jealousy	is	going	to	be	destructive.	Just
watch.
And	I	am	not	saying	repress	it,	because	that	is	again	doing	something.	People
are	either	expressive	or	repressive,	and	both	ways	are	wrong.	If	you	express	you
become	destructive	to	the	other	person.	Whoever	is	your	victim	suffers,	and	he	is
going	to	take	revenge.	He	may	not	take	revenge	consciously,	but	unconsciously
it	is	going	to	happen.
Just	a	few	months	ago,	KB	fell	in	love	with	a	woman.	Nothing	extraordinary
about	it,	but	his	girlfriend	Deeksha	got	mad!	She	could	not	accept	the	idea.	For
centuries	we	have	been	told	that	if	a	man	loves	you	or	a	woman	loves	you	and
the	man	or	the	woman	goes	to	somebody	else,	that	is	a	rejection	of	you.
That	 is	utter	nonsense.	 It	 is	not	 rejection;	 in	 fact,	 it	 is	 just	 the	opposite.	 If	a
man	loves	the	woman	and	he	enjoys	the	woman,	he	starts	fantasizing	how	it	will
be	with	 other	women.	 It	 is	 really	 the	 joy	 that	 this	woman	 has	 given	 him	 that
triggers	 his	 fancy.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 he	 is	 rejecting	 this	 woman;	 it	 is	 really	 an
indication	that	this	woman	has	been	such	a	nourishment	that	he	would	like	to	see
and	know	how	other	women	are.	And	if	he	is	allowed,	he	is	not	likely	to	go	very
far,	he	will	come	back	because	with	the	other	woman	it	may	be	novelty,	it	will	be
something	 new,	 but	 it	 can’t	 be	 that	 nourishing	 because	 there	 will	 not	 be	 any
intimacy.	It	will	have	something	empty	about	it.	It	will	be	sex	without	love.
Love	 needs	 time	 to	 grow,	 it	 needs	 intimacy	 to	 grow.	 It	 needs	 a	 really	 long
time.	It	is	not	a	seasonal	flower	that	is	there	within	three	or	four	weeks,	but	then
within	another	 few	weeks	 it	 is	gone.	 It	 is	 a	 long	process	of	growing	 intimacy.
Slowly,	two	persons	melt	and	merge	into	each	other;	then	it	becomes	nourishing.
So	the	other	woman,	or	 the	other	man,	cannot	be	nourishing.	It	may	be	just	an
adventure,	a	thrill.	But	then	suddenly	the	feeling	will	arise—it	is	bound	to	arise
—that	it	was	good	as	fun,	but	not	very	nourishing.	And	the	person	will	be	back.
And	KB	would	have	been	back,	but	Deeksha	went	mad.	She	behaved	just	like
any	other	woman!	But	I	was	watching	to	see	if	sooner	or	later	she	was	going	to
take	revenge.	And	now	she	is	taking	revenge.	KB	fell	ill,	he	was	in	the	hospital,
and	Deeksha	had	a	little	freedom—she	fell	in	love	with	her	own	handyman!	He
really	proved	handy!	So	now	KB	is	in	hell.
There	is	no	need	to	be	so	worried	about	it.	I	have	sent	KB	a	message:	“Wait,
don’t	 be	 worried.	 Just	 let	 her	 take	 revenge.	 It	 is	 good	 that	 her	 unconscious
burden	has	a	chance	to	be	finished.”
If	we	 understand	 each	 other	 a	 little	more,	 if	we	 understand	 human	nature	 a
little	more,	there	should	be	no	jealousy.	But	it	is	a	past	heritage	of	centuries.	It	is
not	so	easy	to	get	rid	of	it,	I	am	not	saying	you	can	just	drop	it	right	now.	You
will	 have	 to	 meditate	 over	 it.	 Whenever	 it	 possesses	 you,	 meditate	 over	 it.
Slowly,	 the	meditation	will	 create	 the	 distance	 between	 you	 and	 the	 jealousy.
And	the	greater	the	distance	the	less	jealousy	will	arise.	One	day,	when	there	is
no	jealousy,	your	love	releases	such	a	fragrance	that	no	flower	can	compete	with
it.	All	flowers	are	poor	compared	to	the	flowering	of	love.
But	your	love	is	crippled	because	of	jealousy	and	possessiveness	and	anger.	It
is	not	love	that	stinks,	remember,	because	I	have	seen	people	who	think	it	is	love
that	stinks	so	they	close	up,	 they	become	closed,	 they	stop	loving.	That’s	what
has	happened	to	millions	of	monks	and	nuns	down	the	ages:	they	became	closed
to	 love,	 they	 dropped	 the	 whole	 idea	 of	 love.	 Rather	 than	 dropping	 jealousy,
which	would	have	been	a	revolution,	rather	than	dropping	possessiveness,	which
would	have	been	something	of	immense	value,	they	dropped	love.	That	is	easy,
that	is	not	much;	anybody	can	do	that.
To	be	a	monk	or	a	nun	is	very	easy,	but	to	love	and	not	to	be	jealous,	to	love
and	not	to	be	possessive,	to	love	and	let	the	other	have	all	their	freedom,	is	really
a	great	achievement.	Only	then	will	you	experience	love	and	its	fragrance.
LOVE	AND	THE	ART	OF	NON-DOING
There	are	things	which	only	happen,	which	cannot	be	done.
Doing	 is	 the	 way	 of	 very	 ordinary	 things,	 mundane	 things.	 You	 can	 do
something	 to	 earn	money,	 you	 can	 do	 something	 to	 be	 powerful,	 you	 can	 do
something	 to	 have	 prestige;	 but	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 as	 far	 as	 love	 is
concerned,	 gratitude	 is	 concerned,	 silence	 is	 concerned.	 It	 is	 significant	 to
understand	 that	 “doing”	means	 the	world,	 and	 non-doing	means	 that	which	 is
beyond	the	world—where	things	happen,	where	only	the	tide	brings	you	to	the
shore.	If	you	swim,	you	miss.	If	you	do	something,	you	will	undo	it;	because	all
doing	is	mundane.
Very	few	people	come	to	know	the	secret	of	non-doing	and	allowing	things	to
happen.	 If	 you	 want	 great	 things—things	 that	 are	 beyond	 the	 small	 reach	 of
human	hands,	human	mind,	human	abilities—then	you	will	have	to	learn	the	art
of	non-doing.	I	call	it	meditation.
It	is	a	trouble,	because	the	moment	you	give	a	name	to	it,	immediately	people
start	asking	how	to	“do”	it.	And	you	cannot	say	that	they	are	wrong,	because	the
very	word	“meditation”	creates	the	idea	of	doing.	They	have	their	doctorate,	they
have	 done	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things;	 when	 they	 hear	 the	 word	 “meditation”
they	 ask,	 “So	 just	 tell	 us	 how	 to	 do	 it.”	 And	 meditation	 basically	 means	 the
beginning	of	non-doing,	 relaxing,	going	with	 the	 tide—just	being	a	 leaf	 in	 the
breeze,	or	a	cloud	moving	with	the	winds.
Never	ask	a	cloud,	“Where	are	you	going?”	He	himself	does	not	know;	he	has
no	address,	he	has	no	destiny.	If	the	winds	change	he	was	going	to	the	south,	he
starts	moving	towards	 the	north.	The	cloud	does	not	say	to	 the	winds,	“This	 is
absolutely	illogical.	We	were	moving	south,	now	we	are	moving	north.	What	is
the	 point	 of	 it	 all?”	 No,	 he	 simply	 starts	 moving	 north	 as	 easily	 as	 he	 was
moving	south.	To	him,	south,	north,	east,	west,	don’t	make	any	difference.	Just
to	move	with	the	wind,	with	no	desire,	with	no	goal,	nowhere	to	reach;	he	is	just
enjoying	 the	 journey.	Meditation	makes	 you	 a	 cloud—of	 consciousness.	 Then
there	is	no	goal.
Never	 ask	 a	meditator,	 “Why	 are	 you	meditating?”	 because	 that	 question	 is
irrelevant.	Meditation	is	in	itself	the	goal	and	the	way	together.
Lao	Tzu	 is	one	of	 the	most	 important	 figures	 in	 the	history	of	non-doing.	 If
history	is	 to	be	written	rightly	 then	there	should	be	 two	kinds	of	histories.	The
history	 of	 doers	 includes	 Genghis	 Khan,	 Tamerlane,	 Nadirshah,	 Alexander,
Napoleon	 Bonaparte,	 Ivan	 the	 Terrible,	 Joseph	 Stalin,	 Adolf	 Hitler,	 Benito
Mussolini;	these	are	the	people	who	belong	to	the	world	of	doing.	There	should
be	another	history,	a	higher	history,	a	real	history—of	human	consciousness,	of
human	evolution.	This	is	the	history	of	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu,	Lieh	Tzu,	Gautam
Buddha,	Mahavira,	Bodhidharma;	a	totally	different	kind.
Lao	 Tzu	 became	 enlightened	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree.	 A	 leaf	 had	 just	 started
falling:	it	was	in	the	autumn	and	there	was	no	hurry;	the	leaf	was	coming	down
zigzag	 with	 the	 wind,	 slowly.	 He	 watched	 the	 leaf.	 The	 leaf	 came	 down	 and
settled	on	the	ground,	and	as	he	watched	the	leaf	falling	and	settling,	something
settled	 in	him.	From	 that	moment,	he	became	a	non-doer.	The	winds	come	on
their	own,	and	existence	takes	care.
Lao	Tzu’s	whole	 teaching	was	 the	watercourse	way:	 just	 go	with	 the	water
wherever	 it	 is	going,	don’t	swim.	But	 the	mind	always	wants	 to	do	 something,
because	 then	 the	credit	goes	 to	 the	ego.	 If	you	 just	go	with	 the	 tide,	 the	credit
goes	to	the	tide,	not	to	you.	If	you	swim,	there	is	a	chance	that	you	can	have	a
greater	ego:	“I	managed	to	cross	the	English	Channel!”
But	 existence	 gives	 you	 birth,	 gives	 you	 life,	 gives	 you	 love;	 it	 gives	 you
everything	that	is	invaluable,	everything	you	cannot	purchase	with	money.	Only
those	who	are	ready	to	give	the	whole	credit	of	their	lives	to	existence	realize	the
beauty	and	the	benediction	of	non-doing.
It	is	not	a	question	of	doing.	It	is	a	question	of	being	absent	as	an	ego,	letting
things	happen.
Let	go—just	these	two	words	contain	the	whole	experience.
In	 life	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 do	 everything.	 Please,	 leave	 a	 few	 things	 for	 non-
doing,	because	those	are	the	only	valuable	things.
There	are	people	who	are	trying	to	love,	because	from	the	very	beginning	the
mother	is	saying	to	the	child,	“You	have	to	love	me	because	I	am	your	mother.”
Now	she	is	making	love	also	a	logical	syllogism—“because	I	am	your	mother.”
She	is	not	allowing	love	to	grow	on	its	own,	it	has	to	be	forced.
The	father	is	saying,	“Love	me,	I	am	your	father.”	And	the	child	is	so	helpless
that	all	that	he	can	do	is	pretend.	What	else	can	he	do?	He	can	smile,	he	can	give
a	kiss,	and	he	knows	that	it	is	all	pretension:	he	does	not	mean	it,	it	is	all	phony.
It	is	not	coming	from	him.	But	because	you	are	his	daddy,	you	are	his	mommy,
you	are	this,	you	are	that.	They	are	spoiling	one	of	the	most	precious	experiences
of	life.
Then	 wives	 are	 telling	 husbands,	 “You	 have	 to	 love	 me,	 I	 am	 your	 wife.”
Strange.	Husbands	are	saying,	“You	have	to	love	me.	I	am	your	husband,	it	is	my
birthright.”	Love	cannot	be	demanded.	 If	 it	 comes	your	way,	be	 thankful;	 if	 it
does	 not	 come,	 wait.	 Even	 in	 you’re	 waiting,	 there	 should	 be	 no	 complaint,
because	 you	 don’t	 have	 any	 right.	 Love	 is	 nobody’s	 right,	 no	 constitution	 can
give	 you	 the	 right	 to	 experience	 love.	 But	 they	 are	 all	 destroying	 everything,
then	wives	are	smiling,	husbands	are	hugging.
One	 of	 America’s	 most	 famous	 authors,	 Dale	 Carnegie,	 writes	 that	 every
husband	should	tell	his	wife	at	least	three	times	a	day,	“I	love	you,	darling.”	Are
you	insane?	But	he	means	it,	and	it	works;	and	many	people,	millions	of	people,
are	practicing	Dale	Carnegie	followers.	“When	you	come	home,	bring	ice	cream,
flowers,	roses,	to	show	that	you	love	your	wife,”	as	if	love	needs	to	be	shown,
proved	 materially,	 pragmatically,	 linguistically,	 verbalized	 again	 and	 again	 so
that	nobody	forgets	it.	If	you	don’t	tell	your	wife	for	a	few	days	that	“I	love	you”
she	will	count	how	many	days	have	passed,	and	she	will	become	more	and	more
suspicious	 that	 you	must	 be	 saying	 it	 to	 somebody	 else,	 because	 her	 quota	 is
being	cut.	Love	is	a	quantity.	“If	he	is	not	bringing	ice	cream	anymore,	that	ice
cream	must	be	going	somewhere	else,	and	this	cannot	be	tolerated.”
We	have	created	a	society	which	believes	only	in	“doings,”	while	the	spiritual
part	of	our	being	remains	starved	because	it	needs	something	which	is	not	done
but	happens.	Not	 that	 you	manage	 to	 say	 “I	 love	 you,”	 but	 that	 suddenly	 you
find	yourself	saying	 that	you	 love.	You	yourself	are	surprised	by	what	you	are
saying.	You	have	not	rehearsed	it	in	your	mind	first	and	then	repeated	it,	no;	it	is
spontaneous.
And	in	fact,	the	real	moments	of	love	remain	unspoken.	When	you	are	really
feeling	 love,	 that	 very	 feeling	 creates	 around	 you	 a	 certain	 radiance	 that	 says
everything	that	you	cannot	say,	that	can	never	be	said.
But	instead	we	manage	everything,	we	turn	everything	into	a	“doing”	and	the
ultimate	 result	 is	 that	 slowly	 hypocrisy	 becomes	 our	 very	 characteristic.	 We
forget	completely	that	it	is	hypocrisy.	And	in	the	mind,	in	the	being	of	a	person
who	is	a	hypocrite,	anything	of	the	world	of	non-doing	is	impossible.	You	can	go
on	doing	more	and	more;	you	will	become	almost	a	robot.
So	whenever	you	have	suddenly	an	experience	of	happening,	take	it	as	a	gift
from	existence	and	make	that	moment	the	herald	of	a	new	lifestyle.	Just	allow	a
few	 moments	 in	 twenty-four	 hours	 when	 you	 are	 not	 doing	 anything,	 just
allowing	existence	 to	do	something	 to	you.	And	windows	will	start	opening	 in
you,	windows	that	will	connect	you	with	the	universal,	the	immortal.
It	feels	to	me	that	much	of	my	own	“doing”	is	to	avoid	boredom.	Can
you	 talk	 about	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 experiences	we	 call	 boredom	 and
restlessness?
Boredom	and	restlessness	are	deeply	related.	Whenever	you	feel	boredom,	then
you	feel	restlessness.	Restlessness	is	a	by-product	of	boredom.
Try	to	understand	the	mechanism.	Whenever	you	feel	bored	you	want	to	move
away	from	that	situation.	If	somebody	is	saying	something	and	you	are	getting
bored,	you	 start	 becoming	 fidgety.	This	 is	 a	 subtle	 indication	 that	you	want	 to
move	away	from	this	place,	from	this	person,	from	this	nonsense	talk.	Your	body
starts	 moving.	 Of	 course,	 out	 of	 politeness	 you	 suppress	 it,	 but	 the	 body	 is
already	on	the	move	because	the	body	is	more	authentic	than	the	mind,	the	body
is	 more	 honest	 and	 sincere	 than	 the	 mind.	 The	 mind	 is	 trying	 to	 be	 polite,
smiling.	You	say,	“How	interesting!”	but	inside	you	are	saying,	“How	boring!	I
have	listened	to	this	story	so	many	times	and	you	are	telling	it	again!”
I	have	heard	a	story	about	Albert	Einstein’s	wife.	Friends	of	Albert	Einstein
would	come	to	visit,	and	of	course	Einstein	would	always	tell	some	anecdotes,
some	 jokes,	 and	 they	would	 laugh.	But	one	 friend	became	curious;	 he	noticed
that	whenever	he	came,	and	Einstein	started	telling	stories,	Frau	Einstein	would
immediately	 start	 knitting	or	 doing	 something.	So	he	 asked	her,	 “The	moment
your	husband	starts	telling	some	story	or	some	joke,	why	do	you	start	knitting?”
She	said,	“If	 I	don’t	do	anything,	 it	will	be	 tremendously	difficult	 for	me	 to
tolerate	because	I	have	heard	those	stories	and	jokes	a	thousand	and	one	times.
You	come	 to	visit	 sometimes,	 I	am	always	here.	Whenever	anybody	comes	he
tells	the	same	jokes,	the	same	stories.	If	I	didn’t	do	something	with	my	hands,	I
would	 become	 so	 fidgety	 that	 it	 would	 be	 impolite.	 So	 I	 have	 to	 move	 my
restlessness	into	some	work.	Then	I	can	hide	my	fidgetiness	behind	the	work.”
Whenever	you	feel	bored	you	will	feel	restless.	Restlessness	 is	an	indication
of	the	body;	the	body	is	saying,	“Move	away	from	here.	Go	anywhere,	but	don’t
be	here.”	But	the	mind	goes	on	smiling,	and	the	eyes	go	on	sparkling,	and	you
go	on	saying	that	you	are	listening	and	you	have	never	heard	such	an	interesting
story.	The	mind	is	civilized;	the	body	is	still	wild.	The	mind	is	human;	the	body
is	still	animal.	The	mind	is	false;	the	body	is	true.	The	mind	knows	the	rules	and
regulations,	how	to	behave	and	how	not	to	behave.	So	even	if	you	meet	a	bore
you	 say,	 “I	 am	 so	 happy,	 so	 glad	 to	 see	 you!”	 And	 deep	 down,	 if	 you	 were
allowed,	 you	 would	 kill	 this	 man!	 He	 tempts	 you	 to	murder.	 So	 you	 become
fidgety,	you	feel	restless.
If	you	listen	to	the	body	and	run	away,	the	restlessness	will	disappear.	Try	it!
If	 somebody	 is	 boring	 you,	 simply	 start	 jumping	 and	 running	 around.	Watch
what	 happens—your	 restlessness	 will	 disappear,	 because	 restlessness	 simply
shows	 that	 the	 energy	 does	 not	want	 to	 be	 here.	The	 energy	 is	 already	 on	 the
move;	the	energy	has	already	left	this	place.	Now	you	are	following	the	energy,
so	the	restlessness	disappears.
The	real	thing	is	to	understand	boredom,	not	restlessness.	Boredom	is	a	very
significant	 phenomenon.	 Only	 man	 feels	 bored,	 no	 other	 animal.	 You	 cannot
make	 a	 buffalo	 bored,	 impossible.	 Only	man	 gets	 bored	 because	 only	man	 is
conscious.	 Consciousness	 is	 the	 cause.	 The	 more	 sensitive	 you	 are,	 the	 more
alert	you	are,	the	more	conscious	you	are,	the	more	you	will	feel	bored,	and	in
more	situations.	A	mediocre	mind	does	not	feel	bored	so	easily.	He	goes	on;	he
accepts	whatsoever	is	happening	as	okay.	He	is	not	so	alert.	The	more	alert	you
become,	 the	more	 fresh,	 the	more	you	will	 feel	as	 if	a	given	situation	 is	 just	a
repetition,	as	if	some	situation	is	just	intolerable,	as	if	some	situation	is	just	stale.
The	more	sensitive	you	are	the	more	easily	you	will	become	bored.
Boredom	is	an	 indication	of	sensitivity.	Trees	are	not	bored,	animals	are	not
bored,	rocks	are	not	bored	because	they	are	not	sensitive	enough.	This	has	to	be
one	of	the	basic	understandings	about	your	boredom:	it	happens	because	you	are
sensitive.
But	buddhas	also	are	not	bored.	You	cannot	bore	a	buddha.	Animals	are	not
bored	 and	buddhas	 are	not	bored,	 so	boredom	exists	 as	 a	middle	phenomenon
between	the	animal	and	the	buddha.	For	boredom,	a	little	more	intelligence	and
sensitivity	is	needed	than	is	given	to	the	animals.	And	if	you	want	to	get	beyond
boredom	 then	 you	 have	 to	 become	 totally	 sensitive.	 Then	 again	 the	 boredom
disappears.	But	in	the	middle,	the	boredom	is	there.
If	you	become	animal-like,	then	too	boredom	disappears.	So	you	will	find	that
people	who	live	a	very	animalistic	life	are	less	bored.	Eating,	drinking,	marrying
—they	are	not	very	bored,	but	they	are	also	not	very	sensitive.	They	live	at	the
minimum,	 with	 only	 as	 much	 consciousness	 as	 is	 needed	 for	 a	 day-to-day
routine	life.
You	will	 find	 that	 intellectuals,	people	who	 think	 too	much,	are	more	bored
because	 they	 think,	 and	 in	 their	 thinking	 they	 can	 see	 that	 something	 is	 just
repetitious.
Your	life	is	full	of	repetitions.	Every	morning	you	get	up	in	almost	the	same
way	as	you	have	been	getting	up	all	your	life.	You	take	your	breakfast	in	almost
the	same	way.	Then	you	go	to	the	office—the	same	office,	the	same	people,	the
same	work.	Then	you	come	home—the	same	wife,	the	same	husband,	the	same
partner.	 If	 you	 get	 bored	 it	 is	 natural.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 see	 any
newness	here;	everything	seems	to	be	old,	dust-covered.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
Mary	Jane,	the	very	good	friend	of	a	wealthy	broker,	opened	her	door
cheerfully	one	day,	then	quickly	attempted	to	close	it	when	she	discovered
the	person	on	the	threshold	to	be	her	lover’s	wife.
The	wife	leaned	against	the	door	and	said,	“Oh,	let	me	in,	dear.	I	don’t
intend	to	make	a	scene,	just	to	have	a	small	friendly	discussion.”
With	 considerable	 nervousness	 Mary	 Jane	 let	 her	 enter,	 then	 said
cautiously,	“What	do	you	want?”
“Nothing	much,”	said	the	wife,	looking	about.	“I	just	want	the	answer
to	one	question.	Tell	me,	dear,	 just	between	us,	what	do	you	see	 in	 that
dumb	jerk?”
The	same	husband	every	day	becomes	a	dumb	jerk;	the	same	wife	every	day,
you	 almost	 forget	 how	 she	 looks.	 If	 you	 are	 told	 to	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 to
remember	your	wife’s	face,	you	will	find	it	impossible	to	remember.	Many	other
women	will	come	 into	your	mind,	 the	whole	neighborhood,	but	not	your	wife.
The	whole	relationship	has	become	a	continuous	repetition.	You	make	love,	you
hug	 your	wife,	 you	 kiss	 your	wife,	 but	 these	 are	 all	 empty	 gestures	 now.	The
glory	and	the	glamour	has	disappeared	long	before.
A	marriage	is	almost	finished	by	the	time	the	honeymoon	is	over,	then	you	go
on	pretending.	But	behind	those	pretensions	a	deep	boredom	accumulates.	Watch
people	walking	on	the	street	and	you	will	see	them	completely	bored.	Everybody
is	bored,	bored	to	death.	Look	at	their	faces—there	is	no	aura	of	delight.	Look	at
their	 eyes—they	 are	 dust-covered,	 no	glimmer	of	 inner	 happiness.	They	move
from	the	office	to	home,	from	home	to	the	office,	and	by	and	by	the	whole	life
becomes	 a	 mechanical	 routine,	 a	 constant	 repetition.	 And	 one	 day	 they	 die.
Almost	always	people	die	without	ever	having	been	alive.
Bertrand	Russell	 is	 reported	 to	have	said,	“When	I	 think	back,	 I	cannot	 find
more	than	a	few	moments	in	my	life	when	I	was	really	alive,	aflame.”	Can	you
remember	 how	many	moments	 in	 your	 life	 you	were	 really	 aflame?	Rarely	 it
happens.	One	dreams	about	 those	moments,	one	 imagines	 those	moments,	one
hopes	for	those	moments,	but	they	almost	never	happen.	Even	if	they	do	happen,
sooner	or	later	they	also	become	repetitive.	When	you	fall	in	love	with	a	woman
or	a	man	you	feel	a	miracle	has	happened,	but	by	and	by	the	miracle	disappears
and	everything	settles	into	a	routine.
Boredom	 is	 the	 consciousness	 of	 repetition.	 Because	 animals	 cannot
remember	 the	past,	 they	cannot	 feel	bored.	They	cannot	 remember	 the	past,	 so
they	cannot	feel	the	repetition.	The	buffalo	goes	on	eating	the	same	grass	every
day	with	 the	same	delight.	You	cannot.	How	can	you	eat	 the	same	grass	every
day	with	the	same	delight?	You	get	fed	up.
Hence,	people	try	to	change.	They	move	into	a	new	house,	they	bring	a	new
car	home,	they	divorce	the	old	husband,	they	find	a	new	love	affair.	But	again,
that	 new	 thing	 is	 going	 to	 become	 repetitive	 sooner	 or	 later.	Changing	 places,
changing	partners,	changing	houses,	is	not	going	to	do	anything.
And	whenever	a	 society	becomes	very	bored,	people	 start	moving	 from	one
town	to	another,	from	one	job	to	another,	from	one	wife	to	another,	but	sooner	or
later	 they	 realize	 that	 this	 is	 all	 nonsense.	 The	 same	 thing	 is	 going	 to	 happen
again	 and	 again	 with	 every	 woman,	 with	 every	 man,	 with	 every	 house,	 with
every	car.
What	 to	 do	 then?	Become	more	 conscious.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 changing
situations.	Transform	your	being,	become	more	conscious.	If	you	become	more
conscious	you	will	be	able	to	see	that	each	moment	is	new.	But	for	 that,	much
energy,	a	tremendous	energy	of	consciousness	is	needed.
The	wife	is	not	the	same,	remember.	You	are	in	an	illusion.	Go	back	home	and
look	 again	 at	 your	 wife—she	 is	 not	 the	 same.	 Nobody	 can	 be	 the	 same;	 just
appearances	deceive.	The	trees	are	not	the	same	as	they	were	yesterday.	How	can
they	 be?	 They	 have	 grown.	Many	 leaves	 have	 fallen,	 new	 leaves	 have	 come.
Look	at	 the	 tree	on	your	street—how	many	new	leaves	have	come?	Every	day
the	old	are	falling	and	the	new	are	coming.	But	you	are	not	that	conscious.
Either	have	no	consciousness,	then	you	cannot	feel	the	repetition,	or,	have	so
much	consciousness	 that	 in	 each	 repetition	you	 can	 see	 something	new.	These
are	the	two	ways	to	get	out	of	boredom.
Changing	 outside	 things	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 rearranging	 the
furniture	in	your	room	again	and	again.	Whatever	you	do,	you	can	put	it	this	way
or	 that	way,	 it	 is	 the	 same	 furniture.	There	are	many	people	who	continuously
think	 about	 how	 to	manage	 things,	where	 to	 put	 things,	 how	 to	 arrange	 them,
where	not	to	put	them,	and	they	go	on	changing	things	according	to	their	ideas.
But	it	 is	 the	same	room,	it	 is	 the	same	furniture.	How	long	will	you	be	able	to
deceive	 yourself	 in	 this	 way?	 By	 and	 by	 everything	 settles,	 the	 newness
disappears.
You	 don’t	 have	 a	 quality	 of	 consciousness	 that	 can	 go	 on	 finding	 the	 new
again	and	again.	For	a	dull	mind,	everything	is	old;	for	a	totally	alive	mind	there
is	nothing	old	under	the	sun,	cannot	be.	Everything	is	in	flux.	Every	person	is	in
flux,	 is	 riverlike.	Persons	 are	not	dead	 things,	how	can	 they	be	 the	 same?	Are
you	the	same?	Between	the	time	you	woke	up	this	morning	and	went	out,	and	the
time	you	went	back	home,	a	lot	has	happened.	Some	thoughts	have	disappeared
from	 your	 mind,	 other	 thoughts	 have	 entered.	 You	 may	 have	 attained	 a	 new
insight.	 You	 cannot	 go	 back	 home	 the	 same	 as	 you	 had	 left.	 The	 river	 is
continuously	 flowing;	 it	 looks	 the	 same,	but	 it	 is	not	 the	 same.	Old	Heraclitus
has	said	that	you	cannot	step	twice	into	the	same	river,	because	the	river	is	never
the	same.
One	thing	is	that	you	are	not	the	same,	and	another	thing	is	that	everything	 is
changing….	but	then	one	has	to	live	at	the	peak	of	consciousness.	Either	live	like
a	buddha	or	 live	 like	a	buffalo,	 then	you	will	not	be	bored.	Now	 the	choice	 is
yours.
I	have	never	seen	anybody	the	same.	I’m	always	surprised	by	the	newness	that
you	bring	every	day.	You	may	not	be	aware	of	it.
Remain	capable	of	being	surprised.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
A	man	entered	a	bar,	deep	in	private	thoughts	of	his	own.	He	turned	to
a	 woman	 just	 passing	 and	 said,	 “Pardon	 me,	 miss,	 do	 you	 happen	 to
have	the	time?”
In	 a	 strident	 voice	 she	 responded,	 “How	 dare	 you	 make	 such	 a
proposition	to	me!”
The	 man	 snapped	 to	 attention	 in	 surprise	 and	 was	 uncomfortably
aware	that	every	pair	of	eyes	in	the	place	had	turned	in	their	direction.
He	mumbled,	“I	just	asked	the	time,	miss.”
In	a	voice	even	 louder	 the	woman	shrieked,	“I	will	 call	 the	police	 if
you	say	another	word!”
Grabbing	 his	 drink	 and	 embarrassed	 very	 nearly	 to	 death,	 the	 man
hastened	to	the	far	end	of	 the	room	and	huddled	at	a	table,	holding	his
breath	and	wondering	how	soon	he	could	sneak	out	the	door.
No	more	than	half	a	minute	had	passed	when	the	woman	joined	him.
In	 a	quiet	 voice	 she	 said,	“I’m	 terribly	 sorry,	 sir,	 to	 have	 embarrassed
you,	but	I	am	a	psychology	student	at	the	university	and	I	am	writing	a
thesis	on	the	reaction	of	human	beings	to	sudden,	shocking	statements.”
The	 man	 stared	 at	 her	 for	 three	 seconds,	 then	 he	 leaned	 back	 and
bellowed,	“You	will	do	all	that	for	me,	all	night,	for	just	two	dollars?”
And	it	is	said	that	the	woman	fell	down	unconscious.
Maybe	 we	 don’t	 allow	 our	 consciousness	 to	 rise	 higher	 because	 then	 life
would	be	a	constant	 surprise.	You	might	not	be	able	 to	manage	 it.	That’s	why
you	have	settled	for	a	dull	mind,	there	is	some	investment	in	it.	You	are	not	dull
for	no	 reason,	you	are	dull	 for	a	certain	purpose;	 if	you	were	 really	alive	 then
everything	would	 be	 surprising	 and	 shocking.	 If	 you	 remain	 dull	 then	 nothing
surprises	you,	nothing	is	shocking.	The	more	dull	you	are,	 the	more	life	seems
dull	to	you.	If	you	become	more	aware,	life	will	also	become	more	alive,	livelier,
and	there	is	going	to	be	difficulty.
You	always	live	with	dead	expectations.	Every	day	you	come	home	and	you
expect	 certain	 behavior	 from	 your	 wife.	 Now	 look	 how	 you	 create	 your	 own
misery:	you	expect	a	certain	fixed	behavior	from	your	partner	and	then	you	want
your	partner	to	be	new?	You	are	asking	the	impossible!	If	you	really	want	your
wife,	 your	 husband,	 your	 partner	 to	 remain	 continuously	 new	 to	 you,	 don’t
expect.	Come	 home	 always	 ready	 to	 be	 surprised	 and	 shocked,	 then	 the	 other
will	be	new.
But	 instead,	 we	 expect	 the	 other	 to	 fulfill	 certain	 expectations.	 And	 we
ourselves	never	allow	our	total,	fluxlike	freshness	to	be	known	to	the	other.	We
go	on	hiding,	we	don’t	expose	ourselves,	because	the	other	may	not	be	able	 to
understand	it	at	all.	Both	the	husband	and	the	wife	expect	the	other	to	behave	in
a	certain	way,	and,	of	course,	each	of	them	manages	the	roles.	We	are	not	living
life,	 we	 are	 living	 roles.	 The	 husband	 comes	 home,	 he	 forces	 himself	 into	 a
certain	role.	By	the	time	he	enters	the	house,	he	is	no	longer	an	alive	person,	he
is	just	a	husband.
A	husband	means	a	certain	type	of	expected	behavior.	At	home,	the	woman	is
a	wife	and	 the	man	 is	a	husband.	Now	when	 these	 two	persons	meet	 there	are
really	 four	 persons:	 the	 husband	 and	 wife,	 who	 are	 not	 real	 persons	 but	 just
personas,	masks,	 false	patterns,	expected	behavior,	duties,	and	all	 that,	and	 the
real	persons	hiding	behind	the	masks.
Those	real	persons	feel	bored.
But	you	have	invested	much	in	your	persona,	in	your	mask.	If	you	really	want
a	 life	 that	has	no	boredom	 in	 it,	 drop	all	masks,	be	 true.	Sometimes	 it	will	 be
difficult,	I	know,	but	it	is	worth	it.	Be	true.	If	you	feel	like	loving	your	wife,	love
her;	otherwise	say	you	don’t	feel	like	it.	What	is	happening	right	now	is	that	the
husband	 goes	 on	 making	 love	 to	 the	 wife,	 thinking	 of	 some	 actress.	 In	 his
imagination	 he	 is	 not	making	 love	 to	 this	woman,	 he	 is	making	 love	 to	 some
other	woman.	And	the	same	is	true	about	the	wife.	Then	things	become	boring
because	they	are	no	longer	alive.	The	intensity,	the	sharpness,	is	lost.
It	happened	on	a	railway	platform.	Mr.	Johnson	had	weighed	himself
on	one	of	those	old-fashioned	penny	machines	that	delivers	a	card	with	a
fortune	printed	on	it.
The	 formidable	Mrs.	 Johnson	 plucked	 it	 from	 her	 husband’s	 fingers
and	said,	“Let	me	see	that.	Oh,	it	says	you	are	firm	and	resolute,	have	a
decisive	personality,	are	a	leader	of	men,	and	are	attractive	to	women.”
Then	she	turned	over	the	card,	studied	it	for	a	moment,	and	said,	“And
they	have	got	the	weight	wrong	as	well.”
And	 no	 woman	 can	 tolerate	 it	 if	 her	 husband	 is	 attracted	 to	 other	 women.
There	is	the	whole	point,	the	whole	crux.	If	he	is	not	attracted	to	other	women,
how	can	 she	 expect	 that	 he	will	 be	 attracted	 to	 her?	 If	 he	 is	 attracted	 to	 other
women,	only	then	can	he	be	attracted	to	her,	because	she	is	also	a	woman.	The
wife	wants	him	to	be	attracted	to	her	and	not	to	anybody	else.	Now	this	is	asking
something	absurd.	It	is	as	if	you	are	saying,	“You	are	allowed	to	breathe	only	in
my	 presence	 and	 when	 you	 go	 near	 somebody	 else,	 you	 are	 not	 allowed	 to
breathe.	How	dare	 you	breathe	 anywhere	 else?”	 Just	 breathe	when	 the	wife	 is
there,	 just	breathe	when	the	husband	is	 there,	and	don’t	breathe	anywhere	else.
Of	course,	if	you	do	that	you	will	be	dead,	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	breathe	in
front	of	your	partner	either.
Love	has	 to	be	a	way	of	 life.	You	are	 to	be	 loving.	Only	 then	can	you	 love
your	 wife	 or	 your	 husband.	 But	 the	 wife	 says,	 “No,	 you	 should	 not	 look	 at
anybody	 else	 with	 a	 loving	 eye.”	 Of	 course	 you	 manage	 to	 control	 yourself,
because	if	you	don’t	it	creates	such	nuisance,	but	by	and	by	the	glimmer	in	your
eyes	 disappears.	 If	 you	 cannot	 look	 anywhere	 else	 with	 love,	 by	 and	 by	 you
cannot	look	at	your	own	wife	with	love.	The	capacity	disappears.	And	the	same
has	happened	to	her.	The	same	has	happened	to	the	whole	of	humanity.	Then	life
is	 a	 boredom;	 then	 everybody	 is	 just	 waiting	 for	 death;	 then	 there	 are	 people
constantly	thinking	of	committing	suicide.
Marcel	 has	 said	 somewhere	 that	 the	 only	 metaphysical	 problem	 facing
humanity	 is	 suicide.	 And	 it	 is	 so,	 because	 people	 are	 so	 bored.	 It	 is	 simply
amazing	more	people	don’t	commit	suicide,	how	they	go	on	living.	Life	doesn’t
seem	 to	 give	 anything,	 all	 meaning	 seems	 to	 be	 lost,	 but	 still	 people	 go	 on
dragging	 somehow,	 hoping	 that	 some	 day	 some	 miracle	 will	 happen	 and
everything	will	be	put	right.
It	never	happens.	You	have	to	put	it	right;	nobody	else	is	going	to	put	it	right
for	you.	No	Messiah	is	going	to	come,	don’t	wait	for	one.	You	have	to	be	a	light
unto	yourself.
Live	more	 authentically.	 Drop	 the	masks;	 they	 are	 a	 weight	 on	 your	 heart.
Drop	all	falsities.	Be	exposed.	Of	course	it	is	going	to	be	troublesome,	but	that
trouble	 is	 worth	 it	 because	 only	 after	 that	 trouble	 will	 you	 grow	 and	 become
mature.	 And	 then	 nothing	 is	 holding	 back	 life.	 Each	 moment	 life	 reveals	 its
newness,	it	is	a	constant	miracle	happening	all	around	you,	only	you	are	hiding
behind	dead	habits.
Become	a	buddha	if	you	don’t	want	 to	be	bored.	Live	each	moment	as	fully
alert	as	possible,	because	only	in	full	alertness	will	you	be	able	to	drop	the	mask.
You	have	completely	forgotten	what	your	original	face	is.	Even	when	you	stand
before	 the	mirror	 in	 your	 bathroom	 and	 you	 are	 alone,	 nobody	 is	 there.	 Even
standing	before	the	mirror	you	don’t	see	your	original	face	in	the	mirror.	There,
too,	you	go	on	deceiving	yourself.
Existence	is	available	for	those	who	are	available	to	existence.	And	then,	I	tell
you,	there	is	no	boredom.	Life	is	infinite	delight.
Would	 you	 please	 talk	 more	 about	 what	 you	 mean	 by	 intimacy?
Particularly,	 when	 is	 staying	 together	 through	 difficult	 times	 in	 a
marriage	or	partnership	positive	and	when	is	it	negative?
Marriage	 is	 a	 way	 to	 avoid	 intimacy.	 It	 is	 a	 trick	 to	 create	 a	 formal
relationship.	 Intimacy	 is	 informal.	 If	 marriage	 arises	 out	 of	 intimacy,	 it	 is
beautiful	but	if	you	are	hoping	that	intimacy	will	arise	out	of	marriage,	you	are
hoping	 in	 vain.	Of	 course,	 I	 know	 that	many	people,	millions	 of	 people,	 have
settled	for	marriage	rather	than	for	intimacy—because	intimacy	is	growth	and	it
is	painful.
Marriage	 is	 very	 secure.	 It	 is	 safe.	 There	 is	 no	 growth	 in	 it.	One	 is	 simply
stuck.	Marriage	is	a	sexual	arrangement;	intimacy	is	a	search	for	love.	Marriage
is	a	sort	of	prostitution,	a	permanent	sort.	One	has	got	married	to	a	woman	or	to
a	 man;	 it	 is	 a	 permanent	 prostitution.	 The	 arrangement	 is	 economical,	 not
psychological,	not	of	the	heart.
So	 remember,	 if	 marriage	 arises	 out	 of	 intimacy	 then	 it	 is	 beautiful.	 That
means	 that	everybody	should	have	 lived	 together	before	 they	get	married.	The
honeymoon	should	not	happen	after	marriage,	it	should	happen	before	marriage.
One	should	have	lived	the	dark	nights,	the	beautiful	days,	the	sad	moments,	the
happy	moments,	together.	One	should	have	looked	into	each	other’s	eyes	deeply,
into	each	other’s	being.
How	to	decide?	If	your	intimacy	is	helping	you	to	grow	and	to	become	mature
then	it	is	positive	and	good	and	healthy,	wholesome.	If	it	is	destructive	and	it	is
not	allowing	you	to	become	mature,	rather,	it	is	helping	you	to	remain	childish,
immature,	 then	 it	 is	 unhealthy.	 Any	 relationship	 that	 keeps	 you	 childish	 is
destructive.	Get	out	of	it.	Any	relationship	that	gives	you	challenges	to	grow,	to
go	 on	 an	 adventure,	 to	 go	 deeper	 and	 higher	 into	 life.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 that	 a
positive	 partnership	 or	 marriage	 will	 not	 have	 problems,	 it	 will	 have	 more
problems	 than	 the	 negative.	 A	 positive	 relationship	 will	 have	 more	 problems
because	 every	 day	 new	 challenges	 will	 be	 there.	 But	 each	 time	 a	 problem	 is
solved	you	will	have	gone	a	little	higher;	each	time	a	challenge	is	taken	you	will
find	something	has	become	integrated	in	your	being.
A	negative	relationship	has	no	problems,	or	at	the	most,	pseudo-problems,	so-
called	 problems—not	 real	 problems.	 Have	 you	 not	 watched	 it?	 Wives	 and
husbands	fight	over	trivia.	They	are	not	real	problems,	and	even	if	you	fight	over
them	 they	 don’t	 give	 you	 anything,	 they	 don’t	 help	 your	 growth	Watch	wives
and	husbands,	watch	yourself.	You	may	be	a	husband,	a	wife—just	watch.	If	you
are	fighting	over	trivia—small	things	which	don’t	mean	anything	anyway—then
you	will	remain	immature	and	childish.
Real	problems,	authentic	problems,	which	really	have	to	be	faced,	create	great
turmoil	 in	 your	 being;	 they	 bring	 a	 cyclone.	One	 has	 to	 face	 them,	 and	 never
avoid	 them.	And	 the	 trivial	questions	are	an	escape	 from	 the	 real	questions.	A
husband	 and	 wife	 will	 fight	 over	 very	 small	 things:	 which	 film	 to	 go	 to	 and
which	not	to	go	to;	what	color	car	has	to	be	purchased,	what	model,	what	make;
to	what	restaurant	they	are	going	this	evening.	Such	trivia!	These	things	do	not
make	any	difference.	You	are	making	too	much	fuss	about	such	problems	and	if
you	focus	on	them,	your	relationship	is	not	going	to	help	you,	or	give	you	any
integrity,	any	center.	I	will	call	that	relationship	negative.
The	 positive	 relationship	 will	 face	 real	 problems.	 For	 example,	 if	 you	 are
angry	or	 sad,	you	will	be	 sad	 in	 front	of	your	wife,	you	will	not	 smile	a	 false
smile.	And	you	will	say,	“I	am	sad.”	This	has	to	be	faced.	If,	walking	on	the	road
with	 your	 wife,	 you	 see	 a	 beautiful	 woman	 pass	 by	 and	 a	 great	 desire	 and
longing	arises	 in	your	heart,	 you	will	 tell	 your	wife	 that	 this	woman	created	a
great	desire,	 stirred	your	heart.	You	will	not	 avoid	her.	You	will	not	 take	your
eyes	 away	 or	 pretend	 that	 you	 have	 not	 seen	 the	 woman	 at	 all.	Whether	 you
pretend	or	not,	your	wife	has	already	noticed	 it!	 It	 is	 impossible	 for	her	not	 to
know	because	immediately	your	energy,	your	presence,	changes.	These	are	real
problems.
Just	 getting	 married	 to	 a	 woman	 doesn’t	 mean	 that	 you	 are	 no	 longer
interested	 in	 any	 other	 woman.	 In	 fact,	 the	 day	 you	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 any
other	women,	 you	will	 not	 be	 interested	 in	 your	wife	 either.	Why?	For	what?
What	has	your	wife	got	that	is	special?	If	you	are	no	longer	interested	in	women
you	will	not	be	interested	in	your	wife	either.	You	are	in	love	with	her	because
you	are	 in	 love	with	women,	 still.	Your	wife	 is	a	woman.	And	sometimes	you
come	across	another	woman	who	enchants	you.	You	will	say	it	and	you	will	face
the	turmoil	that	will	arise.	It	is	not	trivia,	because	it	will	create	jealousy,	it	will
create	 a	 struggle,	 it	will	 disturb	 all	 peace	 and	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 sleep	 at
night.	The	wife	will	be	throwing	pillows	at	you!
To	be	true	creates	real	problems.	To	be	authentic	creates	real	problems.	And
say	whatsoever	is	the	case.	Never	demur,	never	look	sideways.	Look	straight	and
be	true,	and	help	your	partner	to	be	true.
Yes,	 there	 are	 problems	 in	 real	 intimacy,	more	 problems	 than	 in	 a	 negative
state.	If	you	are	really	intimate	with	your	partner,	how	can	you	avoid	the	fact	that
you	become	interested	in	another	person?	You	have	to	say	it.	That’s	part	of	love,
part	of	intimacy.	You	expose	yourself	totally	and	you	don’t	hold	anything	back.
Even	 if	 during	 the	 night	 you	 dream	 a	 dream	 about	 another	 person,	 in	 the
morning	you	can	relate	it	to	your	partner.
I	have	heard	about	a	 film	director.	During	 the	night	he	started	 talking	 to	his
girlfriend	 in	his	sleep,	and	he	was	 talking	aloud.	He	was	saying	such	beautiful
things,	and	his	wife	woke	up.	She	started	staring	at	him,	listening	hard	to	what
he	was	saying.	When	you	are	married,	even	in	your	dreams	you	remain	afraid	of
your	wife,	so	suddenly	he	woke	up	and	became	afraid.	What	was	he	saying?	He
felt	his	wife	looking	at	him	and	with	great	presence	of	mind,	without	opening	his
eyes	 to	give	any	 indication	 that	he	was	awake,	he	said,	“Cut!	Now	to	 the	next
scene,”	as	if	he	was	directing	a	film!
If	you	really	love	the	woman,	in	the	morning	you	will	tell	her	your	dream,	that
you	made	love	to	another	woman	in	the	night	in	your	dream.	Everything	has	to
be	shared.	The	whole	heart	has	to	be	shared.
Intimacy	means	that	there	is	no	privacy.	You	don’t	carry	anything	private	now,
at	 least	with	 the	person	you	are	 intimate	with,	you	drop	your	privacy.	You	are
nude	 and	 naked—good,	 bad,	 whatsoever	 you	 are,	 you	 open	 your	 heart.	 And
whatever	 the	 cost	you	pay	 for	 it;	whatever	 the	 trouble	you	go	 through	with	 it.
That	brings	growth.
And	you	help	the	other	person	also	to	drop	all	inhibitions,	screens,	masks.	In
an	intimate	relationship	one	comes	to	see	the	original	face	of	the	other	and	one
comes	to	show	one’s	own	original	face.	If	a	relationship	helps	you	to	find	your
original	face	then	it	is	meditative,	then	it	is	spiritual.	If	your	relationship	simply
helps	you	to	create	more	and	more	masks	and	hypocrisies	then	it	is	irreligious.
Try	to	understand	my	definition.	If	my	definition	is	understood	then	out	of	a
hundred	marriages,	ninety-nine	are	 irreligious	because	 they	are	simply	creating
more	and	more	falsity.	From	the	very	beginning	the	falsity	starts.
I	have	heard:
The	minister,	casting	an	appraising	eye	over	the	bridal	couple	before
him	 and	 the	 goodly	 crowd	 come	 to	 witness	 the	 ceremony,	 intoned,	 “If
there	 is	 anyone	 here	 who	 knows	 why	 these	 two	 should	 not	 be	 joined
together	in	wedlock,	let	him	speak	now	or	forever	hold	his	peace.”
“I’ve	got	something	to	say,”	a	voice	rang	out	bold	and	clear.
“You	keep	quiet!”	snapped	the	minister.	“You’re	the	groom.”
From	the	very	beginning!	They	are	not	even	married	yet.	And	that’s	how	the
life	of	a	married	couple	starts.	People	keep	quiet.	They	don’t	say	anything.	They
don’t	 say	 the	 truth	 at	 all.	They	pretend	with	 lies.	They	 smile	when	 they	 don’t
want	to	smile,	they	kiss	when	they	don’t	want	to	kiss.	Naturally,	when	you	kiss
and	you	don’t	want	to,	the	kiss	is	poisonous.	Naturally,	when	you	don’t	want	to
smile	 and	 you	 have	 to	 smile,	 your	 smile	 is	 ugly,	 it	 is	 political.	 And	 then
somehow	one	gets	accustomed	to	these	things,	one	settles	with	the	falsity,	with
the	inauthenticity	of	life.	And	one	consoles	oneself	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways.
“Oh,	we’re	very	happy,”	insisted	the	husband.	“Of	course,	once	in	a
while	my	wife	throws	dishes	at	me.	But	that	doesn’t	change	the	situation
one	 bit,	 because	 if	 she	 hits	 me	 she’s	 happy,	 and	 if	 she	 misses	 me	 I’m
happy!”
One	by	and	by	comes	to	such	an	arrangement:	both	are	happy.
The	car	in	which	the	elderly	couple	were	riding	went	over	the	cliff.	It
was	an	awful	wreck.
“Where	 am	 I?”	 moaned	 the	 man	 when	 he	 opened	 his	 eyes.	 “In
heaven?”
“No,”	said	his	dazed	wife.	“I’m	still	with	you.”
These	settlements	are	hellish.	What	you	know	in	 the	name	of	 relationship	 is
just	a	game	of	falseness	and	hypocrisy.
So	 remember	 it	 as	 a	 criterion:	 if	 you	 are	 growing	 more	 and	 becoming	 an
individual,	 if	 life	is	happening	more	to	you,	if	you	are	becoming	more	open,	if
more	beauty	is	felt	in	existence,	if	more	poetry	is	arising	in	your	heart,	if	more
love	 flows	 through	 you,	 more	 compassion,	 if	 you	 are	 becoming	 more	 aware,
then	 the	 relationship	 is	 good.	 Carry	 on.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 marriage.	 Then	 it	 is
intimacy.
But	 if	 the	 reverse	 is	 happening;	 if	 all	 poetry	 is	 disappearing	 and	 life	 is
becoming	prosaic;	if	all	love	is	disappearing	and	life	is	becoming	just	a	load,	a
dead	load;	if	all	song	is	dying	and	you	are	just	living	as	a	duty,	then	it	is	better	to
escape	from	this	prison.	It	 is	better	for	you	and	it	 is	better	for	 the	partner	with
whom	you	are	living.
I	feel	really	confused.	You	just	keep	on	telling	me,	in	one	way	or	the
other,	 that	 I	 am	a	 complete	 crackpot	 to	be	with	my	boyfriend;	but
there	 is	 still	 something	 so	 strong	 in	 me	 that	 wants	 to	 stay	 in	 this
relationship.	If	it	brings	me	closer	to	really	and	truly	being	myself	to
be	alone	and	without	relationship,	I	am	definitely	not	getting	it.	If	it
means	that	this	relationship	is	getting	in	the	way,	it	hurts	too	much	to
even	feel	it.	What	is	it	that	I	am	still	not	getting?
The	question	is	not	what	you	are	not	getting,	but	that	you	are	getting	too	many
ideas	of	your	own	which	have	nothing	to	do	with	me.	So	let	me	tell	you	clearly
and	simply,	that	I’m	not	against	any	relationship;	and	particularly	you	and	your
boyfriend,	who	fit	 together	so	well!	He’s	a	nutcase,	you	are	a	crackpot—I	will
not	disturb	your	relationship.	Otherwise,	the	nutcase	will	disturb	somebody	else,
the	crackpot	will	disturb	somebody	else,	and	two	more	persons	will	be	disturbed.
Just	 out	 of	 sheer	 compassion	 I	 want	 you	 to	 be	 together,	 to	 cling,	 whatever
happens.	What	more	 can	 happen?	He	 has	 become	 a	 nutcase;	 beyond	 that,	 the
road	comes	to	an	end.	You	are	a	crackpot.	Hang	around	each	other,	it	is	beautiful
company!	Yes,	there	is	fighting,	but	there	are	moments	of	love	too.	You	are	so
attached	to	him,	and	he’s	also	attached	to	you.	It	always	happens	when	nuts	fall
in	love	with	each	other,	then	no	matter	what	hell	they	create	for	each	other	they
remain	together.	That	hell	is	their	heaven.
I’m	 not	 against	 your	 relationship.	 What	 I’m	 saying	 is	 that	 your	 boyfriend
should	get	out	of	being	a	nut	and	become	a	human	being,	and	that	you	should	get
out	of	being	a	crackpot	to	be	a	human	being—to	relate	as	human	beings,	love	as
human	 beings.	 I’m	 the	 last	 person	 to	 disturb	 anybody’s	 love.	 If	 I	 disturb	 it,	 I
disturb	it	only	to	take	you	a	little	higher,	to	take	your	love	to	more	juicy	spaces.
You	 got	 it	 all	 wrong,	 but	 that	 is	 understandable.	 I	 was	 waiting	 for	 your
question.	I	could	have	written	the	question	myself,	because	I	knew	what	would
be	going	on	in	these	two	strange	people’s	minds.	And	you	yourself	reported	to
me	that	since	your	boyfriend	had	gone	to	Goa,	you	enjoyed	such	peace	and	joy
in	those	weeks.
When	he	 informed	you	 that	 he	was	 coming	back	 in	 a	week,	 he	 had	not	 yet
come,	but	you	started	retraining	yourself.	You	had	to	be	ready	to	receive	him,	so
you	started	becoming	miserable.	In	those	seven	days	while	you	were	waiting	for
him	to	come	back	you	again	lost	all	joy,	all	peace.	Now	that	he	is	here,	you	are
again	playing	your	old	games,	which	are	destructive	to	both	of	you.
I	would	not	like	to	separate	you,	but	I	would	like	you	to	drop	these	ideas	of
being	a	crackpot,	or	being	a	nut.	These	are	dangerous	ideas,	and	if	you	carry	a
certain	idea	too	long,	it	starts	becoming	a	reality.	You	create	your	reality	around
yourself	with	your	ideas—it	is	a	projection.
Simply	renounce	your	past	and	meet	with	each	other	as	strangers.	Say	to	your
boyfriend,	 “Hello,”	 and	 don’t	 repeat	 inside	 your	 mind	 that,	 “This	 is	 that
nutcase.”	Avoid	that.	Nutcases	are	not	bad	people,	but	after	all	they	are	nuts.	You
fit	together	very	well,	but	the	fit	should	be	joyous.	It	should	be	a	great	blessing;
you	should	help	each	other	for	your	growth.
Fighting	should	stop.	You	are	soft	in	your	heart,	and	he	is	also	very	soft	in	his
heart.	 I	 know	many	 kinds	 of	 nuts	 and	 they	 are	 all	 soft	 inside.	 Just	 drop	 your
coverings,	your	personalities,	and	don’t	clash	with	each	other.
I	am	not	against	your	relationship,	but	a	relationship	is	not	meant	to	be	just	for
clashing	with	each	other.	Fighting	 is	not	 love.	Once	 in	a	while	you	are	 loving,
but	that	is	just	so	that	you	can	go	on	fighting.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 fight	 at	 all.	 And	 whenever	 you	 are	 feeling	 too	 full	 of
energy,	you	can	do	Dynamic	Meditation.	Why	do	you	 think	 I	have	 created	 all
these	meditations	for	all	kinds	of	nuts?—so	they	can	enjoy	one	hour	of	being	a
nut,	with	a	great	 idea	 that	 they	are	doing	a	spiritual	meditation!	 It	 is	simply	 to
throw	out	their	nuttiness	without	throwing	it	on	anybody	else,	so	that	with	others
they	can	have	a	cooler,	more	peaceful,	loving	relationship.
I	am	not	against	any	love,	but	if	love	creates	hell,	then	I	will	not	suggest	that
you	 go	 on	 living	 in	 misery.	 Then	 it	 is	 better	 for	 both	 of	 you—if	 you	 cannot
create	 a	 beautiful	 space	 between	 you,	 then	 perhaps	 you	 are	 not	 born	 for	 each
other.	Give	it	a	try,	and	beware	of	the	fact	that	if	you	remain	grumpy,	your	face
continuously	sad,	then	I	am	going	to	suggest	that	you	part	from	each	other.
You	 are	 simply	 a	 nut.	 He	 is	 a	 very	 qualified	 person,	 a	 coconut—he	 will
understand	me.
There	is	no	need	to	lose	hope.	Give	it	a	try,	but	this	time	make	it	a	point	that
either	 your	 life	 becomes	 peaceful	 and	 joyous,	 or	with	 peace	 and	 joy,	 you	 part
from	one	another.
We	are	all	strangers	in	the	world.	We	meet	suddenly,	accidentally,	on	the	road.
It	 is	 good	 if	we	can	help	 each	other	 to	be	more	 authentic,	more	 sincere,	more
loving;	to	be	more	meditative,	to	be	more	alert,	to	be	more	aware.	Then	our	love
relationship	 is	 a	 spiritual	 phenomenon.	 But	 if	 we	 are	 simply	 destroying	 each
other,	this	is	not	even	friendship;	this	is	sheer	enmity.
So	you	have	to	decide.	You	both	sit	together,	outside	in	the	open—not	in	your
room,	because	there	the	fight	starts.	Sit	outside	where	everybody	is	passing	by,
so	you	cannot	fight.	Have	a	nice	conversation.	Lovers	forget	completely	how	to
have	 a	 nice	 conversation;	 they	 all	 start	 speaking	 Marathi.	 Have	 you	 heard
Marathi?	 I	 cannot	 conceive	 that	 you	 can	 love	 anybody,	 talking	 in	Marathi;	 it
always	sounds	like	you	are	fighting.	Just	at	the	opposite	pole	is	another	language
in	India,	Bengali—you	cannot	fight	in	it.	Even	if	you	are	fighting,	it	looks	as	if
you	are	having	a	beautiful	conversation.
Have	a	good,	decisive	conversation,	and	follow	a	very	simple	rule:	that	we	are
together	to	help	each	other,	not	to	destroy	each	other;	to	create	each	other,	not	to
kill	 each	 other.	 Then	 everything	 is	 perfectly	 okay.	 Nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 you,
separately,	and	nothing	 is	wrong	 in	Om,	separately.	But	 together	you	suddenly
both	become	warriors.
	
When	I	say	that	your	love	should	be	a	let-go,	a	non-doing,	a	freedom,	I	mean	it
should	not	be	something	forced.	 It	 should	not	be	something	dependent	on	 law,
on	social	conventions.	I	mean	that	the	only	binding	force	between	two	lovers	is
simply	love,	and	nothing	else.	This	love	may	go	a	long	way	or	it	may	not	go	a
long	way.	This	love	may	last	for	your	whole	life,	or	it	may	be	finished	tomorrow.
That’s	what	I	mean	by	let-go.
There	are	people	who	want	licentiousness.	That	is	not	my	meaning	of	let-go.	I
am	not	 saying	you	should	go	on	changing	your	partners	every	day.	Again	 that
will	be	forced.	That	would	be	moving	from	the	one	extreme	of	marriage,	where
you	cannot	change	the	partner,	to	the	other	extreme	that	you	have	to	change	your
partner.
What	 I	 have	 said	 is,	 let	 it	 be	 a	 freedom.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 be	 together	 it	 is
perfectly	beautiful.	The	day	you	want	to	part,	part	lovingly,	with	gratefulness	to
each	other	for	all	those	beautiful	moments	that	you	have	given	to	each	other.
The	parting	 should	be	 as	beautiful	 as	 your	meeting.	 It	 should	 even	be	more
beautiful,	because	you	have	lived	for	so	long	together,	you	have	grown	roots	into
each	 other	 even	 though	 now	 you	 are	 deciding	 to	 leave	 one	 another.	 But	 the
memories	will	haunt	you.	You	have	loved	each	other;	it	does	not	matter	that	now
you	feel	it	is	difficult	to	be	together,	there	was	a	time	you	wanted	to	be	together
for	 lifetimes.	So	part	without	 any	 conflict,	without	 any	quarrel.	You	were	 two
strangers	 who	 met,	 and	 again	 you	 are	 becoming	 strangers	 but	 with	 a	 great
treasure	that	happened	between	the	two	of	you.	You	have	to	be	grateful	to	each
other	while	parting.
But	if	the	love	continues,	I	have	not	said	that	you	have	to	break	it.	I	have	said
that	you	have	not	to	do	anything	against	it.	If	it	goes	on	for	your	whole	life,	until
you	are	in	your	grave,	that	too	is	good.	And	if	it	lasts	only	for	one	night	and	in
the	 morning	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 not	 for	 each	 other,	 but	 still	 you	 gave	 a
beautiful	night	to	each	other,	you	have	to	be	thankful	for	it.
Many	 people	 have	misunderstood	me.	 They	 think	 that	 I	 am	 telling	 people,
“Change	your	partners	as	quickly	and	as	often	as	possible.”	I	am	not	saying	that.
I	 am	simply	 saying	 that	 as	 long	as	 love	 is	 the	only	binding	 force,	be	 together.
The	moment	you	both	start	feeling	that	something	has	become	past,	that	it	is	no
longer	present…you	can	drag	on,	but	it	will	be	deceiving	each	other.	It	is	ugly	to
deceive	a	man	you	have	loved;	it	is	ugly	to	deceive	a	woman	you	have	loved.	It
is	better	to	be	honest	and	say,	“This	is	the	time	we	should	separate,	because	the
love	has	gone	and	we	are	not	capable	of	holding	on	to	love.”
There	 are	 things	which	come	and	go	of	 their	own	accord.	When	you	 fell	 in
love	with	someone,	it	was	not	you,	you	did	not	decide	it.	Suddenly	it	happened;
you	could	not	have	given	a	reason	for	why	it	happened.	You	can	simply	say,	“I
found	myself	being	in	love.”	Just	remember	the	first	meeting,	and	also	remember
the	way	love	comes;	in	the	same	way,	it	goes.	One	day,	suddenly	in	the	morning
you	wake	up	and	you	find	that	 the	love	has	left.	The	husband	is	 there,	you	are
there,	but	something	between	you	that	was	a	bridge,	a	constant	flow	of	energy,
has	 disappeared.	 You	 are	 two,	 but	 you	 are	 alone	 and	 the	 other	 is	 alone.	 That
“together”	is	no	longer	there,	and	the	mystery	that	was	keeping	it	together	is	not
in	your	hands.	You	cannot	force	it	to	come	back.
Millions	 of	 couples	 are	 doing	 that,	 hoping	 that	 perhaps	 it	 will	 come	 back,
hoping	 that	 praying	may	 help,	 going	 to	 church	may	 help,	 getting	 somebody’s
blessings	may	help,	some	marriage	counselor	may	help—but	nothing	is	going	to
help.	Even	if	in	some	way	you	can	catch	hold	of	the	same	man	again,	you	will
find	 that	 he	 is	 not	 the	 same	man,	 and	 he	will	 find	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 same
woman.	It	is	better	to	become	strangers	again.	What	is	wrong	in	it?	Back	when
you	 were	 strangers,	 nothing	 was	 wrong.	 Back	 when	 you	 did	 not	 know	 the
woman,	 did	 not	 know	 the	 man,	 everything	 was	 good.	 Now	 again	 that	 has
happened	and	you	are	again	strangers.	It	is	nothing	new!	You	should	have	been
aware	from	the	very	beginning	that	something	mysterious	came	in.	You	did	not
bring	it	in.	Naturally,	it	can	go	any	moment	and	you	cannot	hold	it	back.
All	depends	on	love.	If	it	remains	a	long	time,	good.	If	it	remains	only	for	a
few	 moments,	 that	 too	 is	 good	 because	 love	 is	 good.	 The	 length	 of	 it	 is
meaningless.	It	is	possible	to	have,	in	just	a	few	minutes,	more	intensity	of	love
than	you	can	have	in	a	few	years.	And	that	intensity	will	give	you	something	of
the	unknown,	which	so	many	years	will	simply	dilute.	So	the	length	is	irrelevant,
the	depth	is	the	only	thing	to	be	thought	about.
While	 you	 are	 in	 love,	 be	 totally	 immersed	 in	 it.	And	when	 it	 is	 gone,	 say
good-bye	and	be	totally	finished	with	it.	Don’t	let	the	idea	linger	in	your	mind.
There	are	many	strangers	available	in	the	world—who	knows?	Love	has	left	you
simply	so	that	you	can	find	a	better	stranger.
Life’s	ways	are	strange.	Trust	life.	You	may	find	somebody	who	proves	to	be
a	 tremendous	 love,	 and	 then	 you	 will	 see	 that	 your	 first	 love	 was	 nothing
compared	to	it.
And	 remember,	 some	day	 this	 greater	 love	 can	 also	 disappear.	But	 trust	 the
life	 which	 has	 been	 giving	 you	 gifts	 again	 and	 again	 without	 your	 asking.
Remain	available.
The	 world	 is	 so	 full	 of	 beautiful	 people;	 there	 is	 no	 scarcity.	 And	 every
individual	has	something	unique	which	nobody	else	has.	Every	individual	gives
to	his	 love	a	color,	a	poetry,	a	music	 that	 is	his	own,	and	 that	nobody	else	can
give.
Trust	life—that	is	my	basic	understanding,	to	trust	life	because	we	are	born	of
life,	we	are	children	of	life.
Trust	life.	Life	has	never	betrayed	anyone.	Perhaps	you	have	passed	through
one	 class	 and	 you	 have	 to	 enter	 into	 a	 second	 class,	 a	 higher	 grade,	 a	 more
delicate	 love,	 a	more	 sophisticated	 phenomenon—who	knows?	 Just	 keep	 your
heart	open,	and	life	never	frustrates	anybody.
PART	III
From	Relationship	to
		Relating—Love	as	a
					State	of	Being
The	capacity	to	be	alone	is	the	capacity	to	love.	It	may
look	paradoxical	 to	you,	but	 it	 is	not.	 It	 is	an	existential	 truth:
only	those	people	who	are	capable	of	being	alone	are	capable
of	love,	of	sharing,	of	going	into	the	deepest	core	of	the	other
person—without	 possessing	 the	 other,	 without	 becoming
dependent	on	the	other,	without	reducing	the	other	to	a	thing,
and	 without	 becoming	 addicted	 to	 the	 other.	 They	 allow	 the
other	 absolute	 freedom,	 because	 they	 know	 that	 if	 the	 other
leaves,	they	will	be	as	happy	as	they	are	now.	Their	happiness
cannot	 be	 taken	 by	 the	 other,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 give	 by	 the
other.
Then	why	 do	 they	want	 to	 be	 together?	 It	 is	 no	 longer	 a
need;	it	is	a	luxury.	Try	to	understand	it.	Real	persons	love	each
other	 as	 a	 luxury;	 it	 is	 not	 a	 need.	 They	 enjoy	 sharing:	 they
have	 so	much	 joy,	 they	 would	 like	 to	 pour	 it	 into	 somebody.
And	they	know	how	to	play	their	life	as	a	solo	instrument.
The	 solo	 flute	 player	 knows	how	 to	 enjoy	his	 flute	 alone.
And	 if	 he	comes	and	 finds	a	 tabla	player,	 a	 solo	 tabla	player,
they	will	enjoy	being	together	and	creating	a	harmony	between
the	 flute	 and	 the	 tabla.	 Both	will	 enjoy	 it:	 they	will	 both	 pour
their	richness	into	each	other.
“LOVE”	IS	A	VERB
Love	is	existential;	fear	is	only	the	absence	of	love.	And	the	problem
with	 any	 absence	 is	 that	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	directly	 about	 it.	 Fear	 is	 like
darkness.	What	 can	 you	 do	 about	 darkness	 directly?	 You	 cannot	 drop	 it,	 you
cannot	 throw	 it	 out,	 you	 cannot	 bring	 it	 in.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 relate	 with
darkness	without	 bringing	 light	 in.	The	way	 to	 darkness	 goes	 via	 light.	 If	 you
want	darkness,	put	the	light	off;	if	you	don’t	want	darkness,	put	the	light	on.	But
you	will	have	to	do	something	with	light,	not	with	darkness	at	all.
The	same	is	true	about	love	and	fear:	love	is	light,	fear	is	darkness.	The	person
who	becomes	obsessed	with	fear	will	never	be	able	to	resolve	the	problem.	It	is
like	wrestling	with	darkness:	you	are	bound	to	be	exhausted	sooner	or	later,	tired
and	defeated.	And	the	miracle	is,	defeated	by	something	which	is	not	there	at	all!
And	when	one	is	defeated,	one	certainly	feels	how	powerful	the	darkness	is,	how
powerful	 the	 fear	 is,	 how	 powerful	 the	 ignorance	 is,	 how	 powerful	 the
unconscious	is.	They	are	not	powerful	at	all,	they	don’t	exist	in	the	first	place.
Never	fight	with	the	non-existential.	That’s	where	all	the	ancient	religions	got
lost.	Once	you	start	fighting	with	the	non-existential	you	are	doomed.	Your	small
river	of	consciousness	will	be	lost	in	the	non-existential	desert,	and	it	is	infinite.
So	don’t	make	a	problem	out	of	fear.	Love	is	the	question.	Something	can	be
done	about	love	immediately;	there	is	no	need	to	wait	or	postpone.	Start	loving!
And	it	is	a	natural	gift	from	existence	to	you,	or	from	God,	or	from	the	whole,
whichever	term	you	like.	If	you	are	brought	up	in	a	religious	way,	then	God;	if
you	 are	 not	 brought	 up	 in	 a	 religious	 way,	 then	 the	 whole,	 the	 universe,
existence.
Remember,	love	is	born	with	you;	it	is	your	intrinsic	quality.	All	that	is	needed
is	to	give	it	a	way—to	make	a	passage	for	it,	to	let	it	flow,	to	allow	it	to	happen.
We	are	all	blocking	it,	holding	it	back.	We	are	so	miserly	about	love,	for	the
simple	reason	that	we	have	been	taught	a	certain	economics.	That	economics	is
perfectly	right	about	the	outside	world:	if	you	have	just	so	much	money	and	you
go	on	giving	 that	money	 to	people,	 soon	you	will	 be	 a	 beggar.	By	 just	 giving
away	money	you	will	 lose	 it.	This	 economics,	 this	 arithmetic	 has	 entered	 into
our	blood,	bones,	and	marrow.	It	is	true	about	the	outside	world,	and	nothing	is
wrong	 in	 it,	but	 it	 is	not	 true	about	 the	 inner	 journey.	There,	a	 totally	different
arithmetic	 functions:	 the	more	you	give,	 the	more	you	have;	 the	 less	you	give,
the	 less	you	have.	 If	you	don’t	give	at	 all	 you	will	 lose	your	natural	qualities.
They	will	become	stagnant,	closed;	they	will	go	underground.	Finding	no	means
of	expression	they	will	shrink	and	die.
It	is	like	a	musician:	if	he	goes	on	playing	on	his	guitar	or	on	his	flute,	more
and	more	music	will	 come.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 by	 playing	 on	 the	 flute	 he	 is	 losing
music—he	is	gaining.	It	is	like	a	dancer:	the	more	you	dance,	the	more	skillful
you	become.	It	is	like	painting:	the	more	you	paint,	the	better	the	paintings	you
create.
Once,	 while	 Picasso	 was	 painting,	 a	 critic	 and	 friend	 stopped	 him	 in	 the
middle	 and	 said,	 “One	 question	 has	 been	 bothering	 me	 and	 I	 cannot	 wait
anymore,	 I	 cannot	 contain	 it.	 I	 want	 to	 know:	 you	 have	 painted	 hundreds	 of
paintings;	which	is	your	best	painting?”
Picasso	said,	“This	one	that	I	am	painting	right	now.”
The	 critic	 said,	 “This	 one?	 What	 about	 the	 others	 that	 you	 have	 painted
before?”
Picasso	said,	“They	are	all	contained	in	it.	And	the	next	one	that	I	do	will	be
even	better	 than	 this,	because	 the	more	you	paint,	 the	greater	 is	your	skill,	 the
greater	is	your	art.”
Such	 is	 love,	 such	 is	 joy—share	 it!	 In	 the	 beginning	 it	will	 come	 only	 like
dewdrops,	because	your	miserliness	has	been	in	existence	for	so	long,	it	is	very
ancient.	 But	 once	 even	 dewdrops	 of	 love	 have	 been	 shared,	 you	 will	 soon
become	 capable	 of	 sharing	 the	 whole	 oceanic	 flood	 of	 your	 being,	 and	 you
contain	infinities.
Once	you	have	known	the	higher	mathematics	of	giving	and	gaining,	you	will
find	 that	 just	 by	 giving	 you	 gain.	 Not	 that	 something	 is	 returned;	 in	 the	 very
giving	you	are	becoming	richer.	Then	love	starts	spreading,	radiating.	And	one
day	you	will	be	 surprised.	Where	 is	 the	 fear?	Even	 if	you	want	 to	 find	 it,	you
will	not	be	able	to	find	it	at	all.
	
Love	is	not	a	relationship.	Love	relates,	but	it	is	not	a	relationship.	A	relationship
is	 something	 finished.	 A	 relationship	 is	 a	 noun;	 the	 full	 stop	 has	 come,	 the
honeymoon	is	over.	Now	there	is	no	joy,	no	enthusiasm,	now	all	is	finished.	You
can	 carry	 it	 on,	 just	 to	 keep	 your	 promises.	 You	 can	 carry	 it	 on	 because	 it	 is
comfortable,	convenient,	cozy.	You	can	carry	it	on	because	there	is	nothing	else
to	do.	You	can	carry	 it	on	because	 if	you	disrupt	 it,	 it	 is	going	 to	create	much
trouble	for	you.
Relationship	 means	 something	 complete,	 finished,	 closed.	 Love	 is	 never	 a
relationship;	love	is	relating.	It	is	always	a	river,	flowing,	unending.	Love	knows
no	 full	 stop;	 the	 honeymoon	 begins	 but	 never	 ends.	 It	 is	 not	 like	 a	 novel	 that
starts	at	a	certain	point	and	ends	at	a	certain	point.	It	is	an	ongoing	phenomenon.
Lovers	end,	love	continues.	It	is	a	continuum.	It	is	a	verb,	not	a	noun.
Why	do	we	reduce	the	beauty	of	relating	to	relationship?	Why	are	we	in	such
a	hurry?	Because	to	relate	is	insecure,	and	relationship	is	a	security,	relationship
has	 a	 certainty.	 Relating	 is	 just	 a	 meeting	 of	 two	 strangers,	 maybe	 just	 an
overnight	stay	and	in	the	morning	we	say	good-bye.	Who	knows	what	is	going
to	happen	tomorrow?	And	we	are	so	afraid	that	we	want	to	make	it	certain,	we
want	 to	make	 it	 predictable.	We	would	 like	 tomorrow	 to	 be	 according	 to	 our
ideas;	we	don’t	allow	it	freedom	to	have	its	own	say.	So	we	immediately	reduce
every	verb	to	a	noun.
You	are	in	love	with	a	woman	or	a	man	and	immediately	you	start	thinking	of
getting	married.	Make	 it	 a	 legal	 contract.	Why?	How	 does	 the	 law	 come	 into
love?	The	law	comes	into	love	because	love	is	not	there.	It	is	only	a	fantasy,	and
you	know	the	fantasy	will	disappear.	Before	it	disappears,	settle	down.	Before	it
disappears,	do	something	so	it	becomes	impossible	to	separate.
In	 a	 better	 world,	 with	 more	 meditative	 people,	 with	 a	 little	 more
enlightenment	spread	over	the	earth,	people	will	love,	love	immensely,	but	their
love	will	remain	a	relating,	not	a	relationship.	And	I	am	not	saying	that	their	love
will	be	only	momentary.	There	is	every	possibility	their	love	may	go	deeper	than
your	love,	may	have	a	higher	quality	of	intimacy,	may	have	something	more	of
poetry	and	more	of	godliness	in	it.	There	is	every	possibility	that	their	love	may
last	 longer	 than	 your	 so-called	 relationships	 ever	 last.	 But	 it	 will	 not	 be
guaranteed	 by	 the	 law,	 by	 the	 court,	 by	 the	 policeman.	 The	 guarantee	will	 be
inner.	It	will	be	a	commitment	from	the	heart,	it	will	be	a	silent	communion.
If	you	enjoy	being	with	somebody,	you	would	like	to	enjoy	it	more	and	more.
If	 you	 enjoy	 the	 intimacy,	 you	 would	 like	 to	 explore	 the	 intimacy	 more	 and
more.	And	there	are	a	few	flowers	of	love	that	bloom	only	after	long	intimacies.
There	are	seasonal	 flowers	 too;	within	six	weeks	 they	are	 there	 in	 the	sun,	but
within	six	weeks	again	they	are	gone	forever.	There	are	flowers	which	take	years
to	bloom,	and	there	are	flowers	that	keep	blooming	for	many	years	to	come.	The
longer	it	takes,	the	deeper	it	goes.
But	it	has	to	be	a	commitment	from	one	heart	to	another	heart.	It	has	not	even
to	 be	 verbalized,	 because	 to	 verbalize	 it	 is	 to	 profane	 it.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 a	 silent
commitment:	eye	to	eye,	heart	to	heart,	being	to	being.	It	has	to	be	understood,
not	said.
It	is	so	ugly	seeing	people	going	to	the	church	or	the	court	to	get	married.	It	is
so	ugly,	so	inhuman.	It	simply	shows	they	can’t	trust	themselves,	they	trust	the
authorities	more	than	they	trust	their	own	inner	voice.	It	shows	that	because	they
can’t	trust	their	love,	they	trust	the	law.
Forget	 relationships	 and	 learn	 how	 to	 relate.	Once	 you	 are	 in	 a	 relationship
you	start	taking	each	other	for	granted.	That’s	what	destroys	all	love	affairs.	The
woman	thinks	she	knows	the	man,	the	man	thinks	he	knows	the	woman.	Nobody
knows!	It	is	impossible	to	know	the	other,	the	other	remains	a	mystery.	And	to
take	the	other	for	granted	is	insulting,	disrespectful.
To	 think	 that	you	know	your	partner	 is	very	ungrateful.	How	can	you	know
the	 woman?	 How	 can	 you	 know	 the	 man?	 They	 are	 processes,	 they	 are	 not
things.	The	woman	that	you	knew	yesterday	is	not	 there	 today.	So	much	water
has	gone	down	the	Ganges;	she	is	somebody	else,	totally	different.	Relate	again,
start	again,	don’t	take	it	for	granted.
And	 the	 man	 who	 you	 slept	 with	 last	 night,	 look	 at	 his	 face	 again	 in	 the
morning.	 He	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 same	 person,	 so	 much	 has	 changed.	 So	 much,
incalculably	much,	 has	 changed!	That	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 thing	 and	 a
person.	The	furniture	in	the	room	is	the	same,	but	the	man	and	the	woman,	they
are	 no	 longer	 the	 same.	 Explore	 again,	 start	 again.	 That’s	 what	 I	 mean	 by
relating.
Relating	 means	 you	 are	 always	 starting,	 you	 are	 always	 trying	 to	 become
acquainted.	Again	and	again,	you	are	introducing	yourself	to	each	other.	You	are
trying	 to	 see	 the	 many	 facets	 of	 the	 other’s	 personality.	 You	 are	 trying	 to
penetrate	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 his	 realm	 of	 inner	 feelings,	 into	 the	 deep
recesses	 of	 her	 being.	 You	 are	 trying	 to	 unravel	 a	 mystery	 which	 cannot	 be
unraveled.
That	is	the	joy	of	love:	the	exploration	of	consciousness.
And	 if	 you	 relate,	 and	 don’t	 reduce	 it	 to	 a	 relationship,	 then	 the	 other	 will
become	 a	mirror	 to	 you.	 Exploring	 the	 other,	 unawares	 you	will	 be	 exploring
yourself	 too.	Getting	deeper	 into	 the	other,	 knowing	his	 feelings,	his	 thoughts,
his	deeper	stirrings,	you	will	be	knowing	your	own	deeper	stirrings	too.	Lovers
become	mirrors	to	each	other,	and	then	love	becomes	a	meditation.
Relationship	is	ugly,	relating	is	beautiful.
In	relationship	both	persons	become	blind	to	each	other.	Just	think,	how	long
has	it	been	since	you	saw	your	lover	eye	to	eye?	How	long	has	it	been	since	you
looked	at	your	partner?	Maybe	years!	Who	looks	at	one’s	own	wife?	You	have
already	 taken	 it	 for	granted	 that	you	know	her.	What	more	 is	 there	 to	 look	at?
You	are	more	interested	in	strangers	than	in	the	people	you	know;	you	know	the
whole	 topography	 of	 their	 bodies,	 you	 know	 how	 they	 respond,	 you	 know
everything	 that	 has	 happened	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 again	 and	 again.	 It	 is	 a
repetitive	circle.
It	is	not	so,	it	is	not	really	so.	Nothing	ever	repeats;	everything	is	new	every
day.	 Just	 your	 eyes	 become	 old,	 your	 assumptions	 become	 old,	 your	 mirror
gathers	dust	and	you	become	incapable	of	reflecting	the	other.
Hence	 I	 say	 relate.	 By	 saying	 relate,	 I	 mean	 remain	 continuously	 on	 a
honeymoon.	 Go	 on	 searching	 and	 seeking	 each	 other,	 finding	 new	 ways	 of
loving	each	other,	finding	new	ways	of	being	with	each	other.	And	each	person
is	 such	 an	 infinite	mystery,	 inexhaustible,	 unfathomable,	 that	 it	 is	 not	 possible
that	you	can	ever	say,	“I	have	known	her,”	or,	“I	have	known	him.”	At	the	most
you	can	say,	“I	have	tried	my	best,	but	the	mystery	remains	a	mystery.”
In	fact	the	more	you	know,	the	more	mysterious	the	other	becomes.	Then	love
is	a	constant	adventure.
COUPLES	COUNSELING
Insights	for	Living	and	Growing	in	Love
Editor’s	 note:	 The	 following	 selections	 are	 taken	 from	 the	 evening
meetings	where	Osho	spoke	directly	with	one	or	both	partners	 in	a
couple,	or	with	individuals	who	had	come	to	ask	him	for	insight	into
their	problems	in	relationships.
When	Telepathy	Doesn’t	Work
It	almost	always	happens	that	couples	don’t	make	things	clear	to	each	other.	You
hope	that	the	other	will	understand,	and	the	same	is	the	case	with	the	other:	he	or
she	 thinks	 you	 will	 understand.	 Nobody	 understands!	 There	 is	 no
communication,	the	problems	have	never	been	put	forward	clearly.	You	have	to
put	 things	 clearly:	 “I	 am	not	 interfering	with	you,	you	can	be	who	you	are—I
love	you	and	I	will	go	on	loving	you—but	what	about	me?”	Then	some	way	can
be	found	to	work	out	the	difficulties.	You	can	remain	together	and	still	you	can
have	your	individuality	and	your	freedom.	If	both	partners	really	love	each	other,
then	they	will	be	able	to	deal	with	the	problem.	But	what	really	happens	is	that
we	never	make	 things	clear	 to	each	other.	We	go	on	hoping	 that	 the	other	will
know	 telepathically.	 Nobody	 knows	 telepathically!	 The	 other	 is	 not	 a
clairvoyant,	 you	 have	 to	 put	 it	 exactly:	 “two	 plus	 two	 is	 four”—like	 that.	But
what	happens	is	that	the	real	problem	is	not	talked	about.
Understanding	the	Need	for	Space
Create	 understanding,	 talk	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 understand	 that	 sometimes	 the
other	needs	his	space.	And	this	is	a	problem:	it	may	not	happen	at	the	same	time
for	both	of	you.	Sometimes	you	want	to	be	with	your	partner,	and	he	wants	to	be
alone—nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	Then	you	have	to	understand	and	leave	him
alone.	Sometimes	you	want	to	be	alone	but	he	wants	to	come	to	you—then	tell
him	that	you	are	helpless,	but	you	need	your	space!
Just	create	more	and	more	understanding.	That’s	what	lovers	miss:	love	they
have	 enough,	 but	 understanding	 none,	 not	 at	 all.	 That’s	 why	 on	 the	 rocks	 of
misunderstanding	their	love	dies.	Love	cannot	live	alone	without	understanding.
Alone,	love	is	very	foolish;	with	understanding,	love	can	live	a	long	life,	a	great
life—of	many	 joys	 shared,	 of	many	beautiful	moments	 shared,	 of	 great	 poetic
experiences.	But	that	happens	only	through	understanding.
Love	can	give	you	a	small	honeymoon,	but	that’s	all.	Only	understanding	can
give	you	deep	intimacy.	Then,	even	some	day	if	you	separate,	the	understanding
will	be	with	both	of	you,	and	that	will	be	a	gift	of	your	love	to	each	other.	Lovers
can	separate,	but	the	understanding	that	has	been	gained	through	the	other,	in	the
company	of	the	other,	will	always	be	with	you.	That	will	remain	as	a	gift,	there
can	be	no	other	gift.	If	you	love	a	person,	the	only	valuable	gift	that	you	can	give
to	him	is	some	quantity	of	understanding.
Dealing	with	Negative	Feelings
Love	 is	 always	 beautiful	 in	 the	 beginning	 because	 you	 don’t	 bring	 your
destructive	 energies	 into	 it.	 In	 the	 beginning	 you	 bring	 your	 positive	 energies
into	 it;	 both	 pool	 their	 energies	 positively,	 the	 thing	 goes	 simply	 fantastically.
But	then	by	and	by	the	negative	energies	will	start	overflowing;	you	cannot	hold
them	back	 forever.	And	once	you	have	 finished	with	your	positive	energy,	 the
honeymoon	is	over	and	then	comes	the	negative	part.	Then	hell	opens	its	doors
and	 one	 cannot	 understand	 what	 has	 happened.	 Such	 a	 beautiful	 relationship,
why	is	it	on	the	rocks?
If	 one	 is	 alert	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 it	 can	 be	 saved.	 Pour	 your	 positive
energies	into	it,	but	remember	that	sooner	or	later	the	negative	will	start	coming
up.	And	when	 the	 negative	 starts	 coming	 in,	 you	 have	 to	 release	 the	 negative
energy	alone.	Go	 into	a	 room	by	yourself	and	 release	 the	negative;	 there	 is	no
need	to	throw	it	on	the	other	person.
If	you	want	 to	 scream	and	 shout	 and	be	angry,	go	 into	a	 room	and	 shut	 the
door—shout,	be	angry,	beat	the	pillow.	Because	nobody	should	be	so	violent	as
to	throw	things	on	other	people.	They	have	not	done	anything	wrong	to	you,	so
why	should	you	throw	things	on	them?	It	 is	better	 to	 throw	all	 that	 is	negative
into	the	dustbin.	If	you	remain	alert,	you	will	be	surprised	to	see	that	 it	can	be
done;	and	once	the	negative	is	released,	again	the	positive	is	overflowing.
The	 negative	 can	 be	 released	 together	 only	much	 later	 on	 in	 a	 relationship,
when	the	relationship	has	become	very	well	established.	And	then	too	it	should
be	done	only	as	a	therapeutic	measure.	When	the	two	partners	of	a	relationship
have	become	very	alert,	very	positive,	have	become	consolidated	as	one	being
and	are	able	now	to	tolerate—and	not	only	tolerate	but	use	the	other’s	negativity
—they	 have	 to	 come	 to	 an	 agreement	 that	 now	 they	will	 be	 negative	 together
also,	as	a	therapeutic	measure.
Then	too	my	suggestion	is	to	let	it	be	very	conscious,	not	unconscious;	let	it
be	 very	 deliberate.	Make	 it	 a	 point	 that	 every	 night	 for	 one	 hour	 you	will	 be
negative	 with	 each	 other—let	 it	 be	 a	 game—rather	 than	 being	 negative
anywhere,	any	time.	Because	people	are	not	so	alert—for	twenty-four	hours	they
are	not	alert—but	for	one	hour	you	can	both	sit	together	and	be	negative.	Then	it
will	 be	 a	 game,	 it	will	 be	 like	group	 therapy!	After	 one	hour	you	 are	 finished
with	 it	 and	 you	 don’t	 carry	 the	 hangover,	 you	 don’t	 bring	 it	 into	 your
relationship.
The	 first	 step:	 the	 negative	 should	 be	 released	 alone.	 The	 second	 step:	 the
negative	should	be	released	at	a	particular	time	with	the	agreement	that	you	are
both	going	to	release	the	negative.	Only	at	a	third	stage	can	one	really	become
natural,	and	then	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	to	harm	the	relationship	or	hurt	the
other.	Then	you	can	be	both	negative	 and	positive,	 and	both	 are	beautiful,	 but
only	at	the	third	stage.
At	 some	 point	 in	 the	 first	 stage	 you	 will	 start	 feeling	 that	 now	 your	 anger
comes	up	no	longer.	You	sit	before	the	pillow,	and	the	anger	does	not	come.	It
will	come	for	months,	but	one	day	you	will	find	that	 it	 is	no	longer	flowing,	it
has	become	meaningless,	you	cannot	be	angry	alone.	Then	the	first	stage	is	over.
But	wait	for	the	other	person	also	to	feel	whether	the	first	stage	is	over	or	not.	If
your	partner’s	first	stage	is	also	complete,	then	the	second	stage	starts.	Then	for
one	or	two	hours—whether	morning	or	evening,	you	can	decide—you	set	a	time
to	 express	 your	 negative	 feelings,	 deliberately.	Take	 it	 as	 a	 psychodrama,	 it	 is
impersonal.	You	don’t	hit	hard—you	hit,	but	still	you	don’t	hit	the	person.	In	fact
you	are	simply	throwing	out	your	negativity.	You	are	not	accusing	the	other,	you
are	not	saying	“You	are	bad”	you	are	simply	saying	“I	am	feeling	that	you	are
bad.”	You	 are	 not	 saying	 “You	 insulted	me”	you	 say	 “I	 feel	 insulted.”	That	 is
totally	different,	 it	 is	a	deliberate	game;	“I	am	feeling	 insulted,	so	I	will	 throw
out	my	anger.	You	are	closest	to	me	so	please	function	as	an	excuse	for	me”	and
the	same	is	done	by	the	other.
A	moment	will	come	when	again	you	will	find	that	this	deliberate	negativity
does	not	function	anymore.	You	sit	for	one	hour	together	and	nothing	comes	to
you,	nothing	comes	to	your	partner.	Then	that	second	stage	is	over.
Now	 the	 third	 stage,	 and	 the	 third	 stage	 is	 the	whole	 of	 life.	 Now	 you	 are
ready	to	be	negative	and	positive	as	those	feelings	arise;	you	can	be	spontaneous.
This	is	how	love	becomes	relating,	becomes	a	quality	of	loving,	becomes	the
natural	state	of	your	being.
Breaking	Out	of	Old	Relationship	Patterns
Take	 twenty-four	 hours	 and	write	 down	 everything	 that	 you	 can	 remember	 of
how	 you	 have	 been	 sabotaging	 your	 relationships	 in	 the	 past,	 everything	 in
detail.	 Look	 at	 it	 from	 every	 angle,	 and	 then	 don’t	 repeat	 it.	 It	will	 become	 a
meditation,	and	whether	love	remains	in	a	new	relationship	or	not	is	immaterial.
If	you	can	remain	aware	in	it,	that	will	be	worth	something.
You	know	well,	everybody	knows	because	it	is	impossible	not	to	know	what
you	 do	 in	 your	 relationships.	 In	 your	 saner	moments	 you	 know	well.	 In	 your
insane	moments	you	forget;	that	I	know.	So	before	these	insane	moments	come,
look.	 Write	 down	 all	 the	 things	 you	 always	 have	 done	 to	 sabotage	 your
relationships,	and	keep	a	copy	with	you.	Whenever	something	comes	up	where
that	old	pattern	might	be	repeated,	look	at	it.
One	should	become	alert	by	and	by,	and	then	everything	is	beautiful.	Love	is
tremendously	beautiful	but	 it	can	become	a	hell.	So	first	you	pinpoint	all	 these
things,	and	then	don’t	do	them.	And	you	will	feel	so	happy,	just	in	being	able	not
to	do	them,	you	will	feel	a	certain	liberation.	Those	things	are	obsessive;	they	are
like	a	neurosis,	a	sort	of	madness.
And	whenever	 two	people	are	 in	 love	 they	are	 there	 to	be	happy:	nobody	 is
there	to	be	unhappy.	But	this	is	how	everybody	goes	on	being	stupid.	Sooner	or
later	they	start	making	each	other	unhappy,	and	then	the	whole	point	is	lost.	All
dreams	are	shattered	and	again	and	again	it	becomes	a	wound.
The	Feeling	of	“Something	Missing”
Every	 lover	 feels	 that	 something	 is	missing,	because	 love	 is	unfinished.	 It	 is	 a
process,	not	a	thing.	Every	lover	is	bound	to	feel	that	something	is	missing,	but
don’t	interpret	it	wrongly.	It	simply	shows	that	love	in	itself	is	a	dynamic	thing.
It	 is	 just	 like	a	river,	always	moving,	always	moving.	 In	 the	very	movement	 is
the	life	of	the	river.	Once	it	stops	it	becomes	a	stagnant	thing;	then	it	is	no	longer
a	river.	The	very	word	“river”	implies	a	process,	the	very	sound	of	it	gives	you
the	feeling	of	movement.
Love	is	a	river;	it	is	not	a	thing,	a	commodity.	So	don’t	think	that	something	is
missing;	it	is	part	of	love’s	process.	And	it	is	good	that	it	is	not	completed.	When
something	 is	 missing	 you	 have	 to	 do	 something,	 to	 move.	 That	 feeling	 of
“something	missing”	is	a	call	from	higher	and	higher	peaks.	Not	that	when	you
reach	 them	 you	 will	 feel	 fulfilled.	 Love	 never	 feels	 fulfilled.	 It	 knows	 no
fulfillment,	but	it	is	beautiful	because	then	it	is	alive	forever	and	ever.
In	and	Out	of	Tune
And	 you	 will	 always	 feel	 that	 something	 is	 not	 in	 tune.	 That	 too	 is	 natural,
because	 when	 two	 persons	 are	meeting,	 two	 different	 worlds	 are	meeting.	 To
expect	 that	 they	 will	 fit	 perfectly	 is	 to	 expect	 too	 much,	 is	 to	 expect	 the
impossible,	 and	 that	 will	 create	 frustration.	 Something	 will	 always	 be	 out	 of
tune.	If	you	fit	completely	and	there	is	nothing	out	of	tune,	the	relationship	will
become	 stagnant.	At	 the	most	 there	 are	 a	 few	moments	when	 everything	 is	 in
tune,	 rare	moments.	Even	when	 they	come	you	may	not	be	able	 to	catch	 them
they	are	so	swift,	so	rare.	They	have	barely	come	and	they	are	already	gone,	just
a	 glimpse.	And	 that	 glimpse	 can	make	 you	more	 frustrated,	 because	 then	 you
will	see	more	and	more	that	things	are	out	of	tune.
This	is	how	it	has	to	be.	Make	all	efforts	to	create	that	intuneness,	but	always
be	ready	if	it	doesn’t	happen	perfectly.	And	don’t	be	worried	about	it,	otherwise
you	will	fall	more	and	more	out	of	tune.	The	feeling	of	being	in	tune	comes	only
when	you	are	not	worried	about	it.	It	happens	only	when	you	are	not	tense	about
it,	when	you	are	not	even	expecting	it—just	out	of	the	blue.	It	is	a	grace,	a	gift	of
existence,	a	gift	of	love.
Love	is	not	a	thing	you	can	do.	But	by	doing	other	things,	love	will	happen.
There	 are	 small	 things	 you	 can	 do—sitting	 together,	 looking	 at	 the	 moon,
listening	to	music—nothing	directly	to	do	with	love.
Love	 is	 very	 delicate,	 fragile.	 If	 you	 look	 at	 it,	 gaze	 at	 it	 directly,	 it	 will
disappear.	 It	 comes	 only	 when	 you	 are	 unaware,	 doing	 something	 else.	 You
cannot	 go	 directly,	 arrowlike.	 Love	 is	 not	 a	 target.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 subtle
phenomenon.	 It	 is	very	shy.	 If	you	go	direct,	 it	will	hide.	 If	you	do	something
direct,	you	will	miss.
Cooling	Passions
If	love	goes	deeper,	husbands	and	wives	eventually	become	brothers	and	sisters.
If	love	goes	deeper,	the	sun	energy	becomes	moon	energy.	The	heat	is	gone,	it	is
very	 cool.	 And	 when	 love	 goes	 deeper,	 a	 misunderstanding	 can	 also	 happen,
because	we	have	become	accustomed	to	that	fever,	passion,	that	excitement,	and
now	it	looks	all	foolish.	It	is	foolish!	Now	if	you	make	love	it	looks	silly;	if	you
don’t	make	love	you	feel	as	if	something	is	missing	because	of	the	old	habit.
So	you	will	 have	 to	understand	 this	 coolness	 that	 is	 coming.	And	of	 course
when	 you	 start	 feeling	 as	 one,	 a	 fear	 arises.	 A	 fear	 about	 what	 is	 happening
because	if	the	two	of	you	become	too	much	one	person	you	will	start	forgetting
the	other.	The	other	can	be	 remembered	only	as	“the	other.”	Psychologists	 say
that	when	a	child	starts	learning	and	the	word	he	first	utters	is	“daddy”	it	hurts
the	mother,	 because	 she	 has	 been	 taking	 care	 of	 the	 child	 and	 she	 carried	 the
child	for	nine	months.	She	is	with	the	child	for	twenty-four	hours,	but	when	the
child	utters	his	 first	word	he	says	“daddy”?	The	 father	 is	 just	on	 the	periphery
and	the	mother	is	so	close.	She	feels	the	child	is	betraying	her!
But	there	is	a	reason	to	it:	the	mother	is	so	one	with	the	child	that	he	cannot
name	her	yet—that’s	 the	 reason.	She	 is	 so	one	with	 the	child	 that	he	does	not
have	the	feeling	that	she	is	the	“other.”	Daddy	is	not	with	the	child	so	much;	he
comes	and	goes,	in	the	morning	he	goes	to	the	office	and	then	he	comes	back	in
the	evening	and	sometimes	comes	and	plays	with	the	child,	and	then	he	is	gone
again.	He	is	always	on	the	go,	so	he	can	be	thought	of	as	the	“other.”	The	mother
is	always	there,	so	cannot	yet	think	of	her	as	separate.	So	first	he	names	“daddy”
and	 then,	by	and	by,	one	day	he	 learns	 the	word	“mommy.”	The	 third	 thing	 is
that	he	will	 learn	his	own	name	because	 that	 is	 the	most	difficult	 thing	 for	 the
child.
Now	 he	 can	 understand	 that	 the	 mother	 is	 also	 separate.	 Sometimes	 he	 is
hungry	and	 she	does	not	 come,	 and	 sometimes	he	 is	wet	 and	 she	 is	 talking	 to
somebody	 and	 doesn’t	 notice	 it.	 He	 starts	 feeling	 that	 she	 is	 “other,”	 not
absolutely	one	with	him.	But	he	is	one	with	himself,	so	the	last	thing	he	learns	is
his	own	name.
So	when	two	lovers	start	becoming	one,	 the	fear	arises:	“Are	you	losing	 the
other?”	In	a	way	you	are,	because	the	other	will	not	be	felt	as	 the	other,	hence
the	idea	of	brotherly	and	sisterly	love.	Why?	The	brotherly	and	sisterly	love	has
no	 excitement;	 it	 is	 a	 cool	 thing.	 It	 is	 very	 cool	 and	 calm—no	 passion,	 no
sensuality,	no	sexuality.
And	another	thing	is	that	the	brother	and	sister	have	not	chosen	each	other;	it
is	 a	 given	 phenomenon.	 One	 day	 you	 suddenly	 find	 that	 you	 are	 a	 sister	 to
somebody	or	a	brother	to	somebody;	you	have	not	chosen.	Lovers	you	choose.
In	 choosing	 a	 lover	 there	 is	 some	 ego	 involved.	With	 a	 sister,	with	 a	 brother,
there	 is	no	ego	 involved.	You	have	not	chosen;	 it	 is	a	gift	 from	existence.	You
cannot	change,	you	cannot	go	to	a	judge	and	say	that	you	want	to	divorce	your
sister	and	you	don’t	want	to	be	a	brother	to	her	anymore.	Even	if	you	decide	not
to	be	a	brother,	you	still	 remain	a	brother.	 It	doesn’t	make	any	difference	what
you	want,	there	is	no	way	to	change	it.	It	is	irrevocable,	you	cannot	revoke	it.
When	a	husband	and	wife	start	feeling	so	much	oneness,	a	fear	arises:	Have
you	started	taking	the	other	for	granted?	Has	he	become	a	brother	or	a	sister,	and
so	 is	 no	 longer	 your	 choice,	 no	 longer	 involved	 with	 your	 ego,	 no	 longer	 a
fulfillment	of	your	ego’s	desires?	All	these	fears	arise.	And	in	the	past	you	had
so	much	passion	for	one	another,	so	much	heat.	You	know	now	that	it	is	foolish,
but	 still,	 the	 past	 habit….	 Sometimes	 one	 starts	 feeling	 that	 one	 is	 missing
something,	one	 feels	a	sort	of	emptiness.	But	don’t	 look	at	 it	 through	 the	past.
Look	at	it	from	the	future.
Much	 is	going	 to	happen	 in	 this	emptiness,	much	 is	going	 to	happen	 in	 this
intimacy—you	 will	 both	 disappear.	 It	 will	 become	 absolutely	 non-sexual,	 all
heat	will	be	gone,	and	then	you	will	know	a	totally	different	quality	of	love.	That
quality	 that	 will	 arise	 in	 you	 that	 I	 call	 prayerfulness,	 meditativeness,	 pure
awareness.	But	 that	 is	still	 in	 the	future,	 that	has	not	yet	happened.	You	are	on
the	way	towards	it.	The	past	is	gone	and	the	future	has	not	yet	come.
This	interim	period	will	be	a	little	hard,	but	don’t	think	of	the	past.	It	is	gone
and	 it	 is	 gone	 forever;	 even	 if	 you	 try	 you	 cannot	 bring	 it	 back.	 It	will	 be	 so
foolish,	it	will	feel	so	silly.	You	can	drag	it	back,	you	can	try,	but	you	will	fail
and	that	will	create	more	frustration.	So	don’t	even	try.	Just	be	loving	in	a	new
way.	Let	this	new-moon	love	happen.
Hold	each	other,	be	 loving	to	each	other,	care,	and	don’t	hanker	for	 the	heat
because	 that	 heat	was	 a	 kind	 of	madness,	 it	was	 a	 frenzy;	 it	 is	 good	 that	 it	 is
gone.	So	you	should	think	yourselves	fortunate.	Don’t	misunderstand	it.
That	is	going	to	happen	to	each	lover	if	you	really	listen	to	me	and	go	deep.
This	is	the	depth	you	are	asking	for	when	you	say	that	you	want	your	love	to	go
deep—this	 is	 the	depth!	The	passionate	 love	 is	 a	periphery,	 the	 compassionate
love	is	at	the	center.	That	is	the	depth.
Just	enjoy	it:	feel	blissful,	meditate	together,	dance	together.	If	sex	disappears,
let	 it;	 don’t	 force	 it	 to	 remain.	 If	 sometimes	 it	 happens,	 let	 it	 happen;	 if	 it
disappears,	let	it	disappear.
When	the	Thrill	Is	Gone
It	is	very	difficult	to	be	in	love	for	a	long	time.	It	needs	a	great	transformation	in
your	being.	Only	then	can	you	be	in	love	for	a	long	time.	The	ordinary	love	is	a
very	momentary	thing;	it	comes	and	goes,	it	starts	and	it	ends,	it	has	a	beginning
and	it	has	an	end.	So,	rather	than	rationalizing	it,	just	look	into	the	phenomenon
that	you	are	no	longer	in	love.	It	will	be	hard!	It	is	not	that	the	love	is	still	there
but	the	energy	is	somehow	no	longer	flowing.	How	can	that	happen?	Love	is	the
energy;	if	love	is	there,	the	energy	will	flow.
Maybe	you	are	in	love	with	your	past	love,	that’s	possible.	Maybe	you	are	in
love	with	your	past	memories—how	beautiful	 things	were	and	how	the	energy
was	flowing	between	you,	and	now	it	 is	not	flowing.	It	 is	a	hangover	from	the
past.	You	are	continuously	thinking	about	the	past,	and	you	want	the	present	also
to	be	like	the	past.	But	it	cannot	be	done.	The	present	is	totally	different	from	the
past,	and	it	is	good	that	it	is	different!	If	it	were	just	a	repetition	of	the	past	you
would	be	fed	up,	completely	bored.
So	both	partners	have	to	look	into	the	reality	and	try	to	find	out	the	truth.	If
you	 are	not	 in	 love	 anymore,	 then	one	 thing	 can	be	done:	 you	 can	be	 friends.
There	is	no	need	to	force	yourselves	to	be	lovers,	and	love	cannot	be	forced.	If
you	force	it,	it	will	be	a	hypocrisy	and	it	will	never	satisfy	anybody.
So	just	 look	into	 the	 thing.	You	have	been	lovers	 in	 the	past,	so	at	 least	you
can	be	 friends.	 Just	 look	 into	 it!	Maybe	 if	 you	decide	 to	 be	 friends,	 love	may
start	flowing	again,	because	again	you	will	start	being	free,	again	you	will	start
becoming	individuals,	again	the	security	will	be	gone,	again	those	elements	that
have	 destroyed	 your	 love	will	 disappear.	 There	 is	 a	 possibility	 your	 love	may
start	flowing	again.
Just	 as	 you	 came	 together	 one	 day,	 now	part	 and	 just	 be	 friends.	 First	 your
love	happened:	you	were	friends,	and	 then	you	just	came	together.	Love	arises
out	of	friendship,	and	then	sooner	or	later	it	becomes	a	relationship	but	without
the	friendship,	 then	it	dies.	 If	you	really	want	 to	revive	 it	again—and	I	am	not
saying	that	it	is	a	certainty,	nobody	can	say	anything	about	that,	but—there	is	a
possibility	 that	 it	may	revive.	Or	even	if	 it	doesn’t	revive,	you	can	revive	your
loving	energies	with	somebody	else,	your	partner	can	love	somebody	else.
Always	remember	one	thing:	to	be	in	love	is	good—that	is	great	virtue.	If	it	is
not	flowing	with	one	person,	then	it	is	better	to	let	it	be	flowing	with	somebody
else.	But	don’t	get	stuck,	otherwise	you	will	suffer,	you	will	make	your	partner
suffer,	you	both	will	suffer.	And	the	problem	is	 that	 if	you	suffer	 long	enough,
you	will	become	addicted	to	your	suffering.	Then	you	will	start	feeling	a	sort	of
enjoyment	in	the	suffering	itself.	You	may	become	masochists,	and	then	it	will
be	very	difficult	to	get	out	of	it.	Right	now	the	problem	is	so	great.
Time	to	Say	Good-bye
Talk	 to	 your	 partner,	 be	 truthful,	 and	 ask	your	 partner	 also	 to	 be	 truthful.	You
have	loved	each	other;	at	least	this	much	you	owe	to	each	other,	to	be	truthful,	to
be	 absolutely	 truthful.	 Put	 all	 the	 cards	 out	 on	 the	 table	 and	don’t	 try	 to	 hide;
because	that	is	not	going	to	help.	Only	truth	helps.	Lies	never	help,	they	can	only
postpone	 the	 problem,	 and	 meanwhile	 the	 problem	 will	 be	 getting	 more	 and
more	roots	in	you.	So	the	sooner	the	better.
Talk	to	your	partner:	be	honest,	even	if	 it	hurts.	Tell	your	partner	 that	 it	will
hurt,	but	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	You	have	been	happy	together;	if	it	hurts,
that	too	has	to	be	faced.	Be	absolutely	true—no	finding	of	scapegoats,	no	witch
hunting,	no	rationalization.	Just	be	true.	Look	into	yourself,	show	your	heart,	and
help	 the	partner	also	 to	be	 true.	 If	 love	 is	 finished,	 then	be	 friends,	 there	 is	no
need	to	force	it.
Never	betray	love.	Lovers	change.	That	is	not	a	problem,	that	should	not	be	a
problem;	we	should	not	become	attached	too	much	to	persons.	Let	there	be	only
one	 commitment,	 and	 that	 has	 to	 be	 to	 love	 itself!	 Be	 in	 love	with	 love,	 and
everything	else	is	secondary.
And	be	courageous,	 that	 courage	will	 help.	Otherwise	you	can	both	pretend
that	really	you	should	stay	together	because	of	this	and	because	of	that,	and	you
will	go	on	being	miserable.	Never	remain	 in	misery	for	a	single	moment.	Live
dangerously	because	that	is	the	only	way	to	live.
The	Agony	and	Ecstasy	of	Honesty
It	 is	 said	 that	 if	 every	 person	 starts	 saying	 the	 truth,	 then	 there	 will	 be	 no
friendship	 in	 the	 world,	 no	 friendship	 at	 all:	 no	 lovers,	 no	 friendship,	 no
marriage,	 nothing.	 All	 these	 things	 will	 simply	 disappear.	 Then	 it	 will	 be	 an
encounter	group,	the	whole	situation	will	be	an	encounter	group	everywhere,	in
every	situation.
But	 one	 can	work	 slowly,	 particularly	 in	 intimate	 relationships.	And	 if	 both
are	willing	to	go	into	the	depth	of	sincerity	and	honesty,	it	pays.	Your	love	will
become	deeper;	it	will	have	something	of	the	beyond	in	it.	If	you	can	be	honest
and	yet	be	together,	if	you	can	suffer	the	agony	that	honesty	brings,	then	one	day
the	ecstasy	that	honesty	and	only	honesty	can	bring	also	follows.
Fear	Is	Not	Always	Wrong
Sometimes	 your	 energy	 needs	 to	 be	 left	 alone,	 something	 is	 happening	within
you	that	needs	you	to	keep	to	yourself.	And	when	you	think	of	getting	involved
with	somebody	there	is	a	hesitation	that	can	feel	like	fear.	But	fear	is	not	always
wrong,	remember.	Nothing	is	always	wrong;	it	depends.	People	have	such	ideas
that	fear	is	always	wrong—it	is	not.	Yes,	sometimes	it	is	wrong,	sometimes	it	is
not.	Nothing	is	always	right,	and	nothing	is	always	wrong;	everything	depends
on	the	context.
Right	 now	 your	 fear	 is	 perfectly	 right.	 It	 simply	 says	 to	 you	 “Don’t	 get
involved.”	It	is	not	the	fear	of	the	new,	not	at	all;	that	is	a	misinterpretation.	It	is
simply	fear	that	if	you	get	entangled	in	somebody	else’s	energy,	you	will	lose	the
centering	which	 is	growing	within	you.	You	are	becoming	more	centered,	you
are	settling	more	 in	your	being.	You	are	coming	 to	 terms	with	your	aloneness,
and	if	you	fall	into	a	relationship,	that	will	be	dragging	yourself	out.	When	your
movement	 is	 inwards,	 a	 relationship	 will	 take	 you	 out	 and	 that	 can	 create	 a
contradiction.	Hence	the	fear.	The	fear	is	really	helpful	in	this	case;	it	is	showing
you	not	to	be	foolish.
Remain	alone.	When	the	fear	disappears,	move	into	relationship;	then	it	will
be	 perfectly	 right.	 It	 will	 disappear—when	 its	 time	 is	 gone,	 when	 you	 have
settled,	when	the	energy	is	exactly	as	it	should	be	inside	you,	then	you	can	afford
to	go	out.	First	one	has	to	settle	inside,	then	it	is	easy	to	go	outside	and	it	is	not	a
distraction.	 In	 fact	 it	 becomes	 an	 enhancement	 of	 the	 inner	 because	 of	 the
contrast.	It	becomes	a	little	holiday	from	the	inner,	but	you	always	come	back.
Then	it	is	not	destructive,	it	is	creative.	Then	love	helps	meditation.
So	simply	wait.	Listen	to	your	fear	and	don’t	repress	it.	It	will	disappear	on	its
own.	When	the	energy	is	ready	to	go	out,	you	will	suddenly	see	one	day	that	you
are	moving	with	somebody	and	there	is	no	fear	at	all,	your	whole	being	is	with
you.	When	that	happens,	then	move	into	relationship.	Till	then,	avoid	it.
Haunted
There	 is	no	need	 to	 forget!	Go	on	 remembering!	You	are	 trying	 to	 forget	your
lost	lover—who	can	forget	by	trying?	The	more	you	try	to	forget,	the	more	you
remember,	 because	 even	 to	 forget	 you	 have	 to	 remember!	Don’t	 try	 to	 forget.
Make	it	a	meditation.	Whenever	you	remember	your	old	partner	just	close	your
eyes	and	remember	the	person	as	deeply	as	you	can,	and	soon	you	will	forget.
Imperfect	Fit
Only	two	dead	things	can	fit	with	each	other	totally.	Life	asserts	itself,	struggles,
fights,	 clamors	 to	 be	 taken	 note	 of,	 tries	 to	 dominate.	 Life	 is	 a	will	 to	 power,
hence	 there	 is	 conflict.	 It	 is	 intrinsic	 to	 life	 itself.	 And	 nobody	 wants	 to	 be
dominated;	 everybody	 wants	 to	 dominate.	 Relationship	 exists	 between	 these
two.
A	relationship	is	a	miracle.	It	should	not	happen	really,	scientifically	it	should
not	happen.	It	happens	because	we	are	not	yet	scientific.	And	it	is	good	that	we
are	 not	 yet	 scientific;	 and	 we	 are	 never	 going	 to	 be	 absolutely	 scientific.
Something	illogical	will	always	remain	in	the	heart	of	man.	That	keeps	the	flame
of	humanity	alive;	otherwise	man	becomes	a	machine.	Only	machines	are	utterly
adjusted;	a	machine	is	never	maladjusted.
So	this	is	the	problem	facing	every	couple:	when	there	is	total	conflict,	all	is
destroyed.	There	is	no	bridge	between	you	and	the	other;	a	relationship	doesn’t
exist.	If	there	is	total	adjustment,	again	the	relationship	disappears	because	there
is	 no	more	 flow,	 there	 is	 no	more	 hope.	 Just	 between	 the	 two,	 exactly	 in	 the
middle	between	adjustment	and	conflict,	a	little	bit	of	adjustment,	a	little	bit	of
conflict—and	 they	 go	 together.	 They	 look	 contradictory	 but	 they	 are
complementary.
If	one	can	remember	that,	one	remains	sane;	otherwise	a	relationship	can	drive
you	 insane.	 There	 are	 moments	 when	 it	 drives	 people	 insane,	 when	 it	 is	 too
much	to	bear.	So	never	ask	for	absolute	adjustment.	Just	a	little	bit	is	more	than
enough.	Feel	grateful	for	that,	and	let	the	relationship	remain	a	flow.	Be	together,
but	 don’t	 try	 to	 become	 one.	 Be	 together,	 but	 don’t	 become	 absolutely
unconnected.	Remain	two	and	yet	in	contact.	That’s	what	I	mean	by	the	middle.
And	 be	 a	 little	more	 alert.	One	 has	 to	 be	 a	 little	more	 conscious	when	 one	 is
moving	 in	 love,	and	one	has	 to	be	careful	about	 the	other.	Whatsoever	you	do
affects	that	person.
Give	and	Take
If	in	a	relationship	one	person	goes	on	giving	and	the	other	goes	on	taking,	both
suffer.	Not	only	the	giver—because	the	giver	feels	cheated—but	the	person	who
is	the	receiver	is	also	suffering	because	he	cannot	grow	unless	he	is	allowed	to
give.	 He	 becomes	 a	 beggar	 and	 his	 self-image	 falls	 low.	 He	 needs	 to	 be
strengthened	and	he	needs	 to	be	given	an	opportunity	where	he	 can	also	give.
Then	he	feels	human;	he	feels	confident.
Not	Just	Sex
Be	very	watchful,	be	loving,	and	if	sometimes	sex	happens	as	part	of	love,	then
there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	worried	 about.	But	 it	 shouldn’t	 be	 the	 focus.	 The	 focus
should	 be	 love.	You	 love	 a	 person,	 you	 share	 his	 being,	 you	 share	 your	 being
with	him,	you	share	the	space.
That	 is	exactly	what	 love	 is:	 to	create	a	space	between	two	persons,	a	space
which	belongs	to	neither	or	belongs	to	both—a	small	space	between	two	persons
where	they	both	meet	and	mingle	and	merge.	That	space	has	nothing	to	do	with
physical	space.	It	is	simply	spiritual.	In	that	space	you	are	not	you,	and	the	other
is	not	the	other.	You	both	come	into	that	space	and	you	meet.	That	is	what	love
is.	 If	 it	grows,	 then	 that	common	space	becomes	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger
and	then	both	the	partners	are	dissolved	into	it.
So	 sometimes	 if	 you	 share	 space	 with	 somebody,	 a	 husband	 or	 friend	 or
anybody,	 and	 sex	 happens	 as	 a	 spontaneous	 phenomenon—not	 something
brooded	upon,	not	something	sought	after,	not	something	that	you	were	planning
—then	it	is	not	sexual.
There	 is	 a	 sort	 of	 sex	 which	 is	 not	 sexual	 at	 all.	 Sex	 can	 be	 beautiful	 but
sexuality	can	never	be	beautiful.	By	“sexuality”	I	mean	cerebral	sex—thinking
about	 it,	 planning	 it,	 managing,	 manipulating	 and	 doing	many	 things,	 but	 the
basic	thing	remains	deep	down	in	the	mind	that	one	is	approaching	a	sex	object.
When	 you	 look	 to	 a	 person	 through	 the	 eyes	 of	 this	 kind	 of	 sexuality,	 you
reduce	 the	 other	 to	 an	 object.	 The	 other	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 person,	 and	 the	whole
game	 is	 only	of	manipulation.	You	 are	going	 to	 land	 in	bed	 sooner	or	 later.	 It
depends	how	much	you	play	with	the	idea	and	how	much	both	of	you	prolong
the	foreplay.	But	if	in	the	mind	the	end	is	just	sex,	then	it	is	the	sexuality	I	am
talking	 about.	 When	 the	 mind	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 sex,	 then	 it	 is	 pure,
innocent	sex.	It	is	virgin	sex.
That	 sex	 can	 sometimes	 be	 even	 purer	 than	 celibacy,	 because	 if	 a	 celibate
continuously	 thinks	 of	 sex,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 celibacy.	When	 a	 person	moves	 in	 a
deep	 love	 relationship	with	 somebody,	 not	 thinking	 about	 sex,	 and	 it	 happens
because	you	share	so	totally	that	sex	also	comes	in,	then	it	is	okay	and	nothing	to
worry	about.	Don’t	create	guilt	about	it.
Stormy	Weather
In	a	single	moment,	a	person	can	change	completely.	She	was	so	happy	and	she
can	become	so	unhappy.	Just	a	moment	before	she	was	ready	to	die	for	you,	and
just	a	moment	afterwards	she	is	ready	to	kill	you.	But	this	is	how	humanity	is.	It
gives	depth,	it	gives	surprises,	it	gives	salt.	Otherwise	life	would	have	been	very
tedious.
It	is	all	beautiful.	These	are	all	notes	of	a	great	harmony.	And	when	you	love	a
person,	 you	 love	 that	 harmony	 and	 you	 accept	 all	 that	 makes	 that	 harmony.
Sometimes	it	is	raining,	sometimes	the	sky	is	cloudy	and	dark,	and	sometimes	it
is	 full	of	 sunlight	 and	 the	clouds	have	disappeared.	Sometimes	 it	 is	very	cold,
and	sometimes	it	 is	very	hot.	In	just	 the	same	way,	 the	human	climate	goes	on
changing,	 everything	goes	on	changing.	When	you	 love	a	person,	you	 love	all
these	possibilities.	Infinite	are	the	possibilities,	and	you	love	all	the	shades	and
nuances.
So	be	true	and	help	your	partner	also	to	be	true.	Then	love	becomes	a	growth.
Otherwise	love	can	become	a	poisonous	thing.	At	least	don’t	corrupt	love.	It	is
not	corrupted	by	hatred,	remember;	it	is	corrupted	by	falsity.	It	is	not	destroyed
by	anger,	never,	but	it	is	destroyed	by	an	inauthentic	persona,	a	false	face.
Love	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 there	 is	 freedom	 to	 be	 oneself	 without	 any
guarding,	without	any	reserve.	One	is	simply	flowing.	What	can	you	do?	When
you	feel	hateful,	you	are	hateful.	When	the	clouds	are	there	and	when	the	sun	is
shining,	what	can	you	do?	And	if	the	other	understands	and	loves	you,	they	will
accept;	they	will	help	you	to	come	out	of	the	clouds	because	they	know	that	this
is	 just	a	climate,	and	it	comes	and	goes.	These	are	just	moods,	passing	phases,
and	behind	these	passing	phases	is	the	reality,	the	spirit	of	the	person,	the	soul.
And	when	you	accept	all	these	phases,	by	and	by	glimpses	of	the	real	soul	start
happening	to	you.
Sweet	Sorrow
Aloneness	has	in	it	both	a	sort	of	sadness,	a	sort	of	sorrow,	and	yet	a	very	deep
peace	and	silence.	So	it	depends	on	you	how	you	look	at	it.
When	you	are	separated	from	your	lover,	look	at	it	as	a	great	opportunity	to	be
alone.	Then	the	vision	changes.	Look	at	 it	as	an	opportunity	 to	have	your	own
space.	 It	becomes	very	difficult	 to	have	one’s	own	space,	and	unless	you	have
your	own	 space,	 you	will	 never	become	acquainted	with	your	own	being,	 you
will	never	come	 to	know	who	you	are.	Always	engaged,	always	occupied	 in	a
thousand	 and	 one	 things—in	 relationship,	 in	 worldly	 affairs,	 anxieties,	 plans,
future,	past—one	continuously	lives	on	the	surface.
When	 one	 is	 alone	 one	 can	 start	 settling,	 sinking	 in.	 Because	 you	 are	 not
occupied	 you	 will	 not	 feel	 the	 way	 you	 have	 always	 been	 feeling.	 It	 will	 be
different,	and	that	difference	can	feel	strange.
And	 certainly	 when	 one	 is	 separated	 one	 misses	 one’s	 lovers,	 beloveds,
friends,	but	this	is	not	going	to	be	forever.	It	is	just	a	small	discipline.	And	if	you
love	yourself	deeply	and	go	down	into	yourself,	you	will	be	ready	to	love	even
more	deeply	because	one	who	does	not	know	oneself	cannot	love	very	deeply.	If
you	 live	 on	 the	 surface,	 your	 relationship	 cannot	 be	 of	 the	 depths.	 It	 is	 your
relationship,	 after	 all.	 If	 you	 have	 a	 depth,	 then	 your	 relationship	will	 have	 a
depth.
So	 take	 this	 opportunity	 as	 a	 blessing	 and	 move	 into	 it.	 Enjoy	 it.	 If	 you
become	too	sorrowful,	the	whole	opportunity	is	wasted.
And	 it	 is	not	against	 love,	 remember.	Don’t	 feel	guilty.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 the	very
source	of	love.	Love	is	not	what	is	ordinarily	known	as	love.	It	is	not	that.	It	is
not	a	stew	of	sentimentality,	emotions,	feelings.	It	is	something	very	deep,	very
foundational.	It	is	a	state	of	mind,	and	that	state	of	mind	is	possible	only	when
you	 penetrate	 your	 own	 being,	 when	 you	 start	 loving	 yourself.	 That	 is	 the
meditation	when	one	is	alone:	to	love	oneself	so	deeply	that	for	the	first	time	you
become	your	own	love	object.
So	 in	 these	 days	 when	 you	 are	 alone,	 be	 a	 narcissist;	 love	 yourself,	 enjoy
yourself!	Delight	in	your	body,	in	your	mind,	in	your	soul.	And	enjoy	the	space
that	is	empty	around	you	and	fill	it	with	love.	The	lover	is	not	there—fill	it	with
love!	Spread	your	 love	around	your	 space,	and	your	 space	will	 start	becoming
luminous;	 it	will	 glow.	And	 then	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	will	 know,	when	 your
lover	 comes	 close	 to	 you,	 that	 now	 it	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 quality.	 In	 fact	 you
have	something	to	give,	share.	Now	you	can	share	your	space	because	you	have
your	space.
Ordinarily	people	think	that	they	are	sharing,	but	they	don’t	have	anything	to
share—no	 poetry	 in	 their	 heart,	 no	 love.	 In	 fact	 when	 they	 say	 they	 want	 to
share,	 they	don’t	want	 to	give,	because	they	don’t	have	anything	to	give.	They
are	 in	 search	 of	 getting	 something	 from	 the	 other	 and	 the	 other	 is	 also	 in	 the
same	boat.	He	is	searching	to	get	something	from	you,	and	you	are	searching	to
get	something	from	him.	Both	are	in	a	way	trying	to	rob	the	other	of	something.
Hence	 the	 conflict	 between	 lovers,	 the	 tension;	 the	 continuous	 tension	 to
dominate,	 to	 possess,	 to	 exploit,	 to	make	 the	other	 a	means	 for	 your	pleasure;
somehow	to	use	the	other	for	your	gratification.	Of	course	we	hide	in	beautiful
words.	We	say,	“We	want	to	share,”	but	how	can	you	share	if	you	don’t	have?
So	enjoy	this	space,	aloneness.	Don’t	fill	it	with	past	memories	and	don’t	fill	it
with	 future	 imagination	 and	 fantasy.	 Let	 it	 be	 as	 it	 is—pure,	 simple,	 silent.
Delight	in	it;	sway,	sing,	dance.	A	sheer	joy	of	being	alone.
And	don’t	feel	guilty.	That	too	is	a	problem	because	lovers	always	feel	guilty.
If	they	are	alone	and	they	are	happy,	they	feel	a	certain	guilt.	They	think,	“How
can	you	be	happy	when	your	lover	is	not	with	you?”—as	if	you	are	cheating	the
person.	But	 if	 you	 are	 not	 happy	when	 you	 are	 alone,	 how	 can	 you	 be	 happy
when	you	are	together?	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	cheating	anybody.	In	the	night,
when	nobody	is	looking	at	the	rosebush,	it	is	preparing	the	rose.	Deep	down	in
the	 earth,	 the	 roots	 are	 preparing	 the	 rose.	 Nobody	 is	 looking	 there.	 If	 the
rosebush	 thinks,	 “I	will	 show	my	 roses	 only	when	people	 are	 around,”	 then	 it
will	 not	 have	 anything	 to	 show.	 It	 will	 not	 have	 anything	 to	 share,	 because
whatever	you	can	share	has	first	to	be	created,	and	all	creativity	arises	out	of	the
depths	of	aloneness.
So	 let	 this	aloneness	be	a	womb,	and	enjoy	and	delight	 in	 it;	don’t	 feel	 that
you	are	doing	something	wrong.	It	is	a	question	of	attitude	and	approach.	Don’t
give	it	a	wrong	interpretation.	It	need	not	be	sorrowful.	It	can	be	tremendously
peaceful	and	blissful.	It	depends	on	you.
The	Fire	Test	of	Truth
No	relationship	can	truly	grow	if	you	go	on	holding	back.	If	you	remain	clever
and	go	on	safeguarding	and	protecting	yourself,	only	personalities	meet,	and	the
essential	 centers	 remain	 alone.	 Then	 just	 your	 mask	 is	 related,	 not	 you.
Whenever	 such	a	 thing	happens,	 there	are	 four	persons	 in	 the	 relationship,	not
two.	Two	false	persons	go	on	meeting,	and	the	two	real	persons	remain	worlds
apart.
Risk	is	there.	If	you	become	true,	nobody	knows	whether	this	relationship	will
be	capable	of	understanding	truth,	authenticity;	whether	this	relationship	will	be
strong	enough	 to	 stand	 in	 the	 storm.	There	 is	 a	 risk,	 and	because	of	 it,	 people
remain	 very	 guarded.	 They	 say	 things	 which	 should	 be	 said;	 they	 do	 things
which	 should	 be	 done.	 Love	 becomes	 more	 or	 less	 like	 a	 duty.	 But	 then	 the
reality	remains	hungry,	and	the	essence	is	not	fed.	So	the	essence	becomes	more
and	more	sad.	The	lies	of	the	personality	are	a	very	heavy	burden	on	the	essence,
on	the	soul.	The	risk	is	real,	and	there	is	no	guarantee	for	it,	but	I	will	tell	you
that	the	risk	is	worth	taking.
At	 the	 most,	 the	 relationship	 can	 break,	 at	 the	 most.	 But	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be
separate	and	 to	be	 real	 rather	 than	being	unreal	and	 together	because	 then	 it	 is
never	 going	 to	 be	 satisfying.	 Benediction	will	 never	 come	 out	 of	 it.	 You	will
remain	hungry	and	 thirsty,	and	you	will	go	on	dragging,	 just	waiting	 for	 some
miracle	to	happen.
For	 the	miracle	 to	 happen	 you	will	 have	 to	 do	 something,	 and	 that	 is	 start
being	true,	at	the	risk	that	maybe	the	relationship	is	not	strong	enough	and	may
not	 be	 able	 to	 bear	 it.	 The	 truth	 may	 be	 too	 much,	 unbearable,	 but	 then	 that
relationship	is	not	worthwhile.	So	that	test	has	to	be	passed.
Once	you	are	true,	everything	else	becomes	possible.	If	you	are	false—just	a
facade,	 a	painted	 thing,	 a	 face,	 a	mask—nothing	 is	 possible.	Because	with	 the
false,	only	false	happens;	with	the	truth,	truth.
I	understand	your	problem.	That	is	the	problem	of	all	lovers:	that	deep	down
they	are	afraid.	They	go	on	wondering	whether	 this	 relationship	will	be	strong
enough	 to	bear	 truth.	But	how	can	you	know	beforehand?	There	 is	no	a	priori
knowledge.	One	has	to	move	into	it	to	know	it.
How	are	you	to	know,	sitting	inside	your	house,	whether	you	will	be	able	to
withstand	the	storm	and	the	wind	outside?	You	have	never	been	in	the	storm.	Go
and	 see.	 Trial	 and	 error	 is	 the	 only	 way—go	 and	 see.	 Maybe	 you	 will	 be
defeated,	 but	 even	 in	 that	 defeat	 you	will	 have	 become	 stronger	 than	 you	 are
right	now.
If	one	experience	defeats	you,	and	another,	and	another—by	and	by,	the	very
going	through	the	storm	will	make	you	stronger	and	stronger	and	stronger.	A	day
comes	when	one	simply	starts	delighting	in	the	storm,	one	simply	starts	dancing
in	the	storm.	Then	the	storm	is	not	the	enemy.	That	too	is	an	opportunity—a	wild
opportunity—to	be.
Remember,	 being	 never	 happens	 comfortably;	 otherwise	 it	 would	 have
happened	to	all.	It	cannot	happen	conveniently;	otherwise	everybody	would	have
their	own,	authentic	being	without	any	problem.	Being	happens	only	when	you
take	risk,	when	you	move	into	danger.	And	love	is	the	greatest	danger	there	is.	It
demands	you	totally.
So	 don’t	 be	 afraid,	 go	 into	 it.	 If	 the	 relationship	 survives	 truth,	 it	 will	 be
beautiful.	If	it	dies,	then	too	it	is	good	because	one	false	relationship	has	ended,
and	now	you	will	be	more	capable	of	moving	 into	another	 relationship—truer,
more	solid,	more	concerning	the	essence.
Never	Ask	for	Sympathy
Just	be	happy.	A	relationship	is	not	as	important	as	your	being	happy.	And	if	you
are	happy,	who	bothers	about	a	relationship?
A	 relationship	 is	not	 creative,	 it	 simply	 reflects	what	 is	 the	case.	 It	 is	 like	a
mirror:	 if	 there	 is	 something	 to	 be	 reflected,	 the	 mirror	 reflects.	 If	 there	 is
nothing	 to	 reflect,	 the	mirror	 cannot	 create	 anything;	 it	 is	 passive.	 So	 always
remember	to	be	happy,	enjoying,	and	if	something	comes	by	the	way,	good.	And
it	 is	going	 to	come,	because	a	happy	person	has	 to	share.	But	he	has	 to	wait	a
little,	because	a	happy	person	attracts	only	another	happy	person.
If	 you	 are	 unhappy,	 you	 will	 attract	 many	 people,	 because	 they	 are	 also
unhappy	 and	 something	 fits.	 There	 is	 a	messiah,	 a	 therapist	 in	 everybody.	 So
when	you	are	in	misery	somebody	comes	and	sympathizes	and	feels	very	good,
high.	 Somebody	 is	 in	misery	 and	 he	 is	 the	 one	 to	 help;	 he	 feels	 very	 egoistic
about	it.	So	that’s	how	people	become	interested	in	each	other.	Somebody	is	in
pain,	 somebody	 is	 in	 suffering;	 that	 person	 will	 attract	 many	 sympathizers,
lovers,	friends.
They	will	be	of	many	sorts.	They	may	be	sadists	who	are	interested	in	others
being	miserable.	A	great	majority	of	sadists	exists	in	the	world!	Or,	they	may	be
just	 on	 their	 ego	 trips.	 Any	 unhappy	 person	 helps	 them	 to	 feel	 happy	 in
comparison,	 relatively	 speaking,	 so	 they	 always	 like	 to	 have	 unhappy	 people
around	them.	That	is	the	only	way	they	know.
Remember,	 sympathy	 is	 not	 love,	 and	 if	 somebody	 is	 sympathetic	 to	 you,
beware!	It	is	not	love,	and	the	sympathy	will	remain	only	as	long	as	you	remain
in	 misery.	 Once	 you	 become	 happy,	 the	 sympathy	 will	 disappear,	 because
sympathy	cannot	go	uphill.	It	is	just	like	water	flowing	downhill;	it	goes	towards
people	who	are	more	unhappy	than	you.	Sympathy	never	rises,	it	cannot	rise.	It
has	no	pumping	 system;	your	 sympathy	 cannot	move	 towards	 a	higher	person
than	you.
So	never	ask	for	sympathy,	because	that	is	corrupting	to	you	and	to	the	other
also.	And	if	you	become	settled	with	sympathy	and	you	start	thinking	that	this	is
love,	 you	 have	 settled	 with	 something	 like	 a	 false	 coin.	 It	 just	 gives	 one	 the
feeling	of	love;	it	is	not	love.
True	 love	 is	 not	 sympathetic.	 True	 love	 is	 empathetic.	 It	 is	 empathy,	 not
sympathy.	Sympathy	means,	“You	are	miserable,	and	I	would	like	to	help	you.	I
remain	outside.	I	give	you	my	hand.	I	am	not	affected	by	you.	In	fact	deep	down
I	enjoy	it.	I	relish	it	that	one	person	is	giving	me	the	opportunity	to	feel	so	high.”
This	is	violent.
Empathy	is	totally	different.	Empathy	means,	“I	feel	just	as	you	are	feeling.	If
you	 are	miserable,	 I	 feel	 your	misery.	 It	 touches	me,	 it	 affects	me.	Not	 as	 an
outsider	but	as	if	I	am	part	of	your	being.”
Love	is	empathy,	it	is	not	sympathy	at	all.
So	 remember	 this,	 and	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to	 ask	 for	 sympathy.	 That
temptation	is	there,	because	when	one	feels	that	love	is	not	happening,	one	starts
settling	for	less.	One	starts	moving	around	in	sadness	and	asking	for	sympathy	in
subtle	ways.	Never	ask	that.	That	is	the	greatest	degradation	that	can	happen	to	a
human	being.	Never	do	that.	Be	happy.
It	 will	 take	 a	 little	 time	 for	 the	 love	 to	 happen,	 because	 most	 people	 are
sadists,	miserable	themselves	and	trying	to	prove	that	they	are	messiahs,	helpers,
solving	other	people’s	miseries.	But	if	you	are	happy,	you	will	attract	somebody
who	is	not	caught	up	in	all	these	neurotic	trips;	who	is	simply	happy	and	would
like	to	share	with	you.
And	this	is	the	beauty	of	it:	if	you	are	happy	and	a	relationship	happens,	you
feel	good,	you	share,	but	you	are	not	dependent	on	it.	You	don’t	become	a	slave,
you	don’t	become	addicted	to	it,	because	you	can	be	happy	without	it.
A	good	relationship	is	a	sharing;	there	is	no	dependence.	Both	partners	remain
totally	free	and	independent.	Nobody	possesses,	there	is	no	need.	It	is	a	free	gift.
I	have	so	much,	so	I	give	it	to	you.	There	is	no	need,	I	can	be	alone	and	perfectly
happy.	When	 two	persons	are	 in	 love	and	both	can	be	alone	and	happy,	 then	a
tremendously	beautiful	love	happens,	because	they	are	not	hindering	each	other
in	any	way	in	their	growth.
Be	Aware	in	the	Moment
Whenever	 there	 is	 a	 change,	 any	 sort	 of	 change,	 things	 will	 come	 into	 focus
more	clearly.	When	change	disturbs	you,	all	your	inner	disturbances	are	stirred
up.	 When	 you	 are	 both	 feeling	 disturbed,	 and	 both	 are	 trying	 to	 throw	 the
responsibility	 on	 the	 other,	 just	 try	 to	 see	 it.	 Inside	 yourself,	 try	 to	 see	 it;	 the
other	 is	 never	 responsible.	 Remember	 that	 as	 a	 mantra:	 The	 other	 is	 never
responsible.
Just	watch	it,	just	watch	it.	And	if	you	become	wise	in	the	moment,	there	will
be	no	problem.	Everybody	becomes	wise	only	when	 the	moment	 is	 gone,	 and
retrospective	wisdom	 is	worthless.	When	you	 are	 picking	on	 something	 in	 the
other	 person,	 at	 that	 very	 moment	 become	 aware,	 and	 let	 your	 awareness
function.	Immediately	you	will	drop	it.
But	when	you	have	done	everything,	and	fought	and	nagged	and	bitched,	and
then	later	on	you	become	wise	and	see	that	there	was	no	point	in	it,	it	is	too	late.
It	is	meaningless,	you	have	done	the	harm.	This	wisdom	is	just	pseudo-wisdom.
It	gives	you	a	feeling	as	if	you	have	understood.	That	is	a	trick	of	the	ego.	This
wisdom	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help.	 When	 you	 were	 doing	 the	 thing,	 at	 that	 very
moment,	simultaneously,	the	awareness	should	arise	and	you	should	see	that	it	is
useless.
If	 you	 can	 see	 it	when	 it	 is	 there,	 then	 you	 cannot	 do	 it.	One	 can	 never	 go
against	 one’s	 awareness,	 and	 if	 one	 goes	 against	 it,	 that	 awareness	 is	 not
awareness.	Something	else	is	being	mistaken	for	it.
So	 remember,	 the	 other	 is	 never	 responsible	 for	 anything.	 It	 is	 something
boiling	within	you.	And	of	course	the	one	you	love	is	closest	to	you.	You	cannot
throw	it	on	some	stranger	passing	on	the	road,	so	the	closest	person	becomes	the
place	where	you	go	on	throwing	and	pouring	your	nonsense.	But	that	has	to	be
avoided,	because	love	is	very	fragile.	If	you	do	it	too	much,	if	you	overdo	it,	love
can	disappear.
The	 other	 is	 never	 responsible.	 Try	 to	make	 this	 such	 a	 permanent	 state	 of
awareness	 in	 you	 that	 whenever	 you	 start	 finding	 something	 wrong	 with	 the
other,	you	will	remember	it.	You	will	catch	yourself	red-handed,	and	drop	it	then
and	there.
ONLY	LOVE	REMAINS
Only	after	you	have	moved	in	deep	love	and	the	ego	has	really	been
dropped—and	there	is	something	very	valuable	which	can	be	gained	only	if	you
drop	the	ego,	and	that	price	has	to	be	paid—when	you	have	really	loved	deeply,
then	a	new	kind	of	integration	will	arise	in	you.
Love	does	two	things:	first	it	takes	the	ego	away,	then	it	gives	you	the	center.
Love	is	a	great	alchemy.
There	are	three	kinds	of	love.	I	call	them	love	one,	love	two,	love	three.	The
first	 love	 is	 object-oriented;	 there	 is	 an	 object	 of	 love.	 You	 see	 a	 beautiful
woman,	 really	graceful,	with	 a	proportionate	body.	You	are	 thrilled.	You	 think
you	are	falling	in	love.	Love	has	arisen	in	you	because	the	woman	is	beautiful,
because	 the	woman	 is	 nice,	 because	 the	woman	 is	 good.	 Something	 from	 the
object	 has	 stirred	 love	 in	 you.	You	 are	 not	 really	 the	master	 of	 it;	 the	 love	 is
coming	from	the	outside.	You	may	be	a	very	unloving	person,	you	may	not	have
the	 quality,	 you	 may	 not	 have	 that	 benediction,	 but	 because	 the	 woman	 is
beautiful	you	think	love	is	arising	in	you.	It	is	object-oriented.
This	 is	 the	 ordinary	 love,	 this	 is	 what	 is	 known	 as	 eros.	 It	 is	 lust.	 How	 to
possess	this	beautiful	object?	How	to	exploit	this	beautiful	object?	How	to	make
it	your	own?	But	remember,	if	the	woman	is	beautiful	she	is	not	only	beautiful
for	you,	she	is	beautiful	for	many.	So	there	will	be	many	people	falling	in	love
with	her.	And	there	 is	going	 to	be	great	 jealousy,	competition,	and	all	kinds	of
uglinesses	that	come	into	your	love,	into	your	so-called	love.
The	 story	 is	 that	Mulla	 Nasruddin	married	 a	 very	 ugly	 woman,	 the	 ugliest
possible.	Naturally	 the	 friends	were	puzzled	 and	 they	 asked	Mulla,	 “You	have
money,	 you	 have	 prestige,	 you	 could	 have	 got	 any	 beautiful	 woman	 that	 you
wanted,	why	have	you	chosen	this	ugly	woman?”
He	 said,	 “There	 is	 a	 reason	 for	 it.	 I	 will	 never	 suffer	 from	 jealousy.	 This
woman	will	always	be	 faithful	 to	me.	 I	cannot	believe	anybody	 falling	 in	 love
with	 her.	 In	 fact,	 even	 I	 am	 not	 in	 love	with	 her.	 It	 is	 impossible.	 So	 I	 know
nobody	can	love	her.”
With	orthodox	Mohammedans	it	is	a	tradition	that	a	wife	has	to	remain	behind
a	purdah,	 behind	 a	veil;	 she	 cannot	 show	her	 face	 to	 everybody.	And	 the	new
wife	has	to	ask	the	husband,	“To	whom	can	I	show	my	face	and	to	whom	am	I
not	allowed	to	show	my	face?”
So	when	this	woman	asked	Nasruddin,	“To	whom	can	I	show	my	face	and	to
whom	 am	 I	 not	 allowed	 to	 show	 it,”	 he	 said,	 “You	 can	 show	 it	 to	 everybody
except	me!”
If	you	are	falling	in	love	with	a	beautiful	woman	or	a	beautiful	man,	you	are
getting	into	 trouble.	There	 is	going	to	be	jealousy,	 there	 is	going	to	be	murder,
there	is	going	to	be	something.	You	are	in	trouble.	And	from	the	very	beginning
you	 will	 start	 trying	 to	 possess	 the	 person	 so	 that	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of
anything	 going	 wrong,	 or	 beyond	 your	 control.	 You	 will	 start	 destroying	 the
woman	 or	 the	 man.	 You	 will	 stop	 giving	 freedom.	 You	 will	 encroach	 on	 the
person	from	all	sides	and	try	to	close	all	the	doors.
Now,	 the	 woman	 was	 beautiful	 because	 she	 was	 free.	 Freedom	 is	 such	 an
ingredient	 in	beauty	 that	when	you	see	a	bird	on	 the	wing	 in	 the	sky,	 it	 is	one
kind	of	bird,	but	if	you	see	the	same	bird	in	a	cage	it	is	no	longer	the	same.	The
bird	on	 the	wing	 in	 the	 sky	has	a	beauty	of	 its	own.	 It	 is	 alive.	 It	 is	 free.	The
whole	sky	is	his.	The	same	bird	in	a	cage	is	ugly.	The	freedom	is	gone,	the	sky	is
gone.	 Those	 wings	 are	 just	 meaningless	 now,	 a	 kind	 of	 burden.	 They	 remain
from	the	past	and	they	create	misery.	Now	this	is	not	the	same	bird.
When	 you	 fell	 in	 love	with	 the	woman,	 she	was	 free;	 you	 fell	 in	 love	with
freedom.	When	you	bring	her	home	you	destroy	all	possibilities	of	being	 free,
but	 in	 that	 very	 destruction	 you	 are	 destroying	 the	 beauty.	 Then	 one	 day
suddenly	you	find	that	you	don’t	love	the	woman	at	all,	because	she	is	beautiful
no	more.	This	happens	every	time.	Then	you	start	searching	for	another	woman
and	you	don’t	see	what	has	happened;	you	don’t	look	at	the	mechanism,	at	how
you	destroyed	the	beauty	of	the	woman.
This	is	the	first	kind	of	love,	love	one.	Beware	of	it.	It	is	not	of	much	value,	it
is	not	very	significant.	And	if	you	are	not	aware,	you	will	remain	trapped	in	love
one.
Love	two	is:	the	object	is	not	important,	your	subjectivity	is.	You	are	loving	so
you	 bestow	your	 love	 on	 somebody.	But	 love	 is	 your	 quality,	 it	 is	 not	 object-
oriented.	The	subject	 is	overflowing	with	 the	quality	of	 love,	 the	very	being	 is
loving.	Even	 if	you	are	alone	you	are	 loving.	Love	 is	 a	kind	of	 flavor	 to	your
being.
When	you	fall	in	love,	the	second	kind	of	love,	there	is	going	to	be	greater	joy
than	 the	first.	And	you	will	know—because	 this	 love	will	know—how	to	keep
the	other	free.	Love	means	to	give	all	that	is	beautiful	to	the	beloved.	Freedom	is
the	most	 beautiful,	 the	most	 cherished	 goal	 of	 human	 consciousness;	 how	 can
you	take	it	away?	If	you	love	a	woman	really,	or	a	man,	the	first	present,	the	first
gift,	will	 be	 the	 gift	 of	 freedom.	How	 can	 you	 take	 it	 away?	You	 are	 not	 the
enemy,	you	are	the	friend.
This	second	kind	of	love	will	not	be	against	freedom,	it	will	not	be	possessive.
And	you	will	not	be	worried	very	much	that	somebody	else	also	appreciates	your
woman	or	your	man.	In	fact,	you	will	be	happy	that	you	have	a	woman	whom
others	also	appreciate,	that	you	have	chosen	a	woman	whom	others	also	desire.
Their	desire	 simply	proves	 that	you	have	chosen	a	diamond,	 a	valuable	being,
who	 has	 intrinsic	 value.	You	will	 not	 be	 jealous.	 Each	 time	 you	 see	 someone
looking	at	your	woman	with	loving	eyes	you	will	be	thrilled	again.	You	will	fall
in	love	with	your	woman	again	through	those	eyes.
This	 second	kind	of	 love	will	 be	more	 a	 friendship	 than	 lust,	 and	 it	will	 be
more	enriching	to	your	soul.
And	this	second	kind	of	love	will	have	one	more	difference.	In	the	first	kind
of	 love,	 the	 object-oriented,	 there	will	 be	many	 lovers	 surrounding	 the	 object,
and	there	will	be	fear.	In	the	second	kind	of	love	there	will	be	no	fear	and	you
will	be	 free	 to	bestow	your	 love	not	only	on	your	beloved,	you	will	be	 free	 to
bestow	your	love	on	others	too.
In	the	first,	the	object	will	be	one	and	many	will	be	the	lovers.	In	the	second,
the	subject	will	be	one	and	it	will	be	flowing	in	many	directions,	bestowing	its
love	in	many	ways	on	many	people,	because	the	more	you	love,	the	more	love
grows.	If	you	love	one	person,	then	naturally	your	love	is	not	very	rich;	if	you
love	 two,	 it	 is	 doubly	 rich.	 If	 you	 love	many,	 or	 if	 you	 can	 love	 the	whole	of
humanity,	or	you	can	love	even	the	animal	kingdom,	or	you	can	love	even	trees,
the	 vegetable	 kingdom—then	 your	 love	 goes	 on	 growing.	 And	 as	 your	 love
grows,	 you	 grow,	 you	 expand.	This	 is	 real	 expansion	 of	 consciousness.	Drugs
only	give	you	a	false	idea	of	expansion;	love	is	the	basic	ultimate	drug	that	gives
you	the	real	idea	of	expansion.
And	there	is	a	possibility:	Albert	Schweitzer	has	talked	about	“reverence	for
life,”	all	that	lives	is	to	be	loved.	Mahavira	in	India	has	said	the	same	thing.	His
philosophy	of	ahimsa,	nonviolence,	says	 to	 love	all	 that	 lives.	And	there	 is	 the
possibility	to	take	even	one	step	further	than	Mahavira	and	Schweitzer.	One	can
have	reverence	for	things,	too.	That	is	the	ultimate	in	love.	You	don’t	only	love
that	which	lives,	you	love	even	that	which	simply	exists.	You	love	the	chair,	the
shoes,	 the	door	 through	which	you	enter	your	house,	 the	plates	on	which	your
food	 is	 served.	You	 love	 things,	 too,	 because	 they	 also	 have	 a	 kind	 of	 being.
When	 one	 has	 come	 to	 this	 point	 that	 you	 love	 the	 whole	 of	 existence
irrespective	 of	 what	 it	 is—that	 love	 becomes	 unconditional.	 It	 is	 turning	 into
prayerfulness,	it	is	becoming	a	meditation.
The	 first	 love	 is	good	 in	 the	sense	 that	 if	you	have	 lived	a	 loveless	 life	 it	 is
better	than	no	love.	But	the	second	love	is	far	better	than	the	first	and	will	have
less	anxiety,	less	anguish,	less	turmoil,	conflict,	aggression,	violence.	The	second
kind	of	love	will	be	more	of	a	love	than	the	first	kind,	it	will	be	more	pure.	In	the
first,	the	lust	is	too	great	and	it	spoils	the	whole	game,	but	even	the	second	love
is	not	the	last.	There	is	love	three—when	subject	and	object	disappear.
In	 the	 first	 type	of	 love	 the	object	 is	 important;	 in	 the	 second	 the	 subject	 is
important.	 In	 the	 third	 there	 is	 transcendence.	One	 is	 neither	 a	 subject	 nor	 an
object,	 and	 one	 is	 not	 dividing	 reality	 in	 any	 way:	 subject,	 object,	 knower,
known,	lover,	loved.	All	division	has	disappeared.	One	is	simply	love.
Up	 through	 the	 second	 type	 of	 love	 you	 are	 a	 lover.	When	 you	 are	 a	 lover
something	will	hang	around	you	like	a	boundary,	like	a	definition.	With	the	third,
all	 definition	 disappears.	 There	 is	 only	 love;	 you	 are	 not.	 This	 is	 what	 Jesus
means	when	he	says,	“God	is	love”—love	three.	If	you	misunderstand	the	first,
you	will	never	be	able	to	interpret	rightly	what	Jesus’	meaning	is.	It	is	not	even
the	 second,	 it	 is	 the	 third.	God	 is	 love.	One	 is	 simply	 love.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 one
loves,	it	is	not	an	act,	it	is	one’s	very	quality.
It	 is	not	 that	 in	 the	morning	you	are	 loving	and	in	 the	afternoon	you	are	not
loving—you	are	love,	it	is	your	state.	You	have	arrived	home.	You	have	become
love.	Now	there	is	no	division.	All	duality	has	disappeared.
The	 first	 kind	 of	 love	 is	 “I-it.”	 The	 other	 is	 taken	 as	 a	 thing.	 That’s	 what
Martin	Buber	calls	 it,	“I-it.”	The	other	 is	 like	a	 thing	that	you	have	to	possess.
“My”	wife,	“my”	husband,	“my”	child,	and	in	that	very	possession	you	kill	the
spirit	of	the	other.
The	second	kind	of	 love	Martin	Buber	calls	“I-thou.”	The	other	 is	a	person.
You	have	respect	for	the	other.	How	can	you	possess	somebody	you	respect?	But
Martin	Buber	stops	at	 the	second;	he	has	no	understanding	about	 the	 third.	He
goes	up	to	“I-thou,”	and	it	is	a	great	step	from	“I-it”	to	“I-thou.”	But	it	is	nothing
compared	 to	 the	 step	 that	 happens	 from	 “I-thou”	 to	 no	 dualism,	 to	 oneness,
where	only	love	remains.
Even	“I-thou”	is	a	bit	of	a	tension-creating	phenomenon.	You	and	the	beloved
are	separate,	still,	and	all	separation	brings	misery.	Unless	one	becomes	 totally
one	 with	 the	 beloved,	 with	 the	 loved	 one,	 some	 kind	 of	 misery	 is	 bound	 to
remain	lurking	by	the	side.	In	the	first	the	misery	is	very	clear,	in	the	second	the
misery	is	not	so	clear;	in	the	first	it	is	very	close,	in	the	second	it	is	not	so	close;
it	is	far	away,	but	it	is	there.	In	the	third	it	is	no	more.
So	I	would	like	you	to	learn	more	of	love.	Move	from	the	first	to	the	second
and	keep	it	in	your	consciousness	that	the	third	is	the	goal.	With	the	second	kind
of	 love	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 being.	 You	 love.	 You	 love	 as	 many	 people	 as	 are
available.	 And	 you	 love	 in	 different	 ways:	 somebody	 you	 love	 as	 your	 wife,
somebody	 you	 love	 as	 your	 friend,	 somebody	 you	 love	 as	 your	 daughter,
somebody	you	love	as	your	sister,	somebody	as	your	mother.	And	it	is	possible
also	that	you	can	share	one	kind	of	love	with	many	people.	So	first	attain	to	the
second	kind	of	love.
And	with	 the	 third	 kind	 of	 love,	 you	 are	 simply	 love.	 Then	 you	 can	 go	 on
loving,	there	is	no	end	to	it.
ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR
Osho’s	 teachings	 defy	 categorization,	 covering	 everything	 from	 the
individual	quest	 for	meaning	to	 the	most	urgent	social	and	political	 issues
facing	 society	 today.	 His	 books	 are	 not	 written	 but	 are	 transcribed	 from
audio	and	video	recordings	of	extemporaneous	talks	given	to	international
audiences	over	a	period	of	thirty-five	years.	Osho	has	been	described	by	the
London	Sunday	Times	as	one	of	the	“1000	Makers	of	the	20th	Century”	and
by	American	author	Tom	Robbins	as	“the	most	dangerous	man	since	Jesus
Christ.”
About	 his	 own	 work	 Osho	 has	 said	 that	 he	 is	 helping	 to	 create	 the
conditions	 for	 the	 birth	 of	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 human	 being.	 He	 has	 often
characterized	this	new	human	being	as	“Zorba	the	Buddha”—capable	both
of	enjoying	the	earthy	pleasures	of	a	Zorba	the	Greek	and	the	silent	serenity
of	a	Gautam	Buddha.	Running	 like	a	 thread	 through	all	aspects	of	Osho’s
work	is	a	vision	that	encompasses	both	the	timeless	wisdom	of	the	East	and
the	highest	potential	of	Western	science	and	technology.
Osho	 is	 also	known	 for	his	 revolutionary	contribution	 to	 the	 science	of
inner	transformation,	with	an	approach	to	meditation	that	acknowledges	the
accelerated	pace	of	contemporary	life.	His	unique	“Active	Meditations”	are
designed	to	first	release	the	accumulated	stresses	of	body	and	mind,	so	that
it	is	easier	to	experience	the	thought-free	and	relaxed	state	of	meditation.
OSHO	INTERNATIONAL	MEDITATION	RESORT
The	 Osho	 Meditation	 Resort	 is	 a	 place	 where	 people	 can	 have	 a	 direct
personal	experience	of	a	new	way	of	living	with	more	alertness,	relaxation,
and	fun.	Located	about	100	miles	southeast	of	Mumbai	in	Pune,	India,	the
resort	 offers	 a	 variety	 of	 programs	 to	 thousands	of	 people	who	visit	 each
year	from	more	than	one	hundred	countries	around	the	world.
Originally	 developed	 as	 a	 summer	 retreat	 for	 Maharajas	 and	 wealthy
British	 colonials,	 Pune	 is	 now	 a	 thriving	 modern	 city	 that	 is	 home	 to	 a
number	 of	 universities	 and	 high-tech	 industries.	 The	 Meditation	 Resort
spreads	 over	 forty	 acres	 in	 a	 tree-lined	 suburb	 known	 as	Koregaon	 Park.
The	resort	campus	provides	accommodation	for	a	limited	number	of	guests,
and	 there	 is	 a	 plentiful	 variety	 of	 hotels	 nearby	 and	 private	 apartments
available	for	stays	of	a	few	days	up	to	several	months.
Resort	programs	are	all	based	in	 the	Osho	vision	of	a	qualitatively	new
kind	of	human	being	who	is	able	both	to	participate	creatively	in	everyday
life	and	 to	 relax	 into	silence	and	meditation.	Most	programs	 take	place	 in
modern,	 air-conditioned	 facilities	 and	 include	 a	 variety	 of	 individual
sessions,	courses,	and	workshops	covering	everything	from	creative	arts	to
holistic	 health	 treatments,	 personal	 transformation	 and	 therapy,	 esoteric
sciences,	the	Zen	approach	to	sports	and	recreation,	relationship	issues,	and
significant	 life	 transitions	 for	 men	 and	 women.	 Individual	 sessions	 and
group	 workshops	 are	 offered	 throughout	 the	 year,	 alongside	 a	 full	 daily
schedule	of	meditations.
Outdoor	 cafes	 and	 restaurants	 within	 the	 resort	 grounds	 serve	 both
traditional	 Indian	 fare	 and	 a	 choice	 of	 international	 dishes,	 all	made	with
organically	grown	vegetables	from	the	commune’s	own	farm.	The	campus
has	its	own	private	supply	of	safe,	filtered	water.
See	 www.osho.com/resort	 for	 more	 information,	 including	 travel	 tips,
course	schedules,	and	guesthouse	bookings.
FOR	MORE	INFORMATION
about	Osho	and	his	work,	see:
www.osho.com
a	 comprehensive	Web	 site	 in	 several	 languages	 that	 includes	 an	 online
tour	 of	 the	 Meditation	 Resort	 and	 a	 calendar	 of	 its	 course	 offerings,	 a
catalog	of	books	and	 tapes,	a	 list	of	Osho	 information	centers	worldwide,
and	selections	from	Osho’s	talks.
Or	contact:
Osho	International
New	York	e-mail:	oshointernational@oshointernational.com
More	OSHO	Books
INSIGHTS	FOR	A	NEW	WAY	OF	LIVING	SERIES
Awareness
Compassion
Courage
Creativity
Freedom
Intelligence
Intimacy
Intuition
Joy
Maturity
OTHER	BOOKS
Emotional	Wellness
The	Book	of	Understanding
Autobiography	of	a	Spiritually	Incorrect	Mystic
The	Book	of	Secrets
Pharmacy	for	the	Soul
Love,	Freedom,	Aloneness
Meditation:	The	First	and	Last	Freedom
Sex	Matters
Your	Answers	Questioned
Osho	Transformation	Tarot
Osho	Zen	Tarot
Tao:	The	Pathless	Path
Zen:	The	Path	of	Paradox
Yoga:	The	Science	of	the	Soul
Tarot	in	the	Spirit	of	Zen
Meditation	for	Busy	People
Body	Mind	Balancing
The	ABC	of	Enlightenment
AUDIO
Book	of	Secrets:	Keys	to	Love	and	Meditation
Ah,	This!	The	Heart	Sutra
Osho	Meditations	on	Buddhism
Osho	Meditations	on	Tantra
Osho	Meditations	on	Tao
Osho	Meditations	on	Yoga
Osho	Meditations	on	Zen
Copyright	©	2008	by	Osho	International	Foundation,	Switzerland
All	rights	reserved.
Published	 in	 the	 United	 States	 by	 Harmony	 Books,	 an	 imprint	 of	 the	 Crown
Publishing	Group,	a	division	of	Random	House,	Inc.,	New	York.
www.crownpublishing.com
Harmony	Books	is	a	registered	trademark	and	the	Harmony	Books	colophon	is	a
trademark	of	Random	House,	Inc.
OSHO	 is	 a	 registered	 trademark	 of	Osho	 International	 Foundation,	 used	with
permission/license.
The	material	in	this	book	is	selected	from	various	discourses	by	Osho	given	to	a
live	audience.	All	of	 the	Osho	discourses	have	been	published	 in	full	as	books
and	 are	 also	 available	 as	 original	 audio	 recordings.	 Audio	 recordings	 and	 the
complete	 text	 archive	 can	 be	 found	 via	 the	 online	 OSHO	 Library	 at
www.osho.com.
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Osho,	1931–1990.
Being	in	love:	how	to	love	with	awareness	and	relate	without	fear	/	Osho.—
1st	ed.
p.	cm.
1.	Love—Religious	aspects.	I.	Title.
BP605.R34B445	2008
299'.93—dc22															2007036736
eISBN:	978-0-307-40988-1
v3.0
