
Beware	of	Socialism
Talks	given	from	13/4/70	to	17/4/70
Original	in	Hindi
5	Chapters
Year	published:	1978
2nd	edition	1984,	RFI,	USA.
Also	titled	"Be	Aware	of	Socialism".	254	(small)	pages.
Beware	of	Socialism
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	I	will	say	the	truth
13	April	1970	pm	in	Cross	Maidan
Archive
code:
7004135
ShortTitle:
SOCIAL01
Audio:
No
Video:	No
I	would	like	to	begin	my	talk	today	with	an	anecdote.
In	 a	 great	 city,	 one	 day,	 the	 streets	 were	 crowded	 with	 tens	 of	 thousands	 of
people.	They	were	waiting	with	great	expectation	for	the	arrival	of	 the	king.	A
little	later	the	royal	procession	came,	and	everybody	in	that	huge	crowd	started
talking	admiringly	about	the	king's	celestial	garments.	But	strangely	enough,	the
king	was	completely	naked;	he	had	not	a	shred	of	clothes	on	him.
In	 all	 the	 crowd	 only	 one	 small	 child,	 who	 came	 perched	 on	 his	 father's
shoulders,	 saw	 it,	 and	 he	 said	 to	 his	 father	 with	 amazement,	 "Everybody	 is
talking	 about	 the	 king's	 clothes,	 but	 I	 see	 he	 is	 completely	 naked."	His	 father
said,	"Keep	quiet,	you	fool.	We	will	be	in	great	 trouble	if	someone	heard	what
you	said."	And	the	father	hurriedly	made	his	way	out	of	the	crowd.
The	king	was	naked.	and	the	people	were	praising	his	garments.	What	was	the
matter?
A	few	months	earlier	a	clever	man	had	come	to	the	court	and	offered	to	bring	the
garments	 of	 The	 gods	 for	 the	 king.	 He	 said	 to	 him,	 "Although	 you	 have
conquered	the	world,	yet	you	don't	have	the	clothes	of	the	gods.	I	can	make	them
available	to	you."	The	king's	greed	was	aroused.	He	had	everything,	but	he	did
not	have	the	gods'	clothes.	He	had	not	seen	them;	he	had	not	even	heard	of	them.
The	man	said.	"You	don't	worry.	It	will	cost	you	a	little,	but	I	will	bring	them	for
you."	He	asked	for	six	months'	time.
The	man	was	locked	in	a	house	in	the	palace,	and	armed	guards	were	placed	all
around	him.	The	man,	from	time	to	time,	asked	for	large	sums	of	money.	And	in
the	course	of	six	months	he	was	paid	many	millions	of	rupees	from	the	treasury.
But	as	he	was	imprisoned	in	the	palace	and	so	could	not	escape	with	the	money,
the	king	was	undisturbed.
After	six	months	the	man	returned	to	the	court	with	the	godly	clothes	in	a	costly
box.
Many	kings	had	been	 invited	 to	 the	 court	 to	witness	 the	great	 event.	The	man
opened	the	box	and	said	 to	 the	king,	"Please	give	me	your	 turban."	He	put	 the
king's	turban	in	the	box,	took	out	another	one,	and	proceeded	to	place	it	on	the
head	of	the	king.	But	his	hands	were	empty,	and	the	king	saw	it	well.	The	man
said	to	the	king,	"Do	you	see	the	turban?"	And	then	he	said	in	a	whisper,	"When
I	was	leaving	for	your	court,	the	gods	told	me	that	only	those	who	are	legitimate
sons	of	their	fathers	will	be	able	to	see	these	celestial	clothes."	His	hands	were
empty,	but	immediately	the	king	started	"seeing"	the	turban.	And	he	said,	"Never
have	I	seen	such	a	gorgeous	turban."
So	one	by	one,	all	the	king's	clothes	were	taken	away	and	put	in	the	box.	and	the
king	put	on	the	clothes	that	were	not	there	at	all.	He	was	gradually	disrobed.	And
when	it	came	to	the	last	piece	the	king	was	very	disturbed.	But	the	man	said,	"It
is	no	use	worrying	now.
The	journey	of	untruth,	once	begun,	has	to	be	completed.	There	is	no	way	out.
And	what	will	the	people	say?"	And	then	he	openly	announced	to	the	court	that
these	clothes	would	be	visible	only	 to	 those	who	were	 truly	 their	 fathers'	sons.
And	the	king	was	deprived	of	the	last	article	of	his	clothing.	But	now	everybody
in	the	court	"saw"	the	heavenly	garments,	which	were	not	there	at	all.	Each	one
of	 the	 courtiers	 thought	 that	 when	 the	 clothes	 were	 visible	 to	 all	 others,	 they
must	 be	 there.	 He	 also	 felt,	 to	 his	 shame,	 that	 he	 was	 the	 only	 one	 in	 the
gathering	who	was	unable	to	see	the	clothes,	so	his	parentage	was	in	doubt;	but	it
was	wise	to	keep	it	to	himself.
All	this	had	happened	inside	the	palace.
Then	the	man	said,"Your	Highness,	 the	gods	also	said	 that	as	 this	was	the	first
time	that	divine	clothes	were	being	sent	to	the	earth,	it	is	necessary	that	they	be
celebrated	by	being	 taken	out	 in	a	procession.	Your	chariot	 is	 ready.	Let	us	go
out."	The	king	was	worried	once	again.	But	the	man	said	promptly,	"Don't	worry
at	all.	The	drummers	will	be	going	at	 the	head	of	your	procession	announcing
that	 the	 gods'	 clothes	will	 be	 visible	 only	 to	 those	who	 are	 truly	 born	 of	 their
fathers.	So	everyone	will	see	them,	you	need	not	worry."
The	 king	 mounted	 the	 chariot,	 and	 the	 procession	 began.	 Everybody	 in	 the
crowd	in	the	streets	saw	that	the	king	was	naked,	but	no	one	had	the	guts	to	say
it.	Only	a	small	child	had	said	so,	and	for	this	he	was	scolded	by	his	father.	His
father	had	said,	"Keep	quiet,	you	fool,	you	are	simply	inexperienced	in	the	ways
of	the	world.	When	you	will	be	a	grownup,	you	will	begin	to	see	the	clothes.	Let
us	go	home,	because	we	will	be	in	trouble	if	someone	heard	what	you	said."
Why	do	I	begin	my	talk	on	socialism	with	this	anecdote?	What	is	the	point?
In	the	name	of	socialism	today	a	great	uproar	is	being	raised	all	over	the	world.
In	this	huge	crowd,	shouting	hurray	to	socialism,	my	position	is	like	that	of	the
little	child	who	exclaimed,	"Father,	the	king	is	stark	naked;	there	are	no	clothes
on	his	body."	I	feel	it	is	time	somebody	said	it.
Human	nature	is	such	that	it	accepts	a	well-published	lie	as	truth.	A	lie	repeated
again	and	again	begins	to	 look	like	truth.	And	truth	said	for	 the	first	 time	does
not	look	like	truth.	For	the	last	hundred	years	a	systematic	myth	has	been	created
around	socialism.
And	 its	 constant	 propaganda	 and	 slogan-mongering	 have	 made	 socialists	 of
those	who	are	not	socialists	at	all.	Even	those	who	do	not	accept	it	in	their	hearts
have	begun	to	sing	hymns	of	praise	to	socialism.	And	no	one	seems	to	have	the
courage	 to	 speak	 against	 it.	 I	 am	 an	 inexperienced	 man	 in	 the	 world	 of	 the
experienced,	and,	therefore,	I	am	going	to	speak	out	against	socialism.
The	history	of	mankind	says	 that	 it	 is	not	necessary	that	what	 the	 large	crowd,
the	masses,	accept	should	be	the	truth.	The	crowd	has	always	accepted	great	lies,
and	lived	with	them.	Now	a	new	lie,	in	the	name	of	socialism,	has	captured	the
minds	of	men.	So	it	is	essential	to	understand	its	full	implications.
The	 first	 thing	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 socialism	 today	 stands	 as	 an	 enemy,	 in
opposition	 to	 capitalism.	 But	 whatever	 socialism	 may	 be,	 it	 is	 the	 child	 of
capitalism.	Capitalism	arose	out	of	the	system	of	feudalism.	And	if	capitalism	is
allowed	to	develop	fully,	it	will	lead	to	socialism.	And	socialism,	allowed	to	run
its	full	course,	will	turn	into	communism.
And	in	the	same	way	communism	can	lead	to	anarchism.	But	the	basic	condition
is	that	these	systems	should	be	allowed	to	evolve	fully,	completely.	But	a	child
can	be	 forced	prematurely	out	 of	 its	mother's	womb,	 and	 the	mother	may	 feel
tempted	to	have	a	child	sooner	than	later.	An	impatient	mother	may	want	to	have
the	child	 in	 five	months,	 instead	of	nine;	 she	will	escape	 four	months	of	 labor
and	see	her	child	earlier.	But	such	a	child	will	be	a	dead	child,	not	a	living	one.
And	even	if	the	child	survives,	it	will	be	worse	than	dead.
The	socialism	that	was	born	in	Russia	is	such	a	premature	child.	Russia	was	not
a	 capitalist	 country,	 so	 socialism	 was	 forced	 on	 it	 much	 before	 its	 time.
Socialism	was	 born,	 but	 it	was	 born	 dead.	That	 is	why	 ten	million	 people,	 all
poor	people,	the	very	people	for	whom	socialism	was	ushered	in,	had	to	be	killed
mercilessly.	Perhaps	in	the	history	of	mankind	no	other	country	has	resorted	to
such	 colossal	 killings	 as	 the	 two	 socialist	 countries,	 Russia	 and	 China,	 have
done.	 And	 the	 irony	 is	 that	 the	 people	 who	 were	 slaughtered	 were	 those	 for
whom	 socialism	was	 brought	 in.	 Russia	 never	 had	 ten	million	 capitalists.	 Ten
million	 capitalists	 don't	 exist	 even	 in	 America	 today.	 Yet	 ten	 millions	 were
butchered	 in	 Russia,	 that	 we	 know.	And	 they	were	 those	 for	whom	 socialism
came	into	being.
But	 killing	 becomes	 easy	 when	 killing	 is	 done	 "in	 your	 own	 interest".	When
somebody	 kills	 in	 your	 name	 you	 are	 disarmed,	 you	 cannot	 even	 defend
yourself.
And	 even	 after	murdering	 ten	millions	 of	 their	men	 and	women	 and	 children,
Russia	 remains	 a	 poor	 country.	 Even	 today	 Russia	 is	 not	 a	 rich	 country.	 Its
socialism	is	anemic	and	sick;	it	is	lifeless.	And	that's	why	Russia,	for	the	last	few
years,	has	been	reverting	to	the	capitalist	way.	The	mistake	they	made	is	being
corrected	by	a	return	to	capitalist	measures.	The	basic	conflict	of	Mao	Tse-tung
with	Russia	is	just	this:	that	Russia	is	increasingly	turning	to	capitalism.
Experiences	of	the	past	fifty	years	have	made	Russia	realize	that	socialism	was	a
hasty	 step	on	 their	 part,	 because	 they	have	not	 created	 capital,	 created	wealth.
Remember,	 if	 capitalism	 is	 developed	 properly,	 socialism	 will	 be	 its	 natural
outcome	 --	 in	 a	 pregnancy	of	 nine	months	 the	 child	 comes	out	 of	 its	mother's
womb	naturally	and	 silently.	So,	 talk	of	 socialism	when	capitalism	has	not	yet
grown	to	its	full	height,	is	suicidal.
I	 am	myself	 a	 socialist,	 so	 it	 will	 surprise	 you	 when	 I	 ask	 you	 to	 beware	 of
socialism.	 I	 also	 want	 the	 child	 of	 socialism	 to	 come	 to	 India,	 but	 on	 one
condition	 --	 that	 it	 completes	 its	 full	 nine	months	 in	 the	mother's	womb.	This
country	 has	 not	 achieved	 capitalism	 as	 yet.	 So	 talk	 of	 socialism	 here	 at	 this
moment	is	as	dangerous...	as	dangerous	as	it	proved	in	Russia,	and	is	going	to	be
proved	 in	China.	China	 is	out	 to	kill	millions,	and	yet	socialism	will	not	come
there,	because	nothing	 in	 life	happens	before	 its	 time.	The	 law	of	 life	does	not
permit	haste.	This	country	has	yet	to	develop	its	capitalist	system.
It	 is	 necessary	 to	 understand	 what	 capitalism	 means.	 Today	 the	 word
"capitalism"	 comes	 to	 our	 minds	 as	 a	 four-letter	 word.	 It	 is	 now	 a	 much
maligned	word.	We	rush	 to	condemn	capitalism	without	knowing	what	good	it
has	 done	 to	 human	 society,	 and	 that	 it	 is	 the	 instrument	 that	will	 lead	 human
society	to	socialism.	If	all	men	are	ever	going	to	achieve	equality,	if	they	all	are
ever	going	to	be	free	of	poverty	and	attain	to	affluence,	then	a	hundred	percent
credit	for	it	will	go	to	capitalism.
It	 is,	however,	essential	 that	we	understand	a	 few	 things	about	capitalism	very
clearly.
First,	 capitalism	 is	 a	 system	 that	 creates	 capital,	 creates	 wealth.	 Before
capitalism,	no	other	 system	 in	 the	world	had	produced	capital.	By	capital	 I	do
not	 mean	 natural	 resources	 --	 it	 is	 that	 tangible	 wealth	 which	 is	 man's	 own
creation.	If	man	had	not	created	it,	it	would	not	have	come	on	its	own	from	the
earth	or	the	skies.	Wealth	means	solid	wealth,	accumulated	capital,	which	today
is	the	source	of	all	investment,	all	production.
The	wealth	in	the	present	world	is	created	wealth.	And	it	does	not	 include	that
natural	wealth	which	is	available	from	land	and	sea,	from	mine	and	forest,	from
stream	and	waterfall,	or	 from	anywhere	else.	During	 the	 last	hundred	and	fifty
years,	capitalism	brought	into	being	a	real	wealth-producing	system.
All	 the	 social	 systems	 that	 preceded	 capitalism	 were	 predatory	 systems	 --
systems	 wholly	 based	 on	 plunder	 and	 loot.	 Whether	 it	 was	 Genghis	 or
Tamburlaine	or	any	feudal	lords	of	the	world,	they	all	had	plundered	their	people
and	filled	their	coffers	with	the	wealth	of	looting.	But	the	wealth	in	the	capitalist
system	is	different:	capitalism	created	its	own	wealth.
Without	giving	thought	to	it,	we	are	accustomed	to	equating	capitalism	with	the
feudal	system.	We	think	that	capitalism	has	also	exploited	others'	wealth.	This	is
not	so.
Capitalism	 has	 really	 created	 capital;	 it	 has	 really	 produced	 wealth,	 lots	 of
wealth.
When	wealth	is	created,	then,	and	only	then	its	equitable	distribution	is	possible.
Without	creating	wealth,	what	are	we	going	to	distribute?	Today,	Indira	Gandhi
and	her	foolish	friends	think	that	socialism	can	be	established	in	India,	and	that
wealth	can	be	distributed.
It	means	 that	 they	are	 thinking	of	distributing	wealth	without	having	 it.	Today,
the	country	has	no	wealth.	If	we	embark	on	distribution,	we	can	only	distribute
poverty,	not	wealth.	There	is	no	wealth	and	poverty	we	have	in	abundance.	And
it	is	already	widely	distributed.
Distribution	 is	 necessary,	 but	 before	 distribution	 we	 have	 to	 have	 wealth.
Production	comes	 first;	distribution	 follows	 it.	Capitalism	produces	wealth	and
socialism	distributes	it.	If	there	is	no	capitalism,	and	so	no	wealth,	then	socialism
can	distribute	only	poverty	and	misery.	If	our	country	decides	to	go	socialist,	it
means	 that	we	 decide	 to	 remain	 poor,	 and	 poor	 forever.	 It	 cannot	 be	 anything
else,	because	we	don't	have	the	instruments	that	produce	wealth.
The	 second	 thing	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 all	 the	 people	 of	 the	 world	 have	 not
contributed	to	the	creation	of	wealth.	Wealth	today	is	the	handiwork	of	a	handful
of	 people,	 a	 few	 individuals.	 It	 has	 not	 been	 created	 by	 the	 masses.	 Only	 a
Rockefeller,	only	a	Morgan,	a	Rothschild,	a	Tata,	a	Birla,	a	Sahu	creates	capital,
not	 everybody.	 If	 we	 remove	 ten	 names	 from	America,	 America	would	 be	 as
poor	 as	 we	 are.	 Without	 them,	 America	 could	 not	 have	 achieved	 its	 present
affluence.
I	have	heard	that	once	Henry	Ford	went	to	London.	At	the	airport	he	walked	up
to	the	inquiry	office	and	asked	for	a	cheap	hotel.	The	clerk	at	the	inquiry	booth
recognized	him,	and	he	said,	"I	have	seen	your	photographs	in	the	newspapers;	it
seems	you	are	Henry	Ford.	Why	do	you	ask	for	a	cheap	hotel?	When	your	sons
and	daughters	come	here,	they	ask	for	the	most	expensive	hotels."	Ford	replied,
"My	sons	are	 the	sons	of	Henry	Ford,	sons	of	a	very	rich	man,	while	I	am	the
son	of	a	poor	man.	I	have	made	wealth	myself.	I	am	not	the	son	of	a	Ford	who
produced	wealth.	So	let	me	find	a	cheap	hotel."
Whatever	 wealth	 America	 possesses	 today	 is	 the	 creation	 of	 a	 handful	 of
inventive	geniuses	and	a	few	others	who	knew	the	art	of	producing	wealth.	Why
didn't	the	whole	world	produce	wealth?	Why	does	not	India	produce	it	today?	It
is	still	so	poor.	India	has	the	oldest	culture,	yet	we	could	not	produce	wealth.	We
failed	 to	develop	 the	art	of	creating	capital,	because	as	a	people	we	have	been
against	wealth,	 anti-wealth.	That	 is	why	our	 genius	 could	 not	 take	 the	 road	 to
prosperity	 and	 affluence.	 Whatever	 intelligence	 and	 talent	 we	 had,	 we
channelized	it	in	the	direction	of	sannyas,	renunciation.	The	man	who	could	have
been	 a	 Ford	 became	 a	 Shankaracharya.	 The	 man	 who	 could	 have	 been	 a
Rockefeller	became	Gautam	the	Buddha.	So	we	produced	great	sannyasins;	we
produced	 Buddha,	 Shankara,	 Nagarjuna,	 Mahavira.	 But	 we	 failed	 to	 produce
able	capitalists	--
those	skilled	 in	creating	wealth.	Because	of	our	opposition	 to	 riches,	we	could
not	direct	our	talent	that	way.
A	traveler,	Count	Keyserling,	after	his	visit	 to	India,	wrote	 in	his	diary	a	small
sentence:
"India	is	a	rich	country	where	poor	people	live."	I	was	a	little	amazed	to	read	it.
And	 I	 thought	Keyserling	was	 simply	 crazy.	 If	 India	was	 a	 rich	 country,	 how
could	its	people	be	poor?	And	if	its	people	were	poor,	how	could	it	be	called	a
rich	 country?	But	 then	 I	 understood	 his	 joke.	A	 paradox	 --	 and	 yet	 how	 true!
India	 has	 the	 potential,	 the	 talent	 to	 become	 rich,	 but	 it	 is	 essential	 that	 the
country's	talent	and	will	flow	in	that	direction	in	an	organized	manner.	Then	only
riches	are	produced.
Please	do	not	remain	under	the	illusion	that	capital	is	produced	by	labor,	by	the
toil	 of	 the	 laborer.	 The	 laborer,	 the	 worker,	 is	 not	 the	 creator	 of	 wealth.	 The
primitive	 people	 all	 over	 have	 been	 toiling	 for	 ages,	 and	 yet	 they	 could	 not
produce	any	wealth.	The	poor	of	Africa	have	been	toiling	hard,	and	yet	Africa	is
steeped	in	poverty.	The	poor	of	Asia	also	have	been	toiling,	but	are	as	poor	as
any.	If	labor	could	produce	wealth,	the	whole	world	would	have	been	rolling	in
wealth.	The	 producer	 of	wealth	 is	 someone	 else.	He	 is	 the	 entrepreneur	 --	 the
creative	 talent	behind	capitalism.	Capitalism	gave	opportunity	 to	such	 talent	 to
produce,	organize	and	manage	wealth.	Capitalism	is	organized	production	on	a
mass	scale.
The	 great	 change	which	 capitalism	made	was	 that	 it	 substituted	manual	 labor
with	machines.	Because	man's	 labor	cannot	produce	wealth.	However	hard	his
hands	toil,	they	cannot	produce	enough	even	to	fill	his	stomach.
In	the	time	of	Buddha,	the	entire	population	of	India	was	twenty	millions.	And
this	 population	 could	 not	 have	 been	 bigger	 than	 this,	 because	 nine	 out	 of	 ten
children	had	to	die	for	lack	of	food,	medicines	and	housing.	There	was	no	way	to
save	 them.	 But	 during	 the	 last	 hundred	 and	 fifty	 years,	 a	 tremendous	 thing
happened;	it	is	called	the	population-explosion.	Today	there	are	three	and	a	half
billion	people	on	our	planet.	Three	and	a	half	billion	people	are	alive	today,	only
because	of	capitalism.	Without	it	 they	would	have	perished.	It	was	unthinkable
in	 the	 times	 before	 capitalism	 that	 this	 planet	 could	 maintain	 such	 a	 huge
population.	What	did	capitalism	do?
First,	 it	 replaced	man	with	 the	machine;	 it	 introduced	 technology.	 It	 freed	man
from	 labor	 and	 engaged	 the	 machine.	 This	 in	 its	 turn	 had	 two	 results.	 The
capacity	 of	 the	machine	 is	 limitless;	man's	 capacity	 is	 very	 limited.	What	 one
machine	can	do	in	a	day	will	need	tens	of	thousands	of	men,	even	millions,	to	do
with	 their	 hands.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 the	 machine	 that	 the	 phenomenon	 of	 mass
production	was	possible.	With	 the	machine	began	 the	enormous	 stockpiling	of
wealth	in	the	world.
And	 secondly,	 with	 the	 advent	 of	 the	machine	man	 became	 free	 --	 free	 from
slavery.	 The	 end	 of	 serfdom.	 liquidation	 of	 slavery,	 was	 another	 gift	 of
capitalism	 to	 mankind.	 Had	 not	 the	 machine	 come	 into	 being	 slavery	 would
never	have	ended.	It	was	impossible	to	banish	serfdom	and	slavery	without	the
machine.	 Without	 the	 machine	 man	 would	 have	 had	 to	 remain	 in	 bondage
because	 then	 he	was	 bound	 to	 be	 forced	 to	work,	whipped	 to	work	 hard.	 For
without	force	it	is	not	possible	to	make	a	man	work	hard.	Only	with	the	coming
of	the	machine	could	slavery	be	liquidated.
Today	man	is	free:	he	is	not	a	slave.
But	 socialism	 has	 been	 spreading	 another	 illusion,	 another	 lie.	 It	 has	 given
currency	to	a	false	notion	that	it	is	labor,	it	is	the	worker,	who	creates	capital	and
wealth.	 It	 is	 not	 really	 so.	Already	 labor	 plays	 a	 secondary	part,	 a	 very	 small,
insignificant	part	in	the	production	of	wealth.	And	sooner	or	later	the	worker	is
going	to	become	superfluous.	Then	the	machine	will	have	replaced	him	entirely.
Within	fifty	years	there	will	be	no	man	known	as	a	laborer	on	this	earth.	And	it
will	be	good.	It	is	degrading	for	a	man	to	do	a	job	which	a	machine	can	do.	So
the	worker	will	be	useless.	Gradually	the	worker	has	been	ceasing	to	be	a	part	of
the	productive	system.	And	in	fifty	years	he	will	become	wholly	useless.
He	will	not	be	needed	at	all	because	labor	is	a	non-essential	part	of	production.
The	essential	part	of	production	is	the	productive	mind.	But	socialists	have	given
currency	 to	 an	 illusion	 that	wealth	 has	 been	produced	by	muscles,	 brawn,	 and
that	labor	is	the	kingpin	of	the	productive	machine.	If	this	insistent	lie	wins,	and
brawn	dominates	 the	brain,	 then	mind	will	disappear,	and	brawn	will	 return	 to
the	very	time,	thousands	of	years	before,	when	poverty	and	starvation	stalked	the
earth.
The	 entire	wealth	 of	 the	world	 has	 been	 the	 invention	 of	 the	mind.	Mind	 has
created	 all	 wealth.	 And	 remember,	 not	 all	 the	 people	 have	 contributed	 to	 its
production.	All	the	people	have	not	even	worked	for	it.	One	Einstein	discovers	a
law,	and	the	whole	of	mankind	profits	from	it.	One	Ford	creates	wealth,	and	it
becomes	distributed	among	all.
But	 it	 is	 being	 said	 that	 the	 capitalist	 exploits	 the	wealth	 of	 the	 people.	There
could	be	no	greater	 lie	 than	 this.	The	wealth	 that	does	not	exist,	how	can	 it	be
exploited.	Only	that	wealth	call	be	exploited	which	exists	some	where.	How	can
a	non-existing	wealth	be	exploited?
Capitalism	 does	 not	 exploit;	 it	 creates	 wealth.	 But	 once	 wealth	 is	 created,	 it
begins	 to	 show,	 and	 becomes	 the	 object	 of	 envy	 for	 thousands.	 The	 hold	 of
socialism	is	not	because	it	believes	in	equality	between	man	and	man.	It	 is	not
true	that	every	man	thinks	the	other	as	his	equal.	The	basic	cause	of	its	hold	is
the	innate	jealousy	of	man.	He	is	jealous	of	those	who	have	succeeded,	who	have
prospered,	who	have	sought	and	found	a	place	in	life.	A	major	part	of	mankind
has	 always	 lived	 in	 inertia;	 they	 have	 never	 produced	 wealth	 or	 power	 or
knowledge.	But	 they	have	certainly	become	conscious.	They	have	come	to	see
that	 some	 people	 have	 intelligence	 and	 knowledge	 and	 wealth.	 They	 have
something.	And	for	sure,	the	jealousy	of	the	masses,	of	millions	of	masses,	can
be	aroused	and	whetted.	The	revolution	that	took	place	in	Russia	was	the	result
of	jealousy.
So	was	 the	 Chinese	 revolution.	 And	 the	 talk	 of	 socialism	 in	 India	 also	 stems
from	 this	 very	 source.	 Jealousy	 is	 behind	 them	 all.	 But	 remember,	 we	 cannot
transform	a	society	through	jealousy.	And	also	remember,	the	transformation	that
comes	through	jealousy	can	never	be	fruitful,	nor	can	it	bring	peace,	well-being
and	happiness	to	society.	It	can't	do	any	good.	It	is	also	good	to	remember	that
through	 jealousy	 we	 can	 destroy	 a	 system,	 but	 cannot	 create	 a	 new	 order.
Jealousy	 has	 never	 been	 a	 creative	 force;	 it	 can	 unmake,	 it	 can	 destroy,	 but	 it
cannot	make	--	jealousy	cannot	even	think	of	it.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 a	 man	 died.	 Before	 he	 died	 he	 called	 all	 his	 sons	 to	 his
deathbed	and	asked	them	for	a	promise.	They	were	asked	to	fulfill	a	last	wish	of
their	 dying	 father.	His	 elder	 sons	were	wise	 about	 the	ways	 of	 their	 father,	 so
they	kept	 their	distance.	But	the	youngest	did	not	know	his	father	well,	and	he
went	to	him.	The	father	said	to	him	in	a	whisper,"You	are	my	only	true	son,	and	I
entrust	you	with	a	responsibility.	After	I	am	dead,	cut	my	body	into	pieces	and
throw	them	at	the	houses	of	the	neighbors."	When	the	son	asked,	"What	do	you
mean?~"	the	dying	man	said,	"When	my	soul	will	be	on	its	way	to	heaven,	I	will
have	great	peace	of	mind	to	see	my	neighbors	being	driven	to	jail.	My	heart	will
be	well-satiated.	All	my	life	I	desired	to	send	them	to	prison.	One	neighbor	has	a
big	 house,	while	mine	 is	 so	 small.	 The	 other	 has	 beautiful	 horses,	 and	 I	 have
none.	They	have	this	thing	and	that	thing,	while	I	have	nothing.	The	least	I	can
do	is	this:	after	my	death	my	corpse	should	be	sliced	into	pieces	and	thrown	on
their	rooftops."
This	man	lives	in	jealousy.	You	can,	for	sure,	have	a	big	house,	but	not	through
jealousy.
It	happens	through	creativity.	Yes,	Jealousy	can	reduce	a	big	house	into	a	small
one,	hut	it	cannot	turn	the	small	house	into	a	big	house.	Jealousy	has	no	creative
power,	it	is	the	companion	of	death.	not	of	life.
Jealousy	is	at	the	root	of	the	influence	that	socialism	has	in	the	world.	Jealousy	is
its	very	foundation.	What	 is	 interesting	 is	 that	 this	 jealousy	does	not	afflict	 the
really	poor	people	as	much	as	it	does	those	who	are	midway	between	the	poor
and	the	rich	--	the	political	leaders.	And	remember,	the	harm	their	jealousy	will
do	to	the	rich	is	not	that	big.
Ultimately	it	will	be	the	poor	who	will	suffer	the	most.	Because	the	wealth	that
the	rich	ones	are	creating	is	ultimately	going	to	pass	into	the	hands	of	the	poor;	it
is	already	reaching	them,	it	is	bound	to	reach	them.	There	is	no	way	to	stop	this
process.
Once	 I	was	 traveling	by	 train	 to	Delhi.	A	gentleman	was	with	me	 in	 the	 same
compartment.	On	our	way	we	came	across	a	big	building,	and	around	it	were	a
few	huts.
The	gentleman,	pointing	 the	big	house	out	 to	me,	 said,	 "Do	you	see	 that	 large
mansion,	how	it	has	become	so	big?	It	has	done	so	at	 their	cost,	at	 the	cost	of
those	huts.	It	is	responsible	for	their	miserable	state!"	I	said	to	him,	"You	see	it
the	 wrong	 way.	 You	 remove	 the	 big	 house	 from	 their	 midst,	 and	 see	 what
happens.	 The	 small	 ones	 will	 not	 become	 big	 with	 the	 removal	 of	 the	 big
building;	rather,	they	will	just	disappear.	It	is	because	of	the	construction	of	that
large	building	that	the	huts	have	come	into	being;	it	is	as	it	should	be.	The	small
ones	owe	their	existence	to	the	large	house.	No	house	can	be	built	alone.	When	a
large	house	is	constructed,	ten	small	ones	come	up	in	its	wake.	After	all,	who	is
going	to	work	for	the	construction	of	the	big	house?	And	if	you	pull	it	down,	all
others	will	soon	disappear."
In	 the	 past,	 if	 ten	 babies	 were	 born,	 nine	 of	 them	 had	 to	 die.	 Capitalism	 has
saved	those	nine	from	death.	As	a	result,	there	has	been	phenomenal	growth	in
the	population	of	 the	poor,	who	have	 to	 live	 in	small	houses,	 in	hovels.	 It	 is	a
painful	thing	that	they	live	in	miserable	conditions.	But	the	problem	of	providing
them	with	good	houses	will	not	be	solved	by	pulling	down	the	big	ones.
I	say	that	if	the	big	ones	are	destroyed,	the	small	ones	will	also	perish.	They	have
come	 in	 the	wake	 of	 the	 big	 ones.	 In	 a	way,	 the	 nine	 surviving	 children,	who
used	 to	 die	 in	 the	 past,	 owe	 their	 lives	 to	 the	 big	 houses.	 It	 is	 because	 of
capitalism	 that	 the	worker	 gets	 employment	 and	wages	 and	 houses	 to	 live	 in.
That	worker	will	die	if	you	expropriate	capital	and	distribute	it.
Our	efforts	should	be	to	raise	the	workers	to	the	height	of	the	capitalists.	On	the
contrary,	we	are	trying	to	pull	down	the	latter	to	the	level	of	workers.	We	have	to
strive	 to	 turn	 the	 small	 houses	 into	 big	 houses.	And	 to	 do	 so	we	will	 have	 to
construct	bigger	and	still	bigger	houses.	Then	alone	we	can	attain	to	socialism,
and	not	otherwise.
But	 very	 often	 false	 reasoning	 comes	 in	 our	 way.	 This	 is	 happening	 in
communist	China.
They	 think	 that	 by	destroying	 the	big	houses,	 they	will	 raise	 the	height	 of	 the
small	ones.
This	is	not	possible.	Surely	the	big	house	will	go,	but	that	will	not	help	the	poor.
If	the	poor	people,	with	small	houses,	could	build	big	houses,	they	would	have
done	it	a	long	time	back.	No,	with	the	destruction	of	the	rich,	the	poor	will	return
to	their	old	inertia,	their	habitual	lethargy.
Before	being	 removed	from	his	high	office	 in	Russia,	Khrushchev	had	made	a
very	significant	statement	which	is	worth	considering.	He	said	that	the	greatest
problem	that	his	country	was	facing	was	that	no	one	was	wiling	to	work,	that	the
youth	of	Russia	was	not	at	all	interested	in	doing	anything.	It	is	strange	that	the
workers	 of	Russia,	 the	 young	men	 of	 that	 socialist	 country,	 are	 not	willing	 to
work.	 They	 are	 lapsing	 into	 lethargy	 and	 laziness.	 Stalin	 had	 forced	 them	 to
work,	and	so	the	way	he	was	treated	after	his	death	is	understandable.	His	dead
body	was	removed	from	he	grave	in	Red	Square	facing	the	Kremlin,	where	he
used	 to	 acknowledge	 the	 salutes	of	his	people	 for	decades.	As	 long	 as	he	was
alive,	he	tyranized	Russia	like	a	monster	and	indulged	in	mass	killing.	Force	and
fear	of	death	had	made	the	people	work.	But	as	soon	as	that	fear	was	removed,
people	lapsed	into	inaction.
Capitalism,	on	the	other	hand,	introduced	the	factor	of	incentive	in	production	--
the	incentive	to	work,	to	produce.	Productive	work	became	very	attractive.	This
attraction,	 this	 incentive	 to	work,	will	 go	 if	 capitalism	 goes.	 This	 is	what	 has
happened	in	Russia.
But	there	is	a	way	out	of	this	dilemma.	If	capitalism	is	allowed	its	full	growth,
and	socialism	stems	from	capitalism	very	naturally,	 then	incentive	will	 remain.
And	 it	 seems	 to	 me	 this	 is	 possible.	 It	 will	 be	 possible	 in	 America.	 How
paradoxical	 it	 is,	 but	 it	 is	 true	 nonetheless,	 that	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 next	 fifty
years	America	will	 increasingly	move	 toward	 socialism	 and	Russia	will	move
toward	capitalism.	Without	knowing	and	without	a	bloody	revolution	America	is
turning	 socialist	 every	day.	Why?	Because	when	 there	 is	 abundant	wealth,	 too
much	wealth,	private	ownership	of	propertY	becomes	meaningless.
Private	 ownership	will	 be	 useless	 only	when	 there	 is	 an	 abundance	 of	wealth,
much	more	than	is	needed.	If	we	go	to	a	village	today,	we	will	find	that	there	is
no	private	ownership	of	water,	because	in	the	village	there	is	plenty	of	water	for
a	small	number	of	inhabitants.
But	if	there	is	a	shortage	of	water	tomorrow,	and	the	number	of	inhabitants	goes
up,	 personal	 ownership	 of	 water	 will	 come	 in.	 Now	 air	 is	 free	 for	 all.	 But	 if
tomorrow	 there	 is	 a	 shortage	 of	 air,	 shortage	 of	 oxygen,	 and	 the	 number	 of
people	 increases,	 then	clever	and	resourceful	people	will	store	oxygen	in	 tanks
and	 lock	 them	up	 in	 their	 houses.	 Private	 ownership	will	 have	 started.	 Private
ownership	of	wealth	will	last	as	long	as	there	is	scarcity	of	wealth	and	excess	of
population.	 There	 is	 only	 one	 logical	 and	 natural	 way	 of	 ending	 private
ownership,	and	it	is	that	wealth	becomes	as	abundant	as	air	and	water.
And	it	is	possible.	Even	today,	one	who	is	considered	poor	in	America,	is	a	rich
man	according	to	Russian	standards.	The	rich	man	of	Russia	is	way	behind	the
poor	 man	 of	 America.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 accidental.	 And	 it	 is	 a	 matter	 of	 serious
consideration	 that	 even	 after	 fifty	 years	 of	 socialism	 Russia	 remains	 a	 poor
country.	For	the	last	ten	years.	Russia	has	not	even	been	producing	enough	food
for	its	people.	It	 is	not	only	India	which	has	to	import	food	from	outside,	even
Russia	has	been	buying	its	food	from	the	capitalist	countries.	Where	is	socialism
if	socialist	bellies	have	to	be	filled	with	capitalist	food?
Lethargy	and	sloth	have	gripped	Russia	once	again	capitalism	provides	incentive
to	 work,	 to	 produce.	 If	 that	 incentive	 is	 removed,	 then	 force	 is	 the	 only
alternative.	Then	 you	 have	 to	make	 the	 people	work	 at	 gunpoint.	But	 a	 social
order	maintained	by	force	cannot	be	lasting.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote	about	Khrushchev.
Khrushchev	was	 addressing	 a	party	meeting	 and	vehemently	 criticizing	Stalin.
Somebody	from	the	rear	of	the	gathering	said,	"Sir,	when	Stalin	was	committing
these	 crimes,	murdering	millions,	 deporting	 tens	of	 thousands	 to	 concentration
camps	 in	Siberia,	giving	 the	whole	of	Russia	a	bloodbath,	you	were	with	him.
Why	did	not	you	protest	then?"
Khrushchev	became	silent	 for	a	 full	minute,	 then	he	said:	 "Will	 the	gentleman
who	asked	this	question	kindly	send	me	his	name	and	address?"	But	the	man	did
not	rise	in	his	seat	again.	Then	Khrushchev	said,	"You	please	rise	and	just	show
your	face."	Yet	nobody	stood	up.	Khrushchev	then	said,	"I	remained	quiet	for	the
very	reason	which	forces	you	to	be	quiet	right	now.	To	remain	alive	I	had	to	keep
quiet."
In	capitalism,	wealth	is	produced	in	a	very	natural	manner.	Capitalism	does	not
use	a	stick,	a	gun,	or	force	of	any	kind.	It	provides	incentive	to	work,	to	produce.
Every	person	has	a	small	world	of	his	own,	and	his	own	motivation,	his	drive.	If
my	wife	is	sick,	I	can	work	through	the	night	for	her	sake,	but	if	I	am	told	that
humanity	is	on	its	sickbed,	it	will	go	over	my	head.	Humanity	is	such	a	distant
thing	that	I	fail	to	relate	with	it.	I	remain	completely	unaffected.	To	educate	my
child	I	can	do	anything.	I	can	toil	under	the	midday	sun.	But	if	you	tell	me	that
we	have	to	educate	all	mankind,	it	does	not	inspire	and	stir	me	at	all.	It	seems	so
unreal.	 I	 can	 very	well	 understand	 and	 appreciate	 if	 you	 suggest	 that	 I	 should
have	a	house	of	my	own	with	a	beautiful	garden	in	the	front,	but	tell	me	to	work
for	the	prosperity	and	well-being	of	the	nation,	to	turn	it	into	a	great	garden,	and
the	thing	gets	lost	in	smoke.
The	 circle	 of	 man's	 consciousness	 is	 very	 small;	 it	 is	 like	 an	 earthen	 lamp
shedding	 its	 light	 on	 a	 limited	 area	 of	 five	 square	 feet	 around	 itself.	 Such	 is
man's	consciousness;	its	scope	is	very	limited.	The	family	is	that	small	circle	of
man's	consciousness.	He	has	 largely	been	confined	 to	his	family	so	far,	and	he
has	not	yet	grown	enough	to	go	beyond	its	 limit.	As	he	tries	to	raise	his	sights
beyond	the	family	--	society,	nation	and	humanity	are	the	beyonds	--	he	begins	to
lose	his	 interest,	his	 incentive,	his	drive.	Society,	nation	and	humanity	 --	 these
are	such	vast	spaces	that	they	do	not	mean	a	thing	to	him,	they	do	not	affect	his
consciousness.	They	simply	don't	inspire	him.
Capitalism	launched	a	drive	for	production	of	wealth	on	this	very	basis	--	on	the
basis	of	man's	limited	interests,	individual	incentives.	It	made	him	work	and	earn
for	 himself	 and	 his	 family.	 And	 the	 drive	 succeeded	 immensely.	 Capitalism
created	both	knowledge	and	wealth.	The	knowledge	we	gained	 in	 the	hundred
and	 fifty	years	of	 capitalism	equals	 the	knowledge	of	 the	world	gained	over	 a
period	of	eighteen	hundred	years	after	Christ.	And	again,	mankind	has	gained	as
much	knowledge	in	the	last	fifteen	years	as	it	had	gained	in	the	first	hundred	and
fifty	years	of	capitalism.	And	 the	amount	of	knowledge	gained	 in	 the	 last	 five
years	 again	 equals	 the	 previous	 gains.	What	 the	 old	world	 had	 taken	 eighteen
hundred	years	to	achieve,	the	world	of	capitalism	has	done	in	just	five	years.	A
miracle	indeed!
And	still	we	go	on	condemning	capitalism	without	realizing	what	it	has	done	for
us.	 It	 has	 prepared	 the	 way	 for	 every	 man	 and	 woman	 to	 participate	 in	 the
production	of	wealth.	It	has	created	that	space	where	wealth	will	rain	like	water.
It	 has	 laid	 the	 groundwork	 for	 the	 coming	 of	 immense	 affluence,	 for	 an
abundance	of	wealth.	And	the	day	we	have	that	abundance	of	wealth	the	child	of
capitalism	will	be	born.	That	will	be	true	socialism.
What	do	I	mean	when	I	warn	you	against	socialism?	I	ask	you	to	let	the	time	of
pregnancy	be	complete.	Capitalism	 is	 that	 time	of	pregnancy	 --	 let	 it	 complete
nine	 months.	 Even	 Marx	 had	 not	 imagined	 that	 capitalism	 would	 first	 be
liquidated	 in	Russia,	because	Russia	was	not	capitalist.	Marx	had	not	dreamed
that	 China	 would	 turn	 communist,	 because	 that	 country	 was	 then	 terribly
backward	and	poor.	Marx	had	thought	that	capitalism	would	break	down	first	in
America	 or	 Germany.	 But	 it	 broke	 down	 in	 Russia	 and	 China.	 And	 now	 the
effort	 in	 India	 is	 to	 liquidate	 it.	 These	 are	 all	 poor	 and	 backward	 countries
without	any	capital,	without	any	assets.	But	 they	have	one	thing	in	abundance:
they	have	 large	masses	of	 the	poor.	And	 the	 envy	of	 the	masses	 can	be	 easily
aroused.
Marx's	 thinking	 was	 very	 scientific.	 He	 rightly	 said	 that	 capitalism	 would	 be
abolished	in	the	most	developed	countries,	where	it	would	have	attained	its	full
growth.	 Because	 when	 wealth	 is	 abundant,	 private	 property	 becomes
meaningless.	Marx	 did	 not	 know	 that	 revolutions	 would	 be	made,	 not	 on	 the
measure	of	capitalistic	development	and	affluence,	but	by	exciting	the	jealousy
of	 the	 pool.	 The	 countries	 that	 became	 socialist	 are	 all	 very	 poor	 countries.
Socialism	should	have	first	come	to	America,	but	it	did	not.	In	a	way,	socialism
is	entering	America,	but	very	silently.	Whatever	is	significant	in	life	comes	very
silently;	it	does	not	come	with	drums	and	trumpets.	No	one	knows	when	a	seed
bursts	into	a	sprout;	no	announcement	is	made	when	the	sun	rises.	Whatever	is
meaningful	 in	 life	walks	 on	 silent	 feet.	 and	 one	 comes	 to	 know	of	 its	 coming
only	after	it	has	already	come.	What	comes	with	drums	and	trumpets,	know	it	is
trying	to	come	before	its	time.
Socialism	wants	 to	come	drumming	and	shouting,	and	without	knowing	 that	 it
cannot	 come	 until	 capitalism	 is	 completed.	 What	 will	 happen	 in	 India	 if	 we
destroy	its	nascent,	developing	capitalistic	system,	and	embark	on	distributing	its
scanty	wealth?	This	will,	of	course,	gratify	the	poor	man's	jealousy,	but	he	does
not	know	that	this	will	also	bring	still	more	poverty	and	misery	for	him.
The	system	of	capital-building	in	India	today	needs	every	cooperation.	Indeed,	it
is	the	right	time	for	India	to	take	a	decision	and	resolve	that	in	fifty	years'	time
we	will	create	capitalism	and	become	capitalist.	Then	socialism	will	come;	it	is
then	bound	to	come	--
and	 it	will	 come	 of	 itself.	 It	will	 not	 need	 an	 Indira	 or	 anyone	 else	 to	 help	 it
come.	It	will	come	on	its	own,	like	capitalism.	Did	anyone	bring	in	capitalism?
No,	capitalism	came	by	itself	when	the	feudal	system	reached	its	peak.	Socialism
will	come	 the	same	way.	But	patience	 is	needed,	patience	 is	essential.	And	we
seem	to	have	no	patience	at	all.	And	impatience	will	cause	us	so	much	harm	that
it	cannot	be	calculated.	And	will	it	be	any	use	to	be	wiser	after	the	event?
I	have	heard...	Once	a	socialist	visited	the	USA's	Rothschild	and	said,	"You	have
grabbed	the	wealth	of	the	nation.	If	you	redistribute	it,	the	country	will	become
rich."	Rothschild	heard	him	patiently,	then	took	out	a	piece	of	paper,	made	some
calculations,	handed	him	 five	 cents	 and	 said,	 "Here	 is	your	 share.	You	 take	 it.
And	 whoever	 else	 will	 come	 to	 me	 I	 will	 give	 him	 his	 share.	 If	 I	 were	 to
distribute	my	entire	wealth,	each	person	in	the	country	would	get	five	cents.	I	am
prepared	to	distribute,	and	I	will	not	refuse	anyone	who	comes	for	his	share.	But
do	you	think	socialism	will	come	if	everyone	gets	five	cents?"
Rothschild	had	at	least	five	cents	to	give.	Birla,	Tata	and	Sahu	of	India	will	not
be	 able	 to	 give	 even	 one	 cent.	 We	 do	 not	 have	 capitalists	 as	 such,	 because
capitalism	here	is	in	its	embryonic	stage.	Bombay	is	a	little	well-off,	but	Bombay
is	 not	 India.	 The	whole	 of	 India	 is	 poor.	 Her	 living	 conditions	 today	 are	 like
those	 of	 Europe	 before	 the	 industrial	 revolution.	 We	 have	 not	 even	 had	 our
industrial	 revolution,	 and	 we	 are	 dreaming	 about	 socialism.	 First,	 let	 the
industrial	 revolution	 come.	 First,	 let	 the	 whole	 country	 be	 covered	 with
industries	and	industries.	Let	the	whole	country	be	engaged	in	producing	wealth;
let	there	be	millions	of	big	and	small	Tatas	and	Birlas,	and	kt	the	whole	country
be	filled	with	wealth.	And	when	there	is	abundant	wealth	here,	no	Tata,	no	Birla
can	stop	the	distribution	of	that	wealth.
My	understanding	of	the	problem	is	this:	It	is	only	the	Tatas	and	Birlas	who	can
produce	 that	 enormous	 wealth	 which	 is	 needed	 for	 distribution.	 Distribution
cannot	happen	otherwise.
If	 I	 warn	 you	 against	 socialism,	 it	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 I	 am	 the	 enemy	 of
socialism.	In	fact,	the	socialists	of	the	day	are	its	enemies,	for	they	do	not	know
what	they	are	doing.
They	are	 setting	on	 fire	 the	very	house	 they	 live	 in.	They	will	 be	burned,	 and
with	them	the	whole	country	will	be	burned.
India's	 poverty	 is	 very	 chronic.	 So	 think	 well	 before	 you	 take	 a	 step	 in	 this
direction.	Let	not	the	capital-forming	process	in	this	country	break	down.	In	fact,
it	is	already	weakening,	but	we	do	not	see	it.	It	seems	we	have	decided	not	to	see
anything	 with	 open	 eyes.	 The	 government	 is	 making	 a	 mess	 of	 everything	 it
undertakes	to	do.	For	every	one	rupee	invested	in	the	private	sector	of	industries,
we	 have	 invested	 two	 in	 the	 public	 sector.	But	 all	 the	 public	 undertakings	 are
running	 at	 a	 loss.	 Yet	 the	 government	 says	 that	 all	 the	 industries	 should	 be
nationalized.
It	 is	 important	 to	 see	 and	 understand	 what	 is	 hiding	 behind	 the	 facade	 of
socialism.	We	talk	of	socialism,	when	in	reality	it	is	state-ism	that	comes.	In	the
name	 of	 socialism,	 state	 capitalism	 is	 enthroned.	 It	 is	 nothing	 but	 state
capitalism.	Socialism	means	that	the	society	should	own	wealth;	that	is,	wealth
should	 be	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 society.	 Does	 this	 really	 happen	 in	 socialist
countries?	The	contrary	happens.	From	 the	hands	of	 the	society,	wealth	passes
into	the	hands	of	the	state.	Where	we	had	innumerable	capitalists,	now	there	is
only	one	--	 the	state.	And	we	know	how	inefficient	 the	state	 is.	Even	the	petty
shopkeeper	in	a	village	is	not	as	inefficient	as	the	state.	The	inefficiency	of	the
state	is	appalling.	Even	the	petty	grocer,	even	the	peddler	 in	the	street,	 is	more
intelligent	 than	 the	 state.	 And	 we	 think	 of	 entrusting	 the	 entire	 wealth	 of	 the
country	and	all	 its	means	of	production	 to	 this	state.	One	wonders	 if	 India	has
decided	to	commit	hara-kiri!
It	will	be	dangerous.	Men	who	hold	power	are	already	mad	--	mad	with	power.
They	now	want	 to	 take	over	 the	power	of	wealth	as	well.	They	cannot	 tolerate
that	wealth	should	remain	in	the	hands	of	others.	In	fact,	power-drunk	people	all
over	 the	world	are	anxious	 to	grab	economic	power	 for	 themselves.	Then	 they
will	 have	 total	 power,	 absolute	 power	 in	 their	 hands.	 Political	 power	 plus
economic	power	makes	for	what	is	called	totalitarianism.	Political	power	alone
was	enough	to	turn	their	heads;	if	economic	power	also	passes	into	their	hands,
they	will	become	dictators.	And	then	nothing	can	be	done	to	remove	them	.	After
all,	nothing	could	be	done	to	remove	Stalin	and	Hitler	from	power.
Do	you	know	that	Hitler	was	a	socialist?	The	name	of	his	party	was	the	National
Socialist	 Party.	 He	 was	 also	 a	 socialist.	 Now	 Mao	 cannot	 be	 removed	 from
power.
And	 also	 remember,	 governments	 in	 the	world	 already	 hold	 enormous	 power,
political	power.	 If	 economic	power	 also	passes	 into	 their	hands,	 the	 individual
will	become	quite	 impotent.	The	whole	nation	will	become	impotent.	Then	the
individual	is	left	with	no	power,	nothing.	You	may	not	be	aware	that	individual
freedom,	freedom	of	thought,	can	only	exist	if	there	is	political	freedom,	if	there
is	 economic	 freedom.	 If	 economic	 and	 political	 power	 are	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 a
single	group,	then	the	individual	is	deprived	of	his	freedom	of	thought.	There	is
no	 freedom	 of	 thought	 in	 Russia.	 There	 is	 no	 freedom	 of	 thought	 in	 China.
Tomorrow	it	may	not	be	here	in	India	either.
But	 these	 things	happen	step	by	step	--	gradually	--	and	 take	people	unawares.
Take	away	a	man's	property	and	you	destroy	ninety	percent	of	his	personality.
With	the	loss	of	property,	he	is	ninety	percent	dead.	With	the	loss	of	property	his
capacity	 to	 think	withers	 away,	because	his	 capacity	 to	be	an	 individual,	 to	be
himself,	 has	 withered	 away.	 The	 individual	 will	 die	 if	 the	 state	 has	 absolute
power.	 Currently,	 the	 greatest	 problem	 facing	 the	 whole	 world,	 and	 even	 this
country,	is	how	to	save	the	individual.	The	state	is	out	to	grab	everything,	but	it
grabs	with	cunning.	There	is	a	method	in	its	madness.	It	grabs	power	in	the	name
of	the	people	themselves.	It	says	this	iS	being	done	in	their	interest;	it	is	in	their
interest	 that	 wealth	 and	 means	 of	 production	 are	 being	 taken	 over.	 So	 the
politicians	not	only	usurp	power,	 they	also	win	 the	applause	of	 the	people,	 the
very	people	who	are	being	dispossessed.	The	people	who	applaud	them	do	not
know	 that	 they	 are	 applauding	 their	 hangmen,	 who	 are	 tighening	 the	 noose
around	their	necks.	Soon	they	will	be	hanged.
Once	property	and	the	means	of	production	pass	into	the	hands	of	the	state,	that
state	 becomes	 absolute,	 despotic.	 And	 in	 the	 same	 measure	 the	 individual
becomes	helpless	and	impotent	before	it.	The	individual	becomes	faceless,	even
soulless.	For	the	last	fifty	years	a	small	group	of	fifty	persons	is	ruling	Russia.
Power	has	constantly	remained	in	the	hands	of	this	group;	it	is	not	allowed	to	go
elsewhere.	 Whether	 Stalin	 dies	 or	 Khrushchev	 comes	 in;	 whether	 Kosygin,
Breshnev	or	whosoever	is	there,	this	caucus	of	fifty,	tightly	entrenched	in	power,
has	 been	 keeping	 Russia	 under	 its	 jackboot.	 This	 group	 has	 been	 the
Frankenstein	of	Russia.	No	opposition	is	possible,	no	dissent	is	possible.
Before	 a	man	 thinks	of	dissenting,	 his	 tongue	may	be	 cut;	 before	he	 thinks	of
opposing,	he	himself	may	disappear	from	the	world.	What	can	the	individual	do
if	the	entire	power	is	in	the	hands	of	the	state?
So	remember,	 the	power	of	the	state	has	to	be	increasingly	reduced;	in	no	case
should	it	 increase.	For,	ultimately,	we	need	a	society	 in	which	the	state	will	be
just	 a	 functional	unit,	 nothing	more.	 I	 don't	 think	a	 food	minister	of	 a	 country
should	 have	 much	 importance.	 How	 is	 he	 important?	 The	 family	 cook	 has	 a
place	 in	 the	 family	 --	 the	 same	 place	 a	 food	 minister	 has	 in	 relation	 to	 the
country.	 He	 is	 a	 big	 cook.	 If	 he	 serves	 us	 good	 food,	 he	 should	 be	 praised
sometimes,	but	only	as	much	as	a	cook	is	praised.	Sometimes	you	may	tip	him,
but	only	in	the	way	you	tip	a	cook.	But	the	present	food	minister	is	not	a	cook,
he	is	a	man	of	power.	He	has	much	power.	But	he	is	aware	that	his	power	lacks
something.	 It	 lacks	 something	 because	 people	 have	 personal,	 private	 property.
And	private	property	can	rebel.	Private	property	can	dissent,	resist	and	fight.	The
man	of	property	can	think,	and	think	freely.	The	man	in	power	wants	to	deprive
him	of	it.
The	politician	 is	very	ambitious.	He	wants	 to	have	all	 the	power	 in	his	hands.
But	 when	 the	 state	 usurps	 both	 political	 and	 economic	 power,	 revolution
becomes	impossible;	then	there	is	no	way	to	rebel	and	revolt.	How	strange	it	is
that	Russia	had	a	revolution,	and	today	Soviet	Russia	is	the	one	country	where
revolution	 is	 impossible.	 It	 is	 unthinkable	 to	 stage	 another	 revolution	 there
because	the	state	has	at	its	disposal	enormous	and	unheard	of	means	to	suppress
its	people,	to	regiment	and	to	control	them.	Walls	have	ears,	and	the	tentacles	of
the	state	are	spread	all	over.	The	husband	is	afraid	of	his	wife.	While	talking	to
her	 he	 thinks	 twice	 if	 he	 should	 tell	 her	 what	 he	 wants	 to	 say,	 because,	 who
knows?	--
she	might	be	a	secret	agent.	The	father	cannot	talk	to	his	son	freely	because	to
talk	freely	is	dangerous.	Maybe	the	son	belongs	to	the	young	communist	league,
and	he	may	pass	the	information	on	to	the	authorities.	Every	son	is	 taught	 it	 is
the	nation	 that	matters,	not	 the	father	or	 the	mother.	The	husband	and	the	wife
are	not	important.	What	is	important	is	the	society,	the	state.
Socialism	is	spreading	a	very	illusory	idea	that	the	individual	has	no	value,	when
in	 reality,	 the	 individual,	 and	 only	 the	 individual,	 has	 value.	He	 is	 the	 highest
value	indeed!
What	is	the	value	of	society?	What	is	society	but	an	empty	word,	an	abstraction.
The	individual	is	real;	 the	individual	is	concrete.	Society	is	merely	a	collection
of	 individuals,	 a	 conglomeration.	But	 in	 the	 great	 din	 and	 bustle	 of	 socialism,
that	which	 is	has	no	value	and	 that	which	 is	not	has	become	valuable.	That	 is
why	 the	 individual	 can	 be	 sacrificed	 at	 the	 altar	 of	 the	 society.	 In	 fact,	 the
individual	 has	 forever	 been	 sacrificed	 for	 gods	 that	 do	 not	 exist.	 A	 god,	 a
goddess,	a	sacrificial	ritual	--	anything	is	good	enough	to	sacrifice	him	for.
The	 latest	 god	 is	 the	 society.	And	behind	 the	 society	 stands	 its	 real	 god	 --	 the
state.	The	individual	can	be	sacrificed	for	this	super-god.	You	can	massacre	the
individual	because	he	has	no	value,	he	is	nothing.	It	is	the	group,	to	the	society,
that	is	valuable.	But	where	is	the	thing	called	society?	I	have	never	come	across
it.	I	have	searched	for	it	here,	there	and	everywhere.	But	everywhere	I	have	met
the	individual	and	not	the	society.	Wherever	you	go,	you	will	find	the	individual.
Only	 the	 individual	 is.	 And	 he	 is	 the	 ultimate	 value.	 And	 it	 is	 dangerous	 to
destroy	this	value.
Someday	 socialism	will	 come;	 it	 is	 certain.	But	 it	will	 come,	 not	 to	 finish	 the
individual,	but	to	fulfill	him.	Beware	of	the	socialism	that	comes	to	wipe	out	the
individual.	It	is	not	socialism,	it	is	pure	and	simple	murder	of	the	individual.
Behind	socialism	is	the	state	--	behind	socialism	is	the	power-hungry	politician.
They	are	afraid	of	decentralized	power,	and	so	they	want	to	have	all	the	power
for	themselves.
And	the	last	thing	that	I'd	like	to	say	today	is	that	never	has	the	state	had	as	much
power	 as	 it	 has	 now.	And	 it	 is	 so	 because	 of	 the	 tremendous	 development	 in
technology.
Recently	a	friend	sent	me	a	picture.	I	was	shocked	to	see	that	picture;	I	could	not
sleep	the	whole	night.	I	was	much	worried.	But	I	wonder	if	any	concern	was	felt
about	 it	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 world.	 News	 about	 it	 was	 printed	 in	 newspapers
everywhere.	A	scientist	opened	the	skull	of	a	horse,	inserted	an	electrode	into	it
and	 then	closed	 the	 skull.	And	 the	horse	does	not	know	a	 thing	about	 it.	Now
signals	can	be	sent	to	this	horse	by	radio	from	places	thousands	of	miles	away,
and	the	horse	will	follow	the	signals;	it	will	do	what	it	 is	told	to	do.	The	horse
will	feel	that	the	signals	are	coming	from	his	own	mind.	If	the	scientist,	sitting	in
his	laboratory	thousands	of	miles	away,	signals	the	horse	to	lift	his	leg,	the	horse
will	do	his	bidding.	If	he	is	asked	to	dance,	he	will	dance.	The	friend	sent	me	the
picture	 of	 that	 horse,	 and	 he	 said,	 "What	 a	 great	 invention!"	 I	 sent	 it	 back,
saying,	"It	is	most	unfortunate."	Why	did	I	say	so?	Because	sooner	or	later,	the
state	is	going	to	place	this	electrode	in	the	brain	of	man,	and	he	will	not	know	of
it.	Then	rebellion	will	be	impossible.
A	chemical	revolution	is	taking	place.	Such	drugs	have	been	discovered	that	will
make	it	 impossible	for	any	revolution	to	happen.	It	has	been	found	that	a	rebel
has	 certain	 elements,	 certain	 chemicals	 in	 his	 system	which	 the	 non-rebel,	 the
conformist,	 lacks.	 And	 a	 search	 iS	 going	 on	 to	 find	 out	 such	 drugs	 as	 LSD,
mescaline	and	other,	to	finish	the	rebel	in	man.	Someday,	it	is	just	possible	a	few
drops	of	chemicals	will	be	secretly	mixed	with	the	water	of	your	city's	reservoir	-
-	 from	which	 the	 whole	 population	 gets	 its	 water	 supply	 --	 and	 without	 their
knowing,	 they	 will	 lose	 their	 rebellious	 spirit,	 their	 power	 to	 say	 "No".	 It	 is
exceedingly	dangerous	to	allow	the	state	to	take	over	absolute	power,	because	it
has	at	 its	disposal	 such	superior	 technology	 that	 it	 can	wipe	out	 the	 individual
completely
New	techniques	of	brainwashing	have	been	developed	and	perfected	which	can
erase	man's	memory.	If	a	man	is	kept	in	solitary	confinement	for	six	months,	his
memory	can	be	wiped	out	with	the	help	of	electric	shocks,	drugs,	brainwashing
methods	and	the	rest.
If	he	was	a	no-sayer,	a	non-conformist,	a	rebel,	he	will	forget	it	all;	he	will	even
forget	who	he	was.	If	he	had	an	ideology,	his	ideology	will	be	gone.	He	will	fail
to	say	who	he	was	and	what	his	ideology	was.	He	will	be	like	a	small	child	and
will	 have	 to	 learn	 his	 alphabet	 once	 again.	 He	 will	 have	 to	 begin	 from	 the
beginning.
If	 science	 is	 going	 to	 put	 so	much	 power	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 state,	 and	 then
economic	 power	 is	 also	 taken	 over	 by	 the	 same	 agency,	 it	means	 that	we	 are
preparing	our	own	funeral.
The	politician	does	not	deserve	power.	The	politician	is	not	worth	the	salt.	The
truth	is	that	throughout	history	he	has	failed	to	prove	his	worthiness;	he	has	only
shown	his	unworthiness,	utter	unworthiness.	In	fact,	the	power	of	the	politician
should	be	taken	away;	there	is	no	need	whatsoever	to	add	to	it.
The	 politician	 also	 knows	 that	 if	 he	 says	 that	 all	 power,	 all	 property,	 should
belong	to	the	state,	people	will	say	no	to	it.	Therefore	he	wears	a	different	mask
and	says	that	all	power,	all	property,	should	belong	to	the	society.	But	the	society
is	 an	 abstraction,	 and	 so	 the	 state	 appropriates	 everything	 in	 the	 name	 of	 the
society.	 Whatever,	 today,	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 name	 of	 socialism	 is	 really	 state
capitalism.	And	I	hold	that	private	capitalism	is	far	superior	to	state	capitalism.
Why?
Private	capitalism	is	superior	because	the	individual	in	private	capitalism	is	free.
It	is	superior	because	every	individual	has	the	incentive	to	produce	wealth.	It	is
superior	 because	 power	 is	 distributed	 and	 decentralized.	 And	 it	 is	 superior
because	 if	 someday	wealth	 is	 produced	 in	 abundance,	 socialism	will	 come	 by
itself.	Not	that	it	will	be	forced	to	come,	it	will	come	by	itself.	It	will	come,	not
be	made	to	come.	Forced	socialism	will	be	dangerous.	Let	 it	come	on	its	own.
But	how	will	it	come?
It	will	come	just	like	a	seed	blooms	into	a	flower.	It	will	come	naturally	and	by
itself,	not	forced	to	come	by	the	gardener.	If	the	gardener	uses	any	force,	there	is
every	 possibility	 that	 the	 seed	 itself	 will	 disintegrate	 and	 disappear.	 And	 the
flower	will	remain	a	distant	cry.	But	then,	the	question	remains:	What	should	be
the	role	of	the	gardener?
The	 gardener	 should	 prepare	 the	 soil,	 sow	 the	 seed,	 water	 it,	 care	 for	 it,	 and
protect	 it	 from	 its	 enemies.	Then	 the	 seed	will	 sprout,	 the	plant	will	grow	and
bear	flower	and	fruit	and	the	rest	of	it.	In	the	same	way,	the	seed	of	capitalism
has	to	be	cared	for,	if	socialism	has	to	come.
Many	people	find	contradictions	 in	what	I	say.	But	what	I	say	 is	so	simple,	so
clear.	I	repeat:	Socialism	will	stem	from	capitalism	if	the	latter	is	allowed	its	full
growth.	But	capitalism	should	go	only	after	it	has	completed	its	job.	But	today,
unfortunately,	 the	 capitalist	 himself	 is	 gripped	 with	 fear.	 He	 cannot	 say	 with
courage	 that	capitalism	has	a	 rationale	 to	be,	 to	 live.	He	also	says	socialism	 is
right.	And	there	are	reasons	for	it.
The	 capitalist	 is	 afraid.	He	 is	 afraid	 of	 the	 great	 crowd	 all	 around	 him.	He	 is
scared	 by	 the	 slogans	 and	 the	 flags	 and	 the	 noise	 raised	 by	 the	 power-hungry
politicians.	 And	 in	 panic	 he	 says.	 "Then	 socialism	 is	 right."	 I	 see	 even	 the
biggest	capitalist	is	terrified;	he	is	trembling.	He	thinks	he	has	committed	a	sin;
he	feels	guilty.	And	it	is	amazing.
Capitalism	has	 provided	ways	 and	means	 to	 keep	 such	 a	 huge	 society	 of	men
alive.	 It	 is	 thanks	 to	 capitalism	 that,	 today,	 three	 and	 a	 half	 billion	 men	 and
women	are	alive	on	this	planet.	It	is	capitalism	that	created	wealth	and	abolished
slavery,	and	introduced	the	machine	and	technology	and	freed	mankind	from	the
drudgery	of	manual	labor.	And	lastly,	socialism	is	going	to	come	through	it.	But
the	tragedy	is	that	the	engineer,	the	architect	of	that	great	system,	is	stricken	with
fear.
Eisenhower	has	said	that	once,	while	talking	to	a	communist,	he	was	fumbling	--
he	could	not	argue	with	him	because	he	felt	that	what	the	communist	was	saying
was	 right.	 Even	 Eisenhower	 has	 no	 arguments.	 Capitalism	 has	 no	 answer,	 no
philosophy.	Then	it	will	die,	if	it	has	no	answer	to	communism.
I	want	capitalism	to	have	its	answer.	Capitalism	should	have	its	own	philosophy,
so	that	it	lives	fully,	and	in	turn,	gives	birth	to	socialism.	Socialism	is	the	child	of
capitalism.
And	remember,	if	the	mother	is	sick,	the	child	will	not	he	different;	it	is	bound	to
be	diseased.	But	the	effort	is	on	to	bring	out	the	child	by	killing	the	mother.	It	is
necessary	to	beware	of	these	fools	who	are	making	such	efforts.
In	the	course	of	the	coming	four	talks	I	am	going	to	discuss	with	you	the	many
sides	of	 this	problem.	And	I	would	 like	you	 to	send	me	your	questions.	 if	you
have	any,	in	writing,	so	that	I	can	deal	with	them	at	length.
It	is	a	very	vital	question,	and	deserves	serious	consideration.	Lots	of	rethinking
is	 necessary	 on	 every	 side	 of	 the	 problem.	 The	 effort	 is	 worth	 it.	 It	 is	 not
necessarily	so	that	what	I	say	is	right;	 it	may	be	wrong.	So	I	 invite	you	just	 to
think,	and	objectively.	I	don't	expect	more.	If	so	many	of	us	here	think	together
and	have	a	perspective	of	socialism,	it	will	help	the	whole	country."
I	am	grateful	to	you	for	listening	to	my	talk	with	attention	and	love.	And	I	how
to	 the	 God	 who	 resides	 in	 the	 hearts	 of	 each	 of	 you.	 Please	 accept	 my
salutations.
Beware	of	Socialism
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Socialism	and	self-realization
14	April	1970	pm	in	Cross	Maidan
Archive
code:
7004145
ShortTitle:
SOCIAL02
Audio:
No
Video:	No
A	friend	has	asked:
Question
WE	WANT	SELF-REALIZATION,	AND	WHAT	YOU	SAID	LAST	EVENING
WAS
SOMETHING	 QUITE	 DIFFERENT.	 WHAT	 HAS	 IT	 TO	 DO	 WITH	 SELF-
REALIZATION?
It	has	lots	to	do	with	it.	It	is	not	possible	in	today's	Russia	or	China	to	seek	and
find	what	 you	 say	 you	 are	 seeking.	 Let	 alone	Mahavira,	Buddha,	Mohammed
and	Christ,	even	Karl	Marx	will	not	be	allowed	to	be	born	in	these	communist
countries.	 Man's	 search	 for	 self-realization	 needs	 a	 climate	 of	 freedom.	 And
what	you	call	socialism	does	not	accept	that	man	has	a	soul.	Basically,	socialism
is	 a	 materialist	 way	 of	 life.	 One	 of	 its	 fundamental	 tenets	 says	 that	 man	 is
nothing	more	than	matter.
It	 is	 necessary	 to	 understand	 this,	 because	 the	 socialism	 that	 does	 not	 accept
man's	 soul	 will	 be	 dangerous.	 Because	 it	 will,	 according	 to	 its	 principles,	 do
everything	to	suppress	and	wipe	out	man's	soul	if	it	is	there.
The	questioner	wants	to	know	what	connection	there	is	between	self-realization
and	my	criticism	of	socialism.
The	connection	is	deep.	In	the	history	of	man,	socialism	has	emerged	as	the	most
formidable	 ideology	 in	opposition	 to	what	you	call	self,	 soul	or	God.	Never	 in
the	 past	 had	 atheism	 succeeded	 anywhere	 in	 the	 world,	 nor	 had	 an	 atheist
system,	 an	 atheist	 society	 or	 country,	 been	 established	 on	 this	 planet.	 Why?
Because	 the	 atheists	 had	mounted	 a	 direct	 attack	 on	 the	 existence	 of	God	 and
soul.	And	 they	 lost	 the	 fight,	 they	could	not	win.	But	communism	has	entered
this	battle	from	the	back	door.	And	for	the	first	time	in	history	the	communists
have	created	an	atheistic	society,	an	atheistic	state.
Charvak	and	Epicurus	could	not	win.	Where	all	the	atheists	of	the	past	had	lost,
Marx,	Engels	and	Lenin	won.
What	 is	 the	 secret?	 The	 secret	 is	 that	 communism	 brings	 atheism	 in	 from	 the
back	door.	It	does	not	oppose	religion	directly;	its	direct	opposition	is	mounted
against	 the	 rich,	 the	 capitalist.	 And	 then	 it	 says	 that	 to	 destroy	 the	 rich,	 it	 is
necessary	 to	 destroy	 religion:	 the	 rich	 cannot	 be	 finished	 unless	 religion	 is
finished	first.	Communism	also	argues	that	if	the	affluent	has	to	be	liquidated,	it
is	essential	to	liquidate	all	the	ideologies	of	the	past	that	have	given	a	foothold	to
the	affluent	class.	Marx	believed	that	every	ideology	is	class-oriented.
Marxists	 say	 that	 if	 the	 rich	 man	 talks	 of	 religion,	 it	 is	 just	 because	 religion
shields	and	protects	him.	And	there	is	some	truth	in	this	matter	--	a	religion	can
be	used	as	the	rich	man's	shield.	If	a	thief	escapes	from	the	clutches	of	the	police
by	hiding	himself	in	a	temple,	then	for	sure	the	temple	has	a	hand	in	protecting
him.	But	this	does	not	mean	that	the	temple	is	wrong.	It	is	true	that	the	rich	have
used	religion	as	their	shield,	but	this	does	not	mean	that	religion	is	wrong.	But
the	communists	use	it	as	a	pretext	to	destroy	religion.
Socialism	also	believes	that	man	is	only	a	by-product	of	matter	.	In	its	view	there
is	no	soul,	no	spirit,	nothing	beyond	matter.	It	is	because	of	this	belief	that	Stalin
could	 indulge	 in	 killing	 on	 such	 a	massive	 scale.	 If	 man	 is	 only	matter,	 then
nothing	dies	if	your	throat	is	cut	--	matter	does	not	die.	Mao,	too,	can	indulge	in
killing	with	ease	because	man	is	only	matter;	there	is	no	soul	behind	it.	It	is	the
communists	 who,	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 succeeded	 in	 killing	 people	 without	 any
qualms	 of	 conscience.	 That	 is	 just	 because	 man's	 soul	 has	 been	 denied.	 And
constant	 effort	 is	 made	 to	 smother	 the	 possibilities,	 the	 opportunities,	 for	 its
discovery	and	growth.
In	 this	 connection	 it	 is	 good	 that	 we	 understand	 a	 few	 things.	 Firstly,	 for	 its
manifestation,	the	soul	hidden	inside	a	man	needs	the	right	opportunity	and	help.
A	seed	has	a	tree	hidden	inside	it,	but	the	tree	will	not	appear	if	you	destroy	the
seed.	 Undoubtedly	 the	 tree	 is	 hidden,	 but	 to	 manifest	 itself	 it	 needs	 so	 many
things	 --	 propel	 soil,	 water,	 sunshine,	 manure.	 management.	 and	 a	 loving
gardener	to	care	for	it.	God	is	hidden	in	man	like	a	flower	is	hidden	in	the	seed.
But	God	cannot	be	found	by	dissecting	a	man.	Take	him	to	a	 laboratory,	place
him	on	a	table	and	dissect	his	body,	but	you	will	never	find	God.
I	have	heard	Marx	once	said	as	a	joke	that	he	would	accept	God	if	he	was	caught
in	a	test	tube	in	a	laboratory.	And	then	he	said,	"But	please,	don't	take	your	God
to	the	laboratory	even	by	mistake,	because	what	kind	of	God	will	he	be	if	he	is
caught	in	a	test	tube?"
No,	God	cannot	be	caught	in	a	test	tube,	because	a	test	tube	is	too	small	a	thing.
We	cannot	find	him	by	dissecting	man's	body,	but	this	does	not	mean	that	there
is	no	God.	If	you	open	my	skull	and	dissect	my	brain,	will	you	find	a	thing	like
"thought"	there?	But	thought	is.	Similarly	you	will	not	find	a	thing	like	love	if	a
man's	heart	is	opened	and	dissected.	But	love	is,	though	there	is	nothing	to	prove
it.	 It	 cannot	be	caught	 in	a	 laboratory.	 It	 cannot	be	 found	even	by	dissecting	a
man's	heart,	which	 is	 its	abode.	Yet	you	know	that	 love	 is.	And	even	 if	all	 the
scientific	 laboratories	 of	 the	world	 tell	 you	 that	 there	 is	 no	 love.	 you	will	 not
accept	 their	 verdict.	 You	will	 say,	 "I	will	 not	 accept	 it	 because	 I	myself	 have
known	love."
God	is	an	experience,	a	nd	it	is	beyond	matter.
But	denial	of	God	is	foundational	to	socialism.	And	once	a	society	accepts	this
principle,	it	will	close	all	avenues	that	lead	to	God.	How	will	one	sow	the	seed	if
he	comes	to	believe	 that	 there	 is	nothing	like	a	 tree	hidden	in	 it?	It	will	be	 the
greatest	 misfortune	 of	 man	 if	 it	 is	 accepted	 that	 there	 is	 no	 God.	 Then	 self-
realization	will	be	a	thing	of	the	past,	it	will	become	an	impossibility.	If	people
accept	that	there	is	no	tree	in	a	seed,	then	who	will	care	to	sow	it,	water	it	and
care	for	it?	The	seed	will	rot	and	die.
The	most	 dangerous	 tenet	 of	 socialism	 is	 its	materialism.	And	 remember	 that
socialism	will	destroy	everything	--	climate,	adventure,	opportunity,	and	freedom
--	that	is	greatly	needed	for	self-realization.	At	least	the	socialism	that	threatens
to	come	right	now	will	certainly	do	so.	Because	what	 is	most	essential	 for	 the
socialism	of	the	day	is	the	destruction	of	human	freedom.	Without	taking	away
man's	freedom	it	cannot	succeed.
And	economic	freedom	--	freedom	to	pro-duce	and	own	his	production	--	forms
the	 largest	 pal	 t	 of	 man's	 freedom.	 Really	 economic	 freedom	 is	 man's	 basic
freedom.	And	socialism	cannot	be	established	right	now	without	depriving	man
of	this	freedom.	Of	course,	if	capitalism	is	allowed	to	grow	fully	then,	and	then
alone,	socialism	with	freedom	will	be	possible.	Then	socialism	will	not	need	to
destroy	freedom.
But	socialism	with	freedom	calls	for	abundant	wealth,	as	abundant	as	water	and
air.	That	 is	 the	 first	 condition	 for	 the	 socialism	 that	will	 come	naturally,	on	 its
own.	 At	 the	moment,	 no	 country	 in	 the	 world,	 not	 even	 America,	 fulfills	 the
conditions	of	 socialism	with	 freedom.	Maybe	 in	 fifty	years'	 time	America	will
reach	 that	 peak	 of	 affluence.	 But,	 if	 we	 insist,	 it	 is	 only	 through	 force	 that
socialism	 can	 be	 imposed.	 And	 imposed	 socialism	 will	 mean	 the	 death	 of
freedom.	And	in	the	absence	of	freedom	the	possibility	of	man's	spiritual	growth
will	be	dim.	Man's	spirit	needs	the	open	sky	of	freedom	to	grow	and	bloom.	And
when	man's	 economic	 freedom	 is	 gone,	 the	 next	 assault	 will	 be	 made	 on	 his
freedom	of	thought.	The	partisans	of	socialism	say	that	if	they	allow	freedom	of
thought	 they	 will	 not	 succeed	 in	 creating	 a	 socialist	 system.	 So	 they	 cannot
accept	and	ideology	that	goes	against	socialism.
It	 is	 interesting	 to	note	 that	 there	exists	only	one	political	party	 in	Russia.	 Is	 it
not	amazing	that	elections	are	held	with	a	single	party	in	the	field?	That	is	why
Stalin	always	won	the	elections	with	such	a	huge	number	of	votes	--	as	no	other
person	 in	 the	 world	 had	 ever	 secured.	 Stalin	 always	 won	 with	 one	 hundred
percent	of	the	votes.	And	this	fact	was	announced	to	the	whole	world	with	great
fanfare,	and	great	political	capital	was	made	out	of	it.	And	no	one	ever	asked	if
he	had	a	contestant	 in	 the	field.	He	had	no	contestant,	no	rival.	What	does	this
mean?
It	simply	means	that	there	is	no	freedom	of	thought	in	Russia.	In	the	course	of
the	last	fifty	years	of	socialism	in	Russia,	very	amazing	things	have	happened	in
that	country.
Even	scientists	are	told	by	the	government	what	to	think	and	what	not	to	think.
They	are	 told	what	scientific	 theories	 they	have	 to	 formulate,	and	 to	 formulate
them	according	to	the	tenets	of	Marxism.	If	a	scientific	theory	does	not	accord
with	 Marxism,	 it	 is	 rejected	 and	 condemned.	 Consequently,	 in	 the	 last	 thirty
years,	principles	of	biology	were	current	 there	 that	were	not	valid	 in	any	other
part	 of	 the	world.	Scientists	 and	 research	workers	 all	 over	 the	world	 said	 they
were	wrong,	but	 they	were	valid	 in	Russia	because	Stalin	decreed	 them	so.	Of
course,	 they	became	 invalid	 after	 the	death	of	Stalin.	Russian	 scientists	had	 to
say	yes	to	the	communist	party,	had	to	conform	to	it,	because	to	stay	alive,	they
were	at	the	mercy	of	the	party.
Before	1917,	when	the	Bolshevik	revolution	came	about,	Russia	produced	some
of	the	most	intelligent	men	of	the	world	--	names	worth	being	written	in	letters
of	gold.	But	after	1917	Russia	could	not	produce	a	single	man	of	 their	stature.
Not	 one	 man	 of	 the	 height	 of	 Leo	 Tolstoy,	 Maxim	 Gorky,	 Lenin,	 Turgenev,
Gogol,	Dostoevsky!	What	is	the	matter?
It	 is	 true	 that	 communist	 Russia	 produced	 writers	 and	 thinkers	 who	 received
awards	from	their	government,	but	not	even	one	among	them	can	come	near	the
grandeur	 and	 glory	 of	 those	 whom	 Russia	 produced	 in	 the	 days	 of	 her	 utter
poverty	 anc1	 degradation,	 in	 the	 worst	 days	 of	 the	 czars.	 Russia	 has	 yet	 to
produce	a	thinker	as	intelligent	and	as	creative	as	those	of	the	pre-revolutionary
times.	Why?
It	 is	 because	 the	basic	 requirement	of	 spiritual	 growth	 is	 denied	 in	 communist
Russia.	I,et	alone	Tolstoy,	Turgenev	and	Dostoevsky,	even	Lenin	is	not	possible
in	present-day	Russia.	If	Lenin,	his	soul,	wants	to	be	born	again,	he	will	have	to
go	to	England	or	America;	he	cannot	be	born	in	Russia	again	.
In	 fact,	 people	who	 know	 say	 that	 Lenin	was	 poisoned,	 that	 he	 did	 not	 die	 a
natural	death.
The	man	who	made	the	revolution	and	who	wanted	to	turn	Russia	into	a	socialist
country,	was	killed.	The	other	man	was	Trotsky,	who	came	next	to	Lenin	as	the
architect	of	the	revolution.	He	had	to	flee	Russia	for	his	life,	had	to	run	from	one
country	 to	another	 to	hide	himself:	He	had	 left	behind	 in	Russia	his	pet	dog	--
whom	the	communists	killed	in	spite	--	 ,and	then	they	hunted	Trotsky	down	in
Mexico	and	killed	him	brutally	At	no	time	in	its	history	has	the	human	society
seen	killing	on	such	a	massive	scale.	But	 it	was	easy,	because	there	is	no	soul,
only	matter	is.	So	people	were	killed	like	flies.	It	made	no	difference	whether	the
communists	 killed	 their	 own	 men	 or	 killed	 rats.	 It	 was	 in	 accord	 with	 their
philosophy.
Another	logical	conclusion	that	stems	from	the	thinking	has	no	soul	is	that	man
has	no	need	of	freedom.	If	socialism	succeeds	--	the	socialism	that	we	know	--	it
is	bound	to	turn	man	into	a	machine.	The	process	is	already	underway.
In	this	context	I	would	like	to	repeat	what	I	said	yesterday:	that	man's	bondage
will	 end	 fully	 only	 when	 the	machine	 will	 release	man	 from	 the	 drudgery	 of
labor.	 Man	 will	 really	 be	 free	 from	 poverty	 of	 every	 sort	 when	 automatic
machines	will	do	everything	and	man	will	no	 longer	be	 required	 to	work.	One
way	to	it	lies	through	the	full	development	of	capitalism	but	if	we	are	in	a	hurry
to	bring	socialism	right	now,	Then	we	have	to	take	the	other	way,	 the	opposite
way,	and	this	will	turn	men	into	machines.	That	is	exactly	what	is	happening	in
Russia	and	China	at	the	moment.	That	is	the	other	alternative:	turn	man	into
,a	machine.	Then	he	need	not	think.	A	machine	does	not	think.	And	since	they
believe	 that	man	 is	 just	body,	 their	argument	seems	 logical:	he	need	not	 think:
what	he	needs	is	food	for	his	stomach,	clothes	for	his	body	and	,a	shade	over	his
head.	That	is	all	he	s.
Have	you	ever	heard	,a	socialist	say	that	man	needs	a	soul	too.	Socialism	ends
up	with	three	demands	of	mall:	bread,	clothes	and	housing.	Man	needs	nothing
more.	He	need	not	think	at	all	--	thinking	will	land	him	in	unnecessary	trouble.	It
is	good	that	he	be	deprived	of	the	bother;	then	he	will	live	undisturbed.	like	an
animal	 lives.	 He	 should	 have	 plenty	 to	 eat	 and	 drink,	 he	 should	 be	 properly
clothed,	he	 should	have	good	housing,	he	 should	work	and	 live	happily.	What
use	is	thinking?	It	only	brings	worry	and	trouble	of	every	sort.	It	even	leads	to
rebellion.	The	socialist	not	only	says	so,	he	also	works	to	this	end	--
he	creates	devices	to	eliminate	thinking.	And	their	best	device	is	this:	Before	the
child	begins	to	think,	indoctrinate	him	with	socialist	concepts	and	beliefs	so	that
his	mind	is	in	shackles	--	heavily	conditioned.
Ask	a	child	in	Russia,	"Is	there	God?"	and	he	will	say	immediately,	"No,	there	is
no	God."	A	friend	of	mine	visited	Russia	 in	1936.	He	visited	a	school	and	put
this	 question	 to	 the	 children,	 "Is	 there	God?"	Do	 you	 know	 how	 the	 children
answered	him?	They	said,
"We	wonder	how	a	man	of	your	ripe	age	can	ask	such	a	question.	Before	1917
there	 was	 a	 God	 he	 is	 now	 no	more.	 He	 is	 not;	 he	 was."	 Children	 are	 being
taught	that	there	is	no	God,	no	soul,	no	religion,	no	higher	values	of	life	There	is
only	one	value	in	man's	life	--
if	he	has	plenty	of	food,	clothes	and	housing,	he	is	satisfied.
A	curious	sort	of	caste	system	has	come	into	being	in	Russia,	as	there	is	in	India.
There	are	now	two	castes	there:	one,	that	of	the	rulers	or	the	managers,	and	the
other	of	 the	 ruled	or	 the	managed.	Classes	 in	Russia	 have	not	 been	 abolished,
they	are	still	there,	but	they	have	changed	their	forms.	Here	in	India,	as	we	say,
there	are	those	who	exploit	and	there	are	others	who	are	exploited.	Similarly	in
Russia	 there	 are	 those	 who	 manage	 and	 there	 are	 others	 who	 are	 managed.
Russia	is	still	a	class	society,	not	a	classless	society.	A	number	of	people	are	the
managers	and	the	rest	of	the	people	are	the	managed.	And	the	division	is	clear-
cut.	In	fact,	it	is	wrong	to	describe	them	as	classes,	they	are	really	castes.
There	is	a	difference	between	class	and	caste.	The	class	is	fluid	--	it	is	easy	for
one	 to	move	from	one	class	 to	another;	and	 the	caste	 is	 rigid,	 fixed	--	 it	 is	not
fluid,	 resilient.	 For	 example,	 the	 shudras	 of	 India	 are	 a	 caste.	 Howsoever	 a
shudra	 tries,	 he	 cannot	 become	 a	 brahmin.	 Whatever	 he	 does,	 he	 cannot	 be
admitted	 into	 the	caste	of	 the	brahmins.	The	brahmins	are	a	 caste,	not	 a	 class.
And	the	frontiers	of	a	caste	are	well-defined,	rigidly	fixed.
A	new	caste	system	is	being	set	up	in	Russia,	as	it	once	happened	in	India.	It	has
two	castes:	one	of	the	managers	and	the	other	of	the	managed	--	the	rulers	and
the	 ruled.	 A	 member	 of	 the	 managed	 caste	 cannot	 enter	 the	 caste	 of	 the
managers.	 It	 is	 so	 difficult,	 there	 is	 no	way.	The	manager	will	 not	 allow	 him,
because	 he	 has	 his	 own	 interests,	 vested	 interests.	 Please	 do	 not	 commit	 the
mistake	of	thinking	that	Stalin	had	only	as	much	rights	and	privileges	as	the	poor
worker	of	Russia	has	today.	And	don't	 think	that	 there	is	equality	in	Russia,	or
for	 that	 matter,	 in	 China.	Mao	 and	 his	 attendants	 don't	 have	 equal	 rights	 and
privileges.
Equality	 is	 just	not	possible	 today.	Until	 the	 time	there	 is	an	overabundance	of
wealth,	 so	much	wealth	 that	 it	 loses	meaning,	 the	 classes	will	 remain.	Classes
will	not	disappear,	they	will	only	change	their	forms.	If	ever	a	classless	society
comes	 into	 being,	 it	 will	 be	 in	 a	 society	 where	 wealth	 will	 be	 as	 plentiful	 as
water	and	air.	As	long	as	wealth	is	scarce	and	has	value	and	meaning,	as	it	has
till	 now,	 a	 classless	 society	will	 remain	 a	 dream.	The	people	who	will	 control
power	and	property	will	become	a	new	class	per	se.
In	my	vision,	however,	class	is	better	than	caste.	Because	caste	is	rigid,	fixed,	it
has	no	fluidity.	Class	is	better	because	it	has	mobility:	a	poor	man	can	become
rich	 and	 a	 rich	man	 can	 become	 poor.	 The	 poor	 and	 the	 rich	 are	 classes,	 not
castes,	 and	 the	 Russian	 system	 is	 giving	 rise	 to	 castes.	 There,	 things	 are
becoming	rigid	and	immobile.	And	the	chasm	between	the	establishment	and	the
rest	of	 the	people	 is	so	great	 that	 it	seems	impossible	 to	move	from	one	 to	 the
other.
But	it	seems	necessary	that	we	examine	together	the	fundamental	assumptions	of
socialism.	A	friend	has	asked,	DON'T	YOU	ACCEPT	THE	BASIC	CONCEIT
OF
SOCIALISM	THAT	ALL	MEN	ARE	EQUAL?
Let	us	consider	it.	First,	all	men	are	not	equal	and	all	men	cannot	be	equal.	It	is
not	a	question	of	the	right	of	equality.	The	fact	is	that	all	men	are	not	equal	and
they	cannot	be.
But	 I	 say	 that	 there	 should	be	 equal	 opportunity	of	 development	 for	 all.	What
does	it	mean?
It	means	that	every	person	should	have	equal	opportunity	to	be	unequal.	I	repeat:
Every	person	should	have	equal	opportunity	 to	be	unequal.	Everybody	has	 the
right	 to	be	what	he	wants	 to	be,	and	 this	 right	 to	be	himself	should	be	equally
available	 to	 all.	And	 the	 right	 to	 create	wealth	 is	 one	 such	 right.	 The	 right	 to
acquire	knowledge	is	another.
Everybody	in	 the	world	cannot	become	Einstein,	nor	can	 they	become	Buddha
or	Mahavira.	Rarely	is	a	man	born	with	the	genius	of	Einstein.	Similarly,	I	say,
everybody	cannot	become	Ford.	But,	strangely	enough,	we	do	not	accept	that	the
capacity	to	produce	wealth	is	as	much	inborn	as	the	capacity	to	produce	poetry,
mathematics,	 philosophy	 and	 religion.	 The	 capacity	 to	 produce	 wealth	 also
comes	with	birth.	A	Ford	is	not	made,	he	is	born.	Some	people	are	born	with	the
talent	to	produce	wealth	and	many	others	are	not	born	with	this	talent.	This	is	a
fact,	not	a	theory.	And	if	we	thwart	and	suppress	people	born	with	the	talent	to
produce	wealth,	if	we	prevent	them	from	producing	wealth,	then	the	world	will
be	the	poorer	for	it;	it	will	never	be	prosperous.	It	is	like	saying	that	all	people
should	produce	poetry	equally,	that	there	is	no	need	for	Kalidas	or	Shakespeare
to	be	at	the	top,	that	we	cannot	tolerate	it.	We	will	create	a	society	of	classless
poetry	in	which	everybody	will	compose	poetry	equally	In	that	case	it	will	be	a
grotesque	 rhyming	 of	 verse;	 it	 can	 never	 be	 poetry.	 Then	 Kalidas	 and
Shakespeare	will	not	be	born.	Certainly,	everyone	can	put	a	few	rhymed	verses
together,	 but	 that	 will	 not	 produce	 Shakespeare	 or	 Kalidas.	 Shakespeare	 and
Kalidas	were	 not	 rhymsters.	 Poetry	 is	 something	 very	 different	 and	 rare.	Any
one	of	us	can	daub	color	on	a	poster	or	a	canvas,	but	that	will	not	make	of	him	a
Picasso	or	a	Van	Gogh.	Van	Gogh	and	Picasso	are	born	geniuses.
The	fact	that	socialism	does	not	accept	that	every	person	is	born	different	--	he	is
just	like	himself	and	not	like	everyone	else	--	is	very	dangerous.	The	truth	is	that
every	man	is	unique,	peerless	and	incomparable.	It	is	impossible	to	find	another
person	matching	him	 in	every	way.	No	 two	persons,	not	even	 twins,	are	alike,
the	same	--	let	alone	all	mankind.	It	has	never	happened.	And	that	is	why	every
person	has	a	soul,	a	higher	self.
The	soul	means	the	potentiality	to	be	different.	Machines	can	be	equal,	the	same;
a	hundred	 thousand	Fiat	 cars	 coming	 from	 the	assembly	 line	can	be	 the	 same,
but	not	two	persons.	The	Fiat	car	has	no	soul,	it	is	just	a	machine.	Machines	can
be	equal;	only	machines	can	be	equal.	And	if	attempts	are	made	to	force	all	men
to	be	equal,	it	will	be	possible	only	by	pulling	man	down	to	the	level	of	animals.
At	 any	 level	higher	 than	 that	of	 the	 animal,	men	will	 remain	unequal.	So	 turn
man	into	a	machine	and	he	will	have	equality.
And	men	will	be	increasingly	unequal	as	they	rise	higher	and	higher	spiritually.
And	they	will	be	increasingly	equal	as	they	descend	lower	and	lower.	We	are	all
approximately	equal	at	the	level	of	sleep.	We	are	very	nearly	equal	at	the	level	of
our	hunger	and	other	needs.	Everybody	needs	food,	clothes,	houses	and	sex.	In
these	matters	we	are	all	equal,	even	more	equal	than	animals.	But	as	we	ascend
to	 the	 higher	 levels,	 which	 a	 Buddha,	 a	 Kalidas,	 a	 Picasso,	 an	 Einstein,	 a
Bertrand	Russel	 reach,	 inequality	 grows	 in	 the	 same	measure.	 Because	 as	 the
soul	 soars	 high,	 it	 is	 left	 alone,	 it	 is	 more	 and	 more	 alone.	 Then	 a	 man	 like
Mahavira	 or	 Buddha	 is	 alone,	 solitary,	 rare	 --	 the	 rarest.	 Then	 for	millions	 of
years	we	will	not	see	another	like	him.
But	the	crowd,	burning	with	jealousy,	can	say,	"We	will	not	allow	it	 to	happen
any	more;	we	will	make	all	people	equal."	And	once	this	madness	for	equality
gets	hold	of	us	--	and	it	is	doing	so	all	over	the	world	--	then	we	will	destroy	the
glory	 and	 the	 greatness,	 the	 grandeur	 and	 the	 splendor	 that	man	 is	 heir	 to.	Of
course,	we	will	then	achieve	the	leveling	of	men,	the	equality	of	men.	Everyone
will	have	food	and	clothes	and	jobs	and	sex.	Eat,	drink	and	be	merry!	--	only	on
this	level	of	life	can	equality	be	achieved.	But	at	what	price?
Equality	is	not	possible;	it	is	not	even	desirable.	But	equality	of	opportunity	is	a
must.
Socialism	 mounts	 its	 first	 and	 frontal	 attack	 on	 equality	 of	 opportunity.
Producers	of	wealth	are	its	first	target;	they	are	sorted	out	and	finished	first.	Its
next	 target	 is	 the	 thinker	 --	 one	 who	 is	 unequal,	 superior	 in	 thinking.	 The
socialist	 says	 that	we	are	out	 to	 equalize	 all,	 so	we	cannot	 allow	 inequality	of
thought.	Now	it	is	so	surprising	that	in	the	last	fifty	years	there	has	been	no	great
debate	in	Russia	--	not	even	one.	Fifty	years	is	a	long	time.	The	truth	is	that	there
is	not	one	idea	in	man's	life	over	which	a	debate,	a	controversy	cannot	be	raised.
Every	idea	is	seen	from	the	particular	angle	of	the	thinker,	and	it	is	not	necessary
that	another	person	should	agree	with	it.	Even	the	loftiest	of	thoughts	have	been
opposed,	and	opposed	without	fail.
Great	 debates	 on	 ideas,	 clashes	 of	 ideas,	 ideological	 upheavals	 happen	 in	 the
same	measure	as	man's	intelligence	grows.	But	in	the	last	fifty	years	Russia	has
not	witnessed	any	great	debate,	any	upsurge	of	thought,	any	explosion	of	ideas,
or	a	cultural	 revolution	 that	might	have	stirred	 the	psyche	of	 the	country	 to	 its
roots.	Let	alone	a	tidal	wave,	not	even	a	ripple	could	rise	in	these	fifty	years	in
the	psychic	sea	of	Russia.	Why?
If	you	ask	the	socialists	why,	they	will	simply	say,	"Because	we	are	engaged	in
building	 a	 socialist	 society,	 we	 cannot	 allow	 debates,	 discussions	 and
oppositions;	we	cannot	tolerate	any	revolt	and	rebellion."	They	also	say	"Right
now	we	don't	have	any	space	for	free	thinking,	we	cannot	afford	it.	So	we	will
suppress	freedom	of	thought	for	the	present,	but	we	will	certainly	allow	it	when
everything	is	okay."
But	then	it	will	be	too	late.	It	will	be	impossible	for	Russia	to	think	again,	and	to
think	boldly,	after	thinking	has	been	gagged	for	fifty	years.	Suppose	a	man's	feet
have	 been	 in	 shackles	 for	 fifty	 years	 and	 then	 the	 man	 is	 released	 one	 fine
morning	and	told,	"Now	you	are	free,	so	run	and	climb	the	mountain."	Do	you
think	he	can	climb	the	mountain?	It	will	be	 impossible	for	him	even	to	walk	a
few	steps	inside	his	own	courtyard.	Man's	mind	begins	to	wither	and	die	if	it	is
enslaved	for	a	length	of	time.
To	 the	 friend	 who	 wants	 to	 know	 what	 connection	 there	 is	 between	 my	 talk
about	socialism	and	self-realization,	I	would	say	that	the	greatest	danger	facing
man	and	his	quest	for	the	soul	is	that	the	politician	all	over	the	world	is,	by	and
by,	out	to	concentrate	all	power	--	political	and	economic	--	in	the	hands	of	the
state,	and	thereby,	he	is	going	to	capture	and	control	man's	mind	and	soul.	So	it
is	imperative	that	we	think	it	over,	debate	it,	and	raise	our	voices	against	it.
When	the	socialists	attack	freedom	they	do	it	with	cunning	and	tact.	Their	tactics
are	 appealing.	 They	 say	 they	 want	 equality	 and	 therefore	 curbs	 on	 freedom
become	 necessary.	 With	 freedom,	 they	 argue,	 they	 cannot	 achieve	 equality.
Socialists	don't	talk	of	freedom,	they	lay	all	their	emphasis	on	equality.	Equality,
for	 them,	 comes	 first;	 without	 equality	 freedom	 is	 a	 myth.	 And	 as	 long	 as
inequality	remains,	freedom	will	remain	a	dream.	So	equality	has	to	be	had	first,
they	argue,	even	if	freedom	has	to	be	destroyed	for	its	sake.
Now	 we	 have	 to	 make	 our	 choice.	We	 have	 to	 decide	 clearly	 which	 has	 the
highest	value,	equality	or	freedom.	We	have	to	settle	our	preference.	And	all	of
mankind	 has	 to	 decide,	 and	 to	 decide	 soon:	What	 is	more	 valued,	 freedom	or
equality?
Remember,	 if	 freedom	 lives,	 it	makes	 it	 possible	 for	 equality	 to	happen	 in	 the
future.	But	 if	we	sacrifice	 freedom	for	equality,	 then	 there	 is	no	possibility	 for
regaining	 freedom	 in	 the	 future.	 Because	 once	 we	 lose	 freedom,	 it	 will	 be
extremely	difficult	to	regain	it.
And	this	matter	called	equality	is	very	unscientific	and	anti-psychological.	Men
are	 not	 equal.	 And	 so,	 if	 we	 impose	 equality	 on	man	with	 force,	 it	 will	 only
destroy	him.	Man	should	have	 full	opportunity	 to	be	unequal	and	different;	he
should	be	free	to	differ,	to	dissent,	to	deny,	to	rebel.	Then	only	will	he	grow	and
blossom	and	bear	fruit.
Socialism	today,	is	the	loudest	voice	against	man's	spirit,	soul,	against	God	and
religion.
Another	friend	has	asked:
Question
SOCIALISM	WANTS	TO	DO	GOOD	TO	THE	POOR.	ARE	YOU	AGAINST
THE
GOOD	OF	THE	POOR?
Me	--	against	the	good	of	the	poor!	In	fact,	no	one	should	go	against	the	good	of
the	poor.
But	remember,	this	talk	of	serving	the	poor	has	been	going	on	for	thousands	of
years	--
and	innumerable	servants	of	the	poor	have	come	and	gone	--	but	up	to	now	they
have	not	done	a	thing	for	the	poor.	But	they	have	done	lots	for	themselves	in	the
name	of	the	poor.
And	the	poor	have	remained	where	they	always	were.	The	servants	of	the	poor
have	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 poor,	 but	 the	 poor	 become	 their	 camp	 followers,
because	they	are	told	that	everything	is	being	done	for	their	sake.	And	the	poor
follow	them,	and	even	go	to	the	gallows	at	their	behest.
But	the	people	who	become	martyrs	for	socialism	are	not	the	same	as	those	who
grab	power	in	the	name	of	socialism.	They	are	altogether	different	people.	The
poor	 suffer	 and	 die	 for	 socialism,	 but	 those	who	 come	 to	 power	 are	 not	 poor.
They	are	a	new	class	of	the	rich,	a	new	bourgeoisie.
In	fact,	 the	man	who	comes	to	power	gets	rich	immediately.	There	 is	really	no
difference	 between	 man	 and	 man.	 Today	 he	 is	 a	 partisan	 of	 the	 poor,	 but
tomorrow	when	he	 is	 in	power	he	will	 have	his	 own	vested	 interests.	Now	he
will	want	to	stay	in	power,	and	to	do	so	he	will	systematically	destroy	the	very
ladder	with	which	he	reached	the	top.	Who	knows?	--	by	the	same	ladder	others
may	come	to	the	top	and	displace	him.
The	poor	have	never	been	served;	they	have	never	been	helped.	Yes,	in	the	name
of	 the	 poor	 there	 have	 been	 plenty	 of	 movements,	 plenty	 of	 revolutions,	 and
plenty	of	bloodshed.	But	 they	did	 the	poor	no	good.	 It	 is	 time	that	we	become
alert	about	this	whole	business.	Be	alert	and	aware	when	somebody	tells	you	that
he	wants	to	serve	the	poor	--	for	sure,	he	is	a	dangerous	man.	He,	too,	is	going	to
use	the	poor	as	a	ladder.	And	the	poor	people	are	foolish;	otherwise	they	would
not	 have	 been	 poor.	 They	 are	 poor	 because	 of	 their	 foolishness.	 So	 they	 will
accept	him	as	their	new	messiah.	This	is	how	they	get	their	messiahs	again	and
again,	messiahs	U	ho	exploit	them,	enslave	them,	torture	them.
Hitler	 rose	 to	 power	 through	 "doing	 good	 for	 the	 poor".	 Mussolini	 came	 to
power	for	"the	good	of	the	poor".	So	did	Stalin	and	Mao.	Everybody	in	the	world
seems	 to	be	busy	doing	good	for	 the	poor,	and	no	good	ever	happens	 to	 them.
The	poor	have	remained	as	poor	as	ever.	Why	is	it	so?
There	is	a	single	reason	why	wealth	is	less	and	the	number	of	people	very	large.
As	it	is,	you	cannot	do	a	thing	for	the	good	of	the	poor.	Put	whosoever	in	the	seat
of	power,	and	nothing	will	happen.	The	real	problem	is	that	wealth	is	much	less
than	the	number	of	people	on	the	earth.	We	need	more	wealth,	much	more.	We
need	 to	 have	more	wealth	 than	 the	 number	 of	 people.	We	 need	 to	 have	more
wealth	than	the	needs	of	the	people.
And	the	next	problem	is:	How	to	produce	this	wealth?
The	 irony	 is	 that	 the	 poor	 people	 are	 in	 opposition	 to	 those	who	 can	 produce
more	wealth.
The	poor	are	fighting	their	own	benefactors.	And	this	has	been	an	ancient	habit
with	mankind,	 and	 it	 is	 amazing.	Galileo	was	 killed,	 and	 yet	 the	whole	world
today	 benefits	 by	 his	 discovery.	We	 crucified	 Jesus,	 and	 yet	 the	 teachings	 of
Jesus	are	instrumental	in	humanizing	the	world.	We	poisoned	Socrates,	and	yet
Socrates'	 sayings	 will	 continue	 to	 guide	 mankind's	 spiritual	 evolution	 for
eternity.
Man	is	really	a	strange	creature.	He	can	never	know	who	is	really	working	for
his	good.
His	difficulty	 is	 that	 those	who	shout	and	 scream,	professing	 their	 concern	 for
the	people,	come	to	the	forefront,	while	the	real	benefactors	are	doing	their	work
silently,	unobtrusively.	And	we	are	influenced	by	propaganda.	But	I	say	that	the
real	do-gooders	are	very	different.	A	scientist	doing	research	in	his	laboratory	is
one,	but	not	a	politician	busy	politicking,	quibbling	and	intriguing	in	Delhi.	The
politician	 can	 do	 no	 good,	 though	 he	 is	 always	 before	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 people.
And	 the	poor	man	will	 never	know	 that	 his	 child	 is	 alive	 today	because	 some
Pasteur	 found	 a	 vaccine	 in	 a	 laboratory.	 He	 will	 never	 know	 who	 saved	 him
when	he	was	stricken	with	T.B.	He	will	never	know	the	ones	who	are	working
strenuously	to	prolong	his	life	and	to	find	a	remedy	for	cancer	and	other	deadly
diseases.	The	poor	man	is	not	grateful	to	the	person	who	found	electricity.	But	he
knows	the	politician	because	he	holds	a	flag	in	his	hand	and	shouts.	In	fact,	there
are	a	few	people	who	enjoy	shouting	and	make	it	their	business.
I	have	heard...	A	boy	stood	on	a	pavement	and	began	shouting	in	a	hoarse	voice
to	sell	his	newspapers.	A	man	became	curious	and	asked	him,	"What	profit	do
you	make?	I	see	you	every	day,	straining	your	vocal	chords	so	much."	The	boy
said,	"I	make	no	profit	at	all.	I	buy	these	papers	from	the	vendor	on	the	opposite
side	of	the	street	at	the	rate	of	ten	paise	each	and	sell	them	for	the	same	price."
The	man	said,	"You	seem	to	be	crazy!	You	shout	so	much	for	nothing?"	The	boy
said,	"No,	I	am	not	crazy,"	which	made	the	man	fire	another	question	at	him.	He
asked,	 "Then	 for	what?"	And	 the	 boy	 said,	 "For	 the	 sake	 of	 shouting.	 I	 enjoy
shouting."	Then	the	curious	man	left,	saying,	"You	will	make	a	good	politician."
Who	are	the	people	really	working	for	the	good	of	man?	They	do	it	very	silently;
they	are	not	even	known.	They	die	 for	you,	but	you	don't	know	them.	Do	you
know	who	the	scientist	was	who	died	tasting	a	deadly	poison	on	his	own	tongue
so	 that	 you	 are	 saved	 from	 it?	 Do	 you	 know	 the	 names	 of	 those	 who	 died
working	 on	 disease-bearing	 germs	 so	 that	 you	 remain	 alive	 and	 healthy?	You
don't	 know	 the	 scientists	who	 are	 developing	 automation	 so	 that	man	 is	 saved
from	 the	 drudgery	 of	 labor.	But	 you	 know	 the	 politician	who	 shouts	 from	 the
rooftops	that	he	is	working	for	your	good.
The	politicians	have	done	no	good.	The	revolutionaries	have	done	no	good.	And
all	revolutions	have	failed.	Not	only	revolutions	that	we	know	have	failed	to	do
good,	they	have	definitely	done	immense	harm	to	the	society	of	homo	sapiens.
They	have	obstructed	the	growth	of	man;	they	have	impeded	the	natural	flow	of
life	at	many	points.
Now	 we	 need	 a	 different	 revolution	 --	 altogether	 different	 from	 the	 past
revolutions.	We	need	a	revolution	that	will	make	us	forget	all	other	revolutions.
We	need	a	revolution	that	will	tell	the	do-gooders,	"For	God's	sake,	leave	us	to
ourselves.	 Enough	 is	 enough.	You	 failed	 to	 do	 us	 any	 good	 for	 five	 thousand
years;	we	don't	need	you	anymore.	Be	quiet!"
The	good	of	 the	 poor	 depends	upon	 the	 production	of	wealth,	more	wealth.	 It
depends	upon	 the	production	of	 such	 instruments	 as	 can	 increase	production	a
thousand	 times.	 The	 well-being	 of	 the	 poor	 demands	 that	 class	 conflict	 be
eradicated	from	the	world.
But	socialism,	every	variety	of	it,	 thrives	on	class	conflict.	Class	conflict	is	the
oxygen	on	which	socialists	all	over	the	world	live.	Inciting	the	poor	against	the
rich,	slowing	down	and	stopping	production	in	factories,	strikes	and	bunds	and
marches	have	become	their	stock-in-trade.	And	the	poor	are	blissfully	unaware
that	through	all	these	strikes	and	marches	they	are	only	adding	to	their	poverty,
multiplying	 their	 miseries,	 because	 they	 are	 instrumental	 in	 hampering
production,	in	reducing	production	all	around.	Is	this	what	you	call	"the	good	of
the	poor"?
If	 you	 really	 want	 your	 "good",	 then	 forget	 the	 politicians	 and	 put	 all	 your
energies	 into	 the	 imperative	 task	 of	 increasing	 production	 and	 adding	 to	 the
wealth	of	the	society.
Forget	 the	 politicians	 and	work	 hard.	Don't	 impede	 production	 by	 setting	 one
class	against	another.	Class	conflict	has	to	go.	It	 is	 time	classes	come	closer	 to
each	other	and	work	unitedly	for	massive	production.
But	 the	 politician	 will	 lose	 his	 business	 if	 he	 promotes	 friendly	 relations	 and
understanding	among	the	classes.	The	political	leader	lives	by	inciting	conflicts
and	strife	between	different	groups	and	classes.	Without	 them	he	will	 cease	 to
be.	And	as	long	as	the	leader	is	alive	on	this	earth,	wars	will	go	on.	Say	good-
bye	 to	 all	 your	 politicians	 and	 wars	 will	 say	 goodbye	 to	 you.	 They	 are	 the
architects	of	conflict	and	strife	and	war.	And	they	depend	on	them	for	their	very
existence.
Hitler	has	said	in	his	autobiography	that	if	you	intend	to	be	a	great	leader,	then
you	need	a	great	war.	And	if	 there	is	no	real	war,	 then	a	cold	war	will	do.	But
war	is	a	must,	so	that	people	are	kept	in	fear.	Because	when	they	are	in	fear	they
need	 a	 leader	 to	 cling	 to.	 But	when	 they	 are	 free	 of	 fear,	 when	 they	 have	 no
worries,	then	they	don't	need	the	politician.
So	keep	war	alive,	create	new	conflicts	and	wars,	and	 the	masses	will	 flock	 to
you	and	ask	you	to	lead	them.
In	 the	 twenty	 years	 after	 Indian	 independence,	 the	 politicians	 prevented	 the
industrialization	of	India	by	inciting	class	conflicts	all	over.	This	is	the	greatest
crime	they	have	committed;	they	have	stabbed	the	country	in	the	back.	But	the
poor	will	never	know	that	it	was	especially	a	stab	in	their	backs.
Another	friend	has	asked,
Question
WHAT	YOU	SAY	GOES	IN	SUPPORT	OF	THE	CAPITALISTS.	WON'T	YOU
SAY
SOMETHING	AGAINST	THEM?
Of	course,	I	am	going	to	say	a	lot	against	them.	And	I	will	have	to	say	it	because
the	capitalists	have	also	played	a	basic	role	in	creating	class	conflicts.	In	fact,	the
man	who	becomes	wealthy	 soon	begins	 to	 think	 that	 he	belongs	 to	 a	 different
world	 --	 different	 from	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 society.	 This	 is	 utterly	 wrong;	 no	man
becomes	great	by	amassing	wealth.	By	amassing	wealth	no	one	gets	to	the	top	of
the	world.	If	a	man	paints	a	picture,	he	does	not	get	 to	the	top	of	 the	world.	A
sculptor	does	not	think	that	he	is	great,	but	a	rich	man	thinks	himself	to	be	high
and	mighty.	And	as	long	as	a	rich	man	goes	on	feeding	his	ego	with	riches,	he
will	arouse	the	 jealousy	of	 the	poor;	 this	 is	 inevitable.	I	said	yesterday	that	 the
jealousy	of	the	poor	is	being	aroused	and	inflamed.
Fifty	percent	of	the	responsibility	for	the	poor	man's	jealousy	belongs	to	poverty;
another	fifty	percent	belongs	to	the	ego	of	the	poor	man's	rich	neighbor.	The	rich
man	will	have	to	give	up	his	arrogance.
Production	of	wealth	should	be	his	joy.	But	if	he	inflates	his	ego	with	wealth	and
thinks	himself	to	be	superior	to	others,	to	be	a	demigod,	then	it	is	inevitable	that
the	masses	around	him	will	do	everything	to	pull	him	down.
Really,	wealth	should	not	become	a	means	 to	gratify	 the	ego.	On	 the	contrary,
the	 more	 wealth	 a	 man	 has,	 the	 more	 humble	 and	 egoless	 he	 should	 be.	 He
should	 be	 egoless	 because	 he	 has	 gone	 through	 the	 abundance	 of	 wealth	 and
found	that	nothing	is	gained	by	gaining	wealth.	Buddha	and	Mahavira	were	sons
of	the	rich,	but	they	renounced	riches	and	walked	away.	Why?
Once	Buddha	was	camping	in	a	village	that	belonged	to	some	other	state	than	his
father's.
The	ruler	of	that	state	came	to	see	him,	and	he	said,	"I	have	come	to	remonstrate
with	you.	Are	you	crazy?	Why	did	you	give	up	your	palace,	your	riches,	and	the
grandeur	and	glory	associated	with	them?	This	is	crazy!	I	beseech	you	to	give	up
this	 craziness.	 You	 marry	 my	 daughter,	 and	 become	 heir	 to	 my	 state;	 my
daughter	is	my	only	child.	Give	up	the	monk's	robe	and	manage	the	affairs	of	my
kingdom."	Buddha	 said,	 "The	 kingdom	 that	 I	 left	 behind	 is	 larger	 than	 yours.
Now	don't	tempt	me."	Then	the	king	asked,	"What	is	it	that	made	you	leave	your
kingdom?"	and
Buddha	 answered,	 "I	 realized	 that	 I	 had	 everything	 and	 yet	 there	 was	 an
emptiness	inside	me	which	wealth	could	not	fill."
My	vision	is	 that	 it	 is	difficult	for	a	poor	man	to	drop	his	ego	because	he	does
not	know	that	even	after	having	riches	one	has	nothing.	But	the	rich	man's	ego
should	go.	He	alone	is	truly	rich	who	has	come	to	realize	that	he	has	everything	-
-	 riches	 and	 mansions,	 cars	 and	 everything	 that	 riches	 bring	 --	 yet	 there	 is
something	 inside	 him	 which	 is	 utterly	 empty.	 If	 you	 fill	 that	 emptiness	 with
wealth,	 you	 become	 egoistic,	 arrogant.	 And	 if	 you	 see	 that	 emptiness	 with
clarity,	against	the	background	of	riches,	then	egolessness	arises.
If	 the	 rich	 man	 gives	 up	 his	 ego,	 it	 will	 be	 easier	 for	 the	 poor	 to	 shed	 his
jealousy.	But	if	the	rich	remain	abundantly	egoistic	and	arrogant,	then	the	poor
are	left	with	nothing	but	Jealousy	and	bitterness	to	nurse.
The	 arrogance	 of	 the	 rich	 provides	 an	 opportunity	 to	 the	 politician	 to	 fan	 the
jealousy	 of	 the	 poor.	And	when	 the	 politician	 does	 so,	 the	 rich	man	 becomes
more	arrogant	in	defense.	He	seeks	to	defend	his	ego,	what	he	calls	his	prestige,
in	various	ways.	But	these	ways	are	dangerous;	they	only	add	fuel	to	the	fire.
No,	 if	 the	country	has	to	be	rich,	 it	 is	urgent	 that	class	conflict	be	reduced	and
eliminated.
And	 this	 is	 the	 responsibility	 of	 the	 rich	 --	much	more	 than	 that	 of	 the	 poor,
because	the	poor	man's	jealousy	is	very	natural	while	it	is	unnatural	on	the	part
of	 the	rich	 to	be	egoistic.	While	 the	poor	man's	 jealousy	 is	 real,	 the	ego	of	 the
rich	is	irrational	and	unreal.
I	 remember	a	small	story.	There	 is	a	hospital	 inside	a	 jail	with	a	hundred	beds
where	 sick	 prisoners	 are	 kept	 for	 treatment.	 Like	 the	 prisoners,	 their	 beds	 are
also	 numbered.	 The	 number	 one	 bed	 is	 allotted	 to	 the	 prisoner	who	 is	 a	 little
hefty	 and	 enjoys	 the	 favor	 of	 the	 jail	 authorities.	 The	 second	 bed	 goes	 to	 one
with	 less	 influence	 with	 the	 authorities.	 The	 prisoner	 on	 bed	 number	 one
hundred	thinks	himself	to	be	a	nobody,	a	nonentity.
The	man	on	bed	number	one	is	chained	to	his	cot	like	the	others,	but	he	has	an
air	of	arrogance	about	him,	the	arrogance	of	being	somebody.	His	bed	is	close	to
the	window.
Rising	 from	 his	 bed	 every	morning	 he	 looks	 out	 and	 says,	 "What	 a	 beautiful
morning!"
And	all	 the	other	prisoners	feel	humbled	before	him.	They	 think	him	to	be	 the
most	fortunate	man	and	feel	jealous	of	him.	And	the	prisoner	in	bed	number	one
goes	on	talking.	Sometimes	he	praises	the	grandeur	of	the	full	moon	in	the	sky,
at	other	times	he	describes	the	beauty	and	smell	of	the	various	flowers.
By	and	by	the	number	one	bed	becomes	the	most	coveted	bed	of	the	hospital,	the
object	of	ninety-nine	prisoners'	desires	and	dreams.	The	fellow	prisoners	tell	the
occupant	of	the	number	one	bed,	"You	are	the	most	fortunate	one	among	us;	you
must	have	earned	it	in	your	previous	lives,"	but	in	their	heart	of	hearts	they	pray
for	his	death.	And	whenever	he	has	a	heart	attack	 --	occupants	of	bed	number
one	often	suffer	from	heart	troubles	--	it	sends	a	wave	of	joy	among	his	fellow
prisoners	and	 they	begin	 to	 look	 forward	 to	 the	 time	when	he	will	die.	But	he
survives,	 because	 people	 like	 him	 die	 with	 difficulty.	 And	when	 he	 is	 a	 little
better,	he	begins	again	his	hymns	of	praise	to	the	splendor	of	the	world	beyond
the	window.
At	long	last	the	prisoner	in	bed	number	one	dies.
His	death	sends	a	wave	of	 joy	among	the	ninety-nine	prisoners,	each	of	whom
aspires	for	his	bed.	A	contest	starts	--	as	it	happens	in	Delhi	after	the	death	of	the
"number	one"	man.
A	mad	 race	 is	on.	They	 flatter	 the	officials	of	 the	 jail	 to	win	 their	 favor.	They
even	bribe	them.	And	ultimately	the	prisoner	offering	the	largest	bribe	wins	the
race.	The	winner	is	overjoyed	and	soon	occupies	the	coveted	bed.	And	the	first
thing	he	does	after	occupying	it	is	to	inspect	his	state	and	surroundings.	This	is
what	one	does	after	becoming	the	president	of	the	country.	As	the	new	occupant
looks	out	the	window,	all	his	joys	vanish	into	thin	air.	He	is	utterly	disappointed
to	see	that	there	is	nothing	except	the	massive	outer	wall	of	the	prison.	There	is
no	sky,	no	sunrise,	no	flowers,	no	song	of	the	birds	--
nothing	of	 those	 joys	 that	his	predecessor	had	gleefully	 talked	about	 for	years.
And	now	he	is	in	great	difficulty	--	how	to	say	that	there	is	nothing?	And	do	you
know	what	he	said	to	his	fellow	prisoners?
He	 said,	 "Hey	 guys,	 how	 fortunate	 I	 am!	 The	 sun	 is	 rising,	 the	 flowers	 are
blooming	 and	 the	 birds	 are	 singing."	 And	 again	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 prisoners	 say
outwardly,	"How	fortunate	you	are,"	and	secretly	pray	for	his	death	as	well.
I	have	also	heard	that	this	hospital	has	been	there	for	hundreds	of	years,	and	for
hundreds	of	years	 the	same	drama	 is	being	played	again	and	again.	And	up	 to
now	 no	 prisoner	 in	 bed	 number	 one	 has	 gathered	 enough	 courage	 to	 say	 the
truth.
The	man	getting	to	the	top	of	the	ladder	of	wealth	should	gather	courage	to	say
that	though	he	has	amassed	wealth,	he	has	not	found	his	soul,	he	has	not	known
the	truth,	he	has	not	experienced	love.	In	fact,	he	should	realize	the	utter	poverty
of	his	being	and	say	it.	Then	he	will	cease	to	be	the	pillar	of	ego	that	he	is	--	and,
with	the	cessation	of	ego,	he	will	also	cease	to	inflame	the	jealousy	of	the	poor.
If	class	conflict	has	to	be	removed,	the	rich	man	will	have	to	drop	his	arrogance
and	come	down	from	his	imaginary	height.
Man	does	not	become	great	because	of	wealth.	A	clerk	in	an	office	is	not	small
because	he	is	a	clerk.	To	be	really	human	is	altogether	different.	It	comes	with
the	richness	of	being,	which	has	nothing	to	do	with	outer	richness.	And	the	man
who	has	no	respect	for	this	inner	richness	harms	the	society	in	many	ways.	The
rich	man	should	know	that	wealth	does	not	make	for	inner	richness.	He	should
also	know	that	God	resides	within	the	poor	too.	He	has	not	to	look	down	upon
the	poor	man	as	if	he	is	an	animal.	Only	then	we	will	extinguish	the	fire	of	class
conflict.	And	this	fire	can	be	extinguished.	And	the	country	can	engage	itself	in
creativity,	in	the	production	of	wealth,	only	if	class	conflict	disappears.
A	friend	has	asked,
Question
HOW	IS	IT	THAT	INDIA	COULD	NOT	PRODUCE	WEALTH?
There	 are	 reasons	 for	 it.	And	 I	would	 like	 to	 go	 into	 a	 few	of	 them.	The	 first
reason	 is	 that	 we,	 as	 a	 people,	 are	 anti-wealth.	 It	 must	 have	 been	 a	 most
unfortunate	moment	in	our	long	past	when	we	decided	to	go	against	wealth.	For
thousands	 of	 years	 we	 have	 respected	 poverty,	 even	 deified	 it.	 And	 we	 also
respect	the	poor.	Perhaps	the	reason	was	that	we	were	very	poor,	and	because	of
our	envy	of	the	rich	we	began	to	respect	the	poor.
If	 I	 am	 a	 beggar	 and	 there	 is	 no	way	whatsoever	 to	 be	 a	 king,	 then	 as	 a	 last
measure,	my	mind	may	say	that	I	am	happy	being	a	beggar,	that	I	would	never,
like	to	be	a	king.	This	would	be	the	last	device	of	the	poor	man's	ego.
India	has	 remained	poor	 for	 thousands	of	years.	Our	poverty	has	been	so	 long
that	 it	 became	necessary	 to	 find	a	way	 to	gratify	our	 ego	even	 in	 the	midst	of
poverty.	And	we	found	it	at	last:	we	gave	poverty	many	good	names.	We	said,	"It
is	simplicity,	non-acquisitiveness,	renunciation,"	and	the	rest	of	it.	And	if	some
wealthy	 person	 embraced	 poverty	 voluntarily,	 we	 bowed	 down	 to	 him,	 we
touched	his	feet.	All	the	twenty-four	teerthankaras	of	Jainism	were	sons	of	kings.
Why	could	not	a	poor	man's	son	be	accepted	as	a	teerthankara?
There	is	a	reason	for	it.	The	poor	man	has	nothing	to	renounce,	and	we	measure
a	man's	greatness	by	what	he	renounces.	Really,	wealth	is	our	measure,	whether
one	amasses	it	or	renounces	it.	Mahavira	is	great	because	he	renounced	a	huge
amount	 of	 wealth.	 Buddha	 is	 great	 because	 he	 renounced	 his	 riches.	 No	 one
would	have	cared	to	take	note	of	him	if	he	had	been	born	in	a	poor	family.	We
would	have	asked,	 "How	much	gold,	how	many	palaces,	 elephants	 and	horses
did	 you	 renounce?"	And	 he	would	 have	 said,	 "None,	 because	 I	 had	 nothing."
How	could	one	be	a	teerthankara	if	he	had	no	wealth?	To	be	a	teerthankara,	one
needs	 to	 be	 a	 millionaire.	 We	 measure	 everything	 with	 money.	 Poor	 people
measure	 everything	 with	 money.	We	 measure	 one's	 wealth	 by	 the	 amount	 of
wealth	one	has;	we	measure	renunciation	by	the	amount	of	wealth	one	gives	up.
Once	I	visited	Jaipur.	A	man	came	to	me	and	said,	"There	 is	a	great	sannyasin
here;	you	must	 see	him.	He	 is	an	extraordinary	 sannyasin."	 I	 asked,	 "How	did
you	find	out	that	he	is	a	great	sannyasin?"	And	he	answered,	"The	king	of	Jaipur
himself	touches	his	feet."	I	told	the	man,	"You	respect	the	king	of	Jaipur,	and	not
the	sannyasin.	What	would	you	say	if	the	king	refused	to	touch	his	feet?"
On	another	occasion	I	happened	to	be	the	guest	of	a	sannyasin.	In	the	course	of
our	 talks,	 every	 now	 and	 then	 he	 said	 that	 he	 had	 renounced	 wealth	 worth
hundreds	of	thousands	of	rupees.	Once	I	asked	him,	"Can	you	tell	me	about	the
time	when	you	renounced	so	much	wealth?"	And	he	said,	"Almost	 thirty	years
ago."	 Then	 I	 said,	 "Your	 renunciation	 did	 not	 click,	 because	 you	 remember	 it
even	after	the	lapse	of	thirty	years.	You	are	still	enjoying	the	wealth.	Once	your
ego	thrived	on	its	possession,	now	it	thrives	on	its	renunciation.
But	in	each	case	wealth	remains	the	basis."
A	poor	man's	measure	is	wealth.
But	it	was	most	unfortunate	that	we	accepted	poverty	and	thought	that	it	was	a
blessing.
We	 said	 that	 contentment	 was	 of	 the	 highest.	 And	 that	 is	 why	 we	 failed	 to
produce	wealth,	and	we	remained	poor.
Now	in	order	to	produce	wealth	we	have	to	stop	respecting	poverty.	We	have	to
stop	calling	the	poor	by	the	name	of	daidranarain,	saying	the	poor	are	God.	We
have	had	enough	of	 this	nonsense.	The	poor	are	not	God,	and	poverty	 is	not	a
virtue.	Poverty	is	a	great	disease,	a	curse,	a	scourge.	It	is	like	a	plague,	and	it	has
to	be	destroyed,	and	wealth	has	to	be	respected.	We	will	produce	wealth	only	if
we	respect	it.
We	create	what	we	desire,	intensely	desire	to	create.	We	created	poverty	because
we	 accepted	 it.	 If	 somebody	 asked	 Gandhi	 why	 he	 traveled	 in	 a	 third-class
compartment,	 he	used	 to	 say,	 "Because	 there	 is	 no	 fourth	 class	on	 the	 railway
trains."	If	there	had	been	a	fourth	class	Gandhi	would	have	traveled	in	that	class
saying,	"I	travel	in	the	fourth	because	there	is	no	fifth	class	on	the	train."	Now
Gandhi	would	not	he	contented	until	he	traveled	in	the	train	of	hell	itself.	We	say
that	Gandhi	was	a	mahatma,	a	great	soul,	a	saint,	because	he	accepted	the	third
class.
Because	we	all,	 being	poor,	 travel	 in	 the	 third,	we	 think	of	Gandhi	 as	 the	 real
mahatma.
Really,	we	are	sick	of	traveling	third	class;	we	would	travel	by	first	class	if	w	e
could	afford	it	.	But	that	is	not	possible,	so	we	have	to	lend	respectability	to	the
third	 class	 by	honoring	one	who	 travels	 by	 it.	Third	 class	 is	 now	 sought.	 It	 is
turned	into	an	object	of	our	respect;	 it	 is	made	important	--	and	it	gratifies	our
ego.
This	false	and	senseless	gratification	of	ego	has	ruined	this	country.	It	is	time	for
it	to	go.
We	 need	wealth.	Wealth	 is	 not	 everything,	 but	 it	 is	 certainly	 something.	 Self-
realization	is	not	possible	through	wealth,	but	it	is	also	true	that	without	wealth
self-realization	 is	 more	 difficult	 to	 attain.	 There	 is	 at	 least	 one	 great	 value	 in
wealth:	 it	 helps	 us	 to	 forget	 our	 bodies,	 bodily	 needs.	 Bread	 serves	 one	 great
purpose:	we	are	freed	from	our	bodily	concerns.	In	hunger	it	is	difficult	to	forget
the	body.	If	I	have	a	headache,	I	cannot	forget	my	head,	but	with	the	headache
gone	I	forget	it	completely.	If	I	have	a	thorn	in	my	foot,	my	whole	mind	enters
and	lives	around	the	paining	foot.	With	the	thorn	taken	out,	the	mind	leaves	the
foot,	it	becomes	free,	carefree.	Where	there	is	a	want,	there	is	a	sore.	It	hurts	and
haunts	us.	The	poor	man	lives	in	his	body,	he	lives	on	the	level	of	the	body;	he
cannot	think	beyond	it.	The	rich	man	has	an	advantage:	he	can	forget	his	body.
That	is	why	I	feel	that	the	whole	world	should	be	made	prosperous	and	rich,	so
that	every	person	can	rise	above	his	body.	And	the	day	we	forget	the	body,	we
begin	to	take	care	of	our	soul.	When	the	needs	of	the	body	are	fulfilled,	then	the
question	arises:	What	next?
What	to	seek	next?	The	search	for	religion	and	God	arises	after	all	the	physical
needs	of	man	have	been	 satisfied.	 It	 is	 the	 last	 luxury.	When	you	have	 all	 the
good	things	of	this	world,	the	ultimate	journey	begins.
So	now	we	have	to	change	all	our	old	choices;	they	were	illusory,	ill-conceived
and	wrong.
There	is	yet	another	important	matter	to	consider.	Our	acceptance	of	poverty	has
one	other	reason:	We	believe	that	a	man	is	poor	because	of	his	past	sins,	the	sins
of	 his	 past	 lives.	 This	was	 also	 a	 device	 of	 consolation.	We	 said	 that	 the	 rich
were	rich	because	they	had	earned	merits	in	past	lives,	and	the	poor	were	poor
because	 of	 their	 past	 sins.	 This	 fatalist	 thinking	 again	 provided	 us	 with
consolation.	 And	 it	 made	 poverty	 and	 misery	 bearable.	 But	 it	 also	 made	 it
impossible	to	end	poverty.
Poverty	is	not	the	result	of	any	mistakes	that	we	made	in	our	past	lives,	it	is	the
result	of	 the	mistakes	made	 in	 the	present	 life	 itself.	 If	what	we	do	 in	 this	 life
fails	to	produce	wealth,	then	poverty	is	inevitable.
And	secondly,	poverty	is	not	only	the	result	of	our	individual	ways	of	life,	it	is
also	 the	 cumulative	 effect	 of	 our	 group	 or	 collective	 life	 and	 its	 inner
organization.
If	we	understand	 two	 things	 --	 fallacies	of	past	karmas	and	 individual	ways	of
life	--	then	we	can	get	rid	of	our	age-old	poverty.
As	 long	as	we	believed	 that	 the	 lifespan	of	a	man	was	determined	by	 fate,	we
could	not	 increase	our	 longevity.	But	 the	 same	 lifespan	 increased	considerably
when	our	belief	 in	fate	declined.	There	was	a	strange	custom	in	Tibet.	When	a
child	was	born,	he	was	dipped	in	ice-cold	water	and	then	taken	out.	This	ritual
was	repeated	several	 times,	as	a	 result	of	which	seven	out	of	 ten	children	died
only	 three	 survived.	 The	 people	 of	 Tibet	 believed	 that	 of	 the	 ten,	 seven	 died
because	they	were	destined	to	die,	and	three	lived	because	they	were	destined	to
live.	And	 they	 thought	 that	 this	 ritual	was	 just	 a	way	of	 testing	 the	 fate	of	 the
children.	 This	 custom	 continued	 for	 centuries,	 and	 as	 a	 result,	 millions	 of
children	lost	their	lives.
It	 is	 wrong	 to	 conclude	 from	 the	 history	 of	 the	 Tibetan	 custom	 that	 if	 these
millions	 of	 children	 had	 been	 spared	 this	 ordeal	 they	 would	 yet	 have	 died
because	they	were	destined	to	die.	It	simply	shows	that	their	resistance	was	low.
But	 resistance	 could	 have	 been	 improved.	 But	 the	 Tibetans	 opted	 for	 killing
them.
Our	 lifespan	 increased	when	we	realized	 that	 longevity	was	not	determined	by
fate.	We	now	live	much	longer.
In	the	same	way,	we	believed	that	diseases	were	caused	by	principles	of	karma,
and	so	we	did	not	do	anything	to	fight	or	eradicate	disease.	However,	when	we
dropped	this	belief,	the	situation	changed	radically.	Now	any	number	of	diseases
have	disappeared,	and	a	time	will	come	when	they	will	disappear	altogether.
We	are	poor	because	we	have	decided	to	be	so,	and	poverty	can	end	only	when
we	reject	it	with	all	our	heart	and	mind.	And	if	the	whole	country	so	decides	and
says	goodbye	to	poverty,	there	will	be	no	difficulty	whatsoever.	But	the	will	 to
end	poverty	should	come	first	--	the	ending	will	follow	inevitably.
Now	the	poor	man	is	taught	new	stupidities,	new	superstitions	in	place	of	the	old
ones.
He	is	being	ceaselessly	harangued	that	he	is	poor	because	he	is	exploited	by	the
rich,	and	that	in	order	to	liquidate	poverty	the	exploiter	has	to	be	liquidated	first.
This	is	an	utterly	senseless	argument.	Liquidation	of	the	so-called	exploiter	will
never	end	poverty.
Another	friend	has	asked,
Question
YOU	 ARE	 WRONG	 IN	 SAYING	 THAT	 THE	 POOR	 MAN	 IS	 NOT
EXPLOITED.
WHY	IS	HE	PAID	BY	THE	EMPLOYER	ONLY	TWO	RUPEES	FOR	WORK
WORTH	TEN?
I	 ask	 this	 friend	 what	 will	 happen	 if	 this	 poor	 man	 refuses	 to	 work	 for	 two
rupees?	And	then	let	him	try	to	sell	his	ten	rupees	worth	of	labor	for	ten,	not	less.
Where	will	he	get	this	amount?	Maybe	he	will	fail	to	earn	even	two	paise	if	he
refuses	 to	work	 for	 two	 rupees.	And	 how	 did	 you	 determine	 the	worth	 of	 his
labor	to	be	ten?	Do	you	know	how	wages,	the	price	of	labor	are	determined?
Marx	preached	a	strange	theory	that	the	worker	is	paid	much	less	than	the	real
value	of	his	labor.	But	the	question	is	that	if	the	worker	refuses	to	work	for	two
rupees,	is	he	going	to	be	employed	elsewhere	for	more?	It	is	true	that	search	for
wages	 higher	 than	 the	 current	 ones	 should	 be	 undertaken.	 So	 also	 for	 higher
production.	But	if	we	think	in	terms	of	the	exploited	and	the	exploiter,	we	will
only	create	a	wall	of	enmity	between	the	poor	and	the	rich,	and	the	country	will
suffer.	It	will	never	attain	prosperity	if	the	institution	of	production	is	turned	into
an	institution	of	conflict,	strife	and	enmity.
So,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 an	 institution	 of	 friendship	 and	 cooperation.	 The	 worker	 and
employer	 have	 to	 work	 with	 understanding	 and	 in	 cooperation.	 The	 worker
should	know	that	it	is	not	a	question	of	exploitation,	it	is	a	question	of	increasing
production	and	productivity.
And	the	employer	should	know	that	it	is	not	merely	a	matter	of	earning	profits,
but	 a	 question	 of	 investing	 them	 in	 further	 production.	 And	 if	 this	 twin
understanding	happens,	the	country	will	attain	affluence	unfailingly.
But	if	what	the	socialists	say	is	accepted,	the	country	will	go	to	the	wall,	because
after	 twenty	 years	 we	 will	 be	 poorer	 than	 we	 are	 today.	 Socialists	 give	 no
thought	to	the	matter	of	production,	their	sole	concern	is	distribution	of	wealth.
And	this	thing	appeals	to	the	poor	--	that	he	will	share	the	wealth	of	the	rich	for
nothing.	He	is	poor	because	he	lacks	the	will	to	work,	to	create,	to	produce.	So
what	more	 could	 he	 desire	 if	 wealth	 comes	 free	 of	 charge?	 And	 he	 joins	 the
chorus:	"Stop	all	work	and	march!	We	demand	distribution	of	wealth!"
If	this	mad	wish	takes	a	firm	hold	on	the	country's	poor,	it	means	that	India	has
finally	 decided	 to	 remain	 poor	 forever.	 Then	 riddance	 from	 poverty	would	 be
simply	impossible.
And	now	the	last	thing...	There	remain	a	number	of	questions	to	be	answered;	I
will	 answer	 them	 tomorrow.	 A	 friend	 wants	 to	 know	 if	 I	 am	 paid	 by	 the
capitalists	for	supporting	them.
No	payment	so	far,	but	if	there	is	a	suggestion	please	bring	it	to	me.	It	is	strange,
the	whole	pattern	of	our	thinking	is	such.	When	I	speak	in	favor	of	socialism	I
receive	 letters	 saying	 that	 I	 am	Mao's	 agent	 and	 paid	 by	 China.	 And	 when	 I
criticize	 socialism	 they	 say	 I	 am	 in	 the	 pay	 of	America	 and	 I	 am	 an	 agent	 of
American	capital.
Is	 it	 a	 crime	 to	 think?	Do	only	 agents	 think,	 and	no	one	 else?	 I	wonder	 if	 the
questioner	himself	is	connected	with	some	agency.	If	not	why	this	question?
We	 cannot	 imagine	 that	 one	 can	 think	 independently.	We	 say	 one	must	 be	 an
agent.	This	means	that	man	does	not	have	a	soul	of	his	own	and	he	cannot	think
on	his	own.
Another	friend	says	that	as	I	sometimes	speak	in	support	of	socialism	and	again
against	it,	I	create	confusion.
In	 reality	 our	 problem	 is	 different.	 We	 treat	 socialism	 and	 capitalism	 as
contradictory	 to	 each	 other.	 This	 is	 a	 very	 wrong	 assessment	 Socialism	 is
nothing	more	than	the	developed	stage	of	capitalism;	they	are	not	opposite.	So,
when	I	speak	in	support	of	socialism,	I	speak	about	the	end,	the	goal.	And	when
I	 support	 capitalism,	 I	 speak	 about	 the	 means,	 the	 process.	 There	 is	 no
contradiction	whatsoever.	But	because	we	are	in	the	habit	of	thinking	in	terms	of
enmity,	we	cannot	think	in	any	other	manner.	We	have	been	trained	to	think	in
terms	of	conflict,	not	cooperation.	The	political	leader	knows	only	the	language
of	conflict.
But	I	am	not	a	leader.	To	me	it	seems	that	socialism	is	the	end,	and	capitalism	the
means.
And	that	is	why	I	am	in	favor	of	socialism	and	I	am	not	opposed	to	capitalism.
This	has	to	be	understood	very	clearly.
Any	 number	 of	 friends	 have	 written	 to	 me	 that	 I	 say	 things	 that	 are	 very
inconsistent,	that	sometimes	I	say	one	thing	and	at	other	times	its	very	opposite.
This	charge	is	again	wrong.
You	were	young	yesterday,	and	today	you	are	an	old	man.	If	someone	tells	you
that	you	are	very	inconsistent	--	once	you	were	a	child,	then	young	and	now	you
are	old	--	what	would	you	say	to	him?	You	will	say	that	it	is	not	inconsistent,	it	is
growth.	Childhood	leads	to	youth,	and	youth	in	its	turn	leads	to	old	age.	In	the
same	 way	 capitalism	 will	 lead	 to	 socialism,	 socialism	 to	 communism	 and
communism	 to	 anarchism.	 The	 day	 communism	 will	 have	 been	 established
rightly,	there	will	be	no	need	of	the	state.	But	these	are	the	gradual	processes	of
social	growth;	they	are	not	contradictory	at	all.
I	am	not	inconsistent.	Whatever	I	say	is	relevant,	and	that	is	why	I	say	it.	In	my
view,	socialism	will	not	come	 through	 those	who	 talk	of	 it	 --	 the	demagogues.
There	is	every	possibility	that	they	will	impede	it,	prevent	it.	They	may	succeed
in	subverting	and	sabotaging	the	system	of	capital	formation,	and	consequently
prevent	 the	 advent	 of	 socialism	 in	 India.	But	 nobody	 can	 think	 that	Tatas	 and
Birlas	are	going	to	bring	socialism	here.	I	say	to	you,	Tatas	and	Birlas	are	doing
exactly	that.	I	mean	to	say	that	if	the	wealth	that	they	are	engaged	in	producing
becomes	massive	and	abundant,	then	it	 is	bound	to	culminate	in	socialism,	and
in	 no	 other	 way.	 It	 is	 inevitable.	 And	 then	 socialism	 will	 be	 a	 very	 natural
consequence	of	capitalism.
But	Karl	Marx	thought	in	terms	of	thesis	and	antithesis.	He	thought	in	terms	of
conflict	and	struggle	and	the	revolution	of	the	proletariat.	And	his	followers	are
conditioned	by	his	teachings.	Marx	had	no	concept	of	evolution.	This	is	the	basic
weakness	of	his	philosophy.	But	evolution	is	the	fundamental	law	of	life	and	its
basic	 function.	And	 revolution	 becomes	necessary	 only	when	 the	 evolutionary
process	is	blocked.	Revolution	should	not	step	in	where	evolution	itself	has	not
happened.	As	I	said	yesterday,	it	would	be	wrong	if	a	childbirth	is	forced	much
before	the	child	has	completed	nine	months	in	the	mother's	womb.	It	would	be
dangerous.	 The	 child	 will	 die;	 even	 the	 mother	 may	 die.	 And	 if	 the	 child
survives,	it	would	be	as	good	as	dead.
It	is	also	possible	that	childbirth	does	not	take	place	even	after	completion	of	the
pregnancy,	and	a	Caesarian	section	becomes	unavoidable.	In	the	same	way,	if	the
evolutionary	process	 is	 impeded,	 revolution	will	become	necessary.	Revolution
will	be	needed	to	remove	the	impediment.	If	America	does	not	become	socialist
after	fifty	years,	a	revolution	can	be	needed	there.	But	it	was	not	necessary	for
Russia	 and	 China,	 and	 it	 is	 not	 needed	 in	 India	 yet.	 It	 is	 unfortunate	 that
revolutions	are	taking	place	where	they	were	not	needed	at	all.
Lenin	 had	 predicted	 that	 the	 road	 of	 communism	 to	 London	 lies	 through
Moscow,	Peking	and	Calcutta.	It	was	a	dangerous	prophecy	which	seems	to	be
coming	 true.	 Already	 there	 is	 a	 paved	 road	 from	 Moscow	 to	 Peking,	 and
footpaths	 between	 Peking	 and	Calcutta	 have	 become	 visible.	Nobody	 can	 say
that	Lenin's	prediction	will	really	come	true.	But	in	case	it	comes	true,	it	will	be
most	 unfortunate	 for	 Asia	 and	 the	 world.	 There	 is	 yet	 time	 to	 remove	 the
footpaths	because	they	are	in	their	rudimentary	stage.	But	how	can	it	be	done	in
the	absence	of	a	definite	vision	and	goal?
The	irony	is	 that	while	socialism	has	a	movement	and	a	philosophy,	capitalism
has	none.
Capitalism	has	no	philosophy	of	its	own.	That	is	why	it	cannot	take	a	bold	stand.
it	is	always	on	the	defensive.	And	if	it	does	not	change	its	posture,	its	stance,	it	is
going	to	die.
Its	being	on	the	defensive	means	that	it	accepts	defeat.	A	person	or	a	system,	if	it
wants	 to	win,	must	 not	 be	 on	 the	 defensive.	But	 capitalism	 is	 committing	 the
same	mistake.
Capitalism	 says,	 "It	 does	 not	 matter	 if	 Calcutta	 is	 lost,	 we	 will	 take	 care	 of
Bombay."	And	if	tomorrow	Bombay	is	lost,	they	will	take	care	of	Delhi.	This	is
the	certain	way	of	retreat	and	ultimate	defeat.
So,	this	will	not	do.	When	a	movement	is	based	on	jealousy,	hatred	and	violence,
it	gathers	much	fire	and	goes	on	spreading	like	wildfire.	A	great	force	of	thought.
ideology	and	philosophy	 is	needed	 to	 counteract	 and	defeat	 it.	And	 I	 say,	 it	 is
possible	to	build	that	force.	As	I	see	it.	capitalism	is	dying	for	want	of	argument,
for	 want	 of	 philosophy.	 It	 is	 not	 able	 to	 argue	 its	 case,	 and	 it	 is	 afraid	 of
appearing	in	court	because	it	cannot	produce	evidence	in	its	favor.	A	single	party
is	present	in	the	court	and	getting	away	with	a	default	judgment.
Capitalism	 must	 present	 its	 case,	 Its	 philosophy.	 It	 should	 announce	 in	 clear
terms	that	we	are	part	of	socialism.	part	of	its	development.	Socialism	is	not	the
first,	but	the	last	stage	of	capitalism.	And	when	capitalism	presents	its	case	well,
we	will	 drive	 away	 communism	not	 only	 from	Calcutta	 and	 Peking,	 but	 from
Moscow	itself.	That	is	not	so	difficult.
There	 is	 great	 unrest	 in	 Russia	 at	 the	moment.	 It	 is	 seething	 with	 discontent,
stress	and	strain.	Its	youth	are	in	foment,	but	they	are	not	in	a	position	to	rebel.
They	 don't	 have	 the	 wherewithal,	 the	 necessary	 ideology.	 That	 ideology,	 that
rebellion.	has	to	reach	Russia	too.	America	also	suffers	from	the	same	deficiency
--	it	does	not	have	an	aggressive	ideology.	America	is	also	on	the	defensive,	and
that	 is	why	 it	 is	 in	 difficulty.	But	 I	 think	 socialism	will	 not	 reach	London	 via
Moscow,	 Peking	 and	 Calcutta.	 If	 socialism	 has	 to	 spread	 in	 the	 world,	 its
headquarters	will	be	Washington.	Socialism	via	Washington.
There	can	be	no	other	way.
And	 if	 socialism	 goes	 all	 over	 the	 world	 via	 Washington,	 it	 will	 be	 natural,
healthy	and	happy.
If	you	have	any	questions,	please	give	them	in	writing	and	we	will	discuss	them
together.
I	 am	grateful	 to	 you	 for	 having	 listened	 to	me	with	 such	 love	 and	 attention.	 I
salute	the	God	residing	in	each	of	you.	Please	accept	my	salutations.
Beware	of	Socialism
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	No	going	back	to	the	past
15	April	1970	pm	in	Cross	Maidan
Archive
code:
7004155
ShortTitle:
SOCIAL03
Audio:
No
Video:	No
A	friend	has	a	question,	and	there	are	a	few	more	questions	to	the	same	effect.
The	 friend	 has	 asked,	 HOW	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 YOU	 SUPPORT	 CAPITALISM
WHICH	IS	BASED	ON
SELFISHNESS?
A	few	things	have	to	be	understood	in	this	connection.	Firstly,	down	the	ages	we
have	been	taught	many	wrong	things,	and	among	them,	one	is	that	it	is	wrong	to
live	for	oneself.	In	fact,	man	is	born	to	live	for	himself,	but	he	is	taught	to	live
for	others,	and	not	for	himself.	The	father	should	live	for	his	son,	and	the	son,	in
his	 turn,	should	 live	for	his	son.	This	means	 that	neither	 the	father	nor	 the	son
can	 really	 live.	 They	 say,	 "Live	 for	 the	 society,	 live	 for	 the	 nation,	 live	 for
humanity,	live	for	God,	live	for	salvation,	but	please,	never	commit	the	mistake
of	living	for	yourself."
This	 thing	 has	 been	 so	 incessantly	 preached	 that	 it	 has	 sunk	 deep	 into	 our
consciousness,	and	we	really	believe	 that	 it	 is	a	sin	 to	 live	for	oneself.	But	 the
truth	is	that	if	a	person	has	to	live,	he	can	only	live	for	himself,	and	for	no	one
else.	And	 if	 living	 for	others	happens,	 it	 is	 just	 the	consequence	of	 living	very
deeply	for	oneself;	it	iS	Just	Its	fragrance.
No	one	in	the	world	can	live	for	the	other;	it	is	just	impossible.	A	mother	does
not	live	for	her	son;	she	lives	for	the	joy	of	being	a	mother.	And	if	she	dies	for
her	son,	it	is	really	her	own	joy.	The	son	is	an	excuse.	If	you	see	a	man	drowning
and	you	jump	into	the	river	to	save	him,	you	might	say	to	others	that	you	risked
your	life	to	save	another	man's	life,	but	it	would	be	a	wrong	statement	on	your
part.	The	truth	is	that	you	could	not	bear	to	see	the	man	dying,	which	was	your
own	pain.	And	to	rid	yourself	of	this	pain	you	jumped	into	the	river	and	saved
him.	You	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	other	really.	Would	you	have	saved	him	if
you	had	not	suffered	pain?	There	were	many	others	on	the	bank	of	the	river	too;
they	felt	no	pain	and	they	did	not	do	a	thing.	Whenever	a	man	saves	another	man
from	drowning,	he	really	does	so	to	save	himself	from	pain,	because	he	cannot
bear	to	see	him	dying.	Deep	down	he	is	saving	himself	from	pain	and	sorrow.
A	man	 serves	 the	 poor	 because	 he	 cannot	 hear	 to	 .see	 them	 suffer.	 So,	 he	 is
wrong	if	he	says	 that	he	serves	 the	poor.	The	poverty	of	another	man	hecomes
his	own	sorrow	and	he	does	something	 to	alleviate	 it.	He	 just	cannot	 live	with
this	 sorrow,	 and	 so	 he	 serves	 the	 poor.	Till	 now	no	man	has	 lived	 for	 another
man;	each	man	lives	for	himself.
But	 you	 can	 live	 for	 yourself	 in	 two	ways.	You	 can	 live	 in	 a	way	 that	 harms
others;	you	can	 live	by	 injuring	and	killing	others.	And	you	can	 live	 in	a	way
that	helps	others	to	live	and	grow	too.	But	the	talk	of	altruism,	of	the	service	of
others,	is	dangerous.	When	we	ask	someone	to	live	for	others,	we	really	ask	him
to	live	a	life	that	is	unnatural	and	unhealthy.
I	have	heard	 that	a	 father	was	once	 teaching	his	son	 the	purpose	of	 life.	Many
times	teachings	like	this	have	proven	to	be	dangerous.	He	said	to	his	son,	"God
has	made	you	for	the	service	of	others."	The	son,	if	he	was	like	the	sons	of	olden
times,	 would	 have	 taken	 to	 serving	 others	 as	 asked	 by	 his	 father	 --	 but	 he
belonged	to	the	new	age,	and	he	said,	"I	take	it	that	God	made	me	for	the	service
of	others,	but	why	do	you	 think	he	made	 the	others?	Just	 to	be	served	by	me?
Then	God	has	been	unjust	to	me.	And	if	he	made	me	to	serve	others	and	made
the	others	to	serve	me,	then	God	seems	to	be	very	confused.
Instead	of	this	complex	arrangement	he	could	have	laid	a	very	simple	rule:	'Let
each	live	for	himself.'"
And	remember,	when	somebody	serves	others	he	always	does	so	with	a	motive.
Service	is	a	bait	with	which	he	dominates	others.	Really,	he	begins	with	service
and	 ends	 with	 lordship.	 Beware	 of	 one	 who	 professes	 to	 serve	 you.	 He	 is
certainly	 going	 to	 ask	 the	 price.	 He	 will	 say,	 "I	 served	 you;	 I	 sacrificed
everything	for	you."	A	mother	who	tells	her	child	that	she	sacrificed	everything
for	him	is	going	to	cripple	the	child,	even	ruin	him.
And	a	father	who	says	so	to	his	son	will	possess	and	dominate	him	all	his	life.	It
is	just	natural.	It	is	natural	that	he	will	ask	for	the	price	of	his	services.
But	I	say	that	a	mother	is	not	a	mother	who	tells	her	child	that	she	suffered	and
sacrificed	for	him.	She	may	have	been	a	nurse,	but	not	a	mother.	Really,	she	has
not	known	what	motherhood	is.	Caring	for	the	child	is	the	joy	of	motherhood;	it
is	 its	own	reward.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the	child.	 If	 she	had	no	child,	 she
would	have	shed	tears	for	the	rest	of	her	life;	she	would	have	thought	her	life	to
be	a	waste.
It	is	in	the	very	nature	of	man,	in	his	innate	nature,	to	live	for	himself.	But	this
simple	and	clean	 truth	could	not	be	accepted	 --	we	condemned	 it;	we	called	 it
selfishness.	But	selfishness	is	natural	and	therefore	right;	it	is	not	unnatural.	It	is
unnatural	only	if	I	live	at	the	cost	of	others,	if	I	injure	others	for	my	sake.	So	a
society	should	not	be	so	organized	that	we	ask	everyone	to	live	for	the	society,	to
sacrifice	for	the	society.	It	should	be	such	as	allows	every	member	to	live	for	his
sake,	and	the	law	or	the	state	should	intervene	only	when	one	hurts	the	interests
of	others.
But	the	so-called	socialist	or	communist	ideology	believes	that	the	individual	has
to	be	sacrificed	at	the	altar	of	the	collective,	the	society.	For	them,	society	is	the
end,	and	the	individual	has	to	live	for	the	society.	Whenever	such	goals	are	set,
the	individual	is	disarmed,	he	becomes	helpless.	He	says,	"What	can	I	do?	The
society	 is	 so	 big	 that	 I	 have	 to	 submit	 to	 it,	 to	 sacrifice	 for	 it."	 So	 much
bloodshed	 and	 killing	 in	 human	 history	 were	 the	 results	 of	 this	 thinking.
Someone	is	dying	for	Islam,	and	someone	else	is	killing	for	Islam.	They	say,	"If
you	 die	 for	 Islam,	 your	 heaven	 is	 guaranteed.	Don't	 live	 for	 yourself,	 live	 for
Islam."	 Someone	 else	 says	 that	 you	 have	 to	 live	 for	 Hinduism,	 and	 not	 for
yourself.	You	have	to	live	for	the	temple,	for	the	idol	in	the	temple	--	you	have	to
die	for	the	sake	of	the	idols.	Again,	someone	says	that	you	have	to	live	for	the
sake	of	India,	or	for	the	sake	of	Pakistan	or	China,	or	for	the	sake	of	socialism.
But	no	one	says	that	everybody	should	live	for	himself,	which	is	so	natural	and
simple.
We	 let	go	of	natural	and	simple	 truths;	we	 forget	 them	altogether.	The	 truth	 is
that	every	man	can	live	only	for	himself.	And	if	we	force	him	to	do	otherwise,	he
will	turn	into	a	hypocrite.	That	is	why	people	who	take	to	the	service	of	others,
necessarily,	 unavoidably	 become	 hypocrites.	 Because	 while	 they	 live	 for
themselves,	 they	have	 to	show	 that	 they	are	 living	 for	others.	Thus	 they	 live	a
double	 life;	 they	 are	 one	 thing	 inwardly,	 and	 quite	 another	 outwardly.	 That	 is
inevitable
The	politician	claims	that	he	is	dying	for	the	nation,	when	in	reality	he	is	dying
for	his	chair,	for	his	position.	The	chair	has	become	synonymous	with	the	nation.
If	his	chair	 is	 lost	he	would	not	care	a	bit	 for	 the	nation;	he	would	 let	 it	go	 to
hell.	Similarly	the	priest	proclaims	that	he	is	dying	for	God	and	religion,	when	in
reality	he	is	dying	for	his	position	in	the	church;	he	is	dying	for	his	ego.
But	we	are	not	prepared	to	accept	 this	simple	truth.	And	that	 is	why	hypocrisy
enters	our	 life	and	corrodes	 it.	And	because	of	hypocrisy	and	 its	 thousand	and
one	tentacles,	life	moves	onto	wrong	tracks	and	becomes	hellish.
I	say	to	you	that	to	be	selfish	is	to	be	healthy.	There	is	nothing	sinful	about	it.	In
my	vision,	men	like	Mahavira,	Buddha	and	Christ	are	 the	most	selfish	men	on
this	earth.
Why?	 --	because	 they	 live	purely	 for	 themselves,	 seeking	 their	 self,	 their	 soul,
their	bliss,	 their	 freedom,	 their	God.	And,	curiously	enough,	 they	happen	to	be
the	most	altruistic	people	who	walked	this	planet.	The	reason	is	that	when	a	man
discovers	himself	and	finds	his	enlightenment	and	bliss,	he	immediately	begins
to	share	it	with	others.	He	is	now	on	a	new	journey	--	a	 journey	of	sharing	his
joy,	his	benediction.	What	else	can	he	do?	When	clouds	are	full	they	rain;	when
bliss	is	full	it	overflows,	it	shares	itself	with	others.
And	this	too,	is	selfishness.
The	 same	 is	 true	 with	misery.	When	 a	man	 is	 full	 of	misery,	 he	 shares	 it	 by
hurting	others.	These	are	the	martyr-like	people	abounding	all	over	in	the	form
of	parents,	teachers,	politicians,	saints,	gurus	and	mahatmas.	They	are	trying	to
live	 for	 others,	 and	 they	 are	 very	 dangerous	 people.	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 they
themselves	 fail	 to	 grow	 and	 bloom;	 they	 remain	 stunted	 and	 they	 are
increasingly	miserable.	And	 the	more	miserable	 they	 are,	 the	more	 they	 serve
you.	And	then	they	ask	for	their	return,	for	the	price	of	their	services.	So	by	way
of	serving	you	they	dominate	you,	they	strangle	you.	That	is	the	price	you	pay
for	their	services.
The	 people	 who	 served	 this	 country	 until	 1947	 are	 now	 out	 collecting	 their
rewards.	They	have	been	in	jails	and	now	they	are	asking	for	the	presidency	of
the	country	as	their	price.
Nobody	tells	them	that	it	was	their	pleasure	that	they	courted	imprisonment	and
that	they	enjoyed	it.	Nobody	had	promised	the	presidency	in	return	for	going	to
jail.	They	fought	for	the	country's	freedom;	it	was	their	own	choosing.	Nobody
had	forced	them	to	do	it.
But	now	they	are	trying	to	dominate	us,	to	rule	over	us	forever.	They	say	that	we
have	to	honor	them	for	their	services,	that	we	have	to	pay	them	back.
Every	servant	demands	his	price.	And	nobody	knows	when	a	servant	will	 turn
into	a	boss.	The	servant	is	already	preparing	to	be	a	boss;	service	is	only	a	means
to	this	end.
He	 alone	 truly	 serves	 others	 who	 is	 supremely	 selfish.	 And	 to	 be	 so	 selfish
means	that	he	is	seeking	his	own	highest	good,	his	own	benediction.	And	the	day
he	 attains	 it,	 its	 fragrance,	 its	 joy	 begins	 irresistibly	 to	 reach	 others.	 He	 is
fulfilled,	he	 is	overflowing	with	bliss,	and	he	cannot	but	share	 it.	But	 then	this
man	knows	that	whatever	he	is	doing	is	again	for	his	own	joy.	He	does	not	even
expect	a	"thank	you"	in	return.
Buddha	visited	a	village.	The	people	of	the	village	said,	"We	are	grateful	to	you
for	coming	 to	us	and	sharing	your	wisdom	with	us.	 It	 is	your	compassion	 that
you	traveled	such	a	long	distance	for	our	sake."	Buddha	said,	"Please	don't	say
so.	In	fact,	I	am	grateful	to	you	for	kindly	coming	to	listen	to	me.	I	am	fulfilled,	I
am	overflowing	with	bliss,	and	I	want	to	share	it	with	you.	If	you	had	not	come,
I	would	have	gone	calling	you	from	house	to	house.	I	am	like	a	cloud	in	search
of	parched	land	where	it	can	rain;	I	am	like	a	river	in	search	of	the	sea	to	pour
itself	 into;	 I	 am	 like	 the	 flower	 in	 full	 bloom	 scattering	 its	 fragrance	 in	 all
directions.	I	am	thankful	to	you	for	having	come	to	me	so	I	can	give	of	myself	to
you."
Those	 who	 know,	 know	 well	 that	 service	 of	 others	 is	 also	 an	 act	 of	 deep,
profound	selfishness.	Service	is	the	joy	of	the	servant	himself,	and	this	joy	can
be	possible	only	if	we	accept	selfishness,	not	condemn	it.
The	capitalist	system	is	the	most	natural	system	where	nobody	is	called	upon	to
sacrifice	himself	for	another.	Everybody	lives	for	himself,	in	search	of	life.	And
through	this	search	he	will	certainly	live	for	others	too,	because	nobody	can	live
alone	and	by	himself.
To	 live	means	 living	 in	 relationship.	 Life	 is	 relationship.	 If	 all	 of	 us	 seek	 our
happiness	and	bliss,	if	a	thousand	persons	sitting	here	find	their	happiness,	then
we	are	going	to	have	happiness	a	thousandfold.	And	we	will	have	to	share	it;	it
will	go	on	spreading.
There	is	no	other	way.	On	the	other	hand,	if	each	of	us	lives	for	others,	if	each	is
made	to	sacrifice	himself	for	others,	then	all	of	us	will	be	left	with	nothing	but
piles	of	misery;	there	will	be	not	one	iota	of	happiness	to	share.
To	 the	friend	who	says	 that	 the	world	 is	 in	a	mess	on	account	of	selfishness,	 I
would	like	to	say	that	he	is	mistaken	to	think	so.	It	is	not	because	of	selfishness
but	because	of	the	unnatural	and	unscientific	teaching	of	altruism,	of	service	to
others,	that	the	world	is	in	a	mess.	It	is	enough	if	you	find	your	own	happiness,
which	is	natural	and	easy.	If	you	do	this	much	in	one	lifetime	--	between	birth
and	death,	you	find	your	own	bliss	--	the	world	will	be	grateful	to	you.	Because
the	man	who	finds	his	happiness	ceases	to	hurt	others,	 to	cause	unhappiness	to
others.	Why?
The	man	who	knows	that	he	wants	to	be	happy	also	knows	that	it	is	impossible
to	be	happy	by	hurting	others.	The	man	who	knows	that	if	he	hurts	others	he	will
lose	 his	 own	 happiness,	 also	 knows	 that	 if	 he	 makes	 others	 happy	 his	 own
happiness	will	multiply.
This	 is	 the	 simple	 arithmetic	of	 life.	And	 the	day	a	man	 sees	 the	 truth	of	 it,	 a
revolution	happens	in	his	life:	he	is	transformed.
But	the	religions	of	the	world	teach	renunciation.	They	ask	you	to	renounce,	to
sacrifice,	and	not	to	be	selfish.	The	Sanskrit	word	for	selfishness	is	swartha	and
it	is	beautiful.
Swartha	means	"that	which	is	meaningful	for	the	self".	Swa	means	the	self,	the
soul,	and	artha	means	meaning.
How	is	it	necessary	that	what	is	in	my	interests	should	go	against	your	interests?
If	you	go	deeper	and	deeper	you	will	find	that	what	 is	good	for	you	cannot	go
against	the	good	of	others.	Because	deep	down,	at	the	level	of	being,	we	are	all
united	and	one.	It	is	impossible	that	what	is	good	for	me	should	be	basically	bad
for	you.	And	 the	contrary	 is	also	 true	 --	what	 is	harmful	 for	you	would	be	 the
same	for	me.
I	had	been	to	a	mountain	which	had	an	echo	point.	Whatever	sound	one	makes
there,	 the	whole	mountain	echoes	 it.	One	of	 the	 friends	with	me	knew	how	 to
imitate	 the	 sounds	 of	 different	 animals.	 He	 barked	 like	 a	 dog	 and	 soon	 the
mountain	was	resounding	with	the	bark	of	a	dog.	And	it	seemed	that	a	thousand
dogs	were	barking,	and	that	they	were	all	over	the	place.	I	said	to	the	friend,	"Do
you	see	 it?	You	produced	the	sound	of	a	single	dog,	and	it	was	magnified	 into
that	of	a	 thousand	dogs	 --	as	 if	we	are	 surrounded	by	dogs	and	only	dogs.	On
account	of	your	own	small	dog's	voice	you	are	now	surrounded	by	the	uproar	of
a	thousand	dogs.	How	beautiful	it	would	be	if	you	now	speak	in	the	voice	of	a
cuckoo."
The	friend	knew	how,	and	he	called	like	a	cuckoo.	And	now	the	mountain	was
filled	with	 the	sweet	melody	of	a	 thousand	cuckoos,	 resounding	beautifully	all
over	the	place.
This	 incident	made	 the	 friend	 silent	 and	 pensive,	 and	 he	 retired	 to	 a	 secluded
place.	He	came	back	to	me	after	a	while	and	said.	"It	seems	to	me	that	you	had
devised	 a	message	 for	me	 through	 this	 incident."	Agreeing	with	 him,	 I	 asked.
"Can	you	tell	me	what	the	message	was?"
He	 then	 said.	 "It	 appears	 that	 this	mountain	with	an	echo	point	 is	 symbolic	of
man's	life.
What	we	say	or	do	here	returns	to	us	a	thousandfold.	If	we	bark	like	a	dog	we
will	be	surrounded	by	a	 thousand	barking	dogs.	 If	we	hurt	others	 the	hurt	will
return	to	us	multiplied	by	a	thousand.	If	we	treat	the	world	with	anger,	hate	and
violence,	 the	 same	hate	 and	violence	will	 come	back	 to	 us,	magnified	 greatly.
The	old	dictum	is	true	that	if	we	sow	the	seeds	of	the	thorn,	we	will	have	to	reap
a	whole	harvest	of	thorns	alone.	In	the	same	way,	if	we	share	our	love	and	bliss
with	others	it	will	return	to	us	a	thousandfold.	Life	is	really	an	echo	point."
That	is	why	I	say	that	I	am	not	against	selfishness.	If	you	can	find	your	swartha	-
-	the	meaning	of	your	self	--	you	will	do	so	much	good	to	the	world,	good	you
cannot	do	in	any	other	way.
For	 this	 very	 reason	 I	 am	not	 opposed	 to	 the	 system	of	 capitalism	 --	which	 is
based	on	selfishness.	Rather.	I	support	it	fully.	It	is	this	selfish	system	which	will
gradually	develop	into	a	socialist	system.	My	vision	is	that	if	everybody	pursues
his	self	interests,	we	will,	sooner	or	later,	come	to	realize	that	we	unnecessarily
come	in	the	way	of	the	interests	of	others,	and	then	we	will	cease	to	do	so.	If	all
of	 you	 can	multiply	 your	 selfishness	 --	 your	 self	 interest,	 your	 happiness	 --	 a
thousand	times,	then	humanity	is	destined	to	achieve	socialism.	It	will	come,	not
through	the	conflict	of	self-interests.	but	through	cooperation	of	self-interests.
Another	 friend	 has	 asked,	 CAPITALISM	 IS	 FULL	 OF	 CORRUPTION	 AND
BLACK
MARKETING.	WHAT	HAVE	YOU	TO	SAY	ABOUT	IT?
Capitalism	is	not	the	cause	of	black	markets	and	corruption.	Scarcity	of	capital	is
the	 cause.	When	 there	 is	 a	 shortage	 of	 wealth	 we	 cannot	 prevent	 corruption.
Where	the	population	is	large	and	wealth	scarce,	people	find	ways	and	means	to
own	wealth;	they	care	little	for	the	right	ways	and	means.	If	you	want	to	do	away
with	 corruption,	 then	 stop	 worrying	 about	 corruption,	 because	 corruption	 is	 a
byproduct.	We	have	nothing	to	do	with	it.	But	all	 the	politicians,	all	 the	saints,
are	busy	fighting	corruption.	They	say,	"We	are	determined	to	end	corruption."
But	the	real	problem	is	different	--	it	is	lack	of	wealth.
Corruption	is	the	natural	consequence	of	poverty.	If	there	are	a	thousand	persons
here	and	there	is	food	enough	only	for	ten,	do	you	think	there	will	be	no	attempts
at	procuring	food	through	stealing?
Dr.	 Frankel	 has	 written	 a	 small	 book	 of	 his	 memoirs.	 Dr.	 Frankel	 was	 a
psychologist	 who	 was	 thrown	 into	 one	 of	 Hitler's	 concentration	 camps.	Mind
you,	Hitler	was	a	socialist.	Dr.
Frankel	says	in	his	memoirs	that	it	was	in	that	prison	camp	that	he	came	to	see
the	 real	 face	 of	man.	 The	 prisoners	were	 given	 only	 one	meal	 in	 twenty-four
hours,	 and	 that	 too	 was	 very	 meager.	 They	 were	 almost	 being	 starved.	 Dr.
Frankel	 says	 that	 he	 saw	people	known	as	great	 poets,	writers,	 physicians	 and
engineers,	stealing	pieces	of	bread	from	the	bags	of	their	fellow	prisoners	during
the	nighttime.	Among	 them	were	men	highly	 respected	 for	 their	 character	 and
moral	 values,	men	who	held	 high	 offices	 like	 that	 of	 the	mayor	 of	 a	 city,	 and
they	were	seen	begging	for	a	cigarette	on	bended	knees	--	and	unashamedly.	And
none	of	them	thought	that	he	was	doing	anything	wrong.
Writing	about	himself,	the	famous	psychologist	says	that	the	bread	he	was	given
was	so	 little	 that	 it	never	satiated	his	hunger;	he	was	always	 in	a	state	a	semi-
starvation.	So	he	broke	 the	bread	 into	a	number	of	 small	pieces	 to	be	eaten	at
small	 intervals	of	time	so	they	would	last	for	 twenty-four	hours.	And	he	found
that	day	in	and	day	out	he	only	thought	of	bread	and	nothing	else.	He	forgot	all
about	 God	 and	 soul,	 consciousness	 and	 unconsciousness,	 analysis	 and
psychology,	and	the	rest	of	it	--	which	had	been	the	most	significant	things	of	his
life.	 In	Hitler's	 concentration	 camp	 he	 realized	 that	 bread	was	 everything	 and
nothing	else	mattered.	Frankel	also	admits	that	he	was	not	sure	that	if	given	the
opportunity	he	would	not	have	stolen	another's	bread.
Bribery,	 corruption	 and	 black	marketing	 only	 prove	 the	 fact	 that	 there	 are	 too
many	 people	 and	 too	 little	 goods.	 We	 refuse	 to	 understand	 this	 simple	 fact.
Corruption	 is	 not	 a	 disease,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 symptom	 of	 a	 disease	 which	 is	 deep-
rooted.	When	a	man	has	a	 fever,	 it	 is	 said	 that	he	 is	 "down	with	 fever".	Fever
itself	is	taken	for	the	disease.	But	in	reality	fever	is	a	symptom,	an	indication	of
some	deep	disorder	in	the	physiology	of	the	man	who	is	running	a	temperature.
Similarly,	corruption	is	a	symptom	of	a	social	disease	--
poverty.	But	 the	 politician	 and	 the	 priest	 believe	 that	 corruption	 can	 be	 ended
without	 caring	 for	 production	 and	 population	 control.	 They	 say	 that	 God	 is
sending	 more	 and	 more	 men	 to	 this	 earth.	 If	 God	 is	 responsible	 for	 our
increasing	 population,	 then	 he	 is	 the	 most	 corrupting	 factor	 today,	 because
corruption	grows	with	the	growing	population.	We	have	to	restrict,	even	to	stop
this	ever-flowing	gift	of	God.	We	have	to	tell	him,	"Enough	is	enough;	we	don't
need	more	men.	And	if	you	send	more,	then	give	to	each	one	of	them	ten	acres
of	land	and	a	factory	to	work	with."
People	are	not	immoral,	as	the	priests	and	politicians	would	have	us	believe.	It	is
the	situation	 that	 is	 immoral.	No	man	is	 immoral.	Really,	man	is	neither	moral
nor	 immoral,	 but	 the	 situation	 is	 immoral.	 And	 a	 person	 can	 be	 moral	 in	 an
immoral	situation	if	he	strives	hard,	but	then	his	whole	life	will	be	wasted	in	the
very	 effort.	 He	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 do	 anything	 else.	 He	 will	 somehow	 save
himself	 from	 being	 immoral.	 He	 will,	 with	 tremendous	 effort,	 suppress	 the
temptation	to	steal;	that	is	all	he	will	achieve.	So	it	is	a	question	of	changing	the
situation,	because	really	the	situation	is	immoral.	No	amount	of	anti-corruption
campaigns	are	going	to	succeed	if	the	situation	is	not	changed.	But	if	production
grows	and	wealth	 is	plentiful,	corruption	will	go	by	itself.	Nobody	will	steal	 if
there	is	an	abundance	of	wealth	in	the	society.
Another	friend	has	asked,
Question
BUDDHA,	MAHAVIRA,	KRISHNA	AND	RAMA	--	THEY	ALL	TALKED	OF
RENUNCIATION,	 BUT	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 WEALTH	 HAS	 TO	 BE
INCREASED.
WHY	THIS	CONTRADICTION?
It	 is	 true	 that	I	ask	you	to	produce	more	wealth.	 It	 is	now	difficult	 to	ascertain
exactly	what	Buddha,	Rama	and	Krishna	had	 said	But	 if	 they	 said	 that	wealth
need	not	be	produced,	then	they	were	wrong.
Talk	of	renunciation	on	the	part	of	those	who	have	no	wealth	is	ridiculous.	What
would	they	renounce?	Buddha	could	talk	of	renunciation	because	he	was	born	in
an	affluent	 family.	Buddha	could	afford	 to	 leave	Yashodhara,	his	wife,	behind,
and	 move	 to	 the	 forest	 to	 live	 the	 life	 of	 an	 ascetic,	 because	 he	 knew	 that
Yashodhara	had	a	palace	and	every	other	means	of	security	that	one	needs.	But	if
a	Buddha	of	 the	present	 times	 leaves	his	Yashodara	a	 for	 twelve	years,	 then	at
the	end	of	twelve	years	he	will	find	Yashodhara	in	some	brothel	and	not	in	her
home.	 Buddha	 could	 leave	 his	 son.	 Rahul,	 behind.	 because	 on	 his	 return	 he
would	find	him	in	his	own	home.	But	it	a	present-day	Buddha	leaves	his	son	and
goes	to	the	forest,	the	son	will	be	found	either	in	some	orphanage	or	begging	on
the	 streets	 of	 Bombay.	 It	 would	 even	 be	 difficult	 to	 locate	 him.	 Buddha	 had
abundant	wealth,	and	men	like	him	can	very	well	talk	of	sacrifice	because	they
have	plenty	to	sacrifice.
But	 the	 irony	 is	 that	 people	who	 had	 nothing	 chose	 to	 follow	 those	who	 had
plenty.	All	the	wise	men	of	this	country	came	from	affluent	families,	while	the
rest	of	the	people	lived	in	poverty	and	misery.	I	wonder	how	the	people	accepted
their	teaching	and	agreed	to	follow	them.	But	there	is	a	logic	behind	it,	a	reason
for	it.	The	poor	derived	some	pleasure,	some	satisfaction	from	their	acceptance
of	the	Buddhas.	They	now	said	to	themselves,	"What	is	there	in	wealth?	Buddha
had	so	much	and	he	 is	begging	 in	 the	streets.	We	are	already	Buddhas;	we	are
already	 beggars."	 The	 mind	 of	 India,	 that	 had	 suffered	 so	 much	 poverty,	 felt
consoled	and	gratified.	We	were	pleased	to	see	Buddha	and	Mahavira	begging.
He	bowed	down	to	them	not	because	of	them,	but	because	of	the	consolation	we
derived	from	them.	We	thought	that	we	were	blessed	in	our	misery.
But	remember,	it	is	one	thing	to	live	in	a	palace	and	then	leave	it	and	beg,	and
quite	 another	 never	 to	 have	 lived	 in	 a	 palace	 and	 be	 a	 beggar	 on	 the	 streets.
Buddha	was	not	an	ordinary	beggar;	even	as	a	beggar	he	moved	with	the	dignity
and	 grace	 of	 a	 lord.	 Even	 emperors	 looked	 small	 before	 him,	 because	 he	 had
renounced	 that	 which	 they	 were	 dying	 for.	 He	 was	 the	 emperor	 of	 emperors,
because	empires	had	become	meaningless	for	him.
On	 the	 other	 hand	 there	 are	 those	 who	 have	 never	 known	 riches	 and	 whose
whole	 being	 craves	 riches,	 but	 they	 don't	 have	 the	 will	 and	 energy	 and
intelligence	necessary	to	attain	it.	And	then	they	say	the	grapes	are	sour.	Buddha
and	Mahavira	provide	 them	with	an	alibi,	an	excuse.	This	 is	how	they	console
themselves.
India	has	long	been	in	that	state	of	self:	deception,	and	because	of	it	she	is	in	a
mess.	And	this	 is	her	main	difficulty,	her	real	problem.	We	have	 to	understand
clearly	that	Buddha	and	Mahavira	and	men	like	them	had	renounced	affluence,
and	not	poverty.	They	had	not	known	poverty	and	misery.	Buddha's	 father	had
assembled	around	him	all	the	beautiful	women	that	were	then	available	in	Bihar.
He	had	known	women	through	and	through.
And	so	it	is	understandable	that	he	transcended	sex.
But	 there	 are	 people	 who	 have	 not	 known	 a	 woman	 in	 their	 lives,	 not	 even
touched	 one,	 and	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 become	 Buddhas.	 They	 are	 constantly
dreaming	about	women.
There	 is	 a	 release	 from	 sex	 after	 you	have	 experienced	 it	 thoroughly.	But	 one
who	practices	celibacy	by	keeping	away	from	women	will	get	mole	entangled	in
sex	 than	a	married	man	gets.	Really,	 the	married	man	wants	 to	 run	away	from
women;	 the	husband	 is	constantly	 trying	 to	escape	 from	his	wife,	 to	get	 rid	of
her.	But	the	unmarried	man	cannot	know	the	torments	of	the	married.	And	if	he
decides	to	practice	celibacy	he	is	bound	to	be	in	trouble.	great	trouble.
To	use	contentment	as	an	escape	from	poverty	is	one	thing,	and	to	give	up	riches
with	 wisdom	 is	 quite	 another.	 It	 was	 unfortunate	 that	 India	 accepted	 the
leadership	of	those	who	had	really	known	riches	and	then	renounced	it.	That	is
the	basic	reason	why	this	country	could	not	be	prosperous,	why	it	has	remained
poor	 for	 centuries.	We	 took	 to	 a	 philosophy	 --	 a	 philosophy	of	 poverty	 --	 and
became	 its	 prisoners.	 And,	 curiously	 enough.	 we	 seem	 to	 enjoy	 it.	 It	 is	 like
enjoying	an	itch!
We	have	had	enough	of	this	nonsense.	It	is	time	we	said	a	complete	goodbye	to
it.	The	mind	of	the	country	has	to	understand	very	clearly	that	we	have	to	have
wealth.	Wealth	 is	 a	must,	 because	we	 can	 go	 beyond	 it	 only	 after	we	 have	 it;
otherwise	it	is	tremendously	difficult.
I	don't	say	that	there	cannot	be	any	exceptions	to	this	rule,	but	exceptions	only
prove	the	rule.	Somebody	wrote	to	me	that	a	particular	saint	was	poor	and	yet	he
went	beyond	.	H	e	may	have	been	an	exception.	It	is	just	possible,	but	he	is	not
the	 rule.	 Rules	 cannot	 be	 made	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a	 few	 exceptions.	 If	 there	 is
malaria	 in	 a	 certain	 village	 and	 one	 of	 the	 villagers	 escapes	 infection	without
taking	 anti-malaria	 vaccine,	 does	 it	 prove	 that	 anti-malarial	 vaccination	 is
useless?	Maybe	 he	 escaped	 just	 because	malaria	 germs	were	 negligible	 in	 his
case.	But	he	cannot	be	the	rule.	And	the	whole	village	will	die	if	he	is	made	the
rule;	and	if	the	whole	village	dies,	he	cannot	live.	It	is	also	possible	that	this	man
survived	because	all	others	had	been	vacillated;	their	immunity	helped	him.
Never	should	an	exception	be	made	the	basis	of	a	rule.	But	this	is	precisely	the
mistake	India	has	been	making.	We	make	rules	of	exceptions;	we	do	not	make
rules	on	the	basis	of	the	ordinary	people	--	the	uncommon,	the	extraordinary,	the
rare	become	our	basis.
And	we	try	to	regiment	the	common	men	and	women	according	to	them.	But	to
make	the	uncommon	an	 ideal	 for	 the	common	is	 like	destroying	 the	 latter,	and
this	is	what	has	happened	up	to	now.
If	Mahavira	becomes	the	ideal	because	he	is	naked,	and	all	the	people	are	asked
to	follow	him,	there	is	bound	to	be	trouble.	Mahavira	had	used	clothes,	he	had
lived	in	rich	clothes,	he	had	enjoyed	clothes.	Now	those	clothes	have	a	definite
the	 joys	 that	nudity	brings	 to	Mahavira.	Now	 if	 you	 tell	 a	man	who	was	born
naked,	who	did	not	have	clothes,	that	there	is	great	joy	in	being	nude,	he	will	just
laugh.	He	will	 say,	Mahavira	was	a	god,	a	 teerthankara,	an	extraordinary	man.
He	might	have	enjoyed	being	naked,	but	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	I	enjoy	clothes
tremendously."	 Now	 see	 the	 difference.	 Mahavira	 enjoyed	 nudity	 because	 of
clothes;	this	man	enjoys	clothes	because	of	nudity.	There	is	no	great	difference
in	 the	 state	 of	 their	minds.	Their	 logic	 is	 the	 same:	 happiness	 comes	 from	 the
unknown,	 the	 unfamiliar.	 The	 forbidden	 fruit	 tempts.	 And	 the	 known,	 the
familiar,	 repels,	 is	 useless.	 For	Mahavira,	 clothes,	 being	 familiar	 had	 become
useless;	for	this	man,	nakedness	had	no	use	for	the	same	reason.
We	have	 to	get	 rid	of	 teachings	 that	 support	 poverty.	These	 teachings	 create	 a
non-dynamic	society,	a	static	society.	It	is	because	of	them	that	the	Indian	society
is	so	stagnant	and	dead.	It	has	lost	all	dynamism	of	life.
If	we	 have	 to	 create	 a	 dynamic	 society,	 a	 live	 society,	we	will	 have	 to	 lay	 its
foundation	on	discontent,	not	on	contentment.	We	always	ask	why	we	are	poor.
We	are	poor	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	we	are	contented	with	poverty.	And	as
long	as	we	are	content,	we	will	remain	poor.	Wealth	will	have	to	be	created,	and
it	can	be	created	only	by	those	who	are	discontented	with	poverty.	There	 is	no
other	way	but	discontent.	Wealth	has	 to	be	produced;	 it	does	not	 rain	 from	the
skies.	It	is	a	human	product,	and	a	discontented	mind.
a	searching	mind,	an	adventurous	mind	is	its	first	requirement.
But	all	our	 teachings	applaud	contentment.	And	it	 is	 these	 teachings	 that	make
for	a	static	and	dead	society.	And	we	have	to	get	rid	of	them.
A	friend	has	asked,
Question
YESTERDAY	 YOU	 TALKED	 ABOUT	 GANDHI	 AND	 CRITICIZED	 HIM.
BUT
GANDHI	 ALWAYS	 WANTED	 THE	 COUNTRY	 TO	 BE	 PROSPEROUS,
HAPPY
AND	ITS	PEOPLE	TO	BE	GOOD.	WHAT	DO	YOU	SAY?
Certainly	he	wanted	all	this.	But	remember,	the	road	to	hell	is	paved	with	good
intentions.	Just	desiring	is	not	enough.	I	may	very	much	want	your	cancer	to	go,
but	if	I	give	you	plain	water	for	medication,	your	cancer	will	not	disappear.	It	is
not	going	to	be	cured	by	good	intentions	alone.	I	fervently	desire	you	to	be	free
of	your	T.	B.,	and	I	tie	a	talisman	on	your	arm	--	your	T.B.	will	remain.	To	cure	it
the	science	of	tuberculosis	will	need	to	be	understood.
Gandhi	always	wanted	this	country	to	be	prosperous	and	happy	and	its	people	to
be	good.
But	 the	ways	he	advocated	were	ways	 that	 lead	 to	poverty	and	degradation.	 If
Gandhi	succeeds.	India	will	be	doomed	to	live	in	poverty	forever.	If	what	he	said
is	accepted	fully	by	this	country,	250	million	people	out	of	its	500	millions	will
have	to	be	ready	to	die	and	to	die	soon.	And	if	the	whole	world	accepts	him,	two
billion	out	of	its	three	and	a	half	billion	will	have	to	perish	right	now.	Gandhi's
thoughts	alone	can	kill	more	people	than	all	the	murderers	of	history	--	Genghis,
Hitler	Stalin	and	Mao	put	together.	Why?
Because	what	Gandhi	says	--	I	mean	his	thinking	--	is	antediluvian;	it	belongs	to
the	 pre-industrial	 age,	 the	 feudal	 age.	 He	 is	 essentially	 a	 revivalist.	 The
instruments	 of	 production	 that	 he	 advocates,	 like	 the	 spinning	 wheel	 and	 the
spindle,	belong	to	medieval	times	and	are	not	at	all	useful	and	adequate	for	the
huge	 human	 population	 of	 today.	With	 such	 primitive	 tools	 of	 production	 we
cannot	keep	alive	so	large	a	population;	they	will	simply	starve	and	die.	Please
don't	accept	his	teachings	and	implement	them;	otherwise	the	future	history	will
say	 that	Gandhi	was	 the	 greatest	 killer	 the	world	 has	 ever	 known,	 because	 he
killed	the	largest	number	of	men	ever.
We	need	 a	mode	 of	 production	 that	 can	maintain	 the	 huge	 population	 that	we
have	now.
The	mode	of	production	that	Gandhi	advocated	might	have	been	adequate	for	the
age	of	Rama	the	ancient	age,	when	the	population	of	the	world	was	very	small.
The	 slow-going	 spinning	 wheel	 could	 do.	 But	 now	 very	 speedy	 tools	 of
production	 are	 needed.	 because	 there	 are	 so	many	mouths	 to	 be	 fed.	 so	many
bodies	 to	 be	 clothed,	 so	 many	 men	 and	 women	 to	 be	 kept	 alive.	 Gandhian
methods	cannot	keep	 them	alive.	 If	you	accept	and	 follow	Gandhiism,	poverty
will	become	permanent;	we	can	never	remove	it.
The	 questioner	 has	 further	 said	 that	 I	 criticize	 a	 person	 like	 Gandhi,	 who
practiced	what	he	professed.	and	that	there	was	such	unity	in	his	word	and	deed.
There	cannot	be	a	greater	 lie	 than	 this.	There	was	such	a	wide	chasm	between
Gandhi's	professions	and	his	practice	as	can	hardly	be	found	in	any	other	man's
life.	It	has	had	no	parallel.	What	I	say	may	surprise	you,	but	it	iS	true.
Gandhi	always	opposed	the	railways,	and	he	spent	the	major	part	of	his	life	on
the	railways,	traveling	all	over	India.	He	opposed	the	railways	throughout	his	life
and	 he	 traveled	 by	 railways	 throughout	 his	 life.	 He	 opposed	 allopathy,	 the
modern	medicine,	all	his	life,	and	he	said	that	chanting	the	name	of	Rama	was
the	best	medicine.	But	whenever,	when	 seriously	 sick,	he	 came	near	death,	he
always	took	to	allopathy	--	which	saved	his	life.	Neither	the	name	of	Rama	nor
naturopathy	 could	 save	 him	 --	 though	 he	 used	 them	 until	 the	 disease	 became
very	 serious.	When	 everything	 else	 failed,	 he	 always	 took	 shelter	 in	 allopathy
and	survived.	 It	 is	 strange	 that	all	his	 life	he	opposed	 this	 system	and	 it	 saved
him	 throughout	 his	 life.	 Gandhi	 opposed	 the	 modern	 system	 of	 post	 and
telegraph,	and	he	made	maximum	use	of	them.	He	was	one	of	those	who	wrote
the	largest	number	of	letters	to	be	carried	by	the	postal	system.
Here	is	a	man	who	is	fighting	the	railways	system	--	always	sitting	in	a	railway
carriage.	 I	 am	 the	only	person	who	can	compare	with	Gandhi	 as	 a	user	of	 the
railways,	and	that	only	if	I	continue,	at	the	present	rate,	to	travel	for	the	rest	of
my	life.	And	remember,	he	was	an	enemy	of	the	railways;	he	said	that	railways
w	ere	a	sin	and	they	should	disappear	from	the	world.	He	opposed	every	modern
instrument	 and	 yet	made	 the	 fullest	 use	 of	 them.	And	 you	 say	 that	 there	was
unity	in	his	professions	and	his	practice.	How	is	this	unity?
I	 say	 there	was	 no	 unity	 between	Gandhi's	word	 and	 action.	What	 he	 said	 he
would	not	translate	into	action.	If	you	look	at	his	whole	life	vou	will	find	that	it
was	very	different	from	his	philosophy.	But	our	difficulty	is	that	when	we	accept
someone	as	a	mahatma,	a	great	soul,	we	close	our	eyes,	we	become	blind	to	him.
I	saw	Gandhi	only	once	and	I	never	felt	like	seeing	him	again.	I	was	quite	young
then,	just	in	my	teens.	His	train	was	passing	through	my	town	and	lots	of	people
went	to	have	a	glimpse	of	him	at	the	railway	station.	So	did	I.	As	I	was	leaving
my	 home,	 my	 mother	 put	 three	 rupees	 into	 my	 pocket	 for	 small	 expenses,
because	the	railway	station	was	a	good	three	miles	away.
When	 I	 arrived,	 I	 found	 the	 railway	 platform	 terribly	 crowded	 and	 it	was	 not
possible	for	a	boy	like	me	to	have	a	glimpse	of	him	from	there.	So	I	went	to	the
other	side	of	the	train	where	there	was	no	platform.	When	Gandhi's	train	arrived
I	 entered	his	 compartment	 through	 the	window.	Gandhi	did	not	notice	me;	his
eyes	 fell	 first	 on	 the	 three	 silver	 coins	 showing	 from	 the	 breast	 pocket	 of	my
muslin	shirt.	He	asked	what	it	was,	and	I	hurriedly	took	the	money	out,	saying
that	 I	 should	 donate	 it	 to	 the	 fund	 for	 the	 welfare	 of	 the	 untouchables.	 And
before	I	could	say	yes	or	no,	he	dropped	the	money	into	the	box	meant	for	the
fund.	And	the	way	I	am,	I	said	with	perfect	ease,	"It	is	okay.	You	did	well	that
you	put	the	money	in	the	box."	And	I	really	felt	happy	about	it,	 thinking	that	I
had	done	well	not	to	have	spent	it	already.	But	then,	as	my	intuition	dictated,	I
picked	up	the	donation	box	with	the	money,	and	said	to	Gandhi,	"Now	I'll	take
the	 box	 with	 me,	 and	 I'll	 use	 this	 money	 in	 scholarship	 grants	 for	 the	 poor
students	of	my	school."	Really,	I	had	no	intention	to	take	away	the	box,	which	I
picked	up	 just	 to	know	how	Gandhi	would	 react	 to	 it.	He	 said,	 "No,	no,	 don't
take	 the	 box.	 It	 is	 meant	 for	 a	 great	 work.	 This	 fund	 is	 meant	 for	 the
untouchables.	Leave	it."	To	this	I	said,	"Sir,	you	are	not	ready	to	part	with	this
box	with	the	same	ease	with	which	I	gave	you	three	RUPEES.	"	He	then	handed
me	 an	 orange	 which	 I	 refused	 to	 take,	 saying,	 "I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 take	 this
orange.	For	three	rupees	it	is	too	costly.	Better	keep	it	with	you."	Then	I	looked
into	his	eyes	and	said	to	myself,	"The	man	I	came	to	see	is	not	there."
I	came	out	of	the	train	and	stood	on	the	side.	The	train	moved	and	Gandhi	was
still	 watching	 me	 and	 not	 the	 crowd.	 He	 seemed	 puzzled	 about	 what	 had
happened.
Back	home	my	mother	asked	me	if	I	saw	mahatmaji.	I	said,	"Mahatmaji	did	not
turn	up."
Mother	was	now	puzzled,	 and	 she	asked,	 "What	do	you	mean?	Everyone	 says
that	he	passed	through	the	town."	I	then	said,	"The	man	who	passed	through	the
town	was	Mr.
Mohandas	Karanchand	Gandhi.	He	appeared	to	me	to	be	a	seasoned	tradesman
and	not	a	mahatma,	not	a	great	soul."
This	 incident	 took	 place	 in	 my	 early	 days.	 Ever	 since	 I	 have	 tried	 hard	 to
understand	Gandhi,	and	the	more	I	tried	the	more	my	first	impression	of	him	was
confirmed	 and	 strengthened.	 But	 our	 difficulty	 is	 that	 once	 we	 believe
something,	we	refuse	to	think	and	examine	it.	 I	do	not	say	that	you	agree	with
me,	 but	 I	 do	 say	 please	 don't	 have	 fossil-like	 opinions	 about	men	 and	 things,
because	it	harms	the	thinking	process	of	the	country;	it	may	even	prove	fatal.
Now	everyone	thinks	that	whatever	Gandhi	said	is	bound	to	benefit	the	country,
because	he	was	a	mahatma,	a	saint.	But	it	is	not	necessary	that,	being	a	saint,	one
only	does	good	to	the	community.
I	 visited	 Rajkot	 recently.	 In	 the	 open	 area	 where	 I	 was	 going	 to	 address	 a
meeting,	I	saw	a	number	of	bulls	and	cows.	They	were	all	very	sick	and	skinny,
almost	dying.	Inquiring,	I	learned	that	there	was	a	scarcity	of	water	as	a	result	of
a	 drought	 in	 the	 villages	 around	Rajkot,	 and	 these	 animals	 had	 been	 collected
from	 there	 so	 they	might	be	 saved	 from	dying.	 I	 then	asked	what	 efforts	were
being	made	to	save	them.	The	man	who	was	explaining	things	told	me	a	strange
story.
A	 saint	 came	 to	 Rajkot	 and	 fed	 the	 emaciated	 cows	 with	 quality	 sweets	 that
people	 usually	 have	 for	 feasts,	 and	 the	 same	 day	 forty	 of	 them	 died.	 But	 the
newspapers	 carried	 the	 saint's	 photograph	 saying,	 "What	 a	 saint!	 --	who	 feeds
animals	with	quality	sweets	meant	for	human	beings!"	It	seems	that	to	be	a	saint
it	 is	 necessary	 to	 part	with	 intelligence	 altogether.	He	 gives	 sweets	 to	 animals
that	badly	needed	water	 and	 fodder	 to	 save	 them.	 It	would	have	been	better	 if
they	were	 butchered	 instead	 --	 they	would	 have	 died	 peacefully.	But	 the	 saint
was	applauded	for	being	a	kindly	saint	and	a	devotee	of	cows.
India's	poverty	will	never	go,	it	will	abide,	if	the	remedy	that	Gandhi	suggests	is
applied.
To	 end	 poverty,	 technology	 is	 needed,	 and	Gandhi	was	 the	 greatest	 enemy	 of
technology.
He	said	that	technology	was	the	invention	of	Satan.	But,	in	fact,	it	is	technology
that	 is	 going	 to	 end	poverty	 and	bring	prosperity	 to	 this	 earth.	And	 it	 is	 again
technology	which	iS	going	to	take	us	to	the	moon	and	Mars	when	this	earth	will
be	overpopulated.	In	fifty	years	from	now	this	planet	of	ours	will	cease	to	be	a	tit
place	for	us	to	live.
I	do	not	know	how,	with	Gandhi's	spinning	wheel,	millions	and	billions	of	men
can	be	fed	and	clothed	and	housed.	And	I	do	not	know	how,	with	his	spinning
wheel,	man	will	reach	the	moon	and	other	planets	and	settle	there.
Fortunately,	 however,	 there	 is	 no	 such	 danger,	 because	 even	 those	 who	 shout
"Victory	to	Gandhi!"	do	not	believe	in	his	teachings,	do	not	follow	him.	So	there
is	no	possibility	of	any	danger.	But	if	his	ideas	find	wide	acceptance	the	danger
will	be	 there.	And	 then	his	 ideas	will	 turn	back	 the	hands	of	 the	clock	by	 two
thousand	years;	we	will	be	back	in	the	medieval	times.	What	he	calls	his	rama-
rajya,	 the	 legendary	 kingdom	 of	 Rama,	 is	 nothing	 but	 another	 name	 for	 an
extremely	 backward	 social	 system.	 Rama-rajya	 was	 much	 too	 backward	 in
contrast	to	the	present	times.	But	Gandhi	always	aspired	for	rama-rajya	Another
friend	has	said	that	what	I	am	saying	is	exactly	what	the	ancient	Hindu	culture
stood	for;	it	is	the	real	socialism	that	the	Hindu	culture	advocated.	But	I	fail	to
understand	what	he	means.	He	also	says	that	socialism	had	already	happened	in
India.
Socialism	did	not	happen	anywhere	in	the	world	in	the	past.	And	as	far	as	India
is	concerned	there	was	no	possibility	whatsoever	of	its	happening	here.	And	the
sooner	 you	 get	 rid	 of	what	 you	 call	 your	 ancient	 culture	 the	 better.	A	 disease
does	 not	 become	 good	 just	 because	 it	 is	 your	 disease.	 And	 nothing	 becomes
respectable	just	because	it	is	old	and	ancient.	But	the	difficulty	is	that	we	begin
to	like	even	our	shackles	if	they	have	been	on	our	feet	for	thousands	of	years.	I
don't	 understand	 what	 you	 are	 talking	 about.	When	 did	 we	 have	 socialism	 in
India?
Another	friend	has	said	that	as	all	that	is	good	was	already	there	in	India	in	the
past,	so	we	should	go	back	to	the	past.
There	was	 nothing	 good	 in	 the	 past	 to	which	we	 should	 go	 back.	 In	 the	 first
place	we	would	not	have	left	it	behind	us	if	it	was	good.	No	one	ever	leaves	the
good	behind.	And	if	one	leaves	it	behind,	he	does	so	in	the	search	for	the	better.
But	we	have	been	laboring	under	great	illusions.	We	believe	that	the	India	of	the
past	was	a	golden	bird.	It	was	never	so.	Of	course,	it	was	a	golden	bird	for	a	few,
and	it	remains	so	even	today;	but	it	was	never	a	golden	bird	for	all.
We	believe	that	houses	in	ancient	India	were	without	lock	and	key.	People	were
so	good	and	honest	 that	padlocks	were	not	needed	at	all.	But	 I	don't	 think	 this
could	be	true.	And	if	it	was	true,	then	the	reasons	for	it	were	different	from	those
we	 infer.	 Buddha	 had	 been	 exhorting	 people	 not	 to	 steal;	Mahavira	 had	 been
exhorting	people	not	to	steal.	If	people	were	so	good	and	honest	that	they	did	not
have	to	lock	up	their	houses,	then	who	were	they	whom	Buddha	and	Mahavira
asked	 not	 to	 steal?	 If	 people	 were	 really	 good	 and	 honest	 then	 Buddha	 and
Mahavira	were	crazy.
Theft	was	always	 there,	but	 if	padlocks	were	 really	not	seen	anywhere,	 then	 it
only	means	that	they	had	nothing	in	their	houses	that	was	worth	stealing.	There
could	 be	 no	 other	 reason.	 Or	 maybe.	 they	 did	 not	 possess	 the	 mind	 that
subsequently	invented	locks.	But	the	absence	of	locks	does	not	prove	that	people
were	honest.
All	 the	 scriptures	 preached	 non-stealing.	 Buddha	 talked	 against	 stealing	 and
dishonesty	 day	 in	 and	 day	 out.	 Socrates	 said	 the	 same	 things	 in	 Greece	 two
thousand,	five	hundred	years	ago.	He	said	that	youngsters	had	gone	astray.	they
did	not	 listen	to	their	parents,	 that	 teachers	were	not	respected,	 that	people	had
turned	dishonest	and	corrupt.	There	is	a	six-thousand-year-old	book	in	China.	If
you	read	its	preface	you	will	think	that	you	are	going	through	the	editorial	of	this
morning's	 newspaper.	 It	 says	 that	 people	 are	dishonest,	 that	 they	have	become
materialists,	that	there	has	been	great	moral	decline,	that	corruption	is	rampant,
and	that	anarchy	has	set	in	and	that	doomsday	is	at	hand.	And	this	six-thousand-
year-old	book	also	says	that	the	people	who	lived	before	were	good	and	honest.
That	 the	people	 in	 the	past	were	good	 is	nothing	more	 than	a	myth,	 a	 fantasy.
The	truth	is	that	we	have	forgotten	the	people	of	the	past,	and	a	handful	of	them
whom	we	still	remember	are	at	the	root	of	the	trouble.	We	remember	Mahavira,
hut	we	do	not	remember	 the	people	of	his	 times.	Then	we	think	that	people	of
his	times	must	have	been	good	people.	But	if	the	people	of	his	times	were	really
good,	we	would	 not	 have	 cared	 to	 remember	Mahavira	 at	 all.	Mahavira	 is	 yet
alive	in	our	memory	because	of	the	people	of	his	day.
The	schoolmaster	writes	on	a	blackboard	with	a	piece	of	white	chalk.	If	he	wrote
on	a	white	board	--	and	he	can	--	you	could	not	read	it.	The	writing	shows	on	the
blackboard	 because	 of	 the	 contrast.	 Mahavira	 shines	 as	 a	 great	 man	 for	 two
thousand	 five	 hundred	 years.	 It	 could	 not	 have	 been	 possible	 if	 the	 social
background	against	which	he	stood	had	been	white	and	clean.	Really	the	society
of	 his	 time	must	 have	 been	 corrupt	 and	 ugly.	A	 few	great	men	 shine	 for	 ages
because	the	rest	of	mankind	has	been	like	a	blackboard	on	which	white	writing
shows.
Never	was	the	whole	human	society	good.	It	was	not	even	as	good	as	it	is	today.
Every	day	we	are	progressing	 towards	goodness,	but	we	are	victims	of	a	 false
idea	that	we	are	declining,	that	we	are	going	downhill,	that	we	are	getting	worse
and	worse.	We	say	that	it	was	satyug,	the	age	of	truth,	in	the	past,	we	say	that	we
have	left	our	golden	age	behind,	and	now	it	is	the	kaliyug,	the	dark	age,	now	it	is
downhill	and	downhill	all	the	way	ahead.
And	the	downfall	of	a	community	is	a	certainty	if	this	thought	takes	hold	of	its
mind	that	decline	is	its	future,	because	it	is	thought	that	makes	us	move.	But	we
firmly	believe	 that	our	golden	age,	 the	best	 times,	have	already	happened,	 that
we	left	behind	us	all	that	was	good	and	that	now	there	is	only	evil	and	darkness
in	 store	 for	 us.	 This	 has	 become	 our	 conditioning.	We	 really	 believe	 that	 it	 is
going	to	be	worse	and	worse	in	the	future.
Now	when	someone	stabs	someone	in	your	neighborhood,	you	cry	kaliyug,	you
cry
"wolf";	 you	 say	 that	 the	dark	 age	 is	 now	here.	And	when	 someone	 runs	 away
with	 the	wife	 of	 someone	 else	 you	 scream	 that	 the	worst	 of	 the	 dark	 age	 has
happened.	But	when	your	saints	and	seers,	your	rishis	of	the	past	ran	away	with
others'	women,	then	it	was	satyug,	the	age	of	truth	and	righteousness!	And	it	was
satyug	when	the	gods	of	heaven	came	down	and	seduced	the	wives	of	others	--
your	own	saints!	And	now	it	is	the	dark	age	just	because	the	abductor	happens	to
be	an	ordinary	man	living	in	your	neighborhood!	It	is	a	strange	reasoning.	It	was
a	good	world	when	 the	wife	of	Rama	was	stolen.	And	when	 the	wife	of	 some
present-day	Ramchandra	living	in	your	locality	is	stolen,	 it	becomes	evil,	dark,
abominable.
No,	man	 is	becoming	better	 and	better	 each	day.	And	 if	we	have	 to	make	our
future	better,	then	we	had	better	have	our	golden	age	in	the	future	and	leave	the
dark	 age	 behind.	 This	 should	 be	 the	 order	 of	 things:	 darkness	 in	 the	 past	 and
light	 in	 the	 future;	 the	 dark	 age	 behind	 and	 the	 golden	 age	 ahead.	 If	 a	 bright
future	 has	 to	 be	 created.	 hope,	 intense	 hope	 is	 necessary.	 Without	 hope	 you
cannot	 build	 a	 beautiful	 future.	 In	 my	 view,	 lack	 of	 hope	 is	 one	 reason	 why
modern	 man	 is	 stumbling	 in	 his	 onward	 journey.	 He	 is	 without	 hope	 for	 his
future;	it	seems	all	is	dark	ahead.	This	darkness	is	of	our	own	making.
Never	was	man	 so	good	as	he	 is	 today.	There	was	a	 famine	 in	Bihar	 recently.
Twenty	million	people	would	have	perished,	as	the	famine	was	so	great,	but	only
forty	persons	died.	How	is	it	that	twenty	million	lives	were	saved?	--	the	whole
world	 came	 to	 their	 rescue.	 School	 children	 in	 far-off	 countries	 who	 had	 not
heard	of	Bihar	before,	saved	their	pocket	money	and	sent	it	for	the	succor	of	the
starving	 people.	The	whole	world	 rushed	 to	 save	 those	 in	Bihar	who	were	 all
unknown	to	them	and	with	whom	they	had	nothing	to	do.	It	had	never	happened
before;	it	happened	for	the	first	time.	Again,	it	is	for	the	first	time	that	Bombay
feels	disturbed	when	there	is	a	war	in	Vietnam.	The	whole	world	feels	hurt	for	a
wrong	 happening	 in	 any	 corner	 of	 the	 earth.	 Humanity	 has	 attained	 to	 this
sensitivity,	 to	 this	 awareness	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 It	 is	 unprecedented.	 Man	 has
grown
--	his	understanding	has	grown;	his	happiness	has	grown.
One	last	word.	Two	or	three	friends	have	asked,
Question
YOU	ADMIRE	AMERICA	SO	MUCH,	YOU	SAY	THAT	SOCIALISM	WILL
COME
FIRST	IN	AMERICA,	BUT	IT	IS	IN	AMERICA	WHERE	HIPPIES,	BEATLES
AND
BEATNIKS	 ARE	 INCREASING	 IN	 NUMBER,	 WHERE	 PEOPLE	 ARE
TAKING
INCREASINGLY	TO	DRINKS	AND	DRUGS	LIKE	LSD	AND	MESCALINE,
WHERE	CONSUMPTION	OF	SLEEPING	PILLS	AND	TRANQUILIZERS	IS
ASSUMING	ALARMING	PROPORTIONS	AND	WHERE	PEOPLE	ARE
DISTURBED	AND	RESTLESS.	CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	IT?
You	should	know	that	no	animal	ever	gets	disturbed.	Have	you	ever	heard	that	a
water	buffalo	lost	his	peace	of	mind?	Have	you	ever	seen	a	donkey	spending	a
sleepless	 nights	 or	 getting	 bored?	 Have	 you	 come	 across	 a	 bull	 committing
suicide,	 because	 life	 became	 meaningless?	 No,	 no	 animals	 ever	 get	 bored.
disturbed	or	worried;	nor	do	they	commit	suicide.	Why?
The	reason	is	that	the	mind	of	animals	is	very	undeveloped.	The	more	the	mind
develops,	the	more	you	become	sensitive	and	understanding.	As	the	mind	grows,
your	 vision	 grows;	 you	 begin	 to	 see	 things	 around	 you	 with	 clarity.	 As	 your
mind	 expands,	 your	 being	 expands	 in	 the	 same	 measure.	 And	 with	 the
development	 of	 intelligence	 begins	 the	 search	 for	 the	 meaning	 of	 life,	 its
significance.	If	there	are	hippies	and	Beatles	and	beatniks	in	today's	America,	if
its	young	men	and	women	are	getting	rebellious,	 they	are	 the	barometer	of	 the
fact	 that	 consciousness	 is	 touching	new	heights	 there,	 that	 they	 see	 things	 that
are	not	yet	seen	by	us.
Man's	 intelligence	 has	 developed	 in	 a	 great	 way,	 and	 it	 iS	 this	 developed
intelligence	 that	 is	 making	 him	 restless.	 The	 more	 intelligence,	 the	 more
restlessness.
And	 remember.	 the	 greater	 your	 restlessness,	 the	 greater	 peace	 you	 can	 attain.
Levels	 of	 peace	 and	 restlessness	 --	 their	 proportions	 are	 always	 the	 same.	 If
man's	 restlessness	 is	 say,	 only	 two	milligrams,	 the	 peace	 he	will	 attain	 is	 not
going	to	be	more	or	less	than	two	milligrams.	And	if	his	restlessness	grows	to	be
a	 thousand	 tons,	 his	 peace	 will	 grow	 to	 be	 the	 same	 thousand	 tons.	 Our
capacities	 in	both	directions	--	dialectical	directions	--	grow	together.	They	are
coextensive.	If	I	become	very	sensitive	to	ugliness,	I	am	bound	to	be	as	sensitive
to	beauty	 too.	The	man	with	 a	high	 sense	of	beauty	will	 have	a	high	 sense	of
ugliness	also.	Of	course,	ugliness	will	hurt	him,	but	beauty	will	comfort	him	in
the	same	measure.
As	 man's	 consciousness	 expands,	 his	 world	 of	 anxieties	 will	 equally	 expand,
because	 now	 the	 anxieties	 of	 others	 enter	 his	 awareness.	Man,	 today,	 is	much
more	intelligent	than	before,	and	that	is	why	he	is	so	anxious	and	unhappy	too.
But	because	of	our	mounting	anxiety	and	unhappiness	we	need	not	despair	and
retrace	our	steps	and	turn	back	to	the	past,	our	new	difficulties	and	problems	are
only	 a	 challenge	 and	 we	 have	 to	 accept	 the	 challenge	 and	 go	 onward	 and
forward.	We	have	to	find	new	paths	of	peace	--
peace	commensurate	with	our	restlessness.	Old	paths	will	not	do;	new	ones	have
to	be	found.
Man	is,	today,	on	a	brink,	and	his	consciousness	is	nearing	a	great	leap	forward,
a	quantum	leap.
For	example,	when	the	first	monkey	came	down	from	the	tree	and	for	 the	first
time	walked	on	two	legs	instead	of	four,	he	must	have	felt	very	awkward.	And
then	 the	older	monkeys,	his	elders,	who	remained	sitting	 in	 the	 tree	must	have
jeered	at	him,	saying,
"What	are	you	doing,	you	fool?	How	stupid	it	looks.	Is	it	becoming	for	monkeys
to	walk	 on	 two	 legs?"	And	 the	monkey	walking	 on	 two	 legs	must	 have	 gone
through	 a	 lot	 of	 worry	 and	 anxiety,	 any	 amount	 of	 sufferings.	 Maybe	 his
backbone	had	ached,	his	sleep	had	been	disturbed.	But	it	was	from	this	monkey
that	 humanity	 came	 into	 being	 and	 developed	 to	 its	 present	 state.	 In	 the	 same
way	man's	grown-up	consciousness	today	--
which	is	undergoing	such	pains	that	it	is	driving	him	to	the	point	of	committing
suicide	--
is	soon	going	to	give	birth	to	a	new	humanity,	a	higher	humanity.
The	emergence	of	a	new	consciousness	 in	man	 is	at	hand.	And	 remember,	 the
aboriginals	still	living	in	the	jungles	are	not	going	to	participate	in	this	quantum
leap,	nor	 are	 the	 saints	 and	priests	 sitting	and	 singing	 in	 temples	and	mosques
going	to	take	part	in	this	great	transformation.	They	are	all	seeking	comfort	and
contentment,	 and	 they	 are	 so	 afraid	 of	 discontent.	 Only	 they	 are	 going	 to	 be
partners	 in	 the	glory	of	giving	birth	 to	 the	new	man	who	are	prepared	 to	walk
through	the	fire	of	discontent,	and	who	have	the	courage	to	go	beyond	it.
In	this	respect,	we	are	a	very	unfortunate	people.	We	cannot	produce	hippies,	we
cannot	 be	 that	 anxious,	 we	 cannot	 suffer	 so	 intensely,	 and	 consequently	 we
cannot	 attain	 to	 that	 deep	 peace.	 America	 today	 stands	 as	 a	 vanguard	 on	 a
forward	 line	 from	where	a	 leap	 is	possible.	 It	 is	a	very	critical	 situation	where
many	 times	 one	may	 feel	 like	 escaping	 and	 retreating.	 That	 is	 why	men	 like
Mahesh	Yogi	have	influence	in	America.	The	people	who	feel	panicky	and	want
to	go	back	are	being	influenced	by	Mahesh	Yogi	and	others.
They	are	telling	them,	"Why	worry?	Get	out	of	this	mess;	close	your	eyes,	chant
a	mantra	and	go	back	 to	 the	past."	For	 the	same	reason	Gandhi	has	 influenced
America	 more	 than	 he	 has	 influenced	 his	 own	 country.	 The	 backward-going
mind	has	panicked	and	it	says,
"Yonder	is	an	abyss;	let	us	go	back!	Gandhi	is	right	to	say	that	technology	and
skyscrapers	are	useless!"
The	cry	of	"Go	back	to	 the	past"	has	always	been	there,	and	it	has	done	us	no
good.	We	have	to	go	forward,	there	cannot	be	any	going	back.	There	is	no	way
to	do	it.	And	even	if	there	was	a	way,	it	would	be	so	dangerous	to	do	so.	Nothing
can	be	gained	by	returning	to	the	past.	If	a	grade	four	student	wants	to	go	back	to
first	grade	because	 the	homework	was	easy,	 there	 is	no	sense	 in	doing	 it.	And
even	if	he	actually	goes	back,	he	will	find	it	to	be	meaningless.	He	has	now	the
maturity	that	comes	with	passing	three	grades;	he	cannot	stay	in	first	grade.	So
with	his	highly	developed	mind,	man	cannot	go	back	to	the	times	of	Rama.	He
cannot	return	to	the	caves.	Of	course,	he	may	enjoy	it	for	a	change	if	he	returns
to	the	forest	for	a	while.
Recently	 about	 two	 dozen	 of	 my	 friends	 from	 Bombay	 had	 gone	 to	 Kashmir
with	 me.	 In	 fact,	 they	 had	 escaped	 from	 Bombay	 and	 they	 were	 with	 me	 in
Pahalgaon,	a	scenic	spot	in	Kashmir.	The	man	who	cooked	for	me	at	Pahalgaon
told	 me	 every	 day	 that	 he	 would	 be	 grateful	 if	 I	 took	 him	 with	 me	 to	 see
Bombay.	I	said	to	him,	"You	seem	to	be	crazy.
You	see	the	friends	here	with	me,	they	are	all	from	Bombay	and	they	are	here	to
see	Pahalgaon.	You	are	fortunate	 to	be	 in	Pahalgaon	itself;	better	enjoy	 it."	He
then	said,
"Life	is	so	dull	here	that	I	wonder	why	people	come	here	at	all.	There	is	nothing
here.	I	crave	to	see	Bombay."	He	wants	to	see	Bombay,	and	I	want	that	he	should
have	 the	 opportunity	 to	 see	 that	 city.	Why?	 --	 because	 then	he	will	 be	 able	 to
enjoy	Pahalgaon	too.
That	will	be	his	gain	if	he	visits	Bombay.
Man	has	to	go	forward.	Once	in	a	while	he	can	go	back	to	the	past	to	have	a	brief
holiday.
That	would	be	pleasant.	But	 a	 return	 to	 the	past	 for	good	 is	not	possible.	 It	 is
different	 if	 for	 fun	 you	 sit	 sometimes	 at	Rajghat	with	 a	 spinning	wheel	 as	 the
leaders	do.	It	is	a	pleasant	hobby	and	a	cheap	one	at	that	if	you	occasionally	take
to	spinning	and	get	photographed	and	filmed.	But	 it	would	be	utterly	wrong	 if
we	make	the	spinning	wheel	the	kingpin	of	our	industries.	That	way	the	spinning
wheel	will	be	dangerous.
No	culture	of	 the	past,	be	 it	Hindu,	Mohammedan	or	Christian,	can	make	man
happy	if	he	returns	to	it.	Man	has	to	go	ahead	and	ahead	into	the	future.	In	that
future	no	Hindu,	no	Mohammedan	and	no	Christian	will	survive;	only	man	will
survive.	In	that	future	only	man	will	live.
The	future	belongs	to	man.	And	here	we	have	to	think	together	about	how	much
creativity	we	need	 to	bring	 that	 future	 in.	We	also	have	 to	consider	how	much
wealth	and	health	will	be	needed	to	make	man	happy,	so	that	from	his	happiness
he	creates	music,	he	goes	on	the	search	for	his	soul,	and	ultimately	reaches	the
temple	of	God.
There	are	many	questions	to	be	answered.	I	will	take	them	up	tomorrow.	And	if
you	have	any	more	questions,	you	can	send	them	in	writing.
I	am	grateful	 to	you	 for	having	quietly	 listened	 to	my	 talk	with	so	much	 love.
And	 lastly,	 I	 bow	down	 to	 the	God	 residing	 in	 each	of	 you.	Please	 accept	my
salutations.
Beware	of	Socialism
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Democratic	socialism	is	a	lie
16	April	1970	pm	in	Cross	Maidan
Archive
code:
7004165
ShortTitle:
SOCIAL04
Audio:
No
Video:	No
A	 number	 of	 questions	 have	 been	 received;	 they	 are	 in	 the	 context	 of	 the
previous	discourses.	A	friend	has	asked:	IN	THE	COURSE	OF	YOUR	TALKS
ON	SOCIALISM
AND	 COMMUNISM	 YOU	 DID	 NOT	 GIVE	 ANY	 THOUGHT	 TO
DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALISM.	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALISM?
It	 would	 be	 useful	 to	 understand	 a	 few	 things	 about	 democratic	 socialism.
Democratic	 socialism	 is	 a	 contradiction	 in	 terms;	 it	 is	 a	 combination	 of	 two
words	that	contradict	each	other.	It	is	like	saying	"a	barren	woman's	son",	which
is	again	a	contradiction	in	terms.	If	a	woman	has	a	son	she	could	not	be	barren;
and	if	she	is	barren	she	could	not	have	a	son.
There	 is	 no	 grammatical	 mistake	 in	 the	 composition	 of	 the	 phrase	 "a	 barren
woman's	son",	but	it	cannot	be	true.	In	the	same	way	there	cannot	be	a	thing	like
democratic	socialism;	it	is	just	an	empty	phrase,	a	meaningless	cliche.	Why?
Democracy	and	 socialism,	as	 socialism	 is	 currently	known	cannot	go	 together,
because	the	one	cancels	the	other.	Because	democracy	has	to	be	destroyed	in	the
very	 process	 of	 bringing	 socialism,	 the	 so-called	 socialism	 cannot	 be	 brought
without	murdering	democracy.	And	it	is	necessary	to	understand	why	democracy
will	have	to	go	for	socialism	to	come.
The	first	principle,	the	foundational	principle	of	democracy	is	that	it	gives	every
individual	person	the	freedom	to	live,	to	work,	to	earn,	to	produce	and	to	own,
use	and	amass	his	production,	his	property.	It	is	one	of	his	basic	rights.	The	next
fundamental	principle	of	democracy	ordains	that	there	should	be	no	injustice	to
anyone.	And	another	basic	principle	of	democracy	says	that	the	majority	cannot
subject	 the	 minority	 to	 any	 injustices.	 If,	 in	 a	 village,	 there	 live	 a	 hundred
Mohammedans	and	ten	Hindus,	and	the	Mohammedans	decide	to	kill	the	Hindus
and	 say	 that	 they	 are	 going	 to	 do	 it	 democratically,	 because	 the	majority	 is	 in
support	of	killing	and	only	the	minority	is	against	it,	 then	we	will	say	that	it	 is
wrong,	it	violates	democracy.	Democracy	means	that	even	if	there	is	a	minority
of	one,	 the	majority	cannot	 subject	 it	 to	 injustices,	 and	deprive	 it	of	 any	of	 its
basic	rights.
Capitalism,	or	 the	capitalist,	 is	a	minority	 today.	 If	 the	majority,	whom	the	so-
called	 socialism	claims	 to	 speak	 and	work	 for,	 uses	 democracy	 to	 destroy	 this
minority,	 then	 it	knocks	out	 the	very	 foundation	of	democracy.	And	minorities
change	with	 time.	Today	 one	 group	 is	 in	 the	minority,	 tomorrow	 another	may
take	 its	 place.	 Now	 some	 people	 say	 that	 wealth	 should	 be	 distributed	 --
someone	should	not	have	more	and	others	less	--
because	wealth	creates	jealousy	and	bitterness.	But	it	is	necessary	to	ask	if	it	is
justice	 that	 those	who	did	not	do	a	 thing	 to	produce	wealth,	who	 took	no	part
whatsoever	in	its	creation,	who	were	just	spectators,	should	now,	when	wealth	is
created,	come	forward	and	demand	its	distribution.
It	is	interesting	to	note	that	whenever	a	great	invention	was	made,	an	invention
which	later	on	became	an	instrument	of	great	production,	it	could	not	be	easily
sold,	 it	 had	no	buyers.	The	 inventors	 and	 innovators	have	 always	been	 looked
upon	as	crazy	people.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 a	 scientist	 took	 an	 inventor	 to	 any	 number	 of	 people	 and
introduced	his	new	design	to	them.	And	the	inventor	was	ready	to	sell	his	design
for	 just	 fifty	 rupees,	 but	 nobody	wanted	 to	oblige	him.	The	 first	 design	of	 the
motor	car	was	thought	to	be	a	piece	of	madness,	and	so	was	the	first	design	of
the	airplane.	No	one	was	ready	to	buy	and	try	them,	because	one	could	not	really
believe	 they	would	 be	worthwhile.	They	must	 have	 been	men	 of	 rare	 courage
who	worked	on	those	new	designs	and	opened	unheard	of	doors	to	production.
But	now	that	the	wealth	is	there,	all	those	who	had	been	idle	spectators,	who	had
called	 the	 pioneers	 mad	 and	 crazy,	 come	 forward	 and	 ask	 for	 a	 share	 in	 that
wealth,	saying	that	wealth	belongs	to	all.
A	handful	of	people	have	created	wealth,	but	after	it	has	been	created,	all	those
who	have	had	no	hand	in	its	creation	are	claimants	for	a	share	in	its	ownership.
But	 this	 is	 not	 what	 democracy	 means.	 Democracy	 means	 that	 the	 producer
should	own	his	produce.	And	 if	he	distributes	 it,	 shares	 it	with	others,	 it	 is	his
pleasure.	But	the	so-called	claimants	have	no	right	to	it.	And	if	it	ever	became	a
matter	of	right,	then	nobody	knows	where	this	matter	will	end.
Wealth	is	the	creation	of	intelligence	and	talent.	Today	we	envy	that	intelligence
and	say	that	wealth	should	be	distributed	equally.	In	the	same	way,	tomorrow	we
will	 say	 that	we	cannot	 tolerate	 that	 a	 few	persons	have	beautiful	wives	while
others	have	ugly	ones.	We	will	say	that	this	is	inequality,	it	cannot	be	tolerated;
everyone	should	have	equal	rights	to	beautiful	women.	We	will	not	be	wrong	if
we	say	that,	because	basically	it	 is	 the	same	logic;	 there	is	no	difference	at	all.
And	then	the	day	after	we	will	say	that	it	is	intolerable	that	a	handful	of	people
are	 intelligent	while	others	are	stupid.	This	 too	 is	 inequality;	we	demand	equal
distribution	 of	 intelligence	 and	 talent.	 It	 is	 again	 the	 same	 logic	 that	 demands
equal	distribution	of	wealth.
But	the	whole	approach	is	anti-democratic.	In	fact,	every	person	is	different	and
unique.
Every	person	is	born	with	distinct	and	different	potentialities,	and	they	will	seek
and	develop	their	own	potentialities,	and	they	will	create	what	they	are	made	to
create.	And	as	such	they	will	own	their	creation.	And	if	they	share	it	with	others,
they	do	so	for	their	own	joy.	But	we	have	no	right	to	claim	it;	it	would	be	grossly
unJust.
Socialism,	however,	approves	of	many	such	injustices,	because	it	is	easy	to	win
the	majority	in	support	of	injustices.	But	injustice	will	not	become	justice	and	a
lie	will	 not	 become	 truth	 just	 because	 the	majority	 supports	 them.	Freedom	 to
own	 private	 property	 is	 one	 of	 the	 fundamental	 human	 rights,	 and	 democracy
accepts	this	right	of	the	individual.
So	when	somebody	says	that	socialism	with	democracy	is	possible,	he	is	saying
an	outright	lie.	Socialism	violates	the	basic	principle	of	democracy.	Democracy
and	socialism	cannot	go	together.
The	second	thing	is	that	socialism	only	talks	of	the	great	values,	which	make	for
the	basis	of	its	philosophy;	it	cannot	achieve	them.	So	it	will	be	worthwhile	if	we
go	into	some	of	these	values	at	length.
Freedom	 is	 perhaps	 the	 greatest	 value	 in	man's	 life.	 There	 is	 no	 greater	 value
than	 this,	 because	 freedom	 is	 foundational	 to	 the	whole	 development	 of	man.
That	 is	 why	 bondage	 or	 slavery	 is	 the	 worst	 state	 of	 human	 existence	 and
freedom	its	best	and	most	beautiful.
And	socialism	cannot	be	established	without	 fighting	and	finishing	freedom.	It
is,	of	course,	possible	 that	 the	majority	may	consent	 to	destroy	 the	 freedom	of
the	minority.	But	still	it	is	unfair	and	unjust.	Destruction	of	freedom	can	never	be
democratic.
Freedom	 of	 thought	 is	 the	 very	 life	 of	 democracy;	 it	 is	 its	 very	 soul.	 But
socialism	cannot	stand	freedom	of	thought,	because	freedom	of	thought	includes
the	 freedom	 to	 support	 capitalism.	 It	 is	 difficult	 for	 socialism	 to	 swallow.
Socialism	wants	 to	 destroy	 capitalism	 root	 and	 branch,	 and	 therefore	 it	 has	 to
destroy	freedom	of	thought.	And	it	is	unthinkable	how,	after	destroying	the	right
of	the	individual	to	hold	property	and	his	freedom	of	thought.	socialism	can	be
democratic.
Democratic	 socialism	 is	 a	blatant	 lie.	The	 fact	 is	 that	 the	word	democracy	has
respectability,	and	socialism	does	not	want	 to	forego	this	respectability.	That	 is
why	 Russia	 is	 democratic,	 China	 is	 democratic,	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 them	 are
democratic.	Man	 can	misuse	words	 in	 a	 big	way.	He	 can	 label	 Satan	 as	God.
Who	can	stop	it?	It	is	difficult.
Let	it	be	clearly	understood	that	democracy	is	a	value	that	goes	with	capitalism,
and	 not	 with	 socialism.	 And	 if	 democracy	 has	 to	 live,	 it	 can	 only	 live	 with
capitalism;	it	cannot	live	with	socialism.	Democracy	is	an	inalienable	part	of	the
capitalist	way	of	life,	and	as	such	it	can	only	go	with	capitalism.
Similarly	there	are	other	values	--	we	are	not	even	aware	of	them	--	which	can	be
destroyed	easily.	And	 they	are	already	being	destroyed.	The	 individual	has	 the
ultimate	 value.	 But	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 socialism	 it	 is	 not	 the	 individual	 but	 the
collective,	 the	crowd,	 that	has	value.	And	socialism	accepts	 that	 the	 individual
can	 be	 sacrificed	 for	 the	 collective,	 the	 society.	 The	 individual,	 in	 fact,	 has
always	been	sacrificed	 in	 the	name	of	great	principles,	 and	 for	 the	 sake	of	big
and	high-sounding	names.	He	has	been	sacrificed	sometimes	for	the	sake	of	the
nation	and	sometimes	for	the	sake	of	religion,	and	sometimes	for	the	sake	of	the
KORAN,	the	Gita	and	innumerable	other	things.	But	man	refuses	to	learn	from
history.	 When	 old	 altars	 disappear,	 he	 creates	 new	 ones,	 and	 continues
sacrificing	the	individual.	Socialism	is	such	a	new	altar.
If	 man	 has	 to	 learn	 anything	 from	 his	 history,	 the	 one	 lesson	 that	 is	 worth
learning	 is	 this:	 The	 individual	 cannot	 be	 sacrificed	 for	 anything.	 Even	 the
greatest	 of	 nations	 does	 not	 have	 the	 right	 to	 ask	 for	 the	 sacrifice	 of	 a	 single
individual.	Even	the	greatest	of	humanity	does	not	have	the	right	to	sacrifice	the
individual	for	its	sake	--	because	the	individual	is	a	living	consciousness,	and	it
is	dangerous	to	sacrifice	this	living	consciousness	at	the	altar	of	a	system	or	an
organization,	however	great	it	be;	because	the	system	is	a	lifeless	arrangement,	a
dead	entity,	and	it	is	not	proper	to	sacrifice	a	living	man	for	the	sake	of	a	dead
system.
But	we	have	gotten	into	the	habit	of	killing	the	individual,	and	even	now	we	are
seeking	new	avenues,	new	altars	at	which	the	individual	can	be	sacrificed.	The
new	altar	is	socialism.
Socialism	is	not	democratic.	The	socialism	that	is	sought	to	be	forced	on	us	can
never	 be	 democratic.	 In	 only	 one	way	 can	 socialism	 come	without	 sacrificing
freedom,	and	that	is	when	it	comes	effortlessly,	naturally	and	by	itself.	Otherwise
it	is	not	possible	for	socialism	to	be	democratic.
Only	today	a	friend	told	me	that	he	had	read	in	some	newspaper	about	a	unique
little	island	somewhere	in	the	Pacific	Ocean.	The	population	of	that	island	is	not
large,	 some	 hundreds	 of	 people	 live	 there.	 But	 the	 island	 is	 so	 rich	 in
phosphorous	 mines,	 and	 those	 mines	 yield	 so	 much	 wealth	 that	 every	 person
earns	at	least	eight	thousand	rupees	from	them.	In	that	island	no	one	is	poor,	no
one	is	rich,	just	because	men	are	few	and	wealth	is	plentiful.	This	little	island	is
perhaps	the	first	socialist	society	on	this	earth	at	the	moment.	But	the	people	of
the	island	don't	even	know	that	they	are	a	socialist	society	--	it	is	not	necessary
for	them	to	know	it.
Abundant	wealth	and	scant	population	make	for	socialism.
The	 friend	 also	 told	 me	 about	 a	 unique	 custom	 that	 exists	 in	 that	 island	 and
perhaps	nowhere	else.	If	a	guest	in	a	family	admires	a	thing	--	say	the	radio	in
the	sitting	room	--
then	the	family	immediately	makes	a	gift	of	the	radio	to	the	guest.	Because	they
believe	 that	 if	 a	person	has	 a	 liking	 for	 a	 certain	 thing,	 it	 should	go	 to	him;	 it
really	 belongs	 to	 him.	 This	 custom	 exists	 there	 because	 they	 have	 abundant
wealth	and	so	their	clinging	to	wealth	has	withered	away.
Someday	we	may	have	socialism	on	the	whole	earth.	It	is	necessary,	and	it	will
come,	 if	 the	socialists	are	not	 in	haste.	But	 if	 the	socialists	continue	 to	be	 in	a
hurry,	as	they	are,	then	the	chances	are	that	it	will	never	come;	it	will	be	delayed
forever.	 Socialism	 will	 come	 without	 sacrificing	 democracy	 when	 we	 have
created	a	 situation	with	plenty	of	wealth	and	 less	numbers	of	people.	But	 then
we	will	 not	 know	when	 it	 came,	 how	 it	 came.	 It	 will	 come	 silently,	 as	 every
significant	thing	in	life	comes.
There	is	another	thing	that	deserves	attention,	and	it	should	be	understood	well.
Many	friends	have	complained	that	I	say	that	labor	has	no	use	in	the	creation	of
wealth.	I	never	said	that	labor	has	no	use	in	the	creation	of	riches.	I	only	said	that
sooner	 or	 later	 labor	 will	 increasingly	 become	 a	 non-essential	 factor	 in	 the
production	 of	 goods.	 over	 a	 long	 period	 it	 has	 already	 been	 losing	 its	 place.
Labor	has	a	hand	in	the	creation	of	wealth,	hut	it	has	not	been	the	central	factor,
the	basic	factor	of	production.	 It	does	not	play	a	pivotal	 role.	The	basic	factor,
the	pivotal	factor	is	the	mind	of	man	--	his	intelligence,	his	talent.
It	is	man's	intelligence	that	has	discovered	new	dimensions	of	creating	wealth.
It	 is	 also	 important	 to	know	 that	 labor	 is	a	perishable	commodity;	 it	dies	 soon
and	readily	if	 it	 is	not	used.	Unused	labor	dies	every	day.	If	I	have	not	worked
today,	then	my	unused	labor	cannot	be	preserved	in	some	safe	for	future	use.	I
will	not	do	the	same	work	ever	again	that	I	could	have	done	had	I	worked	today,
because	labor	cannot	be	saved.	It	is	lost	every	day;	it	is	perishable.	It	is	not	that	a
worker	will	escape	being	exploited	if	he	does	not	work	in	a	field	or	factory	for
all	his	life.	He	will	die	nonetheless,	because	labor	cannot	be	preserved;	it	cannot
be	put	in	a	safe	deposit.
Capitalism,	for	the	first	time,	found	ways	and	means	to	preserve	labor.	It	made
labor,	a	perishable	commodity.	preservable	in	the	form	of	wages	in	money;	that
is,	 capital	 created	out	of	 it.	So	 it	 is	 again	capitalism	 that	made	 it	possible.	 If	 I
work	this	very	day	and	save	five	rupees	of	my	wages,	it	is	labor	made	durable.	If
it	had	not	turned	up	in	the	form	of	five	rupees,	it	would	have	gone	to	waste.	It	is
not	 that	my	unexpended	 labor	would	have	remained	with	me	even	 if	 I	had	not
worked	to	earn	the	wage	in	money.	But	it	is	strange	that	I	say	that	while	I	had	put
in	ten	rupees	worth	of	labor,	I	was	paid	only	five.	The	fact	 is,	 that	 if	I	had	not
worked	at	 all,	my	 labor	was	not	worth	a	 single	paisa.	 It	 is	desirable,	however,
that	some	day	I	should	be	paid	ten	rupees	instead	of	five	that	I	receive	right	now.
But	 it	 does	 not	mean	 that	 ten	 rupees	will	 come	 after	 destroying	 the	 capitalist
mode	 of	 production.	 No,	 this	 system	 has	 to	 be	 retained	 and	 progressively
developed.
As	 it	 is	 today,	 the	 capitalist	 system	 is	 not	 adequate.	And	 don't	 think,	 as	many
friends	have	said,	that	I	support	the	system	as	it	is.	The	system	as	it	is	needs	to
be	 tremendously	 improved	and	developed.	As	 it	 is,	 it	 is	primitive;	 it	 is	 just	 the
abe	of	 capitalism.	But	 the	 socialist	 cry	 is	 coming	very	much	 in	 the	way	of	 its
growth,	 and	 it	 will	 not	 allow	 it	 to	 grow	 if	 it	 has	 its	way.	 But	 if	 capitalism	 is
allowed	to	grow	it	will	be	quite	possible	for	it	to	pay	the	worker	ten	rupees,	even
twenty,	 in	 the	 place	 of	 today's	 five.	 It	will	 be	 possible	 to	 pay	 even	 the	 person
who	does	not	work.	And	if	we	go	through	a	full	technological	revolution,	which
is	 in	 the	making,	 it	 is	 just	 likely	people	demanding	work	will	be	paid	 less	and
those	agreeing	to	enjoy	leisure	will	be	paid	more.	It	will	be	so	because	the	utility
of	labor	is	connected	with	so	many	other	things.
If	tomorrow	your	town	is	equipped	with	every	kind	of	automatic	machine,	soon
tens	of	 thousands	of	 people	will	 be	out	 of	 employment.	But	what	will	 you	do
with	the	huge	wealth	that	the	automatic	machines	will	produce?	You	will	have	to
give	 it	 away	 in	 the	 form	 of	 compensation	 to	 the	 unemployed	 people.	 But
someone	among	them	may	say	that	he	cannot	sit	idle	for	twenty-four	hours,	he
must	have	at	 least	 two	hours'	work	every	day,	otherwise	he	will	go	crazy.	This
man	will	 have	 to	 be	 paid	 less	 because	 he	 wants	 both:	 work	 and	money.	 And
another	man	who	agrees	to	sit	idle	and	be	content	with	only	money,	will	have	to
be	paid	more	than	the	one	asking	for	work.
This	can	be	possible	in	fifty	years'	time	if	capitalist	production	is	fully	developed
and	automatized,	and	no	efforts	are	made	to	sabotage	it	at	its	various	points.
The	ways	of	sabotaging	are	devious;	they	are	not	easily	discernible.	On	the	one
hand	the	leaders	shout	that	the	country	is	poor,	and	production.	more	production,
is	the	need	of	the	hour,	and	on	the	other	hand	they	go	on	imposing	higher	taxes
on	 those	 very	 people	who	 produce	more.	 This	 is	 utterly	 foolish.	 If	 you	 really
mean	 production	 of	 wealth,	 the	 pattern	 of	 taxation	 will	 have	 to	 be	 radically
altered.	People	who	produce	more	should	pay	less	tax	and	those	producing	less
should	 be	 made	 to	 pay	 more	 tax.	 The	 person	 who	 produces	 two	 hundred
thousand	rupees	worth	of	goods	annually	should	pay	less	tax	than	the	one	who
produces	 only	 one	 hundred	 thousand	 rupees	 worth	 of	 goods.	 Similarly,	 the
producer	of	five	hundred	thousand	rupees	worth	of	goods	should	pay	 less	 than
the	one	producing	two	hundred	thousand	rupees	worth	of	goods.	And	he	should
be	exempted	totally	from	paying	any	taxes,	who	produces,	say,	a	million	rupees
worth	 of	 goods	 in	 one	 year.	 And	 if	 someone	 produces	 ten	 million	 worth	 of
goods,	the	government	should	pay	him	instead.
Then	alone,	wealth,	abundant	wealth,	can	be	created.	The	key	 to	production	 is
incentive.
If	an	entrepreneur	today	earns	two	hundred	thousand	rupees	in	profit,	he	is	made
to	 part	 with	 ninety	 percent	 of	 his	 income	 by	 way	 of	 taxes.	 And	 if	 another
entrepreneur	 earns,	 save	 five	 hundred	 thousand,	 he	 will	 have	 to	 part	 with	 his
entire	income	to	pay	the	taxes.
And	 in	 case	 someone	 dares	 to	 earn	 a	million	 rupees,	 he	 will	 have	 to	 sell	 his
assets	to	pay	the	taxes.	Under	the	circumstances	the	producer	thinks	--	and	thinks
rightly	 --	 that	 it	 is	useless	 to	produce.	Thus	you	are	obstructing	 those	who	can
create	wealth	and	you	sing	hymns	Of	praise	to	that	largest	group,	the	idlers	who
do	 not	 produce	 and	 earn	 at	 all.	 Can	 there	 be	 a	 better	 way	 of	 destroying	 the
country	than	this?
The	hymns	of	praise	meant	to	placate	the	masses	may	be	pleasant	at	the	moment,
but	they	are	going	to	prove	very	costly	and	dangerous.
It	 is	 very	 interesting	 to	 note	 that	 a	 great	 majority	 of	 mankind	 is	 wholly
uncreative.	This	majority	is	contented	with	eating	and	producing	children.	It	has
done	nothing	else.	Only	a	very	small	fraction	of	humanity	has	engaged	itself	in
creativity	 and	 produced	 great	 results.	 Take	 any	 field,	 be	 it	 poetry	 or	 great
painting,	production	of	wealth,	science	or	religion	--	only	a	handful	of	men	and
women	have	attained	 to	peaks	of	creativity.	The	 tragedy	is	 that	 it	 is	 these	very
people	who	are	being	maligned,	thwarted	and	suppressed.
And	 it	 is	 a	 very	 absurd	 logic	 at	 that.	On	 the	 one	 hand	 you	 say	 that	wealth	 is
urgently	needed	and	on	the	other	you	praise	those	who	are	without	any	wealth.
Why	don't	they	have	limit.
They	have	been	on	this	earth	for	millions	of	years.	Their	forefathers	were	here.
Have	you	ever	thought	why	they	did	not	have	wealth?	They	produced	children
and	not	wealth	--
and	 it	 is	 thus	 they	 have	 always	 remained	 poor.	 It	 is	 amazing	 that	 creators	 of
wealth	 are	 made	 to	 feel	 guilty	 about	 it,	 they	 are	 treated	 as	 criminals	 and	 are
going	to	be	put	on	the	cross	of	the	society.	Their	only	crime	is	that	they	did	not
produce	children	and	sit	idly	by,	like	the	rest	of	mankind.	And	their	worst	crime
is	that	they	produced	wealth.	Now	those	who	did	not	take	part	in	the	production
of	 wealth	 will	 take	 revenge,	 they	 will	 strangle	 them	 on	 the	 grounds	 of	 being
exploiters.	This	is	quite	strange.	This	wealth	has	not	come	through	exploitation;
it	 has	 been	 created	with	 great	 intelligence	 and	 hard	work.	 It	 has	 been	 created
through	the	adventure	of	the	mind	in	many	dimensions.
But	we	give	no	thought	to	it	and	we	are	determined	to	destroy	those	who	create
wealth	 and	 prosperity.	 This	 is	 our	 strange	 logic	 all	 the	 way	 down.	 This	 is	 a
dichotomy.
I	happened	to	visit	a	family-planning	center	a	short	time	ago.	The	whole	country
and	its	government	are	engaged	in	an	effort	to	limit	the	size	of	the	family	with	a
view	 to	 controlling	 the	 exploding	 population	 of	 the	 country.	 But	 our	 logic	 is
upside-down	everywhere.	If	we	have	to	have	family	planning	it	is	necessary	that
we	think	about	it	in	its	total	perspective.	As	I	said	earlier,	that	if	we	have	to	have
wealth,	the	producer	should	be	given	full	encouragement	and	incentive	to	do	it,
but	the	contrary	is	happening	--	he	is	being	punished	and	persecuted.	And	why
should	he	then	produce	if	he	is	going	to	be	punished	for	it?	And	the	people	who
are	not	productive	will	not	do	it	 in	any	case.	And	those	who	can	produce,	will
withhold	their	hands	in	despair.	And	consequently	the	country	will	suffer	and	go
down	the	drain.	It	can	never	be	rich.
When	 I	 arrived	 at	 the	 center	 I	 saw	 a	 lot	 of	 propaganda	 being	 done	 about	 the
importance	of	family	planning.	 I	asked	 the	officer	 in	charge	of	 the	center	 if	he
knew	about	the	rates	of	income	tax	for	the	bachelors	and	the	married	couples	and
couples	with	children.	The	officer	said	that	there	was	no	connection	whatsoever
between	 taxation	 and	 family	 planning.	 I	 then	 said	 that	 in	 that	 case	 there	 is	 no
connection	between	intelligence	and	family	planning.
If	the	government	wants	to	limit	the	family	it	should	levy	heavy	taxes	on	those
who	 produce	 more	 children	 than	 the	 prescribed	 number.	 But	 the	 contrary	 is
happening	on	this	front	too.	Parents	with	many	children	pay	much	less	tax	than
those	with	less	or	no	children.	And	this	law	works	against	family	planning.	If	it
is	to	succeed,	parents	with	more	children	should	be	made	to	pay	a	larger	amount
of	tax	than	the	others	with	less	or	no	children.	A	family	with	three	children	--	if
three	be	 the	 limit	 --	 should	pay	much	 less	 tax	 than	 the	 family	with	more	 than
three	children.	And	if	a	family	exceeds	the	number	of	five	then	the	schools	and
hospitals	 should	be	asked	 to	 charge	higher	 fees	 for	 their	 children's	 studies	 and
treatment.	Then	alone	will	families	feel	compelled	to	limit	their	size.
But,	currently,	parents	with	a	larger	number	of	children	are	given	higher	rebates
in	income	tax.	The	bachelors	pay	higher	taxes	than	the	married	ones.	It	is	utterly
foolish.
Bachelors	should	receive	full	exemption	from	taxes,	or	if	they	have	to	be	taxed
at	all	the	rates	should	be	much	lower	so	that	young	people	abstain	from	marriage
or	marry	late.	On	the	other	hand	married	people	should	be	taxed	heavily	so	that
marriage	becomes	costly.
And	 let	 there	 be	 a	 graduated	 increase	 in	 tax	 rates	 with	 every	 increase	 in	 the
number	 of	 a	 family's	 children	 Then	 there	 will	 be	 a	 system	 a	 logic	 in	 the
management	 of	 the	 state	 affairs;	 otherwise	 the	whole	 thing,	 as	 it	 is,	 is	 simply
ridiculous.	What	does	it	mean	that	while	you	cry	for	limiting	the	family,	you	go
on	rewarding	those	with	unlimited	families?
The	 same	 chaos	 prevails	 in	 the	 field	 of	 production.	 And	 it	 is	 so	 in	 many
dimensions	of	 life	 that	for	 lack	of	a	clear	perspective	we	just	go	on	drifting.	If
we	want	 to	 end	 poverty	 then	 all	 avenues	 of	 production	 should	 be	 opened	 and
every	facility	and	incentive	given	to	those	who	have	the	talent	to	produce.	If	the
country's	 poverty	 has	 to	 be	 liquidated,	 then	 capital	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world
should	be	invited	for	investment	in	India.	But	we	think	that	if	people	from	other
countries	come	here,	they	would	exploit	us.	As	I	said,	if	labor	is	not	used,	it	just
perishes.
So	if	international	capital	is	allowed	to	be	invested	here,	it	can	convert	the	entire
unused	labor	of	this	country	into	solid	wealth.	But	we	are	afraid	that	we	will	be
exploited	It	is	a	very	wrong	way	of	thinking.	International	capital	will	not	exploit
us;	on	the	contrary,	it	will	help	us	immensely.	It	will	utilize	the	huge	unemployed
manpower	of	this	country	which	is	just	being	wasted	everyday	like	the	waters	of
the	Ganges	 and	Narmada	 --	when	 you	 don't	 use	 them,	 they	 disappear	 into	 the
ocean.	 If	we	 fail	 to	utilize	our	 labor	energy	 that	 is	abounding	 it	will	disappear
into	 the	 cosmos	 and	be	 lost	 to	 us	 forever.	Let	 it	 be	 used	 and	 transformed	 into
wealth.	Then	alone	it	can	be	preserved.
But	we	are	a	strange	people.	We	say	that	it	does	not	matter	if	ten	rupees	worth	of
labor	is	wasted,	but	we	will	not	agree	to	work	for	five	rupees	and	be	robbed	of
the	other	five,	as	if	we	have	five	rupees	in	cash	on	us	and	someone	is	going	to
grab	it.	No	it	is	not	so;	nobody	is	robbing	you.
The	whole	concept	of	exploitation	is	full	of	nonsense.
Capitalism	is	an	instrument	for	converting	labor	into	wealth	and	if	capitalism	is
allowed	 to	grow	unimpeded	 it	call	 find	ways	 to	convert	 the	entire	 labor	of	 the
country	into	wealth	but	the	socialists	say	that	they	will	hand	over	everything	--
the	means	of	production	and	labor	--	to	the	state	The	irony	is	that	the	politicians
are,	and	have	always	been.	the	most	inefficient	and	worthless	class	of	people	in
the	world.
There	is	a	reason	for	this.	It	is	that	merit	is	valued	in	every	walk	of	human	life
except	 in	 politics.	 In	 politics	 alone	merit	 has	 no	 value	 at	 all.	 The	 person	who
cannot	 be	 employed	 in	 a	 shoe-shop	 to	 sell	 shoes	 can	 very	 well	 become	 the
education	minister	of	a	country	--
there	is	no	difficulty	in	it,	because	it	is	not	necessary	that	a	minister	of	education
have	any	educational	qualifications.	 In	 fact,	politics	 is	 the	refuge,	and	 the	only
refuge	of	the	misfits	and	the	nincompoops.
A	person	who	has	no	qualifications	whatsoever,	is	qualified	for	politics.	Politics
does	not	ask	for	any	particular	qualifications,	specialized	knowledge,	on	the	part
of	 those	who	want	 to	enter	 its	arena.	 It	 is	a	strange	profession,	which	calls	 for
nothing	except	 that	you	can	shout	slogans	and	get	 some	followers	behind	you.
But	what	will	he	do	by	becoming	the	education	minister?	Vice-chancellors	and
academicians	 will	 dance	 in	 attendance	 on	 him	 and	 the	 man	 will	 put	 his
thumbprint	in	place	of	his	signature.	It	is	an	outrage	on	education	that	it	should
be	directed	by	one	who	cannot	sign	his	name.	A	person	who	does	not	know	what
medical	 science	 is	 becomes	 the	 health	 minister	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the	 country's
health.
Politics,	which	is	the	haven	of	the	nincompoops,	is	trying	to	take	over	the	wealth
of	 the	country	as	well.	 It	 says	 that	 trade,	 commerce,	 industries	 --	 including	all
means	of	production	--	should	be	put	in	the	hands	of	the	state,	which	is	another
name	for	the	politician.	So	the	politicians	will	manage	and	control	the	economic
life	of	the	country.	It	seems	that	they	are	under	a	vow	to	ruin	the	country	forever.
And	they	will	do	it;	they	will	not	stop	short	of	it.
My	vision	is	different.	It	is	that	the	politician	can	be	prevented	from	ruining	the
human	 societies	 of	 the	 world	 if	 he	 is	 prevented	 from	 directly	 controlling	 the
government	 and	 the	 administration	 of	 the	 state.	 The	 elected	 representatives	 of
the	 people.	 of	 course,	 should	 form	 the	 parliament,	 but	 the	 parliament	 or	 the
majority	 party	 in	 parliament	 will	 not	 form	 the	 Cabinet	 or	 the	 council	 of
ministers.	 The	 majority	 party	 should	 find	 highly	 qualified	 and	 experienced
specialists	and	experts	in	different	fields	of	government	--	like	education,	health,
finance	and	the	rest	--	and	form	the	council	of	ministers	with	them.	For	example,
it	will	be	the	task	of	the	majority	party	to	find	the	best	educationist	for	the	job	of
education	minister.	Similarly	it	will	appoint	the	best	physician	as	health	minister.
The	right	to	select	the	specialist	members	of	the	Cabinet	will	certainly	belong	to
the	majority	party,	but	no	popular	representatives	will	be	appointed	as	education
minister	and	health	minister,	or	any	minister	for	that	matter.
What	we	have	at	the	moment	is	mobocracy;	it	is	certainly	not	democracy.	It	is	all
right	 for	 the	 people	 to	 choose	 their	 representatives	 for	 the	 parliament,	 but	 it
should	be	the	clearly	defined	task	of	the	majority	party	in	parliament	to	find	the
best	 men	 of	 merit	 to	 administer	 the	 various	 divisions	 and	 functions	 of	 the
government.	They	have	to	see	to	it	that	the	selected	ministers	are	fully	qualified
for	 their	 different	 jobs.	 Then	 we	 will	 have	 meritocracy	 in	 the	 place	 of	 the
mobocracy	 that	 we	 have.	 Unless	 democracy	 is	 wedded	 to	 meritocracy,	 i	 will
remain	 a	 tool	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 ignorant	 and	 stupid	 people.	 And	 unless
democracy	 it	 allied	 with	 meritocracy,	 democracy	 will	 continue	 to	 be	 the
instrument	of	man's	downfall	and	degradation;	it	can	never	be	the	instrument	of
his	uplifting	and	glory.
I	am	all	in	favor	of	the	people	electing	their	representatives;	it	is	their	right	--	but
they	 have	 no	 right	 to	 make	 their	 representative	 the	 education	 minister	 of	 the
country.	The	representatives	will	have	this	much	right:	They	will	search	for	the
best	 educationist	 and	 invite	 him	 to	 shoulder	 the	 responsibility	 of	 education
minister.	 The	 Cabinet	 and	 the	 administration	 of	 the	 country	 should	 be	 in	 the
hands	of	the	experts.	Meritocracy	means	the	rule	of	the	experts,	the	specialists,
the	qualified	people;	it	is	the	rule	of	men	of	merit.
It	is	the	age	of	specialization	--	we	have	specialists	even	for	small	things	of	life.
Those	days	are	gone	when	you	had	to	go	to	the	village	doctor	who	just	checked
your	 pulse	 and	 prescribed	 medicine	 without	 asking	 you	 if	 you	 suffered	 from
headache	or	bellyache.	 It	happened	 in	pre-specialization	days	when	 the	village
doctor	was	supposed	to	know	every	thing.	Things	have	changed	since.~
I	have	heard	that	fifty	years	from	now	a	woman	visited	the	clinic	of	a	doctor	and
said	that	she	had	eye	trouble.	The	doctor	took	her	into	his	consultation	room	and
enquired	which	particular	eye	was	giving	her	 trouble.	When	she	pointed	to	her
left	eye,	the	doctor	said,
"Excuse	me,	I	am	a	specialist	for	the	right	eye.	The	left-eye	specialist	lives	in	the
neighboring	building."
Even	one	eye	is	such	a	big	thing	that	a	single	doctor	for	both	eyes	will	not	last
long.	Even	a	single	eye	is	a	great	phenomenon	--	much	too	complex	in	itself.	It
needs	specialization	and	its	own	specialist.
The	eye	 is	certainly	a	complex	organ,	but	 the	most	complex	organ	 is	 the	state,
which	is	in	the	hands	of	the	most	incompetent,	the	most	inexpert	and	unskilled
people.	 They	 will	 continue	 to	 ruin	 the	 country.	 And	 the	 inexpert	 want	 to
monopolize	 everything.	 They	want	 all	 power	 for	 themselves.	Besides	 political
power,	 they	 want	 to	 monopolize	 economic	 power	 too.	 They	 want	 trade	 and
industries	and	everything	in	their	hands.	Even	science	and	religion	are	not	spared
--	they	want	everything	under	the	sun.	They	may	desire	so,	but	if	we	allow	their
desires	to	be	fulfilled,	danger	is	guaranteed.
That	 is	 why	 I	 place	 this	 idea	 of	 meritocracy	 before	 you.	 Meritocracy	 is	 not
opposed	to	democracy;	meritocracy	is	a	concept	of	working	through	democracy.
And	sooner	or	later,	with	the	growth	of	understanding,	the	specialist	is	going	to
be	significant	in	the	whole	world.	Maybe,	sooner	or	later,	everything	will	be	in
the	hands	of	the	expert,	the	knowledgeable.
A	friend	has	sent	this	comment	to	me:
AS	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 ONLY	 THE	 CAPITALISTS	 KNOW	 HOW	 TO
PRODUCE
WEALTH,	 THE	 brahmins	 IN	 THE	 PAST	 CLAIMED	 THAT	 THEY	 ALONE
COULD
PRODUCE	KNOWLEDGE.	WHERE	ARE	THOSE	brahmins	AND	THEIR
MONOPOLY	 OF	 KNOWLEDGE?	 NOW	 ANYONE	 IS	 CREATING
KNOWLEDGE.
IN	 THE	 SAME	 WAY	 WHEN	 THE	 CAPITALISTS	 WILL	 HAVE
DISAPPEARED,	EVERYBODY	WILL	CREATE	WEALTH.
I	 would	 say	 to	 this	 friend	 that	 he	 is	 not	 aware	 of	 what	 we	 have	 said	 on	 this
matter.	We	have	not	been	saying	that	only	the	brahmin	can	create	knowledge,	no;
we	have	been	saying	that	he	who	creates	knowledge	is	a	brahmin.	And	this	is	so
even	 today;	 it	 is	 the	 brahmin	who	 is	 creating	 knowledge	 in	 the	whole	world.
Einstein	 is	 a	 brahmin,	 not	 a	 businessman.	And	Bertrand	Russell	 is	 a	 brahmin.
And	so	 is	Marx.	All	of	 them	are	brahmins.	 If	Marx	had	been	born	 in	 India	he
would	have	been	a	maharishi	--	a	great	seer	-
-	a	long	time	ago.	But	what	do	I	mean	by	a	brahmin?
Nobody	is	a	brahmin	by	birth.	It	was	a	grave	mistake,	all	 injustice	at	 that,	 that
the	 concept	 of	 brahmin	was	 joined	with	 birth.	The	 concept	 that	 there	 are	 four
types	 of	 men	 on	 this	 earth	 is	 very	 significant.	 It	 is	 really	 a	 concept	 of	 deep
insight.	The	error	came	in	when	it	was	tied	with	birth.	No	one	is	a	brahmin	by
birth,	or	a	tradesman	or	a	warrior	by	birth.
But	 there	 are	 people	 for	 whom	 the	 search	 for	 knowledge	 becomes	 their	 very
breath,	their	soul.	There	are	people	who	search	for	wealth	with	the	same	passion
and	commitment.
Then	there	are	others	who	seek	power	like	they	are	seeking	their	lives.	Similarly
there	are	people	whose	life's	central	theme	is	work,	labor.
This	concept	of	four	types	--	the	brahmin,	the	knowledgeable,	the	kshatriya,	the
warrior,	 the	 vaishya,	 the	 tradesman,	 and	 the	 shudra,	 the	workman	 --	was	 very
meaningful.	When	 it	 came	 to	 be	 associated	with	 birth	 it	 became	 diseased	 and
distorted.	Otherwise	it	was	very	different.	In	its	true	sense	the	concept	meant	that
there	 are	 only	 four	 types	 of	men	 in	 the	world.	And	 this	 concept	 has	 not	 gone
wrong	even	today;	it	will	never	go	wrong.
There	are	only	four	types,	not	more.
There	are	people	who	can	produce	wealth,	and	they	are	a	few.	It	is	not	necessary
that	the	son	of	a	rich	man	should	produce	wealth;	he	may	do	something	else.	So
an	element	of	liquidity	is	there	in	this	concept.	But	some	persons	are	born	with
the	talent	to	produce	wealth,	and	they	make	for	businessmen.	And	a	few	others
can	produce	knowledge.	Here	is	Karl	Marx	who	spent	twenty	years	in	the	library
of	the	British	Museum	so	that	he	could	write	DAS	KAPITAL.	He	used	to	be	so
absorbed	 in	 his	 studies	 that	 when	 the	 library	 closed	 each	 evening,	 the	 clerk
usually	found	him	Lying	unconscious	in	his	chair	and	had	to	help	him	go	home.
He	read	so	much	all	 through	 the	day	 that	by	 the	evening	he	 fell	 into	a	swoon.
This	man	is	a	brahmin.	The	fact	is	that	knowledge	cannot	be	created	without	the
brahmin.	 He	 who	 brings	 knowledge	 to	 any	 part	 of	 the	 world	 belongs	 to	 the
category	of	brahmins.	So	also,	only	a	few	men	can	create	wealth.
And	the	pursuit	of	power	and	politics	is	different	from	the	pursuit	of	wealth.	If
the	passion	for	politics	is	right	and	pure,	then	the	pursuit	belongs	to	the	category
of	the	warrior.	The	warrior	totally	goes	in	pursuit	of	power	and	spends	his	life	in
that	pursuit.
And	 the	 shudra,	 the	worker	 type,	 is	 not	 going	 to	 disappear	 from	 the	 earth.	Of
course,	nobody	should	be	a	shudra	by	birth.	Shudra	means	a	type	of	person	who
works,	 eats,	 procreates	 and	 dies.	 And	many	 people	 are	 shudras,	 workers,	 and
they	are	 found	all	over	 the	world.	They	are	 found	 in	 the	 families	of	brahmins,
warriors	and	businessman.	Shudra	is	not	a	derogatory	term.	Shudra	is	one	who
does	no	more	 than	fulfill	 the	basic	needs	of	nature;	he	 just	works,	eats,	sleeps,
produces	children	and	dies.	He	ends	his	life	living	on	the	plane	of	an	animal	.
But	we	are	used	to	thinking	that	a	person	is	a	brahmin	if	he	is	born	in	the	family
of	a	brahmin.	The	brahmin	by	birth	is	no	more.	And	the	businessman	by	birth	is
not	going	to	last	long.	But	if	somebody	has	talent	to	produce	wealth,	his	freedom
to	do	it	should	be	secured.	Similarly,	the	worker	should	be	free	to	work	and	the
priest	should	be	free	in	his	own	pursuit.
Socialism	 is	 going	 to	 come	 in	 the	way	 of	 every	 pursuit;	 it	 is	 going	 to	 control
knowledge	 itself.	 In	 Russia	 today	 there	 is	 a	 basic	 restraint	 on	 the	 quest	 for
knowledge.	Every	kind	of	knowledge	is	not	allowed	to	be	sought	and	found.	If
someone	in	Russia	wants	to	do	research	on	meditation,	it	 is	simply	impossible.
There	is	no	way	to	be	a	sannyasin	in	today's	Russia.	The	sannyasin	is	also	on	a
quest,	and	who	can	say	that	this	quest	may	not	prove	to	be	the	ultimate.	When	all
knowledge	has	exhausted	 itself	and	failed,	maybe	 the	quest	of	 the	sannyasin	 is
proven	right.	Because	a	researcher	like	Einstein	says	at	the	close	of	his	life,	that
after	 all	 his	 search,	 he	 came	 to	 a	 point	where	he	 could	only	 say	 that	 he	knew
nothing.	The	more	he	searched	the	more	he	found	that	he	was	ignorant.	And	the
more	he	 searched	 the	more	he	 found	 that	 there	 still	 remained	an	 infinity	 to	be
found.	At	the	end	he	could	say	this	much:	that	life	is	a	mystery	--	beginningless
and	endless.
Now	this	man	is	a	sannyasin;	he	has	reached	the	very	shore	of	mystery.	But	in
Russia	 you	 cannot	 talk	 of	 mystery.	 The	 search	 for	 God	 is	 forbidden;	 it	 is
considered	to	be	dangerous.
This	means	that	there	is	no	way	to	be	a	brahmin	in	Russia.	Even	the	search	for
wealth	is	prohibited.
Only	today	someone	informed	me	that	the	Russian	government	has	invited	Ford
to	build	a	motor	 factory	 in	 their	country.	Now	 they	 invite	Ford	 from	America,
and	they	destroyed,	in	the	past	fifty	years,	the	possibility	for	a	Ford	to	be	born	in
Russia	itself.	Ford	could	have	happened	in	Russia;	it	was	not	necessary	to	import
him	from	America	--	but	they	had	to.	Why?	What	is	the	matter?	Russia,	too,	had
its	business	class	with	 the	acumen	 to	produce	wealth.	What	happened	 to	 it?	 In
fifty	 years'	 time	 the	 socialist	 government	 regimented	 it,	 suppressed	 it	 and
ultimately	destroyed	it.	It	is	in	shackles	at	the	moment;	it	cannot	move	a	finger.
Socialism	does	not	give	freedom	to	any	of	these	four	types	of	people.	And	that	is
why	 I	 believe	 that	 socialism	 is	 inhuman.	 On	 the	 other	 hand	 capitalism	 is	 a
humanistic	 system	which	 gives	 full	 freedom	 to	 all	 kinds	 of	 people,	 and	 in	 all
directions	of	life,	to	grow	and	be	themselves.	If	it	is	not	giving	full	freedom	right
now,	then	efforts	should	be	made	that	it	does.	If	there	are	any	impediments,	they
should	be	removed.	But	there	are	people	who	say,	"Why	get	rid	of	the	disease?
Get	 rid	 of	 the	 diseased	 himself."	 They	 say	 that	 there	 is	 no	 use	 treating	 the
patient,	better	to	kill	him.	In	fact,	there	are	flaws	in	capitalism,	but	they	can	be
removed.	But	the	socialists	argue	that	the	flaws	are	so	numerous	that	it	is	better
to	finish	the	system	itself.	They	don't	know	that	the	death	of	capitalism	may	turn
out	to	be	the	death	knell	of	man	himself.
In	this	context	I	would	refer	to	another	matter.
Yesterday	 I	 called	 Gandhi	 a	 bania,	 a	 businessman,	 and	 some	 friends	 felt	 hurt
about	it.
Gandhi	was	a	businessman;	he	was	a	businessman	in	the	same	sense	in	which	I
referred	to	four	types	of	men	a	little	while	ago.	Somebody	has	said	that	I	used	a
derogatory	 term	 to	 describe	 him.	 Some	 people	 think	 that	 "businessman"	 is	 a
derogatory	 term.	 Even	 the	 businessman	 feels	 so.	 But	 no	 word	 is	 derogatory.
Businessman	 is	 a	 fact;	 he	 is	 a	 type	 of	 man.	 And	 I	 say	 that	 Gandhi	 is	 not	 a
brahmin,	 not	 a	 warrior,	 nor	 a	 worker;	 his	 basic	 personality	 is	 that	 of	 a
businessman.	But	it	is	just	a	statement	of	fact;	there	is	no	condemnation	implied
in	it.
We	have	become	so	feeble	in	our	thinking	that	we	understand	only	the	language
of	praise	or	condemnation;	we	do	not	accept	a	fact,	that	there	is	something	like
"fact".	If	I	say	that	so	and	so	is	suffering	from	T.B.	he	may	say	that	I	slandered
him.	 But	 it	 is	 simply	 a	 fact	 that	 he	 is	 suffering	 from	 TB.	 --	 there	 is	 no
condemnation	involved	in	it.	I	called	Gandhi	a	businessman	just	because	he	is	a
businessman.	 I	 did	 not	 mean	 to	 condemn	 him	 in	 the	 slightest.	 His	 whole
personality	was	such.	But	the	friend	wants	me	to	give	a	few	more	illustrations.
A	 thousand	 illustrations	 can	 be	 given,	 but	 I	will	mention	 only	 a	 few.	Mahavir
Tyagi	has	mentioned	an	incident	in	his	book	of	memoirs.	One	day	Gandhi	visited
his	town	and	addressed	a	largely	attended	public	meeting	in	the	evening.	At	the
end	of	the	meeting	he	asked	for	donations	from	the	audience.	Many	people	gave
money;	women	gave	away	their	ornaments,	like	earrings,	bracelets	and	anklets.
Gandhi	accepted	them	and	piled	them	on	the	podium.	Before	he	left	the	meeting
he	asked	Mahavir	Tyagi	to	carry	the	donations	to	his	residence.
Tyagi	arrived	at	Gandhi's	place	at	about	midnight.	He	thought	 that	Gandhi	had
gone	 to	 bed;	 he	 also	 thought	 that	 he	 himself	 could	 have	waited	 until	 the	 next
morning	before	he	saw	him.	But	he	had	no	idea	of	the	mind	of	a	businessman	--
he	never	goes	to	bed	before	finalizing	his	accounts.	And	so	he	was	surprised	to
see	that	the	old	man	was	wide	awake	at	that	hour	of	the	night.
As	soon	as	Tyagi	arrived	Gandhi	enquired	if	he	had	brought	everything	from	the
meeting	place,	 and	 immediately	he	opened	 the	bag	and	examined	 it.	He	 found
one	earring	missing.	"No	woman	will	give	only	one	earring;	she	will	donate	the
pair.	So	go	back	 to	 the	meeting	place	 and	 find	 the	other,"	 he	 said	 to	Tyagi.	A
tired	Mahavir	 Tyagi	 returned	 to	 the	meeting	 place	 at	 one	 in	 the	morning	 and
found	 the	 missing	 earring	 with	 the	 help	 of	 a	 gaslight.	 When	 he	 returned	 to
Gandhi's	place	he	again	thought	that	he	had	gone	to	bed,	but	no,	he	again	found
the	old	man	awake.	When	he	 received	 the	earring	he	was	satisfied	and	said	 to
Tyagi,	"Now	you	can	go;	the	account	is	okay."
I	 did	 not	 say	 anything	 derogatory	 about	Gandhi.	 This	 is	 also	 a	 kind	 of	mind;
there	is	nothing	of	condemnation	about	it.	And	if	we	had	rightly	understood	the
personality	of	Gandhi,	it	would	have	made	a	great	difference	in	the	life	of	India.
Because	if	the	leadership	of	this	country	was	in	the	hands	of	a	businessman,	the
danger	was	inevitable.
It	was	really	the	job	of	a	warrior	which	Gandhi,	a	businessman,	undertook	to	do.
Bhagat	 Singh	would	 have	 done	 it	well;	 Subhas	Bose	would	 have	 done	 it	 still
better.	 But	 it	 could	 not	 happen	 that	 way.	 And	 Gandhi	 did	 what	 his	 type	 was
capable	of	doing.	The	country	was	partitioned	and	it	was	a	mutilated	and	lifeless
independence	that	we	had,	because	the	businessman	is	always	for	compromise;
he	cannot	afford	to	be	an	extremist.	He	says,
"Let	 us	 settle	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 fifty-fifty."	 India's	 partition	 was	 the	 result	 of
Gandhi's	leadership.	Because	the	mind	of	a	businessman	does	not	like	fight,	he
chooses	compromise	instead.	He	believes	in	settlement	on	the	basis	of	give-and-
take.	He	avoids	conflict	 and	confrontation.	Whether	Gandhi	 said	 so	 in	explicit
terms	 is	 not	 the	 question.	 It	 was	 the	mind	 of	 a	 businessman	 that	 the	 country
acquired	from	the	leadership	of	Gandhi.
This	is	precisely	the	reason	why	Gandhi	found	accord	with	the	British,	because
they	also	are	a	community	of	businessmen.	The	British	could	not	have	found	this
accord	with	anyone	else.	It	was	impossible	to	have	accord	with	Bhagat	Singh	or
Subhas	Bose.	They	had	accord	with	Gandhi	because	 their	mental	 type	was	 the
same.	The	British	were	essentially	businessmen,	who	by	mistake	became	rulers
of	a	country	and	wielded	power.
And	 the	 person	 who	 confronted	 them	 was,	 to	 their	 good	 luck,	 also	 a
businessman.	It	 is	surprising	 to	see	 that	 the	British	government	provided	every
security	 to	Gandhi,	 something	 no	 government	 on	 earth	 had	 ever	 done	 to	 their
enemy.	We	could	not	 save	Gandhi's	 life	after	 the	British	 left	 India,	but	he	was
alive	as	long	as	they	were	here.	It	is	such	an	interesting	episode	of	history.
The	British	gave	full	protection	to	Gandhi	because	it	became	clear	to	them	that
sooner	or	 later	he	would	prove	useful	 to	 them,	and	so	 they	should	be	on	good
terms	with	him.
others	 in	his	place	would	have	been	difficult	 to	deal	with.	There	was	a	 sort	of
inner	communion	between	him	and	the	British	rulers	of	India.	This	relationship
was	 bound	 to	 happen,	 because	 it	was	 so	 natural	 --	 they	 belonged	 to	 the	 same
category	as	 far	as	 their	mental	makeup	was	concerned.	They	could	understand
each	other,	and	so	a	rapport	was	established	between	them.
That	 is	why	 India	could	not	win	her	 independence;	 it	was	given	as	a	gift,	 and
such	 an	 independence	 is	 worse	 than	 slavery.	 Independence	 is	 wrested,	 it	 is
achieved,	it	is	not	had	by	begging.	Independence	is	not	had	through	negotiations
and	compromises;	 it	 is	always	wrested	from	unwilling	hands.	And	the	freedom
that	is	wrested	is	alive	and	dynamic;	it	has	a	verve	and	vitality	of	its	own.	And
one	 that	 is	 granted	 and	 received	 as	 a	 gift	 is	 as	 good	 as	 a	 corpse.	 It	 was	 a
lackluster	 independence	 that	 came	 to	 India	 in	 1947;	 it	 missed	 the	 glory	 and
grandeur	 that	 comes	with	 it.	And	 it	 came	with	 all	 the	 ugly	 consequences	 that
independence	coming	as	a	gift	brings	with	it.
Gandhi	 never	 tired	 of	 preaching	 non-violence,	 because	 a	 businessman	 cannot
afford	violence.	Have	you	cared	to	note	that	the	Jain	teerthankara	Mahavira	is	a
kshatriya,	 a	warrior,	 but	 the	 community	 that	 gathered	 around	him	 is	 entirely	 a
trading	community.
Mahavira	 is	 a	 warrior,	 and	 the	 twenty-four	 teerthankaras	 of	 the	 Jains	 are
warriors,	but	not	one	Jain	is	a	warrior	--	all	the	Jains	are	businessmen.	What	is
the	matter?	There	is	no	other	reason	than	the	fact	that	non-violence	made	a	deep
appeal	 to	 the	 merchant	 community.	 Mahavira's	 non-violence	 made	 a	 great
impact	 on	 the	minds	 of	 the	 shopkeepers.	 Similarly,	 the	 businessman's	mind	 in
India	found	itself	in	accord	with	Gandhi's	non-violence.	It	said	that	Gandhi	was
right:	if	we	are	not	going	to	be	violent	with	others,	others	will	not	be	violent	with
us.	It	was	because	of	Gandhi's	leadership	that	non-violence	became	the	basis	of	a
movement	 for	 independence.	 India	 had	 to	 go	 through	 tremendous	misfortunes
because	of	the	non-violent	character	of	its	movement	for	independence.
It	was	a	great	misfortune	that	Gandhi	did	not	allow	the	hatred	and	violence	that
naturally	 surged	 in	 India's	 mind	 against	 the	 British	 to	 express	 itself.	 He
suppressed	 it.	 Whenever	 a	 little	 violence	 showed	 itself,	 the	 businessman	 in
Gandhi	panicked	and	retreated,	as	if	he	thought	aloud	that	shopkeepers	could	not
afford	violence,	they	were	all	for	compromise.
He	always	retraced	his	steps.
I	 remember	a	 story;	 it	 is	perhaps	one	of	 the	 folk	 tales	of	Rajasthan.	The	 story
says	that	there	was	a	warrior,	a	kshatriya	in	a	village,	who	was	very	proud	of	his
mustache;	 it	 symbolized	 his	 brawn.	He	 sat	 all	 through	 the	 day	 in	 front	 of	 his
house	 twisting	 the	 ends	 of	 his	mustache	 upwards.	He	 had	 it	 announced	 in	 the
village	 that	 nobody	 could	 pass	 his	 house	 twisting	 the	 ends	 of	 his	 mustache
upwards.
One	day	a	businessman,	who	had	newly	settled	in	the	village	and	who	sported	a
mustache,	happened	to	pass	the	house	of	the	warrior	while	twisting	the	ends	of
his	mustache	upwards.	The	warrior	stopped	him	and	said,	"Listen,	businessman,
stop	twisting	the	ends	of	your	mustache	upwards."	The	businessman	said,	"Who
are	you	to	order	me	about?"	The	warrior	stood	up	and	handed	the	businessman	a
sword	saying,
"Then	take	this	sword	and	let	us	settle	the	matter	once	and	for	all."
The	 businessman	 was	 flabbergasted,	 he	 had	 not	 imagined	 that	 things	 would
come	to	such	a	head.	He	said,	"Okay.	But	before	we	fight	a	duel	 let	us	do	one
thing	that	is	necessary.	In	case	I	die,	my	wife	and	children	will	suffer.	And	if	you
die	 your	wife	will	 be	widowed	 and	 your	 children	will	 have	 to	 beg.	 It	will	 be
better	if	both	of	us	go	back	to	our	houses	and	finish	with	our	dependents.	And
then	we	will	settle	our	score."
The	warrior	readily	agreed.	If	he	had	been	intelligent,	he	would	not	have	made
an	issue	of	his	mustache.	The	businessman	went	home,	and	so	did	the	warrior.
The	warrior	 killed	 his	wife	 and	 children	 and	 returned	 to	 his	 seat,	 twisting	 his
mustache.	When	the	businessman	came	back,	he	had	no	mustache	at	all;	he	had
shaved	 it.	And	 he	 said,	 "I	 thought	 there	was	 no	 point	 in	 fighting	 to	 death	 for
nothing,	and	I	shaved	my	mustache!"
This	 is	a	 type	of	mind;	 there	 is	nothing	derogatory	about	 it.	This	 is	 just	 to	say
that	 the	 warrior	 is	 like	 this	 and	 the	 businessman	 is	 like	 that.	 It	 is	 not	 a
condemnation.
Whenever	Gandhi	was	in	difficulties,	whether	 it	was	the	Chaurichaura	incident
or	something	else	that	turned	violent,	he	at	once	beat	a	retreat.	He	thought	it	was
better	that	he	shaved	his	mustache.	Why	fight?	The	result	was	that	the	hatred	and
violence	of	the	Indian	people	against	the	British,	which	was	simply	natural,	was
repressed.	And	because	of	this	repression,	the	two	major	communities	of	India	--
the	Hindus	and	 the	Mohammedans	 --	 fought	with	each	other,	 and	bloody	 riots
took	place	throughout	the	country.	If	India	had	fought	the	British	openly	--	with
swords	 --	 the	 Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 would	 not	 have	 fought	 among
themselves.	As	we	could	not	fight	the	British,	the	repressed	hatred,	the	unspent
violence,	had	to	find	an	outlet	somewhere.
Where	could	it	go?	And	it	found	an	outlet	in	the	Hindu-Mohammedan	riots,	 in
violent	infighting.
It	 is	 generally	 believed	 that	 Gandhi	 tried	 his	 best	 to	 prevent	 the	 infighting
between	Hindus	and	Mohammedans.	But	 I	 say	 that	he	was	 responsible	 for	 the
whole	 tragedy.	 You	 can	 understand	 this	 easily	 if	 you	 are	 familiar	 with	 the
findings	of	modern	psychology.
The	feeling	of	hatred	and	violence	against	the	alien	rulers	was	so	powerful	--	and
very	natural	at	that	--	that	it	could	have	set	fire	to	the	British	regime	and	thrown
it	out	of	India.
Such	 a	 tremendous	 energy	 was	 suppressed,	 and	 it	 had	 to	 find	 other	 ways	 to
express	itself.
It	could	not	have	done	otherwise.
For	 example,	 there	 is	 a	 petty	 clerk	working	 in	 some	 office.	One	 day	 his	 boss
berates	 him	He	 is	 so	 hurt	 that	 he	 feels	 like	 strangling	 his	 boss,	 but	 he	 simply
cannot	do	it;	it	is	unthinkable.	So	he	suppresses	his	anger	and	puts	a	false	smile
on	his	face	and	goes	about	wagging	his	tail	before	the	boss	as	usual.
Then	the	clerk	leaves	for	home	in	the	evening.	Watch	his	bicycle;	he	is	pedaling
it	with	great	force.	Why?	He	is	just	giving	vent	to	his	repressed	anger	against	the
boss.	He	would	have	beaten	him	with	his	shoes,	but	he	could	not.	Now	it	is	as	if
he	 is	beating	 the	pedal	with	 the	same	shoes.	And	he	drives	 fast.	Now	his	wife
should	 know	 that	 the	 lord	 and	 husband	 is	 coming	 home	 after	 he	 had	 some
trouble	with	his	boss.	But	she	does	not	know	a	thing.	She	is	fondly	expecting	her
husband	 home.	 The	 husband	 too	 is	 not	 aware	 of	what	 he	 is	 going	 to	 do	 after
reaching	home.	But	you	can	know	that	he	is	now	going	to	strangle	his	wife	in	the
place	of	his	boss.	He	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	excuses	to	punish	her	--
the	bread	 for	 his	 dinner	was	burned,	 the	bed	was	not	made,	 and	 so	on	 and	 so
forth.	And	he	 takes	her	 to	 task,	he	 thrashes	her.	 In	 reality	he	had	 to	 thrash	 the
boss,	but	he	dared	not.
So	the	anger	deviates	and	makes	the	wife	its	target.
Hatred	 is	 stored	 in	 his	mind;	 it	 is	 bursting.	 If	 you	 close	 the	 drainage	 of	 your
house,	then	filth	will	be	all	over	the	place.	As	a	house	needs	a	drainage,	so	also
our	violence	needs	a	let-go.	And	if	it	is	not	allowed	a	right	outlet,	it	will	find	a
wrong	one.	And	the	violence	expressed	the	wrong	way	will	do	you	more	harm
than	one	expressed	the	right	way.	It	proved	to	be	so.
But	 the	wife	 is	also	helpless;	 she	cannot	beat	 the	husband	 in	 retaliation.	Up	 to
now	 the	wife	 has	 not	 gathered	 that	much	 courage...	 but	 she	 should.	Husbands
themselves	 have	 taught	 the	 wives	 that	 husbands	 are	 their	 gods.	 Now	 it	 is
dangerous	 to	beat	a	god,	although	the	wife	has	her	doubts	 too.	What	kind	of	a
god	is	he	that	beats	his	wife	without	reason?
But	she	has	to	believe	what	she	had	been	taught	to	believe.
So	the	wife	of	the	clerk,	in	her	turn,	waits	for	her	son	to	return	from	the	school.
These	are	all	unconscious	deviations.	The	son	is	returning	from	school;	he	is	not
aware	 of	 what	 has	 happened	 between	 his	 father	 and	mother.	 He	 comes	 home
singing	 a	 film	 song.	 The	 mother	 immediately	 grabs	 him	 by	 the	 neck	 saying,
"What	a	dirty	song	it	is!"	It	was	this	very	song	he	sang	while	returning	home	the
previous	evening	and	the	evening	before	that.	And	the	mother	herself	sang	it,	his
father	too.	Their	forefathers	had	done	the	same	--
there	is	nothing	new	about	this	song	--	but	today	the	mother	is	about	to	strangle
him	on	the	grounds	that	he	sang	an	indecent	song.
Now	what	should	the	son	do?	Should	he	hit	his	mother	back?	But	the	world	has
not	become	that	civilized	yet.	So	he	goes	inside	his	room,	picks	up	his	doll	and
tears	it	to	pieces.
The	mind	 has	 its	 own	 energy.	Gandhi	 caused	 deviations	 in	 the	way	 of	 India's
natural	 energy	 by	 thwarting	 it,	 suppressing	 it.	 If	 India's	 violence	 had	 been
directed	 against	 the	 British	 --	 which	 was	 its	 natural	 course	 --	 a	 splendored
country	could	have	emerged	out	of	that	clean	fight.	Then	India	would	not	have
been	 divided	 into	 two	 parts;	 it	would	 have	 remained	 one	 and	whole.	A	 direct
fight	 with	 the	 British	 power	 would	 have	 disciplined	 us	 as	 a	 people,	 given	 an
edge	 and	 sharpness	 to	 our	 energy	 and	 a	 dignity	 and	 grandeur	 of	 our	 own.	 A
straight	and	clean	fight	with	the	alien	rulers	would	have	filled	us	with	hope	and
confidence,	 verve	 and	 vitality;	 it	 would	 have	 made	 our	 life	 lively,	 juicy	 and
beautiful.	But	that	could	not	happen.
But	we	had	to	use	the	sword	nonetheless,	and	we	used	it	against	our	own	people.
This	 is	how	 the	Hindus	and	Mohammedans	clashed,	 and	clashed	 like	 savages.
And	who	is	responsible	for	the	massive	violence	that	blasted	this	country	after	it
became	independent	on	August	15,	1947?
People	 are	 dishonest	 who	 say	 that	 the	 British	 government	 engineered	 the
communal	riots	and	infighting.	Some	people	say	that	Mr.	Jinnah	was	responsible
for	it.	Others	say	other	 things.	No,	 this	 is	wrong.	None	of	 them,	neither	Jinnah
nor	the	British	were	behind	the	holocaust.	The	real	reason	was	that	a	volcano	of
hate	and	violence	was	smoldering	in	India's	mind,	but	it	had	no	outlet.	So	when
India	 was	 partitioned,	 the	 suppressed	 volcano	 found	 an	 opportunity	 and	 it
erupted.	The	pain	of	hundreds	of	years	of	slavery	found	an	outlet.	The	country
was	partitioned	and	a	million	people	were	killed.	At	the	price	of	a	million	lives
we	would	have	wrested	our	freedom	from	the	British	a	long	time	before.	If	one
fine	morning	a	million	people	had	only	shown	readiness	to	die	for	their	country's
freedom,	the	British	government	would	have	left	 the	very	next	morning.	But	 it
could	not	be.
When	I	say	that	Gandhi	was	a	businessman,	I	say	it	after	due	consideration.	And
I	do	not	mean	to	slander	him	in	the	least.	And	it	will	stand	you	in	good	stead	if
you	 take	 him	 to	 be	what	 he	 is	 --	 a	 businessman.	 Then	 you	will	 be	 careful	 in
relating	 with	 him	 in	 the	 future.	 If	 this	 country	 has	 anything	 to	 do	 with	 the
shopkeeper's	 mind,	 then	 it	 will	 never	 have	 that	 dynamism,	 that	 elan	 vital,
without	which	we	would	be	as	good	as	a	dead	people.
The	 tradesman	 has	 his	 usefulness.	 He	 has	 a	 place	 in	 the	 society,	 and	 he	 is
valuable.
Similarly	 the	warrior	has	a	place	 in	 the	 society,	 and	he	 is	useful	 and	valuable.
The	 priest	 is	 equally	 useful	 and	 valuable.	And	 the	 laborer	 also.	They	 all	 have
their	distinctive	usefulness	and	value.	And	in	the	humanist	sense	no	one	is	more
or	less	valuable	than	the	other.
But	 it	 should	 be	 clearly	 understood	 that	 socialism	 is	 going	 to	 wipe	 out	 these
distinctive	types	altogether,	because	it	does	not	accept	them.	It	says	that	all	men
are	the	same	--	but	all	men	are	not	the	same.
A	friend	has	a	question,	and	a	few	other	friends	have	put	the	same	question	with
some	variations.	They	want	 to	 know	on	what	 authority	 I	 say	 that	Gandhi	was
opposed	to	railways,	telegraphs	and	airplanes.	They	also	say	that	I	am	wrong	to
say	so.
I	wonder	if	you	read	anything	at	all.
If	 you	 only	 read	 Gandhi's	 hind	 swaraj	 you	 will	 see	 that	 Gandhi	 denounced
modern	 machines	 and	 technology	 a	 thousand	 times	 more	 than	 what	 I	 have
mentioned	here.	But	 the	book	hind	 swaraj	was	written	way	back	 in	1905,	 and
someone	may	say	that	it	is	not	right	to	judge	a	person	who	died	in	1948	from	his
writings	of	1905.	I	will	agree	with	him.
But	 in	 this	 context	 there	 is	 a	 letter	 of	Gandhi's	 which	 he	wrote	 to	 Jawaharlal
Nehru	 in	 1945.	 Nehru	 had	 asked	 Gandhi	 by	 letter	 if	 he	 still	 stood	 by	 his
opposition	to	railways	and	telegraphs	as	he	had	written	in	his	book	hind	swaraj.
Gandhi	wrote	back	to	Nehru	--	and	this	in	1945	--	that	he	stood	by	every	word	he
had	 written	 in	 hind	 swaraj.	 It	 appears	 that	 the	 questioners	 don't	 read	 a	 thing.
They	have	said	that	I	am	not	aware	of	facts.	But	the	truth	is	that	Gandhi	himself
was	not	a	well-read	man,	and	his	followers	are	still	less	so.	In	my	understanding,
Gandhi	 is	 the	 least-read	 man	 among	 the	 great	 men	 of	 this	 century.	 He	 was
unaware	of	 all	 the	great	 findings	of	 the	present	 times.	He	knew	nothing	about
Freud	and	Jung.	And	what	he	talked	about	celibacy	was	three	thousand	years	old
and	now	out-of-date.	He	had	no	knowledge	of	the	studies	done	on	birth	control.
He	 read	Marx	 in	 jail	 in	 1942,	 and	 I	 doubt	 if	 he	 read	 him	 fully.	 His	 grasp	 of
Marxism,	however,	was	never	deep.
He,	 of	 course,	 read	 the	 GITA	 and	 the	 RAMAYANA,	 but	 the	 GITA	 and	 the
RAMAYANA	 are	 the	 textbooks	 for	 the	 ignorant	 villagers,	 not	 for	 the
knowledgeable.
Gandhi	read	poorly	and	thought	poorly,	and	his	followers,	it	seems,	do	not	even
read	their	leader's	writings.
A	last	word.	Another	friend	has	said	that	I	did	not	illustrate	my	point	when	I	said
that	there	was	contradiction	in	Gandhi's	professions	and	his	practice.
I	would	like	to	give	a	few	examples.
Gandhi	preached	non-violence	throughout	his	 life,	but	his	own	personality	was
violent,	utterly	violent.	He	never	tired	of	talking	of	non-violence.	You	may	ask
how	I	say	it.	We	need	to	understand	this	thing	carefully.
If	 I	point	a	knife	at	your	chest	and	say	 that	 I	w	 ill	kill	you	 if	you	don't	accept
what	 I	 say,	 then	you	will	 say	 that	 I	 am	a	violent	person.	Now	 just	 reverse	 the
process.	Instead	of	pointing	the	knife	at	you,	I	point	 it	at	myself	and	say	that	I
will	kill	myself	if	you	don't	accept	what	I	say.	Do	I	now	become	a	non-violent
person?	Does	one	become	non-violent	by	just	turning	the	direction	of	the	knife,
or	changing	its	target?
All	his	life	Gandhi	used	this	threat,	this	coercion	that	he	would	kill	himself	if	his
point	 of	 view	 was	 not	 accepted.	 This	 is	 coercion,	 this	 is	 violence.	 Gandhi
coerced	Dr.	Ambedkar	through	fasting.	He	could	not	bring	about	one	change	of
heart,	 though	he	 resorted	 to	any	number	of	 fasts	and	 fasts-unto-death.	Not	one
heart	was	changed,	although	he	always	talked	of"change	of	heart"	as	the	object
of	his	fasts.	Ambedkar	just	gave	in	under	duress	and	accepted	Gandhi's	demands.
Later	 on	Ambedkar	 said	 that	 Gandhi	 should	 not	 be	 under	 the	 illusion	 that	 he
changed	his	heart.	He	still	believed	that	he	was	right	and	Gandhi	was	wrong,	but
he	submitted	because	he	realized	that	it	would	be	too	much	if	Gandhi	lost	his	life
for	his	demand.	His	heart	was	not	at	all	changed;	he	relented	because	of	Gandhi's
coercion.	Gandhi	used	this	kind	of	coercion	all	along.
Whether	you	 threaten	 to	kill	 yourself	or	kill	 others,	 it	 is	 all	 the	 same	and	 it	 is
violence.
Both	kinds	of	threats	are	violent.	But	we	fail	to	observe	it,	and	we	think	that	the
threat	to	kill	oneself	is	non-violent.	Truth	is	otherwise;	it	is	subtle	violence.	It	is
not	non-violence.
Non-violence	 is	 very	 different.	 Non-violence	 means	 that	 there	 should	 be	 no
threat,	 no	 coercion	 whatsoever,	 to	 kill	 oneself	 or	 others.	 Ask	 the	 people	 who
were	 associated	 with	 Gandhi.	 Ask	 his	 own	 sons.	 Ask	 Haridas	 Gandhi	 if	 his
father	 was	 non-violent.	 If	 so,	 then	 why	 did	 he	 become	 a	 Mohammedan?	 If
Gandhi	was	non-violent,	why	did	his	 son	 take	 to	drinking	 and	meat-eating?	 If
Gandhi	was	non-violent,	why	did	he	have	to	fight	his	father	all	his	life?
It	 was	 because	 Gandhi's	 non-violence	 was	 so	 sadistic,	 so	 torturous	 that	 he
tortured	his	own	sons.	Haridas	left	home	and	ran	away	for	fear	of	his	father,	that
he	would	destroy	him.	Haridas	did	not	know	that	the	person	who	could	not	be	a
right	father	to	his	own	son	was	going	to	become	the	father	of	a	whole	nation.
Really,	it	is	easy	to	become	the	father	of	a	nation;	it	is	much	more	difficult	to	be
a	 right	 father	of	a	single	son.	Being	 the	nation's	 father	you	are	 really	nobody's
father.	Ask	Haridas	and	you	will	know	whether	Gandhi's	personality	was	violent
or	non-violent.	Ask	Kasturba,	his	wife,	about	it.	A	lot	is	being	written	about	the
married	 life	of	Gandhi	and	Kasturba	and	 it	 is	 trumpeted	 that	 they	made	a	very
ideal	couple.	It	is	sheer	tall-talk;	but	in	talking	tall	we	are	a	matchless	people.
In	reality	the	married	life	of	Gandhi	was	ridden	with	constant	conflict	and	strife,
but	we	claim	 that	 it	was	 the	 ideal	of	 ideals.	Ask	Kasturba;	 look	at	 their	whole
life.But	we	don't	see	at	all;	we	are	so	skilled	in	shouting	and	slogan-mongering
that	we	don't	need	seeing.
Whenever	they	had	a	guest	in	their	house	in	South	Africa,	Gandhi	always	asked
Kasturba	 to	 clean	 the	 guest's	 latrine.	 Once	 Gandhi	 saw	 that	 Kasturba	 was
weeping	while	coming	down	the	stairs	with	the	guest's	chamber	pot	in	her	hands.
He	took	her	to	task	saying,
"Don't	 cry.	 Service	 should	 be	 rendered	 with	 a	 smile	 on	 your	 lips."	 The	 poor
woman	 is	 being	 forced	 to	 clean	 the	 latrine	 of	 others;	 she	 is	 not	 doing	 it	 for
service.	She	is	just	in	the	trap	of	her	husband	who,	in	his	turn,	is	in	the	trap	of	a
set	 of	 principles.	 So	 he	 coerces	 his	wife	 to	 clean	 latrines	with	 a	 smile.	Many
times	he	took	Kasturba	by	her	wrist	and	threw	her	out	of	the	house	at	midnight,
on	the	grounds	that	she	did	not	follow	his	principles.
This	man	is	not	non-violent;	he	is	utterly	violent.	But	he	swears	by	non-violence;
it	is	his	ideal.	And	it	is	on	account	of	his	ideal	of	non-violence	that	it	becomes	so
difficult	to	understand	his	personality.
Life	is	a	very	complex	affair;	it	is	not	that	simple.	So	when	I	say	something	don't
jump	to	a	conclusion	about	 it.	Whatever	I	say	 is	well-considered;	I	have	given
thought	to	it.
But	 Gandhi's	 devotees	 think	 that	 they	 are	 protecting	 him	 by	 questioning	 me.
They	are	mistaken	to	think	so.	The	more	questions	they	ask,	the	more	vulnerable
they	make	him	to	beatings.	There	is	no	place	in	my	mind	for	Gandhi.	I	consider
him	to	be	an	utterly	diseased	personality,	so	don't	get	him	beaten	unnecessarily.
It	is	not	necessary	to	drag	him	in	the	midst	of	our	present	discussions.	Right	now
I	am	speaking	on	the	question	of	socialism	and	capitalism,	and	you	bring	him	in
for	a	beating.	It	is	absolutely	uncalled	for.
I	am	grateful	to	you	for	having	listened	to	me	so	silently,	with	love.	And	at	the
end	 I	bow	down	 to	 the	God	enshrined	 in	 the	heart	of	 each	one	of	you.	Please
accept	my	salutations.
Beware	of	Socialism
Chapter	#5
Chapter	 title:	 Gandhiism	 capitalism	 and
socialism
17	April	1970	pm	in	Cross	Maidan
Archive
code:
7004175
ShortTitle:
SOCIAL05
Audio:
No
Video:	No
Hundreds	of	questions	--	all	in	the	context	of	what	I	said	in	the	course	of	the	last
four	discourses	 --	have	been	 received.	 I	will	 try	 to	answer	 in	brief	as	many	of
them	as	is	possible.
A	 friend	has	asked	 if	 in	my	view	socialism	call	 come	 through	Vinobe	Bhave's
sarvodaya
--	his	concept	of	"the	good	of	all".
Sarvodaya,	whether	 it	 is	Vinoba's	or	Gandhi's,	cannot	bring	socialism,	because
the	whole	concept	of	sarvodaya	is	concerned	with	taking	man	back	to	the	jungle
--	 the	primitive	way	of	 life.	The	 ideal	of	sarvodaya	 is	opposed	 to	capitalism	--
not	in	the	sense	of	going	beyond	it,	but	in	the	sense	of	going	behind	it.
There	are	two	ways	of	getting	rid	of	capitalism	--	either	you	go	beyond	it	or	you
go	behind.	And	for	some	people	going	back	is	always	easy,	and	alluring	too.	But
going	back	to	the	past	is	neither	possible	nor	desirable.
We	 have	 to	 go	 forward	 willingly	 or	 compulsively.	 Those	 who	 go	 forward
compulsively	do	so	listlessly	like	animals.	And	those	who	go	voluntarily	do	so
with	a	song	in	their	hearts	and	with	a	rhythm	in	their	walk.	They	go	with	a	hope
and	a	dream	and	a	thrill	to	find	their	future.
The	thought	of	going	back	to	the	past	has	gripped	India	so	firmly	that	whenever
we	 are	 faced	with	 difficulties	we	 immediately	 think	 of	 turning	 back.	And	 the
reason	is	psychological,	which	we	would	do	well	to	understand.	It	would	be	very
useful	to	investigate	the	psychological	meaning	of	Vinoba's	sarvodaya	and	of	the
whole	Gandhian	thought	and	outlook.
Firstly,	 everybody	 thinks	 that	 everything	was	 so	 good	 in	 the	 past.	 The	 village
was	good	and	the	city	is	bad	just	because	the	village	is	of	the	old	and	the	city	is
new.	But	 it	 is	 the	people	 living	 in	 the	city	who	think	 that	 the	countryside	 is	so
good.	The	villagers	 themselves	don't	 think	so.	 It	 is	one	 thing	 to	 take	a	day	off
and	go	round	a	village,	and	quite	another	to	spend	a	lifetime	in	the	countryside.
It	 is	 funny	that	people	who	lay	so	much	stress	on	 the	 importance	of	sarvodaya
and	 the	village	 life	and	 the	old	system	of	village	government,	don't	 live	 in	 the
villages	 themselves,	 they	all	 live	 in	cities.	Living	 in	cities	 they	write	books	on
the	beauty	and	grandeur	of	the	natural	life	in	the	village.
These	 illusions	 that	we	nurse	are,	of	course,	very	beautiful	 to	 look	at,	but	 they
are	dangerous	nonetheless.
The	 village	 has	 no	 future;	 the	 future	 belongs	 to	 the	 city.	 In	 the	 coming	world
there	will	be	no	villages;	there	will	be	cities	and	such	big	cities	that	we	cannot
think	 of.	A	 village	 in	 relation	 to	 the	 city	 is	 like	 a	 straw	 hut	 in	 relation	 to	 the
skyscraper.	Neither	the	straw	hut	nor	the	village	is	going	to	exist	in	the	coming
world.	In	fact,	the	future	world	will	be	the	world	of	the	cities	and	their	citizens.
The	 truth	 is	 that	 as	 man	 progresses,	 he	 will	 gradually	 be	 freed	 from	 his
dependence	on	the	land.	And	unless	man	is	fully	freed	from	the	land	he	will	not
be	a	fully	cultured	man.
Man	has	been	constantly	freeing	himself	from	his	dependence	on	many	things,
but	he	 is	yet	dependent	on	 the	 land	for	his	 food.	But	 it	 is	possible	 that	he	will
soon	be	free	in	this	respect	too.	In	my	view,	the	growth	of	technology	will	end
his	dependence	on	land.	The	day	is	not	far	off	when	he	will	not	depend	on	the
land	 for	 his	 food.	 Food	 will	 be	 produced	 as	 any	 other	 industrial	 goods	 are
produced	--	 in	workshops	and	factories.	Food	will	be	produced	chemically	and
synthetically.
And	it	 is	not	possible	 to	remain	tied	to	 the	 land	forever.	The	area	of	cultivable
land	 is	 small	 and	 the	 population	 is	 already	 too	 large.	 And	 agriculture,	 as	 we
know	it,	 is	much	too	old	and	archaic,	and	 it	cannot	have	any	deep	relationship
with	the	highly	developed	technology	of	today.	New	kinds	of	food	and	new	ways
of	food	production	will	have	to	be	found.	Food	can	be	obtained	from	the	seas.
Really,	sea	food	is	already	in	the	market.	And	efforts	are	on	to	extract	food	from
the	air	and	sunrays.	And	sooner	or	later	food	can	be	had	directly	from	the	cosmic
rays.
Until	 man	 frees	 himself	 from	 this	 dependence	 on	 the	 land,	 his	 poverty	 and
degradation	are	not	going	to	disappear	completely,	because	 the	amount	of	 land
available	is	small	and	the	population	is	increasingly	large.	We	have	reduced	our
death	rate,	but	it	seems	as	if	it	is	impossible	to	reduce	the	birthrate.
Sarvodaya	is	a	movement	tied	to	the	land.	And	it	 is	a	past-oriented	movement,
believing	 that	man's	 salvation	 lies	 in	his	 return	 to	 the	caves.	 It	 is	not	 a	 future-
oriented	movement.
And	there	is	no	future	for	a	land-bound	movement	and	a	movement	that	is	past-
oriented.
Secondly,	the	entire	philosophy	of	sarvodaya	is	based	on	renunciation,	austerity
and	 simplicity.	 For	 thousands	 of	 years	 man	 has	 been	 taught	 the	 virtues	 of
renunciation	and	austerity.	But	nobody	follows	it	in	practice	and	nobody	is	ever
going	to	follow	it.	Once	in	a	long	while	somebody	comes	along	who	is	austere
and	simple,	but	he	too	is	not	really	simple.	He	can	wear	simple	clothes	and	eat
simple	 food,	but	his	mind	 is	more	complex	 than	 the	mind	of	an	ordinary	man.
Simplicity	is	not	a	way	of	life;	expansion	and	complexity	is	the	way	of	life.
Remember	 that	 life	evolves	from	the	simple	 to	 the	complex.	 the	amoeba	is	 the
first	tiny	living	being	from	whom	man	came	into	being.	In	the	course	of	time,	it
is	 the	 amoeba	 that	 developed	 into	man.	And	 the	 amoeba	 has	 only	 one	 cell;	 it
lives	 with	 a	 single	 cell.	 It	 is	 the	 simplest	 creature	 on	 this	 earth.	 It	 has	 no
intelligence;	 it	 has	 nothing.	 It	 can	 just	 breathe;	 it	 exists	 and	 dies.	 But	 as	 life
evolves	 and	 grows,	 it	 begins	 to	 be	 complex.	 Man	 is	 more	 complex	 than	 the
monkey.	The	man	of	Bombay	is	more	complex	than	the	primitive	man.
The	more	complex	the	brain,	the	more	developed	one	is.
Gandhi	and	Vinoba	are	too	much	obsessed	with	the	old	idea	of	simplicity.	They
believe	that	man's	life	should	be	simple	and	his	needs	few.	It	would	be	great	if	he
produces	his	 clothes	with	 the	 spinning	wheel	 and	operates	his	 farms	manually
without	 the	 help	 of	 tools.	 Tools	 and	 implements,	 according	 to	 Gandhian
ideology,	are	not	necessary.
But	 these	 ideals	 are	 unnatural.	 This	 talk	 of	 return	 to	 nature	 is	 very	 unnatural.
Man	 has	 been	 constantly	moving	 toward	 complexity	 and	 his	 needs	 have	 been
constantly	multiplying.	All	the	teachers	of	the	world	said,	"Reduce	your	needs,"
but	nobody	listened	to	them.	Needs	cannot	be	reduced;	it	is	not	in	the	nature	of
things.	It	is	not	the	way	of	life.
Life	is	always	in	favor	of	increasing	its	needs.	Of	course,	if	you	want	to	die,	you
can	very	well	 reduce	 them.	And	if	 the	needs	are	reduced	to	 the	minimum,	you
will	die	in	the	end.
In	 the	 process	 of	 reducing	 necessities	 a	 masochist	 personality,	 a	 suicidal
personality,	is	born	--	one	who	goes	on	destroying	himself.
Life	 is	 ever-expanding;	 it	 is	 an	 expansion	 of	 necessities.	 And	 the	 greater	 the
expansion	of	necessities,	the	greater	the	production.	The	greater	the	necessities,
the	more	man	invents.
The	 greater	 the	 necessities,	 the	more	 latent	 parts	 of	man's	mind	 are	 activated.
The	greater	 the	needs,	 the	more	man	 is	 freed	 from	his	animality.	An	animal	 is
animal	because	it	has	very	few	needs.	And	if	his	needs	are	reduced	absolutely,
man	will	have	to	 live	again	on	the	 level	of	 the	animals.	His	humanity	will	 just
wither	away.	Man	means	a	complex	life,	full	of	expanding	necessities.
A	movement	 like	 sarvodaya	 insists	on	 simplicity	 and	a	minimum	of	needs.	 Its
whole	emphasis	 is	 this.	 It	means	 that	 it	 lacks	a	correct	understanding	of	man's
mind	and	brain.
Yet	 it	 has	 appeal.	 It	 appeals	 because	 when	 we	 feel	 overwhelmed	 with
complexities,	when	they	become	too	much	and	we	are	at	our	wits'	end,	we	tend
to	return	to	the	past,	to	our	childhood,	to	the	state	of	simplicity.	You	will	find	a
fifty	year-old	man,	 if	his	house	is	on	fire,	behaving	like	a	child	of	 ten.	He	will
scream	and	wail	in	utter	helplessness.	This	is	psychological	regression.	Now	he
is	a	ten	year-old,	not	fifty	years	old.	The	house	being	on	fire	has	suddenly	made
the	situation	too	complex	for	him	to	understand	and	cope	with.
Not	 knowing	 what	 to	 do,	 he	 is	 beating	 his	 breast,	 running	 here	 and	 there
aimlessly	and	crying.	It	was	all	right	for	a	child	to	do	what	he	is	doing,	but	it	is
wrong	 for	 a	 grown-up	man	 to	 scream	 and	 shout.	What	 has	 happened	 to	 him?
How	 is	 it	 that	 a	 man	 of	 fifty	 has	 turned	 into	 a	 ten	 year-old?	 Why	 is	 he	 so
childish?
The	situation	is	too	complex	for	him	to	understand,	and	he	does	not	know	what
to	do	--
so	 he	 has	mentally	 regressed	 to	 his	 childhood	days	 and	 is	 behaving	 like	 a	 ten
year-old.
Many	 times,	 in	 the	 course	 of	 a	 day,	 we	 become	 like	 children.	 It	 is	 because
whenever	a	complex	problem	arises,	the	mind	calls	for	rising	to	the	height	of	the
problem,	 it	calls	 for	more	 intelligence	and	alertness.	And	when	we	fail	 to	 rise,
we	just	regress,	we	retreat.
Somebody	gets	drunk	or	finds	other	ways	to	become	unconscious.	Being	drunk
he	forgets	the	problem,	he	escapes	it.	And	if	the	problem	is	still	more	complex
he	 takes	 to	 bhajan-kirtan	 --	 singing	 sacred	 songs	 in	 prayers	 to	 gods	 and
goddesses.	 Singing	 sacred	 songs,	 he	 is	 again	 like	 a	 child	 trying	 to	 forget	 the
problem.	Desire	for	drink	or	bhajan	or	going	back	to	the	past	is	always	escapist.
Life	is	a	struggle	with	new	problems,	new	challenges	that	are	ever	arising.
Sarvodaya	 and	 things	 like	 it	 are	 all	 escapist;	 they	 just	 ask	 you	 to	 escape	 the
world	of	complexities.	They	say,	"Why	live	in	Bombay?	Why	live	in	New	York?
Why	 live	 in	Moscow?	Go	back	 to	 the	old-fashioned	ways;	 return	 to	 the	 forest
and	 live	 like	 the	 people	 who	 live	 there."	 If	 you	 can	 live	 without	 clothes,	 the
better;	 you	will	 be	 free	 of	 even	 plying	 the	 spinning	wheel.	 Go	 back	 and	 still
further	back	 in	 time	when	human	beings	 lived	on	 roots	 and	 fruits.	 If	not,	 then
even	a	little	agriculture	will	do.	All	emphasis	is	on	return	to	the	past.	Why?
It	is	because	some	people	are	overwhelmed	by	the	great	and	complex	problems
of	life;	they	are	frightened	and	panicky.	It	is	they	who	are	talking	of	returning	to
the	past,	to	the	simple.
My	vision	is	quite	different.	I	maintain	that	whenever	great	problems	arise,	it	is
the	time	for	a	leap	forward.	Human	consciousness	takes	a	jump	when	such	great
problems	surround	you;	they	compel	you	to	think	and	reflect,	to	struggle	and	to
stake	 your	 very	 life.	 Only	when	 it	 is	 really	 a	 question	 of	 life	 and	 death	 does
consciousness	prepare	itself	for	a	great	leap.
At	 the	moment	mankind	 is	 faced	 with	 any	 number	 of	 complex	 problems	 and
great	 challenges.	And	 there	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 people.	One	 kind	 is	 in	 the	 great
majority	--	and	to	us	they	seem	to	be	right	too.	This	majority	says,
Why	get	into	trouble?	Let	us	return	to	the	past	when	we	had	no	problems.	Let	us
go	back	to	the	days	when	there	were	no	railways,	no	automobiles,	no	airplanes
and	no	big	cities.
There	were	small	villages,	and	we	should	return	to	them."
There	 were	 no	 big	 universities	 then,	 only	 small	 gurukuls	 --	 teachers'	 family
schools,	where	 a	 handful	 of	 students	 lived	with	 the	 family	 of	 the	 teacher	 and
studied.	Now	great	problems	are	arising	because	a	single	university	has	twenty
thousand	students	to	manage.
Problems	 are	 bound	 to	 arise.	Never	 before	 in	 the	world	have	 twenty	 thousand
young	people	collected	and	lived	within	one	campus.	A	son	in	the	old	days	lived
with	 his	 father	 who	 always	 dominated	 him.	 Now	 twenty	 thousand	 sons	 are
together,	whereas,	nowhere	can	you	find	twenty	thousand	fathers	living	together.
The	difficulty	is	really	enormous.
Twenty	 thousand	 sons	 are	 smothering	 their	 parents;	 now	 the	 parents	 feel
dominated	and	suppressed.	Now	there	is	one	way:	You	do	some	real	thinking	to
solve	the	problems	of	twenty	thousand	young	people	living	on	one	campus.	This
is	 difficult	 because	 the	 old	 cultures	 have	 no	 answers	 for	 these	 problems.	You
cannot	find	an	answer	in	any	of	 the	old	scriptures	because	the	problems	are	so
new.	 The	 coming	 together	 of	 such	 a	 large	 number	 of	 youth	 at	 one	 place	 is
altogether	a	new	phenomenon.
The	truth	 is	 that	youth	 itself	 is	a	new	phenomenon.	This	youth	did	not	exist	 in
the	old	world.	In	old	times	there	was	the	child	and	then	there	was	the	old	man,
but	there	was	no	youth.	Before	one	attained	to	youth	he	was	married,	married	in
his	very	childhood.	So	the	phenomenon	of	youth	and	its	problems	simply	did	not
arise	 in	 the	past,	because	youth	was	bypassed	and	one	entered	old	age	straight
from	 childhood.	 Being	 married	 at	 the	 age	 of	 ten,	 one	 did	 not	 have	 the
opportunity	to	be	a	youth.	He	will	have	been	a	father	of	two	kids	by	the	time	he
turns	twenty.	So	he	is	already	saddled	with	the	responsibilities	of	an	old	man.	A
father	is	never	young;	he	is	always	an	old	man.	This	was	the	answer	that	the	old
days	had	for	the	problems	of	youth	--	it	just	did	not	allow	the	child	to	go	through
the	period	of	youth.	And	then	the	children	lived	with	their	parents,	and	so	again
there	was	no	problem.	Now	twenty	to	twenty-five	thousand	--	at	places,	even	a
hundred	 thousand	 young	 people	 --	 are	 living	 together.	 Evidently	 an	 altogether
new	problem	has	arisen.	So	what	to	do?
The	 exponents	 of	 sarvodaya	 suggest	 that	 the	 universities	 be	 disbanded	 and
youngsters	 sent	 back	 to	 their	 villages	where	 they	 should	 receive	 only	 primary
education	 --	 what	 Gandhi	 calls	 "basic	 education."	 This	 much	 education	 is
enough	--	that	they	learn	carpentry,	shoemaking,	weaving	and	things	like	these.
Nothing	more	is	needed.
This	country	will	be	ruined	if	it	accepts	Gandhian	teachings.	Is	basic	education
really	education?	It	is	not	education	at	all,	it	is	really	an	escape	from	education.
But	for	them	the	problem	is	solved;	they	say	that	this	is	how	we	can	get	over	the
trouble.
We	 have	 to	 grapple	 with	 the	 problem;	 we	 cannot	 escape	 it.	 Now	 that	 a	 new
problem	 has	 arisen,	 it	 will	 have	 to	 be	 solved	 in	 a	 new	 way.	 But	 since	 the
exponents	 of	 decadent	wisdom	 have	 no	 answer	 they	 plead	 for	 a	 return	 to	 the
times	when	these	problems	did	not	exist.	I	say	that	not	only	India,	but	the	whole
world	 is	 facing	 this	 problem	 of	 young	 people.	 All	 over	 the	 world	 they	 are
coming	together	and	they	have	become	a	class.	The	old	people	are	not	a	class.
So	we	have	to	think	it	through	and	find	a	solution.	And	we	have	to	think	some
new	thoughts.
My	understanding	is	that	going	back	to	the	village	and	resurrecting	the	gurukuls
--
teachers'	family	schools	--	and	asking	the	youngsters	to	sit	at	the	feet	of	the	old
gurus	will	not	do.	Those	times	are	past,	and	what	the	teacher	of	old	taught	is	of
no	use	now.	We	have	now	so	much	to	learn	that	small	gurukuls	cannot	handle	it.
Even	 the	 existing	universities	 are	 proving	 inadequate	 for	 the	 task,	which	 is	 so
vast.	 We	 need	 still	 bigger	 universities.	 We	 need	 much	 bigger	 libraries.	 Vast
knowledge	has	been	coming	into	being	and	with	such	speed	that	it	has	become
difficult	to	communicate	it	to	the	new	generation.
The	gurukul	of	old	cannot	do	it;	a	single	old	teacher	cannot	do	it.	It	is	just	out	of
the	question.
So	 the	 question	 remains	 --	 the	 question	 of	 educating	 thousands	 of	 tens	 of
thousands	of	students.	What	to	do?	The	cry	of	the	obscurantist,	the	escapist,	is:
"Just	 close	 the	 universities	 and	 go	 back	 to	 the	 past."	 Gandhi	 was	 very	 much
against	universities.	He	did	not	 send	his	own	sons	 to	 schools	and	colleges,	his
sons	remained	uneducated.	He	was	so	much	opposed	to	universities.	He	thought
that	the	university	and	modern	education	were	diseases	to	be	shunned.
This	whole	outlook	is	the	result	of	lack	of	new	thinking	on	their	part.
But	I	say:	Work	hard,	grapple	with	the	new	questions	and	find	new	answers.	In
my	 understanding,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 bring	 the	 new	 and	 the	 old	 generations
together.
Wherever	 there	 is	 a	 university	 campus,	 a	 campus	 of	 retired	 elders	 should	 be
attached	to	it.
When	 elders	 retire	 from	 their	 active	 life	 let	 them	 becomes	 residents	 of	 a
university	 campus.	 If	 there	 are	 ten	 thousand	 young	 people	 in	 a	 university,	 let
there	be	 ten	 thousand	elders	 too,	 and	 let	 the	 two	classes	 live	 face-to-face	with
each	 other.	 Undoubtedly	 the	 youngsters	 will	 bow	 down	 before	 the
understanding,	 the	 experience	 and	 the	 knowledge	 of	 a	 lifetime	 that	 the	 elders
will	bring	with	 them.	That	 is	why	I	say,	 instead	of	escaping,	 let	 the	elders	 live
together	with	the	young.	It	will	yield	valuable	results.
In	a	university	where	ten	thousand	elders,	with	the	experiences	of	a	lifetime,	live
with	 the	young,	 teach	 them,	play	with	 them,	mix	with	 them	and	chit-chat	with
them,	there	can	be	no	problems	of	youth.	Let	the	two	generations	encounter	each
other	directly.
There	is	a	great	difficulty	in	this	matter.	We	say	that	there	are	two	generations	--
the	old	and	the	new.	But	while	the	new	generation	is	a	fact,	the	old	is	not.	The
old	generation	is	not	gathered	together;	it	is	scattered	all	over.	You	can	meet	the
new	 generation	 living	 together	 in	 thousands	 at	 one	 place,	 but	 where	 can	 you
meet	the	old?	So	bring	the	old	generation	together.	but	then	new	questions	will
arise	because	 the	problems	are	new.	And	 they	will	again	call	 for	new	 thinking
and	new	answers.	The	difficulty	 is	 that	we	prefer	 to	go	back	 to	 the	past	 rather
than	do	hard	work.
During	 the	bhoodan	movement,	 the	voluntary	 land	distribution	movement,	 lots
of	 land	was	 distributed	under	 its	 auspices	without	 giving	 a	 thought	 to	 the	 fact
that	arable	and	in	this	country	is	already	so	heavily	fragmented	that	any	further
fragmentation	will	only	add	to	the	poverty	and	misery	of	the	country.	But	Vinoba
has	a	very	amusing	theory.	He	says	that	he	places	much	more	value	on	the	land
donated	by	a	poor	 farmer.	He	does	not	consider	 it	a	great	donation	 if	a	 farmer
owning	 a	 hundred-acre	 holding	 donates	 five	 acres	 to	 him.	 But	 when	 a	 poor
farmer	gives	away	two	and	a	half	acres	out	of	his	five-acre	holding,	it	is	really	a
great	donation.	This	 is	 a	very	dangerous	 theory,	because	a	 five-acre	holding	 is
already	 small	 and	 unproductive.	 It	 comes	 in	 the	 category	 of	 uneconomic
holdings.	Now	Vinoba	wants	the	owner	of	this	holding	to	donate	two	and	a	half
acres	and	so	be	left	with	one	half	his	former	small	holding.	Now	two	holdings	of
two	and	a	half	acres	each	will	yield	much	less	produce	than	when	they	were	a
single	five-acre	holding.
This	is	somewhat	like	something	I	heard	in	a	story.
A	king	wanted	to	marry	off	his	son.	He	asked	his	minister	to	find	a	beautiful	girl
of	sixteen	for	his	son.	The	minister	searched	and	searched,	but	he	could	not	find
a	 beautiful	 girl	 of	 sixteen.	 So	 being	 a	mathematician,	 he	 brought	 two	 girls	 of
eight	years	each.
thought	 that	 two	half-rupee	coins	are	as	good	as	a	one-rupee	coin.	And,	 if	 the
minister	had	not	found	two	girls	of	eight	years	each,	he	would	have	settled	for
four	 of	 four	 years	 each.	 But	 four	 girls	 of	 four	 years	 each	 do	 not	 make	 for	 a
woman	of	sixteen.	This	is	no	mathematics.
The	mathematics	of	Vinoba	 led	 to	 further	 fragmentation	of	agricultural	 land	 in
the	country.	But	we	are	so	stupid	that	we	fail	to	understand	the	reality	and	live	on
propaganda.
Recently,	 Nagpur	 University	 did	 research	 on	 the	 bhoodan	 movement.	 I	 don't
remember	the	exact	statistics	of	that	research,	but	they	are	approximately	as	I	am
going	to	reveal.
The	 research	 has	 uncovered	 very	 strange	 things,	 and	 I	 think	 the	 report	 of	 the
research	should	reach	every	home	in	India.	It	has	been	found	that	ninety	percent
of	 the	 entire	 land	 collected	 in	 donations	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 movement	 is
government	 land.	 Just	 note	 that	 ninety	 percent	 is	 government	 land	 falsely
donated	by	the	public.	Of	the	remaining	ten,	seven	percent	is	barren	land	which
can	produce	nothing.	And	of	the	remaining	three	percent,	one	percent	is	involved
in	litigation	and	you	cannot	be	sure	of	it.	How	much	real	land	did	Vinoba	or	his
movement	acquire?
But	who	cares?	They	are	only	concerned	with	large	figures,	figures	in	hundreds
of	thousands	for	propaganda	purposes.	Nobody	cares	to	see	if	the	donations	are
genuine,	 if	 the	 land	 is	 genuinely	 owned	 by	 the	 donors	 and	 if	 the	 land	 really
exists.	Cases	have	 come	 to	 light	 that	 people	owning	not	 a	 square	 inch	of	 land
have	also	donated	land.	But	w	hen	a	crowd	is	on	the	move	anything	is	possible.
The	irony	is	that	the	land	of	the	country	is	already	so	much	fragmented	that	you
cannot	solve	any	national	problem	by	further	 fragmenting	 it	 through	donations
and	distribution.
The	 real	 problem	 is	 how	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 this	 fragmentation	 so	 that	 large-scale
farming	is	undertaken.	If	the	entire	land	of	a	village	is	pooled	together,	farming
can	become	an	industry	on	its	own.	Agriculture	can	be	turned	into	industry.	And
it	is	urgently	necessary.
But	 we	 have	 believed	 in	 the	 virtue	 of	 donations	 since	 olden	 times	 --	 that
problems	could	be	solved	through	donations.	The	real	problem	that	we	have	now
is	immense	and	it	cannot	be	solved	through	charity.
If	we	really	want	to	solve	our	problems,	we	will	have	to	go	to	their	roots,	to	their
very	roots.
But	we	think	that	if	we	teach	people	to	live	simply,	to	be	contented	with	a	couple
of	bits	of	bread	and	one	piece	of	clothing,	the	problem	will	be	solved.	The	matter
is	not	 that	easy.	Man	is	not	 ready	 to	be	content	with	one	piece	of	clothing	and
two	slices	of	bread.
Up	 to	 the	 time	 he	 has	 not	 even	 two	 slices	 of	 bread,	 he	may	 nod	 yes	 to	 your
teaching,	but	the	moment	he	has	two	slices	in	his	hands,	he	will	ask	for	more.	He
will	now	ask	for	washing	soap.	And	when	 the	washing	soap	 is	 in	his	hand,	he
will	ask	for	a	radio.	And	after	the	radio	he	will	demand	a	car.
And	 he	 is	 right	 in	 asking	 for	 more	 and	 more;	 he	 is	 not	 wrong.	 Life	 is	 ever-
expanding	 and	making	 new	 demands.	 This	 is	 how	 i.	 should	 be,	 because	 then
alone	life	will	have	dynamism.
And	if	a	society	chooses	to	be	simple	and	do	with	less	and	less,	it	will	cease	to
grow,	 it	will	become	stagnant	and	static,	stunted	and	dead.	There	are	primitive
societies	 --	 they	 are	 non-dynamic	 societies,	 dead	 societies.	 They	 don't	 move,
they	don't	grow,	they	just	vegetate.	They	don't	produce	a	Tansen	or	an	Einstein
or	 a	 Kalidas;	 they	 produce	 nothing	 worthwhile.	 The	 aboriginals	 live	 like
animals;	they	eat,	sleep,	produce	children	and	die.
They	don't	live	on	the	level	of	men,	but	of	animals.	They	just	exist.
The	philosophy	of	sarvodaya	or	Gandhiism	is	not	concerned	with	man's	growth
and	expansion;	it	is	not	future-oriented.	Socialism	will	never	come	about	through
this	sort	of	thinking.	In	order	to	bring	socialism,	we	need	a	philosophy	of	growth
and	expansion,	a	philosophy	that	believes	in	the	infinite	expansion	of	needs.	And
its	 beauty	 is	 that	 as	man's	 needs	 grow	 and	multiply	 and	 as	 he	 works	 hard	 to
achieve	 them,	 his	 intelligence	 and	 his	 soul	 expand	 and	 crystallize	 in	 the	 same
measure.	 And	 the	 ultimate	 crystallization	 that	 happens	 is	 unique	 and
extraordinary.	As	a	result	of	this	crystallization,	which	comes	with	the	expansion
of	 needs	 and	 their	 fulfillment,	 one	 comes	 to	 realize	 that	 there	 is	 yet	 another
dimension	 of	 life	 --	 the	 dimension	 of	 the	 inner,	 of	 the	 soul.	 And	 unless	 this
dimension	 grows	 and	 expands,	 wealth,	 affluence	 and	 palaces	 are	 of	 no
advantage.	Only	a	wealthy	man	can	realize	the	futility	of	wealth.	The	last	use	of
wealth	is	that	it	gives	you	the	capacity	to	free	yourself	of	wealth,	to	go	beyond
wealth.	He	alone	becomes	aware	of	 the	 inner	needs	for	 the	first	 time,	who	has
gone	through	the	whole	gamut	of	outer	needs.
I	have	heard	a	story	from	the	UPANISHADS.
A	young	man	returned	from	his	gurukul,	 the	family	school	of	his	 teacher,	after
learning	 the	doctrine	of	 ultimate	knowledge	 --	 knowledge	of	 the	brahman.	All
the	way	back	and	at	home	he	talked	of	nothing	else	but	the	ultimate,	God,	soul,
spirit	 and	 the	 rest.	 From	 morning	 to	 evening	 people	 heard	 him	 talking
incessantly	of	divine	knowledge.	Then	one	day	his	father	said,	"Look	son,	first
you	undertake	a	fast	for	twenty-one	days	and	then	we	shall	discuss	the	ultimate."
The	young	man	went	on	a	twenty-one	day	fast.	One	day	passed	and	then	the	next
day	passed	--	he	stopped	talking	about	the	ultimate	knowledge;	instead	he	started
talking	 about	 food.	 After	 seven	 days	 he	 was	 found	 talking	 about	 food	 from
morning	till	night.
During	his	 sleep	 too,	he	dreamed	about	 food.	After	 fifteen	days,	whenever	his
father	 asked	 him	 to	 say	 something	 about	 the	 ultimate,	 he	 kept	 quiet;	 but	 the
moment	 one	mentioned	 the	word	 "food",	 his	 discourse	 on	 food	 came	 flowing
like	all	irresistible	stream.	On	the	twenty-first	day	his	father	said.	"Let	us	now	sit
and	discuss	the	brahman."
The	son	said,	"To	hell	with	the	brahman;	tell	me	something	about	food,	Dad!"
Then	the	old	father	said,	"Listen	son,	I	say	to	you	that	food	is	the	first	brahman,
the	first	God.	So	learn	 it	 first.	What	are	called	 the	ordinary	needs	of	 life	 is	 the
first	 God.	 After	 this	 fulfillment	 begins	 the	 expansion	 of	 life,	 the	 world	 of
expanded	needs,	and	that	is	the	outer	God.	And	when	the	outer	God	is	realized,
one	begins	to	be	aware	of	the	inner	brahman,	the	ultimate."
It	 is	 generally	 thought	 that	 a	 social	 system	 founded	 on	 the	 basis	 of	Gandhian
principles	 will	 be	 a	 religious	 system,	 but	 I	 fail	 to	 understand	 it.	 No	 religious
society	 can	 be	 born	 in	 conditions	 of	 poverty	 and	 degradation.	 It	 is	 always	 in
conditions	of	plenty	and	affluence	that	the	flower	of	religion	blooms.	Whenever
a	society	attains	to	material	affluence,	 its	people	become	interested	in	religious
pursuits.	 Only	 they	 can	 go	 in	 pursuit	 of	 spiritual	 fulfillment	 who	 have	 their
bellies	full.	For	empty	bellies	the	question	simply	does	not	exist.
According	 to	 my	 understanding,	 socialism	 will	 not	 come	 with	 the	 coming	 of
sarvodaya;	on	the	contrary,	if	any	day	socialism	comes,	sarvodaya	may	follow	it
as	a	consequence.
Socialism	can	only	come	after	the	full	development	of	capitalism.	Socialism	will
be	like	a	fruit	on	the	tree	of	capitalism.	And	if	socialism	develops	rightly,	then	a
social	 condition	may	 arise	 in	which	 equality	 and	 the	 good	 of	 all	will	 happen.
One	may	call	 it	 sarvodaya	and	another	may	call	 it	 communism	 --	names	don't
make	a	difference.	The	road	does	not	go	from	sarvodaya	to	socialism.	but	from
socialism	 to	 sarvodaya;	 and	 no	 socialism	 is	 possible	 without	 developing
capitalism.
But	 sarvodaya,	 as	 we	 know	 it,	 is	 against	 the	 expansion	 of	 capitalism.	 It	 is
opposed	to	the	age	of	machines	and	industries.	"Return	to	the	times	of	Rama,	the
primitive	 times,"	 is	 its	war	cry.	So	 if	you	have	understood	my	view	fully,	 it	 is
this:	 At	 the	 moment	 sarvodaya	 is	 the	 greatest	 impediment	 in	 the	 way	 of
socialism,	 because	 sarvodaya	 believes	 in	 returning	 to	 the	 pre-capitalist	 stage
while	socialism	is	a	stage	beyond	capitalism.	If	we	are	going	to	be	sarvodayaist,
then	we	can't	be	socialist	ever.	Then	socialism	will	be	impossible.
But	we	are	not	going	 to	be	sarvodayist.	Vinoba	has	 failed	miserably,	and	he	 is
tired	and	retired.	He	has	failed	so	badly	that	it	does	not	seem	likely	that	he	can
do	anything	now.
But	Vinoba	is	not	to	blame,	nor	are	the	people	to	blame.	It	 is	the	wrong	vision
and	 philosophy	 of	 sarvodaya,	 which	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	 fiasco.	 Vinoba	 is
bound	 to	be	 tired	 and	defeated;	 his	 defeat	 is	 certain.	 It	 is	 because	we	have	no
idea	of	what	human	nature	is.
The	philosophy	and	vision	of	life	should	be	in	full	accord	with	man's	nature.	In
my	understanding,	 capitalism	 is	 a	 philosophy	of	 life	 that	 is	 in	 absolute	 accord
with	man	and	his	nature.	It	is	not	only	an	economic	system,	it	is	a	philosophy	of
life,	a	way	of	life	as	well.
A	friend	has	asked:
Question
YOU	SAY	THAT	SOCIALISM	WILL	COME	WHEN	CAPITALISM	IS	FULLY
DEVELOPED.	BUT	WHO	IS	GOING	TO	BRING	ABOUT	SOCIALISM?
We	think	that	certain	things	come	only	when	they	are	brought	about	by	someone
or	the	other.	When	I	say	that	as	a	child	grows,	youth	comes	in,	you	don't	ask	as
to	who	brings	it	about.	When	I	say	that	as	youth	grows,	old	age	comes	in,	you
again	don't	ask	about	the	agent	who	brings	it.	The	growth	of	childhood	turns	into
youth	of	its	own	accord.	And	similarly,	the	growth	of	youth	turns	into	old	age.	It
is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 being	 brought	 about	 through	 some	 agency.	 As	 there	 are
natural	stages	of	 life,	so	 there	are	natural	stages	of	social	growth.	 If	capitalism
develops,	 it	 turns	 into	 socialism	on	 its	 own;	 nobody	works	 as	 a	medium.	And
when	you	talk	of	the	medium,	it	means	that	capitalism	is	not	ripe	enough	and	so
the	 question	 of	 the	medium	arises.	A	medium	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 necessary	 only
when	 capitalism	 has	 not	 developed	 well	 and	 therefore	 socialism	 has	 to	 be
brought	 about.	But	 this	will	 be	 an	 imposed	 socialism	and	not	 a	natural	one.	 It
will,	however,	come	of	its	own	if	we	just	let	it	come.	Socialism	can	come	only	if
we	don't	force	it.
In	 answer	 to	 your	 question	 I	 can	 only	 say	 that	 the	 transformation	 of	 a	 social
system	happens	by	 itself	 --	as	youth	 turns	 into	old	age.	Can	you	say	on	which
particular	 day	 of	 the	 calendar	 the	 young	 man	 turned	 old?	Many	 of	 you	 have
grown	to	youth	and	old	age.
Can	you	say	when	the	particular	events	took	place?	You	will	say	that	you	don't
know.
The	growth	of	life	is	so	silent,	so	subtle	a	phenomenon,	that	no	demarcation	lines
can	be	drawn	between	different	stages	of	its	growth.
Yet	we	are	trying	to	guess	as	to	when	capitalism	will	change	itself	into	socialism.
In	my	view	two	conditions	have	to	be	fulfilled	for	this	change	to	happen.
First,	it	will	change	when	there	will	be	an	abundance	of	wealth,	not	before.	All
attempts	 to	 change	 it	 prematurely	 will	 fail.	 In	 communist	 countries	 like
Czechoslovakia	 and	Yugoslavia,	 capitalism	 is	 returning,	 because	 they	 acted	 in
haste	by	imposing	socialism.
Now	they	are	slowing	down	the	process	of	socialization	since	they	realized	their
mistake.
They	realized	 that	 it	was	a	mistake	 to	have	 forced	 the	pace	of	collectivization,
and	now	 they	are	 relaxing	 its	 rigors.	Their	 experiences	of	 thirty	or	 forty	years
have	 shown	 them	 that	 this	 thing	 does	 not	 agree	 with	 human	 nature,	 and	 that
human	nature	should	be	allowed	to	have	its	way.	You	can	force	a	man	to	work
for	a	day	or	two,	even	for	three,	but	you	cannot	do	so	forever.	Only	that	can	last
forever	which	is	in	harmony	with	human	nature.	Socialism	lies	in	abundance	of
wealth	 --	 excessive	 wealth.	 This	 is	 one	 thing.	 But	 the	 question	 is	 how	 this
abundance	of	wealth	will	happen.
Abundance	 of	wealth	 cannot	 be	 created	 by	man's	 labor;	 labor	will	 have	 to	 be
replaced	by	 technology	 to	achieve	 this	aim.	 It	 is	worthwhile,	 therefore,	 to	give
up	 the	mad	attempt	 to	 replace	capitalism	with	socialism,	and	engage	ourselves
instead	in	replacing	man's	labor	with	technology.
Another	friend	has	asked:
Question
YOU	TALK	OF	DEVELOPING	TECHNOLOGY,	BUT	IS	IT	CHILD'S	PLAY?
Yes,	development	of	 technology	 is	child's	play.	Go	and	see	Germany,	or	Japan
for	that	matter.	Germany	was	razed	to	the	ground	during	the	Second	World	War;
it	 was	 destroyed	 as	 no	 other	 country	 has	 ever	 been	 destroyed.	 But	 in	 twenty
years'	 time	after	 the	war,	Germany	became	much	more	prosperous	 than	 it	ever
was	before.	Similarly,	Japan	was	destroyed	in	 the	same	war,	but	 just	 in	 twenty
years,	Japan	attained	a	prosperity	that	it	never	had	before.
But	there	is	a	glaring	difference	in	the	attainment	of	the	two	parts	of	Germany.
Some	 of	my	 friends	 visited	 Berlin	 only	 recently.	 They	 tell	 me	 that	 there	 is	 a
world	of	difference	between	the	eastern	part	of	Berlin,	which	is	in	the	hands	of
the	communists,	and	its	western	part,	which	is	in	the	hands	of	non-communists.
While	 the	 communist	 part	 of	 Berlin	 is	 still	 poor	 and	miserable,	 the	 affluence
achieved	 by	 non-communist	 Berlin	 is	 astounding.	 Berlin	 stands	 today	 as	 a
symbol	 --	 where	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 two	 systems	 is	 so	 clear-cut	 that
choice	is	easy.
Another	friend	has	asked:
Question
YOU	HIGHLY	PRAISE	CAPITALISM,	WHILE	YOU	OVERLOOK	THE
ACHIEVEMENTS	 OF	 RUSSIA.	 HAS	 NOT	 TECHNOLOGY	 BEEN
DEVELOPED	IN
RUSSIA?	 HAVE	 NOT	 THE	 RUSSIANS	 REACHED	 THE	 MOON?	 DON'T
THEY
HAVE	EVERYTHING	WHICH	CAPITALISM	HAS?
Russia	has	developed;	I	don't	deny	it.	There	is	a	skyscraper	in	Moscow	too,	but
there	 are	 hundreds	 of	 skyscrapers	 in	New	York.	And	 the	 single	 skyscraper	 of
Moscow	has	been	built	at	the	cost	of	the	starving	people	of	Russia.	People	were
forced	to	sacrifice	so	that	things	like	the	skyscraper	could	be	built.	And	it	is	built
with	the	sole	purpose	of	show	--
they	want	to	tell	those	visiting	their	country	that	they	are	not	a	poor	people,	that
they	have	their	skyscrapers	too.	But	in	America	sky-scrapers	have	come	up	with
the	same	ease	with	which	 the	grass	grows	from	the	soil.	No	force	was	applied
and	 no	 sacrifices	 made	 in	 America	 for	 building	 skyscrapers;	 they	 came	 by
themselves.	Moscow	 too,	has	an	underground	 railway	whose	stations	are	 lined
with	marble,	but	the	subway	is	also	a	showpiece	achieved	at	a	tremendous	cost	--
paid	by	the	people's	sweat	and	blood.	There	are	high	class	hotels	in	Moscow	for
visitors,	and	in	the	neighborhood	of	those	very	hotels,	poor	people	had	to	stand
in	 line	 for	 hours	 in	 1935	 for	 their	 daily	 bread.	Both	 things	 --	 showpieces	 and
suffering	people	--	are	standing	side	by	side,	but	we	don't	see	them.
Recently	 the	Russians	 tried	 their	best	 to	 reach	 the	moon,	but	 they	had	 to	 slow
down	their	efforts	because	the	game	proved	much	too	costly.	To	land	one	man	on
the	 moon	 was	 going	 to	 cost	 one	 hundred	 and	 eighty	 billion	 rupees,	 so	 they
retraced	their	steps	under	 the	pressure	of	 the	poor	millions	who	said	 they	were
being	starved	to	pay	for	a	mad	race.
Russia	ultimately	realized	that	the	stake	was	costly.	But	for	America	it	was	really
child's	play	to	reach	the	moon.
Russia	has,	of	course,	developed	its	technology,	but	it	is	a	forced	development.
And	because	it	was	forced,	it	is	now	lagging	behind.	The	toiling	people	have	lost
their	nerve,	and	they	are	no	more	prepared	to	work	that	hard.	Gone	are	the	clays
of	revolutionary	zeal;	the	revolutionary	fever	has	died	down.
Life	 goes	 by	 natural	 laws.	 And	 for	 man,	 one	 of	 those	 natural	 laws	 lies	 in
capitalism.
When	I	say	that	technology	is	a	play,	I	don't	mean	that	it	will	appear	by	magic.
But	 twenty	or	 twenty-five	years	are	nothing	in	the	life	of	a	country.	But	 if	you
keep	 thinking	 that	 technology	 is	 not	 child's	 play,	 which	 can	 be	 achieved	 in	 a
short	time,	you	will	not	achieve	it	even	in	a	thousand	years.
I	have	heard	a	story.
A	man	is	sitting	on	 the	outskirts	of	his	village	with	his	 lamp,	and	 it	 is	dark	all
over.	A	passerby	comes	along	and	asks	him	what	he	is	doing	there.	The	man	says
that	he	has	 to	go	 far	 to	visit	 a	 temple	on	 the	 top	of	 the	hill,	 yonder,	 ten	miles
distant.	The	passerby	says,
"Then	come	along.	Let	us	go	together.	Why	don't	you	start	walking?"	The	man
replies,
"My	lamp	is	so	small	that	it	hardly	lights	a	distance	of	three	feet,	and	the	journey
is	long.
I	have	been	calculating	and	wondering	how	I	can	cover	such	a	long	journey	with
this	small	lamp."	The	other	man	says,	"You	are	simply	crazy!	If	you	keep	sitting
here	you	will	die	before	you	can	start	on	your	journey.	You	will	never	reach	that
temple;	 your	 arithmetic	 will	 kill	 you	 Get	 up	 and	 get	 going.	 When	 you	 have
covered	a	distance	of	three	feet	the	lamp	will	light	up	three	feet	further,	and	thus
you	 can	 go	 on	 and	 on.	But	 if	 you	 keep	 calculating	 you	will	 never	 reach	 your
destination.	And	if	you	give	up	calculating	and	start	right	now,	you	can	complete
a	journey	of	even	a	thousand	miles	with	this	lamp."
The	problem	with	us	is	that	we	think	that	we	have	been	a	wise	people	since	time
immemorial.	But	down	the	ages	we	have	just	been	calculating	and	arguing	about
everything	without	doing	a	thing.
That	 is	 why	 you	 ask	 how	 technology	 can	 be	 possible	 --	 a	 big	 thing	 like
technology	 will	 take	 twenty	 years	 at	 least.	 I	 say,	 it	 will	 not	 happen	 even	 in
twenty	years	if	you	think	that	it	will	take	a	long	time.	And	it	can	happen	in	just
ten	years	if	you	decide	to	start	the	work	right	now.	It	is	a	matter	of	being	clear
and	positive	and	starting	the	work	immediately.
And	the	matter	is	so	urgent	that	if	you	do	not	go	with	a	sense	of	urgency	and	go
fast,	you	will	be	nowhere	in	the	world	fifty	years	from	now.	Maybe	the	distance
between	you	and	the	rest	of	the	world	will	be	the	same	as	exists	today	between
the	aboriginals	of	Bastar	and	the	people	of	Bombay.	It	is	already	happening	and
happening	every	day.	We	are	not	aware	of	how	things	are	moving	on	the	world
scale.
Recently	 I	 came	 across	 a	 few	 statistics	 that	 are	 startling.	 The	 scientists	 living
today	all	around	the	world	form	ninety	percent	of	the	entire	number	of	scientists
that	the	world	has	produced	in	the	course	of	the	entire	history	of	mankind.	That
means	that	ninety	percent	of	all	scientists	have	been	born	in	the	last	fifty	years
only,	and	only	ten	percent	were	born	in	the	course	of	ten	thousand	years.	And,	of
the	existing	ninety	percent	of	scientists,	fifty	percent	are	gathered	in	one	country
alone,	 and	 that	 is	America.	Again,	 that	means	 that	America	has	 at	 its	 disposal
fifty	percent	of	all	the	growth	of	scientific	intelligence	and	scientific	knowledge
that	the	human	race	has	produced	in	its	whole	life.	This	collection	of	scientific
intelligence	may	soon	reach	a	stage	of	growth	where	it	may	become	impossible
for	us	to	catch	up	with	it.	So	we	have	to	start	fast	and	work	with	a	sense	of	utter
urgency.
But	our	ways	are	strange.	We	are	not	concerned	about	 technology	and	growth.
We	 have	 other	 things	 to	 be	 concerned	 with.	We	 are	 concerned	 about	 how	 to
bring	socialism	and	distribute	wealth	equally.	We	are	concerned	with	strikes	and
go-slow-strikes,	 with	 gharaos,	 with	 physically	 encircling	 and	 confining	 the
executive	authorities,	and	things	like	that.	We	are	concerned	with	postponement
of	university	examinations.	We	are	concerned	whether	 a	 certain	village	 should
remain	with	Mysore	or	go	to	Maharashtra.	We	are	worried	whether	Ghandigarh
should	 go	 to	 Punjab	 or	 Hariyana.	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 end	 to	 our	madness.
Chandigarh	will	remain	where	it	is,	but	we	are	unnecessarily	worried.
I	have	heard	that	when	India	was	being	partitioned,	a	mental	asylum	came	right
on	the	dividing	line,	and	it	had	to	be	divided	between	India	and	Pakistan.	But	the
difficulty	was	 that	neither	 India	not	Pakistan	was	 interested	 in	having	 the	mad
people.	 So	 the	 authorities	 thought	 of	 consulting	 the	 inmates	 themselves.	 They
had	to	explain	the	whole	thing	to	them	again	and	again,	and	then	they	could	get
it.	What	 is	 interesting	 is	 that	while	 those	who	were	sane	agreed	 to	divide	 their
country,	the	insane	ones	asked,	"Why	should	we	divide	it	at	all?"	The	authorities
said,	"Because	of	the	Hindus	and	Mohammedans."	The	madmen	said,	"Let	them
be.	Here,	we	have	both	Hindus	and	Mohammedans,	but	we	never	 fight	among
ourselves.	It	appears	that	Hindus	and	Mohammedans	living	beyond	the	walls	of
this	 madhouse	 have	 surpassed	 us.	 We	 live	 together	 amicably;	 there	 is	 no
difficulty.	 We	 eat	 and	 drink	 together	 and	 we	 never	 use	 knives	 and	 shotguns
against	each	other.	Then	why	do	you	way	that	we	are	mad?"
The	authorities	further	explained,	"We	don't	have	much	to	say,	we	only	ask	you
what	side	you	choose	to	go	with	--	whether	you	go	to	India	or	Pakistan?"	To	this
the	madmen	said,
"We	want	 to	 remain	where	we	 are."	The	 officers	 again	 said,	 "Don't	worry.	Of
course	you	will	 remain	here,	but	 let	us	know	which	country	you	choose	 to	go
with?"	The	madmen	 then	 retorted,	 "Have	you	gone	 really	mad?	 If	we	have	 to
remain	here,	why	does	the	question	of	going	anywhere	arise?"
Now	the	authorities	found	themselves	in	an	intractable	situation.	It	was	difficult
to	argue	with	mad	people,	so	they	came	upon	a	device	instead	of	carrying	on	the
argument	with	them.	They	just	drew	a	line	with	a	piece	of	chalk	and	divided	the
asylum	into	two	parts.
Half	of	it	became	Pakistan	and	the	other	half	became	India.	And	a	wall	was	then
erected.
Only	a	little	while	ago	I	heard	that	at	times	madmen	climb	the	dividing	wall	and
say	to	each	other,	"How	strange.	We	are	where	we	are,	we	are	both	in	the	same
place,	but	now	we	are	two	peoples	--	Indians	and	Pakistanis.	And	all	because	of
this	wall."
The	madness	that	once	existed	in	the	form	of	India	and	Pakistan	has	taken	new
forms.
Now	 we	 are	 quarreling	 over	 whether	 a	 particular	 district	 should	 remain	 with
Mysore	or	it	should	go	to	Maharashtra.	The	mad	people	of	Mysore	shout,	"We
want	it	to	remain	with	Mysore,"	and	those	of	Maharashtra	scream,	"No,	we	want
it	 for	 ourselves!"	And	no	one	 asks	why	we	 are	worried	 about	 a	 district	which
will	always	remain	where	it	is.	But	the	whole	country	is	involved	in	any	number
of	such	pseudo-problems.	The	politicians	are	perverting	the	mind	of	the	country
by	 raising	 false	 issues	 instead	of	genuine	ones.	While	 the	 real	problems	of	 the
country	 are	 different,	 the	 leaders	 are	 agitating	 for	 meaningless	 issues.	 Some
people	say	that	cow-slaughter	should	stop.	When	man	himself	is	about	to	die	the
politicians	are	protecting	 the	cow.	Some	people	may	come	forward	and	agitate
against	killing	of	mosquitoes	and	bugs,	and	 there	 is	no	doubt	 that	 they	will	be
acknowledged	as	leaders.
Now	 men	 are	 on	 the	 brink	 of	 death	 and	 the	 country	 is	 about	 to	 be	 pushed
backward	 forever	 and	 ever.	 The	 country	 is	 facing	 grave	 dangers.	 Those	 who
have	a	worldwide	view	say	that	by	1978	a	great	famine	will	visit	India	in	which
two	hundred	million	people	may	die.	When	I	talked	about	it	with	a	great	political
leader	 in	Delhi,	 he	 said.	 "1978	 is	 very	 far.	What	 really	matters	 for	 us	 are	 the
1972	 elections.	We	will	 see	when	 the	 famine	 comes	 and	 two	 hundred	million
people	die,	but	the	immediate	question	is	who	is	going	to	occupy	the	chair	of	the
prime	minister	of	the	country."
Right	now	there	is	only	one	most	significant	question	before	the	whole	country
and	 it	 is	how	 to	produce	wealth.	 It	 is	 a	momentous	question:	How	 to	 take	 the
country	through	a	technological	revolution	so	that	we	produce	enough	food	and
clothes	and	other	necessities	of	life?
But	the	problem	is	not	going	to	be	solved.	It	 is	not	going	to	be	solved	because
the	 politicians	 are	 diverting	 the	 attention	 and	 energy	 of	 the	 people	 in	 wrong
directions.	 They	 have	 always	 been	 entangling	 the	 country	 in	 meaningless
problems.	 But	 they	 can	 raise	 only	 such	 questions	 as	 their	 small	 minds	 are
capable	 of	 raising.	 It	 seems	 that	 because	 of	 their	 ideal	 of	 simplicity	 they	 are
practicing	abstinence	 from	 intelligence	 too.	Maybe	 renunciation	of	 intelligence
is	essential	for	being	a	leader.	Their	minds	are	full	of	cobwebs	--	cobwebs	of	all
shapes	and	sizes.	And	these	cobwebs	are	so	venerable	for	someone	or	other	that
you	 cannot	 remove	 them.	 They	 all	 bear	 the	 trademarks	 of	 different	 gods	 and
goddesses,	saints	and	mahatmas.	It	 is	so	difficult	 to	tear	them	off	because	their
patrons	are	always	coming	in	the	way.
We	must	stop	thinking	in	terms	of	the	spinning	wheel	if	we	really	want	to	take
the	 country	 through	 a	 technological	 revolution.	We	 have	 to	 think	 in	 terms	 of
giant	machines	and	automation.	The	difficulty	is	that	on	the	one	hand	we	want	to
develop	 technology,	 and	 on	 the	 other.	we	 cry	 "Victory	 to	Gandhi!"	 and	 swear
allegiance	to	his	ideology.	This	creates	all	inner	contradiction	and	a	split	in	our
minds.	 Gandhi	 is	 against	 industry	 and	 industrialization;	 he	 is	 against
centralization	of	production,	and	you	celebrate	his	centenary	with	 fanfare.	You
also	want	technological	revolution,	but	both	Gandhi	and	technological	revolution
cannot	go	together.	The	country's	mind	has	to	be	united	as	one	and	we	have	to	be
very	 clear	 about	what	we	want	 and	what	we	 are	 going	 to	 do.	We	 have	 to	 act
without	any	further	loss	of	time.
And	we	can	act.	The	country	has	an	enormous	labor	force,	and	there	is	plenty	of
intelligence	too.	In	fact,	the	country	today	has	an	excuse	of	intelligence.	For	the
first	 time	 the	 youth	 of	 India	 have	 shown	 a	 glimpse	 of	wisdom,	 but	 they	 don't
know	 how	 to	 use	 it	 in	 a	 creative	way.	 That	 is	 the	 reason	 they	 are	 engaged	 in
destructive	activities.	Please	remember	that	the	energy	that	is	used	in	destruction
is	the	same	energy	that	creates.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	creates	and	destroys	--
the	difference	is	only	of	its	direction.	If	it	does	not	get	an	opportunity	to	express
itself	creatively,	it	turns	to	destructive	activities.
This	country	lacks	the	will	to	create,	although	it	has	enough	energy	to	seize	and
grab	from	one	another.
That	 is	why	 I	 say	 that	 socialism	 is	not	 a	 creative	 ambition;	 it	 only	believes	 in
grabbing	 and	 looting	 and	 distribution	 of	 the	 booty.	 The	 have-nots	 are	 out	 to
plunder	 the	 haves.	 But	 the	 tragedy	 is	 that	 we	 don't	 have	 enough	 wealth	 to
distribute.	Very	 few	 people	 have	wealth.	 If	many	 had	 it,	 we	would	 then	 have
seized	and	distributed	their	wealth.
And	we	have	no	idea	of	creating	wealth.	We	cannot	have	it	unless	we	inspire	the
entire	youth	 force,	 the	coming	force	of	 the	country,	with	a	vision	of	creativity.
This	vision,	this	spirit	of	creativity,	is	difficult	to	achieve	when	the	leaders	of	the
country	are	busy	exhorting	the	youth	that	we	are	poor,	not	for	lack	of	the	spirit	of
creativity,	but	because	of	exploitation.	What	they	say,	however.	is	utterly	wrong.
People	are	also	being	told	that	 they	are	poor	because	of	a	decline	in	our	moral
character.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 discuss	 this	 issue	 in	 some	 detail,	 because	 it	 is	 very
important	to	us.	We	have	received	a	few	questions	on	this	matter	also.
The	 whole	 country	 is	 being	 told	 that	 because	 characterlessness	 is	 rampant,
character	has	 to	be	rebuilt	 first,	and	unless	we	do	 it	we	cannot	be	wealthy	and
prosperous.	Wherever	the	question	of	corruption	and	destructiveness	arises	they
immediately	come	out	with	 the	 theory	 that	 it	 is	 so	 for	want	of	basic	character.
But	 I	 say	 to	you	 that	 character	 is	 simply	 impossible	 in	poverty.	Character	 and
poverty	do	not	go	together.	Character,	too,	is	a	luxury	which	is	only	possible	in
conditions	 of	 prosperity	 and	 affluence.	 I	 don't	 say	 that	 character	 necessarily
comes	 with	 prosperity.	 What	 I	 mean	 to	 say	 is	 that	 with	 prosperity	 character
becomes	possible.
But	how	can	a	poor	man	have	character?	Life	closes	in	on	him	from	all	sides	and
suffocates	 him	 so	 that	 he	 is	 compelled	 to	 say	 good-bye	 to	 character.
Nevertheless,	 the	 politicians	 go	 on	 saying	 that	 poverty	 cannot	 be	 eradicated
unless	corruption	is	eradicated.
This	is	putting	the	cart	before	the	horse.	So	I	say	let	us	drop	the	talk	of	character
and	characterlessness	for	the	present	and	put	all	our	energy	towards	eradicating
poverty.	 And	 when	 poverty	 disappears,	 corruption	 will	 disappear	 on	 its	 own.
Poverty	has	to	go	first.	It	will	not	go	with	the	departure	of	characterlessness,	just
because	 the	 latter	 is	 simply	 not	 going	 to	 disappear.	 But	with	 the	 departure	 of
poverty	and	degradation,	the	level	of	character	will	begin	to	rise.
A	magistrate	visited	me	 the	other	day.	By	 the	way,	he	 told	me	 that	he	did	not
accept	 bribes.	 I	 asked	 him	 to	 let	 me	 know	 the	 limit	 within	 which	 he	 refused
bribes.	He	was	 startled	 and	 said	 that	 he	 could	 not	 understand	what	 I	meant.	 I
said,	"Would	you	accept	if	I	offer	a	bribe	of	five	paise?"	He	said,	"What	are	you
talking	about?	Five	paise?	Never!"
"And	if	I	give	you	five	rupees?"	I	asked	again.	He	again	said	no.	And	I	asked,
"And	what	about	five	hundred?"	He	repeated	his	no,	but	this	time	his	no	was	not
that	emphatic.
When	I	raised	the	assumed	figure	of	a	bribe	to	five	thousand	rupees,	he	queried
about	the	purpose	of	my	asking	these	questions,	but	he	did	not	say	no	this	time.
And	finally	as	I	raised	the	sum	to	five	hundred	thousand	he	said	that	he	would
have	to	think	about	it.
What	does	 lack	of	character	mean?	You	are	a	man	of	character	 if	you	refuse	a
bribe	 of	 five	 paise	 and	 you	 become	 characterless	 on	 accepting	 a	 hundred
thousand	rupees?	No,	every	man	has	his	limit.	If	the	offer	is	only	a	few	paise	he
can	 say	 no	 and	 retain	 his	 character	 because	 he	 has	 had	 lots	 of	 paise	 in	 his
possession.	 But	 if	 the	 offer	 comes	 in	 the	 form	 of	 five	 hundred	 rupees,	 the
question	arises	whether	to	refuse	or	not	to	refuse	it.
Someone	 can	 afford	 to	 refuse	 five	 hundred	 rupees	 because	 he	 has	much	more
than	 that	 in	 his	 bank	 accounts.	 But	 when	 an	 offer	 of	 five	 hundred	 thousand
comes	along,	he	thinks	then	that	character	is	not	worth	this	sum	--	it	can	be	given
away	for	the	moment;	there	will	be	enough	time	in	the	future	to	mend	it.
A	little	while	ago	a	friend	informed	me	that	the	Jain	saint	Chitrabhan	has	gone
on	a	 trip	 to	a	 foreign	country.	Since	he	 is	a	Jain	saint	he	 is	not	expected	 to	go
overseas,	but	he	went	in	spite	of	the	opposition	of	the	Jains.	The	friend	wanted	to
know	what	I	thought	of	it.
I	said	that	in	the	first	place	Chitrabhan	was	not	a	saint,	not	because	he	went	on	a
foreign	trip,	but	because	he	continues	to	be	a	Jain,	and	a	Jain	cannot	be	a	saint.	A
saint	is	just	a	man,	he	is	not	a	Jain	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Christian	or	a	Mohammedan.
And	secondly,	he	escaped	with	the	kamandol	--	the	water	container	--	and	other
things	which	are	symbols	of	a	Jain	saint,	and	which	the	Jains	had	asked	him	to
return	to	them.	The	Jains	had	gone	to	the	airport	when	Chitrabhan	was	leaving,
to	seize	his	symbols,	but	he	managed	to	hold	on	to	them.	It	appears	that	the	saint
and	 his	 opponents	 are	 in	 the	 same	 boat,	 because	 both	 believe	 that	 sainthood
consists	 of	 those	 articles.	 Chitrabhan	 escaped	 with	 those	 things	 because	 he
thought	he	would	be	reduced	to	nothing	without	them.	He	had	nothing	else	with
him;	without	those	symbols	he	would	not	have	made	his	foreign	trip	worthwhile.
His	saint-hood	was	confined	in	those	things.
As	the	friend	wants	to	know	my	view,	I	say	it	was	sheer	cunningness	on	his	part
to	do	so.
If	 he	 thought	 it	 right	 to	 travel	 abroad,	 he	 should	have	given	up	 the	 symbol	 of
those	who	were	opposed	to	his	going	to	a	foreign	country	as	a	Jain	saint.	But	he
held	on	to	the	symbols	and	kept	them	with	him	with	great	effort	because	he	did
not	want	 to	 lose	 the	 respectability	 that	went	with	 the	 symbols.	This	was	 sheer
cunningness,	pure	dishonesty	on	his	part.	It	is	not	a	question	whether	his	foreign
tour	was	right	or	wrong	--	the	question	is	that	you	want	to	have	the	respect	that
comes	with	those	Jain	symbols,	the	respect	of	the	Jains	who	are	opposed	to	your
tour.	It	was	not	proper	at	all.
The	friend	also	wanted	to	know	what	Chitrabhan	would	do	after	his	return	from
the	foreign	trip.	I	said	he	would	atone	for	it.	He	would	atone	and	apologize.	And
the	act	of	atonement	will	not	be	that	severe,	because	there	was	no	airplane	when
the	 Jain	 scriptures	were	written.	 So	 he	will	 atone	 for	 using	 a	 vehicle	 like	 the
bullock	cart	and	be	back	in	the	Jain	fold.	He	will	be	a	saint	again.
The	thing	is	that	he	had	to	choose	between	character	and	the	tempting	offer	of	a
foreign	 tour.	 While	 he	 was	 here	 he	 had	 never	 used	 any	 transport,	 he	 always
walked	 on	 foot	 from	 one	 place	 to	 another.	 And	 he	 was	 enjoying	 the
respectability	 that	 comes	 with	 being	 a	 Jain	 saint.	 Now	 an	 invitation	 from
Switzerland	 created	 a	 big	 problem.	 It	was	 like	 the	 offer	 of	 a	 bribe	worth	 five
hundred	thousand	rupees.	What	to	do?	To	accept	it	or	not	was	the	question.	He
had	to	make	a	choice	between	his	character	as	a	Jain	saint	and	the	respectability
that	comes	with	a	foreign	tour.	The	choice	was	really	difficult	and	he	had	to	give
up	character	because	the	temptation	was	great.	If	you	had	offered	to	take	him	to
Poona	 in	your	 car,	he	would	have	easily	 turned	 it	 down,	because	 it	was	 like	 a
bribe	 of	 five	 paise.	 He	 would	 have	 walked	 to	 Poona	 or	 foregone	 the	 offer
altogether.	But	 the	offer	of	 a	visit	 to	Switzerland	was	 too	much;	he	had	never
been	 there.	Until	 then	he	had	been	confined	 to	Bombay;	he	had	not	even	seen
Poona.	So	Switzerland	was	too	much	and	he	had	to	give	up	his	character.
Generally	the	movement	of	a	Jain	monk	is	very	restricted.	Because	he	cannot	use
any	transport,	he	has	to	walk	and	walk.	He	lives	 like	a	frog	lives	in	a	well.	So
when	a	Jain	monk	goes	from	one	part	of	a	city,	say	Bombay,	to	another	part,	it	is
said	that	he	has	changed	his	city.	He	is	still	in	Bombay,	but	he	has	changed	his
city.	It	is	the	story	of	the	mad	asylum	being	repeated.	So	it	was	with	Chitrabhan
before	 he	went	 to	 Switzerland.	His	 visit	 to	 Switzerland	was	 like	 an	 offer	 of	 a
bribe	of	five	hundred	thousand	rupees,	and	he	accepted	the	offer	in	the	hope	that
he	will	mend	his	character	later	on.	After	all,	it	does	not	take	much	time	to	mend
character.
This	is	how	everybody's	mind	works.
Really,	 it	 is	 poverty	 that	 does	 not	 allow	 character	 to	 grow.	And	who	 is	 poor?
Lack	 of	 any	 kind,	 any	 sort	 of	 inferiority,	makes	 for	 poverty.	 For	 example,	 an
Indian	monk	 thinks	 that	unless	he	has	visited	Europe	and	America,	he	 is	not	a
great	monk,	he	is	far	behind	Vivekanand.	He	is	oppressed	by	the	feeling	that	he
will	remain	a	petty	monk	if	he	does	not	visit	the	West.	An	inferior	man	is	a	poor
man.	 Whether	 he	 is	 inferior	 in	 wealth	 or	 in	 knowledge,	 or	 in	 prestige	 or	 in
anything,	 he	 is	 a	 poor	man.	And	 poverty	 breeds	 corruption,	 characterlessness.
Every	kind	of	corruption	arises	from	poverty.	And	since	there	are	many	forms	of
poverty,	the	forms	of	corruption	are	also	many.
Similarly,	there	are	many	kinds	of	richness	too.	There	is	a	richness	of	wealth	--
and	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 bribe	 a	 wealthy	 person.	 Then	 there	 is	 a	 richness	 of
knowledge	 --	 you	 cannot	 buy	 a	 really	 knowing	 person	with	 certificates.	 Self-
knowledge	or	enlightenment	has	a	richness	of	 its	own;	 it	 is	difficult	 to	 tempt	a
Buddha	 with	 the	 things	 of	 the	 ego.	 And	 peace	 has	 its	 own	 richness	 where
challenges	and	tensions	simply	go	to	waste.
Character	comes	from	richness,	from	fulfillment	--	fulfillment	of	all	kinds.	So	let
India	understand	well	 that	 it	has	 to	create	richness	first,	and	not	 indulge	 in	 tall
talk	 of	morality	 and	 character.	Once	 richness	 is	 there,	 it	will	 be	 easy	 to	 build
character.	But	if	we	start	from	the	wrong	end,	if	we	think	of	creating	character
first,	we	will	have	none	--	neither	character	nor	prosperity.	On	the	contrary,	our
poverty	will	 become	 accentuated	 and	 abiding.	 Such	mistakes	 have	 been	made
more	than	once.
A	farmer	sows	wheat	in	his	field.	With	the	wheat	harvest	comes	chaff.	A	foolish
farmer	may	think	that	if	chaff	comes	with	wheat	when	wheat	is	sown,	similarly
wheat	will	come	with	chaff	if	chaff	is	sown.	But	it	is	never	going	to	happen.	On
the	contrary,	even	the	chaff	will	be	wasted.	If	chaff	comes	with	wheat,	it	does	not
mean	that	wheat	will	come	with	chaff.	Chaff	is	a	by-product	of	wheat,	but	wheat
is	not	a	by-product	of	chaff.
Similarly,	 what	 you	 call	 character	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 prosperity,	 wealth	 and
education.
But	we	think	in	a	lopsided	way;	we	put	things	upside-down.	We	think	that	if	we
build	 character,	 prosperity	 and	 affluence	will	 follow	 on	 their	 own.	This	 is	 not
going	to	happen.
It	is	impossible	to	build	character	without	building	prosperity	first.	If	we	have	to
have	 character,	 let	 us	 begin	 by	 having	 prosperity;	 let	 us	 begin	 from	 the
beginning.
Let	 there	be	a	unitary	objective,	a	single	goal	before	 the	whole	country	for	 the
coming	twenty	years.	Let	us	stop	talking	tall,	talking	nonsense,	and	work	for	this
one	 objective	with	 single-minded	 commitment.	 In	 twenty	 years'	 time	we	must
reach	 where	 Japan,	 a	 war-torn	 and	 vanquished	 country,	 and	 Israel,	 a	 poor
newborn	country,	reached	in	twenty	years.	If	they	could	attain	to	that	prosperity,
why	not	we?
Certainly	we	can,	but	our	mind	is	divided;	we	don't	have	an	integrated	mind.	We
think	of	a	thousand	things	--	all	absurd	and	stupid	things.	The	creative	energy	of
the	people	 is	being	diverted	into	wrong	channels.	But	 it	 is	all	 in	 the	 interest	of
the	politician,	who	comes	to	power	by	dividing	the	people.	Divide	and	rule	is	his
maxim.
The	 importance	 of	 the	 politician	 in	 India	 has	 to	 be	 reduced.	 It	 is	 essential	 to
devalue	him.
At	 the	 moment	 he	 has	 too	 much	 value;	 he	 is	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the	 stage.	 He
commands	 all	 our	 attention,	 all	 our	 respect,	 everything	 --	 as	 if	 politics	 has
become	our	 life.	Really	 it	 is	not	our	 life;	 it	has	 fraudulently	assumed	 this	 role,
and	it	has	to	be	pulled	down	from	the	pedestal.
One	 last	word.	 If	 you	want	 the	 good	 of	 your	 country,	 stop	 giving	 respect	 and
adulation	to	the	politician	and	make	him	leave	the	center	of	the	stage.	He	does
not	deserve	 it.	 It	 is	 amazing	 that	 if	 the	 chamber	of	 commerce	holds	 its	 annual
meeting,	 the	prime	minister	 is	 invited	 to	 inaugurate	 it.	And	 the	prime	minister
rebukes	 businessmen	 in	 their	 faces	 and	 they	 listen	 to	 him	 in	 silence,	 with	 a
broad,	but	false	smile	on	their	faces.	And	if	it	is	a	university	convocation,	again
the	politician	is	called	to	deliver	the	convocation	address	to	the	students.	People
who	never	saw	the	face	of	a	university	are	delivering	convocation	addresses.	It	is
really	too	much.	It	is	time	we	remove	the	politician	from	this	exalted	position	--
it	is	not	at	all	necessary	to	exalt	him,	to	hallow	him.	We	have	to	cease	looking	up
to	him	and	turn	our	eyes	in	other	directions.
We	 have	 now	 to	 turn	 our	 eyes	 to	 the	 centers	 of	 creativity.	 Wherever	 life	 is
creative,	whether	it	is	in	the	field	of	science	or	wealth	or	health	or	literature	or
poetry	or	religion	--
the	eyes	of	the	country	should	be	focused	on	it.	Let	us	respect	the	scientist,	the
technologist,	 the	 educationist,	 the	 poet,	 the	writer,	 the	 producer,	 the	worker	 --
they	are	the	people	who	really	create	and	enrich	our	lives.	If	we	turn	our	backs
on	 the	 politician,	 in	 twenty	 years	 we	 will	 have	 all:	 technology,	 wealth	 and
character.	And	when	the	country	is	affluent	then	alone	we	will	be	able	to	thank
God.
How	can	a	poor	man	thank	God?	For	what?	Even	if	he	goes	to	a	temple	he	begs
for	 the	 marriage	 of	 his	 daughter,	 for	 the	 employment	 of	 his	 son	 and	 for	 the
medical	care	of	his	sick	wife.	And	while	he	is	standing	with	folded	hands	before
a	 statue,	 he	 is	wondering	 if	 his	 prayers	 are	 going	 to	 be	 answered	 at	 all,	 he	 is
wondering	whether	there	is	God	or	not.
He	says	 to	himself	 that	he	will	have	belief	 in	God	 if	his	 sick	wife	gets	proper
medical	 care	 and	 his	 son	 is	 employed.	 The	 existence	 of	 God	 depends	 on	 his
wife's	health	and	his	son's	employment!	The	poor	man	can	only	beg,	he	cannot
thank	Cod.
But	true	religion	is	thanksgiving.	True	religion	is	a	feeling	of	gratefulness.	And
who	is	grateful?	Grateful	 is	he	who	has	everything	in	 life,	and	he	 truly	says	 to
God,	"Thank	you!
You	gave	me	happiness,	you	gave	me	peace,	you	gave	me	bliss,	you	gave	me	the
fragrance	and	music	of	life,	and	I	am	immensely	grateful	to	you!"	The	poor	man
cannot	be	religious.	It	is	only	the	man	of	riches,	who	has	riches	of	all	kinds,	who
has	peace,	happiness	and	bliss,	who	thanks	God	heartily.
In	the	end	I	pray	to	God	that	the	day	may	come	when	we	will	go	to	his	temple
not	to	beg,	but	to	thank	him.	And	that	day	can	come.
I	am	grateful	to	you	for	having	listened	to	me	in	silence	and	with	great	love.	And
I	bow	down	to	the	God	residing	inside	all	of	you.	Please	accept	my	salutations.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Socialism	and	self-realization
Chapter	title:	Gandhiism	capitalism	and	socialism
