
Beyond	Enlightenment
Talks	given	from	03/10/86	pm	to	04/11/86	pm
English	Discourse	series
32	Chapters
Year	published:	1980
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Beyond	Enlightenment	is	only	beyondness
3	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610035
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
123
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	BEYOND	ENLIGHTENMENT?
Maneesha,	beyond	enlightenment	is	only	beyondness.	Enlightenment	is	the	last
host.
Beyond	it,	all	boundaries	disappear,	all	experiences	disappear.	Experience	comes
to	 its	utmost	 in	enlightenment;	 it	 is	 the	very	peak	of	all	 that	 is	beautiful,	of	all
that	 is	 immortal,	 of	 all	 that	 is	 blissful	 --	 but	 it	 is	 an	 experience.	 Beyond
enlightenment	 there	 is	 no	 experience	 at	 all,	 because	 the	 experiencer	 has
disappeared.	 Enlightenment	 is	 not	 only	 the	 peak	 of	 experience,	 it	 is	 also	 the
finest	definition	of	your	being.	Beyond	it,	there	is	only	nothingness;	you	will	not
come	again	to	a	point	which	has	to	be	transcended.
Experience,	the	experiencer,	enlightenment	--	all	have	been	left	behind.	You	are
part	of	the	tremendous	nothingness	that	is	infinite.	This	is	the	nothingness	out	of
which	 the	 whole	 existence	 comes,	 the	 womb;	 and	 this	 is	 the	 nothingness	 in
which	all	the	existence	disappears.
Science	 has	 something	 parallel;	 there	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 something	 parallel.	 The
spiritual	experience	is	of	the	interior	world,	and	science	is	the	exploration	of	the
exterior.	 But	 both	 are	 wings	 of	 the	 same	 existence	 --	 the	 inwardness	 and	 the
outwardness	--	they	always	have	similar	points.
Scientists	 have	 come	 to	 a	 strange	 conclusion	 in	 this	 century,	 that	 a	 few	 stars
suddenly	disappear...	and	stars	are	not	small	things;	they	are	not	so	small	as	they
look	to	you.	They	look	small	because	they	are	so	far	away,	millions	of	light	years
away,	but	they	are	huge.
Our	sun	is	a	star,	but	of	a	mediocre	size,	medium	size.	In	comparison	to	the	earth
it	is	vast,	but	in	comparison	to	other	stars	it	is	a	small,	medium-sized	star.	There
are	stars	which	are	a	thousand	times	bigger	than	the	sun.
And	in	this	century,	for	the	first	time	we	had	the	instruments	of	observation	and
we	were	very	much	puzzled:	suddenly	a	star	disappears,	not	even	leaving	a	trace
behind	of	where	it	has	gone.	Such	a	huge	phenomenon,	and	not	even	footprints	-
-	in	what	direction	has	it	gone?	It	has	just	moved	simply	into	nothingness.	This
was	happening	continually.
It	took	almost	twenty	years	to	figure	out	this	new	phenomenon:	that	in	existence
there	 are	 black	 holes.	 You	 cannot	 see	 them,	 but	 they	 have	 tremendous
gravitation.	Even	the	biggest	star,	 if	 it	comes	within	their	radius	of	magnetism,
will	be	pulled	in.	And	once	it	is	pulled	into	a	black	hole,	it	disappears.	It	is	the
ultimate	death.	We	can	only	see	the	effect;	we	cannot	see	the	black	hole,	we	only
see	that	one	star	is	disappearing.
After	the	black	hole	was	almost	an	established	theory,	scientists	started	thinking
that	there	must	be	something	like	a	white	hole	--	there	has	to	be.	If	it	is	possible
that	in	a	certain	gravitation,	magnetic	force,	a	big	star	simply	disappears	out	of
existence....	We	have	been	aware	that	every	day	stars	are	born.	From	where	are
they	coming?	--	nobody	has	asked	it	before.
In	fact,	birth	we	always	take	for	granted;	nobody	asks	from	where	the	babies	are
coming.
Death	we	never	accept,	because	we	are	so	much	afraid	of	it.
There	is	not	a	single	philosophy	in	the	whole	history	of	man	which	thinks	about
where	 the	 babies	 come	 from,	 but	 there	 are	 philosophies	 and	 philosophies
thinking	about	what	is	dead,	where	people	go	on	disappearing	to,	what	happens
after	death.
In	my	whole	life	I	have	come	across	millions	of	people,	and	not	a	single	person
has	asked	what	happens	before	birth	--	and	thousands	have	asked	what	happens
after	 death.	 I	 have	 always	 been	 thinking,	 why	 is	 birth	 taken	 without	 any
question?	Why	is	death	not	taken	in	the	same	way?
We	were	 aware	 for	 centuries,	 almost	 three	 centuries,	 that	 stars	 are	 being	 born
every	day	--
big	 stars,	huge	 stars	 --	 and	nobody	 raised	 the	question,	 "From	where	are	 these
stars	coming?"	But	when	we	came	to	know	about	the	black	holes	and	we	saw	the
stars	 disappearing,	 then	 the	 second	 question	 became	 almost	 an	 absolute
necessity.	 If	 black	 holes	 can	 take	 stars	 into	 nothingness,	 then	 there	 must	 be
something	like	white	holes	where	things...	stars	come	out	of	nothingness.
I	 am	 reminded....	Mulla	 Nasruddin	 had	 applied	 for	 a	 post	 on	 a	 ship.	 He	 was
interviewed.
The	 captain	 and	 the	 high	 officials	 of	 the	 ship	 were	 sitting	 in	 a	 room.	 Mulla
entered.	The	captain	asked,	"If	the	seas	are	in	a	turmoil,	winds	are	strong,	waves
are	huge	and	mountainous,	what	are	you	going	to	do	to	save	the	ship?	It	is	tossed
from	here	to	there...."
Mulla	 Nasruddin	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 much	 of	 a	 problem:	 I	 will	 just	 drop	 a	 huge
anchor	 to	 keep	 the	 ship	 stable	 against	 the	 winds,	 against	 the	 waves.	 It	 is	 not
much	of	a	problem."
The	captain	again	said,	"Suppose	another	mountainous	wave	comes	and	the	ship
is	going	to	be	drowned;	what	are	you	going	to	do?"
He	said,	"Nothing	--	another	huge	anchor."
The	captain	looked	at	him	and	asked	a	third	time,	"Suppose	it	is	a	great	typhoon
and	it	is	impossible	to	save	the	ship.	What	are	you	going	to	do?"
He	said,	"Nothing,	the	same	--	a	huge	anchor."
The	captain	said,	"From	where	are	you	getting	these	huge	anchors?"
He	 said,	 "From	 the	 same	 place.	 From	 where	 are	 you	 getting	 these	 great,
mountainous	waves,	 strong	winds?	 --	 from	 the	 same	 place.	You	 go	 on	 getting
them,	I	will	go	on	getting	bigger	and	bigger	anchors."
If	there	are	holes	in	existence	where	things	simply	disappear	into	non-existence,
then	there	must	be	holes	from	where	things	appear	from	nothingness	--	and	just	a
little	imagination	is	needed.	Scientists	have	not	worked	on	it	yet.
My	suggestion	is	that	a	black	hole	is	like	a	door:	from	one	side	it	is	a	black	door,
a	black	hole	 --	 things	go	 into	 it	 and	disappear	 into	nothingness.	And	 from	 the
other	side	of	 the	tunnel	--	 it	 is	 the	same	door,	 just	from	the	other	side	--	 it	 is	a
white	hole;	things	are	born	again,	renewed.	It	is	the	same	womb.
Beyond	enlightenment	you	enter	into	nothingness.
Experience	disappears,	experiencer	disappears.
Just	pure	nothingness	remains,	utter	silence.
Perhaps	this	is	the	destiny	of	every	human	being,	sooner	or	later	to	be	achieved.
We	don't	know	yet	whether	there	is	a	white	hole	or	not	--	there	must	be.
Just	 as	 you	 enter	 beyond	 enlightenment	 into	 nothingness,	 there	 must	 be	 a
possibility	of	coming	out	of	nothingness	back	into	form,	back	 into	existence	--
renewed,	refreshed,	luminous	--	on	a	totally	different	plane.	Because	nothing	is
destroyed,	things	can	only	go	into	a	dormant	state;	things	can	go	only	into	deep
sleep.	Then	in	the	morning	they	wake	up	again.	This	is	how	the	existence	goes
on.
In	the	West,	 this	idea	has	never	happened	in	the	two	thousand	years'	history	of
philosophy.	They	only	 think	of	 this	creation:	"Who	created	 this?"	and	 they	get
into	 troubles	 because	 whatever	 the	 answer	 is,	 it	 is	 going	 to	 create	 more
questions.
In	the	East	we	have	a	conception	of	circles	of	existence	and	non-existence,	just
like	 day	 and	 night.	 Creation	 is	 followed	 by	 de-creation,	 everything	 goes	 into
nothingness,	just	as	day	is	followed	by	night	and	everything	goes	into	darkness.
And	 the	 period	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 same:	 as	 long	 as	 the	 creation	 is,	 so	 is	 the
resting	period	going	to	be;	and	again	there	will	be	a	creation	of	a	higher	order.
And	 this	will	 go	 on	 from	 eternity	 to	 eternity	 --	 creation,	 de-creation,	 creation,
again	de-creation	--	but	each	time	the	morning	is	more	beautiful.	Each	dawn	is
more	 colorful,	more	 alive;	 the	 birds	 are	 singing	 better,	 the	 flowers	 are	 bigger,
with	more	fragrance.
And	the	East	has	a	tremendous	courage	of	accepting	the	idea	that	this	will	go	on
forever	and	 forever.	There	has	never	been	any	beginning,	and	 there	will	be	no
end.
After	enlightenment,	you	have	to	disappear.	The	world	is	left	behind,	the	body	is
left	behind,	the	mind	is	left	behind;	just	your	consciousness,	as	individuality,	is
still	there.
To	 go	 beyond	 enlightenment	 is	 to	 go	 beyond	 individuality	 and	 to	 become
universal.	This	way,	 each	 individual	will	 go	 on	moving	 into	 nothingness.	And
one	day,	the	whole	existence	moves	into	nothingness	and	a	great	peace,	a	great
night,	 a	 deep,	 dark	 womb,	 a	 great	 awaiting	 for	 the	 dawn....	 And	 it	 has	 been
happening	 always,	 and	 each	 time	 you	 are	 always	 born	 on	 a	 higher	 level	 of
consciousness.
Enlightenment	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 human	 beings.	 But	 those	 who	 are	 enlightened
cannot	remain	static;	they	will	have	to	move,	they	will	have	to	change.	And	now
they	have	only	one	thing	to	lose	--	themselves.
They	 have	 enjoyed	 everything.	 They	 have	 enjoyed	 the	 purity	 of	 individuality;
now	 they	 have	 to	 enjoy	 the	 disappearing	 of	 individuality.	 They	 have	 seen	 the
beauty	of	 individuality;	now	they	have	to	see	the	disappearance	and	its	beauty,
and	the	silence	that	follows,	that	abysmal	serenity	that	follows.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	NIGHT	WHEN	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	EGO	AND	HOW,
WITH
AWARENESS,	ONE	CAN	 SEE	 THAT	 IT	DOES	NOT	EXIST,	 I	 REALIZED
THAT	 I	 NEVER	 PUT	 MUCH	 EMPHASIS	 ON	 AWARENESS.	 FOR	 ME,
BEING	WITH	YOU
ALWAYS	MEANT	 LOVING	YOU	AS	MUCH	AS	 I	 CAN,	 LONGING	 FOR
YOU	AND
TRYING	TO	BE	AS	CLOSE	TO	YOU	AS	POSSIBLE.
BELOVED	OSHO,	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SHOW	THE	WAY	FOR	A	FEMALE
GERMAN	LOVER	TO	BECOME	MORE	AWARE?
Latifa,	love	is	enough	unto	itself.
If	your	love	is	not	the	ordinary,	biological	instinctive	love,	if	it	is	not	part	of	your
ego,	if	it	is	not	a	power	trip	to	dominate	someone;	if	your	love	is	just	a	pure	joy,
rejoicing	in	the	being	of	the	other	for	no	reason	at	all,	a	sheer	joy,	awareness	will
follow	this	pure	love	just	like	a	shadow.	You	need	not	worry	about	awareness.
There	 are	 only	 two	 ways:	 either	 you	 become	 aware,	 then	 love	 follows	 as	 a
shadow;	or	you	become	so	loving	that	awareness	comes	on	its	own	accord.	They
are	 two	 sides	of	 the	 same	coin.	You	need	not	bother	 about	 the	other	 side;	 just
keep	one	side,	the	other	side	cannot	escape.	The	other	side	is	bound	to	come.
And	the	path	of	love	is	easier,	rosier,	innocent,	simple.
The	path	of	awareness	is	a	little	arduous.
Those	 who	 cannot	 love,	 for	 them	 I	 suggest	 the	 path	 of	 awareness.	 There	 are
people	who	 cannot	 love	 --	 their	 hearts	 have	 become	 stones.	 Their	 upbringing,
their	 culture,	 their	 society	 has	 killed	 the	 very	 capacity	 to	 love	 --	 because	 this
whole	 world	 is	 not	 run	 by	 love,	 it	 is	 run	 by	 cunningness.	 To	 succeed	 in	 this
world	you	don't	need	love,	you	need	a	hard	heart	and	a	sharp	mind.	In	fact,	you
don't	need	the	heart	at	all.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 one	 great	 politician	who	was	 in	 the	 hospital	 and	who	 had
some	great	complications	with	his	heart.	So	they	put	him	on	a	plastic	heart	and
took	 out	 his	 real	 heart,	 because	 it	 was	 going	 to	 take	 hours	 to	 clean	 it.	 And
certainly	a	politician's	heart	--
even	if	you	can	clean	it	 in	hours,	 it	 is	 too	soon.	The	surgeons	were	working	in
the	other	room	--	it	was	a	disgusting	job	--	and	the	politician	was	lying	down.
A	man	came	into	the	room	and	shook	the	politician;	he	opened	his	eyes	and	the
man	said,
"What	 are	 you	 doing	 here?	 You	 have	 been	 chosen	 the	 prime	 minister	 of	 the
country."
He	 jumped	out	 of	 the	bed.	The	doctors	 looked	 from	 the	other	 room,	 "What	 is
happening?"	The	politician	was	going	out.	They	said,	"Wait!	Your	heart,	we	are
cleaning	it."
The	politician	said,	"Now,	at	least	for	five	years	I	won't	need	it.	You	can	clean	it
as	much	as	you	want.	Take	your	time.	What	does	a	prime	minister	need	a	heart
for?	But	keep	it	safe	in	case	something	goes	wrong;	then	I	will	come	back.	But	if
things	go	well,	I	may	perhaps	never	need	it."
In	 this	 world	 the	 heart	 is	 not	 needed.	 The	 people	 of	 the	 heart	 are	 crushed,
exploited,	 oppressed.	 This	 world	 is	 run	 by	 the	 cunning,	 by	 the	 clever,	 by	 the
heartless	and	the	cruel.
So	the	whole	society	is	managed	in	such	a	way	that	every	child	starts	losing	his
heart,	 and	 his	 energy	 starts	 moving	 directly	 towards	 the	 head.	 The	 heart	 is
ignored.
I	 have	 heard	 an	 ancient	 parable	 from	Tibet,	 that	 in	 the	 beginning	 of	 time	 the
heart	 used	 to	 be	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle	 part	 of	 the	 body.	 But	 because	 of
continuously	being	pushed	aside,	out	of	the	way,	now	it	is	no	more	in	the	middle
of	 the	 body.	The	 poor	 fellow	waits	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 road:	 "If	 some	day	 you
need,	 I	 am	 here"	 --	 but	 it	 gets	 no	 nourishment,	 no	 encouragement.	 It	 gets	 all
kinds	of	condemnation.
If	you	do	something	and	you	say,	"I	did	it	because	I	felt	like	doing	it,"	everybody
is	 going	 to	 laugh:	 "Felt?	 Have	 you	 lost	 your	 head?	 Give	 your	 reason,	 logic.
Feeling	is	no	logic."
Even	if	you	fall	in	love,	you	have	to	find	reasons	why	you	have	fallen	in	love	--
because	the	woman's	nose	is	very	beautiful,	her	eyes	have	such	depth,	her	body
is	 so	 proportionate.	 These	 are	 not	 the	 reasons.	 You	 have	 never	 calculated	 all
these	 reasons	 on	 your	 calculator	 and	 then	 found	 that	 this	woman	 seems	 to	 be
worthy	of	falling	in	love	with:	"Fall	in	love	with	this	woman	--	exactly	the	right
length	of	nose,	the	right	kind	of	hair,	the	right	color,	the	right	proportion	of	the
body.	What	more	do	you	want?"
But	this	is	not	the	way	that	anybody	ever	falls	in	love.	You	fall	in	love.	Then	just
to	 satisfy	 the	 idiots	 around	 you	 that	 you	 are	 not	 a	 fool,	 you	 have	 calculated
everything	 and	 only	 then	 you	 have	 taken	 the	 step.	 It	 is	 a	 reasonable,	 rational,
logical	step.
Nobody	hears	the	heart.
And	 the	 mind	 is	 so	 chattering,	 so	 continuously	 chattering	 --	 yakkety-yak,
yakkety-yak	--
that	 even	 if	 the	 heart	 sometimes	 says	 something,	 it	 never	 reaches	 to	 you.	 It
cannot	reach.
The	 bazaar	 in	 your	 head	 is	 buzzing	 so	 much	 that	 it	 is	 impossible,	 absolutely
impossible	for	the	heart.
Slowly	 slowly,	 the	 heart	 stops	 saying	 anything.	 Not	 heard	 again	 and	 again,
ignored	again	and	again,	it	falls	silent.
The	 head	 runs	 the	 show	 in	 the	 society;	 otherwise,	 we	 would	 have	 lived	 in	 a
totally	 different	 world	 --	 more	 loving,	 less	 hate,	 less	 war,	 no	 possibility	 of
nuclear	weapons.	The	heart	will	never	give	support	for	any	destructive	methods
to	be	evolved.	The	heart	will	never	be	in	the	service	of	death.	It	is	life	--	it	throbs
for	life,	it	beats	for	life.
Because	of	the	whole	conditioning	of	the	society,	the	method	of	awareness	has	to
be	chosen,	because	awareness	appears	to	be	very	logical,	rational.
But	 if	 you	 can	 love,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 on	 a	 long,	 arduous	 route
unnecessarily.
Love	is	the	most	shortcut	way,	the	most	natural	--	so	easy	that	it	is	possible	even
for	a	small	child.	It	needs	no	training.	You	are	born	with	the	quality	of	it,	if	it	is
not	corrupted	by	others.
But	love	should	be	pure.	It	should	not	be	impure.
You	will	be	surprised	 to	know	that	 the	English	word	`love'	comes	from	a	very
ugly	root	in	Sanskrit.	It	comes	from	lobh.	Lobh	means	greed.
And	as	far	as	ordinary	love	is	concerned,	it	is	a	kind	of	greed.
That's	why	there	are	people	who	love	money,	there	are	people	who	love	houses,
there	are	people	who	love	this,	who	love	that.	Even	if	 they	love	a	woman	or	a
man,	it	is	simply	their	greed;	they	want	to	possess	everything	beautiful.
It	 is	 a	 power	 trip.	 Hence,	 you	will	 find	 lovers	 continuously	 fighting,	 fighting
about	 such	 trivia	 that	 they	 both	 feel	 ashamed,	 "About	 what	 things	 we	 go	 on
fighting!"	In	their	silent	moments	when	they	are	alone,	they	feel,	"Do	I	become
possessed	by	some	evil	spirit?	--
such	trivia,	so	meaningless."	But	it	is	not	a	question	of	trivia;	it	is	a	question	of
who	has	power,	who	is	more	dominant,	whose	voice	is	heard.
Love	cannot	exist	in	such	circumstances.
I	have	heard	a	story....	In	the	life	of	one	of	the	great	emperors	of	India,	Akbar,
there	 is	 a	 small	 story.	 He	 was	 very	 much	 interested	 in	 all	 kinds	 of	 talented
people,	and	from	all	over	India	he	had	collected	nine	people,	 the	most	 talented
geniuses,	who	were	known	as	the	"nine	jewels	of	Akbar's	court."
One	 day,	 just	 gossiping	 with	 his	 vice-councillors,	 he	 said,	 "Last	 night	 I	 was
discussing	with	my	wife.	She	is	very	insistent	that	every	husband	is	henpecked.	I
tried	 hard,	 but	 she	 says,	 Ì	 know	 many	 families,	 but	 I	 have	 never	 found	 any
husband	who	is	not	henpecked.'
What	do	you	think?"	he	asked	the	councillors.
One	of	the	councillors,	Birbal	said,	"Perhaps	she	is	right,	because	you	could	not
prove	it.
You	yourself	 are	a	henpecked	husband;	otherwise,	you	could	have	given	her	a
good	beating,	then	and	there	proving	that,	`Look,	here	is	a	husband!'"
He	said,	"That	I	cannot	do,	because	I	have	to	live	with	her.	It	is	easy	to	advise
somebody	else	to	beat	his	wife.	Can	you	beat	your	wife?"
Birbal	said,	"No,	I	cannot.	I	simply	accept	that	I	am	a	henpecked	husband,	and
your	wife	is	right."
But	Akbar	said,	"It	has	 to	be	 found....	 In	 the	capital	 there	must	be	at	 least	one
husband	 who	 is	 not	 henpecked.	 There	 is	 no	 rule	 in	 the	 world	 which	 has	 no
exception,	and	this	is	not	a	rule	at	all."
So	 he	 said	 to	Birbal,	 "You	 take	my	 two	 beautiful	Arabian	 horses"	 --	 one	was
black,	one	was	white	--	"and	go	around	the	capital.	And	if	you	can	find	a	man
who	is	not	henpecked,	you	can	give	him	the	choice:	whichever	horse	he	wants	is
a	 present	 from	 me."	 They	 were	 valuable.	 In	 those	 days	 horses	 were	 very
valuable,	and	those	were	the	most	beautiful	horses.
Birbal	said,	"It	is	useless,	but	if	you	say,	I	will	go."
He	went,	and	everybody	was	found	 to	be	henpecked.	 It	was	very	ordinary:	He
would	 just	 call	 the	 person	 and	 call	 his	wife,	 and	 ask,	 "Are	 you	 henpecked	 or
not?"
The	man	would	 look	at	 the	wife	and	say,	"You	should	have	asked	when	 I	was
alone.	This	is	not	right.	You	will	create	unnecessary	trouble.	Just	for	a	horse	I	am
not	going	to	destroy	my	life.	You	take	your	horses,	I	don't	want	any."
But	one	man	was	sitting	in	front	of	his	house	and	two	persons	were	massaging
him.	He	was	a	wrestler,	a	champion	wrestler,	a	very	strong	man.	Birbal	thought,
"Perhaps	 this	man...	 he	 can	kill	 anybody	without	 any	weapons.	 If	 he	 can	hold
your	neck,	you	are	finished!"	Birbal	said,	"Can	I	ask	you	a	question?"
He	said,	"Question?	What	question?"
Birbal	said,	"Are	you	henpecked?"
That	 man	 said,	 "First,	 let	 us	 greet	 each	 other,	 a	 handshake."	 And	 he	 crushed
Birbal's	hand	and	said,	"Unless	you	start	crying	and	tears	start	coming	from	your
eyes,	I	will	not	leave	your	hand.	Your	hand	is	finished.	You	dared	to	ask	me	such
a	question?"
And	 Birbal	 was	 dying	 --	 he	 was	 almost	 a	 man	 of	 steel	 --	 and	 tears	 started
coming,	and	he	said,	"Just	leave	me.	You	are	not	henpecked.	I	have	just	come	to
a	wrong	place.	But	where	is	your	wife?"
He	said,	"Look,	she	 is	 there,	cooking	my	breakfast."	A	very	small	woman	was
cooking	his	breakfast.
The	woman	was	so	small	and	 the	man	was	so	big	 that	Birbal	said,	"There	 is	a
possibility	that	perhaps	this	man	is	not	henpecked.	He	will	kill	this	woman."
So	 he	 said,	 "Now	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 further	 into	 investigation.	 You	 can
choose	either	horse	from	these	two,	black	and	white,	a	reward	from	the	king	for
the	one	who	is	not	henpecked.
And	at	 that	 time	 that	 small	woman	said,	 "Don't	 choose	 the	black!	Otherwise	 I
will	make	your	life	a	hell!"
The	man	said,	"No,	no,	I	will	choose	the	white.	You	just	keep	quiet."
Birbal	said,	"You	don't	get	either,	neither	white	nor	black.	It	is	all	finished,	you
lost	the	game.	You	are	a	henpecked	husband."
There	 is	 a	 continuous	 fight	 for	 domination.	 Love	 cannot	 blossom	 in	 such	 an
atmosphere.
The	 man	 is	 fighting	 in	 the	 world	 for	 all	 kinds	 of	 ambitions.	 The	 woman	 is
fighting	 the	man	because	she	 is	afraid:	he	 is	out	of	 the	house	 the	whole	day	--
"Who	 knows?	 He	 may	 be	 having	 affairs	 with	 other	 women."	 She	 is	 jealous,
suspicious;	 she	 wants	 to	 be	 sure	 that	 this	 man	 remains	 controlled.	 So	 in	 the
house	he	is	fighting	with	the	wife,	 in	 the	outside	he	is	fighting	with	the	world.
Where	do	you	think	the	flower	of	love	can	blossom?
Latifa,	the	flower	of	love	can	blossom	only	when	there	is	no	ego,	when	there	is
no	 effort	 to	 dominate,	 when	 one	 is	 humble,	 when	 one	 is	 trying	 not	 to	 be
somebody	but	is	ready	to	be	nobody.
Naturally,	 in	 the	 ordinary	 world	 it	 cannot	 happen,	 but	 with	 a	 master	 it	 is	 a
possibility.	The	love	for	the	master	is	not	biological.	Biology	has	nothing	to	do
with	 masters	 and	 disciples.	 The	 love	 for	 the	 master	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
domination.
The	flower	can	blossom	because	love	is	pure	of	ego.
You	are	simply	rejoicing	in	the	presence,	in	the	fulfillment	of	the	master,	in	the
contentment	 of	 the	master.	You	 are	 rejoicing	 as	 if	 it	 is	 your	 contentment,	 it	 is
your	 fulfillment.	 In	 the	 radiation	 of	 the	 master	 you	 are	 feeling	 it	 is	 your
radiation.	You	are	part	of	the	master;	you	have	become	so	harmonious	with	him
that	his	heart	and	your	heart	are	no	more	two.
Awareness	will	come	on	its	own	accord,	and	this	is	the	most	beautiful	way,	the
most	innocent	way	--	a	path	full	of	flowers,	a	path	that	passes	through	beautiful
lakes,	rivers,	groves,	greenery.
The	path	of	awareness	is	the	path	that	passes	through	a	desert.	It	is	only	for	those
who	cannot	manage	to	get	back	into	their	hearts.
If	you	can	easily	be	heartful,	forget	all	about	awareness;	it	will	come	on	its	own
accord.
Each	step	of	love	will	bring	its	own	awareness.	This	love	will	not	be	falling	in
love;	I	call	it	rising	in	love.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	ARE	ALWAYS	TWO	PARTS	IN	ME	RELATED	TO	YOU.	ONE	PART
OF
ME	HAS	THE	DRIVE	TO	WORK,	RUN	AROUND,	ORGANIZE,	JUMP	UP
AND
DOWN,	 FIGHT,	 TALK	 TO	 PRESS	 AND	 POLITICIANS,	 JUST	 SHOUT
FROM	THE
ROOFTOPS.	 THE	 OTHER	 PART,	 WHICH	 HAS	 BECOME	 SO	 MUCH
STRONGER
OVER	 THE	 LAST	 YEARS,	 JUST	WANTS	 TO	 SIT	 AT	 YOUR	 SIDE	 AND
ABSORB
EVERYTHING	--	YOU,	YOUR	SILENCE	AND	YOUR	WORDS.
WAS	 IT	 THAT	 I	 HAD	 TO	 BE	 SO	 ACTIVE	 JUST	 TO	 BE	 ABLE	 TO	 SIT
SILENTLY
NOW?
OSHO,	 PLEASE	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 YOUR	 OUTER
AND	YOUR
INNER	WORK?
There	is	no	split	in	you.
If	a	part	fights	in	the	outer	world	for	my	message	to	be	spread	to	all	nooks	and
corners,	and	the	other	part	simply	wants	to	sit	close	to	me,	drinking	my	silence,
my	presence,	my	peace,	rejoicing	in	my	blissfulness,	being	ecstatic	just	without
doing	anything....
Ordinarily	it	may	seem	that	these	two	parts	are	against	each	other.	They	are	not.
The	more	you	shout	from	the	housetops,	the	more	you	will	be	able	to	sit	silently,
close	 to	me;	 and	 the	more	you	can	 sit	 silently,	 close	 to	me,	 the	more	you	will
have	something	to	share	with	the	world,	something	to	fight	for.
Man	 is	 both	 the	 inner	 and	 the	 outer,	 and	 it	 has	 been	 a	 fallacy,	 a	 very	 ancient
fallacy,	to	condemn	one	in	favor	of	the	other.
In	the	East,	people	renounce	the	outer	in	favor	of	the	inner.	They	escape	from	the
world	 into	 the	caves	 in	 the	Himalayas	 so	 that	 they	can	devote	 their	whole	 life
and	their	whole	time	and	their	whole	energy	to	the	inner	journey	--	but	they	don't
understand	the	dialectics	of	life.
In	the	West,	just	the	opposite	has	been	done.	They	have	renounced	the	inner	so
that	they	can	put	their	whole	energy	into	the	outer	world	and	the	conquest	of	the
outer	world.
Both	have	been	wrong,	and	both	have	been	right.
Both	have	been	wrong	because	both	remained	halves;	one	part	grew	bigger	and
bigger,	and	the	other	part	remained	retarded.	You	can	see	it.
In	 the	 East	 there	 is	 so	 much	 poverty,	 so	 much	 disease,	 so	 much	 sickness,	 so
much	death.
Still,	 there	 is	 a	 certain	 contentment.	 With	 all	 this,	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 no
revolutionary	approach	that	"We	should	change	the	whole	world.	We	cannot	go
on	 living	 in	 this	 poverty,	 and	 we	 have	 lived	 in	 this	 poverty	 for	 centuries,	 in
slavery	 for	 centuries.	 And	 we	 have	 accepted	 everything	 --	 poverty,	 slavery,
disease,	 death	 --	 without	 any	 resistance,	 because	 these	 are	 outer	 things.	 Our
whole	effort	has	been	inner."
In	the	West	they	have	destroyed	poverty,	they	have	destroyed	much	disease,	they
have	made	man's	 life	 longer.	They	have	made	man's	body	more	beautiful,	 they
have	made	man's	existence	more	comfortable,	but	the	man	himself	--	for	whom
all	these	comforts,	all	these	conquests	of	science	and	technology	have	been	done
--	is	missing.	They	have	completely	forgotten	for	whom	it	was	done.	The	inside
is	hollow.	Everything	 is	 there,	all	around,	and	 in	 the	middle	 there	 is	a	 retarded
consciousness,	almost	non-existential.
So	both	have	succeeded	in	what	they	were	doing,	and	both	have	failed	--	because
they	have	chosen	only	half	of	man's	life.
My	attitude	is	that	of	accepting	man	in	his	totality,	in	his	wholeness.
And	it	has	to	be	understood	that	once	you	accept	the	totality	of	man,	you	have	to
understand	the	law	of	dialectics.
For	example,	the	whole	day	you	work	hard	--	in	the	fields,	in	the	garden	--	you
perspire.
In	the	night	you	will	have	a	beautiful	sleep.	Don't	think	that	because	the	whole
day	you	have	been	working	so	hard,	how	can	you	sleep	in	the	night?	--	it	is	so
against	your	whole	day's	work.	It	is	not	against.	The	whole	day's	hard	work	has
prepared	you	to	relax;	the	night	will	be	deep	relaxation.
Beggars	sleep	the	best.	Emperors	cannot	sleep	because	the	emperor	has	forgotten
the	dialectics	of	life.	You	need	two	legs	to	walk,	you	need	two	hands,	you	need
two	hemispheres	in	your	brain.
It	 has	 now	 become	 an	 accepted	 psychological	 truth	 that	 you	 can	 do	 hard
mathematical	work	--	because	it	is	done	by	one	part	of	the	mind	--	and	then	you
can	do	the	same	hard	work	on	your	musical	instrument,	and	because	it	is	done	by
another	 part	 of	 the	 mind,	 it	 is	 not	 continuous	 labor.	 In	 fact,	 when	 you	 are
working	 hard	 on	 mathematics,	 the	 musical	 part	 of	 your	 mind	 is	 resting;	 and
when	 you	 are	 working	 hard	 on	 the	 musical	 part,	 your	 mathematical	 mind	 is
resting.
In	the	universities,	in	the	colleges	all	over	the	world,	we	change	the	class	period
every	forty	minutes	because	it	has	been	found	that	after	each	forty	minutes,	the
part	that	you	have	been	working	with	gets	tired.	Just	change	the	subject;	that	part
goes	into	rest.
Sitting	with	me,	fill	your	cup	with	as	much	juice	as	possible.	Feel	silence	to	its
uttermost	depth,	so	that	you	can	shout	from	the	housetops.
And	there	is	no	contradiction:	your	shouting	from	the	housetops	is	simply	part	of
a	 dialectical	 process.	 Your	 silence	 and	 your	 shouting	 are	 just	 like	 two	 hands,
your	two	legs,	your	day	and	night,	your	work	and	rest	period.	Don't	divide	them
as	antagonistic	to	each	other;	that's	how	the	whole	world	has	suffered.
The	East	has	created	great	geniuses,	but	we	are	still	living	in	the	bullock	cart	age
because	our	geniuses	simply	meditated.	Their	meditation	never	came	into	action.
If	 they	 had	 meditated	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 and	 used	 their	 silence	 and	 peace	 and
meditativeness	for	scientific	research,	 this	country	would	have	been	the	richest
in	the	world	--	outer	and	inner,	both.
The	same	is	true	about	the	West:	 they	created	great	geniuses,	but	they	were	all
involved	 with	 things,	 objects.	 They	 forgot	 themselves	 completely.	 Once	 in	 a
while	a	genius	remembered,	but	it	was	too	late.
Albert	Einstein,	at	the	time	of	death,	said	his	last	words	--	and	remember,	the	last
words	are	the	most	important	a	person	has	ever	spoken	in	his	life,	because	they
are	 a	 conclusion,	 the	 essential	 experience.	 His	 last	 words	 were,	 "If	 there	 is
another	life,	I	would	like	to	be	a	plumber.	I	don't	want	to	be	a	physicist.	I	want	to
be	something	very	simple	--	a	plumber."
A	tired	brain,	a	burned	brain...	and	what	was	his	achievement?	--	Hiroshima	and
Nagasaki.
This	man	was	capable	of	becoming	a	Gautam	Buddha.	If	he	had	looked	inwards,
he	had	such	an	insight	that	perhaps	he	would	have	gone	deeper	than	any	Gautam
Buddha,	 because	 he	 looked	 towards	 the	 stars	 and	 went	 further	 than	 any
astronomer	has	ever	done.
It	is	the	same	power;	it	is	only	a	question	of	direction.
But	why	get	fixed?	Why	not	keep	yourself	available	to	both	dimensions?	What
is	the	need	of	getting	fixed?	--	"I	can	only	see	outwardly,	I	cannot	see	inwardly,
or	vice-versa."
One	 should	 only	 learn	 how	 to	 see	 deeply,	 and	 then	 use	 that	 insight	 in	 both
dimensions.
Then	he	can	give	better	science	and	better	 technology	 to	 the	world	and	he	can
give	better	human	beings,	a	better	humanity,	at	the	same	time.
And	remember,	only	in	a	better	human	being's	hands	is	a	better	technology	right;
otherwise,	it	is	dangerous.
The	East	is	dying	with	poverty.	The	West	is	dying	with	power.	Strange....	They
have	created	so	much	power	that	 they	can	only	kill.	They	don't	know	anything
about	life	because	they	have	never	looked	in.
The	 East	 knows	 everything	 about	 life,	 but	 without	 food	 you	 cannot	meditate.
When	you	are	hungry	and	you	close	your	eyes,	you	can	see	only	chappattis	just
floating	all	around.
It	has	happened	in	the	life	of	a	poet,	Heinrich	Heine.	He	was	lost	in	a	jungle	for
three	 days,	 hungry,	 tired.	 Out	 of	 fear,	 he	 could	 not	 sleep;	 wild	 animals	 were
staying	in	the	tops	of	the	trees	in	the	night.	And	for	three	days	continuously	he
did	not	come	across	a	single	human	being	to	ask	whether	he	was	moving	right	or
wrong,	where	he	was	going	or	 if	 he	was	moving	 in	 a	 roundabout.	Three	days
continuously...	and	then	came	the	full	moon	night.
Hungry,	 tired,	hanging	onto	a	 tree,	he	 looked	at	 the	 full	moon.	He	was	a	great
poet,	and	he	was	surprised,	he	could	not	believe	it.	He	himself	had	written	about
the	moon,	he	had	read	about	the	moon.	So	much	is	written	about	the	moon	--	so
much	poetry,	 so	much	painting,	 so	much	art	 is	around	 the	moon.	But	Heinrich
Heine	had	 a	 revelation:	before,	 he	used	 to	 see	his	 beloved's	 face	 in	 the	moon;
today	he	saw	only	a	bread	floating	in	the	sky.
He	tried	hard,	but	the	beloved's	face	did	not	appear.
It	is	perfectly	good	to	be	dialectical.	And	always	remember	to	try	the	opposites
as	complementaries.	Use	all	the	opposites	as	complementaries	and	your	life	will
be	fuller,	your	life	will	be	whole.
To	me,	this	is	the	only	holy	life:	a	whole	life	is	the	only	holy	life.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
TODAY	I	OBSERVED	A	TIGHTROPE	WALKER	AND	HOW	HE	TRAINED
A	 YOUNG	 GIRL	 PARTNER	 TO	 WALK	 ON	 THE	 ROPE.	 HE	 WAS
SOMETIMES
HITTING	 HER,	 SOMETIMES	 PERSUADING	 HER,	 BUT	 IT	 SEEMED	 TO
ME	THAT
SHE	 WAS	 MAINLY	 ENCOURAGED	 TO	 TRY	 IT	 AGAIN	 AND	 AGAIN
BECAUSE
SHE	FELT	HIS	TRUST	IN	HER	POTENTIAL	TO	BE	ABLE	TO	WALK	THE
ROPE
ALONE.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THE	MASTER'S	TRUST	IN
THE
DISCIPLE?
The	very	fact	that	the	master	accepts	a	disciple	shows	his	trust	in	the	potential	of
the	disciple.	Otherwise,	he	would	not	have	been	accepted.
Every	 man	 has	 the	 potential,	 but	 the	 right	 time,	 the	 right	 place,	 the	 right
experience	make	all	the	difference.	Otherwise,	every	human	being	is	capable	of
being	enlightened,	will	be	enlightened,	but	when,	at	what	time	--	whether	in	this
life	or	in	another	life	--	depends	on	many	things:	how	much	your	experience	is,
your	experience	of	being	frustrated	in	the	world,	how	much	you	are	in	misery.
Are	 you	 still	 hoping	 that	 tomorrow	 things	will	 be	 better,	 or	 have	 you	 lost	 all
hope?	 Is	 your	 despair	 ultimate,	 or	 only	 momentary?	 Have	 you	 come	 to	 the
master	because	you	have	fought	with	your	wife	today,	but	after	fifteen	minutes
things	will	be	different	--
anger	will	be	gone?
I	used	to	live	on	a	university	campus.	The	first	day,	I	entered	into	my	bungalow.
I	was	 alone,	 and	 the	 attached	 bungalow	was	 occupied	 by	 a	Bengali	 professor.
And	the	walls	were	so	thin	that	even	if	you	plugged	your	ears,	still	you	would	be
able	to	hear	what	was	going	on	on	the	other	side	of	the	wall.
Because	 the	husband	and	wife	were	fighting	so	badly,	 I	 thought	 that	 there	was
going	 to	be	 some	blood.	 I	could	not	 sleep.	 It	was	one	o'clock	 in	 the	night	and
they	were	 fighting	and	 fighting	and	 fighting.	And	 I	could	not	understand	what
they	were	 saying	 either,	 but	 things	must	have	been	 serious	because	 finally	 the
professor	said,	"I	am	going	to	commit	suicide"	--	that	he	said	in	English.
I	said,	"This	is	something	good;	at	least	I	can	understand	this	much."	So	I	came
out	of	my	house	to	prevent	him	--	"Just	wait.	In	the	middle	of	the	night,	where
will	 you	go	 to	 commit	 suicide?	 In	 the	morning	 it	will	 be	 better"	 --	 but	 by	 the
time	I	was	out	he	was	gone,	fast.
I	asked	his	wife	--	who	had	not	come	out	even	to	say	goodbye!	I	said,	"What	am
I	 supposed	 to	 do?	 Should	 I	 go	 to	 the	 police	 station?	 Somebody	 has	 to	 be
informed	by	phone?	What	has	to	be	done?"
She	said,	"Nothing	has	to	be	done.	Do	you	see	his	umbrella	is	here?	Without	his
umbrella	 he	 cannot	 go	 anywhere.	 He	 will	 be	 coming	 soon	 --	 the	 moment	 he
remembers	 the	 umbrella.	 In	 anger,	 he	 has	 forgotten	 the	 umbrella.	 A	 Bengali
without	an	umbrella?"
I	 said,	 "But	 suicide	 is	 such	 a	 serious	matter,	 and	 an	umbrella	 is	 not	 needed	 at
all."
She	said,	"You	 just	wait.	You	sit	here.	 I	will	make	coffee	 for	you	because	you
have	been...	I	knew	that	you	must	be	hearing	all	this."
And	within	fifteen	minutes	he	was	back.
And	I	said,	"What	happened?"
He	said,	"What	happened?	I	forgot	my	umbrella!	And	now	it	must	be	at	least	two
o'clock	in	the	morning."
I	said,	"That's	 the	right	 thing	to	do.	In	the	morning,	 take	your	umbrella	and	go
out,	find	a	right	place."	But	who	goes	in	the	morning?
In	 the	 morning	 I	 reminded	 him,	 "You	 are	 still	 here?	 The	 sun	 has	 risen.	 You
should	go	now	and	search	for	the	right	place."
He	 said,	 "I	 was	 thinking	 to	 go,	 but	 when	 I	 opened	 the	 umbrella	 it	 was	 not
repaired	because	the	rains	have	not	come."
I	said,	"I	see	you	with	that	umbrella	every	day,	going	to	the	university."
He	said,	"That	is	just	habitual.	Because	there	are	no	rains,	nothing,	so	there	is	no
question	of	opening	it;	one	just	carries	it.	Now	I	tried	and	opened	it	--	 it	 is	not
repaired.	 And	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 my	 wife	 that	 my	 umbrella	 should	 be	 kept
repaired	 in	 case	 some	emergency	arises.	Now	 I	wanted	 to	 commit	 suicide	 and
the	umbrella	is	not	ready."
I	 thought,	 "This	 is	 really	great	of	you,	 and	every	person	who	commits	 suicide
should	learn	something	from	you."
One	day,	it	must	have	been	afternoon,	three	o'clock	or	something,	I	again	heard
that	 he	 is	 going	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 But	 this	 time	 I	 was	 not	 so	much	 excited,
because	I	thought	that	this	is	the	usual	business.	Still,	I	came	out	to	say	goodbye.
He	 looked	 at	 me	 with	 a	 very	 strange	 face.	 He	 said,	 "What	 do	 you	 mean	 by
goodbye?"
I	 said,	 "You	 are	 going	 to	 commit	 suicide,	 and	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 we	 will	 be
meeting	 again	 so	 I	 am	 saying	 goodbye.	 But	 what	 are	 you	 carrying?"	 He	was
carrying	a	tiffin.
I	said,	"Where	are	you	taking	the	tiffin?"
He	said,	"You	know	these	Indian	railway	trains	--	sometimes	they	are	ten	hours
late,	twelve	hours	late.	And	I	cannot	tolerate	hunger	at	all,	so	I	will	lie	down	by
the	 line	 and	 wait	 for	 the	 train.	 If	 it	 comes,	 good;	 otherwise,	 I	 am	 taking	 my
supper	with	me."
I	said,	"You	are	a	clever	and	intelligent	person	--	anybody	looking	at	you	would
think	you	are	going	on	some	picnic."
And	when	he	was	gone,	his	wife	came.	She	said,	"Has	he	gone?"
I	said,	"He	has	gone."
She	said,	"He	will	be	coming	soon.	This	idiot,"	she	said,	"whenever	he	wants	to
go	for	a	picnic....	But	he	is	such	a	miser	that	he	will	not	take	even	me	with	him,
so	he	says	 that	he	 is	going	 to	commit	 suicide.	He	must	be	eating	 just	near	 the
railway	station;	you	can	go	and	see	right	now."
The	 railway	 station	was	 not	 very	 far	 away,	 so	 I	went	 and	 I	 saw	 him.	He	was
enjoying	all	Bengali	sweets	and	things.
I	 said,	 "Chatterji,	 the	 train	 is	 standing	 on	 the	 platform.	Leave	 your	 tiffin,	 run!
Just	lie	down	ahead	of	the	train!"
He	said,	"It	is	too	late.	First	I	have	to	finish	everything	that	I	brought,	and	today	I
have	missed.	And	the	train	comes	to	this	station	only	once	in	twenty-four	hours"
--	because	 it	was	not	a	big	station,	 it	was	a	small	station,	and	 the	 train	used	 to
stop	only	once	for	the	university	because	the	university	was	outside	the	city.	So
he	said,	"Today	it	is	finished."
But	 I	 said,	 "You	 were	 first	 saying,	 Ì	 am	 going	 to	 wait.'	 And	 this	 is	 not
suppertime;	it	is	only	three	o'clock."
He	said,	"When	you	have	such	sweets	in	your	hand,	you	cannot	wait.	And	I	am
just	coming	back	home	with	you."
There	 are	 people	 who	 would	 like	 to	 become	 sannyasins,	 who	 would	 like	 to
become	disciples.	It	may	be	just	an	emotional,	sentimental,	temporal	thing,	and
within	two	minutes	it	has	come	and	it	is	gone.	They	had	the	potential,	but	it	was
not	the	right	time.
Even	if	they	take	sannyas,	even	if	they	become	disciples	--	because	no	master	is
so	unkind	as	to	say	no	to	somebody	who	wants	to	become	a	disciple	--	they	are
going	 to	 betray.	 They	 are	 going	 to	 leave	 sooner	 or	 later	 because	 it	 was	 not
something	 very	 deep,	 coming	 from	 their	 very	 heart.	 It	 was	 something	 very
superficial,	 something	 so	 superficial	 that	 if	 they	 had	waited	 for	 a	 few	minutes
more,	 they	would	have	changed	 their	minds.	 It	was	a	mind	 thing,	and	mind	 is
never	stable,	it	is	continuously	changing.
You	 cannot	 stay	 with	 one	 thought	 in	 the	 mind	 even	 for	 a	 few	 seconds.
Sometimes,	 try:	 just	 one	 thought,	 and	 you	 try	 to	 stay	with	 it,	 and	 you	will	 be
surprised	 that	 in	 not	more	 than	 thirty	 seconds	you	have	 forgotten	 about	 it	 and
your	mind	has	moved	 somewhere	 else.	And	 then	 suddenly	you	 remember	 that
you	 were	 trying	 to	 stay	 with	 one	 thought,	 and	 you	 could	 remain	 only	 thirty
seconds.
Gurdjieff	used	to	give	this	experiment	to	everyone	who	had	come	to	become	a
disciple.
He	would	give	him	his	own	pocket	watch	and	tell	him,	"Keep	it	in	front	of	you,
watch	the	second	hand	and	choose	any	word	--	your	name.	Keep	just	that	name
in	your	mind,	and	just	tell	me	how	long	you	can	keep	it"	--	fifteen	seconds,	thirty
seconds,	at	the	most,	forty	seconds,	not	even	one	whole	minute.
Mind	is	in	a	flux.
So	 those	 who	 want	 to	 become	 disciples	 because	 of	 some	 mind	 thing	 are	 not
going	to	stay.
There	is	no	need	to	say	no	to	them,	they	will	be	going	themselves.
But	the	master	knows	perfectly	well	when	somebody	comes	with	an	urge	from
the	heart,	with	an	urge	 that	he	can	stake	his	whole	 life	for	but	he	will	not	 turn
back.	Only	these	few	people	attain	to	the	fulfillment.
Everybody	has	the	potential,	but	everybody	is	not	ripe	at	this	moment	--	perhaps
at	some	other	time,	in	some	other	life,	with	some	other	master.
But	one	day	is	going	to	come	in	everybody's	life	that	becomes	a	turning	point,	a
180
degree	turn,	and	then	disciplehood	is	a	beautiful	growth.
Then	the	whole	energy	 is	moving	 in	one	direction,	with	one	 intention,	with	no
diversions.
Then	the	distance	from	the	goal	is	less.
The	more	 intense	 is	 your	 urge,	 the	 smaller	 is	 the	distance.	 If	 your	 intention	 is
total,	then	there	is	no	distance	at	all.
Then	you	need	not	go	to	the	goal,	the	goal	comes	to	you.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Innocence	is	a	light	unto	itself
4	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610045
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
125
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	QUESTIONS,	BUT	THEY	ARE	NEVER	COMPLETE,	AND	I	DON'T
KNOW
HOW	TO	ASK.
No	question	is	ever	complete,	because	the	completion	of	a	question	will	mean	it
has	its	answer	in	itself.
A	question	by	its	very	nature	is	incomplete.	It	is	a	desire,	a	longing,	an	inquiry,
because	something	needs	to	be	completed.
It	 is	 part	 of	 human	 consciousness	 that	 it	 demands	 completion.	Leave	 anything
incomplete	 and	 it	 becomes	 an	 obsession;	 complete	 it	 and	 you	 are	 free	 of	 it.
Completion	brings	freedom.
Hence,	it	is	not	only	your	questions	that	are	incomplete.	You	are	more	alert	that
you	have	seen	the	incompleteness	of	each	question.
Secondly,	you	don't	know	what	to	ask.	Nobody	knows.	All	of	our	questions	are
out	 of	 our	 ignorance,	 out	 of	 our	 unconscious,	 out	 of	 our	 dark	 soul.	 Nobody
knows	exactly	what	his	question	is,	what	is	essential	to	be	asked	--	because	the
moment	you	know	what	your	question	is,	you	will	immediately	find	the	answer
within	yourself.
To	be	absolutely	confident	about	the	question	means	the	answer	is	not	very	far.	It
is	very	close,	because	confidence	comes	from	the	answer,	not	from	the	question.
But	still,	man	has	to	ask.
Although	 all	 questions	 are	 incomplete	 and	 you	 do	 not	 know	what	 to	 ask,	 still
man	has	to	ask	because	man	cannot	remain	silent.	It	is	possible	not	to	ask	--	that
does	not	mean	you	don't	have	questions,	that	simply	means	you	are	not	bringing
them	 out.	 Perhaps	 you	 are	 afraid	 to	 be	 exposed,	 because	 each	 question	 will
indicate	towards	your	ignorance.
There	are	millions	of	people	who	never	ask	for	the	simple	reason	that	to	be	silent
at	 least	 appears	 to	be	wise.	To	ask	 the	question	 is	 to	 show	your	wounds,	 is	 to
show	all	the	dark	spots	in	your	being.	It	needs	courage.
Secondly,	there	are	questions	which	are	not	out	of	your	ignorance	but	out	of	your
borrowed	knowledge	--	which	are	the	worst	questions	possible.
A	question	that	comes	out	of	ignorance	is	innocent,	has	purity.	It	is	unpolluted,
uncorrupted;	it	shows	your	courage,	your	trust.
But	there	are	questions	which	come	out	of	your	borrowed	knowledge.	You	have
heard	much,	 you	 have	 read	much,	 you	 have	 been	 informed	 from	 the	 parents,
teachers,	priests,	politicians,	all	kinds	of	demogogues,	all	kinds	of	pretenders	to
knowledge	--	and	you	have	been	collecting	their	whole	garbage.
Purna	has	sent	me	a	beautiful	present:	a	very	artistic,	beautiful	wastepaper	basket
with	a	note	 --	"Osho,	 if	you	feel	my	questions	are	 just	garbage,	 throw	them	in
this	wastepaper	basket.	You	need	not	answer	them."
Questions	coming	out	of	knowledge	are	garbage.
You	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 God,	 the	 universe;	 you	 don't	 know	 anything
about	the	soul,	reincarnation,	future	lives,	past	lives.	All	that	you	know	is	simply
hearsay.	People	have	been	chattering	around	you	and	you	are	collecting	all	kinds
of	information	that	seems	to	be	important	to	you.	Why	does	it	seem	important?	-
-	it	seems	important	because	it	covers	your	ignorance.	It	helps	you	to	feel	as	if
you	know.	But	remember,	it	is	a	very	big	às	if.'	You	do	not	know,	it	is	only	as	if.
All	holy	scriptures,	all	books	on	philosophy,	theology	should	be	categorized	into
one	category:	as	if.	They	are	talking	about	every	possible	impossible	thing	they
know	nothing	of,	but	they	are	articulate,	imaginative	intellectuals	who	can	create
systems	out	of	nothing.
That's	 why	 no	 philosopher	 agrees	 with	 any	 other	 philosopher.	 And	 every
philosopher	thinks	that	he	has	found	the	whole	system	that	explains	everything
in	 the	world	 --	and	all	other	philosophers	 laugh	at	him;	 they	find	 thousands	of
loopholes	 in	 his	 system.	 But	 as	 far	 as	 they	 themselves	 are	 concerned,	 they
commit	 the	 same	 mistake:	 they	 claim	 that	 their	 system	 is	 complete	 and	 now
there	is	no	question	of	further	inquiry.
And	 the	 strangest	 thing	 is	 that	 these	 are	 the	people	who	 are	 very	 insightful	 in
seeing	 the	 loopholes	of	 others,	 but	 they	 cannot	 see	 the	 loopholes	of	 their	 own
system.	Perhaps	they	don't	want	to	see.	They	are	there,	everybody	else	can	see
them;	 it	 is	 impossible	 that	 they	 themselves	 are	 not	 seeing	 them.	 They	 are
ignoring	them,	hoping	that	nobody	sees	them.
Every	philosophy	has	failed.
Every	religion	has	failed.
You	are	 carrying	 the	 ruins	of	 all	 the	philosophies	 and	 all	 the	 religions	 in	your
mind,	and	out	of	those	ruins,	questions	arise.	Those	questions	are	meaningless;
you	should	not	ask	them.	They	really	show	your	stupidity.
But	questions	 arising	out	of	 your	 ignorance	 --	 just	 like	 a	 child	 asking	 --	 those
questions	are	incomplete,	not	very	great	questions,	but	tremendously	important.
One	day	a	 small	 child	was	walking	with	D.H.	Lawrence	 in	 a	garden,	 and	was
continuously	asking	questions	of	all	kinds.	And	D.H.	Lawrence	was	one	of	the
most	 sincere	 men	 of	 this	 century,	 condemned	 by	 governments,	 by	 priests
because	of	his	sincerity,	because	he	would	say	only	the	truth,	because	he	was	not
ready	 to	 be	 diplomatic,	 a	 hypocrite,	 because	 he	would	 not	 compromise.	 Even
before	this	small	child	he	showed	such	authentic	sincerity,	which	even	your	great
saints	have	not	shown.
The	child	asked,	"Why	are	the	trees	green?"	--	a	very	simple	question,	but	very
profound.
All	the	trees	are	green	--	why?	What	is	the	matter	with	the	trees?	When	there	are
so	many	colors,	when	the	whole	rainbow	of	colors	is	available	--	some	tree	can
be	yellow,	some	tree	can	be	red,	some	tree	can	be	blue	--	why	have	all	the	trees
chosen	to	be	green?
In	D.	H.	Lawrence's	place,	any	parent,	any	teacher,	any	priest,	anybody	--	x,	y,	z
--	would	have	told	some	lie,	that	"God	made	them	green	because	green	is	very
soothing	 to	 the	eyes."	But	 this	would	have	been	deceptive,	a	 lie,	because	D.H.
Lawrence	does	not	know	anything	about	God,	does	not	know	why	the	trees	are
green.
In	fact,	no	scientist	who	has	been	working	with	the	trees	knows,	although	he	can
show	that	it	is	because	of	a	certain	element,	chlorophyl,	that	trees	are	green.	But
that	is	not	the	answer	for	the	child.	He	will	simply	ask,	"Why	have	they	chosen
chlorophyl	--	all	the	trees?"	It	is	not	a	satisfactory	answer.
D.H.	Lawrence	closed	his	eyes,	waited	for	a	moment	in	silence...	what	to	say	to
this	 child?	 He	 did	 not	 want	 to	 be	 a	 deceiving	 person	 to	 an	 innocent	 child	 --
although	 the	 question	 is	 ordinary,	 any	 answer	would	 do.	But	 the	 question	 has
come	from	innocence;	hence	it	is	very	profound.
And	D.	H.	Lawrence	opened	his	eyes,	looked	at	the	trees	and	said	to	the	child,
"The	trees	are	green	because	they	are	green."
The	child	said,	"Right.	I	was	also	thinking	that."
But	 D.H.	 Lawrence	 remembered	 it	 in	 his	 memoirs:	 "To	 me	 it	 was	 a	 great
experience	--
the	 love	and	 the	 trust	 the	child	 showed	 towards	me	because	of	 sheer	 sincerity.
My	answer	was	not	an	answer;	according	to	logicians,	 it	was	a	tautology.	`The
trees	are	green	because	they	are	green'	--	is	this	an	answer?"
In	fact,	D.H.	Lawrence	is	accepting	that:	My	child,	I	am	as	much	ignorant	as	you
are.	Just	because	there	is	a	difference	of	age	does	not	mean	that	I	know	and	you
do	not	know.	The	difference	of	age	is	not	the	difference	between	ignorance	and
knowledge.
Trees	being	green	is	part	of	the	mystery	of	the	whole	existence.
Things	are	what	they	are.
A	woman	is	a	woman,	a	man	is	a	man.	A	rose	is	a	rose;	call	it	by	any	name,	it
still	remains	the	rose.
That	 morning,	 in	 that	 small	 incident,	 something	 tremendously	 beautiful	 is
hidden.
Ask	questions	--	not	out	of	knowledge	because	all	that	knowledge	is	borrowed,
unfounded,	pure	rubbish.
Ask	out	of	your	ignorance.
Remember,	the	ignorance	is	yours	--	be	proud	of	it.
The	knowledge	is	not	yours.	How	can	you	be	proud	of	it?
And	 the	question	 is	 not	 to	 cover	 the	 ignorance.	The	question	 is	 to	bring	 some
light,	so	that	the	ignorance,	the	darkness,	disappears.
I	 cannot	 give	 you	 any	 better	 answer	 than	D.H.	 Lawrence,	 but	 I	 can	 give	 you
something	else	which	Lawrence	has	no	insight	about.
I	can	give	you	a	space,	a	silence	in	which	you	can	realize	the	mystery	on	your
own.
You	ask	the	question,	whatever	the	question	is.	Just	remember:	don't	ask	out	of
knowledge,	ask	out	of	your	own	authentic	ignorance.
And	my	answers	are	not	answers,	in	fact.	My	answers	are	killers	--	they	simply
kill	the	question,	they	take	away	the	question,	they	don't	give	you	any	answer	to
hold	on	to.
And	that	is	the	difference	between	a	teacher	and	a	master:	the	teacher	gives	you
answers	 so	 that	you	can	hold	 those	answers	and	 remain	 ignorant	 --	beautifully
decorated	 on	 the	 surface,	 libraries	 full	 of	 answers,	 but	 underneath,	 below	 the
surface,	an	abysmal	ignorance.
The	master	simply	kills	your	questions.
He	does	not	give	you	an	answer,	he	takes	away	the	question.
If	all	your	questions	can	be	taken	away...	listen	carefully	to	what	I	am	saying:	If
all	your	questions	can	be	taken	away,	your	ignorance	is	bound	to	disappear,	and
what	remains	is	innocence.
And	innocence	is	a	light	unto	itself.
In	that	innocence	you	don't	know	any	question,	any	answer,	because	the	whole
realm	of	questions	and	answers	is	left	behind.	It	has	become	irrelevant,	you	have
transcended	it.
You	are	pure	of	questions	and	pure	of	answers.
This	state	is	enlightenment.	And	if	you	are	courageous	enough,	you	can	go	even
beyond	it.
This	will	give	you	all	 the	beautiful	experiences	described	by	the	mystics	down
the	 ages:	Your	 heart	will	 dance	with	 ecstasy,	 your	whole	 being	will	 become	 a
beautiful	sunrise...
thousands	of	lotuses	blossoming	in	you.
If	you	want,	you	can	make	your	home	here.
In	the	past,	people	have	stopped	here,	because	where	can	you	find	a	better	place?
Gautam	Buddha	has	called	this	place	the	"Lotus	Paradise."
But	if	you	are	a	born	seeker....
I	will	suggest:	have	a	little	rest,	enjoy	all	the	beauties	of	enlightenment	but	don't
make	it	a	full-stop.
Go	 beyond,	 because	 life,	 its	 journey,	 is	 unending	 and	much	more	 is	 going	 to
happen	which	is	absolutely	indescribable.
The	 experience	 of	 enlightenment	 is	 also	 beyond	 description,	 but	 it	 has	 been
described	by	all	who	have	experienced	it.	They	all	say	it	 is	beyond	description
and	still	they	describe	it
--	that	it	is	full	of	light,	that	it	is	full	of	joy,	that	it	is	the	ultimate	in	blissfulness.
If	this	is	not	description	then	what	is	description?
I	 am	 saying	 it	 for	 the	 first	 time:	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 the	 people	who	 have
become	 enlightened	 have	 been	 saying	 that	 it	 cannot	 be	 described,	 and	 at	 the
same	time	have	been	describing	it,	have	been	their	whole	lives	singing	it.
But	 beyond	 enlightenment	 you	 certainly	 enter	 into	 a	 world	 which	 is
indescribable.
Because	in	enlightenment	you	still	are;	otherwise	who	is	feeling	the	blissfulness,
who	is	seeing	the	light?	Kabir	says,	"...	as	if	thousands	of	suns	have	risen."	Who
is	seeing	it?
Enlightenment	 is	 the	 ultimate	 experience	 --	 but	 still	 it	 is	 experience,	 and	 the
experiencer	is	there.
Going	beyond	it,	there	is	no	experiencer.
You	dissolve.
First	 you	were	 trying	 to	 dissolve	 your	 problems;	 now	you	 dissolve	 --	 because
existentially	 you	 are	 the	 problem.	 Your	 separation	 from	 existence	 is	 the	 only
question	which	has	to	be	solved.
You	lose	your	boundaries,	you	are	no	more.	Who	is	there	to	experience?
You	need	tremendous	courage	to	drop	the	ego	to	achieve	enlightenment.
You	will	need	a	million	times	more	courage	to	drop	yourself	to	attain	the	beyond
--	and	the	beyond	is	the	real.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	FAMILIAR	WITH	THE	MASTER-DISCIPLE	RELATIONSHIP	AFTER
YEARS
OF	BEING	AROUND	YOU.
COULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT	ON	THE	DISCIPLE-DISCIPLE
RELATIONSHIP?
There	is	no	such	thing.
Disciples	in	the	past	have	created	organizations.	That	was	their	relationship,	that
"we	 are	 Christians,"	 that	 "we	 are	 Mohammedans,"	 that	 "we	 belong	 to	 one
religion,	 to	one	 faith	 and	because	we	belong	 to	one	 faith,	we	are	brothers	 and
sisters.	We	will	live	for	the	faith	and	we	will	die	for	the	faith."
All	organizations	have	arisen	out	of	the	relationships	between	disciples.
In	fact,	two	disciples	are	not	connected	with	each	other	at	all.
Each	disciple	is	connected	with	the	master	in	his	individual	capacity.
A	 master	 can	 be	 connected	 with	 millions	 of	 disciples,	 but	 the	 connection	 is
personal,	not	organizational.
Disciples	 don't	 have	 any	 relationship.	 Yes,	 they	 have	 a	 certain	 friendliness,	 a
certain	lovingness.
I	am	avoiding	the	word	`relationship'	because	that	is	binding.	I	am	not	calling	it
friendship	even,	but	`friendliness'	--	because	they	are	all	fellow	travelers	walking
on	the	same	path,	in	love	with	the	same	master,	but	they	are	related	to	each	other
through	the	master.
They	are	not	related	to	each	other	directly.
That	 has	 been	 the	 most	 unfortunate	 thing	 in	 the	 past:	 that	 disciples	 became
organized,	related	amongst	themselves,	and	they	were	all	ignorant.
And	ignorant	people	can	only	create	more	nuisance	in	 the	world	than	anything
else.	All	the	religions	have	done	exactly	that.
My	 people	 are	 related	 to	me	 individually.	 And	 because	 they	 are	 on	 the	 same
path,	certainly	they	become	acquainted	with	each	other.	A	friendliness	arises,	a
loving	atmosphere,	but	I	don't	want	to	call	it	any	kind	of	relationship.
We	have	suffered	too	much	because	of	disciples	getting	directly	related	to	each
other,	creating	religions,	sects,	cults,	and	then	fighting.	They	cannot	do	anything
else.
At	least	with	me,	remember	it:	you	are	not	related	to	each	other	in	any	way	at	all.
Just	 a	 liquid	 friendliness,	 not	 a	 solid	 friendship,	 is	 enough	 --	 and	 far	 more
beautiful,	and	without	any	possibility	of	harming	humanity	in	the	future.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 HERE,	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 TORN	 APART	 BETWEEN
WANTING
TO	ASK	YOU	A	QUESTION	 --	WANTING	TO	EXPOSE	MYSELF	 --	AND
TRYING
EVERYTHING	TO	AVOID	THAT.	IT	FEELS	AS	IF	I	HAVE	BEEN	STUCK	IN
THIS
POSITION	FOR	YEARS.
WHAT	IS	THIS	FEAR,	OSHO?
There	is	only	one	basic	fear.
All	other	small	fears	are	byproducts	of	the	one	main	fear	that	every	human	being
carries	with	himself.
The	fear	is	of	losing	yourself.	It	may	be	in	death,	it	may	be	in	love,	but	the	fear	is
the	same:	You	are	afraid	of	losing	yourself.
And	the	strangest	thing	is	that	only	those	people	are	afraid	of	losing	themselves
who	don't	have	themselves.	Those	who	have	themselves	are	not	afraid.
So	it	is	really	a	question	of	exposure.
You	 don't	 have	 anything	 to	 lose;	 you	 just	 believe	 that	 you	 have	 something	 to
lose.
I	was	 traveling	with	Mulla	Nasruddin...	and	 the	 ticket	checker	came.	 I	showed
him	my	ticket,	and	Mulla	started	searching	for	his	ticket.	He	opened	one	of	his
suitcases,	then	another	suitcase,	went	through	all	his	pockets	--	coat,	pants,	shirt
--	but	I	saw	that	he	was	avoiding	one	pocket.
Watching	him,	even	the	ticket	checker	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	You	are	a	well-
known	person.	You	can't	travel	without	a	ticket,	it	must	be	somewhere.	You	have
so	much	luggage,"	he	said,	"I	will	be	coming	back	in	the	second	round.	By	that
time	you	may	have	found	it."
He	went	away,	and	Mulla	was	still	perspiring	and	searching	for	the	ticket.
I	said,	"Mulla,	 I	can	see	only	one	 thing	--	 that	you	are	 looking	 into	everything
but	you	are	not	looking	into	one	pocket."
He	said,	"Just	don't	raise	that	question,	because	I	am	already	in	such	trouble."
But	I	said,	"What	has	that	pocket	to	do	with	trouble?"
He	said,	"It	has	everything	to	do	with	it.	That	is	the	only	place	I	am	hoping	that
the	 ticket	 may	 be,	 and	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 lose	 that	 hope.	 First	 let	 me	 look	 in
everything	 else.	That	 is	my	 last	 resort;	 I	 also	know	 that	 I	 am	avoiding	 it.	The
ticket	checker	was	looking	at	that	pocket,	you	are	also	looking	at	that	pocket.	It
is	not	that	I	am	not	aware.	Fully	consciously	I	am	avoiding	it,	because	if	it	is	not
there	then	the	ticket	is	nowhere."
The	fear	of	coming	close	is	the	fear	of	exposure.
Who	knows?	--	as	you	come	close	to	the	master,	in	his	presence,	in	his	light	you
may	 find	 that	 you	 don't	 exist.	 And	 that	 will	 be	 almost	 a	 death...	 bigger	 than
death.	So	people	keep	at	a	certain	distance.
Watching	the	wild	animals	in	the	jungles,	in	the	mountains,	scientists	have	come
to	discover	a	certain	idea:	that	they	have	a	territorial	imperative,	that	each	animal
has	his	own	territory.	If	you	don't	enter	his	territory,	he	will	not	bother	you,	but	if
you	enter	his	territory	you	are	in	danger,	he	can	attack	you.	In	fact,	he	feels	the
danger:	you	are	 in	his	 territory,	coming	 too	close,	and	who	knows	if	you	are	a
friend	or	a	foe?
And	 they	 have	 a	 very	 strange	 way	 of	 creating	 the	 demarcation	 line	 of	 their
territory.	You	see	the	dogs	pissing?	--	they	are	creating	their	territory.	Each	dog
has	 his	 own	 territory;	 he	 creates	 it	 not	 by	 visible	walls	 and	 fences	 but	 by	 the
smell.	Other	dogs	immediately	smell	it:	"This	territory	belongs	to	some	dog	--	be
careful."
And	the	same	is	done	even	by	lions;	they	will	go	pissing	around	a	large	territory.
And	their	urine	has	a	very	strong	smell;	no	animal	is	so	insensitive	that	he	will
not	sense	it.
And	once	he	senses	the	smell,	he	will	avoid	that	place	--	that	is	a	prohibited	area.
The	 scientists	 studying	 the	 whole	 thing	 came	 to	 a	 conclusion:	Why	 are	 these
animals	 so	 much	 interested	 in	 keeping	 a	 certain	 space	 of	 their	 own	 and	 not
allowing	anybody	else	to	enter?	--	they	found	that	it	is	fear.	The	other	animal	can
be	death.	It	is	better	to	warn	him,	and	before	he	attacks	the	best	way	to	defend
yourself	is	to	attack.	So	if	anybody	enters	your	territory,	you	attack	him	before
he	attacks	you;	and	whoever	attacks	first	has	more	chances	to	be	victorious.
In	zoos,	where	man	has	kept	animals	in	small	spaces...
Psychologists	have	been	shocked	to	learn	that	in	the	wild,	animals	never	go	mad,
never	 commit	 suicide,	 never	 become	 homosexuals,	 never	 attack	 their	 own
species.	But	in	a	zoo	they	start	doing	strange	things:	they	become	homosexuals,
they	start	attacking	their	own	species.	Otherwise,	except	man,	no	animal	attacks
his	own	species.	It	is	a	prerogative	of	humanity	--	only	a	man	kills	another	man.
No	lion	kills	another	lion.
But	 in	 a	 zoo	 it	 happens	 that	 they	 lose	 all	 their	 natural	 instinctive	 intelligence;
they	 start	 becoming	 crazy,	 mad.	 And	 strangely	 enough,	 they	 even	 start
committing	suicide,	and	the	reason	is	that	their	territory	has	been	taken	away	and
they	are	living	in	constant	fear.	So	many	animals	so	close	--	they	cannot	sleep,
they	cannot	relax,	the	other	animal	may	attack.
They	 have	 lost	 their	 freedom,	 they	 have	 lost	 their	 sleep,	 they	 have	 lost	 their
sanity.	And	to	live	in	such	conditions,	a	point	comes	when	it	is	better	to	commit
suicide	 rather	 than	 live	 in	 such	 torture.	You	 don't	 see	 the	 torture	 because	 you
don't	know	that	they	are	suffering	from	a	special	cause:	they	need	space.
And	 as	 humanity	 has	 grown	 in	 population,	murders	 have	 grown,	 crimes	 have
grown,	homosexuality	has	grown,	lesbianism	has	grown.	People	are	committing
suicide	 like	 anything.	War	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 thing	we	 are	 preparing	 for;	 it
seems	war	is	the	only	thing	we	are	born	for.
Perhaps	it	is	the	territorial	imperative.	Perhaps	man	has	lost	his	feeling	of	space.
Just	 see	 what	 territorial	 imperative	 is	 possible	 in	 a	 local	 train.	 Look	 at	 what
territorial	imperative	is	possible	on	the	road.	Still,	if	you	watch	carefully,	even	in
a	 local	 train	people	are	standing	 in	such	a	way	 that	nobody	 touches	 them,	still
making	their	last	effort	to	keep	a	certain	distance.	It	may	be	just	inches,	but	just	a
little	distance	will	give	them	breathing	space.
Psychologically,	 man	 is	 afraid	 to	 come	 close	 to	 anybody	whose	 presence	 can
become	an	exposure,	whose	eyes	can	be	so	penetrative,	like	x-rays,	who	can	see
you	through	and	through.
And	 you	 are	 afraid	 that	 perhaps	 nothing	will	 be	 found	 --	 there	 is	 nobody,	 the
house	is	empty.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 questions:	 you	 are	 afraid	 to	 ask	 authentic	 questions
coming	 out	 of	 your	 ignorance	 because	 you	 will	 be	 allowing	 yourself	 to	 be
exposed	as	an	ignorant	person.
Everybody	is	pretending	to	be	knowledgeable.
In	my	village	there	was	a	certain	man...	a	little	loose	in	the	head,	so	I	was	very
much	interested	in	him.	I	am	always	interested	in	people	who	are	a	little	loose;
they	are	special	people.
His	 name	was	 Sunderlal,	 but	 I	 used	 to	 call	 him	Doctor	 Sunderlal.	 At	 first	 he
could	 not	 believe	 it	 --	why	 am	 I	 calling	 him	doctor?	He	 asked	me,	 "You	 said
DOCTOR?"
I	said,	"You	arèdoctor'.	In	this	village,	nobody	is	more	knowledgeable	than	you
are."
He	said,	"That's	true."
I	said,	"In	this	village,	you	are	a	D.Litt.,	a	doctor."
He	said,	"Are	you	joking?"
I	said,	"Why	should	I	joke?	A	fact	is	a	fact.	If	you	want,	I	can	bring	a	few	people
as	witnesses."
He	said,	"No,	no,	there	is	no	need.	I	trust	in	you;	if	you	are	saying	it,	then	it	must
be	so."
The	next	 day	 I	 saw	 that	 he	 had	hung	 a	 board	on	his	 house:	Doctor	Sunderlal,
D.Litt.
The	whole	 town	was	 agog...	 suddenly	 this	 crazy	man...	 "Which	university	 has
given	him	a	D.Litt.?"
I	reached	his	home	and	I	said,	"You	have	done	the	right	thing.	It	is	not	a	question
of	any	university	--	what	rights	do	they	have	to	give	you	a	D.Litt.?	--	it	is	your
declaration."
He	said,	"That's	right.	Because	my	father	was	saying,	`You	idiot,	you	are	writing
Doctor	Sunderlal,	D.Litt.	 --	 the	 police	will	 come!	You	will	 be	 caught	 in	 some
trouble;	don't	listen	to	that	man.'"
I	said,	"There	is	no	question;	 it	 is	your	declaration	that	Ìn	this	village	I	am	the
most	knowledgeable	person.	If	anybody	has	any	doubts...	open	challenge!'"
He	said,	"Should	it	be	written	underneath	the	board?"
I	said,	"It	should	be	written	underneath	the	board."
So	a	certain	board	was	made	on	which	he	wrote,	 "This	 is	a	declaration	 that	 in
this	 village	 I	 am	 the	 most	 knowledgeable	 person.	 And	 if	 somebody	 has	 any
doubts,	that	means	an	open	challenge	for	a	discussion."
Now,	who	wanted	to	discuss	with	that	fellow?	He	was	so	crazy;	nobody	turned
up.	 And	 he	 was	 sitting	 in	 a	 chair	 just	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 board	 waiting	 for
somebody	to	come.
I	inquired	two	or	three	times,	"Has	anybody	turned	up?"
He	said,	"Nobody...	people	come,	they	read	and	they	go	again!	Even	my	father
said	 that	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 something	 in	 it,	 because	 nobody	 is	 making	 any
objection.	Even	the	police	inspector	came,	read	the	whole	thing	and	went	away:
Ìf	it	is	a	declaration....'"
Just	a	few	years	ago	the	man	died,	and	he	died	as	"Doctor	Sunderlal,	D.Litt."	In
the	newspapers	it	was	printed,	"Doctor	Sunderlal,	D.Litt.	has	died."	And	nobody
ever	 asked	 or	 bothered,	 because	 nobody	 was	 ready	 to	 accept	 the	 challenge.
Everybody	was	afraid,	because	to	discuss	with	that	crazy	fellow...	he	could	say
anything.	He	could	raise	questions	that	you	could	not	answer,	he	could	criticize
anything.
And	they	all	knew	that	I	was	supporting	him.	I	had	told	him,	"Don't	be	worried.
If	somebody	accepts	the	challenge	I	will	be	there	by	your	side	to	help	you."
He	said,	"I	am	not	worried.	I	have	defeated	my	wife,	my	cousin,	my	brother.	I
have	defeated	my	family	completely,	and	I	know	that	in	this	village	they	are	the
average	people,	so	I	have	defeated	the	village.	Should	I	try	to	make	the	territory
a	little	bigger?"
I	 said,	 "No,	 you	 should	 keep	 the	 territory	 just	 as	 the	 village.	 It	 is	 enough	 --
because	you	have	 the	D.Litt.,	you	have	declared	 it.	Now,	no	need	 to	make	 the
territory	bigger,	because	that	may	create	trouble.	In	this	village	you	are	the	only
one	whose	head	is	loose.	In	other	villages	there	may	be	somebody	who	has	the
same	 kind	 of	 loose	 head	 --	 unnecessary	 trouble	 will	 arise.	 You	 just	 remain
silent."
And	people	started	calling	him	"Doctor	Sunderlal."	And	by	and	by,	people	forgot
all	about...	he	was	accepted	as	Doctor	Sunderlal,	D.Litt.	That	almost	became	his
name.
Your	knowledge...	whether	you	have	declared	it	or	not,	deep	down	you	believe
that	you	know	so	much.	And	all	that	you	know	is	not	yours.
Coming	 closer	 to	 a	 person	 in	 whose	 light	 your	 knowledge	 will	 start	 melting,
disappearing,	evaporating,	 leaving	you	naked	in	your	 ignorance,	you	are	afraid
even	to	ask	a	question.
I	 have	 seen	 people,	 thousands	 of	 people	 in	 my	 life,	 asking	me	 questions	 and
saying	that
"This	 is	 a	 question	 from	 one	 of	my	 friends."	 And	when	 I	 used	 to	 see	 people
personally,	I	would	tell	 them,	"The	best	way	will	be	that	you	send	your	friend.
And	he	can	say	the	same	thing:	`This	is	a	question	from	one	of	my	friends.'"
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
I	 said,	 "You	have	understood...	 this	 is	 your	 question.	But	 you	don't	 even	have
guts	to	say
`This	is	my	question.'	Knowledge,	which	you	claim	as	yours,	is	all	from	others.
And	the	question	--	which	you	are	saying	is	some	friend's	question	--	is	yours."	I
said,	"Bring	your	friend.	Tomorrow,	come	with	your	friend.	I	would	like	to	see
the	friend,	because	the	question	is	very	important."
He	said,	"The	question	is	important?"
I	said,	"It	is	a	very	important	question,	and	I	would	like	to	see	the	person."
He	said,	"Forgive	me...	really	it	is	my	question."
People	are	afraid	to	expose	themselves.
But	 to	be	with	a	master,	one	of	 the	basic	rules	 is	 that	you	will	drop	your	fears
and	you	will	 stand	naked	 in	your	 ignorance,	because	 from	 that	 ignorance	your
innocence	can	be	achieved.
From	your	knowledge,	no	route	goes	to	innocence.
Only	from	your	ignorance	is	there	a	pathway	to	innocence.
Hence	I	repeat	again:	a	vast	knowledge	which	is	borrowed	is	of	no	meaning.	But
a	small	ignorance	that	is	yours	is	a	treasure,	because	from	that	ignorance	opens
the	door	to	your	innocence.
And	 it	 is	 innocence	 that	 becomes	 the	 light,	 that	 becomes	 the	 incense	 and	 the
fragrance.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONCE	 YOU	 TOLD	 ME	 THAT	 THE	 SPRING	 HAD	 COME,	 BUT	 MY
ANXIETY	IS
THAT	I	HAVE	LOST	EVERYTHING,	THAT	THE	GARBAGE	HAS	TAKEN
OVER
COMPLETELY,	AND	THAT	I	CANNOT	KEEP	MYSELF	OPEN	TO	YOU	AS
A	DISCIPLE	UNLESS	I	AM	CONTINUALLY	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE.
CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 THE	 SEED	 OF	 SPIRITUAL
GROWTH
WHICH	YOU	PLANT	IN	US	AND	WHETHER	IT	CAN	DIE?
Pankaja,	the	seed	is	immortal,	it	cannot	die.
But	it	can	remain	dormant;	it	can	remain	dormant	for	lives.
If	 the	 right	 soil	 is	 not	 provided,	 if	 the	 right	water	 is	 not	 provided,	 if	 the	 right
exposure	to	the	sunlight	is	not	provided,	it	will	remain	dormant,	a	potentiality,	a
waiting	--	but	it	cannot	die.	You	may	die	many	times,	but	the	seed,	once	planted
in	you,	will	go	on	following	your	consciousness	wherever	you	are.
Unless	you	give	 it	 your	 attention,	nourishment,	your	 care,	your	 love,	 it	 cannot
become	a	living	sprout.	Small,	fresh	green	leaves	cannot	come	out	of	it.
Only	your	love	and	your	consciousness	can	create	the	miracle...	and	the	day	will
not	be	far	away	when	there	will	be	flowers.
There	are	people	here	who	have	been	carrying	seeds	from	other	masters.	I	do	not
need	to	sow	new	seeds	in	them;	all	that	I	need	is	to	help	their	dormant	seeds	to
open	up.
You	are	not	here	for	 the	first	 time.	You	have	been	here	always	--	perhaps	with
Zarathustra,	 perhaps	 with	 Pythagoras,	 perhaps	 with	 Heraclitus,	 perhaps	 with
Gautam	Buddha.
It	is	very	rare	that	a	person	comes	to	me	who	needs	a	new	seed	--	because	you
are	all	ancient	people.	It	is	almost	impossible	not	to	have	come	in	contact	with
one	 of	 the	 magicians	 of	 the	 soul;	 those	 people	 are	 magnets.	 So	 in	 some	 life,
somewhere,	 you	 may	 have	 met	 al-Hillaj	 Mansoor,	 Jalaluddin	 Rumi,	 Kabir	 or
Nanak.
Very	 rarely	do	 I	 find	a	person	who	 is	not	 already	pregnant	 --	but	 the	 seed	has
remained	 the	 seed,	 you	 have	 not	 been	 a	 gardener	 to	 it.	 Somebody,	with	 great
compassion,	must	 have	 sown	 the	 seed,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 been	 kind	 enough	 to
yourself.
The	seed	never	dies.
And	Pankaja,	 you	understand	perfectly	well	 that	 your	mind	 is	 full	 of	 garbage.
This	very	understanding	is	enough	to	get	rid	of	it.
But	 it	 seems	 the	problem	 is	 that	 this	garbage	 is	paying	you;	 it	 is	 in	 some	way
fulfilling	your	ego.
Pankaja	is	a	novelist,	is	well	known	as	a	novelist.
I	have	worked	with	many	kinds	of	celebrities;	they	are	the	most	third-rate	people
to	work	with	 for	 the	 simple	 that	 their	 celebrity	 has	 become	 part	 of	 their	 ego.
They	cannot	drop	the	ego,	because	if	they	drop	the	ego	the	celebrity	disappears.
And	 the	 celebrity,	 the	 famousness,	 their	 name,	 has	 become	 so	 important	 to
them...	 it	has	become	 their	 identity	 in	 the	world.	Where	millions	of	people	are
without	any	identity,	they	have	an	identity.
For	them,	to	drop	the	ego	is	very	difficult	--	and	understandably;	it	is	arduous.
A	person	who	is	not	a	celebrity	has	a	small	ego.	In	fact,	to	have	it	or	not	to	have
it	does	not	make	much	difference;	he	is	already	nobody.	He	can	drop	it,	and	by
dropping	it	he	can	gain	the	whole	beautiful	existence	and	all	its	benediction.	By
becoming	nobody,	he	can	open	the	doors	to	the	universe	and	its	blessings.
But	all	the	celebrities	that	have	come	to	me	from	different	fields,	have	all	proved
to	be	 failures.	They	 take	 the	most	 time,	but	 they	have	a	problem	because	 their
ego	 is	 involved	 with	 their	 name	 and	 fame.	 Even	 if	 they	 understand	 that	 it	 is
garbage,	the	garbage	is	paying	them	so	much	that	they	want	to	cling	to	it	a	little
more	--	perhaps	tomorrow	or	the	day	after	tomorrow	they	will	drop	it.	They	have
understood	the	point,	but	just	to	drop	it	right	now	seems	too	much.
I	am	reminded	of	a	very	great	 thinker,	Voltaire.	He	was	famous	in	his	country,
and	it	was	a	convention	in	the	country	that	if	you	could	get	a	small	piece	of	cloth
from	a	famous	man	like	Voltaire,	you	could	make	a	beautiful	locket	out	of	it.	It
was	a	great	security,	safety	against	dangers,	disease,	sickness,	death.
When	Voltaire	used	to	go	out	of	his	house,	he	would	come	home	almost	naked,
because	crowds	would	follow	him,	tearing	his	clothes	--	and	not	only	his	clothes,
he	would	 get	 scratched	 on	 the	 body.	He	 had	 to	 ask	 for	 police	 protection	 if	 he
wanted	to	go	to	the	railway	station	or	to	go	to	some	other	place.	Without	police
protection	 it	 was	 impossible,	 because	 to	 reach	 the	 railway	 station	 naked,
scratched	 all	 over,	 blood	 all	 over,	 would	 not	 look	 right...	 although	 he	 deeply
enjoyed	it,	because	he	was	the	only	man	in	the	whole	country	who	was	so	much
respected.	This	was	a	respect	given	by	people.
But	in	the	world,	everything	goes	on	changing.	The	name	and	the	fame	is	just	a
soap	 bubble.	 It	 may	 become	 very	 big	 --	 the	 bigger	 it	 becomes,	 the	 more
dangerous,	because	it	is	going	to	burst	soon.
And	the	day	came	when	Voltaire	was	forgotten;	somebody	else	had	become	the
celebrity.
Now	 there	was	 no	 need	 for	 police	 protection.	 People	 even	 forgot	 that	 he	was
alive.	In	his	notebooks	he	has	written,	"I	enjoyed	those	days.	But	at	that	time	I
used	to	think	that	it	would	be	better	not	to	be	known	at	all,	just	to	be	a	nobody,	to
live	silently,	because	life	had	become	a	nightmare.	But	when	I	became	nobody,
then	 I	 started	 feeling	 great	 despair	 that	 I	 had	 lost	 my	 respect,	 my	 name,	 my
fame."
And	he	does	not	say	in	his	notes	that	this	was	what	he	wanted,	to	be	nobody.	He
had	become	nobody	now,	but	it	was	not	a	joy,	it	was	a	defeat.
He	wrote,	"I'm	dying	a	defeated	man."	And	the	day	he	died,	only	four	persons
carried	his	body	to	the	graveyard.	Of	the	four	persons,	one	was	his	dog	and	three
were	his	neighbors
--	and	those	three	had	to	carry	the	body	because	otherwise	it	would	start	rotting
and	 the	 neighborhood	would	 become	 a	 hell	 to	 live	 in.	 Somehow	he	 had	 to	 be
thrown	into	a	grave.
So	in	fact	the	only	person	who	lovingly	followed	was	the	dog.
And	 this	was	 the	man	who	was	 followed	by	 thousands	of	people	wherever	he
went.
Pankaja,	your	garbage	is	paying	you.	You	can	choose	it,	there	is	no	problem.	But
choose	 consciously,	 that	 you	 choose	 garbage	 because	 it	 is	 paying	 you.
Consciously	chosen,	it	won't	last	long.	Don't	fight	with	it;	fighting	will	not	help.
Or	if	you	are	courageous	enough,	see	a	simple	point:	even	if	you	write	hundreds
of	novels	and	inside	you	remain	just	a	wound	which	is	hurting	twenty-four	hours
a	 day,	 your	whole	 life	 is	wasted	 in	misery	 just	 to	 fulfill	 a	 non-existential	 ego.
Tomorrow	you	will	die,	and	the	day	after	tomorrow	nobody	will	remember	you.
How	many	novelists	have	been	in	this	world?	And	who	cares	about	them	today?
And	they	all	must	have	suffered	in	the	same	way,	because	what	they	were	doing
was	garbage.
You	may	be	a	big	garbage	truck.	It	does	not	matter	--	big	or	small	--	if	you	can
have	a	little	courage	and	throw	away	all	this	garbage	and	clean	yourself,	perhaps
something	 beautiful	may	 come	out	 of	 you	which	may	 be	 helpful	 to	 humanity,
which	may	be	remembered	for	centuries;	not	only	remembered,	but	may	have	a
certain	transforming	effect	on	people.
But	 the	 garbage	 that	 you	 are	 writing	 is	 just	 journalistic.	 Nobody	 bothers
tomorrow	about	today's	newspaper.
I	used	to	live	in	a	place	where	a	retired	man,	who	was	a	little	eccentric....	Retired
people	become	eccentric,	 having	nothing	 to	do.	And	nobody	wants	 to	become
useless	--	it	hurts.
Nobody	wants	to	be	just	a	burden.
And	in	the	family,	nobody	cares	about	the	old	man.	In	fact,	they	want	to	get	rid
of	 these	people	because	 they	are	unnecessarily	a	nuisance.	Young	people	have
their	 own	 life,	 their	 own	 enjoyment,	 their	 own	 entertainment,	 and	 these	 old
fellows	 are	 continually	 interrupting,	 condemning,	 making	 them	 feel	 guilty	 or
constantly	irritable.	And	they	have	nothing	to	do;	twenty-four	hours	a	day	they
are	sitting	there.	Naturally,	they	need	some	work;	they	become	great	critics	about
everything.
He	used	to	come	to	me.	I	was	in	the	university	--	for	just	one	or	two	hours	I	was
teaching	 in	 the	university	 and	 then	 I	was	back.	He	used	 to	 come	 to	me,	 and	 I
loved	to	listen	to	him.
He	was	very	happy	with	me,	because	he	 said	 "You	are	 the	only	man	who	has
patience	to	listen;	otherwise,	nobody	bothers.	I	am	saying	such	significant	things
and	nobody	cares."
But	how	long	could	I	tolerate	him?
So	I	used	to	give	him	the	newspapers,	magazines,	so	he	would	read	them	and	he
would	 get	 into	 them	 and	 leave	 me	 alone.	 Sometimes	 it	 would	 happen	 that	 I
would	give	him	an	old	newspaper	just	by	mistake.	He	would	start	reading	it	--	so
deeply	engrossed	--	and	then	I	would	look	at	the	date.	I	would	say,	"My	God,	I
have	 given	 him	 an	 old	 newspaper."	 And	 I	 would	 tell	 him,	 "This	 is	 an	 old
newspaper.	I	will	give	you	the	new,	the	fresh."
He	said,	"It	doesn't	matter	--	almost	ninety	percent	of	 it	 is	 the	same	news.	Just
for	 ten	percent,	who	cares?	To	me,	 it	 is	all	 the	same.	When	you	are	not	 in	 the
house	I	come	and	ask	the	gardener.	He	does	not	allow	me	into	your	study,	but	he
brings	newspapers	and	I	sit	in	the	garden.	And	sometimes	he	brings	one-year-old
newspapers!	But	I	say	it	does	not	matter;	the	same	things	go	on	happening,	so	I
read.	Even	your	gardener	says	to	me,	`My	God,	this	is	one	year	old.	You	wait,
my	master	will	be	coming	soon;	 then	I	will	bring	the	fresh	newspapers.'	And	I
say,	`Don't	be	worried,	I	just	enjoy	reading.'	And	it	is	the	same	-
-	 somebody	 has	 been	 killed,	 somebody	 has	 been	 murdered,	 somebody	 has
committed	 suicide,	 somebody	 has	 been	 assassinated,	 somewhere	 some
government	is	changed.	It	does	not	matter	to	me	who	rules	in	Brazil	--	what	does
it	matter?"
My	gardener	told	me,	"That	old	fellow	is	a	philosopher."
I	said,	"How	have	you	discovered	that	he	is	a	philosopher?"
He	 said,	 "He	 has	 a	 very	 philosophical	 attitude;	 he	 reads	 a	 year-old	 newspaper
and	he	reads	it	with	such	concentration.	And	when	I	ask,	he	says,	`What	does	it
matter?	Time	passes	on.	Just	one	year	ago	this	was	new,	and	what	is	new	today
will	 be	 old	 one	 year	 afterwards.	 And	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 it	 is	 only	 a
question	of	passing	time,	so	what	I	am	reading	does	not	matter.'"
Pankaja,	 I	would	 like	you	first	 to	be	clean,	 innocent,	silent.	And	 then	 if	out	of
that	 silence	 something	 is	 born,	 that	 will	 be	 a	 contribution	 to	 the	 universe.
Otherwise,	out	of	the	garbage	you	can	go	on	writing	novels,	and	they	will	sell,
because	 people	 need	 something	 to	 read	 and	 throw	 away.	But	 they	 don't	 know
that	somebody	has	put	his	life,	wasted	his	life	in	writing	these	novels.	Somebody
has	missed	his	buddhahood.
It	is	up	to	you	to	choose.
It	cannot	be	forced	upon	anybody.
I	can	just	give	you	a	hint	--	that	it	is	time.
And	you	 are	mature	 enough:	 you	 have	written	 your	 novels,	 and	 you	 know	all
that	is	garbage.
It	 shows,	 because	 people	 love	 to	 read	 anything.	 Railway	 bookstalls	 need
garbage,	 airport	 bookstalls	 need	 garbage;	 everywhere	 garbage	 is	 also	 needed
because	people	need	garbage.	But	why	should	you	waste	your	life?
And	you	have	the	possibility	to	give	birth	to	something	really	significant	--	but	a
breakthrough	is	needed.	You	need	a	discontinuity.
You	 forget	 what	 you	 have	 been	 doing,	 forget	 the	 name	 and	 the	 fame	 and
anything	that	it	brings	to	you.
Just	be	a	nobody,	enjoy	being	nobody.
And	I	tell	you	that	in	being	nobody	there	is	a	freedom.
And	 then	 one	 day	 you	 will	 find	 that	 the	 seed	 that	 is	 within	 you	 has	 started
growing.	And	then	if	something	out	of	your	own	experience	comes	to	be	written
by	you,	it	will	be	significant	for	you,	it	will	be	significant	for	others.	Anything
that	 can	 really	make	 life	 a	 little	more	 beautiful,	 a	 little	more	musical,	 a	 little
more	poetic,	is	going	to	help	you	too.	It	is	possible	only	because	of	your	growth.
You	can	collect	all	kinds	of	 information	--	 read	 ten	novels,	and	 the	eleventh	 is
born	--	that	is	one	way	that	is	being	followed	by	all	writers,	poets,	painters.	But
they	are	third-rate,	and	they	will	be	forgotten.
Something	meaningful	only	comes	from	your	very	innermost	being.
But	before	that,	you	have	to	throw	all	the	rubbish	off;	otherwise,	the	rubbish	is
so	much	and	the	seed	is	so	small,	it	is	lost	in	the	rubbish.
I	hope	that	you	will	be	able	to	do	what	I	am	saying;	otherwise,	I	would	not	have
said	it.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	No	other	path	but	life
5	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610055
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
122
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	COME	EVERYTHING	IS	GOING	SO	WELL?
Gandharaj,	the	question	is	not	a	laughing	matter.
It	 touches	something	of	tremendous	value	in	human	misery,	in	human	anguish,
in	human	reality.	It	creates	laughter	because	it	looks	absurd	to	ask	why	things	are
going	so	well.
We	have	become	accustomed	to	things	never	going	so	well.
We	 are	 well	 acquainted	 with	 the	 misery,	 the	 pain,	 the	 darkness,	 the
meaninglessness,	the	whole	tragedy	of	human	existence.	It	has	gone	to	our	very
bones,	blood	and	marrow;	we	accept	it	as	if	it	is	our	nature.
If	things	are	going	wrong,	it	seems	natural.
If	 things	 are	 not	 going	 wrong,	 then	 something	 must	 be	 wrong	 --	 how	 come
things	are	going	so	well?	We	have	forgotten	the	language	of	well-being,	we	have
forgotten	the	taste	of	blissfulness.
We	have	forgotten	our	own	nature.
The	natural	thing	is	that	things	should	go	well;	for	their	going	well,	no	reason	is
needed.
You	are	healthy	--	you	don't	go	to	the	doctor	to	ask	him,	"What	is	the	matter	with
me?	I	am	healthy."	You	go	to	the	doctor	when	you	are	not	healthy,	when	you	are
sick.
When	 people	 are	 young,	 they	 don't	 ask,	 "What	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 life?"	 Their
youth,	 their	 overflowing	 energy,	 is	 enough	 meaning,	 is	 enough	 significance.
They	 are	 still	 capable	 of	 love.	 They	 are	 still	 capable	 of	 a	 dance,	 a	 song,	 a
celebration.	Death	has	not	overshadowed	their	lives	yet.
The	moment	a	person	starts	asking,	"What	is	the	meaning	of	life?"	it	means	he
has	 become	 old	 --	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 at	 what	 age.	 His	 question	 emphatically
shows	 that	 he	 has	 lost	 touch	 with	 life,	 lost	 touch	 with	 love,	 lost	 touch	 with
vitality,	 and	 wherever	 he	 looks	 it	 is	 all	 emptiness.	 The	 question	 has	 become
significant	to	him	--	why	is	he	living?	In	fact,	he	has	died;	his	life	is	posthumous.
The	moment	a	person	asks,	"What	is	the	meaning	of	life?"	it	is	the	question	of	a
dead	man	--	who	still	breathes,	whose	heart	still	beats,	but	it	is	all	like	a	robot.
All	poetry,	all	rainbows	have	disappeared	...	no	sunrises	at	all.	It	seems	the	night
is	eternal.	 It	seems	that	he	must	have	dreamt	about	 the	days	when	he	had	seen
the	light;	they	were	not	real.
Old	age,	when	death	is	just	standing	close	to	you,	creates	the	question,	"What	is
the	meaning	of	life?"
But	 when	 you	 are	 alive,	 when	 death	 is	 far	 away	 beyond	 the	 horizon	 of	 your
vision,	who	cares	about	the	meaning	of	life?	--	you	live	it,	you	have	it,	you	sing
it,	you	dance	it.	It	is	in	every	breath,	it	is	in	every	beat	of	your	heart.
One	thing	has	to	be	understood	clearly:	that	the	people	who	have	asked	so-called
great	 questions	 about	 the	 meaning	 of	 life,	 about	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 very
existence,	about	the	meaning	of	love,	about	the	meaning	of	beauty,	are	thought
to	be	great	philosophers	but	they	have	one	foot	in	the	grave.	Just	before	slipping
into	their	graves,	they	are	raising	all	these	questions.
One	of	the	great	aestheticians,	a	great	philosopher	of	aesthetics,	Croce,	devoted
his	whole	 life	 to	 a	 single	 question:	What	 is	 beauty?	 In	 this	 century	 he	 stands
alone	 as	 a	 high	 peak,	 incomparable	 to	 anybody	 else.	 His	 dedication	 to	 the
question	of	beauty	is	total.	He	wrote	about	it,	he	talked	about	it,	he	taught	about
it,	 he	 dreamt	 about	 it;	 his	whole	 life	was	woven	 around	 the	question:	What	 is
beauty?
I	have	gone	through	his	writings,	and	on	each	step	I	have	felt	that	this	man	must
have	been	blind	--	only	a	blind	person	can	ask,	"What	is	beauty?"
And	 for	 almost	 one	 century,	 nobody	has	 raised	 the	 question	 of	whether	Croce
was	blind	or	not.	 I	 say	he	was	definitely	blind.	He	may	have	had	eyes,	 just	as
you	have,	but	he	had	no	perception,	no	sensitivity.	He	was	asking	the	question
what	is	beauty?	and	went	on	inquiring	about	it	--	and	the	whole	existence	is	full
of	beauty.
Even	 the	 smallest	blade	of	grass	 is	beautiful.	All	 around	 there	are	 flowers	and
stars,	birds	and	trees	and	rivers	and	mountains,	and	beautiful	human	beings.
Why	 could	 a	 man	 of	 the	 intelligence	 of	 Croce	 not	 see	 a	 simple	 thing	 --	 that
beauty	 has	 to	 be	 felt,	 not	 thought	 about?	 You	 have	 to	 see	 it,	 you	 have	 to
experience	it.	You	are	capable	of	creating	it.
But	it	is	such	a	mystery	that	it	is	beyond	explanation.
You	cannot	confine	it	in	a	definition.
But	 his	 whole	 lifelong	 effort	 shows	 only	 one	 thing:	 the	 poor	 man	 never
experienced	even	a	single	moment	of	beauty;	otherwise,	his	whole	questioning
would	have	changed.	He	would	rather	have	devoted	his	life	to	creating	beauty,	to
experiencing	beauty,	to	rejoicing	with	the	stars	and	with	the	moon	and	with	the
flowers	and	with	the	birds.	But	he	wasted	his	whole	life.
And	 to	what	 conclusion	did	he	 come	 in	 the	 end?	 --	 that	 beauty	 is	 indefinable.
This	could	have	been	told	to	him	by	anybody	in	the	very	beginning.	There	was
no	need	to	waste	a	beautiful	life,	a	precious	gift	of	existence.
And	one	cannot	be	certain	that	it	will	be	given	to	you	again;	you	cannot	even	be
certain	why	 it	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 this	 time.	Do	 you	 deserve	 it?	Have	 you
earned	it?	Does	the	existence	owe	it	to	you?	It	seems	to	be	a	sheer	gift,	a	gift	of
an	abundant	 existence,	not	bothering	about	whether	you	deserve	 it	 or	not.	Not
asking	for	your	qualifications,	not	inquiring	about	your	character,	your	morality
...	making	no	demands	on	you,	just	giving	it	without	any	conditions	attached	to
it.	Giving	it	not	as	a	business,	but	without	any	expectations	from	you	in	return;
giving	it	and	allowing	you	total	freedom	to	do	whatever	you	want	to	do	with	it.
Gandharaj,	 everything	 should	 go	 beautifully,	 easily,	 with	 a	 well-being.	 It	 is
natural.
If	something	is	not	going	well	that	means	something	is	sick,	something	is	ill.
But	all	the	great	moralists	of	the	world,	all	the	theologians,	all	the	prophets	and
messengers	of	God	have	really	messed	you	up.	They	have	made	such	demands
on	you.
They	have	taken	away	all	your	freedom.	They	have	asked	you	to	do	impossible
things,	and	naturally	you	have	failed	in	doing	them.	It	has	left	wounds	in	you	--
wounds	of	failure,	inferiority,	wounds	of	unworthiness	--	and	you	are	living	with
all	those	wounds.
Naturally,	everything	goes	wrong.
It	 is	 not	 nature,	 it	 is	 your	 great	 benefactors	 --	 the	 people	 who	 have	 been
promising	you	that	"We	are	the	saviors."	In	fact,	 they	are	the	people	who	have
created	a	sick	humanity,	a	diseased	human	mind,	a	psychology	that	is	not	sane.
Demanding	anything	unnatural	is	bound	to	create	guilt.	If	you	do	not	do	it,	you
feel	 guilty	 that	 you	 are	 not	 really	 a	 human	 being,	 that	 you	 are	 behaving	 like
subhuman	 beings,	 animals;	 that	 you	 are	 a	 sinner,	 that	 you	 are	 doing	 things
against	the	prophets	and	the	messengers	who	represent	God.
And	if	you	try	to	follow	them,	you	get	into	a	trap.	If	you	follow	them	you	have
to	go	against	nature,	and	nature	is	all	that	you	are.
You	cannot	go	against	yourself,	so	on	each	step	there	is	failure.
On	each	step	you	become	more	and	more	schizophrenic:	a	small	part	becomes
the	priest,	condemning	your	whole	nature.
Whatever	you	do	is	wrong.
Life	becomes	a	nightmare.
And	 that's	 how	man	has	 lived	 for	 thousands	of	years:	 a	 life	which	 could	have
been	 a	 beautiful	 experience	 has	 been	 turned	 into	 an	 unbearable	 torture,	 a
nightmare.
Even	if	you	want	to	wake	up	you	cannot.	The	nightmare	is	heavy	and	long	--	it	is
not	 only	yours,	 it	 is	 coming	 from	your	 forefathers;	 generation	 after	 generation
has	cultivated	it.	It	has	roots	as	ancient	as	man;	you	cannot	fight	with	it.
You	are	torn	apart.	You	cannot	fight	with	your	nature,	you	cannot	fight	with	your
sick	heritage.
And	I	say	that	on	the	whole	earth	every	man	is	living	under	the	burden	of	a	sick
heritage.
It	does	not	matter	whether	he	is	Christian	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan	--	those	are
different	names	for	the	same	sickness.
If	 you	 follow	 your	 nature,	 you	 yourself	 condemn	 yourself.	 The	whole	 society
condemns	 you.	 The	 whole	 world	 is	 against	 you,	 and	 you	 are	 also	 against
yourself.
But	you	have	to	live	your	nature.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	has	a	beautiful	 insight.	He	says	that	all	 the	religions	of	the
world	 have	 been	 against	 sex,	 but	 they	 have	 not	 been	 successful	 in	 destroying
sex;	 otherwise,	 from	 where	 do	 these	 people	 go	 on	 coming?	 This	 whole
population	explosion	...	if	your	priests	had	succeeded,	churches	would	be	empty.
But	 there	 are	 seven	 hundred	million	Catholics	 --	 certainly	 the	Catholic	 priests
have	failed	utterly.
Nietzsche	is	right.	The	religions	have	not	succeeded	in	destroying	sex.	But	they
have	 succeeded	 in	 one	 thing:	 they	 have	made	 sex	 poison,	 poisonous.	 It	 is	 no
more	a	joy,	it	is	no	more	a	thing	of	beauty,	it	is	no	more	sacred.	They	have	been
able	to	create	a	great	guilt	out	of	it.	And	what	is	right	about	sex	is	right	about	all
your	natural	instincts,	but	everything	has	been	poisoned.
So	when	things	are	not	going	right,	you	are	perfectly	at	ease.
When	things	are	going	right,	you	start	feeling	uneasy:	"What	is	the	matter?"
If	 there	 are	 wars,	 it	 is	 perfectly	 right.	 If	 there	 are	 riots	 between	 Hindus	 and
Mohammedans,	if	Mohammedans	and	Jews	are	killing	each	other,	it	is	perfectly
right.
But	if	suddenly	Jews	and	Mohammedans	start	dancing	and	singing	and	rejoicing
together,	 the	 whole	 world	 will	 be	 shocked:	 "What	 is	 going	 on?	 Have	 these
people	gone	mad?"
We	 are	 suffering	 a	wrong	 heritage,	 and	 unless	we	 get	 ourselves	 free	 from	 the
past	we	cannot	live	peacefully.
Gandharaj,	the	people	who	are	gathered	here	with	me	and	the	people	around	the
earth	who	are	with	me	have	dropped	the	past.	They	are	no	more	Hindus,	no	more
Christians,	 no	 more	 Buddhists;	 they	 are	 simply	 human	 beings.	 And	 they	 are
trying	to	live	their	nature	fully,	authentically,	without	any	guilt	and	without	any
feeling	of	sin.
Things	are	going	beautifully	well.
They	are	living	in	freedom.
The	past	is	our	slavery,	and	if	the	past	is	too	much,	then	it	is	going	to	create	our
future.
We	 are	 crushed	 between	 past	 and	 future,	 and	 the	 future	 is	 nothing	 but	 a
reproduction	of	the	past.
And	 a	 small	 moment	 of	 present	 is	 almost	 powerless	 against	 two	 eternities
pressing	it	from	both	sides.
Once	 you	 are	 free	 of	 past	 a	 tremendous	 realization	 happens:	 you	 are	 free	 of
future	also.
And	your	being	free	of	future	means	that	now	you	are	free	to	make	your	future,
it	 will	 not	 be	 made	 by	 the	 past.	 It	 will	 be	 made	 by	 your	 nature,	 by	 your
intelligence,	by	your	meditation,	by	your	silence,	by	your	love.
Gandharaj,	around	my	sannyasins	things	are	bound	to	go	easy,	because	there	is
no	sin,	no	guilt,	no	imposed	morality.
I	corrupt	people	so	much	that	they	become	innocent.
People	 are	 living	 innocently.	 They	 don't	 have	 any	 moral	 codes,	 any	 ten
commandments,	 any	 holy	 bibles.	 They	 have	 only	 their	 own	 insight	 and	 a
freedom	to	create	their	future,	to	live	according	to	their	nature	without	any	fear.
Because	there	is	no	hell,	and	there	is	no	God	to	decide	whether	you	are	right	or
wrong.
If	you	are	right,	your	life	will	be	a	life	of	joy;	if	you	are	wrong,	your	life	will	be
a	life	of	misery.
There	is	no	need	for	any	God.	Each	act	is	decisive,	intrinsically.
So	 you	 can	 feel	 your	 way:	 if	 you	 are	 moving	 rightly,	 your	 life	 will	 go	 on
growing	more	and	more	 flowers,	will	go	on	growing	bigger	and	bigger	wings.
Your	reach	towards	the	stars	will	become	easier.
And	 if	 you	 are	 doing	 something	wrong,	 your	 very	 nature	will	 say	 it	 is	wrong
because	 you	 will	 be	 suffering	 the	 consequences	 of	 your	 wrong	 acts	 here	 and
now.	You	will	not	have	to	wait	for	the	last	judgment	day.
What	a	stupid	kind	of	hypothesis,	`the	last	judgment	day'	--	one	day	everybody
will	be	awakened	from	his	grave.	Just	visualize	what	will	happen:	all	skeletons,
and	there	is	going	to	be	such	a	crowd.	At	the	place	where	you	are	sitting	there
are	at	least	ten	skeletons	underneath	you.	When	all	the	skeletons	stand	up	there
is	not	going	to	be	elbow	room,	and	there	is	going	to	be	such	shrieking,	shouting,
moaning.	Even	for	poor	God,	it	is	going	to	be	very	difficult	to	recognize	who	is
who	--	because	there	will	only	be	skeletons.
Then	 to	 judge	who	 is	going	 to	heaven	and	who	 is	going	 to	hell	 ...	 and	do	you
think	 in	 just	 one	 day?	Each	 person	 has	millions	 of	 acts,	 good	 and	 bad,	which
have	to	be	balanced,	and	there	is	only	one	God	--	and	not	very	intelligent	either.
George	Bernard	Shaw	used	 to	 say,	 "Just	 the	very	 crowd	makes	me	 feel	 that	 it
will	be	difficult	to	make	judgments.	Moreover,	half	of	the	crowd	will	be	women
...	who	will	make	it	almost	impossible!"
Perhaps	that's	why	the	 last	 judgment	day	has	not	happened	and	is	not	going	to
happen.
Because	Jesus	used	to	say	to	his	disciples,	"Soon,	in	your	life,	you	will	see	the
last	 judgment	 day	 happen"	 --	 in	 his	 disciples'	 lives.	 That	 means,	 at	 the	most,
seventy	years.
Two	 thousand	 years	 have	 passed,	 and	 as	 the	 days	 go	 by	 the	 skeletons	 go	 on
growing.
I	think	God	has	changed	his	mind.
Judgment	is	not	possible	anymore.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned	 each	 act	 brings	 its	 own	 judgment,	 and	 that	 is	more
scientific.
Why	go	on	collecting	acts	for	a	certain	day	and	then	deciding?	And	why	decide
from	outside	when	there	is	a	possibility	to	decide	from	inside?	Each	act	has	its
intrinsic	consequence.
You	 can	 figure	 it	 out:	 if	 your	 life	 is	miserable	 then	 you	 are	 doing	 something
wrong;	and	if	your	life	 is	a	merry-go-round	then	you	are	doing	everything	else
that	should	be	done	perfectly.	So	 it	 is	up	 to	you	whether	you	make	your	 life	a
merry-go-round	or	a	sorry-go-round;	there	is	nobody	to	decide	it.	You	are	the	act
and	you	are	the	judge.	And	this	seems	to	be	more	scientific,	simple.
Gandharaj,	if	everything	is	going	well,	be	happy.	And	remember	why	things	are
going	well	so	they	can	continue	to	go	more	and	more	well,	because	wellness	also
has	depth.
Just	find	out	what	it	is	that	is	making	your	life	blissful,	peaceful,	silent,	happy	--
simple	arithmetic	--	and	your	life	can	become	a	holy	life.
According	to	me,	if	you	are	living	joyously,	you	are	a	holy	man.
Only	one	 thing	you	have	 to	do:	die	 to	 the	past	 so	 that	you	can	be	 reborn	 in	 a
fresh	present	and	a	free	future.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	THERE	ANOTHER	WAY	WITHOUT	DEATH	AND	INSECURITY?
There	is	no	death	in	the	first	place.
Death	is	an	illusion.
It	is	always	somebody	else	who	dies;	you	never	die.	It	means	death	has	always
been	seen	from	the	outside,	it	is	the	outsider's	view.
Those	who	have	seen	their	inner	world	are	unanimous	in	saying	that	there	is	no
death.
Because	 you	 don't	 know	 what	 constitutes	 your	 consciousness;	 it	 is	 not
constituted	of	breathing,	it	is	not	constituted	of	heartbeats,	it	is	not	constituted	of
blood	circulation.	So	when	the	doctor	says	that	a	man	is	dead,	it	is	an	outsider's
conclusion;	all	 that	he	 is	saying	is,	"This	man	is	no	longer	breathing,	his	pulse
has	stopped,	his	heart	is	not	beating."	Are	these	three	things	equivalent	to	death?
They	are	not.
Consciousness	is	not	your	body,	nor	your	mind,	nor	your	heart.
So	when	a	person	dies,	he	dies	for	you,	not	for	himself.	For	himself	he	simply
changes	the	house,	perhaps	moves	into	a	better	apartment.	But	because	the	old
apartment	 is	 left,	 and	 you	 are	 searching	 for	 him	 in	 the	 old	 apartment	 and	you
don't	find	him	there,	you	think	the	poor	guy	is	dead.	All	that	you	should	say	is,
"The	poor	guy	escaped.	Now	where	he	has	gone,	we	don't	know."
In	fact,	medical	science	is	going	beyond	its	limits	when	it	says	that	some	person
is	dead.
Medical	 science	 has	 no	 right	 yet,	 because	 it	 has	 no	 definition	 yet	 of	 what
constitutes	death.	 It	 can	 simply	 say	 that	 "This	man	 is	no	 longer	breathing.	His
heart	 has	 stopped.	His	 pulse	 is	 no	 longer	 functioning."	To	 conclude	 that	 he	 is
dead	 is	going	beyond	what	you	are	 seeing.	But	because	 science	does	not	have
any	idea	of	consciousness,	the	death	of	the	body	becomes	the	death	of	the	being.
Those	who	have	known	the	being	...	and	it	is	not	necessary	for	it	that	you	should
die	and	then	you	know;	you	can	just	go	inside.	That's	what	I	call	meditation	--
just	 go	 inside	 and	 find	 out	what	 is	 your	 center,	 and	 at	 your	 center	 there	 is	 no
breathing,	there	is	no	heartbeat,	there	is	no	thought,	no	mind,	no	heart,	no	body,
and	still	you	are.
Once	a	person	has	experienced	himself	--	that	he	is	not	the	body,	not	the	mind,
not	the	heart,	but	pure	awareness	--	he	knows	there	is	no	death	for	him,	because
he	does	not	depend	on	the	body.
Awareness	 has	 no	 dependence	 on	 blood	 circulation.	 It	 does	 not	 depend	 on
whether	the	heart	beats	or	not,	it	does	not	depend	on	whether	the	mind	functions
or	not.	It	is	a	totally	different	world;	it	is	not	constituted	of	any	material	thing,	it
is	immaterial.
So	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 there	 is	 no	 death	 --	 it	 has	 never	 been
found.
And	if	there	is	no	death,	what	insecurity	can	there	be?
For	 an	 immortal	 life	 there	 can	 be	 no	 insecurity.	 Your	 immortality	 is	 not
dependent	on	your	bank	balance;	the	beggar	is	as	immortal	as	the	emperor.
As	far	as	people's	consciousnesses	are	concerned,	 that	 is	 the	only	world	where
true	 communism	 exists:	 they	 all	 have	 equal	 qualities,	 and	 they	 don't	 have
anything	 that	 can	be	 lost	 or	 taken	 away.	They	don't	 have	 anything	 that	 can	be
destroyed,	burned.
There	is	no	insecurity.
All	insecurity	is	a	shadow	of	death.
If	you	look	deeply,	then	every	insecure	feeling	is	rooted	in	the	fear	of	death.	But
I	am	saying	to	you	that	there	is	no	death;	hence	there	cannot	be	any	insecurity.
You	are	immortal	beings,	amritasya	putrah.
That's	 what	 the	 seers	 in	 the	 ancient	 East	 have	 said:	 You	 are	 the	 sons	 of
immortality.
And	they	were	not	misers	like	Jesus	Christ,	that	"I	am	the	only	begotten	son	of
God."	A	strange	idea	...	even	to	say	it	one	should	feel	ashamed.	"I	am	the	only
begotten	 son	 of	 God"	 ...	 what	 about	 others?	 Are	 they	 all	 bastards?	 Jesus	 is
condemning	the	whole	world!
He	is	the	son	of	God,	and	whose	sons	and	daughters	are	all	these	people?	And	it
is	strange	--	why	should	God	stop	by	giving	birth	to	only	one	child?	Is	he	spent
just	with	one	child?	Or	was	he	a	believer	in	birth	control?
I	have	been	asking	the	pope	and	Mother	Teresa,	"Your	God	must	be	a	believer	in
birth	 control,	 must	 be	 using	 things	 which	 you	 are	 prohibiting	 to	 people	 --
condoms	and	all;	otherwise,	how	is	 it	possible?	Once	he	created	a	son,	 then	at
least	one	daughter	--	that's	a	natural	tendency."
And	in	the	whole	eternity	...	having	no	fun.
The	 psychologists	 say	 that	 poor	 people	 create	 more	 children	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	they	don't	have	any	other	fun.	To	go	to	the	cinema	you	need	money,
to	go	to	the	circus	you	need	money,	to	go	to	Chowpatty	Beach	you	need	money.
Wherever	there	is	fun,	you	need	money.	So	just	go	to	bed	--	that	is	the	only	fun
without	money,	nobody	asks	for	money.
What	is	God	doing?	--	neither	can	he	go	to	Chowpatty	nor	can	he	go	to	a	circus
nor	to	a	cinema	hall.	Sitting	eternally	bored....	Just	created	one	son?	It	has	many
implications:	 perhaps	 he	was	 so	 frustrated	with	 this	 one	 son	 that	 he	 became	 a
celibate	--	"I	am	not	going	to	create	any	more	idiots."
Jesus	was	 teaching	 on	 the	 earth	 for	 just	 three	 years.	 His	 age	was	 only	 thirty-
three,	 and	he	was	 crucified	 --	 a	 great	 savior	who	could	not	 save	himself.	God
must	 have	 felt	 tremendously	 let	 down:	 "Be	 finished!	 No	more	 sons,	 no	more
daughters."
But	the	reality	is	that	there	is	a	certain	element	of	egoism	in	being	the	only	one,
with	no	competitors.
Krishna	may	be	the	incarnation	of	God	but	he	is	not	the	son	--	just	a	photocopy.
Mohammed	may	be	a	messenger	--	just	a	postman.
But	 Jesus	 is	 special,	 he	 is	 the	 only	 begotten	 son	 of	 God.	 There	 is	 a	 certain
egoism	in	it.
The	ancient	seers	were	not	so	egoistic.	They	called	the	whole	humanity	--	past,
present,	future	--	amritasya	putrah:	You	are	all	sons	of	immortality.	They	are	not
putting	 themselves	 higher	 than	 you,	 they	 are	 not	 pretending	 to	 be	 holier	 than
you.	They	are	making	every	human	being,	as	far	as	consciousness	is	concerned,
absolutely	equal,	eternal.
There	is	no	insecurity.
There	is	no	need	for	any	other	path	--	and	anyway,	there	is	no	other	path.
Life	is	the	path	which	passes	through	the	illusory	gate	of	death.
You	can	pass	the	gate	consciously.	If	you	are	meditative	enough,	then	you	can	go
through	death	knowing	perfectly	that	you	are	changing	the	house;	you	can	enter
another	womb	knowing	perfectly	that	you	are	entering	the	new	apartment	--	and
it	 is	 always	 better,	 because	 life	 is	 always	 evolving.	 And	 if	 you	 can	 die
consciously,	then	certainly	your	new	life	will	be	on	a	very	high	level,	from	the
very	beginning.
And	I	don't	see	any	insecurity.
You	 come	 into	 the	 world	 without	 anything,	 so	 one	 thing	 is	 certain:	 nothing
belongs	to	you.
You	come	absolutely	naked,	but	with	 illusions.	That's	why	every	child	 is	born
with	closed	hands,	fists,	believing	that	he	is	bringing	treasures	--	and	those	fists
are	just	empty.
And	everybody	dies	with	open	hands.	Try	 to	die	with	fists	 --	nobody	has	been
successful	 up	 to	 now.	Or	 try	 to	 be	 born	with	 open	 hands	 --	 nobody	 has	 been
successful	in	that	either.
The	child	is	born	with	fists,	with	illusions	that	he	is	bringing	treasures	into	the
world,	 but	 there	 is	 nothing	 in	 the	 fist.	 Nothing	 belongs	 to	 you,	 so	 what
insecurity?	Nothing	can	be	stolen,	nothing	can	be	taken	away	from	you.
Everything	that	you	are	using	belongs	to	the	world.
And	one	day,	you	have	to	leave	everything	here.
You	will	not	be	able	to	take	anything	with	you.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 rich	man	 in	 a	 village	who	was	 such	 a	miser	 that	 he	 had
never	 given	 anything	 to	 any	 beggar.	 The	 whole	 community	 of	 beggars	 knew
about	it,	so	whenever	they	saw	some	beggar	standing	before	his	house	they	knew
--	"This	man	seems	to	be	new,	from	some	other	village.	Tell	him,	`You	won't	get
anything	from	there.'"
The	man's	wife	was	dying,	 but	 he	wouldn't	 call	 the	 doctor.	He	had	one	 friend
only,	because	 to	have	many	friends	means	unnecessary	 insecurity	 --	 somebody
may	ask	for	money,	somebody	may	ask	for	something.	He	had	only	one	friend,
and	 that	 one	was	 also	 such	 a	miser	 that	 there	was	 no	 problem	 between	 them.
They	 both	 understood	 each	 other's	 psychology	 --	 no	 conflict,	 no	 asking,	 no
question	of	creating	any	embarrassment.
The	friend	said,	"But	this	is	the	time	that	the	doctor	should	be	called	--	your	wife
is	dying."
The	man	 said,	 "It	 is	 all	 in	 the	 hands	 of	God.	What	 can	 a	 doctor	 do?	 If	 she	 is
going	 to	 die,	 she	 is	 going	 to	 die.	You	will	 unnecessarily	 put	me	 in	 trouble	 ...
paying	the	fee	to	the	doctor	for	the	medicine,	this	and	that.	I	am	a	religious	man,
and	if	she	is	not	going	to	die	she	will	recover	without	any	doctor.	The	real	doctor
is	God,	nobody	else.	And	 I	believe	 in	God	because	he	never	 asks	 for	 a	 fee	or
anything."
The	wife	died.
His	friend	said,	"Look,	just	for	a	little	money	you	didn't	call	a	doctor."
He	said,	"Little	money?	Money	is	money;	it	is	never	a	question	of	a	little.	And
death	comes	to	everybody."
The	friend	was	a	little	angry.	He	said,	"This	is	too	much.	I	am	also	a	miser,	but	if
my	wife	is	dying	at	least	I	will	call	a	pharmacist	--	but	I	will	call	somebody.	But
you	are	really	hard.	What	are	you	going	to	do	with	all	this	money?"
He	said,	"I	am	going	to	take	it	with	me."
The	friend	said,	"Nobody	has	ever	heard	of	it."
He	 said,	 "But	 nobody	 has	 ever	 tried."	That	 too	was	 true.	He	 said,	 "Just	 see.	 I
have	my	own	plan	--	I	will	take	everything	with	me."
The	friend	said,	"Just	 tell	me	your	secret,	because	some	day	I	will	have	 to	die
also,	and	you	are	such	a	friend."
He	said,	"Friendship	is	one	thing,	but	this	secret	I	cannot	tell.	And	the	secret	is
such	 that	 you	 cannot	 use	 it	 when	 you	 are	 dying	 --	 it	 has	 to	 be	 used	 before,
because	you	have	to	carry	all	your	money	and	all	your	gold	and	diamonds	and
everything	to	the	river."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
He	said,	"Yes,	and	go	into	a	small	boat	in	the	middle	of	the	river	and	jump	with
all	your	money	and	be	drowned	--	so	you	have	taken	it.	Try!	Nobody	has	tried.	If
you	don't	 succeed	 there	 is	no	harm,	because	everybody	goes	without	 it.	 If	you
succeed,	then	you	will	be	the	pioneer,	the	first	one	who	reaches	paradise	with	his
whole	bag	of	money.	And	all	those	saints	will	be	looking	with	wide-open	eyes	--
`This	man	has	done	something!'"
But	the	friend	said,	"That	means	you	have	to	die."
He	 said,	 "Naturally,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 in	 good	 health.	When	 you	 are	 dying,
then	it	will	be	very	difficult	 to	carry	that	heavy	load.	I	am	going	to	do	it	soon,
because	my	wife	is	gone,	now	nobody	is	there."
But	even	if	you	jump	in	the	ocean	with	all	your	money,	the	money	will	remain	in
the	ocean,	your	body	will	remain	in	the	ocean.
You	will	have	to	go	alone,	alone	just	as	consciousness.
Nothing	 belongs	 to	 you,	 because	 you	 bring	 nothing	 here	 and	 you	 can	 take
nothing	from	here.
Life	is	the	only	way.
Death	is	the	only	illusion	to	be	understood.
If	you	can	live	fully,	totally,	understanding	death	as	an	illusion	--	not	because	I
am	 saying	 it,	 but	 by	 your	 own	 experience	 in	 deep	meditation	 --	 then	 live	 life
fully,	as	totally	as	possible,	without	any	fear.	There	is	no	insecurity,	because	even
death	is	illusory.
Only	the	living	being	in	you	is	real.
Clean	 it,	 sharpen	 it,	make	 it	 fully	 aware	 so	 that	 not	 even	 a	 small	 part	 of	 it	 is
drowned	in	darkness,	so	that	you	are	luminous	all	over,	you	become	aflame.
This	is	the	only	way;	there	is	no	other	alternative.
And	there	is	no	need.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
TO	BE	OPEN	AND	TO	BE	WITNESSING	ARE	TWO	DIFFERENT	THINGS.
IS	IT
SO,	OR	IS	THIS	A	DUALITY	CREATED	BY	MY	MIND?
Mind	always	creates	duality;	otherwise,	 to	be	open	or	 to	be	witnessing	are	not
two	things.
If	you	are	open,	you	will	be	witnessing.
Without	being	a	witness,	you	cannot	be	open;	or	if	you	are	a	witness,	you	will	be
open	--
because	 being	 a	witness	 and	 yet	 remaining	 closed	 is	 impossible.	 So	 those	 are
only	two	words.
You	can	either	start	with	witnessing	--	then	opening	will	come	on	its	own	accord;
or	you	can	start	by	opening	your	heart,	all	windows,	all	doors	--	then	witnessing
will	be	found,	coming	on	its	own.	But	if	you	are	simply	thinking,	without	doing
anything,	then	they	look	separate.
Mind	cannot	think	without	duality.	Duality	is	the	way	of	thinking.
In	silence,	all	dualities	disappear.
Oneness	is	the	experience	of	silence.
For	example,	day	and	night	are	very	clear	dualities,	but	they	are	not	two.	There
are	 animals	 who	 see	 in	 the	 night.	 Their	 eyes	 are	 more	 sensitive,	 capable	 of
seeing	 in	darkness.	For	 them,	 there	 is	no	darkness.	Those	animals	cannot	open
their	 eyes	 in	 the	 day,	 because	 their	 eyes	 are	 so	 delicate	 that	 the	 sun	 hurts.	 So
while	 it	 is	day	 for	you,	 for	 those	animals	 it	 is	night;	 the	eyes	are	closed,	all	 is
darkness.	When	it	is	night	for	you,	it	is	day	for	them.	The	whole	day	they	sleep,
the	whole	night	they	are	awake.
And	if	you	ask	a	scientist	and	a	logician,	you	will	see	the	difference.	If	you	ask
the	logician,	"What	is	day?"	he	will	say,	"That	which	is	not	night."	And	what	is
not	night?	It	is	a	circular	game.	If	you	ask,	"What	is	night?"	the	logician	is	going
to	say,	"What	is	not	day."
You	 need	 day	 to	 define	 night,	 you	 need	 night	 to	 define	 day.	 Strange	 duality,
strange	 opposition....	 If	 there	 is	 no	 day,	 can	 you	 think	 of	 night?	 If	 there	 is	 no
night,	can	you	think	of	day?	It	is	impossible.
Ask	 the	 scientist,	 who	 is	 closer	 to	 reality	 than	 the	 logician.	 For	 the	 scientist
darkness	is	less	light,	light	is	less	darkness.	Now	it	is	one	phenomenon,	just	like
a	thermometer.
Somebody	 has	 a	 temperature	 of	 110	 degrees,	 just	 ready	 to	 move	 out	 of	 the
house.
Somebody	has	a	 temperature	of	98	degrees,	 the	normal	 temperature	for	human
beings,	but	somebody	falls	below	96	degrees,	again	ready	for	a	move.
Your	existence	is	not	very	big,	just	between	96	and	110	degrees.	Sixteen	degrees
...
below	is	death,	above	is	death;	 just	a	small	slit	 in	between,	a	small	window	of
life.
If	we	could	have	a	 thermometer	 for	 light	and	darkness,	 the	 situation	would	be
the	same,	just	as	it	is	between	heat	and	cold	--	the	same	thermometer	will	do	for
both.	The	cold	is	less	hot	and	the	hot	is	less	cold,	but	it	is	one	phenomenon;	there
is	no	duality.
It	is	the	same	with	darkness	and	light.
And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 all	 oppositions	 that	 mind	 creates.	 Openness,
witnessing	...	 if	you	think	intellectually,	 they	look	very	different.	They	seem	to
be	unrelated,	how	can	they	be	one?	But	in	experience	they	are	one.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	BEEN	YOUR	DISCIPLE	FOR	TWO	AND	A	HALF	YEARS	NOW,
AND	ALL
THE	TIME	I	HAVE	LONGED	TO	BE	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE.	NOW	I	HAVE
MET
YOU	 FOR	 THE	 FIRST	 TIME,	 AND	 EVERYTHING	 HAS	 CHANGED.	 I
WANT	TO
RUN	AWAY	FROM	YOU.	I	AM	TOTALLY	CONFUSED.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
It	is	almost	normal.
You	 fall	 in	 love	with	me.	 Just	 hearing	my	words,	 it	 appeals	 to	 your	 intellect.
Your	reason	feels	satisfied,	and	then	a	desire	arises	to	be,	at	least	for	some	time,
with	me.
And	 then	a	great	 shock	 ...	because	 I	 am	not	a	man	of	words.	Although	 I	have
spoken	more	words	than	anybody	else	in	the	whole	world,	but	still	I	say	I	am	not
a	man	of	words.
My	words	are	just	like	nets	thrown	to	catch	fish.
My	message	is	wordless.
When	you	come	close	to	me,	then	you	see	the	point:	that	I	am	not	a	reasonable,
rational,	logical	person;	that	you	have	come	to	an	irrational	mystic.
You	had	come	with	a	certain	rational	conviction,	and	here	you	find	that	reason
has	 to	 be	 abandoned.	You	have	 to	 take	 a	 jump	 into	 the	 unknown,	 for	which	 I
cannot	provide	any	logic,	any	evidence	...	except	my	own	presence.
Anybody	 who	 has	 come	 here,	 caught	 by	 my	 words,	 will	 feel	 like	 escaping.
Because	he	had	come	for	a	different	reason,	and	here	he	finds	a	totally	different
situation	--	not	only	different,	but	diametrically	opposite.
I	am	not	a	teacher.	I	am	not	a	philosopher.	I	am	not	interested	in	creating	systems
and	hypotheses.
My	 interest	 is	 in	destroying	you	as	you	are,	 so	 that	you	can	be	 reborn	 in	your
existential	potential.
I	am	here	to	destroy	your	personality,	to	give	birth	to	your	individuality.
It	is	a	natural	reaction,	it	happens	to	everybody.	But	you	cannot	escape	either.	At
the	most,	you	may	go	up	 to	Dardar	Station	and	come	back	again.	You	can	 try,
and	exactly	from	Dardar	you	will	come	back;	that	is	the	radius.
Once	you	are	caught	up	with	me,	you	cannot	escape.
But	I	will	not	prevent	you;	trying	to	escape	will	be	helpful.	If	you	try	to	escape
and	then	you	have	to	come	back,	the	next	time	the	desire	will	arise	but	it	will	not
have	any	effect	on	you.	You	will	simply	drop	it,	because	it	does	not	work.
Now	you	have	to	go	the	whole	way,	whatever	it	means.	It	may	mean	the	death	of
the	ego,	of	the	personality;	then	you	have	to	take	the	risk.
If	 you	 had	 not	 come	 to	 me	 you	 would	 have	 continued	 to	 enjoy	 my	 words,
because	it	was	just	borrowed	knowledge	for	you.	And	here	I	want	you	to	drop	all
borrowed	knowledge,	including	that	which	you	have	gathered	from	me.
I	want	you	to	become	a	knower,	a	seer.
Certainly,	you	have	 to	pass	 through	 fire.	But	 the	 fire	only	 looks	 like	 fire	 from
afar.	The	closer	you	come,	the	cooler	you	will	find	it.	And	the	moment	you	pass
through	the	fire	you	will	be	surprised	that	fire	can	also	be	so	cool,	so	refreshing.
There	 is	 a	 story	 in	Moses'	 life	 that	 Jews	have	not	been	able	 to	explain	 in	 four
thousand	years.
On	Mount	Sinai,	Moses	encountered	a	strange	phenomenon	that	he	thought	was
God.
Certainly,	it	was	very	mysterious:	a	bush	was	afire	but	it	was	not	burning;	it	was
as	green	as	any	bush.	Its	flowers	were	as	juicy	and	young	as	any	flowers,	and	yet
there	was	fire	in	the	bush.	Naturally	attracted,	curious,	he	wanted	to	look	from
close	quarters	at	what	was	happening.	He	had	never	 thought	 that	 fire	could	be
there,	flames	were	rising	above	the	bush	--	and	the	bush	was	green!
He	came	close,	 and	 just	 as	he	was	coming	very	close	a	voice	 shouted,	 "Leave
your	 shoes	 behind,	Moses!	 You	 are	 entering	 into	 the	 holy	 land,	 into	 a	 sacred
place."	 Trembling,	 he	 left	 his	 shoes.	 He	 could	 not	 see	 anybody,	 but	 it	 was
certainly	a	miraculous	experience.	He	thought	it	was	God's	voice.
My	 own	 explanation	 of	 the	 story	 is	 that	 everybody	 who	 goes	 through	 a
transformation	comes	to	the	same	bush	which	is	afire,	but	 the	fire	 is	cool.	It	 is
nourishing	the	bush,	not	destroying	it.	It	only	looks	like	fire;	it	is	cool	flames	of
life.	For	life,	Moses'	word	is	`God'
--	that's	the	only	difference.	That	is	a	difference	of	language,	nothing	much.
You	 have	 come	 here,	 you	 have	 seen	 the	 flames.	 And	 the	 first	 idea	 will	 be,
"Escape	as	quickly	as	possible;	otherwise	you	will	be	burned."
Don't	be	worried.	If	I	am	not	burned,	if	all	these	people	here	are	not	burned,	you
also	are	not	going	to	be	burned.
The	fire	is	cool;	it	transforms.
It	takes	away	your	mask	and	helps	you	to	discover	your	original	face.
But	still,	freedom	is	available	to	you	up	to	Dardar	Station.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HEARD	YOU	TALKING	ABOUT	THE	SRI	LANKAN	MYSTIC	ASKING
HIS
FOLLOWERS	TO	STAND	UP	IF	THEY	WANTED	TO	GO	THE	SHORTCUT
TOWARDS	ENLIGHTENMENT.
I	 WANT	 YOU	 TO	 KNOW	 THAT	 I'M	 WAITING	 FOR	 THE	 CHANCE	 TO
STAND	UP
AS	SOON	AS	I	HEAR	YOU	ASKING	--	KNOWING	THAT	MY	LEGS	WILL
MOST
LIKELY	 BE	 TREMBLING,	 MY	 BODY	 PERSPIRING,	 AND	 MY	 HEART
BEATING
LIKE	MAD.
Deva	Prem,	 it	 is	 necessary	 that	 I	 should	 repeat	 the	 story	 first:	A	mystic	 in	Sri
Lanka	is	dying.	He	has	thousands	of	followers;	they	have	all	gathered.
Just	before	closing	his	eyes	he	says,	"If	anybody	wants	to	come	with	me,	I	can
take	him	with	me	--	and	this	is	the	most	shortcut	way.	You	will	not	have	to	do
anything.	I	don't	have	much	time.	Anybody	wanting	to	go	the	most	shortcut	way
...	otherwise,	it	takes	so	many	lives	to	achieve	enlightenment.	I	can	take	you	with
me	from	the	back	door.	Just	stand	up!"
There	 was	 absolute	 silence,	 pin-drop	 silence.	 People	 looked	 at	 each	 other
thinking,	"This	man	has	been	listening	to	him	for	forty	years,	perhaps	he	may	be
ready."	But	he	was	looking	at	somebody	else,	because	he	had	so	many	problems
still	to	solve	--	"Business	is	not	good."
Everybody	 has	 problems:	 somebody	 has	 a	 girl	 to	marry,	 somebody	 has	 a	 boy
who	is	a	troublemaker;	somebody	has	a	case	in	the	court	and	this	is	not	a	time	to
become	enlightened,	first	the	court	case	has	to	be	finished,	and	so	on,	so	forth.
But	one	man	raised	one	hand.	He	said,	"I	cannot	stand	up	because	I	am	not	ready
to	go	yet,	but	 I	cannot	 resist	 the	 temptation	 to	know	where	 the	back	door	 is	 --
because	if	sometime	I	am	ready,	I	can	follow	the	shortcut.	Right	now,	I	am	not
ready	--	 let	 it	be	completely	clear	 to	you	 that	 I	am	not	coming	with	you	--	but
just	tell	us	where	the	back	door	is."
The	 old	man	 said,	 "The	 back	 door	 is	 such	 that	 you	 can	 enter	 only	with	 your
master,	not	alone.	It	 is	a	very	narrow	gate;	only	one	can	enter	at	a	time.	If	you
are	ready	to	dissolve	yourself	in	the	being	of	the	master,	then	there	is	no	problem
--	one	or	one	thousand,	they	will	all	enter	through	the	door	as	one	being.	Alone,
you	will	not	be	able	to	find	it."
Now,	Deva	Prem	wants	me	to	ask	him	some	day	to	come	along	from	the	back
door.	And	he	thinks	he	is	ready	and	he	will	stand	up	--	although	even	thinking,
he	perspires	and	his	legs	tremble	and	his	heart	beats	faster.
My	feeling	is,	Deva	Prem,	you	are	the	man	who	had	raised	his	hand!
And	one	day	I	will	ask,	and	I	know	that	this	time	also	you	will	only	raise	your
hand	...	or	perhaps	you	may	not	even	raise	your	hand.	Because	I	am	a	different
type	of	man.	That	old	man	was	very	compassionate.
I	 would	 have	 taken	 even	 this	 man	 --	 at	 least	 he	 has	 raised	 his	 hand.	 That	 is
enough	 --	 what	 is	 the	 need	 of	making	 him	 stand	 up?	 Just	 raising	 the	 hand	 is
enough.
So	when	I	will	ask,	remember:	I	will	ask	you	to	simply	raise	the	hand.	This	time
be	alert,	and	get	prepared	--	because	with	trembling	legs	and	perspiring	it	will	be
difficult	to	enter	that	back	door.
That	 back	 door	 needs	 people	 who	 can	 disappear	 into	 nothingness	 dancing,
singing,	celebrating.
So	learn	to	sing,	learn	to	dance,	learn	to	celebrate.
Any	day,	I	can	ask.
And	I	hate	perspiration.	I	am	very	allergic	--	perspiration	you	will	have	to	stop.
And	 trembling,	 that	gate	won't	allow	you	 in;	 it	will	 immediately	see	 that	 there
are	two	persons.	You	have	to	be	absolutely	still	and	one	with	me	...	no	trembling.
And	this	time	I	will	not	ask	you	to	stand	up.	The	last	time,	it	was	my	fault.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	In	the	end	there	is	no	word
6	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610065
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
133
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SITTING	BEFORE	YOU,	FEELING	YOUR	WORDS	FLOWING	TOWARDS
ME
FROM	 YOUR	 GREAT	 HEART,	 I	 FOUND	 MY	 OWN	 HEART	 BURSTING
OPEN
AND	 RECEIVING	 THE	 SUN	 AND	 MOON	 OF	 YOUR	 BEING.	 SOON	 A
GREAT
PEACE	FELL	OVER	ME,	FOLLOWED	BY	A	NEVER-KNOWN	CALMNESS
SO
THAT	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 I	 AM	 RESTING	 IN	 THE	 ARMS	 OF	 EXISTENCE
ITSELF.
I	BOW	DOWN	BEFORE	YOU	IN	GRATEFULNESS	TO	KISS	THE	EARTH
THAT
GAVE	 YOU	 LIFE.	 I	 LIFT	 MY	 ARMS	 TO	 THE	 STARS	 AND	 SING
HALLELUJAH,	 HALLELUJAH,	 HALLELUJAH.	 BELOVED	 MASTER,
BECAUSE	OF	YOU	I	AM
ALIVE	 TO	 REALIZE	 THE	 BEAUTY,	 THE	 JOY,	 THE	 PURITY	 OF	 LOVE
THAT	IS
THE	VERY	EXPANSE	OF	EXISTENCE.	THESE	WORDS	SEEM	UNABLE
TO
EXPRESS	THE	TRUEST	FEELINGS	THAT	ARISE	FROM	THE	DEPTH	OF
MY
BEING.	 BUT	 I	 BOW	 DOWN	 BEFORE	 YOU	 NOW,	 AND	 AGAIN	 AND
AGAIN	AND
AGAIN	 TO	 DANCE,	 TO	 SING,	 TO	 SHOUT:	 THANK	 YOU,	 BELOVED
MASTER,	 THANK	 YOU,	 THANK	 YOU,	 THANK	 YOU.	 HALLELUJAH!
HALLELUJAH!
HALLELUJAH!
Jivan	Mary,	there	is	much	more	yet	to	happen.
What	has	happened	to	you	is	immense.
What	will	 happen	 to	 you	will	 be	 greater,	 but	 remember	 one	 thing:	 it	 is	 never
enough.
Existence	is	such	an	abundance	--	we	cannot	exhaust	it.	It	is	inexhaustible	in	its
beauty,	in	its	blissfulness,	in	its	benediction.
You	are	feeling	difficulties	to	express	what	is	happening	to	you.	And	this	is	only
the	beginning	--	just	think	of	the	difficulties	of	those	who	have	gone	far	ahead	of
you.	 There	 comes	 a	moment	when	 even	 to	 say	 that	 this	 cannot	 be	 said	 is	 not
possible	--	because	to	say	that	this	cannot	be	said	is	still	saying	something	about
it.	It	is	still	defining	it	in	a	very	negative	way.
There	 comes	 a	 moment	 when	 only	 silence,	 utter	 silence,	 remains	 your
expression.
That	is	your	thankfulness,	that	is	your	gratitude,	that	is	your	hallelujah...	a	dance
which	is	invisible,	a	song	which	is	not	heard,	a	beauty	which	cannot	be	painted,
described.
And	only	when	we	have	 come	 to	 the	 point	where	words	 are	 to	 be	 left	 behind
does	what	I	call	`religiousness'	begin.
I	do	not	say	renounce	the	world,	but	I	certainly	say	move	towards	the	moment
when	you	will	have	to	renounce	the	word.
THE	BIBLE	says,	 "In	 the	beginning	was	 the	word."	Nobody	knows	about	 the
beginning.
Nobody	can	know	about	the	beginning,	because	nobody	can	be	the	witness	about
the	beginning.	If	somebody	had	been	witnessing	the	beginning	then	it	would	not
have	been	the	beginning,	because	somebody	was	already	there.
THE	BIBLE	may	be	 right,	may	be	wrong	about	 the	beginning,	 but	 I	 say	unto
you:	 In	 the	end	 there	 is	no	word,	and	 that	has	been	witnessed	by	 thousands	of
mystics	in	thousands	of	years	past.
And	the	moment	you	come	to	realize	that	words	are	slipping	out	of	your	hands,
that	 the	boundary	line	of	 language	is	crossed...	a	 tremendous	innocence,	a	new
childhood.	For	 the	 first	 time	you	can	understand	 that	which	cannot	be	 spoken.
You	can	understand	the	message	of	the	wind	blowing	through	the	pine	trees,	you
can	understand	the	poetry	of	the	sound	of	running	water.
To	be	freed	from	language	is	to	be	freed	from	all	human	limitations.
Language	is	the	greatest	imprisonment.
I	am	happy	that	you	are	feeling	a	great	difficulty	to	express	something	that	you
are	 experiencing.	 Slowly,	 it	will	 become	more	 and	more	 clear	 that	 there	 is	 no
word,	no	language,	no	concept	to	explain	it,	to	express	it.
Just	 silence	 is	 the	 only	 answer	 to	 all	 your	 questions,	 the	 only	 meeting	 with
existence	without	any	barrier,	any	wall.
As	 the	 language	disappears,	 the	mind	 is	no	more	of	any	use.	For	 the	first	 time
you	 contact	 existence	 directly,	 without	 the	 mediation	 of	 the	 mind	 --	 and	 that
experience	 is	 enlightenment.	 And	 nobody	 is	 far	 away	 from	 it,	 it	 is	 within
everybody's	reach.
But	people	 are	 searching	 for	 their	 happiness	where	 it	 does	not	 exist.	They	 are
looking	for	living	waters	in	deserts.	And	when	frustration	comes,	failure	comes,
despair	comes,	they	are	angry	at	life,	not	angry	at	themselves.
What	 can	 life	 do?	 It	 is	 available,	 but	 somehow	 you	 manage	 to	 search	 in	 the
wrong	direction.	Perhaps	you	are	afraid,	deep	down,	that	life	may	be	too	much,
love	may	be	too	much,	existence	may	drown	you.
And	in	a	way,	your	fear	is	right:	the	closer	you	come	to	reality,	the	less	you	will
be.	The	moment	you	encounter	reality	face	to	face,	you	will	not	be	at	all.
I	have	said	many	times	that	nobody	has	seen	God	--	neither	Moses	nor	Jesus	nor
Krishna.
And	 naturally,	 people	 have	 misunderstood	 me.	 Whenever	 I	 have	 said	 that
nobody	has	seen	God,	I	was	not	saying	there	is	no	God;	I	was	simply	saying	the
moment	you	come	close	enough	to	God	to	see,	you	are	no	more.	Who	is	going	to
see	God?	As	long	as	you	are	--	 to	see,	 to	feel,	 to	say,	 to	question,	 to	inquire	--
God	is	not.
And	God	 is	 another	 name	 of	 reality.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 person,	 it	 is	 only	 a	 quality,	 a
fragrance,	a	sweetness,	a	music.
Jivan	Mary,	one	day	will	come	when	you	will	be	 in	 the	state	of	hallelujah	but
you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 say	 the	word,	 because	 the	word	will	 fall	 short	 of	 the
experience.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	THESE	FIVE	YEARS	OF	RELATIONSHIP	WITH	YOU,	I	HAVE	NEVER
FELT
THINGS	 GOING	 AS	 FAST	 AS	 NOW!	 WHEN	 I	 FINISH	 WRITING	 A
LETTER	OR	A	QUESTION	TO	YOU,	I	IMMEDIATELY	KEEP	IT,	FEELING
IT	TO	BE
RIDICULOUS.
SOMETIMES	I	ACCEPT	THE	CHALLENGE	AND	DELIVER	IT,	AND	THEN
I	FEEL
AS	IF	I	HAVE	AN	IDIOTIC	FACE:	WORRY,	REPENTENCE,	SHYNESS...	 I
FEEL
THAT	IT	IS	NOT	WORTH	COMING	TO	YOU	BEING	"DRESSED	UP"	WITH
INTELLIGENCE,	HUMBLENESS,	MEDITATIVENESS,	OR	WHATSOEVER
I	COULD	DRESS	IN	TO	SHOW	TO	YOU.	IN	SPITE	OF	ALL	MY	EFFORTS,
I	STILL
HAVE	THE	FEELING	OF	DRESSING	UP,	OF	USING	A	KIND	OF	MASK.
PLEASE	TELL	ME,	MASTER:	HOW	TO	BE	TOTALLY	SINCERE	TO	YOU
AND
"UNDRESSED"?
The	problem	is	not	only	of	one	person	--	everybody	is	dressed	up.
Everybody	is	showing	his	best	side	to	the	world.
The	heart	may	be	full	of	tears,	but	people	are	smiling.
This	is	how	we	have	been	brought	up	by	a	hypocritical	society.	We	are	children
of	a	hypocritical	 society.	Rather	 than	 teaching	every	child	 to	be	 just	himself	 --
sincere,	honest,	naked	--	we	are	helping	every	child	to	be	exactly	the	opposite.
Just	two	days	ago,	one	of	my	old	friends	had	come	to	see	me.	He	has	a	son	who
is	 thought	by	everybody	 to	be	crazy,	 insane,	except	by	me.	So	 the	 first	 thing	 I
inquired	about	was	his	son,	and	he	said,	"Leave	that	subject.	It	makes	me	so	sad,
because	now	he	is	eighteen	years	old	and	he	still	goes	naked	all	over	the	town.
He	is	such	a	shame	to	the	family."
I	said,	"In	what	way	is	he	hurting	anybody?	He	is	not	violent.	He	simply	enjoys
being	naked."
They	 force	 clothes	 on	 him,	 and	 he	 throws	 them	 away	 on	 the	 street	 and	 goes
towards	the	market.	And	they	are	running	after	him	--	"Please,	at	least	take	the
underwear."
And	he	says,	"No	underwear...	the	breeze	is	so	cool."
And	the	boy	is	very	intelligent.	Of	course,	he	is	in	a	crowd	which	cannot	accept
him.	He	never	lies;	he	is	always	utterly	honest.	Whatever	he	does,	he	does	with
totality.	He	has	never	gone	to	school	because	he	asks	those	who	have	gone	what
they	 have	 gained.	His	 father	 is	 a	 post-graduate;	 he	 asks	 him,	 "What	 have	 you
gained?	--	just	a	certificate."	He	says,	"I	want	to	live	my	life.	I	don't	want	to	be
dictated	to	by	anybody,	wrong	or	right.	I	simply	want	to	be	myself."
He	is	a	hard	worker.	He	will	be	working	in	the	garden,	and	you	can	see	how	hard
he	works,	but	he	works	at	only	what	he	feels	like	working	at.	He	plays	beautiful
flute,	but	the	whole	town	thinks	that	he	is	mad.
And	I	have	tried	my	best	to	find	where	his	madness	is.	I	have	not	been	able	to
find	 his	 madness	 anywhere.	 He	 is	 just	 not	 willing	 to	 be	 part	 of	 the	 mob
psychology.	The	crowd	cannot	accept	that	he	is	sane,	because	if	he	is	sane,	then
what	about	the	whole	crowd?
Even	his	parents,	my	friend	his	father,	cannot	accept	him.	He	said,	"Except	for
you,	nobody	accepts	that	he	is	sane."
I	said,	"You	are	his	father,	you	love	him.	Have	you	seen	any	madness	in	him?"
He	said,	"What	more	do	you	want?	You	want	more	madness?	--	going	naked	in
the	streets.	And	he	is	now	eighteen	years	old,	and	he	will	approach	a	woman	and
he	will	say
`You	are	so	beautiful.	Can	I	kiss	you?'"
Naturally,	 the	 society	 cannot	 accept	 such	a	person	 --	 although	he	 is	 absolutely
honest.
And	 he	 has	 honored	 the	woman,	 he	 has	 praised	 her	 beauty,	 he	 has	 asked	 her
permission.
Otherwise	 he	 is	 very	 strong	 --	 living	 naked,	 doing	 hard	work,	 never	 going	 to
school;	 he	 is	 really	 strong	 --	 he	 could	 have	 kissed	 any	 woman	 without	 any
permission.
But	a	crowd	gathers,	and	the	woman	starts	shouting	that	he	is	being	nasty	to	her,
misbehaving	with	her.
Many	times	when	I	was	there,	I	had	to	go	inside	the	crowd	and	tell	them,	"You
are	making	unnecessary	fuss.	The	boy	is	alone,	that's	true,	but	he	is	not	insane.
He	is	a	minority	of	one,	and	you	are	the	majority	of	many	--	but	just	because	you
are	many,	do	you	think	you	are	right?"
Nobody	has	been	ever	able	to	point	out	to	me	that	something	is	wrong	with	him.
And	he	is	being	dragged	to	this	doctor	and	to	that	doctor.
And	he	says,	"What	is	wrong	with	me?	I	am	not	sick.	The	doctor	cannot	make
any	difference	in	me."
The	truth	is,	the	doctor	is	sick.	The	doctor	is	not	honest.
The	boy	is	very	intelligent	in	seeing	things.	He	has	a	strange	clarity.	He	says,	"I
have	been	watching	 this	doctor"	 --	because	 the	doctor	 lives	 just	 in	 front	of	his
house;	his	dispensary	 is	 there	 --	"and	seeing	 that	poor	people	get	well	quickly,
and	rich	people	linger	on	for	months.	And	I	am	sitting	there	outside	and	enjoying
the	whole	scene	--	what	kind	of	society	is	this?	The	poor	man	gets	well	because
the	 doctor	 wants	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 him;	 you	 cannot	 get	 much	 money	 out	 of	 him.
Instead	the	poor	man	starts	asking,	`Give	me	some	money;	I	will	return	later	on
for	the	medicine.	You	are	suggesting	fruits	and	milk,	but	you	will	have	to	give
me	some	money.'
"But	the	rich	man,	once	he	falls	sick,	is	kept	sick;	he	is	sent	to	this	expert	for	x-
rays,	 to	 that	 expert	 for	 something	 else.	 It	 seems	 to	 be	 almost	 a	 conspiracy	 of
experts	exploiting	the	rich	sick	man."
I	asked	him	how	the	boy	is	doing.	He	said,	"Because	of	him,	I	feel	so	ashamed	to
go	out	of	 the	house.	And	I	always	wanted	you	 to	help	me,	but	you	 think	he	 is
right	 and	we	 are	wrong.	You	want	me	 also	 to	 go	 naked,	 so	 I	 cannot	 raise	 the
question,	`What	should	be	done	with	him?'"
I	said,	"He	needs	nothing	to	be	done,	he	is	no	harm	to	anybody.	Give	him	work;
he	 is	 always	 ready	 to	work,	 he	 enjoys	working.	But	 he	 is	 not	 ready	 to	 have	 a
mask.	He	is	not	ready	to	be	continuously	an	actor,	dressed	up."
But	the	whole	society	that	we	have	created	is	almost	a	drama.	Here,	everybody	is
repeating	dialogues	from	books,	from	films,	from	stories.	Nobody	is	opening	his
own	heart.
I	can	understand	your	problem:	you	are	afraid	to	ask	authentic	questions	because
they	will	expose	you.
People	ask	questions	which	make	them	feel	very	knowledgeable.	They	want	to
ask	questions	not	to	get	the	answer,	but	just	to	show	their	knowledge.
Whenever	you	ask	a	knowledgeable	question,	you	will	not	feel	guilty,	you	will
feel	great.
But	I	am	a	crazy	person:	I	never	answer	those	questions	which	come	out	of	your
knowledge.	I	simply	throw	them	away.
I	only	answer	questions	which	open	up	your	wounds,	because	once	your	wounds
are	open	there	is	a	possibility	of	healing.	Once	you	expose	yourself,	you	are	on
the	way	of	transformation.
Once	you	are	sincere	in	asking	a	question,	you	will	listen	to	the	answer	because
it	is	your	need,	it	is	your	food.	Your	question	was	your	thirst,	and	the	answer	can
quench	it.
So	always	remember:	this	is	not	a	philosophical	association,	not	a	theosophical
society	where	everybody	is	trying	to	prove	that	he	knows	more	than	you	know.
This	is	a	place	of	transformation,	of	going	through	a	revolution.	And	unless	you
show	 your	 real	 face,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 make	 any	 changes	 in	 your	 life,	 any
transformations	in	your	consciousness.
At	 the	 most,	 I	 can	 paint	 your	 mask,	 but	 I	 cannot	 change	 your	 real	 face	 by
painting	 the	mask.	The	mask	has	 to	 be	put	 aside.	Hence,	 a	 love	 and	 a	 trust	 is
needed	--	that	you	can	be	utterly	nude,	without	any	fear.
You	are	not	going	to	be	condemned	here.	You	will	be	accepted	as	you	are,	and
we	will	begin	from	that	acceptance	to	reach	for	a	higher	stage,	for	growth.
But	 that	 growth	 is	 not	 a	 condemnation	 of	 your	 present	 state.	 That	 growth	 is
based	on	your	present	state	of	being;	it	has	to	be	accepted.
But	 the	 religions	of	 the	world	have	 really	poisoned	people's	minds.	Nobody	 is
ready	 to	 open	up	 and	 show	who	he	 is,	 because	 for	 centuries	 things	have	been
condemned,	you	have	to	hide	them.	Nobody	wants	to	be	condemned.	And	there
are	 things	which	have	been	praised,	so	you	have	 to	show	them	--	whether	you
have	them	or	not	does	not	matter.
It	is	very	human	and	very	natural;	you	want	to	be	loved	and	to	be	accepted.
And	the	society	has	made	the	rules	of	the	game,	that	 these	are	the	things	to	be
condemned,	so	if	you	have	those	things	hide	them,	repress	them	so	deeply	that
even	you	become	unaware	of	 them.	And	 if	 you	don't	 have	 those	 things	which
society	 praises,	 honors,	 then	 pretend,	 and	 pretend	 so	 cleverly	 that	 it	 seems
almost	real.
Sometimes	 it	 is	 possible	 that	 the	 pretender	 may	 look	 more	 real	 than	 the	 real
person,	 because	 the	 real	 person	 never	 goes	 through	 rehearsals.	 The	 pretender
practices,	disciplines	himself.
I	have	always	liked	a	beautiful	incident	in	the	life	of	Charlie	Chaplin.	It	was	his
birthday,	 perhaps	 the	 fiftieth	 birthday,	 and	 all	 his	 fans	 and	 friends	 wanted	 to
celebrate	it	in	a	special	way.	And	they	found	a	special	way	--	all	over	England,	in
every	place,	 there	would	be	competitions,	and	people	would	be	 invited	 to	play
the	part	of	Charlie	Chaplin.	And	in	those	competitions	there	would	be	selections,
and	 then	 there	would	 be	 other	 competitions	 from	 district	 to	 district.	 Then	 the
semi-finals	would	be	in	London	and	there	would	be	the	final	decision	about	who
gets	the	first	prize.
Just	to	give	his	friends	a	great	surprise,	Charlie	Chaplin	himself	entered	into	the
competition	 from	a	nearby	district.	He	came	 to	 the	semi-finals,	but	 rather	 than
surprising	his	friends	he	was	surprised	himself:	he	got	second	prize.	Somebody
played	his	act	better	than	him;	he	had	never	thought	about	the	possibility.
But	 it	 happened	 because	 the	 other	 person	was	 practicing	 it,	 rehearsing	 it,	 and
Charlie	 Chaplin	 simply	 appeared	 as	 he	 was.	 There	 was	 no	 need	 for	 him	 to
rehearse	--	he	WAS
Charlie	Chaplin.	But	getting	the	second	prize....
And	when	the	people	came	to	know	that	he	had	got	the	second	prize,	he	was	so
ashamed	of	himself.	He	said,	"I	have	been	such	an	idiot	to	enter	into	it	in	the	first
place.	 I	 entered	 because	 I	 thought	 that	 I	 was	 going	 to	 be	 the	 first,	 without
question."
So	 you	 have	 the	 possibility	 of	 pretenders	 posing	 qualities,	 values,	 characters,
which	 are	 not	 real.	 Inside	 they	 are	 just	 the	 opposite	 kind	of	 people.	Criminals
become	 saints	 --	 it	 is	 easy:	 you	 just	 have	 to	 practice	 certain	 values,	 certain
disciplines	which	are	expected	from	a	saint.	Who	cares	 that	you	are	carrying	a
thousand	 and	 one	 criminal	 tendencies	within	 you?	 People	 only	 see	 your	 face,
nobody	dives	deep	in	you.
So	the	whole	society	has	become	a	very	strange	phenomenon,	almost	weird,	and
everybody	is	suffering.
The	 person	who	 is	 pretending	 to	 be	 a	 saint	 cannot	 enjoy	 it	 because	 his	whole
being	 is	against	 it,	his	whole	nature	 is	against	 it.	He	 is	continuously	 fighting	a
battle	with	himself,	and	there	 is	no	greater	misery	than	to	be	continuously	 in	a
fight	with	yourself.	So	those	who	are	honored,	respected	citizens,	you	will	never
see	them	joyful,	cheerful,	rejoicing.
They	are	always	sad,	and	to	hide	the	fact	of	sadness	they	call	it	`seriousness'	--
that	they	take	life	very	seriously.
And	the	other	part	of	humanity	which	has	decided	to	go	with	its	natural	feelings
is	 condemned;	 they	 become	 criminals.	 In	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	 religions	 they	 are
sinners;	 they	will	 fill	 the	 space	 in	 hell	 reserved	 for	 them.	 In	 life	 nobody	will
respect	them,	and	after	life	also.	Even	their	God	is	not	capable	of	accepting	his
own	creation.
If	anybody	is	responsible,	God	is	responsible.
Only	 one	 person	 is	 responsible	 for	 all	 the	 sinners.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 send
everybody	into	hell	--	just	throw	God	into	hell	and	that	will	do,	because	he	is	the
sole	cause.
And	 these	hypocrites,	 these	phony	people	who	are	 showing	 something	but	 are
not	what	 they	are	showing,	can	 they	cheat	existence	also?	Can	they	cheat	God
also?	Here	 they	will	be	 respectable,	but	will	 they	also	be	 in	paradise	after	 life,
enjoying	all	the	pleasures?
We	have	put	 such	 tremendous	pressure	on	poor	human	beings	 to	destroy	 their
integrity,	to	create	a	split	in	them.
My	approach	is	totally	different.
First,	I	want	you	to	accept	yourself	as	you	are.
That's	how	existence	wanted	you	to	be.	You	have	not	created	yourself;	naturally
the	whole	responsibility	goes	to	existence.	And	there	must	be	a	need	for	a	person
like	you;	otherwise,	you	would	not	exist.
Existence	needs	you	as	you	are.
The	 first	 principle	 of	 an	 authentic	 religious	man	 is	 to	 accept	 himself	 as	 he	 is,
without	 any	 judgment	 --	 and	 only	 from	 there	 does	 your	 authentic	 pilgrimage
begin.
Ask	me	questions	without	any	fear,	because	I	have	never	condemned	anybody.
My	whole	love	and	respect	is	for	the	person	who	accepts	himself	totally,	as	he	is.
He	has	courage.	He	has	courage	to	face	the	whole	pressure	of	the	society	which
is	 bent	 upon	 splitting	 him	 into	 divisions	 --	 into	 good	 and	 bad,	 into	 saint	 and
sinner.	 He	 is	 really	 a	 brave,	 courageous	 being	 who	 stands	 against	 the	 whole
history	of	man,	of	morality,	and	declares	to	the	skies	his	reality,	whatever	it	is.
And	at	least	with	the	master,	the	disciple	has	to	be	absolutely	clean	and	clear	so
the	master	can	start	working	with	your	reality,	not	with	your	phoniness.	Because
everything	done	with	your	phoniness	is	a	sheer	wastage.
Only	the	real	you	is	capable	of	growing,	of	coming	to	a	flowering.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	ALWAYS	WANT	A	TOTAL	CHANGE	IN	MY	LIFE	BECAUSE	I	FEEL	SO
DISCONTENTED,	SO	LIMITED,	SO	FRUSTRATED.
WHEN	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAYING,	 "COME	 CLOSER,"	 IT	 TOUCHED	 MY
HEART
DEEPLY.	 I	 SAW	 THAT	 I	 AM	 ALWAYS	 MANAGING	 MY	 LIFE
REASONABLY
AND	OUT	OF	MY	MIND,	THAT	 I	LIVE	A	LIFE	FULL	OF	LIES	AND	GO
ON
POSTPONING	BEING	REALLY	ALIVE.
I	DECIDED	TO	STAY	HERE	WITH	YOU	LONGER	THAN	I	INTENDED	TO,
IN
SPITE	 OF	 ALL	 REASONS	 AND	 PROBLEMS	 THAT	MAY	 COME.	 BUT	 I
DON'T
FEEL	AT	EASE,	AND	I	DON'T	KNOW	IF	IT	IS	NOT	AGAIN	SOMETHING
COMING	FROM	MY	MIND.
WILL	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THE	MIRACLE	OF
TRANSFORMATION	AND	HOW	TO	LIVE	MORE	OUT	OF	THE	HEART?
The	first	thing	to	remember	is,	never	ask	for	the	impossible.
Begin	slowly,	bit	by	bit,	step	by	step.
Just	by	walking	step	by	step,	you	can	cover	ten	thousand	miles	easily.	But	if	you
start	thinking	from	the	very	beginning	that	"I	want	to	cross	ten	thousand	miles"
your	legs	may	start	wavering,	your	heart	may	start	feeling	tremendously	afraid.
Your	mind	will	 say,	 "You	 are	 asking	 too	much;	 it	 is	 unreasonable.	 You	 are	 a
small	 human	 being.	 Ten	 thousand	 miles...	 just	 walking	 one	 step	 each	 time	 --
because	nobody	can	walk	 two	steps	at	one	 time.	Ten	 thousand	miles	 looks	 too
big."
Make	small	goals.
You	are	asking	for	total	change.	You	don't	see	the	impossibility	of	it	at	this	point.
At	 some	 other	 point	 it	 will	 not	 be	 impossible,	 but	 at	 this	 point	 it	 will	 be
impossible	to	ask	for	a	total	change,	because	there	will	be	so	many	implications
in	it.
Why	not	go	a	 little	slowly?	Why	not	 take	one	part	of	your	being	and	clean	 it?
Put	 your	 total	 energy	 into	 cleaning	 one	 part	 of	 your	 being,	 then	move	 to	 the
second	part.	And	of	course,	finally	you	will	be	able	to	have	a	total	change.
But	mind	is	very	cunning:	whatever	it	wants	to	avoid,	from	the	very	beginning	it
creates	such	a	situation	--	 it	asks	for	 the	 impossible.	So	you	remain	where	you
are,	more	frustrated,	more	in	despair	because	the	total	change	is	not	happening.
The	mind	has	given	you	a	goal	and	deceived	you.
Total	change	certainly	is	the	goal,	but	don't	try	to	have	it	in	a	single	step.
Go	in	a	more	human	way,	changing	small	parts.
I	used	to	live	with	a	man	for	many	years.	He	was	a	rich	man,	and	he	loved	me
very	much.
I	had	a	bungalow	in	the	university	but	he	wouldn't	allow	me	to	live	there.	He	had
a	beautiful	mansion	 in	 the	city.	He	said,	"If	you	want,	you	can	have	 the	whole
mansion.	I	will	move	to	another	house."	He	had	many	houses.
I	said,	"No,	there	is	no	need.	What	will	I	do?	I	need	only	one	room.	You	can	live
and	take	care	of	the	whole	mansion	and	the	garden	and	my	room,	because	I	am	a
lazy	man.	This	big	mansion	--	who	is	going	to	clean	it?"
In	my	university	days	I	used	to	keep	my	bed	just	near	the	door	and	all	my	books
around	my	bed,	 so	 I	had	not	 to	 enter	 into	 the	 room	 --	because	 there	was	 such
thick	 dust	 gathering,	 for	 two	 years.	 I	 had	 never	 entered	 --	 why	 unnecessarily
disturb	settled	things?	So	from	the	door	I	would	directly	jump	into	my	bed,	and
all	 my	 books	 were	 around	 my	 bed	 so	 I	 could	 find	 them.	 This	 was	 a	 perfect
arrangement:	neither	did	the	dust	disturb	me	nor	did	I	disturb	the	dust.
So	I	told	him,	"I	don't	need	the	whole	mansion.	Just	one	room	is	enough	for	me."
So	he	lived	with	me.
He	was	very	rich	but	very	miserly.	Perhaps	the	word	`miserly'	is	not	enough	to
describe	it.
He	used	to	go	for	a	walk	in	the	morning	with	me,	and	anything	he	would	find	by
the	side	of	the	road	here	and	there,	he	would	grab	it.	I	said,	"What	will	you	do
with	it?	--	just	a	handle	of	a	bicycle;	somebody	had	thrown	it	away.
He	said,	"You	don't	know.	Just	come	with	me,	I	will	show	you."
So	I	went	into	his	house,	in	his	part	of	the	mansion,	and	he	showed	me.	And	I
was	 really	 amazed!	He	 said,	 "All	 these	parts	 of	 the	 cycle	 I	 have	 found	on	 the
street.	Just	a	few	things	are	missing...	and	I	hope	I	have	enough	life	left;	I	have
not	yet	 found	a	chain.	Two	wheels	are	 there,	 the	seat	 is	 there,	 the	handlebars	I
have	 found	 today.	Mud	 guards	 are	 not	 necessary,	 just	 a	 chain.	 And	 I	 am	 not
asking	for	too	much.	What	do	you	think	I	go	walking	with	you	for?"
I	said,	"I	never	thought	that	you	were	going	in	search	of	a	chain!"
He	said,	"A	chain,	or	anything...."
His	house	was	full	of	strange	things...	just	one	shoe.	I	said,	"Where	is	the	other?"
He	said,	"Some	day	I	will	find	it,	because	the	other	one	must	be	somewhere."
And	he	himself	was	so	clever	that	he	would	go	to	the	temple	and	he	would	put
one	shoe	 in	one	corner,	 the	other	shoe	 in	another	corner	so	nobody	could	steal
them	--	because	who	will	steal	one	shoe?	And	in	a	crowd	of	shoes	who	is	going
to	search	for	the	other?	Where	is	the	other?	--	because	a	thief	is	in	a	hurry.
He	said,	"I	am	the	only	progressive	person	who,	when	he	is	worshipping	never
looks	 back.	 Otherwise,	 everybody	 is	 looking	 back:	What	 is	 happening	 to	 the
shoes?	Their	worship	is	false!	Are	they	bowing	down	to	God	or	to	their	shoes?	I
am	the	only	person	who	does	not	look	back	at	all.	I	have	figured	it	out	--	that	this
way	nobody	 can	 and	nobody	has	 ever	 been	 able....	And	 I	 go	 every	day	 to	 the
temple	because	 I	am	 looking	for	 the	other	shoe.	This	shoe...	 the	other	must	be
somewhere."
And	there	were	many	things	that	he	had	found;	people	had	thrown	them	and	he
would	collect	them.
But	 when	 I	 saw	 his	 bicycle,	 I	 was	 really	 amazed	 that	 he	 had	 managed...
ALMOST
managed;	 just	a	chain	was	missing.	That	could	even	be	purchased.	But	he	was
such	a	miser,	he	was	not	going	to	purchase	it;	he	was	waiting.	He	said,	"Just	as
you	say...	trust!	-
-	I	trust	that	the	chain	will	be	found	one	day."
Jabalpur	had	the	largest	number	of	cycles	in	India.	So	he	said,	"This	is	the	place
where	it	is	impossible	to	miss	a	chain.	I	will	find	it."	And	one	day	he	found	it.
In	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 he	 woke	 me.	 I	 said,	 "What	 is	 the	 matter?	 Has
something	gone	wrong?"
He	said,	"No,	I	have	found	the	chain!"
"In	the	middle	of	the	night?	Where	have	you	been?"
He	said,	"I	was	just	not	feeling	sleepy,	so	I	thought	why	not	have	a	look	for	the
chain	around	the	park?	And	it	is	a	miracle	--	I	found	it.	Perhaps	that's	why	I	was
not	feeling	sleepy.	Now	I	can	sleep	with	ease.	One	tension	was	always	there	on
my	mind,	that	death	might	come	before	the	chain	comes."
And	 I	 saw	 him	 within	 three	 days	 sitting	 on	 the	 bicycle	 without	 mud	 guards,
without	any	carrier,	going	to	his	shop.	I	said,	"I	have	been	telling	people	to	trust	-
-	but	it	seems	that	trust	works!	You	have	proved	me	right."
And	he	said,	"One	thing	more	is	good	about	this:	there	are	no	brakes	on	it.	And	it
makes	so	much	noise	that	you	can	hear	it	from	almost	half	a	mile	away.	So	when
I	 am	 coming	 home	my	wife	 knows	 that	 I	 am	 coming,	 so	 she	 starts	 preparing
things	 for	me.	By	 the	 time	 I	 reach	 the	 house	 everything	 is	 ready;	 no	 need	 for
wasting	time	in	waiting.	And	nobody	else	can	sit	on	my	bicycle."
I	said,	"Why?"
He	said,	"Its	seat	is	such	--	it	hurts	so	much.	So	there	is	no	question	of	its	ever
being	stolen.	I	leave	it	anywhere,	and	I	go	and	do	my	work	and	I	always	find	it
in	its	place.
People	have	tried	--	I	have	come	to	know	that	people	have	tried	to	steal	it	--	but
they	come	back	and	put	it	in	its	place,	because	it	is	unnecessary	trouble.	First,	it
makes	so	much	noise	 that	everybody	will	know	who	has	stolen	 it.	Secondly,	 it
hurts	so	much,	and	thirdly,	it	has	no	brakes,	so	any	time,	any	accident...."
I	said,	"But	how	do	you	manage?"
He	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	Just	in	front	of	my	shop	there	is	a	big	mango	tree.
I	just	go	there;	it	needs	a	tree	to	stop."
And	 in	 the	 mansion	 where	 I	 was	 living	 with	 him	 there	 were	 very	 big	 trees,
ancient	trees	all	around,	so	there	was	no	question,	no	need.	He	said,	"There	is	no
need	--	I	go	to	my	shop,	there	is	a	tree;	I	go	to	my	home,	there	is	a	tree.	Unless
you	have	a	very	ancient	tree,	you	cannot	have	my	bicycle."
Just	go	slowly...	part	by	part...	and	trust.	Total	change	will	also	happen,	but	don't
ask	too	much	from	the	very	beginning.
Always	be	alert	that	mind	is	cunning	and	gives	you	impossible	goals,	so	you	go
on	running	after	them.
Nothing	is	impossible	if	you	go	slowly,	if	you	make	many	stopovers	and	you	are
not	 in	a	hurry.	Whether	 the	 total	change	happens	or	not	 is	not	 important.	Even
small	 changes	 in	 life	are	precious,	because	 the	 total	 change	will	be	 simply	 the
accumulated	effect	of	all	the	small	changes.	Total	change	is	not	one	whole;	it	is
simply	 the	 effect	 of	 all	 the	 small	 changes,	 the	 accumulated	 revolution	 that
happens	in	you.
So	always	remain	human.
The	 past	 of	 man	 has	 been	 concentrated	 on	 giving	 you	 goals	 which	 are
impossible.	That	is	just	to	make	you	humiliated,	because	you	cannot	fulfill	them
--	you	feel	too	tiny,	too	small,	too	fragile,	with	so	many	weaknesses.
I	don't	want	you	to	think	about	impossible	things.	I	want	you	to	go	very	slowly,
changing	small	parts	of	your	life	--	which	is	not	difficult.
One	day,	you	will	suddenly	find	that	total	change	has	happened.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	USED	TO	BE	SO	SCARED	OF	BEING	HIT	OR	EXPOSED.	SINCE	I	HAVE
BEEN
HERE	 WITH	 YOU	 AND	 MELTING	 INTO	 YOU,	 I'M	 LONGING	 FOR	 IT
WITH	AN
UNKNOWN	 IMPATIENCE.	 I	 LONG	 TO	 GET	 THE	 OBSTACLES	 OUT	 OF
THE
WAY,	TO	BE	OVER	AND	DONE	WITH	`THIS	ONE'	SO	THAT	I	CAN	MOVE
ON
THE	JOURNEY	TO	THE	NEXT	ROCK	ON	MY	PATH.	FEAR	SEEMS	TO	BE
JUST
A	QUITE	UNIMPORTANT,	OLD	HABIT.
I	 AM	 EXPERIENCING	 YOU	 AS	 A	 BOUNDLESS	 INVITATION.	 NO
BARRIERS
ARE	 THERE	 WHICH	 I	 COULD	 USE	 TO	 RATIONALIZE	 A	 LACK	 OF
COURAGE.	I	FEEL	THANKFUL	ABOUT	THE	LACK	OF	ORGANIZATION
AROUND	YOU;	THERE	IS	NO	MORE	FEAR	THAT	GETTING	A	HIT	FROM
YOU	MAY	BE	USED
BY	PEOPLE	WHO	ARE	IN	POWER	TO	FEED	THEIR	OWN	JUDGMENTS,
TO	PUT
ME	DOWN	OR	TO	MAKE	ME	FEEL	GUILTY.
BELOVED	OSHO,	I	AM	SO	TIRED	OF	ME	AND	ME	AND	ME.
IS	THIS	A	HEALTHY	OR	UNHEALTHY	IMPATIENCE?
It	is	the	case	with	most	of	the	sannyasins:	if	they	get	a	hit	they	feel	bad	about	it,
their	 ego	 feels	 hurt.	 Rather	 than	 understanding	 the	 hit,	 they	 become	 resentful,
angry.
If	they	are	not	hit,	then	they	start	feeling	that	I	am	not	taking	care	of	them,	that	I
am	not	paying	attention	to	them,	that	while	others	are	being	hit,	 they	are	being
left	out.	They	feel	as	if	they	are	not	important	enough.
This	is	how	human	mind	creates	misery	out	of	every	situation.	If	you	get	the	hit,
you	are	hurt;	if	you	don't	get	the	hit,	you	are	hurt	all	the	same.
But	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	not	interested	in	hitting	you	or	hurting	you	or
ignoring	anybody.
To	me,	all	are	equally	important.
A	same	longing	has	brought	them	to	me,	a	same	thirst	has	brought	them	to	me.
It	will	be	very	kind	of	you	all	to	leave	it	to	me	that	whenever	a	hit	is	necessary
you	will	get	it	--	because	a	hit	is	medicinal,	it	is	a	kind	of	surgery.
But	 don't	 feel	 that	 because	 surgery	 is	 not	 being	 done	 on	 you,	 you	 are	 being
ignored.	If	somebody	else	is	hospitalized	and	nobody	is	taking	care	of	you....	No,
whenever	you	need	to	be	hospitalized	you	will	be	hospitalized,	each	according	to
his	need.
Whenever	 a	 hit	 is	 necessary	 to	 help	 your	 growth,	 you	 will	 not	 miss	 it.	 And
whenever	it	is	not	necessary,	then	unnecessarily	hitting	you	will	only	make	your
skull	thick.	Then	when	the	time	comes	to	hit	you,	you	will	have	already	been	so
disciplined	in	getting	hits....
In	my	high	school	days,	I	was	almost	always	late	because	I	was	interested	in	so
many	things	on	the	way.	I	always	started	from	home	to	reach	the	school	at	 the
right	time,	but	I	never	reached	because	so	much	was	going	on	along	the	way	--
some	magician	was	 doing	 his	 tricks,	 and	 it	 was	 irresistible.	 Just	 to	 leave	 that
magician	and	go	to	study...	some	stupid	teacher	talking	about	geography....
So	I	was	punished	continually,	but	soon	my	teachers	realized	that	it	was	useless
to	punish	me.	Their	first	punishment	was	to	tell	me	to	go	around	the	high	school
building	seven	times.	I	would	ask,	"If	I	go	eleven	times	will	it	do?"
They	would	say,	"Are	you	mad?	This	is	a	punishment."
I	said,	"I	know	this	is	a	punishment,	but	I	have	missed	my	morning	exercise.	So
if	I	make	it	my	morning	exercise,	you	are	not	losing	anything.	Your	punishment
is	covered,	my	morning	exercise	is	complete;	nobody	is	losing	anything,	both	are
gaining."
So	 they	 stopped	 that,	 because	 this	 wouldn't	 do.	 They	 would	 tell	 me	 to	 stand
outside	 the	class.	 I	said,	"That's	good,	because	I	 love	the	open	air.	The	class	 is
dark	 and	 dirty,	 and	 outside	 it	 is	 so	 beautiful.	 And	 in	 fact,	 sitting	 inside	 I	 am
always	 looking	 outside.	 Who	 cares	 what	 you	 are	 teaching?	 --	 the	 birds	 are
singing,	the	trees	are	blossoming...	it	is	so	beautiful	outside."
The	 headmaster	 would	 come	 on	 his	 round,	 and	 every	 day	 he	 would	 find	 me
standing	outside.	And	he	would	say,	"What	is	the	matter?"
I	 said,	 "Nothing	 is	 the	matter.	 I	 love	 to	 stand	outside;	 it	 is	 healthier,	 hygienic.
And	you	can	see	how	beautiful	it	is."
But	 he	 said,	 "I	 will	 see	 your	 teacher.	 How	 is	 it	 that	 he	 allows	 you	 to	 stand
outside?"
I	said,	"I	don't	know,	but	he	tells	me	himself,	every	day,	`Stand	outside.'	So	now
I	don't	even	ask	him.	It	has	become	a	routine,	so	I	simply	come	and	stand	here."
He	asked	the	teacher.	The	teacher	said,	"It	must	have	been	thirty	days	ago!	I	told
him	only	once	to	stand	outside	--	since	then	he	has	not	entered	the	class.	I	was
thinking	it	was	a	punishment,	and	he	is	enjoying	it.	Not	only	that,	he	is	spreading
the	 rumor	 among	 the	 students	 that	 it	 is	 hygienic,	 it	 is	 healthy.	 And	 they	 are
asking	me,	`Sir,	can	we	also	stand	outside?'	Then	what	am	I	to	do	here?	Then	I
will	also	go	and	stand	outside."
It	is	a	question	of	how	you	take	things.
So	first,	don't	be	worried.	If	you	are	not	getting	a	hit,	perhaps	you	don't	need	it,
or	perhaps	 it	 is	 not	 the	 right	 time.	Or	 if	 you	are	getting	 the	hit	 then	don't	 feel
hurt,	 because	 I	 am	not	hitting	you,	 I	 am	always	hitting	your	 ego	 --	 something
that	is	your	disease,	something	that	has	to	be	dropped.
But	leave	it	to	me.	I	will	not	follow	your	expectations	that	because	you	want	a
hit	--	the	biggest	hit,	so	you	can	show	everybody,	"Look,	I	have	got	the	biggest
hit"....	Then	the	ego	has	used	the	hit.	Rather	than	destroying	the	ego,	the	ego	has
taken	the	hit	as	a	nourishment.
So	leave	it	completely	to	me.	It	is	none	of	your	business.
Whenever	I	feel	that	you	need	a	hit,	you	will	get	it	--	and	you	will	get	it	in	the
right	quantity	that	you	need.	Don't	brag	about	it,	and	don't	feel	sorry	for	it;	just
try	to	understand	it.
It	is	a	school	of	understanding.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
TWENTY-FIVE	 YEARS	 TO	 GET	 TO	 YOU,	 THREE	 YEARS	 TO	 HANG
AROUND
YOU,	 FOUR	 YEARS	 TO	 RUN	 AWAY	 FROM	 YOU	 IN	 A	 ROLLER-
COASTER
RELATIONSHIP.	 FOUR	 YEARS	 TO	 STAGGER	 BACK	 TOWARDS	 YOU,
ELEVEN
YEARS	 TO	GET	A	QUESTION	 THROUGH	TO	YOU	 --	 AND	YOU	GIVE
THE
ANSWER	 TO	 THIS	 GERMAN	 FELLOW,	 GUNAKAR	 AND	 WANT	 TO
SEND	ME
BACK	 TO	 HELL	 AND	 SOME	 DIFFICULT	WOMAN.	 AND	 IN	 TWENTY-
EIGHT
YEARS'	TIME,	MAYBE	YOU	HAVE	ESCAPED	WHEN	I	CRAWL	BACK	TO
ASK
YOU,	"WHAT'S	NEXT?"
OSHO,	DO	YOU	WANT	TO	KILL	ME	OR	SOMETHING?
Gunateet,	you	are	right.
The	 question	was	 yours	 --	 at	 least	 written	 by	 you	 --	 but	 Gunakar	 needed	 the
answer	more.
There	has	not	been	any	misunderstanding.
He	was	 also	 surprised,	 because	 he	 had	 not	 asked	 the	 question.	 But	 it	was	 his
question.
And	he	could	not	believe	how	somebody	else	had	written	exactly	 the	question
that	he	was	going	to	ask.
And	it	was	not	time	for	you,	for	that	question.	Perhaps	you	got	the	vibration	of
the	German	Gunakar,	and	wrote	down	the	question;	it	was	not	your	question.
And	 I	 can	 understand	 your	 difficulty:	 it	 took	 eleven	 years	 for	 you	 to	 ask	 the
question	and	now	you	are	worried	 that	 I	am	sending	you	back	 to	your	old	 life
and	the	hard	woman.
About	that	you	are	wrong.	Once	you	get	a	woman,	it	is	always	hard.	If	you	miss
a	woman,	it	is	just	ice	cream.	Once	you	get	a	woman,	suddenly	she	is	steel	hard.
But	without	women	there	would	have	been	no	enlightenment	in	this	world.
Just	think...	a	world	without	women.	Then	you	cannot	find	any	Gautam	Buddha,
because	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 run	 away	 from.	 If	 there	 is	 no	woman,	 there	 is	 no
problem.	Women	are	the	real	incentive.
They	say	that	behind	every	great	man	there	is	a	woman;	it	may	be	true,	it	may
not	be	true.
But	behind	every	enlightened	man	there	are	many	women	--	one	won't	do.
Enlightenment	 is	 a	 little	difficult	 subject.	When	many	women	go	on	making	a
football	 of	 you,	 then	 at	 last	 you	 become	 enlightened.	 You	will	 say,	 "Enough!
Stop	the	game,	I	am	going	home."
Women	are	a	blessing	in	the	world.	Without	them,	there	is	nothing.
So	just	be	thankful	to	your	hard	woman;	perhaps	you	are	here	because	of	her.
And	you	are	saying	that	next	time	you	come	it	will	be	in	twenty-eight	years,	and
you	will	ask,	"What	next?"
I	am	reminded	of	two	stories.
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	on	Chowpatty	Beach	with	his	wife,	and	suddenly	he	said,
"Would	you	like	bhelpuri	once	more?"
The	wife	said,	"Once	more?	But	we	have	not	had	any	bhelpuri."
He	 said,	 "Beloved,	 it	 seems	 you	 are	 losing	 your	memory.	 Just	 fifty	 years	 ago
when	we	got	married	and	we	had	come	here	for	the	first	time,	we	had	bhelpuri.
That's	why	I	am	saying,	`Would	you	like	it	once	more?'"
Going	back	 to	 your	 life,	 to	 your	wife,	 to	 your	work...	 but	 you	will	 not	 be	 the
same	man.
You	will	be	taking	something	of	me	with	you.	I	may	not	have	answered	you,	but
you	have	felt	me.
Answers	and	questions	are	superficial.
You	have	tasted	my	love,	my	presence.
So	if	by	chance,	after	twenty-eight	years,	we	meet	again	I	will	ask,	"Do	you	want
it	once	more?"
Most	probably,	you	will	not	need	to	ask	me	again	because	the	seed	is	sown.	You
know	 exactly	what	 has	 to	 be	 done	 --	 you	 have	 to	 slip	 your	 energies	 from	 the
mind	towards	the	heart.	Those	energies	falling	towards	the	heart	are	just	like	rain
falling,	and	the	seed	will	start	sprouting.
Perhaps	after	 twenty-eight	years,	 if	 existence	allows	 it,	 it	will	not	be	you	who
asks	 what	 is	 next.	 I	 will	 ask	 you,	 "What	 is	 next?"	 You	 will	 have	 come	 to
flowering.	You	will	have	come	just	to	show	your	gratitude.
It	is	good	that	you	are	not	German.
The	German	soil	is	a	little	hard.	It	has	its	negative	points	and	its	positive	points,
its	pros	and	cons.	It	 is	hard,	 it	 is	very	difficult	for	 the	seed	to	settle	 in	it	--	but
once	a	seed	settles	in	it,	then	it	is	very	hard	not	to	grow.
Your	question	was	a	mind	question,	and	Gunakar	needed	it.
You	don't	need	it.	You	have	a	soft	heart.	And	the	seed	is	already	in	your	heart,
and	you	know	it	is	growing.
It	is	almost	like	a	pregnant	woman:	when	the	child	starts	growing	she	knows	that
the	 child	 is	 growing.	 An	 experienced	 mother	 of	 two	 or	 three	 children	 even
knows	whether	the	child	is	a	boy	or	a	girl	--	because	the	boy	starts	kicking,	and
the	girl	remains	very	centered,	calm	and	quiet.
Boys	are,	after	all,	boys.	From	the	very	beginning,	they	are	trouble.
An	experienced	mother	can	say	after	the	third	or	fourth	month	whether	the	child
will	be	a	boy	or	a	girl	because	the	boy	is	doing	all	kinds	of	gymnastics,	and	the
girl	is	simply	sitting	silently,	waiting	for	her	own	chance.	Later	on,	she	will	do
the	gymnastics	and	the	boy	will	sit	and	read	the	newspaper.	Everybody	has	his
own	chance.
The	 second	 story	 I	 was	 going	 to	 tell	 you	 is	 about	 a	 very	 rich	 American,	 a
billionaire.	He	becomes	fed	up	with	money,	fed	up	with	all	kinds	of	luxuries,	fed
up	with	all	pleasures.
And	 naturally	 he	 starts	 searching	 --	 is	 there	 something	 more,	 or	 is	 this	 all?
Because	if	this	is	all	then	there	is	no	point	anymore	for	him	to	live;	he	has	had
enough	of	it.	It	is	a	question	of	life	and	death.
And	 he	 moves,	 and	 goes	 from	 one	master	 to	 another	 --	 some	 Tibetan	 lamas,
some	Sufi	mystic,	some	Zen	master.	And	then	he	comes	to	India	and	meets	many
saints.	They	all	say,	"There	is	one	very	wise	old	man	in	the	Himalayas;	only	he
can	help	you."
So	he	 travels	 to	 the	Himalayas,	 then	by	 foot	carries	his	 luggage.	He	has	never
carried	luggage	in	his	life.	He	has	never	walked	uphill	in	the	mountains.	It	is	too
cold,	but	somehow	he	manages.	Tired,	he	falls	at	 the	feet	of	 the	old	man,	who
looks	very	ancient,	and	he	says,	"I	have	found	you	after	all!	I	want	 to	know	--
what	is	the	meaning	of	life?"
The	old	man	said,	"First	things	first.	Have	you	got	a	Havana	cigar?"
The	man	said,	"What	kind	of	question...	Havana	cigar?	Yes,	I	have	got	one.	In
fact,	 I	 am	a	chain	 smoker,	 and	 I	have	been	keeping	one	 in	case	you	make	me
enlightened.	Before	 enlightenment,	 the	 last	Havana	 cigar...	 I	would	 like	 just	 a
few	minutes	more	to	enjoy	it,	and	then	make	me	enlightened	and	do	whatsoever
you	 want.	 After	 enlightenment,	 I	 was	 thinking	 Havana	 cigars	 would	 not	 be
allowed,	because	I	have	not	seen	Buddha	smoking,	or...."
He	said,	"Forget	all	about	 those	old	fellows.	Bring	 the	Havana	cigar."	And	 the
old	man	started	smoking.
The	tired	American	watched,	and	said,	"But	what	about	my	question?"
He	said,	"The	time	is	not	right.	You	go	back.	Come	again	after	few	years."
The	man	said,	"This	is	strange.	Any	message?"
He	 said,	 "When	 you	 come,	 bring	 as	many	Havana	 cigars	 as	 you	 can	 because
once	you	are	enlightened	we	will	both	be	smoking.	On	this	hill	there	is	nothing
else	 to	 do.	 Just	 go	 fast	 and	 come	 back	 --	 but	 bring	 them.	 I	 am	 sending	 you
especially	for	Havana	cigars.
Enlightenment	is	a	very	simple	thing,	but	to	get	Havana	cigars	in	the	Himalayas
is	very	difficult."
Don't	be	worried,	I	am	not	a	smoker!	You	need	not	bring	any	Havana	cigars;	just
come.
Don't	wait	for	twenty-eight	years.	Whenever	you	feel	the	flower	has	opened	its
petals	in	you,	come	back.
I	would	just	like	to	see	you	luminous,	radiant,	ecstatic.
And	I	say	it	is	possible	because	you	have	a	heart,	Gunateet,	that	is	ripe	to	grow
any	moment.	No	hard	woman	can	prevent	it;	she	can	only	help	it.
So	 just	go	back,	and	whenever	 the	spring	comes	and	 the	flower	 is	 there,	come
back	 so	 I	 can	 see	 that	 the	 flower	 has	 lived	 to	 its	 potentiality	 and	 you	 have
become	fragrant.
And	meanwhile,	you	can	smoke	as	many	Havana	cigars	as	you	want.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#5
Chapter	 title:	 Questions:	 Exposing	 your	 way	 from	 ignorance	 to	 innocence	 7
October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610075
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
121
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	FIRST	TIME	I	MET	YOU,	I	SAID	"NO"	TO	YOUR	QUESTION	AS	TO
WHETHER	 I	HAD	A	QUESTION,	AND	 IN	ALL	THESE	EIGHT	YEARS	 I
HAVE
NEVER	ASKED	ANY.
NOW	MY	MIND	SEEMS	TO	BE	EXPLODING	WITH	QUESTIONS,	OUT	OF
WHICH	IT	IS	HARD	TO	CHOOSE	ANY	SATISFYING	TO	A	GERMAN
PERFECTIONIST;	YET	I	FEEL	ALMOST	IN	PANIC	--	 I	DON'T	WANT	TO
MISS
THAT	CHANCE.
OSHO,	 WHY	 IS	 THERE	 THAT	 CONSTANT	 FEAR	 OF	 MISSING	 THE
TRAIN?
There	are	people	who	really	do	not	have	questions.
They	have	a	quest,	but	not	questions.	They	have	a	thirst,	a	deep	hunger	for	being
and	more	being,	but	no	desire	for	gathering	and	accumulating	knowledge.	Hence
they	don't	have	any	questions.
They	are	the	best	kind	of	disciples.
There	 are	 other	 people	who	do	not	 ask	 questions,	 but	 that	 does	 not	mean	 that
they	 don't	 have	 questions.	 They	 do	 not	 ask	 because	 asking	 a	 question	 goes
against	their	ego.
And	if	the	ego	is	German,	then	the	problem	becomes	more	difficult.
It	 is	 not	 coincidental	 that	 Germany	 has	 produced	 great	 philosophers,
philosophers	who	are	ready	to	give	answers	to	every	question.	But	Germany	has
not	produced	sincere	inquirers,	seekers,	who	are	thirsty	for	the	answer.	It	has	not
created	 disciples;	 it	 creates	 only	 masters,	 and	 these	 masters	 are	 only	 great
intellectuals,	not	mystics.
Germany	has	contributed	much	as	far	as	knowledge	is	concerned	--	Hegel,	Kant,
Feuerbach,	Karl	Marx	--	but	it	has	not	contributed	a	single	mystic.	In	the	whole
of	 history,	 not	 a	 single	 Kabir,	 not	 a	 single	 Nanak,	 not	 a	 single	 Farid	 --	 very
strange,	but	it	is	not	coincidental.
The	German	ego	is	ready	to	give	the	answer,	whether	it	knows	or	not;	but	it	 is
very	reluctant	to	ask	the	question,	whether	it	has	the	question	or	not.
The	 same	 is	 your	 situation.	For	 eight	years	you	have	been	 repressing,	 perhaps
unconsciously,	and	there	is	a	limit	to	everything.	You	can	repress	only	so	much,
and	 then	a	point	 comes	when	you	are	 sitting	on	a	volcano.	Now	your	mind	 is
exploding	 with	 questions.	 From	 where	 they	 have	 come?	 For	 eight	 years	 they
were	not	 there,	and	suddenly	out	of	nowhere	 they	are	creating	 in	you	almost	a
state	 of	 insanity	 --	 so	many	 questions	 that	 you	 cannot	 even	 find	which	 one	 is
worthy	to	be	asked.
You	will	have	to	look	backwards:	those	eight	years	that	you	kept	them	repressed
are	your	 responsibility.	 If	 you	had	 allowed	 them	 to	 come,	 in	 those	 eight	 years
you	 might	 have	 been	 completely	 cleansed	 of	 all	 questions;	 you	 might	 have
become	a	tabula	rasa,	an	innocent	child.
But	because	to	ask	is	to	show	one's	ignorance,	you	went	on	repressing.	And	there
is	always	a	hope:	somebody	else	here	may	ask	it,	so	why	expose	yourself?
But	remember,	each	person's	question	has	a	personality	of	its	own.	Even	though
the	words	may	be	the	same,	the	language	exactly	the	same,	the	phrasing	of	the
question	not	a	bit	different,	but	because	the	questioner	is	different,	it	makes	such
a	difference	that	it	is	almost	unbridgeable.	Each	person	has	grown	in	a	different
way,	has	lived	a	different	life,	has	passed	through	different	ups	and	downs.	You
cannot	find	another	person	who	has	gone	through	the	same	experiences.	Hence,
the	question	may	appear	to	be	the	same,	but	it	cannot	be	the	same.
So	never	wait,	thinking	that	somebody	is	bound	to	ask	the	question	and	save	you
the	 trouble	of	exposing	yourself	as	 ignorant,	 so	you	can	 remain	silent,	 looking
wise.
Just	not	asking	the	question	does	not	mean	that	you	know.	It	only	means	that	you
are	not	courageous	enough,	it	only	means	that	you	are	afraid	to	show	your	darker
side.	But	unless	you	show	your	disease,	unless	you	say	something	about	it,	 the
physician	cannot	do	anything.
I	had	a	professor	friend.	He	was	a	great	scholar	of	ancient	Sanskrit.	Not	only	was
he	a	scholar	of	ancient	Sanskrit,	his	mind	was	also	very	old	and	rotten.
He	was	feeling	sick,	and	as	I	was	coming	out	of	my	classroom	he	told	me,	"I	am
feeling	very	weak	and	very	sick.	I	don't	know	what	the	problem	is,	but	you	have
to	give	me	a	lift	and	take	me	to	the	nearby	doctor."	So	I	took	him	to	a	friend	who
was	one	of	the	best	doctors	near	the	university	campus.
Now,	 in	 the	 ancient	 Indian	medicine	 the	 patient	 does	 not	 say	 anything	 to	 the
physician;	 that	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 insulting.	The	 physician	 takes	 the	wrist	 of	 the
patient,	 checks	his	pulse;	 that's	 all.	And	he	decides	what	 the	disease	 is	 and	he
decides	what	the	medicine	is	going	to	be.
And	the	Indian	medicine	ayurveda	has	been	very	proud	about	it.
So	 this	 ancient	Sanskrit	 scholar	would	not	 say	 to	 the	doctor	what	 the	problem
was.	He	said,	"You	are	a	doctor,	you	have	studied	in	England,	you	have	got	the
best	education	--
you	have	to	find	out	what	my	disease	is."
The	doctor	said,	"This	is	strange.	I	am	not	a	doctor	of	animals,	I	am	a	doctor	of
human	beings.	Of	course	as	far	as	animals	are	concerned	they	cannot	say	what
the	 problem	 is,	 so	 the	 vet	 has	 to	 find	 out,	 to	 figure	 out	 what	 the	 donkey	 is
suffering	from...."
And	sometimes	things	go	very	wrong.
I	remember	one	case.	One	of	my	neighbors	in	my	village	had	a	donkey,	a	very
good	donkey.	And	suddenly	there	was	some	epidemic	among	donkeys	and	many
donkeys	in	the	town	died.	The	veterinary	hospital	and	its	doctors	were	at	a	loss
what	 to	do	because	 the	donkeys	 could	not	 say	what	was	happening.	And	 they
were	unable	to	find	out.	The	disease	seemed	to	be	something	very	new.
My	 friend	 was	 very	 much	 afraid	 for	 his	 donkey.	 He	 said,	 "Before	 anything
happens,	I	want	to	take	all	the	precautions."
So	we	both	took	his	donkey	--	because	I	used	to	sit	on	his	donkey;	he	was	the
best	in	the	town	--	to	the	doctor.	And	the	doctor	said,	"He	is	not	sick	at	all."
We	said,	"We	know	--	and	he	knows	too	--	because	he	was	not	willing	to	come
this	way;	we	have	brought	him	forcibly.	But	we	want	to	take	precautions.	Other
donkeys	are	dying,	and	this	is	such	a	beautiful	fellow.	So	if	you	can	just	help;	as
a	precaution	give	him	some	medicine	so	that	he	is	not	affected	by	the	epidemic."
He	gave	us	some	solution,	and	also	a	small	bamboo	pipe,	and	he	 told	 the	man
whose	donkey	it	was,	"You	have	to	put	this	medicine	in	your	mouth."
The	man	said,	"What	are	you	saying?	A	donkey's	medicine?	--	should	I	put	it	in
my	mouth?"
The	 vet	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 way	 it	 has	 to	 be	 given	 to	 the	 donkey,	 because	 the
donkey	will	create	a	thousand	and	one	troubles.	Put	the	other	end	of	the	pipe	in
the	donkey's	mouth	and	blow	the	medicine	into	his	mouth."
He	said,	"Strange	way...."
But	the	vet	said,	"You	don't	know	how	to	deal	with	animals."
But	an	accident	happened.	When	he	was	about	to	give	the	medicine,	the	donkey
did	such	a	great	 job....	He	blew	such	a	forceful	breath	from	his	mouth	 that	 the
man	drank	all	the	medicine!	And	he	said,	"Now	what	is	going	to	happen?	This
was	a	freak	accident,	and	this	idiot...	at	the	right	time,	just	as	I	was	going	to	give
the	medicine,	he	managed	 to	 force	 it	 into	my	body.	Now	let	us	go	back	 to	 the
doctor.	It	may	have	some	bad	effects	on	me	--
it	was	a	precaution	for	the	donkey,	not	a	precaution	for	me."
I	said,	"Now	I	cannot	go,	you	can	go."
This	Sanskrit	 scholar	wanted	 to	be	 told	by	 the	doctor	what	was	wrong	 just	by
having	his	pulse	checked.
The	doctor	said,	"I	know	that	in	ayurveda	this	has	been	the	ancient	method,	but
at	 that	 time	 there	were	 no	 other	 instruments.	At	 that	 time	 people	were	 not	 so
intelligent	 and	 aware	 and	 sensitive	 to	 their	 own	 bodies,	 feelings.	 They	 were
coming	 almost	 from	 the	 world	 of	 animals.	When	 ayurveda	 was	 born,	 human
beings	 were	 just	 emerging	 out	 of	 the	 animal	 kingdom;	 that's	 why	 feeling	 the
pulse	was	the	only	way."
But	 the	 scholar	was	 not	 satisfied.	He	 said,	 "The	 reality	 is	 that	 you	 are	 not	 so
proficient	 in	 the	 subtle	 vibrations	 of	 the	 pulse	 rate.	 You	 are	 not	 ready	 to
acknowledge	your	ignorance."
I	said	to	him,	"You	have	not	come	here	to	discuss	whether	ayurveda	is	a	better
medical	 system	 than	 modern	 medicine.	 You	 have	 come	 here	 for	 your	 own
sickness.	Don't	waste	my	time,	and	don't	waste	the	time	of	the	doctor	--	he	is	not
ignorant.	No	modern	medical	practitioner	is	going	to	tell	you	your	disease,	you
have	to	tell	him.	And	man	has	come	of	age."
You	can	 sit	 here	 silently	 for	 eight	 years	without	 asking	 a	question,	 just	 hiding
yourself	behind	silence	--	which	is	not	true	silence,	because	inside	the	questions
are	boiling.
But	the	German	mind	is	not	ready	to	accept	easily	that	it	is	ignorant.
It	is	good	that	now	you	are	ready	--	because	your	mind	is	exploring	its	questions
--	that	you	are	not	afraid	you	will	be	understood	as	ignorant.
Nobody	is	going	to	understand	you	as	ignorant.
Ignorance	is	our	natural	state,	there	is	nothing	wrong	with	it.	Just	as	everybody	is
naked	behind	the	clothes	--	however	thick	your	clothes	are,	however	many	layers
of	 clothes	 you	 have,	 your	 nakedness	 is	 still	 there.	There	 is	 nothing	 in	 it	 to	 be
ashamed	of.
Naked	we	are	born,	ignorant	we	are	born.
And	it	will	be	helpful	to	recognize	the	fact	of	ignorance	sooner,	so	that	you	will
not	die	ignorant.
Ignorant	 we	 are	 born,	 but	 if	 we	 can	 die	 innocent,	 life	 has	 been	 a	 successful
journey.
And	the	only	way	to	be	innocent	is	to	get	rid	of	all	your	questions.
Don't	 hide	 anything,	 because	whatever	 you	 are	 hiding	will	 come	up	 sooner	 or
later,	will	surface.	It	is	better	to	bring	it	out	yourself	into	the	open,	into	the	light.
And	the	function	of	a	master	 is	not	 to	give	you	an	answer,	but	 to	destroy	your
question.
Nobody	can	give	you	the	answer.
The	 answer	 will	 arise	 in	 you,	 will	 grow	 in	 you.	 It	 will	 be	 your	 growth,	 your
enlightenment.	It	cannot	be	given	from	outside.
But	questions	can	be	destroyed.
So	 it	 is	 good	 that	 you	 have	 started,	 even	 though	 you	 have	wasted	 eight	 years
unnecessarily.	And	that's	why	your	mind	is	continuously	worried	and	scared	of
only	 one	 thing:	Am	 I	 going	 to	miss	 the	 train	 this	 time?	Eight	 years	 you	 have
been	missing,	every	day,	every	moment.
But	there	are	a	few	people	who	are	very	expert	in	missing	trains.
I	have	heard	that	three	persons,	all	professors	of	a	university,	were	standing	on
the	platform.	The	train	was	getting	ready	to	leave	--	two	had	come	to	see	one	off
--	and	they	were	involved	in	deep	discussion.
Suddenly,	 the	 conductor	 shows	 the	 flag	 and	 the	 train	 starts,	 and	 they	 are	 so
absorbed	that	they	don't	notice.	They	notice	only	when	the	train	has	almost	left
the	platform.	So	they	all	three	run	to	catch	it	--	two	succeed,	and	one	fails.	And
the	one	who	fails	starts	laughing.
A	crowd	gathers;	they	say,	"What	is	the	matter?"
But	he	is	laughing	so	much,	a	belly	laughter,	that	he	cannot	contain	himself.
He	says,	"Just	wait	a	minute....	I	have	missed	the	train."
They	say,	"But	missing	a	train	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	laugh."
He	said,	"You	don't	know	the	whole	story	--	just	wait:	the	two	who	have	caught
the	train	came	to	see	me	off!	But	in	a	hurry...."
There	are	people	who	are	always	missing.	Missing	becomes	their	habit	for	their
whole	life.
Each	moment	--	you	have	to	be	alert	not	to	miss	it.
But	you	are	not	there,	you	are	somewhere	else.	Naturally	you	go	on	missing.
You	will	think	of	this	moment	when	it	is	gone.	You	will	say,	"My	God,	I	missed
that	opportunity."
Henry	Ford	was	asked	by	a	 journalist,	"What	 is	 the	secret	of	your	success?"	--
because	he	was	a	poor	man,	born	poor,	and	became	the	richest	man	in	the	world.
Ford	 said,	 "My	 secret	 is	 simple,	 it	 is	 an	 open	 secret:	 I	 never	 miss	 an
opportunity."
But	 the	 journalist	 said,	 "It	 still	 remains	 a	 mystery.	 Nobody	 wants	 to	 miss	 an
opportunity,	but	people	go	on	missing.	So	tell	me	just	in	a	little	detail	how	you
manage	--	because	people	become	aware	of	an	opportunity	only	when	it	is	gone,
but	by	that	time	it	is	too	late."
Henry	Ford	said,	"The	way	not	 to	miss	an	opportunity	is	 just	 to	keep	jumping.
So	whenever	it	comes,	it	doesn't	matter,	you	will	jump	and	ride	on	it.	Don't	stand
and	wait;	otherwise	you	will	get	engaged	in	other	thoughts	and	other	things.
"I	 keep	 on	 jumping.	Let	 the	 opportunity	 come	whenever	 it	 comes	 --	 I	 am	not
going	to	miss	it."
In	a	London	museum	 there	 is	 a	beautiful	painting	 titled	 "Opportunity."	A	very
strange	painting....	When	for	the	first	time,	a	century	ago,	it	was	acquired	by	the
museum,	the	painter	himself	was	alive	and	he	was	present	there	for	the	opening
ceremony.	 The	 museum	 had	 asked	 him	 to	 be	 there	 to	 explain	 it	 to	 people	 --
because	it	is	a	beautiful	painting	but	a	little	difficult,	a	little	strange.
There	is	the	face	of	a	man,	but	you	have	never	come	across	such	a	face:	all	the
hairs	 are	 growing	 not	 on	 the	 head	 but	 on	 the	 forehead,	 and	 the	 head	 is	 clean-
shaven.	And	the	title	is	"Opportunity."
"What	kind	of	man...	where	have	you	found	this	man?"
He	said,	"This	is	the	opportunity.	When	it	comes	you	cannot	see	it,	because	the
face	is	covered	with	hair.	When	it	 is	 just	passing	by,	you	cannot	see	it	because
the	face	is	covered	and	by	the	time	you	recognize	it	and	say,	`Jesus!'...	your	hand
slips!	 --	because	 the	head	 is	clean-shaven.	 It	has	gone.	And	no	moment	comes
back;	once	gone,	it	is	gone	forever."
You	are	afraid	of	missing	the	train.
Whether	you	are	afraid	or	not,	everybody	is	missing	the	train.	It	is	good	that	you
are	afraid,	because	that	may	help	you	to	understand	why	you	are	missing.
You	are	not	in	the	moment.	You	are	either	in	the	past	or	in	the	future	--	both	are
non-existent.	Neither	can	you	do	anything	with	the	past,	nor	can	you	do	anything
with	the	future.	All	that	you	can	do	is	with	the	present,	and	the	present	is	such	a
small,	split	second	that	if	you	are	engaged	somewhere	else,	it	simply	slips	by	and
you	have	missed	the	train.
Learn	to	be	in	the	present.
Withdraw	your	energy	from	the	past.	Don't	waste	your	time	in	memories;	what	is
gone	is	gone	--	say	goodbye	to	it	and	close	the	chapter.
What	has	not	 come	yet	has	not	 come	yet;	don't	unnecessarily	waste	your	 time
and	energy	in	imagination,	because	no	imagination	is	ever	fulfilled.	It	is	because
of	 this	 that	 the	 proverb	 exists	 in	 every	 language:	 "Man	 proposes,	 and	 God
disposes"	--	because	you	imagine	a	certain	thing	in	the	future,	and	it	is	never	so.
Withdrawing	 yourself	 from	 past	 and	 future,	 you	 will	 become	 a	 tremendously
intense	energy,	focused	in	the	present,	concentrated	in	the	present	like	an	arrow.
No	train	could	manage	to	leave	the	platform	without	you.
Each	moment	being	aware,	alert,	watchful,	in	the	herenow,	is	the	way	not	to	miss
the	train.	Every	experience	needs	your	presence	here,	this	moment.
And	 this	 is	 a	 simple	 secret,	 but	 it	 opens	 the	 doors	 of	 existence,	 of	 all	 the
mysteries,	 of	 all	 that	 is	 worth	 knowing,	 worth	 tasting,	 worth	 feeling,	 worth
being.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	IS	SUCH	A	JOY	SEEKING	OUT	A	QUESTION	--	IT	COMES	WORD	BY
WORD
AND	SURPRISES	ME	AS	IT	APPEARS	ON	THE	PAPER.
BEING	 HERE	 WITH	 YOU	 HAS	 BEEN	 MORE	 MOMENT-TO-MOMENT
AND	LESS
PLAN-FILLED	THAN	ANY	OTHER	TIME	IN	MY	LIFE.
THE	 QUESTION	 IS:	 WHERE	 DO	 THESE	 QUESTIONS	 COME	 FROM?
HOW	DOES
SEEKING	 THEM	 OUT	 EMPTY	 OUR	 MINDS	 AND	 CLEANSE	 OUR
BEINGS?
I	 LOVE	 YOU	 BEYOND	 MY	 UNDERSTANDING.	 THANK	 YOU	 AGAIN
AND
AGAIN.
We	are	born	not	knowing	anything.
Questions	don't	come	from	outside.
As	 you	 grow,	 as	 you	 face	 different	 situations,	 as	 you	 move	 into	 different
moments,	encountering	different	circumstances,	your	ignorance	goes	on	and	on
becoming	questions.
These	are	the	right	questions.
And	 if	 you	 insist	 on	 asking	 only	 the	 right	 questions,	which	 come	 out	 of	 your
ignorance	in	encountering	existence,	you	will	be	able	to	get	rid	of	them	without
any	difficulty.
The	 problem	 arises	 because	 you	 have	 many	 questions	 which	 are	 not	 right
questions,	which	have	not	arisen	out	of	your	ignorance	but	which	have	arisen	out
of	 your	 borrowed	 knowledge.	 You	 read	 something	 in	 a	 book	 and	 a	 question
arises;	if	you	had	not	read	the	book,	the	question	would	have	never	arisen,	you
may	have	lived	from	eternity	to	eternity.
For	example,	I	have	been	around	the	world,	but	except	for	a	follower	of	Jainism
--	who	are	not	many,	only	three	and	a	half	million,	and	confined	only	to	India	--
nobody	can	ask	a	question	that	a	Jaina	can	ask.	Only	a	Jaina	can	ask	it,	because
his	 scriptures	 give	 him	 the	 question.	 The	 question	 is	 not	 a	 right	 question;
otherwise,	if	it	was	a	natural	question,	it	would	arise	in	every	human	being.
For	example,	you	may	never	have	wondered	what	nigod	is.	Only	a	Jaina	will	ask
what	nigod	is.	And	for	Jainism	it	is	a	very	important	question;	it	is	as	important
as	 God	 is	 to	 other	 religions	 --	 in	 fact,	 it	 is	 a	 replacement	 for	 God,	 because
Jainism	does	not	believe	in	God.	Then	the	question	arises:	from	where	does	this
universe	come?
Jainism	has	 a	 simple,	 scientific	 answer	 to	 it:	 the	universe	does	not	 come	 from
anywhere,	it	is	always	here.	But	one	problem	gets	them	into	trouble,	because	the
population	 goes	 on	 growing:	 From	where	 do	 these	 people	 come	 if	 nobody	 is
creating	them?
In	Mahavira's	time,	there	were	only	two	million	people	in	India	--	just	in	India.
Now	 there	 are	 seven	 hundred	 million	 people	 in	 India.	 From	 where	 are	 these
people	coming?
Where	have	they	been	hiding	all	this	time?	Who	is	managing	the	whole	circus?	-
-	when	 they	should	come	and	not	come,	why	 they	should	come	at	a	particular
time	and	not	come	at	a	particular	time.
Jainism	has	 to	 invent	 a	 hypothesis.	 The	 hypothesis	 is	 called	 nigod;	 nigod	 is	 a
dormant	 state	of	human	souls.	 Just	as	you	go	 to	 sleep	and	 in	 the	morning	you
wake	up,	 there	 are	millions	 of	 souls	who	 are	 sleeping	 for	 eternity;	 from	 those
dormant	souls	a	few	wake	up	and	start	moving	into	existence.
But	all	such	hypotheses	are	as	dubitable	as	God.
I	have	asked	Jaina	monks	how	many	souls	are	dormant	--	because	there	will	be
one	day	when	nigod	is	empty,	all	souls	will	have	awakened.	Then	the	population
will	remain	static;	there	will	be	no	need	for	any	birth	control.	Whatever	you	do,
you	cannot	produce	a	child.	But	they	don't	have	any	answer.	They	say,	"We	don't
know.	The	scriptures	say	an	infinite	number	of	souls."
I	said,	"This	is	just	befooling	people.	Who	has	counted	them?	Who	has	the	right
to	say	that	they	are	infinite?	This	can	be	said	only	when	they	have	been	counted.
If	 they	have	been	counted,	 they	are	not	 infinite.	Do	you	see	a	simple	 logic?	 If
you	 say	 they	 have	 been	 counted,	 then	 they	may	 be	many	 but	 they	 cannot	 be
infinite.	And	 if	 you	 say	 they	 have	 not	 been	 counted,	 you	 cannot	 say	 they	 are
infinite."
But	nobody	in	the	whole	world	is	ever	going	to	ask,	"What	is	nigod?"	This	is	a
false	question,	it	is	a	bookish	question.
Now,	Jainas	never	ask	about	God.	All	over	the	world,	every	other	religion	will
ask	about	God	because	they	have	been	told	about	God	from	their	very	childhood.
And	naturally,	curiosity	arises:	What	is	God?	How	does	he	look?
Strangely	 enough,	 different	 religions	 have	 different	 ideas	 of	God,	 and	 nobody
bothers	that	God	cannot	have	so	many	appearances	unless	he	has	many	masks.
He	shows	one	face	to	the	Christians,	another	face	to	the	Jews,	another	face	to	the
Hindus...	but	why	should	he	take	such	trouble?	And	none	of	these	fellows	who
are	talking	about	God	have	seen	him.
But	 centuries	 have	 passed,	 and	 people	 are	 discussing	 and	 inquiring	 and
questioning,	and	all	questions	concerned	with	such	things	are	absolutely	futile.
"How	many	hands	 does	God	have?"	Now,	 is	 this	 a	 question	 that	 really	means
anything	 to	 you?	 --	whether	 he	 has	 two	 hands	 or	 four	 hands	 or	 one	 thousand
hands?	What	does	it	matter	to	you?	But	there	are	people	who	believe	that	God
has	one	thousand	hands,	because	to	take	care	of	this	big	world,	two	hands	are	not
enough.	 But	 who	 says	 to	 you	 that	 one	 thousand	 hands	 will	 be	 enough?	 The
world	is	still	big.	If	two	hands	are	too	few,	one	thousand	hands	are	also	too	few.
And	just	think	of	a	god	who	has	one	thousand	hands....
I	 think	 two	 hands	 can	 do	 things	 in	 a	 better	 way	 than	 a	 person	 who	 has	 one
thousand	hands.	He	is	bound	to	get	confused.
And	to	carry	one	thousand	hands...	the	weight	of	one	thousand	hands	will	be	too
much.
There	 was	 one	 very	 famous	 Hindu	 monk,	 Swami	 Shivananda,	 who	 became
world	famous.	Seeing	him,	I	dropped	the	idea	of	one	thousand	hands	--	because
he	was	not	able	even	to	carry	his	two	hands.	His	hands	became	so	fat	that	he	was
not	able	to	raise	them.
Two	persons	used	to	raise	his	hands,	then	he	would	be	able	to	move;	otherwise
those	hands	were	so	much	of	a	weight....	And	nobody	even	thinks	--	because	he
was	a	medical	doctor	before	he	became	a	mahatma	--	first,	medically	he	is	living
a	wrong	life;	otherwise	how	have	these	hands	become	so	heavy?	Secondly	--	he
is	thought	to	be	a	great	yogi	--
according	 to	 yoga	 he	 is	 living	 a	 wrong	 life;	 otherwise	 how	 have	 these	 hands
gone	out	of	proportion?	And	still	he	is	worshipped	as	a	great	saint.
When	 I	 saw	 him,	 I	 said	 to	 him,	 "One	 thing	 is	 settled	 in	 my	 mind,	 that	 God
cannot	 have	 one	 thousand	hands.	 Seeing	 you...	 you	 need	 two	persons	 to	 carry
you	 from	one	place	 to	another	place.	 If	you	had	one	 thousand	hands,	 it	would
really	be	a	great	trouble."
Perhaps	trucks	would	have	been	needed;	Suraj	Prakash	would	have	to	be	called	-
-	 "Bring	 all	 your	 transport,	 Swami	 Shivananda	 is	 going	 to	 the	 bathroom"	 --
because	how	would	he	go?	One	hand	in	one	truck...	at	least	one	thousand	trucks
would	be	needed.	And	for	the	transport	company	it	would	be	a	problem:	how	to
manage	one	thousand	trucks	around	him?	There	would	be	a	parking	problem....
But	just	hypotheses...	and	there	are	thousands	of	things	which	have	kept	human
beings	engaged	in	creating	questions.
And	there	are	always	so-called	wise	people	who	are	ready	to	answer	them.	They
are	 the	 enemies	 of	 humanity.	 Rather	 than	 saying	 that	 your	 question	 is	 wrong
because	 it	 has	 no	 relevance	 to	 your	 growth,	 it	 has	 no	 relevance	 to	 your	 own
spirituality,	that	whether	God	exists	or	not	does	not	matter,	or	how	many	heads
he	has....
The	 Hindu	 god	 has	 three	 heads.	 No	 other	 god	 in	 the	 world	 has	 three	 heads;
naturally	 he	 is	 superior.	He	 can	 look	 in	 three	 dimensions;	 a	 three-dimensional
god,	in	all	dimensions	he	is	looking.	Other	gods	are	one-dimensional.
You	cannot	cheat	a	Hindu	god,	but	a	Mohammedan	god	or	a	Christian	god	--	you
can	hit	him	from	the	back,	he	cannot	see.	The	Hindu	god	you	cannot	hit.	Three
heads,	 one	 thousand	 hands...	 if	 you	 got	 caught	 in	 his	 hands,	 it	 would	 take
eternity	to	get	out	of	the	jungle.
All	useless,	fictitious,	meaningless	things	are	in	the	air,	and	they	have	been	there
for	centuries.	They	create	many	questions	in	you.
So	 you	 have	 to	 remember	 one	 very	 basic	 thing:	 that	 any	 question	 that	 is	 not
concerned	with	your	 individual	growth	has	no	meaning,	no	 substance	 for	you.
Only	then	can	you	sort	out	those	few	questions	which	can	be	of	help.
And	then	ask	them,	then	expose	yourself.	Then	don't	wait	a	single	moment	--	and
don't	 hesitate,	 don't	 feel	 embarrassed.	 It	 is	 your	 right	 to	 ask	 the	question.	 It	 is
nature	demanding	that	you	ask	the	question,	because	once	the	question	is	solved
--	or	better,	DISsolved	--
you	will	feel	light,	your	heaviness	will	be	gone.
The	day	you	don't	have	any	question	will	be	a	day	of	great	celebration,	because
you	will	be	as	light	as	you	can	conceive.
And	then	existence	becomes	just	a	pure	dance	--	no	more	questions.
Existence	becomes	a	trust	--	no	more	questions.
There	are	no	more	 tensions	 in	 the	mind	--	 life	becomes	a	 let-go,	a	 tremendous
relaxation.
You	become	part	of	the	trees	and	the	mountains	and	the	ocean	and	the	river	and
the	stars;	you	are	no	longer	separate	--	your	questions	keep	you	separate.
Your	unquestionable	trust	in	existence	allows	you	to	merge	into	it.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
GOVIND	 SIDDHARTH'S	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 SHOWED	 ME	 THAT	 I	 AM
NOT
CONNECTED	WITH	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 AT	 ALL.	 I	 CANNOT	 IMAGINE
HOW	 I	WOULD	 FEEL	 BEING	 ENLIGHTENED.	 I	 REALIZED	 HOW	 FAR
AWAY	IT	IS	FOR
ME,	AND	THAT	I	AM	NOT	REALLY	SEEKING	IT.
CONCERNING	 MYSELF,	 I	 HAVE	 MOSTLY	 FORGOTTEN	 ABOUT	 THE
STATE
CALLED	ENLIGHTENMENT.	I	SEE	THAT	I	AM	ONLY	LONGING	FOR	IT
WHEN	I	AM	IN	A	STATE	OF	PAIN,	AND	FEEL	LOST,	AND	DON'T	KNOW
ANY	MORE
WHAT	TO	DO.	BUT	IN	MOMENTS	OF	HAPPINESS	AND	FULFILLMENT,
ENLIGHTENMENT	DOES	NOT	EXIST	AT	ALL.
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT	ON	THIS?
Lokita,	enlightenment	is	absolutely	un-Germanic.
I	have	gone	through	all	the	great	philosophers	of	Germany;	nobody	has	any	idea
of	enlightenment.
So	 you	 need	 not	 be	worried.	 It	 simply	 shows	 you	 are	 a	 pure	Nordic	German,
stuck	 with	 another	 German,	 Niskriya.	 One	 German	 is	 enough	 of	 a	 hindrance
towards	enlightenment,	 and	 two	Germans	 together...	 it	 is	 impossible.	You	both
will	tug	at	each	other's	legs	and	will	not	allow	anybody	to	become	enlightened!
And	 the	 idea	 of	 enlightenment	 has	 arisen	 because	 of	 Govind	 Siddharth's
enlightenment.	It	is	not	your	longing	or	your	search.
This	is	what	I	have	been	calling	borrowed.
If	it	is	not	nature	that	is	desiring	something	in	you,	a	longing	coming	out	of	your
very	soul,	out	of	your	very	roots,	then	don't	waste	time	on	it.
That's	 why	 when	 you	 are	 in	 pain,	 in	 misery,	 in	 anguish,	 you	 think	 of
enlightenment	 and	 when	 you	 are	 happy	 and	 contented	 and	 enjoying	 yourself,
you	never	think	about	it.
In	 fact,	 if	 you	 are	 contented,	 happy	 and	 pleasurable	 and	 I	 offer	 you
enlightenment,	you	will	refuse	it.	You	will	say,	"Bhagwan,	when	I	am	in	pain	I
will	come	myself.	Don't	disturb	my	happiness	at	this	moment.	It	is	so	difficult	to
be	happy	with	Niskriya,	and	now	you	have	come	with	enlightenment...."
Remember:	 anything	 that	 comes	out	 of	 pain	 and	 anguish	 and	 anxiety	 is	 at	 the
most	an	effort	to	escape	from	all	these	painful	experiences.
Hearing	again	and	again	that	enlightenment	is	blissful,	you	think	that	rather	than
suffering	 pain	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 enlightened.	 But	 when	 you	 are	 contented	 and
feeling	 happy,	 joyful,	 no	 fight	with	Niskriya	 --	 because	 I	 know	perfectly	well
that	two	Germans	in	one	room	must	be	fighting	twenty-three	hours	a	day	at	least.
For	 one	 hour,	 naturally,	 they	 need	 rest	 and	 contentment.	 At	 that	 time	 if
somebody	comes	and	says,	"Come	on	--
and	this	is	enlightenment,"	you	will	say,	"No,	not	at	this	time;	I	have	hardly	got
one	hour	of	peace	and	you	have	come	to	disturb	that	peace	also."
You	have	to	understand	one	thing:	that	enlightenment	is	not	an	escape	from	pain
but	 an	 understanding	 of	 pain,	 an	 understanding	 of	 your	 anguish,	 an
understanding	 of	 your	 misery	 --	 not	 a	 cover-up,	 not	 a	 substitute,	 but	 a	 deep
insight:	 "Why	 am	 I	miserable,	why	 is	 there	 so	much	 anxiety,	why	 is	 there	 so
much	anguish,	what	are	the	causes	in	me	that	are	creating	it?"	And	to	see	those
causes	clearly	is	to	be	free	from	them.
Just	 an	 insight	 into	 your	 misery	 brings	 a	 freedom	 from	 misery.	 And	 what
remains	is	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	 is	not	something	 that	comes	 to	you.	 It	 is	when	pain	and	misery
and	 anguish	 and	 anxiety	 have	 been	 understood	 perfectly	 well	 and	 they	 have
evaporated	 because	 now	 they	 have	 no	 cause	 to	 exist	 in	 you	 --	 that	 state	 is
enlightenment.
It	will	bring	you,	for	the	first	time,	real	contentment,	real	blissfulness,	authentic
ecstasy.
And	only	then	can	you	compare.
What	you	used	to	call	`contentment'	before	was	not	contentment.	What	you	used
to	call
`happiness'	before	was	not	happiness.
But	right	now	you	don't	have	anything	to	compare	it	with.
Once	 enlightenment	 gives	 you	 a	 taste	 of	 the	 real,	 you	 will	 see	 that	 all	 your
pleasures,	all	your	happinesses	were	simply	the	stuff	dreams	are	made	of;	 they
were	not	real.	And	what	has	come	now,	has	come	forever.
That	is	the	definition	of	the	real:	a	contentment	that	comes	and	never	leaves	you
again	 is	 real	 contentment.	 A	 contentment	 that	 comes	 and	 goes	 again	 is	 not
contentment,	it	is	simply	a	gap	between	two	miseries.
Just	as	we	call	a	gap	between	two	wars	`peace	time'	--	it	is	not	a	peaceful	time,	it
is	 simply	 preparation	 for	 another	 war.	 If	 the	 war	 is	 a	 positive	 war,	 the	 time
between	two	wars	is	a	negative	war,	a	cold	war.	It	goes	on	underground,	you	are
getting	ready	for	a	hot	war.
Anything	that	comes	and	goes	is	a	dream.
Let	that	be	the	definition.
Anything	that	comes	and	never	goes	is	reality.
Don't	 be	 bothered	 about	 the	 word	 ènlightenment.'	 What	 you	 call	 it	 does	 not
matter;	you	can	call	 it	 illumination,	you	can	call	 it	blissfulness,	you	can	call	 it
self-realization,	 you	 can	 call	 it	 actualization	 of	 all	 your	 potentials	 --	whatever
you	want	to	call	it.
But	 remember	 one	 quality:	 that	 it	 knows	 only	 a	 beginning,	 it	 knows	 no	 end.
Anything	that	comes	and	goes,	beware	--	that	is	simply	illusory,	it	is	only	a	gap,
because	one	gets	tired.
Niskriya	 also	 gets	 tired,	 and	when	 one	 is	 tired	 one	 thinks,	 "Just	 be	 loving,	 be
peaceful."
So	for	an	hour	or	two	hours	there	is	love,	but	it	does	not	last	long;	just	a	small
thing,	 anything,	 and	 the	 quarrel	 begins.	And	 every	other	 day	you	 are	 ready	 to
separate.	Just	look	in	one	week	how	many	times	you	decide	to	separate.
You	don't	know,	I	have	been	keeping	you	together.	Niskriya	 is	a	very	obedient
follower.	 I	 tell	 him,	 "Niskriya,	 just	 let	 things	 be	 as	 they	 are.	 One	 woman	 is
absolutely	needed	for	your	enlightenment;	just	remain...."
And	the	same	is	true	for	you:	he	is	needed	for	your	enlightenment.
Separately	--	because	there	will	be	no	fight,	no	anxiety,	no	pain	--	you	may	start
thinking	that	life	is	perfectly	peaceful,	what	is	the	need	of	enlightenment?	And	it
will	not	be	peace;	it	will	be	the	peace	of	the	graveyard.
I	want	the	peace	of	the	garden,	not	of	the	graveyard.	The	birds	should	be	singing,
because	 their	 songs	 deepen	 the	 peace.	 The	 flowers	 should	 be	 blossoming
because	 their	 colors,	 their	 fragrance	 make	 the	 peace	 alive	 --	 the	 foliage,	 the
greenery,	everything	is	overflowing	with	life.
In	 a	 graveyard	 also	 there	 is	 silence	 and	 there	 is	 peace,	 because	 everybody	 is
dead.	 They	 are	waiting	 for	 the	 last	 judgment	 day;	 then	 they	will	 come	 out	 of
their	 graves	 and	 you	 will	 see	 such	 a	 quarrel	 as	 you	 have	 never	 seen,	 not
imagined.	Because	lying	in	their	graveyards,	they	are	repressing	everything,	and
when	they	come	out...	just	skeletons	hitting	each	other!
You	will	see	the	scene,	the	last	judgment	day:	nobody	will	bother	who	is	hitting
whom,	just	hitting	will	be	such	a	joy.	So	much	is	repressed	--	because	somebody
has	been	in	the	grave	for	thousands	of	years.	Just	think	of	yourself	in	a	grave	for
thousands	of	years:	how	much	anger	you	must	be	gathering!	--	it	will	explode	in
just	one	day,	in	twenty-four	hours.	More	time	is	not	given;	perhaps	God	is	afraid
to	give	more	time.	Because	if	you	give	more	time,	that	quarrel	will	never	end;	it
will	continue.	So	finish	it	in	twenty-four	hours.
And	 in	 twenty-four	hours	 in	 that	 crowd	you	cannot	 find	your	enemy	or	where
your	wife	is,	where	your	neighbor	is.	So	don't	waste	time	--	whoever	you	meet,
hit	him	hard!
Somebody	must	be	hitting	your	wife,	 so	you	hit	 somebody	else's	wife;	 it	does
not	matter,	the	question	is	of	hitting.
There	 is	 a	 peace	 in	 the	 graveyard.	 If	 people	 live	 separately....	And	 that's	what
religions	have	thought:	renounce	the	world	and	go	into	the	caves,	and	there	will
be	 peace.	 It	will	 be	 the	 peace	of	 the	 graveyard,	 your	 cave	will	 be	 your	 grave.
Because	there	is	nobody	to	provoke	you,	nobody	to	insult	you.	Just	being	alone,
what	can	you	do	except	be	silent?
But	that	is	not	the	peace	that	passeth	understanding,	that	is	a	deadness,	a	suicide.
Try	 to	understand	your	misery.	Live	 it,	go	 to	 the	very	depth	of	 it,	 find	out	 the
cause,	why	it	is	there.
Let	understanding	be	your	meditation.
And	try	to	understand	your	contentment	also,	your	happiness	also,	and	you	will
see	their	superficiality.
Once	you	know	that	your	happiness	is	superficial	and	your	anguish	is	very	deep
--	and	it	is	in	your	hands	--	you	can	change	your	whole	style	of	consciousness.
Your	contentment	can	become	your	whole	being;	not	even	a	small	space	is	left
for	discontentment.
Your	 love	becomes	your	very	 life.	And	 it	 remains.	Time	passes,	 but	what	you
have	achieved	goes	on	deepening.	More	and	more	flowers,	more	and	more	songs
are	born	out	of	it.
That's	what	we	call	enlightenment.
The	word	is	Eastern,	but	the	experience	has	nothing	to	do	with	East	or	West.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	A	STORY	TO	TELL:
IT	 HAPPENED	 IN	 THE	 EARLY	 SECOND	 HALF	 OF	 THE	 MONTH	 OF
JUNE,	1985,	WHEN	I	WAS	LIVING	IN	RAJNEESHPURAM.
ONE	 MORNING,	 SOON	 AFTER	 I	 WOKE,	 I	 TOOK	 A	 PEE	 IN	 THE
BATHROOM,	 AND	 FELT	 A	 TIDAL	 WAVE	 OF	 RELAXATION
DESCENDING	ON	ME	AS	IT
SOMETIMES	HAPPENS	IN	THE	LAST	STAGE	OF	YOUR	MEDITATION
TECHNIQUES.	 THE	 RELAXATION	 WAS	 ALL	 OVER	 ME,	 AND	 MY
EYELIDS
CLOSED	GENTLY	AND	INSTANTLY.	I	COULDN'T	MOVE	OR	STOP	THIS
TIDAL
WAVE	FEELING.
AS	MY	EYES	CLOSED,	YOU	APPEARED	IN	ALL	YOUR	BEAUTY.	YOUR
PHYSICAL	PRESENCE	WAS	SO	REAL	AND	 INTOXICATING	 --	AS	ONE
SEES
AND	FEELS	YOU	IN	A	DARSHAN,	SITTING	IN	THE	FIRST	ROW.	BUT	IN
A	MOMENT	 YOU	 STARTED	 DISAPPEARING,	 BEGINNING	 FROM	 ALL
SIDES	OF
YOUR	 BODY,	 AND	 A	 DEEP	 BLACKNESS	 STARTED	 TAKING	 YOUR
PLACE.
SOON	 ALL	 THAT	 WAS	 LEFT	 WAS	 A	 DEEP,	 DEEP	 BLACKNESS	 OF	 A
KIND	I	HAVE	NEVER	SEEN	BEFORE.	IT	GAVE	A	FEELING	OF	TERROR,
AND	LASTED
FOR	A	COUPLE	OF	MINUTES.
AS	 I	 CAME	 OUT	 OF	 THIS	 EXPERIENCE	 I	 WAS	 STUNNED,	 DAZED,
ALMOST
DRAINED.	 I	WAS	FULL	OF	A	DEEP	 INNER	PAIN;	 I	WAS	VERY	SHAKY
AND
UPSET,	AS	THE	MEANING	THAT	SOMEHOW	HAD	REVEALED	ITSELF
TO	ME
WAS	 IN	 THE	 IMPACT	 OF	 THE	 EXPERIENCE.	 IT	 MEANT	 PHYSICAL
DEATH	TO
YOUR	BODY,	OR	AT	LEAST	A	DEATH-LIKE	CALAMITY.
I	TRIED	TO	FORCE	MYSELF	TO	BE	NORMAL,	BUT	COULDN'T	TALK	TO
PEOPLE.	 WHEN	 MY	 FRIEND	 NOTICED	 I	 WAS	 DISTURBED,	 AND
ASKED	ME
THE	REASON,	I	TOLD	HER	OF	THE	INCIDENT.	I	CONTINUED	TO	FEEL
THAT
SOMETHING	GRAVE	WAS	PEEPING	OVER	THE	HORIZON.
IN	THE	LATE	AFTERNOON	WHEN	I	WAS	WORKING,	SUDDENLY	OUT
OF
NOWHERE	A	DEEP	TIDAL	WAVE	OF	RELAXATION	OVERPOWERED	ME
AGAIN.	MY	EYES	CLOSED	AND	A	BRIGHT	PURPLE	COLOR	APPEARED
ALL
OVER	IN	FRONT	OF	ME,	AMIDST	WHICH	YOU	APPEARED	AGAIN	IN
YOUR
FULLEST	 GLORY,	 BEAMING.	 BEAUTIFUL	 FLOWERS	WERE	 POPPING
OPEN
ALL	AROUND	YOU	LIKE	BUBBLES	 --	 IT	WAS	PSYCHEDELIC!	 I	 FELT
NOW
FULLY	 ASSURED	 THAT	 NO	 REAL	 HARM	WAS	 GOING	 TO	 COME	 TO
YOUR
BODY.	WHATEVER	CALAMITIES	CAME	WOULD	 PASS	AWAY,	AND	A
MORE-GLORIOUS-THAN-EVER	PHASE	FOR	YOU	AND	YOUR	PEOPLE
WOULD
FOLLOW.
IN	 THE	 LATER	MONTHS	 A	 GREAT	 CALAMITY	DID	 COME	 TO	 YOUR
BODY	IN
THE	FORM	OF	YOUR	ILLEGAL	ARREST	BY	THE	POWER-BLINDED	U.S.
GOVERNMENT	 --	WHICH	WAS	A	PHYSICAL	THREAT	TO	YOUR	LIFE.
NOW,	IN
THE	 LIGHT	 OF	 THE	 FIRST	 PART	 OF	 MY	 STORY	 TURNING	 INTO	 A
REALITY,	IT
IS	 QUITE	 NATURAL	 FOR	ME	 TO	 FEEL	 THAT	 THE	 SECOND	 PART	 OF
THE
STORY	HAS	ALREADY	STARTED	TURNING	INTO	A	REALITY,	SLOWLY
SLOWLY.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WOULD	YOU	LIKE	TO	COMMENT?
Pratap,	you	have	related	your	story	with	absolutely	the	right	interpretation.
It	needs	no	comment.
This	is	a	good	sign.	Slowly	slowly,	to	other	sannyasins	also,	the	same	is	going	to
happen.
They	will	come	 to	feel	an	experience,	and	 they	will	also	be	able	 to	 interpret	 it
correctly.
I	can	only	say	you	are	blessed	that	your	mind	has	not	interfered,	has	not	misled
you,	 and	 your	 heart	 has	 been	 in	 complete	 control	 seeing	 the	 experience	 and
interpreting	it.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	GLIMPSE	OF	YOUR	EYES,	A	FLASH	OF	TOTAL	LOVE	--	IT	HAPPENS
IN	A	SECOND	BUT	STAYS	FOREVER.
OSHO,	HOW	COULD	THIS	HAPPEN?
It	is	a	simple	phenomenon.
A	moment	of	love	is	a	moment	of	eternity.	The	depth	of	it	is	so	great	that	time
cannot	erase	it.
Although	 the	happening	was	 in	a	single	moment,	 it	 is	 like	a	woman	becoming
pregnant:	the	happening	is	in	a	single	moment,	but	it	gives	birth	to	a	child	who
may	 live	 seventy,	 eighty	 years,	who	may	give	 birth	 to	many	more	 children.	 It
may	 become	 a	 tree:	 many	 branches,	 and	 each	 branch	 bifurcating	 into	 new
branches.
I	 am	 reminded....	 If	 you	 go	 to	 Bodh	 Gaya,	 where	 Gautam	 Buddha	 became
enlightened,	the	tree	under	which	he	was	sitting	is	still	 there,	although	it	 is	not
the	same	tree	but	the	continuity	of	the	same	tree,	a	child	of	the	same	tree.
When	Ashoka	was	the	emperor	of	India,	he	sent	his	daughter	Sanghamitra,	who
had	 become	 a	 sannyasin,	 to	 Sri	 Lanka	 with	 a	 branch	 of	 the	 original	 tree.	 Sri
Lanka	was	 converted	 by	Sanghamitra	 to	 the	 ideology	of	Gautam	Buddha,	 and
the	branch	was	planted	there	and	became	a	big	tree.
Here,	after	Gautam	Buddha,	a	strange	tragedy	happened:	Buddhism	disappeared
from	 India,	 and	 Hindus	 burned	 the	 tree	 under	 which	 Gautam	 Buddha	 had
become	enlightened.
It	was	only	when	 India	became	 independent	 just	 forty	years	 ago	 that	 a	branch
from	Sri	Lanka	was	brought	back.
Now	you	see	a	beautiful	tree	again	flourishing	in	Bodh	Gaya	--	although	it	is	not
the	same	tree,	but	it	is	the	same	tree.
A	moment	of	deep	love	goes	so	deep	in	your	being	that	time	cannot	erase	it.	It
goes	on	and	on	giving	birth	to	itself	within	you.
Hence	I	say	that	a	moment	of	love	is	a	moment	of	eternity.
Question	6
BELOVED	OSHO,
MOST	 OF	 HUMANITY	 LIVES	 TO	 EAT	 AND	 SLEEP,	 WORK,
ACCUMULATE
POWER	AND	MONEY,	OR	TO	PROPOGATE	ITSELF.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	DO	YOU	LIVE	FOR?
Milarepa,	I	will	tell	you	a	real	historical	fact:
In	Greece,	there	was	a	great	philosopher,	Xeno.	He	lived	a	long	life	--	in	those
days	it	was	really	very	long,	because	the	average	life	in	those	days	was	not	more
than	twenty-five	years.	Xeno	lived	ninety	years.
And	he	is	a	strange	philosopher,	unique	in	a	sense,	because	his	teaching	is	that
life	is	meaningless;	so	meaningless	that	any	man	of	intelligence	would	commit
suicide,	that	is	the	only	intelligent	act	you	can	do.
So	many	of	his	disciples	committed	suicide,	went	on	committing	suicide.	Ninety
years	long,	thousands	of	disciples	--	and	he	was	a	very	convincing	man.	What	he
was	saying	was	so	accurate,	because	ordinary	life	is	certainly	so	meaningless	--
unless	you	know	to	change	it	into	a	divine	phenomenon,	it	is	meaningless.
And	 he	 was	 a	 great	 logician;	 he	 argued	 and	 convinced	 people,	 and	 people
committed	suicide,	young	people	committed	suicide.
When	he	was	dying,	somebody	asked,	"Xeno,	one	thing	has	always	disturbed	us.
According	 to	 your	 philosophy,	 thousands	 of	 people	 have	 committed	 suicide.
Why	have	you	gone	on	living?"
He	said,	"It	was	 just	 to	 teach	people	 to	commit	suicide;	otherwise	who	will	do
my	job?	I	had	to	live."
Milarepa,	people	are	living	absolutely	meaningless	lives.
I	also	teach	them	a	kind	of	suicide	--	not	exactly	the	same	as	Xeno.	I	teach	them
a	suicide	in	which	they	are	reborn	in	a	more	luminous	life,	of	a	greater	glory,	of	a
divine	ecstasy.
I	 have	 to	 live	 because	 it	 would	 be	 absolutely	 unkind,	 knowing	 the	 path	 of
transformation	and	not	telling	it	to	the	people	who	need	it.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Truth	knows	no	fifty-fifty
8	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610085
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
118
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 REQUESTING	 YOUR	 GUIDANCE	 ON	 MY	 ANSWER	 TO
SOMETHING	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 TO	 ME	 --	 WHICH	 YOU	 NEVER
ACTUALLY	SAID.
DURING	 MY	 SANNYAS	 DARSHAN	 YOU	 SPOKE	 TO	 ME	 AT	 LENGTH
ABOUT
WHAT	HAPPENED	TO	BUDDHA'S	TEACHINGS	AFTER	BUDDHA	LEFT
HIS
BODY.	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 BUDDHA'S	 DISCIPLES
COMPROMISED
BUDDHA'S	TEACHING.	THEY	CREATED	SAFE	RELIGIONS,	AND	THUS
COMPROMISED.	YOU	TOLD	ME,	"DO	NOT	COMPROMISE."
WHILE	 YOU	 WERE	 SPEAKING	 THESE	 WORDS	 TO	 ME,	 I	 HEARD
ANOTHER
COMMUNICATION.	THE	REQUEST	THAT	I	SILENTLY	HEARD	SPOKEN
WAS,
"DO	NOT	LET	IT	HAPPEN	TO	ME."
SINCE	THAT	DAY	I	HAVE	CONTINUALLY	LOOKED	FOR	WHAT	I	MIGHT
BE
ABLE	TO	DO	TO	FULFILL	THIS	REQUEST.	MUCH	TO	MY	WONDER,	 I
KNOW
WHAT	TO	DO,	I	KNOW	HOW	TO	FULFILL	THE	UNSPOKEN	REQUEST	--
BUT	I	WANT	YOUR	GUIDANCE.
WILL	YOU	PLEASE	GIVE	ME	YOUR	SPECIFIC	GUIDANCE?
What	happened	to	Gautam	Buddha	and	his	teachings	is	almost	the	rule,	not	the
exception.
The	moment	 the	master	 leaves	his	body,	 the	disciples	start	compromising	with
the	surrounding	world	to	survive,	to	continue	to	exist.
And	truth	is	something	that	cannot	be	compromised.
Just	Gautam	Buddha's	teachings...	five	hundred	years	afterwards,	there	was	not	a
single	Buddhist	in	the	whole	of	India.	The	greatest	man	who	has	ever	walked	on
the	earth,	 and	 the	most	 refined	 teaching	and	 the	most	clear	perception	of	 truth
simply	disappeared	like	a	dream.
One	 wonders	 --	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 to	 Christianity,	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 to
Mohammedanism,	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 to	 Jainism.	 So	 the	 complexity	 of	 the
phenomenon	has	to	be	understood.
The	people	who	had	followed	Gautam	Buddha	refused	to	compromise.	That	was
the	 cause	 of	 the	 disappearance	 of	 Buddhism	 from	 India.	 The	 Buddhists	 were
either	killed,	burned	alive	or	forcibly	converted	into	Hinduism,	or	the	fortunate
ones	escaped	to	the	neighboring	countries.
In	a	way,	it	was	a	blessing	in	disguise	because	the	Buddhists	who	escaped	India
spread	 all	 over	 Asia	 and	 converted	 the	 whole	 continent	 to	 the	 teachings	 of
Gautam	Buddha.
But	 the	problem	was,	 they	had	 learned	 something	 that	 a	disciple	 should	never
learn:	 they	 had	 learned	 in	 India	 that	 if	 you	 insist	 for	 truth,	 crucifixion	 is	 the
result.	 If	 you	want	 to	 survive,	 you	 have	 to	 compromise	with	 all	 kinds	 of	 lies
which	are	prevalent.
What	they	did	not	do	in	India	they	did	in	China,	they	did	in	Japan,	they	did	in
Korea,	 they	 did	 in	 Ceylon.	 All	 over	 Asia	 they	 compromised	 with	 the	 local
population,	 its	 superstitions,	 its	 ancient	 ideologies	 unfounded	 on	 truth,	 just
created	 out	 of	 fear.	 But	 because	 they	 compromised	with	 them,	 they	 survived.
And	it	was	not	only	that	they	survived,	they	became	very	respectable.	Buddhism
became	the	religion	of	the	whole	of	Asia	except	India.
It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	phenomenon,	 because	Buddha	was	born	here;	 all	 his	 great
disciples	 were	 born	 here.	 Hundreds	 of	 people	 became	 enlightened	 under	 his
guidance.	 The	 consciousness	 of	 this	 country	 reached	 the	 highest	 point	 in	 the
presence	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 And	 yet	 the	 moment	 Buddha	 was	 gone,	 the
tremendous	 experience	 disappeared,	 evaporated	 --	 because	 the	 people	 who
remained	behind	were	still	not	ready	to	betray	their	master.	They	were	ready	to
die,	but	not	to	betray;	they	were	not	going	to	compromise.
And	Hinduism	took	revenge	with	great	vengeance	--	because	in	the	presence	of
Gautam	Buddha....	Hinduism	did	not	have	the	guts	to	encounter	this	man.	Efforts
were	made.
Hindu	pundits,	 scholars	 had	gone	 to	 argue,	 but	 they	were	mere	parrots.	 In	 the
presence	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 their	 borrowed	 knowledge	 proved	 completely
inadequate	for	human	growth.
The	 very	 presence	 of	Gautam	Buddha	was	 enough	 to	 convince	 them	 that	 this
man	had	experienced	something	that	they	had	not	experienced.	What	they	were
saying	was	simply	repetition	of	old	scriptures.	What	he	was	saying	was	a	valid
individual	experience	--	his	own.	And	when	the	experience	is	your	own,	it	has	an
authority.
Hinduism	had	to	wait	for	Buddha's	death.	In	his	presence,	it	was	impossible	to
argue	in	favor	of	superstitions.	They	had	to	wait	for	five	hundred	years;	because
after	Buddha,	his	 immediate	disciples	 --	Sariputta,	Moggalayan,	Mahakashyap,
Ananda	--	and	hundreds	of	others	were	filled	with	the	same	light,	with	the	same
silence.	 They	 created	more	 living	 enlightened	 people.	 This	 continued	 for	 five
hundred	years.
Slowly	 slowly,	 it	 died	 out.	 Instead	 of	 the	 enlightened	man,	 slowly	 slowly	 the
scholar,	the	pundit	became	more	important.
That	 was	 the	 time	 when	 Hinduism	 came	 with	 vengeance	 --	 and	 certainly
Hinduism	 is	 a	 far	 older	 religion.	 It	 had	 great	 scholars.	 The	 Buddhist	 scholars
were	amateurs,	they	could	not	withstand	Hindu	scholarship;	they	were	defeated
very	easily.
Now,	it	was	not	their	own	experience.
These	 were	 the	 people	 who	 have	 written	 Buddhist	 scriptures.	 You	 will	 be
surprised	 to	 know	 that	 every	Buddhist	 scripture	 begins	with	 the	words	 Ì	 have
heard.'	 These	 people	 had	 not	 seen,	 these	 people	 had	 not	 experienced.	 These
people	had	simply	heard	from	others	about	the	innermost	reality,	but	it	was	only
hearsay.
Hindus	 were	 more	 proficient	 scholars,	 almost	 ten	 thousand	 years	 old;	 very
refined	logicians,	rationalists.
The	 poor	 Buddhist	 scholars	 could	 not	 manage	 to	 prove	 anything.	 They	 were
defeated	so	utterly	that	they	had	to	move	back	into	the	Hindu	fold.
The	Buddhist	monks	who	had	escaped	from	India	learned	a	lesson:	"If	you	don't
have	your	own	experience,	then	it	is	better	to	compromise	to	survive."	They	had
burned	their	fingers	in	arguing	for	somebody	else's	experience.
They	 dropped	 argument.	 They	 started	 talking	 of	 the	 synthesis	 of	 all	 religions;
they	started	spreading	the	idea	that	all	religions	are	right.	Nobody	is	wrong,	the
question	of	discussion	does	not	arise.
And	they	were	the	first	in	the	world	to	bring	this	idea	that	all	religions	are	right.
Naturally	all	religions	respected	these	people	--	 they	were	not	quarrelsome.	Up
to	now	every	religion	had	been	quarrelsome,	arguing,	proving	that	"We	have	got
the	truth;	we	are	right	and	you	are	wrong."
And	these	were	the	first	people	who	were	saying,	"Everybody	is	right.	There	are
millions	of	 paths,	 but	 the	goal	 is	 one.	There	 is	 no	need	 for	 any	 argument.	We
may	be	moving	on	different	paths,	but	we	are	moving	towards	the	same	goal."
The	 same	 has	 happened	 with	 Jainism	 in	 India,	 which	 was	 a	 contemporary
religion	to	Buddha.	Jainas	are	still	in	existence	in	India.
It	 is	also	a	 strange	 fact	 that	Mahavira,	 their	greatest	 teacher,	and	Buddha	were
contemporaries.	 In	 the	presence	of	Gautam	Buddha,	Mahavira	could	not	make
any	impact	on	the	country.	Yes,	he	had	a	small	following,	but	Buddha	loomed	so
large,	 he	 was	 such	 a	 huge	 tree	 that	 for	 three	 hundred	 years	 British	 scholars,
historians,	 philosophers,	 thought	 that	Mahavira	was	 not	 separate	 from	Gautam
Buddha,	 that	Mahavira	was	 another	 name	 of	Gautam	Buddha.	Because	 it	 is	 a
title,	 just	 as	 `buddha'	 is	 a	 title.	 `Buddha'	means	 the	 awakened	one;	 `Mahavira'
means	 one	who	 has	 conquered.	And	 they	 both	 had	 the	 same	 title	 of	 `Jaina'	 --
`Jaina'	also	means	one	who	has	conquered.	Because	 the	same	 title	belonged	 to
both,	it	was	thought	that	Mahavira	was	not	somebody	separate.
It	was	just	recently	that	scholars	started	feeling	that	this	was	not	right,	that	these
were	two	different	people.
Buddha	created	so	much	impact,	he	overshadowed	everybody	--	but	within	five
hundred	years	he	disappeared.
Mahavira's	 followers	 are	 still	 in	 existence	 because	 Mahavira's	 followers
compromised	with	the	Hindus.	They	were	not	burned,	they	were	not	killed.	They
compromised	so	much	that	you	cannot	find	much	difference.
And	 they	 had	 to	 compromise	 because	 they	 are	 dependent	 on	 the	 Hindus	 for
everything.
They	are	not	a	whole	culture.	If	they	need	shoes	--	they	cannot	make	shoes	and
certainly	they	need	shoes	--	they	will	have	to	depend	on	the	Hindus.	They	need
their	toilets	to	be	cleaned;	they	cannot	do	that,	they	have	to	depend	on	Hindus.
It	 is	 a	 strange	 phenomenon	 that	 Jainism	 and	Buddhism	 both	 arose	 as	 a	 revolt
against	 Hinduism.	 Mahavira	 is	 very	 strongly	 against	 Hinduism,	 but	 Jainas
compromised	on	every	point	 --	because	 from	where	are	you	going	 to	get	your
clothes?	The	weavers	are	either	Hindu	or	Mohammedan.	Who	is	going	to	make
your	houses?	Who	is	going	 to	cultivate	food	for	you?	--	because	Jainas	cannot
even	 cultivate.	 It	 is	 against	 their	 religion,	 because	 plants	 have	 life,	 and	 if	 you
cultivate	you	will	have	to	cut	plants	and	you	will	be	doing	violence.
So	 all	 the	 violence	 has	 to	 be	 done	 by	 Hindus;	 then	 naturally	 you	 have	 to	 be
dependent	on	them,	and	you	cannot	argue,	and	you	cannot	 insist	 that	you	have
the	 truth.	You	have	 to	 say	 that	 everybody	has	 the	 truth;	 just	 the	 languages	 are
different,	paths	are	different,	ways	are	different,	but	 the	basic	experience	is	 the
same.
Jainism	survived.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 Mohammedanism,	 Christianity	 --	 they	 have	 all
compromised	with	the	existing	people.
Just	a	few	months	ago,	the	present	pope	visited	India.
The	 Indian	 Christians	 are	 the	 low	 caste	 Hindus,	 converted	 to	 Christianity
because	of	poverty.	There	is	no	other	reason	for	their	conversion	--	they	are	poor,
uneducated,	and	Christianity	promises	them....
But	 the	 pope	 was	 faced	 with	 great	 difficulties	 because	 the	 Hindus	 who	 have
become	converted	cannot	simply	drop	their	habits	of	thousands	of	years.	In	the
church	they	bring	incense	before	Jesus	Christ.	And	it	was	reported	to	him	by	the
bishops	and	 the	cardinals..."What	 should	be	done?	We	 try	 to	prevent	 them	but
they	don't	 listen.	They	bring	 flowers,	 they	bring	 incense...	not	only	 that,	 in	 the
church	they	repeat	the	mantra	omkar."
And	the	pope	agreed	that	they	should	be	allowed;	otherwise,	they	will	desert.
This	 is	 something	 so	 deep	 in	 them...	 they	 cannot	 think	 that	OM,	 the	 sound	of
OM	can	be	anything	other	than	the	most	spiritual	thing.	They	are	Christians,	and
OM	has	nothing	to	do	with	Christianity	--	but	basically	they	are	Hindus.	And	the
pope's	concession	is	a	compromise,	it	is	cunning.
Tomorrow	these	people	will	start	painting	Jesus	Christ	in	the	color	red,	and	you
will	have	to	accept	it	because	without	the	red	color	no	stone	can	become	God.	It
has	never	happened	in	India.
When	for	the	first	time	the	British	government	made	roads	and	milestones,	they
had	no	idea	what	they	were	doing.	They	painted	the	milestones	red,	because	red
shows	from	far	away,	 it	 stands	out	against	 the	greenery,	 is	more	clear.	So	 they
painted	 them	 red,	 and	 they	 were	 surprised	 that	 every	 milestone	 was	 being
worshipped!	 The	 villagers	 came	 with	 flowers,	 incense...	 every	 milestone	 had
become	the	monkey	god	Hanuman.
Their	engineers	tried	to	explain,	that	"These	are	not	gods,	these	are	milestones."
They	 said,	 "You	 don't	 know.	We	have	 been	 doing	 this	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.
Any	 stone	 painted	 red	 becomes	 divine."	 They	 were	 very	 happy	 --	 not	 happy
because	of	the	roads,	they	were	happy	because	of	the	milestones.
Christianity	has	been	compromising	 from	 the	very	beginning	 in	every	country.
That	has	been	its	way	of	survival.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	Indian	Christianity	is	older	than	the	Vatican.
Indian	 Christianity	 is	 the	 oldest	 in	 the	 world,	 because	 one	 of	 Jesus'	 closest
disciples,	Thomas,	came	to	India.
It	was	difficult	to	convert	Indians	to	any	other	religion.	They	have	seen	so	much,
they	 have	 heard	 so	much	 about	 religion,	 they	 have	 so	many	 beliefs...	 Thomas
was	at	a	loss	in	the	beginning,	but	finally	he	managed	to	compromise.
He	started	dressing	like	a	Hindu.	If	you	see	the	pictures	of	Thomas,	you	will	be
surprised	 that	 he	 shaved	 his	 head	 just	 like	 a	 Hindu	 shankaracharya.	 And	 he
started	using	 the	 thread	 that	Hindus	use,	 and	he	 also	used	 the	wooden	 sandals
that	Hindu	monks	were	using	to	avoid	leather.	And	he	would	wear	just	a	small
dhoti	with	no	shirt	on	top,	just	like	the	old	brahmins.	He	learned	Sanskrit.
And	seeing	him,	that	he	was	just	like	a	brahmin,	so	whatever	he	was	saying	must
be	right,	many	people	started	following.	They	were	the	first	Christians.
But	 this	 is	more	businesslike,	 it	 is	 salesmanship.	 It	 is	not	 real	conversion;	 it	 is
tricky,	it	is	exploiting	innocent	people.
In	 every	 country	 Christianity	 has	 compromised	 with	 the	 local	 population.
Whatever	 its	 religion	 was,	 Christianity	 has	 compromised	 with	 it,	 taken	 its
principles,	 its	 behavior.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 compromising	 attitude	 that
Christianity	has	become	 the	biggest	 religion	 in	 the	world	 --	 almost	 half	 of	 the
world	is	Christian.
Truth	cannot	be	so	cheap.	And	truth	cannot	be	so	appealing	to	such	a	big	mob.
The	crowd	psychology	is,	 that	whatever	 it	believes	should	be	accepted	as	 true;
then	there	is	a	possibility	of	fifty-fifty:	"You	believe	something	from	us,	we	will
take	something	from	you."
But	truth	knows	no	fifty-fifty.
It	has	to	be	a	hundred	percent	pure;	otherwise	it	is	worse	than	a	lie.
So	when	I	said	to	you,	"Don't	compromise"	I	was	saying	many	things	in	that.
First,	to	compromise	means	that	convenience	and	survival	are	more	important	to
you	than	truth.
Secondly,	 it	means	 that	 truth	 is	not	a	 revolution	but	a	business,	 that	 it	 is	not	a
transformation	of	your	being	but	a	social	conformity.
Thirdly,	 it	means	 that	you	will	never	find	yourself	on	 the	path.	Once	you	have
learned	to	compromise,	you	have	started	going	astray.
Not	to	compromise	is	one	of	the	basic,	essential	principles	to	follow	if	you	want
to	find	truth	in	its	purity	and	full	glory.
And	when	I	said	this	to	you,	certainly	you	heard	rightly	something	more	which
was	not	said:	"Please	don't	do	it	to	me."
My	whole	effort	 is	 to	make	you	 individuals,	 courageous	enough	even	 to	 stand
against	the	whole	world.	If	you	feel	that	you	are	right	and	you	are	experiencing
the	truth	in	your	innermost	core,	then	the	whole	world	may	be	against	you	--	it
does	not	matter.	Then	even	crucifixion	is	nothing	but	a	seal	of	validity.
A	man	who	can	go	to	his	crucifixion	laughing	has	proved	beyond	doubt	that	he
knows	something	more	than	the	mortal	body.
Jesus	seems	to	be	wayward.	At	the	crucifixion,	on	the	cross,	he	was	not	joyous,
he	 was	 not	 smiling,	 laughing.	 On	 the	 contrary,	 he	 was	 complaining.	 He	 was
shouting	at	God,
"Have	 you	 forsaken	 me?"	 Because	 his	 expectation	 was	 not	 crucifixion;	 his
expectation	was	 crowning.	He	 is	 the	 only	 begotten	 son	 of	God,	 how	 can	God
allow	him	to	be	crucified?	A	miracle	is	bound	to	happen.
But	the	miracle	did	not	happen,	because	miracles	don't	come	from	outside.	The
miracle	would	 have	 happened	 if	 he	 had	 smiled	 and	 laughed	because	 he	 knew,
that	"You	can	only	crucify	a	dead	body,	you	cannot	crucify	my	consciousness."
It	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 case	 of	 al-Hillaj	Mansoor.	He	was	 laughing	 --	 and	 his
crucifixion	was	more	cruel	than	Jesus'	because	Mohammedans	are	more	violent,
more	 fanatic	 than	 any	 Jew.	 They	 cut	 him	 piece	 by	 piece,	 it	 was	 not	 a	 single
stroke.	First	they	cut	his	legs,	then	they	cut	his	hands,	then	they	made	him	blind,
then	 they	made	him	deaf.	They	killed	him	piece	by	piece	and	still,	 to	 the	very
last,	he	was	smiling.
And	somebody	asked,	"Before	they	cut	your	tongue,	we	want	to	know	--	why	are
you	smiling?"
He	said,	"I	am	smiling	because	they	are	punishing	somebody	else.	The	body	that
they	are	punishing	is	not	me."
This	is	the	miracle.
It	does	not	depend	on	God,	 it	does	not	depend	on	anybody	else.	 It	depends	on
your	experience.
al-Hillaj	proves	himself	to	be	far	closer	to	truth,	just	by	his	simple	action.	He	is
not	 grumbling,	 he	 is	 not	 saying	 to	 God	 that	 "This	 is	 not	 right	 that	 they	 are
behaving	 in	 this	 primitive	way	with	me	 and	 you	 are	 simply	 silent."	He	 is	 not
talking	about	God	at	all.
He	is	simply	enjoying	 the	whole	 thing	and	 laughing	at	 the	stupidity	of	people.
"You	are	punishing	somebody	else.	And	I	have	always	been	telling	you	that	you
cannot	punish	me,	you	cannot	even	touch	me.	Punishment	is	not	the	question	at
all."
When	you	heard,	although	I	did	not	say	it	to	you,	"Don't	do	it	to	me"	you	heard
rightly.	I	was	just	going	to	say	it,	but	seeing	that	you	heard	it,	I	did	not	say	it.
All	these	years	it	has	haunted	you	that	you	heard	it	and	I	have	not	said	it	--	was	it
your	imagination	or	was	I	really	saying	something	without	saying	it?
No,	it	was	not	your	imagination.	I	was	saying	it	without	saying	it.
I	say	many	things	to	you	without	saying	them.	I	simply	create	the	atmosphere	by
saying	many	other	things	in	which	you	can	hear	the	unsaid.
Because	there	are	a	few	things	which	can	only	be	whispered,	not	shouted.	And
there	 are	 a	 few	 things	 which	 cannot	 even	 be	 whispered	 but	 only	 indicated
indirectly,	only	then	are	they	beautiful.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
RECENTLY	IT	HAS	STARTED	HAPPENING	THAT	AS	I	BEGIN	TO	OPEN
MY
EYES	 FIRST	 THING	 IN	 THE	MORNING	 I	 CAN	 SEE	A	VISION,	 LIKE	A
SCENE
FROM	 A	 MOVIE	 --	 AND	 THAT	 SCENE	 HAPPENS	 DAYS	 AFTER	 IN
REALITY,	JUST	LIKE	A	REPETITION.
BEFORE	 I	 ARRIVED	 HERE	 IN	 BOMBAY,	 I	 HAD	 A	 VISION	 OF	 THE
GOLDEN
MANOR	HOTEL	 --	THE	SETTING,	THE	GARDEN,	THE	PEOPLE	 --	AND
WHEN	I	ARRIVED	HERE,	IT	WAS	EXACTLY	THE	SAME	AS	MY	VISION.
I	WROTE	YOU
A	LETTER	ABOUT	THIS	EARLIER,	BUT	DID	NOT	HAVE	THE	COURAGE
TO
DELIVER	 IT.	 NOW	 IT	 HAS	 BEEN	 HAPPENING	 OFTEN,	 AND	 I	 DON'T
KNOW	IF
IT	IS	GOOD	OR	BAD.
ALSO,	WHEN	YOU	WERE	IN	URUQUAY	AND	I	WAS	IN	BRAZIL,	I	HAD
THE
SUDDEN	COMPULSION	TO	GO	TO	MY	ROOM,	TO	SIT	ON	THE	FLOOR
AND
CLOSE	MY	EYES.	I	DID	SO,	AND	LIKE	A	FLASH,	I	SAW	YOU	SITTING
AT	A	TABLE,	LAUGHING	 JOYOUSLY.	 I	COULD	ONLY	SEE	THE	BACK
OF	ANOTHER
MAN	WHO	SEEMED	A	LITTLE	BIT	SERIOUS	OR	SAD.	THEN	YOU	SAW
ME
AND	INVITED	ME	IN,	AND	THE	MAN	TURNED	HIS	FACE	TO	SEE	ME.
HE	WAS
BEAUTIFUL,	 VERY	 BEAUTIFUL...	 THE	 SCENE	 WAS	 SO	 FULL	 OF
LIGHT!	I'M
SURE	HE	WAS	NOT	JESUS	 --	THE	BEARD	WAS	DIFFERENT	AND	THE
EYES
WERE	MORE	 DEEP	 AND	DIRECT.	 HOURS	 LATER,	 THE	 RADIO	 GAVE
THE
NEWS	THAT	KRISHNAMURTI	HAD	DIED	HOURS	BEFORE.
OSHO,	FROM	THAT	DAY	ON,	 I	WAS	TOTALLY	SURE	THAT	YOU	LIVE
ON
TWO	 LEVELS	 SIMULTANEOUSLY,	 AND	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW	 ON	 WHICH
LEVEL
YOU	ARE	FOR	MOST	OF	THE	TIME	DURING	YOUR	DAILY	LIFE.
YOU	 ANSWERED	 TURIYA	 THAT	 YOU	 DON'T	 COME	 INTO	 OUR
DREAMS.
BUT	ISN'T	IT	TRUE	THAT	YOU	ARE	SO	CLOSE	TO	THE	DISCIPLE	THAT
WE
ARE	ONE	WITH	YOU	ALL	THE	TIME,	NOT	ONLY	IN	OUR	DREAMS?
One	 very	 fundamental	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 understood:	 a	 dream	 and	 a	 vision	 look
alike,	but	they	are	two	totally	different	phenomena.
A	dream	is	a	mind	projection.	It	has	no	validity	of	its	own.	It	is	only	a	thought	in
picture	form.
Small	children	cannot	think	in	thoughts,	but	they	can	understand	pictures;	hence,
in	their	books	you	will	see	big	pictures,	beautiful	colors,	and	very	little	writing.
Slowly	slowly,	as	the	child	grows	up,	the	pictures	go	on	becoming	smaller	and
the	writing	in	his	books	increases.	Finally,	when	he	is	in	the	university,	pictures
disappear	and	only	writing	remains.	You	may	not	have	inquired	why	this	is	so....
If	you	give	a	child	in	a	kindergarten	school	a	book	which	has	no	pictures,	he	will
not	be	interested	at	all,	because	he	has	not	yet	learned	to	think	in	words.	But	he
can	dream	more	perfectly	than	you	can	dream;	he	dreams	so	perfectly	that	once
in	a	while	you	will	find	a	child	waking	up	in	the	morning	and	crying	--	"Just	now
I	had	my	bicycle.	Where	has	it	gone?"	He	was	dreaming	of	riding	on	his	bicycle,
and	as	he	opens	his	eyes	he	is	in	his	bed	and	the	bicycle	is	gone.	And	his	dream
is	so	clear	that	it	is	very	difficult	for	him	to	make	a	distinction	between	the	real
bicycle	and	a	dream	bicycle;	they	look	almost	alike.
We	are	grown	up,	but	our	unconscious	never	grows,	it	remains	a	child.
So	in	sleep,	when	your	conscious	mind	--	which	has	learned	language,	concepts,
words	--
is	 fast	asleep,	your	unconscious	starts	dreaming.	 It	 is	a	child,	 so	every	 thought
form	has	to	be	translated	by	the	unconscious	mind	into	a	picture	form.
This	is	one	of	the	great	discoveries	of	Sigmund	Freud,	listening	to	your	dreams.
And	he	does	the	opposite	process,	translates	your	dream	back	from	picture	form
into	language,	 into	concepts,	 into	words.	It	needs	a	 tremendous	expertise.	Still,
nobody	can	be	certain	about	it.
If	 you	 go	 to	 Sigmund	 Freud,	 each	 dream	will	 end	 up	 as	 something	 sexual	 --
because	that	is	his	idea,	that	all	sex	is	repressed.
It	 is	 true	 that	much	sexuality	 is	repressed,	but	 there	are	many	other	 things	also
which	are	repressed.	It	is	not	only	sex.
But	 it	 is	 a	 problem	 with	 inventors	 and	 pioneers	 particularly;	 they	 become	 so
obsessed	with	their	findings	that	they	don't	take	note	of	other	possibilities.
Freud's	own	disciple,	Adler,	went	 away	 from	him	 just	 because	Adler	 said	 that
sex	 can	 be	 a	 part	 of	 repression,	 but	 that	 is	 not	 all.	 His	 own	 idea	 was	 that
ambition,	 will	 to	 power,	 is	 far	more	 important,	 and	 that	 a	major	 part	 of	 your
dreams	concerns	will	to	power.
For	 example,	 you	 dream	 that	 you	 have	 become	 a	 bird	 and	 you	 are	 flying.	 To
Sigmund	Freud	it	will	symbolize	only	that	you	want	the	same	sexual	freedom	as
the	 birds	 and	 the	 animals,	 nothing	 else.	 But	 to	 Adler	 it	 will	mean	 that	 flying
upwards	means	you	are	ambitious,	you	want	to	become	the	prime	minister.
But	this	is	all	guesswork.
Another	disciple,	Carl	Gustav	Jung,	also	went	away	from	Freud	because	he	was
more	interested	in	 the	ancient	mythologies,	and	he	thought	 that	our	dreams	are
part	of	our	previous	lives.	So	if	you	are	a	bird	flying,	he	will	interpret	it	that	in
some	of	your	past	lives	you	have	been	a	bird.
Now	what	to	do	with	these	people,	and	how	to	decide?
The	 language	 of	 pictures	 cannot	 be	 precise.	 It	 is	 almost	 like	 a	 painting:	many
people	can	see	and	can	decide	its	meaning	in	different	ways.
Just	as	the	child	has	a	picture	language,	your	unconscious	has	a	picture	language.
I	am	not	interested	in	interpreting	your	dreams	because	it	is	such	a	rubbish	job.
You	can	go	on	interpreting	for	years	and	years,	and	the	dreams	will	not	come	to
an	 end	 --	 every	 day,	 six	 hours	 every	 night	 you	 have	 to	 dream.	And	 you	 have
inexhaustible	sources	of	dreaming.
And	it	is	very	quick	--	the	dream	time	is	not	the	same	as	your	ordinary	time.	Just
reading	 your	 newspaper,	 you	may	 fall	 asleep	 for	 a	minute	 and	 you	may	 see	 a
dream	which	spreads	for	years;	and	when	you	wake	up	you	look	at	your	watch
and	just	one	minute	has	passed.	You	say,	"My	God,	in	one	minute	I	saw	a	dream
which	is	spread	for	a	whole	year,	or	even	for	years."
Dream	time	is	totally	different.
Up	 to	 now	 there	 has	 been	 no	way	 to	 invent	 dream	wristwatches,	 and	 perhaps
there	 never	 will	 be	 a	 possibility,	 because	 there	 are	 lazy	 people	 and	 there	 are
speedy	people;	some	people	are	running	fast,	some	people	are	simply	sitting.	In
dreams	also,	the	same	differences	exist:	lazy	people	dream	in	a	lazy	way,	speedy
people	dream	in	a	speedy	way;	your	dream	reflects	you.	So	I	don't	think	there	is
any	possibility	 of	making	 a	watch	which	 can	 function	 for	 everybody.	 It	 is	 not
possible,	because	everybody's	dream	speed	is	different.
Vision	also	appears	to	be	just	like	dream,	but	it	is	not	dream.
A	vision	is	an	objective	phenomenon,	it	is	not	projected	by	your	mind.	You	are
seeing	 something,	 you	 are	 not	 projecting.	 In	 a	 certain	 clarity,	 your	 mind	 is
capable	of	seeing	things.
For	example,	I	was	traveling	with	one	of	my	friends.	He	is	a	poet.	We	were	in	an
air-conditioned	 bus,	 and	 it	must	 have	 been	 nearabout	 ten	 o'clock	 in	 the	 night.
And	he	suddenly	heard,	"Munna,	Munna."	Nobody	else	heard.	I	was	sitting	by
his	 side,	 and	 he	 asked	 me,	 "Have	 you	 heard?	 Somebody	 is	 calling	 `Munna,
Munna.'"
I	said,	"I	have	not	heard	anything.	You	must	be	dreaming."
He	 said,	 "No,	 I	 am	awake.	 I	was	 smoking,	 I	was	 not	 dreaming.	And	only	my
father	calls	mèMunna'.	Nobody	else	calls	me	Munna,	that	is	my	childhood	name.
My	mother,	who	used	to	call	me	Munna,	has	died.	My	father	is	the	only	person
alive	who	 calls	me	Munna;	 and	 nobody	 else	 even	 knows.	And	 the	 voice	was
exactly	like	my	father's."
I	said,	"Let	us	reach	the	destination	and	we	can	phone	your	house	from	there,	to
see	what	is	the	matter."
We	reached	Nagpur	nearabout	twelve	o'clock,	and	we	phoned	and	we	found	that
the	 father	 had	 died	 at	 exactly	 ten	 o'clock.	 Perhaps	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death	 he
remembered	his	only	son,	and	remembered	the	name	that	he	always	used.
Now,	 this	 is	 not	 a	 dream.	 He	 had	 not	 seen	 anything,	 but	 he	 had	 heard;	 it	 is
objective.	And	the	father	was	almost	sixty	miles	away,	and	a	dying	man	cannot
shout	to	reach	sixty	miles.	And	if	he	had	shouted	that	loudly,	then	everybody	in
the	bus	would	have	heard	it.
But	only	he	heard	it.	Even	I	was	not	aware	that	his	father	called	him	`Munna'.
This	is	a	vision...	not	visual,	this	is	audio	vision	--	not	video,	Niskriya!
I	may	not	come	into	your	dreams	--	and	if	I	come	it	is	your	projection,	I	am	not
responsible	for	it.	If	I	do	anything,	I	am	not	responsible	for	it!
But	I	can	come	into	a	vision,	and	then	the	whole	responsibility	is	mine.
The	difference	is	very	delicate.
The	dream	always	happens	when	you	are	asleep.
The	vision	always	happens	when	you	are	not	asleep.
This	is	the	first	distinction:	you	are	fully	awake.	And	the	vision	always	appears
to	be	coming	from	outside,	reaching	to	you.	And	sooner	or	later,	you	will	find	its
validity,	its	reality.
The	 reality	 of	 dream	 you	will	 never	 find.	 It	 is	 simple	 garbage,	 it	 is	 really	 the
unwinding	of	the	mind.	The	whole	day	the	mind	has	to	work,	and	it	gets	wound
up,	 and	 needs	 unwinding	 to	 be	 fresh	 for	 tomorrow.	 So	 it	 is	 unwinding.
Inconsistent	 things	 go	 on	 coming:	 you	 had	 been	 talking	 to	 somebody,	 you
wanted	to	say	something	but	you	did	not	say	it.	Now	that	is	hanging,	it	needs	to
be	released	--	in	the	dream	it	will	be	released.
The	dream	 is	a	great	help,	a	cleaning.	 It	 is	not	against	you,	 it	keeps	you	sane;
otherwise,	everybody	will	go	insane.	For	six	hours	your	mind	goes	on	cleaning
itself	of	every	impression	that	has	remained	incomplete	in	the	mind	--	throws	it
off,	prepares	itself	for	tomorrow's	work.	But	dreaming	has	no	other	significance.
Vision	is	a	reality.
The	dream	is	of	the	mind.
And	the	vision	has	a	connection	with	the	heart.
These	things	you	will	have	to	feel,	because	the	differences	are	very	very	fine.
Whenever	 you	 are	 feeling	 something	 coming	 as	 a	 vision	 to	 you,	 be	 in	 a
meditative	mood,	silent.	Allow	 it	 to	happen,	be	 receptive;	don't	 interfere,	don't
interpret.	 Just	 first	 let	 it	 be	 complete	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 it	 from	 the	 very
beginning	to	the	very	end.
Most	 probably	 there	 will	 be	 no	 need	 of	 interpretation.	 Just	 seeing	 it	 in	 its
completion	 will	 be	 enough;	 you	 will	 have	 the	 understanding.	 And	 then,	 soon
some	events	will	follow	which	will	validate	your	vision.
Your	dreams	will	never	be	validated	by	existence.	So	whatever	you	have	 seen
was	a	vision	--	you	were	awake.
And	 if	 you	 are	 silent,	 you	 can	 see	 things	 happening	 thousands	 of	miles	 away.
Space	makes	no	difference.	And	you	can	see	things	which	do	not	happen	on	the
material	 level	 but	 happen	 on	 the	 level	 of	 consciousness.	 That's	 what	 you	 are
mentioning,	two	levels.
Yes,	 it	 is	 true.	 I	 have	 to	work	 on	 two	 levels:	 one	 is	 the	 level	where	 you	 live,
where	you	are,	and	one	is	the	level	where	I	am	and	I	want	you	also	to	be.
From	the	 top	of	a	hill	 I	have	to	come	into	 the	valley	where	you	are;	otherwise
you	won't	listen,	you	won't	believe	the	sunlit	top.	I	have	to	take	your	hand	in	my
hand	and	persuade	you	--	and	on	the	way,	tell	stories	which	are	not	true!	But	they
keep	 you	 engaged,	 and	 you	 don't	 create	 any	 trouble	 in	 walking;	 you	 go	 on,
engaged	with	the	story.	And	when	you	have	reached	the	hilltop,	you	will	know
why	I	was	telling	long	stories,	and	you	will	feel	grateful	that	I	told	those	stories;
otherwise	you	would	not	have	been	able	to	travel	that	long,	that	far	uphill.
It	is	something	to	be	remembered:	all	the	masters	of	the	world	have	been	telling
stories,	parables	--	why?	The	truth	can	be	simply	said,	 there	is	no	need	to	give
you	 so	 many	 stories.	 But	 the	 night	 is	 long,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 kept	 awake;
without	stories	you	are	going	to	fall	asleep.
Till	the	morning	comes	there	is	an	absolute	necessity	to	keep	you	engaged,	and
the	stories	the	masters	have	been	telling	are	the	most	intriguing	things	possible.
The	truth	cannot	be	said,	but	you	can	be	led	to	the	point	from	where	you	can	see
it.	Now,	the	question	is	how	to	lead	you	to	the	point	from	where	you	can	see	it.
There	is	a	story	in	Sarmad's	life.	He	was	teaching	his	students,	his	disciples,	and
suddenly	he	said,	"Come	on	out	of	the	class,	something	is	happening."	So	they
all	came	out.
A	man	was	dragging	a	bull,	but	the	bull	was	very	powerful.	The	man	was	also
powerful,	but	a	bull	 is	a	bull.	So	although	the	man	was	dragging	the	bull...	 the
man	was	being	dragged!
Sarmad	showed	his	disciples,	"Look,	this	is	the	situation."
They	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
He	said,	"This	is	the	situation	between	me	and	you,	but	I	am	not	so	stupid	as	this
man."
And	he	said,	"Listen!	Are	you	taking	the	bull	for	the	first	time?"
The	man	said,	"I	am	a	new	servant,	and	I	come	from	the	city	and	I	don't	know
what	to	do...	because	I	drag	him	one	foot	and	he	drags	me	four	feet!	It	has	been
going	on	for	hours,	and	I	don't	think	that	it	is	going	to	end."
Sarmad	 said,	 "You	 drop	 it!	You	 don't	 understand	 the	ways	 of	 the	 village,	 and
particularly	the	language	of	bulls."
And	he	took	a	little	grass,	green	and	beautiful,	and	just	walked	ahead	of	the	bull,
without	even	touching	the	bull	--	and	the	bull	followed	him.	And	Sarmad	started
walking	faster,	and	the	bull	walked	faster.
The	man	said,	"This	is	great!	He	is	not	even	dragging	him,	the	bull	is	going	on
its	own."
And	Sarmad	said,	"You	take	this	grass.	Don't	let	him	eat;	otherwise,	you	will	be
in	 trouble.	 If	he	creates	 trouble,	 start	 running	 --	he	will	 run	with	you,	but	you
will	reach	home."
And	he	said	to	his	disciples,	"This	is	what	I	have	been	doing	with	you.	All	the
parables,	all	the	stories	are	nothing	but	green	grass."
Visions	should	not	be	made	an	object	of	thinking.	You	should	just	wait,	and	life
will	provide	you	the	right	validity.	Then	accept	it	with	gratitude.
Whatever	 you	have	 seen	was	 a	 vision,	 and	 it	 has	 been	validated	by	 life	 itself.
Now	there	is	no	need	to	think	about	it.
If	 you	 start	 thinking,	 you	will	 create	 a	mess.	And	 if	 you	 don't	 think,	 you	will
allow	more	visions	to	happen	to	you.
And	a	man	of	visions	starts	moving	from	the	lower	plane,	from	the	valley,	to	the
higher	plane,	towards	the	top,	without	much	effort.
It	is	a	good	indication	that	you	are	ready.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 LONGER	 I	 AM	 YOUR	 DISCIPLE,	 THE	 LESS	 I	 KNOW	 AND
UNDERSTAND.
A	MAGIC	PULL	BROUGHT	ME	TO	BOMBAY,	AND	SITTING	IN	YOUR
PRESENCE	HAS	BEEN	LIKE	COMING	HOME	AGAIN	 --	GLIMPSES	OF
TWO
HEARTS	 BEATING	 TOGETHER,	 MOMENTS	 OF	 LOVE	 AND	WONDER,
DAYS	OF
JOY	AND	PLAYFULNESS.
BEING	BACK	IN	HOLLAND	THERE	IS	ONLY	THIS	BIG	LONGING	LEFT
INSIDE
MY	HEART:	TO	SIT	AT	YOUR	FEET	AGAIN	AND	AGAIN	AND	AGAIN.
BELOVED	MASTER,	MY	MIND	IS	LOSING	CONTROL,	AND	MY	HEART
STARTS	SINGING.	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING?
The	mind	is	a	habit.
Even	if	there	are	moments	when	the	heart	is	singing	and	the	whole	being	is	full
of	 joy,	 the	 mind	 cannot	 leave	 its	 old	 habits.	 It	 will	 certainly	 ask	 what	 is
happening.
Can't	you	allow	things	to	happen	without	asking	why?	what?
Do	you	understand	why	we	ask	such	questions?
The	mind	asks	these	questions	because	it	wants	to	control	your	lifestyle,	it	wants
to	know	everything	that	is	going	on.	Nothing	should	happen	which	is	beyond	it;
everything	 should	 be	 in	 its	 control.	 The	 mind	 is	 a	 great	 controller.	 And	 if
everything	remains	in	its	control,	it	will	be	a	tragedy	because	nothing	great	can
happen	to	you.
Everything	that	is	great,	magnificent,	is	beyond	mind.
And	mind	can	never	get	the	answer	why,	what,	how.
You	have	 to	 learn	 one	 thing:	 that	 it	 is	 not	 necessary	 to	 satisfy	 the	mind	 about
every	experience.
Experiences	 of	 the	 heart,	 experiences	 of	 the	 being,	 experiences	 of	 the
transcendental	should	not	be	made	a	point	of	 inquiry.	You	should	not	ask	why,
you	should	enjoy	them.
You	should	not	ask	what	is	happening,	because	if	you	insist	on	these	questions
the	happening	will	stop.	These	questions	are	not	your	friends.	Let	the	mind	ask
questions	 only	 when	 something	 is	 going	 wrong.	 You	 are	 sick,	 you	 have	 a
headache,	your	stomach	has	cramps	--	let	the	mind	ask;	that	is	the	right	realm	for
the	mind.
But	your	heart	is	dancing	--	what	has	the	mind	to	do	with	it?
Just	tell	the	mind,	"Keep	quiet,	this	is	not	your	world.	You	look	at	your	affairs.
You	should	not	go	on	poking	your	nose	everywhere."
The	heart	is	a	higher	reality.
The	 being	 is	 still	 higher,	 and	 there	 are	 realities	 higher	 than	 the	 being.	 Mind
cannot	ask	questions	about	them,	and	no	answer	is	possible.
You	will	 have	 to	 learn	 some	 new	ways,	 and	 you	will	 have	 to	 drop	 some	 old
habits.
So	just	make	it	a	point,	simple:	if	there	is	something	wrong,	you	are	miserable...
misery	 is	 perfectly	 the	 right	 terrain	where	mind	 is	 needed.	Without	mind,	 you
cannot	create	misery;	it	is	the	world	of	mind	--	then	ask	why.
But	 it	 is	 strange:	 nobody	 comes	 to	 ask,	 "Why	am	 I	miserable?"	But	when	 the
heart	is	dancing,	people	ask,	"Why?	What	is	happening?"
The	reason	is	because	your	heart	has	not	danced	for	centuries,	so	the	experience
is	so	new	that	you	get	scared.	You	start	feeling	perhaps	you	are	a	little	bit	crazy,
getting	old,	senile.
What	is	happening?	--	because	the	experience	is	new.
But	 remember,	 the	mind's	 area	of	 concern	 is	 only	with	 anything	going	wrong.
The	mind	has	the	right	to	ask	and	to	find	the	right	cause	and	to	put	things	right.
But	celebration,	rejoicing,	ecstasy	--	mind	has	nothing	to	do	with	them.	Just	tell
the	mind,
"You	rest.	Everything	is	going	fine,	you	need	not	worry."
If	you	can	teach	the	mind	to	ask	the	right	questions	and	not	to	interfere	in	realms
which	 are	 beyond	 it,	 you	 will	 have	 disciplined	 yourself	 for	 more	 and	 more,
greater	and	higher	experiences.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 MY	 PROBLEMS	 ARE	 GETTING	 MORE	 AND	 MORE
SINCE	I	HAVE	BECOME	YOUR	SANNYASIN.	IS	THAT	YOUR	WORK?
It	is	my	work.
My	work	 is	 to	make	 you	more	 and	more	 aware,	 and	when	 you	 become	more
aware	you	become	aware	of	more	problems.
Those	problems	were	there	before.
I	don't	create	your	problems,	it	is	just	that	you	were	unconscious,	you	were	not
taking	any	note.	Those	problems	were	there.
It	is	just	like	a	house	which	is	in	darkness,	and	many	spiders	are	weaving	their
nests	and	scorpions	are	living	and	snakes	are	enjoying,	and	suddenly	you	bring
light	there.	The	light	does	not	create	the	spiders	or	the	scorpions	or	the	snakes,
but	it	makes	you	aware	of	them.
And	it	is	good	to	be	aware,	because	then	the	house	can	be	cleaned;	then	you	can
avoid	the	snakes.
You	have	many	problems	which	you	are	not	seeing	--	which	in	fact,	you	do	not
want	to	see.	You	go	on	postponing.	You	are	so	afraid	of	seeing	those	problems,
because	then	you	will	have	to	solve	them.	But	by	postponing	they	are	not	solved;
it	is	not	so	easy.
Problems	are	not	letters	written	to	George	Bernard	Shaw.
George	Bernard	Shaw	used	to	collect	letters;	he	would	not	open	them.	He	would
open	 them	 on	 the	 first	 of	 every	 month,	 so	 for	 thirty	 days	 he	 would	 collect
thousands	of	 letters	from	all	over	 the	world.	His	date	was	fixed:	on	the	first	of
every	month	he	would	open	them.	And	he	would	go	on	throwing	them,	because
most	of	them	had	already	been	answered.	It	was	rarely	that	some	letter	was	left
that	had	not	answered	itself.
Somebody	asked	him,	"This	is	a	strange	way...."
He	said,	"It	is	not	strange,	it	is	the	simplest	way.	When	somebody	does	not	get
an	answer	for	two	weeks,	three	weeks,	he	gets	the	answer	that	`This	man	is	not
going	to	answer.'	He	drops	the	hope.
"And	most	of	those	letters	are	useless	anyway.	I	am	not	going	to	waste	my	whole
month.
I	have	given	them	just	one	day	--	and	any	really	authentic	 letter	 that	needs	my
attention,	I	answer.	This	way,	I	save	my	time,	I	save	their	 time;	otherwise	they
would	have	to	read...
and	this	is	such	a	difficult	world	that	they	would	not	only	read	they	would	reply
also...
again	you	have	to	read	it.
"It	is	better	to	finish	it	from	the	very	beginning.	It	is	a	chain	phenomenon,	it	can
go	on	endlessly.	And	the	more	you	allow	it	and	then	stop,	the	more	it	hurts.	The
first	letter	and	it	is	finished	--	it	does	not	hurt.	The	man	just	understands	that	this
man	is	not	the	type	who	answers	letters."
But	problems	are	not	 letters,	and	 life	 is	not	George	Bernard	Shaw.	You	cannot
postpone.
But	 people	 are	 postponing.	 They	 go	 on	 pushing	 them	 this	 way	 and	 that	 way,
everywhere	 hiding	 them,	 thinking	 that	 some	 miracle...	 and	 things	 will	 settle
down	and	problems	will	be	solved.	This	is	not	going	to	happen.	On	the	contrary,
those	 problems	 will	 create	 their	 children.	 They	 will	 start	 finding	 boyfriends,
girlfriends	 --	 two	 problems	meeting	 together	 and	 a	 third	 problem	 is	 produced,
and	you	will	be	in	more	difficulty.
It	is	better	to	go	on	facing	each	problem	as	it	comes	by.
It	is	not	sannyas	that	has	created	your	problems.	Sannyas	has	simply	given	you	a
little	more	awareness.
Your	problems	have	always	been	there.
Sannyas	has	given	you	the	opportunity	to	solve	them.
And	 one	 should	 enjoy	 solving	 one's	 problems.	 It	 sharpens	 your	 intelligence.
Each	problem	is	a	challenge.	Each	problem	makes	you	more	intelligent.
And	the	day	you	will	not	have	any	problems,	your	mind	will	come	to	its	utmost
clarity	--
because	 no	 dust,	 no	 problem.	 Your	 mind	 becomes	 a	 mirror,	 so	 pure	 that	 it
reflects	reality.
Yes,	it	is	my	work.
But	don't	think	that	I	am	creating	your	problems.
I	 am	 just	 giving	 you	 insight,	 awareness,	 silence,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 see	 your
problems	and	solve	them.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#7
Chapter	 title:	 Zorba	 and	 Buddha:	 Their	 split	 is	 your	 social	 disease	 9	 October
1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610095
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
122
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 I	CAME	TO	GREECE	TO	SEE	YOU,	EVERYTHING	REFLECTED
MORE
AND	MORE	OF	THE	ZORBA.
NOW,	 BEING	 HERE	 IN	 INDIA,	 EVERYTHING	 AROUND	 YOU	 IS
REFLECTING
MORE	OF	THE	BUDDHA.
OSHO,	DOES	THIS	DEPEND	ON	BEING	IN	GREECE	OR	INDIA?
Human	history	has	been	a	tragedy.
And	the	reason	for	 it	being	a	 tragedy	is	not	very	complex.	You	have	not	 to	go
very	far	to	find	it	out,	it	is	in	everybody.
The	whole	past	of	man	has	created	a	split	in	man;	there	is	a	constant	civil	war	in
every	human	being.
If	you	do	not	feel	at	ease,	the	reason	is	not	personal.	Your	disease	is	social.
The	strategy	that	has	been	used	is	to	divide	you	into	two	enemy	camps:	the	zorba
and	the	buddha,	the	materialist	and	the	spiritualist.
You	are	not	divided	in	reality.	In	reality	you	are	a	harmonious	whole.	But	in	your
mind	the	conditioning	is	that	you	are	not	one	whole,	one	piece:	you	have	to	fight
against	 your	 body.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 be	 a	 spiritual	 being,	 the	 body	 has	 to	 be
conquered,	defeated,	destroyed,	tortured	in	every	possible	way.
This	 has	 been	 the	 accepted	 ideology	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 In	 different	 cultures,
different	 religions,	 the	 formulations	may	 be	 different,	 but	 the	 basic	 rule	 is	 the
same:	 divide	 man,	 create	 a	 conflict	 in	 him	 so	 one	 part	 starts	 feeling	 higher,
becomes	holy,	starts	condemning	the	other	part	as	the	sinner.
And	the	trouble	is	that	you	are	one,	there	is	no	way	to	divide	you.
Every	division	 is	 going	 to	 create	misery	 in	you,	 every	division	will	mean	 that
half	of	your	being	is	fighting	with	the	other	half.	And	if	you	are	fighting	within
yourself,	how	can	you	be	at	ease?
The	whole	humanity	up	to	now	has	lived	in	a	schizophrenic	way.	Everyone	has
been	 cut	 into	 pieces,	 fragments.	 Your	 religions,	 your	 philosophies,	 your
ideologies	have	not	been	healing	processes,	they	have	been	root	causes	of	inner
conflict	and	war.	You	have	been	wounding	yourself.	Your	right	hand	wounds	the
left	 hand,	 your	 left	 hand	 wounds	 the	 right	 hand;	 both	 your	 hands	 become
wounded.
The	West	finally	chose	to	go	with	the	zorba.	There	was	no	other	way	to	remain
sane	--
one	part	had	to	be	completely	destroyed,	ignored,	forgotten.	The	West	denied	the
inner	reality	of	man,	his	consciousness:	man	is	only	body	--	 there	 is	no	soul	--
and	eat,	drink	and	be	merry	is	the	only	religion.	This	was	simply	a	way	to	find
some	 peace	 of	 mind,	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 conflict,	 to	 come	 to	 a	 decision	 and	 a
conclusion	--	because	this	is	accepting	that	you	are	one:	just	matter,	just	body.
The	East	has	chosen	the	other	way,	but	the	basic	problem	is	the	same:	the	East
has	chosen	that	you	are	the	soul	and	the	body	is	an	illusion.
Matter	does	not	exist,	the	world	is	made	of	the	same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of,
so	don't	be	bothered	about	 it.	Renounce	 it,	 forget	all	about	 it	 --	 it	 is	not	worth
taking	note	of.
On	 the	 surface	 it	 seems	 that	 East	 and	 West	 are	 doing	 different	 things,	 but
essentially	they	are	not	doing	different	things.	Essentially	they	are	trying	to	find
a	rational	way	to	be	one.
Because	to	be	two	means	a	constant	dis-ease,	a	conflict	--	it	is	better	to	drop	the
idea	of	the	other.
The	East	says	that	the	body	is	illusory,	it	is	only	an	appearance,	a	shadow,	it	has
no	reality.
The	West	says	that	consciousness	is	a	byproduct	--	it	does	not	exist	in	itself,	it	is
an	 appearance.	When	 the	 body	 dies	 nothing	 remains,	 the	 body	 is	 all,	 and	 the
consciousness	 that	 you	 feel	 is	 just	 the	 combination	 of	 all	 the	 elements	 of	 the
body.
For	example,	 if	you	 take	all	 the	parts	of	your	car	separately,	or	all	 the	parts	of
your	watch	separately,	do	you	think	something	like	a	soul	will	be	released	out	of
the	watch?	Who	was	running	the	watch?	It	was	just	because	of	the	combination
of	the	parts	in	a	certain	way	that	the	watch	was	running,	the	car	was	running,	that
all	machines	are	working;	it	is	a	byproduct.	Put	all	the	parts	together	again	and
the	watch	will	start	ticking	--	the	soul	has	not	gone	anywhere,	there	has	been	no
soul	in	the	first	place.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 see	 that	 the	 fundamental	 reason	 is	 to	 somehow
choose	one	and	decide	that	the	other	is	illusory,	so	that	you	can	be	at	peace,	so
that	there	is	no	need	to	fight,	torture,	and	be	in	constant	fear	of	being	defeated.
Why	 have	 the	 East	 and	 the	 West	 chosen	 differently?	 That	 also	 has	 to	 be
understood.
The	Eastern	mind,	in	search	of	a	unitary	being,	tried	to	find	out:	what	exactly	is
this	 inner	 consciousness	 that	 the	 Eastern	 mystics,	 saints	 and	 sages	 have	 been
talking	about,	and	calling	the	body	illusory?	To	us	the	body	seems	to	be	real,	and
consciousness	is	just	a	word.	But	because	all	the	saints	in	the	East	were	insisting
that	this	word	`consciousness'
is	your	reality,	the	East	has	tried	to	find	out	what	this	reality	is	before	deciding	in
favor	of	the	body.
The	natural	tendency	will	be	to	decide	in	favor	of	the	body,	because	the	body	is
there,	already	appearing	real	--	consciousness	you	have	to	search	for,	you	have	to
go	into	an	inner	pilgrimage.
The	East,	because	of	people	like	Gautam	Buddha	and	Mahavira,	could	not	deny
that	these	people	were	sincere.	Their	sincerity	was	so	clear,	their	presence	was	so
impressive,	 their	words	were	 so	 authoritative...	 it	 was	 impossible	 to	 deny.	No
argument	was	enough,	because	these	people	were	their	own	argument,	their	own
validity.
And	 they	 were	 so	 peaceful	 and	 so	 joyful,	 so	 relaxed,	 so	 fearless.	 They	 had
everything	 that	 every	 human	 being	 desires...	 and	 in	 a	 way	 they	 had	 nothing.
Certainly	they	had	found	a	source	within	themselves,	a	treasure.	And	you	cannot
just	deny	it	without	giving	enough	time	to	the	search.	Unless	you	find	that	there
is	no	consciousness,	you	cannot	deny	it.
We	had	people	so	fragrant...	we	could	not	see	their	roses,	but	the	fragrance	was
so	much	 that	 the	East	 tried	 to	 look	 inside,	 and	 found	 that	 the	 soul	 is	 far	more
real.	The	body	is	just	an	appearance.
And	just	by	the	way,	it	will	be	significant	to	remind	you	that	modern	science	has
come	to	the	conclusion	that	matter	is	illusory,	that	matter	does	not	exist,	it	only
appears.	 They	 have	 come	 to	 the	 conclusion	 from	 a	 very	 different	 route.	 By
searching	 deeply	 into	 matter,	 they	 have	 found	 that,	 as	 they	 reach	 deeper	 into
matter,	 it	 is	 less	and	 less	substantial.	And	at	a	point	after	 the	atom,	 there	 is	no
matter	at	all:	there	are	only	electrons,	which	are	particles	of	electricity	--	which
is	not	matter	but	energy.
Just	a	hundred	years	ago,	Nietzsche	declared	"God	is	dead"	not	knowing	at	all
that	within	a	hundred	years	the	whole	of	science	would	agree	that	perhaps	God
may	be	alive,	but	matter	is	dead.
The	East	has	moved	inwards	and	found	that	the	body,	matter,	is	relatively	non-
substantial.	The	ultimate	reality	belongs	to	consciousness.
In	 the	West,	 development	 happened	 in	 a	 different	way.	And	 there	 are	 reasons
why	it	happened	in	that	way.
The	East	is	ancient.	At	least	ten	thousand	years	of	a	constant,	consistent	search
of	the	inner	reality	of	man	--	and	all	the	genius	of	the	East	has	been	devoted	to	it.
When	 the	 UPANISHADS	 were	 being	 written	 in	 the	 East,	 nearabout	 five
thousand	years	ago,	the	West	did	not	exist	as	a	human	society	at	all.
In	 India	we	have	Mohenjo	daro,	Harrapur	 --	cities	 that	existed	seven	 thousand
years	ago,	with	such	refined	development...	they	have	streets	as	wide	as	those	in
Bombay.	They	have	bedrooms	with	attached	bathrooms.
And	you	will	be	surprised	at	why	I	am	saying	this:	because	just	a	hundred	years
ago	in	America,	there	was	a	court	case	against	bathrooms	which	went	up	to	the
Supreme	Court.
The	first	man	who	made	a	bathroom	attached	to	his	bedroom...	Christianity	was
against	 it	 because	 this	 is	 dirty	 --	 making	 your	 bathroom	 attached	 to	 your
bedroom.	 This	 is	 un-Christian;	 cleanliness	 is	 next	 to	 God.	 And	 here	 is	 the
bathroom	 next	 to	 the	 bedroom!	 Just	 a	 hundred	 years	 ago...	 and	 the	 Supreme
Court	had	to	decide	that	there	is	nothing	unclean	in	it,	and	if	somebody	wants	to
have	a	bathroom	attached	to	his	bedroom	it	is	nobody	else's	business	to	interfere
and	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	religion.
But	the	church	was	fighting.
In	 Harapur,	 seven	 thousand	 years	 ago,	 they	 had	 bathrooms	 attached	 to	 their
bedrooms,	 they	 had	 bathtubs,	 and	 they	 had	 a	 very	 special	 arrangement	 for
circulation	of	water	in	the	city.	The	hot	and	cold	water	in	your	bathroom	is	not	a
new	 thing;	 it	was	available	 in	Harapur,	 in	Mohenjo	daro.	They	had	 swimming
pools.	It	must	have	been	a	very	highly	cultured	society.
At	 the	 time	 of	 Gautam	Buddha,	 just	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago,	 even	 then	 the
West	 was	 not	 very	 evolved.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 it.	We	 did	 not	 crucify	 Gautam
Buddha,	 and	 the	West	 crucified	 Jesus	 Christ	 five	 hundred	 years	 after	 Gautam
Buddha.
And	what	Jesus	was	saying	was	nothing	compared	to	Gautam	Buddha.	Gautam
Buddha	was	saying	that	there	is	no	God;	still,	nobody	thought	of	crucifying	him.
Jesus	Christ	was	not	 saying	anything	against	 Judaism;	on	 the	contrary,	he	was
simply	 saying	 that	he	was	 their	 lost	prophet.	And	he	was	 repeating	everything
written	 in	 the	 Old	 Testament	 --	 he	 was	 not	 saying	 anything	 that	 was
contradicting	the	old	religion.	And	Gautam	Buddha	was	contradicting	everything
in	Hinduism:	he	said	that	the	VEDAS	are	idiotic,	he	said	that	there	is	no	God,	he
said	 that	 all	 priests	 are	 the	most	 cunning	 people	 in	 the	 world.	 And	 priests	 in
India,	the	brahmins,	are	the	highest	caste.	But	nobody	thought	of	crucifying	him.
People	challenged	him	for	discussions,	people	discussed,	and	because	they	could
not	defeat	him	in	argument....	They	could	not	defeat	him.
When	 they	 came	 in	 front	 of	 him,	 they	 were	 sincere	 enough	 to	 realize	 and
recognize	 that	he	knew	better,	 that	 their	knowledge	was	only	bookish,	 and	his
knowledge	was	authentic	experience.
Western	development	is	childish	compared	to	Eastern	development.	It	begins	in
Greece.
But	even	a	man	like	Socrates,	who	was	neither	denying	God	nor	affirming	God,
who	was	simply	saying	that,	"I	have	not	come	to	experience,	hence,	I	cannot	be
untruthful	--	I	cannot	say	whether	God	exists	or	not.	And	I	would	like	everybody
to	be	sincere	about	it.
Unless	 you	 encounter,	 don't	 say	 yes,	 don't	 say	 no;	 remain	 agnostic,	 keep	 your
conclusions	suspended."
A	 very	 reasonable	 man,	 but	 he	 was	 also	 poisoned.	 He	 has	 not	 denied	 your
tradition,	he	has	not	denied	your	past,	he	has	not	denied	anything	--	he	simply
argued	for	a	more	rational	approach,	a	more	logical	approach.	It	is	not	a	crime.
And	this	 is	 the	reward	that	he	gets:	he	is	poisoned,	society	decides	that	he	is	a
dangerous	man.
Those	people	who	could	have	changed	Western	society	towards	inner	reality	are
being	crucified	or	poisoned.
Naturally,	the	talented	people	became	afraid	even	of	talking	about	inner	things,
mysteries.	 They	 started	 talking	 only	 about	 objective	 things,	 matter,	 because
matter	cannot	be	denied.	And	there	is	no	problem	with	going	into	a	deep	search
into	matter.
The	crucifixion	of	Jesus	and	 the	death	of	Socrates	closed	 the	door	for	Western
genius	to	move	inwards.	Anybody	who	had	any	intelligence	became	aware	that
it	is	simply	inviting	your	death;	it	is	better	to	use	your	talents	and	genius	in	such
a	way	that	the	society	cannot	condemn	it.
So	 the	whole	genius	of	Western	humanity	became	a	 servant	 for	 creating	more
comforts	for	the	body,	more	technology,	more	machines,	more	knowledge	about
matter	--	and	everybody	was	happy.
Even	 in	 these	 matters,	 if	 there	 was	 something	 that	 went	 against	 religion,
immediately	the	church	was	there	to	stop	it.
For	example,	when	Galileo	wrote	that	the	sun	does	not	go	around	the	earth	as	it
appears,	but	that	in	actuality	the	earth	goes	around	the	sun,	as	it	does	not	appear,
he	was	called	by	the	pope	to	his	court	and	asked	--	and	he	was	old,	seventy-five
years	 old,	 sick	 and	 almost	 on	 his	 deathbed	 --	 "You	have	 to	 change	 your	 book
because	 it	goes	against	 the	BIBLE.	 In	 the	BIBLE	the	statement	 is	 that	 the	sun
goes	 around	 the	 earth,	 and	 we	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 listen	 to	 any	 argument.	 You
simply	change	it;	otherwise,	death	will	be	your	punishment."
Such	an	idiotic	church,	which	is	not	even	ready	to	listen	to	any	argument,	which
only	knows	to	dictate:	Do	it	or	be	ready	to	die!
Galileo	must	have	had	a	great	sense	of	humor.	He	said,	"There	is	no	need	for	you
to	take	so	much	trouble	to	kill	me.	I	am	going	to	die	anyway.	As	far	as	the	book
is	concerned,	I	will	change	it,	but	I	want	you	to	remember	that	by	my	changing
the	book,	neither	is	the	earth	going	to	change	nor	is	the	sun	going	to	change.	The
earth	will	still	go	around	the	sun,	because	they	don't	read	my	book	and	they	don't
care	what	I	write."
So	he	cancelled	the	statement	in	his	book.	And	in	the	footnote	he	wrote,	"I	am
canceling	the	statement,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	it	makes	no	difference.	The
reality	remains	the	same."
When	Copernicus	found	that	the	earth	is	not	flat	as	it	is	said	in	the	BIBLE,	but
round,	he	was	immediately	in	trouble.
Now,	 these	matters	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 religion.	What	 has	 religion	 to	 do
with	whether	 the	 earth	 is	 round	 or	 flat?	 It	 can	 have	 any	 geometrical	 shape	 --
religion	does	not	have	anything	to	do	with	it.
But	Christianity,	Mohammedanism,	are	very	primitive	religions.	They	don't	have
the	 cultured,	 sophisticated	 attitude	 of	 Hinduism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism,	 Taoism.
They	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 argue,	 they	 only	 know	 how	 to	 fight.	 Their	 only
argument	is	the	sword;	at	the	point	of	the	sword	is	to	be	decided	who	is	right.
It	is	the	church	--	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	--	that	has	prevented	the	West
from	 going	 in	 the	 direction	 of	 inwardness.	 It	 forced	Western	 humanity	 to	 go
towards	matter.
The	 inner	was	 absolutely	 the	 church's	monopoly,	 and	 they	 decided	 everything
about	it:	there	was	no	need	to	search,	there	was	no	need	to	discover,	there	was	no
need	to	meditate.	You	were	only	supposed	to	believe	in	God.	But	if	you	could	do
something	as	far	as	matter	is	concerned,	there	would	be	no	problem;	as	long	as	it
did	not	come	in	conflict	with	the	BIBLE.
Copernicus	said	to	the	pope,	"It	is	just	a	small	thing,	and	I	have	every	proof	that
the	 earth	 is	 round.	 It	 is	 my	 lifelong	 work,	 and	 it	 does	 not	 affect	 your
religiousness."
The	pope	said,	"You	don't	understand.	The	question	is	not	whether	it	affects	our
religiousness	or	not;	the	question	is	that	the	BIBLE	is	God's	book,	the	holy	book.
If	one	statement	in	the	BIBLE	is	proved	wrong,	that	has	great	implications:	first,
that	God	can	be	wrong.	We	cannot	accept	that."
They	cannot	even	accept	 that	 the	pope	can	be	wrong,	what	 to	 say	about	God?
The	 pope	 is	 a	 faraway	 representative.	 Jesus	 represents	 God,	 and	 the	 pope
represents	 Jesus	 --	 not	 directly,	 but	 through	 hundreds	 of	 popes	who	 have	 died
before	 him.	 He	 is	 connected	 through	 them	 to	 Jesus,	 and	 Jesus	 has	 a	 direct
telephone	line	to	God.
Just	one	statement	against	the	BIBLE,	if	it	is	proved	valid,	makes	God	fallible.
And	it	cannot	be	accepted	--	that's	one	thing.
Secondly,	 if	 one	 statement	 is	 proved	wrong,	what	 is	 the	guarantee	 about	other
statements?	 It	 creates	 suspicion.	 It	 destroys	 the	 very	 foundation	 of	 belief	 and
faith	 --	 "So	 we	 cannot	 accept	 anything	 in	 the	 BIBLE	 as	 wrong.	 You	 can	 do
everything	that	does	not	go	against	the	BIBLE."
Naturally	only	matter	was	left.	You	can	do	research	in	physics,	in	chemistry,	in
biology,	in	zoology,	in	geology.	You	can	do	all	these	things,	you	are	free.
The	church	has	been	a	great	China	Wall,	preventing	people	from	going	inwards.
It	 looks	 strange,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 fact:	 the	 Christian	 church	 has	 proved	 the	 greatest
enemy	of	religion	on	the	earth.	Other	religions	have	also	proved	enemies,	but	not
that	great.
Genius	was	left	to	work	only	with	matter.
In	the	East,	the	genius	had	first	preference	for	the	inner	journey.
Only	second-class,	mediocre	people	would	work	 for	 the	outer,	material	 things;
real	intelligence	would	always	move	into	meditativeness.
Slowly	slowly,	the	distance	became	bigger.	The	West	became	materialist	--	and
the	whole	responsibility	goes	to	the	Christian	church	--	and	the	Eastern	humanity
became	more	 and	more	 spiritualist.	 The	 division,	 the	 split	 that	was	 created	 in
each	man,	became	a	split	on	a	wider	scale:	as	East	and	West.
One	great	poet	has	written,	"East	is	East	and	West	is	West,	and	never	the	twain
shall	meet."	And	this	man,	Lord	Kipling,	was	very	much	interested	in	the	East.
He	 lived	 in	 India	 for	 years,	 he	was	 in	 the	 government	 service.	But	 seeing	 the
difference...	 that	 the	 whole	 Eastern	 consciousness	 moves	 inwards	 and	 the
Western	consciousness	moves	outwards	--	how	could	they	meet?
My	whole	work	is	just	to	prove	Lord	Kipling	wrong.
I	would	like	to	say	--	neither	West	is	West	nor	East	is	East,	and	the	twain	have
already	met.
What	do	you	mean	by	Èast'?	In	Bombay,	Calcutta	is	east;	in	Calcutta,	Bombay	is
west.
This	 is	nonsense,	 these	words	are	relative	words.	You	cannot	say	that	a	certain
place	is	east	and	a	certain	place	is	west;	 they	are	all	relative.	For	the	people	of
Calcutta,	Tokyo	is	east	--	and	that's	what	the	Japanese	think.	They	call	their	land
"the	land	of	sunrise"	and	they	call	 their	king	"the	only	begotten	son	of	 the	sun
god."	The	sun	god	 is	 the	 real	god,	and	Hirohito,	 the	king	of	 Japan,	 is	his	only
son.
In	fact,	in	the	second	world	war	when	the	Japanese	were	defeated,	they	could	not
believe	 it.	Thousands	of	 soldiers	committed	suicide	 just	out	of	 shame	 --	 "How
can	it	happen	that	God's	son	should	be	defeated?	Now	there	is	no	point	in	living,
everything	has	gone	wrong."
They	believe	that	they	are	the	real	East.
Nobody	is	East	and	nobody	is	West.
But	the	attitudes	can	be	understood,	and	they	are	very	prominent.	And	my	whole
approach	is	to	bring	a	bridge	into	each	individual,	so	that	you	are	one	whole.
Don't	be	against	your	body;	it	is	your	home.
Don't	be	against	your	consciousness,	because	without	consciousness	your	house
may	be	very	decorated	but	it	won't	have	any	master,	it	will	be	empty.	Together
they	create	a	beauty,	a	fuller	life.
Symbolically,	I	have	chosen	Zorba	for	the	body	and	Buddha	for	the	soul.
Your	question	is	that	when	I	was	in	Greece	I	was	talking	more	about	Zorba,	and
here	in	India	the	atmosphere	seems	to	be	closer	to	Buddha.	Your	observation	is
true.
In	Greece	I	was	talking	about	Zorba.	Still	they	deported	me.
If	I	had	been	talking	about	Buddha,	you	would	not	have	seen	me	again!
I	was	 talking	 about	Zorba	because	 that	 is	 the	 foundation.	But	 I	was	making	 it
clear	 that	 Zorba	 alone	 is	 only	 the	 foundation	 of	 the	 house,	 it	 is	 not	 the	 house
itself.
In	India	I	am	talking	about	Buddha,	but	I	have	not	forgotten	Zorba.
Each	 statement	 that	 I	 make	 --	 whether	 it	 is	 about	 Zorba	 or	 about	 Buddha	 --
implies	the	other	automatically,	because	to	me	they	are	inseparable.	It	is	only	a
question	of	emphasis.
To	make	the	Greek	mind	understand,	I	emphasized	Zorba.
The	 ambassador	 of	 Sri	Lanka	 to	America	wrote	me	 a	 letter	 saying	 that	 "Your
followers	 around	 the	 world	 are	 making	 restaurants,	 discos,	 and	 calling	 them
ZORBA	THE
BUDDHA.	It	is	very	insulting	to	Buddha.	And	if	you	do	such	thing	in	a	country
like	Sri	Lanka,	there	can	be	violence.	I	advise	you	to	drop	this	name."
I	 told	 my	 secretary	 to	 write	 to	 him,	 that	 "In	 the	 first	 place,	 nobody	 has	 the
monopoly	on	Zorba	or	on	Buddha.	Secondly,	we	are	not	concerned	with	Gautam
the	Buddha;	`buddha'
is	not	a	personal	name,	it	is	a	quality.	It	means	the	awakened	one.	Anyone	who	is
awakened	can	be	called	the	buddha.	Gautam	Buddha	is	only	one	of	the	millions
of	buddhas	who	have	happened	and	who	will	happen.	And	you	cannot	prevent
Zorba	 becoming	 a	 buddha.	 In	 fact,	 you	 should	 help	 me	 to	 make	 zorbas	 into
buddhas,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 real	 revolution	 --	 that	 a	materialist,	 a	 zorba,
who	knows	nothing	of	higher	consciousness,	becomes	a	buddha."
He	never	replied.
Zorba	has	his	own	beauty.	And	the	island	in	Greece	where	I	was	staying	is	the
place	 where	 Kazantzakis,	 the	 novelist	 who	 created	 the	 novel	 ZORBA	 THE
GREEK....	Zorba	is	a	fictitious	name,	he	is	not	a	historical	person.	But	the	island
where	I	was	staying	was	the	island	where	Kazantzakis	was	born.
And	 Kazantzakis	 is	 one	 of	 the	 best	 novelists	 of	 this	 century,	 and	 he	 suffered
tremendously	at	 the	hands	of	the	church.	Finally,	when	he	wrote	ZORBA	THE
GREEK
he	 was	 expelled	 from	 the	 church.	 By	 writing	 ZORBA	 he	 was	 forced:	 "You
withdraw	your	book	ZORBA;	otherwise	you	will	be	expelled."	Because	he	did
not	 withdraw	 the	 book,	 he	 was	 expelled	 from	 Christianity	 and	 condemned	 to
hell.
Zorba	is	really	Kazantzakis'	own	individuality,	which	Christianity	had	repressed,
which	 he	 could	 not	 live,	 which	 he	 wanted	 to	 live.	 He	 expressed	 that	 whole
unlived	part	of	his	life	in	the	name	of	Zorba.
Zorba	is	a	beautiful	man	--	no	fear	of	hell,	no	greed	for	heaven,	living	moment	to
moment,	 enjoying	 small	 things...	 food,	 drink,	 women.	 After	 the	 whole	 day's
work,	he	will	take	his	musical	instrument	and	will	dance	on	the	beach	for	hours.
And	 the	 other	 part	 of	Kazantzakis	which	 he	 lived	 in	 ZORBA	THE	GREEK...
Zorba	 is	 the	 servant.	The	other	 part	 is	 the	master	who	 employed	Zorba	 as	 his
servant.	He	is	always	sad	and	sitting	in	his	office,	doing	his	files,	never	laughing,
never	enjoying,	never	going	out	and	always	feeling	deep	down	jealous	of	Zorba
because	he	earns	a	little,	not	much,	but	he	lives	like	an	emperor,	not	thinking	of
tomorrow,	of	what	will	happen.	He	eats	well,	he	drinks	well,	he	sings	well,	he
dances	well.	And	his	master,	who	is	very	rich,	is	just	sitting	there	sad,	tense,	in
anguish,	in	misery,	suffering.
One	 day	Zorba	 says	 to	 his	master	 --	which	 is	Kazantzakis	 himself	 --	 "Master,
there	 is	 only	 one	 thing	wrong	with	 you:	 you	 think	 too	much.	You	 come	with
me."	It	was	a	full-moon	night.
Kazantzakis	tried	--	"No,	no.	What	are	you	doing?"
But	 Zorba	 pulled	 him	 out	 to	 the	 beach	 and	 he	 started	 dancing,	 playing	 his
instrument.
And	he	told	Kazantzakis,	"Try.	Jump!	If	you	cannot	dance,	do	SOMETHING."
And	with	Zorba's	energy	and	his	vibe,	Kazantzakis	also	started	dancing.	For	the
first	time	in	his	life	he	felt	that	he	was	alive.
Zorba	is	the	unlived	part	of	every	so-called	religious	person.
And	why	was	the	church	so	much	against	it	when	ZORBA	was	published?	It	was
just	a	novel;	there	was	nothing	for	the	church	to	be	worried	about.	But	it	was	so
clear	 that	 it	 is	 the	 unlived	 Christian	 in	 every	 Christian,	 this	 book	 could	 be	 a
dangerous	book.	And	it	is	a	dangerous	book.
But	Zorba	 is	 tremendously	beautiful.	Kazantzakis	 sends	him	 to	purchase	 some
things	from	the	city,	and	he	forgets	all.	He	drinks	and	goes	to	the	prostitutes	and
enjoys,	and	once	in	a	while	he	remembers	that	it	seems	many	days	have	passed
but	 still,	 the	money	 is	with	him.	Unless	all	 the	money	 is	 finished,	how	can	he
return?	The	master	will	be	very	angry,	but	nothing	can	be	done	about	it	--	it	is	his
problem.
And	after	three	weeks	he	comes	back	--	and	he	had	gone	only	for	three	days	--
and	he	does	not	bring	anything	that	he	was	sent	for.	And	he	comes	with	all	the
stories	--	"What	a	great	journey	it	was,	you	should	have	been	there.	I	met	such
beautiful	bubalinas...	and	such	good	wine."
And	 the	master	said,	"But	what	about	 the	 things?	For	 three	weeks	I	have	been
sitting	here	boiling."
He	said,	"When	there	are	so	many	beautiful	things	available,	who	bothers	about
such	 small	 things?	You	can	 cut	my	 salary	 every	week,	 by	 and	by,	 slowly,	 and
take	your	money	back.	I	am	sorry	I	could	not	come	earlier.	And	you	should	be
happy	that	I	have	come	--
because	the	money	was	finished	I	had	to	come.	But	next	time	when	I	go,	I	will
bring	all	the	things."
He	said,	"You	will	never	go	again.	I	will	send	somebody	else."
Zorba's	 whole	 life	 is	 a	 life	 of	 simple,	 physical	 enjoyment,	 but	 without	 any
anxiety,	without	any	guilt,	without	any	botheration	about	sin	and	virtue	and....
I	would	like	this	man	Zorba	to	be	alive	in	everybody,	because	it	is	your	natural
inheritance.	But	you	should	not	stop	at	Zorba.
Zorba	 is	 only	 the	 beginning.	 Sooner	 or	 later,	 if	 you	 allow	 your	 Zorba	 full
expression,	you	are	bound	to	think	of	something	better,	higher,	greater.	It	will	not
come	out	of	thinking;	it	will	come	out	of	your	experiences	--	because	those	small
experiences	will	become	boring.
Buddha	himself	had	come	to	be	Buddha	because	he	had	lived	the	life	of	a	zorba.
That	thing	has	not	been	noticed	by	the	East	--	that	for	twenty-nine	years	Buddha
lived	as	no	Zorba	could	ever	live.	Zorba	was	so	poor.
Gautam	Buddha's	father	had	arranged	for	all	the	beautiful	girls	to	be	picked	from
the	whole	kingdom	for	Buddha's	enjoyment.	He	made	three	beautiful	palaces	in
three	different	places	for	different	seasons.	He	had	beautiful	gardens	and	lakes.
Buddha's	whole	life	was	just	luxury,	pure	luxury.	But	he	got	bored.
One	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 experiences	 that	 he	 comes	 across	 was	 when	 one
night	 beautiful	 girls	were	 dancing...	 he	was	 drinking,	 they	were	 drinking,	 and
then	 everybody	 fell	 asleep	 drunk.	 In	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	 he	woke	 up	 and
looked	around,	and	he	was	shocked;	and	that	shock	was	one	of	the	turning	points
in	his	life.	Some	girl	was	snoring	--
she	was	a	beautiful	girl,	but	her	mouth	open	and	snoring...	she	 looked	so	ugly,
the	 saliva	was	 coming	 out...	 somebody's	 nose	was	 flowing.	And	 he	 said,	 "My
God,	 this	 is	what	 beauty	 is!"	He	was	 finished.	 Those	 girls	were	 dispersed	 the
next	morning.	"I	don't	want	any	girls	in	my	palaces.	Enough	is	enough."
In	fact,	it	was	too	much.	In	twenty-nine	years	he	lived	almost	the	equivalent	to
four	or	five	lives	of	an	ordinary	man.	With	all	that	luxury,	soon	he	found	himself
tired	and	bored,	and	a	question	became	very	prominent	in	his	mind:	Is	this	all?
Then	what	am	I	going	 to	 live	 tomorrow	for?	Life	must	mean	something	more;
otherwise,	it	is	meaningless.
It	was	out	of	the	zorba	that	the	search,	for	Buddha,	started.
Not	everybody	becomes	a	buddha;	and	the	basic	reason	is	that	the	zorba	remains
unlived.
Do	 you	 see	 my	 argument?	 My	 argument	 is:	 live	 Zorba	 fully,	 and	 you	 will
naturally	enter	into	the	life	of	a	buddha.
Kazantzakis	 has	 written	 ZORBA	 THE	 GREEK.	 He's	 dead.	 If	 he	 had	 been
allowed	 to	 live	 more....	 He	 was	 sick,	 he	 was	 very	 tense,	 he	 remained	 very
miserable	because	he	was	always	afraid	of	sin.	And	then	when	he	was	expelled
from	the	Christian	church	--	that	means	condemned	to	hell;	only	Christians	can
go	to	paradise	--	that	was	such	a	shock	that	he	could	not	survive.	He	was	really
killed	by	the	Christian	church	expelling	him.
If	he	were	alive,	I	would	have	told	him:	"Your	book	is	half.	You	need	to	write
another	book,	ZORBA	THE	BUDDHA.	Then	it	will	be	a	complete	phenomenon.
But	you	can	write	the	other	book	only	if	you	live	your	zorba.	You	have	not	even
lived	zorba;	how	can	you	live	the	buddha?"
Enjoy	 your	 body,	 enjoy	 your	 physical	 existence.	 There	 is	 no	 sin	 in	 it.	Hidden
behind	it	 is	your	spiritual	growing,	is	your	spiritual	blissfulness.	When	you	are
tired	of	physical	pleasures,	only	 then	will	you	ask,	"Is	 there	something	more?"
And	 this	question	cannot	be	only	 intellectual,	 it	 has	 to	be	existential:	 "Is	 there
something	more?"
And	when	 the	 question	 is	 existential,	 you	will	 find	within	 yourself	 something
more.
There	is	something	much	more.	Zorba	is	only	the	beginning.
Once	 the	 buddha,	 the	 awakened	 soul,	 takes	 possession	 of	 you,	 then	 you	 will
know	that	pleasure	was	not	even	a	shadow.	There	is	so	much	bliss....	That	bliss	is
not	against	pleasure.	In	fact,	it	is	pleasure	which	has	brought	you	to	bliss.
There	is	no	fight	between	Zorba	and	Buddha.	Zorba	is	the	arrow	--	if	you	follow
it	rightly,	you	will	reach	the	Buddha.
Certainly	 in	 Greece	 there	 is	 an	 atmosphere	 different	 from	 India.	 The	 Greek
personality	has	remained	materialistic.
In	India,	the	basic	and	the	essential	atmosphere	is	that	of	the	awakened	soul.
Whether	you	go	on	sleeping,	it	doesn't	matter,	but	the	atmosphere	around	you	is
that	of	the	sunrise.	The	birds	are	singing,	the	flowers	are	blossoming,	and	from
everywhere	the	indication	is	for	you	to	wake	up.
I	will	 go	 to	Greece	 again	because	 I	have	been	enjoying	all	 these	deportations.
And	next	time	I	have	to	talk	about	Buddha	--	because	I	have	talked	only	about
Zorba,	and	I	never	leave	anything	incomplete.
And	already,	 the	minister	of	 interior	 in	Greece	has	 invited	me:	 "We	will	make
arrangements,	you	come."
I	said,	"I	will	come,	but	at	least	for	three	weeks	don't	deport	me"	--	because	no
country	seems	to	be	able	to	have	me	for	more	than	three	weeks.	A	few	countries
are	so	stupid	that	they	cannot	even	have	me	for	thirty-six	hours.
England	proved	to	be	the	worst.	They	would	not	allow	me	six	hours	to	sleep	at
the	airport
--	not	even	entering	England,	but	just	the	airport	lounge.	They	wouldn't	allow	me
to	sleep	there	for	six	hours.
I	said,	"What	reasons	have	you	got?"
And	 the	 airport	 officer	 said,	 "We	 have	 no	 reasons.	 This	 is	 the	 file,	 the
information	from	the	prime	minister	 is	 that	`This	man	is	dangerous	and	should
not	be	allowed.'"
But	I	said,	"I	am	not	entering	England,	and	from	the	lounge	there	is	no	way	to
enter	 into	 England.	 And	 you	 have	 checked	me	well	 --	 I	 am	 not	 carrying	 any
bombs	or	anything.
And	sleeping	six	hours	in	the	airport,	what	danger	can	I	do?	You	just	think...."
He	 said,	 "Don't	 put	 me	 into	 trouble,	 because	 tomorrow	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 in
parliament	and	then	I	will	be	answerable	--	`Why	did	you	allow	him?'"
So	I	had	to	go	to	jail	for	six	hours.	They	said,	"The	only	place	we	can	allow	you
to	remain	is	in	jail."
And	 the	 next	 day	 in	 parliament	 the	 question	 was	 there,	 and	 I	 am	 always
surprised	that	the	question	is	asked	and	the	same	answer	is	given,	that	"The	man
is	 very	 dangerous,"	 but	 nobody	 in	 the	 parliament	 has	 the	 intelligence	 to	 ask,
"What	danger	could	he	have	been	just	sleeping	in	the	lounge	at	the	airport?	He
may	 be	 dangerous,	 but	 what	 danger	 could	 he	 have	 been?"	 Nobody	 in	 the
parliament	asked.
So	I	have	informed	the	minister	in	Greece	that	I	will	go.	I	have	to	go.
I	was	really	 thinking	to	stay	 longer,	and	I	had	fifteen	more	days	on	the	visa	 to
stay,	but	the	archbishop	of	Greece	threatened	the	government	that	if	they	didn't
deport	 me	 immediately	 then	 they	 were	 going	 to	 burn	 my	 house	 where	 I	 was
staying,	burn	me	alive	and	all	 the	people	who	were	staying	with	me,	dynamite
the	house.	And	the	government	became	threatened,	and	they	thought	that	"Some
problem	may	arise,	it	is	better	to	send	this	man	away	immediately."
I	was	asleep	when	I	was	arrested.	You	don't	arrest	people	when	they	are	asleep.
And	they	had	no	reason,	because	I	had	not	gone	out	of	the	house	for	fifteen	days.
I	said,
"You	have	to	show	some	reason	why	you	are	deporting	me."
They	 said,	 "We	 don't	 have	 any	 reason,	 just	 orders	 from	 above."	 And	 all	 the
orders	were	based	on	the	threat	of	the	archbishop.
It	is	the	same	archbishop	that	expelled	Kazantzakis.
And	 these	 people	 are	 living	 almost	 out	 of	 date,	 out	 of	 time.	 They	 are	 not
contemporaries.
Because	the	day	they	deported	me	from	the	island,	the	people	of	the	island,	who
had	no	idea	about	me,	just	rumors....	But	seeing	the	threat	of	the	archbishop	they
all	felt	ashamed.	And	they	asked	me,	"What	we	can	do?	We	are	poor	people."
I	said,	"You	all	go	 to	 the	airport	 to	show	the	archbishop	how	many	people	are
with	 him	 and	 how	many	people	 are	with	me	 --	 although	 I	 have	 been	 here	 for
only	 fifteen	days	 and	 they	have	been	here	 for	 two	 thousand	years."	And	 there
were	only	six	old	women	with	the	archbishop	in	the	church,	and	three	thousand
people,	the	whole	island,	at	the	airport.
Still	 they	 don't	 understand	 that	 they	 are	 no	 longer	 needed,	 that	 their	 time	 is
finished.	And	they	talk	about	loving	your	enemy	and	loving	your	neighbor,	and
God	is	love	--	and	they	threaten	a	man	who	has	not	done	anything	that	they	will
burn	him	alive,	with	all	his	friends.	At	least	twenty-five	people	were	staying	in
that	big	mansion.
This	shows	that	somehow	the	Western	mind	has	not	grown	towards	inwardness,
towards	love,	towards	non-violence.	Their	whole	approach	is	materialistic.
Two	 thousand	 years	 after	 Jesus	 is	 crucified,	 and	 this	man	 is	 threatening	me	 --
Jesus	Christ's	representative	in	Greece	is	threatening	me	--	that	he	will	burn	me
alive.	 Does	 he	 represent	 Jesus	 Christ	 or	 was	 he	 also	 one	 of	 the	 rabbis	 who
crucified	Jesus	Christ?
The	 mind	 of	 the	 priest	 in	 the	West	 has	 been	 a	 hindrance	 to	Western	 growth
towards	meditation.	But	a	strange	time	of	revolution	has	come	--	at	least	for	the
new	 generation,	 because	 the	 new	 generation	 is	 not	 with	 these	 old	 priests	 and
these	old	churches.
And	the	new	generation	in	the	West	 is	 looking	towards	the	East.	That's	a	great
hope.
That	is	Zorba	searching	for	Gautam	Buddha.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THOUGHTS	 OF	 DEATH	 HAVE	 BEEN	 A	 FREQUENT	 VISITOR	 DURING
MY
DISCIPLEHOOD.	 HOW	 CAN	 A	 DISCIPLE	 DIE	 IN	 A	 MASTER'S
PRESENCE,	 ESPECIALLY	 WHEN	 THE	 MASTER	 IS	 PHYSICALLY
DISTANT?
OSHO,	IS	MAHAKASHYAP	THE	ONLY	ANSWER?
The	 question	 is	 not	whether	 or	 not	 you	 are	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 the	master,	 but
whether	or	not	you	are	filled	with	love	and	trust	for	the	master.
Physical	closeness	means	nothing.	Only	spiritual	closeness	is	significant.
Your	love,	your	trust	is	enough.	You	can	be	on	the	moon	and	the	master	will	be
by	 your	 side	 --	 really,	 the	 master	 will	 be	 inside	 you	 --	 because	 as	 your	 love
deepens,	 something	of	 the	master,	his	energies,	 start	melting	and	merging	with
you.
The	fear	of	physical	distance	is	the	fear	of	lack	of	love	and	trust.
Mahakashyap	 alone	 is	 not	 the	 answer.	 Everybody	 has	 to	 be	 an	 answer	 unto
himself.
Mahakashyap	remained	with	Buddha,	and	after	Buddha's	death	he	died;	he	could
not	survive	separately.
But	that	is	Mahakashyap's	uniqueness.	It	is	not	the	only	answer.
I	will	tell	you	a	few	other	stories	around	Buddha	so	you	can	understand.
Ananda	lived	with	Buddha	for	forty-two	years.	Nobody	else	lived	with	Buddha
so	long,	nobody	was	allowed	to	live	with	him	so	long.	But	there	was	a	problem.
Ananda	was	Buddha's	cousin-brother,	 and	older	 than	him,	and	 just	 the	Eastern
tradition....	 Before	 taking	 initiation	 --	Ananda	was	 the	 elder	 brother	 --	 and	 he
said	to	Gautam	Buddha,
"Siddharth"	 --	 Siddharth	 was	 his	 family	 name	 --	 "Listen:	 after	 initiation,
whatever	 you	 say	 I	 will	 have	 to	 do.	 I	 will	 be	 your	 disciple,	 you	 will	 be	 my
master.	 Right	 now	 I	 am	 your	 elder	 brother,	 you	 are	 my	 younger	 brother;
whatever	I	say	you	have	to	do.	Three	things	you	have	to	remember	--	don't	forget
them	when	I	become	a	disciple."	It	is	a	beautiful	story.
Buddha	said,	"What	are	the	three	things?"
Ananda	said,	"First,	I	will	always	live	with	you;	you	cannot	send	me	anywhere
else	to	spread	the	message.	Second,	if	I	want	anybody	to	meet	you	--	even	in	the
middle	 of	 the	 night	 --	 you	 cannot	 say	 no;	 that	 is	 my	 personal	 privilege.	 And
thirdly,	I	will	sleep	in	the	same	room	where	you	sleep.	Even	in	sleep,	you	cannot
make	me	stay	in	a	different	place."
Buddha	promised,	and	these	three	conditions	were	followed	for	forty-two	years.
But	Ananda	did	not	become	enlightened.	You	can	understand	his	pain	 and	his
anguish	--
people	who	had	come	long	after	him	became	enlightened,	and	he	remained	in	his
ignorance	 just	 the	 same	 as	 before.	 The	 day	 Buddha	 died	 he	 said,	 "What	 will
happen	to	me?	I	could	not	become	enlightened	even	though	I	was	with	you	for
forty-two	years,	day	 in,	day	out,	 twenty-four	hours	a	day.	Without	you,	 I	don't
see	any	hope."
Buddha	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand	 the	 dynamics	 of	 life.	 Perhaps	 you	 will
become	 enlightened	 only	when	 I	 am	 gone;	 I	 am	 the	 barrier.	 You	 take	me	 for
granted.	The	day	you	had	asked	those	three	conditions,	I	had	thought	that	those
conditions	were	going	to	be	a	barrier	for	you.	You	cannot	forget	that	you	are	my
elder	brother,	even	now.	You	cannot	forget	that	you	have	certain	privilege	over
others.	You	cannot	forget	that	I	have	agreed	on	three	conditions	only	for	you,	for
nobody	else.	Perhaps	my	death	will	help."
Buddha	died.	And	after	 twenty-four	hours,	 there	was	a	great	meeting	of	all	 the
enlightened	disciples	to	write	down	whatever	Buddha	had	said	in	these	forty-two
years.
But	the	problem	was	that	nobody	had	been	with	him	continuously	for	forty-two
years	except	Ananda	--	but	he	could	not	be	allowed	in	 the	meeting	because	he
was	not	enlightened.	An	ignorant	man,	unenlightened	--	you	cannot	rely	on	what
he	 is	 saying,	 whether	 he	 heard	 it	 or	 imagined	 it,	 whether	 he	 has	 forgotten
something,	whether	he	has	put	his	own	interpretation	in	it.	It	is	difficult.
And	 the	 scene	 is	 really	 tragic.	 The	 conference	 is	 inside	 a	 hall	 and	Ananda	 is
sitting	outside	on	 the	steps	crying,	because	he	 lived	with	Buddha	for	forty-two
years;	 he	 knows	more	 than	 anybody	 else.	Each	 single	moment	 he	 remembers,
but	he	is	unenlightened.
Crying,	sitting	there	outside	the	hall,	something	transpired.	He	had	not	cried	his
whole	life.	With	those	tears,	his	ego	disappeared;	he	became	like	a	child.
They	opened	the	door	to	see	whether	Ananda	was	still	sitting	outside	--	because
they	had	told	him,	"You	sit	outside.	If	we	need	some	confirmation	from	you,	we
will	ask	you,	but	you	cannot	enter	the	conference."
They	 saw	 a	 transformed	 being.	 The	 old	Ananda,	 the	 old	 egoist	was	 gone.	An
innocent	being	with	 tears	of	 joy...	 and	 they	all	 could	 see	 the	 light	 surrounding
him.
They	invited	him	--	"You	come	in.	Now	there	 is	no	need	for	us	 to	be	worried.
But	 it	 is	 strange...	 you	 could	 not	 become	 enlightened	 for	 forty-two	 years,	 and
just	 after	 twenty-four	 hours	 you	 have	 attained	 that	 state"	 --	 and	 this	 was
continuously	emphasized	by	Gautam	Buddha.
Ananda	said,	"It	was	my	fault.	His	death	became	the	death	of	my	ego	too."
All	the	scriptures	that	are	in	existence	are	related	by	Ananda.
There	were	other	enlightened	disciples	who	did	not	die	with	Gautam	Buddha.	It
was	asked	--	when	Mahakashyap	died,	it	became	a	very	significant	question	--	it
was	asked	to	other	enlightened	disciples,	"If	Mahakashyap	has	died,	how	are	you
living?"
One	 of	 the	 disciples,	 Moggalayan,	 said,	 "I	 have	 to	 live	 now	 for	 my	 master's
message.	 I	 am	not	 living	 anymore	 --	 I	 died	with	him;	now	he	 is	 living	 in	me.
That	was	one	way,	 the	way	of	Mahakashyap	--	 to	dissolve	 in	Gautam	Buddha.
This	 is	 another	 way.	 I	 have	 also	 dissolved,	 but	 dying	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help
anybody.	And	there	are	so	many	blind	people	in	the	world	who	need	eyes,	there
are	so	many	people	in	darkness	who	need	light.	I	will	live.	I	will	live	as	long	as	it
is	possible;	I	will	live	for	Buddha."
So	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 one	 person	 being	 decisive.	 Each	 person	 has	 to	 be
unique	 in	his	own	way.	Somebody	dies	 for	 the	master,	 somebody	 lives	 for	 the
master,	 and	 you	 cannot	 say	who	 is	 greater	 --	 perhaps	 no	 comparison	 is	 right.
Both	are	themselves.
Just	 remember	 one	 thing	 --	 your	 love.	 Then	wherever	 you	 are,	 space	 and	 the
distance	 in	 space	 does	 not	matter.	And	 at	 a	 certain	 depth,	 even	 time	 does	 not
matter.
And	when	time	and	space	both	are	immaterial,	then	you	have	really	touched	the
feet	of	the	master.
Then	whatsoever	transpires	in	you	--	to	live	for	the	message	or	to	die,	whatever
comes	naturally	and	spontaneously	--	let	it	happen.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Indifference	to	the	mind	is	meditation
10	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610105
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
108
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 OFTEN	 WANTED	 TO	 ASK	 YOU	 SOME	 QUESTIONS,	 BUT	 AFTER
WAITING
FOR	 A	 WHILE,	 I	 ALWAYS	 FOUND	 MY	 QUESTIONS	 ANSWERED	 BY
YOU.	AND
AT	 THE	 SAME	 TIME	 I	 FOUND	 OUT	 THAT	 ALL	 THOSE	 QUESTIONS
WERE	JUST
SILLY	 QUESTIONS,	 COMING	 FROM	 MY	 MIND	 WITHOUT	 ANY
CONNECTION
TO	 MY	 HEART.	 MY	 HEART	 ONLY	 WANTS	 TO	 CRY,	 AND	 MY	 MIND
ONLY
WANTS	TO	KNOW,	DESPITE	ANY	ANSWER.
COULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 COMMENT	 ON	 HOW	 TO	 DEAL	 WITH	 A
CONTINUOUS
QUESTIONING	 MIND	 THAT	 IS	 NOT	 INTERESTED	 IN	 ANY	 ANSWER
ANYWAY?
OR	AM	I	JUST	A	GREEK	DONKEY?
The	 disciple	 who	 can	 wait	 will	 find	 all	 his	 questions	 answered	 at	 the	 right
moment.
But	waiting	is	a	great	quality:	it	is	deep	patience,	it	is	great	trust.
The	mind	cannot	wait,	it	is	always	in	a	hurry.	It	knows	nothing	about	patience;
hence	it	goes	on	piling	questions	upon	questions	without	getting	the	answer.
It	 is	 something	 very	 delicate	 to	 understand:	 that	 it	 is	 not	 the	 answer	 that	 is
significant	but	the	right	timing,	your	readiness	to	receive	it;	otherwise	it	will	just
go	above	your	head.
The	 impatient	 mind	 is	 too	 much	 occupied	 in	 questioning.	 It	 forgets	 that
questioning	in	itself	is	a	meaningless	activity	--	the	real	thing	is	the	answer,	but
for	the	answer	you	need	a	certain	silence,	peace,	openness,	receptivity.	The	mind
is	incapable	of	these	qualities;	hence,	for	thousands	of	years	the	mind	has	been
asking	and	asking	but	it	finds	no	answer.
In	the	world	of	the	mind	there	are	only	questions.
And	in	the	world	of	the	heart	there	is	only	the	answer,	because	the	heart	knows
how	 not	 to	 ask,	 how	 to	wait:	 let	 the	 spring	 come	 by	 itself;	wait	 like	 a	 thirsty
earth...	 the	 rainclouds	will	 come;	 they	 have	 always	 been	 coming.	 There	 is	 no
need	 to	 distrust,	 because	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a	 single	 exception	 where	 trust	 has
failed,	where	waiting	is	not	fulfilled,	where	patience	is	not	immensely	rewarded.
The	functioning	of	the	heart	and	the	mind	are	totally	different;	not	only	different,
but	diametrically	opposite.	The	mind	creates	philosophies,	theologies,	ideologies
--	they	are	all	questions	that	don't	have	any	answer.	The	heart	simply	waits.	At
the	right	moment,	the	answer	blossoms	by	itself.
The	heart	has	no	question,	yet	it	receives	the	answer.
The	mind	has	a	thousand	and	one	questions,	yet	it	has	never	received	any	answer
because	it	does	not	know	how	to	receive.
Your	mind	is	full	of	questions	yet	you	have	been	observing	that	by	and	by,	they
are	being	answered.	This	should	create	in	you	a	new	insight,	a	new	trust.	A	new
dimension	 is	 opening:	 that	 you	 have	 just	 to	wait,	 alert	 and	 awake,	 and	 if	 it	 is
needed	the	answer	will	come	to	you.
You	 are	 also	 seeing	 that	most	 of	 the	 questions	 that	 the	mind	 is	 filled	with	 are
silly.
They	are	--	not	most	of	them,	all	of	them	are	silly	for	the	simple	reason	that	mind
does	 not	 go	 through	 the	 discipline	 of	 asking	 receptively.	 It	 is	more	 concerned
with	questions.
Even	 while	 the	 answer	 is	 being	 given,	 it	 has	 moved	 on	 to	 another	 question.
Perhaps,	 listening	 to	 the	 answer,	 it	 has	 created	 ten	more	 questions	 out	 of	 the
answer	itself.
Questions	arise	out	of	 the	mind	 just	 like	 leaves	grow	on	 the	 trees.	And	slowly
slowly,	 they	become	more	and	more	 silly	 --	because	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	 find
many	significant	questions,	and	the	mind	is	not	satisfied	with	a	small	quantity	of
questions.	 It	 is	greedy.	It	wants	 to	ask	everything;	 it	wants	 to	know	everything
without	being	ready	to	understand	anything.
There	are	few	significant	questions.
And	there	is	only	one	really	fundamental	question.
But	that	small	quantity	does	not	satisfy	the	greed	of	the	mind.
You	will	be	amazed	 to	know	 that	 the	English	word	 `greed'	 comes	 from	a	very
strange	word	in	Sanskrit	--	and	if	you	want	to	see	those	people	from	where	this
word	 has	 come,	 Bombay	 has	 most	 of	 them.	 In	 Sanskrit	 the	 vulture	 is	 called
giddha,	and	from	`giddha'
comes	 greed.	 And	 Bombay	 has	 the	 greatest	 number	 of	 vultures	 in	 the	 whole
world,	because	Bombay	has	 the	greatest	number	of	Parsees.	There	 is	 a	 certain
relationship	between	Parsees	and	vultures.
Parsees	have	a	very	strange	way	of	disposing	of	their	dead:	they	don't	burn	them
like	the	Hindus,	Buddhists,	Jainas;	they	don't	bury	them	like	the	Christians	and
the	Mohammedans	and	the	Jews.	They	have	a	unique	way	of	their	own,	and	they
have	a	certain	rationale	for	 it.	In	their	cemetery...	and	Bombay	has	the	biggest,
because	Bombay	has	the	biggest	population	of	Parsees.
In	their	cemetery	they	have	a	big	well.	There	are	steel	rods	on	top	of	 the	well.
The	dead	body	 is	put	on	 those	 steel	 rods,	and	between	 the	 steel	 rods	 there	are
gaps.	All	around,	there	are	big,	ancient	trees	and	thousands	of	vultures	are	sitting
there,	waiting	for	some	poor	Parsee	to	die	--	 the	vultures	need	food	every	day;
Parsees	supply	the	food.	The	dead	body	of	the	Parsee	is	put	on	those	rods	on	top
of	the	well	and	the	vultures	eat	whatever	is	edible.	And	whatever	is	not	edible	--
bones,	 et	 cetera	 --	 goes	 on	 falling	 through	 the	 gaps	 between	 the	 rods	 into	 the
well.
On	the	surface	it	looks	very	strange	--	"What	are	you	doing?"	--	but	the	Parsees
have	 their	 rationale.	 In	 this	world	 everybody	has	 some	 reasonable	grounds	 for
every	superstition.
They	 say,	 "Because	we	 have	 been	 eating	 everything,	 now	 it	 is	 our	 duty	 to	 be
eaten."	A	beautiful	logic:	you	have	been	eating	for	your	whole	life.	If	you	are	a
meat-eater	you	have	been	eating	animals.	If	you	are	a	vegetarian,	then	you	have
been	eating	vegetables;	that	too	is	life.	For	your	whole	life	you	have	been	eating,
and	 it	 is	natural	 to	be	part	of	 the	same	circle	by	being	eaten.	According	 to	 the
Parsees,	this	is	the	most	natural	thing.
And	 I	 think	people	who	believe	 in	nature	will	 support	 their	 idea	 --	because	 to
burn	a	body	is	to	destroy	food,	is	to	unnecessarily	kill	a	few	vultures,	or	to	keep
them	hungry.
In	a	Hindu	village,	vultures	don't	 exist.	What	will	 they	do	 there?	At	 the	most,
once	in	a	while	a	cow	dies,	or	a	buffalo,	and	they	can	eat	that.
Now	there	is	a	widespread	movement	amongst	intellectuals	around	the	earth	that
we	should	not	break	natural	cycles	anywhere.	For	our	whole	lives	we	have	been
eating	--
now	 it	 is	 time	 that	 we	 should	 be	 eaten.	 And	 anyway	 you	 are	 dead;	 why
unnecessarily	destroy	good	food	for	the	vultures?
Just	 go	 here	 in	 Bombay,	 you	will	 see	 a	 beautiful	 scene	 --	 you	will	 not	 see	 it
anywhere	else	in	the	whole	world	--	so	many	vultures	together	just	waiting	for
poor	Parsees	to	die,	praying	to	God,	"Finish	someone	today."	And	God	seems	to
listen	to	the	vultures;	some	Parsee	is	bound	to	come.
The	English	word	`greed'	comes	from	the	same	root	as	`giddha',	the	vulture.
The	vulture	is	one	of	the	ugliest	birds	you	can	conceive	of.
And	greed	is	certainly	one	of	the	ugliest	things	in	man	that	you	can	think	of.
But	the	mind	is	a	vulture.	It	is	never	satisfied	with	anything.	You	go	on	giving	to
it,	it	goes	on	taking,	and	it	goes	on	asking	for	more.	It	never	feels	grateful;	it	is
always	complaining	that	it	is	not	enough.	Nothing	is	enough	to	the	mind.
Question	 after	 question	 --	meaningful,	meaningless,	 relevant,	 irrelevant	 --	 and
not	even	a	small	space	for	any	answer	to	enter	into	your	mind.	It	is	so	crowded
with	questions.
The	heart	knows	no	questions.
And	 this	 is	one	of	 the	mysteries	of	 life:	 that	 the	mind	questions	 the	whole	 life
long	 and	never	 receives	 any	 answer,	 and	 the	 heart	 never	 asks	 but	 receives	 the
answer.
But	there	is	one	thing	to	be	remembered:	the	mind	is	noisy,	there	is	maddening
noise.	The	heart	may	be	 receiving	 the	 answer,	 but	 because	of	 the	noise	 of	 the
mind	you	may	not	come	to	feel	that	the	answer	has	been	received,	that	you	are
carrying	it	with	you,	that	you	are	pregnant	with	it.
Not	only	does	the	mind	disturb	your	peace,	your	silence;	it	disturbs	it	to	such	an
extent	that	the	heart	--	which	is	capable	of	listening	to	silence,	waiting,	receptive
--	is	denied	all	connection	with	your	being.	The	mind	monopolizes	your	being;	it
simply	puts	the	heart	aside.	And	because	the	heart	is	silent,	and	a	gentleman,	it
does	not	quarrel;	it	simply	goes	down	the	street,	waits	by	the	side	of	the	road.
Mind	wants	to	occupy	the	whole	space.
The	disciple	has	to	understand	this	whole	situation	--	that	the	dictatorship	of	the
mind	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed,	 that	 the	 mind	 is	 only	 a	 servant,	 not	 a	 master.	 The
master	 is	 the	 heart,	 because	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful	 grows	 in	 the	 heart;	 all	 that	 is
valuable	comes	out	of	the	heart	-
-	your	love,	your	compassion,	your	meditation.
Anything	that	is	valuable	grows	in	the	garden	of	the	heart.
Mind	is	a	desert,	nothing	grows	there	--	only	sand	and	sand	and	barren	land.	It
has	never	given	any	fruit,	any	flower.	You	have	to	understand	it:	mind	should	not
be	supported	as	much	as	you	have	been	supporting	it	up	to	now.	Mind	has	to	be
put	in	its	right	place.
The	throne	belongs	to	the	heart.
And	this	is	the	revolution	through	which	the	disciple	becomes	a	devotee:	when
the	heart	becomes	the	master,	and	the	mind	becomes	a	servant.
This	has	to	be	remembered:	that	as	a	servant,	the	mind	is	perfect.	As	a	master...	it
is	the	worst	master	possible;	as	a	servant,	it	is	the	best.
And	 the	heart	 --	wherever	 it	 is,	 either	on	 the	 throne	or	on	 the	 street	 --	 is	your
only	 hope,	 the	 only	 possibility	 for	 you	 to	 be	 bridged	 with	 your	 being,	 to	 be
bridged	with	existence.	It	is	the	only	possibility	for	songs	to	arise	in	you,	stars	to
descend	in	you,	for	your	life	to	become	a	rejoicing,	a	dance.
You	are	asking	me	how	to	stop	this	mind,	its	constant	questioning,	its	silly	crowd
of	questions.
That	 is	 where	 everybody	 takes	 the	wrong	 step.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 stop	 it,	 you	will
never	be	able	to	stop	it.	Ignore	it.	Be	indifferent	to	it.	Let	it	chatter.
Be	 aloof,	 unconcerned	 --	 as	 if	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 whether	 it	 chatters	 or	 not,
whether	there	are	questions	or	not.	Only	this	aloofness,	this	ignoring	--	Buddha
has	given	it	the	right	name,	upeksha	--	this	indifference	slowly,	slowly	makes	the
miracle	happen.
What	you	want	 to	achieve	by	 fighting	 is	not	possible,	because	when	you	 fight
with	someone	you	are	giving	energy	to	the	enemy.	You	are	giving	attention,	and
attention	 is	 food;	 you	 are	 getting	 entangled	with	 the	mind,	 and	mind	 enjoys	 a
good	fight.	It	has	never	happened	that	anybody	has	been	able	to	stop	the	mind	by
fighting	with	 it.	That	 is	 the	most	 important	 thing	 to	understand:	don't	 take	any
step	towards	fighting.
Just	ignore,	just	be	aloof,	just	let	the	mind	do	whatever	it	wants	to	do.	When	the
mind	feels	unwelcomed,	when	the	mind	sees	that	you	are	no	more	interested	in
it,	that	it	is	pointless	to	go	on	shouting;	you	are	not	even	hearing	it,	that	you	are
not	even	curious	about	what	is	going	on	in	the	mind	--	it	stops.
It	happened...	and	I	have	remembered	it	because	the	boy	is	here	today.	He	is	my
sister's	son.
He	 was	 very	 young,	 six	 years	 old.	We	 had	 gone	 to	 see	 the	 chief	 minister	 of
Madhya	Pradesh	and	his	father	was	driving.	His	father	went	to	make	inquiries,	to
say	that	I	had	come,	and	ask	whether	the	chief	minister	was	in	the	house	or	not.
At	 that	very	moment	 --	 the	boy	must	have	been	 feeling	sleepy	 in	 the	 jeep;	we
had	come	a	long	distance	--	he	fell	asleep	and	hit	his	head	on	the	dashboard	in
front	of	him.	He	 looked	at	me.	 I	didn't	pay	any	attention,	 I	 looked	outside	 the
jeep.	 He	 was	 going	 to	 cry	 and	 create	 trouble	 --	 he	 looked	 again	 and	 again	 I
looked	outside.
Then	his	father	came	out.	I	went	in	for	a	half-hour	meeting.	Then	we	went	home.
It	was	almost	two	hours	later,	as	we	arrived	home,	that	he	started	crying.	As	soon
as	he	saw	his	mother	he	immediately	started	crying.	I	said,	"What	happened?"
He	said,	"I	hit	my	head	on	the	jeep."
I	said,	"That	happened	two	hours	ago!"
He	said,	"I	know,	but	there	was	no	point	in	crying	because	twice	I	looked	at	you
and	 you	 looked	 outside	 the	 window.	What	 is	 the	 point	 in	 crying	 with	 such	 a
man?	You	did	not	even	ask	what	had	happened...	you	had	seen	that	I	had	hit	my
head.	Now	my	mother	is	here;	now	I	can	cry."
Even	 that	 small	 child	 could	 understand	 that	 when	 there	 is	 indifference,	 it	 is
pointless	to	make	any	fuss;	it	is	as	if	there	is	nobody	in	the	jeep.
When	you	are	indifferent,	the	mind	starts	feeling	as	if	there	is	nobody	--	what	is
the	 point	 of	 all	 the	 questions?	 Because	 you	 are	 interested,	 curious,	 you	 get
involved,	you	are	giving	juice	to	the	mind.
Indifference	to	the	mind	is	meditation.
And	all	those	questions	will	disappear,	because	they	are	absolutely	meaningless.
And	when	the	chattering	of	the	mind	has	disappeared,	there	is	a	silence,	a	peace,
so	that	you	can	hear	the	still,	small	voice	of	your	heart.
Only	the	heart	knows	the	answer...	it	already	knows	it.
And	if	you	are	with	a	master,	the	heart	simply	says	yes	to	the	master,	because	the
heart	knows	the	answer	already.	Perhaps	the	master	is	putting	it	in	a	better	way,
more	 articulate,	 but	 the	 heart	 is	 in	 complete	 agreement.	 And	 that	 agreement
dissolves	all	distances	between	the	master	and	the	disciple.
Then	silence	is	not	only	silence,	it	is	also	communion.
Then	things	are	not	said	but	heard;	then	things	are	not	said	but	shown.
And	 when	 the	 heart	 is	 totally	 willing,	 life	 is	 such	 a	 simple,	 uncomplicated
phenomenon	that	you	cannot	conceive	of	anything	more	simple.
It	 is	 the	mind	which	creates	complications,	goes	on	creating	complications	and
questions.
Mind's	whole	expertise	is	to	create	complications.
If	you	want	to	live	a	simple,	a	beautiful,	a	silent,	a	joyful,	a	blissful	life,	let	the
mind	be	ignored	and	let	the	heart	be	restored	to	its	status	as	master.	This	is	the
whole	work	of	a	religious	seeker;	nothing	more	is	needed.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	NEVER	BEEN	GOOD	AT	REMEMBERING	MY	DREAMS.	THEY
SEEM
TO	 BE	 THERE	 ONLY	 IN	 TIMES	 OF	 EMOTIONAL	 CRISIS.	 ONCE	 OR
TWICE	A	YEAR	I	HAVE	ÀBIG'	DREAM	WHICH	IS	MORE	LIKE	A	VISION
--	AND	THAT'S
IT.
DURING	THE	LAST	YEARS	 IT	HAS	BECOME	WORSE,	AND	NOW	 IT'S
DOWN
TO	ZERO.	CONSIDERING	DREAMS	AS	IMPORTANT	FOR	MY	WORK	AS
A	 THERAPIST,	 I	 TRIED	 HARD	WITH	 ALL	 KINDS	 OF	 METHODS	 BUT
HAD	NO
SUCCESS.
RECENTLY	 I	 MADE	 PEACE	 WITH	 IT.	 AS	 LOTS	 OF	 FLASHES	 AND
INTUITIONS
COME	 UP	 IN	 THE	 DAYTIME,	 OR	 BEFORE	 I'M	 FALLING	 ASLEEP,	 I
THOUGHT
THIS	MIGHT	BE	FINE	TOO.	AFTER	YESTERDAY'S	DISCOURSE	WHERE
YOU
SAID	THAT	TO	UNBURDEN	THE	SUBCONSCIOUS	IS	THE	WAY	TO	THE
SUPERCONSCIOUS,	I	STARTED	WORRYING	AND	WONDERING	AGAIN.
AM	 I	 SO	 REPRESSIVE?	 WHAT	 AM	 I	 SCARED	 OF	 THAT	 MAKES	 ME
INCAPABLE	OF
REMEMBERING	MY	DREAMS?
Purna,	 the	process	of	dreaming	and	 the	process	of	 remembering	 the	dream	are
two	things.
Very	 few	 people	 remember	 dreams;	 that	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 they	 don't	 have
dreams.
Everybody	has	dreams	--	but	 remembering	a	dream	is	a	 totally	different	 thing.
Even	 the	 people	 who	 remember	 dreams	 remember	 only	 the	 last	 dreams,	 the
dreams	 of	 the	 early	 morning	 when	 you	 are	 just	 waking	 up,	 because	 the
mechanism	 of	 memory	 is	 part	 of	 the	 conscious	 mind.	 Dreams	 happen	 in	 the
unconscious;	 the	 unconscious	 doesn't	 have	 any	memory	mechanism.	Only	 the
conscious	mind	has	the	memory	mechanism.
So	 if	 a	 dream	 is	 happening	 in	 the	 unconscious	 mind	 but	 very	 close	 to	 the
conscious	mind,	then	it	remembers	it	faintly,	vaguely.
In	the	morning	when	you	are	waking	up	you	are	coming	closer	to	the	conscious
mind	--
from	the	unconscious,	back	to	the	conscious	mind.	The	last	dream,	the	tail	end,
will	be	remembered,	because	it	will	be	very	close	to	when	you	wake	up.	So	even
people	 who	 remember,	 remember	 only	 the	 last	 dreams.	 They	 have	 been
dreaming	for	almost	six	hours	through	the	whole	night;	if	 they	are	sleeping	for
eight	hours,	 they	are	dreaming	for	six	hours.	You	can	catch	hold	of	just	a	faint
reflection	of	the	last	dream,	but	if	you	don't	catch	hold	of	it	for	a	few	seconds,	it
will	 be	 gone.	 As	 you	 become	 more	 awake,	 you	 are	 farther	 away	 from	 the
unconscious.
So	to	different	people,	different	things	will	be	happening.
There	 are	 people	who	wake	 up	 very	 slowly;	 they	 don't	wake	 up	 quickly,	 in	 a
jump.
The	 people	 who	 wake	 up	 quickly,	 in	 a	 jump,	 will	 have	 a	 different	 kind	 of
memory	from	the	people	who	wake	up	very	slowly.	They	will	have	another	kind
of	memory.
It	also	depends	on	what	kind	of	dreams	you	are	having.
Because	you	are	a	therapist	--	and	not	only	a	therapist	but	my	therapist	--	your
repression	cannot	be	 superficial.	Because	my	whole	 teaching	 is:	Don't	 repress;
live	out	every	instinct,	every	feeling,	every	emotion.	If	you	are	 living	out	your
emotions,	your	feelings,	then	you	will	not	have	superficial	dreams;	your	dreams
will	 be	 very	 deep.	 They	 will	 be	 less	 in	 the	 unconscious	 and	 more	 in	 the
collective	unconscious	 --	 so	deep	 that	you	will	not	be	able	 to	 remember	 them.
Unless	a	special	effort	is	made,	they	cannot	be	remembered.	And	the	only	effort
that	is	possible	is	hypnosis.
If	you	are	hypnotized	and	led	by	your	hypnotist	deep	into	your	unconscious	and
asked,
"What	is	happening	there?	What	kind	of	dream	is	going	on?"	only	then	will	you
be	 able	 to	 express	 it	 to	 him.	 When	 you	 wake	 up,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
remember	what	you	have	said	either.	It	will	take	a	long	training	between	you	and
the	 hypnotist:	 after	 each	 hypnosis	 he	 has	 to	 suggest	 to	 you	 that	 you	 will
remember	it	when	you	wake	up.	He	has	to	emphasize	it	every	time	so	much	that
it	becomes	a	deep-rooted	impression.	Then	you	may	be	able	to	remember	your
dreams.
But	 there	 is	 no	 need.	Unless	 you	 are	 especially	working	 on	 dreams,	 for	 some
specific	purpose,	there	is	no	need.
I	 am	 emphasizing	 that	 you	 should	 ignore	 the	 mind.	 Now	 the	 unconscious,
collective	 unconscious,	 cosmic	 unconscious	 --	 these	 are	 all	 parts	 of	 the	mind,
and	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 remember	 them.	 Just	 the	 conscious	 mind	 is	 enough	 to
torture	you	--	why	do	you	need	to	remember	the	unconscious	mind?
In	 the	East	we	have	been	aware	 that	 the	conscious	mind	 is	not	 the	only	mind.
Below	 it,	 there	 is	 the	 unconscious	 mind;	 then	 below	 that	 is	 the	 collective
unconscious	mind;	 then	below	 that	 is	 the	 cosmic	unconscious	mind.	Above	 it,
there	 is	 the	 superconscious	 mind;	 above	 that	 there	 is	 the	 collective
superconscious	mind;	above	that	there	is	the	cosmic	superconscious	mind.	And
when	I	say	`mind'	I	mean	this	whole	range	--	they	are	one	entity,	one	rainbow.
Ignore	them	all.	There	is	no	need	to	remember.
Many	 people	 are	 in	 madhouses	 because	 by	 some	 accident	 their	 collective
unconscious	has	broken	up	and	released	its	memories.	Now	their	conscious	mind
is	not	capable	of	holding	those	memories,	the	weight	is	too	much;	that's	what	is
driving	them	mad.
For	example,	in	your	collective	unconscious	mind,	the	woman	who	is	your	wife
now	may	have	been	your	mother	in	your	past	life.	If	this	memory	comes	to	your
mind	 then	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 in	 trouble.	Then	 how	 are	 you	 going	 to	 behave
with	 your	 wife,	 as	 your	 mother	 or	 as	 your	 wife?	 Just	 being	 your	 wife	 was
enough;	just	being	your	mother	was	enough	too
--	now	she	is	both.	And	you	will	be	crushed,	because	you	cannot	have	a	sexual
relationship	 with	 a	 woman	 who	 is	 your	 mother...	 the	 whole	 inhibition	 of
thousands	of	years.	And	how	will	you	manage	your	wife?	Because	she	has	no
remembrance;	she	is	going	to	say,	"You	are	crazy,	just	forget	all	about	it"	--	but
you	cannot	forget	about	it.
Nature	 has	 a	 beautiful	 arrangement:	 with	 each	 death,	 a	 thick	 layer	 of
forgetfulness	comes	over	your	memories.	You	are	carrying	all	 the	memories	of
all	your	lives.	But	a	small	human	being	finds	it	so	difficult	to	live	with	a	small
conscious	mind	of	one	life	--	if	so	many	lives	burst	upon	him,	he	is	bound	to	be
insane.	It	is	a	natural	protection.
It	happened....
I	was	in	Jabalpur	and	a	girl	was	brought	to	me.	She	must	have	been,	at	that	time,
nine	years	of	age.	She	remembered	her	past	life	completely	--	so	realistically	that
it	was	not	a	memory	for	her,	it	was	a	continuity.	It	was	just	some	accidental	error
in	nature	that	there	was	no	barrier	between	the	past	life	and	this	life.
There	 is	a	place	 just	 eighty	miles	away	 from	Jabalpur,	Katni.	She	was	born	 in
Katni	and	she	remembered	that	she	had	her	family	in	Jabulpur.	She	remembered
the	names,	she	remembered	her	husband,	she	remembered	her	sons,	the	house	--
she	remembered	everything.	One	of	my	friends	brought	them	to	me.
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 strange,	 because	 the	 people	 she	 is	 remembering	 are	 living	 just
three	or	four	blocks	away	from	my	house."	They	had	a	petrol	pump,	so	I	used	to
go	for	petrol	at	their	petrol	pump	every	day.	But	I	said,	"You	wait.	You	wait	in
my	house	and	I	will	call	them	--	the	Pathak	brothers	--	I	will	call	them	and	we
will	see	whether	this	girl	remembers	them	or	not."
So	they	came	with	their	servants	and	a	few	other	neighbors.	There	were	twelve,
thirteen	people	in	the	crowd,	so	that	they	could	see	whether	she	could	find	out....
She	 immediately	 jumped,	and	said,	"Brother,	have	you	recognized	me	or	not?"
She	caught	hold	of	both	brothers,	among	thirteen	people,	and	she	inquired	about
the	mother	and	the	children...	and	father	had	died,	and	she	was	crying.	It	was	not
a	memory,	 it	was	 a	 continuity.	They	 took	her	 to	 their	 home	 and	 then	 it	was	 a
problem:	 the	 girl	was	 torn	 apart	 about	whether	 to	 go	 to	 this	 family's	 house	 in
Jabalpur	and	live	there,	or	to	go	back	to	Katni	to	the	new	family	where	she	had
been	born.
Of	course,	 in	this	family	she	had	lived	for	seventy	years,	so	the	pull	was	more
towards	the	past-life	family.	And	in	the	new	family	she	had	been	born	only	nine
years	before;	there	was	no	pull	--	but	that	was	her	family,	her	real	family.	This
other	family	was	only	a	memory,	but	to	her,	it	was	such	a	heart-rending	problem.
And	 both	 the	 families	 were	 disturbed	 about	 what	 to	 do:	 if	 she	 remained	 in
Jabalpur,	she	would	remember	the	other	family	continuously,	worry	about	what
was	happening	to	them	and	feel,	"I	want	to	go	there."	If	she	was	there,	she	would
be	thinking	that	she	wanted	to	be	in	Jabalpur.
Finally	 I	 suggested	 that	 the	only	way	 --	 it	was	a	 freak	case,	 there	was	nothing
spiritual	 in	 it	 --	 was	 that	 she	 needed	 a	 deep	 hypnosis	 for	 a	 few	 days,	 so	 the
barrier	could	be	created.
She	had	to	be	hypnotized	to	forget	the	old	and	the	past.	Unless	she	could	forget
the	past,	her	whole	life	was	going	to	be	a	misery.
Both	 families	 were	 ready	 to	 accept	 that	 something	 had	 to	 be	 done.	 She	 was
hypnotized	 continually	 for	 at	 least	 ten	 days,	 to	 forget.	 It	 took	 ten	 sessions	 to
create	a	small	barrier	so	that	the	old	life's	memories	didn't	float	into	the	new	life.
I	 have	 been	 inquiring	 about	 her.	 She	 is	 now	 perfectly	 okay	 --	 married,	 has
children,	has	forgotten	completely.	Even	when	those	people	come	to	see	her,	she
does	not	recognize	them.	But	her	barrier	is	very	thin	and	artificial.	Any	accident,
and	 the	 barrier	 could	 be	 broken,	 or	 any	 hypnotist	 could	 break	 it	 very	 easily
within	ten	sessions;	or	some	great	shock,	and	the	barrier	could	be	broken.
There	is	no	need	for	you	to	remember.	It	is	perfectly	good.
We	have	to	get	free	from	the	mind.
The	East	has	known	all	 the	 layers	of	 the	mind,	but	 the	East	has	emphasized	a
totally	different	aspect	than	the	West:	ignore	it	--	you	are	the	pure	consciousness
behind	all	these	layers.
Western	psychology	is	just	childish,	just	born	at	the	end	of	the	last	century.	It	is
not	even	a	hundred	years	old.	They	have	taken	up	the	desire	to	enter	into	dreams
and	to	find	out,	to	dig	deeper	into	what	is	there	in	the	mind.
There	 is	 nothing.	 You	 will	 find	 more	 and	 more	 memories,	 more	 and	 more
dreams,	and	you	will	destroy	the	person	because	you	will	make	him	vulnerable
to	an	unnecessary	burden	which	has	to	be	erased.
One	has	to	go	beyond	mind,	not	within	the	mind.
And	you	don't	have	any	memory	as	far	as	the	state	of	beyond	mind	is	concerned.
Just	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 mind.	 Don't	 meddle	 with	 it;	 it	 is	 getting	 into	 an
unnecessary	trouble	and	nightmare.	You	have	to	surpass	 the	mind,	you	have	to
transcend	the	mind.
Your	whole	effort	 should	be	one-pointed,	 and	 that	 is	how	 to	be	a	no-mind:	no
dreams,	no	memories,	no	experiences.
Then	you	are	at	the	very	center	of	your	being.
Only	then	do	you	taste	something	of	immortality.	Only	then,	for	the	first	time,	do
you	know	what	intelligence	is.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONLY	 JUST	 NOW	 I	 DISCOVERED	 THAT	 A	 MASTER-DISCIPLE
RELATIONSHIP
IS	REALLY	A	TWO-WAY	AFFAIR,	IN	WHICH	THE	DISCIPLE	NEEDS	TO
RESPOND	OPENLY	TO	THE	MASTER	IN	ORDER	FOR	THE	MASTER	TO
BE
ABLE	TO	DO	HIS	WORK.
I	MYSELF,	ON	THE	CONTRARY,	HAVE	ALWAYS	WATCHED	PASSIVELY,
KEPT	A	DISTANCE	AND	DRAWN	MY	OWN	CONCLUSIONS.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
The	master	never	does	anything.
And	if	you	are	remaining	aloof,	nothing	will	ever	happen	to	you.
Your	receptivity	and	openness	is	not	needed	for	the	master	to	do	something;	your
openness	and	receptivity	are	needed	so	that	the	very	presence	of	the	master	can
provoke	something	to	happen	in	you	--	and	these	are	two	different	things.	Doing
something	 is	 a	 very	 positive	 effort,	 and	 just	 allowing	 your	 presence	 for
something	 to	 happen	 in	 you	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 thing.	 There	 is	 no	 positive
effort.	The	effort	is	on	the	side	of	the	disciple.
So	what	you	have	discovered,	you	have	discovered	wrongly:	it	is	not	a	two-way
affair,	 not	 a	 two-way	 road;	 it	 is	 a	 one-way	 street.	 It	 is	 up	 to	 you	 to	 be	 open,
ready,	available.
The	presence	of	the	master	is	there,	just	like	the	light	--	you	open	your	eyes	and
the	light	is	there.
The	 light	 does	 not	 travel	 to	 your	 eyes	 in	 particular.	 You	 can	 keep	 your	 eyes
closed	 and	 the	 light	will	 not	 knock	 on	 your	 eyelids:	 "Please	 open	 your	 eyes."
You	can	keep	your	eyes	closed;	the	light	is	very	democratic,	it	will	not	interfere.
But	 if	you	open	your	eyes	you	will	 see	 the	 light;	not	only	 the	 light,	but	 in	 the
light	 you	will	 see	many	 other	 things	 too	 --	 the	 flowers,	 the	 people,	 the	whole
world.	 Still,	 you	 cannot	 say	 that	 light	 has	 been	 doing	 something	 to	 you.
Something	 is	 transpiring	 in	 you.	 It	 will	 not	 transpire	 without	 the	 light,	 so
certainly	the	presence	of	the	light	is	needed	--	but	just	the	presence	is	needed,	not
the	action.
Action	is	needed	on	your	part,	not	just	presence,	because	you	can	be	present	here
and	closed	--	nothing	will	evolve	out	of	it.
The	disciple	has	to	do	everything.
And	this	is	the	beauty	of	the	whole	phenomenon.	Otherwise,	you	will	become	a
puppet	 in	 the	hands	of	 the	master.	Then	he	will	do	 things	 that	he	wants	 to	do;
then	he	will	make	you	the	way	he	wants	to	make	you	--	the	ideal,	the	mold.	He
will	destroy	your	 individuality,	he	will	destroy	your	freedom.	No	master	worth
the	name	can	do	that.
The	master	can	give	his	whole	being	to	you,	can	make	it	available	--	but	only	as
a	presence,	not	as	an	action.
The	doing	is	on	the	part	of	the	disciple.	You	have	to	be	receptive,	you	have	to	be
silent,	you	have	to	be	meditative,	you	have	to	be	trusting	everything,	because	it
is	your	life	and	you	should	be	responsible	for	it.	You	are	not	a	painting	that	the
master	painter	can	change	in	whatever	way	he	wants.
I	have	heard	that	in	a	small	school,	a	beautiful	painting	was	shown	that	had	been
made	by	the	drawing	teacher	of	the	school.	He	was	showing	the	students	the	art
and	 the	craft	of	painting.	And	he	said,	 "It	 is	 such	a	delicate	phenomenon.	You
look	at	the	painting."
And	they	said,	"Yes,	we	can	see	a	man	with	a	sad	face."
The	painter	went	to	the	painting	and	just	gave	one	or	two	touches	with	his	brush
and	 the	whole	painting	changed	 --	 the	 face	was	smiling.	And	because	 the	 face
was	 smiling,	 the	 whole	 complex	 of	 trees	 and	 flowers	 and	 stars	 now	 had	 a
different	 effect.	 Everybody	 was	 impressed:	 the	 teachers	 were	 impressed...
parents	had	come;	they	were	very	much	impressed.	Just	one	small	boy	was	not
interested.
The	painter	asked,	"Are	you	not	interested?"
He	 said,	 "I	 am	 interested.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 something	 great;	my	mother	 does	 it
every	day."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?	Is	she	a	painter?"
He	 said,	 "She	 is	 not	 a	 painter.	 But	 I	 go	 home	 smiling,	 and	with	 one	 slap	 the
whole	world	 changes	 into	 tears	 and	 tears	 and	 crying.	 And	 if	 you	want	me	 to
show	you,	 I	 can	 show	you	here,	because	 I	have	also	become	an	expert.	Every
day	it	is	happening."
He	simply	went	and	hit	a	small	girl	sitting	there,	and	the	girl	started	crying.	And
she	had	been	smiling	and	enjoying,	but	suddenly	the	hit,	and	tears	came	to	her
eyes	 and	 she	 started	 crying.	 And	 because	 of	 her	 crying	 and	 this	 boy's
craftsmanship,	the	whole	crowd	fell	silent.
And	even	the	drawing	teacher	said,	"This	is	right.	I	was	thinking	that	I	had	some
great	art.	Your	mother	knows	better.	Without	brush,	without	color,	just	a	hit	and
everything	changes;	the	whole	world	changes."
The	 master	 can	 change	 you,	 but	 that	 change	 is	 very	 costly.	 He	 can	 do	 many
things,	 but	 you	 are	 becoming	more	 and	more	 of	 a	 slave.	You	 had	 come	 to	 be
liberated,	and	it	is	going	the	wrong	way.
No	authentic	master	has	ever	done	anything.	He	has	made	himself	available	 in
many	ways.	He	has	taught	you	how	to	be	available,	how	to	be	open,	how	to	be
receptive	 --	 and	 then,	 whatever	 your	 potential	 is	 will	 start	 growing.	 In	 the
blissful	showering	of	the	presence	of	the	master	your	potential	will	grow,	but	it
will	 grow	 according	 to	 its	 own	 intrinsic	 qualities.	 Nothing	 is	 imposed	 from
outside.
So	please	note	 it	down:	your	observation	 is	not	 right,	 it	 is	not	 two-way	 traffic.
From	the	master's	side	there	is	no	traffic	at	all.
You	have	to	do	something.	Certainly	the	master	is	present	and	available,	his	love
is	available.	In	his	shadow,	in	his	loving	radiation,	you	will	start	growing.	But	he
will	not	touch	you;	he	will	let	you	be	whatever	you	can	be.	Whatsoever	is	your
destiny,	you	should	not	be	carried	away	from	it.
He	 is	 just	 a	 silent	 help:	without	 touching	 you,	 he	 transforms	 you.	 That	 is	 the
miracle	of	the	master.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
SITTING	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE,	MEDITATION	IS	REALLY	AT	ITS	BEST.	IF
ASKED	WHY,	I	WOULD	SAY	THAT	IT	IS	BECAUSE	YOUR	BLISSFUL
PRESENCE	 IS	 CONTAGIOUS	AND	 SOMEHOW	MOTIVATES	ME	TO	BE
AS
TOTAL	AS	POSSIBLE.
BELOVED	OSHO,	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	EXPLAIN	AGAIN	HOW	IT	IS
POSSIBLE	TO	BE	IN	SUCH	A	NICE	MEDITATION	WHEN	NOT	BEING	IN
YOUR
PRESENCE?
My	presence	has	to	be	only	a	lesson.
Once	 you	 have	 learned	 the	 art	 of	 opening,	 the	 art	 of	 being	 silent,	 it	 does	 not
matter	whether	I	am	present	or	not.	If	you	have	really	learned	it,	it	will	happen
anywhere.	It	may	be	a	little	difficult	in	the	beginning,	but	soon	you	will	get	the
knack	of	it.
It	 is	almost	 like	swimming.	The	 teacher	who	 teaches	swimming	 just	gives	you
courage	and	trust,	and	is	there	so	that	nothing	goes	wrong.	Just	in	three	or	four
days'	 time,	one	hour	each	day,	you	start	swimming.	And	 the	moment	you	start
swimming	you	are	surprised	--	why	didn't	you	start	it	from	the	very	beginning?
There	is	nothing	to	it.	 It's	 just	 that	 in	the	beginning	you	were	not	moving	your
arms	artfully,	 it	was	haphazard.	 Just	 in	 three	or	 four	days	you	have	 learned	 to
move	 your	 arms	 more	 smoothly,	 more	 harmoniously;	 now	 the	 teacher	 is	 not
needed.	Now	you	can	go	anywhere,	 for	any	distance,	because	 the	depth	of	 the
bottom	does	not	matter;	you	are	swimming	on	the	surface.	The	depth	can	be	one
thousand	feet,	ten	thousand	feet,	five	miles	deep;	it	does	not	matter,	because	you
are	always	swimming	on	the	surface.
And	once	you	have	 learned...	 it	 has	 not	 been	heard	of	 in	 the	whole	 history	 of
humanity	that	anybody	who	has	learned	swimming	has	forgotten	it.	You	may	not
swim	for	fifty	years,	and	when	again	somebody	pushes	you	into	the	swimming
pool,	you	start	swimming.	You	cannot	say,	"For	fifty	years	I	have	not	practiced"
--	it	is	not	a	question	of	practice	at	all.	It	is	a	knack:	once	you	have	known	it,	you
have	known	it;	there	is	no	way	not	to	know	it	anymore.
Meditation	is	also	a	knack.
You	are	not	to	become	attached	to	the	presence	of	the	master,	because	that	will
be	 learning	 something	wrong.	You	have	 to	 learn	how	you	 are	 opening.	Forget
about	 the	master;	 that	 is	 his	 business,	 to	be	present	 or	 not	 to	be	present.	Your
business	is	to	see	how	you	are	opening,	what	happens	in	your	opening,	and	then
try	on	your	own,	when	you	are	alone	to	see	whether	it	can	happen	or	not.	It	 is
bound	to	happen.
Maybe	 in	 the	 beginning	 you	 will	 feel	 that	 it	 is	 a	 little	 difficult;	 a	 certain
attachment	 grows,	 unconsciously.	 But	 you	 cannot	 say	 that	 the	 teacher	 has	 to
follow	 you	 everywhere,	 wherever	 you	 go	 swimming.	 That	 will	 not	 do.	 Then
each	swimmer	will	need	one	 teacher;	 it	will	be	 too	much.	Each	meditator	will
need	one	master	with	him;	it	will	be	too	costly,	and	there	is	no	need	at	all.	You
just	 have	 to	 see	what	 is	 happening	 in	 you,	 and	 let	 the	 same	 happen	when	 the
master	is	not	present.
Or,	you	can	visualize.	He	will	be	present	somewhere,	a	few	miles	away.	Here,	it
is	a	few	feet	away.	It	is	only	a	question	of	visualizing	--	just	visualize	that	your
master	is	a	few	feet	away....
Space	makes	no	difference,	but	you	have	 to	 learn	what	happens	 in	you	so	 that
you	 can	 repeat	 it	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 the	 master.	 Otherwise,	 one	 can	 become
attached	to	things	which	were	to	help	you...	but	now	they	will	hinder	you.	The
presence	 of	 the	 master	 was	 to	 help	 you;	 now	 it	 has	 become	 a	 hindrance	 --
because	the	master	is	not	there,	so	you	cannot	meditate.
Remember:	no	attachment	 should	grow,	no	clinging	 should	grow.	They	are	 all
against	 your	 independence,	 your	 freedom,	 your	 individuality.	And	whatever	 is
happening	here	can	happen	anywhere;	it	just	needs	a	little	understanding	of	how
it	happens	here.
Just	try.	Even	if	you	fail	a	few	times,	don't	be	worried.	It	is	a	knack	which	will
come	to	you.
And	 once	 it	 happens	 without	 any	 support	 from	 outside	 --	 even	 the	 smallest
support,	such	as	the	presence	of	the	master	--	you	will	feel	a	great	joy,	because	a
great	freedom	has	happened.
Now	there	are	no	barriers	for	you.	Wherever	you	are	you	can	be	in	meditation,
you	 can	 be	 in	 silence,	 you	 can	 be	 peaceful.	Now	you	 can	 carry	 your	 paradise
within	you.
And	unless	that	happens,	a	disciple	has	not	matured.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	The	Master	is	a	mirror
11	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610115
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH09
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
129
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 REDUCES	 ME	 TO	 A	 HYSTERICAL,	 INCOHERENT
CHILD	IN
YOUR	PRESENCE	OR	EVEN	AT	THE	THOUGHT	OF	BEING	IN	YOUR
PRESENCE?
IS	 IT	 SOMETHING	 INHERENT	 IN	 THE	 MASTER-DISCIPLE
RELATIONSHIP,	OR
MY	PSYCHOLOGICAL	IMMATURITY,	OR	BOTH?
Pankaja,	humanity	is	not	yet	mature.	We	have	the	faces	of	human	beings,	but	our
minds	are	lagging	far	behind.
In	 the	 ordinary	world,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	manage	 your	mask,	 your	 pretension,	 your
hypocrisy.
But	when	 you	 come	 to	 a	master...	 the	 very	 urge	 to	 come	 to	 a	master	 shows	 a
tremendous	desire	in	you	to	know	your	original	face,	to	know	yourself.
The	face	that	you	are	carrying	now	is	not	your	original	face,	it	is	not	you.
I	am	saying	you	are	not	you,	and	you	know	it.
The	master	 is	 only	 a	mirror.	You	 cannot	 deceive	 the	mirror,	 it	 simply	 reflects
your	reality.
There	 is	 an	 ancient	 parable	 of	 a	 very	 ugly	woman	who	was	 very	 antagonistic
towards	mirrors	because	she	thought,	just	as	you	all	think,	that	it	was	the	mirror
that	created	the	ugliness	in	her	--	because	when	the	mirror	was	not	there,	she	was
no	longer	ugly.	She	was	so	madly	against	mirrors	that	whenever	she	would	see	a
mirror,	she	would	immediately	break	it.
The	parable	is	signficant.	That's	what	we	are	all	doing	in	our	lives	in	many	ways.
Whatsoever	 reflects	 our	 reality	 we	 want	 to	 escape	 from	 because	 it	 is	 not
gratifying.
Pankaja,	here	in	my	presence,	or	even	when	you	think	of	me,	if	you	feel	yourself
as	immature,	a	retarded	child,	don't	try	to	explain	it	away	in	any	way.	This	is	the
truth.	And	this	is	not	only	your	truth;	this	is	the	truth	of	the	whole	of	humanity.
You	are	just	fortunate	that	you	have	become	aware	of	it.
You	have	come	across	a	mirror.
Breaking	the	mirror	is	not	going	to	help.
Poisoning	Socrates	has	not	helped	the	Greeks	--	he	was	a	mirror.
Crucifying	Jesus	has	not	helped	the	Jews	--	he	was	a	mirror.
Killing	al-Hillaj	Mansoor	has	not	helped	the	Mohammedans	--	he	was	a	mirror.
On	the	contrary,	they	have	remained	retarded,	childish,	because	there	is	no	one
to	show	them	where	they	are,	who	they	are.	They	are	in	a	crowd	of	similar	kinds
of	retarded	children.
After	the	first	world	war,	for	the	first	time	in	Germany	they	tried	to	figure	out	the
average	mental	age	of	a	soldier.	Thousands	of	soldiers	went	through	the	process,
through	many	 experiments,	 and	 the	 result	 was	 shocking	 and	 shattering	 to	 the
whole	of	human	pride.	The	result	was	that	the	average	mental	age	of	the	soldiers
was	only	fourteen	years.
And	the	average	age	of	those	who	are	not	soldiers	cannot	be	much	more.	A	man
may	be	seventy	years	old	--	his	body	has	aged,	but	his	mind	has	remained	at	the
age	of	fourteen.
And	once	in	a	while	you	can	see	it	in	yourself;	you	can	see	it	in	others	in	certain
situations.
Every	woman	knows	moments	when	she	starts	 throwing	 tantrums;	 they	cannot
be	coming	out	of	maturity.
Every	 man	 knows	 that	 whenever	 he	 feels	 nervous,	 he	 starts	 smoking.	 Now,
smoking	cannot	help	in	any	way,	but	it	diverts	your	mind	from	nervousness.
Only	nervous	people	smoke.	And	you	can	watch...	some	days	you	smoke	more,
some	days	you	smoke	less.	The	days	you	smoke	more	are	the	days	when	you	are
very	 tense,	 worried,	 very	 much	 in	 anguish.	 The	 world	 is	 too	 much.	 You	 are
feeling	 so	nervous	 that	you	want	 to	divert	your	mind	 to	 something,	 something
uncomplicated,	 something	 not	 involving	 anybody	 else	 --	 because	 that	 could
bring	more	complications.
The	 cigarette	 is	 very	 innocent	 --	 and	 very	 soothing,	 because	 it	 has	 the	 same
chemical	as	tea	has,	as	coffee	has,	which	gives	a	certain	soothing	effect	for	the
moment.
And	 more	 specifically,	 smoking	 has	 a	 resemblance	 to...	 a	 deep-rooted
remembrance	of	drinking	milk	at	your	mother's	breast.	The	breast	has	almost	the
same	warmth,	the	milk	is	warm	just	as	the	smoke	from	your	cigarette	or	cigar	is
warm.	The	cigarette	or	cigar	have	 the	 same	 feel	on	your	 lips	as	 the	nipples	of
your	mother,	and	the	smoke	is	flowing	inside	you	just	like	the	milk	through	the
nipple.	 You	 have	 fallen	 back	 into	 childhood	 --	 those	 golden	 days	 when	 there
were	no	anxieties,	no	problems,	no	worries.	So	whenever	you	feel	nervous,	you
start	looking	for	your	cigarette.
When	you	are	not	nervous	--	when	you	are	feeling	happy	and	blissful	and	joyous
--	you	completely	forget	all	about	cigarettes.
All	smokers	are	retarded	people,	so	the	retarded	people	are	in	the	majority	in	the
world.
And	 there	 are	 other	 substitutes.	You	may	 not	 be	 smoking	 and	 you	may	 think,
"I'm	not	retarded	because	I	use	chewing	gum."	And	it	is	worse	than	cigarettes	--
chewing	gum!
You	 are	 not	 only	 retarded,	 you	 are	 stupid,	 engaged	 in	 an	 activity	 which	 is
absolutely	 useless,	 uncreative,	 unnecessarily	 tiring	your	mouth	 and	your	 teeth.
But	it	proves	Charles	Darwin	was	right.
Although	scientists	have	tried	in	many	ways	to	disprove	the	theory	of	evolution
proposed	by	Charles	Darwin,	the	theory	has	such	psychological	significance	that
even	if	it	is	proved	wrong,	its	significance	cannot	be	destroyed.
Just	watch	a	monkey.	He	cannot	sit	in	one	posture,	he	cannot	sit	on	one	branch.
He	is	continuously	chewing	this	or	that,	eating	this	or	that	--	the	whole	day.	From
the	 time	he	wakes	up	 in	 the	morning	 till	he	goes	back	 to	 sleep,	he	 is	 chewing
something.
Perhaps	man	is	not	yet	completely	free	from	his	animal	heritage	--	although	he
walks	on	two	legs,	that	does	not	make	much	difference.
As	far	as	I	know,	monkeys	don't	 think	that	you	have	evolved,	developed,	gone
forward	more	than	them.	They	laugh	at	the	very	idea.
They	think	you	have	fallen	from	the	trees.	And	they	have	substantial	reasoning
behind	it.
You	are	no	longer	as	strong	as	a	monkey;	you	cannot	live	in	trees,	you	cannot	go
on	jumping	from	one	tree	to	another	tree	for	miles.	You	have	lost	the	beauty	of
the	body	that	the	monkey	has.	Just	because	you	started	walking	on	two	legs....
Monkeys	 think,	 "Poor	 fellows...	 those	 few	monkeys	can't	make	 it	 living	 in	 the
trees"	--
because	it	is	a	very	challenging	life,	risky,	full	of	danger	--	"those	cowards	have
got	down	onto	the	earth	and	started	walking	on	two	legs!	Not	only	that,	to	hide
their	cowardice,	they	are	proposing	a	theory	of	evolution!"
No	monkey	agrees	with	the	theory	of	evolution.
Pankaja,	if	in	my	presence	you	feel	a	childishness	in	yourself,	a	mind	which	has
not	become	mature,	this	awareness	has	to	be	welcomed.
Once	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 retarded	 somewhere,	 that	 something	 is
blocking	your	 consciousness,	 then	 those	blocks	can	be	 removed.	 In	 fact,	 to	be
aware	that	there	are	some	blocks...	the	very	awareness	removes	them.
There	are	things	which	one	has	just	 to	be	aware	of.	The	very	awareness	brings
the	transformation;	it	is	not	that	after	being	aware	you	have	to	do	something	to
make	the	change.
Seeing	 your	 mind	 as	 childish,	 you	 can	 also	 see	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 mind	 --
otherwise,	who	 is	 seeing	 the	mind	as	childish?	There	 is	 something	beyond	 the
mind	--	the	watcher	on	the	hills.
You	are	only	looking	at	the	mind.
You	have	completely	forgotten	who	is	looking	at	it.
Watch	the	mind,	but	don't	forget	the	watcher	--	because	your	reality	is	centered
in	 the	watcher,	 not	 in	 the	mind.	And	 the	watcher	 is	 always	 a	 fully	 grown-up,
mature,	centered	consciousness.	It	needs	no	growth.
And	once	you	become	aware	that	the	mind	is	only	an	instrument	in	the	hands	of
your	witnessing	soul,	then	there	is	no	problem;	the	mind	can	be	used	in	the	right
way.	Now	the	master	is	awake,	and	the	servant	can	be	ordered	to	do	whatever	is
needed.
Ordinarily	the	master	is	asleep.	We	have	forgotten	the	watcher,	and	the	servant
has	 become	 the	master.	And	 the	 servant	 is	 a	 servant	 --	 it	 is	 certainly	 not	 very
intelligent.
You	have	 to	 be	 reminded	 of	 a	 basic	 fact:	 intelligence	 belongs	 to	 the	watching
consciousness;	memory	belongs	to	the	mind.
Memory	is	one	thing	--	memory	is	not	intelligence.	But	the	whole	of	humanity
has	 been	 deceived	 for	 centuries	 and	 told	 indirectly	 that	 the	 memory	 is
intelligence.	Your	schools,	your	colleges,	your	universities	are	not	trying	to	find
your	intelligence;	they	are	trying	to	find	out	who	is	capable	of	memorizing	more.
And	 now	 we	 know	 perfectly	 well	 that	 memory	 is	 a	 mechanical	 thing.	 A
computer	can	have	memory,	but	a	computer	cannot	have	intelligence.
And	a	computer	can	have	a	better	memory	than	you	have.	The	day	is	not	far	off
when	 people	 will	 be	 carrying	 small	 computers	 in	 their	 pockets	 rather	 than
unnecessarily	 going	 through	 years	 of	 studying	 history	 and	 geography	 and
chemistry	and	physics.	All	that	can	be	contained	in	a	small	computer	which	you
can	carry	in	your	pocket,	and	whatever	information	you	want,	the	computer	can
supply	it	immediately	--	and	it	is	going	to	be	absolutely	correct.
Man's	memory	 is	 not	 so	 reliable.	 It	 can	 forget,	 it	 can	get	mixed	up,	 it	 can	get
blocked.
Sometimes	 you	 say	 that	 "I	 remember	 it,	 it	 is	 just	 on	 the	 tip	 of	 my	 tongue."
Strange,	it	is	on	the	tip	of	your	tongue,	then	why	don't	you	speak?
But	you	say	it	is	not	coming,	"It	is	on	the	tip	of	my	tongue...	I	know	that	I	know,
and	 it	 is	 not	very	 far	 --	 it	 is	 very	 close."	But	 still	 some	block,	 some	very	 thin
block	--	it	may	be	just	a	curtain	--	is	not	allowing	it	to	surface.
And	the	more	you	try,	the	more	tense	you	become,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of
remembering	it.	Finally,	you	forget	all	about	it,	you	start	doing	something	else	--
preparing	a	cup	of	tea	or	digging	a	hole	in	the	garden	--	and	suddenly	it	is	there
because	you	were	relaxed,	you	had	forgotten	all	about	it,	there	was	no	tension.	It
surfaced.
A	 tense	 mind	 becomes	 narrow.	 A	 relaxed	 mind	 becomes	 wide	 --	 many	 more
memories	can	pass	 through	it.	A	tense	mind	becomes	so	narrow	that	only	very
few	memories	can	pass	through	it.
But	 for	 thousands	of	years	a	misunderstanding	has	continued,	 and	 it	 continues
still,	as	if	memory	is	intelligence.	It	is	not.
You	will	find	people	who	have	a	great	memory	but	no	intelligence,	and	you	can
also	find	people	who	have	great	intelligence	and	no	memory	at	all.
It	 is	 said	 about	 Thomas	 Alva	 Edison...	 perhaps	 he	 is	 the	 only	 man	 who	 is
credited	with	at	least	one	thousand	inventions,	but	his	memory	was	nil.
In	 the	 first	 world	 war	 he	 was	 standing	 in	 a	 queue	 to	 receive	 his	 ration	 card.
Ration	 cards	 had	 come	 into	 existence	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 By	 and	 by	 the	 queue
became	 smaller	 and	 smaller,	 and	 finally	 he	 came	 to	 the	 front	 and	 the	 clerk
shouted,	"Thomas	Alva	Edison!"	--
he	 looked	 here	 and	 there,	 because	 he	 had	 forgotten	 his	 name.	 Because	 it	 was
long,	long	ago...	when	his	father	and	mother	were	alive,	they	used	to	call	him	by
name.	Now	he	was	 so	well	 known,	 such	 a	 great	 scientist,	 a	 great	 professor	 --
nobody	used	his	name,	people	called	him	`Professor'.	He	himself	had	forgotten.
Fortunately,	one	man	in	the	queue	behind	him	recognized	that	this	fellow	looked
like	Thomas	Alva	Edison,	who	was	standing	in	front	and	looking	here	and	there.
And	the	man	said,	"What	is	your	name?"
Edison	said,	"My	God,	I	will	have	to	go	home	and	ask	my	wife."
The	man	said,	"As	far	as	I	know,	you	are	Thomas	Alva	Edison."
Edison	said,	"It	seems	I	have	heard	this	name	somewhere	before.	Perhaps	I	am.
If	nobody	else	claims	it,	then	that	card	is	mine."
He	 was	 such	 a	 great	 intelligence.	 You	 cannot	 find	many	more	 people	 of	 that
intelligence.
But,	going	for	a	lecture	tour,	before	getting	into	the	car,	he	said	goodbye	to	his
wife	and	kissed	her	and	waved	at	her	maidservant.	And	the	wife	said,	"You	are
absolutely	wrong;	I	am	your	maidservant	and	she	is	your	wife!"
He	 said,	 "The	whole	 day	 I	 am	 so	 engaged	 in	 the	 experiments	 --	 I	 only	 come
home	 at	 night.	 It	 is	 a	 long	 time	 since	 I	 have	 seen	my	wife	 in	 the	 sunlight,	 so
please	forgive	me	--
whichever	 is	my	wife,	 I	kiss	her,	 and	whichever	 is	my	maidservant,	 I	wave	 to
her.	But	let	me	go,	because	the	train	is	standing	at	the	platform."
Absolutely	no	memory.
His	wife	used	to	keep	notes	of	his	thoughts...	because	sometimes	he	would	come
to	 a	 thought,	 but	 it	 was	 incomplete.	 And	 before	 he	 forgot	 it,	 he	 would	 tell
somebody,	 whoever	 was	 close	 by,	 "Please	 write	 it	 down	 and	 keep	 it	 for	 me.
Whenever	I	need	it,	just	remind	me	--	because	half	is	missing.	It	will	come,	but
my	fear	is	that	when	the	other	half	comes,	this	half	may	be	lost."
Somebody	 suggested,	 "You	 are	 behaving	 strangely.	 Why	 don't	 you	 keep	 a
notebook?"
He	said,	"That	 is	 the	 trouble.	 I	have	been	keeping	notebooks,	but	 then	I	go	on
forgetting	where	I	have	put	them.	Then	the	notebook	becomes	the	problem!	This
is	 far	better.	At	 least	 somebody	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	half	 thought	 and	he	will
remind	me:	`This	is	half	your	thought.	If	the	other	half	has	come	to	your	mind,
take	this	and	relieve	me	of	the	burden.'"
In	India	--	as	in	Arabia,	China,	Greece,	Rome,	in	all	old	countries	--	all	the	old
languages	 depend	 on	 memory,	 not	 on	 intelligence.	 You	 can	 become	 a	 great
Sanskrit	scholar	without	a	bit	of	intelligence	--	no	need	for	intelligence,	just	your
memory	 has	 to	 be	 perfect.	 Just	 like	 a	 parrot...	 the	 parrot	 does	 not	 understand
what	 he	 is	 saying,	 but	 he	 can	 say	 it	 absolutely	 correctly,	 with	 the	 right
pronunciation.	You	can	teach	him	whatever	you	want.
All	old	languages	depend	on	memory.
And	 the	 whole	 educational	 system	 of	 the	 world	 depends	 on	 memory.	 In	 the
examinations,	 they	 don't	 ask	 the	 student	 something	 that	 will	 show	 his
intelligence	but	something	that	will	show	his	memory,	how	much	he	remembers
from	textbooks.	This	is	one	of	the	reasons	for	your	retarded	mind.	You	have	used
the	memory	as	if	it	were	your	intelligence
--	 a	 tremendously	 grave	 misunderstanding.	 Because	 you	 know	 and	 remember
and	you	can	quote	scriptures,	you	start	thinking	that	you	are	grown	up,	you	are
mature,	that	you	are	knowledgeable,	you	are	wise.
This	is	the	problem,	Pankaja,	that	you	are	feeling.
I	am	not	a	man	of	memory.	And	my	effort	here	is	to	provoke	a	challenge	in	you
so	that	you	start	moving	towards	your	intelligence.
It	is	of	no	use	how	much	you	remember.
What	is	significant	is	how	much	you	have	experienced	yourself.
And	for	experiencing	the	inner	world,	you	need	great	intelligence	--	memory	is
of	 no	 help.	 Yes,	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 a	 scholar,	 a	 professor,	 a	 pundit,	 you	 can
memorize	scriptures	and	you	can	have	a	great	pride	that	you	know	so	much.	And
other	 people	 will	 also	 think	 that	 you	 know	 so	 much,	 and	 deep	 down	 your
memory	is	nothing	but	ignorance.
In	front	of	me,	you	cannot	hide	your	ignorance.
In	every	possible	way,	I	try	to	bring	your	ignorance	in	front	of	you	because	the
sooner	you	get	hold	of	your	ignorance,	the	sooner	you	can	get	rid	of	it.	And	to
know	 is	 such	 a	 beautiful	 experience	 that	 the	 borrowed	 knowledge,	 in
comparison,	is	just	idiotic.
I	have	heard	about	the	archbishop	of	Japan.	He	wanted	to	convert	a	Zen	master
to	Christianity.	Not	knowing,	not	understanding	anything	of	the	inner	world,	he
went	to	the	master.	He	was	received	with	great	love	and	respect.
He	opened	the	BIBLE	he	carried	with	him	and	started	reading	the	Sermon	on	the
Mount.
He	wanted	to	impress	upon	the	Zen	master	that..."We	follow	this	man.	What	do
you	think	about	these	words,	about	this	man?"
He	had	read	only	two	sentences	and	the	Zen	master	said,	"That	will	do.	You	are
following	a	good	man,	but	he	was	following	other	good	men.	Neither	you	know
nor	does	he	know.	Just	go	home."
He	was	very	much	shocked.	He	said,	"You	should	at	least	let	me	finish	the	whole
thing."
He	said,	"No	nonsense	here.	If	you	know	something,	you	say	it.	Close	the	book!
--
because	we	are	not	believers	 in	books.	You	are	carrying	 the	very	 truth	 in	your
being,	and	you	are	 searching	 in	dead	books.	Go	home	and	 look	within.	 If	you
have	found	something	inside,	then	come.	If	you	think	these	lines	that	you	have
repeated	to	me	are	from	Jesus	Christ,	you	are	wrong."
Jesus	Christ	was	simply	repeating	 the	Old	Testament.	He	was	 trying	his	whole
life	 to	 convince	people	 that	 "I	 am	 the	 last	prophet	of	 the	 Jews."	He	had	never
heard	the	word
`Christian',	he	had	never	heard	the	word	`Christ'.	He	was	born	a	Jew,	he	lived	a
Jew,	he	died	a	Jew.	And	his	whole	effort	was	to	convince	the	Jews	that	"I	am	the
awaited	prophet,	the	savior	which	Moses	has	promised.	I	have	come."
The	Jews	could	have	forgiven	him...	Jews	are	not	bad	people.	And	Jews	are	not
violent	people	either.	Nobody	who	is	as	intelligent	as	the	Jews	are	can	be	violent.
Forty	 percent	 of	Nobel	 prizes	 go	 to	 Jews;	 it	 is	 simply	out	 of	 all	 proportion	 to
their	population.	Almost	half	the	Nobel	prizes	go	to	Jews,	and	the	other	half	to
the	rest	of	the	world.
Such	 intelligent	 people	 would	 not	 have	 crucified	 Jesus	 if	 he	 was	 saying
something	which	was	 of	 his	 own	 experience.	But	 he	was	 saying	 things	which
were	 not	 his	 experience	 --	 all	 borrowed.	And	 yet	 he	was	 pretending	 that	 they
were	his.	Jews	could	not	forgive	that,	that	dishonesty.
Otherwise,	Jesus	was	not	creating	any	trouble	for	anybody.	He	was	a	little	bit	of
a	nuisance.	Just	like	the	Witnesses	of	Jehovah	or	the	Hare	Krishna	people;	they
are	a	little	bit	of	a	nuisance.	If	they	catch	hold	of	you	they	will	not	listen	to	you
at	all	and	they	will	go	on	giving	you	all	kinds	of	wisdom,	advice	--	and	you	are
not	interested;	you	are	going	for	some	other	work,	you	want	to	be	left	alone.	But
they	are	determined	to	save	you.
Whether	you	want	to	be	saved	or	not	does	not	matter	--	you	have	to	be	saved.
It	happened	that	I	was	sitting	near	the	Ganges	in	Allahabad,	and	it	was	just	as	the
sun	was	setting.	A	man	started	shouting	from	the	water,	"Save	me!	Save	me!"
I	am	not	interested	in	saving	anybody.	So	I	looked	all	around...	 if	somebody	is
interested	in	saving	him,	let	him	have	the	first	chance.	But	there	was	nobody,	so
finally	I	had	to	jump.
And	with	difficulty...	he	was	a	heavy	man,	fat.	The	fattest	men	in	India	you	will
find	 in	 Allahabad	 and	 Varanasi	 --	 the	 brahmins,	 the	 Hindu	 priests,	 who	 do
nothing	except	eat.
Somehow	I	pulled	him	out.	And	he	started	being	angry	--	"Why	did	you	pull	me
out?"
I	said,	"This	is	something!	You	were	asking	for	help,	you	were	shouting,	`Save
me!'"
He	 said,	 "It	 was	 because	 I	 was	 becoming	 afraid	 of	 death.	 But	 in	 fact	 I	 was
committing	suicide."
I	said,	"I	am	sorry,	I	had	no	idea	that	you	were	committing	suicide."
I	pushed	the	man	back!	And	he	started	shouting	again,	"Help!"
I	 said,	 "Now	wait	 for	 somebody	 else	 to	 come.	 I	 will	 sit	 here	 and	 watch	 you
commit	suicide."
He	said,	"What	kind	of	man	are	you?	I	am	dying!"
I	said,	"Die!	That	is	your	business!"
But	there	are	people	who	are	bent	upon	saving	you.
The	Zen	master	said	to	the	archbishop,	"Jesus	was	repeating	old	prophets.	You
are	repeating	Jesus.	Repetition	is	not	going	to	help	anybody.	You	need	your	own
experience	-
-	that	is	the	only	deliverance,	the	only	liberation."
Pankaja,	it	is	good	that	you	are	understanding	that	your	mind	starts	behaving	like
a	 child,	 immature.	 Remember	 also	 who	 is	 watching	 the	 child,	 the	 immature
mind,	and	be	with	 the	watcher.	Pull	out	all	your	attachments	 from	 the	mind	 --
because	 the	mind	 is	 only	 a	mechanism	 --	 and	 the	mind	will	 start	 functioning
perfectly	well.	Once	your	watcher	 is	 alert,	 your	 intelligence	 starts	growing	 for
the	first	time.
Mind's	work	 is	memory,	which	 the	mind	 can	 do	 very	well.	 But	 the	mind	 has
been	 burdened	 by	 the	 society	 with	 intelligence,	 which	 is	 not	 its	 work.	 It	 has
crippled	 its	memory.	 It	has	not	made	you	more	 intelligent,	 it	 has	 simply	made
your	memory	erroneous,	fallible.
Always	 remember:	 your	 eyes	 are	 for	 seeing,	 don't	 try	 to	 listen	with	 the	 eyes.
Your	ears	are	for	listening,	don't	try	to	see	with	the	ears.	Otherwise,	you	will	get
into	an	insane	state.	While	your	eyes	are	perfectly	alright,	your	ears	are	perfectly
alright,	you	are	trying	to	do	something	with	a	mechanism	that	is	not	meant	to	do
it.
If	your	watcher	is	clear,	then	the	body	does	its	own	functions,	the	mind	does	its
own	 functions,	 the	 heart	 does	 its	 own	 functions.	 Nobody	 interferes	 in	 each
others'	work.
And	life	becomes	a	harmony,	an	orchestra.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	DO	I	ALWAYS	FEEL	SO	MISERABLE?	HAVE	I	EVER	REALLY	LET
YOU
IN?	THE	MOMENT	I	SIT	IN	FRONT	OF	YOU,	ALL	IS	GONE.	WHAT	IS
HAPPENING?	CAN'T	YOU	TAKE	IT	ALL	AWAY?
The	answer	 is	 in	your	question.	You	don't	want	 to	 take	 responsibility	 for	your
own	being,	somebody	else	should	do	it.
And	that's	the	sole	cause	of	misery.
There	is	no	way	that	anybody	else	can	take	away	your	misery.	There	is	no	way
that	anybody	else	can	make	you	blissful.	But	if	you	become	aware	that	you	are
responsible	 for	 whether	 you	 are	 miserable	 or	 blissful....	 Nobody	 else	 can	 do
anything.	Your	misery	is	your	doing;	your	bliss	will	also	be	your	doing.
But	it	is	hard	to	accept	--	misery	is	my	doing?
Everybody	feels	 that	others	are	 responsible	 for	his	misery.	The	husband	 thinks
the	wife	is	responsible	for	his	misery,	the	wife	thinks	the	husband	is	responsible
for	her	misery,	the	children	think	the	parents	are	responsible	for	their	misery,	the
parents	think	the	children	are	responsible	for	their	misery.	It	has	become	such	a
complexity.	And	whenever	 somebody	 else	 is	 responsible	 for	 your	misery,	 you
are	not	aware	that	by	giving	the	responsibility	you	are	losing	your	freedom.
Responsibility	and	freedom	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
And	because	you	think	others	are	responsible	for	your	misery....	That's	why	there
are	charlatans,	so-called	saviors,	messengers	of	God,	prophets	who	go	on	telling
you,	"You	have	not	to	do	anything,	just	follow	me.	Believe	in	me	and	I	will	save
you.	I	am	your	shepherd,	you	are	my	sheep."
Strange,	 that	not	 a	 single	person	 stood	up	against	people	 like	 Jesus	Christ	 and
said,	"This	is	utterly	insulting	to	say	that	you	are	the	shepherd	and	we	are	sheep,
and	you	are	the	savior	and	we	are	just	dependent	on	your	compassion,	that	our
whole	religion	is	just	to	believe	in	you."	But	because	we	have	been	throwing	the
responsibility	for	our	misery	on	others,	we	have	accepted	the	corollary	that	bliss
will	also	come	from	others.
Naturally,	if	misery	comes	from	others,	then	bliss	has	to	come	from	others.	But
then	what	 are	 you	 doing?	You	 are	 neither	 responsible	 for	misery	 nor	 are	 you
responsible	for	bliss	--
then	what	is	your	function?	What	is	your	purpose?	--	just	to	be	a	target	for	a	few
people	to	make	you	miserable	and	for	others	to	help	you	and	save	you	and	make
you	blissful?
Are	you	just	a	puppet?
All	 the	 strings	 are	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 others.	 You	 are	 not	 respectful	 of	 your
humanity;	 you	 do	 not	 respect	 yourself.	You	don't	 have	 any	 love	 for	 your	 own
being,	for	your	own	freedom.
If	you	are	respectful	of	your	life,	you	will	refuse	all	the	saviors.	You	will	say	to
all	the	saviors,	"Get	lost!	Just	save	yourself,	that's	enough.	It	is	our	life	and	we
have	 to	 live	 it.	 If	we	 do	 something	wrong,	we	will	 suffer	 the	misery;	we	will
accept	the	consequences	of	our	wrong	action	without	any	complaint."
Perhaps	that	is	the	way	one	learns:	by	falling,	one	gets	up	again;	by	going	astray,
one	 comes	 back	 again.	 You	 commit	 a	 mistake.	 But	 each	 mistake	 makes	 you
more	intelligent;	you	will	not	commit	the	same	mistake	again.	If	you	commit	the
same	mistake	 again,	 that	means	 you	 are	 not	 learning.	You	 are	 not	 using	 your
intelligence,	you	are	behaving	like	a	robot.
My	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 give	 back	 to	 every	 human	 being	 the	 self-respect	 that
belongs	to	him
--	which	he	has	given	to	just	anybody.
And	the	whole	stupidity	starts	because	you	are	not	ready	to	accept	that,	for	your
misery,	you	are	responsible.
Just	think:	you	cannot	find	a	single	misery	for	which	you	are	not	responsible.	It
may	be	jealousy,	it	may	be	anger,	it	may	be	greed	--	but	something	in	you	must
be	the	reason	that	is	creating	the	misery.
And	 have	 you	 seen	 anybody	 in	 the	world	 ever	making	 anybody	 else	 blissful?
That	too	depends	on	you,	on	your	silence,	your	love,	your	peace,	your	trust.	And
the	miracle	happens	--	nobody	does	it.
In	Tibet,	 there	 is	a	beautiful	story	about	Marpa.	 It	may	not	be	factual,	but	 it	 is
tremendously	significant.
I	don't	care	much	about	facts.	My	emphasis	is	on	the	significance	and	the	truth,
which	is	a	totally	different	thing.
Marpa	 heard	 about	 a	master.	He	was	 searching	 and	 he	went	 to	 the	master,	 he
surrendered	to	the	master,	he	trusted	totally.	And	he	asked	the	master,	"What	am
I	supposed	to	do	now?"
The	master	said,	"Once	you	have	surrendered	to	me,	you	are	not	supposed	to	do
anything.
Just	believe	 in	me.	My	name	 is	 the	only	secret	mantra	 for	you.	Whenever	you
are	in	difficulty,	just	remember	my	name	and	everything	will	be	all	right."
Marpa	 touched	 his	 feet.	 And	 he	 tried	 it	 immediately	 --	 he	was	 such	 a	 simple
man.	He	walked	on	the	river.	Other	disciples	who	had	been	with	the	master	for
years	could	not	believe	it	--	he	was	walking	on	the	water!
They	reported	to	the	master	that,	"That	man,	you	have	not	understood	him.	He	is
no	ordinary	man,	he	is	walking	on	water!"
The	master	said,	"What?"
They	 all	 ran	 towards	 the	 river	 and	Marpa	 was	 walking	 on	 the	 water,	 singing
songs,	 dancing.	 When	 he	 came	 to	 the	 shore,	 the	 master	 asked,	 "What	 is	 the
secret?"
He	said,	"What	is	the	secret?	It	is	the	same	secret	that	you	have	given	to	me	--
your	name.
I	remembered	you.	I	said,	`Master,	allow	me	to	walk	on	water'	and	it	happened."
The	master	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 his	 name....	 He	 himself	 could	 not	 walk	 on
water.	But	perhaps...	he	had	never	tried.
But	it	would	be	better	to	check	a	few	more	things	before	he	tries.	So	he	said	to
Marpa,
"Can	you	jump	from	that	hill?"
Marpa	said,	"Whatever	you	say."	He	went	up	on	the	hill	and	jumped,	and	they
were	all	standing	in	the	valley	waiting	--	just	pieces	of	Marpa	will	be	there!	Even
if	they	can	find	pieces	of	him,	that	will	be	enough	--	the	hill	was	very	high.
But	Marpa	came	down	smiling,	sitting	in	a	lotus	posture.	He	came	just	under	a
tree	in	the	valley,	and	sat	down.	They	all	surrounded	him.	They	looked	at	him	--
not	even	a	scratch.
The	master	said,	"This	is	something.	You	used	my	name?"
He	said,	"It	was	your	name."
The	master	said,	"This	is	enough,	now	I	am	going	to	try,"	and	the	first	step	in	the
water,	he	sank.
Marpa	could	not	believe	it	when	he	sank.	His	disciples	jumped	in	and	somehow
pulled	 him	 out.	 He	 was	 half	 dead.	 The	 water	 was	 taken	 out	 of	 his	 lungs...
somehow	he	survived.
And	Marpa	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
The	master	said,	"You	just	forgive	me.	I	am	no	master,	I	am	just	a	pretender."
But	Marpa	said,	"If	you	are	a	pretender,	then	how	did	your	name	work?"
The	pretender	said,	"My	name	has	not	worked.	It	is	your	trust.	It	does	not	matter
who	you	trust	--	 it	 is	 the	trust,	 the	love,	 the	totality	of	 it.	I	don't	 trust	myself.	I
don't	trust	anybody.	I	cheat	everybody	--	how	can	I	trust?	And	I	am	always	afraid
to	be	cheated	by	others,	because	I	am	cheating	others.	Trust	is	impossible	for	me.
You	 are	 an	 innocent	man,	 you	 trusted	me.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 your	 trust	 that	 the
miracles	have	happened."
Whether	the	story	is	true	or	not	does	not	matter.
One	thing	is	certain,	that	your	misery	is	caused	by	your	mistakes	and	your	bliss
is	caused	by	your	trust,	by	your	love.
Your	bondage	is	your	creation	and	your	freedom	is	your	declaration.
You	are	asking	me,	"Why	am	I	miserable?"
You	are	miserable	because	you	have	not	accepted	 the	 responsibility	 for	 it.	 Just
see	what	your	misery	is,	find	out	the	cause	--	and	you	will	find	the	cause	within
yourself.	Remove	the	cause,	and	the	misery	will	disappear.
But	people	don't	want	to	remove	the	cause,	they	want	to	remove	the	misery.	That
is	impossible,	that	is	absolutely	unscientific.
And	then	you	ask	me	to	save	you,	to	help	you.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 you	 to	 become	 a	 beggar.	My	 people	 are	 not	 to	 become
beggars.	My	people	are	not	sheep,	my	people	are	emperors.
Accept	your	responsibility	for	misery,	and	you	will	 find	 that	 just	hidden	inside
you	are	all	the	causes	of	bliss,	freedom,	joy,	enlightenment,	immortality.
No	savior	is	needed.	And	there	has	never	been	any	savior;	all	saviors	are	pseudo.
They	have	been	worshipped	because	you	always	wanted	somebody	to	save	you.
They	have	always	appeared	because	they	were	always	in	demand,	and	wherever
there	is	a	demand,	there	is	a	supply.
Once	you	depend	on	others,	you	are	losing	your	soul.
You	are	forgetting	that	you	have	a	consciousness	as	universal	as	anybody	else's,
that	you	have	a	consciousness	as	great	as	any	Gautam	Buddha's	--	you	are	just
not	aware	of	it,	you	have	not	looked	for	it.	And	you	have	not	looked	because	you
are	looking	at	others	--
somebody	else	 to	save	you,	somebody	else	 to	help	you.	So	you	go	on	begging
without	recognizing	that	this	whole	kingdom	is	yours.
This	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 as	 one	 of	 the	most	 basic	 principles	 of	 sannyas	 --	 a
declaration	of	self-respect	and	freedom	and	responsibility.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 TALK	 ABOUT	 THE	 SADHANA	 BASED	 ON
HOLDING	AS
MUCH	AS	POSSIBLE	TO	THE	"I"	THOUGHT	OR	THE	SENSE	"I	AM"	AND
ON
ASKING	ONESELF	THE	QUESTIONS,	"WHO	AM	I?"	OR	"FROM	WHERE
DOES
THIS	 Ì'	 ARISE?"	 IN	 WHAT	 WAY	 DOES	 THIS	 APPROACH	 TO
MEDITATION
DIFFER	 FROM	THAT	OF	WATCHING	 THE	GAPS	BETWEEN	ONE'S	 IN-
BREATH
AND	OUT-BREATH?	DOES	IT	MAKE	ANY	DIFFERENCE	WHETHER	ONE
WITNESSES	THE	BREATH	FOCUSING	ON	THE	HEART	CENTER	OR	ON
THE
LOWER	BELLY	CENTER?
It	is	an	ancient	method	of	meditation,	but	full	of	dangers.
Unless	you	are	alert,	the	greater	possibility	is	that	you	will	be	led	astray	by	the
method	rather	than	to	the	right	goal.
The	method	is	simple	--	concentrating	yourself	on	the	concept	of	I,	closing	your
eyes	and	inquiring,	"Who	am	I?"
The	greatest	problem	is	that	when	you	ask	"Who	am	I"...	who	is	going	to	answer
you?
Most	probably	the	answer	will	come	from	your	tradition,	from	your	scriptures,
from	your	conditioning.
You	have	heard	that	"I	am	not	the	body,	I	am	not	the	mind.	I	am	the	soul,	I	am
the	ultimate,	brahma,	 I	 am	God"	 --	 all	 these	kinds	of	 thoughts	you	have	heard
before.
You	will	ask	a	few	times,	"Who	am	I?	Who	am	I?"	--	and	then	you	will	say,	"I
am	ultimate,	BRAHMA."	And	this	is	not	a	discovery,	this	is	simply	stupid.
If	 you	 want	 to	 go	 rightly	 into	 the	 method,	 then	 the	 question	 has	 not	 to	 be
verbally	asked.
"Who	am	 I?"	has	not	 to	be	 repeated	verbally.	Because	 as	 long	 as	 it	 remains	 a
verbal	question,	you	will	supply	a	verbal	answer	from	the	head.
You	have	to	drop	the	verbal	question.	It	has	to	remain	just	a	vague	idea,	just	like
a	thirst.
Not	that	"I	am	thirsty,"	--	can	you	see	the	difference?	When	you	are	thirsty,	you
feel	the	thirst.
And	 if	you	are	 in	a	desert,	you	feel	 the	 thirst	 in	every	fiber	of	your	body.	You
don't	 say,	 "I	am	 thirsty,	 I	 am	 thirsty."	 It	 is	no	 longer	a	 linguistic	question,	 it	 is
existential.
If	"Who	am	I?"	is	an	existential	question,	if	you	are	not	asking	it	in	language	but
instead	the	feeling	of	the	question	is	settling	inside	your	center,	then	there	is	no
need	for	any	answer.	Then	it	is	none	of	the	mind's	business.
The	mind	will	not	hear	that	which	is	non-verbal,	and	the	mind	will	not	answer
that	which	is	non-verbal.
All	your	scriptures	are	in	the	mind,	all	your	knowledge	is	gathered	there.
Now	you	are	entering	an	innocent	space.	You	will	not	get	the	answer.	You	will
get	the	feel,	you	will	get	the	taste,	you	will	get	the	smell.
As	 you	 go	 deeper,	 you	 will	 be	 filled	 more	 with	 the	 feeling	 of	 being,	 of
immortality,	blissfulness,	silence...	a	tremendous	benediction.
But	there	is	no	answer	like,	"I	am	this,	I	am	that."	All	that	is	from	the	scriptures.
This	feeling	is	from	you,	and	this	feeling	has	a	truth	about	it.
It	is	a	perfectly	valid	method.
One	of	the	great	masters	of	this	century,	Raman	Maharshi,	used	only	this	method
for	his	disciples:	"Who	am	I?"	But	I	have	come	across	hundreds	of	his	disciples	-
-	they	are	nowhere	near	the	ultimate	experience.	And	the	reason	is	because	they
know	the	answer	already.
I	have	asked	them,	"Do	you	know	the	answer?"
They	said,	"We	know	the	answer."
I	 said,	 "If	 you	 know	 the	 answer,	 then	 why	 are	 you	 asking?	 And	 your	 asking
cannot	go	on	very	 long	 --	do	 it	 two	or	 three	 times	and	 the	answer	comes.	The
answer	was	already	there,	before	the	question."
So	it	is	just	a	mind	game.	If	you	want	to	play	it,	you	can	play	it.	But	if	you	really
want	 to	go	 into	 it	 as	 it	was	meant	by	Raman	Maharshi,	 and	by	all	 the	ancient
seers,	it	is	a	non-verbal	thirst.
Not	knowing	oneself	hurts,	it	is	a	wound.	Not	knowing	oneself	makes	the	whole
of	life	meaningless.	You	may	know	everything,	only	you	do	not	know	yourself	--
and	that	would	be	the	first	thing	to	know.
So	 if	you	can	avoid	 the	danger	of	 falling	 into	a	verbal	question,	 it	 is	perfectly
good,	you	can	go	ahead.
You	 have	 also	 asked	 about	 witnessing,	 watching	 the	 breath	 and	 where	 one
should	watch.
Anywhere	--	because	the	question	is	not	where	you	are	watching,	the	question	is
that	you	are	watching.
The	 emphasis	 is	 on	watching,	watchfulness.	All	 those	 points	 are	 just	 excuses.
You	can	watch	the	breath	at	the	tip	of	the	nose	where	the	breath	goes	in,	you	can
watch	it	while	it	is	going	in,	you	can	watch	it	when	it	returns	--	you	can	watch	it
anywhere.	You	can	watch	thoughts	moving	inside.	The	whole	point	is	not	to	get
lost	in	what	you	are	watching,	as	if	that	is	important.	That	is	not	important....
The	 important	 thing	 is	 that	 you	 are	 watchful,	 that	 you	 have	 not	 forgotten	 to
watch,	that	you	are	watching...	watching...	watching.
And	 slowly	 slowly,	 as	 the	 watcher	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 solid,	 stable,
unwavering,	 a	 transformation	 happens.	 The	 things	 that	 you	 were	 watching
disappear.
For	 the	 first	 time,	 the	 watcher	 itself	 becomes	 the	watched,	 the	 observer	 itself
becomes	the	observed.
You	have	come	home.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 NOT	 EXPECTED	 ANYTHING	 FROM	 YOU,	 YET	 YOU	 HAVE
TRICKED
ME	AND	GIVEN	ME	SOME	BEAUTIFUL	THINGS.	IS	THERE	ANYTHING
A	SANNYASIN	HAS	TO	ASK,	OR	DOES	EVERYTHING	HAPPEN	ON	ITS
OWN?
Everything	happens	on	 its	own,	but	a	sannyasin	has	 to	be	alert	not	 to	miss	 the
train.
The	train	comes	on	its	own,	but	you	have	to	be	alert.	All	around	you	so	much	is
happening;	 in	 twenty-four	hours...	 awake,	 asleep...	 you	have	 to	be	watchful	 of
what	is	happening.	And	the	more	you	are	alert,	you	will	be	surprised...	the	same
things	are	happening	that	were	happening	before,	but	the	meaning	has	changed,
the	significance	is	different.
The	 roseflower	 is	 the	 same,	 but	 now	 it	 is	 radiant,	 surrounded	 by	 some	 new
energy	that	you	were	not	aware	of	before	--	a	new	beauty.	It	seems	you	used	to
see	only	the	outer	side	of	the	rose;	now	you	are	able	to	see	its	inner	world.	You
used	 to	 watch	 the	 palace	 from	 the	 outside;	 now	 you	 have	 entered	 into	 its
innermost	chambers.	You	have	seen	the	moon	hundreds	of	times,	but	when	you
see	it	silently,	peacefully,	meditatively,	you	become	aware	of	a	beauty	that	you
were	not	aware	of	before,	a	beauty	that	is	not	ordinarily	available,	for	which	you
need	to	grow	some	insight.
And	in	silence,	in	peace,	that	insight	grows.
It	happened...	a	very	significiant	incident.	One	of	the	Indian	poets,	Rabindranath
Tagore,	 translated	one	of	his	 small	books	of	poems,	GITANJALI,	"Offering	of
Songs."	He	was	awarded	the	Nobel	prize	for	that	small	book.
In	India	 it	was	available	 for	at	 least	 fifteen	years.	But	unless	a	book	meets	 the
international	 standards	 of	 language	 and	 gains	 international	 appreciation,	 it	 is
difficult	for	it	to	get	a	Nobel	prize.
Rabindranath	 himself	 was	 a	 little	 worried,	 because	 he	 translated	 it	 and	 to
translate	poetry	is	always	a	very	difficult	affair.	To	translate	prose	is	simple;	to
translate	poetry	is	immensely	difficult,	because	prose	is	of	the	marketplace	and
poetry	is	something	of	the	world	of	love,	of	the	world	of	beauty,	of	the	world	of
moon	and	stars.	It	is	a	delicate	affair.
And	 every	 language	 has	 its	 own	 nuances	 which	 are	 almost	 untranslatable.
Although	the	poet	himself	translated	his	own	poetry,	he	was	doubtful	about	the
translation.	So	he	showed	it	to	one	of	the	Christian	missionaries,	a	very	famous
man	of	those	days,	C.F.
Andrews	--	a	very	literate,	cultured,	sophisticated	man.
Andrews	suggested	four	changes.	He	said,	"Everything	else	is	right,	but	in	four
places	it	is	not	grammatically	right."
So	Rabindranath	simply	accepted	his	advice,	and	changed	those	four	places.
In	London,	his	friend,	the	Irish	poet	Yeats,	called	a	meeting	of	English	poets	to
hear	the	translation	of	Rabindranath.	Everybody	appreciated	it.	The	beauty	of	it
was	something	absolutely	new	to	the	Western	world.
But	 Yeats,	 who	was	 the	most	 prominent	 poet	 of	 England	 in	 those	 days,	 said,
"Everything	else	is	right,	but	in	four	places	it	seems	that	somebody	who	is	not	a
poet	has	made	some	changes."
Rabindranath	could	not	believe	it.	He	said,	"Where	are	those	four	places?"
Yeats	pointed	out	the	four	places	exactly.
Rabindranath	said,	"What	is	wrong?"
He	 said,	 "There	 is	 nothing	 wrong,	 they	 are	 grammatically	 correct.	 But
poetically...
whoever	suggested	 them	is	a	man	who	knows	his	grammar	but	does	not	know
poetry.	 He	 is	 a	 man	 of	 the	 mind	 but	 not	 a	 man	 of	 the	 heart.	 The	 flow	 is
obstructed,	as	if	a	river	had	come	across	a	rock."
Rabindranath	 told	 him,	 "I	 asked	C.F.	Andrews;	 these	 are	 his	words.	 I	will	 tell
you	the	words	that	I	put	there	before."
And	when	 he	 put	 his	words	 in,	Yeats	 said,	 "They	 are	 perfectly	 right	 although
grammatically	wrong.	But	 grammar	 is	 not	 important.	When	 it	 is	 a	 question	of
poetry,	grammar	is	not	important.	You	change	it	back,	use	your	own	words."
I	have	always	been	thinking	that	there	are	ways	of	the	mind,	there	are	ways	of
the	heart;	 they	need	not	be	supportive	of	each	other.	And	if	 it	happens	that	 the
mind	is	not	in	agreement	with	the	heart,	then	the	mind	is	wrong.	Its	agreement	or
disagreement	 does	 not	 matter.	 What	 matters	 is	 that	 your	 heart	 feels	 at	 ease,
peaceful,	silent,	harmonious,	at	home.
We	are	 trained	 for	 the	mind,	 so	our	mind	 is	very	articulate.	And	nobody	 takes
any	care	of	the	heart.	In	fact,	it	is	pushed	aside	by	everybody	because	it	is	of	no
use	in	the	marketplace,	it	is	no	use	in	the	world	of	ambitions,	no	use	in	politics,
no	use	in	business.
But	 with	 me,	 the	 situation	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 --	 the	 mind	 is	 of	 no	 use.	 The
heart....
Everything	happens,	just	your	heart	has	to	be	ready	to	receive	it.
Everything	comes,	but	if	your	heart	is	closed....	The	secret	laws	of	life	are	such
that	the	doors	of	your	heart	will	not	even	be	knocked	on.
Existence	knows	how	to	wait;	it	can	wait	for	eternity.
It	all	depends	on	you.
Everything	 is	 ready	 to	 happen	 any	moment.	 Just	 open	 all	 your	 doors,	 all	 your
windows,	so	that	existence	can	pour	into	you	from	every	side.	There	is	no	other
god	than	existence,	and	there	is	no	other	paradise	than	your	very	being.
When	existence	pours	 into	your	being,	paradise	has	entered	 into	you	 --	or	you
have	entered	into	paradise,	just	different	ways	of	saying	the	same	thing.
But	remember:	nothing	is	expected	of	you.
All	the	religions	have	been	telling	you	for	centuries	that	you	have	to	do	this,	you
have	to	do	that.	That	you	have	to	be	a	torturer	of	yourself,	you	have	to	renounce
pleasures,	you	have	to	fight	with	your	body,	you	have	to	renounce	the	world.
The	Buddhist	 scriptures	 have	 thirty-three	 thousand	 principles	 that	 a	 sannyasin
should	follow.	It	is	almost	impossible	to	remember	them	--	following	them	is	out
of	the	question.
I	don't	have	a	single	principle	for	you	to	follow;	just	a	simple	understanding	that
it	 is	 your	 life	 --	 enjoy	 it,	 allow	 it	 to	 sing	 a	 song	 in	 you,	 allow	 it	 to	 become	 a
dance	in	you.	You	have	nothing	else	to	do	but	simply	to	be	available.
And	flowers	are	going	to	shower	on	you.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	I	answer	your	questions	just	to	kill	them	12	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610125
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
116
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	OBEYING	THE	MASTER	AND
FOLLOWING	HIS	GUIDANCE?
The	question	is	complex.
In	the	first	place,	the	master	does	not	expect	to	be	obeyed	but	to	be	understood.
He	does	not	give	you	guidelines	either.
In	his	presence,	your	loving	heart	finds	them.
It	means	 that	 those	who	order	and	expect	 that	 their	orders	should	be	 followed,
complied	with,	are	not	authentic	masters.
The	 master	 is	 not	 a	 commander.	 He	 does	 not	 issue	 things	 likèTen
Commandments.'
Certainly,	he	explains	to	you	his	experience,	his	realization,	and	then	it	is	up	to
your	intelligence	to	do	whatever	is	right.	It	is	not	a	direct	order,	it	is	an	appeal	to
your	intelligence.
An	 order	 never	 cares	 about	 your	 intelligence,	 an	 order	 never	 wants	 you	 to
understand	 anything.	 The	 basic	 purpose	 of	 all	 ordering	 of	 people	 is	 to	 reduce
them	into	robots.
All	 over	 the	 world,	 in	 every	 army,	 they	 are	 turning	 millions	 of	 people	 into
machines	--	of	course,	in	such	a	way	that	you	don't	understand	what	is	going	on.
Their	methodology	is	very	indirect.
What	 does	 it	 mean	 that	 thousands	 of	 people	 every	 morning	 are	 marching,
following	orders	--	"Right	turn,	left	turn,	move	forward,	move	backward"	--	for
what	is	all	this	circus	going	on?	And	for	years	it	goes	on.	This	is	to	destroy	your
intelligence.
The	 strategy	 is	 that	 if	 for	years	 continuously	you	go	on	 following	any	kind	of
stupid	thing,	meaningless,	every	day	in	the	morning,	every	day	in	the	evening...
And	you	are	not	supposed	to	ask	why.	You	just	have	to	do	it,	to	do	it	as	perfectly
as	possible;	there	is	no	need	for	you	to	understand	why.	And	when	a	person	goes
through	such	a	training	for	years,	the	natural	effect	is	that	he	stops	asking	why.
And	why?	--	because	the	questioning	attitude	is	the	very	base	of	all	intelligence.
The	 moment	 you	 stop	 asking	 why,	 you	 have	 stopped	 growing	 as	 far	 as
intelligence	is	concerned.
It	happened	in	the	second	world	war....
A	retired	army	man...	he	had	fought	in	the	first	world	war,	and	he	was	honored
well;	he	was	a	brave	man.	And	now	almost	twenty-five	years	had	passed.	He	had
a	small	farm	and	lived	silently.
He	was	going	from	the	farm	to	his	house	with	a	bucket	full	of	eggs,	and	a	few
people	 in	 a	 restaurant,	 just	 jokingly,	played	a	 trick	on	 the	poor	old	 army	man.
One	of	the	men	in	the	restaurant	shouted,	"Attention!"	and	the	man	dropped	the
bucket	and	stood	in	the	position	of	attention.
It	 had	 been	 twenty-five	 years	 since	 he	 had	 gone	 through	 the	 training.	But	 the
training	had	gone	into	the	bones,	into	the	blood,	into	the	marrow;	it	had	become
part	of	the	unconscious.	He	completely	forgot	what	he	was	doing	--	it	happened
almost	autonomously,	mechanically.
He	was	very	angry.	But	those	people	said,	"Your	anger	is	not	right,	because	we
can	call	out	any	word	we	want.	Who	is	telling	you	to	follow	it?"
He	said,	"It	is	too	late	for	me	to	decide	whether	to	follow	it	or	not	to	follow	it.
My	 whole	 mind	 functions	 like	 a	 machine.	 Those	 twenty-five	 years	 simply
disappeared.	Àttention'
only	means	àttention'.	You	destroyed	my	eggs.	I	am	a	poor	man."
But	 this	 is	 being	 done	 all	 over	 the	world.	And	 not	 only	 today;	 from	 the	 very
beginning	armies	have	been	trained	not	to	use	intelligence,	but	to	follow	orders.
You	 have	 to	 understand	 one	 thing	 very	 clearly:	 that	 to	 follow	 an	 order	 and	 to
understand	a	 thing	are	 two	diametrically	opposite	 things.	 If,	 by	understanding,
your	 intelligence	 feels	 satisfied	 and	you	do	 something	out	of	 that,	 you	are	not
following	an	order	from	the	outside;	you	are	following	your	own	intelligence.
And	an	authentic	master	is	not	your	commander.	He	loves	you,	and	he	wants	you
to	be	more	understanding,	more	 intelligent,	more	capable	of	 finding	your	way,
more	insightful,	more	intuitive.	This	cannot	be	done	by	orders.
I	am	reminded	of	another	incident	in	the	first	world	war.	In	Berlin,	one	German
professor	of	logic	was	recruited	into	the	army.	There	was	a	shortage	of	soldiers,
and	everybody	who	was	physically	able	was	asked	to	volunteer.	Otherwise,	they
were	forcing	people	to	go	to	the	army....
Because	 all	 the	 societies,	 all	 the	 nations,	 all	 the	 cultures,	 have	 taken	 it	 for
granted	 that	 the	 individuals	 exist	 for	 them,	 not	 vice-versa.	 To	 me,	 just	 the
opposite	is	the	case:	the	society	exists	for	the	individual,	the	culture	exists	for	the
individual,	the	nation	exists	for	the	individual.	Everything	can	be	sacrificed,	but
the	individual	cannot	be	sacrificed	for	anything.
Individuality	is	the	very	flowering	of	existence	--	nothing	is	higher	than	it.
But	no	culture,	no	society,	no	civilization	is	ready	to	accept	a	simple	truth.
The	professor	was	forced.	He	said,	"I	am	not	a	man	who	can	fight.	I	can	argue,	I
am	a	logician.	If	you	need	somebody	to	argue	with	the	enemies,	I	am	ready,	but
fighting	is	not	my	business.	It	is	barbarous	to	fight."
But	 nobody	 listened,	 and	 finally	 he	 was	 brought	 to	 the	 parade	 grounds.	 The
parade	started,	and	the	commander	said,	"Left	turn."	Everybody	turned	left,	but
the	professor	remained	standing	as	he	was	standing.
The	commander	was	a	 little	worried:	 "What	 is	 the	matter?	Perhaps	 the	man	 is
deaf."	So	he	shouted	loudly,	"Now	turn	to	the	left	again!"	All	the	people	turned
to	the	left	again,	but	that	man	remained	standing	as	if	he	had	not	heard	anything.
Forward,	 backward...	 all	 the	 orders	were	 given	 and	 everybody	 followed.	 That
man	remained	just	standing	in	his	place.
He	was	a	well-known	professor;	even	the	commander	knew	him.	He	could	not
be	treated	just	like	any	other	soldier,	he	had	a	certain	respect.	Finally,	when	the
parade	ended	and	everybody	came	back	 to	 the	same	 line	 from	where	 they	had
started,	the	commander	went	to	the	professor	and	asked,	"Is	there	some	problem
with	your	ears?	Can't	you	hear?"
He	said,	"I	can	hear."
"But	 then,"	 the	commander	said,	"why	did	you	remain	standing?	Why	did	you
not	follow	the	orders?"
He	said,	 "What	 is	 the	point?	When	everybody	 finally	has	 to	come	back	 to	 the
same	state,	after	all	this	movement	going	forward	and	backward,	left	and	right,
what	have	they	gained?"
The	commander	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	gaining,	it	is	a	training!"
But	he	said,	"I	don't	need	any	training.	This	kind	of	stupid	thing...	You	come	to
the	same	place	after	doing	all	kinds	of	stupid	things,	which	I	don't	see	any	point
in.	Can	you	explain	to	me	why	I	should	turn	left	and	not	right?"
The	commander	said,	"Strange,	no	soldier	asks	such	questions."
The	professor	said,	"I	am	not	a	soldier,	I	am	a	professor.	I	have	been	forced	to	be
here,	but	you	cannot	force	me	to	do	things	against	my	intelligence."
The	commander	went	 to	 the	higher	authorities	and	said,	"What	 to	do	with	 this
man?	He	may	 spoil	 other	 people	 --	 because	 everybody	 is	 laughing	 at	me,	 and
everybody	is	saying,
`Professor,	you	did	great!'	I	cannot	tackle	that	man.	He	asks...	each	thing	has	to
be	explained:	Ùnless	I	understand	it,	unless	my	intelligence	supports	it,	I	am	not
going	to	do	it.'"
The	commander	in	chief	said,	"I	know	the	man.	He	is	a	great	logician.	His	whole
life's	training	is	in	questioning	everything.	I	will	take	care	of	him,	you	don't	be
worried."
He	 called	 the	 professor	 to	 his	 office	 and	 said,	 "I	 am	 sorry,	 but	 we	 cannot	 do
anything.
You	have	been	 recruited;	 the	country	needs	 soldiers.	But	 I	will	give	you	some
work	 which	 will	 not	 create	 any	 difficulty	 for	 you	 and	 will	 not	 create	 any
difficulty	for	others.
You	come	with	me	to	the	army	mess."
He	took	the	professor	there,	and	showed	him	a	big	pile	of	green	peas.	He	told	the
professor,	"You	do	one	thing:	sit	down	here.	You	have	to	sort	out	the	big	peas	on
one	side,	the	small	peas	on	the	other	side.	And	after	one	hour	I	will	come	to	see
how	things	are	progressing."
After	one	hour	he	came	back.	The	professor	was	sitting	there	and	the	peas	were
also	sitting	there,	in	the	same	place.	He	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	You	have	not
even	started."
He	 said,	 "For	 the	 first	 and	 for	 the	 last	 time,	 I	want	 you	 all	 to	 understand	 that
unless	you	explain	to	me...	Why	should	I	sort	out	the	peas?	My	intelligence	feels
insulted	by	you.
Am	 I	 an	 idiot,	 to	 sort	 the	 peas?	What	 is	 the	 need?	Moreover,	 there	 are	 other
problems.
Sitting	here,	 I	 thought	 that	perhaps	 there	 is	 some	need,	but	 there	are	questions
which	have	to	be	decided:	there	are	peas	which	are	big	and	there	are	peas	which
are	small,	but	 there	are	peas	of	many	other	sizes.	Where	are	 they	going	to	go?
You	have	not	given	me	any	criterion."
A	mystery	school,	a	spiritual	path,	is	not	the	path	of	a	soldier.
Here,	orders	are	prohibited.
Here,	only	intelligence	is	appealed	to.	The	decision	is	always	on	your	part.
It	 is	 only	 the	phony	masters	who	give	you	orders,	 because	 they	cannot	 satisfy
your	 intelligence.	 An	 authentic	 master	 is	 perfectly	 capable	 to	 satisfy	 your
intelligence,	and	then	leave	it	up	to	you.	It	is	your	life,	and	the	final	decision	has
to	be	made	not	by	anyone	else	other	than	you.	You	have	to	take	the	responsibility
on	 your	 own	 shoulders.	 So	 there	 are	 no	 orders	 as	 far	 as	 true	 masters	 are
concerned.
You	have	also	asked	about	guidelines.
People	have	been	told	such	nonsense	for	centuries	--	as	if	spirituality	is	a	kind	of
geography,	so	that	maps	are	given	to	you,	guidelines	are	provided	to	you:	Follow
the	right	guidelines	and	you	will	reach	the	goal.
Alas,	things	are	not	so	cheap.
There	 are	 no	 maps	 in	 existence;	 no	 solid	 guidelines	 either,	 because	 each
individual	 is	 so	 unique	 that	 what	 may	 be	 a	 guideline	 for	 one	 may	 prove	 a
distraction	 for	 another;	 what	 may	 be	 medicine	 to	 one	 may	 prove	 poison	 to
another.
Individuals	are	so	different.
And	 if	 a	 master	 cannot	 understand	 the	 difference	 of	 individuals,	 their	 unique
qualities,	talents,	geniuses,	then	who	is	going	to	understand?
No	general	guidelines	can	be	provided.
The	 master	 simply	 goes	 on	 dropping	 all	 kinds	 of	 hints.	 Remember	 my	 word
`hints'	 --	 not	 guidelines.	And	you	have	 to	 choose	whatever	 suits	 you,	 and	you
have	to	experiment	to	see	whether	it	is	workable	for	you	or	not.	If	it	works,	go
on	deeper	into	it;	if	it	does	not	work,	don't	feel	guilty.	You	have	not	committed
any	sin,	you	have	simply	failed	in	an	experiment.
With	a	master,	life	becomes	a	scientific	experiment.	It	is	no	more	a	question	of
heaven	and	hell,	punishment	and	reward.	It	is	a	question	of	exploration.
And	each	individual	has	to	explore	in	his	own	way.
There	are	no	golden	rules:	this	is	the	only	golden	rule	there	is.
There	is	no	superhighway	with	milestones	telling	you	how	far	you	are	from	the
goal.	In	the	spiritual	exploration,	you	have	to	walk	and	create	your	path	by	your
walking;	there	is	no	ready-made	path	so	that	you	have	simply	to	walk	on	it.
And	my	feeling	is	that	this	is	tremendously	blissful	and	ecstatic.	You	are	not	like
railway	 trains.	 Running	 on	 rails,	 you	 cannot	 run	 into	 the	 jungles,	 into	 the
mountains,	anywhere	you	like.	The	railway	train	is	a	prisoner.
But	a	river	is	not	a	prisoner.	It	also	travels	long.	It	may	be	coming	thousands	of
miles,	 from	 the	Himalayas,	and	 it	 reaches	 finally	 to	 the	ocean	 --	with	no	map,
with	no	guidelines,	with	no	guides,	and	nobody	on	 the	way	 to	whom	the	 river
can	inquire,
"Which	way	am	I	to	go	now?"...	because	each	step	is	a	crossroad.
But	 strangely	 enough,	 every	 river	 reaches	 to	 the	 ocean	 with	 great	 freedom,
finding	its	own	path.
The	master	can	only	give	you	certain	hints	about	how	to	find	your	path.	He	can
give	 you	 certain	 indications	 whether	 you	 have	 found	 it	 or	 not,	 can	 give	 you
certain	criteria	to	judge	whether	you	are	moving	towards	the	goal	or	away	from
the	goal.	But	he	does	not	give	you	guidelines.	In	the	very	nature	of	things,	it	is
not	possible.
The	moment	you	have	found	a	master,	you	have	found	the	path.
And	 who	 is	 the	 master?	 --	 not	 one	 who	 fulfills	 your	 mind	 expectations.	 A
Christian	 mind	 has	 Christian	 expectations,	 a	 Hindu	 mind	 has	 Hindu
expectations,	a	Buddhist	mind	has	Buddhist	expectations.
A	master	is	one	who	fulfills	the	longing	of	your	heart.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	mind.	It	is	a	love	affair.
You	 simply	 find	 that	 you	 are	 in	 love.	You	 simply	 find	 that	 your	 heart	 feels	 at
home,	 at	 ease,	 that	 your	 heart	 has	 found	 a	 treasure,	 feels	 a	 tremendous
benediction.	And	as	you	come	closer	to	the	master	--	in	your	love,	in	your	trust	--
your	peace	deepens;	your	silence	becomes	not	something	dead,	the	silence	of	a
graveyard,	but	something	singing	and	dancing,	alive.
The	 more	 you	 are	 moving	 towards	 your	 life's	 fulfillment,	 the	 more	 your	 life
becomes	a	rejoicing,	a	deep	joy	for	no	reason	at	all,	a	blissfulness	so	deep	and	so
abundant	 that	you	can	start	 sharing	 it	with	others.	 In	 fact,	you	have	 to	share	 it
with	others	because	it	is	overflowing,	you	cannot	contain	it.
For	the	first	time,	you	are	small	and	your	bliss	is	infinite.
These	are	the	indications	that	you	are	moving	towards	home.
Your	ecstasies	go	on	growing	deeper	and	higher.
And	if	you	are	moving	away,	you	will	become	more	miserable,	more	sad,	more
saintly,	more	Christian,	more	Hindu,	more	 Jaina	 --	 all	 kinds	of	diseases.	More
knowledgeable...
but	inside,	more	and	more	empty;	a	beggar	living	by	a	thin	thread	of	hope	that
somewhere	in	the	other	life,	somewhere	in	the	other	world,	you	will	be	rewarded
for	all	your	sadness,	your	long	British	faces.
Saints	 don't	 laugh.	 They	 have	 fallen	 below	 humanity,	 because	 only	 human
beings	laugh.
Buffaloes	don't	laugh,	donkeys	don't	laugh	--	they	all	belong	to	the	categories	of
the	saints	and	sages.	Perhaps	these	fellows	--	donkeys	and	buffaloes	--	may	have
been	great	sages	in	their	past	lives	and	now	they	are	getting	their	reward.	Don't
misbehave	with	them.	Be	respectful.	One	never	knows.
But	as	 far	as	 I	am	concerned,	your	sense	of	humor,	your	 laughter	will	become
deeper	as	you	grow	in	consciousness.	You	will	become	more	playful	in	life.
So	there	are	neither	orders	nor	guidelines,	but	only	vague	hints,	indications,	and
a	constant	effort	to	sharpen	your	intelligence	so	that	you	can	find	your	way.	And
when	you	have	found,	you	have	the	courage	to	burst	into	songs,	into	dances,	into
rejoicings.
That's	 the	 function	 of	 the	 master:	 to	 make	 you	 more	 intelligent	 and	 more
courageous,	 more	 loving,	 more	 understanding.	 But	 there	 are	 no	 orders,	 no
disciplines,	no	guidelines.
Orders,	disciplines,	guidelines	--	these	have	been	used	by	people	who	wanted	to
dominate	you,	by	people	who	wanted	to	dictate	their	terms,	to	enforce	their	ideas
on	 other	 people's	 lives.	 I	 call	 all	 such	 people	 great	 criminals.	 To	 impose	 your
idea	on	somebody,	 to	give	some	 ideal,	 some	mold,	 is	violence,	 sheer	violence.
You	are	being	destructive,	and	a	master	cannot	do	that.
A	master	is	always	creative.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 HAVING	 QUESTIONS	 COMING	 TO	 ME.	 I	 WRITE	 THEM	 DOWN
AND	READ
THEM	OVER.	MEDITATING	AGAIN,	I	OFTEN	GET	THE	ANSWER,	AND
COINCIDENTALLY,	MANY	TIMES	THE	SAME	QUESTION	IS	READ	OUT
TO
YOU	IN	THE	DISCOURSE	OR	AT	THE	VIDEO	THAT	NIGHT.	EVEN	IF	IT
IS
FROM	SOMEONE	ELSE,	I	FEEL	THAT	IT	IS	MY	QUESTION,	AND	I	FEEL
AS	IF	I	AM	BEING	ANSWERED.
BELOVED	MASTER,	CAN	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
It	is	a	fallacy	that	any	question	is	yours.
It	is	just	an	old	habit	of	possessiveness	--	the	house	is	mine,	the	wife	is	mine,	the
child	is	mine,	even	the	question	is	mine.
All	human	beings	are	potentially	capable	of	all	the	questions	that	any	one	of	you
can	 ask,	 because	 all	 questions	 come	 out	 of	 your	 insane	mind	 and	 you	 are	 all
equally	insane.
There	are	only	a	 few	 things	 in	which	you	are	equal	 --	 insanity	 is	one	of	 them.
Only	once	in	a	while	somebody	is	more	insane	than	others;	then	he	is	caught.
And	the	whole	function	of	psychologists,	psychiatrists,	psychotherapists	is	not	to
destroy	 insanity	 --	 they	 cannot;	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 understanding	 about	what
sanity	is.	All	that	they	can	do	is	that	when	somebody	has	gone	a	little	ahead	of
the	average	insane	humanity,	they	can	pull	him	back:	"Just	be	normal."	"Just	be
normal"	means	"Just	be	normally	insane;	don't	try	to	be	abnormal."
Abnormally	insane	people	are	thought	to	be	mad.
Normally	insane	people	--	because	they	are	the	only	kind	of	people	there	are	--
raise	no	questions,	no	problems,	although	they	are	full	of	the	same	problems	as
the	mad	people.
But	the	difference	is	of	quantity.
Just	 sit	down	 in	your	 room,	close	all	 the	doors	and	 lock	 them	from	 inside	and
write	down	on	your	pad	anything	that	goes	on	in	your	mind.	Don't	do	any	kind
of	editing	work;	simply	go	on	writing	whatever	comes	into	your	mind.	And	you
will	 be	 surprised	 --	 after	 ten	minutes,	 read	 it,	 and	you	will	 be	 shocked	 --	 is	 it
written	by	you	or	by	some	insane	person?	What	kind	of	nonsense,	what	rubbish
goes	on	and	on	in	your	mind?
It	is	said	that	God	made	the	world.	There	are	many	people	who	prove	that	there
are	so	many	mistakes	in	 the	world...	 it	cannot	be	made	by	God.	A	perfect	God
cannot	make	such	an	imperfect	world.
But	on	one	point	I	have	a	soft	spot	for	him:	he	has	not	made	small	windows	in
your	head	through	which	others	can	look	inside	at	what	is	going	on.	Otherwise,
it	would	have	been	such	a	perfect	world	--	 just	 little	windows,	so	at	 least	your
friends	can	just	have	a	look	at	what	is	going	on.	And	they	will	be	surprised	that
on	the	face	nothing	shows,	and	inside	this	man	is	carrying	such	garbage.	And	it
goes	on,	round	and	round,	twenty-four	hours	a	day.
In	my	meditation	camps	I	used	to	have	a	special	meditation:	the	meditation	was
that	for	one	hour,	everybody	was	to	sit	relaxed	and	say	whatsoever	came	to	his
mind	--	just	to	become	a	spokesman	of	his	own	mind,	just	a	loudspeaker	--	and
to	do	whatever	he	felt	like	doing,	no	inhibition,	for	one	hour.	And	it	was	such	a
joy,	 and	 people	were	 doing	 such	 great	 things!	 Such	 good	 people...	 you	would
have	never	imagined.
One	 man...	 I	 would	 never	 have	 thought	 that	 he	 would	 do	 this:	 he	 was
continuously	phoning,	just	sitting	in	front	of	me.	And	he	was	a	man	of	the	age	of
nearabout	sixty,	a	 rich	man,	continuously	phoning	--	"Hello,	hello!"	Later	on	 I
discovered	that	that's	what	he	did;	his	whole	business	was	the	share	market.
And	he	used	to	sit	 just	 in	front	of	me,	so	once	in	a	while	he	would	look	at	me
and	smile	because	he	would	see	that	what	he	was	doing	was	not	right,	what	he
was	talking	was	nonsense.	But	what	to	do?	--	this	was	the	meditation	one	had	to
do!
Jayantibhai	is	sitting	here.	One	of	his	friends	--	they	are	old	friends,	they	are	still
friends,	and	very	deeply	 related	 --	 simply	stood	up	and	started	pushing	his	car
down	the	hill.	 It	was	the	car	 in	which	I	used	to	come	to	the	camp,	and	he	was
going	to	push	Jayantibhai's	car	down	the	hill	--	it	would	be	finished!	And	he	was
his	great	friend.	I	had	to	tell	a	few	people,	"Stop	your	meditation.	Just	catch	hold
of	that	man;	otherwise	that	car	is	finished.
And	he	knows	it	is	his	friend's	car,	and	he	knows	that	I	will	need	it,	that	I	have	to
go..."
Somehow	he	was	taken	away	from	the	car,	but	he	was	so	angry	that	in	his	anger
he	climbed	up	the	tree	that	was	just	in	the	middle	where	all	the	meditators	were
sitting,	and	he	started	throwing	his	clothes	from	there,	became	naked.	He	is	such
a	serious,	silent	person	--	you	cannot	imagine	that	he	can	do	such	things.	And	it
was	such	a	difficulty	to	bring	him	down:	"The	meditation	is	finished,	you	come
down,"	 but	 he	wouldn't	 listen,	 it	was	 too	 difficult	 for	 him	 to	 come	 out	 of	 the
meditation.
These	things	go	on	in	the	mind,	but	you	don't	do	them.
Finally	 I	 had	 to	 stop	 that	 meditation,	 because	 it	 was	 dangerous.	 It	 was	 very
beautiful	to	throw	out	your	garbage,	it	was	very	cleansing,	but	it	was	dangerous	-
-	people	may	start	hitting	each	other.
It	 happened	 in	 one	 place.	 People	 were	 meditating,	 and	 one	 sardarji	 started
hitting...	not	that	anybody	was	his	enemy	or	anything.	He	made	such	long	jumps
to	hit	people	that	the	whole	of	the	grounds	were	empty;	all	the	meditators	were
standing	around	the	edge	of	the	grounds,	and	the	sardarji	was	alone	inside.
I	said,	"Sardarji,	now	sit	down.	Everybody	is	gone."
He	 said,	 "What	 came	 over	me?	 --	 because	 I	 am	 not	 a	 violent	man."	 And	 the
people	of	his	town	also	reported,	that	"He	is	a	very	good	man.	What	came	to	his
mind?"
I	said,	"It	must	have	been	coming	to	his	mind	every	day;	it	is	just	that	the	chance
was	not	there.	Today	he	got	a	chance.	He	alone	finished	all	the	meditators!"	and
there	were	at	least	five	hundred	people.
I	asked	him	later	on,	"Did	you	not	realize	what	you	were	doing?"
He	said,	"I	 realized	 that	what	 I	was	doing	was	not	 right,	and	 that	 these	people
have	done	no	harm	to	me.	Most	of	them	are	unknown	to	me.	But	from	my	very
childhood,	I	have	had	dreams	of	beating	people,	cutting	their	heads.	Even	in	the
day,	when	 I	close	my	eyes	 I	have	always	had	 this:	 that	 I	 alone	am	enough	 for
hundreds	 of	 people.	 You	 have	 seen	 it	 yourself	 --	 five	 hundred	 people,	 great
meditators,	all	forgot	their	meditation."
I	said,	"And	do	you	think	you	are	sane?"
He	said,	"That's	what	I	have	been	asking	after	your	meditation!	This	thing	is	in
my	mind...	any	day,	something	goes	wrong,	goes	beyond	my	control	and	I	will
be	insane.
Insanity	is	there,	it	is	just	repressed."
There	 are	 only	 two	 kinds	 of	 people	 in	 the	world:	 normally	 insane	 people	 and
abnormally	insane	people.
One	man	became	mad...	and	mad	people	are	very	 inventive	because	 they	don't
have	 any	 fear	 of	 anybody;	 no	 question	 of	 respectability,	 no	 question	 of	 what
others	will	 think	 about	 them.	They	become	very	 fearless,	 and	 they	 start	 doing
their	thing,	what	they	had	always	wanted	to	do	but	were	suppressing.
This	man	 had	 this	 idea	 that	 some	 strange,	 slimy	 creature	was	 rolling	 all	 over
him,	and	the	whole	day	he	was	throwing	it	off	of	himself.	His	family	said,	"What
are	you	doing?	--
because	we	don't	see	any	slimy	creature	or	anything."
He	said,	"You	cannot	see	it.	I	was	also	in	your	situation	before;	I	had	suspicions
about	it	but	I	had	never	seen	it.	Now	it	seems	my	third	eye	has	opened.	I	can	see
it!"	and	he	would	go	on	throwing	it	off.
They	said,	"You	are	just...	are	you	going	to	the	business,	to	the	office,	or	not?"
He	said,	"How	can	I	go?	And	it	is	so	disgusting	--	it	crawls	on	my	face,	it	goes
on	into	my	hair...	I	cannot	go	anywhere."
So	 finally	 they	 took	 him	 to	 the	 psychiatrist.	 The	 psychiatrist	 said,	 "Don't	 be
worried,	I	have	seen	such	cases.	You	come	here	and	sit."
He	sat	there,	and	he	was	continuously	throwing	off	the	creature.	The	psychiatrist
said,
"There	 is	 nothing;	 you	 just	 have	 an	 idea,	 you	 have	 become	 obsessed	with	 an
idea."
He	says,	"Obsessed?	I	will	show	you."
He	took	his	chair	close	to	the	psychiatrist.	And	the	psychiatrist	said,	"What	are
you	doing?"
And	the	man	started	throwing	his	creatures	onto	him,	and	the	psychiatrist	said,
"Stop!
Don't	 throw	 those	 creatures	 on	 me!	What	 kind	 of	 fellow	 are	 you?	 Have	 you
come	here	for	 treatment	or	have	you	come	here	to	make	me	sick	also?	What	a
disgusting	fellow!"
He	said,	"Now	you	see,	it	is	not	an	idea."
He	said,	"I	do	understand,	it	is	not	an	idea.	I	can	see	them;	it	seems	my	third	eye
is	also	opening!	You	just	don't	come	again.	You	can	try	another	psychiatrist;	he
lives	just	opposite	me.	He	is	my	enemy,	and	when	I	find	cases	like	you,	I	send
them	to	him.	But	you	forgive	me	--	this	is	your	fee,	you	take	it	back.	But	don't
drop	your	creatures	here!
Take	them	to	the	other	psychiatrist	--	that	is	the	office	--	every	day.	And	if	you
want	 something,	 I	 will	 pay	 your	 fee.	 Whatever	 fee	 you	 have	 to	 give	 to	 the
psychiatrist,	 I	will	 give	 to	 you.	 But	 open	 his	 third	 eye	 just	 the	way	 you	 have
opened	mine.	You	are	great	--
there	are	yogis	who	are	trying	hard	to	open	their	third	eyes	and	nothing	opens,
and	within	minutes	you	have	opened	my	third	eye."
And	as	 the	man	was	going	out,	he	 looked	back.	The	psychiatrist	was	 throwing
off	those	creatures.
Everybody	 is	 in	 the	 same	boat.	 Just	 a	 few	are	 sitting	 in	 the	middle,	 a	 few	are
sitting	at	the	very	edge,	can	fall	into	the	river	easily.
It	is	not	your	question.	No	question	is	yours.
Remember,	all	questions	come	out	of	your	normal	insanity.
So	when	you	hear	that	somebody	else	has	asked	your	question,	don't	be	puzzled.
These	are	 the	same	slimy	creatures	 --	 it	 is	not	your	monopoly.	They	also	have
their	own.
If	you	remain	silent,	you	will	find	that	every	question	that	has	ever	bothered	you
is	being	asked	by	somebody	else,	by	someone	else	--	because	we	are	not	islands;
we	 are	 all	 connected,	 we	 are	 one	 continent.	 And	 we	 are	 continuously
broadcasting	our	ideas,	even	without	saying	anything	to	anybody	sitting	by	our
side.	Neither	are	you	trying	to	say	something	to	him,	nor	is	he	trying	to	listen	to
you,	but	those	ideas	are	radiating.
It	is	something	to	be	understood:	that	most	of	your	ideas	are	just	uninvited	guests
which	you	pick	up	 just	 from	anywhere.	They	are	 in	 the	air,	 and	once	 they	get
into	your	head	you	think,	"It	is	my	idea."
And	if	you	listen	carefully,	every	answer	is	for	you.	Even	if	the	question	was	not
yours,	even	if	you	were	not	able	to	recognize	any	resemblance	of	the	question	to
any	 question	 in	 your	 mind,	 the	 answer	 is	 certainly	 for	 you	 --	 as	 it	 is	 for
everybody	else.
Because	my	work	is	not	what	you	call	retail;	it	is	wholesale.
Now,	if	I	go	on	doing	retail	work,	 it	will	be	 too	big	a	 job	in	 too	small	a	 life;	I
cannot	help	many	people.
I	 do	 a	 wholesale	 job.	My	 answer	 is	 for	 you,	 whether	 you	 have	 asked	 or	 not.
Perhaps	 you	 may	 ask	 tomorrow	 or	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow;	 just	 wait	 --	 but
remember	 the	 answer.	 The	 question	will	 come.	 The	 question	may	 be	 coming,
already	arising	from	your	unconscious	layers;	it	has	just	not	reached	in	time.	So
you	keep	the	answer;	the	question	is	bound	to	come.
I	am	answering	your	questions	 just	 to	kill	 them,	 just	 to	destroy	 them,	so	 that	 I
can	help	you	to	go	beyond	questions	and	beyond	answers	into	a	state	of	silence
where	there	is	no	question	and	no	answer.
That	space	is	the	space	of	all	miracles,	of	all	mysteries.
That	magical	space	I	call	true	religion.
To	enter	into	it	is	to	be	a	religious	person.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 SITTING	HERE	WITH	YOU,	 I	 TRY	 TO	WATCH	AND	 TO	BE	AS
AWARE
AS	 POSSIBLE.	 MY	 MIND	 RUNS	 ON,	 WONDERING	 IF	 THIS	 SPACE	 IS
RIGHT,	 WHETHER	 I	 SHOULD	 BE	 THE	WATCHER	 OR	 BE	 LOST	 INTO
YOU.	AT	THE
SAME	TIME,	I	TRY	TO	RELAX	AND	IGNORE	ALL	THIS.
SOMEHOW,	DESPITE	ALL	 THESE	GYMNASTICS,	A	MOMENT	COMES
WHEN
MELTING	 HAPPENS,	 AND	 I	 BECOME	 SO	 SOFT	 AND	 RECEPTIVE,	 SO
VERY
SIMPLE	AND	FLOWING.
BELOVED	MASTER,	HOW	CAN	I	GET	OUT	OF	MY	OWN	WAY	SO	THAT
I	DON'T	WASTE	SO	MUCH	OF	THIS	PRECIOUS	TIME	WITH	YOU?
There	are	things	which	are	really	simple,	but	become	very	complicated	because
of	you.
Now	sitting	here,	you	can	simply	relax	and	enjoy	--	but	no,	you	make	a	problem
out	 of	 it:	 whether	 to	 relax	 or	 to	 merge	 or	 to	 watch.	 And	 in	 all	 this,	 you	 are
missing	the	train.
There	is	no	need	to	do	anything	here.
Just	 relax	and	 listen,	and	out	of	 that	 listening	a	 few	insights	will	come	 to	you.
Use	those	insights	in	your	life.
When	 somebody	 insults	 you,	 watch	 it	 --	 as	 if	 you	 are	 just	 the	 watcher,	 he	 is
insulting	somebody	else.	That's	truly	the	case.
Or	 you	 are	 sitting	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 ocean	 --	 merge	 with	 the	 beauty	 of	 the
sunrise,	don't	bring	the	watcher	in,	because	beauty	is	something	which	has	to	be
enjoyed.
And	anger	is	something	which	has	to	be	dropped.
So	different	methods	have	to	be	used	in	different	situations.
Lying	on	your	bed,	you	have	nothing	to	do	--	just	relax.	The	whole	day	you	have
been	active,	you	have	been	doing	a	thousand	and	one	things.	Now	is	the	time	to
forget	it	all	and	just	let	your	whole	energy	relax	and	be	refreshed.
Relaxation,	 merging,	 watching	 --	 all	 are	 different	 techniques	 for	 different
situations.	And	if	you	are	trying	all	the	techniques	in	a	single	situation,	you	will
simply	miss	the	whole	point	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	do	either	this	or	that.
Still,	you	are	fortunate	that	doing	such	a	stupid	thing	you	finally	find	relaxation.
Perhaps	 you	 get	 tired,	 because	 enough	 is	 enough	 --	 merging,	 watching,
relaxing....	You	get	tired,	so	relaxation	comes	on	its	own;	you	feel	soft.
It	is	good.
In	India	we	have	a	proverb	that	if	a	person	gets	lost	in	the	morning	and	comes
home	by	the	evening,	he	should	not	be	called	`lost'.	At	least	he	has	come	back	--
for	the	whole	day	he	has	been	wandering	and	doing	all	kinds	of	stupid	things.
But	 when	 you	 see	 that	 relaxation	 comes	 and	 you	 are	 soft	 and	 things	 become
beautiful,	 why	 not	 do	 it	 from	 the	 very	 beginning?	 Or	 is	 that	 introduction	 a
necessity?
If	you	have	seen	George	Bernard	Shaw's	dramas,	his	introductions	are	very	long,
longer	 than	 the	 drama.	 The	 drama	 is	 very	 small,	 and	 the	 introduction	 is	 three
times	bigger.	Every	friend,	well-wisher,	told	him,	"This	is	unnecessarily	tiring.	If
we	miss	 the	 introduction	and	 just	 read	 the	drama,	 then	 it	 feels	 that	perhaps	we
are	missing	something:	the	man	has	written	such	a	big	introduction,	there	must
be	something	 in	 it.	And	 if	we	read	your	 introduction,	 it	 is	so	 tiring	 that	by	 the
time	we	 come	 to	 the	 drama	we	 feel	 like	 throwing	 the	 book	 away	 --	 you	 have
tortured	us	so	much."
There	is	no	need	of	long	introductions,	just	a	preface.
So	it	is	okay	if	for	a	minute	or	two	you	do	merging,	relaxation,	watching;	finish
it	quickly	so	you	feel	satisfied	that	the	introduction	part	 is	done.	Then	come	to
the	real	drama	--
relax	and	enjoy.
Things	 are	 simple.	But	 somehow	 the	mind	wants	 to	make	 them	 unnecessarily
complicated,	because	unless	they	are	complicated,	the	mind	is	not	of	any	use.
The	 mind	 is	 useful	 only	 when	 something	 is	 complicated	 --	 then	 the	 mind	 is
needed.	When	the	thing	is	simple,	the	mind	is	not	needed	at	all.
And	 life	 is	 so	 simple	 that	 if	 one	 is	 courageous	 enough	 to	 live	 it,	mind	 can	be
abandoned	completely.	And	to	abandon	the	mind	and	to	live	life	spontaneously
is	what	I	call	sannyas.
Moment	to	moment,	we	will	see.
Why	go	on	doing	rehearsals?
When	the	moment	comes,	your	consciousness	will	face	it	and	respond	to	it.
But	people	are	preparing	so	much	 that	almost	 their	whole	 lives	are	used	up	 in
preparations.
I	have	heard	about	a	German	professor.	He	wanted	to	have	the	biggest	collection
of	philosophical,	religious,	spiritual	literature.	And	he	was	a	very	rich	man	too,
so	 he	 wandered	 around	 the	 earth	 collecting	 all	 kinds	 of	 scriptures.	 There	 are
three	hundred	religions	in	the	world,	and	there	are	hundreds	of	philosophies,	and
each	 philosophy	 has	 hundreds	 of	 books	 in	 different	 languages.	 And	 he	 had
translators	 translating	 them	all	 into	German.	This	was	all	preparation	for	when
he	would	start	reading.
But	by	the	time	he	was	ninety,	he	was	still	collecting	books.
Somebody	 told	 him,	 "Now	 it	 is	 time	 that	 you	 should	 start	 reading.	 The
preparation	 has	 gone	 on	 too	 long,	 and	 you	 have	 thousands	 and	 thousands	 of
books	--	we	don't	think	you	will	be	able	to	read	all	of	them.	Your	life	is	just	at
the	very	end,	maybe	a	year	or	two	more."
But	the	man	said,	"But	my	collection	is	not	complete	yet."
So	 he	 started	 collecting	 more	 forcibly,	 put	 more	 men	 into	 collection,	 into
translation.
Finally	he	fell	sick,	and	the	doctor	said,	"He	is	not	going	to	survive	more	 than
seven	days."
He	called	all	the	scholars	who	were	translating	his	books:	"Now	stop	translating.
You	 just	 try	 to	 find	 small	 summaries	 from	every	 scripture,	 because	 I	 have	got
only	seven	days	and	I	want	to	know	what	is	written	in	all	the	scriptures.	So	just
prepare	small	summaries	of	all	the	scriptures."
But	the	scholars	said,	"You	have	collected	so	many	scriptures,	even	summaries
will	not	be	possible.	We	will	try,	but	in	seven	days	all	the	summaries	will	not	be
ready."
The	last	day	came.	He	inquired	again,	"What	has	happened?"
They	said,	"We	are	trying."
He	 said,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 it.	 You	 do	 one	 thing:	 just	 make	 one	 small	 note
summarizing	all	 the	scriptures.	Because	 there	 is	no	more	 time;	 I	 feel	 that	 I	am
going.	So	be	fast	and	be	quick."
They	said,	"How	can	we	be	fast	and	quick?	We	have	 to	 look	 into	scriptures	 to
find	 the	 very	 gist,	 the	 very	 essential	 center	 of	 all	 of	 them.	 It	will	 take	 a	 little
time."
The	whole	day	passed,	and	by	the	evening	when	they	had	come	to	a	conclusion,
a	small	summary	of	a	few	pages....	They	reached;	the	man	was	almost	drowning.
He	said,	"That	many	pages	won't	do.	You	just	make	it	half	a	page,	just	a	small
summary	that	can	be	printed	on	a	postcard.	I	don't	have	time	for	all	these	pages."
So	they	rushed	back,	again	they	summarized.	Now	it	meant	nothing,	because	all
those	scriptures,	 summaries	and	summaries...	 and	by	 the	 time	 they	came	back,
the	man	was	dead.
His	wife	 said,	 "It	 is	 a	very	 sad	 thing.	You	can	at	 least	 shout	 loudly	 in	his	 ear;
perhaps	he	may	be	able	to	hear.	He	is	just	going	down."
The	doctor	said,	"Now	it	is	useless.	But	you	can	try,	there	is	no	harm	in	it."	So
one	 scholar	 shouted	 the	 summary	 of	 all	 the	 scriptures.	But	 the	man	was	 dead
already,	and	the	doctors	were	saying,	"Now	he	cannot	hear."
His	whole	life	went	into	preparation.
And	 this	 is	 not	 the	 story	 of	 one	 strange,	 weird	 man.	 This	 is	 the	 story	 of	 all
normal	 people:	 preparation,	 preparation,	 preparation.	 They	 forget	 completely,
that...	preparation	for	what?
We	are	not	certain	even	of	the	next	moment.
Preparation	for	what?
Either	live	or	prepare.
If	you	want	to	live,	live	now.
Or	prepare	for	tomorrow	--	and	remember,	tomorrow	never	comes.	What	comes
in	place	of	 tomorrow	is	death.	An	 intelligent	person	 lives	his	 life.	He	does	not
bother	about	preparations,	disciplines.
You	 are	 here	 with	 me.	 Live	 this	 moment	 to	 its	 totality,	 to	 its	 very	 intensity.
Perhaps	out	of	 that	 totality	and	 intensity,	you	may	get	 the	 taste	 that	will	go	on
lingering	 with	 you	 into	 the	 next	 moment.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 known	 that	 a
moment	can	be	 lived	with	 totality	and	 intensity,	you	know	 the	secret,	 the	very
secret	of	life.
You	are	always	given	a	single	moment;	you	are	not	given	two	moments	together.
If	you	know	the	secret	of	living	one	moment,	you	know	the	whole	secret	of	life.
Because	you	will	always	get	one	moment	--	and	you	know	how	to	live	it,	how	to
be	totally	in	it.
Your	question	reminds	me	about	one	of	my	old	friends,	a	centipede.	A	centipede
has	one	hundred	legs;	hence,	the	namècentipede'.	The	name	comes	from	ancient
Sanskrit,	shattpadee.
Just	one	morning,	early	in	the	morning	as	the	sun	was	rising,	the	centipede	was
going	for	a	morning	walk.	A	philosophical	 rabbit,	watching	the	 legs,	could	not
believe	--	he	said,
"My	 God,	 this	 centipede	 is	 going	 to	 be	 in	 trouble	 soon.	 How	 is	 he	 going	 to
remember	which	foot	first,	which	foot	second...	one	hundred	legs!	He	is	bound
to	be	in	trouble."
The	 rabbit	 came	close	 and	 said	 to	 the	 centipede,	 "Uncle,	 I	 am	a	philosophical
rabbit	--
just	a	student,	an	inquirer	about	truth."
The	centipede	said,	"That	is	all	right,	but	what	is	the	problem?"
He	said,	"The	problem	is:	how	do	you	manage	one	hundred	legs?"
So	 the	 centipede	 said,	 "I	 never	 thought	 about	 it.	 And	 no	 centipede	 has	 ever
thought	 about	 it;	 there	 is	 no	 mention	 of	 it	 in	 our	 scriptures.	 We	 have	 been
managing	perfectly	well.	But	your	question	is	valid.	Just	sit.	I	will	 try,"	and	he
could	not	go	even	two	feet.	Puzzled,	he	fell	down.
And	he	was	very	angry	at	the	rabbit.	He	said,	"You	rascal,	never	again	ask	any
centipede	 your	 philosophical	 question,	 because	 now	 I	 am	 in	 trouble.	 And	 the
question	has	got	into	my	head;	now	I	cannot	walk	without	thinking	about	how	it
is	happening	--	which	one?
And	one	hundred	legs...	my	life	is	finished.	But	be	kind	enough	not	to	ask	such
questions	to	anybody	else.	I	will	 try	to	forget	this	question.	I	don't	know....	If	I
can	forget	it	I	can	live;	if	I	cannot	forget	it,	I	am	finished."
Now	you	are	trying	to	be	in	my	presence,	relaxing,	merging,	watching...	you	will
get	into	trouble.
Forget	all	nonsense,	forget	all	philosophical	questions.
Here,	just	be.
Simply	be,	and	out	of	that	being	grows	an	understanding	that	will	give	you	the
insight	into	where	to	merge,	where	to	watch,	where	to	relax.
Here,	you	are	to	just	get	a	taste	of	being	--	of	being	fully	alive,	silent,	joyous	--
and	everything	else	will	come	out	of	it.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	Harmony...	The	birthplace	of	love
13	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610135
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH11
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
136
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	FRUIT	FALLS	ON	THE	GROUND	WHEN	IT	IS	RIPE.	ONE	DAY,	YOU
WILL
LEAVE	 US,	 AND	 IT	 WILL	 BE	 IMPOSSIBLE	 TO	 HAVE	 ANOTHER
MASTER	IN
YOUR	PLACE.
HOW	CAN	ANYBODY	ELSE	BE	THE	SUBSTITUTE	FOR	THE	MASTER
OF
MASTERS?
OSHO,	 WHEN	 YOU	 LEAVE	 THE	 PHYSICAL	 BODY,	 WILL	 YOUR
MEDITATION
TECHNIQUES	HELP	OUR	INNER	GROWTH	AS	THEY	DO	NOW?
My	approach	to	your	growth	is	basically	to	make	you	independent	of	me.
Any	kind	of	dependence	 is	a	slavery,	and	 the	spiritual	dependence	 is	 the	worst
slavery	of	all.
I	have	been	making	every	effort	to	make	you	aware	of	your	individuality,	your
freedom,	your	absolute	capacity	 to	grow	without	any	help	from	anybody.	Your
growth	is	something	intrinsic	to	your	being.	It	does	not	come	from	outside;	it	is
not	an	imposition,	it	is	an	unfolding.
All	the	meditation	techniques	that	I	have	given	to	you	are	not	dependent	on	me	-
-	my	presence	or	absence	will	not	make	any	difference	--	they	are	dependent	on
you.	It	is	not	my	presence,	but	your	presence	that	is	needed	for	them	to	work.
It	is	not	my	being	here	but	your	being	here,	your	being	in	the	present,	your	being
alert	and	aware	that	is	going	to	help.
I	can	understand	your	question	and	its	relevance.	It	is	not	irrelevant.
The	whole	past	of	man	is,	in	different	ways,	a	history	of	exploitation.	And	even
the	so-called	spiritual	people	could	not	resist	the	temptation	to	exploit.	Out	of	a
hundred	 masters,	 ninety-nine	 percent	 were	 trying	 to	 impose	 the	 idea	 that,
"Without	 me	 you	 cannot	 grow,	 no	 progress	 is	 possible.	 Give	 me	 your	 whole
responsibility."
But	the	moment	you	give	your	whole	responsibility	to	somebody,	unknowingly
you	are	also	giving	your	whole	freedom.
And	naturally,	all	those	masters	had	to	die	one	day,	but	they	have	left	long	lines
of	 slaves:	 Christians,	 Jews,	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans.	 What	 are	 these	 people?
Why	should	somebody	be	a	Christian?	If	you	can	be	someone,	be	a	Christ,	never
be	 a	 Christian.	 Are	 you	 absolutely	 blind	 to	 the	 humiliation	 when	 you	 call
yourself	a	Christian,	a	follower	of	someone	who	died	two	thousand	years	ago?
The	 whole	 of	 humanity	 is	 following	 the	 dead.	 Is	 it	 not	 weird	 that	 the	 living
should	follow	the	dead,	that	the	living	should	be	dominated	by	the	dead,	that	the
living	should	depend	on	the	dead	and	their	promises	that	`We	will	be	coming	to
save	you.'?
None	of	 them	has	come	to	save	you.	In	fact,	nobody	can	save	anybody	else;	 it
goes	against	the	foundational	truth	of	freedom	and	individuality.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 am	 simply	making	 every	 effort	 to	make	 you	 free
from	everybody	--	including	me	--	and	to	just	be	alone	on	the	path	of	searching.
This	existence	respects	a	person	who	dares	 to	be	alone	 in	 the	seeking	of	 truth.
Slaves	 are	 not	 respected	 by	 existence	 at	 all.	 They	 do	 not	 deserve	 any	 respect;
they	 don't	 respect	 themselves,	 how	 can	 they	 expect	 existence	 to	 be	 respectful
towards	them?
So	remember,	when	I	am	gone,	you	are	not	going	to	lose	anything.	Perhaps	you
may	gain	something	of	which	you	are	absolutely	unaware.
Right	now	I	am	available	to	you	only	embodied,	 imprisoned	in	a	certain	shape
and	form.
When	I	am	gone,	where	can	I	go?	I	will	be	here	in	the	winds,	in	the	ocean;	and	if
you	have	loved	me,	if	you	have	trusted	me,	you	will	feel	me	in	a	thousand	and
one	ways.	In	your	silent	moments	you	will	suddenly	feel	my	presence.
Once	I	am	unembodied,	my	consciousness	is	universal.	Right	now	you	have	to
come	to	me.
Then,	 you	will	 not	 need	 to	 seek	 and	 search	 for	me.	Wherever	 you	 are...	 your
thirst,	 your	 love...	 and	 you	 will	 find	 me	 in	 your	 very	 heart,	 in	 your	 very
heartbeat.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEING	 ON	 MY	 OWN	 IN	 THE	 MARKETPLACE,	 I	 FELT	 MYSELF
BECOMING
VERY	MECHANICAL	AND	UNAWARE	IN	MY	ACTIVITIES.	NOW,	BEING
IN
YOUR	 PRESENCE	 AND	 GOING	 INSIDE,	 MY	 BODY-MIND	 SPEED	 IS
SLOWING
DOWN,	AND	SELF	CONSCIOUSNESS	IS	ARISING.	THIS	STATE	OF	SELF
COSNCIOUSNESS	GIVES	A	LIGHTNESS,	AND	ONE	WANTS	TO	STAY	IN
IT
MORE	AND	MORE.	WHEN	I	LOOK	AT	YOU,	I	SEE	A	GRACE	THAT	IS
POINTING	FAR	BEYOND.
OSHO,	 CAN	 YOU	 SPEAK	 ON	 THE	 SELF	 CONSCIOUSNESS	 OF	 THE
DISCIPLE,	AND	THE	GRACE	OF	THE	MASTER?
It	is	good	that	you	are	becoming	aware	of	a	very	essential	phenomenon:	that	in
the	marketplace	you	had	become	mechanical,	robot-like.
Coming	here,	you	are	more	relaxed.
The	speed	of	the	mind	is	slowly,	slowly	getting	less.	And	as	your	awareness	is
becoming	 clear,	 your	 mechanicalness	 is	 disappearing.	 You	 have	 to	 see	 that
awareness	 and	 mechanicalness	 cannot	 exist	 together;	 there	 is	 no	 coexistence
possible	between	those	two	factors.
In	 the	marketplace	you	are	not	expected	 to	be	aware	--	you	are	expected	 to	be
efficient.
Efficiency	 is	 a	 quality	 of	 machines;	 machines	 are	 more	 efficient	 than	 human
beings.
Because	 efficiency	 is	 required,	 you	 become	 more	 mechanical,	 and	 as	 you
become	more	mechanical	your	awareness	disappears.
And	your	awareness	 is	your	real	being.	By	efficiency	and	mechanicalness,	you
may	 succeed	 in	 earning	 more	 money,	 more	 power,	 more	 prestige,	 more
respectability,	 but	 you	 will	 lose	 yourself.	 And	 you	 are	 losing	 yourself	 very
cheaply;	what	you	are	gaining	in	return	is	worthless.
Do	 you	 know	how	many	 people	 have	 lived	 before	 you	 on	 this	 earth?	Do	 you
realize	 the	fact	 that	millions	of	 them	were	successful	people?	Millions	of	 them
were	 famous	 in	 their	 time,	 and	 now	people	 don't	 even	 remember	 their	 names.
They	have	disappeared	like	dreams,	without	leaving	any	trace	behind.
We	are	also	going	to	disappear	in	the	same	way.	The	only	few	people	who	have
died	 and	yet	 continue	 to	 live	 on	 in	 people's	 love,	 in	 people's	 trust,	 are	 not	 the
very	 successful	 --	 the	 emperors,	 the	world	 conquerors,	 the	 richest.	 These	 few
people	who,	 in	spite	of	 their	deaths,	 still	beat	 in	 the	hearts	of	man	belong	 to	a
totally	different	category:	they	were	the	people	of	awareness,	people	with	soul.
Their	impact	has	been	so	deep	that	it	will	remain	unto	the	last	man.
Gautam	 Buddha,	 Lao	 Tzu,	 Kabir,	 Christ,	 al-Hillaj	 Mansoor	 --	 these	 people
cannot	be	forgotten.	They	will	go	on	living	in	the	deepest	parts	of	your	being	for
the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 never	 compromised	 their	 awareness	 for	 the
expectations	of	the	marketplace.
So	the	first	thing	--	you	have	become	aware.	Make	your	awareness	more	sharp,
and	next	time	when	you	go	to	the	marketplace	there	is	no	need	to	become	robot-
like.	Perhaps	you	will	not	be	as	efficient	as	robots	--	so	what?	Perhaps	you	will
not	be	as	successful	as	the	mechanical	ones	--	so	what?	Let	them	have	their	day,
and	 then	 they	will	 disappear	 like	 soap	bubbles.	Don't	 feel	 jealous	of	 them.	Be
compassionate	towards	them,	and	remain	contented	with	your	awareness.
Risk	everything	for	awareness,	but	never	risk	awareness	for	anything.	This	is	the
commitment	 of	 a	 sannyasin:	 that	 he	 is	 ready	 to	 lose	 his	 life	 but	 not	 his
awareness;	he	has	found	a	value	which	is	higher	than	life.
There	is	no	other	value	which	is	higher	than	awareness.
Awareness	is	the	seed	of	godliness	in	you.
When	 it	 comes	 to	 its	 full	 growth,	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 fulfillment	 of	 your
destiny.
As	your	awareness	goes	deeper,	your	actions	may	not	be	efficient	but	they	will
have	 a	 new	 quality	 --	 the	 quality	 of	 grace	 --	 which	 is	 far	 more	 valuable.	 No
machine	 can	 have	 the	 quality	 of	 grace.	 Your	 actions,	 your	 words	 will	 have	 a
beauty	of	their	own.
The	way	a	man	of	awareness	lives,	each	moment	is	filled	with	tremendous	grace
and	beauty.	It	is	reflected	in	his	actions,	even	in	the	smallest	actions	--	just	in	the
gesture	 of	 his	 hand	 or	 just	 the	 way	 he	 looks;	 in	 the	 depth	 of	 his	 eyes	 or	 the
authority	 of	 his	 words	 or	 the	 music	 of	 his	 silence.	 His	 very	 presence	 is	 a
celebration.
In	comparison	to	such	a	man,	emperors	are	beggars;	they	have	everything	of	the
world,	but	inside	they	are	empty.	The	temple	may	be	made	of	gold,	but	inside	the
master	of	the	temple	is	missing.
The	disciple	becomes	every	day	more	and	more	graceful,	more	and	more	alert	--
and	with	all	these	qualities,	a	deep	gratefulness	towards	the	master	is	a	necessary
outcome.
It	is	not	that	you	have	to	do	it.	If	you	do	it,	it	is	phony.
If	it	comes	on	its	own	accord,	then	it	has	authenticity.
And	 as	 your	 gratefulness	 grows,	 you	 become	more	 available,	more	 open.	The
master	 can	 pour	 his	 whole	 being	 into	 you,	 all	 his	 blessings,	 his	 whole
benediction.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 SENSE	 SOMETHING	 WONDERFUL,	 SOMETHING	 INCREDIBLE
HAPPENING
TO	YOU	OVER	THERE	IN	YOUR	CHAIR.	AND	MORE	AND	MORE	OVER
THE
YEARS,	 I	 SENSE	 SOMETHING	 REALLY	 WONDERFUL	 HAPPENING
WITHIN	ME
OVER	HERE.	FOR	ME,	 IT	 IS	NOT	ENLIGHTENMENT	 --	 I	KNOW	THAT.
BUT	IT
IS	LIKE	A	HARMONY	WITH	YOU.
OSHO,	 CAN	 YOU	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 HOW	 I	 CAN	 REACH
THROUGH
THE	SMOKE	OF	THE	MIND	TO	BRING	THIS	WONDROUSNESS,	THIS
BEAUTIFUL	FEELING	OF	GIFTEDNESS	OUT	INTO	THE	OPEN	SO	THAT
IT	CAN
GROW?
The	 phenomenon	 of	 harmony	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 mysterious	 experiences
possible.
It	means	that	two	bodies	are	still	two	bodies,	but	the	two	souls	within	them	are
no	more	two.
One	soul	within	two	bodies:
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	harmony.
It	is	the	most	exquisite	experience.
Ordinarily	 we	 are	 living	 in	 conflict,	 in	 disharmony.	 The	 husband	 is	 living	 in
disharmony	with	the	wife	--	they	call	it	living	together.	But	unless	this	oneness
arises,	their	togetherness	is	nothing	but	an	underground	conflict,	erupting	at	any
moment	for	any	meaningless,	silly	reason.	Both	are	sitting	on	volcanoes.
Parents	are	feeling	a	generation	gap	between	themselves	and	their	own	children.
There	seems	to	be	no	common	ground	of	understanding;	harmony	is	a	faraway
goal.	 They	 don't	 even	 understand	 each	 other's	 language	 --	 not	 that	 they	 speak
different	 languages,	 but	 their	 visions	 are	 different,	 their	 attitudes	 are	 different,
their	approach	towards	life	is	different	--
and	there	seems	to	be	no	way	to	come	to	any	conclusion.	Parents	and	children
are	no	more	on	speaking	terms	because	each	time	they	speak	it	turns	out	to	be	a
fight.
The	same	 thing	happens	with	husbands	and	wives.	When	 they	are	newly	wed,
things	 are	 hot	 --	 they	 fight,	 the	 wives	 throw	 things,	 break	 plates,	 cups	 and
glasses,	throw	pillows.
The	husbands	behave	in	the	same	way	--	they	beat	the	same	woman	they	used	to
think	 they	 could	 not	 live	without.	 They	 not	 only	 beat	 her,	 they	 even	 imagine
many	 times	 killing	 her;	 otherwise,	 the	 wife	 is	 going	 to	 kill	 him.	 It	 is	 only	 a
question	of	who	takes	the	initiative;	it	is	a	cold	war.
Slowly	 slowly,	 things	 get	 cooler:	 no	more	 pillow	 fights,	 no	more	 breaking	 of
cups	and	glasses	and	saucers.	But	that	does	not	mean	that	they	have	come	to	a
harmony.	That	 simply	means	 they	 have	 understood	 the	 stupidity	 of	 it	 all;	 it	 is
better	to	be	silent.	The	husband	simply	goes	on	reading	the	same	newspaper.	On
Sunday	 it	 is	 a	 little	 difficult;	 they	 avoid	 each	 other,	 they	 don't	want	 to	 be	 left
alone	together.
One	of	my	friends	--	a	very	rich	man	--	asked	me	when	he	became	fifty,	"I	have
enough	money.	I	had	only	two	girls,	who	are	married.	And	it	is	very	difficult...
because	only	my	wife	and	I	are	left	in	the	house."
But	I	said,	"You	should	be	happy.	I	thought	this	was	a	love	marriage."
He	said,	"Now	I	don't	use	that	word	`love'	at	all;	it	is	that	word	that	destroyed	my
life.	So	just	because	of	the	wife,	I	continue	with	the	business	and	the	industries	--
just	to	avoid	her,	because	otherwise	there	would	be	no	need."
I	said,	"Then	find	a	beautiful	hill	station,	and	move	there	and	live	peacefully."
He	said,	 "But...	 alone	with	 this	woman	on	a	hill	 station?	You	are	 suggesting	a
murder!"
I	said,	"What	are	you	talking	about?	Who	is	going	to	murder	whom?"
He	said,	"That	depends	on	who	takes	the	initiative	first.	With	this	woman	alone?
--	no!	If	you	are	willing	to	stay	with	us,	I	could	be	safe,	I	could	go	to	any	hill
station.	Without	a	friend,	we	don't	even	go	to	see	a	movie.	The	friend	has	to	sit
between	the	two	of	us;	otherwise,	something...	and	anything	is	enough	to	begin	a
quarrel."
I	said,	"I	never	see	you	fighting."
He	 said,	 "That's	 true;	 for	 years,	 everything	 has	 gone	 underground.	But	we	 are
fighting.
Inside	myself,	 I	 am	beating	 her;	 inside	 herself	 she	 is	 beating	me	 --	 but	 not	 to
make	a	show.	What	will	people	think,	what	will	the	servants	think?"
They	were	not	sleeping	in	the	same	room.	I	asked	the	wife	why.	She	said,	"No,
there	is	not	much	of	a	problem...	it	is	because	he	snores."
I	said,	"I	have	slept	in	the	same	room	with	him	many	times.	I	have	never	heard
him	snoring."
I	asked	my	friend,	"What	is	the	matter?	Your	wife	says	you	snore."
He	said,	"Yes,	I	snore	--	just	to	keep	her	in	the	other	room.	I	never	snore	in	my
sleep!
That's	why	you	have	not	heard	it.	I	have	to	make	an	effort	to	snore	--	it	is	a	very
difficult	art,	one	has	to	learn	it	--	just	to	give	her	an	excuse.	She	wanted	to	sleep
in	the	other	room,	but	some	excuse	was	needed.	And	it	is	perfectly	peaceful	to
be	here.	She	is	there,	and	I	lock	the	door	from	inside,	because	she	may	come	in
the	middle	of	the	night;	some	idea	may	come	to	her	and	a	quarrel	will	start."
People	are	not	living	in	harmony.
Harmony	is	an	empty	word,	and	for	most	of	the	people,	unfortunately,	it	remains
empty.
They	know	only	fight,	anger.
Harmony	means	you	are	dropping	your	ego,	you	are	saying,	"I	would	like	to	be
with	you,	so	deeply	one,	that	this	very	idea	of	Ì'	is	no	more	needed."
A	few	people	have	lived	in	harmony;	and	particularly	the	master	and	the	disciple
cannot	 have	 any	 kind	 of	 relationship	without	 harmony.	 The	master	 is	without
ego;	the	disciple	just	has	to	drop	his	ego,	and	two	consciousnesses	become	one,
and	a	great	music	vibrates
--	in	both	persons,	one	music.
It	has	happened	 in	other	 relationships	 too,	but	very	 rarely.	 I	 am	reminded	of	a
strange	book	in	Sanskrit.	It's	name	is	bhamiti.	It	is	a	strange	name	because	it	is	a
commentary	 on	 one	 of	 the	 most	 philosophical	 treatises	 ever	 written,	 the
BRAHMASUTRAS	of	Badarayan.
Badarayan	 is	 perhaps	 the	 greatest	 philosopher	 the	world	 has	 produced,	 and	he
has	 written	 these	 small	 maxims,	 BRAHMASUTRAS,	 maxims	 about	 the
ultimate.
There	is	no	other	book	in	the	whole	world	on	which	so	many	commentaries	have
been	written	--	 thousands	and	thousands	of	commentaries,	because	the	maxims
are	 so	 small,	 so	 condensed	 that	 unless	 somebody	 opens	 them,	 explains	 them,
interprets	them,	you	will	not	be	able	to	find	their	meaning.
BRAHMASUTRA	 is	 a	 strange	 book.	 No	 other	 book	 has	 the	 same	 fate	 as
Badarayan's	 BRAHMASUTRA.	 Commentaries	 were	 written,	 but	 the
commentaries	 were	 also	 very	 difficult	 to	 understand,	 so	 commentaries	 upon
commentaries	 were	 written.	 But	 still	 these	 were	 not	 so	 simple	 either,	 so
commentaries	on	those	commentaries....	This	is	the	only	book	in	which	you	will
find	a	series	of	commentaries;	the	original	is	lost.	And	for	thousands	of	years	in
India,	people	have	been	writing	commentaries	on	the	commentaries	to	bring	its
meaning	to	the	masses.
One	 of	 the	 commentaries,	 one	 of	 the	 best	 commentaries	 on	 the
BRAHMASUTRAS,	 is	 bhamiti,	 and	 it	 is	 strange,	 because	 bhamiti	 is	 a	 weird
name	for	a	commentary.	`Bhamiti'	is	the	name	of	a	certain	woman,	and	to	give
that	name	to	the	commentary....
The	commentary	was	written	by	a	great	 philosopher,	Vachaspati,	whose	wife's
name	was	Bhamiti.	 It	 took	 him	 twelve	 years	 to	write	 the	 commentary,	 and	 he
decided	 that	 the	 day	 the	 commentary	 was	 complete,	 he	 would	 renounce	 the
world	and	go	to	the	Himalayas.
One	day,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	the	commentary	was	completed.	He	took	the
candle,	 in	whose	light	he	had	been	writing	the	commentary,	 to	go	to	his	room.
And	on	the	way	there,	he	found	a	woman	and	he	asked,	"Who	are	you	and	what
are	you	doing	here?"
She	said,	"My	lord,	you	were	so	much	immersed	in	writing	the	commentary,	you
forgot	completely	that	you	had	married	me.	I	am	your	wife."
Vachaspati	said,	"I	 remember.	And	I	also	remember	 that	every	day...	 just	show
me	your	hand,	because	 I	can	 recognize	your	hand.	You	were	 the	one	who	was
putting	the	candle	by	my	side	every	day	as	the	sun	was	setting.	I	know	this	hand.
But	it	is	too	late;	I	have	decided	that	the	day	the	commentary	is	complete	I	will
leave	the	house.	You	should	have	reminded	me."
Bhamiti	said,	"It	would	have	been	very	unloving	to	disturb	you;	I	was	waiting.
And	 don't	 be	 worried	 --	 if	 you	 have	 decided	 to	 leave,	 you	 leave	 without	 any
worry.	I	will	not	come	as	a	hindrance	to	your	decision.	It	is	enough	that	I	can	see
that	you	are	worried	for	me.
This	will	be	enough	for	my	whole	life,	that	you	had	a	certain	love."
Vachaspati	said,	"You	are	a	great	woman.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	such	a	woman.	It
is	easy	to	find	many	commentators	of	my	quality,	but	to	find	a	woman	of	your
quality	--	such	love,	such	trust,	such	waiting,	such	patience.	And	such	greatness
of	heart	--	just	your	concern	that	it	is	getting	late	is	enough	for	you	--	as	if	there
is	no	expectation.	I	will	call	my	commentary	Bhamiti,	so	that	whoever	reads	this
commentary	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 surprised	 by	 the	 name"	 --	 because	 it	 has	 no
relevance;	the	commentary	is	on	the	BRAHMASUTRAS....	And,	Bhamiti?
"But	without	you,	and	without	your	love,	and	without	your	patience,	and	without
your	silent	waiting....	You	never	came	 in	 front	of	me,	and	you	are	so	beautiful
that	 it	 is	 certain:	 if	 you	 had	 come	 in	 front	 of	 me,	 it	 would	 have	 been	 a
disturbance.	I	may	have	forgotten	about	the	commentary;	I	may	have	delayed	in
completing	it	just	to	remain	with	you."
But	Bhamiti	said,	"I	have	received	more	than	I	deserve.	You	should	not	wait	in
the	house	any	longer.	Let	me	have	the	pride	of	having	a	husband	who	followed
his	decision...	even	though	now	I	can	see	you	are	hesitating.	Don't	hesitate.	I	will
not	allow	you	to	remain	in	the	house;	you	have	to	go	to	the	Himalayas	--	because
if	you	remain	in	the	house,	I	will	not	be	able	to	give	you	the	same	respect."
This	is	a	tremendous,	unbelievable	story.
Vachaspati	 left	 for	 the	 Himalayas,	 but	 he	 could	 not	 forget	 Bhamiti...	 such	 a
quality,	such	grace	and	such	beauty...	something	beyond	human	qualities.	Only
such	people	have	given	proof	that	there	is	something	more	than	human	qualities,
something	which	can	only	be	called	divine.
Vachaspati	remains	a	great	scholar,	but	Bhamiti	proves	to	be	a	far	more	divine
personality.
So	once	in	a	while	there	have	been,	in	other	relationships,	people	who	have	felt
harmony	with	each	other,	but	that	is	extremely	rare	--	accidental	and	exceptional.
But	 as	 far	 as	 the	 master	 and	 disciple	 relationship	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is	 a	 basic
necessity;	without	it,	there	is	no	relationship.
A	musical	oneness...	such	a	deep	love	that	it	consumes	your	ego.	There	are	not
two	persons	in	relationship	but	only	a	harmonious	whole,	an	energy	field.
And	once	you	have	experienced	it	with	a	master,	you	can	experience	it	in	your
other	 relationships	 too,	 because	 the	 principle	 is	 the	 same.	 And	 if	 you	 can
experience	 it	 in	 all	 your	 relationships,	 many	 harmonies	 around	 you,	 your	 life
becomes	truly	a	divine	gift,	an	orchestra.	Then	the	master-discipleship	was	just
the	 learning	 of	 a	 certain	 knack:	 you	 can	 use	 it	 with	 your	 wife,	 with	 your
husband,	 with	 your	 children,	 with	 your	 parents,	 with	 your	 friends.	 You	 can
spread	 it	 all	over	 the	world.	You	can	 feel	 it	with	 the	 trees,	with	 the	 stars;	 it	 is
only	a	question	of	knowing	the	knack.
The	secret	is:	how	not	to	be,	how	to	disappear	as	an	ego.
Then	whatever	you	touch	creates	music,	whatever	you	touch	becomes	gold.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
AFTER	LEAVING	RAJNEESHPURAM	IN	NOVEMBER	LAST	YEAR,	I
EXPERIENCED	 THAT	 IT	 BECAME	 NEARLY	 IMPOSSIBLE	 FOR	ME	 TO
FIND
OUT	WHAT	I	WAS	GOING	TO	DO.	IN	THE	BEGINNING	IT	WAS	A	BIT
FRIGHTENING,	BUT	VERY	SOON	I	SAW	MORE	AND	MORE	THAT	JUST
WAITING	WAS	ENOUGH,	AND	MANY	BEAUTIFUL	THINGS	STARTED
HAPPENING	TO	ME,	WITHOUT	MY	GOING	FOR	IT.
IS	THIS	HOW	BEING	WITH	YOU	WORKS?
It	is	not	only	the	way	things	happen	around	me.
It	is	the	way	of	the	whole	existence.
You	just	wait,	and	everything	happens	at	its	right	moment.
Wait	and	watch.	Don't	fall	asleep	--	because	in	waiting	that	is	very	natural,	to	fall
asleep.
Nothing	to	do,	one	falls	asleep.	Then	things	will	be	happening	but	you	will	not
know.	So	wait	and	watch.
Life	 has	 been	 disturbed	 by	 the	 so-called	 do-gooders,	 who	 are	 continuously
preaching	around	the	world,	"Do	this,	do	that,	do	service	to	the	poor."	Doing	has
been	raised	so	high	that	we	have	completely	forgotten	the	art	of	waiting.
And,	certainly,	there	are	things	which	can	happen	only	if	you	do	them.
For	example,	you	cannot	simply	wait	and	grow	rich.
There	are	people	who	even	teach	that.	One	American	thinker,	Napoleon	Hill,	has
written	beautiful	books,	 a	master	writer.	 I	have	always	 liked	one	of	his	books,
THINK	AND
GROW	RICH,	although	 it	 is	absolute	nonsense.	But	he	writes	well.	And	 there
are	people	who	believe	that	all	that	you	have	to	do	is	simply	wait;	sow	the	seeds
of	thinking	that	a	Cadillac	car	should	come	into	your	garage,	and	just	wait.	And
one	day,	suddenly	a	Cadillac	car	comes,	delivered	to	you.	There	are	people	who
believe	this	--	that	thinking	has	so	much	power.
In	 America	 there	 is	 still	 a	 Christian	 sect...	 half	 a	 century	 ago	 it	 was	 very
important	because	a	large	majority	believed	in	it.	The	sect	calls	itself	`Christian
Science'.	 And	 the	 science	 is	 that	 you	 need	 not	 do	 anything,	 you	 have	 just	 to
think.	God	is	the	doer.	You	think,	pray,	wait;	just	give	time	to	God.	And	what	do
you	 think,	 that	 a	Cadillac	 is	 a	 bigger	 thing	 than	 the	whole	 universe?	God	 can
create	the	whole	universe	and	he	cannot	create	a	Cadillac	car?
I	have	heard	a	story	that	a	young	man	was	going	to	college	and	was	met	by	an
old	woman.	She	asked,	"What	happened	to	your	father?	He	is	not	coming	to	our
Sunday	meetings."	They	were	Christian	Scientists.
The	boy	said,	"He	is	sick."
The	old	woman	laughed.	She	said,	"Nonsense,	he	must	be	thinking	he	is	sick.	It
is	thinking	that	matters.	Just	tell	that	old	man,	that	`For	your	whole	life	you	have
been	a	member	of	Christian	Science	and	still	you	have	not	understood	a	simple
thing.	Stop	thinking	that	you	are	sick,	and	you	will	not	be	sick.'"
The	boy	said,	"I	will	deliver	the	message."
After	a	week,	again	 the	old	woman	met	 the	boy	and	said,	"What	happened?	--
because	he	has	not	come	even	this	week	to	the	weekly	meeting	of	the	Christian
Scientists."
The	boy	said,	"Madam,	now	he	thinks	he	is	dead.	And	not	only	does	he	think	he
is	dead,	the	whole	neighborhood	thinks	he	is	dead,	so	they	have	put	him	in	the
grave.	I	tried	to	persuade	them,	`Wait.	He	may	be	thinking...	but	they	think	that	I
am	mad."
There	are	things	which	will	go	on	happening	without	your	doing;	you	have	just
to	wait	--
and	 there	 are	 things	 which	 you	 have	 to	 do;	 only	 then	 will	 they	 happen.	 And
slowly	slowly,	the	things	that	happen	by	doing	became	more	important:	they	are
your	material	possessions,	your	money,	your	power,	your	prestige,	your	palaces,
your	 empires.	 They	 won't	 happen	 just	 by	 waiting.	 By	 waiting,	 you	 will	 not
become	Alexander	 the	Great.	 So	 because	 things	which	 happen	 only	 by	 doing
became	important,	humanity	has	completely	forgotten	 the	whole	area	of	 things
which	happen.
Love	happens,	you	cannot	do	it	--	although	all	over	the	world	people	have	been
trying	to	do	that.	And	it	 is	so	strange	that	the	world	has	not	yet	recognized	the
utter	failure....
Parents,	 for	 centuries,	 have	 been	 arranging	 marriages	 for	 their	 children.
Astrologers	are	asked,	palmists	are	asked,	everything	else	is	inquired	about	--	the
family,	the	wealth,	the	character	of	the	people	--	but	nobody	asks	the	boy	and	the
girl	whether	 they	 love	 each	 other.	Love	 is	 not	 a	 subject	 of	 inquiry	 at	 all.	 It	 is
taken	for	granted	that	once	they	are	married,	they	will	love.
For	thousands	of	years	humanity	has	been	doing	that,	and	certainly	when	a	small
boy	and	girl	are	married,	they	start	being	like	brothers	and	sisters	also	--	fighting,
playing	with	each	other,	quarreling.	They	never	come	to	know	what	love	is;	they
think	this	is	love.
They	 produce	 children,	 they	 buy	 ornaments	 for	 their	 wives,	 the	 wives	 try	 to
make	 the	 life	of	 the	husband	as	difficult	as	possible	 --	 in	every	way,	 they	help
each	other.
It	is	only	just	in	this	century	that	people	started	saying,	"Unless	we	are	in	love,
we	will	not	marry"	--	and	that,	too,	only	in	a	few	advanced	countries.
But	love	is	a	question	about	which	you	cannot	do	anything.	Either	it	happens	or
it	does	not	happen.	It	is	not	within	your	control.
`Love	marriage'	came	into	existence	but	 is	not	going	to	survive,	for	 the	simple
reason	that	love	comes,	happens,	and	one	day	suddenly	goes.	It	was	not	in	your
hands	to	bring	it;	neither	is	it	in	your	hands	to	keep	it.
The	 old	marriage	 failed	 because	 the	 insistence	was	 that	 you	 should	 love	 your
wife,	 you	 should	 love	your	husband.	 It	was	 àshould'.	And	you	 could	not	 even
conceive	how	you	could	love;	at	the	most	you	could	pretend,	you	could	act.
But	love	is	not	a	pretension,	is	not	an	acting.	You	cannot	do	anything.	You	are
absolutely	powerless	as	far	as	love	is	concerned.
The	old	marriage	failed.
The	new	marriage	is	failing	because	the	new	marriage	is	simply	a	reaction	to	the
old	marriage.	 It	 is	 not	 out	 of	 understanding,	 but	only	out	of	 reaction,	 revolt	 --
`love	marriage.'
You	don't	know	what	love	is.	You	simply	see	some	beautiful	face,	you	see	some
beautiful	body	and	you	think,	"My	God,	I	am	in	love!"	This	love	is	not	going	to
last,	because	after	 two	days,	 seeing	 the	same	face	 for	 twenty-four	hours	a	day,
you	will	get	bored.	The	same	body...	you	have	explored	the	whole	topography;
now	there	is	nothing	to	explore.
Exploring	 the	same	geography	again	and	again,	you	feel	 like	an	 idiot.	What	 is
the	point?
This	love	affair,	this	love	marriage	is	failing,	it	has	already	failed.	The	reason	is
that	you	don't	know	how	to	wait	so	that	love	can	happen.
You	have	to	learn	a	meditative	state	of	waiting.	Then	love	is	not	a	passion,	it	is
not	a	desire.	Then	love	is	not	sexual;	then	love	is	a	feeling	of	two	hearts	beating
in	the	same	rhythm.	It	is	not	a	question	of	beautiful	faces	or	beautiful	bodies.	It
is	something	very	deep,	a	question	of	harmony.
If	love	arises	out	of	harmony,	then	only	will	we	know	a	successful	life,	a	life	of
fulfillment	 in	 which	 love	 goes	 on	 deepening	 because	 it	 does	 not	 depend	 on
anything	outer;	 it	 depends	on	 something	 inner.	 It	does	not	depend	on	 the	nose
and	the	length	of	the	nose;	it	depends	on	an	inner	feeling	of	two	hearts	beating	in
the	same	rhythm.	That	rhythm	can	go	on	growing,	can	have	new	depths,	newer
spaces.	Sex	can	be	a	part	of	 it,	but	 it	 is	not	sexual.	Sex	may	come	into	it,	may
disappear	in	it.	It	is	far	greater	than	sex.
So	whether	the	person	you	love	is	young	or	old	does	not	matter.	Every	woman
has	thought	once	in	a	while...	many	women	have	been	asking	their	lovers,	"Will
you	also	love	me	when	I	become	old?"
I	know	about	one	of	my	friends	--	he	asked	me,	that's	why	I	know	--	that	the	girl
he	loves	is	continually	asking	him,	"Will	you	love	me	when	I	am	old?"	He	asked
me,	"What	should	I	say?"
I	said,	"Why	are	you	bringing	me	unnecessarily	 into	 this	 trouble?	This	 is	your
business.
You	say	anything.	What	do	you	feel?"
He	said,	"If	she	becomes	like	her	mother,	I	cannot	love	her.	And	most	probably
she	will	become	like	her,	so	that	is	the	only	fear."
So	 I	 said,	 "Say	 it	 clearly,	 that	 `Your	 old	 age	 is	 not	 the	 question;	 but	 if	 you
become	like	your	mother	then	just	forgive	me,	I	will	not	be	able	to	love	you.'"
He	said,	"But	then	everything	will	be	finished,	because	then	her	mother	will	be
angry,	 and	 the	whole	 thing	 depends	 on	 her.	 I	 am	 persuading	 her	mother.	 The
father	is	dead;	she	is	the	only	one	to	decide	about	the	marriage.	Secondly,	the	girl
will	also	get	angry,	because	she	also	knows	that	she	will	become	like	her	mother.
All	the	symptoms	are	there."
I	said,	"Then	keep	quiet.	Then	when	the	difficult	times	come,	see	me	again."
He	said,	"But	that	girl	is	so	insistent.	She	wants	to	know	before	marriage."
I	 said,	 "It	 is	 simple.	You	 start	 asking	 her,	 `When	 I	 become	 old,	will	 you	 love
me?'"
He	said,	"That's	good,	because	I	am	going	to	become	old	just	like	my	father,	and
she	hates	my	father	just	like	I	hate	her	mother.	That's	absolutely	right."
And	he	told	her,	and	she	said,	"Never!	If	you	become	like	your	own	father,	I	am
not	going	to	love	you.	I	will	divorce	you	immediately."
The	boy	said,	"Then	when	the	difficult	times	come,	we	will	see	what	to	do.	But
why	bring	in	these	questions	from	the	very	beginning?"
But	all	your	love	is	dependent	on	such	small	 things	--	 the	size	of	 the	nose,	 the
eyes,	the	color	of	the	hair,	the	proportions	of	the	body.	These	things	have	nothing
to	do	with	love.
Love	is	a	feeling	of	harmony	with	an	individual,	of	accordance.
So	it	is	not	only	with	the	relationship	of	the	master	and	the	disciple;	in	all	your
relationships,	 if	 you	wait	 and	watch	 for	 a	 harmonious	moment	with	 existence,
you	will	 find	 that	 things	are	happening	 that	you	could	never	have	been	able	 to
do.
Many	flowers	are	possible,	many	poems	and	songs	are	possible.
Many	stars	are	born	out	of	harmony,	waiting,	and	being	alert.
Things	 are	 happening,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 be	 conscious.	 Many	 times	 things	 are
happening	but	you	are	not	conscious.	You	miss	what	was	your	very	right,	just	by
being	sleepy.
My	 teaching	 is	 basically	 of	 let-go.	 Things	 that	 happen	 only	 by	 doing	 are
mundane.	I	am	not	against	them,	but	they	are	not	the	essential	part	of	your	life.	If
you	want	to	have	a	beautiful	house,	you	will	have	to	build	it,	 it	 is	not	going	to
happen.	Whether	you	are	a	Christian	Scientist	or	you	believe	 in	THINK	AND
GROW	RICH,	nothing	is	going	to	help.	But	these	are	non-essential	things.
Essential	 things...	 love,	 joy,	 cheerfulness,	 a	 sense	of	humor,	peace	 that	passeth
understanding,	an	inward	journey	to	find	yourself...	these	are	the	essential	things
which	you	cannot	do,	which	you	have	to	learn	to	allow	to	happen.
So	keep	a	clear-cut	idea:	what	has	to	be	done	should	be	done,	and	what	has	to	be
allowed	to	happen	should	be	allowed	to	happen;	never	interfere	with	it.
And	also	remember:	the	essential	is	that	which	happens	on	its	own,	and	the	non-
essential	is	that	which	you	do.
Your	doing	cannot	be	anything	sacred.
That's	why	I	say	that	all	the	temples	and	all	the	churches,	all	the	statues	of	God
made	 by	man	 are	mundane.	Whatever	 is	made	 by	man	 cannot	 be	 higher	 than
man.
It	is	a	simple	arithmetic:	What	is	higher	than	man	always	happens,	it	is	beyond
your	 doing.	 You	 are	 always	 at	 the	 receiving	 end.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 just	 open,
receptive,	grateful	to	existence.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEING	WITH	YOU	IN	DISCOURSE,	I	FEEL	SO	NOURISHED,	AND	HAVE
FINALLY	FOUND	THE	REST	I	HAD	LONGED	FOR.
BEING	IN	THE	WEST,	I	DIDN'T	EVEN	FEEL	HOW	MUCH	I	WAS	MISSING
BEING	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE.	HOW	COULD	I	FORGET	THE	BEAUTY	OF
BEING
WITH	YOU?
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Man's	memory	is	not	very	great.	He	forgets	easily.
Just	a	few	examples	will	help	you.
You	all	have	been	children.	How	much	do	you	remember	the	innocence	that	you
had?	 In	 fact,	 a	 strange	 fact	 is	 discovered	 by	 the	 psychologists:	 that	 if	 you	 go
backwards	trying	to	remember,	you	reach	only	to	the	age	of	four,	at	the	most	to
the	age	of	three.	But	those	three	or	four	years	in	the	very	beginning	were	the	best
--	 no	 responsibility,	 no	worry,	 no	 tension.	Life	was	 simply	 a	 romance,	 a	 sheer
joy,	but	people	don't	remember	it.
And	it	is	very	strange	that	everybody's	memory	stops	nearabout	the	age	of	three
or	four.
It	seems	the	best	in	us	is	not	recorded.	Perhaps	it	is	a	biological	strategy	that	you
should	forget	 it;	 if	you	remember	it,	 then	for	your	whole	life	you	will	feel	you
are	missing.	You	are	missing	because	you	have	seen	the	most	beautiful	moments,
and	now	everything	will	be	dull,	pale,	dead.	It	will	not	have	that	luster,	that	joy,
that	 liveliness.	Perhaps	 it	 is	 a	 strategy	of	biology	not	 to	 record	 those	beautiful
moments.
Even	in	later	life....	You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	the	mind	functions	in	a
very	strange	way:	it	records	everything	that	is	miserable	very	quickly.	Somebody
has	insulted	you	--	you	will	never	forget	it	for	your	whole	life.	So	many	people
have	 respected	you,	 you	have	 forgotten.	One	person	has	 insulted	you	 and	you
cannot	forget.
It	seems	that	the	ugly,	the	dark,	the	humiliating,	the	tragic	have	a	priority	as	far
as	 remembrance	 is	 concerned.	 All	 that	 is	 good,	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful	 is	 simply
forgotten;	they	leave	no	marks	on	your	memory.
Politicians	have	been	using	it,	priests	have	been	using	it	in	exploiting	humanity
from	the	very	beginning.
They	say	that	in	a	democracy	two	parties	are	needed.	Democracy	has	nothing	to
do	with	two	parties.	Two	parties	are	needed	for	a	totally	different	reason,	which
is	psychological.
One	party	is	in	power	for	five	years;	in	those	five	years	everybody	goes	against
that	party
--	 because	 it	 has	 promised	 paradise	 and	 you	 are	 living	 in	 hell,	 and	 it	 has
forgotten	all	those	promises.
The	opposition	party	goes	on	provoking	you:	"What	happened	to	the	promises	of
these	people?	We	could	have	fulfilled	your	promises."	In	the	next	election,	those
who	were	in	power	lose	power	and	the	other	party	that	was	powerless	comes	into
power.	In	five	years'
time,	 they	are	 finished.	But	 in	 five	years,	people	have	 forgotten	 the	 first	party,
and	the	first	party	is	again	promising	a	paradise,	and	they	are	listening	to	them
and	believing	them.
It	has	been	found	that	the	masses	have	a	memory	of	five	years	at	the	most.	That's
why	elections	have	to	be	decided	every	five	years;	there	is	no	other	reason.	So	in
five	years'
time	the	masses	forget	the	first	party's	crimes,	the	first	party's	stupidities,	the	first
party's	lies;	they	all	become	saints	again.
That's	why	two	parties	are	needed.	One	party	will	be	in	difficulty,	because	if	they
are	continuously	in	power	you	cannot	forgive	them.	People	will	start	revolting,
killing	those	who	are	in	power.	So	this	 is	a	very	psychological	way	of	keeping
people	satisfied:	"Don't	be	worried,	it	is	only	a	question	of	two	years	more.	Then
these	people	will	be	gone	and	 the	good	people	will	be	coming"	--	and	 they	all
belong	to	the	same	category.
I	 have	 never	 voted	 in	 my	 life	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 I	 could	 not	 see	 any
difference	between	two	idiots,	who	is	a	lesser	idiot.	I	could	not	find	a	way,	so	I
thought	it	was	better	not	to	get	involved	in	it.	At	least	nobody	can	blame	me	--
"You	have	chosen	this	idiot."	I	have	never	chosen	anybody.	Choose	anyone	and
you	have	chosen	the	wrong	person.
Just	look	forty	years	back	in	India:	whoever	you	choose,	you	always	choose	the
wrong	person,	and	whoever	you	choose	again	you	will	choose	the	wrong	person
--	because	they	are	the	same	people.	It	is	just	like	a	football	match:	two	parties,
two	groups	are	playing	football,	and	you	are	 the	football.	You	are	going	to	get
kicks	from	everywhere.	Wherever	you	go,	you	will	get	a	good	kick.
You	are	asking	me	why	we	 tend	 to	 forget	 the	beautiful	moments.	 It	 is	natural,
because	the	mind	is	not	interested	in	taking	note	of	the	flowers,	it	is	interested	in
taking	note	of	the	thorns.	Anything	that	hurts,	it	immediately	takes	note	of.
Who	cares	about	a	flower?	You	remember	your	enemies	better	than	your	friends.
Just	watch	your	mind	and	you	will	be	surprised	that	you	remember	your	enemy
more	 than	 you	 remember	 your	 friends.	 You	 can	 forget	 your	 friends,	 but	 you
cannot	forget	your	enemies.
This	is	your	insane	mind.
A	saner	mind	will	look	at	things	from	just	the	opposite	direction:	it	will	count	the
blessings,	 it	will	 count	all	 that	 is	beautiful,	 it	will	keep	note	of	all	 it	has	 to	be
grateful	for.
And	 then,	 naturally	 the	 life	 of	 such	 a	 person	will	 become	 a	 life	 of	 blessings,
surrounded	by	all	beautiful	experiences.
It	is	only	a	question	of	changing	a	small	structure	in	your	mind.
I	have	always	loved	a	story.
It	happened	in	a	synagogue.	The	synagogue	was	also	a	monastery	for	the	Jews,
and	 the	chief	 rabbi	was	a	very	strict	person.	Two	young	Jews	were	walking	 in
the	garden	of	the	monastery.	They	used	to	get	one	hour	in	the	morning,	and	one
hour	 in	 the	 evening	 to	 go	 into	 the	 garden.	Other	 times,	 they	 had	 to	 study	 the
scriptures	and	do	other	disciplines.
They	both	were	thinking,	"Should	we	ask	the	chief	if	we	can	smoke	while	we	are
in	 the	 garden?"	 Both	 were	 chain	 smokers,	 but	 in	 the	 monastery,	 inside	 the
synagogue,	 smoking	was	 impossible.	 It	 was	 a	 crime.	 They	were	 suffering,	 so
both	decided	that	although	it	was	putting	your	hand	in	a	lion's	mouth,	one	effort
should	be	made:	"That	chief	rabbi	 is	a	dangerous	man;	how	he	will	react,	only
God	knows!"
The	next	day,	one	of	the	two	was	coming	out	of	the	synagogue	with	tears	in	his
eyes,	both	angry	and	sad.	And	then	he	saw	the	other	fellow,	who	was	sitting	by
the	side	of	a	beautiful	rose	bush	--	smoking!	He	said,	"My	God,	have	you	started
without	asking?"
The	other	man	said,	"No,	I	have	asked."
He	said,	"What	kind	of	man	is	this?	I	asked	him	also,	and	he	shouted	at	me	so
loudly	--
`You	 rascal!	What	 do	 you	 think,	 this	 is	 a	 synagogue	 or	 hell?	 If	 you	 want	 to
smoke	cigarettes,	go	to	hell!'	So	how	is	it	that	he	allowed	you?'"
The	other	man	smiled	and	he	said,	"What	was	your	way	of	asking?"
He	said,	"What	has	that	to	do	with	it?"
The	other	man	said,	"Just	tell	me,	how	did	you	ask?"
He	 said,	 "I	 simply	 asked..."	 because	 these	 two	 hours	 were	 called	 `hours	 of
prayer.'	They	were	allowed	to	go	into	the	garden	for	twòhours	of	prayer'.
So	he	answered,	"I	simply	asked,	`Can	I	smoke	while	praying?'	And	he	shouted
so	loudly	and	it	seemed	he	was	going	to	hit	me!"
The	other	man	said,	"Calm	down.	You	asked	in	the	wrong	way.	I	asked	him	also;
I	asked	him,	`Sir,	can	I	pray	while	smoking?'	and	he	said,	`That's	perfectly	good,
there	is	no	harm	in	that.'"
Just	a	slight	change,	but	it	makes	lot	of	difference.
Start	collecting	all	that	is	happening	to	you	that	is	beautiful.	And	it	is	happening
to	everybody.	And	anything	that	is	not	beautiful	is	not	worth	remembering,	not
worth	 collecting.	Why	make	yourself	 burdened	with	 rubbish	when	you	 can	be
full	of	flowers	and	fragrance?
You	have	to	make	a	little	change	in	your	natural	biological	mind.
Meditation	can	do	it	very	easily.
One	of	the	essential	parts	of	meditation	is	to	look	at	the	good	side	of	things,	to
look	at	the	good	side	of	people,	to	look	at	the	good	side	of	incidents,	so	that	you
are	surrounded	with	everything	good.
Surrounded	with	all	beautiful	things,	your	growth	is	easier.
But	people	are	strange....	You	may	do	one	thousand	favors	for	a	person	and	just
do	 one	 unfavorable	 thing	 --	 he	 will	 forget	 one	 thousand	 favors	 and	 he	 will
remember	 that	 one	 unfavorable	 thing	 that	 you	 did.	 That	 he	 will	 carry	 for	 his
whole	life.	This	is	how	people	are	living:	in	revenge,	in	anger,	in	despair,	feeling
rejected	by	life,	feeling	like	outcasts	of	existence.
But	the	whole	thing	is	that	you	are	collecting	the	wrong	things.
Life	is	full	of	both.	You	can	see	that	one	day	is	sandwiched	between	two	nights,
and	you	can	also	 see	 two	beautiful	days	 sandwiching	one	 small	night.	Choose
how	you	want	to	feel	--	to	be	in	heaven	or	hell.	It	is	your	choice.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#12
Chapter	 title:	The	 three	 initiations:	Student,	disciple,	devotee	14	October	1986
pm	in
Archive
code:
8610145
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH12
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
142
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	IT	TRUE	THAT	TO	BE	IN	COMMUNION	WITH	THE	MASTER	IS	THE
INITIATION?
The	word	ìnitiation'	is	very	significant	and	profound.
There	 are	 three	 initiations:	 first,	 when	 a	 student	 becomes	 a	 disciple;	 second,
when	a	disciple	becomes	a	devotee;	 and	 third,	when	 the	devotee	disappears	 in
the	master.
To	understand	the	whole	process,	all	three	steps	have	to	be	understood.
Everyone	begins	as	a	student,	as	an	inquirer	into	what	this	life	is	all	about,	with	a
curiosity	 to	 know	 the	 mysteries	 that	 surround	 us.	 But	 the	 desire	 is	 for
knowledge;	hence,	superficial.	Because	the	desire	 is	for	knowledge,	 it	 is	of	 the
mind.	And	mind	 is	 the	periphery	of	our	being,	 the	most	superficial	part	of	our
individuality.
The	 student	 has	 questions,	 but	 he	 has	 no	 quest.	 His	 questions	 are	 easily
answerable,	he	is	easily	satisfied	--	just	borrowed	knowledge	is	enough	for	him.
He	does	not	yet	need	a	master;	he	only	needs	a	teacher.	He	accumulates	answers,
becomes	 an	 intellectual,	 but	 does	 not	 become	 intelligent.	The	 accumulation	 of
answers	happens	in	the	memory	part	of	the	mind,	and	the	part	that	functions	in
accumulation	is	mechanical,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	intelligence.
It	is	possible	to	find	very	educated,	cultured,	sophisticated	intellectuals	behaving
in	 life	 in	 a	 very	 unintelligent	 way.	 They	 are	 very	 efficient	 whenever	 some
question	 is	 asked	 for	which	 they	are	 already	prepared.	But	 if	 life	 raises	 a	new
question	for	which	they	are	not	prepared,	they	are	completely	at	a	loss,	they	are
as	ignorant	as	one	can	be.	And	the	problem	is,	life	goes	on	posing	new	questions,
new	challenges.
Memory	is	good	in	the	marketplace;	memory	is	not	good	as	a	lifestyle.
And	all	your	universities	only	teach	you	how	to	memorize.
It	 has	 been	 found	 that	 the	 people	 of	 very	 great	 memory	 are	 generally
unintelligent	people.
In	 the	 life	 of	 one	 of	 the	 British	 viceroys,	 Curzon,	 there	 is	 mention	 of	 a	 very
significant	incident	--	and	it	is	a	historical	fact.
Curzon	 had	 heard	 that	 there	was	 a	man	 in	Rajputana	whose	memory	was	 just
unbelievable.	 The	 man	 knew	 only	 his	 local	 dialect,	 Rajasthani,	 a	 dialect	 of
Hindi;	he	did	not	know	any	other	 language.	But	 that	did	not	prevent	him	from
memorizing	 any	 statement	 in	 any	 language,	 and	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 it	 seemed
almost	superhuman.
He	 was	 called	 to	 the	 court	 of	 the	 Viceroy	 Curzon;	 a	 special	 meeting	 was
arranged.	Thirty	 scholars,	 knowing	 thirty	 languages,	were	 to	 examine	 the	man
and	his	memory.	Among	 those	 thirty	 scholars,	 there	was	not	a	 single	one	who
understood	the	man's	mother	tongue,	and	all	those	thirty	languages	were	foreign
languages	for	him.
And	the	arrangement	was	so	strange	--	it	had	never	been	made	before	and	I	don't
think	it	will	be	ever	made	again.
The	arrangement	was	such	that	each	of	those	thirty	scholars	was	to	deliver	one
sentence	 in	 his	 own	 language	 to	 the	 poor	 villager	 from	 Rajasthan.	 But	 the
sentence	was	not	to	be	delivered	to	him	in	one	piece.	The	villager	would	go	to
one	person	who	would	give	him	the	first	word	of	his	sentence.	Then	a	bell	would
be	rung.	Then	the	villager	would	move	to	the	next	person,	who	would	give	him
his	first	word.	In	this	way	he	would	go	round	and	round.	After	thirty	persons,	he
would	come	again	 to	 the	 first	 person	 to	get	 the	 second	word	of	his	 sentence...
and	after	each	word	a	big	bell	would	ring	to	confuse	him.
The	scholars	were	not	certain	that	they	would	be	able	to	remember	their	whole
sentence	for	the	whole	time,	because	it	was	going	to	take	so	much	time.	They	all
had	 their	 sentences	written	 in	 front	 of	 them,	 and	 they	were	marking	 off	 each
word	they	had	given.
And	 this	 man	 went	 on	 and	 on,	 round	 and	 round,	 taking	 their	 words,	 and
accumulating	 in	his	memory	system	the	sentences	which	were	given	 to	him	 in
pieces.
After	all	the	scholars	had	given	their	sentences,	he	repeated	thirty	statements	in
thirty	 languages,	of	which	he	knew	nothing.	He	knew	nothing	about	what	 they
meant.	He	was	so	correct	that	all	the	intellectuals	were	puzzled.	They	could	not
remember	their	own	sentences,	they	had	had	to	write	them	down.	They	could	not
remember	whether	they	had	given	the	fifth	word	or	the	sixth	--	they	had	had	to
mark	it.	And	this	man	was	uneducated
--	he	could	not	even	write.
Curzon	was	amazed.	He	praised	the	man,	and	rewarded	him.
But	it	was	found	by	talking	with	his	fellow	villagers	that	he	was	an	idiot.	Just	as
far	 as	 his	 memory	 was	 concerned,	 he	 was	 simply	 great	 --	 but	 any	 simple
question	in	life,	any	simple	situation	in	life,	and	he	was	not	able	to	solve	it,	he
was	not	able	 to	answer	 it.	They	said,	"He	is	known	in	our	village	as	`the	great
intellectual	idiot'."
It	 is	a	well-known	fact	that	a	student	is	interested	in	collecting	knowledge.	His
questions	are	easily	satisfied.	His	mind	functions	like	a	computer.
But	once	in	a	while,	a	student	falls	into	the	trap	of	a	master.	He	is	not	in	search
of	a	master,	he	does	not	know	any	difference	in	the	words	`master'	and	`teacher'.
In	the	dictionaries	both	words	mean	the	same.
But	in	actual	 life,	a	teacher	simply	transfers	knowledge	from	one	generation	to
another	generation	--	it	is	not	his	own	experience.	The	master	does	not	transfer
knowledge	from	one	generation	to	another	generation;	what	he	gives	out	 is	his
own	realization.
But	if	the	student	is	caught	in	the	trap	of	a	master,	then	it	is	very	difficult	to	get
out	 of	 it	 because	 soon	 it	 becomes	 clear	 that	 knowledge	 and	 knowing	 are	 two
different	things.
Questions	and	quest	are	two	different	things.
Questions	are	simply	curiosities.
Quest	is	a	risk,	is	a	pilgrimage,	is	a	search.
A	 question	 is	 easily	 satisfied	 by	 any	 logical,	 rational	 answer.	The	 quest	 is	 not
satisfied	by	logical	or	rational	answers;	the	quest	is	like	thirst.
You	 can	 go	 on	 repeating	 that	 scientifically,	 H2O	means	water,	 but	 that	 is	 not
going	 to	 quench	 the	 thirst.	 It	 is	 an	 answer,	 and	 a	 perfectly	 right	 answer.	 If
somebody	is	asking	what	water	is,	as	a	question,	it	 is	very	simple	to	answer	it.
But	 if	 somebody	 is	 asking	 about	water	 because	 he	 is	 thirsty,	 then	H2O	 is	 not
going	to	help.	Then,	only	real	water	will	do.
Quest	means	thirst,	hunger.	No	borrowed	knowledge	can	satisfy	it.
And	the	master	slowly	makes	the	student	aware	that	if	you	are	really	a	man,	then
just	 to	be	curious	is	childish.	Maturity	demands	that	you	should	go	on	a	quest,
that	you	should	not	ask	only	for	knowledge,	you	should	ask	for	ways	and	means
and	 methods	 so	 that	 you	 can	 know	 --	 not	 knowledge	 that	 has	 come	 from
generation	to	generation.	No	one	knows	whether	somebody	invented	it,	whether
it	is	fiction,	whether	somebody	realized	it	or	not,	how	much	is	lost	in	transferring
it,	 how	 much	 is	 added,	 how	 much	 is	 edited	 out.	 Knowing	 means	 "I	 want	 a
personal	experience."
A	genuine	seeker	has	no	questions,	but	a	tremendous	thirst.
This	 is	 the	 first	 initiation	 --	when	 the	master	 changes	 the	 student's	 focus	 from
knowledge	towards	knowing,	from	memory	towards	intelligence.
And	it	 is	not	an	ordinary	phenomenon,	 it	happens	to	only	a	very	few	fortunate
ones.
Millions	 of	 people	 simply	 remain	 curious,	 childish,	 immature	 for	 their	 whole
life.
Once	the	emphasis	has	moved	from	knowledge	to	knowing,	your	concern	is	no
more	with	 the	past,	your	concern	 is	with	 the	present.	Your	concern	 is	no	more
with	 the	 great	 philosophers,	 wise	 people;	 your	 concern	 is	 about	 your	 own
consciousness.	For	the	first	time	you	become	interested	not	in	objects	but	in	your
subjectivity,	not	about	other	things	but	about	the	one	who	wants	to	know:	Who	is
this	who	wants	to	know?
This	is	the	first	initiation:	the	student	dies,	and	the	disciple	is	born.
The	second	initiation	is	when	the	disciple	also	disappears,	into	a	devotee.
A	 disciple	 is	 still	 interested	 in	 gaining	 methods,	 disciplines,	 ways	 to	 know
himself.	The	master	has	to	be	used;	hence,	he	is	grateful.	But	he	is	the	end,	and
the	master	is	the	means;	he	is	using	the	master	for	his	own	ends.
As	he	comes	closer	to	the	master,	the	master	takes	him	into	the	second	initiation.
And	the	second	initiation	is	that	unless	you	drop	this	obsession	with	yourself	you
will	never	know	yourself.
It	 appears	 contradictory;	 it	 is	 not.	Your	 very	obsession	 is	 preventing	you;	 it	 is
egoistic.
You	drop	the	ego,	surrender	the	ego;	you	forget	yourself,	and	in	the	very	moment
you	forget	yourself	you	will	find	yourself.
From	 knowledge	 to	 knowing,	 the	 student	was	 never	 interested	 in	 himself.	 He
was	 interested	 in	 things,	 objects,	 the	whole	world.	 The	 first	 initiation	 brought
him	into	a	new	world	of	interest	about	himself.
The	second	initiation	takes	away	the	ego.
The	second	initiation	teaches	him	love.	Because	knowing	oneself	is	a	byproduct
--	if	you	can	love,	you	will	know	yourself	without	any	difficulty.
Only	in	loving	light	does	the	darkness	within	you	disappear.
Love	is	light,	and	the	flame	of	love	has	to	be	taught.
The	master	 loves,	his	presence	is	 love.	His	very	presence	is	magnetic.	Without
saying	 a	word...	 just	 to	 be	 close	 to	 him,	 you	will	 feel	 a	 certain	 pull,	 a	 certain
love,	a	trust.
And	you	don't	know	the	man,	you	don't	know	whether	he	is	trustworthy	or	not.
But	you	are	ready	to	risk.	The	presence	of	the	master	is	so	convincing	that	there
is	no	need	of	any	argument	to	prove	it.
I	 have	 been	 a	 teacher	 in	 the	 university,	 and	 each	 year	 on	 Teacher's	 Day	 the
university	professors	used	to	have	an	intimate	meeting	to	discuss	problems	that
they	were	facing.
And	 every	 year	 the	 basic	 and	 the	 most	 troublesome	 problem	 was	 that	 the
students	don't	respect	them.	When	I	joined	their	meeting	for	the	first	time,	it	was
my	first	year	in	the	university.	They	were	all	condemning	the	students,	they	were
condemning	modern	society,	the	Western	world,	because	they	have	taken	away
all	 respect.	One	of	 the	professors	--	an	old	man,	a	very	respected	professor,	he
was	the	dean	of	the	faculty	of	arts
--	 said,	 "It	 is	 so	 shameful,	 particularly	 in	 a	 country	 where	 there	 have	 been
students	like	Ekalavya."
I	will	have	 to	 tell	you	 the	 story	 so	you	can	understand.	 It	 is	 an	ancient	 Indian
story.
There	was	a	great	master	archer,	Dronacharya.	Princes,	 rich	people,	high	caste
Hindus,	warriors	used	to	come	to	him	from	faraway	places	to	learn	archery.
The	Hindu	society	is	divided	into	four	classes.	It	is	the	ugliest	division	that	exists
in	the	whole	world,	and	it	has	existed	for	five	thousand	years.	One	fourth	of	the
Hindu	 society	 are	 not	 treated	 like	 human	 beings;	 they	 are	 called	 sudras,
untouchables.	They	are	not	even	worthy	to	be	touched.	If	by	accident	you	touch
a	sudra,	you	have	to	immediately	take	a	shower	to	clean	yourself.	Not	only	the
sudra,	even	the	shadow	of	the	sudra	is	untouchable.	If	a	sudra	passes	by	and	his
shadow	touches	you,	you	have	to	take	a	bath.
This	 young	 man,	 Ekalavya,	 was	 born	 a	 sudra.	 But	 he	 wanted	 to	 become	 an
archer,	and	he	started	learning	archery	on	his	own.	He	knew	perfectly	well	--	his
elders	told	him,	"No	teacher	is	going	to	accept	you."
He	said,	"Before	I	go	to	any	teacher,	I	will	learn	so	much	that	it	will	be	almost
impossible	 for	 him	 to	 reject	 me."	 And	 he	 disciplined	 himself,	 and	 when	 he
thought	that	now	he	knew	enough,	he	went	to	the	greatest	archer	of	those	days,
Dronacharya.
Dronacharya	was	 amazed,	 seeing	 that	 the	 young	man	 had	 learned	 on	 his	 own
tremendously	 well.	 But	 still,	 Dronacharya	 was	 a	 brahmin,	 the	 highest	 Hindu
caste,	and	it	was	impossible	to	accept	Ekalavya	as	a	disciple.	He	rejected	him.
But	Ekalavya	was	made	of	a	different	kind	of	mettle	than	ordinary	human	beings
are	made	of.	He	went	into	the	forest	and	made	a	statue	of	Dronacharya.	And	just
in	front	of	 the	statue,	he	continued	 learning	on	his	own.	Soon	the	word	started
spreading	all	over	the	country	that	Ekalavya	had	become	a	master	archer,	just	by
the	side	of	the	statue	of	Dronacharya.
Dronacharya	had	an	ambition,	 and	 that	 ambition	was	 that	one	prince	who	was
his	disciple,	Arjuna	--	and	he	was	a	great	archer	--	should	become	the	greatest
archer	in	the	history	of	man.
But	this	Ekalavya	was	disturbing	everything,	he	was	becoming	more	famous.
Dronacharya	went	into	the	forest....
And	this	is	the	point	to	be	noted	--	that's	why	the	dean	of	the	faculty	of	arts	had
quoted	the	name	of	Ekalavya.
He	had	been	 rejected	by	Dronacharya.	Any	ordinary	human	being	would	have
felt	insulted,	humiliated.	But	on	the	contrary,	he	made	a	statue	of	Dronacharya	--
because	 he	 has	 chosen	 him	 as	 his	 master.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 whether
Dronacharya	 accepts	 him	 as	 his	 disciple	 or	 not	 --	 he	will	 have	 to	 accept	 him.
What	matters	is	how	deep	his	acceptance	is	of	Dronacharya	as	his	master.
And	when	Dronacharya	came,	he	fell	at	his	feet.	And	Dronacharya	saw	what	he
had	learned.	Certainly	he	was	far	ahead	of	Arjuna,	and	Arjuna	was	not	going	to
be	the	greatest	archer,	which	was	the	deep	ambition	of	Dronacharya.	This	man
had	rejected	Ekalavya,	and	now	he	said	to	him,	"You	have	been	learning	here	in
front	of	my	statue.
You	have	accepted	me	as	your	master."
Ekalavya	 said,	 "I	 have	 always	 thought	 of	 you	 as	 my	 master,	 even	 when	 you
rejected	me.	I	have	not	taken	any	note	of	your	rejection."
Dronacharya	said,	"I	accept	you	as	my	disciple,	but	then	you	will	have	to	pay	the
fee.
Every	disciple	has	to	pay	the	fee	to	the	master	--	and	you	have	not	given	even
the	entrance	fee,	and	you	have	already	become	such	a	great	archer."
Poor	Ekalavya	said,	"Whatever	you	ask,	 if	 I	have	 it	 I	will	give	 it	 to	you.	I	can
give	my	life.	You	are	my	master,	you	just	say	it.	But	I	am	a	poor	man,	so	just	ask
for	that	which	I	have."
Dronacharya	said,	"Yes,	I	will	ask	only	that	which	you	have.	I	want	your	right-
hand	thumb.	You	cut	it,	and	give	it	to	me."
This	 is	an	ugly	story.	The	strategy	is	 that	once	his	right-hand	thumb	is	cut,	his
archery	 would	 be	 finished,	 he	 would	 no	 longer	 be	 a	 competitor	 to	 Arjuna.
Dronacharya	accepted	him	as	his	disciple	just	to	get	his	thumb.
And	Ekalavya,	without	saying	a	word,	simply	took	his	sword	and	cut	his	thumb.
He	gave	it	to	the	master	and	said,	"If	you	want	anything	more,	you	just	tell	me."
This	story,	you	have	to	remember	in	the	background.
The	dean	was	saying:	"This	country,	which	has	produced	students	like	Ekalavya
--	who	 respected	 a	master	 like	Dronacharya	who	 rejected	him,	 insulted	him	 --
has	fallen	so	low	that	students	are	not	respecting	teachers	at	all.	Something	has
to	be	done."
I	 was	 very	 new.	 It	 was	 my	 first	 meeting	 with	 all	 the	 professors	 from	 all	 the
departments.	I	had	to	stand	up,	and	I	said	to	the	old	man,	"You	have	raised	a	few
questions.	One:	this	is	certainly	the	country	of	students	like	Ekalavya,	but	this	is
also	 the	 country	 of	 teachers	 like	Dronacharya	 --	 ugly,	 cunning,	 inhuman.	This
man	 has	 behaved	 in	 the	 most	 inhuman	 way	 possible.	 Why	 do	 you	 go	 on
forgetting	about	him?
"First,	you	are	rejecting	a	poor	young	man	because	he	is	condemned	by	you	as
an	 untouchable.	 Secondly,	 when	 he	 achieves	 on	 his	 own,	 you	 are	 willing	 to
accept	 him	 as	 your	 disciple	 --	 in	 the	 forest,	 where	 nobody	 knows	 what	 is
happening.	And	 that	 too	 for	 a	 certain	 reason,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 cripple	 his	 right
hand	to	destroy	his	archery,	so	that	your	ambition	of	making	Arjuna	the	greatest
archer	in	the	world	can	be	fulfilled."
I	said,	"You	should	not	forget	that	it	is	because	of	teachers	like	Dronacharya	that
teachers	in	India	have	lost	 their	respect.	You	represent	Dronacharya	--	on	what
grounds	do	you	want	students	to	respect	you?	And	you	are	not	even	conscious	of
the	fact	you	are	mentioning	Ekalavya.	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	don't	see...	I
also	have	 students,	 and	 I	 am	a	new	professor.	 I	have	not	 seen	a	 single	 student
being	disrespectful	towards	me.	I	love	them,	I	respect	them.	Love	resonates	love
in	the	other,	respect	creates	respect	in	the	other	--	these	are	resonances.	If	I	had
been	 in	 the	place	of	Ekalavya,	 I	would	have	cut	off	 the	head	of	Dronacharya!
That's	exactly	what	he	deserved."
The	old	man	was	in	such	a	shock	and	so	shattered,	he	was	almost	trembling.
I	 said,	 "You	 sit	 down	 because	 you	 are	 trembling,	 and	 if	 some	 heart	 attack	 or
something	happens	I	will	be	responsible	for	it.	Please	sit	down.	I	am	not	going	to
cut	your	head	--
although	you	also	need	to	be	treated	in	the	same	way.	You	want	students	to	be
Ekalavya's
--	what	about	the	teachers?"
The	master	 is	 not	 a	 teacher.	 He	 loves;	 it	 will	 be	 better	 to	 say	 he	 is	 love.	 He
respects;	it	will	be	better	to	say	he	is	respectfulness.
Naturally	he	creates	a	gravitational	field	of	love,	respect,	gratitude.
In	this	gravitational	field,	the	second	initiation	happens.
The	disciple	is	no	longer	interested	in	knowing	about	himself.	His	only	interest
is	in	how	to	be	dissolved	into	the	master,	how	to	be	in	harmony	with	the	master.
And	the	day	the	harmony	comes	to	its	peak,	the	disciple	disappears;	the	devotee
is	born.
The	devotee	is	miles	away	from	the	student.	The	whole	journey	has	taken	such
revolutionary	changes.	The	devotee	 is	on	 the	verge...	 the	 life	of	 the	devotee	 is
not	long.
The	longest	life	is	that	of	the	student.	In	the	middle	is	the	disciple.	And	the	life
span	of	the	devotee	is	very	small.
It	is	something	like	a	dewdrop	on	a	lotus	petal	in	the	early	morning	sun,	slipping
slowly,	 slowly	 towards	 the	 sun	 into	 the	 ocean.	The	 dewdrop	 is	 just	 that	 small
fragment	of	time	that	it	takes	to	slip	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	ocean.
The	devotee's	life	is	not	long,	it	is	very	short	--	because	once	you	have	tasted	the
harmony,	you	cannot	wait	to	taste	oneness.	It	is	impossible	to	wait.	The	dewdrop
runs	fast,	drops	into	the	ocean,	becomes	one	with	the	ocean.
There	are	two	ways	to	say	it.
Kabir,	one	of	the	great	mystics	of	India,	is	the	only	one	who	has	used	both	ways.
When	for	the	first	time	he	slipped	into	the	ocean,	he	wrote	a	small	statement	in
which	 he	 said,	 "I	 had	 been	 searching	 for	 myself,	 but,	 my	 friend,	 instead	 of
finding	myself,	I	have	disappeared	into	the	ocean.	The	dewdrop	has	disappeared
into	the	ocean."
After	 almost	 twenty	 years,	 when	 he	 was	 on	 his	 deathbed,	 he	 asked	 his	 son,
Kamal,	"Bring	the	notes	you	have	been	taking	of	my	statements.	Before	I	die,	I
have	to	correct	one	thing."	He	said,	"I	have	said	at	one	place	that	 the	dewdrop
has	disappeared	into	the	ocean.
Change	it.	Write	down,	`The	ocean	has	disappeared	into	the	dewdrop.'"
His	own	words	are	tremendously	beautiful.	The	first	words	are,	HERAT	HERAT
HEY
SAKHI	RAHYA	KABIR	HERAYI;	BUNDA	SAMANI	SAMUNDA	MEN	SO
KAT
HERI	 JAYI.	And	 the	 second:	HERAT	HERAT	HEY	SAKHI	RAHYA	KABIR
HERAYI;	SAMUNDA	SAMANA	BUNDA	MEN	SO	KAT	HERI	JAYI.	 In	 the
first,	 the	 dewdrop	 has	 disappeared	 in	 the	 ocean.	 In	 the	 second,	 the	 ocean	 has
disappeared	into	the	dewdrop.
Perhaps	two	sides	of	the	same	coin....
This	is	the	third	initiation,	and	only	after	the	third	initiation	is	there	communion	-
-
because	there	is	union,	there	is	no	more	separation,	there	is	at-oneness.
The	path	of	a	mystic	begins	as	a	student,	ends	as	a	master...	begins	as	a	dewdrop,
ends	as	an	ocean.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	CLOSER	I	AM	TO	YOU	PHYSICALLY,	THE	MORE	 I	GET	LOST	 IN
YOUR
PRESENCE	AND	FORGET	ABOUT	THE	PERSON	THAT	I	THINK	I	AM.	IT
FEELS
AS	IF	MAGNETIC	ENERGY	IS	COMING	FROM	YOU	THAT	PULLS	ME
STRONGLY	TOWARDS	YOU.
WHAT	IS	HAPPENING?
That	which	should	be	happening	is	happening.
You	are	coming	closer	to	my	presence.	You	cannot	keep	your	person	intact.
You	cannot	have	both	my	presence	and	your	person.	 If	you	want	your	person,
you	will	have	 to	 lose	my	presence;	 if	you	want	my	presence,	you	will	have	 to
lose	your	person	--
they	cannot	coexist.
But	what	is	your	person?	Have	you	ever	thought	about	it?	It	consists	of	all	your
miseries,	anxieties,	despairs,	nightmares;	it	is	your	hell.
Have	 you	 ever	 given	 thought	 to	 a	 simple	 phenomenon?	 Since	 the	 very
beginnings	 of	 man,	 why	 have	 human	 beings	 been	 so	 much	 interested	 in
intoxicating	drugs?
In	RIG	VEDA,	 the	 oldest	 book	 in	 the	world...	 even	 the	 so-called	 seers	 of	 the
VEDAS	are	interested	in	a	certain	drug	called	somras.
One	of	 the	most	 intelligent	persons	of	 this	century,	Aldous	Huxley	--	who	was
very	well	acquainted	with	the	East,	particularly	Eastern	mystics	--	finally	ended
up	experimenting	with	LSD.	He	wrote	that	in	the	coming	century,	the	finest	form
of	LSD	will	be	called
`soma'	in	remembrance	of	the	RIG	VEDAS'	somras.
He	 was	 absolutely	 convinced	 that	 LSD	 has	 come	 very	 close	 to	 somras.	 And
perhaps	he	 is	 right,	because	 the	 rishis,	 the	 seers	of	 the	VEDAS,	after	drinking
somrasa,	 the	 juice	of	 a	 plant	 called	 som,	have	described	 their	 experiences	 and
what	happens	to	them...	how	much	peace,	how	much	serenity,	how	much	joy.	All
their	experiences	are	exactly	the	same	as	 those	Aldous	Huxley	described	when
he	came	out	of	his	first	LSD	trip.
All	the	cultures,	all	the	religions	have	been	condemning	alcohol,	opium,	hashish,
marijuana	--	but	their	condemnation	seems	to	have	no	effect.	Humanity	goes	on
taking	drugs,	and	nobody	bothers	to	ask,	if	so	many	wise	people	are	against	it,
why	 are	 people	 taking	 these	 drugs?	And	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 so	many	 of
these	wise	people	who	are	against	 it	 are	 taking	drugs	 themselves	 --	perhaps	 in
different	ways.
In	one	country,	marijuana	may	be	 illegal,	hashish	may	be	 illegal,	LSD	may	be
illegal,	but	alcohol	is	not.	And	alcohol	is	more	dangerous	than	any	of	the	other
three.	Why	 isn't	 alcohol	 illegal?	 --	 because	 Jesus	 used	 to	 drink	 it.	Christianity
cannot	make	it	illegal;	otherwise	Jesus	would	be	proved	a	criminal	--	and	not	an
ordinary	criminal,	because	he	was	even	making	water	into	alcohol.
And	the	countries	who	have	tried....	For	example,	India,	which	is	not	a	Christian
country,	 has	 tried	 hard	 to	 prohibit	 alcohol,	 but	 has	 failed.	 Prohibition	 makes
things	even	worse.
People	start	making	alcohol	on	their	own,	in	their	own	homes.	And	thousands	of
people	 have	 died	 from	 poisoning	 because	 they	 don't	 know	 what	 they	 are
drinking.	 It	 is	 being	 sold	 underground,	 and	 they	 don't	 know	 how	 it	 is	 being
prepared.	And	finally	those	prohibitions	have	to	be	withdrawn.
One	thing	that	I	want	to	make	clear	to	you	is	that	all	the	people	who	have	been
against	the	laws	and	governments	and	religions	and	who	are	still	going	for	drugs
have	 a	 certain	 argument.	 And	 that	 is	 that	 they	 want	 their	 personality	 to	 be
forgotten.	Their	person	is	so	painful,	so	ugly,	that	they	are	ready	to	commit	any
illegal	act,	just	to	forget	it	for	a	few	hours.
The	influence	of	intoxicating	drugs	proves	only	one	thing:	man,	in	his	ordinary
personality,	 is	 living	 in	despair.	He	wants	 for	a	 few	hours	at	 least	 to	 forget	 all
about	the	worries	and	the	problems	and	the	anxieties,	and	there	seems	to	be	no
other	way.
What	do	you	want	to	protect	your	person	for?	Your	person	is	your	problem.
And	if	you	are	intelligent	enough,	and	you	can	find	some	presence	where	your
person	starts	melting	and	disappearing	--	without	any	intoxication,	without	any
drugs	--	then	can	you	conceive	of	a	greater	blessing?	Let	the	person	disappear;	it
is	simply	a	burden,	a	torture,	a	pain	in	the	neck	for	which	there	is	no	medicine.
What	do	you	think,	Amrito	--	is	there	any	medicine	for	a	pain	in	the	neck?	I	have
never	 heard	 of	 it.	 I	 am	 asking	 my	 physician	 --	 and	 he	 is	 a	 knowledgeable
physician;	he	is	a	member	of	the	Royal	Society	of	England.
Let	the	person	disappear,	evaporate.
The	disappearance	of	your	person	is	not	your	disappearance,	remember;	on	the
contrary,	it	is	your	appearance.	As	your	person	disappears,	your	personality	falls
away;	your	individuality,	your	individual	arises.
To	have	a	personality	is	hypocrisy.
To	be	an	individual	is	your	birthright.
And	 the	 function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	 take	away	everything	 that	 is	not	you,	and
leave	only	that	which	is	essentially	yours,	given	by	existence	itself.
I	can	understand,	there	arises	a	fear.	You	have	lived	with	the	person	for	so	long,
you	 have	 become	 identified	with	 it.	When	 it	 starts	 disappearing,	 a	 fear	 arises:
"What	is	happening?
Am	I	going	to	disappear?"
Now,	 what	 is	 true	 is	 not	 going	 to	 disappear,	 and	 what	 is	 untrue	 needs	 to
disappear.	So	be	courageous.
And	when	your	personality	leaves	you,	say	goodbye	to	it	forever...
"Don't	 come	back.	Find	 somebody	else;	 there	 are	 so	many	people	 all	 around."
Because	 there	are	people	who	are	not	 so	poor	as	 to	have	only	one	personality.
They	are	rich	people,	 they	have	many	personalities	--	when	they	are	with	 their
wife	 they	 have	 one	 personality,	 when	 they	 are	 with	 their	 girlfriend	 they	 have
another	 personality	 --	 the	 same	 personality	 won't	 do.	 They	 go	 on	 changing
constantly.	It	becomes	almost	an	autonomous	process.
George	Gurdjieff,	 one	of	 the	great	masters	 of	 this	 age,	 used	 a	 few	 techniques.
One	of	the	techniques	was	to	make	you	aware	of	your	personalities.	He	himself
was	such	an	expert	that	you	could	be	sitting	on	his	left	side	and	your	friend	could
be	sitting	on	his	right	side,	and	to	one	he	would	show	an	angry	face	and	to	the
other	his	face	would	appear	really	blissful,	peaceful,	very	loving.
And	when	you	meet,	one	will	say,	"What	a	man!	I	was	so	afraid;	he	was	so	angry
the	 whole	 time."	 And	 the	 other	 will	 say,	 "What	 are	 you	 saying?	 He	 was	 so
loving,	 and	 smiling."	And	 only	 later	 on	would	 you	 discover	 that	 he	 has	 been
playing	a	game.	He	 learned	 the	art	of	changing	personalities	 to	 such	an	extent
that	he	could	use	two	personalities	at	the	same	time.	Gurdjieff	could	show	half	of
the	personality	to	the	wife,	and	half	to	the	girlfriend!	But	a	long	training....
There	is	no	need.	Whether	you	have	one	personality	or	many,	they	are	all	junk.
Just	 leave	 them,	 just	 be	 simply	 yourself.	 In	 the	 beginning	 it	 may	 feel	 a	 little
awkward,	as	if	you	are	naked	--	in	a	certain	way	it	is	a	kind	of	nakedness.	But
soon	you	will	understand	the	beauty	and	innocence	of	simply	being	yourself.
My	grandfather	died.	We	were	great	 friends;	 in	my	whole	 family	we	were	 the
only	friends.	No	one	was	at	ease	with	me,	and	no	one	was	at	ease	with	him.	He
was	very	old,	but	a	troublemaker.	But	with	me	he	was	perfectly	happy.
We	used	 to	 go	 together	 to	 the	 river,	 to	 the	 temple,	 to	 public	meetings,	 and	 he
would	tell	me,	"Create	trouble.	Ask	some	question	just	to	make	that	leader	feel
embarrassed."
He	was	 a	 nice,	 beautiful	man.	He	 died.	 So	 the	whole	 family	was	 sad,	 people
were	crying.
I	 went	 to	 a	 nearby	 sweet	 shop,	 and	 I	 asked	 the	 owner,	 "You	 give	me	 all	 the
beautiful	sweets	that	you	have	prepared	today	--	the	whole	lot."
He	said,	"Are	you	mad?	Your	grandfather	has	died.	Haven't	you	heard?"
I	said,	"That's	why!	In	death	--	celebration!	We	were	great	friends,	you	know?"
He	said,	"I	know,	but	your	father,	your	uncle	and	the	others	will	kill	me.	They
will	say,
`HE	 is	 a	 rascal,	 but	 YOU...	 why	 did	 you	 give	 him	 sweets?	 Is	 this	 a	 time	 for
celebration?'"
I	said,	"Are	you	going	to	give	them	to	me,	or	should	I	create	some	trouble?"
He	 said,	 "No,	 I	 don't	 want	 any	 trouble.	 You	 can	 take	 them,	 but	 it	 is	 your
responsibility."
I	said,	"I	always	do	everything	on	my	own	responsibility."
By	that	time	a	few	people	had	gathered.	I	said,	"All	these	people	are	witnesses;	I
am	taking	these	sweets	on	my	responsibility.	This	man	is	absolutely	innocent.	In
fact,	he	has	been	trying	to	prevent	me	because	he	does	not	understand	at	all	that
my	grandfather	has	gone	to	heaven	and	this	is	the	time	to	celebrate."
And	 I	 sat	 in	 front	of	my	house	distributing	 sweets.	My	whole	 family	gathered
and	they	said,	"What	are	you	doing?"
I	said,	"Simply	celebrating."
They	said,	"Is	this	a	time	for	celebration?"
I	 said,	 "To	 be	 sincere,	 you	 are	 all	 feeling	 good	 that	 that	 old	 fellow	 is	 dead.
Except	me,	nobody	is	sad.	But	you	are	all	hypocrites."
My	father	said	to	them,	"Don't	talk	so	loudly,	you	will	gather	a	crowd;	and	if	you
gather	a	crowd,	he	is	always	the	winner."	He	told	me,	"You	do	whatsoever	you
want	to	do.	He	was	your	grandfather,	and	if	you	want	to	celebrate,	celebrate."
But	whoever	I	gave	the	sweets	to	would	say,	"But	this	is	not	the	time."
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 time,	because	my	whole	 family	 is	 celebrating	except	me	 --
and	 they	 are	 all	 sitting	 sad,	with	 crocodile	 tears.	 That	 is	 all	 nonsense.	 I	 know
them,	and	because	they	have	to	hold	on	to	their	hypocrisy	they	cannot	celebrate.
So	I	have	to	do	this	job	--
although	 I	 am	 the	 only	 person	 who	 is	 sad,	 because	 he	 was	 my	 friend.	 And
everybody	 is	 saying	 that	 he	 has	 gone	 to	 heaven	 --	 then	 why	 not	 make	 it	 a
celebration?	If	he	had	gone	to	hell,	then	it	would	be	perfectly	okay.	Sit	with	long
faces	and	 tears,	and	don't	eat	 for	 two	or	 three	days,	and	make	as	much	fuss	as
you	can.	But	 if	he	has	gone	 to	heaven,	 then	why	are	you	 feeling	 jealous?	 Just
celebrate,	enjoy."
Late	 in	 the	night	my	father	 told	me,	"The	whole	day	I	have	been	 thinking	 that
perhaps	you	are	right.	We	were	not	sincere.	We	all	were	feeling	relieved	because
he	was	always	a	trouble	--	in	everything	he	created	trouble."
In	 the	 shop	 they	 avoided	 him.	He	would	 come	 into	 the	 shop,	 and	 they	would
send	 him	 somewhere	 else	 because	 he	will	 tell	 the	 customers,	 "He	 is	 cheating
you"	--	his	own	son	--
"He	is	cheating	you.	That	cloth	is	not	worth	twelve	rupees,	it	is	just	worth	eight
rupees.	If	you	wait	a	little,	I	will	give	it	to	you	for	eight	rupees.	Otherwise,	it	is...
if	you	have	too	much	money	to	throw	away,	throw	it."
So	 in	 the	 shop,	 all	my	 uncles,	my	 father,	 everybody	 tried	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 him	 --
"Customers	are	coming,	send	him	away	--	anywhere,	whatever	he	wants	to	do.
But	if	he	stands	here,	he	will	tell	the	truth."
And	if	I	was	there,	I	would	tell	the	customers,	"Just	wait	a	little,	my	grandfather
is	coming.	Then	you	will	get	the	same	thing	for	four	or	five	rupees	less."
So	not	only	were	they	getting	rid	of	him,	as	I	would	enter	the	shop	they	would
tell	me,
"Just	go	to	the	post	office."
I	said,	"You	harass	me	unnecessarily.	Collect	all	your	post	in	the	evening	and	I
will	go	every	day.	But	I	cannot	do	this	 the	whole	day	long.	Whenever	I	come:
`Go	to	the	post	office,	just	one	postcard...	drop	it	at	the	post	office.'	And	this	is
just	a	trick,	nothing	else.	I	will	go	only	when	my	grandfather	is	in	the	shop.	At
least	one	of	us	has	to	be	here;	otherwise	the	customers	are	going	to	be	cheated,
exploited."
So	my	 father	 said,	 "You	were	 right.	We	were	 all	 feeling	 relieved,	 and	 all	 our
tears	were	 false.	But	 you	made	 it	 too	 open	 a	 secret,	 distributing	 sweets	 to	 the
whole	town	and	telling	people	that	`My	whole	family	is	celebrating.'"
I	 said,	"If	 I	was	 right,	 then	you	should	drop	 these	masks.	Even	at	 the	death	of
your	 own	 father,	 you	 cannot	 drop	your	 false	 faces.	When	 are	 you	going	 to	 be
true?"
All	your	personalities	are	absolute	cover-ups,	hiding	your	individuality.
So	it	is	perfectly	good	if	it	is	happening	that	you	are	coming	closer	and	you	feel
a	magnetic	pull.	Don't	 resist;	help	 it.	Let	 those	personalities	die.	Their	death	 is
going	 to	 become	 your	 new	 life,	 a	 life	 which	 will	 be	 a	 joy,	 an	 innocence,	 a
luminosity,	a	constant	dance	of	the	heart.	Just	a	little	courage....
Don't	 ask	 what	 is	 happening.	 Let	 it	 happen,	 and	 see.	 What	 I	 am	 saying	 is
nothing;	what	will	happen	will	be	a	thousandfold	more.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	LOVE	YOU	SO	MUCH,	AND	STILL	--	HOW	CAN	IT	BE	THAT	SO	MANY
QUESTIONS	 WHICH	 COME	 TO	 MY	 MIND	 ARE	 REFLECTING	 THE
DARK	SIDE
OF	 ME?	 I	 AM	 AFRAID	 TO	 BORE	 YOU,	 BUT	 SOMEHOW	 THESE
QUESTIONS
OFTEN	FEEL	AS	IF	THEY	ARE	THE	MOST	HONEST	AND	AUTHENTIC
TO	ME.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Latifa,	one	thing	to	be	constantly	remembered	is	not	 to	judge	what	 is	dark	and
what	is	light,	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong,	what	is	good	and	what	is	evil	--
because	 the	moment	 you	 judge,	 you	 start	 repressing.	 You	 don't	 want	 to	 show
anything	that	you	judge	as	dark,	as	evil,	as	bad.	Then	you	have	chosen	only	half
of	 yourself;	 it	 is	 as	 if	 you	 have	 chosen	 only	 the	 day	 and	 you	 have	 denied	 the
night.
But	the	night	has	its	own	beauties.	Its	darkness	is	also	a	beauty	--	it	has	a	depth,
a	 silence,	 a	 serenity,	 the	 stars.	 If	 the	 day	 has	 its	 beauty,	 the	 night	 has	 its	 own
beauty;	they	are	both	unique	--	and	they	are	complementary.
What	 you	 have	 been	 doing	 is	 to	 ask	 questions	 which	 look	 good	 --	 and	 you
repress	those	questions	which	you	feel	and	judge	to	be	bad.	Naturally,	your	so-
called	good	side	is	exhausted	by	and	by,	and	only	the	side	which,	according	to
you	is	bad,	remains	inside.
Then	you	are	boiling	with	all	that	is	black.	Days	are	finished;	only	nights	remain,
and	now	you	feel	very	much	afraid	 to	open	yourself	because	anybody	will	see
simply	 darkness	 and	 nothing	 else.	 And	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 you	 feel	 that	 it	 is
absolutely	sincere,	it	is	part	of	you.
It	is	not	something	insincere,	but	the	whole	problem	begins	in	your	judgment.
Judgment	is	one	of	the	crimes.
We	go	on	judging	other	people,	and	we	do	the	same	with	ourselves.	We	go	on
judging	our	thoughts,	our	actions,	what	is	good,	what	is	bad,	what	should	have
been	 done,	 what	 should	 not	 have	 been	 done;	 and	 we	 are	 constantly	 creating
conflict	and	duality.
Here	with	me	you	have	 to	 create	 a	oneness,	 a	beautiful	harmony	between	day
and	 night,	 between	 life	 and	 death.	 Between	 any	 things	 that	 seem	 to	 be	 polar
opposites	you	have	to	create	a	wholeness.	And	then	you	will	not	feel,	bringing
out	anything,	that	it	will	expose	you;	it	will	simply	show	your	wholeness.
Just	 think	 of	 a	 rosebush.	 If	 the	 rosebush	 starts	worrying	 about	 the	 thorns	 and
starts	 suppressing	 them,	 the	whole	 energy	 of	 the	 rosebush	will	 be	 involved	 in
suppressing	the	thorns.	It	may	not	be	able	to	bring	roses	--	or	even	if	it	does	they
may	not	be	worth	bringing;	 they	may	be	crippled,	 almost	dying	 from	 the	very
beginning.
But	once	you	accept	that	thorns	are	part	of	the	rosebush,	as	roses	are...
From	my	very	childhood	I	have	seen	thorns	in	the	rosebushes	as	the	bodyguards
of	 the	 roses.	And	 they	 are	 bodyguards	 --	 they	 protect	 them.	They	 are	 coming
from	the	same	roots;	they	are	part	of	the	same	bush,	they	live	on	the	same	juice.
They	 are	 brothers	 and	 sisters;	 they	 live	 in	 deep	 harmony,	 there	 is	 no	 conflict.
Have	you	seen	the	thorns	and	roses	fighting	with	each	other?	Have	you	seen	any
rosebush	being	embarrassed	that	it	has	thorns?
Thorns	have	their	own	beauty.
The	mind	that	continuously	goes	on	judging	creates	anguish	in	you.
But	we	are	taught	to	judge.
Even	those	with	whom	we	have	no	concern,	we	go	on	judging:	this	man	is	good,
that	man	is	bad.	What	business	is	this,	what	concern	is	it	of	yours?	And	if	you
knew	the	whole	story	of	the	man,	perhaps	you	would	have	said	that	this	act	you
had	 thought	 was	 bad	 was	 absolutely	 inevitable.	 Without	 this	 act	 there	 would
have	remained	something	incomplete	in	the	whole	story.
You	know	only	parts	--	as	if	you	take	out	a	page	from	a	novel,	and	you	judge	the
whole	 novel	 from	 the	 page.	 It	 is	 sheer	 stupidity.	 First,	 go	 through	 the	 whole
novel.
And	as	 far	 as	human	 life	 is	 concerned,	nobody	can	go	 through	 the	whole	of	a
single	 human	 life.	 It	 is	 so	 vast,	 compressed	 in	 such	 a	 small	 time...	 seventy	 or
eighty	years,	with	so	many	complexities,	complications	that	if	you	could	see	it	as
a	whole	you	would	not	say	that	something	was	bad;	it	fits	perfectly	in	the	whole
pattern	of	the	person's	life.
And	anyway,	who	are	we?	Who	has	made	us	judges?
Once	the	mind	learns	the	trick	of	judging,	it	goes	on.	Then	you	are	continuously
judging	inside:	This	 is	good,	 this	 is	bad.	Then	show	the	good	side	always,	and
keep	the	bad	side	 to	yourself.	Slowly	slowly,	 the	good	side	 is	shown	so	much,
everybody	is	bored	with	it.
You	are	bored	with	it.	And	you	cannot	show	the	bad	side,	because	it	is	bad.
Show	your	wholeness.
Just	your	good	side	is	bound	to	be	boring,	too	flat.
With	your	black	parts,	it	becomes	juicy,	it	becomes	more	interesting.
It	 is	 said	 that	 "a	 good	 man	 has	 no	 life"	 --	 and	 I	 agree	 with	 this	 statement,
whoever	made	it.	What	can	a	good	man	have?	A	bad	man	has	a	life!
If	you	are	whole,	you	will	have	more	alive	expressions...	not	flat,	not	boring,	but
always	full	of	surprises.	Not	only	surprising	others	but	even	surprising	yourself	-
-	"My	God,	I	was	able	to	do	this	too?"
Life	should	be	lived	with	as	much	wholeness	as	possible.
That's	the	only	way	to	live,	to	love,	and	to	have	a	good	laugh	in	the	end.
And	don't	be	worried	about	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.
Just	for	example,	God	created	the	world.	Of	course,	if	there	was	no	devil,	there
would	have	been	nothing	at	all	in	the	world.	Although	the	whole	credit	goes	to
God,	it	should	go	to	the	devil	who	persuaded	Adam	and	Eve	to	eat	the	fruit	from
the	tree	of	knowledge.	He	is	the	first	revolutionary,	the	first	rebel,	the	first	man
to	 bring	 some	 aliveness	 into	 the	 world;	 otherwise,	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 would	 be
chewing	grass,	still.	In	the	Garden	of	Eden	what	else	will	you	do?	God	has	said
not	to	eat	from	the	tree	of	knowledge,	not	to	eat	from	the	tree	of	eternal	life	--
what	 is	 left?	Knowing	 is	prohibited,	 living	 is	prohibited	 --	 just	 sit	 silently	 like
buffaloes	and	chew	grass.
It	is	by	the	mercy	of	the	devil	that	you	see	this	whole	world.
God	has	not	created	it.	God	created	a	world	which	consisted	of	Adam	and	Eve
just	 like	 animals.	 This	 whole	 humanity,	 these	 great	 people	 --	 Gautam	 the
Buddha,	Jesus	Christ	and	Moses,	Mohammed	and	Mahavira	--	you	would	never
have	heard	of	them;	they're	all	because	of	the	devil.
It	 is	 significant	 to	 remember:	 `devil'	 comes	 from	a	Sanskrit	 root	which	means
divine.	It	comes	from	dev	--	from	the	same	root	comes	`divine,'	from	the	same
root	comes	`devil.'
The	devil	has	done	such	a	divine	work.	This	whole	creation	is	a	deep	partnership
between	God	and	the	devil.	Neither	can	God	do	it	alone	--	because	he	can	only
create	flat	things	--
nor	can	the	devil	do	it	alone,	because	he	can	only	revolt,	he	is	a	revolutionary.
First	something	has	to	be	there	to	be	revolutionary	against.	God	is	needed	for	the
devil	to	revolt	against,	and	then	the	dynamics	start	turning,	and	the	wheel	of	life
and	death,	day	and	night,	good	and	bad.
But	life	consists	of	opposites,	remember.
And	don't	try	to	judge;	just	live	the	whole,	whatever	it	is.
I	teach	you	wholeness,	and	you	go	on	judging	parts.	Parts	are	not	of	any	use.	It	is
the	 whole,	 where	 parts	 lose	 their	 personalities	 and	 function	 in	 the	 way	 an
orchestra	functions.
I	myself	have	never	thought	that	anything	is	good	or	anything	is	bad.	Not	for	a
single	 moment	 have	 I	 thought	 that	 anything	 is	 bad	 or	 good;	 they	 are	 both
together	and	they	can	exist	only	together.	If	you	want	to	live,	live	them	in	their
togetherness.
The	people	who	are	afraid	of	their	togetherness	started	teaching,	"Renounce	life,
escape	from	life,	because	here	you	cannot	avoid	the	bad.	Whatever	you	do,	even
if	you	do	good,	you	cannot	avoid	the	bad."
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	in	India,	Jainism	has	a	sect	called	terapanth.
Bombay	 has	 many	 followers	 of	 the	 Terapanth.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 logical	 but	 very
strange	ideology.
It	says	that	if	somebody	falls	into	a	well	you	should	not	take	him	out.	He	may	be
shouting	and	you	are	by	the	side	of	the	well	and	there	is	nobody	else	there	--	you
simply	go	on	as	you	are,	unconcerned.	 It	 seems	strange.	A	philosophy	of	non-
violence...	and	a	man	is	dying	and	they	are	saying	that	you	go	on,	unconcerned.
But	 their	 reasoning	 is	 worth	 noting:	 they	 say	 you	 can	 save	 the	 man	 but	 if
tomorrow	he	murders	somebody,	then	you	will	be	responsible	too.	And	what	is
the	guarantee	about	his	tomorrow?	--	it	is	better	not	to	get	involved.
In	the	first	place	he	has	fallen	in	the	well.	It	must	be	because	of	some	evil	act	in
his	past	life;	otherwise	why	should	he	fall	into	the	well?	Now,	he	is	receiving	the
punishment	for	his	action,	and	you	interfere	in	it;	you	interfere	in	the	great	law
of	action.	Secondly,	if	he	murders	somebody	tomorrow,	then	you	will	share	the
evil	act.	It	is	better	to	move	on	silently,	not	to	bother	about	what	is	happening	to
him.
These	 are	 the	 people	who	 have	 been	 judging.	Now,	 judgment	 has	 gone	 to	 the
extreme.
Somebody	is	thirsty;	don't	give	him	water.	Somebody	is	hungry;	don't	give	him
food	--
because	you	don't	know	what	he	is	going	to	do.	You	get	involved	in	his	life	by
giving	him	water;	otherwise	he	may	have	died.	By	giving	him	water	you	keep
him	 alive.	Now	whatever	 he	 does,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 share	 in	 it.	You	 have	 not
done	a	bad	act,	but	life	is	not	so	simple	--	it	may	turn	into	a	bad	act.
It	 looks	 very	 logical,	 but	 very	 inhuman;	 it	 looks	 very	 rational	 but	 very
uncompassionate,	without	any	love.	But	this	is	the	logical	end	of	judging	things.
I	want	you	to	drop	judgment	and	live	a	life	without	judgment,	in	its	wholeness.
And	you	will	be	surprised	that	wholeness	is	neither	good	nor	bad.
Wholeness	is	transcendental;	it	is	beyond	good	and	evil.
There	 is	 only	 one	man	 in	 the	whole	 history	 of	 humanity,	 Friedrich	Nietzsche,
who	 has	 written	 a	 book,	 BEYOND	GOOD	AND	 EVIL.	 And	my	 insight	 and
understanding	 is	 that	 he	 is	 the	only	man	who	has	 seen	 judgment	 to	 its	 logical
end.
An	authentic	person	should	live	beyond	good	and	evil.
He	does	not	care	what	is	good,	what	is	bad.
He	lives	with	intensity	and	totality,	and	whatever	the	moment	allows	him	and	he
feels	to	do,	he	does	it.
But	 all	 the	 religions	 and	 all	 the	 theologians	 and	 all	 the	 saints	 are	 sitting	 and
thinking	about	whether	this	is	right	or	wrong.	And	if	you	listen	to	them,	you	will
find	it	impossible	to	live;	everything	seems	to	be	wrong.
I	have	looked	into	all	the	scriptures	of	the	world	just	trying	to	find	out	--	perhaps
there	may	be	one	 thing	which	 is	not	condemed	by	somebody.	But	 there	 is	not,
somebody	or	other	is	against	everything.	And	there	are	things	that	somebody	or
other	 is	 for.	 There	 is	 no	 ultimate	 criterion	 to	 decide	what	 is	 right	 and	what	 is
wrong.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned	 and	 my	 people	 are	 concerned,	 they	 should	 live
wholeheartedly	-
-	live	the	day	and	live	the	night	too.	Don't	miss	anything.
Make	 your	 life	 such	 a	 complementary	whole	 that	 everything	 fits	 together	 and
makes	it	a	piece	of	art,	a	beautiful	phenomenon.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	The	only	holy	approach
15	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610155
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH13
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
132
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 CLOSE	MY	EYES,	 I	 FEEL	 SUCH	AN	ENORMOUS	PRESENCE,
SUCH	A	VAST	 ISNESS,	 SUCH	A	BEATITUDE.	BUT	 IT	 IS	A	 FULLNESS,
NOT	AN
EMPTINESS.
COULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 THE	 DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN
THIS	 FULLNESS,	 AND	 THE	 EMPTINESS	 OR	 NOTHINGNESS	 WHICH
YOU	ARE
SPEAKING	OF?
Maitri,	 the	 fullness	 that	 you	 are	 experiencing	 and	 the	 nothingness	 that	 I	 have
been	 speaking	 about	 are	 just	 two	 names	 for	 the	 same	 thing	 seen	 from	 two
different	perspectives.
If	you	look	at	it	from	the	world	of	miseries,	anxieties,	darkness	and	death,	it	is
nothingness	 --	because	all	 these	 things	are	absent.	Your	whole	 so-called	world
and	its	experiences	are	no	more	in	it.
But	if	you	look	at	what	is	left,	or	at	what	is	revealed	because	of	the	absence	of
misery	and	darkness,	then	you	are	full	of	blissfulness,	full	of	light,	of	enormous
presence	 and	 beatitude,	 a	 great	 benediction.	 It	 is	 fullness.	 It	 is	 empty	 of	 the
world	and	full	of	God,	it	is	empty	of	all	your	falsities	and	full	of	your	essential
reality.
Those	two	words	are	not	contradictory;	they	are	indicating	the	same	experience
from	two	different	perspectives.
It	is	significant	to	understand	that	there	is	only	one	person,	Gautam	Buddha,	who
has	used	nothingness,	emptiness,	for	 the	ultimate	experience.	All	other	mystics
of	the	world	have	used	fullness,	wholeness,	as	the	expression,	the	indication	of
the	ultimate	experience.
Why	did	Gautam	Buddha	have	to	choose	a	negative	term?
It	 is	 significant	 to	 understand	 --	 for	 your	 own	 spiritual	 growth,	 not	 for	 any
philosophical	 reasons.	 I	 do	 not	 speak	 for	 philosophical	 reasons.	 I	 speak	 only
when	I	see	there	is	some	existential	relevance.
The	 idea	 of	 fullness,	 the	 idea	 of	 God,	 the	 idea	 of	 perfection,	 the	 idea	 of	 the
absolute,	the	ultimate	--	all	are	positive	terms.	And	Gautam	Buddha	was	amazed
to	see	the	cunningness	of	human	mind.
The	innocent	mystics	have	simply	used	the	positive	words	because	that	was	their
experience.	 Why	 bother	 about	 the	 misery	 which	 is	 no	 more?	 Why	 not	 say
something	about	 that	which	 is	 now?	The	 innocent	mystics	have	 spoken	out	of
their	 isness.	But	 throughout	 the	 centuries	 the	 cunning	minds	 of	 people	 around
the	world	have	taken	advantage	of	it.
To	 the	 cunning	mind,	 the	 idea	 of	 fullness	 and	 the	 positive	 terms	 indicating	 it
became	 an	 ego	 trip:	 "I	 have	 to	 become	God.	 I	 have	 to	 attain	 the	 absolute,	 the
brahma;	I	have	to	achieve	the	ultimate	liberation."	The	I	became	the	center	of	all
our	assertions.
And	the	 trouble	 is	 that	you	cannot	make	 the	ultimate	experience	a	goal	 for	 the
ego.
Ego	is	the	barrier;	it	cannot	become	the	bridge.
So	all	the	positive	terms	have	been	misused.	Rather	than	destroying	the	ego,	they
have	 become	 decorations	 for	 the	 ego.	 God	 has	 become	 a	 goal,	 you	 have	 to
achieve	the	goal.
You	become	greater	than	God.
Remember,	the	goal	cannot	be	greater	than	you.	The	achieved	cannot	be	greater
than	the	achiever.	It	is	a	very	simple	fact	to	understand.
And	all	the	religions	have	fallen	because	of	this	simple	innocence	of	the	mystics.
Gautam	 Buddha	 was	 the	 most	 cultured	 and	 the	 most	 educated,	 the	 most
sophisticated	 person	 ever	 to	 become	 a	mystic.	 There	 is	 no	 comparison	 in	 the
whole	 of	 history.	 He	 could	 see	 where	 the	 innocent	 mystics	 had	 unknowingly
given	chances	for	cunning	minds	to	take	advantage.	He	decided	not	to	use	any
positive	 term	 for	 the	 ultimate	 goal,	 to	 destroy	 your	 ego	 and	 any	 possibility	 of
your	ego	taking	any	advantage.
He	 called	 the	 ultimate,	 nothingness,	 emptiness,	 shunyata,	 zero.	Now,	 how	 can
the	ego	make	zero	the	goal?	God	can	be	made	the	goal,	but	not	zero.
Who	 wants	 to	 become	 zero?	 --	 that	 is	 the	 fear.	 Everybody	 is	 avoiding	 all
possibilities	 of	 becoming	 zero,	 and	 Buddha	 made	 it	 an	 expression	 for	 the
ultimate.
His	word	is	nirvana.
He	 chose	 a	 tremendously	 beautiful	 word,	 but	 he	 shocked	 all	 the	 thinkers	 and
philosophers	by	choosing	 the	word	`nirvana'	as	 the	most	significant	expression
for	the	ultimate	experience.
Nirvana	means	blowing	out	the	candle.
The	 other	 mystics	 have	 said	 that	 you	 are	 filled	 with	 enormous	 light,	 as	 if
thousands	of	suns	 together	have	suddenly	risen	 inside	you,	as	 if	 the	whole	sky
full	of	stars	has	descended	within	your	heart.
These	 ideas	 appeal	 to	 the	 ego.	The	ego	would	 like	 to	have	all	 the	 stars,	 if	 not
inside	 the	chest	 then	at	 least	hanging	on	 the	coat	outside	 the	chest.	"Enormous
light"...	the	ego	is	very	willing.
To	cut	the	very	roots,	Buddha	says	the	experience	is	as	if	you	were	to	blow	out	a
candle.
There	was	a	small	flame	on	the	candle	giving	a	small	light	--	even	that	is	gone,
and	you	are	surrounded	with	absolute	darkness,	abysmal	darkness.
People	used	to	come	to	ask	him,	"If	you	go	on	teaching	such	things,	nobody	is
going	 to	 follow	you.	Who	wants	darkness,	enormous	darkness?	You	are	crazy.
You	say	that	the	ultimate	experience	is	ultimate	death.	People	want	eternal	life,
and	you	are	talking	about	ultimate	death."
But	he	was	a	very	consistent	man,	and	you	can	see	 that	 for	 forty-two	years	he
hammered	on	the	genius	of	the	East	without	ever	compromising	with	the	ego.
He	also	knows	that	what	he	 is	calling	darkness	 is	 too	much	light;	 that's	why	it
looks	like	darkness.	If	one	thousand	suns	rise	in	you,	what	do	you	think?	--	that
you	will	 feel	 enormous	 light?	 You	will	 feel	 immense	 darkness,	 it	 will	 be	 too
dazzling.	Just	 look	at	one	sun	for	a	few	seconds	--	and	you	will	feel	your	eyes
are	 going	 blind.	 If	 one	 thousand	 suns	 are	 within	 you,	 inside	 the	 mind,	 the
experience	will	be	of	darkness,	not	of	light.
It	 will	 take	 a	 long	 time	 for	 you	 to	 get	 accustomed,	 for	 your	 eyes	 to	 become
strong	enough	to	see	--	slowly	slowly	--	darkness	turning	into	light,	death	turning
into	life,	emptiness	turning	into	fullness.
But	he	never	talked	about	those	things.	He	never	said	that	darkness	would	ever
turn	 into	 light.	 And	 he	 never	 said	 that	 death	 would	 become	 a	 resurrection	 at
some	later	point,	because	he	knows	how	cunning	your	ego	is.	If	that	is	said,	the
ego	will	say,	"Then	there	is	no	problem.	Our	aim	remains	the	same;	it	is	just	that
we	will	have	to	pass	through	a	little	dark	night	of	the	soul.	But	finally,	we	will
have	enormous	light,	thousands	of	suns."
Gautam	Buddha	had	to	deny	that	God	existed	--	not	that	he	was	against	God,	a
man	 like	 Gautam	 Buddha	 cannot	 be	 against	 God.	 And	 if	 Gautam	 Buddha	 is
against	God,	then	it	is	of	no	use	for	anybody	to	be	in	favor	of	God.	His	decision
is	decisive	 for	 the	whole	of	humanity,	he	 represents	our	very	soul.	But	he	was
not	against	God.	He	was	against	your	ego,	and	he	was	constantly	careful	not	to
give	your	ego	any	support	to	remain.	If	God	can	become	a	support,	then	there	is
no	God.
One	thing	becomes	very	clear:	although	he	used,	for	the	first	 time,	all	negative
terms,	 yet	 the	 man	 must	 have	 had	 tremendous	 charismatic	 qualities.	 He
influenced	millions	 of	 people.	His	 philosophy	 is	 such	 that	 anyone	 listening	 to
him	 would	 freak	 out.	 What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 all	 the	 meditations	 and	 all	 the
austerities,	 renouncing	 the	 world,	 eating	 one	 time	 a	 day...	 and	 ultimately	 you
achieve	nothingness,	you	become	zero!	We	are	already	better	--
we	 may	 be	 miserable	 zeros,	 but	 we	 are	 at	 least.	 Certainly,	 when	 you	 are
completely	 a	 zero	 there	 cannot	 be	 any	 misery;	 zeros	 are	 not	 known	 to	 be
miserable	--	but	what	is	the	gain?
But	 he	 convinced	 people	 --	 not	 through	 his	 philosophy,	 but	 through	 his
individuality,	through	his	presence.	He	gave	people	the	experience	itself,	so	that
they	 could	 understand:	 it	 is	 emptiness	 as	 far	 as	 the	 world	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is
emptiness	for	the	ego.	And	it	is	fullness	for	the	being.
There	are	many	reasons	for	 the	disappearance	of	Buddha's	 thought	 from	India,
but	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 significant.	All	 other	 Indian	mystics,	 philosophers,
and	seers	have	used	positive	terms.	And	for	centuries	before	Buddha,	the	whole
of	 India	 was	 accustomed	 to	 thinking	 only	 in	 the	 positive;	 the	 negative	 was
something	 unheard	 of.	 Under	 the	 influence	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha	 they	 followed
him,	 but	 when	 he	 died	 his	 following	 started	 disappearing	 --	 because	 the
following	 was	 not	 intellectually	 convinced;	 it	 was	 convinced	 because	 of	 his
presence.
Because	 of	 the	 eyes	 of	Gautam	Buddha	 they	 could	 see:	 "This	man	 --	 if	 he	 is
living	in	nothingness	then	there	is	no	fear,	we	would	love	to	be	nothing.	If	this	is
where	 zeroness	 leads,	 if	 by	 being	 nothing	 such	 lotuses	 bloom	 in	 the	 eyes	 and
such	grace	flows,	then	we	are	ready	to	go	with	this	man.	The	man	has	a	magic."
But	his	philosophy	alone	will	not	convince	you,	because	it	has	no	appeal	for	the
ego.
And	Buddhism	survived	 in	China,	 in	Ceylon,	 in	Burma,	 in	Japan,	 in	Korea,	 in
Indochina,	 in	 Indonesia	 --	 in	 the	 whole	 of	 Asia	 except	 India	 --	 because	 the
Buddhists	who	reached	there	dropped	negative	 terms.	They	started	speaking	in
positive	 terms.	 Then	 the	 ultimate,	 the	 absolute,	 the	 perfect	 --	 the	 old	 terms
returned.	This	was	the	compromise.
So	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	Buddhism	died	with	Gautam	Buddha.
Whatever	exists	now	as	Buddhism	has	nothing	to	do	with	Buddha	because	it	has
dropped	his	basic	contribution,	and	that	was	his	negative	approach.
I	 am	aware	of	 both	 traditions.	 I	 am	certainly	 in	 a	 better	 position	 than	Gautam
Buddha	was.	Gautam	Buddha	was	aware	of	only	one	 thing	 --	 that	 the	ego	can
use	the	positive.
And	it	is	his	great	contribution,	his	courageous	contribution,	that	he	dropped	the
positive	 and	 insisted	 on	 the	 negative,	 emphasized	 the	 negative	 --	 knowing
perfectly	well	that	people	were	not	going	to	follow	this	because	it	had	no	appeal
for	the	ego.
To	me,	now	both	traditions	are	available.	I	know	what	happened	to	the	positive	-
-	the	ego	exploited	it.	I	know	what	happened	to	the	negative.	After	the	death	of
Gautam	Buddha,	 the	 disciples	 had	 to	 compromise,	 compromise	with	 the	 same
thing	which	Gautam	Buddha	was	revolting	against.
So	I	am	trying	to	explain	to	you	both	approaches	together	--	emptiness	as	far	as
the	world	is	concerned	and	fullness,	wholeness	as	far	as	the	inner	experience	is
concerned.	And	this	is	a	total	approach,	it	takes	note	of	both:	that	which	has	to
be	left	behind,	and	that	which	is	to	be	gained.
I	call	my	approach	the	only	holy	approach.
All	other	approaches	up	to	now	have	been	half-half.	Mahavira,	Shankara,	Moses,
Mohammed,	all	used	the	positive.	Gautam	Buddha	used	the	negative.	I	use	both,
and	I	don't	see	any	contradiction.
If	you	understand	me	clearly,	then	you	can	enjoy	the	beauty	of	both	viewpoints,
and	you	need	not	be	exploited	by	your	ego	or	be	afraid	of	death	and	darkness
and	nothingness.
Maitri,	they	are	not	two	things.	It	is	almost	as	if	I	were	to	put	a	glass	of	water	in
front	of	you,	half	full	and	half	empty,	and	ask	you	whether	the	glass	is	empty	or
full.	Either	answer	would	be	wrong,	because	the	glass	is	both	half	full	and	half
empty.	From	one	side	it	is	empty,	from	another	side	it	is	full.
Half	of	your	life	is	part	of	the	mundane	world,	the	other	half	is	part	of	the	sacred.
And	 it	 is	 unfortunate,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way	 --	 we	 have	 to	 use	 the	 same
language	for	both	 the	mundane	and	the	sacred.	So	one	has	 to	be	very	alert.	To
choose	the	mundane	will	be	missing;	if	you	think	of	the	mundane,	you	will	find
the	sacred	life	empty.	If	you	think	of	 the	sacred,	you	will	find	it	overflowingly
full.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	 YOU	 WERE	 TALKING	 ABOUT	 INDIAN	 AND	 WESTERN
SANNYASINS,	 I	 FELT	 WHAT	 YOU	 WERE	 SAYING	 WAS	 TRUE	 --
SOMETIMES	THE	INDIANS
ARE	TOO	MUCH	OF	THE	HEART.	 IT	 IS	HARD	TO	SAY	NO	TO	THEM,
YET	YOU
CANNOT	SAY	YES	TO	THEIR	EXPECTATIONS	AND	THEORIES.	 THEY
ARE
DEAF.
WILL	YOU	PLEASE	EXPLAIN	WHY	THIS	IS	SO?
The	question	has	many	parts.
The	 first	 part,	 that	 the	 Indians	 are	 sometimes	 too	 much	 of	 the	 heart...	 that
statement	is	wrong.	One	can	never	be	too	much	of	the	heart;	that	is	existentially
impossible.
The	heart	and	its	qualities	are	such	that	you	can	always	have	more	of	them.	And
there	is	no	limit	--	not	even	the	sky	is	the	limit.
But	I	understand	your	problem.	You	are	saying	that	you	are	finding	it	difficult	in
certain	moments,	the	people	of	the	East	are	much	too	loving;	you	cannot	say	no
to	them	and	you	cannot	say	yes	either.
I	am	reminded	of	when	 I	came	 to	Bombay	for	 the	 first	 time,	 I	was	 invited	 for
lunch...	I	was	new,	and	the	people	who	had	invited	me	here	were	new.	None	of
us	knew	each	other.
The	man	had	come	 to	Bombay	 just	 two	or	 three	days	before.	He	 is	one	of	 the
most	beautiful	men	I	have	met	in	my	life.	Along	with	me,	he	had	invited	at	least
twenty	 more	 people.	 It	 was	 beautiful	 food,	 but	 the	 way	 they	 were	 forcing
everybody	 to	 eat	was	 just	 unimaginable.	They	were	 three	brothers;	 two	of	 the
brothers	would	hold	the	person,	and	the	third	one	would	force	him	--	"One	laddu
more."
And	the	person	would	be	trying	to	say,	"I	will	die!	Leave	me!"
They	would	say,	"Just	one..."	And	this	was	something	unending.
Even	the	women	of	the	house	were	helping.	People	were	trying	to	run	out	of	the
room	and	the	women	were	standing	in	the	doorway.
I	 asked	 the	man,	 "Your	 love	 is	good,	 and	your	 sweets	 are	good,	but	 there	 is	 a
limit.	 That	 man	 is	 saying	 he	 will	 die	 --	 and	 you	 are	 not	 concerned	 about	 his
death,	you	are	concerned	about	forcing	more	food	on	him."
What	he	said	to	me	I	have	not	forgotten.	He	said,	"If	we	don't	do	this,	my	father's
soul	will	be	very	unhappy."
I	said,	"My	God!	Is	your	father's	soul	also	present	here?"
He	said,	 "No,	 that	 is	not	 the	question.	This	 is	our	heritage.	 In	my	 father's	day,
this	was	the	routine:	unless	the	guest	starts	fighting	and	beating	you,	don't	leave
him	alone.	Things	have	to	come	to	that	end."
I	said,	"Listen,	don't	do	this	thing	to	me	--	because	I	cannot	beat	you,	and	neither
do	I	want	to	fight."
They	said,	"But	our	father's	soul..."
I	 said,	 "You	 are	 idiots!	Your	 father's	 soul	must	 have	 been	 born	 again	 by	 now.
When	did	your	father	die?"
They	said,	"It	must	be	twenty	years."
I	said,	"He	must	be	in	a	college	somewhere	studying.	Forget	about	him,	he	has
nothing	to	do	with	it."
He	said,	"If	you	say	so...	But	we	will	feel	very	guilty."
I	said,	"If	you	force	anything	on	me,	I	am	not	going	to	come	to	Bombay	again."
With	tears	in	his	eyes,	he	took	hold	of	my	legs.	He	said,	"That's	perfectly	good.	I
will	not	 force	you.	 Just	one	 laddu,	no	 fight,	but	please	continue	 to	come.	And
promise	me	that	at	 least	whenever	you	come...	one	 lunch	at	my	house,	and	we
will	never	force	you.	Just	have	one	more	laddu."
I	said,	"But	you	are	forcing	me!	This	is	another	strategy	--	tears,	holding	my	leg;
it	 is	 no	 different	 from	 holding	my	 neck.	 It	 is	 even	worse,	 because	 I	 feel	 that
although	it	will	create	trouble	for	me	--	you	have	forced	so	many	sweets	on	me	--
looking	at	your	tears..."
He	said,	"What	can	I	do?	Just	thinking	of	my	father's	soul..."
I	said,	"Drop	your	father's	soul!	Do	you	promise	me	that	if	I	take	this	laddu	you
will	not	ask	anything?"
He	said,	"I	absolutely	promise."
But	 I	was	not	 aware	of	 the	 strategy.	 It	was	one	brother's	promise	 --	 they	were
three	brothers,	with	three	wives....
I	 said,	"My	God,	 it	 seems	soon	my	soul	 is	going	 to	meet	your	 father's	soul!	 If
you	have	any	message,	I	will	deliver	it	to	him.	And	I	will	never	come	again."
And	they	were	all	sitting	on	the	floor,	holding	my	leg	--	"You	have	to	come."
Love	is	one	thing...	this	is	not	love.
Because	 love	would	 take	care	of	me,	see	 that	 I	don't	 fall	 sick.	They	are	 taking
care	of	their	father's	soul,	they	are	not	concerned	with	me.
So	I	can	understand	your	question,	that	sometimes	their	love	is	too	much,	their
heart	is	too	much.	You	cannot	say	no	and	you	cannot	say	yes	either.
But	you	have	to	be	very	clear	with	the	people	in	the	East.	Accept	their	love,	be
grateful	 for	 their	 love,	 but	 when	 it	 goes	 against	 your	 reason,	 "no"	 is	 not
something	that	cannot	be	said.	It	is	not	necessarily	against	love.	You	are	simply
protecting	yourself,	and	you	have	the	right	to	protect	yourself.	And	if	you	cannot
say	yes,	don't	say	yes.
And	 remember:	 what	 they	 are	 doing	 is	 not	 love,	 but	 some	 formality,	 some
tradition,	some	convention.	This	is	not	part	of	love.	They	are	fulfilling	their	own
traditional,	conventional,	orthodox	views.
If	 it	were	 love	 then	 food	would	not	be	 forced;	 then	 the	guest	would	be	 served
and	allowed	to	eat	whatever	he	feels	like	eating,	and	however	much	he	wants	to
eat.	Love	will	give	that	freedom.
It	is	not	heart.	The	dividing	line	is	very	fine	--	that's	why	you	cannot	understand
how	to	say	no.	He	is	so	loving	that	it	seems	better	to	suffer	a	little,	but	not	to	say
no.	But	this	is	not	his	love.
Love	never	enforces	anything	on	anyone.
Love	never	tries	to	dominate,	to	dictate.
You	call	this	love?	--	two	persons	are	holding	onto	the	man's	hands	and	the	third
person	is	forcing	a	laddu	into	his	mouth,	and	the	man	is	saying,	"I	will	die!	What
are	you	doing?
If	you	had	told	me	that	this	was	going	to	happen	I	would	have	never	come."
But	they	have	a	certain	idea.	It	has	been	happening	in	their	family	for	centuries	-
-	 unless	 a	guest	 starts	 beating	you,	 you	 are	not	 a	host,	 not	worth	 the	name.	A
strange	idea!
You	have	to	say	no.	And	if	 they	need	beating,	 then	it	 is	better	 that	before	 they
force	the	food,	you	start	beating	them.	If	that	is	the	only	thing	that	will	stop	them
and	 satisfy	 them	 and	 their	 father's	 soul,	 then	 beat	 them	before	 they	make	 you
sick.
Be	alert,	and	understand	clearly	the	idea	of	love.	It	is	non-interfering.	It	is	non-
enforcing	-
-	about	anything.
Love	is	authentic	only	when	it	gives	you	freedom.
I	am	reminded	of	a	strange	Eastern	story	that	will	show	you	what	love	is.
A	man	 is	 in	great	 love	with	a	woman.	The	woman	says,	 "I	am	ready	 to	marry
you,	but	there	is	one	condition."
If	the	man	had	been	aware	of	a	simple	fact,	that	love	never	makes	conditions,	he
would	 have	 said	 goodbye	 to	 the	 woman	 at	 that	 very	 point.	 But	 he	 was	 mad,
really	blindly	in	love.	He	was	ready	to	do	anything.	He	said,	"Any	condition,	and
I	am	ready	to	do	it."
The	woman	said,	"My	condition	is	difficult."
The	man	said,	"Whatever	the	condition	is,	don't	be	worried.	You	just	say	it."
The	woman	said,	"Go	home	and	kill	your	mother.	Bring	her	heart	on	a	plate	and
present	it	to	me.	Only	on	this	condition	will	I	marry	you,	because	only	this	will
give	me	proof	that	you	really	love	me."
Blind	 lovers	 can	do	 anything.	They	 are,	 not	 only	 in	 this	 story	but	 all	 over	 the
world.
He	went	home,	he	killed	his	mother,	and	he	put	her	heart	on	a	plate...	he	rushed.
He	was	in	such	a	hurry	to	reach	the	woman	that	he	stumbled	on	the	road	and	fell.
The	plate	broke	and	the	heart	was	all	over	the	street	in	small	pieces.
And	a	voice	came	from	those	pieces:	"My	son,	are	you	hurt?	I	am	sorry,	but	it
wasn't	my	fault.	Try	to	gather	the	pieces;	go	home	and	get	another	plate,	and	go
to	your	sweetheart."
Listening	 to	 this,	 it	was	 as	 if	 he	 suddenly	 awoke	 from	a	 dream.	What	was	 he
doing?	What	had	he	done?	And	his	mother	has	not	still	complained,	is	not	even
angry.	On	the	contrary,	she	had	inquired,	"Are	you	hurt?	--	because	you've	fallen
on	the	ground.	I	have	always	been	telling	you	to	go	slowly,	but	you	never	listen
to	me.	Now	collect	all	the	pieces	and	go	back	home."
He	collected	the	pieces,	went	home,	and	forgot	all	about	that	woman.
The	woman	waited	and	waited.	One	day	passed,	another	day	passed.	She	said,
"What	 happened?"	 She	went	 to	 the	man's	 house,	 found	 that	 he	 had	 killed	 his
mother.	She	said,
"What	happened	then?	Where	is	the	heart?"
It	 was	 on	 a	 plate,	 in	 fragments.	 He	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 heart,	 but	 something
happened	on	the	road	that	made	me	turn	back.	I	knew	for	the	first	time	what	love
means.	I	am	grateful	 to	you;	otherwise	I	would	have	never	understood	that	my
mother	was	so	much	concerned	about	my	welfare.	And	I	cannot	forgive	myself,
that	 I	 killed	 the	 woman	 with	 my	 own	 hands.	 As	 for	 you,	 who	 asked	 such	 a
condition...!"
Love	makes	no	conditions.
Love	gives	you	freedom	to	be	yourself,	helps	you	to	be	yourself.
Even	if	it	goes	against	his	own	interest,	still,	a	loving	person	will	suffer	himself
rather	than	make	the	loved	one	suffer.
Another	ancient	story...
A	woman	loved	her	husband,	but	the	husband	never	paid	any	attention	to	her.	He
was	in	love	with	a	prostitute,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	prostitutes	don't	love	--
because	there	were	many	other	customers.	He	was	only	a	customer,	not	a	lover.
And	 in	his	 life	 he	had	 seen	 that	 the	day	 the	 customer's	money	 is	 finished,	 the
prostitute's	door	is	closed	for	that	man.
He	 had	 destroyed	 his	 health,	 he	 had	 destroyed	 his	money,	 now	 he	was	 dying.
Just	as	he	was	dying,	his	wife	asked	him,	"If	you	have	any	last	wish	so	that	you
can	die	contented..."
He	said,	"Yes,	I	have	a	wish,	but	I	am	ashamed	to	say	it	to	you."
She	said,	"Don't	be	ashamed.	This	is	not	the	time	to	be	ashamed.	I	love	you	as
you	are	--
there	is	no	question	of	feeling	ashamed."
He	said,	"My	only	wish	is	to	see	the	prostitute	just	once	more	before	I	die."
The	woman	said,	"There	is	no	problem."
He	had	lost	all	their	money,	there	was	no	money	in	the	house.	She	had	to	carry
the	 dying	man	 on	 her	 shoulders	 to	 the	 prostitute's	 house.	 She	 knocked	 on	 the
door.
The	 prostitute	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 She	 said,	 "Am	 I
hallucinating?	Is	this	real?	You	are	the	wife	of	the	man..."
The	wife	said,	"Yes,	I	am	the	wife	and	also	the	lover	of	the	man."
The	prostitute	said,	"Then	why	have	you	brought	him	here?	He	destroyed	your
life,	 he	 spent	 all	 your	money	 and	 he	was	mad	 after	me.	And	 to	me,	 once	 the
money	is	finished,	all	relationship	is	finished.	He	was	only	a	customer.	This	is	a
marketplace	and	he	knows	it.	You	are	a	strange	woman!"
She	said,	"But	this	was	his	dying	wish.	He	wanted	to	see	you,	and	I	love	him	so
much	that	I	could	not	say	no.	In	his	happiness	is	my	happiness,	and	if	he	can	die
contented	I	will	feel	I	have	fulfilled	my	duty,	my	love."
No	complaint	about	the	man,	about	his	whole	behavior.	No	jealousy	against	the
woman.
Love	knows	no	jealousy,	love	knows	no	complaint.
Love	is	a	deep	understanding.
You	love	someone	--	that	does	not	mean	that	the	other	should	love	you	also.	It	is
not	a	contract.
Try	to	understand	the	meaning	of	love.
And	you	will	not	be	able	 to	understand	 the	meaning	of	 love	by	your	 so-called
love	affairs.
Strangely	enough,	you	will	understand	the	meaning	of	love	by	going	deep	into
meditation,	by	becoming	more	silent,	more	together,	more	at	ease.	You	will	start
radiating	 a	 certain	 energy.	 You	 will	 become	 loving,	 and	 you	 will	 know	 the
beautiful	qualities	of	love.
It	knows	to	say	yes,	it	also	knows	to	say	no.	It	is	not	blind.
But	 it	 has	 to	 come	 out	 of	 your	 meditation	 --	 only	 then	 does	 love	 have	 eyes;
otherwise	love	is	blind.
And	unless	 love	has	 eyes,	 it	 is	worthless.	 It	 is	 going	 to	 create	more	 and	more
trouble	for	you	--	because	two	blind	persons	with	blind	expectations	are	not	only
going	 to	double	 the	 troubles	of	 life,	 they	 are	going	 to	multiply	 the	 troubles	of
life.
So	be	silent	and	be	alert.	Be	loving.
And	you	can	say	no	with	great	 love.	No	does	not	mean	 that	you	are	unloving;
yes	does	not	mean	 that	you	are	 loving.	Sometimes	yes	may	mean	 that	you	are
simply	afraid,	 it	 is	out	of	 fear.	So	 it	 is	not	necessarily	 that	 love	means	yes	and
you	cannot	say	no.
Love	with	eyes	knows	when	to	say	no,	when	to	say	yes.
Love	neither	interferes	in	anybody's	life	nor	allows	anybody	else	to	interfere	into
one's	 own	 life.	 Love	 gives	 individuality	 to	 others,	 but	 does	 not	 lose	 its	 own
individuality.
And	it	is	not	a	question	of	Western	or	Eastern	--	what	I	am	saying	is	applicable
to	all.	Just	because	you	have	asked	the	question	as	if	the	problem	is	because	you
come	from	the	West...
It	has	to	be	understood	well:	it	is	not	a	question	of	your	coming	from	the	West;	it
is	 a	problem	because	 reason	and	heart	 are	 always	 in	 conflict.	And	 the	West	 is
more	rationalist,	but	the	West	has	spread	all	over	the	world	through	its	empires
and	 through	 its	 educational	 systems.	 Now	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 a	 purely
Eastern	man.	The	West	has	poisoned	everybody.
Reason	has	become	supreme.
So	 try	 to	understand	 it	 in	 terms	of	 reason	 and	heart,	 not	 in	 terms	of	West	 and
East.
Because	even	in	the	East,	for	the	people	who	are	living	in	their	reason	--	and	all
people	who	are	cultured,	educated,	are	living	in	their	reason	--	the	problem	is	the
same.
The	heart	has	 its	own	 language,	 reason	has	 its	own	 language,	and	 they	are	not
necessarily	 always	 in	 agreement.	 Most	 probably	 they	 are	 in	 disagreement,
because	reason	thinks	in	a	different	dimension.
I	am	reminded	of	Albert	Einstein	and	his	wife,	Frau	Einstein.
His	wife	was	 a	 poet.	And	 he	was	 just	 the	wrong	 person	 to	 be	married	 to	 --	 a
mathematician,	a	physicist.	In	mathematics,	one	plus	one	is	always	two.	In	love,
one	plus	one	is	always	one.	Languages	are	so	different.
And	Frau	Einstein	was	a	talented	woman;	naturally	she	wanted	to	show	a	few	of
her	poems	to	Albert	Einstein,	and	would	have	enjoyed	being	appreciated	by	the
world's	most	famous	mathematician,	physicist,	scientist.
But	 she	 could	 not	 see	 any	 emotion	 moving	 on	 Albert	 Einstein's	 face,	 or	 any
changes	in	his	eyes.	He	listened	to	her	poems	as	if	he	were	a	stone	statue.
She	had	written	a	beautiful	piece,	talking	about	the	beloved	and	comparing	the
face	of	the	beloved	with	the	moon.	At	that	point,	Einstein	said,	"Enough!	Stop!
This	is	too	much.
You	don't	understand	anything	about	the	moon.	Do	you	know	its	proportions?	If
a	moon	were	put	on	a	man's	body	as	a	head,	your	beloved	would	not	be	found
again,	 he	 would	 be	 crushed	 to	 pieces.	 And	 who	 told	 you	 that	 the	 moon	 is
beautiful?	It	is	a	dead	rock,	with	no	water,	no	greenery,	no	flowers,	no	trees,	no
birds.	Who	told	you	that	the	moon	is	beautiful?	What	do	you	mean	by	beauty?"
The	wife	was	 shocked,	 she	 could	not	believe	 that	 such	a	great	 scientist	would
talk	in	such	a	way.	But	he	was	not	joking	--	that's	how	reason	thinks.
Reason	cannot	understand	poetry;	it	is	not	its	way.
It	is	very	prose.
Frau	Einstein	has	written	in	her	memoirs,	"That	was	the	first	and	the	last	time	I
ever	mentioned	poetry	 to	him.	It	would	be	better	 to	 talk	 to	a	rock;	perhaps	 the
rock	might	respond	better	than	this	man."
The	question	is	not	of	East	and	West.	The	question	is	between	the	heart	and	the
reason.
In	the	East,	the	heart	has	been	predominant,	but	it	has	created	a	problem	which
nobody	has	discussed.	I	have	been	looking	through	ancient	scriptures,	literature,
commentaries	--
has	 anybody	 ever	 thought	 about	 this	 problem	 or	 not?	 --	 because	 it	 is	 so
significant	it	cannot	be	ignored.
Because	 the	 East	 is	 leaning	 too	much	 towards	 the	 heart,	 it	 has	 not	 developed
rationality	to	its	fullest	--	but	still	it	goes	on	talking	about	theories,	reincarnation,
heaven	and	hell.	If	you	were	to	say	that	these	are	mythological,	there	would	be
no	problem,	but	people	insist	that	these	are	rational	hypotheses.
And	your	 question	 is	 relevant:	 it	 becomes	 so	 difficult	 to	 talk	with	 the	Eastern
person	 because	 he	 goes	 on	 talking	 about	 theories	 which	 look	 absurd,	 stupid,
illogical.	 But	 to	 him	 they	 seem	 absolutely	 valid	 because	 he	 has	 never	 been
trained	in	reason.	His	validity	is	of	the	heart.
I	will	give	you	few	examples	so	you	can	understand.
Jainas	 say	 that	 once	 a	 snake	 bit	 Mahavira	 on	 his	 foot,	 and	 instead	 of	 blood
coming	 out,	milk	 came	out.	Now,	 if	 you	 say	 it	 is	 a	myth,	 a	 parable,	 a	 poetry,
there	is	no	problem....
The	 first	 time	 I	 spoke	 in	 Bombay,	 one	 Jaina	 monk,	 Chitrabhanu,	 had	 spoken
ahead	of	me.
And	he	mentioned	 this	 fact,	 and	gave	 the	 reason	why	milk	 came	out:	 because
Mahavira	is	so	full	of	love	that	even	when	a	snake	bites	him,	it	is	because	of	his
love	and	compassion	that	milk	comes	out	--	just	a	little	breakfast	for	the	snake.
No	anger,	no	violence...
And	for	twenty-five	centuries	Jainas	have	been	writing	in	their	books	that	this	is
factual.
I	was	 to	 speak	after	Chitrabhanu,	 and	 I	 said,	 "If	 it	 is	 factual	 then	many	 things
have	to	be	explained:	it	means	that	Mahavira's	body	was	filled	with	milk	instead
of	blood.	And	the	snakebite	happened	when	he	was	nearabout	fifty,	so	for	fifty
years...	all	the	milk	would	have	certainly	turned	into	curd.	And	he	used	to	walk
naked,	on	foot...	in	fifty	years'	time,	the	curd	would	have	turned	into	butter!	And
in	such	heat,	in	such	a	hot	country,	butter	is	going	to	become	GHEE."
So	 if	 ghee	 had	 come	 out	 of	 his	 foot	 instead	 of	 blood,	 there	 would	 be	 some
rationality	to	it
--	but	milk?	And	this	is	so	stupid,	that	a	man	is	full	of	curd...	he	would	stink	of
curd!	Fifty	years	filled	with	curd	and	butter	and	ghee	--	 just	 think	of	 that	poor
man.	In	the	hot	season,	he	wouldn't	perspire,	he	would	start	flowing	with	ghee!
So	 I	 said,	 "This	 is	 nonsense.	 The	 only	 possibility	 is:	 milk	 comes	 out	 of	 a
woman's	body,	and	she	has	a	certain	mechanism	 in	her	breast	 to	 transform	 the
blood	 into	milk.	A	 rational	mind	 could	 accept	 it,	 that	Mahavira	 had	 the	 same
mechanism	in	his	feet.	His	feet	were	nothing	but	breasts.	And	strangely...	was	he
expecting	 that	 the	 snake	was	going	 to	bite	him	on	 the	 foot?	Most	probably	he
had	breasts	all	over,	so	that	wherever	the	snake	bit,	milk	would	come	out."
And	 even	 a	woman's	 breast	will	 not	 give	milk	 unless	 she	 has	 given	birth	 to	 a
child.	 So	 I	 said,	 "This	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 into	 difficulties.	 It	 is	 better	 to	 simply
accept	that	this	is	poetry.
Don't	 make	 it	 history.	 Don't	 try	 to	 theorize	 it,	 don't	 try	 to	 make	 it	 scientific.
Simply	say	that	it	is	a	poetic	way	of	saying	that	he	was	so	loving...	how	to	say	it
in	poetry?	So	we	have	expressed	it	by	saying	that	milk	came	out,	just	as	the	milk
comes	out	of	the	mother's	breast,	in	love."
Milk	has	a	certain	association	with	love,	because	the	child	receives	the	milk	and
love	from	the	same	breast	--	that	is	his	first	experience	in	the	world.	And	that's
why	humanity	is	so	obsessed	with	the	breast.	Painters	go	on	painting	breasts	and
breasts,	sculptors	go	on	making	breasts	and	breasts.
Poets,	novelists,	all	kinds	of	creative	people	are	obsessed	only	with	one	object,
and	 that	 is	 the	 woman's	 breast.	 The	 reason	 is	 clear:	 it	 is	 the	 child's	 first
experience	of	love,	of	warmth,	of	the	human	body,	of	the	other,	of	the	world.	It
contains	 so	much.	So	 just	 to	give	 expression	 to	 a	 feeling	of	 love	 and	warmth,
milk	has	been	used	as	a	symbol.
But	no	Jaina	is	going	to	agree	with	me,	because	then	the	miracle	is	lost.	Poetry	is
not	a	miracle.	The	miracle	is	in	the	historicity	of	the	fact.
So	 you	 are	 right	 in	 questioning	 how	 to	 deal	 with	 these	 people.	 They	 are	 so
loving,	 they	are	 so	 full	 of	heart,	 but	 they	go	on	 talking	about	 such	nonsense...
esoteric,	occult.
And	 everybody	 in	 the	 East	 knows	 so	much	 that	 it	 seems	 that	 all	 are	 realized
souls!	Where	to	stop	these	people,	and	where	to	say	no	to	these	people?
You	 have	 to	 be	 very	 clear,	 very	 loving,	 but	 without	 any	 compromise.	 The
moment	 you	 see	 that	 these	 people	 are	 going	 into	 fictions	 and	 creating	 stupid
theories	--	and	their	scriptures	are	full	of	them	--	you	have	to	stop	them.
That	is	one	of	the	misfortunes	of	the	East,	that	people	have	forgotten	completely
that	poetry	 is	not	history,	 that	poetry	 is	 far	more	 significant	 than	history.	Then
theorizations,	rationalizations	are	meaningless,	and	the	effort	to	prove	them	as	if
they	are	scientific	truths	makes	the	whole	East	a	laughingstock.
My	own	approach	is	very	simple:
You	have	to	be	alert	not	to	allow	the	heart	to	start	overpowering	your	reason,	just
as	you	have	 to	be	 alert	 that	 your	 reason	does	not	overpower	your	heart.	Their
functions	are	separate.	Reason	should	function	 in	 the	world	of	objects,	and	 the
heart	 should	 function	 in	 the	world	 of	 human	 consciousness.	 And	 the	moment
they	overlap,	there	is	going	to	be	a	certain	kind	of	mess.
And	whenever	you	feel	it,	that	the	man	is	so	loving,	how	to	say	no	to	him?	don't
be	worried.	It	has	been	my	whole	life's	difficulty	--	because	everybody	in	India
is	so	full	of	knowledge,	and	all	that	knowledge	is	simply	holy	cow	dung,	there	is
nothing	in	it.
But	 these	 people	 are	 good,	 this	 is	 the	 problem.	 The	 people	 are	 good:	 very
generous,	very	loving,	very	helpful.	Only	their	hearts	have	overrun	their	heads,
so	whatsoever	they	are	saying...	you	have	to	be	a	little	alert.
And	when	you	say	no	to	them,	they	feel	hurt;	they	think	their	love	is	rejected.	So
you	have	to	be	very	careful	and	very	articulate.	It	is	a	difficult	task	--	it	was	for
me,	because	with	my	family,	my	teachers,	my	professors...	everywhere	I	was	in
difficulty.	 Because	 I	 could	 not	 see	 how	 a	 well-educated	 professor	 could	 be
talking	such	nonsense,	without	even	being	aware	at	all	that	what	he	is	saying	is
nonsense.	 And	 he	 is	 a	 good	 man,	 there	 is	 no	 doubt	 about	 his	 sincerity.	 It	 is
simply	that	his	reason	is	retarded.	Only	the	heart	has	grown,	and	it	has	its	beauty.
But	the	heart	is	leading	the	reason,	so	they	are	talking	all	kinds	of	nonsense.
I	had	to	stop	them	--	"Wait	a	minute.	You	cannot	say	this	rationally.	Either	accept
it	as	a	poetry	or	withdraw	it."
But	the	result	was	that	I	was	expelled	from	this	college,	from	that	university	--
and	they	had	no	reason.	The	vice-chancellor	said	to	me,	that	"We	don't	have	any
reason	to	expel	you,	you	have	not	done	anything	that	demands	such	punishment
as	to	expel	you.	But	you	should	understand	our	difficulty:	you	are	creating	such
trouble	 to	 so	many	 professors	 that	 they	 are	 threatening	 to	 resign	 if	 you	 don't
leave	 this	 university.	 And	 we	 cannot	 afford	 it,	 those	 are	 our	 very	 respected
professors."
And	I	said,	"First	you	should	call	them	and	ask	them	what	the	problem	is,	why
they	are	so	angry	with	me."
And	 the	 professors	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 being	 angry	 with	 you.	 You
simply	raise	questions	which	make	us	feel	embarrassed	before	the	whole	class.
And	people	laugh,	and	we	cannot	answer.	You	are	destroying	the	respectability
we	 have	 established	 over	 thirty	 years,	 forty	 years	 --	 you,	within	 half	 an	 hour,
destroy	the	whole	of	it.	People	lose	all	respect	for	us."
And	I	said,	"Have	I	ever	shown	any	disrespect	to	you?"
They	said,	"You	never	show	any	disrespect.	That	is	not	the	question,	the	question
is	 that	 we	 cannot	 change	 now.	 Our	 whole	 lives	 we	 have	 lived	 with	 certain
theories.	And	we	have	believed	them	to	be	scientific,	we	have	never	suspected
them.	Suddenly	you	come	here,	and	on	each	point	you	create	a	question	and	we
are	at	a	loss."
One	of	the	professors	was	a	celibate,	and	he	was	continually	preaching	celibacy,
that	the	only	spirituality	is	to	be	celibate.
I	 asked	 him,	 "I	 have	 been	 in	 your	 home,	 and	 I	 see	Rama	 there	with	 Sita,	 the
Hindu	 god	 Rama	 standing	 with	 his	 wife,	 Sita.	 What	 kind	 of	 celibacy	 is	 this
fellow	following?	And	out	of	this	celibacy	two	children	are	born	--	you	should
throw	this	fellow	out	of	your	house!	But	you	worship	him,	and	in	the	university
you	 talk	 about	 celibacy.	 Do	 you	 see	 the	 contradiction	 or	 not?	 All	 your	 Vedic
seers	were	married	people,	all	your	Upanishadic	seers	were	married	people.	You
read	SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA	every	day,	and	this	fellow	Shri	Krishna	had
sixteen	thousand	wives	--	what	kind	of	celibacy	is	this?"
Now	this	man	took	my	hand	and	told	me,	"Come	with	me	to	the	vice-chancellor.
This	is	too	much	--	now	either	you	are	going	to	remain	in	the	university	or	I	am
going	to	remain	in	the	university."
But	 I	 said,	 "I	 have	 simply	 asked	 a	 question.	 You	 can	 satisfy	 me	 by	 giving	 a
satisfying	 answer.	 Or,	 you	 can	 say	 that	 you	 are	 greater	 than	 all	 these	 people
because	you	are	celibate	and	they	were	not.	But	why	are	you	worshipping	them?
They	should	worship	you."
On	the	way,	he	asked	me,	"Should	we	go	to	the	vice-chancellor	or	not?"
I	said,	"It	is	up	to	you.	Because	the	whole	question	will	be	discussed,	and	I	will
insist	 that	 the	 vice-chancellor	 have	 a	 look	 in	 your	 house.	 You	 have	 made	 a
temple	where	Rama	is	standing	with	Sita	and	Krishna	is	standing	with	Rukmani
--	which	 is	absolute	hypocrisy;	he	was	married	 to	 this	woman	Rukmani	but	he
never	 lived	with	her.	How	could	he	manage	 it?	Sixteen	 thousand	wives	 stolen
from	other	people's	houses...	he	was	married	to	only	one	woman;	the	remaining
ones	were	 all	 stolen,	 forcibly	 taken.	Whenever	 he	 saw	a	beautiful	woman,	 his
soldiers	would	take	her	--	no	consideration	of	the	husband	or	the	children	or	the
old	 parents,	 no	 consideration	 at	 all.	 And	 still,	 the	 hypocrisy	 is	 that	 you	 are
putting	poor	Rukmani	next	to	Krishna.	I	will	take	the	vice-chancellor	to	have	a
look	in	your	house	and	things	can	be	decided	then	and	there."
I	 said,	 "There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 you	 to	 resign.	You	 simply	 don't	 be	 celibate,	 get
married!	The	problem	will	be	solved	--	neither	I	will	have	to	be	expelled	from
the	university	nor	will	you	have	to	resign.	And	if	you	feel	shy,	I	will	find	a	good
wife	for	you."
He	said,	"You	stop!	Don't	 talk	 like	 this,	you	are	almost	persuading	me.	This	 is
seduction!"
I	said,	"Then	come	on	and	see	the	vice-chancellor."
And	we	went,	 and	 the	 vice-chancellor	 listened,	 and	 he	 told	me,	 "You	 are	 not
wrong,	but	what	can	we	do?	As	far	as	Indian	logic	is	concerned,	this	man	is	the
best	in	the	whole	of	India.	We	cannot...."
I	 said,	 "You	 just	 think	 --	 this	 man	 is	 absolutely	 illogical.	 How	 can	 he	 be	 an
expert	 in	 Indian	 logic?	 His	 behavior	 is	 so	 illogical...	 a	 celibate	 worshipping
married	people."
But	the	vice-chancellor	said,	"You	had	better	choose	some	other	university.	I	will
recommend	 you.	 I	 will	 not	 expel	 you,	 I	 will	 recommend	 you	 as	 highly	 as
possible."	 But	 no	 university	 was	 ready	 to	 accept	 me,	 because	 my	 fame	 had
reached	ahead	of	me	already
--	that	that	fellow	is	coming	to	be	admitted	to	the	university	or	the	college.
In	India	it	is	a	problem	--	people	are	not	rational.	Even	those	who	pretend	to	be
rational,	their	behavior	is	very	irrational.
They	will	be	very	loving,	but	don't	allow	them	to	destroy	your	reason.	The	heart
has	 to	 grow,	 reason	 has	 to	 become	 sharp	 --	 because	 both	 have	 to	 fulfill	 their
functions	in	the	totality	of	your	growth.
A	man	with	a	great	heart	and	a	great	intelligence,	without	any	conflict	between
them,	is	truly	a	genius.
And	everybody	has	the	possibility,	but	everybody	is	either	dominated	by	logic	or
dominated	by	the	heart.	Everybody	is	living	a	lopsided	life.
Have	you	seen	any	advertisements	for	circuses?	When	a	circus	comes	to	a	town	-
-	I	have	seen	it	in	many	towns	--	they	have	bicycles,	with	one	wheel	small	and
one	wheel	big.
And	the	big	wheel's	center	is	not	in	the	center,	it	is	off-center.	So	the	man	riding
on	 the	 bicycle	 comes	 up,	 goes	 down,	 comes	 up,	 goes	 down	 --	 naturally	 he
attracts	everybody's	attention	--	"What	is	happening?"	A	man	suddenly	comes	up
and	goes	down...	and	he	is	a	joker,	wearing	the	joker's	dress...	and	the	name	of
the	 circus,	 and	 the	 timings	 and	 the	 tickets	 and	 everything...	A	 single	man	will
attract	everybody	--	a	simple	device.
But	seeing	 that	kind	of	advertisement,	 I	saw	that	 this	 is	 the	situation	of	almost
every	man.
You	have	two	wheels,	the	reason	and	the	heart.
Somebody's	heart	is	big	and	their	reason	is	small	--	then	he	goes	up	and	down.
Somebody's	reason	is	big	and	his	heart	is	small	--	then	he	goes	up	and	down.
Everybody	is	going	up	and	down	--	and	for	whom	are	you	advertising?
And	it	is	not	easy	to	sit	on	that	bicycle,	I	have	tried	it.	It	is	a	very	difficult	job.
But	people	are	living	this	way	--	unbalanced.
You	need	a	balanced	life	in	which	reason	and	heart	move	in	harmony,	supporting
each	other,	helping	each	other.	So	whenever	you	see	that	anybody	--	either	from
the	East	or	from	the	West	--	is	disturbing	your	harmony,	stop	him.
Stop	him	lovingly,	there	is	no	need	to	be	rude.
But	don't	be	silent,	because	to	be	silent	is	to	be	rude.	You	have	allowed	that	man
to	move	in	a	wrong	way,	you	were	not	compassionate	enough.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	Don't	be	a	missionary,	be	a	message
16	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610165
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH14
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
131
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	HEARD	MY	PRAYER	AND	CALLED	ME	TO	YOU	ON	THE	8TH	OF
AUGUST.
AS	 I	 ENTERED	 YOUR	 ROOM,	 I	 EXPERIENCED	 YOU	 AS	 A	 LARGE
OCEAN,	AN
EMPTINESS	 THAT	 I	 HAVE	 NEVER	 EXPERIENCED	 BEFORE.	 I	 SAW
YOUR
BEAUTIFUL	BEING,	AND	I	WAS	IMMERSED	IN	THAT	EMPTINESS	AND
BEAUTY.	I	FELT	THAT	THE	OCEAN'S	EMPTINESS	WAS	FLOWING	INTO
ME
FROM	YOU.
AFTER	THAT	DAY,	NEW	SONGS	AND	MELODIES	ARE	COMING	FROM
THAT
EMPTINESS	OF	YOURS,	AND	I	DON'T	KNOW	ANYTHING.
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 PLEASE	 EXPLAIN	 HOW	 THIS	 CAN	 HAPPEN	 SO
EASILY	IN
THE	 MASTER'S	 PRESENCE.	 IS	 IT	 SO	 SIMPLE?	 IT	 DOESN'T	 FEEL
POSSIBLE	FOR
ME	TO	EXIST	IN	THIS	LIFE	WITHOUT	HAVING	HAD	THAT	MEETING	--
IS
THAT	 SO?	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 SUCH	 A	 FEELING	 MIGHT	 NOT	 HAVE
OTHERWISE
HAPPENED	TO	ME	FOR	MANY	LIVES.
PLEASE	 EXPLAIN	 THE	 MEETING	 OF	 THE	 MASTER	 AND	 THE
DISCIPLE.
Ashok	Bharti,	 the	most	obvious	in	life	seems	to	be	the	most	difficult;	 the	most
simple	seems	to	be	the	most	complicated.
The	 reason	 why	 it	 happens	 so,	 is	 because	 the	 mind	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 the
obvious.	It	wants	the	challenge	of	the	impossible;	only	with	the	challenge	of	the
impossible	can	 the	mind	fulfill	 its	ego.	With	 the	obvious,	 there	 is	no	space	for
the	ego	to	grow	or	even	to	exist.
The	obvious	is	the	grave	of	the	ego.
The	simple	we	take	for	granted,	because	it	is	so	simple.
Only	the	far	away,	the	distant,	catches	our	eye,	invites	us	for	a	journey.	Because
of	this,	people	have	gone	around	the	earth	--	people	like	Columbus.	People	have
gone	to	the	moon,	people	are	trying	to	go	to	Mars,	people	are	thinking	to	reach
some	day	to	the	most	distant	stars.
Nobody	bothers	to	enter	into	himself,	and	to	see	the	most	miraculous,	the	most
mysterious,	the	most	fundamental	principle	of	life,	the	very	source	of	life	--	it	is
so	close,	so	obvious,	so	simple.
People	may	not	 find	anything	on	 the	moon;	 they	have	not	 found	anything,	but
they	have	become	great	historical	figures.
Edmund	Hillary	has	not	found	anything	on	Everest,	but	his	name	will	remain	a
landmark	forever.
I	have	always	been	surprised	that	for	at	least	one	hundred	years	people	from	all
the	 Western	 countries	 have	 been	 coming	 to	 climb	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 the
Himalayas,	Everest.
No	Indian	has	bothered	about	it;	for	the	Indian	it	is	so	obvious.
The	more	difficult	a	thing	is,	the	more	attractive	it	is;	the	more	unattainable,	the
more	mind	becomes	obsessed.
I	have	heard,	a	great	psychologist	was	visiting	a	madhouse.	The	superintendent
of	 the	 madhouse	 was	 taking	 him	 on	 a	 tour,	 satisfying	 his	 curiosities	 and
questions	about	the	inmates.
He	became	immensely	interested	in	one	inmate;	behind	the	bars,	 in	his	cell,	he
was	 standing	 naked.	 On	 the	 wall	 there	 was	 a	 small	 picture	 of	 an	 ordinary
woman,	and	he	was	standing	in	a	worshipful	mood,	tears	flowing	from	his	eyes.
The	psychologist	asked,
"What	is	the	matter	with	this	man?"
The	 superintendent	 said,	 "Don't	disturb	him,"	 took	him	a	 little	 away,	 and	 said,
"He	does	 not	 like	 to	 be	 disturbed	 in	 his	 prayers,	 and	 he	 is	 praying	 almost	 the
whole	day."
The	psychologist	said,	"Whose	picture	is	that?"
The	superintendent	started	laughing.	He	said,	"It	is	nobody,	it	is	just	an	ordinary
woman.
He	was	in	love,	but	because	they	belonged	to	different	castes,	 the	father	of	 the
woman	 refused;	 he	 became	 mad	 and	 the	 woman	 became	 a	 goddess.
Unattainable,	 one	 ordinary	 woman	 became	 a	 goddess.	 Now	 he	 worships	 and
prays	 that,	 `What	 has	 not	 happened	 in	 this	 life,	 perhaps	 through	 prayer	 and
worship	may	happen	in	the	next.'"
The	psychologist	said,	"I	have	never	come	across	such	a	case."
The	superintendent	said,	"Just	wait	a	little	more."
In	the	next	cell	there	was	another	man	who	was	hitting	his	head	against	the	wall,
and	two	guards	were	holding	him.	The	psychologists	said,	"What	has	happened
to	him?	Why	does	he	want	to	hit	his	head	on	the	wall?"
The	superintendent	said,	"He	has	gone	mad.	He	wants	to	commit	suicide,	and	it
is	such	a	problem	to	watch	him	continuously	--	he	hurts	himself."
"But	what	is	the	cause	of	his	madness?"
The	superintendent	said,	"That's	why	I	was	telling	you	to	just	wait	a	little.	He	got
married,	and	the	marriage	has	been	such	a	disaster	that	he	is	in	the	madhouse.	He
wants	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 Because	 sooner	 or	 later	 he	 will	 be	 sent	 out	 of	 the
madhouse,	and	again	be	in	the	hands	of	that	woman.	But	it	is	the	same	woman!
And	to	avoid	her,	he	wants	to	commit	suicide."
The	psychologist	said,	"My	God,	it	is	the	same	woman	the	other	man	is	praying
to	get	 in	his	next	 life?	 --	 because	he	missed	 the	 train	 this	 time!	And	 this	poor
fellow	did	not	miss	this	time	--	now	he	wants	to	jump	out	of	the	train.	He	can't
even	wait	for	the	station	to	come."
Life	is	not	logic.	Life	is	love.
Logic	is	a	complicated	phenomenon.
Love	is	simple,	innocent	communion.
Life	is	closer	to	music	than	to	mathematics,	because	mathematics	is	of	the	mind,
and	life	throbs	in	your	heartbeats.
Ashok	Bharti,	you	love	me	and	that	opens	the	door	for	all	the	mysteries	possible.
People	say	love	is	blind	because	they	do	not	know	what	love	is.
I	say	unto	you,	only	love	has	eyes;	other	than	love,	everything	is	blind.
Once	 your	 eyes	 of	 love	 are	 opened,	 things	which	 you	 have	 never	 dreamed	 of
start	becoming	realities;	new	songs	that	you	had	never	thought	yourself	capable
of,	new	poetries,	with	such	insights	that	you	cannot	believe	that	you	have	written
them.
This	 is	 the	 reason	why	all	 the	 ancient	 scriptures	don't	 have	 the	names	of	 their
authors	--
because	 the	 authors	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 they	 were	 the	 writers	 of	 the
UPANISHADS,	 of	 the	 VEDAS.	 They	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 At	 the	most,	 they
have	 been	 vehicles;	 they	 were	 possessed.	 Some	 universal	 energy	 has	 taken
possession	 of	 them,	 and	what	 they	 have	written	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 them.
They	have	not	signed	the	scriptures	that	they	have	written.
It	is	very	difficult	to	find	out	who	are	the	sculptors	of	the	most	beautiful	ancient
statues	of	Gautam	Buddha,	which	have	never	again	been	paralleled.
The	 grand	 architectures	 of	 the	 caves	 of	 Ajanta,	 Ellora...	 it	 seems	 almost
superhuman	work,	and	the	people	have	not	even	signed	their	names	because	they
never	 believed	 that	 they	 were	 doing	 it.	 They	 experienced	 that	 existence	 was
using	them	as	instruments,	and	they	were	blessed	and	grateful	that	they	had	been
chosen	to	be	instrumental.	Existence	has	been	compassionate	towards	them;	they
are	enough	rewarded.
Ashok	Bharti	is	a	poor	man,	but	has	a	very	rich	heart;	and	to	have	a	rich	heart	is
the	only	real	richness	in	the	world.	He	has	the	potentiality	of	becoming	a	great
singer,	a	great	poet,	a	great	composer,	but	he	was	not	aware	of	it.	He	had	come
just	to	see	me;	he's	my	old	sannyasin.	And	knowing	that	to	me,	religion	means
celebration,	he	brought	his	khanjhari
--	just	to	sing	a	song	to	me;	what	else	to	bring	as	an	offering?	He	was	very	shy	in
asking,
"Can	I	sing	a	song	in	Your	presence?"
I	said,	"This	is	the	most	beautiful	present	anyone	could	have	brought	to	me.	You
can	sing	every	day."	And	I	have	been	watching	him	for	almost	one	month	--	the
depth,	 the	 significance,	 the	 meaning	 of	 his	 songs	 has	 been	 deepening.	 His
courage	is	growing,	he	is	no	more	hesitant,	he	is	not	worried	that	so	many	people
are	 watching.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 public	 singer	 --	 he's	 just	 like	 everybody	 else,	 a
bathroom	singer.
It	is	strange	--	in	bathrooms	you	will	find	the	great	singers	of	the	world,	but	the
moment	you	bring	them	out	of	the	bathroom	they	become	dumb.	Everybody	is	a
good	 conversationalist.	 The	 whole	 world	 is	 agog	 with	 people	 talking	 to	 each
other,	but	just	put	somebody	on	a	pedestal,	and	he	looks	at	the	crowd	watching
him	and	his	heart	starts	sinking.	These	are	the	same	people	he	has	been	talking	to
separately,	privately.	But	 to	be	observed	with	 thousands	of	eyes...	 a	 fear	arises
that,	"If	something	goes	wrong,	I	will	become	a	 laughingstock	before	so	many
people."
I	have	been	watching	Ashok.	The	first	day	there	was	that	fear.	Slowly	slowly,	the
fear	 has	 disappeared;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 a	 fearlessness,	 a	 strength....	And	 he	 has
been	 creating	 his	 own	 songs,	 tremendously	 beautiful	 --	 not	 composed	 by	 the
mind,	 but	 arising	 out	 of	 his	 love	 and	 out	 of	 his	 heart.	 They	 have	 a	 totally
different	beauty.
It	is	true,	Ashok,	that	if	you	love	me	you	will	feel	in	my	presence	as	if	you	are
disappearing	into	a	vast	emptiness,	or	into	a	vast	fullness.
Beyond	human	mind,	emptiness	and	fullness	mean	the	same	thing.
Love	makes	 you	 empty	 --	 empty	 of	 jealousy,	 empty	 of	 power	 trips,	 empty	 of
anger,	empty	of	competitiveness,	empty	of	your	ego	and	all	its	garbage.
But	love	also	makes	you	full	of	things	which	are	unknown	to	you	right	now;	it
makes	you	full	of	fragrance,	full	of	light,	full	of	joy.
An	 ancient	 story	 is,	 a	 king	 is	 getting	 old....	 He	 has	 three	 sons,	 and	 all	 are
intelligent.	They	are	triplets,	born	together,	so	there	is	no	question	of	who	is	the
eldest;	otherwise,	there	would	have	been	no	problem,	the	eldest	son	would	have
been	 the	 successor.	The	 problem	was,	who	out	 of	 the	 three	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the
successor?	They	 are	 all	 of	 the	 same	 age.	 In	 horse	 riding	 they	 are	 all	 of	 equal
efficiency;	 in	 archery	 they	 are	 equally	 great.	 In	 every	 field	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
decide	who	is	the	best	of	the	three.
He	asked	his	master,	an	old	wise	man	living	in	the	forest:	"I	am	getting	old,	and
somebody	has	 to	succeed	me	and	 take	care	of	 the	kingdom.	And	I	am	in	great
difficulty:	can	you	give	me	some	idea	how	to	choose	the	right	person?"	And	the
wise	man	gave	him	some	advice.
The	king	came	back,	and	he	gave	an	equal	amount	of	money	 to	all	 three	 sons
and	told	them	--	because	they	all	had	their	own	palaces	--	that,	"With	this	money,
you	have	to	manage	to	fill	your	palaces	completely.	And	after	seven	days	I	will
come	to	see:	whoever	succeeds	in	filling	the	house	totally,	better	than	the	other
two,	is	going	to	succeed	me	as	the	king	of	the	kingdom."
They	were	puzzled,	because	the	money	was	not	that	great.	They	thought	of	many
things,	but	the	palaces	were	big	--	how	to	fill	them	completely?
The	 first	prince	went	 to	 the	municipal	corporation	and	asked,	 "From	 today,	all
the	trucks	that	throw	the	garbage	of	the	town	outside	the	city	should	throw	it	into
my	palace	--
because	 with	 that	 money	 only	 this	 much	 is	 possible,	 to	 fill	 the	 palace
completely."
He	 filled	 the	palace	 completely.	The	whole	neighborhood	was	angry;	 even	 the
traffic	 on	 the	 road	 stopped	 --	 because	 it	 was	 stinking.	 But	 they	 could	 not	 do
anything	--	he	was	 the	prince,	and	it	was	a	question	of	a	certain	 test.	The	king
himself	has	asked.
The	second	prince	was	very	much	worried...	asked	many	people.	But	they	said,
"With	such	a	small	amount	of	money	it	is	very	difficult.	What	your	brother	has
done...	 he	 has	 filled	 the	 house;	 you	 can	 do	 something	 similar.	 Just	 purchase
cheap	grass,	fill	the	house."
He	purchased	cheapest	quality	of	grass,	which	even	animals	were	not	 ready	 to
eat,	but	still	the	house	was	not	full;	it	was	only	half	full.
They	 were	 both	 worried	 about	 what	 the	 third	 brother	 was	 doing,	 because	 he
looked	 absolutely	 unconcerned.	 Six	 days	 had	 passed	 and	 he	 had	 not	 done
anything.	And	the	seventh	day	came,	and	by	the	evening,	as	the	sun	set	the	king
came	with	the	wise	old	man.
It	was	 impossible	 to	 come	 close	 to	 the	 first	 son's	 house.	 The	 king	 said,	 "This
idiot,	 he	 has	 really	 filled	 the	 house	 --	 but	with	 garbage!	 It	 is	 disgusting,	 I	 am
feeling	sick."
But	the	old	man	said,	"You	had	asked...	and	we	have	to	go	and	see.	Just	have	a
little	patience.	You	need	not	 stay	 long;	 just	have	a	 look	 to	 see	whether	he	has
filled	the	house	or	not."
They	saw	it.
They	went	 to	 the	 second	son's	house....	 It	was	not	better,	but	 it	was	not	worse
either.	It	was	rotten	grass,	but	the	house	was	half	full.
The	king	was	very	much	disappointed	--	so	much	so	that	he	thought	that	it	would
be	better	not	to	go	to	house	of	the	third	prince.	Because	these	idiots...	what	they
have	done	is	not	worth	seeing.
But	the	wise	man	said,	"You	have	to	go,	because	the	decision	has	to	be	taken."
They	went	to	the	house	of	the	third	young	man.	They	entered	the	house,	and	they
were	 puzzled	 --	 because	 it	 was	 absolutely	 empty.	 He	 had	 even	 removed	 the
furniture,	 the	paintings,	 the	 statues,	other	 things	of	 the	house...	 everything	was
removed.	The	house	was	utterly	empty.
They	asked	the	son,	"What	have	you	done?"
He	said	to	the	father,	"You	just	see,	it	is	full."
He	looked	around.	He	said,	"It	is	absolutely	empty,	you	are	befooling	us."
The	wise	old	man	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 angry	with	him;	 it	 is	 full,	 but	 it	 is	 full	with
something	that	you	are	not	acquainted	with.	What	he	has	done	is	that	he	has	just
purchased	candles	 and	put	 the	 candles	 all	 over	 the	house	 --	 it	 is	 full	 of	 light."
Light	is	not	material,	it	is	not	objective.
The	word	òbjective'	is	beautiful;	it	means	that	which	objects	to	you.	You	want	to
go	through	the	wall.	The	wall	will	object,	will	prevent	you;	the	wall	is	objective.
Light	 is	 immaterial.	 It	 is	 a	 strange	 phenomenon	 on	 the	 earth.	 In	 a	 sense	 it	 is
outside	you,	can	be	called	objective,	but	 in	another	sense	 it	 is	not	creating	any
objection	--	you	can	pass	through	it,	it	is	immaterial.
It	 was	 thought	 for	 centuries	 that	 light	 had	 no	 weight;	 just	 recently	 they	 have
discovered	that	it	has	weight,	but	it	is	almost	neglible.	When	the	sky	is	without
clouds	and	the	sun	is	burning	hot,	all	the	rays	that	fall	on	five	square	miles	will
have	some	weight	 that	can	be	detected.	 If	we	could	collect	all	 those	rays,	 they
would	give	you	a	little	sense	of	weight.
So	in	a	way,	light	is	part	of	the	objective	world,	and	in	a	way	it	is	part	of	the	non-
objective	world.
The	old	man	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	boy."
And	the	boy	returned	most	of	the	money.	He	said,	"This	was	too	much.	I	could
have	filled	the	house	in	many	other	dimensions	also.	I	could	have	brought	music
into	the	house,	which	has	no	weight.	I	could	have	brought	incense	into	the	house
--	 the	 fragrance	 has	 no	weight,	 and	 it	would	 fill	 the	 house.	But	 I	 thought	 that
would	be	doing	too	much.
This	 is	 enough	 --	 and	why	waste	 your	money?	You	 take	 your	money	 back;	 a
small	part	of	your	money	was	enough."
Ashok,	when	you	are	in	love,	in	a	way	you	feel	as	if	you	are	disappearing	into	an
emptiness	as	far	as	the	material	world	is	concerned.	But	on	the	other	hand,	you
are	entering	a	new	kind	of	fullness	--	immaterial,	spiritual,	not	of	this	world.
But	 this	 is	 not	 the	 only	world.	 Something	 transcendental,	 something	 from	 the
beyond....
And	I	can	see	your	love.	This	whole	month	it	has	been	growing,	as	if	spring	has
come	to	you,	new	green	leaves,	new	flowers,	a	new	perfume,	and	your	heart	is
full	of	new	visions.
Just	continue	dissolving	into	love.
That's	the	meaning	of	disciplehood:	dissolving	into	the	love,	dissolving	into	the
presence	of	 the	master;	 just	becoming	one	with	his	heartbeats.	And	songs	will
shower	on	you,	and	flowers	of	unknown,	unexperienced	fragrances	will	grow	in
you.
You	 are	 on	 the	 right	 track.	 Just	 don't	 look	 back	 --	 and	 don't	 stop	 anywhere,
because	this	is	a	journey	that	only	begins	but	never	ends.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 WONDER	 WHETHER	 AS	 YOUR	 DISCIPLE	 I	 CAN	 BE	 UTTERLY
SELFISH,	TO
FIND	MY	WAY	TO	ENLIGHTENMENT	WHATEVER	I	AM	DOING,	OR	DO
I	 HAVE	 TO	 FULFILL	 A	 CERTAIN	 FUNCTION	 FOR	 YOU	 TO	 SPREAD
YOUR
VISION?
It	has	to	be	understood	very	clearly	that	nobody	has	a	duty	to	spread	my	vision,
my	message	to	the	people.
I	hate	the	very	word	`missionary'.	These	are	the	ugliest	creatures	on	the	earth.
I	don't	want	to	create	missionaries.
You	 have	 to	 be	 utterly	 selfish,	 concentrated	 on	 only	 one	 aim:	 becoming
enlightened.
Of	course,	 as	you	become	enlightened,	your	 light	will	 start	 reaching	 to	others.
My	message	 will	 start	 vibrating	 through	 you,	 through	 your	 love,	 without	 any
effort	on	your	part.
It	has	never	been	said:	"Be	utterly	selfish."	All	 the	religions	of	 the	world	have
been	 teaching,	 "Be	 altruistic,"	 and	 they	 all	 have	 failed,	 because	 their	 very
foundation	was	wrong.
You	don't	know	what	truth	is,	and	you	start	spreading	the	message	about	truth.
You	are	lying.
I	have	asked	Christian	missionaries,	"What	is	your	experience?"	They	don't	have
any	experience.	What	they	have	is	degrees	from	theological	colleges.	Somebody
is	a	D.D.,	a	doctor	of	divinity.	Because	he	has	written	a	thesis,	he	has	become	a
doctor	of	divinity	--
and	he	knows	nothing	about	divineness,	he	has	never	tasted	anything	that	he	can
call	divine.	He	has	never	had	a	single	moment	 in	his	 life	when	he	has	 touched
the	 beyond;	 he	 had	 no	 time	 --	 he	was	 reading	 books	 and	writing	 his	 doctoral
thesis.	He	was	concerned	with	words,	not	with	experiences.
I	 lived	 in	 Jabalpur	 for	 at	 least	 twenty	 years,	 and	 Jabalpur	 has	 Asia's	 biggest
Christian	theological	college.	It	prepares	missionaries	--	that's	its	function.
The	principal	was	very	much	interested	in	me.	I	asked	him,	"Be	sincere:	do	you
really	feel	that	you	have	something	more	than	the	body	and	the	mind?	Have	you
experienced	anything	of	the	soul?"
He	said,	"I	have	read	about	it,	and	I	trust	that	the	people	who	have	written	about
it	are	not	lying."
I	said,	"It	is	possible	they	were	also	in	the	same	position	as	you	are,	that	they	had
read	other	people	whom	they	believed	could	not	lie	--	but	you	cannot	be	certain
unless	you	experience.	And	what	about	your	professors?	And	you	are	preparing
three	thousand	missionaries	per	year;	you	are	giving	them	degrees	to	go	all	over
Asia	to	convert	other	people	to	Christianity.	This	whole	game	is	hypocrisy.	None
of	your	teachers,	none	of	your	students	has	any	taste	of	meditation;	none	of	them
has	 encountered	God.	 And	 I	 think	 none	 of	 them	 is	 ready	 to	 be	 crucified	 like
Jesus	Christ."
I	asked	him,	"Are	you	ready	to	be	crucified	like	Jesus	Christ?"
He	said,	"What	kind	of	question	are	you	asking?	I	have	children,	I	have	my	wife,
I	have	my	old	parents."
I	 said,	 "Jesus	 also	had	his	old	parents.	And	you	are	 almost	 sixty;	he	was	only
thirty-three.
Then	why	are	you	hanging	a	golden	cross	on	a	golden	chain	around	your	neck?
Because	as	far	as	I	understand,	the	neck	has	to	be	put	on	the	cross	--	not	that	the
cross	is	golden,	hanging	around	your	neck	on	a	gold	chain."
He	said,	 "I	was	 thinking	 that	one	day	 I	would	ask	you	 to	 speak	 to	my	college
students"	--
they	 had	 almost	 five	 thousand	 students	 --	 "but	 now,	 I	 have	 dropped	 that	 idea.
You	can	disturb	the	whole	thing."
And	the	same	question,	you	are	asking	me.
I	am	not	converting	you.	I	am	trying	to	explain	to	you	how	to	transform	yourself,
how	to	become	more	luminous,	how	to	become	more	alert,	more	conscious.	And
if	that	consciousness	brings	you	experiences	which	are	not	available	ordinarily,
and	those	experiences	have	an	intrinsic	quality	that	they	have	to	be	shared,	then
share	them.	But	don't	try	to	impose	any	ideology	on	anyone.
You	love	me.	Naturally	the	desire	arises	that	others	should	also	love	me.
But	the	only	right	way	is	that	you	should	come	to	a	state	that	others	start	loving
you.
I	can	be	connected	through	you	to	others;	not	by	your	words,	but	by	your	life.
You	are	not	to	be	a	missionary.
You	have	to	become	a	message	yourself.
People	 should	 ask	 you,	 "What	 has	 happened	 to	 you?	Why	 do	we	 feel	 such	 a
magnetic	 attraction	 towards	 you?	 Why	 do	 we	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 hiding	 some
treasure	from	us?	Why	do	we	feel	that	you	have	moved	far	above	our	ordinary
visions?"
Then	share	your	experience;	there	is	no	need	to	convert	anybody.
And	when	somebody	comes	on	his	own	accord	 to	be	 transformed,	 to	 learn	 the
whole	 science	 of	 living	 in	 a	 new	way,	 it	 is	 totally	 different.	When	 you	 go	 to
people	to	somehow	convince	their	minds	that	your	ideology	is	better	than	their
ideology,	it	is	possible	that	you	may	convince	a	few	people	with	your	ideology,
but	it	is	not	conversion.	They	remain	the	same.
The	 Catholic,	 the	 Protestant,	 the	 Hindu,	 the	 Mohammedan,	 the	 Jew,	 the
communist	--
what	is	the	difference	in	their	lifestyle?	If	you	insult	any	of	them,	they	are	going
to	react	in	the	same	way.
I	am	reminded	of	a	beautiful	story.
Gautam	Buddha	is	passing	near	a	village	which	consists	of	high	caste	brahmins
only.
They	are	very	much	against	Gautam	Buddha,	they	have	all	gathered	outside	the
village	to	condemn	him,	to	abuse	him.	He	stands	there	listening	to	their	abuse,
their	 allegations,	 their	 lies.	 Even	 Ananda	 --	 who	 has	 been	 with	 him	 all	 these
years	 --	 feels	 angry.	 Because	 they	 were	 born	 into	 a	 royal	 family:	 they	 were
warriors,	their	whole	training	was	to	fight.
But	because	Gautam	Buddha	is	present,	he	controls	himself;	otherwise	he	would
have	killed	one	or	two	people	then	and	there.
Gautam	Buddha	said	to	them,	"You	see	that	the	sun	is	going	to	set	soon,	and	we
have	 to	reach	 the	other	village	before	 the	sun	sets.	 If	you	have	not	 finished	all
that	you	wanted	to	say	to	me,	I	will	make	a	point	that	when	I	return	I	set	aside
enough	time	to	listen	to	you	again.	And	in	two	days,	I	will	be	returning	along	the
same	route	--	so	it	will	be	very	kind	of	you	if	you	can	wait	just	two	days."
One	man	from	the	crowd	said,	"You	don't	seem	to	be	disturbed	at	all.	And	we	are
not	just	saying	things	to	you	--	we	are	abusing	you,	insulting	you."
Gautam	Buddha	 said,	 "You	have	 come	a	 little	 late.	 If	 you	had	 come	 ten	years
before,	you	would	not	have	gone	back	alive.	 I	am	also	a	warrior.	There	would
have	been	bloodshed	here;	not	a	single	man	in	this	crowd	would	have	gone	back
alive.	But	you	have	come	a	little	late.
"In	the	village	just	before	this	village,	people	came	with	sweets	and	fruits.	And
we	said,
`We	eat	only	once	a	day,	and	we	have	taken	our	food,	so	it	would	be	very	kind	if
you	would	take	these	things	back	with	you.	We	are	grateful.'	What	do	you	think
they	did	with	those	sweets	and	those	fruits?"
Somebody	 said,	 "They	 must	 have	 distributed	 them	 amongst	 themselves;	 they
must	have	eaten	them."
Buddha	 said,	 "You	are	 intelligent.	Do	 the	 same:	whatever	you	have	brought,	 I
don't	accept;	take	it	back.	Because	unless	I	accept	your	insult,	you	cannot	insult
me;	it	is	a	two-way	affair.	It	is	your	mouth,	you	can	say	anything	--	but	unless	I
accept	it,	you	are	just	talking	into	the	air.	Just	go	home	and	say	all	these	things	to
each	other;	enjoy.	And	I	will	be	coming	again	after	two	days,	so	be	ready."
They	 were	 shocked,	 and	 they	 could	 not	 believe	 --	 what	 kind	 of	 man	 is	 this?
When	 they	moved	on,	Ananda	said	 to	Buddha,	 "This	 is	 too	much.	There	were
moments	when	I	was	going	to	jump	and	hit	the	man!	Just	because	of	you,	I	tried
to	control	my	temptation."
Buddha	said	--	and	remember	it	--	he	said:	"What	those	people	were	saying	has
not	hurt	me.	What	you	are	saying	hurts	me.	You	have	been	with	me	for	so	many
years,	and	yet	you	are	not	aware	enough	to	know	what	to	take	and	what	not	to
take?	Can't	you	discriminate?"
I	want	you	not	to	become	missionaries,	I	want	you	to	become	messages.
And	 that	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 you	 are	 utterly	 selfish,	 so	 that	 before	 you	 start
helping	 others,	 you	 have	 helped	 yourself;	 before	 you	 start	 enlightening	 other
people,	you	are	enlightened	yourself.
That's	what	I	mean	by	being	selfish.
Whatever	you	want	to	spread	must	be	your	living	experience.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THESE	 DAYS	 HERE	 WITH	 YOU	 ARE	 CERTAINLY	 THE	 MOST
BEAUTIFUL.
DOING	NOTHING,	SO	MUCH	TIME	TO	SIT	SILENTLY	IN	THE	GARDEN,
IN	MY
ROOM,	AND	WATCH	THE	TREES	DANCING	IN	THE	WIND,	SPARKLING
IN
THE	SUN...	SO	MUCH	BEAUTY.
MY	 MIND	 IS	 FINALLY	 GETTING	 USED	 TO	 THE	 IDEA	 OF	 BEING
TURNED	OFF.
I	AM	SO	PEACEFUL,	SO	HAPPY.	NOW,	TODAY,	AGAIN	GOING	INSIDE
ON
THIS	PATH	OF	SILENCE,	WITH	THOUGHTS	DRIFTING	AWAY	AND
EMPTINESS	SURROUNDING	ME,	I	AM	AWARE	OF	A	TENSION	INSIDE
ME	AS
IF	I	AM	HOLDING	ON	TO	SOMETHING.
MY	BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	AM	I	HOLDING	ON	TO,	AND	HOW	DO	I
LET
GO?
It	is	not	difficult	to	find	out	what	you	are	holding	on	to,	what	your	subtle	tension
is	inside.
You	are	 feeling	peaceful,	you	are	 feeling	silent,	you	are	 feeling	blissful	as	you
have	never	felt.	Hence,	side	by	side	a	fear	must	be	lurking	inside:	soon	you	will
be	going	from	here	-
-	 will	 this	 peace,	 this	 silence,	 this	 blissfulness	 remain	 a	 part	 of	 you?	 Or	 the
moment	you	are	away	from	me,	will	this	disappear?
This	fear	is	not	only	within	you,	it	is	in	every	disciple's	mind,	that	when	you	are
here	it	is	one	thing	and	when	you	go	back	to	the	marketplace,	into	the	world,	you
will	find	it	more	miserable,	more	saddening	than	before	because	now	you	have
something	to	compare	it	with.
Have	you	seen?	--	by	the	side	of	the	road	you	are	standing	in	darkness,	and	a	car
passes	with	its	headlights	on.	The	darkness	disappears	for	a	moment.	The	car	is
gone,	but	 strangely	enough	after	 the	car	 is	gone	 the	darkness	 is	greater	 than	 it
was	 before	 the	 car	 had	 come.	 You	 have	 seen	 the	 light.	 Now	 there	 is	 a
comparison.
This	fear	is	natural.
Only	one	thing	can	be	done	about	it,	and	that	is	not	to	repress	it	but	let	it	surface.
You	are	repressing;	that's	why	you	are	not	finding	what	it	is	that	is	troubling	you
somewhere	inside.	Allow	it	to	surface.	Experience	that	fear	also.
Accept	the	fear,	and	accept	the	challenge	of	the	fear.	Tell	your	mind	that	"It	does
not	matter	where	I	am.	Whatever	I	have	experienced,	it	is	my	experience	and	I
can	create	it	again."
It	may	have	been	triggered	in	my	presence,	but	it	is	not	my	experience,	it	is	your
experience.
Let	it	be	settled	deeply	in	you	that	it	is	your	experience,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with
me.	I	may	have	been	a	catalytic	agent,	but	the	experience	is	yours.
And	now,	once	it	has	happened,	you	can	create	it	again	anywhere	in	the	world.
Maybe	 in	 the	 beginning	 you	 will	 find	 it	 a	 little	 difficult,	 because	 you	 have
become	accustomed	and	associated	it	with	my	presence.	But	it	is	not	dependent
on	my	presence.
It	is	just	as	if	you	light	a	candle	with	another	candle	--	but	once	the	candle	is	lit,
it	has	 its	own	flame.	Perhaps	 in	 the	beginning	 it	needed	 to	be	close	enough	 to
another	 flame,	 but	 once	 it	 catches	 the	 flame,	 it	 has	 its	 own,	 it	 is	 no	 longer
dependent.
And	when	you	go	away,	you	will	experience	what	 I	am	saying	--	but	give	 it	a
chance.
Don't	decide	that	"Now	it	cannot	happen	because	the	master	is	not	here."
The	master	was	needed	to	make	you	aware	that	it	is	something	within	you.
Now	 you	 have	 seen	 it.	 Close	 your	 eyes	 anywhere,	 and	 you	 can	 recreate	 the
silence,	the	beauty,	the	bliss.	You	can	even	recreate	the	presence	of	the	master	--
that	 is	 the	most	difficult	part,	but	not	 impossible.	 It	depends	on	how	intense	 is
your	love,	how	deep	is	your	trust.
But	no	need	to	try	it.
First	try	those	things	which	you	can	create	within	yourself.	And	once	you	have
created	all	those	things	then	you	can	try	the	tremendously	beautiful	experiment
of	creating	the	presence	of	the	master.
So	don't	be	worried;	just	bring	your	fear	to	the	surface.
And	it	is	not	only	in	you,	it	is	in	everyone.	It	is	something	in	the	nature	of	things.
So	 don't	 give	 it	 too	 much	 importance	 either;	 just	 accept	 it	 as	 a	 natural
phenomenon	which	will	disappear	by	your	little	experiments	away	from	me.
I	 guarantee	 it	will	 disappear,	 because	 I	 have	guaranteed	 it	 to	 thousands	 of	my
sannyasins	 and	 it	 has	 disappeared	 from	 their	 lives.	 There	 is	 no	 reason	why	 it
should	not	 disappear	 from	your	 life.	The	principles	 are	 the	 same,	 there	 are	 no
exceptions.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	SEEM	TO	BE	SO	UNCONSCIOUS	SO	MUCH	OF	THE	TIME,	SO	VERY
UNAWARE	 AND	 JUST	 SIMPLY	 INVOLVED	 IN	 LIFE	 AND	 LOVING
LIVING	IT.
WHEN	YOU	SPEAK	ABOUT	THE	TOTALITY	AND	 INTENSITY	OF	THE
SEARCH,	 AND	 HOW	 NOTHING	 ELSE	 REALLY	 MATTERS,	 AND	 HOW
IMPORTANT	IT	IS
TO	LET	NOTHING	BECOME	A	DISTRACTION,	 I	 FEAR	 I	WILL	NEVER
MANAGE
IT.
IN	MY	HEART	I	FEEL	NOTHING	ELSE	DOES	MATTER,	YET	I	AM	NOT
LIVING
IN	THIS	AWARENESS	ALL	THE	TIME	AND	IN	EVERY	SITUATION.
WOULD	IT	BE	GOOD	FOR	ME	TO	TRY	TO	BRING	THIS	AWARENESS	TO
EACH
AND	 EVERY	MOMENT,	 EVEN	 IF	 IT	 REQUIRES	 INTENSE	 EFFORT?	 IF
YOU
FEEL	 THIS	 IS	 GOOD	 FOR	 ME,	 I	 WILL	 TRY	 IT	 EVEN	 THOUGH	 I	 AM
AFRAID	 I	 MAY	 LOSE	 SOME	 OF	 THE	 FUN	 AND	 SPONTANEITY	 AND
EASE	OF	JUST
LIVING,	AND	EVEN	THOUGH	I	DON'T	KNOW	IF	I	CAN	MANAGE	IT.
Maitri,	 the	 question	 is	 significant	 for	 everybody.	Because	 I	 am	 speaking	 to	 so
many	people	 --	not	only	 those	who	are	present	here,	but	also	 to	 those	millions
who	are	not	present	here	but	will	be	hearing	my	words	or	reading	my	words.
It	 becomes	 a	 very	 difficult	 affair,	 because	 people	 are	 different	 in	many	ways.
And	certainly	no	two	persons	are	the	same.	And	the	danger	is	that	you	may	start
doing	something	which	is	not	meant	for	you.
A	 simple	 criterion	 should	 be	 remembered:	 whatever	 feels	 good	 for	 you	 --
blissful,	peaceful,	spontaneous,	happening	on	its	own	accord	--	that	is	your	path.
But	I	have	 to	speak	also	 to	 those	people	for	whom	nothing	 is	spontaneous,	 for
whom	the	most	difficult	thing	is	to	relax,	for	whom	the	most	impossible	thing	is
just	 to	 sit	 and	 not	 to	 do	 anything.	 They	 also	 need	 every	 help.	 To	 them	 I	 say,
"Live	with	total	intensity,	with	total	effort"	--	because	that	is	the	easiest	thing	for
them.	And	whatever	is	easy	is	close	to	truth.
Maitri,	 for	 you	 that	 would	 not	 be	 the	 easiest	 thing.	 You	would	 have	 to	make
effort	against	yourself;	it	would	not	be	natural,	it	would	not	be	spontaneous.	You
would	be	forcing	yourself,	and	this	will	destroy	the	whole	beauty	and	the	peace
and	the	silence	that	you	are	already	feeling.
If	you	are	feeling	silence,	peace,	a	beautiful	energy	through	spontaneity,	through
relaxation,	through	let-go,	then	that	is	your	way.
Everybody	has	to	find	out	what	is	close	to	his	heart.
I	am	speaking	for	many	people	of	many	types.
You	have	to	find	out	what	is	right	for	you.	If	you	start	doing	everything	that	I	am
saying,	you	will	get	in	a	mess.
You	simply	do	that	which	your	heart	supports.
And	the	heart	is	never	wrong,	remember.	The	mind	can	be	right,	can	be	wrong.
The	heart	is	always	right,	there	is	no	question	of	its	being	wrong.
So	whenever	your	heart	feels	at	ease	with	something,	then	go	with	it	--	root	and
all.	Then	don't	look	back	and	don't	bother	about	what	others	are	doing.	Let	them
do	their	thing;	you	do	your	thing.
Because	 the	 religions	 of	 the	 past	 emphasized	 only	 one	method,	 naturally	 that
religion	became	only	for	one	type	of	people.	It	 is	because	of	this	that	 there	are
three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth.
And	I	want	only	one	religiousness.
All	 those	 three	 hundred	 religions	 have	 some	 kind	 of	 truth	 and	 some	 kind	 of
validity	to	them.	But	they	are	specializations	of	a	certain	method,	applicable	to
certain	people	--	and	that	has	made	the	whole	world	irreligious.
For	example,	effort	is	the	way	for	Mahavira.	Even	to	mention	the	word	`let-go'	is
to	support	laziness.	`Mahavira'	is	not	his	name;	his	name	was	Vardhamana.	He	is
called	 Mahavira	 because	 his	 attitude	 and	 approach	 is	 that	 truth	 has	 to	 be
conquered.	It	is	not	a	love	affair,	it	is	a	war.	And	Mahavira	has	won	the	war;	that
is	why	he	is	called	the	great	warrior.	`Mahavira'	means	the	great	warrior.
Now,	it	creates	trouble.	His	method	is	suitable	only	to	a	certain	type	of	person	--
the	warrior	type.	But	because	of	his	own	teaching,	his	followers	--	who	all	came
from	the	chhatriyas,	 the	warrior	race	in	India	--	had	to	drop	their	profession	of
being	warriors,	because	that	is	violence.
Now	they	were	in	trouble	--	what	to	do?	They	could	not	be	brahmins	because	a
brahmin	 is	 only	 born.	You	 cannot	 become	 a	 brahmin	by	 studying	or	 by	doing
anything,	there	is	no	way.	A	brahmin	is	only	born,	you	cannot	be	converted	into
a	brahmin.	So	these	people	could	not	be	brahmins.
These	people	 could	not	be	 sudras,	untouchables,	because	 they	were	high	caste
Hindus,	second	only	to	brahmins.	They	had	their	own	pride.
The	only	way	for	them	was	to	become	businessmen.	So	all	the	Jainas	in	India	are
businessmen.	 They	 could	 not	 become	 cultivators,	 gardeners,	 because	 in
cultivation	 or	 gardening	 you	 will	 have	 to	 cut	 trees	 --	 and	 that	 is	 violence,
because	trees	have	life.	So	all	other	areas	are	rejected.
And	these	business	people	are	not	trained	like	Mahavira.	He	was	trained	in	his
youth	as	a	warrior,	as	a	fighter,	and	he	brought	his	fighting	qualities	to	his	search
for	truth.	Now,	these	business	people	are	not	trained	for	fighting.
If	somebody	comes	and	says	that	truth	can	be	purchased,	they	will	be	ready!	But
"truth	has	to	be	conquered"?	--	that	just	seems	to	be	out	of	reach.	`Conquered'...
that	is	beyond	their	scope.
All	 they	 can	 do	 is	worship	Mahavira.	 Twenty-five	 centuries	 have	 passed,	 and
Jainas	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 produce	 another	 man	 of	 the	 same	 caliber	 as
Mahavira.	What	is	the	reason?
He	 represented	one	 type,	and	he	preached	 for	one	 type,	but	 it	was	an	accident
that	 the	people	who	 followed	him	were	not	 of	 that	 type	 and	 cannot	 be	of	 that
type.	So	they	have	remained	in	a	limbo,	they	cannot	move	anywhere.
Business	they	can	do.	And	they	have	created	the	most	beautiful	temples	in	India,
the	most	beautiful	statues.	Worship	they	can	do.	But	fighting?	That	is	simply	not
possible.
So	 a	 strange	 phenomenon...	 the	 teacher	 they	 followed	was	 of	 a	 different	 type.
They	 were	 impressed	 by	 his	 unique	 quality,	 he	 was	 a	 man	 of	 steel.	 But	 his
followers	 can	 simply	 praise	 him;	 they	 cannot	 do	what	 their	 teacher	 has	 done.
And	this	is	not	only	with	Jainas,	this	is	the	situation	with	every	religion.
And	there	is	no	necessity	that	your	child	will	be	of	the	same	type	as	you	are.	But
by	 a	 certain	 calamity	we	 have	 accepted	 the	 idea	 that	 religion	 comes	 by	 birth.
This	is	simply	stupid.	It	is	as	if	a	doctor's	son	becomes	doctor	because	he	is	born
to	a	doctor.	He	need	not	go	to	the	medical	college	--	what	is	the	need?	And	if	he
is	the	son	of	a	doctor	whose	wife	is	also	a	doctor,	then	there	is	no	question	--	in
his	very	blood	and	bones	he	is	a	born	doctor,	he	needs	no	certificate.
It	is	good	that	we	don't	do	this.
But	in	religion	we	have	been	doing	it.
I	have	seen	people	who	are	born	into	a	religion	where	devotion	is	not	allowed.	It
is	not	for	the	devotional	type,	but	the	person	is	of	the	devotional	type.	Somebody
is	 the	 type	who	 can	 easily	move	with	 a	 negative	 approach,	 and	 for	 somebody
else	 a	 negative	 approach	 is	 simply	 impossible;	 unless	 something	 positive	 is
there,	he	cannot	take	a	single	step.
My	own	suggestion	is	that	religion	should	not	be	something	decided	by	birth;	a
religion	 should	 be	 decided	 by	 the	 person	 himself	 according	 to	 his	 feelings.
Wherever	he	feels	good,	growing,	wherever	he	feels	joyous,	wherever	he	feels	a
certain	magnetic	attraction,	that	is	his	path.	It	does	not	matter	whether	that	is	the
religion	he	is	born	into	or	not;	that	is	the	religion	he	is	born	for.
But	 that	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 everybody	 is	 freed	 from	 religious	 slavery,	 and	we
allow	 our	 children	 to	 be	 acquainted	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 religions,	 all	 kinds	 of
methods.	And	if	we	tell	them	to	feel,	to	move	with	different	kinds	of	people:	"Go
to	 different	 temples,	 go	 to	 different	 schools,	 go	 to	 different	 masters,	 and	 feel
your	way."	And	wherever	he	feels	that	this	is	his	nourishment,	then	the	parents
have	to	bless	him	to	go	on	that	way.
It	does	not	matter	if	you	feel	nourished	in	the	company	of	a	Mohammedan	Sufi,
it	does	not	matter	if	you	feel	nourished	in	the	company	of	a	Buddhist	monk;	the
whole	question	should	be	decided	by	your	own	heart.
And	the	heart	never	leads	you	wrong.	If	you	allow	it,	it	will	give	you	clear-cut
indications	that	you	are	on	the	right	path.	Peace,	silence,	bliss,	benediction	--	all
will	be	coming	more	and	more,	and	the	scope	will	become	wider	and	wider.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHO	IS	THE	BLESSED	ONE?
The	one	who	is	asleep	in	you	is	the	blessed	one,	but	unfortunately	he	is	sleeping
and	snoring.
He	has	to	be	awakened,	and	the	moment	your	sleeping	consciousness	becomes
wakeful	you	start	feeling	blissfulness.	The	highest	peak	of	your	bliss	makes	you
feel	 to	go	beyond	humanity.	That	 is	 the	moment	of	being	 the	blessed	one;	you
have	become	part	of	the	universal	blissfulness.
But	people	are	so	asleep.
I	have	suffered	so	much	from	people's	sleep.	Because	I	used	to	travel	continually
in	 India;	 mostly	 I	 was	 in	 an	 air-conditioned	 coupe,	 but	 sometimes	 there	 was
another	person	in	the	coupe	also.	And	sometimes	a	coupe	was	not	available	so
there	were	four	persons.
Once	 it	 happened,	 I	 was	 coming	 from	Calcutta	 in	 a	 four-person	 room.	And	 I
have	seen	many	snoring	people,	but	 I	will	not	 forget	 those	 three	fellows.	They
had	a	certain	harmony:	one	would	snore	and	the	other	two	would	remain	silent,
and	then	as	he	would	stop,	the	second	would	snore	louder	than	the	first	and	the
other	two	would	remain	silent.
And	as	the	second	would	stop,	the	third	would	snore	loudest	of	all,	and	the	other
two	would	remain	silent.	And	the	circle	went	on.
I	 heard	 this	 for	 one	 hour	 and	 then	 I	 said,	 "This	 is	 impossible.	 I	 don't	want	 to
interfere	in	anybody's	life,	but	these	three	people	are	interfering	in	my	life."
So	as	the	third	stopped,	I	snored	so	loudly	that	all	three	became	awake.	And	they
saw	 me	 snoring	 with	 open	 eyes,	 so	 they	 could	 not	 believe...	 they	 could	 not
believe	it.	They	looked	at	each	other	like,	"What	kind	of	man	is	this?	His	eyes
are	open."	And	I	was	not	blinking	my	eyes.	All	three	got	up	from	their	seats	and
came	close	to	me.
I	 said,	 "Listen,	 if	 you	 want	 to	 sleep,	 stop	 this	 harmony	 that	 is	 going	 on.
Otherwise,	I	will	not	allow	any	of	you	to	sleep."
One	said,	"But	you	are	awake	and	you	are	snoring?"
I	said,	"What	else	 to	do?	--	because	I	cannot	sleep,	so	 the	question	of	sleeping
and	then	snoring	does	not	arise.	You	don't	allow	me	to	sleep!	First	let	me	sleep.
Then	perhaps	I	may	fall	 into	 the	harmony,	something	may	happen;	but	first	 let
me	sleep.	And	how	are	you	managing?"
They	said,	"We	three	are	brothers."
I	said,	"You	are	great	brothers."
They	said,	"What	to	do?	--	it	is	such	a	difficult	matter,	even	in	our	family.	Our
wives	don't	sleep	in	our	rooms;	we	three	brothers	have	to	sleep	in	one	room.	So,
slowly	slowly,	a	certain	harmony	has	arisen."
I	said,	"That's	perfectly	good,	but	in	just	one	night	it	will	be	very	difficult	for	me
to	get	into	the	harmony.	Something	has	to	be	done."
So	we	 had	 to	 come	 to	 a	 conclusion	 that	 those	 three	 fellows	would	 play	 cards
while	 I	 slept	 for	 a	 few	 hours,	 and	 then	 they	would	 have	 their	 harmony	 and	 I
would	 sit	 and	 listen.	 But	 listening	 to	 them	was	 also	 beautiful,	 because...	 how
were	they	managing	any	sleep?
Everybody	is	carrying	the	blessed	one,	but	it	needs	to	be	awakened.
The	 blessed	 one	 is	 not	 a	 certain	 talent.	 It	 is	 not	 like	 being	 a	musician:	 a	 few
people	are	musicians	but	EVERYbody	cannot	be;	a	few	people	are	painters	but
everybody	cannot	be;	a	few	people	are	poets,	dancers,	actors,	writers	--	these	are
talents.
The	blessed	one	is	not	a	question	of	talent.	It	is	your	very	nature.
It	is	your	self-nature,	it	is	your	intrinsic	quality.
It	is	up	to	you	how	long	you	want	to	be	miserable	and	asleep	--	you	are	free.	The
moment	you	decide	that	enough	is	enough,	you	will	have	the	same	experiences
as	 any	 Gautam	 Buddha	 or	 Ramakrishna	 or	 Raman	Maharshi	 --	 these	 are	 not
talented	people.	Kabir	or	Raidas	or	Farid	 --	 these	are	not	 talented	people,	 they
are	just	ordinary	human	beings.
But	as	far	as	their	blissfulness	is	concerned,	they	have	reached	to	the	same	peak
as	Gautam	Buddha.
It	is	your	birthright.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#15
Chapter	 title:	 Master	 and	 Disciple:	 A	 mystery	 beyond	 explaining	 17	 October
1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610175
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH15
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
116
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVERY	 TIME	 WHEN	 PEOPLE	 ASK	 ME,	 "WHAT	 IS	 OSHO	 IN	 YOUR
LIFE?"	 --	 I	ANSWER	THAT	YOU	ARE	MY	MASTER.	BUT	THE	PEOPLE
DON'T
UNDERSTAND,	 EVEN	 IF	 I	 TRY	 TO	 EXPLAIN.	WHAT	 IS	 THE	 REASON
FOR	IT?
WHY	CAN'T	I	EXPLAIN	IT	WITH	SUCCESS?
Life	is	beautiful	because	there	is	so	much	which	cannot	be	explained.
It	 would	 have	 been	 a	 disaster	 if	 life	 consisted	 only	 of	 things	 which	 can	 be
explained.
Just	think	for	a	moment:	if	everything	could	be	explained,	then	there	would	be
no	mystery,	then	there	would	be	no	poetry,	then	there	would	be	no	secret.	Then
everything	would	be	utterly	flat	and	boring.
Life	 is	 not	 a	 boredom	 because	 there	 are	 dimensions	 in	 it	 that	 you	 can	 go	 on
exploring,	yet	you	can	never	come	 to	explanations.	You	can	experience	much,
yet	even	that	which	you	have	experienced	cannot	be	translated	into	words.
You	fall	in	love.	Since	the	very	first	man,	millions	of	people	must	have	fallen	in
love;	yet	love	is	still	a	mystery,	you	cannot	reduce	it	to	knowledge.	The	moment
you	try	to	reduce	to	knowledge,	it	slips	out	of	your	hands.	And	it	is	good	that	it
is	so	miraculous	that	generation	after	generation,	millions	of	people	go	through
the	experience;	they	know	what	it	is,	yet	they	cannot	say	what	it	is.
All	 that	 can	 be	 experienced	 is	 not	 necessarily	 explainable,	 and	 all	 that	 can	 be
explained	is	not	necessarily	experienceable.
Mathematics	can	be	explained	easily,	but	there	is	no	corresponding	experience.
Science	can	be	explained	easily,	but	even	the	greatest	scientist	is	not	transformed
by	his	knowledge.	But	an	anonymous	poet	not	only	gives	birth	to	poetry,	he	also
goes	through	a	deep	revolution,	a	rebirth.	His	poetry	is	not	just	a	composition	of
words;	it	is	the	juice	of	his	very	life.
The	greatest	poets	have	not	been	able	to	explain	their	own	poetry.
Once	 Coleridge	 was	 asked	 by	 a	 professor	 of	 literature....	 The	 professor	 was
teaching	at	the	university	and	he	came	across	a	point	in	one	of	Coleridge's	poems
where	he	was	doubtful	 about	 the	meaning.	He	was	a	 sincere	man.	He	 told	 the
students,	 "You	 will	 have	 to	 wait	 at	 least	 one	 day.	 Coleridge	 lives	 in	 my
neighborhood;	I	can	ask	him	exactly	what	he	means."
The	professor	went	to	Coleridge	that	evening.	Coleridge	said,	"You	have	come	a
little	late."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean	a	little	late?	You	are	still	alive."
Coleridge	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	my	being	alive	or	not.	When	I	wrote	these
lines,	two	persons	knew	the	meaning;	now	only	one	knows."
Naturally,	 the	professor	 inferred	 that	 that	one	person	could	not	be	anyone	else
but	Coleridge.	He	said,	"So	I	have	not	come	too	late.	Tell	me	what	the	meaning
is."
Coleridge	said,	"You	have	not	yet	got	 the	point.	When	I	wrote	these	lines,	 two
persons	knew	the	meaning	--	Coleridge	and	God.	Now	only	God	knows!
"I	myself	have	been	wondering.	Many	times	I	have	read	it	and	wondered	--	what
is	the	meaning?	It	is	groovy!	--	but	very	slippery.	You	feel	that	you	are	just	about
to	catch	it	and	it	 is	gone	just	 like	a	breeze.	I	am	sorry.	I	have	certainly	written
these	lines,	and	I	know	there	is	some	meaning,	and	I	feel	it,	but	you	will	have	to
forgive	me.	I	cannot	even	explain	it	to	myself,	how	can	I	explain	it	to	you?"
It	is	not	only	so	about	poetry.	Anything	significant	in	life....
Picasso	used	to	get	very	angry	whenever	anybody	would	ask	the	meaning	of	his
paintings.	And	he	was	not	an	angry	man.	He	was	a	very	beautiful,	loving	person.
But	 the	moment	 you	 ask	 the	meaning	 of	 his	 painting,	 you	 have	 touched	 him
from	the	wrong	side.
He	would	immediately	get	very	angry.	He	would	say,	"This	is	strange.	Nobody
asks	a	roseflower	what	its	meaning	is.	Nobody	asks	the	stars	what	their	meaning
is.	Nobody	asks	a	bird	on	the	wing	what	its	meaning	is.	Nobody	asks	a	sunrise	or
a	 sunset	what	 its	meaning	 is.	 People	 simply	 enjoy	 the	beauty;	 nobody	bothers
about	the	meaning.	Why	are	people	after	me?	I	am	a	poor	painter.	All	that	I	can
say	is	that	it	is	beautiful.	But	that	is	not	its	meaning,	it	is	its	impact	on	a	sensitive
being."
Meaning	is	rational.	And	the	experience	of	mystery	is	supra-rational.
Your	question	is	significant,	and	it	must	be	the	question	of	many	other	disciples.
People	ask	you	what	 the	relationship	is	between	you	and	me.	Just	 to	say	that	I
am	your	master	neither	satisfies	them	nor	satisfies	you.	How	can	it	satisfy	them
when	 it	 does	 not	 satisfy	 even	 you?	 --	 because	 it	 is	 not	 just	 a	 relationship	 like
somebody	 is	 your	 father	 and	 somebody	 is	 your	mother	 and	 somebody	 is	 your
brother.	 Once	 you	 have	 said	 that	 somebody	 is	 your	 father,	 everything	 is
explained.	Nobody	bothers	you	anymore,	that
`What	do	you	mean	by	father?'	and....
The	 relationship	 with	 the	 master	 is	 not	 of	 the	 same	 category	 as	 all	 other
relationships.	It	is	intrinsically	different.
It	is	love,	but	not	only	love.
It	is	love	with	a	center	of	trust.
Love	alone	is	unexplainable,	and	now	it	has	 joined	hands	with	an	even	greater
mystery.
Trust	is	absolutely	something	of	another	world.
In	this	world,	there	is	distrust	in	everybody.	Even	in	people	who	love	each	other,
there	is	no	trust.	There	are	friends	who	can,	if	there	is	need,	die	for	each	other	--
but	there	is	no	trust.
In	the	Middle	Ages	it	used	to	happen....
A	very	strange	and	ugly	thing	was	in	existence	in	Europe.	Whenever	a	warrior
would	go	to	war,	he	would	put	a	lock	on	his	wife	so	that	she	could	not	make	love
to	anybody,	and	take	the	key	with	him.	A	strange	device	it	was...	those	locks	are
still	exhibited	in	the	museums	of	Europe.
You	cannot	even	trust	your	wife!	And	if	you	cannot	trust	your	wife,	do	you	think
a	master	key	cannot	be	 found?	The	goldsmiths	who	made	 the	 locks	also	made
extra	keys!
One	prince	was	going	to	war.	His	only	fear	was	about	his	beautiful	wife.	He	was
afraid	that	if	the	key	were	lost	in	the	war	then	for	the	rest	of	his	life	he	wouldn't
be	able	to	make	love	to	his	own	wife.	So	he	thought	it	would	be	better	to	give
the	key	to	one	of	his	best	friends.	They	were	so	close	that	they	would	have	died
for	each	other,	so	there	was	no	question	of	distrust.
He	gave	his	friend	the	key	and	told	him,	"When	I	come	back	I	will	take	it	back.
So	keep	it	safe."
He	had	gone	not	more	 than	 a	half	mile	out	of	 the	 town	on	his	horse	when	he
heard	a	fast	horse	approaching	him	from	behind.	He	looked	back,	and	his	friend
was	coming,	shouting,	"Wait!"
He	said,	"What	has	happened?"	Just	five	minutes	ago	he	had	left	him	perfectly
healthy,	and	there	had	been	no	problem.
The	friend	said,	"You	gave	me	the	wrong	key!"
In	this	world,	there	is	no	trust	at	all.
When	 love	 is	 joined	with	 trust,	 it	becomes	even	more	difficult	 to	explain	 it.	 It
becomes	more	mysterious.
And	 thirdly,	 as	 love	 and	 trust	 grow	 to	 their	 optimum,	 something	 comes	which
can	only	be	called	`surrender'.	It	is	not	a	good	word,	but	there	is	no	other	word	as
a	substitute.
Surrender	makes	the	whole	thing	absolutely	not	of	this	world.	You	cannot	give
any	reason,	you	cannot	give	any	explanation.	The	only	way	is:	whoever	asks,	tell
him	that	it	is	something	like	a	thirsty	man	finding	water	in	the	desert.	His	every
fiber	is	just	thirst,	and	the	water	quenches	all	thirst.	A	great	peace	descends.
The	master	is	not	a	person.
The	master	is	only	a	presence.
If	you	are	thirsty	enough	for	the	unknown,	you	can	drink	out	of	this	presence	and
be	quenched.
Anybody	who	asks	you	the	question,	tell	him,	"Come	with	me.	There	are	a	few
things	which	cannot	be	explained,	but	I	can	take	you	to	the	place	where	perhaps
you	may	 also	 experience	 them.	 Your	 question	 itself	 shows	 that	 there	 is	 some
interest	in	you	--	perhaps	a	deep,	hidden	desire.	Who	knows?	--	it	may	become
aflame	in	the	presence	of	the	master.
Who	knows?	--	surrounded	by	disciples	and	 their	 love	and	 their	 trust	and	 their
surrender,	and	the	presence	of	the	master,	something	may	transpire	in	you.	One
thing	is	certain:	if	something	transpires	in	you,	you	will	become	dumb	the	way	I
am	dumb."
Accept	your	dumbness,	but	create	a	quest	in	the	person	who	is	asking	only	for	a
verbal	answer.	Use	that	situation.	A	verbal	answer	is	of	no	use.	You	just	say,	"I
have	experienced	something,	which	is	untranslatable	into	any	language,	but	I	can
take	you	to	 the	river.	You	yourself	can	drink.	Your	experience	will	be	 the	only
explanation."
And	 I	 repeat	 again:	Life	 is	 beautiful	 because	 there	 are	 so	many	unexplainable
dimensions	to	it.	That	is	its	richness.	If	everything	is	explained,	all	juice	will	be
lost;	you	will	be	fed	up,	bored	to	death	with	a	life	which	is	explained.
What	 transpires	 between	 a	 master	 and	 a	 disciple	 is	 one	 of	 the	 peaks	 of
unexplainable	experiences.	Don't	destroy	it	with	any	explanation.
It	 is	 a	 crime	 to	 destroy	 the	 unexplainable	 by	 bringing	 it	 to	 the	 level	 of
explanations,	because	you	have	killed.	It	is	almost	like	a	bird	on	the	wing	in	the
sky...	it	is	so	beautiful	in	its	freedom;	the	whole	sky	belongs	to	him,	all	the	stars
belong	to	him...	no	limits,	no	barriers.	You	can	catch	hold	of	 the	bird;	you	can
make	 a	 beautiful	 golden	 cage	 and	 you	 can	 put	 the	 bird	 in	 the	 cage.	 But
remember,	it	is	not	the	same	bird	that	was	flying	in	freedom	in	the	sky	under	the
stars.	Factually	it	is	the	same	bird,	but	spiritually	no	--
because	where	is	the	freedom	and	where	are	the	stars?	Where	is	the	sky?	Your
golden	cage	cannot	replace	what	you	have	taken	away	from	the	bird.	It	has	lost
its	soul.
The	same	happens	when	you	 try	 to	explain	 something	which	 is	unexplainable.
You	bring	it	into	the	cage	of	language,	of	words	--	beautiful	words,	but	the	soul
has	disappeared.
Don't	do	it.	I	know	it	feels	a	little	awkward	when	somebody	asks	and	you	cannot
answer	-
-	you	feel	embarrassed.
It	is	better	to	feel	embarrassed.	But	don't	commit	a	crime	against	the	mysteries	of
life.
Tell	 the	 person,	 "I	 am	 feeling	 embarrassed	 because	 I	 cannot	 say	 it.	Not	 that	 I
don't	want	to	say	it	--	I	would	have	loved	to	say	it	to	you	but	I	cannot,	because
saying	it	means	killing	it.	I	can	take	you	to	the	window	from	where	you	can	see
the	open	sky,	I	can	take	you	to	the	man.	Perhaps	your	heart	will	start	dancing	in
the	 same	 way	 my	 heart	 dances	 within	 me.	 And	 in	 deep	 silence,	 you	 will
understand	what	it	means	to	me.
But	only	when	it	starts	to	mean	something	to	you."
People	will	 be	 asking	 you	many	 questions.	Use	 their	 questions	 to	 invite	 them
towards	the	same	light,	towards	the	same	bliss,	towards	the	same	truth.
Don't	answer	--	because	you	cannot	answer,	and	whatever	you	say	will	fall	flat.
Resist	the	temptation	of	being	knowledgeable.	Accept	your	inarticulateness.	But
invite	the	person.
Perhaps	out	of	ten,	one	may	turn	up.	And	one	never	knows	--	by	coming	here,	he
may	turn	on!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	OLD,	AND	HAD	BEEN	A	BUDDHIST	FOR	OVER	THIRTY	YEARS
BEFORE	 I	 CAME	 TO	 POONA.	 BUT	 STILL	 I	 FEEL	AS	 IF	 I	 AM	AT	 THE
BEGINNING,	CONFUSED	WITH	LOTS	OF	DOUBTS.
ON	 THE	 OTHER	 HAND,	 SOMETHING	 INSIDE	 ME	 KNOWS	 ABOUT
YOUR
SILENCE,	 AND	 THAT	 SOMETHING	 IS	 NOT	 IRRITATED	 AT	 ALL.	 IT	 IS
LIKE	A	ROBE	OF	TRUST.	BUT	I	AM	NOT	ABLE	TO	BELIEVE.
COULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 THE	 DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN
TRUST	AND	BELIEF?
Trust	 and	 belief	 have	 a	 very	 similar	 appearance,	 but	 they	 are	 diametrically
opposite	realities.
Belief	is	a	false	coin.	It	pretends	to	be	real;	it	tries	to	play	the	role	of	trust.
Millions	of	people	are	caught	 in	 the	net	of	belief,	because	 it	 is	 cheap.	Trust	 is
costly,	very	costly.
Trust	 is	 costly	 because	 it	 is	 risky,	 it	 is	 dangerous.	 It	 means	 you	 are	 opening
yourself,	 becoming	 vulnerable	 to	 somebody	 who	 can	 do	 you	 harm.	 You	 are
dropping	 all	 your	 defense	 measures.	 You	 will	 be	 defenseless	 --	 you	 can	 be
exploited,	cheated,	destroyed.
Everybody	 has	 a	 defense	 system	 around	 himself,	 just	 to	 protect	 himself	 from
others.
Life	is	competitive.	Everybody	is	running	after	the	same	goals,	and	you	cannot
remain	loving,	compassionate,	kind,	in	a	competitive	world	or	you	are	going	to
be	a	 failure.	 In	 this	 competitive	world,	 the	people	who	 succeed	are	 the	people
who	are	ready	to	sacrifice	anybody,	to	destroy	anybody.	They	go	on	climbing	on
people	as	 if	people	were	 stepping	stones.	They	care	about	only	one	 thing,	and
that	is	success.
Naturally,	everybody	has	to	be	ready	not	to	be	trampled,	killed.
Trust	 means	 going	 against	 the	 current	 of	 the	 competitive	 world.	 In	 the
competitive	world,	trust	is	simply	impossible.
Machiavelli,	 wrote	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 treatises	 on	 diplomacy,	 THE
PRINCE.
Strangely	 enough,	 his	 great	 great	 granddaughter	 is	 a	 sannyasin	 --	Machiavelli
would	have	never	dreamed	that	his	blood	would	one	day	trust	somebody.
Machiavelli	 has	 written	 in	 THE	 PRINCE	 --	 it	 is	 a	 small	 treatise	 for	 every
politician,	maxims	to	be	followed	if	you	want	to	succeed	--	"Don't	trust	anybody,
but	let	everybody	believe	that	you	trust	them.	Don't	say	anything	to	a	friend	that
you	would	not	 say	 to	an	enemy	--	because	no	one	knows,	 the	 friend	may	 turn
into	 your	 enemy	 tomorrow.	 Don't	 say	 anything	 against	 your	 enemy	 that	 you
would	 not	 say	 against	 your	 friend	 --	 because	 in	 this	 competitive	 world,	 the
person	who	is	an	enemy	may	become	a	friend,	 the	person	who	is	a	friend	may
become	an	enemy.	Basically,	keep	yourself	completely	closed	and	secretive.	 If
you	say	something,	say	it	in	such	a	way	that	it	can	be	interpreted	either	way,	for
or	against.	Don't	say	anything	which	has	only	a	single	meaning,	because	every
day	 you	 will	 have	 to	 face	 a	 new	 reality	 and	 you	 will	 have	 to	 change	 your
meaning."
Machiavelli	is	the	real	leader	of	the	world	--	not	Jesus	Christ	or	Gautam	Buddha.
It	 is	 a	 strange	 world.	 Here,	 the	 real	 leaders	 are	 not	 worshipped,	 but	 they	 are
followed.	Here,	the	unreal	leaders	are	worshipped...	but	not	followed.
When	love	and	trust	meet,	their	ultimate	byproduct	is	surrender.	You	relax	into
the	master,	into	his	being,	without	holding	anything.
It	is	certainly	only	for	those	who	are	ready	to	take	a	risk.
But	 belief	 is	 very	 cheap.	 Everybody	 is	 a	 believer	 --	 somebody	 is	 a	 Hindu,
somebody	is	a	Mohammedan,	somebody	is	a	Christian.	Belief	comes	in	all	sizes,
all	shapes,	all	colors	--
you	can	choose.	And	you	don't	have	to	pay	anything	for	it.	Generally	you	get	it
with	your	mother's	milk,	free	of	charge.
Secondly,	belief	is	always	in	an	idea,	and	trust	is	always	in	a	presence.
That	is	a	very	delicate	difference.
Belief	is	theoretical.
Trust	is	existential.
You	 can	 change	 your	 belief	 without	 any	 trouble;	 it	 is	 just	 like	 changing	 your
clothes.
From	a	Hindu,	you	can	become	a	Christian;	from	a	Christian,	you	can	become	a
Mohammedan;	from	a	Mohammedan,	you	can	become	a	communist.	There	is	no
problem,	 because	 belief	 is	 only	 of	 the	 mind.	 If	 anything	 is	 more	 convincing,
more	logical,	you	can	change	it.	It	has	no	roots	in	your	heart.
Belief	is	like	plastic	flowers,	which	look	like	flowers	from	far	away.	They	don't
have	 any	 roots,	 they	 don't	 need	 any	 care	 --	 no	 manure,	 no	 chemicals,	 no
watering,	no	gardening,	nothing	is	needed.	And	they	are	permanent	people,	they
can	remain	with	you	your	whole	 life	 long	--	because	 they	were	never	born,	 so
they	will	never	die.	They	are	manufactured.
Unless	you	destroy	them,	they	will	remain.
Trust	is	a	real	rose.	It	has	roots,	and	roots	go	deep	into	your	heart	and	into	your
being.
Belief	is	just	in	the	head.
Trust	 is	 in	 the	heart,	 in	 your	deeper	world	of	 being.	To	 change	 trust	 is	 almost
impossible	-
-	it	has	never	happened,	it	is	not	known	to	have	happened	in	the	whole	of	history.
If	 you	 trust,	 you	 trust;	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 its	 changing.	 And	 it	 goes	 on
growing	because	it	has	roots.	It	never	remains	static;	it	is	dynamic,	it	is	a	living
force,	it	goes	on	growing	new	foliage,	new	flowers,	new	branches.
Belief	is	a	dead	thing,	a	plastic	flower	--	it	never	grows.
Hindus	may	have	believed	in	a	certain	thing	for	 ten	thousand	years	--	 it	 is	still
there,	the	same;	it	never	grows.
"The	 cow	 is	 the	mother."	Hindus	have	believed	 it	 for	 ten	 thousand	years.	The
belief	 has	 not	 grown	 even	 to	 include	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 bull	 is	 your	 father.	 It	 is
static.	And	 if	you	mention	 to	any	Hindu	 that	 the	bull	 is	his	 father	 then	he	will
become	a	bull,	and	prove	that	certainly	the	bull	 is	his	father!	--	but	he	will	not
believe	it.	He	will	behave	exactly	like	a	bull,	but	he	will	not	accept	the	fact.
All	beliefs	are	old,	all	beliefs	are	dead.	No	belief	grows	even	a	single	leaf.
Belief	 is	 ideological,	 philosophical,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 a	 force	 that	 transforms	 your
being.	 It	 can	make	 you	 a	 great	 scholar,	 it	 can	make	 you	 a	 great	 philosopher,
theologian	--	but	it	can	never	make	you	a	new	man,	young	and	fresh;	it	cannot
give	 you	 any	 experience.	 It	 can	 bring	 you	 degrees	 from	 the	 universities	 and
awards	and	Nobel	prizes;	it	can	do	everything.	But	it	will	not	change	anything	in
your	interior;	it	will	remain	empty.
The	question	is	even	more	important	because	it	is	coming	from	a	person	who	has
been	a	Buddhist	for	thirty	years.
After	being	a	Buddhist	for	thirty	years,	the	person	comes	to	me,	feels	a	certain
trust	in	me,	falls	in	love.	Naturally,	there	is	a	conflict	which	is	bound	to	happen.
His	mind	is	full	of	thirty	years	of	Buddhist	ideology	--	that	is	the	belief	system	--
and	 the	heart	 is	growing	 fresh	sprouts	of	 trust.	The	person	 is	bound	 to	be	 in	a
great	difficulty.	The	beliefs	are	pulling	in	one	direction	and	the	trust	is	moving	in
another	direction.
The	beliefs	have	a	certain	weight	because	they	are	thirty	years	old,	but	the	trust	-
-
although	 it	 is	new	--	has	a	 force	of	 its	own	because	 it	 is	alive.	The	beliefs	are
thirty-year-old	 corpses.	 They	 have	weight,	 but	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 force.	 The
person	is	bound	to	be	split.
Things	can	be	solved	very	easily.
The	first	thing	to	remember	is:	if	Buddhism	was	enough,	there	would	have	been
no	need	to	come	to	me.	Being	a	Buddhist	for	thirty	years	has	not	done	anything
to	you.	You	can	be	a	Buddhist	 for	 thirty	 lives,	but	a	belief	never	changes	your
reality.	The	length	of	time	makes	no	difference.
So	the	first	question	you	have	to	ask	yourself	is	why,	after	thirty	years,	you	had
to	 seek	 and	 search	 for	 some	 new	 source,	 for	 some	 new	 light,	 for	 some	 new
indication.
If	you	are	courageous,	you	need	not	get	into	a	conflict;	you	can	simply	see	that
those	thirty	years	have	gone	to	waste.	But	what	is	gone	is	gone;	now	don't	waste
any	more	time	on	it.
And	remember:	I	am	not	saying	that	Buddha	is	wrong.
I	am	simply	saying	that	Buddha	was	right	only	to	those	people	who	could	drink
out	of	his	presence,	for	whom	he	was	a	master.
But	for	you,	he	is	only	a	belief.
It	 is	 better	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 those	 thirty	 years	 and	whatever	 information	 you	 have
collected	 in	 you,	 because	 that	 is	 a	 burden	 and	 a	 hindrance	 in	 your	 spiritual
growth.
If	you	can	dare	not	to	be	a	Buddhist,	I	promise	you	that	there	is	a	possibility	of
your	being	a	buddha.	Why	be	a	Buddhist	when	there	is	a	possibility	of	being	a
buddha?	Why	settle	for	such	dead	theories	when	living	waters	are	available?
To	be	a	buddha	is	a	beauty.
To	be	a	Buddhist	is	stupidity.
Buddha	was	not	a	Buddhist,	remember;	he	never	heard	the	word.	Nobody	called
him	a	Buddhist.
Jesus	was	never	a	Christian.	So	one	thing	is	certain,	that	no	Christian	remaining
a	Christian	can	 find	 the	experience	 that	 Jesus	 found.	 If	 any	Christian	wants	 to
experience	 what	 Jesus	 experienced,	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 do	 is	 to	 get	 rid	 of
Christianity	--	because	Jesus	was	not	a	Christian.
Your	belief	system	has	to	be	completely	thrown	out,	so	that	your	juices	are	not
divided	and	your	whole	energy	moves	into	your	trust.
Your	trust	is	growing,	but	under	a	heavy	burden,	under	a	tension.	It	can	grow	in
a	relaxed	way,	under	open	sky.	Just	say	goodbye	to	those	beliefs	that	you	have
been	carrying,	and	let	your	trust	grow.
What	Buddha	has	been	to	his	disciples,	his	theories	cannot	be.
Theories	 are	 mere	 words.	 They	 don't	 have	 the	 charm	 and	 the	 grace	 and	 the
charisma;	they	don't	have	that	magnetism.
And	 when	 you	 are	 here	 and	 the	 possibility	 is	 available	 for	 you	 to	 become
awakened,	to	become	a	buddha,	I	don't	think	that	it	is	a	bad	bargain...	dropping
Buddhist	theories	in	favor	of	becoming	Gautam	Buddha	himself.
In	 twenty-five	 centuries,	 how	 many	 buddhas	 have	 been	 produced	 by	 the
Buddhists?
One	 English	 Buddhist	 --	 Bhikku	 Dharm	 Rakshita,	 a	 very	 devoted	 man	 --
dropped	 Christianity,	 was	 converted	 to	 Buddhism	 and	 became	 one	 of	 the
topmost	 scholars	 of	Buddhist	 literature.	He	had	 an	 ashrama	 in	Kalimpong.	He
used	to	go	once	in	a	while	to	attend	Buddhist	conferences,	and	he	made	it	a	point
that	whenever	he	came	down	from	the	Himalayas	he	would	find	me	and	come	to
be	with	me	for	a	day	or	two.
He	was	an	internationally	known	Buddhist	scholar.	His	books	are	rare	as	far	as
the	accuracy	of	his	translations	is	concerned.
I	 used	 to	 ask	 him,	 "Dharm	 Rakshita,	 you	 have	 devoted	 almost	 fifty	 years	 to
learning	Buddhist	 theology,	 translating	Buddhist	 literature	 --	 but	 have	 you	 got
any	taste	of	buddhahood?"
And	 tears	 would	 come	 to	 his	 eyes.	 He	 would	 say,	 "Please,	 don't	 ask	 that
question.	 You	 are	 the	 only	 person	 who	 asks	 that.	 Nobody	 else	 seems	 to	 be
interested.	They	ask	about	literature,	they	ask	about	principles,	philosophies	and
everything,	 but	 nobody	 asks,	 `Has	 fifty	 years'	 concentrated	 effort	 brought
anything	to	your	being?	--	or	has	it	brought	only	a	dozen	books	and	world	fame?
Are	you	satisfied?'"
One	 night	 he	 said	 to	me,	 "You	met	me	 too	 late.	 I	 am	 old,	 I	 have	wasted	my
whole	life.
And	now	it	 is	very	difficult	 for	me	 to	drop	all	 that	garbage	 that	 I	 learned	with
great	effort,	and	to	begin	from	ABC,	from	the	very	scratch.	But	whenever	I	can
manage	 it,	 I	 just	come	 to	be	near	you.	And	whenever	 I	am	near	you....	 I	don't
know	how	it	would	have	been	to	be	with	Gautam	Buddha,	but	I	feel	it	must	have
been	something	like	this	--	the	same	taste.	Now	it	 is	too	late	for	me	to	change,
but	at	least	at	the	very	end	of	my	life	I	will	not	be	dying	just	a	scholar,	I	will	be
dying	as	a	seeker.	I	could	not	do	that	 in	this	 life,	but	you	have	created	a	thirst.
Perhaps	in	my	next	life	I	may	not	get	lost	in	the	jungle	of	theories,	and	I	may	try
to	enter	into	myself."
You	have	a	rare	opportunity	here.
Nothing	like	this	has	ever	existed	in	the	world	before.	Because	I	don't	have	any
prejudice
--	 you	 can	 become	 a	 Christ	 here,	 you	 can	 become	 a	 Buddha	 here,	 you	 can
become	 a	 Mahavira,	 you	 can	 become	 a	 Lao	 Tzu.	 I	 don't	 have	 any	 prejudice
because	 I	 know	 these	 are	 only	 different	 names.	 Behind	 them	 is	 the	 same
universal	consciousness.
So	don't	be	bothered	about	your	beliefs;	just	drop	them.
Trust	 is	 enough,	 more	 than	 enough.	 For	 your	 pilgrimage,	 it	 is	 enough
nourishment.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
INSIDE	OF	ME	THERE	SEEM	TO	BE	SO	MANY	QUESTIONS,	BUT	WHEN
I	TRY
TO	ASK	YOU	ONE	OF	 THEM,	 THEY	ALL	 SEEM	TO	BE	GONE,	AND	 I
DON'T
KNOW	EVEN	 IF	 I	REALLY	WANTED	TO	ASK	YOU	SOMETHING.	BUT
STILL
THE	FEELING	OF	QUESTION	REMAINS.
PLEASE,	CAN	YOU	EXPLAIN	WHERE	THIS	FEELING	COMES	FROM?
It	is	very	simple.
You	 don't	 have	 a	 question;	 you	 have	 a	 quest.	 And	 you	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 the
distinction.
Your	 quest	 is	 not	 clear	 to	 you,	 it	 is	 clouded.	You	 think	 perhaps	 there	 is	 some
question	--
so	you	make	many	questions	and	 they	disappear	but	you	are	 left	with	a	vague
feeling	that	something	similar	to	a	question	is	still	there.	What	is	it?
All	questions	are	like	leaves.
The	quest	is	like	the	roots.
You	 are	 fortunate,	 because	 at	 first	 people	 have	 to	 ask	 thousands	 of	 questions;
then,	by	and	by,	one	by	one,	the	leaves	disappear.	Then	branches	come,	then	the
trunk,	and	then	finally	they	realize	that	the	real	thing	is	the	quest.
You	are	fortunate	 that	you	have	only	roots.	But	with	roots	 the	difficulty	 is	 that
they	are	always	underground,	so	you	don't	see	where	they	are.	You	try	somehow
to	make	questions,	but	they	disappear	because	they	are	not	connected	with	your
roots.
A	quest	is	the	most	significant	thing	for	a	seeker.
A	quest	means	you	want	 to	know,	you	want	 to	experience,	you	want	 to	be	 the
truth	itself.
A	question	wants	to	be	answered.
A	quest	wants	to	become	the	answer	itself.
Questions	are	many;	the	answer	is	one.
And	you	are	in	a	position...	if	you	simply	meditate,	you	will	not	come	across	a
question,	 you	 will	 come	 across	 the	 answer.	 And	 the	 answer	 is	 not	 something
separate	from	you.
You	are	the	answer.
Just	go	 to	your	very	 center.	 It	 is	 there	 for	you,	waiting	 for	 thousands	of	 lives.
Don't	 let	 it	 wait	 anymore.	 Sometimes	 it	 also	 gets	 impatient.	 Because	 of	 that
impatience,	it	starts	creating	questions.
Questions	only	show	impatience.
But	your	position	is	very	clear:	you	don't	need	to	ask	anything;	you	simply	have
to	go	deeper	and	deeper	into	silence,	and	you	will	find	it.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEFORE	COMING	INTO	CONTACT	WITH	YOU,	PROFESSOR	JOSHI	OF
KATHMANDU	 WAS	 SPIRITUALLY	 GUIDED	 BY	 A	 BUDDHIST	 LAMA.
THIS
LAMA	LEFT	HIS	FAMILY	AND	VILLAGE	WHEN	HE	WAS	YOUNG	AND
TRAVELED	FOR	FORTY	YEARS	IN	TIBET,	BURMA	AND	THAILAND,
MEDITATING	AND	SEEKING	TRUTH.
AT	 THE	 AGE	 OF	 SIXTY,	 ONE	 EVENING	 THE	 LAMA	 QUIETLY
RETURNED	TO
HIS	VILLAGE	AND	JOINED	THE	FAMILY	AND	HIS	OLD	LIFE.	BUT	HIS
GRACE
AND	 SILENCE	 ATTRACTED	 MANY	 SEEKERS,	 AND	 NOW	 HE	 IS
FAMOUS	AS
AN	"AVATARI	LAMA."
THE	PROFESSOR	WAS	HIGHLY	IMPRESSED	BY	THE	LAMA,	AND	OUT
OF
LOVE	 PRESENTED	 HIM	WITH	 YOUR	 BOOK,	 Anta	 Yantra.	 THE	 LAMA
COULD
NOT	 READ	 HINDI	 OR	 ENGLISH,	 SO	 HE	 REQUESTED	 MR.	 JOSHI	 TO
READ
SOME	PASSAGES	TO	HIM	AND	TO	SHOW	HIM	YOUR	PICTURE.
WHEN	 HE	 SAW	 YOUR	 PICTURE,	 THE	 LAMA	 SAID:	 "OSHO	 COMES
FROM	THE
LAND	WHERE	 I	GO	EVERY	DAY	 IN	MY	MEDITATION.	THIS	TIME	HE
HAS
COME	WITH	FULL	GLORY,	(SIXTEEN	kalas)	--	WHICH	HAPPENS	ONLY
IN	THE
INCARNATION	OF	KRISHNA	OR	BUDDHA.	NOW	THERE	 IS	NO	NEED
TO
COME	 TO	 ME	 FOR	 GUIDANCE;	 FOLLOW	 OSHO,	 HE	 IS	 THE	 RIGHT
MASTER."
OSHO,	 HOW	 CAN	 PEOPLE	 SEE	 SO	 MUCH	 JUST	 IN	 YOUR	 PICTURE,
WHICH	WE
DISCIPLES	 CANNOT	 REALIZE	 EVEN	 AFTER	 SUCH	 A	 LONG
ASSOCIATION?
Arun,	it	is	not	a	question	of	long	association.
It	is	a	question	of	deep	insight.	You	don't	have	that	meditative	perspective.	You
can	see	only	what	the	ordinary	eyes	can	see.
But	as	a	person	becomes	more	meditative,	he	starts	growing	his	sensitivities	to
such	depth	and	such	height	that	he	is	able	to	see	things	which	are	invisible	to	us.
Life	is	not	only	what	is	available	to	our	five	senses.
Just	think....	For	example,	if	you	were	all	blind,	you	would	never	come	to	know
that	there	is	something	like	light	--	although	the	light	will	be	all	around	you.	But
just	the	existence	of	light	is	not	enough;	you	need	something	to	perceive	it.
One	fact	scientists	have	been	concerned	about	 is	 that	on	at	 least	 fifty	 thousand
planets	there	is	a	possibility	of	life.	One	thing	is	certain:	that	on	these	different
planets,	life	must	have	grown	in	different	ways	--	because	the	climate	would	be
different,	the	whole	situation	would	be	different.
It	is	possible	that	on	some	planet	there	may	be	animals	who	have	more	than	five
senses.
Right	now	it	is	only	a	hypothetical	question,	but	it	is	significant;	the	possibility
is	 there.	 If	 there	 are	 animals	 on	 some	planets	who	 have	 seven	 senses	 or	 eight
senses,	then	they	must	be	able	to	perceive	two	or	three	things	more	than	we	can
perceive.	And	we	 cannot	 even	 imagine	what	 those	 things	might	 be	 --	 because
even	in	imagination,	we	can	only	imagine	that	which	we	have	seen.	We	cannot
even	dream	about	it,	because	our	dreams	are	only	reflections.	You	cannot	be	so
creative	 in	your	dreams	 to	 create	 something	new:	 all	 that	will	 be	 reflected	 are
those	five	senses.
Before	 x-rays	 were	 developed,	 we	 had	 no	 idea	 that	 there	 are	 rays	 which	 can
enter	into	your	body	and	photograph	your	insides.
The	 people	who	have	 been	working	 on	meditation	 for	 centuries	 have	 come	 to
know	many	 things,	but	because	 they	are	not	scientists	 they	have	never	 tried	 to
prove	them	objectively.
For	 example,	 in	 the	 East	 it	 has	 been	 known	 for	 centuries	 that	 a	 man	 of
meditation	can	see	if	somebody	is	going	to	die	within	six	months	or	not.	And	the
thing	is	so	simple	that	it	need	not	be	even	a	question	of	meditation;	you	yourself
can	know	whether	you	are	going	to	die	within	six	months	or	not.	The	day	you
stop	seeing	the	tip	of	your	nose,	that	means	only	six	months	are	left	--	because	at
the	 time	 a	 person	 dies,	 his	 eyes	 turn	 up,	 and	 they	 start	 turning	 up	 six	months
before	that,	very	slowly,	very	slowly.	From	six	months	beforehand	till	his	death,
he	cannot	see	the	tip	of	his	nose.	Now,	that	 is	known	to	villagers	who	have	no
meditation	or	meditative	understanding.
The	lama	has	been	meditating	for	forty	years.
He	can	see	in	my	picture	things	which	you	cannot	see.
I	am	reminded	of	Ramakrishna.	A	painter	made	his	portrait,	and	he	brought	the
painting	to	show	Ramakrishna	--	to	see	whether	he	liked	it	or	not.	The	disciples
were	also	gathered	there.
Ramakrishna	 looked	 at	 the	 painting	 and	 touched	 the	 feet	 of	 the	 painting.	 His
disciples	--
Vivekananda	and	others	--	 felt	embarrassed	--	"What	 to	do	with	our	master?	--
because	 he	 does	 such	 things	 that	 even	we	 look	 like	 fools.	 Now	 it	 is	 his	 own
picture,	 and	 he	 is	 touching	 its	 feet.	 We	 had	 no	 idea	 that	 he	 would	 do	 this;
otherwise,	we	would	have	prevented	him.	And	now	he	has	done	it,	and	people
are	laughing	and	smiling	and	looking	at	each	other."
There	were	many	observers	there	who	were	not	disciples.	They	said,	"They	think
this	man	is	a	realized	soul?	He	seem	to	be	insane!	Even	an	insane	person	will	not
touch	 his	 own	 feet;	 at	 least	 he	will	 recognize	 that	 `This	 is	my	 own	 portrait;	 I
cannot	touch	its	feet.'"
The	painter	was	also	shocked,	but	he	was	not	a	disciple.	So	he	gathered	courage
and	asked	Ramakrishna,	"I	cannot	believe	my	eyes.	This	is	your	own	portrait	and
you	are	touching	your	own	feet!	It	looks	a	little	awkward."
And	Ramakrishna's	 eyes	were	 full	of	 tears	of	 joy.	He	 said,	 "It	 is	my	picture,	 I
know,	but	I	am	not	touching	the	feet	because	it	is	my	picture.	I	am	touching	the
feet	because	you	have	caught	my	state	of	samadhi	in	the	picture.	And	when	I	see
a	picture	of	someone	in	samadhi...	 it	does	not	matter	whether	 that	picture	 is	of
me	or	somebody	else	--	that	is	irrelevant.	What	matters	is	that	the	picture	is	of	a
self-realized	consciousness,	then	I	have	to	touch	its	feet.	And	I	cannot	see	why
you	are	all	looking	so	embarrassed."
Now	they	all	felt	more	embarrassed:	"We	are	such	idiots.	We	don't	understand;
we	should	at	least	keep	quiet.	If	we	don't	understand,	then	it	is	better	not	to	show
any	 emotion.	 He	 has	 done	 something	 which	 nobody	 has	 done	 before,	 but	 his
reason	is	so	valid."
Arun,	the	lama	must	be	going	well	in	his	meditations.	If	he	can	see	what	he	has
seen	in	my	picture,	that	validates	that	he	is	on	the	right	path,	that	his	meditation
is	bringing	flowers,	that	he	is	very	close	to	the	home.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SAYING,	"I	LOVE:"	I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SAYING
"I	HATE."	WHAT	DO	YOU	MEAN?
OSHO,	 TELL	ME	 THE	 TRUTH,	 FOR	MY	 FEELING	 IS	 THAT	 THERE	 IS
NOTHING
UP	THERE	--	NOT	EVEN	LOVE,	NOT	EVEN	COMPASSION.
Do	I	have	to	tell	you	the	truth?
It	is	a	little	bit	difficult	for	me	because	it	is	not	my	habit...	but	the	truth	is	there	is
no	love,	no	hate.
Up	there	is	absolute	silence.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	Rising	in	love...	a	partnership	in	meditation	18	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610185
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH16
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
122
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I'M	 EXPERIENCING	MORE	 AND	MORE	 A	 HARMONY,	 A	 QUIETNESS,
AN	EASE,	AN	ABUNDANCE	IN	MYSELF,	MOMENTS	IN	WHICH	I	FEEL
SO	VAST	AND
RICH,	LIKE	THE	UNIVERSE,	AND	SO	CLOSE	TO	YOU.	I	DIVE	INTO	IT
AND
DISAPPEAR,	AND	SEE	THAT	THIS	AGAIN	WAS	JUST	AN	OPENING,	A
DOOR
TO	 ANOTHER	 DIMENSION	 ON	 THIS	 ONGOING,	 NEVER-ENDING
JOURNEY
YOU	ARE	TAKING	ME,	MY	BELOVED	MASTER.
AND	I	CAN	FIND	NO	WORDS	TO	EXPRESS	HOW	MUCH	I	FEEL,	THAT	I
CAN
BE	WITH	YOU.
BEING	 TOGETHER	 WITH	 A	 MAN	 I	 FIND	 THESE	 MOST	 BEAUTIFUL
AND
PRECIOUS	MOMENTS	SO	RARELY;	 IT	SEEMS	MOST	OF	THE	TIME	 IS
WASTED
IN	LOVING	AND	FINDING	OURSELVES	AND	EACH	OTHER.	WHY	IS	IT
SO
DIFFICULT	 FOR	ME	 TO	 BE	 IN	 THIS	 HARMONY	 TOGETHER	WITH	 A
MAN,	AND
EVEN	TAKE	HIM	WITH	ME	INTO	THIS	UNKNOWN?
OR	IS	IT	SOMETHING	WHICH	CAN	HAPPEN	JUST	BETWEEN	YOU	AND
ME?
There	are	a	few	very	fundamental	things	to	be	understood.
First,	a	man	and	a	woman	are	on	 the	one	hand	halves	of	 the	other,	and	on	 the
other	hand,	opposite	polarities.
Their	being	opposites	attracts	them	to	each	other.	The	farther	away	they	are,	the
deeper	will	 be	 the	 attraction;	 the	more	 different	 from	 each	 other	 they	 are,	 the
more	 will	 be	 the	 charm	 and	 beauty	 and	 attraction.	 But	 there	 lies	 the	 whole
problem.
When	they	come	close,	they	want	to	come	closer,	they	want	to	merge	into	each
other,	they	want	to	become	one,	a	harmonious	whole	--	but	their	whole	attraction
depends	 on	 opposition,	 and	 the	 harmony	 will	 depend	 on	 dissolving	 the
opposition.
Unless	a	 love	affair	 is	very	conscious,	 it	 is	going	to	create	great	anguish,	great
trouble.
All	lovers	are	in	trouble.
The	trouble	is	not	personal;	it	is	in	the	very	nature	of	things.
They	would	not	have	been	attracted	 to	each	other...	 they	call	 it	 falling	 in	 love.
They	 cannot	 give	 any	 reason	 why	 they	 have	 such	 a	 tremendous	 pull	 towards
each	 other.	 They	 are	 not	 even	 conscious	 of	 the	 underlying	 causes;	 hence	 a
strange	thing	happens:	the	happiest	lovers	are	those	who	never	meet.	Once	they
meet,	the	same	opposition	that	created	the	attraction	becomes	a	conflict.	On	each
small	point,	their	attitudes	are	different,	their	approaches	are	different.	Although
they	speak	the	same	language,	they	cannot	understand	each	other.
One	 of	 my	 friends	 was	 talking	 to	 me	 about	 his	 wife	 and	 their	 continuous
conflict.	I	said,
"It	seems	you	cannot	understand	each	other."
He	said,	"What	to	say	about	understanding	her,	I	cannot	even	stand	her!"	And	it
was	a	 love	marriage.	The	parents	of	both	were	opposed	 to	 it;	 they	belonged	 to
two	 different	 religions,	 their	 societies	 were	 opposed.	 But	 they	 fought	 against
everybody	and	got	married	 --	 just	 to	 find	 that	 they	had	entered	 into	a	constant
struggle.
The	way	a	man	looks	at	the	world	is	different	from	a	woman.
For	example,	a	man	is	interested	in	faraway	things	--	in	the	future	of	humanity,
in	the	faraway	stars,	whether	there	are	living	beings	on	other	planets	or	not.
A	woman	simply	giggles	at	the	whole	nonsense.	She	is	only	interested	in	a	very
small,	closed	circle	--	in	the	neighbors,	in	the	family,	in	who	is	cheating	his	wife,
whose	wife	has	fallen	in	love	with	the	chauffeur.	Her	interest	 is	very	local	and
very	 human.	 She	 is	 not	 worried	 about	 reincarnation;	 neither	 is	 she	 concerned
about	life	after	death.	Her	concern	is	more	pragmatic.	She	is	concerned	with	the
present,	here	and	now.
Man	 is	 never	 here	 and	 now.	 He	 is	 always	 somewhere	 else.	 He	 has	 strange
preoccupations
--	reincarnation,	life	after	death.
If	both	partners	are	conscious	of	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 is	a	meeting	of	opposites,	 that
there	is	no	need	to	make	it	a	conflict,	then	it	is	a	great	opportunity	to	understand
the	 totally	 opposite	 point	 of	 view	 and	 absorb	 it.	 Then	 the	 life	 of	 a	 man	 and
woman	 together	 can	 become	 a	 beautiful	 harmony.	Otherwise,	 it	 is	 continuous
fight.
There	are	holidays.	One	cannot	continue	 to	 fight	 twenty-four	hours	a	day;	one
needs	a	little	rest	too	--	a	rest	to	get	ready	for	a	new	fight.
But	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	 strangest	 phenomena	 that	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	men	 and
women	have	been	living	together,	yet	they	are	strangers.	They	go	on	giving	birth
to	 children,	 but	 still	 they	 remain	 strangers.	 The	 feminine	 approach	 and	 the
masculine	approach	are	so	opposed	to	each	other	that	unless	a	conscious	effort	is
made,	unless	it	becomes	your	meditation,	there	is	no	hope	of	having	a	peaceful
life.
It	is	one	of	my	deep	concerns:	how	to	make	love	and	meditation	so	involved	in
each	 other	 that	 each	 love	 affair	 automatically	 becomes	 a	 partnership	 in
meditation	--	and	each	meditation	makes	you	so	conscious	that	you	need	not	fall
in	love,	you	can	rise	in	love.
You	can	find	a	friend	consciously,	deliberately.
You	 feel	 a	 deep	 harmony	 with	 me,	 moments	 of	 peace,	 love	 and	 silence,	 and
naturally	the	question	has	arisen	in	you	that	if	this	is	possible	with	me,	why	is	it
not	possible	with	the	man	you	love?
The	difference	has	to	be	understood.	You	love	me,	but	you	don't	love	me	in	the
same	 way	 you	 love	 your	 husband,	 your	 wife.	 Your	 love	 towards	 me	 is	 not
biological;	with	me	 your	 love	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon	 --	 it	 is	 of	 the
spirit,	not	of	the	body.
And	secondly,	you	are	connected	with	me	because	of	your	search	for	truth.	My
relationship	with	you	is	that	of	meditation.
Meditation	is	the	only	bridge	between	me	and	you.
Your	 love	 will	 deepen	 as	 your	 meditation	 deepens,	 and	 vice-versa:	 as	 your
meditation	blossoms,	your	love	will	also	blossom.	But	it	is	on	a	totally	different
level.
With	your	husband,	you	are	not	connected	in	meditation.	You	never	sit	silently
for	 one	 hour	 together	 just	 to	 feel	 each	 other's	 consciousness.	 Either	 you	 are
fighting	or	you	are	making	love,	but	in	both	cases,	you	are	related	with	the	body,
the	 physical	 part,	 the	 biology,	 the	 hormones.	 You	 are	 not	 related	 with	 the
innermost	core	of	the	other.	Your	souls	remain	separate.
In	 the	 temples	 and	 in	 the	 churches	 and	 in	 the	 courts,	 only	 your	 bodies	 are
married.	Your	souls	are	miles	apart.
While	you	are	making	love	to	your	man	--	even	in	those	moments	--	neither	are
you	there,	nor	is	your	man	there.	Perhaps	he	is	thinking	of	Cleopatra,	Noorjahan,
Mumtaj	Mahal.
You	 are	 also	 thinking....	And	 perhaps	 that's	why	 every	woman	keeps	 her	 eyes
closed	--
not	to	see	her	husband's	face,	not	to	get	disturbed.	She	is	thinking	of	Alexander
the	Great,	Ivan	the	Terrible.	And	looking	at	her	husband,	everything	falls	apart.
He	looks	just	like	a	mouse.
Mulla	Nasruddin	and	his	wife	were	quarreling	one	morning.	She	said,	"Outside
the	house	you	walk	as	if	you	are	a	lion,	and	inside	the	house	you	look	just	like	a
mouse."
Mulla	Nasruddin	said,	"That	is	absolutely	wrong.	Put	yourself	right:	I	am	not	a
mouse,	I	am	a	mousetrap.	You	are	a	mouse.	Mousetraps	don't	run	after	mice	to
catch	hold	of	them.
The	mice	themselves	come	and	get	caught,	and	that's	how	it	happened	with	us."
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	not	courageous	enough	to	approach	this	woman.	He	was
afraid	from	the	very	beginning.
Every	man	is	afraid	because	he	has	seen	what	has	happened	to	his	father,	what
has	 happened	 to	 his	 grandfather.	 He	 has	 seen	 what	 is	 happening	 to	 every
neighbor.	Every	man	is	afraid.
Mulla	 was	 very	 much	 afraid;	 he	 never	 approached	 any	 woman.	 It	 was	 this
woman	who	 caught	 him.	 So	 he	 said,	 "Remember	 --	 I	 am	 a	mousetrap,	 that	 is
true,	but	I	was	just	sitting	in	my	place.	You	got	into	me,	it	is	your	responsibility."
But	it	does	not	matter	who	catches	who,	who	takes	the	initiative.
Even	 in	 those	 beautiful	moments	which	 should	 be	 sacred,	meditative,	 of	 deep
silence...
even	then	you	are	not	alone	with	your	beloved.	There	is	a	crowd.	Your	mind	is
thinking	of	somebody	else,	your	wife's	mind	is	thinking	of	somebody	else.	Then
what	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 just	 robot-like,	 mechanical.	 Some	 biological	 force	 is
enslaving	you,	and	you	call	it	love.
I	have	heard	that	early	in	the	morning,	a	drunkard	on	the	beach	saw	a	man	doing
pushups.
The	drunkard	walked	around	him,	looked	very	closely	from	here	and	from	there,
and	finally	said,	"I	should	not	interfere	in	such	an	intimate	affair,	but	I	have	to
tell	you	 that	your	girlfriend	has	gone.	Now	don't	exercise	unnecessarily	 --	 first
get	up	and	find	where	she	is!"
That	seems	to	be	the	situation.	When	you	are	making	love,	is	your	woman	really
there?	 Is	 your	 man	 really	 there?	 Or	 are	 you	 just	 doing	 a	 ritual	 --	 something
which	has	to	be	done,	a	duty	to	be	fulfilled?
If	you	want	a	harmonious	relationship	with	your	man,	you	will	have	to	learn	to
be	more	meditative.	Love	alone	is	not	enough.
Love	alone	is	blind;	meditation	gives	it	eyes.	Meditation	gives	it	understanding.
And	once	your	 love	 is	both	 love	and	meditation,	you	become	 fellow	 travelers.
Then	it	is	no	longer	an	ordinary	relationship	between	husband	and	wife.	Then	it
becomes	a	friendliness	on	the	path	towards	discovering	the	mysteries	of	life.
Man	alone,	woman	alone,	will	find	the	journey	very	tedious	and	very	long...	as
they	have	 found	 it	 in	 the	 past.	Because	 seeing	 this	 continuous	 conflict,	 all	 the
religions	decided	that	those	who	wanted	to	seek	should	renounce	the	other	--	the
monks	should	be	celibate,	the	nuns	should	be	celibate.	But	in	five	thousand	years
of	history,	how	many	monks	and	how	many	nuns	have	become	realized	souls?
You	cannot	even	give	me	names	enough	to	count	on	ten	fingers.	And	millions	of
monks	and	nuns	of	all	religions	--	Buddhist,	Hindu,	Christian,	Mohammedan....
What	has	happened?
The	path	is	not	so	long.	The	goal	is	not	that	far	away.	But	even	if	you	want	to	go
to	your	neighbor's	house,	you	will	need	both	your	legs.	Just	jumping	on	one	leg,
how	far	can	you	go?
I	 am	 introducing	 a	 totally	 new	 vision,	 that	 men	 and	 women	 together	 in	 deep
friendship,	in	a	loving,	meditative	relationship,	as	organic	wholes,	can	reach	the
goal	any	moment	they	want.	Because	the	goal	is	not	outside	you;	it	is	the	center
of	 the	cyclone,	 it	 is	 the	 innermost	part	of	your	being.	But	you	can	find	 it	only
when	you	are	whole,	and	you	cannot	be	whole	without	the	other.
Man	and	woman	are	two	parts	of	one	whole.
So	rather	than	wasting	time	in	fighting,	try	to	understand	each	other.	Try	to	put
yourself	in	the	place	of	the	other;	try	to	see	as	a	man	sees,	try	to	see	as	a	woman
sees.	And	four	eyes	are	always	better	than	two	eyes	--	you	have	a	full	view;	all
four	directions	are	available	to	you.
But	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered:	that	without	meditation,	love	is	destined	to
fail;	 there	is	no	possibility	of	its	being	a	success.	You	can	pretend	and	you	can
deceive	others,	but	you	cannot	deceive	yourself.	You	know	deep	down	 that	all
the	promises	love	had	given	to	you	have	remained	unfulfilled.
Only	 with	 meditation	 does	 love	 start	 taking	 on	 new	 colors,	 new	 music,	 new
songs,	new	dances	--	because	meditation	gives	you	the	insight	to	understand	the
polar	opposite,	and	in	that	very	understanding	the	conflict	disappears.
All	the	conflict	in	the	world	is	because	of	misunderstanding.	You	say	something,
your	 wife	 understands	 something	 else.	 Your	 wife	 says	 something,	 you
understand	something	else.
I	have	seen	couples	who	have	lived	together	for	thirty	or	forty	years;	still,	they
seem	to	be	as	 immature	as	 they	were	on	 their	 first	day	 together.	Still	 the	same
complaint:	 "She	 doesn't	 understand	 what	 I	 am	 saying."	 Forty	 years	 being
together	and	you	have	not	been	able	to	figure	out	some	way	that	your	wife	can
understand	 exactly	what	 you	 are	 saying,	 and	you	 can	understand	 exactly	what
she	is	saying.
But	 I	 think	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 for	 it	 to	 happen	 except	 through	meditation,
because	 meditation	 gives	 you	 the	 qualities	 of	 silence,	 awareness,	 a	 patient
listening,	a	capacity	to	put	yourself	in	the	other's	position.
It	is	possible	with	me:	I	am	not	concerned	with	the	trivia	of	your	life.
You	are	here	basically	to	listen	and	understand.
You	are	here	to	grow	spiritually.
Naturally	 there	 is	 no	question	of	 conflict,	 and	 the	harmony	 arises	without	 any
effort.
You	 can	 love	 me	 with	 totality,	 because	 with	 me	 your	 relationship	 is	 of
meditation.	With	any	other	man	or	with	any	other	woman,	if	you	want	to	live	in
harmony	you	will	have	to	bring	the	same	atmosphere	and	the	same	climate	that
you	have	brought	here.
Things	are	not	impossible,	but	we	have	not	tried	the	right	medicine.
I	would	like	you	to	be	reminded	that	the	word	`medicine'	comes	from	the	same
root	as
`meditation'.	Medicine	 cures	 your	 body;	meditation	 cures	 your	 soul.	Medicine
heals	the	material	part	of	you;	meditation	heals	the	spiritual	part	of	you.
People	 are	 living	 together	 and	 their	 spirits	 are	 full	 of	 wounds;	 hence,	 small
things	hurt	them	so	much.
Mulla	 Nasruddin	 was	 asking	 me,	 "What	 to	 do?	 --	 whatever	 I	 say	 I	 am
misunderstood,	and	immediately	there	is	trouble."
I	said,	"Try	one	thing:	just	sit	silently,	don't	say	anything."
The	next	day,	I	saw	him	in	more	despair	than	ever.	I	said,	"What	happened?"
He	 said,	 "I	 should	 not	 ask	 you	 for	 advice.	 Every	 day	 we	 used	 to	 fight	 and
quarrel,	but	it	was	just	verbal.	Yesterday,	because	of	your	advice,	I	got	beaten!"
I	said,	"What	happened?"
He	said,	"I	just	sat	there	silent.	She	asked	many	questions,	but	I	was	determined
to	remain	silent.	She	said,	`So	you	are	not	going	to	speak?'	I	remained	silent.	So
she	 started	hitting	me	with	 things!	And	 she	was	very	 angry.	She	 said,	 `Things
have	gone	from	bad	to	worse.
At	least	we	used	to	talk	to	each	other;	now	even	we	are	not	on	speaking	terms!'"
I	said,	"This	is	really	bad."
He	said,	 "You	are	saying	bad?	The	whole	neighborhood	gathered,	and	 they	all
started	 asking,	 `What	 happened?	 Why	 aren't	 you	 speaking?'	 And	 somebody
suggested:	Ìt	seems	he	is	possessed	by	some	evil	spirit.'
"I	thought,	my	God,	now	they	are	going	to	take	me	to	some	idiot	who	will	beat
me	and	try	to	drive	the	evil	spirit	out.	I	said,	`Wait!	I'm	not	possessed	by	any	evil
spirit,	 I'm	 simply	 not	 speaking	 because	 to	 say	 anything	 triggers	 a	 fight:	 I	 say
something,	then	she	has	to	say	something,	and	then	I	have	to	say	something,	and
nobody	knows	where	it	is	going	to	end.'	I	was	simply	meditating	silently,	doing
no	harm	to	anybody	--	and	suddenly	the	whole	neighborhood	was	against	me!"
People	are	living	without	any	understanding.
Hence,	whatsoever	they	do	is	going	to	end	in	disaster.
If	you	love	a	man,	meditation	will	be	the	best	present	that	you	can	give	to	him.	If
you	love	a	woman,	then	the	Kohinoor	is	nothing;	meditation	will	be	a	far	more
precious	gift	--
and	it	will	make	your	life	sheer	joy.
We	are	potentially	capable	of	sheer	joy,	but	we	don't	know	how	to	manage	it.
Alone,	we	are	at	the	most	sad.
Together,	it	becomes	really	hell.
Even	a	man	like	Jean-Paul	Sartre,	a	man	of	great	intelligence,	has	to	say	that	the
other	 is	 hell,	 that	 to	 be	 alone	 is	 better,	 you	 cannot	make	 it	with	 the	 other.	He
became	so	pessimistic	that	he	said	it	is	impossible	to	make	it	with	the	other,	the
other	is	hell.
Ordinarily,	he	is	right.
With	meditation	the	other	becomes	your	heaven.
But	Jean-Paul	Sartre	had	no	idea	of	meditation.
That	is	the	misery	of	Western	man.	Western	man	is	missing	the	flowering	of	life
because	he	knows	nothing	about	meditation,	and	Eastern	man	is	missing	because
he	knows	nothing	of	love.
And	 to	me,	 just	 as	man	 and	woman	 are	 halves	 of	 one	whole,	 so	 are	 love	 and
meditation.
Meditation	is	man;	love	is	woman.
In	the	meeting	of	meditation	and	love	is	the	meeting	of	man	and	woman.	And	in
that	meeting,	we	create	the	transcendental	human	being	--	which	is	neither	man
nor	woman.
Unless	we	create	the	transcendental	man	on	the	earth,	there	is	not	much	hope.
But	I	feel	my	people	are	capable	of	doing	the	apparently	impossible.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVEN	 IN	 MY	 CHILDHOOD	 I	 NEVER	 REBELLED	WHEN	 SOMETHING
WASN'T
AUTHENTIC.	I	LEARNED	TO	WEAR	A	MASK.	I	LEARNED	IT	SO	WELL
THAT	IT
IS	VERY	DIFFICULT	 FOR	ME	TO	 SEE	WHETHER	 I'M	AUTHENTIC	OR
PHONY.
TOMORROW	I	AM	GOING	TO	TAKE	SANNYAS.
IS	IT	ALRIGHT	WITH	YOU	TO	HAVE	A	DISCIPLE	WHO	HAS	SO	LITTLE
AUTHENTICITY	AND	WHO	HARDLY	KNOWS	WHAT	LOVE	IS?
The	question	is	such...	it	is	as	if	you	are	sick	and	you	go	to	a	physician	and	ask
him,	"Is	it	alright	for	you	to	accept	a	sick	man	as	a	patient,	or	do	you	accept	only
the	healthy	people?"
My	whole	business	is	to	accept	all	kinds	of	people	--	hypocrites	with	all	kinds	of
masks...
insincere...	obedient	against	their	own	intelligence.	But	these	are	the	people	who
need	me,	and	these	are	the	people	I	need	too.
Bring	all	your	sicknesses.
Don't	 be	 worried,	 I	 have	 even	 initiated	 a	 few	 dead	 people	 in	 the	 hope	 that
resurrection	is	possible!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMETIMES	 LIFE	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 SUCH	 A	 DRAG	 THAT	 I	 WOULD
RATHER	LIKE
TO	DIE.	ANY	ADVICE?
There	are	many	methods	to	die,	but	one	thing:	anybody	who	really	wants	to	die
never	asks	for	advice.	Living	may	be	a	drag,	but	death	is	very	quick.	All	around
you,	there	are	so	many	ways....
But	you	don't	want	to	die.
In	fact,	even	the	people	who	commit	suicide	don't	want	to	commit	suicide.	They
commit	suicide	because	they	expected	too	much	from	life	and	they	could	not	get
it.	 The	 failure	 was	 so	 great,	 that	 to	 live	 shamefully	 became	 difficult.	 They
committed	 suicide	not	 against	 life;	 they	 committed	 suicide	because	 they	 could
not	manage	to	learn	the	art	of	life.
They	wanted	life	to	be	a	great	benediction,	and	it	was	a	drag.
It	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 fallacy	 all	 over	 the	world	 that	 just	 because	 you	 are	 born	 you
know	how	to	live.	This	is	not	right.	To	be	born	is	one	thing.	To	know	the	art	of
living	and	of	living	fully	is	totally	different.
Birth	is	only	an	opportunity	--	you	can	make	it	or	mar	it.	Birth	is	not	equivalent
to	life.
Almost	everybody	thinks	that	birth	is	equivalent	to	life;	so	it	is	bound	to	become
a	drag	--
just	breathing,	eating	every	day,	going	to	sleep,	waking	up	in	the	morning,	going
to	the	same	office,	the	same	files	and	the	same	routine.	For	idiots	it	is	perfectly
okay,	 but	 for	 anybody	who	 has	 some	 intelligence	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 become	 drag.
Because	he	can	see	--
what	 is	 the	point?	Why	after	all	am	I	 living?	If	 tomorrow	is	again	going	 to	be
just	a	repetition	of	today,	as	today	has	been	a	repetition	of	yesterday,	then	why
go	on	living?
What	 is	 the	point	of	unnecessarily	 repeating	 the	same	circle,	 the	 same	 routine,
the	same	happenings?
But	the	fallacy	is	in	the	fact	that	you	have	accepted	a	wrong	concept,	that	birth	is
life.
Birth	is	only	an	opportunity.
Either	you	can	learn	to	live	a	beautiful	life	or	you	can	just	drag	yourself	towards
the	graveyard.
It	is	up	to	you.	There	are	people	for	whom	life	is	a	drag,	and	there	are	people	for
whom	even	death	is	a	dance.
I	want	 to	 say	 to	 you	 that	 if	 you	make	 your	 life	 an	 art,	 your	 death	will	 be	 the
culmination	of	the	art	--	the	highest	peak,	a	beauty	in	itself.
Millions	are	there,	who	are	in	the	same	position	as	your	question.
They	don't	know	why	they	are	living	and	they	don't	know	if	there	is	any	point	in
dying	either.	Life	is	futile	--	how	can	death	appear	to	be	significant?	So	they	are
afraid	of	suicide	also,	because	if	life	is	such	--	just	a	dark	hole	--	death	is	going
to	be	even	worse.
One	day	I	saw	Mulla	Nasruddin	with	his	gun,	a	rope,	and	a	tin	of	kerosene	oil.	I
said,
"Where	are	you	going,	Mulla?"
He	 said,	 "Enough	 is	 enough.	 I	 was	 just	 coming	 to	 say	 goodbye	 to	 you.	 I	 am
going	to	commit	suicide."
I	said,	"But	so	many	arrangements?"
He	said,	"You	know	me,	I	am	a	perfectionist.	I	don't	take	chances.	I	have	made
every	arrangement."
I	said,	"Can	I	come	just	to	watch,	and	just	to	wave	when	you	are	disappearing	in
smoke?"
He	said,	"You	can	come."
So	 I	 went	 with	 him	 and	 sat	 on	 a	 rock	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 river.	 He	 made	 the
arrangements	very	efficiently.	On	a	branch	of	a	tree	which	was	hanging	over	the
river,	he	tied	the	rope	by	which	he	was	going	to	hang	himself.
I	said,	"Mulla,	that's	enough."
He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 believe	 it....	 Unless	 I	 have	 done	 everything...	 no	 loopholes
should	be	left."
He	put	his	neck	into	the	rope,	poured	the	kerosene	oil	over	himself.
I	said,	"Mulla,	is	it	going	to	be	real?"
He	said,	"What	do	you	think?"
He	lit	a	match,	set	fire	to	himself,	and	before	jumping	from	the	tree,	he	fired	the
gun	--
the	last	resort	--	at	his	head.	But	that's	where	everything	went	wrong	--	the	gun
missed	 the	mark	and	cut	 the	 rope	and	he	 fell	 into	 the	 river...	naturally,	 the	 fire
was	finished,	and	he	started	swimming!
I	said,	"Mulla,	what	are	you	doing?"
He	said,	"What	to	do?	I	know	how	to	swim."
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 strange.	You	 arranged	 everything	 so	well,	 but	 still	 there	was	 a
loophole,	the	swimming.	You	should	not	have	started	to	swim.	You	should	have
remained	there	and	died."
He	said,	"That's	just	it	--	dying	is	not	so	easy.	When	I	saw	the	gun	had	misfired,
when	I	saw	the	water	had	put	the	fire	out,	it	became	clear:	God	wants	me	to	live.
And	moreover,	I	know	how	to	swim!	It	is	impossible	when	you	know	swimming
not	to	swim.	Next	time,	some	other	arrangement...."
Nobody	wants	to	die.
And	it	is	true	that	life	is	a	drag.
But	it	is	not	life	that	is	a	drag,	it	is	you	--	you	have	not	learned	the	art	of	making
life	a	joy,	a	thing	of	beauty,	a	piece	of	art.
Unless	a	man	is	creative,	he	cannot	find	much	joy	in	life.
So	the	first	principle	is:	Be	creative.
Don't	 bother	whether	you	become	a	world-famous	 artist	 or	not;	 that	 is	 not	 the
significant	 thing.	 But	 create	 something	 --	 a	 beautiful	 song,	 a	 little	 music,	 a
dance,	a	painting,	a	garden.	And	when	the	roses	blossom...	you	cannot	say	that
life	is	a	drag	with	so	many	roses	blossoming.	A	beautiful	painting...	you	cannot
say	life	is	a	drag,	because	this	painting	has	been	created	for	the	first	time	in	the
world	and	 for	 the	 last	 time.	Nobody	has	done	 it	 before,	 and	nobody	will	do	 it
again;	only	you	were	capable	of	doing	it.
Express	your	uniqueness	in	whatsoever	you	do.
Express	your	individuality.
Let	existence	be	proud	of	you.
Life	will	not	be	felt	like	a	drag;	it	will	become	a	fragrance.
Not	only	will	life	be	a	joy	and	a	dance	--	for	a	creative	person,	for	a	meditative
person,	even	death	will	be	transformed.
I	have	always	loved	a	story	about	Bokoju,	a	Zen	master.
He	was	ninety	years	old	when	he	died.	Three	days	before,	he	 informed	all	his
disciples:
"If	you	want	to	come	for	the	last	goodbye,	then	come.	In	three	days'	time	I	am
going	to	leave	the	world."
So	thousands	of	his	disciples	came	--	and	he	was	one	of	the	most	unique	masters
Zen	has	produced.	On	the	third	day,	in	the	morning	there	was	a	great	gathering	in
his	garden,	and	he	was	lying	under	his	most	beautiful	tree.
He	suddenly	asked,	"Just	tell	me	one	thing:	In	what	way	should	I	die?	--	because
I	don't	want	to	die	like	everybody	else.	Ninety-nine	percent	of	people	die	in	their
beds."	He	said,
"That	is	out	of	the	question.	Remove	the	bed	from	here!"
The	bed	 is	 the	most	 dangerous	 thing.	Ninety-nine	 percent	 of	 people	 die	 there,
and	every	night	you	go	to	bed	without	thinking	of	the	danger.	When	the	light	is
turned	off,	just	put	your	mattress	down	on	the	floor.	Then	there	is	some	chance
of	surviving	--	death	may	try	to	search	for	you	on	the	bed	and	may	not	be	able	to
find	you.
Bokoju	said,	"Take	this	bed	away	from	here,	and	suggest	something,	something
unique,	worthy	of	Bokoju."
The	disciples	thought	what	to	suggest?	Somebody	said	that,	"You	can	die	sitting
in	a	lotus	posture.	Many	masters	have	died	in	the	lotus	posture."
But	Bokoju	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 very	unique,	 because	many	people	have	died	 in
that	posture."
Somebody	said,	"You	can	die	standing."
He	said,	"That	seems	to	be	appealing."
But	one	man	objected;	he	said,	"That's	not	right,	because	I	know	of	a	Zen	master
who	died	standing.	It	will	not	be	unique."
Bokoju	said,	 "It	 is	very	difficult.	Find	out	quickly	because	my	 time	 is	 running
out,	and	I	cannot	delay	any	more.	So	many	idiots	are	here,	and	you	cannot	find
just	one	unique	way	of	dying	for	your	beloved	master?"
One	man	suggested,	"Nobody	has	ever	died	standing	on	his	head.	You	can	do	a
headstand	and	die."
Bokoju	said,	"Perfectly	right!"
He	stood	on	his	head	and	died.
Now	the	problem	was...	The	disciples	said,	"What	to	do?"	--	because	they	know
what	 has	 to	 be	 done	when	 a	 person	 dies	 in	 his	 bed.	But	what	 to	 do	with	 this
fellow	who	has	died	standing	on	his	head?
Somebody	said,	"His	elder	sister,	who	is	also	a	great	master,	lives	just	close	by.	It
is	better	to	call	her	and	not	to	interfere,	because	this	is	a	strange	thing.	We	will
be	 condemned	 later	 on	 if	 we	 don't	 do	 the	 right	 thing,	 so	 it	 is	 better	 to	 call
somebody	who	can	take	responsibility."
The	sister	came	and	she	said,	"Bokoju!	From	your	very	childhood	you	have	been
mischievous	--	and	this	is	no	time	to	be	mischievous!	Just	lie	down!"
And	Bokoju	 laughed	and	said,	 "Okay	sister	 --	because	 I	cannot	disobey	you.	 I
was	almost	dead.	I	was	just	waiting	to	see	what	these	people	would	do	trying	to
work	out	what	to	do	with	me	after	death.	But	these	idiots	have	brought	you	here!
And	you	always	were	a	killjoy.	You've	destroyed	the	whole	fun!	Now	I	will	die
in	the	ordinary,	orthodox	way."
And	he	died.
And	his	sister	did	not	even	look	back,	she	just	went	away.
People	said,	"But	he	has	died!"
She	said,	"It	was	 time.	He	was	delaying	it.	And	it	 is	not	right	 to	play	jokes	on
existence.
At	 least	 at	 the	 time	 of	 death	 one	 should	 be	 serious!	 Now	 he	 is	 dead,	 you	 do
whatever	you	want	to	do.	Even	if	he	is	not	dead,	finish	him	off	--	his	time	is	up!"
Make	your	life...
Find	out	why	you	are	feeling	bored.	Change.
It	is	such	a	small	life.
Take	risks,	be	a	gambler	--	what	can	you	lose?
We	come	with	empty	hands,	we	go	with	empty	hands.	There	is	nothing	to	lose.
Just	a	little	time	to	be	playful,	to	sing	a	beautiful	song,	and	the	time	is	gone.
Each	moment	is	so	precious.
If	 you	 are	 silent,	 if	 you	 are	 creative,	 if	 you	 are	 loving,	 if	 you	 are	 sensitive	 to
beauty,	 if	 you	 are	 grateful	 to	 this	 vast	 universe...	 There	 are	 millions	 of	 stars,
which	are	dead	--	and	you	are	so	small,	yet	you	have	the	most	precious	thing	in
existence...	 life.	 And	 not	 only	 life,	 but	 the	 possibility	 of	 becoming	 a
consciousness,	of	becoming	enlightened,	of	coming	to	a	space	where	death	has
never	entered.
If	Bokoju	is	not	serious,	the	reason	is	because	he	knows	there	is	no	death,	it	is
only	changing	houses,	or	changing	clothes	at	 the	most.	It	 is	excitement	--	even
death	is	a	great	excitement	and	ecstasy.
It	is	just	your	wrong	approach.
Drop	it,	and	don't	drop	it	slowly	slowly,	piece	by	piece.	Drop	it	totally,	instantly.
When	 you	 go	 out	 of	 this	 place,	 go	 dancing	 and	 singing.	 Let	 the	whole	world
think	you	are	insane,	that	is	far	better.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	1980	YOU	GAVE	ME	SANNYAS.	I	WAS	NOT	EVEN	LOOKING	FOR	A
MASTER.	SINCE	THEN	I	HAVE	EXPERIENCED	THE	JOY	AND	FUN	OF
BEING
ONE	OF	YOUR	DISCIPLES.
BUT	NOW	I	START	FEELING	THE	PAIN:	YOU	ARE	SO	VAST	--	WHERE
IS	THE
WAY?	IS	THERE	A	WAY?	JUST	TO	BE	TRUE	IS	SO	DIFFICULT.
AND	IS	THAT	ALL?
You	have	asked	three	questions	in	one	question.
First,	you	found	me	although	you	were	not	looking	for	a	master.
Let	me	make	it	clear	to	you	that	I	was	looking	for	a	disciple,	and	that	is	far	more
important.
Your	 looking	 for	 a	 master	 is	 not	 so	 important	 because	 you	 are	 asleep	 and
dreaming.	 So	 whenever	 I	 see	 some	 sleepwalker	 passing	 by,	 and	 see	 some
possibility	that	he	can	be	awakened,	I	just	turn	his	way	--	and	he	is	a	sleepwalker
so	there	is	no	problem.	It	does	not	matter	where	he	is	going.	I	give	him	sannyas,
he	takes	sannyas	--	because	in	sleep	it	does	not	matter.
I	create	a	beautiful	dream	for	him.
I	 am	 not	 a	 hard	 taskmaster.	 First	 I	 create	 a	 beautiful	 dream,	 and	 then	 slowly
slowly	I	take	you	out	of	it.
Now	you	are	out	of	the	dream,	so	the	second	problem	arises	--	where	is	the	path?
In	fact,	it	is	my	doing.	While	you	were	asleep	I	was	talking	about	the	path..."the
path...
the	 mystic	 path..."	 to	 wake	 you	 up.	 Now	 you	 are	 awake	 so	 you	 are	 asking,
"Where	is	the	path?"
There	is	no	path.
It	was	just	a	device	to	wake	you	up.
You	 are	 not	 to	 go	 anywhere.	 You	 are	 exactly	 at	 the	 place	where	 you	 have	 to
reach.	You	are	exactly	that	which	you	have	to	become.
There	is	no	path,	there	is	no	goal.
Your	isness	is	your	realization.
And	thirdly:	waking	up,	you	see	me	vast	like	an	ocean.	While	you	were	asleep,
you	were	not	aware	of	where	I	was	leading	you.	Now	you	are	fully	awake,	and
you	see	the	vast	ocean.
It	is	not	me.	It	is	the	reality	--	and	it	is	your	reality.
And	 the	 ocean	 that	 you	 are	 seeing	 outside	 you	 will	 remain	 outside	 till	 your
dewdrop	disappears	into	it.	And	the	dewdrop	is	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf.	Any
moment	it	will	be	part	of	the	ocean	and	you	will	know	that	no	man	is	an	island;
we	all	belong	to	one	reality,	one	consciousness,	one	continent.
It	is	only	in	our	sleep	that	we	are	separate.
The	moment	we	are	awake	we	are	one.
There	will	be	a	little	fear.	It	is	said	that	even	before	a	river	falls	into	the	ocean,	it
trembles	 with	 fear.	 It	 looks	 back	 at	 the	 whole	 journey,	 the	 peaks	 of	 the
mountains,	the	long	winding	path	through	the	forests,	through	the	people,	and	it
sees	 in	 front	 of	 it	 such	 a	 vast	 ocean	 that	 entering	 into	 it	 is	 nothing	 but
disappearing	forever.	But	there	is	no	other	way.
The	river	cannot	go	back.
Neither	can	you	go	back.
Going	back	is	impossible	in	existence;	you	can	only	go	forward.	The	river	has	to
take	the	risk	and	go	into	the	ocean.	And	only	when	it	enters	the	ocean	will	 the
fear	disappear	because	only	then	will	 the	river	know	that	 it	 is	not	disappearing
into	the	ocean;	rather,	 it	 is	becoming	the	ocean.	It	 is	a	disappearance	from	one
side	and	it	is	a	tremendous	resurrection	on	the	other	side.
So	don't	be	worried.	Things	are	happening	perfectly	right	for	you.
You	had	not	come	in	search	of	a	master,	but	what	to	do?	A	master	was	in	search
of	you.
And	now	there	is	no	going	back.	Even	if	you	try	to	close	your	eyes,	that	sleep	in
which	you	were	living	cannot	be	recalled.
And	the	vastness	 is	not	something	 to	be	afraid	of.	 It	 is	very	friendly,	 it	 is	very
loving.
Disappearing	 into	 it	 is	 almost	 like	 finding	 the	 womb	 and	 its	 warmth	 and	 its
nourishment	again.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
DO	YOU	HAVE	ANY	PROBLEM	WHICH	YOU	HAVE	NOT	SOLVED	YET?
I	don't	have	any	problem.
I	used	to	have	problems,	but	I	never	solved	them.
My	 procedure	 is	 totally	 different.	 I	 dissolve	 the	 problem;	 I	 never	 solve	 it	 --
because	solving	does	not	help.	You	solve	a	problem,	and	you	will	find	that	ten
other	problems	have	arisen	out	of	your	solution.
I	 have	 been	 dissolving,	 I	 have	 been	 getting	 rid	 of	 --	 because	 no	 problem	 is
significant.	All	problems	are	barriers	between	you	and	existence.
Now	I	have	only	mysteries	--	no	problems,	no	questions.
In	that	way	I	am	a	very	poor	man.
No	 problem,	 no	 question;	 I	 am	 utterly	 silent.	 But	 silence	 has	 a	 richness	 that
millions	 of	 problems	 cannot	 give	 to	 you.	 Silence	 has	 a	 richness	 that	 all	 the
philosophies	of	the	world	and	all	the	answers	together	cannot	give	you.
When	I	answer	your	questions,	it	is	not	that	I	have	got	an	answer	and	I	simply
give	it	to	you.	I	don't	have	any	answer.
I	simply	listen	to	your	question	and	let	my	silence	respond	to	it;	hence,	you	can
find	many	 contradictions	 in	my	 answers.	 But	 I	 am	 not	 responsible,	 because	 I
have	never	answered.
It	is	the	silence	that	goes	on	responding	at	different	moments	in	different	times	to
different	people	in	different	ways.	Just	as	you	listen	to	the	answer,	I	also	listen	to
it.
There	is	no	speaker	here.
Here,	there	are	only	listeners.
Question	6
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	LAST	QUESTION	WE	SHOULD	ASK	YOU,	OSHO?
There	is	not	even	a	first	question,	so	the	question	about	the	last	question	does	not
arise.
You	should	learn	to	be	silent,	to	be	at	ease	with	me,	to	be	in	tune	with	me.	In	that
silent	harmony	all	is	achieved:	all	the	treasures	that	existence	has	been	keeping
safe	for	you,	so	that	when	you	wake	up	you	can	claim	your	portion.
And	everybody's	portion	of	 the	 treasure	 is	 infinite.	 It	 is	not	 that	because	 it	 is	a
portion,	it	will	be	limited.
The	 upanishadic	 seers	 have	 said:	 You	 can	 take	 out	 even	 the	 whole	 from	 the
whole,	yet	the	whole	remains	behind.
Existence	 is	 such	 a	 mystery	 that	 it	 can	 give	 to	 each	 person	 infinite	 treasure,
eternal	life,	unbounded	beauty.
So	don't	be	worried	about	the	last	question.	There	is	not	even	a	first	question.
Be	 innocent	 and	 silent,	 and	 just	 be	 open	 and	 receptive	 to	my	 heartbeats.	 The
moment	your	heartbeats	are	also	dancing	to	the	same	tune,	you	have	come	home.
In	fact,	you	have	never	gone	anywhere.	You	have	just	forgotten	that	this	is	your
home.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	The	point	of	no	return
19	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610195
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH17
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
123
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SRI	 AUROBINDO	DECLARED	 THAT	 THERE	 IS	 SOMETHING	BEYOND
THAT
WHICH	BUDDHA	CALLS	ENLIGHTENMENT.	HIS	WHOLE	ASPIRATION
WAS
DEDICATED	 TOWARDS	 OPENING	 A	 DOOR	 FOR	 THIS	 NEW	 STEP	 IN
HUMAN
EVOLUTION.
BELOVED	OSHO,	WHAT	COULD	NOT	HAPPEN	WITH	AUROBINDO,	 IS
IT
HAPPENING	WITH	YOU?
Sri	Aurobindo	is	a	strange	case.	He	knows	everything	about	enlightenment,	but
he	is	not	enlightened.
He	is	one	of	the	greatest	scholars	of	this	age,	a	genius;	vast	is	his	knowledge.	But
his	 knowing	 is	 nil.	 He	 knows	 about	 the	 scriptures,	 and	 he	 knows	 better	 than
anybody	else.
His	 interpretation	 is	 profound,	 very	 logical,	 but	 heartless.	 It	 is	 dead;	 it	 is	 not
coming	out	of	his	own	realization.
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 great	 problems	 for	 all	 seekers	 of	 truth:	 one	 can	 get	 lost	 in
knowledge	without	knowing	anything	about	the	reality.
He	knows	all	 the	 theories,	all	 the	philosophies,	but	he	 is	 just	a	blind	man	who
knows	 everything	 about	 light	 but	 has	 not	 seen	 the	 light	 himself.	 And	 it	 is
possible	 to	 remain	 in	 a	 deception	 for	 your	whole	 life	 --	 because	 you	 know	 so
much,	and	people	start	worshipping	you,	people	start	believing	you.	And	belief
has	its	own	psychology:	if	many	people	believe	in	you,	you	are	bound	to	believe
in	yourself.
I	have	often	told	a	small	story	about	a	great	journalist	who	died	and	reached	the
doors	of	heaven.
The	doors	of	heaven	and	hell	are	not	far	apart;	they	are	just	opposite	each	other.
The	distance	 is	not	much,	and	naturally	one	would	 like	 to	enter	heaven.	So	he
knocked	on	 the	door.	The	doorkeeper	opened	a	 small	window	 in	 the	door	 and
asked,	"What	do	you	want?"
He	said,	"I	am	a	great	journalist.	I	have	just	died,	and	I	want	to	enter."
The	doorkeeper	said,	"I	am	sorry	but	I	have	to	refuse	you	--	because	we	have	a
quota;	we	can	have	only	twelve	journalists	in	heaven.	That	quota	has	been	filled
for	centuries	--	 for	centuries,	no	new	journalist	has	entered.	And	anyway,	even
those	twelve	are	utterly	useless	because	nothing	happens	in	heaven.	They	tried	to
publish	a	newspaper,	but	only	one	issue	appeared	--	because	there	are	only	saints
here	--	no	murder,	no	suicide,	no	crime,	no	politics,	no	struggle	for	power...	no
change	ever	happens;	everything	is	eternally	the	same.	From	where	can	you	get
news?"
"And,"	the	doorkeeper	said,	"you	must	have	heard	the	definition	of	news:	when	a
dog	bites	a	man	it	is	not	news,	but	when	a	man	bites	a	dog	it	is	news.	So	nothing
sensational	happens	here,	no	love	affair...	When	people	get	bored,	they	read	the
first	issue	that	was	published	centuries	ago.
"You	should	go	to	hell.	Every	moment	tremendous	things	happen	there.	All	the
active	 people	 of	 the	 world,	 all	 the	 creative	 people	 of	 the	 world	 are	 there	 --
painters,	 musicians,	 poets,	 actors,	 dancers,	 thieves,	 murderers,	 rapists,
psychoanalysts,	philosophers	--	you	will	find	every	variety.
"Heaven	is	monotonous.	Only	dull,	dead	saints	--	skeletons.	Their	only	quality	is
that	they	don't	do	anything.	So	just	go	to	hell	and	enjoy.	You	will	find	everything
that	you	may	have	missed	on	earth	 --	because	 for	centuries	upon	centuries,	all
the	juicy	people	have	collected	there.	In	fact,	I	myself	want	to	go...	but	once	you
get	 into	heaven,	you	cannot	escape.	So	 I	am	stuck	here.	My	suggestion	 is	 that
you	just	go."
But	 journalists	 are	 stubborn	people.	He	 said,	 "I	have	 a	 suggestion,	 and	 I	 think
you	must	 be	 compassionate	 enough	 to	 do	 it	 for	me.	 Just	 give	me	 twenty-four
hours'	entry.	If	I	can	convince	one	of	the	journalists	inside	to	go	to	hell	then	you
can	put	me	in	the	quota;	twelve	journalists	will	remain	twelve."
The	gatekeeper	said,	"It	is	unheard	of,	there	is	no	precedent.	But	I	cannot	say	no
to	you.
Go	 in,	have	a	 try.	But	 remember,	after	 twenty-four	hours....	 I	am	taking	a	 risk.
After	twenty-four	hours,	come	back."
After	twenty-four	hours	he	came	back.	In	those	twenty-four	hours	he	had	created
a	rumor	among	all	the	journalists:	"A	big	newspaper	is	going	to	be	started	in	hell
and	 there	 is	 great	 need	 for	 editors,	 sub-editors,	 story	 writers,	 all	 kinds	 of
journalists.	The	salaries	are	great.	So	what	are	you	doing	HERE?"
After	 twenty-four	 hours	 when	 the	 journalist	 came	 to	 the	 gate,	 the	 gatekeeper
said,	"Go	back.	You	cannot	go	out	now."
The	journalist	said,	"Why	not?"
The	gatekeeper	 said,	 "I	have	kept	my	word,	 and	you	have	 to	keep	your	word.
You	 were	 very	 convincing.	 All	 twelve	 journalists	 have	 gone.	 I	 tried	 hard	 to
explain	 that	 `This	 is	 just	 a	 rumor;	 don't	 spoil	 your	 heaven.'	But	 they	wouldn't
listen."
The	man	himself	had	created	the	rumor,	but	he	had	started	thinking	perhaps	there
was	something	in	it;	otherwise	twelve	persons	wouldn't	go	to	hell	for	no	reason.
He	said,	"Just	open	the	door!"	He	was	convinced	by	others	being	convinced.
And	this	happens	to	millions	of	people.
When	 you	 see	 that	 seven	 hundred	million	 people	 are	 convinced	 that	 Catholic
Christianity	 is	 the	 only	 religion,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 say	 that	 those	 seven	 hundred
million	people	can	be	wrong.	The	sheer	number	has	such	weight.
That's	why	all	 the	 religions	go	on	 trying	 to	 increase	 their	numbers.	They	have
their	 methods	 to	 increase	 their	 numbers	 because	 the	 more	 you	 increase	 the
numbers	 the	more	 you	 convince	 those	who	 are	 not	 in	 your	 fold	 that	 they	 are
wrong	 and	 you	 are	 right.	 Your	 sheer	 majority	 is	 an	 argument;	 it	 validates
anything	you	say.
Sri	Aurobindo	was	a	great	intellectual,	a	very	convincing,	rational	philosophical
genius.
He	convinced	many	people,	and	those	many	people	convinced	him	that	he	was
enlightened.
He	knows	nothing	of	 enlightenment.	 It	 is	 true	 that	 there	 is	 something	more	 in
existence	than	the	enlightenment	Gautam	the	Buddha	achieved.	But	it	is	Gautam
the	Buddha	himself	who,	for	the	first	time	in	the	world,	indicated	the	possibility
of	the	beyond.
Naturally,	 nobody	 else	 can	 say	 that	 there	 is	 something	 beyond	 --	 unless	 they
reach	that	boundary.
So	when	Sri	Aurobindo	says	there	is	something	more	than	the	enlightenment	of
Gautam	Buddha,	he	 is	hiding	the	fact	 that	 it	was	Gautam	Buddha	himself	who
was	 the	 first	man	 in	 the	whole	 of	 history	 to	 say	 that	 "This	 is	 not	 all;	 there	 is
something	beyond."
Buddha	says	--	and	you	can	see	the	sincerity	of	the	man	--	that	"A	man	who	has
entered	the	path,	srotapanna,	who	has	entered	the	stream	that	leads	to	the	ocean,
is	 millions	 of	 times	 more	 respectable	 than	 anybody	 else,	 just	 because	 he	 has
entered	the	path	in	search	of	the	truth.	He	has	not	found,	but	just	the	urge,	just
the	 effort,	 the	 first	 step,	 and	 he	 has	 become	millions	 of	 times	more	 honorable
than	all	your	respectable	generals,	kings,	emperors	and	world	conquerors.
"The	 person	 who	 has	 reached	 the	 point	 from	 which	 he	 will	 not	 turn	 back,
anagamin,	is	millions	of	times	more	honorable	than	the	srotapanna,	than	the	one
who	has	entered	the	stream.	And	the	man	who	has	become	enlightened,	who	has
become	a	buddha,	is	millions	of	times	more	honorable	than	the	person	who	has
reached	the	point	of	no	return."
The	point	of	no	return	is	something	worth	understanding.
Many	people	start	the	search	and	then	drop	out.	It	is	arduous,	it	is	moving	into
the	unknown;	nobody	knows	whether	there	is	anything	like	enlightenment	or	just
a	 fiction	 created	 by	 a	 few	 people	 like	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 Perhaps	 they	 are	 not
lying,	 perhaps	 they	 themselves	 are	 deceived	 --	 who	 knows?	 There	 is	 no
guarantee.
So	many	start,	but	very	few	remain.	Most	of	them	return	to	the	world.	Sooner	or
later,	 finding	 that	 they	 are	 going	 into	 an	 unknown	 territory	 without	 a	 map,
without	any	guide,	they	start	feeling	crazy.	Because	the	whole	world	is	going	in
a	totally	different	direction,	and	they	are	left	alone.	Their	whole	strength	was	in
the	crowd.	Alone,	a	thousand	and	one	doubts	arise.	Alone,	one	starts	feeling	that
millions	of	people	cannot	be	wrong,	"And	I	am	alone,	thinking	that	I	am	right	--
I	must	be	getting	crazy."
Anagamin	 is	one	who	has	come	to	a	point	 from	where	he	cannot	 return.	He	 is
not	 enlightened	 but	 he	 has	 seen,	 from	 far	 away,	 the	 possibility.	 He	 has	 not
reached	the	peak;	he	is	still	in	the	dark	valley.	But	he	can	see	the	sunlit	peak;	it	is
a	reality,	it	is	not	a	fiction.	Now	there	is	no	force	in	the	world	which	can	make
him	go	back.
Buddha	 says,	 "But	 the	 one	 who	 has	 become	 enlightened	 is	 millions	 of	 times
more	honorable	than	the	person	who	has	reached	the	point	of	no	return."
And	here	is	the	sincerity	of	the	man	--	he	says:	"The	man	who	has	transcended
buddhahood,	 who	 has	 gone	 beyond	 enlightenment,	 is	 millions	 of	 times	 more
honorable	than	anyone	who	is	enlightened."	He	is	not	claiming	that	he	has	gone
beyond;	he	is	simply	saying	"I	can	see	from	my	place	that	faraway	star."
And	he	was	the	first	to	see	that	faraway	star:	beyond	enlightenment.
Sri	Aurobindo	is	not	sincere.	He	never	quotes	this	passage,	which	was	his	duty
to	quote.
He	 tries	 to	 convince	 his	 readers	 and	 followers	 that	 he	 is	working	 to	 open	 the
door	 beyond	 enlightenment.	 He	 is	 not	 even	 courageous	 enough	 to	 declare
himself...	 to	 say	 that	 he	 is	 enlightened.	 He	 never	 declared	 that.	 But	 only
indirectly...	 he	 is	 assuming	 that	 you	 will	 understand	 that	 he	 is	 enlightened
because	he	is	trying	to	open	the	door	beyond	enlightenment.	Naturally	he	must
be	enlightened,	but	he	is	not	saying	it.
To	declare	it	needs	courage,	not	scholarship.
He	gives	a	hint,	as	if	he	is	enlightened	and	he	is	working	for	others	so	that	they
can	also	go	beyond	enlightenment.	They	have	not	even	reached	enlightenment.	It
is	 hilarious,	 the	 very	 idea	 that	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 open	 the	 door...	 his	whole	 life's
aspiration.
All	his	aspirations	were	stupid.
This	 is	 stupid	 because	 others	 will	 need	 that	 door	 only	 if	 they	 have	 become
enlightened.
First	help	people	to	become	enlightened!	Rather	than	helping	people	to	become
enlightened,	 you	 are	 devoting	 your	whole	 energy	 to	 opening	 the	 door	 beyond
enlightenment.
And	 it	 is	 not	 only	 on	 this	 point	 that	 he	was	 talking	 nonsense,	 he	was	 talking
nonsense	on	many	points.
Another	of	his	aspirations	was	physical	immortality;	he	was	working	so	that	man
can	 become	 physically	 immortal.	 Naturally	 you	 will	 think	 he	 has	 become
physically	immortal
--	 these	 are	 natural	 assumptions.	 And	 his	 followers	 all	 over	 the	world	 started
spreading	 the	 great	 news,	 the	 good	 news,	 that	 Sri	 Aurobindo	 had	 become
physically	immortal:
"Now	he	 is	 trying	 to	 find	 the	 right	 techniques	 so	 that	 every	 human	 being	 can
become	physically	immortal."	And	then	one	day	he	died.
One	 of	 my	 friends	 was	 living	 in	 Sri	 Aurobindo's	 ashram.	 I	 phoned	 him
immediately	and	asked	him,	"What	happened?"
But	 such	 is	 blindness...	 he	 said,	 "Here	 in	 the	 ashram	 everybody	was	 shocked.
But	 the	 mother	 of	 the	 ashram	 told	 us	 that	 he	 has	 simply	 gone	 into	 a	 long
samadhi.	 He	 is	 not	 dead;	 it	 is	 part	 of	 his	 project	 to	 find	 immortality.	 He	 has
found	all,	but	 just	 for	 the	 last,	missing	 link	he	has	 to	go	 into	deep	samadhi,	 to
dive	deep	into	the	ocean."	And	he	told	me	that	everybody	believed	it!
For	 three	 days	 they	 did	 not	 cremate	 his	 body	 or	 bury	 his	 body	 because	 they
believed	 that	 he	 would	 be	 coming	 back.	 But	 in	 three	 days	 the	 body	 started
stinking.	 Then	 they	 became	 afraid	 that	 if	 the	 news	 spread	 that	 the	 body	 was
stinking...
The	man	was	dead,	he	was	not	going	to	come	back.	After	three	days	they	put	his
body	into	a	marble	grave.
Still	they	did	not	burn	his	body	because	he	might	come	back	at	any	moment.	The
really	faithful	ones	still	believe	that	one	day	he	will	come	back.	And	the	whole
belief	 shifted	 towards	 the	mother	 --	 she	was	 the	 co-partner	 in	 the	 business	 of
finding	immortality	for	humanity.	And	it	looked	as	if	she	had	found	it,	because
she	lived	for	almost	a	century.	It	seemed	probable;	perhaps	she	had	found	it.	And
she	was	saying	that	she	was	going	to	live	forever.
Now	this	is	the	beautiful	thing	about	spirituality:	I	can	say	to	you	that	I	am	going
to	live	forever	and	tomorrow	I	can	die	--	who	are	you	going	to	argue	with?
And	one	day	the	mother	died.	Again	the	same	thing:	they	waited	for	three	days,
and	when	the	body	started	stinking,	she	was	put	into	another	marble	grave	next
to	Sri	Aurobindo.
And	 the	 faithful	ones	 still	 sit	 beside	 the	graves	 every	day,	waiting	 for	 them	 to
return.
Slowly	slowly,	the	number	of	faithful	ones	is	lessening.	The	hope	is	turning	into
hopelessness,	 into	 despair.	 Perhaps	 they	 have	 not	 yet	 found	 the	 missing	 link
together.
It	 is	 enough	 that	 man	 has	 an	 immortal	 soul,	 an	 immortal	 consciousness,	 an
immortal	life	principle.
But	Sri	Aurobindo	was	obsessed	with	the	idea	that	he	had	to	bring	some	original
contribution	 to	 the	 spiritual	 progress	 of	 humanity.	 That	 the	 human	 soul	 is
immortal	is	as	ancient	an	experience	as	humanity	itself.	Even	the	VEDAS,	five
thousand	 years	 old,	 declare	 man	 as	 amritasya	 putrah	 --	 "you	 are	 sons	 of
immortality."	Something	new,	something	original...	and	this	was	a	great	original
idea,	that	your	body	can	be	immortal.
One	 cannot	 conceive	 how	 intelligent	 people	 can	 get	 caught	 up	 in	 such	 absurd
ideas.
Sri	 Aurobindo	 was	 a	 child,	 he	 became	 a	 young	 man,	 he	 became	 old.	 If	 the
human	body	is	immortal,	then	you	will	have	to	say	at	what	age	it	is	going	to	be
immortal.	As	a	child?	As	a	young	man?	As	an	old	man?	Or	as	a	dead	man?	The
last	seems	to	be	the	only	possibility.
"As	a	dead	man,	the	human	body	is	immortal"	--	and	certainly	it	is,	because	all
the	 elements	 of	 the	 human	body	disperse	 into	 nature.	Nothing	 is	 going	 to	 die,
everything	is	going	to	merge	--	the	earth	into	earth,	the	water	into	water,	the	air
into	air...	all	the	elements	will	go	to	their	sources.	In	that	sense	the	human	body
has	 always	 been	 immortal.	 Not	 only	 the	 human	 body	 --	 buffaloes,	 donkeys,
monkeys,	 everybody	 is	 immortal.	 It	 does	 not	 need	 a	 Sri	Aurobindo	 to	 declare
that	his	body	is	immortal.
Gautam	Buddha	is	the	rarest	human	being	in	that	he	recognizes	that	there	is	still
something	more,	he	has	not	reached	the	end	of	evolution.
In	Japan,	they	had	a	beautiful	collection	of	paintings	called	"Ten	Zen	Bulls."	It	is
a	series	of	paintings	depicting	the	whole	story	of	the	search.
In	the	first,	a	man	is	looking	here	and	there...	his	bull	is	lost.	You	see	forest	all
around,	ancient	trees,	and	the	puzzled	man	standing	there	looking,	and	he	cannot
see	the	bull.
In	 the	 second	painting,	 he	 looks	 a	 little	 happier	because	he	has	 seen	 the	bull's
footprints.
It	is	the	same	painting,	the	same	forest.	Just	one	thing	he	has	discovered	in	this
painting	and	that	is,	he	has	seen	the	bull's	footprints,	so	he	knows	where	he	has
gone.
In	the	third	painting	he	moves	and	sees	the	backside	of	the	bull	--	because	it	is
standing	by	the	side	of	a	tree,	and	the	man	is	behind	him	--	so	he	looks...	and	just
the	backside	is	shown	in	the	painting.
In	the	fourth	he	has	reached	the	bull;	he	sees	the	whole	bull.
In	the	fifth	he	has	caught	hold	of	the	bull	by	the	horns.
In	the	sixth	he	is	riding	on	the	bull.	It	is	difficult,	the	bull	is	trying	to	throw	him
off.
By	the	eighth	he	is	returning	home,	the	bull	is	conquered.
In	the	ninth	the	bull	is	back	in	the	stall	and	the	man	is	playing	on	a	flute.
In	 the	 tenth,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 the	 bull	 at	 all.	 The	 man	 is	 seen	 in	 the
marketplace	with	a	bottle	of	wine,	drunk.
Buddhists	 were	 very	 much	 embarrassed	 about	 the	 tenth	 painting.	 It	 does	 not
seem	to	be	Buddhist	at	all	--	and	there	is	no	connection,	because	nine	seems	to
be	perfect;	there	is	no	need	for	the	tenth.
So	in	the	Middle	Ages	they	dropped	the	tenth	painting,	and	they	started	talking
of	the	nine	paintings.	Only	recently	has	the	tenth	painting	been	discovered	again
in	 the	 ancient	 scriptures	 with	 its	 description	 --	 because	 each	 painting	 has	 a
description	of	what	 is	 happening.	The	bull	 is	 lost,	 your	 soul	 is	 lost	 --	 the	 bull
represents	your	soul,	your	energy,	your	spirit.	When	the	bull	is	found,	you	have
become	a	realized	soul.	You	are	singing	a	song	on	the	flute	--	that	is	the	stage	of
enlightenment.
What	about	the	tenth?	That	is	the	stage	when	you	go	beyond	enlightenment;	you
become	ordinary	again.	Now	there	is	no	split	between	this	world	and	that,	now
there	is	no	split	between	good	and	bad.	Now	all	opposites	have	joined	together
into	one	single	harmony;	that's	what	is	represented	by	the	bottle	of	wine,	a	bottle
of	wine	in	the	hands	of	a	buddha.
Sri	Aurobindo	never	talked	about	the	Ten	Bulls	because	that	again	would	have
destroyed	 his	 originality.	 The	 paintings	 of	 the	 Ten	 Bulls	 are	 at	 least	 fifteen
centuries	old.
The	Buddhists	in	the	Middle	Ages	were	cowardly;	they	could	not	understand	the
tenth.
But	as	 far	as	 I	am	concerned,	 I	can	see	a	natural	growth	 from	 the	ninth	 to	 the
tenth,	from	enlightenment	to	beyond	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	 makes	 you	 special.	 That	 means	 something	 of	 the	 ego	 in	 some
subtle	form	still	remains.	Others	are	ignorant,	you	are	a	knower;	others	are	going
towards	hell,	your	paradise	is	guaranteed.	These	are	the	last	remnants	of	a	dying
ego.	And	when	this	ego	also	dies	the	buddha	becomes	an	ordinary	human	being,
not	knowing	at	 all	 that	he	 is	holier	 than	 thou,	higher	 than	 thou,	 special	 in	 any
sense	--	so	ordinary	that	even	a	bottle	of	wine	is	acceptable.	The	whole	of	life	is
acceptable;	the	days	and	the	nights,	the	flowers	and	the	thorns,	the	saints	and	the
sinners	--	all	are	acceptable,	with	no	discrimination	at	all.
This	ordinariness	is	really	the	greatest	flowering	of	human	reality.
Sri	 Aurobindo	 will	 be	 remembered	 as	 a	 great	 philosopher	 --	 should	 be
remembered	as	a	great	philosopher	 --	a	man	of	 tremendous	 insight	 into	words,
scriptures;	 immensely	 articulate	 in	 bringing	meanings,	 interpretations	 to	 them;
novel,	original....	But	he	was	not	a	man	of	realization.	And	he	is	not	sincere,	he
is	not	an	authentic	man.
He	had	a	great	desire	to	prove	himself,	to	prove	that	he	is	greater	than	Gautam
Buddha.
That	was	his	ego.
To	go	beyond	enlightenment	is	not	to	become	greater	than	Gautam	Buddha.
To	go	beyond	enlightenment	is	to	become	an	ordinary	human	being.	To	forget	all
about	enlightenment	and	all	about	great	spiritual	aspirations	and	 to	 live	simply
joyously,	playfully...	 this	ordinariness	is	 the	most	extraordinary	phenomenon	in
the	world.
But	you	will	not	be	able	 to	 recognize	him.	Up	 to	Gautam	Buddha	you	will	be
able	to	recognize,	but	as	a	person	moves	beyond	Gautam	Buddha,	he	will	start
slipping	out	of	your	hands.	Those	who	have	 recognized	him	as	an	enlightened
being	may	remain	aware	of	who	he	is,	but	those	who	come	new	will	not	be	able
to	 recognize	 him	 at	 all,	 because	 he	 will	 be	 simply	 a	 very	 innocent,	 ordinary
human	being	--	just	like	a	child	collecting	seashells	on	the	beach,	running	after
butterflies,	 gathering	 flowers.	 No	 division	 of	 body	 and	 soul,	 no	 division	 of
matter	and	spirit,	no	division	of	this	life	and	that	--	all	that	is	forgotten;	one	has
relaxed	totally.
If	 Sri	 Aurobindo	 had	 known	 even	 the	 meaning	 of	 what	 it	 is	 to	 go	 beyond
realization,	beyond	enlightenment,	he	would	not	have	even	thought	about	it.	He
was	thinking	that	going	beyond	enlightenment	is	something	greater	than	Gautam
Buddha.	He	was	continuously	in	a	inner	jealousy,	and	of	course	the	jealousy	was
of	Gautam	Buddha.
And	he	wanted	to	come	up	with	some	original	ideas	so	that	he	could	prove	them,
but	he	has	not	proved	anything.
I	respect	Sri	Aurobindo	as	a	scholar	--	but	scholars	are	just	scholars,	a	dollar	a
dozen.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 NIGHT	 YOU	 TALKED	 ABOUT	 THE	 MASTER	 AND	 THE
MYSTIC.
MY	 QUESTION	 IS	 ABOUT	 THE	 MYSTIC	 AND	 THE	 SKEPTIC.	 IS	 IT
POSSIBLE
FOR	A	SKEPTIC	TO	BECOME	A	MYSTIC?	SO	MUCH	OF	THE	ESOTERIC
AND
MYSTICAL	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 A	 PROCESS	 OF	 AUTOSUGGESTION,
IMAGINATION
AND	WISHFUL	THINKING.	 I	SOMETIMES	FEEL	VERY	DISCOURAGED
AND
WANT	 TO	GIVE	 IT	 ALL	UP	AS	NONSENSE.	 YET	 THERE	 IS	 ALSO	AN
INNER
VOICE	LEADING	ME	ON.	THE	BIGGEST	RELIEF	FOR	ME	SEEMS	TO	BE
IN
YOUR	CONTINUAL	ENCOURAGEMENT	TO	LET	GO	AND	TRUST.
BELOVED	MASTER,	DO	YOU	SEE	ANY	POSSIBILITY	FOR	A	SKEPTIC
TO	GET
THROUGH	THIS	CONGLOMERATION	OF	MIND	FABRICATIONS?
The	skeptical	mind	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	things	in	the	world.
It	 has	 been	 condemned	 by	 the	 religions	 because	 they	 were	 not	 capable	 of
answering	skeptical	questions;	they	wanted	only	believers.
And	the	skeptical	mind	is	just	the	opposite	of	the	believer.
I	am	all	in	favor	of	the	skeptical	mind.	Do	not	believe	anything	unless	you	have
experienced	 it.	Do	 not	 believe	 anything	 --	 go	 on	 questioning,	 however	 long	 it
takes.
Truth	 is	not	cheap.	It	 is	not	available	 to	 the	believer;	 it	 is	available	only	 to	 the
skeptical.
Just	 remember	 one	 thing:	 don't	 be	 skeptical	 halfheartedly.	 Be	 a	 total	 skeptic.
When	I	say	be	a	total	skeptic,	I	mean	that	your	skeptical	ideas	should	also	be	put
to	 the	 same	 test	 as	 anybody	 else's	 beliefs.	 Skepticism,	 when	 it	 is	 total,	 burns
itself	 out	 because	 you	 have	 to	 question	 and	 doubt	 your	 skepticism	 too.	 You
cannot	leave	your	skepticism	without	doubt;	otherwise	that	is	the	standpoint	of
the	believer.
If	you	can	doubt	the	skeptic	in	you,	then	the	mystic	is	not	far	away.
What	 is	 a	 mystic?	 --	 one	 who	 knows	 no	 answer,	 one	 who	 has	 asked	 every
possible	question	and	found	that	no	question	is	answerable.	Finding	this,	he	has
dropped	questioning.	Not	 that	he	has	 found	 the	answer	 --	he	has	simply	 found
one	thing,	that	there	is	no	answer	anywhere.
Life	is	a	mystery,	not	a	question.	Not	a	puzzle	to	be	solved,	not	a	question	to	be
answered	 but	 a	 mystery	 to	 be	 lived,	 a	 mystery	 to	 be	 loved,	 a	 mystery	 to	 be
danced.
A	totally	skeptical	mind	is	bound	to	finally	become	a	mystic;	hence,	my	doors
are	 open	 for	 all.	 I	 accept	 the	 skeptic	 because	 I	 know	 how	 to	 turn	 him	 into	 a
mystic.	I	invite	the	theist	because	I	know	how	to	destroy	his	theism.	I	invite	the
atheist	because	I	know	how	to	take	away	his	atheism.	My	doors	prevent	nobody,
because	I	am	not	giving	you	any	belief.	I	am	giving	you	only	a	methodology,	a
meditation	to	discover	for	yourself	what	in	reality	is	the	case.
I	have	found	that	there	is	no	answer.	All	questions	are	futile,	and	all	answers	are
more	futile.	Questions	have	been	asked	by	foolish	people,	and	great	philosophies
have	 arisen	 because	 of	 their	 questions.	 These	 philosophies	 are	 created	 by	 the
cunning	and	the	shrewd.
But	if	you	want	to	have	a	rapport	with	reality,	you	have	to	be	neither	a	fool	nor
shrewd.
You	have	to	be	innocent.
So	whatever	you	bring	--	skepticism,	atheism,	theism,	communism,	fascism,	any
type	of	nonsense	you	can	bring	here	--	my	medicine	is	the	same.
It	does	not	matter	what	kind	of	nonsense	is	filled	in	your	head	when	you	come
here.	I	will	chop	your	head	without	any	distinction.	Who	is	sitting	on	your	head
does	not	matter	--
my	concern	is	chopping!
I	am	just	a	woodcutter.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	CANNOT	FIND	THE	QUESTION,	BUT	MY	HEART	NEEDS	AN	ANSWER.
WHAT
IS	IT?
It	is	a	very	profound	inquiry.
Anybody	who	is	sincere	will	have	the	same	inquiry.
All	 questions	 are	 foolish,	 silly	 at	 the	most.	 But	 still,	 there	 is	 some	 existential
need	for	an	answer.
The	question	is	not	known.
I	 have	 told	you	 about	 one	of	 the	most	 beautiful	woman	poets,	Gertrude	Stein.
She	was	dying,	and	a	small	circle	of	friends	had	gathered	around	her.	Just	before
her	death	she	opened	her	eyes	and	asked,	"What	is	the	answer?"
They	were	 all	 puzzled	 because	 this	 is	 not	 the	way...	 first	 you	 have	 to	 ask	 the
question.
She	is	first	asking	what	the	answer	is	--	answer	to	what?	But	you	cannot	be	hard
to	a	dying	woman	--	and	no	ordinary	woman,	a	really	great	poet.
And	even	in	this	statement	her	greatness	is	absolutely	present.
For	a	few	seconds	there	was	silence.	Then	one	person	gathered	courage	and	said,
"Stein,	you	have	not	asked	the	question.	This	is	strange	that	you	are	asking	what
the	answer	is."
So	 the	 dying	 woman	 opened	 her	 eyes	 and	 said,	 "Okay.	 So	 tell	 me	 what	 the
question	is."
And	she	died.
This	is	something	truly	mystic.
There	is	no	question,	but	there	is	an	existential	thirst	which	appears	to	the	mind
as	a	search	for	an	answer.	But	there	is	no	answer.
Existence	is,	and	it	is	tremendously	beautiful,	psychedelically	colorful.	It	is	song
and	dance	and	celebration	all	over.
But	please	don't	ask	any	question	or	any	answer.
It	 is	a	mystery.	Mystery	means	 there	 is	no	way	 to	solve	 it,	whatever	you	do	 is
going	 to	 fail.	 Rather,	 live	 it	 --	 drop	 solving.	 Perhaps	 through	 living	 you	 will
come	to	an	understanding.	But	that	will	not	be	the	answer,	it	will	be	more	than
the	 answer;	 it	 will	 be	 an	 alive	 experience.	 You	 will	 have	 become	 part	 of	 the
mystery	itself.
Even	 the	 greatest	 philosophers	 have	 been	 behaving	 like	 children.	 They	 go	 on
representing	life	as	if	it	is	a	puzzle,	a	crossword	puzzle.
It	is	not	a	puzzle.	It	is	simply	an	unanswerable	but	experienceable	phenomenon.
That's	what	I	mean	by	`mysticism'.
Philosophers	 miss	 it	 completely	 because	 they	 try	 to	 find	 questions,	 and	 then
answers.
Questions	are	man-made.
A	 rosebush	 never	 asks	 a	 question,	 a	 cloud	 never	 bothers	 about	 a	 question,	 a
mountain	never	raises	a	question.	It	does	not	mean	that	they	have	the	answer;	it
simply	means	they	are	beyond	the	question-answer	game.
And	when	 I	 say	 `going	 beyond	 enlightenment'	 I	 am	 saying	 the	 same	 thing	 in
other	words
--	 going	 beyond	 the	 question-answer	 game	 and	 just	 accepting	 reality	 as	 it	 is,
whatsoever	it	is.
Otherwise,	 there	are	 troubles	upon	 troubles.	First	you	create	 the	question,	 then
you	create	 the	answer.	Then	 the	answer	creates	 ten	more	questions;	you	create
ten	more	answers	and	 then	each	answer	creates	 ten	more	questions.	 It	 is	 like	a
tree;	it	goes	on	growing	and	becoming	bigger	and	bigger	and	there	is	no	end.
Just	 live	 your	 life	 simply,	 without	 putting	 a	 question	 mark	 behind	 every
experience.
People	may	think	you	are	crazy,	but	if	you	are	crazy	then	the	whole	of	existence
is	crazy
--	what	to	do?	It	is	out	of	our	hands.
Why	 does	 the	 sun	 rise	 in	 the	morning	 every	 day?	Not	 even	 a	 single	 day	 is	 a
holiday.	Not	even	for	a	single	day	does	it	rise	from	the	West	--	just	for	a	change:
"I	am	getting	tired	of	rising	from	the	East..."
No,	things	are	simply	going	so	smoothly...	just	man	is	in	trouble.
The	moment	you	also	start	living	like	a	rosebush,	rising	like	a	sun,	floating	like	a
white	cloud,	you	have	come	to	a	profound	understanding	of	 the	mysterious,	of
the	miraculous	truth	of	existence.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	WOMAN	FRIEND	OF	MINE	OFTEN	USES	THE	WORDS	"MALE	EGO"
ABOUT
ME,	WHICH	I	FEEL	IS	NOT	TRUE	ABOUT	ME.
FROM	THE	VERY	BEGINNING	I	HAVE	BEEN	OPEN	AND	VULNERABLE
TO
FEMININE	 ENERGY,	 WHICH	 IS	 TEACHING	 ME	 TO	 BECOME	 A
DISCIPLE
EVERY	DAY.	MOREOVER,	 I	HAVE	FELT	THAT	WHEN	SHE	USED	THIS
WORD
THERE	WAS	SOME	KIND	OF	HATRED	TOWARDS	MEN.
OSHO,	CAN	YOU	EXPLAIN	WHAT	THE	"MALE	EGO"	IS,	AND	WHAT	IT
MEANS
WHEN	A	WOMAN	USES	THIS	EXPRESSION	ABOUT	A	MAN?
The	ego	is	simply	the	ego,	it	is	neither	male	nor	female.
But	 man	 has	 been	 very	 inhuman	 towards	 women	 for	 centuries,	 continuously.
And	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 the	man	has	 been	 so	 cruel	 and	 inhuman	 towards
women	because	he	feels	a	deep	inferiority	complex	in	comparison	to	them.
The	greatest	problem	has	been	that	the	woman	is	capable	of	becoming	a	mother;
she	is	capable	of	giving	birth	to	life,	and	man	is	not.	That	was	the	beginning	of
the	feeling	of	inferiority	--	that	nature	depends	on	woman,	not	on	man.
Moreover,	he	has	found	that	she	is	in	many	ways	stronger	than	him.
For	 example,	 for	 every	 one	 hundred	 and	 fifteen	 boys	 that	 are	 born,	 only	 one
hundred	 girls	 are	 born	 --	 because	 fifteen	 boys	 will	 pop	 off	 by	 the	 time	 they
become	sexually	mature,	but	the	girls	will	remain;	they	have	a	certain	stamina.
Women	fall	sick	less	than	men.
Women	commit	suicide	less	than	men	--	although	they	talk	about	suicide	more,
they	simply	talk.	At	the	most	they	take	sleeping	pills,	but	always	in	such	a	small
quantity	that	they	never	die.	Men	commit	suicide	in	almost	double	the	numbers.
Women	live	five	years	longer	than	men.
Women	are	more	patient,	more	 tolerant	 than	men.	Men	are	very	 impatient	and
very	 intolerant.	 Women	 are	 less	 violent	 than	 men.	 Women	 don't	 commit
murders;	 it	 is	 the	 man	 who	 commits	 murders,	 who	 wages	 crusades,	 who	 is
always	getting	ready	for	war,	who	invents	all	kinds	of	deadly	weapons	--	atomic
bombs,	nuclear	weapons.
The	woman	is	completely	out	of	this	whole	game	of	death.
Hence	 it	 was	 no	 coincidence	 that	 man	 started	 feeling	 somehow	 inferior.	 And
nobody	wants	to	be	inferior;	 the	only	way	was	to	force	the	woman	in	artificial
ways	to	become	inferior.	For	example,	not	to	allow	her	education,	not	to	allow
her	economic	 freedom,	not	 to	allow	her	 to	move	out	of	 the	house,	but	confine
her	to	an	imprisonment.
It	seems	almost	unbelievable	what	man	has	done	to	woman	just	to	get	rid	of	his
inferiority.	He	has	made	the	woman	artificially	inferior.
In	China,	 for	 five	 thousand	 years	 it	was	 thought	 that	women	 had	 no	 soul.	Of
course	all	the	writers	were	men;	they	proposed	the	idea	that	a	woman	is	only	a
machine,	a	reproductive	machine.	And	the	idea	gained	so	much	influence	that	it
even	entered	the	justice	system	of	China.	If	a	man	murdered	his	wife,	he	was	not
a	 criminal	 --	 because	 he	 had	 simply	 broken	 a	 chair,	 a	 table...	 at	 the	 most	 a
television.	But	it	was	his	property,	and	he	had	the	right	to	destroy	it.
So	 in	 China,	 thousands	 of	 women	 were	 killed	 by	 their	 husbands.	 But	 the
husbands	 could	 not	 be	 punished	by	 the	 government	 or	 the	 courts,	 because	 the
basic	principle	that	the	woman	had	a	soul	was	denied.
In	India	for	ten	thousand	years	the	woman	was	told	that	even	to	dream	of	some
other	man	is	a	sin.	The	same	was	not	said	to	the	man.	The	woman	had	to	live	a
very	virtuous	life	while	for	the	man	there	was	freedom.	Man	created	prostitutes
for	his	freedom.
And	this	possessiveness	in	India	took	on	almost	insane	proportions.	When	a	man
died,	his	wife	had	to	die	with	him.	She	had	to	jump	alive	onto	the	funeral	pyre	--
and	for	ten	thousand	years	that	continued.	If	some	woman	was	afraid	--	anybody
would	be	afraid	to	jump	alive	into	a	funeral	pyre	--	then	she	was	condemned	as
immoral.	The	husband's	wish	was	that	she	should	die	with	him	because	he	could
not	 trust	 her	 --	 when	 he	 is	 gone,	 she	may	 start	 having	 some	 love	 affair	 with
somebody	else,	and	this	cannot	be	tolerated.
But	the	strange	thing	is	that	the	same	rule	was	not	applicable	to	men,	that	when
the	wife	 dies	 the	 husband	 should	 jump	 into	 the	 funeral	 pyre.	 No,	man	was	 a
higher	quality	of	being.
The	way	they	used	to	do	it	brings	tears...	because	to	burn	a	woman	alive	is	not	an
easy	 task.	 First	 they	 would	 make	 the	 funeral	 pyre,	 put	 the	 dead	 body	 of	 the
husband	on	 it,	 force	 the	woman	 to	 lie	down	next	 to	 the	dead	body.	Then	 they
would	put	more	wood	on	top	of	both	of	them	and	pour	refined	butter	all	over	the
funeral	pyre,	so	that	the	fire	would	get	going	fast,	strong	--	and	not	only	fast	and
strong,	 but	 it	 would	 create	 so	 much	 smoke	 that	 nobody	 could	 see	 what	 was
happening	 there,	 because	 sometimes	 the	woman	would	 try	 to	 jump	 out	 of	 the
funeral	pyre.
There	were	priests	standing	around	the	funeral	pyre	with	burning	torches	in	their
hands.
If	the	woman	tried	to	jump	out,	they	would	force	her,	with	the	burning	torches,
back	into	the	funeral	pyre.	Hence	so	much	smoke	was	needed,	so	nobody	could
see	what	the	priest	was	doing.
The	woman	was	bound	to	cry	and	scream.	Her	screams	should	not	be	heard,	so
there	 was	 an	 arrangement:	 behind	 the	 priests,	 there	 was	 another	 row	 of
thousands	 of	 people	 playing	 music,	 dancing,	 singing,	 shouting	 as	 loudly	 as
possible	 just	 to	drown	out	 the	 screams	of	 the	woman	coming	 from	 the	 funeral
pyre.	And	they	were	celebrating,	because	one	woman	had	proved	her	 love,	her
trust	by	committing	suicide.
She	was	forced;	she	did	not	come	to	do	it	willingly,	she	was	brought	there.
And	the	same	situation	has	happened	all	over	the	world.	In	different	ways,	they
have	been	cutting	woman's	wings,	her	abilities,	her	talents,	her	genius.
It	is	not	only	a	question	for	you.	When	your	woman	is	telling	you	that	you	have
a	male	 ego,	 she	 is	 simply	 representing	 all	women,	 and	 you	 are	 nothing	 but	 a
representative	of	all	men.	Your	forefathers	have	done	so	much	harm	that	there	is
no	way	to	come	to	a	balance.
So	when	your	woman	says	that	this	is	male	ego,	try	to	understand	--	perhaps	she
is	right.
Most	probably	she	is	right	--	because	the	male	has	accepted	himself	as	superior
for	so	long	that	he	does	not	feel	that	it	is	his	ego.	It	is	the	woman	who	feels	it.
Don't	deny	her	feeling.	Be	grateful	to	her,	and	ask	her	where	she	feels	the	ego	so
that	you	can	drop	it.	Take	her	help.
You	are	simply	denying	it;	you	don't	feel	that	you	have	any	male	ego.	But	it	is
simply	a	traditional	heritage.
Every	 small	 boy	 has	 a	 male	 ego	 --	 just	 a	 small	 boy,	 if	 he	 starts	 crying	 you
immediately	 say,	 "Why	 are	 you	 crying	 like	 a	 girl?	 A	 girl	 is	 allowed	 to	 cry
because	she	is	subhuman.
You	are	going	to	be	a	big	male	chauvinist;	you	are	not	supposed	to	cry	or	weep."
And	small	boys	start	stopping	their	tears.	It	is	very	rare	to	find	men	who	are	as
ready	to	cry	and	allow	tears	to	flow	as	women	are.
Remember,	you	both	have	the	same	size	tear	glands	in	your	eyes,	so	nature	does
not	make	any	difference.	Listen	to	the	woman.	You	have	suppressed	the	woman
and	oppressed	the	woman	so	much,	it	is	time	that	she	should	be	listened	to	and
things	should	be	corrected.	At	least	in	your	personal	life	do	as	much	as	you	can
to	allow	the	woman	as	much	freedom	as	possible	--	the	same	freedom	that	you
allow	yourself.	Help	her	to	stand	up	so	that	she	can	blossom	again.
We	will	have	a	more	beautiful	world	if	all	women	--	and	women	are	half	of	the
world	--
are	allowed	to	grow	their	talents,	their	genius.	It	is	not	a	question	at	all...	nobody
is	 higher,	 nobody	 is	 lower.	 Women	 are	 women,	 men	 are	 men;	 they	 have
differences,	 but	 differences	 don't	 make	 anybody	 higher	 or	 lower.	 Their
differences	create	their	attraction.
Just	 think	of	a	world	where	 there	are	only	men.	 It	will	be	so	ugly,	everywhere
Morarji	Desai...	Morarji	Desai...	all	drinking	their	urine,	nothing	else	to	do.
Life	is	rich	because	there	are	differences,	different	attitudes,	different	opinions.
Nobody	is	superior,	nobody	is	inferior.	People	are	simply	different.
Accept	 this,	 and	 help	 your	 woman	 to	 be	 free	 from	 ten	 thousand	 years	 of
repression.	Be	a	friend	to	her.	Much	harm	has	been	done;	she	has	been	wounded
so	much	that	if	you	can	do	some	healing	with	your	love,	you	will	be	contributing
to	the	whole	world,	to	the	whole	world	consciousness.
Don't	feel	bad	if	your	woman	says	"this	is	male	ego."	It	is	there	in	a	subtle	form,
unrecognizeable	because	 it	has	been	 there	 for	 so	 long;	you	have	 forgotten	 that
this	is	ego.
Take	her	help	so	that	you	can	recognize	it	and	destroy	it.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	Meditation	--	the	courage	to	be	silent	and	alone	20	October	1986
pm	in
Archive
code:
8610205
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH18
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
113
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 ALWAYS	 AFRAID	 OF	 BEING	 ALONE,	 BECAUSE	 WHEN	 I	 AM
ALONE	I	START	TO	WONDER	WHO	I	AM.	IT	FEELS	THAT	IF	I	INQUIRE
DEEPER,	I	WILL
FIND	 OUT	 THAT	 I	 AM	 NOT	 THE	 PERSON	WHO	 I	 HAVE	 BELIEVED	 I
WAS	FOR
THE	 PAST	 TWENTY-SIX	 YEARS,	 BUT	 A	 BEING,	 PRESENT	 AT	 THE
MOMENT
OF	BIRTH	AND	MAYBE	ALSO	THE	MOMENT	BEFORE.
FOR	SOME	REASON,	THIS	SCARES	ME	COMPLETELY.	IT	FEELS	LIKE	A
KIND
OF	INSANITY,	AND	MAKES	ME	LOSE	MYSELF	IN	OUTSIDE	THINGS	IN
ORDER	TO	FEEL	SAFER.
OSHO,	WHO	AM	I,	AND	WHY	THE	FEAR?
Surabhi,	it	is	not	only	your	fear,	it	is	everybody's	fear.	Because	nobody	is	what
he	was	supposed	to	be	by	existence.
The	 society,	 the	 culture,	 the	 religion,	 the	 education	 have	 all	 been	 conspiring
against	 innocent	children.	They	have	all	 the	powers	--	 the	child	is	helpless	and
dependent.	So	whatsoever	they	want	to	make	out	of	him,	they	manage	to	do	it.
They	don't	allow	any	child	to	grow	to	his	natural	destiny.	Their	every	effort	is	to
make	human	beings	into	utilities.
Who	knows,	if	a	child	is	left	on	his	own	to	grow,	whether	he	will	be	of	any	use
to	the	vested	interests	or	not?	The	society	is	not	prepared	to	take	the	risk.	It	grabs
the	child	and	starts	molding	him	into	something	that	is	needed	by	the	society.	In
a	certain	sense,	it	kills	the	soul	of	the	child	and	gives	him	a	false	identity,	so	that
he	never	misses	his	soul,	his	being.
The	 false	 identity	 is	 a	 substitute.	But	 that	 substitute	 is	useful	only	 in	 the	 same
crowd	which	 has	 given	 it	 to	 you.	 The	moment	 you	 are	 alone,	 the	 false	 starts
falling	apart	and	the	repressed	real	starts	expressing	itself.
Hence	the	fear	of	being	lonely.
Nobody	wants	 to	be	 lonely.	Everybody	wants	 to	belong	to	a	crowd	--	not	only
one	crowd,	but	many	crowds.	A	person	belongs	to	a	religious	crowd,	a	political
party,	a	rotary	club...
and	there	are	many	other	small	groups	to	belong	to.
One	wants	 to	be	 supported	 twenty-four	hours	 a	day	because	 the	 false,	without
support,	 cannot	 stand.	 The	 moment	 one	 is	 alone,	 one	 starts	 feeling	 a	 strange
craziness.
Surabhi,	that's	what	you	have	been	asking	about	--	because	for	twenty-six	years
you	 believed	 yourself	 to	 be	 somebody,	 and	 then	 suddenly	 in	 a	 moment	 of
loneliness	you	start	feeling	you	are	not	that.	It	creates	fear:	then	who	are	you?
And	 twenty-six	 years	 of	 suppression...	 it	 will	 take	 some	 time	 for	 the	 real	 to
express	itself.
The	gap	between	the	two	has	been	called	by	the	mystics	"the	dark	night	of	the
soul"	--	a	very	appropriate	expression.	You	are	no	more	the	false,	and	you	are	not
yet	the	real.	You	are	in	a	limbo,	you	don't	know	who	you	are.
Particularly	 in	 the	West	 --	 and	Surabhi	comes	 from	 the	West	 --	 the	problem	 is
even	more	complicated.	Because	 they	have	not	developed	any	methodology	 to
discover	 the	 real	 as	 soon	as	possible,	 so	 that	 the	dark	night	of	 the	 soul	can	be
shortened.
The	West	knows	nothing	as	far	as	meditation	is	concerned.
And	meditation	 is	 only	 a	 name	 for	 being	 alone,	 silent,	waiting	 for	 the	 real	 to
assert	itself.
It	is	not	an	act,	it	is	a	silent	relaxation	--	because	whatever	you	do	will	come	out
of	your	false	personality.	All	your	doing	for	twenty-six	years	has	come	out	of	it;
it	is	an	old	habit.
Habits	die	hard.
There	was	one	great	mystic	in	India,	Eknath.	He	was	going	for	a	holy	pilgrimage
with	all	his	disciples	--	it	was	almost	three	to	six	months'	journey.
One	man	came	 to	him,	 fell	at	his	 feet	and	said,	"I	know	I	am	not	worthy.	You
know	it	too,	everybody	knows	me.	But	I	know	your	compassion	is	greater	than
my	unworthiness.
Please	accept	me	also	as	one	of	 the	members	of	 the	group	that	 is	going	on	the
holy	pilgrimage."
Eknath	said,	"You	are	a	thief	--	and	not	an	ordinary	thief,	but	a	master	thief.	You
have	never	been	caught,	 and	everybody	knows	 that	you	are	a	 thief.	 I	 certainly
feel	 like	 taking	you	with	me,	 but	 I	 also	have	 to	 think	 about	 those	 fifty	people
who	are	going	with	me.
You	will	 have	 to	 give	me	 a	 promise	 --	 and	 I	 am	not	 asking	 for	more,	 just	 for
these	three	to	six	months'	time	while	we	are	on	the	pilgrimage:	you	will	not	steal.
After	 that,	 it	 is	 up	 to	 you.	 Once	 we	 are	 back	 home,	 you	 are	 free	 from	 the
promise."
The	man	said,	"I	am	absolutely	ready	to	promise,	and	I	am	tremendously	grateful
for	your	compassion."
The	other	fifty	people	were	suspicious.	To	trust	in	a	thief....	But	they	could	not
say	anything	to	Eknath.	He	was	the	master.
The	pilgrimage	started,	and	from	the	very	first	night	there	was	trouble.	The	next
morning	there	was	chaos	--	somebody's	coat	was	missing,	somebody's	shirt	was
missing,	somebody's	money	was	gone.
And	everybody	was	shouting,	"Where	is	my	money?"	and	they	were	all	 telling
Eknath,
"We	were	suspicious	from	the	very	beginning	that	you	were	taking	this	man	with
you.	A	lifelong	habit...."
But	 then	 they	 started	 looking,	 and	 they	 found	 that	 things	 were	 not	 stolen.
Somebody's	 money	 was	 missing,	 but	 it	 was	 found	 in	 somebody	 else's	 bag.
Somebody	else's	coat	was	missing,	but	it	was	found	in	somebody	else's	luggage.
Everything	was	found,	but	it	was	an	unnecessary	trouble	--	every	morning!
And	nobody	could	conceive	--	what	can	be	the	meaning	of	it?	And	now	certainly
it	is	not	the	thief,	because	nothing	is	stolen.
The	 third	night,	Eknath	remained	awake	 to	see	what	goes	on.	 In	 the	middle	of
the	night,	the	thief	--	just	out	of	habit	--	woke	up,	started	taking	things	from	one
place	to	another	place.	Eknath	stopped	him	and	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	Have
you	forgotten	your	promise?"
He	said,	"No,	I	have	not	forgotten	my	promise.	I	am	not	stealing	anything,	but	I
have	not	promised	that	I	will	not	change	things	from	one	place	to	another	place.
After	six	months	I	have	to	be	a	 thief	again;	 this	 is	 just	practice.	And	you	must
understand	--	it	is	a	lifelong	habit,	you	cannot	drop	it	just	like	that.	Just	give	me
time.	You	should	understand	my	problem	also.	For	three	days	I	have	not	stolen	a
single	thing	--	it	is	just	like	fasting!	This	is	just	a	substitute,	I	am	keeping	myself
busy.	This	is	my	business	time,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	so	it	is	very	hard	for
me	just	to	lie	down	on	the	bed	awake.	And	so	many	idiots	are	sleeping...	and	I
am	not	doing	any	harm	to	anybody.	In	the	morning	they	will	find	their	things."
Eknath	said,	"You	are	a	strange	man.	You	see	that	every	morning	there	is	such
chaos,	and	one	or	two	hours	unnecessarily	are	wasted	in	finding	things	--	where
you	have	put	them,	whose	thing	has	gone	into	whose	luggage.	Everybody	has	to
open	everything	and	ask	everybody...	`To	whom	does	this	belong?'"
The	thief	said,	"This	much	concession	you	have	to	give	to	me."
Surabhi,	 twenty-six	 years	 of	 a	 false	 personality	 imposed	 by	 people	 who	 you
loved,	who	you	respected...	and	they	were	not	intentionally	doing	anything	bad
to	you.	Their	intentions	were	good,	just	their	awareness	was	nil.	They	were	not
conscious	people	--
your	 parents,	 your	 teachers,	 your	 priests,	 your	 politicians	 --	 they	 were	 not
conscious	people,	they	were	unconscious.
And	even	a	good	intention	in	the	hands	of	an	unconscious	person	turns	out	to	be
poisonous.
So	 whenever	 you	 are	 alone,	 a	 deep	 fear	 --	 because	 suddenly	 the	 false	 starts
disappearing.
And	the	real	will	take	a	little	time.	You	have	lost	it	twenty-six	years	back.	You
will	have	to	give	some	consideration	to	the	fact	that	twenty-six	years'	gap	has	to
be	bridged.
In	fear	--	that	"I	am	losing	myself,	my	senses,	my	sanity,	my	mind	--	everything"
because	the	self	that	has	been	given	to	you	by	others	consists	of	all	these	things	-
-	it	looks	like	you	will	go	insane.	You	immediately	start	doing	something	just	to
keep	yourself	engaged.	 If	 there	are	no	people,	at	 least	 there	 is	some	action.	So
the	false	remains	engaged	and	does	not	start	disappearing.
Hence	 people	 find	 it	 the	most	 difficult	 on	 holidays.	 For	 five	 days	 they	work,
hoping	that	on	the	weekend	they	are	going	to	relax.	But	the	weekend	is	the	worst
time	in	the	whole	world	--	more	accidents	happen	on	the	weekend,	more	people
commit	 suicide,	more	murders,	more	 stealing,	more	 rape.	 Strange...	 and	 these
people	were	engaged	for	five	days	and	there	was	no	problem.	But	the	weekend
suddenly	gives	 them	a	choice,	either	 to	be	engaged	 in	something	or	 to	 relax	--
but	relaxing	is	fearsome;	the	false	personality	disappears.
Keep	 engaged,	 do	 anything	 stupid.	 People	 are	 running	 towards	 the	 beaches,
bumper	to	bumper,	miles-long	traffic.	And	if	you	ask	them	where	they	are	going,
they	are	getting	away	from	the	crowd	--	and	the	whole	crowd	is	going	with	them.
They	are	going	to	find	a	solitary,	silent	space	--	all	of	them.
In	fact,	if	they	had	remained	home	it	would	have	been	more	solitary	and	silent	--
because	 all	 the	 idiots	 have	 gone	 in	 search	 of	 a	 solitary	 place.	 And	 they	 are
rushing	like	mad,	because	two	days	will	be	finished	soon,	they	have	to	reach	--
don't	ask	where!
And	on	the	beaches,	you	see...	they	are	so	crowded,	not	even	marketplaces	are	so
crowded.	And	strangely	enough,	people	are	feeling	very	much	at	ease,	taking	a
sunbath.
Ten	thousand	people	on	a	small	beach	taking	a	sunbath,	relaxing.
The	 same	 person	 on	 the	 same	 beach	 alone	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 relax.	 But	 he
knows	thousands	of	other	people	are	relaxing	all	around	him.	The	same	people
were	in	the	offices,	the	same	people	were	in	the	streets,	the	same	people	were	in
the	marketplace,	now	the	same	people	are	on	the	beach.
The	crowd	is	an	essential	for	the	false	self	to	exist.
The	moment	it	is	lonely,	you	start	freaking	out.
This	is	where	one	should	understand	a	little	bit	of	meditation.
Don't	be	worried,	because	that	which	can	disappear	is	worth	disappearing.	It	 is
meaningless	to	cling	to	it	--	it	is	not	yours,	it	is	not	you.
You	 are	 the	 one	 when	 the	 false	 has	 gone	 and	 the	 fresh,	 the	 innocent,	 the
unpolluted	being	will	arise	in	its	place.
Nobody	else	can	answer	your	question	"Who	am	I?"	--	you	will	know	it.
All	meditative	techniques	are	a	help	to	destroy	the	false.	They	don't	give	you	the
real	--
the	real	cannot	be	given.
That	which	can	be	given	cannot	be	real.
The	real	you	have	got	already;	just	the	false	has	to	be	taken	away.
In	a	different	way	it	can	be	said:	the	master	takes	away	things	from	you	which
you	don't	really	have,	and	he	gives	you	that	which	you	really	have.
Meditation	is	just	a	courage	to	be	silent	and	alone.
Slowly	slowly,	you	start	feeling	a	new	quality	to	yourself,	a	new	aliveness,	a	new
beauty,	 a	 new	 intelligence	 --	 which	 is	 not	 borrowed	 from	 anybody,	 which	 is
growing	within	you.
It	has	roots	in	your	existence.
And	if	you	are	not	a	coward,	it	will	come	to	fruition,	to	flowering.
Only	the	brave,	the	courageous,	the	people	who	have	guts,	can	be	religious.	Not
the	 churchgoers	 --	 these	 are	 the	 cowards.	 Not	 the	 Hindus,	 not	 the
Mohammedans,	 not	 the	 Christians	 --	 they	 are	 against	 searching.	 The	 same
crowd,	they	are	trying	to	make	their	false	identity	more	consolidated.
You	 were	 born.	 You	 have	 come	 into	 the	 world	 with	 life,	 with	 consciousness,
with	 tremendous	 sensitivity.	 Just	 look	 at	 a	 small	 child	 --	 look	 at	 his	 eyes,	 the
freshness.	All	that	has	been	covered	by	a	false	personality.
There	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.
You	 can	 lose	 only	 that	which	 has	 to	 be	 lost.	And	 it	 is	 good	 to	 lose	 it	 soon	 --
because	the	longer	it	stays,	the	stronger	it	becomes.
And	one	does	not	know	anything	about	tomorrow.
Don't	die	before	realizing	your	authentic	being.
Only	 those	 few	 people	 are	 fortunate	who	 have	 lived	with	 authentic	 being	 and
who	have	died	with	authentic	being	--	because	they	know	that	life	is	eternal,	and
death	is	a	fiction.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	 SITTING	 SILENTLY,	 DOING	 NOTHING,	 WATCHING	 THE	 GRASS
GROW	--
AND	MAYBE	FALLING	ASLEEP	--	REALLY	ENOUGH?
I	ONCE	HEARD	YOU	 SAY	ABOUT	 FREUD	THAT	HE	 PROBABLY	WAS
NOT
ABLE	TO	CREATE	HIMSELF.	OR	I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	WE	CREATE
OUR
OWN	LIVES,	OUR	OWN	HELLS	AND	MISERIES,	AND	THAT	WE	ARE
RESPONSIBLE.
IF	SITTING	SILENTLY	REALLY	IS	ENOUGH,	WHERE	DOES	THE	WORD
ÈFFORT'	 OR	 `DISCIPLINE'	 COME	 IN?	 THEN,	 IF	 WE	 ARE	 DOING
SOMETHING,	WHAT	ARE	WÈDOING'?	CAN	WE	DO	ANYTHING	AT	ALL,
OR	AM	I
DREAMING	THAT	I	AM	DOING	SOMETHING?
SOMEWHERE	I	AM	SO	TIRED	OF	IT.	BUT	THEN	ALSO	AM	I	GOING	TO
END	UP
IN	A	STATE	OF	LETHARGY	AND	INDIFFERENCE,	IN	WHICH	I	CANNOT
SEE
ANY	LOVE	OR	BEAUTY?
The	people	who	have	been	exploiting	humanity	have	created	great	philosophies,
theologies,	disciplines.	Without	the	support	of	all	this	philosophical,	theological,
religious	framework,	it	would	be	impossible	to	create	the	false	personality.
The	word	`discipline'	comes	from	these	people,	and	the	word	èffort'	also	comes
from	these	people.
They	 have	 created	 such	 a	world	 emphasizing	work,	 effort,	 endeavor,	 struggle,
achievement,	that	they	have	turned	almost	everybody	into	a	workaholic	--	which
is	worse	 than	an	alcoholic,	because	 the	alcoholic	at	 least	 feels	 that	he	 is	doing
something	wrong.
The	 workaholic	 feels	 he	 is	 doing	 the	 right	 thing,	 and	 those	 who	 are	 not
workaholics	are	lazy	people,	worthless;	they	don't	have	any	right	even	to	exist,
because	they	are	a	burden.
They	 have	 destroyed	 beautiful	 words,	 given	 them	 new	 connotations,	 new
meanings.
For	example,	`discipline'.	Discipline	does	not	mean	what	you	have	heard	that	it
means.
The	word	`discipline'	comes	from	the	same	root	as	disciple.	Its	root	meaning	is:
capacity	to	learn,	learning	--	to	be	more	sensitive,	to	be	more	aware,	to	be	more
sincere,	to	be	more	authentic,	to	be	more	creative.
Life	 is	 a	 beautiful	 journey	 if	 it	 is	 a	 process	 of	 constant	 learning,	 exploration.
Then	it	 is	excitement	every	moment,	because	every	moment	you	are	opening	a
new	door,	every	moment	you	are	coming	in	contact	with	a	new	mystery.
The	word	`disciple'	means	one	who	learns,	and	`discipline'	means	the	process	of
learning.
But	the	word	has	been	prostituted.
`Discipline'	means	obedience.	They	have	turned	the	whole	world	into	a	camp	of
boy	scouts.	High	above	there	is	somebody	who	knows	--	you	need	not	learn,	you
have	simply	to	obey.	They	have	turned	the	meaning	of	`discipline'	into	its	very
opposite.
Learning	automatically	consists	of	doubting,	of	questioning,	of	being	skeptical,
of	 being	 curious	 --	 not	 of	 being	 a	 believer	 certainly,	 because	 a	 believer	 never
learns.
But	 they	have	used	 the	word	 for	 thousands	of	years	 in	 this	way.	And	 it	 is	 not
only	 one	 word	 that	 they	 have	 prostituted,	 they	 have	 prostituted	 many	 words.
Beautiful	words	 have	become	 so	 ugly	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 vested	 interests	 that
you	cannot	even	imagine	the	original	meaning	of	the	word...	thousands	of	years
of	misuse.
They	 want	 everybody	 to	 be	 disciplined	 the	 way	 people	 are	 disciplined	 in	 the
army.	You	are	ordered	--	you	have	to	do	it	without	asking	why.
This	is	not	the	way	of	learning.
And	even	 from	 the	very	beginning	 they	have	 imposed	 stories	on	 the	minds	of
people,	 that	 the	 first	 sin	 committed	 was	 disobedience.	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 were
expelled	from	the	Garden	of	Eden	because	they	disobeyed.
I	have	tried	in	thousands	of	ways,	but	I	don't	see	that	they	have	committed	any
sin	or	any	crime.	They	were	simply	exploring.	You	are	in	a	garden	and	you	start
exploring	the	fruits	and	flowers	and	what	is	edible	and	what	is	not	edible.
And	 God	 is	 responsible,	 because	 he	 prohibited	 them	 from	 two	 trees	 --	 he
indicated	the	trees:	"You	should	not	approach	these	two	trees.	One	is	the	tree	of
wisdom,	and	the	other	is	the	tree	of	eternal	life."
Just	think,	if	you	were	Adam	and	Eve	--	was	not	God	himself	tempting	you	to	go
to	these	two	trees?	And	those	two	trees	were	of	wisdom	and	of	eternal	life.	Why
should	God	be	against	them?
If	 he	was	 really	 a	 father,	 one	who	 loves	 you,	 he	might	 have	 pointed	 to	 them,
saying	that
"This	is	a	poisonous	tree,	don't	eat	from	it"	or,	"This	is	the	tree	of	death;	if	you
eat	anything,	you	will	die."	But	these	two	trees	are	perfectly	right	--	eat	as	much
as	you	can,	because	to	be	wise	and	to	have	eternal	life	is	absolutely	right.
Every	father	would	wish	his	children	to	have	wisdom	and	eternal	life.	This	father
seems	to	be	absolutely	loveless.	Not	only	loveless,	but	as	the	devil	said	to	Eve,
"He	 has	 prevented	 you	 from	 these	 two	 trees.	 Do	 you	 know	 the	 reason?	 The
reason	is	that	if	you	eat	from	these	two	trees	you	will	be	equal	to	him,	and	he	is
jealous.	 He	 does	 not	 want	 you	 to	 become	 divine.	 He	 does	 not	 want	 you	 to
become	gods,	full	of	wisdom	and	eternal	life."
I	cannot	see	that	the	devil's	argument	has	any	flaw	in	it.	It	is	absolutely	right.	In
fact,	he	is	the	first	benefactor	of	humanity.
Without	him,	perhaps	there	would	have	been	no	humanity	--	no	Gautam	Buddha,
no	Kabir,	no	Christ,	no	Zarathustra,	no	Lao	Tzu...	 just	buffaloes,	donkeys,	and
yankees,	all	eating	grass,	chewing	grass	contentedly.	And	God	would	have	been
very	happy,	that	his	children	are	very	obedient.
But	this	obedience	is	poison,	pure	poison.
The	devil	must	be	counted	as	 the	first	 revolutionary	of	 the	world,	and	 the	first
man	to	think	in	terms	of	evolution,	of	wisdom,	of	eternal	life.
And	God	 said	 --	 so	 the	 priests	 have	 been	 saying,	 the	 Jewish	 rabbis,	 Christian
priests,	 Mohammedan	 maulavis,	 ayatollas....	 They	 all	 have	 been	 saying	 for
centuries	that	it	was	the	original	sin.
Again,	another	prostitution	of	a	beautiful	word.
The	word	`sin'	in	its	roots	means	forgetfulness.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	sin	as
we	have	come	to	understand	it.
To	forget	yourself	is	the	only	sin.
And	to	remember	yourself	is	the	only	virtue.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	obedience,	nothing	to	do	with	discipline.
But	the	people	who	want	to	exploit...	their	very	effort	is	that	of	a	parasite,	taking
every	 drop	 of	 blood	 out	 of	 you.	 They	 say,	 "Work.	Work	 hard,	 be	 disciplined,
obey	the	orders	--
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 question	 because	 the	 orders	 are	 coming	 from	 a	 higher
intelligence	than	you	have."	They	are	in	such	a	mind	that	they	don't	even	want
you	to	sleep.
In	the	Soviet	Union,	they	are	now	developing	a	whole	educational	system.	Every
child	 will	 be	 educated	 during	 the	 day	 in	 school	 --	 but	 why	 waste	 his	 whole
night?	 People,	 after	 a	 while	 --	 twenty-five	 years	 --	 have	 to	 come	 out	 of	 the
university	and	work	in	the	world.
But	they	work	only	five	hours,	six	hours,	and	their	whole	night	is	sheer	wastage
--	it	can	be	used.	Now	they	are	developing	methods	and	means	to	use	it.
For	example,	it	can	be	used	for	teaching.	The	child's	ears	are	plugged	with	a	very
subtle	mechanism	controlled	by	 the	central	 system	 in	 the	 town,	 and	what	 they
call	 "subliminal	 education"...	 it	 does	 not	 disturb	 your	 sleep.	 Very	 slowly,	 so
quietly	 that	 it	cannot	even	be	called	whispering,	because	even	whispering	may
disturb	your	sleep....	Its	range	is	lower	than	a	whisper.	And	the	strangest	thing	is
--	 which	 was	 known	 long	 before	 about	 women,	 but	 it	 was	 not	 known	 that	 it
could	be	used	in	such	a	way....
About	women	 it	 has	 been	 known	 for	 centuries,	 that	 if	 you	want	 them	 to	 hear
what	 you	 are	 saying,	whisper.	 If	 you	 just	 start	whispering	with	 someone,	 any
woman	around	is	going	to	hear	exactly	what	you	are	saying.
If	you	are	talking	loudly,	nobody	cares.	Whispering	means	that	you	are	trying	to
hide,	something	is	secretive.	The	woman	becomes	alert	with	her	more	sensitive
being,	 and	 she	 catches	 everything	 that	 you	 are	 saying.	 So	 if	 you	want	 to	 say
anything	 to	 any	woman,	 just	whisper	 it	 to	 somebody	else	 and	 she	will	 get	 the
message	absolutely	correctly	--	and	no	argument!
Subliminal	education	is	a	lower	range	whispering.	They	have	found	that	it	does
not	 disturb	 sleep,	 it	 does	 not	 even	 disturb	 dreams.	Dreams	 are	 here...	 sleep	 is
lower	than	dreams,	and	subliminal	whispering	is	lower	than	sleep	--	so	it	simply
goes	underground.
For	eight	hours	 in	 the	night	you	can	 teach	continuously	whatever	you	want	 to
teach,	 and	 the	 most	 wonderful	 thing	 about	 it	 is	 that	 the	 child	 will	 remember
everything	--	there	is	no	need	for	him	to	memorize	it,	there	is	no	need	for	him	to
do	 homework	 for	 it.	 It	 has	 simply	 entered	 into	 his	 memory	 system	 from	 an
underground	source.	Now	they	have	captured	your	twenty-four	hours.
Even	freedom	to	dream	may	be	taken	away	one	day.
It	 is	possible	 that	 the	government	could	decide	what	 to	dream	and	what	not	 to
dream.
Dreams	 could	 be	 projected	 just	 like	 projecting	 pictures	 on	 a	 screen,	 and	 you
would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 tell	 the	 difference,	 whether	 you	 are	 dreaming	 or	 the
government	agency	is	projecting	some	idea.
Subliminal	teaching	is	really	one	of	the	most	dangerous	things	discovered	by	the
psychologists.	It	has	been	tried	in	many	countries	and	found	to	work	immensely
well.
For	example,	you	go	into	a	movie....
You	see	advertisements	--	they	work,	but	they	need	constant	repetition.	A	certain
brand	of	cigarette...	you	have	to	read	it	in	the	newspaper,	you	have	to	see	it	on
television,	you	have	to	hear	it	on	the	radio,	you	have	to	see	it	on	the	street	on	the
billboards,	 you	 have	 to	 see	 it	 in	 the	 movie	 house,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 repeated
continually.	A	certain	brand...	you	don't	 take	any	note	of	 it.	You	simply	read	 it
and	you	forget	about	it,	but	it	is	going	to	make	a	mark	inside	you.	And	when	you
go	to	purchase	cigarettes,	suddenly	you	will	find	yourself	asking	for	that	brand.
But	it	is	a	long	process.	Up	to	now,	advertising	has	been	a	lengthy	process.
With	subliminal	teaching,	it	becomes	very	shortcut	and	very	dangerous.
They	have	tried	in	a	few	movies,	experimentally,	between	two	frames.	You	are
watching	the	movie	and	you	will	not	be	aware	that	something	has	happened;	you
will	go	on	seeing	the	movie.	The	story	is	going	on	and	in	just	a	flash	--	so	short
that	you	will	not	be	able	to	detect	with	your	eyes	that	something	has	passed	on
the	screen	--	you	feel	very	thirsty	and	you	need	a	Coca	Cola.	You	have	not	read
"Coca	Cola",	but	even	though	you	have	not	read	it,	your	memory	has	simply	got
the	idea.
And	 they	have	 found	 that	on	 that	night,	 in	 that	movie	house	 the	sales	of	Coca
Cola	 rose	 by	 seventy	 percent.	 The	 people	who	 ask	 for	Coca	Cola	 don't	 know
why	 they	 are	 asking	 for	 Coca	 Cola	 --	 they	 feel	 thirsty.	 They	 are	 not	 feeling
thirsty,	they	don't	need	Coca	Cola,	but	a	subliminal	impact....
This	 is	 dangerous.	 It	 is	 taking	 away	 your	 freedom.	 You	 are	 not	 even	 free	 to
choose,	you	are	simply	being	ordered	--	and	in	such	a	way	that	you	are	not	even
aware	that	you	have	been	ordered	to	purchase	Coca	Cola.
Political	parties	are	going	to	use	it	--	vote	for	Ronald	Reagan.	There	is	no	need
to	destroy	all	 the	walls	and	write	everywhere	"Vote	for	Ronald	Reagan"	--	 just
subliminal...	on	television,	in	the	movies.
And	in	the	Soviet	Union,	the	educationalists	are	thinking	that	everybody's	night
can	be	used	for	further	training,	refresher	courses.
For	example,	a	doctor	comes	out	of	the	university....	But	medical	science	goes	on
growing,	and	the	doctor	is	always	lagging	far	behind.	He	uses	medicines	which
are	no	longer	valid;	science	has	gone	farther	ahead,	has	found	better	medicines.
But	 the	doctor	has	no	opportunity	 to	 read	all	 that	 literature	 --	his	night	 can	be
used.	During	 the	day	he	 can	 look	 at	 the	patients;	 at	 night	 he	 can	be	given	 the
latest	information.
But	that	means	you	have	made	man	a	robot,	twenty-four	hours	a	day	geared	to
work,	and	geared	to	do	whatever	kind	of	work	you	want.	It	is	not	his	free	will.
These	 people	 have	 brought	 these	 beautiful	 words	 like	 discipline,	 work,
obedience,	 to	such	a	distasteful	state	 that	 it	 is	better	for	a	few	days	to	abandon
them	completely.
Work	is	beautiful	if	it	comes	out	of	your	love,	if	it	comes	out	of	your	creativity.
Then	work	has	some	spiritual	quality.
Discipline	 is	 good	 if	 it	 comes	 out	 of	 your	 learning,	 your	 disciplehood,	 your
dedication,	 your	 devotion	 --	 then	 it	 is	 something	 that	 is	 growing	 in	 you	 like	 a
beautiful	flame,	directing	your	life	in	its	light.
If	obedience	comes	out	of	trust...	not	that	somebody	is	more	powerful	and	if	you
don't	listen	you	will	be	punished.
Even	God	 could	 not	 forgive	 just	 one	 act	 of	 disobedience.	 The	 poor	 fellows...
Adam	and	Eve	had	eaten	one	apple!
For	 five	 years	 continuously	 I	 lived	 on	 apples.	 My	 mother	 used	 to	 say,	 "You
should	think	about	it	--	just	one	apple	and	Adam	and	Eve	were	turned	out	of	the
Garden	of	Eden.	And	you	are	simply	living	on	apples!"	For	five	years	I	didn't	eat
anything	else.
I	said,	"That's	what	I	want	to	see...	where?	--	now	at	the	most	he	can	drive	me
into	the	Garden	of	Eden.	There	are	only	two	places,	the	Garden	of	Eden	and	the
world.	There	is	no	other	world	he	can	drive	me	to."
Naturally	God	 remained	 silent.	 "What	 to	 do	 now?	He	 is	 committing	 sin	 from
morning	to	night,	sin	upon	sin"	--	because	that	was	my	whole	food.
He	could	not	forgive	a	small	thing.
No,	it	is	not	the	question	that	they	had	committed	a	great	sin.	The	question	is	that
God's	ego	is	hurt;	it	is	a	revenge.	With	great	vengeance...	It	is	unbelievable	that
even	now	you	are	suffering	because	of	the	sin	committed	by	Adam	and	Eve.	We
don't	know	these	people	 --	when	 they	existed,	whether	 they	existed	or	not;	we
have	no	part	in	their	act	--
still,	we	are	suffering.
Every	human	child	 is	going	 to	 suffer	 such	vengeance?	 --	 it	doesn't	 seem	 to	be
divine.	God	seems	 to	be	more	evil	 than	 the	devil.	The	devil	 seems	 to	be	more
friendly,	more	understanding.
The	people	who	have	brought	these	words	--	work,	discipline,	obedience	--	are
the	priests	of	 this	God,	 they	 represent	him.	They	have	destroyed	 the	beauty	of
simple	words.
Obedience	can	also	be	of	tremendous	beauty.
But	 it	 should	 come	 out	 of	 your	 commitment	 --	 not	 out	 of	 an	 order	 from
somebody.
It	should	come	out	of	your	heart.
You	love	and	you	respect	and	you	are	dedicated	to	someone	so	deeply	that	your
heart	always	says	yes;	it	has	forgotten	how	to	say	no.	Even	if	you	want	to	say	no,
you	have	forgotten	the	word.
Then,	obedience	is	religious,	spiritual.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	NINE	YEARS	OF	BEING	WITH	YOU,	I	FEEL	THAT	I	HAVE	DONE	ALL
I	CAN
AS	FAR	AS	INTELLIGENCE	GOES	TO	BE	WITH	YOU.	AND	YET	NOW	I
FEEL	IN
MORE	CHAOS	AND	CONFUSION,	AND	MORE	IGNORANT	THAN	EVER.
I	EVEN
FEEL	ON	THE	POINT	OF	GIVING	UP.
IS	THERE	SOMETHING	I	SHOULD	BE	DOING?	IS	THERE	SOME	WAY	TO
BE
MORE	INTELLIGENT	AND	MORE	WAKEFUL?	--	BECAUSE	I	AM	SURE
THAT	I	HAVE	ALREADY	MISSED	A	THOUSAND	TIMES.
It	will	be	great	if	you	can	give	up.	That	is	the	trouble.
I	have	been	 telling	you	 to	give	up.	From	the	very	beginning	 --	don't	 start!	But
you	don't	listen.
Nine	years	 of	 great	work,	 hard	work,	 and	 still	 you	 are	 asking	 "Should	 I	 bring
more	 intelligence	 and	more	work?"	And	you	 think	you	have	been	missing	 the
train	because	you	are	not	working	hard	enough!	Just	the	opposite	is	the	case.
You	are	missing	the	train	because	you	are	working	too	hard.
You	are	so	involved	in	your	work	that	you	don't	see	that	the	train	has	come	and
passed.
By	 the	 time	 you	 see	 other	 passengers	 getting	 out	 on	 the	 road...	 THEN	 you
become	aware	that	the	train	has	come	and	passed.
You	 simply	 give	 up	 and	 rest	 on	 the	 platform.	 So	whenever	 the	 train	 comes....
What	is	the	need	to	miss	the	train?
But	 you	 cannot	 rest,	 you	 cannot	 relax,	 you	 cannot	 let	 go.	You	have	made	 it	 a
project.	You	are	aggressive,	goal	oriented,	always	trying	to	achieve	something.
And	 here	 you	 are	with	 a	man	who	 is	 saying	 to	 you	 that	 all	 that	 you	want	 to
achieve	 is	already	within	you	 --	 just	 relax,	because	only	 in	 relaxation	will	you
realize	what	is	hidden	in	you.
But	 you	 are	 running	 so	 fast.	 You	 don't	 stop,	 you	 are	 putting	 your	 whole
intelligence...
nine	years!
You	 could	have	made	 it	 the	 very	 first	 day	you	had	 come	 to	me.	And	you	 can
make	it	right	now	--	because	the	train	is	always	standing	on	the	platform.
It	never	leaves	because	there	is	nowhere	to	go.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEFORE	 BECOMING	 YOUR	 SANNYASIN,	 I	 WAS	 DESPERATELY
SEEKING
SPIRITUAL	TRUTH.	DESPITE	WHAT	I	FELT	TO	BE	MANY	GENUINE
SPIRITUAL	 EXPERIENCES,	 I	 REMAINED	 DISCONTENTED	 AND
DESPERATE.
AFTER	SANNYAS	 I	BEGAN	TO	LIVE	WITH	YOUR	PEOPLE,	WORK	 IN
YOUR
COMMUNES	AND	MOST	OF	 ALL,	 FEEL	 YOUR	 BEAUTY	AND	 PEACE
GROW	IN
MY	HEART.	IN	THIS	TIME,	MY	BURNING	DESIRES	FOR	SPIRITUAL
EXPERIENCE	AND	THE	FRUITS	OF	THOSE	EXPERIENCES	HAVE	BEEN
SLOWLY	DISAPPEARING.
NOWADAYS	 I	 SIMPLY	 ENJOY	 EVERYDAY	 LIFE,	 AND	 EVERYTHING
THAT
GOES	WITH	IT	 --	A	TASTY	MEAL,	A	WALK	IN	THE	COUNTRYSIDE,	A
GOOD
LAUGH	WITH	A	LOVED	ONE,	AND	SO	ON.
BELOVED	MASTER,	AM	I	GETTING	LAZY	ON	THE	WAY	TO
ENLIGHTENMENT?
CAN	 YOU	 PLEASE	 TALK	 ON	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 FALLING
ASLEEP
AND	LETTING	GO?
You	are	doing	perfectly	well.	Just	forget	all	about	enlightenment.
Enjoy	simple	things	with	total	intensity.
Just	a	cup	of	tea	can	be	a	deep	meditation.
If	you	can	enjoy	it,	the	aroma	of	it,	slowly	sipping	it,	the	taste	of	it...	who	cares
about	God?
You	don't	 know	 that	God	 is	 continuously	 feeling	 jealous	 of	 you	when	he	 sees
you	 drinking	 a	 cup	 of	 tea	 and	 the	 poor	 fellow	 cannot	 have	 it.	 Instant	 coffee...
these	things	are	not	available	in	the	Garden	of	Eden.
And	since	Adam	and	Eve	 left,	 there	 is	no	human	company	at	 all	 --	 just	 living
with	animals,	who	don't	know	how	to	make	tea.
God	is	very	jealous	of	you	and	very	repentant	that	he	drove	Adam	and	Eve	out
of	 the	 Garden	 of	 Eden,	 but	 now	 nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 it.	 The	 sons	 and
daughters	of	Adam	and	Eve	are	living	far	more	beautifully,	far	more	richly.
Enlightenment	happens	when	you	have	forgotten	all	about	it.
Don't	 look	 even	 out	 of	 the	 corner	 of	 your	 eye,	 just	 in	 case	 enlightenment	 is
coming	and	you	will	miss	it.	Forget	all	about	it.	You	just	enjoy	your	simple	life.
And	everything	is	so	beautiful	--	why	create	unnecessary	anxiety	and	anguish	for
yourself?	Strange	problems	of	spirituality....	Those	things	are	not	something	you
can	do	anything	about.
If	 you	 can	make	your	 ordinary	 life	 a	 thing	of	 beauty	 and	 art,	 all	 that	 you	had
always	desired	will	start	happening	of	its	own	accord.
There	is	a	beautiful	story....
There	 is	 a	 temple	 in	 this	 state,	Maharashtra.	 It	 is	 a	 temple	 of	 Krishna,	 and	 a
strange	 story	 is	 connected	with	 the	 temple	 because	 the	 statue	 of	Krishna	 --	 in
Maharashtra	 he	 is	 called	 Bitthal	 --	 is	 standing	 on	 a	 brick.	 Strange,	 because
nowhere	in	any	temple	is	any	god	standing	on	a	brick.
The	story	is	that	one	beautiful	man,	enjoying	life,	every	bit	in	its	totality,	was	so
contented	and	so	fulfilled	that	Krishna	decided	to	appear	before	him.	Ordinarily
there	 are	 people	who	 are	 singing	 and	dancing	 their	whole	 life,	 "Hare	Krishna,
Hare	Rama"	and	neither	Rama	appears	nor	Krishna	appears	--	nobody	appears.
And	 this	man	was	 not	 bothering	 about	Krishna	 or	 Rama	 or	 anybody.	He	was
simply	living	his	life,	but	living	it	the	way	it	should	be	lived	--	with	love,	with
heart,	with	beauty,	with	music,	with	poetry.
His	life	was	in	itself	a	blessing,	and	Krishna	has	to	decide	that	"This	man	needs	a
visit	from	me."
You	see	the	story	--	the	man	is	not	at	all	thinking	of	Krishna	--	but	Krishna,	on
his	own	part,	 feels	 that	 this	man	deserves	a	visit.	He	goes	 in	 the	middle	of	 the
night,	not	to	create	any	trouble	in	the	whole	town.	He	finds	the	door	open	and	he
goes	in.
The	 man's	 mother	 is	 very	 sick,	 and	 he	 is	 massaging	 her	 feet.	 Krishna	 comes
behind	him	and	says,	"I	am	Krishna	and	I	have	come	to	give	you	an	audience,	a
DARSHANA."
The	man	said,	"This	is	not	the	right	time;	I	am	massaging	my	mother's	feet."
Meanwhile,	just	by	his	side	there	was	a	brick;	he	pushed	the	brick	back	--	he	did
not	even	look	back	to	see	who	this	Krishna	is	--	he	pushed	the	brick	and	told	him
to	stand	on	it,	and	that	when	he	is	finished	with	his	work	he	will	see	him.	But	he
was	so	much	absorbed	in	massaging	the	mother's	feet	--	who	was	almost	dying	--
that	the	whole	night	passed,	and	Krishna	remained	standing	there.
He	said,	"This	 is	a	strange	stupidity.	People	are	singing	 their	whole	 life,	 `Hare
Krishna,	Hare	Rama'	and	I	never	go	there.	And	I	have	come	here	and	this	fool
has	 not	 even	 looked	back,	 has	 not	 even	 said	 to	me,	 `Sit	 down'	 but	 tells	me	 to
stand	on	the	brick!"
And	 then	 it	was	 getting	 light,	 the	 sun	was	 rising,	 and	Krishna	 became	 afraid,
because	people	would	be	coming	in.	The	road	was	just	by	the	side	of	the	house,
and	the	door	was	open	--	and	if	they	saw	him	standing	there,	soon	there	would
be	 trouble,	 great	 crowds	would	 come.	 So	 he	 disappeared,	 leaving	 just	 a	 stone
statue	of	himself	on	the	brick.
When	 the	 mother	 went	 to	 sleep,	 then	 the	 man	 turned	 and	 said,	 "Who	 is	 the
fellow	who	was	disturbing	me	in	the	night?"
And	he	found	just	a	statue	of	Krishna.
The	whole	village	gathered	 --	 this	was	a	miracle,	what	had	happened?	He	 told
the	whole	story.	They	said,	"You	are	a	strange	fellow.	Krishna	himself	had	come,
and	you	are	such	a	 fool!	You	could	have	at	 least	 told	him	 to	sit	down,	offered
him	something	to	eat,	something	to	drink.	He	was	a	guest."
The	man	said,	"At	that	time	there	was	nothing	by	my	side	except	this	brick.	And
whenever	 I	 am	 doing	 something,	 I	 do	 it	 with	 totality.	 I	 don't	 want	 any
interference.	If	he	is	so	much	interested	in	being	seen,	he	can	come	again,	there
is	no	hurry."
That	 statue	 remains	 in	 the	 temple	 of	Bitthal,	 still	 standing	 on	 a	 brick.	But	 the
man	was	really	a	great	man	--	not	bothering	about	rewards	or	anything,	absorbed
so	 fully	 in	 every	action	 that	 the	 action	 itself	becomes	 the	 reward.	And	even	 if
God	comes,	the	reward	that	is	coming	out	of	the	totality	of	action	is	bigger	than
God.
Nobody	has	 interpreted	 the	story	 the	way	 I	am	 interpreting	 it,	but	you	can	see
that	any	other	interpretation	is	nonsense.
So	 just	 forget	 about	 spirituality,	 enlightenment,	 God	 --	 they	 will	 take	 care	 of
themselves.
That	is	their	business.	They	are	sitting	there	without	customers.
You	need	not	worry;	you	do	the	best	you	can	do	with	life	--	that	is	your	test,	that
is	your	worship,	that	is	your	religion.	And	everything	else	will	follow	on	its	own
accord.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
IF	 THE	 MASTER	 IS	 THE	 ONE	 WHO	 CHOOSES	 THE	 DISCIPLE	 AND
DROPS	HIM	-
-	THOUGH	IT	MAY	APPEAR	TO	THE	DISCIPLE	THAT	HE	HAS	CHOSEN
THE
MASTER,	 AND	 IN	 THE	 COURSE	 OF	 TIME,	 HAS	 DROPPED	 HIM	 --
BELOVED
OSHO,	WHY	DID	YOU	HAVE	TO	TELL	US?
NOW	I	HAVE	THE	FEELING	AND	FEAR	THAT	YOU	MIGHT	DROP	ME	AT
ANY
TIME.	 BELOVED,	 PLEASE	 DON'T	 DO	 THAT	 TO	ME.	 IT	 HURTS	 VERY
MUCH	TO
THINK	OF	IT	BECAUSE	IF	A	MAN	LIKE	YOU	CANNOT	HELP	ME,	THEN
WHO
WILL?	 I	 HAVE	 ALWAYS	 BEEN	 LET	 DOWN,	 AND	 IT	 HURTS.	 AND	 TO
THINK	OF
YOU	LETTING	ME	DOWN	IS	TOO	MUCH.
BELOVED	OSHO,	PLEASE	PROMISE	THAT	YOU	WON'T	LET	ME	DOWN
EVEN
IF	 I	AM	OF	NO	USE	TO	YOU.	 I	KNOW	YOU	WON'T,	BUT	STILL	THAT
FEAR	IS
THERE.	PLEASE	BE	WITH	ME	ALWAYS,	WILL	YOU?
It	is	a	tricky	question.
I	can	promise	I	will	not	drop	you.	The	only	problem	is	that	if	you	want	to	drop
me,	then	you	will	find	it	very	difficult	to	drop	--	I	won't	let	you	drop!
So	now	this	will	be	your	 fear:	 I	will	 fulfill	my	promise	 in	any	case	--	whether
you	want	it	or	not!
So	if	this	dispels	your	fear,	perfectly	good.
It	is	not	a	problem	for	me,	I	can	promise.
I	 just	 don't	want	 to	 interfere	with	 anybody's	 freedom.	 I	want	 to	 keep	 the	door
open;	if	you	want	to	go	out,	I	don't	want	to	close	it.
But	if	that	is	what	you	want,	the	door	is	closed	--	and	locked!
Now	don't	come	next	time	saying	that	you	are	now	fearing	that	if	you	want	to	get
out,	now	there	is	no	way.
A	promise	is	a	promise!
Question	6
BELOVED	OSHO,
MY	 BEAUTIFUL	 MASTER!	 FIRST	 I	 WANTED	 TO	 RUN	 AWAY;	 NOW	 I
NEVER
WANT	TO	LEAVE	YOU.	WHAT	HAPPENED?
I	changed	my	mind.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	The	future	belongs	to	the	creative	man
21	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610215
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH19
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
125
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	A	TWO-YEAR-OLD	CHILD	IN	SANNYAS	AT	THE	AGE	OF	SIXTY!
I	CONSIDER	MYSELF	BLESSED	TO	HAVE	COME	 INTO	THE	FOLD	OF
YOUR
GRACE.
WAS	THIS	DESTINED	TO	BE	SO?	THEN	WHY	WAS	IT	SO	LATE	IN	LIFE?
CAN
THE	CHILD	IN	ME	BECOME	MATURE	IN	WHAT	REMAINS	OF	MY	LIFE?
HOW?
KINDLY	HELP.
Anand	Yeshwant,	the	question	you	have	asked	has	many	implications.	It	is	many
questions	in	one.
First,	 you	 say	 that	 at	 the	 age	 of	 sixty	 you	 are	 a	 two-year-old	 child	 as	 far	 as
sannyas	 is	 concerned.	This	 reminds	me	of	 an	ancient	 tradition	 in	 the	East.	We
used	 to	count	 life	 from	the	day	a	man	was	 initiated	 into	sannyas,	not	 from	the
day	he	was	born.	Because	birth	does	not	necessarily	turn	into	life;	more	often	it
only	turns	into	vegetation.
There	 are	 cabbages	 and	 there	 are	 cauliflowers,	 but	 the	difference	 is	 not	much.
The	experts	say	that	cauliflowers	are	cabbages	with	university	degrees.
But	most	people	simply	vegetate;	they	do	not	live,	they	do	not	come	into	contact
with	the	living	waters	of	life.	They	breathe,	they	grow	old,	but	they	never	grow
up.	Between	their	birth	and	their	death	is	a	horizontal	line.	There	are	no	peaks	of
delight,	 no	 sunlit	 peaks	 of	 ecstasy.	 There	 are	 no	 depths	 of	 love,	 of	 peace,	 of
silence.	There	is	just	a	horizontal,	flat	routine	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave.
Nothing	happens.	They	come	and	they	go.
It	is	said	that	most	of	the	people	realize	that	they	were	alive	only	when	they	die	-
-
because	life	was	so	flat,	so	colorless.	It	was	not	a	dance,	it	was	not	beauty,	it	was
not	a	blessing;	there	was	no	gratitude	in	the	heart,	that	"Existence	has	chosen	me,
and	not	 anybody	else	 in	my	place,"	 that	 "Without	me	existence	will	be	a	 little
less.	There	is	nobody	else	who	can	replace	me;	I	am	occupying	a	unique	position
and	I	never	asked	for	it,	I	never	deserved	it.	It	is	a	sheer	gift	out	of	the	abundance
of	existence."
It	 happened	 that	Gautam	Buddha	was	 having	 a	meeting	with	 one	 of	 the	most
intelligent	 emperors	 of	 those	 days.	 Just	 in	 the	middle	 of	 their	 dialogue	 an	 old
sannyasin	--	must	have	been	seventy-five	years	old	--	came	to	touch	the	feet	of
Buddha.	He	asked	the	emperor	to	forgive	him	because	he	was	interfering	in	their
conversation,	but	it	was	out	of	necessity.
No	Buddhist	monk	can	travel	 in	 the	night;	 they	can	move	between	sunrise	and
sunset,	but	at	night	they	have	to	remain	in	one	place.
"I	 have	 been	 ordered	 to	 go	 to	 the	 nearest	 village,	 and	 I	 cannot	 go	 without
touching	the	feet	of	my	master.	The	sun	is	going	down	every	moment,	and	your
dialogue	seems	to	go	on	and	on	--	so	please	just	forgive	me."
Gautam	Buddha	asked	the	sannyasin,	"How	old	are	you?"
The	emperor	was	very	much	puzzled:	what	was	the	need?	--	just	bless	him	and
let	him	go.
And	the	old	sannyasin	said,	"Forgive	me,	I	have	come	very	late.	My	age	is	only
four	years."
The	emperor	was	even	more	puzzled,	and	he	could	not	contain	himself.	He	said,
"This	 is	 too	much!	This	man	might	be	seventy-five,	might	be	eighty,	might	be
seventy,	but	not	four	years	of	age.	Absolutely	not!"
Gautam	Buddha	said,	 "Perhaps	you	do	not	know	about	 the	way	we	count	age.
This	man	became	a	sannyasin	four	years	ago.	Hence,	the	real	brahmin,	the	one
who	has	known	the	divine,	the	brahma	is	called	dwij,	`twice	born'.	The	first	birth
is	only	an	opportunity	for	the	second	birth.	If	the	second	birth	does	not	happen
your	first	birth	is	meaningless.
And	 to	 the	 sannyasin	 Buddha	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried.	 We	 have	 an	 ancient
proverb."	He	quoted	it:	"The	man	who	gets	lost	in	the	morning,	if	he	comes	back
home	by	the	evening	he	should	not	be	called	`lost'.	Four	years	are	plenty.	Even
one	minute	of	awareness	is	equal	to	eternity."
So	the	first	thing,	Anand	Yeshwant:	Don't	be	worried	about	the	fifty-eight	years
that	have	passed	in	sleep.	Whether	they	existed	or	not	does	not	matter;	they	were
like	 signatures	 made	 on	 water	 --	 you	 go	 on	 making	 them,	 and	 they	 go	 on
disappearing.
These	two	years	you	have	been	a	sannyasin	are	immensely	significant	--	and	the
significance	 does	 not	 require	 time,	 it	 requires	 depth.	 You	 can	 have	 the	whole
eternity	superficially.	And	you	can	have	one	single	moment	of	abysmal	depth	or
of	the	height	of	Everest	and	you	are	fulfilled.
So	the	first	thing	I	want	to	say	to	you:	don't	be	worried	about	the	fifty-eight	years
that	were	 lost	wandering	 in	 the	 desert.	 Be	 grateful	 for	 the	 two	 years	 that	 you
have	entered	into	the	garden	of	God.	Now	it	is	up	to	you	to	make	each	moment	a
deep	contentment,	a	profound	silence,	a	joyful	dance...	an	eternity	of	rejoicing,	a
fragrance	that	is	not	of	this	world...	that	is	not	of	time	and	space	but	belongs	to
the	beyond.
And	as	I	see	it,	you	are	growing	on	the	right	path	with	a	sincere	heart...	I	have
been	 listening	 to	 your	 songs;	 they	 have	 a	 sweet	 pain,	 a	 heartfelt	 thankfulness.
Sweet	 because	 nothing	 can	 be	 sweeter	 than	 to	 come	 in	 contact	 with	 the
immortal,	timeless,	deathless	source	of	life.
To	 be	 in	 touch	 with	 a	 master	 is,	 in	 an	 indirect	 way,	 to	 be	 in	 touch	 with	 the
godliness	of	existence.
There	 is	sweetness	 in	your	songs,	and	 there	 is	a	certain	pain	 too.	Pain	because
whatever	you	want	to	express,	words	are	impotent	to	express	it.	What	you	want
to	 sing...	 your	 heart	 is	 overflowing	with	 it,	 but	 the	 language	 is	 not	 capable	 of
translating	it.	Your	musical	instruments,	howsoever	refined,	are	not	able	to	bring
the	music	of	silence	into	the	world	of	sound.	They	are	two	diametrically	opposite
dimensions.
But	your	pain	does	not	destroy	 the	beauty	of	your	 sweetness;	 it	makes	 it	 even
more	beautiful,	gives	it	depth.	It	shows	your	experience	and	at	the	same	time	the
inability	to	express	it.
That	which	can	be	expressed	is	mundane.
That	which	cannot	be	expressed	is	sacred.
And	every	artist	--	musician	or	poet,	painter	or	dancer	--	all	have	been	trying	in
different	ways	for	millions	of	years	to	give	expression	to	the	inexpressible.	Even
if	 they	 can	 give	 an	 indirect	 hint,	 just	 a	 finger	 pointing	 to	 the	 moon,	 that	 is
success	enough.
And	you	are	successful.
Sing	 without	 any	 hesitation,	 without	 being	 worried	 that	 you	 will	 be	 thought
crazy.	Unless	a	singer	is	thought	by	the	world	to	be	insane,	he	is	not	a	singer	at
all;	 if	a	dancer	 is	not	forced	into	a	madhouse,	 the	world	has	not	given	him	the
certificate.
All	geniuses	are	bound	to	be	thought	of	by	the	world	in	this	way...	"Something
has	gone	wrong	with	these	poor	people."
Vincent	Van	Gogh,	one	of	the	Dutch	painters,	could	not	sell	a	single	painting	in
his	whole	life.	Now	only	two	hundred	paintings	have	survived	out	of	thousands
that	he	painted,	because	nobody	took	care	of	 them.	He	was	simply	distributing
them	to	friends;	nobody	would	purchase	them.	People	were	afraid	even	to	hang
his	paintings	in	their	sitting	rooms	because	whoever	would	see	them	would	think
that	they	were	crazy:	what	kind	of	painting	are	you	hanging	here?	People	were
taking	them	--	not	to	hurt	him	--
thanking	him,	and	throwing	his	paintings	into	their	basements	so	nobody	would
see.
Now	 each	 of	 his	 paintings	 is	 worth	 a	 million	 dollars.	What	 happened	 in	 one
hundred	years?
The	man	himself	was	 forced	 into	 a	mad	asylum	when	he	was	only	 thirty-two.
And	he	was	 forced	because	 of	 his	 painting	 --	 he	was	 not	 harmful,	 he	was	 not
violent,	he	was	not	doing	anything	to	anybody.	But	anybody	who	looked	at	his
paintings	 was	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 this	 man	 was	 mad	 and	 unreliable.	 He
should	 be	 put	 in	 a	 madhouse.	 If	 he	 could	 paint	 these	 things,	 he	 might	 do
anything...."
For	 example,	 he	 always	 painted	 stars	 as	 spirals.	 Even	 other	 painters	 told	 him,
"Stars	are	not	spirals!"
He	said,	"I	also	see	the	stars.	I	see	that	they	are	not	spirals,	but	the	moment	I	start
painting	 them	 something	 in	 me	 says	 so	 strongly	 that	 they	 are	 spirals.	 The
distance	is	so	vast...	that's	why	your	eyes	cannot	see	exactly	what	their	shape	is.
And	the	voice	is	so	strong.	I	am	simply	unable	to	do	anything	else	but	what	my
inner	being	says	to	do."
And	 now	 physicists	 have	 discovered	 that	 stars	 are	 spirals.	 It	 has	 gone	 like	 a
shock	throughout	the	world	of	painters,	that	only	one	painter	in	the	whole	history
of	man	had	some	inner	contact	and	communication	with	the	stars	--	and	that	was
a	man	who	was	 thought	 to	 be	mad.	 And	 because	 he	was	 thought	 to	 be	mad,
nobody	was	ready	to	give	him	any	service.
Every	week,	his	brother	used	to	give	him	enough	money	to	last	for	seven	days.
And	he	was	fasting	three	days	in	a	week	and	eating	four	days	--	because	that	was
the	only	way	to	purchase	canvas	and	colors	and	brushes	 to	paint.	Painting	was
more	important	than	life.
He	committed	 suicide	 at	 the	 age	of	 thirty-three.	 Just	 after	his	 release	 from	 the
madhouse,	 he	 painted	 only	 one	 painting,	 which	 they	 had	 prevented	 him	 from
painting	in	the	madhouse.	He	wanted	to	paint	the	sun.	It	took	him	one	year.	He
lost	his	eyes...	the	burning	sun,	the	hot	sun,	and	the	whole	day	long	he	would	be
watching	all	the	colors,	from	the	morning	till	the	evening,	from	the	sunrise	to	the
sunset.	He	wanted	 the	painting	 to	 contain	 everything	 about	 the	 sun,	 the	whole
biography	of	the	sun.
Everybody	 who	 was	 sympathetic	 to	 him	 told	 him,	 "This	 is	 too	 much.	 Just
studying	it	one	day	is	enough;	it	is	the	same	sun."
Van	Gogh	said,	"You	don't	know.	It	is	never	the	same.	You	have	never	looked	at
it.	I	have	never	seen	the	same	sunrise	twice,	never	seen	the	same	sunset	again.
And	I	want	my	painting	to	be	a	biography."
One	year...	the	whole	day	watching	the	sun...	He	lost	his	eyes,	but	he	painted.
And	when	 the	painting	was	complete,	he	wrote	a	small	 letter	 to	his	brother:	"I
am	not	committing	suicide	out	of	any	despair	 --	because	I	am	one	of	 the	most
successful	men	in	the	world.	I	have	done	whatever	I	wanted	to	do	in	spite	of	the
whole	 world	 condemning	 me.	 But	 this	 was	 my	 last	 wish,	 to	 paint	 the	 whole
biography	 of	 the	 sun	 in	 one	 painting.	 It	 is	 completed	 today.	 I	 am	 immensely
joyful,	and	now	there	is	no	need	to	live.	I	was	living	to	paint;	painting	was	my
life,	not	breathing."
And	he	shot	himself	dead.
You	 cannot	 categorize	 him	with	 ordinary	 suicides.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 suicide	 --	 out	 of
despair,	out	of	sadness,	out	of	failure	--	no.	Out	of	immense	success,	out	of	total
fulfillment,	 seeing	 that	 now,	 why	 unnecessarily	 go	 on	 living	 and	 waiting	 for
death?...	"I	have	done	the	work	that	I	wanted	to	do."
Every	 creative	 artist	 has	 to	 understand	 this:	 the	moment	 people	 start	 thinking
about	him	that	he	is	a	little	bit	off	center,	that	something	is	loose	in	his	head,	he
should	 rejoice	 that	 he	 has	 crossed	 the	 boundary	 of	 the	 mundane	 and	 the
mediocre.	Now	he	has	grown	the	wings	which	others	don't	have.
And	I	can	see	in	you	the	possibility,	the	potential.
Meditate,	 and	 let	music	become	your	meditation.	Sing	and	 let	 singing	become
your	life,	your	very	breathing,	your	very	heartbeat.
A	very	stupid	 idea	has	prevailed	 in	 the	world,	 that	only	saints	are	 religious.	 In
fact,	almost	99.9	percent	of	saints	are	not	religious.	The	real	religious	people	will
be	 found	 in	creative	dimensions	 --	dancers,	poets,	painters,	 singers,	musicians,
sculptors.
The	future	belongs	to	the	creative	man.
The	past	belonged	to	the	uncreative	saints.	They	have	not	created	anything;	their
only	quality	was	self	torture.	They	were	really	all	masochists.	In	a	better	world
they	would	have	been	treated,	not	worshipped.	They	were	not	saints,	they	were
psychologically	sick.
But	 because	 the	 uncreative	was	 on	 the	 heights,	was	 dominant,	 creative	 people
suffered	very	much.	They	were	thought	to	be	sick.
The	 future	 is	 going	 to	 be	 totally	 different.	 Now	 nobody	 can	 be	 a	 saint	 just
because	he	is	capable	of	torturing	himself.	He	may	be	good	in	a	circus.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	by	Turgenev.
In	 a	 circus	 there	 was	 a	 man	 whose	 sole	 qualification	 was	 that	 he	 could	 fast
continuously	for	forty	days,	fifty	days	--	and	that	was	the	longest	time	the	circus
would	remain	in	one	town.	So	for	the	whole	time	the	circus	was	in	one	town,	he
would	be	on	a	fast.	Doctors	are	checking,	people	are	watching,	but	he	will	not
eat.
The	 circus	 moved	 from	 one	 town	 to	 another	 town,	 and	 then	 it	 came	 to	 the
capital,	where	 it	 remained	 longer	 than	 forty	 days.	And	what	 is	 there	 in	 a	man
who	 is	 fasting?	You	 can	 go	 to	 see	 him	 one	 time	 --	 after	 that	 there	 is	 nothing
intriguing,	 nothing	 interesting	 about	 it.	 So	 after	 a	 few	 days,	 people	 forgot	 all
about	him.
There	were	many	stalls,	but	because	nobody	was	coming	to	visit	his	stall,	it	was
placed	at	the	end.	Finally,	people	completely	forgot	about	him.	Even	the	circus
management	forgot	about	him,	because	there	was	no	need.	And	after	forty	days,
he	continued	his	fasting	--
because	he	had	forgotten	to	count	the	days.	He	knew	only	that	when	the	circus
moved	from	one	town	to	another	town,	on	the	way	they	would	give	him	food.
He	 was	 dying.	 And	 then	 somebody	 remembered	 --	 what	 happened	 about	 the
great	fasting	man?	The	manager	rushed.	The	man	was	almost	dying;	it	had	been
ninety	days.	Ninety	days	is	the	limit	to	how	long	a	man	can	fast	if	he	is	healthy.
They	asked	him,	"Are	you	mad	or	something?	After	forty	days	you	should	have
reported,	you	should	have	called	somebody."
He	said,	"There	were	two	reasons:	One,	I	have	never	counted	the	days.	Second,	I
slowly	became	aware	that	the	time	seemed	to	be	longer	this	time,	but	fasting	has
become	a	habit.
Now,	eating	is	troublesome.	So	whenever	you	change	towns,	it	is	very	hard	for
me.	Forty	days	I	am	hungry...	for	seven	days	while	you	are	changing	towns,	for
me	to	put	the	whole	mechanism	back	into	eating	and	digesting	is	such	a	torture.	I
felt	relieved	that	the	time	had	become	longer."
And	with	 hunger	 there	 are	 few	 points	 to	 remember.	 If	 you	 fast,	 you	will	 feel
hunger	 for	 only	 three	 days.	After	 the	 third	 day,	 hunger	will	 start	 disappearing
because	the	body	has	an	emergency	arrangement:	for	three	days	it	waits	for	food
--	it	cannot	wait	longer.	After	the	third	day	it	starts	eating	itself.	That's	why	you
start	losing	weight.
Have	you	ever	wondered	where	that	weight	disappears	to?
Fasting	is	a	kind	of	cannibalism,	eating	yourself.	The	worst	kind	of	cannibalism
--	eating	somebody	else	one	can	understand,	but	eating	yourself?
But	these	were	your	saints.	Their	qualities	were	all	in	the	service	of	death,	not	in
the	service	of	life.
I	 want	my	 sannyasins,	 Anand	Yeshwant,	 to	 be	 saints	 with	 a	 new	 quality:	 the
quality	that	serves	life,	the	quality	that	nourishes	life,	affirms	life,	that	makes	life
a	little	more	beautiful,	brings	a	few	more	flowers	to	it.
Meditation	in	the	past	has	been	life	negative:	renounce	life	and	everything	that
makes	life	worth	living.
To	me,	meditation	is	just	the	opposite	of	what	it	has	been	up	to	now.
Meditation	is	a	silent	heart,	a	peaceful	mind	which	can	make	life	more	lovable,
more	livable,	which	can	make	life	richer	in	every	dimension.
I	don't	want	you	to	renounce	anything.
I	want	you	to	rejoice	in	everything,	whatever	you	are	doing.
You	are	a	musician.	Let	music	be	your	meditation.	This	 is	your	 religion	 --	not
Mohammedanism,	not	Hinduism,	not	Christianity.	Music	is	your	religion.	If	you
are	a	dancer,	then	dancing	is	your	religion.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	DOES	EVERYONE	WANT	TO	PRETEND	TO	BE	WHAT	THEY	ARE
NOT?
WHAT	IS	THE	PSYCHOLOGY	BEHIND	IT?
Narendra,	everybody	is	condemned	from	his	very	childhood.
Whatever	he	does	on	his	own	accord,	out	of	his	own	 liking,	 is	not	acceptable.
The	people,	the	crowd	in	which	a	child	has	to	grow	has	its	own	ideas,	ideals.	The
child	has	to	fit	with	those	ideas	and	ideals.	The	child	is	helpless.
Have	you	ever	thought	about	it?	--	the	human	child	is	the	most	helpless	child	in
the	whole	animal	kingdom.	All	 the	animals	can	survive	without	 the	support	of
the	 parents	 and	 the	 crowd,	 but	 the	 human	 child	 cannot	 survive,	 he	 will	 die
immediately.	He	 is	 the	most	 helpless	 creature	 in	 the	world	 --	 so	 vulnerable	 to
death,	so	delicate.
Naturally	 those	who	are	 in	power	 are	 able	 to	mould	 the	 child	 in	 the	way	 they
want.
So	 everybody	has	 become	what	 he	 is,	 against	 himself.	That	 is	 the	 psychology
behind	the	fact	that	everybody	wants	to	pretend	to	be	what	he	is	not.
Everybody	is	in	a	schizophrenic	state.	He	has	never	been	allowed	to	be	himself,
he	has	been	forced	to	be	somebody	else	that	his	nature	does	not	allow	him	to	be
happy	with.
So	as	one	grows	and	stands	on	his	own	legs,	one	starts	pretending	many	things
which	he	would	have	liked	in	reality	to	be	part	of	his	being.	But	in	this	insane
world,	he	has	been	distracted.	He	has	been	made	into	somebody	else;	he	is	not
that.	He	knows	 it.	Everybody	knows	 it	 --	 that	he	has	been	 forced	 to	become	a
doctor,	 to	 become	 an	 engineer;	 he	 has	 been	 forced	 to	 become	 a	 politician,	 to
become	a	criminal,	to	become	a	beggar.
There	are	all	kinds	of	forces	around.
In	Bombay	there	are	people	whose	whole	business	is	to	steal	children	and	make
them	crippled,	blind,	lame,	and	force	them	to	beg	and	each	evening	to	bring	all
the	money	that	they	have	gathered.	Yes,	food	will	be	given	to	them,	shelter	will
be	 given	 to	 them.	They	 are	 being	 used	 like	 commodities,	 they	 are	 not	 human
beings.	 This	 is	 the	 extreme,	 but	 the	 same	 has	 happened	 with	 everybody	 to	 a
lesser	or	greater	extent.
Nobody	is	at	ease	with	himself.
I	have	heard	about	a	great	surgeon	who	was	retiring,	and	he	was	very	famous.
He	had	many	 students	 and	many	colleagues.	They	all	 gathered,	 and	 they	were
dancing	and	singing	and	drinking	--	but	he	was	standing	in	a	dark	corner,	sad.
One	 friend	 came	 up	 to	 him	 and	 asked,	 "What	 is	 the	matter	with	 you?	We	 are
celebrating	and	you	are	standing	here	so	sad	--	don't	you	want	to	retire?	You	are
seventy-five;	you	should	have	retired	fifteen	years	ago.	But	because	you	are	such
a	 great	 surgeon,	 even	 at	 seventy-five	 nobody	 can	 compete	 with	 you,	 nobody
comes	even	close	to	you.	Now,	retire	and	relax!"
He	said,	"That's	what	I	was	thinking.	I	am	feeling	sad	because	my	parents	forced
me	to	become	a	surgeon.	I	wanted	to	be	a	singer,	and	I	would	have	loved	it.	Even
if	 I	was	 just	 a	 street	 singer	 --	 at	 least	 I	would	have	been	myself.	Now	 I	 am	a
world-famous	 surgeon,	 but	 I	 am	 not	 myself.	 When	 people	 praise	 me	 as	 a
surgeon,	I	listen	as	if	they	are	praising	somebody	else.	I	have	been	given	awards,
doctorates,	but	nothing	rings	a	bell	of	joy	in	my	heart	--	because	this	is	not	me.
This	 being	 a	 surgeon	 has	 killed	me,	 destroyed	me.	 I	wanted	 to	 be	 just	 a	 flute
player,	even	if	I	had	to	be	a	beggar	on	the	streets.	But	I	would	have	been	happy."
In	this	world,	there	is	only	one	happiness	and	that	is	to	be	yourself.
And	because	nobody	is	himself,	everybody	is	trying	somehow	to	hide	--	masks,
pretensions,	hypocrisies.	They	are	ashamed	of	what	they	are.
We	have	made	the	world	a	marketplace,	not	a	beautiful	garden	where	everybody
is	allowed	to	bring	his	own	flowers.	We	are	forcing	marigolds	to	bring	roses	--
now	 from	where	 can	marigolds	bring	 roses?	Those	 roses	will	 be	plastic	 roses,
and	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 hearts	 the	marigold	will	 be	 crying,	 and	with	 tears,	 feeling
ashamed	that	"We	have	not	been	courageous	enough	to	rebel	against	the	crowd.
They	have	 forced	plastic	 flowers	on	us,	and	we	have	our	own	real	 flowers	 for
which	our	juices	are	flowing	--	but	we	cannot	show	our	real	flowers."
You	 are	 being	 taught	 everything,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 being	 taught	 to	 be	 yourself.
This	 is	 the	 ugliest	 form	 of	 society	 possible,	 because	 it	 makes	 everybody
miserable.
I	have	heard	of	another	great	man,	a	great	professor	of	literature	who	was	being
retired	 from	 the	 university.	 All	 the	 university	 professors	 had	 gathered,	 all	 his
friends	had	gathered,	and	they	were	rejoicing.	But	suddenly	they	became	aware
that	he	was	missing.
One	 of	 his	 friends,	 an	 attorney,	went	 out...	 perhaps	 he	 in	was	 the	 garden.	But
what	was	he	doing	there?	He	was	sitting	under	a	tree.
The	attorney	was	his	closest	friend,	a	boyhood	friend.	The	attorney	said,	"What
are	you	doing	here?"
He	said,	"What	I	am	doing	here?	Remember	fifty	years	ago?	--	I	came	to	tell	you
that	I	wanted	to	kill	my	wife.	And	you	said,	`Don't	do	any	such	thing.	Otherwise
--	fifty	years	in	jail.'	I	am	thinking	that	if	I	had	not	listened	to	you,	today	I	would
have	been	out	of	jail,	free.	He	said,	"I	am	feeling	so	angry	that	a	desire	comes	to
me	--	why	should	I	not	at	least	kill	you!	Now	I	am	seventy-five.	Even	if	they	put
me	in	jail	for	fifty	years	they	cannot	keep	me	there	for	fifty	years.	Within	five,
seven	 years	 I	 will	 be	 dead.	 But	 you	were	 not	 a	 friend;	 you	 proved	 to	 be	my
greatest	enemy."
To	be	what	you	don't	want	to	be,	to	be	with	someone	you	don't	want	to	be	with,
to	do	something	you	don't	want	to	do	is	the	basis	of	all	your	miseries.
And	on	the	one	hand	the	society	has	managed	to	make	everybody	miserable,	and
on	the	other	hand	the	same	society	expects	that	you	should	not	show	your	misery
--	at	least	not	in	public,	not	in	the	open.	It	is	your	private	business.
They	have	created	it	--	it	really	is	public	business,	not	private	business.	The	same
crowd	that	has	created	all	the	reasons	for	your	misery	finally	says	to	you:	"Your
misery	is	your	own,	but	when	you	come	out,	come	out	smiling.	Don't	show	your
miserable	face	to	others."
This	they	call	etiquette,	manners,	culture.	Basically,	it	is	hypocrisy.
And	unless	a	person	decides	that	"Whatever	the	cost,	I	want	just	to	be	myself.
Condemned,	unaccepted,	losing	respectability	--	everything	is	okay	but	I	cannot
pretend	 anymore	 to	 be	 somebody	 else"...	 This	 decision	 and	 this	 declaration	 --
this	declaration	of	freedom,	freedom	from	the	weight	of	the	crowd	--	gives	birth
to	your	natural	being,	to	your	individuality.
Then	you	don't	need	any	mask.	Then	you	can	be	simply	yourself,	just	as	you	are.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 can	 be	 just	 as	 you	 are,	 there	 is	 tremendous	 peace	 that
passeth	understanding.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
COULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 EXPLAIN	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN
TRUSTING
EXISTENCE	AND	FATALISM?
The	difference	between	trust	and	fate	is	very	subtle.
On	the	surface	it	seems	they	mean	exactly	the	same	thing,	but	in	reality	they	are
diametrically	opposite	experiences.
Fate	is	a	consolation.	You	are	poor,	and	you	see	others	getting	richer	and	richer	-
-	 some	 consolation	 is	 needed.	 You	 do	 everything	 and	 you	 do	 it	 honestly,
truthfully,	morally.	You	never	use	wrong	means;	still	you	are	a	failure.	And	you
see	others	being	dishonest,	cunning,	insincere,	immoral,	criminal,	using	all	kinds
of	 wrong	 means	 and	 succeeding,	 becoming	 richer,	 attaining	 power,	 prestige.
How	to	explain	it?
It	is	not	new.	Since	the	very	beginning	man	has	been	puzzled	by	it.	And	he	had
to	create	some	idea	as	a	consolation.	Fate,	kismet,	destiny,	God	--	everything	is
written	 in	 the	 lines	 of	 your	 hand,	 in	 the	 lines	 of	 your	 forehead;	 everything	 is
predetermined	in	your	birthchart,	you	cannot	do	anything	against	it.	The	forces
that	have	determined	your	 life	are	 too	big.	You	are	going	 to	 fail;	 it	 is	better	 to
accept	your	failure	as	destiny.	It	hurts	less	to	say	it	is	fate;	it	gives	consolation.	It
is	not	your	doing,	it	is	not	your	failure	--	what	can	you	do	against	the	stars?	You
cannot	determine	your	birth	time	and	the	day	and	the	year.
You	come	into	the	world	just	like	an	actor,	comes	onto	the	stage	fully	prepared.
He	cannot	change	anything.
Once	in	a	while	actors	can	change	things,	because	a	drama	is	a	drama....
I	 have	 heard	 that	 in	 a	 village...	 All	 over	 India,	 every	 year	 at	 this	 time	 every
village	 is	 playing	 the	 drama	 of	 the	 life	 of	 Rama,	 the	 Hindu	 god.	 And	 in	 the
beginning...	 it	 is	 just	 like	 any	 film	 story:	 a	 triangle	 --	 two	 lovers,	 one	woman.
Sita	is	 the	woman,	and	Rama	and	Ravana	are	the	two	lovers.	Rama	is	a	young
man.	Ravana	is	very	strong.
In	 those	 days,	 the	 daughters	 of	 kings	 particularly	 had	 the	 right	 to	 choose	 any
device	for	selecting	their	husbands.	Sita	had	asked...	because	in	their	family	they
had	the	bow	that	had	belonged	to	the	god,	Shiva.	It	was	such	a	big	strong	bow
that	even	to	pick	it	up	needed	a	great	wrestler;	it	was	not	easy	for	one	person	to
raise	 it.	As	a	device	Sita	chose	 that	anybody	who	could	raise	 the	bow,	and	not
only	raise	it	but	break	it	with	his	hands	alone	--	it	was	a	steel	bow	--	that	man	she
would	choose	as	her	husband.
Hundreds	of	kings,	great	wrestlers,	archers...	Rama	was	also	present	 there.	But
nobody	 thought	 he	 would	 be	 of	 any	 use;	 he	 was	 too	 young.	 Everybody	 was
worried	that	Ravana	-
-	 who	 was	 a	 huge	 man,	 dangerous,	 had	 ten	 heads	 --	 was	 going	 to	 win.	 And
everybody	was	worried	 --	Sita's	 father	was	worried,	 everybody	concerned	was
worried	that	Sita	would	fall	into	the	hands	of	this	idiot.	Somehow	she	had	to	be
saved.
So	just	as	the	others	were	coming	forward	--	and	they	could	not	even	move	the
bow,	raising	it	was	out	of	question;	they	were	becoming	laughingstocks....
Before	Ravana	stood	up,	a	man	came	running...	it	was	a	device	to	send	Ravana
back	to	his	kingdom.	He	was	the	king	of	Sri	Lanka.	And	the	man	said,	"What	are
you	doing	here?
Sri	Lanka	is	on	fire.	Your	whole	kingdom	is	burning."
Ravana	forgot	all	about	getting	married	 to	Sita.	He	rushed	off	 to	see	what	was
happening	in	the	kingdom	first.	It	was	a	false	strategy;	there	was	no	problem,	Sri
Lanka	was	perfectly	okay.	But	by	the	time	he	came	back,	Rama	had	broken	the
bow,	married	Sita,	and	gone.
This	was	a	conspiracy,	and	Ravana	could	not	forgive	it.	He	was	continuously	in
search	of	Sita,	 to	steal	her.	Finally	he	stole	her,	and	for	three	years	he	kept	her
imprisoned.	That's	how	the	whole	story	goes.
In	every	village	it	is	enacted	every	year.
In	 this	particular	village,	 the	man	who	played	 the	part	of	Ravana	was	really	 in
love	 with	 the	 girl	 who	 was	 playing	 the	 part	 of	 Sita.	 But	 they	 belonged	 to
different	castes;	marriage	was	not	possible.
Every	 year	 it	was	 happening:	 the	moment	 he	would	 stand	 up,	 the	man	would
come	out	shouting:	"Sri	Lanka	is	on	fire!"
This	 time	he	was	determined	--	because	outside	the	drama	they	wouldn't	allow
the	marriage.	They	were	not	of	the	same	caste	and	in	India	you	cannot	marry	in
another	 caste.	And	 the	man	who	played	Ravana	was	 in	 a	 lower	 caste;	 the	girl
was	a	brahmin.	This	time	he	thought,	something	has	to	be	done.
The	man	came	running	and	he	said,	"Sri	Lanka	is	on	fire!"
Ravana	said,	"Let	it	be.	This	year	I	am	not	coming!"	Everybody	laughed,	nobody
could	believe	it.
The	prompter	was	behind	the	curtain:	"What	are	you	saying?"
And	he	said,	"This	year	I	am	going	to	marry	Sita!"	And	he	went	up	--	and	it	was
just	 an	 ordinary	 bow,	 everybody	 had	 just	 pretended	 that	 it	 was	 so	 heavy	 that
nobody	could	pick	it	up;	it	was	just	ordinary	bamboo.	He	took	it	up,	showed	it	to
the	audience,	broke	it,	 threw	the	pieces	into	the	audience	and	told	Sita's	father,
"Bring	your	daughter!	Enough	is	enough,	and	the	story	is	finished!"
Even	people	who	had	fallen	asleep	woke	up	--	"What	is	happening?	Something
new!"
The	director	didn't	know	what	to	do.	For	a	moment	there	was	silence.
And	Ravana	was	shouting,	"Where	is	Sita?	Now	fulfill	the	promise!"
And	 nobody	 could	 say	 to	 him,	 "You	 are	 not	 following	 the	 part	 that	 has	 been
given	to	you"	--	because	that	would	not	be	right	to	say	in	front	of	the	public.
But	the	king	--	Sita's	father	--	was	a	very	wise	man.	He	said	to	his	servants,	"You
idiots,	 this	 is	 not	 Shiva's	 bow;	 this	 is	 the	 bow	my	 children	 play	with.	 Take	 it
away.	Bring	the	real	bow."
So	 the	servants	 took	away	 the	broken	parts.	The	curtain	was	pulled	down,	and
they	 all	 jumped	 on	Ravana	 and	 said,	 "You	 idiot,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 destroy	 the
whole	story."
He	said,	"This	time	I	am	determined."
So	the	police	had	to	be	called,	and	Ravana	was	sent	to	the	police	station:	"Take
him,	because	he	is	destroying	our	whole	drama."
In	a	drama	it	is	possible	that	you	can	change	things.	But	in	life	you	don't	know
exactly	what	 is	written	in	your	fate,	so	whatever	happens	has	to	be	accepted	--
"This	must	be	written	in	my	fate."
The	belief	in	fate	is	simply	a	consolation	because	we	cannot	accept	our	failure	as
failure.
And	 we	 cannot	 accept	 our	 failure	 for	 another	 reason	 --	 because	 it	 has
implications	 for	 all	 our	 moral	 values:	 "We	 were	 honest,	 we	 were	 moral,	 we
followed	right	means,	we	were	truthful,	and	yet	we	failed.	And	the	other	person
was	dishonest,	cunning,	insincere,	immoral,	criminal,	and	yet	he	succeeded."
Now,	the	whole	moral	system	teaches	that	truth	is	going	to	win,	that	morality	is
going	to	win,	that	honesty	is	going	to	win.	But	in	life	we	see	that	all	the	honest
people	 are	 losing	 and	 immoral	 people	 are	 gaining.	 The	 cunning,	 the	 clever
become	 powerful.	 The	 simple	 and	 the	 innocent	 are	 crushed.	 Our	whole	 value
system	is	at	stake.
So	it	was	necessary	for	the	priests	and	the	prophets	to	find	a	way	in	which	your
failure	would	not	be	your	failure.	"You	cannot	do	anything,	it	is	written	in	your
fate.	Your	failure	is	not	the	failure	of	your	sincerity,	morality,	honesty.	And	the
other	 person's	 success	 is	 not	 the	 success	 of	 wrong	 means,	 dishonesty,
cunningness	--	it	is	his	fate.	And	as	far	as	fate	is	concerned,	nothing	can	change
it	--	neither	honesty	nor	dishonesty.	Yes,	because	you	have	been	honest	you	will
have	a	better	fate	in	your	future	life.	Because	he	has	been	dishonest,	he	will	have
a	bitter	fate	in	his	future	life.
So	this	was	a	beautiful	consolation,	and	a	beautiful	defense	--	rational	--	for	our
moral	system.
But	it	is	all	bogus.
The	 truth	 is,	 the	man	has	 succeeded	because	of	 dishonesty,	 not	 because	of	 his
fate.	He	has	succeeded	because	of	his	immorality,	he	has	succeeded	because	he
does	not	care	what	kind	of	means	he	is	using.
Existence	gives	you	birth	as	 tabula	 rasa.	No	fate	 is	written;	 there	 is	no	destiny
such	that	whatever	you	do,	it	has	to	happen.
Existence	is	freedom.	Fate	is	slavery.
Freedom	means	it	is	up	to	you	to	decide	what	is	going	to	happen.
Fate	is	a	bogus	hypothesis.
But	trust	is	a	totally	different	thing.
Trust	 is	 not	 fate.	 Trust	 simply	 means	 that	 "Whatever	 happens,	 I	 am	 part	 of
existence	and	existence	cannot	be	intentionally	inimical	to	me.	If	sometimes	that
it	feels	it	is,	it	must	be	my	misunderstanding."
I	have	always	loved	to	remember	a	Sufi	master	Junnaid.	He	was	the	master	of	al-
Hillaj	Mansoor.	He	had	a	habit:	after	each	prayer...	and	Mohammedans	pray	five
times	a	day.
After	 each	 prayer	 he	 would	 say	 to	 the	 sky,	 "Your	 compassion	 is	 great.	 How
beautifully	you	take	care	of	us,	and	we	don't	deserve	it.	I	don't	even	have	words
to	 show	 my	 gratefulness,	 but	 I	 hope	 you	 will	 understand	 the	 unexpressed
gratitude	of	my	heart."
They	 were	 on	 a	 pilgrimage,	 and	 it	 happened	 that	 for	 three	 days	 they	 passed
through	villages	where	orthodox	Mohammedans	would	not	allow	them	even	to
stay	in	the	villages;	there	was	no	question	of	giving	them	food	or	water.
For	 three	 days	 without	 food,	 without	 water,	 without	 sleep	 --	 tired,	 utterly
frustrated...	The	disciples	could	not	believe	that	 this	man	Junnaid,	 their	master,
still	goes	on	saying	the	same	things.	Before,	it	was	okay	--	but	still	he	goes	on
saying,	"You	are	great,	you	are	compassionate,	and	I	don't	have	words	to	express
my	gratitude."
On	the	third	evening	when	he	had	finished	his	prayer,	his	disciples	said,	"Now	it
is	time	for	an	explanation.	For	three	days	we	have	been	hungry,	we	have	not	had
water,	we	are	 thirsty;	we	have	not	slept,	we	have	been	 insulted	continually,	no
place	has	been	given	 to	us,	no	shelter.	At	 least	 today	you	should	not	say,	 `You
are	great,	you	are	compassionate.'
For	what	you	are	showing	your	gratitude?"
Junnaid	laughed.	He	said,	"My	trust	in	existence	is	unconditional.	It	is	not	that	I
am	 grateful	 because	 existence	 provides	 this	 and	 that	 and	 that.	 I	 am	 --	 that's
enough.	Existence	accepts	me	--	that's	enough.	And	I	don't	deserve	to	be,	I	have
not	 earned	 it.	 Moreover,	 these	 three	 days	 have	 been	 of	 tremendous	 beauty
because	I	had	an	opportunity	to	watch	whether	anger	would	arise	in	me,	and	it
didn't	arise;	whether	I	would	start	to	feel	that	God	had	forsaken	me,	and	the	idea
did	not	arise.
There	has	been	no	difference	in	my	attitude	towards	existence.	My	gratitude	has
not	changed,	and	it	has	filled	me	with	more	gratitude	than	ever.	It	was	a	fire	test,
and	 I	 have	 come	 out	 of	 it	 unburned.	 What	 more	 do	 you	 want?	 I	 will	 trust
existence	in	my	life	and	I	will	trust	existence	in	my	death.	It	is	my	love	affair.
"It	is	not	a	question	that	somebody	is	rich	and	somebody	is	poor,	that	somebody
is	successful	and	somebody	is	not.	 It	has	nothing	 to	do	with	anybody.	 It	 is	my
personal,	 intimate	 contact	 with	 reality.	 And	 there	 is	 great	 harmony.	 I	 am
completely	at	ease	and	at	home."
Trust	is	the	outcome	of	deep	meditation.
Fate	is	the	outcome	of	your	failures,	and	a	mind	consolation.
They	are	totally	different.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	 DO	 I	 LIKE	 SO	 MUCH	 TO	 CRITICIZE	 PEOPLE	 AND	 COMPLAIN
AGAINST
LIFE?
Everybody	likes	it.
To	 criticize	 people,	 to	 complain	 against	 people,	 gives	 you	 a	 good	 feeling.
Criticizing	others,	 you	 feel	you	are	higher;	 complaining	about	others,	 you	 feel
you	are	better.	It	is	very	ego	fulfilling.
And	I	am	saying	almost	everybody	does	it.	A	few	people	do	it	out	 loud,	a	few
people	do	it	just	within	themselves,	but	the	enjoyment	is	the	same.
Only	rarely	are	 there	people	who	don't	criticize,	who	don't	complain;	 those	are
the	people	who	have	dropped	 their	egos.	Then	 there	 is	no	point	 --	why	should
you	bother	about	it?	It	is	none	of	your	business,	it	no	longer	pays	you.	The	ego
was	helped,	nourished.
Hence	my	emphasis	is:	drop	the	ego.	With	the	dropping	of	the	ego,	you	will	find
almost	a	whole	world	disappearing.	The	whole	world	 that	was	knit	around	 the
ego	falls	away	completely,	and	you	start	seeing	people	 in	a	new	light.	Perhaps
the	same	person	that	you	might	have	criticized	in	the	same	situation...	instead	of
criticizing	him	you	feel	a	great	compassion	for	him,	a	great	love,	a	deep	desire	to
help.	 The	 same	 person	 and	 the	 same	 situation	 you	 would	 have	 complained
against,	now	your	eyes	are	different;	you	see	things	differently.	Perhaps	you	will
see	that	in	his	place	in	this	situation	you	would	have	behaved	in	the	same	way,
there	is	nothing	to	complain	about.
Your	 outlook	will	 become	more	 human,	more	 friendly...	 a	 deep	 acceptance	 of
people	as	they	are.
You	know	only	some	part	of	them;	you	don't	know	their	whole	life.	And	it	is	not
good	 to	 decide	 from	 a	 small	 fragment	 about	 the	 whole	 person.	 That	 small
fragment	may	be	absolutely	fitting	and	right	in	the	whole	context.
But	 the	 situation	 is	 this:	 it	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 criticize.	 It	 does	 not	 need	 much
intelligence.
I	have	often	told	a	story	of	Turgenev's,	THE	FOOL.	In	a	village,	a	young	man	is
very	much	disturbed	because	the	whole	village	thinks	he	is	an	idiot.	A	wise	man
is	passing	 through	 the	village	and	 the	young	man	goes	 to	him	and	says,	"Help
me!	For	twenty-four	hours	a	day	I	am	criticized;	whatever	I	do	I	am	criticized.	If
I	don't	do	anything	I	am	criticized.	If	I	speak	I	am	criticized,	if	I	don't	speak	I	am
criticized.	I	don't	know	any	way	out."
The	wise	man	said,	"Don't	be	worried...."	He	whispered	the	secret	in	his	ear,	and
told	 him,	 "After	 one	month	 I	will	 come	 back.	Meet	me	 then	 and	 tell	me	 how
things	are	going."
The	 young	man	 went	 to	 the	 marketplace	 and	 started	 working	 on	 the	 formula
given	by	the	wise	man.
Somebody	said,	"What	a	beautiful	sunset!"
And	he	said,	"What	is	beautiful	in	it?	Prove	what	is	beautiful	in	it!"
The	man	who	had	said	it	was	a	beautiful	sunset	was	shocked.	It	was	a	beautiful
sunset,	 but	 what	 was	 the	 proof?	 Is	 there	 any	 evidence?	 Do	 you	 know	 what
beauty	is?	Everybody	knows,	but	nobody	can	prove	it.
The	man	remained	silent.	Everybody	started	laughing.
And	everybody	said,	"Strange,	we	used	to	think	this	man	was	an	idiot.	He	is	a
great	intellectual."
This	was	the	formula	given	by	the	old	man:	criticize	anything;	just	roam	about
the	village	watching	and	when	anybody	says	anything,	does	anything,	criticize	it.
And	 particularly	 criticize	 things	 which	 are	 taken	 for	 granted	 and	 nobody
questions.	 Somebody	 uses	 the	 word	 `God'	 --	 immediately	 catch	 hold	 of	 him:
"Where	 is	God?	What	nonsense	are	you	talking	about?"	Somebody	talks	about
love	--	catch	hold	of	him:	"What	is	love?	Where	is	love?	Put	it	here	in	front	of
everybody!"
Somebody	would	say,	"Love	is	in	the	heart."
And	he	would	say,	 "No,	 there	 is	nothing	 in	 the	heart.	You	can	go	and	ask	any
surgeon	--
in	the	heart	 there	is	nothing	like	love.	There	is	only	a	blood-circulating	system
which	just	pumps	blood	and	purifies	it.	What	does	it	have	to	do	with	love?"
After	one	month	 the	old	man	came	back.	By	 that	 time	 the	 idiot	had	become	a
wise	man.
He	 touched	 the	old	man's	 feet	 and	he	 said,	 "You	are	great!	That	 trick	worked;
now	the	whole	village	thinks	I	am	a	wise	man."
The	 old	man	 said,	 "Just	 remember	 one	 thing:	 don't	 assert	 anything	 from	 your
side,	so	nobody	can	criticize	you.	Let	 them	assert	 things;	you	just	criticize	and
complain.	And	always	be	aggressive,	never	be	defensive.	Don't	take	a	defensive
attitude.	Attack,	 be	 aggressive,	 criticize	 each	 and	 everybody,	 and	 they	will	 all
worship	you."
And	the	idiot	becomes	the	wise	man.
It	does	not	need	much	intelligence	to	criticize	or	to	complain.	And	cheaply	you
become	wise;	cheaply	you	become	very	intelligent.
One	of	my	professors...	He	used	to	teach	me	logic.	Within	a	few	days	I	found	out
that	 even	 if	 I	 mentioned	 the	 name	 of	 a	 book	which	 did	 not	 exist,	 a	 fictitious
writer,	 he	would	 immediately	 criticize	 it:	 "I	 have	 read	 that	 book,	 and	 there	 is
nothing	in	it."
I	went	to	the	vice-chancellor	and	I	told	him	the	whole	thing.	I	said,	"This	is	sheer
dishonesty,	because	first	he	criticized	those	who	have	really	written	books.	And
seeing	his	attitude	--	that	he	criticizes	everybody,	I	suspected	that	he	had	not	read
them	but	was	just	trying	to	show	that	he	is	so	well-read,	so	wise,	so	intelligent.
So	I	tried	a	few	fictitious	names	and	he	criticized	them	also.	He	said:	`There	is
nothing	in	those	books.
Those	 writers	 know	 nothing.'"	 And	 I	 said,	 "Those	 writers	 don't	 exist.	 Those
books	don't	exist!"
The	 vice-chancellor	 said,	 "This	 is	 strange.	 I	 used	 to	 think	 that	 man	 was	 a
responsible	man."
I	said,	"Call	him	in	sometime,	and	I	will	drop	in	casually,	by	the	way."	I	wrote
down	three	or	four	names	of	books	which	don't	exist,	have	never	existed	and	will
never	exist,	with	writers	who	are	just	fictitious.	I	gave	those	names	to	the	vice-
chancellor	and	I	told	him,	"I	will	come	when	he	is	here	and	we	will	talk,	and	just
by	the	way	you	bring	up	these	names	and	see	what	his	reaction	is."
And	 he	 brought	 up	 those	 names	 and	 the	 professor	 immediately	 said,	 "Don't
waste	time.
Those	are	all	ordinary,	mediocre	writers,	and	the	books	they	have	written	have
nothing	original	in	them."
The	vice-chancellor	could	not	believe	his	eyes.	He	said,	"Do	you	know	that	these
four	books	do	not	exist	at	all?	Neither	have	these	four	men	ever	existed.	Why	are
you	criticizing	them?"
And	before	the	vice-chancellor,	he	became	afraid.	He	said,	"Never	existed?	How
did	I	get	the	idea	that...."
I	said,	"Don't	try	to	befool	anybody,	because	I	have	been	asking	you	about	other
books	which	have	not	existed.	This	was	only	a	proof.	I	wanted	to	show	the	vice-
chancellor	that	a	professor	should	at	least	be	sincere	enough	to	acknowledge	that
he	has	not	read	a	particular	book."
I	said	to	the	vice-chancellor,	"What	kind	of	respect	does	this	man	want	from	us?
My	feeling	is	that	he	has	not	read	anything;	he	has	simply	read	Turgenev's	story,
THE
FOOL."
I	had	brought	 the	book,	and	I	read	the	story	to	 the	vice-chancellor.	And	I	said,
"This	 man	 is	 the	 idiot	 from	 this	 story.	 You	 should	 make	 him	 alert	 that	 if	 it
happens	 again	 in	 the	 class,	we	 are	going	 to	boycott	 him	completely.	Either	 he
will	have	to	find	the	book	and	prove....	He	never	even	goes	to	the	library!"
I	 had	 looked	 into	 all	 the	 records	 before	 I	 went	 to	 the	 vice-chancellor.	 The
professor	had	never	been	to	the	library.	Under	his	name	--	and	he	had	been	in	the
university	for	ten	years	--	not	a	single	book	was	issued.	And	this	man	was	ready
to	criticize	anybody.
I	said,	"A	wise	man,	an	intelligent	man	is	always	humble."
Your	question	about	why	we	are	so	ready	to	criticize,	to	complain	is	very	simple.
The	psychology	behind	 it	 is	 that	 this	 is	 the	 simplest	way,	 the	 cheapest	way	 to
prove	 that	you	are	somebody	special,	 that	you	know	more.	But	 in	 fact	you	are
simply	proving	that	you	are	the	idiot	of	Turgenev	and	nobody	else.
Be	humble	in	the	world	of	wisdom.
Before	criticizing	anybody,	look	into	the	fact	from	all	directions,	from	all	angles,
from	all	possible	viewpoints,	and	you	will	be	surprised:	 there	 is	very	little	 that
can	be	criticized	or	complained	about.	And	if	you	pay	that	much	attention,	then
whatever	you	criticize	will	be	accepted,	and	accepted	with	gratitude	because	it	is
not	to	fulfill	your	ego;	it	is	just	to	help	the	other	person	on	the	path.
But	you	have	to	do	so	much	work.
One	of	my	professors	had	written	his	doctoral	thesis	on	Shankara	and	Bradley.	I
told	him,
"I	 have	 read	 the	 thesis,	 and	 now	 I	 am	 studying	 everything	 possible	 about
Shankara	and	Bradley	before	I	say	anything	about	your	thesis."
He	 said,	 "You	are	 strange,	because	 I	 have	given	my	 thesis	 to	many	professors
and	they	have	all	given	their	opinions."
I	said,	"I	cannot	give	you	my	opinion	in	such	a	cheap	way.	I	will	look	at	all	the
sources	you	have	 looked	 into;	 I	will	 look	 into	other	 sources	 that	you	have	not
looked	into."	And	it	took	me	almost	six	months	to	study	Shankara	and	Bradley.
When	I	gave	my	opinion	to	him	he	said,	"My	God,	it	is	good	that	you	were	not
one	 of	 my	 examiners;	 otherwise,	 I	 would	 never	 have	 been	 able	 to	 get	 the
doctorate.	I	worked	on	it	for	six	years,	and	in	six	months	you	have	gone	through
all	the	sources	that	I	have	referred	to.	You	have	even	gone	to	other	sources	which
I	have	not	even	heard	of...."
I	 said,	 "Your	 treatise	 is	 juvenile,	 it	 is	 written	 by	 an	 amateur.	 Shankara	 and
Bradley	are	very	mature	philosophers	of	 the	East	and	West.	You	have	not	paid
enough	 respect	 to	 these	 two	geniuses.	You	have	done	a	 clerical	 job.	You	have
looked	at	a	few	books	of	Shankara,	a	few	books	of	Bradley,	taken	a	few	pieces
from	here,	from	there,	and	your	thesis	was	ready.	Your	thesis	does	not	contribute
a	single	original	point.	And	unless	a	thesis	contributes	an	original	point,	it	does
not	deserve	a	doctorate;	it	is	at	the	most	a	beautiful	essay.	You	can	publish	it	as	a
book,	but	not	for	a	doctorate."	But	he	was	a	humble	man;	he	accepted	it.	He	said,
"You	are	right.	I	myself	was	feeling	that	I	had	not	done	them	justice.	Six	years
were	not	enough	to	cover	Bradley's	whole	life	and	Shankara's	whole	life.	These
two	are	the	very	highest	peaks	of	genius;	six	years	are	not	enough.	But	nobody
pointed	it	out	to	me,	not	even	my	examiners.	The	examiners	will	not	point	it	out
because	 to	do	 that	 they	would	have	had	 to	 read	 it,	 they	would	have	had	 to	go
through	 the	whole	 thing.	Who	bothers?	 In	 fact,	perhaps	 some	of	 their	 students
gave	 me	 the	 marks	 and	 the	 examiners	 have	 not	 even	 looked	 at	 the	 thesis."
Nobody	 is	 interested	 in	 praising	 anybody,	 in	 finding	 those	 qualities	 which
everybody	 has...	 Nobody	 is	 ready	 to	 help	 those	 qualities	 grow;	 everybody	 is
afraid	--	 if	all	are	growing,	what	about	him?	His	whole	concern	is	 that	his	ego
should	go	on	becoming	bigger,	and	 the	easier	way	 is	 to	criticize	everybody,	 to
complain	against	everything:	Be	negative,	make	negativity	your	very	approach.
And	 for	 this	 you	 don't	 need	 intelligence,	 any	 idiot	 can	 do	 it.	 But	 to	 be	 really
critical,	one	has	to	be	very	compassionate,	very	loving.	And	one	has	to	be	ready
to	devote	time	and	energy	and	intelligence.	Then	it	is	not	criticism,	then	it	is	not
inimical,	 it	 is	 not	 antagonistic;	 it	 is	 a	 friendly	 suggestion,	 a	 sympathetic
approach.	Everyone	here	should	learn	to	be	sympathetic.	Your	meditation	should
help	you,	not	to	criticize	but	to	appreciate.	And	if	you	are	intelligent	enough,	you
can	 appreciate	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 whatever	 you	 wanted	 to	 criticize	 will	 be
understood	without	being	said.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 BUDDHA	 IN	 ME	 CONDEMNS	 THE	 ZORBA,	 AND	 THE	 ZORBA
ENVIES	THE
BUDDHA.	 HOW	 CAN	 THESE	 TWO	 BELOVEDS	WITHIN	ME	 BECOME
FRIENDS?
Just	let	them	fight	one	day	more.	Tomorrow	we	will	settle	it!
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	Let	go...	the	cure	for	the	disease	of	becoming	22	October	1986	pm
in
Archive
code:
8610225
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH20
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
113
mins
I	have	first	to	reply	to	the	question	that	I	had	before.
The	question	was	important.
I	never	postpone	a	question	because	one	never	knows	what	 is	going	 to	happen
tomorrow.
I	may	be	here	to	answer	it	or	not.	You	may	be	here	to	listen	to	it	or	not.
But	 I	 had	 to	 postpone,	 because	 the	 question	was	 important,	 and	 the	 time	was
already	9:30.
I	never	want	to	do	an	imperfect	job,	so	I	took	the	risk.	I	hoped	for	the	best	--	that
tomorrow	we	will	be	meeting	--	and	by	chance	it	has	come	true.
The	questioner	said	that	within	his	personality,	the	buddha	and	the	zorba	are	in
constant	conflict.
My	whole	philosophy	is	to	bring	a	harmonious	unity	between	the	zorba	and	the
buddha	within	 every	human	being.	But	 the	questioner	 is	 asking	only	 from	 the
mind.	In	reality,	in	actual	experience,	zorba	and	buddha	can	never	be	in	conflict.
This	has	to	be	underlined	--
because	 in	 reality	 the	 zorba	 is	 completely	 asleep,	 he	 does	 not	 know	 anything
about	the	buddha,	and	you	cannot	fight	with	something	you	know	nothing	about.
The	zorba	is	not	even	suspicious	that	there	is	anything	more	in	life	than	to	eat,
drink	and	be	merry.	That	is	his	whole	philosophy	of	life,	there	is	nothing	beyond
it.	 How	 can	 he	 be	 in	 conflict	 with	 the	 buddha?	 Both	 have	 to	 be	 present
simultaneously	to	be	in	conflict.	This	is	very	simple	arithmetic.
If	 the	buddha	has	arisen	 in	you,	 if	 that	awakening	has	happened	 in	you,	zorba
disappears.
It	 is	 just	 like	you	were	asleep,	 and	now	you	are	awake.	When	you	are	awake,
sleep	is	no	more.	Zorba	is	the	name	of	your	spiritual	sleep.	They	cannot	co-exist.
The	moment	 you	 are	 conscious,	 alert,	 aware,	 the	 darkness	 of	 the	 unconscious
disappears.	Either	there	is	zorba,	and	buddha	is	dormant....	Buddha	is	just	a	seed
as	far	as	zorba	is	concerned,	it	is	non-existential.	When	buddha	has	blossomed,
zorba	disappears,	just	as	darkness	disappears	when	you	bring	the	light	in.
You	cannot	have	light	and	darkness	together.
I	have	always	loved	an	ancient	story.
God	 made	 the	 world,	 and	 from	 that	 very	 day	 the	 sun	 went	 running	 after
darkness.	And	darkness	could	not	understand:	 it	has	not	harmed	the	sun,	 it	has
not	 even	 talked	 with	 the	 sun,	 it	 has	 not	 even	 met	 the	 sun,	 yet	 the	 sun	 is
continuously	harassing	her.
After	millions	of	years	of	harassment,	she	finally	got	tired	and	went	to	God	and
said,	"It	is	ungrateful	to	complain,	but	there	is	a	limit	to	everything.	I	have	been
harassed	 for	millions	of	years,	 and	 I	 cannot	 conceive	of	 any	 fault	 on	my	part.
The	sun	goes	on	expelling	me	from	everywhere.	It	is	even	difficult	to	take	a	rest
without	anxiety	--	the	sun	may	be	coming,	the	sunrise	may	be	close.	I	have	not
slept	 for	millions	of	years	 --	 the	anguish	would	not	allow	it.	The	sun	has	been
almost	 a	 continuous	 torture,	 and	 without	 any	 reason.	 I	 simply	 want	 to	 know:
what	have	I	done	wrong?"
God	 said,	 "You	 should	have	 come	earlier.	There	was	no	need	 to	wait	 so	 long.
This	 is	 very	 ungentlemanly	 on	 the	 part	 of	 the	 sun.	 The	 sun	 should	 be	 called
immediately."
The	sun	was	called.	He	asked	the	messenger,	"What	is	the	problem?	--	because	I
have	never	done	anything	wrong.	I	simply	go	on	doing	the	same	routine	every
day.	Since	God	made	me,	I	have	not	done	anything	else."
But	the	messenger	said,	"God	is	very	angry.	You	have	been	hurting,	harassing	a
poor	woman	--	darkness."
He	 said,	 "My	God,	 I	 have	 never	 heard	 of	 her.	 I	 have	 never	met	 her.	 I	 am	not
interested	 in	women	at	 all	 --	 I	 am	a	born	celibate.	 I	 am	coming,	 I	want	 to	 see
who	this	woman	is."
And	as	the	sun	came	to	the	house	of	God,	darkness	disappeared.
God	said,	"Where	has	that	woman	gone?"	They	searched	everywhere;	darkness
was	not	found.
Millions	of	years	passed	again,	and	one	day	the	woman	appeared	and	she	said,
"You	have	not	done	anything;	it	is	still	continuing,	the	same	torture."
God	said,	"You	are	strange.	When	the	sun	was	here,	where	did	you	go?"
She	said,	"You	are	behaving	like	a	simpleton.	If	the	sun	is	here,	I	cannot	be	here;
if	I	am	here,	the	sun	cannot	be	here.	We	cannot	stand	each	other.	You	will	have
to	hear	our	story	separately	and	then	decide."
God	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	my	way.	You	both	have	 to	 be	 present	 here	 so	 I	 can	be
certain	that	nobody	is	lying."
The	woman	said,	"Then	it	is	better	I	take	my	complaint	back."
Since	then,	the	woman	has	not	appeared	again.	Once	in	a	while	the	sun	comes	to
inquire,
"What	happened	to	the	woman	--	because	I	want	to	clear	it	up,	it	has	become	a
worry	on	my	head	that	somebody	is	being	hurt	by	me,	perhaps	unknowingly."
God	 said,	 "You	 need	 not	 be	 worried.	 The	 problem	 is	 such	 that	 it	 cannot	 be
solved.	 I	 cannot	 give	 any	 decision	 unless	 you	 are	 both	 present	 in	 my	 court
together	and	I	have	listened	to	both	sides	in	the	presence	of	each	other.	But	by
the	 very	 nature	 of	 things,	 you	 cannot	 both	 be	 present.	 That	 woman	 is	 your
absence.	 So	 of	 course	 you	 cannot	 be	 present	 and	 absent	 simultaneously.	Drop
your	worry.	You	are	doing	perfectly	fine,	and	that	woman	is	not	going	to	report
against	you	again.	The	file	in	your	case	is	closed."
Exactly	the	same	is	the	case	with	zorba	and	buddha.
The	moment	buddha	arrives	with	all	his	light	and	beauty,	with	all	his	awareness,
with	all	his	joy,	zorba	disappears,	dissolves.	Conflict	is	impossible.
Conflict	is	possible	only	in	your	mind.
You	 have	 been	 listening	 to	 me	 so	 you	 have	 made	 a	 concept	 of	 zorba	 and	 a
concept	 of	 buddha;	 neither	 have	 you	 lived	 zorba	 nor	 have	 you	 lived	 buddha.
These	are	only	words	in	your	mind.
Then	conflict	is	very	easy;	then	you	can	go	on	arguing	within	your	mind:	"How
can	 zorba	 and	 buddha	 become	 one?	 They	 are	 antagonistic,	 they	 are	 enemies;
harmony	is	not	possible."
Yes,	in	the	mind	it	is	not	possible.
That's	why	I	am	telling	you	constantly	to	go	beyond	mind,	where	it	is	possible	--
not	only	possible,	it	is	already	happening.
Beyond	mind,	zorba	is	the	buddha;	there	is	no	dividing	line.	All	that	is	beautiful
in	zorba	becomes	even	more	beautiful	when	buddha	arrives,	everything	becomes
a	 thousandfold	 more	 glorified.	 And	 all	 that	 is	 wrong	 and	 ugly	 in	 zorba
disappears	 like	 darkness.	 That	 which	 can	 be	 absorbed	 is	 absorbed,	 and	 that
which	is	not	worth	absorbing	is	dissolved.
But	don't	make	it	a	mental	problem.
My	approach	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	of	meditation.	It	is	an	existential	approach.
The	zorba	loves	singing,	playing	on	his	musical	instruments,	dancing.
Buddha	will	make	 it	 perfect,	 absolute.	Even	 silence	will	 become	a	 song,	 even
stones	 will	 become	 sermons,	 and	 whatever	 you	 touch	 will	 become	 a	 musical
instrument	because	your	hands	will	now	have	the	magic	of	the	whole	existence;
they	will	have	the	grace,	the	beauty,	the	poetry....
Your	life	will	not	be	a	struggle	between	zorba	and	buddha,	but	a	love	affair	--	so
deep	 that	 two	 lovers	 disappear	 into	 each	 other,	 never	 to	 separate	 again.	 The
union,	the	harmony,	the	accordance	is	going	to	be	eternal.
But	avoid	the	mind.
Mind	knows	only	conflict.	Even	where	there	is	no	conflict,	mind	creates	it;	even
where	there	is	no	problem,	mind	creates	it.
Mind	 cannot	 exist	 without	 problems;	 problems	 are	 its	 nourishment.	 Conflict,
fight,	 disharmony	 --	 and	 the	 mind	 is	 perfectly	 at	 ease	 and	 at	 home.	 Silence,
harmony	--	and	the	mind	starts	becoming	afraid,	because	harmony,	silence	and
peace	are	nothing	but	death	to	the	mind.
So	just	shift	your	problem	from	the	mind.	Start	living.	And	with	me,	it	is	easy;	it
has	never	ever	 in	history	been	so	easy,	because	I	am	not	 telling	you	 to	disown
the	zorba,	I	am	telling	you	to	live	the	zorba	to	its	utmost.	There	is	nothing	to	be
afraid	of.	Only	add	one	more	thing,	and	that	is	meditation.
Meditation	is	the	bridge	between	zorba	and	buddha.	Once	the	bridge	is	complete
and	the	buddha	descends	there	will	be	a	tremendous	change	in	your	zorba	--	all
that	is	ugly	will	be	gone,	and	all	that	is	beautiful	will	be	beautified	tremendously.
The	zorba	is	not	going	to	lose	anything.	Without	buddha,	zorba	is	just	a	mundane
existence.	Without	zorba,	the	buddha	has	no	roots	--	only	flowers.	But	how	long
can	flowers	live	without	roots?
Roots	are	ugly;	that's	why	they	remain	hiding	underneath	the	ground	--	but	they
are	 the	 source	 of	 life	 and	 juice.	 Those	 beautiful	 flowers	 cannot	 exist	 without
those	ugly	roots	underneath	the	ground;	those	roots	are	continuously	nourishing
them,	giving	their	life	to	the	flowers.
And	this	miracle	 is	happening	everywhere.	But	we	are	so	blind	that	we	cannot
see.
When	you	see	a	 roseflower,	you	don't	 see	 that	 in	 that	 roseflower	 is	hidden	 the
whole	philosophy	of	life	--	the	leaves	are	not	red,	nor	are	the	thorns	red	nor	are
the	roots	red.
Yet	 out	 of	 this	 green	 foliage	 comes	 a	 beautiful	 red	 rose.	 It	 is	 nourished	 by
everything:	 by	 the	 roots,	 by	 the	 leaves	 --	 because	 the	 leaves	 are	 breathing
constantly;	 otherwise,	 the	 rose	 would	 die.	 Branches	 are	 constantly	 doing	 a
miracle	--	bringing	juice	and	water	from	the	depths	in	the	earth	upwards,	against
gravitation.	And	there	is	no	pumping	system.
In	the	beginning	scientists	were	puzzled	at	how	trees	one	hundred	and	fifty	feet
high	managed	to	keep	their	leaves	green	--	lush	green,	at	a	hundred	and	fifty	feet
high.	Water	goes	against	gravitation	with	no	apparent	mechanism.
Miracles	are	all	over;	one	just	needs	a	sensitive	heart,	a	perceptive	eye,	and	you
will	see	matter	and	spirit	dancing	together	everywhere.
Zorba	and	buddha	are	never	separate.	There	 is	 just	one	possibility:	buddha	can
be	asleep;	then	zorba	has	to	live	a	mundane	life.	Or,	under	the	stupid	influence	of
the	past,	you	can	disown	your	body,	become	destructive	of	your	body	and	try	to
achieve	the	impossible	--
living	like	a	buddha	without	having	anything	to	do	with	zorba.
Thousands	 of	 saints	 have	 done	 that,	 but	 you	 will	 not	 find	 in	 their	 life	 roses
flowering;	you	will	not	find	in	their	life	the	lush	greenery	of	existence;	you	will
not	find	in	their	life	songs	and	dances.	They	are	almost	the	living	dead.
I	am	fighting	against	that	whole	past.
I	want	you	to	be	a	zorba	and	a	buddha	together;	then	whatever	is	ugly	in	zorba
will	disappear	on	its	own	accord	--	you	are	not	to	renounce	it.	And	whatever	is
beautiful	will	be	absorbed	in	the	new	consciousness,	in	the	new	awakening.
But	don't	make	it	a	mind	problem.
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEFORE	MEETING	YOU	AND	TAKING	SANNYAS	 IN	 1980,	 I	USED	TO
ACHIEVE
WHATSOEVER	 TARGETS	 AND	 GOALS	 I	 MADE.	 BUT	 SINCE	 THEN	 I
HAVE
BEEN	RELAXING	AT	THE	PLATFORM,	WAITING	FOR	THE	WHISTLE	OF
THE
INCOMING	 TRAIN.	 RELAXING	 AND	 WAITING	 HAS	 INCREASED	 TO
SUCH	AN
EXTENT	THAT	SOMETIMES	DURING	YOUR	DISCOURSES	THE	SOUND
OF	MY
OWN	SNORING	MAKES	ME	GET	UP,	FEELING	AS	IF	THE	TRAIN	HAS
ARRIVED	--	BUT	THE	TRAIN	NEVER	ARRIVES.
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	NEXT?
Suraj	Prakash,	learn	to	snore	totally.
This	 is	 not	 right	 --	 that	 your	 own	 snoring	 wakes	 you	 up.	 Be	 a	 real	 authentic
snorer,	so	that	it	wakes	up	everybody	but	you.
Snoring	is	an	art.
And	as	 far	 as	 the	platform	 is	 concerned,	you	are	not	on	 the	platform.	You	are
sleeping	on	 the	 train.	So	no	need	 to	worry.	The	 train	 is	 taking	you;	 that's	why
you	don't	hear	the	whistles	of	incoming	trains.
Snore	fully,	sleep	well;	the	train	is	going	fast.
This	 is	 one	of	 the	 problems	 for	 those	who	 in	 their	 life	 have	been	 achievers	 --
whatever	 they	 wanted,	 they	 achieved;	 whatever	 the	 target,	 whatever	 the	 goal,
they	managed	it.
But	enlightenment	is	not	a	goal.
And	God	is	not	an	achievement.
God	is	your	very	reality.	All	 that	you	need	is	to	relax	completely.	That's	why	I
am	saying	snore	perfectly.	This	getting	up	again	and	again	and	watching	whether
the	 train	 is	 coming	 in	 or	 not	 unnecessarily	 disturbs	 your	 sleep,	 disturbs	 your
relaxation.
My	sannyasins	are	not	goal	oriented.
My	whole	approach	is	that	of	let-go;	it	is	not	of	effort.	You	just	relax	and	enjoy.
Even	in	the	discourse	sleeping	is	not	prohibited,	nor	is	snoring	prohibited.
Just	snore	a	little	musically	so	everybody	can	enjoy	it.
You	do	not	have	to	do	anything	--	so	don't	ask	what	next.	You	just	have	to	relax
so	totally	that	you	can	feel	your	being	in	its	ultimate	glory,	 its	blissfulness	and
benediction.
I	am	telling	you	that	you	are	already	where	you	want	to	be,	you	are	already	that
which	you	are	thinking	to	become.
Becoming	is	a	disease.
You	are	a	being.	You	are	not	to	become	anything.	But	because	in	your	whole	life
you	have	been	a	hard	worker,	achieving	everything	that	you	wanted,	it	is	just	the
old	habit	 that	makes	meditation	also	an	effort,	 enlightenment	 also	a	goal,	God
also	somewhere	else.
In	this	wide	world,	why	do	so	many	people	go	on	missing?	And	why	do	only	so
few	 people	 realize	 the	 truth,	 the	 beauty,	 the	 bliss?	 The	 reason	 is	 simple:
everybody	is	thinking	in	terms	of	goals.	And	those	who	are	thinking	in	terms	of
goals	are	going	to	fail	--
because	it	is	not	a	goal.	It	is	already	within	you.	So	the	more	you	run	to	get	it,
the	farther	you	go	away	from	it.
Coming	to	oneself	is	not	a	journey;	it	is	just	renouncing	all	effort,	all	goals,	all
becoming.
Just	start	enjoying	wherever	you	are	whatever	you	are.	This	is	the	most	simple
thing	but	it	appears	very	difficult	because	we	have	been	trained	for	goals.
There	is	nothing	that	you	have	to	do.
All	that	is	needed	is	for	you	to	sit	silently	doing	nothing	--	the	spring	comes,	and
the	grass	grows	by	itself.
Naturally,	the	grass	never	gives	any	whistles,	it	simply	grows;	it	is	not	a	railway
station.
And	the	grass	is	growing.
But	if	you	see	it	every	day,	you	will	not	feel	that	it	is	growing.
You	are	all	growing.	You	will	realize	it	only	when	the	growth	has	come	to	such
an	explosion	that	you	cannot	conceive	that	it	is	possible	without	growth.	You	are
growing	 every	day	 --	 from	a	 child	 you	become	young,	 from	being	young	you
become	old;	but	you	cannot	find	the	point	at	which	you	started	becoming	young,
at	 what	 point	 you	 started	 becoming	 old	 --	 because	 you	 are	 so	 close	 to	 your
growth	and	it	happens	slowly	every	day.
Being	close	to	me,	you	are	not	aware	of	the	fact	that	you	are	no	more	part	of	the
world	in	which	you	are	living.	Superficially	you	are	living	in	the	same	world,	but
deep	down	you	have	entered	a	different	world	with	me	--	a	world	of	no	effort,	a
world	of	non-doing,	a	world	of	no	goal,	a	world	of	isness,	of	here,	of	now.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	 DO	 I	 FEEL	 THAT	 I	 HAVE	 FAILED?	 IS	 IT	 BECAUSE	 I	 STILL
HANKER	TO
BE	PERFECT,	SUPERHUMAN,	SPECIAL?	OSHO,	PLEASE	DON'T	SPARE
ME
ANYTHING!
Surabhi,	the	answer	that	I	gave	to	Suraj	Prakash	is	also	the	answer	for	you.
Only	people	who	want	to	be	somewhere,	somebody,	have	to	suffer	the	sadness	of
failure.
But	a	person	who	never	wants	to	be	anybody,	never	wants	to	be	anywhere	else,
cannot	suffer	the	sadness	of	failure	--	he	is	always	successful,	just	like	me.
From	 my	 very	 childhood,	 my	 parents,	 my	 well-wishers,	 my	 neighbors,	 my
teachers,	 everybody	was	 saying	 that,	 "You	are	going	 to	be	utterly	worthless,	 a
good-for-nothing."
I	 said,	 "If	 that	 is	 my	 destiny,	 I	 am	 perfectly	 happy.	 Why	 should	 I	 try	 to	 be
somebody	else?	Utterly	useless?	--	perfectly	good!	Good	for	nothing?	I	don't	see
anything	wrong	in	it."
And	they	would	say,	"Can't	you	ever	talk	reasonably?"
I	said,	"It	is	just	a	question	of	reason.	Whatever	is	going	to	happen,	I	am	going	to
be	successful....	Because	I	have	not	made	a	criterion	that	this	has	to	happen,	only
then	will	 I	 be	 successful.	 Just	 vice-versa:	 I	 am	 successful.	Whatever	 happens,
that	does	not	matter;	my	successfulness	is	certain."
One	of	my	professors	was	so	concerned....	He	 loved	me	so	much	 that	he	said,
"You	could	top	the	university	with	your	left	hand,	but	your	behavior	is	such	that
even	if	you	manage	to	get	a	third	class	that	would	be	a	miracle	--	because	I	never
see	you	reading	any	textbook."
He	used	to	come	to	the	hostel	to	check.	He	never	found	a	textbook	in	my	room.	I
had	never	purchased	one.
"When	 the	professors	are	 lecturing,	you	are	 sleeping.	And	 the	professors	don't
disturb	you	because	when	you	are	awake,	you	are	arguing.	It	 is	better	 that	you
remain	asleep	so	there	is	no	disturbance."
He	was	so	worried:	 I	may	go	 to	 the	examination	hall	 --	but	 I	may	not	go.	Just
before	 my	 post-graduate	 final	 examination,	 he	 came	 in	 the	 evening	 and	 said,
"Give	me	a	promise."
I	said,	"I	can	give	you	a	promise,	but	I	lie.	So,	it	is	not	of	much	use."
He	said,	"You	lie?"
I	said,	"Yes,	I	lie;	whatever	suits	the	purpose,	I	do	it.	You	want	a	promise?	--	I'll
give	you	a	promise.	If	somebody	else	comes	and	asks	for	a	promise,	I'll	give	him
a	promise	also."
He	 said,	 "That	 means	 you	 will	 torture	 me.	 Tomorrow	 morning,	 be	 ready	 at
seven;	I	will	pick	you	up	and	leave	you	at	the	examination	hall	--	every	day."
And	 it	was	 really	 a	 torture	 for	 him,	because	he	was	 a	 drunkard,	 a	 really	good
man.	He	never	used	to	get	up	before	one	o'clock.	To	get	up	at	six	o'clock	and	get
ready,	and....
And	he	had	perhaps	the	oldest	model	car	--	 it	would	take	hours	 to	start	 it.	The
whole	neighborhood	would	be	pushing	 it.	Somehow	he	would	manage	once	 it
had	started.
But	he	would	reach	there	exactly	at	seven.	All	these	difficulties....	And	he	would
find	me	sleeping,	and	he	would	wake	me	and	say,	"This	is	too	much.	I	never	get
up	before	one,	I	am	getting	up	at	six.	And	you	know	my	car,	she	is	lazier	than
me.	At	six	o'clock	to	start	it	in	the	cold	is	so	difficult	--	the	whole	neighborhood
has	to	help.	And	you	are	sleeping."
I	said,	"When	you	told	me	that	you	would	be	coming,	I	 trusted."	I	said,	"Then
why	bother	to	get	up	early?	When	you	come,	I	will	get	out	of	bed	and	sit	in	your
car."
He	said,	"You	are	not	going	to	take	a	bath	or	anything?"
I	said,	"Everything	after	the	examination."
"Any	preparation?"
I	said,	"Who	bothers	about	preparation?"
On	the	way	to	the	examination	hall,	he	would	try	to	tell	me,	"Listen,	remember	a
few	things:	this	is	your	roll	number.	Don't	forget."	He	would	force	me	to	write
the	roll	number	on	my	hand,	so	 that	I	wouldn't	 forget	 it.	 I	would	write	 the	roll
number	on	my	hand,	and	he	would	 say,	 "Write	your	name;	otherwise	you	will
wonder	what	this	is,	whose	roll	number	it	is."
I	said,	"You	should	trust	me	just	a	little	bit."
He	said,	 "I	don't	 trust	you.	First	you	do	 this	 examination.	You	have	 to	 top	 the
university."
I	said,	"Whatever	happens,	I	am	happy."
And	 he	would	 tell	 the	 superintendent,	 "Don't	 let	 him	 out	 of	 the	 hall	 for	 three
hours."
Three	hours	was	the	time	--	because	he	was	worried	that	once	he	is	gone,	I	may
go	back	 to	my	bed.	And	 the	superintendent	came	 to	me	and	said,	"Remember,
there	is	no	hurry	for	you	to	finish	the	paper.	Take	your	time.	You	cannot	get	out
of	here	for	three	hours.
Your	professor	has	ordered	me,	and	I	respect	that	old	man."
I	said,	"This	is	strange."
I	would	finish	the	paper	in	two	hours	or	one	and	a	half	hours,	and	I	would	ask
the	superintendent,	"You	can	see	I	have	finished	the	paper.	Now	don't	bother	me,
because	I	have	not	even	taken	a	bath	yet.	I	have	to	go	and	wash	my	mouth,	take
a	bath	and	change	my	clothes.	I	have	come	directly	from	bed."
He	said,	"Directly	from	bed?	But	who	forced	you?"
I	 said,	 "The	 same	 professor	 who	 forced	 you."	 And	 I	 said,	 "I	 will	 not	 report
against	you.
Nobody	is	going	to	report	it;	everybody	is	so	engaged	in	writing."
He	 said,	 "If	 this	 is	 the	 situation,	 you	 can	 go.	 But	 have	 you	 answered	 all	 the
questions?"
"I...	You	can	see!"	He	saw	that	I	had	answered,	but	he	would	look.	He	would	say,
"This	is	strange.	In	a	post-graduate	examination,	your	answer	to	the	question	is
just	one	page,	half	a	page.	Do	you	hope	to	pass?
I	said,	"I	never	hope	anything.	This	much	I	enjoyed;	more	than	that....	I	never	do
anything	that	I	don't	enjoy."
And	by	chance	it	happened	that	one	of	the	retired	professors,	Professor	Ranade
of	 Allahabad	 University	 --	 he	 was	 a	 world-famous	 authority	 --	 he	 got	 my
examination	papers,	my	answers.	So	my	professor	was	going	completely	mad.
He	said,	"First	I	did	not	think	that	you	would	even	get	a	third	class	--	although
you	deserve	 to	 top	 the	university.	But	now	you	are	 in	 a	very	dangerous	man's
hands:	 it	 is	 known	 for	 years,	 he	 has	 not	 given	 a	 first	 class	 to	 anybody	 in	 his
whole	 life.	He	 is	 retired	now,	but	he	 still	gets	 the	examination	papers.	And	by
chance	he	is	going	to	examine	your	papers.	You	are	finished."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	That	makes	me	happy:	I	will	be	staying	one	more	year
with	you."
He	said,	"Don't	talk	nonsense."
I	said,	"I	am	not	 talking	nonsense.	You	will	have	another	chance	to	take	me	to
the	examination	hall,	to	torture	me.	You	should	be	happy.
But	 this	 is	 what	 I	 call...	 strange	 things	 happen:	 Ranade	 gave	 me	 ninety-nine
percent	 marks,	 with	 a	 special	 note	 saying	 that,	 "I	 wanted	 to	 give	 a	 hundred
percent	 but	 that	 might	 look	 a	 little	 prejudiced.	 The	 reason	 I	 am	 giving	 him
ninety-nine	percent	 --	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	my	whole	 life	 a	 first	 class	 --	 is
because	I	always	wanted	the	answers	to	be	to	the	point.	And	I	have	never	seen	a
man	who	would	answer	a	whole	question	in	just	one	paragraph.	I	loved	the	boy!"
He	had	written	the	note	to	the	vice-chancellor	saying,	"Tell	the	boy	from	me	--
show	him	my	note"	--	he	was	very	old,	seventy-five	years	--	"that	he	is	the	first
in	my	whole	life	to	whom	I	am	giving	a	first	class."
I	 topped	 the	university.	My	professor	 --	who	was	 so	anxious	 --	now	could	not
believe	it.
When	the	results	came,	he	asked	me,	"What	is	the	matter?	There	must	be	some
mistake.
You,	and	topping	the	university?	Just	go	to	the	vice-chancellor's	office,	find	out	-
-	there	is	some	mistake	in	the	newspaper."
I	said,	"Don't	bother.	If	there	is	some	mistake,	that	is	perfectly	good."
But	he	himself	was	so	anxious	that	I	had	to	push	his	car,	start	his	car,	and	take
him	to	the	vice-chancellor's	office.	Till	he	saw	the	note,	he	did	not	believe	it.
And	coming	out	of	the	office	he	looked	me	up	and	down,	and	he	said,	"This	is
the	strangest	thing	that	I	have	seen	in	my	life,	that	you	have	been	getting	out	of
bed	--	no	preparation,	nothing	--	and	now	you	are	the	gold	medalist.	For	the	first
time,"	he	said,	 "I	have	started	believing	 in	God	 --	because	you	could	not	have
managed	it.	God	must	be	behind	you."
I	 said,	 "That	 is	 absolutely	 clear.	 That's	 why	 I	 was	 so	 relaxed.	 You	 were
unnecessarily	worried.	God	is	just	exactly	behind	me	the	way	I	am	behind	your
car	to	start	it.	He	starts	me,	and	once	I	am	started	everything	goes	well."
Surabhi,	there	is	no	failure	in	life.	It	all	depends	how	you	take	things.	If	you	are
desiring	too	much	--	you	want	to	reach	too	high,	and	you	cannot	--	then	there	is
frustration	and	failure.	But	if	you	are	not	desiring	anything	and	you	are	perfectly
happy	wherever	you	are,	life	is	moment-to-moment	victory.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	THE	MIND	RUNNING	LIKE	CRAZY	WHEN	THE	HEART	WANTS
TO
SAY	SOMETHING?
Mind	is	always	afraid	--	only	of	one	thing,	and	that	is	your	heart	--	because	mind
is	basically	meant	to	be	a	servant	but	has	managed	to	become	the	master.
And	the	heart	 --	which	was	going	 to	be	 the	master	 --	has	not	even	bothered	 to
interfere,	and	has	allowed	the	mind	to	remain	the	master.
But	the	mind	is	aware	that	if	at	any	moment	the	heart	wants	it,	his	mastery	will
be	gone.
So	whenever	the	heart	wants	to	say	something,	a	fear	arises	in	the	mind.
Mind	is	very	much	afraid	of	love.
Mind	is	very	much	afraid	of	trust.
Mind	is	very	much	afraid	of	anything	that	has	to	do	with	the	heart.	Because	the
mind's	mastery	is	not	part	of	nature.	Heart	is	naturally	the	master.
But	 this	 is	 the	problem:	Because	 the	heart	 feels	 its	mastery	 so	definitely,	with
such	 a	 certainty,	 it	 never	 asserts	 itself	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need.	 It	 is	 an	 intrinsic
knowing	in	the	heart	that	the	mind	can	be	pushed	aside	at	any	moment.	And	the
mind	 knows	 perfectly	well	 that	 he	 is	 just	 a	 servant.	 Because	 the	master	 is	 so
gentlemanly,	he	has	allowed	even	the	servant	to	pretend	to	be	the	master.
But	a	servant	is	a	servant.
So	whenever	your	heart	wants	to	say	something,	the	mind	starts	feeling	shaky	--
it	wants	the	heart	to	remain	completely	dead,	it	wants	man	to	become	completely
heartless.	And	it	has	succeeded	all	over	the	world	in	making	people	heartless.
But	once	in	a	while	a	few	people	escape	from	the	slavery	of	the	mind	and	start
asserting	 the	 rights	 of	 their	 heart.	 This	 is	 the	 greatest	 revolution	 there	 is,	 the
revolution	of	the	heart	against	the	mind.
I	call	it	the	essential	sannyas.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
ALWAYS	WHEN	I	WALK	ACROSS	TO	YOUR	HOUSE	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO
DANCE	 AND	 SING,	 BUT	 THEN	 TEARS	 COME	 INTO	 MY	 EYES	 AND
STRONG
FEELINGS	OVERWHELM	ME	AND	I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	SHOUT	TO
EVERYBODY,	"WAKE	UP!	HERE	IS	OSHO.	HE	IS	AVAILABLE	FOR
EVERYBODY!"	I	AM	SO	GRATEFUL	FOR	ALL	I	HAVE	GOT	FROM	YOU,
AND
SOMETIMES	 IT	 IS	 SO	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 KEEP	 ALL	 THIS	 TO	MYSELF	 --
BUT	I	WON'T	GO	ON	A	MISSIONARY	TRIP.
WHAT	CAN	I	DO?
To	have	a	mission	and	to	be	a	missionary	are	two	different	things.
The	missionary	is	functioning	from	the	mind.
And	to	have	a	mission	is	the	overflowing	experience	of	the	heart.
The	 distinction	 is	 difficult,	 but	 not	 impossible.	 The	 missionary	 is	 trying	 to
convince	 people	 about	 something	 of	 which	 he	 himself	 is	 not	 convinced	 --
because	the	things	that	he	wants	people	to	be	convinced	of	are	not	things	that	he
has	 experienced.	 A	 missionary	 is	 simply	 a	 computer	 transferring	 knowledge
from	one	generation	to	another	generation.
But	to	have	a	mission	is	a	totally	different	thing.
Jesus	is	not	a	missionary.
Pope	the	polack	is.
Jesus	has	a	mission.
Gautam	Buddha	has	a	mission.
To	 have	 a	 mission	 means	 you	 have	 experienced	 something,	 and	 it	 is	 against
human	 compassion	 and	 love	 not	 to	 share	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 converting
anybody;	it	is	a	question	of	sharing.	So	there	is	no	harm.	If	it	is	your	experience,
shout	it	from	the	housetops.	If	it	is	coming	from	your	heart,	then	don't	prevent	it
--	because	 the	more	you	spread	 it,	 the	deeper	will	go	 its	 roots.	 It	 is	 just	 like	a
tree;	 the	 tree	 goes	 on	 spreading	 its	 branches	 far	 and	 wide	 in	 the	 sky,	 and
underneath	the	earth	the	roots	go	on	spreading.
If	 you	 have	 an	 experience	 that	 you	 feel	 is	 capable	 of	 quenching	 the	 thirst	 of
many,	then	take	every	risk	--	shout	it,	sing	it,	dance	it,	do	whatever	you	can	do.
Even	if	the	whole	world	thinks	you	are	insane,	don't	be	worried.	The	more	you
share	your	experience,	the	deeper	it	will	go	into	your	own	heart,	and	the	stronger
it	will	become;	your	individuality	will	become	a	tremendous	force.
Never	become	a	missionary.
A	missionary	is	a	servant,	a	poor	servant	--	just	like	any	other	servant.	He	gets	a
certain	 salary	 to	 spread	 the	message	 of	 the	BIBLE.	He	 is	 not	 a	 bit	 concerned
about	 the	message;	 his	whole	 concern	 is	 about	 his	 salary.	 If	 somebody	 else	 is
ready	 to	 give	 him	 double	 his	 salary,	 he	 would	 be	 ready	 to	 speak	 against	 the
BIBLE.
I	have	heard	that	in	a	church....	A	bishop	was	very	much	worried	because	one	of
the	 eldest	 and	 the	 richest	members	of	 the	 church	used	 to	 sleep,	 just	 like	Suraj
Prakash	--	but	it	was	not	a	place	like	this,	where	even	snoring	is	allowed,	as	long
as	you	are	a	little	musical.	And	the	old	man	used	to	snore.	The	bishop	was	very
much	disturbed	as	the	man	was	always	sitting	right	in	front	of	him.
Finally,	the	bishop	found	a	way	--	because	the	old	man	would	always	come	with
a	 small	boy,	his	great	grandson.	The	bishop	caught	hold	of	 the	great	grandson
one	day,	took	him	to	a	corner	and	told	him,	"Can	you	do	one	thing	for	me?	I	will
give	you	fifty	cents	every	Sunday."
The	boy	said,	"Done.	What	do	you	want?"
He	said,	"You	don't	have	to	do	much.	Whenever	your	old	man	starts	snoring,	you
just	 nudge	 him,	wake	 him.	His	 sleeping	 is	 not	 a	 problem;	 the	 problem	 is	 that
when	he	 snores,	 he	wakes	up	 the	whole	 congregation.	And	 I	 don't	 have	many
sermons	--	only	 three.	So	I	don't	want	people	 to	be	awake,	otherwise	 they	will
start	getting	bored."
The	boy	said,	"Advance	me!"
The	bishop	said,	"Advance?	You	are	something!	Don't	you	believe	me?"
The	 boy	 said,	 "Business	 is	 business.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 belief	 --	 it	 is	 not
religion.	You	just	give	me	fifty	cents	and	then	you	will	see	my	performance	next
Sunday."
And	 the	 boy	 performed	 well.	 He	 did	 not	 allow	 the	 old	 man	 to	 sleep	 at	 all.
Whenever	he	snored	the	boy	would	start	hitting	him.	He	looked	many	times	at
the	boy:	"What	has	happened	to	you?"
But	the	boy	would	not	look	at	him;	he	would	listen	to	the	sermon	so	religiously,
unconcerned	with	what	was	happening.
Outside,	 the	 old	 man	 said,	 "You	 rascal,	 why	 were	 you...?	 The	 whole	 night	 I
cannot	sleep	because	of	my	old	age	and	this	is	the	only	time	in	the	week	that	I
have	a	good	 sleep,	 and	you	disturb	me.	What	happened?	What	went	wrong	 in
your	mind?	And	you	looked	so	religious,	listening	as	if	you	understood	what	was
being	said."
He	said,	 "It	 is	not	a	question	of	 religion.	 I	get	 fifty	cents	 for	my	performance.
The	bishop	gave	me	an	advance	for	today.	And	I	am	going	to	the	bishop	to	get
an	advance	for	next	Sunday."
The	old	man	said,	"Wait.	I	will	give	you	a	dollar	--	but	don't	disturb	me!"
He	said,	"Perfectly	okay.	Advance	me!"
Next	Sunday,	the	bishop	was	very	puzzled.	Many	times	he	inquired	of	the	boy,
but	the	boy	looked	everywhere	else,	but	never	at	the	bishop.	"What	happened	to
the	boy?
Perhaps	I	have	not	given	him	the	advance	after	all	so	he	is	not	bothering."
He	tried	somehow,	hoping	that	nobody	would	understand	what	he	was	trying	to
do...	he	made	gestures.	But	the	boy	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
After	the	meeting	he	got	hold	of	the	boy	saying,	"What	is	the	matter?	Can't	you
even	trust	me	for	fifty	cents?	Here	is	fifty	cents."
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 your	 fifty	 cents.	My	 old	man	 is	 giving	me	 a
dollar	not	to	disturb	him.	Now,	if	you	want....	It	is	up	to	you."
The	bishop	said,	"I	am	a	poor	man.	If	I	go	on	giving	to	you	in	this	way,	and	your
old	man	goes	on	doubling	it....	He	is	a	rich	man."
The	boy	said,	"Business	is	business.	If	you	cannot	go	beyond	a	dollar,	then	not
only	will	my	grandfather	snore,	I	am	going	to	snore	too;	and	then	you	will	see
real	chaos.	Then	not	only	will	you	have	to	pay	for	my	old	man,	you	will	have	to
pay	 for	me	 --	 separately:	 fifty	cents	 for	me	and	a	dollar	and	a	half	 for	 the	old
man.	Only	two	dollars.	But	it	will	change	every	Sunday;	it	all	depends	on	how
business	goes."
A	missionary	is	a	poor	servant.	Christianity	pays	him;	he	believes	in	Christianity.
If	somebody	else	pays	him	more,	he	is	ready	for	it.
But	a	man	of	mission	is	a	totally	different	thing	--	you	cannot	change	him.	You
can	crucify	him,	but	you	cannot	change	him.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOUR	FIRST	SILENT	MESSAGE	TO	ME	WAS:	"DON'T	BE	SO	SERIOUS,
ENJOY,	CELEBRATE!"
AFTER	THREE	YEARS	 I	 FINALLY	GOT	 IT!	WHY	DID	 IT	TAKE	ME	SO
LONG	TO
WAKE	UP?	AM	I	REALLY	WAKING	UP?
Do	you	think	three	years	is	so	long?
What	is	your	criterion?	Time	is	eternal.
Three	years	are	not	even	equal	to	three	seconds.
If	you	can	understand	the	message	to	celebrate,	to	rejoice,	even	in	three	lives,	it
is	early,	it	is	not	late.
You	are	fortunate	that	in	three	years	you	got	it.
How	 much	 time	 you	 take	 depends	 on	 you.	 You	 could	 have	 got	 it	 the	 very
moment	 I	 gave	 it	 to	 you.	 You	 took	 three	 years	 --	 postponing	 for	 tomorrow
because	 so	many	 other	 things	 have	 to	 be	 done,	 postponing	 for	 other	 reasons.
Because,	celebrating	when	the	whole	world	is	in	misery?	--	you	will	look	insane
--	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?	 The	 world	 is	 facing	 a	 nuclear	 disaster	 and	 you	 are
celebrating?"
You	 have	 found	many	 reasons	 to	 remain	 miserable,	 to	 remain	 sad,	 to	 remain
serious;	but	you	managed	to	come	out	of	them	in	three	years.
If	you	ask	me,	you	have	come	home	quite	early.	It	is	not	a	long	time.
In	 fact,	whenever	you	understand	 it,	 it	 is	always	early	 --	because	 thousands	of
times,	for	thousands	of	lives	you	have	heard	it	and	you	did	not	get	it.	You	went
on	postponing,	you	went	on	forgetting.
I	was	refering	in	a	talk	to	a	beautiful	book,	WAITING	FOR	GODOT.	The	author
certainly	means	waiting	for	God;	but	not	to	hurt	anybody,	he	manages	to	create	a
fictitious	namèGodot'.	But	reading	the	whole	story	--	and	it	is	a	small	piece....
Two	 persons	 are	 sitting	 underneath	 a	 tree,	 and	 they	 are	 saying,	 "He	 has	 not
come,	 this	 is	 the	 time;	he	should	have	 reached	here	by	now."	They	are	getting
worried	 and	 they	 are	 talking,	 and....	 And	 nobody	 says	 who	 this	 Godot	 is.	 Or
when	this	Godot	promised	to	come,	or	who	has	ever	met	him	--	nobody	touches
any	sensitive	points.	It	is	taken	for	granted	that	Godot	is	coming.	It	is	good	when
you	have	nothing	to	do,	at	least	to	wait	--
something	is	going	to	happen!
I	thought	perhaps	Godot	may	be	the	German	word	for	God,	so	I	asked	my	oldest
German	sannyasin	Haridas,	"Haridas,	is	Godot	a	German	word	for	God?"
Haridas	said,	"No."
I	said,	"What	is	German	for	God?"
He	said,	"The	German	word	is	gott!"
And	I	said,	"That	is	really	German?	Gott!?"
There	is	no	question	of	getting	it.	In	three	years	you	got	it!
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	The	watermelon	and	the	knife
23	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610235
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH21
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
108
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I'M	SO	GLAD	AND	HAPPY	TO	BE	WITH	YOU.	MY	BELOVED	MASTER,
I'M	SO
GRATEFUL	TO	YOU	BECAUSE	YOU	ARE	STILL	AVAILABLE	TO	ALL	OF
US
WHO	WANT	 TO	 DRINK	 FROM	 YOUR	 NEVER-ENDING	 SOURCE.	 IT'S
SUCH	 A	 BLESSING	 TO	 BE	 SHOWERED	 FROM	 YOUR	 LOVE	 AND
COMPASSION	THAT
I'LL	NEVER	FIND	THE	WORDS	ANYWAY	TO	SAY	THANK	YOU	FOR
EVERYTHING	YOU	GIVE	TO	US.
SOON	 I'LL	 BE	 BACK	 IN	 THAT	 CRAZY	WORLD	 OUT	 THERE,	WHERE
YOU
WILL	 BE	 PRESENT	 ONLY	 IN	MY	 HEART.	 SOMETIMES	 I	WONDER	 IF
IT'S	STILL
WORTH	 IT	 TO	 WORK	 OUTSIDE	 TO	 SPREAD	 YOUR	 TEACHINGS;	 I
WONDER	IF
YOU	STILL	HAVE	A	DESIGN,	A	HOPE	TO	DO	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS
CRAZY	 WORLD,	 OR	 IF	 YOU	 JUST	 WISH	 TO	 STAY	 WITH	 YOUR
SANNYASINS.
CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS?
The	question	has	many	questions	in	it.
First,	the	real	gratitude	can	never	find	words	to	express	itself.
The	gratitude	that	can	find	words	to	express	itself	is	just	a	formality	--	because
anything	heartfelt	immediately	goes	beyond	words,	concepts,	language.	You	can
live	it,	it	can	shine	from	your	eyes,	it	can	come	as	a	fragrance	from	your	whole
being.	It	can	be	a	music	of	your	silence,	but	you	cannot	say	it.	The	moment	you
say	it,	something	essential	dies	immediately.
Words	can	only	carry	corpses,	not	living	experiences.
So	it	is	understandable	that	you	find	it	difficult	to	express	your	thankfulness.	It	is
not	your	difficulty;	it	is	the	difficulty	of	the	experience	of	thankfulness	itself.
And	blessed	are	those	who	have	such	experiences	which	are	beyond	words.
Cursed	are	those	who	know	nothing	except	words	and	language.
Secondly,	you	are	saying	that	soon	you	will	be	going	away	from	me	and	I	will	be
only	in	your	heart.
If	 I	 am	 in	your	heart,	 there	 is	no	way	 to	go	away	 from	me.	You	can	go	away
from	my	physical	presence,	but	my	physical	presence	is	no	longer	significant	if
you	are	already	feeling	my	presence	in	your	heart.
You	have	become	aware	of	my	spiritual	presence.	The	physical	presence	is	only
a	triggering	point	--	if	it	can	lead	you	to	the	spiritual	presence,	its	work	is	done.
Now	I	will	be	beating	in	your	heart	wherever	you	are,	it	does	not	matter	whether
you	are	here	or	on	a	faraway	planet.
Love	is	the	only	phenomenon	which	destroys	space,	distance,	time.
The	chemistry	of	love	has	not	been	understood	yet.	The	physicists	are	concerned
about	space	and	 time,	and	 they	have	not	yet	come	 to	understand	 the	point	 that
there	is	something	more	in	existence,	where	time	and	space	both	disappear.
Love	 is	a	phenomenon	which	knows	no	 time,	 space,	distance.	Perhaps	science
will	never	be	able	to	understand	it.	Perhaps	it	is	beyond	the	scope	of	science.	But
it	 is	 not	 beyond	 the	 scope	of	poetry,	 of	 religion.	 It	 is	 not	 beyond	 the	 scope	of
meditation.
It	 is	not	beyond	the	scope	of	every	individual	who	is	ready	to	dissolve	himself
into	love.
Science	then	remains	a	faraway	echo,	and	love	becomes	the	only	reality.
People	like	Shankara,	Bosanquet,	Bradley,	were	not	talking	nonsense	when	they
said	 that	 the	world	 is	 an	 illusion.	The	world	 consists	 of	 time	 and	 space	 --	 but
these	 people	 tried	 to	 argue	 that	 the	 world	 is	 an	 illusion.	 They	 made	 a
philosophical	system	propounding	the	illusoriness	of	the	world.	Their	very	effort
confutes	them	--	if	the	world	is	illusory,	then	what	is	the	need	to	prove	that	it	is
illusory?	If	something	is	not,	it	is	not.
But	 if	Shankara	had	to	go	out	of	 this	room,	he	would	go	through	the	door,	not
through	the	wall.	The	wall	is	real.	If	Bradley	had	to	take	his	lunch,	he	would	not
eat	stones.	Because	what	difference	can	there	be,	when	breads	are	illusory,	and
stones	are	also	illusory?	--
both	are	illusions.
These	people	were	trying	to	prove	something	which	they	had	not	experienced	in
their	own	beings.	 It	was	not	 the	experience	of	 love;	 it	was	mere	 logic.	Hence,
hundreds	 of	 philosophers	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 convince	 the	 world	 that	 all	 is
illusory,	but	nobody	is	convinced.	Even	they	themselves	are	not	convinced.
I	am	reminded	of	a	story.
One	Buddhist	philosopher	was	brought	to	the	court	of	a	king.	People	said	that	he
was	one	of	the	greatest	logicians	they	had	ever	heard	about.	And	he	propounded
the	 theory	 that	everything	 is	 illusory,	all	 is	made	of	 the	same	stuff	 that	dreams
are	made	of.
But	the	king	was	a	very	pragmatic,	practical	man.	He	said,	"Wait.	Announce	that
all	 people	 should	 go	 into	 their	 houses	 and	 close	 their	 doors,	 shops	 should	 be
closed,	because	our	mad	elephant	 is	going	 to	come	out	on	 the	 road."	And	 this
Buddhist	 philosopher	 was	 left	 standing	 on	 the	 road,	 and	 he	 was	 crying	 and
weeping	and	shouting,	"Save	me!
Nothing	is	illusory	--	at	least	this	elephant	is	not	illusory."	And	the	elephant	was
really	mad.
Seeing	 his	 condition...	 the	 elephant	 was	 stopped	 from	 attacking	 him.	 The
philosopher	was	 brought	 back	 to	 the	 court	 and	 asked,	 "Now	what	 do	 you	 say
about	your	philosophy?"
He	said,	"Everything	is	illusory."
The	king	said,	"And	the	elephant?"
He	 said,	 "The	 elephant	 is	 illusory,	 the	 philosopher	 who	 was	 crying	 and	 and
weeping	is	illusory,	and	the	king	who	has	saved	him	is	illusory	--	everything	is
illusory.	But	please	don't	put	me	out	there	again	--	because	it	is	a	philosophy.	I
am	ready	to	argue,	but	you	cannot	argue	with	a	mad	elephant.	If	you	have	any
philosophers,	you	bring	them	and	I	will	prove	that	everything	is	illusory."
These	philosophers	were	saying	something	which	has	a	piece	of	truth	in	it.	But
they	were	trying	to	prove	it.	That's	where	they	went	wrong.
Love	cannot	be	proved.
It	can	be	only	be	experienced.
And	in	love,	all	that	consists	of	space	and	time	appears	to	be	made	of	the	same
stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.	It	is	not	an	argument,	not	a	philosophy.
You	 can	 sit	 close	 to	 a	 person,	 your	 bodies	 are	 touching	 and	 yet	 you	 can	 be
hundreds	of	miles	away	from	each	other.
And	 you	 can	 be	 hundreds	 of	 miles	 distant	 from	 each	 other,	 and	 yet	 love	 can
bring	you	so	close	that	you	can	melt	into	each	other.
So	 remember:	 if	 you	 feel	 me	 in	 your	 heart,	 then	 I	 am	 coming	 with	 you.
Wherever	you	go,	 I	am	coming	with	you	 --	and	without	a	 ticket,	because	 they
have	not	yet	found	a	way	to	know	whether	a	person	is	 traveling	with	someone
hiding	in	his	heart.
Thirdly:	 the	world	 is	certainly	crazy.	And	it	 is	not	 that	 it	has	suddenly	become
crazy	--	it	has	always	been	so.
I	am	not	a	pessimist;	neither	am	I	an	optimist.	I	am	simply	a	realist.	I	know	that
it	is	impossible	to	change	this	whole	crazy	world.
Even	if	I	can	change	my	people,	my	sannyasins,	that	is	hoping	too	much.
So	I	don't	want	you	to	become	a	missionary,	making	efforts	to	change	the	crazy
people.
You	change	yourself,	and	you	help	the	fellow	travelers	--	the	sannyasins	who	are
on	 the	 same	 path,	 in	 the	 same	 search	 --	 encourage	 them,	 help	 them	 in	 every
possible	 way.	 There	 are	 moments	 of	 darkness,	 there	 are	 moments	 of
discouragement,	there	are	moments	one	feels	perhaps	he	should	not	have	chosen
this	path	because	it	goes	against	the	whole	crazy	world.
To	be	sane	in	this	insane	world	is	bound	to	be	against	it.
So	help	those	few	people	who	are	moving	towards	sanity,	and	never	ask	for	the
impossible.	This	is	possible	--	to	change	a	few	thousand	sannyasins	around	the
world.
And	perhaps	if	a	few	thousand	sannyasins	are	changed	that	may	create	a	certain
magnetism,	a	certain	gravitation,	such	that	many	more	millions	of	people	may	be
pulled	into	it.
But	you	 should	begin	with	yourself.	 If	you	can	change	yourself,	 that	 is	much;
and	if	you	can	help	those	who	are	on	the	path,	it	is	enough	for	your	compassion
and	for	your	love.
In	the	crazy	world	also	there	are	many	people	who	don't	want	to	be	the	way	they
are,	 they	 want	 to	 be	 transformed.	 And	 if	 you	 find	 someone	 who	 has	 a	 deep
longing	 to	 be	 transformed,	 help	 him.	 But	 never	 impose	 yourself	 on	 anybody,
because	if	somebody	wants	to	remain	insane	that	is	his	birthright.	Don't	disturb
him;	he	is	already	disturbed	too	much.	Just	leave	him	alone,	and	let	him	live	his
insanity.	Bless	him,	that	"Live	it	totally."
Perhaps	by	living	insanity	totally	he	may	come	out	of	it.
The	problem	with	 insane	people	 is	 that	 they	are	always	 living	 it	partially,	 they
are	always	repressing,	 they	are	always	not	doing	what	 they	want	 to	do.	 If	 they
are	allowed	total	freedom,	perhaps	they	may	come	out	of	their	insanity.
At	 least	my	people	should	give	everybody	 freedom	 to	be	himself,	without	any
judgment,	 without	 any	 condemnation,	 without	 calling	 him	 insane,	 without
calling	him	a	sinner,	without	sending	him	to	hell.	Just	accept.
A	loving	person	accepts	the	other	as	he	is,	without	demanding	any	change.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONCE	 I	WAS	HAPPILY	WAITING	 TO	GREET	YOU	ON	YOUR	WAY	TO
SANAI	GROVE.	I	WAS	JOYFULLY	DANCING	AND	SINGING.
WHEN	YOU	CAME	CLOSER,	MY	BODY	STARTED	MOVING	WITH	THE
MOVEMENT	OF	YOUR	HANDS;	SUCH	WEIGHTLESSNESS	AND	JOY
EXPLODING	 MORE	 AND	 MORE	 BEYOND	 BOUNDARIES	 INTO
VASTNESS,	AND	THEN	FALLING	INTO	A	DEEP,	SILENT	ABYSS	INSIDE
MYSELF.
AFTERWARDS	 I	 FELT	 GRATEFUL	 AND	 SO	 RELIEVED;	 I	 HAD	 BEEN
LOOKING
FOR	 THIS	 EXPERIENCE	 BY	 BEING	 WITH	 MEN,	 AND	 IT	 HAD
HAPPENED
THROUGH	BEING	WITH	YOU.
IS	 SUCH	GREAT	 BLISS	 OR	 ECSTASY	OR	ORGASM	 --	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW
WHAT	TO
CALL	IT	--	ONLY	POSSIBLE	WITH	A	MASTER,	OR	ALSO	WITH	A	MAN?
The	experience	of	ultimate	blissfulness,	ecstasy	or	orgasm	has	nothing	to	do	with
the	other.
It	happens	within	you;	the	other	is	only	an	excuse.
It	can	be	the	master,	it	can	be	anybody	else.
With	 the	 master	 it	 is	 easier,	 because	 with	 the	 master	 you	 don't	 have	 any
expectations.
With	 any	 other	man	 you	 have	 expectations.	With	 any	 other	man	 you	want	 to
dominate;	with	any	other	man	your	relationship	is	not	a	relaxed	phenomenon.	It
has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 man	 --	 it	 is	 your	 attitude,	 your	 approach	 that	 is
decisive.
If	your	relationship	with	the	master	is	full	of	expectations,	then	this	experience
cannot	happen.
The	experience	can	happen	even	with	a	tree,	or	even	with	the	stars,	or	even	just
sitting	alone	in	your	room.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	anybody	else.	You	have	to
understand	it	clearly:	it	is	an	explosion	of	joy	within	you.
But	sitting	alone	in	your	room	is	the	most	difficult,	because	you	don't	have	any
excuse.
You	 cannot	 even	 smile	 because	 you	 will	 think,	 "Am	 I	 going	 crazy?	 There	 is
nobody	and	I	am	smiling."
I	was	waiting	on	a	 railway	station	platform.	The	 train	was	 to	come	 late	 in	 the
night,	and	there	were	few	other	people.	One	man	relaxing	in	an	easy	chair	was
attracting	everybody's	attention	because	sometimes	he	would	make	gestures	as	if
he	was	throwing	something	away,	and	sometimes	he	would	smile	and	sometimes
he	would	laugh	--	and	the	laughter	would	be	so	much	that	he	would	have	to	hold
his	belly,	because	the	whole	body	was	laughing.
I	was	just	sitting	by	his	side.	I	don't	want	to	disturb	anybody	--	he	was	enjoying
so	much	-
-	but	it	was	difficult	to	resist	the	temptation	to	know	what	was	happening	to	the
man.
I	 asked	 him,	 "It	 is	 interference	 on	 my	 part,	 I	 am	 sorry,	 but	 I	 cannot	 resist
anymore,	 and	 we	 have	 to	 sit	 here	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 still.	 What	 is	 going	 on?
Sometimes	you	throw	things	away	just	by	a	gesture	of	your	hand.	And	you	make
such	 faces,	 and	 sometimes	 you	 smile,	 and	 sometimes	 you	 have	 such	 a	 belly
laughter	that	you	have	to	hold	your	belly	--	and	you	are	alone."
The	man	said,	"I	don't	 tell	 the	secret	 to	anybody.	But	you	have	been	sitting	by
my	side	for	three	hours,	and	I	can	understand	how	difficult	it	must	have	been	for
you	to	resist	the	temptation	of	asking.	I	will	tell	you	the	secret.	Just	come	close."
So	 I	 went	 close.	 I	 pulled	 my	 chair	 close	 to	 him.	 And	 he	 said,	 "It	 is	 nothing
special.	I	am	just	telling	jokes	to	myself."
I	said,	"Jokes?"
He	said,	"Yes,	I	am	telling	jokes,	but	sometimes	old	jokes	that	I	have	told	many
times	start,	 so	 I	 throw	them	away.	And	sometimes	 the	 jokes	are	so	 juicy	 that	 I
cannot	contain	myself	from	laughing	loudly	--	but	people	are	sleeping,	and	there
are	so	many	people,	so	I	have	to	hold	myself	and	my	laughter.	A	few	jokes	are
such	they	don't	create	laughter,	but	just	a	very	gentle	smile."
I	said,	"You	are	a	great	man.	You	have	found	a	great	secret."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean	by	finding	à	great	secret'?"
I	 said,	 "If	 everybody	 knew	 this	 secret,	 the	 world	 would	 be	 much	 nicer,	 less
miserable;	there	would	be	more	laughter,	more	joy.	There	is	no	need	to	wait	for
somebody	 else	 to	 tell	 you	 a	 joke.	 This	 is	 perfectly	 good	 --	 you	 tell	 a	 joke	 to
yourself,	and	if	you	don't	like	it	you	can	simply	throw	it	away.	With	somebody
else	 telling	a	 joke,	 if	you	don't	 like	 it	you	still	have	 to	smile,	you	have	 to	be	a
hypocrite.	 Deep	 down	 you	 are	 saying,	 `Rotten!'	 but	 on	 the	 surface	 you	 are
smiling	 and	 saying	what	 a	 great	 joke	 it	 is.	And	you	have	 found	 a	 tremendous
freedom.	You	can	choose	your	own	jokes,	and	you	can	enjoy	any	juicy	joke	as
many	times	as	you	want	--	you	can	start	telling	it	again."
The	 scientists	 have	 discovered	 that	 all	 that	 happens	 to	 you,	 happens	 in	 the
centers	of	your	brain.	Excuses	may	be	outside,	but	 the	real	happening	is	 in	the
seven	hundred	centers	in	the	brain.
One	of	the	most	important	men	of	this	century	was	Delgado.	For	his	whole	life
he	worked	on	animals	 and	how	 their	brains	 function.	And	he	was	 surprised	 to
find	that	what	you	call	sexual	orgasm	--	which	the	ordinary	man	finds	to	be	the
ultimate	in	pleasure	--
can	be	managed	without	anybody,	you	can	do	it	alone.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with
anybody	 else.	 You	 can	 keep	 just	 a	 small	 remote	 controller	 in	 your	 pocket...
because	there	is	one	center	that	controls	your	sexual	pleasure.
Delgado	was	working	on	white	mice.	He	had	opened	 the	 brain	 of	 one	mouse,
and	planted	an	electrode	at	the	sex	center	in	the	mind.	According	to	his	findings,
sex	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 your	 genitals.	 Sex	 is	 centered	 in	 the	 head	 --	 the
genitals	are	only	branches	spreading	out,	connected	with	the	center.
He	fixed	the	electrode	with	a	remote	controller,	and	as	he	would	push	the	button
the	poor	mouse	would	go	 into	a	 thrilling	experience,	ecstasy,	orgasm.	Delgado
could	not	believe	it
--	it	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	genitals;	it	was	direct.
Then	he	made	a	small	machine	with	buttons	on	it,	and	trained	the	mouse	to	push
the	button	if	he	wanted	a	mild	orgasm,	or	if	he	wanted	a	very	strong	one,	or	if	he
wanted	the	strongest.
And	you	will	be	surprised:	even	mice	are	not	so	stupid	--	when	there	is	a	choice,
who	will	go	for	the	mild	orgasm?	He	had	just	to	push	the	button	and	his	whole
body	would	go	into	a	thrill.	By	his	side	was	put	his	food,	water,	everything	that
he	liked	--	but	he	was	not	interested	in	anything.	In	one	hour	he	had	six	hundred
strong	orgasms	--	and	of	course	he	died,	because	you	cannot	survive	that	much,
there	is	a	limit	to	everything.	Six	hundred	orgasms	in	one	hour,	ten	orgasms	per
minute...	and	he	forgot	about	drinking	or	food.
Delgado	says	that	whenever	we	think	that	our	pleasure,	our	pain,	our	misery,	our
joy	is	dependent	on	somebody	outside,	we	are	wrong.
Outside	are	only	excuses.
And	this	is	the	teaching	of	all	the	ancient	mystics:	that	your	bliss	is	within	you,
the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you.
These	are	different	ways	of	saying	it.	Delgado	speaks	in	scientific	terminology.
Jesus	speaks	in	a	religious	way.
You	are	saying	that	here	with	me,	you	feel	ecstatic,	orgasmic	experiences.
I	want	you	to	remember:	I	may	be	the	excuse,	but	the	whole	doing	is	yours.	You
are	absolutely	 independent.	And	 it	 is	better	 to	 remember	 it;	 then	 it	can	happen
with	any	man,	 any	 tree,	 any	beautiful	 sunset,	 any	 starry	night	 --	or	 just	 sitting
silently	doing	nothing	 in	 the	darkness	of	your	 room.	You	 just	have	 to	 find	out
what	happens	in	you.
You	are	focused	on	the	outside;	that's	why	you	go	on	missing	what	is	happening
inside.
You	 think	 it	 is	 happening	 because	 of	 the	 master,	 so	 you	 are	 focused	 on	 the
master.	Then	you	become	attached	to	the	master	--	that	becomes	your	slavery.
When	something	 like	 this	happens,	close	your	eyes	and	see	what	 is	happening
within	 you,	 and	 soon	 you	 will	 find	 small	 clues...	 how	 it	 happens,	 in	 what
situations.	You	were	silent,	you	were	relaxed,	you	were	not	thinking.	Your	mind
was	empty,	and	it	came	like	a	flood.
Then	try	it	alone.
It	is	not	happening	with	any	other	man	because	with	any	other	man	you	are	not
silent.
With	any	other	man	you	are	constantly	quarreling,	fighting,	nagging.
It	 is	very	difficult	 to	find	a	woman	who	is	not	bitchy,	and	being	bitchy	do	you
think	you	will	have	ecstasy?	You	are	bitchy,	but	the	man	will	be	the	target.	You
think	that	he	is	the	cause	--	why	did	he	come	late?	where	has	he	been?
One	day	Mulla	Nasruddin's	wife	was	crying.	As	I	entered	their	house,	she	started
crying	even	more	loudly.	I	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
She	said,	"Now	things	have	gone	beyond	control.	This	man"	--	and	she	pointed
towards	Mulla	Nasruddin,	her	husband	--	"has	been	having	affairs	with	women.
There	 is	no	doubt	about	 it,	because	many	 times	 I	have	 found	hairs	on	his	coat
which	are	not	his	hairs	--	he	is	bald.	The	color	is	different."
I	said,	"Have	you	found	any	today?"
She	said,	"Not	today	--	that's	why	I	am	crying,	because	today	I	looked	minutely
and	found	that	there	was	no	hair.	It	means	he	has	started	having	affairs	with	bald
women.
This	 is	 too	much,	I	cannot	 tolerate	 this.	With	women	who	have	hair	 it	 is	okay,
but	with	women	who	are	bald...."
It	 is	you	who	are	 finding	 things	which	can	make	you	 joyous,	which	can	make
you	miserable.
It	was	not	happening	with	 the	man	for	a	simple	reason:	 first,	you	were	always
quarreling,	always	demanding.	And	these	experiences	are	not	such	that	they	can
be	produced	on	demand	--	"Bring	one	ecstasy	just	now."	Nobody	can	do	that	--
except	Delgado.	But	for	 that	you	will	have	 to	go	 through	a	small	operation.	 In
your	skull	he	will	make	a	small	hole	and	put	 in	an	electrode.	And	he	can	give
you	a	 remote	control	 --	 just	 a	 small	 size,	you	can	keep	 it	 in	your	pocket.	And
there	will	be	no	need	to	ask	anybody;	you	can	give	yourself	as	many	orgasms	as
you	want.
But	the	danger	is	the	same:	what	happened	to	the	poor	white	mouse	is	going	to
happen	to	you,	because	the	experience	is	so	beautiful	that	you	will	not	want	to
lose	 a	 single	moment	 for	 anything	 else.	 Perhaps...	 the	mouse	 is	 a	 small	 thing,
died	 in	 one	 hour;	 you	 may	 take	 twenty-four	 hours.	 But	 more	 than	 that,	 you
should	not	hope	to	survive.
Man	can	survive	in	misery	for	seventy-five	years.
But	in	ecstasy...	seventy-five	years	in	ecstasy?	Impossible.
Your	organism	is	not	made	of	steel.	It	will	have	a	breakdown.
I	can	provide	you	an	atmosphere	in	which	it	is	easier	to	move	into	such	spaces.
If	you	are	intelligent,	you	will	start	looking	inside	yourself	for	why	these	spaces
are	happening.	And	you	will	start	on	your	own,	alone,	so	that	you	can	have	those
experiences	without	me.
If	you	are	unintelligent,	 then	you	will	start	clinging	 to	me	--	and	 that's	how	so
many	people	in	the	world	are	being	exploited.	If	you	go	to	someone	and	say,	"It
is	 because	of	 you,	master...	 you	 are	 the	 lord	of	my	heart,"	 you	 are	giving	 that
man	a	chance	to	exploit	you	and	others.
Out	of	all	the	so-called	spiritual	teachers,	masters,	prophets,	saviors,	ninety-nine
percent	are	simply	frauds.	But	you	are	responsible.	You	have	made	them	frauds.
I	don't	want	anybody	to	cling	to	me,	to	be	attached	to	me	in	any	way.
My	whole	effort	is	to	give	you	total	freedom,	and	methods	so	that	whatever	you
want,	 you	 can	 create	 it	 within	 yourself.	 Not	 even	 God	 is	 needed,	 nothing	 is
needed	--	you	are	enough	unto	yourself.
This	is	the	great	blessing	of	existence	to	every	human	being.	You	are	made	with
such	perfection	--	but	you	never	explore	it,	it	remains	dormant.
Just	become	an	explorer	of	your	own	 interiority,	of	your	own	subjectivity,	and
you	will	find	thousands	of	ecstasies,	immense	blessings,	unimagined,	undreamt
of.
You	are	a	paradise,	but	have	you	forgotten	yourself.
You	are	looking	everywhere	except	within	you,	and	that	is	the	only	place	where
you	are	going	to	find	the	treasure,	the	truth,	the	beauty.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 THIS	 PHASE	 OF	 YOUR	 WORK,	 ARE	 YOU	 GIVING	 THE	 FINAL
TOUCH	TO
THE	PAINTING	OF	YOUR	WHOLE	LIFE,	FOR	THE	TRANSFORMATION
OF	THE
NEW	HUMAN	BEING?
My	work	is	not	like	a	painter's	work.
It	 is	not	 that	I	can	complete	the	painting;	 it	 is	one	long	painting.	And	I	will	be
giving	 touches	 to	 the	 painting	 even	 when	 I	 am	 breathing	 my	 last	 --	 still,	 the
painting	will	be	incomplete.
In	life,	only	mad	people	ask	for	perfection.	The	perfectionist	is	another	name	for
someone	who	is	getting	ready	to	become	mad.
I	was	a	guest	in	a	maharaja's	palace,	and	the	maharaja	was	showing	me	around	--
it	was	 a	 beautiful	 palace.	At	 a	 certain	 place	 he	 stopped	 and	 he	 said,	 "Do	 you
see?"	There	was	a	wall,	incomplete.
I	said,	"Why	have	you	left	it	incomplete?"
He	said,	"The	palace	was	made	by	my	grandfather,	and	this	is	the	tradition	in	our
family	that	nothing	should	be	made	perfect.	Some	imperfection	should	be	left	so
that	the	coming	generation	remembers	that	life	does	not	allow	perfection."
Imperfection	 is	 not	 something	 bad.	 Imperfection	 is	 the	 root	 of	 all	 growth;
perfection	can	only	be	death.
Once	something	is	perfect	it	is	dead.
The	painting	 that	 I	have	started	will	 remain	 imperfect	 --	 although	 I	will	go	on
trying	to	make	it	perfect,	but	it	 is	the	very	nature	of	existence	that	it	cannot	be
perfect.
And	it	is	not	my	painting.
Those	who	are	with	me...	it	is	as	much	their	painting	too.	When	I	am	gone,	you
have	to	continue	to	paint	it.	The	painting	has	to	go	on	growing	new	flowers,	new
foliage.	Don't	let	it	be	dead	at	any	point.
In	other	words,	don't	let	it	become	perfect.
Make	every	effort	to	make	it	perfect,	but	don't	let	it	become	perfect.
Then	 there	 is	 tremendous	 beauty,	 and	 always	 flowing	 and	 growing,	 and	 there
comes	no	full-stop.
In	life	we	are	always	in	the	middle.
You	 don't	 know	 the	 beginning	 of	 life,	 you	 don't	 know	 the	 end	 of	 life.	We	 are
always	 in	 the	 middle	 and	 everybody	 has	 been	 always	 in	 the	 middle.	 It	 is	 a
process,	an	ongoing	process,	a	river	that	goes	on	flowing.	That's	the	beauty	of	it,
that's	 the	 glory	 of	 it.	 And	 not	 only	 with	 the	 painting	 --	 with	 everything,
remember	 it.	 Accept	 that	 imperfection	 is	 the	 rule,	 that	 something	 becomes
perfect	only	when	its	death	has	come.
To	ask	for	perfection	is	to	ask	for	death.	Death	is	the	full-stop.
In	life	you	can	use	commas,	semi-colons,	but	never	a	full-stop.
In	 one	 of	 the	 poems	 of	 Rabindranath	 Tagore...	 the	 critics	 all	 over	 the	 world
criticized	 it	 because	 it	 suddenly	 begins	 and	 it	 suddenly	 ends;	 there	 is	 no
beginning	and	no	end.	 It	 seems	as	 if	 it	 is	a	middle	portion	 --	 something	 in	 the
beginning	is	missing,	something	in	the	end	is	missing.
And	Rabindranath	was	asked,	"You	have	been	criticized	but	why	are	you	silent?"
He	said,	"Those	people	don't	understand	life.	Life	 is	always	in	 the	middle,	and
my	poetry	represents	life.	Out	of	nowhere	it	begins,	and	suddenly	it	disappears
and	evaporates	without	giving	you	the	feeling	of	completion."
But	mind	is	a	perfectionist.
Hence	 the	mind	 always	 feels	 uneasy	with	 the	 heart,	with	 love,	with	 life,	with
meditation,	 with	 beauty.	 With	 everything	 that	 grows,	 mind	 is	 always	 feeling
uneasy.
It	is	perfectly	at	ease	with	machines;	they	are	complete.
Machines	are	perfect.
To	me,	 imperfection	 is	 not	 something	 to	 be	 condemned;	 it	 is	 something	 to	 be
rejoiced	in,	something	to	be	appreciated	--	because	it	is	the	principle	of	life	itself.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	 STRANGE	 THING	 HAPPENED	 WHEN	 I	 LAST	 SAW	 YOU	 IN
DISCOURSE:	LOOKING	AT	YOU,	I	FELT	AS	IF	I	COULD	NOT	SEE	YOU;	I
HAD	TO	CLOSE	MY
EYES	 TO	BE	CENTERED	AGAIN.	AND	EVEN	THEN	 I	 CANNOT	 SAY	 I
FOUND
YOU.
ALSO,	 DURING	 THE	 DAY	 WHEN	 I	 GO	 INSIDE	 THERE	 IS	 SO	 MUCH
LOVE	AND
GENTLENESS	IN	BEING	WITH	MYSELF.	IT	IS	ALMOST	LIKE:	WHERE	I
USED
TO	FIND	YOU	BEFORE,	THERE	IS	JUST	A	VAST,	LOVING	SPACE	AND
IT
FEELS	 LIKE	 ME.	 YOU	 ARE	 SOMEHOW	 DISTANT	 AND	 COOL.	 THIS
PUZZLES
ME.
IS	SOMETHING	GOING	WRONG?	--	ALTHOUGH	I	FEEL	RICH,	AND	YOU
ARE
MY	MOST	BELOVED	MASTER.
There	is	no	need	to	be	puzzled.
Nothing	has	gone	wrong.
Everything	is	as	it	should	be.
The	more	you	love	me,	the	closer	you	come	to	me,	the	more	you	will	find	I	am
disappearing.	At	 a	 certain	point,	you	will	 find	 that	where	 I	used	 to	be	 there	 is
only	love,	a	fragrance,	a	presence.	And	the	strangest	thing	is	that	it	will	feel	as	if
it	is	your	center,	it	is	you.
This	is	one	way	of	coming	close	to	the	master.
People	are	different.
Somebody	may	have	just	the	opposite	thing:	as	he	comes	closer	to	me,	he	starts
disappearing.	And	as	he	comes	very	close,	he	finds	he	is	no	more.	But	it	does	not
matter.
The	basic	thing	is	that	two	are	not	allowed	to	enter	into	the	door	of	heaven.	The
two	should	become	one.	Now	who	disappears	and	who	remains	is	just	a	question
of	language,	absolutely	immaterial.
And	 you	 are	 feeling	 love,	 you	 are	 feeling	 blissful,	 you	 are	 feeling	 rich;	 so
certainly	everything	 is	going	right.	When	 things	are	going	right,	 they	give	you
indications.	When	things	are	going	wrong,	you	are	miserable,	you	are	in	despair,
you	are	 in	anguish.	There	 is	no	need	 to	 inquire;	you	can	simply	see	your	own
state,	and	you	can	find	out	whether	things	are	going	right	or	wrong.
If	you	are	feeling	loving,	richer,	fuller,	contented,	then	everything	is	going	right.
You	are	blessed.
And	whether	 the	master	disappears	 in	 the	disciple	or	 the	disciple	disappears	 in
the	master	is	only	a	question	of	from	where	you	are	seeing	it.
My	grandfather	used	to	say...	He	was	not	educated,	he	was	not	a	thinker.	He	was
a	very	practical	man.	But	once	in	a	while	he	used	to	say	things,	 just	out	of	his
practical	life	experiences,	which	had	a	tremendous	validity.
He	was	a	cloth	merchant.	I	used	to	sit	by	his	side	once	in	a	while	when	he	was
dealing	with	customers	--	his	way	of	dealing	with	the	customers	was	strange.
But	they	loved	him;	if	he	was	not	there	they	would	ask	"Where	is	he?	When	will
he	be	here?	--	then	we	will	come."
The	first	thing	he	would	ask	the	customer	was,	"Do	you	want	to	be	cheated?	It	is
up	to	you.	Do	you	want	to	pay	the	right	price,	or	do	you	want	to	pay	more?	You
can	 decide;	 just	 tell	 me.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 pay	 more,	 then	 haggling	 is	 going	 to
happen.	And	remember	one	thing...."
In	my	village	 there	was	 a	beautiful	 river,	 and	very	 sweet	watermelons	used	 to
grow	by	the	side	of	the	river.	I	have	never	come	across	such	sweet	watermelons
in	my	whole	life,	moving	around	the	world.	The	watermelons	were	so	sweet	that
the	name	of	the	river	became	sakkar,	sugar.
So	 he	 used	 to	 say	 to	 customers,	 "Listen,	whether	 the	watermelon	 falls	 on	 the
knife	or	 the	knife	 falls	on	 the	watermelon,	 in	each	case	 the	watermelon	 is	cut.
You	are	the	watermelon,	I	am	the	knife.	So	what	do	you	decide?	--	haggling	or
no	haggling?	In	haggling	you	will	pay	more.	I	know	the	exact	price.	I	cannot	go
below	that,	above	that	I	can	say	yes	at	any	moment.	But	if	you	don't	want	to	be
cheated,	I	will	tell	you	the	right	price	exactly.	Just	remember	the	watermelon	and
the	knife."
So	whether	the	disciple	disappears	in	the	master	or	the	master	disappears	in	the
disciple,	it	does	not	matter...	it	is	just	the	watermelon	gone!
And	you	are	the	watermelon	and	I	am	the	knife.	So	enjoy,	and	feel	rich.
Everything	is	going	right.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 SIT	 IN	YOUR	LECTURE	 I	 FEEL	YOUR	SILENCE	AND	FEEL	 I
BECOME
PART	OF	IT.	THIS	IS	A	WORDLESS	PROCESS	IN	MELTING	MORE	AND
MORE
INTO	SILENCE.
AT	THE	SAME	TIME,	THERE	ARE	WORDS	FROM	YOU.	I	HEAR	THEM,
AND
SUDDENLY	 A	 CONNECTION	 HAPPENS	 FROM	 THE	 SILENCE	 TO	 THE
WORDS,	 AND	 I	 FEEL	 GOLDEN,	 GOLDEN	 GRATEFULNESS	 ABOUT
YOUR	 BELOVED,	 WONDERFUL	 WORDS.	 THE	 SILENCE	 AND	 THE
WORDS	ARE	ONE.
PLEASE	CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS	PROCESS	--	IF	IT	IS
REALLY	POSSIBLE	THAT	WORDS	CAN	SAY	THE	WORDLESS.
Yes,	the	word	can	say	the	wordless	but	only	to	the	chosen	few,	only	to	those	who
are	absolutely	silent.
The	word	coming	out	of	silence	carries	around	it	the	wordless	silence.
Now	 the	 question	 is	 at	 the	 receiving	 end	 --	 if	 it	 is	 received	 by	 a	mind	 full	 of
words	 and	 chattering,	 then	 the	 silence	 and	 the	wordlessness	 is	 destroyed,	 you
only	hear	the	word.
But	if	you	are	silent,	you	hear	the	word	and	you	also	hear	the	wordless;	you	hear
the	sound,	and	you	also	experience	the	soundlessness.
In	Mahavira's	life	a	strange	thing	is	reported.	It	is	very	difficult	to	say	that	it	can
be	 factual,	 historical.	 Particularly	 in	 the	 outside	world,	 it	 will	 look	 absolutely
absurd	and	irrational.
But	here,	I	can	tell	you	the	story.	And	I	can	tell	you	that	it	may	have	happened	--
because	 it	 is	 happening	 here,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 why	 it	 could	 not	 have
happened	in	Mahavira's	time.	Time	is	irrelevant,	but	it	can	be	told	only	to	those
chosen	few	people	who	have	experienced	something	similar.
It	 is	 said	 that	 Mahavira	 never	 spoke.	 Although	 there	 are	 scriptures	 --	 but
Mahavira	 never	 spoke,	 he	 just	 remained	 silent.	 He	 had	 eleven	 disciples	 who
were	 deep	 in	 silence,	 and	 there	 was	 something	 transferred	 from	Mahavira	 in
silence	 to	 the	disciples.	And	 these	eleven	disciples	have	written	 the	 scriptures;
they	told	the	people	what	Mahavira	was	saying.
So	whenever	it	is	said	that	Mahavira	said	this,	remember,	what	he	said	is	not	a
direct	statement.	Mahavira	never	spoke,	he	was	silent.	But	something	transpired
between	him	and	his	chosen	group	of	disciples,	and	those	disciples	became	his
spokesmen.	They	went	around	spreading	his	message.
What	is	the	guarantee	that	they	heard	the	right	thing?	What	is	the	guarantee	that
they	did	not	imagine	that	they	were	hearing?	What	is	the	guarantee	that	they	are
not	saying	things	of	their	own?	There	is	a	guarantee,	and	the	guarantee	is	that	all
the	eleven	heard	the	same	thing.
All	the	eleven	had	to	immediately	write	down	what	they	heard,	and	because	all
eleven	 could	 not	 have	 imagined	 the	 same	 thing,	 it	 becomes	 an	 absolute
guarantee:	they	have	heard,	silence	has	spoken	to	them.	From	silence	to	silence
there	has	been	a	communion.
The	followers	of	Mahavira	cannot	prove	this.
I	have	asked	many	Jaina	monks,	"Can	you	prove	this?"
And	 they	 said,	 "Those	were	 the	days	of	 truth,	 and	 this	 is	 the	 age	of	 darkness.
Now	it	cannot	be	proved;	neither	can	it	be	experienced."
To	them	it	is	simply	a	belief,	and	most	often	they	don't	mention	it	because	it	is
embarrassing.	If	somebody	raises	a	question,	they	don't	have	the	right	answer.
But	 in	 this	mystery	school	 it	 is	happening,	 so	 there	 is	no	question	of	 the	story
about	Mahavira	being	a	fiction.
As	my	sannyasins	are	growing	 in	 silence,	moving	deeper	 into	meditation	 --	 as
their	masks	are	 falling	down,	as	 they	are	becoming	more	and	more	 innocently
connected	with	me	--
first	it	will	happen	that	they	will	hear	my	words,	and	along	with	my	words,	the
wordless	message.
And	at	the	second	step,	there	will	be	no	need	for	me	even	to	use	the	word.	I	can
simply	sit	here,	and	you	can	hear	the	wordless	message.
And	before	I	 leave	this	body,	I	want	it	 to	become	an	existential	experience	not
only	to	eleven	people	but	to	thousands	of	people.	Only	that	can	give	credibility
to	Mahavira's	 story.	 In	 twenty-five	 centuries	Mahavira's	 disciples	 have	 failed,
they	have	not	been	able	to	bring	any	rationality	--	because	it	is	not	a	question	of
reason,	it	is	a	question	of	meditation.
And	you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	Mahavira's	whole	 life	 is	 the	 life	 of	meditation,
and	in	Jainism	meditation	is	simply	forgotten.	The	whole	religion	has	become	a
ritual.
So	it	 is	 true:	you	can	hear	the	wordless	side	by	side	with	my	words.	And	soon
you	will	be	able	to	hear	the	wordless	even	without	the	words.	And	that	day	will
be	a	day	of	great	celebration	--	when	I	can	speak	to	you	without	speaking.
A	silent	meeting,	a	communion	with	no	noise,	a	music	with	no	sounds...	nothing
is	said	but	everything	is	heard,	understood,	immediately	experienced.
Question	6
BELOVED	OSHO,
GERMAN	YOUNGSTERS	SEEM	TO	CONTRADICT	NIETZSCHE!	I	HAVE
READ:
"GOD	IS	NOT	DEAD,	IT'S	JUST	THAT	HE	CAN'T	FIND	A	SPACE	TO	PARK
HIS
CAR."	WHAT	DO	YOU	THINK?
The	German	young	people	are	not	wrong,	neither	are	they	right;	they	just	don't
know	the	whole	thing.
Frederick	Nietzsche	 is	 also	 in	 the	 same	 position	 --	 neither	 right	 nor	wrong	 --
because	he	also	does	not	know	the	whole	thing.	He	says,	"God	is	dead."
That	 is	 true	 in	 a	way	but	 the	 fact	 is,	God	committed	 suicide.	And	why	did	he
commit	suicide?	--	because	he	could	not	find	a	parking	place	for	his	old,	ancient
Ford.
So	they	are	both	right.
It	is	that	same	old	Ford	--	the	BIBLE	describes	it	--	that	God	used	when	he	drove
Adam	and	Eve	out	of	the	Garden	of	Eden.	Drove?	--	in	what?	It	was	an	ancient
Ford	Model-T.
And	 it	 must	 be	 somewhere	 in	 Bombay,	 because	 I	 have	 been	 all	 around	 the
world...	you	cannot	find	such	ancient	models	as	you	can	find	in	Bombay.
And	 the	 Indian	 government	 is	 very	 protective	 of	 ancient	 models:	 it	 does	 not
allow	new	cars	to	come	in,	and	it	does	not	allow	the	old	cars	to	go	out.
Bombay	is	a	great	museum	for	old	cars.	If	you	search,	you	may	find	the	first	car
in	which	God	 drove	Adam	 and	Eve.	Where	 did	 he	 drive	 them?	 --	 to	Victoria
Station!
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	The	forgotten	language	of	the	heart
24	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610245
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH22
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 AFRAID	 TO	 MEET	 YOU.	 TREMBLING,	 SHOCKED,	 ALONE...	 IT
MEANS
DEATH.
The	meeting	with	 the	master	has	always	been	a	kind	of	death,	death	 to	all	 that
you	have	been,	death	to	your	past,	death	to	your	ego,	death	to	your	personality.
But	it	is	not	only	death,	it	is	also	resurrection:	the	birth	of	the	new,	the	birth	of
the	fresh	and	 the	 innocent,	a	new	sunrise	on	 the	horizon,	a	new	unfoldment	of
your	 being.	 But	 naturally,	 first	 you	 have	 to	meet	 the	 death,	 you	 have	 to	 pass
through	it.	Resurrection	can	only	be	afterwards.
The	 death	 is	 what	 you	 pay	 for	 your	 resurrection;	 hence,	 your	 question	 is
significant.
You	are	feeling	afraid	coming	closer	to	me.	This	is	not	new.	This	has	nothing	to
do	with	you	or	me.	This	is	as	old	as	man.
The	 ancientmost	 scriptures	 in	 the	 world	 are	 the	 VEDAS.	 They	 describe	 the
master	as	death,	but	a	death	which	opens	the	door	to	the	divine,	certainly	a	death
which	happens	only	to	the	blessed	ones.
It	 is	 no	 ordinary	 death,	 it	 is	 not	 the	 death	 of	 your	 body;	 it	 is	 the	 death	 that
transforms	you.
Everything	 remains	 the	same	 --	 the	body,	 the	world	 --	yet	nothing	 remains	 the
same	 because	 your	 vision,	 your	 perspective,	 your	 way	 of	 looking	 has	 gone
through	such	a	deep	mutation	that	although	superficially	everything	is	the	same,
in	depth	everything	has	changed.	You	have	entered	a	new	dimension	of	life	--	the
dimension	of	eternity,	the	dimension	of	ecstasy,	the	dimension	which	is	beyond
time	and	space.
But	this	much	courage	is	needed:	You	will	have	to	come	close	to	the	master,	you
will	have	to	go	through	this	fire	which	burns	only	that	which	is	false	in	you.	Out
of	it,	you	come	as	twenty-four	karat	gold.
The	function	of	a	mystic	school	is	to	encourage	you:	"You	need	not	be	worried.
We	have	passed	through	the	test;	the	fire	is	cool	and	the	death	is	a	blessing."
But	if	you	don't	have	any	guts,	then	perhaps	the	time	is	not	ripe	for	you,	perhaps
in	some	other	life	with	some	other	master	the	death	will	happen.
But	 why	 postpone?	 What	 is	 possible	 right	 now	 should	 not	 be	 postponed	 for
tomorrow.
Why	 remain	 in	 misery	 even	 for	 one	 day,	 even	 for	 one	 minute,	 even	 for	 one
second?
The	death	of	the	ego,	the	death	of	your	personality,	the	death	of	all	that	you	have
been	 thinking	 about	 yourself,	 immediately	 opens	 a	 door.	 New	 flowers	 start
blossoming,	new	songs	start	stirring	in	your	heart,	new	dances.
You	don't	walk	anymore,	you	simply	dance;	you	fly.
The	ecstasy	is	such,	the	blissfulness	is	such...	gather	just	a	little	bit	of	courage.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 ALWAYS	 SAID	 TO	 US	 THAT	 WE	 SHOULD	 REJOICE	 IN	 BEING
ALIVE,	BUT	DEEP	IN	MYSELF	I	FOUND	A	VERY	STRONG	WILL	TO	DIE
--	NOT	THAT	I	WANT	TO	COMMIT	SUICIDE,	BUT	TO	DIE	NATURALLY.
SOMEHOW	 I	 KNOW	THAT	 BY	DYING	 I	MIGHT	 FIND	 THAT	WHICH	 I
REALLY
ENJOY,	WHICH	IS	SILENCE.	 I	CAN	SAY	THAT	I	AM	UTTERLY	BORED
AND
FED	UP	WITH	THIS	UGLY	WORLD.	THERE	IS	NOTHING	THAT	MAKES
ME
FEEL	 ATTRACTED	 TO	 DO	 ANYTHING	 OTHER	 THAN	 BEING	 WITH
YOU.
BELOVED	OSHO,	WHAT'S	WRONG	WITH	ME?
Nothing	is	wrong	with	you.
Everything	is	wrong	with	the	world.
It	is	only	the	retarded	people	who	don't	feel	bored.
You	are	intelligent.	You	can	see	that	there	is	nothing	meaningful.	Life	is	a	drag,	a
repetition.	There	seems	to	be	no	adventure	in	it,	no	challenge;	there	seems	to	be
no	hope.
Tomorrow	will	be	again	the	same	as	yesterday.
It	 is	 the	 prerogative	 only	 of	 human	 beings	 to	 get	 bored;	 no	 other	 animal	 gets
bored	in	existence.
Have	you	seen	any	animal	in	existence	being	bored?
Boredom	is	a	high	quality	of	intelligence.	It	means	you	are	perceptive;	you	can
see	 that	 there	 is	nothing	but	 --	 finally	 --	death.	Empty	handed	you	have	come,
and	one	day	empty	handed	you	will	leave,	and	all	that	happens	in	between	birth
and	death	is	simply	tedious.
So	I	cannot	say	there	is	anything	wrong	with	you.
Every	intelligent	person	thinks	that	perhaps	what	is	not	available	in	life	may	be
available	in	death.	Psychologists	have	found	that	almost	every	intelligent	person
at	least	once	in	his	life	thinks	of	committing	suicide	--	he	may	not	commit	it,	but
the	idea	comes.
Particularly	in	this	century,	the	greatest	philosophers	--	Jean-Paul	Sartre,	Jaspers,
Martin	Heidegger,	Soren	Kierkegaard,	Marcel....	Almost	all	the	topmost	thinkers
of	the	contemporary	world	are	agreed	on	one	thing	--	they	don't	agree	on	many
things,	 but	 on	 one	 thing	 they	 are	 all	 in	 absolute	 agreement	 --	 that	 life	 is
meaningless.	 And	 if	 this	 is	 so,	 then	 the	 question	 naturally	 arises,	 why	 go	 on
living?	 If	 there	 is	 no	 meaning,	 no	 significance,	 then	 what	 is	 the	 need	 to	 be
dragged	 from	 the	 cradle	 to	 the	 grave	 unnecessarily?	 This	 is	 the	 only
contemporary	philosophy:	existentialism.
There	have	been	many	philosophies	born	in	different	ages,	but	in	this	age	there
has	been	only	one	philosophy	and	that	is	existentialism.	And	its	basic	ground	is
so	strange	that	one	feels	that	all	these	people	are	mad.	If	they	are	not	mad,	then
we	are	mad	--	there	is	no	other	alternative.
The	 whole	 philosophical	 movement	 called	 existentialism	 talks	 about	 life	 as
meaningless,	 accidental,	 there	 is	no	purpose	behind	 it;	 it	 is	 full	of	 anxiety	and
anguish	--	which	are	incurable.	It	is	a	nightmare.
This	is	such	a	contrast.
Gautam	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Nagarjuna,	Bodhidharma,	they	talk	of	blissfulness,	of
tremendous	possibilities	of	ecstasy,	of	growing	into	new	dimensions	of	being.
What	has	happened?	Why	this	diametrical	opposition?
And	 Jean-Paul	 Sartre	 or	 Jaspers	 or	 Martin	 Heidegger	 are	 not	 unintelligent
people;	they	are	as	intelligent	as	any	Gautam	Buddha.	One	thing	is	missing:	they
have	 depended	 only	 on	 reason.	 They	 are	 very	 rational	 people,	 they	 have
completely	 forgotten	 the	 heart.	 They	 live	 in	 the	 mind	 and	 mind	 is	 a	 desert.
Nothing	grows	there	--	no	flowers,	not	even	an	oasis.
The	 modern	 man	 slowly	 slowly	 has	 forgotten	 the	 language	 of	 the	 heart.	 The
possibilities	that	open	only	through	the	heart	are	completely	forgotten.	Only	one
thing	has	remained,	and	that	is	your	reason,	your	rationality.
And	the	trouble	is,	all	that	is	beautiful	belongs	to	the	heart,	all	that	is	meaningful
belongs	to	the	heart,	all	that	is	significant	is	a	fragrance	of	the	heart.
Reason	 is	 perfectly	 good	 as	 far	 as	 objects,	 dead	 objects	 are	 concerned;	 for
scientific	research	it	is	the	best	instrument.	For	things,	reason	is	the	right	method
of	discovery.	But	the	moment	the	question	arises	about	anything	living,	reason	is
impotent.	 And	 if	 you	 ask	 reason	 a	 question	 concerning	 life,	 love,	 peace,	 joy,
blissfulness,	it	simply	negates,	as	if	these	things	don't	exist.
It	is	almost	like	a	blind	man.	If	you	talk	about	light	to	the	blind	man,	he	is	going
to	say	that	there	is	no	light.	Because	to	see	light...	your	hands	cannot	do	anything
to	see	light,	your	ears	cannot	see	it,	you	cannot	taste	it,	you	cannot	smell	it.	All
your	senses	are	perfect,	but	only	eyes	have	the	capacity	 to	see	 light	and	colors
and	rainbows.
Reason	has	a	limitation.	It	is	a	perfect	tool	for	dead	things.
And	this	is	one	of	the	mistakes	of	this	whole	century:	we	have	been	asking	blind
people	about	light,	or	asking	the	deaf	about	music.
Asking	 reason	about	 love,	meaning,	 significance,	ecstasy	 is	 futile.	Reason	will
simply	say	these	things	don't	exist	--	because	reason	has	never	come	in	contact
with	any	of	these	things.	Reason	is	not	intentionally	denying	you	anything,	it	is
just	not	its	capacity;	you	are	stretching	it	beyond	its	capacity.
It	is	good	that	at	least	in	your	life	one	thing	is	still	significant:	your	love	for	me.
But	you	cannot	give	any	reason	for	 it.	Or	can	you?	Is	 it	something	rational?	Is
there	 some	arithmetic	behind	 it?	 --	 some	 scientific	 evaluation?	Can	your	mind
support	it?
It	is	not	from	the	mind	that	you	are	related	to	me;	it	is	that	a	part	of	your	heart	is
still	alive	with	me,	is	still	dancing,	is	still	singing.
And	 that	 is	 the	 great	 hope:	 your	 heart	 is	 not	 dead,	 you	 have	 not	 completely
denied	it.
This	small	loophole	is	enough.	If	I	can	enter	through	it,	I	can	bring	the	whole	of
paradise	behind	me	--	don't	be	worried.
And	you	are	such	a	nice	man	that	you	are	not	thinking	of	committing	suicide.	So
there	is	time,	you	are	waiting	for	a	natural	death.	Don't	be	worried.
Before	natural	death,	I	will	give	you	the	taste	of	natural	life.
And	once	you	are	drunk	with	natural	life,	death	disappears;	you	become	part	of
an	eternal	flow	of	life	which	knows	no	end.	Every	moment	is	a	new	discovery,
every	moment	 a	 new	 peak.	 Every	moment	 you	 think,	what	 can	 be	more	 than
this?	--	yet	the	next	moment	something	more	becomes	possible.
This	 is	 an	 unending	 process.	 Just	 let	 me	 in.	 And	 the	 way	 to	 help	 me	 is	 to
meditate.
Sit	silently....
Life	is	boring	--	so	there	is	no	harm	in	sitting	with	closed	eyes,	because	there	is
nothing	 to	 see.	 Sit	 silently,	 peacefully.	You	 have	 looked	 outside	 and	 you	 have
found	 nothing	 but	 meaninglessness.	 Now	 give	 a	 chance	 to	 your	 inner	 world:
look	inwards.
And	 I	promise	you	 that	 the	 same	eyes	which	have	not	 found	anything	outside
will	find	inside	everything,	a	constant	hallelujah.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	HAPPENING	TO	ME?	I	AM	OPENING	MORE	AND	MORE,	AND
I	HAVE
THE	FEELING	THAT	THE	SHADOWS	IN	MY	BODY	ARE	GRADUALLY
DISAPPEARING.	WHEN	I	CLOSE	MY	EYES	I	CAN	SEE	MORE	LIGHT	IN
THE
BODY.	IT	IS	SO	BEAUTIFUL,	AND	I	FEEL	SO	MUCH	FOR	YOU	--	MORE
THAN	I	EVER	FELT	BEFORE.
BELOVED	OSHO,	CAN	THIS	BE?	IS	THIS	ME?	WHY	DO	THESE	DOUBTS
STILL
ARISE?	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Whatever	is	happening	is	the	deepest	longing	of	every	seeker.
You	are	here	only	for	this	kind	of	happening.	It	is	the	beginning.
In	the	beginning	it	is	very	natural:	the	mind	will	create	doubts.	There	is	no	need
to	be	angry	with	the	mind;	mind	cannot	understand	it,	it	is	beyond	the	scope	of
mind.	And	naturally	the	mind	wants	you	to	remain	rational,	reasonable,	sane.
The	mind	creates	doubts	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	wants	to	protect	you.	It	is
not	against	you,	it	is	trying	to	protect	you	so	that	you	don't	get	into	some	crazy
space.	But	it	is	only	in	the	beginning	that	the	mind	creates	doubts.	And	this	is	the
time	when	the	master	and	the	school	of	the	master	helps	you	not	to	be	bothered
with	what	your	mind	is	saying,	but	to	explore	the	new	that	is	arising.
You	 are	 feeling	 light.	 All	 shadows	 are	 disappearing,	 and	 a	 luminous	 body	 is
arising	within	you,	a	body	of	light.
The	mind	can	accept	a	skeleton;	it	cannot	accept	a	body	of	light.
Mind	is	very	primitive;	it	still	believes	in	matter.
Physicists	have	come	to	the	conclusion	that	there	is	no	matter	at	all;	only	energy
exists.
But	 the	 energy	 particles	 are	 moving	 so	 fast	 that	 they	 create	 the	 illusion	 of
solidness.
It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 fan	moving	 fast:	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 three	wings	 separately,	 it
becomes	a	circle.	If	it	moved	with	the	speed	of	light,	the	way	electrons	move	in	a
pillar,	then	you	could	sit	on	the	fan	and	you	would	not	fall,	and	you	would	not
feel	that	something	is	changing	beneath	you	and	there	are	gaps.	Because	before
you	could	feel	 the	gap,	 the	other	wing	of	 the	fan	would	have	come	in	and	you
would	not	feel	anything,	the	fastness	of	speed	would	make	it	a	solid	thing.
All	that	looks	solid	only	looks	solid.
But	mind	is	very	primitive.
The	heart	is	neither	primitive	nor	contemporary.	The	heart	is	eternal;	it	knows	no
divisions	of	 time.	So	 the	heart	can	see	without	any	doubt	 the	body	of	 light.	 In
fact,	 that	 body	 is	 truer	 than	 the	 solid	body	 that	we	 see	 --	 because	 the	body	of
light	means	the	body	of	electrons,	pure	electricity.
It	happened	after	the	second	world	war:	a	soldier	came	back	home.	He	had	been
away	from	home	for	five	years,	and	naturally	he	was	in	a	hurry	to	meet	his	wife.
As	he	hugged	his	wife	he	got	a	shock	--	such	an	electric	shock,	he	fell	flat	on	the
ground.	He	said,	"My	God,	what	has	happened?"
For	 five	 years	 the	 wife	 had	 been	 waiting	 and	 waiting	 and	 waiting	 with	 such
intensity,	her	electric	forces	had	been	accumulating.
Doctors	were	 called.	They	 could	not	 even	 take	her	 hand	 to	 check	her	 pulse	 --
immediate	shocks.	Then	the	electrician	was	called,	hoping	that	something...	now
it	 is	 no	 longer	 physical;	 something	 electrical	 has	 gone	wrong.	 The	 electrician
was	very	much	afraid.	He	said,	"First	take	this	bulb	in	your	hand."	He	gave	the
woman	a	five-candle	bulb	to	put	in	her	hand,	and	the	bulb	lit	up.
That	was	the	first	happening	of	its	type.	The	whole	woman	was	throbbing	with
electricity.	Because	of	her,	research	started	into	human	electricity,	and	now	it	is
an	established	fact	that	every	human	body	has	electricity.
If	your	eyes	are	very	perceptive,	you	can	see	the	electric	aura	around	the	body.
As	you	have	seen	around	the	photos	of	Nanak,	Kabir,	Krishna,	Rama,	Buddha	--
those	circles	around	 the	faces	are	not	 fictions,	 they	are	not	 the	 imaginations	of
the	painters;	they	have	been	seen	by	disciples,	by	meditators.
And	 now	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 there	 is	 a	 photographer	 who	 even	 takes
photographs....	He	has	developed	very	sensitive	plates.	His	name	is	Kirlian,	and
because	 of	 his	 name,	 his	 photography	 has	 become	 known	 as	 Kirlian
photography.	He	has	become	world	 famous.	 If	he	 takes	your	photo,	 it	will	not
just	be	you	but	also	surrounding	your	whole	body	an	aura	of	light.
And	strangely	enough,	 if	 somebody's	hand	has	been	cut	off	 in	an	accident	and
Kirlian	takes	a	photograph,	the	hand	is	not	there	in	the	photograph	but	the	aura
of	 the	hand	 is	 still	 there.	The	 electrical	 body	 is	 still	 intact	 --	 nothing	has	been
disturbed,	only	the	physical	part	has	dropped.	One	of	your	fingers	has	been	cut
off	for	some	reason,	some	accident;	but	in	the	photograph	four	fingers	will	show
a	 darker	 photo	 of	 the	 physical	 finger	 with	 a	 lighter	 shade	 around	 it,	 and	 one
finger	will	be	simply	the	lighter	electric	shade.	But	the	shade	will	still	be	there.
And	this	is	not	only	with	the	human	body.	A	roseflower:	you	can	pluck	a	petal
and	Kirlian	can	say	which	petal	has	been	taken	out	--	his	photograph	will	show
the	missing	petal's	electric	aura.
So	what	 is	 happening	 to	you	 is	 that	 as	you	become	 silent,	 you	 start	 becoming
aware	of	your	inner	being	--	which	is	surrounded	by	a	light.
The	ancients	have	called	it	the	astral	body,	the	body	of	light,	the	body	made	of
starlight	--
that	is	what	àstral'	means.
Just	remember	that	it	is	not	in	the	area	of	mind,	and	tell	the	mind,	"This	is	none
of	your	business.	You	do	your	thing."
And	 there	are	many	more	 things.	Existence	 is	not	 limited	 to	 the	mind,	 it	 is	 far
bigger,	far	more	mysterious.
You	have	all	the	possibilities	that	any	mystic	has	ever	experienced	anywhere	in
the	world,	but	you	will	have	to	silence	your	mind;	otherwise	those	doubts	can	go
on	disturbing	you.
That's	why	my	insistence	 is:	before	entering	 the	mysterious	world,	 first	silence
the	mind.
Discipline	 the	 mind	 for	 silence,	 for	 no-thinking,	 so	 that	 when	 you	 enter	 the
mysterious	world	 the	mind	does	not	come	 in	 the	way,	does	not	 raise	awkward
questions	which	you	cannot	answer	--	and	which	even	if	you	answer,	 the	mind
cannot	understand.
Mind	has	a	limited	scope.	It	is	a	bio-computer.	It	is	not	your	whole	being.
The	heart	is	far	bigger.	And	beyond	the	heart	is	your	being,	which	is	bigger	than
the	heart.	And	beyond	your	being	is	the	universal	being	--	which	is	infinite.
To	enter	 into	 these	mysteries	you	will	need	a	silent	mind	 that	does	not	disturb
you.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
LAO	 TZU	 DESCRIBED	 BUDDHA	 NATURE	 TO	 BE	 MORE	 LIKE	 A
WOMAN	THAN
A	MAN	--	WHICH	MAKES	THE	STORY	OF	MEETING	THE	BUDDHA	ON
THE
PATH	AND	KILLING	HIM	HIGHLY	SUSPECT.
IN	OTHER	WORDS,	SUPPOSE	I	MEET	HER	ON	THE	PATH?	OSHO,	THIS
SURELY	SPELLS	TROUBLE.	ANY	SUGGESTIONS?
Milarepa,	as	far	as	you	are	concerned,	if	a	buddha	--	as	a	woman	--	meets	you	on
the	way,	your	job	is	easier.	You	are	a	great	ladykiller.	So	kill	her	lovingly	--	what
is	the	problem	in	it?
Lao	Tzu	has	made	things	very	easy	for	you.
It	 is	 true	 that	 all	 great	 qualities	 are	 feminine	 --	 love,	 compassion,	 sympathy,
kindness.	All	these	qualities	have	a	flavor	of	the	feminine.
There	 are	 male	 qualities,	 qualities	 of	 the	 warrior,	 courage.	 They	 are	 hard
qualities,	 one	 has	 to	 be	 like	 steel.	 Because	 man's	 qualities	 have	 developed
through	war,	and	female	qualities	have	developed	at	home,	in	the	garden	of	love,
with	the	husband	and	children	--
she	has	lived	in	a	totally	different	world.	Man	has	lived	continuously	fighting.	In
three	 thousand	 years	 there	 have	 been	 five	 thousand	wars	 on	 the	 earth	 --	 as	 if
killing	is	man's	only	profession.
Just	the	other	day,	Nirvano	showed	me	Ronald	Reagan	kissing	his	wife.	The	way
he	is	kissing	her,	it	looks	as	if	he	will	kill	the	woman!	That	photograph	should	be
enlarged	and	hung	everywhere	all	over	the	world	--	because	he	looks	exactly	like
a	chimpanzee.
Even	kissing	has	some	violence	in	it	--	perhaps	it	is	nuclear	kissing.
The	world	has	lived	in	two	parts.	Man	has	made	his	own	world	while	the	woman
has	lived	in	a	shadow	--	she	has	created	her	own	world	in	the	shadow.	It	is	very
unfortunate	because	a	man	or	a	woman,	to	be	complete,	to	be	whole,	must	have
all	the	qualities	together.	Both	men	and	women	should	be	as	soft	as	a	rose	petal
and	as	hard	as	a	sword	--
both	together.	So	whatever	the	opportunity	and	whenever	the	situation	demands
it....	If	the	situation	needs	you	to	be	a	sword,	you	are	ready;	if	the	situation	needs
you	 to	 be	 just	 a	 rose	 petal,	 you	 are	 ready.	This	 flexibility	 --	 between	 the	 rose
petal	and	the	sword	--	will	make	your	life	richer.
And	it	is	not	only	between	two	qualities,	it	is	between	all	the	qualities.
Man	 and	woman	 are	 two	 parts	 of	 one	whole;	 their	 world	 should	 also	 be	 one
whole,	 and	 they	 should	 share	 all	 the	 qualities	 without	 any	 distinction	 --	 no
quality	should	be	stamped	as	feminine	or	masculine.
When	you	make	somebody	masculine	 that	person	loses	great	 things	 in	his	 life.
He	becomes	juiceless,	he	becomes	stale,	he	becomes	hard,	almost	dead.
And	 the	woman	who	 completely	 forgets	 how	 to	 be	 hard,	 how	 to	 be	 a	 rebel	 is
bound	to	become	a	slave,	because	she	has	only	soft	qualities.	Now	roses	cannot
fight	with	swords,	they	will	be	crushed	and	killed	and	destroyed.
A	total	human	being	has	not	been	born	yet.	There	have	been	men	and	there	have
been	women,	but	there	have	not	been	human	beings.
My	whole	approach,	Milarepa,	is	to	bring	the	whole	man	to	the	earth	--	with	all
the	 beautiful	 qualities	 of	 woman	 and	 with	 all	 the	 courageous,	 rebellious,
adventurous	qualities	of	man.	And	they	should	all	be	part	of	one	whole.
But	from	the	very	beginning	we	start	telling	children...	A	small	boy,	if	he	wants
to	play	with	toys	like	girls,	we	immediately	stop	him	--	"Be	ashamed	of	yourself;
you	are	a	boy,	you	are	a	man,	don't	be	girlish."
And	if	a	girl	tries	to	climb	a	tree	we	stop	her	immediately:	"This	is	not	ladylike,
climbing	a	tree,	this	is	for	the	boys	--	rough.	You	just	come	down!"
From	 the	 very	 beginning	 we	 start	 dividing	 man	 and	 woman	 into	 parts.	 Both
suffer	--
because	climbing	a	tree	has	a	joy	of	its	own,	no	woman	should	miss	it.	To	be	on
top	of	a	tree	when	the	wind	is	strong,	in	the	sun,	with	the	birds	singing...	if	you
have	not	been	to	 that	point,	you	have	missed	something.	And	just	because	you
are	a	woman.	Strange...
To	be	adventurous	--	to	climb	the	mountains,	to	swim	the	oceans	--	should	not	be
prevented	 just	 because	 you	 are	 a	 woman,	 because	 that	 thrill	 is	 something
spiritual.
A	man	should	not	be	prevented	when	he	wants	to	cry.	He	is	prevented,	he	cannot
bring	 tears	 --	 tears	 are	only	 for	women:	 "You	are	 a	man;	 behave	 like	 a	man!"
And	 tears	 are	 such	 a	 beautiful	 experience.	 In	 deep	 sadness	 or	 in	 great	 joy,
whenever	something	is	overflowing,	tears	give	expression	to	it.	And	if	tears	are
repressed,	at	the	same	time	what	they	were	going	to	express	--	the	deep	sadness
or	the	great	joy	--	is	also	repressed.
And	 remember	 perfectly	 well	 that	 nature	 has	 not	 made	 any	 difference.	 It	 has
given	man	and	women	the	same	tear	glands,	of	equal	size.
But	 if	you	are	a	man	and	you	are	crying,	 then	everybody	condemns	you,	as	 if,
"You	are	behaving	like	a	woman."
You	should	say,	"What	can	I	do?	Nature	itself	has	given	me	tear	glands.	Nature
is	behaving	like	a	woman.	It	is	not	my	responsibility,	I	am	simply	enjoying	my
nature.
Tears	are	my	right."
All	qualities	should	be	available	to	everybody.
There	 are	 men	 who	 become	 incapable	 of	 love	 because	 they	 are	 trained	 for
certain	qualities:	"You	have	to	be	hard.	You	have	to	be	competitive.	You	are	not
to	show	emotions.	You	must	not	be	sentimental."
Now	how	do	you	expect	a	man	who	is	not	emotional,	not	sentimental,	who	is	not
allowed	to	feel...	how	can	you	expect	him	to	love?	And	when	he	misses	love,	his
life	becomes	miserable.	And	the	same	is	happening	on	both	sides.
I	 would	 like	 all	 distinctions	 to	 disappear.	 Everybody	 should	 be	 allowed
everything	 that	 is	 naturally	 possible	 to	 the	 person	 whether	 he	 is	 a	 man	 or	 a
woman.
And	we	would	have	a	richer	world	consisting	of	richer	people.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
MAY	 I	 ASK	 YOU	 A	 TIBETAN	 QUESTION?	 LORD	 BUDDHA'S	 THIRD
BODY	HAS
NOW	 DISAPPEARED	 INTO	 YOU.	 IS	 IT	 NOT	 CALLED	 THE	 MENTAL
BODY?
DOES	IT	MEAN	THAT	THE	WHOLE	MENTAL	HERITAGE	OF	BUDDHA,
ALL	HIS
TEACHINGS	OF	MEDITATION	AND	INITIATION	--	HIS	WHOLE	SYSTEM
--	HAS
DISSOLVED	INTO	YOU?	DOES	IT	ALSO	MEAN	THAT	YOU	FREE	THIS
EARTHLY	 GLOBE	 FROM	 ALL	 SYSTEMS,	 BY	 SWALLOWING	 THEM
INTO
YOUR	LOVE	AND	FRIENDLINESS?
PLEASE	TELL	A	JOKE.	JAYESH	IS	GOING	MAD!
First,	Jayesh,	the	third	body	does	not	mean	the	mental	body.
The	 first	 body	 is	 the	physical	 body.	The	 second	body	 is	 the	mental	 body.	The
third	body	is	the	astral	body.
One	becomes	enlightened	when	one	transcends	the	mental	body.
The	astral	body	consists	only	of	pure	light,	just	a	flame	with	no	smoke	around	it.
Secondly,	 you	 are	 right:	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 take	 all	 the	 poison	 in	 the	world	 that	 is
driving	people	crazy	and	to	drink	it	--	because	that	poison	cannot	make	me	crazy.
I	 can	 relieve	 people	 from	 their	 poisons:	 their	 theologies,	 their	 religions,	 their
political	 ideologies.	 These	 are	 all	 poisons,	 and	 since	 the	 beginning	 they	 have
been	driving	mankind	into	constant	madness.	Christians	killing	Mohammedans,
Mohammedans	 killing	 Hindus,	 Hindus	 killing	 Buddhists;	 it	 goes	 on	 and	 on...
atheists	killing	theists,	theists	killing	atheists.	It	seems	we	don't	want	anybody	in
this	world	to	be	free	--	at	least	free	to	think.
In	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 my	 sannyasins	 are	 being	 persecuted,	 they	 are	 being
continuously	harassed	by	 the	government.	They	have	done	no	harm.	 Just	 their
being	 related	 to	 something	 which	 is	 not	 communism	 is	 enough	 to	 freak	 the
communists	out:	Communism	should	be	the	only	religion	in	the	Soviet	Union.
They	don't	understand	anything	of	what	I	am	saying,	they	don't	understand	that
my	 atheism	 is	 far	 more	 refined	 than	 their	 Karl	Marx	 or	 their	 Engels	 or	 their
Lenin,	 than	 any	 of	 their	 atheism	 is.	 They	 don't	 understand	 that	 I	 am	 for	 an
authentic	communism	in	the	world.
And	in	the	Soviet	Union	there	is	no	communism.
Yes,	 the	 capitalists	 are	 no	 longer	 there	 and	 now	 poverty	 has	 been	 distributed
equally.
I	 am	 not	 in	 favor	 of	 poverty.	 I	 want	 richness	 to	 be	 distributed	 equally	 --	 not
poverty.
And	the	basic	idea	in	communism	was	to	create	a	classless	society	--	which	has
not	 happened.	There	 are	 no	more	 capitalists,	 but	 the	 people	who	 are	 in	 power
have	 become	 the	 new	 class,	 the	 power	 elite.	 Capitalists	 have	 never	 been	 as
powerful	anywhere	in	the	world	as	the	power	elite	are	in	the	Soviet	Union.
And	it	is	now	sixty	years,	seventy	years	after	the	revolution.	The	same	group	of
people	is	running	the	country,	no	new	blood	can	enter	the	power	class.	And	they
want	to	overrule	the	whole	world.
And	America's	intention	is	the	same:	to	destroy	freedom,	to	destroy	individuality
and	 to	 create	 an	 indirect	 imperialism	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 They	 have	 almost
succeeded.
I	 would	 like	 to	 take	 all	 these	 ideologies	 away	 and	 make	 people	 free	 of	 their
cages,	give	them	their	wings	again,	give	them	their	sky	back.
So	you	are	right.	That	has	been	my	effort	my	whole	life.	And	to	my	last	breath	I
will	 continue	 to	 do	 the	 same	 --	 to	 free	 people	 from	 Hinduism,	 from
Mohammedanism,	 from	 Christianity,	 from	 Judaism,	 from	 communism,	 from
fascism,	 from	 nationalities,	 from	 distinctions	 and	 discriminations	 of	 man	 and
woman,	black	and	white.
How	many	insanities	have	we	been	carrying	on	our	shoulders?
Because	of	that	burden	we	cannot	grow.
I	would	like	everybody	to	be	unburdened	completely.
I	understand	Jayesh.	He	is	saying	that	he	is	going	mad...	because	for	almost	three
months	he	has	been	away	from	me.
His	has	been	a	strange	story.
He	was	 a	 successful	 businessman;	 then	 he	 got	 tired.	He	 heard	 about	me,	 read
about	me	and	came	from	Canada	to	be	with	me	in	the	commune	in	America	with
great	expectations	that	"Now	I	will	be	sitting	and	meditating."
And	the	next	day	he	was	arrested	with	me,	and	we	were	behind	bars.
He	told	me,	"Bhagwan,	this	is	too	much.	I	came	to	meditate...	But	in	a	way	I	am
fortunate	that	from	the	very	beginning	I	am	with	you.	Although	it	is	jail,	it	does
not	matter."
And	then	he	was	with	me	all	around	the	world,	being	deported	from	this	country
to	that	country.
For	 three	months	 he	 has	 been	 away	 --	 working	 for	me.	 Certainly	 he	must	 be
going	mad	because	he	has	been	trying	to	find	a	headquarters	for	me.	He	works	to
the	last	--
everything	is	complete	--	and	then	at	the	very	end	American	pressure	comes	in.
Because	 the	American	 spies	 are	 continuously	 surrounding	 him.	The	American
ambassador	is	continuously	watching	every	move.
At	 the	 last	moment,	 as	 they	 are	 going	 to	 sign	 an	 agreement	 that	 I	 can	 have	 a
commune	in	their	country,	the	phone	rings	and	the	American	president	himself	is
on	the	phone.	And	such	blackmail!	He	threatens	that	"If	you	allow	Bhagwan	to
remain	in	your	country	more	than	thirty-six	hours	then	you	will	have	to	return	all
the	 loans	 that	 you	 have	 taken	 in	 the	 past"	 --	which	means	 billions	 of	 dollars.
"And	 if	 you	 cannot	 return	 them,	 then	 your	 interest	 rate	 will	 be	 doubled.
Secondly,	whatever	loan	agreements	there	are	for	the	future"
--	which	are	again	for	billions	of	dollars	--	"are	cancelled	immediately.	You	can
choose,	 you	 are	 free;	 you	 can	 choose	 Bhagwan	 or	 you	 can	 choose	 American
loans."
Naturally	no	country	is	in	a	position....	They	have	to	drop	the	whole	idea.
Jayesh	has	been	working,	working,	working	for	almost	the	whole	year.	It	takes	a
month	or	two	months	to	negotiate	with	the	politicians	and	everybody,	and	when
the	 final	 decision	 is	 about	 to	 be	 taken	 then	 immediately	 American	 pressure
comes	 in.	And	 it	 is	 not	 pressure,	 it	 is	 simply	blackmail;	 it	 is	 threatening	 them
that	"We	will	kill	you."
And	certainly	a	country	will	be	killed	--	it	cannot	pay	the	loans,	and	it	has	all	its
future	 programs	 based	 on	 the	 loans	 that	 America	 is	 going	 to	 give.	 All	 those
programs...	 bridges	will	 remain	half	 built,	 hospitals	will	 remain	half	 built,	 and
there	will	be	such	a	great	unemployment	that	the	whole	economy	will	flop.	This
is	economic	imperialism:	on	the	surface	politically	you	are	free,	but	deep	inside
you	are	not	free,	nobody	is	free.
Naturally	he	needs	a	joke	after	three	months,	just	to	give	him	a	laugh.
Jayesh,	I	have	heard	that	a	certain	man,	Reagy	--	no	relation	to	Ronald	Reagan	--
worked	in	a	circus,	and	he	was	 the	elephant	 trainer.	He	 trained	 the	elephant	so
that	on	his	order,	he	would	raise	one	of	his	legs	up.	Then	he	trained	him	to	raise
up	 two	legs	and	 then	he	 trained	him	to	raise	up	 three	 legs.	And	he	was	such	a
perfectionist	that	he	was	trying	to	train	the	poor	elephant	to	raise	all	four	legs	up.
Until	he	realized	it	seemed	difficult,	that	it	was	impossible,	it	could	not	happen.
So	he	had	a	great	idea:	he	declared	in	the	newspapers	that,	"Anybody	who	can
come	and	make	my	elephant	raise	all	four	of	his	legs	simultaneously,	I	will	give
him	a	ten-thousand-dollar	reward.	Entry	fee	is	one	hundred	dollars."
Many	 people	 came	 and	 lost	 their	 one	 hundred	 dollars.	 How	 can	 the	 elephant
raise....	They	tried	persuasion,	hypnosis,	meditation	--	nothing	worked.
And	Reagy	was	very	happy;	he	was	collecting	money.
And	then	one	day	a	blue	convertible	car	came	in,	and	a	small	man	came	out.	And
he	said	to	Reagy,	"Are	you	the	man	who	is	going	to	give	me	ten	thousand	dollars
if	I	can	make	your	elephant	raise	all	four	legs	simultaneously?"
He	said,	"Yes.	But	before	that	you	will	have	to	give	me	one	hundred	dollars	as
an	entry	fee."
He	gave	him	one	hundred	dollars,	went	back.	From	the	back	of	the	car	he	pulled
out	a	steel	rod.
Reagy	could	not	 imagine	what	he	was	going	 to	do.	People	had	come	who	had
tried	 yoga...	 who	 had	 tried	 all	 kinds	 of	 things.	 "What	 he	 is	 going	 to	 do?"	He
waited.
First	 the	man	went	 in	 front	 of	 the	 elephant	 and	 looked	 into	 its	 eyes.	 Then	 he
went	to	the	back	of	the	elephant	and	gave	it	a	good	hit	in	the	balls.	The	elephant
jumped	with	all	four	of	its	legs.
Reagy	was	 in	 tears.	He	had	accumulated	only	eight	 thousand	dollars!	And	 this
man	cheated!	He	had	to	give	him	two	thousand	dollars	from	his	own	pocket.	The
man	took	ten	thousand	dollars	away.
Then	Reagy	saw	how	to	get	those	ten	thousand	dollars	back.
Elephants	are	known	to	move	their	heads	up	and	down,	but	they	are	not	known
to	move	their	heads	from	side	to	side.
So	 he	 declared	 in	 another	 advertisement:	 "I	 will	 give	 ten	 thousand	 dollars	 to
anybody	who	can	make	my	elephant	move	his	head	from	side	to	side."
Again	people	 started	 coming	 for	 a	 hundred-dollar	 entry	 fee.	Again	Reagy	was
very	 happy:	 people	 were	 coming	 --	 yogis,	 Taoists,	 Zen	 masters,	 all	 sorts	 of
magicians.	But	nobody	could	manage	 it,	he	would	only	move	his	head	up	and
down	and	they	would	lose	their	hundred	dollars.
Then	suddenly	one	day	that	blue	convertible	car	came	back	again	and	out	came
out	the	small	man.	And	Reagy	started	to	tremble,	that	"This	man....	Now	let's	see
what	he	does."
He	 said,	 "Are	 you	 the	man	who	 is	 going	 to	 give	 ten	 thousand	dollars	 if	 I	 can
move	your	elephant's	head	from	side	to	side?"
He	said,	"Yes,	but	first	--	one	hundred	dollars!"
He	gave	one	hundred	dollars.	Then	he	went	behind	the	car	and	took	out	the	rod.
Reagy	said,	"This	idiot...	with	that	rod	again?	How	can	he	make	his	head	move
from	side	to	side?
And	the	man	came	to	the	front	of	the	elephant	carrying	the	rod,	he	looked	into
his	eyes	and	said,	"Do	you	recognize	me?"
And	the	elephant	said,	"Yes."
The	man	said,	"Do	you	want	the	experience	once	more?"
And	the	elephant	said,	"No."
And	he	asked	for	another	ten	thousand	dollars!
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	Ten	Non-comandments
25	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610255
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH23
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
TODAY,	 AFTER	 A	 YEAR,	 I	 AM	 COMING	 TO	 SEE	 YOU,	 TO	 BE	 WITH
YOU.	AND
SINCE	 I	 AWOKE	 THIS	 MORNING	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 AWARE	 THAT	 MY
HEART	IS
BEATING	HARDER	AND	QUICKER	THAN	USUAL,	AND	THAT	THERE	IS
A	 HOLLOW,	 STAGE	 FRIGHT	 FEELING	 IN	 MY	 BELLY.	 TEARS	 ARE
CLOSE	TO	MY
EYES,	BUT	THERE	IS	NO	SADNESS.	ON	ONE	HAND	I	CAN	SEE	IT	AS
FEAR,	 NERVOUSNESS.	 ON	 ANOTHER	 IT	 IS	 EXCITEMENT,
ANTICIPATION,	AND	ON
YET	ANOTHER	IT	IS	ENERGY,	PURE	AND	SIMPLE	--	LIFE,	PULSATION.
BELOVED	FRIEND,	IT	CERTAINLY	DOESN'T	FEEL	TO	BE	A	PROBLEM,
BUT
COULD	 YOU	 SPEAK	 ABOUT	 THE	 PHENOMENON	 OF	 THE	 DISCIPLE
COMING
CLOSER	TO	THE	PHYSICAL	BODY	OF	THE	MASTER?
There	are	very	few	moments	in	man's	life	more	magical	than	the	feeling	of	love
and	trust	from	a	disciple	towards	the	master.
It	is	a	relationship	not	of	this	world,	because	it	is	a	ladder	to	the	beyond.
Coming	closer	to	the	master	certainly	gives	a	new	pulsation	to	the	life	energy,	to
your	receptivity,	to	your	openness.	It	gives	you	a	dance,	your	heart	starts	singing
a	song.	It	is	a	moment	of	rejoicing.
It	is	the	same	moment	as	when	a	river	comes	to	the	ocean,	dancing,	to	disappear
into	 the	ocean	 --	but	 the	disappearance	 is	only	 from	 the	 side	of	 those	who	are
standing	on	the	bank.	To	the	river	itself,	it	is	becoming	bigger,	vaster,	oceanic.
Coming	closer	to	the	master	is	a	way	of	becoming	a	master	--	and	what	can	be
more	rejoicing,	more	joyful?
There	are	many	kinds	of	love,	but	the	love	that	exists	between	the	master	and	the
disciple	 is	 the	purest:	unpolluted	by	any	expectations,	by	any	demands,	by	any
conditions.	The	master	accepts	you	as	you	are,	with	no	desire	to	make	something
else	of	you.	You	love	the	master	because	he	gives	you,	for	the	first	time	in	your
life,	 in	 all	 your	 relationships,	 freedom	 to	 be	 yourself	 --	 without	 fear,	 without
guilt.
Your	experience	is	natural.
It	has	happened	to	every	disciple,	it	is	a	cosmic	experience.
But	 it	 cannot	happen	 if	you	are	only	a	 student.	 If	you	have	come	here	only	 to
learn,	to	accumulate	knowledge,	then	this	kind	of	miracle	is	not	possible.
If	you	have	come	here	to	expand	your	consciousness,	to	make	your	being	more
integral,	 then	you	have	not	come	to	 increase	your	knowledge	but	 to	be	reborn.
You	have	come	to	become	a	child	again;	you	have	come	to	get	back	the	purity,
the	fragrance,	the	beauty	of	your	innocence.
I	am	not	a	 teacher,	and	 this	 is	not	a	place	where	knowledge	 is	 important.	 I	am
just	a	presence	to	inspire	in	you	that	which	is	dormant,	to	allow	you	to	recognize
yourself.
I	am	not	here	to	impose	any	religion	on	you.	I	am	here	to	make	you	completely
weightless	 --	 without	 religion,	 without	 ideology	 --	 just	 a	 profound	 silence,	 a
serenity,	a	depth,	a	height	that	goes	to	the	stars.
This	is	a	place	of	a	master,	and	the	function	of	this	place	is	magic	--	not	ordinary
magic,	but	magic	that	creates	Gautam	Buddhas.
And	naturally,	when	you	are	coming	out	of	your	darkness	 towards	 the	 light	of
becoming	a	Gautam	Buddha,	it	is	impossible	not	to	be	thrilled,	not	to	be	ecstatic,
not	to	be	in	a	dance.
If	you	are	alive,	stars	will	be	born	out	of	you,	flowers	will	be	blossoming	in	you.
But	 if	 you	 are	 dead,	 as	most	 of	 the	 people	 on	 the	 earth	 are,	 then	nothing	will
happen	to	you	--
nothing	happens	to	the	dead.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	Mahavira's	life.
Mahavira	went	to	Vasali,	one	of	the	great	cities	of	those	days.	In	Vasali	there	was
a	great	 thief.	He	had	only	one	young	son	whom	he	was	 training	 in	his	art.	He
said	to	him,
"Listen,	you	are	free	to	do	everything,	but	don't	go	close	to	that	man	Mahavira.	I
am	 a	 master	 thief,	 but	 I	 also	 avoid	 him,	 because	 that	 man	 is	 dangerous.
Something	magical	surrounds	him,	and	once	you	are	caught	in	it	there	is	no	way
out.	So	remember,	go	everywhere	else,	but	avoid	the	campus	where	Mahavira	is
staying."
The	son	was	very	obedient.	He	avoided	Mahavira's	campus	for	many	days,	but
the	 temptation	was	natural....	Here	 is	 a	man	who	his	 father	 fears	 so	much	 that
just	to	be	close	to	him	seems	to	be	dangerous....	It	is	worth	testing.
So	 one	 day	 he	 went	 just	 a	 little	 closer	 to	 the	 campus	 --	 not	 inside	 the	 grove
where	 Mahavira	 was	 staying	 with	 his	 ten	 thousand	 disciples,	 but	 outside	 the
grove.	And	he	heard	only	one	sentence.	Mahavira	was	saying	 that	 in	paradise,
the	angels	and	the	female	angels	are	tremendously	beautiful,	but	just	one	thing	is
wrong:	their	feet	are	pointing	in	the	opposite	direction.	The	angels	are	going	one
way,	but	their	feet	are	going	in	the	opposite	direction.
Being	 afraid	 that	 his	 father	 might	 come	 to	 know,	 the	 boy	 escaped.	 But	 he
thought,	"There	was	no	danger	 there,	and	Mahavira	was	just	 telling	a	fictitious
story."
But	that	very	night	he	and	his	father	were	both	caught	stealing.	It	was	impossible
to	get	any	information	from	the	father;	hence,	the	king	said,	"Don't	bother	about
the	father,	concentrate	on	the	son.	There	is	a	possibility	that	we	may	be	able	to
find	out	all	the	information	that	we	need."
And	the	strategy	was	that	he	was	given	intoxicating	drugs,	so	he	slept	for	hours,
completely	unconscious.	He	was	taken	to	the	most	beautiful	room	in	the	palace,
and	all	 the	beautiful	girls	were	serving	him,	bringing	food,	drinks.	As	he	came
back	to	consciousness,	he	thought,	"My	God,	I	am	dead.	I	am	in	paradise.	This	is
the	 paradise	 that	 fellow	 Mahavira	 was	 describing,	 and	 the	 girls	 are	 really
beautiful.	Everything	is	great."
But	 then	he	looked	at	 their	feet,	and	immediately	he	understood	that	 there	was
some	conspiracy	--	"This	is	not	paradise,	because	their	feet	are	just	like	our	feet."
The	women	 tried	 in	every	way	 to	persuade	him,	"You	are	dead	and	you	are	 in
paradise."
And	 they	 were	 saying,	 "This	 is	 just	 the	 reception.	 Before	 you	 enter	 the
permanent	paradise,	you	have	to	tell	everything	about	your	life.	This	is	the	rule.
Everything	 will	 be	 written,	 recorded,	 and	 then	 you	 will	 enter	 permanent
paradise."
They	 wanted	 him	 to	 confess	 all	 the	 sins	 that	 he	 and	 his	 father	 had	 been
committing,	 all	 the	 thefts,	murders,	 and	 things	 for	which	 they	 had	 never	 been
caught.	But	now	he	would	simply	smile.
He	said,	"Forget	all	about	it;	I	have	heard	from	Mahavira	himself.	Your	feet	have
given	me	the	clue	that	this	is	the	palace	of	the	king.	And	this	is	a	strategy.	Tell
your	king	to	try	to	befool	somebody	else.	I	am	a	disciple	of	Mahavira."
They	said,	"Strange.	When	did	you	become	the	disciple	of	Mahavira?"
He	said,	"Just	passing	by	I	heard	one	sentence,	and	that	one	sentence	has	saved
me	today."
And	because	there	was	no	proof,	finally	they	had	to	be	released.
He	told	his	father,	"I	am	not	going	to	listen	to	you	at	all.	If	I	had	not	disobeyed
you	and	had	not	listened	to	Mahavira,	we	would	both	be	hanging	on	the	gallows.
Just	one	sentence	--	and	that	 too,	a	small	part	of	a	story	--	has	saved	me.	I	am
going	to	the	man.
His	magic	has	caught	me."
He	became	a	great	disciple	of	Mahavira.
He	said,	"You	have	saved	me.	Now	give	me	a	new	life,	because	I	don't	want	just
to	be	 saved	 and	continue	 to	be	 a	 thief	 and	a	murderer.	 It	was	good	 that	 I	was
caught,	a	discontinuity	has	happened.	You	start	my	life	from	scratch;	accept	me
as	a	child."
Coming	to	the	master	is	coming	in	search	of	your	innocence,	in	search	of	your
lost	childhood,	in	search	of	your	originality...	in	search	of	your	individuality,	in
search	of	freedom.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONE	 DAY	 --	 IT	 WAS	 FRIDAY,	 WHEN	 ORTHODOX	 JEWS	 ARE
PREPARING	FOR
THE	SABBATH	--	A	MAN	WHO	DIDN'T	LIKE	JEWS	MET	AN	ORTHODOX
RABBI	 ON	 THE	 STREET.	 IN	 AN	 ATTEMPT	 TO	 TORMENT	 HIM,	 HE
ASKED	HIM
TO	 EXPRESS	 THE	 ENTIRE	 PHILOSOPHY	 OF	 JUDAISM	 WHILE	 HE
STOOD	ON
ONE	FOOT.
THE	RABBI	STOOD	ON	ONE	FOOT	AND	SAID,	"DO	UNTO	OTHERS	AS
YOU
WOULD	HAVE	THEM	DO	UNTO	YOU.	THAT	IS	THE	LAW	--	THE	REST
IS
COMMENTARY."
IF	I	WERE	TO	BE	MET	BY	A	TORMENTOR	AND	ASKED	TO	STAND	ON
ONE
FOOT	AND	EXPLAIN	 IN	ONE	SENTENCE	WHAT	YOUR	TEACHING	IS,
WOULD
I	BE	CORRECT	IN	SAYING	THAT	IT	IS	FREEDOM	FROM	SUPPRESSION?
It	will	not	be	so	easy.
First,	you	don't	know	the	name	of	the	rabbi.	His	name	was	Hillel.	He	is	the	most
famous	Jewish	philosopher,	and	he	certainly	condensed	the	whole	philosophy	of
Judaism	into	a	single	sentence.
The	 incident	 is	 true.	 He	 was	 asked	 to	 stand	 on	 one	 foot	 and	 answer	 in	 the
shortest	way	what	the	essence	of	Judaism	is.	And	what	he	said	is	beautiful,	but
not	without	flaw.	He	said:	Do	unto	others	what	you	would	like	to	be	done	to	you
by	 them.	 This	 is	 the	 essential	 Judaism,	 the	 rest	 is	 commentary.	 All	 great
scriptures	of	the	Jews,	the	TORAH,	the	TALMUD...	all	are	just	commentaries	on
the	single,	small,	seedlike	statement:	Do	unto	others	what	you	would	like	to	be
done	to	you	by	them.
As	far	as	Judaism	is	concerned,	no	Jewish	thinker	has	raised	any	suspicion	about
it.
Neither	has	any	non-Jewish	philosopher	raised	any	question	about	it.
But	 I	 am	 more	 concerned	 with	 human	 reality	 than	 just	 with	 philosophical
arguments.
And	 looking	at	human	 reality,	 the	 statement	 is	not	 correct	 --	 because	my	 taste
and	your	taste	may	be	different.
To	do	unto	others	what	you	would	like	to	be	done	to	you	by	them	can	be	right
only	if	everybody's	taste	is	the	same.	And	that	is	not	the	case.
For	 example,	 somebody	 is	 a	 masochist;	 he	 likes	 to	 be	 beaten,	 he	 likes	 to	 be
tortured.	 Now	 what	 should	 he	 do	 with	 you,	 torture	 you?	 According	 to	 the
principle,	 he	 should	 beat	 you,	 he	 should	 torture	 you,	 because	 that's	 what	 he
wants	you	to	do	to	him.
Perhaps	Hillel	or	 the	Jewish	philosophers	were	not	aware	 that	 there	are	people
who	love	to	be	tortured	and	there	are	people	who	love	to	torture.
It	is	the	latest	contemporary	psychological	insight	that	there	are	sadists	who	like
to	torture,	and	there	are	masochists	who	like	to	be	tortured;	hence,	it	is	said	that
the	best	couple	in	the	world	is	if	by	chance	a	sadist	and	a	masochist	get	married.
Then	they	are	living	in	paradise,	because	one	wants	to	be	tortured	and	the	other
wants	to	torture.	Both	are	enjoying.
But	it	is	very	difficult.	No	astrologer	thinks	about	it,	no	parents	think	about	it.	In
fact,	whether	somebody	is	a	sadist	or	a	masochist	is	not	considered	at	all	when
people	are	thinking	about	marriage.	Before	you	fall	 in	love,	remember	the	first
basic	inquiry:	if	you	are	a	sadist,	then	find	a	masochist;	if	you	are	a	masochist,
find	a	sadist.
The	 best	 places	 to	 find	 such	 people	 are	 the	 offices	 of	 psychoanalysts.	 Just	 sit
outside	there;	you	will	find	all	kinds	of	people.
But	this	statement	will	not	be	applicable.
And	 you	 want	 to	 know	 if	 somebody	 asks	 you	 about	 my	 philosophical
standpoint....	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 that	 easy,	 because	 I	 see	 man	 as	 a	 multi-
dimensional	being.	You	will	be	able	to	state	it	standing	on	one	foot,	there	is	no
need	for	sentences,	but	you	will	have	to	state	ten	non-commandments.
The	first:	freedom.
The	second:	uniqueness	of	individuality.
The	third:	love.
The	fourth:	meditation.
The	fifth:	non-seriousness.
The	sixth:	playfulness.
The	seventh:	creativity.
The	eighth:	sensitivity.
The	ninth:	gratefulness.
Tenth:	a	feeling	of	the	mysterious.
These	 ten	 non-commandments	 constitute	 my	 basic	 attitude	 towards	 reality,
towards	man's	freedom	from	all	kinds	of	spiritual	slavery.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
AT	 RAJNEESHPURAM	 IN	 1983	 SOMETHING	 FROM	 THE	 BEYOND
ENTERED
INTO	 ME.	 SINCE	 THEN	 I	 HAVE	 NOT	 BEEN	 THE	 SAME	 PERSON
ANYMORE.	MY
OLD	 GOALS	 AND	 DESIRES	 HAVE	 FADED	 AWAY.	 THINGS	 WHICH
WERE
MEANINGFUL	TO	ME	BEFORE	HAVE	LOST	THEIR	IMPORTANCE.
BUT	WHEN	I	TALK	TO	PEOPLE	ABOUT	MEDITATION,	SILENCE,	AND
WHAT
KEEPS	US	AWAY	FROM	IT,	A	GREAT	NEW	ENERGY	AND	CLEARNESS
STARTS	RISING	IN	ME.	EVERY	CELL	OF	MY	BODY	BECOMES	ALIVE.	I
MYSELF	BECOME	A	LISTENER	TO	WHAT	IS	SAID	THROUGH	ME,	AND
I	FEEL
GRATEFUL	AND	VERY	LOVING	TOWARDS	THE	PEOPLE	WITH	WHOM
I	CAN
SHARE.
BELOVED	MASTER,	HAVE	I	BECOME	A	FLUTE,	AN	INSTRUMENT	FOR
THE
BEYOND?	 OR	 IS	 MY	 EGO	 PLAYING	 A	 HORRIBLE	 JOKE	 ON	 ME?
PLEASE
COMMENT.
It	 certainly	 has	 changed	 your	 life.	 You	 have	 become	 a	 flute	 to	 the	 divine	 --
because	if	it	was	a	projection	of	the	ego,	the	ego	would	not	have	allowed	you	to
ask	the	question.
And	 the	 ego	 never	 becomes	 a	 vehicle,	 a	 medium,	 a	 flute.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 hollow
bamboo.	The	ego	is	very	solid,	does	not	allow	itself	to	be	used	by	higher	forces.
It	can	exist	only	in	the	very	mundane	world.
To	allow	the	higher	forces	means	you	are	entering	into	the	sacred,	going	beyond
the	mundane.	The	ego	cannot	go	outside	the	mundane	world.	And	its	very	fabric
is	to	praise	itself,	to	brag	about	itself	even	when	it	is	not	valid.
For	example,	a	poetry	descends	in	you	but	the	ego	grabs	it	and	proclaims	to	the
whole	world	that	"I	have	written	it."
No	great	poetry	has	been	written	by	any	ego;	nothing	great	can	come	out	of	it.
The	great	comes	only	when	the	ego	gives	way,	when	it	is	not	obstructing,	when
it	is	absent,	on	leave.
It	is	said	about	Rabindranath	that	whenever	he	would	be	writing,	he	would	close
his	door	and	inform	the	house	that	unless	he	opens	the	door,	nobody	is	allowed
even	to	knock	on	it.
It	was	a	big	family.	Rabindranath's	grandfather	was	given	the	title	of	raja	by	the
British	government,	although	he	was	not	a	king	--	but	he	was	so	rich	and	he	had
so	much	 land	 that	 he	 could	 have	 purchased	 a	 few	maharajas.	 His	 family	was
very	big;	almost	one	hundred	members	were	living	in	the	palace.
And	it	was	a	very	strange	family.	Rabindranath	has	written	in	his	memoirs,	"We
have	 seen	 strangers	 coming	 into	 the	 family	 as	 guests	 and	 then	 never	 leaving.
And	my	grandfather	was	such	that	he	would	say,	Ìt	does	not	matter.	He	must	be
some	distant	 relative.	Perhaps	we	have	 forgotten,	he	has	 forgotten,	but	destiny
has	brought	us	together.
Let	him	live	here.'"
So	the	family	went	on	growing.	Anybody	could	come	and	say,	"I	am	related	to
you,	a	far	off,	distant	relation."	And	he	was	received	not	only	as	a	guest,	but...
once	he	entered	the	house	it	was	against	the	culture	to	ask	him,	"When	are	you
going	to	leave?"	It	was	not	asked.
It	is	not	the	culture	of	Bombay.	In	Bombay,	the	first	thing	people	ask	is,	"When
are	you	going	to	leave?"	You	have	not	even	settled	in	the	chair,	your	luggage	is
still	 in	 the	 taxi,	 and	 they	 are	 asking	 when	 you	 are	 going	 to	 leave	 --	 because
tickets	have	to	be	advance-booked.
Those	were	different	days,	and	a	different	kind	of	people.
So	 nobody	 ever	 asked	 when	 you	 were	 going	 to	 leave.	 And	 why	 should	 one
leave?	--
living	in	the	palace	of	a	king,	living	like	kings...	every	need	was	fulfilled.
So	a	man	used	to	go	with	a	bell,	all	over	the	palace,	announcing	that	nobody	is	to
disturb	Rabindranath.	And	all	his	brothers,	his	mother,	father,	grandfather,	 they
were	all	concerned	while	he	was	inside	his	room	--	sometimes	it	would	be	three
days,	four	days,	and	he	has	not	eaten,	he	has	not	come	out.
They	asked	him,	"What	is	the	matter?	You	can	come	out,	you	can	eat,	you	can	go
back	again.	Nobody	 is	going	 to	prevent	you,	nobody	 is	even	going	 to	ask	you
any	question."
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 problem	 for	 me	 to	 come	 out.	 The	 problem	 is	 that	 when
something	is	descending	in	me,	if	I	leave	the	room	just	to	take	a	shower	or	just	to
drink	a	cup	of	tea,	the	process	stops.	And	it	is	not	in	my	hands	to	start	it	again.
Then	 I	 don't	 know	 when	 it	 will	 start	 again;	 it	 is	 something	 falling	 upon	 me,
falling	 through	 me.	 I	 am	 just	 a	 passage.	 I	 don't	 want	 anybody	 to	 disturb	 me
because	I	don't	want	to	disturb	the	process."
Every	great	poet,	painter,	singer,	dancer	has	been	aware	of	 the	fact	 that	he	has
been	great	only	in	the	moments	when	he	has	not	been.	It	is	not	a	contradiction.
The	greatest	dancer	of	this	age	was	Nijinsky.	He	went	mad	because	he	was	born
in	the	West;	in	the	East,	he	would	have	become	a	Gautam	Buddha.	In	the	West
there	was	no	background	 to	 explain	what	was	happening	 to	 him,	 and	 it	was	 a
weird	 experience	 --	 while	 dancing...	 once	 in	 a	 while	 when	 he	 would	 forget
himself	completely,	would	become	so	much	absorbed	in	the	dance	that	there	was
only	 the	 dance	 and	 no	 dancer	 --	 he	 would	 jump	 so	 high	 that	 it	 was	 against
gravitation.	No	scientist	had	any	explanation.	Man	cannot	 jump	 that	high,	 it	 is
simply	not	possible.
And	that	was	not	the	whole	story.
When	he	would	come	back	down...	anything	when	falling,	the	gravitation	of	the
earth	pulls	it	forcibly.	But	when	Nijinsky	would	be	coming	back	down,	he	would
come	so	 slowly...	 just	 like	a	dead	 leaf	 falling	 from	 the	 tree,	moving	slowly,	or
like	a	feather.	That	was	even	more	difficult	to	explain.
And	when	people	asked	him,	"What	you	do?"	he	said,	"Whenever	I	try	to	do	it,	it
never	happens.	Finally	I	give	up,	and	then	one	day	suddenly	it	happens	--	but	it
happens	 only	when	 I	 am	 not,	 when	 I	 am	 not	 the	 doer.	 It	 is	 something	 of	 the
beyond."
So	don't	be	worried.
If	you	are	feeling	silent,	peaceful,	loving...	these	are	not	the	ways	of	the	ego.	The
ego	cannot	feel	silent,	the	ego	cannot	feel	peaceful,	the	ego	cannot	feel	loving.
Your	meditation	has	ripened.
You	have	come	to	a	maturity.
Rejoice,	and	be	grateful.
Existence	 is	 very	 compassionate.	 If	 we	 are	 ready	 to	 open	 our	 hearts	 without
holding	anything	back,	then	immense	treasures	become	available	to	us.
In	the	beginning	such	doubts	may	arise:	"Perhaps	it	is	ego."	Don't	give	a	place	to
such	doubts.
Remember:	ego	can	create	misery,	ego	can	create	anguish,	ego	can	create	hate,
ego	can	create	 jealousy.	Ego	can	never	become	a	vehicle	 for	 the	divine,	 it	 can
never	become	the	passage	for	the	beyond.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	DO	I	ALWAYS	COMPROMISE?
One	compromises	because	one	is	not	certain	about	one's	truth,	one	is	not	certain
about	one's	own	experience.
The	moment	you	have	experienced	something,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	compromise.
There	is	no	possibility	at	all.	You	compromise	only	because	your	idea	is	only	a
mind	thing,	a	borrowed	thought.	You	don't	know	whether	it	is	right	or	wrong,	so
even	if	half	proves	to	be	right,	it	is	not	a	bad	bargain.
There	 is	 an	 ancient	 story	 in	Egypt.	Two	women	came	 to	 the	 court	 of	 the	king
with	a	small	child.	They	contended	--	both	of	them	--	that,	"The	child	belongs	to
me,	he	is	my	child."
And	each	woman	was	persistent	--	"The	child	is	mine."
The	king	had	to	decide,	and	it	was	very	difficult	--	how	to	decide?	The	husbands
of	both	women	had	died	in	war,	in	the	service	of	the	king.
Finally	he	asked	his	master,	an	old	wise	man.	The	master	came	and	he	said,	"It	is
very	simple.	Bring	the	child."
The	child	was	brought	to	the	master,	who	asked	the	king	to	cut	him	in	two,	and
give	 half	 to	 each	 woman.	 "What	 is	 the	 problem?	 They	 both	 say	 the	 child	 is
theirs.	There	being	no	other	evidence,	no	witness,	justice	demands	that	the	child
should	be	divided	into	two."
The	king	was	shocked.	He	said,	"What	are	you	saying?"
But	before	the	king	could	say	anything	more,	the	master	drew	the	king's	sword
out	of	its	sheath.	And	one	woman	ran	forward	and	said,	"No!	Give	the	child	to
the	other;	he	is	not	mine."
The	master	gave	the	child	to	the	woman	who	had	run	forward	and	said	he	was
not	hers.
The	king	said,	"What	is	happening?	I	don't	understand.	The	woman	is	saying	the
child	is	not	hers."
The	master	said,	"Only	the	mother	couldn't	stand	to	see	the	child	cut	in	two.	The
other	 woman	 is	 withstanding	 it	 perfectly	 well,	 without	 any	 difficulty	 --	 if	 the
child	is	cut	in	two,	it	is	cut,	there	is	no	harm,	it	is	not	her	child.	She	is	ready	to
compromise,	even	if	half	a	dead	child	is	given	to	her.	But	the	other	woman	is	not
ready	to	compromise	--	either	the	whole	child	or	no	child."
When	you	have	a	truth,	you	are	almost	like	a	mother	--	you	have	given	birth	to
an	experience.	Either	you	would	 like	 to	have	 it	 total,	or	you	would	not	 like	 to
have	it	at	all.
But	you	cannot	be	 ready	 to	cut	 it	 in	 two,	because	any	 living	experience	cut	 in
two	becomes	dead.
All	compromises	are	dead.
Nobody	 in	 the	whole	history	of	man	who	has	known	anything	about	 truth	has
ever	compromised.	Rather,	he	has	been	ready	to	die	for	it.
It	happened	with	al-Hillaj	Mansoor.	His	master	Junnaid	loved	him	very	much	--
he	was	a	man	worthy	to	be	loved	--	and	he	tried	to	persuade	him	for	years,	"In
your	room	you	can	shout	Ana'l	hag	--	Ì	am	God'	--	but	don't	do	that	in	the	streets.
You	know	that	the	people	are	fanatic,	I	also	know	the	fact."
But	 al-Hillaj	 said,	 "You	 only	 know	 the	 fact.	 I	 have	 experienced	 it.	 You	 have
compromised	 with	 the	 society,	 you	 are	 a	 respected	 teacher.	 I	 don't	 want	 any
respectability,	but	I	will	not	hide	my	truth.	Truth	is	like	fire,	you	cannot	hide	it.	I
have	to	shout	it	from	the	housetops."
And	in	a	Mohammedan	country	--	where	fanaticism	is	the	rule,	not	the	exception
--	 he	was	 immediately	 caught,	 and	 brought	 before	 the	 caliph	 because	 "This	 is
against	our	religion;	there	is	only	one	God,	and	he	is	in	the	heavens.	You	are	just
a	mortal	being.
Even	Mohammed	has	not	said,	Ì	am	God.'	He	simply	says,	Ì	am	the	messenger	of
God.'
And	you	are	saying	that	you	are	God.	Are	you	mad?	Either	stop	it,	or	death	is	the
only	punishment	for	it."
al-Hillaj	said,	"Death	is	accepted,	but	I	cannot	compromise	on	this	point.	It	is	my
experience,	I	am	god.	And	I	say	you	are	also	god	--	but	your	god	is	asleep	and
my	god	is	awake."
Junnaid	again	came	into	the	jail	to	persuade	him,	"This	is	foolish.	You	are	such	a
beautiful	 young	 man,	 with	 a	 great	 future.	 You	 can	 become	 a	 great	 teacher.	 I
know	that	what	you	are	saying	is	right,	but	can't	you	compromise?"
al-Hillaj	said,	"With	all	honor	I	want	to	say	to	you,	you	don't	know.	That's	why
you	have	compromised.	You	have	heard	--	I	have	seen.	You	have	read	--	I	have
been.	Death	does	not	matter,	but	compromise	is	simply	out	of	the	question."
And	 the	 day	 he	 was	 crucified,	 thousands	 of	 people	 came	 to	 throw	 stones,	 to
condemn	him.	Junnaid	also	came;	he	loved	him,	he	was	his	student,	and	he	knew
that	 he	 had	 immense	 possibilities	 of	 growth.	And	he	 had	 understood	 perfectly
well	that	he	himself	was	only	knowledgeable,	and	al-Hillaj	had	experienced.
But	this	is	how	compromise	works.
Everybody	was	throwing	stones	--	not	 to	 throw	a	stone	was	to	risk	 that	people
may	think,
"This	man	is	in	favor	of	al-Hillaj."	So	he	brought	a	roseflower	so	that	when	so
many	people	 in	 the	 crowd	are	 throwing	 stones	he	 could	 throw	 the	 roseflower;
people	will	see	that	he	has	thrown	something,	but	who	knows	that	he	has	thrown
the	roseflower?
The	 mind	 of	 compromise...	 nobody	 should	 suspect	 that	 he	 has	 not	 thrown	 a
stone.	So	he	is	compromising	on	two	grounds:	one	with	the	people,	that	he	has
thrown	a	stone...	and	he	 is	compromising	with	al-Hillaj	also.	Because	al-Hillaj
must	be	looking	out	for	Junnaid,	to	see	whether	he	has	come	or	not,	and	it	would
be	very	cowardly	not	to	go.
al-Hillaj	 was	 smiling	 when	 stones	 were	 showering	 on	 him,	 hurting	 him,	 and
blood	was	 flowing	 all	 over	 the	 body.	 But	when	 the	 roseflower	 of	 Junnaid	 hit
him,	he	started	crying.
Tears	came	to	his	eyes.
Somebody	asked,	"What	happened?	So	many	stones	and	you	continued	to	smile,
and	somebody	has	thrown	a	roseflower	and	tears	have	come	to	your	eyes."
al-Hillaj	said,	"Yes,	because	the	people	who	are	throwing	stones	don't	know	me.
And	the	person	who	has	thrown	the	roseflower	knows	me,	knows	my	truth.	But
he	is	a	coward,	and	I	am	ashamed	that	I	have	been	a	student	of	this	man.	Stones
don't	matter.	But	this	roseflower	has	hit	me	hard."
Compromise	simply	means	you	are	on	uncertain	ground.
Rather	than	compromising,	find	grounding,	roots,	individuality.	Find	a	sincerity
of	feeling,	the	support	of	your	heart.	Then	whatever	the	consequence,	it	does	not
matter.
The	man	who	knows,	knows	perfectly	well	that	no	harm	is	possible.	You	can	kill
him,	but	you	cannot	harm	him.
And	 the	man	who	does	not	know	 is	always	 trembling,	always	worried.	 In	 that
worrying	and	trembling,	that	anguish,	he	goes	on	compromising	with	everybody
--	just	to	be	safe,	not	to	be	harmed.
But	what	are	you	trying	to	save?	You	don't	have	anything	to	save.
Those	who	have	something	to	save	don't	compromise.
A	 man	 like	 Socrates	 is	 given	 an	 opportunity	 by	 the	 judges,	 that	 if	 he	 leaves
Athens...	he	can	 live	outside	of	Athens	and	 in	 this	way	he	can	avoid	 the	death
penalty.	Anybody	would	suggest	that	"This	is	a	simple	compromise,	you	can	just
live	 outside	 the	 boundary	 lines	 of	Athens"	 --	 because	 in	 those	 days	 in	Greece
there	were	only	city-states;	every	city	was	a	state.	Just	outside	the	boundary	you
were	outside	the	state.	He	could	have	lived	almost	in	the	suburbs.
But	men	like	Socrates	are	impossible.
He	said,	"I	would	rather	die	than	escape.	And	anyway,	I	am	old.	How	long	I	am
going	 to	 live?	And	 if	 the	most	 cultured	 city	 of	 these	 days	 cannot	 tolerate	me,
who	is	going	to	tolerate	me?	It	is	better	to	die	in	Athens	than	anywhere	else	--	at
least	I	have	the	consolation	that	I	am	being	killed	by	the	most	cultured	people."
The	 judges	were	 really	 trying	hard	 somehow	 to	 save	 him,	 because	 he	 had	not
committed	any	crime.	It	was	just	that	the	mob	wanted	him	to	be	killed	--	he	was
corrupting	the	youth.
Now,	anybody	who	brings	new	thoughts	to	the	world	can	be	blamed	because	he
is	corrupting	the	youth	--	because	he	is	bound	to	be	against	the	old	ideas,	he	is
bound	to	fight	against	the	old.	You	can	call	it	corruption:	"He	is	corrupting	our
tradition,	our	religion,	our	culture."
The	judges	said,	"We	have	another	suggestion:	you	can	live	in	Athens,	but	stop
talking	about	truth."
Socrates	says,	"You	are	asking	me	to	do	the	impossible.	I	will	speak	about	truth
and	truth	alone	until	my	last	breath.	Do	you	want	me	to	start	speaking	lies?	Do
you	want	me	not	to	speak	at	all?	--	that	too	is	a	lie,	because	I	know	the	truth	and
I	 am	not	 speaking	 it,	 and	 the	 lie	 is	 spreading	 in	 people's	minds.	No,	 I	will	 be
here,	 and	 I	 will	 speak	 the	 truth.	 It	 is	 up	 to	 you	 --	 you	 can	 kill	 me.	 But	 no
compromise	on	any	ground."
Try	 to	 find	 your	 individuality,	 your	 integrity,	 and	 make	 the	 effort	 of	 not
compromising.
Because	the	more	you	compromise,	the	less	you	are	an	individual.	You	are	only
a	cog	in	the	wheel,	just	a	part	in	the	vast	mechanism,	just	a	small	part	of	the	mob
--	not	an	individual	in	your	own	beauty,	in	your	own	right.
I	 am	absolutely	against	 compromise.	Death	 is	 far	more	beautiful	 than	a	 life	of
compromise.
Question	5
THIS	IS	A	JOKE	FOR	MY	BELOVED	MASTER:
IT	HAS	ALWAYS	BEEN	ONE	OF	THE	MOST	PROFOUND	QUESTIONS
THROUGHOUT	 THE	 AGES	 --	 WAS	 JESUS	 CHRIST	 A	 JEW	 OR	 NOT?
RECENTLY,	 SCIENTISTS	 HAVE	 MADE	 SUBSTANTIAL	 PROGRESS
TOWARDS	FINDING	THE
ANSWER.	 THE	 RESULTS	 OF	 THEIR	 RESEARCH	 WERE	 FIRST	 MADE
PUBLIC	A	FEW	MONTHS	AGO.
JESUS	WAS	A	JEW	FOR	THREE	IMPORTANT	REASONS:
(1)	HE	LIVED	WITH	HIS	MOTHER	ALL	HIS	LIFE;
(2)	HIS	MOTHER	ALWAYS	CALLED	HIM	`THE	BEST';	AND
(3)	STARTING	OUT	WITH	A	GIFT	OF	JUST	TWO	PIECES	OF	WOOD,	HE
MANAGED	TO	SET	UP	AN	INTERNATIONAL	COMPANY....
Jews	 have	 never	 been	 able	 to	 forgive	 themselves	 for	 crucifying	 Jesus	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	he	was	their	best	boy.
They	 could	 not	 conceive	 that	 he	 would	 create	 the	 greatest	 and	 the	 richest
international	company.	Almost	half	of	the	population	of	the	world	is	Christian.
And	he	certainly	created	this	whole	big	show	out	of	two	pieces	of	wood	--	that's
how	 the	 cross	 is	 made.	 I	 never	 call	 Christianity	 `Christianity'	 --	 I	 call	 it
`crossianity'	 because	 it	 is	 really	 based	 on	 the	 cross.	 The	 findings	 seem	 to	 be
perfectly	true.
And	 he	 created	 a	 company	 that	 has	 lasted	 for	 two	 thousand	 years	 and	 is	 still
growing.
And	the	commodity	that	he	produces	is	invisible.
As	 far	 as	 salesmanship	 is	 concerned,	 Jesus	 is	 the	 best	 salesman	 ever.	 His
commodity	 is	not	great.	Christianity	 is	not	a	great	 religion,	 it	 is	very	primitive
and	third	class.	But	he	managed	to	sell	the	product	to	almost	half	of	the	world.
And	because	the	product	is	invisible,	it	is	very	difficult	to	decide	its	quality.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 in	 a	New	York	 shop	 they	were	 selling	 invisible	 hairpins	 for
women,	and	women	were	certainly	excited	--	invisible	hairpins!	And	they	were
charging	a	lot	for	nothing.	One	woman	opened	the	box	--	of	course	invisible	pins
you	 cannot	 see	 --	 and	 she	 asked	 the	 salesman,	 "Are	 you	 sure	 that	 there	 are
invisible	hairpins	in	it?"
He	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	We	have	been	out	of	stock	for	almost	three	months,
but	 they	are	still	 selling	--	so	we	have	stopped	purchasing,	because	 there	 is	no
point.	They	are	 invisible	 --	we	cannot	 see	 them,	you	cannot	 see	 them,	nobody
can	see	them.	And	people	are	purchasing	them,	standing	in	queues	for	invisible
pins."
God	is	an	invisible	commodity	which	you	cannot	see.	Not	for	a	few	months,	but
for	eternity	it	has	been	out	of	stock.	Heaven	and	hell...	all	invisible	things	--	and
Jesus	managed	 to	create	a	bogus	 religion	on	 these	 things	 like	god,	heaven	and
hell.
The	religion	has	nothing	in	it.
One	can	argue	against	Gautam	Buddha.	At	least	there	is	something	in	it	--	you
may	agree,	you	may	not	agree.
But	Christianity	has	nothing	in	it	--	you	cannot	even	argue	against	it,	it	is	simply
baseless.
It	is	a	great	hypocrisy.	The	pope,	the	archbishops,	the	bishops,	the	cardinals	and
the	priests	--	none	of	them	have	experienced	anything;	none	of	them	have	ever
said	that	they	have	experienced	anything.	And	they	are	millions	in	number,	and
they	are	converting	others	to	their	religion.
They	don't	know	anything	of	what	religion	is.
Perhaps	that's	why	they	have	such	a	great	appeal	for	all	the	idiots.	The	mediocre
mind	does	not	want	to	experience	or	even	at	least	to	be	intelligently	convinced.
It	simply	wants	to	believe,	the	cheapest	thing	in	the	world.
Christianity	provides	belief.	You	believe	and	you	are	saved.
And	who	are	these	saviors?
Just	the	other	day,	Neelam	brought	news	from	a	monastery	in	Europe.	It	is	an	old
monastery,	and	now	it	is	divided	in	two	parts.	Half	of	the	monks	have	declared
that	 they	are	homosexuals	 --	so	 they	are	worshipping	separately	and	 they	have
occupied	almost	half	the	grounds	and	the	church.
And	you	should	not	think	that	the	other	half	are	celibate;	most	probably	they	are
not	courageous	enough	to	say	what	the	other	brothers	have	said.
When	 I	 was	 in	 America,	 in	 Texas	 the	 government	 passed	 a	 law	 against
homosexuality.
Now,	 Texas	 is	 a	 backward	 state	 in	 America:	 homosexuality	 becomes	 illegal,
criminal,	 and	 one	 million	 people	 protested	 against	 the	 law.	 If	 there	 are	 one
million	homosexuals	in	Texas,	what	about	California?
In	 parliament	 in	Holland	 they	 discussed	why	 they	 have	 not	 allowed	me	 entry
into	Holland.	And	 the	minister	 concerned	 said	 strange	 things...	 but	 nobody	 in
parliament	raised	the	question:	"What	nonsense	are	you	talking?"
One	can	understand....	He	said	it	was	because	I	have	been	speaking	against	the
pope.	To	speak	against	the	pope	is	not	a	crime	--	in	no	country's	constitution,	and
in	no	country's	law	is	it	a	crime	to	speak	against	the	pope.
But	it	can	be	understood.
Secondly	he	said	that	I	have	been	speaking	against	Mother	Teresa.
But	are	these	crimes?
And	 thirdly	 --	 the	 most	 important	 --	 is	 that	 I	 have	 been	 speaking	 against
homosexuality.
Has	 the	 whole	 of	 Holland	 gone	 homosexual?	 Then	 change	 the	 name	 from
Holland	tòHomosexual-land'	--	because	in	parliament	nobody	raised	the	simple
question	 that	 "This	 is	 nonsense;	 we	 are	 not	 homosexuals."	 They	 may	 be
Catholics,	they	may	believe	in	the	pope...
Christianity	teaches	celibacy,	and	celibacy	is	unnatural.
It	creates	homosexuals,	lesbians.
And	finally	it	has	brought	the	disease	AIDS,	which	is	another	name	for	death	--
because	there	is	no	medicine,	no	medical	cure	for	it.
The	 pope	 who	 served	 just	 before	 this	 pope	 was	 a	 world-famous	 homosexual.
Before	 becoming	 a	 pope,	 he	 was	 the	 archbishop	 of	 Milan,	 and	 all	 of	 Milan
laughed	because	he	was	continuously	moving	around	with	his	boyfriend.	When
he	became	 the	pope,	 he	 took	his	 boyfriend	 also	 to	 the	Vatican;	 he	became	his
secretary.	And	everybody	knew	--	the	whole	of	Milan	knew,	the	whole	Vatican
knew,	but	nobody	raised	the	question.
It	seems	Christianity	has	created	the	most	unintelligent	people	in	the	world.
I	have	heard:	a	man	and	woman	were	making	love	in	their	bed,	and	suddenly	a
car	drove	into	the	garage.	The	woman	said	to	the	man,	"Wake	up,	wake	up!	My
husband	is	coming,	it	is	certainly	his	car.	Just	get	in	the	closet."
So	the	man	jumped	into	the	closet.
The	husband	came	in;	he	had	come	just	for	half	an	hour	because	he	was	on	his
way	 to	 some	 other	 duty.	And	 the	man	 inside	 the	 closet	 heard	 a	 small	 voice...
somebody	said,	"It	is	very	dark	in	here."
He	said,	"My	God,	who	is	there?	Keep	quiet!"
The	voice	said,	"Give	me	something."	So	the	man	gave	him	fifteen	dollars.
The	voice	said,	"I	am	going	to	scream."
He	said,	"You	seem	to	be	a	very	strange	fellow,"	and	he	gave	him	fifteen	dollars
more.
The	voice	said,	"No!	It	is	so	dark!"	So	the	man	gave	him	all	he	had,	fifty	dollars.
He	said,
"This	is	all	I	have;	now	you	do	whatever	you	want	to	do	--	whether	it	is	dark	or
not,	screaming	or	not,	I	don't	have	anything	more."
The	next	day,	the	boy	said	to	his	mother,	"I	want	to	purchase	a	bicycle."
The	mother	said,	"Bicycle?	But	a	bicycle	costs	fifty	dollars	at	least."
He	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	I	have	got	it."
She	said,	"Where	did	you	get	it	from?"
About	that	he	remained	silent.
The	mother	 said,	 "You	will	 have	 to	 tell	me	where	 you	 got	 it	 from.	Have	 you
stolen	it?"
He	said,	"No,	I	have	not	stolen	it.	And	I	am	not	going	to	say	where	it	came	from.
But	it	is	certain	that	I	have	not	stolen	it,	and	my	source	of	getting	it	is	absolutely
moral."
Mother	said,	"You	first	go	to	the	church	and	confess	to	the	priest.	If	you	cannot
tell	me,	you	tell	the	priest	where	you	got	the	money."
So	he	went	to	the	confession	booth,	and	the	priest	came.	The	boy	said,	"It	is	very
dark	in	here."
And	the	priest	said,	"You	sonofabitch!	Don't	start	it	again!"
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	Eastern	psychology:	The	science	of	the	soul	26	October	1986	pm
in
Archive
code:
8610265
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH24
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	CAN	MODERN	PSYCHOLOGISTS	NOT	THINK	OR	WRITE	ABOUT
OR
EVEN	CONCEIVE	OF	ENLIGHTENMENT?	IS	ENLIGHTENMENT	A	NEW
PHENOMENON	BEYOND	THEIR	CONCEPTION?	WILL	THEY	EVER
UNDERSTAND	A	PHENOMENON	"BEYOND	ENLIGHTENMENT"?
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Narendra,	modern	psychology	is	in	its	very	childhood.	It	is	just	one	century	old.
The	 concept	 of	 enlightenment	 belongs	 to	Eastern	 psychology,	which	 is	 almost
ten	thousand	years	old.
The	modern	psychology	is	just	beginning	from	scratch,	it	is	at	the	ABC	stage.
Enlightenment	 and	 beyond	 enlightenment	 are	 the	 very	 end	 of	 the	 alphabet	 of
human	endeavor	--	XYZ.
Modern	 psychology	 is	 a	 misnomer	 because	 the	 word	 `psychology'	 originates
from	the	word	`psyche'.	Psyche	means	the	soul.	The	exact	meaning	of	the	word
`psychology'
would	be	the	science	of	the	soul.	But	it	is	a	very	weird	word.
Psychology	 denies	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 soul	 and	 still	 goes	 on	 calling	 itself
`psychology'.	It	accepts	only	the	physical	body	and	its	byproduct,	the	mind.	As
the	 physical	 body	 dies,	 the	 mind	 also	 dies;	 there	 is	 no	 rebirth,	 there	 is	 no
reincarnation.	 Life	 is	 not	 an	 eternal	 principle,	 but	 just	 a	 byproduct	 of	 certain
physical	material	things	put	together.
You	have	to	understand	the	word	`byproduct'.	Even	the	idea	of	a	byproduct	is	not
very	original.
In	India,	there	has	been	a	school	of	materialists,	at	least	five	thousand	years	old,
called	charvakas.	They	describe	mind	as	a	byproduct	of	the	body.	Their	example
is	very	fitting.
Remember,	 it	 is	 a	 five	 thousand	 year-old	 example.	 We	 can	 find	 modern
contemporary	parallels	to	it.
In	India	you	must	have	seen	people	chewing	betel	leaves,	pan.	It	consists	of	four
or	five	things	--	 the	betel	 leaf	and	three	or	four	 things	more.	You	can	eat	 them
separately	and	they	will	not	give	the	color	red	to	your	lips;	but	if	you	eat	them
together	 they	 will	 create	 the	 color	 red	 as	 a	 byproduct.	 That	 red	 color	 has	 no
existence	of	its	own,	it	is	a	byproduct.
In	a	contemporary	example,	look	at	a	watch	working.
I	have	heard	that	Mulla	Nasruddin,	when	he	retired,	was	presented	with	a	gold
pocket	watch	by	his	 friends.	 It	was	automatic,	and	from	the	very	beginning	he
was	surprised,	he	thought	what	a	miracle	it	was	that	it	went	on	and	on.	But	after
three	or	four	days	it	stopped.	He	was	very	much	surprised:	what	had	happened?
When	it	stopped	he	opened	it	up	and	found	a	small	dead	ant	inside.
He	said,	"Now	I	know	the	secret!	This	ant	is	the	driver,	and	now	he's	dead	how
can	 the	 watch	 continue?	 But	 those	 idiots	 should	 have	 told	 me	 that	 there	 is	 a
driver!	--	it	needs	food,	it	needs	water.	And	sometimes	you	even	have	to	change
a	driver!"
When	 a	watch	 is	 running,	 and	 if	 it	 is	 automatic,	 what	makes	 it	 tick?	 Is	 there
some	immaterial	entity	like	a	soul?	Open	the	watch	and	take	the	parts	apart,	and
you	will	not	find	any	soul.
That's	what	charvakas	said	five	thousand	years	ago:	that	if	 there	is	a	soul,	 then
cut	a	man	open	and	you	should	find	it.	Or	when	soldiers	are	cut	open	in	the	war	-
-	so	many	souls	would	be	flying	upwards.	Or	when	ordinarily	a	death	happens
naturally	in	your	house,	the	soul	must	leave	the	body.
Charvakas	were	very	 stubborn	materialists.	 In	 five	 thousand	years	materialism
has	not	gone	even	a	step	further	than	charvakas.	They	weighed	a	dying	person,
and	when	he	was	dead	they	weighed	him	again	and	the	weight	was	the	same	--	it
proves	 that	 nothing	 left	 the	 body.	 Then	what	was	 ticking	 in	 the	 body?	 It	was
something:	a	byproduct	of	the	constituents	of	the	body.
And	the	materialists	of	all	ages	--	Epicurus	in	Greece,	Karl	Marx	and	Engels	in
Germany	and	England	--	continued	to	repeat	the	same	idea:	that	consciousness	is
a	byproduct.	And	modern	psychology	has	accepted	it	as	their	basic	foundation:
there	is	no	soul	in	man;	man	is	only	a	body.
Joseph	Stalin	was	able	 to	kill	almost	one	million	Russians	after	 the	revolution.
Anybody	 who	 was	 unwilling	 to	 give	 up	 his	 rights	 to	 his	 property	 was	 killed
mercilessly.	The	whole	family	of	the	czar	which	had	ruled	for	hundreds	of	years
--	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	 empires	 in	 the	 world,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 biggest	 --	 nineteen
persons	in	that	family	were	killed	so	mercilessly	that	they	did	not	even	leave	a
six-month-old	baby,	they	killed	that	baby	too.
Killing	was	easy:	because	of	 the	philosophy,	nothing	 is	killed,	 it	 is	almost	 like
breaking	a	chair.
Otherwise	 it	would	be	difficult	 for	any	man	 to	kill	one	million	people	and	not
feel	any	prick	in	his	conscience.	But	the	philosophy	was	supportive	of	all	these
murders	--
because	nothing	is	murdered,	only	the	physical	body.	There	is	no	consciousness
which	is	separate	from	the	body.
Modern	psychology	 is	 still	 behaving	 stupidly	because	 it	 is	 still	 clinging	 to	 the
five	 thousand	 year-old	 primitive	 idea	 of	 charvaka,	 that	 consciousness	 is	 a
byproduct.	Hence,	all	that	modern	psychology	can	do	is	a	mechanical	job.
Your	car	is	broken	down.	You	go	to	the	workshop	and	a	mechanic	fixes	it.
The	psychologist	 is	 a	mechanic,	 no	different	 from	a	plumber.	He	 simply	 fixes
nuts	and	bolts	 in	your	mind	which	get	 loose	once	 in	a	while;	he	 tightens	 them
here	and	there...
somewhere	they	are	too	tight,	somewhere	they	are	loose.	But	it	is	a	question	of
nuts	and	bolts.
The	 question	 of	 enlightenment	 does	 not	 arise	 for	 the	 modern	 psychologist
because	enlightenment	 is	based	on	 the	experience	 that	mind	 is	not	your	whole
reality.
Beyond	 mind	 there	 is	 your	 consciousness,	 and	 going	 beyond	 mind	 is	 what
enlightenment	is	all	about.
At	 the	 moment	 you	 cross	 the	 borders	 of	 the	 mind,	 there	 is	 enlightenment,	 a
world	of	tremendous	light,	awareness,	fulfillment,	rejoicings.
But	there	is	a	possibility	to	go	even	beyond	that	--	because	that	is	your	individual
consciousness.	If	you	can	go	beyond	it,	you	enter	into	the	cosmic	consciousness.
We	are	 living	 in	 the	ocean	of	 cosmic	 consciousness,	 just	 as	 a	 fish	 lives	 in	 the
ocean	and	is	not	aware	of	the	ocean.	Because	it	is	born	in	the	ocean,	it	lives	in
the	 ocean,	 it	 dies	 in	 the	 ocean,	 the	 fish	 knows	 only	 the	 ocean.	 If	 a	 fisherman
pulls	it	out	of	the	ocean,	throws	it	in	the	sand	on	the	beach,	then	for	the	first	time
it	becomes	aware	that	something	had	been	surrounding	it,	nursing	it,	and	giving
it	life	--	and	that	without	it,	it	cannot	remain	alive.
It	 is	 easy	 to	 give	 a	 fish	 the	 experience	 of	 being	 out	 of	 the	 ocean.	 It	 is	 very
difficult	 to	give	man	 the	experience	of	being	out	of	 the	cosmic	consciousness.
Because	the	cosmic	consciousness	is	everywhere	--	there	is	no	beach,	there	are
no	boundaries	to	the	cosmic	consciousness.	So	wherever	you	are,	you	are	always
in	an	invisible	ocean	of	consciousness.
Modern	psychology	stops	at	the	mind.
Mind	is	only	an	instrument,	and	it	is	a	instrument	of	the	physical	body	--	so	they
are	not	wrong	in	saying	that	it	is	a	byproduct.	But	mind	is	not	all.	Mind	is	only	a
biocomputer,	and	the	day	is	not	far	away	when	the	function	of	the	mind	will	be
almost	taken	over	by	computers.
You	will	 be	 able	 to	 keep	 just	 a	 small	 computer	 in	 your	 pocket	 containing	 the
whole	ENCYCLOPEDIA	BRITANICA.	Any	information	about	any	subject	will
be	immediately	available	--	there	is	no	need	to	remember	it,	there	is	no	need	to
read	it,	there	is	no	need	to	study	it.
Your	mind	is	going	to	lose	its	job	very	soon.
But	 the	 psychologist	 is	 concerned	 only	 with	 the	 mind.	 And	 there	 are	 people
called
`behaviourists'	 who	 say	 there	 is	 no	 mind	 either,	 that	 man	 is	 only	 a	 physical
organism.
In	the	Soviet	Union	they	don't	accept	the	mind.	The	Soviet	psychology	is	even
more	 primitive;	 it	 accepts	 only	 the	 behavior	 of	 your	 body.	 There	 is	 nothing
which	you	can	call	mind;	hence	in	the	Soviet	Union	there	is	nothing	parallel	to
pscyhoanalysis.	 There	 is	 no	 question:	 if	 somebody's	 mind	 is	 behaving	 in	 an
abnormal	way	 then	medicine	 is	needed,	not	psychoanalysis.	Then	he	has	 to	be
hospitalized;	he	is	suffering	from	a	sickness	just	like	any	other	sickness.
At	least	in	the	West	they	have	taken	the	first	step	beyond	the	body	--	not	a	very
big	 step,	 very	 small,	 very	 negligible,	 but	 still	 a	 step	 accepting	 that	 there	 is
something	like	mind,	 that	although	it	 is	a	byproduct,	 it	functions	on	its	own	as
long	as	the	body	is	alive.
And	 now	 it	 is	 a	 great	 profession:	 psychologists,	 psychoanalysts,
psychotherapists;	they	are	all	fixing	people's	minds	--	because	everybody's	mind
is	in	trouble.
There	are	only	two	kinds	of	people	in	the	world:	normally	mad,	and	abnormally
mad.
Normally	mad	means	you	are	mad,	but	not	beyond	limits.	You	are	mad	just	like
everybody	else.
You	can	see	these	normally	mad	people	watching	a	football	match.	Now	can	a
sane	person	watch	a	football	match?	They	need	some	nuts	and	bolts...	Because
with	a	few	idiots	on	this	side	and	a	few	idiots	on	that	side	throwing	a	ball,	and
millions	of	idiots	so	excited	in	the	stadium	and	at	their	television	sets,	glued	to
their	 chairs	 for	 six	 hours	 so	 they	 cannot	 move...	 as	 if	 something	 immensely
valuable	is	happening	because	a	ball	is	being	thrown	from	this	side	to	that	side.
And	millions	more,	who	are	not	so	fortunate	to	be	able	to	see,	keep	a	transistor	at
their	ears,	at	least	listening	to	the	commentary.
You	call	this	world	sane?
There	are	boxing	matches:	people	are	hitting	each	other,	and	millions	of	people
are	so	excited.
In	 California,	 the	 University	 of	 California	 has	 been	 researching...	 whenever	 a
boxing	match	happens	in	California	the	crime	rate	immediately	rises	by	thirteen
percent;	and	it	remains	thirteen	percent	higher	for	seven	to	ten	days	afterwards	--
rape,	murder,	suicide.
And	 now	 it	 is	 confirmed	 by	 other	 studies	 that	 boxing	 is	 simply	 our	 animal
heritage.
The	one	who	gets	excited	in	you	is	the	animal	--	it	is	not	you.	You	also	want	to
kill	 somebody	--	many	 times	you	have	 thought	of	killing	somebody	--	but	you
are	not	ready	to	take	the	consequences.
In	a	boxing	match	there	is	a	psychological	consolation;	you	get	identified.	Every
boxer	 has	 his	 own	 fans.	 Those	 fans	 are	 identified	 with	 him.	 If	 he	 hits	 the
opponent	 and	 the	 opponent's	 nose	 is	 dripping	 blood,	 they	 are	 rejoicing.	What
they	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 do,	 somebody	 else	 is	 doing	 on	 their	 part,	 on	 their
behalf.
In	any	world	which	is	sane,	boxing	would	be	a	crime.
It	 is	a	game,	but	all	your	games	seem	to	be	primitive...	nothing	of	intelligence,
nothing	of	humanity.
These	normally	mad	people	are	always	 just	on	 the	boundary	 line.	At	any	 time
they	can	slip.	A	small	accident	--	the	wife	dies	or	goes	away	with	somebody	else
--	and	you	forget	the	normal	boundary,	you	cross	it.	Then	you	are	declared	mad,
insane,	 and	 immediately	 you	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 to	 the	 psychiatrist	 or	 the
psychoanalyst.
And	what	 is	 his	 function?	His	 profession	 is	 the	 highest	 paid	 profession	 in	 the
world.
Naturally	 he	 makes	 people	 normal	 again,	 he	 pulls	 them	 back,	 he	 keeps	 them
from	going	farther	away	from	the	normal	line.
His	whole	expertise	is	how	to	put	you	back	and	make	you	normally	mad.
Naturally	 the	 people	 who	 are	 functioning	 as	 psychologists,	 psychoanalysts,
psychotherapists	 are	 in	 danger	 because	 they	 are	 constantly	 dealing	 with	 mad
people.
Naturally	more	psychologists	go	mad	than	any	other	profession	--	the	number	is
twice	as	many.	More	psychologists	commit	suicide	than	any	other	profession	--
the	number	again	is	twice	as	many.	And	once	in	a	while	every	psychologist	goes
to	another	psychologist	to	put	himself	back	into	the	normal	world,	because	he	is
slipping	out.
One	would	expect	 that	at	 least	 the	psychologist	 should	be	a	 sane	person;	he	 is
trying	 to	help	other	 insane	people.	But	 this	 is	not	 the	case.	They	behave	more
insanely	 than	 anybody	 else,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 from	morning	 till	 night
they	 are	 constantly	 coming	 in	 contact	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 weird,	 strange	 people
with	weird	ideas.
One	man	was	brought	to	a	psychoanalyst...	The	man	was	convinced	that	he	was
dead.
Everybody	had	 tried	 to	 tell	him:	 "Don't	be	 foolish,	you	eat	perfectly	well,	you
sleep	perfectly	well,	you	 talk	perfectly	well,	you	go	for	a	morning	walk	--	and
you	say	you	are	dead?"
He	said,	"Who	says	that	dead	people	don't	go	for	a	morning	walk?	Every	day	I
meet	many	dead	people	going	for	a	morning	walk."
The	family	was	very	much	puzzled	--	what	to	do	with	the	man?
When	they	found	it	impossible	to	convince	him...	Because	he	wouldn't	go	to	the
shop.
His	argument	was	clear:	"Dead	people	don't	run	businesses.	I	have	never	come
across	a	single	dead	man.	If	you	can	convince	me	by	bringing	a	dead	man	who
runs	a	business,	I	will	go	to	the	shop.	I	will	do	only	things	which	dead	people	are
supposed	to	do	--	nothing	else."
They	told	the	psychoanalyst	the	whole	story:	"This	man	is	in	a	poor	state."
The	psychologist	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	I	will	fix	him."
He	took	a	needle	and	asked	this	madman:	"What	do	you	think	about	the	proverb
that
`Dead	people	don't	bleed'?"
He	said,	"It	 is	absolutely	right.	I	heard	it	when	I	was	alive:	`Dead	people	don't
bleed.'"
The	psychologist	was	very	happy.	The	family	was	very	happy	also	--	listening,
thinking	 that	 the	 psychologist	 is	 really	 great:	 he	 is	 catching	 him	 on	 the	 first
point.
The	psychologist	 pushed	 the	needle	 into	 the	dead	man's	 hand	 and	blood	 came
out.	He	looked	at	the	dead	man	and	said,	"What	do	you	say	now?"
The	man	said,	"That	means	that	proverb	is	wrong	--	dead	people	do	bleed.	I	had
only	heard	it;	now	it	is	my	own	experience."
If	you	come	across	such	people	the	whole	day	long,	in	the	night	you	will	dream
of	the	same	people.	Naturally,	psychologists	don't	live	a	very	sane	life.
And	 they	 cannot	 live	 a	 sane	 life	 until	 and	 unless	 they	 accept	 that	 there	 is
something	beyond	mind.
The	beyond	is	the	rest,	the	shelter.	Mind	is	a	continuous	chattering,	it	is	twenty-
four	hours	chattering.	Only	beyond	mind	is	peace	and	silence.	In	that	peace	and
silence	sanity	is	born.
Enlightenment	 is	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 sanity	 --	 when	 one	 becomes	 perfectly
sane,	has	come	to	a	point	where	silence,	serenity,	consciousness	are	twenty-four
hours	his,	waking	or	 sleeping.	There	 runs	 a	 current	of	 tranquility,	 blissfulness,
benediction	which	is	a	nourishment,	food	from	the	beyond.
Eastern	psychology	accepts	mind	as	 the	lowest	part	of	human	consciousness	--
dismal	and	dark.
You	have	to	go	beyond	it.
And	enlightenment	is	not	the	end,	because	it	is	only	individual	consciousness.
Individuality	is	still	like	two	banks	of	a	river.	The	moment	the	river	moves	into
the	 ocean,	 all	 banks	 disappear,	 all	 boundaries	 are	 annihilated.	 You	 have	 gone
beyond	enlightenment.
Modern	 psychology	 has	 to	 learn	much	 from	 the	Eastern	 experiment.	 It	 knows
nothing.
All	 that	 modern	 psychology	 is	 doing	 is	 analyzing	 dreams,	 fixing	 people	 to
somehow	carry	on	their	normal	business	and	repressing	their	abnormalities.	But
it	brings	no	transformation.
Even	the	founders	of	modern	psychology	--	Freud	or	Jung	or	Adler	or	Assagioli
--	are	not	people	who	you	can	put	in	the	category	of	Gautam	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,
Chuang	Tzu.	You	cannot	put	these	people	with	the	seers	of	the	UPANISHADS,
with	 Kabir	 and	 Nanak	 and	 Farid.	 These	 are	 the	 sanest	 people	 humanity	 has
produced,	and	they	have	not	bothered	about	dreams,	they	have	not	gone	through
psychoanalysis	for	years	together.
It	is	such	a	strange	phenomenon:	in	the	whole	world	there	is	not	a	single	person
who	 has	 completed	 psychoanalysis	 --	 because	 it	 goes	 on	 and	 on,	 ten	 years,
twelve	 years.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 have	 been	 in	 psychoanalysis	 for	 twenty
years,	wasting	millions	of	dollars.
In	fact,	just	as	everywhere	ladies	talk	about	diamonds	and	emeralds	and	rubies,
in	America	ladies	say:	"How	long	have	you	been	in	psychoanalysis?	I	have	been
in	it	for	thirteen	years!"
It	is	a	criterion	of	wealth:	it	shows	you	can	afford	to	pay	millions	of	dollars.
The	 poor	 man,	 the	 psychoanalyst,	 has	 to	 listen	 to	 all	 kinds	 of	 garbage.	 No
wonder	that	they	start	going	mad,	they	start	committing	suicide,	they	jump	from
the	window	of	a	thirty-story	building	or	hundred-story	building!	Just	listen	to	a
woman's	 dreams	 for	 twenty	 years....	 It	 is	 a	 great	 relief	 for	 the	 husband,	 he	 is
perfectly	happy	that	she	throws	all	her	garbage	and	tantrums	and	everything	on
the	psychoanalyst	--	it	is	not	too	costly,	he	can	manage	to	pay	--	but	for	the	poor
psychoanalyst...	Twenty	years	of	listening	to	one	woman	and	her	stupid	dreams?
If	one	day	he	suddenly	jumps	out	of	the	window,	you	cannot	condemn	him	--	he
needs	everybody's	sympathy.
But	it	is	big	business.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 telling	 you	 that	 Jesus	 founded	 a	 big	 business,
Christianity.
Another	 Jew,	 Sigmund	 Freud,	 founded	 another	 business,	 psychoanalysis.
Another	Jew,	Karl	Marx	founded	another	business,	communism.
Jews	 are	 strange	 people.	 Whenever	 they	 do	 something,	 nobody	 can	 compete
with	them.
Now	half	the	world	is	communist	in	one	Jew's	hands;	the	other	half	is	Christian,
in	another	Jew's	hands.	And	who	knows?	--	maybe	both	are	partners.
Jews	are	always	business	minded;	they	don't	bother	about	Christianity,	they	don't
bother	about	communism.	Sigmund	Freud	is	dead,	Karl	Marx	is	dead.	Wherever
they	 are	 --	 in	 hell	 or	 in	 heaven	 --	 they	 may	 be	 enjoying	 the	 fact	 that	 their
businesses	are	going	well;	they	may	have	even	joined	with	Jesus.	This	would	be
the	real	trinity:	three	Jews	running	the	whole	world.
Modern	psychology	will	not	accept	meditation	because	meditation	will	destroy
their	business.
A	man	of	meditation	needs	no	psychoanalysis.	The	deeper	his	meditation	goes,
the	saner	he	becomes	and	the	further	beyond	the	mind	is	his	flight.
Meditation	 is	 the	 greatest	 danger	 for	 psychoanalysis,	 for	 psychologists.	 They
have	 to	 insist	 that	 there	 is	 nothing	beyond	mind	because	 if	 there	 is	 something
beyond	mind,	then	their	whole	business	can	flop.
The	East	has	to	assert	itself:	show	that	what	they	are	doing	is	simply	foolish.
In	 a	 Zen	 monastery	 in	 Japan	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 psychological	 case	 is	 treated
within	three	weeks;	in	the	West	he	would	not	be	treated	in	twelve	years.	And	in
the	Zen	monastery	in	those	three	weeks	there	is	no	psychoanalysis.	You	will	be
surprised:	nothing	 is	done;	 the	person	 is	put	 in	 an	 isolated	place	 --	 a	beautiful
garden,	pond.	In	time	food	will	be	provided,	in	time	tea	will	be	sent;	but	nobody
will	talk	with	him,	he	has	to	remain	silent.
You	can	see	the	difference.
In	psychoanalysis	he	has	 to	 talk	 about	his	dreams	continuously,	 for	years,	 one
hour	 every	 day,	 two	 hours,	 two	 sessions	 a	 week,	 three	 sessions	 a	 week	 --	 as
much	as	you	can	afford.
And	here	in	a	Zen	monastery	they	simply	put	the	man	in	a	beautiful,	comfortable
place.
There	are	musical	instruments	available,	painting	material	is	available,	or	if	there
is	 anything	 special	 he	 wants	 to	 do	 that	 is	 made	 available;	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be
something	to	do	--
not	talking.	And	for	three	weeks	nobody	will	to	talk	to	him.
During	 the	 three	weeks,	people	paint,	people	play	music,	people	dance,	people
work	 in	 the	 garden,	 and	 after	 three	weeks	 they	 are	 perfectly	 normal,	 they	 are
ready	to	go	back	home.
What	has	happened?	 If	you	ask	 the	Zen	master,	he	would	say,	"Nothing;	 these
people	were	working	 too	 hard,	 and	 their	mind	 got	wound	 up	 too	much.	 They
needed	unwinding.
So	 just	 three	 weeks	 rest	 and	 their	 mind	was	 unwound.	 They	 needed	 physical
work	so	that	 the	whole	energy	goes	into	the	body,	not	 in	the	mind."	And	these
people	certainly	become	interested...	without	doing	anything	all	the	strange	and
weird	things	that	they	had	been	thinking	had	disappeared.	This	is	a	simple	way
for	sick	people	to	unwind	the	overloaded	mind.
For	those	who	are	healthy	--	not	sick	people	--	the	way	is	meditation.	There	are
different	methods	 for	 different	 types.	 And	 thousands	 of	 people	 have	 achieved
such	 luminosity,	 such	 glory,	 such	 godliness,	 that	 all	 the	 psychologists	 of	 the
world	should	be	ashamed.
They	have	not	been	able	to	produce	a	single	person.	Even	their	founders	are	just
very	ordinary	--	worse	than	ordinary.
Sigmund	Freud	was	so	afraid	of	death	that	even	the	word	`death'	was	prohibited.
In	his	essence	nobody	should	mention	the	word	`death'	because	just	hearing	the
word	he	would	fall	into	a	fit,	he	would	go	unconscious.	These	are	the	founders
of	modern	psychology;	they	are	going	to	give	humanity	sanity!
And	on	 the	other	hand....	A	Zen	monk,	 just	before	dying,	said	 to	his	disciples:
"Listen,	I	have	always	lived	in	my	own	way.	I	am	an	independent	person	and	I
want	 to	die	 in	my	own	way	also.	When	I	am	dead	I	will	not	be	here,	so	I	will
give	you	the	instructions	to	be	followed."
Just	 as	 in	 India,	 it	happens	 in	exactly	 the	 same	way	 in	 Japan	 too;	before	he	 is
taken	to	the	funeral,	the	person's	clothes	are	changed,	he	is	given	a	bath	and	new
clothes	are	put	on	him.
He	said,	"I	have	taken	the	bath	myself,	I	have	changed	my	clothes,	you	can	see.
So	when	I	am	dead,	 there	 is	no	need	for	any	bath	or	changing	of	clothes.	And
these	 are	 the	 orders	 from	 your	 master,	 so	 remember:	 at	 least	 a	 dying	 man's
wishes	should	not	be	denied	--	and	I	am	not	asking	much."
His	disciples	said,	"We	will	do	as	you	say.	There	is	nothing	much	in	it."
He	died,	and	thousands	of	disciples	were	there.	When	his	body	was	put	on	the
funeral	pyre,	they	all	started	laughing	and	giggling	--	he	had	hidden	firecrackers
inside	his	clothes.	He	had	made	it	into	a	divali,	just	to	make	everybody	laugh	--
because	that	was	his	basic	teaching,	that	life	should	be	a	dance,	a	joy,	and	death
should	be	a	celebration.
And	people	said	that	even	after	death	he	managed	it	so	that	nobody	should	stand
around	him	with	a	long	face,	so	that	everybody	was	laughing.	Even	the	strangers
who	had	come	started	laughing;	they	had	never	seen	such	a	scene.
These	are	the	people	who	have	understood	life	and	death.	They	can	make	death	a
joke.
Not	Sigmund	Freud,	for	whom	the	word	`death'	becomes	a	fit.
And	 the	same	 is	 the	case	with	other	great	psychologists.	 Jung	wanted	 to	go	 to
Egypt	 to	see	 the	old	mummies	of	kings	and	queens,	dead	bodies	preserved	for
three	thousand	years	old.	But	he	was	very	much	afraid	of	death	and	dead	bodies.
He	was	a	disciple	of	Freud.
He	booked	the	ticket	twelve	times,	and	each	time	he	would	find	some	excuse:	"I
am	feeling	feverish,"	or,	"Some	urgent	work	has	come."
And	he	knew.	He	wrote	in	his	diary:	"I	knew	it	was	all	an	excuse.	I	was	avoiding
going	to	Egypt,	but	the	more	I	avoided	it	the	more	I	was	attracted	--	as	if	I	had	to
go,	it	was	a	challenge	to	my	manliness.	Am	I	such	a	coward?	So	I	would	book
again,	and	I	would	gather	courage,	and	I	would	try	to	convince	myself	that	there
is	nothing	to	be	worried	about	--	they	are	dead	bodies,	they	cannot	do	anything
to	 you.	And	 so	many	 people	 go	 to	 see	 them.	They	 are	 there	 in	 the	museums.
Thousands	of	people	see	them	every	day.	Why	are	you	afraid?"	--	but	arguments
won't	do.
Finally,	the	twelfth	time	he	booked,	he	managed	to	get	to	the	airport,	but	when
the	 plane	 came	 on	 the	 airstrip	 all	 his	 courage,	 arguments	 and	 everything
disappeared.	He	said,	 "I	am	feeling	very	sick	and	nauseous.	 I	want	 to	go	back
home.	Cancel	the	trip."	And	after	that,	he	never	dared	book	again;	twelve	times
was	enough.	He	never	managed	to	reach	Egypt	--	which	was	only	a	few	hours'
flight.
He	came	to	India,	and	he	went	 to	all	 the	universities	of	India.	He	was	here	for
three	months.	But	he	would	not	go	to	one	man,	where	he	needed	to	go:	He	would
not	go	to	Shri	Raman	Maharshi.	And	in	every	university	it	was	suggested	that	he
was	wasting	his	time:
"You	 have	 come	 to	 understand	 the	 Eastern	 approach,	 but	 we	 are	 all	Western-
educated	 psychologists	 in	 the	 Indian	 universities'	 psychological	 departments.
You	are	just	wasting	your	time.	These	people	may	be	educated	in	the	West	or	in
the	East	but	 their	education	 is	Western;	 they	know	nothing	of	 the	East.	But	by
chance	 there	 is	 a	 man	 --	 he	 knows	 nothing	 of	 psychology,	 he	 is	 absolutely
uneducated,	but	he	 represents	 the	East.	This	man	has	 experienced	 the	ultimate
flights	of	meditation.	You	just	go	and	sit	by	his	side."
He	went	up	to	Madras,	but	he	would	not	go	to	see	him.	It	was	only	a	two-hour
journey	 from	 Madras,	 but	 he	 would	 not	 go.	 And	 he	 had	 come	 to	 India	 to
understand	what	the	Eastern	attitude	to	psychology	was.
Western	psychology	--	which	is	the	contemporary	psychology	--	is	very	childish.
The	East	has	a	 ten	 thousand	year-old	 inquiry	 into	human	consciousness.	 It	has
touched	 every	 nook	 and	 corner	 of	 human	 being,	 within	 and	 without,	 as
individual	and	as	universal.
But	 it	 is	 unfortunate	 that	 even	 the	 Eastern	 psychologists	 and	 professors	 of
psychology	 have	 no	 idea	 about	 the	 Eastern	 approach.	 They	 are	 just	 parrots
repeating	Western	 psychology	 secondhand.	 That	 too	 is	 not	 their	 own	 original
contribution.	Sometimes	even	parrots	are	better	and	more	intelligent.
I	 have	 been	 a	 professor	 in	 the	 university,	 and	 I	 have	 been	 in	 constant	 conflict
with	 the	 professors:	 "You	 are	 parrots	 and	 you	 are	 agents	 of	 the	West	without
your	 knowing.	 You	 are	 corrupting	 the	 Eastern	 mind	 because	 you	 don't	 know
what	 you	 are	 doing.	 You	 are	 not	 even	 aware	 of	 what	 the	 East	 has	 already
discovered.	 You	 are	 just	 carbon	 copies	 carrying	 certificates	 from	 Western
universities."
I	have	often	told	a	story	in	the	universities.
A	bishop	was	looking	for	a	parrot.	His	own	parrot	had	died.	He	had	been	a	very
religious	parrot	--	religious	in	the	sense	that	he	was	able	to	repeat	the	Sermon	on
the	 Mount	 accurately,	 word	 for	 word.	 And	 whoever	 heard	 him	 was	 simply
amazed.	And	the	parrot	had	died	and	the	bishop	was	missing	his	parrot.
So	 he	 went	 to	 a	 very	 big	 pet	 shop,	 and	 he	 looked	 around.	 There	 were	many
parrots	there	with	many	qualities.	But	he	said,	"No,	my	parrot	was	almost	a	saint,
I	want	a	very	religious	parrot."
The	 pet	 shop	 owner	 said,	 "I	 have	 a	 special	 parrot	 --	 but	 the	 price	may	be	 too
much.	He	is	no	ordinary	saint,	he	is	a	very	special	saint.	Come	inside	with	me.	I
keep	my	special	parrots	in	my	house	behind	the	shop,	not	in	the	shop	itself.
There	in	a	golden	cage	was	a	beautiful	parrot.
The	pet	shop	owner	said,	"This	is	the	religious	parrot.	You	have	talked	so	much
about	your	parrot,	but	this	parrot	is	unique	--	you	will	forget	all	about	him.	Come
close	and	see:	on	its	right	leg	there	is	a	small	thread;	if	you	pull	that	thread,	he
will	repeat	the	Sermon	on	the	Mount.	There	is	also	a	small	thread	on	its	left	leg;
if	you	pull	that,	it	will	repeat	the	Song	of	Solomon.	So	if	you	have	a	Jew	for	a
guest,	 you	 can	 make	 the	 parrot	 repeat	 the	 Song	 of	 Solomon	 from	 the	 Old
Testament;	or	if	you	have	a	Christian	guest,	then	the	Sermon	on	the	Mount	from
the	New	Testament."
The	bishop	said,	"Great;	this	is	really	great.	And	what	will	happen	if	I	pull	both
threads	together?"
Before	the	owner	could	say	anything,	the	parrot	said,	"Never	do	that,	you	idiot.	I
will	fall	on	my	ass!"
Even	parrots	have	some	intelligence.
Sooner	or	 later	psychology	has	to	 inquire	 into	the	states	created	by	meditation,
into	 spaces	 which	 are	 beyond	 mind.	 And	 unless	 it	 dares	 to	 penetrate	 the
innermost	 core	 of	 human	 beings,	 it	 will	 not	 become	 a	 science.	 Right	 now	 its
name	is	wrong;	it	has	to	prove	that	it	is	psychology	--	the	science	of	the	soul.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
DURING	DEEP	RELAXATION	I	HAVE	EXPERIENCED	SOME	STRANGE
THINGS.	 ONE	 IS	 THAT	 I	 FELT	 LIFTED	 FROM	 THE	 EARTH,	 AND	 THE
SECOND
THAT	I	FELT	TOUCHED	BY	HANDS	TRYING	TO	HELP	ME.
EVERY	TIME	 IT	HAPPENED	 I	 FELT	TOTALLY	SCARED,	DIDN'T	DARE
TO
OPEN	 MY	 EYES,	 AND	 DID	 EVERYTHING	 I	 KNOW	 TO	 GROUND
MYSELF.
OSHO,	CAN	 I	 TRUST	AND	 JUST	LET	GO,	OR	 IS	 THERE	DANGER?	 "I"
DON'T
MAKE	MYSELF	FLY.	I	DON'T	KNOW	HOW	FAR	IT	WOULD	GO,	AND
WHETHER	I	WOULD	EVER	BE	ABLE	TO	COME	BACK.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
First,	can't	you	recognize	my	hands?	Open	your	eyes,	and	just	take	a	good	look!
You	see	my	hands	every	day.
If	 in	meditation	you	 feel	 two	hands	appearing,	don't	close	your	eyes.	And	you
will	be	able	to	recognize	my	hands.
There	is	nothing	to	fear.
In	fact,	the	feeling	that	you	are	uplifted	from	the	earth	is	tremendously	valuable.
You	are	not	really	lifted	up,	you	are	on	the	earth;	it	is	not	that	your	body	is	really
lifted	up.
But	you	have	three	bodies.
Your	physical	body	will	remain	on	the	earth.
And	because	of	meditation	your	mental	body	is	silent,	relaxing.
Only	 the	 astral	 body	 is	 capable	 of	 rising	 upwards;	 it	 is	 beyond	 gravitation.
Gravitation	has	no	power	over	it.
Light	is	not	under	the	control	of	gravitation.	That's	why	the	flame	of	a	candle	can
go	upwards.	Even	if	you	put	the	candle	upside	down,	the	flame	will	immediately
turn	upwards.	The	 flame	cannot	 go	downwards	because	 the	gravitation	has	no
pull	on	light.
Your	astral	body	is	made	only	of	light,	of	electrons.
It	 is	 very	 indicative	 that	 you	 feel	 that	 your	 body	 is	 uplifted.	 Naturally	 in	 the
beginning	you	will	be	gripped	by	fear:	What	is	happening?
But	open	your	eyes.
These	are	the	moments	when	I	am	really	with	you	in	case	you	need	me;	hence,
you	 feel	 two	 hands	 because	 it	 is	 a	 very	 delicate	 moment.	 Any	 accident	 is
possible.
Open	your	eyes	and	see.	You	will	be	surprised,	because	it	will	seem	as	if	you	are
floating	above	your	body	and	your	body	is	lying	down	on	the	floor.	But	you	will
see	a	thin	cord	as	if	made	of	silver,	shining,	joined	with	the	body	lying	down	on
the	 floor.	 The	 point	 the	 silver	 cord	 is	 joined	 to	 is	 your	 navel	 --	 and	 it	 is	 very
flexible.	You	can	 fly	higher,	 and	 it	will	 stretch	without	any	difficulty.	You	can
come	closer.
But	don't	be	afraid.	Don't	start	 thinking,	"How	am	I	going	to	get	into	my	body
again?"
You	 have	 not	 come	 out	 of	 the	 body	with	 your	 effort.	 It	 is	 your	 silence,	 your
peace	 that	 has	 helped	 your	 astral	 body	 move	 out.	 The	 moment	 you	 feel	 like
getting	back	into	the	body,	you	will	immediately	find	yourself	back	in	the	body.
And	those	two	hands	that	were	close	to	you	will	disappear	the	moment	you	are
back	in	the	body.
And	 just	 watch	my	 hands	 closely	 because	 these	 will	 be	 the	 same	 hands,	 and
naturally	you	need	not	be	afraid	of	my	hands.	My	hands	have	never	done	any
harm	to	anybody.
In	fact,	I	cannot	do	anything	with	my	hands	--	these	must	be	the	laziest	hands	in
the	whole	world.
But	your	experience	is	immensely	significant,	impeccably	beautiful.
And	the	fear	that	if	you	go	on	and	on,	how	far	and	where	it	will	lead....	Don't	be
worried.
Wherever	it	will	lead	you	is	the	right	place,	the	right	space.
Relax	and	remain	in	a	let-go.	You	are	not	to	control	its	movements	because	you
are	far	smaller	than	the	energy	that	you	are	trying	to	control.	The	best	way	is	to
simply	surrender	to	existence	and	allow	it	to	take	you	wherever	it	takes	you;	it
has	never	taken	anybody	into	any	wrong	space.
It	always	takes	you	back	home.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
OUT	ON	THE	SPARKLING	SEAS	OF	ONENESS,	A	MYSTERIOUS	WIND
FILLS
MY	 SAILS,	 GIVING	 DIRECTION	 TO	MY	 JOURNEY	 AND	 BECKONING
ME
ONWARDS	INTO	UNKNOWN	WATERS.
MY	BELOVED	CAPTAIN,	WHEN	DOES	THE	UNKNOWN	BECOME	THE
UNKNOWABLE?
Milarepa,	your	question	is	very	simple.
The	mind	can	be	divided	into	two	parts:	the	known	and	the	unknown.
The	 known	 is	 your	 knowledge;	 the	 unknown	 is	 your	 ignorance.	 And	 all	 your
universities	and	educational	systems	are	trying	to	do	only	one	thing:	to	put	your
mind	 completely	 in	 the	 field	 of	 the	 known,	 to	 dispel	 the	 unknown,	 to	 dispel
ignorance.
Beyond	 the	 known	 and	 the	 unknown	 is	 what	 I	 call	 `the	 unknowable'.	 That	 is
beyond	mind.	That	is	the	world	of	the	mysterious,	the	world	of	the	miraculous.
The	moment	you	pass	beyond	mind,	 the	unknown	 is	 left	behind,	 the	known	 is
left	behind,	and	you	enter	into	the	unknowable.	And	the	unknowable	is	the	field
of	 true	 religion.	 You	 experience	 it,	 you	 live	 it,	 you	 feel	 it,	 it	 becomes	 your
heartbeat,	but	you	can	never	say	you	know	it.
Knowledge	seems	to	be	a	much	lower	category.
The	 unknowable	 belongs	 to	 the	 category	 of	 being,	 not	 to	 the	 category	 of
knowing.
The	mystics	of	all	the	ages,	of	all	countries,	are	making	every	effort	to	push	you
from	the	known	and	unknown	into	the	unknowable,	to	push	you	from	the	mind
into	the	ocean	of	the	mysterious.	There	you	will	experience	much	--	much	that
you	can	imagine,	much	that	you	can	dream	about	--	but	you	will	not	be	able	to
bring	 anything	 from	 it	 into	 the	 world	 of	 knowledge,	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
translate	it	into	words,	into	language,	into	anything	that	can	become	a	symbol	for
it.
I	am	reminded	of	a	small	child....	And	a	mystic	is	almost	like	a	small	child.	The
child	was	sitting	with	a	canvas	with	all	his	colors	and	brushes,	and	his	father	was
reading	the	newspaper.	Again	and	again	the	father	looked	at	the	child...	he's	not
doing	anything,	just	sitting	there.	He	said,	"What	are	you	doing?"
The	child	said,	"I	am	painting."
After	half	an	hour	the	father	said,	"But	I	don't	see	any	painting	on	your	canvas.
Haven't	you	decided	what	you	are	going	to	paint	yet?"
The	boy	said,	"No,	that's	not	the	point.	I	have	painted	it."
The	 father	 came	 close	 to	 see.	 He	 said,	 "Painted	 it?	 I	 never	 thought	 that	 you
would	befool	me.	A	plain	canvas;	you	have	not	even	touched	it!"
He	said,	"No,	father;	I	have	done	my	painting:	a	cow	is	grazing	the	grass."
The	father	said,	"A	cow	grazing	in	the	grass?	Where	is	the	cow?"
The	boy	said,	"After	grazing	 the	grass,	 she	has	gone.	What	would	she	do	here
now?"
The	father	said,	"Okay,	where	is	the	grass?"
The	boy	said,	"You	are	strange;	the	cow	has	eaten	the	grass	and	gone."
The	father	said,	"How	did	you	make	this	idea	up?	To	befool	me?"
The	boy	said,	"No,	I	am	not	befooling	you.	I	saw	the	grass,	I	saw	the	cow,	I	saw
the	grass	disappearing	and	I	saw	her	go	away."
The	 child	 is	 innocent.	 Perhaps	 his	 imagination...	 And	 a	 child's	 imagination	 is
really	powerful	--	they	cannot	make	any	distinction	between	the	dream	and	the
real.	He	may	have	seen	a	cow	and	the	grass,	and	when	the	cow	was	there	and	the
grass	was	 there	 he	 did	 not	 paint	 anything.	What	 is	 the	 point	 of	 painting	 on	 a
canvas	when	there	is	a	cow	and	grass	and	everything	is	already	there?	But	then
the	cow	eats	the	grass	and	the	cow	goes....
The	 father	 said,	 "Stop	 painting	 from	 today,	 and	 you	 stop	 all	 kinds	 of
imaginations;	otherwise	you	will	go	mad."
That's	 what	 we	 are	 doing	 with	 every	 child.	 We	 are	 not	 allowing	 the	 child's
imagination	to	be	refined	to	such	a	point	that	it	becomes	almost	real;	otherwise,
every	 person	 would	 carry	 a	 poet	 in	 him,	 a	 painter	 in	 him,	 a	 singer	 in	 him,	 a
dancer	in	him.
And	finally,	the	culmination	of	all	that	is	creative	is	the	mystic.
When	you	have	sung	the	best	of	your	songs,	then	silence	is	the	song.
When	you	have	danced	the	best	dance,	 the	dancer	disappears.	And	without	 the
dancer,	how	can	the	dance	remain?
When	 your	 poetry	 is	 perfect,	 there	 is	 no	 poet.	 The	 poetry	 has	 immense
significance	but	no	meaning.
In	ancient	China	a	Taoist	proverb	says:	"When	the	archer	 is	perfect,	he	 throws
away	his	bow	and	his	arrows.	When	the	musician	is	perfect,	he	forgets	all	about
his	instruments."
There	is	a	mysterious	world	--	illogical	to	the	mind,	supra-logical	to	those	who
understand	 the	 world	 of	 the	 mystic.	 It	 surrounds	 us;	 we	 just	 need	 the	 right
perception,	clear	eyes	unburdened	with	knowledge	--	innocent,	weightless.
We	need	wings	--	wings	of	love,	not	of	logic.
Logic	pulls	you	downwards.	It	is	under	the	rule	of	gravitation.
Love	takes	you	towards	the	stars.
Allow	the	mystic	in	you,	and	you	have	found	all	that	is	worth	finding.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	You	are	what	you	are	seeking
28	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610285
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH25
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
125
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
FROM	 TIME	 TO	 TIME	 A	 BEAUTIFUL	 STORY	 YOU	 TOLD	 US	 MORE
THAN	A	YEAR	AGO	COMES	TO	MY	MIND.
IT	 IS	ABOUT	A	YOUNG	MAN	WHO	SET	OUT	TO	LOOK	FOR	TRUTH,
AND
AFTER	SOME	FAILURES	WAS	GIVEN	THE	TASK	OF	LOOKING	AFTER
SOME
COWS.	STARTING	WITH	JUST	A	FEW	OF	THEM	ON	THE	MOUNTAINS,
HE
WAS	NOT	TO	COME	BACK	UNTIL	HE	HAD	SUCCEEDED	 IN	RAISING
ONE
THOUSAND	OF	THEM.	YEARS	WENT	BY,	UNTIL	ONE	DAY	THE	MAN
HEARD
THE	COWS	TALKING	TO	HIM,	SAYING,	"WE	ARE	ONE	THOUSAND!"
EVENTUALLY	 HE	 RETURNED	 TO	 THE	 VALLEY,	 WHERE	 PEOPLE
COULD
HARDLY	DISTINGUISH	THE	MAN	FROM	THE	ANIMALS.
OFTEN,	 SIMPLY	 BY	 RECALLING	 THIS	 STORY,	 TEARS	 COME	 TO	MY
EYES.
THERE	 IS	SO	MUCH	BEAUTY	AND	FRESHNESS	 IN	THE	END	OF	THE
STORY,	 THAT	 FOR	 A	 FEW	 MOMENTS	 IT	 BRINGS	 MY	 BEING	 TO	 A
STANDSTILL.
OSHO,	 I	WOULD	LOVE	TO	HEAR	YOU	TELLING	THIS	STORY	AGAIN
AND
AGAIN:	"WE	ARE	ONE	THOUSAND!	WE	ARE	ONE	THOUSAND!"
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 WHAT	 IS	 THE	 MEANING	 THIS	 SMALL	 TALE	 IS
CARRYING?
WHY	 DO	 THESE	 FEW	 WORDS	 FILL	 ME	 WITH	 AWE	 AND	 TEARS?
WOULD	YOU
KINDLY	COMMENT?
The	 story	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 ancient	 stories	 of	 the	 heart,	 of	 the	world	 beyond
words	 --	 of	 knowing,	 not	 of	 knowledge;	 of	 utter	 innocence	 as	 the	 door	 to	 the
divine.
The	story	contains	the	very	essence	of	meditativeness.
It	has	many	dimensions,	many	implications,	and	it	is	no	wonder	that	it	fills	you
with	tears	of	joy.	Those	tears	are	indicative	that	the	story	has	touched	your	heart,
your	very	being;	that	you	have	tasted	it	although	you	don't	understand	what	it	is.
You	have	felt	its	beauty,	its	glory,	its	depth	--	but	you	find	it	hard	to	explain	to
yourself	what	it	is	that	you	have	found.
You	have	found	a	world	of	magic,	mystery	and	miracles.
I	 would	 love	 to	 tell	 you	 the	 whole	 story.	 It	 needs	 to	 be	 told	 thousands	 and
thousands	of	 times	because	each	 time	you	will	 find	some	new	fragrance,	some
new	sweetness,	some	new	height,	some	new	door	opening,	some	new	sky	with
new	stars.	And	there	are	skies	beyond	skies.
I	used	to	live	in	a	place...	I	lived	there	for	twenty	years,	in	Jabalpur.	Its	ancient
name	 was	 Jabalpur;	 it	 was	 named	 after	 a	 great	 mystic	 and	 seer	 of	 the
UPANISHADS,	 Satyakam	 Jabal.	 And	 this	 story	 is	 concerned	 with	 Satyakam
Jabal.
Satyakam	was	a	very	 inquiring	child.	He	did	not	believe	 in	anything	unless	he
had	experienced	it.	As	he	became	a	young	man	--	he	must	have	been	nearabout
the	 age	 of	 twelve	 --	 he	 asked	 his	mother,	 "Now	 it	 is	 time.	 The	 prince	 of	 the
kingdom	has	gone	to	the	forest	to	join	the	family	of	a	seer.	He	is	my	age.	I	also
want	to	go,	I	also	want	to	learn	what	this	life	is	all	about."
The	mother	said,	"It	is	very	difficult,	Satyakam,	but	I	know	that	you	are	a	born
seeker.	I	was	afraid	that	one	day	you	would	ask	me	to	send	you	to	a	master.	I	am
a	poor	woman,	but	that	is	not	a	great	difficulty.	The	difficulty	is	that	when	I	was
young	I	served	in	many	houses	--	I	was	poor,	but	I	was	beautiful.	I	don't	know
who	your	father	is.	And	if	I	send	you	to	a	master,	you	are	going	to	be	asked	what
the	name	of	your	father	is.	And	I	am	afraid	they	may	reject	you.
But	there	is	no	harm	in	making	an	effort.	You	go	and	tell	the	truth,	in	the	same
way	I	have	told	the	truth	to	you.	Many	men	have	used	my	body	because	I	was
poor.	Just	say	that	you	don't	know	who	your	father	is.	Tell	the	master	that	your
name	is	Satyakam,	your	mother's	name	is	Jabala,	so	they	can	call	you	Satyakam
Jabal.	And	as	far	as	the	search	for	truth	is	concerned,	who	your	father	is	does	not
matter."
Satyakam	went	to	an	ancient	seer	in	the	forest,	and	sure	enough	the	first	question
was,
"What	is	your	name?	Who	is	your	father?"
And	he	repeated	exactly	what	his	mother	had	said.
There	 were	 many	 disciples	 --	 princes,	 rich	 people's	 sons.	 They	 all	 started
laughing.
But	the	old	master	said,	"I	will	accept	you.	It	does	not	matter	who	your	father	is.
What	matters	is	that	you	are	authentic,	sincere,	unafraid	--	capable	of	saying	the
truth	without	 feeling	 embarrassed.	Your	mother	 has	 given	you	 the	 right	 name,
Satyakam.	`Satyakam'
means	one	whose	only	desire	is	truth.	You	have	a	beautiful	mother,	and	you	will
be	 known	as	 `Satyakam	 Jabal'.	And	 the	 tradition	 is	 that	 only	 brahmins	 can	be
accepted	 as	 disciples.	 I	 declare	 you	 a	 brahmin	 --	 because	 only	 a	 brahmin	 can
have	the	courage	of	such	truth."
Those	were	beautiful	days.	The	old	seer's	name	was	Uddalak.
Satyakam	became	his	most	loved	disciple.	He	deserved	it,	he	was	so	pure	and	so
innocent.
But	Uddalak	had	his	own	limitations.	Although	he	was	a	man	of	great	learning,
he	was	not	an	enlightened	master.	So	he	 taught	Satyakam	all	 the	scriptures,	he
taught	him	everything	that	he	was	capable	of,	but	he	could	not	deceive	Satyakam
as	 he	 had	 been	 deceiving	 everybody	 else.	Not	 that	 Satyakam	was	 raising	 any
doubts;	 it	was	 just	 that	 his	 innocence	had	 such	power	 that	 the	old	man	had	 to
confess,	 "Whatever	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 you	 is	 knowledge	 gathered	 from	 the
scriptures.	 It	 is	 not	 my	 own.	 I	 have	 not	 experienced	 it,	 I	 have	 not	 lived	 it.	 I
suggest	that	you	go	deeper	into	the	forest.	I	know	a	man	who	has	realized,	who
has	become	an	embodiment	of	truth,	love,	compassion.	You	go	to	him."
Uddalak	had	heard	about	the	man,	but	did	not	know	the	man	personally.	Uddalak
was	far	more	famous,	he	was	a	great	scholar....
Satyakam	went	to	the	other	man.	This	man	taught	him	many	new	scriptures,	and
all	the	VEDAS,	the	most	ancient	scriptures	of	the	world.	And	after	years	he	told
him,	 "Now	 you	 know	 everything;	 there	 is	 nothing	more	 to	 know.	You	 can	 go
back	home."
First	he	went	to	see	Uddalak.	From	his	window,	Uddalak	saw	Satyakam	coming
on	the	footpath	through	the	forest.	He	was	shocked.	Satyakam's	innocence	was
lost;	in	place	of	innocence	there	was	pride	--	naturally,	because	now	he	thought
he	knew	everything	 in	 the	world	 that	 is	worth	knowing.	The	very	 idea	was	 so
ego	fulfilling.
He	 came	 in.	As	 he	 started	 to	 touch	 the	 feet	 of	Uddalak,	Uddalak	 said,	 "Don't
touch	my	 feet!	 First,	 I	 want	 to	 know	where	 you	 have	 lost	 your	 innocence.	 It
seems	I	have	sent	you	to	the	wrong	man."
Satyakam	said,	"To	the	wrong	man?	He	has	taught	me	everything	that	is	worth
knowing."
Uddalak	said,	 "Before	you	 touch	my	feet,	 I	would	 like	 to	ask	you	 --	have	you
experienced	 anything	 or	 it	 is	 just	 information?	 Has	 any	 transformation
happened?	Can	you	say	that	whatever	you	know	is	your	knowledge?"
Satyakam	 said,	 "I	 cannot	 say	 that.	What	 I	 know	 is	written	 in	 the	 scriptures;	 I
have	not	experienced	anything."
Uddalak	said,	"Then	go	back,	but	now	go	to	another	person	I	have	come	to	know
about	while	you	were	gone.	And	unless	you	have	experienced,	don't	come	back.
You	 have	 come	 here	 not	 more	 than	 when	 I	 sent	 you	 but	 less.	 You	 have	 lost
something	of	immense	value.	And	what	you	call	knowledge	--	if	it	is	borrowed,
it	only	covers	your	 ignorance;	 it	does	not	make	you	a	knower.	Go	 to	 this	man
and	 tell	 him	 that	 you	 have	 not	 come	 for	more	 information	 about	 truth,	 about
God,	about	love.	Tell	him	you	have	come	to	know	truth,	to	know	love,	to	know
God.	Tell	him,	Ìf	you	can	fulfill	the	promise,	only	then	waste	my	time;	otherwise
I	will	find	another	master.'"
Satyakam	said	exactly	this.
The	master	was	sitting	under	a	tree	with	a	few	of	his	disciples.	After	listening	to
the	request,	he	said,	"It	is	possible,	but	you	are	asking	something	very	difficult.
There	are	so	many	disciples	here	--	they	all	want	more	knowledge.	They	want	to
know	 about	 and	 about.	 But	 if	 you	 insist	 that	 you	 are	 not	 interested	 in
information,	 that	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 do	 anything,	 that	 your	 devotion	 to	 truth	 is
total,	then	I	will	find	a	way	for	you."
Satyakam	said,	"I	am	ready	to	sacrifice	my	life,	but	I	cannot	go	without	knowing
the	 truth.	Neither	 can	 I	go	 to	my	 teacher	nor	 can	 I	go	 to	my	mother,	who	has
given	me	 the	 namèSatyakam'.	 And	 the	 teacher	 accepted	 me	 without	 knowing
whether	I	was	a	brahmin	or	not,	 just	on	the	simple	grounds	that	I	was	truthful.
Tell	me	what	has	to	be	done."
The	master	said,	"Take	all	these	cows	that	you	see	here	deep	into	the	forest.	Go
as	deep	as	possible,	so	you	don't	come	in	contact	again	with	any	human	being.
The	purpose	is	that	you	forget	language,	words.	Live	with	the	cows,	take	care	of
the	cows,	play	on	your	flute,	dance	--	but	forget	words.	And	when	the	cows	have
grown	to	one	thousand,	come	back."
The	other	disciples	could	not	believe	what	was	happening	--	because	there	were
just	a	dozen	or	two	dozen	cows.	How	long	is	it	going	to	take	for	them	to	become
one	thousand?
But	Satyakam	 took	 the	cows,	went	 as	deep	as	possible	 into	 the	 forest,	beyond
human	contact,	beyond	human	context.	For	a	few	days	it	was	difficult	but	slowly
slowly,	 the	 cows	were	 his	 only	 company.	And	 they	 are	 very	 silent	 people.	He
played	on	the	flute,	he	danced	alone	in	the	forest,	he	rested	under	the	trees.
For	a	few	years	he	continued	to	count	the	cows.	Then	by	and	by	he	dropped	it,
because	 it	 seemed	 impossible	 that	 they	 would	 become	 one	 thousand.	 And
moreover	he	was	forgetting	how	to	count;	language	was	disappearing.
Words	disappeared;	counting	could	not	be	saved.
And	the	story	is	so	immensely	beautiful....
The	 cows	 became	 worried	 when	 they	 became	 one	 thousand	 --	 because	 they
wanted	to	go	back	home,	and	this	man	had	forgotten	how	to	count!	Finally	the
cows	 decided,	 "We	 have	 to	 speak;	 otherwise	 this	 lonely	 forest	 is	 going	 to
become	our	grave."
So	one	day	the	cows	caught	hold	of	him	and	told	him,	"Listen,	Satyakam,	we	are
now	one	thousand	and	it	is	time	to	go	back	home."
He	 said,	 "I	 am	 very	 grateful	 to	 you.	 If	 you	 had	 not	 told	 me....	 I	 had	 even
forgotten	 about	 home	 or	 about	 returning.	 Each	 moment	 was	 so	 tremendously
beautiful...	so	many	blessings.	In	the	silence,	flowers	went	on	showering.	I	had
forgotten	everything.	I	had	no	idea	why	I	had	come	here,	who	I	am.	Everything
had	become	an	end	 in	 itself	 --	playing	 the	 flute	was	enough,	 resting	under	 the
trees	was	 enough,	 seeing	 the	 beautiful	 cows	 sitting	 silently	 all	 around	was	 so
beautiful.	But	if	you	insist,	we	should	return."
The	disciples	of	the	great	master	saw	him	coming	with	one	thousand	cows.	They
reported	to	the	master,	"We	had	never	believed	that	he	would	come	back.	He	is
coming,	and	we	have	counted	exactly	one	thousand	cows.	He	is	coming!"
And	when	he	came,	he	stood	there...	just	in	the	crowd	of	cows.
The	 master	 said	 to	 the	 other	 disciples,	 "You	 counted	 wrong.	 There	 are	 one
thousand	and	one	cows;	you	 forgot	 to	count	Satyakam!	He	has	moved	beyond
your	world,	he	has	entered	into	the	innocent,	the	silent,	the	mysterious.	He	is	not
saying	anything,	he	is	just	standing	there	as	the	cows	are	standing	there	."
The	master	said,	"Satyakam,	you	come	out.	Now	you	have	 to	go	 to	your	other
master	 who	 sent	 you	 here.	 He	 is	 an	 old	 man	 and	 he	 must	 be	 waiting.	 Your
mother	must	be	waiting."
And	when	Satyakam	came	to	Uddalak,	his	first	teacher	--	who	had	not	allowed
him	 to	 touch	 his	 feet	 because	 he	 had	 lost	 his	 innocence,	 he	 was	 no	 more	 a
brahmin,	 he	 had	 fallen,	 he	 had	 become	 just	 a	 knowledgeable	 parrot...	 As
Uddalak	saw	him	from	the	window	again,	he	ran	out	 the	back	door	 --	because
now	Satyakam	cannot	be	allowed	to	touch	his	feet;	now	Uddalak	would	have	to
touch	his	feet.	Because	Uddalak	is	still	a	scholar,	and	Satyakam	is	coming	not	as
a	scholar	but	as	one	who	is	awakened.
Uddalak	escaped	from	the	house:	"I	cannot	face	him.	I	am	ashamed	of	myself.
Just	tell	him,"	he	told	his	wife,	"that	Uddalak	is	dead	and	he	can	go	now	to	his
mother.	Tell	him	I	died	remembering	him."	These	were	people	made	of	different
mettle.
Satyakam	went	back	home.
The	mother	 had	 become	 very	 old,	 but	 she	 had	waited	 and	waited	 and	waited.
And	she	said,	"You	have	proved,	Satyakam,	that	truth	is	always	victorious.	And
you	 have	 proved	 that	 a	 brahmin	 is	 not	 born,	 a	 brahmin	 is	 a	 quality	 to	 be
achieved.	Everybody	by	his	birth	 is	a	sudra	--	because	everybody's	birth	 is	 the
same.	 One	 has	 to	 prove	 by	 purifying	 himself,	 by	 crystallizing	 himself,	 by
becoming	centered	and	enlightened,	that	he	is	a	brahmin.	Just	to	be	born	into	the
family	of	a	brahmin	does	not	make	you	a	brahmin."
If	you	meditate	on	the	story,	you	will	see:	the	very	essence	of	meditation	is	to	be
so	 silent	 that	 there	 is	 no	 stirring	 of	 thoughts	 in	 you,	 that	 words	 don't	 come
between	you	and	reality,	that	the	whole	net	of	words	falls	down,	that	you	are	left
alone.
This	aloneness,	this	purity,	this	unclouded	sky	of	your	being	is	meditation.
And	meditation	is	the	golden	key	to	all	the	mysteries	of	life.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	THE	MOST	BEAUTIFUL	MASTER	EVER	--	LIFE	HAS	GIVEN	ME
SO
MUCH	 SINCE	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	WITH	 YOU	 --	 BUT	 STILL,	 EXCEPT	 FOR
MOMENTS
OF	BEATITUDE	WITH	YOU	OR	 IN	MY	MEDITATION,	DEEP	DOWN	 IN
MYSELF
THERE	IS	ALWAYS	A	DEEP-ROOTED	SADNESS	AND	A	LONGING	FOR
SOME
SPACE	THAT	I	HARDLY	CAN	REMEMBER.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
Meditation	always	opens	doors,	different	doors	to	different	people.
Sadness	 is	 not	 necessarily	 something	 bad.	Don't	 judge	 it	 as	 a	 bad	 or	 negative
quality.
When	a	person	who	has	never	been	silent,	for	the	first	time	becomes	silent,	the
very	silence	feels	sad	because	there	is	no	excitement,	no	firecrackers.
You	can	misunderstand	your	first	acquaintance	with	silence	as	sadness,	but	it	is
not	sadness.	It	is	just	that	you	have	been	always	engaged	in	a	thousand	and	one
things	and	now	 they	have	all	disappeared.	You	 feel	a	 little	 lost.	Before	silence
becomes	a	song,	a	small	period,	a	transitory	period,	is	absolutely	necessary.
You	know	sadness.	And	sadness	has	something	of	silence	in	it	--	whenever	you
are	sad,	you	are	a	 little	silent.	So	 there	 is	an	association	between	your	sadness
and	silence.	When	you	become	silent	 for	 the	first	 time,	 the	only	 thing	you	can
feel	from	your	past	experience	is	sadness.
Allow	it	 to	deepen.	Don't	 judge	 it	as	sadness,	because	 that	very	 judgment	may
become	a	barrier.	The	moment	you	say	something	negative	you	are	trying	to	get
rid	of	it.	Don't	say	anything	negative	about	it.
Just	accept	it	as	a	bridge	between	silence	and	song.
Just	wait	a	little,	and	you	will	start	feeling	that	this	silence	is	not	dead,	it	is	not
the	silence	of	 the	graveyard.	It	 is	a	silence	which	is	very	much	alive,	a	silence
which	is	not	empty	but	too	full,	overflowing....
Overflowing	with	what?	Again,	a	new	experience	is	waiting	for	you.	You	have
known	 only	 songs	 with	 words.	 You	 have	 never	 known	 a	 pure	 song	 without
words,	music	without	sound.
Just	a	little	waiting,	and	the	sadness	will	start	turning	into	a	song	with	no	words,
into	a	music	with	no	sounds,	into	a	dance	with	no	movements.
Everything	is	going	perfectly	right,	just	a	little	bit	of	patience	is	needed.
When	 you	 are	 sick,	 in	 the	 hospitals	 you	 are	 called	 `patients'.	 Have	 you	 ever
thought	about	why?	--	because	healing	takes	time,	and	you	have	to	be	patient.
This	is	inner	healing,	and	you	need	a	deeper	patience.
But	if	silence	is	 there	and	meditation	is	happening,	 then	there	is	no	problem	at
all.	Spring	will	be	coming	soon	with	all	its	colors	and	all	its	flowers	and	all	its
beauty.
Just	wait	a	little.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 WAS	 BORN	 IN	 THE	 MOUNTAINS,	 AND	 THROUGHOUT	 MY
CHILDHOOD	AND
YOUTH	 I	WAS	 PULLED	 TO	 EXPLORE,	 CLIMB,	 OR	 JUST	 SIT	 ON	 THE
PEAKS,	 ON	 THE	 STEEP	 WALLS,	 OR	 BY	 THE	 SIDE	 OF	 A	 GLACIER
STREAM.	I	LIVED	IN
THE	 MOUNTAINS,	 AND	 THEY	 FED	 ME,	 LIKE	 A	 MOTHER,	 WITH
SOMETHING
VERY	PRECIOUS.
SOMEWHERE	 I	 READ	 THAT	 THE	 MOUNTAINS,	 THE	 HIGH,	 SNOW-
CAPPED
PEAKS	ARE	THE	VERY	ESSENCE	OF	BUDDHA.
OSHO,	 THE	 BEAUTY	 THAT	 SURROUNDS	 YOU,	 THE	 COOL	 BREEZE
THAT
HOVERS	 AROUND	 YOU,	 IS	 LIKE	 THE	 ONE	 COMING	 FROM	 THE
HIGHEST,	THE
WILDEST	PEAK	IN	THE	WORLD.
I'VE	BEEN	WITH	YOU	FOR	SEVEN	YEARS,	AND	IN	THIS	LAST	PERIOD
OF
TIME	I	FELT	THAT	I	WAS	PASSING	THROUGH	THE	SAME	PASTURES,
THE
SAME	 PLAINS	 I	 REMEMBER	 LEAVING	 FOR	 THE	 HEIGHTS	 SEVEN
YEARS
AGO.	I	SEE	THE	STARTING	POINT	AS	COMPLETELY	DIFFERENT	NOW:
IT	IS
SWEET	 AND	 BEAUTIFUL,	 ENOUGH	 UNTO	 ITSELF,	 NO	 LONGER
AWFUL	AND
DISGUSTING	AS	IT	USED	TO	BE.
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 I	 HAVEN'T	 COME	 TO	 KNOW	 ANYTHING;	 THE
THOUSAND
SUNS	DID	NOT	SHINE	IN	MY	HEAD.	ALL	I'VE	GOT	NOW	IS	MYSELF,
CONTENTED,	 AT	 THE	 SAME	 POINT	 FROM	 WHERE	 I	 STARTED	 MY
JOURNEY
SEVEN	YEARS	AGO.
HAVE	 I	 BEEN	 DREAMING	 ALL	 THESE	 YEARS	 OF	 TRAVELING	 FAR
AWAY
WHEN	MY	FEET	DID	NOT	LEAVE	THE	BASE	CAMP?	OR	WAS	ALL	THIS
TO
REALIZE	THAT	WHERE	I	STARTED	FROM	IS	WHERE	I	BELONG?
OSHO,	 PLEASE	 TELL	 ME:	 SOMETIMES	 THIS	 DREAM	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE
REAL,	BUT
NOW	 MY	 BEING	 DOES	 NOT	 FEEL	 AS	 IF	 IT	 IS	 PULLED	 TO	 GO
ANYWHERE.
HAVE	 I	 BEEN	 CHEATING	 MYSELF?	 OR	 IS	 THIS	 AS	 FAR	 AS	 IT	 IS
ALLOWED
FOR	ME	TO	GO	IN	THIS	LIFE?
WILL	 YOU	 TELL	ME	 THE	 TRUTH?	 I'M	 TIRED	NOW;	 BE	MERCILESS,
BUT
PLEASE	SAY	WHAT	IS	REALLY	HAPPENING	TO	ME.
It	is	not	only	with	you	but	with	everybody,	exactly	the	same.
You	are	what	you	are	seeking.
You	are	standing	at	exactly	the	place	towards	which	you	have	been	traveling	--
for	seven	years	or	seventy	years	or	seven	hundred	years.
Your	reality	is	within	you,	it	is	not	somewhere	else.	But	to	understand	the	point,
sometimes	 it	 takes	 years.	You	knock	on	many	doors	 before	 you	 come	 to	 your
own	door...
and	then	you	are	puzzled,	because	this	is	the	house	you	had	left	and	this	is	the
house	you	have	been	searching	for.
But	the	search	has	not	been	useless;	it	has	given	you	the	eyes	to	recognize.
I	have	often	told	a	Sufi	story.	A	man	renounces	the	world,	his	wife,	his	home.	He
is	young	and	he	is	going	in	search	of	a	master.
Just	outside	his	village	under	a	tree,	an	old	man	is	sitting.	The	sun	is	just	setting,
and	darkness	 is	descending.	The	young	man	asks	 the	old	man,	"You	 look	as	 if
you	are	a	traveler;	you	certainly	don't	belong	to	my	village.	I	am	a	young	man
and	 I	 am	 in	 search	of	 a	master.	You	 are	 old;	 perhaps	you	have	 come	 across	 a
master	 in	 your	 journeys,	 and	 will	 be	 kind	 enough	 to	 help	 me	 with	 some
directives,	some	guidelines	--	because	I	am	feeling	at	a	loss,	where	to	go."
The	old	man	said,	"I	will	give	you	exact	details.	The	master	 looks	 like	 this"	--
and	he	described	the	face	of	the	master,	 the	eyes	of	the	master,	 the	nose	of	the
master,	the	beard	of	the	master,	his	robe.	"And	he	sits	under	a	certain	tree"	--	and
he	described	the	tree.
And	he	said,	"You	will	find	him;	just	remember	these	details.	Whenever	you	find
a	man	who	fulfills	these	criteria,	you	have	found	your	master."
Thirty	 years	 passed.	The	young	man	became	old,	 tired.	He	never	 came	 across
anybody	 fitting	 the	 description	 given	 by	 the	 old	man.	 Finally	 he	 gave	 up	 the
whole	idea	of	finding	a	master:	"Perhaps	there	is	no	master	anywhere."
He	went	back	to	his	village.	And	as	he	was	entering	the	village,	under	the	same
tree...	 It	was	sunrise,	 there	was	more	 light.	The	old	man	had	become	very	old.
The	 last	 time	 they	had	met	 he	must	 have	been	 sixty;	 now	he	was	ninety.	And
because	 for	 thirty	 years	 the	 man	 had	 been	 looking	 for	 certain	 eyes,	 a	 certain
nose,	a	certain	beard,	a	certain	robe,	a	certain	tree....	As	he	saw	the	tree	and	he
saw	the	old	man	he	said,	"My	God,	so	you	were	describing	yourself!	Why	didn't
you	tell	me?	Why	did	you	force	me	to	travel	unnecessarily	around	the	world	for
thirty	years	searching	for	you,	while	you	were	sitting	here?"
The	old	man	said,	"First	throw	out	all	your	tantrums	and	your	anger;	then	I	will
tell	you	the	truth.	Thirty	years	ago	you	were	too	young.	The	time	was	not	right;
it	was	sunset,	darkness	was	descending.	And	you	were	in	such	a	hurry	to	go	in
search,	that	if	I	had	told	you	that	I	was	the	master	you	would	have	laughed	and
said,	`This	is	strange	that	you	are	sitting	just	outside	my	village!'	And	you	cannot
blame	me	because	I	explained	every	detail,	but	your	eyes	were	looking	far	away.
You	were	listening	to	me,	but	you	were	not	looking	to	see	that	I	was	describing
my	eyes,	my	nose,	my	beard,	my	robe,	that	I	was	describing	the	tree	under	which
I	was	sitting.	You	were	not	ripe.
"These	thirty	years	have	not	gone	to	waste;	they	have	matured	you.	Now	you	can
recognize	me.	Just	look;	it	is	sunrise,	the	right	time.	And	it	is	not	the	beginning
of	your	journey,	you	had	already	given	up.	I	am	meeting	you	at	the	end	of	thirty
years	 of	 long,	 arduous	 effort.	 That	 which	 you	 can	 get	 cheap	 you	 cannot
recognize.	You	had	 to	pay	 these	 thirty	years	and	all	 the	 troubles	 that	you	went
through	just	to	be	mature	enough	to	recognize	me.
"I	could	have	told	you	on	that	day	too	--	but	it	would	have	been	pointless,	and
you	would	have	missed	me.
"And	you	think	you	have	been	in	trouble	for	thirty	years?	Just	think	about	me	--
for	thirty	years	I	have	been	sitting	under	the	same	tree,	because	I	described	this
tree.	I	have	not	left	it	for	a	single	day	because	I	was	aware	that	any	moment	you
might	come,	and	 if	you	didn't	 find	me	here	 I	would	have	been	proved	 to	have
spoken	lies.	I	have	been	sitting	here	for	thirty	years	continuously	--	day	in,	day
out;	summer,	winter,	rain,	but	I	have	been	sitting	here.	And	you	see	I	am	old.	I
was	worried	that	if	I	died	before	you	came	back,	it	would	be	a	tragedy.	So	I	have
been	trying	to	somehow	cling	to	life	--	because	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	there	is
nothing	left;	I	have	realized	myself.	Life	has	given	everything	that	it	can	give.	I
have	been	sitting	just	for	you."
The	story	is	strange,	but	significant.
It	takes	time	to	realize	that	which	you	are.
Basically	 there	 is	no	need:	you	can	 realize	 just	now,	 this	very	moment.	But	 to
realize	 it	 you	 will	 need	 a	 certain	 maturity,	 a	 certain	 centering,	 a	 certain
awareness,	a	certain	silence.
Seven	 years	 are	 not	 long.	 And	 don't	 be	 worried	 that	 you	 have	 not	 seen	 a
thousand	 suns	 rising	 in	 you;	 it	 is	 not	 necessary.	 Everybody	 experiences	 his
innermost	being	in	his	own	way.
Somebody	experiences	it	as	light,	but	that	is	his	type.
There	are	people	who	have	realized	it	as	immense	darkness.
You	are	hearing	the	firecrackers	all	around.	Two	religions	in	India,	Hindus	and
Jainas,	celebrate	this	festival,	the	festival	of	lights.	They	have	different	reasons;
it	 is	 just	 a	 coincidence	 that	 something	 has	 happened	 on	 the	 same	 day	 in	 the
history	of	both	religions.
Hindus	 celebrate	 it	 because	Rama,	one	of	 the	Hindu	 incarnations	of	God,	was
victorious	over	Ravana.	He	came	back	after	fourteen	years	of	wandering	in	the
forest	and	 the	mountains	 to	his	capitol,	Ayodhya.	And	because	he	was	coming
back	after	fourteen	years,	the	capitol	celebrated	with	lights	and	firecrackers	and
rejoicings.	That	is	the	Hindu	reason.
For	Jainas	this	is	not	the	reason.
Mahavira	 became	 enlightened	 on	 the	 same	 day,	 and	 Mahavira	 is	 the	 most
important	 individual	 in	 the	 history	 of	 Jainism.	 Jainas	 are	 celebrating	 because
Mahavira	attained	liberation.	And	he	attained	liberation	in	a	unique	way....
Gautam	 Buddha	 became	 enlightened	 on	 a	 full-moon	 night.	 And	 except	 for
Mahavira,	anybody	who	has	become	enlightened	has	become	enlightened	either
on	 a	 full-moon	 night	 or	 close	 to	 it.	 Mahavira	 is	 unique	 in	 that	 he	 became
enlightened	on	the	night	of	amawas,	no	moon,	complete	darkness.	He	is	alone;
there	is	nobody	else	who	has	become	enlightened	on	the	night	of	amawas.
Individual	types...
Gautam	Buddha	was	 born	 on	 a	 full-moon	 night.	He	 became	 enlightened	 on	 a
full-moon	night.	He	died	on	a	full-moon	night.	This	cannot	be	just	coincidence.
His	type	has	something	to	do	with	a	synchronicity	with	the	full-moon	night.
There	 are	 saints,	 mystics...	 when	 they	 become	 enlightened,	 they	 smell	 some
perfume	 which	 is	 not	 of	 this	 world.	 Because	 of	 this	 experience,	 among	 Sufi
mystics	 perfume	 has	 become	 very	 significant,	 and	 Sufi	 mystics	 of	 different
schools	 use	 different	 kinds	 of	 perfumes.	 Because	 their	 master	 experienced	 a
certain	perfume,	they	use	something	parallel	to	it.	It	cannot	be	exactly	the	same,
but	something	parallel,	on	the	lowest	rung	of	the	same	ladder	which	the	master
experienced	 on	 the	 highest	 rung.	 They	 use	 that	 perfume	 as	 a	 remembrance	 of
their	master.
Some	have	heard	unworldly	music,	anahat	nad.
Because	people	are	of	different	types,	their	ultimate	experience	is	also	going	to
be	of	a	different	type;	it	is	going	to	have	their	signature	on	it.
So	don't	be	worried	if	you	are	not	seeing	a	thousand	and	one	suns	rising	in	you.
Kabir	has	seen	them.	Gautam	Buddha	has	not	seen	them.	Mahavira	has	not	seen
them.
But	there	are	a	few	other	mystics	who	have	seen	them.
Just	 as	 you	 are	 unique	 in	 your	 ordinary	 life...	 You	 know	 people	 who	 have	 a
sensitivity	for	music,	and	there	are	others	who	don't	have	any	ear	for	music.
Mulla	Nasruddin's	wife	 bought	 two	 tickets	 for	 a	 classical	 concert.	Mulla	 tried
hard,	but	could	not	escape;	he	had	 to	go	 to	 the	concert.	 It	was	classical	 Indian
music.	 So	 when	 the	 musician	 started	 doing	 his	 aalap,	 tuning	 his	 instrument,
Mulla	Nasruddin's	eyes	became	full	of	tears.	His	wife	said,	"I	never	thought	you
loved	classical	music	so	much."
He	said,	"It	is	not	the	classical	music.	I	am	crying	because	this	man	is	going	to
die!"
The	wife	said,	"What	gave	you	the	idea	this	man	is	going	to	die?"
He	 said,	 "You	 wouldn't	 understand.	 One	 night	 one	 of	 my	 goats	 started	 doing
exactly	what	this	man	is	doing.	And	I	said,	`What	is	the	matter?'	I	tried	hard	to
stop	 her	 but	 she	 wouldn't	 listen,	 and	 in	 the	 morning	 she	 was	 dead.	 I	 can
guarantee	that	by	morning	this	man	is	going	to	be	dead;	this	is	the	beginning	of
the	disease.	This	is	not	music."
He	had	never	heard	classical	music.	Poor	fellow	had	one	similar	experience...	a
natural	conclusion.
There	are	people	who	are	sensitive	to	certain	things,	for	example	paintings,	and
there	are	a	few	who	are	not	at	all	sensitive	to	paintings.
In	the	life	of	Michelangelo	there	was	one	incident....
Just	a	few	years	ago,	you	may	have	read	in	the	newspapers:	a	man,	a	madman
destroyed	one	of	the	most	beautiful	statues	in	the	Vatican.	It	was	of	Jesus	Christ
lying	in	his	mother's	lap	after	he	was	taken	down	from	the	cross.	That	statue	was
thought	 to	be	 the	best	 statue	 in	 the	whole	world,	and	certainly	 it	was	 so	alive.
Michelangelo	 had	 put	 all	 his	 art	 into	 it,	 it	was	 his	masterpiece.	And	 this	man
simply	destroyed	it	with	a	hammer	because	he	wanted	to	become	world	famous.
He	became	world	famous.
This	incident	in	Michelangelo's	life	concerns	the	same	statue.
Michelangelo	 went	 into	 a	 shop	 in	 the	 market	 where	 there	 were	 shops	 selling
marble.	 Just	 in	 front	of	 the	shop	on	 the	open	ground	 there	was	a	big	 rock	 --	a
huge	marble	rock	that	had	been	lying	there	for	years.	And	he	asked,	"How	much
is	the	price?"
The	owner	said,	"There	is	no	price;	it	has	been	lying	there	for	almost	ten	years,
and	you	are	 the	 first	person	even	 to	ask	about	 it.	 If	you	can	 take	 it	 away,	 it	 is
yours.	It	will	be	enough	payment	that	our	grounds	are	cleared	and	we	can	put	out
other	rocks	for	show.
That	 rock	 is	 taking	 so	much	 space.	And	 every	 artist	 comes	 here;	 no	 artist	 has
ever	seen	any	possibility	for	that	rock."
And	Michelangelo	cut	from	that	same	rock	this	statue	that	was	destroyed	a	few
years	ago.
When	 the	 statue	 was	 ready,	 he	 invited	 the	 shop	 owner.	 The	 man	 could	 not
believe	it.	He	said,	"Where	did	you	get	such	a	beautiful	piece	of	marble?"
Michelangelo	said,	"This	is	the	same	rock	that	you	gave	me	at	no	charge."
The	man	said,	"My	God,	but	you	have	created	the	most	beautiful	statue	I	have
ever	seen.
How	could	you	manage	 to	 think,	 looking	at	 that	ugly	 rock,	 that	you	would	be
able	to	do	it?"
He	 said,	 "I	 have	 not	 done	 anything.	 It	 was	 just	 that	 Jesus	 cried	 out	 to	 me,
`Michelangelo,	I	am	encaged	in	this	rock.	Make	me	free.'"
This	is	genius.
Jesus	was	there,	Mary	was	there.	But	to	see	the	possibility	in	that	ugly	rock,	you
need	a	certain	insight.
Now,	if	Michelangelo	becomes	enlightened,	his	experience	will	have	something
to	 do	 with	 his	 genius.	 If	 Yehudi	 Menuhin	 becomes	 enlightened,	 his
enlightenment	will	have	something	to	do	with	his	musical	genius.
Each	 individual	 is	unique	 in	ordinary	 life.	The	uniqueness	becomes	even	more
sharp	and	clear,	crystal	clear,	when	 the	person	becomes	enlightened	--	because
only	then	his	pure	genius,	his	pure	individuality,	uncontaminated,	unpolluted,	is
revealed.
So	never	be	concerned	that	what	has	happened	to	others	should	happen	to	you.
Sometimes	it	can	happen	because	in	this	big	world,	millions	of	people	have	lived
before	 and	 thousands	 of	 people	 have	 become	 enlightened;	 you	 may	 have
something	similar.	You	may	have	something	which	will	look	strange	to	others.
Ashok	Bharti	has	asked	a	question	which	is	unique	--	because	it	happened	only
once	before.	Since	he	has	been	here	--	and	he	has	been	singing	songs;	those	who
have	been	here	can	see	that	the	quality,	the	joy,	the	celebration	has	been	growing
--	but	something	else	has	been	happening	that	you	cannot	see.
He	has	written	in	his	question,	"Bhagwan,	my	breasts	are	growing	like	women's
breasts.
And	feminine	qualities	which	I	was	not	aware	of	before	are	becoming	more	and
more	expressive."	If	he	says	this	to	anybody	else,	they	will	think	he	is	mad:	"You
just	go	to	some	doctor,	you	have	some	hormonal	disturbance."
But	it	happened	in	Ramakrishna's	life,	and	something	much	more...	because	after
his	 enlightenment	 Ramakrishna	 tried	 whatever	 methods	 were	 available.	 He
wanted	 to	 see	 whether	 he	 could	 reach	 the	 same	 experience	 through	 other
methods,	 because	he	wanted	 there	 to	be	only	one	 religion	 in	 the	world.	Every
religious	person	should	have	that	desire.
It	is	ugly	to	see	that	there	are	three	hundred	religions	in	the	world,	continuously
fighting	and	continuously	destroying	each	other;	 talking	about	 love	and	killing
each	other.
In	Bengal,	there	is	a	small	religion	which	believes	that	Krishna	is	the	only	man
and	everybody	else	is	a	woman.	It	is	a	strange	kind	of	idea,	and	everybody	else
laughs	 about	 it,	 and	 particularly	 at	 the	 behavior	 of	 those	 people	 because	 they
sleep	with	a	statue	of	Krishna	close	 to	 their	bosom	at	night,	 just	 like	a	woman
sleeps	with	her	husband	or	her	lover.
Ramakrishna	tried	their	ideology	also,	and	in	six	months	time	his	breasts	became
just	 like	 those	of	women.	But	what	was	even	more	strange	was	 that	he	started
having	 a	menstrual	 period.	The	 sincerity	 of	 the	man,	 the	 totality	 of	 the	man...
whenever	he	followed	anything,	whenever	he	did	anything	he	did	it	completely.
So	it	is	possible:	singing	songs	of	love...	your	mind	is	the	creator	of	your	body,	it
affects	your	body.
You	can	see	it	happening	in	the	West	in	the	women	who	are	concerned	with	the
liberation	movement.	Their	breasts	slowly	disappear	because	they	don't	want	to
be	women,	 they	want	 to	 be	men.	And	 they	want	 in	 every	 possible	way	 to	 be
exactly	like	men	--	in	their	dress,	in	their	behavior,	in	their	language.
For	example,	nowhere	in	the	East	will	any	woman	use	a	four-letter	word;	that	is
simply	 ungraceful.	 But	 in	 the	West,	 that	 is	 part	 of	 the	 liberated	 woman	 --	 to
smoke	 cigarettes	 and	 to	 use	 four-letter	words.	One	 is	 just	waiting	 for	 the	 day
when	 they	 start	 pissing	 standing	up.	They	may	 start!	Equality	 is	 equality.	One
can	go	to	stupid	lengths.
But	in	the	West,	the	breast	has	suffered	immensely.
The	Eastern	woman	is	still	rich	as	far	as	breasts	are	concerned.
Your	mind	has	immense	power	over	your	body.	If	your	mind	takes	up	a	certain
idea,	sooner	or	later	the	body	will	follow	it.	The	body	is	slow,	but	it	will	follow
it.
But	 even	 beyond	 the	 mind,	 your	 individuality	 is	 intact.	 No	 two	 individuals'
experience	 is	 exactly	 the	 same.	 That	 has	 been	 the	 cause	 of	 a	 great	 tragedy,
because	 Mohammed	 experiences	 something	 which	 Mahavira	 does	 not
experience,	and	then	the	followers	start	making	criteria:	if	they	follow	Mahavira
then	Mahavira's	experience	becomes	the	criterion;	unless	somebody	experiences
the	 same,	 his	 experience	 is	 not	 right.	 The	 same	 is	 true	 of	 the	 followers	 of
Mohammed	or	Moses	or	Zarathustra.
But	 the	 truth	 is	 --	 and	 nobody	 has	 been	 insisting	 on	 it	 --	 that	 all	 are	 unique
people,	they	all	grow	different	flowers.	The	similarity	is	in	blossoming	but	not	in
the	 color	 of	 the	 flowers	 or	 in	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 flowers.	 The	 color	 and	 the
fragrance	is	going	to	be	unique	--	and	it	is	good,	because	it	makes	spiritual	life
rich;	otherwise	it	will	be	very	monotonous.
So	don't	be	worried	about	anybody's	experience.
And	 if	 you	 are	 fed	up	with	 the	 journey,	 perhaps	you	 are	 coming	back	 to	your
village	and	I	am	sitting	there	under	the	tree.
Just	recognize	me!	I	have	been	telling	you	in	every	possible	way	who	the	master
is.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 DESCRIBED	 IN	 "THE	 MUSTARD	 SEED"	 HOW	 RAMAKRISHNA
WAS
ADDICTED	TO	FOOD,	AND	PEOPLE	WOULD	NEVER	HAVE	THOUGHT
THAT	A	LIBERATED	MAN	COULD	BE	ADDICTED	TO	FOOD.	BEFORE
HE	DIED,	HE
SAID	HE	WAS	CLINGING	TO	SOMETHING	IMPERFECT	IN	HIM	SO	HE
COULD
BE	HERE	AND	SERVE	PEOPLE.
YOU	 SAY	MANY	MASTERS	 HAVE	 DONE	 THIS.	 THE	MOMENT	 THEY
FEEL
THAT	SOMETHING	IS	GOING	TO	BECOME	COMPLETELY	PERFECT	IN
THEM,	 THEY	WILL	 CLING	 TO	 SOME	 IMPERFECTION	 JUST	 TO	 STAY
HERE.
NOW	OSHO,	WHAT	ARE	YOU	CLINGING	TO,	OR	PLANNING	TO	CLING
ONTO?
I	am	addicted	to	you!
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	The	alchemy	of	enlightenment
29	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610295
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH26
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
108
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	 MY	 CHILDHOOD,	 I	 HAVE	 SEEN	 YOU	 AS	 A	 BUDDHA,	 EVEN
BEFORE
YOUR	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 I	 SAW	 YOU	 AS	 A	 BUDDHA	 --	 THE	 SAME
SERENITY,	 THE	 SAME	 NATURAL	 GLOW,	 THE	 SAME	 SPONTANEITY,
THE	 SAME	 LOVE,	 THE	 SAME	 COMPASSION,	 THE	 SAME
CAREFREENESS,	THE	SAME
BLISSFULNESS	AS	IT	IS	TODAY.
I	 HAVE	 SEEN	 MANY	 OF	 YOUR	 PHASES,	 AND	 I	 SAY	 AGAIN	 AND
AGAIN	THAT
YOU	WERE	A	BUDDHA	BEFORE	YOUR	ENLIGHTENMENT.
THE	 STORY	OF	YOUR	ENLIGHTENMENT	 IS	A	DEVICE	 FOR	US,	 IS	A
BEAUTIFUL	ASSURANCE	FOR	US.
I	 AM	 IMMENSELY	 GRATEFUL.	 I	 FEEL	 FORTUNATE	 THAT	 YOU
SHOWERED
YOUR	LOVE	AND	COMPASSION	ON	ME	FROM	THE	BEGINNING.	YOU
HAVE
HELPED	ME	AT	EACH	STEP,	AT	EACH	TURNING	POINT	OF	MY	LIFE.
YOU
CHANGED	MY	LIFE,	YOU	FILLED	MY	LIFE	WITH	LOVE	AND	JOY,	YOU
GAVE
ME	IMMENSE	CLARITY,	YOU	MADE	ME	FREE.
I	 BOW	 DOWN	 TO	 YOU.	 BUDDHAM	 SHARANAM	 GACHCHHAMI,
BUDDHAM
SHARANAM	GACHCHHAMI,	BUDDHAM	SHARANAM	GACHCHHAMI.
Narendra,	you	are	almost	right.	But	remember	my	emphasis	on	the	word	almost.
And	 this	 is	 true	 not	 only	 about	 me,	 this	 is	 true	 about	 everybody	 else	 too:
Everybody	 is	 by	 nature	 a	 divine	 being,	 an	 awakened	 soul,	 a	Gautam	Buddha,
who	has	 just	fallen	asleep	for	a	while,	has	 just	forgotten	himself	for	a	moment
and	 is	 lost	 in	 dreams,	 beautiful	 dreams	 of	 ambition,	 desire,	 success...	 to	 be
someone	special	in	the	world,	to	leave	footprints	behind.
The	moment	your	dream	is	broken,	your	sleep	is	gone,	suddenly	you	are	in	for	a
great	 surprise,	 perhaps	 the	 greatest	 surprise:	 that	 the	 treasure	 you	 have	 been
looking	for	is	within	you,	that	the	paradise	you	have	been	searching	for	is	within
you,	that	there	is	no	God	who	can	drive	you	out	of	the	Garden	of	Eden	because
the	Garden	of	Eden	 is	 your	very	being.	At	 the	most	 you	 can	 forget	 it	 but	 you
cannot	lose	it.	And	once	you	recognize	it,	then	life	becomes	really	hilarious;	you
can	laugh	at	your	own	efforts	and	endeavors,	at	your	whole	past	 that	you	have
spent	in	searching	for	it.
And	the	goal	of	your	search	was	not	away	from	you,	not	even	close	to	you.	You
were	the	goal,	the	seeker	was	the	sought.
And	everything	that	you	have	done	before	you	became	enlightened,	everything
that	you	have	been	before	you	became	aware	of	your	tremendous	beauty,	of	your
eternal	life,	will	take	a	different	meaning	after	your	enlightenment.	To	you	and	to
those	who	are	close	to	you,	the	enlightenment	will	make	such	a	great	difference.
Narendra	 has	 known	 me	 since	 he	 was	 a	 child.	 But	 if	 I	 had	 not	 become
enlightened	he	would	not	have	asked	me	this	question	or	raised	this	question	to
himself.	Even	the	very	idea	of	buddhahood	might	not	have	happened	to	him;	he
would	 have	 known	 me	 as	 a	 friend,	 he	 would	 have	 known	 me	 as	 a	 loving
companion.
It	 is	 the	 enlightenment	 that	 changes	 the	meaning	 of	 all	 his	 experiences,	 gives
them	a	new	color,	a	new	light,	a	new	luminosity.	The	same	incidents	start	having
a	totally	new	meaning.
I	can	understand	your	question,	Narendra.	Now	you	look	backwards,	but	because
now	 you	 know	my	 enlightenment	 you	 can	 easily	 conclude	 that	 I	 was	 always
enlightened,	that	I	was	born	enlightened;	otherwise	those	incidents	of	love,	care,
understanding	 would	 not	 have	 taken	 such	 a	 colorful	 and	 meaningful
significance.	That's	why	I	say	you	are	almost	right.
I	 myself	 can	 look	 retrospectively...	 then	 everything	 starts	 taking	 on	 a	 new
meaning.	 It	 would	 not	 have	 had	 the	 same	 meaning.	 It	 is	 the	 alchemy	 of
enlightenment	that	everything	has	become	pure	gold,	that	small	and	meaningless
things	have	taken	wings	and	have	become	great.
I	will	 give	 you	 a	 few	 examples	which	 could	 not	 have	 been	 understood	 in	 the
same	way	they	have	been	understood;	there	was	no	possibility,	no	hope.
One	 of	 my	 teachers	 was	 very	 perfectionistic,	 a	 great	 disciplinarian,	 a	 very
beautiful	man.
Every	year	he	started	his	class	with	the	same	introduction,	because	the	students
were	new;	he	introduced	himself	by	saying	that,	"It	is	better	that	I	should	make
clear	to	you	what	kind	of	man	I	am,	so	you	are	not	in	the	dark	and	you	don't	do
anything	without	understanding	the	nature	of	the	teacher.	First:	I	don't	believe	in
headaches,	stomachaches,	no.	Anything	that	you	cannot	prove	and	anything	that
I	cannot	check	by	myself	will	not	be	an	excuse	to	take	a	holiday	or	to	go	home.
You	can	have	a	fever,	I	can	feel	your	fever.
So	remember	it	--	I	simply	don't	believe	in	headaches	and	stomachaches	because
there	 is	 no	proof.	Even	 a	 physician	has	 to	 rely	 upon	 the	patient,	 that	 he	has	 a
headache	 --	he	may	be	 lying,	or	he	may	be	 in	 illusion.	What	 is	 the	guarantee?
How	do	you	know	that	you	are	right?"
I	said,	"This	is	strange;	this	is	going	to	be	difficult"	--	because	those	were	simple
excuses	 to	 escape	 from	any	 class,	 to	 say	 that	 "I	 have	 a	 strong	headache	 and	 I
want	to	go	home."
He	used	to	go	every	evening	for	a	walk.	Just	by	the	side	of	the	school	there	was
a	beautiful	road,	covered	from	both	sides	with	big	trees,	mango	trees.
I	said,	"Things	have	to	be	settled	from	the	very	beginning."
So	 I	 climbed	 up	 into	 a	 tree,	 high	 up,	 and	waited	 for	 this	 teacher	 --	 he	was	 a
Mohammedan,	his	name	was	Rahimuddin.	He	came	exactly	on	 time...	He	was
very	precise	in	everything;	at	exactly	the	same	time	each	day	he	used	to	pass	by
that	tree.
I	dropped	a	big	mango	on	his	head.	He	said,	"Ahhhh!"	and	looked	up.	And	he
saw	me	there.
I	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	What	has	happened?"
For	a	moment	there	was	silence.	He	said,	"Come	down."
I	came	down.
He	said,	"You	have	proved	that	there	is	something	like	a	headache,	but	don't	tell
anybody.	If	you	have	a	headache,	you	just	raise	one	finger	and	I	will	give	you	a
holiday.
If	 you	 have	 a	 stomachache,	 you	 need	 not	 prove	 it	 to	me	 --	 you	 just	 raise	 two
fingers,	because	you	seem	to	be	dangerous!"
He	was	a	bachelor,	an	old	man;	he	had	never	married.	He	lived	a	very	beautiful
life,	had	a	small	cottage,	a	garden.
And	he	was	very	famous	for	one	strange	thing	--	because	he	had	enough	money,
unmarried,	no	children,	no	wife....	He	had	three	hundred	and	sixty-five	suits	of
clothes,	one	for	each	day;	then	for	the	whole	year	that	suit	of	clothes	would	not
be	used	again.
Naturally	every	husband	was	jealous.
He	said,	"I	live	alone.	I	sleep	outside	in	the	garden,	and	I	don't	want	any	proof
for	stomachache!	--	so	one	is	enough.	You	have	given	me	the	proof	that	you	are
capable,	 so	 when	 you	 have	 a	 stomachache	 raise	 two	 fingers	 and	 I	 will
understand.	But	this	is	an	agreement	between	us:	that	you	will	not	tell	anybody
else	that	headaches	or	stomachaches	exist."
I	 said,	"I	am	not	worried	about	anybody	else.	My	problem	is	solved	because	 I
want	things	from	the	very	beginning	to	be	clear,	just	like	you	do."
He	said,	"You	have	made	it	very	clear	--	it	is	still	hurting!	I	have	been	a	teacher
thirty	years	and	nobody	ever	 thought	of	 this	 idea.	 I	will	 remember	you	for	my
whole	life."
It	 was	 a	 small	 incident,	 and	 would	 have	 been	 forgotten	 --	 but	 when	 people
started	coming	to	me	many	years	after	this	incident	he	started	telling	people,	"I
knew	beforehand	that	this	boy	was	going	to	be	someone	extraordinary."
People	 asked,	 "How	 did	 you	 come	 to	 know?	 --	 and	 you	 never	 mentioned	 it
before."
He	 said,	 "I	 had	 almost	 forgotten	 it;	 just	 now,	 as	 his	 name	 is	 becoming	known
around	 the	 world	 and	 people	 are	 coming	 to	 him	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 I
remembered.	And	now	that	incident	has	a	totally	different	meaning.	Because	for
my	whole	 life	 I	was	 introducing	every	class	 in	 the	same	way	and	nobody	ever
tried	anything.	And	this	was	the	only	one	--
a	 singular	 instance	 --	who	proved	 to	me	 that	 a	headache	had	 to	be	accepted.	 I
knew	it	that	very	day."
In	1970	I	went	to	that	village	for	the	last	time.	He	had	become	very	old.	Hearing
that	I	was	there,	he	came	to	see	me.	I	said,	"I	was	going	to	come	to	you.	You	are
too	old,	you	should	not	have	bothered	to	walk	almost	two	miles."
He	said,	"I	am	feeling	so	happy.	Seeing	you	it	still	hurts,	but	now	I	feel	a	certain
pride	that	you	were	my	student."
Now	the	whole	thing	takes	a	different	color,	it	becomes	a	pride.	Otherwise,	if	I
had	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 a	 thief	 or	 a	 criminal,	 then	 the	 same	 incident	would	 have
been	a	proof:	"I	knew	from	the	very	beginning	that	 this	boy	was	going	to	be	a
criminal,	that	sooner	or	later	he	would	murder	somebody."
Retrospectively	you	always	look	at	things	in	a	way	you	would	not	have	looked	at
them	 if	 life	 had	 moved	 in	 a	 different	 direction	 --	 the	 same	 things.	 The	 same
things	would	not	have	given	you	the	same	indications.
By	the	way,	I	would	like	to	remind	you	that	all	autobiographies	are	false	because
they	are	all	written	retrospectively.	A	man	becomes	a	Mahatma	Gandhi	and	then
he	writes	his	autobiography	in	the	light	what	he	has	become.	He	starts	looking	at
things	in	the	past	when	he	was	not	Mahatma	Gandhi,	and	everything	now	has	to
fit	with	Mahatma	Gandhi.
There	has	to	be	a	logical	connection,	a	coherence.	So	it	is	as	if	you	are	reading	a
novel	backwards	--	things	will	be	totally	different.
All	 autobiographies	 are	 fictions.	 They	 should	 not	 be	 categorized	 separately	 in
any	library.
The	 science	 of	 librarianship	 should	 understand	 a	 simple	 fact:	 that	 every
autobiography	is	a	fiction.
For	 example	 the	 day	 Mahatma	 Gandhi's	 father	 died	 he	 was	 with	 his	 father
massaging	his	 feet,	 and	 the	doctors	 had	 said	 that	 this	was	going	 to	be	 the	 last
night;	there	was	no	hope	that	this	man	would	ever	see	the	sunrise,	before	sunrise
he	would	be	gone.	In	the	middle	of	the	night,	Mahatma	Gandhi	was	massaging
his	father's	feet,	but	he	was	thinking	of	his	wife.
The	father	was	dying.	It	was	an	absolute	certainty	that	this	was	his	last	night,	and
he	had	fallen	asleep.	Seeing	that	he	was	asleep,	Mahatma	Gandhi	slipped	silently
into	his	wife's	room,	and	while	he	was	making	love	to	his	wife,	his	father	died.
And	suddenly	 the	whole	house	was	awake.	He	heard	 the	noise	 --	"What	 is	 the
matter?"	And	he	could	not	forgive	himself,	that	even	for	one	night	he	could	not
remain	away	from	his	wife	when	the	death	of	his	father	was	absolutely	certain.
If	he	had	not	become	a	famous	man,	a	world-famous	man,	 this	 incident	would
not	 have	 carried	 any	 importance;	 perhaps	 he	 himself	 would	 have	 forgiven	 it,
forgotten	it	--	just	an	ordinary	incident.
But	 writing	 his	 autobiography,	 he	 connects	 it	 with	 the	 great	mahatma	 that	 he
became.
And	 this	 is	 all	 fiction	 --	 he	 says	 that	 he	 became	 concerned	 about	 celibacy
because	of	this	incident.	He	started	thinking	of	brahmacharya,	celibacy,	because
of	 this	 incident.	This	 is	not	 true,	but	he	has	 to	fit	 the	incident	 into	 the	life	of	a
mahatma.	And	it	fits	perfectly	well;	anybody	reading	it	will	feel	that	there	seems
to	be	a	certain	connection.	But	it	is	not	true,	because	all	his	four	sons	were	born
after	 this	 incident.	 So	 he	 cannot	 deceive	 me.	 He	 is	 deceiving	 himself,	 he	 is
deceiving	his	followers,	he	is	deceiving	the	historians.	But	if	this	was	the	cause
of	his	becoming	a	celibate,	then	he	would	have	remained	without	any	children.
All	four	sons	were	born	after	this	incident,	so	this	incident	has	nothing	to	do	with
celibacy.
But	in	his	mind	--	and	in	anybody's	mind	who	is	reading	Mahatma	Gandhi	--	it
seems	relevant,	 that	perhaps	 the	shock	was	 too	much,	as	 if	"I	am	guilty	of	 the
death	 of	my	 father.	 I	 could	 have	 stayed	 a	 few	more	minutes,	 but	my	 lust,	my
sexuality	proved	 to	be	more	powerful	 than	my	 love	and	 respect	 for	my	 father.
And	my	wife	was	going	to	remain	with	me	for	my	whole	life,	but	my	father	was
going	to	disappear	that	very	night	into	darkness	and	into	the	unknown	and	there
would	not	be	another	meeting	again."
I	have	read	many	autobiographies,	and	I	have	seen	how	people	when	they	look
backwards	 look	with	 the	 eyes	 that	 they	have	now,	 and	with	 all	 the	 experience
they	 have	 accumulated	 meanwhile.	 With	 all	 this	 experience,	 with	 these	 new
eyes,	the	meaning	of	the	incidents	starts	changing.
Narendra,	you	have	been	with	me	from	your	very	childhood.
If	 I	 had	not	become	what	 I	 have	become,	you	would	have	 remembered	me	as
loving,	as	friendly,	but	you	would	have	never	thought	I	was	born	as	a	buddha	--
that	idea	arises	now.	It	is	my	enlightenment	that	gives	you	the	feeling	that,	"My
God,	he	was	always	loving."	But	it	was	not	the	same	love.
In	 a	 sense,	 the	 dewdrop	 and	 the	 ocean	 are	 both	 water.	 But	 a	 dewdrop	 is	 a
dewdrop,	and	an	ocean	is	an	ocean.
What	you	had	seen	in	me	was	only	a	dewdrop.	Now	that	dewdrop	looks	like	an
ocean	 because	 now	 you	 are	 seeing	 the	 ocean.	 It	 is	 exactly	 as	 if	 you	 see	 the
Ganges	in	the	Himalayas	at	Gangotri	--	it	is	just	a	small	stream.	You	could	not
even	hope	that	it	would	ever	reach	the	ocean,	it	is	so	small.	Hindus	have	placed	a
marble	face	of	a	cow	there,	and	the	Ganges	falls	from	the	mouth	of	the	cow,	it	is
such	a	small	stream.	You	will	 find	millions	of	streams	in	 the	Himalayas	which
are	far	bigger.
But	 if	 you	 see	 the	 same	 Ganges	 near	 Calcutta,	 in	 Gangasagar	 --	 Gangasagar
means	the	òcean	of	Ganges'	--	it	has	become	so	big,	so	vast,	so	immense	that	it	is
difficult	 to	 think	 of	 it	 as	 a	 river;	 it	 looks	 oceanic.	 To	 connect	 the	 two	 is	 very
difficult.	 The	 Ganges	 in	 Gangotri	 could	 have	 been	 one	 of	 those	 millions	 of
streams	 which	 disappear	 in	 the	 forest,	 in	 the	 desert,	 and	 nobody	 would	 have
remembered	 it.	 But	 because	 this	 stream	 became	 Gangasagar...	 retrospectively,
looking	backwards,	even	standing	at	the	source	where	the	stream	is	so	small,	you
have	the	feeling	of	vastness,	of	potentiality,	of	all	the	possibilities	that	it	is	going
to	 become.	You	 cannot	 see	 it	 just	 like	 a	 small	 stream;	 it	 is	 the	 stream	 that	 is
going	to	become	Gangasagar.
Each	autobiography	is	fictitious;	small	incidents	with	no	meaning	in	themselves
suddenly	start	having	meaning	in	the	context	of	the	person	that	has	come	to	be.
Essentially	it	is	true:	everybody	is	a	buddha,	and	naturally	I	am	not	an	exception.
Please	 don't	 exclude	me	 out.	 But	 this	 buddhahood	 is	 only	 a	 seed,	 and	 out	 of
millions	of	seeds	perhaps	one	seed	comes	to	blossom.	It	indicates	that	every	seed
can	come	to	blossom.	It	is	a	tremendous	encouragement	to	every	human	being.
In	 this	 sense	 your	 seeing	me	 as	 a	 born	 buddha	 is	 right,	 but	 don't	 forget	 your
responsibility.	 It	 means	 you	 have	 to	 prove	 it	 too	 --	 that	 you	 are	 also	 a	 born
buddha.
Maybe	you	started	growing	a	little	late.
And	in	the	eternity	of	time,	what	is	"late"?
There	are	only	seven	days.	Choose	any	day,	but	start.
I	am	not	interested	at	all	to	convert	anybody	to	my	ideology	--	I	don't	have	any.
Secondly,	 I	 believe	 that	 the	 very	 effort	 to	 convert	 anybody	 is	 violence,	 it	 is
interfering	in	his	individuality,	in	his	uniqueness,	into	his	freedom.
So	my	function	is	not	that	of	a	teacher,	not	that	of	a	prophet,	not	that	of	a	savior,
not	that	of	a	messenger.	My	function	simply	is	that	of	a	reminder.	I	want	just	to
be	a	mirror	to	you	so	that	you	can	see	your	original	face.
And	if	you	can	see	a	buddha	in	me,	there	is	no	difficulty	in	seeing	the	buddha	in
you	too	-
-	maybe	a	little	lazy,	a	little	sleepy,	a	little	gone	off	the	track.
But	 a	buddha	 is	 a	 buddha.	 It	 does	not	matter	whether	his	 nuts	 and	bolts	 are	 a
little	loose,	we	will	fix	them.
One's	buddhahood	is	one's	essential	nature.
I	don't	want	you	to	worship	buddhas,	I	want	you	to	become	buddhas.
That	is	the	only	right	worship.
If	you	love,	become	it.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
GAUTAM	 BUDDHA,	 MAHAVIRA,	 J.	 KRISHNAMURTI	 WERE
TRAVELING
FROM	ONE	PLACE	TO	ANOTHER	FOR	THEIR	WHOLE	LIVES.	IT	WAS
REPORTED	ABOUT	J.	KRISHNAMURTI	THAT	BEFORE	HE	LEFT	INDIA
FOR
CALIFORNIA	FOR	THE	LAST	TIME	HE	TOLD	SOMEONE	THAT	IF	THE
DOCTOR	IN	CALIFORNIA	SAID,	"NO	MORE	TRAVEL,	NO	MORE	TALK,"
THEN
ALL	WOULD	BE	FINISHED;	HE	WOULD	BE	GONE	IN	FOUR	WEEKS	--
AND
THAT'S	EXACTLY	WHAT	ACTUALLY	HAPPENED.
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	THE	INSIGHT	OF	ALL	THE	MASTERS	WHO	WERE
TRAVELING	ALL	 THE	 TIME	AND	DIDN'T	 STAY	 IN	 ONE	 PLACE	 LIKE
RAMAN
MAHARSHI?
Raman	Maharshi	is	a	mystic,	but	not	a	master.
The	mystics	have	never	traveled	because	the	mystics	are	not	making	any	effort
of	any	kind	to	 transfer	 their	experience	to	others.	They	have	decided	that	what
they	have	experienced	is	untransferable,	that	it	cannot	be	communicated.
So	the	mystics	all	through	the	ages	have	remained	in	one	place.	What	is	the	point
of	 moving	 around,	 going	 from	 village	 to	 village	 or	 country	 to	 country	 --	 for
what?
The	 mystic's	 experience	 is	 expressed	 in	 the	 ancient	 saying	 that	 "The	 well
remains	 in	 its	 own	 place;	 it	 is	 the	 thirsty	who	 should	 go	 to	 the	well,	 the	well
cannot	go	to	the	thirsty."
Buddha,	Mahavira,	Bodhidharma,	Shankara,	Nagarjuna,	Mohammed,	Jesus,	J.
Krishnamurti,	they	were	all	traveling,	going	continuously....
Mohammed	 has	 countered	 the	 proverb	 about	 the	 well	 and	 the	 thirsty,	 and
countered	it	 in	such	a	beautiful	way.	He	says,	"If	 the	mountain	cannot	come	to
Mohammed,	then	Mohammed	will	go	to	the	mountain."
These	are	masters....
Not	 that	 they	 are	 against	 the	 mystics;	 basically	 they	 agree	 that	 it	 is	 difficult,
almost	 impossible	 to	communicate,	 to	say	anything	about	 the	 truth,	about	self-
realization.	It	is	beyond	words,	beyond	language;	they	agree	on	that	point.
But	still	the	masters	say	that	some	indirect	ways	can	be	always	tried,	and	there	is
no	harm.
There	 is	 no	 direct	 way	 of	 translating	 the	 inner	 experience	 into	 the	 outer
languages,	but	ways	can	be	 found,	devices	 can	be	created	 in	which	 something
may	be	said,	may	not	be	said,	but	may	be	heard.
The	 emphasis	 is	 not	 that	 the	 truth	 can	 be	 said.	 On	 that,	 the	 mystics	 and	 the
masters	agree:	it	cannot	be	said.
But	the	masters	disagree	with	the	mystics	on	one	point:	that	it	may	not	be	said
but	it	can	be	heard	--	through	the	eyes	of	the	master,	through	the	presence	of	the
master,	through	his	love,	through	his	compassion,	through	his	silence,	just	being
with	him.	Nothing	is	said,	but	somebody's	heart	may	start	dancing,	a	song	may
arise.
In	the	presence	of	the	master,	 the	disciple	may	become	aware	that	the	ordinary
human	life	is	not	all	there	is;	there	is	something	more.	Even	to	make	them	aware
that	 there	 is	 something	 more	 --	 greater	 peace,	 deeper	 silence,	 overflowing
ecstasy	 --	 perhaps	 they	 may	 start	 searching	 for	 it,	 perhaps	 they	 may	 become
seekers.	And	what	 is	 the	 harm?	 If	 nobody	 listens,	 then	 too	 the	 effort	 is	worth
making.
The	 mystic	 and	 the	 master	 both	 have	 the	 same	 experience,	 but	 they	 have
different	views	about	its	transfer	--	and	both	seem	to	be	right.
My	own	understanding	 is	 this:	 that	 the	mystics	are	of	a	more	ordinary	variety.
They	come	from	the	categories	of	human	beings	who	are	not	articulate,	who	are
not	 poets,	who	 are	 not	 painters,	who	 are	 not	musicians,	who	 are	 not	 dancers.
They	come	from	the	common	masses.
And	the	master	is	more	articulate,	more	talented.	If	he	cannot	say,	he	will	paint;
if	he	cannot	say,	he	will	sculpt;	if	he	cannot	say,	he	will	dance;	if	he	cannot	say,
he	will	sing	--
and	singing,	dancing,	painting	or	any	other	creative	art	may	become	a	vehicle	for
that	which	language	is	not	capable	of.
And	 there	 are	 people	who	 are	 articulate	with	 language	 too;	 they	 can	 speak	 in
such	a	way	that	through	the	words	they	can	send	the	wordless	message	to	you.
The	 words	 will	 be	 only	 the	 packages;	 the	 content	 will	 be	 the	 wordless.	 The
words	 will	 be	 only	 the	 containers.	 But	 for	 that,	 a	 very	 articulate	 person	 is
needed,	 who	 can	 use	 language	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 it	 becomes	 music,	 that	 it
becomes	poetry,	that	it	becomes	silence...	that	it	becomes	not	only	that	which	it
says	but	also	that	which	remains	unsaid.
Language	can	become	a	vehicle	--	now	the	emphasis	will	be	on	 those	who	are
listening.
Much	will	depend	on	those	who	are	listening.
So	 the	 basic	 function	 of	 the	 master	 is	 first,	 to	 create	 disciples	 who	 can
understand	 the	 wordless	 through	 the	 words...	 who	 can	 sit	 in	 silence	 but	 can
become	 filled	 with	 immense	 serenity.	 Just	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 the	 master,
something	can	start	opening	up	 in	 them	--	as	 if	 the	sun	has	risen	and	 the	birds
start	singing;	nobody	informs	the	birds	that	it	is	sunrise.
There	are	no	alarm	clocks	for	poor	birds,	but	just	the	light...	the	darkness	is	gone,
the	night	is	over,	and	there	is	a	celebration	all	over	nature.	Flowers	suddenly	start
opening,	there	is	fragrance	all	over.
The	mystic	has	achieved,	is	fulfilled,	has	completed	his	journey.	But	he	is	not	a
very	talented	genius.
The	master	 is	 doing	overtime.	His	work	 is	 finished,	 but	 his	 genius,	 his	 talents
demand	expression.
J.	Krishnamurti	said,	"If	I	have	to	follow	the	doctor's	advice	and	not	speak	and
not	 travel	 then	 I	 cannot	 live	more	 than	 four	 weeks."	 And	within	 exactly	 four
weeks	he	died.	His	work	was	complete;	now	he	was	living	only	for	others.	And
if	even	that	cannot	be	done	then	what	is	the	point	of	being	here	unnecessarily?
His	boat	had	arrived	long	ago.	He	had	been	delaying	his	departure	--	somebody
may	 listen,	 somebody	may	 hear,	 somebody	may	 be	 touched.	But	 if	 he	 cannot
speak	and	cannot	travel,	then	there	is	no	reason	at	all	for	him	to	go	on	breathing.
He	is	not	an	idiot.
Why	 did	 he	 say	 four	 weeks?	 --	 because	 it	 is	 just	 the	 old	 momentum.	 For
breathing	and	heartbeats	to	slow	down	and	disappear,	it	takes	nearabout	three	to
four	 weeks.	 And	 the	 older	 the	 man,	 the	 longer	 time	 it	 takes.	 If	 he	 had	 been
younger,	it	may	have	been	just	one	week.
It	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon	--	it	is	because	the	younger	person's	heart	runs
fast,	 it	can	exhaust	 the	momentum	quickly.	The	older	man	 is	already	slow;	his
heart	has	become	accustomed	to	a	slow	pace	so	it	will	take	three	to	four	weeks.
To	be	a	mystic	is	rare,	but	to	be	a	master	is	very	rare.
And	to	be	a	successful	master...	you	will	have	to	come	to	me!
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER	I	AM	IN	A	SILENT	SPACE	I	HEAR	A	SOUND	--	SOMETHING
LIKE
ÀUM'	 OR	 HUMMING.	 I	 LOVE	 THIS	 RHYTHMIC,	 SWEET,	 UNENDING
SOUND.
IN	CERTAIN	ACTIVITIES	TOO,	WHEN	I	AM	TOTAL	AND	SILENT,	THIS
LISTENING	HAPPENS.
IS	 IT	 OKAY	 TO	 LISTEN	 AND	 ENJOY	 THIS	 SOUND,	 OR	 IS	 IT	 A
PROJECTION	OR
DAYDREAMING?
PLEASE	GUIDE	ME.
First	 thing	 to	 remember:	 you	 should	 not	 repeat	 any	 sound	 as	 a	 mantra,	 as	 a
chanting,	 because	 when	 you	 repeat	 you	 create	 --	 then	 it	 is	 your	 mental
projection.
If	you	are	simply	silent	and	you	hear	a	certain	humming,	then	it	is	the	sound	of
existence.
That	 humming	has	 been	heard	 for	 centuries	 by	meditators.	That	 humming	has
been	 given	 a	 special	 name	 in	 the	 East,	 OM.	 It	 is	 not	 exactly	 OM	 but	 it	 is
something	similar.
It	has	 to	be	remembered	 that	 in	Sanskrit	 --	which	 is	 the	oldest	 language	 in	 the
world,	 the	mother	 language	of	all	civilized	languages	in	existence	--	 they	don't
write	OM	in	letters.
They	have	made	a	 special	 symbol	 for	 it	 just	 to	create	a	distinction,	 to	 indicate
that	it	is	not	something	to	do	with	language,	it	is	beyond	language,	and	it	is	not
part	of	the	Sanskrit	alphabet.
The	way	it	is	written	is	only	with	a	symbol,	and	that	symbol	can	be	used	by	any
language.
Sanskrit	 has	 no	 monopoly	 over	 it	 because	 it	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the	 alphabet	 of
Sanskrit.	It	has	been	heard....
Jainas,	Buddhists,	Hindus	--	 they	differ	in	their	 theology	on	every	single	point,
but	they	all	have	heard	the	sound	OM.	There	is	no	question	of	differing;	it	is	not
a	hypothesis	and	it	is	not	a	theory	propounded	by	somebody.
Anybody	who	 becomes	 utterly	 silent...	 it	 is	 the	 silence	 itself	 singing,	 it	 is	 the
song	of	silence.
Hence	 about	 OM	 Hindus,	 Jainas	 and	 Buddhists	 all	 agree.	 They	 begin	 their
scriptures	with
"om,"	they	end	their	scriptures	with	"om"	because	that	is	the	universal	sound.
This	has	created	a	problem	--	and	there	are	many	problems	of	a	similar	type	--
because	all	the	mystics	in	this	country	and	in	the	far	East	have	heard	the	sound
OM.	The	people	who	read	the	scriptures	start	thinking	that,	"If	OM	is	the	sound
of	the	nature	of	existence	itself,	then	if	we	repeat	òm'	we	will	be	able	to	hear	it
soon."	It	is	logical,	but	it	is	not	realistic.
If	you	repeat	it,	you	will	never	hear	the	real	thing;	you	will	go	on	repeating,	and
you	may	start	hearing	your	own	repetition.
In	Tibet,	where	 the	greatest	work	has	been	done	on	 this	 "soundless	 sound,"	as
they	call	it,	they	have	made	a	special	instrument.	It	is	a	certain	kind	of	metal	pot
made	with	special	proportions	of	different	metals,	and	a	small	rod	--	again	made
of	different	proportions	of	different	metals.	You	put	the	rod	against	the	rim	of	the
pot,	 and	you	move	 it	 fast	 and	 it	 creates	a	 certain	humming.	That	 is	 something
closer	to	the	existential	sound	than	OM.
In	every	lamasery	in	Tibet	you	will	hear	that	sound	--	somebody,	some	lama	is
continuously	 making	 it.	 When	 he	 leaves,	 then	 somebody	 else...	 twenty-four
hours	a	day	that	sound	is	created,	but	that	is	a	man-made	sound.	It	is	similar,	but
it	is	not	the	same.
Hindus	in	India	have	fallen	into	the	same	fallacy.	They	have	made	òm'	their	most
significant	mantra;	just	repeat	it	continuously	inside	so	your	whole	being	is	filled
with	the	sound	of	"om,	om,	om."	You	are	deceiving	yourself;	this	is	your	sound.
So	if	you	are	not	creating	it,	then	there	is	no	need	for	any	anxiety.
If	the	moment	you	become	silent	you	hear	it,	then	it	is	a	tremendous	blessing.	It
means	you	have	gone	very	deep	into	the	existential	world	of	serenity.
But	don't	try	to	deceive	existence.	You	can	go	on	chanting	"om"	your	whole	life;
it	is	meaningless,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	existence.	With	existence	you	have	to
be	a	listener,	absolutely	passive,	relaxed,	in	a	let-go.	Don't	impose	yourself.	You
are	 the	 only	 barrier,	 your	 impositions	 are	 your	 only	 sins.	 Just	 remain	 utterly
passive	in	a	non-doing	witnessing,	listening	to	whatever	is	happening,	allowing
it	to	happen.
It	 is	perfectly	good,	and	of	great	significance.	On	the	path,	 if	you	start	hearing
OM,	 you	 are	 accepted,	 you	 are	welcomed.	You	 need	 not	 seek	 anywhere,	 you
have	found	the	door.
Just	relax	more,	and	leave	everything	in	the	hands	of	existence...	a	total	trust	and
a	complete	passivity.
Your	absence	is	the	presence	of	godliness.
The	moment	you	are	not,	the	miracle	has	happened.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 NIGHT	 YOU	 POINTED	 OUT	 THAT	 JESUS,	 MARX	 AND
FREUD
WERE	PERHAPS	THE	WORLD'S	GREATEST	BUSINESSMEN.
ON	OCCASION	I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	CALL	YOURSELF	AN	OLD	JEW.
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	YOUR	BUSINESS?
Milarepa,	I	am	a	silent	partner.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	SANNYAS	IN	1981	PEOPLE	HAVE	CONTINUALLY	BEEN	SEEING
JESUS
CHRIST	IN	ME!	WHAT	HAVE	I	TO	DO	WITH	THIS	GUY?
Satsanga,	 it	 is	dangerous.	You	cut	off	your	beard!	Otherwise,	 they	will	 cut	off
your	head!
Jesus!	--	they	see	Jesus	Christ	in	you?	Then	crucifixion	is	not	far	away.	The	first
thing	out	of	 this	hall	you	cut	your	beard,	and	 if	 they	 recognize	you	even	 then,
keep	a	small	board	hanging	on	your	neck	that	says,	"I	am	not	Jesus	Christ."
You	have	to	make	it	clear;	otherwise	your	life	is	in	danger.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	Whatsoever	happens	in	silence	is	your	friend	30	October	1986	pm
in
Archive
code:
8610305
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH27
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
105
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIRTEEN	 YEARS	 AGO	 I	 LEFT	 THE	 WORLD,	 DEADLY	 WOUNDED,
AND	CAME
TO	YOU.	YOU	HEALED	ME	AND	GAVE	ME	BACK	EVEN	MORE	THAN
LIFE.
THEN	ONE	YEAR	AGO	I	WENT	BACK	TO	THAT	SAME	WORLD	I	HAD
ESCAPED	 FROM,	 FEELING	 LIKE	 A	 CHILD	 JUST	 OUT	 OF
KINDERGARTEN,	 WHO	 BARELY	 KNOWS	 THE	 ABC.	 NATURALLY
THERE	WERE	DARK
MOMENTS.	 DURING	 THOSE	MOMENTS	 AN	 INNER	 VOICE	 --	WAS	 IT
YOUR
VOICE,	 OSHO?	 --	 KEPT	 HAMMERING	 AT	 ME,	 "DON'T	 GET	 LOST	 IN
YOUR
EMOTIONS	 --	 WATCH!"	 FOR	 MONTHS	 THIS	 VOICE	 BECAME	 MY
CONSTANT
COMPANION	UNTIL	 SUDDENLY	A	REALIZATION	HAPPENED	TO	ME:
THAT
THE	DARKNESS	AND	THE	CONFLICT	WERE	CREATED	BY	MY	OWN
FEARS,	 DESIRES,	 JUDGEMENTS.	 THIS	 GLIMPSE	WAS	 SURROUNDED
BY	A	CALM,	RELAXED	FEELING	OF	FREEDOM	AND	ACCEPTANCE.
NOW,	 EXPERIENCING	 AGAIN	 THE	 OVERWHELMING	 BEAUTY	 OF
SITTING	AT
YOUR	FEET,	I	CAN	SEE	THAT	NO	MATTER	HOW	LONG	I	WATCH,	THIS
DESIRE	TO	BE	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE	WILL	REMAIN	WITH	ME.
BELOVED	 OSHO,	 IS	 IT	 REALLY	 POSSIBLE	 NOT	 TO	 LONG	 FOR
SOMETHING
SO	UNIQUE	AND	BEAUTIFUL?
Lalita,	the	spiritual	path	has	many	crossroads.
On	each	crossroad,	one	feels	as	if	one	has	arrived.	In	a	certain	way	it	is	true,	too.
It	is	a	certain	blessing	which	was	never	known	before,	a	peace	that	is	absolutely
new,	a	silence	undreamt	of,	and	a	love,	the	fragrance	of	which	one	has	desired,
longed	for	for	lives	and	has	never	found.	Naturally	one	feels	the	home	has	come.
This	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	tasks	for	the	master	--	to	push	you	on,	to	say	to
you,
"This	is	only	the	beginning;	there	is	much	more	waiting	for	you."	And	although
it	is	inconceivable	to	you	that	there	can	be	anything	more	than	this,	the	trust,	the
love,	the	devotion	towards	the	master	helps	you	to	move.
These	 moments	 come	 again	 and	 again.	 Each	 time	 it	 becomes	 in	 a	 way	more
difficult,	in	a	way	easier.	It	is	difficult	in	the	sense	that	each	new	realization,	new
achievement,	new	revelation	 is	so	vast,	 so	absorbing,	 that	everything	you	have
known	before	simply	fades	away	--	so	it	becomes	more	difficult	to	move	on.	But
on	 the	other	hand,	 it	becomes	easier	 to	move	on	because	each	 time	 the	master
has	said	 to	you,	"Move	on"	you	have	always	gained	more;	 it	has	never	been	a
loss,	it	has	always	been	a	new	door	to	a	new	mystery,	a	new	sky	beyond	the	old
one.
So	the	trust	also	has	increased.	It	is	easier	now	to	listen	to	the	master	and	move
on.
An	ancient	story...	 I	have	always	 loved	 it.	An	old	woodcutter,	poor,	alone,	had
only	 one	 way	 to	 earn	 his	 everyday	 bread	 and	 that	 was	 by	 cutting	 wood	 and
selling	 it.	As	 he	 came	 into	 the	 forest,	 just	 near	 the	 entrance	 under	 a	 beautiful
bodhi	 tree	 --	 the	 same	 tree	 under	which	Gautam	Buddha	 became	 enlightened;
hence	the	name	of	the	tree	has	becomèbodhi	tree'.	Bodhi	means	enlightenment.
By	the	way,	you	will	be	surprised	to	know,	scientists	have	found	that	the	bodhi
tree	 has	 a	 certain	 chemical	 which	 no	 other	 tree	 has,	 and	 that	 chemical	 is
absolutely	 necessary	 for	 the	 growth	 of	 intelligence.	 Perhaps	 it	 is	 a	 very
intelligent,	sensitive	tree.	It	may	not	have	been	just	a	coincidence....
The	woodcutter	would	see	this	old	man	sitting	silently,	always	there	--	summer,
winter,	rain.	He	would	touch	his	feet	before	entering	the	forest,	and	every	time
he	would	do	that	the	old	man	would	smile	and	say,	"You	are	such	an	idiot."
The	woodcutter	would	 be	 shocked:	 "Why?	 --	 I	 touch	 his	 feet,	 but	 rather	 than
giving	me	a	blessing,	he	simply	smiles	and	says,	`You	are	such	an	idiot.'"
One	day	he	gathered	courage	and	asked,	"What	do	you	mean?"
The	old	man	said,	"I	mean	that	you	have	been	cutting	trees	in	this	forest	for	your
whole	life,	and	if	you	go	just	a	little	deeper	into	it	you	will	find	a	copper	mine.
Only	an	idiot	could	miss	it!	Your	whole	life	you	have	been	in	this	forest...	you
can	collect	the	copper	and	that	will	be	enough	for	seven	days'	comfortable	living,
no	need	to	cut	wood	every	day	in	your	old	age."
The	man	could	not	believe	it	because	he	knew	the	whole	forest	--	"He	must	be
joking!"
But	perhaps	he	was	right...	and	 there	was	no	harm	in	going	a	 little	 further	and
being	alert	and	watching	to	see	whether	there	was	some	copper	mine.
And	he	went	in,	and	he	found	a	copper	mine.	He	said,	"Now	I	know	why	he	was
continually	saying,	`You	are	such	an	idiot,	working	every	day	in	your	old	age.'"
Now	he	was	 going	 only	 once	 every	week.	But	 the	 old	 tradition	 continued:	 he
would	 touch	his	 feet,	 and	 the	old	man	would	 smile	 and	 say,	 `You	 are	 such	 an
idiot!'"
"But,"	he	said,	"now	this	is	not	right!	Because	I	have	found	the	copper	mine."
The	 old	man	 said,	 "You	 don't	 know.	 If	 you	 go	 a	 little	 further,	 you	will	 find	 a
silver	mine."
He	said,	"My	God,	why	didn't	you	tell	me	before?"
The	old	man	 said,	 "You	didn't	 believe	me	 even	 about	 the	 copper	mine	 --	 how
could	you	have	believed	about	the	silver	mine?	Just	go	a	little	further."
This	time	there	was	suspicion	but	not	so	much;	there	was	a	certain	trust	arising.
And	he	found	the	silver	mine.
He	 came	 back	 and	 he	 said,	 "Now	 I	 have	 found	 silver	 enough	 that	 I	 will	 be
coming	 only	 once	 in	 a	 month.	 I	 will	 miss	 you	 very	 much.	 I	 will	 miss	 your
blessing	very	much.	I	have	started	loving	to	hear	from	you,	`What	an	idiot	you
are.'"
But	the	old	man	said,	"You	are	still	an	idiot,	it	makes	no	difference."
The	woodcutter	said,	"Even	though	I	have	found	the	silver	mine?"
He	said,	 "Yes,	even	 then.	You	are	 just	an	 idiot	and	nothing	more	 --	because	 if
you	 go	 just	 a	 little	 deeper	 there	 is	 gold.	 So	 don't	 wait	 for	 a	 month,	 come
tomorrow."
Now	he	thought	he	must	be	joking.	If	there	is	gold,	why	should	he	be	sitting	here
under	this	tree	in	old	rags,	with	no	shelter	from	the	rain,	no	shelter	from	the	sun,
depending	 on	 people	 who	 bring	 food	 to	 him...	 sometimes	 they	 bring	 it,
sometimes	they	don't..."	And	if	he	knows	where	the	gold	is,	I	don't	think...	this
time	he	is	certainly	joking!	But	there	is	no	harm.	He	has	always	been	right.	Who
knows?	This	old	guy	is	a	little	mysterious."
He	went	further	and	found	a	big	gold	mine.	He	could	not	believe	his	own	eyes	--
this	is	the	forest	he	has	been	working	in	for	his	whole	life,	and	this	is	the	forest
where	that	old	man	is	sitting....
He	brought	much	gold,	and	he	said,	"I	think	you	will	not	say	anymore	that	I	am
an	idiot."
He	said,	"I	will	continue.	Come	tomorrow	because	this	is	not	the	end;	this	is	only
the	beginning."
He	said,	"What?	Gold	is	just	a	beginning?"
He	 said,	 "Come	 tomorrow.	 Just	 a	 little	 deeper	 in	 the	 forest	 you	 will	 find
diamonds	 --	 but	 that	 too	 is	 not	 the	 end.	 But	 I	 will	 not	 tell	 you	 too	 much;
otherwise	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 sleep	 tonight.	 Just	 go	 home.	 Tomorrow
morning,	first	you	find	the	diamonds,	and	then	come	to	me."
He	 really	 could	 not	 sleep	 the	 whole	 night.	 A	 poor	 woodcutter...	 he	 could	 not
imagine	 that	he	was	going	 to	become	the	owner	of	all	 these	mines	--	gold	and
silver	and	copper,	and	now	diamonds!	And	the	old	man	was	saying	this	was	only
the	beginning.	He	thought	and	thought...	what	can	be	more	than	diamonds?
In	 the	morning	 he	went	 very	 early	 --	 the	 old	man	was	 asleep.	He	 touched	 his
feet.	The	old	man	opened	his	eyes	and	said,	"Have	you	come?	I	knew	you	would
come,	you	couldn't	sleep.	First	go	and	see	the	diamonds."
The	woodcutter	said,	"Can	you	tell	me	what	can	be	more?"
He	said,	"First	find	the	diamonds	--	step	by	step;	otherwise,	you	will	go	crazy."
He	found	the	diamonds	and	he	came	dancing	to	the	old	man.	He	said,	"Now	you
cannot	say	that	Ì	am	an	idiot.	I	have	found	the	diamonds!"
But	the	old	man	said,	"Still,	you	are	an	idiot."
He	said,	"Now	I	will	not	leave	you	unless	you	explain	it	to	me."
The	old	man	said,	"You	can	see	that	I	know	all	about	these	mines	--	silver,	gold,
diamonds	--	and	I	don't	care	about	them.	Because	there	is	something	more	which
is	not	 in	 the	forest	but	within	you,	 just	a	 little	deeper	--	not	outside	but	 inside.
And	because	I	have	found	that,	I	don't	care	about	all	these	diamonds.	Now	it	is
up	 to	you:	you	can	stop	your	 journey	at	 the	diamonds	but	 remember,	you	will
remain	an	idiot.	And	I	am	a	proof	--
because	I	know	about	all	 these	mines	and	I	have	not	bothered	with	 them.	This
can	make	 you	 understand	 that	 there	 is	 something	more	 which	 is	 never	 found
outside	however	far	you	go;	it	is	found	inside	you."
The	man	dropped	the	diamonds.	He	said,	"I	am	going	to	sit	by	your	side.	Unless
you	drop	this	idea	that	I	am	an	idiot,	I	am	not	going	to	move	from	here!"
He	was	a	simple,	innocent	woodcutter.
It	is	difficult	for	knowledgeable	people	to	go	in.
It	was	not	difficult	for	the	woodcutter.	Soon	he	was	entering	into	a	deep	silence	-
-	a	joy,	a	blissfulness,	a	benediction.
And	the	old	man	shook	him	and	said,	"This	is	the	place.	Now	you	need	not	go
into	 the	 forest.	 And	 I	 withdraw	my	word	 ìdiotàbout	 you,	 you	 have	 become	 a
wise	man.	You	can	open	your	eyes.	You	will	see	the	same	world	but	not	in	the
same	 light;	 the	 same	colors,	but	now	 they	have	become	psychedelic;	 the	 same
people,	 but	 they	 are	 no	 longer	 just	 skeletons	 covered	 with	 skin,	 they	 are
luminous	spiritual	beings...	the	same	cosmos,	but	for	the	first	time	it	is	an	ocean
of	consciousness."
The	woodcutter	opened	his	eyes.
He	 said,	 "You	 are	 a	 strange	 fellow.	Why	 did	 you	 wait	 so	 long?	 I	 have	 been
coming	here	 almost	my	whole	 life	 and	 I	have	 seen	you	 sitting	under	 this	 tree.
You	could	have	said	this	any	day."
The	old	man	said,	"I	was	waiting	for	the	right	moment...	for	the	ripe	moment,	for
the	 time	 when	 you	 would	 be	 able	 not	 only	 to	 hear	 but	 to	 understand	 it.	 The
journey	 is	 short,	but	you	should	not	 stop	at	 every	achievement.	Because	every
achievement	is	so	fulfilling	that	your	imagination	cannot	think	there	can	be	more
than	this."
Lalita,	you	are	asking	me	what	can	be	more	beautiful	than	to	be	in	the	presence
of	 the	master.	Why	not	 dissolve	 in	 the	presence?	To	be	 in	 the	presence	of	 the
master,	 there	 is	 still	 separation.	Why	be	 in	 the	presence?	Why	not	become	 the
presence	itself?	And	only	then	you	will	know	that	to	be	in	the	presence	was	only
the	beginning	of	a	journey	that	ends	in	becoming	the	presence.
I	know	you,	and	I	know	your	heart.	I	have	not	told	the	story	of	the	woodcutter
without	remembering	the	fact	that	you	have	such	an	innocent	heart	yourself.
Just	don't	stop	anywhere.
It	 is	 possible...	 make	 it	 your	 realization.	 Become	 the	 light	 yourself,	 and	 then
whatever	is	experienced	is	inexpressible.
In	your	dark	moments,	while	you	have	been	away	for	one	year,	you	have	heard
the	word
`watch'.	With	your	innocent	mind,	it	is	very	simple	for	me	to	speak	to	you	from
any	 distance,	 a	 heart-to-heart	 communion.	 Those	 words	 were	 mine,	 and	 you
have	recognized	them.	Because	there	are	things	you	need	not	bother	about,	you
simply	 have	 to	 watch	 and	 they	 pass	 on	 --	 anger,	 greed,	 jealousy.	 All	 the
components	of	darkness	have	one	quality	in	common:	that	if	you	can	watch	them
they	start	dispersing.	Watching	is	enough;	you	are	not	supposed	to	do	anything
with	them.
In	the	life	of	one	of	the	great	mystics,	Baal	Shem,	there	is	an	incident.	He	used	to
go	 towards	 the	 river	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	 just	 to	 be	 in	 absolute	 silence,
alone,	 to	 enjoy	 the	 peace	 and	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 night.	 Just	 on	 the	 bank	 of	 the
river	was	 a	 rich	man's	mansion,	 and	 a	watchman	was	 there	who	was	 puzzled
about	 this	man,	Baal	Shem.	Every	night,	 exactly	 as	 the	 tower	 bell	was	 tolling
twelve,	Baal	Shem	would	appear	out	of	the	darkness.
The	poor	watchman	could	not	contain	 the	 temptation	 to	 inquire,	 "Why	do	you
come	 here	 every	 night	 and	 sit	 next	 to	 the	 river	 in	 the	 darkness?	What	 is	 the
purpose	of	it?"
Rather	than	answering	him,	Baal	Shem	asked,	"What	is	your	work?"
He	said,	"I	am	a	watchman."
Baal	Shem	said,	"Exactly	--	that	is	my	work.	I	am	a	watchman."
The	watchman	said,	"That	is	strange.	If	you	are	a	watchman,	then	what	are	you
doing	here?	You	should	be	watching	the	house	where	you	are	the	watchman."
Baal	 Shem	 said,	 "There	 is	 something	 to	 be	 explained	 to	 you:	 You	 watch
somebody	else's	house;	I	watch	my	own	house.	This	is	my	house.	Wherever	I	go,
I	go	with	my	house	--
but	I	am	continuously	the	watchman."
I	love	the	story.
Be	continuously	a	watchman	of	all	dark	moments.	They	will	pass	away.	In	fact,
that	 is	 the	 definition:	 anything	 you	 watch,	 if	 it	 disappears	 by	 watching	 that
means	 it	was	 something	wrong.	 If	 by	watching	 it	 becomes	more	 clear,	 closer,
that	means	it	was	something	to	be	absorbed.
There	is	no	other	definition	of	good	and	bad.
It	is	watching	that	decides	--	the	only	criterion.	What	is	sin	and	what	is	virtue?
That	 which	 disappears	 is	 sin,	 and	 that	 which	 comes	 closer,	 becomes	 clearer,
wants	to	become	part	of	you,	is	virtue.
Watching	is	certainly	the	golden	key	of	spiritual	life.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 YOU	 TALKED	 SO	 BEAUTIFULLY	 ABOUT	 THE
SADNESS
WHICH	 FOLLOWS	 THE	 FIRST	 EXPERIENCE	 OF	 OUR	 INNERMOST
SILENCE.
IS	 IT	 NECESSARILY	 SO,	 THAT	 WHEN	 I	 FIRST	 EXPERIENCE	 THIS
SILENCE,	 I	 ALSO	 FEEL	 WITH	 MY	 WHOLE	 BEING	 THAT	 I	 AM
ABSOLUTELY	ALONE	ON
MY	JOURNEY?
Aloneness	is	also	one	of	the	fundamental	experiences	as	you	enter	silence.
In	silence	there	is	nobody	else,	you	are	simply	alone.
The	deeper	your	silence	will	be,	 thoughts	will	be	gone,	emotions	will	be	gone,
sentiments	will	be	gone	--	just	pure	being,	a	flame	of	light,	burning	alone.
One	can	get	scared	because	we	are	so	much	accustomed	to	living	with	people	--
in	the	crowd,	in	the	marketplace,	in	all	kinds	of	relationships.
You	may	not	be	aware	 that	 in	all	 these	 relationships	 --	with	 friends,	with	your
husbands,	 with	 your	 wives,	 with	 your	 children,	 with	 your	 parents	 --	 you	 are
basically	trying	to	avoid	the	experience	of	aloneness.	These	are	strategies	so	that
you	are	always	with	somebody.
It	is	a	well-known	fact,	psychologically	established,	that	if	a	person	is	left	alone
in	isolation,	after	seven	days	he	starts	talking...	a	little	like	whispering.	For	seven
days	 he	 keeps	 talking	 inside,	 keeps	 himself	 engaged	 in	 the	 mind,	 but	 then	 it
becomes	too	much	--
things	start	coming	out	of	his	mind	through	his	mouth	and	he	starts	whispering.
After	 fourteen	days	you	can	hear	him	clearly,	what	he	 is	saying.	After	 twenty-
one	 days	 he	 does	 not	 bother	 about	 anybody,	 he	 has	 gone	 insane;	 now	 he	 is
talking	to	walls,	to	pillars,
"Hello	friend,	how	are	you?"	--	to	a	pillar,	hugging	a	pillar!	And	this	is	true	not
about	 somebody	 special,	 it	 is	 true	 about	 everybody.	He	 is	 trying	 to	 find	 some
relationship.	If	he	cannot	find	it	in	reality,	he	will	create	a	hallucination.
You	will	see:	just	stand	by	the	side	of	the	road	and	watch	people	going	from	the
office	to	the	house,	and	you	will	be	surprised.	They	are	alone	--	although	there	is
a	 crowd	 all	 around	 --	 but	 they	 are	 talking	 to	 themselves.	 They	 are	 making
gestures,	they	are	telling	somebody	something...	because	the	crowd	around	them
is	not	related	to	them.	They	are	alone	in	the	crowd,	so	they	are	trying	to	create
their	own	illusion.	Maybe	they	are	talking	to	their	wife,	to	their	boss	--	there	are
many	things	which	cannot	be	said	but	right	now	they	can	say	them.	In	front	of
the	wife	they	cannot	say	it,	but	in	this	crowd,	where	everybody	is	engaged	in	his
own	 thing,	 everybody	 is	 doing	his	own	 thing,	 they	 can	 say	 things	 to	 the	wife.
Nobody	is	listening,	and	at	least	one	thing	is	certain	--	the	wife	is	not	there!	But
they	need	the	wife,	they	need	someone	to	talk	to.
And	after	thirty	days	of	isolation,	a	dramatic	change	happens:	it	is	not	only	one-
sided;	it	is	not	only	that	they	are	talking	to	the	pillar,	the	pillar	also	starts	talking
to	them!	They	do	both	things:	first,	"Hello,	how	are	you?"	and	then,	"I	am	good.
I	am	fine,	doing	well."
They	answer	from	the	side	of	the	pillar	too	--	in	a	different	voice.	Now	they	have
created	a	world	of	their	own,	they	are	no	longer	alone.	No	madman	is	alone.
Either	you	are	mad	or	not.	 If	you	don't	know	aloneness,	 there	 is	 something	of
madness	in	you.
Only	 pure	 aloneness	 gives	 you	 a	 clean	 sanity.	 You	 don't	 need	 the	 other;	 the
dependence	 on	 the	 other	 is	 no	 more	 there,	 you	 are	 enough	 unto	 yourself.
Language	is	meaningless	because	language	is	a	medium	to	relate	with	the	other.
The	moment	you	are	no	longer	dependent	on	the	other,	language	is	meaningless,
words	are	meaningless.
In	your	silence	--	when	there	are	no	words,	no	language,	nobody	else	is	present	-
-	you	are	getting	in	tune	with	existence.	This	serenity,	this	silence,	this	aloneness
will	bring	you	immense	rewards.
It	will	allow	you	to	grow	to	your	full	potential.	For	the	first	time	you	will	be	an
individual,	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	will	have	 the	 touch	and	 the	 taste	of	 freedom,
and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 immensity,	 the	 unboundedness	 of	 existence	 will	 be
yours	with	all	its	blissfulness.
So	whatever	 happens	 in	 silence	 --	 either	 sadness	 or	 aloneness	 --	 remember,	 in
silence	nothing	wrong	can	ever	happen.	Whatever	happens	is	going	to	enhance
the	beauty	of	 it,	deepen	the	charm	of	it;	anything	that	happens	will	bring	more
and	more	flowers,	more	and	more	fragrance	to	it.
Rejoice!	Whatever	 happens	 in	 silence	 is	 your	 friend,	 it	 is	 really	 your	 bosom
friend.	It	is	going	to	take	you	to	the	ultimate	peak	of	ecstasies.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	DON'T	REALLY	HAVE	A	QUESTION	TO	ASK	YOU	--	EVERYTHING	IS
VERY
GOOD.	 ONLY	 ONE	 THING	 IS	 CONFUSING	ME	 A	 LITTLE.	 YOU	 HAVE
OFTEN
SPOKEN	ABOUT	THE	"CHOSEN	FEW."	PLEASE,	WHO	IS	DOING	THE
CHOOSING?
It	is	a	very	difficult	question.
In	the	beginning,	God	used	to	do	it!	But	there	are	many	hypotheses	about	what
happened	 to	 God:	 some	 say	 he	 died	 a	 natural	 death,	 some	 say	 he	 committed
suicide,	some	say	he	got	into	an	accident.	Some	say	he	was	murdered	by	man	--
because	without	murdering	him,	man	could	not	really	be	free.
I	will	not	go	into	what	happened	to	God.
One	thing	is	certain:	he	is	missing.
In	 the	beginning,	he	had	chosen	 the	 Jews	 to	be	 the	 chosen	 few	 --	 "God's	own
people."	But	 since	 then,	 he	 has	 had	 no	 opportunity.	Although	 Jews	 have	 been
praying	continuously	in	every	synagogue	all	over	the	world,	"Now	it	is	time	for
you	to	choose	somebody	else;	we	have	suffered	enough!"
And	 it	 is	 true.	 If	 God	 had	 not	 chosen	 them	 they	 would	 have	 lived	 just	 like
everybody	else.
But	 because	 he	 chose	 them,	 he	 made	 everybody	 else	 their	 enemies	 --	 great
jealousy	and	competition.
I	remember	that	once,	India's	first	prime	minister,	Pandit	Jawaharlal	Nehru	was
asked,
"Who	are	you	going	to	choose	as	your	successor?"
He	 said,	 "I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 choose	 anyone,	 because	whoever	 I	 choose	would
have	to	face	immense	difficulties.	Everybody	else	who	is	ambitious	and	wants	to
become	the	prime	minister	would	all	be	together	against	one	single	person,	and
there	would	be	no	possibility	for	that	person	I	have	chosen	to	succeed	me.	So	I
will	keep	my	mouth	shut."
And	you	are	asking	who	is	choosing	here?
Here,	 it	 is	a	very	different	process.	Here,	 the	moment	you	become	a	sannyasin
you	have	chosen	yourself.
Every	sannyasin	belongs	to	the	chosen	few,	and	nobody	is	doing	the	choosing	--
it	is	you	who	are	doing	it;	hence	there	is	a	freedom.	If	you	feel	difficulties,	you
can	drop	out	of	it.
Nobody	 prevents	 you	 from	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin,	 nobody	 prevents	 you	 from
dropping	sannyas.	Your	freedom	is	intact.
So	remember:	here,	nobody	is	choosing.	Everybody	is	choosing	by	becoming	a
sannyasin.	So	no	need	to	kill	me;	I	have	learned	from	the	lesson	of	God	--	I	will
never	choose	anybody,	because	it	is	dangerous!	And	to	choose	anybody	is	to	put
him	in	difficulty.
Now	Jews	have	 suffered	 so	much	 in	 four	 thousand	years	 for	 the	 single	 reason
that	 they	were	 the	chosen	 few.	All	over	 the	earth,	nobody	else	has	 suffered	 so
much.	It	gave	them	a	superiority	complex,	a	feeling	that	they	are	holier	than	thou
--	and	naturally	nobody	likes	people	who	think	themselves	holier	than	thou.
So	in	every	country,	in	every	place,	they	have	been	put	down	and	given	evidence
that	they	are	not	holier	or	higher.
Just	 in	Germany	alone	Adolf	Hitler	 killed	 six	million	 Jews.	The	 responsibility
lies	 with	 God,	 because	 the	 reason	 these	 Jews	 were	 coming	 into	 conflict	 with
Adolf	Hitler	was	 that	he	was	 saying	 that	 the	nordic	Germans	were	 the	highest
race.	 Jews	have	 to	be	completely	eradicated	 from	 the	earth	because	as	 long	as
the	Jews	remain,	you	cannot	proclaim	that	nordic	Germans	are	the	highest.	Jews
are	an	old	race,	with	a	four-thousand-year	history,	and	they	have	proved	in	every
way	 that	 they	 are	more	 intelligent.	No	 Jew	 is	 a	 beggar;	 they	 are	 all	 rich,	 they
know	 how	 to	 produce	 wealth.	 They	 are	 all	 cultured	 and	well	 educated.	 Forty
percent	of	Nobel	prizes	go	to	Jews,	and	the	other	sixty	percent	to	the	rest	of	the
world	--	it	is	simply	unimaginable.
It	was	difficult	for	Adolf	Hitler	in	the	presence	of	Jews,	because	they	had	all	the
intelligence,	all	the	riches,	everything	that	proved	that	they	were	somehow	more
intelligent	than	others.
To	 make	 the	 nordic	 Germans	 a	 superior	 race,	 Jews	 had	 to	 be	 completely
eradicated	from	the	earth.
The	fault	lies	with	God;	he	should	not	have	chosen	the	poor	Jews.	And	even	if
he	had	chosen	them,	he	should	have	whispered	in	the	ear	of	Moses	and	told	him,
"Please	don't	tell	anybody.	Just	keep	it	in	your	mind	that	you	are	the	chosen	few
--	but	it	should	not	leak	out,	it	is	a	secret."
But	there	is	no	joy	if	it	is	a	secret.	The	joy	is	when	you	proclaim	it.
Here	 I	 am	 not	 proclaiming	 anybody	 as	 chosen,	 but	 I	 am	 giving	 you	 an
opportunity.	If	you	want	to	be	chosen,	there	will	be	difficulties.	My	sannyasins
everywhere	are	going	through	all	the	difficulties.
One	has	to	pay	for	everything.	You	want	to	be	the	chosen	few	for	free?	--	 it	 is
not	possible.	You	will	have	to	pay	for	it.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
OFTEN,	 IN	 THE	 PAST,	 YOU	 HAVE	 SPOKEN	 ON	 DOUBT	 AND	 THE
VALUE	OF
DOUBTING	EVERYTHING.
ON	 THE	 LEVEL	 WHERE	 YOU	 ARE	 MY	 MASTER	 AND	 I,	 THROUGH
YOUR
GRACE,	 HAVE	 BECOME	YOUR	DISCIPLE,	 THERE	 HAS	 NEVER	 BEEN
ANY
DOUBT.	FORGETFULNESS	ON	MY	PART,	YES;	UNAWARENESS	ON	MY
PART,	YES	--	BUT	NEVER	THE	TORMENT	OF	DOUBT.
BELOVED	 MASTER,	 COULD	 YOU	 SPEAK	 ON	 DOUBT	 IN	 THE
RELATIONSHIP
OF	THE	DISCIPLE	WITH	THE	MASTER?
There	is	no	possibility.
A	 disciple	 becomes	 a	 disciple	 only	 when	 he	 drops	 all	 doubts.	 So	 in	 the	 very
nature	of	things,	a	disciple	cannot	doubt.
If	he	doubts,	he	is	not	a	disciple.
As	a	student	he	can	doubt	as	much	as	he	wants.	When	all	his	doubts	are	finished
and	 a	 trust	 beyond	doubt	 has	 arisen,	 he	 enters	 into	 the	world	 of	 disciplehood;
now	there	is	no	possibility	of	doubt	arising.	If	it	arises,	the	disciple	immediately
falls	back	into	the	category	of	student.
So	as	far	as	the	master	and	discipleship	is	concerned,	doubt	is	an	impossibility.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	DO	YOU	ALWAYS	LOOK	IN	YOUR	HAND	BEFORE	YOU	START
ANSWERING	THE	FIRST	QUESTION?	DO	 I	 SEE	 IT	WRONGLY,	OR	DO
YOU
FIND	THE	ANSWER	THERE?
My	hands	are	empty.
I	don't	have	any	answer.
You	have	questions;	 I	 don't	 answer	you,	 I	 simply	destroy	your	questions.	And
before	destroying	your	questions	I	have	to	look	at	my	hand	because	it	is	not	only
with	my	language	that	I	destroy	your	questions,	it	is	also	with	my	hands.
So	I	have	to	prepare	them,	to	ask	"Are	you	ready?"
When	they	say,	"Yes,	master,	go	ahead"	I	start!
Without	my	hands,	I	cannot	answer	you.	They	do	almost	most	of	the	work.	My
words	keep	you	engaged,	and	they	go	on	doing	the	real	work.
So	you	are	not	seeing	wrongly;	you	are	seeing	absolutely	right.
I	look	at	them	--	not	for	answers,	but	just	to	see	whether	they	are	ready	or	not.
Question	6
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	IS	FOR	THE	FIRST	TIME	I	HAVE	BEEN	SO	CLOSE	TO	YOU.	WHEN	I
AM
SITTING	HERE	WITH	YOU	 I	 FEEL	MY	HEART	 IN	 TUNE	WITH	YOUR
HEART,	I	FEEL	A	DEEP	LOVE	FOR	YOU.	BUT	I	ALSO	FEEL	MY	OUTER
SERIOUSNESS.
WHY	IS	LAUGHTER	SO	DIFFICULT	FOR	ME?
Laughter	is	one	of	the	things	most	repressed	by	society	all	over	the	world,	in	all
the	ages.
Society	 wants	 you	 to	 be	 serious.	 Parents	 want	 their	 children	 to	 be	 serious,
teachers	want	 their	 students	 to	be	 serious,	 the	bosses	want	 their	 servants	 to	be
serious,	the	commanders	want	their	armies	to	be	serious.	Seriousness	is	required
of	everybody.
Laughter	is	dangerous	and	rebellious.
When	the	teacher	is	teaching	you	and	you	start	laughing,	it	will	be	taken	as	an
insult.
Your	 parents	 are	 saying	 something	 to	 you	 and	 you	 start	 laughing	 --	 it	will	 be
taken	as	an	insult.
Seriousness	is	thought	to	be	honor,	respect.
Naturally	laughter	has	been	repressed	so	much	that	even	though	life	all	around	is
hilarious,	nobody	is	laughing.	If	your	laughter	is	freed	from	its	chains,	from	its
bondage,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 --	 on	 each	 step	 there	 is	 something	 hilarious
happening.
Life	is	not	serious.
Only	graveyards	are	serious,	death	is	serious.
Life	is	love,	life	is	laughter,	life	is	dance,	song.
But	we	will	have	to	give	life	a	new	orientation.	The	past	has	crippled	life	very
badly,	it	has	made	you	almost	laughter	blind,	just	like	there	are	people	who	are
colorblind.
There	are	ten	percent	of	people	who	are	colorblind	--	it	is	a	big	percentage,	but
they	are	not	aware	that	they	are	colorblind.
George	Bernard	Shaw	was	colorblind,	and	he	came	to	know	it	when	he	was	sixty
years	old.	On	his	birthday	somebody	sent	a	present,	a	beautiful	suit,	a	coat,	but
the	person	forgot	to	send	a	tie.	So	Bernard	Shaw	went	with	his	secretary	to	find	a
matching	tie.	He	liked	the	suit	very	much.	He	looked	at	 ties	and	he	chose	one,
and	the	secretary	was	surprised;	she	could	not	believe	it	--	because	the	suit	was
yellow	and	the	tie	was	green.
She	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	This	will	look	very	strange."
He	said,	"Why	will	it	look	strange?	It	is	the	same	color."
The	manager,	 the	salesman...	 they	all	gathered,	and	they	tried	in	many	ways	to
find	out....
He	could	not	distinguish	between	yellow	and	green;	they	both	appeared	the	same
to	him.
He	was	colorblind.
But	for	sixty	years	he	was	not	aware	of	it.
And	there	are	ten	percent	of	people	in	the	world	who	are	colorblind.	Some	color
they	are	missing,	or	maybe	they	are	mixing	it	up	with	some	other	color.
The	constant	repression	of	laughter	has	made	you	laughter	blind.
Situations	are	happening	everywhere,	but	you	cannot	see	that	there	is	any	reason
to	laugh.
If	 your	 laughter	 is	 freed	 from	 its	 bondage,	 the	 whole	 world	 will	 be	 full	 of
laughter.	 It	 needs	 to	 be	 full	 of	 laughter;	 it	 will	 change	 almost	 everything	 in
human	life.
You	will	not	be	as	miserable	as	you	are.	In	fact,	you	are	not	as	miserable	as	you
look	 --	 it	 is	 misery	 plus	 seriousness	 that	 makes	 you	 look	 so	 miserable.	 Just
misery	plus	laughter,	and	you	will	not	look	so	miserable!
In	 one	 apartment	 house...	 And	 modern	 apartments	 have	 such	 thin	 walls	 that
whether	you	want	to	or	not,	you	have	to	hear	what	is	going	on	on	the	other	side
of	the	wall.	In	a	way,	it	is	very	human.
The	whole	 apartment	 house	was	 puzzled	 about	 one	 thing....	Every	 couple	was
fighting,	throwing	pillows,	throwing	things,	breaking	cups	and	saucers,	shouting
at	each	other,	husbands	beating	wives,	wives	screaming	 --	and	 they	don't	need
any	loudspeaker	systems	or	anything,	and	the	whole	apartment	house	enjoyed.
The	 only	 problem	 was	 with	 one	 sardarji.	 From	 his	 flat	 they	 never	 heard	 any
fight;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 they	 always	 heard	 laughter.	 The	 whole	 crowd	 was
puzzled:	"What	is	the	matter?
These	people	never	fight.	There	 is	always	 laughter	--	and	both	are	 laughing	so
loudly	that	the	whole	building	can	hear	it!"
One	day	 they	decided	 that	 it	had	 to	be	 looked	 into:	"We	are	missing	so	much,
and	they	are	enjoying	so	much.	What	is	their	secret?"
So	they	caught	hold	of	the	sardarji	as	he	was	coming	from	the	market,	carrying
vegetables	 and	other	 things.	They	 all	 caught	 hold	 of	 him	and	 they	 said,	 "First
you	have	to	tell	us	that	what	the	secret	is	--	why	do	you	laugh	when	everybody
fights?"
The	sardar	said,	"Don't	force	me,	because	the	secret	is	very	embarrassing."
They	said,	"Embarrassing?	But	we	thought	you	are	doing	great.	We	always	hear
laughter
--	either	you	laugh	or	your	wife	laughs...	no	fight."
The	sardar	said,	"What	happens	is,	she	throws	things	at	me.	If	she	misses,	then	I
laugh;	if	she	hits	me	then	she	laughs.	The	same	things	are	going	on,	but	it	is	just
that	 we	 have	 made	 a	 different	 arrangement	 --	 what	 is	 the	 point?	 So	 I	 have
learned	how	to	dodge	her,	and	she	is	learning	how	to...."
After	 twenty	years	 the	same	sardar	wanted	 to	divorce	his	wife.	The	magistrate
had	heard	about	 them,	that	 this	was	the	only	couple	in	 the	whole	city	who	had
never	been	known	to	fight.	They	simply	laugh	--	the	whole	city	knows	them	as
the	laughing	couple.
The	magistrate	said,	"What	has	gone	wrong?	You	are	so	famous."
The	sardar	said,	"Forget	all	about	that	--	just	give	us	permission	to	divorce."
But	the	magistrate	said,	"I	have	to	know	the	reason."
He	said,	"The	reason	is	very	clear	--	she	hits	me.	And	it	is	too	much;	I	have	been
getting	those	hits	for	years."
The	magistrate	asked,	"How	long	have	you	been	married?"
He	said,	"Almost	thirty	years."
The	magistrate	said,	"If	you	have	been	able	 to	cope	with	 the	woman	for	 thirty
years,	then	just	ten,	twenty	years	more...."
He	said,	"That	is	not	the	point.	At	first	I	used	to	dodge,	but	now	she	has	become
such	a	good...	there	is	no	way	that	I	can	dodge!	So	only	she	laughs,	I	have	not
laughed	for	ten	years.	This	is	unbearable.	In	the	beginning	it	was	perfect;	it	was
almost	fifty-fifty,	there	was	no	problem.	I	was	laughing,	she	was	also	laughing.
But	now	a	hundred	percent	of	the	time	she	laughs,	and	a	hundred	percent	I	am
just	standing	there,	looking	like	a	fool.	No,	I	cannot	tolerate	it	any	more."
Just	look	around	at	life	and	try	to	see	the	humorous	side	of	things.
Every	event	that	is	happening	has	its	own	humorous	side,	you	just	need	a	sense
of	humor.
No	religion	has	accepted	the	sense	of	humor	as	a	quality.
I	want	a	sense	of	humor	to	be	a	fundamental	quality	of	a	good	man,	of	a	moral
man,	of	a	religious	man.	And	it	does	not	need	much	looking;	you	just	try	to	see
it,	and	everywhere....
Once	I	was	traveling	in	a	bus	when	I	was	a	student.	The	bus	conductor	was	in
trouble	 because	 there	 were	 thirty-one	 passengers	 and	 he	 had	 money	 only	 for
thirty	 tickets.	 So	 he	 was	 asking,	 "Who	 is	 the	 fellow	 who	 has	 not	 given	 his
money?"
Nobody	would	speak.
He	said,	"This	is	strange;	now	how	am	I	going	to	find	out?"
I	said	to	him,	"Do	one	thing:	 tell	 the	driver	to	stop	the	bus,	and	tell	 the	people
that	unless	the	person	who	has	not	given	the	money	confesses,	the	bus	will	not
move."
He	said,	"That's	right."
The	bus	was	stopped.	Everybody	looked	at	each	other,	now	what	to	do?	Nobody
knew	who	the	person	was....
Finally	one	man	stood	up	and	said,	"Forgive	me,	 I	am	the	person	who	has	not
given	the	money.	Here	it	is."
The	bus	conductor	asked,	"What	is	your	name?"
He	said,	"My	name	is	Achchelal."	Achchelal	means	"a	good	man."
And	 I	was	 surprised	 that	 out	 of	 thirty	 people,	 nobody	 laughed!	When	 he	 said
"Achchelal"
I	could	not	believe	it	--	a	"good	man"	doing	such	a	thing...	and	nobody	seemed	to
see	the	humor	in	it.
Seriousness	has	become	almost	part	 of	our	bones	 and	blood.	You	will	 have	 to
make	 some	 effort	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 seriousness,	 and	 you	 will	 have	 to	 be	 on	 the
lookout	--	wherever	you	can	find	something	humorous	happening,	don't	miss	the
opportunity.
Everywhere	there	are	people	who	are	slipping	on	banana	peels	--	just	nobody	is
looking	at	them.	In	fact,	it	is	thought	to	be	ungentlemanly.	It	is	not,	because	only
bananas	slip	on	banana	peels.
Laughter	 needs	 a	 great	 learning,	 and	 laughter	 is	 a	 great	medicine.	 It	 can	 cure
many	 of	 your	 tensions,	 anxieties,	 worries;	 the	 whole	 energy	 can	 flow	 into
laughter.	And	there	is	no	need	that	there	should	be	some	occasion,	some	cause.
In	my	meditation	 camps	 I	 used	 to	 have	 a	 laughing	meditation:	 for	 no	 reason,
people	would	sit	and	just	start	laughing.	At	first	they	would	feel	a	little	awkward
that	 there	was	 no	 reason	 --	 but	when	 everybody	 is	 doing	 it...	 they	would	 also
start.	Soon,	everybody	was	in	such	a	great	 laughter,	people	were	rolling	on	the
ground.	They	were	laughing	at	the	very	fact	that	so	many	people	were	laughing
for	 no	 reason	 at	 all;	 there	was	 nothing,	 not	 even	 a	 joke	 had	 been	 told.	And	 it
went	on	like	waves.
So	 there	 is	no	harm...	even	 just	 sitting	 in	your	 room,	close	 the	doors	and	have
one	hour	of	simple	laughter.	Laugh	at	yourself.
But	learn	to	laugh.
Seriousness	is	a	sin,	and	it	is	a	disease.
Laughter	has	tremendous	beauty,	a	lightness.	It	will	bring	lightness	to	you,	and	it
will	give	you	wings	to	fly.
And	 life	 is	 so	 full	 of	 opportunities.	 You	 just	 need	 the	 sensitivity.	 And	 create
chances	 for	other	people	 to	 laugh.	Laughter	should	be	one	of	 the	most	valued,
cherished	qualities	of	human	beings	--	because	only	man	can	laugh,	no	animals
are	capable	of	it.
Because	it	is	human,	it	must	be	of	the	highest	order.	To	repress	it	is	to	destroy	a
human	quality.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	Unless	the	whole	existence...
31	October	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8610315
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH28
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
119
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 HAVE	 RECENTLY	 SAID	 THAT	 MOST	 OF	 HUMANITY	 IS
VEGETATING,	 NOT	 LIVING.	 PLEASE	 EXPLAIN	 TO	 US	 THE	 ART	 OF
LIVING	SO	THAT	DEATH
MAY	BECOME	ALSO	A	CELEBRATION.
Suraj	Prakash,	man	is	born	to	achieve	life,	but	it	all	depends	on	him.
He	 can	 miss	 it.	 He	 can	 go	 on	 breathing,	 he	 can	 go	 on	 eating,	 he	 can	 go	 on
growing	old,	he	can	go	on	moving	towards	the	grave	--	but	this	is	not	life.	This	is
gradual	death	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave,	a	seventy-year-long	gradual	death.
And	because	millions	of	people	around	you	are	dying	in	this	gradual,	slow	death,
you	 also	 start	 imitating	 them.	 Children	 learn	 everything	 from	 those	 who	 are
around	them,	and	we	are	surrounded	by	the	dead.
So	first	we	have	to	understand	what	I	mean	by	`life'.
It	must	not	be	simply	growing	old.
It	must	be	growing	up.
And	these	are	two	different	things.
Growing	old,	any	animal	is	capable	of.	Growing	up	is	the	prerogative	of	human
beings.
Only	a	few	claim	the	right.
Growing	 up	means	moving	 every	moment	 deeper	 into	 the	 principle	 of	 life;	 it
means	going	farther	away	from	death	--	not	 towards	death.	The	deeper	you	go
into	 life,	 the	more	 you	 understand	 the	 immortality	within	 you.	You	 are	 going
away	from	death;	a	moment	comes	when	you	can	see	that	death	is	nothing	but
changing	clothes,	or	 changing	houses,	 changing	 forms	 --	nothing	dies,	nothing
can	die.
Death	is	the	greatest	illusion	there	is.
For	growing	up,	 just	watch	a	 tree.	As	 the	 tree	grows	up,	 its	 roots	are	growing
down,	deeper.	There	is	a	balance:	the	higher	the	tree	goes,	the	deeper	the	roots
will	go.	You	cannot	have	a	tree	one	hundred	and	fifty	feet	high	with	small	roots;
they	could	not	support	such	a	huge	tree.
In	 life,	 growing	 up	 means	 growing	 deep	 within	 yourself	 --	 that's	 where	 your
roots	are.
To	me,	 the	 first	 principle	 of	 life	 is	meditation.	 Everything	 else	 comes	 second.
And	 childhood	 is	 the	 best	 time.	As	 you	 grow	 older,	 it	means	 you	 are	 coming
closer	to	death,	and	it	becomes	more	and	more	difficult	to	go	into	meditation.
Meditation	means	 going	 into	 your	 immortality,	 going	 into	 your	 eternity,	 going
into	your	godliness.
And	 the	 child	 is	 the	 most	 qualified	 person	 because	 he	 is	 still	 unburdened	 by
knowledge,	 unburdened	 by	 religion,	 unburdened	 by	 education,	 unburdened	 by
all	kinds	of	rubbish.
He	is	innocent.
But	 unfortunately	 his	 innocence	 is	 being	 condemned	 as	 ignorance.	 Ignorance
and	 innocence	have	a	similarity,	but	 they	are	not	 the	same.	 Ignorance	 is	also	a
state	 of	 not	 knowing,	 just	 as	 innocence	 is.	But	 there	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 too,
which	has	been	overlooked	by	 the	whole	of	humanity	up	 to	now.	 Innocence	 is
not	knowledgeable	--	but	 it	 is	not	desirous	of	being	knowledgeable	either.	 It	 is
utterly	content,	fulfilled.
A	 small	 child	 has	 no	 ambitions,	 he	 has	 no	 desires.	 He	 is	 so	 absorbed	 in	 the
moment	 --	 a	 bird	 on	 the	 wing	 catches	 his	 eye	 so	 totally;	 just	 a	 butterfly,	 its
beautiful	 colors,	 and	 he	 is	 enchanted;	 the	 rainbow	 in	 the	 sky...	 and	 he	 cannot
conceive	 that	 there	 can	be	 anything	more	 significant,	 richer	 than	 this	 rainbow.
And	the	night	full	of	stars,	stars	beyond	stars....
Innocence	is	rich,	it	is	full,	it	is	pure.
Ignorance	 is	 poor,	 it	 is	 a	 beggar	 --	 it	 wants	 this,	 it	 wants	 that,	 it	 wants	 to	 be
knowledgeable,	it	wants	to	be	respectable,	it	wants	to	be	wealthy,	it	wants	to	be
powerful.
Ignorance	moves	on	the	path	of	desire.
Innocence	is	a	state	of	desirelessness.
But	because	they	both	are	without	knowledge,	we	have	remained	confused	about
their	natures.	We	have	taken	it	for	granted	that	they	are	both	the	same.
The	 first	 step	 in	 the	 art	 of	 living	will	 be	 to	 create	 a	 demarcation	 line	between
ignorance	 and	 innocence.	 Innocence	 has	 to	 be	 supported,	 protected	 --	 because
the	child	has	brought	with	him	the	greatest	treasure,	the	treasure	that	sages	find
after	arduous	effort.	Sages	have	said	that	they	become	children	again,	that	they
are	reborn.
In	India	the	real	brahmin,	the	real	knower,	has	called	himself	dwij,	 twice	born.
Why	 twice	 born?	What	 happened	 to	 the	 first	 birth?	What	 is	 the	 need	 of	 the
second	birth?	And	what	 is	he	going	 to	gain	 in	 the	 second	birth?	 In	 the	 second
birth	he	is	going	to	gain	what	was	available	in	the	first	birth	but	the	society,	the
parents,	the	people	surrounding	him	crushed	it,	destroyed	it.
Every	child	is	being	stuffed	with	knowledge.	His	simplicity	has	to	be	somehow
removed,	because	simplicity	is	not	going	to	help	him	in	this	competitive	world.
His	simplicity	will	look	to	the	world	as	if	he	is	a	simpleton;	his	innocence	will	be
exploited	 in	 every	 possible	way.	Afraid	 of	 the	 society,	 afraid	 of	 the	world	we
have	 created	 ourselves,	 we	 try	 to	 make	 every	 child	 be	 clever,	 cunning,
knowledgeable	--	to	be	in	the	category	of	the	powerful,	not	in	the	category	of	the
oppressed	and	the	powerless.
And	once	the	child	starts	growing	in	the	wrong	direction,	he	goes	on	moving	that
way	--
his	whole	life	moves	in	that	direction.
Whenever	 you	 understand	 that	 you	 have	 missed	 life,	 the	 first	 principle	 to	 be
brought	back	is	innocence.	Drop	your	knowledge,	forget	your	scriptures,	forget
your	 religions,	 your	 theologies,	 your	 philosophies.	 Be	 born	 again,	 become
innocent	--	and	it	is	in	your	hands.
Clean	your	mind	of	all	that	is	not	known	by	you,	of	all	that	is	borrowed,	all	that
has	come	from	tradition,	convention,	all	that	has	been	given	to	you	by	others	--
parents,	teachers,	universities.	Just	get	rid	of	it.
Once	again	be	simple,	once	again	be	a	child.
And	this	miracle	is	possible	by	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 simply	 a	 strange	 surgical	method	which	 cuts	 you	 away	 from	 all
that	 is	 not	 yours	 and	 saves	 only	 that	 which	 is	 your	 authentic	 being.	 It	 burns
everything	else	and	leaves	you	standing	naked,	alone	under	the	sun,	in	the	wind.
It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 are	 the	 first	man	who	 has	 descended	 onto	 earth	 --	 who	 knows
nothing,	who	has	to	discover	everything,	who	has	to	be	a	seeker,	who	has	to	go
on	a	pilgrimage.
The	second	principle	is	the	pilgrimage.
Life	must	be	a	seeking	--	not	a	desire,	but	a	search;	not	an	ambition	to	become
this,	to	become	that,	a	president	of	a	country	or	a	prime	minister	of	a	country,	but
a	search	to	find	out	"Who	am	I?"
It	is	very	strange	that	people	who	don't	know	who	they	are,	are	trying	to	become
somebody.	 They	 don't	 even	 know	 who	 they	 are	 right	 now!	 They	 are
unacquainted	with	their	being	--	but	they	have	a	goal	of	becoming.
Becoming	is	the	disease	of	the	soul.
Being	is	you.
And	to	discover	your	being	is	the	beginning	of	life.	Then	each	moment	is	a	new
discovery,	each	moment	brings	a	new	joy;	a	new	mystery	opens	its	doors,	a	new
love	starts	growing	in	you,	a	new	compassion	that	you	have	never	felt	before,	a
new	sensitivity	about	beauty,	about	goodness.
You	 become	 so	 sensitive	 that	 even	 the	 smallest	 blade	 of	 grass	 takes	 on	 an
immense	 importance	 for	 you.	 Your	 sensitivity	 makes	 it	 clear	 to	 you	 that	 this
small	blade	of	grass	is	as	important	to	existence	as	the	biggest	star;	without	this
blade	of	grass,	existence	would	be	less	than	it	is.	And	this	small	blade	of	grass	is
unique,	it	is	irreplaceable,	it	has	its	own	individuality.
And	this	sensitivity	will	create	new	friendships	for	you	--	friendships	with	trees,
with	 birds,	with	 animals,	with	mountains,	with	 rivers,	with	 oceans,	with	 stars.
Life	becomes	richer	as	love	grows,	as	friendliness	grows.
In	 the	 life	of	St.	Francis,	 there	 is	a	beautiful	 incident.	He	 is	dying,	and	he	has
always	traveled	on	a	donkey	from	place	to	place	sharing	his	experiences.	All	his
disciples	are	gathered	to	listen	to	his	last	words.
The	last	words	of	a	man	are	always	the	most	significant	that	he	has	ever	uttered
because	they	contain	the	whole	experience	of	his	life.
But	what	the	disciples	heard,	they	could	not	believe....
St.	 Francis	 did	 not	 address	 the	 disciples;	 he	 addressed	 the	 donkey.	 He	 said,
"Brother,	I	am	immensely	indebted	to	you.	You	have	been	carrying	me	from	one
place	to	another	place	with	never	a	complaint,	never	grumbling.	Before	I	leave
this	world,	all	 that	 I	want	 is	 forgiveness	 from	you;	 I	have	not	been	humane	 to
you."
These	were	the	last	words	of	St.	Francis.	A	tremendous	sensitivity	to	say	to	the
donkey,
"Brother	donkey"	and	ask	to	be	forgiven.
As	 you	 become	more	 sensitive,	 life	 becomes	 bigger.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 small	 pond,	 it
becomes	oceanic.	It	is	not	confined	to	you	and	your	wife	and	your	children	--	it
is	not	confined	at	all.	This	whole	existence	becomes	your	family,	and	unless	the
whole	existence	 is	your	 family	you	have	not	known	what	 life	 is	 --	because	no
man	is	an	island,	we	are	all	connected.
We	are	a	vast	continent,	joined	in	millions	of	ways.
And	if	our	hearts	are	not	full	of	love	for	the	whole,	in	the	same	proportion	our
life	is	cut	short.
Meditation	will	bring	you	sensitivity,	a	great	sense	of	belonging	to	the	world.	It
is	 our	world	 --	 the	 stars	 are	 ours,	 and	we	 are	 not	 foreigners	 here.	We	 belong
intrinsically	to	existence.	We	are	part	of	it,	we	are	heart	of	it.
Secondly,	 meditation	 will	 bring	 you	 a	 great	 silence	 --	 because	 all	 rubbish
knowledge	 is	gone.	Thoughts	 that	are	part	of	 the	knowledge	are	gone	 too...	an
immense	silence,	and	you	are	surprised:
This	silence	is	the	only	music	there	is.
All	music	is	an	effort	to	bring	this	silence	somehow	into	manifestation.
The	seers	of	the	ancient	East	have	been	very	emphatic	about	the	point	that	all	the
great	 arts	 --	 music,	 poetry,	 dance,	 painting,	 sculpture	 --	 are	 all	 born	 out	 of
meditation.	 They	 are	 an	 effort	 to	 in	 some	way	 bring	 the	 unknowable	 into	 the
world	of	the	known	for	those	who	are	not	ready	for	the	pilgrimage	--	 just	gifts
for	those	who	are	not	ready	to	go	on	the	pilgrimage.	Perhaps	a	song	may	trigger
a	desire	to	go	in	search	of	the	source,	perhaps	a	statue.
The	next	time	you	enter	a	temple	of	Gautam	Buddha	or	Mahavira	just	sit	silently,
watch	 the	 statue.	 Because	 the	 statue	 has	 been	 made	 in	 such	 a	 way,	 in	 such
proportions	that	if	you	watch	it	you	will	fall	silent.	It	is	a	statue	of	meditation;	it
is	not	concerned	with	Gautam	Buddha	or	Mahavira.
That's	why	all	those	statues	look	alike	--	Mahavira,	Gautam	Buddha,	Neminatha,
Adinatha....	 Twenty-four	 tirthankaras	 of	 Jainas...	 in	 the	 same	 temple	 you	 will
find	twenty-four	statues	all	alike,	exactly	alike.
In	 my	 childhood	 I	 used	 to	 ask	 my	 father,	 "Can	 you	 explain	 to	 me	 how	 it	 is
possible	 that	 twenty-four	persons	are	 exactly	 alike?	 --	 the	 same	 size,	 the	 same
nose,	the	same	face,	the	same	body...."
And	he	used	to	say,	"I	don't	know.	I	am	always	puzzled	myself	that	there	is	not	a
bit	of	difference.	And	it	is	almost	unheard	of	--	there	are	not	even	two	persons	in
the	whole	world	who	are	alike,	what	to	say	about	twenty-four?"
But	as	my	meditation	blossomed	I	found	the	answer	--	not	from	anybody	else,	I
found	the	answer:	 that	 these	statues	have	nothing	 to	do	with	 the	people.	These
statues	have	something	to	do	with	what	was	happening	inside	those	twenty-four
people,	and	that	was	exactly	the	same.
And	we	have	not	bothered	about	the	outside;	we	have	insisted	that	only	the	inner
should	 be	 paid	 attention	 to.	 The	 outer	 is	 unimportant.	 Somebody	 is	 young,
somebody	 is	 old,	 somebody	 is	 black,	 somebody	 is	 white,	 somebody	 is	 man,
somebody	is	woman	--	it	does	not	matter;	what	matters	is	that	inside	there	is	an
ocean	of	silence.	In	that	oceanic	state,	the	body	takes	a	certain	posture.
You	have	observed	it	yourself,	but	you	have	not	been	alert.	When	you	are	angry,
have	you	observed?	 --	 your	 body	 takes	 a	 certain	 posture.	 In	 anger	 you	 cannot
keep	your	hands	open;	 in	anger	--	 the	fist.	 In	anger	you	cannot	smile	--	or	can
you?
With	a	certain	emotion,	the	body	has	to	follow	a	certain	posture.
Just	small	things	are	deeply	related	inside.
So	those	statues	are	made	in	such	a	way	that	if	you	simply	sit	silently	and	watch,
and	 then	 close	your	 eyes,	 a	 negative	 shadow	 image	 enters	 into	your	body	 and
you	start	feeling	something	you	have	not	felt	before.
Those	 statues	 and	 temples	were	 not	 built	 for	worshipping;	 they	were	 built	 for
experiencing.	 They	 are	 scientific	 laboratories.	 They	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
religion.	 A	 certain	 secret	 science	 has	 been	 used	 for	 centuries	 so	 the	 coming
generations	could	come	in	contact	with	the	experiences	of	the	older	generations	-
-	 not	 through	 books,	 not	 through	 words,	 but	 through	 something	 which	 goes
deeper	--	through	silence,	through	meditation,	through	peace.
As	your	silence	grows;	your	friendliness,	your	love	grows;	your	life	becomes	a
moment-to-moment	dance,	a	joy,	a	celebration.
Do	you	hear	the	firecrackers	outside?	Have	you	ever	thought	about	why,	all	over
the	world,	in	every	culture,	in	every	society,	there	are	a	few	days	in	the	year	for
celebration?
These	few	days	for	celebration	are	just	a	compensation	--	because	these	societies
have	 taken	 away	 all	 celebration	of	 your	 life,	 and	 if	 nothing	 is	 given	 to	you	 in
compensation	your	life	can	become	a	danger	to	the	culture.
Every	 culture	 has	 to	 give	 some	 compensation	 to	 you	 so	 that	 you	 don't	 feel
completely	lost	in	misery,	in	sadness.	But	these	compensations	are	false.
These	 firecrackers	 outside	 and	 these	 lights	 outside	 cannot	 make	 you	 rejoice.
They	are	only	 for	children;	 for	you	 they	are	 just	a	nuisance.	But	 in	your	 inner
world	there	can	be	a	continuity	of	lights,	songs,	joys.
Always	remember	that	society	compensates	you	when	it	feels	that	the	repressed
may	 explode	 into	 a	 dangerous	 situation	 if	 it	 is	 not	 compensated.	 The	 society
finds	 some	way	 of	 allowing	 you	 to	 let	 out	 the	 repressed.	 But	 this	 is	 not	 true
celebration,	and	it	cannot	be	true.
True	celebration	should	come	from	your	life,	in	your	life.
And	 true	 celebration	 cannot	 be	 according	 to	 the	 calendar,	 that	 on	 the	 first	 of
November	you	will	celebrate.	Strange,	the	whole	year	you	are	miserable	and	on
the	 first	 of	 November	 suddenly	 you	 come	 out	 of	 misery,	 dancing.	 Either	 the
misery	was	false	or	the	first	of	November	is	false;	both	cannot	be	true.	And	once
the	first	of	November	is	gone,	you	are	back	in	your	dark	hole,	everybody	in	his
misery,	everybody	in	his	anxiety.
Life	should	be	a	continuous	celebration,	a	festival	of	lights	the	whole	year	round.
Only	then	you	can	grow	up,	you	can	blossom.
Transform	small	things	into	celebration.
For	example,	in	Japan	they	have	the	tea	ceremony.	In	every	Zen	monastery	and
in	every	person's	house	who	can	afford	it,	they	have	a	small	temple	for	drinking
tea.	Now,	 tea	 is	no	 longer	an	ordinary,	profane	 thing;	 they	have	 transformed	 it
into	a	celebration.	The	temple	for	drinking	tea	is	made	in	a	certain	way	--	 in	a
beautiful	garden,	with	a	beautiful	pond;	swans	in	the	pond,	flowers	all	around...
guests	come	and	they	have	to	leave	their	shoes	outside.	It	is	a	temple.
And	as	you	enter	the	temple,	you	cannot	speak;	you	have	to	leave	your	thinking
and	thoughts	and	speech	outside	with	your	shoes.	You	sit	down	in	a	meditative
posture.	And	the	host,	the	lady	who	prepares	tea	for	you	--	her	movements	are	so
graceful,	 as	 if	 she	 is	 dancing,	moving	 around	 preparing	 tea,	 putting	 cups	 and
saucers	before	you	as	if	you	are	gods.	With	such	respect...	she	will	bow	down,
and	you	will	receive	it	with	the	same	respect.
The	tea	is	prepared	in	a	special	samovar	which	makes	beautiful	sounds,	a	music
of	its	own.	And	it	is	part	of	the	tea	ceremony	that	everybody	should	listen	first	to
the	music	of	the	tea.	So	everybody	is	silent,	listening...	birds	chirping	outside	in
the	 garden,	 and	 the	 samovar...	 the	 tea	 is	 creating	 its	 own	 song.	 A	 peace
surrounds....
When	the	tea	is	ready	and	it	is	poured	into	everybody's	cup,	you	are	not	just	to
drink	it	the	way	people	are	doing	everywhere.	First	you	will	smell	the	aroma	of
the	tea.	You	will	sip	the	tea	as	if	it	has	come	from	the	beyond,	you	will	take	time
--	there	is	no	hurry.
Somebody	may	start	playing	on	the	flute	or	on	the	sitar.
An	 ordinary	 thing	 --	 just	 tea	 --	 and	 they	 have	 made	 it	 a	 beautiful	 religious
festival,	and	everybody	comes	out	of	it	nourished,	fresh,	feeling	younger,	feeling
juicier.
And	what	can	be	done	with	tea	can	be	done	with	everything	--	with	your	clothes,
with	your	food.
People	are	living	almost	in	sleep;	otherwise,	every	fabric,	every	cloth	has	its	own
beauty,	 its	own	 feel.	 If	you	are	 sensitive,	 then	 the	clothing	 is	not	 just	 to	 cover
your	 body;	 then	 it	 is	 something	 expressing	 your	 individuality,	 something
expressing	your	taste,	your	culture,	your	being.
Everything	 that	 you	 do	 should	 be	 expressive	 of	 you;	 it	 should	 have	 your
signature	on	it.
Then	life	becomes	a	continuous	celebration.
Even	if	you	fall	sick	and	you	are	lying	in	bed,	you	will	make	those	moments	of
lying	 in	 bed	 moments	 of	 beauty	 and	 joy,	 moments	 of	 relaxation	 and	 rest,
moments	of	meditation,	moments	of	listening	to	music	or	to	poetry.	There	is	no
need	to	be	sad	that	you	are	sick.
You	should	be	happy	that	everybody	is	in	the	office	and	you	are	in	your	bed	like
a	king,	relaxing	--	somebody	is	preparing	tea	for	you,	the	samovar	is	singing	a
song,	 a	 friend	 has	 offered	 to	 come	 and	 play	 flute	 for	 you....	 These	 things	 are
more	important	than	any	medicine.	When	you	are	sick,	call	a	doctor.	But	more
important,	call	those	who	love	you	because	there	is	no	medicine	more	important
than	love.	Call	 those	who	can	create	beauty,	music,	poetry	around	you	because
there	is	nothing	that	heals	like	a	mood	of	celebration.
Medicine	is	the	lowest	kind	of	treatment.
But	 it	 seems	we	have	forgotten	everything,	so	we	have	 to	depend	on	medicine
and	be	grumpy	and	 sad	 --	 as	 if	 you	 are	missing	 some	great	 joy	 that	 you	were
having	in	the	office!	In	the	office	you	were	miserable	--	just	one	day	off,	and	you
cling	to	misery	too;	you	won't	let	it	go.
Make	everything	creative,	make	the	best	out	of	the	worst	--	that's	what	I	call	`the
art'.	And	if	a	man	has	lived	his	whole	life	making	every	moment	and	every	phase
of	it	a	beauty,	a	love,	a	joy,	naturally	his	death	is	going	to	be	the	ultimate	peak	of
his	whole	life's	endeavor.	The	last	touches...	his	death	is	not	going	to	be	ugly	as
it	ordinarily	happens	every	day	to	everyone.
If	death	is	ugly,	that	means	your	whole	life	has	been	a	wastage.
Death	should	be	a	peaceful	acceptance,	a	loving	entry	into	the	unknown,	a	joyful
goodbye	to	old	friends,	to	the	old	world.	There	should	not	be	any	tragedy	in	it.
One	Zen	master,	Lin	Chi,	was	dying.	Thousands	of	his	disciples	had	gathered	to
listen	to	the	last	sermon,	but	Lin	Chi	was	simply	lying	down	--	joyous,	smiling,
but	not	saying	a	single	word.
Seeing	that	he	was	going	to	die	and	he	was	not	saying	a	single	word,	somebody
reminded	Lin	Chi	 --	 an	 old	 friend,	 a	master	 in	 his	 own	 right....	He	was	 not	 a
disciple	of	Lin	Chi.
That's	why	he	could	say	to	him,	"Lin	Chi,	have	you	forgotten	that	you	have	to
say	your	last	words?	I	have	always	said	your	memory	isn't	right.	You	are	dying...
have	you	forgotten?"
Lin	 Chi	 said,	 "Just	 listen."	 And	 on	 the	 roof	 two	 squirrels	 were	 running,
screeching.	And	he	said,	"How	beautiful"	and	he	died.
For	a	moment,	when	he	said	"Just	listen,"	there	was	absolute	silence.	Everybody
thought	 he	 is	 going	 to	 say	 something	 great,	 but	 only	 two	 squirrels	 fighting,
screeching,	running	on	the	roof....	And	he	smiled	and	he	died.
But	he	has	given	his	 last	message:	don't	make	things	small	and	big,	 trivial	and
important.
Everything	is	important.	At	this	moment,	Lin	Chi's	death	is	as	important	as	the
two	squirrels	running	on	the	roof,	there	is	no	difference.	In	existence	it	is	all	the
same.	That	was	his	whole	philosophy,	his	whole	 life's	 teaching	 --	 that	 there	 is
nothing	which	is	great	and	there	is	nothing	which	is	small;	it	all	depends	on	you,
what	you	make	out	of	it.
Start	with	meditation,	and	things	will	go	on	growing	in	you	--	silence,	serenity,
blissfulness,	 sensitivity.	And	whatever	 comes	out	 of	meditation,	 try	 to	 bring	 it
out	in	life.
Share	it,	because	everything	shared	grows	fast.	And	when	you	have	reached	the
point	of	death,	you	will	know	there	is	no	death.	You	can	say	goodbye,	there	is	no
need	for	any	tears	of	sadness	--	maybe	tears	of	joy,	but	not	of	sadness.
But	you	have	to	begin	from	being	innocent.
So	first,	throw	out	all	crap	that	you	are	carrying.	And	everybody	is	carrying	so
much	crap
--	 and	 one	wonders,	 for	what?	 Just	 because	 people	 have	 been	 telling	 you	 that
these	are	great	ideas,	principles...
You	have	not	been	intelligent	with	yourself.	Be	intelligent	with	yourself.
Life	is	very	simple;	it	is	a	joyful	dance.	And	the	whole	earth	can	be	full	of	joy
and	 dance,	 but	 there	 are	 people	who	 are	 seriously	 vested	 in	 their	 interest	 that
nobody	should	enjoy	life,	 that	nobody	should	smile,	 that	nobody	should	 laugh,
that	life	is	a	sin,	that	it	is	a	punishment.	How	can	you	enjoy	when	the	climate	is
such	that	you	have	been	told	continuously	that	it	is	a	punishment?	--	that	you	are
suffering	because	you	have	done	wrong	things	and	it	is	a	kind	of	jail	where	you
have	been	thrown	to	suffer?
I	say	to	you	life	is	not	a	jail,	it	is	not	a	punishment.	It	is	a	reward,	and	it	is	given
only	to	those	who	have	earned	it,	who	deserve	it.	Now	it	is	your	right	to	enjoy;	it
will	be	a	sin	if	you	DON'T	enjoy.
It	will	be	against	existence	if	you	don't	beautify	it,	if	you	leave	it	just	as	you	have
found	it.	No,	leave	it	a	little	happier,	a	little	more	beautiful,	a	little	more	fragrant.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	A	DISCIPLE	OF	YOUR	MYSTERY	 SCHOOL,	 I	WANT	TO	ASK	YOU
THE
FOLLOWING	QUESTION:	WHEN	I	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	YOU	WERE
BEYOND	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 NOW,	 IT	 FELT	 LIKE	 A	 RELAXATION	 IN
MY
HEART.	THAT	VERY	MOMENT	A	PICTURE	AROSE	IN	ME	SHOWING	ME
THAT
YOU	ARE	EVEN	CLOSER	TO	US	NOW,	AND	 IT	FEELS	TO	ME	AS	 IF	 I
CAN
SOMEHOW	 UNDERSTAND	 "BEYOND	 ENLIGHTENMENT"	 BETTER
THAN
ENLIGHTENMENT	ITSELF.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS?
Adima,	it	raises	a	few	fundamental	questions.
First,	 if	 you	 cannot	 understand	 enlightenment,	 how	 can	 you	 understand	 that
which	is	beyond	it?
You	are	MISunderstanding.
Your	 misunderstanding	 is	 that	 perhaps	 beyond	 enlightenment	 means	 below
enlightenment.
And	you	are	feeling	happy,	but	I	cannot	feel	happy	with	your	happiness.	I	 feel
sorry	for	it.	You	are	feeling	happy	that	I	have	come	close	to	you.	You	should	feel
happy	when	you	come	close	to	me.
Just	think:	if	I	say	that	I	have	dropped	even	"beyond	enlightenment,"	that	it	was
all	 fiction	 --	 enlightenment,	beyond	enlightenment...	 I	 am	 just	one	of	you	who
had	a	few	imaginative,	fictitious	ideas	--	you	will	feel	even	happier.	Now	there	is
nothing	 for	 you	 to	 worry	 about,	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 nothing	 to	 achieve,	 you	 are
perfectly	okay.
Your	 question	 makes	 me	 understand	 why	 Gautam	 Buddha	 remained	 with
enlightenment	-
-	although	he	was	seeing	it,	the	stars	beyond	were	calling	him.	He	was	the	first
man	to	see	beyond	enlightenment,	but	he	didn't	go	beyond;	he	remained	at	 the
stage	of	enlightenment.
Perhaps	it	was	for	people	like	you.	Because	you	will	not	be	able	to	understand
the	 person	 who	 goes	 beyond	 enlightenment;	 in	 a	 way	 he	 will	 become	 almost
ordinary	 --	 and	 there	 is	 the	 danger.	Your	 ordinariness	 and	 his	 ordinariness	 are
poles	 apart	 --	 but	 both	 are	 ordinariness,	 and	 the	 danger	 is	 that	 you	 will
misunderstand.	He	has	come	back	home.
You	have	not	even	started	the	journey.
It	is	almost	like	meeting	someone	on	a	staircase	--	you	are	both	standing	on	the
same	step;	one	 is	going,	one	 is	coming.	Both	are	on	 the	same	step	--	 in	a	way
equal	--	but	one	is	going	up,	one	is	going	down.	Hence,	they	are	not	equal,	their
equality	is	illusory.
I	 thought	 perhaps	 that	 in	 the	 twenty-five	 centuries	 after	 Gautam	Buddha	man
might	have	become	a	little	more	intelligent	--	and	someone	some	day	has	to	try
going	beyond	and	see	what	happens,	how	people	take	it.
The	way	you	have	understood	it	is	absolutely	wrong.
I	have	not	come	closer	to	you,	I	have	gone	farther	away.
And	you	cannot	avoid	enlightenment;	if	you	avoid	it,	you	cannot	reach	beyond
it.	 It	 is	 simple	 arithmetic.	 That's	 what	 is	 making	 you	 happy,	 that	 perhaps
enlightenment	can	be	avoided	--	when	one	has	to	go	beyond	it,	what	is	the	need
to	first	go	to	enlightenment	and	then	go	beyond	it?	We	are	already	beyond	it!
You	are	not	beyond	it.
You	are	behind	it.
And	in	any	case	enlightenment	cannot	be	avoided.	One	has	to	pass	through	that
fire,	through	that	great	experience.
So	drop	that	idea	that	I	have	come	closer	to	you.
My	being	closer	to	you	is	not	significant.	What	is	significant	is	your	being	closer
to	me.
You	say,	"Now	you	are	a	friend	to	us."
I	have	always	been	a	 friend	 to	you.	The	question	 is	 from	your	 side:	 are	you	a
friend	to	me?	And	my	friendship	will	enhance	and	enrich	my	life,	not	your	life.
It	is	your	friendship	that	is	going	to	enhance	and	enrich	your	life.	And	if	you	can
be	 a	 friend	 to	 one	who	 is	 enlightened	 you	 have	 taken	 a	 long	 jump,	 you	 have
extended	 your	 hands	 for	 a	 faraway	 star,	 you	 have	 stretched	 your	 being	 to	 its
fullest.	This	will	give	you	an	evolution.
And	 only	 after	 you	 have	 reached	 the	 point	 of	 enlightenment	 can	 you	 see	 that
there	are	skies	beyond	skies,	that	enlightenment	is	not	the	end.	Existence	is	not
exhausted	yet;	there	is	still	much	more	ahead,	the	journey	continues.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
NOW	THAT	I	AM	SLOWLY,	SLOWLY	TURNING	INWARD,	I	FIND	THIS
LONGING	 MIXED	 WITH	 SADNESS	 WELLING	 UP	 FREQUENTLY.	 IT
SEEMS
CONNECTED	WITH	THE	FEELINGS	THAT	ARISE	WHEN	I	SEE	YOU	OR
DREAM
ABOUT	YOU.
IS	 IT	THE	REALIZATION	THAT	 I	REALLY	DON'T	KNOW	MUCH	LOVE
AND
BLISS	IN	MY	LIFE,	OR	IS	IT	THE	LONGING	FOR	HOME?
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	SPEAK	TO	ME	ABOUT	THIS?
It	is	good	and	fortunate	that	nothing	satisfies	you	completely	and	entirely.	That
means	you	don't	become	stagnant,	that	means	you	have	to	keep	moving.
Slowly	slowly,	you	will	understand	that	there	is	no	home,	that	movement	itself	is
the	home;	that	 there	is	no	end	to	the	pilgrimage	but	 the	pilgrimage	itself	 is	 the
end.
It	is	very	difficult	to	understand	because	we	are	accustomed	to	a	certain	logic:	if
we	want	to	go	somewhere,	going	is	always	just	a	means,	reaching	somewhere	is
the	end.
But	as	far	as	the	universal	life	is	concerned,	there	cannot	be	a	place	where	you
can	say	"I	have	come	and	now	there	is	nothing	further."
It	is	inconceivable	that	you	will	find	a	place	which	will	be	the	end	and	there	will
be	a	fence	and	a	board	saying,	"Here	ends	the	world."	And	even	if	you	can	find
such	 a	 place,	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 jump	 the	 fence	 --	 because	 there	 must	 be
something	beyond	the	fence.	If	the	fence	cannot	just	stand	by	itself,	there	must
be	 something	 beyond	 it.	 Somebody	 is	 playing	 a	 joke	 by	putting	 up	 a	 board	 --
"Here	ends	the	world"	--	and	fixing	a	fence	there.
Don't	be	deceived.
You	 will	 come	 to	 many	 places	 where	 you	 would	 like	 to	 make	 your	 home	 --
because	 it	 is	 so	 blissful,	 so	 peaceful,	 you	 feel	 so	 fulfilled;	 you	 don't	 see	 the
point...	why	should	you	continue?
But	I	say	unless	you	continue,	you	will	never	know	that	there	is	much	more.	But
if	you	stop,	nobody	is	going	to	prevent	you.
You	need	a	master	 to	go	on	goading	you,	 to	go	on	destroying	every	home	you
make,	so	finally	you	decide	not	to	make	any	home	--	it	is	better	to	be	homeless
under	the	sky	and	continue	the	journey.
In	 the	 life	 of	 al-Hillaj	Mansoor,	 a	 beautiful	 incident	 is	 related.	He	was	 a	 poor
man.	He	 collected	money	 from	people	because	he	wanted	 to	go	 to	Kaaba,	 the
sacred	place	of	 pilgrimage	 for	 the	Mohammedans.	And	everybody	 contributed
because	he	was	going	to	Kaaba,	and	whoever	contributes	also	gets	a	share	in	the
virtue	that	he	will	get	by	reaching	there.	It	is	according	to	how	much	you	give.
So	 people	 gave	 him	money	 --	 those	who	 could	 give	more,	 gave	more.	 People
even	gave	beyond	their	capacity;	they	borrowed	and	gave	him	money.
The	next	day	he	was	back.	And	they	said,	"So	soon?"	--	because	in	those	days
the	journey	from	his	place	to	Kaaba	and	back	used	to	take	three	to	six	months.
"What	happened?	And	where	is	the	money?"
He	said,	"A	strange	man	met	me	on	the	way	just	as	I	was	going	out	of	town.	He
said,
`Listen,	where	are	you	going?'	I	said,	Ì	am	going	to	Kaaba.'	He	said,	`There	is	no
need.'	 I	 said,	 `But	 every	 scripture	 says	 there	 is	 a	 need.'	He	 said,	 Ì	 am	a	 living
master,	and	I	am	saying	there	is	no	need.	You	just	go	around	me	seven	times	and
put	all	the	money	in	front	of	me.	I	am	Junnaid,	the	great	master.	Give	the	money
first.'	So	I	said,	Ìf	you	are	Junnaid,	then...'"
Junnaid's	 name	was	 known	 all	 over	 the	 country.	 So	 al-Hillaj	 said,	 "If	 Junnaid
says	 something	he	cannot	be	wrong.	 I	gave	given	 the	money	 to	 Junnaid,	went
around	him	seven	times,	and	he	told	me	to	go	back	home."
Those	people	said,	"You	idiot.	First,	have	you	inquired	whether	he	is	Junnaid	or
not?	 It	 seems	 some	cheat	has	deceived	you.	Let	us	go	and	 find	out.	 If	 he	was
really	Junnaid,	he	will	be	sitting	there."
They	 reached,	 and	 Junnaid	 was	 sitting	 there.	 Junnaid	 said,	 "So	 you	 all	 have
come.	Put	your	money	here,	whatever	money	you	have.	Take	seven	rounds	--	I
am	a	living	Kaaba	--
and	then	go	home.	And	whenever	you	have	money	you	can	come	again."
So	the	poor	fellows	had	to	put	their	money	there	and	took	seven	rounds,	sadly.
"This	 is	 strange,	 we	 never	 thought	 that	 Kaaba	 would	 come	 just	 outside	 our
village."
But	 the	news	spread.	People	started	coming	from	other	villages.	They	said,	"If
Junnaid	 says	 so,	 it	must	 be	 right.	That	 is	 a	 dead	 stone	 in	Kaaba,	 and	 this	 is	 a
living	master."
Somebody	asked	him,	"We	have	come.	We	heard	that	you	were	here,	so	we	have
come	for	the	pilgrimage."
He	said,	"Just	give	the	money	and	do	the	pilgrimage."
But	the	man	said,	"I	have	a	question:	After	taking	seven	rounds	around	you,	is
the	journey	finished?	Is	the	pilgrimage	over?"
He	said,	"No,	whenever	you	have	money	again,	you	can	come.	This	pilgrimage
is	never	going	 to	 end.	And	 if	you	don't	 find	me	here,	you	will	 find	 somebody
else.	You	can	do	this	pilgrimage	around	anybody	--	you	just	have	to	be	sensitive
to	see	 the	real,	 the	 living	god	within.	 It	 is	not	only	within	me,	 it	 is	within	you
also.	 If	you	are	alert,	you	can	 take	seven	rounds	around	yourself	 --	no	need	 to
waste	the	money	and	no	need	to	go	anywhere.
Remember,	there	is	no	home.	Or,	the	home	is	everywhere	--	both	are	true."
I	will	not	say	to	you	that	the	home	is	everywhere	--	although	it	is	true.
I	will	say	there	is	no	home.
If	you	can	continue	your	pilgrimage	with	this	sincerity	--	that	there	is	no	home
and	there	is	no	place	you	are	going	to,	that	just	the	going	is	in	itself	the	beauty,
the	joy,	the	blissfulness,	everything...	the	going	itself	--	then	the	second	will	also
be	 true:	 that	wherever	you	are,	 it	 is	 home.	But	 the	 second	can	be	deceptive	 --
because	 people	 are	 very	 cunning,	 even	 cunning	 with	 themselves.	 They	 have
misused	 all	 truths,	 they	 have	 managed	 to	 give	 them	meanings	 which	 support
their	 own	 ideas.	 If	 I	 say	 "Everywhere	 is	 home"	 then	 they	will	 relax	wherever
they	are,	then	there	is	no	need.
So	I	say:	There	is	no	home,	and	the	journey	has	to	be	continued.	It	has	to	be	a
dance.
Take	your	guitars	and	go	on,	and	never	stop	anywhere.
That	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	rest	for	a	while.	There	are	caravanserais	but
no	homes	--	stay	over	for	the	night,	but	in	the	morning	we	have	to	go.
This	ongoing	process	is	what	life	is.
The	moment	it	stops,	it	is	death	--	and	there	is	no	death.
And	why	do	people	hanker	for	the	home?	--	security,	safety.	But	in	the	name	of
security	and	safety,	they	don't	make	homes,	they	make	prisons	--	and	they	are	the
jailed	and	they	are	the	jailers,	but	because	they	have	the	keys	in	their	own	hands,
they	think	they	are	free.
They	are	not	free.	Only	a	constantly	moving	river...	sometimes	slow,	sometimes
fast,	 sometimes	 falling	 from	the	mountains,	 sometimes	moving	very	slowly	on
the	plains...	but	moving	all	the	time....
Movement	is	life,	change	is	life.
Stay	for	a	while	if	you	feel	tired,	but	stay	only	to	regain	enough	energy	so	that
tomorrow	morning	you	can	move	again.
The	home	is	everywhere	--	but	that	home	is	just	a	caravanserai.
Never	make	anything	in	life	stable.	That's	how	things	die,	that's	how	things	start
stinking.
Allow	 movement	 --	 it	 keeps	 things	 fresh,	 it	 keeps	 things	 alive.	 It	 keeps	 the
adventure	alive,	the	excitement,	the	ecstasy	of	the	discovery	of	the	unknown	and
finally	the	unknowable.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVER	SINCE	I	HAVE	BEEN	WITH	YOU	LISTENING,	LISTENING,	I	WAS
NEVER
ABLE	TO	REMEMBER	ANYTHING	YOU	SAID.	AS	SO	OFTEN	BEFORE,
YOU
ARE	 SPEAKING	 FROM	 MY	 OWN	 HEART,	 BUT	 THE	 MOMENT	 THE
WORDS
ARE	HEARD,	THEY	ARE	FORGOTTEN	TOO.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING?	AM	I	NOT	REALLY	LISTENING?
It	is	perfectly	good.	It	is	as	it	should	be,	because	this	is	not	a	kindergarten	school
where	you	have	to	remember	every	word	spoken	by	me.
Here	 the	emphasis	 is	not	on	 remembering;	 the	emphasis	 is	on	 listening.	 If	you
have	 listened	 in	 silence,	 then	 whatever	 is	 significant	 will	 be	 absorbed	 by	 the
heart.	You	may	forget	the	words....
Words	are	only	containers,	not	the	content.	The	content	will	be	absorbed	in	the
heart,	 and	 the	 containers	 have	 to	 be	 thrown	 away.	 You	 cannot	 carry	 all	 the
containers	always.
Listen	 perfectly.	 Never	 bother	 about	 remembering	 --	 because	 that	 is	 a
disturbance.	Doing	the	two	things	together,	then	one	starts	taking	notes	--	if	not
visibly,	 then	 inside	 in	 the	 mind.	 No,	 don't	 create	 disturbance;	 just	 listen.	 If
something	is	true,	your	heart	will	simply	absorb	it.
And	the	heart	has	no	memory	system.
The	memory	system	is	in	the	head.
But	whatever	the	heart	absorbs	will	be	changing	your	actions,	will	be	changing
your	behavior,	will	be	changing	you.	It	will	bring	a	transformation.
It	will	not	bring	you	knowledge,	 it	will	bring	you	 transformation.	 It	will	make
you	a	new	man.
So	don't	be	worried	about	memory	at	all.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	THERE	ANY	WAY	TO	TRANSCEND	BEING	A	GERMAN?
Latifa,	 there	 is	 only	 one	 way.	 And	 you	 have	 done	 it	 --	 you	 have	 become	 a
sannyasin.
A	 sannyasin	 is	 neither	 German	 nor	 Indian,	 neither	 Chinese	 nor	 Japanese.	 A
sannyasin	declares	that	he	is	simply	a	human	being.	He	drops	all	boundaries,	all
limitations	of	nations,	of	religions,	of	ideologies.	And	that	you	have	done;	now
don't	be	worried.
Now	the	whole	of	Germany	is	afraid	of	sannyasins.
You	 need	 not	 be	worried	 about	 being	 a	German.	You	 just	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 and
make	more	and	more	sannyasins,	and	Germany	will	disappear!
We	are	going	to	make	Germany	the	first	sannyas	land.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	I	am	crazy	but	you	are	crazier!
1	November	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8611015
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH29
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
122
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
RESEARCH	 OVER	 THE	 PAST	 FEW	 YEARS	 HAS	 SUGGESTED	 THAT
CERTAIN
STATES	OF	CONSCIOUSNESS	BROUGHT	ABOUT	BY	MEDITATION
TECHNIQUES	APPEAR	TO	 EVOKE	 SPECIFIC	BRAINWAVE	 PATTERNS.
THESE
STATES	ARE	NOW	BEING	CREATED	BY	ELECTRONIC	AND	AUDITORY
STIMULATION	 OF	 THE	 BRAIN,	 AND	 THEY	 CAN	 BE	 LEARNED
THROUGH
BIOFEEDBACK.
THE	TRADITIONAL	`MEDITATIVE	STATE'	--	SITTING	SILENTLY	(OR	AT
LEAST	 QUIETLY	 ALERT)	 IS	 COMPOSED	 OF	 BILATERAL,
SYNCHRONOUS
ALPHA	WAVES.	DEEPER	MEDITATION	ALSO	HAS	BILATERAL	THETA
WAVES.	A	STATE	CALLED	`LUCID	AWARENESS'	HAS	THE	BILATERAL
SYNCHRONOUS	 ALPHA	 AND	 THETA	WAVES	 OF	 DEEP	MEDITATION,
PLUS
THE	 BETA	 WAVES	 OF	 NORMAL	 THOUGHT	 PROCESSES.	 `LUCID
AWARENESS'
CAN	 BE	 LEARNED	 THROUGH	 BIOFEEDBACK,	 USING	 THE	 MOST
MODERN
EQUIPMENT.
ARE	 THESE	 KINDS	 OF	 STIMULATION	 AND	 BIOFEEDBACK	 USEFUL
TOOLS
FOR	THE	MEDITATOR?	WHAT	IS	THE	RELATIONSHIP	OF	THESE
TECHNOLOGICAL	TECHNIQUES	TO	THE	MEDITATION	BEYOND
TECHNIQUE?	 IS	 THIS	 AN	 EXAMPLE	 OF	 BRINGING	 SCIENCE
TOGETHER	WITH
MEDITATION?
I	WOULD	LIKE	TO	EXPERIMENT	WITH	THESE	NEW	TECHNOLOGIES	--
BOTH
PERSONALLY	 IN	MY	OWN	MEDITATION,	 AND	 PROFESSIONALLY	 IN
MY
WORK	AS	A	PHYSICIAN.	DO	I	HAVE	YOUR	BLESSINGS?
It	is	a	very	complex	question.
You	 will	 have	 to	 understand	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fundamental	 things	 about
meditation	--	that	no	technique	leads	to	meditation.
The	old	so-called	techniques	and	the	new	scientific	biofeedback	techniques	are
the	same	as	far	as	meditation	is	concerned.
Meditation	is	not	a	byproduct	of	any	technique.
Meditation	happens	beyond	mind.	No	technique	can	go	beyond	mind.
But	there	is	going	to	be	a	great	misunderstanding	in	scientific	circles,	and	it	has	a
certain	basis.	The	basis	of	all	misunderstanding	is:	When	the	being	of	a	person	is
in	a	state	of	meditation,	it	creates	certain	waves	in	the	mind.	These	waves	can	be
created	 from	 the	 outside	 by	 technical	means.	 But	 those	waves	will	 not	 create
meditation	--	this	is	the	misunderstanding.
Meditation	creates	those	waves;	it	is	the	mind	reflecting	the	inner	world.
You	cannot	see	what	is	happening	inside.	But	you	can	see	what	is	happening	in
the	mind.
Now	there	are	sensitive	instruments...	we	can	judge	what	kind	of	waves	are	there
when	 a	 person	 is	 asleep,	 what	 kinds	 of	 waves	 are	 there	 when	 a	 person	 is
dreaming,	what	kinds	of	waves	are	there	when	a	person	is	in	meditation.
But	 by	 creating	 the	 waves,	 you	 cannot	 create	 the	 situation	 --	 because	 those
waves	are	only	symptoms,	indicators.
It	is	perfectly	good,	you	can	study	them.	But	remember	that	there	is	no	shortcut
to	meditation,	and	no	mechanical	device	can	be	of	any	help.	In	fact,	meditation
needs	no	technique	--	scientific	or	otherwise.
Meditation	is	simply	an	understanding.
It	is	not	a	question	of	sitting	silently,	it	is	not	a	question	of	chanting	a	mantra.	It
is	 a	 question	 of	 understanding	 the	 subtle	 workings	 of	 the	 mind.	 As	 you
understand	those	workings	of	the	mind	a	great	awareness	arises	in	you	which	is
not	 of	 the	 mind.	 That	 awareness	 arises	 in	 your	 being,	 in	 your	 soul,	 in	 your
consciousness.
Mind	is	only	a	mechanism,	but	when	that	awareness	arises	it	is	bound	to	create	a
certain	energy	pattern	around	it.	That	energy	pattern	is	noted	by	the	mind.	Mind
is	a	very	subtle	mechanism.
And	you	are	studying	from	the	outside,	so	at	the	most	you	can	study	the	mind.
Seeing	that	whenever	a	person	is	silent,	serene,	peaceful,	a	certain	wave	pattern
always,	inevitably	appears	in	the	mind,	the	scientific	thinking	will	say:	if	we	can
create	this	wave	pattern	in	the	mind,	through	some	biofeedback	technology,	then
the	being	inside	will	reach	the	heights	of	awareness.
This	is	not	going	to	happen.
It	is	not	a	question	of	cause	and	effect.
These	 waves	 in	 the	 mind	 are	 not	 the	 cause	 of	 meditation;	 they	 are,	 on	 the
contrary,	the	effect.	But	from	the	effect	you	cannot	move	towards	the	cause.	It	is
possible	that	by	biofeedback	you	can	create	certain	patterns	in	the	mind	and	they
will	 give	 a	 feeling	 of	 peace,	 silence	 and	 serenity	 to	 the	 person.	 Because	 the
person	himself	does	not	know	what	meditation	is	and	has	no	way	of	comparing,
he	may	be	misled	into	believing	that	this	is	meditation	--	but	it	 is	not.	Because
the	 moment	 the	 biofeedback	 mechanism	 stops,	 the	 waves	 disappear,	 and	 the
silence	and	the	peace	and	the	serenity	also	disappear.
And	you	may	go	on	practicing	with	those	scientific	instruments	for	years;	it	will
not	 change	your	 character,	 it	will	 not	 change	your	morality,	 it	will	 not	 change
your	individuality.	You	will	remain	the	same.
Meditation	 transforms.	 It	 takes	 you	 to	 higher	 levels	 of	 consciousness	 and
changes	your	whole	lifestyle.	It	changes	your	reactions	into	responses	to	such	an
extent	that	it	is	unbelievable	that	the	person	who	would	have	reacted	in	the	same
situation	 in	 anger	 is	 now	 acting	 in	 deep	 compassion,	with	 love	 --	 in	 the	 same
situation.
Meditation	is	a	state	of	being,	arrived	at	through	understanding.
It	needs	intelligence,	it	does	not	need	techniques.
There	is	no	technique	that	can	give	you	intelligence.	Otherwise,	we	would	have
changed	all	the	idiots	into	geniuses;	all	the	mediocre	people	would	have	become
Albert	Einsteins,	Bertrand	Russells,	Jean-Paul	Sartres.	There	is	no	way	to	change
your	intelligence	from	the	outside,	to	sharpen	it,	to	make	it	more	penetrating,	to
give	 it	more	 insight.	 It	 is	 simply	a	question	of	understanding,	and	nobody	else
can	do	it	for	you	--	no	machine,	no	man.
For	 centuries	 the	 so-called	 gurus	 have	 been	 cheating	 humanity.	 Now,	 in	 the
future	instead	of	gurus,	these	guru	machines	will	cheat	humanity.
The	gurus	were	cheating	people,	 saying	 that	 "We	will	give	you	a	mantra.	You
repeat	the	mantra."	Certainly	by	repeating	a	mantra	continuously,	you	create	the
energy	field	of	a	certain	wave	length;	but	the	man	remains	the	same,	because	it	is
only	on	the	surface.
Just	as	if	you	have	throw	a	pebble	into	the	silent	lake	and	ripples	arise	and	move
all	over	the	lake	from	one	corner	to	the	other	corner	--	but	it	does	not	touch	the
depths	 of	 the	 lake	 at	 all.	 The	 depths	 are	 completely	 unaware	 of	 what	 is
happening	on	the	surface.
And	 what	 you	 see	 on	 the	 surface	 is	 also	 illusory.	 You	 think	 that	 ripples	 are
moving	--
that's	not	true.	Nothing	is	moving.
When	you	throw	a	pebble	into	the	lake,	 it	 is	not	 that	ripples	start	moving.	You
can	check	 it	by	putting	a	small	 flower	on	 the	water.	You	will	be	surprised:	 the
flower	remains	in	the	same	place.	If	the	waves	were	moving	and	going	towards
the	 shore,	 they	 would	 have	 taken	 the	 flower	 with	 them.	 The	 flower	 remains
there.	The	waves	are	not	moving,	it	 is	just	the	water	going	up	and	down	in	the
same	place,	creating	the	illusion	of	movement.
The	depths	of	the	lake	will	not	know	anything	about	it.	And	there	is	going	to	be
no	change	in	the	character,	in	the	beauty	of	the	lake	by	creating	those	waves.
Mind	is	between	the	world	and	you.
Whatever	 happens	 in	 the	 world,	 the	 mind	 is	 affected	 by	 it;	 and	 you	 can
understand	through	the	mind	what	is	happening	outside.
For	 example,	 you	 are	 seeing	me	 --	 you	 cannot	 see	me;	 it	 is	 your	mind	 that	 is
affected	by	 certain	 rays	 and	 creates	 a	 picture	 in	 the	mind.	You	 are	 inside,	 and
from	inside	you	see	the	picture.	You	don't	see	me;	you	can't	see	me.
The	mind	 is	 the	mediator.	 Just	 as	when	 it	 is	 affected	by	 the	outside,	 the	 inner
consciousness	can	read	it	--	what	is	happening	outside	--	what	the	scientists	are
trying	to	do	is	just	the	same:	they	are	studying	meditators	and	reading	their	wave
lengths,	 the	 energy	 fields	 created	 by	 meditation.	 And	 naturally,	 the	 scientific
approach	 is	 that	 if	 these	 certain	patterns	 appear	without	 any	 exception	when	a
person	is	in	meditation,	then	we	have	got	the	key;	if	we	can	create	these	patterns
in	the	mind,	then	meditation	is	bound	to	appear	inside.
That's	where	the	fallacy	is.
You	can	create	the	pattern	in	the	mind....
And	 if	 the	 person	 does	 not	 know	 about	 meditation,	 he	 may	 feel	 a	 silence,	 a
serenity	--	for	the	moment,	as	long	as	those	waves	remain.
But	 you	 cannot	 deceive	 a	meditator	 because	 the	meditator	 will	 see	 that	 those
patterns	are	appearing	in	the	mind....
Mind	 is	a	 lower	 reality,	 and	 the	 lower	 reality	cannot	change	 the	higher	 reality.
The	mind	is	the	servant;	it	cannot	change	the	master.
But	you	can	experiment.
Just	remain	aware	that	whether	it	is	a	biofeedback	machine	or	a	chanting	of	OM,
it	 does	 not	 matter;	 it	 only	 creates	 a	 mental	 peace,	 and	 a	 mental	 peace	 is	 not
meditation.
Meditation	is	the	flight	beyond	the	mind.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	mental	peace.
One	 of	 America's	 great	 thinkers,	 Joshua	 Liebman,	 has	 written	 a	 very	 famous
book,	 PEACE	OF	MIND.	 I	 wrote	 him	 a	 letter	 many	 years	 ago	 when	 I	 came
across	the	book,	saying	that	"If	you	are	sincere	and	honest,	you	should	withdraw
the	book	from	the	market	because	there	is	no	such	thing	as	peace	of	mind.	Mind
is	the	problem.	When	there	is	no	mind	then	there	is	peace,	so	how	there	can	be
peace	of	mind?	And	any	peace	of	mind	 is	only	fallacious;	 it	 simply	means	 the
noise	has	slowed	down	to	such	a	point	that	you	think	it	is	silence.	And	you	don't
have	anything	to	compare	it	with."
A	man	who	 knows	what	meditation	 is	 cannot	 be	 deceived	 by	 any	 techniques,
because	no	technique	can	give	you	understanding	of	the	workings	of	the	mind.
For	example,	you	feel	anger,	you	feel	jealousy,	you	feel	hatred,	you	feel	lust.	Is
there	any	technique	that	can	help	you	to	get	rid	of	anger?	of	jealousy?	of	hatred?
of	sexual	lust?
And	if	these	things	continue	to	remain,	your	lifestyle	is	going	to	remain	the	same
as	before.
There	is	only	one	way	--	there	has	never	been	a	second.	There	is	one	and	only
one	way	 to	 understand	 that	 to	 be	 angry	 is	 to	 be	 stupid:	watch	 anger	 in	 all	 its
phases,	be	alert	to	it	so	it	does	not	catch	you	unawares;	remain	watchful,	seeing
every	step	of	the	anger.	And	you	will	be	surprised:	that	as	awareness	about	the
ways	of	anger	grows,	the	anger	starts	evaporating.
And	when	 the	 anger	 disappears,	 then	 there	 is	 a	 peace.	 Peace	 is	 not	 a	 positive
achievement.
When	the	hatred	disappears,	there	is	love.	Love	is	not	a	positive	achievement.
When	jealousy	disappears,	there	is	a	deep	friendliness	towards	all.
Try	to	understand....
But	all	the	religions	have	corrupted	your	minds	because	they	have	not	taught	you
how	 to	watch,	 how	 to	 understand;	 instead	 they	 have	 given	 you	 conclusions	 --
that	anger	is	bad.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 condemn	 something,	 you	 have	 already	 taken	 a	 certain
position	of	judgment.	You	have	judged.	Now	you	cannot	be	aware.
Awareness	needs	a	state	of	no-judgment.
And	all	the	religions	have	been	teaching	people	judgments:	this	is	good,	this	is
bad,	 this	 is	 sin,	 this	 is	 virtue	 --	 this	 is	 the	whole	 crap	 that	 for	 centuries	man's
mind	has	been	loaded	with.	So,	with	everything	--	the	moment	you	see	it	--	there
is	 immediately	 a	 judgment	 about	 it	within	 you.	You	 cannot	 simply	 see	 it,	 you
cannot	be	just	a	mirror	without	saying	anything.
Understanding	arises	by	becoming	a	mirror,	a	mirror	of	all	 that	goes	on	 in	 the
mind.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	--	not	just	a	story,	but	an	actual	historical	fact.
One	disciple	of	Gautam	Buddha	is	going	on	a	journey	to	spread	his	message.	He
has	come	to	see	Gautam	Buddha	and	to	get	his	blessings,	and	to	ask	if	there	is
any	last	message,	any	last	words	to	be	said	to	him.
And	Gautam	Buddha	said,	"Just	remember	one	thing:	While	walking,	keep	your
gaze	just	four	feet	ahead,	looking	four	feet	ahead	of	you."
Since	 that	 day,	 for	 twenty-five	 centuries,	 Buddhist	monks	 have	walked	 in	 the
same	way.
That	 was	 a	 strategy	 to	 keep	 you	 from	 seeing	 women	 in	 particular.	 Those
disciples	were	monks.	They	had	taken	the	vow	of	celibacy.
Ananda,	 another	of	Gautam	Buddha's	disciples,	 could	not	understand	what	 the
matter	was,	why	the	monk	should	keep	his	eyes	always	focused	four	feet	ahead.
He	inquired:	"I	want	to	know,	what	is	the	matter?"
Buddha	said,	"That's	how	he	will	avoid	looking	at	a	woman,	at	least	a	woman's
face	--	at	the	most	he	will	see	her	feet."
But	Ananda	 said,	 "There	may	be	 situations	when	a	woman	 is	 in	a	danger.	For
example,	 she	 has	 fallen	 into	 a	 well	 and	 is	 shouting	 for	 help.	 What	 is	 your
disciple	supposed	to	do?
He	will	have	to	see	her	face,	her	body."
Buddha	said,	"In	special	situations	he	is	allowed	to	see	her,	but	it	is	not	the	rule,
it	is	only	the	exception."
Ananda	said,	"What	about	touching?	--	because	there	may	be	situations	when	a
woman	has	fallen	on	the	road.	What	is	your	disciple	supposed	to	do?	Should	he
help	her	 to	get	up	or	not?	Or	an	old	woman	wants	 to	cross	 the	road	--	what	 is
your	disciple	supposed	to	do?"
Buddha	said,	"As	an	exception	--	but	remember	it	is	not	a	rule	--	he	can	touch	the
woman	 with	 one	 condition,	 and	 if	 he	 cannot	 fulfill	 the	 condition	 he	 is	 not
allowed	the	exceptions.
The	 condition	 is	 that	 he	 should	 remain	 just	 a	 mirror,	 he	 should	 not	 take	 any
judgment,	 any	 attitude.	 `The	 woman	 is	 beautiful'	 --	 that	 is	 a	 judgment.	 `The
woman	 is	 fair'	 --	 that	 is	 a	 judgment.	 He	 should	 remain	 a	 mirror,	 then	 he	 is
allowed	the	exceptions.	Otherwise,	let	the	woman	drown	in	the	well	--	somebody
else	will	save	her.	You	save	yourself!"
What	he	is	saying	is	this:	in	every	situation	where	mind	starts	any	kind	of	desire,
greed,	lust,	ambition,	possessiveness,	the	meditator	has	to	be	just	a	mirror.	And
what	is	that	going	to	do?	To	be	just	a	mirror	means	you	are	simply	aware.
In	pure	awareness	the	mind	cannot	drag	you	down	into	the	mud,	into	the	gutter.
In	 anger,	 in	 hatred,	 in	 jealousy,	 the	mind	 is	 absolutely	 impotent	 in	 the	 face	 of
awareness.	And	because	the	mind	is	absolutely	impotent,	your	whole	being	is	in
a	profound	silence	--	the	peace	that	passeth	understanding.
Naturally	that	peace,	that	silence,	that	joy,	that	blissfulness	will	affect	the	mind.
It	will	create	ripples	in	the	mind,	it	will	change	the	wave	lengths	in	the	mind,	and
the	 scientist	 will	 be	 reading	 those	 waves,	 those	 wave	 patterns	 and	 he	 will	 be
thinking,	 "If	 these	 wave	 patterns	 can	 be	 created	 in	 someone	 by	 mechanical
devices,	then	we	will	be	able	to	create	the	profoundness	of	a	Gautam	Buddha."
Don't	be	stupid.
All	your	technical	devices	can	be	good,	can	be	helpful.	They	are	not	going	to	do
any	harm;	 they	will	be	giving	 some	 taste	of	peace,	of	 silence	 --	 although	very
superficial,	 still	 it	 is	 something	 for	 those	 who	 have	 never	 known	 anything	 of
peace.
For	the	thirsty,	even	dirty	water	does	not	look	dirty.
For	the	thirsty,	even	dirty	water	is	a	great	blessing.
So	you	can	start	your	experiments	with	all	my	blessings,	but	remember	it	is	not
meditation	that	you	are	giving	to	people	--	you	don't	know	meditation	yourself.
You	may	be	giving	 them	a	 little	 rest,	 a	 little	 relaxation	 --	 and	 there	 is	 nothing
wrong	in	it.
But	if	you	give	them	the	idea	that	this	is	meditation	then	you	are	certainly	being
harmful	-
-	 because	 these	 people	 will	 stop	 at	 the	 technical	 things,	 with	 the	 superficial
silence,	thinking	that	this	is	all	and	they	have	gained	it.
You	can	be	helpful	 to	people.	Tell	 them	that	"This	 is	 just	a	mechanical	way	of
putting	your	mind	at	peace,	and	mind	at	peace	is	not	the	real	peace	--	real	peace
is	when	mind	is	absent.	And	that	is	not	possible	from	the	outside,	but	only	from
the	 inside.	 And	 inside	 you	 have	 the	 intelligence,	 the	 understanding	 to	 do	 the
miracle."
It	is	good	for	people	who	cannot	relax,	who	cannot	find	a	few	moments	of	peace,
whose	 minds	 are	 continuously	 chattering	 --	 your	 technical	 devices	 are	 good,
your	biofeedback	mechanisms	are	good.	But	make	it	clear	to	them	that	this	is	not
meditation,	 this	 is	 just	 a	 mechanical	 device	 to	 help	 you	 relax,	 to	 give	 you	 a
superficial	 feeling	 of	 silence.	 If	 this	 silence	 creates	 an	 urge	 in	 you	 to	 find	 the
real,	 the	inner,	 the	authentic	source	of	peace,	 then	those	technical	devices	have
been	 friends,	 and	 the	 technicians	 who	 have	 been	 using	 them	 have	 not	 been
barriers	but	have	been	bridges.	Become	a	bridge.
Give	people	the	little	taste	that	is	possible	through	machines,	but	don't	give	them
the	false	idea	that	this	is	what	meditation	is.	Tell	them	that	this	is	only	a	faraway
echo	of	the	real;	if	you	want	the	real,	you	will	have	to	go	through	a	deep	inner
search,	a	profound	understanding	of	your	mind,	an	awareness	of	all	the	cunning
ways	of	the	mind	so	that	the	mind	can	be	put	aside.	Then	the	mind	is	no	longer
between	you	and	existence,	and	the	doors	are	open.
Meditation	is	the	ultimate	experience	of	blissfulness.
It	cannot	be	produced	by	drugs,	it	cannot	be	produced	by	machines,	it	cannot	be
produced	from	the	outside.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 COMMUNES	 OF	 MAHAVIRA	 AND	 BUDDHA	 SURVIVED	 EVEN
AFTER
THEIR	LIFETIMES,	BUT	YOUR	COMMUNES	ARE	NOT	SURVIVING	 IN
YOUR
LIFETIME	ALTHOUGH	THEY	ARE	SELF-SUFFICIENT.
DOES	SURVIVAL	OF	COMMUNES	DEPEND	ON	SOCIAL	STRUCTURE,
AFFLUENCE	 OF	 THE	 SOCIETY,	 PREVALENT	 RELIGIONS,	 OR
NATIONAL	AND
INTERNATIONAL	POLITICS?	PLEASE	COMMENT.
The	first	thing	to	understand:	Gautam	Buddha	and	Mahavira	had	no	communes.
Their	disciples	were	wandering	monks;	they	were	not	living	a	commune	life	in
one	 place,	 they	were	 always	 on	 the	move	 --	 except	 for	 the	 rainy	 season.	And
even	in	the	rainy	season	they	used	to	stay	in	different	places.
My	commune	was	an	alternative	society.
Gautam	Buddha	and	Mahavira	did	not	provide	an	alternative	society;	hence	they
were	not	 in	conflict	with	 the	 society.	On	 the	contrary,	 they	were	dependent	on
the	society	for	food,	for	clothes,	for	shelter	--	their	disciples	were	dependent	on
the	society	for	everything.
They	could	not	be	rebellious.	How	can	you	be	rebellious	against	a	society	which
gives	you	food,	which	gives	you	clothes,	which	gives	you	shelter,	which	gives
you	everything	 that	you	need?	You	cannot	go	against	 its	morality	 --	 it	may	be
rotten,	but	you	have	to	support	it.	You	cannot	go	against	its	traditions.
My	commune	was	a	totally	new	experiment.	It	has	never	happened	before.	There
is	no	comparison	in	the	past	because	my	people	were	not	dependent	on	anybody,
and	 they	were	against	 the	 society,	 the	culture,	 the	civilization,	 the	 religion,	 the
politics,	the	education	--	everything	that	constitutes	the	world.
We	were	fighting	an	impossible	fight	--	a	small	group	trying	to	live	in	a	totally
different	way	from	the	whole	of	humanity.
Mahavira	was	not	against	marriage;	I	am.
Mahavira	was	not	respectful	towards	women;	I	am.
Buddha	 was	 as	 much	 a	 male	 chauvinist	 as	 anybody	 else.	 For	 twenty	 years
continuously,	 he	 refused	 to	 initiate	 any	 women	 into	 Buddhism.	 He	 never
accepted	the	idea	that	they	are	equal	to	men.	I	say	they	are	not	only	equal	but	in
some	respects	superior.
My	commune	was	a	revolt.
Their	 religions	 --	 Gautam	 Buddha's	 and	 Mahavira's	 religions	 --	 were	 simply
offshoots	of	the	same	civilization,	the	same	society,	the	same	morality,	the	same
superstitions.
Yes,	 they	 were	 arguing	 about	 invisible	 things	 which	 nobody	 bothers	 about	 --
whether	God	 is	 seven	 feet	high	or	 six	 feet	high	 is	nobody's	business.	Whether
God	 has	 three	 faces	 or	 only	 one	 face,	 it	 is	God's	 problem,	 it	 is	 nobody	 else's
problem.	Maybe	if	he	has	three	faces	then	God's	tailor	might	have	a	problem!
They	were	disagreeing	on	many	points,	but	all	those	points	were	immaterial,	not
substantial,	not	concerned	with	the	life	that	man	is	living	here	and	now	--	about
that	they	were	all	in	absolute	agreement.
Hence	it	was	absolutely	to	be	expected	that	my	commune	would	be	destroyed.
It	was	against	the	church,	it	was	against	the	state,	it	was	against	all	that	your	so-
called	 civilization	 stands	 for	 --	 because	 I	 don't	 believe	 man	 has	 yet	 become
civilized.
If	man	has	become	civilized,	then	there	is	no	need	for	wars;	if	man	has	become
civilized,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 discrimination	 between	 blacks	 and	whites,
men	and	women;	if	man	has	become	civilized	then	there	is	no	need	for	people	to
die	 because	 they	 have	 nothing	 to	 eat	 --	 and	 there	 are	 people	 who	 are	 dying
because	they	have	too	much	to	eat.
In	America,	 thirty	million	people	are	dying	from	overeating,	and	 thirty	million
people	are	dying	because	they	have	nothing	to	eat.
And	you	call	this	world	a	civilized	world?	It	is	not	even	sane.	And	it	cannot	be
just	 coincidence:	 exactly	 thirty	 million	 people	 overeating,	 knowing	 perfectly
well	that	they	are	eating	themselves	to	death,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	thirty
million	 people	 are	 on	 the	 streets	 dying	 without	 food.	 Strange...	 sixty	 million
people	can	be	saved	within	a	second,	but	these	sixty	million	people	will	die.
I	 have	 heard....	 A	 man	 was	 very	 much	 worried	 because	 his	 wife	 was	 getting
fatter	and	fatter	and	fatter.
And	women	have	greater	capacity	for	becoming	fat	than	men	--	it	is	a	biological
privilege,	because	 the	woman	has	 to	be	able	 to	become	pregnant,	 to	become	a
mother;	then	for	nine	months	she	cannot	eat	well,	she	throws	up,	she	is	carrying
such	a	load	in	her	belly.	And	every	day	the	child	needs	more	and	more	food.	It	is
a	very	strange	situation:	 the	woman	cannot	eat,	and	 the	child	wants	more	food
because	 he	 is	 growing.	 Hence	 nature	 has	 made	 woman's	 body	 capable	 of
collecting	more	fat	for	emergency	measures.
So	 even	 if	 she	 does	 not	 eat,	 the	 child	 can	 get	 as	much	 as	 he	 needs	 from	 the
reserve	fat	the	woman	has;	and	the	woman	can	also	go	on	eating	her	own	fat	--
and	nine	months	is	a	long	time.	So	the	woman	has	immense	capacity.	If	she	uses
her	full	capacity,	then	man	is	no	competitor.
And	women	are	thinner	while	they	are	not	married.	Once	they	are	married	they
start	becoming	fat	--	because	now	there	is	no	problem.	They	have	got	hold	of	a
man	 who	 cannot	 escape	 so	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 what	 happens	 to	 their	 body
proportions;	they	are	no	more	interested	in	any	beauty	competition.
The	man	asked	his	doctor,	"What	has	to	be	done?"
The	doctor	said,	"You	do	one	thing:	take	a	beautiful	picture	of	a	naked	woman
and	paste	it	inside	the	fridge,	so	whenever	your	wife	opens	the	fridge	for	more
ice	 cream	 she	will	 think,	 `What	 a	 beautiful	 body!'	And	 she	may	 start	 thinking
about	herself,	that	this	is	not	good."
The	man	said,	"That	idea	is	very	good."
After	two	months	the	doctor	met	the	man,	and	he	could	not	believe	it.	He	said,
"What	happened?	I	have	not	seen	you	for	two	months,	and	you	have	become	so
fat!"
He	said,	"Everything	went	wrong	because	of	your	suggestion,	you	idiot!	Are	you
my	doctor	or	my	enemy?	I	pasted	a	beautiful	woman,	naked,	 inside	the	fridge.
Since	 then	my	wife	 does	 not	 open	 the	 fridge,	 but	 I	 cannot	 remain	more	 than
fifteen	minutes	away	before	a	desire	arises	to	see	the	photo.	But	when	one	opens
the	fridge,	it	is	not	just	the	photo	one	sees	--	the	ice	cream,	the	cake...	You	have
destroyed	 my	 life.	 So	 my	 wife	 has	 become	 slimmer,	 beautiful,	 and	 I	 have
become	ugly.	And	the	whole	credit	goes	to	you!"
This	society,	this	world	is	based	on	insane	superstitions.
My	commune	was	a	revolt.	It	survived	five	years	--	it	was	a	miracle,	because	the
whole	fascist	and	imperialist	government	of	America	tried	everything	to	destroy
it.	Legally	they	could	not	do	it	because	we	had	four	hundred	legal	experts	in	the
commune	--	 the	commune	had	 the	biggest	 legal	 firm	 in	 the	whole	world.	Four
hundred	sannyasins,	a	 few	of	 them	very	well-known	legal	experts;	others,	new
graduates	from	the	universities	--
four	 hundred	 legal	 experts	 continuously	 fighting	 the	American	 government	 on
every	legal	point.	Finally	the	government	decided	that	legally	it	was	impossible
to	destroy	us,	and	then	they	started	doing	illegal	things.
And	when	a	world	power	 --	 the	world's	greatest	power	 --	 starts	being	criminal
and	illegal,	what	can	four	hundred	people	do?
We	were	ready	to	fight	 legally,	 rationally,	 logically,	 in	every	possible	way.	But
illegally	it	was	impossible	to	fight.
I	was	arrested	illegally,	without	any	arrest	warrant	--	because	they	could	not	find
a	reason	to	arrest	me,	so	how	to	issue	an	arrest	warrant?
In	the	middle	of	the	night	at	the	point	of	twelve	loaded	guns,	I	was	arrested.	And
I	asked	them,	"Where	is	the	arrest	warrant?"
They	said,	"There	is	no	arrest	warrant."
I	 said,	 "You	 can	 at	 least	 tell	me	 verbally	what	 the	 reason	 is,	why	 I	 am	 being
arrested."
They	said,	"We	don't	know."
I	asked	them,	"Then	give	me	the	opportunity	to	inform	my	attorney."
And	they	refused.
That	is	every	citizen's	right	everywhere	in	the	world	--	to	inform	his	attorney	if
the	 government	 is	 doing	 such	 an	 illegal	 act.	But	 they	were	worried	 that	 if	 the
attorney	 comes,	 the	 first	 thing	 he	 is	 going	 to	 ask	 is,	 "Where	 is	 the	 arrest
warrant?"
They	destroyed	the	commune	in	such	a	way	that	the	world	would	think	nothing
criminal	had	been	done,	but	everything	criminal....
In	court	they	produced	one	hundred	and	thirty-six	crimes	against	me.
I	was	silent	for	three	and	a	half	years,	never	going	out	of	my	room.	And	if	a	man
remaining	silent	--	not	meeting	anybody,	not	talking	to	anybody,	not	going	out	of
his	 room	 --	 can	manage	 to	 commit	 one	 hundred	 and	 thirty-six	 crimes,	 then	 I
thought	there	must	be	miracles,	I	must	be	doing	miracles!	And	they	had	no	proof
of	anything.
They	 asked	 for	 negotiations.	 The	 government	 attorney	 made	 it	 clear	 to	 my
attorneys	 that	 the	 government	 could	 not	 accept	 defeat.	 They	 themselves	 had
foolishly	called	the	case
"The	 United	 States	 of	 America	 versus	 Bhagwan	 Shree	 Rajneesh,"	 they
themselves	had	called	 the	case	 that;	 there	was	no	need	 to	give	 it	 such	a	name.
Now	 they	were	 in	 trouble:	 if	 I	 had	won	 the	 case	 that	would	mean	 the	United
States	of	America	would	have	been	defeated	in	their	own	courts	under	their	own
law,	by	their	own	constitution.
So	they	said,	"We	cannot	--	the	government	cannot	accept	defeat.	And	you	know
and	we	know	that	we	don't	have	any	proof.	So	the	best	way	will	be	not	to	go	to
trial.	 We	 are	 ready	 for	 negotiations.	 And	 the	 negotiating	 agreement	 is	 that
Bhagwan	 should	 accept	 any	 two	 charges,	 should	 admit	 that	 he	 has	 committed
two	crimes	--	just	to	show	the	world	that	we	have	not	done	anything	wrong	by
arresting	him	 --	 and	pay	a	nominal	 fine.	Then	on	 the	 surface	everything	 looks
legal."
But	my	attorney	said,	"It	will	be	very	difficult	to	convince	him	to	accept."
They	said,	"We	should	make	you	aware	of	the	fact	that	if	he	does	not	accept	--
and	 if	 the	 case	 goes	 to	 trial	 --	 then	 the	 trial	 can	 be	 prolonged	 for	 ten	 years,
twenty	years.	It	is	a	case	against	the	government,	and	you	should	be	aware	that
government	is	not	ready	to	lose	the	case.	So	we	will	go	on	postponing	it,	and	bail
will	be	cancelled	and	Bhagwan	will	have	to	remain	in	jail.	His	whole	movement
will	be	destroyed,	and	all	his	sannyasins	all	over	the	world	will	be	in	immense
torture."
And	 he	 suggested	 --	 whispered	 into	 my	 chief	 attorney's	 ear:	 "You	 should	 be
aware	that	he	can	be	killed	too.	If	we	see	that	the	case	is	going	to	be	lost,	he	can
be	killed	too."
My	 attorneys	 came	 to	 me	 crying	 --	 and	 they	 were	 the	 topmost	 attorneys	 of
America.	 I	 asked	 them,	 "Why	 you	 are	 crying?	What	 is	 the	matter?	 --	 because
there	is	nothing	in	those	hundred	thirty-six	charges.	We	are	going	to	win."
They	said,	"We	are	going	to	win,	but	your	life	is	at	risk	and	we	don't	want	your
life	to	be	at	risk."
And	they	were	right.
Because	they	had	already	planted	a	bomb	under	my	seat,	so	if	something	went
wrong	then	they	could	finish	me	on	that	very	day.	It	was	just	a	coincidence	that	I
reached	the	jail	earlier	than	they	expected	--	and	the	bomb	was	a	time	bomb,	so
it	did	not	explode.
After	I	left	America,	the	attorney	general	told	the	press,	"Our	first	priority	was	to
destroy	the	commune."
Why?	--	because	 the	commune	had	done	no	harm	to	America	 in	any	way.	But
deep	down	it	has	hurt	America's	ego,	its	pride	--	because	we	have	shown	them
that	a	dream	can	be	realized,	that	five	thousand	people	can	live	without	any	law
enforcement	authority,	without	any	court,	without	any	fight,	without	any	drugs,
without	any	murder,	without	any	suicide,	nobody	going	mad.	And	people	were
living	so	joyously	and	so	beautifully	that	 the	whole	of	America	was	starting	to
feel	jealous.
The	very	existence	of	the	commune	was	dangerous	to	the	American	politicians
because	 it	 showed	 that	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 intelligence;	 otherwise	 they	 could
have	done	what	we	had	done	very	easily	--	they	had	all	the	power,	all	the	money.
This	small	commune	of	five	thousand	people	had	everything	that	man	needs,	and
all	 the	 freedom,	all	 the	 love.	And	everybody	was	working	 seven	days	a	week,
twelve	 to	 fourteen	 hours	 a	 day,	 and	 still	 were	 not	 tired	 --	 because	 it	 was	 not
something	forced,	it	was	something	they	wanted	to	do,	they	wanted	to	create.	It
was	such	a	creative	act	that	after	working	fourteen	hours	they	were	still	dancing
in	 the	 streets;	 late	 in	 the	 night	 they	 were	 playing	 on	 their	 guitars,	 singing,
dancing.
The	commune	was	destined	to	be	destroyed.	It	was	too	good	not	to	be	destroyed.
It	was	the	alternative	society.
Mahavira	and	Buddha	did	not	create	any	alternative	society.	They	were	part	of
this	society,	they	remained	dependent	on	this	society.
Their	revolution	was	intellectual,	verbal.
My	revolt	was	actual	and	existential.
And	the	destruction	of	the	commune	in	America	does	not	mean	that	the	idea	of
the	 commune	 will	 disappear.	 There	 are	 still	 communes	 around	 the	 world
flourishing	in	many	countries.	More	and	more	communes	will	be	coming	up.
America	is	going	to	repent;	it	has	missed	an	opportunity.	It	could	have	supported
the	 commune	and	made	 it	 clear	 to	 the	world	 that	 it	 stands	 for	 freedom,	 that	 it
stands	for	a	new	man,	that	it	stands	for	a	future	humanity.
It	missed	a	great	opportunity.
By	 destroying	 the	 commune,	 it	 has	 destroyed	 its	 own	 credibility,	 its	 own
democracy.	It	has	proved	itself	simply	nothing	but	a	hypocritical	society.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	MOST	POWERFUL	EXPERIENCE	IN	MY	LIFE	IS	THE	LOVE	THAT	I
FEEL
FOR	 YOU.	 IT'S	 LIKE	 A	 SHOWER	 THAT	 CLEANSES	 MY	 SOUL	 AND
FILLS	MY
HEART	WITH	GRATITUDE.
BUT	STILL	I	KEEP	SEARCHING	FOR	SOMETHING	ELSE,	AS	IF	THERE
IS	A	SECRET	YOU	HAVEN'T	SHARED	WITH	ME	YET.	 IS	THIS	CRAZY
LOVE	AFFAIR
BETWEEN	US	REALLY	AND	TRULY	ALL	THAT	IS	NEEDED?	WHY	AM	I
NOT
SATISFIED	WITH	THIS	EXPERIENCE?
Love	can	never	be	satisfied.
If	it	is	satisfied,	it	is	not	much	of	a	love.	The	greater	and	deeper	it	is,	the	more
dissatisfaction	 there	 will	 be.	 That	 is	 not	 against	 love;	 it	 simply	 shows	 the
vastness,	 that	 your	 heart	wants	 to	 love	 in	 a	way	which	 is	 infinite,	 that	 it	 will
never	be	satisfied.
And	it	is	good	that	it	is	not	satisfied.	The	moment	it	is	satisfied,	it	is	dead.
The	 love	 between	 the	 master	 and	 the	 disciple	 can	 never	 be	 satisfied.	 It	 will
always	 remain	 a	 thrill,	 a	 new	 excitement,	 a	 new	 ecstasy.	 It	will	 always	 go	 on
opening	doors	upon	doors	-
-	 disciplehood	will	 become	devotion;	 one	day	devotion	will	 become	a	merger,
just	as	the	river	merges	in	the	ocean.	But	that	too	is	not	going	to	satisfy.
Satisfaction	is	not	a	great	quality.	It	belongs	to	the	little	minds,	to	the	little	hearts
which	are	satisfied	with	small	things.
There	are	people	who	are	satisfied	with	a	little	money,	there	are	people	who	are
satisfied	with	 a	 house,	 there	 are	 people	who	 are	 satisfied	with	 a	 little	 name,	 a
little	fame	--	these	are	pygmies.
Giants	are	never	satisfied.	On	every	new	step	they	find	the	journey	is	becoming
deeper,	more	miraculous,	more	mysterious	--	and	the	longing	is	growing	and	the
heart	is	full	of	a	sweet	ache.
To	be	in	a	love	affair	with	a	master	is	to	be	in	a	love	affair	with	existence	itself;
the	master	 is	 only	 an	 arrow	pointing	 towards	 the	unknowable,	 the	miraculous,
the	mysterious.
The	master	is	not	the	end,	the	master	is	only	the	beginning.
The	whole	 function	 of	 the	master	 is	 to	 push	 you	 the	 same	way	 a	mother	 bird
pushes	a	 small	bird,	 a	new	bird	who	has	never	opened	his	wings	 into	 the	 sky.
Naturally	he	is	afraid
--	a	vast	sky.	He	has	lived	in	a	small	cozy	nest,	safe	and	secure,	the	mother	has
been	taking	care	--	and	now	she	wants	him	to	take	a	jump	and	fly.	And	one	day
she	pushes	him.	And	the	moment	he	is	pushed	out	of	the	nest	--	for	a	moment	it
feels	as	if	he	is	going	to	fall	down	on	the	earth,	but	before	he	falls	on	the	earth
his	wings	open	and	the	whole	sky	is	his.
And	there	are	skies	beyond	skies.
The	 function	 of	 the	 master	 is	 nothing	 but	 to	 push	 you	 into	 a	 more	 divine
discontentment,	into	a	discontentment	that	knows	no	satisfaction.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	ARE	REALLY	SOMETHING	--	TALKING	ABOUT	"BEYOND
ENLIGHTENMENT"	 WHEN	 MOST	 OF	 US	 ARE	 NOT	 BEYOND
PETTINESS,	FUTILITY	AND	POSTPONEMENT!
DO	YOU	BELIEVE	IN	MIRACLES	OR	SOMETHING?	(PERHAPS	LOVE?)
It	is	true,	I	am	something!
I	 know	 you	 are	 not	 beyond	 pettiness,	 beyond	 jealousy,	 beyond	 greed,	 beyond
anger.	But	I	don't	talk	about	going	beyond	them	for	the	simple	reason	that	if	you
start	struggling	with	your	pettiness,	you	will	remain	petty;	if	you	start	struggling
against	your	jealousy,	you	will	remain	jealous.
An	ancient	proverb	is:	"Always	choose	the	enemy	very	carefully."
A	friend	can	be	chosen	without	much	care,	but	an	enemy	has	to	be	chosen	very
carefully	 because	 you	 will	 be	 fighting	 with	 him	 --	 and	 in	 fighting	 you	 will
become	just	like	the	enemy	because	you	will	have	to	use	the	same	methods,	the
same	means.
Enemies	are	very	precious.
I	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 fight	 with	 small	 things.	 Rather	 than	 looking	 down	 at	 the
earth,	 and	 all	 around	 is	 your	 pettiness	 and	 jealousy	 and	 anger,	my	 effort	 is	 to
show	you	 the	 stars	 and	help	you	 to	know	 that	you	have	wings.	And	once	you
start	moving	 towards	 the	 stars,	 those	 small	 things	will	 disappear	 on	 their	 own
accord.
It	 is	 better	 to	 look	 at	 a	 star	 and	 to	 strive	 to	 get	 to	 it	 because	 the	 journey	 is
beautiful,	the	heart	is	throbbing	with	excitement.
Rather	than	fighting	with	small	things...
You	will	remain	small,	fighting	with	small	things.
All	your	religions	teach	you	to	fight	with	small	things,	and	that's	why	the	whole
of	humanity	has	remained	small	--	fight	with	small	things.
I	insist:	Don't	fight	with	small	things.
Fight	for	something	great,	and	as	you	move	towards	the	great	the	small	ones	will
disappear.
I	am	crazy,	but	you	are	crazier!
And	that	is	the	only	bond	between	us	--	I	am	crazy,	you	are	crazier.	That	is	the
only	commitment.	We	will	 reach	 to	 the	stars	 --	we	will	not	bother	about	small
things.	Leave	them	here	for	other	people,	they	will	fight	with	them.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	NEEDED	TO	NOT	MISS	YOU?
Prasad,	 only	 one	 thing	 is	 needed	 not	 to	 miss	 me,	 and	 that	 is:	 You	 have	 to
remember	constantly	that	in	every	mind,	in	every	person	who	comes	in	search	of
truth,	the	ego	plays	a	very	cunning	game.
I	will	tell	you	one	story.
It	is	said	that	one	of	the	great	Zen	masters	Bokoju	used	to	ask	every	newcomer:
"Have	 you	 realized	 that	 the	 path	 of	 disciplehood	 is	 very	 difficult?	Before	 you
enter	 on	 the	 path,	 it	 is	 my	 duty	 to	 make	 you	 alert	 to	 all	 the	 difficulties,
arduousness,	 hostilities;	 it	 is	 an	 uphill	 task.	Are	 you	 ready,	 or	 you	 have	 come
here	just	out	of	curiosity?"
The	man	said,	"No,	I	have	come	here	to	find	the	truth,	but	if	it	is	too	difficult	to
be	a	disciple	then	what	about	making	me	a	master?"
It	is	a	very	strange	story.
But	that	is	the	only	thing	that	can	prevent	you	coming	closer	to	me	--	the	desire
in	 the	 ego	 somewhere	 to	 become	 a	 master.	 You	 have	 to	 become	 something
bigger,	something	greater.
The	master	is	just	a	finger	pointing	to	the	moon.	Don't	be	bothered	to	become	a
master;	while	you	can	become	the	moon,	why	become	the	finger?
You	are	asking	what	can	keep	you	missing	me.
Only	one	thing:	the	desire	to	be	a	master.
It	is	one	of	the	mysteries	of	life	that	only	those	who	don't	have	any	desire	to	be	a
master	become	masters,	and	those	who	have	the	desire	even	fall	from	the	status
of	being	a	disciple	 --	because	 the	desire	 to	be	a	master	 is	nothing	but	a	 subtle
ego.
So	just	watch	your	mind.
From	disciple	become	a	devotee;	 from	devotee	 take	 a	quantum	 leap,	 a	merger
with	existence.
Never	 think	 for	 a	 moment	 of	 becoming	 a	 master.	 Leave	 it	 to	 existence:	 if
existence	wants	you	to	become	a	master	--	that	means	if	existence	wants	to	use
you	as	a	master,	you	will	be	used.	If	existence	thinks	you	have	done	enough	and
wants	you	to	relax,	disperse	into	eternity	--	leave	it	to	existence.	You	should	not
be	desirous	of	anything.
The	moment	you	come	to	the	state	of	desirelessness,	then	existence	uses	you	in
whatever	way	is	needed:	as	a	mystic,	as	a	master,	as	a	singer,	as	a	dancer,	as	a
flute	player	--	or	just	as	nobody;	but	everything	is	a	benediction.
That	which	comes	to	you	from	existence	without	your	desiring	it	 is	always	the
greatest	ecstasy	there	is.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	You	are	the	watcher	not	the	actor
2	November	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8611025
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH30
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
131
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SPEAK	FOR	THE	PAST	MONTH	ON	"BEYOND
ENLIGHTENMENT"	--	AND	I	DON'T	UNDERSTAND	IT.
I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SPEAK	FOR	THE	PAST	TWELVE	YEARS	ON
ENLIGHTENMENT	--	AND	I	DON'T	UNDERSTAND	IT.
ALL	I	KNOW	IS	THE	MOMENT	WHEN	I	SIT	BEFORE	YOU:	YOU	FEEL
LIKE
BLOOD	TO	MY	BODY;	YOUR	VOICE,	MORE	FAMILIAR	THAN	MY	OWN
HEARTBEAT.
OSHO,	HAVE	I	LET	YOU	DOWN?
Maneesha,	there	are	things	which	are	beyond	understanding.
Enlightenment	is	beyond	understanding,	and	of	course	beyond	enlightenment	is
going	to	be	more	miraculous,	more	mysterious.
Understanding	itself	is	not	the	heart	of	human	beings,	it	is	not	their	very	being.	It
is	 useful	 only	 as	 far	 as	 the	 outside	world	 is	 concerned.	The	moment	 you	 start
moving	inwards,	you	have	to	learn	new	ways	of	feeling,	of	loving,	of	knowing,
and	finally	of	being.
Understanding	is	perfectly	right	for	the	mind,	for	intelligence,	for	the	objective
world;	but	life	does	not	consist	only	of	those	things	which	you	can	understand.
In	 fact,	 the	 things	 that	 you	 can	 understand	 don't	make	 life	 a	 celebration,	 they
don't	give	life	a	meaning,	a	significance,	they	don't	allow	life	to	become	love.
Understanding	is	the	demarcation	line	between	the	mundane	and	the	sacred.
The	 mundane	 can	 be	 understood	 and	 should	 be	 understood.	 And	 the	 sacred
cannot	be	understood	and	should	not	be	understood.	Its	sacredness	is	basically	a
secret	that	you	experience,	just	the	way	you	feel	the	heartbeat,	the	way	you	feel
your	breathing.
The	 sacred	 gives	 color	 to	 existence,	 gives	music	 to	 that	which	 is	mundane.	 It
transforms	all	prose	 into	poetry	and	makes	everything	a	mystery	unto	 itself	 so
that	 the	whole	 existence	becomes	 a	 constant	 challenge	 to	 discover.	You	go	on
discovering,	 but	 the	discovery	 is	 never	 finished;	 hence	you	 can	never	 say	you
have	understood.	On	the	contrary,	the	deeper	you	enter	into	the	sacred	dimension
of	life	the	more	you	feel	you	don't	understand,	you	don't	know.
Socrates	had	become	very	old,	and	before	he	was	given	poison	the	oracle	of	the
temple	of	Delphi	declared	him	to	be	the	wisest	man	in	the	whole	world.	A	few
people	 who	 knew	 Socrates	 were	 immensely	 glad,	 they	 rushed	 to	 Athens	 to
inform	 Socrates:	 "It	 has	 never	 happened	 before,	 it	 is	 unprecedented	 that	 the
oracle	of	Delphi	should	declare	anybody	as	the	wisest	man	in	the	world.	You	are
the	first."
Socrates	 said,	 "You	will	 have	 to	 go	 back	 to	 the	 temple	 of	Delphi	 and	 tell	 the
oracle	that	although	it	has	always	been	right,	this	time	it	has	missed	--	because	I
know	nothing."
The	people	who	brought	the	news	were	shocked.
They	went	back	and	told	to	the	oracle:	"Socrates	refuses.	Not	only	does	he	refuse
to	be	the	wisest	man	in	the	world,	he	says,	Ì	know	NOTHING.'"
And	here	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 incident:	The	 oracle	 said,	 "That's	why	he	 is	 the
wisest	man	in	the	world,	there	is	no	contradiction."
Maneesha,	 if	 you	 had	 understood	 what	 I	 was	 saying	 for	 twelve	 years	 about
enlightenment,	you	would	have	missed.	If	you	had	understood	what	I	have	been
saying	for	one	month	continuously	about	beyond	enlightenment,	you	would	have
missed.
Because	you	are	aware	that	you	have	not	been	able	to	understand	anything,	you
have	not	missed.
And	 your	 feeling	 that	 sitting	 close	 to	 me	 you	 feel	 as	 if	 I	 have	 become	 your
heartbeat,	your	breathing,	your	circulation	of	blood	--	this	is	true	understanding.
This	is	not	knowledge;	this	is	the	same	understanding	as	when	Socrates	says,	"I
know	nothing."	This	 is	 closer	 to	 love,	 this	 is	 closer	 to	music,	 this	 is	 closer	 to
feeling	beauty.
You	don't	understand	beauty,	you	don't	understand	music,	you	don't	understand
dance	--
you	enjoy,	you	rejoice,	you	feel.	It	enters	into	your	being.	It	becomes	part	of	you,
but	you	cannot	say	it	is	knowledge.
Listening	to	the	music	of	the	winds	as	they	pass	through	the	pine	trees,	what	can
you	 understand?	 Or	 listening	 to	 the	 sound	 of	 running	 water,	 what	 can	 you
understand?	Or	 looking	at	a	beautiful	 sunset	and	all	 the	colors	spread	over	 the
horizon,	what	can	you	understand?	What	do	you	understand?
But	something	happens	which	is	far	more	precious	than	understanding.
You	fall	in	love,	you	feel	it,	you	become	it.
This	 is	 how	 it	 should	 be	 --	 aes	 dhammo	 sanantano.	 This	 is	 how	 religion	 has
always	been,	this	is	the	eternal	mystery	I	call	`religion'	--	not	the	religion	of	the
mind,	but	the	religion	of	the	heart,	of	the	being;	not	the	religion	of	knowing,	but
the	religion	of	innocence.
Whatever	is	happening	to	you	is	exactly	what	should	happen	to	everybody.
Those	who	go	from	here	understanding	things,	knowing	things,	becoming	more
knowledgeable,	 it	would	have	been	better	 that	 they	had	not	 come	 --	because	 I
have	 not	 been	 a	 help	 to	 them,	 I	 have	 burdened	 them;	 I	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to
unburden	 them.	 And	 my	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 take	 all	 weight	 of	 knowing,
knowledge,	wisdom	from	you	and	to	make	you	innocent	children	again	--	again
collecting	 flowers	 in	 the	 garden,	 running	 after	 butterflies,	 collecting	 seashells,
making	houses	 of	 sand	on	 the	beach...	 utterly	 absorbed	 in	whatsoever	 you	 are
doing,	utterly	blissful	--	so	the	whole	existence	around	you	is	a	fairyland	because
everything	is	mysterious.
If	I	can	take	away	your	knowledge	and	give	you	back	the	sense	of	mystery,	then
I	have	done	my	job,	I	have	fulfilled	my	function.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
READING	A	SCIENTIFIC	REPORT	ABOUT	BRAIN	MANIPULATION,
QUESTIONS	AROSE	IN	ME.
FOR	 INSTANCE,	 IF	 EVERY	 FEELING	 --	 LIKE	 HAPPINESS,	 SADNESS,
SEXUALITY,	AGGRESSION,	AND	SO	ON	--	CAN	BE	STIMULATED	BY
ELECTRODES,	 OR	 INDIRECTLY	 BY	 CHEMISTRY,	 CAN	 BE
MANIPULATED
FROM	 THE	 OUTSIDE,	 THEN	 THESE	 FEELINGS	 ARE	 NOT	 MY	 OWN;
THEY	ARE
JUST	 PUPPETS	 IN	 SOMEONE'S	 HANDS.	 THEY	 ARE	 EITHER
MANIPULATED
FROM	 THE	 OUTSIDE	 OR	 FROM	 THE	 INSIDE	 AS	 AUTOMATIC
REACTIONS	TO
SITUATIONS	--	THEY	ARE	NOT	ME.	THIS	IS	ABOUT	FEELINGS.
MAYBE	 SOME	 DAY	 THOUGHTS	 CAN	 BE	 MANIPULATED	 EQUALLY
EASILY.
THEN	WHAT	IS	REALLY	MINE?	THEN	WHAT	IS	LEFT?	THEN	WHO	AM
I?
QUESTIONING	AND	THINKING	IN	THESE	DIRECTIONS,	I	CAME	TO
RECOGNIZE	 THAT	 I	 OFTEN	 THINK	 ABOUT	 MYSELF,	 ABOUT	 LIFE,
ABOUT
TRUTH	IN	THESE	WAYS.	AND	THEN	THE	QUESTION	AROSE:	 IS	THIS
WAY	OF
QUESTIONING	AND	THINKING	THE	WAY	THE	MIND	TRIES	TO	KNOW
SOMETHING?	IS	IT	ABLE	TO	REACH	ANY	TRUTH	AT	ALL?	IF	NOT,	IS
THIS
THINKING	OR	QUESTIONING	JUST	A	FUTILE	EFFORT,	JUST	A	WASTE
OF
TIME?	OR	IS	IT	NOT	THE	MIND,	NOT	THE	INTELLECT,	BUT	A	DEEPER
INTELLIGENCE,	A	DEEPER	INSTRUMENT	THAT	IS	ABLE	TO	COME	TO
SOME
TRUTH?
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
It	is	absolutely	true:	your	emotions,	your	sentiments,	your	thoughts	--	the	whole
paraphernalia	of	the	mind	--	is	from	the	outside,	is	manipulated	by	the	outside.
Scientifically	it	has	become	more	clear.	But	even	without	scientific	investigation,
the	mystics,	for	thousands	of	years,	have	been	saying	exactly	the	same	thing	--
that	all	these	things	that	your	mind	is	filled	with	are	not	yours,	you	are	beyond
them.	You	get	identified	with	them,	and	that's	the	only	sin.
For	example,	 somebody	 insults	you	and	you	become	angry.	You	 think	you	are
becoming	angry	--	but	seen	scientifically,	his	insult	 is	only	a	remote	controller.
The	man	who	has	insulted	you	is	managing	your	behavior.	Your	anger	is	in	his
hands,	you	are	behaving	like	a	puppet.
Now	scientists	are	able	 to	put	electrodes	 in	 the	brain	at	certain	centers	 --	 there
are	seven	hundred	centers.	And	it	is	almost	unbelievable:	the	mystics	have	been
talking	 about	 these	 seven	 hundred	 centers	 in	 the	 brain	 for	 almost	 seven,	 eight
thousand	 years.	 Science	 has	 just	 now	 discovered	 that	 there	 are	 exactly	 seven
hundred	centers	controlling	all	your	behavior.
An	 electrode	 can	 be	 put	 at	 a	 particular	 center	 --	 for	 example,	 anger	 --	with	 a
remote	control	so	you	cannot	see	that	anybody	is	doing	anything	to	you.	Nobody
insults	you,	nobody	humiliates	you,	nobody	says	anything	to	you;	you	are	sitting
silently,	happily,	and	somebody	pushes	the	button	of	the	remote	control	and	you
become	 angry.	 It	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 feeling	 because	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 reason
anywhere,	why	you	are	becoming	angry.	Perhaps	you	will	rationalize	somehow:
you	see	a	man	passing	down	the	street	and	you	remember	that	he	insulted	you	--
you	will	find	some	rationalization	just	to	console	yourself	that	you	are	not	going
mad.	Sitting	silently...	and	suddenly	feeling	so	angry	without	any	provocation?
And	 the	 same	 remote	 controller	 can	work	 to	make	 you	 happy:	 sitting	 in	 your
chair	you	start	giggling,	and	you	look	all	around	in	case	somebody	sees	you	--	he
will	think	you	are	going	crazy!	Nobody	has	said	anything,	nothing	has	happened,
nobody	 has	 slipped	 on	 a	 banana	 peel,	 so	why	 are	 you	 giggling?	But	 you	will
rationalize	it,	you	will	give	some	apparently	rational	grounds	for	giggling.
And	the	strangest	thing	is	that	when	the	next	time	the	same	button	is	pushed	and
you	 giggle,	 you	will	 again	 have	 the	 same	 rationale,	 the	 same	 consolation,	 the
same	explanation	--	that	too	is	not	yours.	It	is	almost	like	a	gramophone	record.
And	the	scientists	have	come	to	discover	a	tremendously	meaningful	thing:	the
moment	the	remote	controller	releases	the	center,	 it	 rewinds	itself	 immediately.
For	 example,	 your	 speech	 center:	 the	 remote	 control	 can	 force	 you	 to	 speak.
There	is	no	audience,	you	will	feel	awkward	--	but	you	cannot	do	anything,	you
have	to	speak.	It	is	just	like	a	recording.
When	 the	 remote	 controller	 releases	 the	 button,	 the	 pressure	 on	 the	 electrode,
you	become	 silent.	 Press	 the	 button	 again...	 and	 the	 strange	 thing	 is,	 you	 start
your	speech	again	from	the	very	beginning!
When	I	was	reading	about	the	scientific	investigations	into	these	centers,	I	was
reminded	of	my	student	days.	 I	was	a	competitor	 in	an	 inter-university	debate;
all	the	universities	of	the	country	were	participating.	The	Sanskrit	University	of
Varanasi	 was	 also	 participating,	 but	 naturally	 the	 students	 from	 the	 Sanskrit
University	were	 feeling	 a	 little	 inferior	 compared	with	 competitors	 from	other
universities.	 They	 knew	 ancient	 scriptures,	 they	 knew	 Sanskrit	 poetry,	 drama,
but	 they	 were	 not	 familiar	 with	 the	 contemporary	 world	 of	 art,	 literature,
philosophy	or	logic.
And	the	inferiority	complex	works	in	very	strange	ways.
Just	after	I	had	spoken,	the	next	person	was	the	representative	from	the	Sanskrit
University.	And	just	to	impress	the	audience	and	to	hide	his	inferiority	complex
he	started	his	speech	with	a	quotation	from	Bertrand	Russell	--	he	had	crammed
it,	and	Sanskrit	students	are	more	capable	of	cramming	things	than	anybody	else.
But	his	stage	fright....
He	knew	nothing	about	Bertrand	Russell,	he	knew	nothing	about	what	he	was
quoting.	 It	 would	 have	 been	 better	 to	 have	 quoted	 something	 from	 Sanskrit
because	he	would	have	been	more	at	ease.
In	the	middle	he	stopped	--	just	in	the	middle	of	a	sentence.	And	I	was	sitting	by
his	side,	because	I	had	just	finished.	There	was	silence,	and	he	was	perspiring.
And	 just	 to	help	him,	 I	 said,	 "Start	 again"	 --	because	what	 else	 to	do?	he	was
simply	stuck.	"And	if	you	cannot	go	ahead,	you	start	again;	perhaps	it	may	come
back	to	you."
So	he	started	again:	"Brothers	and	sisters..."	and	at	exactly	the	same	point	he	got
stuck	again.	Now	it	became	a	joke.	The	whole	hall	was	shouting,	"Again!"	and
he	was	in	such	a	difficult	situation.	Neither	could	he	go	ahead	nor	could	he	keep
standing	 there	 silent	 --	 it	 looked	very	 idiotic.	 So	he	 had	 to	 start	 again.	But	 he
would	start	again,	"Brothers	and	sisters..."
For	a	whole	fifteen	minutes	we	heard	only	that	portion:	"Brothers	and	sisters..."
up	to	the	point	where	he	got	stuck,	again	and	again.
When	his	time	was	finished	he	came	and	sat	next	to	me.	He	said,	"You	destroyed
my	whole	thing!"
I	said,	"I	was	trying	to	help	you."
He	said,	"This	is	help?"
I	said,	"You	were	going	to	be	in	difficulty	anyway.	This	way	at	least	everybody
enjoyed	 it	except	you	--	 that	 I	can	understand,	but	you	should	 rejoice	 that	you
made	so	many	people	happy.	And	why	did	you	choose	that	quotation?	When	I
was	saying	to	you,	`Start	again'	there	was	no	need	to	start	over	--	you	could	have
dropped	 that	 quotation,	 there	 was	 no	 need	 to	 begin	 again	 from	 the	 very
beginning."
But	I	came	to	know	through	reading	the	scientific	research	that	the	speech	center
is	exactly	like	a	gramophone	record,	but	with	one	thing	very	strange	and	special:
the	moment	the	needle	is	taken	away	from	the	record	you	cannot	put	the	needle
back	where	you	took	it	from.	Once	it	is	taken	away,	it	will	have	to	begin	again
exactly	at	the	beginning.	The	center	instantly	goes	back	to	the	beginning.
And	if	this	happens,	can	you	say	you	are	the	master	of	what	you	are	saying?	Are
you	 the	 master	 of	 what	 you	 are	 feeling?	 Certainly	 there	 are	 no	 electrodes
scientifically	put	into	you,	but	biologically	exactly	the	same	work	is	going	on.
You	see	a	certain	woman,	and	immediately	your	mind	reacts:	"How	beautiful!"
This	is	nothing	but	remote	control.	That	woman	functioned	like	a	remote	control
and	your	speech	center	simply	went	into	a	recorded	speech:	"How	beautiful!"
Mind	is	a	mechanism.	It	is	not	you.
It	records	things	from	outside,	and	then	reacts	to	outside	situations	according	to
the	recordings.	That's	the	only	difference	between	a	Hindu	and	a	Mohammedan
and	 a	Christian	 and	 a	 Jew	 --	 they	have	 just	 got	 different	 gramophone	 records.
Inside	 it	 is	 one	 humanity.	 And	 do	 you	 think	 when	 you	 play	 a	 gramophone
record...	it	may	be	in	Hebrew,	it	may	be	in	Sanskrit,	it	may	be	in	Persian,	it	may
be	in	Arabic,	but	it	is	the	same	machine	that	plays	the	record.	To	the	machine	it
does	not	matter	whether	it	plays	Hebrew	or	Sanskrit.
All	your	religions,	all	your	political	ideas,	all	your	cultural	attitudes	are	nothing
but	recordings.	And	in	certain	situations	certain	recordings	are	provoked.
There	is	a	beautiful	incident	in	the	life	of	one	of	the	very	wisest	kings	of	India,
Raja	Dhoj.	He	was	very	much	interested	in	wise	people.	His	whole	treasury	was
open	 only	 for	 one	 purpose	 --	 to	 collect	 all	 the	 wise	 people	 of	 the	 country,
whatsoever	 the	 cost.	His	 capital	was	Ujjain,	 and	he	had	 thirty	of	 the	 country's
most	 famous	 people	 in	 his	 court.	 It	was	 the	most	 precious	 court	 in	 the	whole
country.
One	of	the	greatest	poets	of	the	world,	Kalidas,	was	one	of	the	members	of	the
court	of	Raja	Dhoj.
One	day	a	man	appeared	at	the	court	saying	that	he	spoke	thirty	languages	with
the	same	fluency,	the	same	accuracy	and	accent	as	any	native	person	could,	and
he	 had	 come	 to	 make	 a	 challenge:	 "Hearing	 that	 you	 have	 in	 your	 court	 the
wisest	people	of	the	country,	here	are	one	thousand	gold	pieces..."
The	rupee	used	to	be	golden.	We	should	stop	calling	it	 the	rupee	now,	because
the	word
`rupee'	comes	from	the	word	rupya.	`Rupya'	means	gold.	It	went	on	falling	from
gold	to	silver,	from	silver	to	something	else.	Now	it	is	just	paper	and	you	go	on
calling	it	`rupee'.
The	very	word	means	gold.
And	 he	 said,	 "Anybody	 who	 can	 recognize	 my	 mother	 tongue,	 these	 one
thousand	gold	pieces	are	his.	And	if	he	cannot	recognize	it,	then	he	will	have	to
give	me	one	thousand	gold	pieces."
There	were	great	scholars	there,	and	everybody	knows	that	whatever	you	do,	you
can	never	speak	any	language	the	way	you	can	speak	your	own	mother	tongue
because	 every	 other	 language	 has	 to	 be	 learned	 by	 effort.	 Only	 the	 mother
tongue	is	spontaneous	--	you	don't	even	learn	it,	just...	the	very	situation	and	you
start	speaking	it.	It	has	a	spontaneity.
That's	why	even	Germans	who	call	their	country	`fatherland'....	That	is	the	only
country	 which	 calls	 itself	 `fatherland'.	 All	 other	 countries	 call	 their	 land
`motherland'.	 But	 even	 the	 Germans	 don't	 call	 their	 languagèfather	 tongue'.
Every	language	is	called	a	mother	tongue	because	the	child	starts	learning	from
the	mother,	and	anyway	the	father	never	has	the	chance	to	speak	in	the	house.	It
is	always	the	mother	who	is	speaking	--	father	is	listening.
Many	 took	 the	 challenge.	He	 spoke	 in	 thirty	 languages	 --	 a	 few	pieces	 in	 one
language,	 a	 few	 pieces	 in	 another	 language	 --	 and	 it	 was	 really	 hard;	 he	 was
certainly	a	master	artist.
He	was	speaking	each	language	the	way	only	a	native	can	speak	his	own	mother
language.	 All	 of	 the	 thirty	 great	 scholars	 lost.	 The	 competition	 continued	 for
thirty	days,	 and	 every	day	one	person	 took	 the	 challenge	 and	 lost	 it.	The	man
would	say,	"This	is	not	my	mother	tongue."
On	 the	 thirty-first	 day....	 King	 Dhoj	 had	 been	 continually	 saying	 to	 Kalidas,
"Why	 don't	 you	 accept	 the	 challenge?	 --	 because	 a	 poet	 knows	 language	 in	 a
more	delicate	way,	with	all	its	nuances,	more	than	anybody	else."
But	Kalidas	remained	silent.	He	had	been	watching	for	thirty	days,	trying	to	find
out	which	language	the	man	spoke	with	more	ease,	with	more	spontaneity,	with
more	joy.
But	he	could	not	manage	 to	 find	any	difference,	he	 spoke	all	 the	 languages	 in
exactly	the	same	way.
On	the	thirty-first	day,	Kalidas	asked	King	Dhoj	and	all	the	wise	people	to	stand
outside	 in	 front	 of	 the	 court.	There	was	 a	 long	 row	of	 steps	 and	 the	man	was
coming	up;	as	he	came	up	to	the	last	step,	Kalidas	pushed	him	down.	And	as	he
fell	rolling	down	the	steps,	anger	came	up	--	he	shouted.
And	Kalidas	 said,	 "This	 is	your	mother	 tongue!"	Because	 in	anger	you	cannot
remember,	and	the	man	had	not	been	expecting	this	to	be	a	challenge.
And	that	actually	was	his	mother	tongue.
Deepest	in	his	mind,	the	recording	was	of	the	mother	tongue.
One	 of	 my	 professors	 used	 to	 say	 --	 he	 lived	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 teaching	 in
different	 universities	 --	 that	 "Only	 in	 two	 situations	 in	 life	 have	 I	 been	 in
difficulty	in	different	countries	--	fighting	or	falling	in	love.	In	those	times	one
remembers	one's	mother	tongue.	However	beautifully	you	express	your	love,	it
is	 not	 the	 same,	 it	 seems	 superficial.	And	when	you	 are	 angry	 and	 fighting	 in
somebody	else's	language,	you	cannot	have	that	joy...."
He	said,	"Those	are	two	very	significant	situations	--	fighting	and	loving	--	and
mostly	they	are	together	with	the	same	person.	With	the	same	person	you	are	in
love,	with	that	same	person	you	have	to	fight."
And	he	was	right,	 that	everything	remains	superficial	 --	you	can	neither	sing	a
beautiful	song	nor	can	you	use	real	four-letter	words	of	your	language.	In	both
cases,	it	remains	lukewarm.
Mind	certainly	is	a	mechanism	for	recording	experiences	from	the	outside,	and
reacting	and	responding	accordingly.	It	is	not	you.
But	 unfortunately	 the	 psychologists	 think	 mind	 is	 all,	 beyond	 mind	 there	 is
nothing.	That	means	you	are	nothing	but	impressions	from	the	outside.	You	don't
have	any	soul	of	your	own.	The	very	idea	of	the	soul	is	also	given	by	the	outside.
This	is	where	the	mystics	are	different:	they	will	agree	absolutely	that	about	the
mind,	the	contemporary	scientific	research	is	right.	But	it	is	not	right	about	man's
total	personality.
Beyond	mind,	there	is	an	awareness	which	is	not	given	by	the	outside	and	which
is	 not	 an	 idea	 --	 and	 there	 is	 no	 experiment	 up	 to	 now	which	 has	 found	 any
center	in	the	brain	which	corresponds	to	awareness.
The	whole	work	of	 religion,	 of	meditation	 is	 to	make	you	 aware	 of	 all	 that	 is
mind	and	disidentify	yourself	with	it.	When	the	mind	is	angry,	you	should	think,
"It	 is	 simply	a	gramophone	record."	When	 the	mind	 is	 sad,	you	should	simply
remember:	it	is	only	a	gramophone	record.
A	certain	situation	 is	pressing	 the	remote	controller,	and	you	feel	sad,	you	feel
angry,	you	feel	frustrated,	you	feel	worried,	you	feel	tense	--	all	these	things	are
coming	from	the	outside,	and	the	mind	is	responding	to	them.
But	you	are	the	watcher.
You	are	not	the	actor.	It	is	not	your	reaction.
Hence	 the	 whole	 art	 of	 meditation	 is	 to	 learn	 awareness,	 alertness,
consciousness.
While	you	are	feeling	angry,	don't	repress	it;	let	it	be	there.	Just	become	aware.
See	it	as	if	it	is	some	object	outside	you.
Slowly	slowly,	go	on	cutting	your	identifications	with	the	mind.	Then	you	have
found	your	real	individuality,	your	being,	your	soul.
Finding	this	awareness	is	enlightenment	--	you	have	become	luminous.
You	are	no	more	in	darkness,	and	you	are	no	more	just	a	puppet	in	the	hands	of
the	mind.
You	 are	 a	 master,	 not	 a	 servant.	 Now	 the	 mind	 cannot	 react	 automatically,
autonomously
--	the	way	it	used	to	do	before.	It	needs	your	permission.
Somebody	insults	you,	and	you	don't	want	to	be	angry....
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	say	to	his	disciples	that,	"To	be	angry	is	so	stupid	that	it
is	inconceivable	that	intelligent	human	beings	go	on	doing	it.	Somebody	else	is
doing	something	and	you	are	getting	angry.	He	may	be	doing	something	wrong,
he	may	be	saying	something	wrong,	he	may	be	making	some	effort	to	humiliate
you,	to	insult	you	--
but	that	is	his	freedom.	If	you	react,	you	are	a	slave."
And	if	you	say	to	the	person,	"It	is	your	joy	to	insult	me,	it	is	my	joy	not	to	be
angry,"
you	are	behaving	like	a	master.
And	unless	this	master	becomes	crystal	clear	in	you,	crystallized,	you	don't	have
any	soul.	You	are	just	a	phonograph	record.
As	 you	 grow	 older,	 your	 recording	 goes	 on	 becoming	 more	 and	 more.	 You
become	more	knowledgeable.	People	 think	you	are	becoming	wiser	 --	you	are
simply	becoming	a	donkey	loaded	with	scriptures.
Wisdom	consists	only	of	one	thing,	not	of	knowing	many	things	but	of	knowing
only	one	thing:	that	is	your	awareness	and	its	separation	from	the	mind.
Just	try	watching	in	small	things,	and	you	will	be	surprised.	People	go	on	doing
the	same	things	every	day.	They	go	on	deciding	to	do	something,	and	they	go	on
repenting	because	they	have	not	done	it;	it	becomes	a	routine.
Everything	you	do	 is	not	new.	The	 things	which	have	been	giving	you	misery,
sadness,	worries,	wounds,	and	you	don't	want	--	somehow	mechanically	you	go
on	doing	these	things	again	and	again	as	if	you	are	helpless.	And	you	will	remain
helpless	unless	you	create	a	separation	between	mind	and	awareness.
That	very	separation	is	the	greatest	revolution	that	can	happen	to	man.	And	from
that	 very	moment	 your	 life	 is	 a	 life	 of	 continuous	 celebration	 --	 because	 you
need	not	do	anything	that	harms	you,	you	need	not	do	anything	that	makes	you
miserable.	Now	you	can	do	and	act	on	only	that	which	makes	you	more	joyous,
fulfills	you,	gives	you	contentment,	makes	your	life	a	piece	of	art,	a	beauty.
But	this	is	possible	only	if	the	master	in	you	is	awake.	Right	now	the	master	is
fast	asleep,	and	the	servant	is	playing	the	role	of	master.
And	the	servant	is	not	your	servant;	the	servant	is	created	by	the	outside	world,	it
belongs	to	the	outside	world,	it	follows	the	outside	world	and	its	laws.
This	is	the	whole	tragedy	of	human	life:	you	are	asleep,	and	the	outside	world	is
dominating	you,	creating	your	mind	according	to	its	own	needs	--	and	the	mind
is	a	puppet.
Once	your	 awareness	 becomes	 a	 flame,	 it	 burns	 up	 the	whole	 slavery	 that	 the
mind	has	created.
And	there	is	no	blissfulness	more	precious	than	freedom,	than	being	a	master	of
your	own	destiny.
Mind	is	not	your	friend.	Either	the	mind	is	pretending	to	be	the	master	or	it	has
to	be	put	into	its	right	place	as	a	servant	--	but	mind	is	not	your	friend.
And	 the	 struggle	 for	 freedom,	 for	 bliss,	 for	 truth	 is	 not	with	 the	world;	 it	 is	 a
fight	with	this	puppet	mind.	It	is	very	simple.
Kahlil	Gibran	has	a	beautiful	story.
The	farmers	in	the	villages,	to	protect	their	cultivated	farms,	create	a	false	man:
just	a	stick,	another	stick...	it	looks	almost	like	a	cross.	And	then	they	put	a	kurta
on	it,	and	a	mud	pot	in	place	of	the	head.	That's	enough	to	make	poor	animals
afraid	that	somebody	may	be	standing	there.	The	white	kurta	and	two	hands,	in
the	night...	somebody	is	watching.	For	the	animals	it	is	enough,	they	keep	away
from	the	farm.
Gibran	says,	"Once	I	asked	such	a	false	man,	Ì	can	understand	the	farmer	who
made	you,	he	needs	you.	I	can	understand	the	poor	animals,	they	don't	have	great
intelligence	to	see	that	you	are	bogus.	But	in	rain,	in	sun,	in	hot	summer,	in	cold
winter	you	remain	standing	here	--	for	what?'
"And	 the	 false,	 bogus	man	 said,	 `You	 don't	 know	my	 joy.	 Just	 to	make	 those
animals	afraid	is	such	a	joy	that	it	is	worth	suffering	rain,	suffering	sun,	suffering
heat,	winter	--
everything.	I	am	making	thousands	of	animals	afraid!	I	know	I	am	bogus,	there
is	nothing	 inside	me	 --	but	 I	don't	 care	about	 that.	My	 joy	 is	 in	making	others
afraid.'"
I	want	to	ask	you:	would	you	like	to	be	just	like	this	bogus	man	--	nothing	inside,
making	 somebody	 afraid,	 making	 somebody	 happy,	 making	 somebody
humiliated,	making	somebody	respectful?
Is	your	life	only	for	others?
Will	you	ever	look	inside?
Is	there	anybody	in	the	house	or	not?
The	people	who	are	with	me,	their	search	is	to	find	the	master	of	the	house.
I	say	to	you	the	master	is	there	--	perhaps	asleep,	but	he	can	be	awakened.	And
once	the	master	is	awakened	within	you,	your	whole	life	takes	new	colors,	new
rainbows,	new	flowers,	new	music,	new	dances.
For	the	first	time	you	become	alive.	Before,	you	were	only	vegetating.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	LOVE	BEING	HERE.	I	WANTED	AND	FELT	TO	BE	WITH	YOU	EVEN	IF
IT
WERE	JUST	FOR	TWO	DAYS.
AT	 YOUR	 BIRTHDAY	 IN	 1981	 WE	 MET	 FOR	 THE	 FIRST	 TIME.	 THE
REASON
WAS	THAT	I	HAD	JUST	READ	A	BOOK	ABOUT	GURDJIEFF	AND	THE
PHENOMENON	OF	baraka.	THIS	GAVE	ME	SUCH	A	HIT	THAT	I	MADE	IT
TO
COME	TO	THE	RANCH.
THESE	 DAYS	 I	 AM	 WORKING	 WITH	 MANAGERS	 AND	 TEACHING
THEM
MEDITATION	TECHNIQUES.	I'M	ALSO	PREPARING	A	WORLDWIDE
MEDITATION	PROJECT.	AGAIN	I	FEEL	I	NEED	`BARAKA'!
PLEASE	CAN	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	BARAKA?
Baraka	is	a	Sufi	word	meaning	grace.
George	Gurdjieff	was	trained	in	Sufi	schools.	He	has	carried	many	ideas	of	the
Sufis	into	the	West.
The	Sufi	master	--	 just	 like	any	other	master	 in	 the	world	--	 is	full	of	grace.	If
you	 are	 receptive,	 if	 you	 are	 open,	 just	 coming	 close	 to	 the	master	 something
invisible,	some	vibe	of	the	divine,	some	rays	of	the	unknowable	start	penetrating
you.
It	also	has	the	meaning	of	blessing.
People	come	to	the	masters	and	ask	for	blessing.
In	English	 there	 is	no	exact	word	 to	 translatèbaraka',	but	 in	Sanskrit,	 in	Hindi,
we	 have	 the	 word	 prasad.	 Blessings	 carry	 a	 faraway	 echo	 of	 it.	 If	 you	 are
receptive...	And	unless	one	is	receptive	one	never	goes	to	a	master.
That	 has	 been	 the	Eastern	 tradition.	Why	waste	 your	 time	 and	why	waste	 the
master's	time?	You	go	only	when	you	see	that	your	heart	is	opening,	it	needs	a
ray	of	light,	as	if	your	being	is	just	like	thirsty	earth	which	needs	a	raincloud	to
shower	on	you.	Only	in	such	moments	people	go	to	a	master,	they	touch	the	feet
of	the	master,	they	sit	with	the	master.
Nothing	 is	 said	 and	 everything	 is	 heard;	 nothing	 is	 asked	 and	 everything	 is
given.
Baraka	 is	 a	mystical	principle	 that	happens	between	 the	 receiving	disciple	and
the	overflowing	master.
It	is	possible	to	pass	a	master	without	even	noticing	him	--	if	you	are	not	open.
Sufis	are	very	careful.	It	is	not	easy	to	find	a	Sufi	master;	he	may	take	months	or
sometimes	years	to	find	--	and	perhaps	the	master	is	just	living	in	front	of	your
house.
The	Sufis	wait	for	the	right	moment.
They	have	their	disciples	who	come	to	know	that	a	certain	man	is	asking	if	this
village	 has	 a	 Sufi	master.	 And	 the	 disciples	 go	 on	 telling	 him,	 "Yes,	 the	 Sufi
master	 is	here,	 and	you	will	be	called	only	when	you	are	 ready	 --	because	 the
real	thing	is	your	openness.
The	master	 is	 ready,	 but	what	will	 you	 be	 doing?	Even	 if	we	 take	 you	 to	 the
master,	you	will	not	be	able	to	recognize	him."
So	 the	disciples	will	keep	 the	person	hanging	around,	giving	him	hope,	giving
him	time	--
"Next	month	we	will	try"	--	making	him	more	and	more	thirsty.	And	when	they
see	that	he	has	become	a	longing,	that	now	it	is	no	longer	an	ordinary	inquiry,	it
is	not	just	a	curiosity	to	see	a	Sufi	master,	but	a	deep	longing,	a	question	of	life
and	death;	that	if	this	man	does	not	get	in	contact	with	a	master	he	may	die,	only
then	 will	 he	 be	 introduced	 into	 the	 company	 of	 the	 master.	 And	 he	 will	 be
surprised:	the	master	is	a	man	he	has	passed	in	the	village	many	times,	he	sells
vegetables	 --	 because	 Sufis	 keep	 themselves	 hiding	 in	 very	 ordinary	 life.
Somebody	is	a	shoemaker,	somebody	is	a	weaver,	somebody	sells	vegetables	--
ordinary	 things,	 nothing	 special	 about	 it.	 And	 they	meet	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the
night.
Then	the	same	man	sits	with	the	dignity	of	an	emperor.	It	is	called	`the	court	of
the	master'.	The	same	man	who	was	selling	vegetables	the	whole	day	long	in	the
marketplace
--	now	even	the	emperor	comes	to	touch	his	feet.
But	 nobody	 can	 come	 to	 the	 Sufi	master	 unless	 somebody	 from	 his	 company
introduces	 him,	 unless	 somebody	 takes	 the	 responsibility	 that	 the	 person	 is
ready,	 somebody	 brings	 him,	 introduces	 him:	 "He	 is	 ready.	 He	 needs	 your
grace."
When	Gurdjieff	entered	 into	a	Sufi	circle	 for	 the	first	 time	--	 it	 took	him	three
years	to	enter	the	circle....	When	he	entered,	almost	a	dozen	people	were	sitting
there	silently	with	their	eyes	closed.	He	was	brought	close	to	the	master.
The	friend	who	brought	him	told	him,	"Just	sit	down.	Nothing	is	needed	on	your
part	 except	 a	 silent	 opening,	 and	 the	 rain	 will	 come.	 And	 then	 don't	 close
yourself.	Drink	of	the	master	as	much	as	you	can	--	this	is	his	blessing;	this	will
keep	you	on	the	path,	on	the	right	track.	It	will	keep	you	courageous	enough	to
pass	 all	 the	 dark	 nights,	 it	will	 keep	 you	 trusting	 that	 the	morning	 is	 going	 to
happen.	The	face	of	the	master,	the	eyes	of	the	master,	the	gestures	of	the	master,
the	silence	of	the	master	--	everything	has	to	be	soaked	up	so	it	becomes	part	of
you."
When	the	master	is	no	longer	outside	you	only,	but	inside	you	too	--	that	is	real
blessing.
Then	 the	disciple	 is	 pregnant,	 the	master	 has	 come	 into	his	womb,	 and	 it	will
help	him	in	times	of	danger,	in	times	of	discouragement,	in	times	of	darkness.
It	will	 always	keep	him	 together,	 remembering	 that	 if	 truth	 can	happen	 to	one
man,	if	God	can	happen	to	one	man,	then	it	is	everybody's	birthright.
Remembering..."It	may	 take	a	 little	 time	 for	me,	 I	have	 joined	 the	path	a	 little
late.	But	the	dawn	is	not	far	away."
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
RAJNEESHPURAM	WAS	 A	 RARE	 EXPERIMENT	 IN	 THE	 HISTORY	 OF
HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS	WHERE	FOR	THE	FIRST	TIME	SEEKERS	OF	TRUTH
FROM
THE	WHOLE	WORLD	GATHERED	AROUND	A	MASTER.	IT	WAS	AN
INTERNATIONAL	 COMMUNE	 FOR	 THE	 MOST	 INTENSE	 AND	 THE
FASTEST
GROWTH	OF	HUMAN	CONSCIOUSNESS.
THE	 RAJNEESHPURAM	COMMUNE	COULD	NOT	 SURVIVE	 BECAUSE
OF
ORTHODOX	RELIGIONS	AND	INTERNATIONAL	POLITICS.
IS	 THERE	 ANY	 HOPE	 OF	 SUCH	 A	 RARE	 EXPERIMENT	 HAPPENING
AGAIN
AROUND	 YOU?	 OR	 IS	 THERE	 ANY	 ALTERNATIVE	 EXPERIMENT
POSSIBLE
ON	 AN	 INDIVIDUAL	 SCALE	 IN	 THE	 PRESENT	 SITUATION?	 OR	 IS	 IT
DESTINED
THAT	 SUCH	 A	 RARE	 OPPORTUNITY	 FOR	 HUMAN	 CONSCIOUSNESS
TO
FLOWER	TO	ITS	OPTIMUM	SHOULD	BE	MISSED?
PLEASE	COMMENT.
The	 commune	 in	 America	 was	 only	 a	 beginning;	 a	 beginning	 of	 many
communes	around	the	world.
They	 will	 go	 on	 spreading	 --	 because	 it	 is	 not	 only	 a	 question	 of	 orthodox
religions	and	dirty	politics,	 it	 is	also	a	question	of	 the	future	of	humanity.	And
the	future	is	always	more	important	than	the	past.
The	past	 is	heavy	and	long.	The	future	is	 light,	unknown.	But	the	past	 is	dead,
and	life	belongs	to	the	future	--	and	death	cannot	win	over	life.
One	commune	can	be	destroyed.	Thousands	of	other	communes	will	arise.
Of	 course	my	way	 of	 functioning	will	 be	 different	 because	 the	 experiment	 in
Rajneeshpuram	needed	me	 to	be	 there,	 it	was	 the	 first	 commune....	Every	 step
had	to	be	 taken	carefully.	And	within	five	years,	so	much	was	done	that	 is	not
possible	to	do	even	in	fifty	years.	But	now	the	basic	rules	are	clear.
And	my	being	in	any	commune	is	going	to	be	dangerous	for	the	commune.
It	was	absolutely	necessary	for	the	first	commune	that	I	should	be	present.	I	took
the	risk,	and	the	commune	has	succeeded.	Now	there	are	communes	all	around
the	 world.	 More	 communes	 will	 be	 arising.	 I	 am	 just	 waiting	 for	 the	 right
moment	to	trigger	a	new	kind	of	process.
I	will	not	be	part	of	any	commune	because	my	presence	will	be	dangerous	for
the	commune.	So	now	I	will	be	 just	wandering	from	one	commune	to	another.
Before	my	presence	becomes	dangerous	in	one	commune,	I	will	move	to	another
--	so	the	commune	is	saved,	and	whatever	I	can	give	and	my	presence	can	give,
can	be	given	on	a	much	bigger	scale	around	the	globe.
There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 people	 to	 come	 to	 me.	 I	 can	 move	 from	 commune	 to
commune.	This	way,	many	more	communes	can	flourish.
I	am	just	waiting	for	the	right	moment.	Preparations	are	being	made,	and	soon	I
will	 start	 working	 on	 a	 series	 of	 communes	 --	 because	 the	 movement	 has	 to
become	worldwide,	it	is	already	worldwide.
The	commune	is	the	lifestyle	of	the	future.
The	family	is	gone	and	the	commune	is	going	to	take	its	place.	Much	depends	on
the	 success	 of	 commune	 life,	 and	we	 have	 to	make	 the	 commune	 life	 such	 a
celebration	 that	 it	 starts	 spreading	 like	wildfire,	 that	 others	 start	 communes	 of
their	own.
Each	 village	 can	 become	 a	 commune,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 establish	 different
villages.	We	just	have	to	prove	that	life	in	a	commune	is	much	richer,	much	more
lovely,	much	more	meditative,	 that	 there	 is	a	possibility	of	 living	in	a	different
way,	different	from	the	way	humanity	has	lived	up	to	now.
We	have	proved	it	in	Rajneeshpuram.
It	was	our	success	that	forced	America	to	destroy	the	commune.	If	we	were	not
successful,	nobody	would	have	bothered	about	us.	Remember	this:	it	was	not	a
failure	that	we	were	destroyed;	it	was	our	success	which	could	not	be	tolerated.
And	if	we	have	been	successful	in	one	place....	We	are	successful	in	Germany,	in
Italy,	 in	Holland,	 in	 Japan,	 in	Australia,	 in	different	other	 countries.	Because	 I
am	not	there,	the	politicians	are	not	worried,	the	theologians	are	not	afraid.
So	I	want	the	communes	to	become	more	consolidated	before	I	start	my	world
tours,	because	now	it	will	not	be	A	world	 tour,	 it	will	be	 just	 the	beginning	of
world	 tours.	 I	 will	 be	 continuously	 rotating	 like	 a	 satellite	 around	 the	 earth,
creating	as	much	trouble	as	possible.	Only	then	these	traditional	vested	interests
can	be	destroyed.
But	if	the	truth	is	with	us,	the	victory	is	also	with	us.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
DO	 THOSE	 CELLS	 NEEDED	 FOR	 A	 LIVELY	 AND	 GROWING
INTELLIGENCE
HAVE	 ONLY	 ÀLIMITED'	 LIFE	 SPAN,	 SO	 THAT	 THERE	 IS	 A	 POINT
BEYOND
WHICH	ONE	EITHER	BECOMES	SENILE	OR	SIMPLY	STAGNATES?
OR,	 GIVEN	 THE	 NECESSARY	 STIMULUS,	 IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 FOR
INTELLIGENCE
TO	 CONTINUE	 TO	 GROW	 RIGHT	 UP	 TO	 THE	 MOMENT	 OF	 ONE'S
DEATH?
The	ordinary	human	being	 stops	his	growth	of	 intelligence	at	 the	age	 fourteen
because	the	biological	purpose	is	complete.
At	the	age	of	fourteen,	the	person	is	mature	enough	to	give	birth,	to	reproduce.
Biology	is	no	longer	interested	beyond	this	point.
This	is	the	reason	why	the	average	human	being	is	stuck	at	the	age	of	fourteen	as
far	 as	 his	 mental	 age	 is	 concerned.	 People	 go	 on	 growing	 physically	 up	 to
seventy,	 eighty,	 ninety,	 a	 hundred	years	 --	 in	 some	places	 like	Caucasia,	 up	 to
one	 hundred	 and	 fifty,	 even	 one	 hundred	 and	 eighty.	 But	 their	 mental	 age
remains	stuck	at	fourteen.	This	has	been	the	routine	up	to	now.
This	 can	 be	 changed.	 And	 this	 should	 be	 changed	 because	 there	 is	 infinite
potential	 for	 growth,	 but	 the	 change	 will	 come	 only	 if	 you	 have	 some	 goals
beyond	biology.	If	your	life	remains	concerned	only	with	sex,	children,	family,
food,	house,	then	there	is	no	need;	that	much	intelligence	is	enough.	But	if	your
interest	 is	 that	 of	 an	 Albert	 Einstein	 then	 your	 intelligence	 starts	 moving
sometimes	even	ahead	of	your	physical	body.
Emerson	is	reported	to	have	said	--	and	rightly	so	--	when	asked	how	old	he	was:
"Three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
The	 journalist	who	was	asking	said,	"Three	hundred	and	sixty?	You	don't	 look
more	than	sixty."
Emerson	said,	"That's	right.	From	one	point	of	view,	I	am	sixty	years	old.	But	I
have	done	so	much	work	as	 far	as	my	 intelligence	 is	concerned	 that	either	 six
people	would	be	needed	to	do	it	or	I	would	need	three	hundred	and	sixty	years.
My	intelligence	is	so	far	ahead	of	my	physical	body."
Intelligence	depends	what	you	are	doing	with	it.
The	person	who	is	meditating	has	the	greatest	possibility	of	reaching	the	highest
peaks	 of	 intelligence	 because	 in	 meditation	 he	 is	 doing	 the	 greatest	 possible
work	that	a	man	is	capable	of	--	and	that	is	realizing	oneself,	knowing	"Who	am
I."	Entering	into	the	deepest	interiority	of	one's	subjectivity	is	the	greatest	work
for	 intelligence.	 Then	 you	 cannot	 even	 count	 --	 you	 cannot	 count	 Gautam
Buddha's	intelligence,	it	is	beyond	calculations,	beyond	measurements.
And	if	you	are	a	meditator,	as	your	meditation	goes	on	becoming	more	and	more
luminous,	your	 intelligence	will	be	growing	 to	 the	 last	breath	of	your	 life.	Not
only	 that,	 even	 after	 the	 last	 breath	 your	 intelligence	will	 continue	 to	 grow	 --
because	you	are	not	going	 to	die,	only	your	body	will	be	dying.	And	the	body
has	nothing	to	do	with	intelligence,	mind	has	nothing	to	do	with	intelligence.
Intelligence	is	the	quality	of	your	awareness	--	more	aware,	more	intelligent.
And	if	you	are	totally	aware,	you	are	as	intelligent	as	this	whole	existence	is.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#31
Chapter	 title:	 Discarding	 the	 container,	 discovering	 the	 content	 3	 November
1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8611035
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH31
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
130
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 AFRAID	 TO	 JUMP	 FROM	 A	 THREE-METER	 TOWER	 INTO	 A
SWIMMING
POOL.
WILL	I	STILL	BE	ABLE	TO	JUMP	INTO	ENLIGHTENMENT?
The	 first	 basic	 thing	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 you	 are	 not	 expected	 to	 jump	 into
enlightenment.	You	have	to	climb	for	it	--	 it	 is	higher	than	you,	not	lower	than
you.
So	at	least	one	fear	you	can	drop!
And	climbing	to	enlightenment	is	a	simple	process.	It	is	not	something	tortuous,
arduous.
It	 is	 something	 like	 peeling	 an	 onion;	 after	 one	 layer	 there	 is	 another	 layer	 --
fresher,	younger,	juicier,	after	that	layer	there	are	still	more,	juicier	layers.	And	if
you	go	on	peeling,	finally	nothing	is	left	in	your	hands	--	because	the	onion	was
nothing	but	layers	upon	layers.
Enlightenment	is	a	kind	of	peeling	of	the	ego.
It	 is	 parallel	 to	 the	 onion	 because	 it	 has	 no	 inner	 substance,	 only	 layers.	And
those	 layers	 sometimes	 slip	 by	 themselves	 --	 they	 become	 old	 sometimes	 by
accident.	If	you	watch	your	life,	you	can	see	it	happening.	It	is	not	a	theorization.
Sometimes	 you	 can	 see	 that	 you	 are	 not	wearing	 the	 right	mask	 for	 the	 right
occasion.
When	you	are	expected	to	smile,	you	are	not	smiling;	when	you	are	expected	to
weep,	you	are	not	weeping.
I	 used	 to	 live	 with	 a	 distant	 uncle's	 family.	 His	 wife	 died.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 very
difficult	 to	 find	 a	 husband	who	 never	 thinks	 that	 if	 his	wife	 died	 it	would	 be
good,	a	good	riddance.	And	my	uncle's	wife	was	certainly	a	nightmare.	In	fact
everybody	was	happy	that	she	died,	and	everybody	knew	that	the	husband	was
happy	that	she	had	died,	but	still	the	convention,	the	tradition....
I	used	to	sit	in	the	garden.	He	told	me,	"I	cannot	remain	in	a	miserable	posture
the	whole	day	long	because	really	I	am	not	miserable.	You	know	it.	I	cannot	hide
it	from	you	--
twenty-four	hours	a	day	you	are	in	the	house	--	but	when	relatives	come,	I	have
to	show	that	I	am	very	miserable."	Not	to	be	caught	being	happy	and	at	ease,	he
told	me,	"You	mostly	sit	in	the	garden	reading,	so	you	can	just	give	me	a	signal
from	there	that	somebody	is	coming."	So	I	had	to	give	him	signals.
And	the	miracle	was	that	the	moment	I	would	give	him	the	signal,	immediately
he	would	become	miserable.	Sometimes	 I	would	play	a	 joke:	 I	would	give	 the
signal	and	nobody	would	turn	up.	And	he	would	be	very	angry:	"This	you	should
not	do,	because	this	is	a	dangerous	joke.	Sometimes	I	may	think	you	are	joking
and	somebody	may	turn	up.	You	have	to	understand	that	I	should	not	be	caught
enjoying	myself.	In	fact	I	have	never	enjoyed	myself	--	because	of	this	woman!
She	was	such	a	pain	 in	 the	neck.	And	even	 today,	although	she	 is	dead,	she	 is
torturing	 me	 through	 these	 relatives	 --	 relatives	 I	 have	 not	 seen	 for	 years,
relatives	 I	 don't	 even	 recognize	 as	 relatives.	 They	 come	 and	 I	 have	 to	 be
miserable	--	whether	the	relative	is	real	or	false,	I	have	to	bring	tears	to	my	eyes.
"I	am	surprised	myself	that	I	am	capable	of	it	--	being	miserable,	tears	flowing.
And	I	pray	 to	you	 that	when	I	am	acting	 this	way,	please	don't	 stand	so	close.
You	just	be	out	in	the	garden;	you	don't	have	to	be	present	to	watch	the	whole
scene,	because	then	it	becomes	more	difficult	for	me	to	do	the	performance."
One	day	a	man	came.	He	was	known	to	me,	he	was	a	bookseller.	And	I	told	him,
"Can	you	pretend	just	for	two	minutes	to	be	a	far-off	relative	of	a	dead	wife?"
He	said,	"What?"
I	said,	"I	will	explain	it	to	you	later	on	when	I	come	to	your	shop.	But	remember,
it	 has	 to	 be	 done	 in	 a	 certain	 way:	 First,	 I	 will	 introduce	 you	 as	 the	 best
shopkeeper	in	town,	who	is	not	only	a	shopkeeper	but	who	loves	books	and	has	a
collection	of	rare	books.	Ìt	 is	not	 just	a	business	for	him,	it	 is	his	 love	affair.'	 I
will	introduce	you	first	in	this	way.	And	then	in	the	middle	I	will	tell	him,	`He's
also	a	relative	of	your	dead	wife.'	I	just	want	to	see	how	he	changes	his	mask."
I	introduced	the	man.	My	uncle	was	perfectly	happy.	He	said,	"Very	good,	I	will
come	some	 time.	 I	don't	have	much	 time	 to	 read,	but	 if	you	can	suggest	 some
rare	books	I	will	try	to	find	the	time."
And	then	I	said,	"But	I	forgot	one	thing.	He	has	not	come	here	to	sell	books;	he
is	a	relative	of	your	dead	wife."	And	immediately	my	uncle	started	crying,	tears
came	to	his	eyes	and	he	was	so	miserable....
The	bookseller	was	also	amazed	at	how	quickly	he	changed.	He	had	 just	been
laughing	and	there	had	been	no	question	of	misery	or	anything.
And	then	I	said,	"Just	don't	harass	yourself.	He	is	not	related	to	your	wife,	it	is
just	a	misunderstanding."
He	said,	"What	kind	of	misunderstanding?"
I	said,	"Another	woman	in	the	neighborhood	has	also	died;	he	is	related	to	that
woman."
And	immediately	all	the	tears	were	gone	and	he	started	laughing.	He	said,	"This
is	a	great	joke!	Why	didn't	you	tell	me?"
The	bookseller	said,	"I	am	very	new	to	this	locality,	I	have	never	been	here,	and
he	misled	me.	He	told	me	that	my	relative	used	to	live	here,	and	she	has	died.	I
came	because	of	my	relative	who	has	died	--	but	I	am	not	acquainted	with	this
locality	and	I	have	never	seen	the	husband	of	my	relative,	so	just	forgive	me.	But
it	 has	 been	 a	 great	 experience!	 You	 could	 have	 been	 a	 great	 actor	 --	 within
minutes,	from	laughter	to	misery,	from	misery	back	to	laughter."
I	said,	"This	is	nothing.	If	I	tell	him	the	reality,	he	will	be	back	again	to	tears	and
misery."
He	said,	"What	reality?"
I	said,	"No	other	woman	has	died.	He	is	a	relative	of	your	wife."
He	said,	"Listen,	I	have	told	you	this	is	a	serious	affair."	And	again	misery	and
tears.
And	that	man	felt	so	sad	for	this	miserable	creature...	he	told	me,	"Don't	torture
him	this	way."
I	said,	"I	am	not	 torturing	him.	He	is	 torturing	himself!	What	 is	 the	need?	The
wife	 is	dead,	 she	cannot	 come	back.	He	need	not	be	afraid	of	her,	 at	 least	not
now.	While	 she	was	alive,	 it	was	difficult	 to	 say.	 I	knew	his	wife,	 and	he	was
perfectly	 right	 to	 be	 afraid	 of	 her.	 But	 now	 he	 need	 not	 be	 afraid,	 she	 cannot
come."
I	 said	 to	my	uncle,	 "You	 just	 be	 your	 natural	 self.	 If	 you	 are	 feeling	pleasant,
why	change	personalities?	Why	make	your	life	a	drama	instead	of	a	reality?"
But	we	are	all	doing	that	in	different	measures.
Your	 personality	 consists	 only	 of	 cultivated	 layers.	 Many	 masks	 are	 hanging
around	you	-
-	whichever	you	need,	you	put	it	on.	In	fact,	humanity	has	developed,	by	and	by,
almost	an	automatic	system	--	you	need	not	do	anything,	it	happens	by	itself.
The	moment	you	see	your	boss,	your	face	changes	--	not	that	you	change	it.	It	is
so	unconscious	that	you	start	smiling,	just	like	a	dog	wagging	his	tail.
Even	dogs	are	very	clever.	If	they	are	not	certain	about	a	stranger	who	is	coming
towards	their	house	--	he	may	be	a	friend,	he	may	not	be	a	friend	--	they	do	both
things:	they	go	on	barking,	and	they	go	on	wagging	their	tail	also.	They	are	just
waiting	 to	 see	which	 direction	 the	 camel	 turns;	 if	 the	man	 is	 received	 by	 the
family	 as	 a	 friend,	 the	 barking	 stops	 and	 the	 tail	 continues.	And	 if	 the	 family
rejects	the	man,	then	the	tail	stops	and	barking	continues.
Poor	dogs	 are	being	 corrupted	because	of	 the	 company	 they	keep	with	human
beings;	they	have	learned	your	tricks.
A	person	meeting	 the	boss	has	one	 face.	The	same	person	meeting	his	 servant
has	a	different	face.	He	behaves	with	the	servant	as	if	he	does	not	matter	at	all,
he	is	not	human.	You	can	pass	him	without	taking	any	note	of	him,	he	is	only	a
servant.
But	as	far	as	the	boss	is	concerned,	you	have	to	take	a	joyous	attitude,	an	ear-to-
ear	smile
--	a	 Jimmy	Carter	 smile.	And	you	are	not	doing	 it	deliberately;	now	 it	 is	your
autonomous,	unconscious	functioning.
Enlightenment	 is	 simply	 the	 process	 of	 becoming	 aware	 of	 your	 unconscious
layers	of	personality	and	dropping	those	layers.	They	are	not	you;	they	are	false
faces.	And	because	of	those	false	faces,	you	cannot	discover	your	original	face.
Enlightenment	 is	nothing	but	 the	discovery	of	 the	original	 face	 --	 the	essential
reality	you	brought	with	you,	and	the	essential	reality	you	will	have	to	take	with
you	when	you	die.
All	these	layers	gathered	between	birth	and	death	will	be	left	here	behind	you.
The	man	 of	 enlightenment	 does	 exactly	what	 death	 does	 to	 everybody,	 but	 he
does	it	himself.	He	dies	in	a	way	and	is	reborn,	dies	in	a	way	and	is	resurrected.
And	his	originality	is	luminous	because	it	is	part	of	eternal	life.
It	is	a	simple	process	of	discovering	yourself.
You	are	not	the	container	but	the	content.
Discarding	 the	 container	 and	 discovering	 the	 content	 is	 the	 whole	 process	 of
enlightenment.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	YOUR	PRESENCE	ALL	AROUND	ME,	YOUR	LOVE	AND	YOUR
COMPASSION,	 BUT	 I	 MYSELF	 FEEL	 UNWORTHY	 OF	 IT.	 WHO	 AM	 I
THAT	 I	 SHOULD	 DESERVE	 YOU?	 JUST	 BECAUSE	 OF	 THIS,	 I	 HAVE
CLOSED	A	DOOR
IN	 FRONT	 OF	 YOU.	 MY	 HEART	 IS	 SUFFERING,	 BUT	 I	 HAVE
FORGOTTEN
WHERE	THE	DOOR	IS.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
It	is	one	of	the	crimes	that	has	been	committed	against	everybody	everywhere	in
human	 society:	 you	 have	 been	 continuously	 conditioned	 and	 told	 that	 you	 are
unworthy.
Because	 of	 this	 conditioning,	 the	 major	 part	 of	 humanity	 has	 given	 up	 even
desiring	 any	 adventure,	 any	pilgimage	 to	 the	 stars	 --	 they	 are	 so	 convinced	of
their	unworthiness.	Their	parents	were	 telling	 them,	"You	are	unworthy."	Their
teachers	were	telling	them,	"You	are	unworthy."	Their	priests	were	telling	them,
"You	 are	 unworthy."	 Everybody	was	 forcing	 the	 idea	 on	 them	 that	 they	 were
unworthy.	Naturally	they	accepted	the	idea.
And	once	you	accept	the	idea	of	unworthiness,	you	naturally	close.	You	cannot
believe	 that	you	have	wings,	 that	 the	whole	sky	 is	yours,	 that	you	have	 just	 to
open	your	wings	and	the	sky	is	going	to	be	yours,	with	all	its	stars.
And	 it	 is	not	 a	question	 that	 somewhere	you	have	 forgotten	 to	open	one	door.
You	don't	have	any	doors,	you	don't	have	any	walls.
This	unworthiness	is	simply	a	concept,	an	idea.
You	have	become	hypnotized	by	the	idea.
Since	the	very	beginning,	all	cultures,	all	societies	have	been	using	hypnotism	to
destroy	individuals	--	their	freedom,	their	uniqueness,	their	genius	--	because	the
vested	 interests	are	not	 in	need	of	geniuses,	not	 in	need	of	unique	 individuals,
not	 in	need	of	 people	who	 love	 freedom.	They	 are	 in	need	of	 slaves.	And	 the
only	psychological	way	 to	create	slaves	 is	 to	condition	your	mind	 that	you	are
unworthy,	that	you	don't	deserve;	that	you	don't	even	deserve	whatever	you	have,
you	 should	 not	 go	 for	 anything	 more.	 Already	 you	 owe	 too	 much	 for	 things
which	you	are	not	worthy	of.
And	hypnotism	is	a	simple	process	of	continuous	repetition.	Just	go	on	repeating
a	 certain	 idea	 and	 it	 starts	 settling	 inside	 you,	 and	 it	 becomes	 a	 thick	 wall,
invisible	--	there	are	no	doors,	no	windows.	There	is	no	wall	either.
George	Gurdjieff	has	remembered	his	childhood....	He	was	born	in	the	Caucasus,
one	 of	 the	 most	 primitive	 parts	 of	 the	 world.	 It	 is	 still	 at	 the	 stage	 where
humanity	was	when	 it	 lived	 by	 hunting;	 even	 cultivation	 has	 not	 started.	 The
people	of	the	Caucasus	are	great	hunters.
And	any	society	that	lives	by	hunting	is	bound	to	be	a	nomadic	society.	It	cannot
make	 houses,	 it	 cannot	make	 cities,	 because	 you	 cannot	 depend	 on	 animals	 --
today	 they	 are	 available	 here,	 tomorrow	 they	 are	 not	 available	 here.	 And
certainly	 you	will	 kill	 them,	 and	 because	 of	 your	 presence	 they	will	 escape	 --
either	they	will	be	killed	or	they	will	escape.
Cities	 are	 possible	 only	with	 cultivation	 because	 trees	 cannot	 escape,	 and	 you
have	to	be	 there	 to	protect	 them,	 to	water	 them,	 to	 take	care	of	 them	--	so	you
have	to	live	in	villages	near	your	fields.
The	Caucasus	is	still	nomadic.	They	are	on	their	horses,	moving	from	one	place
to	another	place,	hunting.
Gurdjieff	was	brought	up	by	a	nomadic	society,	so	he	was	coming	from	almost
another	planet.	He	knew	a	few	things	which	we	have	forgotten.	He	remembers
that	 in	 his	 childhood	 the	 nomads	 hypnotized	 their	 children	 --	 because	 they
cannot	carry	them	continuously	while	they	are	hunting;	they	have	to	leave	them
somewhere	 under	 a	 tree,	 in	 a	 safe	 place.	But	what	 is	 the	 guarantee	 that	 those
children	will	 remain	 there?	They	have	 to	be	hypnotized.	So	 they	used	 a	 small
strategy	--	and	they	have	used	it	for	centuries.
From	 the	very	beginning	when	 the	 child	 is	very	 small,	 they	will	make	him	sit
under	a	tree.	They	will	draw	a	circle	around	the	child	with	a	stick	and	tell	him,
"You	cannot	go	out	of	this	circle;	if	you	go	out	of	it,	you	will	be	dead."
Now	 those	 small	 children	 believe,	 just	 like	 you.	 Why	 are	 you	 Christian?	 --
because	your	parents	told	you.	Why	are	you	Hindus?	Why	are	you	Jainas?	Why
are	you	Mohammedans?	--	because	your	parents	told	you.
Those	children	believe	that	if	they	go	out	of	the	circle	they	will	die.	They	grow
up	with	this	conditioning.
And	you	may	try	to	persuade	them:	"Come	out,	I	will	give	you	a	sweet."	They
cannot,	because	death....	Even	sometimes	if	they	try,	they	feel	as	if	an	invisible
wall	prevents	them,	pushes	them	back	into	the	circle.	And	that	wall	exists	only	in
their	minds	--	there	is	no	wall,	 there	is	nothing.	Unless	the	person	who	has	put
them	in	the	circle	comes	and	withdraws	the	circle,	takes	the	child	out,	the	child
remains	inside.
And	the	child	goes	on	growing,	but	the	idea	remains	in	the	unconscious.	So	even
an	old	man,	if	his	father	draws	a	circle	around	him,	cannot	get	out	of	it.
So	 it	 is	 not	 only	 a	 question	 of	 the	 child;	 the	 old	 man	 also	 still	 carries	 his
childhood	in	his	unconscious.
And	it	is	not	a	question	of	one	child.	The	whole	group	of	nomads	have	put	their
children	under	trees	nearby,	and	all	 the	children	are	sitting	there	the	whole	day
long.	By	 the	 time	 their	 parents	 come	back,	 it	 has	 become	 such	 a	 conditioning
that	no	matter	what	happens,	the	child	will	not	leave	the	circle.
Exactly	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 circles	 are	 drawn	 around	 you	 by	 your	 society.	 Of
course	they	are	more	sophisticated.	Your	religion	is	nothing	but	a	circle,	but	very
sophisticated;	 your	 church,	 your	 temple,	 your	 holy	 book	 is	 nothing	 but	 a
hypnotic	circle.
One	has	to	understand	that	one	is	 living	surrounded	by	many	circles	which	are
only	in	your	mind.	They	don't	have	a	real	existence,	but	they	function	almost	as
if	they	are	real.
One	 night	 it	 happened,	 it	 must	 have	 been	 nearabout	 twelve,	 a	 young	 man
knocked	 on	 my	 door.	 I	 was	 still	 awake,	 writing	 a	 few	 letters.	 He	 fell	 on	 the
ground,	 took	hold	of	my	 feet,	 and	 said,	 "Just	give	me	one	glass	of	water	with
your	hand."
I	said,	"What	is	the	purpose?"
He	 said,	 "I	 have	 been	 sent	 by	 a	Dr.	 S.C.	Barat.	 I	 am	 his	 patient.	 I	 have	 been
suffering	 from	 a	 stomachache	 for	 years.	 He	 has	 tried	 all	 kinds	 of	 medicines,
nothing	helps.	And	today	he	said,	`Now	medical	science	cannot	help	you;	only	a
miracle	can	help	you.'	So	I	asked	where	I	had	to	go	for	the	miracle	and	he	sent
me	to	you.	And	he	said,	`Whatever	happens,	you	go	on	holding	his	feet	unless	he
gives	you	a	glass	of	water	--	just	that	water	will	be	the	cure."
Dr.	Barat	was	my	friend.	He	had	told	me	that	he	was	going	to	send	this	young
man.	He	said,	"He	is	a	hypochondriac.	He	has	no	stomachache,	nothing	--	just	he
is	 rich,	 too	 much	 money	 and	 nothing	 to	 do.	 So	 he	 is	 doing	 stomachache,
headache...	he	gets	any	kind	of	disease.	I	have	not	found	any	disease	in	him,	he
is	 perfectly	 healthy.	 But	 every	 day	 he	 tortures	 me	 for	 hours.	 I	 know	 that	 no
medicine	 is	 going	 to	 help	 because	 he	 is	 not	 sick.	 In	 fact,	 to	 give	 him	 any
medicine	is	dangerous.
"So	 I	 have	 been	 giving	 him	 just	 colored	water,	 especially	 prepared	 for	 him.	 I
have	 a	whole	 cabinet	 full	 of	 colored	water	 in	 bottles;	 I	make	 a	mixture	 from
these	bottles	and	give	it	to	him.	He	says,	`Yes,	a	little	relief	but	the	pain	remains.'
And	 if	 it	 disappears	 from	one	 place,	 it	 starts	 appearing	 in	 another	 place.	 I	 am
tired.	And	because	of	him,	I	am	losing	many	patients.	So	you	have	to	save	me
from	 this	 rich	 young	 man.	 His	 father	 has	 died	 and	 he	 has	 a	 big	 inheritance,
enough	money	to	throw	away	on	anything.	But	he	is	destroying	my	business."
I	said,	"I	don't	understand	--	how	is	he	destroying	your	business?"
He	said,	"It	is	very	simple	--	because	my	other	patients	see	him,	and	see	that	he
has	been	coming	for	ten	years	and	I	have	not	been	able	to	cure	him.	It	creates	a
bad	impression.	So	I	am	sending	him	to	you,	and	you	have	to	do	the	miracle."
I	 said,	 "I	don't	do	miracles,	 and	miracles	don't	happen.	But	 if	you	want,	 I	will
try."
So	when	the	young	man	came,	I	went	on	denying	him:	"Just	water	 touched	by
me	is	not	going	to	help.	You	should	go	to	another	doctor	--	why	are	you	after	this
Dr.	 Barat?	 If	 one	 doctor	 has	 failed,	 go	 to	 another	 doctor.	 If	 onèpathy'	 fails...
change	 from	 allopathy:	 try	 ayurveda;	 if	 ayurveda	 fails,	 try	 homeopathy;	 if
homeopathy	fails,	 try	naturopathy.	And	by	that	 time	you	will	be	dead,	don't	be
worried.	Whether	the	disease	goes	or	not,	you	will	be	gone!"
He	said,	"But	I	want	to	live!	I	am	too	young	to	die	right	now."	And	he	was	not
more	than	twenty-six.	He	said,	"I	am	not	even	married.	Because	my	father	died,	I
have	enough	money	--	many	people	are	after	me.	They	want	me	to	marry	their
daughters,	and	I	don't	want	 to	be	encaged.	And	first	 I	want	 to	 take	care	of	my
health.	Getting	married	means	bringing	more	sicknesses,	more	diseases	into	the
house.	You	have	to	give	me	a	glass	of	water!"
I	said,	"It	is	very	difficult,	because	miracles	don't	happen."
I	 was	 staying	 in	 a	 friend's	 house.	 His	 wife	 was	 listening	 as	 this	 whole
conversation	was	going	on	and	on,	and	he	was	crying....	Finally	the	woman	came
out	and	said,	"I	never	thought	that	you	are	so	hard.	Whether	it	helps	or	not,	just
give	him	a	glass	of	water.	Half	of	the	night	has	passed;	neither	are	you	going	to
sleep,	nor	are	you	allowing	anybody	else	in	the	house	to	sleep	--	because	we	are
all	excited,	waiting	to	see	what	happens,	whether	the	miracle	happens	or	not."
I	 said,	 "Because	you	 say	 so,	 and	because	 I	don't	want	 to	 torture	your	 family...
Bring	a	glass	of	water."
And	I	told	the	young	man,	"Remember,	you	are	not	to	talk	about	it	to	anybody	--
because	I	don't	want	it	to	happen	that	from	tomorrow	the	whole	day	long	a	queue
of	patients	is	there.	I	don't	have	time	for	all	this.	So	promise	me	that	you	will	not
talk."
He	 said,	 "I	 promise	 that	 I	will	 not	 talk,	 but	 you	 also	 have	 to	 promise	me	 one
thing."
I	said,	"What	is	it?"
He	said,	"You	will	have	 to	promise	me	that	once	in	a	while	I	can	come	with	a
bottle	of	water	and	you	will	touch	it."
I	said,	"What	you	are	going	to	do	with	it?"
He	 said,	 "I	 will	 not	 say	 anything	 to	 anybody	 about	 you.	 But	 if	 the	 miracle
happens	 and	 my	 stomachache	 disappears,	 there	 are	 many	 people	 who	 are
suffering.	I	can	distribute	the	water.	But	I	promise	I	will	not	talk."
So	I	said,	"Okay,	it	is	a	promise.	But	don't	bring	anybody	here!"
I	gave	him	a	glass	of	water,	 and	as	he	drank	 the	water	 --	 just	drinking	 it,	 you
could	see	his	face	changing.	And	he	said,	"My	God,	the	pain	is	gone!"
My	friend's	wife	was	standing	behind	me.	She	said,	"You	did	it!"
I	 said,	 "I	have	not	done	 it	 --	and	 remember	 that	you	are	not	 to	 talk	about	 it	 to
anybody."
She	 said,	 "I	may	 not	 talk,	 but	 everybody	 in	 the	 house	 knows	 --	 everybody	 is
hiding,	all	the	children	are	there.	Now...."	She	said,	"If	this	was	going	to	happen,
why	did	you	waste	one	hour?"
I	said,	"Without	wasting	that	hour,	the	water	wouldn't	have	helped.	It	was	not	the
water;	it	was	my	insistence	that	I	wouldn't	give	it	to	him.	He	became	more	and
more	convinced	that	the	water	was	going	to	work.	And	when	I	told	him	that	he
had	 to	 promise	 not	 to	 talk	 to	 anybody,	 he	 was	 absolutely	 convinced	 that	 the
miracle	was	going	to	happen."
He	started	distributing	the	water.
And	 people	 told	 me	 --	 even	 Dr.	 Barat	 told	 me,	 "It	 is	 strange.	 You	 cured	 my
patient	and	now	he	is	curing	my	patients.	I	was	thinking	I	was	finished	with	him
--	now	he	comes	with	a	bottle	into	my	dispensary.	He	sits	there	and	says,	`Don't
bother	about	this	medicine,	it	won't	help.	Take	the	miraculous	water.'	That	young
man	 seems	 to	 be	my	 enemy	 from	 a	 past	 life!	And	 he	 has	 cured	 a	 few	 of	my
patients!"
Seventy	percent	of	sick	people	are	only	sick	in	their	minds,	they	don't	have	a	real
sickness.
Hence	 it	 has	 been	 found	 that	 all	 the	 pathies	 --	 allopathy,	 ayurveda,	 yunani,
naturopathy,	 homeopathy	 --	 they	 all	 succeed	 in	 seventy	 percent	 of	 cases.	 In
seventy	percent	of	cases	anybody	can	do	miracles,	one	just	has	to	make	the	right
arrangement	so	the	mind	is	convinced	that	the	miracle	is	going	to	happen.
It	is	simply	a	conditioning	that	you	are	unworthy.
Nobody	is	unworthy.
Existence	does	not	produce	people	who	are	unworthy.
Existence	 is	not	unintelligent.	 If	existence	produces	so	many	unworthy	people,
then	 the	 whole	 responsibility	 goes	 to	 existence.	 Then	 it	 can	 be	 definitely
concluded	that	existence	is	not	intelligent,	that	there	is	no	intelligence	behind	it,
that	 it	 is	 an	 unintelligent,	 accidental	 materialist	 phenomenon	 and	 there	 is	 no
consciousness	in	it.
And	 this	 is	 our	 whole	 fight,	 our	 whole	 struggle:	 to	 prove	 that	 existence	 is
intelligent,	that	existence	is	immensely	conscious.
It	is	the	same	existence	which	creates	Gautam	Buddhas.
It	cannot	create	unworthy	people.
You	are	not	unworthy.
So	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 finding	 a	 door;	 there	 is	 only	 an	 understanding	 that
unworthiness	is	a	false	idea	imposed	on	you	by	those	who	want	you	to	be	a	slave
for	your	whole	life.
You	can	drop	it	just	right	now.
Existence	gives	the	same	sun	to	you	as	to	Gautam	Buddha,	the	same	moon	as	to
Zarathustra,	the	same	wind	as	to	Mahavira,	the	same	rain	as	to	Jesus	--	it	makes
no	difference,	 it	has	no	 idea	of	discrimination.	For	existence,	Gautam	Buddha,
Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu,	Bodhidharma,	Kabir,	Nanak	or	you	are	just	the	same.
The	 only	 difference	 is	 that	 Gautam	 Buddha	 did	 not	 accept	 the	 idea	 of	 being
unworthy,	 he	 rejected	 the	 idea.	 It	 was	 easy	 for	 him	 to	 reject	 it	 --	 he	 was	 the
prince	of	a	great	kingdom,	the	only	son	of	the	king,	and	the	king	was	thought	to
be	almost	a	god.	So	he	had	no	idea	of	unworthiness.
But	what	about	Kabir?	What	about	Raidas	the	shoemaker?	What	about	Gora	the
potter?
These	 poor	 people	were	 burdened	 by	 the	 society	with	 the	 idea	 that	 they	were
unworthy,	but	they	rejected	it.
In	Kabir's	life	there	were	clearcut	examples.	Kabir	lived	his	whole	life	in	Kashi.
For	centuries	Hindus	have	believed	that	to	die	in	Kashi	is	the	greatest	thing	you
can	do	in	life,	because	for	one	who	dies	in	Kashi,	his	paradise	is	guaranteed.	It
does	not	matter	what	kind	of	man	he	was,	whether	he	was	a	murderer,	a	thief,	a
saint	 or	 a	 sinner	 --	 these	 things	 are	 all	 irrelevant.	 His	 dying	 in	 Kashi	 erases
everything	and	he	becomes	qualified	for	paradise.
So	 in	Kashi	you	will	 find	old	people,	old	women	who	have	come	there	 just	 to
die.	 They	 have	 not	 done	 anything	 in	 their	 life,	 but	 they	 don't	 want	 to	 miss
paradise.
And	Kabir	lived	his	whole	life	in	Kashi,	and	when	he	was	going	to	die	he	said,
"Take	me	out	of	Kashi	to	the	other	side,	to	the	small	village."	Just	on	the	other
side	of	the	Ganges	was	a	small	village.
His	disciples	said,	"Are	you	mad	or	something?	People	come	to	Kashi,	the	whole
of	Kashi	is	full	of	people	who	have	come	here	to	die.	You	have	lived	your	whole
life	in	Kashi,	what	kind	of	nonsense	is	this?	And	the	village	you	are	pointing	to
is	 a	 condemned	 village;	 people	 say	 whoever	 dies	 there	 is	 born	 again	 as	 a
donkey."
But	Kabir	said,	"I	will	go	to	that	village,	and	I	will	die	in	that	village.	I	want	to
enter	paradise	on	my	own	worth,	not	because	of	Kashi.	And	I	know	my	worth."
They	had	to	take	him.	Against	their	will	they	had	to	take	him	to	the	other	side,
and	he	died	there.
This	man	is	so	certain	of	his	worth.
He	 was	 a	 weaver.	 It	 is	 not	 certain	 whether	 he	 was	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan
because	his	name,	Kabir,	is	Mohammedan;	it	is	one	of	the	names	of	God.	He	was
found	 on	 the	 Ganges	 --	 a	 small	 child,	 just	 a	 few	 days	 old,	 abandoned	 by	 his
parents.
One	great	Hindu	scholar,	Ramananda,	had	gone	for	his	early	bath	and	he	found
the	child.
And	he	could	not	be	so	hard	as	 to	 leave	him	there,	so	he	brought	him	into	his
ashram	--
he	had	an	ashram	and	hundreds	of	disciples.	So	 the	child	was	brought	up	by	a
brahmin.
But	on	his	hand	was	written	the	namèKabir'.	He	didn't	change	his	name.
It	is	still	uncertain	whether	he	was	Mohammedan	or	Hindu.	He	never	cared.
Once	there	was	a	great	conference	in	Kashi.	It	used	to	convene	only	after	each
twelve	years	to	decide	about	certain	spiritual	matters,	problems	which	may	have
arisen	about	scriptures.	Naturally	Kabir	was	not	invited	because	it	was	not	even
certain	that	he	was	a	Hindu,	and	only	brahmins	could	be	allowed.
But	about	a	certain	point	in	the	scriptures	they	could	not	come	to	a	conclusion.
One	 man	 said,	 "You	 have	 to	 forget	 about	 whether	 Kabir	 is	 Hindu	 or
Mohammedan,	 it	 doesn't	 matter.	 He	 is	 the	 only	 man	 alive	 in	 Kashi	 who	 can
immediately	decide	the	meaning,	the	insight	of	this	scriptural	passage."
I	am	telling	you	about	this	incident	for	a	particular	reason.
At	that	very	time	Meera	was	also	in	Kashi,	she	had	just	come.	She	was	traveling
around	India.
Reluctantly,	the	scholars	asked	Kabir:	"You	are	invited	to	the	conference	because
we	 are	 stuck	 at	 a	 certain	 point,	 and	nobody	has	 the	 experience.	And	 there	 are
many	people	in	the	conference	who	say,	`Kabir	has	the	experience.'	This	passage
needs	to	be	interpreted	only	by	one	who	has	known	himself;	so	although	we	are
not	 certain	 whether	 you	 are	 Hindu	 or	Mohammedan	 or	 brahmin,	 still	 we	 are
inviting	you,	against	all	precedents."
Kabir	said,	"There	is	a	condition:	I	will	come	only	if	Meera	is	also	invited."
Now	 that	 was	 even	more	 difficult	 for	 the	 male	 chauvinist	 mind	 --	 a	 woman!
What	does	a	woman	have	to	do	with	it?	When	wise	scholars	are	deciding	things,
a	woman's	function	is	in	the	house.
Kabir	said,	"Then	Kabir	is	not	coming.	Kabir	can	come	only	if	Meera	is	allowed
to	come.
When	you	are	ready	to	allow	Kabir	--	whose	caste	is	not	certain,	whose	religion
is	not	certain	--	what	is	the	problem	about	Meera?	--	because	she	can	also	decide.
Even	if	I	don't	come,	she	also	has	the	same	experience	as	I	have."
And	the	scholars	had	to	agree.
This	has	happened	only	once,	that	a	woman	and	a	non-brahmin	joined	with	the
highest	 hierarchy	 of	 Hinduism	 to	 interpret	 their	 scriptures.	 And	 their
interpretation	was	accepted.
Kabir's	disciples	asked,	"From	where	did	you	get	such	authority?"
He	said,	 "If	 existence	accepts	me,	 if	 existence	gives	me	 life,	 that	 is	 enough	 to
prove	that	I	am	needed,	that	existence	cannot	do	without	me."
So	drop	the	idea	of	unworthiness,	it	is	simply	an	idea.	And	with	the	dropping	of
it,	you	are	under	the	sky	--	there	is	no	question	of	doors,	everything	is	open,	all
directions	are	open.	That	you	are	 is	enough	 to	prove	 that	existence	needs	you,
loves	you,	nourishes	you,	respects	you.
The	idea	of	unworthiness	is	created	by	the	social	parasites.
Drop	that	idea.
And	be	grateful	to	existence	--	because	it	only	creates	people	who	are	worthy,	it
never	creates	anything	which	is	worthless.
It	only	creates	people	who	are	needed.
My	emphasis	is	that	every	sannyasin	should	respect	himself	and	feel	grateful	to
existence	that	he	has	been	required	to	be	here	at	this	juncture	of	time	and	space.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	IS	A	SUFI	SAYING	THAT	"NO	HUMAN	BEING	CAN	AVOID	HIS
FATE.
THIS	 IS	 A	 WORLD	 OF	 LIMITATIONS	 --	 BLESSED	 ARE	 THOSE	 WHO
GAIN	A	TASTE	OF	THE	LIMITLESS,	DESPITE	THIS	FACT."
A	 FAMOUS	 ASTROLOGER	 AND	 COMPOSER,	 DANE	 RUDHYAR,	WHO
WAS	 A	 FRIEND	 OF	 GEORGE	 GURDJIEFF,	 SAID,	 "THE	 OLD	 IDEA	 OF
ASTROLOGY	--
THAT	EXPERIENCE	HAPPENS	TO	HUMAN	BEINGS	--	IS	NOT	TRUE.	ON
THE
CONTRARY,	HUMAN	BEINGS	HAPPEN	TO	THEIR	EXPERIENCE."
MY	 OBSERVATION	 IS	 THAT	 EVERY	 ASTROLOGER	 WHO	 IS
COURAGEOUS
ENOUGH	WILL	FIND	OUT	THAT	GURDJIEFF	IS	TRUE	WHEN	HE	SAYS,
"MAN
IS	A	MACHINE."
ON	THE	OTHER	HAND,	MY	EXPERIENCE	WITH	YOU,	CHRIST,	AND
BUDDHIST	 TEACHERS	 HAS	 REVEALED	 THE	 EXISTENCE	 OF	 THE
LIMITLESS
IN	THE	MIDST	OF	LIMITATIONS.	WHILE	RELIGIOUSNESS	OPENS	THE
DOORS
TO	 THE	 LIMITLESS,	 ASTROLOGY	 STUDIES	 THE	WORLD	 OF	 FORMS
AND
LIMITATIONS.	AND	WITHOUT	THE	FIRST,	THE	SECOND	COULD	HAVE
BECOME	 INTOLERABLE	 TO	 ME.	 NOW,	 SLOWLY	 SLOWLY,	 THE
FORMLESS
AND	THE	FORM	SEEM	TO	MEET	AND	MARRY	INSIDE	OF	ME.
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
George	Gurdjieff	 is	right	when	he	says	that	man	is	a	machine,	but	by	`man'	he
means	all	 those	who	are	 living	unconsciously,	who	are	not	aware,	who	are	not
awake,	who	do	not	respond	to	reality	but	only	react.
Ninety-nine	 point	 nine	 percent	 of	 human	 beings	 come	 in	 the	 category	 of
machines.	With	these	machines,	astrology	is	possible.
In	fact,	predictions	can	be	made,	guarantees	can	be	issued	only	about	machines.
A	watch	can	be	guaranteed	for	five	years,	a	car	can	be	guaranteed	for	a	certain
time	 --	because	we	know	 the	capacity	of	 the	machine,	how	much	 it	 can	work,
how	long	 it	can	go.	 Its	 scope	 is	 limited.	And	 it	cannot	do	anything	on	 its	own
accord,	it	can	only	react	to	situations	--
which	are	almost	predictable.
For	example,	at	a	certain	stage	a	boy	and	a	girl	will	become	sexually	mature,	and
their	 hormones	 and	 their	 biology	 will	 start	 forcing	 them	 towards	 each	 other.
They	will	call	it	love	because	nobody	wants	to	be	categorized	as	a	machine.	But
two	machines	cannot	love,	two	machines	can	only	be	together,	can	struggle,	can
stumble	against	each	other.
And	it	is	not	coincidence	that	in	every	language,	love	is	called	`falling	in	love'.	It
is	an	unconscious	process,	it	is	a	fall.	You	cannot	answer	why	you	love	a	certain
person.
And	now	the	science	of	human	biology,	genetics,	has	grown	much	more	mature.
It	 is	 possible	 to	 inject	 hormones	 into	 you	 which	 can	 make	 all	 your	 love
disappear,	 or	which	 can	make	you	 a	 great	 lover.	But	 these	 are	 hormones;	 it	 is
chemical.	You	are	not	consciously	involved	in	it.
It	happened	in	Bombay	nearabout	twenty	years	ago	--	an	astrologer	came	to	see
me.	I	told	him,	"You	will	be	disappointed.	Astrology	won't	work	with	me."
He	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	you	or	anybody	else,	there	are	no	exceptions	in
astrology."
I	said,	"Then	do	one	 thing:	Write	down	twelve	 things	 that	 I	am	going	 to	do	 in
one	year.
You	keep	one	 copy	 and	 I	will	 keep	one	 copy,	 I	will	write	 on	both	 copies	 that
these	 are	 the	 twelve	 things	 that	 I	 will	 not	 do.	 That's	 the	 only	 way	 to	 decide
whether	your	astrology	works	or	not."
He	got	a	little	afraid	because	he	had	not	thought	of	this	possibility.
I	said,	"Even	to	the	extent...	if	you	say	that	I	will	live,	I	will	die	--	just	to	make
the	point	clear	that	astrology	won't	work	with	me."
He	said,	"Now	I	now	have	to	study	more	in	depth.	And	after	three	days	I	will	be
coming	back."
Twenty	years	have	passed;	he	has	not	come.
And	whenever	 I	 have	been	 in	Bombay,	 I	 have	 inquired,	 "Phone	 the	 astrologer
and	ask	when	that	in-depth	study	is	going	to	be	complete	--	because	twenty	years
have	passed.
Has	he	dropped	the	idea?"
If	 you	 are	 enlightened,	 then	 astrology	 cannot	 function	 for	 you.	 Then	 you	 can
love,	 then	you	can	do,	 then	you	can	act,	 then	you	have	a	certain	mastery	over
your	own	being.
But	unconscious,	you	are	just	moving	hither	and	thither	as	the	wind	blows.
And	 anybody	 who	 has	 studied	 human	 nature	 deeply....	 There	 are	 many
astrological	 schools	which	have	studied	 for	centuries	how	 the	mechanical	man
works.	They	have	come	to	certain	conclusions,	and	their	conclusions	are	almost
always	 correct.	 If	 they	 are	 incorrect,	 that	 means	 the	 astrologer	 is	 not	 well
prepared,	 his	 studies	 in	 human	 nature	 and	 unconscious	 behavior	 are	 not
complete.
But	the	moment	you	start	becoming	conscious,	you	start	becoming	really	a	man	-
-	not	a	machine.
When	Gurdjieff	 said	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that	man	 is	a	machine,	 it	 shocked	many
people.	 But	 he	 was	 saying	 the	 truth.	 Only	 the	 truth	 is	 applicable	 just	 to	 99.9
percent	of	people	--	0.1
percent	of	people	have	to	be	left	out	of	it.
Gautam	Buddha	was	born....
And	 in	 the	 East	 those	 were	 the	 days	 of	 the	 highest	 possibilities	 for	 human
genius.	In	all	directions	in	which	the	East	was	working,	it	reached	the	very	peak,
the	climax...	to	such	an	extent	that	you	cannot	find	a	new	Yoga	posture;	Patanjali
exhausted	all	the	possibilities	of	postures,	the	science	is	complete.	Five	thousand
years	have	passed,	and	in	five	thousand	years	thousands	of	people	have	tried	but
there	is	no	way	to	find	a	new	posture.
You	cannot	 find	a	new	sex	posture;	Vatsyayana	has	completed	all	 the	postures
possible	--
and	a	few	which	may	even	look	impossible!
Shiva	completed	all	the	techniques	--	one	hundred	and	twelve.	You	can	play	with
new	combinations,	but	nothing	new	is	possible.
Astrology	was	at	its	peak.
And	as	Gautam	Buddha	was	born,	the	son	of	a	great	king,	the	king	immediately
called	the	best	astrologers.	They	all	studied	the	birth	chart	and	they	all	remained
silent.
Only	 one	 --	 a	 young	 astrologer	 --	 said	 to	 the	 king,	 "These	 people	 are	 silent
because	 this	 is	 a	 strange	boy,	 and	we	cannot	be	decisive	about	him.	There	are
two	 possibilities"	 --	 and	 astrology	 never	 speaks	 in	 that	way.	Astrology	means
you	 have	 to	 predict	 what	 is	 going	 to	 be;	 you	 are	 not	 there	 to	 predict	 all	 the
possibilities	--	that	will	not	be	prediction.
But	the	young	astrologer	said,	"These	are	old	wise	people,	they	will	not	even	say
this.	I	am	young	and	I	can	stick	my	neck	out,	I	can	risk,	because	I	don't	have	any
reputation.
There	are	two	possibilities:	either	this	boy	will	become	an	emperor	of	the	world,
a	chakravartin,	or	he	will	become	an	enlightened,	awakened	liberated	soul	--	but
then	he	will	be	a	beggar.	Either	he	will	be	the	emperor	of	the	whole	world	or	he
will	be	just	a	beggar	with	a	begging	bowl	in	his	hands.	And	it	is	not	in	our	power
to	say	what	the	outcome	will	be."
And	 all	 the	 old	 astrologers	 agreed.	 "The	 young	 man	 is	 right.	We	 were	 silent
because	this	is	not	the	way	astrology	functions	--	we	say,	`this	is	definitely	going
to	 happen.'	 But	 about	 this	 boy	 we	 cannot	 say.	 And	 the	 possibilities	 are	 so
diametrically	opposite	--	either	the	emperor	or	the	beggar."
And	that's	what	happened.
The	king	asked	all	those	wise	astrologers,	"Then	tell	me	how	to	protect	him	so
that	 he	 does	 not	 move	 towards	 becoming	 a	 beggar	 but	 becomes	 the	 world
emperor.	That	has	been	my	lifelong	desire.	I	could	not	achieve	it	--	but	he	has	the
possibility.	So	just	tell	me	how	to	prevent	him	from	becoming	a	beggar."
They	gave	all	their	advice,	and	their	advice	turned	out	to	create	just	the	opposite
to	what	they	intended.	They	had	suggested,	"Give	him	all	the	luxuries.	Don't	let
him	know	about	death,	old	age.	Don't	 let	him	know	about	 sannyas.	He	 should
not	be	given	time	to	think,
`What	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 life?'	 Keep	 him	 engaged	 continuously	 in	 singing,	 in
dancing,	wine	and	women,	drown	him	completely."
And	that's	what	created	the	trouble	--	because	for	twenty-nine	years	he	was	kept
so	 isolated	 from	 the	world,	 so	 ignorant	 about	 the	ordinary	 reality	of	 the	world
where	people	become	sick,	people	become	old,	people	die,	there	are	sannyasins,
there	are	seekers	of	truth...	If	he	had	been	allowed	from	the	very	beginning,	he
would	have	become	immune	-
-	 from	 the	very	beginning	he	would	have	seen	 that	people	become	old,	people
become	sick,	a	few	people	become	sannyasins.	But	for	twenty-nine	years	he	was
kept	completely	aloof.
And	 after	 twenty-nine	 years	when	 he	 came	 into	 contact	with	 the	world	 --	 one
day,	one	has	to	come	into	contact	with	the	world	--	then	it	was	a	great	shock.	He
could	not	believe	his	eyes	that	people	become	old;	he	could	not	believe	that	life
is	going	to	end	in	death.	He	could	not	believe	that	he	had	been	kept	in	darkness
while	there	were	people	searching	to	find	the	meaning	of	life,	trying	to	find	out
whether	there	was	something	immortal	in	man	or	not.
The	shock	would	not	have	been	so	much.	It	is	not	such	a	shock	for	anybody	else
--	 from	 the	 very	 childhood,	 everything...	 one	 becomes,	 slowly	 slowly,
accustomed.	But	for	him	the	shock	was	tremendous.
That	very	night	he	left	the	palace	as	a	sannyasin	in	search	of	truth.
The	 father	was	 trying	 to	 save	 him	 from	 the	 begging	 bowl,	 and	 that's	what	 he
adopted	that	night.
It	was	possible	he	might	have	become	Alexander	 the	Great	 if	he	had	not	been
kept	in	darkness.	But	in	a	way	it	was	good,	because	Alexander	the	Great	and	his
kind	have	not	helped	human	consciousness.
This	man	alone,	with	his	begging	bowl,	raised	humanity	more	than	anybody	else
towards	the	stars,	towards	immortality,	towards	truth.
About	such	a	man,	astrology	is	not	possible.
It	is	good	to	accept	that	you	are	functioning	like	a	machine.	Don't	feel	offended	-
-
because	if	you	feel	offended,	you	will	defend	yourself	and	you	will	remain	what
you	are.
Try	to	understand	your	behavior	--	is	it	mechanical	or	not?
Somebody	 insults	 you	 --	 how	 do	 you	 react?	 Is	 that	 reaction	 mechanical	 or
conscious?	 Do	 you	 think	 before	 you	 become	 angry?	 Do	 you	 meditate	 for	 a
moment	before	you	respond?
Perhaps	 what	 the	 man	 has	 said	 is	 right,	 and	 if	 you	 had	 not	 got	 angry
immediately,	 instantly,	 without	 giving	 a	 small	 gap	 for	 meditation,	 you	 might
have	been	grateful	to	the	man	rather	than	being	angry	--	"You	are	right."
In	fact,	things	which	are	right	hurt	you	much	more.
Lies	don't	hurt	you	at	all.
Just	 the	 other	 day,	 Nirvano	 brought	 a	 newspaper	 cutting.	 A	Western	 traveler
coming	from	Tibet	gave	his	first	press	conference,	and	in	the	press	conference	he
said,	"My	greatest	experience	was	meeting	with	Bhagwan	in	Tibet."
Now	 people	 can	 lie	 like	 anything,	 and	 whoever	 reads	 it	 will	 believe	 it.	 The
printed	word	has	a	certain	impact	on	people.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 before,	 there	was	 another	 news	 item	 --	 no	 ifs	 and	 no	 buts,	 a
certainty	--
that	"Bhagwan	is	going	to	appear	in	Israel	very	soon.	He	has	decided	to	become
converted	to	Judaism,	and	after	converting	to	Judaism,	he	will	declare	himself	to
be	the	reincarnation	of	Moses."
Now	what	 can	 you	 do	 with	 these	 people?	 You	 can	 laugh,	 but	 you	 cannot	 be
angry.	You	can	enjoy,	you	can	 thank	 them	for	 their	 imagination.	These	are	 the
people	who	keep	the	world	going!
Just	watch	your	actions,	and	try	not	to	be	mechanical.	Try	to	do	something	that
you	have	never	done	before	in	the	same	situation.
That's	what	the	meaning	is	when	Jesus	says,	"When	somebody	slaps	your	face,
give	him	the	other	cheek	too."	The	real	meaning	is,	simply	act	non-mechanically
--	because	 the	mechanical	 thing	would	be	when	somebody	slaps	you,	you	slap
him.	Or	if	you	are	not	capable	of	slapping	him	right	now,	then	wait	for	the	right
moment.	 But	 to	 give	 him	 the	 other	 cheek	 is	 behaving	 non-mechanically,	 is
behaving	very	consciously.
But	people	can	make	anything	mechanical.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 Christian	 saint	 who	 was	 continuously	 quoting	 the	 same
thing:	"Love	your	enemy,	and	if	somebody	slaps	you	on	one	cheek	give	him	the
other	too."
One	day	a	man	who	was	against	Christianity	found	the	saint	alone,	hit	him	hard
on	one	of	his	cheeks,	looked	into	the	eyes	of	the	saint....	For	a	moment	the	saint
wanted	 to	hit	him	back	--	but	being	a	saint,	 remembering	all	his	 teachings	and
remembering	that	this	man	sits	in	his	congregation	in	the	front,	he	gave	him	the
other	 cheek,	 thinking	 that	 he	would	 not	 hit	 it.	 The	man	 hit	 him	harder	 on	 the
other	cheek!	--	and	that	very	moment	the	saint	jumped	on	the	man,	hitting	him
hard	on	the	nose.	The	man	said,	"What	are	you	doing?
You	are	a	Christian,	you	have	to	love	your	enemy."
He	 said,	 "Forget	 all	 about	 it.	 Jesus	 only	 talked	 about	 two	 cheeks	 --	 about	 the
third,	I	am	free.	Now	there	is	no	third	cheek	to	give	you.	And	he	has	not	said	that
when	he	hits	you	on	the	second,	give	him	your	nose	too!"
Because	Jesus	has	not	said	why....
Gautam	Buddha	in	one	of	his	sermons	said,	"Try	to	be	non-mechanical	as	much
as	possible.	If	somebody	hits	you,	insults	you,	humiliates	you,	forgive	him	seven
times.	Be	conscious."
Jesus	was	saying	only	one	time	--	because	you	have	only	two	cheeks,	and	one	he
has	hit	already.	Only	one	is	left,	so	there	is	not	much....	Buddha	is	saying	seven
times.
One	of	the	disciples	stood	up	and	said,	"What	about	the	eighth?	Seven	times	we
will	keep	patience,	but	what	about	the	eighth?"
Even	Buddha	was	silent	for	a	moment.	So	deep	is	man's	mechanicalness....	He
said,
"Then	change	it,	make	it	seventy-seven	times."
The	man	said,	 "You	can	make	 it	 any	number,	but	 the	question	will	 remain	 the
same	--
what	about	the	seventy-eighth	time?	We	can	wait	seventy-seven	times...."
You	 can	 behave	 in	 a	 saintly	 way,	 but	 if	 it	 is	 mechanical	 it	 doesn't	 change
anything.
Be	 alert	 and	 see	 that	 yesterday	 you	 have	 done	 the	 same	 thing.	 Today	make	 a
little	difference	--	you	are	not	a	machine.
You	said	 the	same	 thing	 to	your	wife,	make	a	 little	difference	 --	you	are	not	a
machine.
And	if	in	twenty-four	hours	time	you	continually	go	on	changing,	slowly	slowly
you	will	 slip	out	 of	 the	mechanical	 behavior	 and	 a	 consciousness	will	 arise	 in
you.
That	consciousness	makes	you	really	human.	Before,	you	only	appear	human;	in
reality	you	are	not.
Beyond	Enlightenment
Chapter	#32
Chapter	title:	Truth	has	to	wait...	but	not	to	wait	forever	4	November	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8611045
ShortTitle:
ENLIGH32
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
133
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MANY	 THINGS	 HAVE	 HAPPENED	 IN	 YOUR	 WORLD	 DURING	 THE
PAST
FOURTEEN	 MONTHS	 THAT	 WERE	 VERY	 CONTROVERSIAL	 AND
LOOKED
STRANGE	FOR	A	SPIRITUAL	GROUP.
JUST	 READING	 THE	 FACTS	 AND	 FIGURES	 SET	 FORTH	 IN	 THE	 156-
PAGE,	 TWO-SERIES	 ARTICLE	 IN	 RECENT	 ISSUES	 OF	 THE	 NEW
YORKER	COULD
MAKE	MOST	PEOPLE	ANGRY.
THOUGH	SOME	SANNYASINS	LEFT,	I	NOTICE	THAT	MANY	OF	US,
INCLUDING	MYSELF,	WERE	UNDISTURBED	 IN	OUR	 INNER	BEINGS.
WITH
NO	REGRETS,	MANY	OF	US	JUMPED	INTO	THE	NEW	WAY,	THE	NEW
ADVENTURE.
FAMILY,	FRIENDS,	STRANGERS,	ARE	EITHER	CURIOUS	ABOUT	THIS
OR
SUSPECT	 WE'RE	 BRAINWASHED	 DUMMIES,	 OR	 IRRESPONSIBLE.	 IS
THERE
ANY	 WAY	 TO	 EXPLAIN	 THIS	 INNER	 TRUST	 THAT	 HAPPENS	 TO	 A
DISCIPLE
WITH	 A	 MASTER?	 IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 FOR	 ANY	 OF	 US	 TO	 EXPLAIN
ANYTHING
BEYOND	THESE	FACTS	AND	FIGURES?	--	THE	LOVE,	THE	FUN,	THE
MYSTERY	 OF	 SPIRITUAL	 TRANSFORMATION	 THAT	 WE	 ARE	 SO
FORTUNATE
TO	PARTICIPATE	IN	WITH	YOU?	SHOULD	I	EVEN	BOTHER,	OR	JUST
CONCENTRATE	 ON	 YOU	 AND	 THE	 INNER	 JOURNEY	 AND	 IGNORE
THE
CURIOUS	AND	THE	SKEPTICS?
It	 would	 have	 been	 very	 easy	 if	 life	 were	 only	 facts	 and	 figures	 --	 easy	 but
boring;	easy	but	flat;	easy	but	not	worth	living.
And	mind	is	concerned	only	with	facts	and	figures.
It	is	a	great	blessing	of	existence	that	mind	is	not	all,	that	there	is	much	more	to
life	 which	 cannot	 be	 confined	 to	 facts,	 explanations,	 theories.	 Something
mysterious	remains	always	unexplained,	and	that	is	the	most	valuable,	the	most
significant	part	of	life.
It	is	impossible	to	explain	love,	trust,	beauty,	grace,	gratitude,	silence.	All	that	is
meaningful	seems	to	be	beyond	mind,	and	all	that	is	meaningless	seems	to	be	the
boundary	of	the	mind.
I	am	reminded	of	a	great	Sufi	master,	Junnaid.	One	day	one	of	his	disciples	 --
who	had	managed	somehow	 to	 trust	 in	 Junnaid,	who	had	with	effort	 remained
unskeptical	--	had	gone	hunting	in	the	forest.	And	he	saw	Junnaid	sitting	by	the
side	of	a	beautiful	lake	with	a	beautiful	woman.	From	far	away	he	saw,	and	from
far	away	everything	is	beautiful	--
and	particularly	a	Mohammedan	woman.
No	Mohammedan	woman	 is	ugly	 --	her	 face	 is	veiled.	 It	 is	 a	great	 strategy	of
ugly	women	against	the	beautiful;	in	this	way	the	beautiful	are	lost.
All	 his	 repressed	 suspicions	 and	 doubts	 arose,	 surfaced	 --	 and	 it	was	 not	 only
that	Junnaid	was	sitting	with	 the	woman;	 the	woman	was	pouring	wine	from	a
flask	into	a	cup	for	Junnaid.
All	 his	 trust	 was	 shattered,	 all	 his	 love	 was	 finished:	 "There	 is	 a	 limit	 to
everything.	This	is	going	too	far.	This	man	is	a	fraud!"
And	 if	 he	 had	 returned	without	 going	 to	 Junnaid	 to	 say	 something,	 he	would
have	remained	with	 the	 idea	 that	 the	man	was	a	fraud.	He	had	all	 the	facts,	he
had	seen	with	his	own	eyes,	he	was	a	witness.	He	needed	no	other	evidence,	no
other	 proof.	No	 argument	would	 have	 convinced	him	 that	 he	 could	 have	 been
wrong.
But	 Junnaid	 shouted	 loudly,	 "Don't	 go	 back!	 Come	 close,	 because	 when	 you
come	 close	 many	 facts	 prove	 to	 be	 fictions.	 The	 closer	 you	 come,	 the	 more
fictitious	they	are.	Just	come	close."
A	little	bit	afraid,	but	he	came.
Junnaid	lifted	the	veil	from	the	woman's	face.	She	was	Junnaid's	mother,	an	old
woman.
And	he	 said,	 "What	 about	 the	beautiful	woman	you	had	 seen?	 --	 and	you	had
seen	her	with	your	own	eyes.	Could	you	have	imagined	an	old	woman,	my	own
mother?	It	was	beyond	your	imagination.
"And	take	this	flask	and	look	closely,	taste	it;	it	is	pure	water,	not	wine.	Just	the
flask	is	of	the	wine.
"But	you	were	going	with	absolute	certainty:	that	this	man	is	a	fraud	--	women
and	wine	in	privacy,	in	the	forest	--	and	in	public	he	has	another	face,	of	a	great
master."
The	disciple	fell	at	his	feet	and	said,	"Please	forgive	me."
Junnaid	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 forgiveness;	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of
understanding.	You	have	a	trust	which	is	forced,	and	a	forced	trust	 is	bound	to
sooner	or	later	go	through	a	breakdown.	Your	love	is	an	effort,	and	love	cannot
be	an	effort	--	either	you	love	or	you	don't,	the	question	of	effort	does	not	arise.
You	were	 trying	 to	 imitate	 other	 disciples,	 and	 the	 path	 of	 the	 truth	 is	 not	 for
imitators.
"I	had	come	to	this	place	only	for	you,	knowing	that	you	were	going	hunting	and
you	were	bound	to	come	to	this	lake.	You	have	to	start	from	the	beginning,	and
this	time	your	love	has	not	to	be	an	effort	and	your	trust	has	not	to	be	something
forced.	These	 things	 are	 beautiful	when	 they	 grow	naturally	 --	 and	when	 they
grow	 naturally	 then	 no	 facts,	 no	 figures	 can	 destroy	 them.	 They	 have	 such
tremendous	energy	of	their	own	that	all	facts	and	figures	simply	evaporate."
Facts	are	not	 truths,	but	 just	 like	soap	bubbles.	Yes,	a	soap	bubble	 is	 --	but	 its
existence	or	non-existence	is	almost	equal.
Truth	has	an	eternity:	it	was	true,	it	is	true,	it	will	remain	true.	There	is	no	way
for	the	truth	to	be	otherwise.
Facts	 go	 on	 changing.	 Facts	 depend	 on	 interpretations.	 The	 same	 fact	 can	 be
interpreted	 in	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 ways.	 And	 that's	 what	 we	 are	 all	 doing;
otherwise,	there	would	be	no	need	of	so	many	religions,	so	many	philosophies,
so	many	ideologies.
Truth	is	one.
The	mystic	has	no	philosophy,	the	mystic	has	no	ideology	--	because	he	has	the
truth	itself.
Just	look	at	a	few	facts	and	how	they	can	be	interpreted	not	only	differently	but
in	a	diametrically	opposite	way.
The	 most	 important	 Jaina	 master,	 Mahavira,	 lived	 naked	 all	 his	 life.	 He
renounced	the	world,	his	kingdom,	he	renounced	everything	--	clothes,	shoes.	He
lived	just	as	a	child	is	born,	naked,	with	nothing	in	his	hands.	He	did	not	even
carry	a	begging	bowl.	He	used	to	make	a	begging	bowl	with	his	own	hands.	He
would	not	use	anything	on	which	one	becomes	dependent.
His	ultimate	goal	was	total	freedom.
And	he	was	so	logically	consistent	that	even	to	use	a	small	blade	--	a	razor	blade
to	 cut	 his	 hair	 or	 to	 shave	 his	 beard	 --	 he	was	 not	 ready.	To	 use	 scissors	 or	 a
blade	would	be	a	dependency,	so	he	used	to	pull	his	hair	out	with	his	own	hand.
It	was	painful,	but	he	managed.
He	lived	eighty-two	years...	and	he	had	to	pull	out	the	hairs	because	he	was	not
taking	baths.	According	to	his	approach,	to	take	a	bath	is	to	decorate	the	body,	is
to	 believe	 in	 the	 body	 --	 and	 the	 body	 is	 nothing	 but	 bones,	 blood,	 flesh,
everything	rotten,	just	covered	with	skin.	What	is	the	point	of	taking	a	bath?	--
you	are	not	the	body.	And	consciousness	needs	no	cleanliness	because	it	cannot
become	unclean.
In	India	he	has	been	worshipped	by	the	Jainas	for	twenty-five	centuries	as	one	of
the	most	important	mystics	of	the	whole	world.	And	even	those	who	are	not	of
his	fold	have	immense	respect	for	the	man.
But	 I	 bring	Sigmund	Freud	 to	 analyze	Mahavira's	 attitude	 and	character	 --	 the
same	facts.
It	is	strange	that	there	are	thousands	of	madmen	in	the	insane	asylums	around	the
world,	and	there	is	a	certain	kind	of	madness	in	which	nakedness	and	pulling	out
the	hair	happens	together.	Those	mad	people	live	naked	and	they	pull	out	 their
hair	--	they	don't	allow	anybody	to	cut	their	hair	or	shave	their	beards.	And	the
same	 mad	 people	 don't	 allow	 themselves	 to	 be	 given	 showers	 or	 baths.
Strange....
Is	Mahavira	a	madman	of	the	same	category?
Or	are	 these	mad	people	Mahaviras,	great	masters	misunderstood	by	an	 insane
world?
Somewhere	something	has	to	be	decided.
Strangely	 enough,	 these	mad	 people	who	 live	 naked,	 pull	 out	 their	 hair,	 don't
take	any	baths,	are	absolutely	non-violent.	They	are	not	dangerous;	 they	never
hurt	anybody,	they	never	kill	anybody.	They	are	very	harmless	people.	And	that
is	the	whole	philosophy	of	Mahavira	--	non-violence.
Perhaps	he	was	a	madman	with	a	genius,	with	such	a	talented	intelligence	that	he
made	a	philosophical	standpoint	out	of	his	madness.
Now,	who	is	going	to	decide?
The	fact	in	itself	is	without	any	judgment;	in	itself	it	says	nothing,	it	is	simply	a
fact.
At	the	moment	you	start	thinking	about	it,	you	start	creating	interpretations,	and
those	interpretations	will	depend	on	your	attitude.	They	have	nothing	to	do	with
the	fact.
Because	 I	 have	 brought	 Sigmund	 Freud	 in,	 I	 cannot	 allow	 him	 to	 go	 out	 so
easily.	He	was	the	founder	of	psychoanalysis,	and	yet	he	remained	a	practicing
Jew	for	his	whole	life,	subscribing	to	all	the	superstitions	of	the	Jews.
For	example,	circumcision:	Every	Jewish	child...	as	he	is	born,	the	male	child	is
immediately	circumcised.	Mohammedans	are	also	circumcised	but	after	 two	or
three	years,	not	immediately.
And	Jews	believe	that	they	are	the	most	intelligent	people	in	the	world	because
of	 circumcision.	 It	 is	 true	 that	 they	 are	 perhaps	 the	 most	 intelligent	 group	 of
people	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 whole	 contemporary	 world	 is	 dominated	 by	 Jews:
Sigmund	 Freud,	 Karl	 Marx,	 Albert	 Einstein	 --	 these	 three	 figures	 stand	 out
amongst	billions	of	people.	Their	contribution	to	human	well-being	is	immense.
I	have	told	you	that	forty	percent	of	Nobel	prizes	go	to	Jews.	That	is	simply	out
of	all	proportion	--	forty	percent	to	the	small	group	of	Jews,	and	sixty	percent	to
the	rest	of	the	world.	Naturally	they	have	more	intelligence,	you	cannot	suspect
it;	 it	 is	 a	 fact.	 And	 they	 have	 this	 idea	 that	 they	 are	 so	 intelligent	 because	 of
circumcision,	and	they	provide	philosophical,	logical,	scientific	proofs	for	it.
And	one	never	knows,	they	may	be	right	--	because	now	many	governments	of
the	world	are	getting	ready	to	pass	resolutions	that	every	child	born	in	hospitals
should	be	circumcised.	It	doesn't	matter	whether	he	is	Jew	or	Hindu	or	Christian
or	Mohammedan,	that	is	not	a	question;	it	is	a	question	of	hygiene.
It	 is	 certainly	 hygienic.	 But	 Jews	 have	 a	 very	 far-fetched	 philosophical	 idea
behind	 it:	 they	 say	 when	 the	 child	 is	 born...	 and	 the	 genitals	 are	 the	 most
sensitive	parts.	This	is	recognized	by	science,	by	physiology,	that	the	genitals	are
connected	with	a	certain	center	in	the	mind.	Strangely	enough,	the	center	in	the
mind	 that	 is	 connected	 with	 the	 genitals	 is	 absolutely	 close	 to	 the	 center	 for
intelligence,	 they	are	neighbors.	And	 they	have	 to	be	very	close	because	 there
are	seven	hundred	centers	in	your	brain,	so	they	are	very	close	knit.
Jews	say	that	when	you	cut	the	skin	of	the	small	child,	the	shock	goes	to	the	sex
center.
But	 the	 shock	 is	 so	much	 and	 the	 child	 is	 so	 delicate	 that	 the	 shock	 does	 not
remain	confined	to	the	sex	center	--	the	shock	goes	to	the	nearby	center,	which	is
the	 center	 of	 intelligence.	 And	 intelligence	 gets	 a	 great	 impetus	 which	 other
children	are	missing,	so	they	are	far	ahead	of	anybody	else.
Now	the	rest	of	the	world	has	looked	upon	circumcision	as	a	superstition.
The	fact	is	the	same,	but	now	they	are	providing	scientific	fragments	to	support
it.	They	also	are	not	absolute	proofs,	that	is	why	I	say	far-fetched.	But	Sigmund
Freud	also	believed	in	them,	and	he	had	not	all	these	facts	that	I	have,	because	at
that	time	it	was	not	known	that	the	centers	of	sex	and	intelligence	are	very	close.
Neither	was	 it	 known	 that	 sex	 is	 really	 in	 the	mind	 and	 the	 genitals	 are	 only
extensions,	 they	are	not	 really	 the	 sex	organs.	They	can	be	bypassed,	 and	you
can	enjoy	a	sexual	experience	without	your	genitals	even	knowing	about	it.
Sigmund	Freud	never	inquired,	never	raised	a	question	about	the	Jewish	idea	of
circumcision	--	which	he	should	have,	because	he	was	a	Jew,	and	his	whole	work
was	with	sexuality.	His	whole	life	was	devoted	to	finding	out	everything	about
sexuality,	 but	 he	 bypassed	 circumcision,	 he	 did	 not	 talk	 about	 it.	 Others	 have
laughed	for	centuries.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 one	 bishop	 and	 one	 rabbi	 lived	 opposite	 each	 other,	 and
naturally	 there	 was	 great	 competition	 in	 everything.	 One	 day	 the	 bishop
purchased	a	beautiful	Chevrolet.
The	rabbi	came	out	and	he	said,	"A	beautiful	car...	whose	car	is	this?"
And	the	bishop	came	out	with	a	bucket	of	water	and	poured	the	water	on	the	car.
He	said,
"I	have	purchased	it."
The	rabbi	said,	"But	what	are	you	doing?"
He	 said,	 "Baptism."	 He	 was	 a	 Christian	 Baptist.	 "Now	 the	 car	 is	 a	 Christian
Baptist	car	--
baptized."
This	was	too	much	for	the	rabbi.
Next	day,	as	the	bishop	woke	up,	he	saw	a	beautiful	Cadillac	sitting	in	the	garage
of	 the	 rabbi.	He	was	 shocked	 --	 because	 the	Chevrolet	 is	 a	 poor	man's	 car	 in
America.	 The	 poor	 peoples'	 neighborhoods	 are	 called	 "Chevrolet
neighborhoods."	 It	 is	 a	 rich	 man's	 car	 in	 other	 countries,	 but	 in	 America	 the
Chevrolet	is	a	poor	man's	car.	But	the	Cadillac	is	especially	Jewish.
The	bishop	came	out	and	he	said,	"How	could	you	manage	it?"
The	 rabbi	 said,	 "God	 looks	 after	 his	 chosen	 few."	 And	 he	 said,	 "Come	 on	 --
because	there	is	going	to	be	a	ceremony."
The	bishop	said,	"What	kind	of	ceremony?"
He	said,	"You	come	inside."
The	bishop	came	into	the	garage,	and	the	rabbi	went	into	his	house	and	brought
out	 a	 big	 pair	 of	 garden	 scissors.	 The	 bishop	 could	 not	 believe	 --	 what	 is
happening?	What	kind	of	ceremony...?	The	rabbi	started	chanting	some	mantras
in	Hebrew,	and	then	finally	he	cut	the	exhaust	pipe.
The	bishop	asked,	"What	are	you	doing?"
He	said,	"Circumcision	--	now	the	car	is	absolutely	Jewish.	If	you	can	baptize,
what	do	you	think?	--	can't	we	do	something	to	make	the	car	a	Jew?"
Everybody	has	been	laughing	about	circumcision.
But	 Sigmund	 Freud	 never	 even	 raised	 a	 question	 about	 it.	 He	 never	 raised	 a
single	 question	 that	 goes	 against	 Jewish	 tradition.	All	 his	 logic,	 all	 his	 reason
was	used	to	criticize	everybody	else.
I	 have	 asked	 a	 Jaina	 saint:	 "Sigmund	 Freud	 would	 say	 these	 things	 about
Mahavira,	 although	 he	 has	 not	 said	 them,	 because	 he	 knew	 nothing	 about
Mahavira.	 But	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain	 he	 would	 say	 these	 things.	 Have	 you
something	to	say	about	Sigmund	Freud,	about	Jews?"
And	the	first	thing	he	said	was:	"If	the	skin	on	the	male	genitals	was	not	needed,
then	 existence	would	 not	 have	 given	 it	 to	 the	 child.	 Existence	 gives	 only	 that
which	is	needed.
To	 remove	 that	 skin	 is	egoistic,	 it	 is	an	effort	 to	prove	 that	you	are	wiser	 than
existence	itself.	And	the	very	idea	that	man	is	wiser	than	existence	is	stupid."
I	asked	him	about	Jesus	--	because	I	had	taken	with	me	a	Christian	missionary,
Stanley	Jones,	to	meet	the	Jaina	saint.	And	I	said,	"Stanley	Jones	is	here,	and	his
criticism	against	Jaina	saints,	Buddhist	saints,	Hindu	saints,	is	that	they	don't	do
any	service	to	humanity.
On	the	contrary,	they	demand	that	they	should	be	served,	worshipped	--	that	it	is
their	birthright.
"People	may	be	dying	from	starvation	--	that	is	not	their	concern.	Mahavira	and
Buddha	have	not	opened	a	single	hospital,	not	a	single	school	for	poor	children,
not	a	single	orphanage,	 like	Mother	Teresa.	But	 these	people	are	 thought	 to	be
great	compassionate	people.	What	compassion	is	there?	What	do	you	think	about
Jesus?"
He	said,	"About	Jesus?	According	to	us,	everything	in	life	is	a	connected	link	of
cause	and	effect,	the	theory	of	action."
There	are	stories	that	if	Mahavira	is	passing	on	the	road	and	a	thorn	is	there,	the
thorn	will	jump	out	of	the	road	--	because	Mahavira	has	finished	all	evil	actions.
Now	no	pain	can	be	given	 to	him	by	existence.	 It	 looks	 logical:	 if	existence	 is
deciding	 rewards	 and	 punishments,	 certainly	 the	 thorn	 must	 jump	 out	 of	 the
road.
Mohammedans	say	--	because	Mohammed	was	in	Arabia...	hot	sun,	no	clouds,
no	 shade,	 no	 trees.	 But	 a	 beautiful	 cloud	 always	 moved	 over	 Mohammed,
wherever	he	went	--
because	he	was	finished	with	all	evil	acts.	That's	why	he	was	chosen	by	God	as
his	best	messenger;	he	had	become	so	pure	that	he	could	be	a	vehicle.	Now	it	is
God's	duty	to	protect	him.	In	the	hot	burning	sun,	a	cool	breeze	surrounds	him,
and	a	big	cloud	goes	on	keeping	him	in	shadow.
The	Jaina	saint	said,	"Jesus	being	crucified	proves	that	he	must	have	done	some
very	evil	acts	in	his	past	life.	Crucifixion	was	the	punishment."
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 Jews	 crucifying	 him	 or	 the	Romans	 crucifying	 him.
Those	are	the	visible	facts,	but	the	invisible	truth	is	that	he	must	have	committed
something	 really	 heinous	 --	 murder,	 rape	 --	 and	 the	 result	 is	 crucifixion.	 So
crucifixion	is	not	something	to	be	worshipped;	it	is	a	condemnation.
Now	 for	 the	 Christian	 the	 same	 fact,	 the	 crucifixion	 of	 Jesus,	 makes	 him	 the
greatest	man	on	the	earth	because	he	suffered	for	humanity,	he	was	crucified	for
you;	to	save	you	he	gave	his	own	life.	That	is	their	interpretation.
But	the	Jainas,	Hindus	and	Buddhists	will	all	explain	that	"He	is	suffering	from
many	past	lives	of	crimes.	He	is	not	giving	his	life	to	save	anybody	--	because
we	don't	see	anybody	saved.	Who	is	saved?	He	could	not	even	save	himself."
One	 thing	 should	 always	 be	 remembered:	 don't	 be	 bothered	 about	 facts.	 They
can	be	interpreted	this	way	or	that	way	very	convincingly,	but	facts	belong	to	the
mundane	world.
Truth	is	the	thing	you	should	concentrate	on.
You	 have	 mentioned	 the	 New	 Yorker	 article	 about	 me	 and	 the	 commune.
Perhaps	they	may	not	have	ever	written	such	a	big	article	before	--	one	hundred
and	fifty-six	pages.
And	what	they	call	facts	are	only	the	facts	that	the	government	has	supplied	to
them.
They	have	not	asked	me;	otherwise	for	every	fact	there	is	a	counter-fact.	But	it	is
easy	not	to	ask	both	parties.
I	have	heard	that	Mulla	Nasruddin	in	his	old	age	became	an	honorary	magistrate.
His	first	case	came	up.	He	heard	one	side,	and	started	writing	the	judgment.
The	court	clerk	could	not	believe	what	was	happening.	He	whispered	in	his	ear,
"Honorable	magistrate,	what	are	you	doing?	You	have	not	heard	 the	other	side
yet.	They	are	waiting."
Mulla	Nasruddin	said,	"I	am	not	going	to	hear	anybody,	because	right	now	I	am
absolutely	 clear	 what	 the	 situation	 is,	 and	 if	 I	 hear	 the	 other	 side	 also	 I	 will
become	confused.	And	out	of	confusion,	judgment	will	be	very	difficult."
The	New	Yorker	is	simply	presenting	one	side.
I	will	give	you	a	few	facts	on	the	other	side	so	you	can	see	how	facts	should	not
be	decisive.
The	land	that	we	purchased	for	the	commune	had	been	for	sale	for	almost	half	a
century,	 and	 nobody	 had	 purchased	 it	 --	 because	 it	was	 a	 desert.	Not	 a	 single
flower	ever	blossomed	there,	no	cultivation	was	ever	done;	it	was	just	a	useless
wasteland.	And	 it	was	big	--	one	hundred	and	 twenty-six	square	miles,	eighty-
four	thousand	acres.
We	purchased	the	land.	The	man	was	very	happy,	because	he	had	lost	hope	that
the	land	could	ever	be	sold.
And	the	government	was	asking	him	to	give	it	to	them	for	three	million	dollars.
It	was	almost	a	small	country	--	one	hundred	and	twenty-six	square	miles,	three
times	 bigger	 than	 Manhattan.	 And	 the	 man	 was	 just	 going	 to	 say	 yes	 to	 the
government	as	we	entered	the	scene.
We	immediately	offered	him	six	million	dollars.	He	could	not	believe	it	--	from
three	million	to	six	million!	Immediately	everything	was	settled.
And	this	was	the	beginning	of	conflict	with	the	government.
But	if	the	government	had	really	been	interested,	they	could	have	offered	more.
They	should	not	have	felt	offended,	it	was	a	simple	business	matter.	And	it	is	not
their	land	either.
The	whole	world	has	 forgotten	 completely	 that	 the	 real	Americans	 are	 the	 red
Americans	who	are	living	in	reservations	in	the	forests.	They	have	been	forced
to	 live	 almost	 in	 concentration	 camps,	 an	 American	 version	 of	 the	 German
concentration	camps	--	 far	better,	because	 the	German	concentration	camp	was
barbed	wire,	guns	all	around,	very	crude.
The	American	 concentration	 camp	 is	 very	 sophisticated	 --	 no	 barbed	wire,	 no
guards,	 you	 cannot	 say	 that	 this	 is	 a	 concentration	 camp.	 But	 this	 is	 a
concentration	camp	--	of	a	higher	order,	of	a	more	subtle	and	delicate	quality.
What	they	have	done	is	to	give	every	red	Indian	a	pension	--	because	America
belongs	 to	 them,	 it	 is	 their	 country.	 They	 don't	 have	 any	 work,	 but	 they	 get
enough	pension.	All	 they	do	 is	 to	go	on	producing	more	children,	because	 the
more	children	they	have,	the	more	pension	they	will	get.	Each	individual	gets	a
pension.
But	 you	 should	 understand	 that	 when	 you	 have	 no	 work	 and	 enough	 money,
what	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do?	 They	 gamble,	 they	 are	 all	 drunkards,	 all	 kinds	 of
drugs,	prostitution,	and	no	worries	about	anything	 --	every	month	 the	salary	 is
there.	Salary	for	nothing,	salary	for	remaining	silent	about	the	fact	that	America
belongs	 to	 them,	 that	 the	 people	 who	 are	 known	 as	 Americans	 are	 not
Americans.	 Somebody	 is	 from	England,	 somebody	 is	 from	 Italy,	 somebody	 is
from	France,	somebody	is	from	Holland,	somebody	is	from	Germany,	somebody
is	 from	 Switzerland	 --	 from	 all	 the	 European	 countries,	 but	 nobody	 is	 an
American.	They	are	all	foreigners.
And	my	 first	 conflict	with	 the	 government	was	 that	 I	 told	 it	 exactly	 the	 same
way	I	am	telling	you:	that	the	American	president	is	as	much	a	foreigner	as	I	am
a	 foreigner.	 The	 only	 difference	 is	 that	 he	 has	 been	 here	 perhaps	 for	 two
generations,	three	generations	--
he	is	a	two	hundred	year-old	foreigner.	I	am	fresh.
And	the	fresh	is	always	better	than	the	old	and	rotten.
I	told	them:	Neither	does	the	land	belong	to	you	nor	does	the	land	belong	to	us.
And	we	purchased	 the	 land,	we	paid	money;	you	 invaded	 the	 land,	you	killed
people,	innocent	people.	You	are	criminals.
If	anybody	needs	permission	to	live	in	America,	it	is	you	--	from	the	American
president	 to	the	last	American	beggar.	And	if	you	really	mean	what	you	say	in
your	constitution	--
that	you	are	 for	democracy,	 for	 freedom	 --	 if	 you	are	 sincere	 and	honest,	 then
give	the	country	back	to	the	red	Indians.	It	belongs	to	them.	And	apply	for	your
green	cards.	If	they	want	you	here,	you	can	be	here;	otherwise	go	home.
And	you	have	killed,	you	have	invaded,	you	are	criminals.
We	have	simply	purchased.
Sometimes	you	have	also	purchased,	but	your	purchase	was	simply	a	facade.	For
example,	New	York	--	the	whole	New	York	area	was	purchased	for	thirty	silver
pieces.	Is	this	business?	Do	you	think	it	was	done	by	people	willingly,	or	was	it
just	because	at	 the	point	of	 the	bayonet,	at	gunpoint	 they	had	to	sign:	"We	sell
the	land	for	thirty	silver	pieces."
The	 conflict	 started	 because	 I	 said:	 "Not	 one	 of	 you	 is	 any	 different	 from	 the
people	in	my	commune.	We	are	newcomers;	you	came	a	little	earlier.	And	you
have	 committed	 all	 kinds	 of	 crimes;	we	 have	 simply	 purchased	 the	 land.	And
you	were	there,	you	could	have	purchased	it	by	offering	more	money	--	it	was	a
simple	business	matter."
But	the	American	government	will	not	say	this.
And	America	must	remain	the	only	country	in	the	world	where	people	like	the
poor	 red	 Americans	 cannot	 revolt.	 It	 is	 such	 a	 cunning	 strategy	 that	 you	 are
giving	them	money.
They	think,	"Revolt?	for	what?	We	are	getting	money,	enough	money,	no	work...
enjoy,	 dance,	 sing,	 take	 all	 kinds	 of	 drugs.	 No	 problems	 of	 worrying	 about
poverty	or	anything	-
-	why	bother	about	revolution?"	The	very	idea	is	not	possible.
And	 they	 are	 all	 drunkards,	 opium	 addicted,	 lotus	 eaters.	 They	 are	 not	 in	 a
position	 to	 fight	 a	 revolution.	Their	 revolution	 has	 been	 killed,	 their	 spirit	 has
been	killed	by	money.
Because	I	said	it	clearly....
And	because	the	land	we	purchased	had	belonged	to	an	ancient	red	Indian	tribe
which	lived	just	nearby	in	a	forest....	And	they	had	a	prophecy	from	the	old	days:
that	a	man	from	the	East,	with	his	followers	wearing	red	clothes,	would	come	to
this	land	and	free	them	from	the	slavery	imposed	on	them	by	the	invaders.
By	 coincidence,	 my	 people	 were	 wearing	 red	 clothes;	 by	 coincidence,	 I	 was
coming	from	the	East.
And	red	Indians	started	coming,	saying	 that	"We	have	been	waiting	--	because
this	prophecy	we	have	heard	for	generations."
These	were	the	fears	the	government	would	never	talk	about.
I	could	have	provoked	the	red	Indians	against	the	whole	American	government,	I
could	have	created	a	revolution	--	this	was	their	fear.	They	wanted	to	destroy	me
and	the	commune	as	quickly	as	possible.
The	land	had	never	produced	anything,	but	they	said	that	it	was	farmland;	hence,
we	could	not	make	more	than	twenty	houses,	twenty	farmhouses.	And	we	fought
and	 we	 said,	 "You	 have	 to	 come	 and	 prove	 --	 in	 fifty	 years	 what	 has	 been
produced?	 If	 it	 is	 farmland,	 then	 something	 must	 have	 been	 cultivated.	 Just
because	you	have	written	 in	your	papers...	 and	we	don't	 know	when	you	have
written	it.	You	may	have	written	it	just	now,	just	to	harass	us.	You	have	to	prove
what	 kind	 of	 cultivation	 has	 been	 happening	 here.	 If	 this	 is	 farmland,	we	will
cultivate	it;	but	such	a	big	land	area	cannot	be	cultivated	by	a	small	group	living
in	twenty	houses.	This	much	land	needs	at	least	five	thousand	people	to	make	it
lush	green,	to	make	lakes,	reservoirs	--	because	everything	has	to	depend	on	the
rainwater.	And	tremendous	effort	is	needed	to	make	roads,	houses."
But	they	would	not	change	the	zoning	--	which	was	simply	stupid,	because	we
were	 not	 going	 to	 destroy	 their	 farmland.	We	 were	 creating	 farmland	 from	 a
desert,	we	were	changing	the	desert	into	an	oasis.
So	they	went	on	creating	legal	problems,	and	for	five	years	we	went	on	fighting	-
-	and	we	were	winning	in	every	court,	because	the	facts	were	so	clear.
When	 they	 saw	 that	 they	 could	 not	 win	 legally,	 then	 they	 started	 behaving
illegally.
And	when	 a	 government	 itself	 starts	 behaving	 illegally,	 then	 it	 becomes	 very
difficult	 to	 fight	 --	 a	 small	minority	 of	 five	 thousand	 people.	 The	 government
was	 fighting,	 the	 Christian	 church	 was	 fighting,	 and	 nobody	 could	 say	 what
harm	we	were	doing	to	them,	what	harm	we	had	done.
The	nearest	American	town	was	twenty	miles	away	from	us.	We	were	living	and
doing	our	own	thing.	But	they	became	so	much	afraid....
The	fear	had	unconscious	reasons.
America	does	not	belong	to	them,	and	they	are	talking	about	democracy,	they	are
talking	about	liberty,	they	are	talking	about	freedom,	they	are	talking	about	the
rights	of	man.
And	 they	 have	 taken	 all	 of	 the	 land	 from	 the	 poor	 natives,	 and	 they	 have
destroyed	them	in	such	a	sophisticated	way	as	has	not	been	done	anywhere	else.
There	is	no	hope	for	 the	red	Indians	for	 two	reasons:	one,	 they	are	not	 in	 their
senses,	 they	 are	 continuously	 drunk,	 continuously	 unconscious	 --	 fighting,
murdering	each	other.
Secondly,	slavery	is	paying	well	--	without	working	you	are	getting	a	salary.	To
fight	against	this	government	means	you	will	lose	your	salary	and	you	will	have
all	kinds	of	problems	--	so	why	bother?
And	because	I	said	things	exactly...	and	I	invited	the	president,	the	governor,	the
attorney	general	of	America	to	come	and	see,	to	show	us	what	cultivation	they
had	done	on	this	land.	And	we	had	transformed	the	whole	land.
Rather	 than	 praising	 us,	 they	 wanted	 us	 to	 destroy	 the	 commune	 and	 leave
America.
It	seems	they	loved	the	desert	so	much	that	now	they	have	made	it	desert	again.
Perhaps	they	need	a	third	world	war	to	make	the	whole	of	America	a	desert.	If
they	love	the	desert	so	much,	their	wishes	should	be	fulfilled.
But	 these	 facts	 that	 they	 have	 produced	 after	 one	 year...	Where	was	 this	New
Yorker	when	I	was	there	to	reply?	Now	they	are	writing	facts	and	figures.
And	they	have	not	consulted	the	other	party	at	all,	to	ask,	"What	are	your	facts
and	what	are	your	figures?	How	has	the	government	misbehaved	with	you?	How
has	 the	 government	 proved	 to	 be	 fascist,	 violent,	 crude,	 primitive,
undemocratic...?"
They	should	have	asked	us	--	because	we	have	suffered.
But	 the	press	 is	either	 in	 the	hands	of	 the	church	or	 in	 the	hands	of	a	political
party,	or	in	the	hands	of	the	government,	or	in	the	hands	of	rich	people.
The	man	who	came	first	into	the	conflict	was	the	ex-vice-president	Rockefeller	-
-
because	he	was	planning	that	the	whole	of	Oregon	should	become	a	federal	state.
The	federal	government	owns	half	of	the	land	of	Oregon,	and	their	desire	was	to
have	all	of	 the	 land	 in	Oregon	 to	create	shelters	 in	case	of	a	nuclear	war.	And
Oregon	 is	 perfectly	 the	 right	 place	 --	 not	 very	 populated,	 could	 easily	 be
converted	into	a	vast	shelter	in	case	of	nuclear	war.
When	 we	 entered	 the	 state,	 the	 first	 person	 who	 became	 annoyed	 was
Rockefeller	--
because	 now	 that	 one	 hundred	 and	 twenty-six	 square	 miles	 could	 in	 no	 way
become	federal	land.
It	was	he	who	said	in	a	press	conference	that,	"This	commune	is	an	independent
country	within	a	country,	and	this	cannot	be	tolerated."
If	 they	 had	 asked	 us...	 It	 was	 a	 simple	 thing.	 They	 could	 have	 given	 us	 land
somewhere	 else,	 we	 would	 have	 moved	 the	 commune.	 Or	 from	 the	 very
beginning	 they	could	have	 told	us,	"We	are	ready	to	give	you	another	piece	of
land."	There	was	no	problem;	to	us	it	was	the	same.
But	 these	 people	 have	 faces	 of	 one	 kind,	 they	 say	 one	 thing,	 and	 they	 do
something	else.
And	they	are	thinking	still	something	else	--	you	never	know	exactly	what	is	in
their	minds,	what	they	are	doing,	what	their	purpose	is.
They	accepted	our	 right	 to	be	a	city	 --	 and	 it	was	accepted	by	 the	court,	 three
judges.
One	 judge	was	 against	 us,	was	 a	 fanatic	Christian.	But	 seeing	 that	 two	 of	 the
judges	were	ready	--	and	his	being	against	us	would	be	useless,	he	also	signed,
and	we	became	a	city.
Now	 that	 was	 the	 most	 difficult	 thing	 for	 them	 to	 swallow:	 that	 against	 the
president,	against	the	whole	government,	we	won	the	case	and	we	became	a	city.
You	will	be	surprised,	in	the	twentieth	century....	The	one	judge	who	was	in	our
favor	was	a	Mormon.	They	are	very	good	people,	a	sect	of	Christians,	but	very
honest	and	sincere.	And	they	have	suffered	very	much	in	America	at	the	hands
of	other	Christians	because	of	certain	of	their	ideologies....
One	 idea	 they	 have	 is	 that	 the	 head	 of	 the	Mormons	 is	 in	 direct	 contact	with
God,	 with	 no	 pope,	 no	 mediator	 in	 between.	 The	Mormon	 head	 has	 a	 direct
communication	 line	with	God.	 This	 is	 not	 acceptable	 to	 Christians	 --	 you	 are
bypassing	the	pope.
They	 killed	 the	 first	 Mormon	 founder,	 and	 because	 they	 killed	 him	 they
consolidated	the	Mormons,	and	they	had	to	give	them	a	city.	The	same	story	was
being	repeated	again,	so	they	became	afraid.	Now	Mormons	have	a	city	--	one	of
the	most	beautiful	in	America	--
Salt	Lake	City.
This	one	judge	was	a	Mormon.	And	a	trick	was	played:	the	head	of	the	Mormons
informed	him	that	he	had	been	chosen	by	God	to	resign	from	his	post	and	go	to
Nigeria	to	serve	humanity.
I	 informed	 that	 judge	 that,	 "This	 is	 simple	 politics.	 They	want	 to	 remove	 you
from	 the	 post	 because	when	you	 are	 removed...	One	 person	 is	 against	 us,	 one
person	is	half-half	--
he	will	be	on	the	side	of	whoever	 is	 in	power.	 It	was	because	of	you	and	your
sincerity,	 your	 fairness	 that	 we	 got	 the	 city.	 Now	 you	 are	 leaving	 us	 in	 the
dumps!"
And	what	a	stupid	idea.	Billions	of	people	in	the	world,	and	God	has	chosen	this
poor	man	 to	 resign	 from	his	post	 and	go	 to	Nigeria	 for	one	year.	But	 they	are
such	simple	people	that	they	believed	that	it	was	God's	order	and	they	could	not
go	against	it.
So	he	resigned,	and	immediately	they	appointed	a	fanatic	Christian.
The	 same	 court	 that	 had	 given	 us	 the	 sanction	 to	 be	 a	 city,	 after	 six	 months
denied	that	we	were	a	city.
And	the	simple	trick	was	that	they	removed	the	man	who	would	not	do	anything
wrong,	and	replaced	him	with	a	man	who	was	an	absolutely	fanatical	Christian.
They	 completely	 forgot	 their	 own	 laws,	 their	 own	 constitution,	 and	 they	 did
everything	against	their	constitution.
For	two	years	continuously	there	was	a	rumor	that	they	were	going	to	arrest	me,
but	 they	 would	 not	 dare	 to	 enter	 the	 campus	 of	 the	 commune	 for	 the	 simple
reason	 that	 they	 knew	 that	 unless	 they	 killed	 five	 thousand	 sannyasins	 they
would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 arrest	 me.	 And	 they	 were	 not	 ready	 to	 take	 that	 risk	 --
killing	 five	 thousand	 people,	 most	 of	 them	 Americans,	 would	 condemn	 their
democracy	forever.
They	wanted	me	in	some	way	to	be	out	of	the	commune	so	they	could	find	me
alone.
That's	why	they	waited	for	two	years.
And	we	were	hearing	the	rumor	continuously,	so	by	and	by	it	became	accepted
that	this	was	just	a	rumor,	they	didn't	have	the	courage.
They	 had	 their	National	Guard	 just	 twenty	miles	 away	 in	 the	American	 town,
every	day	collecting	more	and	more	army	forces,	so	that	if	there	was	a	need	they
could	be	ready	to	kill	five	thousand	people.
But	once	they	could	get	me	out	of	the	commune,	things	became	easy	for	them.
Without	any	arrest	warrant,	they	arrested	me	and	five	sannyasins	who	were	with
me.	That	is	absolutely	illegal.	They	could	not	even	show	the	cause;	not	even	for
three	days	in	court	could	they	prove	anything	to	show	why	they	had	arrested	me.
Still	they	would	not	set	bail.
These	are	the	facts	and	figures.	The	government	was	pressuring	the	magistrate:
"If	you	want	 to	be	promoted	 to	 federal	 judge,	don't	give	 this	man	bail."	So	all
five	sannyasins	were	given	bail;	only	I	was	retained.
And	the	government	attorney	said	in	the	court,	"We	have	not	been	able	to	prove
any	 charge;	 still,	 the	 government	 asks	 that	 bail	 should	 not	 be	 granted	 for	 this
man	 because	 he	 is	 very	 intelligent"	 --	 I	 heard	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that	 to	 be
intelligent	is	criminal	--	"and	he	has	thousands	of	friends."
I	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 these	 things	were	 enough	 to	 be	 a	 criminal;	 if	 that	 is
enough	 to	be	a	criminal,	 then	Jesus	Christ	must	be	 the	greatest	criminal	 in	 the
world	--	because	half	of	the	world	is	Christian.	And	thirdly,	that	I	had	resources
enough	that	I	could	jump	bail	--
even	if	it	were	ten	million	dollars'	bail,	I	could	jump	it.
And	this	shows	the	poverty	and	the	weakness....	The	greatest	power	of	the	world
--	 you	 have	 all	 your	 armies	 and	 all	 your	 nuclear	weapons	 and	 all	 your	 police
forces,	 and	 you	 cannot	manage	 to	 prevent	 a	man	 from	 crossing	 the	 country....
Then	all	your	power	is	impotent.
But	 the	 reality	 was	 that	 the	 woman	magistrate	 was	 not	 interested	 in	 anything
else,	she	was	interested	in	becoming	a	federal	judge.
Even	the	 jailer	did	not	 think	that	I	would	go	back	to	 jail,	he	 thought	 that	 there
would	be	no	 reason	 --	 "They	don't	have	an	arrest	warrant,	 they	don't	have	any
cause,	so	you	will	be	released."	So	he	brought	my	clothes	and	everything	in	his
car	so	that	"I	can	free	you	direct	from	court;	there	is	no	need	to	come	back	to	the
jail."
When	he	had	to	take	me	back,	he	was	annoyed.	He	said,	"In	my	whole	life	I	have
not	seen	such	unfairness.	The	attorney	could	not	prove	--	and	he	accepts	that	he
has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 prove	 in	 three	 days	 of	 continuous	 arguing	 --	 anything
against	this	man.	Still	the	government	wants..."
Who	is	the	government?	The	government	was	only	a	part	in	the	case.
And	 against	 an	 individual,	 the	 government	 forces	 the	 magistrate	 --	 bribes,
blackmails....
The	jailer	told	me,	"The	reality	is	that	that	woman	has	been	told	that	if	she	gives
you	bail
--	 which	 is	 your	 right	 --	 she	 will	 not	 be	 promoted	 to	 federal	 judge.	 And	 she
wants	to	become	a	federal	judge."
And	within	just	three	days	she	was	a	federal	judge.
These	 journalists	 should	 think	 not	 only	 of	 those	who	 have	 power,	 but	 also	 of
those	who	don't	have	power,	and	they	should	be	guards	against	injustice.
They	 had	 formed	 one	 hundred	 and	 thirty-six	 crimes	 against	me	 --	 a	man	who
never	leaves	the	house.	I	have	not	gone	out	of	this	house	for	three	months,	not
even	into	the	garden;	how	can	I	manage	one	hundred	and	thirty-six	crimes?
But	the	government	attorneys	told	my	attorneys,	"If	you	don't	accept	at	least	two
crimes,	then	Bhagwan's	life	will	be	in	danger."	That	was	the	last	blackmail.	"If
you	want	to	put	his	 life	 in	danger,	you	can	go	for	 trial"	--	 this	 is	 just	when	the
court	 case	was	going	 to	 start,	 five	minutes	before.	 "It	 is	better	you	accept	 and
convince	Bhagwan	 to	 accept	 any	 two	 counts"	 --	 just	 to	 save	 the	 government's
face,	so	 that	 they	can	be	right:	 I	must	have	committed	a	crime,	because	I	have
accepted.	And	 the	 threat	was,	 "If	 you	don't	 accept,	 then	bail	will	 be	 cancelled
and	 the	 case	 can	 go	 on	 for	 ten	 to	 twenty	 years	 --	 it	 is	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the
government.	And	there	is	every	risk	for	the	life	of	Bhagwan.	So	if	you	want	to
save	him,	you	try	some	way	to	convince	him	to	accept."
My	attorneys	came	with	tears	in	their	eyes,	and	they	said,	"We	have	never	seen
such	 blackmail	 --	 and	 the	 blackmail	 is	 being	 done	 by	 the	 government	 --	 a
clearcut	 threat.	 So	 you	 accept	 two	 counts.	 And	 they	 don't	 want	 you	 to	 be	 in
America	more	than	fifteen	minutes	longer.	Accept	two	of	the	charges	and	your
plane	is	ready	at	the	airport,	you	immediately	move	out	of	America,	and	for	five
years	you	cannot	re-enter."	My	whole	idea	was	to	refuse.
But	I	looked	at	my	attorneys	and	I	looked	at	my	sannyasins	all	over	the	world...
And	I	had	heard	that	a	few	sannyasins	were	not	even	eating.	For	the	twelve	days
I	had	been	in	jail,	a	few	sannyasins	had	not	been	eating	at	all,	they	were	fasting.
And	I	am	not	a	rigid	man.	And	I	am	not	a	serious	man	either.
So	 I	 said,	 "There	 is	no	problem.	Don't	be	worried	 --	 I	 accept.	And	outside	 the
court,	just	in	front	of	the	courthouse,	I	will	announce	to	the	world	press	that	this
is	blackmail."
And	it	was	true	that	they	were	ready	to	kill	me,	because	as	I	reached	the	jail	to
pick	up	my	things,	they	had	planted	a	bomb	under	my	chair.	It	did	not	explode
because	it	was	a	time	bomb.
And	I	reached	there	early	--	because	I	had	accepted	immediately.	I	said,	"There
is	no	point."	I	said,	"Whatever	crimes	they	want,	I	have	committed.	I	don't	even
need	to	know	what	those	crimes	are."	So	within	five	minutes	the	case	was	over.
They	were	thinking	I	would	reach	there	nearabout	five,	and	I	reached	there	just
nearabout	one	o'clock.	So	the	timing	was	not	right.	And	as	I	left	the	jail,	they	had
to	remove	the	bomb.	And	they	have	to	accept	it	--	now,	in	jail	nobody	can	put	a
bomb	except	for	the	government,	nobody	else	can	reach	there.
The	 American	 jail...	 first	 you	 have	 to	 pass	 three	 big	 gates,	 which	 are	 all
automatic,	 electric	 gates.	 You	 cannot	 open	 them,	 they	 open	 only	 with	 remote
control	 buttons.	When	 one	 gate	 opens,	 the	 other	 two	 remain	 closed.	 And	 the
second	 opens	 only	 when	 the	 first	 is	 closed.	 After	 three	 gates,	 then	 there	 are
offices.
And	the	room	where	my	clothes	were	to	be	given	to	me	was	in	the	most	interior
part	 of	 the	 building.	 It	 would	 be	 impossible	 for	 anybody	 from	 the	 outside	 to
reach	there	and	plant	a	bomb.
The	 bomb	 was	 planted	 by	 the	 government.	 They	 must	 have	 thought	 that	 if	 I
refused	 to	 accept	 the	 crimes,	 then	 it	 would	 be	 better	 to	 finish	me	 rather	 than
carry	 on	 for	 years	with	 a	 case	which	 they	were	 going	 to	 lose	 --	 because	 they
don't	have	any	evidence,	they	don't	have	any	proof.
All	 those	one	hundred	and	 thirty-six	crimes	are	 their	 imagination,	 and	nothing
else	--	and	this	has	been	accepted	by	the	attorney	general	 just	now,	a	few	days
ago.
In	a	press	conference,	he	was	asked,	"Why	has	Bhagwan	not	been	put	into	jail?"
And	he	said,	"Because	he	has	not	committed	any	crime,	and	we	don't	have	any
proof	of	any	crime."
This	same	man	was	standing	in	court	with	the	list	of	one	hundred	and	thirty-six
crimes.
And	 this	 man	 is	 the	 right-hand	 man	 of	 president	 Ronald	 Reagan;	 they	 are
boyhood	 friends,	 they	 were	 both	 actors	 in	 Hollywood.	 And	 when	 Reagan
became	president	he	called	him	and	made	him	the	attorney	general	of	America;
now	 he	 is	 the	 highest	 legal	 authority	 in	 America.	 So	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 that
whatever	he	is	doing	is	not	known	to	Ronald	Reagan.
It	is	a	conspiracy	in	the	White	House.
Journalists	 should	 gather	 a	 little	 courage,	 and	 when	 they	 start	 writing	 stories
about	 facts	 and	 figures	 they	 should	 look	 at	 the	 other	 side	 also.	 Just	 put	 both
sides;	don't	give	your	judgment.	Let	the	people	decide.
And	truth	has	a	quality	of	 its	own:	 if	both	sides	are	placed	before	you	without
any	prejudice,	you	will	be	able	to	figure	out	what	is	true	and	what	is	false.
And	it	has	helped	the	whole	movement	around	the	world.	Those	whose	trust	was
forced,	whose	 love	was	managed,	naturally	have	 to	fall	out	of	my	world,	 from
my	people.
But	it	has	been	a	fire	test	for	those	who	really	love	and	trust	me.	Their	trust	has
become	 stronger,	 their	 love	 has	 become	deeper.	And	 thousands	 of	 new	people
have	 come	 into	 the	 movement.	 Seeing	 that	 against	 a	 single	 man...	 the	 whole
world	and	the	whole	worlds'
governments	are	against	him	--	it	is	not	possible	that	the	man	can	be	wrong.
Otherwise,	there	is	no	need	for	so	many	governments	to	be	against	me.	They	can
simply	refute	me,	their	theologians	can	refute	me,	their	legal	systems	can	prove
me	wrong.
Because	 they	 cannot	 do	 anything,	 now	 they	 have	 come	 down	 to	 the	 lowest.
Ronald	Reagan	and	the	people	who	are	cooperating	with	him	have	sunk	to	 the
status	of	terrorists.
Now,	putting	a	bomb	against	a	man	who	 is	under	your	protection	 in	 the	 jail	 --
this	is	pure	inhumanity.
And	existence	will	not	tolerate	it,	existence	will	not	forgive	it,	existence	will	not
forget	it.
And	you	will	see	every	day	these	people	disappearing	from	the	scene.
Truth	 has	 to	wait,	 but	 not	 to	wait	 forever.	 It	 is	 patient,	 it	 is	 patient	 because	 it
knows	its	victory	is	certain.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Truth	knows	no	fifty-fifty
Chapter	title:	The	only	holy	approach
Chapter	title:	Ten	Non-comandments
Chapter	title:	The	alchemy	of	enlightenment
