
Beyond	Psychology
Talks	given	from	12/04/86	pm	to	04/05/86	am
English	Discourse	series
44	Chapters
Year	published:	1988
Ch	6	appears	in	the	book	"Socrates	Poisoned..."	Ch	29
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Truth	is	the	greatest	offender
12	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604125
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
86
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 THE	 POONA	 YEARS,	 I	 REMEMBER	 YOU	 SO	 OFTEN	 USING	 THE
PHRASE,
"BE	 IN	 THE	 MARKETPLACE,	 BUT	 NOT	 OF	 IT."	 I	 THOUGHT	 THIS
MEANT	THAT
WHEN	 I	 WAS	 AWAY	 FROM	 YOU,	 I	 WOULD	 NEED	 TO	 CONSTANTLY
REMIND
MYSELF	THAT	I	WAS	NO	LONGER	PART	OF	THE	MARKETPLACE
MENTALITY	--	I	WAS	A	SANNYASIN.
RECENTLY,	DROPPED	INTO	THE	SO-CALLED	NORMAL	REALITY	OF
BARGAIN-HUNTING	AND	FLAT-FINDING,	OF	SUPERMARKETS	AND
SKINHEADS,	I	REALIZED	YOUR	PEOPLE	AREN'T	PART	OF	THE
MARKETPLACE;	 THAT	 NOW	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 NEED	 TO	 REMIND
OURSELVES	--
WE	ARE	VERY	OBVIOUSLY	AND	IRREVOCABLY	A	RACE	APART.
ONLY	 WEEKS	 AGO,	 MY	 QUESTION	 WAS	 ABOUT	 HELPING	 YOUR
VISION	TO
BE	 REALIZED.	 NOW,	 AFTER	 MY	 RECENT	 EXPERIENCE	 OF	 THE
WORLD,	AND
SEEING	ITS	TREATMENT	OF	YOU,	I	DON'T	EVEN	HAVE	THE	ENERGY
TO
TALK	TO	PEOPLE	ABOUT	YOU.	DOES	THIS	MEAN	THEY	ARE	TOO	FAR
GONE
--	OR	AM	I?
The	 way	 the	 world	 has	 treated	 me	 is	 absolutely	 natural,	 you	 should	 not	 feel
offended	by	 it.	 If	 they	had	been	 respectful,	 understanding,	 and	 loving	 towards
me,	that	would	have	been	a	shock.	Their	treatment	is	absolutely	expected.
You	have	not	gone	far	away,	they	have	gone	far	away	and	they	have	been	going
on	and	on	for	millions	of	years.	The	distance	between	the	real	man	and	the	man
that	exists	 in	the	world	has	become	almost	unbridgeable.	They	are	so	far	away
from	their	own	reality,	they	have	forgotten	the	way	back	home.
They	have	forgotten	what	was	the	purpose	of	their	being	here.
There	 is	an	ancient	parable...	A	very	wise	king	wanted	his	son	--	 the	only	son,
who	was	going	to	be	his	successor	--	to	be	a	wise	man	before	he	succeeded	him
and	became	 the	king	of	a	vast	kingdom.	The	old	man	chose	a	way	which	was
very	 strange:	 he	 sent	 the	 son	 away	 from	 the	 kingdom,	 told	 him	 that	 he	 was
abandoned,	 that	he	 should	 forget	 completely	 that	he	was	a	prince	 --	 "He	 is	no
longer	a	prince	and	I	am	not	going	to	make	him	my	successor."
All	his	beautiful	clothes,	ornaments	--	everything	was	taken	away.	He	was	given
the	clothes	of	a	beggar	and	sent	away	in	the	middle	of	the	night	in	a	chariot	to	be
thrown	out	of	 the	kingdom.	And	 there	were	strict	orders	 that	he	should	not	be
allowed	back	in	the	kingdom	from	anywhere.
Years	passed;	the	prince	really	became	a	beggar.	He	really	forgot	that	he	was	a
prince.	In	fact	there	had	been	no	effort	on	his	part	to	forget	--	he	was	a	beggar.
He	was	begging	for	clothes,	for	food,	for	shelter,	and	he	had	slowly	accepted	the
condition	he	was	in.
After	many	 years,	 one	 day	 he	was	 sitting	 outside	 a	 hotel,	 begging.	 It	was	 hot
summer	and	he	wanted	enough	money	to	purchase	a	pair	of	shoes	--	secondhand
of	 course	 --	 because	 the	 earth	was	 almost	 like	 fire,	 and	 to	walk	without	 shoes
was	becoming	impossible.	He	had	wounds	on	his	feet,	and	he	was	crying	out	for
just	a	few	coins.	At	that	very	moment	a	golden	chariot	stopped	before	the	hotel,
and	 a	man	 descended.	 The	man	 said,	 "Your	 father	 has	 called	 you	 back.	He	 is
very	old	and	dying,	and	he	wants	you	to	be	his	successor."
In	a	single	split	 second	 the	beggar	disappeared.	The	man	was	 totally	different;
you	could	see	it	in	his	face,	his	eyes...	the	clothes	were	of	the	beggar	still,	but	the
man	was	totally	different.	A	crowd	gathered	--	the	same	crowd	before	whom	he
had	 been	 spreading	 his	 hands	 for	 a	 few	 coins	 --	 and	 they	 all	 started	 showing
great	 friendship.	But	he	was	not	even	paying	attention	 to	 them.	He	went	up	 to
the	chariot,	sat	in	the	chariot	and	told	the	man	who	had	come	to	get	him,	"First
take	me	to	a	beautiful	place	where	I	can	have	a	good	bath,	find	clothes	worthy	of
me,	shoes,	ornaments...	because	I	can	go	before	the	king	only	as	a	prince."
He	came	home,	and	he	came	as	a	prince.	He	said	to	his	father,	"Just	one	thing	I
want	 to	 ask:	Why	 did	 I	 have	 to	 be	 a	 beggar	 for	 so	many	 years?	 I	 had	 really
forgotten...	If	you	had	not	called	me	back,	I	would	have	died	as	a	beggar,	never
remembering	that	once	I	was	a	prince."
The	father	said,	"This	is	what	my	father	did	to	me.	It	was	not	done	to	harm	you,
but	to	give	you	the	experience	of	the	extremes	of	life	--	the	beggar	and	the	king.
And	between	these	two,	everybody	exists.
"That	 day	 I	 told	 you	 to	 forget	 that	 you	 were	 a	 prince;	 now	 I	 want	 you	 to
remember	 that	 being	 a	 prince	 or	 being	 a	 beggar	 are	 just	 identities	 given	 by
others.	It	is	not	your	reality,	it	is	not	you	--	neither	the	king,	nor	the	beggar.	And
the	moment	you	realize	that	you	are	not	what	 the	world	thinks	of	you,	you	are
not	what	you	appear	to	be,	but	you	are	something	so	deeply	hidden	in	yourself
that	 except	 for	 you,	 nobody	 else	 can	 see	 you,	 then	 a	 man	 becomes	 wise.
Knowing	it,	wisdom	follows.
"I	was	angry	with	my	father	and	I	know	you	must	have	been	angry	with	me.	But
forgive	me,	I	had	to	do	it	to	make	it	clear	to	you:	don't	get	identified	with	being	a
king,	 don't	 get	 identified	with	 being	 a	 beggar,	 because	 in	 a	 split	 second	 these
identities	can	be	changed.
And	that	which	can	be	changed	is	not	you.	You	are	something	eternal,	something
unchangeable."
People	have	gone	far	away	from	their	reality,	and	to	remind	them	of	their	reality
hurts	them.	Their	treatment	of	me	is	nothing	but	an	expression	of	their	wounded
heart.	They	don't	want	 to	see	those	wounds;	 they	don't	want	 to	be	reminded	of
anything	else	which	they	have	tried	so	hard	to	forget,	to	forgive.	Somehow	they
have	 managed	 a	 certain	 identity	 in	 the	 world...	 and	 here	 comes	 a	 man	 who
shatters	it	completely.
It	is	natural	they	should	be	angry	with	me.	It	is	natural	they	will	stone	me.	It	is
natural	they	will	do	everything	that	they	have	always	done	with	people	like	me.
That	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 you	 have	 to	 lose	 hope,	 that	 you	 have	 to	 become
pessimistic,	that	you	have	to	stop	even	talking	about	me.	That	way	you	are	not
helping	them,	and	that	way	you	are	not	helping	yourself	either.
Their	 behavior	 should	 not	 be	 taken	 into	 account	 at	 all.	 They	 are	 absolutely
asleep.	We	 are	 trying	 something	which	 goes	 against	 their	 sleep,	 and	 naturally
they	 feel	 disturbed	 and	 react.	This	 is	 absolutely	 acceptable.	But	 how	 long	 can
they	react?	It	is	a	question	of	a	great	challenge.
Losing	hope	means	you	have	lost	the	game.
I	am	not	going	to	lose	the	game.
To	my	very	last	breath	I	will	go	on	doing	the	same,	whatever	their	reaction.	It	is
only	by	bringing	their	reaction	to	the	surface	that	there	is	a	possibility	of	change.
It	 will	 take	 time,	 because	 millions	 of	 years	 have	 taken	 them	 away	 from
themselves.	You	should	have	patience	with	 them.	They	need	your	compassion,
they	need	your	patience.
They	will	come	home;	they	want	to	come	home,	but	it	goes	against	their	ego	to
recognize	that	they	are	not	at	home	already.	It	goes	against	their	ego	to	recognize
that	they	are	false,	that	they	are	phony.
But	 their	 reaction	 --	 their	 throwing	 stones	at	me,	or	 throwing	knives	at	me,	or
putting	me	in	jails,	or	crucifying	me	--	is	going	to	change	them.	This	is	the	only
way	 that	 they	will	 start	 thinking	 about	what	 they	 are	doing	 and	why	 they	 feel
offended.	 You	 feel	 offended	 only	 when	 something	 truthful	 about	 you	 is	 told,
something	which	you	have	been	hiding.
You	are	never	offended	by	lies.
Truth	is	the	greatest	offender.
Their	very	disturbance,	their	fear	that	I	will	destroy	their	morality,	I	will	destroy
their	 religion,	 I	 will	 destroy	 their	 tradition,	 shows	 one	 thing:	 they	 don't	 have
religion,	 they	 don't	 have	 morality,	 they	 don't	 have	 any	 tradition.	 They	 are
managing	 to	believe	 that	 they	have,	but	 it	 is	only	a	belief	which	can	be	easily
destroyed;	otherwise	what	happened	in	Greece?
I	was	just	a	tourist	for	four	weeks	in	a	country	thousands	of	years	old.	The	Greek
Orthodox	church	is	the	oldest	church	in	the	world	--	the	Vatican	is	not	that	old.
Jesus	 and	 his	 sayings	 were	 first	 translated	 into	 Greek;	 that's	 why	 he	 became
"Christ,"	and	his	followers	became	"Christians."	These	are	Greek	words.
Now,	 this	 country	 --	 which	 for	 two	 thousand	 years	 has	 been	 perpetually
propagating	 Christianity,	 teaching	 every	 child	 a	 conditioning	 --	 is	 afraid	 of	 a
tourist	 who	 is	 going	 to	 be	 there	 for	 only	 four	 weeks.	 The	 archbishop	 was
disturbed	 so	 much	 that	 he	 threatened	 that	 my	 house	 would	 be	 burned,	 that	 I
would	be	stoned	if	I	was	not	removed	immediately	from	the	country,	because	my
presence	would	destroy	the	morality	of	the	country,	it	would	destroy	the	religion
of	the	country,	the	family,	the	church,	the	tradition	--	just	in	four	weeks!
If	I	can	manage	to	do	that	in	four	weeks,	then	whatever	I	am	destroying	deserves
to	be	destroyed.	 It	 simply	means	 that	 it	 is	phony.	People	are	not	 really	 in	 it	 --
they	 are	 just	 pretending.	 Only	 pretensions	 can	 be	 destroyed	 in	 four	 weeks;
realities	 cannot	 be	 destroyed.	 But	 the	 archbishop	 of	 the	 oldest	 church	 of
Christianity	is	so	much	afraid,	and	he	goes	on	saying	things	which	are	absolute
lies.	 But	 that's	 what	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 you	 again	 and	 again	 --	 that	 all	 your
religions	are	based	on	lies,	and	hence	they	are	afraid.
The	 archbishop	 was	 sending	 telegrams	 to	 the	 president	 of	 the	 country,	 to	 the
prime	 minister,	 to	 other	 ministers,	 and	 he	 was	 saying	 that	 I	 had	 been	 sent
specially	from	hell	to	destroy	the	Christian	Orthodox	church	in	Greece.	Can	you
believe	a	sane	man	saying	something	like	that?	And	he	holds	the	highest	post,	so
even	 the	 president	 is	 afraid,	 the	 prime	minister	 is	 afraid,	 and	 they	 have	 to	 do
something	criminal	because	that	man	can	provoke	the	masses	against	them.
But	I	enjoyed	the	whole	thing	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	shows	that	truth	has
really	a	strength	and	power	of	its	own.	Truth	has	an	authority	which	lies	cannot
have.	You	may	have	been	conditioning	people	with	those	lies	for	centuries,	but
just	a	ray	of	light,	just	a	small	truth,	can	destroy	that	whole	structure.
So	 there	 is	no	need	 to	be	hopeless.	Talk	 to	people	 --	 and	 if	 they	are	offended,
rejoice.	 It	means	whatever	you	have	 said	has	disturbed	 their	 conditioning,	 and
they	are	trying	to	protect	it.	You	cannot	disturb	an	unconditioned	man.	You	can
say	anything	about	him,	but	you	cannot	disturb	him.
Now	my	sannyasins	are	in	the	world,	and	I	have	told	them	to	mix	with	the	world
so	that	they	can	spread	the	truth	more	easily.	You	are	fortunate	--	just	our	people,
a	 small	 minority	 in	 the	 world	 of	 five	 billion	 people,	 is	 enough	 to	 create	 a
wildfire.	But	 don't	 be	 in	 a	 hurry	 and	 don't	 be	 impatient.	And	 there	 is	 no	 need
ever	to	be	in	a	state	of	losing	hope.
Truth	is	intrinsically	indefatigable,	intrinsically	impossible	to	defeat.
It	may	take	time,	but	there	is	no	scarcity	of	time.	And	there	is	no	need	that	the
revolution	 should	 happen	 before	 our	 eyes.	 It	 is	 contentment	 enough	 that	 you
were	part	of	a	movement	 that	changed	 the	world,	 that	you	played	your	 role	 in
favor	 of	 truth,	 that	 you	 will	 be	 part	 of	 the	 victory	 that	 is	 going	 to	 happen
ultimately.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	 IS	 MONEY	 SUCH	 A	 LOADED	 ISSUE?	 IT	 SEEMS	 AS	 THOUGH
WHEN	WE
HAVE	 MONEY,	 EITHER	 WE	 FEEL	 GUILTY	 ABOUT	 IT,	 AND	 THUS
COMPELLED
TO	SPEND	IT,	OR	INSECURE,	AND	THEREFORE	WANT	TO	HOLD	ONTO
IT.
OBVIOUSLY	 IT	 AFFECTS	 A	 MULTITUDE	 OF	 AREAS	 THAT	 REVOLVE
AROUND
THE	PIVOT	OF	POWER	AND	FREEDOM.	THE	CURIOUS	THING	IS	THAT
EVEN
TO	 DISCUSS	 THE	 SUBJECT	 OF	 MONEY	 IS	 SOMEHOW	 AS	 MUCH	 A
TABOO	AS
DISCUSSING	 SEX	 OR	 DEATH	 AT	 THE	 DINNER	 TABLE.	 PLEASE
COMMENT.
Money	is	a	 loaded	subject	 for	 the	simple	reason	 that	we	have	not	been	able	 to
work	out	a	sane	system	in	which	money	can	be	a	servant	to	the	whole	humanity,
and	not	the	master	of	a	few	greedy	people.
Money	is	a	loaded	subject	because	man's	psychology	is	full	of	greed;	otherwise
money	 is	 a	 simple	 means	 of	 exchanging	 things,	 a	 perfect	 means.	 There	 is
nothing	wrong	in	it,	but	the	way	we	have	worked	it	out,	everything	seems	to	be
wrong	in	it.
If	 you	 don't	 have	money,	 you	 are	 condemned;	 your	whole	 life	 is	 a	 curse,	 and
your	whole	life	you	are	trying	to	have	money	by	any	means.
If	you	have	money	it	does	not	change	the	basic	thing:	you	want	more,	and	there
is	 no	 end	 to	 wanting	 more.	 And	 when	 finally	 you	 have	 too	 much	 money	 --
although	it	is	not	enough,	it	is	never	enough,	but	it	is	more	than	anybody	else	has
--	 then	 you	 start	 feeling	 guilty,	 because	 the	 means	 that	 you	 have	 used	 to
accumulate	the	money	are	ugly,	inhuman,	violent.	You	have	been	exploiting,	you
have	been	sucking	 the	blood	of	people,	you	have	been	a	parasite.	So	now	you
have	got	the	money	but	it	reminds	you	of	all	the	crimes	that	you	have	committed
in	gaining	it.
That	 creates	 two	 kinds	 of	 people:	 one	 who	 starts	 donating	 to	 charitable
institutions	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 guilt.	 They	 are	 doing	 "good	 work,"	 they	 are	 doing
"God's	 work."	 They	 are	 opening	 hospitals,	 and	 schools.	 All	 they	 are	 doing	 is
trying	somehow	not	to	go	mad	because	of	the	feeling	of	guilt.	All	your	hospitals,
and	 all	 your	 schools	 and	 colleges,	 and	 all	 your	 charitable	 institutions	 are
outcomes	of	guilty	people.
For	example,	the	Nobel	prize	was	founded	by	a	man	who	earned	money	in	the
first	world	war	by	creating	all	kinds	of	destructive	bombs,	machines.	The	 first
world	war	was	 fought	using	 the	means	 supplied	by	Mr.	Nobel.	And	he	earned
such	a	huge	amount	of	money...
Both	the	parties	were	getting	war	material	from	the	same	source;	he	was	the	only
person	who	was	creating	war	materials	on	a	vast	scale.	So	whoever	was	killed,
was	killed	by	him.	It	doesn't	matter	whether	he	belonged	to	this	side	or	 to	that
side;	whoever	was	killed	was	killed	by	his	bombs.
So	 in	 old	 age,	 when	 he	 had	 all	 the	 money	 in	 the	 world	 a	 man	 can	 have,	 he
established	the	Nobel	prize.	It	is	given	as	a	peace	award	--	by	a	man	who	earned
the	money	by	war!
Whoever	 is	 working	 for	 peace	 receives	 a	 Nobel	 prize.	 It	 is	 given	 for	 great
scientific	inventions,	great	artistic,	creative	inventions.
And	with	 the	Nobel	 prize	 comes	 big	money	 --	 right	 now	 it	 is	 near	 about	 two
hundred	and	fifty	 thousand	dollars.	The	best	award,	and	 two	hundred	and	fifty
thousand	 dollars	 with	 it;	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 increasing	 because	 money	 goes	 on
becoming	less	and	less	valuable.	And	such	a	fortune	that	man	must	have	created
that	all	 these	Nobel	prizes	 that	are	distributed	every	year	are	given	only	out	of
the	 interest.	The	basic	money	 remains	 intact,	will	 remain	 intact	 forever.	Every
year	so	much	interest	accumulates	that	you	can	give	twenty	Nobel	prizes.
All	 charitable	 work	 is	 really	 an	 effort	 to	 wash	 your	 guilt	 --	 literally.	 When
Pontius	Pilate	ordered	the	crucifixion	of	Jesus,	the	first	thing	he	did	was	to	wash
his	hands.	Strange!
The	order	for	crucifixion	does	not	make	your	hands	dirty,	why	should	you	wash
your	hands?	It	is	something	significant:	he	is	feeling	guilty.	It	took	two	thousand
years	 for	man	 to	understand	 this,	because	for	 two	 thousand	years	nobody	even
mentioned	or	bothered	to	comment	on	why	Pontius	Pilate	washed	his	hands.	It
was	 Sigmund	 Freud	 who	 found	 out	 that	 people	 who	 are	 feeling	 guilty	 start
washing	their	hands.	It	is	symbolic...	as	if	their	hands	are	full	of	blood.
So	if	you	have	money,	it	creates	guilt.	One	way	is	to	wash	your	hands	by	helping
charitable	institutions,	and	this	is	exploited	by	the	religions.	They	are	exploiting
your	 guilt,	 but	 they	 go	 on	 buttressing	 your	 ego,	 saying	 you	 are	 doing	 great
spiritual	work.	It	is	nothing	to	do	with	spirituality;	it	is	just	that	they	are	trying	to
console	the	criminals.
The	first	way	is	what	religions	have	been	doing.	The	other	is	that	the	man	feels
so	guilty	that	either	he	goes	mad	or	commits	suicide.	His	own	existence	becomes
just	anguish.
Each	 breath	 becomes	 heavy.	 And	 the	 strange	 thing	 is	 that	 he	 has	 worked	 his
whole	life	to	attain	all	 this	money,	because	the	society	provokes	the	desire,	 the
ambition,	 to	 be	 rich,	 to	 be	 powerful.	 And	 money	 does	 bring	 power;	 it	 can
purchase	everything,	except	 those	few	things	which	cannot	be	purchased	by	 it.
But	nobody	bothers	about	those	things.
Meditation	cannot	be	purchased,	love	cannot	be	purchased,	friendship	cannot	be
purchased,	gratitude	cannot	be	purchased	--	but	nobody	is	concerned	with	these
things.
Everything	 else,	 the	whole	world	 of	 things,	 can	 be	 purchased.	 So	 every	 child
starts	 climbing	 the	 ladder	 of	 ambitions,	 and	 he	 knows	 if	 he	 has	 money	 then
everything	 is	 possible.	 So	 the	 society	 breeds	 the	 idea	 of	 ambition,	 of	 being
powerful,	of	being	rich.
It	is	an	absolutely	wrong	society.	It	creates	psychologically	sick,	insane	people.
And	when	they	have	reached	the	goal	that	the	society	and	the	educational	system
have	 given	 to	 them,	 they	 find	 themselves	 at	 a	 dead	 end.	The	 road	 ends	 there;
there	is	nothing	beyond.
So	either	they	become	a	phony	religious	person	or	they	just	jump	into	madness,
into	suicide,	and	destroy	themselves.
Money	can	be	a	beautiful	thing	if	it	is	not	in	the	hands	of	the	individuals,	if	it	is
part	 of	 the	 communes,	 part	 of	 the	 societies,	 and	 the	 society	 takes	 care	 of
everybody.	Everybody	creates,	everybody	contributes,	but	everybody	is	not	paid
by	money;	 they	 are	 paid	 by	 respect,	 paid	 by	 love,	 paid	 by	 gratitude,	 and	 are
given	all	that	is	necessary	for	life.
Money	 should	 not	 be	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 individuals;	 otherwise	 it	will	 create	 this
problem	of	being	burdened	with	guilt.	And	money	can	make	people's	lives	very
rich.	 If	 the	 commune	 owns	 the	 money,	 the	 commune	 can	 give	 you	 all	 the
facilities	 that	 you	 need,	 all	 the	 education,	 all	 creative	 dimensions	 of	 life.	 The
society	will	be	enriched	and	nobody	will	feel	guilty.	And	because	the	society	has
done	so	much	for	you,	you	would	like	to	pay	it	back	by	your	services.
If	you	are	a	doctor	you	will	do	the	best	you	can	do;	if	you	are	a	surgeon	you	will
do	the	best	you	can	do,	because	it	is	the	society	that	has	helped	you	to	become
the	best	surgeon,	given	you	all	the	education,	given	you	every	facility,	taken	care
of	you	from	your	very	childhood.	That's	what	 I	mean	when	I	say	 that	children
should	 belong	 to	 the	 communes,	 and	 the	 commune	 should	 take	 care	 of
everything.
And	all	that	is	created	by	people	will	not	be	hoarded	by	individuals;	it	will	be	a
commune	resourcefulness.	It	will	be	yours.	It	will	be	for	you,	but	it	will	not	be	in
your	 hands.	 It	 will	 not	 make	 you	 ambitious;	 it	 will	 make	 you	 more	 creative,
more	generous,	more	grateful,	so	the	society	goes	on	becoming	better	and	more
beautiful.	Then	money	is	not	a	problem.
Communes	can	use	money	as	an	exchange,	because	every	commune	cannot	have
all	the	things	it	needs.	It	can	purchase	from	another	commune;	then	money	can
be	used	 as	 a	means	of	 exchange	 --	 but	 from	commune	 to	 commune,	 not	 from
individual	to	individual,	so	that	every	commune	is	capable	of	bringing	in	things
which	 are	 not	 available	 there.	 So	 money's	 basic	 function	 remains,	 but	 its
ownership	 changes	 from	 the	 individual	 to	 the	 collective.	 To	 me	 this	 is	 basic
communism:	the	money's	function	changes	from	the	individual	to	the	collective.
But	 the	 religions	will	 not	want	 that.	 Politicians	will	 not	want	 it,	 because	 their
whole	game	will	be	destroyed.	Their	whole	game	depends	on	ambition,	power,
greed,	lust.
It	seems	very	strange	to	say	that	the	religions	exist	almost	on	irreligious	things,
or	it	will	be	better	to	say,	on	anti-religious	things.	They	use	those	things,	but	on
the	 surface	 you	 don't	 see	 that.	 You	 see	 charity,	 but	 you	 don't	 see	 from	where
charity	 comes,	 and	 why.	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 why	 should	 there	 be	 a	 need	 for
charity?	Why	should	there	be	orphans,	why	should	there	be	beggars?	Why	in	the
first	place	should	we	allow	beggars	to	happen	and	orphans	to	happen?	And	in	the
second	place,	why	are	there	people	who	are	very	willing	to	do	charity	work,	to
give	money,	to	give	their	whole	lives	to	charity	and	serving	the	poor?
On	the	surface	everything	seems	to	be	right	because	we	have	lived	in	this	kind	of
structure	for	so	long;	otherwise	it	is	absolutely	absurd.	No	child	is	an	orphan	if
the	 commune	 owns	 the	 children,	 and	 if	 the	 commune	 owns	 everything,	 then
nobody	is	a	beggar;	we	all	share	whatsoever	we	have.	But	then	religions	will	not
have	their	sources	of	exploitation.	They	will	not	have	the	poor	to	console,	they
will	not	have	 the	 rich	 to	help	get	 rid	of	 their	guilt.	These	are	 the	 reasons	why
they	are	so	much	against	me.
My	work	is	almost	like	that	of	a	gravedigger	who	goes	on	digging	up	beautiful
marble	graves	and	bringing	out	skeletons.	Nobody	wants	to	see	them.	People	are
afraid	of	skeletons.
One	of	my	 friends	was	a	 student	 in	a	medical	college,	and	 I	used	 to	 stay	with
him	once	in	a	while,	while	traveling.	If	I	had	to	stay	the	whole	night,	rather	than
staying	 at	 the	 station	 I	 would	 stay	 in	 the	 hostel	 with	 this	 student.	 One	 day	 it
happened	that	somehow,	late	in	the	night,	the	discussion	went	on	about	so	many
things,	and	came	around	to	ghosts.	And	I	was	simply	joking;	I	said,	"They	are	a
reality.	It	is	strange	that	you	have	not	come	across	them."
Almost	 fifteen	 students	 were	 there	 in	 the	 room,	 and	 they	 said,	 "No,	 we	 don't
believe	 in	 them.	We	have	dissected	so	many	bodies;	we	have	never	 found	any
soul,	and	there	is	no	ghost,	nothing."
So	I	prepared	my	friend...	 In	 their	surgical	ward	 they	had	many	skeletons,	and
they	 also	 had	 another	 ward	 where	 autopsies	 are	 done,	 when	 beggars	 die	 or
somebody	is	killed	or	commits	suicide	--	it	was	a	big	city,	it	was	the	capital	of	a
state.	The	wards	were	joined	together.	On	this	side	of	the	hall	were	the	skeletons,
and	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 hall	many	 dead	 bodies	 used	 to	wait.	And	who	 cares
about	 the	beggars	and	this	and	that?	--	whenever	 there	was	time	the	professors
would	do	the	autopsies	and	decide.
I	told	my	friend,	"You	do	one	thing:	tomorrow	night,	you	lie	down	on	a	stretcher
where	the	dead	bodies	are	lying,	and	I	will	bring	in	your	friends.	You	have	to	do
nothing.	 In	 the	middle	of	 the	conversation,	when	I	am	 there	with	your	 friends,
you	just	have	to	sit	up.
From	the	lying	position	you	simply	sit	up."
It	was	a	simple	thing,	there	was	no	problem.	He	said,	"I	will	do	it."
But	 a	 problem	 arose...	 it	 became	 very	 complicated.	We	went	 into	 the	 surgical
hall,	and	my	friend	was	lying	down.	As	we	entered	he	got	up,	and	all	the	fifteen
people	started	trembling.	They	could	not	believe	their	eyes	 that	a	dead	body...!
But	the	problem	became	real	because	a	real	dead	body	got	up!	So	my	friend	who
was	pretending	jumped	up	and	he	said,	"There	are	really	ghosts!	Just	look	at	that
body!"
There	had	been	some	misunderstanding:	that	man	was	in	a	coma.	Some	servants
had	brought	him	in	the	night	so	they	put	him	in	with	the	dead	bodies.	Then	he
came	 back	 to	 consciousness,	 so	 he	 stood	 up.	 When	 he	 saw	 these	 people	 he
thought	it	must	be	morning	and	now	it	is	time	to	get	up	and	ask	what	is	going	on.
Even	I	could	not	manage	at	first	to	work	out	what	had	happened,	because	I	had
sent	only	one.	This	second	man...!	We	closed	the	doors	and	started	to	leave.	The
man	was	shouting,	"Wait,	I	am	alive!	Why	I	am	being	put	here?"
We	 closed	 the	 doors.	 We	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 our	 business,"	 and	 we	 left.	 It	 was
difficult	to	convince	my	friend	who	had	been	lying	there	that	it	was	not	a	ghost,
that	 the	other	man	was	 just	a	mistake.	He	said,	"But	never	a	next	 time!	 It	was
good	that	he	stood	up	only	when	you	all	had	come.	If	he	had	stood	up	when	I
was	lying	there	alone	I	would	have	died!	I	could	not	have	survived."
If	you	go	on	digging	at	the	roots	--	which	are	ugly,	which	nobody	wants	to	see....
That's	why	words	 likèsex'	 or	 `death'	 or	 `money'	 have	become	 taboos.	There	 is
nothing	in	them	that	you	cannot	discuss	at	the	dining	table,	but	the	reason	is	that
we	have	repressed	them	deep	down	and	we	don't	want	anybody	to	dig	them	out.
We	are	afraid.
We	are	afraid	of	death	because	we	know	we	are	going	to	die,	and	we	don't	want
to	die.
We	want	to	keep	our	eyes	closed.	We	want	to	live	in	a	state	as	if	"everybody	else
is	going	to	die,	but	not	me."	That	is	the	normal	psychology	of	everybody:	"I	am
not	going	to	die."
To	 bring	 up	 death	 is	 taboo.	 People	 become	 afraid	 because	 it	 reminds	 them	 of
their	own	death.	They	are	so	much	concerned	with	trivia,	and	death	is	coming.
But	they	want	that	trivia	to	keep	them	engaged.	It	functions	as	a	curtain:	they	are
not	going	to	die,	at	least	not	now.	Later	on...	"whenever	it	happens,	we	will	see."
Sex	they	are	afraid	of	because	so	many	jealousies	are	 involved.	Their	own	life
experiences	have	been	bitter.	They	have	 loved	and	failed,	and	 they	really	don't
want	to	bring	the	subject	up	--	it	hurts.
And	 so	 is	 the	 case	 with	 money,	 because	 money	 immediately	 brings	 in	 the
hierarchy	of	the	society.	So	if	there	are	twelve	persons	sitting	around	the	table,
immediately	you	can	put	them	in	a	hierarchy;	the	similarity,	the	equality,	for	the
moment	is	lost.	Then	somebody	is	richer	than	you,	somebody	is	poorer	than	you,
and	suddenly	you	see	yourself	not	as	friends	but	as	enemies,	because	you	are	all
fighting	for	the	same	money,	you	are	grabbing	at	the	same	money.	You	are	not
friends,	you	are	all	competitors,	enemies.
So	at	least	at	the	dining	table	when	you	are	eating	you	want	no	hierarchy,	not	the
struggle	of	 the	ordinary	 life.	You	want	for	a	moment	 to	forget	all	 those	 things.
You	want	to	talk	only	of	good	things	--	but	these	are	all	facades.
Why	not	create	a	life	which	is	really	good?	Why	not	create	a	life	where	money
does	 not	 create	 a	 hierarchy,	 but	 simply	 gives	 more	 and	 more	 opportunity	 to
everybody?	Why	not	create	a	 life	where	sex	does	not	make	bitter	experiences,
jealousies,	failures;	where	sex	becomes	just	fun	--	nothing	more	than	any	other
game,	just	a	biological	game.
A	simple	understanding...	I	can't	conceive	why...	if	I	love	some	woman	and	she
enjoys	some	man,	it	is	perfectly	okay.	It	does	not	disturb	my	love.	In	fact	I	love
her	 more	 because	 she	 is	 being	 loved	 by	more	 people;	 I	 have	 chosen	 really	 a
beautiful	woman.	It	will	be	really	ugly	to	find	a	woman	whom	only	I	love,	and
she	cannot	find	anybody	else	in	the	whole	world	to	love	her.	That	will	be	really
hell.
And	 what	 is	 wrong	 if	 she	 is	 happy	 sometimes	 with	 somebody	 else?	 An
understanding	heart	will	be	happy	that	she	is	happy.	You	love	a	person	and	you
want	 him	 to	 be	 happy.	 If	 she	 is	 happy	 with	 you,	 good;	 if	 she	 is	 happy	 with
somebody	else	it	is	as	good.	There	is	no	problem	in	it.
Once	we	stop	the	old	nonsense	that	has	been	poured	into	our	minds	continuously
--	of	monogamy,	of	one-to-one	relationship,	of	fidelity	--	which	is	all	nonsense...
When	 there	 are	 so	many	beautiful	 people	 in	 the	world,	why	 shouldn't	 they	 be
intermixing?	You	play	 tennis;	 that	does	not	mean	your	whole	 life	you	have	 to
play	tennis	with	the	same	partner,	fidelity...!	Life	should	be	richer.
So	it	is	only	that	a	little	understanding	is	needed	and	love	will	not	be	a	problem,
sex	will	not	be	taboo.	Nor	will	death	be	a	taboo	once	your	life	has	no	problems,
no	anxieties;	once	you	have	accepted	your	life	in	its	totality,	death	is	not	the	end
of	life,	it	is	part	of	it.
In	accepting	life	in	its	totality,	you	have	accepted	death	too;	it	is	just	a	rest.	The
whole	day	you	have	been	working	--	and	in	the	night	do	you	want	to	rest,	or	not?
There	are	a	few	insane	people	who	don't	want	to	sleep.	I	have	come	across	one
person	who	was	 brought	 to	me	 because	 he	 did	 not	 want	 to	 sleep.	 The	whole
night	he	made	every	effort	to	keep	himself	awake.	The	problem	was	that	he	was
afraid	 that	 if	he	sleeps,	 then	what	 is	 the	guarantee	 that	he	will	wake	up?	Now,
who	can	give	the	guarantee?	That	is	really	a	great	problem	--	who	can	give	him	a
guarantee?
He	wants	a	guarantee	that	"I	will	wake	up.	What	is	the	guarantee	that	I	will	not
go	 on	 sleeping?	 --	 because	 I	 have	 seen	 many	 people	 just	 go	 to	 sleep	 and...
finished!	People	say	that	they	are	dead,	and	they	take	them	to	the	burning	place
and	 burn	 those	 people.	 I	 don't	want	 to	 be	 burned.	 So	why	 take	 the	 risk?	This
sleep	is	risky!"	Now	sleep	can	become	a	problem.
Death	 is	 a	 little	 longer	 sleep,	 a	 little	 deeper.	 The	 daily	 sleep	 rejuvenates	 you,
makes	you	again	capable	of	functioning	better,	efficiently.	All	tiredness	is	gone,
you	are	again	young.	Death	does	the	same	on	a	deeper	level.	It	changes	the	body,
because	 now	 the	 body	 cannot	 be	 rejuvenated	 only	 by	 ordinary	 sleep;	 it	 has
become	too	old.	It	needs	a	more	drastic	change,	it	needs	a	new	body.	Your	life
energy	wants	a	new	form.	Death	is	simply	a	sleep	so	that	you	can	easily	move
into	a	new	form.
Once	you	accept	life	in	its	totality,	life	includes	death.	Then	death	is	not	against
it	but	is	just	a	servant,	just	as	sleep	is.	Your	life	is	eternal,	it	is	going	to	be	there
forever	and	forever.	But	the	body	is	not	eternal;	it	has	to	be	changed.	It	becomes
old,	and	then	it	 is	better	 to	have	a	new	body,	a	new	form,	rather	than	dragging
the	old.
To	me,	a	man	of	understanding	will	not	have	any	problems.	He	will	have	only	a
clarity	 to	 see	 --	 and	 the	 problems	 evaporate.	 And	 tremendous	 silence	 is	 left
behind,	a	silence	of	great	beauty	and	great	benediction.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Your	mind	is	the	judas
13	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604130
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
107
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HEAR	 YOU	 SAYING	 THAT	 WE	 ARE	 ALL	 LEAVES	 ON	 THE	 SAME
TREE,	AND
THAT	ENLIGHTENMENT	IS	ONLY	POSSIBLE	WHEN	WE	REALLY	COME
TOGETHER.	ON	THE	OTHER	HAND,	I	HEAR	YOU	SAYING	THAT	ONLY
THE
SINGLE	INDIVIDUAL	CAN	FULFILL	HIS	BEING	IN	DEEP	ALONENESS.
I	FEEL	BOTH	OF	THESE	ARE	RIGHT,	BUT	STILL	I	HAVE	NO	REAL
UNDERSTANDING	OF	IT.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Both	are	right,	but	they	appear	to	be	contradictory;	hence	the	confusion.	On	the
one	 hand	 I	 am	 saying	 that	 when	 you	 are	 one	 with	 existence,	 you	 come	 to
realization	 --	 and	 to	 be	 one	 with	 existence	 means	 you	 disappear,	 you	 are	 no
more.	And	on	the	other	hand	I	am	telling	you	to	be	yourself,	to	be	authentically
your	original	face;	only	then	can	you	experience	realization.
I	can	see	your	dilemma.	You	feel	that	they	are	both	right	--	that	is	significant	to
remember	 --	 that	 you	 feel	 that	 they	 are	 both	 right,	 but	 your	 mind	 is	 not
convinced,	your	thinking	is	not	convinced.	Your	thinking	creates	questions:	How
can	they	both	be	right?
Mind	functions	in	an	either/or	way:	either	this	can	be	right	or	its	opposite	can	be
right.
Both	 together	 cannot	 be	 right	 --	 as	 far	 as	 mind,	 its	 logic,	 its	 rationality,	 is
concerned.
If	 mind	 is	 either/or,	 then	 the	 heart	 is	 both/and.	 The	 heart	 has	 no	 logic,	 but	 a
sensitivity,	a	perceptivity.	It	can	see	that	not	only	can	both	be	together;	 in	fact,
they	 are	 not	 two.	 It	 is	 just	 one	 phenomenon,	 seen	 from	 two	 different	 aspects.
And	there	is	much	more	than	the	two	--	that's	why	I	say	"both/and."
And	the	heart	is	always	right.	If	there	is	a	question	of	choosing	between	the	mind
and	the	heart...	because	mind	is	a	creation	of	the	society.	It	has	been	educated.	It
has	been	given	to	you	by	the	society,	not	by	existence.
The	heart	is	unpolluted.
It	is	pure	existence:
Hence	it	has	a	sensitivity.
Look	 from	 the	viewpoint	of	 the	heart,	 and	 the	contradiction	starts	melting	 like
ice.
I	 say	 to	 you,	 be	 one	 with	 the	 universe;	 you	 have	 to	 disappear	 and	 let	 the
existence	be.
You	just	have	to	be	absent	so	that	the	existence	can	be	present	in	its	totality.	But
the	person	who	has	to	disappear	is	not	your	reality,	it	is	only	your	personality.	It
is	just	an	idea	in	you.	In	reality	you	are	already	one	with	existence;	you	cannot
exist	in	any	other	way.
You	are	existence.
But	 the	personality	 creates	 a	 deception,	 and	makes	you	 feel	 separate.	You	 can
assume	yourself	to	be	separate	--	existence	gives	you	total	freedom,	even	against
itself.	 You	 can	 think	 of	 yourself	 as	 a	 separate	 entity,	 an	 ego.	 And	 that	 is	 the
barrier	 that	 is	 holding	 you	 back	 from	melting	 into	 the	 vastness	 that	 surrounds
you	every	moment.
It	has	no	closed	doors,	all	 its	doors	are	open.	Sometimes	you	do	 feel	a	certain
door	open	-
-	 but	 only	 for	 a	 fragment	 of	 a	moment;	 your	 personality	 cannot	 afford	more.
Those	moments	you	call	moments	of	beauty,	moments	of	ecstasy.
Looking	at	a	sunset,	just	for	a	second	you	forget	your	separateness.	You	are	the
sunset.
That	is	the	moment	when	you	feel	the	beauty	of	it.	But	the	moment	you	say	that
it	is	a	beautiful	sunset,	you	are	no	longer	feeling	it;	you	have	come	back	to	your
separate,	enclosed	entity	of	the	ego.	Now	the	mind	is	speaking.
And	this	is	one	of	the	mysteries,	that	the	mind	can	speak	--	and	knows	nothing;
and	the	heart	knows	everything	--	and	cannot	speak.
Perhaps	to	know	too	much	makes	it	difficult	to	speak.
The	mind	knows	so	little,	it	is	possible	for	it	to	speak.	Language	is	enough	for	it,
but	is	not	enough	for	the	heart.
But	sometimes,	under	the	impact	of	a	certain	moment	--	a	starry	night,	a	sunrise,
a	beautiful	flower	--	and	just	for	a	moment	you	forget	that	you	are	separate.	And
even	forgetting	it	releases	tremendous	beauty	and	ecstasy.
When	 I	 say	you	have	 to	 disappear	 for	 the	 realization	of	 the	 ultimate,	 I	 do	not
mean	you;	I	mean	the	you	that	you	are	not.	I	mean	the	you	that	you	think	you
are.
And	 the	 second	 statement,	 that	 only	 in	 feeling	 one	 with	 existence,	 totally
dissolved	 in	 it,	 do	 you	 realize	 yourself,	 you	 realize	 truth...	 there	 is	 no
contradiction	for	the	heart,	because	this	"you"	that	you	realize	when	you	are	one
with	 existence	 is	 not	 the	 old	 you.	 That	was	 your	 personality,	 and	 this	 is	 your
individuality.	That	was	given	by	the	society,	and	this	is	nature,	reality,	a	gift	of
existence.	You	can	forget	it,	but	you	cannot	destroy	it.
The	other	you,	the	false	you	--	you	can	create	it,	but	you	cannot	make	it	real.	It
will	remain	a	shadow,	a	painted	face.	It	will	never	become	your	original	face.
When	I	was	a	professor	in	the	university,	in	the	professors'	campus	there	used	to
be	 a	 small	 street.	 Very	 few	 bungalows	 were	 there	 and	 those	 were	 the	 best
bungalows	 --	 for	 the	 deans	 and	 the	 vice-chancellor	 and	 the	 heads	 of	 the
departments.	 So	 very	 silent,	 empty,	 no	 traffic...	 and	 the	 street	was	 not	 long.	 It
went	just	half	a	mile	and	then	there	was	an	end,	a	dead	end,	and	a	deep	valley.
Whenever	there	was	rain...	I	loved	to	walk	in	the	rain.	The	last	house	had	made	it
a	point...	because	they	saw	it	happening	again	and	again,	that	whenever	it	rains	I
am	certain	to	appear	on	the	street.	And	that	was	the	last	house;	 then	the	valley
was	there.
They	 thought	 I	 must	 be	mad	 --	 without	 umbrella,	 soaking	with	 water,	 with	 a
beard,	long	hair,	and	walking	so	slowly	and	at	ease...	as	if	there	is	no	problem	of
the	rain.	And	then	I	used	to	stand	by	the	side	of	a	big	bodhi	tree,	just	at	the	very
end	of	the	street.
The	bodhi	tree	has	many	beauties.	One	of	the	beauties	is	that	its	leaves	are	such
that	when	 it	 is	 raining	you	can	 stand	underneath	 it	 and	 save	yourself	 from	 the
rains:	 the	 leaves	prevent	 the	water	from	reaching	to	you.	And	it	has	very	thick
foliage,	 so	 the	water	 goes	 on	 gathering	 on	 the	 leaves.	And	 the	 leaves	 are	 like
cups,	so	they	hold	much.
So	if	you	are	suddenly	caught	in	the	rain,	and	don't	want	to	spoil	your	clothes,
the	bodhi	tree	protects	you	longer	than	any	other	tree.	But	the	other	beauty	is	--
which	was	more	important	for	me	--	that	when	the	rain	has	stopped,	then	under
the	bodhi	tree,	rain	starts!	-
-	 because	 how	 long	 can	 it	 contain	 all	 that	 water?	 Sooner	 or	 later	 it	 becomes
weightier,	and	leaves	start...	So	when	the	whole	world	is	silent,	under	the	bodhi
tree	it	is	raining.
So	I	used	to	go	to	the	end	of	the	street	and	rest	under	the	bodhi	tree.	That	was
another	madness	to	the	people	of	the	house.	Only	in	the	beginning	few	minutes
of	 rain	 can	 the	 bodhi	 tree	 protect	 you;	 after,	 that	 is	 dangerous,	 the	 most
dangerous.	The	rain	has	stopped,	but	it	will	not	stop	under	the	bodhi	tree	for	at
least	one	hour.
The	children	of	the	house,	the	wife,	daughters,	sons	--	they	all	will	gather	in	the
verandah	 and	 look	 at	me.	And	 it	 became	 an	 absolute	 thing	 to	 them,	 that	 both
things	happen	together
--	rain,	and	my	coming	to	their	house.
The	 house	was	 given	 to	 one	 of	 the	most	 important	 physicists,	 the	 head	 of	 the
physics	department.	And	he	was	very	much	interested	in	me,	because	once	in	a
while	 I	 was	 making	 statements	 which	 were	 bringing	 physics	 and	 mysticism
closer	than	ever.	Perhaps	the	same	statement	can	be	made	by	the	physicist	as	is
being	made	by	the	mystics.
He	was	a	very	humble	man.	He	had	been	teaching	all	over	the	world	in	different
universities.	Whenever	 I	was	giving	a	 lecture	 in	 the	 students'	union	 --	because
almost	 every	week,	 once	 or	 twice...	He	was	 an	 absolute	 audience	 --	 he	would
come,	certainly.
Many	 other	 professors	 used	 to	 come,	 but	 he	 was	 the	 most	 regular.	 And	 we
became	friends.
He	was	very	old.	He	had	worked	with	Albert	Einstein,	and	after	Albert	Einstein's
death	he	came	to	America	in	his	place	--	because	he	was	his	closest	colleague,
and	nobody	could	have	taken	that	place	except	him.
We	became	such	great	friends	that	he	said,	"Sometime	I	would	like	you	to	come
to	my	house;	I	would	like	to	introduce	you	to	my	wife	and	my	children."	I	had
no	 idea	 that	 those	 were	 the	 people	 who	 knew	 me	 already,	 and	 I	 knew	 them
already.
When	I	reached	their	house	they	all	started	giggling,	and	he	was	very	angry.	He
said,	"I	have	brought	a	friend.	Accepted	that	he	is	very	young	and	I	am	very	old,
and	the	friendship	looks	strange,	but	our	conceptions	about	reality	are	very	close,
and	you	should	not	behave	like	this	--	you	have	never	behaved	like	this."
But	the	wife	said,	"You	don't	know	this	man."
And	I	said	 to	him,	"She	 is	 right:	we	have	been	well-acquainted	for	almost	 two
years."
He	said,	"What!	You	are	acquainted	with	my	wife	and	children?"
I	said,	"Not	actually,	but	a	sort	of	acquaintance	is	there."	And	then	I	told	him,	"I
come	here	on	this	street	when	it	is	raining;	I	love	rains,	and	these	people	love	to
see	 me	 --	 a	 madman.	 And	 don't	 think	 they	 are	 unmannerly	 --	 that	 you	 are
introducing	 me	 and	 they	 are	 laughing	 and	 giggling...	 even	 your	 wife	 cannot
contain	herself."
This	physicist	met	some	sannyasin	in	America,	and	sent	me	a	message:	"The	last
person	I	want	to	see	is	you,	and	I	am	coming	back	to	India	as	soon	as	possible
just	to	see	you.	And	the	reason	is	that	I	feel	you	are	perfectly	right	that	the	way
of	the	heart	in	seeing	things	is	far	closer	to	reality	than	the	way	of	the	mind."
But	before	he	could	come	to	India,	he	died.	I	 feel	 that	I	must	have	been	in	his
thoughts	when	he	died.
We	are	one	as	far	as	our	reality	is	concerned.
We	look	separate	as	far	as	our	fabricated	egos	are	concerned.
So	when	I	say	dissolve	your	"you,"	I	mean	your	own	creation,	or	the	creation	of
the	 society	 in	you.	And	 just	 feel	 the	 silence	of	 the	moment	when	you	are	not;
then	you	will	feel	so	much	in	tune	with	clouds	and	the	ocean	and	the	mountains.
The	 day	 you	 drop	 it	 completely	 is	 the	 greatest	 day	 in	 your	 life,	 because	 this
brings	you	the	whole	universe.	You	lose	nothing	--	you	lose	only	a	false	idea	--
and	you	attain	everything:	 the	whole	universe,	 the	 infinite	universe	with	all	 its
beauties,	with	all	its	treasures.
But	before	you	can	drop	the	false	"I"	you	have	to	find	your	real	"I";	otherwise
dropping	the	false	"I",	you	will	feel	you	are	becoming	empty.
That's	why	I	say	become	an	individual,	be	yourself.
That	simply	means	that,	feeling	your	reality	you	will	be	--	without	any	trouble	--
capable	of	dropping	the	false.	In	fact	the	false	will	drop	itself.	As	the	real	comes
in,	 the	 false	 goes	 out.	 And	 the	 real	 is	 from	 one	 standpoint,	 individual	 --
individual	against	personality.	The	personality	was	just	hodgepodge;	something
was	put	by	your	mother,	something	was	put	by	your	father,	something	by	your
neighbors,	 friends,	wife,	 teachers,	 priests,	 leaders...	 It	was	 a	patchwork,	 it	was
not	indivisible.
It	was	almost	falling	apart	--	any	moment,	a	small	accident	and	it	will	fall	apart	-
-	it	had	no	soul	connecting	all	its	parts.	It	had	no	wholeness,	it	was	only	parts.
Against	 `personality'	 I	 use	 the	 word	 ìndividuality'	 in	 the	 meaning	 of
indivisibility.
Individual	means	indivisible:	you	cannot	divide	it,	there	are	no	parts	--	it	cannot
fall	apart.	It	is	solid	rock,	it	is	one	piece.	Seen	in	comparison	with	personality...
but	that	is	only	one	aspect.
Seen	 from	 the	 universal,	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 individual	 either.	 Even	 that	much
demarcation	disappears.	You	are	the	whole.	The	winds,	 the	trees,	 the	moon	are
not	 separated	 anywhere;	 neither	 are	 you.	 You	 are	 breathing	 every	 moment.
Existence	is	not	separate	from	you,	even	when	you	think	you	are	separate.
And	when	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 not	 separate,	 it	 is	 a	 tremendous	 realization.
Then	all	fear	of	losing	your	face,	all	fear	of	losing	your	personality	--	which	is
always	slipping	--
disappears.	You	have	come	to	the	origins.	You	have	come	to	the	eternal,	to	the
universal.
This	is	what	I	call	enlightenment.
You	have	become	full	of	light	and	clarity.
Now	you	live	the	whole	mystery	of	existence.
Seeing	 a	 roseflower,	 you	 become	 it.	You	 don't	 see	 it	 from	outside;	 you	 feel	 it
from	its	innermost	being.	Its	petals	are	yours,	its	perfume	is	yours.	You	are	not
an	observer	--	you	are	it.
Krishnamurti	 used	 to	 say	 again	 and	again	 --	 his	whole	 life	he	was	 saying	 it;	 I
don't	think	the	people	who	were	listening	were	really	listening	to	him.	This	is	his
most	 repeated	 observation:	 that	 the	 observed	 becomes	 the	 observer,	 or	 the
observer	becomes	the	observed.
You	don't	 see	a	sunset	setting	 far	away;	you	are	 in	 it,	you	are	part	of	all	 those
beautiful	 colors.	 And	 to	 live	 existence	 in	 such	 deep	 empathy	 is	 the	 richest
experience	man	is	capable	of.
Trust	your	feeling.
Never	trust	your	mind	--	your	mind	is	the	Judas.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 MORE	 I	 MOVE	 INTO	 THE	 MEDITATION,	 THE	 MORE	 I	 FEEL
RESPONSIBLE
FOR	 MYSELF	 AND	 FOR	 THE	 SITUATION	 IN	 THE	 WHOLE	 WORLD.
HOW	IS
THAT	POSSIBLE?
It	is	the	same	thing	--	just	the	same	question.
The	more	you	become	yourself,	the	more	you	will	feel	responsible	for	the	world
because	 the	more	 you	 are	 becoming	 part	 of	 the	world	 --	 you	 are	 not	 separate
from	it.	Your	being	authentically	yourself	means	a	tremendous	responsibility	--
but	it	is	not	a	burden.	It	is	a	rejoicing	that	you	can	do	something	for	existence.
Existence	has	done	so	much	for	you,	there	is	no	way	to	pay	it	back.	But	we	can
do	something.	It	will	be	very	small	compared	to	what	existence	has	done	for	us,
but	it	will	show	our	gratitude.	It	is	not	a	question	of	whether	it	is	big	or	small;
the	question	is	that	it	is	our	prayer,	our	gratitude,	and	our	totality	is	involved	in
it.
Yes,	 it	 will	 happen:	 the	 more	 you	 become	 yourself,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 start
feeling	responsibilities	which	you	had	never	felt	before.
I	am	reminded....	In	the	life	of	Mahavira,	the	most	important	Jaina	philosopher....
He	is	going	from	one	village	to	another	village	with	his	close	disciple,	Goshalak.
And	 this	 is	 the	 question	 they	 are	 discussing:	 Mahavira	 is	 insisting,	 "Your
responsibility	 towards	 existence	 shows	 how	 much	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 your
authentic	 reality.	 We	 cannot	 see	 your	 authentic	 reality	 but	 we	 can	 see	 your
responsibility."
As	they	are	walking,	they	come	across	a	small	plant.	And	Goshalak	is	a	logician
--	he	pulls	the	plant	and	throws	it	away.	It	was	a	small	plant	with	small	roots.
Mahavira	 said,	 "This	 is	 irresponsibility.	 But	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 against
existence.
You	can	try,	but	it	is	going	to	backfire."
Goshalak	 said,	 "What	 can	 existence	 do	 to	 me?	 I	 have	 pulled	 this	 plant;	 now
existence	cannot	bring	it	to	life	again."
Mahavira	 laughed.	 They	went	 into	 the	 town,	 they	were	 going	 to	 beg	 for	 their
food.	After	 taking	 food,	 they	were	 coming	 back,	 and	 they	were	 surprised:	 the
plant	was	rooted	again.
While	 they	were	 in	 the	 town	 it	 had	 started	 raining,	 and	 the	 roots	 of	 the	 plant,
finding	the	support	of	the	rain,	went	back	into	the	soil.	They	were	small	roots,	it
was	windy,	and	the	wind	helped	the	plant	to	stand	up	again.
By	 the	 time	 they	 had	 come	 back,	 the	 plant	 was	 back	 to	 its	 normal	 position.
Mahavira	 said,	 "Look	 at	 the	 plant.	 I	 told	 you	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 against
existence.	You	 can	 try,	 but	 that	will	 turn	 against	 you,	 because	 that	will	 go	 on
separating	you	from	existence.	It	will	not	bring	you	closer.
"Just	see	that	plant.	Nobody	could	have	imagined	that	this	will	happen,	that	the
rain	 and	 the	wind	 together	will	manage	 that	 small	 plant	 back,	 rooted	 into	 the
earth.	It	is	going	to	live	its	life.
"It	seems	to	us	a	small	plant	but	it	is	part	of	a	vast	universe,	a	vast	existence,	of
the	greatest	power	 there	 is."	And	Mahavira	 said	 to	Goshalak,	 "From	 this	point
our	paths	separate.	I	cannot	allow	a	man	to	live	with	me	who	is	against	existence
and	feels	no	responsibility."
Mahavira's	 whole	 philosophy	 of	 non-violence	 can	 be	 better	 expressed	 as	 the
philosophy	of	reverence	for	existence.	Non-violence	is	simply	a	part	of	it.
It	 will	 go	 on	 happening:	 the	 more	 you	 find	 yourself,	 the	 more	 you	 will	 find
yourself	responsible	for	many	things	you	have	never	cared	about.	Let	that	be	a
criterion:	 the	more	 you	 find	 yourself	 responsible	 for	 people,	 things,	 existence,
the	more	you	can	be	at	ease	that	you	are	on	the	right	track.
One	of	my	professors,	Dr.	Ras	Biharidas	--	he	was	a	very	old	man	--	has	lived
his	 life	 alone,	 because	 he	was	 so	 contented,	 and	 so	 joyous	 in	 himself	 that	 he
never	needed	anybody	else.	He	was	the	head	of	the	department,	so	he	had	a	big
bungalow	--	living	alone	in	it.	And	as	we	became	acquainted	with	each	other,	he
became	very	loving	towards	me,	like	a	father.
He	said,	"There	is	no	need	for	you	to	live	in	the	hostel	--	you	can	come	and	live
with	me.
I	have	lived	all	alone	in	my	life..."	He	used	to	play	the	sitar	--	perhaps	better	than
anybody	else	I	have	heard,	and	I	have	heard	all	 the	best	sitarists.	But	he	never
played	it	to	entertain	people;	he	just	played	out	of	his	joy.
And	his	timing	was	such,	that	nobody	would	have	ever	thought...	three	o'clock	in
the	 morning	 every	 day	 he	 will	 play	 his	 sitar.	 For	 seventy	 years	 he	 had	 been
playing.	The	difficulty	arose	the	first	day,	because	I	used	to	read	up	to	three,	and
then	I	would	go	to	bed	--	and	that	was	the	time	for	him	to	wake	up.
And	this	was	a	disturbance	for	both	of	us,	because	I	loved	to	read	things	that	I
liked,	not	silently	but	loudly.	When	you	are	just	reading	with	your	eyes	there	is
only	a	partial	connection.	But	when	you	read	poetry	loudly	you	are	involved	in
it;	for	the	moment,	you	become	the	poet.	You	forget	it	is	somebody	else's	poetry;
it	starts	becoming	part	of	your	blood	and	bones	and	marrow.
Naturally	it	was	difficult	for	him	to	sleep.	And	when	I	would	go	to	sleep	at	three
it	was	difficult	for	me	to	sleep.	Just	by	my	side,	in	the	next	room,	he	was	playing
his	electric	instruments	--	the	guitar,	sitar,	and	other	instruments.	In	two	days	we
both	were	tired.
He	said	to	me,	"You	live	in	this	house	--	I	am	leaving!"
I	said,	"You	need	not	leave	--	and	where	will	you	go?	I	have	at	least	a	place	in
the	hostel.
I	will	leave."
But	he	said,	"I	cannot	say	to	you	to	leave.	I	love	you,	I	love	your	presence	here.
But	our	habits	are	dangerous	to	each	other.	I	have	never	interfered	with	anybody;
there	has	never	been	anybody	with	me	to	interfere	with.	And	I	know	you	--	you
will	not	interfere	with	me.	But	this	will	kill	both	of	us!	You	will	not	say,	`Change
your	time.'	I	cannot	say	that	you	should	leave	the	house;	that's	why	I	said	that	I
am	leaving	--	you	live	in	the	house."
I	 persuaded	 him,	 "I	 cannot	 live	 in	 the	 house.	 Once	 you	 leave,	 the	 university
cannot	allow	me	to	live	in	this	house	--	this	house	is	meant	for	you.	I	have	to	go
to	my	hostel."	With	tears	in	his	eyes	he	came	to	lead	me	to	the	hostel.
I	 remembered	him	at	 this	point	because	 I	have	never	seen	anybody	else	 in	my
life	who	was	so	responsive,	so	sensitive.	Even	if	by	mistake	he	had	hit	the	chair,
he	will	apologize
--	to	the	chair.	I	told	him,	"Dr.	Biharidas,	this	is	going	too	far!"
He	 said,	 "That's	 how	 I	 feel.	 I	 have	 hit	 the	 poor	 chair.	 She	 cannot	 speak;
otherwise	she	would	have	been	angry.	And	she	is	part	of	this	whole	cosmos,	and
she	has	 served	me,	 and	 I	 have	not	 been	 friendly	 towards	her;	 I	 have	hit	 her.	 I
have	to	apologize."
People	in	the	university	thought	that	he	was	mad	--	a	man	who	asks	forgiveness
from	 a	 chair	 in	 this	world	 cannot	 be	 thought	 to	 be	 sane.	 I	 have	watched	 him
closely;	he	was	one	of	the	sanest	persons.	But	his	responsibility	was	tremendous.
He	could	not	say	to	me...	it	was	his	house.	He	could	have	said	to	me,	"You	can
read	silently"	or,	"You	can	read	at	some	other	time"	or,	"You	can	read	while	I	am
playing	my	 instrument."	But	 that	he	would	not	do.	 It	would	have	been	easy	 --
that's	what	 everybody	 else	 is	 doing	 in	 the	world.	But	 his	 sensitivity	 and	 deep
respect	for	the	other	person...	even	his	reverence	for	things	was	impeccable.
People	have	looked	at	his	behavior	and	have	thought,	"He	is	not	in	the	right	state
of	mind."	But	nobody	bothered	to	think	that	the	right	state	of	mind	makes	people
responsible,	so	responsible	that	they	start	looking	--	to	others	--	mad.
For	 example,	 Mahavira	 slept	 his	 whole	 life	 only	 on	 one	 side.	 He	 would	 not
change	his	side	in	the	night.	Asked	why,	he	said	--	because	he	was	living	naked,
having	nothing,	lying	down	on	the	bare	floor....	If	he	changes	his	side,	some	ant,
some	 small	 insects	may	 be	 crushed	 by	 his	 turning,	 and	 he	will	 not	 do	 such	 a
thing.	His	 responsibility	 towards	 very	 small	 things	 simply	 shows	 his	 integrity
with	existence.
His	way	of	begging	will	explain	to	you	what	I	mean.	Nowhere	else	in	the	world
has	anybody	done	such	a	 thing	 --	 so	much	 trust	 for	existence!	 In	 the	morning,
after	 his	 meditations,	 he	 would	 visualize	 in	 what	 condition	 he	 was	 going	 to
accept	today's	food.
And	sometimes	it	happened	that	thirty	days	would	pass	and	he	would	not	be	able
to	receive	food	because	what	he	has	visualized,	a	particular	condition,	was	not
fulfilled.
Strange	things....
For	example,	he	thinks	that	he	will	accept	food	if	a	woman	at	the	house	where	he
stands	begging	comes	out	of	the	house	with	her	baby	still	sucking	milk	from	her
breast.	Then	 only	will	 he	 accept	 food	 from	 that	woman;	 otherwise	 that	 day	 is
gone.	Then	next	day	he	will	try	again.
His	 people	 persistently	 said	 to	 him,	 "This	 is	 strange!	 There	 have	 been	 great
ascetics...	you	can	fast	as	much	as	you	want,	that	is	another	thing."
He	said,	"This	is	not	a	question	of	fasting.	I	am	leaving	it	to	existence,	and	I	am
making	a	condition	so	that	I	can	know	if	existence	wants	me	to	eat	today	or	not.
It	is	between	me	and	existence.	If	the	condition	is	not	fulfilled	that	simply	means
existence	wants	me	to	fast.	It	is	not	my	fast,	it	is	simply	that	existence	does	not
want	me	to	eat	today,	and	the	wisdom	of	the	whole	is	bigger."
And	 sometimes	 such	 strange	 conditions	were	 fulfilled	 that	 nobody	 could	 have
imagined	 that	 it	 would	 be	 possible.	 For	 example,	 one	 of	 the	 conditions	 was
fulfilled....	After	 thirteen	 days	 remaining	 hungry,	 fasting,	 he	 continued:	 unless
that	condition	was	fulfilled	he	would	not	change	the	condition.	He	would	change
it	only	when	it	is	fulfilled;	then	he	would	add	the	second	condition.
The	condition	was	that	a	princess	--	no	ordinary	woman,	but	a	great	princess	--
chains	on	her	legs,	handcuffed...	if	she	offers	food	to	him,	he	will	accept.	Now,
this	 is	 asking	 something	 absurd.	 In	 the	 first	 place,	 if	 she	 is	 a	 princess,	 why
should	she	be	handcuffed,	with	chains	on	her	feet?	And	if	she	is	handcuffed	and
with	chains	on	her	feet,	she	will	be	in	jail!	She	may	be	a	princess	but	she	will	not
be	able	to	offer	food.
But	 it	 happened	 that	 one	 of	 the	 kings	 got	 very	 angry	with	 his	 daughter	 --	 her
name	 was	 Chandana	 --	 and	 out	 of	 anger	 he	 ordered	 that	 she	 should	 be
handcuffed	and	chained	for	 twenty-four	hours.	She	was	not	put	 in	 jail,	but	she
was	free	in	the	home.
And	when	Mahavira	came...	And	that	was	the	argument	 that	created	the	whole
problem:	she	wanted	to	offer	food	to	Mahavira.	She	loved	the	man,	she	loved	his
way	 of	 thinking,	 and	 her	 father	was	 absolutely	 against	 it.	 That's	why	 she	was
handcuffed	and	chained	--
she	would	not	be	able	to	go	out	of	the	house	in	that	way	because	this	would	be
so	 embarrassing.	 When	 Mahavira	 came,	 he	 came	 with	 thousands	 of	 his
followers.
But	 she	 went	 out	 with	 the	 food,	 and	 those	 thousands	 of	 followers	 could	 not
believe	their	eyes.	Because	that	very	day,	after	 thirteen	days,	 they	had	insisted,
"Mahavira,	we	would	like	to	know:	what	is	the	condition?	We	are	not	going	to
tell	 anybody;	 we	 just	 want	 to	 see	 whether	 there	 is	 any	 meaning	 in	 your
conditions.	 Is	 existence	 compassionate	 enough,	 is	 existence	 caring	 enough?
Does	 it	 bother	 about	 you?	 Just	 for	 once,	 we	 want	 to	 know:	 what	 is	 your
condition?"
He	said,	"This	is	my	condition..."
They	said,	"My	God,	this	may	never	be	fulfilled!"
Mahavira	 said,	 "That	 simply	 means	 existence	 does	 not	 need	 me.	 I	 have	 no
complaint;	 perhaps	 my	 work	 is	 completed,	 and	 I	 am	 unnecessarily	 being	 a
burden."	But	the	condition	was	fulfilled.
Such	 trust	 in	 existence,	 such	 unwavering	 trust,	 comes	 when	 you	 start	 taking
responsibilities.	As	you	feel	more	responsible	towards	small	things	around	you,
existence	goes	on	responding	in	a	thousand-fold	way.	You	are	not	a	loser.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	A	CHAIN-SMOKER	BECOME	MEDITATIVE?	I	HAVE	SMOKED	FOR
TWENTY-FIVE	YEARS,	AND	I	FEEL	THAT	IN	SMOKING	I	STOP	GOING
DEEPLY	 INTO	 MEDITATION..	 STILL,	 I	 CAN'T	 STOP	 SMOKING.	 CAN
YOU	TELL
ME	SOMETHING	ABOUT	IT?
A	meditator	cannot	smoke,	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	never	feels	nervous,	in
anxiety,	in	tension.
Smoking	helps	 --	on	a	momentary	basis	 --	 to	 forget	about	your	anxieties,	your
tensions,	your	nervousness.	Other	things	can	do	the	same	--	chewing	gum	can	do
the	same,	but	smoking	does	it	the	best.
In	 your	 deep	 unconscious,	 smoking	 is	 related	 with	 sucking	 milk	 from	 your
mother's	breast.	And	as	civilization	has	grown,	no	woman	wants	the	child	to	be
brought	up	by	breast-feeding	--	naturally;	he	will	destroy	the	breast.	The	breast
will	lose	its	roundness,	its	beauty.
The	child	has	different	needs.	The	child	does	not	need	a	round	breast,	because
with	a	 round	breast	 the	child	will	die.	 If	 the	breast	 is	 really	 round,	while	he	 is
sucking	 the	milk	he	cannot	breathe;	his	nose	will	be	stopped	by	 the	breast.	He
will	get	suffocated.
The	child's	 needs	 are	different	 from	a	painter's	 need,	 form	a	poet's	 need,	 from
that	of	a	man	of	aesthetic	sensibility.	The	child	needs	a	long	breast	so	his	nose	is
free	and	he	can	do	both	--	he	can	breathe	and	also	feed	himself.	So	every	child
will	 try	 to	make	 the	 breast	 according	 to	 his	 needs.	 And	 no	woman	wants	 the
breast	to	be	destroyed.	It	is	part	of	her	beauty,	her	body,	her	shape.
So	 as	 civilization	 has	 grown,	 children	 are	 taken	 away	 from	 the	 breast	 of	 the
mother	sooner	and	sooner.	And	the	longing	to	drink	from	the	breast	goes	on	in
their	 minds.	 And	 whenever	 people	 are	 in	 some	 nervous	 state,	 in	 tension,	 in
anxiety,	 the	 cigarette	 helps.	 It	 helps	 them	 to	 become	 a	 child	 again,	 relaxed	 in
their	mother's	lap.
The	cigarette	 is	very	 symbolic.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 the	nipple	of	 the	mother,	 and	 the
smoke	that	goes	through	it	is	warm	just	like	the	milk	is	warm.	So	it	has	a	certain
symmetry,	and	you	become	engaged	in	it,	and	for	the	moment	you	are	reduced	to
a	child	who	has	no	anxieties,	no	problems,	no	responsibilities.
You	say	that	for	thirty	years	you	have	been	smoking,	a	chain-smoker;	you	want
to	stop	it	but	you	cannot	stop	it.	You	cannot	--	because	you	have	to	change	the
causes	that	have	produced	it.
I	have	been	successful	with	many	of	my	sannyasins.	First	 they	laughed	when	I
suggested	to	them...	they	could	not	believe	that	such	a	simple	solution	could	help
them.	I	said	 to	 them,	"Don't	 try	 to	stop	smoking,	but	rather	bring	a	milk	bottle
that	is	used	for	small	children.	And	in	the	night	when	nobody	can	see	you,	under
your	blanket	enjoy	 the	milk,	 the	warm	milk.	 It	 is	not	going	 to	do	any	harm	at
least."
They	said,	"But	how	is	it	going	to	help?"
I	said,	"You	forget	about	it	--	how	and	why	--	you	just	do	it.	It	will	give	you	good
food	before	you	go	 to	 sleep,	 and	 there	 is	 no	harm.	And	my	 feeling	 is	 that	 the
next	day	you	will	not	feel	so	much	need	for	cigarettes.	So	you	count."
And	 they	 were	 surprised...	 slowly,	 slowly	 the	 cigarettes	 were	 disappearing,
because	 their	 basic	 need	 which	 had	 remained	 hanging	 in	 the	 middle	 was
fulfilled:	 they	 are	 no	 more	 children,	 they	 are	 maturing,	 and	 the	 cigarette
disappears.
You	 cannot	 stop	 it.	You	 have	 to	 do	 something	which	 is	 not	 harmful,	which	 is
healthier,	as	a	substitute	for	the	time	being	so	that	you	grow	up	and	the	cigarettes
stop	themselves.
Small	 children	 know	 this	 --	 I	 have	 learned	 the	 secret	 from	 them.	 If	 a	 child	 is
crying	or	weeping	and	is	hungry,	and	the	mother	is	far	away,	then	he	will	put	his
thumb	in	his	mouth	and	start	sucking	it.	And	he	will	forget	all	about	hunger	and
crying	and	weeping,	and	will	 fall	asleep.	He	has	found	a	substitute	--	although
that	 substitute	 is	 not	 going	 to	 give	 him	 food,	 at	 least	 it	 gives	 a	 sense	 that
something	similar	is	happening.	It	relaxes	him.
I	have	tried	with	a	few	of	my	sannyasins,	even	sucking	the	thumb.	If	you	are	too
afraid	 to	 bring	 a	 bottle	 and	 fill	 it	with	milk,	 and	 if	 your	wife	 comes	 to	 know
about	it,	or	your	children	see	you	doing	it,	then	the	best	way	is:	you	go	to	sleep
with	the	thumb	in	the	mouth.	Suck	it	and	enjoy	it.
They	have	always	laughed	but	they	have	always	come	back	and	said,	"It	helps,
and	 the	 number	 of	 cigarettes	 next	 day	 is	 less	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 becoming	 less."
Perhaps	 it	will	 take	 a	 few	weeks,	 then	 the	 cigarettes	will	 disappear.	And	once
they	 have	 disappeared	 without	 your	 stopping	 them....	 Your	 stopping	 is
repression,	and	anything	repressed	will	try	to	come	up	again	with	greater	force,
with	vengeance.
Never	stop	anything.
Find	 the	 basic	 cause	 of	 it	 and	 try	 to	 work	 out	 some	 substitute	 which	 is	 not
harmful.	So	the	basic	cause	disappears	--	the	cigarette	is	only	a	symptom.	So	the
first	thing	is,	stop	stopping	it.	The	second	thing	is,	get	a	good	bottle,	and	don't	be
embarrassed.	If	you	are	embarrassed	then	use	your	own	thumb.	Your	own	thumb
will	not	be	that	great,	but	it	will	help.
And	I	have	never	seen	anybody	failing	who	has	used	what	I	am	saying.	One	day
suddenly	he	cannot	believe	that	he	was	unnecessarily	destroying	his	health	rather
than	having	pure	and	clean	air,	smoking	dirty	smoke	and	destroying	his	lungs.
And	this	is	going	to	become	a	problem	more	and	more	because	as	the	women's
liberation	movement	grows	children	will	not	be	breast-fed.	I	am	not	saying	that
they	should	be	breast-fed;	but	they	should	be	given	some	substitute	breast	so	that
their	unconscious	does	not	carry	some	wound	that	will	create	problems	for	them
--	chewing	gum	and	cigarettes	and	cigars....	These	are	all	symptoms.	In	different
countries	they	are	different.
In	India	they	go	on	chewing	pan	leaves,	or	there	are	many	people	who	use	snuff.
These	are	all	the	same.	The	snuff	looks	far	away,	but	it	is	not	that	far	away.	The
people	who	are	nervous,	 tense,	 in	anxiety,	will	 take	a	dose	of	 snuff.	 It	gives	a
good	sneeze,	clears	their	mind,	shakes	their	whole	being,	and	it	feels	good.
But	those	anxieties	will	come	back.	The	snuff	cannot	destroy	them.	You	have	to
destroy	the	very	base	of	your	being	nervous.	Why	should	you	be	nervous?
Many	journalists	have	told	me,	"With	you	one	of	the	greatest	difficulties	is	that
we	 feel	 nervous."	 And	 they	 have	 said,	 "This	 is	 strange	 because	 we	 interview
politicians	 --	 they	feel	nervous,	we	make	 them	nervous.	You	make	us	nervous,
and	immediately	the	desire	to	smoke	arises.	Then	you	prevent	us	smoking:	`You
cannot	smoke	here.'	You	are	allergic.
"You	have	a	great	strategy!	--	we	cannot	smoke,	and	you	are	making	us	nervous
and	tense,	and	this	allergy	you	have	which	prevents	us	from	smoking...	so	you
have	no	way	out	for	us."
But	 why	 should	 they	 feel	 nervous	 before	 me?	 Those	 politicians	 are	 powerful
people	--	if	they	feel	nervous	before	them,	it	can	be	understood.	But	the	reality	is
those	powerful	people	are	 just	hollow	inside,	and	 that	power	 is	borrowed	from
others,	and	they	are	afraid	for	their	respectability.	Each	word	they	have	to	speak,
they	have	 to	 think	 twice.	They	 are	 nervous	 that	 these	 journalists	may	 create	 a
situation	in	which	their	influence	over	people	is	destroyed.	Their	image	that	they
have	created	has	to	become	better	and	better.	That	is	their	fear.	Because	of	that
fear,	 the	 journalist	 --	 any	 journalist,	 who	 has	 no	 power	 --	 can	 make	 them
nervous.
To	me	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	 I	 have	 no	 desire	 for	 respectability.	 I	 am	notorious
enough	--
they	 cannot	make	me	more	 notorious.	 I	 have	 done	 everything	 that	 could	 have
made	me	nervous;	I	have	managed	already.	What	can	they	do	to	me?	--	I	don't
have	 any	 power	 to	 lose,	 and	 I	 can	 say	 anything	 that	 I	want	 because	 I	 am	 not
worried	about	being	contradictory,	 inconsistent.	On	 the	contrary,	 I	 enjoy	being
contradictory,	inconsistent.
They	start	 feeling	nervous,	and	the	nervousness	 immediately	brings	 the	 idea	 to
do	something,	to	get	engaged,	so	nobody	feels	that	you	are	nervous.	Just	watch:
when	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 you	 need	 a	 cigarette,	 just	watch	why	 you	 need	 it.
There	is	something	that	is	making	you	nervous,	and	you	don't	want	to	be	caught.
I	am	reminded...	One	day	in	a	New	York	church,	as	the	bishop	entered	he	saw	a
strange	man,	a	perfect	hippy-type.	But	he	made	the	bishop	nervous,	because	that
man	looked	into	his	eyes,	and	said,	"Do	you	know	who	I	am?	I	am	Lord	Jesus
Christ."
The	bishop	phoned	Rome:	"What	am	I	supposed	to	do?"	he	asked	the	pope,	"a
hippy-looking	man,	 but	 he	 also	 looks	 like	 Jesus	Christ.	And	 I	 am	 alone	 here,
early	in	the	morning	and	he	has	come	here.	I	have	never	been	told	what	we	have
to	do	when	Jesus	Christ	comes,	so	I	want	instruction.	Clearly,	so	I	don't	commit
any	mistake."
The	pope	was	himself	nervous.	He	said,	 "Do	only	one	 thing:	 look	busy!	What
else	can	be	done?	Meanwhile	give	a	phone	call	 to	 the	police	station.	And	look
busy	so	that	man	cannot	see	your	nervousness."
Cigarettes	help	you	to	look	busy;	your	nervousness	is	covered	by	it.	So	don't	try
to	stop	it;	otherwise	you	will	feel	nervous	and	then	you	will	fall	back	to	the	old
pattern.	The	desire	is	there	because	something	is	left	incomplete	in	you.
Complete	 it	 --	 and	 there	are	 simple	methods	 to	complete	 it.	 Just	 a	baby's	milk
bottle	will	do.	It	will	give	you	good	food,	it	will	make	you	healthier	and	it	will
take	away	all	your	desire	for	looking	busy!
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Just	counting	other	people's	cows
13	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604135
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
79
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	POPE	AND	HIS	BISHOPS	--	ARE	THEY	REALLY	FULLY	AWARE	OF
HOW
THEY	ARE	CHEATING	THEIR	PEOPLE?	I	CAN'T	IMAGINE	THAT	THEY
ARE
JUST	 A	 BIG	 HEAP	 OF	 CRIMINALS,	 WITHOUT	 ANY	 RESPECT	 FOR
TRUTH.
The	 religious	 leaders	 are	 as	 asleep	 as	 the	 people	 they	 are	 leading.	 The	 only
difference	between	the	leaders	and	the	led	is	theoretical.	The	leaders	have	a	great
store	 of	 theological	 knowledge,	 all	 borrowed;	 nothing	 in	 it	 is	 of	 their	 own
experience,	but	it	gives	them	great	authority	over	the	people	who	don't	have	even
borrowed	knowledge.	And	 these	 leaders	 are	 consistently	 emphasizing	 the	 fact:
"You	are	sinners,	you	are	ignorant.
We	are	the	saints,	we	are	the	knowers."
The	 poor	 masses	 cannot	 make	 a	 distinction	 between	 authentic	 knowing	 and
borrowed	 knowledge.	 Even	 these	 leaders	 --	 popes,	 bishops,	 shankaracharyas,
ayatollahs	--	even	they	are	not	alert	of	the	distinction.	They	know	only	one	kind
of	 knowledge,	 and	 that	 is	 borrowed	 knowledge.	They	 have	 no	 awareness	 of	 a
different	 dimension	 of	 knowing,	 so	 whatever	 they	 are	 doing	 is	 done	 in	 deep
sleep.	They	are	not	cheating	people	consciously.
You	cannot	cheat	anybody	consciously.
Consciousness	 will	 prevent	 you	 from	 doing	 anything	 as	 ugly	 as	 cheating,
deceiving,	 pretending,	 being	 a	 hypocrite,	 condemning	 people	 as	 sinners	 and
fulfilling	your	own	egos	as	great	saints.	No,	it	is	not	done	consciously.
I	never	suspect	for	a	single	moment	their	good	intentions.	Whatever	these	people
are	doing,	they	are	doing	with	good	intentions;	but	the	questions	is	not	of	good
intentions,	the	question	is:	what	is	the	result?
You	 may	 murder	 me	 with	 good	 intentions,	 but	 your	 good	 intentions	 cannot
justify	my	murder.
I	have	come	into	contact	with	almost	all	kinds	of	religious	scholars,	and	on	one
point	 they	 are	 the	 same,	 whether	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,	 Christian,	 Jew.	 That
point	 is	 that	 they	are	perfectly	at	ease,	 feeling	very	good,	 in	whatever	 they	are
doing	--	they	are	doing	God's	work,	and	they	are	spreading	wisdom.	They	don't
even	know	the	meaning	of	wisdom.
They	have	never	 tasted	anything	 like	 that;	 they	have	heard	about	 it,	 they	have
read	about	it,	they	have	crammed	hundreds	of	scriptures.
I	am	reminded	of	an	historical	event...	When	Alexander	the	Great	invaded	India,
his	master	was	 no	 one	 other	 than	Aristotle,	 the	 father	 of	 logic	 in	 the	western
hemisphere.
And	he	 had	 asked	him,	 "When	you	 come	back,	 bring	 the	 four	VEDAS	of	 the
Hindus.	 The	 rumors	 have	 been,	 for	 hundreds	 of	 years,	 that	 those	 four	 books
contain	all	the	knowledge	that	is	in	the	world;	if	you	know	those	four	VEDAS,
you	know	all.	So	bring	those	four	VEDAS	for	me."
Alexander	said,	"That	 is	very	simple."	But	 in	 those	days	 the	VEDAS	were	not
printed.
Hindus	resisted	printing	them	for	hundreds	of	years	after	the	printing	press	was
invented.
They	never	wanted	their	sources	of	wisdom	to	be	printed	and	sold	in	the	market.
Knowledge	cannot	be	 sold,	 and	you	cannot	purchase	wisdom.	And	purchasing
the	four	VEDAS	from	a	bookstall,	you	will	be	deceiving	yourself	--	those	words
are	dead.
Alexander	enquired	because	he	was	thinking	he	could	get	them	easily,	but	it	was
difficult.
Very	 few	prominent	brahmin	 families	had	copies	of	 the	VEDAS,	and	 that	was
their	whole	treasure.	But	finally	he	found	one	old	brahmin...	people	said,	"He	has
one	of	the	most	authentic	copies	of	the	VEDAS.	And	he	is	old;	you	can	get	them
from	him."
Alexander	went	 to	 the	 old	man.	 The	 old	man	 said,	 "There	 is	 no	 problem,	 but
traditionally	 we	 can	 give	 the	 VEDAS	 only	 when	 the	 sun	 is	 rising.	 You	 have
come	at	the	wrong	time	--
the	sun	is	setting.	Come	tomorrow	morning,	just	before	sunrise,	just	as	the	sun	is
rising,	and	I	will	hand	over	all	the	four	VEDAS	to	you."
Alexander	said,	"I	was	not	thinking	that	it	is	going	to	be	so	simple.	You	don't	ask
anything	in	return?"
He	said,	"No,	this	is	enough,	that	you	will	be	taking	the	VEDAS	into	the	wide
world.
Come	early	in	the	morning."	But	that	old	man	was	really	clever....
The	whole	night	he	and	his	four	sons	remained	awake	sitting	around	a	fire.	He
told	 the	 sons,	 "Read	 one	 page	 of	 the	 book	 that	 I	 have	 given	 to	 you."	 He
distributed	the	four	VEDAS	to	the	four	sons,	according	to	their	age.	The	eldest
got	the	RIGVEDA,	the	oldest	scripture.	"You	read	aloud	one	page	so	that	I	can
hear	that	you	are	reading	it	rightly,	and	then	remember	it	and	drop	it	into	the	fire.
By	the	morning	all	four	VEDAS	have	to	be	burned,	and	by	the	morning	all	you
four	have	to	become	my	four	VEDAS.	I	am	going	to	present	you	to	Alexander
the	Great."
In	 ancient	 India,	 memory	 was	 particularly	 trained.	 Still,	 all	 universities,	 and
colleges'
educational	 systems	 depend	 on	 cultivating	 memory.	 They	 deceive	 you	 and
themselves,	 thinking	 that	 this	 is	 intelligence.	 Memory	 is	 not	 intelligence,
because	memory	can	be	part	of	a	computer	--	which	has	no	consciousness,	which
has	no	intelligence.	Your	mind	is	also	a	natural	bio-computer.	Memory	is	simply
remembering	but	not	understanding;	understanding	is	totally	different.	Memory
needs	a	very	mechanical	mind,	and	understanding	needs	a	very	non-mechanical
mind.	In	fact	the	ways	are	diametrically	opposite.
In	the	morning	when	Alexander	appeared	he	was	stunned.	All	the	four	VEDAS
were	burned,	and	the	old	man	said,	"Now	you	can	take	my	four	sons.	They	have
perfect	memory.	They	will	repeat	the	VEDAS	exactly.	I	could	not	give	you	the
VEDAS	--	that	is	never	done	--	but	I	can	give	my	sons	to	you.	My	whole	life	I
have	 trained	 them	 in	memorizing.	You	 just	have	 to	 repeat	 something	one	 time
and	it	remains	in	their	memory,	as	if	written	on	a	stone."
Alexander	 was	 defeated	 by	 the	 old	 man.	 He	 could	 not	 take	 those	 four	 sons
because	they	didn't	know	the	meaning	of	what	they	were	saying;	they	could	not
explain	anything.	The	 language	was	different,	and	 they	could	not	 translate	 it	 --
they	didn't	know	Greek.	What	purpose	would	be	served	by	taking	these	people?
But	 all	 your	 religious	 scholars	 and	 leaders	 are	 nothing	 but	 memories,	 trained
memories.
They	don't	know	what	they	are	saying,	but	they	say	it	correctly.	Their	language
is	right,	their	grammar	is	right,	their	pronunciation	is	right,	their	accent	is	right,
but	 all	 these	 are	 futile	 because	 they	 don't	 know	 the	meaning,	 they	 have	 never
lived	it.	That	meaning	comes	through	living,	through	experiencing.	But	they	will
remain	in	a	deception,	and	they	will	spread	the	same	deception	to	other	people.
So	I	say	again:	the	popes,	the	bishops,	the	shankaracharyas	--	they	are	not	doing
intentionally	 any	 crime.	 They	 are	 fast	 asleep;	 they	 cannot	 do	 anything
intentionally!	They	are	 living	an	unconscious	 life.	Their	words	are	beautiful	 --
they	have	collected	them	from	beautiful	sources	--	but	the	words	have	not	grown
within	their	being.	The	words	are	not	part	of	their	 life.	They	are	as	ignorant	as
the	people	they	are	teaching.
Socrates	used	to	say	that	there	is	a	knowledge	which	is	ignorant,	and	there	is	an
ignorance	which	is	knowledge.
Borrowed	knowledge	is	ignorance.
Experienced	 truth	 makes	 you	 not	 knowledgeable,	 but	 humble.	 The	 more	 you
know	it,	the	less	you	claim	to	know	it.	The	day	you	know	it	perfectly,	you	can
only	 say,	 "I	 am	 utter	 ignorance.	 I	 am	 just	 a	 child,	 collecting	 seashells	 on	 the
beach.	I	know	nothing."
"I	do	not	know,"	can	only	be	said	by	a	man	who	knows	perfectly.
The	 people	 who	 say,	 "We	 know,"	 are	 utterly	 ignorant	 people	 --	 but	 their
memories	are	 full.	And	 those	memories	are	dead,	because	 they	have	not	given
birth	to	any	experience	of	their	own.
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	say,	"I	used	to	know	a	man	--	he	was	my	servant.	Sitting
by	the	door,	he	would	count	the	cows	that	were	going	early	in	the	morning	to	the
pasture,	to	the	river."	He	would	count	them	--	it	had	become	almost	an	automatic
thing	with	him.	His	duty	was	 to	sit	 in	 front	of	 the	door	of	Gautam	Buddha,	 in
case	he	needs	anything;	otherwise	he	was	sitting	there	the	whole	day.	And	by	the
time	the	cows	returned...	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	times.	In	Indian	villages,
which	are	still	not	modernized,	the	time	when	the	sun	is	setting	has	got	a	special
name,	goadhooli.	Goa	means	cow,	and	dhooli	means	dust:	the	cows	are	coming,
raising	dust.	The	sun	is	setting,	the	birds	are	returning	to	their	trees	--	it	is	a	very
peaceful	moment.
So	at	the	time	of	goadhooli	he	would	count	again	the	cows	that	were	returning
home.
And	he	would	become	very	much	worried	if	some	cow	was	missing,	if	the	count
was	not	exactly	as	it	should	have	been.	Later,	when	Gautam	Buddha	became	a
great	master,	he	used	 the	 story	of	 that	man	and	his	habit	 to	explain	 something
immensely	meaningful.
He	said,	"I	used	to	ask	that	poor	fellow,	`Do	you	have	a	cow?'	And	he	would	say,
Ì	am	so	poor,	 I	don't	have	a	cow.'	And	I	would	say	 to	him,	`Then	why	do	you
unnecessarily	 go	 on	 counting	 thousands	 of	 cows	 in	 the	 morning,	 then	 in	 the
evening	again	--	thousands	of	cows?	And	if	one	cow	is	missing	--	or	perhaps	you
have	miscounted	 --	 then	you	are	worried,	you	cannot	 sleep.	And	 it	 is	not	your
cow,	it	is	not	your	concern!'"
Buddha	used	to	say	to	his	disciples,	"All	knowledge	that	is	not	yours	is	not	your
concern.
You	 are	 counting	 other	 people's	 cows,	 unnecessarily	 wasting	 your	 time.	 It	 is
better	to	have	one	cow	of	your	own	--	that	will	be	nourishment."
But	all	your	scholars	are	just	counting	other	people's	cows.	And	they	are	doing
immense	harm	without	knowing	it,	because	 they	are	helping	people	 to	become
knowers	without	knowing.	This	is	the	greatest	harm	that	can	be	done	to	man,	to
give	him	a	sense	that	he	knows	--	and	he	knows	nothing.	You	have	destroyed	his
whole	 life.	You	have	destroyed	 the	opportunity	 in	which	he	may	have	known,
experienced,	 lived.	You	have	 taken	all	his	opportunities,	 all	his	possibilities	of
growth.
I	am	against	all	these	scholars,	not	because	their	intentions	are	bad	but	because
the	 outcome	 of	 their	 very	 good	 intentions	 is	 disastrous.	 They	 have	 destroyed
millions	of	people	on	the	earth;	they	never	allowed	them	to	grow,	they	gave	them
a	false	notion	that	they	know	already.	This	is	pure	poison.
George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 tell	 a	 story...	 there	 was	 a	 magician	 who	 had	 many
sheep.	And	it	was	a	trouble	to	get	them	home	from	the	forest	every	night	--	wild
animals	were	there,	and	he	was	losing	many	of	his	sheep.	Finally	the	idea	came
to	him,	"Why	do	I	not	use	my	expertise,	my	magic?"
He	hypnotized	all	his	sheep	and	told	them	different	things.	To	one	sheep	he	said,
"You	are	a	lion.	You	need	not	be	afraid;	you	are	the	king	amongst	the	animals."
To	another	he	said,	"You	are	a	tiger,"	to	another,	"You	are	a	man."	And	he	told	to
everybody,	to	all	the	sheep:	"You	are	not	going	to	be	butchered	because	you	are
not	sheep,	so	you	need	not	be	afraid	to	come	back	home.	You	should	come	early,
before	nightfall."
And	from	that	day	no	sheep	went	missing.	In	fact,	from	that	day	no	sheep	was
behaving	 like	 a	 sheep:	 somebody	 was	 roaring	 like	 a	 lion,	 somebody	 was
behaving	 like	 a	man,	 and	 nobody	was	 afraid	 of	 being	 butchered,	 killed	 --	 the
very	question	was	irrelevant.	And	the	magician	was	butchering	them	every	day
for	his	food.	They	may	have	been	roaring	like	lions	--	that	did	not	matter;	they
were	sheep	after	all.
But	he	managed	very	beautifully.	Giving	one	sheep	 the	notion	of	being	a	 lion,
there	was	no	need	now	to	be	bothered	 that	he	would	 try	 to	escape,	seeing	 that
other	 sheep	 are	 being	 killed.	 Still	 sheep	were	 being	 killed,	 but	 this	 sheep	will
know,	"I	am	a	lion,	I	am	not	a	sheep.	Sheep	are	bound	to	be	killed!"	When	he	is
killed,	others	will	be	thinking,	"He	was	just	a	sheep,	we	are	men.	And	he	was	not
only	a	sheep,	but	a	foolish	sheep	who	used	to	think	that	he	is	a	lion,	and	never
listened	to	us.	We	argued	many	times,	`You	are	a	sheep.
We	are	men,	we	know	better.	You	stop	roaring,	 that	 is	not	going	 to	help.'"	But
the	magician	was	in	absolute	control.
The	 story	 Gurdjieff	 was	 telling	 was	 about	 your	 religious	 leaders.	 They	 have
managed	to	tell	you	things	which	you	are	not.	They	have	managed	to	convince
you	 that	 you	know	 things	which	you	know	not.	And	 this	 is	 the	greatest	 crime
that	can	be	committed.	But	you	cannot	call	them	criminals,	because	they	are	not
doing	it	to	harm	you.	They	are	trying	to	serve	you,	they	are	trying	to	help	you.
Just	because	all	the	religions	have	been	doing	the	same	thing,	the	whole	world	is
under	a	certain	hypnosis.	And	why	have	I	created	so	many	enemies?	--	for	 the
simple	reason	that	I	am	telling	you	that	your	knowledge	is	not	knowledge,	that	it
is	a	cover-up.	You	are	utterly	ignorant.	You	know	nothing,	and	you	believe	that
you	know.	It	hurts!
I	 am	 taking	 away	your	knowledge,	 I	 am	 taking	 away	your	virtue,	 I	 am	 taking
away	your	morality.	I	am	taking	away	everything	that	you	used	to	think	is	a	great
treasure,	everything	that	was	cherished	by	you,	nourished	by	you,	protected	by
you,	because	you	thought	that	you	have	got	the	real	secrets	of	life,	that	you	know
the	real	mysteries	of	life.
And	to	take	away	these	things	from	people	is	naturally	going	to	create	enemies.
It	 is	 a	 strange	 world.	 The	 enemies	 are	 popes,	 are	 archbishops,	 are
shankaracharyas,	are	ayatollahs	--	they	are	the	respected	people	of	the	world,	and
the	friend	looks	like	the	greatest	enemy.	The	enemies	appear	to	be	friends,	and
the	friends	appear	to	be	enemies.
Humanity	 has	 misbehaved	 with	 its	 friends	 and	 given	 all	 its	 respect	 to	 its
enemies.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 reason	why	 the	whole	world	 is	 in	misery:	 you	 have
listened	to	the	enemies	and	you	have	destroyed	your	friends.
And	the	same	story	continues.
I	 have	 talked	 to	 so	many	wise	 people,	 and	 found	 that	 all	 their	wisdom	 is	 just
memory.
Not	 even	 a	 small	 bit	 is	 their	 own;	 all	 has	 come	 from	 others.	 And	 this	 is
something	 fundamental	 to	 realize,	 that	 truth	can	only	be	your	own	experience.
There	 is	 no	 other	 way	 to	 get	 it.	 Lies	 you	 can	 get	 in	 abundance.	 There	 are
supermarkets	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 Christian,	 Jewish,	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,
Buddhist	 --	 all	 kinds	 of	 lies,	 all	 colors,	 all	 shapes	 and	 sizes,	 whichever	 you
prefer.	They	are	available	and	suitable	to	you.	You	are	not	to	fit	with	them,	they
fit	with	you.	It	is	very	easy.	They	are	made	for	you,	they	are	tailored	for	you.
Truth	is	a	totally	different	matter.
You	will	have	to	fit	with	it.
Truth	knows	no	compromise.
You	will	have	to	change	according	to	it.
You	will	have	to	go	through	a	transformation.
So	 I	 am	 creating	 enemies,	 not	 without	 any	 reason.	 The	 reason	 is	 clear.	 I	 am
creating	a	few	friends	also,	but	those	few	friends	have	to	go	through	a	deep	fire
test.	They	have	 to	drop	 their	 false	personalities,	 their	 egos,	 their	 knowledge	 --
everything	they	have.	They	have	to	be	ready	to	be	utterly	naked	and	empty.	Only
then	are	they	at	the	right	point	of	the	journey,	the	journey	towards	truth.
Naked,	empty,	and	alone....
But	it	is	such	a	joy,	and	each	moment	is	such	a	glory,	such	a	paradise	that	once
you	have	tasted	a	single	moment	on	the	way	towards	truth,	you	will	never	look
back	on	all	that	you	had	to	leave.	It	is	a	great	unburdening,	a	freedom.
Now	you	can	open	your	wings	unto	the	sky.
The	whole	sky	now	is	yours.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	WERE	SAYING	THAT	THE	NEW	WILL	BE	VICTORIOUS.	WILL	 IT
REALLY
BE	 THE	 NEW,	 OR	 WILL	 IT	 BE	 THE	 OLD	 POLISHED	 UP	 HERE	 AND
THERE.
THERE	 ARE	 PUBLICATIONS	 NOW	 IN	 GERMANY	 THAT	 USE	 YOU.
SOME
MENTION	YOU	 IN	THE	LIST	OF	LITERATURE	AS	THE	SOURCE,	BUT
OTHERS
USE	YOU	AND	DON'T	MENTION	YOU	 --	 OR	 THEY	 EVEN	CONDEMN
YOU.	 I	 AM	 REALLY	 AFRAID	 OF	 THOSE	 PEOPLE.	 WHAT	 IS	 THEIR
INTENTION?	CAN
YOU	PLEASE	TAKE	AWAY	THAT	FEAR?
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 afraid	 of	 those	 people.	 That	 is	 happening	 in	 every
language	all	over	the	world.	People	are	taking	my	statements	and	not	mentioning
my	 name.	 There	 is	 no	 harm	 in	 it,	 because	my	 name	 is	 not	 important;	what	 is
important	 is	 the	 statement.	Even	 if	 these	people	are	 stealing,	 there	 is	no	harm.
That	 statement	 may	 start	 something	 in	 somebody	 which	 these	 people	 cannot
fulfill.	That	statement	may	trigger	a	process	in	somebody	who	will	have	to	come
to	the	original	source.
They	are	not	mentioning	my	name	for	 two	reasons.	One	reason	 is,	 they	would
like	to	appear	original.	Secondly,	 they	are	afraid	 that	 if	 they	mention	my	name
they	will	be	condemned	--	then	their	book	is	not	going	to	be	praised,	respected.
But	don't	be	afraid	of	these	people,	whatever	their	reason.	Anything	taken	from
me	 is	 fire,	 and	 it	 does	 not	matter	 in	what	way	 the	 fire	 reaches	 to	 somebody's
heart.	 These	 people	who	 are	 doing	 such	 things	 cannot	 be	 great	writers,	 poets,
creative	 thinkers;	 otherwise	 they	would	 not	 do	 such	 an	 act	 of	 stealing.	 These
people	are	third	rate.
So	if	they	have	stolen	something	from	me	it	is	going	to	stand	out	in	their	whole
book	 as	 separate,	 unrelated,	 out	 of	 context.	 Anybody	 who	 has	 a	 little
intelligence,	will	 see	 that	 this	 part	 has	 not	 come	 from	 the	 same	man	who	 has
written	the	book,	because	the	book	has	a	third	class	flavor;	there	is	no	originality,
there	is	no	understanding	of	the	deeper	problems	of	life,	and	there	is	no	courage
to	say	the	truth	as	it	is.	So	anything	that	they	have	stolen	to	decorate	their	books,
to	make	 their	 books	 valuable,	 unknowingly	 that	 very	 part	 is	 going	 to	 destroy
their	whole	book.	They	have	stolen	fire	and	put	it	into	their	book.
In	India,	one	radio	station	was	reading	my	statements	every	day,	for	ten	minutes
in	 the	 morning,	 without	 mentioning	 my	 name	 --	 but	 passages	 from	 books,
stories.	Hundreds	of	letters	came	to	me	saying,	"These	people	are	stealing	from
your	books."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	My	name	is	not	significant,	my	message	is.	They	are
cowards,	or	perhaps	they	love	me	but	they	are	government	servants."
In	 India	 radio	 is	 owned	 by	 the	 government,	 television	 is	 owned	 by	 the
government.	If	they	use	my	name,	they	may	lose	their	jobs.	And	certainly	during
that	 series,	 which	 was	 continuing	 for	 six	 months,	 even	 ministers,	 cabinet
ministers	and	 the	prime	minister,	were	quoting	from	those	statements,	 thinking
that	they	have	nothing	to	do	with	me.	But	the	people	who	were	listening	knew
that	those	statements	were	not	coming	from	Indira	Gandhi	--	they	could	not	be,
they	had	no	relevance	with	the	person	--	they	were	stolen.
And	 they	 started	 searching	 for	 the	 place	 from	where	 the	 statements	 had	 been
stolen.
Finally	I	met	the	person,	the	director	of	that	radio	station.	He	was	a	lover	of	me,
and	 he	 said,	 "I	 have	 been	 condemned.	Hundreds	 of	 letters	 are	 coming	 to	me,
saying,	`You	are	stealing.	You	are	not	mentioning	Osho's	name.	But	if	I	mention
your	name	then	the	series	will	be	stopped	that	very	day.	I	will	continue	as	long	as
they	don't	discover...
`"And	the	moment	it	was	discovered,	immediately	the	series	was	stopped	and	the
man	 was	 removed.	 He	 told	 me,	 "It	 happened	 because	 of	 that	 series.	 People
started	 writing	 letters	 to	 the	 prime	 minister	 saying,	 `This	 man	 is	 stealing
passages	from	Osho.'"
The	prime	minister	herself	had	been	stealing.	Her	lectures	have	been	sent	to	me,
and	word	for	word,	long	passages	have	been	stolen	from	me.	But	I	have	always
taken	the	standpoint:	let	the	truth	reach	to	people	by	any	means,	by	anyone.
I	have	been	thinking	that	if	the	great	powerful	governments	of	the	world	are	so
afraid	that	they	will	not	allow	me	entry	into	their	country	--	just	as	a	tourist	for
three	or	four	weeks	-
-	if	they	are	so	impotent	with	all	their	power	that	they	will	not	even	allow	me	an
overnight	stay	at	the	airport,	which	is	legally	my	right...
In	England	my	jet	plane	was	standing	at	 the	airport,	and	 the	pilots	had	 to	 rest.
According	 to	 the	 law,	 after	 a	 certain	 period	 they	 cannot	 fly,	 so	 only	 in	 the
morning	would	they	be	able	to	fly.	I	had	every	right	to	stay	in	the	lounge	at	the
airport,	but	they	refused	--	as	if	with	me	there	are	different	laws!
One	of	my	friends	who	was	traveling	with	me	just	happened	to	see	the	file	of	the
man	who	was	preventing	me,	because	he	went	to	the	bathroom,	leaving	the	file
on	the	table.
And	my	 friend	 just	 looked	 and	was	 surprised,	 because	 there	were	 government
instructions....	I	had	just	arrived,	but	the	file	was	ready,	saying	that	if	I	try	to	stay
even	 overnight	 I	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 to	 stay	 in	 the	 first	 class	 lounge,	 but	 I
should	be	put	in	jail;	I	am	a	dangerous	person.
In	the	airport	lounge,	from	where	I	cannot	get	into	the	country...	there	is	no	way
to	get	into	the	country	from	the	lounge.	Every	instruction	was	there	about	how
they	had	to	treat	me.	In	England	we	had	to	stay	for	one	night	in	jail,	without	any
crime	--	just	because	the	pilots	could	not	fly	overtime.	And	the	government	was
ready	beforehand.	It	was	not	a	spontaneous	decision,	it	was	well-planned.
Now	there	are	countries	who	have	decided	in	their	parliaments	that	I	should	not
be	 allowed	 into	 their	 country.	And	 they	 have	 a	 certain	 European	 parliament...
Just	the	other	day	I	was	informed	that	now	they	are	considering	in	the	European
parliament	--	which	is	just	a	combined	body	of	all	the	parliaments	of	Europe	--	a
decision	 that	 I	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 even	 to	 land	my	 plane	 at	 any	 airport	 in
Europe.
Today	 they	 will	 be	 doing	 this	 in	 Europe	 --	 America	 has	 done	 it	 already.
Tomorrow	 they	will	 be	 doing	 it	 in	Asia,	 in	Australia,	 in	Africa.	 It	 is	 possible,
very	possible,	that	if	they	are	so	much	afraid	of	me,	they	will	start	banning	my
books.	And	 it	may	 become	 necessary	 that	my	 books	 go	without	my	 name,	 or
with	any	name	--	like	Holy	Ghost!
The	name	does	not	matter.
But	the	message	has	to	reach.
It	is	unprecedented.	The	whole	world	against	a	single	man	--	a	man	who	has	no
power,	 no	 nuclear	weapons,	who	 cannot	 do	 any	 harm	 to	 anybody.	 The	whole
world	 is	at	war	with	a	 single	person.	 It	 simply	shows	 that	 I	am	hitting	at	 their
very	roots.
You	need	not	be	worried.	If	somebody	has	taken	some	passage,	that	passage	will
prove	more	 important	 than	 his	whole	 book.	And	 I	would	 like	more	 and	more
writers,	poets,	film	makers	to	steal	as	much	as	they	can,	because	truth	is	not	my
property,	I	am	not	its	owner.
Let	it	reach	in	any	way,	in	anybody's	name,	in	any	form,	but	let	it	reach.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THESE	 WORDS	 "TAKING	 RESPONSIBILITY	 FOR	 YOURSELF,"
CONFUSE	ME.	 I	AM	AN	 INDIVIDUALIST	AND	ENJOY	BEING	ON	MY
OWN.	IF	I	DO	WHAT
FEELS	GOOD	TO	SUPPORT	MYSELF,	IS	IT	NOT	A	WAY	OF	FEEDING	MY
EGO?
WHERE	 IS	 THE	 LIMIT	 BETWEEN	 TAKING	 RESPONSIBILITY	 FOR
ONESELF
AND	FEEDING	THE	EGO	BY	FULFILLING	ITS	TENDENCIES?
There	 is	 no	 limit	 for	 taking	 responsibility	 for	 yourself.	 And	 the	 question	 has
arisen...	and	not	only	this	question,	many	questions	arise	because	you	only	think
about	them;	they	are	not	your	existential	experiences.	If	you	take	responsibility
for	yourself	you	cannot	be	an	egoist,	because	to	be	an	egoist	simply	means	you
are	fast	asleep	and	you	cannot	take	any	responsibility.
Responsibility	comes	with	awareness,	alertness.
You	are	asking	an	intellectual	question	like,	"When	we	bring	light	into	the	room,
what	 are	we	 are	 going	 to	 do	with	 the	 darkness?	Where	 have	we	 to	 throw	 it?"
Intellectually	 it	 is	 perfectly	 right.	 There	 is	 darkness	 in	 the	 room	 and	 you	 say,
"Bringing	light	into	the	room,	the	question	arises,	`Where	then	has	the	darkness
to	be	pushed?	Where	has	it	to	be	thrown?	In	what	way?'	But	it	is	not	existential.
Just	try	to	bring	light	in	and	there	will	be	no	question	about	darkness.	There	will
be	no	darkness!
Responsibility	is	awareness,	alertness,	consciousness.
Ego	is	just	unconsciousness.
They	cannot	coexist.
As	 you	 grow	 more	 conscious	 you	 grow	 more	 towards	 light,	 and	 anything
belonging	 to	 the	 world	 of	 darkness	 starts	 disappearing.	 Ego	 is	 nothing	 but
darkness.
So	 remember	one	 thing,	 try	 to	 ask	questions	which	 are	 existential.	 Intellectual
questions	may	look	logical,	but	are	really	absurd.	You	try	responsibility,	and	by
being	responsible	you	will	have	to	be	conscious	and	alert.
Remaining	 responsible,	 you	will	 create	 the	 light	 that	 automatically	 dispels	 the
darkness	of	the	ego.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Dancingly,	disappear
14	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604140
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
102
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
OFTEN,	WHEN	I	AM	DEEPLY	RELAXED,	A	STRONG	FEELING	TO	DIE
COMES
UP	 IN	 ME.	 IN	 THESE	 MOMENTS	 I	 FEEL	 MYSELF	 AS	 PART	 OF	 THE
WHOLE
COSMOS,	AND	I	WANT	TO	DISAPPEAR	INTO	IT.	ON	ONE	HAND,	IT	IS
SUCH	A	BEAUTIFUL	FEELING,	AND	 I	AM	SO	GRATEFUL	FOR	 IT.	ON
THE	OTHER
HAND	 I	MISTRUST	 IT:	MAYBE	 I	HAVE	NOT	SAID	 "YES"	TO	MYSELF,
TO	MY
BEING,	 IF	 THE	 DESIRE	 TO	 DIE	 IS	 SO	 STRONG.	 IS	 IT	 A	 SUICIDAL
DESIRE?
It	is	not	a	suicidal	desire.
One	basic	 thing	 about	 suicide	 is	 that	 it	 arises	only	 in	people	who	are	 clinging
very	much	to	 life.	And	when	they	fail	 in	 their	clinging,	 the	mind	moves	to	 the
opposite	pole.	The	function	of	the	mind	is	of	either/or:	either	it	wants	the	whole,
or	none	of	it.	The	lust	for	life	cannot	be	fulfilled	totally,	because	life	as	such	is	a
temporal	thing;	it	is	bound	to	end	at	a	point,	just	as	it	began	one	day	at	a	point.
You	 cannot	 have	 a	 line	with	 only	 the	 beginning;	 somewhere	 or	 other	 there	 is
bound	to	be	an	end.
So	the	people	who	commit	suicide	are	not	against	life;	it	only	appears	so.	They
want	life	in	its	totality,	they	want	to	grab	it	whole,	and	when	they	fail	--	and	they
are	bound	to	fail	-
-	then	out	of	frustration,	out	of	failure,	they	start	thinking	of	death.	Then	suicide
is	 the	 only	 alternative.	 They	 will	 not	 be	 satisfied	 with	 whatsoever	 life	 gives
them;	they	want	more	and	more	and	more.
Life	 is	 short,	 and	 the	 series	of	 the	desire	 for	more	 and	more	 is	 infinite,	 so	 the
failure	 is	certain.	Somewhere	or	other	 there	 is	bound	 to	come	a	moment	when
they	will	 feel	 they	have	been	cheated	by	 life.	Nobody	 is	cheating	 them	--	 they
have	cheated	themselves.
They	have	been	asking	too	much,	and	they	have	only	been	asking,	they	have	not
been	 giving	 anything,	 not	 even	 gratefulness.	 In	 anger,	 in	 rage,	 in	 revenge	 the
pendulum	 of	 the	mind	moves	 to	 the	 other	 end	 --	 still	 they	 do	 not	 know	with
whom	 they	 are	 taking	 the	 revenge.	 They	 are	 killing	 themselves:	 it	 does	 not
destroy	life,	it	does	not	destroy	existence.
So	this	experience	is	not	of	a	suicidal	nature.	It	is	something	similar	to	suicide,
but	on	a	very	different	level	and	from	a	very	different	dimension.	When	you	are
relaxed,	when	there	is	no	tension	in	you,	when	there	is	no	desire,	when	the	mind
is	as	silent	as	a	lake	without	any	ripples,	a	deep	feeling	arises	in	you	to	disappear
in	this	moment,	because	life	has	not	given	you	anything	better	 than	this.	There
have	been	moments	of	happiness,	of	pleasure,	but	this	is	something	far	beyond
happiness	and	pleasure;	it	is	pure	blissfulness.
To	 turn	 back	 from	 it	 is	 really	 hard.	One	wants	 to	 go	 deeper,	 and	 one	 can	 see
going	 deeper	 means	 disappearing.	 Most	 of	 him	 has	 already	 disappeared	 in
relaxation,	in	silence,	in	desirelessness.	Most	of	his	personality	has	already	gone,
just	a	small	thread	of	the	ego	is	still	hanging	around.	And	he	would	like	to	take	a
jump	out	of	this	circle	of	the	ego,	because	if	relaxing	even	within	the	ego	brings
so	much	benediction,	one	cannot	imagine	what	will	be	the	result	if	everything	is
dissolved,	so	that	one	can	say,	"I	am	not	and	existence	is."
This	 is	 not	 a	 suicidal	 instinct.	 This	 is	 what	 basically	 is	 meant	 by	 spiritual
liberation:	it	is	liberation	from	the	ego,	from	desire,	even	from	the	lust	for	life.	It
is	total	liberation,	it	is	absolute	freedom.
But	in	this	situation	the	question	is	bound	to	arise	in	everyone.	The	question	is
arising	not	out	of	your	intelligence;	the	question	is	arising	out	of	your	cowardice.
You	really	want	some	excuse	not	to	dissolve,	not	to	evaporate	into	the	infinite.
Immediately	 the	mind	gives	you	 the	 idea	 that	 this	 is	what	 suicide	 is:	 --	 "Don't
commit	suicide.	Suicide	is	a	sin,	suicide	is	a	crime.	Come	back!"	And	you	start
coming	 back.	And	 coming	 back	means	 you	 become	 again	 tense,	 again	 full	 of
anxieties,	again	full	of	desires.	Again	the	whole	tragic	drama	of	your	life...
It	 is	your	fear	of	 total	dissolution.	But	you	don't	want	 to	accept	 it	as	a	fear,	so
you	give	it	a	condemnatory	name	--	suicide.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	suicide;	it
is	really	going	deeper	into	life.
Life	 has	 two	 dimensions.	 One	 is	 horizontal	 --	 in	 which	 you	 are	 all	 living,	 in
which	you	are	always	asking	for	more	and	more	and	more.	The	quantity	is	not
the	 question;	 no	 quantity	 is	 going	 to	 satisfy	 you.	 The	 horizontal	 line	 is	 the
quantitative	line.	You	can	go	on	and	on.	It	is	like	the	horizon	--	as	you	go	on,	the
horizon	goes	on	receding	back.	The	distance	between	you	and	the	goal	of	your
more	and	more,	the	goal	of	your	desire,	remains	always	exactly	the	same.	It	was
the	same	when	you	were	a	child,	it	was	the	same	when	you	were	young,	it	is	the
same	when	you	are	old.	It	will	remain	the	same	to	your	last	breath.
The	 horizontal	 line	 is	 exactly	 an	 illusion.	 The	 horizon	 does	 not	 exist,	 it	 only
appears	--
there,	 perhaps	 just	 a	 few	miles	 away,	 the	 sky	 is	 meeting	 the	 earth...	 it	 meets
nowhere.
And	out	of	the	horizon	comes	the	horizontal	line	--	unending,	because	the	goal	is
illusory;	you	cannot	come	to	make	it	a	reality.	And	your	patience	is	limited,	your
span	of	life	is	limited.	One	day	you	realize	that	it	seems	all	futile,	meaningless:
"I	am	unnecessarily	dragging	myself,	torturing	myself,	reaching	nowhere."	Then
the	opposite	of	 it	arises	 in	you	--	destroy	yourself.	 It	 is	not	worthwhile	 to	 live,
because	life	promises,	but	never	delivers	the	goods.
But	 life	 has	 another	 line	 --	 a	 vertical	 line.	The	vertical	 line	moves	 in	 a	 totally
different	dimension.	In	such	an	experience,	for	a	moment	you	have	turned	your
face	towards	the	vertical.
You	are	not	asking	--	that's	why	you	are	being	given.
You	are	not	desiring	--	that's	why	so	much	is	made	available	to	you.
You	don't	have	any	goal	--	that's	why	you	are	so	close	to	it.
Because	there	is	no	desire,	no	goal,	no	asking,	no	begging,	you	don't	have	any
tension;	you	are	utterly	relaxed.
In	this	relaxed	state	is	the	meeting	with	existence.
The	fear	comes	at	the	moment	when	you	come	to	dissolve	your	last	part,	because
then	it	will	be	irrevocable;	you	will	not	be	able	to	come	back.
I	have	told	many	times	a	beautiful	poem	of	Rabindranath	Tagore.	The	poet	has
been	 searching	 for	God	 for	millions	 of	 lives.	He	 has	 seen	 him	 sometimes,	 far
away,	near	a	star,	and	he	started	moving	that	way,	but	by	the	time	he	reached	that
star,	 God	 has	 moved	 to	 some	 other	 place.	 But	 he	 went	 on	 searching	 and
searching	 --	 he	 was	 determined	 to	 find	 God's	 home	 --	 and	 the	 surprise	 of
surprises	 was,	 one	 day	 he	 actually	 reached	 a	 house	 where	 on	 the	 door	 was
written:	"God's	Home."
You	can	understand	his	ecstasy,	you	can	understand	his	joy.	He	runs	up	the	steps,
and	just	as	he	is	going	to	knock	on	the	door,	suddenly	his	hand	freezes.	An	idea
arises	in	him:
"If	by	chance	this	is	really	the	home	of	God,	then	I	am	finished,	my	seeking	is
finished.	 I	 have	 become	 identified	 with	 my	 seeking,	 with	 my	 search.	 I	 don't
know	anything	else.	If	the	door	opens	and	I	face	God,	I	am	finished	--	the	search
is	over.	Then	what?	Then	 there	 is	an	eternity	of	boredom	--	no	excitement,	no
discovery,	no	new	challenge,	because	there	cannot	be	any	challenge	greater	than
God."
He	 starts	 trembling	 with	 fear,	 takes	 his	 shoes	 off	 his	 feet,	 and	 descends	 back
down	 the	 beautiful	 marble	 steps.	 He	 took	 the	 shoes	 off	 so	 that	 no	 noise	 was
made,	for	his	fear	was	that	even	a	noise	on	the	steps...	God	may	open	the	door,
although	he	has	not	knocked.
And	then	he	runs	as	fast	as	he	has	never	run	before.	He	used	to	think	that	he	had
been	 running	after	God	as	 fast	 as	he	can,	but	 today,	 suddenly,	he	 finds	energy
which	 was	 never	 available	 to	 him	 before.	 He	 runs	 as	 he	 has	 never	 run,	 not
looking	back.
The	poem	ends,	"I	am	still	searching	for	God.	I	know	his	home,	so	I	avoid	it	and
search	everywhere	else.	The	excitement	 is	great,	 the	challenge	 is	great,	 and	 in
my	search	I	continue,	I	continue	to	exist.	God	is	a	danger	--	I	will	be	annihilated.
But	now	I	am	not	afraid	even	of	God,	because	I	know	His	home.	So,	leaving	His
home	aside,	I	go	on	searching	for	him	all	around	the	universe.	And	deep	down	I
know	my	search	is	not	for	God;	my	search	is	to	nourish	my	ego."
I	place	Rabindranath	Tagore	as	one	of	the	greatest	religious	men	of	our	century,
although	he	 is	not	ordinarily	 related	with	 religion.	But	only	a	 religious	man	of
tremendous	 experience	 can	 write	 this	 poem.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 ordinary	 poetry;	 it
contains	 such	 a	 great	 truth.	And	 that's	what	 your	 question	 is	 raising.	Relaxed,
you	come	to	a	moment	where	you	feel	you	are	going	to	disappear,	and	then	you
think,	 "Perhaps	 this	 is	 a	 suicidal	 instinct,"	 and	 you	 come	 back	 to	 your	 old
miserable	world.	But	that	miserable	world	has	one	thing:	it	protects	your	ego,	it
allows	you	to	be.
This	 is	 the	 strange	 situation:	 blissfulness	 does	 not	 allow	 you;	 you	 have	 to
disappear.
That's	why	you	don't	 see	many	blissful	 people	 in	 the	world.	Misery	 nourishes
your	ego	--
that's	 why	 you	 see	 so	many	miserable	 people	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 basic	 central
point	is	the	ego.
So	you	have	not	come	to	a	point	of	suicide.	You	have	come	to	a	point	of	nirvana,
of	 cessation,	 of	 disappearance,	 of	 blowing	 out	 the	 candle.	This	 is	 the	 ultimate
experience.	If	you	can	gather	courage,	just	one	step	more...	Existence	is	only	one
step	away	from	you.
Don't	 listen	 to	 this	 garbage	 of	 your	 mind	 saying	 that	 this	 is	 suicide.	 You	 are
neither	drinking	poison,	nor	are	you	hanging	yourself	 from	a	 tree,	and	you	are
not	 shooting	 yourself	 with	 a	 gun	 --	 what	 suicide?	 You	 are	 simply	 becoming
thinner	 and	 thinner	 and	 thinner.	And	 the	moment	 comes	when	you	are	 so	 thin
and	so	spread	all	over	existence	that	you	cannot	say	you	are,	but	you	can	say	that
existence	is.
This	we	have	called	enlightenment,	not	suicide.
This	we	have	 called	 realization	 of	 the	 ultimate	 truth.	But	 you	have	 to	 pay	 the
price.	And	 the	price	 is	nothing	but	dropping	 the	ego.	So	when	such	a	moment
comes,	don't	hesitate.
Dancingly,	disappear...	with	a	great	laughter,	disappear;	with	songs	on	your	lips,
disappear.
I	 am	 not	 a	 theoretician,	 this	 is	 not	 my	 philosophy.	 I	 have	 come	 to	 the	 same
borderline	 many	 times	 and	 turned	 back.	 I	 have	 also	 found	 the	 home	 of	 God
many	times	and	could	not	knock.	Jesus	has	a	few	sayings.	One	of	the	sayings	is,
"Knock,	 and	 the	 door	 shall	 be	 opened	 unto	 you."	 If	 this	 sentence	 has	 any
meaning,	it	is	this	meaning	that	I	am	giving	you	now.
So	 when	 this	 moment	 comes,	 rejoice	 and	 melt.	 It	 is	 human	 nature	 --	 and
understandable	-
-	 that	many	times	you	will	come	back.	But	 those	many	times	don't	count.	One
time,	gather	all	courage	and	take	a	jump.
You	will	be,	but	 in	such	a	new	way	 that	you	cannot	connect	 it	with	 the	old.	 It
will	be	a	discontinuity.	The	old	was	so	tiny,	so	small,	so	mean,	and	the	new	is	so
vast.	From	a	small	dewdrop	you	have	become	the	ocean.	But	even	the	dewdrop
slipping	from	a	lotus	leaf	trembles	for	a	moment,	tries	to	hang	on	a	little	more,
because	he	can	see	the	ocean...
once	he	has	fallen	from	the	lotus	leaf	he	is	gone.	Yes,	in	a	way	he	will	not	be;	as
a	dewdrop	he	will	be	gone.	But	it	is	not	a	loss.	He	will	be	oceanic.
And	all	other	oceans	are	limited.
The	ocean	of	existence	is	unlimited.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	CLOSE	MY	EYES	I	OFTEN	HEAR	THE	SOUND	OF	A	TINY	BELL
RINGING	WITHIN.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	TELL	US	ABOUT	HEARING,	MEDITATION,	SOUND
AND
SILENCE?
It	is	possible	that	hearing	inside	you	a	tiny	bell	when	you	enter	into	meditation
may	be	related	to	your	past	life,	particularly	as	a	Tibetan,	because	for	centuries
in	 Tibet	 this	 has	 been	 the	 conditioning	 of	 the	 mind	 --	 that	 when	 you	 enter
meditation,	you	hear	tiny	bells.
And	if	a	conditioning	has	been	continued	too	long,	it	is	carried	into	new	lives.
But	hearing	 the	 tiny	bell	 is	not	meditation;	 it	 is	 just	a	conditioning.	When	you
start	 entering	 into	 total	 silence	 where	 no	 bells	 are	 ringing,	 then	 meditation
begins.	 The	 tiny	 bell	 rings	 in	 the	mind,	 and	meditation	 is	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind.
Tiny	or	not	tiny,	no	bell	can	ring	there;	it	is	utter	silence.
But	 many	 religions,	 particularly	 in	 the	 East...	 and	 the	 most	 prominent	 is	 the
Tibetan	 religion	 which	 has	 used	 tiny	 bells.	 It	 is	 a	 significant	 technique	 but
dangerous,	 as	 all	 techniques	are:	you	can	get	 attached	 to	 the	 technique.	 If	you
listen	 to	 a	 tiny	 bell	 for	 hours	 it	 will	 have	 a	 hypnotizing	 effect	 on	 your	mind.
Thinking	will	stop,	only	the	bell	will	go	on	ringing.	Even	when	in	reality	the	bell
has	stopped,	it	will	go	on	ringing	in	the	mind.
The	idea	behind	the	technique	was	that	slowly,	slowly	the	sound	of	the	bell	will
fade	away	into	silence.	If	it	happens,	good.	But	the	greater	possibility	is	that	you
will	 become	 attached	 to	 the	 bell.	 And	 it	 gives	 great	 peace,	 it	 will	 give	 you	 a
feeling	of	great	well-being,	because	the	mind	will	not	be	thinking;	it	cannot	do
two	things.
It	is	not	only	the	bell	--	anything	can	be	used.	Lord	Tennyson,	the	great	poet,	was
embarrassed	to	recognize	in	his	autobiography	that	from	his	very	childhood...	he
does	not	know	how	--	perhaps	sleeping	in	a	separate	room	as	a	small	child,	he
was	afraid	of	the	darkness.	Just	to	make	him	feel	that	he	is	not	alone,	he	started
repeating	his	own	name,
"Tennyson,	 Tennyson..."	 Repeating	 his	 own	 name	 he	 forgot	 all	 about	 the
darkness	and	the	ghosts,	and	all	kinds	of	creatures	that	humanity	has	invented	for
poor	 children	 to	 be	 tortured	 with.	 He	 would	 repeat	 a	 few	 times,	 "Tennyson,
Tennyson,	Tennyson..."	and	he	would	become	silent	and	would	fall	 into	a	deep
sleep.
Later	on,	as	he	grew	up,	it	became	his	usual	practice.	Without	it	he	could	not	fall
asleep	--
it	became	a	necessary	ritual.	But	 it	started	giving	him	new	insights:	 it	not	only
brought	sleep,	but	repeating,	"Tennyson,	Tennyson,"	his	own	name,	he	became
silent,	peaceful;	he	became	somehow	more	than	the	body,	somehow	immaterial.
And	 then,	 as	he	came	 to	know	about	meditation...	 he	had	already	developed	a
technique	through	his	whole	life.	He	tried	it	for	meditation,	and	it	worked.	Just
as	it	was	leading	him	into	deep	sleep,	it	started	leading	him	into	deep	relaxation,
a	great	peacefulness.
So	it	is	not	a	question	of	what	mantra,	what	chanting,	what	name	of	which	God,
or	just	the	sound	of	a	bell...	it	doesn't	matter.	All	that	matters	basically	is	that	you
become	concentrated	on	one	thing,	that	the	mind	is	so	full	of	one	thing	that	all
other	 thoughts	 stop.	And	any	one	 thing	 for	 a	 long	 time	 is	going	 to	give	you	a
certain	kind	of	hypnotic	state.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago,	 Anando	 brought	 me	 a	 press	 clipping.	 The	 man	 was
authentic	 in	 writing	 it...	 he	 was	 puzzled,	 he	 could	 not	 understand	 what	 is
happening.	He	had	been	listening	to	me	--	he	had	come	as	a	journalist	to	report	--
he	 had	 never	 heard	 such	 long	 discourses,	 and	 on	 subjects	which	were	 not	 his
area!	So	he	reports	on	me:	"What	is	striking,"	he	reports,	"is	Osho	speaks	very
slowly,	with	gaps	--	sometimes	with	closed	eyes,	and	sometimes	he	looks	very
intensely	at	you.	He	speaks	so	long	that	one	feels	bored,	but	the	strange	thing	is
that	after	this	boredom	one	feels	a	deep	serenity,	a	silence	-
-	 which	 is	 strange,	 because	 usually	 out	 of	 boredom	 one	 feels	 frustration,	 one
feels	angry."
But	he	has	observed	well	 his	 own	mind...	 one	 feels	 a	 certain	 serenity,	 silence,
peacefulness,	 and	 finally	 it	 seems	 that	 a	 kind	 of	 hypnosis	 has	 happened:
"Perhaps	this	is	Osho's	method	--	to	speak	slowly,	to	speak	with	gaps,	so	that	you
start	feeling	bored.	But	out	of	that	boredom	comes	a	serenity."
It	is	strange	for	him	--	it	is	strange	for	Western	psychology	too	--	that	if	boredom
is	used	rightly	it	is	going	to	create	serenity,	peacefulness	and	a	state	of	hypnosis.
And	 hypnosis	 is	 healthy:	 It	 is	 not	 meditation,	 but	 it	 still	 somehow	 reflects
meditation.	It	is	like	the	moon	reflected	in	the	water;	it	is	not	the	moon,	but	this
is	still	a	reflection	of	the	moon.
So	all	the	religions	--	in	the	East	particularly,	but	in	the	West	also	--	have	used
very	 similar	 techniques.	Now	 a	Buddhist	monk	 in	 Tibet,	 in	 the	 silence	 of	 the
Himalayas,	goes	on	ringing	a	small	bell	for	hours...	no	other	sound	--	the	whole
universe	 around	him	 is	 silent	 --	 the	only	 sound	 is	 the	bell.	Naturally	 his	mind
starts	getting	bored,	starts	feeling	disinterested.	There	is	no	excitement,	it	is	just
repetition,	but	that	is	the	point:	if	the	bell	can	be	stopped	--	and	the	bell	has	to	be
stopped	--	the	mind	will	go	on	listening	to	it	for	a	little	time	longer.
The	 monk	 has	 become	 so	 accustomed	 to	 listening	 to	 it	 that	 he	 will	 go	 on
listening	to	it.
And	 as	 the	 sound	of	 the	bell	 recedes,	 becomes	 thinner,	 becomes	distant,	more
distant,	 the	 mind	 is	 left	 in	 a	 certain	 silence.	 This	 silence	 either	 can	 give	 you
hypnosis...	Hypnosis	is	another	name	for	deliberately	created	sleep:	it	is	deeper
than	your	ordinary	sleep,	healthier	 than	your	ordinary	sleep;	 it	 rejuvenates	you
within	minutes,	which	your	 ordinary	 sleep	 can	do	only	 in	 eight	 hours.	That	 is
one	line	that	it	can	move	on,	but	that	is	not	meditation.
The	other	line	is...	listening	to	the	bell	inside	you	getting	more	and	more	distant,
you	become	more	 and	more	 alert	 so	 that	 you	 can	 listen	 to	 it,	 even	 though	 the
sound	is	going	away	from	you.
Now	you	have	to	be	more	conscious	to	listen	to	it.	First	you	were	unconscious
and	you	were	listening	to	it;	now	it	is	getting	distant	so	you	have	to	be	very	alert,
very	conscious.
And	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 the	 sound	 disappears...	 you	 have	 to	 be	 perfectly
conscious.
You	have	taken	a	different	route.
This	state	of	consciousness	is	meditation.
I	 am	 not	 against	 hypnosis;	 what	 I	 am	 against	 is...	 hypnosis	 should	 not	 be
understood	as	meditation.	Hypnosis	is	of	the	mind,	and	good	for	the	mind,	good
for	the	body.
Meditation	is	neither	of	the	body	nor	of	the	mind,	but	belongs	to	the	third	within
you	--
your	being.	It	is	good	for	the	being,	it	is	nourishment	for	the	being.
So	it	is	possible	that	if	sitting	in	meditation,	you	suddenly	start	hearing	bells,	you
may	have	practiced	 this	 in	your	past	 lives.	 I	 don't	 talk	 about	past	 lives	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	for	you	it	will	be	just	a	belief.	But	the	question	was	such	that	I
had	to	bring	the	past	life	in,	because	it	had	nothing	to	do	with	this	life.	You	had
not	practiced	meditation	on	the	sound	of	bells,	so	from	where	can	it	come	into
your	 mind?	 It	 can	 come	 only	 from	 the	 past	 conditioning,	 and	 a	 very	 deep
conditioning.
Nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it.	 Enjoy	 it,	 but	 remember	 not	 to	 go	 towards	 sleep.	 Go
towards	more	consciousness.	Sleep	is	unconsciousness,	so	they	are	diametrically
opposite	directions.
And	there	comes	a	point	from	where	you	can	move	either	way.	When	the	sound
of	 bells	 is	 receding,	 disappearing,	 that	 is	 the	 moment.	 Either	 you	 can	 fall
asleep...	which	is	good	but	this	is	not	meditation,	and	it	is	not	going	to	give	you
any	spiritual	experience.	If	you	remain	alert,	aware,	 the	sound	disappears;	only
silence	remains.
Consciousness	and	silence	together	is	what	meditation	is	all	about.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	ONCE	DREW	A	PICTURE	OF	A	FLOWER	BLOSSOMING.	THE	FLOWER
WAS
SIMPLE	AND	LOVELY;	IT	HAD	A	FAINT	LIGHT	COMING	OUT	OF	THE
JUST-OPENING	 BUD,	 AND	 THE	 LEAVES	 WERE	 STRONG	 AND
HEALTHY.	BUT	THE
ROOTS	WERE	 UNDERDEVELOPED	 AND	WEAK,	 AS	 IF	 THEY	 DIDN'T
BELONG
TO	 THIS	 FLOWER	AT	ALL.	 THIS	 PICTURE	WAS	 TO	 SYMBOLIZE	ME,
AND	 I	 HAVE	 A	 DEEP	 ATTACHMENT	 TO	 IT.	 BUT	 I	 AM	 CONSTANTLY
WORRIED	BY
THE	 ROOTS,	 AS	 THEY	 CONTRADICT	 THE	 PROMISE	 OF	 THE
BLOSSOM.
THERE	 ARE	 MANY	 QUESTIONS	 CONNECTED	 WITH	 THIS	 PICTURE,
BUT	 I	 WOULD	 BE	 VERY	 HAPPY	 IF	 YOU	 WOULD	 ANSWER	 ME
SOMEHOW.
This	is	not	only	your	situation.	This	is	the	situation	of	almost	all	human	beings:
their	 roots	 are	 weak,	 and	 without	 strong	 roots	 the	 promise	 of	 a	 healthy
blossoming	 of	 thousands	 of	 flowers	 is	 impossible.	 Why	 are	 the	 roots	 weak?
They	are	kept	weak.
In	 Japan	 they	 have	 trees	 four	 hundred,	 five	 hundred	 years	 old,	 and	 six	 inches
high.	 It	 is	 considered	 to	 be	 an	 art.	 To	me	 it	 is	 simple	murder.	Generations	 of
gardeners	have	been	keeping	those	trees	in	this	situation.
Now,	a	tree	which	is	five	hundred	years	old...	you	can	see	its	branches	are	old,
although	small;	it	is	a	very	tiny	old	man,	but	it	shows	on	the	leaves,	on	the	trunk,
on	the	branches.
And	the	strategy	that	has	been	used	is	this:	they	plant	a	tree	in	a	mud	pot	which
has	 no	 bottom,	 then	 they	 go	 on	 cutting	 the	 roots	 --	 because	 the	 pot	 has	 no
bottom.	When	the	roots	come	out	and	try	to	reach	the	earth,	they	will	cut	them.
They	will	not	do	anything	to	the	tree;	 they	will	simply	go	on	cutting	the	roots.
Now	 for	 five	 hundred	 years	 a	 family	 has	 been	 continuously	 cutting	 the	 roots.
The	 tree	may	 live	for	 thousands	of	years,	but	 the	 tree	never	blossoms,	 it	never
comes	to	fruition.
The	same	has	been	done	to	man	all	over	the	world.	His	roots	have	been	cut	from
the	very	beginning,	about	everything.
Every	child	has	to	be	obedient.	You	are	cutting	his	roots.	You	are	not	giving	him
a	chance	to	think	whether	to	say	yes	to	you,	or	to	say	no.	You	are	not	allowing
him	to	think,	you	are	not	allowing	him	to	make	a	decision	on	his	own.	You	are
not	 giving	him	 responsibility	 --	 you	 are	 taking	 responsibility	 away,	 behind	 the
beautiful	word	òbedience'.	You	are	taking	his	freedom	away,	you	are	taking	his
individuality	away,	by	a	simple	strategy	--	insisting	that	he	is	a	child,	he	does	not
know	anything.	The	parents	have	 to	decide,	 and	 the	child	has	 to	be	absolutely
obedient.	The	obedient	child	is	the	respected	child.
But	 so	much	 is	 implied	 in	 it	 that	 you	 are	 destroying	 him	 completely.	He	will
grow	 old,	 but	 he	 will	 not	 grow	 up.	 He	 will	 grow	 old,	 but	 there	 will	 be	 no
blossoming	and	there	will	be	no	fruition.	He	will	live,	but	his	life	will	not	be	a
dance,	will	not	be	a	song,	will	not	be	a	rejoicing.	You	have	destroyed	the	basic
possibility	 for	 all	 that	makes	 a	man	 individual,	 authentic,	 sincere,	 gives	 him	a
certain	integrity.
In	my	childhood...	there	were	many	children	in	my	family.	I	had	ten	brothers	and
sisters	 myself,	 then	 there	 were	 one	 uncle's	 children,	 and	 another	 uncle's
children...	and	I	saw	this	happening:	whoever	was	obedient	was	respected.	I	had
to	decide	one	thing	for	my	whole	life	--	not	only	for	being	in	my	family	or	for
my	childhood	--	that	if	I	in	any	way	desire	respect,	respectability,	then	I	cannot
blossom	 as	 an	 individual.	 From	 my	 very	 childhood	 I	 dropped	 the	 idea	 of
respectability.
I	told	my	father,	"I	have	to	make	a	certain	statement	to	you."
He	was	always	worried	whenever	I	would	go	to	him,	because	he	knew	that	there
would	be	some	trouble.	He	said,	"This	is	not	the	way	a	child	speaks	to	his	father
--	Ì	am	going	to	make	a	statement	to	you.'"
I	said,	"It	 is	a	statement	through	you	to	the	whole	world.	Right	now	the	whole
world	is	not	available	to	me;	to	me	you	represent	the	whole	world.	It	is	not	just
an	 issue	 between	 son	 and	 father;	 it	 is	 an	 issue	 between	 an	 individual	 and	 the
collectivity,	 the	 mass.	 The	 statement	 is	 that	 I	 have	 renounced	 the	 idea	 of
respectability,	 so	 in	 the	 name	 of	 respectability	 never	 ask	 anything	 from	 me;
otherwise	I	will	do	just	the	opposite.
"I	cannot	be	obedient.	That	does	not	mean	I	will	always	be	disobedient,	it	simply
means	 it	 will	 be	my	 choice	 to	 obey	 or	 not	 to	 obey.	 You	 can	 request,	 but	 the
decision	is	going	to	be	mine.	If	I	feel	my	intelligence	supports	it,	I	will	do	it;	but
it	 is	not	obedience	to	you,	it	 is	obedience	to	my	own	intelligence.	If	I	feel	it	 is
not	 right,	 I	 am	going	 to	 refuse	 it.	 I	 am	 sorry,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 one
thing	clearly:	unless	I	am	able	to	say	no,	my	yes	is	meaningless."
And	that's	what	obedience	does:	it	cripples	you	--	you	cannot	say	no,	you	have	to
say	yes.
But	when	a	man	has	become	incapable	of	saying	no,	his	yes	is	just	meaningless;
he	is	functioning	like	a	machine.	You	have	turned	a	man	into	a	robot.	So	I	said	to
him,	"This	 is	my	statement.	Whether	you	agree	or	not,	 that	 is	up	 to	you;	but	 I
have	decided,	and	whatever	the	consequences,	I	am	going	to	follow	it."
It	is	such	a	world...	In	this	world	to	remain	free,	to	think	on	your	own,	to	decide
with	your	own	consciousness,	to	act	out	of	your	own	conscience	has	been	made
almost	impossible.
Everywhere	--	in	the	church,	in	the	temple,	in	the	mosque,	in	the	school,	in	the
university,	in	the	family	--	everywhere	you	are	expected	to	be	obedient.
Just	recently	I	was	arrested	in	Crete.	They	did	not	show	me	my	arrest	warrant.	I
told	them,	"This	is	absolutely	criminal."
They	said,	"We	have	got	it,	but	it	is	in	Greek."
And	I	said,	"Do	you	have	another	warrant	to	search	the	house?"	They	had	none	-
-	they	had	never	thought	about	it.	I	said,	"You	were	allowed	by	your	warrant	to
arrest	me	outside	 the	house;	you	were	not	allowed	 to	enter	 the	house.	You	not
only	entered	 the	house,	but	Anando,	my	secretary,	was	 trying	 to	 tell	you,	 `Just
wait!	 Osho	 is	 asleep	 and	 I	 will	 go	 and	 awaken	 Him.	 It	 will	 take	 only	 five
minutes.'	You	could	not	even	wait	five	minutes.
"You	threw	Anando	from	the	porch,	four	feet	high,	onto	the	ground	--	which	was
gravel	and	stone	--	and	dragged	her	away	and	arrested	her	with	no	warrant.	And
the	only	crime	she	had	done	was	 to	 tell	you,	 `Just	wait.	We	are	bringing	Osho
down,	then	you	can	show	your	papers	to	Him.'"
When	I	was	awakened	by	John,	 they	had	already	started	 throwing	rocks	at	 the
windows,	 at	 the	 doors,	 trying	 to	 break	 into	 the	 house	 from	 all	 sides.	 I	 heard
noises	 as	 if	 bombs	 were	 being	 thrown.	 They	 had	 dynamite	 bombs,	 and	 were
threatening	to	dynamite	the	house.
On	the	way	to	the	police	station	they	stopped	in	an	empty,	silent	space	and	gave
me	 a	 paper,	 describing	 all	 that	 had	 happened,	 that	 I	 should	 sign	 it.	 I	 said,	 "I
would	 be	 happy	 to	 sign	 it,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 a	 true	 description.	 You	 have	 not
mentioned	 anything	 about	 breaking	 the	 windows,	 the	 doors	 of	 the	 house,
threatening	 that	 you	 will	 destroy	 the	 house	 with	 dynamite.	 You	 have	 not
mentioned	anything	about	Anando,	 that	you	 threw	her	on	 the	ground,	dragged
her	along	the	stones	without	any	arrest	warrant	for	her...	I	will	not	sign	it!	You
want	to	cover	it	up.	If	I	sign	it,	that	means	I	cannot	go	to	the	court	because	you
can	present	 this	 paper	 that	 I	 have	 signed	 already.	You	make	 it	 exactly	 factual,
saying	all	that	has	happened;	then	I	will	be	willing	to	sign	it."
They	understood	that	I	am	not	a	person	who	can	be	threatened,	and	they	took	the
paper	away.	And	they	never	again	asked	me	to	sign	it,	because	they	were	not	in	a
position	to	write	all	those	things	that	they	had	done;	that	would	have	been	their
condemnation.	 They	 wanted	 immediately	 to	 send	 me	 to	 India	 by	 boat,	 and	 I
refused.	 I	 said,	"Sailing	by	boat	on	 the	sea	does	not	suit	me.	 I	will	be	seasick,
and	who	will	be	responsible	for	it?	So	you	have	to	give	me	a	written	document
saying	that	you	will	be	responsible	for	my	seasickness	and	the	damages."	They
forgot	all	about	that	boat!
I	said,	"My	jet	plane	is	waiting	in	Athens.	You	have	to	take	me	on	a	plane	from
here	to	Athens,	or	you	have	to	allow	my	plane	to	come	here.	I	am	not	interested
in	 living	 in	 such	a	 country	 even	 for	 two	weeks"	 --	 because	my	visa	was	valid
only	for	two	weeks	more	--
"where	government	authorities	behave	in	such	a	primitive,	ugly,	inhuman	way."
I	 told	 the	 police	 officer,	 "Wherever	 the	 pope	 goes,	 he	 kisses	 the	 ground	 after
landing.	I	should	start	spitting	on	the	ground,	because	that's	what	you	deserve."
The	comment	that	he	made	to	me	reminded	me	of	all	this.	He	said,	"It	seems	that
from	your	very	childhood,	nobody	has	disciplined	you	in	obedience."
I	 said,	 "That's	 right,	 that's	 an	 absolutely	 right	 observation.	 I	 am	 not	 against
obedience,	I	am	not	disobedient,	but	I	want	to	decide	my	life	in	my	own	way.	I
don't	 want	 to	 be	 interfered	 with	 by	 with	 anybody	 else,	 and	 I	 don't	 want	 to
interfere	in	anybody	else's	life	either."
Man	 can	 only	 be	 truly	 human	when	 this	 becomes	 an	 accepted	 rule.	But	 up	 to
now	 the	 accepted	 rule	 has	 been	 to	 destroy	 the	 person	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 his
whole	 life	he	 remains	servile,	 submissive	 to	every	kind	of	authority,	 to	cut	his
roots	 so	 that	 he	 doesn't	 have	 enough	 juice	 to	 fight	 for	 freedom,	 to	 fight	 for
individuality,	 to	 fight	 for	 anything.	Then	 he	will	 have	 only	 a	 small	 amount	 of
life,	which	will	 enable	him	 to	 survive	 till	 death	 relieves	him	 from	 this	 slavery
that	 we	 have	 accepted	 as	 life.	 Children	 are	 slaves	 of	 their	 parents;	 wives	 are
slaves,	 husbands	 are	 slaves,	 old	 people	 become	 slaves	 of	 the	 younger	 people
who	 have	 all	 the	 power.	 If	 you	 look	 around,	 everybody	 is	 living	 in	 slavery,
hiding	the	wounds	behind	beautiful	words.
So	that	drawing	of	yours,	of	a	flower	with	beautiful	petals	and	a	light	aura,	but
with	 very	 weak	 roots...	 you	 felt	 that	 it	 describes	 you:	 it	 describes	 all	 human
beings.
The	roots	can	be	strong	only	if	we	stop	what	we	have	been	doing	up	to	now,	and
do	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 it.	 Every	 child	 should	 be	 given	 a	 chance	 to	 think.	We
should	help	him	to	sharpen	his	intelligence.	We	should	help	him	by	giving	him
situations	him	and	opportunities	where	he	has	to	decide	on	his	own.	We	should
make	it	a	point	that	nobody	is	forced	to	be	obedient,	and	everybody	is	taught	the
beauty	and	the	grandeur	of	freedom.
Then	the	roots	will	be	strong.
But	even	your	God	has	been	cutting	the	roots	of	his	own	children	because	they
were	not	obedient.	Their	disobedience	became	the	greatest	sin,	such	a	great	sin
that	 hundreds	 of	 generations	 have	 passed,	 but	 the	 sin	 continues;	 you	 have	 not
committed	it,	but	you	come	in	the	line	of	hundreds	of	generations.	Somebody	in
the	beginning	disobeyed	God,	and	God	is	so	furious	that	not	only	Adam	and	Eve
should	be	punished,	but	all	their	future	generations,	forever.
These	 are	 the	 religions	 which	 have	 made	 human	 beings	 live	 without	 any
blossomings	 and	 without	 any	 fragrance;	 otherwise	 each	 individual	 has	 the
capacity	to	be	a	Socrates,	to	be	a	Pythagoras,	to	be	a	Heraclitus,	to	be	a	Gautam
Buddha,	to	be	a	Chuang	Tzu.	Each	individual	has	potential,	but	the	potential	is
not	getting	enough	nourishment.	It	remains	potential...	and	the	man	dies,	but	the
potential	never	becomes	actuality.
My	whole	effort	and	approach	is	to	give	each	individual	opportunities	to	develop
his	potential,	whatsoever	it	is.	Nobody	should	try	to	divert	his	life	--	nobody	has
the	 right	 to	 do	 it.	 And	 then	 we	 can	 have	 a	 world	 which	 is	 truly	 a	 garden	 of
human	beings.	Right	now	we	are	living	in	hell.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	You	have	to	go	nowhere
14	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604145
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
80
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 FEEL	 DIVIDED	 IN	 TWO	 PARTS	 --	 HALF	 GOING	 TOWARDS	 THE
UNKNOWN,	AND	HALF	TOWARDS	ALL	THAT	IS	FAMILIAR	FROM	MY
PAST.	WHEN	I	GET
CLOSE	TO	LETTING	GO	OF	WHAT	I	BELIEVE	IS	MINE,	I	PANIC	--	EVEN
THOUGH	I	YEARN	TO	GO	TO	THE	PLACE	YOU	TALK	ABOUT.
PLEASE	GIVE	ME	COURAGE	TO	TAKE	THE	NEXT	STEP.
The	real	question	is	not	of	courage;	the	real	question	is	that	you	don't	understand
that	the	known	is	the	dead,	and	the	unknown	is	the	living.
Clinging	to	the	known	is	clinging	to	a	corpse.	It	does	not	need	courage	to	drop
the	clinging;	in	fact	it	needs	courage	to	go	on	clinging	to	a	corpse.	You	just	have
to	see...
That	which	is	familiar	to	you,	which	you	have	lived	--	what	has	it	given?	Where
have	you	reached?	Are	you	not	still	empty?	Is	 there	not	 immense	discontent,	a
deep	 frustration	 and	meaninglessness?	 Somehow	 you	 go	 on	managing,	 hiding
the	truth	and	creating	lies	to	remain	engaged,	involved.
This	is	 the	question:	to	see	with	clarity	that	everything	that	you	know	is	of	the
past,	it	is	already	gone.	It	is	part	of	a	graveyard.	Do	you	want	to	be	in	a	grave,	or
do	you	want	to	be	alive?	And	this	is	not	only	the	question	today;	it	will	be	the
same	 question	 tomorrow,	 and	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow.	 It	 will	 be	 the	 same
question	at	your	last	breath.
Whatever	 you	 know,	 accumulate	 --	 information,	 knowledge,	 experience	 --	 the
moment	 you	 have	 explored	 them	 you	 are	 finished	 with	 them.	 Now	 carrying
those	 empty	words,	 that	 dead	 load,	 is	 crushing	 your	 life,	 burdening	 your	 life,
preventing	you	from	entering	into	a	living,	rejoicing	being	--	which	is	awaiting
you	each	moment.
The	man	of	understanding	dies	every	moment	to	the	past	and	is	reborn	again	to
the	future.	His	present	is	always	a	transformation,	a	rebirth,	a	resurrection.	It	is
not	 a	question	of	 courage	at	 all,	 that	 is	 the	 first	 thing	 to	be	understood.	 It	 is	 a
question	of	clarity,	of	being	clear	about	what	is	what.
And	secondly,	whenever	there	is	really	a	question	of	courage,	nobody	can	give	it
to	you.
It	 is	not	something	that	can	be	presented	as	a	gift.	 It	 is	something	that	you	are
born	with,	you	just	have	not	allowed	it	to	grow,	you	have	not	allowed	it	to	assert
itself,	because	the	whole	society	is	against	it.
The	 society	does	not	want	 lions,	 it	wants	 a	 crowd	of	 sheep.	Then	 it	 is	 easy	 to
enslave	 people,	 exploit	 people,	 do	whatever	 you	want	 to	 do	with	 them.	 They
don't	have	a	soul;	they	are	almost	robots.	You	order,	and	they	will	obey.	They	are
not	free	individuals.
No	society	wants	you	to	be	courageous.	Every	society	wants	you	to	be	a	coward,
but	nobody	says	it	so	sincerely;	 they	have	found	beautiful	words	instead.	They
will	not	say,
"Be	cowardly,"	because	 that	will	 look	offensive	 to	 the	person	and	he	will	 start
thinking,
"Why	should	I	be	cowardly?"	--	and	a	coward	is	not	something	respectable.
No,	 they	 say,	 "Be	 cautious.	 Think	 twice	 before	 you	 leap.	 Remember	 your
tradition,	 your	 religion	 is	 thousands	 of	 years	 old;	 it	 has	 wisdom.	 You	 are	 a
newcomer,	 you	 cannot	 afford	 to	 disbelieve	 in	 it.	There	 is	 no	 comparison.	You
have	 just	 come	 in,	 and	 your	 religion	 has	 been	 there	 for	 ten	 thousand	 years,
accumulating	more	and	more	experience,	knowledge.
It	is	a	Himalayan	phenomenon.
"You	are	a	small	pebble.	You	cannot	fight	with	tradition	--	that	is	fighting	against
yourself,	 it	 is	 self-destructive.	 You	 can	 only	 submit	 to	 tradition;	 that	 is	 wise,
intelligent.
To	be	with	the	crowd	you	are	protected,	you	are	secure,	you	are	assured	that	you
will	not	go	astray."
In	so	many	ways	you	will	be	told	a	simple	thing:	Just	be	a	coward;	it	pays	to	be
cowardly.
It	is	dangerous	to	be	courageous,	because	it	is	going	to	bring	you	in	conflict	with
all	the	vested	interests	--	and	you	are	a	small	human	being.	You	cannot	fight	with
the	whole	world.
My	grandfather	used	to	say	to	me,	"Whatever	you	say	is	right.	I	am	old,	but	I	can
understand	that	you	are	saying	something	true.	But	I	will	suggest	--	don't	say	it
to	anybody.	You	will	be	in	trouble.	You	cannot	be	against	the	whole	world.	You
may	have	the	truth,	but	truth	does	not	count;	what	counts	is	the	crowd.
"Somebody	may	be	simply	lying"	--	and	all	religions	have	been	doing	that,	lying
about	God,	lying	about	heaven,	lying	about	hell,	lying	about	a	thousand	and	one
things	--	"but	 the	crowd	is	with	them.	Their	 lies	are	supported	by	the	immense
humanity	and	its	long	tradition.	You	are	nobody."
I	was	very	friendly	with	my	grandfather.	He	used	to	 take	me	to	 the	saints	who
were	visiting	the	town.	He	enjoyed	very	much	my	arguments	with	the	so-called
saints,	creating	a	situation	absolutely	embarrassing	for	the	saint	because	he	was
unable	to	answer	me.	But	coming	back	he	would	tell	me,	"Remember,	it	is	good
as	 a	game	but	don't	make	 it	 your	 life;	 otherwise	you	will	 be	 alone	 against	 the
whole	world.	And	you	cannot	win	against	the	whole	world."
The	last	thing	he	said	was	the	same.	Before	he	died,	he	called	me	close	and	told
me,
"Remember,	don't	fight	against	the	world.	You	cannot	win."
I	 said,	 "Now	 you	 are	 dying.	You	 have	 been	with	 the	world	 --	what	 have	 you
gained?
What	is	your	victory?	I	cannot	promise	you	what	you	are	asking.	I	want	it	to	be
absolutely	clear	to	you	that	whatever	the	cost...	I	may	lose	in	the	fight,	but	it	will
be	my	fight,	and	I	will	be	immensely	satisfied	because	I	was	in	favor	of	truth.	It
does	 not	 matter	 whether	 I	 win	 or	 lose	 --	 that	 is	 irrelevant,	 the	 defeat	 or	 the
victory.	What	is	important	is	that	whatever	you	feel	is	right,	you	stand	for	it."
This	courage	is	in	everybody.	It	is	not	a	quality	to	be	practiced;	it	is	something
that	is	part	of	your	life,	your	very	breathing.	It	is	just	that	the	society	has	created
so	many	barriers	against	your	natural	growth	that	you	have	started	thinking	from
where	to	get	courage?
from	where	to	get	intelligence?	from	where	to	get	truth?
You	have	to	go	nowhere.	You	contain	in	the	seed	form	everything	that	you	want
to	be.
Realizing	this	and	seeing	the	other	side...	The	people	who	live	with	the	crowd	--
what	is	their	gain?	They	lose	everything.	In	fact	they	don't	live	at	all;	they	only
die.	From	their	birth	they	start	dying,	and	go	on	dying	till	the	last	breath.	Their
whole	life	is	a	long	series	of	deaths.	Just	look	at	the	whole	crowd	of	people.	You
can	be	with	them,	but	the	same	is	going	to	be	your	fate.
It	is	so	simple	if	you	see	it:	the	only	way	to	live	life	is	to	live	on	your	own.	It	is
an	individual	phenomenon,	it	is	an	independence,	it	is	freedom.	It	is	a	constant
unburdening	of	all	that	is	dead,	so	that	life	can	go	on	growing	and	is	not	crushed
under	the	weight	of	the	dead.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	ARE	MY	INSPIRATION.
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 YOU	 NEVER	 HAD	 A	 MASTER;	 BUT	 WAS
THERE
ANY	SOURCE	OF	INSPIRATION	FOR	YOU	WHEN	YOU	BEGAN	YOUR
JOURNEY?
Life	itself	is	enough.
Seeing	people	all	around	--	walking	corpses	--	is	inspiration	enough	not	to	move
with	them,	not	to	go	their	way,	but	to	find	a	small	footpath	of	your	own	if	you
want	to	be	alive.
I	have	never	had	a	master,	and	I	am	fortunate	that	I	never	had	a	master.	I	have
been,	 in	my	past	 lives,	with	a	 few	 living	masters.	They	were	beautiful	people,
lovable,	 but	 one	 thing	 has	 been	 clear	 all	 along	 to	me	 --	 that	 nobody	 can	 be	 a
source	of	inspiration	for	me,	because	that	word	ìnspiration'	is	dangerous.
First	it	is	inspiration,	then	it	becomes	following,	then	it	becomes	imitation	--	and
you	end	up	being	a	carbon	copy.	There	is	no	need	to	be	inspired	by	anybody.	Not
only	 is	 there	 no	 need,	 it	 is	 dangerous	 too.	 Just	 watching,	 I	 have	 seen...	 each
individual	is	unique.	He	cannot	follow	anybody	else.
He	 can	 try	 --	 millions	 have	 been	 trying	 for	 thousands	 of	 years.	 Millions	 are
Christians,	millions	 are	Hindus,	millions	 are	Buddhists.	What	 are	 they	 doing?
Inspiration	 from	Gautam	Buddha	 has	made	millions	 of	 people	Buddhists,	 and
now	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 follow	 in	 his	 footsteps.	 And	 they	 are	 not	 reaching
anywhere;	they	cannot.
You	are	not	a	Gautam	Buddha,	and	his	footprints	won't	fit	you,	neither	will	his
shoes	 fit	 you;	 you	will	 have	 to	 find	 the	 exact	 size	of	 shoes	 that	 fit	 you.	He	 is
beautiful,	but	 that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	become	like	him.	And	that's
the	meaning	of	the	word	ìnspiration'.	It	means	you	are	so	much	influenced	that
the	man	becomes	your	ideal,	that	you	would	like	to	be	like	him.	That	has	misled
the	whole	humanity.
Inspiration	has	been	a	curse,	not	a	blessing.
I	would	 like	you	 to	 learn	 from	every	 source,	 to	 enjoy	 every	unique	being	 that
you	come	across.	But	never	follow	anybody	and	never	try	to	become	exactly	like
somebody	else;	that	is	not	allowed	by	existence.	You	can	be	only	yourself.
And	it	is	a	strange	phenomenon:	the	people	who	have	become	an	inspiration	for
millions	 of	 other	 people	 were	 themselves	 never	 inspired	 by	 anybody	 --	 but
nobody	takes	note	of	this	fact.	Gautam	Buddha	was	never	inspired	by	anybody,
and	that's	what	made	him	a	great	source	of	inspiration.	Socrates	was	not	inspired
by	anybody,	but	that's	what	makes	him	so	unique.
All	 these	people	whom	you	 think	of	as	 sources	of	 inspiration	have	never	been
inspired	by	anybody	else.	That	is	something	very	fundamental	to	be	understood.
Yes,	 they	 learned;	 they	 tried	 to	 understand	 all	 kinds	 of	 people.	 They	 loved
unique	 individuals,	 but	 nobody	 was	 to	 be	 followed.	 They	 still	 tried	 to	 be
themselves.
So	please	don't	be	inspired	by	me;	otherwise	you	will	never	become	a	source	of
inspiration.	 You	 will	 be	 just	 a	 carbon	 copy,	 you	 won't	 have	 your	 authentic,
original	face.
You	will	be	a	hypocrite:	you	will	say	one	thing	--	you	will	do	another.	You	will
show	your	 face	 in	different	 situations	with	different	masks,	and	slowly,	 slowly
you	will	forget	which	one	is	your	real	face;	so	many	masks...
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 man...	 One	 hundred	 years	 had	 passed	 since	 Abraham
Lincoln	was	shot	dead,	so	for	one	year	a	great	celebration	was	arranged	 in	his
honor	all	over	America.
One	man	looked	like	Abraham	Lincoln;	just	a	few	touches	here	and	there	and	he
was	almost	a	photographic	copy	of	Abraham	Lincoln.
He	 was	 trained	 to	 speak	 the	 way	 Abraham	 Lincoln	 used	 to	 speak,	 with	 his
gestures,	his	emphasis,	his	accent,	everything,	small	details	 --	even	the	way	he
walked	--	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day...	and	he	was	to	perform	this	drama	of	the
life	of	Abraham	Lincoln	all	over	the	country,	moving	from	one	place	to	another
place	the	whole	year.
He	was	 shot	 dead	 so	many	 times,	 every	 night	 in	 every	 show,	 sometimes	 even
twice	a	day.
That	year	was	a	long	year	--	he	died	so	many	times	--	and	his	part	in	the	drama
became	 almost	 his	 second	 nature.	 So	 when	 the	 celebrations	 were	 finished,
people	were	surprised:	he	walked	out	of	the	hall	the	same	way	Abraham	Lincoln
used	to	walk	--	he	used	to	limp	a	little.	He	was	limping.
His	wife	said,	"Come	to	your	senses!"	--	because	he	spoke	in	the	same	way,	in	an
accent	one	hundred	years	old.	His	wife	said,	"Don't	 stretch	 the	 joke	 too	much.
Just	become	your	real	self	and	come	home."
He	said,	"I	am	my	real	self,	I	am	Abraham	Lincoln."	For	one	year	continuously
he	 had	 lived	 as	 Abraham	 Lincoln,	 he	 died	 thousands	 of	 deaths	 as	 Abraham
Lincoln;	he	had	completely	forgotten	that	he	was	ever	anybody	else.
He	was	 brought	 to	 a	 doctor.	 The	 doctor	 talked	 to	 him,	 but	 he	was	 still	 in	 his
dramatic	role.	The	doctor	said,	"Just	forget	that	drama."
The	man	said,	"What	drama?"
The	doctor	turned	to	his	wife	and	said	to	her,	"This	man	won't	listen	unless	he	is
shot	dead!"
The	 family	 was	 getting	mad.	 He	 lost	 his	 job;	 nobody	was	 ready	 to	 treat	 him
because	he	was	not	sick.	He	was	simply	glued	with	a	mask.	One	year	is	a	long
time,	and	every	day,	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	he	was	Abraham	Lincoln.	And	to
be	Abraham	Lincoln	for	one	year	and	then	suddenly	become	an	ordinary	human
being	--	who	would	like	it?	He	had	seen	the	glorious	days,	the	golden	days,	and
he	was	clinging	tightly	to	them.
That	man	lived	for	a	few	years	as	Abraham	Lincoln;	he	used	to	sign	"Abraham
Lincoln"
exactly	the	same	as	Abraham	Lincoln	used	to	sign.	Would	you	say	this	man	has
attained	 something	 or	 lost	 something?	 He	 has	 lost	 himself,	 and	 what	 he	 has
gained	is	just	a	dramatic	act.	He	has	become	absolutely	phony.
And	this	is	the	situation	of	almost	everybody	in	the	world	--	not	so	dramatic,	not
so	outstanding	--	but	everybody	is	playing	a	certain	role	that	has	been	taught	to
him,	for	which	he	has	been	brought	up.
A	child	is	born	--	he	is	not	Christian,	he	is	not	a	Jew,	he	is	not	Mohammedan	--
and	then	we	start	putting	a	mask	on	him.	His	innocent	face	disappears.	And	he
will	die	believing	that	he	is	a	Christian.	So	don't	laugh	at	that	poor	man	who	died
believing	 that	 he	 was	 Abraham	 Lincoln,	 because	 everybody	 else	 is	 doing	 the
same.	People	are	dying	as	Hindus
--	they	were	not	born	as	Hindus.
It	was	a	continual	trouble	for	me	whenever	there	was	census.	The	officers	would
come	 to	me	 to	 fill	out	 the	 form,	and	when	 it	 came	 to	 religion,	 I	would	 say,	 "I
don't	have	any	religion."
They	would	 be	 shocked,	 but	 they	would	 say,	 "You	must	 have	 been	 born	 into
some	religion.	Your	parents	must	have	been	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	Jainas."
I	 said,	 "That	 does	 not	 make	 any	 difference.	My	 father	 can	 be	 a	 doctor	 or	 an
engineer	--
that	 will	 not	 make	 me	 a	 doctor	 or	 an	 engineer.	 He	 may	 be	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a
Mohammedan	--
that	 is	 his	 business.	 He	 cannot	 biologically	 transfer	 his	 religion	 to	 me.	 If	 he
cannot	 transfer	his	medical	knowledge	 to	me,	how	can	he	 transfer	his	 spiritual
knowledge	to	me?
It	is	a	deception,	and	I	don't	want	to	be	part	of	any	deception."
People	 are	 being	 trained	 as	 actors;	 in	 this	 whole	 big	 world	 you	 will	 find
everybody	 acting.	 Everybody	 is	 brought	 up	 to	 act...	 beautiful	 names	 --
"etiquette,"	"manners"	--	but	hidden	behind	is	a	subtle	psychology	to	make	you
forget	 your	 originality	 and	 imbibe	 some	 actor	which	 the	 vested	 interests	want
you	to	be.
Never	be	inspired	by	anybody.
Remain	open.
When	you	see	a	beautiful	 sunset,	you	enjoy	 the	beauty	of	 it...	when	you	see	a
Buddha,	enjoy	 the	beauty	of	 the	man,	enjoy	 the	authenticity	of	 the	man,	enjoy
the	silence,	enjoy	the	truth	the	man	has	realized	--	but	don't	become	a	follower.
All	followers	are	lost.
Remain	yourself	--	because	this	man	Gautam	Buddha	has	found	because	he	has
remained	himself.	And	all	these	beautiful	names	--	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang	Tzu,	Lieh
Tzu,	Bodhidharma,	Nagarjuna,	Pythagoras,	Socrates,	Heraclitus,	Epicurus	--	all
these	beautiful	names	which	have	been	a	great	inspiration	to	many	people	were
themselves	never	inspired	by	anybody.
That's	how	they	protected	their	originality;	that's	how	they	remained	themselves.
I	have	been	with	masters,	and	I	have	loved	them.	But	to	me	the	very	desire	to	be
like	 them	 is	 ugly.	 One	 man	 is	 enough;	 a	 second	 like	 him	 will	 not	 enrich
existence,	it	will	only	burden	it.
To	me,	uniqueness	of	individuals	is	the	greatest	truth.
Love	 people	 when	 you	 find	 them	 in	 some	 dimension	 true	 and	 authentic,
blossoming.	 But	 remember,	 they	 are	 blossoming	 because	 of	 their	 authenticity
and	 originality;	 so	 be	 mindful	 not	 to	 fall	 in	 the	 trap	 of	 following	 them.	 Be
yourself.
The	 famous	 maxim	 from	 Socrates	 is:	 "Know	 thyself."	 But	 it	 should	 be
completed	--	it	is	incomplete.	Before	"Know	thyself"	another	maxim	is	needed:
"Be	thyself";	otherwise	you	may	know	only	some	actor	that	you	are	pretending
to	be.	Knowing	thyself	comes	second;	first	is	being	thyself.
The	real	great	masters	have	been	only	friends,	a	helping	hand,	fingers	pointing	to
the	moon;	they	have	never	created	a	slavery.	But	the	moment	they	died	they	left
such	 a	 great	 impact	 around	 them	 that	 cunning	 people	 --	 theologians,	 priests,
scholars	--	started	preaching	to	people,	"Follow	Gautam	Buddha."
Now	 the	man	 is	 dead	 and	 he	 cannot	 deny	 anything...	 and	 these	 people	 started
exploiting	 the	 great	 impact	 that	 Buddha	 had	 left.	 Now	 the	 whole	 of	 Asia,
millions	 of	 people,	 for	 twenty-five	 centuries	 have	 followed	 in	 the	 steps	 of
Gautam	Buddha,	but	not	a	single	Gautam	Buddha	has	been	created.	It	is	enough
proof:	two	thousand	years	and	not	a	single	Jesus	again;	three	thousand	years,	not
a	single	Moses	again.
Existence	never	repeats.
History	repeats	itself	because	history	belongs	to	the	unconscious	mob.
Existence	 never	 repeats	 itself.	 It	 is	 very	 creative	 and	 very	 inventive.	And	 it	 is
good;	 otherwise,	 although	 Gautam	 Buddha	 is	 a	 beautiful	 man,	 if	 there	 are
thousands	of	Gautam	Buddhas	around	--	 if	wherever	you	go	you	meet	Gautam
Buddha,	in	every	restaurant!	--
you	will	be	really	bored	and	tired.	It	will	destroy	the	whole	beauty	of	the	man.	It
is	good	that	existence	never	repeats.	It	only	creates	one	of	a	kind,	so	it	remains
always	rare.
You	are	also	one	of	a	kind.	You	 just	have	 to	blossom,	 to	open	your	petals	and
release	your	fragrance.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	IT	SAID	THAT	SOME	SANNYASIN	THERAPISTS	NOW
IMAGINE	 THAT	 THEY	 ARE	 ON	 THE	 SAME	 PLANE	 AS	 YOU	 ARE,
DOING	THE
SAME	 KIND	 OF	WORK	 --	 IF	 PERHAPS	 ON	 A	 SOMEWHAT	 SMALLER
SCALE.
THEY	NO	 LONGER	 EVEN	MENTION	YOUR	NAME,	 AND	APPEAR	 TO
HAVE
DISCARDED	THE	MALA	AND	RED	CLOTHES	ENTIRELY.
HAVE	 THEY	 ACHIEVED	 --	 OR	 WHAT	 IS	 REALLY	 GOING	 ON	 WITH
YOUR
THERAPISTS?
What	is	going	on	is	hilarious.
These	people	 think	 they	have	become	 individuals,	 they	have	attained	 freedom.
But	 they	 don't	 even	 see	 a	 simple	 thing...	 I	 said	 to	 them,	 "You	 can	 drop	 your
malas,	 and	 you	 can	 drop	 your	 clothes,	 and	 you	 can	 be	 free"	 --	 and	 they
immediately	followed!	They	proved	that	they	are	followers	--	chronic	followers!
If	 I	had	not	 said	 that,	 they	would	have	been	wearing	 the	mala	and	 red	clothes
still.	Their	freedom	is	not	their	attainment,	but	just	my	joke!
Naturally	when	I	said,	"I	am	your	friend,"	they	started	thinking	that	they	are	my
friends.
These	are	two	totally	different	things!	When	I	say	I	am	your	friend,	that	does	not
mean	that	you	are	my	friend.	For	the	second	to	be	real,	you	will	have	to	travel
long.
I	say	out	of	my	compassion	that	I	am	your	friend,	and	you	say	out	of	your	ego
that	you	are	my	friend.	Naturally,	when	you	are	my	friend,	 then	you	are	doing
the	same	work	as	I	am	doing.	It	 is	 just	out	of	humbleness	that	 they	are	saying,
"Perhaps	 you	 are	 doing	 it	 on	 a	 bigger	 scale	 and	we	 are	 doing	 it	 on	 a	 smaller
scale."	But	deep	down	 they	may	be	 thinking	 that	 they	are	doing	 it	on	a	bigger
scale	--	or	a	more	personal	and	intimate	scale.
They	have	been	with	me	 for	years,	but	 they	have	been	 less	with	me	 than	with
their	patients.	The	people	who	have	missed	me	most	are	the	therapists.
Once	I	declared	some	people	enlightened	--	and	they	became	enlightened!	And
when	I	said	it	was	just	a	joke,	they	became	unenlightened	again.	I	had	told	them,
"You	are	now	 free."	So	 they	are	 free!	Tomorrow	 I	can	call	 them	back	and	put
them	in	red	clothes	and	in	the	mala:	"This	much	freedom	is	enough;	more	than
that	is	dangerous.	Just	come	back	and	be	your	old	self!"
If	you	are	really	understanding	me,	you	will	see	the	point:	I	give	you	chances	to
show	your	ego	to	yourself,	 to	show	your	reality	 to	yourself.	And	that's	what	 is
happening,	and	it	is	really	hilarious.	I	saw	one	therapist	who	has	even	shaved	his
beard	and	mustache.
Perhaps	 he	 thinks	 by	 shaving	 the	 beard	 and	mustache,	 he	 has	 shaved	 himself
spiritually	too.	And	all	that	he	looks	like	is	like	a	well-shaved	ape	--	just	stupid.
It	 is	unfortunate	but	 it	 is	 true	 that	 the	 therapists	have	missed	me	most,	 for	 the
simple	 reason	 that	 in	 the	commune	 they	were	working	on	people's	psychology
and	they	started	getting	a	subtle	ego	that	they	are	helping	my	work.	They	forgot
completely	that	they	have	not	even	started	working	on	themselves.
They	had	a	certain	knowledge	of	therapy;	they	were	useful	for	people	and	they
helped	to	bring	people	close	to	me.	Their	patients	became	more	intimate	to	me,
more	open	 to	me,	became	more	understanding	of	my	work	 than	 the	 therapists.
Because	 they	were	 therapists	 and	 they	were	 answering	 questions	 from	people,
running	groups,	they	would	not	ask	questions	to	me	about	themselves.
They	had	come	for	themselves,	but	they	got	lost	because	they	had	brought	a	load
of	 knowledge.	 It	 was	 useful	 for	 others,	 and	 I	 told	 them	 that	 they	 should	 help
people.	But	all	their	knowledge	was	not	able	to	indicate	a	simple	small	thing	to
them,	that	"we	have	come	here	to	realize	ourselves.	We	can	do	the	therapy,	but
that	is	not	what	we	have	come	here	for."
They	went	on	doing	therapy,	and	when	the	commune	dispersed,	they	went	back
to	their	countries	thinking	that	now	they	are	doing	exactly	the	work	I	am	doing	--
and	they	don't	know	even	the	ABC	of	my	work.	They	were	the	most	blind	and
the	most	deaf,	because	they	were	the	most	knowledgeable	people.
They	have	missed	the	first	opportunity.	Now	in	the	second	opportunity,	all	those
therapists	 who	 are	 just	 behaving	 like	 buffoons	will	 be	 called	 back	 and	 put	 to
some	other	work	--	not	therapy.	They	have	to	be	completely	removed	from	their
knowledge;	otherwise	it	is	very	simple	for	them	to	think	like	this.
They	 are	 afraid	 to	 mention	 my	 name	 because	 that	 may	 create	 the	 feeling	 in
people	that	they	are	still	not	free	of	me.	Their	fear	shows	that	they	are	not	free	of
me.	If	they	were	really	free	of	me,	there	would	have	been	gratitude.	They	would
have	taken	my	name	to	different	parts	of	the	world	with	great	respect	and	love	if
they	were	really	free.
But	they	know	they	are	not	free;	hence	the	fear.	If	somebody	discovers	that	they
have	been	my	sannyasins,	then	what	will	happen	to	the	sudden	mastery	that	they
have	attained?	A	few	of	 them	have	become	"enlightened,"	a	 few	of	 them	have
become
"liberated"	 --	 and	 they	 are	 simply	 proving	 one	 thing,	 that	 they	 are	 utter	 fools.
And	the	sooner	they	realize	it,	the	better!
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	THAT	PERHAPS	ALL	THE	MASTER	NEEDS	TO	DO	IS
TO
HAND	OUT	TO	EACH	OF	HIS	DISCIPLES	A	LENGTH	OF	ROPE.	OVER
THE
COURSE	OF	TIME,	WE	EITHER	USE	THAT	ROPE	TO	SKIP	WITH	OR	TO
HANG
OURSELVES	WITH.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
That's	true	--	it	needs	no	comment!
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	A	lot	--	and	nothing
15	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604150
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
130
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	YOU	TELL	US	WHAT	HAPPENED	TO	YOU	SINCE	WE	LAST	MET
ON
THAT	BEAUTIFUL	MORNING	IN	CRETE,	SOME	WEEKS	AGO?
A	lot	--	and	nothing.
A	lot	on	the	periphery,	and	nothing	to	my	being	--	nothing	to	me.
The	first	thing	that	I	became	aware	of	was	that	man	has	not	been	evolving,	that
perhaps	the	concept	of	evolution	is	wrong,	because	for	thousands	of	years	he	has
been	behaving	in	the	same	pattern.
That	beautiful	morning	on	the	island	of	Crete,	the	people	and	their	mistreatment
of	me	and	my	friends	who	were	with	me,	reminded	me	of	Socrates.	These	were
the	same	people,	and	strangely	the	crime	alleged	against	Socrates	was	the	same:
corrupting	 the	young	minds,	 destroying	 their	morality.	Their	 allegation	 against
me	was	exactly	the	same.
It	 seems	 twenty-five	 centuries	 have	 simply	 passed	 by	 and	 man	 is	 stuck,	 not
evolving.
Their	 behavior	 was	 brutal,	 inhuman.	 They	 could	 have	 told	 me	 to	 leave	 the
country	 --	 it	 is	 their	 country	 --	 there	 was	 no	 need	 for	 brutality,	 smashing	 the
windows	 and	 the	 doors	 of	 the	 house	with	 rocks.	 To	me,	 coming	 from	 the	 top
floor,	 it	 sounded	 as	 if	 bombs	 were	 being	 exploded.	 They	 had	 dynamite	 with
them,	and	 they	were	 threatening	 that	 they	would	dynamite	 the	whole	house.	 It
seems	as	if	to	send	me	out	of	the	country	was	just	an	excuse	to	give	expression
to	 this	 brutality;	 otherwise	 it	 was	 a	 simple	 matter	 to	 tell	 me	 that	 I	 am	 not
welcome.
The	man	 who	 had	 given	me	 the	 tourist	 visa	 for	 four	 weeks	 was	 the	 chief	 of
police;	and	 the	man	who	canceled	 it	 after	 fifteen	days	was	 the	deputy	chief	of
police.	That	 seems	 to	 be	 absolutely	 improper	 --	 that	 the	 chief	 should	 give	 the
permission	and	the	deputy	should	cancel	it.
At	the	airport	in	Athens	there	were	at	least	forty	police	officers,	just	for	a	single
unarmed	man,	and	that	deputy	chief	was	also	present.	There	was	a	huge	crowd
of	 press	 people	 from	 newspapers,	 radio,	 television,	 and	 dozens	 of	 cameras	 --
they	 all	wanted	 an	 interview	with	me.	And	 I	 said,	 "There	 is	 not	much	 to	 say,
other	than	it	seems	man	is	not	going	to	be	civilized,	ever."
The	 press	 people	 were	 in	 front	 of	 me	 and	 those	 forty	 police	 dogs	 --	 all	 big
officers	--	were	surrounding	me,	and	the	deputy	chief	was	standing	by	my	side.
When	 I	 said,	 "With	 this	 kind	 of	 police,	 this	 kind	 of	 government,	 you	 are
destroying	the	very	future	of	humanity,	particularly	of	your	own	country.	These
people	were	responsible	for	killing	Socrates...."
When	I	said	this,	pointing	towards	the	deputy	chief,	he	wanted	to	interfere.
For	the	first	time	in	thirty-five	years,	I	pretended	to	be	angry.	I	could	not	succeed
because	 inside	 I	was	giggling!	But	 I	 told	 that	man,	"Shut	up,	and	stand	by	 the
side	where	you	belong.	And	don't	come	close	to	me."
And	I	shouted	so	loudly,	"Shut	up!"	that	he	really	became	silent	and	went	back
and	stood	in	the	crowd.	Later	on	I	saw	the	reports:	they	thought	I	was	ferocious,
very	 angry	 --	 I	 was	 nothing!	 But	 that	 is	 the	 only	 language	 those	 people	 will
understand.	 And	 when	 you	 are	 talking	 to	 somebody,	 you	 have	 to	 use	 the
language	he	understands.
But	I	enjoyed	that.	Anger	can	be	acted	--	you	can	remain	absolutely	silent	within
and	 you	 can	 be	 ferocious	 outside.	And	 there	 is	 no	 contradiction,	 because	 that
ferociousness	is	only	acting.
On	 the	 plane	 I	 remembered	 George	 Gurdjieff,	 who	was	 trained	 in	many	 Sufi
schools	in	different	kinds	of	methods.	In	a	certain	school	one	method	was	used,
and	that	was	acting
--	when	you	are	not	feeling	angry,	act	angry;	when	you	are	feeling	very	happy,
act	miserable.	The	method	has	a	tremendous	implication.
It	means	that	when	you	are	miserable	you	will	be	capable	of	acting	happy;	when
you	are	angry	you	will	be	able	to	act	peaceful.	Not	only	that,	it	implies	that	you
are	 neither	 misery	 nor	 happiness.	 These	 are	 faces	 you	 can	 make:	 you	 are
different,	your	being	 is	not	 involved	 in	 it.	Strange	methods	have	been	used	for
meditation,	to	discover	your	being,	to	detach	it	from	your	emotions,	sentiments,
actions.	And	Gurdjieff	 became	 so	 proficient	 in	 it,	 and	 the	 school	was	 training
him	for	this	particular	method....
Gurdjieff	became	so	capable	that	if	he	was	sitting	between	two	persons,	to	one
person	he	would	appear	 immensely	peaceful	 and	 silent	 --	half	of	his	 face,	one
side	 profile.	 And	 to	 the	 other	 he	 will	 appear	 to	 be	 murderous,	 dangerous,
criminal	--	 the	other	profile,	 the	other	side.	And	when	both	persons	would	talk
about	Gurdjieff,	how	could	they	agree?
They	were	bound	 to	disagree:	according	 to	one	 they	have	met	 --	a	very	silent,
peaceful	 person,	 and	 according	 to	 the	 other	 --	 a	 very	 murderous,	 dangerous,
criminal	type.
When	asked,	Gurdjieff	would	say,	"They	are	both	right.	I	can	manage	not	only	to
divide	my	being	and	my	action,	I	can	manage	to	divide	even	my	face	into	two
parts."
I	was	presented	a	statue	of	Buddha	from	Japan	--	a	very	beautiful	statue,	but	very
strange.
In	one	hand	he	is	holding	a	naked	sword,	and	in	the	other	hand	he	is	holding	a
small	 lamp.	In	the	East	 they	use	mud	lamps,	which	are	just	small	cups	of	mud
filled	with	oil.
They	 are	 almost	 like	 candles	with	 a	 flame,	 so	 the	 flame	was	 there.	The	 flame
was	 shining	 on	 one	 part	 of	 his	 face;	 it	 was	 lighted,	 silent,	 peaceful.	 And	 the
sword	was	reflected	on	 the	other	side	of	his	 face	--	a	warrior,	a	 fighter,	a	born
rebel,	a	revolutionary.
At	the	airport	in	Athens,	I	saw	those	forty	police	officers...	they	must	have	been
the	 topmost	people	 --	except	 the	chief,	because	he	could	not	gather	courage	 to
come.	 I	would	 have	 asked	him,	 "On	what	 grounds	 has	 the	 visa	 issued	by	 you
been	cancelled	by	your	assistant?"	--	only	he	was	not	there.
But	 the	 others...	 I	 saw	 a	 strange	 thing:	 they	 were	 behaving	 in	 very	 inhuman
ways,	but	they	were	all	cowards.	When	I	shouted,	"Shut	up!"	that	deputy	chief
simply	slipped	back	like	a	small	child,	afraid	that	the	television	would	catch	my
words	and	me,	and	him	with	all	the	honors	of	the	police	on	his	coat,	with	a	pistol
hanging	by	his	side.	But	inside	there	was	a	child,	a	cowardly	child.
It	was	an	experience	--	because	democracy	was	born	in	Athens.
Democracy	is	a	Greek	idea,	and	yet	the	man	who	created	the	idea	of	democratic
values	was	poisoned	by	Athenians	--	that's	what	history	goes	on	saying.	But	that
day	I	became	suspicious	of	history.
Socrates	was	not	poisoned	by	 the	people	of	Athens,	but	by	 the	bureaucracy	of
Athens.
And	one	 should	make	 a	 distinction,	 because	 I	was	mistreated	on	 the	 island	of
Crete	 by	 the	 police.	 But	 the	 people	 of	 the	 village	 where	 I	 was	 staying,	 Saint
Nicholas,	 were	 not	 with	 the	 bureaucracy.	 And	when	 one	 journalist	 asked	me,
"What	is	your	message	to	the	people	of	Saint	Nicholas?"	I	said,	"Just	tell	them	to
come	to	the	airport,	to	show	the	police	that	they	are	with	me	and	not	with	them."
Three	thousand	people	were	at	the	airport	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	filling	the
whole	terrace	of	the	airport.	They	had	been	standing	there	for	hours.	The	whole
village	was	empty;	those	who	were	left	behind	had	to	walk	because	they	could
not	 get	 any	 taxi,	 any	 bus	 --	 everything	 had	moved	 to	 the	 airport.	 But	 people
walked	miles	to	reach	the	airport	to	demonstrate	a	simple	fact:	they	are	not	with
the	brutality	and	the	fascist	behavior	of	the	government;	they	are	with	me.
People	 have	 always	 been	 blamed	 for	 the	 bureaucracy	 and	 its	 brutality.	 I	 don't
think	Socrates	would	have	been	killed	by	the	people	of	Athens.	He	was	such	a
loving	person,	and	with	no	egoistic	idea	of	being	holier	than	you.
In	 the	morning	he	would	go	 to	 fetch	 some	vegetable,	 and	he	would	not	 return
even	by	the	night	--	because	everywhere	on	the	streets,	in	the	vegetable	shop,	in
the	 market,	 he	 was	 discussing	 with	 everybody	 things	 which	 are	 beyond	 the
ordinary	man.	He	was	 the	 teacher	of	 the	whole	of	Athens.	A	single	man	made
Athens	 one	 of	 the	most	 intelligent	 cities	 that	 has	 ever	 existed	 in	 the	world	 --
single-handedly,	just	moving,	meeting	anybody.	To	say	hello	to	him	meant	you
were	 entering	 into	 a	 dialogue	 --	 in	 spite	 of	 yourself.	You	may	 have	 been	 in	 a
hurry	--	Socrates	was	not	in	a	hurry.
These	 people	 could	 not	 have	 killed	 him.	 The	 bureaucracy	 became	 afraid.	 The
Crete	 experience	 made	 me	 look	 again	 at	 history.	 The	 books	 are	 lying	 --	 the
people	have	not	killed	the	man.	They	could	not	have	even	imagined	it.	But	the
government...	and	why	should	the	government	kill	the	man?	--	because	the	man
was	 making	 the	 masses	 so	 intelligent,	 so	 independent,	 so	 freedom-loving,	 so
individualistic,	that	the	government	would	soon	find	itself	in	troubled	waters.	It
would	not	be	able	to	control	these	people,	it	would	not	be	able	to	enslave	these
people.
It	is	better	to	kill	Socrates	than	let	him	go	on	sharpening	people's	minds	to	such
an	extent	that	the	bureaucrats	look	like	fools!	Before	it	happens,	it	is	better	to	kill
him.	 But	 the	 history	 books	 go	 on	 saying	 that	 the	 people	 of	 Athens	 killed
Socrates.	Now,	I	saw	the	people	of	Saint	Nicholas	come	running	to	the	airport	to
demonstrate	 that	 they	 are	 not	with	 the	 police.	And	 even	when	 I	 had	 left	 their
country,	a	deputation	from	Saint	Nicholas,	on	their	own	decision,	went	to	see	the
president	of	the	country	to	protest	about	what	had	happened	in	their	village.
I	had	been	there	only	two	weeks,	and	I	had	never	gone	out	of	the	house;	but	they
could	see	my	people	--	at	least	five	hundred	sannyasins	from	all	over	Europe	had
gathered.
They	were	well	accustomed	to	tourists,	because	it	is	a	tourist	place,	but	they	had
never	 seen	 such	 loving	 people.	 And	 just	 because	 of	 my	 sannyasins,	 although
they	could	not	understand	me	--	the	language	was	a	great	barrier	--	still,	a	few	of
the	 village	 people	 started	 coming	 just	 to	 sit	 with	 me	 in	 the	 morning,	 in	 the
evening.	And	that's	what	was	hurting	the	religious	hierarchy.
The	archbishop	was	getting	mad	because	nobody	comes	to	his	congregation;	and
I	 had	 been	 there	 for	 fifteen	 days	 and	 I	 had	 created	 a	 big	 congregation.	 In	 his
congregation,	between	six	to	twelve	old	women	--	who	were	almost	dead	--	they
used	to	come	to	listen	to	him.
He	was	getting	afraid,	sending	telegrams	to	the	president,	to	the	prime	minister,
to	other	ministers,	to	the	police	chief,	giving	interviews	which	were	full	of	lies	--
because	 he	 knew	 nothing	 about	 me.	 And	 his	 fear	 became	 infectious:	 the
government	also	became	afraid.
One	of	my	sannyasins,	Amrito	--	who	had	invited	me	to	Greece	--	was	a	close
friend	of	 the	president,	of	 the	prime	minister.	She	was	well	connected	with	all
the	 high-position	 people,	 because	 twenty	 years	 before	 she	 had	 been	 chosen	 as
the	beauty	queen,	"Miss	Greece,"	and	she	had	become	famous.	And	since	then
she	 had	 been	 modeling,	 so	 all	 the	 film	 directors,	 businessmen...	 all	 kinds	 of
people	were	 related	 to	her.	She	was	never	 asked	 to	make	 an	 appointment;	 she
simply	went	to	their	houses	--	the	president	or	the	prime	minister.
But	that	day	she	went	to	the	president	and	for	six	hours	she	remained	there,	and
she	was	not	allowed	into	 the	house.	Why	was	 the	president	afraid	of	a	woman
whom	he	 knows,	who	 has	 been	 coming	 to	 him	 and	 they	 have	 been	 friends...?
The	 fear	was	because...	what	will	 he	 say?	What	had	been	done	 to	me	and	my
people	by	his	government,	he	had	no	answer	for.
And	you	will	be	surprised:	the	answer	came	in	a	very	strange	way.	I	left	Athens
because	they	wouldn't	allow	me	even	to	stay	for	the	night	in	a	hotel	under	their
supervision,	or	at	the	airport.
As	 I	 left,	 they	 immediately	started	searching	 for	Amrito.	She	must	have	 found
out	from	some	source:	"Now	you	will	be	the	target	--	why	did	you	invite	Osho
here,	 knowing	 him?"	And	 she	 had	 to	 escape	 out	 of	 the	 country.	 And	 still	 the
police	went....
Amrito	is	a	very	simple	and	loving	person.	She	is	not	rich;	she	has	only	a	small
juice	bar.
And	still	the	police	went	to	the	juice	bar	and	tried	to	find	out	strange	things	with
which	the	police	had	no	concern	--	that	it	was	not	clean.
Of	 course	 it	 was	 not	 clean,	 because	 for	 three	 days	 she	 had	 been	 out	 of	 the
country.	And	it	was	not	clean	because	for	fifteen	days	she	was	on	the	island	of
Crete	with	me,	so	only	 the	servant	was	running	it.	But	 that	 is	not	a	crime	--	at
least	 not	 for	 the	 police.	 Perhaps	 the	 municipal	 authorities	 who	 look	 for
cleanliness	in	restaurants,	hotels	may	have	come	--	but	they	were	not	there;	the
police	were	finding	faults.
But	 I	 have	 told	 her	 to	 go	 back	 and	 give	 a	 fight,	 because	 she	 has	 not	 done
anything	wrong.
Everything	wrong	is	on	the	part	of	 the	government.	Because	they	could	not	do
any	harm	to	me,	afraid	of	its	international	consequences,	they	found	a	scapegoat:
they	can	harass	her,	they	can	torture	a	woman	who	is	divorced,	has	a	little	child,
an	old	mother,	and	she	is	the	only	earning	person.	And	what	earning	can	come
out	of	a	juice	bar?
These	 people	 always	 throw	 their	 crimes	 on	 the	masses	 --	 and	 the	masses	 are
dumb.	 And	 history	 is	 really	 bunk:	 there	 are	 more	 lies	 in	 history	 books	 than
anywhere	else.	The	incident	was	small,	but	the	implications	were	great.
I	had	not	stepped	out	of	the	house,	I	was	not	talking	in	Greek.	The	people	of	the
country	could	not	understand	me.	The	people	who	were	listening	to	me	were	all
from	 outside	 of	 Greece.	 To	 say	 that	 I	 am	 corrupting	 the	 minds	 of	 youth,
destroying	the	morality	of	the	country,	 its	 tradition,	 its	church,	 the	family...	but
the	people	who	were	listening	to	me	were	not	Greek!	In	what	way	could	I	have
had	any	effect	on	their	morality,	on	their	religion?
But	it	seems	bureaucracy	does	not	think;	it	simply	lives	out	of	fear.	And	the	fear
is	that	somebody	could	raise	questions	about	the	very	roots	of	their	society.	But
it	is	foolish	because	wherever	I	am,	I	am	going	to	do	the	same,	and	my	word	is
going	to	reach	everywhere	in	the	world.
What	 can	 I	 do	 if	 their	 roots	 are	 rotten?	What	 can	 I	 do	 if	 their	morality	 is	 not
morality	but	only	a	pretension?	What	can	I	do	if	their	marriage	is	hypocrisy	and
not	love?	What	can	I	do	if	the	family	has	been	outlived,	and	needs	to	be	replaced
by	something	better?	It	has	done	its	work.	It	has	done	a	few	good	things	which
can	 be	 done	 by	 a	 different	way.	 It	 has	 done	 a	 few	 very	 dangerous,	 poisonous
things	which	can	be	avoided.
The	family	as	it	has	existed	down	the	ages	cannot	be	allowed	to	exist.	If	it	exists,
then	man	has	to	die.	To	save	man	we	have	to	change	the	social	structure	around
him,	to	bring	a	new	man	--	because	the	old	has	been	an	utter	failure.
For	 ten	 thousand	years	 at	 least,	we	have	moved	on	 the	 same	 lines	 --	 reaching
nowhere.
It	is	time	to	understand	that	we	have	taken	a	wrong	route.	It	is	stale;	it	leads	to
death.	It	does	not	allow	people	joy,	rejoicing;	it	does	not	allow	people	to	sing	and
to	dance.
It	makes	people	serious,	heavy	--	for	themselves	and	for	others.
In	the	family	are	the	seeds	of	all	wars,	of	all	religions,	of	all	nations.	That's	why
they	call	the	family,	the	"unit	of	our	civilization."
There	 is	 no	 civilization	 --	 and	 the	 unit	 is	 rotten.	 It	 creates	 only	 a	 pathological
man,	who	needs	all	kinds	of	psychotherapies	and	still	remains	pathological.
We	have	not	been	able	to	create	a	sane	humanity.
So	on	the	periphery	I	thought	what	happened	in	Greece	perhaps	may	happen	in
other	countries,	because	it	is	the	same	structure	--	and	it	happened.
From	Greece	we	moved	to	Geneva,	 just	 for	an	overnight	rest,	and	 the	moment
they	came	to	know	my	name	they	said,	"No	way!	We	cannot	allow	him	into	our
country."
I	was	not	even	allowed	to	get	out	of	the	plane.
We	moved	to	Sweden,	thinking	that	people	go	on	saying	that	Sweden	is	far	more
progressive	 than	any	country	 in	Europe	or	 in	 the	world,	 that	Sweden	has	been
giving	 refuge	 to	many	 terrorists,	 revolutionaries,	 expelled	 politicians,	 that	 it	 is
very	generous.
We	 reached	 Sweden.	 We	 wanted	 to	 stay	 overnight	 because	 the	 pilots	 were
running	out	of	time.	They	could	not	go	on	anymore;	otherwise	it	would	become
illegal.	And	we	were	happy	because	the	man	at	the	airport...	we	had	asked	only
for	an	overnight	stay,	but	he	gave	seven-day	visas	 to	everybody.	Either	he	was
drunk	or	just	sleepy	--	it	was	midnight,	past	midnight.
The	person	who	had	gone	for	the	visas,	came	back	very	happy	that	we	had	been
given	seven-day	visas.	But	immediately	the	police	came	and	cancelled	the	visas,
and	told	us	to	move	immediately:	"This	man	we	cannot	allow	in	our	country."
They	 can	 allow	 terrorists,	 they	 can	 allow	 murderers,	 they	 can	 allow	 Mafia
people,	and	they	can	give	them	refuge	--	but	 they	cannot	allow	me.	And	I	was
not	asking	for	refuge	or	permanent	residence,	just	an	overnight	stay.
We	turned	to	London,	because	it	was	simply	a	question	of	our	basic	right.	And
we	made	it	twice	legally	--	we	purchased	first-class	tickets	for	the	next	day.	Our
own	jet	was	there	but	still	we	purchased	them	in	case	they	started	saying,	"You
don't	have	tickets	for	tomorrow,	so	we	won't	allow	you	to	stay	in	the	first-class
lounge."
We	purchased	tickets	for	everybody,	just	so	that	we	could	stay	in	the	lounge,	and
we	told	them,	"We	have	our	own	jet	--	and	we	also	have	tickets."	But	they	came
upon	 a	 bylaw	 of	 the	 airport	 that	 the	 government	 or	 anybody	 cannot	 interfere
with:	"It	is	at	our	discretion	--
and	this	man	we	won't	allow	in	the	lounge."
In	the	lounge,	I	thought:	How	can	I	destroy	their	morality,	their	religion?	In	the
first	place	I	will	be	sleeping,	and	by	the	morning	we	will	be	gone.
But	no,	these	so-called	civilized	countries	are	as	primitive	and	barbarous	as	you
can	conceive.	They	said,	"All	 that	we	can	do	 is,	we	can	put	you	 in	 jail	 for	 the
night."
And	 just	 by	 chance	 one	 of	 our	 friends	 looked	 into	 their	 file.	They	 had	 all	 the
instructions	 from	 the	 government	 already	 about	 how	 they	 were	 to	 treat	 me:	 I
should	not	be	allowed	in	any	way	to	enter	into	the	country,	even	for	an	overnight
stay	in	a	hotel	or	in	the	lounge;	the	only	way	was	that	I	should	be	kept	in	jail.
In	 the	morning	we	moved	to	Ireland.	Perhaps	 the	man	did	not	 take	note	of	my
name	amongst	 the	passengers.	We	had	asked	 just	 to	stay	for	 two,	 three	days	--
"At	 the	most	 seven,	 if	 you	 can	 give	 us."	We	wanted	 time	because	 some	other
decision	 was	 being	 made,	 and	 they	 were	 delaying	 it,	 and	 our	 movement	 was
dependent	on	that	decision.
The	 man	 was	 really	 generous...	 must	 have	 taken	 too	 much	 beer:	 he	 gave
everybody	twenty-one	days.	We	moved	to	the	hotel	and	immediately	the	police
arrived	at	 the	hotel	 to	cancel	it,	saying,	"That	man	is	mad	--	he	does	not	know
anything."
They	cancelled	the	visas,	but	they	were	in	a	difficult	situation	--	what	to	do	with
us?
We	were	already	in	the	land,	we	were	in	the	hotel;	we	had	passed	a	few	hours	in
the	 hotel.	 They	 had	 given	 us	 twenty-one	 days	 on	 the	 passports.	 Now	 he	 had
cancelled	them,	and	we	were	not	ready	to	go.	We	had	to	wait	still	a	few	days.
You	can	see	how	bureaucracy	covers	its	own	errors.
They	said,	"You	can	stay	here,	but	nobody	should	come	to	know	about	it	--	no
press,	nobody	should	come	to	know	that	Osho	is	here,	because	then	we	will	be	in
trouble.	And	of	course	we	cannot	do	anything	because	that	will	stir	up	problems
immediately.
"If	 you	 don't	 want	 to	 go	 --	 and	 we	 have	 given	 you	 twenty-one	 days'
permission....	On	what	grounds	are	we	cancelling?	You	have	not	done	anything	-
-	you	have	only	slept	the	night	here.	Unless	sleeping	is	a	crime...	So	we	are	in	a
difficulty.	The	only	way	is,	you	remain	silent	and	absolutely	hidden."
Now,	 it	 was	 absolutely	 illegal	 to	 stay	 without	 a	 visa;	 and	 the	 police	 were
suggesting	 to	us	 to	 remain	silent	so	 that	nobody	knows	 it	 --	and	 leave	silently.
And	they	were	keeping	the	press	away;	they	were	giving	them	false	clues	so	they
were	looking	in	some	different	places.
But	 the	strange	 thing	 is	 that	 these	people	are	 in	direct	communication	with	 the
government.
The	question	was	raised	in	the	parliament,	"What	happened?	Their	jet	is	standing
at	the	airport.	They	have	entered	the	country	--	where	have	they	disappeared	to?"
And	the	minister	simply	lied,	saying,	"They	had	come,	and	they	have	left."	We
were	in	the	country,	and	the	parliament	was	told	that	we	have	left	the	country....
This	whole	journey	has	been	an	exposure	of	the	bureaucracies.
And	 just	now	I	have	 received	 the	 information	 that	all	 the	countries	of	Europe,
jointly,	are	deciding	that	I	cannot	land	my	plane	at	any	airport.
How	will	that	effect	their	morality	--	refueling	the	plane?	But	they	simply	want
to	cut	me	away	from	humanity.	That's	why	I	had	to	leave	India.	Their	conditions
were	clear:	they	wanted	me	to	remain	in	India	--	naturally	they	cannot	deny	me;
it	is	my	birthland.	"You	can	remain,"	they	said.	"But	no	foreign	disciple	can	be
allowed	to	reach	you,	and	no	news	media	can	be	allowed	to	reach	you."
That	was	a	way	to	cut	me	off	from	the	world,	from	my	people,	and	even	from
news	media,	so	nobody	knows	whether	I	am	alive	or	dead.	It	was	a	strategy	to
make	me	almost	dead	--	although	I	am	alive	--	to	cut	me	away	from	everybody.
I	 refused	 their	 conditions.	 I	 have	 never	 lived	 under	 any	 conditions,	 and
particularly	such	ugly	conditions.	I	left	the	country	and	went	to	Nepal	--	because
that	 is	 the	 only	 country	 where	 I	 can	 go	 without	 a	 visa;	 otherwise	 the	 Indian
government	had	informed	all	the	embassies	that	no	visa	should	be	issued	to	me
so	that	I	cannot	leave	India.	They	have	a	treaty	with	Nepal;	no	visa	is	needed.
But	 Nepal	 is	 a	 small	 and	 very	 poor	 country	 --	 the	 poorest	 --	 and	 under
tremendous	pressure	from	India....	India	can	take	it	over	any	moment.	It	has	no
army	worth	the	name.
When	it	became	from	reliable	sources;	absolutely	certain	that	they	would	compel
the	Nepalese	government	either	to	arrest	me	or	to	send	me	back	to	India,	I	had	to
leave	Nepal.
It	makes	no	difference	to	my	being.
But	it	makes	a	lot	of	difference	to	my	attitude	about	the	society	in	which	we	are
living.	It	is	absolutely	ugly,	barbarous,	uncultured,	uncivilized.
That's	why	I	said,	"A	lot	--	and	nothing."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 FOUND	 THE	 STORY	 YOU	 TOLD	 US	 ABOUT	MAHAVIRA	WHEN	 HE
WENT
BEGGING	VERY	ODD.	THAT	HE	SHOULD	STIPULATE	HOW	EXISTENCE
SHOULD	 PRESENT	 HIS	 DAILY	 FOOD	 SEEMED	 TO	 ME	 LIKE	 A	 TRIP,
AND	NOT
THE	 ATTITUDE	 OF	 SOMEONE	 TOTALLY	 AVAILABLE	 TO,	 AND
ACCEPTING
OF,	LIFE'S	WAYS.	PROBABLY	I	HAVE	MISUNDERSTOOD	THE	WHOLE
POINT.
YOU	HAVE	SAID	WE	NEED	NOT	BE	IN	A	HURRY	IN	OUR	SEARCH;	BUT
AROUND	 YOU	 I	 ALWAYS	 FEEL	 SUCH	 A	 GREAT	 SENSE	 OF	 HOW
PRECIOUS
TIME	 IS,	 SO	 I	WANT	TO	USE	 IT	TO	THE	MAXIMUM.	AND	TO	ME	AT
THE
MOMENT	THAT	MEANS	ASKING	ALL	AND	ANY	QUESTIONS	 I	ONCE
MIGHT
HAVE	HELD	BACK,	FROM	FEAR	OF	APPEARING	STUPID.	I	REALLY	DO
WANT
TO	STAND	BEFORE	YOU,	"NAKED,	EMPTY,	AND	ALONE."
The	story	of	Mahavira	has	always	been	misunderstood	--	it	is	not	only	you	who
have	misunderstood	it	--	because	we	understand	things	according	to	our	minds.
If	you	were	in	place	of	Mahavira	then	perhaps	it	would	be	stipulating	existence,
but	for	Mahavira	it	is	not	so;	it	is	not	stipulating	existence.
As	 far	 as	Mahavira	 is	 concerned,	 he	 simply	 wants	 a	 signal	 from	 existence	 --
whether	he	should	continue,	or	he	is	no	longer	needed.	He	never	complains.	At
times	 he	 has	 remained	 fasting	 for	 three	months	 continuously,	 but	 not	 a	 single
word	of	complaint.
If	he	was	stipulating	then	there	would	be	frustration,	there	would	be	complaint.
If	he	was	trying	to	manipulate	existence	then	there	would	be	a	certain	sense	of
failure.	For	three	months	he	had	not	been	able	even	to	get	food	--	but	there	was
no	complaint.	He	was	one	of	the	most	peaceful,	loving,	silent	beings.
Why	did	he	make	this	decision	after	his	morning	meditation?	--	simply	not	to	be
a	burden	on	existence.	Let	existence	decide.	He	is	not	stipulating	existence;	he	is
allowing	existence	 to	 take	 total	charge	of	his	 life,	even	of	his	breathing,	of	his
food.	Everything	he	is	leaving	in	the	hands	of	existence.
But	how	will	he	know?	There	is	no	linguistic	communication	between	you	and
existence;	there	can	be	only	a	symbolic	communication	--	and	that	was	nothing
but	a	symbolic	communication.	He	wanted	a	symbol.
One	 thing	has	 to	be	 remembered,	 that	 these	people	 like	Mahavira,	Parsunatha,
Buddha,	are	very	unique	beings.	They	have	 their	own	ways,	and	 their	ways	fit
perfectly	with	their	personality.
Now	I	will	never	do	that	kind	of	thing.	I	am	a	totally	different	person	--	but	I	will
not	misunderstand	Mahavira	 either.	 I	 accept	 his	 uniqueness,	 and	 I	 respect	 the
way	 he	 lived	 his	 life	 --	 always	 undemanding.	 This	 was	 not	 a	 demand	 --	 that
existence	 should	 fulfill	 this	 condition	 --	 it	was	 simply	an	agreement:	 "Because
language	 is	 not	 possible,	 I	 will	 choose	 a	 certain	 symbol,	 and	 then	 it	 is	 up	 to
existence."	He	is	leaving	himself	in	the	hands	of	existence	so	totally	that	he	does
not	want	to	breathe	even	a	single	breath	on	his	own.
But	I	am	a	totally	different	person,	almost	the	very	opposite	of	Mahavira.	I	will
never	 ask	 such	a	 thing	 from	existence.	My	whole	way	 is	of	 let-go	 --	 and	why
bother?	Once	and	for	all,	leave	it	to	existence,	and	when	existence	does	not	need
you,	you	will	be	absorbed	into	the	universe.	There	is	no	need	every	day	to	ask
again	and	again	--	that	is	a	kind	of	nagging.	I	have	done	it	once,	and	that's	all.	I
will	not	do	it	twice,	because	to	do	it	twice	means	that	the	first	time	you	were	not
total;	otherwise	who	is	doing	it	again?	Let-go	can	be	done	only	once.
When	I	was	a	child	we	used	to	have	many	puzzles,	and	particularly	we	used	to
ask	a	 teacher	 --	who	was	a	 little	dumb	--	simple	 things,	and	he	would	get	 into
such	a	nervous	state.
For	example	we	used	to	ask	him,	"One	man	tried	to	commit	suicide	four	times.
Can	you	tell	us	when	he	succeeded?	--	the	first	time,	the	second	time....	Which
time	did	he	succeed?"
And	he	would	start	thinking	about	it.	He	would	say,	"How	should	I	know?"	If	a
man	succeeds	then	the	last	time	is	really	the	first	time!
In	my	understanding,	 let-go	 is	 only	once.	 If	 you	need	 it	 again,	 that	means	 the
first	time...
whom	were	you	deceiving?	And	what	is	the	guarantee	that	the	second	time	is	not
going	to	be	just	like	the	first?
Let-go	is	an	understanding.
It	is	not	something	that	you	have	to	do.
It	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 have	 to	 say	 to	 existence;	 it	 is	 simply	 an
understanding:	 "I	 will	 not	 swim	 against	 the	 current,	 because	 that	 is	 simply
stupid."	You	are	going	to	be	tired	soon,	you	can	never	be	victorious	against	the
current.	Understanding	that,	you	accept	the	current's	way	as	your	way.
That	is	let-go.
Now,	wherever	 the	 river	 leads	 you...	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 check	 every	 day;	 you
simply	go	with	the	river.	Some	day	--	any	day	--	you	may	reach	the	ocean,	you
may	disappear.
So	I	will	not	suggest	to	anybody	to	do	what	Mahavira	used	to	do.	But	Mahavira
has	his	own	unique	being.
His	 real	 name	was	 not	Mahavira;	 mahavira	means	 "a	 great	 warrior."	 His	 real
name	 was	 Vardhmana,	 but	 nobody	 remembers	 his	 real	 name	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	his	whole	approach	is	that	of	a	warrior,	a	fighter.	Even	with	existence
he	is	in	a	constant	fight.	He	is	saying,	"I	can	live	only	if	I	am	welcome.	I	don't
want	to	live	even	a	single	moment	more	if	I	am	not	welcome."
Deep	down	he	was	 fighting,	 but	 his	 fighting	had	 a	beauty	of	 its	 own.	He	was
total	in	it	--
that	 was	 its	 beauty.	 It	 was	 not	 a	 partial	 war,	 it	 was	 total.	 And	 the	 secret	 is,
whatever	 is	 total	 transforms	you;	 your	 let-go,	 if	 it	 is	 total,	will	 transform	you;
your	fight,	if	total,	will	transform	you.
What	transforms	is	neither	let-go	nor	war,	but	your	totality.
Even	today	there	are	monks	doing	the	same,	who	follow	Mahavira.	There	are	not
many	because	as	soon	as	Mahavira	died	there	was	a	division.	There	were	people
who	were	not	ready	for	such	a	fight.	And	that	division	has	many	monks.	They
have	compromised	on	many	points	on	which	Mahavira	would	not	compromise.
For	example,	they	wear	clothes;	Mahavira	remained	naked.	These	people	stay	in
homes;	Mahavira	 never	 stayed	under	 a	 roof.	 It	may	have	been	 raining,	 it	may
have	 been	 cold,	 it	 may	 have	 been	 hot	 --	 he	 was	 always	 under	 a	 tree.	 So	 the
people	who	wanted	to	compromise	could	not	compromise	when	he	was	alive.	He
was	a	tremendously	powerful	man.	But	the	day	he	died,	his	followers	divided.
So	the	orthodox	ones,	who	still	follow	Mahavira...	There	are	only	twenty-two	of
them	--
there	were	when	I	was	in	India;	a	few	may	have	died,	because	they	were	all	old
people.
And	once	one	monk	dies,	it	is	very	difficult	to	replace	him.
The	other	party,	the	compromisers,	have	almost	five	thousand	monks	--	and	they
go	on	growing.	And	they	go	on	compromising.
First	they	started	using	clothes;	then	they	started	using	people's	houses	to	stay	in.
Now	they	have	started	using	even	airplanes.	Mahavira	walked	all	his	life,	never
using	any	vehicle.	I	have	seen	these	compromisers	hiding	toothpaste;	Mahavira
never	washed	his	teeth.
I	know	about	these	monks,	that	whenever	they	have	a	chance	they	take	a	shower;
Mahavira	 never	 took	 a	 shower	 himself	 unless	 the	 sky	was	 raining	 and	he	was
standing	under	a	tree.	I	have	seen	in	one	monk's	place,	where	he	was	staying...
he	was	very	friendly	to	me,	and	he	was	not	worried	that	I	would	expose	him.
He	said,	"What	you	will	take?	--	Fanta	or	Coca	Cola?"
I	said,	"What	are	you	saying?"
He	said,	"Just	don't	tell	anybody!"	--	and	he	opened	a	closet	and	he	was	hiding
Coca	Cola,	Fanta.	Compromise	has	no	 limit.	But	what	 is	harmful	 in	 it?	 --	 it	 is
absolutely	nonviolent	junk;	you	can	drink	it.
But	those	who	have	followed	Mahavira,	their	number	has	been	getting	less	and
less;	 one	 dies	 and	 is	 not	 replaced.	 Even	 they,	 in	 an	 underground	 way,	 have
compromised.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 be	 exactly	 like	 Mahavira	 --	 that's	 what	 I	 say,
following	is	impossible.
These	 people	 also	 make,	 after	 their	 meditation	 in	 the	 morning,	 a	 certain
condition	that	should	be	fulfilled.	But	those	conditions	are	limited	--	six	or	eight
--	and	everybody	knows,	so	if	they	are	staying	in	a	city,	then	they	will	go	to	all
the	Jaina	houses	and	all	 the	Jaina	houses	will	be	fulfilling	different	conditions.
And	they	have	made	very	simple	conditions.
For	example,	if	on	the	door	of	a	house	two	bananas	are	hanging,	then	the	food
will	be	accepted.	And	this	is	known,	so	every	Jaina	is	hanging	two	bananas,	and
they	come	and	they	accept	the	food	--	the	condition	is	fulfilled.	Just	such	small
conditions	which	are	known,	and	which	must	be	made	known	by	the	monks.
They	 cannot	 eat	 food	 from	 anybody	 other	 than	 a	 Jaina	 family,	 so	 you	will	 be
surprised	to	see	that	they	have	renounced	their	family,	one	family,	but	when	they
are	moving...	And	they	are	constantly	moving.	They	cannot	stay	more	than	three
days	in	one	place,	because	this	is	Mahavira's	understanding	--	and	I	feel	that	he
is	right	--	that	after	three	days	some	kind	of	attachment	starts	growing.
For	 example,	 for	 the	 first	day	you	will	not	 find	 the	place	 suitable	 to	you.	You
may	not	 sleep	well,	you	may	have	a	certain	 tension	 in	you.	But	after	 the	 third
day,	 things	 start	 settling;	 and	 after	 the	 twenty-first	 day	 you	 become	 well-
accustomed	to	the	place,	as	if	you	had	been	born	in	it.
A	certain	amount	of	time	is	needed	for	adjustment,	so	Mahavira	does	not	allow
more	than	three	days.	And	in	India,	Jainas	are	very	few,	so	there	are	many,	many
places	where	there	are	no	Jainas	--	so	what	will	 the	Jaina	monk	do?	So	twenty
families	follow	him	with	their	buses	and	their	cars	and	tents,	and	wherever	there
is	no	Jaina	family	they	make	a	small	campus	of	tents	and	bananas	are	hanging...
and	 all	 eight	 conditions	 that	 are	 known	 are	 fulfilled.	 And	 every	 family	 has
prepared	food	--	and	the	man	must	have	made	one	condition	out	of	eight	--	so	he
will	get	food.
Now,	formally	he	is	following,	but	this	was	not	what	Mahavira	was	doing.	That
was	a	 totally	different	 thing.	It	was	not	 let-go;	he	was	not	a	man	for	 let-go,	he
was	a	warrior.
Truth	has	to	be	conquered,	according	to	him,	and	to	conquer	it	you	have	to	fight
totally.
And	the	story	I	told	you	is	part	of	his	fight.	His	whole	life	is	the	path	of	fight.
I	will	tell	you	one	story	more.
He	 remained	 for	 twelve	years	 silent,	 till	 he	became	enlightened.	Those	 twelve
years	 are	 filled	 with	 great	 incidents.	 One	 day	 he	 is	 meditating...	 and	 his
meditation	 is	also	not	 that	of	a	 relaxed	way.	The	meditation	ordinarily	done	 in
the	East	is	in	the	lotus	posture,	and	the	lotus	posture	physiologically	is	the	most
relaxed	once	you	have	learnt	it,	because	your	spine	is	straight	and	the	gravitation
is	 the	 least,	 and	 that	makes	 your	 body	 hang	 on	 the	 straight	 spine	 like	 a	 loose
cloth.
Mahavira	 meditates	 standing.	 In	 his	 every	 attitude	 he	 is	 a	 warrior.	 There	 are
people	who	meditate	with	closed	eyes	--	this	is	more	relaxed.	There	are	people
who	meditate	with	open	eyes,	just	the	natural	way	--	blinking.	That	too	is	not	a
fight.	Mahavira	meditates	with	eyes	half	closed	and	half	open,	and	no	blinking.
In	 those	 twelve	years	one	day	he	 is	standing	and	meditating	by	 the	side	of	 the
river,	and	a	man	comes	and	says	to	Mahavira,	"You	are	standing	here,	just	watch
my	cows.	I	am	leaving	--	I	have	to	go	urgently	to	my	home;	my	mother	is	sick
and	somebody	has	come	to	inform	me	that	she	is	dying.	So	I	will	be	back	soon,
but	just...	you	are	standing	here	for	the	whole	day:	just	have	a	look	so	my	cows
don't	get	lost	in	the	jungle."
And	Mahavira,	because	he	cannot	speak,	is	silent.	And	the	man	is	in	such	a	hurry
--	 his	mother	 is	 dying	 --	 he	does	not	 bother	 that	 this	man	 is	 not	 speaking.	He
simply	takes	his	silence	as	a	yes.
When	he	comes	back	after	one	or	two	hours,	Mahavira	is	still	standing	there	but
all	the	cows	are	gone.	Now,	he	gets	furious.	He	says,	"You	seem	to	be	a	cunning
man.	So	you	were	standing	here	the	whole	day	just	for	my	cows.	Where	are	my
cows?"
And	because	he	does	not	speak,	 the	man	becomes	more	and	more	furious:	"So
you	are	trying	to	be	dumb!	I	will	make	you	speak!"	And	he	takes	two	pieces	of
wood	and	forces	 those	 two	pieces	 into	Mahavira's	 two	ears	and	hits	 them	hard
with	 a	 rock,	 so	 that	 he	 becomes	 deaf	 for	 his	 whole	 life.	 But	 still	 he	 will	 not
speak,	he	will	not	blink.
The	man	thought,	"He	seems	to	be	mad.	Anybody	would	have	spoken..."	And	he
goes	and	looks	in	the	forest.	In	the	evening	the	cows	come	back,	and	when	the
man	comes	back,	he	finds	they	are	all	sitting	around	Mahavira	where	he	had	left
them	before.
He	said,	"You	are	really	a	man!	I	destroyed	your	ears	and	you	did	not	speak!	I
have	been	going	all	over	 the	forest,	and	 the	cows	are	sitting	here!	Where	have
you	been	hiding	them?"	And	he	beats	him	--	he	is	naked.	And	Mahavira	remains
standing.	The	man	 is	 thinking	 that	 he	 is	 really	mad	 --	 neither	 beating	 has	 any
effect...	you	cannot	do	anything	to	him,	he	will	not	react.	That	is	total	silence	--
that	whatever	 happens,	 he	will	 remain	 centered	without	 any	 reaction.	 It	 is	 not
only	a	question	of	speaking.
The	story	is	beautiful.	Up	to	 this	point	 it	 is	factual,	but	 it	 takes	a	mythological
ending.	In	India	 there	are	many	gods.	India	does	not	believe	 in	one	god	--	one
god	seems	to	be	like	believing	in	a	dictator;	it	is	undemocratic	--	India	believes
in	 many	 gods,	 actually	 thirty-three	 million.	 That	 was	 the	 population	 of	 India
when	they	invented	gods:	one	god	for	everyone.	That	seems	to	be	right	and	fair.
Indra,	one	of	the	gods,	feels	terribly	hurt	and	disturbed	by	what	has	happened	to
Mahavira	 --	 a	 silent	man	who	has	done	nothing.	The	cows	moved	 themselves,
came	back	again,	and	he	is	utterly	innocent.
Indra	came	--	and	gods	can	speak	without	words	--	so	he	spoke	to	Mahavira,	"I
can	give	you	 two	gods	as	bodyguards,	because	 it	 is	unthinkable,	unbelievable!
This	should	not	happen."	And	to	gods	you	may	not	speak	but	they	can	read	your
thought.
Indra	 reads	Mahavira's	 thought:	 "Just	 leave	me	 alone.	 I	 don't	 want	 anybody's
help;	I	want	to	fight	it	alone.	I	don't	want	to	be	indebted	to	anybody	--	forgive
me.	Whatever	 happens,	 I	 am	 going	 to	 fight	 this	 whole	 war	 alone	 until	 I	 am
victorious."
Now,	 his	 victory	will	 sound	 strange	 to	 anybody	who	has	 been	 listening	 to	 the
idea	of	let-go,	surrender	to	existence.	But	this	is	a	good	place	to	remind	you:	Be
compassionate	about	others,	their	uniqueness.	It	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to
follow	their	path;	it	simply	means	a	deep	understanding	that	people	are	unique;
and	if	people	are	unique	then	their	ways	are	going	to	be	unique.	And	sometimes
very	opposite	ways	lead	to	the	same	goal.
It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	misunderstand,	 but	 I	would	 like	 you	 to	 understand	 different
ways,	different	people,	different	uniquenesses.	All	that	will	help	to	broaden	your
heart,	 your	 compassion,	 your	 comprehension.	 And	 whatever	 path	 you	 are
following,	it	will	be	helpful	to	it.
This	is	broadness	--	that	it	can	contain	contradictions.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Empty	from	birth	to	death
15	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604155
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
108
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	REMEMBER	WHILE	YOU	WERE	IN	THE	POLICE	STATION	IN	CRETE,
THOSE
TWO	 YOUNG	 SMILING	 GREEK	 WOMEN,	 DRESSED	 IN	 BLACK	 LIKE
TYPICAL
CRETAN	WOMEN,	COMING	TO	THE	WINDOW,	HOLDING	YOUR	HAND
AND
SAYING	IN	VERY	BROKEN	ENGLISH,	"OSHO,	WE	LOVE	YOU.	WE	ARE
CRETAN,	WE	WANT	YOU	TO	STAY	HERE."
IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 AS	 THE	 GOVERNMENTS	 BECOME	 INCREASINGLY
STRIDENT
IN	 THEIR	 ATTACKS	 ON	 YOU	 --	 IN	 SPITE	 OF	 THE	 INCREASINGLY
OBVIOUS
LOVE	 THE	 COMMON	 MAN	 HAS	 FOR	 YOU	 --	 ONE	 OF	 THE	 MOST
IMPORTANT
PARTS	 OF	 YOUR	 WORK	 WILL	 BE	 TO	 SHOW	 HOW	 THE
BUREAUCRACY,	FAR
FROM	REPRESENTING	THE	COMMON	MAN,	IS	IN	FACT	IN	COMPLETE
OPPOSITION	TO	HIM.
I	 certainly	 remember	 those	 two	 young	women	 holding	my	 hand	 and	 trying	 to
convey	to	me	that	"We,	the	people	of	this	island,	want	you	to	stay	here.	We	love
you."
The	question	you	have	raised	has	occurred	to	me	many	times	in	my	life,	again
and	again.
The	bureaucracy	is	not	for	the	people,	it	is	against	them.	It	uses	them,	it	exploits
them,	it	manipulates	them;	it	makes	them	believe	that	it	is	serving	their	purposes.
But	the	reality	is	just	the	opposite.
They	define	democracy	as	the	government	of	the	people,	for	the	people,	by	the
people.	It	is	none	of	these	things.	It	is	neither	by	the	people,	nor	of	the	people,
nor	for	the	people.
The	people	who	have	been	holding	power	down	the	centuries	have	always	been
able	to	persuade	people	that	whatever	is	being	done,	is	done	for	their	sake.	And
the	 people	 have	 believed	 it	 because	 they	 have	 been	 trained	 to	 believe;	 it	 is	 a
conspiracy	between	religion	and	state	to	exploit	humanity.
The	religion	goes	on	preaching	belief	and	destroys	the	intelligence	of	people	to
question,	makes	them	retarded.	And	the	state	goes	on	exploiting	them	in	every
possible	way	--	still	managing	to	keep	the	people's	support,	because	the	people
have	been	trained	to	believe,	not	to	question.	Any	kind	of	government	--	it	may
be	monarchy,	it	may	be	aristocracy,	it	may	be	democracy,	it	may	be	any	kind	of
government...	 Just	 the	 names	 change	 but	 deep	 down	 the	 reality	 remains	 the
same.
In	 Japan	 before	 the	 second	 world	 war,	 Hirohito,	 the	 emperor	 of	 Japan,	 was
believed	to	be	the	direct	descendant	of	the	God	Sun,	and	whatever	he	was	saying
was	not	human,	 it	was	divine;	his	order	had	 just	 to	be	 followed.	For	centuries
Japanese	 people	 have	 believed	 in	 him	 as	 a	 Sun	 God,	 And	 they	 have	 died	 in
hundreds	of	wars,	willingly,	 joyously,	because	 they	are	dying	 for	God	himself.
What	more	blissful	and	beautiful	a	death	could	one	aspire	to?
Japan	is	a	small	country	but	no	other	country	has	been	able	to	conquer	it	--	even
countries	 like	 China,	 vast	 countries.	 China	 is	 the	 greatest	 country	 as	 far	 as
numbers	are	concerned,	as	far	as	land	is	concerned,	but	a	small	tiny	Japan	was
able	to	defeat	the	Chinese	because	the	people	had	this	fanatic	belief	that	God	is
behind	 them,	 so	 victory	 is	 theirs.	 And	 more	 or	 less	 the	 same	 has	 been	 the
situation	all	over	the	world.
That	day	when	those	two	Cretan	women,	holding	my	hand	with	great	love,	said
to	me,
"We	 are	 not	 against	 you.	 We	 love	 you	 and	 we	 want	 you	 to	 stay	 here,"	 they
represented	the	real	consciousness	of	the	people.	And	then	I	saw	at	the	airport,
three	thousand	people
--	 it	must	 have	 been	 the	whole	 population	 of	 Saint	Nicholas	 --	 came	 to	 show
their	support,	and	to	show	that	they	are	not	with	the	brutality	and	nazi	actions	of
the	police	against	me,	that	they	are	for	me.
Yes,	it	has	to	be	one	of	my	works	to	awaken	people	to	the	real	situation:	you	are
being	 exploited	 in	 different	 names.	The	 exploiters	 even	 call	 themselves	 public
servants,	to	tell	you	that	they	serve	you.	For	thousands	of	years	they	have	been
"serving,"	--	and	the	people	are	in	immense	misery,	ignorance.	They	don't	have
anything	 to	 their	 life;	 they	are	born,	 they	somehow	live,	and	 they	die.	Nothing
happens	 to	 them	 which	 could	 be	 called	 ecstatic,	 which	 could	 be	 called	 an
experience.
Empty	 from	birth	 to	death,	nothing	 flowers,	nothing	blossoms...	and	 they	have
all	 the	 potential	 of	 being	 a	 song	of	 joy.	But	 these	 bureaucracies,	 religious	 and
political,	would	not	allow	it.	They	are	so	afraid	of	joyous	people.
It	was	a	strange	feeling	for	me	in	the	beginning.	I	had	never	thought	that	people
should	be	so	afraid	of	joyous	people.	Slowly	slowly,	I	became	aware	that	joy	has
many	implications:
A	joyous	person	is	not	retarded.
A	joyous	person	is	intelligent.
A	 joyous	 person	 knows	 the	 art	 of	 life;	 otherwise	 he	 cannot	 be	 joyous.	 And	 a
joyous	 person	 is	 dangerous	 to	 all	 those	 vested	 interests	 which	 go	 against
humanity.
Those	 interests	 want	 humanity	 to	 live	 in	 hell	 forever.	 They	 have	managed	 in
every	possible	way	to	keep	you	in	misery.	They	destroy	everything	that	you	can
rejoice	 in,	 and	 they	 give	 you	 ample	 opportunity	 to	 be	miserable.	 A	miserable
person	is	not	a	danger	to	this	rotten	society.
Yes,	it	has	to	be	one	of	my	basic	works	to	make	people	aware	that	the	powerful
ones	--
either	religious	or	political	--	are	not	your	friends.	They	are	your	enemies.	And
unless	 the	 common	 humanity	 goes	 through	 a	 rebellion	 against	 all	 types	 of
bureaucracies,	man	will	remain	stuck,	not	evolving,	not	reaching	to	the	heights
which	are	his	birthright.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HAS	ANYONE	REALLY	UNDERSTOOD	YOUR	MESSAGE	OF	LOVE?
RECENTLY	IT	HAS	BEEN	PAINFULLY	CLEAR	TO	ME	THAT	I	HAVEN'T,
AND	I	WONDER	IF	WE	AREN'T	ALL,	WITH	SOME	SLIGHT	VARIATIONS
ON	THE
THEME,	STILL	SINGING	THE	SAME	OLD	SONG.
WHY	 IS	 IT	 SO	DIFFICULT	TO	LIVE	SOMETHING	THAT	 IS	 SO	SIMPLE
AND
NATURAL?
Just	because	it	is	so	simple	and	so	natural,	that's	why	it	is	so	difficult.
You	are	not	simple	and	you	are	not	natural.
And	it	is	simple	and	natural.
My	message	of	love	is	absolutely	simple;	nothing	can	be	more	simple	than	that.
But	your	mind	is	very	complex,	very	tricky.	It	makes	simple	things	complicated.
--	that's	its	work.
And	 for	 centuries	 it	 has	 been	 trained	 for	 only	 one	 thing:	 to	 make	 things	 so
complicated	that	your	life	becomes	impossible.
Your	mind	has	become	expert	 in	destroying	you,	because	your	 life	 consists	 of
simple	 things.	 The	 whole	 existence	 is	 simple,	 but	 man's	 mind	 has	 been
cultivated,	 conditioned,	 educated,	programmed	 in	 such	a	way	 that	 the	 simplest
thing	 becomes	 crooked.	 The	 moment	 it	 reaches	 to	 your	 mind	 it	 is	 no	 longer
simple.	The	mind	starts	 interpreting	 it,	 finding	 things	 in	 it	which	are	not	 there,
ignoring	things	which	are	there.
And	you	think	that	you	have	heard	whatever	I	have	been	telling	you?	It	is	not	so.
I	 have	 been	 telling	 you	 one	 thing,	 and	 you	 have	 been	 hearing	 something	 else
because	your	hearing	is	not	direct.	There	is	a	mediator	--	your	mind.	It	functions
in	many	ways	as	a	censor,	it	does	not	allow	many	things	to	enter	inside	you.
You	will	be	surprised	 to	know	how	much	it	prevents	--	ninety-eight	percent.	 It
allows	in	only	 two	percent	of	what	 is	being	said	 to	you,	and	that	 too	not	 in	 its
purity.	First	it	pollutes	it	by	its	own	interpretations,	by	its	own	past	experiences,
conditionings,	 and	 by	 the	 time	 the	 mind	 comes	 to	 have	 the	 sense	 that	 it	 has
understood,	what	was	said	and	what	was	heard	are	poles	apart.
Gautam	Buddha	 used	 to	 tell	 a	 story...	 it	 is	 strange	 that	 all	 great	masters	 have
depended	on	stories.	There	 is	some	reason	for	 it:	 the	mind	relaxes	when	it	 is	a
question	of	a	story;	when	it	is	just	a	joke	the	mind	relaxes.	There	is	no	need	to	be
tense	and	serious,	just	a	story	is	being	told,	you	can	relax.
But	when	something	like	love	or	freedom	or	silence	is	being	explained,	you	are
tense.
That's	 why	 the	masters	 have	 to	 use	 simple	 stories.	 Perhaps	 by	 the	 end	 of	 the
story	they	can	manage	it	so	a	small	message	enters	in	from	the	back	door	while
you	are	still	relaxed.
Gautam	Buddha	used	to	say	--	it	was	his	custom	after	his	evening	talk	--	he	used
to	say	 to	his	disciples,	"Now	go	and	do	 the	 last	 thing	before	you	go	 to	sleep."
That	last	thing	was	the	meditation.
One	day	 it	happened	 that	a	prostitute	was	 listening	and	a	 thief	was	also	 in	 the
audience.
When	Buddha	said,	"Now	it	 is	 time	for	you	 to	go	and	do	 the	 last	 thing	before
you	go	to	sleep,"	all	 the	sannyasins	went	to	meditate.	The	thief	simply	became
awakened	--	"What	am	I	doing	here?"	This	was	the	time	to	do	his	business.	The
prostitute	 looked	 around	 and	 felt	 that	 Buddha	 was	 really	 very	 perceptive,
because	when	Buddha	had	said	that,	he	was	looking	at	her.	She	bowed	down	in
gratitude	because	she	was	reminded,	"Go	to	do	your	business	before	you	go	to
sleep."
A	simple	statement,	but	three	types	of	people	heard	three	meanings.	In	fact	there
must	 have	 been	 more	 meanings,	 because	 to	 somebody	 meditation	 must	 have
been	a	 joy,	 to	somebody	else	meditation	must	have	been	something	one	has	 to
do;	 and	 then	 the	meaning	differs.	To	all	 those	meditators	 the	message	was	 the
same,	but	what	was	heard	by	them	could	not	have	been	the	same.
All	my	life	I	have	never	taught	anything	complex	to	anybody.	Life	is	already	too
complex,	 and	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 burden	 you	 more.	 But	 I	 have	 been	 more
misunderstood	 than	perhaps	anybody	else	 in	 this	whole	century,	 for	 the	simple
reason	that	I	am	saying	simple	things	which	nobody	says.	I	am	talking	about	the
obvious	 which	 everybody	 has	 forgotten,	 which	 has	 been	 taken	 for	 granted.
Nobody	talks	about	it.
You	can	look	at	the	great	theological	treatises	of	the	Christians,	at	great	works	of
religion	 by	 Hindus,	 Mohammedans,	 Jews	 --	 very	 scholarly,	 very	 difficult	 to
understand.	 The	 more	 difficult	 they	 are,	 the	 more	 they	 are	 respected.	 When
people	cannot	understand	something	they	think	it	is	something	great,	mysterious,
something	far	above	their	comprehension.
And	naturally	it	becomes	respectable.
The	Hindus	use	a	language	for	their	religious	treatises,	Sanskrit,	which	has	never
been	 a	 living	 language.	 It	 has	 never	 been	 spoken	 by	 the	 people	 in	 the
marketplace;	 it	 has	 been	 a	 language	 of	 the	 experts.	 But	 they	 have	 resisted
continuously	that	Hindu	scriptures	should	be	translated.
I	was	always	wondering,	why	this	resistance?	In	fact	they	should	be	happy	that
their	 scriptures	 are	 being	 translated	 and	 their	 message	 is	 being	 spread	 to	 all
corners	of	the	earth.	But	when	I	studied	their	scriptures,	I	understood	the	reason.
The	 reason	 was	 that	 those	 scriptures	 have	 nothing.	 Just	 the	 language	 is	 so
difficult,	and	people	don't	understand	it,	so	they	go	on	paying	respect	to	it.	Once
it	is	translated	into	the	language	of	the	people,	it	loses	all	glory,	all	spirituality.	It
becomes	so	ordinary	because	it	is	no	longer	difficult.
And	the	same	is	true	about	others	--	for	example	the	Jews.	The	rabbis	will	still
prefer	Hebrew.	Now	it	is	not	a	living	language,	why	go	on	insisting	on	it?	But	it
gives	the	mind	the	impression	of	something	mysterious,	impenetrable,	holy,	far
beyond,	so	that	all	that	you	can	do	is	to	bow	down.	Once	it	is	translated,	it	has
nothing.	And	specially,	it	has	nothing	that	you	need.
None	 of	 these	 scriptures	 teach	 about	 love,	 its	 implications,	 its	 different
dimensions.	 None	 of	 these	 scriptures	 teach	 about	 freedom.	 None	 of	 these
scriptures	 teach	 about	 you,	 your	 life,	 and	 how	 it	 can	 be	 transformed	 into	 a
celebration.	They	 talk	about	God!	 I	have	never	come	across	a	single	man	who
has	any	problem	with	God	--	it	is	so	irrelevant.	Is	God	anybody's	problem?	Is	the
Holy	 Ghost	 anybody's	 problem?	 --	 things	 which	 are	 absolutely	 irrelevant	 to
human	existence.
The	mind	has	been	filled	with	all	kinds	of	unnecessary	luggage.	No	space	is	left
in	 the	 mind	 for	 the	 realities	 that	 you	 have	 to	 live.	 So	 even	 your	 greatest
theologian	is	as	foolish	about	love	as	you	are,	has	no	understanding	of	freedom,
has	never	enquired	into	the	distinction	between	personality	and	individuality.
I	had	one	professor	who	was	teaching	religion.	After	listening	for	a	few	days	I
stood	up	and	told	him,	"I	think	you	are	talking	about	irrelevant	things.	I	don't	see
a	single	student	here	for	whom	God	is	a	problem,	and	I	don't	see	either	that	God
is	a	problem	to	you"	--
because	I	used	to	live	just	in	front	of	his	house,	and	his	wife	was	the	problem.
I	 told	 him,	 "Your	 wife	 is	 the	 real	 problem;	 that	 you	 can	 discuss.	 God	 is
absolutely	 abstract.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 you	 thinking	 about	God	 in	 your	 house.
And	all	that	you	are	teaching	about	God	has	nothing	of	your	experience	in	it,	it
has	not	been	your	quest.	You	are	filling	the	minds	of	these	innocent	people	with
ideas	which	are	of	no	use.	Talk	about	love!"
He	was	very	angry.	He	said,	"You	have	to	come	with	me	to	the	principal."
I	said,	"I	can	come	even	to	God.	You	cannot	threaten	me."
On	the	way	towards	the	principal's	office	he	said,	"You	don't	feel	afraid?"
I	said,	"Why	should	I	feel	afraid?	You	should	feel	afraid!	I	know	all	the	students;
their	 problem	 is	 love,	 and	 your	 problem	 is	 love.	 And	 I	 am	 going	 to	 tell	 the
principal,	 Ìf	 you	 don't	 believe	me,	 just	 call	 this	 professor's	wife,	 and	 you	will
know	what	I	mean	by	problem.'"
He	said,	"You	are	making	it	too	complex."
I	said,	"I	am	making	it	absolutely	simple,	factual.	I	can	bring	all	the	students	to
the	office;	they	all	have	problems	of	love.	Somebody	is	chasing	a	woman,	and	is
not	getting	her	--
that's	his	problem.	Somebody	has	got	her	--	and	that	is	his	problem."
He	said,	"It	is	better	you	should	come	back;	there	is	no	need."
I	 said,	 "I	 never	 go	 back	 from	 anywhere.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 coming,	 I	 am	 going
alone."
He	said,	"When	I	am	saying	there	is	no	need..."
I	 said,	 "It	may	 not	 be	 a	 need	 for	 you;	 it	 is	 a	 need	 for	me.	 I	 have	 to	 decide	 it
finally,	because	to	me	love	is	a	religious	phenomenon,	while	God	is	not.	God	is
only	a	hypothesis.	It	means	nothing	because	there	is	nothing	corresponding	to	it.
"And	 love	 is	 a	 religious	 phenomenon.	Unless	 it	 is	 understood	 in	 its	 totality,	 a
man	is	bound	to	become	miserable	by	something	which	could	have	made	his	life
divine.	The	 same	 thing	which	could	have	been	his	heaven	 is	going	 to	become
hell	because	he	has	no	understanding.	And	it	is	certainly	an	art.	Who	cares	about
God?	So	you	start	talking	sense.	We	have	come	here	to	understand	religion,	not
nonsense."
"But,"	 he	 said,	 "in	 the	 whole	 syllabus	 there	 is	 no	 mention	 of	 love,	 freedom,
individuality,	silence...	we	have	to	complete	the	syllabus."
Universities	are	completing	their	syllabuses	without	bothering	about	the	real	life
of	man,	his	real	problems.
Because	I	am	talking	about	simple	 things,	many	people	simply	feel	 that	 this	 is
not	what	 religion	has	 to	be.	They	have	got	 an	 idea	of	 religion,	of	 complicated
abstract	 hypotheses,	 you	 can	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 them	 but	 it	 makes	 no
difference	 to	 your	 life	 --	 you	 remain	 the	 same.	 You	 may	 be	 a	 Hindu,	 or	 a
Mohammedan,	 or	 a	 Christian	 it	 does	 not	 matter;	 your	 real	 problems	 are	 the
same.	Your	unreal	problems	are	different,	but	those	unreal	problems	are	nothing
but	a	burden	to	the	mind.
It	 is	 possible	 to	 understand	 me	 if	 you	 can	 just	 put	 aside	 your	 mind	 and	 its
complicated	mechanism.	It	is	not	needed	because	my	work	is	heart	to	heart.
I	am	speaking	from	my	heart.
I	am	not	a	theoretician,	I	am	not	speaking	from	my	mind.	I	am	pouring	my	heart
to	you,	but	if	you	are	going	to	listen	from	the	mind	you	are	going	to	miss	it.
If	you	are	also	ready	to	open	a	new	door	into	your	being,	if	you	are	ready	to	hear
from	the	heart,	 then	whatever	I	am	saying	is	so	simple	that	 there	is	no	need	to
believe	in	it	because	there	is	no	way	to	disbelieve	it.	It	is	so	simple	that	there	is
no	way	to	doubt	it.
I	 am	against	 belief	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 for	 all	my	 teaching,	 no	belief	 is
needed.	I	am	all	for	doubt	because	for	my	simple	teaching,	you	cannot	doubt.	All
the	religions	of	the	world	insist	on	belief,	because	what	they	are	teaching	can	be
doubted.	And	 they	are	all	against	doubt	because	doubt	can	destroy	 their	whole
edifice.
I	am	simple	and	real.	I	am	not	metaphysical;	hence	there	is	no	need	to	believe	in
me.	If	you	have	heard	me,	a	trust	is	bound	to	arise	which	is	not	belief,	which	is
closer	to	love;	even	if	you	try	to	doubt,	you	cannot.	And	when	you	cannot	doubt
something,	 then	 there	 is	 real	 trust,	 indubitable	 trust.	 It	 transforms	 simply	 by
being	within	you.
In	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 man,	 only	 Mahavira	 has	 made	 a	 distinction	 to	 be
remembered	--
which	is	significant	in	this	reference.	He	says	that	there	are	two	ways	to	reach	to
the	truth.	One	is	the	way	of	the	shravaka.	Shravaka	means	one	who	can	hear,	one
who	is	able	to	hear	from	the	heart.	Then	he	need	not	do	anything.	Just	hearing	is
enough,	and	he	will	be	transformed.	The	other	is	the	way	of	the	monk,	who	will
have	to	try	hard	to	reach	to	the	truth.
My	 effort	 has	 been	 not	 to	 create	 monks.	 That's	 why	 I	 have	 chosen	 to	 speak
because	 just	 hearing	 you	 can	 be	 reborn.	Nothing	 else	 is	 needed	 on	 your	 part,
except	a	willingness	to	open	the	doors	of	your	heart.	Just	let	me	in	and	you	will
not	be	the	same	again.
I	have	seen	thousands	of	my	people	changing	without	their	knowing;	they	have
changed	so	drastically,	but	the	change	has	happened	almost	underground.	Their
mind	has	not	been	even	allowed	to	take	part	in	it	--	just	from	heart	to	heart.
These	people	 had	not	 needed	 any	 therapy.	These	people	 here	 have	not	 needed
any	meditation.	 If	 they	have	heard,	 the	way	 I	am	 telling	you,	 then	 this	 is	 their
meditation,	and	this	is	their	therapy,	and	this	is	their	revolution.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 EXTOL	 "COMMUNE-ISM"	 AS	 THE	 HIGHEST
FORM	OF
ECONOMIC	 SYSTEM,	 THE	 EQUAL	 SHARING	 OF	 ABUNDANCE	 AND
RICHNESS
IN	A	LOVING	FAMILY	OF	MAN.	HOWEVER,	I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SAY
THAT
THE	 POOR	 SHOULD	BE	BROUGHT	UP	 TO	 THE	 LEVEL	OF	 THE	RICH
RATHER
THAN	THE	RICH	BEING	DRAGGED	DOWN	INTO	POVERTY,	AS	HAS
HAPPENED	 IN	 ALL	 EXISTING	 COMMUNISTIC	 SOCIETIES.	 BUT	HOW
CAN	THE
RICH	 SHARE	 WEALTH	 NOW,	 AND	 LIVE	 IN	 "COMMUNE-ISM"
WITHOUT
BEING	DRAGGED	DOWN	INTO	ECONOMIC	MEDIOCRITY?
The	 first	 thing	 is	 that	 the	 rich	 people	 of	 the	 world	 should	 start	 living	 in
communes.	Let	 those	communes	be	of	 the	 rich!	 --	 so	 they	will	not	be	dragged
down	 from	 their	 standard	 of	 life,	 their	 comforts,	 their	 luxuries.	 Let	 there	 be
around	the	world	hundreds	of	communes	of	rich	people	--	rich	communes.
And	 to	me,	wealth	 is	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 creativity.	 If	 five	 thousand	 rich	 people
who	have	all	created	wealth	 individually	are	 together,	 they	can	create	wealth	a
millionfold.	Their	standard	will	not	go	lower;	their	standard	can	even	go	higher.
Or	they	can	start	sharing.
They	 can	 start	 inviting	 people	who	 are	 not	 rich	 but	who	 are	 creative	 in	 some
other	way,	who	will	 enhance	 the	 life	 of	 their	 commune	 although	 they	may	 be
poor.
Five	 thousand	 rich	 people	 together	 with	 their	 genius	 for	 creating	 wealth	 are
capable	 of	 creating	 so	 much	 wealth	 that	 they	 can	 invite	 thousands	 of	 other
people	who	may	not	be	rich	in	the	sense	of	being	wealthy,	but	who	may	be	rich
as	painters,	as	poets,	as	dancers,	as	singers.
What	are	you	going	to	do	only	with	wealth?	You	cannot	play	music	on	money;
you	cannot	dance	 just	because	you	have	 so	much	cash	 in	 the	bank.	And	 these
rich	 communes	 can	 start	 becoming	 bigger,	 absorbing	more	 and	more	 creative
people.	These	rich	communes	will	need	every	kind	of	thing.
Talking	about	the	rich	commune,	I	am	reminded	of	the	Jaina	community.	There
was	 a	 time,	 in	 India,	 in	 the	 history	 of	 Jainism...	 because	 Jainism	 is	 a	 small
community	 and	 it	 is	 a	 community	 of	 rich	 people.	 In	 India	 you	 cannot	 find	 a
single	 Jaina	 beggar,	 a	 single	 Jaina	 orphan.	 In	 the	 ancient	 days	 it	 was	 a
fundamental	 rule	 that	 if	 a	 Jaina	was	 poor,	 then	 all	 other	 Jainas	would	 simply
contribute	just	little	bits.
For	 example,	 if	 he	 needs	 a	 house,	 the	 whole	 commune	 simply	 provides	 it.
Somebody	 provides	 the	 wood,	 somebody	 provides	 the	 bricks,	 somebody
provides	the	tiles	and	the	whole	community	provides	some	money	for	the	man	to
start	off	with.	You	have	changed	a	poor	man	into	a	rich	man.	Nobody	has	been
forced	to	do	it,	it	is	just	out	of	generosity.
And	 that	 man	 will	 do	 the	 same	 when	 a	 new	 arrival	 happens	 to	 come	 to	 the
commune.
You	are	asking	me	right	now	what	the	rich	people	should	do.	They	should	drop
their	private	ownership	and	make	a	rich	commune	wherever	they	can	manage	--
and	they	can	manage	everywhere,	anywhere.	They	can	make	beautiful	places	all
around	the	world,	and	slowly,	slowly	more	people	can	be	absorbed.
For	example,	you	will	need	plumbers,	however	rich	you	may	be;	you	will	need
mechanical	people;	you	will	need	technicians;	you	will	need	shoemakers.	Invite
these	 people	 --	 and	 they	 come	 to	 you	 not	 as	 servants,	 but	 as	members	 of	 the
commune.	They	will	be	enriching	the	commune	doing	whatever	they	can	do	the
best.	And	it	is	the	commune's	duty	to	raise	those	people	to	the	same	standard	of
life.
Slowly	slowly	we	can	transform	the	whole	world	--	without	any	bloodshed	and
without	any	dictatorship.
A	communism	that	comes	out	of	love,	out	of	intelligence,	out	of	generosity,	will
be	real.
A	communism	that	comes	through	force	is	going	to	be	unreal.	And	there	is	not	a
single	man	in	the	world,	howsoever	poor,	who	has	nothing	to	contribute.
I	am	reminded	of	Abraham	Lincoln...	 I	 love	 this	anecdote	so	much!	 It	was	his
first	address	in	the	Senate	as	president.	He	was	a	poor	man's	son,	his	father	was	a
shoemaker	-
-	 in	 India	 he	would	 have	 been	 an	 untouchable.	 Even	 in	America	 people	were
very	annoyed,	irritated,	angry	that	a	shoemaker's	son	had	become	the	president;
the	 aristocrats,	 the	 rich,	 the	 super-rich	 naturally	 were	 angry.	 There	 was	 great
tension	on	the	first	day	when	he	addressed	them.
As	he	stood	up,	one	aristocrat	also	stood	up	and	said,	"Mr	President,	before	you
start	speaking,	I	would	like	you	to	remember	that	your	father	used	to	make	shoes
for	my	 family.	Right	 now	 I	 am	using	 the	 shoes	made	 by	 your	 father,	 so	 don't
forget	 that.	 Just	 becoming	president	 does	 not	mean	 anything.	Don't	 forget	 that
you	are	a	shoemaker's	son."
There	 was	 absolute	 silence,	 pin-drop	 silence.	 Everybody	 felt	 that	 Abraham
Lincoln	would	feel	embarrassed,	but	instead	of	feeling	embarrassed,	he	made	the
whole	Senate	feel	embarrassed.
He	said,	"It	is	good,	I	am	immensely	thankful	to	you	that	you	reminded	me	about
my	father"	--	and	tears	came	to	his	eyes.	And	he	said,	"How	can	I	forget	him?	I
know	that	he	was	a	perfect	shoemaker	and	I	can	never	be	that	perfect	a	president.
I	cannot	defeat	the	old	man.
"You	are	still	wearing	shoes	he	has	made	--	many	of	you	must	be	wearing	them.
If	they	do	not	fit	you,	if	they	are	pinching,	if	you	are	feeling	uncomfortable,	don't
be	worried.
Although	my	 father	 is	 dead,	 he	 made	 me	 learn	 the	 art	 enough	 to	 mend	 your
shoes.	I	cannot	replace	him;	he	was	a	perfect	master.	I	am	just	an	amateur,	but	I
can	mend	your	 shoes	and	 I	will	 always	 remember	 to	 try	 at	 least	 to	become	as
good	a	president	as	he	was	a	shoemaker.	I	cannot	hope	to	be	better	than	him	--
that	is	impossible,	because	I	know	him."
The	poorest	man	in	the	world	has	also	got	something	to	contribute.
Create	 rich	communes	and	suddenly	you	will	 find	 that	you	need	many	people,
not	just	the	rich.	They	may	be	able	to	create	wealth,	but	wealth	is	not	all.	Life	is
much	more	than	wealth.	It	needs	so	many	things	that	naturally	you	will	have	to
invite	many	people.
Around	 the	world	all	 the	 rich	communes	will	need	people;	 and	 slowly,	 slowly
your	commune	will	become	bigger	and	bigger.
The	 richer	 will	 not	 become	 poorer,	 but	 the	 poorer	 will	 become	 richer,	 and
respectable,	and	equal	--	in	no	way	inferior	to	anybody	else	--	because	they	are
also	functioning	in	the	same	way	as	anybody	else.	And	whatever	they	are	doing
is	needed	as	much	as	anybody	else's	expertise	is	needed.
I	conceive	of	this	just	like	a	flower	opening	up,	becoming	bigger	--	all	the	petals
opening	up.	A	commune,	full-blown,	complete,	lacking	nothing,	will	not	be	only
of	rich	people.
Many	poor	people	will	 have	been	 transformed	 into	 richness.	And	 they	will	 be
contributing	--	they	will	not	be	a	burden,	and	they	will	not	be	beggars.	They	will
have	their	pride.	You	cannot	exist	without	them.
We	can	transform	the	whole	earth	into	a	rich	society,	but	it	should	start	the	way	I
am	telling	you:	not	by	the	dictatorship	of	the	proletariat,	but	by	communes	of	the
rich.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	REALLY	FELT	AFFECTED	WHEN	YOU	TALKED	ABOUT	RAJEN	THE
OTHER
NIGHT,	 BECAUSE	 I	 FEEL	 FRIENDSHIP	 FOR	 HIM,	 AND	 I	 FEEL	 HE
LOVES	YOU
AS	HE	DID	BEFORE.	I	FEEL	THAT	IN	DROPPING	THE	MALA	AND	THE
RED
CLOTHES,	HE	IS	SIMPLY	TRYING	TO	EXPERIENCE	SOMETHING	NEW.
I	 MUST	 ADMIT,	 THOUGH,	 THAT	 HAVING	 WORKED	 WITH	 HIM	 FOR
YEARS,	IN
THE	 MOST	 RECENT	 GROUP	 EXPERIENCE	 WITH	 HIM	 JUST	 A	 FEW
DAYS	AGO
THE	 QUALITY	 OF	 HIS	 WORK	 FELT	 DIFFERENT:	 I	 MISSED	 THE
FEELING	OF
YOUR	PRESENCE	THROUGH	HIM.	PLEASE	COMMENT.
Your	question	itself	is	the	answer.	If	he	loves	me,	then	in	his	groups	my	presence
would	 have	 become	 even	 more	 tangible.	 If	 my	 presence	 in	 his	 groups	 has
disappeared,	 then	 what	 he	 calls	 love	 is	 just	 an	 empty	 word.	 This	 is	 a	 simple
thing.
Neither	 dropping	 the	 mala	 nor	 the	 red	 clothes	 is	 important,	 because	 I	 have
allowed	it	myself.	But	in	his	groups	he	is	saying,	"I	used	to	serve	Osho	through
surrender.	I	am	still	serving	him,	through	making	you	free	of	Osho."
The	whole	world	 is	 free	of	me.	Nobody	needs	 to	work	 to	make	people	 free	of
me.	The	whole	world	is	already	free	of	me.
But	why	 is	my	presence	being	missed?	He	has	 lost	 contact	with	my	heart;	his
heart	is	no	longer	beating	with	my	heart.	And	it	is	not	only	with	Rajen.	It	is	so
with	many	other	therapists.	Only	a	few	have	proved	the	fire	test,	like	Prasad.	He
has	not	just	remained	the	same,	but	has	become	more	deeply	involved	with	me
on	a	new	basis,	a	new	flowering	of	love.	In	his	groups	my	presence	has	become
deeper.	 And	 his	 work	 has	 changed;	 his	 therapy	 has	 become	 different,	 more
effective.
But	 all	 these	 people	 are	 unconscious.	 Their	 love	 is	 not	what	 I	mean	 by	 love.
Perhaps	at	 the	most,	 their	 love	means	 that	 they	don't	hate	me.	Even	 that	much
will	be	great,	because	most	of	them	may	even	be	angry	with	me	for	the	simple
reason	 that	 they	 had	 become	 accustomed	 to	 being	 just	 a	 follower.	 The	whole
responsibility	was	on	me.	Now	I	have	given	back	the	responsibility	to	them;	they
can	be	angry	--	they	are	bound	to	be	angry.
They	may	 go	 on	 saying	 like	 old	 parrots,	 "I	 love	 you,"	 but	 their	 actions	 don't
prove	it.
Ananda	Teertha	and	a	few	others	with	him	have	opened	a	meditation	academy	in
Italy.
Devageet	was	there.	In	finding	the	place,	in	arranging	the	place	he	worked	hard,
but	finally	he	was	very	disappointed	because	they	did	not	want	my	name	to	be
associated	with	the	academy.
Devageet	said,	"I	have	been	working	day	and	night	just	so	that	we	can	create	an
academy	 for	 Osho,	 and	 you	 are	 not	 ready	 even	 to	 mention	 His	 name	 in	 the
brochure!"	They	all	had	their	pictures	in	the	brochure,	and	they	were	not	willing
to	have	my	picture	in	the	brochure.
Devageet	had	to	leave	in	disgust.	They	all	were	saying,	"We	love	Osho,"	but	no
mention	of	me	in	the	brochure,	no	mention	of	me	in	their	groups.	And	all	their
groups	are	filled	by	sannyasins,	and	those	sannyasins	are	coming	because	of	me.
Devageet	made	it	clear	that	this	is	pure	exploitation.	"These	people	are	coming
to	 your	 groups	 because	 of	 Osho,	 not	 because	 of	 you.	 And	 you	 are	 no	 longer
working	for	Osho."
Devageet	came	to	see	me	in	Crete,	and	I	 told	him,	"Don't	be	disturbed.	This	is
how	unconscious	humanity	is.	Let	them	do	what	they	are	doing.	If	it	is	good	for
people,	people	will	go	on	coming	to	them;	if	it	is	not	good,	they	will	disappear."
"But,"	he	said,	"it	hurts	 that	you	made	these	people	great	 therapists.	You	made
their	name	famous	around	the	world."
I	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	unconscious	mind's	logic:	now	they	are	taking
revenge.
They	 cannot	 forgive	 me	 because	 I	 have	 made	 them;	 they	 feel	 a	 certain
inferiority,	and	they	would	like	to	proclaim	their	superiority.	So	let	them	do	it	--
don't	be	worried.	This	is	how	this	world	goes	on."
It	makes	no	difference	to	me	whether	my	name	is	associated	with	their	academy,
because	there	are	thousands	of	other	therapists	in	the	world	who	have	nothing	to
do	with	me,	so	these	few	also	can	be	part	of	that.	Or,	they	may	realize	sooner	or
later	that	what	they	are	doing	is	ugly,	unloving,	and	to	a	man	who	has	made	you
world-famous;	 otherwise	 nobody	 knew	 about	 you,	 nobody	 would	 have	 ever
heard	about	you.
But	 this	 is	 the	problem:	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	 forgive	a	person	who	has	helped
you	in	any	way.	You	cannot	pay	it	back	to	me;	there	is	no	way	of	repaying,	and
you	feel	indebted.	A	certain	inferiority	that	you	are	not	self-made	creates	anger,
revenge.	But	all	this	will	subside.
Just	look	at	your	question.	You	say	that	you	have	been	with	Rajen,	and	you	feel,
"He	 loves	You	 just	 as	 he	 loved	You	before."	And	 still	 you	observe	 that	 in	 his
work	I	am	no	longer	there;	I	am	absent.
Can't	you	see	the	contradiction?	If	he	loves	me,	I	should	be	more	present	and	he
should	be	more	absent.	If	he	loves	me	totally,	then	only	I	will	be	present	and	he
will	not	be	present	at	all;	otherwise	the	word	`love'	is	just	a	word	as	everybody
else	is	using	it.
But	these	people	will	come	to	understand	soon.	It	will	take	a	little	time	because
while	 they	 were	 with	 me,	 and	 they	 were	 working	 with	 the	 people	 in	 therapy
groups,	it	was	as	if	they	were	constantly	nourished	by	my	love.
Soon	 they	will	 find	 out	 that	 that	 nourishment	 is	 no	 longer	 there	 because	 their
hearts	are	closed,	and	 they	will	 start	 feeling	 tired,	exhausted,	because	all	 those
people	who	come	for	therapy	are	going	to	take	their	energies.	Soon	they	will	find
that	they	have	lost	their	roots,	that	now	they	cannot	blossom.	But	it	will	 take	a
little	time.	You	can	cut	the	roots	--	still	the	flowers	will	remain	for	a	few	days,
but	not	for	long.
So	 let	 them	 come	 to	 the	 understanding	 by	 themselves,	 that	 here	 they	 used	 to
work	so	much	with	so	many	people	--	thousands	of	people	they	worked	with	--
but	they	never	felt	as	if	their	energies	were	sucked.	But	they	were	not	aware	why
they	were	not	feeling	like	that	--	because	their	roots	were	within	me.
But	 in	 the	 name	 of	 freedom,	 they	 have	withdrawn	 their	 roots.	 They	will	 start
dying.	It	will	be	sad	if	they	don't	understand	it.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	The	head	is	compulsory,	but	not	the	cap
16	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604160
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	TALKED	THE	OTHER	MORNING	OF	THE	CHILD	BEING	FORCED
TO	BE
OBEDIENT.	THAT	CHILD	IS	STILL	SITTING	HERE:	I	HATE	BEING	TOLD
WHAT
TO	 DO.	 BUT	 IN	 A	 WAY	 THAT	 SHOULD	 BE	 THE	 OTHER	 PERSON'S
PROBLEM;	 HOWEVER,	 I	 INSIST	 ON	 MAKING	 IT	 MY	 PROBLEM	 BY
REACTING	WITH
ANGER,	 RESENTMENT,	 AND	 THE	 NEED	 TO	 JUSTIFY	 MYSELF.	 IT	 IS
CLEAR
THAT	THOSE	WHO	DO	THE	TELLING	ALSO	HATE	BEING	TOLD	WHAT
TO	DO.
IT	SEEMS	AS	IF	WE	ARE	ALL	CAUGHT	IN	THE	SAME	INTRICATE	WEB,
PLAYING	 DIFFERENT	 ROLES	 AT	 DIFFERENT	 TIMES.	 AS	 AN	 ADULT
HOW
CAN	I	CONVERT	REACTION	INTO	RESPONSE	AND	RESPONSIBILITY?
The	first	thing	to	be	understood	very	clearly	is	what	I	mean	by	"disobedience."	It
is	not	the	disobedience	you	will	find	in	the	dictionaries.	My	idea	of	disobedience
is	not	to	hate	being	told	what	to	do	or,	in	reaction,	to	do	just	the	opposite.
Obedience	 needs	 no	 intelligence.	All	machines	 are	 obedient;	 nobody	 has	 ever
heard	of	a	disobedient	machine.	Obedience	is	simple,	too.	It	takes	from	you	the
burden	of	any	 responsibility.	There	 is	no	need	 to	 react,	you	have	simply	 to	do
what	is	being	said.	The	responsibility	rests	with	the	source	from	where	the	order
comes.	 In	a	certain	way	you	are	very	 free:	you	cannot	be	condemned	for	your
act.
After	the	second	world	war,	in	the	Nuremberg	trials,	so	many	of	Adolf	Hitler's
top	men	 simply	 said	 that	 they	were	not	 responsible,	 and	 they	don't	 feel	guilty.
They	were	simply	being	obedient	--	whatever	was	told	they	did	it,	and	they	did	it
with	as	much	efficiency	as	they	were	capable	of.
In	fact	to	make	them	responsible	and	condemn	them,	punish	them,	send	them	to
the	gallows,	according	to	me	was	not	fair.	It	was	not	justice,	 it	was	revenge.	If
Adolf	 Hitler	 had	 won	 the	 war,	 then	 Churchill's	 people,	 Roosevelt's	 people,
Stalin's	 people	or	 they	 themselves	would	have	been	 in	 the	 same	 situation,	 and
they	would	have	said	exactly	the	same	--	that	they	are	not	responsible.
If	Stalin	had	been	on	the	stand	in	the	court,	he	would	have	said	that	 it	was	the
order	of	the	high	command	of	the	communist	party.	It	was	not	his	responsibility
because	it	was	not	his	decision;	he	had	not	done	anything	on	his	own.	So	if	you
want	to	punish,	punish	the	source	of	 the	order.	But	you	are	punishing	a	person
who	simply	fulfilled	what	all	the	religions	teach,	and	all	the	leaders	of	the	world
teach	--	obedience.
Obedience	 has	 a	 simplicity;	 disobedience	 needs	 a	 little	 higher	 order	 of
intelligence.	Any	idiot	can	be	obedient,	in	fact	only	idiots	can	be	obedient.	The
person	of	 intelligence	 is	bound	 to	ask	why?	 --	 "Why	am	I	 supposed	 to	do	 it?"
And,	"Unless	I	know	the	reasons	and	the	consequences	of	it,	I	am	not	going	to
be	involved	in	it."	Then	he	is	becoming	responsible.
Responsibility	 is	 not	 a	 game.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 authentic	ways	of	 living	 --
dangerous	too	--	but	it	does	not	mean	disobedience	for	disobedience's	sake.	That
will	be	again	idiotic.
There	is	a	story	about	a	Sufi	mystic,	Mulla	Nasruddin.	From	the	very	beginning
it	 was	 thought	 that	 he	 was	 upside	 down.	 His	 parents	 were	 in	 trouble.	 If	 they
would	 say,	 "Go	 to	 the	 right,"	 he	 would	 go	 to	 the	 left.	 Finally	 his	 old	 father
thought	that	rather	than	bothering	with	him,	it	is	better,	if	they	want	him	to	go	to
the	left,	to	order	him	to	go	to	the	right	--
and	he	is	bound	to	go	to	the	left.
One	 day	 they	were	 crossing	 the	 river.	On	 their	 donkey	 they	 had	 a	 big	 bag	 of
sugar,	and	the	bag	was	leaning	more	towards	right	so	there	was	a	danger	that	it
may	slip	 into	 the	 river;	 it	had	 to	 remain	balanced	on	 the	donkey.	But	 to	 tell	 to
Nasruddin,	"Move	the	bag	towards	the	left,"	will	mean	losing	the	sugar	--	he	will
move	it	towards	the	right.
So	 he	 said	 to	Nasruddin,	 "My	 son,	 your	 bag	 is	 slipping;	move	 it	 towards	 the
right."	And	Nasruddin	moved	it	towards	the	right.
The	father	said,	"This	is	strange,	for	the	first	time	you	have	been	obedient!"
Nasruddin	said,	"For	the	first	 time	you	have	been	cunning.	I	knew	you	wanted
this	to	be	moved	towards	the	left;	I	could	see	with	my	eyes	where	it	needs	to	be
moved.	Even	in	such	a	subtle	way	you	cannot	make	me	obedient."
But	 just	 to	 go	 against	 obedience	 is	 not	 moving	 your	 intelligence	 higher.	 You
remain	 on	 the	 same	 plane.	Obedient	 or	 disobedient,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 change	 of
intelligence.
To	me	disobedience	is	a	great	revolution.
It	 does	 not	 mean	 saying	 an	 absolute	 no	 in	 every	 situation.	 It	 simply	 means
deciding	whether	 to	 do	 it	 or	 not,	whether	 it	 is	 beneficial	 to	 do	 it	 or	 not.	 It	 is
taking	the	responsibility	on	yourself.	It	is	not	a	question	of	hating	the	person	or
hating	to	be	told,	because	in	that	hating	you	cannot	act	obediently,	disobediently;
you	act	very	unconsciously.	You	cannot	act	intelligently.
When	you	 are	 told	 to	 do	 something,	 you	 are	 given	 an	opportunity	 to	 respond.
Perhaps	what	is	being	told	is	right;	then	do	it,	and	be	grateful	to	the	person	who
told	you	at	the	right	moment	to	do	it.	Perhaps	it	is	not	right	--	then	make	it	clear.
Bring	 your	 reasons,	 why	 it	 is	 not	 right;	 then	 help	 the	 person	 --	 what	 he	 is
thinking	is	going	in	a	wrong	way.
But	hate	has	no	place.
If	it	is	right,	do	it	lovingly.
If	it	is	not	right,	then	even	more	love	is	needed,	because	you	will	have	to	tell	to
the	person,	explain	to	the	person	that	it	is	not	right.
The	 way	 of	 disobedience	 is	 not	 stagnant,	 just	 going	 against	 every	 order	 and
feeling	anger	and	hate	and	revenge	towards	the	person.	The	way	of	disobedience
is	a	way	of	great	intelligence.
So	it	is	not	ultimately	obedience	or	disobedience.	Reduced	to	the	basic	fact,	it	is
simply	 a	 question	 of	 intelligence	 --	 behave	 intelligently.	 Sometimes	 you	 will
have	to	obey,	and	sometimes	you	will	have	to	say,	"I	am	sorry,	I	cannot	do	it."
But	there	is	no	question	of	hate,	there	is	no	question	of	revenge,	anger.	If	hate,
anger	or	revenge	arises,	 that	simply	means	you	know	that	what	is	being	told	is
right,	but	it	goes	against	your	ego	to	obey	it;	it	hurts	your	ego.	That	hurt	feeling
comes	up	as	hate,	as	anger.
But	the	question	is	not	your	ego;	the	question	is	the	act	that	you	have	to	do	--	and
you	have	 to	 bring	your	 total	 intelligence	 to	 figure	 it	 out.	 If	 it	 is	 right,	 then	be
obedient;	if	it	is	wrong,	be	disobedient.	But	there	is	no	conflict,	there	is	no	hurt
feeling.
If	you	are	obeying	it,	it	is	easier;	you	need	not	explain	to	anybody.	But	if	you	are
not	obeying	 it,	 then	you	owe	an	 explanation.	And	perhaps	your	 explanation	 is
not	right.	Then	you	have	to	move	back,	you	have	to	do	it.
A	man	should	live	intelligently	--	that's	all.
Then	whatever	he	does	is	his	responsibility.
It	 happens	 that	 even	 great	 intellectuals	 are	 not	 living	 intelligently.	 Martin
Heidegger,	one	of	the	greatest	intellectuals	of	this	age,	was	a	follower	of	Adolf
Hitler.	And	after	Adolf	Hitler's	 defeat	 and	 the	 exposure	of	his	basic	 animality,
brutality,	murderousness,	violence,	even	Martin	Heidegger	shrank	back	and	said,
"I	was	simply	following	the	leader	of	the	nation."
But	 a	philosopher	has	no	business	 to	 follow	 the	 leader	of	 the	nation.	 In	 fact	 a
philosopher's	basic	duty	is	to	guide	the	leaders	of	the	nation,	not	to	be	guided	by
them,	because	he	is	out	of	active	politics,	his	vision	is	more	clear.	He	is	standing
aloof,	he	can	see	things	which	people	who	are	involved	in	action	cannot	see.
But	it	is	easy	to	throw	responsibility...
If	Adolf	Hitler	had	been	victorious,	I	am	certain	Martin	Heidegger	would	have
said,	 "He	 is	 victorious	 because	 he	 followed	my	 philosophy."	And	 certainly	 he
was	 a	 great	 intellectual	 compared	 to	 Adolf	 Hitler.	 Adolf	 Hitler	 was	 just	 a
retarded	person.	But	power...
We	have	been	brought	up	 to	 follow	 the	powerful	 --	 the	 father,	 the	mother,	 the
teacher,	the	priest,	the	God.	Essentially	we	have	been	told	that	whoever	has	the
power	is	right:	"Might	is	right."	And	you	have	to	follow	it.	It	is	simple	because	it
needs	no	intelligence.	It	is	simple	because	you	can	never	be	told	that	it	was	your
responsibility,	that	whatever	happened	was	your	responsibility.
In	 all	 the	 armies	 around	 the	 world	 only	 one	 thing	 is	 taught	 through	 years	 of
training,	and	that	is	obedience.	In	Germany,	in	the	second	world	war,	there	were
good	 people,	 but	 they	 were	 heads	 of	 concentration	 camps.	 They	 were	 good
fathers,	good	husbands,	good	friends.	Nobody	could	have	conceived	--	watching
them	 in	 their	 families,	 with	 their	 friends,	 in	 the	 club	 --	 that	 these	 people	 are
burning	thousands	of	Jews	every	day.
And	they	were	not	feeling	guilty	at	all,	because	it	is	only	an	order	from	above.
And	that	is	their	whole	training,	that	you	have	to	follow	the	order.	It	has	become
part	 of	 their	 blood	 and	 their	 bones	 and	 their	marrow.	When	 the	 order	 comes,
obedience	is	the	only	way.
This	is	how	man	has	lived	up	to	now,	and	that's	why	I	say	obedience	is	one	of
the	greatest	crimes,	because	all	other	crimes	are	born	out	of	it.	It	deprives	you	of
intelligence,	it	deprives	you	of	decisiveness,	it	deprives	you	of	responsibility.	It
destroys	you	as	an	individual.	It	converts	you	into	a	robot.
Hence	I	am	all	for	disobedience.	But	disobedience	is	not	just	against	obedience.
Disobedience	is	above	obedience	and	the	so-called	disobedience	described	in	the
dictionaries.	Disobedience	is	simply	the	assertion	of	your	intelligence:	"I	take	the
responsibility,	and	I	will	do	everything	that	feels	right	to	my	heart,	to	my	being.
And	I	will	not	do	anything	that	goes	against	my	intelligence."
My	 whole	 life,	 from	 my	 childhood	 to	 the	 university,	 I	 was	 condemned
continuously	for	being	disobedient.	And	I	 insisted,	"I	am	not	disobedient.	I	am
simply	trying	to	figure	out,	with	my	own	intelligence,	what	is	right,	what	should
be	done,	and	I	 take	the	whole	responsibility	for	 it.	 If	something	goes	wrong,	 it
was	my	fault.	I	don't	want	to	condemn	somebody	else	because	he	has	told	me	to
do	it."
But	it	was	difficult	for	my	parents,	for	my	teachers,	professors.	In	my	school	it
was	 compulsory	 to	 wear	 caps,	 and	 I	 entered	 the	 high	 school	 without	 a	 cap.
Immediately	 the	 teacher	 said,	 "Are	 you	 aware	 or	 not	 that	 the	 cap	 is
compulsory?"
I	said,	"A	thing	like	a	cap	cannot	be	compulsory.	How	can	it	be	compulsory	to
put	 something	 on	 your	 head	 or	 not?	The	 head	 is	 compulsory,	 but	 not	 the	 cap.
And	I	have	come	with	the	head;	perhaps	you	have	come	only	with	the	cap."
He	 said,	 "You	 look	 a	 strange	 type.	 It	 is	 just	 written	 in	 the	 school	 code	 that
without	a	cap,	no	student	can	enter	the	school."
I	said,	"Then	that	code	has	to	be	changed.	It	is	written	by	human	beings,	not	by
God;	and	human	beings	commit	mistakes."
The	 teacher	 could	not	believe	 it.	He	 said,	 "What	 is	 the	matter	with	you?	Why
can't	you	just	wear	a	cap?"
I	said,	"The	trouble	is	not	with	the	cap;	I	want	to	find	out	why	it	is	compulsory,
its	reason,	its	results.	If	you	are	unable...	you	can	take	me	to	the	principal	and	we
can	discuss	it."	And	he	had	to	take	me	to	the	principal.
In	 India,	 Bengalis	 are	 the	 most	 intelligent	 people;	 they	 don't	 use	 caps.	 And
Punjabis	 are	 the	most	 unintelligent,	 simple	 people,	 and	 they	 use	 turbans.	 So	 I
said	to	the	principal,
"Looking	at	 the	 situation	 --	Bengalis	don't	use	any	caps	and	 they	are	 the	most
intelligent	people	in	the	country,	and	Punjabis	use	not	only	a	cap	but	a	very	tight
turban,	and	they	are	the	most	unintelligent	people.	"It	has	something	to	do	with
your	intelligence.	I	would	rather	not	take	the	risk."
The	principal	 listened	 to	me	and	he	said,	"The	boy	 is	stubborn,	but	what	he	 is
saying	makes	sense.	I	had	never	thought	about	it	--	this	is	true.	And	we	can	make
this	 code	 non-compulsory.	 Anybody	 who	 wants	 to	 wear	 a	 cap	 can	 wear	 one;
anybody	who	does	not	want	to	use,	there	is	no	need	--	because	it	has	nothing	to
do	with	learning,	teaching."
The	 teacher	 could	not	believe	 it.	On	 the	way	back	he	 told	me,	 "What	did	you
do?"
I	said,	"I	have	done	nothing,	I	simply	explained	the	situation.	I	am	not	angry,	I
am	perfectly	willing	to	use	a	cap.	If	you	feel	it	helps	intelligence,	why	only	one?
I	can	use	two	caps,	three	caps,	caps	upon	caps,	if	it	helps	intelligence...!	I	am	not
angry.	But	you	have	to	prove	it."
The	teacher	said	to	me	--	I	still	 remember	his	words	--	"You	will	be	in	trouble
your	whole	life.	You	will	not	fit	in	anywhere."
I	 said,	 "That's	 perfectly	 okay,	 but	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 be	 an	 idiot	 and	 fit	 in
everywhere.	 It	 is	good	 to	be	an	"unfit"	but	 intelligent.	And	I	have	come	 to	 the
school	 to	 learn	 intelligence,	 so	 I	 can	be	an	unfit	 intelligently!	Please	never	 try
again	to	change	me	from	an	individual	into	a	cog	in	the	wheel."
And	from	the	next	day	the	caps	disappeared;	only	he	had	come	with	a	cap.	And
looking	at	 the	class	and	the	school...	because	the	new	rule	has	come	into	force
that	 caps	 are	 not	 compulsory,	 all	 other	 teachers,	 even	 the	 principal,	 had	 come
without	caps.	He	 looked	so	 idiotic.	 I	 said	 to	him,	"There	 is	 still	 time.	You	can
take	it	off	and	put	it	in	your	pocket."
And	he	did	it!
He	 said,	 "That's	 right.	 If	 everybody	 is	 against	 the	 cap...	 I	 was	 simply	 being
obedient	to	the	law."
I	said,	"The	law	is	made	by	us.	We	can	change	it,	without	any	anger.	Can	we	not
discuss	each	and	everything	intelligently?"
So	 remember,	 when	 I	 say	 "disobedience"	 I	 don't	 mean	 replace	 obedience	 by
disobedience.	That	will	not	make	you	better.	I	use	the	word	`disobedience'	only
to	make	it	clear	to	you	that	it	is	up	to	you,	that	you	have	to	be	the	decisive	factor
of	all	your	actions	in	life.	And	that	gives	tremendous	strength,	because	whatever
you	do,	you	do	with	a	certain	rational	support	to	it.
I	entered	the	university,	and	the	first	question	the	vice-chancellor	asked	me	was,
"Why	have	you	been	growing	your	beard	and	mustache?"	And	it	was	in	a	way
natural	because	no	other	student	was	doing	that.
I	said	to	him,	"I	have	come	here	to	see	you	for	a	scholarship,	but	I	can	risk	the
scholarship.	I	cannot	risk	a	chance	for	an	argument."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?"
I	 said,	 "I	 mean	 I	 should	 ask	 you	 why	 you	 have	 shaved	 your	 beard,	 your
mustache.	I	have	done	nothing;	they	are	growing	by	themselves.	You	have	done
something;	you	have	not	allowed	them	to	grow	--	you	are	shaving	twice	a	day.
You	owe	me	an	explanation.	What	is	the	reason	why	you	are	doing	it?"
He	said,	"I	have	never	thought	about	it...	because	everybody	else	was	doing	it	I
started	doing	it."
I	said,	"That	is	not	a	very	intelligent	answer.	You	can	think	over	it.	I	will	come
every	day	and	knock	on	the	door,	so	whenever	you	have	found	the	answer	you
can	give	me	the	answer,	and	from	that	day	I	will	start	shaving."
Three	days	only	I	had	to	go	to	his	office	to	knock.	On	the	fourth	day	he	said	to
me,
"Excuse	me,	you	have	taken	away	my	sleep.	The	whole	day	I	am	thinking	about
my	beard	and	mustache,	and	 the	whole	day	 I	am	 looking	at	 the	door,	 thinking
that	you	must	be	coming	to	knock.	And	sometimes	I	hear	that	there	has	been	a
knock,	and	I	open	the	door	and	there	is	nobody,	so	I	am	hallucinating!	You	have
made	me	so	afraid!	You	simply	take	your	scholarship	and	do	whatever	you	want;
it	is	your	beard	and	your	mustache.	And	just	please	forgive	me	that	I	asked	you."
I	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 so	 easy.	You	 have	 to	 stop	 shaving;	 otherwise	 I	will	 continue
coming	every	day,	knocking	on	the	door,	waiting	for	the	answer."
He	said,	"My	God!	I	am	giving	you	the	scholarship,	which	really	should	not	be
given	to	you	because	you	don't	belong	to	this	university	--	you	are	coming	from
another	university,	and	according	to	our	rules,	 the	first	preference	will	be	for	a
graduate	of	this	university.	I	am	not	bothering	about	the	rule;	I	am	giving	you	the
scholarship	because	I	simply	want	you	to	stop	knocking	on	my	door."
I	said,	"You	can	keep	your	scholarship	and	you	can	give	it	to	anybody	you	want,
but	you	will	have	to	stop	shaving."
He	said,	"Don't	be	so	hard	on	an	old	man	--	because	what	will	people	say?	Don't
make	me	a	laughingstock!"
I	said,	"You	will	become	a	laughingstock	if	you	don't	listen	to	me,	because	then	I
am	going	to	tell	everybody	the	whole	story	of	what	has	been	happening	in	these
four	days."
And	you	will	not	believe	it:	he	gave	me	the	scholarship,	and	he	started	growing
the	beard!	The	whole	university	was	surprised,	because	he	was	very	fussy	about
his	clothes,	and	about	shaving	--	he	had	been	in	Oxford,	a	professor	of	history,
head	of	 the	 department	 of	 history	 there.	Everybody	 started	 asking	him,	 "What
has	happened?"
He	 said,	 "Nothing	 has	 happened.	 I	 just	 came	 to	 realize	 that	 I	 was	 doing
something	wrong,	because	I	cannot	give	any	reason.	This	young	man	has	made
me	aware	that	you	should	live	your	life	rationally.	I	have	been	an	imitator,	I	have
been	 very	 obedient	 to	 the	 surroundings.	 Nobody	 has	 told	 me	 --	 I	 have	 been
obedient	on	my	own.	But	because	 I	don't	have	any	reason,	 I	will	 let	my	beard
grow.	And	this	young	man	seems	to	be	right,	that	if	women	start	growing	beards,
mustaches..."
And	it	is	not	very	difficult.	There	are	hormones	which	can	be	injected	and	they
will	start	growing	beards.	Do	you	think	it	will	be	a	beautiful	world,	where	men
are	shaving	beards,	and	women	are	growing	beards?	A	woman	with	a	beard	will
freak	out	anybody!	And	the	same	happens	with	the	man;	just	the	women	are	very
patient,	 very	 tolerant.	 They	 even	 tolerate	 people	 without	 beards.	 No	man	 can
tolerate	his	wife	with	a	beard,	 I	 tell	you;	 it	 is	absolutely	certain.	Either	he	will
throw	 her	 out,	 or	 he	will	 hang	 himself!	 But	millions	 of	women	 are	 tolerating
beardless	men.
Nature	 never	 does	 anything	 without	 any	 reason.	 I	 have	 tried	 to	 look	 at	 men
without	beards.	It	seems	something	is	missing	in	the	man.	Just	look	at	Milarepa!
When	I	first	saw	him	here	I	was	so	shocked.	He	was	looking	so	beautiful	with	a
beard	and	now	he	is	looking	simply	idiotic!	He	has	lost	all	his	grandeur.
Just	live	intelligently.
If	 something	 is	 told	 to	 you,	 decide	whether	 it	 is	 right	 or	wrong,	 then	 you	 can
avoid	all	guilt	feelings.	Otherwise,	if	you	don't	do	it,	then	you	feel	guilty;	if	you
do	 it,	 again	 you	 feel	 guilty.	 If	 you	 do	 it	 you	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 being	 obedient,
subservient,	that	you	are	not	being	assertive,	that	you	are	not	being	yourself.	And
if	you	don't	do	it,	then	you	start	feeling	guilty	again	--	because	perhaps	it	was	the
right	thing	to	do,	and	you	are	not	doing	it.
There	is	no	need	for	all	 this	clumsiness.	Just	be	simple.	If	something	is	 told	to
you,	 respond	 intelligently.	And	whatsoever	your	 intelligence	decides,	do	 it	 this
way	or	that	--
but	you	are	responsible.	Then	there	is	no	question	of	guilt.
If	you	are	not	going	to	do	it,	explain	to	the	person	why	you	are	not	going	to	do	it.
And	explain	without	any	anger,	because	anger	simply	shows	that	you	are	weak,
that	 you	 don't	 really	 have	 an	 intelligent	 answer.	 Anger	 is	 always	 a	 sign	 of
weakness.	 Just	 plainly	 and	 simply	 explain	 the	 whole	 thing;	 perhaps	 the	 other
person	may	find	that	you	are	right	and	may	be	thankful	to	you.	Or	perhaps	the
other	person	may	have	better	reasons	than	you;	then	you	will	be	thankful	to	the
other	person	because	he	has	raised	your	consciousness.
Use	every	opportunity	in	life	for	raising	your	intelligence,	your	consciousness.
Ordinarily	 what	 we	 are	 doing	 is	 using	 every	 opportunity	 to	 create	 a	 hell	 for
ourselves.
Only	 you	 suffer,	 and	 because	 of	 your	 suffering,	 you	make	 others	 suffer.	 And
when	so	many	people	are	living	together,	and	if	they	all	create	suffering	for	each
other,	it	goes	on	multiplying.	That's	how	the	whole	world	has	become	a	hell.
It	can	be	instantly	changed.
Just	 the	 basic	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 understood,	 that	without	 intelligence	 there	 is	 no
heaven.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO
YOU	 HAVE	 BEEN	 CALLED	 "THE	 GENIUS	 OF	 THE	 ABSURD."	 YOUR
WAY	IN
THIS	 WORLD	 SEEMS	 SO	 RELENTLESSLY	 WILD	 AND	 CRAZY	 THAT
MANY
PEOPLE	--	PERHAPS	ALL	PEOPLE	--	ARE	FILLED	WITH	WONDER,	OR
CONFUSION;	AND	SOMETIMES,	EVEN	ANGER.	BUT	THE	EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT,	 GATHERING	 VOTES	 TO	 BAN	 YOU	 FROM	 EUROPE
FOREVER
SEEMS	 ALSO	 ABSURD	 AND	 CRAZY.	 I	 WONDER	 WHO	 IS	 MORE
ABSURD:	YOU
OR	 THEM?	 WHAT	 CAN	 WE	 DISCOVER	 ABOUT	 TRUTH	 IN	 YOUR
ABSURDITY?
They	 are	 not	 absurd;	 they	 are	 functioning	 very	 logically.	 They	 can	 see	 the
potential	 danger	 that	 I	 can	 bring	 to	 the	 younger	 generation,	 and	 which	 can
destroy	their	centuries	of	vested	interests.
They	are	not	absurd.	 It	may	 look	absurd	--	 the	whole	world	against	one	single
man	--	but	it	is	very	logical.	They	can	see	that	what	I	am	saying	is	true,	and	they
have	 no	way	 to	 defend	 their	morality,	 their	marriage,	 their	 family,	 their	 social
structure.	Naturally,	they	would	not	like	me	to	come	in	contact	with	their	youth,
because	 their	 youth	 is	 going	 to	 be	 powerful	 tomorrow;	 and	 if	 their	 youth
becomes	 aflame	with	my	 ideas,	 tomorrow	 the	 old	world	will	 have	 completely
collapsed.
To	save	the	old	and	to	prevent	the	new,	they	are	taking	every	measure	--	and	it	is
logical.
I	am	certainly	absurd.
You	 have	 to	 understand	 the	 meaning	 of	 absurd.	 In	 life	 everything	 that	 is
significant	is	absurd.	When	you	fall	 in	love	with	someone	it	 is	absurd,	it	 is	not
logical.	You	cannot	give	us	a	logical	answer	why	you	have	fallen	in	love	with	a
particular	person	--	man	or	woman.	It	is	something	beyond	you	that	has	gripped
you.	It	is	not	your	doing.	Even	if	you	wanted	to	prevent	it,	you	could	not	have
succeeded;	in	fact	you	were	absolutely	helpless.
Your	 joy	 in	 a	 world	 full	 of	 misery	 is	 absurd.	 It	 has	 no	 relatedness	 to	 the
miserable	humanity.	You	are	completely	alone.	Everything	that	is	valuable	--	you
love	music,	you	are	enchanted	with	beauty,	you	are	seeking	 truth,	you	want	 to
know	yourself	--	all	these	are	absurd	activities.
Meditating	is	absurd;	it	would	be	better	and	more	logical	to	earn	money.
Just	before	I	left	Nepal,	a	group	of	sannyasins	from	Delhi	had	come	to	prevent
me	from	going	out	of	Nepal	or	out	of	India	--	a	kind	of	deputation.	They	were
ready	to	purchase	a	big	palace	and	make	every	arrangement	for	a	commune.	But
I	told	them,	"Right	now	you	are	being	emotional.	You	will	be	in	difficulty.	The
palace	costs	one	million	dollars.
Perhaps	 you	 can	 collect	 that	 much	 donation,	 saying	 that	 if	 the	 palace	 is	 not
purchased,	I	am	going	to	leave.	But	the	palace	is	not	the	only	thing;	then	there
will	be	at	least	fifty	people	living	there,	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	support	them.
"It	is	not	a	question	of	one	day,	so	be	logical.	Your	asking	me	to	remain	in	India
is	 out	 of	 love,	 but	 it	 is	 absurd.	You	will	 create	 trouble	 for	me	 and	 trouble	 for
yourselves.	So	you	go	back,	 think	over	 it.	 I	will	wait	here	 ten	days	more.	You
can	come	after	seven	days	with	the	decision."
They	never	came.	They	must	have	understood	the	 implications	--	 they	will	not
be	able	to	manage	it.	But	their	insistence	was	out	of	love,	not	out	of	reason.
I	am	absurd	because	whatever	I	am	teaching	to	you	goes	against	everything	that
you	have	been	taught.	And	you	have	been	taught	things	for	so	long	that	you	have
forgotten	completely	that	they	are	questionable.
For	 example,	 every	 culture	 in	 the	 world	 has	 believed,	 has	 conditioned	 its
younger	 generations,	 with	 an	 idea	 that	 love	 is	 permanent,	 that	 if	 you	 love	 a
person	you	love	that	person	forever.	This	idea	has	prevailed	for	centuries	all	over
the	world.	It	looks	logical	that	if	you	love	a	person,	the	very	phenomenon	of	love
will	make	it	permanent.	And	why	has	everybody	accepted	it?	--	because	you	also
desire	that	it	should	be	permanent.
Everybody	wants	his	love	to	be	permanent.
So	the	traditional	idea	and	your	desire	synchronize,	and	it	becomes	a	truth...	so
much	 so	 that	 if	 your	 love	 changes,	 then	not	 only	others	 but	 you	yourself	 start
thinking	that	it	was	not	love	--	that's	why	it	changed.	You	don't	change	the	basic
idea	 of	 permanent	 love;	 you	 start	 thinking,	 "Perhaps	what	 I	 thought	was	 love
was	not	love,	because	it	has	changed	--
and	love	does	not	change."
I	 am	bound	 to	 be	 absurd,	 because	 I	want	 to	 say	 to	 you	 that	 in	 life	 everything
changes	--	in	spite	of	your	desire	for	no	change.	It	does	not	matter	that	sitting	by
the	side	of	the	river	you	desire	that	the	river	should	not	go	on	flowing,	that	the
seasons	 should	 not	 change,	 that	 the	 flowers	 should	 not	 die,	 that	 youth	 should
never	turn	into	old	age,	that	life	should	never	end	up	in	a	graveyard.
Your	 desires	 apart...	 existence	 does	 not	 listen	 to	 your	 desires,	 and	 does	 not
follow	your	desires,	however	beautiful	and	however	pious.	Existence	goes	on	in
its	own	way.
Everything	changes	--	and	love	is	not	an	exception.
Now,	perhaps	I	am	the	first	person	who	wants	to	make	it	understood	by	everyone
that	love	changes:	it	begins,	it	comes	of	age,	it	becomes	old,	it	dies.	And	I	think
it	is	good	the	way	it	is.	It	gives	you	many	more	chances	of	loving	other	people,
to	make	life	richer	--
because	each	person	has	something	special	 to	contribute	 to	you.	The	more	you
love,	the	more	rich	you	are,	the	more	loving	you	become.
And	if	the	false	idea	of	permanence	is	dropped,	jealousy	will	drop	automatically;
then	jealousy	is	meaningless.	Just	as	you	fall	in	love	and	you	cannot	do	anything
about	 it,	 one	 day	you	 fall	 out	 of	 love	 and	you	 cannot	 do	 anything	 about	 it.	A
breeze	 came	 into	 your	 life	 and	passed.	 It	was	 good	 and	beautiful	 and	 fragrant
and	cool,	and	you	would	have	liked	it	to	remain	always	there.	You	tried	hard	to
close	all	the	windows	and	all	the	doors,	to	keep	the	breeze	fragrant,	fresh.	But	by
closing	 the	 windows	 and	 the	 doors,	 you	 killed	 the	 breeze,	 its	 freshness,	 its
fragrance;	it	became	stale.
Every	marriage	is	stale.
I	am	absurd,	because	I	don't	want	 to	enforce	 logic	--	which	 is	man-made	--	on
existence.
In	 trying	 to	 impose	 logic	 on	 existence	 you	 simply	 create	misery	 for	 yourself,
because	 you	 are	 going	 to	 fail;	 your	 failure	 is	 absolute.	Millions	 of	 people	 are
simply	pretending	 that	 they	go	on	 loving	each	other.	Once	 they	had	 loved,	but
now	 it	 is	 only	 a	 memory,	 and	 becoming	 fainter	 and	 fainter	 every	 day.	 But
because	of	the	idea	of	permanency	they	are	afraid	to	say	the	truth.
And	it	is	not	anger,	it	is	not	hate;	it	is	nothing	against	the	other.	It	is	simply	the
way	of	life	--	love	changes.	It	is	seasonal,	and	it	is	good	to	have	summer	and	to
have	winter,	and	to	have	rain...	to	have	the	fall	and	the	spring.
Your	whole	 life	 can	 be	 lived	 either	 as	 logic	 or	 as	 existence.	Existence	will	 be
absurd.	One	moment	it	is	one	thing;	another	moment,	it	is	something	else.	And
you	are	left	with	the	choice	either	to	go	on	pretending	that	it	is	still	the	same,	or
to	 be	 honest	 and	 sincere	 and	 to	 say	 that	 it	was	 a	 beautiful	moment	 but	 it	 has
passed.	The	oasis	is	passed	and	now	we	are	in	a	desert,	and	we	know	that	we	are
in	a	desert;	we	cannot	enjoy,	we	cannot	rejoice.
Still	we	are	bound	to	each	other	with	the	idea	of	permanent	love.	That	permanent
love	is	a	logical	idea.
Real	love	is	a	real	roseflower:	it	is	going	to	change.	From	morning	to	evening	it
is	going	to	take	different	shapes,	different	shades,	and	by	the	evening	it	will	be
gone.	And	I	don't	think	that	there	is	anything	wrong.
Love	 is	 just	one	example.	Your	whole	 life	 is	 full	of	 such	 things.	For	example,
every	child	is	taught	respect	for	the	parents,	respect	for	the	teachers,	respect	for
the	elders.	Respect	is	a	beautiful	experience,	but	when	you	have	to	be	respectful
just	as	a	mannerism,	it	is	ugly.
I	was	told	again	and	again	in	my	childhood,	"You	have	to	be	respectful."
I	used	to	tell	my	father,	"Before	you	tell	me	to	be	respectful	towards	somebody,
you	should	at	least	be	certain	whether	he	is	worthy	of	respect;	otherwise	you	are
making	me	phony.	 I	know	that	a	man	is	not	worthy	of	respect;	but	he	 is	elder,
and	I	am	supposed	to	be	respectful.	I	am	ready	to	be	respectful,	but	there	must	be
something	corresponding	to	it.	For	what	am	I	going	to	be	respectful?"
But	 for	 centuries	 upon	 centuries,	 the	 same	 idea	 in	 different	 dimensions...	 be
respectful	towards	your	parents.	But	why?	Just	because	they	have	given	birth	to
you?	Was	it	not	a	joy	to	them?	If	it	was	a	joy	to	them,	they	have	already	got	their
reward.	 Now	 if	 they	 want	 respect	 from	 you,	 then	 they	 should	 be	 worthy	 of
respect.
And	my	father	would	say,	"You	are	always	talking	absurdities.	We	have	to	live	in
a	society,	and	the	society	runs	through	a	certain	discipline.	Certain	manners	have
to	 be	 followed;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 crushed	 by	 the	 society.	 So	 don't	 be
absurd,"	he	was	continuously	saying	to	me.
And	I	said,	"I	would	not	like	to	be	crushed	by	the	society,	but	I	cannot	behave
logically,	seeing	that	existence	is	moving	in	a	different	direction.	What	you	are
saying	is	logical.
You	are	saying,	`This	 is	 the	way	things	have	always	been	done;	and	this	 is	 the
way	things	should	be	done.'"
And	there	is	a	logic	in	it	--	that	if	you	are	respectful	towards	others,	others	will
be	respectful	towards	you;	if	you	help	the	society,	the	society	will	help	you.	But
if	you	go	on	criticizing	the	society,	if	you	go	on	finding	faults	everywhere,	you
will	fall	alone,	and	you	cannot	win	against	the	vast	majority.
Logic	is	the	way	of	winning	in	the	society.
Be	logical,	and	it	will	be	easier	for	you	to	climb	the	ladders.
I	said,	"I	would	like	to	remain	true	to	existence	--	and	existence	is	absurd.	It	has
no	 logic,	 it	 has	 no	 meaning.	 It	 has	 immense	 beauty,	 it	 has	 tremendous
possibilities	for	ecstasy,	but	you	cannot	make	a	logical	system	out	of	it."
So	 remember	 it:	 the	 European	 parliament,	 the	 American	 government	 --	 and
others	will	soon	be	following	--	are	all	behaving	very	logically.
But	I	am	not	a	logician.
I	am	an	existentialist.
I	believe	in	this	meaningless,	beautiful	chaos	of	existence,	and	I	am	ready	to	go
with	it	wherever	it	leads.
I	 don't	 have	 a	 goal,	 because	 existence	 has	 no	 goal.	 It	 simply	 is,	 flowering,
blossoming,	 dancing	 --	 but	 don't	 ask	why.	 Just	 an	 overflow	 of	 energy,	 for	 no
reason	at	all.
I	am	with	existence.
And	that's	what	I	call	being	a	sannyasin:
To	be	with	existence.
The	only	thing	you	will	have	to	renounce	will	be	your	logical	mind.
So	start	living	in	an	existential	but	illogical	way.
The	world	may	call	you	absurd,	mad...
So	what?
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	I	want	to	provoke	your	jealousy
16	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604165
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO09
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
102
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
BECAUSE	 OF	 YOUR	 GENIUS	 IN	 COMBINING	 AND	 THEN	 GOING
BEYOND	THE
MATERIAL	AND	THE	SPIRITUAL,	AND	BECAUSE	YOU	SEEM	TO	HAVE
AN
ABUNDANCE	 OF	 BOTH	 WORLDS,	 I	 THINK	 THAT	 MANY	 NON-
SANNYASINS
AND	 SANNYASINS	 FEEL	 JEALOUS	 OF	 YOU.	 PEOPLE	 RESENT	 AND
DON'T
WANT	TO	FEED	ABUNDANCE.	IF	THEY	FEED	ANYTHING,	THEY	FEED
POVERTY.	IF	YOU	WERE	SITTING	IN	A	CAVE,	NAKED,	COLD,	AND
MEDITATING,	 IT	 WOULD	 BE	 ONE	 THING,	 BUT	 YOU	 ARE	 NOT.
SANNYASINS
WHO	 NEVER	 DREAMED	 OF	 HAVING	 A	 ROLLS	 ROYCE	 SEEM	 TO
YEARN	FOR
ONE	 MORE	 THAN	 FOR	 THE	 STATE	 OF	 MEDITATION	 EVEN	 AFTER
SPENDING
YEARS	WITH	YOU.	YOU	SEEM	TO	BE	SPARKING	GREED	FOR	THE
MATERIAL,	RATHER	THAN	A	YEARNING	FOR	THE	BEYOND	--	OR	AT
LEAST
THAT'S	 THE	MESSAGE	 THAT'S	 BEING	 RECEIVED	 BY	 SOME.	 COULD
YOU
COMMENT.
It	 is	 part	 of	 my	 whole	 device	 to	 change	 the	 very	 structure	 of	 human
consciousness.
The	 past	 has	 revered	 poverty,	 asceticism,	 masochistic	 attitudes.	 A	 man	 was
respected	 if	 he	was	 renouncing	 all	 that	 is	 pleasant,	 all	 that	 is	 comfortable.	He
was	 respected	 for	 torturing	 himself;	 the	 greater	 the	 torture,	 the	 greater	 the
respect.	 The	 whole	 human	 past	 is	 masochistic,	 and	 all	 the	 religions	 have
contributed	to	this	insanity.
My	effort	 is	to	change	such	a	vast	past	and	its	influence.	So	it	has	been	only	a
device.	 I	have	not	been	creating	desires	 for	materialistic	 things	 in	people;	 they
are	 there	 without	 anybody's	 creating	 them.	 Yes,	 they	 have	 been	 repressed	 so
deeply	 that	 people	 have	 even	 forgotten	 that	 they	 had	 them.	 I	 am	 not	 creating
them;	 I	 simply	want	 to	 remove	 the	 cover-up,	 the	 repression,	 and	 to	make	 the
person	realize	that	he	wants	a	Rolls	Royce	more	than	enlightenment.
This	realization	will	be	a	basic	step	towards	enlightenment,	because	it	will	make
him	aware	of	his	own	reality,	his	greed.
There	was	no	need	 for	ninety-three	Rolls	Royces.	 I	 could	not	use	ninety-three
Rolls	Royces	simultaneously	--	 the	same	model,	 the	same	car.	But	 I	wanted	 to
make	it	clear	to	you	that	you	would	be	ready	to	drop	all	your	desires	for	truth,
for	love,	for	spiritual	growth	to	have	a	Rolls	Royce.	I	was	knowingly	creating	a
situation	in	which	you	would	feel	jealous.
The	 function	 of	 a	 master	 is	 very	 strange.	 He	 has	 to	 help	 you	 come	 to	 an
understanding	of	your	inner	structure	of	consciousness:	it	is	full	of	jealousy.
All	the	traditions	and	the	whole	past	have	done	just	the	opposite.	The	so-called
saint,	in	all	the	traditions,	lives	in	such	a	way	that	you	will	never	feel	jealous	of
him.	Note	that	point.
You	 will	 feel	 sympathetic	 towards	 him,	 respectful	 towards	 him;	 but
respectfulness	 is	 not	 your	 reality,	 sympathy	 is	 not	 your	 nature.	 The	 saint	 is
torturing	 himself,	 that	 is	 not	 his	 nature	 either.	 He	 is	 being	 unnatural	 to	 gain
respect,	to	fulfill	his	ego.	He	is	not	interested	in	spiritual	growth;	he	is	interested
in	respectability,	in	being	worshipped	like	a	god.	And	he	is	ready	to	do	anything
for	it.
He	is	living	in	an	illusion,	and	he	is	creating	a	great	illusion	in	people	who	come
to	him.
He	helps	them	to	feel	that	they	are	religious,	that	they	are	spiritual,	because	they
respect	a	saint,	 they	worship	a	saint.	They	are	not	yet	 ready	to	do	such	ascetic
disciplines	for	themselves,	but	they	hope	some	day...	this	is	their	ideal.	They	are
completely	 forgetting	 that	 they	 are	 jealous	 human	 beings.	 And	 the	 saint	 is
helping	them	to	forget	their	jealousy;	he	is	helping	them	to	repress	it.
My	 work	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 totally	 different.	 I	 want	 to	 provoke	 your	 jealousy,
because	that	is	the	only	way	to	get	rid	of	it.	First	you	have	to	know	that	you	have
it;	then	you	can	drop	it,	because	it	is	misery	and	hell.	But	you	can	repress	it	so
deeply	that	the	question	of	dropping	it	does	not	arise.
I	 have	 lived	 in	 abundance	 because	 to	 me	 there	 is	 no	 division	 between	 the
material	and	the	spiritual.
The	 teaching	 to	 live	 in	poverty	 is	 dangerous:	 you	will	 be	materially	poor,	 and
you	will	be	spiritually	poor	too,	because	there	is	no	division.	I	teach	you	to	live
richly,	 in	 abundance,	materially	 and	 spiritually	 --	 both.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
whether	 you	 should	 live	 materially	 in	 abundance,	 or	 spiritually.	 The	 basic
question	is	whether	you	should	live	in	abundance,	in	richness	--	which	is	natural
and	existential.	It	is	your	very	basic	urge	to	blossom	in	abundance,	to	know	all
the	colors,	to	know	all	the	songs,	to	know	all	the	beauties	of	life.
But	 certainly	 I	 am	bound	 to	 come	 in	 conflict	with	 the	 old,	 because	 the	whole
human	past	has	been	praising	poverty	and	making	it	equal	to	spirituality,	which
is	absolute	nonsense.
Spirituality	is	the	greatest	richness	that	can	happen	to	a	man,	and	it	contains	all
other	richnesses.	It	is	not	against	any	other	richness;	it	is	simply	against	all	kinds
of	poverty.	So	what	I	have	been	trying	is	something	so	radical	that	it	is	bound	to
create	 antagonism	 all	 around	 the	 world	 from	 every	 corner.	 People	 have	 lived
with	certain	values	for	so	long	that	although	those	values	have	given	them	only
misery,	they	don't	see	the	connection.
Those	values	have	not	made	 them	fulfilled,	 contented	 --	but	 they	don't	 see	 the
connection.
I	want	my	 people	 to	 become	 symbolic...	 to	make	 the	whole	world	 aware	 that
their	misery	 is	 caused	 by	 their	wrong	 values,	 that	 they	 are	 poor	 because	 they
have	respected	poverty	--
and	their	behavior	is	so	insane.	On	the	one	hand	they	will	respect	poverty,	and
on	 the	 other	 hand	 they	 will	 say,	 "Serve	 the	 poor."	 Strange!	 If	 poverty	 is	 so
spiritual	 then	 the	most	 spiritual	 thing	will	 be	 to	make	 every	 rich	man	poor,	 to
help	the	rich	man	to	be	poor,	so	he	can	become	spiritual.	Why	help	the	poor?	Do
you	want	to	destroy	their	spirituality?
But	a	deep	unconsciousness,	a	great	blindness	exists,	and	I	am	fighting	against	a
mountainous	 unconsciousness,	 darkness.	 Naturally	 they	 will	 be	 very	 much
annoyed.
They	would	have	loved	me,	they	would	have	worshipped	me.	And	it	was	so	easy
for	me	to	do	what	 they	wanted,	but	 then	I	would	have	been	continuing	the	old
misery,	the	old	disease,	the	old	stupidity.	I	decided	to	be	unrespectable,	but	not	to
help	any	nonsensical	value	system.
It	is	a	very	simple	thing	to	see	why	ascetics	--	self-destructive	people	engaged	in
a	 kind	 of	 slow	 suicide	 --	 have	 been	 respected;	 it	 is	 because	 it	 is	 unnatural,
because	 you	 cannot	 do	 it.	 They	 are	 doing	 something	which	 you	 cannot	 do.	 If
somebody	 is	 standing	 on	 their	 head	 on	 the	 road,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 crowd
immediately,	but	you	are	walking	on	your	legs	--
no	crowd	will	be	there!
What	is	that	man	doing	that	attracts	the	crowd?	He	is	doing	something	that	the
crowd	cannot	do.	He	is	proving	mind	over	body,	he	is	proving	spirit	over	nature.
Torturing	his	body	he	is	proving	that	he	is	not	the	body,	it	does	not	affect	him.
By	fasting,	not	sleeping,	or	standing	for	days	he	is	proving	that	what	you	cannot
do	he	can	do;	he	is	superior	to	you.	You	also	can	do	what	he	is	doing,	you	just
have	to	be	a	little	stupid,	you	just	have	to	be	a	little	suicidal,	destructive.	All	that
you	need	is	a	certain	pleasure	in	pain	and	you	can	become	a	great	spiritual	saint.
I	 have	 looked	 at	 the	 whole	 history	 and	 found	 not	 one	 single	 man	 revolting
against	 this	 suicidal	 attitude	 towards	 life,	 this	 anti-life	 attitude.	 Perhaps	 they
were	afraid	that	nobody	was	going	to	listen	to	them,	afraid	that	they	would	lose
their	respectability.
I	decided	in	the	very	beginning	days	of	my	life	that	there	is	one	thing	I	have	to
be	aware	of,	and	that	is	not	to	be	bothered	about	respectability.	Then	things	are
very	simple.	Then	I	can	do	what	is	natural	and	what	is	healthy.	And	then	I	can
manage	a	bridge	between	matter	and	spirit,	between	this	world	and	that	world.
And	to	me,	to	live	in	abundance	is	the	only	spiritual	thing	in	the	world.
Just	look	at	existence	and	its	abundance.	What	is	the	need	of	so	many	flowers	in
the	 world?	 Just	 roses	 would	 have	 been	 enough,	 but	 existence	 is	 abundant:
millions	 and	 millions	 of	 flowers,	 millions	 of	 birds,	 millions	 of	 animals	 --
everything	in	abundance.
Nature	is	not	ascetic;	it	is	everywhere	dancing	--	in	the	ocean,	in	the	trees.	It	is
everywhere	singing	--	in	the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees,	in	the	birds...
What	is	the	need	of	millions	of	solar	systems,	each	solar	system	having	millions
of	stars?
There	seems	to	be	no	need,	except	that	abundance	is	the	very	nature	of	existence,
that	richness	is	the	very	core,	that	existence	does	not	believe	in	poverty.	Look	at
nature,	look	at	existence,	and	you	will	see	that	what	man	has	done	is	against	it.
My	effort	is	to	bring	man	back	to	his	natural	self.
I	will	be	condemned,	I	will	be	criticized.	Every	religion,	every	 tradition,	every
morality,	every	ethical	code	is	going	to	condemn	me.	That	does	not	surprise	me!
I	expect	it,	because	what	I	am	saying	and	doing	is	changing	the	very	course	of
human	consciousness.
I	 don't	 think	 that	 by	 torturing	 yourself	 you	 can	 meditate	 more	 easily;	 on	 the
contrary,	if	your	body	is	pleasantly	at	ease	you	can	meditate	more	easily.	I	don't
think	that	when	you	are	fasting	you	can	meditate.	You	can	only	think	of	food	and
nothing	else;	you	will	dream	of	food	and	nothing	else.	But	if	you	are	well	fed,
well	 nourished,	 you	 don't	 think	 of	 food	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need.	 The	 body	 is
completely	satisfied,	it	does	not	create	any	disturbance.
To	 live	 pleasurably,	 to	 live	 joyously	 is	 not	 against	meditation.	 It	 is	 really	 the
basic	need	of	meditation.	I	know	many	kinds	of	ascetics	but	I	have	never	seen
any	intelligence	in	them,	I	have	never	seen	any	creativity	in	them.	I	have	never
seen	in	their	eyes	a	 light	of	 the	beyond,	or	 in	 their	gestures	some	message	that
cannot	 be	 said	 through	 words.	 They	 don't	 have	 anything.	 They	 are	 simply
starving	--	and	starving	because	it	fulfills	the	ego,	because	the	more	they	starve,
the	more	they	torture	themselves,	more	and	more	people	come	to	worship	them.
Now	this	is	to	me	just	an	insane	chapter	in	the	history	of	man;	it	has	to	be	closed.
It	is	time	that	we	start	a	new	chapter	--	natural,	existential,	life-affirmative	--	and
create	a	bridge	between	the	body	and	the	soul...	not	a	wall	but	a	bridge.
There	 is	no	need	 for	 any	conflict	 and	war.	Fighting	with	yourself,	you	are	not
going	 to	get	anything;	you	will	be	simply	destroying	yourself	 slowly.	All	your
so-called	 saints	 are	 mostly	 mentally	 sick,	 and	 they	 have	 made	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	sick.
Your	question	is	significant.	I	have	been	asked	again	and	again,	"Spiritual	people
are	respected	everywhere,	why	are	you	opposed	everywhere?"
I	 said,	 "Only	 one	 thing	 is	 certain:	 either	 they	 are	 not	 spiritual,	 or	 I	 am	 not
spiritual.	 We	 both	 cannot	 be	 spiritual,	 that	 is	 certain.	 And	 as	 far	 as	 I	 am
concerned,	 I	say	 that	 they	are	sick,	not	spiritual,	and	 they	are	worshipped	by	a
sick	society."
It	is	a	vicious	circle:	the	society	creates	the	sick	saint,	the	sick	saint	creates	the
sick	society	--	and	it	goes	on	and	on.	I	have	no	part	in	this	sickness,	the	so-called
spirituality.	 I	 am	 just	 a	 contented,	 fulfilled	 human	 being.	 What	 more	 do	 you
want?	And	what	more	can	spirituality	be?
We	 want	 people	 to	 be	 fulfilled	 and	 contented,	 and	 this	 journey	 towards
contentment,	 fulfillment,	enlightenment	should	start	with	 the	body.	You	cannot
begin	from	anywhere	else.	You	can	begin	only	from	the	beginning.	You	cannot
ignore	the	roots	and	just	go	on	praising	the	flowers.	Your	flowers	will	die,	and
you	will	have	to	replace	them	with	plastic	flowers	if	the	roots	are	not	taken	care
of.	Is	there	any	conflict	between	the	roots	and	the	blossoms?	It	is	the	same	juice
--	and	you	have	to	begin	with	the	roots,	because	flowers	will	come	only	in	the
end.
But	with	humanity	we	have	been	almost	mad.	We	have	never	bothered	about	the
roots,	 and	 we	 have	 talked	 only	 about	 flowers.	 We	 talk	 about	 people	 being
nonviolent,	being	compassionate,	being	loving	--	so	much	that	you	can	love	your
enemy,	so	much	 that	you	can	even	 love	your	neighbor.	We	 talk	about	 flowers,
but	nobody	is	interested	in	the	roots.
The	question	is:	"Why	are	we	not	loving	beings?"
It	is	not	a	question	of	being	loving	to	this	person,	to	that	person,	to	the	friend,	to
the	enemy.	The	question	is	whether	you	are	loving	or	not.	Do	you	love	your	own
body?	Have	you	ever	 cared	 to	 touch	your	own	body	with	a	 loving	caress?	Do
you	love	yourself?	No,	all	your	religions	teach	you	to	hate	yourself:	you	are	the
wrong	person	and	you	have	to	put	yourself	right;	you	are	a	sinner	and	you	have
to	 become	 a	 saint.	 How	 can	 you	 love	 yourself?	 --	 you	 cannot	 even	 accept
yourself.	And	these	are	the	roots!
I	will	teach	you	to	love	yourself.	And	if	you	can	love	yourself,	if	you	can	rejoice
in	 being	 yourself,	 naturally	 your	 love	will	 go	 on	 spreading.	 It	will	 become	 an
aura	around	you;	you	will	love	your	friends,	and	in	a	certain	way	you	will	love
your	enemies	too	--	because	just	the	way	the	friend	defines	you,	your	enemy	also
defines	you.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 a	 recent	 incident.	 In	 India,	 before	 freedom	 came	 to	 that
country,	 there	was	 great	 struggle	 between	Hindus	 and	Mohammedans	 because
Hindus	wanted	 the	country	 to	 remain	one,	undivided.	 It	was	favorable	 to	 them
because	 they	 were	 the	 majority	 religion.	 If	 India	 was	 undivided,	 then
Mohammedans	had	no	possibility	of	ever	being	in	power;	they	were	the	second
majority	religion.
The	Mohammedans	wanted	a	separate	country	and	they	had	their	reasons:	"We
have	a	different	 language,	we	have	a	different	religion,	we	are	a	different	race,
we	cannot	live	together."	But	the	basic	reason	was	not	language,	not	culture,	not
race,	 because	 they	had	 lived	 together	 for	 two	 thousand	years,	 so	 there	was	 no
problem	about	 that.	The	 real	 thing	was,	 if	 they	had	a	 separate	country	of	 their
own	they	would	have	power.
The	leader	for	an	undivided	India	was	Mahatma	Gandhi,	and	the	leader	for	the
division	 of	 India	 and	 for	 a	 new	 land,	 Pakistan,	 for	 Mohammedans	 was
Mohammed	Ali	Jinnah.	They	were	archenemies	their	whole	life.
In	 1948	 Gandhi	 was	 shot	 dead.	 Mohammed	 Ali	 Jinnah	 was	 now	 governor
general	 of	 Pakistan.	He	was	 sitting	 on	 the	 lawn	 as	 the	 news	 reached	 him	 that
Gandhi	had	been	shot.
The	person	who	had	brought	this	news	thought	that	he	would	be	happy	to	hear	it
--	 that	his	 long,	 long	enemy	is	dead.	But	he	was	surprised:	Jinnah	became	sad,
and	he	went	into	the	house	and	told	his	secretary	that	he	should	not	be	disturbed.
"If	Gandhi	is	dead,	much	of	me	is	dead	too,	because	we	defined	each	other."
A	 great	 insight	 --	 the	 enemy	 also	 defines	 you,	 in	 the	 same	way	 as	 the	 friend
defines	you.
Jinnah	lived	only	one	year	longer,	and	he	was	never	again	seen	so	happy	as	he
used	to	be;	this	last	year	was	just	sadness.	Without	Gandhi	a	gap,	a	great	gap...	A
life-long	 enmity	 is	 a	 relationship,	 a	 deep	 relationship.	 So	 the	 man	 of
understanding	will	love	the	enemy	too	-
-	not	for	any	spiritual	reason,	but	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	is	defining	him,	he
is	part	of	his	existence.	Without	him	there	will	be	a	gap	which	nobody	else	can
fill.
The	question	 is	 not	 "love	your	 enemies"	 the	way	 Jesus	 says	 it.	That	 is	 simply
egoistic:	love	your	enemies	because	you	are	a	superior	spiritual	being,	and	he	is
just	an	ordinary	human	being;	so	love	him,	show	him	the	true	path	of	spirituality.
But	it	is	just	fulfilling	your	own	ego.
I	will	also	say,	"Love	him,"	but	not	for	the	same	reasons.	I	will	say,	"Love	him,"
because	he	defines	you;	he	is	part	of	you,	just	as	you	are	part	of	him	--	not	only
the	 friend,	 but	 the	 enemy	 too.	 It	 does	not	make	you	 "holier	 than	 thou."	 It	 is	 a
simple	understanding	of	how	psychology	functions.
Love	yourself.	But	you	can	 love	yourself	only	 if	you	drop	 the	 idea	of	being	a
sinner.	You	can	drop	the	idea	of	being	a	sinner	if	you	drop	the	idea	that	there	is	a
god.
If	there	is	a	god,	you	are	a	sinner;	you	cannot	be	anything	else.	If	there	is	a	god,
then	you	are	a	sinner.	You	have	been	expelled	from	the	kingdom	of	god,	and	you
will	be	accepted	back	only	if	you	become	obedient	--	so	obedient	that	you	lose
your	 individuality	 to	 a	 hypothetical	 god	whom	 you	 have	 never	 ever	 seen	 and
whom	you	will	never	see.
Your	religions	don't	allow	you	to	love	yourself,	but	then	they	talk	all	this	bullshit
of	loving	your	enemies	and	loving	your	neighbors.	But	you	can	see	the	point.	If
you	 cannot	 love	 yourself,	 you	 cannot	 love	 anybody	 else	 in	 the	 world.	 That
loving	energy	has	 to	come	from	your	heart,	and	 there,	 there	 is	sitting	a	sinner,
condemned,	waiting	to	be	thrown	into	hellfire.
I	have	heard...	In	the	middle	ages	when	people,	particularly	women,	were	more
naive,	more	simple,	there	were	Christian	preachers	who	would	go	on	threatening
them	with	hellfire,	describing	in	minute	details	how	they	will	be	tortured.	And	it
used	 to	 happen	 that	many	women	would	 faint	 in	 the	 churches	 listening	 to	 the
sermons,	because	the	hellfire	and	the	minute	details	would	drive	them	nuts.	Now
these	women,	can	they	accept	themselves	as	they	are?	--	No!
All	 the	 religions	 stand	 upon	 one	 single	word,	 and	 that	 is	 how	 you	 should	 be.
That	word	is
`should'	--	 that	word	is	not	 ìs'.	The	ìs'	 is	condemned,	and	thèshould'	 is	praised;
and	thèshould'	is	opposed	to	your	ìs'.
You	 cannot	 love	 yourself,	 your	 wife	 cannot	 love	 herself	 --	 and	 you	 both	 are
supposed	 to	 love	 each	 other.	 I	 don't	 understand	 how	 it	 is	 possible.	 You	 can
pretend,	but	basically	you	will	hate,	because	 the	wife	knows	you	are	dragging
her	farther	into	hell,	you	know	that	she	is	dragging	you	farther	into	hell	--	how
can	you	love?	Jesus	is	clever.	He	talks	about	loving	your	enemies	but	he	does	not
say	anything	about	 loving	your	wives.	Strange,	 that	 should	have	been	 the	 first
thing	 to	be	 reminded	of	 --	 "Love	your	husbands."	But	no,	 these	 things	are	not
mentioned.
The	religions	have	been	talking	about	flowers;	I	am	working	with	the	roots.	And
I	am	against	plastic	flowers.	Real	flowers	have	many	differences;	plastic	flowers
are	 permanent	 --	 plastic	 love	 will	 be	 permanent.	 The	 real	 flower	 is	 not
permanent,	 it	 is	 changing	moment	 to	moment.	Today	 it	 is	 there	dancing	 in	 the
wind	and	in	the	sun	and	in	the	rain.	Tomorrow	you	will	not	be	able	to	find	it	--	it
has	disappeared	just	as	mysteriously	as	it	had	appeared.
Real	love	is	like	a	real	flower.
But	 all	 religions	 teach	 you	 plastic	 love.	 And	 then	 they	 destroy	 the	 very
possibility	 of	 ever	 coming	 to	 know	 a	 real	 flower.	 The	 real	 flower	 will	 have
fragrance;	the	plastic	flower	has	nothing	to	contribute	to	your	life.	It	only	looks
like	a	 flower,	 it	 is	not	a	 flower.	The	plastic	 flower	 is	easy.	You	do	not	need	 to
water	 it,	 you	 do	 not	 need	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the	 roots.	 Real	 flowers	 need	 some
creativity	on	your	part.	Every	real	value	needs	creativity.
And	just	look	at	your	saints:	none	of	them	are	creative.	All	their	qualities	are	just
hilarious	--	somebody	can	lie	down	in	a	grave	for	seven	days,	and	then	you	dig
him	up	and	he	 is	 still	 alive;	 and	he	becomes	a	great	 saint.	But	 I	don't	 see	 that
there	is	any	contribution,	any	creativity	in	it.	He	may	lie	for	seven	hundred	years
in	a	grave;	that	does	not	matter.	How	can	he	become	a	saint	by	lying	in	a	grave
for	seven	days,	by	learning	a	certain	technique	of	holding	the	breath	in?
Paul	Brunton,	a	great	seeker	going	from	one	country	to	another	country	all	over
the	 East,	 came	 across	 many	 people	 who	 were	 worshipped	 as	 saints	 in	 the
beginning	of	this	century.
In	Ajmer	in	India	he	came	across	a	Mohammedan	saint	who	used	to	put	both	his
eyes	down,	hanging	out	of	their	sockets	--	that	was	his	only	quality.	And	he	was
worshipped	far	and	wide,	because	he	was	doing	really	the	impossible!
He	came	across	a	Hindu	yogi	who	was	able	to	drink	any	kind	of	poison.	He	had
exhibited	his	great	achievement	at	many	universities	--	in	Oxford,	in	Cambridge,
in	Varanasi,	in	Calcutta.	But	in	Calcutta	an	accident	happened.	He	was	capable
of	keeping	the	poison	in	his	body,	without	getting	it	 into	his	bloodstream,	only
for	half	an	hour:	more	than	that	he	was	incapable	of.	He	had	learned	his	whole
life	how	to	do	it,	but	in	Calcutta	the	traffic	defeated	him.
In	India,	you	know	the	traffic	is	great;	all	the	centuries	are	moving	on	the	road	--
a	bullock	cart,	a	horse-driven	vehicle,	a	donkey,	a	camel-driven	cart,	cars,	buses,
trams.
Particularly	 in	 Calcutta	 you	 will	 find	 all	 the	 centuries	 together	 on	 the	 street.
From	 the	very	beginning	when	man	 first	 invented	a	vehicle	 to	 the	 latest	 car	 --
everything	is	available.	You	just	stand	by	the	side	of	the	road	and	watch.
So	he	was	stuck	somewhere	in	a	traffic	jam	and	could	not	reach	the	place	where
he	was	going	to	vomit;	that	was	the	whole	art.	For	half	an	hour	he	could	keep	it;
and	then	he	would	vomit	--	not	to	let	it	go	into	his	bloodstream.	But	he	was	late;
it	 reached	 to	 his	 bloodstream	 and	 he	 died.	 But	 he	 was	 a	 world	 famous	 saint.
What	is	his	contribution?
I	cannot	conceive	why	these	people	should	be	called	saints.	Perhaps	they	should
be	 called	 certain	 kinds	 of	 experts;	 they	 have	 a	 certain	 expertise,	 but	 it	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 spirituality.	 In	 the	 name	 of	 spirituality	 you	 have	 been
worshipping	 utter	 nonsense.	 And	 behind	 this	 nonsense	 is	 the	 real	 man	 --
suffering,	uncared	for,	unlooked	at.	Nobody	bothers	about	him	and	his	problems;
nobody	answers	his	real	need.
My	whole	effort	is	to	make	a	fresh	beginning.	It	is	bound	to	create	condemnation
of	me	from	all	over	the	world.	But	it	doesn't	matter	--	who	cares!
I	 care	 only	 for	 those	 who	 are	 ready	 to	 change	 the	 very	 course	 of	 human
consciousness.	 I	will	 offend	others,	 I	will	 annoy	others,	 I	will	 irritate	others,	 I
will	create	jealousy	in	others.	These	are	part	of	my	devices.	I	am	really	exposing
them.	If	they	have	any	intelligence	they	will	understand	it.
Ninety-three	 Rolls	 Royces...	 but	 I	 have	 not	 looked	 back	 at	 them,	 at	 what
happened.	They	were	not	mine,	and	I	am	as	happy	without	them	as	I	was	with
them.	I	never	went	to	see	those	Rolls	Royces	in	the	garage.	The	director	of	my
garage,	Avesh,	is	here.	I	went	on	saying	to	him,	"One	day	I	am	coming,"	but	that
day	 never	 came.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 those	 cars	 together.	 It	 was	 he	who	would
bring	a	car	for	a	one-hour	drive,	it	was	his	choice.
And	I	have	not	looked	back.
Those	 cars	 fulfilled	 their	 purpose.	 They	 created	 jealousy	 in	 the	 whole	 of
America,	in	all	the	super-rich	people.	If	they	were	intelligent	enough,	then	rather
than	being	my	enemies	they	would	have	come	to	me	to	find	a	way	to	get	rid	of
their	jealousy,	because	it	is	their	problem.	Jealousy	is	a	fire	that	burns	you,	and
burns	you	badly.	You	are	in	the	hands	of	somebody	else.
I	was	just	a	tourist	there,	and	I	made	the	whole	of	America	disturbed.	They	had
enough	money;	 they	 could	have	purchased	more	Rolls	Royces	 if	 they	wanted.
But	they	had	no	guts	for	that	either.	They	were	condemning	me,	saying	that	I	am
a	 materialist.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 surprised;	 one	 bishop	 who	 was	 continuously
condemning	me	as	a	materialist,	wrote	me	a	letter,	privately,	saying,	"It	would	be
very	compassionate	of	you	if	you	could	donate	a	Rolls	Royce	to	my	church.	It
won't	make	any	difference	to	you	--	ninety-three	or	ninety-two	--	but	it	will	make
much	 difference	 to	 us."	 And	 every	 Sunday	 he	 was	 condemning	 me.	 His
condemnation	was	not	about	my	materialism;	his	condemnation	was	to	hide	his
jealousy.
The	politicians,	the	rich,	could	have	managed	it	for	themselves	--	why	were	they
worried?
But	the	worry	was	that	a	tourist,	who	has	not	even	a	valid	visa,	has	defeated	all
the	 superrich;	 it	 hurts!	 If	 they	 were	 intelligent	 enough,	 they	 could	 have
understood	that	there	must	be	a	purpose	behind	these	Rolls	Royces.	It	cannot	be
just	the	one-hour	ride.	For	that,	one	Rolls	Royce	would	have	been	enough.
Everything	that	I	have	done	in	my	life	has	a	purpose.	It	is	a	device	to	bring	out
something	in	you	of	which	you	are	not	aware.
If	you	are	intelligent	you	would	like	to	get	rid	of	it	because	it	is	a	poison	which
is	killing	you.	A	jealous	mind	is	incapable	of	love;	a	jealous	mind	is	incapable	of
rejoicing...	 and	 not	 only	 incapable	 of	 rejoicing,	 he	 is	 incapable	 of	 seeing
anybody	 else	 rejoice.	 This	 kind	 of	 people	 fill	 the	 whole	 earth.	 And	 your	 so-
called	saints	have	not	been	a	help	to	them.
Your	so-called	saints	have	exploited	them.
It	 is	 hilarious!	 Your	 saints	 are	 exploiting	 you	 by	 being	 poor,	 torturing
themselves;	 they	are	helping	you	not	 to	 feel	 jealous,	not	 to	 feel	hurt.	They	are
protecting	your	ego.	And	it	is	not	one-sided.	That's	why	I	say	it	is	hilarious.	The
game	is	strange:	they	are	helping	you	to	remain	in	your	misery,	in	your	insanity,
and	you	are	helping	 them	to	 remain	 in	 their	 suicidal,	 torturous	 life	 --	a	mutual
conspiracy	of	the	whole	of	humanity	to	remain	in	hell.
The	 commune	 in	America	was	 also	 a	 device.	 It	 did	 its	 work.	 It	made	 people
aware	that	to	be	joyous,	to	be	loving	is	possible	on	this	earth;	you	do	not	have	to
wait	 for	 heaven.	And	 I	 can't	 see,	 I	 can't	 understand...	 a	 person	who	 has	 never
been	dancing	and	singing	here,	when	he	enters	heaven	and	a	harp	is	provided	for
him	--	what	is	he	going	to	do	with	the	harp?	He	will	be	at	a	loss!	He	will	ask,
what	is	it,	and	what	am	I	supposed	to	do	with	it?
Only	my	people	will	be	immediately	able	to	do	something,	whichever	instrument
is	provided.	It	is	not	only	a	question	of	rejoicing...	all	other	things	too.	If	here	for
your	whole	life	you	learn	only	torture,	what	are	you	going	to	do	in	heaven?	That
self-torture	has	become	a	second	nature	to	you.
I	 am	 reminded	of	 a	 story...	There	was	 a	very	beautiful	man,	Eknath,	who	was
going	on	a	pilgrimage	with	his	disciples.	One	well-known	thief	approached	him,
and	 asked	 the	 master,	 "Although	 I	 am	 a	 sinner	 --	 you	 know	 me,	 everybody
knows,	I	am	a	thief	--	a	great	desire	has	arisen	in	me	to	go	on	a	pilgrimage	with
you,	if	you	allow	me	in	your	company.
Thirty	people	are	going;	it	won't	make	much	difference,	one	person	more..."
Eknath	said,	"There	is	no	harm,	but	one	condition:	while	you	are	with	me,	and	it
is	going	to	take	nine	months"	--	because	they	were	going	to	be	traveling	by	foot
all	around	the	country,	covering	all	the	holy	places,	singing	and	dancing	--	"you
will	 not	 steal	 anything	 from	 the	 group	 or	 from	 somebody	 else	 where	 we	 are
staying	 in	 a	 village.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 stop	 your	 art	 for	 nine	 months.	 If	 you
promise	me	you	are	allowed."
The	man	said,	"I	promise	absolutely	that	I	will	not	steal	anything	for	the	coming
nine	months."	But	just	within	two,	three	days	there	was	trouble.	A	strange	kind
of	 thing	 started	 happening,	 and	 that	 was	 that	 your	 money	 bag	 was	 found	 in
somebody	 else's	 luggage,	 somebody	 else's	 coat	 was	 found	 in	 somebody	 else's
bag!	Strange...	things	were	missing	from	here,	but	they	were	found	there.
Finally	Eknath	one	night	had	to	remain	awake	to	see	what	was	going	on,	because
it	was	very	disturbing.	Every	morning	you	would	have	 to	 find	out	where	your
things	were;	they	were	always	found,	but	it	was	an	unnecessary	nuisance.	Eknath
had	a	suspicion	that	that	man	may	be	the	cause	of	it	--	and	he	was.	In	the	middle
of	 the	 night	 he	 started	 changing	 things	 around,	 and	 Eknath	 caught	 him
redhanded.	He	said,	"You	had	promised	me	that	you	would	not	steal."
He	said,	"I	am	completely	following	my	promise;	I	am	not	stealing.	But	I	never
promised	you	that	I	would	not	change	things	from	one	bag	to	another	--	that	is
not	stealing.	I	am	not	putting	anybody's	things	into	my	bag.	But	just	to	practice...
otherwise	 in	 nine	months	 I	may	 forget	my	whole	 art.	And	moreover,	 I	 cannot
sleep	unless	I	do	something.	It	is	a	lifelong	habit."
Eknath	said,	"I	understand	your	problem,	but	you	must	understand	my	problem
too:	 every	 morning	 everybody	 is	 disturbed	 and	 upset	 --	 money	 has	 gone,
somebody's	 shirt	 is	missing,	 somebody's	blanket	 is	missing.	And	unnecessarily
every	morning,	for	one	hour,	we	have	to	sort	it	out."
But	he	said,	"This	much	you	will	have	to	tolerate.	This	I	have	never	promised.
And	 I	am	not	doing	 too	much	 --	 just	one	hour	 in	 the	night	 then	 I	can	sleep	at
ease."
A	man	who	has	tortured	himself	for	his	whole	life	--	do	you	think	he	will	be	able
to	rejoice	in	heaven?	He	will	have	forgotten	how	to	smile,	he	will	have	forgotten
what	joy	means.	No,	I	say	to	you	the	whole	human	past	has	been	ugly,	insane;	it
has	created	a	kind	of	spirituality	which	is	another	name	for	schizophrenia.	I	have
to	fight	against	it,	whatsoever	the	cost.
Somebody	has	to	raise	his	hand	and	say	to	the	people,	"You	have	been	misled.
Your	misery	is	a	proof;	no	other	proof	is	needed."
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
RECENTLY	 I	 READ	 AN	 OLD	 SAYING:	 A	 MAN	 WHO	 LOVES	 ONE
WOMAN
WILL	 SURELY	 LOSE	 HIS	 MIND;	 BUT	 A	 MAN	 WHO	 LOVES	 TWO
WOMEN
LOSES	HIS	SOUL.	IS	THERE	ANY	TRUTH	TO	UNDERSTAND	IN	THIS?
I	am	sure	this	question	must	be	from	Milarepa!
It	is	true:	if	you	love	one	woman	you	will	lose	your	mind;	if	you	love	two	you
will	 lose	your	soul.	But	 if	you	go	on	 loving	more	and	more,	you	have	nothing
else	to	lose	--	with	the	second	you	are	finished!
When	Milarepa	came	I	asked	Vivek,	"Has	he	brought	his	guitar?	And	what	else
does	he	do?"
She	said,	"He	does	nothing	else	--	just	plays	on	his	guitar	and	chases	women."
I	 said,	 "Enquire	 if	 he	 has	 got	 his	 guitar.	 Then	 he	 should	 start	 playing	 guitar;
otherwise	 chasing	women	 the	whole	 time	will	 not	 be	 good	 for	 his	 health.	 So
once	in	a	while,	just	to	get	some	rest,	he	can	play	guitar."
But	he	has	not	brought	his	guitar.	I	think	you	should	provide	him	with	a	guitar,
because	he	has	lost	everything.	Now	he	has	nothing	to	be	worried	about	losing;
he	can	go	on	chasing...
That's	 why	 the	 saying	 stops	 at	 two	 women,	 because	 for	 the	 third	 you	 have
nothing	to	lose.
And	it	is	good	to	go	beyond	the	second,	because	then	you	really	become	humble
--	you	have	nothing.
To	me	that	is	spirituality.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	The	ostrich	argument
17	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604170
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
107
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	LITTLE	WHILE	AGO	THE	BRITISH	GOVERNMENT	REFUSED	YOUR
ADMISSION	TO	ENGLAND,	EVEN	FOR	AN	OVERNIGHT	STAY,	ON	THE
BASIS
THAT	YOUR	EXCLUSION	FROM	THE	COUNTRY	WAS	"CONDUCIVE	TO
THE
PUBLIC	GOOD."
JUST	 A	 FEW	 WEEKS	 LATER,	 THE	 HEAD	 OF	 THAT	 SAME
GOVERNMENT
AUTHORIZED	 THE	 USE	 OF	 MILITARY	 BASES	 BY	 AMERICAN
BOMBERS	FOR
THE	 RECENT	 ATTACK	 ON	 LIBYA.	 THE	 PRIME	MINISTER	 JUSTIFIED
THE
DECISION	 TO	 ASSIST	 AMERICA'S	 BOMBING	 OF	 MIDDLE	 EASTERN
CITIES
SAYING	 THAT	 IT	 WAS	 HER	 DUTY	 TO	 "PREVENT	 THE	 EVILS	 OF
TERRORISM."
THE	NOTIONS	OF	GOOD	AND	EVIL	EXPRESSED	BY	THE	BRITISH
GOVERNMENT	ARE	SIMPLY	MIND-BOGGLING.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
One	 has	 to	 understand	 that	 everything	 is	 relative,	 not	 ultimate;	 hence	 what
appears	 to	 be	 good	 to	 one	 person	 may	 look	 evil	 to	 another.	 And	 there	 is	 no
contradiction:	both	may	be	right.
What	is	good	depends	on	your	preconceived	ideas;	so	does	evil.
The	British	government	thinks	my	entry	even	for	an	overnight	stay	in	England,
is	 not	 conducive	 to	 the	 public	 good.	 The	 same	 government	 is	 ready	 to	 allow
American	bombers,	missiles,	 to	use	 their	bases,	 to	destroy	a	small	country	 like
Libya,	and	to	the	government	this	seems	to	be	conducive	to	public	good.
There	is	no	inconsistency.	In	their	eyes	their	society,	their	culture,	their	religion,
their	country	has	to	be	saved	at	any	cost,	because	they	think	they	stand	for	good
--	 although	 the	British	government	has	 tortured	humanity	more	 than	any	other
government	in	the	world.
For	 three	 hundred	 years	 it	 has	 been	 the	 greatest	 terrorist	 possible;	 it	 killed
millions	of	people	around	the	world,	to	create	the	greatest	empire	of	history.	This
government	is	absolutely	in	tune	with	the	American	imperialistic	ideology.
Out	 of	 necessity	 it	 has	 been	 compelled	 to	 give	 freedom	 to	 the	 countries	 of	 its
empire,	but	not	willingly	and	 joyously.	Those	countries	had	 to	fight	 for	almost
one	century,	without	any	arms.	They	were	butchered,	without	any	consideration
of	human	values.
I	 am	 reminded...	 In	 India	 there	happened	an	 incident	which	can	be	considered
one	of	the	most	inhuman	in	history.	In	Amritsar,	the	holy	place	of	the	Sikhs,	they
have	a	beautiful	public	garden,	a	vast	area	that	can	contain	at	 least	one	million
people	 for	 any	 gathering,	 meeting,	 discourse.	 And	 it	 has	 been	 used	 for	 that
purpose.	It	has	a	very	high	wall	so	that	no	traffic	noise	comes	in	and	it	has	only
one	 door,	 so	 small	 that	 only	 one	 person	 can	 come	 out	 or	 go	 in;	 two	 persons
together	cannot	pass	through	the	door.
They	 were	 having	 a	 silent	 meeting	 of	 almost	 one	 million	 people	 --	 children,
women,	 old	men.	The	 prayer	was,	 "The	British	 government	 should	 change	 its
heart	and	should	leave	our	country."	Now,	it	 is	not	terrorism;	they	were	simply
praying	for	a	change	of	heart.
But	Colonel	Dyer,	who	was	 in	 charge	 of	 the	 area,	went	 there	with	 his	 troops,
fixed	machine	guns	on	 the	people,	and	started	firing	--	because	 it	 is	 revolution
against	the	empire,	this	prayer	that	the	government	should	change	its	heart!
There	 was	 only	 one	 door,	 and	 from	 that	 door	 they	 were	 shooting	 bullets	 at
random,	with	no	discrimination	--	children,	women,	old	men.	And	nobody	could
escape	from	there	because	of	the	high	wall.	Dyer	killed	the	whole	crowd;	not	a
single	human	being	came	alive	out	of	 that	door.	Now,	 it	was	 their	country;	 the
British	 had	 been	 terrorists,	 had	 been	 ruling	 their	 country,	 exploiting	 their
country.
India	 has	 been	 rich,	 known	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 as	 "a	 golden	 bird"	 --	 that's
how	 Pythagoras	 describes	 it,	 that's	 how	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 describes	 it.	 So
many	invaders...
but	still	 India	seemed	 to	be	 inexhaustibly	rich.	People	would	come,	 invade	 the
country,	take	away	their	treasures,	take	over	their	beautiful	women...
This	had	been	going	on	for	thousands	of	years;	the	Britishers	were	the	last.	For
three	hundred	years	they	squeezed	every	richness,	the	last	drop	of	it,	from	Indian
soil.	 And	 people	 were	 not	 even	 allowed	 to	 pray	 for	 a	 change	 of	 heart	 --	 this
became	an	act	against	the	empire.	And	there	was	no	need	for	any	magistrate,	for
any	judge;	there	was	no	need	for	any	trial.	Just...	a	colonel	simply	kills	all	those
people!
The	British	government	has	been	one	of	the	ugliest	phenomena	that	we	know	of.
It	 created	 the	 biggest	 empire	 --	 it	 was	 said	 that	 in	 the	 British	 empire	 the	 sun
never	set.	And	it	was	true,	because	the	empire	was	all	around	the	earth.	The	sun
may	have	set	in	one	part,	but	it	was	rising	in	another	part;	there	was	not	any	gap.
The	sun	was	always	rising	somewhere	in	the	British	empire.
These	imperialists	have	a	deep	sympathy,	friendship,	with	America.	Naturally,	it
is	 for	 the	 public	 good	 to	 allow	American	 troops,	 to	 allow	America	 a	 base	 to
destroy	a	small	country.
And	why	destroy	Libya?	Because	the	man	who	is	leading	Libya	now	is	one	of
the	most	outspoken	politicians	in	the	whole	world.	Just	a	few	days	ago,	Kaddafi
said	that	Ronald	Reagan	is	"Adolf	Hitler	Number	Two."	And	I,	commenting	on
it,	 say	 that	Kaddafi	 is	wrong.	And	he	will	agree	with	me	when	he	understands
the	 reason	why	 I	am	saying	he	 is	wrong:	Adolf	Hitler	himself	 is	now	Number
Two.	 Ronald	 Reagan	 is	 Adolf	 Hitler	 Number	 One,	 because	 what	 power	 did
Adolf	Hitler	have?	Reagan	has	a	million	times	more	power.
Adolf	Hitler	could	not	have	destroyed	the	world;	Reagan	can	do	that.
To	allow	Reagan	a	base	in	England	seems,	to	the	British	government,	to	be	for
the	public	good.	Both	are	imperialists,	both	are	agreed	on	exploiting	people,	both
are	 agreed	 that	 nothing	 like	 communism	should	happen	 in	 the	world,	 both	 are
agreed	 that	 Christianity	 should	 be	 imposed	 on	 people	 who	 are	 not	 Christian:
naturally	 Ronald	 Reagan	 is	 a	 friend,	 although	 he	 is	 going	 to	 do	 something
inhuman	which	may	trigger	the	third	world	war.
And	 I	 understand	Kaddafi.	He	 is	 not	 a	man	 to	 sit	 back.	And	 he	 is	 not	 sitting
back.	He	has	a	small	country	but	he	is	not	 just	a	politician,	he	is	a	warrior.	He
would	 rather	 the	 country	 die	 than	 to	 allow	 the	 country	 to	 be	 enslaved.	And	 I
praise	 him	 for	 being	 a	 pioneer.	 He	 has	 responded	 well.	 Now	 he	 is	 bombing
American	bases	all	over	Europe.	He	has	bombed	in	Spain;	in	other	countries	he
is	going	to	bomb	--	in	Greece...	wherever	in	Europe	American	bases	exist,	he	is
going	 to	 bomb	 them.	 And	 he	 will	 have	 the	 sympathy	 of	 all	 the	 downtrodden
countries.	He	will	rise	as	a	world	leader.
Ronald	Reagan	may	have	the	power,	but	he	will	not	have	any	sympathy.
This	imperialist	government	of	Britain	feels	afraid	of	me.	Just	my	overnight	stay
at	the	airport	--	I	was	not	asking	to	enter	their	country	--	and	against	their	own
laws	they	refused	me.	They	said	it	was	not	good	for	their	public;	my	overnight
stay	 would	 have	 destroyed	 their	 morality,	 their	 religion,	 all	 their	 cherished
values!
There	is	something	to	understand	clearly:	I	am	against	imperialism.	I	am	against
exploiting	man,	other	human	beings.	 I	 am	against	 torturing	people	 just	 so	 that
you	 can	 have	 power.	 Perhaps	 they	 were	 afraid	 that	 overnight	 my	 sannyasins
from	all	over	England	may	gather...	just	one	night	may	be	enough	to	give	them	a
fresh	insight,	a	new	life	to	go	against	all	traditional	values.
And	it	 is	a	conspiracy.	Not	only	Britain	is	responsible	for	it.	All	those	who	are
living	and	thriving	on	traditional	values	are	really	afraid	--	of	a	man	who	has	no
power	except	 that	he	can	show	people	that	 their	misery	is	caused	by	their	own
wrong	 ideas,	 and	 that	 those	 wrong	 ideas	 are	 being	 emphasized	 by	 their
government,	by	their	church.
There	is	a	conspiracy.
All	 the	 European	 governments	 are	 agreeing	 on	 the	 point	 that	 I	 cannot	 land	 at
their	 airports.	 They	 do	 not	 understand	 that	 this	 is	 defeatism,	 that	 they	 have
already	accepted	defeat.	They	are	showing	that	they	have	no	arguments	to	save
their	religion,	their	morality,	their	politics,	it	is	all	rotten.
And	they	are	afraid	that	their	youth	will	be	on	my	side,	not	on	their	side.	I	can
give	an	open	challenge	to	any	country:	Let	me	speak	to	your	young	people,	and
you	speak	to	the	same	young	people,	and	let	it	be	decided	by	those	young	people
who	are	going	 to	own	the	future.	These	governments	know	perfectly	well	 they
cannot	defend	anything	that	they	believe.
These	efforts	 to	prevent	me	are	good	signs;	 they	are	good	news.	It	means	they
have	 accepted	 their	 defeat;	 otherwise,	 what	 was	 the	 fear?	 --	 they	 could	 have
allowed	me	 to	 talk	 to	 people.	And	 they	 have	 their	 archbishops	 and	 popes	 and
priests	 who	 could	 have	 demolished	 my	 arguments;	 that	 would	 have	 been	 a
cultured	way,	a	human	way.
I	am	alone	--	they	have	millions	of	priests.	But	they	don't	have	a	single	argument
for	anything	that	they	think	is	the	basis	of	their	society.
Yes,	 it	 is	 not	 conducive	 to	 their	 rotten	 society.	 It	may	 ring	 the	 death	 bell.	But
they	cannot	prevent	me.	It	is	not	me	who	is	going	to	destroy	the	rottenness;	it	is
the	time	itself	which	is	not	in	favor	of	them.	If	not	me,	then	somebody	else	will
have	to	do	it.
It	 is	 impossible	 to	 protect	 those	 societies,	 those	 governments,	 those	 churches.
They	have	lost	all	roots.	And	they	are	aware	of	it,	that	just	a	push	and	they	will
fall	down.	They	cannot	even	resist	--	even	that	much	power	is	not	left.	You	can
make	 a	 corpse	 stand,	 but	 if	 you	 push	 it,	 it	 cannot	 retaliate;	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 fall
down.
All	these	countries	are	corpses.
And	they	don't	want	their	youth	to	come	in	contact	with	anybody	who	can	show
them	that	the	old	is	dead	and	you	have	to	find	a	new	way	of	life.
This	is	not	a	question	of	one	country;	it	is	a	question	of	the	whole	human	past.
Just	a	deep	attachment,	a	deep	conditioning...
There	is	a	beautiful	story	in	India.	Shiva	is	one	of	the	Hindu	trinity	of	gods.	It	is
not	called	a	trinity,	it	is	called	trimurti	--	three	faces	of	one	God.	Shiva	is	one.	He
fell	 in	 love	 with	 a	 beautiful	 woman,	 Parvarti,	 and	 he	 loved	 her	 so	much	 that
when	she	died	he	would	not	accept	that	she	was	dead.
Nobody	could	dare	to	tell	him	that	she	was	dead	and	now	it	was	time	to	take	her
to	the	crematorium.	Instead,	he	carried	the	corpse	of	Parvarti	on	his	shoulder	all
over	India,	in	search	of	some	physician,	some	healer,	who	could	bring	her	back
to	life.	You	cannot	carry	a	corpse...	It	took	twelve	years	for	him	to	move	around
the	 country	 --	 it	 was	 a	 big	 country.	 Wherever	 he	 heard	 that	 there	 was	 some
physician,	he	would	go	there.
In	those	twelve	years	the	parts	of	the	woman	he	was	carrying	started	falling	off	-
-	the	hand	fell,	the	leg	fell,	the	head	fell.	But	he	was	not	worried	about	that;	he
was	not	even	looking	at	her,	because	he	was	afraid	to	look.
Note	that	point:
He	was	afraid	to	look	at	her,	because	deep	down	he	also	knew	that	she	was	dead.
But	his	mind	did	not	want	to	believe	it;	he	wanted	to	believe	she	was	alive.	Now
she	was	 not	 even	whole.	 The	 head	 had	 fallen	 somewhere,	 the	 legs	 had	 fallen
somewhere	else,	the	hands	had	fallen	somewhere	else.
India	 is	 a	 country	 of	 stories,	 signifying	 tremendous	meanings.	 Now	 there	 are
twelve	pilgrimage	temples	which	are	made	at	points	where	one	part	of	Parvarti
fell,	 to	 give	 the	 story	 a	 feeling	 of	 reality.	 Twelve	 temples	 exist	 all	 over	 the
country	representing...
because	some	part	of	Parvarti	had	fallen	there,	they	have	become	sacred.
But	Shiva	remained	completely	blind,	knowingly	blind.	And	this	is	the	situation
of	the	world.	The	societies	are	rotten,	the	religions	are	dead;	the	politicians	are
only	promising,	knowing	perfectly	well	they	cannot	fulfill	any	promise.
The	future	is	dark,	but	nobody	wants	to	see	it	--	the	past	is	dead,	and	if	you	go	on
clinging	to	the	past	the	future	is	going	to	become	darker	and	darker.
I	will	be	avoided	by	every	country.
I	will	be	persecuted	by	every	power,	 for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 I	want	 them	to
see	the	reality.	They	are	keeping	their	eyes	closed.
In	logic	it	is	called	the	"ostrich	argument."	The	ostrich	has	a	tendency:	whenever
he	comes	against	an	enemy	and	knows	that	death	is	certain,	he	simply	puts	his
head	 into	 the	sand.	He	 lives	 in	 the	desert,	eyes	closed,	head	 in	 the	sand.	He	 is
perfectly	happy	because	he	cannot	see	any	enemy	anywhere.
But	 this	 does	 not	 eliminate	 the	 enemy;	 in	 fact	 it	 makes	 the	 enemy	 more
powerful.	 Now	 this	 ostrich	 is	 not	 going	 to	 do	 anything	 to	 escape,	 to	 fight,	 to
negotiate,	to	do	something.
Now	there	is	no	question:	he	is	simply	available	as	food.	And	ostriches	are	eaten
by	their	predators	without	any	fight,	because	 the	ostrich	 is	 living	with	 the	 idea
that,	"I	don't	see	any	enemy	here."
This	"ostrich	argument"	is	widespread	today	around	the	world.	Nobody	wants	to
see	the	reality	--	that	you	are	sinking,	that	all	your	values	are	false,	that	all	your
civilization	is	hypocrisy,	that	all	your	smiles	are	just	exercises	of	lips,	and	there
is	no	heart	in	it;	that	you	have	forgotten	to	live,	to	love,	to	laugh,	that	you	don't
know	what	life	means	at	all.
And	you	go	on	clinging	because	there	is	nothing	else,	 there	is	no	alternative	--
and	I	am	being	prevented	because	I	can	give	you	the	alternative.
I	can	show	you	that	 this	 is	not	 the	only	way	a	society	can	exist,	 this	 is	not	 the
only	way	that	a	marriage	can	exist,	this	is	not	the	only	way	that	children	can	be
brought	up,	this	is	not	the	only	way	that	governments	should	function.	There	are
alternative	ways.
But	even	to	hear	of	the	alternative,	they	are	afraid.	The	message	should	not	reach
to	the	young	--	because	the	young	are	bound	to	be	affected	by	the	news	that	there
is	an	alternative,	that	you	need	not	remain	in	this	misery,	continuously	fighting,
killing	human	beings	unnecessarily.
Now	Libya	is	destroying	American	bases.	America	cannot	remain	silent:	it	will
start	destroying	Libya	--	not	only	its	military	bases	but	its	civilians.	It	is	a	small
country,	 but	 Libya	 knows	 that	 if	 America	 starts	 to	 destroy	 the	 civilians,	 the
whole	East	--	particularly	the	Middle	East	--	will	be	on	its	side.	And	behind	the
scenes	will	be	the	Soviet	Union.
So	 if	 America	 has	 guts,	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 start	 a	 fight	 between	 America	 and
Libya	--
which	is	very	unbalanced:	Libya	has	nothing	with	which	to	fight	against	one	of
the	greatest	 nuclear	powers.	But	Libya	has	 the	 assurance	of	 the	Soviet	Union:
"Don't	 be	 worried,	 Libya	 is	 just	 a	 facade,	 just	 a	 front."	 And	 once	 these	 two
powers	start	fighting,	they	cannot	resist	using	nuclear	weapons;	it	is	impossible.
But	the	government	of	England	is	not	afraid	of	this.	The	government	of	England
should	 have	 prevented	 America:	 "This	 is	 not	 a	 right	 beginning;	 this	 is	 not
conducive	to	the	public	good.	This	will	lead	more	and	more	into	war.	Don't	take
the	first	step;	otherwise	the	last	step	will	not	be	far	away."	But	they	would	prefer
to	have	a	third	world	war	rather	than	change	the	human	mind.
Why?	--	because	to	change	the	human	mind	means	that	for	millions	of	years	you
have	been	behaving	stupidly,	that	all	your	great	ancestors	have	been	simply	fools
and	 nothing	 else.	 They	 knew	 nothing	 about	 human	 consciousness;	 they	 were
unconscious,	 they	were	blind.	And	blind	people	have	been	 leading	other	blind
people	towards	the	goal	of	light.	It	seems	it	is	difficult	to	accept	that	our	whole
past	has	been	wrong.	It	is	better	to	destroy	the	whole	future	but	remain	stubborn
that	our	past	has	been	right:	Let	man	die,	but	save	your	ego.
That	 will	 give	 you	 a	 clue	why	 I	 am	 a	 danger,	 just	 for	 an	 overnight	 stay,	 and
American	 nuclear	 missiles	 are	 not	 dangerous.	 They	 think	 alike;	 their
mathematics	is	the	same.
To	 them	 I	 am	a	dangerous	person	because	 I	 have	no	pride	 in	 the	past.	 I	 am	a
dangerous	person	because	I	do	not	consider	that	for	thousands	of	years	man	has
lived	intelligently;	otherwise	why	so	much	misery,	why	so	much	anxiety,	why	so
much	anguish?	The	fruit	shows	the	quality	of	the	tree.	And	the	fruit	that	we	have
shows	 that	 the	whole	human	past	went	 somewhere	wrong,	 and	 just	out	of	 ego
went	on	pushing	in	a	wrong	direction.
I	am	ready	and	willing	to	change	my	ideas	if	somebody	can	show	me	that	they
are	wrong,	that	they	will	not	lead	to	the	good	of	the	people.	But	nobody	is	ready
to	do	that;	they	simply	accept	it.	No	argument	is	needed,	no	discussion	is	needed.
The	government	of	Spain	was	wondering	for	one	month	continuously	whether	to
allow	me	 into	 Spain	 or	 not.	 They	 have	 nuclear	 bases	 for	 the	American	 army;
they	 are	 members	 of	 NATO,	 and	 the	 man	 who	 is	 the	 prime	 minister	 became
prime	minister	by	promising	the	people	of	Spain	that	he	would	pull	Spain	out	of
NATO,	and	that	he	would	order	the	American	bases	to	be	removed	from	Spain.
And	the	people	of	Spain	don't	want...	because	they	have	seen	Franco,	who	ruled
for	 forty	years	with	absolute	dictatorship;	he	destroyed	all	 freedom	of	 thinking
and	 killed	 anybody	 who	 said	 anything	 against	 him.	 After	 forty	 years	 of	 this
experience,	this	nightmare,	they	don't	want	to	get	into	another	nightmare	again.
They	voted	in	this	man	on	a	single	point	--	that	he	was	promising	that	he	would
pull	 out	 of	 NATO	 and	 force	 the	 Americans	 to	 leave	 Spain.	 Two	 years	 have
passed	and	the	people	have	been	asking,	"What	happened?	You	are	not	pulling
out	of	NATO,	and	neither	are	the	American	bases	moving	out	of	Spain."
In	 these	 two	 years,	 the	 man...	 when	 he	 had	 come	 to	 power	 he	 was	 not	 a
politician,	but	 these	 two	years	have	 turned	him	 into	a	politician.	He	said,	 "My
experience	of	 two	years	 in	power	makes	me	change	my	 idea:	we	are	going	 to
remain	in	NATO,	and	American	bases	are	going	to	remain	in	Spain."
It	 was	 such	 a	 betrayal	 that	 the	 people	 demanded	 a	 vote	 on	 the	 point,	 a
referendum.	 But	 the	 prime	 minister,	 the	 whole	 bureaucracy,	 the	 whole
government,	 is	 now	FOR	American	military	 bases	 and	membership	 in	NATO.
Still,	they	do	not	have	a	big	majority.	The	young	people	of	Spain	have	still	voted
against	them:	forty-five	percent	of	the	people	have	voted	against	NATO.	But	the
government	with	all	their	powers...	certainly	they	managed	to	get	just	a	little	bit
bigger	number	of	votes	in	favor.
If	 this	man	had	 any	 sense	 of	 dignity	 he	would	 have	 resigned,	 because	 he	was
chosen	for	a	simple	program.	He	was	not	chosen	--	the	program	was	chosen,	and
because	 he	 has	 dropped	 the	 program	 he	 should	 resign	 immediately.	 But	 these
politicians	seem	to	be	so	shameless,	with	no	dignity,	with	no	honor,	with	no	self-
respect.
He	wanted	me	to	stay	in	Spain,	but	the	problem	was	the	American	pressure.	For
one	month	he	went	on	postponing.	He	 informed	me	 that	 I	 should	not	 leak	 the
news	 that	 Spain	 had	 invited	me,	 because	 the	 royal	 family	 of	 Spain,	 the	 prime
minister,	the	president,	the	cabinet	--	they	would	all	be	at	the	airport	to	receive
me.	I	was	going	to	be	 their	 invited	guest,	so	 they	would	proclaim	the	date	and
time,	and	they	would	inform	me.
But	slowly,	slowly	he	saw	that	if	forty-five	percent	of	the	people	can	vote	against
him,	 then	 to	 bring	 a	man	 like	me	 into	 the	 country	 is	 dangerous	 because	 these
young	people	are	bound	to	be	influenced	by	me.
The	 parliament	 decided	 that	 I	 should	 be	welcomed,	 the	 cabinet	 decided	 that	 I
should	be	welcomed,	but	 finally	 the	prime	minister	 informed	me	 that	 it	would
not	be	possible;	politically	it	would	be	difficult.
I	know	the	difficulty;	the	difficulty	came	after	the	referendum.	And	I	have	been
telling	 John	 every	 day	 that	 if	 any	 decision	 has	 to	 be	 taken,	 it	 should	 be	 taken
before	the	referendum.	After	the	referendum	I	don't	see	any	hope,	because	once
the	prime	minister	sees	how	many	people	can	vote	against	him,	he	will	not	be
courageous	enough	to	invite	a	person	who	can	influence	his	people.
This	is	the	fear,	and	the	fear	is	now	almost	all	over	the	world,	in	every	country	--
strange	 fears.	 In	 this	 small,	 beautiful	 country,	 I	 was	 told	 that	 we	 should	 not
mention	that	we	have	one	million	sannyasins	around	the	world	and	three	million
sympathizers,	 because	 that	 may	 become	 a	 fear	 --	 this	 country	 has	 only	 three
million	people,	and	they	would	not	like	such	a	powerful	man	in	the	country,	who
has	four	million	people	around	the	world	who	love	him.
The	country	should	be	proud	to	have	someone...	and	I	am	not	a	political	person,
I	am	not	going	to	have	any	political	contest	with	anybody;	but	still,	fear	is	fear.
All	these	powerful	people	are	deep	down	very	inferior	and	very	fearful.
They	go	on	thinking...	the	only	thing	in	their	minds	is	power,	what	can	enhance
their	power	and	what	can	destroy	their	power.	And	they	put	conditions....
The	president	of	Greece	was	willing	for	me	to	have	a	commune	in	Greece,	and
in	fact	he	wanted	it.	His	reasons	were	different	--	that	it	would	bring	thousands
of	tourists	and	that	it	would	boost	the	economy.	In	fact	he	was	the	cause	that	I
was	allowed	a	four-week	visa	for	Greece.
But	 then	 the	 condition	 came	 in	 --	 that	 if	 I	 wanted	 to	 stay	 there	 and	 make	 a
commune,	 I	 should	 remember	 a	 few	 things:	 "The	 Greek	 Orthodox	 church	 is
respected	 by	 our	 constitution;	 you	 cannot	 criticize	 it.	 The	 family	 is	 our
foundation;	you	cannot	criticize	it.
Our	code	of	morality;	you	cannot	criticize	it.	We	believe	in	virginity;	you	cannot
criticize	it."
They	certainly	believe	in	virginity,	but	it	is	difficult	to	find	a	single	virgin	in	the
whole	of	Greece.	That's	okay	--	but	you	should	not	criticize	it.	You	can	see	the
political	mind:	the	reality	can	be	tolerated	but	it	should	not	be	exposed.
I	cannot	accept	anybody's	conditions.
Whatever	happens	to	me,	whatever	the	consequences...	but	to	accept	conditions,
and	that	too	for	a	little	piece	of	land...
How	much	land	does	a	man	require?	I	might	like	to	live	without	a	country	--	a
wanderer	 in	 the	 true	 sense.	 There	 have	 been	 wanderers	 but	 they	 had	 a	 home
base.	I	will	be	really	a	wanderer	without	any	home	base	--	being	rejected	from
one	country	to	another	country.
But	their	rejection	of	me	is	simply	an	acceptance	of	their	defeat,	their	impotency.
Sooner	or	 later	 they	will	have	 to	pay	for	 it,	pay	highly	for	 it,	because	 in	every
country	 there	 are	 intelligent	 people.	 How	 long	 can	 these	 intelligent	 people
tolerate	 this?	Sooner	or	 later	 it	will	become	a	 revolution.	Without	my	entering
those	lands,	I	will	find	my	friends	there.
I	cannot	lose	hope,	because	I	cannot	see	that	intelligence	is	dead.	It	is	repressed,
but	 it	 is	 alive.	 It	 has	 become	 an	 undercurrent,	 but	 my	 rejection	 is	 going	 to
provoke	 it	 to	come	to	 the	surface.	Soon	there	will	be	protests	 in	every	country
which	is	denying	me	entry.
In	Italy	they	have	been	postponing	for	almost	three	months,	just	for	a	three-week
tourist	visa.	And	the	president	and	the	prime	minister	and	the	minister	of	foreign
affairs,	all	are	saying,	"We	are	going	to	give	it	to	him	--	just	tomorrow...."	And
sannyasins	 are	 going	 every	 day;	 they	 are	 sitting	 there	 in	 their	 offices,	 saying,
"Whenever	you	want	we	are	ready.	But	when	will	your	tomorrow	come?"	And
after	three	months	they	got	so	frustrated,	because	the	pope	is	holding	them	back.
They	cannot	say	no	to	the	sannyasins	because	they	have	no	reason	to	say	no.
And	they	know	my	impact	in	Italy.	Just	a	few	days	ago,	a	television	interview	of
one	 and	 a	 half	 hours	was	 seen	 by	 thirty-four	million	 people	 --	 unprecedented.
The	director	informed	me,	"We	could	not	believe	that	so	many	people	would	be
interested	in	you.	You	have	never	come	to	this	country."	No	other	program	in	his
whole	life,	had	attracted	so	many	people.	And	not	only	the	show	--	the	show	was
finished	in	one	and	a	half	hours	--
but	 people	 are	 discussing	 each	 and	 every	 point	 in	 the	 marketplace,	 in	 the
university	--
everywhere.	Somebody	 is	 for,	 somebody	 is	against,	but	everybody	 is	 intensely
involved.
So	the	government	could	not	say	no	because	that	might	create	trouble.	And	the
pope	 is	 insisting	 that	 I	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 into	 Italy.	 So	 they	 go	 on
postponing.	Finally	 the	 sannyasins	got	 so	 frustrated	 that	 they	 started	making	 a
protest,	 and	 one	 of	 the	most	 famous	 Italian	 film	 directors,	 Fellini,	 has	 signed
their	 petition	 first.	 They	 have	 thirty-six	 other	 world-known	 people	 who	 have
signed	the	protest,	and	they	are	collecting	more	names	--	and	I	have	never	been
there.
But	one	thing	is	certain,	whether	you	agree	with	me	or	not:	I	cannot	be	prevented
from	presenting	my	views,	my	perspective,	to	the	people.	And	what	is	happening
there,	will	happen	in	Germany,	will	happen	in	Greece,	will	happen	in	England,
will	happen	in	Spain,	is	going	to	happen	everywhere.	Sannyasins	have	to	create
a	 worldwide	 chain	 of	 protests,	 signed	 by	 all	 the	 important	 creative	 artists,
novelists,	 musicians,	 sculptors,	 dancers,	 actors,	 directors	 --	 people	 of	 all
dimensions	who	have	made	an	impact	on	the	world.
Collect	 their	names	for	 the	protest	first,	 in	every	country,	and	then	send	a	final
protest	to	the	U.N.,	with	all	the	protests	of	all	the	countries	together	--	because
now	it	is	not	a	question	of	one	country;	if	the	European	parliament	decides	that	I
cannot	even	land	my	plane	at	their	airports,	you	cannot	now	take	me	just	as	an
individual.
I	 have	 become	 representative	 of	 a	worldwide	 intelligence	 of	 creative,	 talented
people.
That	is	my	country.
And	my	sannyasins	have	to	go	to	the	U.N.,	because	this	is	simply	ugly.
But	as	I	said	in	the	beginning,	it	is	something	relative.
To	me	 it	 is	 ugly.	And	 to	 all	 those	who	 can	 understand,	 it	will	 be	 ugly.	But	 to
those	who	believe	in	the	ostrich	logic,	it	is	good,	it	is	"for	the	public	good."	But
we	will	show	to	 the	world	what	 is	good	for	 the	public	and	what	 is	bad	for	 the
public!
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	WAS	ONE	OF	THOSE	WHO	WAS	TAKEN	FOR	A	RIDE	WHEN	THE	LIST
OF
ENLIGHTENED	PEOPLE	WAS	ANNOUNCED,	BECAUSE	I	THOUGHT,	"IF
OSHO
SAYS	I'M	ENLIGHTENED,	WHY	NOT	TRY	IT	OUT?"
I	ENJOYED	IT:	 I	THREW	A	PARTY	FOR	A	HUNDRED	OR	SO	FRIENDS,
AND
FOR	 THE	 NEXT	 SIX	 MONTHS	 --	 UNTIL	 I	 BECAME	 ENDARKENED
AGAIN	--
TRIED	TO	USE	WHAT	I	SAW	AS	A	REALLY	POTENTIAL	SITUATION.
THE	 MAIN	 THING	 I	 SAW	 WAS	 THAT	 I	 REALLY	 AM	 OKAY.	 AM	 I
KIDDING
MYSELF	ABOUT	THAT	EXPERIENCE?
No,	if	you	can	understand	it	you	cannot	be	kidding.
First	let	me	explain	a	few	other	things.
After	I	declared	a	few	people	enlightened	--	Santosh	was	also	one	of	them.	He
wrote	me	 a	 letter	 saying,	 "Your	 declaration	 of	my	 enlightenment	 gives	me	 no
excitement,	 but	 my	 being	 accepted	 as	 a	 member	 of	 the	 committee	 of	 the
enlightened	ones	makes	me	feel	very	great."
I	 sent	him	 the	message,	 "Why	does	your	being	enlightened	not	make	you	 feel
excited?
The	reason	 is	 that	you	 think	 that	you	are	already	enlightened	--	and	 that	 is	not
true.	That's	why	your	becoming	a	member	of	the	committee	of	the	enlightened
ones	makes	you	feel	great	--	at	last	your	enlightenment	has	been	recognized.	It	is
not	a	declaration	for	you	but	a	recognition	that	you	have	been	enlightened	long
before.
"But	if	enlightenment	is	not	an	excitement,	then	how	can	it	be	a	great	thing	to	be
a	 member	 of	 the	 party,	 or	 the	 committee,	 of	 enlightened	 people?	 If
enlightenment	 itself	 makes	 no	 sense	 to	 you,	 then	 being	 the	 member	 of	 the
committee	cannot	make	any	sense,	except	this:	that	it	fulfills	your	ego.
"You	 were	 enlightened,	 and	 nobody	 was	 taking	 note	 of	 it.	 Finally	 I	 have
recognized	it,	and	now	you	are	part	of	the	committee	of	enlightened	people,	so	it
is	sealed.	But	you	are	wrong	--	because	it	was	all	a	joke!	The	committee	was	a
joke,	the	declaration	was	a	joke.
And	it	was	a	device."
Somendra	immediately	sent	a	telegram	to	Teertha,	saying,	"I	have	got	it	--	what
about	you?"	He	was	continuously	in	competition	--	that	was	his	problem,	that	he
should	be	higher	than	Teertha.	And	this	was	a	good	chance.
He	 has	 dropped	 sannyas,	 he	 has	 not	 been	 in	 any	 contact	 with	 us,	 but	 my
declaration	of	his	enlightenment	--	that	he	accepts.	Sannyas	he	has	dropped	--	he
is	no	longer	part	of	my	family	--	but	enlightenment...	immediately	a	telegram:	"I
have	got	it	--	what	about	you?"
It	was	a	device	to	see	how	people	would	react.
Your	response	to	it	was	perfectly	beautiful.
Your	response	was,	"If	Osho	says	I	am	enlightened,	I	must	be."
It	simply	shows	trust,	love.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	ego.	And	your	throwing	a
party	and	rejoicing	the	moment	with	your	friends	was	perfectly	right.
And	when	I	said	it	was	a	joke,	you	were	not	angry.	You	simply	took	it	again	the
same	way:	"If	Osho	says	I	am	not	enlightened,	and	it	was	a	joke,	perhaps	I	am
not	enlightened	and	it	was	really	a	joke."	And	the	six	months	that	you	lived	as
enlightened,	 the	 joy	 and	 the	 peace	 and	 the	 serenity	 that	 you	 felt	 was	 not	 of
enlightenment	--	it	was	of	trust	and	love.
It	was	a	good	experience	for	you.
But	different	experiences	happen	to	different	people.
There	were	only	 two	Indians	 in	 the	group	who	were	declared	enlightened,	and
they	understand	traditionally	what	enlightenment	means.	One	was	Vinod	Bharti.
He	became	very	nervous,	was	 crying,	 came	 to	Vivek	 to	give	me	 the	message,
"Osho,	 I	 am	not	enlightened.	And	you	have	created	a	 trouble	 for	me:	 I	 cannot
say	you	are	wrong,	and	I	know	perfectly	well	myself	that	I	am	not	enlightened.
So	what	am	I	supposed	to	do?
I	am	just	torn	apart.	You	just	tell	me	the	truth!"
He	 knows	 about	 enlightenment.	 He	 knows	 that	 for	 centuries	 in	 India
enlightenment	 has	 been	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 spiritual	 search.	 In	 the	West	 the
very	 idea	 has	 never	 existed.	 So	 he	 cannot	 conceive	 of	 himself	 as	 Gautam
Buddha,	and	he	cannot	deny	me	because	he	loves	me	and	trusts	me.	So	I	can	see
his	trouble.	So	I	sent	him	the	message,	"Don't	be	worried,	it	was	just	a	joke.	You
are	not	enlightened,	relax!"
Until	he	heard	that	he	was	not	enlightened,	he	could	not	sleep	for	two	days.	Then
he	relaxed	--	he	is	not	enlightened;	there	is	no	problem.
The	 other	 man	 was	 Swami	 Anand	 Maitreya,	 who	 was	 the	 only	 one	 who
understood	the	joke	immediately,	because	as	he	left	the	room	he	said,	"Osho	is
really	a	rascal!	Saying	to	me	that	I	am	enlightened,	proves	it!"	But	he	was	also
an	 Indian	 and	 particularly	 comes	 from	 Bihar	 where	 most	 of	 the	 enlightened
people	happened	in	India	--	Gautam	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Parsunatha,	Naminatha,
Adinatha...	 a	 long	 series	 of	 enlightened	 people.	 All	 twenty-four	 enlightened
masters	of	the	Jainas...	Gautam	Buddha	--	they	all	happened	in	Bihar.	Bihar	has
the	deepest	understanding	and	experience	of	enlightenment.	So	naturally	he	said,
"Osho	is	a	rascal."	But	it	was	also	his	love.
He	 was	 not	 disturbed,	 because	 once	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 a	 joke,	 there	 is	 no
question	of	any	difficulty	about	it.
A	few	people	simply	remained	silent:	they	neither	reacted	this	way	or	that.	That
too	is	good.	They	were	not	affected	by	it;	they	simply	remained	themselves,	as
they	were.	"If	Osho	says	it	is	enlightenment,	it	may	be;	if	he	says	it	is	not,	it	may
not	 be."	But	 it	 did	 not	make	 any	 difference	 to	 them;	 they	 remained	 aloof	 and
detached.
And	it	was	a	good	experience	to	see	how	people	react	to	a	single	idea,	with	their
different	minds.	Those	who	were	 not	 included	 in	 the	 committee	were	 angry.	 I
received	 a	 few	 letters	 saying,	 "If	 these	 people	 have	 become	 enlightened,	 then
why	have	I	not	become	enlightened?"	As	if	it	were	something..."You	have	given
it	to	these	people.	Why	have	you	not	given	it	to	me?"
Somebody	wrote,	"I	have	been	with	you	longer	than	these	people,	and	I	am	not
enlightened	yet.	Have	you	forgotten	me	or	what?"	But	it	was	good	to	know	how
people	react.
Your	 reaction	 was	 perfectly	 beautiful	 on	 both	 ends.	 "If	 Osho	 says	 it	 is
enlightenment,	it	must	be"	--	that	is	a	simple	trust.	"And	if	He	says	it	is	not...."
Then	you	don't	feel	any	contradiction	or	inconsistency,	you	simply	accept	it:	"If
he	 says	 it	 is	 not,	 then	 it	 must	 not	 be."	 You	 have	 transcended	 the	 world	 of
consistencies,	inconsistencies.
Love	knows	no	contradiction.
It	knows	no	comparison.
Each	moment	it	is	available.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	It	is	pure	light...	pure	delight
17	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604175
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO11
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
75
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	A	NATURAL	DEATH?
It	 is	 a	 significant	 question,	 but	 there	 are	many	possible	 implications	 in	 it.	The
simplest	and	the	most	obvious	is	 that	a	man	dies	without	any	cause;	he	simply
becomes	 old,	 older,	 and	 the	 change	 from	 old	 age	 to	 death	 is	 not	 through	 any
disease.	Death	is	simply	the	ultimate	old	age	--	everything	in	your	body,	in	your
brain,	has	stopped	functioning.	This	will	be	the	ordinary	and	obvious	meaning	of
a	natural	death.
But	to	me	natural	death	has	a	far	deeper	meaning:	one	has	to	live	a	natural	life	to
attain	a	natural	death.	Natural	death	is	 the	culmination	of	a	 life	 lived	naturally,
without	any	 inhibition,	without	any	repression	--	 just	 the	way	the	animals	 live,
the	birds	live,	the	trees	live,	without	any	split...	a	life	of	let-go,	allowing	nature
to	flow	through	you	without	any	obstructions	from	your	side,	as	if	you	are	absent
and	life	is	moving	on	its	own.
Rather	 than	 you	 living	 life,	 life	 lives	 you,	 you	 are	 secondary;	 then	 the
culmination	 will	 be	 a	 natural	 death.	 According	 to	 my	 definition,	 only	 an
awakened	 man	 can	 die	 a	 natural	 death;	 otherwise	 all	 deaths	 are	 unnatural,
because	all	lives	are	unnatural.
How	can	you	arrive	at	a	natural	death,	living	an	unnatural	life?	Death	will	reflect
the	ultimate	culmination,	the	crescendo	of	your	whole	life.	In	a	condensed	form,
it	 is	 all	 that	 you	 have	 lived.	 So	 only	 very	 few	 people	 in	 the	world	 have	 died
naturally,	because	only	very	few	people	have	lived	naturally.	Our	conditionings
don't	allow	us	to	be	natural.
Our	 conditionings,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 teach	 us	 that	 we	 have	 to	 be
something	more	than	nature,	that	just	to	be	natural	is	to	be	animal;	we	have	to	be
supernatural.	And	it	seems	very	logical.	All	the	religions	have	been	teaching	this
--	that	to	be	man	means	going	above	nature	--	and	they	have	convinced	centuries
of	humanity	to	go	above	nature.
Nobody	has	succeeded	in	going	above	nature.	All	that	they	have	succeeded	in,	is
destroying	their	natural,	spontaneous	beauty,	their	innocence.
Man	need	not	transcend	nature.
I	say	unto	you,	man	has	to	fulfill	nature	--	which	no	animal	can	do.	That	is	the
difference.
The	 religions	 were	 cunning,	 cheating	 and	 deceiving	 people.	 They	 made	 the
distinction	that	animals	are	natural	and	you	have	to	be	supernatural.	No	animal
can	do	fasting;	you	cannot	convince	any	animal	that	fasting	is	something	divine.
The	 animal	 only	 knows	 that	 it	 is	 hungry,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 difference	 between
fasting	and	being	hungry.	You	cannot	convince	any	animal	to	go	against	nature.
This	gave	an	opportunity	to	the	so-called	religious	people,	because	man	has	the
capacity	at	least	to	fight	against	nature.	He	will	never	be	victorious,	but	he	can
fight.	And	in	fighting	he	will	not	be	destroying	nature;	he	will	be	destroying	only
himself.
That's	how	man	has	destroyed	himself	--	all	his	joy,	all	his	love,	all	his	grandeur
--	and	has	become	not	something	higher	 than	animals,	but	something	 lower,	 in
every	possible	way.	Perhaps	you	have	never	 thought	about	 it:	no	animal	 in	 the
wild	 is	homosexual.	The	very	 idea,	 and	 the	whole	world	of	 animals	will	burst
into	laughter.	It	is	simply	stupid!	But	in	a	zoo,	where	females	are	not	available,
animals	turn	into	homosexuals	out	of	sheer	necessity.
But	man	has	turned	the	whole	world	into	a	zoo:	millions	and	millions	of	people
are	homosexuals,	 lesbians,	 sodomists,	and	what-not	 --	all	kinds	of	perversions.
And	 who	 is	 responsible?	 The	 people	 who	 were	 teaching	 you	 to	 go	 beyond
nature,	to	attain	supernatural	divineness.
This	 is	 only	 one	 example.	 In	 every	 other	 way	 they	 have	 done	 the	 same.	 For
example,	in	India	Mahavira	was	so	much	attached	to	the	idea	of	nonviolence	that
even	cultivation	--
gardening	 --	was	prohibited	 to	his	 followers,	because	 if	you	cultivate	you	will
have	to	cut	plants...	and	plants	have	life,	and	that	will	be	violence.
His	 followers	 were	 mostly	 coming	 from	 the	 warrior	 race,	 the	 Kshatriyas;	 he
himself	 was	 a	 warrior	 king.	 Now	 they	 could	 not	 fight	 because	 fighting	 was
violence;	 they	 could	not	 be	 cultivators	 because	 cultivation	was	violence.	They
could	 not	 be	 teachers	 because	 that	 was	 the	monopoly	 of	 the	 brahmins,	 and	 a
brahmin	 is	 born;	 you	 cannot	 enter	 into	 the	 brahmin	 fold,	 howsoever	wise	 you
are.	You	may	be	wiser	than	all	those	brahmins,	but	you	cannot	become	a	teacher
of	the	people	--	that	is	the	birthright	of	a	brahmin.	So	they	could	not	be	accepted
by	 the	brahmins.	They	would	not	 like	 to	become	 the	sudras,	 the	untouchables,
making	shoes,	cleaning	streets	and	toilets.
Now	 the	 only	 way	 possible	 for	 them	 was	 to	 become	 businessmen;	 all	 other
possibilities	were	closed.	So	all	 the	Jainas	 in	India	became	businessmen,	and	a
strange	phenomenon	happened:	all	 their	violence...	because	 just	by	not	being	a
fighter	or	a	hunter	or	a	cultivator	makes	no	difference;	you	are	the	same	person.
All	 their	violence	became	exploitation:	 they	cannot	cut	off	your	head,	but	 they
can	suck	your	blood.	And	they	became	the	richest	people	in	the	country,	for	the
simple	reason	that	all	their	violence	became	concentrated	only	on	one	thing,	and
that	was	money.
This	was	 not	 evolution.	These	 people	were	 not	 better	 people.	The	 teaching	 of
nonviolence	has	not	helped	them	to	become	better	--	 they	have	become	worse!
They	 are	 the	 greediest,	 the	 most	 materialist,	 the	 most	 money-minded;	 their
whole	world	 is	money,	 because	 every	 other	 avenue	 is	 closed.	They	 talk	 about
money,	 they	 think	 about	 money,	 they	 dream	 about	 money.	 And	 they	 can	 do
anything	to	accumulate	money.
Whenever	you	enforce	something,	the	result	is	not	going	to	bring	a	betterment.
They	have	not	become	compassionate;	to	be	nonviolent	means	to	be	loving	and
to	be	compassionate.
They	have	become	just	 the	opposite.	They	are	not	compassionate,	 they	are	not
kind,	they	are	not	loving.
In	 many	 other	 spheres,	 by	 different	 religions,	 it	 has	 been	 tried	 to	 make	 man
something	above	nature.	The	result	has	been	without	any	exception,	failure.	You
are	born	as	a	natural	being.	You	cannot	go	above	yourself.	It	is	just	like	trying	to
lift	yourself	off	the	ground	by	pulling	your	legs.	You	may	hop	a	little,	but	sooner
or	 later	you	are	going	to	fall	 to	 the	ground,	and	you	may	have	a	few	fractures.
You	cannot	fly.
And	 that's	 what	 has	 been	 done.	 People	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 raise	 themselves
above	nature,	which	means	above	themselves.	They	are	not	separate	from	nature,
but	 the	 idea	 suited	 their	 egos:	 you	 are	 not	 animals	 so	 you	 have	 to	 be	 above
nature;	you	cannot	behave	like	animals.	People	have	even	tried	to	make	animals
not	behave	like	animals;	they	have	tried	to	make	them	go	a	little	above	nature.
In	 the	Victorian	 age	 in	 England,	 dogs	were	 clothed	when	 people	 used	 to	 take
them	for	a	walk.	The	dogs	had	coats	 to	prevent	 them	being	natural,	 to	prevent
them	being	naked	and	nude	--	which	is	suitable	to	animals.	These	kind	of	people
are	trying	to	raise	their	dogs	a	little	higher	than	animals.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	in	the	Victorian	age	in	England,	even	the	legs
of	chairs	were	covered	 --	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 they	were	called	 legs,	and
legs	should	be	covered.	Bertrand	Russell,	who	lived	almost	one	century	--	a	long
life	--	remembers	in	his	childhood	that	seeing	the	feet	of	a	woman	was	enough	to
get	sexually	excited.	The	dresses	were	made	in	such	a	way	that	they	covered	the
feet;	you	could	not	see	the	feet.
It	was	believed,	even	 just	one	hundred	years	ago,	 that	 the	women	of	 the	 royal
family	don't	have	two	legs.	Royalty	has	to	be	somehow	different	than	ordinary,
common	humanity,	and	nobody	had	seen	--	and	there	was	no	possibility	to	see	--
whether	their	legs	were	separate	from	each	other.
But	the	ego...	neither	did	those	royal	people	make	it	clear:	"This	is	nonsense,	we
are	 as	 human	 as	 you	 are."	 The	 ego	 prevented	 them.	 If	 the	 people	 are	 putting
them	on	a	higher	pedestal,	then	why	bother?	--	just	remain	royal.	That	was	one
of	the	reasons	why	royal	families	would	not	allow	anybody,	a	commoner,	to	be
married	 into	 the	 royal	 family,	because	he	may	expose	 the	whole	 thing:	 "These
people	are	just	as	human	as	everybody	else;	there	is	nothing	royal	about	them."
But	for	centuries	they	maintained	the	idea.
I	would	also	like	you	to	be	different	from	the	animals,	but	not	in	the	sense	that
you	can	go	above	nature	--	no.	You	can	go	deeper	into	nature,	you	can	be	more
natural	than	animals.
They	are	not	free,	they	are	in	a	deep	coma;	they	cannot	do	anything	other	than
what	their	ancestors	have	been	doing	for	millennia.
You	can	be	more	natural	than	any	animal.	You	can	go	to	the	abysmal	depths	of
nature,	and	you	can	go	to	the	very	heights	of	nature,	but	you	will	not	be	going
beyond	in	any	way.	You	will	be	becoming	more	natural,	you	will	be	becoming
more	multidimensionally	natural.
To	me	the	religious	man	is	not	one	who	is	above	nature,	but	is	the	man	who	is
totally	natural,	fully	natural,	who	has	explored	nature	in	all	its	dimensions,	who
has	not	left	anything	unexplored.
Animals	 are	 prisoners;	 they	 have	 a	 certain	 limited	 area	 of	 being.	Man	has	 the
capacity,	 the	 intelligence,	 the	 freedom	 to	 explore.	 And	 if	 you	 have	 explored
nature	 totally,	you	have	come	home.	Nature	 is	your	home.	And	then	death	 is	a
joy,	 is	 a	 celebration.	 Then	 you	 die	 without	 any	 complaint;	 you	 die	 with	 deep
gratitude,	because	life	gave	you	so	much,	and	death	is	simply	the	ultimate	height
of	all	that	you	have	lived.
It	is	just	like	before	the	flame	of	a	candle	goes	out	it	burns	brightest...	the	natural
man,	before	he	dies,	lives	brightest	for	a	moment;	he	is	all	light,	all	truth.
To	me	this	is	natural	death.
But	it	has	to	be	earned;	it	is	not	given	to	you.	The	opportunity	is	given	to	you,
but	you	have	to	explore,	you	have	to	earn,	you	have	to	deserve.
Even	to	see	the	death	of	an	authentic	man,	just	to	be	near	him	while	he	is	dying,
you	will	be	filled	suddenly	with	a	strange	joy.	Your	tears	will	not	be	of	sadness,
sorrow;	 they	will	 be	 of	 gratitude	 and	 blissfulness	 --	 because	when	 a	man	dies
naturally,	 living	 his	 life	 fully,	 he	 spreads	 his	 being	 into	 the	 whole	 of	 nature.
Those	 who	 are	 present	 and	 close	 to	 him	 are	 bathed...	 a	 sudden	 freshness,	 a
breeze,	a	new	fragrance	and	a	new	feeling	that	death	is	not	something	bad,	that
death	is	not	something	to	be	afraid	of,	that	death	is	something	to	be	earned,	to	be
deserved.
I	teach	you	the	art	of	life.	But	it	can	be	called	also	the	art	of	death.	They	are	both
the	same.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	 CAN	 ONE	 GET	 OUT	 OF	 THE	 TRAP	 THE	 MIND	 CREATES	 OF
NEVER
BEING	 QUITE	 BLISSFUL	 IN	 THE	 MOMENT,	 AND	 BEING	 PATIENT,
LETTING
THE	GRASS	GROW	BY	ITSELF.
I'M	ALWAYS	WANTING	TO	MOVE	FASTER,	TO	PUSH	THE	RIVER,	AND
MISSING	THE	BEAUTY	OF	IT	TAKING	ME	IN	ITS	OWN	TIME.	WOULD
YOU
PLEASE	COMMENT?
It	is	one	of	the	eternal	questions.
The	East	has	come	up	with	something	very	close	to	the	truth.	There	are	religions
born	 in	 India	 and	 religions	 born	 outside	 India;	 the	 religions	 born	 outside	 all
believe	in	one	life	--
that	is,	seventy	years.	Naturally,	one	is	in	a	hurry;	one	has	to	be	in	a	hurry	--	such
a	 small	 life	 and	 so	 much	 to	 do,	 so	 much	 to	 experience,	 so	 much	 to	 explore.
That's	 why	 the	Western	 mind	 is	 speedy,	 wanting	 to	 do	 everything	 faster	 and
faster,	 quickly,	 because	 his	 conception	 of	 life	 is	 too	 small.	 You	 cannot	 blame
him.
The	religions	born	in	India	have	an	eternal	expanse	--	life	after	life.	There	is	no
hurry,	there	is	no	haste.	But	man	is	so	stupid	that	you	solve	one	question,	and	out
of	the	solution	a	thousand	other	questions	will	arise.	The	idea	of	many	lives	was
really	to	help	you	to	relax:	there	is	no	hurry;	the	eternity	is	yours,	so	don't	run,
just	walk	the	way	you	go	for	a	morning	walk	--	at	ease,	relaxed.
That	was	 the	 idea	of	 the	people	who	gave	 the	conception	of	 reincarnation,	but
people	are	such	that	rather	than	becoming	relaxed,	they	became	lazy.	They	said,
"There	is	no	hurry,	so	why	bother	even	to	walk?	Running	is	out	of	question	but
even	to	go	for	a	morning	walk,	what	is	the	need?	Eternity	is	yours	--	you	can	go
any	time	for	your	morning	walk."
The	 East	 became	 poor	 because	 of	 this,	 because	 no	 technology	 was	 evolved.
Technology	is	just	to	make	things	quickly,	to	produce	things	faster	than	man	can
do	with	 his	 own	hands.	The	 people	 remained	poor,	went	 on	 becoming	poorer.
The	idea	was	good,	but	the	consequences	proved	not	to	be	good.
The	West	has	just	the	opposite	idea	--	of	a	small	life.	It	created	great	tension	and
anxiety,	 but	 it	 created	 technology,	 scientific	 developments,	 richness,	 comfort,
luxuries;	 it	 created	 everything.	 But	 the	 man	 inside	 was	 lost,	 because	 he	 was
always	running.	He	was	never	where	he	was;	he	was	always	going	for	something
else.	And	that	goal	where	you	can	stop	never	comes.	So	in	the	West	people	have
means	 of	 speed,	 and	 they	 are	 going	 fast.	But	 don't	 ask	 them,	 "Where	 are	 you
going?"	Don't	waste	their	time	in	asking	such	stupid	questions!	All	that	matters
is	that	they	are	going	fast;	it	does	not	matter	where	they	are	going	and	why	they
are	going.
Both	 ideas	 have	 failed.	 Eastern	 religions	 have	 not	 been	 of	 help;	 Western
religions	have	not	 been	of	 help.	They	both	 tried	 to	give	you	 an	 idea,	 but	 they
never	gave	you	an	insight	into	your	own	being.
That's	where	I	differ.
For	example,	your	question	is	that	you	understand,	"Relax	and	let	the	grass	grow
by	itself,"	but	still	you	go	on	pushing.
No,	you	don't	understand.	The	first	thing	for	you	to	understand	is	that	you	don't
understand	 the	meaning	of	 the	grass	growing	by	 itself.	 If	 you	understand	 that,
the	pushing,	 the	forcing,	will	disappear.	When	I	say	 it	will	disappear,	 I	am	not
saying	it	will	stop.	It	will	differ	with	different	people.
If	 you	 understand	 what	 it	 means	 that	 the	 grass	 grows	 by	 itself...	 such	 a	 vast
universe	is	going	so	silently,	so	peacefully;	millions	of	solar	systems,	millions	of
stars	moving	day	 in,	day	out,	 from	eternity	 to	eternity...	 If	you	understand	 that
existence	 is	happening,	 it	 is	not	doing,	 then	 if	pushing	 is	your	nature	you	will
accept	it.	It	is	not	a	question	of	stopping	it,	because	that	will	be	again	doing.	You
simply	understand	that	 things	are	happening,	 that	 this	 is	how	you	are:	 that	you
push,	 that	 you	 force.	 Then	 there	 is	 a	 great	 acceptance	 of	 it,	 and	 in	 that
acceptance,	the	tension	disappears.
For	a	few	others	the	pushing	may	disappear	--	if	it	is	not	part	of	their	nature,	if
they	are	imitating	somebody	else,	if	they	are	competing	with	somebody	else	and
because	everybody	else	is	pushing,	they	are	pushing.	It	may	stop,	understanding
that	 things	 are	 happening,	 and	 you	 need	 not	 unnecessarily	 bother	 about	 them;
you	can	enjoy	silently	the	way	things	are	happening.	You	can	contribute	without
any	anxiety	anything	that	comes	naturally	to	you;	but	not	beyond	that.
So	 each	 individual	 will	 have	 different	 things	 happening	 out	 of	 the	 same
understanding.	If	pushing	is	your	nature,	then	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.	Enjoy
it,	 push	as	much	as	you	can	 --	but	with	a	 song	and	with	a	dance,	 and	without
being	worried	that	you	are	pushing.
This	 is	 you.	 This	 is	 your	 grass,	 and	 it	 grows	 this	 way.	 There	 are	 grasses	 and
grasses.
Just	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered,	that	anything	that	you	are	doing	is	joyfully
done,	rejoicingly	done	--	that's	enough.	Different	people	will	be	doing	different
things,	and	the	world	needs	that	different	people	should	do	different	things.	It	is
the	richness	of	the	world,	that	all	are	not	alike,	and	should	not	be	alike.	But	on
one	point	they	should	meet;	and	that	is	the	cosmic	center	of	being	relaxed.
In	Japan	they	have	developed	strange	things	for	meditative	purposes...	Japan	has
done	a	tremendous	service	to	humanity.	Meditation	was	developed	in	India,	but
it	 remained	 a	 very	 limited	 phenomenon	 --	 just	 sitting	 in	 a	 lotus	 posture
witnessing	 your	 thoughts,	 becoming	 silent.	 It	 did	 the	 work,	 but	 Japan	 tried
different	dimensions,	 strange	dimensions:	 swordsmanship,	but	with	meditation.
Two	 swordsmen	 bent	 upon	 killing	 each	 other	 have	 to	 remain	 centered	 in
themselves	without	 tension,	 without	 fear,	 without	 anger,	 without	 revenge,	 just
playful.
To	the	observer	it	is	a	question	of	life	and	death,	but	to	those	two	meditators	it	is
playfulness.	And	a	strange	thing	has	been	observed	again	and	again:	if	both	the
meditators	are	of	 the	same	depth	in	meditation,	nobody	wins,	nobody	is	killed.
Even	before	one	person	raises	the	sword	to	hit	the	other	person	at	a	certain	point
--	even	before	he	has	done	that	--	 just	that	idea	of	his	has	reached	to	the	other,
and	his	sword	is	ready	to	protect	him.
It	is	impossible	to	declare	who	is	the	winner.	Ordinarily	it	is	difficult	to	think	of
swordsmanship	 and	meditation,	 aikido	 and	meditation,	 jujitsu	 and	meditation,
wrestling	and	meditation.	But	in	Japan	they	have	tried	every	dimension	possible,
and	they	have	found	that	it	doesn't	matter	what	you	are	doing;	what	matters	is,
are	you	centered?
If	you	are	centered	then	you	can	do	anything	and	it	will	not	create	any	tension;
your	relaxation	will	remain	the	same.
So	don't	be	worried	about	pushing.	 Just	 try	 to	understand	 that	we	are	so	small
compared	to	this	immense	universe;	what	we	do	or	don't	do	makes	no	difference
to	 existence.	We	 are	 not	 to	 be	 serious	 about	 it.	 I	 was	 not	 here	 and	 existence
continued;	 I	 will	 not	 be	 here,	 and	 existence	 will	 continue.	 I	 should	 not	 take
myself	seriously.
That	 is	 a	 fundamental	 understanding	 of	 a	 meditator	 --	 that	 he	 does	 not	 take
himself	 seriously.	 Then	 relaxation	 comes	 automatically.	 And	 with	 relaxation,
whatsoever	is	natural	to	you	continues,	and	whatsoever	is	not	natural	to	you	falls
on	its	own	accord.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	QUESTION	FOR	THE	MEDITATOR	USED	TO	BE,	 "HOW	TO	BE	 IN
THE
WORLD	AND	NOT	OF	IT?"	SINCE	THE	RANCH	AND	HAVING	MOVED
BACK
INTO	THE	WORLD,	MANY	OF	US	FEEL	ALIEN,	DIFFERENT,	NOT	OF	IT.
THE	QUESTION	NOW	SEEMS	TO	BE,	"HOW	TO	BE	IN	IT?"
No,	still	the	question	is	to	be	in	the	world	and	not	to	be	of	it.	To	be	in	it	does	not
change	the	first	position.	The	first	position	allows	you	to	be	in	the	world	but	not
worldly.
It	is	perfectly	good	that	you	feel	alien	--	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.	You	should
feel	so,	that	this	world	in	which	you	have	to	be	is	not	the	world	where	you	can
synchronize	with	people,	with	their	ideas,	with	their	behavior.
This	world	is	not	the	right	world	--	I	mean	the	human	world.	And	you	want	to	be
in	it,	part	of	it?	Then	you	have	to	be	a	Christian	in	a	Christian	society.	Then	you
have	 to	go	 to	 the	church,	 then	you	have	 to	believe	 in	THE	HOLY	BIBLE.	Do
you	want	to	be	in	this	way	in	the	world?	Then	all	that	you	have	done	before	has
been	a	sheer	wastage	of	time.
Being	 in	 the	world	 only	means	 that	 you	will	 be	 doing	 a	 job,	 that	 you	will	 be
earning	your	bread,	that	you	will	be	living	with	people	who	are	not	of	the	same
mind	as	you,	that	you	will	be	living	amongst	foreigners;	and	naturally,	you	will
feel	alien.	But	that	is	something	to	be	happy	about.
I	have	not	sent	you	into	the	world	to	get	lost.
I	have	sent	you	into	the	world	to	remain	yourself	in	spite	of	the	world.	And	that
was	 the	meaning	of	 the	original	 statement:	To	be	 in	 the	world	but	not	of	 it.	 It
remains	unchanged.
It	is	so	fundamental	that	it	will	remain	unchanged.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONE	OF	THE	THINGS	I	ENJOY	MOST	IN	THIS	LIFE	IS	HEARING	YOU
DESCRIBE	THE	STATE	OF	ENLIGHTENMENT.	FOR	THOSE	OF	US	WHO
LOVE
TO	LISTEN,	CAN	YOU	ONCE	AGAIN	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THE
UNSAYABLE?
It	is	true	that	there	is	nothing	more	beautiful,	more	blissful	than	enlightenment	--
even	 the	 talk	 of	 it,	 even	 the	 faraway	 echo,	 even	 the	 shadow	 of	 it.	 The	moon
reflected	in	the	water	is	not	the	real	moon,	but	still	it	has	tremendous	beauty;	and
if	the	waters	of	your	mind	are	silent,	then	the	moon	reflected	in	those	waters	is
exactly	the	same.
It	is	not	your	experience,	but	it	is	someone's	experience	you	love,	it	is	someone's
experience	you	trust.	And	just	because	you	love	and	you	trust,	you	start	sharing
the	experience	in	a	subtle	way.
It	 is	 certainly	difficult	 to	 say	anything	about	 it,	 although	my	whole	 life	 I	have
been	 saying	 things	 about	 it	 --	 and	only	 about	 it.	Even	 if,	 though,	 I	 am	 talking
about	other	 things,	 I	 am	only	 talking	 to	 lead	you	 towards	 an	understanding	of
enlightenment.
It	is	your	state	of	silence,	it	is	your	state	of	universal-hood.
It	is	you	without	the	ego	and	its	problems.
It	is	you	without	any	questions	and	without	any	answer	either	--	simply	silent.
And	there	is	no	joy	which	can	transcend	this	silence.
It	is	pure	light,	it	is	pure	delight.
I	 can	 understand	 your	 question.	 Just	 to	 hear	 about	 it	 again	 and	 again	 is	 a
necessary	need,	so	you	don't	forget	why	you	are	here.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	Obedience	needs	no	art
18	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604180
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO12
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
90
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	HEAR	YOU	SPEAKING	OF	YOUR	VISION,	 I	CAN'T	HELP	BUT
FEEL
THAT	THOSE	FEW	DARING	PEOPLE	AROUND	YOU	WILL	LIVE	TO
EXPERIENCE	THE	NEW	MAN.	BUT	IT	FEELS	MORE	LIKE	A	HUNDRED
YEARS
AWAY	BEFORE	MAN	AT	LARGE	WILL	COME	TO	SEE	AND	LIVE	THE
GENIUS
OF	YOUR	WAYS.	IS	THIS	TRUE?
It	is	true.
Even	if	it	happens	in	a	hundred	years	time	it	will	be	soon.
But	the	question	is	significant	in	a	totally	different	way.	It	is	not	the	realization
of	the	vision,	the	coming	of	the	new	man,	a	new	humanity...	that	will	come	in	its
own	time.	The	more	important	thing	is	to	be	able	to	visualize	it.
Everything	 great	 that	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 world	 has	 been	 an	 idea	 first.
Sometimes	 it	 took	 hundreds	 of	 years	 for	 it	 to	 become	 a	 reality,	 but	 the	 joy	 of
having	a	vision,	an	insight	into	the	future,	is	immense.	The	people	who	are	with
me	 should	 rejoice	 that	 they	 can	 see	 a	 possibility	 of	 the	 old	 rotten	 world
disappearing	and	a	new	fresh	human	being	taking	its	place.
Just	the	vision	will	change	you	at	least,	will	shift	your	being	from	the	past	to	the
future.
In	a	certain	way	you	will	start	living	the	new	man,	who	has	not	yet	come.	You
will	start	living	the	new	man	in	small	ways,	and	each	moment	of	that	living	will
be	 a	 blessing.	 And	 as	 you	 become	 acquainted,	 within	 yourself,	 with	 the
explosion	of	 the	new	and	 the	destruction	of	 the	old,	you	are	changing,	you	are
going	through	a	revolution.
I	am	interested	in	you.	Who	cares	about	what	is	going	to	happen	after	a	hundred
years?
Something	must	be	going	to	happen,	but	it	is	not	our	business.	And	when	I	talk
about	the	new	man	I	am	really	talking	about	you,	for	you	to	become	aware	of	the
possibility,	because	that	very	awareness	will	change	you.	I	am	not	interested	in
the	future;	I	am	simply	interested	in	the	immediate	present.
The	 future	will	go	on	 for	eternity,	but	 if	your	mind	can	be	cleaned	of	 the	past
rubbish,	 and	 if	you	can	 see	 the	 faraway	 rising	 sun...	 I	 am	not	 interested	 in	 the
sun,	 I	 am	 interested	 in	 your	 vision,	 in	 your	 capacity	 to	 see,	 in	 your
understanding,	 in	 your	 hope	 that	 it	 is	 possible.	 That	 very	 hope	will	 become	 a
seed	in	you.
The	new	man	will	come	whenever	it	has	to	come.
But	the	new	vision	can	come	right	now.
And	with	the	new	vision	you	participate	in	a	subtle	way	with	the	man	who	has
not	 come	yet,	with	 the	 humanity	who	 is	 still	 in	 the	womb.	You	 start	 having	 a
synchronicity,	a	certain	relationship.	Your	roots	from	the	past	start	dropping,	and
you	start	growing	your	roots	into	the	future.
But	my	interest,	I	repeat,	is	basically	in	you.	Neither	am	I	interested	in	the	past,
nor	 in	 the	future.	 I	 talk	about	 the	past	so	you	can	get	 rid	of	 it;	 I	 talk	about	 the
future	so	you	can	remain	open	to	it.	But	you	are	the	point	of	my	emphasis.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
NOTHING	 THRILLS	 ME	 MORE	 THAN	 WHEN	 YOU	 SPEAK	 ABOUT
NIRVANA.
HOW	 MYSTERIOUS	 IT	 IS	 THAT	 I	 CAN	 LONG	 FOR	 SOMETHING	 SO
MUCH
THAT	 I	 DON'T	 KNOW	 AND	 YOU	 CAN'T	 SAY.	 THE	 WORD	 ITSELF	 IS
STILL
UNPOLLUTED	 AND	 SO	 WONDROUS.	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 HAND,	 I
NOTICED	THE
OTHER	 WEEK	 THAT	 WE	 NOW	 HAVE	 "ENLIGHTENED"	 INSURANCE
POLICIES!
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	THRILL	MY	HEART	ONCE	MORE?
This	must	be	Kaveesha,	because	the	question	can	come	only	from	California.	In
California	you	can	have	enlightened	insurance	policies.	In	California	everything
is	possible!	But	there	is	no	insurance,	no	guarantee	for	enlightenment.	You	have
to	 earn	 it,	 you	 have	 to	 deserve	 it.	 Nobody	 can	 give	 it	 to	 you;	 it	 is	 not	 a
commodity.
And	I	can	see	why	the	word	nirvana	thrills	you	into	ecstasies.	It	is	certainly	one
of	the	words	which	is	unpolluted.	There	is	a	reason	why	it	remained	unpolluted.
The	 first	 reason	 that	 it	 remained	unpolluted	was	 its	meaning.	Unless	you	have
come	to	a	deep	understanding	of	yourself	and	existence,	 the	word	nirvana	will
create	 fear	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 a	 negative	 word.	 Literally	 it	 means	 "blowing	 out	 the
candle."
Gautam	Buddha	used	the	word	for	the	ultimate	state	of	consciousness.	He	could
have	chosen	some	positive	word,	and	 in	 India	 there	were	many	positive	words
for	 it:	 moksha,	 freedom,	 liberation;	 kaivalya,	 aloneness,	 absolute	 aloneness;
brahmanubava,	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 ultimate.	 But	 he	 chose	 a	 strange	 word,
which	has	never	been	used	in	spiritual	contexts:	"blowing	out	the	candle."	How
can	you	relate	it	with	a	spiritual	experience?
Buddha	 says	 your	 so-called	 self	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 flame,	 and	 it	 is	 being	 kept
burning	 through	 your	 desires.	 When	 all	 desires	 disappear	 the	 candle	 has
disappeared.	Now	the	flame	cannot	exist	anymore.	The	flame	also	disappears	--
disappears	 into	 the	vast	universe,	 leaving	no	trace	behind	it;	you	cannot	find	it
again.	It	is	there	but	it	has	gone	forever	from	any	identity,	from	any	limitation.
Hence	 Buddha	 chose	 the	 word	 nirvana	 rather	 than	 realization,	 because
realization	still	can	give	you	some	egoistic	superiority	--	that	you	are	a	realized
person,	 that	 you	 are	 a	 liberated	 being,	 that	 you	 are	 enlightened,	 that	 you	 are
illuminated,	that	you	have	found	it.
But	you	remain.	And	Buddha	is	saying	you	are	 lost	--	who	is	going	to	find	it?
You	 disperse,	 you	 were	 only	 a	 combination.	 Now	 each	 element	 goes	 to	 its
original	source.	The	identity	of	the	individual	is	no	more.	Yes,	you	will	exist	as
the	universe...
So	Buddha	 avoided	 any	 positive	word,	 knowing	 the	 human	 tendency,	 because
each	positive	word	can	give	you	a	feeling	of	ego.	No	negative	word	can	do	that;
that's	 why	 it	 remains	 unpolluted.	 You	 cannot	 pollute	 something	 which	 is	 not.
And	 people	 were	 very	 much	 afraid	 to	 use	 the	 word	 --	 with	 a	 deep	 inner
trembling	--	nirvana.
Thousands	of	times	Buddha	was	asked,	"Your	word	nirvana	does	not	create	in	us
an	 excitement,	 does	 not	 create	 in	 us	 a	 desire	 to	 achieve	 it.	The	 ultimate	 truth,
self-realization,	the	realization	of	God	--	all	those	create	a	desire,	a	great	desire.
Your	word	creates	no	desire."
And	Buddha	 said	 again	 and	 again,	 "That	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	word.	All	 those
words	which	create	desire	in	you	are	not	going	to	help	you,	because	desire	itself
is	the	root	cause	of	your	misery.	Longing	for	something	is	your	tension.	Nirvana
makes	 you	 absolutely	 free	 from	 tension:	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 desire.	 On	 the
contrary,	you	have	to	prepare	yourself	to	accept	a	dissolution.	In	dissolution	you
cannot	claim	the	ego,	hence	the	word	remains	unpolluted."
No	other	word	has	remained	unpolluted.	Its	negativity	is	the	reason	--	and	only	a
great	master	can	contribute	to	humanity	something	which,	even	if	you	want,	you
cannot	pollute.	Twenty-five	centuries...	but	there	is	no	way.	Nirvana	is	going	to
dissolve	you;	you	cannot	do	anything	to	nirvana.
It	 is	 certainly	 the	 purest	 word.	 Even	 its	 sound,	 whether	 you	 understand	 the
meaning	or	not,	 is	 soothing,	gives	a	deep	 serenity	and	 silence,	which	no	other
word	 --	 god-realization,	 the	 absolute,	 the	 ultimate...	 no	 other	 word	 gives	 that
feeling	of	silence.	The	moment	you	hear	the	word	nirvana	it	seems	as	if	time	has
stopped,	as	if	there	is	nowhere	to	go.
In	this	very	moment	you	can	melt,	dissolve,	disappear,	without	leaving	any	trace
behind.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 ANECDOTE	 YOU	 TOLD	ABOUT	MULLA	NASRUDDIN	 AND	 THE
SACK	OF
SUGAR	 PINPOINTED	 THE	 REASON	 FOR	 MY	 OCCASIONAL
RESISTANCE	TO
BEING	TOLD	WHAT	TO	DO.	WHEN	NASRUDDIN'S	FATHER	SAW	WHAT
WAS
HAPPENING	TO	 THE	 SUGAR,	HE	NEED	ONLY	HAVE	MADE	HIS	 SON
AWARE
OF	 IT,	 WITHOUT	 PROVIDING	 A	 SOLUTION.	 HAVING	 HAD	 THE
SITUATION
POINTED	OUT	TO	HIM,	THE	MULLA,	IF	HE	HAD	ANY	INTELLIGENCE	-
-	AND
IT	 SEEMS	HE	HAD	HIS	 FAIR	 SHARE	 --	 COULD	HAVE	 IMMEDIATELY
SEEN
WHAT	WAS	NEEDED	TO	BE	DONE	AND	ACTED	ACCORDINGLY.	BUT
HIS
FATHER	DID	NOT	ALLOW	HIM	THE	CHANCE	TO	THINK	IT	OUT	FOR
HIMSELF.
TO	 ENCOURAGE	 PEOPLE	 TO	 USE	 THEIR	 INTELLIGENCE	 AND
INITIATIVE
SEEMS	TO	BE	A	CREATIVE	WAY	OF	PUTTING	ONE'S	AUTHORITY	INTO
ACTION.
I	WOULD	BE	GRATEFUL	FOR	YOUR	COMMENT.
The	story	is	simply	a	way	of	saying	very	complex	and	complicated	things.	As	far
as	the	story	is	concerned,	you	are	right;	 the	father	could	have	explained.	There
was	no	need	for	any	order,	and	no	need	for	obedience	or	disobedience.	But	it	is	a
story.
In	 actual	 life	 there	 are	 things	 --	 particularly	 for	 example	God,	 or	 the	 soul,	 or
paradise,	the	temple,	worship,	the	prayer	to	an	unknown	God...	there	is	no	way
to	explain.	The	father	cannot	explain	God	--	he	himself	does	not	know.	He	has
been	told,	he	accepted	it,	and	he	has	believed	it.	Now	it	is	time	for	him	to	tell	the
son	--	how	can	he	explain?	And	that's	where	I	come	into	the	story.
Your	whole	society	and	the	mind	of	your	society	is	based	on	things	which	can	be
only	believed	but	cannot	be	explained;	hence	the	necessity	of	obedience;	hence
the	angry	reaction	of	your	elders	if	you	disobey.
It	was	a	problem	for	me	also	 in	my	childhood.	My	whole	family	was	going	 to
the	 temple	and	 I	was	 resistant.	 I	was	willing	 --	 if	 they	could	explain	what	 this
whole	 thing	was	all	 about.	They	had	no	explanation	except,	 "It	has	been	done
always,	and	it	 is	good	to	follow	your	elders,	 to	follow	your	old	generations,	 to
follow	the	ancient	heritage...	it	is	good."
This	is	not	an	explanation.
I	told	them,	"I	am	not	asking	whether	it	is	good	or	bad;	I	am	asking	what	it	is.	I
don't	see	any	God,	I	see	only	a	stone	statue.	And	you	know	perfectly	well	that	it
is	a	stone	statue	--
you	know	better	 than	me,	 because	 you	have	purchased	 it	 from	 the	market.	 So
God	is	being	sold	in	the	market?	You	have	installed	it	with	your	own	hands	in
the	 temple;	 at	 what	 point	 did	 it	 become	 God?	 --	 because	 in	 the	 shop	 of	 the
sculptor	it	is	not	worshipped.
People	 are	 haggling	 for	 its	 price;	 nobody	 is	 praying	 to	 it!	Nobody	 thinks	 that
these	are	gods,	because	there	are	so	many	statues.	And	you	can	choose	according
to	your	liking.
"You	 haggled	 for	 the	 price,	 you	 purchased	 the	 statue,	 and	 I	 have	 been	 an
observer	all	 the	 time,	waiting	 to	 see	at	what	moment	 the	stone	statue	becomes
God,	 at	 what	moment	 it	 is	 not	 a	 commodity	 to	 be	 purchased	 and	 sold,	 but	 a
divinity	to	be	worshipped."
They	 had	 no	 explanation.	 There	 is	 no	 explanation,	 because	 in	 fact	 it	 never
became	God;	it	is	still	a	statue.	It	is	just	no	longer	in	the	shop,	it	is	in	the	temple.
And	what	is	the	temple?
--	another	house.
I	 was	 asking	 them,	 "I	 want	 to	 participate	 with	 you	 in	 your	 prayers,	 in	 your
worship;	 I	don't	want	 to	 remain	an	outsider.	But	 I	 cannot	do	 it	 against	myself.
First	I	have	to	be	satisfied,	and	you	don't	give	any	answer	that	is	satisfying.	And
what	are	you	saying	in	your	prayers?
"`Give	us	this,'	`Give	us	that'	--	and	do	you	see	the	whole	hilarious	scene?	You
have	purchased	a	stone	statue,	installed	it	in	a	house,	and	now	you	are	begging
from	 the	 statue,	 which	 is	 purchased	 by	 you,	 `Give	 us	 this,'	 `Give	 us	 that...
prosperity	to	our	family,	health	to	our	family.'	You	are	behaving	very	strangely,
in	a	weird	way,	and	I	cannot	participate	in	it.
"I	don't	want	to	disobey	for	disobedience's	sake.	And	this	is	not	disobedience;	I
am	 ready	 to	 follow	your	order,	but	you	are	not	prepared	 to	give	 it	 to	me.	You
never	 asked	 your	 own	 parents.	 They	 lived	 in	 ignorance,	 you	 are	 living	 in
ignorance,	and	you	want	me	also	to	live	in	ignorance."
They	 thought	 that	 I	would	 cool	down	by	and	by.	They	used	 to	 take	me	 to	 the
temple.
They	would	all	bow	down,	and	I	would	stand	by	the	side.	And	my	father	would
say	to	me,	"Just	for	our	sake...	it	doesn't	look	good.	It	looks	odd	that	you	stand
by	the	side	when	everybody	is	bowing	down	with	so	much	religiousness."
I	said,	"I	don't	see	any	religiousness;	I	simply	see	a	certain	kind	of	exercise.	And
if	these	people	are	so	much	interested	in	exercise,	they	can	go	to	a	gymnasium,
which	will	really	give	them	health.
"Here	 they	 are	 asking,	 `Give	 us	 health,'	 and	 `Give	 us	 wealth.'	 Go	 to	 the
gymnasium	and	there	you	will	get	health,	and	you	will	have	real	exercises.	This
is	not	much!	And	you	are	right	that	it	looks	odd	--	not	my	standing	here	but	you
all	doing	all	kinds	of	stupid	rituals.
You	are	odd.	I	may	be	in	the	minority,	but	I	am	not	odd.
"And	you	say	for	your	sake	I	should	participate.	Why	are	you	not	participating
with	me	 for	my	sake?	You	all	 should	stand	 in	a	 line	 in	 the	corner	 --	That	will
show	that	you	really	want	to	participate."
Finally	 he	 told	 me,	 "It	 is	 better	 you	 don't	 come	 to	 the	 temple,	 because	 other
people	come	and	they	see	you,	and	you	are	always	doing	something	nasty."
I	said,	"What?"...	because	I	was	always	sitting	with	my	back	towards	God,	which
is	not	allowed	--	that	is	"nasty."
I	 said,	 "If	 God	 is	 omnipotent,	 he	 can	 change	 his	 position.	 Why	 should	 I	 be
bothered	 about	 it?	But	 he	 goes	 on	 sitting	 in	 the	 same	 position.	 If	 he	 does	 not
want	to	see	my	back,	he	can	move;	he	can	start	 looking	at	the	other	side.	I	am
more	 alive	 than	your	God,	 that's	why	you	 tell	me	 to	 change	my	position;	 you
don't	tell	your	God.	You	know	that	he	is	dead."
And	they	said,	"Don't	say	such	things!"
I	said,	"What	can	I	do?	He	does	not	breathe,	he	does	not	speak,	and	I	don't	think
he	hears,	 because	 a	man	who	 is	 not	 breathing,	who	 is	 not	 seeing,	who	 cannot
move,	cannot	hear	--
all	these	things	happen	in	an	organic	unity,	and	the	organism	has	to	be	alive.	So
to	whom	are	you	praying?"
And	slowly,	slowly	I	persuaded	my	family	to	get	rid	of	the	temple.	It	was	made
by	my	family,	but	then	they	gave	it	to	the	community;	they	stopped	going	there.
I	told	them,
"Unless	 you	 explain	 it	 to	 me,	 your	 going	 shows	 that	 you	 are	 not	 behaving
intelligently."
So	the	question	is	not	the	story.	The	story	is	a	simplification	of	the	complicated
life	situations	where	explanations	have	never	been	given.	For	thousands	of	years
man	has	lived	without	explanations,	has	lived	in	obedience,	has	not	questioned,
has	not	doubted,	has	not	been	skeptical;	has	been	afraid	to,	because	these	are	all
sins	--	obedience	is	virtue.
To	me	 obedience	 is	 not	 virtue:	 intelligence	 is	 virtue.	 If	 you	 follow	 something
because	 it	 appeals	 to	 your	 intelligence,	 it	 becomes	 virtuous.	 And	 if	 you	 don't
follow	 something	 because	 your	 intelligence	 is	 against	 it,	 it	 has	 not	 to	 be
condemned	as	sin.
The	mind	of	man,	for	centuries,	has	been	conditioned	to	obey.
I	want	a	society	where	we	will	drop	all	those	things	which	cannot	be	explained.
Then	only,	obedience	can	be	dropped.
I	have	not	removed	God	without	any	reason;	it	is	all	a	connected	whole.
If	 God	 is	 not	 removed,	 obedience	 remains	 in	 religion.	 Then	 religion	 never
becomes	a	scientific	approach	towards	your	own	interiority.
So	anything	that	cannot	be	explained	should	not	be	ordered.	Those	things	should
be	taken	out	of	the	human	mind.	But	then,	what	remains	of	your	religion?	God
disappears,	hell	and	heaven	disappear.
Mahavira	believed	in	three	hells,	because	people	are	committing	sins	in	different
categories.	Naturally,	to	put	all	of	them	in	one	hell	and	punish	them	in	the	same
way	is	illogical.	He	was	a	man	of	logic;	he	was	very	mathematical.	You	will	be
surprised	 to	 know	 that	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago	 he	 said	 everything	 about	 the
theory	of	relativity	that	Einstein	discovered	in	this	century.	Of	course	not	in	such
minute	detail,	because	he	had	no	way	to	experiment;	it	was	just	his	vision....
So	he	has	three	hells.	Christianity	has	only	one,	Mohammedanism	has	only	one,
Judaism	has	only	one	--	why	does	Mahavira	insist	on	three?	Because	he	can	see
that	 it	 is	unjustified:	 somebody	has	committed	a	small	 sin,	has	simply	stolen	a
little	 money	 from	 somebody	 else,	 and	 somebody	 has	 killed	 many	 people,
murdered,	 raped.	 Now	 putting	 them	 together	 with	 the	 same	 punishment	 is
illogical.	So	he	has	three	categories.
In	 the	 first	 will	 be	 the	 light	 sinners:	 the	 people	who	 have	 been	 smoking,	 and
drinking	tea	and	coffee,	and	eating	ice	cream	etc.	They	are	not	doing	very	great
sins,	so	just	the	first	hell	will	be	for	them,	just	to	give	them	a	little	torture.	Not	to
give	 them	 their	 ice	 cream	 will	 be	 enough;	 to	 put	 them	 in	 hellfire	 seems	 too
much!	In	the	second	will	be	the	heavier	sinners.	And	in	the	third	will	be	the	most
heavy	ones,	the	greatest	sinners.
But	it	is	not	so	easy	to	categorize	into	three.	Buddha	has	seven	hells,	because	he
sees	that	with	three	you	still	cannot	be	fair,	because	there	are	so	many	kinds	of
people	and	so	many	kinds	of	sins	that	a	little	more	scope	is	needed	to	be	fair.	He
has	 seven	 hells.	 But	 nobody	 has	 any	 explanation;	 nobody	 can	 prove	 their
existence.	It	is	just	hypothetical.
There	 was	 a	 man,	 Sanjay	 Belattiputta	 who	 was	 also	 a	 great	 teacher,
contemporary	to	Buddha	and	Mahavira.	He	has	seven	hundred	hells	because,	he
says,	"These	people	don't	understand	the	complexity."	And	I	think	he	is	right.	As
far	 as	 complexity	 is	 concerned,	 even	 seven	hundred	 hells	may	not	 be	 enough.
You	may	have	to	find	a	hell	for	everyone,	for	every	single	sinner,	because	two
sinners	cannot	be	put	together:	it	will	be	unfair	to	this	person,	or	to	that	person.
There	is	no	criterion,	no	weighing	machine	so	that	you	can	decide	how	much	sin
you	have	done,	how	many	kilos.
But	it	is	all	hypothetical.	And	whom	to	listen	to?	--	all	the	three	persons	are	great
teachers,	 great	 masters.	 But	 what	 they	 are	 saying,	 although	 it	 seems	 to	 be
reasonable,	is	still	hypothetical.	Somebody	may	come	and	may	talk	about	seven
thousand,	and	you	cannot	refute	them	and	you	cannot	prove	them.
Once	 you	 ask	 for	 an	 explanation	 for	 everything,	 your	 religions	 will	 start
withering	away.
Your	political	ideologies	will	be	found	to	be	based	on	nonsense.
For	example,	communism	is	based	on	 the	equality	of	man	--	and	 there	are	not
two	men	who	are	equal,	or	have	ever	been	equal.	It	is	psychological	nonsense	to
talk	 of	 the	 equality	 of	man.	Each	 individual	 is	 unique;	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of
comparison.	All	that	your	mind	is	filled	with	--	if	you	take	it	item	by	item	and	try
to	find	out	evidence,	proof,	explanation,	you	will	be	surprised:	you	are	carrying
an	unnecessary	load.
Yes,	there	are	things	which	cannot	be	explained	but	still	they	are	true.	But	they
are	 not	 to	 be	 ordered	 either;	 they	 have	 to	 be	 learned	 in	 a	 deep,	 loving
atmosphere.
If	 you	 trust	 a	 master,	 if	 you	 love	 a	 master,	 if	 you	 can	 feel	 his	 authenticity,
sincerity,	his	humanness,	then	perhaps	he	can	talk	about	things	which	are	but	can
only	be	experienced,	which	cannot	be	explained.	But	such	a	man	will	not	order
you	to	believe	in	them.
For	example,	I	cannot	tell	you	to	believe	in	reincarnation,	although	I	know	it	is	a
truth.
But	because	I	cannot	prove	 it,	 I	cannot	ask	you	 to	believe	 in	 it.	 I	can	only	ask
you	 to	explore,	 to	go	deeper	 into	your	meditation,	 to	go	deeper	 into	your	own
being,	so	that	you	can	reach	to	when	you	were	born;	and	still	a	little	deeper,	so
that	you	can	feel	that	you	are	in	your	mother's	womb.
You	have	been	in	your	mother's	womb,	and	the	memory	of	it	is	carried	by	you.
Go	further	back,	and	you	can	see	the	moment	in	which	you	were	conceived,	the
moment	when	your	father	and	mother	provided	the	opportunity	for	your	soul	to
enter	into	a	body.
Go	back	a	little	more,	and	you	can	see	yourself	dying	--	your	past	life's	end.	You
can	move	backwards	into	a	few	lives	but	that	will	be	your	experience;	still	you
cannot	explain	 to	anybody	else,	 and	you	cannot	 insist	 that	 they	 should	believe
your	 experience.	You	may	be	hallucinating,	 it	may	be	 an	 illusion,	 it	may	be	 a
dream.	It	is	not	--	because	dreams	have	different	definitions.
You	cannot	 repeat	 a	dream.	Have	you	 thought	 about	 it?	You	 see	 a	dream,	and
tomorrow	you	want	 to	 repeat	 it	 --	 can	you	 repeat	 it?	 It	 is	 beyond	you.	 It	may
come	sometime,	but	you	cannot	repeat	it.
But	by	going	into	your	past	life,	you	can	repeat;	it	is	within	your	hands,	it	is	not
a	dream.
A	hallucination	needs	unconsciousness,	 a	 drugged	 state.	 In	meditation	you	 are
not	 unconscious,	 you	 are	 conscious	 --	 more	 conscious	 than	 ever;	 hence	 your
experience	 of	 past	 lives	 cannot	 be	 a	 hallucination.	 But	 these	 are	 your	 inner
experiences,	and	they	remain	individual.
There	are	things	which	cannot	be	explained;	they	are	there,	but	they	need	not	be
ordered.
They	 have	 also	 been	 ordered	 --	 to	 be	 a	 Hindu	 you	 have	 to	 believe	 in
reincarnation.	But	the	person	who	believes	in	reincarnation	knows	nothing	about
it.	And	every	belief	dulls	your	intelligence.
So	it	is	right	that	Mulla	Nasruddin's	father	could	have	explained	to	his	son	rather
than	 ordering	 him,	 but	 he	 is	 ordering	 because	 otherwise	 the	 story	would	 have
lost	all	meaning.
The	story	is	a	Sufi	story;	it	has	a	certain	purpose.	If	the	father	had	explained,	and
Mulla	Nasruddin	had	followed	the	explanation,	what	story	would	there	be?
The	story	is	there	to	indicate	something	about	human	beliefs,	which	can	only	be
ordered,	 which	 can	 only	 be	 obeyed,	 which	 cannot	 be	 explained.	 And	 if	 the
younger	 generation	 wants	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 them,	 the	 only	 way	 is	 to	 disobey
everything	that	does	not	convince	them.
Disobedience	is	an	art.
It	 is	not	against	anybody,	and	it	 is	not	something	hard.	You	can	be	very	polite,
you	can	be	 really	nice,	 and	yet	disobedient.	 It	 looks	difficult	because	we	have
become	 accustomed	 to	 the	 association	 that	 the	 disobedient	 person	 is	 a	 hard
person,	that	he	is	not	gentle,	that	he	is	not	nice.	That	is	a	wrong	association.
I	have	disobeyed	my	whole	 life	 --	my	parents,	my	 teachers,	my	elders	 --	but	 I
have	never	let	them	feel	that	I	am	in	any	way	disrespectful	to	them,	or	that	I	am
being	nasty	to	them.
Disobedience	is	a	greater	art	than	obedience.
Obedience	needs	no	art.
One	of	my	professors,	Professor	S.S.	Roy,	was	in	deep	love	with	me	--	so	much
so	that	at	times	he	would	say,	"Okay,	so	you	come	here,	near	the	board,	and	you
explain	to	the	class	if	you	feel	my	explanation	is	not	enough,	or	is	not	adequate."
And	he	would	go	and	sit	in	my	place,	and	I	would	stand	in	his	place	and	teach
the	class.
I	asked	him	again	and	again,	"Do	you	feel	that	I	am	disrespectful	to	you?"
He	said,	"Never.	Don't	be	worried	about	it."	He	was	very	much	concerned	that	I
go	 to	 the	 examination	 hall,	 because	 he	 knew	 perfectly	 well	 that	 I	 was	 not
interested	 in	 examinations	 or	 in	 getting	 degrees	 or	 anything.	 I	 was	 in	 the
university	to	sharpen	my	intelligence,	not	to	get	a	certificate.	So	he	would	come
to	my	room,	 take	me	 in	his	car	 to	 the	examination	hall,	 see	with	his	own	eyes
that	I	had	entered	into	the	hall	--	and	then	he	would	leave.
I	told	him	the	first	day,	"I	have	not	prepared	at	all	about	this	subject.	And	I	am
going	to	be	absolutely	original,	because	any	answer	that	I	am	going	to	give	will
not	be	found	in	any	book!"
He	 said,	 "My	God,	why	did	you	not	 tell	me?	 --	 because	 I	 have	 set	 this	 paper.
Don't	be	worried,	there	is	still	time."	He	took	out	his	notebook	and	gave	me	five
questions,	and	 told	me,	sitting	 in	 the	car,	answers	 to	each,	 in	short.	He	said,	"I
am	giving	you	just	the	essential	answers,	then	you	can	elaborate."
When	 he	 was	 finished,	 I	 told	 him,	 "Don't	 feel	 hurt	 --	 I	 will	 not	 use	 a	 single
sentence	of	what	you	have	told	me,	because	it	is	unfair.	You	have	set	the	paper;
you	should	not	let	me	know.	You	have	created	more	difficulty	for	me.	Now	I	will
have	to	avoid	everything	that	you	have	said."
He	said,	"You	are	strange!"
I	 said,	 "I	 am	not	 strange,	 I	 am	 simply	 saying	 that	 you	have	done	wrong;	 now
please	don't	force	me	to	do	wrong."	And	it	was	a	difficult	paper	because	he	had
given	me	 the	 questions,	 he	 had	 given	me	 the	 answers,	 and	 I	 had	 to	 avoid	 his
answers.	But	it	was	a	great	exercise	to	find	my	own	answers	--	absolutely	clean,
unpolluted.	And	he	was	also	the	examiner	of	that	paper,	so	as	my	paper	reached
to	 him	 and	 he	 saw	 it,	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 his	 eyes:	 I	 had	 really	 avoided
everything	that	he	had	said;	I	had	not	even	used	one	word.
He	called	me,	and	said,	"I	am	sorry	that	I	gave	you	such	trouble.	I	can	see	how
difficult	it	must	have	been	for	you	to	avoid	all	the	right	answers,	and	yet	remain
right.	But	you	did	well,	and	I	am	giving	you	ninety-nine	percent	marks.	I	wanted
to	give	you	one	hundred	percent,	but	that	would	look	a	little	too	much,	so	I	have
cut	one	mark.
"But	to	you	I	can	say	that	that	was	my	desire	--	to	give	you	one	hundred	percent
marks,	for	the	simple	reason	that	you	have	been	able	to	avoid	all	the	real	answers
and	 yet	 you	 have	 managed	 to	 answer	 my	 questions	 relevantly.	 And	 these
answers	cannot	be	found	in	any	textbook;	it	must	have	been	a	strain	on	you."
I	said,	"No,	it	has	not	been.	It	has	been	just	a	play,	just	an	exercise."
"Still,"	 he	 asked,	 "why	 did	 you	 not	 listen	 to	 me?	 That	 would	 have	 been	 the
easiest	thing."
I	 said,	 "You	know	 that	 I	 cannot	 do	 anything	which	 is	 unfair;	 no	 other	 student
knew	it.
Now	 these	 ninety-nine	 percent	 are	 my	 own	 earning.	 If	 I	 had	 repeated	 your
answers	I	would	have	always	felt	guilty	that	I	was	part	of	some	unfair	process.
But	don't	feel	hurt;	I	have	not	rejected	your	answers	for	any	other	reason."
You	can	be	disobedient	with	great	artfulness;	in	fact	you	will	have	to	learn	much
artfulness	to	be	disobedient.	So	to	anything	that	has	no	explanation,	and	is	being
forced	on	you,	it	is	good	to	say	no.
But	there	will	come	a	moment	in	your	life	when	you	are	close	to	a	mystic	--	then
don't	ask	for	explanations,	because	he	is	not	ordering	you	to	believe	anything	or
disbelieve	anything.	He	is	simply	opening	his	heart	to	you.	He	is	not	asking	for
any	response	from	you,	so	the	question	of	obedience	and	disobedience	does	not
arise.
Don't	ask	explanations	from	him.
Ask	how	to	experience	what	he	is	saying.
So	there	is	a	world	of	explanations,	which	is	mundane.
And	 there	 is	 a	 world	 of	 experience,	 which	 is	 really	 the	 very	 truth,	 the	 very
essence	of	life,	the	very	foundation	of	existence.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
ARE	WE	REALLY	LOOKING	FOR	THE	ANSWER	TO	OUR	NUMEROUS
QUESTIONS?	 IT	OCCURS	TO	ME	THERE	MUST	BE,	FOR	EACH	OF	US
PRESENT
HERE,	 ONE	 QUESTION	 THAT	 CHARACTERIZES	 US,	 AND	WHICH,	 IF
WE
COULD	JUST	PINPOINT	IT,	WOULD	ACT	LIKE	A	BEACON.	THEN	THAT
QUESTION	WOULD	BE	ENOUGH	IN	ITSELF	AND	WITHOUT	THE	NEED
FOR
AN	ANSWER.
In	 fact	 there	 is	 no	 question	 which	 will	 be	 an	 answer	 to	 you.	 The	 reality	 is
unquestionably	here.	All	your	questions	are	not	really	in	search	of	answers	--	but
they	can	put	you	in	great	trouble.
If	the	man	you	are	asking	the	question	to	is	a	scholar,	a	pedagogue,	then	he	can
give	you	an	answer	which	will	create	thousands	of	questions.	You	had	come	only
with	one	question;	he	has	given	one	answer.	Now	that	answer	creates	thousands
of	questions	 --	 and	 that's	how	 it	has	been	going	on	 in	philosophy,	 in	 theology.
Each	question	leads	to	an	answer,	and	that	answer	leads	to	many	questions.	And
this	goes	on	growing.
In	fact,	if	the	man	you	are	asking	knows,	then	he	is	not	answering	your	question;
he	is	destroying	it.	He	is	trying	that	you	get	rid	of	it.	He	is	not	putting	an	answer
in	its	place,	because	then	that	will	torture	you.
This	is	the	real	work	of	a	master,	a	mystic,	 that	sooner	or	later	the	people	who
are	with	him	start	feeling	questionless.
To	be	questionless	is	the	answer.
There	is	no	answer...	it	is	not	that	when	you	are	questionless	all	your	questions
have	been	demolished.	It	is	not	that	you	come	upon	a	hidden	answer.
No,	there	is	nothing	hidden.
All	the	rubbish	has	been	removed.	You	feel	just	a	clean	and	clear	consciousness.
This	is	the	answer...	Not	the	answer	to	any	question,	but	the	state	of	no	question
is	 the	 answer	 that	 we	 are	 seeking	 and	 searching.	 Every	 question	 is	 a	 burden,
every	question	is	a	wound,	every	question	is	a	tension.	And	to	be	questionless,	to
be	completely	free	of	all	questions...
There	is	a	story	in	the	life	of	Mevlana	Jalaluddin	Rumi.	He	was	working	with	his
disciples	in	the	desert,	in	a	small	monastery.	A	few	travelers	passing	by,	just	out
of	 curiosity	 stopped	 and	went	 in.	 They	 saw	 that	 in	 the	 courtyard	 the	 students
were	 sitting,	 the	 disciples	 were	 sitting,	 and	 Mevlana	 --	 Mevlana	 means	 the
beloved	master	--	Mevlana	Rumi	was	answering	them.
They	got	fed	up,	because	strange	questions	and	strange	answers...	they	went	on
their	way.
After	 years	 of	 traveling,	 they	 came	 back,	 and	 stopped	 again	 to	 see	 what	 was
happening.
Only	Mevlana	Rumi	was	 sitting	 there,	 and	 there	were	no	disciples.	They	were
really	 shocked	 --	 what	 had	 happened?	 They	 went	 to	 Mevlana	 and	 they	 said,
"What	happened?"
Mevlana	laughed.	He	said,	"This	is	my	whole	work.	I	crushed	all	their	questions,
and	now	 they	have	no	questions	 so	 I	 have	 told	 them,	 `Go	and	do	 the	 same	 to
others:	 crush	 their	 questions.	 And	 if	 you	 find	 somebody	 you	 cannot	 manage,
send	him	here!'"
When	all	questions	are	 removed,	you	are	 again	a	 child,	utterly	 innocent.	Then
your	mind	is	bound	to	be	silent,	and	there	is	no	possibility	of	it	getting	disturbed.
And	a	great	serenity...
This	is	the	answer.	There	are	no	words	in	it,	and	it	is	not	relevant	to	any	question
in	particular;	it	is	only	a	state	of	silence.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Christianity	is	an	empty	box
18	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604185
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO13
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
99
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
MODERN	CHRISTIANS	ARE	MAKING	DESPERATE	ATTEMPTS	TO	SAVE
THEIR	RELIGION	FROM	ITS	PRIMITIVE,	SUPERSTITIOUS	PAST	--	AND
FROM
THE	FUNDAMENTALISTS!
FOR	 EXAMPLE,	 A	 MODERNIST	 IN	 THE	 CHURCH	 OF	 ENGLAND
BELIEVES,	IT
IS	 SAID,	 IN	 A	 GOD	 WHO	 WORKS	 THROUGH	 EVOLUTIONARY
PROCESSES
ONLY,	 DOES	 NOT	 DOUBT	 THE	 EXISTENCE	 OF	 JESUS	 CHRIST,	 BUT
WOULD
NOT	LOSE	HIS	FAITH	IF	IT	WERE	TO	BE	PROVED	THAT	JESUS	NEVER
EXISTED,	 AND	 CLAIMS	 TO	 BELIEVE	 IN	 THE	 SUPERNATURAL,	 BUT
NOT	IN
THE	MIRACULOUS.	 HIS	 JESUS	 DID	 NOT	 PERFORM	MIRACLES	 AND
WAS	NOT
BORN	OF	A	VIRGIN.	THE	TOMB	WAS	NOT	EMPTY.	ETHICS	ARE	MORE
IMPORTANT	TO	THE	MODERNIST	THAN	DOCTRINE.
DOWN	 THE	 SAME	 PATH	 IS	 TRAVELING	 OUR	 OLD	 FRIEND,	 THE
BISHOP	OF
DURHAM,	 WHO	 GOT	 INTO	 TROUBLE	 FOR	 HIS	 COMMENTS	 LAST
YEAR
ABOUT	THE	VIRGIN	BIRTH	AND	RESURRECTION.	HE	WAS	RECENTLY
QUOTED	 AS	 SAYING,	 "EITHER	 GOD	 DOES	 NOT	 EXIST	 OR	 ELSE	 HE
MUST
ESTABLISH	HIS	OWN	EXISTENCE."
IS	THE	RESURRECTION	OF	CHRISTIANITY	ANY	MORE	LIKELY	THAN
THAT
OF	A	JESUS	CHRIST	HIMSELF?
The	 resurrection	 of	 Jesus	 Christ	 may	 be	 possible,	 but	 not	 the	 resurrection	 of
Christianity.
In	 fact	 Jesus	 never	 died	 on	 the	 cross.	 It	 takes	 at	 least	 forty-eight	 hours	 for	 a
person	 to	 die	 on	 the	 Jewish	 cross;	 and	 there	 have	 been	 known	 cases	 where
people	have	existed	almost	six	days	on	 the	cross	without	dying.	Because	Jesus
was	taken	down	from	the	cross	after	only	six	hours,	there	is	no	possibility	of	his
dying	on	the	cross.	It	was	a	conspiracy	between	a	rich	sympathizer	of	Jesus	and
Pontius	 Pilate	 to	 crucify	 Jesus	 as	 late	 as	 possible	 on	 Friday	 --	 because	 on
Saturday,	 Jews	 stop	 everything;	 their	 Sabbath	 does	 not	 allow	 any	 act.	 By	 the
evening	of	Friday	everything	stops.
The	 arrangement	 was	 that	 Jesus	 would	 be	 crucified	 late	 in	 the	 afternoon,	 so
before	 sunset	 he	 would	 be	 brought	 down.	 He	 might	 have	 been	 unconscious
because	so	much	blood	had	flowed	out	of	the	body,	but	he	was	not	dead.	Then	he
would	be	kept	in	a	cave,	and	before	the	Sabbath	ended	and	the	Jews	hung	him
again,	his	body	would	be	 stolen	by	his	 followers.	The	 tomb	was	 found	empty,
and	Jesus	was	removed	from	Judea	as	quickly	as	possible.	As	he	again	became
healthy	and	healed,	he	moved	 to	 India	and	he	 lived	a	 long	 life	 --	one	hundred
and	twelve	years	--	in	Kashmir.
It	is	a	coincidence,	but	a	beautiful	coincidence,	that	Moses	died	in	Kashmir	and
Jesus	 also	 died	 in	Kashmir.	 I	 have	been	 to	 the	 graves	 of	 both.	The	graves	 are
ample	proof,	because	those	are	the	only	two	graves	that	are	not	pointing	towards
Mecca.
Mohammedans	make	their	graves	with	the	head	pointing	towards	Mecca,	so	in
the	 whole	 world	 all	 the	 graves	 of	 Mohammedans	 point	 towards	 Mecca,	 and
Kashmir	is	Mohammedan.
These	two	graves	don't	point	towards	Mecca,	and	the	writing	on	the	graves	is	in
Hebrew,	which	 is	 impossible	 on	 a	Mohammedan	 grave	 --	Hebrew	 is	 not	 their
language.	The	name	of	Jesus	is	written	exactly	as	it	was	pronounced	by	the	Jews,
"Joshua."	 "Jesus"	 is	 a	 Christian	 conversion	 of	 the	 Jewish	 name.	 The	 grave	 is
certainly	of	Jesus.
A	family	has	been	taking	care	of	both	the	graves	--	they	are	very	close	together
in	 one	 place,	 Pahalgam	 --	 and	 only	 one	 family	 has	 been	 taking	 care	 of	 them
down	the	centuries.
They	are	Jews	--	they	are	still	Jews	--	and	I	had	to	take	their	help	to	read	to	me
what	is	written	on	the	graves.
Moses	had	come	to	Kashmir	 to	 find	a	 tribe	of	Jews	who	were	 lost	on	 the	way
from	Egypt	to	Jerusalem.	When	he	reached	Jerusalem	his	deep	concern	was	the
whole	 tribe	 that	 had	 got	 lost	 somewhere	 in	 the	 desert.	When	 his	 people	were
established	in	Jerusalem,	he	went	in	search	of	the	lost	tribe,	and	he	found	the	lost
tribe	 established	 in	 Kashmir.	 Kashmiris	 are	 basically	 Jewish	 --	 later	 on
Mohammedans	forcibly	converted	them	--	and	Moses	lived	with	them	and	died
there.
Jesus	also	went	to	Kashmir,	because	then	it	was	known	that	Moses	had	found	the
lost	tribe	there.	The	doors	of	Judea	were	closed	--	he	would	be	hanged	again	--
and	 the	 only	 place	 where	 he	 would	 find	 the	 people	 who	 speak	 the	 same
language,	 the	people	who	have	a	same	kind	of	mind,	where	he	would	not	be	a
foreigner,	was	Kashmir.	So	it	was	natural	for	him	to	go	to	Kashmir.
But	 he	 had	 learned	 his	 lesson.	 He	 had	 dropped	 the	 idea	 of	 being	 the	 only
begotten	son	of	God;	otherwise	these	Jews	would	crucify	him	too.	He	dropped
the	idea	of	being	a	messiah.	He	lived	with	his	few	intimate	friends	and	followers
in	Pahalgam.
Pahalgam	is	named	after	Jesus,	because	he	used	to	call	himself	"the	shepherd"	--
Pahalgam	means	"the	town	of	the	shepherd."	So	it	was	a	small	colony	of	Jesus
and	 his	 friends,	 surrounding	 the	 grave	 of	 their	 forefather	 and	 the	 founder	 of
Judaic	tradition.
Jesus	remained	a	Jew	to	the	very	end;	he	never	heard	about	Christianity.
But	 the	 followers	 who	 were	 left	 in	 Judea	 managed	 to	 create	 the	 story	 of
resurrection.	And	 there	was	no	way	 to	prove	 it	 this	way	or	 that.	Neither	could
they	produce	 Jesus	 --	 if	he	was	 resurrected	 then	where	was	he?	Nor	could	 the
other	party	prove	what	had	happened.
They	had	put	such	a	big	rock	on	the	mouth	of	the	cave	that	it	was	impossible	for
Jesus	 to	have	 removed	 it,	 and	 there	was	 a	Roman	 soldier	 on	duty	 twenty-four
hours,	so	there	was	no	possibility	of	anybody	else	removing	the	rock	and	taking
the	body.
But	 because	 Pontius	 Pilate	 was	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 against	 crucifying
Jesus....	He	could	see	the	man	was	absolutely	innocent.	He	has	some	crazy	ideas,
but	 they	are	not	criminal.	And	what	harm	does	it	do	to	somebody?	If	someone
thinks	he	is	the	only	begotten	son	of	God,	let	him	enjoy	it.	Why	disturb	him,	and
why	get	disturbed?	If	somebody	thinks	he	is	the	messiah	and	he	has	brought	the
message	of	God...	if	you	want	to	listen,	listen;	if	you	don't	want	to	listen,	don't
listen.	But	there	is	no	need	to	crucify	the	man.
But	Jesus	 learned	his	 lesson	--	 learned	 the	hard	way.	 In	Kashmir	he	 lived	very
silently	with	his	group,	praying,	living	peacefully,	no	longer	trying	to	change	the
world.	 And	 Kashmir	 was	 so	 far	 away	 from	 Judea	 that	 in	 Judea	 the	 story	 of
resurrection,	amongst	the	followers	of	Jesus,	became	significant.
So	 I	 say	a	kind	of	 resurrection	certainly	happened	 --	 it	was	a	conspiracy	more
than	a	resurrection.	But	certainly	Jesus	did	not	die	on	the	cross,	he	did	not	die	in
the	cave	where	he	was	put;	he	lived	long	enough.
But	Christianity	cannot	even	conspire	to	revive	itself,	to	resurrect	itself.	There	is
a	great	movement	among	Christian	theologians,	and	they	are	making	desperate
efforts.	Their	very	efforts	show	that	they	are	going	to	fail.	In	fact	their	efforts	are
ridiculous.
There	 is	 one	 theologian	 who	 says,	 "There	 is	 no	 God,	 and	 we	 have	 to	 accept
godless	Christianity."	He	knows	that	it	is	impossible	to	prove	God	to	the	coming
generation;	to	the	young	and	the	fresh	mind	it	is	impossible	to	prove	God.	And
the	 days	 of	 belief	 are	 over.	 It	 is	 a	 scientific	 age:	 you	 must	 prove,	 give	 the
evidence;	nobody	is	going	 to	accept	something	 just	by	your	saying	 it.	So	he	 is
ready	to	sacrifice	God	to	save	Christianity.
What	will	Christianity	be	without	God?
There	is	another	theologian	who	is	ready	to	believe	that	perhaps	Jesus	is	only	a
myth,	he	never	existed.	It	is	as	difficult	to	prove	Jesus'	existence	as	the	existence
of	God,	because	no	contemporary	literature	even	mentions	his	name.	There	is	no
proof	other	than	those	four	gospels	of	his	own	disciples	--	they	cannot	be	called
proof.	This	theologian	is	willing	to	drop	Jesus	to	save	Christianity,	but	what	will
Christianity	 be	without	God,	without	 Jesus?	But	 they	 are	 so	 desperate	 to	 save
Christianity	that	they	don't	see	the	implications	of	what	they	are	doing.
Another	 theologian	 says	 there	 have	 been	 no	 miracles;	 all	 miracles	 are	 just
inventions	of	the	followers.	Up	to	now,	for	two	thousand	years,	Christianity	has
depended	on	the	miracles.	Those	were	its	basic	foundations	to	prove	it	a	superior
religion	to	any	other	religion	--	because	Gautam	Buddha	does	not	walk	on	water,
Mahavira	 cannot	 revive	 a	 dead	 man,	 Krishna	 cannot	 heal	 the	 sick	 just	 by
touching	them,	Mohammed	cannot	make	wine	out	of	water.
These	miracles	have	been,	for	two	thousand	years,	the	superiority	of	Christianity
over	all	 religions;	otherwise	what	has	Christianity	got?	But	he	is	ready	to	drop
the	miracles	because	now	they	are	continuously	hammered.	Nobody	is	ready	to
believe	in	them	--	they	go	against	the	very	way	things	are.	And	nature	does	not
change	its	rules,	its	laws,	for	anybody;	it	does	not	take	anybody	as	an	exception.
So	the	new	theologian	feels	embarrassed.	He	knows	himself	that	it	is	impossible
to	prove	the	miracles.
I	 asked	 the	 archbishop	 in	 Bombay,	 "You	 represent	 Jesus,	 the	 pope	 represents
Jesus.	You	should	do	at	least	some	little	miracles	as	evidence	that	you	are	really
representatives;	 otherwise	 what	 have	 you	 got	 to	 prove	 that	 you	 are	 the
representative?	Walk	on	water,	and	the	whole	world	will	become	Christian.	And
you	say	faith	in	Jesus	can	do	miracles	--
then	try	it!	You	must	have	faith."
But	no	theologian,	nor	any	pope,	is	ready	to	walk	on	water.	They	all	know	that
nature	does	not	change	its	laws	for	anybody.
So	 it	 is	 a	 bold	 step,	 but	 very	 dangerous.	 If	 you	 take	 away	 all	 the	miracles	 of
Jesus	then	a	very	poor	man,	just	a	carpenter's	son,	is	left	behind,	with	nothing	to
be	compared	with	Gautam	Buddha	or	Mahavira	or	Zarathustra.	Really	you	take
away	all	his	glory	which	depends	on	miracles.	But	you	cannot	prove	miracles,
and	because	you	cannot	prove	miracles	you	create	suspicion	about	Jesus.	So	it	is
better	 to	drop	miracles;	at	 least	 the	suspicion	about	Jesus	will	be	dropped.	But
you	don't	understand	the	implication:	without	miracles	Jesus	means	nothing.
Without	miracles	Buddha	remains	the	same,	because	he	never	did	any	miracles.
People	 loved	 him	 not	 for	 his	 miracles.	 People	 loved	 him	 for	 his	 clarity	 of
perception,	of	seeing	into	the	very	root	of	things,	of	giving	insights	to	people	to
transform	life.	Walking	on	water	is	simply	stupid.	Even	if	you	can	do	it,	then	too
it	is	not	a	miracle,	it	is	simply	stupidity,	because	you	will	remain	the	same.	You
will	not	come	out	of	the	water	a	transformed	human	being.
Just	 to	 give	 you	 an	 idea	 of	 how	Gautam	 Buddha	 and	 Jesus	 will	 behave	 in	 a
similar	situation....	Lazarus	is	dead.	His	sisters	are	great	devotees	--	Lazarus	was
a	great	friend	of	Jesus.	They	send	a	message	to	him,	"Come,	Lazarus	is	dead!"
And	 they	 keep	 his	 body	 inside	 a	 cave.	 Jesus	 comes	 and	 he	 calls	 Lazarus,
standing	outside	the	cave,	"Lazarus,	come	out!"
Lazarus	 says,	 "Have	 you	 come?	 Great,	 I	 am	 coming!"	 And	 he	 comes	 out.	 It
seems	to	be	dramatic,	it	seems	to	be	all	planned.	It	seems	the	man	was	not	dead.
He	 was	 a	 friend,	 his	 two	 sisters	 were	 devotees	 --	 it	 was	 as	 if	 he	 was	 simply
sitting	there,	waiting.
But	it	is	not	a	miracle.	And	even	if	it	is	a	miracle,	even	if	Lazarus	comes	back	to
life,	he	is	not	transformed.	We	don't	hear	anything	else	again	of	Lazarus.	A	man
who	has	died,	a	man	who	has	gone	through	the	process	of	death	to	the	beyond,
who	 comes	 back,	 cannot	 be	 the	 same.	 Lazarus	 would	 have	 become	 a	 great
master,	but	he	remained	the	same	person	--	no	change	at	all.
In	a	similar	situation	Gautam	Buddha	behaves	differently,	and	I	think	that	is	the
way	any	wise	man	will	behave.	A	woman,	Krishagautami,	had	only	one	son.	Her
husband	had	died,	her	other	children	had	died;	she	had	seen	death	 in	 its	brutal
ugliness.	Only	 one	 son	 remained,	 and	 she	was	 living	 only	 for	 him;	 otherwise
there	was	 nothing	 for	 her	 to	 live	 for.	 She	wanted	 to	 kill	 herself;	 she	 had	 lost
everything	 --	 all	 those	 people	 she	 had	 loved	 and	 lived	 for.	 But	 her	 neighbors
suggested,	 "One	son	 is	alive	 --	without	you	he	will	 also	be	dead.	Take	care	of
him.	We	understand	your	sorrow..."
But	one	day	that	boy	also	died,	and	Krishagautami	went	completely	mad.	It	was
a	coincidence	that	Buddha	was	staying	in	the	same	city	of	Shravasti.	Somebody
suggested	 to	Krishagautami,	 "A	great	mystic	 is	here.	Why	don't	you	 take	your
son	to	him?	He	can	do	anything;	he	is	a	man	of	tremendous	power.	Seeing	your
situation,	and	knowing	his	compassion,	something	is	possible.	Perhaps	your	son
may	come	back	to	life."
Krishagautami	went	with	the	dead	body.	She	put	the	body	at	the	feet	of	Gautam
Buddha	and	said,	"I	have	lost	everything	--	all	my	children,	my	husband.	I	was
living	 only	 for	 this	 son;	 now	 he	 is	 also	 dead.	 I	 have	 heard	 much	 about	 your
compassion.	Now	is	the	time	to	show	it.	Let	my	son	get	up	again,	resurrect	him."
Buddha	said,	"On	one	condition:	you	go	into	the	town...	to	resurrect	your	child	I
need	a	few	mustard	seeds,	but	they	should	be	from	a	family	where	nobody	has
ever	died."
Krishagautami	was	not	in	a	state	of	mind	to	realize	that	this	was	impossible,	that
the	 condition	 could	 not	 be	 fulfilled.	 She	went	 from	 one	 house	 to	 another	 and
people	said,
"We	can	give	you	as	many	mustard	seeds	as	you	want.	We	can	fill	our	bullock
carts	with	mustard	seeds	and	bring	them	to	Gautam	Buddha	if	your	son	can	be
revived.	But	our	mustard	seeds	won't	help,	because	not	only	one	but	thousands
must	 have	 died	 in	 our	 family.	 For	 generations	 after	 generations,	 people	 have
been	dying.	These	mustard	seeds	are	not	going	to	fulfill	the	condition.
She	went	on,	and	the	same	was	the	answer	everywhere.	She	went	to	the	king	of
Shravasti	and	told	him,	"Can't	you	do	just	a	small	thing	for	me?	A	few	mustard
seeds	and	my	son	can	be	back,	alive."
The	king	said,	"You	can	have	as	many	mustard	seeds	as	you	want."
But	 the	 woman	 said,	 "There	 is	 a	 condition,	 and	 the	 condition	 is	 that	 in	 your
family	no	one	should	have	died.	And	your	family	 is	royal	--	certainly	you	will
fulfill	my	condition."
The	 king	 said,	 with	 tears	 in	 his	 eyes,	 "Royal	 or	 not	 royal,	 death	 makes	 no
difference.	My	father	has	died,	my	son	has	died,	and	an	unaccountable	number
of	people	must	have	died	in	my	family	before	I	was	born.	You	have	to	forgive
me;	I	can	give	you	anything	you	want,	but	that	condition	cannot	be	fulfilled."
The	whole	day	going	round	the	city,	the	woman	became	alert	of	a	fact...	death	is
inevitable,	today	or	tomorrow.
After	 seeing	 the	 king	 she	 came	 back	 to	 Buddha,	 touched	 his	 feet	 and	 said,
"Please	 forgive	me.	 I	was	asking	you	 to	do	something	against	nature,	 and	you
were	wise	enough	not	 to	say	no	 to	me.	 Instead	you	gave	me	an	opportunity	 to
understand	that	my	asking	was	wrong.	Please	initiate	me.	I	don't	have	anything
to	live	for,	but	I	would	like	to	know	what	it	is	that	lives	and	what	it	is	that	dies."
Buddha	 initiated	 her,	 and	 she	 became	 one	 of	 the	 great	 meditators	 among	 his
followers.
Now,	which	 one	 do	 you	 think	 is	 a	miracle,	Lazarus	 or	Krishagautami?	Which
one	do	you	think	is	doing	the	miracle?	--	Jesus	or	Gautam	Buddha?
Gautam	Buddha	is	not	doing	a	miracle	at	all,	but	if	you	understand	it	rightly,	he
is	doing	the	miracle,	because	he	is	changing	the	woman	from	a	mad	state	into	a
meditative	state.
Even	 if	 Lazarus	 becomes	 alive	 he	 remains	 Lazarus,	 and	 one	 day	 he	 will	 die
again,	so	what	is	the	point?
But	Christianity	has	depended	on	these	miracles	 in	proving	its	superiority	over
other	religions;	in	fact	those	religions	are	far	superior,	because	they	don't	depend
on	such	stupid,	childish	ideas.	So	there	are	theologians	who	are	ready	to	drop	all
miracles.	But	if	you	drop	all	miracles	then	Jesus	is	left	naked;	you	have	taken	all
his	clothes,	he	has	nothing	to	give	to	the	world.
One	theologian	takes	God	away,	another	theologian	makes	Jesus	himself	a	myth,
another	theologian	takes	miracles	away,	and	the	fourth	theologian	takes	religion
itself	away	--	he	wants	a	religionless	Christianity,	but	Christianity	has	to	remain!
I	don't	understand:	when	you	have	taken	all	the	contents,	why	cling	to	the	box?
Now	 even	 religion	 has	 to	 be	 taken	 away	 because	 half	 of	 humanity	 is	 already
religionless.
The	communists	don't	believe	in	religion,	and	the	communists	are	not	only	in	the
communist	 countries,	 which	 is	 half	 of	 humanity;	 communists	 are	 in	 other
countries	also.
In	 fact,	 three-fourths	of	humanity	has	already	dropped	 religion.	The	 remaining
ones	 are	 only	 formally	 religious.	 They	 are	 not	much	 disturbed	 by	 the	 idea	 of
taking	religion	out.
But	then	what	remains?
It	 seems	 you	 are	 clinging	 just	 to	 the	 label,	 to	 the	 name	 "Christianity."	 It	 is	 a
desperate	effort,	and	stupid	too.	Why	not	accept	that	Christianity	is	dead?	God	is
dead,	miracles	are	dead,	religion	is	dead,	Jesus	is	no	longer	born	out	of	a	virgin
Mary	--	so	what	are	you	saving?
I	have	been	looking	into	all	 these	theologians	who	are	prominent	people	in	the
Christian	world.	They	have	taken	all	the	contents;only	an	empty	box...	But	why
carry	on	this	empty	box?	For	what	reason?	Just	an	old	habit,	an	old	attachment.
And	 then	 there	 is	 another	 effort...	 because	 you	 cannot	 carry	 an	 empty	 box	 for
long;	 you	will	 also	 feel	 that	 you	 are	doing	 something	 foolish.	And	others	will
start	feeling,	when	they	look	into	your	box,	that	you	have	a	great	Christianity!	--
Jesus	is	missing,	God	is	missing,	miracles	are	not	there,	the	Virgin	Mary	is	not
there.	All	that	was	Christianity	is	not	there;	then	why	are	you	carrying	this	empty
box?	 So	 there	 is	 another	 effort	 going	 on,	 side	 by	 side,	 to	 fill	 the	 box	 with
something.
So	Christian	 theologians	 are	 studying	other	 religions,	 so	 as	 to	 have	 something
similar.	It	is	going	to	be	imitation,	unauthentic,	because	it	is	not	their	experience.
They	call	it
"comparative	religion";	in	all	Christian	colleges	they	study	comparative	religion.
I	asked	the	professors	and	the	principals	of	those	colleges,	"Why	should	you	be
worried	about	other	religions?	--	you	have	Christianity."	But	the	problem	is	that
they	 have	 to	 fill	 the	 box	 with	 something,	 so	 from	 other	 religions	 they	 are
collecting	ideas.
They	 are	 studying	 psychoanalysis.	 Now	 every	 Christian	 preacher	 has
compulsorily	 to	 study	psychoanalysis.	Now,	what	does	psychoanalysis	 have	 to
do	with	 religion?	But	 the	problem	 is,	what	 religion	used	 to	do	was	 to	 console
people	in	their	misery.	Now	they	don't	have	that	religion	at	all,	so	they	have	to
find	 some	 contemporary	way	 to	 console	 people.	And	psychoanalysis	 is	 a	 very
thriving	 business	 all	 around	 the	world;	 the	most	 highly-paid	 professionals	 are
psychoanalysts.	So	Christians	think,	"They	must	be	doing	something	for	people.
Let	us	learn	their	art	and	use	it	 to	save	Christianity."	But	they	don't	understand
that	Freud	was	against	religion,	the	whole	of	psychoanalysis	is	against	religion.
They	cannot	use	it.
They	 are	 studying	Karl	Marx	 because	 the	man	 has	 converted	 three-fourths	 of
humanity;	 he	 must	 have	 something	 --	 the	 idea	 of	 equality	 of	 human	 beings.
Although	 he	 is	 against	 religion	 and	 against	 God,	 he	 has	 certain	 values;	 those
values	can	be	taken.
They	are	collecting	all	kinds	of	things	in	the	box	where	Christianity	used	to	be.	It
is	so	eclectic	that	it	does	not	make	one	organic	whole.	If	you	look	into	the	box
you	 will	 get	 into	 a	 madness,	 because	 the	 things	 they	 are	 taking	 belong	 to
different	systems.	Within	those	systems	they	have	a	living	quality;	out	of	those
systems	 they	 are	 dead.	 Somebody's	 eyes,	 somebody's	 hand,	 somebody's	 legs,
somebody's	heart....
And	do	you	think	in	your	box	there	will	come	a	man,	because	you	have	arranged
everything	 that	 is	needed	 for	a	man?	 --	hands,	head,	eyes,	heart.	Everything	 is
there,	but	it	is	just	nonsense.	Those	eyes	were	able	to	see	in	an	organic	unity	in	a
body;	now	they	cannot	see.	There	is	no	organic	unity,	and	you	cannot	bring	an
organic	unity.
Christianity	is	dead.
Their	desperate	effort	to	save	it	simply	confirms	that	it	is	dead.	But	it	needs	guts
to	accept	it.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	when	Joseph	Stalin	died	it	was	not	declared
to	the	world.	It	took	a	few	days	for	the	communist	high	command...	because	they
had	believed	that	this	man	is	immortal.	Stalin,	man	of	steel,	he	cannot	die!	But
men	of	steel,	whatever	your	conception	may	be,	have	to	follow	nature:	he	died.
For	a	few	days	they	delayed	informing	the	world.	In	fact	they	could	not	believe
it,	but	finally	they	had	to	accept	that	Stalin	was	dead.
The	same	happened	with	Mao	Tse-tung.	His	death	was	not	immediately	reported
to	the	world	because	he	had	become	a	God.
I	know	about	Sri	Aurobindo,	because	he	himself	was	teaching	his	whole	life	that
his	 special	work	was	 to	give	methods	 to	people	 to	attain	physical	 immortality.
All	old	teachers	have	taught	you	spiritual	immortality;	that's	not	a	big	problem,
because	the	spiritual	element	in	you	is	already	immortal.
He	 used	 to	 say,	 "I	 am	 doing	 the	 real	 thing.	 The	 physical	 body,	 which	 is	 not
immortal,	I	am	going	to	make	it	immortal."	And	one	day	he	died.
One	 of	my	 friends	was	 there	 in	 Pondicherry,	 in	 his	 ashram.	He	 told	me,	 "For
seven	 days	 we	 were	 hiding	 the	 fact	 that	 Aurobindo	 had	 died.	 We	 could	 not
believe	 it	ourselves,	because	 if	he	himself	 is	not	 immortal,	 then	what	about	us
who	have	gathered	here	just	to	become	physically	immortal?	And	the	man	who
was	 going	 to	make	 us	 physically	 immortal	 is	 dead!	Now	we	 cannot	 even	 ask
him,	 `You	 deceived	 us.	What	 happened?'	 To	 declare	 it	 to	 the	 world	 looks	 so
embarrassing.'"
The	 chief	 disciple,	 "the	Mother"	 of	 the	Sri	Aurobindo	 ashram,	 finally	 found	 a
solution	 to	 it.	 She	 said,	 "He	 is	 not	 dead,	 he	 has	 gone	 into	 deep	 samadhi,	 the
deepest	 that	 anyone	 has	 ever	 gone.	 He	 will	 wake	 up	 again	 --	 he	 is	 simply
asleep."
So	they	made	a	marble	grave	for	him,	with	all	the	comforts,	because	he	was	just
sleeping	and	one	day	he	was	going	to	wake	up;	this	was	his	last	experiment	in
physical	 immortality.	Then	years	passed,	but	he	did	not	knock	 from	 the	grave.
People	 started	 suspecting,	 but	 the	 mother	 was	 over	 ninety,	 and	 she	 was	 still
preaching	physical	immortality.
Then	one	day	she	died.	And	it	was	very	difficult	 for	 the	believers,	because	the
believers	 had	 some	 investment;	 their	 investment	was	 their	 own	 immortality.	 If
both	the	leaders	were	dead,	then	there	was	no	hope	for	them.	And	they	had	not
yet	told	them	the	real	secret;	they	had	been	telling	them	that	they	were	working
on	it.
Sri	Aurobindo	used	 to	give	an	audience	only	once	a	year	 to	his	disciples.	The
rest	of	the	year	he	was	working	constantly	--	that	was	the	idea	in	the	ashram	for
physical	immortality.	Now	both	are	lying	in	their	graves,	and	there	are	still	idiots
living	in	the	ashram,	believing	that	they	will	awake	one	day.
Idiots	are	also	miracles	--	they	still	believe.	My	friend	who	has	been	there,	and
still	is	there,	is	a	doctor	of	philosophy,	but	he	still	believes.	He	had	been	coming
to	see	me,	but	there	is	no	way	to	convince	him.	I	tried	every	possible	way,	but	he
said,	"Patanjali	himself	says	in	the	YOGA	SUTRAS	that	samadhi	and	susupti	--
samadhi	and	deep	sleep
--	 are	 exactly	 alike.	 They	 have	 gone	 into	 deep	 sleep	 to	 find	 out	 the	 secret	 of
physical	immortality."
I	said,	"But	how	long	will	it	take?	By	that	time	you	will	all	be	dead!	Even	if	they
come...
You	 just	 go	 and	open	 the	 grave,	 and	you	will	 know	 that	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 sleep.
There	are	only	skeletons,	stinking	of	death,	not	the	fragrance	of	immortality.
But	the	believer	is	such	that	he	goes	on	believing,	because	his	belief	is	basically
for	a	reason:	he	is	afraid	that	perhaps	they	are	dead,	and	then	what	about	him?
And	 that	 stops	 him	 --	 the	 idea	 that	 they	 are	 dead.	 Do	 you	 see	 the	 point?	 He
cannot	accept	that	Sri	Aurobindo	and	the	mother	are	dead	because	that	means	he
will	have	to	die	--	and	he	does	not	want	to	die.	That's	why	he	has	come	and	lived
there	 for	 years,	waiting	 for	 the	 secret	 to	 be	 revealed.	He	will	wait:	 "They	 are
asleep	and	working."
Desperate	efforts...	and	they	happen	only	when	something	is	really	gone	and	you
don't	 have	 it.	 Then	 you	 get	 into	 a	 frenzy	 of	 creating	 some	 way	 that	 you	 can
continue	to	believe	in	it.	For	example,	THE	BIBLE	believes	that	God	created	the
world	 four	 thousand	 and	 four	 years	 before	 Jesus	 Christ,	 which	 is	 only	 six
thousand	 years	 before	 now.	 Now,	 that	 is	 disproved	 so	 abundantly	 that	 it	 is
absolutely	wrong.
In	 India	 we	 have	 found	 cities	 which	 were	 lying	 hidden	 underneath	 the	 earth,
seven	 thousand	 years	 old	 --	 and	 not	 ordinary	 cities.	 I	 have	 been	 to	 Harapur,
Mohanjodro	 --	 both	 are	 in	 Pakistan	 now	 --	 and	 it	 is	 something	 to	 see.	 Seven
thousand	is	a	very	orthodox	idea;	there	are	scholars	who	say	they	must	be	more
than	fifteen	thousand	years	old.	But	even	if	they	are	only	seven	thousand	years
old,	 there	must	have	been	a	 long	past	 to	 those	cities,	because	 that	kind	of	city
cannot	be	created	instantly.
They	have	bigger	roads	than	New	York.	Now,	a	city	seven	thousand	years	old,
having	 a	 wider	 road	 than	New	York...	 it	 means	 they	must	 have	 had	 vehicles,
traffic,	 otherwise	why	create	 such	a	 road?	They	had	beautiful	bathrooms,	 they
had	a	system	of	running	water.
Even	if	they	were	seven	thousand	years	old,	they	must	have	been	developed	for
thousands	of	years	to	come	to	such	technology,	to	such	plumbing,	that	they	can
have	 running	 water	 in	 their	 bathrooms,	 in	 their	 houses.	 They	 had	 swimming
pools...
In	China	we	have	found	human	bodies,	frozen	in	ice,	ninety	thousand	years	old.
Now,	 when	 all	 these	 facts	 came	 to	 the	 Christian	 theologians,	 there	 was	 great
turmoil:	What	to	do?	--	because	God	created	the	world	six	thousand	years	ago.	I
am	giving	you	this	example	of	how	a	desperate	believer	functions.
One	 theologian	 came	 up	with	 the	 idea,	 which	 became	 accepted	 by	 the	whole
Christianity,	that	God	created	the	world	exactly	as	it	is	said	in	THE	BIBLE,	six
thousand	years	ago,	with	cities	under	the	earth,	with	bathrooms,	with	plumbing,
with	wide	roads,	with	ninety-thousand-year-old	bodies...	 just	 to	 test	your	 faith!
"God	can	do	anything.	If	he	can	create	the	world,	do	you	think	he	cannot	create
something	 that	 looks	 ninety	 thousand	 years	 old	 to	 all	 scientific	 investigation?
But	the	world	was	created	six	thousand	years	ago."	A	desperate	effort	to	cling	to
superstitions!	But	there	comes	a	point	where	all	your	superstitions	are	proved	to
be	 superstitions.	 Then	 this	 situation	 arises	 that	 you	 start	 saying,	 "They	 are	 all
superstitions,	and	we	can	drop	them	and	still	we	can	save	Christianity."
You	 cannot.	 Those	 superstitions	 have	 been	 the	 very	 backbone	 of	 your
Christianity.
Without	those	superstitions	your	Christianity	will	lose	all	its	life.	And	it	will	be
more	 absurd	 to	 believe	 in	 a	 Christianity	 devoid	 of	 all	 superstitions,	 miracles,
God	--	even	of	religion.
Now	 they	 are	 saying	 it	 is	 only	 ethics,	 not	 doctrine.	 But	 ethics	 need	 not	 be
Christian	--
ethics	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	Christianity.	 Ethics	 is	 a	 science	 in	 itself.	 I	 have
been	 a	 teacher	 of	 ethics,	 and	 I	 had	never	 thought	 that	 ethics	 can	be	Christian.
Ethics	asks	what	is	truth?	what	is	good?	what	is	bad?	It	has	nothing	to	do	with
religion;	 it	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with	 your	 actions.	 And	 it	 is	 the	 same	 for
everybody.	Whether	you	are	in	Tibet	or	China	or	in	America,	it	does	not	make
any	 difference,	 the	 ethical	 standard	 will	 be	 the	 same.	 Ethics	 is	 a	 science
completely	in	itself.
Now,	 finding	nothing	 in	 their	doctrines,	 they	are	 falling	back	on	ethics,	 saying
that	 the	 essential	 thing	 is	 not	 doctrine	 --	 because	 all	 their	 doctrines	 have	 been
proved	wrong.	Up	to	now	it	was	doctrine;	now	because	all	doctrines	are	proved
wrong,	 or	 at	 least	 questionable,	 and	 they	 have	 not	 been	 able	 substantially	 to
support	their	doctrines	and	their	truth...
This	 is	 the	 last	 effort	of	 a	dying	 religion.	You	drop	 those	doctrines	 --	 they	are
dangerous,	they	are	killing	you	--	so	you	jump	upon	something	else	that	can	give
you	a	resurrection.
But	 ethics	 is	 purely	 a	 science	 in	 itself.	 It	 thinks	 about	 values	 --	 which	 have
nothing	to	do	with	Hindu,	Mohammedan	or	Christian.	Ethics	is	not	going	to	save
Christianity;	it	is	not	going	to	give	a	resurrection.
There	is	no	possibility	for	Christianity,	and	it	will	be	good	that	they	accept	it	and
drop	the	dead	body.	It	 is	a	great	load,	and	by	carrying	it	unnecessarily,	you	are
missing	your	life.
And	living	with	a	dead	religion	you	are	bound	to	become	dead.	Your	churches
are	graveyards.	There	is	no	song	of	life,	there	is	no	dance	of	existence.
It	 is	better	 to	 simply	get	out	of	 the	old	habit.	These	are	 just	old	habits.	 I	don't
know	 why	 Christian	 priests',	 nuns',	 bishops'	 old	 clothes	 are	 called	 habits	 --	 I
don't	know.	But	one	thing	I	know:	just	drop	the	habit!	--	whatever	it	means.	Just
be	natural	and	human.
And	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	Christianity.	Your	question	was	concerned	with
Christianity;	otherwise	the	same	is	the	situation	with	other	religions.
Man	has	come	of	age,	and	he	does	not	need	those	old,	superstitious	religions;	he
needs	a	more	scientific	approach	to	explore	his	being.	And	that	will	be	possible
only	 if	 he	 gets	 rid	 of	 the	 old	 habits.	 And	 they	 are	 very	 dirty,	 because	 for
thousands	of	years	the	same	habits	have	been	used	by	so	many	people.	They	are
stinking!
Get	out	of	those	habits	as	quickly	as	possible.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	MORNING,	AS	YOU	SPOKE	OF	THE	"QUESTIONLESS	ANSWER,"	I
WATCHED	 MY	 QUESTIONS	 DISSOLVING	 INTO	 SILENCE,	 WHICH	 I
SHARED
FOR	 A	MOMENT	WITH	 YOU.	 BUT	 ONE	 QUESTION	 SURVIVED,	 AND
THAT	 IS:	 IF	WE	DON'T	ASK	YOU	QUESTIONS,	HOW	ARE	WE	GOING
TO	PLAY	WITH
YOU?
That's	really	a	question!
It	will	be	difficult,	so	whether	you	have	the	questions	or	not,	still	you	can	go	on
asking	just	the	same.	Your	question	need	not	be	yours,	but	it	must	be	somebody
else's,	somewhere.	And	my	answer	may	help	somebody	somewhere,	sometime.
So	let	us	continue	the	game.
I	 cannot	 say	 anything	 on	 my	 own.	 Unless	 there	 is	 a	 question,	 I	 am	 silent.
Because	of	 the	question	 it	 is	possible	 for	me	 to	 respond.	So	 it	does	not	matter
whether	 the	question	 is	yours;	what	matters	 is	 that	 the	question	 is	bound	 to	be
somebody's	somewhere.
And	 I	am	not	only	answering	you.	 I	am	answering,	 through	you,	 the	whole	of
humanity...
not	only	the	contemporary	humanity,	but	also	the	humanity	that	will	be	coming
when	I	will	not	be	here	to	answer.
So	 find	out	 all	 the	possible	angles	and	questions,	 so	 that	 anybody,	 even	 in	 the
future	when	I	am	not	here,	who	has	a	question	can	find	an	answer	in	my	words.
To	us	it	is	a	play.	To	somebody	it	may	become	really	a	question	of	life	and	death.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
QUESTIONS	 SEEM	 TO	 BE	 THE	 OFFSPRING	 OF	 THE	 CAPACITY	 TO
DOUBT;	 AND	 DOUBT,	 THE	 SPARK	 OF	 AN	 ALIVE	 AND	 ACTIVE
INTELLIGENCE.
WITHOUT	QUESTIONS	--	AND	THUS,	WITHOUT	DOUBT	--	HOW	CAN
INTELLIGENCE	CONTINUE	TO	FLOURISH?
AND	 YET	 WITHIN	 YOU	 IS	 THE	 ULTIMATE	 IN	 SILENCE	 AND	 THE
ULTIMATE
IN	INTELLIGENCE.
It	 is	 true	 in	 the	 beginning.	 Doubt	 helps	 your	 intelligence,	 sharpens	 it.
Questioning	makes	you	aware	of	many	possibilities	of	which	you	may	not	have
been	aware	before.
But	this	is	only	the	beginning	of	the	journey.	At	the	end,	when	all	your	questions
have	 disappeared...	 and	 the	 real	 master	 never	 gives	 you	 the	 answer.	 Let	 me
repeat	it:	the	real	master	never	gives	you	the	answer,	so	you	cannot	doubt	it.	He
brings	 you	 to	 a	 point	 where	 all	 your	 questions	 disappear.	 His	 answers	 are
murderous,	killing	your	questions,	destroying	them	mercilessly,	to	bring	you	to	a
point	where	there	is	no	question	in	your	consciousness.
The	 master	 does	 not	 give	 you	 any	 answer	 that	 you	 can	 doubt.	 This	 non-
questioning	consciousness	is	the	answer.	And	it	 is	your	experience;	you	cannot
doubt	it,	it	is	there.
From	this	point,	silence	and	intelligence	are	just	two	aspects	of	the	same	thing.
From	 this	 point,	 not	 knowing,	 innocence	 and	 knowing	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the
same	 thing.	This	 is	 the	mysterious	world	which	 is	 available	 to	 you	 if	 you	 can
pass	the	jungle	of	questions	and	doubts	and	reach	into	the	clear,	where	there	are
no	questions	and	doubts,	and	no	answers	either.	Just	you	are	in	utter	silence,	with
immense	clarity,	with	tremendous	sharpness.
That's	why	I	am	against	belief,	because	it	will	never	allow	you	to	reach	to	this
stage.	 It	will	 stop	you	 in	 the	very	beginning	of	 the	 journey.	 It	will	not	help	 to
make	you	more	intelligent;	it	will	make	you	more	unintelligent.	It	will	make	you
more	 fanatic,	 superstitious,	 but	 it	 will	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 come	 into	 the	 clarity
which	 can	 be	 called	 the	 very	 goal	 of	 what	 transpires	 between	 master	 and
disciple:	 the	moment	 of	 total	 silence,	 the	moment	where	 everything	 is	 crystal
clear.
But	 it	 has	 to	be	 earned.	Belief	 is	 cheap.	This	will	 bring	you	 something	 totally
different,	what	 I	call	 trust	 in	existence.	 In	 the	dictionaries,	 trust	and	belief	and
faith	are	all	synonymous	--	but	not	in	reality.
Belief	is	opposite	to	trust.	You	believe	because	you	have	doubt;	the	belief	is	an
antidote	to	doubt,	it	is	a	need	to	cover	up	the	doubt.	Trust	is	when	you	don't	have
any	 doubt,	 so	 trust	 is	 not	 a	 belief.	 Belief	 is	 always	 in	 something	 --	 in	 some
doctrine,	in	some	principle,	in	some	philosophy.
Trust	is	in	the	totality	of	the	cosmos.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	books	--	HOLY
BIBLES,	 GITAS,	 KORANS	 --	 no.	 Then	 there	 is	 only	 one	 scripture	 which	 is
spread	all	around	you	-
-	in	the	trees,	in	the	rivers,	in	the	ocean,	in	the	stars.	And	you	don't	have	to	read
it;	you	have	to	be	just	silent,	and	it	starts	showering	on	you	all	its	wisdom,	which
is	eternal.
I	am	against	belief	because	I	want	you	to	come	to	the	point	of	trust.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	Let	it	soak	within	your	heart
19	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604190
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO14
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
82
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
RECENTLY	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 TRANSCENDENCE	 OF	 LIFE'S
MISERY
AND	CONFUSION	CAN	OCCUR	BY	EITHER	A	LET-GO	OF	LIFE	OR	BY
FIGHT	--
AS	 LONG	 AS	 EITHER	 IS	 DONE	WITH	 TOTALITY.	 MAHAVIRA'S	 WAY
WAS
FIGHT,	AND	YOURS	IS	LET-GO.	COULD	YOU	SAY	MORE	ABOUT	LET-
GO	AND
ITS	 RELATIONSHIP	 TO	 INTELLIGENCE	 AND	 RESPONSIBILITY?	 I
DON'T	HAVE
THIS	 UNDERSTANDING,	 AND	 MY	 LIFE	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 AN	 ODD
MIXTURE	OF
LET-GO	 AND	 FIGHT.	 LET-GO	 SEEMS	 MORE	 NATURAL,	 AND	 FIGHT
SEEMS
MORE	RESPONSIBLE.
It	is	not	only	your	question,	it	is	everybody's	question	--	a	mixture	of	let-go	and
fight.	But	your	let-go	is	not	my	let-go;	your	let-go	is	simply	a	defeatist	attitude.
Basically	you	want	 to	fight,	but	 there	are	situations	where	you	cannot	fight,	or
perhaps	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 very	 end	 of	 your	 energy	 for	 fighting.	 Then,	 to
cover	up	your	defeat,	 you	 start	 thinking	of	 let-go.	Your	 let-go	 is	not	 true,	 it	 is
phony.
Real	let-go	is	not	against	fight.
Real	let-go	is	absence	of	fighting.
And	you	cannot	mix	real	let-go	with	fighting	attitudes,	for	the	simple	reason	that
the	presence	of	let-go	means	the	absence	of	a	fighting	attitude.	How	can	you	mix
something	which	is	present	with	something	which	is	absent?	Just	as	you	cannot
mix	 light	and	darkness,	however	great	an	artist	you	may	be	 --	you	cannot	mix
light	and	darkness	for	the	simple	reason	that	darkness	is	only	an	absence	of	light.
You	cannot	bring	them	together;	only	one	can	be	present.
So	the	first	thing	to	remember	is	that	the	basic	attitude	of	every	human	being	is
to	fight.
So	don't	think	of	it	particularly	as	your	problem.	It	will	help	you	immensely	to
understand	 that	 it	 is	a	human	problem.	Then	you	can	stand	aloof	and	watch	 it,
observe	it,	understand	it.
Fighting	 is	 a	 basic	 attitude	 because	 it	 feeds	 the	 ego.	 The	more	 you	 fight,	 the
more	your	ego	becomes	stronger.	If	you	become	victorious	the	ego	has	great	joy.
You	are	giving	 life	 to	ego	by	your	victories.	But	on	 the	other	hand,	as	 the	ego
becomes	stronger,	your	being	is	receding	farther	and	farther	away	from	you.
As	your	ego	becomes	stronger	you	are	losing	yourself.	You	may	be	fighting	and
being	victorious,	not	knowing	at	all	that	it	is	not	a	gain	but	a	loss.	Each	child	is
taught	 to	 fight	 in	 different	ways.	Competition	 is	 a	 fight,	 to	 come	 first	 in	 your
class	is	a	fight,	to	win	a	trophy	in	a	game	is	a	fight.	These	are	preparations	for
your	 life.	 Then	 fight	 in	 the	 elections,	 fight	 for	money,	 fight	 for	 prestige.	 This
whole	society	is	based	on	fighting,	competition,	struggle,	putting	each	individual
against	the	whole.
So	it	is	almost	everybody's	situation.	And	then	you	listen	to	me	about	let-go.
Let-go	 means	 no	 competition,	 no	 struggle,	 no	 fight...	 just	 relaxing	 with
existence,	 wherever	 it	 leads.	 Not	 trying	 to	 control	 your	 future,	 not	 trying	 to
control	 consequences,	 but	 allowing	 them	 to	 happen...	 not	 even	 thinking	 about
them.	Let-go	is	in	the	present;	consequences	are	tomorrow.	And	let-go	is	such	a
delightful	experience,	a	total	relaxation,	a	deep	synchronicity	with	existence.
I	am	reminded	of	a	parable.	I	call	it	a	parable	because	it	is	so	good	it	cannot	be
true.	In	the	East,	the	name	of	Majnu	is	very	famous.	It	is	a	Sufi	story	--	perhaps
nobody	of	 that	name	existed,	but	 it	 is	 irrelevant	whether	he	existed	or	not.	He
has	become	the	symbolic	lover.
Majnu	was	a	poor	young	man,	with	 tremendous	 love	and	a	great	heart,	and	he
fell	in	love	with	the	richest	man's	daughter.	The	marriage	was	not	possible;	even
meetings	were	not	possible.	He	could	only	see	once	in	a	while,	from	far	away,
his	beloved,	Laila.	But	the	rumor	about	his	love	started	spreading,	and	the	rich
man,	 the	 father	 of	Laila,	was	 afraid	 that	 it	will	 contaminate	 the	 family's	 name
and	 he	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 find	 the	 right	man	 for	 his	 daughter.	 So	 he	 left	 the
village	 to	 go	 to	 a	 faraway	 country,	 where	 nobody	 will	 know	 anything	 about
Majnu.
The	day	they	were	going,	a	great	caravan...	because	he	had	so	much	money	and
so	many	things	to	take,	hundreds	of	camels	carrying	things.	Majnu	was	standing
by	 the	 road,	 by	 the	 side	 of	 a	 tree,	 hiding	 himself	 in	 the	 foliage	 of	 the	 tree	 --
because	 the	 father	was	 so	mad	 he	 even	 could	 shoot	 him,	 although	 he	 had	 not
done	anything.	He	had	not	even	spoken	to	Laila.
He	was	standing	there	just	to	see	her	for	the	last	time.	It	was	enough	for	him	that
she	was	happy	and	healthy	--	and	he	would	wait.	If	his	love	has	any	power,	she
will	come	back.
There	was	 tremendous	 trust	 in	him.	He	had	seen	 the	 love,	 the	same	flame	 that
was	burning	in	his	heart,	in	the	eyes	of	Laila	too.	Laila	was	also	searching	and
looking	 all	 around	 from	 the	 camel	 she	 was	 riding.	 She	 knew	Majnu	must	 be
waiting	somewhere	on	the	way,	and	then	she	saw	him	hiding	under	a	tree	in	its
thick	 foliage.	For	 a	moment,	without	 a	 single	word	or	gesture,	 they	were	one;
and	then	the	caravan	passed.
But	for	Majnu	time	stopped	then	and	there.	He	remained	standing	by	the	side	of
the	tree	waiting	and	waiting.	It	is	said	years	passed.	Laila	came,	but	came	a	little
late.	She	enquired;	people	said,	"We	have	never	heard	about	him.	Since	you	left
he	has	not	come	to	the	town	again."
She	rushed	to	the	tree	where	she	had	left	him.	He	was	still	 there,	but	a	strange
thing	had	happened	--	he	had	become	one	with	the	tree.	That's	why	I	say	it	is	a
parable:	it	is	too	good	to	be	true.	He	relaxed	so	utterly	because	there	was	nothing
else	to	do	but	to	wait.	He	relaxed	with	the	tree,	and	slowly,	slowly	they	started
merging	with	each	other.	The	tree	became	his	nourishment;	they	were	no	longer
separate,	 they	 became	 one.	Branches	 grew	 out	 of	 his	 body.	He	was	 no	 longer
hiding	under	the	foliage;	the	foliage	was	on	his	body	--
beautiful	leaves	and	beautiful,	fragrant	flowers.
Laila	 could	 not	 recognize	 him.	But	 the	whole	 tree	was	 saying	 only	 one	 thing,
"Laila...
Laila!"	She	was	getting	mad,	and	asking,	"Where	are	you	hiding?"	And	the	tree
said,	"I	am	not	hiding.	Waiting	so	long,	doing	nothing,	and	just	being	relaxed,	I
have	become	one	with	the	tree.	You	came	a	little	late.
"What	was	going	to	happen	between	us	has	happened	between	me	and	the	tree.
We	were	going	to	become	one	--	that	was	not	acceptable	to	destiny	perhaps.	But
I	was	ready	to	relax	in	the	moment,	without	thinking	of	any	consequences.	And	I
am	happy	that	you	are	alive,	still	young,	and	more	beautiful.	But	I	am	gone,	far
away.	I	am	immensely	happy...
alone,	relaxed,	in	a	let-go."
To	 me,	 let-go	 means	 you	 are	 not	 fighting	 for	 anything	 in	 life,	 but	 giving
everything	 to	 life	 to	 take	care	of.	You	say	"let-go	seems	to	be	natural."	 It	only
`seems'...	because	your	whole	conditioning	is	against	it.	You	have	been	brought
up	for	millions	of	years	to	fight.
Fighting,	 either	 you	 can	be	 defeated	 --	which	will	 create	 a	wound,	which	will
create	revenge	--	or	you	can	be	victorious;	which	will	again	create	another	kind
of	 wound.	 That	 is	 the	 ego.	 In	 either	 case	 you	 are	 a	 loser.	 Defeated	 you	 lose,
victorious	you	lose.	In	either	case	you	are	going	farther	away	from	yourself.
Let-go	 has	 not	 been	 taught	 to	 people	 because	 it	 will	 go	 against	 the	 whole
structure	 of	 the	 society	 --	 which	 is	 based	 on	 competition	 and	 fighting,	 where
everybody	is	your	enemy.
Even	 your	 friend	 is	 your	 enemy,	 even	 your	 wife	 is	 your	 enemy,	 even	 your
children	are	your	enemies,	because	everybody	is	trying	to	snatch	as	much	from
you	as	possible.
And	the	same	thing	you	are	trying	to	do.	The	world	of	misery	is	created	because
everybody	 is	 snatching	 things	 from	everybody	else.	 It	 is	not	a	peaceful,	 silent,
loving	existence;	we	are	still	barbarous	and	animalistic.
Let-go	 is	 totally	 a	 different	 approach.	 Its	 first	 step	 is	 dropping	 the	 ego,
remembering	 that	 you	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 existence:	 with	 whom	 are	 you
fighting?	You	are	not	separate	from	people:	with	whom	are	you	fighting?	With
yourself...	 and	 that's	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 misery.	 With	 whomsoever	 you	 are
fighting,	you	are	fighting	with	yourself	--	because	there	is	nobody	else.
Let-go	 is	 a	 deep	 understanding	 of	 the	 phenomenon	 that	 we	 are	 part	 of	 one
existence.	We	cannot	afford	to	have	separate	egos;	we	are	one	with	all.	And	the
all	is	vast,	immense.
Your	understanding	will	help	you	to	go	with	the	whole,	wherever	it	is	going.	You
don't	have	a	goal	separate	from	the	whole,	and	the	whole	has	no	goal.	It	 is	not
going	anywhere.
It	is	being	simply	here.
The	 understanding	 of	 let-go	 helps	 you	 to	 be	 simply	 here,	 without	 any	 goals,
without	any	idea	of	achievement,	without	any	conflict,	struggle,	fight,	knowing
that	it	is	fighting	with	yourself	--	which	is	simply	foolish.
Let-go	is	a	deep	understanding.
It	is	not	an	act	that	you	have	to	do.
Every	act	is	part	of	the	world	of	fight.	That	which	you	have	to	do	is	going	to	be	a
fight.
Let-go	is	simply	understanding.
And	 then	 a	 silent	 relaxation,	 flowing	 with	 the	 river,	 unconcerned	 where	 it	 is
going,	unworried	that	you	can	get	lost...	no	anxiety,	no	anguish,	because	you	are
not	 separate	 from	 the	 totality,	 so	 whatever	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 is	 going	 to	 be
good.
With	this	understanding	you	will	find	there	is	no	mixing:	understanding	cannot
mix	 with	 ignorance;	 insight	 into	 existence	 cannot	 mix	 with	 blindness;
consciousness	cannot	mix	with	unconsciousness.
And	 let-go	 cannot	 mix	 with	 different	 kinds	 of	 struggles	 --	 that	 is	 an
impossibility.
Just	let	it	sink	within	your	heart,	and	you	will	find	a	new	dimension	opening	up,
in	which	each	moment	is	a	joy,	in	which	each	moment	is	an	eternity	unto	itself.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HAVE	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY,	 IN	 CONNECTION	 WITH	 MARTIN
HEIDEGGER,	THAT	THE	WORK	OF	A	PHILOSOPHER	IS	TO	GUIDE	THE
LEADERS	OF	THE
NATIONS,	 NOT	 TO	 FOLLOW	 THEM.	 YOUR	 WORK	 AT	 THIS	 TIME
SEEMS	TO	BE
MOVING	 IN	 THAT	 DIRECTION.	 YOUR	 WORK	 IS	 MORE	 GLOBAL,
INVOLVING
WHOLE	NATIONS	AND	THEIR	PEOPLE,	AND	EVEN	TRANSCENDING
NATIONS.	DIOGENES	STOOD	NAKED	--	AND	LARGELY	UNKNOWN	--
HOLDING	 A	 LAMP	 IN	 BROAD	 DAYLIGHT,	 AND	 REPEATED	 THE
STATEMENT,
"I	AM	LOOKING	FOR	A	MAN."	 IS	YOUR	WORK	REALLY	DIFFERENT
FROM
DIOGENES'	OR	DOES	IT	ONLY	APPEAR	SO?	ARE	YOU	ALSO	LOOKING
FOR	A	MAN?
Diogenes	is	one	of	the	most	loved	human	beings,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned.	As
far	 as	 the	 world	 is	 concerned,	 he	 is	 one	 of	 those	 who	 are	 destined	 to	 be
condemned	 for	 their	 behavior,	 for	 their	 ideas.	 And	 Diogenes	 particularly,
because	he	is	so	unique.
His	ways	would	have	been	understood	in	the	far	East,	in	Japan;	he	would	have
become	a	great	Zen	master.	In	Greece	he	was	simply	condemned.	He	was	not	in
the	right	place.
First,	he	was	naked	--	for	a	certain	reason:	naked	we	have	come	into	the	world,
and	 all	 the	 animals	 are	 naked,	 why	 should	 man	 hide	 his	 wild	 body	 behind
clothes?
And	the	strange	insight	was	that	it	is	not	weather,	cold	or	heat,	that	has	prompted
man	to	use	clothes	--	because	if	all	the	animals	can	exist	without	clothes,	there	is
no	 reason.	 And	 your	 face	 is	 naked,	 but	 it	 becomes	 immune.	 That's	 how	 the
whole	animal	world	lives.
Small	birds	are	more	powerful	 than	you:	 they	are	 immune	 to	cold	and	 to	heat.
They	don't	need	any	clothes.	Why	did	man	need	clothes?	Not	to	protect	his	body
but	 to	hide	 it,	because	he	 is	 the	only	animal	who	has	not	been	natural,	and	his
body	has	become	ugly.
Now,	Diogenes	has	a	strange	insight.
I	agree	with	him,	 that	clothes	help	you	immensely	 to	hide	your	body.	Man	has
lost	 his	 natural	 beauty,	 agility,	 and	 that's	why	 he	 had	 to	 discover	 clothes.	 It	 is
very	strange:	if	your	naked	body	is	brought	before	you,	or	just	a	photograph	of
your	naked	body	is	brought	before	you,	you	will	not	be	able	to	recognize	that	it
is	 your	 body.	 People	 are	 recognizable	 only	 by	 their	 faces;	 the	 whole	 body	 is
ignored.	And	through	clothes	you	can	create	the	illusion	of	beauty.	You	can	hide
the	 ugly	 parts	 and	 you	 can	 expose	 the	 beautiful	 parts;	 you	 can	 emphasize	 the
beautiful	parts.
Diogenes	 was	 disgusted	 with	 the	 whole	 idea.	 This	 is	 exhibitionism,	 not	 what
Sigmund	 Freud	 thinks	 is	 exhibitionism.	 I	 agree	 with	 Diogenes	 and	 not	 with
Sigmund	Freud.
Sigmund	Freud	calls	a	man	exhibitionist	 if	he	 tries	 to	 show	his	naked	body	 to
somebody.
Diogenes	calls	all	people	who	have	been	forced	by	your	so-called	civilization	to
wear	clothes,	exhibitionists.	This	is	a	beginning	of	deception,	hypocrisy.	And	my
feeling	is	that	one	day	man	will	return	back	to	being	naked,	because	only	then	he
will	regain	his	health	again	--	for	the	simple	reason	that	then	he	will	have	to	be
healthy,	otherwise	he	will	feel	embarrassed.	Then	he	will	have	to	exercise,	then
he	will	 have	 to	go	 to	 some	gymnasium	and	maintain	his	body	and	his	 beauty,
because	now	it	is	not	only	his	face	that	is	his	identity;	now	his	whole	body	is	his
identity.	And	he	will	not	be	ashamed	of	it;	it	is	his	body	and	nature	has	given	it
to	him.	He	will	be	proud	of	it.
Diogenes	 was	 as	 beautiful	 a	 man	 as	 Mahavira	 --	 both	 lived	 naked	 --	 so
proportionate,	 so	beautiful.	 In	 India	Mahavira's	 nakedness	became	 spiritual;	 in
Greece	 Diogenes	 became	 a	madman.	 He	 used	 to	 carry	 a	 lamp	with	 him,	 and
whomsoever	he	met	--	even	in	the	full	daylight	--	he	would	raise	his	 lamp	and
look	at	the	man.	And	people	would	ask,	"What	are	you	doing?	It	is	full	daylight,
the	sun	is	shining;	why	are	you	carrying	a	lamp?	And	why	do	you	go	on	looking
in	people's	faces?"
He	used	to	say,	"I	am	looking	for	a	real,	authentic	man."
My	search	is,	in	a	way,	similar:	I	am	also	looking	for	a	real,	authentic	man.	But
the	real,	authentic	man	cannot	be	searched	for	with	a	lamp.
Diogenes'	 lamp	 is	 only	 symbolic.	 It	 simply	 says	 that	 he	 is	 putting	 his	 whole
lighted	 being	 as	 a	 beam	 on	 the	 person,	 as	 an	 X-ray,	 to	 see	 whether	 there	 is
anything	left	or	everything	is	hypocrisy.	The	day	he	died	he	had	his	lamp	by	his
side,	 still	 in	 his	 hand.	 One	man,	 just	 to	 joke,	 asked	 Diogenes,	 "Now	 you	 are
dying.	Before	you	die,	please	answer	one	question.
Your	whole	life	you	have	been	searching	for	the	authentic,	real	man,	with	your
lamp.
Have	you	found	him	or	not?"
Diogenes	was	 really	 a	 beautiful	man.	He	 laughed	 and	 said,	 "I	 have	 not	 found
him,	 but	 I	 am	 grateful	 to	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 that	 nobody	 stole	my	 lamp,
because	I	found	all	kinds	of	thieves	all	around.	An	authentic	man	I	have	not	been
able	 to	come	across,	but	even	this	 is	enough,	 that	 they	have	left	my	lamp	with
me;	 otherwise	 when	 I	 looked	 at	 these	 people	 they	were	 criminals,	 murderers,
thieves,	and	I	was	worried	about	my	lamp	--
that's	 the	only	 thing	I	possess.	So	one	 thing	I	can	say	before	 I	die	 --	one	good
thing	about	humanity	--	is	that	my	lamp	was	not	stolen."
At	 the	moment	 of	 death	 also	 he	 could	 laugh	 and	 joke.	 In	 Greece	 he	 was	 not
understood	 at	 all.	 He	 belongs	 to	 the	 category	 of	 people	 like	 Bodhidharma,
Chuang	Tzu,	Hotei.	That	was	his	category,	but	he	was	with	 the	wrong	people.
Aristotle	had	defined	man	--	Diogenes	was	a	contemporary	of	Aristotle	--	as	"a
two-legged	 animal	 without	 feathers."	 That	 shows	 the	 depth	 of	 logic,	 and	 the
insight	of	Aristotle.	When	Diogenes	heard	it,	he	caught	hold	of	an	animal	with
two	legs,	took	away	all	the	feathers,	and	sent	it	as	a	present	to	Aristotle,	saying,
"This	is	your	man:	a	two-legged	animal	without	feathers."
Aristotle	was	very	angry:	"It	is	not	a	joke,	and	this	Diogenes	is	never	serious!"
But	I	say	to	you,	he	was	serious.	He	was	saying	to	Aristotle,	"This	is	not	the	way
to	define	man	--
two-legged,	 without	 feathers.	 You	 are	 degrading	 man	 to	 animals,	 just	 a	 little
different	variety	 --	without	 feathers.	That's	 the	only	difference:	 there	are	many
animals	with	two	legs."
He	was	not	just	joking	--	he	was	serious.	And	he	was	serious	in	his	search	for	the
authentic	man.	It	is	not	a	question	of	defining	it;	it	is	a	question	of	finding	it.	You
can	define	it	only	after	you	have	found	it.
The	man	that	exists	is	not	authentic.
Yes,	my	work	 is	 similar	 in	 a	way:	 I	 am	 also	 searching	 for	 the	 authentic	man,
destroying	all	that	is	not	authentic	in	you,	at	the	risk	of	being	condemned	all	over
the	world.	But	 I	 am	not	 carrying	a	 lamp	 in	my	hand	because	 I	know	 that	was
only	a	gesture.
I	am	really	working	with	each	 individual	who	has	come	 in	contact	with	me	 to
help	him	to	drop	all	unnecessary	conditionings	and	 to	have	a	communion	with
nature.
To	be	natural	you	will	be	authentic.
To	be	natural	you	will	be	human.
And	to	be	natural	you	will	be	a	being	full	of	rejoicings.
It	 is	 your	 unnaturalness	 that	 is	 creating	 the	 whole	 misery,	 and	 just	 as	 money
brings	more	money,	misery	brings	more	misery.	Whatever	you	have	attracts	 its
own	kind.	If	you	have	a	little	joy,	you	will	attract	much	joy;	if	you	have	a	little
silence,	 then	 even	 from	 the	 faraway	 stars	 you	 will	 be	 attracting	 silence,	 then
even	in	a	crowd,	in	the	marketplace	you	will	be	attracting	silence.
It	depends	what	you	have	within	you;	that	becomes	the	gravitation,	and	it	attracts
its	own	kind.	Just	a	little	experience	and	then	there	is	no	need	to	push	you;	you
will	go	in	that	direction	on	your	own.
My	whole	effort	is	to	give	you	just	a	glimpse,	just	to	open	a	window	so	you	can
see	the	sky	with	all	its	colors	and	sunset.	And	I	know	you	will	come	out	of	the
hole	to	see	the	whole	sky,	to	see	the	birds	returning	home,	to	see	the	trees	going
to	 sleep,	 preparing	 their	 beds.	 But	 right	 now	 you	 have	 only	 misery,	 and	 that
misery	goes	on	attracting	more	misery.
My	work	is	somehow	to	create	a	small	gap	in	your	miserable	existence...	just	a
little	window.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
DOES	A	NATURAL	DEATH	ALSO	TRANSCEND	NATURE?
Nothing	transcends	nature.
Everything	 goes	 on	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 natural	 --	 deeper	 and	 deeper
nature,	higher	and	higher	nature	--	but	nothing	transcends	nature,	because	there
is	nothing	else	but	nature.
You	 have	 to	 drop	 the	 old	 categories	 --	 that	 there	 is	 nature	 and	 then	 there	 is
supernature.
What	 has	 been	 called	 supernature	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 being
natural.	Why	create	categories	--	when	nature	alone	is	capable	of	containing	all?
The	lowest	and	the	highest	point	of	life	are	both	natural.	The	murderer	and	the
enlightened	 man,	 both	 are	 natural.	 The	 murderer	 is	 at	 the	 lowest	 point,	 the
enlightened	man	 is	 at	 the	 highest	 point.	But	 as	man	 they	 are	 part	 of	 the	 same
nature,	and	being	natural,	they	are	similar.	And	this	opens	a	new	possibility:	the
murderer	can	become	enlightened.	We	are	not	preventing	him,	we	are	not	putting
him	in	a	separate	category.
He	can	become	enlightened,	because	he	is	part	of	nature.	Perhaps	he	was	upside
down,	he	just	has	to	change	his	posture.
But	nature	is	profound.	It	contains	everything	--	the	good,	the	bad,	the	evil,	the
divine	--
and	I	want	them	all	to	be	part	of	nature,	so	transformation	is	not	impossible.	Old
religions	have	created	categories,	and	created	such	gaps	that	it	is	impossible...
For	example,	Christianity	believes	in	eternal	hell	--	which	is	absolutely	absurd.
You	cannot	commit	so	many	sins	in	a	small	life	of	seventy	years.	One	third	of	it
is	lost	in	sleep;	much	of	it	is	lost	in	childhood,	in	sickness,	in	earning	the	bread,
in	 quarreling	with	 your	 husbands,	with	 your	wives,	with	 your	 neighbors.	You
don't	have	much	time	to	commit	sin.	And	even	if	you	continuously	commit	sin,
from	your	very	birth	to	the	last	breath,	without	any	coffee	break	--	just	sinning
and	sinning	--	then	too	eternal	hell	is	not	justified.	Then	at	least	seventy	years	in
hell	will	do.	But	eternal	hell,	unending,	 forever	and	forever...	Christianity	does
not	leave	any	possibility	for	the	sinner	to	change.	It	cuts	all	his	future.
My	approach	is	simple:	the	worst	and	the	best	are	both	part	of	the	same	nature.
One	may	be	at	the	lowest,	one	may	be	at	the	highest,	but	they	belong	to	the	same
nature,	and	hence	have	the	possibility	of	transformation.	The	lowest	person	can
start	climbing	to	the	highest	peak	--	and	it	has	happened	many	times.
There	is	a	Hindu	story	in	India...	The	oldest	book	on	the	life	of	Rama	is	written
by	 Balmik.	 Balmik	 was	 a	 robber,	 thief,	 murderer	 --	 everything	 that	 you	 can
conceive	 of	 he	 had	 done.	 That	 was	 his	 only	 profession.	 Uneducated	 but	 a
tremendously	 powerful	 man,	 just	 on	 the	 highway	 he	 would	 be	 waiting	 for
people,	and	anybody	who	was	caught	had	to	give	everything;	otherwise	he	was
finished.	Balmik's	family	was	living	in	luxury	--	he	was	bringing	so	much	every
day.
One	day	it	happened	that	one	beautiful	saint,	Nardar,	who	was	always	carrying
his	ektara
--	a	simple	musical	instrument,	with	only	one	string,	that	had	become	his	symbol
--
singing	 and	 playing	 on	 his	 ektara	 he	was	 passing,	 and	Balmik	 caught	 hold	 of
him.	But	he	was	still	singing	and	playing	on	his	ektara.
Balmik	said,	"Are	you	mad	or	something?	Can't	you	see	me,	can't	you	see	my
sword?
Give	me	everything	that	you	have!"
Nardar	said,	"You	have	caught	a	beggar;	I	have	only	this	ektara.	And	that	too	I
am	not	going	to	give	easily,	because	what	will	you	do	with	this?	But	if	you	want
it,	I	can	give	it	to	you.	If	you	want	my	life	I	can	give	that	too.	But	before	I	give
you	anything,	I	want	to	ask	one	question	to	you."
Balmik	said,	"Question?	What	question?"
Nardar	 said,	 "You	 go	 home,	 ask	 your	 wife:	 you	 have	 been	 killing	 people,
robbing	people
--	 is	 she	 ready	 to	 share	 the	 responsibility	 of	 it.	Ask	 your	 father,	 your	mother,
your	son,	your	daughter.	Are	they	willing	to	share	the	responsibility	of	what	you
are	doing?"
Balmik	had	never	 thought	 about	 such	 a	 thing;	 he	was	 an	uneducated	man.	He
said,	 "I	 have	 never	 thought	 about	 it.	 They	must	 share	 the	 responsibility.	 I	 am
doing	it	for	them."
Narda	said,	"I	will	be	here.	Don't	be	worried,	you	can	just	tie	me	to	the	tree	so	I
cannot	escape."	He	was	tied	to	the	tree	and	Balmik	rushed	to	his	home	and	asked
his	wife.	His	wife	said,	"I	have	nothing	to	do	with	your	responsibilities.	It	is	your
responsibility	to	feed	your	wife;	how	you	do	it	I	have	no	concern	for."	And	the
same	was	the	response	of	everybody.
Even	the	mother	said,	"It	is	your	responsibility	to	take	care	of	your	old	father	and
mother.
Now	how	you	are	doing	it	--	that	you	have	to	work	out.	We	have	not	told	you	to
kill	 people	 and	 rob	 people;	 you	 are	 doing	 it	 on	 your	 own.	We	 are	 simply	 not
responsible	for	any	of	your	acts."
Not	a	single	man	in	his	house	was	ready	to	share	responsibility.	He	was	shocked!
He	went	back,	untied	Nardar,	touched	his	feet	and	said,	"I	have	been	my	whole
life	a	wrong	person.	Is	 there	any	possibility	for	me	to	get	rid	of	all	 that	I	have
done?"
Nardar	said,	"There	is	no	problem.	You	stop	doing	it,	because	the	people	you	are
doing	it	for	are	not	even	ready	to	take	responsibility	for	it!	And	I	will	teach	you
my	 song.	My	 song	 is	 very	 simple;	 I	 simply	 repeat	 the	name	of	Rama.	 It	 is	 so
simple,	 no	 education	 is	 needed.	 You	 sit	 under	 the	 tree	 and	 repeat,	 `Rama,
Rama...'	as	long	as	you	can,	and	you	will	be	transformed	--	because	intrinsically
your	innermost	core	always	remains	pure.	It	is	only	the	layers	on	it	which	can	be
dropped."
After	a	few	months	Nardar	came	back	and	he	was	surprised:	Balmik	was	sitting
there	under	the	tree.	Nardar	had	been	his	whole	life	repeating	the	name	of	Rama,
the	 Hindu	 God,	 but	 nothing	 like	 this	 had	 happened	 to	 him.	 Balmik	 was
surrounded	by	 an	 aura	of	 light.	 Just	 going	 close	 to	 him	you	 felt	 a	 tremendous
silence,	a	great	rejoicing.
He	said,	"My	god,	I	have	been	repeating	the	name	of	God	my	whole	life.	And
this	man	 is	a	murderer,	a	 robber,	he	has	done	every	sin	possible,	and	he	 is	my
student	--	I	have	taught	him	to	repeat	the	name	of	Rama	--	and	he	seems	to	be
transformed,	transmuted!"
Nardar	had	to	wait.	He	did	not	dare	to	touch	him	or	to	disturb	him;	his	presence
was	 so	 sacred.	When	Balmik	 opened	 his	 eyes,	 he	 touched	 the	 feet	 of	Nardar.
Nardar	said,	"You	need	not	touch	my	feet	--	I	have	to	touch	your	feet.	What	has
happened?	Within	a	few	months	you	are	a	new	man!	Have	you	found	something
more	than	I	have	given	to	you?
because	I	have	been	using	that	mantra,	`Rama,	Rama...'	my	whole	life.	And	now
I	feel	like	a	fool;	within	a	few	months...	You	must	have	got	something	else!"
He	 said,	 "My	god,	 is	 it	Ram?	 I	 forgot."	Because	 repeating	 it	 continuously...	 if
you	repeat,
"Rama,	 Rama	 Rama...."	 And	 he	 was	 uneducated,	 a	 robber,	 murderer;	 he	 had
never	done	any	such	thing.	"Rama"	repeated	continuously	without	any	gaps...	he
forgot,	and	started	 repeating,	"Mara,	Mara..."	 Instead	of	"Rama,"	 two	"Ramas"
became	 joined	 and	 he	 forgot	what	 it	was,	 so	 he	 started,	 "Mara,	Mara..."	mara
means	dead.
Balmik	says,	"This	is	another	miracle!"	You	have	been	repeating,	`Mara'	which
means
`dead';	 it	 is	 not	 the	 name	 of	 God.	 But	 your	 sincerity,	 your	 innocence,	 your
totality	has	changed	it.	You	are	far	away	from	me.	Never	touch	my	feet	again!"
The	lowest	can	change	to	the	highest.
There	is	no	barrier,	there	is	no	wall.
And	nature	is	all	that	is	there.
So	even	a	natural	death	does	not	transcend	nature;	it	simply	fulfills	nature	in	its
totality.
Question	4
OSHO,	WE'VE	RUN	OUT	OF	QUESTIONS.
You	don't	have	any	more?
Anando,	some	question	about	poor	Avesh?	No?	Okay!
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	I	have	kept	my	wondering	eyes	alive
19	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604195
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO15
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
96
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOON	I	WILL	BE	SPENDING	A	FEW	DAYS	WITH	MY	TWO	TEENAGE
DAUGHTERS.	THEY	WANT	A	FULL-TIME	MOTHER	AND	ARE	ANGRY
THAT	 I	 HAVE	 CHOSEN	 TO	 BE	WITH	YOU	 INSTEAD	OF	 THEM.	 I	 AM
TORN,	BECAUSE
ALTHOUGH	I	HAVE	BEEN	TOLD	THAT	MY	GREATEST	GIFT	TO	THEM
IS
GETTING	 FREE,	 IT	 IS	 ONLY	 AN	 IDEA.	 ON	 THE	 OTHER	 HAND,	 MY
DESIRE	FOR
APPROVAL	 FOR	 BEING	 A	 GOOD	 MOTHER	 IS	 VERY	 STRONG	 AND	 I
FEEL
GUILTY	 BEING	 WITH	 YOU	 WHILE	 THEY	 CONTINUE	 TO	 SUFFER
ALONE.
WOULD	 YOU	 PLEASE	 TALK	 ABOUT	 HOW	 TO	 BREAK	 FREE	 OF
SOCIETY'S
CONDITIONING	ABOUT	MOTHERHOOD?
Everything	 depends	 on	 a	 very	 simple	 understanding.	 The	 whole	 idea	 that
children	are	your	possession	 is	wrong.	They	are	born	 through	you	but	 they	do
not	belong	to	you.	You	have	a	past;	they	have	only	future.	They	are	not	going	to
live	according	to	you.	To	live	according	to	you	will	be	almost	equivalent	to	not
living	 at	 all.	 They	 have	 to	 live	 according	 to	 themselves	 --	 in	 freedom,	 in
responsibility,	in	danger,	in	challenge.	That's	how	one	becomes	strong.
Parents	down	 the	 ages	have	 carried	 the	 idea	 that	 children	belong	 to	 them,	 and
that	they	have	to	be	just	carbon	copies	of	them.	A	carbon	copy	is	not	a	beautiful
thing,	and	existence	does	not	believe	in	carbon	copies;	it	rejoices	in	originality.
Once	you	understand	that	your	children	do	not	belong	to	you	--	that	they	belong
to	existence,	you	have	been	just	a	passage	--	you	have	to	be	grateful	to	existence
that	it	has	chosen	you	to	be	a	passage	for	a	few	beautiful	children.	But	you	are
not	to	interfere	in	their	growth,	in	their	potential.	You	are	not	to	impose	yourself
upon	them.	They	are	not	going	to	live	in	the	same	times,	 they	are	not	going	to
face	the	same	problems;	they	will	be	part	of	another	world.	Don't	prepare	them
for	this	world,	this	society,	this	time,	because	then	you	will	be	creating	troubles
for	them.	They	will	find	themselves	unfit,	unqualified.
You	have	to	help	them	to	grow	beyond	you;	you	have	to	help	them	not	to	imitate
you.
That	 is	 really	 the	 duty	 of	 the	 parents	 --	 to	 help	 the	 children	 not	 to	 fall	 into
imitation.
Children	are	imitative,	and	naturally,	who	are	they	going	to	imitate?	The	parents
are	 the	 closest	 people.	And	up	 to	now	parents	have	 enjoyed	 it	 very	much	 that
their	children	are	 just	 like	 them.	The	 father	 feels	proud	because	his	 son	 is	 just
like	 him;	 he	 should	 be	 ashamed	 that	 his	 son	 is	 just	 like	 him.	Then	 one	 life	 is
wasted;	then	his	son	is	not	needed	--
he	was	enough.	Because	of	this	wrong	conception	of	pride	in	children	imitating
you,	we	have	created	a	society	of	imitators.
One	of	 the	most	 famous	Christian	books	was	written	by	Kempis:	 IMITATION
OF
CHRIST.	 It	 is	 almost	 second	 to	 THE	 HOLY	 BIBLE.	 One	 great	 Christian
theologian	 and	 a	world-famous	 author	 of	many,	many	 treatises,	Stanley	 Jones,
used	to	stay	with	me	whenever	he	used	to	come	to	my	city.	He	was	continuously
going	around	the	world,	and	he	always	kept	the	book,	IMITATION	OF	CHRIST.
Once	I	told	him,	"If	you	really	understand,	then	this	book	should	be	burned."
To	 teach	 anybody	 to	 imitate	 Christ	 is	 to	 destroy	 that	 person.	 One	 Christ	 is
enough,	more	 than	enough.	Many,	many	Christs	carrying	 their	crosses	on	 their
shoulders	 would	 make	 a	 very	 hilarious	 scene...	 and	 everybody	 proclaiming
himself	to	be	the	only	begotten	son	of	God!
The	word	 ìmitation'	 has	 never	 been	 condemned,	 but	 it	 should	 be	 condemned.
The	 religious	 founders	 have	 been	wanting	 people	 to	 imitate	 them,	 the	 parents
have	been	wanting	their	children	to	imitate	them;	the	teachers,	the	professors,	the
priests	--
everybody	 is	 wanting	 children	 to	 imitate	 them.	 The	 children	 become	 a	 mass
phenomenon;	carbon	copies	of	many	people...	much	ado	about	nothing!
I	remember,	I	must	have	been	seven	years	old	and	a	friend	of	my	father's	who
had	not	 seen	me,	who	had	not	 come	 for	 seven	years...	 he	had	gone	 for	 a	 long
pilgrimage	around	the	Ganges.	Hindus	do	 that	 --	go	around	the	whole	Ganges,
both	sides.	That	is	thousands	of	miles,	deep	in	the	Himalayas,	dangerous	valleys,
mountains.	After	seven	years	he	came	and	he	wanted	to	see	me.	And	he	said	to
my	 father,	 "His	 eyes	 look	 like	yours,"	 and	 to	my	grandfather,	 "His	nose	 looks
like	yours,"	and	to	my	uncle,	"His	face	looks	like	yours."
I	 said,	 "Wait!	Does	 anything	 look	 like	me?	Am	 I	 here	 or	 not?	You	 are	 being
utterly	 disrespectful	 to	 me."	 He	 was	 shocked.	 He	 could	 not	 conceive	 that	 it
would	be	a	disrespect,	because	this	is	commonly	done,	every	day,	in	every	home:
the	child's	eyes	look	like	the	mother's,	his	face	looks	like	the	father's.	And	they
all	feel	proud;	and	nobody	bothers	about	the	child,	whether	anything	looks	like
him	or	not.
But	I	made	it	clear	to	him,	"Just	take	your	words	back,	because	I	can	say	to	you
that	my	eyes	don't	 look	 like	my	 father's.	You	have	another	 look.	And	my	 face
does	not	 look	 like	my	uncle's	 --	how	can	 it	 look...?	 I	have	my	own	eyes	and	I
have	my	own	 face,	 and	 I	 am	going	 into	 the	world	with	my	 face	 and	with	my
eyes."
He	 asked	 to	 be	 forgiven.	 Later	 on	 he	 told	 my	 father,	 "Your	 son	 seems	 to	 be
dangerous.	I	have	never	seen	anybody	so	assertive	--	and	at	this	age!"
My	father	said,	"At	first	we	used	to	feel	very	embarrassed	by	the	things	he	did	or
said,	but	now	we	have	started	feeling	proud,	because	he	seems	to	be	right.	You
are	not	 the	first	man	who	has	compared	my	eyes	with	his	--	many	others	have
done	that.	And	he	has	taken	me	to	the	mirror	and	told	me,	`Look,	they	are	not	the
same.'	And	I	have	to	say	to	you	that	they	are	not	the	same;	he	is	right."
The	whole	of	humanity	has	lived	in	such	a	wrong	way,	and	for	so	long,	that	we
have	completely	forgotten	that	there	can	be	some	other	way,	that	there	can	be	an
alternative.
You	are	here	with	me.	 In	 fact,	you	 should	make	your	children	understand	 that
this	 is	 a	 great	 opportunity	 for	 you,	 to	 be	 yourself:	 "If	 I	was	with	 you	 there	 is
every	possibility	that,	knowingly	unknowingly,	I	may	treat	you	habitually	--	just
the	old	things,	behaving	the	way	my	parents	have	behaved	with	me	--	and	that
would	be	ugly."
And	tell	them	not	to	feel	angry	at	me;	rather,	bring	them	to	me	sometimes.	Once
in	a	while,	when	they	have	holidays,	let	them	come	to	me.	They	will	understand
me	more	clearly	than	you,	because	they	are	fresher,	younger,	closer	to	nature,	yet
unspoiled.	They	are	not	going	to	be	angry	at	me.
Once	they	start	understanding	me,	they	will	be	proud	of	you	--	not	feeling	that
they	 have	 been	 abandoned	 by	 you,	 but	 feeling	 that	 they	 have	 been	 given
freedom,	which	is	the	greatest	gift	possible	in	the	world.	And	your	children	start
feeling	proud	of	you,	because	you	are	one	of	 the	 rarest	mothers	who	can	give
them	freedom,	and	bring	them	to	a	man	who	can	help	them	see	how	to	be	free
and	how	to	be	responsible...	how	to	be	oneself.
In	 this	 world	 of	 imitators,	 how	 to	 be	 original	 and	 authentic?	 --	 because	 only
those	 few	 individuals	 who	 are	 themselves	 feel	 fulfilled.	 Others	 simply	 live
miserably,	hoping	that	tomorrow	things	will	be	better;	but	that	 tomorrow	never
comes.
Once	your	children	start	understanding	something	of	what	I	am	doing	here	and
why	you	are	here,	they	will	be	proud	of	you.	And	their	being	proud	of	you	will
immediately	erase	the	feeling	of	guilt	in	you.
You	are	feeling	guilty	that	you	have	left	children	alone	--	that	perhaps	this	is	not
right.
According	to	the	old	mind,	it	is	not	right.	According	to	the	old	mind	everything
has	 to	be	 taught:	 they	are	not	 to	be	allowed	 to	be	 themselves;	 they	have	 to	be
molded	into	a	certain	ideal.	This	very	process	of	molding	is	going	to	kill	them.
And	there	are	corpses	all	around	the	world	--	moving,	doing	things	--	but	I	say
that	 they	 are	 corpses	 because	 they	 are	 not	 themselves.	 If	 they	 had	 been	 given
freedom,	 if	 they	had	been	given	a	 chance	 to	grow	naturally,	 to	be	 themselves,
they	would	never	have	been	the	person	they	are.	And	only	then	would	they	have
been	able	to	find	a	certain	contentment	and	satisfaction.
You	need	not	 feel	guilty.	Those	who	are	destroying	 their	children,	 they	should
feel	guilty.
Giving	 children	 freedom....	And	 once	 in	 a	while	 you	will	 be	 going,	 once	 in	 a
while	you	will	be	with	your	children	and	that	is	a	pure	gift,	to	be	with	them	once
in	a	while,	because	then	you	can	be	loving.	You	have	gathered	so	much	love;	for
so	many	days	you	have	been	 far	 away.	There	has	 been	 so	much	 longing.	You
will	shower	upon	them	your	whole	love.	They	will	see	only	your	loving	being.
Twenty-four	hours	being	with	 them,	 every	day,	 year	 in	year	 out	 --	 you	 cannot
remain	loving.	You	are	bound	to	be	angry,	you	are	bound	to	be	jealous;	you	are
bound	 to	 be	 everything	 that	 you	 should	 not	 be	 before	 your	 children,	 and	 they
will	learn	those	things	from	you.
My	whole	 idea	 is	 that	parents	 should	meet	 their	 children	only	occasionally,	 so
they	 can	 pour	 out	 their	whole	 heart,	 and	 the	 children	 know	 their	mothers	 and
their	 fathers	 only	 as	 pure	 love.	 They	 don't	 know	 that	 both	 these	 persons	 fight
continuously,	that	they	nag,	they	throw	things	at	each	other.
I	used	to	live	in	a	place	where	everybody	was	surprised.	It	was	a	big	apartment
house	with	thin,	modern	walls.	You	could	hear	everything	that	was	going	on,	on
the	other	side.
You	need	not	go	to	the	movies	or	any	other	entertainment,	it	was	available	free,
and	just	without	any	effort	--	just	lying	on	your	bed	and	all	around	things	were
happening.
The	 most	 amazing	 part	 was	 that	 from	 every	 apartment	 was	 always	 coming
screams,	 shouting,	 fighting,	 beating,	 things	 being	 thrown,	 plates	 being	broken.
Just	 from	 one	 house	 there	 was	 always	 heard	 great	 laughter.	 The	 whole
neighborhood	 was	 surprised;	 they	 seemed	 to	 be	 the	 ideal	 couple	 --	 never
anything	except	great	laughter	was	heard	from	that	apartment.
One	day,	going	for	a	morning	walk,	I	met	the	man	and	I	asked	him,	"You	are	the
ideal	couple	--	not	only	in	this	building,	but	perhaps	in	the	whole	world.	Nothing
else	is	ever	heard	except	laughter.	Can	you	tell	me	the	secret?"
He	 said,	 "Don't	 ask	 me.	 It	 is	 better	 not	 to	 ask,	 not	 to	 say	 anything	 about	 it,
because	I	feel	like	crying."
I	said,	"I	am	praising	you	and	you	feel	like	crying?"
He	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand	 at	 all.	 The	 reality	 is,	 she	 throws	 things	 at	me.
When	 she	 hits	 me,	 she	 laughs;	 when	 she	 misses,	 I	 laugh.	 But	 don't	 tell	 it	 to
anybody.	This	arrangement	 is	going	well."	But	 the	same	man,	after	 five	years,
went	to	the	court	--	he	wanted	a	divorce.
The	whole	neighborhood	was	surprised.	I	had	never	told	anybody,	because	it	was
such	 a	 private	 thing.	 Everybody	 was	 just	 amazed,	 "What	 happened	 that	 they
have	gone	to	the	court?	And,	we	hear,	for	divorce!"	I	was	going	to	the	university.
I	 thought	 that	 first	 I	 should	visit	 them	 --	 the	court	was	 just	on	 the	way	 --	 so	 I
stopped	at	the	court	and	went	into	the	court.
The	judge	was	asking,	"How	long	have	you	been	married?"
They	said,	"For	six	years."
"So	why	do	you	want	now	to	divorce?	What	has	happened?"
He	said,	"What	has	happened?	She	throws	things	at	me."
The	judge	said,	"Recently	she	has	started	throwing	things	at	you?"
He	said,	"No,	she	has	been	throwing	things	from	the	very	first	night."
The	judge	said,	"You	amaze	me.	If	she	has	been	throwing	things	from	the	very
first	night,	then	for	six	years	what	have	you	been	doing?	Why	did	you	not	come
earlier	for	a	divorce?"
He	said,	"You	don't	understand.	Now	she	has	become	so	practiced	that	she	never
misses.
It	is	always	she	who	is	laughing.	For	months	I	have	not	laughed;	now	I	cannot
tolerate	it.
At	first	 it	used	to	be	almost	fifty-fifty:	one	time	she	will	 laugh,	one	time	I	will
laugh.	It	was	okay,	we	were	equal.	Now	it	is	intolerable	--	only	she	laughs,	and	I
am	just	standing	there	like	an	idiot,	with	never	a	chance	to	laugh."
It	is	better	that	the	children	don't	see	your	ugly	faces.	If	no	child	comes	to	know
about	these	ugly	faces,	his	life	will	be	totally	different.	It	will	be	a	life	of	love,
without	jealousies,	without	nagging,	without	throwing	things,	because	he	had	no
chance	to	learn	these	things.
You	need	not	feel	guilty;	those	parents	should	feel	guilty	who	never	leave	their
children	 alone.	Once	 in	 a	while	 go	 and	be	with	 them,	 and	 then	you	 can	be	 as
totally	with	them	as	possible.	And	once	in	a	while	bring	them	here.
You	have	to	share	me	with	your	children.
If	you	love	me,	you	would	like	your	children	also	to	love	me.	Don't	leave	them
in	 anger	 at	 me;	 that	 is	 not	 right.	 And	 their	 love	 towards	 me	 will	 help	 you
immensely	not	to	feel	guilty.	It	will	help	the	children	also	to	feel	that	it	is	good
that	 you	 are	 here.	 They	 would	 also	 like	 to	 be	 here	 someday	 --	 when	 their
educations	 are	 complete,	when	 they	are	grown	up	and	 they	are	 ready	 to	move
into	life.	They	would	like	to	learn	more	about	the	complexities	of	existence,	the
intricacies	of	life,	its	delights,	and	the	art	of	how	to	achieve	it.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	REALIZED	THIS	MORNING	WHEN	YOU	WERE	TALKING	THAT	I	AM	A
FIGHTER,	BUT	I	DON'T	KNOW	ANYTHING	EXCEPT	FIGHTING,	THAT
UNFORTUNATELY	 I	 AM	 A	 PROUD	 FIGHTER	 --	 AND	 EVEN	 WORSE,
THAT	 I	 LOVE	 FIGHTING.	 I	 LOVE	 TO	 STAND	 IN	 THE	 FACE	 OF	 THE
STRONGEST
STORM	AND	LAUGH.	 IT	 IS	GREAT	JOY.	 I	DON'T	LIKE	TO	LIE	 IN	THE
SUN	AND
MELT.	AND	YET	BEHIND	MY	MIND,	MY	HEART	LONGS	TO	MELT.	IT
YEARNS,	 BUT	 IT	 NEVER	 SEEMS	 TO	 HAVE	 EVEN	 A	 FIGHTING
CHANCE.	HOW
CAN	I	SALVAGE	MY	BEING?
There	is	no	problem	in	it.
If	you	feel	you	are	a	fighter,	if	you	enjoy	fighting,	not	only	that,	if	you	are	proud
of	 being	 a	 fighter	 --	 then	 relax.	 Fight	 totally!	 Then	 don't	 fight	 your	 fighting
nature.	That	will	be	let-go	for	you.
It	is	perfectly	beautiful	to	stand	before	the	strongest	storm	and	laugh.	Don't	feel
guilty.
Just	 try	 to	 understand	 one	 thing:	when	 I	 say	 let-go,	 I	 don't	mean	 you	 have	 to
change	 anything.	 I	 simply	 mean,	 whatever	 you	 feel	 you	 are,	 just	 allow	 it	 its
totality.
Be	a	fighter	with	your	whole	being,	and	in	this	totality	you	will	find	the	melting
of	the	heart.	That	will	be	the	reward	of	your	being	total.	You	do	not	need	to	do
anything	for	it;	rewards	come	on	their	own.	Just	be	total	in	anything	that	you	feel
you	love,	that	you	feel	proud	of	--	just	be	total	in	it.	Don't	create	a	split.	Don't	be
half	and	half;	don't	be	partial.
If	you	are	total,	one	day	--	standing	against	the	strongest	storm,	laughing	--	you
will	 suddenly	 feel	 your	 heart	 melting	 in	 the	 sun.	 That	 will	 come	 to	 you	 as	 a
reward.
Man	unnecessarily	creates	problems.	I	want	you	to	understand	that	there	are	no
problems	in	life	except	those	you	create.	Just	try	to	see:	whatsoever	feels	good
for	you	is	good.
Then	go	the	whole	way.	Even	if	the	whole	world	is	against	it,	it	doesn't	matter.
And	whether	you	have	gone	total	and	whole	will	be	decided	by	the	reward.
If	you	start	feeling	at	one	point	a	sudden	melting	then	you	know	that	you	have
not	 cheated	 yourself,	 that	 you	 have	 been	 sincere,	 true.	 That	 now	 is	 really	 the
point	where	you	can	be	proud.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	 DO	 YOU	 FEEL	 THE	 NEXT	 PHASE	 OF	 YOUR	WORK	WILL	 BE,
ONCE
YOU	HAVE	FOUND	A	STABLE	RESIDENCE,	AND	WHAT	DO	YOU	SEE
YOUR
SANNYASINS	DOING?
That's	 really	 a	 problem	 --	 an	 unanswerable	 one	 too,	 because	 I	 never	 think	 of
tomorrow,	and	I	don't	know	what	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow.	I	leave	it	up	to
tomorrow!	I	don't	burden	myself	too	much.	Today	is	enough	unto	itself.
Tomorrow	 I	 will	 be	 there,	 the	 problems	 will	 be	 there,	 the	 challenges	 will	 be
there;	and	I	will	be	available	to	those	challenges,	to	those	problems.
My	whole	 life	 I	 have	 lived	 this	 way	 --	 without	 any	 predecision,	 without	 any
commitment	for	the	future,	without	any	promise	to	myself	or	to	anybody	else	for
the	next	moment.
And	that	has	given	me	the	most	precious	gift	of	life.	I	have	become	attuned	with
existence;	knowing	not	where	I	am	going,	I	am	going	joyously.
One	thing	I	know:	existence	has	no	goal,	and	as	part	of	existence	I	cannot	have
any	goal.
The	moment	 you	 have	 a	 goal,	 you	 cut	 yourself	 away	 from	 existence.	 Then	 a
small	dewdrop	 is	 trying	 to	 fight	 against	 the	ocean.	Unnecessary	 is	 the	 trouble,
meaningless	is	the	struggle.
I	never	think	of	the	yesterdays.
And	I	never	think	of	the	tomorrows.
That	 leaves	 me	 just	 a	 small	 moment,	 the	 present	 moment	 --	 unburdened,
uncluttered,	clean,	free.
So	I	don't	know	the	answer	to	your	question.	All	that	has	happened	in	my	life...
if	 you	 try	 to	 recapitulate	 it,	 you	will	 find	 certainly	 a	 tremendously	 systematic
program	 --	 as	 if	 I	 had	 planned	 everything	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 in	minute
detail.	But	this	is	an	absolutely	wrong	idea.
As	far	as	 I	am	concerned,	 I	have	never	planned	anything;	 I	have	simply	 lived,
wondering	what	is	going	to	happen	next.	I	have	kept	my	wondering	eyes	alive,
just	like	a	small	child.
Hasya	has	to	plan,	Jayesh	has	to	plan,	John	has	to	plan	--	so	they	are	all	suffering
from	fever,	tired.	Just	look	at	Jayesh!
But	I	am	simply	wondering	what	is	going	to	happen.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 ARE	 GIVING	 YOUR	 LIFE	 TO	 HELP	 PEOPLE	 FIND	 INNER
FREEDOM,	AND
THE	WHOLE	WORLD	IS	TRYING	TO	TAKE	AWAY	YOUR	FREEDOM	--
THAT
IS,	 FREEDOM	OF	 SPEECH,	 OF	MOVEMENT,	 AND	 SO	 ON.	 HOW	 IS	 IT
POSSIBLE
THAT	 YOU	 DO	 NOT	 GIVE	 UP?	 WHAT	 IS	 COMPASSION?	 DOES
COMPASSION
POSSESS	YOU	LIKE	LOVE,	OR	CAN	YOU	CHOOSE	WHETHER	OR	NOT
TO	BE
COMPASSIONATE?
The	question	has	many	questions	in	it.
Firstly,	I	am	not	making	any	effort	to	give	to	people	freedom	from	the	bondage
of	their	rotten	past.	It	is	not	my	effort,	it	is	simply	my	joy.	I	enjoy	doing	it;	hence
there	is	no	tension	about	it,	whether	I	succeed	or	not.	I	am	not	serious	--	it	is	just
playfulness.	I	am	free,	I	have	enjoyed	it,	and	out	of	that	joy	arises	an	overflow	of
energy,	spreading	on	its	own	accord.
I	am	just	a	watcher,	not	a	doer.
Secondly,	 the	 world	 cannot	 take	 my	 freedom.	 It	 can	 try,	 but	 its	 failure	 is
absolutely	certain	--	for	 the	simple	reason	that	 to	me	freedom	is	more	valuable
than	my	life.	I	would	rather	risk	my	life	than	choose	to	lose	my	freedom;	hence
nobody	can	take	it.	They	can	kill	me,	but	they	cannot	kill	my	spirit,	they	cannot
kill	my	 freedom.	They	 are	 doing	 everything	 in	 their	 hands	 --	 they	 seem	 to	 be
desperate.	And	 I	 am	 joyfully	 trying	 to	 find	 new	ways	 to	 reach	 people.	At	 the
most	they	can	take	my	life,	but	they	cannot	take	my	freedom.
They	can	take	your	freedom	only	when	you	value	your	life	more	than	freedom;
then	your	 freedom	can	be	 taken	very	easily.	 Just	a	 threat	 to	your	 life	and	your
freedom	can	be	taken.	But	they	cannot	take	my	freedom	because	to	me	life	has
no	value,	and	freedom	has	all	value.
To	me,	freedom	is	life.
They	can	destroy	my	body	but	they	cannot	destroy	my	consciousness.
So	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 their	 taking	my	 freedom.	They	may	 be	 powerful	 --
they	are	powerful.	All	the	governments	of	the	world	are	together	against	a	single
individual,	and	still	they	cannot	take	his	freedom.	And	I	can	say	it	with	absolute
certainty	that	they	cannot	take	my	freedom,	because	I	am	ready	to	offer	my	life
at	any	moment.
Thirdly,	 you	 ask,	 is	 your	 compassion	 as	 possessive	 of	 you	 as	 love?	 No,
compassion	is	not	possessive.	In	love	you	fall;	hence	the	phrase	"falling	in	love."
Have	you	ever	heard	of	somebody	"falling	in	compassion?"	That	kind	of	phrase
does	not	exist	in	any	language.
You	rise	in	compassion.
Compassion	does	not	possess	you;	neither	do	you	possess	compassion.
That	 is	 something	 subtle	 to	 be	 understood.	 It	 is	 easy	 to	 understand	whether	 it
possesses	you	or	not,	but	my	answer	is:	compassion	does	not	possess	me,	neither
do	I	possess	it.
Compassion	has	become	my	nature.	There	is	no	duality	of	the	possessor	and	the
possessed.	So	it	is	a	very	different	situation	from	love.
It	 is	 not	 in	my	 hands	 to	 stop	 being	 compassionate,	 because	 I	 am	 not	 separate
from	 it.	 In	either	case,	whether	you	possess	 something	or	 something	possesses
you,	the	duality	remains.
But	in	compassion	the	duality	disappears.
You	are	it,	there	is	nobody	else;	so	you	can	simply	be	it.
There	is	no	other	way	of	being.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
TO	 HAVE	 SUCH	 AN	 INCREDIBLE	 OPPORTUNITY	 TO	 ASK	 YOU	 A
QUESTION,	AND	TO	BE	SO	FEARFUL	OF	DOING	SO,	SHOWS	ME	HOW
LITTLE	TRUST	I	HAVE.	CAN	I	STILL	BE	YOUR	SANNYASIN?
The	question	is	not	of	being	my	sannyasin,	the	question	is	of	being	A	sannyasin.
To	be	my	sannyasin	certainly	needs	a	certain	commitment,	a	certain	surrender.
And	I	do	not	want	you	to	be	surrendered	to	me,	or	to	be	committed	to	me.	I	want
you	 to	 be	 surrendered	 to	 nature,	 committed	 to	 existence.	You	 need	 not	 be	my
sannyasin,	you	have	 just	 to	be	A	sannyasin	--	and	 that's	 the	only	way	of	being
my	sannyasin.
It	is	not	a	direct	phenomenon	--	that	directly	you	commit	yourself	and	surrender
to	 existence.	 But	 the	 deeper	 you	 surrender	 to	 existence,	 life,	 nature,	 the	more
loving,	the	more	understanding,	the	more	insightful	you	become;	and	that	insight
will	 bring	 you	 closer	 to	me.	You	will	 find	 in	me,	 indirectly,	 the	 state	 of	 total
surrender,	total	trust.
Don't	be	worried	that	you	don't	have	that	total	trust	now.	Even	if	you	have	a	little
bit	of	trust,	 that	is	enough	to	begin	with.	Just	open	the	bank	account;	you	need
not	have	millions	to	open	the	bank	account	with.	With	the	smallest	trust	you	can
start	the	journey,	and	as	the	journey	grows	deeper,	the	trust	grows	deeper.	Soon
you	will	find	yourself	surrounded	with	only	trust.
That	moment	you	will	feel	you	are	my	sannyasin.
Those	 who	 have	 come	 directly	 to	 me	 can	 betray.	 Those	 who	 have	 come
indirectly	 to	 me	 cannot	 betray,	 because	 even	 before	 coming	 to	 me	 they	 had
already	 tasted	 something	of	 the	beyond,	 and	 to	betray	 is	 impossible.	But	 there
have	been	many	 sannyasins	who	have	 come	directly	 to	me.	They	 started	 their
commitment,	 their	 trust,	 towards	 me	 as	 a	 beginning.	 That	 is	 not	 a	 right
beginning,	because	that	means	there	is	a	certain	belief.	They	don't	know	me,	they
can't	know	me	--	and	still	they	have	believed.
There	is	danger	because	the	doubt	is	there;	the	doubt	can	any	day	take	over	their
belief.
But	the	authentic	sannyasins,	the	real	ones,	have	come	to	me	in	a	very	indirect
way.	It	is	very	difficult	for	you	to	find	out	who	has	come	in	what	way,	because	it
is	something	inner	 that	you	cannot	see.	But	 the	people	who	have	come	slowly,
trying	to	understand	me,	step	by	step,	moving	towards	being	natural,	authentic,
sincere...	suddenly	one	day	they	find	they	are	related	to	me.	Strange	--	they	had
never	tried	for	it,	they	had	not	made	any	effort.	It	is	a	discovery.
So	sannyas	to	me	has	to	be	a	discovery.
Then	you	cannot	lose	it;	it	is	your	own	discovery.
Don't	be	worried	that	your	trust	is	partial	--	that's	enough,	that	much	will	do.	You
want	to	learn	swimming...	you	need	not	jump	into	the	deep	water	immediately;
otherwise	 there	 is	 a	 danger	 you	will	 get	 scared	 for	 your	 whole	 life.	 You	will
never	come	close	to	water	again.
There	is	a	Sufi	story	that	Mulla	Nasruddin	wanted	to	learn	swimming.	But	as	he
went	close	to	the	river	with	the	teacher	who	was	going	to	teach	him,	he	slipped
and	fell	into	the	river	--	and	it	was	a	deep	river.	He	was	saved	by	the	teacher,	but
he	went	a	few	times	under	the	water;	and	as	he	was	taken	out,	he	took	his	shoes
and	ran	away.
The	teacher	said,	"Where	are	you	going?	You	have	come	to	learn	swimming."
He	said,	"Now,	first	I	will	learn	swimming	and	then	I	will	come	near	the	water;
otherwise	 I	am	not	going	 to	come	near	 the	water	 --	 it	 is	 too	dangerous.	First	 I
will	learn	swimming."
But	where	is	he	going	to	learn	swimming?	You	cannot	learn	swimming	in	your
bedroom.
There	 is	no	other	way...	but	unfortunately	he	entered	 the	 river	 from	 the	wrong
end.	 The	 teacher	 would	 have	 taken	 him	 to	where	 the	water	 was	 shallow,	 and
slowly	would	have	encouraged	him	 to	go	 towards	deeper	waters.	As	he	would
have	 become	 more	 proficient,	 the	 teacher	 would	 have	 encouraged	 him	 to	 go
farther	and	farther.
Just	a	little	trust	is	enough.
In	the	beginning	you	cannot	hope	to	have	total	trust.	That's	how	we	start	making
impossible	 demands	 upon	 ourselves,	 and	 then	 we	 cannot	 fulfill	 them.	 Guilt
arises,	a	condemnation	of	oneself	arises,	a	rejection:	"I	am	not	worthy...."	But	all
these	things	are	unnecessary.
And	 this	 has	 happened	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 Everybody	 is	 feeling	 unworthy
because	 he	 aspired	 in	 the	 very	 beginning	 to	 find	 the	 end.	 Naturally	 it	 was
impossible	 --	 he	 could	 not	 reach	 it	 --	 and	 that	 stopped	 him	 even	 starting	 the
journey	again.
I	used	to	live	with	one	of	my	professors,	in	the	same	house.	I	was	living	alone
and	 he	 felt	 that,	 looking	 at	 the	 condition	 of	my	 cottage...	 he	 said,	 "It	 will	 be
better	you	come	and	start	living	with	me"	--	because	I	had	my	bed	just	near	the
door,	so	that	I	could	simply	jump	into	bed,	jump	out	of	it...	I	never	used	to	enter
the	house,	because	who	is	going	to	clean	it?
When	he	 saw	 this	 situation	he	 said,	 "I	have	never	 seen	 such	a	way	of	 living."
Just	 in	 front	 of	me	was	my	 bathroom;	 that	much	 space	was	 all	 that	 I	 used	 to
move	in	--	from	the	bed	to	the	bathroom.	All	my	books	were	around	the	bed	so	I
could	pick	up	any	book	that	I	needed,	and	whenever	the	bed	became	too	dirty	I
simply	used	to	put	the	light	off	--	then	everything	looks	the	same!
He	said,	"This	is	not	good.	My	wife	will	take	take	care	of	you;	you	come	with
me.	And	we	don't	have	any	children."	He	was	an	old	man	--	he	was	just	like	my
father.	He	said,	"I	won't	let	you	live	here.	I	had	never	thought	that	you	are	living
in	this	way.	You	have	invented	an	absolutely	new	way	of	life	--	that	you	put	the
light	off	if	you	see	that	it	is	too	dirty".
So	I	went	to	live	in	his	house.	He	was	an	atheist;	he	did	not	believe	in	God.	And
he	was	interested	in	me	because	he	thought	I	was	also	an	atheist	--	because	he
had	heard	me	speaking	in	the	university	and	other	places,	declaring	that	there	is
no	God.	So	he	thought	we	were	both	atheists.
But	on	the	way	I	made	it	plain	to	him,	"You	may	be	under	a	wrong	impression.	I
am	not	an	atheist."
He	said,	"What!	And	you	declare	everywhere	that	there	is	no	God."
I	said,	"Yes,	I	declare	there	is	no	God.	That's	why	I	cannot	be	a	theist;	a	God	is
needed	to	be	a	theist	--	to	believe	in	it.	But	a	God	is	needed	also	to	be	an	atheist	-
-	not	to	believe	in	it.	And	there	is	no	God,	so	I	don't	fall	into	any	category."
He	said,	"My	God!	So	you	don't	fall	into	any	category?"	I	said,	"No."
I	 lived	with	him	for	a	few	months,	and	the	more	I	 tried	to	understand	him,	the
more	I	came	to	the	conclusion	--	a	very	strange	conclusion,	which	proved	right
about	many	other	atheists	I	had	met	during	my	life	--	 that	 this	man	had	been	a
great	 theist	 in	 his	 past	 life,	 and	 because	 he	 failed	 to	 find	God	 he	 reversed	 his
position	to	the	other	extreme.
Otherwise	it	is	unexplainable	that	atheists	should	waste	so	much	time	in	denying
God.
When	 there	 is	 no	 God,	 why	 bother	 about	 it?	 And	 they	 write	 books	 and
pamphlets,	 and	 they	make	 associations.	 They	 have	 their	 own	 philosophy,	 and
they	are	more	argumentative	 than	 theists.	Almost	 all	 the	 time,	 the	whole	 time,
whoever	they	meet,	sooner	or	later	the	conversation	turns	to	atheism,	that	there
is	no	God.
This	 insistence,	 this	 wastage	 on	 something	 negative	 simply	 means	 they	 are
taking	revenge	with	themselves.	They	have	been	theists.
I	came	to	the	conclusion	because	I	started	hypnotizing	this	old	man.	I	told	him,
"This	 is	my	 logical	conclusion,	but	 I	want	 to	know	exactly	where	you	were	 in
your	past	life	--	in	what	belief,	in	what	religion."	He	was	excited	to	know	about
it,	so	he	was	willing.
Unless	someone	is	willing	you	cannot	hypnotize	him.	The	art	of	hypnosis	needs
a	very	intelligent	man	and	a	very	willing	man.	You	cannot	hypnotize	an	idiot	--
that	 is	an	 impossibility.	You	can	hypnotize	only	very	few	people	who	are	very
intelligent,	sharply	intelligent,	and	yet	ready	to	go	on	an	inner	journey,	willingly.
You	cannot	force...	they	have	simply	to	go	with	you.
Living	 with	 him,	 slowly,	 slowly	 I	 persuaded	 him.	 And	 he	 became	 a	 good
medium	for	hypnosis.	His	wife	was	the	judge	--	I	used	to	tell	her	to	sit	there	and
to	 see	 the	 situation,	 because	 this	man	would	not	 remember	when	he	woke	up,
and	he	would	deny	what	I	said.
She	had	to	be	my	witness.	That	man	was	a	very	great	theist,	lived	his	whole	life
worshipping	God,	renounced	his	family,	did	all	kinds	of	ascetic	disciplines.	And
he	failed,	as	he	was	bound	to,	because	there	is	no	God	to	achieve.	That	failure
turned	the	whole	pendulum	of	his	consciousness	 to	 the	other	extreme	and	now
he	was	revengeful	--
unknowingly,	unconsciously.	And	when	I	woke	him	up	and	told	him,	he	would
deny	it:
"No,	I	have	never	been	a	theist	and	I	don't	believe	in	a	past	life."
I	 said,	 "I	 have	 a	witness	 --	 your	wife	 --	 that	 you	 can	 regress,	 under	 hypnosis,
back	 into	 your	 past	 life."	And	 I	 did	 it	 dozens	 of	 times,	 and	 it	was	 always	 the
same	result:	without	any	exception	he	was	a	great	theist.	He	had	turned	against
himself	because	he	had	wasted	one	life.
I	said	to	him,	"Now	you	are	wasting	another	life.	That's	why	I	say	I	don't	belong
to	any	category.	I	don't	want	to	waste	my	life	for	God	--	this	way	or	that."
To	me,	man	has	in	him	the	highest	potential	of	existence	and	consciousness.	If
he	 explores	 it	 he	will	 reach	 to	 a	 state	 of	 godliness	 --	 not	 of	God,	 but	 only	 of
godliness.
But	don't	be	worried	that	you	are	starting	with	a	small	amount	of	trust;	that	much
is	 enough.	 To	 begin	 with,	 anything	 is	 enough,	 Just	 the	 desire	 to	 go	 on	 a
pilgrimage	is	enough.	And	don't	be	bothered	that	you	have	to	be	my	sannyasin;
just	be	a	sannyasin.
Just	be	a	seeker	of	truth.	And	perhaps	somewhere	on	the	way	I	will	be	meeting
you.
I	will	tell	you	one	Sufi	story:	A	man	is	going	in	search	of	truth.	As	he	comes	out
of	 his	 city,	 he	 finds	 an	 old	man	 sitting	 under	 a	 tree.	The	young	man	does	 not
know	where	to	go	in	search	of	truth.	He	has	heard	that	one	has	to	go	somewhere
in	search	of	truth,	one	has	to	go	on	a	pilgrimage	--	but	where?	Roads	go	to	all
sides.	Which	road	is	the	road?
Seeing	 the	 old	man	 sitting	 under	 the	 tree,	 he	 thought:	 perhaps	 this	man	 is	 old
enough;	he	must	know	which	road	leads	to	truth.	And	he	asked	the	man.	He	said,
"Yes	 I	 know	 the	 road.	Follow	 the	 right	 and	go	on	until	 you	 come	 to	 a	 certain
tree"	 --	he	described	 the	 tree	 in	detail,	 its	 leaves,	 its	 fruit	 --	"and	you	will	 find
under	 it	 a	very	old	man...	 just	 to	give	you	an	example,	 something	 like	me	but
thirty	years	older.	This	is	the	man	who	is	going	to	be	your	guide."
The	man	was	very	happy.	He	thanked	the	old	man	and	rushed	towards	the	way
he	had	shown	him.	For	 thirty	years	he	was	wandering	and	wandering,	and	 the
tree	 never	 came	 and	 the	 old	 man	 never	 came.	 He	 was	 getting	 tired,	 and	 he
himself	was	getting	old,	and	he	said,	"What	nonsense!"
Finally	 he	 decided,	 "It	 is	 better	 to	 go	 back	 home...	 enough	 is	 enough!	 Thirty
years	I	have	wasted	in	searching	truth,	and	I	have	not	even	met	the	old	man	who
is	going	to	be	my	guide.	And	God	knows,	when	the	guide	meets	me,	what	kind
of	guidance	it	will	be	and	how	long	it	will	take.	It	seems	to	be	too	complicated;	it
is	better	to	go	home.	I	was	running	a	good	business.	I	destroyed	the	business	and
unnecessarily	got	into	trouble	hearing	this	word	`truth'	again	and	again."
He	came	back.	Again	he	passed	the	tree	--	and	he	was	shocked!	This	was	the	tree
the	old	man	had	described.	And	he	 looked	under	 the	 tree	and	the	old	man	was
there	 --	 the	 same	 old	 man,	 thirty	 years	 older	 and	 exactly	 the	 same	 as	 the
description	in	every	way.	He	said,
"My	God!	Then	why	did	you	waste	my	thirty	years?"
He	 said,	 "I	wasted	your	 thirty	years	 --	 or	you	wasted	my	 thirty	years?	At	 that
time	you	were	not	ripe	enough	to	be	guided,	because	I	gave	all	the	guidance	and
you	didn't	even	look	at	the	tree	--	and	I	was	describing	it	in	minute	detail.	I	was
describing	your	guide	in	minute	detail,	and	you	did	not	look	at	me,	to	see	that	I
am	 describing	 myself.	 You	 were	 in	 such	 a	 hurry;	 you	 were	 too	 young.	 But
nothing	is	wasted.	I	was,	waiting,	knowing	that	one	day	you	will	come	back,	one
day	you	will	recognize	this	tree,	one	day	you	will	recognize	this	old	man,	that	I
am	your	guide!"
The	young	man	said,	"This	seems	to	be	a	strange	business."
The	story	is	immensely	significant.	You	have	a	little	trust.	Don't	be	worried,	go
to	the	right...	This	time	not	under	a	tree,	this	time	on	a	beautiful	chair,	you	will
find	an	old	man
--	someone	looking	similar	to	me.
But	that	will	be	the	right	time	for	you	to	become	my	sannyasin.	Right	now	just
be	a	sannyasin;	don't	be	greedy!
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	Emptiness	has	its	own	fullness
20	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604200
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO16
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
79
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	YEARS	I	HAVE	CONTEMPLATED	WHAT	SEEMS	TO	ME	TO	BE	THE
BASIC
MESSAGE	 FOR	 WELL-BEING:	 LOVE	 YOURSELF.	 WHEN	 I	 WAS	 A
THERAPIST,	ALL	DAY	HEARING,	"I	HATE	MYSELF;	I	FEEL	SORRY	FOR
MYSELF;	I	AM
PROUD	OF	MYSELF;	I	WANT	TO	DESTROY	MYSELF,"	I	STARTED
WONDERING	--	WHO	IS	THIS	SELF?
I	 LOVE	 WHEN	 YOU	 SAY	 THERE	 IS	 NO	 SELF.	 THAT	 SEEMS	 SO
FREEING.
COULD	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	MORE?
The	whole	therapeutic	movement	has	gone	wrong	on	that	point:	Love	thyself.
Socrates	used	to	say,	"Know	thyself."	And	there	have	been	masters,	particularly
Sufis,	who	say,	"Be	thyself."	But	there	is	only	one	person	in	the	whole	history	of
man,	Gautam	Buddha,	who	said,	"There	 is	no	self.	You	are	an	emptiness,	utter
silence,	a	non-being."
His	message	was	much	opposed	by	all	the	traditions,	because	they	all	depended
in	some	way	or	other	on	the	idea	of	the	self.	There	may	have	been	differences	on
other	points,	but	on	one	point	they	were	all	totally	in	agreement	--	and	that	was
the	existence	of	the	self.
Even	people	like	George	Gurdjieff,	who	used	to	talk	about	a	very	novel	idea	--
that	you	are	not	born	with	a	self,	you	have	to	earn	it:	"Deserve	thyself"	--	finally,
he	also	ends	up	with	the	self.
Gautam	Buddha	does	not	make	any	distinction	between	the	self	and	 the	ego	--
and	 there	 is	 none.	 It	 is	 just	 sophistry,	 linguistic	 gymnastics,	 to	 make	 such
distinctions;	then	you	can	discard	the	ego	and	save	the	self.	But	the	self	is	simply
another	name	of	the	ego.	You	are	only	changing	names,	and	no	transformation	of
being	is	happening.
Buddha's	message	is	tremendously	significant:	you	are	an	emptiness;	there	is	no
point	in	you	which	can	say	"I."
Looked	at	from	my	vision,	when	I	say	to	you,	"Melt,	dissolve	into	existence,"	I
am	simply	saying	the	same	thing	in	more	positive	terms.
Buddha's	 way	 of	 saying	 it	 was	 so	 negative	 that	 many	 people	 were	 stopped,
because	the	question	arose,	naturally,	that	if	there	is	no	self,	why	bother?	what	is
there	to	achieve?
Just	to	know	that	you	are	not?
A	whole	life	of	discipline,	great	effort	for	meditation,	and	the	result	is	to	know
that	you	are	not?	The	result	does	not	seem	to	be	worth	 it!	At	 least	without	 the
meditation,	 without	 the	 discipline	 you	 have	 some	 sense	 of	 being.	 It	 may	 be
wrong,	but	at	least	you	are	not	feeling	hollow	and	empty.	Knowing	that	you	are
not,	how	will	you	live?	Out	of	nothingness	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	love,	of
any	 compassion	 --	 no	 possibility	 of	 anything.	 Out	 of	 nothing	 comes	 only
nothing.
So	 the	opponents	of	Buddha	described	his	method	as	a	 subtle	way	of	 spiritual
suicide	--
far	more	dangerous	than	ordinary	suicide,	because	with	ordinary	suicide	you	will
survive,	 you	will	 take	 a	 new	 form,	 a	 new	birth.	But	with	Buddha	 you	will	 be
committing	 total	 suicide,	annihilation.	There	will	be	no	 longer	anything	 left	of
you,	and	you	will	be	never	heard	from	again,	never	found	again.
You	never	were	in	the	first	place.
Buddhism	 died	 in	 India,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 basic	 reasons	 was	 Buddha's	 way	 of
putting	his	philosophy.	 I	can	understand	why	he	was	so	 insistent	on	negatives,
because	all	other	philosophies	were	so	positivistic,	and	all	 their	positivism	was
turning	into	stronger	and	stronger	egos.	He	moved	to	the	other	extreme,	seeing
that	 positivism	 is	 going	 to	 give	 you	 egoistic	 ideas	 --	 and	 that	 is	 a	 hindrance
between	you	and	existence.
To	stop	this	idea	he	became	totally	negative.
You	 cannot	 complain	 about	 it,	 because	 the	 positivistic	 ideologies	 were	 in	 a
strange	situation:	you	have	to	drop	the	ego	to	find	yourself,	you	have	to	drop	the
ego	to	find	God,	you	have	to	drop	the	ego	to	become	God,	you	have	to	drop	the
ego	to	find	ultimate	liberation	--	liberation	of	whom?	Liberation	of	your	self.
So	there	was	achievement,	and	achievement	is	always	of	the	ego.
There	is	a	goal,	and	the	goal	is	always	of	the	ego.
Seeing	all	this,	Buddha	said,	"There	is	no	self.	There	is	nothing	to	be	achieved,
and	there	is	no	goal	to	be	found.	You	have	never	existed,	you	do	not	exist,	you
will	not	exist.	You	can	only	imagine,	you	can	only	dream	that	you	are."
Chuang	Tzu's	story	is	famous.	I	never	get	tired	of	Chuang	Tzu	because	his	small
absurd	stories	have	so	many	aspects	to	explore,	each	time	I	can	bring	it	in	with	a
new	light,	with	a	new	meaning,	with	a	new	perspective.
One	morning	he	wakes	up,	calls	all	his	disciples	and	says,	"I	am	in	great	trouble,
and	you	have	to	help	me."
The	disciples	said,	"We	have	come	to	be	helped	by	you,	and	you	want	our	help?"
Chuang	Tzu	said,	"It	was	okay,	but	this	night	everything	got	disturbed:	I	dreamt
that	I	had	become	a	butterfly."
They	 all	 laughed.	 They	 said,	 "All	 nonsense!	 Dreaming	 does	 not	 create	 any
mess."
Chuang	Tzu	said,	"It	has	created,	because	now	I	am	thinking	that	perhaps	I	am	a
butterfly,	thinking,	dreaming	that	I	am	Chuang	Tzu.	Now,	who	am	I?	And	I	have
to	be	certain,	in	order	to	live,	whether	I	am	Chuang	Tzu	or	I	am	a	butterfly."
He	 looks	 absurd,	 but	 he	 is	 really	 bringing	 the	 absurdity	 of	 logic	 of	 being	 the
surface.	 If	 a	 butterfly	 cannot	 dream	 of	 being	 a	 Chuang	 Tzu,	 then	 how	 can
Chuang	Tzu	dream	of	being	a	butterfly?	And	if	Chuang	Tzu	can	dream	of	being
a	butterfly,	 then	 there	 is	no	 logical	objection	 to	a	butterfly	 falling	asleep	under
the	morning	 sun	on	 a	 beautiful	 flower,	 and	 dreaming	of	 herself	 being	Chuang
Tzu.
None	of	his	disciples	could	help	him.	For	centuries	Taoists	have	been	using	that
as	a	koan,	because	it	is	insoluble	--	but	to	Buddha	it	is	not	so.
Chuang	Tzu	and	Gautam	Buddha	were	contemporaries,	but	far	away;	one	was	in
China,	 one	 in	 India.	 They	 were	 divided	 by	 the	 great	 Himalayas,	 so	 no
communication;	 otherwise	Buddha	would	 have	 solved	Chuang	Tzu's	 problem,
because	 he	 says,	 "Both	 are	 dreams.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 whether	 Chuang	 Tzu
dreams	of	 being	 a	 butterfly,	 or	 the	butterfly	 dreams	of	 being	 a	Chuang	Tzu	 --
both	are	dreams.	You	simply	don't	exist."
Many	came	to	Buddha	and	turned	away,	because	nobody	can	make	nothingness
be	 his	 life's	 achievement	 --	 for	 what?	 So	 much	 discipline	 and	 so	 much	 great
trouble	in	getting	into	meditation	just	to	find	out	that	you	are	not...	strange	kind
of	man	this	Gautam	Buddha.	We	are	good	as	we	are,	what	is	the	need	of	digging
so	deep	that	you	find	there	is	nothing?	Even	if	we	are	dreaming,	at	least	there	is
something.
My	own	approach	is	just	the	same,	but	from	a	very	different	angle.	I	say	to	you
that	 you	 don't	 have	 a	 self,	 because	 you	 are	 part	 of	 the	 universe;	 you	 are	 not
nothing.	Only	the	universe	can	have	a	self,	only	the	universe	can	have	a	center,
only	the	whole	can	have	a	soul.	My	hand	cannot	have	a	soul,	my	fingers	cannot
have	a	soul;	only	the	organic	unity	can	have	a	soul.	And	we	are	only	parts.	We
are,	but	we	are	only	parts;	hence	we	cannot	claim	that	we	have	a	self.
So	Buddha	is	right	--	there	is	no	self	--	but	he	is	not	helping	people,	poor	people,
because	they	cannot	figure	out	all	the	implications	of	the	statement.
I	 say	 to	you:	You	DON'T	have	 a	 self	 because	you	are	part	 of	 a	great	 self,	 the
whole.	You	cannot	have	any	separate,	private,	self	of	your	own.	This	takes	away
the	negativity,	and	this	does	not	give	you	the	positive	desire	for	becoming	more
and	more	egoistic.	 It	 avoids	both	 the	extremes	and	 finds	a	new	approach:	The
universe	is,	I	am	not.	And	whatever	happens	and	appears	to	be	in	me,	as	me,	is
simply	universal.
To	call	 it	 "I"	 is	 to	make	 it	 too	small.	That	 is	what	makes	 it	untrue;	 it	does	not
correspond	to	reality.	To	call	it	"self"	makes	it	unreal,	because	the	self	is	possible
only	if	you	are	totally	independent	--	and	you	are	not.	Even	for	a	single	breath
you	are	not	independent.
Even	for	a	single	moment	you	are	not	 independent	of	 the	sun,	of	 the	moon,	of
the	stars.
The	whole	is	contributing	all	the	time.	That's	why	you	are.
To	recognize	it	is	not	a	loss,	it	is	a	gain;	and	yet	it	is	not	an	egoistic	gain.	If	you
can	see	the	subtlety	of	it...	it	is	a	tremendous	achievement	to	understand	that	you
are	 part	 of	 the	 whole,	 that	 the	 whole	 belongs	 to	 you,	 that	 you	 belong	 to	 the
whole.	And	yet	with	such	a	great	achievement,	there	is	no	shadow	of	the	self.
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 beautiful	 understandings,	 that	we	 are	 not	 separate	 --	 not
separate	from	the	mountains,	not	separate	from	the	trees,	not	separate	from	the
ocean,	 not	 separate	 from	 anybody.	 We	 are	 all	 connected,	 interwoven	 into
oneness.	The	gain	is	immense,	but	there	is	no	sense	of	I,	of	me,	of	my,	of	mine.
As	far	as	these	things	are	concerned,	there	is	utter	silence	and	emptiness.	But	this
emptiness	is	not	just	empty.
We	can	empty	this	room	--	we	can	take	all	the	furniture,	everything	in	the	room
out	--	and	anybody	coming	in	will	say,	"The	room	is	empty."	That	is	one	way	of
looking	at	it	--	but	not	the	right	way.
The	right	way	is	 that	now	the	room	is	full	of	emptiness.	Before,	 the	emptiness
was	hindered,	cut	into	parts,	because	so	much	furniture,	and	so	many	things	were
not	allowing	it	to	be	one:	now	it	is	one.
Emptiness	 too	 is.	 It	 is	 existential;	 it	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 it	 is	 not.	 Somebody
empty	of	jealousy	will	become	full	of	love,	somebody	empty	of	stupidness	will
become	 full	 of	 intelligence.	 Each	 emptiness	 has	 its	 own	 fullness.	 And	 if	 you
miss	seeing	the	fullness	that	comes	with	emptiness,	absolutely	and	certainly,	then
you	are	blind.
There	is	no	self.
And	that's	a	great	relief.
You	don't	have	to	love	it,	you	don't	have	to	hate	it,	you	don't	have	to	accept	it,
you	don't	have	to	reject	it;	you	don't	have	to	do	anything:	it	simply	is	not	there.
You	can	relax,	and	in	this	relaxation	is	the	melting	into	the	universe.
Then	nothingness	becomes	wholeness.
Buddha	was	very	miserly;	he	would	never	say	that	nothingness	is	wholeness.	He
knew	it;	it	is	impossible	that	a	man	who	knows	nothingness	to	such	depths	will
not	know	the	other	side	of	the	coin	--	wholeness.	But	he	was	very	miserly	--	and
for	 a	 reason,	 because	 the	moment	you	utter	 "wholeness,"	 immediately	 the	 ego
feels	at	ease.
The	ego	says,	"So	there	is	no	fear.	You	have	to	attain	to	wholeness.	Nothing	was
a	 danger;	 wholeness	 gives	 hope."	 That's	 why	 he	 was	 so	 persistently	 denying
something	 which	 is	 ultimately	 real.	 He	 was	 leading	 people	 towards	 it,	 but
denying	it	because	the	moment	you	assert	it	those	people	start	going	astray.
But	I	would	like	tell	you	the	whole	thing.
One	day	Buddha	is	passing	through	a	forest.	It	is	fall,	and	the	whole	forest	is	full
of	dry	and	dead	 leaves,	and	 the	wind	 is	 taking	 those	dry	and	dead	 leaves	from
here	and	there	and	making	beautiful	music;	and	just	to	walk	on	those	leaves	is	a
joy.
Ananda	asked	Buddha,	"Can	I	ask	you...	there	is	nobody	around,	and	I	rarely	get
a	chance	to	be	alone	with	you.	Although	I	am	twenty-four	hours	a	day	with	you,
somebody	 is	 always	 there,	 and	 of	 course	 he	 has	 preference	 to	 ask,	 to	 talk,
because	 it	 is	an	opportunity	 for	him;	 I	am	always	with	you.	But	 today	 there	 is
nobody.	Can	I	ask	you	one	thing:	Have	you	said	everything	that	you	know?	Or
have	you	been	keeping	a	few	things	back	and	not	revealing	them	to	people?"
Buddha	stooped	down	and	filled	one	of	his	fists	with	dead	leaves.	Ananda	said,
"What	are	you	doing?"
He	said,	"I	am	trying	to	answer	your	question.	What	do	you	see	in	my	hand?"
And	Anand	said,	"I	see	a	few	leaves."
Buddha	said,	"What	do	you	see	all	over	the	forest?"
He	said,	"Millions	and	millions	of	dead	leaves."
Buddha	 said,	 "What	 I	 have	 said	 is	 just	 this	much,	 and	what	 I	 have	not	 said	 is
equal	 to	 the	leaves	that	are	 in	 the	whole	forest.	But	my	whole	desire	 is	 to	 take
you	to	the	forest,	to	leave	you	to	listen	to	the	music	of	the	whole,	to	walk	and	run
on	dry	leaves,	just	like	children.	I	don't	want	to	give	you	a	few	leaves	in	my	fist.
No,	I	want	to	give	you	the	whole.
"And	 this	 is	my	understanding:	 you	may	 trust	me	or	 not,	 but	 I	 trust	 you.	You
may	change,	you	may	even	become	an	enemy	 to	me,	but	my	 trust	will	 remain
the	same	in	you.
Because	my	trust	is	not	something	conditional	upon	you,	it	does	not	depend	on
you.	My	trust	is	my	joy,	and	I	want	to	give	the	whole."
Nothingness	 is	 half	 of	 the	 truth	 --	 immensely	 relieving,	 but	 yet	 it	 leaves
something	 like	 a	wound,	 something	 unfulfilled.	You	will	 be	 relieved,	 relaxed,
but	 you	will	 be	 still	 looking	 for	 something,	 because	 emptiness	 cannot	 become
the	end.
The	other	side,	wholeness,	has	to	be	made	available	to	you.
Then	your	emptiness	is	full	--	full	of	wholeness.
Then	 your	 nothingness	 is	 all.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 nothing,	 but	 all.	 These	 are	 the
moments	 when	 contradictory	 terms	 are	 transcended,	 and	 whenever	 you
transcend	 any	 contradictory	 terms	 you	 become	 enlightened.	 Whatever	 the
contradiction	may	be,	all	contradictions	transcended	bring	enlightenment	to	you.
And	this	is	one	of	the	fundamental	contradictions:	emptiness	and	wholeness.
The	transcendence	needs	nothing	but	just	a	silent	understanding.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	BEING	WITH	YOU,	I	HAVE	NOTICED	THAT	WHEN	A	PERSON
BECOMES	 CLOSELY	 RELATED	 TO	 YOU	 THEY	 SOMETIMES	 GET	 A
FIXED
IDEA	 ABOUT	 WHO	 YOU	 ARE.	 IT	 SEEMS	 LIKE	 THEY	 FORGET	 WHO
YOU
REALLY	ARE	AND	EVEN	WHY	THEY	HAVE	COME	TO	YOU.
THIS	SITUATION	PUZZLES	ME,	EVEN	SCARES	ME	A	LITTLE.	WOULD
YOU
PLEASE	COMMENT?
The	mind	has	a	natural	tendency	to	quickly	get	fixed	ideas.	It	is	very	much	afraid
of	 change,	 because	 change	 means	 rearrangement.	 Each	 time	 you	 change
something,	you	have	to	rearrange	your	whole	inner	being.
Mind	wants	to	live	with	fixed	ideas,	so	when	a	person	comes	to	me	--	and	it	has
been	 happening	 for	 thirty-five	 years	 continuously	 --	 he	 starts	 loving	 me.	 He
comes	closer,	becomes	intimate,	and	then	gets	a	fixed	idea.	And	that's	where	he
misses,	because	now	his	fixed	idea	is	going	to	create	trouble.
I	am	not	an	idea	and	I	am	not	fixed.	I	am	changing.	I	am	in	absolute	agreement
with	Heraclitus	that	you	cannot	step	twice	in	the	same	river.	Translated,	it	means
you	cannot	meet	the	same	person	again.	I	not	only	agree	with	him,	I	go	a	little
further:	I	say	you	cannot	step	in	the	same	river	even	once.	Again	translated	to	the
human	world,	 it	means	 you	 cannot	meet	 the	 same	 person	 even	 once,	 because
even	while	 you	 are	meeting	 him	 he	 is	 changing,	 you	 are	 changing,	 the	whole
world	is	changing.
But	 once	 you	 get	 a	 fixed	 idea	 you	 cling	 to	 it,	 and	 I	 am	 constantly	 going	 to
change.
Tomorrow	you	will	find	yourself	in	a	conflict.
So	many	 have	 come,	 so	many	 have	 gone,	 and	 this	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	 basic
reasons:	 they	 became	 so	 much	 fascinated	 with	 their	 own	 idea	 of	 me	 that	 I
became	secondary.	Their	idea	of	me	became	primary	--	and	that	too,	old,	dated.	I
am	with	 them,	fresh	and	young,	but	I	became	secondary.	And	if	 there	was	any
conflict	between	their	 idea	and	my	reality,	 they	went	with	 their	 idea	--	even	 to
the	 point	 of	 becoming	 enemies	 to	 me,	 telling	 people	 that	 I	 am	 no	 longer	 the
same,	I	am	no	longer	the	person	I	used	to	be;	they	have	worshipped	a	great	saint,
but	I	am	no	longer	the	same	person.	They	will	keep	their	memory	of	me	deep	in
their	heart,	but	it	is	simply	a	photograph.	Photographs	don't	change.
Once	 it	 happened...	 one	of	my	 friends	was	 collecting	photographs	of	me	 from
my	childhood	 --	 from	wherever	he	could	get	 them.	He	had	made	a	big	album,
and	he	was	showing	me.	He	had	done	a	great	deal	of	work;	he	had	gone	to	many
places,	 to	many	people.	Wherever	he	heard	that	somebody	had	a	picture	of	me
he	went	there,	either	to	get	the	original	or	a	copy	of	it.	But	while	he	was	showing
them	to	me	he	felt	I	was	not	interested.	He	stopped	and	said	to	me,	"You	don't
seem	to	be	interested."
I	said,	"I	don't	seem	to	be	interested	because	none	of	these	photographs	represent
me;	 they	only	represent	 that	which	 is	dead.	The	photograph	can	only	represent
that	 which	 is	 dead.	 A	 photograph	 is	 always	 of	 the	 dead;	 you	 cannot	 find	 a
photograph	which	is	of	the	living."
In	Picasso's	home	there	used	to	be	a	portrait,	a	self-portrait	of	Picasso.	He	never
sold	it,	at	any	price,	that	was	the	only	picture	he	insisted	on	not	selling.	And	the
more	he	 insisted	on	not	 selling,	 the	more	 and	more	people	were	 coming,	with
bigger	and	bigger	offers	for	the	picture.	It	became	a	challenge	for	art	collectors.
One	 beautiful	 woman	 had	 come	 with	 the	 same	 idea,	 to	 purchase	 the	 picture.
Whatever	 the	 price	 she	 was	 ready	 to	 pay;	 she	 was	 rich	 enough.	 She	 said	 to
Picasso,	"I	am	willing	to	pay	you	as	much	as	you	want	for	your	portrait."
Picasso	said,	"People	are	mad.	For	a	dead	 thing	 they	go	on	harassing	me.	You
can	have	it	without	any	price,	but	remember,	it	is	not	me."
The	woman	looked	puzzled.	She	said,	"It	is	not	you?	What	do	you	mean?"
He	said,	"If	 it	were	me	it	would	have	kissed	you	by	now!	It	does	not	speak,	 it
does	 not	 love,	 it	 does	 not	 sing,	 it	 does	 not	 dance.	 Such	 a	 beautiful	woman	 is
standing	before	it	and	the	idiot	is	not	even	kissing.	You	just	can	take	it.	It	is	dead.
Remove	it	from	here	--	it	is	not	me!"
People	 get	 fixed	 ideas	 --	 and	 very	 soon.	 Ordinarily	 it	 goes	 perfectly	 well,
because	you	meet	only	dead	people	who	are	not	changing,	who	go	on	saying	the
same	 thing	 their	whole	 life	 just	 like	 a	parrot.	They	are	 consistent	people;	 they
have	all	your	respect.
I	seem	to	you	self-contradictory,	 inconsistent,	 for	 the	simple	reason	that	I	have
decided	not	to	die	before	I	die.	I	am	going	to	live	to	the	very	last	breath,	so	you
cannot	 be	 certain	 about	 me	 till	 my	 last	 breath.	 After	 that	 you	 can	 make	 any
image	of	me	and	be	satisfied	with	it.	But	remember,	it	will	not	be	me.
To	be	with	me	needs	courage,	and	the	greatest	courage	is	being	capable	of	seeing
the	change	and	moving	with	 it.	 It	may	be	difficult;	 it	 is	 easy	 to	have	one	 idea
once	and	then	be	finished.
A	 Sufi	 story...	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 is	 appointed	 as	 the	 prime	 minister	 of	 a	 king
because	he	was	known	 to	be	very	wise;	 somewhat	weird	was	his	wisdom,	but
still,	 wisdom	 is	 wisdom.	 The	 first	 day	 when	 they	 went	 to	 have	 their	 dinner
together,	 a	 certain	vegetable	 called	bindhi	was	made	by	 the	cook,	 stuffed	with
Eastern	spices.	It	is	a	delicacy.
The	king	appreciated	the	cook,	and	after	that	Mulla	said,	in	appreciation	of	the
bindhi,
"This	is	the	most	precious	vegetable	in	the	world.	It	gives	you	long	life,	it	keeps
you	healthy,	it	gives	you	resistance	against	diseases,"	and	so	on	and	so	forth.
The	king	said,	"I	never	knew	that	you	know	so	much	about	vegetables."
The	cook	heard	about	it,	so	he	thought	if	bindhi	is	such	a	thing	that	our	king	can
live	long	and	healthy	and	young...	Next	day	again	bindhi	was	made,	and	again
Mulla	praised	it,	going	even	higher	than	the	first	day.	The	third	day	bindhi	was
made	and	Mulla	went	 still	 higher.	The	 fourth	day	bindhi	was	made	and	Mulla
was	 going	 higher	 and	 higher.	 The	 fifth	 day	 Mulla	 even	 said	 that	 bindhi	 is	 a
divine	food	--	God	eats	only	bindhi.
But	the	king	was	bored.	He	threw	the	plate	of	bindhi	and	told	Mulla	Nasruddin,
"You	are	an	 idiot.	Bindhi...	and	God	eats	bindhi	every	day?	You	will	drive	me
mad!"
Mulla	said,	"Lord,	you	are	getting	unnecessarily	hot.	I	am	your	servant;	you	said
bindhi	 was	 good,	 I	 simply	 followed	 you,	 and	 when	 I	 do	 something	 I	 do	 it
perfectly.	I	am	not	a	servant	to	bindhi,	I	am	your	servant.	The	truth	is	that	bindhi
is	the	worst	thing	in	the	world	--	even	devils	don't	eat	it.	You	did	well	that	you
threw	it."
He	 threw	 his	 plate	 farther	 away	 than	 the	 king.	 He	 said,	 "You	 should	 always
remember	 that	 I	 am	 your	 servant,	 and	 you	 are	 always	 right.	 And	 I	 am	 a
consistent	man;	I	will	remain	consistently	your	servant,	whatever	happens."
There	are	people	--	almost	the	whole	world	--	who	live	in	a	certain	consistency.
It	is	easier.	But	when	you	come	close	to	a	man	like	me,	you	are	going	to	be	in
difficulty;	either	you	will	have	to	drop	your	idea	of	consistency	or	you	will	have
to	drop	me.	And	people	are	so	infatuated	with	their	own	ideas	that	they	can	drop
me,	but	they	cannot	drop	their	ideas.
My	first	book	was	published	in	1960.	I	was	staying	in	someone's	home,	and	the
housewife	of	the	home	told	me,	"My	father	is	a	monk,	a	Jaina	monk;	he	is	old,
ninety	 years	 old.	 He	 has	 been	 told	 by	 the	 Jaina	 order	 that	 he	 need	 not	 go
begging,	he	is	too	old,	so	he	remains	outside	the	town	in	a	hut,	and	we	take	his
food	there.	But	he	wants	to	come	to	see	you	--	he	insists.	We've	told	him,	`We
can	bring	the	person	you	want	to	see...'"	In	fact	I	used	to	go	on	that	road	every
morning.	She	 said,	 "It	 is	 very	 easy	 for	 you	 to	 go	 to	meet	 the	 old	man,	 but	 he
insists,	 `No,	 that	will	 not	 be	 respectful.'	He	 reads	 your	 books;	 he	 has	 stopped
reading	all	other	books.	And	he	says,	Ìf	it	was	in	my	power	I	would	declare	this
man	as	our	twenty-fifth	TIRTHANKARA.'"
They	have	 twenty-four	 tirthankaras	 in	one	 cycle	of	 existence;	 in	 Jainism	 there
are	cycles	of	existence.	It	is	a	very	mathematical	philosophy.	Everything	moves
in	 the	world	 in	cycles	--	existence	also	has	a	cycle:	 it	begins,	 it	ends,	 it	begins
again,	it	ends	again...	it	is	a	long,	long	way.	In	fact,	India	has	the	biggest	terms
for	counting;	no	other	 language	has	such	big	 terms	for	counting.	And	 it	has	 to
use	its	biggest	terms	to	count	how	long	it	takes	one	cycle	to	complete.
In	 one	 cycle	 there	 are	 twenty-four	 tirthankaras,	 just	 as	 in	 one	 day	 there	 are
twenty-four	hours.	For	each	hour	 in	 the	cycle	of	existence	 there	 is	one	master.
This	old	Jaina	monk	had	said	something	almost	sacrilegious:	that	if	it	was	in	his
power	 he	would	 declare	me	 the	 twenty-fifth	 tirthankara.	He	was	 so	 infatuated
with	the	book	that	he	said	that	he	had	never	understood	things	which	the	book
had	made	 him	 understand,	 and	 he	 was	 happy	 that	 he	 had	 found	 it	 before	 his
death.
He	 came	 to	 see	me;	 it	must	 have	 been	 nearabout	 six	 in	 the	 evening	when	 he
came.	The	daughter	of	 the	woman	I	was	staying	with	came	and	 told	me,	"You
should	take	your	bath	because	your	supper	is	ready."
I	said,	"Wait,	this	old	man	has	come	from	so	far."	And	the	old	man	had	already
said	--
just	 within	 the	 few	 minutes	 he	 had	 been	 there	 --	 "You	 are	 the	 twenty-fifth
tirthankara.
Perhaps	 if	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 according	 to	 existence,	 then	 you	will	 be	 the	 first
tirthankara	in	the	new	cycle.	Your	book	has	given	me	so	much;	all	the	books	that
I	have	read	in	my	whole	life	--	all	the	scriptures	--	have	proved	useless."
He	had	touched	my	feet.	I	told	him,	"It	is	not	good.	You	are	ninety	years	old,	and
a	Jaina	monk	is	not	supposed	to	touch	anybody's	feet."
He	said,	"I	don't	care.	I	consider	you	as	my	master."	But	when	he	heard	the	girl
asking	me	 to	get	 ready,	he	was	shocked	 --	because	 the	sun	had	set,	and	Jainas
don't	eat	after	the	sun	has	set.	Immediately	everything	changed.
He	said,	"Do	you	eat	after	the	sunset?"
I	said,	"Ordinarily,	no.	But	you	have	come	from	so	far,	an	old	man,	and	I	wanted
to	be	with	you.	It	doesn't	matter	if	it	is	a	little	late.	I	can	take	my	supper	a	little
late."
He	said,	"Then	forgive	me.	Whatever	I	have	said	to	you,	I	want	to	take	it	back.
You	 are	 not	 even	 a	 Jaina,	 how	 can	 you	 become	 a	 Jaina	 tirthankara?	 First	 you
should	learn	how	to	discipline	your	life."
He	started	teaching	me.	Just	a	moment	before	I	was	the	master,	and	I	was	going
to	be	the	first	tirthankara	of	the	new	cycle;	now	I	was	not	even	a	disciple!	And
there	was	absolute	condemnation	in	his	mind.	The	book	that	he	had	brought	with
him	--	my	book	--	he	simply	left	there.	He	didn't	take	it	with	him.
I	asked	him,	"What	happened?	That	book...	I	may	have	fallen	from	your	mind,
but	that	book	does	not	eat	supper.	You	can	take	the	book."
He	said,	"I	cannot	even	 touch	 it.	You	have	written	 it	and	you	don't	know	even
simple	things,	 that	after	sunset	one	cannot	eat.	If	one	eats	after	sunset,	one	can
never	know	what	reality	is."
It	was	really	hilarious	to	see	the	whole	thing;	the	whole	family	gathered	to	see.
The	 husband	 of	 the	 woman	 was	 a	 rare	 man.	 He	 said	 to	 me,	 "Except	 me,
everybody	 in	my	 family	 is	going	 to	betray	you.	Only	 I	will	 remain	 in	 the	 end
with	you,	because	I	am	not	a	religious	person;	they	all	are	against	me.	I	don't	go
to	the	temple,	I	don't	read	their	scriptures,	I	don't	follow	the	discipline	of	a	Jaina
--	not	eating	in	the	night,	not	eating	before	sunrise,	and	other	things.	I	will	be	the
last	one	to	still	be	with	you,	because	whatever	you	do	will	not	hurt	me;	I	don't
make	any	image,	I	simply	see	it.
"Each	time	you	come	to	my	home	you	are	different,	and	all	these	people	get	into
difficulty.	They	 are	 puzzled	 --	 last	 time	 you	 said	 something	 and	 this	 time	 you
have	been	saying	something	which	goes	against	it.	Only	to	me	it	does	not	seem
puzzling	 simply	because	 last	 time	was	 last	 time!	The	water	 in	 the	Ganges	has
gone	 down	 so	 much.	 This	 time	 is	 this	 time,	 and	 to	 me	 you	 are	 each	 time
beautiful."
And	he	was	 right.	By	and	by	all	 the	people	 in	his	 family	 started	getting	 stuck
with	some	image	of	me.	Only	he	remained	to	the	very	last.	He	is	dead	now.	Just
before	 dying	 he	 said,	 "Convey	 to	Osho,	Ònly	 you	 are	 in	my	mind	 right	 now,
when	 I	am	 leaving	my	body.'"	He	was	a	man	who	 really	had	guts	 to	go	along
with	me	through	all	the	seasons	of	the	year,	all	the	changes	of	life.
If	you	really	want	to	be	with	me	you	have	to	stop	making	images.	What	is	 the
need	to	make	an	image?	The	need	is	to	cling.
Remain	without	an	image	so	that	your	eyes	are	not	cluttered	with	old	images	and
you	are	available	to	me	directly,	each	moment.
This	direct	immediacy	is	the	true	relationship	between	me	and	you.
Anything	less	than	that	is	worthless.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAYING,	 "JUST	 LISTENING	 TO	 ME
CAN	BE
ENOUGH	TO	BE	TRANSFORMED."	I	FELT	SO	GRATEFUL	TO	YOU	AND
RELAXED	 FOR	A	MOMENT.	 BUT	A	 PART	OF	ME	WAS	DOUBTFULLY
ASKING,
"IS	 IT	 REALLY	 THAT	 EASY?	 CAN	 I	 REALLY	 RELAX	 AND	 LET
EXISTENCE
TAKE	 OVER?"	MY	 CHATTERING	MIND	WANTS	 TO	 DO	 SOMETHING.
HOW
CAN	I	BE	MORE	PATIENT	AND	REALLY	TRUST?
Just	for	a	moment	you	had	the	glimpse.
Now	make	 yourself	 available	more	 and	more...	 that	 glimpse	 comes	 again	 and
again,	becomes	deepened.	And	don't	be	bothered	by	your	chattering	mind.
Use	that	chattering	mind	to	make	new	questions.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	The	world	is	where	the	work	is
20	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604205
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO17
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
76
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 THE	 LAND	 OF	 MONEY,	 POWER,	 DESIGNER	 DRUGS	 LIKE
"ECSTASY"	AND
ENLIGHTENED	INSURANCE,	MANY	OF	YOUR	SANNYASINS	ARE	NOW
WORKING,	 WITH	 A	 JOB,	 AND	 EARNING	 THEIR	 LIVELIHOOD.
LAUGHTER,	 A	 SENSE	 OF	 HUMOR,	 AND	 A	 DEEP	 LOVE	 AND
GRATITUDE	TOWARDS	YOU,	KEEP	US	ALL	CONNECTED	WITH	EACH
OTHER	SOMEHOW.	WITH	YOUR
PEOPLE	IN	THE	WORLD	NOW	AND	PHYSICALLY	SO	FAR	AWAY,	HAS
YOUR
WORK	WITH	US	TAKEN	ON	A	NEW	SIGNIFICANCE?
It	has	certainly	taken	on	a	new	significance,	a	new	turn.
I	always	wanted	my	people	to	be	in	the	world,	occasionally	coming	to	me,	being
with	me,	 refreshing	 themselves,	 then	going	back	again	 to	 the	world	 --	because
the	world	has	to	be	changed.	We	are	not	the	ones	who	renounce	the	world.
All	the	religions	have	been	teaching,	"Renounce	the	world."
I	teach	you,	transform	the	world.
Renouncing	 it	 is	 sheer	 cowardice,	 and	 by	 renouncing	 it,	 nothing	 significant
happens	 --	 the	 world	 goes	 on	 living,	 producing	 new	 generations	 in	 the	 old
pattern.	And	 the	 persons	who	 have	 renounced	 the	world	 --	 they	 also	 don't	 go
through	 a	 transformation,	 for	 a	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 lose	 all	 opportunities
where	 they	 can	 test	 whether	 they	 are	 growing	 or	 not.	 You	 can	 sit	 in	 the
Himalayas	 for	 a	 half	 a	 century	 and	 you	will	 feel	 silent,	 but	 that	 silence	 is	 not
yours;	 it	 belongs	 to	 the	 Himalayas.	 Everything	 is	 silent,	 eternally	 silent,	 and
there	is	nobody	to	disturb	you.
Just	to	get	out	of	the	situations	where	you	get	disturbed	does	not	mean	that	you
are	attaining	peacefulness;	it	simply	means	you	are	running	away	from	situations
where	you	are	certain	 that	your	peace	will	be	disturbed.	Renouncing	 the	world
has	never	been	my	idea;	it	was	always	to	change	it.
Millions	of	people	are	suffering,	and	suffering	for	stupid	reasons.	It	is	absolutely
inhuman	to	turn	your	back	on	it	and	move	to	the	mountains	or	to	the	deserts	to
live	peacefully	there.	That	peace	is	very	cheap,	very	superficial;	it	has	almost	no
meaning.
Just	 come	 back	 to	 the	world	 and	 it	will	 be	 disturbed,	 it	will	 be	 shattered	 into
pieces.	 And	 that	 will	 be	 immensely	 significant	 to	 awaken	 you,	 that	 what	 you
have	been	thinking	of	as	peace,	silence,	has	been	just	a	dream	which	is	shattered
by	the	reality,	just	as	a	mirror	is	shattered	when	hit	by	a	rock...	and	it	is	shattered
forever.	That	mirror	you	cannot	put	together	again,	and	all	those	years	that	you
were	enjoying	the	idea	that	you	have	attained	peace	have	gone	down	the	drain.
So	my	idea	has	always	been:	come	to	me	to	rejoice,	come	to	me	for	a	holiday.
Come	 to	 me	 for	 pure	 joy.	 Be	 filled	 with	 the	 fragrance,	 be	 filled	 with	 my
presence,	 then	 take	 it	 back	 into	 the	 world.	 There	 is	 the	 real	 test:	 whether	 it
remains	with	you	or	not.	 If	you	want	 to	keep	 it,	 spread	 it,	 share	 it,	 and	 it	will
grow	within	you.	But	whenever	you	 feel	 somewhere	 stuck,	not	growing,	 I	 am
available	--	come	back	to	me,	be	with	me.	When	you	feel	 the	clarity	again,	go
back	to	the	world.
If	you	start	living	with	me	you	will	be	a	loser	on	two	counts.	One:	you	will	by
and	 by	 start	 taking	me	 for	 granted	 --	which	 is	 a	 great	 loss,	 because	 I	will	 be
available	to	you.	It	is	dangerous,	because	the	more	I	am	available	to	you,	the	less
you	will	become	available	to	me.
I	have	lived	for	almost	twenty	years	in	Jabalpur	in	India;	it	has	one	of	the	most
beautiful	 spots	 in	 the	 world.	 For	 two	 to	 three	 miles	 continuously	 a	 beautiful
river,	 Narmada,	 flows	 between	 two	mountains	 of	marble...	 just	 three	miles	 of
pure	white	marble	on	both	 sides,	 high	mountains.	And	 the	 river	 is	 deep.	On	a
full-moon	 night,	 when	 the	 moon	 comes	 in	 the	 middle	 and	 you	 can	 see	 those
rocks	 also	 reflected	 into	 the	waters,	 it	 creates	 almost	 a	magical	world.	 I	 don't
think	there	is	anything	in	the	world	which	can	be	compared	to	that	magic.	It	is
simply	unimaginable.
I	insisted	again	and	again	to	my	professor,	Doctor	S.K.	Saxena...	I	had	loved	him
very	much	because	he	was	the	only	teacher	I	came	across	who	never	treated	me
as	a	student.
We	argued,	we	fought	on	small	points,	and	if	he	was	wrong	he	was	always	ready
to	accept	it,	and	he	was	grateful.
He	had	a	Ph.D.	from	America	--	he	lived	his	whole	life	in	America,	and	taught
as	a	professor	of	Indian	philosophy	there.	Just	at	the	end,	he	wanted	to	go	back
to	his	own	country.	He	had	been	searching	for	someone	who	could	translate	his
doctoral	thesis	into	Hindi,	but	he	never	came	across	a	man	who	could.	And	his
thesis	was	 really	of	great	 significance;	 just	 a	 literal	 translation	would	not	have
done.	 It	needed	someone	with	a	deep	understanding.	The	subject	matter	of	 the
thesis	was,	"The	evolution	of	consciousness	in	the	East."	It	was	one	of	the	most
difficult	subjects,	very	elusive,	but	he	had	managed,	worked	hard,	and	had	come
to	certain	very	significant	conclusions.
He	asked	me	 --	 I	was	only	 a	 student	 --	 to	 translate	 it.	 I	 said,	 "You	 should	 ask
some	professor,	at	least	someone	qualified."
He	said,	"I	have	seen	many	professors,	many	qualified	people;	they	can	translate
only	literally.	And	I	trust	you.	Arguing	with	you	I	have	come	to	the	conclusion
that	this	is	the	man	who	can	translate	it."
It	 took	me	 two	months	 continuously	 --	my	whole	holiday	one	 summer.	 It	was
hard	work.
And	it	was	harder	because	there	were	faults,	there	were	mistakes,	and	I	could	not
tolerate	 them.	So	 I	pointed	out	 to	him,	"These	are	mistakes;	out	of	your	 seven
conclusions,	 three	 are	 wrong,	 and	 if	 it	 was	 in	 my	 hands	 I	 would	 take	 your
doctorate	back.	The	people	who	have	given	you	a	doctorate	know	nothing	about
consciousness."
He	said,	"I	was	afraid	of	this!"
But	 I	 said	 to	 him,	 "I	 have	 translated	 it;	 just	 in	 the	 footnotes	 I	 have	made	my
comments	 where	 you	 have	 gone	 wrong,	 why	 you	 have	 gone	 wrong.	 Perhaps
anybody	would	have	gone	wrong.	Just	as	a	scholar	it	was	bound	to	happen,	this
mistake.	I	am	not	a	scholar."
I	 gave	 the	 thesis	 to	 him	 and	 I	 said,	 "You	 look	 at	 it,	 and	you	 tell	me	how	you
feel."
He	hugged	me	and	 told	me,	"You	have	done	such	a	 tremendous	 job	 that	 I	 feel
ashamed.	 It	 looks	 like	my	book	 is	 a	 translation	 and	your	 book	 is	 the	original!
And	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 publish	 it	 because	 that	 would	 destroy	 my	 whole
reputation.	You	have	also	made	comments	which	 I	 agree	with	 --	 you	are	 right
and	my	examiners	were	wrong.	I	was	wrong,	my	examiners	were	wrong."
So	 he	 kept	 the	 translated	 thesis	with	 him	 and	 never	 allowed	 anyone	 to	 see	 it,
never	allowed	anyone	to	publish	it.
I	said,	"You	wasted	my	two	months	unnecessarily!"	I	said,	"Just	to	compensate,
now	you	have	to	come	with	me	to	Jabalpur."	It	was	one	hundred	miles	from	the
university	where	he	was	professor,	to	the	marble	rocks.	"I	would	not	let	you	die
without	seeing	it."
But	he	said,	"Howsoever	beautiful	it	is,	I	have	seen	the	whole	world"	--	he	had
been	a	world	traveler	--	"I	have	seen	everything	that	is	worth	seeing.	What	can
be	there?"
I	said,	"I	cannot	describe...	you	 just	come	with	me."	And	I	 took	him	there.	He
was	asking	again	and	again,	when	we	were	moving	in	the	boat,	"Do	you	call	this
the	most	beautiful	place?"
I	said,	"You	just	wait.	We	have	not	entered	into	 it	yet."	And	then	suddenly	 the
boat	entered	into	the	world	of	marble,	the	mountains	of	marble.	And	in	the	full-
moon	night	they	were	just	so	pure,	so	virgin-pure,	and	their	reflections...	The	old
man	had	tears	in	his	eyes.	He	said,	"If	you	had	not	insisted,	I	would	have	missed
something	in	my	life.	Just	take	the	boat	close	to	the	mountains,	because	I	would
like	 to	 touch	 then.	 It	 looks	 so	 illusory!	Without	 touching	 I	 cannot	 believe	 that
what	I	am	seeing	is	real."
I	 told	 the	boatman	 to	come	close	 to	 the	mountains.	He	 touched	 the	mountains,
and	 he	 said,	 "Now	 I	 can	 leave	 --	 they	 are	 real!	 But	 for	 three	 miles
continuously...!"
This	 man	 wrote	 beautifully,	 spoke	 beautifully,	 but	 still	 was	 miserable.	 And	 I
said,
"Neither	your	writings	mean	anything,	nor	your	speeches	mean	anything.	To	me
what	 is	 significant	 is	 whether	 you	 have	 been	 able	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 causes	 of
misery.	You	are	so	miserable	that	you	drink,	just	to	forget.	You	are	so	miserable
that	you	smoke,	just	to	forget.	You	gamble,	just	to	forget."
Now,	 this	world	 is	 not	 to	 be	 renounced.	 There	 are	 beautiful	 people,	 there	 are
immensely	capable	people;	they	just	have	never	come	across	a	person	who	could
have	triggered	a	process	of	mutation	in	their	life.	So	my	idea	has	always	been:
come	 to	me	whenever	 you	 start	 feeling,	 "Perhaps	 I	 am	 living	 in	 an	 illusion."
Then	 come	 and	 just	 touch	me.	Let	 yourself	 be	 showered	 by	my	 presence,	my
love,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 regain	 confidence,	 courage,	 and	 you	 can	 go	 back	 to	 the
world.
But	the	world	is	where	the	work	is.
This	is	a	mystery	school.
We	prepare	people	to	send	them	to	change	the	world.
That	was	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	my	 idea	 of	 a	 commune,	 but	 because	 I	was
silent	 and	 in	 isolation,	 things	 went	 not	 according	 to	 my	 idea.	 The	 commune,
rather	than	becoming	a	refreshing	place,	a	place	for	holiday,	became	just	another
world	of	work,	of	hierarchy,	of	bureaucracy.	All	those	things	that	we	wanted	to
change	evolved	in	the	commune	itself.
So	my	new	phase	of	work	will	be	that	there	will	be	a	mystery	school.	It	will	live
like	 a	 commune,	 but	 the	 people	 will	 be	 changing.	 People	 will	 be	 coming
whenever	they	can	manage,	whenever	they	need.	There	will	be	a	certain	number
of	 people	 who	 will	 be	 permanent,	 to	 take	 care	 of	 all	 the	 visitors.	 But	 the
commune	will	be	a	continuous	pilgrimage	place	--	where	you	learn	something,
where	you	drink	something,	and	go	back	to	the	world.
We	are	not	the	renouncers	--	we	are	the	revolutionaries.
We	want	to	change	the	whole	world.
And	 in	 changing	 the	 world,	 you	 will	 change	 yourself.	 You	 cannot	 change
anything	else	unless	you	go	through	the	change	simultaneously.
So	on	one	count	 it	was	a	 loss	 that	 if	you	were	staying	with	me	continuously...
you	 are	 human,	 and	 it	 is	 a	 human	 mistake	 that	 one	 starts	 taking	 things	 for
granted.	I	am	available.
I	 told	you	 about	 this	 beautiful	 spot	 because	 in	 Jabalpur	 there	 are	 thousands	of
people	who	 have	 not	 seen	 it.	 It	 is	 only	 thirteen	miles	 away,	 and	 I	 have	 asked
those	people	--
professors,	doctors,	engineers	--	"Just	go	and	see!"
And	they	say,	"We	can	see	it	anytime.	It	is	there;	it	is	not	going	to	go	away."
In	the	second	world	war	it	happened	that	suddenly,	when	Adolf	Hitler	declared
that	he	was	going	to	bomb	the	Tower	of	London,	thousands	of	people	rushed	to
see	 it.	They	had	been	 living	 in	London	 their	whole	 life;	 they	were	born	 there.
They	were	passing	the	Tower	every	day	on	the	way	to	their	job	--	going	to	the
office,	 coming	 back	 home,	 it	 was	 there.	 People	 were	 coming	 from	 faraway
places	 to	 see	 it,	 but	 they	were	 taking	 it	 for	 granted:	 it	 is	 there,	 so	what	 is	 the
hurry?
It	 is	absolutely	certain	 that	 thousands	of	people	have	been	born	in	London	and
died	 in	London	without	 seeing	 the	 tower.	 I	know	about	 Jabalpur;	 thousands	of
people	must	have	died...	It	is	always	there,	but	you	are	not	always	there.
As	far	as	the	relationship	with	me	is	concerned,	neither	you	are	forever	nor	am	I
forever.
But	you	can	take	it	for	granted,	and	by	and	by	a	fog	surrounds	your	mind.	Rather
than	my	presence	there	is	a	fog	--	which	separates	you,	not	connects	you.
This	was	the	most	disastrous	thing	that	was	happening	in	the	commune.	People
were	 with	 me,	 but	 they	 had	 created	 a	 fog	 around	 themselves.	 Seen	 from	 the
outside,	physically	they	were	close,	but	spiritually	they	had	gone	far	away.
Secondly,	when	five	thousand	or	ten	thousand	people	start	living	in	a	commune,
their	 whole	 orientation,	 why	 they	 have	 come	 there,	 changes	 without	 their
knowledge.	They	had	come	there	 to	meditate,	 to	be	with	me,	 to	be	as	much	as
possible	 open	 and	 available	 to	my	 experience...	 to	 enjoy,	 to	 relax,	 to	 sing,	 to
dance,	to	be	ecstatic.	They	had	all	come	for	that.
But	when	ten	thousand	people	have	to	live	together,	you	have	to	make	houses,
you	have	to	make	roads,	you	have	to	prepare	food,	you	have	to	prepare	clothes;	a
thousand	 and	 one	 things	 are	 needed,	 they	 go	 on	 taking	 all	 your	 time.	 Slowly,
slowly	you	completely	forget	 the	real	reason	you	had	come.	You	go	on	getting
into	other	things,	and	the	original	intention	is	completely	forgotten.
This	 time	 I	 am	working	 in	 a	 totally	 different	way,	 so	 these	 two	 things	 can	 be
avoided.
To	me,	I	always	want	to	be	just	a	holiday.
To	me,	I	always	want	to	mean	nothing	but	ecstasy,	music,	dance.
It	is	good	to	be	only	for	a	few	days	with	me	and	then	go	into	the	world.	Take	the
music,	take	the	ecstasy	with	you,	spread	it,	and	whenever	you	feel	thirsty,	come
back	again.
So	 it	 will	 be	 a	 world	 school	 of	 mysticism	 where	 people	 will	 be	 coming	 and
going,	taking	the	message	to	all	the	nooks	and	corners	of	the	world.	And	I	don't
want	 you	 to	 be	 in	 any	 way	 associated	 with	 anything...	 road-making,	 making
houses,	and	creating	a	dam	--	all	that	is	just	damned	foolery!
I	 simply	want	 you	 to	 remember	me	 as	 a	 flower,	 a	 fragrance,	 a	 flame,	 a	 light;
associate	 me	 with	 these	 things.	 That	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 purpose	 of	 the	 new
mystery	school.	I	would	like	to	call	it	the	mystery	school	rather	than	a	commune,
because	that	name	has	become	associated	with	the	commune	we	had.
I	am	not	in	any	way	thinking	that	the	disappearance	of	that	commune	has	been	a
loss.	Not	at	all	 --	because	 the	way	 it	was	 functioning,	 it	was	a	non-ending	rut.
You	would	have	needed	new	roads,	because	new	houses	were	 to	be	built,	 then
new	 roads	 would	 have	 had	 to	 be	 connected.	 You	 would	 have	 needed	 more
restaurants,	 bigger	 restaurants;	 you	 would	 have	 needed	 more	 clothes...	 and
finally,	 you	 were	 going	 to	 have	 to	 produce.	 You	 would	 have	 had	 to	 make
factories	and	other	productive	directions	--	because	how	long	can	five	thousand
people	 live	 only	 on	 donations?	 Friends	 can	 support	 for	 a	 time	 being,	 but	 not
forever.
So	 soon	 you	would	 have	 completely	 forgotten	 that	 you	 are	 separate	 from	 the
world.	In	fact	you	would	have	been	in	more	difficulty,	because	in	the	other	world
somebody	 else	 takes	 care	 of	 the	 roads,	 somebody	 else	 takes	 care	 of	 the	 post
office,	and	somebody	else	takes	care	of	other	things.	You	have	just	to	work	five
hours,	six	hours.	In	the	commune	you	were	working	for	twelve	hours,	sometimes
fourteen	hours;	even	then	the	work	was	unending.
So	 the	 resources	 that	 were	 helping	 the	 commune	 were	 going	 to	 be	 soon
exhausted;	 the	 commune	was	 going	 to	 collapse.	 I	 was	 telling	 the	 people	who
were	in	power	in	the	commune,	"The	commune	will	collapse,	because	how	long
can	 you	 live	 on	 other	 people's	 support?	And	 if	 you	 become	 productive	 --	 you
open	factories	and	you	start	making	things
--	then	why	bother?	All	these	things	are	being	done	everywhere	else."
This	 time,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 only	 a	 small	 nucleus	 of	 people	 who	 are
absolutely	 necessary	 to	 run	 the	 mystery	 school	 will	 be	 living	 with	 me.
Everybody	else	will	be	a	guest	for	a	few	days,	a	few	weeks,	a	few	months...	as
much	 as	 he	 can	 manage.	 But	 his	 being	 here	 with	 me	 will	 be	 all	 relaxation,
meditation,	so	he	can	be	rejuvenated.	And	then	he	can	go	back.	The	whole	world
is	there	to	work	on.
This	 way	we	will	 avoid	 the	most	 basic	 thing	 --	 that	 he	 does	 not	 take	me	 for
granted.	And	 the	 second	 thing	 --	 that	 he	 does	 not	 forget	 his	 basic	 intention	 in
coming	to	me.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONCE,	WHEN	I	WAS	SITTING	WITH	A	DYING	PATIENT	--	IT	WAS	ANNA
FREUD,	SIGMUND	FREUD'S	YOUNGEST	DAUGHTER	--	I	WAS	IN
CONVERSATION	WITH	HER	COMPANION,	AND	IT	HAPPENED	I	WAS
SPEAKING	 OF	 YOU.	 WHEN,	 AN	 HOUR	 OR	 SO	 LATER,	 MY	 PATIENT
DIED,	 I	 RECALLED	 I	 HAD	 MENTIONED	 YOUR	 NAME,	 AND	 IN
RETROSPECT	IT	FELT
AS	IF	BECAUSE	OF	THAT,	ROSEWATER	HAD	BEEN	SPRINKLED	INTO
THE
ATMOSPHERE.	 IS	 IT	 JUST	 BEING	 FANCIFUL	 TO	 FEEL	 THAT	 SIMPLY
THE
MENTION	 OF	 YOUR	 NAME,	 OR	 EVEN	 A	 BRIEF	 GLIMPSE	 OF	 YOUR
FACE	ON
OUR	LOCKETS,	CAN	IN	SOME	WAY	HAVE	AN	EFFECT	ON	PEOPLE?
It	all	depends	on	you	--	not	on	my	name,	not	on	my	face	on	your	locket,	but	on
your	heart.
If	you	are	talking	about	me	with	deep	love,	with	trust,	with	reverence,	your	heart
creates	a	certain	milieu.	 If	you	are	 talking	not	 just	 from	the	mind	but	 from	the
very	 innermost	core	of	your	being,	 it	 can	happen:	you	can	 feel	as	 if	 rosewater
has	been	sprinkled...	a	great	cleanliness,	a	great	freshness,	a	fragrance.	But	they
are	not	contained	in	my	name	or	in	my	photograph;	those	are	just	instrumental.
The	reality	that	is	created	is	by	your	heart.
There	are	people	who	are	against	me,	who	are	saying	my	name	continually,	and
they	will	never	feel	that	rosewater	has	been	sprinkled.
The	 archbishop	 in	Greece	 has	 some	 source	 of	 information!	As	 I	was	 arrested,
and	 the	 whole	 population	 of	 Saint	 Nicholas	 was	 at	 the	 airport	 to	 show	 their
support	 to	me,	 alone,	 with	 his	 half	 a	 dozen	 old,	 almost	 dead	women,	 he	was
ringing	 the	bell	 of	victory	 --	 that	God	had	won	over	 the	devil,	 that	 I	was	 sent
specially	from	hell	to	destroy	God's	land,	His	church,	His	morality.	It	depends!
To	him	it	may	be	that	my	name	may	give	him	such	electric	shocks	that	he	will
think	that	this	man	must	be	evil.
Just	a	 few	days	before,	when	I	was	here	 in	 the	ministry	of	 interior,	 there	were
many	 people	 --	 a	 great	 crowd.	 Nobody	 recognized	 me	 because	 they	 were	 all
people	either	from	this	country	or	from	Argentina	or	Brazil	where	I	have	never
been.	But	as	I	was	being	taken	in,	one	woman	immediately	pulled	back	her	three
children	and	whispered	to	them,
"Don't	touch	him!"	She	must	have	been	either	English	or	American,	afraid	that	if
you	touch	him,	and	if	he	is	really	the	devil	or	comes	from	hell,	it	is	going	to	be
disastrous.
So	it	all	depends	on	you.
But	 it	 was	 good	 that	 you	 were	 mentioning	 me	 when	 Anna	 Freud,	 Sigmund
Freud's	youngest	daughter,	was	dying,	 and	 she	heard	about	me	with	deep	 love
and	reverence	from	you.	And	she	was	not	an	orthodox	woman.	She	was	really
representative	 of	 Sigmund	 Freud	 --	 the	 same	 quality	 of	 mind,	 the	 same
sharpness,	 the	 same	 fearless	 intelligence	 to	 cut	 through	 all	 nonsense,
superstitions.	She	was	one	of	the	most	significant	women	of	this	century	--	and
sensitive,	alert.
I	hope	 that	what	you	felt,	she	also	may	have	felt	a	 little	bit.	At	 the	moment	of
death,	nothing	could	have	been	a	greater	gift	to	her	--	and	she	deserved	it.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
AN	OLD	TIBETAN	IS	QUOTED	AS	SAYING:
"LIKE	A	LION,	I	HAVE	NO	FEAR.
LIKE	AN	ELEPHANT,	I	HAVE	NO	ANXIETY.
LIKE	A	MADMAN,	I	HAVE	NO	HOPE.
I	TELL	YOU	THE	HONEST	TRUTH."
OSHO,	WHAT	IS	SO	WONDROUS	AND	PRECIOUS	ABOUT	THE	HONEST
TRUTH?
In	fact,	to	use	these	two	words	together	shows	a	deep	misunderstanding.
"Honest	truth"	implies	that	there	can	be	dishonest	truth.
Truth	is	enough.
Honesty	is	a	very	ordinary	quality	that	comes	as	a	shadow	of	truth,	with	many
other	 qualities.	 There	 is	 something	 immensely	 important	 about	 truth.	 But
remember,	never	use	the	words	honest	truth.	That	means	you	have	a	suspicion:
deep	 down	 you	 yourself	 are	 not	 convinced	 of	 the	 truthfulness	 of	 truth.	 To
substitute,	to	compensate,	you	add	honesty	to	it.
Nothing	can	be	added	to	truth.
Truth	is	always	pure,	nude,	alone.
And	 there	 is	 great	 beauty,	 because	 truth	 is	 the	 very	 essence	 of	 life,	 existence,
nature.
Except	 for	man,	nobody	 lies.	A	rosebush	cannot	 lie.	 It	has	 to	produce	 roses;	 it
cannot	produce	marigolds	--	it	cannot	deceive.	It	is	not	possible	for	it	to	be	other
than	it	is.
Except	for	man,	the	whole	existence	lives	in	truth.
Truth	is	the	religion	of	the	whole	of	existence	--	except	man.
And	the	moment	a	man	also	decides	to	become	part	of	existence,	truth	becomes
his	religion.	It	is	the	glorious	moment.
When	 I	 say	 that	 except	 for	 man	 everything	 is	 living	 truth	 --	 the	 ocean,	 the
clouds,	 the	 stars,	 the	 stones,	 the	 flowers	 --	 that	 everything	 is	 nothing	 but
truthfulness,	 nothing	but	 just	 itself,	with	no	mask,	 and	only	man	 is	 capable	of
deceiving	others,	of	deceiving	himself	--
it	 has	 to	 be	 remembered	 that	 this	 is	 a	 great	 opportunity.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 be
condemned,	it	has	to	be	praised,	because	even	if	a	rosebush	or	a	lotus	wants	to
lie,	it	cannot.	Its	truth	is	not	freedom;	its	truth	is	a	bondage.	It	cannot	go	beyond
the	boundaries.
Man	has	the	prerogative,	the	privilege	of	being	untrue.	That	means	man	has	the
freedom	to	choose.	If	he	chooses	to	be	truthful,	he	is	not	choosing	bondage,	he	is
choosing	truth	and	freedom.	Freedom	is	his	privilege.	In	the	whole	of	existence,
nobody	else	has	freedom.
But	 there	 are	 dangers	when	 you	 have	 opportunities.	When	 you	 have	 freedom,
you	can	go	wrong.	No	 rose	can	go	wrong,	no	 rock	can	go	wrong.	You	can	go
wrong;	hence	a	deep	awareness	of	each	act,	of	each	thought,	of	each	feeling,	has
to	penetrate	you.
To	me	that	is	what	is	the	meaning	of	a	seeker	of	truth.
Only	man	needs	to	seek	it;	everybody	has	already	got	it,	but	the	glory	of	freedom
is	not	there.	You	have	to	seek	it,	and	find	it.	And	in	that	very	seeking	and	finding
you	are	glorious,	you	are	the	very	crown	of	existence.
But	truth	is	enough.
Don't	burden	it	with	honesty	or	anything	else.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	CAN	I	THANK	YOU?
There	is	no	need:	just	be	what	you	can	be.
Allow	yourself	to	blossom.
Enjoy	in	glory	--	and	that	will	be	thankfulness	enough.
Anybody	who	blossoms	close	to	me	has	already	shown	his	gratitude.	Saying	it
would	be	profane.	Saying	it	would	destroy	the	beauty	of	the	unsaid,	the	silent.
If	you	have	really	come	to	a	point	when	you	want	to	say	thank	you	to	me,	then
don't	 say	 it;	 I	 will	 understand	 it.	 By	 saying	 it,	 you	 will	 be	 bringing	 down
something	from	a	very	high	level.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	in	India,	one	of	the	oldest	civilizations	in	the
world,	perhaps	the	oldest,	you	rarely	hear	anybody	thanking	somebody	else.	No
child	will	thank	his	parents;	no	parents	will	thank	their	child.	In	the	West	that	is
part	of	your	formal	training:	on	each	occasion	say,	"Thank	you."
I	 was	 thinking	 about	 the	 difference,	 why	 it	 has	 not	 developed	 in	 this	 old
civilization.	And	I	understand...	what	I	said,	that	is	the	reason.	If	you	are	really
thankful,	then	saying	it	is	useless,	because	you	cannot	put	your	heart	into	it.	And
if	you	are	not	thankful,	then	why	unnecessarily	destroy	a	beautiful	word?
And	to	make	it	a	formality	means	you	are	making	it	an	unconscious	part	of	your
behavior.	 So	 just	 as	 somebody	presents	 you	with	 a	 cup	of	 coffee	 and	you	 say
thank	 you,	 if	 somebody	 brings	 enlightenment	 to	 your	 consciousness,	 are	 you
going	 to	 use	 the	 same	 words?	 It	 is	 absolutely	 impossible	 to	 use	 those	 same
words;	they	have	become	so	formal.
You	say	them	without	even	thinking	about	it.	You	simply	say	them	like	a	robot.
It	is	a	good	question,	to	ask	me	how	to	say	thank	you	to	me,	because	there	must
be	 a	 great	 feeling	 of	 gratitude,	 but	 all	 words	 seem	 to	 be	 meaningless.
Thankfulness,	gratefulness	--
they	all	seem	to	be	too	small.	What	has	happened	to	you	is	so	vast.
My	suggestion	is:	you	need	not	give	me	any	thank	you.	I	will	take	it	myself.
It	will	be	so	apparent	through	your	eyes	and	through	your	face,	but	there	will	be
no	need	to	say	it.	I	will	simply	understand	it	from	there.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	Terrorism	is	in	your	unconscious
21	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604210
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO18
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
94
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I'VE	 HEARD	 THAT	 IN	 EUROPE	 THE	 THREAT	 OF	 TERRORISM	 IS
STRIKING
FEAR	 IN	 EVERYONE.	 AIRPLANES	 ARE	 DELAYED	 BY
EXTRAORDINARY
SECURITY	MEASURES,	MANY	OF	THE	SEATS	ARE	EMPTY,	AND	SOME
AIRPORTS	 ARE	 CLOSING.	 PEOPLE	 ARE	 EVEN	 THINKING	 TWICE
ABOUT
GOING	OUT	 IN	THE	EVENING.	AND	ALL	THIS	 IS	MORE	PREVALENT
SINCE
THE	RECENT	BOMBING	OF	LIBYA.	IS	THE	RISE	OF	TERRORISM	OVER
THE
LAST	DECADE	IN	SOME	WAY	SYMBOLIC	OF	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING	TO
SOCIETY	IN	GENERAL?
Everything	is	deeply	related	with	everything	else	that	happens.
The	event	of	terrorism	is	certainly	related	with	what	is	happening	in	the	society.
The	 society	 is	 falling	 apart.	 Its	 old	 order,	 discipline,	 morality,	 religion,
everything	 has	 been	 found	 to	 be	 wrongly	 based.	 It	 has	 lost	 its	 power	 over
people's	conscience.
Terrorism	simply	symbolizes	that	to	destroy	human	beings	does	not	matter,	that
there	 is	nothing	 in	human	beings	which	 is	 indestructible,	 that	 it	 is	all	matter	 --
and	you	cannot	kill	matter,	you	can	only	change	its	form.	Once	man	is	taken	to
be	only	a	combination	of	matter,	and	no	place	is	given	for	a	spiritual	being	inside
him,	then	to	kill	becomes	just	play.
The	nations	are	irrelevant	because	of	nuclear	weapons.	If	the	whole	world	can	be
destroyed	 together	 within	 minutes	 the	 alternative	 can	 only	 be	 that	 the	 whole
world	 should	 be	 together.	 Now	 it	 cannot	 remain	 divided;	 its	 division	 is
dangerous,	because	division	can	become	war	any	moment.	The	division	cannot
be	 tolerated.	 Only	 one	 war	 is	 enough	 to	 destroy	 everything,	 and	 there	 is	 not
much	 time	 left	 for	man	 to	understand	 that	we	should	create	a	world	where	 the
very	possibility	of	war	does	not	exist.
Terrorism	has	many	undercurrents.	One	is	that	because	of	nuclear	weapons,	the
nations	are	pouring	their	energy	into	that	field,	thinking	that	the	old	weapons	are
out	of	date.
They	are	out	of	date,	but	individuals	can	start	using	them.	And	you	cannot	use
nuclear	 weapons	 against	 individuals	 --	 that	 would	 be	 simply	 stupid.	 One
individual	 terrorist	 throws	 a	 bomb	 --	 it	 does	 not	 justify	 that	 a	 nuclear	missile
should	be	sent.
What	I	want	to	emphasize	is	that	the	nuclear	weapon	has	given	individual	people
a	certain	freedom	to	use	old	weapons,	a	freedom	which	was	not	possible	in	the
old	days	because	the	governments	were	also	using	the	same	weapons.
Now	the	governments	are	concentrated	on	destroying	the	old	weapons,	throwing
them	 in	 the	ocean,	 selling	 them	 to	countries	which	are	poor	and	cannot	 afford
nuclear	weapons.
And	 all	 those	 terrorists	 are	 coming	 from	 these	 poor	 countries,	 with	 the	 same
weapons	 that	 have	 been	 sold	 to	 their	 countries.	 And	 they	 have	 a	 strange
protection:	 you	 cannot	 use	 nuclear	 weapons	 against	 them,	 you	 cannot	 throw
atom	bombs	at	them.
They	can	throw	bombs	at	you	and	you	are	suddenly	impotent.	You	have	a	vast
amount	of	atomic	bombs,	nuclear	bombs	in	your	hands	--	but	sometimes	where	a
needle	is	useful,	a	sword	may	not	be	of	any	use.	You	may	have	the	sword;	that
does	not	mean	that	you	are	necessarily	in	a	superior	position	to	the	man	who	has
a	needle,	because	 there	are	purposes	 in	which	only	 the	needle	will	work	--	 the
sword	will	not	be	of	any	use.
Those	small	weapons	from	the	old	times	were	piling	up,	and	the	big	powers	had
to	 dispose	 of	 them	 --	 either	 drown	 them	 in	 the	 ocean....	 That	meant	 so	much
money,	so	much	manpower,	so	much	energy	had	gone	to	waste;	economically	it
was	 disastrous.	 But	 just	 to	 go	 on	 piling	 them	 up	 was	 also	 economically
impossible.	How	many	weapons	can	you	gather?	There	is	a	limit.	And	when	you
get	a	new	way	of	killing	people	more	efficiently,	 then	the	old	simply	has	to	be
got	rid	of.
It	 was	 thought	 that	 it	 would	 be	 better	 to	 sell	 them	 to	 poor	 countries.	 Poor
countries	cannot	create	nuclear	weapons	--	it	costs	too	much.	And	these	weapons
were	 coming	 cheap	 --	 as	 help;	 they	 accepted	 it,	 but	 these	weapons	 cannot	 be
used	in	a	war.	In	a	war	these	weapons	are	already	useless.	But	nobody	has	seen
the	 possibility	 that	 these	 weapons	 can	 be	 used	 individually,	 and	 a	 new
phenomenon	--	terrorism	--	can	come	out	of	it.
Now,	 a	 terrorist	 has	 a	 strange	 power,	 even	 over	 the	 greatest	 powers.	 He	 can
throw	bombs	at	the	White	House	without	any	fear,	because	what	you	have	is	too
big	and	you	cannot	throw	it	at	him.	And	these	are	the	weapons	sold	by	you!	But
the	 phenomenon	 was	 not	 conceived	 of,	 because	 human	 psychology	 is	 not
understood.
My	understanding	 is	 that	 the	way	he	has	 lived,	man	needs	every	 ten	 to	 twelve
years	--	a	war.	He	accumulates	so	much	anger,	so	much	rage,	so	much	violence,
that	nothing	short	of	a	war	will	give	him	release.	So,	war	after	war,	there	is	a	gap
of	only	ten	to	fifteen	years.	That	gap	is	a	kind	of	relaxation.	But	again	you	start
accumulating,	because	the	same	psychology	is	working	--	the	same	jealousy,	the
same	violence.
And	man	is	basically	a	hunter;	he	is	not	by	nature	vegetarian.	First	he	became	a
hunter,	and	for	thousands	of	years	he	was	just	a	meat-eater,	and	cannibalism	was
prevalent	everywhere.	To	eat	human	beings	caught	from	the	opposing	tribe	you
were	fighting	with	was	perfectly	ethical.	All	that	is	carried	in	the	unconscious	of
humanity.
Religions	have	imposed	things	on	man	very	superficially;	his	unconscious	is	not
in	agreement.	Every	man	is	living	in	a	disagreement	with	himself.	So	whenever
he	can	find	a	chance	--	for	a	beautiful	cause;	freedom,	democracy,	socialism	--
any	beautiful	word	can	become	an	umbrella	to	hide	his	ugly	unconscious,	which
simply	wants	to	destroy	and	enjoys	destruction.
Now	the	world	war	has	become	almost	impossible;	otherwise	there	would	have
been	no	terrorism.	Enough	time	has	passed	since	the	second	world	war;	the	third
world	war	should	have	happened	nearabout	1960.	It	has	not	happened.	This	has
been	the	routine	for	the	whole	of	history,	and	man	is	programmed	for	it.
It	 has	 been	 observed	 by	 psychologists	 that	 in	wartime	 people	 are	more	 happy
than	in	peacetime.	In	wartime	their	life	has	a	thrill;	in	peacetime	they	look	bored.
In	wartime,	early	in	the	morning	they	are	searching	for	the	newspaper,	listening
to	the	radio.	Things	may	be	happening	far	away,	but	they	are	excited.	Something
in	them	feels	an	affinity.
A	war	 that	 should	have	happened	 somewhere	between	1955	 and	1960	has	 not
happened,	and	man	is	burdened	with	the	desire	to	kill,	with	the	desire	to	destroy.
It	is	just	that	he	wants	good	names	for	it.
Terrorism	is	going	to	become	bigger	and	bigger,	because	the	third	world	war	is
almost	 impossible.	 And	 the	 stupid	 politicians	 have	 no	 other	 alternative.
Terrorism	simply	means	that	what	was	being	done	on	a	social	scale	now	has	to
be	done	individually.	It	will	grow.
It	can	only	be	prevented	if	we	change	the	very	base	of	human	understanding	--
which	is	a	Himalayan	task;	more	so	because	these	same	people	whom	you	want
to	change	will	fight	you;	they	won't	allow	you	to	change	them	easily.
In	fact	they	love	bloodshed;	they	don't	have	the	courage	to	say	so.	In	one	of	the
existentialist's	novels,	there	is	a	beautiful	incident	which	can	almost	be	said	to	be
true.	A	man	is	presented	before	 the	court	because	he	has	killed	a	stranger	who
was	sitting	on	the	beach.	He	had	never	seen	the	stranger.	He	did	not	kill	him	for
money.	He	does	not	yet	know	how	that	man	looked,	because	he	killed	him	from
the	back,	just	with	a	big	knife.
They	 had	 never	met	 --	 there	was	 no	 question	 of	 enmity.	 They	were	 not	 even
familiar;	they	had	not	even	seen	each	other's	faces.
The	magistrate	could	not	figure	it	out,	and	he	asked	the	murderer,	"Why	did	you
do	it?"
He	said,	"When	I	stabbed	that	man	with	a	knife,	and	a	fountain	of	blood	came
out	of	his	back,	that	was	one	of	the	most	beautiful	moments	I	have	ever	known.	I
know	that	the	price	will	be	my	death,	but	I	am	ready	to	pay	for	it;	it	was	worth	it.
My	whole	life	I	have	lived	in	boredom	--	no	excitement,	no	adventure.	Finally	I
had	to	decide	to	do	something.
And	this	act	has	made	me	world	famous;	my	picture	is	in	every	newspaper.	And
I	am	perfectly	happy	that	I	did	it."
There	 was	 no	 need	 for	 any	 evidence.	 The	 man	 was	 not	 denying	 --	 on	 the
contrary,	he	was	glorifying	it.	But	the	court	has	its	own	routine	way	--	witnesses
still	 have	 to	 be	 produced;	 just	 his	word	 cannot	 be	 accepted.	 He	may	 have	 be
lying,	he	may	not	have	killed	the	man.
Nobody	 saw	 him	 --	 there	 was	 not	 a	 single	 eyewitness	 --	 so	 circumstantial
evidences	had	to	be	presented	by	the	police.
One	of	them	was	that	possibly	this	man	has	killed	according	to	his	past	life	and
his	background.	When	he	was	young,	his	mother	died.	And	when	he	heard	that
his	mother	had	died,	he	said,	"Shit!	That	woman	will	not	 leave	me	even	while
dying!	It	is	Sunday,	and	I	have	booked	tickets	for	the	theater	with	my	girlfriend.
But	 I	 knew	 she	would	 do	 something	 to	 destroy	my	whole	 day	 --	 and	 she	 has
destroyed	it."
His	mother	has	died	and	he	is	saying	that	she	has	destroyed	his	Sunday!	He	was
going	to	the	theater	with	his	girlfriend,	and	now	he	has	to	go	to	the	funeral.	And
the	people	who	heard	his	 reaction	were	shocked.	They	said,	"This	 is	not	 right,
what	are	you	saying?"
He	said,	"What?	What	is	right	and	what	is	wrong?	Couldn't	she	die	on	any	other
day?
There	are	seven	days	 in	 the	week	--	from	Monday	to	Saturday,	she	could	have
died	any	day.	But	you	don't	know	my	mother	--	I	know	her.	She	is	a	bitch!	She
did	it	on	purpose."
The	second	evidence	was	that	he	attended	the	funeral,	and	in	the	evening	he	was
found	dancing	with	his	girlfriend	in	a	disco.	And	somebody	asked,	"What!	What
are	you	doing?
Your	mother	has	just	died."
He	said,	"So	what?	Do	you	mean	now	I	can	never	dance	again?	My	mother	 is
never	going	to	be	alive,	she	will	remain	dead;	so	what	does	it	matter	whether	I
dance	 after	 six	 hours,	 eight	 hours,	 eight	 months,	 eight	 years?	 What	 does	 it
matter?	--	she	is	dead.	And	I	have	to	dance	and	I	have	to	live	and	I	have	to	love,
in	spite	of	her	death.	If	everybody	stopped	living	with	the	death	of	their	mother,
with	the	death	of	their	father,	then	there	would	be	no	dance	in	the	world,	no	song
in	the	world."
His	logic	is	very	right.	He	is	saying,	"Where	do	you	draw	the	demarcation	line?
After	how	many	hours	can	I	dance?	--	twelve	hours,	fourteen	hours,	six	weeks?
Where	will	 you	 draw	 the	 line?	 on	what	 grounds?	What	 is	 the	 criterion?	 So	 it
doesn't	matter.	One	thing	is	certain:	whenever	I	dance	I	will	be	dancing	after	the
death	of	my	mother,	so	I	decided	to	dance	today.	Why	wait	for	tomorrow?"
Such	 circumstantial	 evidences	 are	 presented	 to	 the	 court	 --	 that	 this	 man	 is
strange,	he	can	do	such	an	act.	But	if	you	look	closely	at	this	poor	man,	you	will
not	feel	angry	at	him;	you	will	feel	very	compassionate.	Now,	it	is	not	his	fault
that	his	mother	has	died;	and	anyway,	he	has	to	dance	some	day,	so	it	makes	no
difference.	You	cannot	blame	this	man	for	saying	ugly	things:	"She	deliberately
died	on	Sunday	to	spoil	my	joy,"	because	his	whole	experience	of	life	must	have
been	that	she	was	again	and	again	spoiling	any	possibility	of	 joy.	This	was	the
last	conclusion:	"Even	in	death	she	will	not	leave	me."
And	you	 cannot	 condemn	 the	man	 for	 killing	 a	 stranger...	 because	 he	 is	 not	 a
thief;	he	did	not	take	anything	from	him.	He	is	not	an	enemy;	he	did	not	even	see
who	was	the	man	he	was	killing.	He	was	simply	bored	with	life	and	he	wanted	to
do	something	that	made	him	feel	significant,	important.	He	is	happy	that	all	the
newspapers	have	his	photo.	If	they	had	published	his	photo	before,	he	would	not
have	killed;	but	they	waited	--	until	he	kills	they	will	not	publish	his	photo.	And
he	wanted	to	be	a	celebrity...	just	ordinary	human	desires.
And	he	was	ready	to	pay	with	his	life	to	become,	at	least	for	one	day,	known	to
the	whole	world,	recognized	by	everybody.	Until	we	change	the	basic	grounds	of
humanity,	 terrorism	 is	 going	 to	 become	 more	 and	 more	 a	 normal,	 everyday
affair.	 It	will	 happen	 in	 the	 airplanes,	 it	will	 happen	 in	 the	 buses.	 It	will	 start
happening	 in	 the	 cars.	 It	 will	 start	 happening	 to	 strangers.	 Somebody	 will
suddenly	come	and	shoot	you	--	not	that	you	have	done	anything	to	him,	but	just,
the	hunter	is	back.
The	hunter	was	satisfied	in	the	war.	Now	the	war	has	stopped	and	perhaps	there
is	no	possibility	for	it.
The	hunter	is	back;	now	we	cannot	fight	collectively.	Each	individual	has	to	do
something	to	release	his	own	steam.
Things	 are	 interconnected.	 The	 first	 thing	 that	 has	 to	 be	 changed	 is	 that	 man
should	be	made	more	 rejoicing	 --	which	all	 the	 religions	have	killed.	The	 real
criminals	are	not	caught.	These	are	the	victims,	the	terrorists	and	other	criminals.
It	is	all	the	religions	who	are	the	real	criminals,	because	they	have	destroyed	all
possibilities	of	rejoicing.	They	have	destroyed	the	possibility	of	enjoying	small
things	of	life;	they	have	condemned	everything	that	nature	provides	you	to	make
you	happy,	to	make	you	feel	excited,	feel	pleasant.
They	have	taken	everything	away;	and	if	they	have	not	been	able	to	take	a	few
things	 away	 because	 they	 are	 so	 ingrained	 in	 your	 biology	 --	 like	 sex	 --	 they
have	at	least	been	able	to	poison	them.
Friedrich	Nietzsche,	according	to	me,	is	one	of	the	greatest	seers	of	the	Western
world;	his	eyes	really	go	penetrating	to	the	very	root	of	a	problem.	But	because
others	 could	 not	 see	 it	 --	 their	 eyes	 were	 not	 so	 penetrating,	 nor	 was	 their
intelligence	 so	 sharp	 --	 the	 man	 lived	 alone,	 abandoned,	 isolated,	 unloved,
unrespected.
He	 says	 in	 one	 of	 his	 statements	 that	 man	 has	 been	 taught	 by	 religions	 to
condemn	sex,	to	renounce	sex.	Religion	has	not	been	able	to	manage	it;	and	man
has	 tried	hard	but	has	 failed,	because	 it	 is	 so	deeply	 rooted	 in	his	biology	 --	 it
constitutes	 his	whole	 body.	He	 is	 born	 out	 of	 sex	 --	 how	 can	 he	 get	 rid	 of	 it
except	by	committing	suicide?
So	man	has	tried,	and	religions	have	helped	him	to	get	rid	of	it	--	thousands	of
disciplines	and	strategies	have	been	used.	The	total	result	is	that	sex	is	there,	but
poisoned.	That	word	poisoned	is	a	tremendous	insight.	Religions	have	not	been
able	to	take	it	away,	but	they	have	been	certainly	successful	in	poisoning	it.
And	the	same	is	the	situation	about	other	things:	religions	are	condemning	your
living	 in	 comfort.	 Now,	 a	 man	 who	 is	 living	 in	 comfort	 and	 luxury	 cannot
become	a	terrorist.
Religions	 have	 condemned	 riches,	 praised	 poverty;	 now,	 a	 man	 who	 is	 rich
cannot	be	a	 terrorist.	Only	 the	"blessed	ones"	who	are	poor	can	be	 terrorists	 --
because	they	have	nothing	to	lose,	and	they	are	boiling	up	against	the	whole	of
society	because	others	have	things	they	don't	have.
Religions	 have	 been	 trying	 to	 console	 them.	 But	 then	 came	 communism	 --	 a
materialist	 religion	 --	 which	 provoked	 people	 and	 said	 to	 them,	 "Your	 old
religions	are	all	opium	to	the	people,	and	it	is	not	because	of	your	evil	actions	in
this	 life	or	 in	past	 lives	 that	you	are	suffering	poverty.	 It	 is	because	of	 the	evil
exploitation	of	the	bourgeois,	the	super-rich	that	you	are	suffering."
The	last	sentence	in	Karl	Marx's	COMMUNIST	MANIFESTO	is:	Proletariats	of
the	whole	world	unite;	you	have	nothing	to	lose	and	you	have	the	whole	world	to
gain.
"You	are	already	poor,	hungry,	naked	--	so	what	can	you	lose?	Your	death	will
not	make	you	more	miserable	 than	your	 life	 is	making	you.	So	why	not	 take	a
chance	 and	 destroy	 those	 people	 who	 have	 taken	 everything	 away	 from	 you.
And	take	those	things	back,	distribute	them."
What	 religions	 have	 somehow	 been	 consoling	 people	 with	 --	 although	 it	 was
wrong	and	it	was	cunning	and	it	was	a	lie,	but	it	kept	people	in	a	state	of	being
half	asleep	--
communism	suddenly	made	them	aware	of.	That	means	this	world	is	now	never
going	 to	 be	 peaceful	 if	 we	 don't	 withdraw	 all	 the	 rotten	 ideas	 that	 have	 been
implanted	in	man.
The	 first	 are	 the	 religions	 --	 their	 values	 should	 be	 removed	 so	 that	man	 can
smile	again,	can	laugh	again,	can	rejoice	again,	can	be	natural	again.
Second,	what	 communism	 is	 saying	 has	 to	 be	 put	 clearly	 before	 the	 people	 --
that	it	is	psychologically	wrong.	You	are	falling	from	one	trap	into	another.	No
two	men	are	equal;	hence	the	idea	of	equality	is	nonsense.	And	if	you	decide	to
be	 equal	 then	 you	 have	 to	 accept	 a	 dictatorship	 of	 the	 proletariat.	That	means
you	have	to	lose	your	freedom.
First	 the	 church	 took	 away	 your	 freedom,	 the	 God	 took	 away	 your	 freedom.
Now	communism	replaces	your	church,	and	it	will	take	away	your	freedom.
And	without	freedom	you	cannot	rejoice.
You	 live	 in	 fear,	not	 in	 joy.	 If	we	can	clean	 the	basement	of	 the	human	mind's
unconscious...	and	that's	what	my	work	is.	It	can	be	cleaned	away.
The	 terrorism	 is	 not	 in	 the	 bombs,	 in	 your	 hands;	 the	 terrorism	 is	 in	 your
unconscious.
Otherwise,	 this	 state	 of	 affairs	 is	 going	 to	 grow	more	 bitter.	 And	 it	 seems	 all
kinds	 of	 blind	 people	 have	 bombs	 in	 their	 hands	 and	 are	 throwing	 them	 at
random.
The	third	world	war	would	have	released	people	for	ten	or,	fifteen	years.	But	the
third	world	war	cannot	happen	because	 if	 it	happens	 it	won't	 relieve	people,	 it
will	only	destroy	people.
So	individual	violence	will	increase	--	it	is	increasing.	And	all	your	governments
and	 all	 your	 religions	 will	 go	 on	 perpetuating	 the	 old	 strategies	 without
understanding	the	new	situation.
The	 new	 situation	 is	 that	 every	 human	 being	 needs	 to	 go	 through	 therapies,
needs	to	understand	his	unconscious	intentions,	needs	to	go	through	meditations
so	that	he	can	calm	down,	become	cool	--	and	look	towards	the	world	with	a	new
perspective,	of	silence.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHENEVER	 IN	 LIFE	 I'VE	 HAD	A	 BOUT	OF	 FEELING	MISERABLE,	 A
POINT
ALWAYS	COMES	WHEN	I	JUST	LAUGH	AT	MYSELF,	FEEL	FREEDOM
RETURN,	 AND	 SEE	 THAT	 ALL	 I	 HAD	 DONE	WAS	 TO	 STOP	 LOVING
MYSELF.
THIS	 INSIGHT	 IN	 ITSELF	 IS	 PERHAPS	 NOT	 PARTICULARLY
PROFOUND	BUT
AT	THE	MOMENT	OF	 ITS	REALIZATION,	 I	AM	ALWAYS	AMAZED	TO
SEE
HOW	 EASILY,	 FOR	WHAT,	 AND	 FOR	 HOW	 LONG	 I	 AM	WILLING	 TO
FORSAKE
MY	OWN	SELF-LOVE.	IS	THIS	AT	THE	ROOTS	OF	MOST	PEOPLE'S
SUFFERING,	OR	IS	IT	JUST	MY	TRIP?
It	is	not	just	your	trip.	It	is	at	the	root	of	most	people's	suffering	--	but	not	with
the	meaning	you	are	giving	to	it.
It	is	not	because	you	have	stopped	loving	yourself	that	you	fall	in	misery.
It	 is	 that	you	have	created	a	self	which	does	not	exist	at	all,	so	sometimes	this
unreal	self	suffers	misery	in	loving	others,	because	out	of	unreality,	 love	is	not
possible.	And	 it	 is	 not	 on	one	 side:	 two	unrealities	 trying	 to	 love	 each	other...
sooner	 or	 later	 this	 arrangement	 is	 going	 to	 fail.	When	 this	 arrangement	 fails,
you	 fall	 upon	 yourself	 --	 there	 is	 nowhere	 else	 to	 go.	 So	 you	 think,	 "I	 had
forgotten	to	love	myself."
In	a	way	it	is	a	small	relief,	at	least	instead	of	two	unrealities	now	you	have	only
one.	But	what	will	you	do	by	loving	yourself?	And	how	long	you	can	manage	to
remain	loving	yourself?	It	is	unreal;	it	won't	allow	you	to	see	it	for	a	long	time
because	 that	 is	dangerous:	 if	you	see	 it	 for	a	 long	 time,	 this	 so-called	self	will
disappear,	and	that	will	be	a	real	freedom	from	misery.
Love	will	remain,	unaddressed,	to	someone	else	or	to	yourself.
Love	will	 remain	 unaddressed,	 because	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 address,	 and	when
love	is	there	unaddressed,	there	is	great	bliss.
But	this	unreal	self	won't	allow	you	much	time.	Soon	you	will	be	falling	in	love
with	 someone	 else	 again,	 because	 the	 unreal	 self	 needs	 the	 support	 of	 other
unrealities.	So	people	fall	in	love	and	fall	out	of	love	and	fall	in	love	and	fall	out
of	love	--	and	strange	is	the	phenomenon,	that	dozens	of	times	they	do	it	and	still
they	don't	see	the	point.	They	are	miserable	when	they	are	in	love	with	someone
else;	they	are	miserable	when	they	are	alone	and	not	in	love,	a	bit	relieved	--	for
the	moment.
In	India,	when	a	person	dies,	people	carry	him	on	a	stretcher-like	construction	on
their	shoulders.	But	they	go	on	changing	it	on	the	way,	on	their	shoulders	--	from
this	shoulder	they	will	put	it	on	the	right,	and	after	a	few	minutes	they	will	again
change	 and	 put	 it	 on	 the	 left.	 It	 feels	 a	 relief	 when	 you	 put	 it	 from	 the	 left
shoulder	onto	the	right.	Nothing	is	being	changed	--	the	weight	is	there,	and	on
you,	but	 this	 left	shoulder	feels	a	kind	of	relief.	 It	 is	momentary,	because	soon
the	right	shoulder	will	start	hurting	so	you	will	have	to	change	it	again.
And	this	is	what	your	life	is.	You	go	on	changing	the	other,	thinking	that	perhaps
this	woman,	this	man,	will	bring	you	the	paradise	you	have	always	been	longing
for.	But	everybody	brings	hell	--	without	fail!	And	nobody	is	to	be	condemned
for	 it,	 because	 they	 are	 doing	 exactly	 the	 same	 as	 you	 are	 doing:	 they	 are
carrying	an	unreal	self	out	of	which	nothing	can	grow.	 It	cannot	blossom.	It	 is
empty	--	decorated,	but	inside	empty	and	hollow.
So	when	you	see	somebody	from	far	away	he	or	she	is	appealing.	As	you	come
closer	the	appeal	becomes	less.	When	you	meet,	it	is	not	a	meeting	but	a	clash.
And	suddenly	you	see	 the	other	person	 is	empty,	and	you	have	been	deceived,
cheated,	because	the	other	person	has	nothing	which	had	been	promised.
The	same	 is	 the	situation	of	 the	other	person	about	you.	All	promises	 fail,	and
you	become	 a	 burden	 to	 each	other,	 a	misery	 to	 each	other,	 a	 sadness	 to	 each
other,	destructive	to	each	other.	You	separate.	For	a	little	while	there	is	relief,	but
your	 inner	 unreality	 cannot	 leave	 you	 in	 this	 state	 for	 long;	 soon	 you	will	 be
searching	for	another	woman,	another	man,	and	you	will	get	into	the	same	trap.
Only	the	faces	are	different;	the	inner	reality	is	the	same	--	empty.
If	 you	 really	 want	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 misery	 and	 suffering	 then	 you	 will	 have	 to
understand	--
you	don't	 have	 a	 self.	Then	 it	will	 be	 not	 just	 a	 small	 relief	 but	 a	 tremendous
relief.	And	if	you	don't	have	a	self,	the	need	for	the	other	disappears.	It	was	the
need	of	the	unreal	self	to	go	on	being	nourished	by	the	other.	You	don't	need	the
other.
And	listen	carefully:	when	you	don't	need	the	other,	you	can	love.
And	that	love	will	not	bring	misery.
Going	beyond	needs,	demands,	desires,	love	becomes	a	very	soft	sharing,	a	great
understanding.	 When	 you	 understand	 yourself,	 that	 very	 day	 you	 have
understood	the	whole	of	humanity.	Then	nobody	can	make	you	miserable.	You
know	 that	 they	 are	 suffering	 from	 an	 unreal	 self,	 and	 they	 are	 throwing	 their
misery	on	anybody	who	is	close	by.
Your	love	will	make	you	capable	of	helping	the	person	you	love	to	get	rid	of	the
self.
I	know	only	of	one	present....
Love	can	present	you	only	with	one	thing:	That	you	are	not,	that	your	self	is	just
imaginary.	 This	 realization	 between	 two	 persons	 suddenly	 makes	 them	 one,
because	 two	 nothings	 cannot	 be	 two.	 Two	 somethings	 will	 be	 two,	 but	 two
nothings	 cannot	 be	 two:	 Two	 nothings	 start	 melting	 and	 merging.	 They	 are
bound	to	become	one.
For	example,	 if	we	are	 sitting	here....	 If	 everybody	 is	 an	ego	 then	 there	are	 so
many	people;	 they	can	be	counted.	But	 there	are	moments	I	can	see	--	perhaps
many	 times	 you	 see	 them	 too	 --	when	 there	 is	 utter	 silence.	 Then	 you	 cannot
count	how	many	people	are	here.	There	is	only	one	consciousness,	one	silence,
one	nothingness,	one	selflessness.
And	only	in	that	state	can	two	persons	live	in	eternal	joy,	can	any	group	live	in
tremendous	beauty;	the	whole	of	humanity	can	live	in	great	benediction.
But	try	to	see	the	self,	and	you	will	not	find	it.
Not	 finding	 it	 is	 of	 great	 importance.	 I	 have	 told	 many	 times	 the	 story	 of
Bodhidharma	 and	his	meeting	with	 the	Chinese	 emperor	Wu	 --	 a	 very	 strange
meeting,	very	fruitful.
Emperor	Wu	perhaps	was	at	that	time	the	greatest	emperor	in	the	world;	he	ruled
all	over	China,	Mongolia,	Korea,	the	whole	of	Asia,	except	India.
He	became	convinced	of	the	truth	of	Gautam	Buddha's	teachings,	but	the	people
who	 had	 brought	 the	 message	 of	 Buddha	 were	 scholars.	 None	 of	 them	 were
mystics.	And	then	the	news	came	that	Bodhidharma	was	coming,	and	there	was
a	great	thrill	all	over	the	land.
Because	Emperor	Wu	had	become	influenced	by	Gautam	Buddha,	that	had	made
his	whole	 empire	 influenced	 by	 the	 same	 teaching.	And	 now	 a	 real	mystic,	 a
buddha,	was	coming.	It	was	such	a	great	joy!
Emperor	Wu	had	never	 before	 come	 to	 the	boundaries	where	 India	 and	China
meet	 to	receive	anyone.	With	great	 respect	he	welcomed	Bodhidharma,	and	he
asked	 ,	 "I	 have	 been	 asking	 all	 the	 monks	 and	 the	 scholars	 who	 have	 been
coming,	but	nobody	has	been	of	any	help	--	I	have	tried	everything.	But	how	to
get	rid	of	this	self?	And	Buddha	says,	Ùnless	you	become	a	no-self,	your	misery
cannot	end.'"
He	 was	 sincere.	 Bodhidharma	 looked	 into	 his	 eyes,	 and	 he	 said,	 "I	 will	 be
staying	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 river	 near	 the	 mountain	 in	 the	 temple.	 Tomorrow
morning,	at	four	o'clock	exactly,	you	come	and	I	will	finish	this	self	forever.	But
remember,	 you	 are	 not	 to	 bring	 any	 arms	with	you,	 any	guards	with	you;	 you
have	to	come	alone."
Wu	was	a	 little	worried	 --	 the	man	was	strange!	 "How	can	he	 just	destroy	my
self	so	quickly?	It	 takes	--	 it	has	been	told	by	the	scholars	--	 lives	and	lives	of
meditation;	then	the	self	disappears.	This	man	is	weird!	And	he	is	wanting	me	in
the	darkness,	early	in	the	morning	at	four	o'clock,	alone,	even	without	a	sword,
no	guards,	no	other	companion.
This	man	seems	to	be	strange	--	he	could	do	anything.
And	what	does	he	mean	 that	he	will	 kill	 the	 self	 forever?	He	can	kill	me,	but
how	will	he	kill	the	self?"
The	whole	night	he	could	not	sleep.	He	changed	his	mind	again	and	again	--	to
go	 or	 not	 to	 go?	 But	 there	 was	 something	 in	 the	 man's	 eyes,	 and	 there	 was
something	in	his	voice,	and	there	was	some	aura	of	authority	when	he	said,	"Just
come	at	 four	o'clock	sharp,	and	I	will	 finish	 this	self	 forever!	You	need	not	be
worried	about	it."
What	he	said	looked	absurd,	but	the	way	he	said	it,	and	the	way	he	looked	were
so	authoritative:	he	knows	what	he	is	saying.	Finally	Wu	had	to	decide	to	go.	He
decided	 to	 risk,	 "At	 the	 most	 he	 can	 kill	 me	 --	 what	 else?	 And	 I	 have	 tried
everything.	I	cannot	attain	this	no-self,	and	without	attaining	this	no-self	there	is
no	end	to	misery."
He	 knocked	 on	 the	 temple	 door,	 and	 Bodhidharma	 said,	 "I	 knew	 you	 would
come;	I	knew	also	that	the	whole	night	you	would	be	changing	your	mind.	But
that	does	not	matter	--
you	have	come.	Now	sit	down	 in	 the	 lotus	posture,	 close	your	 eyes,	 and	 I	 am
going	to	sit	in	front	of	you.
"The	moment	 you	 find,	 inside,	 your	 self,	 catch	 hold	 of	 it	 so	 I	 can	 kill	 it.	 Just
catch	hold	of	it	tightly	and	tell	me	that	you	have	caught	it,	and	I	will	kill	it	and	it
will	be	finished.	It	is	a	question	of	minutes."
Wu	was	a	little	afraid.	Bodhidharma	looked	like	a	madman;	he	is	painted	like	a
madman	-
-	he	was	not	 like	 that,	but	 the	paintings	are	symbolic.	That's	 the	 impression	he
must	have	left	on	people.	It	was	not	his	real	face,	but	that	must	be	the	face	that
people	were	remembering.
He	was	sitting	with	his	big	staff	in	front	of	Wu,	and	he	said	to	him,	"Don't	miss	a
second.
Just	 the	moment	you	catch	hold	of	 it	 --	search	inside	every	nook	and	corner	--
open	your	eyes	and	then	tell	me	that	you	have	caught	it,	and	I	will	finish	it."
Then	 there	 was	 silence.	 One	 hour	 passed,	 two	 hours	 passed	 and	 the	 sun	 was
rising,	and	Wu	was	a	different	man.	In	those	two	hours	he	looked	inside	himself,
in	every	nook	and	corner.	He	had	to	look	--	that	man	was	sitting	there;	he	could
have	hit	him	on	his	head	with	his	staff.
You	could	expect	anything;	whatever....	He	was	not	a	man	of	etiquette,	manner;
he	was	not	part	of	Wu's	court,	so	he	had	to	look	intently,	intensively.	And	as	he
looked,	 he	became	 relaxed,	 because	 it	was	nowhere.	And	 in	 looking	 for	 it,	 all
thoughts	disappeared.
The	search	was	 so	 intense	 that	his	whole	energy	was	 involved	 in	 it;	 there	was
nothing	left	to	think	and	desire,	and	this	and	that.
As	the	sun	was	rising	Bodhidharma	saw	Wu's	face;	he	was	not	the	same	man	--
such	silence,	such	depth.	He	had	disappeared.	Bodhidharma	shook	him	and	told
him,	"Open	your	eyes	--	it	is	not	there.	I	don't	have	to	kill	it.	I	am	a	nonviolent
man,	I	don't	kill	anything!	But	this	self	does	not	exist.	Because	you	never	look	at
it,	it	goes	on	existing.	It	is	in	your	not	looking	for	it,	in	your	unawareness,	that	it
exists.	Now	it	is	gone."
Two	hours	had	passed,	and	Wu	was	immensely	glad.	He	had	never	tasted	such
sweetness,	such	freshness,	such	newness,	such	beauty.	And	he	was	not.
Bodhidharma	had	fulfilled	his	promise.	Emperor	Wu	bowed	down,	touched	his
feet	 and	 said,	 "Please	 forgive	me	 thinking	 that	you	are	mad,	 thinking	 that	you
don't	know	manners,	thinking	that	you	you	are	weird,	thinking	that	you	you	can
be	 dangerous.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 a	more	 compassionate	man	 than	 you...	 I	 am
totally	fulfilled.	Now	there	is	no	question	in	me."
Emperor	Wu	said	that	when	he	died,	on	his	grave,	the	memorial,	Bodhidharma's
statement	 should	 be	 engraved	 in	 gold,	 for	 the	 people	 in	 centuries	 to	 come	 to
know..."There	 was	 a	 man	 who	 looked	 mad,	 but	 who	 was	 capable	 of	 doing
miracles.
Without	 doing	 anything	 he	 helped	 me	 to	 be	 a	 non-self.	 And	 since	 then
everything	has	changed.	Everything	is	the	same	but	I	am	not	the	same,	and	life
has	become	just	a	pure	song	of	silence."
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	Step	aside,	let	the	mind	pass
21	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604215
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO19
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
81
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
SOMETIMES,	WHEN	DARK	SIDES	OF	MY	MIND	COME	UP,	IT	REALLY
SCARES	ME.	 IT	 IS	VERY	DIFFICULT	FOR	ME	TO	ACCEPT	THAT	 IT	 IS
JUST
THE	 POLAR	 OPPOSITE	 OF	 THE	 BRIGHT	 ONES.	 I	 FEEL	 DIRTY	 AND
GUILTY
AND	NOT	WORTHY	OF	SITTING	WITH	YOU	IN	YOUR	IMMACULATE
PRESENCE.
I	 WANT	 TO	 FACE	 ALL	 FACETS	 OF	 MY	 MIND	 AND	 ACCEPT	 THEM
BECAUSE	 I	 HEAR	 YOU	 OFTEN	 SAY	 THAT	 ACCEPTANCE	 IS	 THE
CONDITION	TO
TRANSCEND	THE	MIND.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	TALK	ABOUT	ACCEPTANCE?
The	basic	thing	to	be	understood	is	that	you	are	not	the	mind	--	neither	the	bright
one	 nor	 the	 dark	 one.	 If	 you	 get	 identified	 with	 the	 beautiful	 part,	 then	 it	 is
impossible	 to	disidentify	yourself	 from	the	ugly	part;	 they	are	 two	sides	of	 the
same	 coin.	 You	 can	 have	 it	 whole,	 or	 you	 can	 throw	 it	 away	whole,	 but	 you
cannot	divide	it.
And	 the	 whole	 anxiety	 of	 man	 is	 that	 he	 wants	 to	 choose	 that	 which	 looks
beautiful,	bright;	he	wants	to	choose	all	the	silver	linings,	leaving	the	dark	cloud
behind.	But	he	does	not	know	 that	 silver	 linings	cannot	 exist	without	 the	dark
cloud.	The	dark	cloud	is	the	background,	absolutely	necessary	for	silver	linings
to	show.
Choosing	is	anxiety.
Choosing	is	creating	trouble	for	yourself.
Being	 choiceless	means:	 the	mind	 is	 there	 and	 it	 has	 a	 dark	 side	 and	 it	 has	 a
bright	side	--
so	what?	What	has	it	to	do	with	you?	Why	should	you	be	worried	about	it?
The	 moment	 you	 are	 not	 choosing,	 all	 worry	 disappears.	 A	 great	 acceptance
arises,	that	this	is	how	the	mind	has	to	be,	this	is	the	nature	of	the	mind	--	and	it
is	not	your	problem,	because	you	are	not	the	mind.	If	you	were	the	mind,	there
would	 have	 been	 no	 problem	 at	 all.	 Then	who	would	 choose	 and	who	would
think	of	transcending?	And	who	would	try	to	accept	and	understand	acceptance?
You	are	separate,	totally	separate.
You	are	only	a	witness	and	nothing	else.
But	you	 are	being	 an	observer	who	gets	 identified	with	 anything	 that	 he	 finds
pleasant	--
and	forgets	that	the	unpleasant	is	coming	just	behind	it	as	a	shadow.	You	are	not
troubled	by	 the	pleasant	 side	 --	 you	 rejoice	 in	 it.	The	 trouble	 comes	when	 the
polar	opposite	asserts	--	then	you	are	torn	apart.
But	you	started	the	whole	trouble.	Falling	from	being	just	a	witness,	you	became
identified.	The	biblical	story	of	the	fall	is	just	a	fiction.	But	this	is	the	real	fall	--
the	 fall	 from	being	a	witness	 into	getting	 identified	with	 something	and	 losing
your	witnessing.
Just	try	once	in	a	while:	Let	the	mind	be	whatever	it	is.	Remember,	you	are	not
it.	And	 you	 are	 going	 to	 have	 a	 great	 surprise.	As	 you	 are	 less	 identified,	 the
mind	 starts	 becoming	 less	 powerful,	 because	 its	 power	 comes	 from	 your
identification;	it	sucks	your	blood.	But	when	you	start	standing	aloof	and	away,
the	mind	starts	shrinking.
The	 day	 you	 are	 completely	 unidentified	 with	 the	 mind,	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment,	there	is	the	revelation:	mind	simply	dies;	it	is	no	longer	there.	Where	it
was	so	full,	where	 it	was	so	continuous	--	day	in,	day	out,	waking,	sleeping,	 it
was	there	--	suddenly	it	is	not	there.	You	look	all	around	and	it	is	emptiness,	it	is
nothingness.
And	with	 the	mind	disappears	 the	 self.	Then	 there	 is	 only	 a	 certain	 quality	 of
awareness,	with	 no	 "I"	 in	 it.	At	 the	most	 you	 can	 call	 it	 something	 similar	 to
"am-ness,"	but	not	"Iness."	To	be	even	more	exact,	it	is	"is-ness"	because	even	in
am-ness	some	shadow	of	the
"I"	is	still	there.	The	moment	you	know	its	is-ness,	it	has	become	universal.
With	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the	 mind	 disappears	 the	 self.	 And	 so	 many	 things
disappear	 which	 were	 so	 important	 to	 you,	 so	 troublesome	 to	 you.	 You	 were
trying	 to	 solve	 them	 and	 they	 were	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 complicated;
everything	was	a	problem,	an	anxiety,	and	there	seemed	to	be	no	way	out.
I	remind	you	of	the	story	The	Goose	is	Out.	It	 is	concerned	with	the	mind	and
your	isness.
The	master	tells	the	disciple	to	meditate	on	a	koan:	A	small	goose	is	put	into	a
bottle,	 fed	and	nourished.	The	goose	goes	on	becoming	bigger	 and	bigger	 and
bigger,	 and	 fills	 the	whole	bottle.	Now	 it	 is	 too	big;	 it	 cannot	come	out	of	 the
bottle's	mouth	--	the	mouth	is	too	small.	And	the	koan	is	that	you	have	to	bring
the	goose	out	without	destroying	the	bottle,	without	killing	the	goose.
Now	it	is	mind-boggling.
What	can	you	do?	The	goose	is	too	big;	you	cannot	take	it	out	unless	you	break
the	bottle,	but	that	is	not	allowed.	Or	you	can	bring	it	out	by	killing	it;	then	you
don't	care	whether	it	comes	out	alive	or	dead.	That	is	not	allowed	either.
Day	 in,	day	out,	 the	disciple	meditates,	 finds	no	way,	 thinks	 this	way	and	 that
way	--	but	in	fact	there	is	no	way.	Tired,	utterly	exhausted,	a	sudden	revelation...
suddenly	he	understands	that	the	master	cannot	be	interested	in	the	bottle	and	the
goose;	 they	must	 represent	something	else.	The	bottle	 is	 the	mind,	you	are	 the
goose...	and	with	witnessing,	it	is	possible.	Without	being	in	the	mind,	you	can
become	identified	with	it	so	much	that	you	start	feeling	you	are	in	it!
He	 runs	 to	 the	master	 to	 say	 that	 the	goose	 is	 out.	And	 the	master	 says,	 "You
have	understood	it.	Now	keep	it	out.	It	has	never	been	in."
If	you	go	on	struggling	with	the	goose	and	the	bottle,	there	is	no	way	for	you	to
solve	it.
It	is	the	realization	that,	"It	must	represent	something	else;	otherwise	the	master
cannot	give	it	to	me.	And	what	can	it	be?"	--	because	the	whole	function	between
the	master	and	the	disciple,	the	whole	business	is	about	the	mind	and	awareness.
Awareness	 is	 the	 goose	 which	 is	 not	 in	 the	 bottle	 of	 the	 mind.	 But	 you	 are
believing	 that	 it	 is	 in	 it	 and	 asking	 everyone	 how	 to	 get	 it	 out.	And	 there	 are
idiots	 who	 will	 help	 you,	 with	 techniques,	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it.	 I	 call	 them	 idiots
because	they	have	not	understood	the	thing	at	all.
The	goose	is	out,	has	never	been	in,	so	the	question	of	bringing	it	out	does	not
arise.
Mind	is	just	a	procession	of	thoughts	passing	in	front	of	you	on	the	screen	of	the
brain.
You	are	an	observer.	But	you	start	getting	identified	with	beautiful	things	--	those
are	bribes.	And	once	you	get	caught	in	the	beautiful	things	you	are	also	caught	in
the	ugly	things,	because	mind	cannot	exist	without	duality.
Awareness	cannot	exist	with	duality,	and	mind	cannot	exist	without	duality.
Awareness	is	non-dual,	and	mind	is	dual.
So	just	watch.	I	don't	teach	you	any	solutions.	I	teach	you	the	solution:	Just	get
back	a	little	and	watch.
Create	a	distance	between	you	and	your	mind.
Whether	it	is	good,	beautiful,	delicious,	something	that	you	would	like	to	enjoy
closely,	or	it	is	ugly	--	remain	as	far	away	as	possible.	Look	at	it	just	the	way	you
look	at	a	film.
But	people	get	identified	even	with	films.
I	have	seen,	when	I	was	young...	I	have	not	seen	any	movie	for	a	long	time.	But	I
have	seen	people	weeping,	tears	coming	down	--	and	nothing	is	happening!	It	is
good	that	in	a	movie	house	it	is	dark;	it	saves	them	from	feeling	embarrassed.	I
used	to	ask	my	father,
"Did	you	see?	The	fellow	by	your	side	was	crying!"
He	said,	"The	whole	hall	was	crying.	The	scene	was	such..."
"But,"	I	said,	"there	is	only	a	screen	and	nothing	else.	Nobody	is	killed,	there	is
no	tragedy	happening	--	just	a	projection	of	a	film,	just	pictures	moving	on	the
screen.	And	people	laugh,	and	people	weep,	and	for	three	hours	they	are	almost
lost.	 They	 become	 part	 of	 the	 movie,	 they	 become	 identified	 with	 some
character..."
My	father	said	to	me,	"If	you	are	raising	questions	about	people's	reactions	then
you	cannot	enjoy	the	film."
I	said,	"I	can	enjoy	the	film,	but	I	don't	want	to	cry;	I	don't	see	any	enjoyment	in
it.	I	can	see	it	as	a	film,	but	I	don't	want	to	become	a	part	of	it.	These	people	are
all	becoming	a	part	of	it."
My	 grandfather	 had	 an	 old	 barber	 who	 was	 an	 opium	 addict.	 For	 something
which	was	possible	to	do	in	five	minutes	he	would	take	two	hours,	and	he	would
talk	continuously.
But	 they	were	 old	 friends	 from	 their	 childhood.	 I	 can	 still	 see	my	grandfather
sitting	in	the	chair	of	the	old	barber...	And	he	was	a	lovely	talker.	These	opium
addicts	 have	 a	 certain	 quality,	 a	 beauty	 of	 talking,	 telling	 stories	 about
themselves,	what	is	happening	day-to-day;	it	is	true.
My	grandfather	would	simply	be	saying,	"Yes,	right,	that's	great..."
I	 said	 to	 him	 one	 day,	 "About	 everything	 you	 go	 on	 saying,	 `Yes,	 right,	 it	 is
great.'
Sometimes	he	is	talking	nonsense,	simply	irrelevant."
He	said,	"What	do	you	want?	That	man	is	an	opium	addict..."
In	 India	 razor	 blades	 are	 not	 used;	 things	 almost	 like	 six-inch	 long	 knives	 are
used	as	razor	blades.	"Now	what	do	you	want	me	to	say?	--	with	that	man	who
has	a	knife,	a	sharp	knife	in	his	hand,	just	on	my	throat.	To	say	no	to	him...	he
will	kill	me!	And	he	knows	it.	He	sometimes	tells	me,	`You	never	say	no.	You
always	 say	 yes,	 you	 always	 say	 great.'	 And	 I	 have	 told	 him,	 `You	 should
understand	that	you	are	always	under	the	influence	of	opium.	It	is	impossible	to
talk	with	you,	to	discuss	with	you	or	to	disagree	with	you.	You	have	a	knife	on
my	throat,	and	you	want	me	to	say	no	to	something?'"
I	 said,	 "Then	why	 don't	 you	 change	 from	 this	man?	 There	 are	 so	many	 other
barbers,	and	this	man	takes	two	hours	for	a	five-minute	job.	Sometimes	he	takes
half	your	beard	and	then	he	says,	Ì	am	coming	back,	you	sit.'	And	he	is	gone	for
an	 hour,	 because	 he	 gets	 involved	 in	 a	 discussion	with	 somebody	 and	 forgets
completely	that	a	customer	is	sitting	in	his	chair.	Then	he	comes	and	says,	`My
God,	so	you	are	still	sitting	here?'"
And	my	grandfather	would	say,	"What	can	I	do?	I	cannot	go	home	with	half	the
beard	shaved.	You	just	complete	it.	Where	have	you	been?"
The	 barber	 would	 say,	 "I	 got	 in	 such	 a	 good	 argument	 with	 somebody	 that	 I
completely	forgot	about	you.	It	 is	good	that	 that	man	had	to	go;	otherwise	you
would	have	been	sitting	here	 the	whole	day.	And	sometimes	I	don't	even	close
the	shop	at	night.	I	simply	go	home,	just	forget	to	close,	and	once	in	a	while	a
customer	is	still	sitting	in	the	chair	and	I	am	sleeping.	Somebody	has	to	say	to
him,	 `Now	 you	 can	 go;	 that	 man	 will	 not	 be	 seen	 again	 before	 tomorrow
morning.	He	is	fast	asleep	in	his	home.	He	has	forgotten	to	close	his	shop	and	he
has	forgotten	about	you.'"
And	if	you	were	angry...	Sometimes	new	people	got	into	his	shop,	and	became
angry.	He	would	say,	"Calm	down.	At	the	most	you	need	not	pay	me.	I	have	cut
only	half	of	the	beard;	you	can	just	go.	I	don't	want	to	argue.	You	need	not	pay
me;	I	don't	ask	even	half	payment."
But	 nobody	 can	 leave	his	 chair	with	 half	 the	 beard	 shaved	 --	 or	 half	 the	 head
shaved!	You	ask	him	just	to	shave	the	beard	and	he	starts	shaving	your	head,	and
by	the	time	you	notice,	he	has	already	done	the	job.	So	he	asks	you,	"Now	what
do	you	want?	--	because	almost	one-fourth	of	the	work	is	done.	If	you	want	to
keep	it	this	way	I	can	leave	it;	otherwise	I	can	finish	it.	But	I	will	not	charge	for
it	because	if	you	say	that	you	never	wanted	it	to	be	cut,	then	it	is	my	fault	and	I
should	take	the	punishment.	I	will	not	charge	you."
This	man	was	dangerous!	But	my	grandfather	used	to	say,	"He	is	dangerous	but
he	 is	 lovely	 and	 I	 have	 become	 so	 much	 identified	 with	 him	 that	 I	 cannot
conceive	that	if	he	dies	before	me	I	will	be	able	to	go	to	another	barber's	shop.	I
cannot	 conceive...	 for	my	whole	 life	 he	 has	 been	my	 barber.	 The	 identity	 has
become	 so	 deep	 that	 I	 may	 stop	 shaving	 my	 beard,	 but	 I	 cannot	 change	 my
barber."
But	fortunately	my	grandfather	died	before	the	opium-addict	barber.
You	 get	 identified	with	 anything.	 People	 get	 identified	with	 persons	 and	 then
they	create	misery	for	themselves.	They	get	identified	with	things,	then	they	get
miserable	if	that	thing	is	missing.
Identification	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 your	 misery.	 And	 every	 identification	 is
identification	with	the	mind.
Just	step	aside,	let	the	mind	pass.
And	soon	you	will	be	able	to	see	that	there	is	no	problem	at	all	--	 the	goose	is
out.	You	don't	have	to	break	the	bottle,	you	don't	have	to	kill	the	goose	either.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	 BEST	 TO	 DEAL	 WITH	 FEAR?	 IT	 AFFECTS	 ME	 VARIOUSLY...
FROM	 A	 VAGUE	 UNEASINESS	 OR	 KNOTTED	 STOMACH	 TO	 A
DIZZYING	PANIC,	AS	IF
THE	WORLD	IS	ENDING.
WHERE	DOES	IT	COME	FROM?
WHERE	DOES	IT	GO?
It	is	the	same	question	that	I	was	just	answering.	All	your	fears	are	by-products
of	identification.
You	 love	a	woman	and	with	 the	 love,	 in	 the	 same	parcel	comes	 fear:	 she	may
leave	you	--
she	has	already	left	somebody	and	come	with	you.	There	is	a	precedent;	perhaps
she	will	do	the	same	to	you.	There	is	fear,	you	feel	knots	in	the	stomach.	You	are
too	much	attached.
You	cannot	get	a	simple	fact:	you	have	come	alone	in	the	world;	you	have	been
here	yesterday	also,	without	this	woman,	perfectly	well,	without	any	knots	in	the
stomach.
And	 tomorrow	 if	 this	woman	goes...	what	 is	 the	need	of	 the	knots?	You	know
how	to	be	without	her,	and	you	will	be	able	to	be	without	her.
The	 fear	 that	 things	may	 change	 tomorrow...	 Somebody	may	die,	 you	may	go
bankrupt,	 your	 job	 may	 be	 taken	 away.	 There	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things
which	may	change.
You	 are	 burdened	with	 fears	 and	 fears,	 and	none	 of	 them	are	 valid	 --	 because
yesterday	also	you	were	full	of	all	 these	fears,	unnecessarily.	Things	may	have
changed,	 but	 you	 are	 still	 alive.	 And	man	 has	 an	 immense	 capacity	 to	 adjust
himself	in	any	situation.
They	 say	 that	 only	 man	 and	 cockroaches	 have	 this	 immense	 capacity	 of
adjustment.
That's	why	wherever	you	find	man	you	will	find	cockroaches,	and	wherever	you
find	 cockroaches	 you	will	 find	man.	 They	 go	 together,	 they	 have	 a	 similarity.
Even	 in	 faraway	 places	 like	 the	 North	 Pole	 or	 the	 South	 Pole...	 When	 man
traveled	to	those	places	he	suddenly	found	that	he	had	brought	cockroaches	with
him,	and	they	were	perfectly	healthy	and	living	and	reproducing.
If	 you	 just	 look	 around	 the	 earth	 you	 can	 see	 --	 man	 lives	 in	 thousands	 of
different	 climates,	 geographical	 situations,	 political	 situations,	 sociological
situations,	 religious	 situations,	 but	 he	 manages	 to	 live.	 And	 he	 has	 lived	 for
centuries...	things	go	on	changing,	he	goes	on	adjusting	himself.
There	 is	nothing	 to	 fear.	Even	 if	 the	world	ends,	 so	what?	You	will	be	ending
with	it.	Do	you	think	you	will	be	standing	on	an	island	and	the	whole	world	will
end,	 leaving	 you	 alone?	 Don't	 be	 worried.	 At	 least	 you	 will	 have	 a	 few
cockroaches	with	you!
What	is	the	problem	if	the	world	ends?	It	has	been	asked	to	me	many	times.	But
what	is	the	problem?	--	if	it	ends,	it	ends.	It	does	not	create	any	problem	because
we	will	not	be	here;	we	will	be	ending	with	it,	and	there	will	be	no	one	to	worry
about.	It	will	be	really	the	greatest	freedom	from	fear.
The	world	ending	means	every	problem	ending,	every	disturbance	ending,	every
knot	in	your	stomach	ending.	I	don't	see	the	problem.	But	I	know	that	everybody
is	full	of	fear.
But	the	question	is	the	same:	the	fear	is	part	of	the	mind.	The	mind	is	a	coward,
and	has	to	be	a	coward	because	it	doesn't	have	any	substance	--	it	is	empty	and
hollow,	and	it	is	afraid	of	everything.	And	basically	it	is	afraid	that	one	day	you
may	become	aware.	That	will	be	really	the	end	of	the	world!
Not	 the	end	of	 the	world	but	your	becoming	aware,	your	 coming	 to	 a	 state	of
meditation	where	mind	has	to	disappear	--	that	is	its	basic	fear.	Because	of	that
fear	it	keeps	people	away	from	meditation,	makes	them	enemies	of	people	like
me	who	are	 trying	 to	 spread	something	of	meditation,	 some	way	of	awareness
and	witnessing.	They	become	antagonistic	to	me	--	not	without	any	reason;	their
fear	is	well-founded.
They	may	 not	 be	 aware	 of	 it,	 but	 their	mind	 is	 really	 afraid	 to	 come	 close	 to
anything	that	can	create	more	awareness.	That	will	be	the	beginning	of	the	end
of	the	mind.	That	will	be	the	death	of	the	mind.
But	 for	 you	 there	 is	 no	 fear.	The	death	 of	 the	mind	will	 be	 your	 rebirth,	 your
beginning	to	really	live.	You	should	be	happy,	you	should	rejoice	in	the	death	of
the	mind,	because	nothing	can	be	a	greater	freedom.	Nothing	else	can	give	you
wings	to	fly	into	the	sky;	nothing	else	can	make	the	whole	sky	yours.
Mind	is	a	prison.
Awareness	 is	 getting	 out	 of	 the	 prison	 --	 or	 realizing	 it	 has	 never	 been	 in	 the
prison;	it	was	just	thinking	that	it	was	in	the	prison.	All	fears	disappear.
I	am	also	living	in	the	same	world,	but	I	have	never	felt	for	a	single	moment	any
fear	because	nothing	can	be	taken	away	from	me.	I	can	be	killed	--	but	I	will	be
seeing	it	happening,	so	what	is	being	killed	is	not	me,	is	not	my	awareness.
The	 greatest	 discovery	 in	 life,	 the	 most	 precious	 treasure,	 is	 of	 awareness.
Without	 it	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 in	 darkness,	 full	 of	 fears.	And	you	will	 go	 on
creating	new	fears	--	 there	is	no	end	to	it.	You	will	 live	in	fear,	you	will	die	in
fear,	and	you	will	never	be	able	to	taste	something	of	freedom.	And	it	was	all	the
time	 your	 potential;	 any	 moment	 you	 could	 have	 claimed	 it,	 but	 you	 never
claimed	it.
It	is	your	responsibility.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	CAME	TO	SAY	FAREWELL	TO	DADAJI	ON	THE	PODIUM
IN
BUDDHA	HALL,	 SUDDENLY	THE	AREA	WHERE	YOU	AND	DADAJI'S
BODY
WERE	BECAME	LIKE	A	FILM.	YOU	BOTH	SEEMED	TO	BE	WITHOUT
SUBSTANCE.	THE	OTHER	HALF	OF	THE	PODIUM	WHERE	MATAJI	SAT,
AND
THE	 REST	 OF	 BUDDHA	 HALL	 WHERE	 WE	 WERE	 ALL	 SITTING,
SEEMED
NORMAL.	 JUST	THE	 PART	WHERE	YOU	WERE	 SEEMED	DIFFERENT.
WHAT
HAPPENED?
Death,	if	it	happens	with	enlightenment,	is	a	tremendous	experience.	On	the	one
hand	the	man	dies;	on	the	other	hand	he	achieves	the	totality	of	life.
When	 I	 touched	my	 father's	 seventh	 chakra,	 just	 on	 the	 top	of	 the	head,	 those
who	 were	 perceptive,	 silent,	 meditative,	 may	 have	 experienced	 something
strange	happening.
According	 to	 the	 centuries-old	 science	 of	 inner	 reality,	 a	 man's	 life	 energy	 is
released	from	the	center,	the	chakra,	at	which	he	was	living.
Most	people	die	from	the	lowest	chakra,	the	sex	center.	There	are	seven	chakras
in	the	body	from	where	life	can	go	out	of	the	body.	The	last	is	on	top	of	the	head,
and	unless	you	are	enlightened	life	cannot	go	out	from	that	chakra.
When	I	touched	my	father's	seventh	chakra,	it	was	still	warm.	Life	had	left	it,	but
it	 was	 as	 if	 the	 physical	 part	 of	 the	 chakra	 was	 still	 throbbing	 with	 the
tremendous	happening.
It	is	a	rare	happening.	And	in	that	moment	it	may	have	appeared	to	many	that	the
small	 section	 on	 the	 podium	 where	 I	 was	 with	 my	 father's	 body	 was	 in	 a
different	world.	It	was,	in	a	sense,	because	it	was	on	a	different	level.	Just	by	his
feet	was	my	mother...	 and	 ten	 thousand	sannyasins	 in	Buddha	Hall	 --	 that	was
the	normal	world.
But	something	abnormal	had	happened.	The	chakra	was	still	warm,	the	body	was
as	 if	 it	was	still	 rejoicing	 in	 the	phenomenon.	 If	you	had	eyes	 to	see,	 then	 this
distinction	was	bound	to	be	seen.
It	is	good	that	it	came	to	your	vision,	the	difference.	It	is	a	difference	of	levels.
The	lowest	is	where	most	people	are	living,	and	the	effort	here	is,	in	this	mystery
school,	to	bring	everybody	to	the	highest.
Slowly,	 slowly,	moving	 from	one	center	 into	another,	you	will	also	 feel	within
your	body	a	few	things.	For	example,	 if	you	are	existing	at	 the	sex	center,	you
will	find	a	subtle	division	--	below	the	lower	center	and	above	the	lower	center.
You	can	feel	it,	that	in	the	body	below	it	and	the	body	above	it	there	seems	to	be
a	division,	because	the	lower	body	has	no	centers,	no	chakras.	It	is	the	same	for
anybody.	Wherever	he	is,	the	body	below	the	sex	center	remains	the	same;	it	is
our	roots	in	the	earth.
But	if	your	center	changes,	comes	to	a	higher	level	--	for	example	if	your	heart
becomes	 your	 very	 life	 --	 you	will	 see	 again	 that	 below	 your	 heart	 the	whole
body	is	separate,	and	above	the	heart	the	whole	body	is	separate.	Wherever	your
energy	is	there	will	be	a	separation	line.
When	you	reach	to	the	seventh	chakra,	then	the	whole	body	is	below	it	and	there
is	no	division.	The	seventh	chakra	is	only	in	a	sense	in	the	body;	otherwise	it	is
above	the	body,	as	if	a	line	touching	your	head	is	pulsing.	Your	whole	body	will
become	one,	and	for	the	first	time	you	will	see	there	are	no	divisions	--	and	this
you	can	watch.
With	each	chakra	coming	into	function,	your	actions	will	change,	your	responses
will	change,	your	dreams	will	change,	your	aspirations	will	change,	your	whole
personality	will	 go	 through	 a	 change.	As	 you	move	 higher,	 newer	 dimensions
start	happening	which	were	not	available	to	you	before.
For	example,	the	heart	center	is	almost	in	the	middle;	three	centers	are	above	it
and	 three	centers	are	below	it.	The	man	of	 the	heart	will	be	 the	most	balanced
man.	 In	his	actions,	 in	his	 feelings,	 in	everything	he	does	he	will	 find	a	subtle
balance,	an	equilibrium.	He	will	never	be	hectic;	there	will	be	a	grace.
In	other	words,	he	has	found	the	center	of	his	life,	exactly	the	middle	path.	You
will	 not	 see	 any	 extremes	 in	 him,	 and	 because	 all	 extremes	 have	 disappeared
from	his	life	he	will	have	a	balanced	view	of	everything.	He	will	not	be	rightist,
he	will	not	be	leftist;	he	will	always	be	fair	and	just.
If	 the	world	was	 run	according	 to	me,	 then	 I	would	choose	as	magistrates	and
judges	only	people	who	are	at	 their	heart	center,	because	only	 they	can	be	 just
and	 fair.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 intellectual	 qualifications	 or	 seniority;	 it	 is	 a
question	of	your	inner	balance.
The	Sufi	story	is....	Mulla	Nasruddin	is	chosen	an	honorary	magistrate.	The	first
case	appears.	He	hears	one	side	and	declares	to	the	court,	"Within	five	minutes	I
will	be	back	with	the	judgment."
The	court	clerk	could	not	believe	it	--	he	has	not	heard	the	other	side!	The	clerk
whispered	in	his	ear,	"What	are	you	doing?	Don't	you	see	a	simple	 thing?	You
have	 heard	 only	 one	 party,	 one	 side.	 The	 other	 side	 is	 waiting,	 and	 without
hearing	them	you	cannot	give	any	judgment."
Mulla	Nasruddin	said,	"Don't	try	to	confuse	me.	Just	now	I	am	absolutely	clear.
If	I	hear	the	other	side	too,	then	there	is	bound	to	be	confusion."
These	Sufi	stories	are	not	just	ordinary	stories,	they	are	extraordinary.	It	is	saying
that	every	judge	is	listening	only	to	one	side	because	he	already	has	a	prejudiced
mind;	he	is	not	capable	of	listening	to	both	sides.	For	that	a	totally	different	kind
of	man	is	needed	--
which	 no	 educationalist	 concerning	 law	 and	 jurisprudence	 has	 even	 thought
about.
No	 one	 thinks	 --	 you	 ask	 the	 judge	 to	 be	 fair,	 but	 his	mind	 is	 prejudiced.	He
cannot	even	hear	both	stories,	both	sides,	with	the	same	clarity	--	impossible.	He
only	pretends.	In	all	the	courts	of	the	world	there	are	pretensions.
And	now	that	I	have	been	in	the	courts	I	can	see,	and	say	with	absolute	authority
that	 they	 don't	 listen	 to	 both	 sides.	 They	 can't!	 I	 am	 not	 complaining:	 I	 am
simply	stating	a	fact.
Their	education	is	wrong.
As	you	go	above	the	heart	center,	new	things	that	may	not	have	ever	been	a	part
of	your	life	start	happening.	The	second	chakra	above	the	heart	is	the	throat.	If
that	chakra	has	your	life	energy,	then	whatever	you	say	has	a	deep	authority	in	it.
Without	any	effort	to	convert	anybody,	it	converts,	because	it	convinces.
The	 chakra	 above	 that	 is	 the	 most	 famous	 and	 well-known	 --	 the	 one	 on	 the
forehead	between	the	two	eyes.	That	kind	of	energy	moving	through	the	agnya
chakra,	the	sixth,	has	a	deep	hypnotic	influence.	It	is	managed...	the	person	is	not
doing	 anything;	 it	 simply	 happens,	 his	 eyes	 become	 so	 full	 of	 some	 unknown
magnetism.
The	man	with	the	seventh	chakra	open	has	the	capacity,	the	intrinsic	flowering,
so	that	his	presence	becomes	infectious.	Below	the	seventh,	the	presence	is	not
infectious;	 with	 the	 seventh	 chakra	 opening,	 it	 is	 as	 if	 the	 consciousness	 has
blossomed	and	there	is	a	fragrance,	an	aura.
Whoever	 is	 available	 to	 this	presence,	 to	 this	 aura,	will	 feel	 the	 freshness	of	 a
breeze,	the	freshness	after	a	shower.	And	many	rotten	things	--	rubbish	that	you
have	been	entangled	 in,	 fighting	--	will	simply	disappear	from	your	 life.	Just	a
touch	from	this	kind	of	man	will	be	a	transformation.
But	that	evening	something	was	transpiring,	and	what	you	noted	was	an	energy
phenomenon;	many	others	must	have	noted	the	same.
I	answer	such	questions	in	order	for	you	to	become	aware	of	your	own	situation
and	start	moving	upwards.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
DO	YOU	EVER	SURPRISE	YOURSELF?	--	AND	IF	YOU	DO,	WHO	IS
SURPRISING	WHOM?
There	is	no	one	to	surprise	or	to	be	surprised.
I	am	as	absent	as	I	will	be	when	I	will	be	dead,	with	only	one	difference...	that
right	now	my	absence	has	a	body,	and	then,	my	absence	will	not	have	a	body.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	It	is	all	happening	silently
22	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604220
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO20
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
83
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	ME,	BEING	HERE	WITH	YOU	IS	AS	 IF	 I	HAVE	ARRIVED	AT	THE
END	OF
A	LONG	JOURNEY,	NO	DESIRE	TO	BE	ANYWHERE	ELSE.	MY	HEART
SHOULD
JUMP	HIGH	AND	 I	 SHOULD	BLISS	OUT,	 BUT	 LOOKING	AT	MYSELF,
CARRYING	THIS	GREAT	GIFT	OF	BEING	WITH	YOU,	THERE	SEEMS	TO
BE
ONLY	 A	 GREAT	 SENSE	 OF	 CALM.	 HAPPINESS	 AND	 SADNESS	 ARE
ALWAYS
SIMULTANEOUSLY	 IN	 ME	 AND	 IT	 IS	 AS	 IF	 THEY	 CANCEL	 EACH
OTHER	OUT.
IT	SEEMS	AS	IF	MY	LIFE	FLAME	BURNS	CONSTANTLY	BUT	LOW,	AND
THIS
WORRIES	ME.
THIS	QUESTION	OF	WHETHER	I	AM	LIVING	INTENSELY	ENOUGH	OR
NOT	IS
WITH	 ME	 ALWAYS	 AND	 PULLS	 MY	 ENERGY	 DOWN	 EVEN	 MORE.
PLEASE
DESTROY	IT.
It	 is	 good	 that	 you	 feel	 calm	 and	 quiet,	 rather	 than	 ecstatic,	 excited,	 because
every	ecstasy,	every	excitement	 is	bound	 to	come	down;	 it	cannot	 remain	high
forever.	 It	 burns	 your	 energy	 and	 burns	 it	 intensely.	 But	 you	 don't	 have	 an
inexhaustible	source;	as	an	individual,	in	the	body,	all	you	have	is	limited.
To	be	with	me,	silently	and	calmly,	peacefully	is	the	right	way;	you	can	afford	it.
Even	with	limited	sources	of	individual	beings,	a	calm	state	of	mind	can	remain
forever.
I	have	seen	both	 types	of	people	coming	 to	me.	Those	who	come	and	become
too	 much	 excited	 are	 soon	 exhausted,	 and	 when	 they	 are	 exhausted	 they	 are
angry	 at	me;	when	 they	 are	 exhausted	 they	 turn	 into	 enemies	 rather	 than	 into
friends.	Obviously	to	them	I	am	the	cause	for	their	breakdown,	and	they	cannot
forgive	me.	Deep	down	in	their	mind	they	carry	an	idea	that	ecstasy	was	given	to
them	and	now	it	has	been	taken	away.
I	don't	give	you	anything	and	I	don't	 take	anything	away.	Whatever	happens	in
you	simply	happens	in	you;	I	am	not	more	than	a	catalytic	agent.	So	the	best	that
can	happen	to	you	is	a	deep	calmness.	It	is	more	reliable	because	it	is	going	to
last	your	whole	life	--
maybe	even	beyond	life.
And	you	are	getting	mixed	up	 in	your	question	between	 this	happening	 in	my
presence,	with	me,	and	your	 intensive	 living.	Intensive	 living	I	 teach	 to	people
just	 so	 that	 they	can	 transcend	 their	desires,	 their	 turmoil,	quickly.	 If	 they	 live
very	 miserly,	 as	 many	 live,	 then	 in	 this	 life	 there	 is	 no	 hope	 for	 them	 to
experience	transcendence.
Don't	 mix	 that	 with	 your	 state,	 because	 your	 calmness	 is	 the	 beginning	 of
transcendence.
That's	 why	 you	 are	 feeling	 that	 your	 happiness	 and	 sadness	 are	 happening
together.	 It	 cannot	happen	 --	 either	you	can	be	happy,	or	you	can	be	 sad.	You
cannot	 be	 sadly	 happy,	 neither	 can	 you	 be	 happily	 sad.	 That	would	 be	 a	 very
strange	situation!
What	is	happening	is	that	your	calmness	is	giving	you	this	impression,	because
in	 your	 calmness	 you	 are	 feeling	 something	 that	 belongs	 to	 happiness	 and
something	that	belongs	to	sadness.	Sadness	is	not	all	wrong;	happiness	is	not	all
right.
The	essential	part	of	happiness	is	a	feeling	of	well-being;	that	you	are	feeling	in
your	calmness,	so	you	think	you	are	happy.	And	the	essential	part	of	sadness	is
silence;	that	you	are	feeling	in	your	calmness.	These	both	can	exist	together,	in
fact	they	can	only	exist	together.
A	silent	 feeling	of	well-being...	whatever	 is	happening	 is	perfectly	 right.	Don't
ask	me	to	destroy	it,	ask	me	to	enhance	it.	Don't	make	it	a	problem!	It	is	not.	It	is
a	tremendous	gift	that	the	master	never	gives	and	the	disciple	always	receives.
There	are	things	the	master	never	says	and	the	disciple	always	hears.	It	is	one	of
those	mysterious	phenomena	that	are	not	handed	over	by	the	master	to	you	--	but
you	receive	it,	it	arises	within	you.
It	is	just	like	the	sunrise	when	millions	of	birds	start	singing.	They	are	not	even
aware	of	the	sunrise,	but	something	in	their	heart	is	triggered	by	the	presence	of
the	 sun;	 the	 sun	 is	 not	 aware	 of	 so	many	 birds.	Millions	 of	 flowers	 suddenly
open	their	petals.	The	sun	is	not	going	to	each	single	flower	saying,	"Wake	up!	It
is	time,	and	I	have	come."	Neither	are	the	flowers	aware	why	they	are	opening
their	petals,	why	they	are	releasing	their	perfume.	It	all	is	happening	silently.	The
presence	of	 the	 sun	 is	needed,	but	 that	presence	does	not	do	anything.	 Just	 its
being	there	is	enough.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	the	situation	of	the	human	mind	is	like	that	of	a	small
school	class.	The	master	is	out,	and	all	children	are	shouting	and	screaming	and
jumping	 and	 every	 kind	 of	 thing	 is	 going	 on,	 books	 are	 being	 thrown	 at	 each
other....	And	then	suddenly	the	master	appears	and	there	is	absolute	silence.	All
screaming,	all	 jumping,	all	 throwing	books	stops.	They	are	all	 leaning	on	 their
books	--	although	they	are	not	reading,	but	pretending	that	they	are	reading.
One	thing	is	certain,	that	the	very	presence	of	the	master	makes	a	difference.	He
does	not	do	anything,	he	does	not	say	anything.	If	he	needs	to	say	anything,	if	he
needs	to	do	anything,	he	is	not	a	master;	he	is	not	respected,	he	is	not	loved.	The
children	 don't	 feel	 that	 he	 is	 worthy	 enough	 that	 they	 should	 be	 behaving
differently	in	his	presence	than	they	behave	in	his	absence.
In	ancient	Eastern	scriptures	it	is	again	and	again	discussed,	because	it	has	been
one	of	 the	eternal	questions:	should	the	disciple	respect	 the	master,	or	not?	All
the	organized	religions	have	decided	that	he	should	respect.
I	have	been	talking	to	different	religious	leaders	and	I	have	said	to	them,	"That	is
just	wrong.	The	disciple	should	not	respect.	The	master	should	be	respectable."
That	is	a	totally	different	thing.	The	master	should	have	the	weight;	he	should	be
lovable,	 he	 should	 be	 respectable.	Don't	 put	 the	 responsibility	 on	 the	 disciple,
who	is	after	all	a	disciple,	a	learner.	It	is	easy	for	him	to	err.
One	of	my	vice-chancellors	said,	in	his	convocation	address,	that	the	respect	for
the	 teacher	 is	 disappearing	 from	 the	world	 of	 students,	 and	 this	 is	 dangerous.
Ordinarily	nobody	stands	up	in	a	convocation	address,	because	that	is	not	a	place
to	 discuss.	 But	 I	 stood	 up	 and	 I	 said,	 "Before	 you	 say	 anything	more,	 let	me
correct	you.	You	are	right	in	your	observation	that	respect	is	disappearing	from
the	student	community,	but	you	are	wrong	in	your	conclusion.	The	responsibility
is	not	of	the	students	but	of	the	teachers.
Can	you	say	with	authority	that	the	teachers	are	worthy	of	respect?	And	if	you
cannot	 say	 it	 with	 authority	 that	 the	 teachers	 are	 worthy	 of	 respect	 then	 why
make	a	student	responsible	for	 this	whole	situation?	If	 the	teacher	is	worthy	of
respect,	the	question	of	respect	from	the	students	does	not	arise	at	all."
I	said	to	him,	"This	I	am	saying	to	you	with	my	own	experience."	For	five	years
at	 that	 time	I	had	been	a	 teacher	 in	 the	university	and	I	had	not	come	across	a
single	student	who	was	not	respectful.	"And	if	you	come	across	students	who	are
disrespectful	to	you,	you	should	go	home	and	think	over	it.	Something	must	be
wrong	in	you.	Somewhere	you	have	lost	the	worth."
There	 was	 immense	 silence	 in	 the	 whole	 auditorium.	 The	 professors	 were
shocked,	 the	 students	were	 shocked,	 the	chancellor	was	suddenly	 frozen	 like	a
statue,	and	the	vice-chancellor	could	not	think	what	to	say.	I	said,	"You	can	see
this	 silence	 --	 I	 have	 not	 told	 anybody	 to	 be	 silent,	 but	most	 of	 them	 are	my
students	or	have	been	my	students	and	they	know	what	I	mean."
And	the	vice-chancellor	had	to	take	his	words	back.	He	said,	"I	can	understand
it.	The	responsibility	should	always	be	on	the	stronger	person,	not	on	the	weaker
person.	 The	 student	 is	 weak,	 a	 learner,	 has	 no	 power;	 the	 teacher	 has	 all	 the
powers,	all	the	learning,	all	the	authority...	and	if	he	cannot	manage	respect,	then
he	is	responsible.	You	are	right."
But	he	used	the	word	manage.	I	didn't	say	anything,	but	that	was	a	wrong	word.
To	 manage	 means	 you	 are	 thinking	 about	 it,	 you	 are	 using	 certain	 tactics,
strategies	for	 it.	A	real	master	simply	comes	amongst	his	disciples	and	there	 is
silence,	and	there	is	calm.
And	 the	 same	 happens	 within	 you.	 You	 need	 not	 be	 worried	 about	 intensive
living.	If	you	can	live	this	calmness,	if	this	calmness	can	become	your	very	life,
where	happiness	 and	 sadness	 contribute	 their	 essential	beauty,	 then	 there	 is	no
need	 to	 think	of	people	who	 talk	of	ecstasy.	Their	ecstasy	will	be	gone	 in	 two
days;	your	calmness	will	go	with	you	beyond	the	grave.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
ONLY	 IN	MOMENTS	OF	LOVE	DO	 I	FEEL	MY	BODY	DANCING	WITH
JOYFUL
SWEETNESS,	 AND	 ONLY	 IN	 MOMENTS	 OF	 LOVE	 DO	 MUSICIANS
CREATE
MUSIC	WHICH	TOUCHES	MY	HEART.	TO	FEEL	THE	MUSIC	MOVING
MY
BODY	AND	THE	DANCE	MOVING	THE	FINGERS	OF	THE	MUSICIANS
IS	FOR
ME	THE	MOST	BEAUTIFUL	EXPERIENCE.
CAN	YOU	PLEASE	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	IT?
It	is	a	beautiful	moment	and	a	beautiful	experience	--	but	there	is	much	more	in
life.
There	 is	much	more	 than	music,	because	music	 is	after	all	 sound,	and	 there	 is
silence	too.
Music	is	beautiful	but	you	should	not	forget	silence.	Dance	is	beautiful,	but	there
is	something	beyond	it:	an	absolute	unmoving	state	of	consciousness...	no	dance.
There	are	beauties	and	beauties...	and	there	are	categories.	Music	and	dance	are
very	physical.	As	far	as	they	go	they	are	beautiful,	but	one	should	not	get	stuck
with	 them,	one	should	not	be	stopped	by	 them.	They	should	open	 the	door	 for
the	higher	realm.	For	example,	if	you	are	really	a	lover	of	music,	soon	music	will
be	 forgotten	 and	 you	 will	 be	 entering	 into	 silence.	 If	 you	 are	 really	 in	 deep
attachment	with	dance,	soon	the	dance	has	to	disappear,	so	that	you	can	be	in	an
unmoving	state	of	being.
In	 China	 there	 is	 an	 ancient	 story.	 A	man	 declared	 himself	 to	 be	 the	 greatest
archer,	 and	 he	 went	 to	 the	 king	 and	 said,	 "I	 am	 ready	 to	 accept	 anybody's
challenge.	 I	 have	 practiced	 archery	 for	 thirty	 years,	 and	 I	 know	 that	 there	 is
nobody	 in	 the	 whole	 empire	 who	 can	 be	 a	 competitor	 to	 me.	 It	 should	 be
declared...	a	time	should	be	given	and	within	this	time,	if	there	is	somebody	who
wants	 to	 compete	with	me,	 I	 am	 ready;	 otherwise	 you	have	 to	 declare	me	 the
champion	of	the	whole	empire,	the	master	archer."
The	 king	 knew	 that	 he	was	 the	 greatest	 archer	 he	 had	 seen	 and	what	 he	was
saying	 was	 not	 boasting,	 it	 was	 really	 true.	 There	 was	 nobody	 in	 the	 whole
empire	even	close	 to	him;	he	had	gone	 into	 the	art	 so	deeply.	But	 an	old	man
who	was	the	constant	companion	of	the	king...	he	was	a	servant,	but	he	was	very
respected	by	 the	king	because	 the	king's	 father	had	died	early	and	 this	 servant
had	been	almost	a	father	to	him;	he	had	protected	him,	he	had	disciplined	him,
he	had	 trained	him	 to	be	a	king,	and	he	managed	 to	put	him	on	 the	 throne,	 to
make	him	the	emperor.	He	was	sitting	by	his	side	on	the	ground,	and	he	laughed.
The	king	said,	 "Why	are	you	 laughing?	What	he	 is	 saying	 is	 true.	 I	know	 this
man,	I	know	his	archery.	Even	with	closed	eyes	he	never	misses	his	target;	with
closed	 eyes	 he	 can	 kill	 a	 flying	 bird.	 There	 is	 nobody	 who	 is	 in	 any	 way
comparable	to	him."
The	old	man	said,	"You	are	too	young.	I	know	a	man	before	whom	this	man	is
just	an	amateur.	He	is	very	ancient,	very	old	--	older	than	me.	He	lives	deep	in
the	mountains.
Before	 you	 declare	 this	man	 the	 champion,	 he	 has	 to	meet	 that	 old	man.	 Just
meeting	him	will	be	enough	--	competition	is	out	of	the	question."
This	was	a	great	challenge...	just	meeting	him	will	be	enough,	competition	is	out
of	 the	 question.	 You	 cannot	 compete	 with	 that	 man.	 He	 is	 a	 master.	 And	 he
showed	him	 the	way	 to	 the	place	where	he	could	be	 found,	 the	cave	where	he
lived.	 The	 archer	 went	 miles	 into	 the	 mountains,	 finally	 found	 the	 cave	 and
laughed,	because	there	was	the	old	man	sitting,	not	even	with	a	bow	in	the	cave
anywhere,	 no	 arrows	 --	what	kind	of	master	 archer	 is	he?	And	he	was	 so	old,
maybe	ninety,	ninety-five	or	more.	He	could	not	hit	the	target,	his	hands	would
tremble;	he	was	so	old!	But	the	man	said,	"I	have	been	sent	by	the	king	to	meet
you."
The	old	man	said,	"I	have	received	 the	message	of	 the	king,	but	before	 I	meet
you	I	will	give	a	little	test.	I	don't	meet	each	and	everybody!	At	least	you	must
be	capable	of	being	an	archer;	you	will	have	to	do	for	me	a	little	test."	To	be	a
master	 archer	 is	 out	 of	 question...	 he	 wanted	 to	 check	 whether	 he	 had	 any
capacity	for	archery,	any	talent,	any	genius.
The	old	man	came	out	of	his	cave,	 took	 the	young	man	with	him	and	he	said,
"The	moment	 I	 saw	you	coming	with	your	bow	and	with	your	arrows,	 I	knew
that	 you	were	 an	 amateur,	 because	 the	 real	master	 does	not	 need	 these	 things.
Have	you	not	 heard	 the	 ancient	 saying:	when	 a	master	 reaches	 to	 his	 ultimate
genius,	 if	 he	 is	 an	 archer	 he	 throws	 away	 his	 bow	 and	 his	 arrows;	 if	 he	 is	 a
musician	he	 throws	away	his	musical	 instruments;	 if	he	 is	 a	painter	he	 throws
away	his	brushes,	his	canvases."
He	said,	"I	have	heard	it	but	I	have	never	understood	it."
The	old	man	said,	"Now	you	have	come	to	the	place	where	you	will	understand
it.	Come	with	me."	There	was	a	rock	protruding	into	 the	valley,	and	the	valley
was	thousands	of	feet	deep.	If	you	fell	from	the	rock	there	was	no	possibility	of
your	 being	 alive;	 in	 fact	 you	 could	 not	 even	 be	 found	 as	 a	 whole	 body,	 you
would	be	scattered.	It	was	a	dangerous	valley.
The	old	man	went	onto	the	protruding	rock;	the	young	man	was	standing	there
trembling
--	he	was	not	going	onto	the	rock.	The	old	man	was	going	and	the	young	man
was	trembling.	The	old	man	said,	"Stop	that	trembling.	That	is	not	the	sign	of	a
master	archer."	And	the	old	man	went	to	the	very	end	of	the	rock,	standing	with
half	of	his	feet	off	the	edge	of	the	rock.	He	was	standing	there	and	he	said	to	the
young	man,	"Now	you	come	and	stand	by	my	side."
The	 young	 man	 took	 one	 step,	 two	 steps	 --	 and	 then	 fell	 flat,	 trembling,
everything	whirling.	He	said,	"You	have	to	forgive	me.	I	cannot	come	where	you
are	standing.	Just	a	little	mistake,	a	little	breeze	of	wind,	a	little	forgetfulness	and
you	are	gone	 forever!	 I	have	come	here	 to	meet	you,	not	 to	 commit	 suicide.	 I
cannot	believe	how	you	are	standing	there."
The	old	man	said,	"That's	what	archery	brings	to	a	man	--	an	untrembling	heart,
a	non-moving	mind.	Now	I	do	not	need	the	bow	and	the	arrows.	I	know	that	you
have	looked	around	in	my	cave	and	I	have	seen	your	subtle	smile,	`How	can	this
man	be	an	archer?'
Now	I	will	show	you	my	archery."
He	looked	up	and	there	were	nine	birds	flying	--	and	as	he	looked	up	all	the	nine
birds	 fell	 down	 on	 the	 earth.	He	 said,	 "If	 you	 are	 absolutely	 immobile	 inside,
even	your	eyes	are	enough;	arrows	are	not	needed.	So	go	back,	practice	archery.
Championship	is	far	away.	While	I	am	alive,	never	think	again	of	championship
--	although	I	am	not	a	competitor.	Even	if	you	were	declared	champion	I	would
not	have	bothered	to	object	--
who	cares?	Your	championships,	your	titles	are	children's	games.
"But	the	old	man	in	the	palace	knows	me.	Now	as	long	as	I	am	living	you	cannot
be	 a	 champion;	 you	 can	 be	 a	 champion	 if	 you	 really	 go	 deeper	 into	 archery,
practice.	And	only	I	can	make	you	a	champion,	not	the	king.	What	does	he	know
about	archery?	So	tell	him,
`You	don't	have	any	authority.'	 I	will	come	in	the	right	 time	if	I	am	alive.	Or	I
will	send	somebody,	or	I	will	make	some	arrangement,	even	if	I	am	dead."
Ten	years	passed	and	the	old	man	was	dying.	He	called	his	son	from	the	village
down	 in	 the	plains	 and	 told	him	 --	he	was	also	very	old	 --	 "Go	 to	 this	 certain
archer	and	just	report	to	me	the	situation."
He	went	 there.	 The	 archer	was	 very	 loving,	 very	 happy	 that	 the	 old	man	 still
remembered	him	and	had	sent	his	son.	The	son	saw	the	big	bow	hanging	on	the
wall.	He	asked,	"What	is	it?"
And	the	archer	said,	"I	used	to	know	what	it	is...	Now	I	don't	know.	I	will	have	to
ask;	somebody	must	know."
But	the	son	said,	"I	have	heard	you	are	an	archer."
He	said,	"I	used	to	be	in	my	youth,	and	in	youth	everybody	is	foolish.	I	used	to
be,	but	your	father	brought	me	to	my	senses."
This	was	reported	to	the	old	man,	that	he	had	forgotten	the	name	of	the	bow.	The
old	man	 said,	 "That	means	 he	 has	 proved	 his	mettle.	 I	 will	 have	 to	 go	 down
before	I	die	to	declare	him	the	champion,	the	master	archer."
Now	he	was	also	capable	--	just	looking	at	a	bird	was	enough	to	kill	it.	Just	those
two	 rays	 going	 from	 the	 eyes	 were	 enough,	 because	 his	 inner	 being	 was	 so
solidly	 immobile	 that	 those	 two	 rays	 became	 like	 arrows.	 He	 said,	 "Now	 I
understand	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 old	 saying:	 The	 musician	 breaks	 down	 his
musical	 instruments	when	he	really	becomes	a	master.	Then	what	 is	 the	use	of
those	instruments?	because	they	are	still	part	of	the	world	of	sound	and	the	real
music	is	silence."
Even	when	you	are	listening	to	music,	what	really	touches	your	heart	is	not	the
sound	but	the	gap	between	two	sounds.	How	to	bring	that	gap	to	your	heart	is	the
whole	art	of	music.	But	if	a	man	can	bring	that	gap	just	by	his	presence,	and	you
fall	 into	deep	 silence,	 you	will	 know	 the	 real	music.	Then	you	will	 know	 that
what	 you	 used	 to	 think	 of	 as	music	was	 only	 a	 preliminary	 training.	And	 the
same	 is	 true	 about	 dancing,	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	 every	 creative	 art.	What	 it
appears	to	be	is	not	the	reality;	it	is	just	a	device	so	that	you	can	become	aware
of	something	intangible,	hidden,	beyond.
But	to	love	music	is	good,	to	love	dance	is	good,	to	play	music	is	good,	to	dance
is	good	-
-	but	remember,	that	is	not	the	end.	You	have	to	go	far	--	away	from	music,	away
from	dance	--	to	understand	the	real	beauty	of	any	creative	art.	Every	creative	art
brings	you	to	your	innermost	being	where	there	is	just	calmness,	utter	quietness,
absolute	silence.
Then	you	can	 say,	 "I	have	heard	 that	which	cannot	be	heard.	And	 I	have	 seen
that	which	cannot	be	seen."
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
UNTIL	 NOW	 I	 HAVE	 NOT	 HAD	 MANY	 SEXUAL	 EXPERIENCES,	 BUT
LATELY	I	HAVE	FELT	TO	BECOME	MORE	SEXUALLY	ACTIVE.	I	SEEM
TO	AVOID
HETEROSEXUAL	 MEN,	 AND	 DESIRE	 THOSE	 WHO	 ARE
HOMOSEXUAL.
I	AM	NOT	CLEAR	IF	I	AM	RUNNING	AWAY	FROM	SEX	OUT	OF	FEAR,
OR
TOWARDS	PEOPLE	I	REALLY	LIKE	AND	NEED.	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE
SHED
SOME	LIGHT	ON	THIS?
It	 is	possible	 that	avoiding	sex	for	a	 long	 time	and	now	getting	 interested	 in	 it
you	will	have	to	go	slowly	towards	it.
To	 be	 attracted	 to	 homosexuals	 is	 a	 step.	 Finally	 you	 will	 be	 attracted	 to	 the
heterosexuals.	The	homosexual	is	half	way.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	it.	It	is	good	to
go	 gradually,	mature	 gradually.	And	 it	 is	 also	 possible	 the	 homosexual	 person
may	 be	 a	 person	 that	 you	 like,	 you	 love,	 that	 he	 deserves	 your	 love.	 His
homosexuality	may	be	a	secondary	thing.	If	it	is	a	secondary	thing,	then	perhaps
you	can	stay	with	the	homosexual	person	long	enough,	but	if	it	is	only	a	passing
phase	 then	 moving	 from	 no	 sexuality	 or	 very	 little	 sexuality	 towards	 a
heterosexual	man,	a	direct	jump,	will	be	too	much	and	can	be	dangerous.	It	may
throw	you	back	into	your	avoidance.
It	is	perfectly	good	that	you	are	loving	a	homosexual.	If	he	is	a	worthy	person	to
be	loved,	that	is	even	better;	otherwise	even	his	homosexuality	is	going	to	help
you	tremendously	to	reach	to	the	heterosexual	person.
These	are	 the	four	stages:	 the	auto-sexual	person	avoids	sexuality.	He	wants	 to
contain	his	sexuality	within	himself,	he	is	a	kind	of	miser,	and	such	people	suffer
from	constipation.	It	is	now	a	well-established	psychological	fact.	There	is	not	a
medical	way	 to	 help	 them	get	 rid	 of	 constipation,	 as	 their	 constipation	 has	 no
cause	in	the	body;	their	constipation	has	cause	in	their	mind.
You	should	be	reminded	that	the	sexual	center	is	in	the	mind,	not	in	the	genitals.
And	strangely	enough,	by	the	way,	the	sexual	center	and	the	food	center	are	very
close	 --	 too	close.	So	a	person	who	 stops	his	 sexuality	 starts	 eating	 too	much.
The	energy	of	 the	sexual	center	 starts	overflowing	onto	 the	next	center,	 that	 is
food.	He	 becomes	 a	 food	 addict;	 he	 looks	 at	 food	 the	way	 a	 lover	 looks	 at	 a
beloved.
The	 second	 stage	 is	 homosexuality.	 It	 is	 a	 little	 better	 than	 being	 auto-sexual,
confined	to	yourself	--	now	at	least	you	are	connecting	with	your	same	sex.	But
there	is	a	confinement	still	--	although	it	is	a	bigger	confinement	--	man	to	man,
woman	to	woman.
The	 third	 stage	 is	 heterosexual,	 which	 is	 the	maturity	 of	 sex	 --	 when	 you	 go
beyond	your	femaleness	or	your	maleness,	where	you	transcend	your	class	and
move	to	the	opposite.
And	 because	 the	 tension	 between	 the	 opposite	 is	 great,	 love	 blossoms	 on	 a
grander	scale.
Between	 two	 homosexuals,	 love	 is	 --	 but	 there	 is	 no	 tension	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 not
without	any	reason	that	homosexuals	are	called	gay	people,	because	there	is	no
tension,	 there	 is	 no	 fight;	 they	 are	 always	 smiling,	 always	 looking	happy.	The
happiness	is	shallow.
The	heterosexuals	are	 in	a	conflict,	and	 in	 love.	They	 laugh	deeply,	 they	weep
deeply,	 they	 fight	 deeply,	 they	 feel	 for	 each	 other	 deeply;	 everything	 is	 deep
because	 of	 the	 tension.	 They	 are	 known	 as	 intimate	 enemies.	 The	 intimacy	 is
deep,	the	enmity	is	also	deep.
The	fourth	state	is	asexual,	when	you	are	fed	up	and	you	have	seen	all	that	sex
can	 provide	 --	 its	 misery,	 its	 pleasure,	 its	 fights,	 its	 friendship	 --	 and	 slowly,
slowly	you	see	the	routine,	the	same	wheel	moving.	To	change	that	boredom	of
the	same	wheel	moving	you	may	change	partners;	that	gives	you	a	little	energy
for	a	few	days	more,	but	again	the	boredom	comes	back.
Once	you	are	utterly	bored	with	sex	then	the	fourth	stage	is	asexual.	For	the	first
time	 you	 are	 completely	 free.	 The	 first	 stage	 was	 very	 much	 confined	 to
yourself;	the	second	stage	was	confined	to	your	class	--	man	to	man,	woman	to
woman.	The	third	was	better,	but	still	it	was	confined	--	man	to	woman,	the	same
species.	The	 fourth	stage	 is	completely	 free	 from	sex:	you	have	known	 it,	you
have	 understood	 it.	 Its	 work	 is	 finished.	 It	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 burden	 on	 you,	 no
longer	a	desire	on	you,	no	more	a	tension.	You	feel	light,	and	for	the	first	time
you	can	enjoy	being	alone.
To	me	this	is	true	celibacy,	not	a	practiced	celibacy.	It	is	through	the	experience
of	all	 the	stages	that	you	come	to	true	celibacy,	and	the	true	celibacy	has	to	be
understood:	it	is	not	anti-sexual,	it	is	only	asexual.	It	has	no	antagonism,	no	anti-
attitudes.	In	the	fourth	stage	you	can	have	sex	as	fun,	just	a	biological	game.
So	it	is	not	that	you	have	to	drop	sex;	you	can	drop...	you	can	either	drop	it	or
you	can	keep	it.	But	it	has	lost	all	the	old	meaning	and	all	the	old	implications,
all	the	old	bondage,	all	old	fights,	jealousies	--	all	that	is	lost.	If	it	drops,	it	drops;
if	it	continues,	then	it	is	just	casual	friendship,	with	no	strings	attached	to	it,	with
no	conditions	attached	to	it.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	 HAVE	 BEEN	 VERY	 FEW	 ENLIGHTENED	 WOMEN	 IN	 THE
WORLD,	AND
NONE	THAT	 I	KNOW	OF	 IN	THIS	CENTURY.	 IS	THERE	HOPE	FOR	US
WOMEN?
It	is	not	hard	--	but	man	has	not	allowed	it.
Man	suffers	from	a	deep	inferiority	complex,	and	to	keep	it	repressed	he	keeps
the	woman	in	every	possible	way	inferior	to	himself;	otherwise	if	she	is	allowed
freedom,	allowed	all	her	talents,	her	genius,	the	great	fear	of	man	is	that	she	can
prove	 superior	 in	 many	 dimensions.	 And	 she	 has	 many	 things	 which	 man	 is
missing.
Naturally	the	only	simple	way	was	to	cut	all	possible	ways	in	which	the	woman
could	 grow.	So	 all	women	have	 been	 left	 retarded.	Their	 roots	 have	 been	 cut:
don't	give	education	 to	 them,	don't	 let	 them	have	 the	 freedom	of	movement	 in
society,	don't	let	them	have	friends	from	the	other	sex.
And	for	 thousands	of	years	 it	has	been	going	on.	Naturally	 if	a	woman	cannot
become	 a	 scientist,	 if	 a	 woman	 cannot	 become	 a	 poet,	 if	 a	 woman	 cannot
become	 a	 great	 architect,	 a	 great	 sculptor,	 then	 the	 question	 of	 a	 woman
becoming	 enlightened	 becomes	 very	 difficult.	 So	many	 steps	 in	 between	 have
been	completely	removed.	My	whole	vision	is	to	put	those	steps	back.
And	I	am	trying	my	best	to	put	those	steps	back,	so	any	woman	of	any	quality
has	 the	full	possibility,	 freedom	and	support	 to	grow.	Some	of	 the	women	will
grow	to	become	enlightened,	but	no	such	possibility	has	ever	before	existed.
So	 it	 is	 true	 you	 have	 not	 heard	 of	 enlightened	 women,	 particularly	 in	 this
century	--
although	there	have	been	a	few	women	who,	in	spite	of	all	this	imprisonment	of
their	 being,	 became	 enlightened.	 But	 they	 are	 not	 the	 rule,	 they	 are	 the
exceptions.	They	simply	prove	one	thing:	that	just	to	be	a	woman	does	not	mean
that	the	doors	of	enlightenment	are	closed	to	you.
One	woman	was	Rabiya	al-Adabiya,	in	Arabia,	one	woman	was	Meera	in	India.
One	woman	was	in	the	very	ancient	times,	in	the	days	of	the	RIG	VEDA	--	that
may	be	five	thousand	years	old,	or	ninety	thousand	years	old;	it	is	undecided	by
the	scholars...	but	these	women	can	be	counted	on	less	than	ten	fingers.
But	it	is	enough	proof	that	to	be	a	woman	does	not	mean	that	enlightenment	is
not	 for	 you.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 feel	 that	 because	 you	 have	 been
prevented	 from	being	 enlightened,	 or	 even	 from	moving	 in	 that	 direction,	 you
have	more	possibility	now	than	man,	for	the	simple	reason	that	just	as	land	that
has	 not	 been	 used	 for	 many	 years	 is	 more	 fertile,	 just	 it	 needs	 seeds...	 That
means	"Okay,	Maneesha!"
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#21
Chapter	 title:	 The	most	 blissful	moment	 --	 when	 you	 cannot	 find	 yourself	 22
April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604225
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO21
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
79
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	SIT	 IN	FRONT	OF	YOU	AND	LISTEN	TO	YOU	SPEAK,	 I	FEEL
AS	 IF	 A	 PROCESS	 OF	 OSMOSIS	 IS	 HAPPENING.	 I	 FIND	 I	 DON'T
INTELLECTUALLY
LISTEN.	IS	THIS	THE	RIGHT	WAY	OR	AM	I	MISSING	SOMETHING?
This	is	the	right	way.
If	 you	 listen	 to	me	 intellectually	 you	miss,	 not	 something,	 but	 all.	 Intellectual
listening	is	a	kind	of	deafness.	When	I	say	something,	you	can	listen	to	the	word.
You	 have	 a	 mind,	 a	 library	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 all	 your	 prejudices,	 philosophies,
ideologies.	The	word	has	to	go	through	all	those	preconceived	patterns,	and	by
the	time	it	reaches	to	you	it	is	no	longer	the	same.
It	has	changed	so	many	times,	passing	through	the	whole	process	of	intellectual
listening,	 that	 when	 it	 comes	 out	 it	 is	 absolutely	 something	 else.	 And	 yet	 it
appears	 to	 be	 rationally	 the	 right	 thing;	 it	 fits	with	 your	mind.	The	 process	 of
listening	has	managed	to	cut	it	here	and	there,	change	it	here	and	there;	to	color
it	here	and	there,	to	make	it	what	you	want	it	to	be,	not	what	it	is.	And	you	will
agree	with	it;	it	is	your	own	idea,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	me.
Listening	intellectually	is	not	listening	at	all.	It	 is	a	way	of	avoiding.	The	right
way	is	that	you	don't	bring	your	mind	in	and	you	let	me	go	into	your	innermost
being	without	being	hindered.	Then	there	will	be	an	understanding.	Then	there
will	be	a	communion,	a	real	 listening,	because	in	the	very	process	of	listening,
you	have	changed.
Now	the	agreement	that	arises	in	your	being	is	not	agreeing	with	your	mind,	it	is
agreeing	with	something	new,	which	your	mind	knows	nothing	of.	The	mind	is
always	old,	and	the	truth	is	always	new;	they	never	meet,	they	never	coexist.
You	are	fortunate	that	you	can	listen	the	right	way	--	putting	the	mind	aside,	just
allowing	me	 to	 sink	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 within	 you.	 Then	 even	 though	 words
have	been	used,	silence	has	been	conveyed.	Even	though	words	have	been	used,
that	which	cannot	be	said	has	been	said	--	at	least	has	been	heard.	And	saying	is
not	important,	hearing	is	important.
Right	 listening	means	 you	will	 never	 ask	 how	 to	 do	 it.	 For	 example,	 if	 I	 am
talking	about	silence	and	you	are	listening	the	right	way,	you	will	never	ask	how
to	be	silent,	because	in	the	very	listening	you	would	have	tasted	it.	 In	the	very
listening	you	will	have	experienced	it	--	the	window	has	opened.
The	people	who	listen	intellectually	are	bound	to	ask	later	on	how	to	do	it.	Their
question	about	how	to	do	it	signifies	that	they	have	missed	what	was	conveyed
to	them.
It	is	not	only	words	that	I	am	saying	to	you	--	I	am	conveying	my	very	heart.	The
words	are	only	vehicles.	Through	the	intellect	the	vehicles	will	reach,	but	I	will
be	left	behind.
When	you	are	listening	without	the	mind,	the	vehicle	becomes	unimportant;	its
only	use	is	that	it	helps	me	to	reach	to	you.	It	is	my	outstretched	hand,	so	that	I
can	touch	your	heart.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 REMEMBER	 YOU	 TALKING	 ABOUT	 EYES	 AND	 LOOKING	 INTO
PEOPLE'S
EYES	 AND	 HIDING	 THROUGH	 NOT	 LOOKING	 DIRECTLY	 INTO
SOMEONE'S
EYES.	 AFTER	 THIS	 DISCOURSE	 I	 DROPPED	MY	 GLASSES,	 WHICH	 I
HAVE
HAD	SINCE	 I	WAS	ONE	YEAR	OLD.	NOT	WEARING	THEM,	 I	 FOUND
MYSELF
BEING	MORE	OPEN	 IN	 LOOKING	 IN	 SOMEONE'S	 EYES,	 AND	 I	 FELT
GREAT
POWER	IN	MY	EYES.	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	TALK	ABOUT	THE
PSYCHOLOGICAL	NEED	TO	WEAR	GLASSES?
It	is	something	truly	significant	to	understand.
No	animal	needs	glasses.	It	is	very	strange	why	man	needs	glasses.	The	reasons
are	two:	the	first	is	the	physiological	reason;	and	the	second	is	the	psychological.
The	physiological	reason	is	that	our	process	of	helping	a	mother	to	give	birth	to
a	child	 is	basically	wrong.	For	example,	 the	child	has	been	 for	nine	months	 in
deep	darkness;	his	eyes	are	very	delicate,	fragile.	And	in	any	hospital	where	he	is
going	to	be	born,	he	is	going	to	face,	immediately	after	the	birth,	glaring	lights
all	around.	That	is	the	first	shock	to	the	whole	delicate	system	of	his	eyes.	And
eyes	are	the	most	delicate	part	of	your	body
--	 softer	 than	 a	 rose	 petal,	 very	 fragile	 and	 very	 important,	 because	 eighty
percent	 of	 your	 life's	 experience	 depends	 on	 them.	 Only	 twenty	 percent	 is
contributed	by	your	other	senses.
That	is	one	of	the	reasons	why	a	blind	man	suddenly	creates	a	deep	compassion
in	you.
The	 deaf	 man	 does	 not	 create	 the	 same	 compassion.	 He	 is	 also	 missing
something	 --	 he	 cannot	 hear.	 The	 dumb	 cannot	 speak....	 In	 any	 other	way	 the
body	may	be	 crippled,	 but	 nothing	 can	 create	more	 compassion	 in	 you	 than	 a
blind	man.	Unknowingly,	unconsciously,	there	is	an	understanding	that	the	blind
man	is	the	poorest.
Eighty	 percent	 of	 his	 life	 experience	 is	 cut	 off;	 he	 is	 living	 only	 on	 twenty
percent.	His	life	has	no	color,	his	life	has	no	experience	of	beauty,	his	life	has	no
experience	of	proportion.	His	life	has	missed	the	beautiful	sunsets	and	the	starry
night.	 His	 eyes	 have	 missed	 millions	 of	 other	 eyes	 which	 are	 loaded	 with
experience;	 and	 to	 be	 in	 contact	 with	 them	 is	 to	 be	 in	 contact	 with	 different
worlds.
But	the	way	the	hospitals	have	decided	to	give	birth	to	a	new	child	is	dangerous.
First	 they	spoil	 the	eyes.	Second,	 they	destroy	 the	 trust	of	 the	child.	The	child
has	 lived	 for	 nine	 months	 in	 the	 mother's	 womb	 with	 immense	 trust	 --	 the
question	of	doubt	does	not	arise.	Everything	that	he	wants	he	gets;	in	fact	before
he	wants,	he	gets	 it.	No	responsibility,	no	worry,	no	question	of	 time.	He	does
not	think	of	tomorrow,	and	he	has	no	memories	of	yesterdays.	He	lives	moment
to	moment,	utterly	 joyous.	There	 is	nothing	 to	make	him	sad,	nothing	 to	make
him	miserable.
But	 the	moment	he	 is	born,	his	whole	 life	goes	 through	a	great	 tragic	 change.
The	doctors	are	in	a	hurry;	they	cannot	even	wait	for	two	minutes.	They	want	to
cut	the	cord	that	joins	the	child	with	the	mother,	immediately	--	and	they	cut	it
immediately,	without	bothering	 that	 the	child	has	not	yet	breathed	on	his	own,
that	his	own	 system	has	not	 started	 functioning.	They	have	cut	 the	 connection
with	 the	 life	source	of	 the	mother.	This	 is	one	of	 the	deep	wounds	that	will	be
carried	all	along	through	his	life.
And	then	to	make	the	child	breathe,	they	will	hang	it	upside	down	and	hit	on	his
buttocks
--	 a	great	 reception!	And	because	of	 the	hit	 the	child	 starts	breathing.	But	 this
breathing	 is	 not	 natural	 and	 spontaneous.	 If	 they	 had	 just	waited	 two	 or	 three
minutes	and	 left	 the	child	on	his	mother's	belly....	He	was	 inside	nine	months;
with	 just	 three	 minutes	 outside	 on	 the	 belly	 --	 the	 same	 warmth,	 the	 same
woman,	 the	 same	 energy	 --	 he	would	 have	 started	 breathing	 on	 his	 own.	And
then	to	cut	the	cord	would	have	been	absolutely	logical,	rational,	scientific.
And	everything	else	that	is	being	done	takes	no	account	of	the	implications.	The
child	has	been	in	the	mother's	womb	in	a	certain	warmth.	He	has	been	floating.
The	best	way	will	be,	once	he	starts	breathing	on	his	own,	just	 to	put	him	in	a
small	bathtub	of	warm	water	consisting	of	 the	 same	chemicals	as	 the	mother's
womb	 --	 it	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 as	 ocean	 water.	 And	 that's	 what	 makes	 the
evolutionists	certain	that	man	was	born	in	the	ocean.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know,	the	first	incarnation	of	God	in	Hinduism	is	a	fish.
It	 is	 very	 strange	 --	 just	 the	 idea...	 but	 to	 them	God	was	 life.	And	 just	 a	 little
translation	is	needed:	instead	of	saying	the	reincarnation	of	God	was	as	a	fish,	all
that	is	needed	is	to	say	that	life's	beginning	was	as	a	fish.
Allow	 the	 child	 the	 same	 atmosphere	 so	 he	 does	 not	 feel,	 from	 the	 very	 first
moment,	 in	a	stranger's	world,	afraid.	But	we	make	him	afraid.	We	destroy	his
delicate	eyes,	we	destroy	his	spontaneity,	we	even	force	his	breathing.	We	don't
give	him	a	natural	environment,	one	to	which	he	is	accustomed.
All	these	small	things	are	going	to	affect	his	whole	life.	For	example,	whenever
he	 is	 in	 anxiety,	 his	 breathing	will	 become	 erratic.	Whenever	 he	 is	 afraid,	 his
breathing	will	be	immediately	affected.	And	sooner	or	later	--	because	only	man
uses	his	eyes	for	reading,	and	his	eyes	are	no	longer	as	powerful	as	nature	had
made	them	--	the	child	finds	his	eyes	are	weakening.	He	cannot	see	small	letters,
small	 figures,	 or	 he	 cannot	 see	 faraway	 things,	 and	 then	 the	 glasses	 become
necessary.	 If	 glasses	 are	 avoided	 then	 his	 eyes	 will	 go	 on	 deteriorating.	 The
glasses	are	simply	to	help	him,	just	to	compensate	for	the	damage	that	has	been
done.
But	glasses	have	their	own	psychology.	With	the	glasses	you	are	always	behind	a
curtain,	in	some	way	hiding	--	not	facing	life	as	it	is,	trying	to	avoid	this	way	or
that,	never	being	straight,	sincere.	Glasses	are	helping	you	to	protect	your	eyes,
but	they	bring	their	own	problems	with	them.	And	these	are	the	problems.	They
stand	between	you	and	the	world,	between	you	and	the	person	you	love,	between
you	and	the	person	you	are	communicating	with.
Because	of	 the	glasses	you	never	come	in	direct	contact	with	the	eyes	of	other
people.
And	that	is	missing	a	great	experience,	because	people	are	basically	their	eyes.	If
you	can	see	into	a	person's	eyes,	its	depth	will	be	that	person's	depth.	A	cunning
person	 will	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 see	 directly	 into	 his	 eyes,	 because	 a	 cunning
person's	eyes	reveal	his	cunningness.
The	eyes	are	just	an	opening	--	the	cunning	person	is	afraid;	he	will	always	look
sideways.	He	will	 be	 talking	 to	you	but	 looking	 at	 something	 else;	 his	 talking
and	his	seeing	will	not	be	in	the	same	direction.	He	will	be	listening	to	you	but
his	 eyes	will	 not	 be	 concentrated	on	you.	The	man	who	wants	 to	 deceive	you
cannot	confront	you	eye	to	eye.	Only	a	simple,	sincere	person,	a	person	with	a
loving	 heart	 and	with	 no	 cunning	 desire	 will	 allow	 you	 to	 look	 into	 his	 eyes
because	he	knows	you	will	find	his	truth.	He	has	nothing	to	hide.
So	 if	you	are	using	glasses,	 then	use	 them	only	 for	particular	purposes.	 If	you
need	them	for	reading,	use	them	for	reading.	If	you	use	them	continuously	it	is
dangerous	--	not	to	your	eyes,	but	to	your	whole	being.	If	you	need	them	to	look
far	away,	you	can	use	them;	but	don't	make	it	part	of	your	being.
Your	glasses	should	never	become	part	of	your	being.	Only	when	necessary	use
them.
When	you	feel	they	are	not	necessary,	put	them	away,	so	at	least	for	long	periods
you	are	available	to	the	world	in	your	authenticity,	and	the	world	is	available	to
you;	there	is	no	barrier.
You	cannot	do	anything	about	the	basic	harm,	but	if	you	give	birth	to	a	child,	it
is	 better	 to	 give	 birth	 amongst	 your	 loving	 friends,	 with	 candlelights,	 with
incense	burning,	with	flowers	all	around.	Give	the	child	at	least	a	good	welcome
to	the	world.
And	 don't	 be	 technical	 --	 man	 is	 not	 a	 machine	 --	 be	 human.	 Let	 him	 first
breathe;	then	cut	the	connection	with	the	mother.	There	is	no	hurry.	He	should	be
given	 the	 chance	 to	 be	 spontaneous;	 otherwise	 he	 will	 suffer	 his	 whole	 life
troubles	and	problems	concerned	with	breathing.
And	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 glaring	 lights;	 otherwise	 you	 have	 started	 already
destroying	 his	 eyes.	 Soon	 he	 will	 need	 glasses.	 If	 you	 have	 been	 using	 them
since	you	were	one	year	old,	that	shows	what	we	have	been	doing	with	children.
And	nobody	tells	you	to	use	glasses	only	when	you	need	them;	otherwise	don't
let	them	become	an	essential	habit.
It	 is	 known	 about	Mulla	 Nasruddin	 that	 one	 night	 he	woke	 up	 and	 asked	 his
wife,	"Where	are	my	glasses?"
She	said,	"What	is	the	need	in	the	middle	of	the	night	for	glasses?"
He	said,	"I	don't	want	to	fight	--	I	am	not	in	a	position	right	now	--	I	will	explain
everything	 later	 on.	 First,	my	 glasses!"	With	 his	 glasses	 on	 he	 tried	 for	 a	 few
minutes,	 then	 he	 said,	 "You	 destroyed	 it.	 If	 you	 had	 given	 them	 to	 me
immediately,	 perhaps	 I	 may	 not	 have	 missed.	 I	 was	 having	 such	 a	 beautiful
dream;	 just	 then	 I	 remembered,	 Ì	 cannot	 see	without	glasses.'	Such	a	beautiful
dream	--	I	must	be	missing	much.	And	you	are	so	stupid	that	you	started	arguing
with	me.
"When	I	was	asking	for	my	glasses,	you	should	have	understood	there	must	be
some	need,	and	later	on	you	could	have	discussed	it.	But	at	that	very	time...	and
the	gap	became	so	big	that	I	tried	again	and	again	with	the	glasses,	but	the	dream
was	broken.	And	with	it	broken	I	could	not	manage	to	catch	up	with	it	again.
"And	it	was	not	only	just	a	beautiful	dream,	it	had	something	to	do	with	finances
too.	A	man	was	promising	to	give	me	money,	and	we	were	haggling.	He	wanted
to	 purchase	 something,	 and	 I	 had	brought	 him	up	 to	 ninety-nine	 rupees.	But	 I
was	stubborn	--	I	was	trying	to	bring	him	to	one	hundred	rupees;	and	it	was	only
a	 question	 of	 one	 rupee.	 And	 the	 thing	 I	 was	 selling	 was	 not	 worth	 twenty
rupees.	I	would	have	given	it	to	him	for	ninety-nine,	but	I	wanted	to	see	the	man
accurately,	 and	 I	 wanted	 to	 count	 the	 money	 accurately.	 The	 glasses	 were
needed.
"After	I	put	on	the	glasses,	I	was	saying	to	 the	man,	`Wherever	you	are,	come
back!	Okay
--	 ninety-nine	 I	will	 accept,	 ninety-eight	 I	will	 accept.	 I	 am	willing	 to	 give	 it
even	for	ninety.'	But	nobody	responded.	Just	because	of	these	glasses	the	whole
profit	was	lost.
And	I	don't	know	if	I	can	ever	meet	this	man	again,	because	in	the	first	place	I
cannot	recognize	him	without	my	glasses.	Even	if	I	meet	him	tomorrow	on	the
street,	 I	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 recognize	 him,	 because	what	 I	was	 seeing	 I	 don't
know	whether	it	was	true	or	not	true."
People	 are	 so	 accustomed	 to	 their	 glasses	 that	 they	 become	 almost	 their
substitute	eyes.
Then	it	 is	dangerous.	Your	eyes	need	a	 little	freedom:	once	in	a	while	 take	the
glasses	off.
And	 there	 are	 a	 few	 exercises	 available.	 Do	 those	 exercises	 which	will	make
your	eyes	stronger,	healthier,	and	perhaps	you	may	not	need	the	glasses	at	all.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
MY	 WHOLE	 LIFE	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 STRUGGLING	 WITH	 TWO	 HUGE
DESIRES:	A	DESIRE	TO	LOVE	AND	BE	LOVED,	AND	THE	DESIRE	TO
UNDERSTAND	AND
BE	UNDERSTOOD.	TO	SEE	HOW	MISUNDERSTOOD	YOU	ARE	BY	THE
WORLD	 AND	 BY	 YOUR	 FRIENDS	 ASTOUNDS	 ME,	 AND	 YOUR	 NOT
BEING
AFFECTED	 BY	 IT	 ASTOUNDS	ME	 EVEN	MORE.	 FOR	 THE	 PAST	 TEN
YEARS	 I	 HAVE	 BEEN	 CONSUMED	 WITH	 DESIRE	 TO	 UNDERSTAND
YOU	EVERY
MINUTE	 OF	 EVERY	 DAY.	 TODAY	 I	 FEEL	 I	 DON'T	 UNDERSTAND
ANYTHING,	 AND	 YET	 MY	 DESIRE	 TO	 BE	 UNDERSTOOD	 HAS
DIMINISHED.	WHEN	YOU
SPEAK,	 THE	 JOY	 OF	 BEING	 BEYOND	 THESE	 TWO	 DUALITIES	 IS
HEAVEN.
The	desire	to	love	and	to	be	loved,	the	desire	to	understand	and	to	be	understood
are	very	 instinctive,	 very	natural	 --	 but	 very	binding,	 imprisoning.	That's	why,
even	if	for	a	few	moments	listening	to	me	--	if	you	can	forget	these	two	desires,
in	that	transcendence	you	will	find	the	ultimate	in	joy.
I	have	been	misunderstood	perhaps	more	 than	anyone	else	 ever,	 but	 it	 has	not
affected	me,	for	the	simple	reason	that	there	is	no	desire	to	be	understood.	It	is
their	 problem	 if	 they	 don't	 understand,	 it	 is	 not	 my	 problem.	 If	 they
misunderstand,	it	is	their	problem	and	their	misery.	I	am	not	going	to	waste	my
sleep	because	millions	of	people	are	misunderstanding	me.	 If	 I	was	concerned
about	being	understood	they	would	have	driven	me	mad.	But	they	have	not	been
able	to	even	scratch	a	little	bit.
All	their	misunderstanding	is	their	problem.	They	are	suffering	from	it,	they	are
paying	for	 it.	Why	should	I	be	bothered	by	it?	I	have	said	what	I	felt	 is	 true.	I
have	said	it,	not	to	be	understood	--	I	have	said	it	because	I	wanted	to	share.	If
they	are	not	willing,	it	is	up	to	them;	I	cannot	force	them.
But	 both	 these	 desires	 --	 to	 understand	 and	 to	 be	 understood	 --	 are	 together.
Unless	you	understand,	you	cannot	drop	the	desire	to	be	understood.	Once	you
understand	 just	 the	 simple	 existence	 of	 your	 being,	 both	 disappear.	 There	 is
nothing	 more	 to	 understand,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 question	 that	 anybody	 should
understand	you.
And	the	same	is	true	about	love.
The	 moment	 you	 understand	 what	 love	 is,	 you	 experience	 what	 love	 is,	 you
become	love.
Then	 there	 is	no	need	 in	you	 to	be	 loved,	and	 there	 is	no	need	 in	you	 to	 love.
Loving	 will	 be	 your	 simple,	 spontaneous	 existence,	 your	 very	 breathing.	 You
cannot	do	anything	else;	you	will	be	simply	loving.
Now	if	in	return,	love	does	not	come	to	you,	you	will	not	feel	hurt,	for	the	simple
reason	 that	only	 the	person	who	has	become	 love	can	 love.	You	can	give	only
that	which	you	have.	Asking	people	to	love	you	--	people	who	don't	have	love	in
their	 life,	 who	 have	 not	 come	 to	 the	 source	 of	 their	 being	where	 love	 has	 its
shrine	--	how	can	they	love	you?
They	can	pretend.	They	can	say,	they	can	even	believe,	but	sooner	or	later	these
things	are	going	to...	it	is	going	to	be	known	that	it	is	only	a	pretension,	that	it	is
only	acting,	that	it	is	hypocrisy.
There	may	not	be	an	intention	to	deceive	you,	but	what	can	the	person	do?	You
ask	for	love,	and	the	other	person	also	wants	love.	Both	understand	that	you	are
expected	 to	 love,	 that	 only	 then	 can	 you	 get	 love	 --	 so	 you	 both	 try	 in	 every
possible	way	to	take	the	posture	of	love.	But	the	posture	is	empty.	And	both	are
going	 to	discover	 it,	and	both	are	going	 to	complain	about	 it	against	 the	other,
that	 it	 is	 not	 right.	 From	 the	 very	 beginning	 it	 has	 been	 two	 beggars	 begging
from	each	other,	and	both	have	only	empty	begging	bowls.
Both	 are	 pretending	 that	 they	 can	 give,	 but	 their	 basic	 desire	 is	 to	 get.	 If	 you
don't	 have	 it,	 you	 cannot	 give	 it.	 And	 those	 who	 have	 it	 --	 this	 is	 to	 be
understood	 very	 clearly	 --	 those	 who	 have	 found	 the	 source	 of	 love	 within
themselves	are	no	longer	in	need	of	being	loved.	And	they	will	be	loved.
They	will	love	for	no	other	reason	but	simply	because	they	have	too	much	of	it	--
just	as	a	rain	cloud	wants	to	rain,	just	as	a	flower	wants	to	release	its	fragrance,
with	no	desire	 to	get	 anything.	The	 reward	of	 love	 is	 in	 loving,	 not	 in	getting
love.
And	 these	 are	 the	mysteries	 of	 life,	 that	 if	 a	 person	 is	 rewarded	 just	 in	 loving
people,	many	will	 love	 him.	 Because	 by	 being	 in	 contact	with	 him,	 they	will
slowly	start	finding	the	source	within	themselves.	Now	they	know	one	person	at
least	who	showers	love	and	whose	love	is	not	out	of	any	need.	And	the	more	he
shares	and	showers	his	love,	the	more	it	grows.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 understanding.	 If	 you	 are	 close	 to	 a	 person	 of
understanding	 you	 will	 see	 that	 he	 shares;	 sharing	 is	 his	 joy,	 it	 is	 not	 his
business.	 He	 gives	 wholeheartedly,	 knowing	 perfectly	 well	 that	 he	 will	 find
many	 doors	 closed	 in	 his	 face,	 but	 his	 understanding	 is	 deep	 enough	 to
understand	these	people	who	misunderstand	him.
They	are	miserable.	They	are	afraid	to	let	his	understanding	reach	them,	they	are
afraid	 of	 his	 light.	They	 start	 closing	 their	windows	 and	 their	 doors.	They	 are
afraid	of	his	presence.	They	will	condemn,	they	will	create	confusion,	they	will
create	rumors,	they	will	create	lies;	they	will	do	everything	to	prevent	this	man's
light,	his	understanding,	his	insight	from	spreading.	And	the	reason	is	that	they
are	afraid.
This	 man's	 presence	 is	 a	 great	 fear	 to	 them.	 In	 his	 presence	 they	 become
suddenly	naked	-
-	with	all	their	jealousies,	with	all	their	miseries,	with	all	their	pain,	with	all	their
wounds.
In	 his	 presence	 they	 cannot	 hide.	Before	 his	 eyes	 they	 are	 as	 if	 before	 x-rays
which	will	penetrate	to	their	deepest	core	and	reveal	all	they	have	been	somehow
hiding	 from	 the	 society,	 and	 creating	 a	 certain	 good	 image.	 They	 are	 just	 the
opposite	within.
I	have	never	been	hurt	by	any	misunderstanding.	It	was	part	of	my	understanding
that	 it	 is	going	 to	be	 so,	 and	once	you	are	 free	of	 the	desire	 to	 love	and	 to	be
loved,	you	will	love;	but	it	will	not	be	a	desire,	it	will	be	an	overflowing	energy.
And	you	will	be	loved,	but	it	will	not	be	an	expectation,	it	will	be	a	surprise.
Once	 you	 understand	 just	 yourself	 and	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	 all	 kinds	 of
misunderstandings,	your	light	is	so	clear	and	bright,	your	certainty	is	so	absolute,
that	the	whole	world	can	condemn	you	but	it	will	not	in	any	way	hurt	you.	It	will
simply	create	more	compassion	and	more	effort	to	make	these	people	somehow
come	out	of	their	darkness	and	see	the	light.
And	 one	 thing	 is	 certain	 that	 you	mention	 --	 that	 once	 both	 these	 desires	 are
calmed	down,	one	feels	in	heaven.	One	really	is	in	heaven.
One	has	always	been;	it	was	just	that	one	was	getting	disturbed	by	small	things
and	forgetting	the	immense	beauty	and	joy	the	whole	existence	is	ready	to	give
to	you	--	and	without	any	price.	It	is	just	yours	for	the	asking.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	TOO	MANY	QUESTIONS	ABOUT	YOU	BECAUSE	IN	YOU	I	SEE
A	PART
OF	MYSELF,	 AND	 IN	 THAT	 PART	 I	 SEE	 EVERYONE.	 PLEASE	NUDGE
ME	IF	I	AM	IN	THE	WRONG	LANE.
You	are	in	the	wrong	space.
You	see	a	part	of	you	in	me.	That	is	going	to	create	many	problems,	because	I
don't	have	any	part	of	you	 in	me.	And	that	 is	 the	beginning	of	a	 long	 journey;
then	in	that	part	you	see	everybody	else	and	all	 their	problems.	Then	the	small
part	 you	had	 seen	 in	me	becomes	 so	big	 --	 because	 in	 that	 small	 part	 you	 are
seeing	everybody	--	that	you	are	going	to	forget	me	completely.	I	will	be	covered
all	over	with	other	people's	parts	--
thick,	not	a	thin	layer,	because	everybody's	parts....
Just	try	the	other	way:	see	me	just	as	a	small	corner	in	you.	Give	it	to	me,	see	me
there,	and	 in	 it	 see	Chuang	Tzu,	see	Gautam	Buddha,	see	Socrates.	See	all	 the
flowers	that	humanity	has	produced,	and	you	will	become	a	totally	new	person.
Just	 seeing	me,	 and	 in	me	 bringing	 all	 those	who	 can	 somehow	be	 connected
with	 me,	 you	 will	 be	 surrounded	 by	 the	 very	 salt	 of	 the	 earth,	 by	 all	 that	 is
glorious.	And	you	will	disappear	in	it:	you	will	not	be	able	to	find	yourself,	find
where	you	have	gone.
You	will	meet	Socrates,	you	will	meet	Pythagoras,	you	will	meet	Heraclitus,	you
will	meet	strange	but	beautiful	beings	--	Bodhidharma	or	Diogenes	or	Dionysius
--	but	you	will	not	find	yourself.	In	fact,	yourself	does	not	exist.	And	the	meeting
of	all	these	people	within	you	will	make	you	a	paradise.
So	please	just	give	it	a	little	turn:	rather	than	seeing	yourself	in	me	--	if	you	can
do	 that,	why	can't	 you	do	 this?	 it	 is	 the	 same	 --	 see	me	 in	you.	And	 I	 am	not
asking	for	your	whole	being	because	I	want	you	to	leave	it	for	other	guests.	Just
give	me	 a	 little	 corner,	 just	 a	 contact	 center	 from	where	 buddhas	 can	 enter	 in
you.
But	we	are	 so	 accustomed	 to	misery	 that	we	can	do	anything	 to	be	miserable.
And	we	 have	 forgotten	 the	 language	 of	 blissfulness,	 so	 to	make	 even	 a	 small
effort	seems	to	be	very	arduous.	But	I	am	asking	you	to	do	the	same	--	just	give
it	a	little	turn.	It	will	be	far	easier,	and	the	reward	is	going	to	be	enormous.	You
will	be	lost,	and	you	will	never	be	found.
And	that	is	the	most	blissful	moment	--	when	you	cannot	find	yourself,	and	there
is	just	utter	silence.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	Freedom	doesn't	choose,	it	discovers
23	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604230
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO22
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
99
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DOES	IT	MEAN	WHEN	YOU	SAY,	"JUST	BE	YOURSELF"?	HOW
CAN	I	BE	MYSELF	WHEN	I	DON'T	KNOW	WHO	I	AM?	I	KNOW	MANY
OF	MY
PREFERENCES,	 LIKINGS,	 DISLIKINGS	 AND	 TENDENCIES,	 WHICH
SEEM	TO
BE	THE	OUTCOME	OF	A	PROGRAMMED	BIOCOMPUTER	CALLED	THE
MIND.
DOES	 JUST	BEING	ONESELF	MEAN	THAT	ONE	TOTALLY	LIVES	OUT
THE
WHOLE	CONTENT	OF	THE	MIND	AS	WATCHFULLY	AS	POSSIBLE?
Yes,	 it	 exactly	 means	 that	 --	 to	 live	 as	 an	 awareness:	 awareness	 of	 all	 the
programs	 the	 mind	 has	 been	 conditioned	 for,	 awareness	 of	 all	 the	 impulses,
desires,	memories,	 imaginations...	 all	 that	 the	mind	 can	 do.	One	 has	 to	 be	 not
part	of	it,	but	separate	--	seeing	it	but	not	being	it	--	watching	it.
And	this	is	one	of	the	most	essential	things	to	remember,	that	you	cannot	watch
your	watchfulness.	If	you	watch	your	watchfulness,	then	the	watcher	is	you,	not
the	watched.
So	you	cannot	go	beyond	watchfulness.	The	point	 that	you	cannot	transcend	is
your	 being.	The	 point	 that	 you	 cannot	 go	 beyond	 is	 you.	You	 can	watch	 very
easily	any	thought,	any	emotion,	any	sentiment.	Just	one	thing	you	cannot	watch
--	and	that	is	your	watchfulness.	And	if	you	manage	to	watch	it,	that	means	you
have	shifted:	the	first	watchfulness	has	become	just	a	thought;	now	you	are	the
second	watcher.
You	can	go	on	shifting	back,	but	you	cannot	get	out	of	watchfulness	because	it	is
you:	you	cannot	be	otherwise.
So	when	I	say,	"Just	be	yourself,"	I	am	saying	to	you,	"Just	be	unprogrammed,
unconditioned	awareness."	That's	how	you	had	come	 into	 the	world,	and	 that's
how	the	enlightened	person	leaves	the	world.	He	lives	in	the	world	but	remains
totally	separate.
One	of	the	great	mystics,	Kabir,	has	a	beautiful	poem	about	it.	All	his	poems	are
just	perfect	--	nothing	can	be	better.	One	of	his	poems	says,	"I	will	give	back	the
soul	 that	was	 given	 to	me	 at	 the	 time	 of	my	birth	 as	 pure,	 as	 clean,	 as	 it	was
given	 to	 me.	 I	 will	 give	 it	 back	 that	 way	 when	 I	 die."	 He	 is	 talking	 about
awareness,	that	it	has	remained	unpolluted.	The	whole	world	was	there	to	pollute
it,	but	he	has	remained	watchful.
All	 that	 you	 need	 is	 just	 to	 be	 watchful,	 and	 nothing	 will	 affect	 you.	 This
unaffectedness	will	keep	your	purity,	and	this	purity	has	certainly	the	freshness
of	life,	the	joy	of	existence	--	all	the	treasures	that	you	have	been	endowed	with.
But	you	become	attached	to	the	small	things	surrounding	you	and	forget	the	one
that	you	are.	It	is	the	greatest	discovery	in	life	and	the	most	ecstatic	pilgrimage
to	truth.	And	you	need	not	be	an	ascetic,	you	need	not	be	anti-life;	you	need	not
renounce	the	world	and	go	to	the	mountains.	You	can	be	where	you	are,	you	can
continue	to	do	what	you	are	doing.
Just	a	new	thing	has	to	be	evolved:	whatever	you	do,	you	do	with	awareness	--
even	the	smallest	act	of	the	body	or	the	mind	--	and	with	each	act	of	awareness
you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 beauty	 and	 the	 treasure	 and	 the	 glory	 and	 the
eternity	of	your	being.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	SAY	FREEDOM	IS	THE	GREATEST	VALUE	FOR	YOU.	YOU	ALSO
SAY
YOUR	ATTITUDE	TO	LIFE	IS	THAT	OF	LET-GO.	IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	THAT
YOU
HAVE	USED	YOUR	FREEDOM	TO	CHOOSE	TO	GIVE	UP	THE	FREEDOM
TO
DECIDE	ANYTHING,	 IN	FAVOR	OF	LETTING	EXISTENCE	TAKE	CARE
OF
YOU.	 IS	 THE	 ULTIMATE	 IN	 FREEDOM	 ACTUALLY	 TOTAL
ENSLAVEMENT?
No,	I	have	not	chosen	anything.
I	have	not	chosen,	out	of	my	freedom,	to	allow	the	existence	to	take	care	of	me.
Freedom	is	choiceless.	In	freedom	I	have	discovered,	not	chosen.
With	the	eyes	free,	with	the	consciousness	free,	I	have	discovered	that	let-go	is
the	way	existence	 functions.	There	was	no	question	of	choice	 --	whether	 to	be
with	existence	or	not.	It	was	not	either/or,	but	just	the	realization	that	this	is	the
only	way	existence	works.
I	relaxed	with	it.
The	 people	who	 are	 not	 living	 a	 life	 of	 let-go	 are	 choosers,	 because	 they	 are
going	 against	 nature,	 against	 existence;	 they	 have	 to	 choose.	 The	 ego	 is	 a
chooser.	When	 you	 are	 completely	 free	 of	 ego,	 of	 self,	 when	 you	 are	 simply
freedom,	you	see	it	happening	that	the	fight	is	disappearing	and	let-go	is	taking
its	place.	You	are	nothing	more	than	a	watcher.	If	you	choose	it,	then	it	is	not	let-
go.	How	can	it	be	let-go	if	you	choose	it?
It	happened	that	one	man	came	to	Gautam	Buddha,	and	he	wanted	to	surrender
himself	 unto	 Buddha's	 feet.	 Buddha	 looked	 at	 him	 and	 said,	 "You	 cannot
surrender."
He	said,	"Why?	Everybody	else	is	allowed,	and	I	am	not	allowed	--	what	is	my
disqualification?"
Buddha	laughed	and	he	said,	"There	 is	no	question	of	disqualification.	Just	 the
nature	of	surrender	is	such	that	you	cannot	do	it	--	it	happens.	If	you	do	it,	it	is
your	doing;	it	is	not	surrender.	And	if	you	do	it,	you	can	take	it	back.	It	is	never
total;	you	are	outside	of	it.	It	was	your	action,	so	you	can	decide	any	moment:	no
more	 surrender!	 But	 if	 it	 happens	 then	 it	 takes	 all	 of	 you,	 the	 whole	 of	 you,
leaving	nothing	behind	which	can	ever	do	anything	against	it."
Simple	 things...	but	 they	become	complicated	because	our	mind	 is	accustomed
only	to	doing.	And	these	are	not	mind	things.	Surrender,	let-go	--	these	are	not
mind	 things.	 For	 the	 mind	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 think	 of	 them.	 It	 can	 agree	 to
surrender,	it	can	agree	to	let-go,	but	it	has	to	be	the	master,	doing	it,	and	it	has	to
be	an	act	--	and	that's	where	everything	goes	wrong.
Surrender	is	once	and	forever;	let-go	is	once	and	forever	--	just	as	death	is	once
and	forever,	because	nothing	is	left	that	can	change	the	course	of	things.	All	has
been	taken	in.	You	are	no	longer	there	to	have	a	second	thought.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	shown	a	statement	of	Rajen,	one	of	our	therapists,	who
is	doing	as	much	damaging	work	as	possible.	His	statement	was,	"Up	to	now	I
was	 helping	Osho's	work	 through	 surrender;	 now	he	 has	 given	me	 freedom.	 I
will	still	continue	to	do	his	work	but	my	work	will	be	different.	My	work	will	be
to	help	people	to	be	free	of	Osho."
Now,	in	the	first	place	if	he	was	really	surrendered,	then	there	is	no	going	back:
you	cannot	do	anything	about	it	anymore.	It	has	happened,	and	you	are	dissolved
in	it.
Secondly,	I	cannot	give	you	freedom,	because	if	I	give	you	freedom	I	can	take	it
back.
Freedom	 has	 to	 be	 your	 realization	 --	 and	 that	 would	 have	 come	 through
surrender,	on	its	own.	Surrender	flowers	into	freedom,	because	in	surrender	the
self	 is	gone,	and	all	 the	hell	 that	 the	self	creates	 is	gone.	Your	whole	energy	is
now	available	to	blossom.
I	cannot	give	freedom	to	anyone.
Freedom	is	not	a	commodity	that	I	can	hand	over	to	you;	it	has	to	happen	at	the
innermost	 core	 of	 your	 being.	 Surrender	 only	 removes	 the	 hindrances.	 You
surrender	only	that	which	is	blocking	the	way	for	freedom	to	come	to	you.
So	on	 the	 second	point	also	he	 is	wrong.	And	 then	on	 the	 third	he	goes	 really
stupid,	saying	that	now	his	work	will	be	to	help	people	to	be	free	of	Osho.	The
whole	world	is	free	of	me	--	that	is	not	helping	them!	But	what	he	means...	He	is
now	 persuading	 sannyasins	 not	 to	 be	 sannyasins.	And	 he	 thinks	 he	 is	 helping
people	to	be	in	a	state	of	freedom.
There	are	things	which	only	happen.
Let-go	is	not	an	action	on	your	part,	but	just	an	understanding	of	the	fact	that	this
is	the	only	way	the	universe	functions,	and	if	you	are	not	functioning	in	this	way,
you	are	going	to	remain	in	misery.	You	are	not	being	punished,	you	are	simply
being	 foolish.	 The	 old	 religions	 have	 given	 the	 idea	 to	 people	 that	 if	 you	 do
wrong,	you	will	be	punished;	 if	you	do	 right,	you	will	be	 rewarded	 --	because
they	were	all	dependent	on	doing,	and	that's	their	basic	fallacy.
Religion	begins	when	you	cross	the	boundary	of	doing	and	enter	into	the	world
of	 happening.	 Then	 let-go	 happens,	 because	 you	 see	 that	 this	 is	 the	 only	way
things	work.	If	you	go	against	it,	you	are	miserable.
Nobody	 is	 punishing	 you;	 you	 are	 simply	 being	 stupid.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 get	 out
through	the	wall	and	hit	your	head,	do	you	think	it	has	been	a	punishment?	And
there	is	 the	door,	always	available	for	you	to	get	out.	Knowing	about	the	door,
you	 try	 to	 get	 out	 through	 the	wall	 and	 smash	 your	 face.	Old	 religions	 call	 it
punishment.	 It	 is	not	punishment,	 it	 is	simple	foolishness.	And	the	person	who
goes	out	of	the	door	into	the	garden,	in	the	sun,	in	the	air,	is	not	being	rewarded;
he	is	just	being	intelligent.
So	 if	 you	 ask	 me,	 I	 will	 say	 intelligence	 is	 the	 reward;	 unintelligence	 is	 the
punishment.
In	its	ultimate	form:	unintelligence	is	hell,	intelligence	is	heaven.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
LIVING	DECISIVELY,	KNOWING	WHAT	ONE	WANTS,	SEEMS	EASY.
HOWEVER,	MY	REALITY	IS	THAT	I	CAN	NEVER	MAKE	UP	MY	MIND
ABOUT
ANYTHING.	I	CAN	ALWAYS	SEE	BOTH	SIDES	OF	AN	ARGUMENT	AND
CAN
NEVER	DECIDE	WHICH	IS	RIGHT.	SO	I	AM	LEFT	HANGING	BETWEEN
THE
TWO.	ONE	 PART	OF	ME,	 LISTENING	 TO	YOU,	 FEELS	 THIS	 IS	 OKAY,
BUT	IT
MAKES	 ME	 FEEL	 STATIC,	 AS	 IF	 I	 AM	 ONLY	 PARTIALLY	 ALIVE.
PLEASE
COMMENT.
Mind	 is	 never	 decisive.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 your	mind	 or	 somebody	 else's
mind;	mind	is	indecisiveness.	The	functioning	of	the	mind	is	wavering	between
two	polar	opposites	and	trying	to	find	which	is	the	right	way.
Mind	is	the	wrong	thing,	and	through	the	wrong	thing	you	are	trying	to	find	the
right	 way.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 by	 closing	 your	 eyes	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 find	 the	 door.
Certainly	you	will	 feel	 yourself	 hanging	between	 the	 two	 --	 to	 go	 this	way	or
that;	you	will	be	always	in	a	condition	of	either/or.	That's	the	nature	of	mind.
One	 great	 Danish	 philosopher	 was	 Soren	 Kierkegaard.	 He	 wrote	 a	 book,
EITHER/OR.	 It	 was	 his	 own	 life's	 experience	 --	 he	 could	 never	 decide	 about
anything.	Everything	was	always	such	that	if	he	was	deciding	this	way,	then	that
way	seemed	to	be	right.	If	he	was	deciding	that	way,	then	this	way	seemed	to	be
right.	He	remained	indecisive.
He	remained	unmarried,	although	a	woman	was	very	much	in	love	with	him	and
had	asked	him.	But	he	 said,	 "I	will	 have	 to	 think	 about	 it	 --	marriage	 is	 a	big
thing,	and	I	cannot	say	yes	or	no	immediately."	And	he	died	with	the	question,
without	getting	married.	He	 lived	 long	 --	 perhaps	 seventy	years	 --	 and	he	was
continually	arguing,	discussing.	But	he	found	no	answer	which	could	be	said	to
be	the	ultimate	answer,	which	had	not	its	equal	opposite.
He	never	could	become	a	professor.	He	had	 filled	out	 the	 form,	he	had	all	 the
qualifications	 --	 the	 best	 qualifications	 possible	 --	 he	 had	 many	 books	 to	 his
credit,	 of	 such	 immense	 importance	 that	 even	 after	 a	 century	 they	 are	 still
contemporary,	not	old,	not	out	of	date.	He	filled	out	the	form	but	could	not	sign
it	--	because	"either/or"...
whether	 to	 join	 the	 service	 or	 not?	The	 form	was	 found	when	 he	 died,	 in	 the
small	room	where	he	used	to	live.
His	 father,	 seeing	 the	 situation	 --	 and	 he	was	 his	 only	 son	 --	 seeing	 that	 even
going	somewhere	he	would	stop	at	the	crossroads	to	decide	to	go	this	way	or	to
go	that	way,	for	hours...!	The	whole	of	Copenhagen	became	aware	of	this	man's
strangeness,	 and	 children	 nicknamed	 him	 "Either/Or,"	 so	 urchins	 would	 be
following	him,	shouting,	"Either/Or!"
wherever	he	would	go.
Before	he	died	his	 father	 liquidated	all	his	businesses,	collected	all	 the	money,
deposited	 it	 into	an	account,	and	arranged	 that	every	month	on	 the	first	day	of
the	month,	Kierkegaard	should	receive	so	much	money,	so	for	his	whole	life	he
at	least	could	survive.	And	you	will	be	surprised:	the	day	he	was	coming	home,
on	the	first	day	of	the	month,	after	taking	out	the	last	installment	of	the	money	--
the	 money	 was	 finished	 --	 he	 fell	 on	 the	 street	 and	 died.	 With	 the	 last
installment!	That	was	the	right	thing	to	do.	What	else	to	do?	--	because	after	this
month,	what	will	he	do?
And	 because	 of	 the	 urchins	 and	 other	 people	 harassing	 him	 and	 calling	 him
Either/Or	he	used	to	come	out	only	once	a	month,	just	on	the	first	day,	to	go	to
the	post	office.	But	now	there	was	nothing	left	--	next	month	he	had	nowhere	to
go.
He	was	writing	books	but	was	not	decisive	about	whether	to	publish	them	or	not;
he	left	all	his	books	unpublished.	They	are	of	tremendous	value.	Each	book	has	a
great	penetration	into	things.	On	each	subject	he	has	written,	he	has	gone	to	the
very	roots,	to	every	minute	detail...	a	genius,	but	a	genius	of	the	mind.
With	the	mind,	that	is	the	problem	--	it	is	not	your	problem	--	and	the	better	mind
you	 have,	 the	more	will	 be	 the	 problem.	 Lesser	minds	 don't	 come	 across	 that
problem	so	much.	It	is	the	genius	mind	that	is	opposed,	with	two	polarities,	and
cannot	choose.	And	then	he	feels	in	a	limbo.
What	I	have	been	telling	you	is	that	it	is	the	nature	of	the	mind	to	be	in	a	limbo.
It	 is	 the	nature	of	 the	mind	 to	be	 in	 the	middle	of	polar	opposites.	Unless	you
move	away	from	the	mind	and	become	a	witness	to	all	 the	games	of	the	mind,
you	will	never	be	decisive.
Even	if	you	sometimes	decide	--	in	spite	of	the	mind	--	you	will	repent,	because
the	other	half	that	you	have	not	decided	for	is	going	to	haunt	you:	perhaps	that
was	right	and	what	you	have	chosen	is	wrong.	And	now	there	is	no	way	to	know.
Perhaps	the	choice	was	better	that	you	had	left	aside	was	better.	But	even	if	you
had	chosen	it,	the	situation	would	not	have	been	different;	then	this	which	would
have	been	left	aside	would	haunt	you.
Mind	is	basically	the	beginning	of	madness.
And	if	you	are	too	much	in	it,	it	will	drive	you	mad.
I	have	told	you	that	in	my	village	I	used	to	live	opposite	a	goldsmith.	I	became
aware	 at	 first,	 and	 then	 the	 whole	 town	 became	 slowly	 aware...	 and	 his	 life
became	hell.	I	used	to	sit	just	in	front	of	his	house,	and	I	became	aware	that	he
had	a	curious	habit:	he	would	lock	his	shop,	then	pull	the	lock	two,	three	times	to
see	whether	it	was	really	locked	or	not.
One	day	I	was	coming	from	the	river	and	he	had	just	 locked	his	shop	and	was
going	home.	I	said,	"But	you	have	not	checked!"
He	said,	"What?"
I	 said,	 "You	have	not	 checked	 the	 lock!"	He	had	checked	 it	 --	 I	 had	 seen	him
three	 times	 pulling	 it,	 but	 now	 I	 had	 created	 a	 suspicion,	 and	mind	 is	 always
ready...
So	 he	 said	 to	 me,	 "Perhaps	 I	 forgot	 --	 I	 must	 go	 back."	 He	 went	 back,	 and
checked	the	lock	again.	That	became	my	joy:	wherever	he	would	go...
In	the	market	he	would	be	purchasing	vegetables	and	I	would	reach	there	saying,
"What	are	you	doing	here?	You	have	left	the	lock	unchecked!"
He	would	drop	the	vegetables	and	he	would	say,	"I	will	be	coming	back;	first	I
have	to	go	and	check	the	lock."
Even	 from	 the	 railway	 station...	He	was	purchasing	 a	 ticket	 to	 go	 somewhere,
and	I	went	and	told	him,	"What	are	you	doing?	The	lock!"
He	said,	"My	God,	have	I	not	checked	it?"
I	said,	"No!"
He	said,	"Now	it	is	impossible	to	go	to	the	marriage	I	was	going	to."	He	returned
the	ticket,	went	home,	and	checked	the	lock.	But	then	it	was	too	late	to	go	back
to	the	station
--	the	train	had	already	gone.	And	he	trusted	me	because	I	was	always	sitting	in
front	of	his	house.
Slowly	it	became	known	to	everybody,	so	wherever	he	would	go,	people	would
say,
"Where	are	you	going?	Have	you	checked	the	lock?"
Finally	he	became	angry	with	me.	He	said,	"You	must	be	spreading	it,	because
wherever	 I	 go	 everybody	 is	 talking	 about	 the	 lock,	 and	 I	 have	 to	 come	 back
home	 --	 sometimes	 so	many	 times	 that	 I	 forget	 completely	 for	what	purpose	 I
had	gone	in	the	first	place	to	the	market!	The	whole	day	I	have	been	checking
the	lock!"
I	said,	"You	don't	listen	to	them.	Let	them..."
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean,	`Don't	listen	to	them'?	If	they	are	right	then	I	am
lost	 forever.	 I	cannot	 take	 that	chance.	So	knowing	perfectly	well	 that	 the	man
may	 be	 lying,	 I	 have	 to	 come	 back	 compulsively	 to	 check	 the	 lock.	 I	 know
somewhere	that	I	have	checked	it,	but	who	knows	for	certain?"
Mind	has	no	certainty	about	anything.
If	you	are	between	the	two	polarities	of	the	mind,	in	a	limbo	--	always	to	do	or
not	 to	 do,	 you	will	 go	 crazy.	You	 are	 crazy!	Before	 it	 happens,	 jump	 out	 and
have	 a	 look	 from	 the	 outside	 at	 the	 mind...	 and	 that's	 what	 I	 am	 telling	 you
continuously.
Be	 aware	 of	 the	 mind	 --	 its	 bright	 side,	 its	 dark	 side,	 its	 right,	 its	 wrong.
Whatever	polarity	it	is,	you	just	be	aware	of	it.	Two	things	will	come	out	of	that
awareness:	 one,	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 mind,	 and	 second,	 that	 awareness	 has	 a
decisiveness	which	mind	never	has.
Mind	is	basically	indecisive,	and	awareness	is	basically	decisive.	So	any	act	out
of	awareness	is	total,	full,	without	repentance.
I	have	never	in	my	life	thought	again	about	anything	--	whether	something	else
would	have	been	better.	I	have	never	repented.	I	have	never	thought	that	I	have
committed	any	mistake,	because	 there	 is	nobody	else	who	has	been	 left	 to	 say
these	things.	I	have	been	acting	out	of	my	awareness	--	that	is	my	whole	being.
Now	whatever	happens	is	all	that	is	possible.
The	world	may	call	 it	 right	or	wrong	 --	 that	 is	 their	business,	but	 it	 is	not	my
problem.
So	awareness	will	take	you	out	of	the	limbo.	Rather	than	hanging	between	these
two	polarities	of	the	mind,	you	will	jump	beyond	both,	and	you	will	be	able	to
see	that	those	two	polarities	are	two	polarities	only	if	you	are	in	the	mind.	If	you
are	outside	it,	you	will	be	surprised	that	 they	are	two	sides	of	 the	same	coin	--
there	was	no	question	of	decision.
With	awareness	you	have	 the	clarity,	 totality,	 let-go	--	existence	decides	within
you.	You	don't	have	to	think	about	what	is	right	and	wrong;	existence	takes	your
hand	 in	 its	hand,	 and	you	are	moving	 relaxedly.	That's	 the	only	way,	 the	 right
way.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 only	 way	 you	 can	 be	 sane;	 otherwise	 you	 will	 remain
muddled.
Now,	Soren	Kierkegaard	is	a	great	mind,	but	being	a	Christian	he	has	no	idea	of
awareness.	He	can	think,	and	think	very	deeply,	but	he	cannot	just	be	silent	and
watch.
That	 poor	 fellow	 had	 never	 heard	 about	 anything	 like	 watching,	 witnessing,
awareness.
Thinking	was	all	that	he	had	heard	about,	and	he	had	put	his	whole	genius	into
thinking.
He	had	produced	great	books,	but	he	could	not	produce	a	great	life	for	himself.
He	lived	in	utter	misery.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 SPOKE	 THE	 OTHER	 NIGHT	 ABOUT	 HONEST	 TRUTH.	 MYSTICS
HAVE
OFTEN	SPOKEN	OF	THE	"ULTIMATE	TRUTH."	CAN	THE	TRUTH	BE
ANYTHING	OTHER	THAN	ULTIMATE?
Truth	cannot	be	anything	other	than	the	ultimate.
But	 the	mystics	 had	 to	 speak	 about	 "ultimate	 truth"	 for	 a	 certain	 reason.	 The
reason	was	 that	 philosophers	 have	 been	 speaking	 of	 "relative	 truth,"	 and	 they
have	been	emphasizing	the	fact	that	every	truth	is	relative.	Albert	Einstein	in	this
century	brought	 the	 conception	of	 relativity	 to	 scientific	 truths;	 otherwise	 they
used	to	be	ultimate	--	they	became	relative.	And	he	was	right.	Mahavira,	Gautam
Buddha	--	they	all	have	talked	about	relativity.
One	thing	that	 is	missing	is	 that	nobody	makes	a	distinction	between	truth	and
fact.	Facts	 are	 relative,	 and	 truth	 is	 ultimate,	 but	 if	 you	get	mixed	up	 and	you
start	thinking	of	facts	as	truth,	then	they	will	be	relative.
Two	things	first:	Facts	are	relative,	and	you	have	to	understand	exactly	what	is
meant	by	relative.	It	means	that	something	can	be	true	in	a	certain	situation,	and
the	same	thing	can	be	untrue	in	some	other	situation.
It	was	said	that	while	Albert	Einstein	was	alive	there	were	only	twelve	people	in
the	whole	world	who	understood	what	he	meant	by	relativity.	It	is	a	very	delicate
and	subtle	explanation	about	the	universe.	And	Einstein	was	continually	asked	--
wherever	he	would	go,	in	a	club,	in	a	restaurant	--	wherever	he	would	go	people
would	ask,	"Just	say	something	about	what	this	relativity	is	and	say	it	so	that	a
layman	can	understand	it."
Finally	he	found	a	way:	he	said	that	if	you	are	sitting	on	a	hot	stove,	time	will
appear	 to	 you	 to	 be	 going	 very	 slowly;	 a	 single	 minute	 will	 look	 like	 hours
because	you	are	sitting	on	a	hot	stove.	Your	state	is	changing	your	conception	of
time.
But	if	you	are	sitting	with	your	girlfriend,	hours	go	by	and	it	seems	only	seconds
have	passed.
He	would	say,	"This	is	what	I	mean	by	relativity:	time	is	relative	to	a	particular
situation.
There	is	nothing	like	ultimate	time	so	that	whatever	you	do	it	is	the	same.	It	has
always	been	known	that	when	you	are	happy	time	passes	fast,	and	when	you	are
miserable,	time	passes	very	slowly."
He	 has	 established	 relativity	 so	 deeply	 that	 it	 has	 become	 almost	 interwoven
with	 all	 scientific	 findings.	But	 only	 one	 thing	 I	want	 you	 to	 remember:	 he	 is
talking	about	facts	and	calling	them	truth.	And	because	of	that	the	mystics	had	to
use	the	word	ùltimate'.
They	 want	 to	 tell	 you	 that	 there	 is	 an	 experience	 which	 is	 beyond	 relativity.
That's	all	their	meaning	is:	truth	is	ultimate.
For	 example,	 what	 I	 have	 experienced	 in	 these	 thirty-five	 years	 in	 different
situations	--	it	has	remained	the	same,	and	I	know	even	in	my	death	it	will	not	be
different.	This	 is	 truth:	 that	which	remains	 the	same,	whatever	happens	around
it...	the	center	of	the	cyclone.
But	 the	whole	world	 is	 full	of	 facts.	Facts	are	relative.	Now,	 it	has	 to	be	made
very	clear	to	the	scientists	that	what	Einstein	was	talking	about	was	not	truth	but
fact.	But	for	science	there	is	no	truth	other	than	what	they	discover.	The	mystic's
truth	they	don't	accept,	because	the	mystic	cannot	put	it	in	front	of	the	scientist
so	 that	 they	 can	 dissect	 it	 and	 find	 out	what	 constitutes	 it	 --	 its	measurement,
weight,	and	things	like	that.
It	is	an	experience,	and	totally	subjective.	It	cannot	be	made	objective.
So	let	us	say	it	in	this	way,	if	they	insist	on	calling	it	truth:	objective	truths	are	all
relative,	and	subjective	truth	is	always	ultimate.	But	just	not	to	get	it	mixed	up,
the	mystics	have	been	calling	it	the	ultimate	truth.
All	 truth	 is	ultimate.	But	 there	are	scientific	 truths	which	are	 really	only	 facts.
For	example,	if	you	are	sitting	on	a	hot	stove	the	experience	of	time	going	very
slowly	 is	 just	 a	 fact	 of	 your	 psychology;	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 time.	 But
nobody	has	pointed	that	out	to	Albert	Einstein.	When	you	are	sitting	with	your
girlfriend	and	time	passes	fast,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	time;	it	has	something	to
do	with	your	mind.
Time	goes	with	its	own	speed.	It	does	not	change;	otherwise	there	would	be	such
a	difficulty.	Somebody	is	sitting	on	the	hot	stove,	and	somebody	is	sitting	with
his	girlfriend	--	what	will	poor	time	do?	Go	slow	or	go	fast?	Time	remains	the
same;	it	is	your	mind,	your	concept	of	time	which	is	relative.
All	 objective	 truths	 are	 relative.	 You	 cannot	 say	 that	 somebody	 is	 tall;	 that
statement	 will	 not	 be	 correct,	 because	 the	 tallness	 of	 the	 person	 has	 to	 be
relative.	Tall	in	comparison	to	whom?	You	have	to	make	it	complete.	Somebody
is	fat,	but	just	that	much	is	not	right	and	not	complete.	You	have	to	make	it	clear
that	he	 is	 fatter	 than	Avirbhava,	or	 thinner	 than	Anando.	Unless	you	make	 the
comparison,	you	cannot	use	relative	terms.
But	 we	 are	 using	 them.	 Because	 people	 are	 using	 relative	words,	 the	mystics
have	been	compelled	to	say	the	"ultimate"	truth;	otherwise	just	saying	"the	truth"
would	be	sufficient,	because	ultimateness	is	its	intrinsic	nature.	But	it	has	to	be
repeated;	otherwise	there	are	people	who	will	get	misguided,	confused,	because
they	have	heard	about	 relative	 truths	and	 they	will	make	your	 truth	also	 into	a
relative	truth.	So	a	distinction	has	to	be	made.	To	draw	that	distinction,	the	word
ùltimate'	is	used	--	unwillingly.
I	would	not	 like	 to	use	 it	because	 it	 is	a	 repetition,	a	 tautology.	"The	ultimate"
and	 "the	 truth"	 mean	 the	 same.	 You	 can	 use	 either,	 but	 to	 use	 both	 is	 an
unnecessary	repetition.
My	father	was	very	insistent	that	every	Monday	he	had	to	receive	a	letter	from
me,	while	 I	was	 in	 the	 university.	 I	 told	 him,	 "If	 there	 is	 something	wrong,	 if
there	is	some	problem,	if	I	am	sick,	I	will	inform	you.	But	unnecessarily	writing
the	same	thing	again	and	again	has	no	justification."
He	said,	"Justification	or	not,	 it	 is	not	a	question	of	your	arguments.	 I	wait	 for
seven	days	 and	 I	 become	worried	 about	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 your	 sickness	 that	 I	 am
worried	about;	I	am	worried	about	what	you	are	doing,	what	is	happening	to	you.
You	may	 get	 into	 trouble	 any	moment.	 So	 every	 Saturday	 you	 have	 to	 post	 a
letter	so	that	on	Monday	I	receive	it.
If	 I	 don't	 receive	 it	 on	 Monday,	 then	 I	 will	 unnecessarily	 have	 to	 come	 two
hundred	miles	to	the	university."
So	what	I	had	done...	I	had	written	one	letter,	"Everything	is	all	right	here.	I	am
not	 in	 any	 trouble.	You	 need	 not	 be	worried."	And	 on	 other	 letters	 I	 had	 just
made	the	sign
`ditto.'	He	was	very	angry.	When	he	 saw	me	he	 said,	 "I	 feel	 like	beating	you!
You	writèditto'	on	the	letters!"
I	said,	"That's	exactly	the	situation,	because	I	have	to	write	the	same	thing	again.
And	do	you	think	I	write	every	Saturday?	I	have	just	asked	one	typist	to	type	the
first	 letter,	 and	 a	 hundred	 letters	with	 thèditto.'	 I	 have	 given	 them	 to	 one	 very
particular	man	--	because	I	may	forget	and	unnecessarily	you	may	have	to	come
--	 and	 I	 have	 told	 him,	 `You	 have	 to	 post	 one	 of	 these	 "ditto"	 letters	 every
Saturday.'	He	is	so	particular	in	everything	that	once	you	ask	him,	he	will	do	it."
He	was	a	student,	living	in	the	same	hostel.
But	my	father	was	very	angry,	"Have	you	ever	heard	of	anybody	writing	in	the
letter	just
`ditto'?	I	wait	for	eight	days	and	then	I	get	a	card	on	which	the	only	message	is
`ditto'!
Not	even	your	 signature,	because	 in	 `ditto'	 everything	 is	 implied	 from	 the	 first
letter:	Refer	to	the	last	letter.	You	can	read	the	first	letter	again	when	you	get	the
ditto	letter."
Life	 is	not	mathematics;	 it	 is	not	 logic,	 it	 is	not	 science.	 It	 is	 something	more,
and	that	something	more	is	the	most	valuable.
The	mystics	have	called	that	something	more	"the	ultimate	truth."	They	can	be
forgiven	for	calling	it	ultimate.	But	you	have	to	understand	that	the	reason	they
are	 calling	 it	 ultimate	 is	 because	 there	 are	 people	who	 are	 calling	 every	 truth
relative	--	not	only	scientists,	not	only	people	who	are	working	with	matter.
Mahavira	says	 that	 truth	 itself	 is	relative:	he	has	no	ultimate	 truth.	Buddha	has
no	 ultimate	 truth.	 Again	 the	 difficulty	 is	 that	 Mahavira	 and	 Buddha	 can	 be
misunderstood	when	they	say	that	there	is	no	ultimate	truth	but	that	every	truth	is
relative:	 it	can	be	one	 thing	 in	one	situation,	 it	can	be	another	 thing	 in	another
situation,	and	because	it	is	related	to	situations	it	cannot	have	any	ultimacy.	This
goes	against	all	the	great	mystics.
Only	Mahavira	 and	Buddha,	 two	 people...	 But	 I	 know	 both,	 and	 I	 understand
both	better	than	their	own	followers,	because	none	of	their	followers	have	been
able	to	make	any	sense	out	of	it:	either	all	the	mystics	are	wrong,	or	Buddha	and
Mahavira	are	wrong!
I	say	nobody	is	wrong.	What	Mahavira	says	is	that	truth	has	seven	aspects,	and
Buddha	 says	 that	 truth	 has	 four	 aspects.	 They	 are	 really	 referring	 to	 the
expression	of	truth.	Truth	can	be	said	in	seven	ways	according	to	Mahavira.	He
is	 really	 a	 logician.	 But	 what	 he	 is	 saying	 is	 not	 about	 truth	 --	 there	 is	 a
misunderstanding.	What	he	is	saying	is	about	 truth	expressed,	not	experienced.
When	 you	 experience	 it,	 it	 is	 always	 ultimate,	 but	 the	 moment	 you	 say	 it,	 it
becomes	 relative.The	 moment	 you	 bring	 it	 into	 language	 it	 becomes	 relative,
because	 in	 language	 nothing	 can	 be	 ultimate.	 The	 whole	 construction	 of
language	is	relative.	Buddha	is	not	a	great	logician,	so	he	stops	at	four,	but	the
situation	is	the	same.
They	 are	 not	 speaking	 of	 the	 truth	 which	 you	 experience	 in	 silence,	 beyond
mind.
Nothing	can	be	said	about	it.	The	moment	you	say	something	about	it,	you	drag
it	into	the	world	of	relativity,	and	then	all	the	laws	of	relativity	will	be	applicable
to	it.
Perhaps	 Ludwig	Wittgenstein,	 one	 of	 the	 best	 logicians	 of	 this	 age,	was	 right
when	he	said,	"That	which	cannot	be	said	should	not	be	said."	This	is	a	strange
statement.	 It	 stands	 out	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 thought,	 unique	 and	 original:
"That	which	cannot	be	said,	should	not	be	said"	--	because	if	you	say	it,	you	are
contradicting	yourself.	First	you	say	it	cannot	be	said,	and	then	you	say	it.	You
may	make	all	kinds	of	conditions:	"When	I	say	it,	it	is	no	longer	the	same;	when
I	say	it,	it	even	becomes	untrue."	But	then,	why	say	it?
Wittgenstein's	statement	will	make	it	clear	that	Mahavira	and	Buddha	both	were
talking	about	the	truth	said:	then	it	is	relative.	And	the	mystics	who	are	talking
about	"the	ultimate	truth"	are	talking	about	the	truth	experienced	yet	not	brought
into	the	world	of	language	and	objects.	So	I	think	it	is	better	to	allow	them	to	use
the	word	ùltimate',	although	it	is	a	repetition,	because	it	keeps	it	separate.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	IT	NOT	TRUE	TO	SAY	THAT	BECAUSE	WE	CAN	EVEN	FORMULATE
A	 QUESTION	 THAT	 WE	 HAVE	 AN	 INKLING	 SOMEWHERE	 OF	 THE
ANSWER	--
EVEN	THOUGH	WE	ARE	NOT	AWARE	OF	IT?
IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	LIKE	A	DOCTOR	LOOKING	AT	A	PATIENT:	THE	FACT
THAT
HE	 ASKS	 THE	 PATIENT	 CERTAIN	 QUESTIONS	 AND	 NOT	 OTHERS
INDICATES
HE	HAS	 SOME	 IDEA	OF	WHAT	THE	DIAGNOSIS	 --	 AND	HENCE	THE
ANSWER
--	IS.
It	is	true.	Whenever	you	ask	a	question,	somewhere	deep	down	you	have	some
inkling	 of	 the	 answer,	 but	 it	 is	 in	 the	 darker	 parts	 of	 your	 consciousness.	You
yourself	cannot	pull	it	out	and	bring	it	to	your	consciousness.
The	question	is	in	the	consciousness;	the	answer	is	in	the	unconscious	--	vague,	a
shadow,	with	no	certainty,	but	the	inkling	is	certainly	there.
The	 function	 of	 the	 master	 is	 exactly	 what	 Socrates	 has	 defined	 it	 as	 --	 the
master	is	only	a	midwife.	He	helps	to	bring	everything	that	is	hidden	in	you	to
consciousness.	When	your	question	disappears,	that	means	your	answer	from	the
unconscious	has	been	brought	to	the	conscious.
It	 has	 to	 be	 remembered	 that	 this	 is	 the	 distinction	 between	 a	 master	 and	 a
teacher:	 a	 teacher	 will	 give	 you	 an	 answer,	 which	 will	 not	 bring	 your	 own
answer	 from	 the	 unconscious.	 He	 will	 force	 an	 answer	 into	 your	 conscious,
repressing	your	question.	He	will	make	the	situation	more	complicated.	First	you
had	 only	 a	 question,	 and	 if	 you	 had	 silently	 waited,	 meditated,	 perhaps	 the
unconscious	 answer	 may	 have	 surfaced	 and	 the	 question	 would	 have
disappeared.	And	once	the	question	disappears,	 the	answer	has	no	relevance	in
being	there;	it	disappears	also,	and	a	pure	emptiness	is	left.
But	 the	 teacher	 forces	 an	 answer	on	your	mind,	 and	makes	 the	 situation	more
complicated.	Now	you	have	a	question	and	you	have	an	answer	which	has	not
been	 able	 to	 dissolve	 the	 question,	 which	 has	 only	 repressed	 it.	 And	 your
unconscious	 answer	 is	 still	 lying	 down	 there,	 to	 be	 released	 so	 you	 can	 be
unburdened.	The	teacher	burdens	you,	complicates	you.
The	master	never	gives	you	any	answer	that	is	going	to	burden	you.
His	every	answer	is	an	unburdening.	He	brings	your	own	unconscious	answer	to
the	 surface,	where	 first	 the	 question	 disappears,	 then	 the	 answer	 disappears	 --
and	not	a	trace	of	either	remains	behind.
This	is	real	communion.
This	is	a	clear-cut	way,	a	criterion,	to	make	the	distinction	between	a	teacher	and
a	master.
In	 the	West	 there	 seems	 to	be	no	distinction.	 In	 the	East	 the	 teacher	 is	 simply
repeating	 inherited	 knowledge;	 he	 is	 not	 concerned	with	 you,	 he	 is	 concerned
with	his	own	knowledge.
The	master	has	nothing	to	impose	upon	you;	he	is	empty	and	silent.
Your	question	does	not	give	him	a	chance	to	impose	something	on	you,	but	only
gives	him	a	chance	to	bring	your	unconscious	answer	to	the	surface.	So	if	you	go
on	 simply	 listening	 to	 the	master,	 slowly,	 slowly	 you	will	 find	 your	 questions
have	disappeared...
and	strangely,	you	don't	have	any	answer.
People	 ordinarily	 think	 that	 when	 the	 question	 disappears	 you	 will	 have	 the
answer	 in	 its	place.	No,	when	the	question	really	disappears	 the	answer	has	no
relevance.	 It	 also	 disappears.	And	 left	without	 questions	 and	without	 answers,
you	have	immense	freedom...	unburdened...	open	sky.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	Trees	grow	without	being	taught
23	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604235
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO23
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
92
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HAVING	 HEARD	 YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 COMPETITION	 AND	 OUR
CHILDHOOD
THE	 OTHER	 MORNING,	 IT	 SET	 ME	 THINKING	 OF	 MY	 OWN
EDUCATION.	 I	REALIZED	THAT	FOR	TWENTY-ONE	YEARS	SOLIDLY,
EVERY	SINGLE
EVENT	 AT	 SCHOOL	 --	 FROM	 PLAYING	 IN	 THE	 GARDEN,	 THROUGH
OFFICIAL
SPORTS,	 TO	 LATIN	GRAMMAR	 --	WAS	BASICALLY	AN	EXERCISE	 IN
HOW	TO
BEAT	THE	NEXT	PERSON.	IT	SEEMS	AS	IF	IT	WAS	THE	SINGLE	MOST
DAMAGING	 EXPERIENCE	 OF	MY	 LIFE.	 I	 CAN'T	 THINK	 OF	 A	 MORE
PERFECT
SYSTEM	TO	DESTROY	CHILDREN	AND	MAKE	US	COMPLETELY
INHARMONIOUS	 WITH	 THE	 WORLD	 AROUND	 US.	 HOW	 CAN	 WE
HELP
CHILDREN	 TO	 GROW	 TO	 THEIR	 FULL	 POTENTIAL,	 WITHOUT
ENCOURAGING
THIS	COMPETITIVE	SPIRIT?
The	 moment	 you	 start	 thinking	 how	 to	 help	 children	 to	 grow	 without	 any
competitive	spirit	you	are	already	on	the	wrong	track,	because	whatever	you	are
going	to	do	is	going	to	give	the	children	a	certain	program.	It	may	be	different
from	the	one	that	you	received,	but	you	are	conditioning	the	children	--	with	all
the	best	intentions	in	the	world.
The	 trees	 go	 on	 growing	 without	 anybody	 teaching	 them	 how	 to	 grow.	 The
animals,	the	birds,	the	whole	existence,	needs	no	programming.	The	very	idea	of
programming	 is	basically	creating	 slavery	 --	 and	man	has	been	creating	 slaves
for	thousands	of	years	in	different	names.	When	people	become	fed	up	with	one
name,	 another	 name	 immediately	 replaces	 it.	A	 few	modified	programs,	 a	 few
changes	here	 and	 there	 in	 the	 conditioning,	 but	 the	 fundamental	 thing	 remains
the	same	--	that	the	parents,	the	older	generation,	want	their	children	to	be	in	a
certain	way.	That's	why	you	are	asking	"How?".
According	to	me,	the	function	of	the	parents	is	not	how	to	help	the	children	grow
--	 they	will	 grow	without	you.	Your	 function	 is	 to	 support,	 to	nourish,	 to	help
what	 is	 already	growing.	Don't	give	directions	and	don't	give	 ideals.	Don't	 tell
them	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong:	let	them	find	it	by	their	own	experience.
Only	one	thing	you	can	do,	and	that	 is	share	your	own	life.	Tell	 them	that	you
have	been	conditioned	by	your	parents,	that	you	have	lived	within	certain	limits,
according	 to	 certain	 ideals,	 and	 because	 of	 these	 limits	 and	 ideals	 you	 have
missed	 life	completely,	and	you	don't	want	 to	destroy	your	children's	 life.	You
want	 them	 to	be	 totally	 free	 --	 free	of	 you,	 because	 to	 them	you	 represent	 the
whole	past.
It	 needs	 guts	 and	 it	 needs	 immense	 love	 in	 a	 father,	 in	 a	 mother,	 to	 tell	 the
children,	 "You	 need	 to	 be	 free	 of	 us.	 Don't	 obey	 us	 --	 depend	 on	 your	 own
intelligence.	 Even	 if	 you	 go	 astray	 it	 is	 far	 better	 than	 to	 remain	 a	 slave	 and
always	remain	right.	It	is	better	to	commit	mistakes	on	your	own	and	learn	from
them,	rather	than	follow	somebody	else	and	not	commit	mistakes.	But	then	you
are	 never	 going	 to	 learn	 anything	 except	 following	 --	 and	 that	 is	 poison,	 pure
poison."
It	 is	 very	 easy	 if	 you	 love.	 Don't	 ask	 "how",	 because	 "how"	 means	 you	 are
asking	for	a	method,	a	methodology,	a	technique	--	and	love	is	not	a	technique.
Love	your	children,	enjoy	their	freedom.	Let	them	commit	mistakes,	help	them
to	see	where	they	have	committed	a	mistake.	Tell	them,	"To	commit	mistakes	is
not	wrong	--
commit	 as	 many	 mistakes	 as	 possible,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 way	 you	 will	 be
learning	more.
But	 don't	 commit	 the	 same	mistake	 again	 and	 again,	 because	 that	makes	 you
stupid."
So	it	is	not	going	to	be	a	simple	answer	from	me.	You	will	have	to	figure	it	out
living	 with	 your	 children	 moment	 to	 moment,	 allowing	 them	 every	 possible
freedom	in	small	things.
For	 example,	 in	 my	 childhood...	 and	 it	 has	 been	 the	 same	 for	 centuries,	 the
children	are	being	taught,	"Go	to	bed	early,	and	get	up	early	in	the	morning.	That
makes	you	wise."
I	told	my	father,	"It	seems	to	be	strange:	when	I	am	not	feeling	sleepy,	you	force
me	 to	 sleep	early	 in	 the	evening."	And	 in	 Jaina	houses	early	 in	 the	evening	 is
really	early,	because	supper	is	at	five	o'clock,	at	the	most	six.	And	then	there	is
nothing	else	to	do	--
the	children	should	go	to	sleep.
I	said	to	him,	"When	my	energy	is	not	ready	to	go	to	sleep,	you	force	me	to	go	to
sleep.
And	when,	in	the	morning,	I	am	feeling	sleepy,	you	drag	me	out	of	the	bed.	This
seems	to	be	a	strange	way	of	making	me	wise!	And	I	don't	see	the	connection	--
how	am	I	going	to	become	wise	by	being	forced	to	sleep	when	I	am	not	feeling
sleepy?	And	for	hours	I	lie	down	in	the	bed,	in	the	darkness...	time	which	would
have	 in	 some	way	 been	 used,	would	 have	 been	 creative,	 and	 you	 force	me	 to
sleep.	But	sleep	is	not	something	in	your	hands.
You	cannot	just	close	your	eyes	and	go	to	sleep.	Sleep	comes	when	it	comes;	it
does	not	follow	your	order	or	my	order,	so	for	hours	I	am	wasting	my	time.
"And	then	in	the	morning	when	I	am	really	feeling	sleepy,	you	force	me	to	wake
up	--
five	o'clock,	 early	 in	 the	morning	 --	 and	you	drag	me	out	 for	 a	morning	walk
towards	the	forest.	I	am	feeling	sleepy	and	you	are	dragging	me.	And	I	don't	see
how	all	this	is	going	to	make	me	wise.	You	please	explain	it	to	me!
"And	how	many	people	have	become	wise	through	this	process?	You	just	show
me	a	few	wise	people	--	I	don't	see	anybody	around.	And	I	have	been	talking	to
my	grandfather,	and	he	said	that	it	is	all	nonsense.	Of	the	whole	household,	that
old	man	is	 the	only	sincere	man.	He	does	not	care	what	others	will	say,	but	he
has	told	me	that	it	is	all	nonsense:	`Wisdom	does	not	come	by	going	early	to	bed.
I	have	been	going	early	to	bed	my	whole	life	--	seventy	years	--	and	wisdom	has
not	come	yet,	and	I	don't	think	it	is	going	to	come!	Now	it	is	time	for	death	to
come,	not	for	wisdom.	So	don't	be	befooled	by	these	proverbs.'"
I	 told	my	father,	"You	think	 it	over,	and	please	be	authentic	and	 true.	Give	me
this	much	freedom	--	that	I	can	go	to	sleep	when	I	feel	sleep	is	coming,	and	I	can
get	up	when	I	feel	that	it	is	time,	and	sleep	is	no	longer	there."
He	thought	for	one	day,	and	the	next	day	he	said,	"Okay,	perhaps	you	are	right.
You	do	it	according	to	yourself.	Listen	to	your	body	rather	than	listening	to	me."
This	should	be	the	principle:	children	should	be	helped	to	listen	to	their	bodies,
to	listen	to	their	own	needs.	The	basic	thing	for	parents	is	to	guard	the	children
from	falling	into	a	ditch.	The	function	of	their	discipline	is	negative.
Remember	the	word	"negative"...	no	positive	programming	but	only	a	negative
guarding
--	 because	 children	 are	 children,	 and	 they	 can	 get	 into	 something	 which	 will
harm	 them,	 cripple	 them.	Then	 too	 don't	 order	 them	 not	 to	 go,	 but	 explain	 to
them.	 Don't	 make	 it	 a	 point	 of	 obedience;	 still	 let	 them	 choose.	 You	 simply
explain	the	whole	situation.
Children	 are	 very	 receptive,	 and	 if	 you	 are	 respectful	 towards	 them	 they	 are
ready	 to	 listen,	 ready	 to	understand;	 then	 leave	 them	with	 their	understanding.
And	 it	 is	 a	 question	 only	 of	 a	 few	 years	 in	 the	 beginning;	 soon	 they	 will	 be
getting	settled	in	their	intelligence,	and	your	guarding	will	not	be	needed	at	all.
Soon	they	will	be	able	to	move	on	their	own.
I	can	understand	the	fear	of	 the	parents	 that	 the	children	may	go	in	a	direction
which	they	don't	like	--	but	that	is	your	problem.	Your	children	are	not	born	for
your	 likings	 and	 your	 dislikings.	 They	 have	 to	 live	 their	 life,	 and	 you	 should
rejoice	that	they	are	living	their	life	--	whatever	it	is.	They	may	become	a	poor
musician....
I	 used	 to	 know	 a	 very	 rich	 man	 in	 the	 town	 who	 wanted	 his	 son,	 after
matriculation,	to	become	a	doctor.	But	the	son	was	interested	only	in	music.	He
was	already	no	longer	an	amateur;	he	was	well	known	in	the	area,	and	wherever
there	was	 any	 function,	 he	was	 playing	 the	 sitar	 and	was	 becoming	more	 and
more	famous.
He	wanted	to	go	to	a	university	which	is	basically	devoted	to	music.	Perhaps	it	is
the	only	university	in	the	world	which	is	devoted	completely	to	music,	and	has
all	 the	 different	 departments	 --	 dance,	 different	 instruments	 --	 but	 the	 whole
world	of	the	university	is	musical.
The	father	was	absolutely	against	it.	He	called	me	--	because	I	was	very	close	to
his	son	-
-	 and	 he	 said,	 "He	 will	 be	 a	 beggar	 all	 his	 life,"	 because	 musicians	 in	 India
cannot	 earn	much.	 "At	 the	most	 he	 can	 become	 a	music	 teacher	 in	 a	 school.
What	will	he	be	earning?
That	much	we	pay	 to	many	 servants	 in	 our	 house.	And	he	will	 be	 associating
with	 the	 wrong	 people,"	 because	 in	 India,	 music	 has	 remained	 very	 deeply
connected	with	the	prostitutes.
The	Indian	prostitute	is	different	from	any	prostitute	in	the	rest	of	the	world.	The
word
"prostitute"	 does	 not	 do	 justice	 to	 the	 Indian	 counterpart,	 because	 the	 Indian
prostitute	 is	 really	 well	 versed	 in	 music,	 in	 dance	 --	 and	 India	 has	 so	 much
variety.	 If	 you	 really	 want	 to	 learn	 the	 deeper	 layers	 of	music,	 of	 singing,	 of
dancing,	you	have	to	be	with	some	famous	prostitute.
There	are	famous	families	--	they	are	called	gharanas.	Gharana	means	family.	It
is	nothing	to	do	with	the	ordinary	family;	it	is	the	family	of	the	master-disciple.
So	there	are	famous	gharanas	which	have	a	certain	way	of	their	own.	Presenting
the	 same	 instrument,	 the	 same	 dance,	 different	 gharanas	 will	 produce	 it	 in
different	ways,	with	subtle	nuances.
So,	if	someone	really	wants	to	get	into	the	world	of	music,	he	has	to	become	part
of	some	gharana	--	and	that	is	not	good	company.	According	to	a	rich	man	it	is
certainly	not	a	good	company.
But	the	son	was	not	interested	in	the	company.	Not	following	his	father,	he	went
to	 the	music	university.	And	his	 father	disowned	him	--	he	was	 so	angry.	And
because	his	father	disowned	him,	and	because	he	had	no	other	ways	--	because
the	university	was	 in	 a	very	 remote	mountaineous	 area	where	you	cannot	 find
any	job	or	anything	--	he	came	back	and	had	to	become	exactly	what	his	father
was	predicting,	just	a	school	teacher.
His	father	called	me	and	told	me,	"Look,	it	is	just	as	I	have	said.	My	other	sons	-
-
somebody	is	an	engineer,	somebody	is	a	professor,	but	this	idiot	did	not	listen	to
me.	I	have	disowned	him;	he	will	not	inherit	a	single	cent	from	me.	And	now	he
will	remain	in	just	the	poorest	profession	--	a	school	master."
But	 my	 friend	 himself	 was	 immensely	 happy...	 not	 worried	 that	 he	 had	 been
abandoned	 by	 his	 family,	 that	 he	was	 going	 to	 live	 a	 poor	man's	 life,	 that	 he
would	not	be	receiving	any	inheritance.	These	things	did	not	bother	him;	he	was
happy,	 "It	 is	 good	 they	 have	 done	 all	 this	 --	 now	 I	 can	 become	 part	 of	 some
gharana.	 I	was	worried	 about	 them,	 that	 they	would	 feel	 humiliated.	But	 now
they	have	abandoned	me,	and	I	am	no	longer	part	of	them,	I	can	become	part	of
some	gharana."
Teaching	 in	a	school,	he	became	part	of	a	gharana,	and	 is	now	one	of	 the	best
musicians	 in	 India.	 It	 is	not	a	question	of	his	being	one	of	 the	best	musicians;
what	is	important	is	that	he	became	what	he	felt	was	his	potential.	And	whenever
you	follow	your	potential,	you	always	become	the	best.	Whenever	you	go	astray
from	the	potential,	you	remain	mediocre.
The	whole	society	consists	of	mediocre	people	for	the	simple	reason	that	nobody
is	what	he	was	destined	to	be	--	he	is	something	else.	And	whatever	he	will	do,
he	cannot	be	the	best,	and	he	cannot	feel	a	fulfillment;	he	cannot	rejoice.
So	the	work	of	the	parents	is	very	delicate,	and	it	is	precious,	because	the	whole
life	of	 the	child	depends	on	 it.	Don't	give	any	positive	program	--	help	him	 in
every	possible	way	that	he	wants.
For	example,	I	used	to	climb	trees.	Now,	there	are	a	few	trees	which	are	safe	to
climb;	 their	 branches	 are	 strong,	 their	 trunk	 is	 strong.	You	 can	 go	 even	 to	 the
very	top,	and	still	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid	that	a	branch	will	break.	But	there
are	a	few	trees	which	are	very	soft.	Because	I	used	to	climb	on	the	trees	to	get
mangoes,	jamuns	--	another	beautiful	fruit	--	my	family	was	very	much	worried,
and	they	would	always	send	somebody	to	prevent	me.
I	 told	my	father,	"Rather	 than	preventing	me,	please	explain	 to	me	which	trees
are	dangerous	--	so	that	I	can	avoid	them	--	and	which	trees	are	not	dangerous,
so	that	I	can	climb	them.
"But	 if	you	 try	 to	prevent	me	 from	climbing,	 there	 is	 a	danger:	 I	may	climb	a
wrong	tree,	and	the	responsibility	will	be	yours.	Climbing	I	am	not	going	to	stop,
I	love	it."	It	is	really	one	of	the	most	beautiful	experiences	to	be	on	the	top	of	the
tree	 in	 the	 sun	 with	 the	 high	 wind,	 and	 the	 whole	 tree	 is	 dancing	 --	 a	 very
nourishing	experience.
I	said,	"I	am	not	going	to	stop	it.	Your	work	is	to	tell	me	exactly	which	trees	I
should	not	climb	--	because	I	can	fall	from	them,	can	have	fractures,	can	damage
my	body.	But	don't	give	me	a	blank	order:	`Stop	climbing.'	That	I	am	not	going
to	do."	And	he	had	to	come	with	me	and	go	around	the	town	to	show	me	which
trees	are	dangerous.	Then	I	asked	him	the	second	question,	"Do	you	know	any
good	climber	in	the	city	who	can	teach	me	even	to	climb	the	dangerous	trees?"
He	 said,	 "You	 are	 too	 much!	 Now	 this	 is	 going	 too	 far.	 You	 had	 told	 me,	 I
understood	it..."
I	said,	"I	will	follow	it,	because	I	have	myself	proposed	it.	But	the	trees	that	you
are	saying	are	dangerous	are	irresistible,	because	JAMUN"	--	an	Indian	fruit	--
"grows	on	them.	It	 is	 really	delicious,	and	when	it	 is	 ripe	I	may	not	be	able	 to
resist	the	temptation.
You	are	my	father,	it	is	your	duty...	you	must	know	somebody	who	can	help	me."
He	said,	"If	I	had	known	that	to	be	a	father	was	going	to	be	so	difficult,	I	would
have	 never	 been	 a	 father	 --	 at	 least	 of	 you!	 Yes,	 I	 know	 one	man"	 --	 and	 he
introduced	me	to	an	old	man	who	was	a	rare	climber,	the	best.
He	was	a	woodcutter,	and	he	was	so	old	that	you	could	not	believe	that	he	could
do	woodcutting.	He	did	only	rare	jobs,	which	nobody	else	was	ready	to	do...	big
trees	which	were	spreading	on	the	houses	--	he	would	cut	off	the	branches.	He
was	just	an	expert,	and	he	did	it	without	damaging	their	roots	or	the	houses.	First
he	would	tie	the	branches	to	other	branches	with	ropes.	Then	he	would	cut	these
branches	and	 then	with	 the	 ropes	pull	 the	other	branches	away	from	the	house
and	let	them	fall	on	the	ground.
And	he	was	so	old!	But	whenever	 there	was	some	situation	 like	 that,	when	no
other	woodcutter	was	 ready,	he	was	 ready.	So	my	 father	 told	him,	 "Teach	him
something,	 particularly	 about	 trees	 which	 are	 dangerous,	 which	 can	 break."
Branches	can	break...	and	I	had	fallen	already	two,	three	times	--	I	still	carry	the
marks	on	my	legs.
That	old	man	looked	at	me	and	he	said,	"Nobody	has	ever	come,	particularly	a
father	bringing	a	boy...!	It	is	a	dangerous	thing,	but	if	he	loves	it,	I	would	love	to
teach	him."
And	he	was	teaching	me	how	to	manage	to	climb	trees	which	were	dangerous.
He	showed	me	all	kinds	of	strategies	of	how	to	protect	yourself:	If	you	want	to
go	 high	 up	 the	 tree	 and	 you	 don't	 want	 to	 fall	 onto	 the	 ground,	 then	 first	 tie
yourself	with	a	rope	to	a	point	where	you	feel	the	tree	is	strong	enough,	and	then
go	up.	If	you	fall,	you	will	be	hanging	from	the	rope,	but	you	will	not	fall	to	the
ground.	And	that	really	helped	me;	since	then	I	have	not	fallen!
The	 function	of	a	 father	or	a	mother	 is	great,	because	 they	are	bringing	a	new
guest	 into	 the	world	 --	who	 knows	 nothing,	 but	who	 brings	 some	 potential	 in
him.	And	unless	his	potential	grows,	he	will	remain	unhappy.
No	parents	like	to	think	of	their	children	remaining	unhappy;	they	want	them	to
be	happy.
It	is	just	that	their	thinking	is	wrong.	They	think	if	they	become	doctors,	if	they
become	 professors,	 engineers,	 scientists,	 then	 they	 will	 be	 happy.	 They	 don't
know!	They	can	only	be	happy	if	they	become	what	they	have	come	to	become.
They	can	only	become	the	seed	that	they	are	carrying	within	themselves.
So	help	in	every	possible	way	to	give	freedom,	to	give	opportunities.	Ordinarily,
if	a	child	asks	a	mother	anything,	without	even	listening	to	the	child,	to	what	he
is	asking,	the	mother	simply	says	no.	"No"	is	an	authoritative	word;	"yes"	is	not.
So	neither	father	nor	mother	or	anybody	else	who	is	in	authority	wants	to	say	yes
--	to	any	ordinary	thing.
The	child	wants	to	play	outside	the	house:	"No!"	The	child	wants	to	go	out	while
it	is	raining	and	wants	to	dance	in	the	rain:	"No!	You	will	get	a	cold."	A	cold	is
not	a	cancer,	but	a	child	who	has	been	prevented	from	dancing	in	the	rain,	and
has	 never	 been	 able	 again	 to	 dance,	 has	 missed	 something	 great,	 something
really	beautiful.	A	cold	would	have	been	worthwhile	--	and	it	is	not	that	he	will
necessarily	have	a	cold.	In	fact	the	more	you	protect	him,	the	more	he	becomes
vulnerable.	The	more	you	allow	him,	the	more	he	becomes	immune.
Parents	have	to	 learn	to	say	yes.	In	ninety-nine	times	when	they	ordinarily	say
no,	 it	 is	 for	 no	 other	 reason	 than	 simply	 to	 show	 authority.	Everybody	 cannot
become	 the	 president	 of	 the	 country,	 cannot	 have	 authority	 over	 millions	 of
people.	But	everybody	can	become	a	husband,	can	have	authority	over	his	wife;
every	wife	can	become	a	mother,	can	have	authority	over	the	child;	every	child
can	have	a	 teddy	bear,	and	have	authority	over	 the	 teddy	bear...	kick	him	from
this	corner	to	the	other	corner,	give	him	good	slaps,	slaps	that	he	really	wanted	to
give	to	the	mother	or	to	father.	And	the	poor	teddy	bear	has	nobody	below	him.
This	is	an	authoritarian	society.
What	 I	 am	 saying	 is	 in	 creating	 children	who	 have	 freedom,	who	 have	 heard
"yes"	 and	 have	 rarely	 heard	 "no",	 the	 authoritarian	 society	will	 disappear.	We
will	have	a	more	human	society.
So	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	the	children.	Those	children	are	going	to	become
tomorrow's	society:	the	child	is	the	father	of	man.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
INDIA,	 YOUR	 HOMELAND,	 HAS	 TREATED	 YOU	 BADLY	 AND
WITHOUT	DUE
RESPECT.	 YET	 SOMETIMES	 WHEN	 I	 HEAR	 YOU	 SPEAK,	 DO	 I	 NOT
DETECT	A	SUBTLE	FONDNESS	IN	YOU	FOR	INDIA	AND	HER	PEOPLE?
OSHO,	WHAT	DO
YOU	LOVE	ABOUT	INDIA?
India,	to	me,	is	not	only	a	country,	but	a	concept...	not	just	a	land,	but	a	way	of
life,	a	tremendously	significant	philosophy.
So	when	 I	 talk	 about	 India,	 it	 does	not	matter	 at	 all	 that	 they	have	 treated	me
badly,	 that	 they	 would	 like	 me	 to	 be	 killed.	 They	 have	 made	 efforts	 --
unfortunately	they	failed.
These	are	small	things,	and	I	don't	take	them	into	consideration.
My	consideration	is	for	the	India	as	a	concept.
It	is	the	only	part	of	the	world	which	has	gone	deep	into	the	interiority	of	man,
which	 has	 discovered	 for	 the	 first	 time	 the	 ultimate	 in	 consciousness,	 the
universality	of	individual	beings.
Science	has	discovered	much,	but	no	discovery	of	science	can	be	compared	 to
the	 discovery	 that	 India	 has	 made	 in	 the	 past.	 For	 ten	 thousand	 years
continuously	it	has	devoted	its	whole	energy	to	finding	out	the	meaning	of	life,
the	very	essence	of	existence
--	and	it	has	found	it.
So	when	I	talk	about	India,	I	do	not	talk	about	the	India	that	you	see	on	the	map,
I	do	not	talk	about	the	India	that	exists	today.	I	am	talking	about	a	concept	that
has	come	out	of	centuries'	work	of	discovery.	Nowhere	has	religion	ever	reached
such	heights.	No	community	has	ever	given	all	her	geniuses	to	the	discovery	of
man's	inner	world.	And	that	is	the	most	precious	thing	in	life.
You	 can	 have	 everything,	 all,	 but	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 yourself...	 you	 can	 know
everything	 around	 you,	 but	 if	 you	 don't	 know	 what	 is	 within	 you,	 all	 your
knowledge,	 all	your	wealth,	 all	your	power	 is	 futile	 --	 and	 sooner	or	 later	you
will	 be	 drowned	 in	 your	 own	wealth,	 in	 your	 own	 power.	 It	 will	 destroy	 you
because	 it	will	go	on	 increasing,	becoming	bigger	and	bigger,	 and	you	will	be
shrinking,	becoming	smaller	and	smaller.
The	scientist	is	denying	that	he	is,	and	asserting	truths	about	things	and	objects.
It	 is	a	very	strange	phenomenon.	Then	who	 is	discovering	all	 these	 things	and
objects?	 Every	 genuine	 scientific	 genius	 feels	 embarrassed	 --	 anybody	 like
Albert	Einstein	--	because	he	cannot	say	anything	about	himself...	and	he	knows
about	the	farthest	star	in	the	world,	its	whole	history	millions	of	years	before	it
was	created,	and	he	knows	how	many	more	million	years	it	will	remain,	and	then
it	will	dissolve.	His	knowledge	is	vast,	but	he	knows	nothing	about	the	knower.
And	what	use	is	this	knowledge?	Not	only	is	it	useless,	it	is	going	to	be	harmful.
And	we	know	now	that	the	whole	of	science	is	in	the	service	of	the	war	machine:
that	 is,	 in	 the	service	of	death.	The	objective	experimentation,	 the	enquiry	 into
the	outside	world,	has	reached	a	stage	which	can	only	be	called	a	global	suicide;
while	in	India	the	search	was	inner,	and	it	culminated	in	the	universal	experience
of	life,	of	joy,	of	blissfulness,	of	nirvana.
I	am	not	concerned	with	India	as	a	geographical	unit,	but	as	a	spiritual	search.	I
can	condemn	the	present-day	situation.	It	is	ugly;	it	is	against	all	human	values.
The	country	is	becoming	poorer	every	day,	and	the	politicians	cannot	prevent	it,
for	the	simple	reason	that	if	they	try	to	prevent	it...	And	the	only	way	to	prevent
it	is	to	spread	birth-control	methods.	That	goes	against	the	orthodox	Indian	mind,
and	 to	 annoy	 the	 orthodox	 Indian	 mind	 means	 you	 lose	 your	 power;	 next
election	you	will	be	gone.	So	you	know	that	if	you	do	something	to	prevent	it,
you	 are	 finished;	 if	 you	 want	 to	 keep	 yourself	 in	 power,	 then	 you	 know	 the
country	is	going	to	die	and	starve.
Already	 India	 has	 nine-hundred	million	 people.	When	 I	 started	 speaking	 there
were	only	four	hundred	million	people.	If	they	had	listened	to	me,	it	would	never
have	got	into	such	a	bad	situation.	But	they	threw	stones	at	me.
Now	countries	are	trying	to	prevent	me	even	from	landing	at	their	airports;	 the
question	of	entry	into	the	country	does	not	arise.	Even	countries	about	which	I
have	never	thought...
Just	today	Anando	informed	me	that	Venezuela	--	I	have	never	thought	about	it!
--	has	passed	a	resolution	that	I	am	banned,	I	cannot	enter	into	the	country.	Even
in	 Ireland,	where	we	were	 for	 two	weeks,	 the	 government	 is	 now	 denying	 it.
They	are	not	even	courageous	enough	to	say,	"Yes,	they	were	here	and	they	are
gone."	 They	 are	 denying,	 saying,	 "They	 have	 not	 been	 here.	 How	 could	 they
enter	 into	 the	 country?	 --	 because	 they	 are	 banned."	 Just	 as	we	 left	 they	must
have	passed	some	resolution	in	the	parliament	to	ban	us.
The	European	parliament	has	a	resolution	now	to	ban	me	collectively,	rather	than
separately,	 so	 all	 European	 countries	 who	 are	 members	 of	 the	 parliament
automatically	become	closed.
The	 same	 situation	was	happening	 in	 India.	At	 the	 stations	my	 train	would	be
delayed	 for	 two	hours	 because	 there	were	people	who	did	not	want	me	 to	 get
down	at	their	city,	and	were	forcing	the	train	to	take	me	back.
I	would	be	speaking	in	an	Indian	city,	and	the	electricity	would	be	cut	off.	And
this	was	happening	so	often,	again	and	again,	that	it	could	not	be	just	accidental.
The	fifty	thousand	people	would	be	sitting	in	darkness	for	half	an	hour,	one	hour,
and	the	electricity	wouldn't	come	on.	And	finally	I	would	have	to	inform	them,
"Now	it	is	pointless	--	you	please	go	home.	I	will	stay	a	little	longer	in	the	city	so
you	will	not	miss	any	lecture	of	the	series."	And	as	the	people	were	leaving,	as	I
was	leaving,	the	electricity	would	come	on.
Just	now	the	Indian	government	wanted	me	to	stay	in	India,	but	with	conditions.
One:	no	 foreign	disciple	 should	be	 allowed	 to	 come	 to	 see	me.	Two:	no	news
media	should	be	allowed	to	interview	me.	Three:	I	will	not	go	out	of	the	country.
If	I	fulfilled	these	three	conditions	then	I	could	stay	in	the	country.
I	said,	"Why	don't	you	simply	shoot	me?	These	conditions	are	just	to	kill	me!"
And	I	had	to	leave	the	country	because...	there	are	many	sannyasins	in	high	posts
in	 the	 government	who	 informed	me	 that	 I	 should	 leave	 immediately	 because
they	were	going	to	confiscate	my	passport	so	I	could	not	get	out	of	the	country.
I	 had	 not	 enough	 time,	 they	 said,	 to	 get	 a	 visa,	 to	 go	 to	 another	 country.
Moreover	they	had	informed	all	the	embassies	in	Delhi	that	nobody	should	give
me	 a	 visa	 to	 their	 country.	 So	 the	 only	 country	 that	was	 available	was	Nepal,
because	no	visa	is	needed	--
that	is	a	treaty	between	India	and	Nepal.
But	 then	 the	 American	 government	 was	 pressurizing	 Nepal,	 the	 German
government	 was	 pressurizing	 Nepal,	 the	 Indian	 government	 was	 pressurizing
Nepal	that	I	should	not	be	allowed	there.	And	when	it	became	absolutely	certain
that	 they	were	 going	 to	 take	 some	 steps	 --	 they	 could	 have	 arrested	me	 there,
they	could	have	sent	me	back	to	India	--	as	I	was	informed,	I	had	immediately	to
leave.
Whenever	I	am	saying	something	about	India,	I	am	not	talking	about	this	India	--
this	India,	which	is	absolutely	corrupted,	and	politically	in	the	worst	shape.
Every	day	hundreds	of	people	are	being	killed	--	and	it	goes	on	declaring	that	it
is	a	democracy.	But	newspapers	are	not	allowed	to	publish	how	many	people	are
killed;	it	seems	to	the	outside	world	that	everything	is	peaceful.	But	the	reality	is
that	India	has	never	been	one	country;	it	was	always	many	countries.
In	 Gautam	 Buddha's	 time	 there	 were	 two	 thousand	 kingdoms	 in	 India.
Mohammedans	tried	to	make	it	one	whole;	they	could	not	succeed	fully,	but	still
they	managed	that	half	of	India	become	one	nation.	Britain,	with	more	brutality,
managed	 to	 force	 the	 whole	 of	 India	 into	 one	 nation;	 otherwise	 "nation"	 and
"nationality"	are	not	Indian	concepts.	This	unity	of	India	was	forced.
Winston	Churchill,	before	he	retired,	said,	"The	day	India	becomes	free,	it	will
fall	apart,	into	pieces."	And	he	was	right.	Politically	he	had	the	insight,	because
he	knew	that	they	had	somehow	put	all	the	pieces	together,	and	it	needs	immense
power	 to	 keep	 them	 together.	 If	 that	 power	 is	 removed,	 those	 pieces	will	 start
falling	apart	--	and	that's	what	is	happening	now.
First	Pakistan	and	Bangladesh	became	separated	from	India,	now	Punjab	wants
to	be	separate	from	India.	Assam	has	been	fighting	for	forty	years	to	be	separate
from	 India,	 Bengal	 wants	 to	 be	 separate	 from	 India,	 Tamil	 Nadu	 wants	 to
separate	from	India.
There	 are	 thirty	 languages	 in	 India.	 For	 forty	 years	 they	 have	 been	 trying	 to
make	 one	 language	 --	 Hindi	 --	 the	 national	 language,	 but	 they	 have	 not	 been
able.	If	you	cannot	even	make	a	national	language,	how	can	you	manage	to	have
a	 nation?	And	 all	 these	 entities	 are	 not	 small.	 India	 is	 almost	 a	 continent.	All
these	states	 --	Punjab	or	Maharashtra	or	Tamil	Nadu	--	are	as	big	as	France	or
England	or	Germany,	 and	 each	has	 its	 own	 culture,	 its	 own	 language,	 its	 own
dress,	its	own	way	of	doing	everything.
Now,	to	prevent	separation	they	have	made	a	law	that	nobody	can	speak	in	favor
of	dividing	any	part.	Anybody	who	speaks	of	dividing	any	part	from	India	will
be	immediately	arrested,	and	there	will	be	no	legal	way,	no	court	trial	for	it.	And
this	is	democracy!
In	Punjab	 they	have	killed	 thousands	of	Sikhs,	Sikhs	have	killed	 thousands	of
Hindus;	and	it	continues	every	day.	And	it	is	going	to	happen	all	over	India.	And
it	can	be	solved	very	easily.
India	is	facing	today	the	question	of	separation.	There	is	no	need	to	kill	people.
India	 should	 remain	 one.	 My	 solution	 is	 simple	 --	 one	 just	 needs	 a	 little
understanding.
Freedom	is	everybody's	birthright.
So	I	am	not	in	favor	of	this	India,	which	is	absolutely	corrupted.	But	to	me,	in
my	vision,	there	is	a	totally	different,	glorious	India,	which	consists	of	men	like
Gautam	Buddha,	Nagarjuna,	Vasubundhu,	Shankara...	a	whole	line	of	thousands
of	enlightened	people.
That's	my	India.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	 CAN	 I	 ASSERT	 MYSELF	 IF	 I	 DISSOLVE	 AND	 ACCEPT
WHATSOEVER	IS
HAPPENING?
The	moment	you	start	thinking	about	these	things,	problems	arise.	You	just	do	it
and	see	what	happens.
You	dissolve	 yourself	 into	 the	whole,	 and	 if	 the	 situation	 needs	 assertion,	 you
will	not	be	asserting;	the	whole	will	be	asserting.	You	will	not	be	less,	you	will
be	more.	You	will	not	be	alone,	you	will	be	supported	by	the	whole.
Experience	dissolves	problems.	But	we	go	on	simply	thinking,	and	if	you	think,
then	naturally	the	problem	seems	to	be	very	relevant:	"If	I	dissolve,	then	how	am
I	 going	 to	 assert	 myself?"	 Naturally	 it	 seems	 contradictory.	 Logically	 it	 is
contradictory,	but	existentially	it	is	not.
You	dissolve,	and	see	what	happens.
If	the	situation	needs	assertion,	there	will	be	assertion...	not	yours,	because	now
you	are	part	of	the	whole.	Now	the	whole	will	assert	with	you.	You	never	lose
anything.	With	the	whole	dissolving,	you	are	always	a	gainer.
But	before	thinking	about	it,	do	it.
Only	doing	will	solve	the	contradiction.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
BEFORE	I	SEE	YOU	EACH	DAY,	I	AM	SO	EXCITED	AT	THE	THOUGHT
OF
SEEING	YOU.	BUT	WHEN	 I	DO	 I	BECOME	BLANK,	AS	 IF	 I	HAVE	NO
FACE,	NO
SMILE.	 I	EVEN	FIND	IT	DIFFICULT	TO	NAMASTE	YOU,	AS	IF	 I	HAVE
BECOME
INVISIBLE	IN	FRONT	OF	YOU.	WHATEVER	MY	HEART	DOES	LOOKS
CHILDISH,	 AND	 IT	 FEELS	 AS	 IF	 ANY	 ACT	 I	 DID	 WOULD	 BE	 JUST
DUMPING
MY	RUBBISH	ON	YOU.OSHO,	I	HAVE	NEVER	EXPRESSED	HOW	MUCH
GRATITUDE	I	FEEL,	ALTHOUGH	MY	HEART	IS	FULL	OF	IT.
I	 know	 it.	 And	what	 is	 happening	 is	 absolutely	 right,	what	 you	 are	 feeling	 is
perfectly	in	tune	with	my	teaching.
You	cannot	express	your	gratitude.	You	can	be	full	of	it,	but	any	act...	it	will	look
too	small.	And	it	can	happen,	it	is	very	natural,	that	you	are	excited	when	I	am
coming,	 but	when	 I	 come,	 you	 are	 almost	 absent.	This	 is	 good,	 this	 is	 how	 it
should	be.
When	 I	 am	 here,	 you	 should	 not	 be	 here,	 because	 in	 this	 room	 only	 one	 can
survive:	either	you	or	I.
So	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question...	But	 you	have	 expressed	very	 accurately	your	 feeling.
You	should	be	happy	that	it	is	happening	to	you.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	Whenever	the	ego	gains,	you	are	the	loser	24	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604240
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO24
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	SOME	TIME	NOW	YOU	HAVE	BEEN	SAYING	THAT	YOU	ARE	OUR
FRIEND	AND	WE	ARE	FRIENDS.	I'M	HAVING	DIFFICULTY	IN	TRULY
GETTING	IT.
OSHO,	TO	ME	YOU	ARE	MY	MOST	BELOVED	MASTER.	PLEASE	SHOW
ME
WHERE	I	AM	MISSING.
The	question	is	from	Vivek.
I	can	understand	her	difficulty.
The	same	will	be	 the	difficulty	of	all	 those	who	have	come	close	 to	me,	 loved
me,	received	me	in	their	hearts	as	a	master.
I	 have	 been	 saying	 that	 I	 am	 your	 friend,	 and	 you	 are	 my	 friend	 for	 a	 very
strange	reason	that	may	not	be	obvious	to	you.	There	was	another	question	from
Milarepa	--	why	are	a	few	sannyasins	feeling	very	resentful	towards	you,	angry
with	you?
This	has	been	an	historical	thing,	that	amongst	disciples	there	are	always	a	few
who	are	accidental.	The	wind	was	blowing	this	way	and	they	arrived.	They	saw
a	tremendous	energy	in	the	disciples,	and	they	became	greedy.	But	it	was	not	a
search	 for	 truth,	 it	 was	 not	 a	 search	 for	 love;	 it	 was	 simple	 greed.	 They	 also
wanted	to	be	spiritually	powerful.
They	 became	 sannyasins,	 they	 became	 disciples,	 but	 the	 distance	 between	me
and	 them	 remained	 the	 same.	 They	 could	 never	 become	 my	 intimate	 people.
They	 could	 never	 become	my	 people.	 Even	 though	 they	 were	 with	 me,	 deep
down	 they	were	 resentful,	 angry.	 I	wanted	 them	 to	drop	 their	 resentfulness,	 to
drop	their	anger.	 It	was	not	my	problem,	 it	was	 their	problem,	and	I	wanted	to
help	them	in	every	possible	way.
It	 was	 for	 this	 simple	 reason	 that	 I	 had	 said,	 "I	 am	 your	 friend,	 you	 are	 my
friend."	 Those	who	were	 not	 really	with	me	were	 immensely	 happy	 that	 now
their	status	and	my	status	was	the	same.	And	amongst	these	were	people	that	you
would	 never	 have	 imagined...	 Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 had	 the	 message	 from	 a
sannyasin	that	Teertha	is	saying	to	people	that	my	state	and	his	state	are	now	the
same	--	we	are	friends.	For	this	he	was	hanging	around	for	fifteen	years.	Rajen	is
saying	 to	people,	 "Now	 I	 am	no	 longer	 a	disciple	but	 a	 friend,	 and	 I	have	 the
same	status."
These	were	 the	people	 that	 I	wanted	 to	get	 rid	of	as	peacefully,	 as	 lovingly	as
possible.
But	 those	 who	 had	 loved	 me	 felt	 hurt	 --	 because	 they	 have	 loved	 me	 as	 a
disciple,	 and	 to	 be	 a	 disciple	 is	 something	 so	 valuable	 that	who	 cares	 to	 be	 a
friend?
There	 is	 a	 story	 in	 Gautam	 Buddha's	 life....	 One	 of	 his	 closest	 disciples,
Sariputta,	was	found	 to	be	not	meditating	enough.	Even	people	who	had	come
after	 Sariputta	 had	 gone	 deeper	 into	 meditation,	 people	 of	 lesser	 genius	 and
lesser	intelligence.	Buddha	called	Sariputta	one	morning	and	said,	"What	is	the
matter?"
He	 said,	 "You	 know	 it.	 I	 never	want	 to	 be	 enlightened	while	 you	 are	 alive.	 I
simply	want	 to	sit	at	your	 feet	 the	way	 I	have	always	been	sitting.	To	be	your
disciple,	to	be	showered	with	your	love...	who	cares	about	enlightenment?	This
is	my	enlightenment!"
So	I	can	understand	Vivek's	difficulty.	She	has	been	for	sixteen	years	with	me.
When	 she	 came	 she	was	 only	 twenty	 years	 old;	 now	 she	 is	 thirty-six,	 almost
twice	the	age.	And	all	these	sixteen	years,	day	in,	day	out,	she	has	been	taking
care	of	me	with	as	much	love	as	possible,	with	a	deep	devotion.	It	is	difficult	for
her	to	think	of	herself	as	being	a	friend.	It	would	not	be	a	gain	to	her,	it	would	be
a	 loss.	 Those	 who	 have	 understood	 the	 joy	 and	 the	 celebration	 of	 being	 a
disciple,	of	being	in	love	with	a	master,	will	all	feel	the	same:	that	to	be	a	friend
is	nothing	compared	to	it;	everything	is	lost.	To	be	a	friend	becomes	formal.
So	those	who	were	really	with	me	have	been	shaken,	hurt,	and	those	who	were
not	 really	with	me	have	been	 tremendously	happy.	 Just	 by	me	calling	you	my
friend,	you	do	not	achieve	the	state	in	which	I	am.	If	it	was	so	easy	I	would	have
called	 the	whole	world	my	 friend,	 and	 they	 all	would	 have	 come	 to	 the	 same
state.
Milarepa's	 question	 is	 concerned	 with	 it.	 After	 the	 American	 government
destroyed	 the	 commune,	 illegally	 but	 systematically	 --	 it	 was	 a	 criminal	 act
against	 human	 consciousness	 and	 its	 evolution	 --	 people	 had	 to	 leave	 the
commune.	Now,	a	few	of	 these	people	are	feeling	resentful;	 that	simply	means
they	were	around	me	for	a	certain	reason.
There	was	some	greed	--	although	I	have	been	 insistently	destroying	all	greed,
all	ego,	all	jealousy,	all	competition,	all	ambition.	But	they	are	so	deeply	rooted
that	although	intellectually	you	may	feel	they	have	left	you,	they	are	there.
These	people	are	now	feeling	 resentful	because	deep	down	 they	had	 the	greed
that	 if	 they	 die	 in	 the	 buddhafield	 they	will	 become	 enlightened,	 and	 now	 the
buddhafield	has	disappeared.	They	are	angry,	and	they	are	angry	at	me,	because
in	 spite	 of	me	 telling	 them	 continually	 that	 I	 do	 not	 believe	 in	miracles,	 they
continued	to	believe,	so	it	was	a	shock	to	them	that	I	was	arrested.	They	would
have	 loved	 it	 if	 I	 could	 have	 gone	 through	 the	 walls	 of	 the	 jail,	 and	 then	 a
miracle...	 Those	 were	 their	 desires...	 the	 commune	 had	 been	 destroyed	 and	 I
should	have	done	something	to	prevent	it	from	being	destroyed.
Naturally,	they	are	angry.
But	 this	 is	 their	misunderstanding.	They	 can't	 see	 real	miracles;	 they	 can't	 see
how	 I	 lived	 for	 those	 twelve	 days	 in	 jail,	 how	 the	 people	 in	 the	 jail	 --	 the
authorities	and	the	inmates	-
-	almost	became	sannyasins.	All	these	people	in	the	jail	were	saying	that	it	was
absolutely	unjust,	unfair,	against	the	constitution,	and	when	I	left	their	jail,	there
were	tears	in	their	eyes.
One	of	the	jailers	said,	"This	is	the	first	time	that	I	have	tears	in	my	eyes	when	I
am	releasing	a	prisoner;	otherwise	I	am	always	happy	to	make	somebody	free.
But	 if	you	ask	me,	I	really	want	you	to	be	here	always!	You	have	changed	the
whole	atmosphere.	How	you	have	done	it,	I	don't	know;	perhaps	it	was	just	your
presence."
I	was	in	the	hospital	section,	and	the	head	nurse	told	me,	"This	is	the	first	time
that	 the	 jailers,	 the	 assistant	 jailer,	 and	 other	 officers	 continually	 come	 to	 this
department;	otherwise	nobody	comes	here.	They	come	here,	 they	sit	with	you,
they	talk	with	you.
They	are	hurt	that	you	have	been	harassed,	and	they	are	ashamed	that	they	are	all
instrumental	in	the	harassment."
They	made	every	arrangement	for	me	--	they	have	never	done	that	for	anybody
else.	 I	 call	 this	 a	miracle,	 not	 coming	out	 of	 the	walls	 or	 breaking	 the	 chains;
those	are	not	miracles.
But	 this	 impact	on	human	consciousness...	All	 the	six	nurses	and	 the	doctor	 --
who	was	 also	 a	woman	 --	were	 crying	when	 I	 left.	They	 said,	 "We	know	you
have	to	go...	we	know	that	you	have	been	only	three	days	with	us,	and	we	have
become	so	attached	to	you;	what	must	be	happening	to	your	people,	who	have
been	living	for	years	with	you?	You	have	to	go,	but	our	personal	feelings	do	not
listen	 to	 logic	 --	 we	 want	 you	 to	 be	 here.	 You	 have	 changed	 the	 whole
atmosphere."
Even	the	inmates	were	not	smoking	so	that	I	was	not	affected.	They	were	trying
in	every	possible	way	so	that	the	government	might	think	they	are	harassing	me
but	I	was	not	harassed.	I	was	not	taking	showers	--	the	prisoners'	shower	booth
was	so	dirty	that	it	felt	cleaner	not	to	have	a	shower	--	the	nurses	found	out,	and
they	made	available	to	me	their	own	shower.
They	made	available	to	me	their	own	place	--	the	office	of	the	nurses,	the	office
of	the	doctor	--	so	that	wherever	I	wanted	to	sit,	I	could	sit;	wherever	I	wanted	to
lie	 down,	 I	 could	 lie	 down;	 I	 did	 not	 need	 to	 go	 to	 the	 cell.	And	whenever	 I
wanted	I	had	simply	to	knock	and	they	would	open	the	cell	and	bring	me	out.	I
said,	"You	need	not	be	worried	--
I	am	perfectly	good	in	my	cell."
They	said,	"It	is	not	a	question	of	your	being	perfectly	good	in	your	cell;	we	love
you	to	be	in	the	office.	We	will	remember	forever	that	this	is	the	place	you	used
to	sit."
The	same	happened	in	Crete:	the	chair	I	was	sitting	in	for	almost	seven	hours...
By	and	by	the	chief	superintendent	relaxed,	started	talking	to	me,	and	finally	he
said,	 "I	 am	 feeling	 proud	 that	 you	 are	 sitting	 in	 my	 office.	 So	many	 of	 your
people	come,	and	I	have	seen	you	only	in	the	picture	of	their	locket.	Now	I	will
be	able	to	say	to	them,	`This	is	the	chair	your	master	has	been	sitting	in	for	seven
hours	with	me.'"
He	 phoned	 his	 wife,	 saying,	 "I	 will	 not	 come	 until	 Osho	 is	 safely	 sent	 to
Athens."	He	 became	 so	 concerned	 that	 he	 allowed	Devaraj	 to	 drive	me	 to	 the
airport.	The	police	officers	were	sitting	at	the	back,	I	was	sitting	in	the	front	and
Devaraj	was	driving!	This	would	have	never	happened...
These	people	who	feel	resentment	may	have	other	causes	also.
Just	 the	other	day	Anando	was	 showing	me	one	book	published	against	me	 in
Australia	by	a	couple	who	have	been	sannyasins	for	three	years	and	have	been	in
the	commune.
But	 just	 looking	 at	 their	 ideas,	 it	 seems	 they	 have	 never	 seen	 me.	 They	 are
saying	 that	 they	 were	 working,	 working	 hard,	 and	 with	 their	 work	 I	 was
purchasing	Rolls	Royces.
You	can	see	the	absurdity:	their	work	was	not	bringing	any	money.	Their	work
was	making	their	own	houses	to	live	in,	the	roads	--	which	were	needing	money,
not	producing	money.	But	 in	 their	mind	 --	and	 for	all	 those	 three	years	also	 --
they	must	have	been	resentful.
Those	Rolls	Royces	were	 not	 produced	 by	 the	 commune.	 They	were	 presents
from	outside,	from	all	over	the	world.	And	I	was	not	their	owner	--	I	had	given
them	to	the	commune.	They	were	commune	property,	and	I	have	not	brought	any
of	them	with	me;	I	have	left	them	with	the	commune.	Everything	that	I	had	has
been	left	with	the	commune.
I	never	owned	anything.	But	there	must	have	been	the	idea	that	they	are	earning
money,	and	I	am	wasting	money.	That	is	their	resentment.
What	money	were	you	earning?	 In	 fact	you	needed	money	 to	make	houses,	 to
make	 roads,	 to	make	a	dam	--	 a	dam	needed	 two	and	a	half	million	dollars	 to
make.	You	were	contributing	your	labor,	but	we	were	not	creating	money	out	of
it	 so	 that	 I	 could	 purchase	Rolls	 Royces,	 so	 that	 I	 could	 purchase	 anything.	 I
have	not	purchased	anything	from	the	money	produced	by	the	commune	because
the	commune	never	produced	any	money.	The	commune	was	absorbing	money.
In	 fact	 all	 my	 royalties,	 all	 my	 books,	 all	 their	 profits	 were	 going	 to	 the
commune.	The	situation	is	just	the	opposite	--	that	I	had	given	everything	to	the
commune.	 Now,	 four	 hundred	 books	 in	 different	 languages	 were	 bringing
millions	of	dollars	in	royalties,	and	those	royalties	were	going	to	the	commune.
If	I	had	wanted	to	purchase	Roll	Royces,	I	could	have	purchased	my	own	Rolls
Royces,	as	many	as	I	wanted,	just	out	of	my	royalties.
But	the	resentment,	the	anger,	is	blind.	In	the	commune	we	invested	two	hundred
million	dollars.	Those	 sannyasins	perhaps	 think	 they	had	brought	 two	hundred
million	dollars	there!	Without	me	and	the	people	who	love	me	around	the	world,
those	two	hundred	million	dollars	would	not	have	been	possible.	And	now	you
can	see:	Sheela	is	 trying	hard	but	is	not	getting	even	enough	money	to	pay	the
attorneys.	No	sannyasin	is	going	to	see	her.
Shanti	B	and	Puja	have	been	given	bail	by	the	magistrate	--	ten	million	dollars
each.	But	they	cannot	collect	even	ten	dollars,	what	to	say	of	ten	million	dollars!
Who	is	going	to	put	up	ten	million	dollars	for	Puja,	ten	million	dollars	for	Shanti
B?	These	people	played	with	two	hundred	million	dollars,	and	they	remained	in
the	illusion	that	this	money	was	coming	to	them!	The	money	was	given	to	me,
but	 because	 I	 don't	 receive	 anything,	 I	 had	 given	 the	 whole	 money	 to	 the
commune.	And	still	they	feel	resentful	towards	me.	They	are	angry	at	me.
Just	to	pacify	these	people,	before	I	left	I	did	everything:	I	dissolved	the	religion,
because	 that	 gives	 hope	 to	 people	 --	 and	 they	 start	 believing	 that	 the
responsibility	 is	mine,	 that	 they	 should	 be	 raised	 in	 consciousness,	 awareness,
and	finally	made	enlightened.
I	made	them	free	--	saying	that	you	need	not	wear	red	clothes,	you	need	not	wear
a	 mala,	 it	 is	 not	 compulsory	 anymore	 --	 simply	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 load	 of
responsibility	that	they	were	unknowingly	putting	on	me.	They	were	hoping	that
just	by	wearing	red	clothes	and	putting	the	mala	on,	their	work	was	finished,	that
now	it	is	my	responsibility	to	make	them	enlightened.	I	dropped	that.	They	think
that	I	was	giving	freedom	to	them;	in	fact	I	was	simply	making	my	own	life	as
light	as	possible.	I	was	simply	dropping	unnecessarily	imposed	responsibilities.
And	finally,	not	to	let	them	feel	that	they	were	inferior	to	me	in	any	way,	I	told
them,	"I	am	your	friend	and	you	are	my	friend."
And	the	people	who	wanted	it,	who	had	been	waiting	for	it,	rejoiced.
But	the	people	who	understood	cried	and	wept.
Now	 in	Rajen's	 groups	 even	my	 name	 is	 not	mentioned.	What	 is	 the	 need	 of
mentioning	 the	name	of	a	friend?	You	have	many	friends	--	you	don't	mention
their	names.
Teertha	has	made	an	academy.	Devageet	was	there;	he	worked	hard	to	find	the
place,	 to	arrange	it,	hoping	that	 it	was	going	to	be	Osho's	meditation	academy.
But	when	he	saw	the	board	being	put	up	it	said	simply	"Meditation	Academy."
He	asked,	"But	no	mention	of	Osho?"
And	Teertha	and	Vedana	and	others	who	were	involved	in	it	simply	said,	"We	are
all	friends	--	why	put	Osho's	name	there?"
They	printed	a	brochure,	and	Devageet	was	saying	to	me,	"I	cried,	and	I	had	to
fight	 almost	 physically	 because	 Your	 name	 was	 not	 even	 mentioned	 in	 the
brochure.	 It	was	not	even	mentioned	that	 the	meditations	 they	will	be	 teaching
have	something	to	do	with	You.	They	have	all	their	pictures	in	the	brochure,	but
Your	picture	is	not	there."	Because	he	fought	so	much,	finally	they	agreed	to	put
in	a	picture	of	me,	a	strange	picture,	an	old	picture	that	nobody	would	recognize
--	it	must	be	a	picture	taken	by	someone	in	'74	--
and	 that	 too	 a	 small	 picture,	 and	 without	 mentioning	 my	 name	 or	 saying
anything	about	who	the	person	is.
Devageet,	simply	out	of	disgust,	left	the	place.	And	now	these	same	people	are
trying	to	have	a	world	festival	--	in	which	my	name	is	not	mentioned.	There	is
no	need,	naturally,	to	mention	the	name	of	a	man	who	is	your	friend;	you	have
many	friends!	But	they	will	be	exploiting	the	sannyasins.
The	strategy	is	very	clear,	because	I	have	been	seeing:	when	they	advertise	their
groups	 in	 our	 newspapers,	 newsletters,	 magazines,	 then	 they	 are	 in	 orange
clothes	with	the	mala.
None	of	them	is	using	red	clothes	or	mala,	and	in	the	group	not	even	my	name	is
mentioned.	 But	 in	 advertisements,	 to	 attract	 sannyasins	 to	 participate	 in	 the
groups,	all	of	them	are	publishing	their	pictures	with	malas,	with	orange	dress	--
as	if	they	are	old	sannyasins.	Just	to	make	these	people	feel	at	ease,	I	withdrew
myself	from	their	lives.
But,	Vivek,	 you	need	not	 be	worried	 about	 it.	Those	who	 love	me,	 those	who
know	me,	know	perfectly	well	 that	I	am	their	master,	and	they	have	traveled	a
long	way	with	me,	in	devotion	and	love.	And	of	course,	it	is	impossible	for	them
at	any	moment	 --	even	 if	 they	become	enlightened	 --	 to	call	me	a	 friend.	That
will	be	simply	ungratefulness.
Again,	 I	 remember	 Sariputta.	 One	 day	 finally	 he	 became	 enlightened,	 and
Buddha	said,
"You	have	to	go	to	preach.	Now	you	are	enlightened	there	is	no	need	for	you	to
sit	here	by	my	feet."
He	said,	"This	was	 the	 trouble!	 I	was	ready	 to	drop	 the	 idea	of	enlightenment.
You	forced	me	to	go	on	deeper	into	meditation,	and	now	I	am	in	a	fix.	I	knew
that	this	was	going	to	happen	--	once	I	become	enlightened	you	will	tell	me	to	go
to	spread	the	word.	I	don't	want	to	go	anywhere.	While	you	are	alive,	I	want	to
be	just	your	shadow."
But	Buddha	persuaded	him.	Finally	he	 agreed,	when	Buddha	was	 so	 insistent,
but	he	said,
"One	freedom	I	want..."	Just	see	the	use	of	the	word	`freedom',	and	you	can	see
the	 freedom	 that	 your	 so-called	 resentful	 and	 angry	 sannyasins	 have:	 "One
freedom	 I	want,	 that	wherever	 you	 are	 I	 should	 be	 allowed	 to	 bow	down	 and
touch	your	feet,	from	a	faraway	distance,	in	your	direction."
But	Buddha	said,	"You	are	already	enlightened	--	you	need	not	touch	my	feet!"
He	said,	"You	have	to	give	me	that	freedom."
Love	asks	for	a	freedom	which	logic	cannot	understand.
Sariputta	was	asked	again	and	again	in	his	journeys...	Every	morning	he	would
get	up,	 take	his	bath,	and	 the	first	 thing	he	would	do	was	 to	bow	down	on	 the
ground	 with	 folded	 hands	 towards	 the	 direction	 where	 he	 knew	 Buddha	 was
dwelling.
They	would	 say,	 "To	whom	are	 you	praying	 this	way?"	 --	 because	 there	 is	 no
God	in	Buddhism.
And	he	would	say,	"I	am	not	praying	to	any	God,	but	Buddha	is	God	to	me;	he	is
my	master."
And	they	would	say,	"But	you	are	enlightened!"
He	said,	"That	does	not	matter.	I	am	enlightened	because	of	him.	Without	him	I
don't	think	it	would	have	happened	in	many	lives'	time,	I	cannot	conceive	how	it
could	have	happened.	So	he	may	say	he	is	not	responsible	for	the	happening,	but
I	 cannot	 accept	 the	 idea.	 This	 freedom	 I	 have	 asked	 from	 him,	 and	 this	 is	 a
special	privilege."
I	am	feeling	very	relieved	--	relieved	of	all	 those	who	were	not	my	people	but
somehow	were	hanging	around.	Now	I	want	only	those	who	are	really	with	me.
Yesterday	while	Vivek	was	reading	the	questions	to	me,	when	she	read	her	own
question	she	started	crying.	I	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	Whose	question	is	this?"
She	said,	"It	is	my	question."
And	I	know	that	is	the	situation	of	many	hearts	--	but	only	those	hearts	who	have
learned	to	love	a	master.
All	 those	 egoist	people	were	pretending	 to	be	disciples.	 I	 did	not	want	 to	hurt
them,	so	the	best,	the	graceful	way	was	that	I	declared:	you	are	my	friends,	and	I
give	you	total	freedom.	And	they	accepted	immediately,	joyously,	not	knowing
what	 they	were	 accepting.	They	were	 free...	 they	met	me;	 now	 they	 are	 again
free,	in	the	same	position.
They	 have	 lost	 something,	 but	 they	 think	 their	 egos	 have	 gained	 something.
Whenever	the	ego	gains,	you	are	the	loser.
It	is	one	of	the	reasons	that	I	don't	want	to	have	another	commune.	I	want	only	a
mystery	school,	so	 those	who	really	are	 interested	can	come,	 learn,	go	back.	 It
has	 been	 a	 tremendously	meaningful	 experience,	 but	 it	was	not	 new.	At	 every
turn	 of	 my	 life	 I	 have	 had	 to	 drop	 a	 few	 people.	 And	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 say	 to
somebody,	 "I	 am	 dropping	 you."	 I	 can't	 be	 that	 unkind,	 ungraceful.	 I	 have
managed	things	so	that	they	drop	themselves.
It	has	happened	many	times	--	this	was	not	the	first	time.	And	it	is	natural	that	as
you	 go	 along,	 you	 start	 gathering	 some	 junk,	 some	 unnecessary	 luggage,	 and
there	 comes	 a	 point	 where	 it	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	 But	 these	 are	 living	 people.
Although	 they	 are	 junk,	 they	 are	 just	 luggage,	 useless,	 I	 am	 still	 respectful
towards	 them.	 So	 I	 have	 to	 find	 a	 certain	 device	 so	 they	 can	 go	 happily,	 not
feeling	that	 they	have	been	dropped,	but	on	the	contrary,	 that	 they	have	gained
what	they	wanted.
It	was	simply	hilarious	when	I	read	Teertha's	letter.	In	the	end	he	writes,	"I	am
doing	the	same	work	as	you	are	doing;	the	only	difference	is	that	you	are	doing	it
on	a	bigger	scale	and	I	am	doing	it	on	a	personal	scale,	individual	to	individual.
But	the	work	is	the	same."
And	 then	 came	 this	 second	 news	 that	 he	 told	 somebody	 on	 the	 phone,	 who
informed	me,
"I	am	of	the	same	state."
It	is	good	that	they	are	feeling	good.
As	far	as	reality	is	concerned,	those	who	were	real	disciples	are	still	disciples	--
even	 if	 they	become	enlightened,	 they	will	not	 lose	 their	disciplehood.	 In	 fact,
they	have	attained	to	the	ultimate	of	disciplehood.	Their	gratitude	and	their	love
towards	the	master	is	not	less	but	more	than	ever.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
LISTENING	 TO	 YOU	 SPEAK	 RECENTLY,	 I	 HAVE	 HAD	 MANY
MOMENTS
WHEN	YOUR	WORDS	GO	IN	AND	STRIKE	A	DEEP	CHORD.	WHEN	THIS
HAPPENS	IT	SEEMS	LIKE	TWO	OPPOSITE	PHENOMENA	OCCUR
SIMULTANEOUSLY:	 ON	 THE	 ONE	 HAND	 IT'S	 LIKE	 HEARING
SOMETHING
FOR	THE	FIRST	TIME,	AND	ON	THE	OTHER,	LIKE	REMEMBERING
SOMETHING	JUST	RECENTLY	FORGOTTEN.
COULD	YOU	SAY	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS?
They	are	not	opposite	phenomenon.	My	whole	work	is	not	to	make	something	of
you,	but	to	help	you	to	remember	something.	Your	innermost	reality,	your	truth,
has	not	to	be	brought	to	you;	it	is	already	there.	It	just	has	to	be	remembered.
The	word	`remember'	is	very	beautiful.	Ordinarily	you	don't	think	about	words.
`Remember'	means	 to	 "make	 it	 a	member	 again."	 Its	 root	meaning	 is	 that	 you
have	 forgotten	 some	member	 of	 your	 being.	 `Remember'	means	 you	 suddenly
become	aware	that	it	is	there.
And	my	talking	to	you	is	not	the	talking	of	a	teacher,	because	I	am	not	teaching
any	theology,	any	doctrine,	any	cult,	any	creed.	I	am	speaking	to	you	in	a	totally
different	context.	I	am	speaking	to	you	in	such	a	way	that	it	creates	inside	you	a
synchronicity,	it	hits	a	deep	chord	in	you.	And	in	that,	simultaneously	something
is	remembered...	You	feel	that	you	have	heard	it	for	the	first	time	and	you	also
feel	 that	 it	 is	 a	 truth	 that	 has	 always	 been	with	 you,	 just	 you	had	 forgotten	 it.
Both	 are	 true.	From	 the	 outside	 you	have	heard	 it	 for	 the	 first	 time.	From	 the
inside	it	is	part	of	your	being;	you	had	forgotten	it.
I	 know	 so	many	people	 in	 the	world,	 and	 so	 intimately,	 but	 still	 I	 forget	 their
names	sometimes	--	but	I	never	forget	their	faces,	I	never	forget	their	eyes.	Even
in	 a	 crowd	 of	 millions	 of	 people	 I	 can	 find	 them.	 But	 as	 far	 as	 names	 are
concerned...	because	deep	down	I	know	names	are	just	given	to	you,	they	are	not
part	of	your	reality.	So	I	forget.
Then	I	have	a	simple	technique	for	how	to	remember...	It	is	strange	that	there	are
a	few	names	which	I	go	on	forgetting.	I	will	 remember	and	will	 forget	again...
there	must	be	something	in	those	names.
So	what	I	do	is	I	simply	close	my	eyes	and	start	repeating	the	alphabet	--	from	A
to	Z,	slowly	--	and	it	helps.	I	say	to	myself	"A"	and	wait	for	a	moment	to	see	if
something	is	remembered,	if	the	"A"	hits	something...	then	"B",	then	"C."	And	it
never	fails.
For	example,	Geeta	is	sitting	here.	Now	Geeta	is	one	of	the	names	that	I	should
not	forget;	it	is	the	bible	of	the	Hindus	--	in	India	the	most	respected	book,	the
holiest	book.
But	perhaps	that	is	the	reason	I	go	on	forgetting	it!	So	this	poor	Geeta	suffers.
Yesterday	I	was	answering	her	question,	but	I	could	not	remember	her	name,	and
there	 was	 not	 time	 while	 answering	 to	 go	 through	 the	 alphabet.	 Later	 on,
walking	up	the	steps,	I	went	through	the	alphabet	and	caught	her	immediately	as
"G"	came;	 I	 immediately	 remembered	 --	 it	 is	Geeta.	And	 then	 I	was	 surprised
because	this	is	such	a	common	name;	it	is	not	uncommon.	But	perhaps	it	is	the
Hindus	and	their	holy	book	--	that	seems	to	be	the	only	reason.	I	have	spoken	on
it...	 not	 in	 English,	 so	 you	 don't	 know;	 otherwise	 twelve	 big	 volumes	 I	 have
spoken	on	it,	twelve	thousand	pages,	although	it	is	a	small	book.
But	I	had	to	go	always...	it	was	not	only	once.	Once	I	can	understand	--	one	can
forget.
Then	the	next	day	I	saw	her	coming	to	clean	my	bathroom	and	I	thought,	"My
God!	 I	 have	 to	 go	 through	 the	 alphabet	 again!"	 And	 I	 caught	 her	 at	 "G"
immediately,	that	"G"
hits	some	chord,	and	I	remembered	"Geeta."	And	there	are	many	names	like	that,
that	I	go	on	forgetting.	But	they	are	there,	just	waiting	to	be	struck	rightly,	then
they	become	alive.
Different	 people	 use	 different	 techniques	 for	 forgotten	 names;	 they	 make
associations.
For	 example,	 if	 I	 don't	 want	 to	 forget	 Geeta's	 name	 I	 can	 simply	 make	 it
associated	with	Krishna.	That	name	I	never	forget,	and	it	is	his	message	--	Geeta.
So	I	can	simply	connect	these	two,	so	that	whenever	I	see	Geeta	I	don't	have	to
bother	 about	 her	 name;	 I	 have	 to	 think	 of	 Krishna,	 then	 immediately	 I	 will
remember	Geeta.	That	too	I	have	tried	just	this	morning.	Coming	in,	I	said,	"Hey
Krishna!"	I	remembered	that	she	is	Geeta	and	no	one	else.
So	if	it	happens	when	I	am	speaking	that	something	hits	a	deep	cord	in	you,	you
feel	 it	 is	 something	new	 that	you	have	heard.	But	 suddenly,	 in	an	even	deeper
and	darker	part	of	your	being,	something	else	is	remembered.	And	suddenly	you
are	in	a	puzzle:	have	you	heard	it	new	or	you	had	just	forgotten,	and	hearing	this
you	have	remembered?
Both	 are	 true	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 puzzle.	 It	 is	 new	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are
concerned;	 it	 is	 as	 ancient	 as	 existence	 as	 far	 as	 your	 being	 is	 concerned.	 For
your	ego	it	is	new,	but	for	your	being	it	is	just	a	forgotten	message.
Sometimes	 you	 feel	 you	 know	 something,	 you	 remember	 something.	 You	 are
absolutely	 certain.	 In	 all	 the	 languages	 this	 kind	 of	 phrase	 is	 available,	 "It	 is
almost	on	 the	 tip	of	my	 tongue."	 It	 is,	 but	 still	 you	 cannot	 say	 it.	And	 it	 feels
very,	 very	 strange,	 a	 little	 awkward	 inside,	with	 both	 the	 things	 together:	 you
know,	you	are	perfectly	certain	that	it	is	on	the	tip	of	the	tongue,	but	you	cannot
verbalize	it,	you	cannot	simply	say	it.	The	more	you	try,	the	more	you	become
tense...	 tense	because	 it	 is	so	close.	And	it	 is	close,	but	something	 is	hindering
the	path,	something	is	coming	in	between	--	a	very	thin	layer	of	something,	some
other	word.	But	because	you	are	becoming	tense,	it	is	not	possible	to	remember
it.
Then	different	 people	 have	different	methods.	 you	 start	 smoking	 a	 cigarette	 --
you	 forget	 all	 about	 it.	 Just	 smoking	 a	 cigarette	 you	 relax,	 and	 suddenly	 it	 is
there.	Or	you	go	 into	 the	garden	and	start	watering	 the	plants	 --	you	 forget	all
about	 it.	 You	 are	 no	 longer	 tense,	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 worried	 even	 about
remembering	 it,	 and	 that	 is	 the	moment	 you	 remember	 it.	 It	 seems	 relaxation
plays	a	great	part	in	letting	it	come	to	the	surface.
Perhaps	when	 I	 say	 something	 it	 relaxes	 you	 deep	 down,	 and	 that	 helps.	 Just
sitting	with	me,	 listening	 to	me,	 is	 not	 a	 tense	 affair.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 lecture	 of	 a
professor,	where	you	are	taking	notes.
In	India	I	had	continuously	to	tell	people,	"Please	stop	taking	notes	because	you
are	destroying	the	whole	atmosphere.	I	am	not	a	professor	and	this	is	not	a	class,
and	when	 I	am	speaking	and	you	are	 taking	notes,	you	can't	hear	me.	You	are
concentrated	on	taking	notes;	you	will	miss	many	significant	things."
Listening	to	me,	sitting	relaxed,	suddenly	a	deep	relaxation	happens	inside,	and
something	that	you	have	forgotten....
Now	 I	would	 like	 again	 to	 remind	 you	 of	 the	meaning	 of	 the	word	 `sin.'	 The
religions	have	destroyed	the	beauty	of	the	word	--	so	much	so	that	it	has	become
almost	impossible	to	use	it,	because	all	the	connotations	that	they	have	given	to
it	are	in	everybody's	mind.
But	in	reality	the	word	`sin'	simply	means	`forgotten.'	In	that	sense	I	accept	it.
Our	only	sin	is	that	we	have	forgotten	ourselves,	and	our	only	enlightenment	will
be	that	we	remember	again.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	We	cannot	be	otherwise
24	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604245
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO25
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
TODAY	 IS	MY	 EIGHTH	 SANNYAS	 BIRTHDAY.	 ISN'T	 EIGHT	 YEARS	 A
VERY
LONG	TIME	TO	MISS	THE	OBVIOUS?
The	obvious	has	been	missed	for	hundreds	of	lives,	so	no	time	is	long	enough	to
miss	it.
On	the	other	hand,	even	a	single	minute	is	enough	to	recognize	it.
In	 fact,	 it	 is	 a	 nontemporal	 phenomenon;	 time	 has	 no	 concern	with	 it.	 If	 you
think	in	terms	of	years,	if	you	have	missed	it	in	the	moment	when	it	was	possible
to	get	it,	you	will	go	on	missing.	Time	cannot	help;	on	the	contrary,	the	longer
you	have	missed	it	the	more	is	the	possibility	to	miss	it	again	when	the	moment
comes	to	recognize	it.
The	 question	 is	 from	Devaraj.	 He	 should	 not	 be	 worried,	 because	 he	 has	 not
missed	it.
And	it	is	not	the	time	of	eight	years	that	has	helped	him	not	to	miss.	It	is	his	love
--	not	the	length	of	time	but	the	depth	of	love	that	he	did	not	miss	it.
He	has	loved	me	immensely	and	in	a	very	difficult	situation.	He	is	my	personal
physician,	and	anybody	in	that	situation	will	be	in	a	very	difficult	situation.
I	am	a	difficult	patient.	I	don't	listen	to	him	or	to	anybody;	I	simply	tell	him	to	do
what	he	should	tell	me	to	do.	And	he	has	to	manage	somehow	to	do	it	--	and	to
do	it	rightly,	because	he	has	to	take	care	of	medical	science	and	he	has	to	take
care	of	a	madman.
I	won't	listen,	because	I	understand	my	body	and	its	ways.	Whatever	he,	or	any
doctor	 in	 the	 world	 has	 learned	 about	 bodies	 and	 ways...	 They	 have	 learned
about	corpses,	not	real	bodies;	they	have	been	dissecting	dead	bodies.
Sooner	 or	 later	 medical	 science	 will	 have	 to	 accept	 the	 fact	 that	 their
understanding	 is	 basically	 wrong,	 because	 a	 living	 body	 functions	 totally
differently;	the	dead	body	does	not	function	at	all.	You	study	the	dead	body	and
you	apply	your	conclusions	to	the	living	body.	That	is	one	of	the	greatest	flaws
in	modern	medical	science.
But	with	me	the	difficulty	is	even	more;	it	is	not	only	a	question	of	a	living	body.
Modern	medical	science	has	no	understanding	of	a	body	in	which	enlightenment
has	happened,	which	changes	its	functioning	absolutely,	totally.
But	Devaraj	has	been	able	to	understand	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	has	been
able	 to	 love.	His	 science,	 his	 experience,	 and	my	 body's	 different	 functioning
may	 have	 created	 a	 great	 problem	 for	 him	 to	 understand	 --	 but	 love	 solves
everything.	He	has	followed	my	understanding	of	my	body	and	its	wisdom,	still
keeping	in	 tune	with	his	scientific	medical	knowledge.	He	has	done	something
which	has	never	been	done	before,	and	he	has	done	it	successfully.
He	 need	 not	 worry:	 eight	 years	 or	 eighty	 years	make	 no	 difference.	 The	 first
moment	 he	 saw	me	 the	 obvious	 became	 a	 reality	 to	 him,	 and	 not	 for	 a	 single
moment	has	he	lost	sight	of	it;	otherwise	you	can	live	with	an	awakened	person
for	your	whole	life	and	still	not	see	what	awakening	is,	what	illumination	is.
So	 remember,	 it	 is	not	 the	 length	of	 time	but	 the	depth	of	 love	 that	makes	 the
obvious	 understood.	 And	 in	 that	 very	 understanding	 a	 tremendous
transformation	takes	place.
Only	such	people	know	intimacy	with	a	master.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	NATURE	OF	THIS	CHATTERBOX	MIND	OF	MINE?	IT	HAS
BEEN
GOING	ON	AND	ON	NOW	FOR	AS	LONG	AS	I	CAN	REMEMBER.	WHAT
ARE
ITS	ORIGINS?	IS	ITS	SOURCE	SOMEWHERE	IN	THE	VAST	SILENCE	IT
DISSOLVES	INTO	WHEN	I	AM	IN	YOUR	PRESENCE?
The	mind	is	simply	a	biocomputer.	When	the	child	is	born	he	has	no	mind;	there
is	 no	 chattering	 going	 on	 in	 him.	 It	 takes	 almost	 three	 to	 four	 years	 for	 his
mechanism	to	start	 functioning.	And	you	will	see	 that	girls	start	 talking	earlier
than	boys.	They	are	bigger	chatterboxes.	They	have	a	better	quality	biocomputer.
It	needs	information	to	be	fed	into	it;	that's	why	if	you	try	to	remember	your	life
backwards,	you	will	get	stuck	somewhere	at	the	age	of	four	if	you	are	a	man,	or
at	the	age	of	three	if	you	are	a	woman.	Beyond	that	is	a	blank.	You	were	there;
many	things	must	have	happened,	many	incidents	must	have	occurred,	but	there
seems	to	be	no	memory	being	recorded,	so	you	cannot	remember.	But	you	can
remember	back	to	the	age	of	four	or	three	very	clearly.
Mind	 collects	 its	 data	 from	 the	 parents,	 from	 the	 school,	 from	 other	 children,
neighbors,	 relatives,	 society,	 churches...	 all	 around	 there	 are	 sources.	And	 you
must	have	seen	 little	children,	when	for	 the	 first	 time	 they	start	 speaking,	 they
will	repeat	the	same	word	many	times.	The	joy!	--	a	new	mechanism	has	started
functioning	in	them.
When	they	can	make	sentences	they	will	make	sentences	so	joyously,	again	and
again.
When	 they	 can	 start	 asking	 questions,	 then	 they	 will	 ask	 about	 each	 and
everything.	They	 are	not	 interested	 in	your	 answers,	 remember!	Watch	 a	 child
when	he	asks	a	question;	he	is	not	interested	in	your	answer,	so	please	don't	give
him	 a	 long	 answer	 from	 the	ENCYCLOPAEDIA	BRITANNICA.	The	 child	 is
not	interested	in	your	answer;	the	child	is	simply	enjoying	that	he	can	question.
A	new	faculty	has	come	into	being	in	him.
And	 this	 is	 how	 he	 goes	 on	 collecting;	 then	 he	 will	 start	 reading...	 and	more
words.	 And	 in	 this	 society,	 silence	 does	 not	 pay;	 words	 pay,	 and	 the	 more
articulate	you	are,	the	more	you	will	be	paid.
What	 are	 your	 leaders?	What	 are	 your	 politicians?	What	 are	 your	 professors?
What	are	your	priests,	theologians,	philosophers,	condensed	to	one	thing?	They
are	very	articulate.
They	 know	 how	 to	 use	words	meaningfully,	 significantly,	 consistently,	 so	 that
they	can	impress	people.
It	 is	 rarely	 taken	 note	 of	 that	 our	 whole	 society	 is	 dominated	 by	 verbally
articulate	people.
They	 may	 not	 know	 anything;	 they	 may	 not	 be	 wise,	 they	 may	 not	 even	 be
intelligent.
But	one	 thing	 is	certain:	 they	know	how	to	play	with	words.	 It	 is	a	game,	and
they	have	learned	it.	And	it	pays	in	respectability,	in	money,	in	power	--	in	every
way.	So	everybody	tries,	and	 the	mind	becomes	filled	with	many	words,	many
thoughts.
And	you	can	 turn	any	computer	on	or	off	 --	but	you	cannot	 turn	 the	mind	off.
The	switch	does	not	exist.
There	 is	no	 reference	about	 it,	 that	when	God	made	 the	world,	when	he	made
man,	he	made	a	switch	for	 the	mind	so	 that	you	could	 turn	 it	on	or	 turn	 it	off.
There	is	no	switch,	so	from	birth	to	death	it	continues.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 that	 the	 people	 who	 understand	 computers	 and	 who
understand	 the	human	brain	have	a	very	 strange	 idea.	 If	we	 take	out	 the	brain
from	 the	 skull	 of	 a	 human	 being	 and	 keep	 it	 alive	 mechanically,	 it	 goes	 on
chattering	 in	 the	 same	 way.	 It	 does	 not	 matter	 to	 it	 that	 it	 is	 now	 no	 longer
connected	to	the	poor	person	who	was	suffering	from	it;	it	still	dreams.	Now	that
it	 is	connected	to	machines,	it	still	dreams,	it	still	 imagines,	it	still	fears,	it	still
projects,	hopes,	tries	to	be	this	or	that.	And	it	is	completely	unaware	that	now	it
can	do	nothing;	the	person	it	used	to	be	attached	to	is	no	longer	there.
You	 can	 keep	 this	 brain	 alive	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 attached	 to	 mechanical
devices,	and	it	will	go	on	chattering,	round	and	round,	the	same	things,	because
we	 have	 not	 yet	 been	 able	 to	 teach	 it	 new	 things.	 Once	 we	 can	 teach	 it	 new
things,	it	will	repeat	new	things.
There	 is	an	 idea	prevalent	 in	scientific	circles:	 It	 is	a	great	wastage	 that	a	man
like	Albert	Einstein	dies	and	his	brain	also	dies	with	him.	If	we	could	save	the
brain,	 implant	 the	brain	into	somebody	else's	body,	 then	the	brain	would	go	on
functioning.	It	doesn't	matter	whether	Albert	Einstein	is	alive	or	not;	 that	brain
will	 continue	 to	 think	 about	 the	 theory	 of	 relativity,	 about	 stars	 and	 about
theories.	 The	 idea	 is	 that	 just	 as	 people	 donate	 blood	 and	 people	 donate	 eyes
before	they	die,	people	should	start	donating	their	brains	too	so	that	their	brains
can	 be	 kept.	 If	we	 feel	 that	 they	 are	 special	 brains,	 very	 qualified	 --	 and	 it	 is
sheer	wastage	to	let	them	die	--	then	we	can	transplant	them.
Some	 idiot	 can	 be	made	 an	Albert	 Einstein,	 and	 the	 idiot	 will	 never	 know	 --
because	inside	the	skull	of	man	there	is	no	sensitivity;	you	can	change	anything
and	the	person	will	never	know.	Just	make	 the	person	unconscious	and	change
anything	you	want	 to	change	in	his	brain	--	 the	whole	brain	you	can	change	--
and	he	will	wake	up	with	the	new	brain,	with	the	new	chattering,	and	he	will	not
even	suspect	what	has	happened.
This	chattering	is	our	education,	and	it	is	basically	wrong	because	it	teaches	you
only	half	of	the	process	--	how	to	use	the	mind.	It	does	not	teach	you	how	to	stop
it	so	that	it	can	relax	--	because	even	when	you	are	asleep	it	goes	on	continuing.
It	knows	no	sleep.
Seventy	years,	eighty	years,	it	has	worked	continuously.
If	we	can	 educate...	 and	 that's	what	 I	 am	 trying	 to	 impress	on	you	 --	 that	 it	 is
possible.	We	call	it	meditation.
It	is	possible	to	put	a	switch	on	the	mind	and	turn	it	off	when	it	is	not	needed.	It
is	helpful	in	two	ways:	it	will	give	you	a	peace,	a	silence,	which	you	have	never
known	before,	and	it	will	give	you	an	acquaintance	of	yourself	which,	because
of	the	chattering	mind,	is	not	possible.	It	has	always	kept	you	engaged.
Secondly,	it	will	give	the	mind	rest	also.	And	if	we	can	give	the	mind	rest	it	will
be	more	capable	of	doing	things	more	efficiently,	more	intelligently.
So	on	both	sides	--	on	the	side	of	mind	and	on	the	side	of	being	--	you	will	be
benefited;	you	just	have	to	learn	how	to	stop	the	mind	from	functioning,	how	to
say	to	it,	"It	is	enough;	now	go	to	sleep.	I	am	awake,	don't	be	worried."
Use	the	mind	when	it	 is	needed,	and	then	it	 is	fresh,	young,	full	of	energy	and
juice.	 Then	 whatever	 you	 say	 is	 not	 just	 dry	 bones;	 it	 is	 full	 of	 life,	 full	 of
authority,	full	of	truth,	sincerity,	and	has	tremendous	meaning.	You	may	be	using
the	same	words,	but	now	the	mind	has	collected	so	much	power	by	resting,	that
each	word	it	uses	becomes	afire,	becomes	power.
What	is	known	in	the	world	as	charisma	is	nothing...	it	is	simply	a	mind	which
knows	how	to	relax	and	let	energy	collect,	so	when	it	speaks	it	is	poetry,	when	it
speaks	it	is	gospel,	when	it	speaks,	it	need	not	give	any	evidence	or	any	logic	--
just	 its	 own	 energy	 is	 enough	 to	 influence	 people.	 And	 people	 have	 always
known	that	there	is	something...
although	they	have	never	been	able	to	exactly	pinpoint	what	it	is	that	they	have
called	charisma.
Perhaps	for	the	first	time	I	am	telling	you	what	charisma	is,	because	I	know	it	by
my	own	experience.	A	mind	that	is	working	day	and	night	is	bound	to	become
weak,	dull,	unimpressive,	somehow	dragging.	At	the	most	it	is	utilitarian;	you	go
to	purchase	vegetables	 --	 it	 is	 helpful.	But	more	 than	 that	 it	 has	no	power.	So
millions	of	people	who	could	have	been	charismatic	remain	poor,	unimpressive,
without	any	authority	and	without	any	power.
If	this	is	possible	--	and	this	is	possible	--	to	put	the	mind	to	silence	and	only	use
it	when	it	is	needed,	then	it	comes	with	a	rushing	force.	It	has	gathered	so	much
energy	that	each	word	uttered	goes	directly	to	your	heart.	People	think	that	these
minds	of	charismatic	personalities	are	hypnotic;	they	are	not	hypnotic.	They	are
really	so	powerful,	so	fresh...
it	is	always	spring.	This	is	for	the	mind.
For	the	being,	the	silence	opens	up	a	new	universe	of	eternity,	of	deathlessness,
of	all	that	you	can	think	of	as	blessing,	as	benediction;	hence	my	insistence	that
meditation	 is	 the	 essential	 religion,	 the	 only	 religion.	 Nothing	 else	 is	 needed.
Everything	else	is	nonessential	ritual.
Meditation	is	just	the	essence,	the	very	essence.	You	cannot	cut	anything	out	of
it.
And	 it	 gives	 you	 both	 worlds.	 It	 gives	 you	 the	 other	 world	 --	 the	 divine,	 the
world	of	godliness	--	and	it	gives	you	this	world	too.	Then	you	are	not	poor.	You
have	a	richness	but	not	of	money.
There	are	many	kinds	of	richness,	and	the	man	who	is	rich	because	of	money	is
the	lowest	as	far	as	the	categories	of	richness	are	concerned.	Let	me	say	it	in	this
way:	the	man	of	wealth	is	the	poorest	rich	man.	Looked	at	from	the	side	of	the
poor,	he	is	the	richest	poor	man.	Looked	at	from	the	side	of	a	creative	artist,	of	a
dancer,	of	a	musician,	of	a	scientist,	he	is	the	poorest	rich	man.	And	as	far	as	the
world	of	ultimate	awakening	is	concerned	he	cannot	even	be	called	rich.
Meditation	 will	 make	 you	 ultimately	 rich	 by	 giving	 you	 the	 world	 of	 your
innermost	being	and	also	relatively	rich,	because	it	will	release	your	powers	of
mind	into	certain	talents	that	you	have.	My	own	experience	is	that	everybody	is
born	with	a	certain	talent,	and	unless	he	lives	that	talent	to	its	fullest,	something
in	him	will	remain	missing.	He	will	go	on	feeling	that	somehow	something	is	not
there	that	should	be.
Give	mind	a	rest	--	it	needs	it!	And	it	is	so	simple:	just	become	a	witness	to	it.
And	it	will	give	you	both	things.
Slowly,	slowly	mind	starts	learning	to	be	silent.	And	once	it	knows	that	by	being
silent	it	becomes	powerful,	then	its	words	are	not	just	words;	they	have	a	validity
and	a	richness	and	a	quality	that	they	never	had	before	--	so	much	so	that	they	go
directly,	like	arrows.
They	bypass	the	logical	barriers	and	reach	to	the	very	heart.
Then	mind	is	a	good	servant	of	immense	power	in	the	hands	of	silence.
Then	 the	 being	 is	 the	master,	 and	 the	master	 can	 use	 the	mind	whenever	 it	 is
needed	and	can	switch	it	off	whenever	it	is	not	needed.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 REMEMBER	 YOU	 ONCE	 EXPLAINING	 THAT	 TANTRA	 MEANS
EXPANSION.
MY	MOMENTS	OF	GREATEST	JOY	AND	MY	MOMENTS	OF	GREATEST
SILENCE	 ARE	 INVARIABLY	 ACCOMPANIED	 BY	 AN	 EXQUISITE
FEELING	OF
EXPANDING.	THIS	FEELING	IS	ALSO	PRESENT	IN	THE	URGE	TO	MELT
INTO
SOMEONE	OR	 SOMETHING	 --	 LIKE	A	 TREE	OR	A	 SUNSET	 --	 THAT	 I
LOVE.
WHERE	DOES	THIS	DESIRE	COME	FROM?	IS	IT	AN	INNATE	LONGING
TO	BE
REUNITED	WITH	SOMETHING	OF	WHICH	WE	WERE	ONCE	PART?
Yes,	it	is	not	something	coming	from	outside.	It	is	your	innate	feeling	to	be	one
with	something	with	which	you	were	once	one	 --	and	with	which	you	are	 still
one,	 but	 without	 being	 aware.	 So	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 awareness,	 of
remembrance.
You	have	never	gone	anywhere.	You	are	still	here;	it	is	just	your	mind	that	goes
on	moving	 to	 faraway	spaces.	 If	 the	mind	 is	 silent,	 suddenly	you	discover	 this
crystal	clear	moment,	now	and	here,	and	the	feeling	of	oneness	with	all.
We	are	one.
We	cannot	be	otherwise.
There	is	no	other	way.
Life	is	one	phenomenon,	existence	is	undivided	--	but	mind	has	the	capacity	to
forget	it.
The	mind	has	the	capacity	to	dream	of	faraway	things.	You	sleep	in	the	night	in
your	bedroom	and	you	can	dream	of	being	on	the	moon.	Do	you	think	if	you	are
suddenly	 awakened	 you	will	 ask,	 "How	 to	 get	 home?	 --	 because	 I	 am	 on	 the
moon."	If	you	are	suddenly	awakened	you	will	not	be	on	the	moon,	you	will	be
in	your	bed.	You	have	never	been	on	the	moon.	Even	when	you	were	dreaming
that	you	were	on	the	moon,	you	were	not	on	the	moon.	The	moon	was	a	dream,
your	being	on	it	was	a	dream;	you	were	on	your	bed,	in	your	bedroom.
The	mind	has	the	capacity	to	go	far	away.	So	once	in	a	while	when	it	is	not	far
away,	 when	 something	 very	 striking	 brings	 it	 back	 to	 herenow	 --	 a	 beautiful
sunset,	 a	 beautiful	 painting,	 a	 great	 dance...	 anything	 can	 pull	 it	 back.	 If
something	so	enchanting	is	happening	here,	it	cannot	wander	out,	here	and	there;
it	has	to	rush	home.	That's	why,	at	the	moment	of	seeing	a	sunset	or	listening	to
music,	you	feel	a	certain	oneness.	And	it	 is	so	fulfilling,	so	satisfying	 that	you
would	like	it	to	persist	every	moment,	forever.
And	the	joke	is	that	it	persists	every	moment,	eternally.	You	just	go	on,	here	and
there,	again	and	again	forgetting	about	it.
You	have	to	be	brought	back.
Once	you	have	understood	the	basic	situation,	then	there	is	no	need	for	anything.
Just	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 feel	 now	 and	 here,	 and	 suddenly	 existence	 opens	 its
doors.
You	have	always	been	part	of	it.
You	are	part	of	it.
You	cannot	be	otherwise.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
ALL	 MY	 LIFE,	 INCLUDING	 MY	 YEARS	 OF	 BEING	 A	 SANNYASIN,	 I
HAVE
NEVER	 HAD	 A	 QUESTIONING	 ATTITUDE.	 THIS	 HAS	 NOT	WORRIED
ME	UP	TO
DATE,	BUT	NOW	SINCE	YOU	HAVE	BEEN	INVITING	US	TO	ASK	YOU
QUESTIONS,	I	WONDER	IF	IT	IS	OKAY	THAT	I	AM	QUITE	EMPTY?
It	is	absolutely	okay.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
MY	 LOVE	 FOR	 FREEDOM	 MAKES	 ME	 ALWAYS	 GIVE	 TO	 MY
BELOVEDS	ALL
THE	FREEDOM	I	POSSIBLY	CAN.	SO	OFTEN,	I	PUT	MYSELF	INTO	AN
UNCOMFORTABLE	SITUATION	WHERE	I	GET	HURT.	DOES	THIS	MEAN
I	DON'T	LOVE	MYSELF	SO	MUCH,	AND	THAT'S	WHY	 I	PUT	MYSELF
SECOND?
It	may	be	much	more	complicated	than	you	think.
First,	the	very	idea	that	you	give	freedom	to	your	beloved	is	wrong.	Who	are	you
to	give	freedom	to	your	beloved?	You	can	love,	and	your	love	implies	freedom.
It	is	not	something	that	has	to	be	given.	If	it	has	to	be	given,	then	there	will	be
the	problems	that	you	are	facing.
So	 in	 the	 first	 place	you	are	doing	 something	wrong.	You	 really	don't	want	 to
give	freedom;	you	would	love	that	no	such	situation	arises	in	which	you	have	to
give	freedom.
But	you	have	heard	me	saying	again	and	again	that	love	gives	freedom,	so	you
force	yourself	unconsciously	to	give	freedom,	because	otherwise	your	love	is	not
love.
You	are	 in	a	 troubled	situation:	 if	you	don't	give	freedom,	you	start	suspecting
your	love;	if	you	give	freedom,	which	you	cannot	give...
The	ego	is	very	jealous.	It	will	raise	a	thousand	and	one	questions:	"Are	you	not
enough	for	your	lover	or	beloved,	that	she	needs	freedom	--	freedom	from	you	to
be	with	someone	else?"	It	hurts,	and	that's	why	you	start	feeling,	"I	am	putting
myself	second."
Giving	 freedom	 to	 her	 you	 have	 put	 somebody	 else	 first,	 and	 you	 have	 put
yourself	second.	That	is	against	the	ego,	and	it	is	not	going	to	help	in	any	way,
because	you	will	take	revenge	for	the	freedom	that	you	have	given.	You	would
like	the	same	freedom	to	be	given	to	you	--	whether	you	need	it	or	not,	that	is	not
the	point	--	just	to	prove	that	you	are	not	being	cheated.
Secondly,	because	your	beloved	has	been	with	someone	else	you	will	feel	a	little
strange	 being	with	 her.	 That	will	 stand	 between	 you	 and	 her.	 She	 has	 chosen
someone	else	and	dropped	you;	she	has	insulted	you.	And	you	have	been	doing
so	much;	you	have	been	so	generous	that	you	gave	her	freedom.	Because	you	are
feeling	hurt,	you	are	going	to	hurt	her	in	some	way	or	other.
But	the	whole	thing	arises	from	a	misunderstanding.	I	have	not	said	that	if	you
love,	then	you	have	to	give	freedom.	No,	I	have	said	that	love	is	freedom.
It	is	not	a	question	of	giving.	If	you	have	to	give	it,	then	it	is	better	not	to	give	it.
Remain	 the	 way	 everybody	 is.	 Why	 create	 unnecessary	 complications?	 --
ordinarily,	there	are	enough.
If	your	 love	 itself	has	come	 to	 that	quality	 that	 freedom	is	part	of	 it,	 that	your
beloved	need	not	even	ask	your	permission...	In	fact,	if	I	was	in	your	place	and
the	beloved	was	asking	my	permission,	I	would	be	hurt.	That	means	she	does	not
trust	my	love.	My	love	is	freedom.	I	have	loved	her;	 that	does	not	mean	that	I
should	 close	 all	 doors	 and	windows	 so	 she	 cannot	 laugh	with	 somebody	 else,
dance	with	somebody	else,	love	somebody	else	--	because	who	are	we?
That	 is	 the	 basic	 question	 that	 everyone	 has	 to	 ask:	Who	 are	 we?	We	 are	 all
strangers,	and	on	what	grounds	do	we	become	so	authoritative	that	we	can	say,	"I
will	give	you	 freedom,"	or	 "I	will	not	give	you	 freedom,"	or	 "If	you	 love	me,
then	 you	 cannot	 love	 anybody	 else"?	 These	 are	 stupid	 assumptions,	 but	 they
have	dominated	humankind	since	its	very	beginnings.
And	we	are	still	barbarous;	we	still	don't	know	what	love	is.
If	I	love	someone,	I	am	grateful	that	that	person	allowed	me,	my	love,	and	did
not	reject	me.	This	is	enough.	But	I	don't	become	an	imprisonment	to	her:	She
loved	me,	and	as	a	 reward	 I	am	creating	a	prison	around	her;	 I	 loved	her,	 and
she,	as	a	result,	is	creating	a	prison	around	me.	Great	rewards	we	are	giving	to
each	other!
If	I	love	someone	I	am	grateful	and	her	freedom	remains	intact.	It	is	not	given	by
me.	 It	 is	 her	 birthright,	 and	my	 love	 cannot	 take	 it	 away.	 How	 can	 love	 take
somebody's	freedom	away,	particularly	the	person	you	love?	It	is	her	birthright.
You	cannot	even	say,	"I	give	freedom	to	her."	Who	are	you	in	the	first	place?	--
just	a	stranger.	You	both	have	met	on	the	road,	by	the	way,	accidentally,	and	she
was	gracious	to	accept	your	love.	Just	be	thankful,	and	let	her	live	the	way	she
wants	to	live,	and	live	the	way	you	yourself	want	to	live.	Your	life-style	should
not	be	interfered	with.
This	 is	what	 freedom	 is.	Then	 love	will	 help	 you	 to	 be	 less	 tense,	 less	 full	 of
anxieties,	less	in	anguish,	and	more	in	joy.
But	what	goes	on	happening	 in	 the	world	 is	 just	 the	opposite.	Love	creates	 so
much	misery,	 so	much	pain,	 that	 there	 are	 people	who	decide	 finally	 that	 it	 is
better	not	to	love	anyone.	They	close	the	doors	of	their	heart	because	it	is	simply
hell	and	nothing	else.
But	closing	the	door	to	love	is	also	closing	the	door	to	reality,	to	existence;	hence
I	will	 not	 support	 it.	 I	 will	 say:	 Change	 the	whole	 pattern	 of	 love!	 You	 have
forced	love	into	an	ugly	situation	--	change	the	situation.
Let	 love	 become	 a	 help	 for	 your	 spiritual	 growth.	 Let	 love	 become	 a
nourishment	 to	 your	 heart	 and	 a	 courage	 so	 that	 you	 can	open	your	 heart,	 not
only	to	one	individual	but	to	the	whole	universe.
Question	6
BELOVED	OSHO,
DO	WE	HAVE	TO	TRANSCEND	SEX	BEFORE	GETTING	ENLIGHTENED?
You	don't	have	to	transcend	anything.	You	have	to	live	everything	that	is	natural
to	you,	and	live	it	fully,	without	any	inhibition	--	joyously,	aesthetically.	Just	by
living	it	deeply,	a	transcendence	will	come.
You	are	not	 to	 transcend	anything.	Remember	my	words.	A	transcendence	will
come	 by	 itself,	 and	 when	 it	 comes	 by	 itself	 it	 is	 such	 a	 release	 and	 such	 a
freedom.
If	you	try	to	transcend,	you	are	going	to	repress,	and	repression	is	the	sole	reason
why	people	cannot	transcend;	so	you	are	getting	into	a	vicious	circle.	You	want
to	transcend,	so	you	repress,	and	because	you	repress	you	cannot	transcend,	so
you	 repress	 more.	 As	 you	 repress	 more,	 you	 become	 more	 incapable	 of
transcendence.
Live	it	out	fully,	without	any	condemnation,	without	any	religion	interfering	with
your	life.	Live	it	out	naturally,	intensely,	totally	--	and	a	transcendence	comes.	It
is	 not	 your	 doing,	 it	 is	 a	 happening.	And	when	 it	 comes	 by	 itself,	 there	 is	 no
repression,	there	is	no	antagonism.
You	are	above	all	those	things	that	you	wanted	to	transcend	--	for	example,	sex.
But	a	 real	 transcendence	does	not	mean	 that	you	cannot	make	 love.	Of	course
your	love	will	have	a	totally	different	quality.	It	will	not	be	sexual,	it	will	not	be
a	biological	urge,	it	will	not	be	animalistic;	it	will	be	simply	a	play	between	two
human	energies.
If	transcendence	comes	by	itself,	then	many	things,	more	or	less,	disappear.	But
anything	 that	 disappears	 --	 you	 are	 not	 against	 it.	 You	 can	 still	 enjoy	 it.	 For
example,	in	a	state	of	transcendence	you	are	not	a	food	addict,	but	that	does	not
mean	that	you	cannot	enjoy,	once	in	a	while,	going	to	a	Chinese	restaurant.
Transcendence	makes	you	 free;	 it	 does	not	 give	you	 a	new	bondage:	 first	 you
were	so	addicted	that	you	had	to	go,	now	you	are	so	addicted	that	you	cannot	go.
Transcendence	means	that	now	all	this	addiction	is	gone	--	you	can	go,	you	may
not	go.	You	are	neither	against	nor	for.
You	may	be	smoking.	Transcendence	does	not	mean	 that	once	 in	a	while	with
friends	 you	 cannot	 smoke	 a	 cigarette.	 I	 don't	 think	 that	 a	 cigarette,	 once	 in	 a
while,	will	destroy	your	spirituality.	And	if	it	destroys	it,	then	that	spirituality	is
not	worthwhile.
I	 cannot	 smoke	 --	 not	 because	 of	 transcendence	 but	 because	 of	my	 breathing
trouble.	 I	 have	 no	 antagonism	 against	 poor	 cigarettes;	 it	 is	 just	 the	 smell	 of
tobacco	I	cannot	tolerate,	the	smoke	I	cannot	inhale.	But	that	is	a	problem	with
my	body;	it	is	my	allergy.
But	 when	 I	 see	 somebody	 smoking	 I	 don't	 feel	 that	 this	 man	 is	 condemned
forever,	is	going	to	fall	into	hellfire.
No	 condemnation	 arises	 in	me,	 because	what	 he	 is	 doing	 is	 simply	 playing	 a
game.	Being	alone,	finding	nothing	else	to	do	and	being	told	continually	by	the
parents	and	the	society	that	it	is	better	to	do	something	rather	than	nothing...	so
the	poor	man	is	doing	something	rather	than	nothing.	He	is	at	least	smoking.
Transcendence	is	a	very	childlike	state.
My	grandfather	used	to	smoke	cigars	and	cheroots,	and	he	would	send	me	to	get
his	cigar	and	lighter.	And	rather	than	bringing	both,	I	would	take	the	cigar	in	my
mouth	and	light	it	and	bring	it	to	him.	He	said,	"This	is	not	right.	I	had	asked	you
to	bring	the	cigar	and	the	lighter."
I	said,	"When	I	can	bring	one,	which	does	the	work	for	both...	I	am	not	stupid."
He	said,	"That	I	know.	But	remember,	don't	learn	this	habit."
I	 said,	 "Don't	 be	worried.	 Seeing	 you	 cough	 continually	 the	whole	 night,	 it	 is
enough.	I	don't	have	to	go	through	the	experience	to	learn	it.	I	learn	from	others'
experience	too."
His	doctors	were	saying	to	him,	"Drop	these	cigars."	But	it	was	impossible	for
him...	 a	whole	 life's	 addiction.	He	was	 ready	 to	 suffer	 --	 to	 cough	 and	 not	 to
sleep	well.
I	said,	"Seeing	you	is	enough	prevention	for	me,	and	just	that	one	puff	that	I	take
when	I	 light	your	cigar	brings	tears	 to	my	eyes.	It	 is	enough	just	 to	experience
what	kind	of	enjoyment	you	must	be	having."
The	people	you	know	as	saints	are	not	childlike.	They	are	addicted	as	much	as
others;	their	addictions	have	just	become	reversed.	Somebody	is	addicted	to	sex
--	 they	 are	 addicted	 to	 no-sex.	 Somebody	 is	 addicted	 to	 smoking	 --	 they	 are
addicted	to	no-smoking.
Transcendence	is	a	state	of	no-addiction...	 just	a	childlike	playfulness.	There	is
no	sin	in	sex.	Just	living	it	intensely,	by	and	by	you	transcend,	just	the	way	you
transcend	playing	tennis.	One	day	you	throw	away	the	whole	thing,	"Enough	is
enough!"	You	transcend	football,	you	transcend	all	kinds	of	things,	and	nobody
calls	you	a	saint.
To	 me	 transcendence	 comes	 out	 of	 your	 experience.	 You	 see	 the	 futility	 of
something	and	 the	addiction	drops.	Then	once	 in	a	while,	 just	 for	 a	 change,	 if
you	want	to	smoke	I	don't	see	any	harm;	if	you	want	to	make	love	I	don't	see	any
harm.	The	harm	is	in	the	addiction
--	 the	harm	is	not	 in	 the	act.	And	 transcendence	 is	not	concerned	with	 the	act;
transcendence	is	concerned	with	the	addiction.
And	to	be	completely	unaddicted	gives	an	immense	freedom.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	The	circle	can	be	broken
25	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604250
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO26
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
92
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HEAR	YOU	OFTEN	SAY	THAT	THE	POLITICIANS	AND	THE	PRIESTS
ARE
EXPLOITING	AND	CHEATING	PEOPLE,	AS	IF	THEY	ARE	A	DIFFERENT
RACE
FROM	OUTER	SPACE,	FORCED	UPON	US.
MY	 UNDERSTANDING	 IS,	 RATHER,	 THAT	 THESE	 POLITICIANS	 AND
PRIESTS
JUST	 COME	 OUT	 FROM	 AMONGST	 US,	 SO	 WE	 ARE	 TOTALLY
RESPONSIBLE
FOR	THEIR	DOINGS,	AND	COMPLAINING	ABOUT	THEM	SEEMS	LIKE
COMPLAINING	 ABOUT	 OURSELVES.	 IS	 NOT	 A	 POLITICIAN	 AND	 A
PRIEST
HIDDEN	IN	EVERY	ONE	OF	US?	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
The	politicians	and	 the	priests	are	certainly	not	coming	 from	outer	 space;	 they
are	 growing	 amongst	 us.	 We	 also	 have	 the	 same	 lust	 for	 power,	 the	 same
ambition	to	be	holier	than	others.	They	are	the	most	successful	people	as	far	as
these	ambitions	and	desires	are	concerned.
Certainly	we	are	responsible,	but	it	is	a	vicious	circle;	we	are	not	the	only	ones
who	 are	 responsible.	The	 successful	 politicians	 and	 priests	 go	 on	 conditioning
the	new	generations	for	the	same	ambitions;	they	make	the	society,	they	cultivate
its	mind	and	conditioning.
They	 are	 also	 responsible	 --	 and	 they	 are	more	 responsible	 than	 the	 common
people,	because	the	common	people	are	victims	of	all	kinds	of	programs	that	are
being	imposed	upon	them.
The	 child	 comes	 into	 the	 world	 without	 any	 ambition,	 without	 any	 lust	 for
power,	without	any	idea	that	he	is	higher,	holier,	superior.	Certainly	he	cannot	be
responsible.	Those	who	bring	him	up	--	the	parents,	the	society,	the	educational
system,	the	politicians,	the	priests
--	the	same	gang	goes	on	spoiling	every	child.	Of	course	in	his	own	turn,	he	will
spoil...
but	it	is	a	vicious	circle.	From	where	to	break	it?
I	 insist	on	condemning	the	priests	and	 the	politicians,	because	 that	 is	 the	place
from	where	 it	 can	 be	 broken.	Condemning	 the	 small	 children	 coming	 into	 the
world	is	not	going	to	help.	Condemning	the	common	masses	is	also	not	going	to
help,	 because	 they	 have	 been	 already	 conditioned	 --	 they	 are	 being	 exploited.
They	are	 suffering,	 they	are	miserable.	But	nothing	wakes	 them	up	 --	 they	are
fast	asleep.	The	only	point	where	our	condemnations	should	be	concentrated	is
on	those	who	have	the	power,	because	they	have	the	power	to	contaminate	 the
future	generations.	If	they	can	be	stopped	we	can	have	a	new	man.
I	know	that	everybody	is	responsible.	Whatever	happens,	in	some	way	or	other,
everybody	has	his	own	part	in	it.	But	to	me	what	is	important	is	whom	to	hit,	so
that	 for	 the	 new	 generation	 of	 children	 the	 vicious	 circle	 can	 be	 avoided.
Humanity	has	been	revolving	in	it	for	centuries.	That's	why	I	don't	condemn	the
common	 masses,	 I	 don't	 condemn	 you.	 I	 condemn	 those	 who	 are	 now	 in	 a
position	 that	 if	 they	 just	 relax	 a	 little	 bit	 as	 far	 as	 their	 vested	 interests	 are
concerned,	 and	 look	 at	 the	 miserable	 mass	 of	 humanity,	 a	 transformation	 is
possible	--	the	circle	can	be	broken.
I	purposely	choose	the	politicians	and	the	priests.	There	are	many	other	things	to
be	 remembered.	 The	 priest	 knows	 perfectly	well	 that	 there	 is	 no	God.	 In	 this
world	 the	priest	 is	 the	only	person	who	knows	 there	 is	no	God,	but	his	whole
profession	depends	on	this	non-existential	God.	He	cannot	say	the	truth	because
all	his	vested	interests	will	be	lost	--
not	only	his,	but	for	generations	to	come	he	will	be	spoiling	the	whole	game.	He
knows	the	rituals	are	just	hocus-pocus,	that	the	mantras	carry	no	power,	that	his
theology	 is	 just	 a	 cover-up.	 Nobody	 else	 knows	 it	 better;	 he	 has	 studied	 the
scriptures	and	he	knows	there	is	no	evidence	of	God	anywhere.	He	interprets	the
scriptures	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 they	 help	 his	 profession.	 He	 goes	 on	 making
commentaries	 on	 the	 ancient	 scriptures,	 adding	more	 and	more	 things	 that	 are
helpful	for	his	profession.
As	 times	 change	 he	 has	 to	 make	 new	 additions.	 For	 example,	 Manu,	 a	 five
thousand	year	old	 thinker,	priest,	 the	 father	of	priesthood,	 in	his	manusmriti	 --
the	memoirs	of	Manu	which	Hindus	follow	word	by	word	--	he	created	the	caste
system,	one	of	the	ugliest	things	in	existence.
Because	of	it	one	fourth	of	Hindus	have	suffered	a	long	slavery,	exploitation	and
humiliation.	 They	 have	 been	 turned	 almost	 into	 subhuman	 beings	 --	 they	 are
called	achhoot,	untouchables.	They	have	 fallen	so	much	 that	you	cannot	 touch
them;	 otherwise	 you	 have	 to	 take	 a	 bath	 immediately.	 Even	 their	 shadow
touching	you	 is	 enough	 to	make	 you	 impure.	Manu	 reduced	one-fourth	 of	 the
Hindus	to	eternal	slavery	it	seems.
He	managed	 the	 highest	 position	 in	 the	 society	 for	 the	 priesthood,	 but	 he	was
really	 cunning	and	clever:	 he	has	given	all	 the	 superiority	 to	brahmins,	 but	he
has	 not	 given	 them	 riches,	 nor	 material,	 temporal	 power.	 He	 has	 divided	 the
castes	so	there	is	no	conflict.	Temporal	power	he	has	given	to	the	second	highest
caste:	the	warriors,	kshatriyas.	They	are	going	to	be	the	kings,	they	are	going	to
be	 the	 generals,	 the	 soldiers,	 the	 fighters,	 and	 they	will	 be	 the	 second	 highest
class.	And	money	he	has	given	 to	 the	 third:	 the	businessmen,	 the	vaishyas.	To
the	fourth	he	has	given	nothing	--	except	slavery.
You	can	see	the	cunningness...	he	divides.	He	does	not	give	money	to	brahmins,
or	 temporal	 power,	 because	 then	 three-fourths	 of	 the	 society	 will	 be	 against
them,	and	it	will	not	be	possible	to	control.	And	if	they	have	also	spiritual	power,
material	 power,	money,	 then	 there	will	 be	 resentment,	 anger,	 violence	 --	 there
will	be	riots.	So	to	brahmins	he	gives	the	holy	power	--	they	are	the	highest,	the
holiest	--	but	he	does	not	give	anything	temporal	to	them.
He	gives	 the	 temporal	 power	 to	 the	warriors.	 It	 is	 satisfying,	 because	 they	 are
going	 to	 be	 the	 kings;	 brahmins	 cannot	 be	 the	 kings.	 And	 who	 cares	 about
spiritual	 power?	 So	 let	 them	 have	 spiritual	 power;	 it	 is	 almost	 like	 having
nothing,	 just	a	nominal	quality	of	being	superior,	so	 the	warriors	are	not	angry
about	it.	On	the	contrary,	they	are	happy	that	one-fourth	of	the	society	will	never
be	 in	conflict	with	 them	 --	 they	are	already	higher,	 they	have	nothing	more	 to
gain.	And	the	warriors	are	the	most	powerful	people.
To	the	third	he	gives	money	and	all	other	worldly	things.	These	are	the	people
who	 cannot	 fight,	who	 are	 not	warriors	 --	 but	 they	 can	 earn	money,	 they	 can
produce	wealth.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	in	India	all	the	kings,	before	India	became	a
slave	country,	were	indebted	to	the	rich	people.	From	where	are	they	going	to	get
money?	--
just	 by	 borrowing.	 They	 can	 pay	 when	 they	 invade	 some	 other	 country;
otherwise	 they	 have	 to	 borrow	 from	 the	 business	 people.	 And	 the	 business
people	are	happy;	they	have	all	the	material	things,	money...	Not	only	that,	kings
are	borrowing	from	them,	brahmins	have	to	depend	on	them	for	everything	--	so
let	them	believe	that	they	are	higher...	but	basically	the	business	people	hold	the
power,	they	have	the	money.
And	against	these	three	classes	the	poor	fourth	has	no	power	to	fight.	They	are
deprived	of	all	education,	deprived	even	of	 living	in	 the	city;	 they	have	to	 live
outside	the	town.
They	cannot	take	water	from	the	city	well	--	they	have	to	make	their	own	wells
or	carry	water	from	the	river.	They	are	completely	cut	off	from	the	society.	They
have	just	to	come	and	serve,	and	do	all	the	ugliest	things	that	nobody	else	wants
to	do.	And	three	powerful	sections	are	there	to	go	on	repressing	them;	they	have
money,	 they	 have	 power,	 they	 have	 spiritual	 heights	 --	 they	 are	 the
representatives	of	God.
For	 five	 thousand	 years	 they	 have	maintained	 this	 --	 and	 they	 have	made	 the
fourth,	 the	slaves,	believe	 that	you	are	born	slaves	because	of	your	evil	acts	 in
the	 past	 life	 --	 this	 is	 the	 punishment.	 The	 brahmin	 is	 enjoying	 his	 position
because	of	good	acts	in	his	past	life.	And	there	is	no	mobility;	one	cannot	move
from	one	caste	to	another	caste.
Since	 Manu,	 the	 priests	 in	 India	 have	 remained	 the	 most	 anti-revolutionary
element	--
naturally,	because	they	will	lose	their	superiority.	Kings	come	to	touch	their	feet,
the	superrich	come	to	touch	their	feet	--	their	ego	is	fulfilled.	And	the	same	is	the
story	 around	 the	 world	 --	 everywhere	 the	 priesthood	 has	 maintained	 its
superiority.	 It	 is	not	 so	clear-cut	as	 in	 India,	but	a	 subtle	division	 is	 there.	The
priest	 is	 everywhere	 superior,	 the	 warrior	 is	 everywhere	 number	 two,	 and	 the
rich	 man	 is	 everywhere	 number	 three.	 The	 fourth,	 the	 slave,	 the	 servant,	 is
everywhere	the	same.
These	priests	go	on	preaching	 to	every	child	a	certain	kind	of	mind	 that	keeps
the	society	running	--	or	stuck.	The	politicians	are	in	a	deep	conspiracy	with	the
priests.	The	politicians	are	 full	of	 lust	 for	power,	and	 if	 they	want	power,	 they
want	 blessings	 from	 the	 priests,	 because	 the	 priests	 have	 a	 spiritual	 hold	 over
humanity.	And	if	a	politician	goes	and	touches	the	feet	of	a	priest,	the	followers
of	 the	 priest	 are	 going	 to	 vote	 for	 the	 politician.	 There	 is	 a	 conspiracy:	 the
politician	goes	on	praising	the	priest,	his	religion,	his	ideology,	and	the	priests	go
on	 blessing	 the	 politician	 and	 his	 ideology.	 And	 between	 these	 two	 powerful
groups	the	whole	society	is	crushed,	sucked.
I	know	everybody	is	responsible,	but	not	everybody	is	powerful	enough	to	break
the	circle;	hence	I	am	hitting	constantly	on	 the	priests	and	 the	politicians.	And
now	they	have	become	afraid	of	me	--	perhaps	they	have	never	been	afraid	of	a
single	 man	 before.	 All	 over	 the	 world	 they	 don't	 want	 me	 to	 enter	 into	 their
countries.	The	priests	are	behind	the	politicians	who	are	making	rules	and	laws
that	I	should	be	prohibited.
The	 commune	 in	 America	 was	 destroyed	 by	 the	 politicians,	 but	 behind	 the
politicians	 were	 the	 fundamentalist	 Christians,	 the	 most	 orthodox	 group	 of
Christian	priests.	Ronald	Reagan	himself	 is	a	 fundamentalist	Christian.	And	 to
be	a	fundamentalist	Christian	means	to	be	absolutely	orthodox.	He	believes	that
every	single	word	in	THE	BIBLE	is	holy,	is	from	God's	own	mouth.	They	were
in	conspiracy	together	to	destroy	the	commune.
Just	the	other	day	I	received	the	news	that	now	they	are	making	a	memorial	in
The	Dalles;	bishops	and	politicians	and	all	kinds	of	leading,	prominent	citizens
are	 contributing	money	 --	 a	 big	memorial,	 a	memorial	 that	 they	 have	 become
victorious,	 that	 they	 have	 thrown	 away	 the	 evil	 forces	 who	 had	 created	 the
commune.	 They	 have	 thrown	 me	 out,	 destroyed	 my	 work,	 and	 they	 are	 not
satisfied	with	that;	they	want	to	create	a	memorial	so	that	the	future	generations
will	know.
And	both	the	priests	and	the	politicians	are	very	vulnerable;	they	have	no	ground
beneath	their	feet.	Just	a	good	hit	is	needed	and	they	will	be	finished.	And	once
they	are	finished,	society	will	have	a	taste	of	freedom.
We	 can	 bring	 up	 children	 in	 a	 more	 human	 way,	 unconditioned,	 intelligent,
looking	 at	 the	 whole	 earth	 as	 one	 --	 not	 Christians,	 not	 Hindus,	 not
Mohammedans,	not	Indians,	not	Chinese,	not	Americans.	Nations	and	religions
are	creations	of	the	priests	and	the	politicians.	Once	they	are	finished,	religions
and	nations	are	also	finished.
And	a	world	free	of	religions,	free	of	nations,	will	be	a	human	world	--	without
wars,	without	unnecessarily	fighting	for	things	which	nobody	has	seen....
It	is	so	stupid	that	for	thousands	of	years	people	have	been	killing	each	other	in
the	name	of	God.	None	of	them	has	seen,	none	of	them	has	any	proof,	none	of
them	has	any	evidence.	And	they	don't	even	feel	embarrassed,	because	nobody
has,	looking	directly	into	their	eyes,	asked	the	question....	And	they	are	going	on
crusades,	jihads,	religious	wars,	destroying	all	those	who	do	not	believe	in	their
dogma,	 because	 their	 dogma	 is	 divine	 and	 every	 other	 dogma	 is	 the	 devil's
creation.
They	 are	 trying	 to	 serve	 humanity	 by	killing	people.	Their	 intention	 is	 to	 free
those	people	from	the	clutches	of	the	devil.	But	the	strangest	thing	is	that	every
religion	 thinks	 that	 the	 other	 religion	 is	 created	 by	 the	 devil.	 So	 the	 fight
continues.	Politicians	are	fighting	war	after	war	--	for	what?	I	don't	see	the	point.
The	earth	has	no	lines;	then	why	make	these	maps	and	draw	lines?
One	of	my	teachers	was	a	very	intelligent	man.	One	day	he	brought	a	few	pieces
of	cardboard;	he	had	cut	the	whole	world	map	into	small	pieces,	put	them	on	the
desk	and	asked,	"Can	anybody	come	and	arrange	them	in	the	right	order?"	Many
tried	and	failed.
Just	one	boy,	 seeing	 that	 everybody	was	 failing	and	 they	were	not	making	 the
world	map	by	putting	the	pieces	together,	he	looked	at	one	piece	on	the	reverse
side.	Then	he	turned	all	 the	pieces	over	and	he	found	the	picture	of	a	man.	He
arranged	the	picture	of	the	man,	which	was	very	easy,	and	that	was	the	key.	On
one	 side	 the	 man	 was	 arranged,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 side,	 the	 world	 map	 was
arranged.
Perhaps	the	same	is	true	about	the	real	world...	if	we	can	arrange	man,	the	world
will	 be	 arranged.	 If	 we	 can	 make	 man	 silent,	 peaceful,	 loving,	 nations	 will
disappear,	wars	will	disappear,	all	dirty	politics	will	disappear.	And	remember,
all	politics	is	dirty;	there	is	no	other	kind.
But	we	have	to	hit	on	those	who	have	the	power.	Hitting	the	poor	common	man
will	not	help,	because	he	has	no	power,	he	 is	a	victim.	Even	 if	we	can	change
him,	 it	won't	be	a	great	 change.	But	 if	we	can	abolish	 the	conspiracy	between
religion	and	politics,	priests	and	the	politicians,	it	will	be	really	a	great	change,	a
revolution	--	the	only	revolution	that	is	needed	and	that	has	not	happened	yet.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	SPOKE	OF	GREED,	I	WAS	TOTALLY	HORRIFIED.	I	HAVE
FINALLY	REACHED	A	POINT	WHERE	I	AM	WILLING	TO	SEE	HOW	BIG
A	PART	IT	PLAYS	IN	MY	LIFE,	AND	THE	MISERY	IT	BRINGS	WITH	IT.
COULD
YOU	 PLEASE	 SHED	 MORE	 LIGHT	 ON	 WHAT	 THIS	 THING	 CALLED
GREED	 IS,	WHERE	 IT	COMES	FROM?	 --	AND	PERHAPS	OFFER	SOME
TOOLS	TO	HELP
ME?
Just	to	understand	the	nature	of	greed	is	enough.	You	need	not	do	anything	else
to	get	rid	of	it;	the	very	understanding	will	clarify	the	whole	mess.
Man	is	full	if	he	is	in	tune	with	the	universe;	if	he	is	not	in	tune	with	the	universe
then	he	is	empty,	utterly	empty.	And	out	of	that	emptiness	comes	greed.	Greed	is
to	fill	it:	by	money,	by	houses,	by	furniture,	by	friends,	by	lovers	--	by	anything,
because	one	cannot	live	as	emptiness.	It	is	horrifying,	it	is	a	ghost	life.	If	you	are
empty	and	there	is	nothing	inside	you,	it	is	impossible	to	live.
To	 have	 the	 feeling	 that	 you	 have	much	 inside	 you,	 there	 are	 only	 two	ways:
either	 you	get	 in	 tune	with	 the	universe...	Then	you	 are	 filled	with	 the	whole,
with	all	 the	flowers	and	with	all	 the	stars.	They	are	within	you	just	as	they	are
without	 you.	That	 is	 real	 fulfillment.	But	 if	 you	 don't	 do	 that,	 and	millions	 of
people	are	not	doing	that,	then	the	easiest	way	is	to	fill	it	with	any	junk.
I	used	to	live	with	a	man.	He	was	a	rich	man	and	he	had	a	beautiful	house.	And
somehow	he	became	interested	in	my	ideas;	he	listened	to	a	few	of	my	lectures,
and	he	invited	me,	saying,	"Why	live	far	away,	out	of	the	city?	I	have	a	beautiful
house	in	the	city	and	it	is	so	big;	you	can	have	half	of	the	house.	And	I	am	not
going	to	charge	you,	I	simply	want	your	presence	to	be	there	in	my	house."
I	was	living	outside,	in	the	mountains,	but	it	was	difficult	to	come	from	there	to
the	 university.	 From	his	 house	 the	 university	was	 very	 close.	His	 house	 had	 a
beautiful	 garden	 and	 was	 in	 the	 best	 locality	 of	 the	 city,	 so	 I	 accepted	 his
invitation.
But	 when	 I	 went	 into	 his	 house	 I	 could	 not	 believe	 it;	 he	 had	 so	 much	 junk
collected	 that	 there	was	no	place	 to	 live.	The	house	was	big,	but	his	collection
was	 bigger	 --	 and	 a	 collection	which	was	 absolutely	 stupid.	 Anything	 that	 he
could	find	in	the	market	he	would	purchase.	I	asked	him,	"What	are	you	going	to
do	with	all	these	things?"
And	he	said,	"One	never	knows,	some	day	one	may	need	it."
"But,"	I	said,	"where	is	one	going	to	live	in	this	house?"	So	much	furniture	of	all
ages...
because	the	Europeans	had	left	the	country	so	they	had	to	sell	all	their	things.	He
could	not	have	enough;	he	managed	to	purchase	anything,	 things	which	he	did
not	 need.	 A	 car	 was	 standing	 in	 the	 porch	 which	 always	 remained	 standing
because	it	was	too	old,	broken.	And	I	asked	him,	"Why	don't	you	throw	it	away?
At	least	to	clean	up	the	place..."
And	he	said,	"It	looks	good	in	the	porch."
All	 the	 tires	were	punctured	--	 it	was	of	no	use.	Whenever	you	had	to	move	it
from	here	and	there,	you	had	to	push	it,	pull	it	back.	And	it	was	there,	rotting.	He
said,	"I	got	it	at	a	very	reasonable	price.	It	belonged	to	an	old	woman	who	used
to	be	a	nurse	here	and	who	has	gone	back	to	England."
But	I	said,	"If	you	were	 interested	in	purchasing	a	car	 then	at	 least	you	should
have	purchased	a	car	which	moves."
He	said,	"I	am	not	interested	in	movement.	My	bicycle	is	perfectly	good."	And
his	bicycle	was	also	a	marvel.	You	would	know	 that	he	was	coming	 from	one
mile	away,	the	bicycle	made	so	much	noise;	it	had	no	mudguards,	no	chain	cover
--	it	must	have	been	the	oldest	bicycle	made.	It	had	no	horn.
He	said,	"There	 is	no	need	for	a	horn.	It	makes	so	much	noise	 that	at	 least	for
one	mile	ahead	people	are	already	giving	way.	And	it	is	a	good	thing,	because	it
cannot	be	stolen."
I	said,	"That	is	strange.	Why	can't	it	be	stolen?"
He	said,	"Nobody	else	can	ride	on	it.	It	has	been	stolen	twice,	and	the	thief	was
caught	 immediately	 --	 because	 it	makes	 so	much	noise,	 and	 everybody	knows
that	it	is	my	bicycle,	so	people	caught	the	thief	and	asked	him,	`Where	are	you
taking	the	bicycle?'
"I	can	leave	it	anywhere.	I	go	to	see	a	movie	--	I	don't	put	it	on	a	bicycle	stand,
because	then	you	have	to	pay	money.	I	put	it	anywhere,	and	it	is	always	there	--
when	I	come	back	it	is	always	there.	Everybody	knows	that	it	is	a	trouble.	And
even	if	you	can	get	it	to	your	home	you	cannot	ride	on	it	in	the	city	--	you	will	be
caught.	So	it	is	better	not	to	bother	with	it."
He	said,	"It	is	a	rare	specimen."
I	said,	"The	way	you	describe	it,	it	looks	like	it."
And	he	had	all	kinds	of	things	in	his	house...	broken	radios,	because	he	could	get
them	cheap.	He	was	a	Jaina	and	he	had	a	broken	statue	of	 Jesus	Christ	on	 the
cross.
I	said,	"What	have	you	purchased	it	for?"
He	said,	"The	woman	gave	it	to	me	free	when	I	purchased	the	car	--	she	offered
it	to	me	as	a	present.	I	don't	believe	in	Jesus	Christ	or	anything,	but	I	could	not
refuse	a	piece	of	art."
I	said	to	him,	"Half	of	the	house	from	today	you	take	to	the	other	half	--	my	part
has	to	be	empty."
And	he	was	very	happy	 to	 take	everything.	Already	his	house	was	so	 full	you
could	not	walk	--	you	could	not	find	your	way.	He	took	everything.	He	had	so
many	kinds	of	furniture	that	he	had	piled	up	on	the	sofa;	it	was	not	used,	because
you	cannot	sit	on	a	sofa	that	is	touching	the	roof.	And	I	asked,	"Why?"
"He	said,	"you	don't	understand	--	the	price!	And	someday	I	may	get	married"	--
he	was	 not	married	 --	 "and	 I	may	 have	 children	 and	 they	may	 need	 all	 these
things.	You	don't	be	worried,	everything	will	be	of	some	use	sometime."
Even	on	the	road,	if	he	could	find	anything	lying	there	which	had	been	thrown
by	somebody,	he	would	pick	 it	up.	One	day	he	was	walking	with	me	from	the
garden	 to	 the	house	and	he	 found	a	bicycle	handle,	 and	he	picked	 it	up.	But	 I
said,	"What	will	you	do	with	a	bicycle	handle?"
He	 said,	 "You	 don't	 understand.	 I	 will	 show	 you."	 I	 went	 with	 him.	 In	 his
bathroom	he	had	almost	a	bicycle	--	just	a	few	things	were	missing.	And	he	said,
"All	these	things	I	have	picked	up	from	the	road.	And	I	go	on	joining	them	and
putting	them	together.	Now	a	few	things	are	missing.	The	chain	is	not	there,	the
seat	is	not	there,	but	I	will	get	them.
Somebody	is	going	to	throw	them	away	someday.	Life	is	long,	and	what	is	the
harm?	It	looks	perfectly	good	in	the	bathroom."
Greed	simply	means	you	are	feeling	a	deep	emptiness	and	you	want	to	fill	it	with
anything	possible	--	it	doesn't	matter	what	it	is.	And	once	you	understand	it,	then
you	have	nothing	to	do	with	greed.	You	have	something	to	do	with	your	coming
into	communion	with	the	whole,	so	the	inner	emptiness	disappears.	And	with	it,
all	greed	disappears.	That	does	not	mean	that	you	start	living	naked;	that	simply
means	you	do	not	live	just	to	collect	things.	Whenever	you	need	something	you
can	have	it.
But	there	are	mad	people	all	over	the	world,	and	they	are	collecting...	Somebody
is	collecting	money	although	he	never	uses	it.	That	is	strange.	In	the	commune,
we	had	made	a	sticker	for	cars:	"Moses	earns,	Jesus	saves,	Osho	spends."
A	thing	has	to	be	a	utility;	if	it	is	not	a	utility	then	there	is	no	need	for	it.
But	 this	 thing	 can	 take	 any	 direction:	 people	 are	 eating;	 they	 are	 not	 feeling
hungry	and	still	 they	go	on	swallowing.	They	know	that	 this	 is	going	to	create
suffering,	 they	will	be	sick,	but	 they	cannot	prevent	 themselves.	This	eating	 is
also	a	filling-up	process.
So	there	can	be	many	directions	and	many	ways	to	fill	emptiness,	although	it	is
never	full
--	it	remains	empty,	and	you	remain	miserable	because	it	is	never	enough.	More
is	needed,	and	the	more	and	the	demand	for	more	is	unending.
I	don't	take	greed	as	a	desire	--	it	is	some	existential	sickness.	You	are	not	in	tune
with	the	whole,	and	only	that	tuning	with	the	whole	can	make	you	healthy.	That
tuning	with	the	whole	can	make	you	holy.
It	is	strange	that	the	word	health,	and	the	word	holy	both	come	from	`wholeness'.
When	 you	 are	 feeling	 one	 with	 wholeness	 all	 greed	 disappears.	 Otherwise...
what	have	religions	been	doing?	They	have	misunderstood	greed	as	a	desire,	so
they	try	to	repress	it:	"Don't	be	greedy."	Then	one	moves	to	the	other	extreme,	to
renounce.	One	collects	--	the	greedy	person;	and	the	person	who	wants	to	get	rid
of	greed	starts	renouncing.	There	too	there	is	no	end.
Mahavira	could	never	 recognize	Gautam	Buddha	as	enlightened	for	 the	simple
reason	that	he	still	carries	three	sets	of	clothes	--	just	three	sets	of	clothes,	which
are	absolutely	necessary.	One	you	are	using,	one	has	to	be	washed,	and	one	for
emergency	reasons...
someday	the	clothes	may	not	come	from	being	washed	or	they	are	not	dry,	or	it
is	raining	the	whole	day.	So	three	seems	to	be	very	essential	--	one	emergency...
Mahavira	is	absolutely	against	greed.	Now,	that	has	taken	to	an	extreme	form	--
he	is	naked.	Buddha	carries	a	begging	bowl.	Mahavira	cannot	accept	it	because
even	a	begging	bowl	is	a	possession,	and	an	enlightened	man,	according	to	him,
should	not	possess	anything.	A	begging	bowl...	 it	 is	made	of	coconut.	You	cut
the	coconut	in	the	middle...
and	there	are	special	coconuts	which	are	very	big.	You	cut	from	the	middle,	you
take	 all	 of	 the	 fruit	 out,	 and	 then	 two	 bowls	 are	 left,	 hard	 shells.	 That	 is	 the
cheapest	 thing,	because	they	are	 thrown	away;	you	cannot	eat	 them.	To	have	a
begging	bowl	and	to	call	it	being	possessive	is	not	right.
But	when	you	take	greed	as	a	desire	and	you	become	stubborn,	going	against	it,
then	everything	is	a	possession.	Mahavira	lived	naked,	and	instead	of	a	begging
bowl	he	used	to	make	a	bowl	of	his	two	hands.	Now	it	was	a	very	difficult	thing:
his	two	hands	are	full	of	the	food	and	he	has	to	eat	just	like	the	animals,	because
he	cannot	use	his	hands	--	so	he	has	 to	use	his	mouth	directly	to	 take	the	food
from	the	hands.
Everybody	 in	 the	world	 eats	 sitting.	But	Mahavira's	 idea	 is	 that	when	 you	 eat
sitting,	 you	 eat	 more.	 Now	 this	 is	 going	 to	 the	 opposite	 extreme.	 So	 he	 was
teaching	to	eat	food	standing	--	standing,	with	the	food	in	your	hands;	it	is	such	a
strenuous	 thing.	You	can	 take	 food	only	one	 time,	 so	whatever	 can	 fit	 in	your
two	hands	at	one	time	is	one	meal.
You	have	to	eat	it	standing,	and	everything	has	to	be	taken	together,	sweet,	salty,
and	they	all	get	mixed.	That	is	Mahavira's	idea	of	making	it	tasteless,	because	to
enjoy	taste	is	to	enjoy	the	body,	is	to	enjoy	matter.
To	me,	greed	is	not	a	desire	at	all.	So	you	need	not	do	anything	about	greed.	You
have	to	understand	the	emptiness	that	you	are	trying	to	fill,	and	ask	the	question,
"Why	am	I	empty?	The	whole	existence	is	so	full,	why	am	I	empty?	Perhaps	I
have	lost	track	--	I	am	no	longer	moving	in	the	same	direction,	I	am	no	longer
existential.	That	is	the	cause	of	my	emptiness."
So	be	existential.
Let	go,	and	move	closer	to	existence	in	silence	and	peace,	in	meditation.
And	one	day	you	will	 see	you	are	 so	 full	 --	overfull,	overflowing	 --	of	 joy,	of
blissfulness,	of	benediction.	You	have	so	much	of	 it	 that	you	can	give	 it	 to	 the
whole	world	and	yet	it	will	not	be	exhausted.
That	day,	for	the	first	time	you	will	not	feel	any	greed	--	for	money,	for	food,	for
things,	 for	 anything.	You	will	 live	 naturally,	 and	whatever	 is	 needed	 you	will
find	 it.	And	you	will	 live,	not	with	a	constant	greed	 that	 cannot	be	 fulfilled,	 a
wound	that	cannot	be	healed.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
MANY	TIMES	 I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	TELL	THE	ZEN	STORY	THAT,	 "IF
YOU
MEET	THE	MASTER	ON	THE	WAY,	KILL	HIM."
OSHO,	 DOES	 IT	 REALLY	HAVE	 TO	 BE	 LIKE	 THAT?	 IF	WE	MEET	ON
THE
PATH,	CAN	WE	NOT	JUST	LAUGH,	AND	CHAT	A	LITTLE	WHILE,	AND
THEN
IF	WE	MUST	PART,	DO	SO	GRACEFULLY,	WITH	A	NAMASTE	AND	A
SMILE?
The	story	is	not	about	any	actual	path,	and	not	about	any	actual	meeting	with	the
master.
The	story	is	about	when	you	are	meditating	and	things	are	disappearing	from	the
mind	--
it	is	becoming	silent.	The	last	to	go	will	be	the	one	you	have	loved	most.	That	is,
the	last	will	be	the	master.	It	is	in	your	meditation,	when	everything	else	is	gone,
that	 still	 you	 will	 be	 seeing	 the	 master.	 Now,	 chit-chatting	 will	 disturb	 your
meditation,	and	preparing	a	cup	of	coffee	will	not	help.
The	 saying	 looks	hard,	 but	 it	 is	 true:	Cut	 the	head	of	 the	master!	 It	 is	 in	your
imagination	that	you	are	cutting.	By	chit-chatting	or	laughing	or	talking,	you	will
not	get	 rid	of	 the	master.	You	have	 to	be	very	simple	and	straight;	you	need	a
sword,	and	cut	the	head	of	the	master	and	pass	on.	Don't	look	back!
The	 master	 is	 saying	 this	 so	 that	 you	 can	 enter	 into	 suneeta-shunyata,	 into
nothingness,	into	nirvana.	The	master	is	making	you	aware	that	even	he	should
not	be	a	hindrance	to	you.
And	I	will	be	a	hindrance.	You	have	loved	me	so	much	that	you	may	be	able	to
drop	everything	from	the	mind,	but	then	I	will	be	there	--	and	you	have	to	drop
me	too.	It	is	not	an	actual	thing,	it	is	just	about	your	imagination,	about	the	last
trick	of	your	mind.
Your	mind	will	bring	 in	 the	master	because	 the	mind	knows	you	cannot	 throw
away	 the	 master.	 You	 have	 thrown	 away	 everything	 else,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 last
resort	 of	 the	mind	 to	 prevent	 you	 from	 going	 into	meditation.	And	 if	 you	 are
afraid	--	if	you	feel	this	is	being	ungrateful,	if	you	feel	this	is	not	the	right	thing
to	do	--	to	cut	the	head	of	the	master,	then	you	are	playing	into	the	hands	of	the
mind.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	master,	because	there	is	no	master	--	it	is	just
your	mind	projecting.
And	don't	ask,	"From	where	am	I	to	get	a	sword?"	It	has	been	asked,	down	the
centuries.
Whenever	masters	have	said	to	their	disciples,	"If	you	meet	me	on	the	way,	cut
my	head,"
the	disciples	have	asked,	"But	from	where	have	I	to	get	a	sword?"
I	will	tell	you	a	Sufi	story.	Mulla	Nasruddin	has	applied	for	a	job	on	a	ship.	He	is
being	 interviewed,	 and	 the	 captain	 and	 the	 high	 officials	 of	 the	 company	 are
asking	questions.
The	captain	asks,	"If	 the	waters	are	 in	a	 turmoil,	and	the	wind	is	blowing	very
strong	and	there	is	a	danger	of	the	ship	being	upturned	or	swayed	into	a	direction
it	does	not	want	to	go,	what	are	you	going	to	do?"
He	said,	"Simple,	I	will	throw	out	an	anchor."
The	captain	said,	 "That's	 right.	But	 suppose	another	 storm	comes	up;	what	are
you	going	to	do?
He	said,	"Nothing	else;	I	will	throw	out	another	anchor."
The	captain	said,	"It	is	right,	but	suppose	a	third	storm	comes	up.	What	are	you
going	to	do?"
He	said,	"The	same!	I	will	throw	out	an	anchor."
And	the	captain	said,	"But	from	where	are	you	getting	these	anchors?"
And	Mulla	Nasruddin	said,	"From	where	are	you	getting	these	storms?	From	the
same	place!"
Just	as	the	master	is	imagination,	your	sword	is	also	an	imagination.	If	the	mind
can	provide	you	with	one	 imagination,	 it	 is	 capable	of	providing	you	with	 the
other	thing	--
and	perhaps	happily,	because	you	are	going	to	kill	the	master.	The	mind	is	very
happy	when	you	are	against	the	master	--	angry,	resentful	--	and	now	he	will	be
bursting	with	 joy	 that	 you	 are	 going	 to	 kill	 the	master.	He	will	 present	 you	 a
beautiful	sword	immediately	--	just	ask.
Both	 are	 imaginary,	 the	 master	 and	 the	 sword.	 And	 you	 have	 to	 go	 beyond
imagination.
So	this	must	be	the	last	barrier,	and	once	there	is	nobody,	nothingness	opens	up	-
-	you	are	connected	with	existence,	you	are	connected	with	your	reality.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	So	which	way	are	you	moving
25	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604255
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO27
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
116
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
OFTEN	 JOYOUSLY	 I	 HEAR	YOU	 SAYING	 CONTRADICTORY	 THINGS,
AND
EMPHASIZING	 THAT	 EVERYTHING	 JUST	 HAS	 ITS	 POLAR	 OPPOSITE
TO	BE
COMPLETE.
BUT	THE	OTHER	MORNING	I	GOT	INTO	TROUBLE	WHEN	YOU	WERE
TALKING	 ABOUT	 OFFERING	 YOUR	 FRIENDSHIP	 TO	 YOUR
SANNYASINS.
I	 UNDERSTOOD	 THAT	 SOME	 OF	 THEM	 HAVE	 TAKEN	 THIS	 LONG-
WANTED
OPPORTUNITY	 FOR	 THEIR	 SELF-AGGRANDIZEMENT,	 AND	 HAVEN'T
BEEN
AWARE	 OF	 THE	 FACT	 THAT	 THEY	 WERE	 BASICALLY	 RESENTFUL
AND
ANGRY	TOWARDS	YOU	AT	BEING	MERE	DISCIPLES..
MY	UNDERSTANDING	WAS	TOTALLY	DIFFERENT,	WHEN	YOU	WERE
TELLING	 US	 IN	 KULU	 AND	 KATHMANDU	 THAT	 AS	 FAR	 AS	 YOU
WERE
CONCERNED,	 YOU	 DIDN'T	 HAVE	 ANY	 DISCIPLES	 ANYMORE,	 AND
NOW	IT
WAS	UP	TO	US	TO	DROP	DISCIPLESHIP.
TO	 ME	 YOUR	 OFFER	 OF	 FRIENDSHIP	 WAS	 JUST	 OVERWHELMING,
AND	 I	 FELT	 MORE	 REVERENCE	 AND	 LOVE	 TOWARDS	 YOU	 THAN
EVER	 BEFORE,	 AND	 VERY	 VERY	 GRATEFUL.	 I	 FELT	 A	 VERY
DELICATE,	SENSITIVE	AND
PRECIOUS	 KIND	 OF	 INTIMACY	 STARTING	 TO	 GROW	 BETWEEN	ME
AND
YOU,	AS	MY	MASTER.
NOW	YOU	SAY	THAT	ALL	THIS	WAS	JUST	A	DEVICE	TO	GET	RID	OF
EGOISTS,	AND	THAT	THEY	ENJOYED	THIS	OFFER	OF	YOURS.	I	DON'T
UNDERSTAND	ANYMORE.	DID	I	GET	IT	ALL	WRONG?	WHERE	AM	I
HOOKED?
The	question	is	from	Premda.
His	situation	 is	different	 from	those	who	were	waiting	 for	such	an	opportunity
for	 their	 own	 ego-fulfillment.	 He	 is	 new.	 He	 has	 not	 known	 the	 phase	 of
discipleship	at	all,	 so	when	friendship	was	offered	 it	was	not	a	nourishment	 to
his	ego;	 it	went	directly	to	his	heart	because	he	has	no	resentment,	no	anger	at
being	a	disciple.
This	became	a	joyous	intimacy	and	a	loving	growth	for	him.	Now	he	is	feeling
more	reverence,	more	love,	more	respect.	This	will	bring	in	him	the	wonderful
experience	 of	 discipleship.	 So	 the	 situation	 is	 so	 different	 that	 there	 is	 no
question	of	contradiction.
The	 people	 who	 have	 been	 with	 me	 for	 ten	 years,	 twelve	 years,	 and	 were
hankering	 deep	 down	 to	 become	 masters	 themselves	 were	 certainly	 feeling
resentful	 towards	me.	And	when	 I	offered	 friendship,	 it	was	not	 a	gratitude	or
reverence	that	grew	in	their	heart	but	a	deep	and	long-awaiting	ego	was	fulfilled.
Now	 they	 could	 declare	 that	 they	 have	 the	 same	 status	 as	 I	 have,	 that	 their
experience	is	the	same	as	my	experience.	So	my	declaration	of	friendship	was	to
them	the	end	of	their	discipleship	--	and	not	the	beginning	of	friendship	either;	it
was	simply	the	end	of	the	road.
But	 to	Premda	 the	 situation	 is	different.	He	has	not	been	around	me	 for	many
years,	and	he	has	not	for	a	single	moment	thought	of	being	a	master.	His	whole
desire	has	been	to	be	closer	to	me,	to	be	intimate	with	me.	So	when	I	declared
that	 I	 am	 your	 friend,	 this	 desire	 was	 fulfilled,	 and	 it	 has	 created	 a	 loving
intimacy	and	reverence.	And	you	can	see	it	from	the	question.	I	call	myself	your
friend,	but	he	says	he	started	feeling	a	reverence	towards	the	master.
To	those	who	have	been	calling	me	"Master,"	the	declaration	of	friendship	ended
their	 discipleship,	 and	 to	 one	 who	was	 simply	 longing	 for	 intimacy	 the	 same
declaration	made	him	a	disciple.	And	the	people	who	were	longing	to	be	masters
were	 not	many;	 they	 belonged	 only	 in	 the	 category	 of	 therapists	 --	 just	 a	 few
therapists,	not	all.	And	 those	 therapists	got	 this	 longing	because	 I	was	sending
people	 to	 their	 therapies	 and	 they	 started	 thinking	 that	 they	 are	 some	 kind	 of
masters,	and	they	are	helping	people	to	grow.
The	 reality	 was,	 I	 was	 sending	 these	 people	 to	 their	 therapies	 because	 these
people	were	 so	 full	 of	 rubbish	 that	 they	 needed	 some	 dry	 cleaning,	 and	 those
therapists	 were	 nothing	 but	 dry	 cleaners.	 But	 thousands	 of	 people	 passing
through	their	 therapies...	 it	 is	very	human	and	very	natural	 to	get	 the	 idea	 that,
"We	can	be	masters	on	our	own."	They	were	just	waiting	for	the	opportunity.
It	is	not	true	about	all	sannyasins;	it	is	only	true	about	a	special	small	group	of
therapists.
Their	work	destroyed	them.	They	may	have	helped	many	people	come	closer	to
me,	but	they	themselves	went	on	going	farther	and	farther	away.
Premda	has	no	desire	to	be	a	master,	and	nobody	who	has	a	desire	to	be	a	master
can	ever	be	a	master.	Only	those	who	are	desireless	happen	to	be	masters.	It	 is
not	something	like	a	goal	that	you	can	achieve:	it	is	something	that	happens	by
the	way,	unintentionally,	without	being	sought	for.	You	are	doing	something	else,
you	are	feeling	more	love,	more	intimacy,	more	reverence,	and	slowly,	slowly,	in
this	reverence	and	love	and	intimacy,	your	ego	is	disappearing.	One	day,	when
the	ego	is	not	there,	you	have	become	a	master.
You	 were	 not	 seeking	 it	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 by-product.	 And	 those	 poor	 therapists
missed	--
although	 they	 were	 with	 me	 for	 years	 --	 because	 they	 remained	 achievers,
climbers.	In	their	mind	they	were	always	thinking	how	to	become	a	master.
It	 is	 good,	 Premda,	 that	my	 offering	 of	 friendship	 created	 discipleship	 in	 you.
That's	how	it	should	have	been	to	everyone	who	is	sincerely	here	for	the	search
of	truth,	for	the	search	of	oneself.
You	are	blessed.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
HEARING	 ABOUT	 THE	 SANNYASIN	 THERAPISTS	 WHO	 ARE
CHOOSING	TO
DO	THEIR	OWN	THING,	REMINDS	ME	THAT	ONCE	 I	ALSO	DECIDED
TO	DO
MY	OWN	THING	RATHER	THAN	BE	WITH	YOU.
WHEN	I	DID	COME	BACK,	I	JUDGED	MYSELF,	AND	FELT	JUDGED	BY
OTHERS	 --	 IRONICALLY,	 SOME	 OF	 WHOM	 ARE	 AMONG	 THOSE	 OF
WHOM
YOU	HAVE	RECENTLY	SPOKEN.
BECAUSE	I	CAN	ALTERNATELY	VIEW	MY	EXPERIENCE	AS	A	GOING
ASTRAY	OR	AS	A	CONSTRUCTIVE	LEARNING,	I	AM	VERY	CAUTIOUS
ABOUT	JUDGING	OTHERS	WHO	WOULD	APPEAR	TO	HAVE	GONE	OFF
TRACK.	SURELY	ONLY	AN	ENLIGHTENED	SEER	IS	IN	A	POSITION	TO
INDICATE	WHERE	WE	ARE.
MY	 QUESTION	 IS:	 WHAT	 IS	 IT	 TO	 MISS?	 IS	 IT	 SOMETHING	 OTHER
THAN,	THROUGH	OUR	SLEEPINESS,	CHOOSING	TO	TAKE	A	LONGER,
MORE
DEVIOUS	 ROUTE	 TO	 THAT	 PLACE	 WHICH	 WE	 MUST	 SOME	 DAY
REACH...
THAT	PLACE	WHICH,	IN	FACT,	YOU	SAY	WE	HAVE	NEVER	LEFT?
ARE	WE	ALL	MISSING	 EVERY	MOMENT	OF	 EVERY	DAY	UNTIL	WE
ARE
ENLIGHTENED?
Yes,	everybody	is	missing	every	moment	until	they	are	enlightened.
Whatever	you	are	doing	can	either	bring	you	close	to	the	point	of	explosion,	or
can	take	you	away	from	the	point	and	make	you	more	closed.	These	are	the	two
possibilities	within	you:	exploding	into	a	lightning	experience,	or	being	closed	in
a	dark	night	of	the	soul.
So	which	way	are	you	moving?
If	 you	 are	moving	 towards	 the	 dark	 night	 of	 the	 soul	 you	 are	missing	 --	 and
missing	more	 every	moment	 because	 you	 are	 going	 farther	 and	 farther	 away.
And	there	is	no	end	of	going	farther	away.	You	can	go	away	eternally;	there	is	no
time	limit.
One	can	remain	unenlightened	forever	--	that's	the	danger.	And	one	can	become
enlightened	this	very	moment.	The	question	is,	towards	what	are	you	moving?	If
you	are	coming	closer	to	your	center	of	explosion,	 then	every	moment	you	are
nearer	 and	 nearer	 to	 enlightenment.	 It	 depends	 on	 your	 speed.	 If	 your
understanding	is	intense	enough,	it	can	happen	this	very	moment;	you	have	not
to	wait	even	for	a	single	moment	more.
So	you	see	these	are	the	two	possibilities:	either	now	or	never.	Both	are	possible,
and	man's	prerogative	is	that	he	has	the	freedom	to	go	either	way.
There	is	no	harm	in	doing	your	own	thing	--	but	you	don't	know	who	you	are,
how	can	you	do	your	own	 thing?	 It	 is	a	dilemma.	Those	who	know	cannot	do
their	own	thing,	because	they	know	there	is	nobody	inside	as	a	self,	as	a	separate
entity	from	existence.
Those	who	do	not	know	themselves	cannot	do	their	own	thing	because	they	don't
know	even	their	own	self.
So	either	you	are	accidental...	one	possibility;	 that's	what	you	call	 "doing	your
own	thing."	You	are	accidental,	or	you	are	existential:	 that's	what	I	call	"doing
the	thing	existence	wants	you	to	do."	It	is	not	your	own	thing.	I	am	not	doing	my
own	 thing	 --	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 do	 such	 a	 thing.	 I	 am	 simply	 available	 to
existence.	So	whatever	and	wherever	it	wants	to	lead	me,	I	am	available,	because
I	am	not.
Remember,	these	are	the	difficulties	with	language.	I	say	I	am	available	because
I	am	not.
Only	when	I	am	not,	there	is	availability.	If	I	am,	then	there	is	always	choice,	not
availability.	Then	I	will	judge	whether	to	go	that	way	or	not,	whether	to	go	this
way	 or	 not,	 whether	 to	 do	 this	 or	 not.	 So	whenever	 you	 are	 doing	 your	 own
thing,	one	thing	is	certain:	you	are	not	in	tune	with	existence.	So	what	can	it	be?
It	can	only	be	accidental.
I	know	people	who	had	come	accidentally	to	me.	They	had	come	to	meet	one	of
their	friends	who	was	a	sannyasin;	they	had	not	come	to	meet	me	or	to	see	me.
They	 were	 not	 even	 remotely	 interested	 in	 me,	 but	 then	 listening	 to	 me	 they
became	 interested,	 they	 became	 curious,	 they	 became	 involved.	 This	 is
accidental.	If	I	send	them	away	to	do	something	I	can	be	certain	some	accident	is
going	to	happen.
I	have	tried	--	seeing	some	accidental	people	I	have	told	them,	"Go	and	open	a
center	in	your	place,"	and	they	were	very	happy	and	they	went	there	and	fell	in
love	with	a	woman,	and	forgot	all	about	the	center	--	got	married	and	got	into	the
whole	mess	of	marriage.
You	 cannot	 depend	 on	 these	 people;	 they	 are	 not	 reliable.	 It	 is	 not	 their	 fault.
They	 are	 just	 driftwood	 --	 any	 accident	 and	 they	 start	 doing	 things	 they	 have
never	thought	about,	doing	things	without	ever	thinking	whether	they	really	want
to	do	them.	Perhaps	others	are	doing,	so	they	start	doing.
What	 you	 call	 "doing	 your	 own	 thing"	 is	 accidental,	 because	 you	 don't	 know
yourself	yet;	you	cannot	do	your	own	thing.	And	to	be	accidental	is	to	remain	in
darkness	 --	being	 thrown	by	winds	here	and	 there	 like	a	dead	 leaf...	having	no
roots,	 having	 no	 integrity,	 having	 no	 individuality,	 having	 no	 sense	 of	 being
connected	with	existence.
Doing	your	own	thing,	you	were	wrong	--	not	that	the	things	that	you	were	doing
were	wrong,	 but	 that	 you	were	 thinking	 that	 they	were	 your	 own.	 They	were
only	accidental.
The	people,	the	therapists,	who	criticized	you	were	thinking	they	were	doing	my
things,	not	their	own.	And	that	was	creating	deep	resentment	in	them,	that	they
have	to	do	my	thing.	They	really	wanted	to	do	their	thing.
They	criticized	you	just	to	strengthen	in	themselves	that	the	very	idea	of	"doing
your	 own	 thing"	 is	wrong.	 To	 repress	 their	 own	 idea	 they	 judged	 you	wrong;
they	were	really	judging	themselves.
And	once	they	got	the	opportunity...	now	they	are	all	doing	their	own	things,	and
thinking	that	this	is	freedom.	They	are	telling	people,	"Osho	has	given	freedom
to	us."	Now,	 this	 is	 such	a	 foolish	 idea.	Nobody	can	give	you	 freedom,	and	 if
somebody	 can	 give	 you	 freedom,	 he	 can	 take	 it	 back	 any	 moment.	 Freedom
cannot	be	a	gift.	You	have	to	grow	and	be	free;	freedom	has	to	be	something	that
happens	to	you	--	it	is	not	given.
Now	they	are	saying,	"Osho	has	given	freedom	to	us,	and	now	we	are	doing	our
own	thing."	And	they	are	doing	the	same	thing	they	were	doing	here...	perhaps
less	efficiently,	more	superficially,	because	 the	people	 they	will	be	getting	will
not	be	meditators.
I	used	to	choose	people	for	their	groups;	seeing	the	need	of	the	person,	I	used	to
choose	which	group	he	should	go	 to.	Now	they	will	be	doing	 things	 to	people
who	 don't	 need	 them;	 or	 these	 things	 may	 even	 harm	 them.	 There	 is	 every
possibility	 that	 the	 people,	 through	 their	 therapies,	 will	 be	 harmed	 --	 because
therapy	is	not	anything	spiritual.
Therapy	 is	 only	 preparing	 the	 ground.	 And	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 the	 seeds,	 the
ground	 that	 you	 have	 prepared	will	 simply	 grow	weeds,	 wild	 grass.	 It	 cannot
grow	roses.
Here	 I	was	using	 their	 therapy	 to	clean	 the	ground	so	 that	 seeds	of	meditation
can	be	sown,	and	people	can	blossom.
But	soon	they	will	understand.	Seeing	the	results,	people	will	start	disappearing
from	their	therapy	groups.	I	know	perfectly	well	that	people	never	wanted	to	do
therapy	 groups;	 I	 had	 to	 persuade	 them	 to	 go	 to	 do	 therapy	 groups.	They	 had
come	to	listen	to	me	and	to	meditate.
Therapy	 groups	 are	 already	 out	 of	 fashion.	 Esalen	 --	 the	 original	 pioneer
institution	 for	 therapy	 groups	 --	 is	 dying.	 Nobody	 comes	 anymore.	 Only	 on
weekends	a	few	old	people	turn	up.	And	when	they	saw	that	thousands	of	people
are	coming	to	me	and	going	through	me	to	the	therapies,	they	could	not	believe
it,	 because	 they	 were	 the	 original	 people	 who	 had	 started	 the	 movement	 of
therapies.	It	was	unbelievable	for	them	why	people	were	not	coming	there.
The	 reason	 was	 that	 people	 had	 been	 there	 and	 had	 seen	 their	 therapies	 and
found	that	they	were	only	games	you	can	play	with.	It	feels	good	while	you	are
playing	 them,	but	after	 two	days	all	 is	gone;	you	are	 the	same	person,	nothing
has	changed.	And	what	is	the	point	of	going	again	and	again,	giving	money	and
playing	the	same	kind	of	games?
These	therapists	who	had	been	working	here	in	the	world	of	the	sannyasins	will
soon	 feel	 frustrated,	 tremendously	 frustrated.	 One	 thing,	 sannyasins	 will	 stop
going	 to	 them,	 knowing	 that	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 part	 of	 a	 spiritual	 movement.
Secondly,	those	who	go	will	see	that	it	is	pointless.	Just	again	and	again	clearing
the	ground	and	letting	the	weeds	grow	makes	no	sense.
I	 was	 using	 therapy	 simply	 as	 a	 preparation	 --	 it	 was	 not	 the	 end.	 And	 these
therapists	know	nothing	of	meditation,	because	they	felt	that	it	was	below	them
to	go	and	meditate	with	the	same	people	who	are	doing	therapies	with	them;	they
are	great	therapists.	So	they	never	meditated;	they	missed	meditation.	They	were
so	 knowledgeable	 that	 they	 thought	 they	 knew	 everything.	 I	 don't	 think	 they
have	 listened	 to	me;	otherwise	 the	way	they	have	betrayed	me	would	not	have
been	possible.
But	they	will	have	to	come	back;	they	cannot	go	on	existing	for	long.	Soon	you
will	see	those	faces	again,	and	this	time	they	are	not	going	to	be	therapists.	This
time	I	am	going	to	work	in	a	totally	different	way.	Therapy	will	not	be	part	of	it;
perhaps	personal	counseling	may	be	there,	but	not	therapy.
There	 is	 nothing	 wrong	 in	 doing	 your	 own	 thing	 --	 just	 remember	 that	 it	 is
accidental.
First	know	thyself,	and	then	do	anything	that	happens,	that	comes	up	out	of	your
nothingness.
And	out	of	nothingness	always	comes	the	lotus	of	nirvana.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	THE	HINDI	INCARNATIONS	OF	GOD	THERE	ARE	A	WOMAN	AND	A
MAN
TOGETHER	 --	 LIKE	 VISHNU	 AND	 LAXMI,	 SHANKAR	 AND	 PARVATI,
KRISHNA	AND	RADHA,	RAMA	AND	SITA,	ETC.	ON	THE	OTHER	HAND,
THERE	ARE
OTHER	 RELIGIONS	 LIKE	 JAINISM,	 BUDDHISM,	 TAOISM,
MOHAMMEDANISM,	 CHRISTIANITY,	 ET	 CETERA,	 WHICH	 HAVE	 NO
PLACE	FOR	WOMEN.
PLEASE	COMMENT.
Compared	 to	 Hinduism,	 all	 these	 religions	 --	 Taoism,	 Jainism,	 Buddhism,
Christianity,	Mohammedanism,	Judaism	--	are	very	new.	Hinduism	is	very	old;
hence	it	has	some	unique	characteristics.	Because	it	is	the	oldest	religion	in	the
world,	a	few	things	are	in	it	which	you	will	not	find	in	other	religions.
For	example,	you	are	asking	that	Hindu	incarnations	of	God	are	always	with	a
woman	consort:	Shiva	is	with	Parvati,	Krishna	is	with	Radha.	In	India,	Jainism
and	 Buddhism	 flowered	 twenty-five	 centuries	 ago.	 They	 had	 to	 fight	 against
Hinduism.	Hinduism	was	the	only	religion.
You	will	 be	 surprised:	 it	was	 so	 alone	 that	 it	 had	no	name.	A	name	 is	 needed
when	there	is	more	than	one	thing;	if	there	is	only	one	thing,	what	is	the	use	of	a
name?	 Hinduism	 was	 the	 only	 religion,	 so	 it	 was	 simply	 called	 dharma	 --
religion.	There	was	no	need	to	put	an	adjective	to	it.	Jainism	and	Buddhism	were
born	out	of	Hinduism,	offshoots	of	 the	old	religion,	but	 then	 they	had	 to	make
some	 specialities	 to	 stand	 aloof;	 otherwise	 the	 oceanic	 Hinduism	would	 have
drowned	them.
Hinduism	was	very	natural,	 that's	why	 the	 reincarnations	 are	not	 celibate.	The
idea	 of	 celibacy	 had	 not	 entered	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 the	 Hindus	 because	 it	 is
unnatural,	 so	even	 their	 incarnations	of	God	have	 their	wives.	They	are	 just	as
natural	as	you	are.
Jainism	 and	Buddhism	both	made	 it	 a	 point	 that	man	 has	 to	 go	 above	 nature,
beyond	nature,	only	then	he	is	religious	--	Hinduism	is	not	religion.	What	kind	of
a	religion	is	it	if	just	to	be	natural	is	to	be	religious?	Then	there	is	no	difference
between	 you	 and	 animals,	 because	 all	 animals	 are	 natural.	 They	 had	 a	 point
there,	and	they	created	great	logical	systems	against	Hinduism.	One	of	the	basic
points	was	that	you	have	to	go	beyond	nature
--	and	that	starts	from	celibacy,	because	that	is	the	basic	nature,	sexuality.
So	Buddha	 is	 alone,	Mahavir	 is	 alone,	 and	 for	 these	 twenty-five	 centuries,	 all
their	 monks	 and	 masters	 have	 been	 alone,	 celibate.	 You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to
know	that	their	celibacy	was	such	a	thing	that	the	common	masses	became	very
impressed.	Their	ascetic	attitude	towards	life...	because	Hindus	were	not	ascetic
--	 I	mean	Hindus	 before	 Buddha	 and	Mahavir	 --	were	 not	 ascetic.	 Even	 their
seers	lived	in	comfort	and	luxury.	They	had	their	communes	in	the	mountains,	in
the	forests,	which	their	followers	went	on	donating	to.
The	 Kings,	 their	 sons,	 their	 daughters	 --	 all	 had	 to	 go	 to	 be	 there	 in	 their
monasteries	to	learn.
So	they	had	immense	power.	One	great	Hindu	wise	man	had	many	kings	as	his
followers,	 and	 lived	 in	 luxury,	 comfort.	 His	whole	 commune	 of	 disciples	 and
teachers,	they	all	lived	beautifully.	They	were	not	other-worldly	people.
Jainism	 and	 Buddhism	 are	 ascetic;	 they	 went	 on	 point	 by	 point	 against
Hinduism,	to	make	a	distinct	identity.	Comfort	is	not	even	heard	of;	discomfort
is	the	way.	The	more	you	can	keep	yourself	in	discomfort,	the	more	spiritual	you
are	--	because	the	body	is	the	enemy	of	your	soul,	so	torture	the	body	so	you	can
find	your	soul.	This	world	is	the	hindrance	for	the	other	world,	so	renounce	it.
Jainism	and	Buddhism	did	so	many	strange	 things	 that	even	 the	Hindu	masses
became	impressed;	even	Hindu	wisemen,	brahmins,	started	thinking	how	to	fight
against	the	rebellious	Jainas	and	Buddhists.	The	only	way	was	that	they	also	had
to	be	ascetic	--
more	 than	 they	 were.	 So	 after	 Gautam	 Buddha	 you	 will	 not	 find	 any	 Hindu
master	with	a	woman.	Shankaracharya,	Ramanujacharya,	Nimbarkha,	Vallabha	-
-	great	masters,	but	you	will	not	find	them	with	a	woman.	What	happened?
They	all	had	to	be	celibate.	They	had	to	be	to	fight	with	the	Buddhists	and	the
Jainas;	otherwise	 they	were	ordinary	people,	 they	were	not	 spiritual.	And	 they
were	all	ascetic,	 just	 like	Jainas	and	Buddhists	were;	 they	were	ascetic	 in	 their
own	 way.	 They	 renounced	 the	 world,	 they	 renounced	 all	 comforts	 --	 just	 to
counter-attack.
Hinduism	 got	 spoiled	 by	 Hindus	 themselves;	 otherwise	 it	 was	 a	 beautiful
religion,	very	natural,	very	simple,	very	innocent.	But	it	became	more	and	more
complicated.	These	three	religions	have	been	fighting	for	twenty-five	centuries,
arguing,	writing	 treatises	 against	 each	 other.	And	 those	 treatises	 have	 become
more	and	more	complicated	--	to	such	a	point	that	even	to	understand	them	has
become	a	difficult	expertise.
And	there	are	treatises	which	scholars	have	been	trying	for	years	to	translate	into
English	 but	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to.	 Because	 of	 the	 complexities	 of	 ideas,
language,	its	nuances,	it	is	difficult	to	be	authentic	to	the	original	and	to	translate
it;	the	translation	looks	very	poor.
Judaism,	 Christianity,	 Mohammedanism,	 Sikhism,	 all	 are	 later	 additions	 to
human	consciousness	--	after	Buddha.	In	fact	Buddha	should	be	the	demarcation
line,	not	Jesus.
We	 say,	 "Before	 Jesus	 Christ,	 after	 Jesus	 Christ."	 Jesus	 has	 become	 the
demarcation	line	dividing	history,	but	that	credit	should	go	to	Gautam	Buddha,
who	came	 five	 centuries	before	 Jesus	 and	 really	divided	human	consciousness
and	its	growth.
Jesus	 himself	 had	 traveled	 to	 India	while	 he	was	 young.	 THE	BIBLE	 has	 no
account	of	him	between	the	age	of	thirteen	to	thirty;	THE	BIBLE	has	no	account
of	where	Jesus	had	been.	This	looks	strange	--	a	small	life	--	he	lived	only	thirty-
three	years	--	and	 in	 those	 thirty-three	years	THE	BIBLE	has	accounts	of	only
three	years,	the	last	three	years.
About	his	earlier	life	are	only	two	incidents	--	minor,	meaningless.	One	was	of
his	birth	and	the	coming	of	the	three	wisemen	from	the	East	to	pay	tribute;	and
second,	his	getting	 lost	 in	 the	 temple	of	 Jerusalem,	arguing	with	 rabbis.	These
are	the	only	two	incidents.
And	then	from	the	age	of	thirteen	to	thirty,	seventeen	years,	nothing	is	mentioned
--	what	happened	to	this	man,	where	he	was.
These	seventeen	years	he	traveled	to	Egypt,	to	India,	to	Ladakh,	to	Tibet,	and	all
these	 places	 were	 Buddhist	 at	 that	 time.	 Buddha	 had	 died	 only	 five	 centuries
before,	and	his	impact	was	still	very	alive.	Jesus	visited	Buddhist	monasteries.	I
have	been	to	a	Ladakh	monastery	which	Jesus	had	visited,	and	I	looked	in	their
records	of	visitors,	which	 they	have	kept	 for	 two	 thousand	years.	And	 I	 asked
them	 if	 they	 had	 a	 record	 of	 all	 the	 visitors	 and	 their	 impressions	 about	 the
monastery.
It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	monasteries,	and	Jesus	stayed	there	for	almost	six
months,	studying	Buddhism	from	the	monks.	There	are,	in	their	official	record,
the	 impressions	 of	 Jesus,	 his	 signature,	 the	 date.	 He	 became	 immensely
influenced	 by	 Buddhism,	 so	 his	 celibacy,	 his	 ascetic	 attitude,	 his	 praise	 for
poverty,	 his	 condemnation	 for	 riches,	 were	 all	 borrowed	 ideas	 from	 Gautam
Buddha.
Naturally	 these	people	 followed	a	 certain	pattern	 that	Buddha	 left	 behind	him.
They	don't	have	a	woman	companion,	which	would	be	natural.	Hinduism	seems
to	be	very	natural	--
even	 its	gods	are	very	natural.	There	 is	no	desire	 to	be	beyond	nature;	 there	 is
only	 one	 desire:to	 be	 totally	 natural.	 But	 in	 a	 way	 all	 other	 religions	 are
reactions,	rebellions	against	Hinduism.
It	had	no	name.	It	was	known	as	the	eternal	religion	because	it	had	always	been
there.
Nobody	can	say	when	it	was	born,	who	was	the	founder	of	the	Hindu	religion.
You	 can	 find	 founders	 of	 all	 other	 religions	 except	 Hinduism.	 Who	 was	 the
original	 man?	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 no	 one.	 Hindus	 themselves	 used	 to	 call	 it
sanatan	dharma:	the	eternal	religion.	How	did	they	become	Hindus?	Who	started
calling	 them	 Hindus?	 It	 was	 in	 a	 very	 strange	 way	 that	 they	 got	 the	 name,
Hindus.
It	was	by	the	foreigners	who	were	constantly	invading	India	that	the	name	was
given,	 because	 every	 invader	 had	 to	 pass	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 rivers	 of	 India,
Sindhu.	 The	 first	 invaders,	 were	 the	 Hunas,	 who	 have	 disappeared	 from	 the
world	now	--	a	wild	 tribe.	 In	 their	alphabet	 they	had	no	sound	 for	 `sa',	 for	 `s'.
The	closest	sound	tòs'	was	`h',	--	`ha'.
`Sa	--	ha'	--	that	was	the	closest.	They	could	not	pronounce	the	river	Sindhu;	they
pronounced	 it,	 the	 river	Hindu,	 and	because	of	 their	 language,	 and	because	of
their	pronunciation,	the	people	who	lived	beyond	this	river,	they	started	calling
Hindus,	the	people	who	live	beyond	the	river	Hindu.
It	is	beautiful	sometimes	to	look	at	the	history	of	how	a	word	evolves,	in	what
phases	it	moves,	what	turns	it	takes,	what	colors	it	takes.
Because	of	the	word	`Hindu'	the	land	of	the	Hindus	became	Hindustan,	and	the
religion	 became	Hindudharma,	Hindu	 religion.	 And	 from	 the	Hunas,	 invaders
used	 to	 be	 continually	 coming.	The	 country	was	 so	 rich	 that	 another	 group	of
invaders,	Mongols	 from	Mongolia...	who	were	 the	most	 terrible	 invaders,	who
produced	 the	Tamerlane,	 and	Genghis	Khan,	 the	most	 terrible	of	men.	 In	 their
language	--	now	it	had	become	established	because	of	the	Hunas	--	the	name	of
the	 Sindhu	 became	 Hindu,	 the	 land	 became	 Hindustan,	 the	 people	 became
Hindus.	 They	 did	 not	 have	 any	 sound	 in	 their	 alphabet	 for	 `h',	 for	 `ha'	 --	 the
closest	 for	 `h'	 was	 ì'.	 They	 could	 not	 pronounce	 Hindu,	 they	 could	 only
pronounce,	Indu.
It	looks	close:	Hindu-Indu.	And	because	of	the	Mongols,	the	river	became	Indu
and	the	country	became	India	--	from	Indu	--	and	the	people	became	Indians.	But
it	all	happened	because	of	that	river	which	has	a	name,	accidentally.	But	Hindus
themselves	 don't	 have	 a	 name,	 neither	 do	 they	 have	 a	 name	 for	 their	 country.
They	have	been	 always	 there,	 their	 religion	has	been	 always	 there.	They	don't
know	any	beginning	of	their	religion.
So	it	seems	it	has	grown	very	naturally	with	the	natural	man.	Buddhism	was	the
first	 effort	 on	 man's	 own	 part	 to	 create	 a	 religion.	 That's	 why	 I	 say	 Buddha
should	 be	 the	 demarcating	 line;	 because	 what	 was	 natural	 up	 to	 then	 became
something	 man-made,	 manufactured.	 And	 now	 religion	 is	 manufactured,	 so
many	religions	are	manufactured.
Nature	 is	 one,	 but	 once	you	 start	manufacturing	 then	you	 can	manufacture,	 as
you	 like,	 different	 religions,	 different	 creeds,	 different	 cults,	 different
philosophies.	Buddha	certainly	stands	just	in	the	middle	of	this	change.
If	you	understand	me,	my	whole	effort	is	to	reverse	the	whole	process.	Man	does
not	need	man-made	religions;	man	simply	needs	to	be	natural.	Nature	should	be
the	 only	 religion,	 and	 then	 there	 will	 not	 be	 divisions	 of	 Hindus	 and
Mohammedans	and	Christians	and	Buddhists.
Nature	does	not	make	any	divisions;	it	is	undivided	and	it	is	one.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
DURING	THE	TIME	WITH	YOU	IN	OREGON,	I	SOMETIMES	FELT	THAT
LEAVING	 WAS	 AN	 ESCAPE,	 A	 MISTAKE	 --	 LIKE	 REMOVING	 THE
KETTLE
FROM	THE	FIRE	 JUST	BEFORE	THE	WATER	BOILED.	NOW	LOOK	AT
US:	WE'VE	ALL	HAD	TO	LEAVE,	AND	YOU	ARE	CONTINENTS	AWAY.
YET	THIS
TIME	SEEMS	EVEN	RICHER	--	A	TIME	WHEN	YOU	ARE	OFFERING
SOMETHING	VITAL,	NOT	TO	BE	MISSED...	PERHAPS	THE	CHANCE	TO
BE	"AT
HOME"	EVERYWHERE.	HOW	TO	SUMMON	YOU,	AND	HOW	TO	SLIP
QUIETLY
INTO	OUR	HEARTS	AS	WE	DRIVE	CABS	AND	BULLDOZERS	 IN	THE
"OUTSIDE
WORLD?"
Love	knows	no	distances	in	time	or	in	space.
So	wherever	my	people	are,	whatever	they	are	doing,	if	their	heart	beats	in	tune
with	me,	they	are	with	me.	Then	all	distances	of	time	and	space	disappear.
The	 question	 is	 of	 the	 hearts	 beating	 in	 the	 same	 rhythm.	 That	 is	 the	 only
closeness.
It	was	easy	to	miss	in	the	commune	because	I	was	so	close	to	you.	It	was	easy	to
forget	me.	I	was	too	obvious.	It	was	easy	to	take	me	for	granted.	But	now	that
you	 are	 scattered	 all	 over	 the	 world,	 by	 the	 courtesy	 of	 the	 American
government,	we	have	made	the	whole	world	our	commune.
There	are	great	distances	 in	space,	but	 this	will	help	you;	 it	will	not	be	a	 loss.
This	will	make	you	 remember	me	more.	This	will	 remind	you	of	me	more.	 In
your	silent	moments,	 in	your	 loving	moments,	 just	playing	on	your	guitar,	you
will	find	me	sitting	by	your	side.	Just	in	moments	when	you	are	silent,	peaceful,
you	will	start	hearing	my	heartbeat	too.
Everything	 that	 happens	 is	 good,	 is	 for	 the	 better,	 because	 existence	 goes	 on
evolving.	 If	 we	 remember	 that	 existence	 is	 continuously	 in	 evolution,	 then
whatever	is	happening...	at	the	time	it	may	seem	disastrous,	but	finally	you	will
find	 that	 it	 was	 not	 so;	 it	 has	 brought	 new	 flowers,	 it	 has	 created	 new
experiences.
I	 know	 there	 are	 continents	 between	me	 and	 you,	 but	 those	 continents	 cannot
separate;	 they	 only	 join.	 They	 are	 not	 walls,	 they	 are	 bridges.	 And	 a	 bridge,
however	long,	is	a	bridge;	and	a	wall,	however	short,	is	a	wall.
My	 own	 experience	 has	 always	 been	 that	 everything	 that	 has	 happened	 has
always	proved	to	be	good.	If	we	can	trust,	then	even	at	the	time	of	its	happening
we	will	not	be	 sad,	we	will	be	celebrating.	And	our	 sannyasins	did	well,	 even
though	the	most	powerful	government	was	destroying	a	small	commune	of	five
thousand	 people	 --	which	 proves	 that	 they	were	 afraid.	Out	 of	 fear	 they	were
acting,	but	our	people	danced	and	sang	and	celebrated,	knowing	that	out	of	this
chaos	some	beautiful	stars	will	be	born.
The	American	government's	 fear	has	now	become	world	a	phobia.	Now	every
government	is	afraid...	not	of	a	commune;	the	question	of	a	commune	does	not
arise.
They	are	afraid	even	of	me	landing	at	their	airport...	not	a	question	of	entering	in
their	country!	Fear	 seems	 to	be	unlimited.	What	can	 I	do	 if	 I	 just	 land	at	 their
airport?
England	 would	 not	 allow	 me	 to	 rest	 overnight	 in	 the	 airport,	 and	 in	 the
parliament	 they	had	 to	discuss	 it,	my	being	 in	 the	 country.	And	 that	was	 a	 lie
because	I	was	only	asking	to	stay	overnight	in	the	lounge	of	the	airport	--	which
it	is	meant	for.	I	had	my	jet	plane	standing	at	the	airport	so	that	in	the	morning
we	could	leave,	thinking	that	they	may	say,
"The	 lounge	 is	 only	 for	 first	 class	 passengers;	 now	 how	 can	we	 decide	 about
your	jet,	which	class	is	it?"	So	we	purchased	tickets	for	first	class	traveling	too,
not	giving	them	any	chance.	And	that's	actually	what	happened.
They	said,	 "The	 jet	 is	okay,	 that	 it	 is	 ready,	but	how	can	we	be	certain...?	The
lounge	 is	 only	 for	 first	 class	 passengers."	 So	 we	 produced	 our	 first	 class
passenger	tickets,	saying	that,	"For	your	satisfaction	we	have	tickets	also."
Then	they	disappeared	and	came	back	about	half	an	hour	later	and	said,	"There
is	some	bylaw	of	the	airport	that	we	cannot	allow	you	to	stay	the	whole	night	--	a
few	hours	is	okay."
I	asked	the	man,	"What	do	you	mean	by	a	few	hours?	And	how	do	you	decide
that	three	hours	is	enough,	or	four	hours	is	enough,	or	twelve	hours	is	enough?
And	where	is	that	bylaw	of	your	airport?"	The	man	disappeared	and	never	came
back.
Another	man	 came	 back,	 and	 he	 said,	 "You	 have	 to	 understand	 it,	 that	 if	 you
want	to	wait	the	whole	night	you	have	to	wait	in	the	jail.	We	cannot	take	the	risk
of	leaving	you	free	in	the	airport	lounge."	And	I	had	to	stay	in	the	jail.	And	in	the
parliament,	 the	 prime	minister	 answered	 the	 questions	 and	 said	 that	my	 being
there	was	dangerous	for	the	country,	for	the	country's	safety.
An	American	establishment	 for	nuclear	weapons	 in	England	 to	bomb	Libya	 is
not	 dangerous;	 my	 just	 staying	 overnight	 in	 the	 airport	 lounge,	 from	where	 I
cannot	 go	 into	 the	 country	 by	 any	 way,	 is	 dangerous.	 You	 can	 see	 these
politicians	are	made	of	straw.
And	the	thing	has	gone	around	the	world:	now	the	whole	European	parliament,
all	the	countries	of	Europe,	are	deciding	together	that	I	cannot	land	my	jet	at	any
airport;	they	will	not	refuel	it.	And	then	small	countries	are	bound	to	follow.
Now	 the	Bahamas	have	decided	 that	 I	 cannot	enter;	other	countries	 --	Panama
and	 two	or	 three	other	 countries	near	Panama	 --	 afraid	 that	 I	may	come	 there,
have	decided.	Strange,	that	they	are	afraid	of	a	single	man	so	much.	Soon	I	think
they	will	be	deciding	in	the	U.N.	that	this	man	should	not	be	allowed	to	stand	on
earth	anywhere.
But	I	take	it	as	a	good	sign.	It	means	they	have	recognized	one	fact;	that	what	I
am	saying	 they	cannot	 refute,	 that	what	 I	am	saying	 is	dangerous	 to	 their	very
roots.	And	 if	 their	 roots	 are	 so	weak,	 do	you	 think	 they	 are	 going	 to	 survive?
Even	without	me	they	will	die;	even	without	me	they	have	to	die.
Their	fear	shows	death.
And	 all	 these	 governments	 are	 lying	 without	 any	 evidence	 of	 anything!	 Now
they	 are	 spreading	 the	 rumor	 around	 the	world	 that	 they	 have	 nothing	 against
me,	 but	 the	 people	who	 are	with	me,	 three	 of	 them,	 are	 criminals.	They	 don't
give	the	names,	of	the	three	people	who	are	criminals	and	what	crime	they	have
committed.	Some	evidence	should	be	proved.	And	even	if	they	are	criminals,	I
cannot	 be	 punished	 for	 their	 crimes.	But	 just	 because	 they	 have	 traveled	with
me,	I	cannot	be	allowed	to	remain	in	a	country.
In	Spain,	 the	government	 took	one	month	 to	decide:	 the	parliament	 discussed,
the	 cabinet	 meetings	 went	 on	 for	 seven	 days,	 and	 finally	 they	 decided	 --	 the
president	 and	 the	 prime	 minister,	 all	 were	 involved	 in	 it	 --	 that	 I	 should	 be
allowed	 in.	 And	 then	 came	 a	 letter	 from	 the	 German	 government	 that	 three
criminals	 are	 traveling	 with	 me.	 They	 called	 my	 secretary,	 Hasya,	 and	 told
her,"We	 don't	 have	 anything	 against	 Osho,	 but	 from	 the	 German	 government
there	is	tremendous	pressure	that	three	criminals	are	with	you."
She	 asked,	 "Who	 are	 the	 three	 criminals,	 and	 what	 crimes	 have	 they
committed?"	 By	 insistently	 asking,	 we	 have	 come	 to	 know	 only	 that	 one	 is
German,	 one	 is	 Canadian,	 one	 is	 American.	 Strangely	 enough,	 there	 is	 no
German	in	the	group,	so	one	third	of	the	information	is	absolutely	wrong.	There
are	 a	 few	 Americans,	 but	 none	 of	 them	 are	 criminals,	 and	 none	 of	 them
remembers	that	he	has	committed	any	crime!	One	is	a	Canadian:	he	is	shocked
by	hearing	it	--	that	he	is	a	criminal.	There	are	no	charges	against	him.
Just	today	I	have	received	a	letter	from	the	U.S.	Supreme	Court	in	Oregon.	They
could	not	prove	 the	case	 for	which	 they	were	harassing	me	 for	 twelve	days	 in
jail;	they	failed	to	prove	the	case	in	North	Carolina.	The	U.S.	attorney	has	had	to
accept	in	the	court	that,
"We	have	not	been	able	 to	prove	anything;	still,	we	want	everybody	else	 to	be
released	on	bail	but	Osho	should	not	be	released	on	bail."
This	must	be	something	unprecedented!	They	have	not	proved	anything	against
me.	Why	should	I	not	be	granted	bail?	The	reasoning	was	that	I	was	capable	of
jumping	 the	 bail,	 whatever	 the	 bail	 would	 be	 --	 ten	million	 dollars	 or	 twenty
million	dollars.	Does	 it	mean	nobody	 in	America	who	has	money	will	ever	be
allowed	bail?
Strange!	The	people	who	don't	have	money	cannot	be	allowed	bail	because	from
where	will	they	get	money	for	bail?	And	the	people	who	have	money	cannot	be
allowed	 bail	 because	 they	 can	 jump.	 So	 bail	 is	 simply	 out	 of	 the	 question	 in
America.
Simple	logic	can	show	the	stupidities.	Then	finally	they	had	to	drop	the	case,	but
they	had	taken	three	persons	on	bail	--	Jayesh,	Devaraj,	Vivek	--	at	twenty-five
thousand	dollars	each.	But	you	can	see	the	cunningness!	If	governments	are	so
cunning	 then	 I	 don't	 think	 criminals	 are	 doing	 anything	bad.	Governments	 are
criminals.
The	 letter	 that	 I	have	received	 today	says	 that	because	 these	 three	people	have
refused	 to	 appear	 as	 witnesses,	 we	 are	 dropping	 the	 case.	 These	 three	 people
have	 never	 received	 any	 summons	 to	 appear.	Now,	 this	 is	 simply	 strange!	We
were	waiting	 that	 these	people	 should	be	 sent	 for	 any	day;	 our	 attorneys	were
waiting	there.	They	said,	"You	give	us	the	time	and	the	date,	and	we	can	call	our
people	and	they	will	be	here."	But	because	they	had	dropped	the	case,	now	they
were	afraid	that	they	would	have	to	return	the	seventy-five	thousand	dollars.
To	keep	 that	money,	 this	 letter	has	been	sent:	Because	 these	 three	people	have
not	appeared,	their	bail	money	is	to	be	taken	up	by	the	U.S.	government.
And	 they	 have	 confiscated	my	 things,	which	 they	 had	 said	would	 be	 released
when	 I	am	released	 --	 they	were	not	given	back.	Then	 they	 told	my	attorneys,
"After	three	days	we	will	be	releasing	them."	They	were	not	released;	then	seven
days...	months	have	passed	and	they	go	on	postponing.
Now	 the	 case	 is	 dropped.	 Even	 the	 bail	 money	 has	 been	 transferred	 to	 the
government	 account.	 What	 about	 my	 personal	 things?	 My	 attorneys	 are
continually	going	to	them,	saying,	"Decide	something	about	his	personal	things."
They	want	to	divide	them	half	and	half	--	half	will	taken	by	the	government,	and
half	will	be	given	to	me.	Strange!	For	what	should	the	government	get	half?	And
we	were	ready	even	for	that.
I	 told	the	attorneys,	"Let	them	have	half.	Half	you	take,	and	then	we	will	fight
for	the	other	half."	But	they	simply	say	--	they	don't	do	anything.	Perhaps	some
other	 day	 I	may	 receive	 a	 letter	 in	which	 all	 those	 things	 are	 confiscated	 and
taken	by	the	government	--
for	some	reason	they	can	find	or	invent,	because	my	people	did	not	appear	in	the
court	on	the	hearing	day.
And	there	has	never	been	a	hearing,	there	has	never	been	a	hearing	day;	the	case
was	dropped	a	few	weeks	ago.	We	have	been	informed	by	the	attorneys	that	the
case	has	been	dropped,	knowing	that	they	have	nothing	to	prove	in	it.
It	seems	on	the	surface,	with	all	these	things,	that	they	are	destroying	my	work,
destroying	my	message.	But	they	are	wrong.	This	is	the	way	--	not	of	destroying
any	truth
--	this	is	the	way	the	truth	enters	into	people's	minds,	gets	their	sympathy,	their
heart.
So	wherever	you	are,	it	does	not	matter.	Just	your	heart	has	to	beat	with	me.	If	it
stops	beating	with	me,	then	there	is	distance.
Now	look	at	Chetana,	sitting	there	in	the	corner:	now	she	is	almost	sitting	on	the
moon.
The	 reason	 is	 that	 she	 had	 asked	 a	 question.	 She	 herself	 had	 asked,	 "If	 I	 am
wrong,	please	nudge	me	a	little."	I	nudged	her	a	little	and	said,	"You	are	wrong,"
and	 that	 has	hurt	 her	 so	much	 that	 since	 that	 day	 she	has	become	a	miserable
person.	I	have	never	seen	her	in	any	misery	before.	She	has	always	been	light,
joyful.	But	since	that	day,	because	I	said,
"You	are	 in	a	wrong	 space..."	And	 she	herself	had	asked,	 "Nudge	me	a	 little."
And	I	really	nudged	her	a	little...	just	a	little,	and	she	has	gone	so	far	away;	she	is
sitting	on	the	moon.
Remember	one	 thing,	when	you	ask	a	question	be	ready	for	any	answer.	Don't
expect	a	certain	answer	that	you	would	like;	otherwise	there	is	not	going	to	be
any	learning,	there	is	not	going	to	be	any	growth.	If	I	say	you	are	not	right	at	a
certain	point,	try	to	look	at	it.
I	will	not	be	saying	it	just	to	hurt	you.	If	I	am	saying	it,	I	mean	it.
And	if	you	start	feeling	hurt	by	small	things,	then	it	will	become	impossible	for
me	to	work.	Then	I	have	to	see	what	you	would	like.	Then	I	will	not	be	a	help,
then	I	will	not	be	a	master	to	you.
So	you	can	be	here,	but	if	your	heart	is	not	beating	with	me,	you	are	far	away.
And	vice	versa.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	Going	just	with	his	flute	and	a	bottle	of	wine	26	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604260
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO28
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
88
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	CARRIED	THIS	SUTRA	YOU	SPOKE	ON	IN
POONA	WITH	ME	FOR	MANY	YEARS.	IT	READS:
THE	BUDDHA	SAID,
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	GOOD	MAN
THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	HUNDRED	BAD	MEN.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	WHO	OBSERVES
THE	FIVE	PRECEPTS	OF	BUDDHA
THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	THOUSAND	GOOD	MEN.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	SROTAPANNA
THAN	TO	FEED	TEN	THOUSAND	OF	THOSE
WHO	OBSERVE	THE	FIVE	PRECEPTS	OF	BUDDHA.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	SKRIDAGAMIN
THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	MILLION	OF	SROTAPANNAS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	ANAGAMIN
THAN	TO	FEED	TEN	MILLIONS	OF	SKRIDAGAMINS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	ARHAT
THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	HUNDRED	MILLIONS	OF	ANAGAMINS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	PRATYAK	BUDDHA
THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	BILLION	OF	ARHATS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	OF	THE	BUDDHAS
EITHER	OF	THE	PRESENT	OR	OF	THE	PAST	OR	OF	THE	FUTURE
THAN	TO	FEED	TEN	BILLIONS	OF	PRATYAK	BUDDHAS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	WHO	IS	ABOVE
KNOWLEDGE,	ONE-SIDEDNESS,	DISCIPLINE,	AND
ENLIGHTENMENT	THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	HUNDRED	BILLIONS	OF
BUDDHAS	OF	PAST,	PRESENT,	OR	FUTURE.
IT	SAYS	SO	MUCH	ABOUT	YOUR	HEIGHT	AND	OUR	DARKNESS,	AND
HAS
PRODUCED	 TWO	 FEELINGS	 IN	 ME:	 THE	 BLESSING	 AND	 JOY	 OF
BEING	IN
YOUR	MAGNIFICENCE,	 AND	 THE	 ARDUOUSNESS	 OF	 HOW	 FAR	WE
HAVE	TO
TRAVEL	JUST	TO	HAVE	A	TASTE	OF	YOUR	CONSCIOUSNESS.
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	SPEAK	ON	THIS	AGAIN?
One	of	 the	most	 fundamental	 things	 to	 be	 understood	 is	 that	 the	 distances	 are
only	dream	phenomenon,	 they	do	not	 exist	 in	 reality.	One	may	be	 asleep	very
lightly,	one	may	be	asleep	very	deeply,	one	may	be	almost	in	a	coma.
There	are	distances...	 If	you	want	 to	wake	 them	up,	 then	 the	 first,	who	 is	 in	 a
very	light	sleep,	half	awake,	half	asleep,	can	be	awakened	soon;	but	every	one	of
them	can	be	awakened.	It	is	only	a	question	of	the	intensity	of	the	effort	needed
to	 awaken	 from	 the	 outside,	 and	 the	 intensity	 needed	 to	 be	 awake	 from	 the
inside.
You	all	must	have	felt	moments	of	nightmare	when	you	want	to	wake	up	but	you
cannot	move.	And	then,	in	a	minute,	you	wake	up.	It	looks	so	strange	that	just	a
moment	before	it	looked	impossible	even	to	open	your	eyes	or	move	your	hands,
and	after	just	one	minute	you	are	fully	awake.
The	distance	between	me	and	you	is	only	a	dream	distance,	so	there	is	no	need	to
feel	any	sadness,	no	need	to	feel	 that	 it	 is	going	to	be	a	very	arduous	and	long
journey.	It	is	a	very	simple	and	very	natural	phenomenon.	If	you	can	relax	--	and
nothing	can	be	easier	than	relaxation	--	things	will	start	happening	on	their	own.
About	 the	 sutra	of	Gautam	Buddha...	 it	 is	 symbolic.	Feeding	somebody	means
nursing	somebody,	respecting	somebody,	loving	somebody,	doing	something	for
somebody	--	out	of	compassion,	kindness,	or	love,	or	respect.	So	food	has	not	to
be	taken	literally.
The	sutra	says:	IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	GOOD	MAN	THAN	TO	FEED
ONE
HUNDRED	 BAD	 MEN.	 Who	 is	 the	 good	 man?	 The	 good	 man	 is	 one	 who
spontaneously	 acts	 in	 the	 right	way.	Remember	 the	word	 `spontaneously'.	The
good	man	is	not	one	who	makes	efforts	to	act	in	a	certain	way	that	is	accepted	by
the	society	in	which	he	is	born	as	good...	it	may	not	be	good.	There	are	hundreds
of	societies	in	the	world,	hundreds	of	civilizations	have	existed,	and	there	is	not
a	single	thing	that	has	not	been	either	praised	as	good	by	someone	or	condemned
as	bad	by	somebody	else.
Now,	to	be	naked	the	Jainas	will	say	is	a	good	act	--	it	shows	that	the	man	has
renounced	the	world	completely.	But	to	be	naked	according	to	any	other	society
will	be	considered	bad,	even	sick.	According	to	Sigmund	Freud,	the	naked	man
simply	wants	to	show	his	naked	body	to	others;	it	is	a	very	perverted,	precarious,
satisfying	sexuality	--	 it	 is	perversion.	And	he	has	given	a	certain	name	to	 this
sickness:	exhibitionism.
So	it	is	not	a	question	to	be	decided	by	the	outside	morality.	The	decision	has	to
be	according	to	your	spontaneity.	Whatever	you	do	out	of	your	heart	--	so	it	 is
not	a	reaction	but	a	response	--	that	act	is	good.
Buddha	says,	IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	GOOD	MAN	--	because	it	is	very
difficult	 even	 to	 find	 a	 good	man,	 a	man	of	 spontaneity,	 a	man	whose	 actions
arise	out	of	his	heart
--	 THAN	TO	 FEED	ONE	HUNDRED	BAD	MEN.	As	 far	 as	 the	 bad	man	 is
concerned,	everybody	who	is	acting	in	sleep,	unconsciously,	is	bad.	The	bad	and
good	are	not	concerned	with	the	act;	they	are	concerned	with	the	consciousness
through	 which	 they	 have	 been	 done.	 Spontaneous	 consciousness,	 a	 little
alertness,	or	unconsciousness...	the	act	may	be	perhaps	the	same,	but	its	quality
changes	by	the	touch	of	the	man	who	is	doing	it.
Buddha	is	saying	that	taking	care	of	one	hundred	sleepy	men,	unconscious,	not
knowing	who	they	are,	not	knowing	why	they	are,	not	knowing	where	they	are
going,	for	what	they	are	going,	they	are	just	part	of	the	crowd,	they	are	not	yet
men,	they	are	sheep...
Buddha	says	it	is	better	to	be	respectful	to	the	spontaneous,	alert	man.
I	 have	 to	 emphasize	 the	 word	 `respect',	 because	 ordinarily	 it	 simply	 means
honor.	But	 the	 root	meaning	of	 the	word	 `respect'	 is	 `re-spect'	 --	 a	man	whom
you	would	like	to	see	again	and	again;	a	man	who	somehow	touches	your	heart,
has	a	magnetic	impact	on	you,	so	that	you	want	to	look	at	him	again	and	again.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	WHO	OBSERVES	THE	FIVE	PRECEPTS	OF
BUDDHA	 THAN	 TO	 FEED	 ONE	 THOUSAND	 GOOD	 MEN.	 Buddha	 is
simply	giving	you	the	vast	expanse	of	consciousness,	its	responses,	and	how	you
have	to	behave	--
because	your	behavior	is	going	to	be	a	transformation	to	you.	The	five	precepts
of	 Buddha	 are	 in	 a	 way	 very	 simple,	 if	 they	 are	 done	 exactly	 according	 to
Buddha's	 teaching;	 otherwise	 they	 become	 self-torture.	 And	 he	 says,	 IT	 IS
BETTER	TO	RESPECT
ONE	 WHO	 OBSERVES	 THE	 FIVE	 PRECEPTS	 OF	 BUDDHA	 THAN	 TO
FEED	ONE
THOUSAND	GOOD	MEN.
The	good	man	acts	spontaneously,	but	the	man	with	five	precepts	has	a	certain
responsibility	with	his	spontaneity,	has	a	certain	goal	with	his	spontaneity,	has	a
certain	very	 clear-cut	 vision	with	his	 spontaneity.	He	knows	what	he	 is	 doing,
why	he	is	doing	it	and	he	knows	what	is	going	to	be	the	result	of	it.	He	is	acting
very	consciously.	The	five	precepts	are	simple,	but	awareness	has	to	be	the	base
of	 it...	 and	 it	 has	 to	 be,	 because	Buddha	 is	 saying,	 IT	 IS	BETTER	TO	FEED
ONE	WHO	OBSERVES	THE	FIVE
PRECEPTS	OF	BUDDHA	THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	THOUSAND	GOOD	MEN.
One	 thousand	 good	men,	with	 all	 their	 spontaneity,	 he	 is	 comparing	with	 one
man.
The	five	precepts:	The	first	is	nonviolence;	whatever	the	situation,	he	should	not
act	in	a	violent	way.	His	response	should	always	be	nonviolent,	because	we	are
part	of	one	existence.	Whomsoever	you	are	hurting,	you	are	hurting	yourself	in
the	long	run.	Today	you	may	not	realize	it,	but	one	day	when	you	will	become
more	aware,	then	you	will	say,
"My	 God!	 This	 wound	 was	 inflicted	 by	 me	 --	 upon	 myself."	 You	 had	 hurt
somebody	else	thinking	that	people	are	different.	Nobody	is	different.
This	whole	existence	is	one	cosmic	unity.
Out	of	this	understanding	comes	nonviolence.
The	 second	 is	 non-possessiveness.	 If	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 one,	 and	 if	 the
existence	 goes	 on	 taking	 care	 of	 trees,	 of	 animals,	 of	mountains,	 of	 oceans	 --
from	the	smallest	blade	of	grass	to	the	biggest	star	--	then	it	will	take	care	of	you
too.	Why	be	possessive?
Possessiveness	shows	simply	one	thing:	that	you	can't	trust	existence;	you	have
to	 arrange	 separate	 security	 for	 yourself,	 safety	 for	 yourself.	 You	 cannot	 trust
existence.
Non-possessiveness	is	basically	trust	in	existence.
There	is	no	need	to	possess,	because	the	whole	is	already	ours.
The	third	is	non-stealing.	If	it	is	one	cosmos,	to	steal	is	simply	as	foolish	as...	I
have	 heard	 that	 one	 pick-pocket	 sometimes	 used	 to	 have	 difficulty	 in	 finding
people,	to	pick	their	pockets.	But	he	was	so	habituated,	and	it	was	so	difficult	for
him	 to	 accept	 the	 fact	 that	 he	 had	not	 been	 able	 to	 do	 anything	 today,	 that	 he
would	pick	his	own	pocket!	People	can	deceive	themselves	that	way.
I	have	heard	about	one	man	who	went	in	the	evening	to	the	fisherman's	shop	and
said,	"I	want	that	fish.	You	throw	it,	and	I	will	catch	it."
The	man	said,	"What	is	the	need	of	throwing	it?	I	can	give	it	to	you."
He	said,	"No,	you	have	to	throw	it	and	I	will	catch	it	--	because	I	never	want	to
lie.	And	when	 I	go	home	my	wife	 is	going	 to	ask,	 `Where	have	you	been?'"	 I
have	 been	 catching	 fish,	 but	 I	 could	 not	 catch	 any.	 And	 this	 one	 I	 will	 have
certainly	caught.	I	have	not	purchased	it;	you	have	thrown	it	and	I	have	caught	it.
So	I	can	say	with	a	straight	face,
`This	 is	my	catch	 --	a	beautiful	 fish.'	But	 I	cannot	 lie.	That's	why	you	have	 to
throw	it,	and	I	have	to	catch	it."
In	fact	that	is	what	we	are	doing.	It	is	all	ours	and	we	are	in	subtle	ways	stealing.
It	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	steal	money	or	you	have	to	steal	things;	you
can	steal	thoughts,	you	can	steal	words.	And	all	your	knowledge	is	stolen.	It	 is
not	something	that	you	have	discovered,	 it	 is	something	you	have	picked	up	--
from	here,	from	there.	And	then,	without	thinking	twice,	with	a	straight	face,	you
say	to	the	world,	"This	is	my	opinion."	It	is	not	your	opinion!	You	are	not	even
aware	of	yourself	--	what	opinion	can	you	have?	So	all	this	is	part	of	stealing.
The	fourth	is	no-taste.	It	became	a	torture,	but	it	was	not	meant	so.	A	man	of	the
sensibilities	of	Gautam	Buddha	cannot	make	it	a	self-torture.	His	idea	of	no-taste
was	simply	not	to	hanker	after	taste.	Food	is	for	nourishment	of	the	body;	taste	is
secondary	--
don't	make	 it	primary.	And	secondly,	his	disciples	were	all	monks;	 they	had	 to
beg.	And	he	was	a	very	careful	man.	He	never	wanted	his	people	 to	become	a
burden	on	the	society.	If	they	start	asking,	"We	want	this,	we	want	that...	please
prepare	this	dish	for	tomorrow	when	I	come	to	beg,"	then	they	will	be	heavy	and
burdensome.
He	 made	 it	 a	 rule:	 don't	 ask	 from	 just	 one	 house.	 Your	 one	 meal	 --	 and	 the
Buddhist	monk	was	to	eat	only	one	meal	--	your	one	meal	has	to	come	from	five
houses.	He	was	simply	trying	to	spread	the	burden,	otherwise...	he	was	moving
with	ten	thousand	bhikkhus,	his	disciples,	wherever	he	was	going,	and	it	would
have	 been	 really	 troublesome	 if	 the	 thousand	 bhikkhus	 had	 come	 into	 a	 small
town	 --	 which	 may	 not	 have	 had	 the	 population	 of	 ten	 thousand	 --	 and	 they
started	asking	for	their	preferences.	The	poor	people	of	the	town	would	be	in	a
difficulty.
Buddha's	whole	effort	about	no-taste	was	 that	you	should	never	be	unwelcome
wherever	 you	 go.	 People	 should	 know	 that	 out	 of	 compassion	 you	 go	 to	 five
houses	--	just	for	a	single	meal.	He	denied	more	than	one	meal.	It	looks	to	us	that
it	is	asceticism,	that	it	is	self-torture.	Even	in	the	poorest	countries,	people	need
at	least	two	meals.	In	richer	countries	like	America	people	are	eating	five	times,
or	 as	 many	 times	 as	 they	 go	 and	 visit	 the	 fridge...	 the	 whole	 day.	 It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	times.
There	are	thirty	million	people	in	America	today	who	are	dying	because	of	over-
eating.
They	know	that	this	over-eating	is	killing	them,	but	they	cannot	stop	it.	It	is	just
like	being	an	alcoholic;	they	have	become	so	addicted,	that	they	need	something.
If	they	have	nothing	then	at	least	they	chew	gum,	so	their	mouth	goes	on	and	on.
In	 a	way	 it	 is	 good;	 otherwise	 they	would	 talk	 --	 yakkety	 yak,	 yakkety	 yak	 --
because	somehow	they	have	to	go	on	using	their	mouth.	Their	 talking	is	 just	a
substitute.	Chewing	gum	keeps	them	silent	at	least!
Buddha's	insight	is	really	deep,	because	modern	experiments,	particularly	by	the
psychologist	Delgado,	have	proved	it	beyond	doubt	that	with	one	meal	per	day
man's	life	can	be	doubled.	The	more	you	eat	the	less	you	will	live;	the	less	you
eat	 the	 longer	 you	will	 live.	He	was	 trying	 one	 experiment...	 for	 thousands	 of
times	he	tried,	then	he	gave	his	conclusion.
He	had	two	rows	of	white	rats.	One	row	was	given	as	much	food	as	they	wanted
--
American	way.	The	food	was	always	available;	they	could	eat	as	much	as	they
want.	 And	 the	 second	 row,	 the	 way	 of	 the	 bhikku,	 had	 just	 one	 meal	 --
nourishing,	complete	for	the	body.	And	thousands	of	times	the	experiment	was
tried	and	always	the	American	style	rats	died	half	way.	The	Buddhist	bhikkhus
lived	double	the	time	of	the	Americans.
So	 there	 Buddha	 had	 a	 deep	 insight:	 eat	 one	 time	 and	 don't	 hanker	 for	 taste;
otherwise	you	would	like	to	eat	many	times.
It	is	known	about	Nero	that	he	used	to	eat	so	many	times	that	he	had	to	keep	four
doctors	with	him;	so	when	he	eats	they	will	help	him	vomit	everything,	so	he	can
eat	again.	 Just	madness...	but	he	was	simply	hankering	 for	 taste.	And	 that	was
the	only	way;	otherwise	you	cannot	go	on	eating	the	whole	day.	He	was	eating
from	 the	 morning	 till	 night	 when	 he	 went	 to	 bed	 --	 he	 was	 either	 eating	 or
vomiting.	 And	 the	 doctors'	 only	 purpose	 was	 to	 help	 him	 vomit	 easily	 so	 he
could	eat	again.
Buddha's	insight	is	right.	It	is	not	self-torture.	It	is	simply	a	profound	insight	into
health,	longevity	--	and	perhaps	sooner	or	later	science	will	like	everybody	to	eat
only	once.	Of	course	the	food	should	be	sufficient,	should	have	all	that	is	needed
by	the	body,	but	only	once.	It	looks	to	us	a	little	difficult,	but	it	is	only	a	question
of	habit.	In	Africa	there	are	many	tribes	who	have	never	eaten	--	for	thousands	of
years	 --	 more	 than	 once	 a	 day.	 They	 were	 simply	 surprised	 when	 Christian
missionaries	reached	Africa.	They	could	not	believe	it:	they	start	with	tea	in	bed,
then	 breakfast,	 then	 lunch,	 then	 coffee	 break,	 then	 supper,	 then	 dinner...	 and
snacks	here	and	there.	They	could	not	believe	it,	"What	are	these	people	doing?
Are	they	living	or	simply	eating?"	--	because	they	had	eaten	only	once,	and	they
were	far	more	healthy	and	they	lived	longer.
They	are	still	eating	once.	Their	bodies	are	more	proportionate,	they	live	longer,
they	run	faster	--	just	like	animals,	like	deer	they	can	run.	And	their	bodies	have
just	 the	 proportion	 that	 people	 are	 trying	 to	 get	 in	 thousands	 of	 gymnasiums
around	the	world.
They	have	it	without	any	effort,	just	by	a	single	meal.
Non-violence,	non-possessiveness,	non-stealing,	no-taste...	and	the	fifth	precept
is	compassion.
We	live	 in	passion	--	our	 lives	are	passionate.	Passion	is	always	a	 turmoil:	ups
and	downs,	one	day	good,	another	day	bad,	day	follows	night...	In	the	same	way
the	life	of	passion	is	continuously	going	into	pleasure,	into	pain	--	and	they	are
balancing	each	other.
Compassion	 is	 not	 to	 live	 passionately,	 but	 to	 live	 calmly,	 quietly,	 silently.
Compassion	can	be	without	ups	and	downs	--	a	deep	serenity.	Whatever	happens
on	 the	 outside	 does	 not	 matter,	 but	 the	 center	 of	 your	 being	 remains	 still,
undisturbed.
So	Buddha	says,	IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	WHO	OBSERVES	THE	FIVE
PRECEPTS	OF	BUDDHA	THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	THOUSAND	GOOD	MEN.
IT	 IS	 BETTER	 TO	 FEED	 ONE	 SROTAPANNA	 THAN	 TO	 FEED	 TEN
THOUSAND
OF	THOSE	WHO	OBSERVE	THE	FIVE	PRECEPTS	OF	BUDDHA.
Srotapanna	is	a	very	beautiful	word.	It	means	"who	has	stepped	into	the	stream."
Literally,	srot	means	"the	source";	Srotapanna	means	"who	has	stepped	into	the
stream	which	 leads	 to	 the	 source."	He	 is	 no	 longer	 standing	 on	 the	 bank.	The
man	who	follows	the	five	precepts	may	be	still	standing	on	the	bank.
Before	 a	 srotapanna,	 Buddha	 says,	 TEN	 THOUSAND	 OF	 THOSE	 WHO
FOLLOW
THE	 FIVE	 PRECEPTS	 OF	 BUDDHA...	 One	 srotapanna	 is	 weightier,	 more
valuable.	He	has	risked	the	journey.	He	has	moved	from	the	bank	into	the	river;
he	is	ready	to	go	to	the	source.	He	has	taken	the	most	courageous	step	a	man	has
to	take,	ever	in	his	life.
The	bank	seems	to	be	so	safe,	and	you	can	make	it	so	cozy.	And	stepping	into	an
unknown	stream	--	no	one	knows	where	it	is	going;	it	is	certainly	going	into	the
unknown,	and	perhaps	ultimately	 into	 the	unknowable...	The	man	who	has	 the
courage	to	step	in,	that	srotapanna	is	better	to	feed	--	just	one	srotapanna	--	than
to	feed	ten	thousand	of	those	who	observe	the	five	precepts	of	Buddha.
IT	 IS	 BETTER	 TO	 FEED	 ONE	 SKRIDAGAMIN	 THAN	 TO	 FEED	 ONE
MILLION	OF
SROTAPANNAS.	One	million	 of	 srotapannas	 are	 nothing	 in	 comparison	with
one	skridagamin:	one	who	has	reached	the	source.	One	million	srotapannas	may
have	stepped
--	 but	 they	 may	 remain	 stuck	 there.	 Their	 first	 step	 may	 be	 their	 last	 step,
because	 the	 journey	 is	 going	 to	 become	more	 and	more	mysterious,	more	 and
more	unknowable,	more	and	more	beyond	their	minds	and	beyond	their	control.
So	many	will	step,	but	only	a	few	will	go	to	the	very	end.	One	who	reaches	to
the	end,	the	skridagamin,	he	is	equal	to	one	million	of	srotapannas.
IT	 IS	 BETTER	 TO	 FEED	 ONE	 ANAGAMIN	 THAN	 TO	 FEED	 TEN
MILLIONS	OF
SKRIDAGAMINS.	 Those	 who	 have	 reached	 the	 source	 are	 not	 necessarily
going	to	stay	there.	They	may	come	back.	Anagamin	means	"who	is	not	going	to
look	back"	--	coming	back	is	out	of	question.
The	 skridagamin	may	have	gone	 for	 strange	 reasons	 --	maybe	his	 ego:	he	 is	 a
strong	person;	when	the	weaker	ones	are	stepping	down	or	stopping,	he	will	go
to	the	very	end,	but	he	has	all	the	desires	in	him	--	which	can	be	fulfilled,	or	at
least	you	can	hope	for	them	to	be	fulfilled,	only	on	the	bank.	He	will	come	back.
He	cannot	remain	there	at	the	source.
Only	one	who	remains	at	the	source	and	does	not	come	back,	anagamin...	These
words	 are	 from	 the	 same	 root.	 Gamin	 means	 "going."	 The	 English	 word	 go
comes	from	the	same	root	as	the	Pali	word	gamin.	Anagamin	means	"one	who	is
not	going	back."	IT	IS
BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	ANAGAMIN	THAN	TO	FEED	TEN	MILLIONS	OF
SKRIDAGAMINS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	ARHAT	THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	HUNDRED
MILLIONS	 OF	 ANAGAMINS.	 Now	 things	 are	 a	 little	 more	 subtle.	 Arhat
means	"the	victorious."	Now	 there	 is	nothing	 for	him	 to	achieve;	he	has	come
home.	The	anagamin	has	come	to	the	source.	He	is	not	going	back,	but	there	are
weaknesses	 in	 him	 which	 do	 not	 allow	 him	 to	 be	 totally	 victorious.	 He	 has
reached	the	place	from	where	victory	is	possible.	He	is	not	going	back	--	but	he
is	not	going	ahead	either.
An	 arhat	 is	 one	who	 goes	 ahead	 of	 the	 anagamin.	 The	 anagamin	 becomes	 so
happy	with	the	source	that	he	has	reached	that	he	feels	that	this	is	all	there	is;	he
has	 arrived	 --	 and	 that's	 an	 illusion.	 There	 is	 much	 more.	 The	 arhat	 is	 not
satisfied	 --	 although	 it	 is	 very	 pleasant,	 nice.	 But	 he	 has	 not	 come	 on	 this
journey,	on	 this	pilgrimage	 to	 reach	a	pleasant	 state.	He	wants	 truth,	 and	he	 is
ready	to	lose	all	pleasures	--	even	this	spiritual	pleasure	of	being	at	the	source.
His	search	is	for	truth,	not	for	pleasure.	IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED
ONE	 ARHAT	 THAN	 TO	 FEED	 ONE	 HUNDRED	 MILLIONS	 OF
ANAGAMINS.
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED	ONE	PRATYAK	BUDDHA	THAN	TO	FEED	ONE
BILLION	OF	ARHATS.
Pratyak	 buddha	means	 "a	man	who	 has	 attained	 enlightenment."	 The	 arhat	 is
victorious	but	he	is	not	illuminated.	There	is	still	darkness	at	the	very	center	of
his	being.	A	pratyak	buddha	is	one	whose	whole	darkness	has	disappeared;	he	is
simply	light.	The	arhat	has	discovered	the	truth;	the	pratyak	buddha	has	become
it.
You	have	to	understand	the	difference.	One	has	discovered	it,	but	it	is	still	there
and	 he	 is	 separate	 from	 it.	 The	 pratyak	 buddha	 has	 become	 it.	 There	 is	 no
question	of	victory,	because	there	are	not	two;	hence	the	difference.	You	can	see:
IT	IS	BETTER	TO	FEED
ONE	PRATYAK	BUDDHA	THAN	TO	FEED	ONE	BILLION	OF	ARHATAS.
The	distance	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger.	IT	IS	BETTER	TO
FEED	ONE
OF	THE	BUDDHAS,	EITHER	OF	THE	PRESENT	OR	OF	THE	PAST	OR	OF
THE
FUTURE	THAN	TO	FEED	TEN	BILLIONS	OF	PRATYAK	BUDDHAS.
What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 pratyak	 buddhas	 and	 buddhas?	 The	 pratyak
buddha	is	one	who	has	become	enlightened,	but	he	never	becomes	a	master.	He
has	experienced	it,	but	he	cannot	explain	it.	Neither	is	he	interested	in	anybody
else,	or	in	sharing	his	experience	with	anybody	else.	He	has	the	same	status	as	a
buddha,	but	 the	difference	is	 that	 the	buddha	wants	to	share	it,	and	the	pratyak
buddha	 simply	keeps	 it	within	himself.	He	has	become	 the	 truth,	but	his	great
achievement	is	confined	only	to	himself.	A	buddha	works	hard,	against	all	kinds
of	oppositions,	difficulties,	 to	reach	people,	 to	reach	those	who	are	on	the	path
but	are	in	darkness.
The	story	about	Gautam	Buddha	is	that	when	he	reached	the	gates	of	nirvana	he
stood	there,	his	back	towards	the	gates.	The	gates	were	opened,	and	the	guards
wanted	him	to	enter.	They	were	ready	to	welcome	him	--	because	centuries	pass
and	then	once	in	a	while	those	gates	open.	And	they	were	immensely	happy	that
someone	has	again	become	a	buddha.
But	Buddha	refused.	The	story	is	symbolic.	He	says,	"Unless	every	living	being
passes	by	me	into	nirvana,	I	am	going	to	stay	here.	I	will	be	the	last.	I	cannot	go
alone,	 I	 have	 to	 take	 everybody	 with	 me.	 "They	 are	 struggling	 in	 pain	 and
misery,	and	do	you	think	I	should	enjoy	nirvana	and	its	tremendous	blissfulness?
It	 is	not	possible.	 I	will	wait.	You	can	wait;	but	waiting	here	 I	will	 try	 to	help
those	struggling	souls,	stumbling	in	darkness,	groping	in	darkness.	Unless	I	am
satisfied	that	everybody	has	passed	in,	I	will	not	come	in	and	close	the	doors."
Buddha	is	certainly	one	of	the	most	insightful	men.	He	does	not	stop	at	himself.
Anybody	would	have	stopped	 there	 --	 it	 is	a	natural	 tendency	 to	put	oneself	at
the	highest	point	and	then	stop.
He	 says,	 IT	 IS	 BETTER	 TO	 FEED	ONE	WHO	 IS	 ABOVE	KNOWLEDGE,
ONE-SIDEDNESS,	DISCIPLINE,	AND	ENLIGHTENMENT	THAN	TO	FEED
ONE
HUNDRED	BILLIONS	OF	BUDDHAS,	OF	PAST,	PRESENT	OR	FUTURE.
The	 last	 category	 is	 tremendously	 significant,	 because	 it	 will	 be	 the	 category
which	will	be	misunderstood	the	most.	One	who	is	above	knowledge	--	he	will
not	be	consistent,	he	will	be	self-contradictory.	One	who	is	above	one-sidedness,
who	cannot	favor	one	side	of	 the	 truth,	one	aspect	of	 the	 truth	--	at	 the	risk	of
being	contradictory	he	will	support	all	 the	aspects	of	 truth.	He	will	support	 the
opposites,	and	naturally	he	will	 look	illogical,	he	will	 look	absurd.	One	who	is
above	discipline	 --	who	has	no	discipline,	who	 lives	moment	 to	moment,	who
has	 no	 certain	 order	 to	 follow	 --	 he	 does	 not	 follow	 anything.	 Each	 moment
decides	what	he	is	going	to	do.
You	cannot	categorize	 such	a	man.	You	cannot	call	him	good,	you	cannot	call
him	bad;	you	cannot	call	him	religious,	you	cannot	call	him	irreligious,	because
he	 follows	 no	 discipline.	 And	 not	 only	 discipline,	 but	 he	 transcends
enlightenment.
Enlightenment	 is	 the	 ultimate	 experience,	 but	 still	 it	 is	 an	 experience...	 the
highest,	but	still	part	and	parcel	of	all	other	experiences:	they	may	be	lower,	this
may	be	the	highest.
Finally	 one	 transcends	 it	 too.	 One	 simply	 forgets	 about	 it.	 It	 becomes	 one's
nature.
In	the	beginning,	when	you	reach	from	your	ignorance	into	enlightenment,	it	is
such	a	difference	that	you	are	immensely	gratified.	But	now	ignorance	is	gone.
Enlightenment	slowly,	slowly	loses	the	excitement	it	had	in	the	beginning.	It	is
no	longer	ecstasy,	it	is	simply	your	nature.	And	nobody	remembers	one's	nature.
This	is	the	ultimate	category	Buddha	manages	to	talk	about:	beyond	knowledge,
beyond	discipline,	beyond	enlightenment.	This	kind	of	man	will	be	opposed	by
all,	 this	 kind	of	man	will	 be	 condemned	by	 all.	This	 kind	of	man	 is	 bound	 to
stand	 alone	 against	 the	 whole	 world,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 all	 that	 they
value,	he	has	transcended.
In	Japan	there	 is	a	beautiful	series	of	pictures	depicting	the	whole	range	of	 the
pilgrimage	 to	 the	 truth.	 In	 the	 beginning	 --	 the	 name	 of	 the	 Zen	 painter	 who
made	it	is	not	known	--	it	had	ten	pictures.	But	even	the	Zen	masters	suppressed
the	tenth	picture,	and	for	centuries	it	was	known	only	as	having	nine	pictures.	It
was	only	later	on	that	it	was	discovered	in	some	old	scripts	that	the	original	had
ten	pictures,	and	the	description	of	the	tenth	is	the	description	Buddha	is	giving
of	the	last.
It	is	a	series	of	pictures:	A	man	loses	his	bull.	In	one	picture,	he	looks	all	around
and	he	cannot	see	it.	There	are	mountains,	there	are	trees,	there	is	a	lake	and	the
man	 is	 standing	 there	 looking	all	 around	 --	 and	 the	bull	 is	not	 anywhere	 to	be
seen.	In	the	second	picture	he	finds	the	footmarks	of	the	bull.	He	cannot	see	the
bull	yet,	but	footmarks	are	there	and	he	follows	the	footmarks.
In	the	third	he	sees	just	the	back	of	the	bull,	who	is	standing	under	a	tree.	In	the
fourth	he	finds	the	bull.	In	the	fifth	he	tries	hard	to	catch	hold	of	it;	it	is	a	bull	--
it	is	difficult,	he	is	really	powerful.	But	in	the	seventh	he	manages.	In	the	eighth
he	rides	on	the	bull.	The	bull	won't	allow	it,	and	tries	this	way	and	that	to	throw
him	off.	In	the	ninth	he	reaches	home	with	the	bull.
The	 tenth	 was	 repressed	 even	 by	 the	 people	 who	 can	 be	 said	 to	 be	 the	 most
meditative,	to	be	the	most	alert	in	the	whole	world.	Perhaps	they	were	afraid	that
the	tenth	picture	may	confuse	people	or	may	help	them	to	go	astray,	because	in
the	tenth	--	he	has	got	the	bull,	and	the	bull	is	in	the	shed,	tied	up	--	in	the	tenth
he	takes	a	bottle	of	wine	and	a	flute	and	goes	back	near	the	lake.	He	is	going	just
with	his	flute	and	a	bottle	of	wine.	Now	this	picture	was	repressed,	destroyed;	it
has	been	recovered	now.	But	this	is	the	picture	of	the	last	state.	Now	there	is	no
discipline:	he	can	drink	wine,	he	can	play	the	flute.
The	bull	is	the	self,	your	inner	reality.	Finding	it	represents	nirvana.	At	the	ninth,
logically	 it	 should	stop.	But	existence	 is	not	 logical,	and	who	will	know	better
then	Gautam	Buddha	that	 it	 is	not	 logical?	The	tenth	goes	beyond	all	 logic,	all
comprehension.
Even	enlightenment	is	dropped.	The	man	becomes	absolutely	ordinary,	without
any	discipline	--	a	hobo	with	a	bottle	of	wine	to	enjoy	under	a	tree,	and	playing
the	flute	--
utterly	ordinary.
But	his	ordinariness	is	not	the	ordinariness	we	are	aware	of;	his	ordinariness	is
something	most	extraordinary.	But	he	is	going	to	be	misunderstood,	he	is	going
to	be	condemned.
Now,	who	 is	 going	 to	 accept	 him	 as	 a	master?	Who	going	 to	 accept	 him	 as	 a
buddha?
But	Gautam	Buddha	has	 put	 him	above	himself.	He	 says,	 IT	 IS	BETTER	TO
FEED	ONE
WHO	IS	ABOVE	KNOWLEDGE,	ONE-SIDEDNESS,	DISCIPLINE,	AND
ENLIGHTENMENT,	 THAN	 TO	 FEED	 ONE	 HUNDRED	 BILLIONS	 OF
BUDDHAS
OF	PAST,	PRESENT,	OR	FUTURE.
This	sutra	shows	the	beauty	of	the	man,	his	grandeur,	his	greatness.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	Come	a	little	closer
26	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604265
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO29
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
104
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 A	 SPEECH	 PREPARED	 FOR	 HIS	 FOLLOWERS	 AFTER	 HIS	 CAR
ACCIDENT,	GURDJIEFF	SAID,	"AGAIN	I	REPEAT	THAT	THE	INSTITUTE
IS	 CLOSED.	 I	 DIED.	 THE	 REASON	 IS	 THAT	 I	 WAS	 DISENCHANTED
WITH	PEOPLE	AFTER
ALL	THAT	I	HAVE	DONE	FOR	THEM;	I	HAVE	SEEN	HOW	WELL	THEY
HAVE
PAID	ME	FOR	IT.	NOW	INSIDE	ME	EVERYTHING	IS	EMPTY."
RECENTLY,	WHEN	KRISHNAMURTI	DIED,	I	FELT	THAT	SOMEHOW	HE
TOO
DIED	DISENCHANTED.
OSHO,	 OVER	 THE	 YEARS	 WITH	 YOU,	 WE	 HAVE	 BUILT	 GREAT
CASTLES	IN
THE	 SAND	 AND	 HAVE	 SEEN	 THEM	 DESTROYED;	 YET	WHEN	 I	 SEE
YOU
THESE	 PRECIOUS	 MORNINGS	 AND	 EVENINGS,	 YOU	 SEEM	 SO
GENUINELY
HAPPY	TO	SEE	US.	DO	YOU	EVER	GET	DISENCHANTED	WITH	US?
It	is	not	only	for	George	Gurdjieff	or	J.	Krishnamurti,	it	is	true	for	hundreds	of
masters	 down	 the	 ages,	 and	 there	 are	 reasons.	 They	 all	 died	 disenchanted,
disappointed,	disillusioned.
Let	us	go	deeper,	first	into	George	Gurdjieff's	last	statement.	The	last	statement
of	anybody	is	the	most	significant	statement	of	his	whole	life;	in	a	certain	way
his	whole	life	is	condensed	in	his	last	statement.
He	 was	 disenchanted	 because	 the	 disciples	 failed	 him,	 betrayed	 him,	 went
against	him,	did	everything	to	harm	him	--	and	these	were	the	people	for	whom
he	had	devoted	his	whole	life,	each	single	moment	of	it.	But	still	in	his	place	I
would	not	be	disenchanted.
He	thought	that	he	was	doing	a	very	serious	work.	That's	where	the	seed	of	his
disenchantment	was.
I	am	not	doing	any	serious	work.	I	am	not	doing	work	at	all;	it	is	my	joy	to	share
with	you.	Now	what	you	do	with	it	is	your	problem,	not	mine.
You	cannot	disappoint	me.
You	can	betray	me;	there	are	people	who	have	done	that.	You	can	do	any	kind	of
harm	imaginable	--	and	people	have	done	that.	You	can	go	against	me,	you	can
tell	 lies	 about	me;	 still	 I	will	 not	 be	 disenchanted,	 because	 in	 the	 first	 place	 I
have	never	expected	anything	from	you.
The	disappointment	comes	from	expectation.
The	 disenchantment	 comes	 from	 a	 deep	 hope	 that	 these	 people	 are	 going	 to
fulfill	my	work.	 I	don't	have	any	expectation,	any	hope	--	 I	am	just	so	blissful
that	 I	 cannot	 contain	 it;	 I	want	 to	 share	 it	 unconditionally.	 It	 is	 the	 conditions
which	create	disappointment.
Gurdjieff	had	worked	hard	with	great	expectations.	And	even	people	like	P.D.
Ouspensky,	who	had	learned	everything	from	the	master,	denied	him.	Ouspensky
himself	became	a	master;	he	even	stopped	using	Gurdjieff's	full	name.	When	he
had	to	mention	him	at	certain	points,	he	would	use	only	G.	He	would	not	allow
his	own	disciples	to	go	to	Gurdjieff,	even	to	see	him,	and	Gurdjieff	had	worked
on	this	man	for	years,	for	decades.
And	whatever	Ouspensky	 said	 after	 separating	 himself	 from	Gurdjieff	 --	 each
single	word,	each	single	insight	--	was	borrowed,	it	was	not	his	own.	Certainly
he	 had	 a	 great	 talent;	 he	 was	 one	 of	 the	 best	 writers	 I	 have	 come	 across.
Gurdjieff	was	not	a	writer.
Ouspensky	was	a	great	logician,	a	world	famous	mathematician,	a	great	writer.
Gurdjieff	was	none	of	these	things,	he	was	purely	a	mystic.
Gathering	everything	from	the	system	of	Gurdjieff,	Ouspensky	was	in	a	position
to	write	beautiful	 treatises,	as	if	 they	were	his	own	experience.	Gurdjieff	could
not	compete	with	him	in	writing,	nor	in	speaking.	Ouspensky	was	a	very	talented
genius,	well	educated.
Gurdjieff	 was	 uneducated,	 coming	 from	 a	 very	 undeveloped	 tribe	 in	 the
Caucasus,	in	Soviet	Russia.	But	he	had	the	whole	mine	of	diamonds	--	it	is	just
that	they	were	all	uncut,	unpolished.	Only	a	man	who	had	the	eyes	of	a	jeweler
would	be	able	to	recognize	them;	otherwise	they	were	just	stones.
Ouspensky	had	the	eyes	of	a	jeweler;	he	recognized	that	this	man	had	a	treasure,
but	had	not	 the	 talent	 to	spread	 it...	a	great	chance	for	exploitation.	He	 learned
everything	from	Gurdjieff,	and	the	day	he	felt	that	now	it	was	enough	--	he	could
make	 a	 system	 out	 of	 it	 all	 --	 he	 betrayed	 him.	 And	 he	 had	 to	 prevent	 his
disciples	from	going	to	Gurdjieff,	because	personality-wise	Ouspensky	was	just
a	schoolteacher	--	he	looked	like	a	schoolteacher.	Even	while	teaching	mysticism
there	 was	 a	 blackboard	 --	 he	 was	 a	 mathematician.	 He	 would	 be	 teaching
mysticism	and	writing	on	the	blackboard;	it	was	like	a	class,	a	university	class.
His	students	were	taking	notes....
Gurdjieff	 had	 a	 tremendously	 charismatic	 personality.	Anybody	who	 had	 seen
him	once	could	not	forget	the	man;	in	a	crowd	of	millions	he	would	still	stand
out.	 If	 you	 had	 looked	 into	 his	 eyes	 once,	 those	 eyes	would	 follow	 you	 your
whole	life.	He	was	not	a	man	of	words,	but	a	man	of	a	tremendously	powerful
being.
And	that	was	the	fear	of	Ouspensky	--	that	if	his	disciples	went	to	Gurdjieff,	then
whatever	he	had	been	 saying	against	Gurdjieff	would	be	exposed.	And	 if	 they
listened	to	that	man...	although	he	was	not	articulate,	in	a	way	he	was	the	most
articulate	master	ever.	To	say	a	simple	 thing	he	would	 take	hundreds	of	pages.
You	have	to	find	out	where	it	is	--	what	he	really	wants	to	say.	He	will	make	up
his	own	words,	big	long	words	spreading	out	over	the	whole	line,	a	single	word
that	you	have	never	heard	before	 --	 it	 is	his	 invention.	He	knew	nothing	about
how	 to	 write;	 one	 paragraph	will	 go	 running	 on	 for	 pages.	 No	 publisher	 was
ready	to	publish	his	books;	he	had	to	publish	them	himself.
When	his	 first	book	was	published	 it	was	one	 thousand	pages.	 It	 is	one	of	 the
strangest	books	in	the	world,	ALL	AND	EVERYTHING.	He	kept	nine	hundred
pages	uncut,	and	only	one	hundred	pages	--	that	is	the	preface	--	were	cut,	with	a
note	to	every	customer	who	purchases	it:	"You	read	the	preface	and	if	you	feel
that	it	is	worth	reading	on,	then	you	can	cut	the	remaining	nine	hundred	pages.
But	if	you	feel	it	is	not	worth	it	you	can	take	your	money	back	--	return	the	book
--	but	don't	cut	the	uncut	pages.	Those	one	hundred	pages	are	enough	example."
Even	to	understand	those	one	hundred	pages	is	a	strange	experience,	particularly
for	 those	who	don't	know	anything	about	mystics	and	their	strange	ways.	Now
he	was	not	 in	 any	way	able	 to	 compete	with	his	own	disciple	Ouspensky.	His
books	 are	 so	 lucid,	 so	 beautifully	written,	 so	 poetic,	 that	 I	 have	 not	 seen	 any
other	man	who	comes	close	to	him,	even	close	to	him.	Kahlil	Gibran	writes	well,
Mikhail	Naimy	writes	well,	but	they	don't	even	come	close	to	Ouspensky.
Gurdjieff	had	much	hope	that	Ouspensky	would	carry	on	his	work.	Rather	than
carrying	 on,	 he	 simply	 opened	 his	 own	 school	 against	 Gurdjieff	 --	 teaching
everything,	 because	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 add	 to	 it;	 the	 system	 is	 complete	 and
perfect.	 You	 cannot	 take	 anything	 out,	 you	 cannot	 put	 anything	 in.	 He	was	 a
great	 teacher,	Ouspensky,	but	he	was	not	a	master.	He	 influenced	many	people
around	 the	world;	millions	 of	 people	 came	 to	 know	of	Gurdjieff	 only	 through
Ouspensky.	What	a	strange	fate!	And	he	was	consistently	trying	to	oppose	him.
It	was	very	difficult,	 because	his	whole	 teaching	was	borrowed	 from	 the	man,
but	it	was	a	logical	necessity.	He	had	to	oppose	Gurdjieff	so	nobody	would	think
that	 he	 had	 borrowed	 all	 this	 teaching	 from	 Gurdjieff.	 It	 is	 an	 existential
necessity	that	any	disciple	who	betrays	and	wants	to	use	the	master's	teaching	to
become	himself	a	master,	is	bound	to	oppose	the	master,	to	create	lies	about	the
master.	And	naturally	it	was	hurting	Gurdjieff	--	and	it	was	not	only	Ouspensky,
there	were	many	 others	who	were	 doing	 the	 same.	 For	 years	Gurdjieff	would
work	on	them,	and	then	one	day	they	turned	into	his	enemies.	And	to	justify	why
they	have	left	Gurdjieff	they	had	to	invent	lies,	they	had	to	create	a	false	image
of	Gurdjieff.
Ouspensky	had	 a	 strategy.	He	 said,	 "While	 I	was	with	Gurdjieff	 he	was	 right,
and	when	I	saw	that	he	was	going	astray,	I	left	him"	--	Gurdjieff	had	gone	astray,
that's	why	the	disciple	had	left.	Up	to	that	point	Gurdjieff	was	right,	and	he	could
use	his	teachings	without	any	difficulty.	But	beyond	that	point,	for	him	Gurdjieff
did	not	exist	at	all.
This	was	being	done	by	many	disciples,	and	if	Gurdjieff	was	working	with	great
expectations,	naturally	he	was	getting	wounded,	hurt.	He	could	not	believe	that
these	were	the	people	for	whom	he	had	lived	and	he	had	died;	his	whole	life	he
had	sacrificed,	and	these	were	the	people....	That's	why	he	said,	"The	institution
is	closed,	is	dead."
He	was	 afraid	 that	 after	his	death	his	 institution	will	 also	be	used	 in	 the	 same
way.	"The	institution	is	dead	because	I	am	dead."	And	these	were	all	the	wounds
of	his	 life	 saying	 it	 together.	This	 statement	 is	 the	 statement	of	his	whole	 life:
"Man	is	cunning,	cowardly,	deceptive,	hypocritical	--	you	cannot	trust	anybody."
This	was	his	whole	life's	experience:	You	cannot	trust	anybody.	He	trusted	many
and	he	gave	everything	that	he	had,	and	still	what	had	they	returned?	--	not	even
gratitude.	And	he	was	not	asking	for	anything	else.	But	his	people	had	given	him
no	 reverence,	 no	 gratitude,	 no	 respect	 --	 on	 the	 contrary,	 great	 antagonism,
opposition,	 all	 kinds	 of	 fictions	 condemning	 him...	 Naturally	 he	 was
disappointed.
But	 my	 approach	 is	 totally	 different.	 I	 trust	 you,	 not	 because	 of	 your
trustworthiness;	otherwise	the	same	will	be	my	experience.	I	do	not	have	to	wait
for	my	 death	 to	 come;	 already	 I	 have	worked	with	 people	 for	 years	 and	 they
have	 repaid	me	very	well.	 I	 trust	 you	because	 I	 cannot	 distrust;	 so	 there	 is	 no
burden	on	you	--	you	can	betray	me,	but	you	cannot	hurt	me.	I	have	trusted	you,
not	because	of	you,	but	because	of	me.	And	I	am	still	there,	the	same.
See	the	difference.	To	trust	a	person	is	possible	 in	 two	ways:	either	because	of
his	trustworthiness	--	then	there	is	danger,	there	is	risk	--	or	because	you	enjoy
trusting.	The	trustworthiness	or	unworthiness	have	no	relevance.
Secondly	 Gurdjieff	 and	 all	 these	 people	 took	 their	 work	 very	 seriously	 --	 the
transformation	 of	man,	 the	 transformation	 of	 human	 society...	 they	 took	 it	 too
seriously.
And	when	people	did	not	live	up	to	their	seriousness	they	felt	that	something	is
basically	wrong	with	man,	 that	 nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 him.	 Then	 a	 great
hopelessness	arose	in	them.
It	 cannot	 happen	 to	 me,	 because	 I	 am	 not	 serious	 at	 all.	 I	 do	 not	 think	 that
existence	 has	 given	 me	 a	 certain	 responsibility,	 to	 transform	 man	 or	 human
society.	Who	am	I	to	bother	about	all	this?	One	day	I	was	not	here	--	the	society
was	there,	man	was	there,	existence	was	there....	One	day	I	will	not	be	here,	so
just	 for	a	 few	days	 in	between....	And	existence	has	not	given	me	any	 job	 that
has	to	be	done.	Why	should	I	be	serious?	I	am	simply	playful.
If	everybody	betrays	me	I	will	have	the	last	laugh;	I	will	enjoy	that	moment	too.
I	will	say	to	myself,	"Great!	I	love	to	play;	I	played	well.	And	these	people	were
good;	as	long	as	they	could	continue	to	be	with	me,	they	managed	and	continued
--	 in	 difficulties,	 in	 troubles.	When	 they	 found	 it	was	 too	much,	 they	went	 on
their	own."
Even	 if	 I	 am	 left	 alone	 I	 will	 not	 be	 disappointed.	 I	 will	 simply	 enjoy	 the
moment,	that	this	has	been	a	great	life	--	so	many	seasons,	so	many	changes,	so
many	people,	so	much	love,	so	much	trust.	And	I	am	going	out	of	life	without
leaving	any	footprints	behind.	I	will	not	feel	that	I	have	wasted	my	life.	I	don't
think	that	there	could	have	been	any	better	way	to	live,	and	to	love,	and	to	laugh.
J.	 Krishnamurti	 was	 very	 serious	 --	 I	 don't	 think	 he	 ever	 smiled.	 A	 long	 life:
ninety	years.
His	fame	started	very	early,	at	thirteen	years	old;	so	really	he	had	a	very	long	life
of	work	and	disappointments.	Even	the	closest	ones	betrayed	him.	His	whole	life
seems	to	be	just	a	series	of	betrayals,	and	those	who	remained	never	managed	to
understand	what	he	was	saying.	They	listened	to	him	for	half	a	century,	but	still
he	could	not	cross	their	thick	minds	and	reach	to	their	being.	And	every	day...	if
you	look	at	his	life,	in	the	beginning	he	was	very	hopeful,	very	excited	that	man
can	be	changed,	that	a	new	man	can	arrive.
But	 slowly,	 slowly	 that	 hope	 disappeared,	 that	 excitement	was	 no	more	 there.
And	as	he	grew	older,	he	became	sadder.
For	 twenty	 years,	 just	 because	 of	 his	 seriousness,	 he	 suffered	 from	 migraine
continuously.	No	medicine	could	help,	no	physician...	and	every	physician	told
him,
"You	are	straining	your	whole	brain	system	too	much.	You	are	too	serious,	you
should	relax;	you	have	taken	too	much	of	a	burden	on	yourself."	Sometimes	his
migraine	was	so	much	that	he	would	like	to	have	hit	his	head	against	the	wall.
While	 speaking	 he	 was	 almost	 screaming,	 shouting,	 hitting	 his	 own	 head,
because	he	could	not	understand	that	you	are	unable	to	understand	such	a	simple
thing.	 For	 example,	 he	 was	 explaining	 the	 same	 thing	 his	 whole	 life:	 that
meditation	 cannot	be	done,	 it	 is	 a	 happening.	And	he	would	 talk	 for	one	hour
about	the	difference	between	doing	and	happening,	and	then	somebody	who	was
just	 sitting	 in	 front	of	him	 listening	attentively,	would	stand	up	and	ask,	"How
can	we	do	meditation?"
I	would	have	laughed	at	the	whole	thing,	but	he	would	hit	his	head...	too	serious.
And	 as	 death	 was	 coming	 closer	 he	 was	 becoming	 more	 and	 more	 serious,
knowing	now	that	his	life	had	been	a	failure.	He	worked	hard,	immensely	hard.
His	 approach	 was	 very	 clean	 and	 very	 clear.	 His	 way	 of	 working	 was	 very
logical,	very	intellectual,	absolutely	contemporary:	an	impeccable	life	of	worth	-
-	he	was	a	perfectionist.
But	in	the	end	the	hands	are	empty.	As	far	as	results	are	concerned,	nothing	has
happened,	as	 if	he	had	not	been	here.	The	world	goes	on...	 the	old	routine,	 the
old	rut.	Do	you	see	anything	that	has	changed	because	J.	Krishnamurti	was	born,
and	lived	for	ninety	years?	Has	it	made	even	a	scratch?	Naturally	he	died	in	the
same	state.
And	 this	 has	 been	 the	 case	 with	 thousands	 of	 masters;	 humanity	 remains
unevolving	because	they	are	so	serious	in	wanting	man	to	evolve.	And	naturally
they	fail.
But	I	cannot	fail,	because	I	am	not	concerned	at	all	whether	humanity	evolves	or
not,	 whether	 the	 new	 man	 is	 born	 or	 not.	 I	 enjoy	 these	 ideas	 and	 I	 enjoy
communicating	them	to	people,	and	there	I	am	perfectly	victorious.	I	don't	need
to	wait	 to	be	victorious	until	 you	have	 changed;	 that	will	 be	your	victory.	My
victory	is	that	I	have	been	able	to	communicate	what	I	wanted	to	communicate.
Now	what	you	do	with	it	is	your	freedom.
I	will	not	call	it	betrayal,	and	I	will	not	call	it	opposition,	and	I	will	not	call	your
things	 lies.	 If	 you	 are	 enjoying	 doing	 these	 things	 it	 is	 perfectly	 good	 --
enjoyment	is	good.	If	somebody	is	creating	lies	about	me	and	is	feeling	perfectly
happy	about	it,	why	should	he	be	stopped?	He	has	all	my	blessings.
In	India	it	happened,	one	man	wrote	a	book	against	me	and	he	sent	me	the	proof
copy.	I	looked	into	it	--	it	was	all	rubbish,	lies,	fictitious	stories	with	no	evidence.
Still,	 I	 sent	 him	my	 blessings	 and	 told	 him	 to	 print	 it	 on	 the	 first	 page	 of	 the
book.	He	could	not	believe	it;	he	was	so	disturbed:	what	kind	of	man	is	this?
He	lived	in	Baroda,	a	thousand	miles	away	from	me,	but	he	came	to	see	me	--	he
had	 never	 seen	 me.	 He	 was	 just	 collecting	 third-rate	 yellow	 newspapers	 and
cuttings	and	gossips,	 rumors...	and	he	managed	to	make	a	book.	And	he	asked
me	"Have	you	seen	inside	or	have	you	simply	sent	blessings?"
I	said,	"I	have	gone	through	it	word	for	word;	it	is	all	bullshit,	but	you	have	done
so	much	work	collecting	bullshit,	you	need	blessings."
He	said,	"But	this	 looks	strange	--	with	your	blessings.	I	know	this	book:	even
while	I	was	collecting	and	writing....	My	purpose	is	to	earn	money	--	this	book	is
going	 to	 become	 a	 bestseller	 --	 but	 now	 seeing	 you	 and	 your	 response,	 I	 feel
perhaps	I	should	not	have	done	this."
I	 said,	 "No,	 you	 continue.	 Let	 this	 book	 go	 into	 the	 market.	 Collect	 more,
because	 while	 I	 am	 alive	 more	 and	 more	 lies	 will	 be	 there,	 more	 and	 more
gossips,	rumors	--	you	can	always	earn	money;	this	is	a	good	way.	It	is	not	doing
any	 harm	 to	 me.	 And	 the	 picture	 you	 have	 chosen	 for	 the	 cover	 is	 really
beautiful."
He	said,	"My	God!	I	was	thinking	you	would	be	angry,	ferocious."
I	said,	"Why	should	I	be	angry,	why	should	I	be	ferocious?	Life	is	too	short	to	be
angry,	to	be	ferocious.	Even	if	we	can	manage	to	be	blissful,	that's	enough;	if	we
can	manage	to	bless,	that's	enough.	What	you	do	is	your	business,	but	you	have
done	 it	well.	Your	writing	 is	good;	what	you	have	written	 is	nonsense,	but	 the
way	you	have	put	it	and	presented	it	is	really	good.	And	you	devoted	almost	one
year	to	my	service.	I	cannot	pay	you,	but	I	can	give	you	my	blessing."
And	the	book	was	published	with	my	blessings	and	every	criticism	that	appeared
in	newspapers	about	the	book	mentioned	it:	"It	is	strange	that	Osho	blesses	it."
And	just	that	simple	blessing	cancels	the	whole	book.
My	whole	approach	is	different,	so	 totally	different	 that	 it	has	never	been	used
before.	 I	 am	 enjoying	 everything	 that	 has	 happened,	 is	 happening	 --	 perhaps
tomorrow	I	will	be	arrested,	deported,	but	I	have	been	enjoying	it.	Then	Hasya
has	to	find	a	new	place,	so	I	can	be	deported	again!	We	are	not	going	to	leave	a
single	country	unblessed.
In	 fact	 I	 cannot	 conceive	 a	 situation	 that	will	 be	 a	 disappointment	 to	me.	You
have	 to	 forgive	me	 --	 I	 am	 simply	 so	 fulfilled	 and	 so	 happy,	 so	 centered	 that
nothing	 can	 affect	me.	Any	new	kind	of	 situation	 is	 really	 a	 great	 excitement.
And	to	live	without	any	conditions,	to	live	with	people	who	have	total	freedom
to	be	 the	way	 they	want	 to	be,	 is	already	a	 transformation.	All	old	approaches
have	 failed.	 Now	 let	 us	 see	 what	 happens	 to	 my	 approach.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 am
concerned	I	cannot	fail,	because	I	am	squeezing	the	juice	of	life	every	moment;	I
don't	leave	it	for	another	moment.
What	has	to	be	seen	is	how	many	people	can	become	as	successful,	as	victorious
as	I	am.
I	am	giving	them	all	the	cues,	now	it	is	their	problem.	If	they	fail	they	should	be
disappointed;	 why	 should	 I	 be	 disappointed?	 If	 they	 succeed,	 they	 should
rejoice.	I	can	participate	in	their	rejoicing,	but	there	is	no	way	to	disappoint	me.
Just	include	me	out	of	the	category	of	Gurdjieff,	Krishnamurti	and	others.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	TRIED	FOR	SO	LONG	TO	WRITE	A	QUESTION	TO	YOU	ABOUT
MONEY.	 THE	QUESTION	 IS	 SO	COMPLEX,	 I	 CAN'T	 EVEN	GET	 IT	ON
PAPER.	IT
INVOLVES	 FRIENDSHIPS,	 SELF-IMAGE,	 INTEGRITY,	 TRUST,
INTELLIGENCE,	IDENTIFICATION,	LETTING-GO,	HOLDING-ON,	GUILT,
RELATIONSHIPS,	AND
MOST	IMPORTANTLY,	MY	DISCIPLESHIP.
PLEASE	HELP	ME	WITH	THE	QUESTION	AND	THE	ANSWER.
Money	is	a	strange	thing.
If	 you	 do	 not	 have	 it,	 it	 is	 a	 simple	 matter	 --	 you	 don't	 have	 it.	 There	 is	 no
complexity.
But	if	you	have	it,	then	it	certainly	creates	complexities.
One	of	the	greatest	problems	that	money	creates	is	that	you	never	know	whether
you	are	loved	or	your	money	is	loved,	whether	you	are	desirable	or	your	money
is	desirable.	And	it	is	so	difficult	to	figure	out,	that	one	would	have	preferred	not
to	have	had	money;	at	least	life	would	have	been	simple.
Just	a	few	days	before,	Hasya	was	telling	me	about	Aristotle	Onassis'	daughter.	I
remember	seeing	her	picture	when	Onassis	was	alive,	perhaps	ten	years	ago.	She
was	a	beautiful,	well-proportioned,	charming	young	girl.	But	Onassis	died	and
left	 her	with	 a	 lot	 of	money,	 and	 that	 created	 hell	 for	 her.	 Since	 then	 she	 has
married	three	times,	and	each	marriage	fails	because	she	thinks	the	person	loves
her	money,	not	her.
And	this	starts	from	the	very	beginning;	the	day	of	marriage	is	really	the	day	of
divorce.
On	 the	 day	 of	 marriage	 she	 takes	 a	 guarantee	 from	 the	 person	 --	 a	 legal
document	 before	 the	 court	 --	 that	 he	will	 not	 take	 her	money.	 In	 case	 divorce
happens,	 he	will	 not	 ask	 for	money.	Now	 can	 you	 conceive	 a	marriage	 to	 be
worthwhile,	when	on	 the	 first	 day	 the	woman	 is	 asking	you	 to	give	 in	writing
before	the	court	that	you	are	interested	in	her,	and	not	in	her	money;	and	that	in
case	 a	 divorce	 happens	 you	will	 not	 ask	 for	money?	 The	 divorce	 has	 already
happened.
In	the	fourth	marriage	she	got	 into	more	troubled	waters.	Before	I	describe	the
fourth	marriage,	something	else	has	to	be	said	which	was	happening	on	the	side.
She	was	becoming	fatter,	uglier,	as	if	deep	down	in	her	psychology	she	wanted
to	prove,	"You	love	me	whether	I	am	beautiful	or	ugly,	shapely	or	fat	--	you	don't
love	my	money."
And	 she	has	become	so	ugly	now	 that	 she	avoids	photographers,	news	media:
she	hides	and	does	not	want	her	pictures	to	be	taken.	Perhaps	it	 is	because	she
was	uncertain	whether	she	is	loved,	or	her	money.	And	most	probably	the	people
who	 have	 been	with	 her	were	 for	 the	money,	 not	 for	 her.	 She	 did	 not	 receive
love.	The	proof	is	that	she	started	eating	too	much.	If	you	are	loved,	you	are	so
full	of	love,	so	filled	with	love	that	you	don't	eat	too	much.
I	have	been	traveling	in	India,	staying	with	different	families,	and	I	have	come
across	at	least	three	women	who	told	me	the	same	thing,	that	while	I	am	staying
in	 their	 homes	 they	 cannot	 eat.	When	 I	was	 told	 this	 for	 the	 first	 time	 I	 said,
"This	is	strange.	Why	can't	you	eat?"
They	 said,	 "We	don't	 know,	 but	we	don't	 feel	 hungry	 either.	We	 feel	 perfectly
good,	with	more	well-being	than	we	have	ever	felt.	You	stay	three	days	and	we
can't	eat.	And	we	wait	the	whole	year	again	when	you	will	be	back	in	the	city	for
three	days;	those	three	days	become	a	beautiful	memory."
When	I	was	told	by	another	woman,	and	then	by	another	woman...	I	had	to	look
into	the	fact	--	what	is	the	matter?	They	felt	so	loved,	and	they	loved	me	so	much
that	 there	was	no	need	 for	 any	 food,	 as	 if	 love	was	 enough	nourishment.	And
after	three	days	they	did	not	look	hungry,	they	did	not	look	starved.	One	of	these
three	was	a	Jaina	woman,	and	she	said,	"Now	I	know	what	a	real	fast	should	be."
She	had	been	fasting	for	almost	ten	years,	long	fasts	of	ten	days.
In	the	Jaina	tradition,	those	Jainas	who	are	very	orthodox,	fast	for	ten	days	every
year	in	the	rainy	season.	This	woman	has	been	fasting	for	ten	days	for	almost	ten
years,	 and	 she	 said	 to	me,	 "Now	 I	know	 that	was	not	 fasting,	 that	was	 simply
starving	because	I	was	continuously	thinking	of	food,	food	and	food.	I	could	not
sleep	in	the	night	because	of	hunger;	even	if	I	fell	asleep	for	a	few	moments	or	a
few	hours	 I	was	dreaming	of	 food.	 I	was	 thinking	of	 food,	 I	was	dreaming	of
food;	except	food	there	was	nothing	in	me.	For	these	three	days	while	you	stay
in	my	house	I	know	what	fasting	is.	I	never	think	about	food	at	all.	It	just	comes
naturally	that	I	don't	feel	any	hunger;	I	feel	so	fulfilled."
Onassis'	immense	riches	have	created	a	hell	for	the	poor	girl,	a	feeling	that	she	is
not	loved.	And	not	coming	in	contact	with	a	man	like	me	who	could	have	told
her....	 The	 question	 is	 not	 that	 you	 should	 be	 loved,	 the	 question	 is	 that	 you
should	love.	Why	bother	about	why	the	other	loves	you?	Have	you	ever	thought
about	 why	 you	 love	 the	 other?	 For	 what?	 And	 then	 you	 will	 understand	 the
situation.	Perhaps	it	is	because	of	his	hair?	Then	you	don't	love	the	man.	Perhaps
because	of	his	eyes?	Then	you	don't	love	the	man.
Perhaps	 because	 of	 his	 nose?	 Then	 you	 don't	 love	 the	 man.	 If	 you	 have	 any
reason	 to	 love,	 then	you	don't	 love	 the	man.	So	why	are	you	making	so	much
fuss	about	money?
You	 should	 love	 and	 you	 should	 be	 loved,	 and	 you	 should	 be	 loved	 more
because	of	your	money.	There	is	nothing	wrong	in	it;	you	have	something	more
than	any	other	woman	has.	Otherwise,	 each	 thing	will	 start	 creating	problems:
you	have	a	beautiful	face,	that's	why	this	man	loves	--	he	does	not	love	you.	If
you	had	a	face	with	pockmarks	this	man	would	not	love	you.	Because	you	have
eyes,	this	man	loves	you;	if	you	were	blind,	this	man	would	not	love	you.	Then
you	 are	 creating	 unnecessary	 problems	 for	 yourself.	 This	 man	 certainly	 loves
you,	in	your	totality,	and	your	money	is	part	of	you.	Why	make	it	separate?	You
are	rich,	just	as	somebody	is	beautiful;	you	are	rich	just	as	somebody	is	a	dancer.
But	the	dancer	will	not	ask	the	question,	"Do	you	love	me	or	my	dance?"	If	she
asks	the	question	she	will	be	in	trouble.
In	the	fourth	marriage	Onassis'	daughter	found	a	rich	man,	just	to	be	certain	that
"He	 is	 himself	 so	 rich	 that	 he	will	 love	me,	 he	will	 not	 love	my	 riches	 --	 he
himself	is	a	big	industrialist."	And	because	of	this	she	did	not	repeat	the	ritual	of
going	to	the	court	after	marriage,	and	taking	a	certificate	from	the	man,	that	in
case	 of	 divorce	 he	 will	 not	 ask	 for	 money.	 Seeing	 that	 the	man	 is	 so	 rich,	 it
looked	absurd	to	ask.	But	this	man	proved	really	cunning,	and	because	there	was
no	certificate	he	divorced	her	and	took	almost	half	of	her	fortune.
Now,	 something	 like	money,	 that	 could	have	been	a	great	pleasure,	has	 turned
out	to	be	immense	anguish.	But	it	is	not	money,	it	is	your	mind.	Money	is	useful.
There	 is	 no	 sin	 in	 having	 money,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 feel	 guilt;	 otherwise
everybody	 should	 feel	 guilty.	 I	 should	 start	 feeling	 guilty	 --	 "Why	 am	 I
enlightened,	 when	 there	 are	 so	 many	 millions	 of	 people	 who	 are	 not
enlightened?	I	must	commit	suicide,	because	the	world	is	full	of	unenlightened
people,	and	I	must	be	immensely	selfish	to	be	enlightened."
I	 don't	 ask	 you,	 "Why	 do	 you	 love	me?	Do	 you	 love	me	 or	 do	 you	 love	my
enlightenment?	 If	you	 love	my	enlightenment	 then	 --	 finished!	Then	you	don't
love	me."
But	 why	 make	 these	 divisions?	 This	 is	 how	 mind	 creates	 misery.	 You	 have
money,	enjoy	it!	And	if	somebody	loves	you,	do	not	pose	this	question	because
you	are	putting	the	person	in	a	really	bad	situation.	If	he	says	he	loves	you,	you
are	not	going	to	believe	it,	and	if	he	says	he	loves	your	money	you	are	going	to
believe	 it.	But	 if	 he	 loves	your	money,	 then	 the	whole	 affair	 is	 finished.	Deep
down	you	will	go	on	suspecting	that	he	loves	your	money,	not	you.	But	there	is
nothing	wrong:	 the	money	 is	yours,	 just	as	 the	nose	 is	yours,	 and	 the	eyes	are
yours,	and	the	hair	is	yours,	and	this	man	loves	you	in	your	totality.	The	money
is	also	part	of	you	--	don't	separate	it,	then	there	is	no	problem.
Try	to	live	a	life	with	as	little	complexities	and	as	few	problems	as	possible.	And
it	is	in	your	hands;	we	go	on	creating	unnecessary	problems.	At	least	being	with
me,	you	should	learn	that	all	problems	are	created;	there	is	no	real	problem.
This	question	is	from	Avirbhava.	She	has	suffered	from	this	question	her	whole
life,	 and	 absolutely	 unnecessarily.	 Your	 money	 should	 make	 your	 life	 richer,
more	lovable,	and	it	is	making	it	difficult.
Whenever	 anybody	 starts	 loving	 you,	 you	 are	 constantly	 thinking	 about	 the
money	--
"this	man	is	interested	in	the	money,	not	in	me."	Even	if	he	is	interested	in	the
money...
who	is	not	interested	in	money?	He	is	simply	being	human.	He	is	not	a	Buddhist
monk,	he	is	interested	in	money.	But	this	does	not	mean	that	he	is	not	interested
in	you.	He	 is	 interested	 in	you	more	because	you	are	not	only	a	woman,	but	a
rich	woman.	Enjoy	the	idea,	and	drop	this	problem	forever.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	TO	CATCH	THE	LIGHT	FROM	YOUR	CANDLE?
Just	 come	 a	 little	 closer.	 People	 are	 afraid	 of	 coming	 closer,	 particularly	 to	 a
person	like	me.
The	fear	is	that	coming	closer	to	me	they	may	be	dissolved.
Coming	closer	to	me	they	may	disappear.
So	 they	 keep	 a	 certain	 distance,	 they	 come	 only	 so	 far,	 so	 they	 can	 remain
themselves;	if	the	time	comes	and	their	mind	decides	to	move	away,	they	can.
But	if	you	come	really	close,	that	means	you	have	taken	a	total	jump,	a	quantum
leap;	 now	 there	 is	 no	 going	 away,	 now	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 going	 away.
Now	you	are	melting	and	dissolving	 into	 the	unknown.	People	come	close	but
only	so	far,	so	they	can	escape	if	 they	want	to,	 they	can	turn	their	back	if	 they
want.
Do	you	know	the	meaning	of	the	word	"hippie"?	It	simply	means	showing	your
hips	--
turning	your	back.	The	hippie	is	one	who	is	turning	his	back	towards	the	world,
its	problems,	its	challenges;	he	is	running,	escaping.
Coming	close	to	me...	don't	stop	as	long	as	you	are,	only	then	your	candle	will	be
lighted.
And	this	is	the	beauty	of	candles:	you	can	light	one	candle	in	this	room,	or	one
thousand	candles	 in	 this	room.	The	candles	may	be	one	thousand,	but	 the	 light
will	be	one.	So	when	a	disciple	comes	too	close	to	the	master,	the	candles	remain
two,	 but	 the	 light	 becomes	 one.	The	 flames	 remain	 two.	That's	why	 I	 have	 to
make	 a	 seemingly	 contradictory	 statement:	 that	 when	 you	 dissolve	 into	 the
master,	for	the	first	time	you	are	not,	and	for	the	first	time	you	are.	You	are	not
your	 old	 self,	 but	 now	you	 have	 a	 new	 individuality.	What	 you	 have	 lost	was
never	yours;	what	you	have	gained	was	always	yours,	but	was	covered	with	the
false.
Two	 lighted	 candles	will	 create	 only	 one	 light	 in	 the	 room.	There	 can	 be	 two
thousand,	 there	can	be	 two	million	--	 it	will	not	make	any	difference,	 the	 light
will	be	one.	So	in	a	certain	way	they	will	all	be	individuals,	and	in	a	certain	way
they	will	all	be	part	of	an	oceanic	existence.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	New	bottles	for	the	old	wine
27	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604270
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO30
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
85
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	NIGHT	YOU	SPOKE	OF	THE	MYSTERY	SCHOOL.	AT	THAT
MOMENT	 I	 THOUGHT	 OF	 PYTHAGORAS.	 SINCE	 YOU	 STARTED
SPEAKING
AGAIN,	I'VE	WANTED	TO	ASK	QUESTIONS	ABOUT	HIM	--	HIS	NAME
COMES
TO	ME	OFTEN.	THE	MAIN	PART	OF	HIS	TEACHINGS	I	LOVE	ARE	THE
THREE
P'S:	PREPARATION,	PURIFICATION,	PERFECTION.
WOULD	YOU	SPEAK	ON	THEM	AGAIN?
Pythagoras	 is	 a	 link	 between	 East	 and	 West,	 between	 a	 civilization	 that
disappeared	in	the	Atlantic	and	a	civilization	that	we	are	living	in;	hence	he	has	a
significance	of	his	own.
He	traveled	almost	all	his	life	in	search	of	fragments	of	truth.	Most	of	his	time	he
was	in	Egypt,	in	Alexandria.	In	those	days	Alexandria	had	the	biggest	library	in
the	 whole	 world,	 particularly	 scriptures	 containing	 all	 the	 discoveries	 of
consciousness	 made	 in	 the	 lost	 civilization	 of	 Atlantis	 --	 a	 whole	 civilization
drowned	 with	 the	 whole	 continent	 in	 the	 Atlantic	 ocean.	 The	 name	 Atlantic
comes	from	the	continent	Atlantis,	that	went	down	into	it.	The	only	fragmentary
knowledge	available	about	it	was	in	Alexandria	--	and	perhaps	Pythagoras	was
the	 first	and	 the	 last	man	of	 such	 integrity,	 intelligence,	 ingenuity,	 to	 look	 into
those	scriptures.
That	 library	 exists	 no	 more,	 so	 whatever	 we	 know	 about	 Atlantis	 we	 know
through	 Pythagoras.	 That	 library	 was	 destroyed	 by	 Mohammedans.	 The	 man
who	destroyed	it,	Mahmud	Gaznavi,	destroyed	many	beautiful	things	in	India,	in
Afghanistan,	in	Egypt.
But	the	most	precious	was	the	vast	 library	that	contained	everything	about	that
whole	 civilization,	which	 had	 reached	 to	 the	 peaks	 of	 consciousness.	 The	 day
this	man	destroyed	 the	 library,	he	 took	Koran	Sharif	 in	one	of	his	hands	and	a
burning	 torch	 in	 another,	 entered	 the	 library	 and	 asked	 the	 learned	 librarian,
"Listen	carefully	--	 the	existence	of	your	 library	depends	on	your	answers.	My
first	question	is:	Is	there	anything	in	your	whole	library	which	goes	against	the
holy	 KORAN?	 And	 my	 second	 question	 is:	 If	 there	 is	 nothing	 which	 goes
against	 the	holy	KORAN,	 then	 the	holy	KORAN	is	enough;	why	bother	about
this	big	library?"
The	 librarian	 must	 have	 been	 in	 a	 dilemma	 --	 whatever	 he	 says	 will	 be
dangerous.	 If	he	says	 there	are	many	 things	 in	 the	 library	which	are	not	 in	 the
KORAN,	Mahmud	is	going	to	burn	the	library,	because	that	which	is	not	in	the
KORAN	is	untrue	--	the	KORAN
contains	 all	 and	 ultimate	 truth.	 And	 if	 he	 says	 that	 everything	 that	 is	 in	 the
library	 is	substantially	and	essentially	contained	 in	 the	KORAN,	then	 too	he	 is
going	to	burn	the	library,	saying,	"Then	it	is	useless;	the	KORAN	has	it	all."	And
the	library	was	so	huge	and	so	immense	that	you	can	only	conceive...	He	burned
it,	 and	 the	 fire	 continued	 for	 six	 months.	 For	 six	 months	 continuously	 books
were	burning;	perhaps	the	greatest	treasure	of	humanity	was	destroyed.
Pythagoras	studied	in	that	library	for	many	years.	He	was	a	Greek,	but	he	found
in	Greece	itself	only	sophistry.	Sophistry	is	something	ugly.	It	comes	from	a	very
beautiful	word	`sophia',	which	means	wisdom,	but	sophistry	is	only	a	pretension
of	wisdom.	And	the	whole	of	Greece	was	so	interested	in	sophistry.	There	were
sophist	 teachers	 moving	 all	 over	 the	 country	 teaching	 people,	 and	 the	 basic
teaching	 of	 sophistry	 was:	 There	 is	 no	 truth.	 It	 is	 all	 a	 question	 of	 better
argument.	Truth	as	such	does	not	exist,	it	is	a	fallacy.
When	two	persons	argue,	whoever	is	better	in	argument	seems	to	have	the	truth,
but	it	is	really	the	better	argument	and	nothing	else.
Their	teaching	was	to	give	you	all	possible	ways	of	arguing	and	to	make	you	a
great	 arguer,	 and	 then	 you	 can	 argue	 from	 any	 side	 --	 it	 doesn't	matter.	When
truth	 does	 not	 exist,	what	 side	 you	 take	 and	 argue	 for	 does	 not	matter.	 It	 is	 a
question	of	convenience:	which	side	is	going	to	declare	you	victorious?	Which
side	do	you	have	more	arguments	for?
I	have	been	interested	in	sophistry,	although	the	name	sophistry	has	disappeared.
Socrates	 was	 the	 cause	 of	 destroying	 it.	 He	 emphasized	 that	 truth	 is,	 and
arguments	do	not	prove	it,	they	only	discover	it.	They	do	not	disprove	it	either;
they	 can	 only	 prevent	 its	 discovery.	 One	 single	 man,	 Socrates,	 destroyed	 the
whole	tradition,	hundreds	of	years	old,	of	sophistry.	But	it	has	remained	running
underground.	 I	 see	 it	 in	 theologians,	 in	 religious	 philosophies,	 in	 political
ideologies...	 no	 concern	 for	 truth,	 the	 only	 concern	 is	 to	 present	 a	 very	 solid
argument.
There	is	a	story:	one	very	famous	sophist	teacher,	Zeno...	and	he	was	not	just	a
sophist,	he	was	a	genius.	It	is	unfortunate	that	his	genius	became	associated	with
sophistry	 because	 that	 was	 prevalent.	 You	 pay	 him	 money	 and	 he	 can	 prove
anything	--	anything	in	the	world.	You	just	say	it,	he	has	a	price	for	it.	He	proved
strange	 things	which	 logicians	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 disprove	 even	now,	 after
two	thousand	years,	and	whatever	he	has	proved	goes	against	all	common	sense.
But	logic	listens	to	the	argument,	and	his	arguments	are	so	fine,	so	refined.
For	example,	he	says	that	when	you	kill	a	bird	with	an	arrow,	the	arrow	does	not
move	at	all.	This	is	absurd,	because	if	the	arrow	does	not	move	at	all,	then	how
does	it	reach	the	bird?	From	your	bow	to	the	bird	there	is	a	distance.	The	arrow
reaches	there,	the	bird	is	killed	--	there	is	proof.	This	question	was	asked	by	one
king,	thinking	that	Zeno	would	not	be	able	to	prove	this	--	and	he	was	ready	to
give	any	amount	of	money	if	Zeno	should	prove	that	the	arrow	does	not	move.
Zeno	proved	that	the	arrow	does	not	move,	and	even	up	to	now	there	is	no	way
to	disprove	him.	His	argument	 is	 that	 for	movement,	 the	arrow	has	 to	go	from
point	1	to	point	2	to	point	3	to	point	4;	obviously	it	has	to	move	from	one	place
to	another	place,	then	only	will	it	reach	the	bird.
Moving	from	A	to	B	or	from	1	to	2,	it	has	to	pass	a	passage	between	A	and	B;	it
cannot	simply	reach	from	A	to	B,	so	you	have	to	make	another	point	between	the
two.	So	where	there	were	two	points,	now	there	are	three	points	--	and	you	have
got	 into	difficulty.	Now	he	has	 to	reach	not	only	 three	points	but	five,	because
these	 two	gaps	are	 there,	and	 this	goes	on	growing.	 If	you	 fill	 these	 two	gaps,
then	there	are	five	points	and	there	are	gaps.
And	you	go	on	filling	ad	infinitum...	the	arrow	will	never	reach	the	bird.
The	argument	is	very	solid.	What	he	is	saying	makes	sense	--	but	it	is	absolute
nonsense:	the	arrow	goes	and	kills	the	bird.
Zeno	 is	not	 interested	 in	 the	arrow	or	 the	bird.	He	says,	 "My	argument	proves
that	nothing	moves,	nothing	can	move;	there	is	no	movement	in	the	world."
These	 kinds	 of	 people	 were	 all	 over	 Greece.	 They	 dominated	 the	 mind;	 they
were	 constantly	 debating.	 Pythagoras	 was	 not	 interested	 at	 all	 in	 this	 kind	 of
stupid	game.	It	sharpens	your	intellect,	but	it	does	not	lead	you	to	any	truth,	to
any	 discovery,	 to	 any	 realization.	And	 even	 the	 greatest	 sophists	were	 getting
into	trouble,	because	Zeno	himself	--	who	had	many	arguments	which	go	against
reality	but	could	not	be	disproved	-
-	was	defeated	by	his	own	student.
This	was	the	routine:	he	was	so	confident,	and	he	had	the	genius	to	be	confident,
that	he	used	to	take	half	the	fees	in	the	beginning,	and	half	when	the	student	won
his	first	argument.	This	student	was	strange:	he	gave	half	the	fee	but	he	told	him
that	he	would	never	give	him	the	other	half.	Zeno	said,	"How?"	He	said,	"I	am
never	going	to	argue!	I	will	accept	defeat	without	arguing.	I	may	lose	everything
that	I	have	but	I	am	not	going	to	give	you	the	other	half	of	your	fee."
Zeno	waited,	but	the	man	would	not	even	talk	about	the	weather,	because	some
argument	may	start	and	there	may	be	trouble.	And	he	was	determined	not	to	pay
the	 fees	 so	 as	 to	 teach	 Zeno:	 "You	 may	 be	 a	 great	 logician,	 but	 there	 is	 a
possibility	of	going	higher	than	you."
But	 Zeno	was	 not	 going	 to	 sit	 silently.	He	 put	 a	 case	 in	 the	 court	 against	 the
student:	"He	has	not	paid	me	half	the	fee."	His	idea	was	that	if	he	wins	the	case,
then	he	will	tell	the	court,	"Force	that	student	to	pay	the	fee."	If	he	loses	the	case,
no	harm	 --	outside	 the	court	he	will	 catch	 the	 student	and	will	 say,	 "You	have
won	your	first	argument	--	my	fee!"	So	whether	he	wins	or	whether	he	loses,	he
is	going	to	get	half	the	fee.
But	 he	 forgot	 that	 it	 was	 his	 own	 student	 who	 knew	 all	 his	 techniques	 and
arguments.
From	 the	 opposite	 side	 the	 student	was	 thinking,	 "That's	 good:	 if	 I	win	 in	 the
court,	 I	will	appeal	 to	 the	court	 that	 this	man	should	not	bother	me	outside	 the
court,	because	that	will	be	a	contempt	of	court.	And	if	I	lose	the	case,	then	there
is	no	problem.	Outside	I	will	catch	hold	of	Zeno	and	say,	"Master,	I	have	lost	my
first	argument	--	you	cannot	get	the	fee."
The	whole	genius	of	Greece	was	involved	in	that,	in	that	atmosphere.	Pythagoras
is	very	unique.	He	got	out	of	Greece	--	 it	was	not	 the	right	place.	People	were
simply	 arguing	 and	 arguing,	 but	 nobody	 was	 concerned	 in	 evolving
consciousness.	He	was	coming	to	India.	On	the	way	he	remained	a	few	years	in
the	library	of	Alexandria,	where	he	picked	up	knowledge	about	the	lost	continent
of	Atlantis.
We	 have	 only	 that	 proof;	 no	 other	 proof	 exists	 --	 although	 recently	 scientists
have	started	looking	into	the	matter.	What	they	have	been	finding	in	the	Atlantic
ocean	 suggests	 that	 there	must	 have	 been	 a	 great	 civilization;	whole	 cities	 are
drowned	 there.	 The	 whole	 continent	 simply	 went	 down	 into	 the	 ocean.	 Such
changes	happen	on	the	earth:	new	islands	come	up,	new	mountains	come	up.
The	Himalayas	are	a	new	mountain	range	--	 the	newest.	 It	was	not	 there	when
RIG
VEDA	was	written,	because	it	is	impossible	that	RIG	VEDA	should	not	mention
such	beautiful	mountains	 --	 the	 highest	 and	 the	most	 glorious.	But	 there	 is	 no
mention	 about	 them.	 And	 the	 people	 who	 wrote	 RIG	 VEDA	 had	 come	 from
Mongolia.	Certainly	 there	was	no	mountain	on	 the	way;	otherwise	 to	cross	 the
Himalayas	and	to	come	to	India	would	have	been	impossible.	Even	today,	there
are	 only	 two	 places	 from	where	 you	 can	 cross	 the	Himalayas;	 otherwise	 it	 is
uncrossable.	Changes	go	on	happening	on	the	earth.
Pythagoras	reached	India,	but	he	got	caught	again	--	in	the	Buddhist	atmosphere.
It	was	so	real;	although	Buddha	was	dead,	the	whole	country	was	throbbing.	His
impression,	 his	 impact,	 had	 been	 very	 deep.	When	 Pythagoras	 reached	 India,
whatever	he	learned	was	learned	in	Buddhist	universities.	You	will	be	surprised
to	 know	 that	 Buddhist	 universities	 are	 the	 oldest	 universities	 in	 the	 world.
Oxford	 is	 only	 one	 thousand	 years	 old.	 Nalanda,	 a	 Buddhist	 university,	 and
Takshila,	 a	 Buddhist	 university,	 existed	 twenty-three	 hundred	 years	 ago.	 They
were	destroyed	by	Hindus	and	Mohammedans	both.
But	they	were	rare	universities	--	they	fulfilled	the	real	meaning	of	the	word.	Not
everybody	was	 allowed	 to	 be	 in	 the	 university.	Outside	 the	 university	 campus
there	 were	 places	 where	 people	 could	 live	 for	 preparation.	 At	 the	 gate	 the
gatekeepers	were	no	ordinary	people	but	very	qualified	Buddhist	bhikkhus,	and
they	had	to	give	people	an	examination	at	the	gate.	When	you	had	passed	those
examinations,	you	could	enter	 into	 the	university	campus;	otherwise	 it	was	not
even	possible	 to	enter	 it.	Even	just	 to	see	it	was	not	possible;	 it	was	so	sacred.
Wisdom	was	thought	so	sacred	--	it	was	not	everybody's	thing,	only	those	who
could	put	their	whole	life	into	the	search.
These	three	P's	--	Purification,	Preparation,	Perfection	--	come	from	the	Buddhist
sources	of	wisdom.	Of	course,	Pythagoras	made	them	more	logical	--	he	had	a
Greek	mind	--
made	them	more	systematic.	But	those	words	are	really	significant.
Preparation	 does	 not	 mean	 preparing	 for	 a	 verbal	 examination	 or	 a	 written
examination.
Preparation	 means	 preparing	 for	 an	 existential	 examination;	 it	 means	 going
deeper	 into	meditation.	Unless	 you	were	meditative	 you	 could	 not	 enter	 those
universities.	And	they	had	big	campuses:	Takshila	had	ten	thousand	scholars	in
it,	 Nalanda	 had	 twelve	 thousand	 scholars	 in	 it.	 Even	 today	 the	 greatest
universities	don't	have	more	than	that	number,	but	their	quality	is	very	ordinary;
students	have	simply	passed	the	school	examinations	and	they	are	ready	to	enter.
No	existential	preparation	is	needed.
Preparation	 means	 that	 you	 drop	 all	 your	 conditionings,	 you	 drop	 your
prejudices,	you	drop	what	you	think	you	know	and	you	do	not	know:	you	get	as
innocent	as	possible.
Your	 innocence	will	 be	 the	preparation	 --	 that	will	 allow	you	 to	 enter	 into	 the
university	campus.
Then	purification...	In	preparation	you	drop	the	conditionings	which	were	given
by	 the	 society,	prejudices	which	were	given	 to	you	or	 caught	by	you	 from	 the
surroundings;	 it	was	borrowed	knowledge	in	some	way	or	other.	You	go	like	a
child	 --	 but	 even	 the	 child	 is	 not	 pure.	 That	 is	 something	 very	 significant	 to
understand,	because	people	take	it	for	granted	that	the	child	is	pure.
He	is	certainly	innocent,	but	his	innocence	is	equivalent	to	ignorance,	and	behind
his	 innocence	 are	 all	 his	 feelings:	 anger,	 hatred,	 greed,	 jealousy.	You	 can	 see,
children	are	very	 jealous.	 If	one	child	has	a	doll,	 the	other	becomes	so	 jealous
that	 they	will	 start	 fighting.	 If	 some	 child	 has	 something,	 then	 the	 other	 child
also	wants	 to	 have	 it.	 They	 are	 very	 competitive.	 Even	 in	 the	 family	 children
have	 a	 hierarchy,	 and	 they	 are	 constantly	 fighting	 to	 be	 higher	 than	 others.
Whatever	is	needed	to	be	done...	if	obedience	makes	them	the	most	loved	in	the
family,	 they	will	 follow	obedience.	But	 they	are	not	 following	obedience;	 they
are	really	trying	a	power	strategy.
So	preparation	simply	takes	away	the	layers	that	society	has	put	on	your	mind.
But	you	have	brought	with	nature,	with	your	birth,	so	many	ugly	instincts,	that	a
purification	is	needed.
You	have	 to	understand	 that	competition	 is	meaningless.	You	have	 to	meditate
deeply	and	recognize	that	you	are	not	like	anybody	else.	And	competition	can	be
only	among	similar	people	--	and	everybody	is	dissimilar,	unique.
Once	the	competitive	mind	disappears,	many	things	change	in	you;	then	you	are
not	 jealous.	 If	 somebody	has	 a	 beautiful	 face	 and	 somebody	has	more	money,
and	somebody	has	a	more	powerful	body,	you	simply	accept	the	fact	that	a	few
trees	are	tall	and	a	few	trees	are	small.	But	existence	accepts	them	all.
The	 disappearance	 of	 competitiveness	 will	 also	 help	 you	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 greed.
People	go	on	accumulating	--	they	want	to	be	in	a	better	position	than	you,	with
more	money	than	you,	with	everything	better	 than	you.	And	their	whole	 life	 is
wasted	in	that.
Purification	is	almost	going	through	a	fire	of	understanding	in	which	all	 that	is
instinctive	and	ugly	burns	down.	And	it	is	a	great	experience	that	only	the	ugly
burns.	That	which	is	beautiful	blossoms.	In	purification	you	lose	all	trace	of	hate,
and	instead,	suddenly	a	spring	of	love	bursts	forth	--	as	if	 the	rock	of	hate	was
preventing	the	spring.
Once	 the	cruelty...	and	children	are	very	cruel.	The	 idea	 that	 they	are	angels	 is
just	stupid.
They	 are	 very	 cruel;	 they	 will	 beat	 dogs,	 they	 will	 beat	 cats.	 A	 small	 insect
passing	by	--
and	a	child	will	simply	kill	it	for	no	reason,	he	just	enjoys	destruction.	There	is	a
destructiveness	in	him.	Once	that	is	gone,	creativity	arises.
So	 purification	 is	 a	 deeper	 meditation	 than	 preparation.	 Preparation	 was	 very
simple,	but	purification	is	going	deeper	into	meditation	--	the	deepest	possible	--
so	everything	that	is	not	worthy	of	human	beings	is	transformed.	Everything	has
energy	in	it	--	hate,	jealousy,	greed	--	and	when	these	things	change,	their	energy
becomes	available	to	you	in	its	purified	form.	And	they	can	turn:	greed	can	turn
into	 compassion,	 sharing;	 hate	 can	 turn	 into	 love.	 Everything	 will	 turn	 into
something	which	makes	your	heart	a	garden.
And	when	 the	 purification	 is	 complete,	 utterly	 complete,	 not	 a	 corner	 of	 your
being	remains	in	the	dark,	everything	is	light	and	fragrant,	fresh...	What	we	have
called	the	awakened	man,	the	enlightened	man,	Pythagoras	calls	perfection.	It	is
simply	a	different	name:	the	perfect	man.
The	 first	 two	 you	 have	 to	 do;	 the	 third	 is	 the	 ultimate	 outcome	 of	 it.	 In	 these
three	 simple	 words	 he	 has	 condensed	 the	 whole	 alchemy	 of	 human
transformation.
Pythagoras	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 people	 that	 Greece	 has	 given	 to	 the
world.	But	strangely	enough,	nothing	much	is	talked	about	all	the	best	geniuses
that	Greece	has	given	to	the	world.	Pythagoras,	Socrates,	Heraclitus,	Epicurus	--
these	 are	 the	 ones	 who	 should	 be	 talked	 about.	 But	 instead	 of	 them,	 in	 the
universities	Plato	is	studied,	Aristotle	is	studied.
Plato	 is	simply	a	 record-keeper	 --	he	has	not	a	single	 idea	of	his	own!	He	 is	a
devoted	lover	of	Socrates,	and	whatever	Socrates	says,	he	goes	on	recording	it,
writing	it.	Socrates	has	not	written	anything	--	 just	as	no	great	master	has	ever
written	anything.	And	Plato	is	certainly	a	great	writer;	perhaps	Socrates	may	not
have	been	able	to	write	so	beautifully.
Plato	has	made	Socrates'	teachings	as	beautiful	as	possible,	but	he	himself	is	no
one.	Now	the	same	work	can	be	done	by	a	tape	recorder.	And	Aristotle	is	merely
an	intellectual,	with	no	understanding	of	being,	or	even	a	desire	to	search	for	it.
These	people	are	taught	in	the	universities.
I	was	constantly	in	a	fight	with	my	professors.	When	they	started	teaching	Plato,
I	said,
"This	 is	 absolute	 nonsense,	 because	 Plato	 has	 nothing	 to	 say	 of	 his	 own.	 It	 is
better	to	teach	about	Socrates.	Plato	can	be	referred	to	--	he	has	compiled	it	all.
But	 Socrates'	 name	 has	 become	 almost	 a	 fiction,	 and	 Plato	 has	 become	 the
reality	--	just	the	way	I	was	saying	to	you	last	night	that	Ouspensky	has	become
the	master,	because	he	has	written	the	books,	beautiful	books.	One	day	Gurdjieff
will	be	forgotten	--	he	is	already	forgotten	--
and	Ouspensky	will	be	remembered	for	centuries.	And	sooner	or	 later	what	he
has	written	will	be	thought	to	be	his	own	ideas.	None	of	it	is	his	own	ideas.
Pythagoras	is	not	at	all	bothered	about	any	university	in	the	world,	for	the	simple
reason	that	he	is	not	a	routine	scholar;	he	is	an	original	seeker,	and	he	is	ready	to
go	anywhere.
He	traveled	all	his	life	to	find	people	who	may	have	had	a	little	glimpse	and	may
be	able	to	impart	something	to	him.	He	was	collecting	pieces,	and	he	managed
beautifully.
But	 Greeks	 don't	 talk	 about	 him	 because	 he	 is	 not	 talking	 about	 Greek
philosophy;	 he	 is	 bringing	 foreign	 ideas,	 strange	 ideas	 from	Alexandria,	 from
Nalanda,	 from	Takshila	 --	he	 is	almost	not	a	Greek.	They	are	not	 interested	 in
what	he	is	bringing,	although	what	he	is	bringing	has	nothing	to	do	with	Greeks
or	 Indians	or	Egyptians.	But	he	 is	 ignored	 --	 one	of	 the	most	 significant	men,
utterly	ignored.
The	 same	 has	 happened	 to	 Diogenes.	 He	 is	 ignored	 because	 he	 looks
embarrassing	to	the	Greeks.	And	he	is	very	original	--	not	only	in	thoughts	but	in
life.	 In	 everything	 that	 he	 does	 he	 is	 original	 and	 very	 sincere	 --	 a	 man	 of
tremendous	courage,	who	could	say	to	Alexander	the	Great,	"You	are	behaving
like	a	fool.	The	very	idea	of	conquering	the	world	is	nonsense.	For	what	do	you
want	to	conquer	the	world?	What	will	you	do	after	it?"
He	said,	"After	it?	I	am	going	to	relax	and	enjoy."	And	Diogenes	looked	at	his
dog	--	they	were	friends,	they	used	to	live	together	--	and	he	told	the	dog,	"Did
you	hear?	He	is	planning	to	relax	and	enjoy	after	conquering	the	world,	and	we
are	 enjoying	 right	 now,	 without	 conquering	 anything!	 Why	 take	 so	 much
trouble?"	 A	 naked	 man	 who	 can	 say	 to	 Alexander,	 "You	 are	 behaving	 like	 a
fool,"	must	have	guts	--	and	Alexander	had	to	recognize	it.	And	he	was	a	man	of
tremendous	power	himself,	of	great	intelligence.	He	had	to	recognize	it	--	that	he
has	never	met	a	man	of	the	quality	of	Diogenes.
But	Greeks	go	on	avoiding,	 the	 same	way	 they	have	done	with	Epicurus.	 It	 is
very	 strange,	 but	 perhaps	 this	 is	 the	way	 of	 humanity	 to	 behave	with	 its	 own
greatest	sons	--	to	ignore	them,	not	to	take	any	note	of	them.
But	 amongst	 all	 these,	 Pythagoras	 has	 created	 a	 complete	 system	 to	 create	 a
Buddha.	He	himself	became	an	enlightened	man	--	 it	was	not	only	 theoretical.
When	he	came	back	to	Greece,	he	was	not	the	same	Pythagoras	who	had	left;	he
was	a	new	man.	And	that	was	one	of	the	greatest	difficulties	--	his	own	country
could	 not	 recognize	 him.	 In	 fact	 they	 had	 no	 category	 of	 enlightenment,
awakening,	buddhahood,	so	where	to	put	Pythagoras?
The	category	just	does	not	exist	in	their	mind,	so	he	remains	uncategorized,	and
for	two	thousand	years	nobody	has	commented	upon	him.
I	am	the	first	man	to	have	commented	on	the	great	genius	and	realization	of	this
unique	individual.	He	has	a	more	perfect	way	of	presentation	than	you	will	find
in	 Indian	scriptures,	because	 Indian	scriptures	are	more	poetic,	and	he	 is,	 after
all,	a	Greek!	He	is	very	logical	and	very	scientific.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 ARE	 FAMOUS	 FOR	 YOUR	 CONTRADICTIONS.	 BUT	 IT	 SEEMS
THAT	ONE
OF	 THE	 MOST	 POWERFUL	 CONFIRMATIONS	 THAT	 YOU	 ARE	 WHO
YOU	ARE
--	FOR	THE	WORLD	IN	GENERAL	AND	POSTERITY	--	IS	THAT,	IN	ALL
THOSE
MILLIONS	 AND	 MILLIONS	 OF	 WORDS,	 SPOKEN	 SPONTANEOUSLY
OVER
SEVERAL	DECADES,	YOU	REALLY	NEVER	EVER	CONTRADICTED
YOURSELF	AT	ALL.
That's	true!
I	 have	 never	 contradicted	 myself.	 I	 cannot	 do	 it.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 I	 don't
remember	anything	that	I	have	said	before	--	how	to	contradict	it?
Secondly,	 it	 is	 not	my	 thinking,	 it	 is	my	 experience.	Contradictions	 happen	 in
thinking,	but	not	 in	experience.	I	have	said	 things	which	may	appear	 to	people
contradictory,	but	they	are	really	evolutionary.	My	experience	I	have	expressed
in	 different	 ways;	 that	 may	 create	 the	 idea	 that	 I	 am	 contradictory.	 I	 was
expressing	it	in	different	ways	so	if	you	have	missed	one	way,	perhaps	the	other
way	you	may	get	it.
I	have	tried	to	describe	it	from	all	aspects	possible,	just	to	help	people,	because
sometimes	it	happens	that	one	aspect	does	not	reach	you	but	the	other	aspect	is
more	in	tune	with	you.	I	have	used	all	possible,	multi-dimensional	expressions,
but	 there	 is	 no	way	 for	me	 to	 contradict.	 It	 is	my	 experience.	 I	 am	not	 taking
about	others'	experience.
Even	if	I	am	talking	about	others,	it	is	always	according	to	my	experience.	They
may	 agree	 with	 it,	 they	 may	 not	 agree	 with	 it	 --	 but	 I	 cannot	 go	 against	 my
experience.
During	the	years,	talking	to	you,	I	have	been	sharpening	my	arrows,	my	words,
so	that	they	can	penetrate	directly	to	your	heart.	But	contradiction	is	not	there	at
all.	And	you	are	right:	the	day	all	of	my	words	will	be	understood,	there	will	be
found	an	undercurrent	 running	 through	all	of	 them	and	 joining	 them.	They	are
like	 flowers	 of	 a	 garland	 --	 a	 thin	 thread,	 invisible,	 is	 running	 through	 all	 the
flowers	--	and	that	is	my	consistency,	that	is	my	experience.
It	 is	 true,	 I	 don't	 think	 anybody	 else	 has	 spoken	 so	 much.	Much	 of	 it	 is	 lost
because	it	was	not	recorded;	almost	half	of	it	is	lost,	but	whatever	remains	is	still
more	than	anyone	else	has	ever	tried	to	convey.
The	 reason	 is	 simple:	 I	 enjoy	 it,	 I	 love	 it.	When	 I	 see	 a	word	 settling	 in	 your
heart,	my	joy	knows	no	bounds.	When	I	see	a	glimpse	in	your	eyes	that	you	have
caught	the	meaning,	I	am	immensely	happy.
And	I	had	to	speak	so	much	because	nobody	before	me	has	addressed	the	whole
world.
They	were	addressing	small	fragments	of	humanity.	Jesus	remained	confined	to
Judea,	 Buddha	 remained	 confined	 to	 Bihar,	 Socrates	 remained	 confined	 to
Athens.	 Fortunately	 they	 don't	 let	me	 remain	 in	 one	 place,	 so	 I	 have	 to	 be	 all
over	 the	world.	And	 I	 have	 to	 speak	 again	 and	 again	 through	 different	 angles
about	the	same	experience,	because	in	that	also	my	life	has	been	unique:	people
have	 been	 coming	 to	 me	 and	 leaving	 me	 --	 new	 people	 coming,	 old	 people
going.	 It	 has	been	beautiful.	 It	 has	not	been	 like	a	dead	pond	where	 the	water
only	evaporates,	and	soon	there	is	left	nothing	but	muddy	mess.
It	is	almost	as	if	I	have	been	speaking	by	the	side	of	a	river,	which	is	running	so
fast	that	each	time	I	look	at	it	there	are	new	faces	to	whom	I	have	to	speak	again.
In	thirty	years	so	many	people	have	changed.	It	was	not	true	about	Socrates	or
Buddha	 or	 Lao	 Tzu,	 they	 worked	 with	 a	 group	 their	 whole	 life.	 I	 have	 been
working	with	so	many	new	people,	and	I	have	always	to	find	out	a	new	mode,	a
new	phase,	new	expressions,	new	bottles	for	the	old	wine...	but	the	wine	is	old,
and	it	is	the	same	wine	that	I	have	been	offering	to	all.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	The	courage	to	be	ignorant
27	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604275
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO31
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
86
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	ARE	THE	QUALITIES	OF	THE	SEEKER	OF	TRUTH?
Every	child	is	born	with	an	innate	search	for	truth.	It	is	not	something	learned	or
adopted	 later	 on	 in	 life.	Truth	 simply	means,	 "I	 am,	 but	 I	 do	 not	 know	who	 I
am."	And	the	question	is	natural	--	"I	must	know	the	reality	of	my	being."	It	is
not	a	curiosity.
These	are	the	three	differences,	or	three	categories	the	world	can	be	divided	into:
there	are	things	which	are,	but	they	do	not	know	that	they	are;	hence	there	is	no
opening	 for	 any	 enquiry.	They	 are	 closed,	 their	 existence	 is	windowless.	Then
there	are	animals	who	know	that	they	are,	but	they	don't	have	the	intelligence	to
enquire	what	it	is	that	they	are.
Their	windows	are	open,	but	their	intelligence	is	not	enough	to	look	out	and	see
the	 stars	 and	 the	 sky	 and	 the	 birds	 and	 the	 trees.	 Their	 windows	 --	 whether
opened	or	closed	--
don't	make	much	difference.
Perhaps	 once	 in	 a	 while	 a	 rare	 animal	 uses	 the	 window.	 In	 Shri	 Raman
Maharshi's	 ashram...	 and	 he	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 people	 of	 this
century.	He	was	not	a	master;	 that's	why	people	don't	know	him	as	 they	know
George	Gurdjieff	or	J.
Krishnamurti.	They	don't	 know	him	even	as	 they	know	Sri	Aurobindo	or	P.D.
Ouspensky	who	were	only	teachers	--	profound	teachers,	but	not	mystics.
Raman	Maharshi	was	a	silent	pool	of	energy.	Every	morning	he	used	to	sit	for	a
silent	satsang,	communion.	He	never	talked	much,	unless	asked	something.	Then
too	his	answer	was	very	short	 --	having	profundity,	but	you	had	 to	 look	 for	 it.
There	 was	 no	 explanation	 in	 it.	 His	 literature	 is	 confined	 to	 two,	 three	 small
booklets.
His	teaching	was	mostly	to	be	in	silent	communion	with	the	disciples.	Naturally,
very	 few	 people	 were	 benefited	 by	 him.	 But	 every	 morning	 he	 was	 sitting,
people	were	sitting,	and	a	cow	would	come	and	stand	outside,	putting	her	neck
through	 the	 window,	 and	 she	 would	 remain	 standing	 there	 while	 the	 satsang
lasted.	It	must	have	continued	for	years.
People	came	and	went,	new	people	came,	but	the	cow	remained	constant...	and
at	the	exact	time,	never	late.	And	as	the	satsang	would	disperse	she	would	move
away.
One	 day	 she	 did	 not	 appear,	 and	 Shri	 Raman	 said,	 "Today	 satsang	 cannot	 be
held,	because	my	real	audience	is	absent.	I	am	afraid	either	the	cow	is	very	sick
or	she	has	died,	and	I	have	to	go	and	look	for	her."	He	lived	on	a	mountain	in	the
south	 of	 India,	Arunachal.	The	 cow	belonged	 to	 a	 poor	woodcutter	who	 lived
near	 the	 ashram.	Raman	 left	 the	 temple	where	 they	 used	 to	meet,	went	 to	 the
woodcutter	 and	 asked,	 "What	 happened?	 The	 cow	 has	 not	 come	 today	 for
satsang."
The	woodcutter	said,	"She	is	very	sick	and	I	am	afraid	she	is	dying,	but	she	goes
on	 looking	 out	 of	 the	 door,	 as	 if	 she	 is	 waiting	 for	 someone.	 Perhaps	 she	 is
waiting	for	you,	to	see	you	for	the	last	time.	Perhaps	that	is	why	she	is	hanging
around	a	little	longer."
Raman	went	in	and	there	were	tears	in	the	eyes	of	the	cow.	And	she	died	happily,
putting	 her	 head	 in	 the	 lap	 of	 Raman	 Maharshi.	 This	 happened	 just	 in	 this
century,	and	Raman	declared	her	enlightened,	and	told	his	people	that	a	beautiful
memorial	should	be	made	for	her.
It	 is	very	rare	 for	human	beings	 to	be	enlightened;	 it	 is	almost	 impossibly	rare
for	animals	 to	become	enlightened,	but	 the	cow	attained.	She	will	not	be	born
again.	From	the	body	of	a	cow	she	has	bypassed	the	whole	world	of	humanity,
and	 she	has	 jumped	ahead	and	 joined	with	 the	buddhas.	So	once	 in	a	while	 --
there	are	a	few	instances	only	--	 it	has	happened.	But	 that	cannot	be	called	the
rule;	it	is	just	the	exception.
Things	are,	but	they	do	not	know	that	they	are.	Animals	are,	they	know	that	they
are,	 but	 they	 don't	 have	 the	 intelligence	 to	 ask	 who	 they	 are.	 And	 it	 is	 not
something	 to	 be	 wondered	 about.	 Millions	 of	 human	 beings	 never	 ask	 the
question	--	that	is	the	third	category.
Man	is,	is	aware	that	he	is,	and	is	capable	by	birth	to	enquire	who	he	is.	So	it	is
not	 a	 question	 of	 learning,	 cultivation,	 education;	 you	 bring	 the	 quest	 with
yourself.	You	are	the	quest.
Your	society	destroys	you.	It	has	very	sophisticated	ways	and	means	to	destroy
your	quest,	to	remove	the	question	from	your	being,	or	at	least	cover	it	up.	And
the	method	it	uses	is	this:	before	the	child	has	even	asked	who	he	is,	the	answer
is	given.	And	any	answer	that	has	been	given	before	the	question	has	been	asked
is	futile;	it	is	going	to	be	just	a	burden.
He	is	told	that	he	is	a	soul,	that	he	is	a	spirit,	that	he	is	not	a	body,	that	he	is	not
material.
Or,	 in	 communist	 countries	he	 is	 told	 that	he	 is	 a	body,	 just	material,	 and	 that
only	in	the	old	days,	out	of	fear	and	ignorance,	did	people	believe	that	they	have
souls	--	that	that	is	just	a	superstition.	But	in	both	cases,	the	child	is	being	given
an	answer	for	which	he	has	not	asked.	And	his	mind	is	delicate,	pure...	and	he
trusts	his	mother,	his	father	--	there	is	no	reason	for	him	not	to	trust.
He	 starts	 a	 journey	of	belief,	 and	belief	kills	 the	quest.	He	becomes	more	and
more	knowledgeable.	Then	education	 is	 there,	 religious	education	 is	 there,	and
there	 is	no	end	 to	collecting	knowledge.	But	all	 this	knowledge	 is	 futile	 --	not
only	futile,	but	poisonous,	because	 the	first	step	has	gone	wrong.	The	question
was	not	asked,	and	the	answer	has	been	implanted	in	his	mind,	and	since	then	he
has	 been	 collecting	more	 and	more	 answers.	He	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 that
any	answer	that	is	not	the	finding	of	a	question	is	meaningless.
So	the	only	quality	of	a	seeker	of	truth	is	that	he	does	not	believe,	that	he	is	not	a
believer,	that	he	is	ready	to	be	ignorant	rather	than	to	be	knowledgeable,	because
ignorance	 is	 at	 least	 natural,	 simple,	 innocent.	And	out	of	 ignorance	 there	 is	 a
possibility,	almost	a	certainty,	 that	 the	question	will	arise,	 that	 the	 journey	will
begin.	 But	 through	 knowledge	 you	 are	 lost	 in	 a	 jungle	 of	 words,	 theories,
doctrines,	dogmas.	And	there	are	so	many,	and	they	are	so	contradictory	to	each
other,	that	soon	you	will	find	yourself	more	and	more	confused...	more	and	more
knowledgeable	and	more	and	more	confused.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned	the	basic	quality	of	a	seeker	of	truth	is	to	cut	himself
away	from	all	belief	systems,	from	all	borrowed	knowledge	--	in	other	words,	to
have	 the	 courage	 to	 be	 ignorant	 rather	 than	 to	 have	 borrowed	 knowledge.
Ignorance	has	a	beauty;	it	 is	at	least	yours,	authentic,	sincere.	It	has	come	with
you.	It	is	your	blood,	it	is	your	bones,	it	is	your	marrow.
Knowledgeability	 is	 ugly,	 absolute	 rubbish.	 It	 has	 been	 poured	 upon	 you	 by
others,	and	you	are	carrying	the	load	of	it.	And	the	load	is	such	that	it	will	not
give	you	any	opportunity	to	enquire	on	your	own	what	truth	is.	Your	collection
of	knowledge	will	 answer	 immediately	 that	 this	 is	 truth.	 If	 you	 are	 filled	with
THE	HOLY	BIBLE,	then	the	question	will	be	answered	by	THE	HOLY	BIBLE.
If	 you	 are	 filled	 with	 the	 VEDAS,	 then	 the	 question	 will	 come	 out	 of	 the
VEDAS.	But	it	will	come	from	some	source	outside	yourself;	it	will	not	be	your
discovery.	And	that	which	is	not	your	discovery	is	not	yours.
Truth	brings	freedom	because	it	is	your	discovery.	It	makes	you	fully	into	man;
otherwise	you	 remain	on	 the	 level	of	 the	animals:	you	are	but	you	don't	know
who	you	are.
The	search	for	truth	is	really	the	search	for	the	reality	of	your	being.
Once	you	have	entered	your	being,	you	have	entered	into	the	being	of	the	whole,
because	we	 are	 different	 on	 the	 periphery	but	 at	 the	 center	we	meet	 --	we	 are
one.	You	can	draw	many	lines	from	the	periphery	of	a	circle	towards	the	center;
those	lines	on	the	periphery	have	a	certain	distance	from	each	other.	But	as	they
come	closer	 to	 the	 center	 the	distance	goes	on	becoming	 less.	And	when	 they
reach	to	the	center	the	distance	disappears.
At	the	center	we	are	one.
At	the	periphery	of	existence	we	appear	to	be	separate.
And	to	know	the	truth	of	your	being	is	to	know	the	truth	of	the	whole.
There	is	just	one	quality,	one	courage:	not	to	be	afraid	of	being	ignorant.	On	that
point	 there	 can	 be	 no	 compromise,	 no	 cheap	 borrowed	 knowledge	 to	 decorate
yourself	with	as	a	wise	man.	That's	enough!	Just	be	pure	and	natural,	and	out	of
that	purity,	naturalness,	ignorance,	innocence,	the	quest	is	bound	to	be	born.
Every	human	being	would	be	a	seeker	of	truth	if	the	society	were	not	interfering
with	children.
The	class	of	children	is	the	most	harmed,	oppressed,	exploited,	distorted	class	of
all	 classes	 --	 and	 the	 most	 helpless.	 And	 you	 are	 taking	 advantage	 of	 the
helplessness	of	small	children.	But	you	are	also	not	 responsible.	The	same	has
been	done	to	you.	It	is	difficult	to	find	out	who	was	responsible	in	the	beginning.
But	as	 long	as	we	can	 look	back,	 this	has	been	 the	 situation:	 every	generation
corrupts	the	new	generation,	and	anybody	who	wants	to	prevent	this	corruption
is	condemned	as	corrupting	the	youth.
Socrates	was	condemned	for	corrupting	the	youth,	and	all	that	he	was	doing	was
the	simple	process	of	removing	borrowed	knowledge	and	helping	his	disciples	to
be	themselves	and	then	"to	know	thyself."	If	anybody	has	served	truth	the	most
sincerely	it	was	Socrates.	But	he	was	condemned	by	the	court,	by	the	law,	by	the
people	who	were	in	power,	for	corruption,	for	corrupting	young	minds.
Strangely,	 in	 the	 land	of	Socrates	 I	was	also	condemned	as	corrupting	people's
minds.	It	seems	the	technology	of	corrupting	the	youth	has	evolved	immensely
in	two	thousand	years,	because	it	 took	Socrates	his	whole	life	to	corrupt,	and	I
was	 only	 there	 for	 two	weeks!	And	 the	 archbishop	was	 already	 threatening	 to
burn	my	house,	to	stone	me	to	death.
Why	are	 they	afraid?	They	know	perfectly	well	 that	 they	have	no	foundations.
So	if	anybody	shows	the	young	people	that	 their	knowledge	is	unfounded,	that
all	their	answers	are	bogus	because	they	don't	even	have	questions,	that	they	are
only	repeating	things	parrot-like	but	they	don't	have	any	understanding	of	what
they	 are	 saying...	 then	 anybody	 who	 has	 a	 little	 intelligence	 will	 be	 able	 to
understand	it	immediately.
Is	this	corruption	of	the	youth?
To	bring	people	to	the	quest	of	the	truth	--	is	this	corruption?
It	seems	it	is	the	greatest	crime	in	the	world	in	which	--	unfortunately	--	we	are
living.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
PROBABLY	 NO	 ENLIGHTENED	 MASTER	 HAS	 SPOKEN	 SO	 MANY
MILLIONS
OF	WORDS	ABOUT	THE	TRUTH	AS	YOU	HAVE.	LAO	TZU	SAYS,	"THE
TRUTH
THAT	CAN	BE	SPOKEN	IS	NOT	THE	TRUTH."
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	DO	YOU	SAY?
Lao	 Tzu	 is	 right.	 The	 truth	 that	 can	 be	 spoken	 is	 no	 longer	 true,	 because	 the
mechanism	of	language	distorts	the	experience	--	which	happens	beyond	mind,
beyond	 words.	 To	 pull	 it	 down	 to	 the	 darker	 valleys	 of	 language	 is	 certainly
distorting	it.
On	 the	 one	 hand	 it	 is	 true	 that	 the	 truth	 cannot	 be	 spoken;	 on	 the	 other	 hand,
because	the	truth	cannot	be	spoken	it	has	to	be	spoken	in	thousands	of	ways.	The
problem	 is	not	 that	 the	 truth	will	 reach	 to	you	 through	 thousands	of	ways,	but
you	may	 become	 infected	with	 the	 search.	 If	 a	man	 speaks	 about	 the	 truth	 he
may	not	be	able	to	say	it...	but	you	can	get	a	glimpse	from	his	eyes,	you	can	get
something	 from	his	gestures	 --	 something	not	 from	 the	words	but	 the	way	 the
words	are	spoken,	the	emphasis,	the	gaps.	The	presence	of	such	a	man	speaking
may	be	just	an	excuse	to	allow	you	to	be	showered	by	his	presence.
Lao	 Tzu	 cannot	 speak	 truth,	 but	 to	 be	 with	 Lao	 Tzu	 you	 may	 get	 the	 right
direction.	His	 presence	may	 prove	 to	 you	 that	 there	 exists	 something	 that	 you
know	nothing	about,	and	that	it	is	so	precious	that	all	that	you	know	and	all	that
you	have	is	worth	sacrificing...
that	what	you	see	in	the	presence	of	the	master,	of	a	realized	man,	is	so	precious
that	it	has	to	be	discovered;	it	has	to	become	your	experience	too.
I	have	spoken	millions	of	words	just	in	order	to	give	you	a	taste,	a	feel.	Truth	I
cannot	give	to	you	--	nobody	can	give	it	to	you	--	but	I	can	open	my	heart	to	you,
which	has	known	the	truth,	lived	the	truth.	And	that	opening	may	help	you	in	a
very	indirect	way	to	go	on	your	own	pilgrimage.	It	may	give	you	confidence	that
all	this	talk	about	truth	is	not	just	talk,	that	it	changes	people,	that	it	changes	their
very	presence,	 that	 it	gives	 them	a	certain	 fragrance,	a	certain	power,	a	certain
authority.	They	don't	speak	like	anybody	else.
They	are	not	orators,	they	are	not	speakers;	they	simply	open	their	heart.	Perhaps
the	rhythm	of	their	heart	will	change	the	rhythm	of	your	heart.
Listening	 to	 them	you	may	 not	 get	 the	 truth,	 but	 you	may	 be	 transported	 into
another	 world:	 a	 world	 of	 silence,	 a	 world	 of	 immense	 peace,	 a	 world	 of
benediction.	And	all	those	are	immensely	helpful	for	the	search.
So	Lao	Tzu	is	both	right	and	wrong:	right	because	what	he	is	saying	is	exactly	so
--	the	spoken	truth	is	no	longer	true.	But	that	is	not	all.	If	the	truth	is	spoken	by
someone,	and	if	it	is	out	of	experience	--	and	it	can	only	be	out	of	experience	--
then	that	very	person,	his	every	act	radiates	something.	It	is	contagious.	Hence,
whether	 truth	 is	conveyed	 to	you	or	not	 is	not	 important.	What	 is	 important	 is
that	if	you	become	convinced	that	there	is	something	like	truth,	there	is	a	certain
transformation	 that	 brings	 the	 full	 flowering	 of	 the	 being,	 then	 the	 word,	 the
language,	has	done	more	than	can	be	expected!
So	I	say	again,	Lao	Tzu	is	right	and	not	right.	And	my	emphasis	on	not	right	is
more	 than	 on	 his	 being	 right;	 otherwise	 I	 would	 not	 have	 spoken	millions	 of
words,	I	would	have	remained	silent.
But	I	saw	that	 it	 is	not	only	a	question	of	speaking;	much	more	 is	 involved.	 It
shows	why	no	mystic	in	the	whole	history	of	man	has	ever	written	anything.	The
reason	is	that	the	written	word	will	miss	all	that	the	spoken	word	has.	It	will	be
the	 same	word	 --	 spoken	 or	 written	makes	 no	 difference.	 It	 will	 be	 the	 same
statement	written	or	spoken,	but	why	has	no	mystic	agreed	to	write?	The	reason
is	 that	 they	were	 all	 aware	 that	 the	 spoken	word	 has	 a	 living	 quality,	 because
experience	 is	behind	 it,	a	heart	 is	beating	behind	 it,	a	consciousness	 is	making
arduous	effort	to	reach	to	you.
The	written	word	is	dead,	just	a	corpse.	You	can	worship	it	but	it	cannot	give	you
anything.	 All	 scriptures	 are	 dead.	 Perhaps	 when	 they	 were	 spoken	 it	 was	 a
different	phenomenon.	If	the	man	who	had	spoken	them	was	speaking	out	of	his
own	realization,	then	something	--	the	very	vibe	--	is	carried	away	by	the	word.
Truth	 may	 not	 be	 expressed,	 but	 truth	 becomes	 a	 reality.	 Seeing	 the	 master,
seeing	one	who	is	a	realized	one,	you	become	certain:	if	you	are	groping	in	the
dark,	don't	be	worried,	and	don't	feel	hopeless.	Go	on	groping!	Every	night	has	a
morning	 to	 it,	and	sooner	or	 later	you	will	 find	 the	door,	you	will	 reach	 to	 the
point.	 If	 one	 man	 has	 reached,	 the	 whole	 humanity	 can	 reach.	 He	 is	 enough
proof.
So	the	question	is	not	whether	truth	can	be	spoken	or	not,	the	question	is	whether
a	presence	can	create	a	conviction	that	there	is	something	that	you	are	missing	--
and	unless	you	find	it	your	life	will	not	be	complete,	will	not	be	perfect.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	ME	YOU	SEEM	TO	BE	POINTING	THE	WAY	SO	STRONGLY	THESE
DAYS
AND	 I'VE	 ALMOST	 BECOME	 UNATTACHED	 TO	 THE	 FINGER...	 BUT
THEN
THERE	 IS	 THE	 ARM,	 AND	 THE	 TWINKLING	 EYES,	 THE	 SOUND	 OF
YOUR
VOICE,	 AND	 THE	 BEAUTIFUL	 GRACEFUL	 ATMOSPHERE	 THAT
SURROUNDS
YOU.	WITH	YOU	 IT	 IS	 SO	 EASY	 TO	 SAY	MA	NANA	 TO	 THE	MOON.
WHAT	TO
DO?
There	is	nothing	to	do.
Say	ma	nana	to	the	moon!
Just	 live	 the	 moment	 with	 intensity	 and	 totality.	 Live	 it	 with	 as	 much	 joy	 as
possible,	with	as	much	love	as	possible,	with	no	fear,	no	guilt.	This	existence	is
yours	and	this	moment	is	a	gift	--	don't	let	it	go	to	waste.	And	don't	be	worried
about	enlightenment,	the	moon.
This	moment,	living	totally,	is	enlightenment.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 telling	 you	 the	 Buddhist	 sutra....	 Gautam	 Buddha	 is
really	 a	 miracle,	 because	 he	 even	 puts	 himself	 down.	 He	 creates	 a	 category
beyond	 himself:	 a	 man	 who	 has	 gone	 beyond	 knowledge,	 beyond	 discipline,
beyond	enlightenment.	Then	billions	of	buddhas	are	not	equal	to	him.	That	last
part	 of	 the	 sutra	 is	 so	 valuable,	 particularly	 for	 you,	 because	 here	 is	 a	man	 in
front	of	you	who	has	no	knowledge,	who	has	no	discipline...
Just	when	we	came	here	I	was	sleeping	twenty	hours	a	day.	Nobody	has	done	it
before,	 and	 no	 religious	 person	will	 forgive	me	 --	 twenty	 hours	 a	 day!	 I	 was
getting	up	in	the	morning	for	two	hours	to	take	a	bath	and	take	my	food	and	go
to	sleep	again,	and	two	hours	in	the	evening	to	take	my	bath,	eat	my	food	and	go
to	bed	again.	And	I	loved	it.
I	don't	have	a	discipline;	that's	why	I	don't	impose	any	discipline	on	you.	When
it	 has	 to	 be	 transcended,	why	 bother	 in	 the	 first	 place	 to	 impose	 it?	 I	 am	 not
telling	you	to	read	this	holy	book	or	that	because	finally	it	has	to	be	transcended
--	transcend	it	right	now!
Even	enlightenment	has	to	be	transcended.
I	have	never	said	it	to	anybody,	but	I	have	left	enlightenment	far	behind.	I	have
not	 said	 it	 because	 you	 will	 not	 understand	 it.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 understand
enlightenment,	and	if	I	start	saying	that	there	is	something	even	beyond	it,	you
may	lose	all	hope.	You	will	say,
"This	is	too	much!	First	enlightenment	was	too	much,	and	we	were	trying	hard
and	nothing	was	happening.	And	now,	beyond	enlightenment...	it	is	better	to	be
ordinary	and	not	bother	about	these	things."
That's	why	I	have	not	said	it.	But	yesterday,	the	sutra,	suddenly...	I	had	no	desire,
but	 I	 could	not	deny	 the	 truth	of	what	Buddha	 is	 saying.	Experience,	even	 the
highest	 experience	 of	 enlightenment	 is	 still	 a	 duality:	 the	 experiencer	 and	 the
experienced.	And	that	duality	has	also	to	be	dropped.	But	the	moment	you	drop
the	experience,	the	experiencer	also	disappears	--	they	can	exist	only	together.
And	that	is	the	state	of	nirvana.
All	has	disappeared,	the	whole	drama	--	the	actors,	the	audience,	everything	has
disappeared.	Just	an	absolute	silence	prevails.
So	 don't	 be	 worried.	 Just	 try	 to	 live	 this	 moment	 as	 sincerely,	 as	 totally	 as
possible,	without	being	disturbed	by	the	past	or	by	the	future.	Undistracted,	go
deep	into	it,	and	that's	enough.	It	is	enlightenment.
One	day	 it	will	explode.	You	need	not	wait	 for	 it;	even	your	waiting	will	be	a
distraction.
You	forget	all	about	it.	That's	why	in	my	presence	you	feel	so	good	--	because
there	 is	no	yesterday,	no	 tomorrow.	 Just	here...	 this	 is	our	whole	world	 for	 the
moment.	One	 day	 that	 atomic	 explosion	within	 you	 happens.	And	 finally,	 one
day	you	go	even	beyond	it	--	then	everything	disappears.
That's	why	 I	 say	again	and	again	 that	what	has	happened	 in	 the	East	 as	 far	 as
spiritual	growth	is	concerned	is	incomparable.	All	other	religions	are	far	behind.
Now,	 no	 religion	 can	 say	 that	 knowledge	 disappears,	 discipline	 disappears,
enlightenment	disappears	--
only	then	you	are	at	home.
Buddha	 is	 saying	 billions	 of	 buddhas	 are	 not	 worth	 it:	 it	 is	 so	 valuable,	 the
ultimate	value.
And	it	is	available	to	all,	every	moment	of	your	life.	It	is	so	mysterious	how	you
go	on	missing	it;	it	is	the	one	thing	that	should	not	be	missed.	But	a	centuries	old
wrong	upbringing	is	destroying	your	small	precious	moment.
It	is	up	to	you	to	throw	away	all	that	upbringing	and	let	this	small	moment	be	all
--	and	you	have	attained	everything.	Then	you	need	not	worry.	Existence	takes
care.	Existence	is	very	compassionate.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHERE	 IS	 MY	 QUESTION	 DISAPPEARING	 TO?	 IT	 IS	 THERE	 ONE
MINUTE,	 AND	 WHEN	 I	 WANT	 TO	 WRITE	 IT	 DOWN	 IT	 IS	 GONE,
BLANK.	IS	IT	GOING
INTO	HIDING	IN	MY	SUBCONSCIOUS?	AND	WHY?
It	 is	not	going	 into	your	unconscious.	 It	 is	coming	from	your	unconscious,	but
when	you	 start	writing	 it,	 it	 becomes	 conscious.	And	 this	 is	 a	 simple	 process:
anything	unconscious	becoming	conscious	starts	disappearing;	it	loses	meaning.
On	 this	 simple	 principle	 the	whole	 of	 psychoanalysis	 stands.	Your	 dreams	 are
unconscious.	 Tell	 them	 to	 the	 psychoanalyst	 --	 by	 telling	 them	 you	 will	 be
making	them	conscious.	And	once	they	are	conscious,	they	disappear.
Unconsciousness	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 basement	 where	 you	 go	 on	 throwing	 things,
repressing	things.	Things	that	you	don't	want	to	see,	things	that	you	don't	want	to
hear,	 things	 that	 you	 don't	 want	 to	 accept,	 you	 go	 on	 throwing	 into	 the
unconscious.	It	is	your	rejected	parts	--	allow	them	to	surface.	And	that	is	what	is
happening	while	you	are	asking	the	question,	and	why	I	am	insisting	that	you	go
on	asking.
My	answer	may	help	you	or	not,	but	your	asking	is	going	to	help	you	certainly.
If	it	is	something	unconscious	that	wants	to	come	into	light,	and	you	start	writing
it,	you	find	it	is	losing	meaning.	Its	whole	meaning	is	in	repression.	Unrepressed
it	bursts	like	a	soap	bubble.
So	it	is	tremendously	good.	Go	on	doing	it.	Only	intellectual	questions	will	not
disappear;	 intellectual	 questions	will	 remain.	But	 if	 a	 question	 is	 coming	 from
the	unconscious	and	is	significant...	Intellectual	questions	are	rubbish;	they	don't
have	 anything	 to	 do	 with	 your	 being	 and	 your	 change.	 Let	 your	 unconscious
reveal,	 and	 you	 will	 start	 seeing	 changes	 --	 not	 that	 the	 questions	 are
disappearing,	 but	 your	 attitudes,	 your	 approaches,	 your	 behavior,	 even	 your
dreams	are	changing.
It	is	a	beautiful	exercise	to	write	down	whatever	you	feel	is	somewhere	lurking
in	the	darkness	of	your	mind.	It	is	not	very	clear;	there	it	is	dark	--	bring	it	into
the	 light.	 And	 if	 you	 can	 bring	 all	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 unconscious	 into	 the
conscious	mind,	your	unconscious	mind	and	your	conscious	mind	will	become
one;	they	will	be	both	conscious.
And	it	is	such	a	gift	--	because	right	now	one-tenth	of	the	mind	is	conscious,	and
nine-tenths	 is	 unconscious	 --	 naturally	 it	 is	 nine	 times	more	 powerful.	 So	 you
decide	something	by	the	conscious	mind,	but	the	unconscious	mind	can	cancel	it
--	it	will	cancel	it!	You	decide	that	tomorrow	morning	you	are	going	to	get	up	at
five	o'clock	--	the	morning	is	so	beautiful,	so	healthy,	so	fresh.	Exactly	at	five	the
alarm	wakes	 you,	 and	 something	happens.	You	don't	want	 to	 get	 up.	You	 say,
"We	will	see	tomorrow.	It	is	so	beautiful	right	now	under	the	blankets,	so	cozy."
And	you	take	a	turn	and	go	to	sleep.
When	you	do	wake	up,	you	will	condemn	yourself,	you	will	feel	guilty.	But	you
don't	understand	what	has	been	happening.	Your	conscious	mind	had	decided	to
wake	up	at	five.	The	unconscious	was	never	in	agreement	with	it.	You	had	never
asked	for	the	agreement	--	there	is	no	way	to	ask	for	agreement.
If	you	are	hypnotized	and	your	unconscious	mind	is	told,	"Wake	up	at	five,"	then
there	will	be	no	change;	you	will	wake	up	at	five,	alarm	or	no	alarm.	But	right
now	you	take	the	decision	with	the	conscious	mind,	and	when	you	are	asleep	the
conscious	mind	is	no	longer	functioning.
It	is	the	unconscious	mind	which	is	in	power	and	functioning	in	your	deep	sleep.
So	when	 at	 five	 o'clock	 the	 alarm	 goes	 off,	 you	 pick	 up	 the	 alarm	 clock	 and
throw	it	away	--
because	the	unconscious	mind	has	no	idea	what	the	conscious	mind	has	decided,
and	it	looks	so	foolish	to	the	unconscious	mind,	an	unnecessary	disturbance.	You
simply	go	back	to	sleep.	But	when	you	wake	up,	the	unconscious	mind	has	gone
back;	the	conscious	mind	has	come	into	function.	It	remembers,	"I	had	decided
to	wake	up	at	 five	o'clock,	and	I	cheated	myself."	 It	 feels	guilty,	but	 it	has	not
done	anything;	it	is	not	responsible	for	it.
You	decide	not	 to	be	angry,	you	decide	not	 to	be	 tense,	you	decide	a	 thousand
things	and	the	unconscious	mind	goes	on	cancelling	them.	It	goes	on	doing	the
way	 it	has	always	been	doing.	But	 if	 all	 the	contents	of	 the	unconscious	mind
evaporate,	then	you	have	only	one	mind,	conscious	mind,	day	in,	day	out.	Every
decision	will	be	followed,	no	decision	will	ever	be	cancelled.	Your	life	will	have
integrity.
That's	 what	 I	 mean	 when	 I	 use	 the	 word	 ìntegrity.'	 You	 will	 have	 a	 kind	 of
oneness.	You	can	promise,	and	you	can	rely	on	your	promise,	because	 there	 is
nobody	 in	 you	 who	 can	 cancel	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 decision	 of	 your	 total	 mind.	 And	 a
decision	of	a	total	mind	is	immensely	powerful.
It	 is	good	 --	go	on	doing	 it.	 If	questions	are	not	enough,	 then	you	can	make	a
notebook.
Just	write	anything	unconscious,	and	don't	be	worried	 that	anybody	will	see	 it,
because	there	will	be	many	things	which	you	don't	want	anybody	to	see	--	that's
why	you	are	keeping	them	in	the	dark.	Don't	be	worried,	just	bring	them	into	the
open.	Nothing	is	wrong.
Keeping	 it	 in	 the	 dark	 is	 wrong.	 Bringing	 it	 into	 the	 light	 changes	 the	whole
quality...	it	disappears.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 SILENCE	 THAT	 HAPPENED	 THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 --	 WAS	 THAT	 A
TASTE	OF
WHERE	YOU	ARE	POINTING	YOUR	FINGER?
Right!
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#32
Chapter	title:	Life	consists	of	small	things
28	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604280
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO32
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 I	 FEEL	 I	 NEED	 TO	 HAVE	 APPROVAL	 AND	 BE
RECOGNIZED,	IN	MY	WORK	ESPECIALLY?	IT	PUTS	ME	IN	A	TRAP	--	I
CANNOT	DO
WITHOUT	 IT.	 I	KNOW	 I	AM	 IN	THIS	TRAP	BUT	 I	AM	CAUGHT	 IN	 IT
AND	I	CANNOT	SEEM	TO	GET	OUT	OF	IT.
CAN	YOU	HELP	ME	BE	ABLE	TO	FIND	THE	DOOR?
The	question	is	from	Kendra.
It	 has	 to	 be	 remembered	 that	 the	 need	 to	 have	 approval	 and	 be	 recognized	 is
everybody's	question.	Our	whole	 life's	 structure	 is	 such	 that	we	are	 taught	 that
unless	there	is	a	recognition	we	are	nobody,	we	are	worthless.	The	work	is	not
important,	but	the	recognition.	And	this	is	putting	things	upside	down.	The	work
should	be	important	--	a	joy	in	itself.	You	should	work,	not	to	be	recognized	but
because	you	enjoy	being	creative;	you	love	the	work	for	its	own	sake.
There	have	been	very	few	people	who	have	been	able	to	escape	from	the	trap	the
society	 puts	 you	 in,	 like	 Vincent	 Van	 Gogh.	 He	 went	 on	 painting	 --	 hungry,
without	 house,	 without	 clothes,	 without	 medicine,	 sick	 --	 but	 he	 went	 on
painting.	Not	 a	 single	 painting	was	 being	 sold,	 there	was	 no	 recognition	 from
anywhere,	but	the	strange	thing	was	that	in	these	conditions	he	was	still	happy	--
happy	because	what	he	wanted	to	paint	he	has	been	able	to	paint.	Recognition	or
no	recognition,	his	work	is	valuable	intrinsically.
By	the	age	of	thirty-three	he	had	committed	suicide	--	not	because	of	any	misery,
anguish,	 no,	 but	 simply	because	 he	 had	painted	his	 last	 painting,	 on	which	he
had	been	working	for	almost	one	year,	a	sunset.	He	tried	dozens	of	times,	but	it
was	not	up	to	his	standard	and	he	destroyed	it.	Finally	he	managed	to	paint	the
sunset	the	way	he	had	longed	to.
He	 committed	 suicide,	 writing	 a	 letter	 to	 his	 brother,	 "I	 am	 not	 committing
suicide	out	of	despair.	I	am	committing	suicide	because	now	there	is	no	point	in
living	 --	 my	 work	 is	 done.	 Moreover,	 it	 has	 been	 difficult	 to	 find	 ways	 of
livelihood.	But	it	was	okay	because	I	had	some	work	to	do,	some	potential	in	me
needed	to	become	actual.	It	has	blossomed,	so	now	it	 is	pointless	to	live	like	a
beggar.
"Up	to	now	I	had	not	even	thought	about	it,	I	had	not	even	looked	at	it.	But	now
that	is	the	only	thing.	I	have	blossomed	to	my	utmost;	I	am	fulfilled,	and	now	to
drag	on,	finding	ways	of	livelihood,	seems	to	be	just	stupid.	For	what?	So	it	 is
not	a	suicide	according	 to	me,	but	 just	 that	 I	have	come	to	a	fulfillment,	a	 full
stop,	 and	 joyously	 I	 am	 leaving	 the	 world.	 Joyously	 I	 lived,	 joyously	 I	 am
leaving	the	world."
Now,	 almost	 a	 century	 afterwards,	 each	 of	 his	 paintings	 is	 worth	 millions	 of
dollars.
There	 are	 only	 two	 hundred	 paintings	 available.	 He	 must	 have	 painted
thousands,	but	they	have	been	destroyed;	nobody	took	any	note	of	them.
Now	 to	 have	 a	 Van	 Gogh	 painting	 means	 you	 have	 an	 aesthetic	 sense.	 His
painting	gives	you	a	 recognition.	The	world	never	gave	any	 recognition	 to	his
work,	but	he	never	cared.
And	this	should	be	the	way	to	look	at	things.
You	work	if	you	love	it.	Don't	ask	for	recognition.	If	it	comes,	take	it	easily;	if	it
does	 not	 come,	 do	 not	 think	 about	 it.	 Your	 fulfillment	 should	 be	 in	 the	work
itself.	And	if	everybody	learns	this	simple	art	of	loving	his	work,	whatever	it	is,
enjoying	it	without	asking	for	any	recognition,	we	would	have	a	more	beautiful
and	celebrating	world.	As	it	is,	the	world	has	trapped	you	in	a	miserable	pattern:
What	you	are	doing	is	not	good	because	you	love	it,	because	you	do	it	perfectly,
but	 because	 the	world	 recognizes	 it,	 rewards	 it,	 gives	 you	gold	medals,	Nobel
prizes.
They	 have	 taken	 away	 the	 whole	 intrinsic	 value	 of	 creativity	 and	 destroyed
millions	of	people	--	because	you	cannot	give	millions	of	people	Nobel	prizes.
And	 you	 have	 created	 the	 desire	 for	 recognition	 in	 everybody,	 so	 nobody	 can
work	 peacefully,	 silently,	 enjoying	 whatever	 he	 is	 doing.	 And	 life	 consists	 of
small	things.	For	those	small	things	there	are	not	rewards,	not	titles	given	by	the
governments,	not	honorary	degrees	given	by	the	universities.
One	 of	 the	 great	 poets	 of	 this	 century,	 Rabindranath	 Tagore,	 lived	 in	 Bengal,
India.	He	had	published	his	poetry,	his	novels,	 in	Bengali	--	but	no	recognition
came	to	him.	Then	he	translated	a	small	book,	GITANJALI,	Offering	of	Songs,
into	 English.	 And	 he	 was	 aware	 that	 the	 original	 has	 a	 beauty	 which	 the
translation	does	not	have	and	cannot	have	-
-	 because	 these	 two	 languages,	Bengali	 and	English,	 have	 different	 structures,
different	ways	of	expression.
Bengali	 is	 very	 sweet.	 Even	 if	 you	 fight,	 it	 seems	 you	 are	 engaged	 in	 a	 nice
conversation.
It	 is	 very	 musical;	 each	 word	 is	 musical.	 That	 quality	 is	 not	 in	 English,	 and
cannot	be	brought	 to	 it;	 it	has	different	qualities.	But	somehow	he	managed	 to
translate	it,	and	the	translation	--	which	is	a	poor	thing	compared	to	the	original	-
-	received	the	Nobel	prize.
Then	suddenly	the	whole	of	India	became	aware...	The	book	had	been	available
in	Bengali,	in	other	Indian	languages,	for	years	and	nobody	had	taken	any	note
of	it.
Every	university	wanted	to	give	him	a	D.Litt.	Calcutta,	where	he	lived,	was	the
first	university,	obviously,	to	offer	him	an	honorary	degree.	He	refused.	He	said,
"You	are	not	giving	a	degree	to	me;	you	are	not	giving	a	recognition	to	my	work,
you	are	giving	recognition	to	the	Nobel	prize,	because	the	book	has	been	here	in
a	far	more	beautiful	way,	and	nobody	has	bothered	even	to	write	an	appraisal."
He	refused	to	take	any	D.Litts.	He	said,	"It	is	insulting	to	me."
Jean-Paul	Sartre,	one	of	the	great	novelists,	and	a	man	of	tremendous	insight	into
human	psychology,	 refused	 the	Nobel	 prize.	He	 said,	 "I	 have	 received	 enough
reward	while	I	was	creating	my	work.	A	Nobel	prize	cannot	add	anything	to	it	--
on	the	contrary,	 it	pulls	me	down.	It	 is	good	for	amateurs	who	are	in	search	of
recognition;	I	am	old	enough,	and	I	have	enjoyed	enough.	I	have	loved	whatever
I	have	done.	It	was	its	own	reward,	and	I	don't	want	any	other	reward,	because
nothing	can	be	better	than	that	which	I	have	already	received."	And	he	was	right.
But	 the	 right	 people	 are	 so	 few	 in	 the	 world,	 and	 the	 world	 is	 full	 of	 wrong
people	living	in	traps.
Why	 should	 you	 bother	 about	 recognition?	 Bothering	 about	 recognition	 has
meaning	only	if	you	don't	love	your	work;	then	it	is	meaningful,	then	it	seems	to
substitute.	You	hate	the	work,	you	don't	like	it,	but	you	are	doing	it	because	there
will	 be	 recognition;	 you	 will	 be	 appreciated,	 accepted.	 Rather	 than	 thinking
about	recognition,	reconsider	your	work.
Do	you	love	it?	--	then	that	is	the	end.	If	you	do	not	love	it	--	then	change	it!
The	parents,	the	teachers	are	always	reinforcing	that	you	should	be	recognized,
you	 should	 be	 accepted.	This	 is	 a	 very	 cunning	 strategy	 to	 keep	 people	 under
control.
I	 was	 told	 again	 and	 again	 in	 my	 university,	 "You	 should	 stop	 doing	 these
things...	you	go	on	asking	questions	which	you	know	perfectly	well	 cannot	be
answered,	and	which	put	the	professor	in	an	embarrassing	situation.	You	have	to
stop	 it;	otherwise	 these	people	will	 take	revenge.	They	have	power	--	 they	can
fail	you."
I	 said,	 "I	 don't	 bother	 about	 it.	 I	 am	 enjoying	 right	 now	 asking	 questions	 and
making	them	feel	ignorant.	They	are	not	courageous	enough	simply	to	say,	Ì	do
not	know.'	Then	there	would	be	no	embarrassment.	But	they	want	to	pretend	that
they	know	everything.	I	am	enjoying	it;	my	intelligence	is	being	sharpened.	Who
cares	 about	 examinations?	 They	 can	 fail	 me	 only	 when	 I	 appear	 in	 the
examinations	--	who	is	going	to	appear?	If	they	have	that	idea	that	they	can	fail
me,	I	will	not	enter	the	examinations,	and	I	will	remain	in	the	same	class.	They
will	have	to	pass	me	just	out	of	fear	that	again	for	one	year	they	will	have	to	face
me!"
And	they	all	passed	me,	and	helped	me	to	pass,	because	they	wanted	to	get	rid	of
me.	 In	 their	 eyes	 I	was	 also	 destroying	 other	 students,	 because	 other	 students
started	questioning	 things	which	have	been	accepted	 for	 centuries	without	 any
question.
While	 I	 was	 teaching	 in	 the	 university,	 the	 same	 thing	 came	 about	 from	 a
different	angle.
Now	I	was	asking	 the	 students	questions	 to	bring	 to	 their	attention	 that	all	 the
knowledge	 that	 they	have	gathered	 is	borrowed,	and	 they	know	nothing.	 I	 told
them	that	I	don't	care	about	their	degrees,	I	care	about	their	authentic	experience
--	and	they	don't	have	any.
They	are	simply	repeating	books	which	are	out	of	date;	long	ago	they	have	been
proved	wrong.	Now	the	authorities	of	the	university	were	threatening	me,	"If	you
continue	 in	 this	 way,	 harassing	 students,	 you	 will	 be	 thrown	 out	 of	 the
university."
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 strange	 --	 I	was	 a	 student	 and	 I	 could	not	 ask	questions	 to	 the
professors;	now	I	am	a	professor	and	I	cannot	ask	questions	to	the	students!	So
what	function	is	 this	university	fulfilling?	It	should	be	a	place	where	questions
are	asked,	quests	begin.
Answers	have	to	be	found	not	in	the	books	but	in	life	and	in	existence."
I	 said,	 "You	 can	 throw	 me	 out	 of	 the	 university,	 but	 remember,	 these	 same
students,	because	of	whom	you	are	throwing	me	out	of	the	university,	will	burn
down	 the	whole	 university."	 I	 told	 the	 vice-chancellor,	 "You	 should	 come	 and
see	my	class."
He	could	not	believe	it	--	in	my	class	there	were	at	least	two	hundred	students...
and	there	were	no	spaces,	so	they	were	sitting	anywhere	they	could	find	--	on	the
windows,	on	the	floor.	He	said,	"What	is	happening,	because	you	have	only	ten
students?"
I	said,	"These	people	come	to	listen.	They	dropped	their	classes;	they	love	to	be
here.
This	class	is	a	dialogue.	I	am	not	superior	to	them,	and	I	cannot	refuse	anybody
who	comes	to	my	class.	Whether	he	is	my	student	or	not,	it	does	not	matter;	if	he
comes	to	listen	to	me,	he	is	my	student.	In	fact	you	should	allow	me	to	have	the
auditorium.	These	classrooms	are	too	small	for	me."
He	 said,	 "Auditorium?	 You	 mean	 the	 whole	 university	 to	 gather	 in	 the
auditorium?	Then	what	will	the	other	professors	be	doing?"
I	said,	"That	 is	 for	 them	to	 think	out.	They	can	go	and	hang	 themselves!	They
should	have	done	it	long	before.	Seeing	that	their	students	are	not	going	to	listen
to	them	was	enough	indication."
The	professors	were	angry,	 the	authorities	were	angry.	Finally	they	had	to	give
me	 the	 auditorium	 --	 but	 very	 reluctantly,	 because	 the	 students	 were	 forcing
them.	But	they	said,
"This	 is	 strange,	 students	who	have	nothing	 to	do	with	philosophy,	 religion	or
psychology,	why	should	they	go	there?"
Many	 students	 told	 the	 vice-chancellor,	 "We	 love	 it.	 We	 never	 knew	 that
philosophy,	 religion,	psychology	can	be	so	 interesting,	 so	 intriguing;	otherwise
we	would	have	 joined	 them.	We	 thought	 that	 these	are	dry	subjects;	only	very
bookish	kind	of	people	join	these	subjects.	We	have	never	seen	any	juicy	people
joining	 the	 subjects.	 But	 this	man	 has	made	 the	 subjects	 so	 significant	 that	 it
seems	that	even	if	we	fail	in	our	own	subjects,	it	does	not	matter.	What	we	are
doing	is	so	right	in	itself,	and	we	are	so	clear	about	it,	that	there	is	no	question	of
changing	it."
Against	 recognition,	 against	 acceptance,	 against	 degrees...	 but	 finally	 I	 had	 to
leave	the	university,	not	because	of	their	threats	but	because	I	recognized	that	if
thousands	of	students	can	be	helped	by	me,	it	is	a	wastage.	I	can	help	millions	of
people	outside	in	the	world.	Why	should	I	go	on	remaining	attached	to	a	small
university?	The	whole	world	can	be	my	university.
And	you	can	see:	I	have	been	condemned.
That	is	the	only	recognition	I	have	received.
I	have	been	in	every	way	misrepresented.	Everything	that	can	be	said	against	a
man	has	been	 said	 against	me;	 everything	 that	 can	be	done	 against	 a	man	has
been	done	against	me.	Do	you	think	this	is	recognition?	But	I	 love	my	work.	I
love	it	so	much	that	I	don't	call	it	work	even;	I	simply	call	it	my	joy.
And	everybody	who	was	in	some	way	elder	to	me,	well-recognized,	has	told	me,
"What	you	are	doing	is	not	going	to	give	you	any	respectability	in	the	world."
But	 I	 said,	 "I	 have	 never	 asked	 for	 it,	 and	 I	 don't	 see	 what	 I	 will	 do	 with
respectability.	I	cannot	eat	it,	I	cannot	drink	it."
Learn	one	basic	thing:	Do	whatever	you	want	to	do,	love	to	do,	and	never	ask	for
recognition.	That	is	begging.	Why	should	one	ask	for	recognition?	Why	should
one	hanker	for	acceptance?
Deep	down	in	yourself,	look.	Perhaps	you	don't	like	what	you	are	doing,	perhaps
you	are	afraid	that	you	are	on	the	wrong	track.	Acceptance	will	help	you	feel	that
you	are	right.
Recognition	will	make	you	feel	that	you	are	going	towards	the	right	goal.
The	question	is	of	your	own	inner	feelings;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	outside
world.
And	why	depend	on	others?	All	these	things	depend	on	others	--	you	yourself	are
becoming	dependent.
I	will	 not	 accept	 any	Nobel	 prize.	All	 this	 condemnation	 from	 all	 the	 nations
around	the	world,	from	all	the	religions,	is	more	valuable	to	me.	Accepting	the
Nobel	 prize	 means	 I	 am	 becoming	 dependent	 --	 now	 I	 will	 not	 be	 proud	 of
myself	but	proud	of	the	Nobel	prize.	Right	now	I	can	only	be	proud	of	myself;
there	is	nothing	else	I	can	be	proud	of.
This	 way	 you	 become	 an	 individual.	 And	 to	 be	 an	 individual	 living	 in	 total
freedom,	on	your	own	 feet,	 drinking	 from	your	own	 sources,	 is	what	makes	 a
man	really	centered,	rooted.	That	is	the	beginning	of	his	ultimate	flowering.
These	 so-called	 recognized	 people,	 honored	 people,	 are	 full	 of	 rubbish	 and
nothing	else.
But	they	are	full	of	the	rubbish	which	the	society	wants	them	to	be	filled	with	--
and	the	society	compensates	them	by	giving	them	rewards.
Any	man	who	has	any	sense	of	his	own	individuality	lives	by	his	own	love,	by
his	own	work,	without	caring	at	all	what	others	 think	of	 it.	The	more	valuable
your	work	is,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	getting	any	respectability	for	it.	And	if
your	work	is	the	work	of	a	genius	then	you	are	not	going	to	see	any	respect	in
your	life.	You	will	be	condemned	in	your	life...	then,	after	two	or	three	centuries,
statues	 of	 you	will	 be	made,	 your	 books	will	 be	 respected	 --	 because	 it	 takes
almost	two	or	three	centuries	for	humanity	to	pick	up	that	much	intelligence	that
a	genius	has	today.	The	gap	is	vast.
Being	respected	by	idiots	you	have	to	behave	according	to	 their	manners,	 their
expectations.	To	be	 respected	by	 this	 sick	humanity	you	have	 to	be	more	 sick
than	they	are.	Then	they	will	respect	you.	But	what	will	you	gain?	You	will	lose
your	soul	and	you	will	gain	nothing.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WOULD	YOU	TALK	TO	US	ABOUT	THE	DIFFERENCE	BETWEEN	LOVE
AND
TRUST?	IT	SEEMS	TO	ME	THAT	TRUST	IS	OF	GREATER	SIGNIFICANCE
IN
OUR	 RELATIONSHIP	 TO	 YOU	 THAN	 LOVE.	 WHEN	 I	 SAY,	 "OSHO,	 I
LOVE
YOU,"	I'M	SPEAKING	OF	A	FEELING	THAT	IS	COLORED	AND	DEFINED
BY
OTHER	LOVE	RELATIONSHIPS,	A	FEELING	THAT	 IS	LIMITED	BY	MY
STATE
OF	 UNENLIGHTENMENT.	 I	 SPEAK	 AS	 IF	 I	 HAVE	 SOME
COMPREHENSION	OF
WHAT	MY	LOVE	TOWARDS	YOU	IMPLIES.
WHEN	I	SAY,	"OSHO,	I	TRUST	YOU,"	I	AM	SAYING,	"DO	WITH	ME
WHATEVER	NEEDS	TO	BE	DONE.	LEAD	ME	INTO	UNIMAGINED	AND
UNIMAGINABLE	PLACES:	I	AM	YOURS."
TRUST	 SEEMS	 TO	 EMBRACE	 THE	 UNDERSTANDING	 THAT	 IT	 IS
AVAILABLE
EVEN	 TO	 THINGS	 BEYOND	 ITS	 COMPREHENSION.	 LOVE,
UNENLIGHTENED
LOVE,	 ALSO	 SEEMS	 OUTGOING,	 SOMEWHAT	 AGGRESSIVE;	 THE	 "I"
VERY
CONSCIOUS	OF	ITSELF	AS	AN	ENTITY.	WHILE	TRUST	--	EVEN	IN	ITS
UNENLIGHTENED	 FORM	 --	 SEEMS	 TO	HAVE	A	 QUALITY	OF	 UTTER
LET-GO
IN	IT.	THE	"I"	IS	ONLY	ATTACHED	TO	IT	FOR	LINGUISTICS,	BECAUSE
THE
TRUSTING	 PERSON	 ACKNOWLEDGES	 THAT	 HE	 HIMSELF	 MAY
DISAPPEAR.
It	is	Maneesha's	question.
It	 is	not	a	question	at	all.	She	has	answered	 it	herself,	and	beautifully.	She	has
said	 exactly	what	 I	would	have	 said.	And	 that's	what	 I	would	 like	 for	 each	of
you,	by	and	by:	to	come	to	an	understanding	that	when	you	ask	a	question,	you
can	answer	it	exactly	the	way	I	will	be	answering	it.
Trust	is	certainly	a	higher	value	than	love.	In	trust,	love	is	implied;	but	in	love,
trust	 is	not	 implied.	When	you	say,	"I	 trust	 in	you,	Osho"	 it	 is	understood	 that
you	love.	But	when	you	say	you	love,	trust	has	nothing	to	do	with	it.	In	fact	your
love	 is	 very	 suspicious,	 very	 untrusting,	 very	 much	 afraid,	 always	 on	 guard,
watching	the	person	you	love.
Lovers	 become	 almost	 detectives.	 They	 are	 spying	 on	 each	 other.	 Love	 is
beautiful	 if	 it	 comes	as	a	part	of	 trust.	And	 it	 always	comes	as	a	part	of	 trust,
because	 trust	 cannot	 be	without	 love.	 But	 love	 cannot	 be	without	 trust,	 and	 a
love	without	 trust	 is	ugly;	deep	down	 it	has	all	kinds	of	 jealousies,	 suspicions,
distrust.
It	 is	also	 true	 that	when	you	say,	 "I	 love	you,"	 it	 is	not	a	 surrender,	 it	 is	not	a
readiness	 to	 be	 dissolved.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 readiness	 to	 be	 taken	 to	 unknown	 and
unknowable	spaces.	When	you	say,	"I	love	you,"	you	stand	equal,	and	there	is	a
certain	aggressive	quality	in	it.
That's	why	from	the	very	beginnings	of	humanity	everywhere,	and	in	every	time,
the	woman	has	not	taken	the	initiative	to	say	"I	love	you."	She	has	waited	for	the
man	to	say,
"I	 love	 you"	 --	 because	 the	 heart	 of	 the	woman	 feels	 that	 aggressiveness.	But
man	has	a	harder	heart;	he	does	not	feel	that	aggressiveness	--	in	fact	he	enjoys
it.
But	when	you	say,	"I	trust	you,"	it	is	a	deep	surrender,	an	openness,	a	receptivity,
a	 declaration	 to	 yourself	 and	 to	 the	 universe	 that,	 "Now	 if	 this	man	 takes	me
even	to	the	hell,	it	is	okay	with	me:	I	trust	him.	If	it	looks	like	hell	to	me,	it	must
be	a	fault	of	my	vision.	He	cannot	take	me	to	hell."
In	 trust	you	will	always	 find	 faults	with	yourself;	 in	 love	you	will	always	 find
faults	with	the	one	you	are	in	love	with.	In	trust	you	are	always,	without	saying
it,	 in	 a	 state	 of	 apology:	 "I	 am	 ignorant.	 I	 am	 sleepy,	 unconscious.	 There	 is	 a
possibility	of	saying	something	wrong,	doing	something	wrong,	so	be	merciful
towards	 me,	 have	 compassion	 on	 me."	 Trust	 implies	 so	 much.	 It	 is	 such	 a
treasure.
When	you	say,	"I	love	you,"	there	is	a	subtle	current	of	possessiveness.	Without
being	 said,	 it	 is	understood,	 "Now	you	are	my	possession,	nobody	else	 should
love	you."
In	trust	there	is	no	question	of	possessing	the	person	you	trust.	On	the	contrary,
you	are	saying,	"Please	possess	me.	Destroy	me	as	an	ego.	Help	me	to	disappear
and	melt	in	you,	so	there	is	no	resistance	in	going	with	you."
Love	is	a	constant	struggle,	a	fight;	it	demands.
"I	love	you,"	means,	"You	have	to	love	me	too.	In	fact,	I	love	you	only	because	I
want	 you	 to	 love	me."	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 bargain;	 hence	 the	 fear:	 "You	 should	 not
love	anybody	else.	Nobody	should	love	you,	because	I	don't	want	anybody	to	be
partners	in	my	love,	to	be	sharers	in	my	love."
The	unconscious	mind	of	man	goes	on	thinking	as	if	love	is	a	quantity,	that	there
is	 a	 certain	quantity	of	 love.	 If	 I	 love	you,	 then	you	 should	possess	 the	whole
quantity.	If	I	love	a	few	other	people,	then	the	quantity	will	be	distributed,	you
will	 not	 get	 the	 whole	 of	 it;	 hence	 the	 jealousy,	 the	 spying,	 the	 fighting,	 the
nagging.	And	all	that	is	ugly	goes	on	behind	a	beautiful	word,	love.
In	 trust	 there	 is	no	question	of	any	fighting.	 It	 is	 really	a	surrender.	When	you
say,	"Osho,	I	trust	in	you,"	it	means,	"From	this	moment	my	fight	with	you	stops.
Now	I	am	yours;	you	can	do	whatever	you	want.	You	can	kill	me,	but	I	will	not
resist	because	I	am	no	longer	there	--	I	have	given	myself	to	you.	Now	it	is	up	to
you:	whatsoever	you	feel	right,	do	it."
And	 trust	 is	 not	 competitive;	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 jealousy.	 You	 can	 trust	 me,
millions	of	people	can	trust	me.	In	fact,	the	more	people	will	trust	me,	the	more
you	will	be	happy.
You	will	be	rejoicing	that	so	many	people	are	trusting...	not	so	with	love.
But	in	trust,	all	that	is	beautiful	in	love	is	implied.
The	moment	you	say,	 "I	 trust	 in	you,	Osho,"	you	have	also	said,	 "I	 love	you."
But	now,	because	of	the	trust,	the	"I"	is	no	longer	existent,	only	love.	And	love
without	the	ego	creates	no	problems:	"Many	people	can	love	you,	and	the	more
people	love	you,	the	more	I	will	be	happy."	But	this	is	because	of	trust.
Trust	is	perhaps	the	most	beautiful	word	in	the	human	language.	And	trust	is	so
close	 to	 truth	 that	 if	 it	 is	 total,	 then	 this	 very	 moment	 your	 trust	 becomes	 a
revelation,	a	revolution.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	WEEKEND	THERE	IS	A	BIG	SANNYASIN	FESTIVAL	IN	FLORENCE
WITH
DANCE	AND	MEDITATION	AND	MUSIC.	 IS	 YOUR	HEART	WITH	ALL
THESE
THOUSANDS	OF	SANNYASINS?
In	the	first	place,	there	are	not	going	to	be	thousands	of	sannyasins	there,	for	the
simple	reason	that	the	people	who	are	organizing	it	are	no	longer	with	me.	They
are	trying	to	cheat	 the	sannyasins.	Only	three	hundred	sannyasins	have	booked
for	it,	and	the	organizers	are	declaring	it	 to	be	the	first	world	festival	since	the
last	one	in	the	commune	in	Oregon,	America.
But	my	name	is	not	mentioned	in	it.	It	is	not	my	festival.	It	is	those	few	people,
those	few	therapists,	who	want	to	exploit	the	sannyasins.	But	they	are	in	trouble,
because	 three	hundred	sannyasins	coming	will	only	cover	 the	expenses	 --	 they
were	 hoping	 thousands	 would	 come.	 And	 also,	 the	 three	 hundred	 are	 coming
because	they	are	not	aware	that	these	people	have	started	working	against	me.
My	heart	will	be	with	my	people	wherever	they	are.	I	will	be	with	my	sannyasins
--	and	I	have	to	be,	particularly	to	show	to	them	that	this	is	not	my	festival,	that
they	have	been	deceived,	that	the	people	on	the	stage	have	ugly	ideas.	They	are
all	pretending	to	be	masters,	that	they	have	become	enlightened.
But	the	festival	is	going	to	be	a	fiasco,	because	on	the	stage	there	is	not	going	to
be	my	presence	but	my	utter	absence.	I	will	be	present	in	the	audience....	These
three	hundred	people	who	are	coming	are	going	to	ask,	"By	what	right	have	you
called	 the	 sannyasins	 for	 a	 world	 festival	 when	 you	 yourself	 are	 no	 longer	 a
sannyasin?	On	whose	authority?"
But	 it	 is	a	good	chance	for	sannyasins	 to	see	who	are	 the	people	 in	 the	role	of
Judas,	selling	their	own	master	for	thirty	pieces	of	silver.
As	 far	 as	 sannyasins	 are	 concerned,	 I	 am	 always	with	 them.	 In	 this	 so-called
world	festival	I	will	be	more	strongly	there	 in	 the	audience,	 to	make	them	feel
that	 the	 stage	 is	empty,	 that	 the	 stage	 is	dark	and	 there	 is	no	 light.	The	people
who	 are	 pretending	 are	 going	 to	 be	 exposed,	 and	 they	will	 never	 try	 anything
like	this	again.
So	inform	all	your	friends:	Go	there	and	ask	the	people	on	the	stage,	"On	what
authority	have	you	called	the	sannyasins?	You	are	not	a	sannyasin.	You	are	not	a
master,	 you	 are	 not	 enlightened,	 and	 you	 had	 no	 guts	 ever	 to	 say	 this	 in	 the
commune.	But	now,	because	Osho	is	not	present,	you	are	trying	to	play	the	role
of	an	enlightened	master."
In	fact,	I	would	have	loved	to	go	there	and	suddenly	walk	onto	the	stage	and	see
what	 happens	 to	 those	 therapists,	 but	 I	 cannot	 enter	 Italy.	 The	 government	 is
stubborn,	 although	 sixty-five	 very	 eminent	 people	 from	 different	 professions,
known	 worldwide,	 have	 protested	 that	 there	 is	 no	 reason	 why	 I	 should	 be
prevented.
But	 the	 government	 is	 simply	 silent,	 because	 the	 pope	 is	 heavy	 and	 the
politicians	are	beggars.	They	are	not	afraid	of	intellectuals,	painters,	musicians,
sculptors,	 architects,	 writers	 --	 they	 are	 not	 afraid	 of	 these	 people.	 They	 are
afraid	of	the	pope,	because	he	holds	the	votes.	But	more	protests	are	going	to	be
presented	 to	 the	 government,	 and	 really	 eminent	 people	 are	 showing	 a
tremendous	 interest	 in	 why	 a	 single	 individual	 who	 has	 done	 no	 harm	 to	 the
country,	who	has	never	been	in	the	country,	should	be	prevented.
So	I	will	not	be	able	to	go	there.	But	my	presence	will	be	with	my	sannyasins,
wherever	 they	are.	And	you	have	to	write	 to	all	your	friends	in	Italy:	"Make	it
clear	 to	 these	 people	 that	 you	 cannot	 exploit	 sannyasins.	 If	 you	 are	 no	 longer
sannyasins,	then	simply	get	out	from	here.	This	is	a	festival	of	sannyasins	--	we
will	manage	it.	Leave	the	stage!	The	empty	stage	is	far	better	than	a	stage	full	of
those	who	have	betrayed."
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	MOST	PAINFUL	EXPERIENCE	 IN	THE	WORLD	 IS	TO	BE	ANGRY
WITH
YOU.	THIS	 IS	NOT	A	QUESTION	--	ONLY	AN	EXPRESSION	OF	SHEER
JOY	AT
FEELING	FREE	AGAIN	TO	LOVE	YOU.
That's	right!	It	must	be	from	Chetana!	It	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	things,	to	be
angry	with	me.
You	can	ask	Vivek,	because	she	suffers	many	times	for	my	sake,	for	my	safety.
And	I	can	understand	that	if	she	becomes	angry	it	is	not	against	me.	But	then	she
suffers	so	much	because	of	anger.
You	love	me	so	much	--	you	cannot	conceive	of	being	angry	with	me.	But	once
in	a	while,	just	a	taste	is	good.	That	will	prevent	you	for	the	future	from	going
into	such	spaces.
Of	 course	 for	 Vivek	 it	 is	 difficult.	 Now	 she	 has	 been	 continuously	 sad	 and
worried	 because	 I	 have	 been	 continuously	 mistreated	 by	 the	 police,	 jail
authorities,	 governments,	 deported	 from	 one	 place	 to	 another.	And	 she	 knows
that	 she	cannot	do	anything	 to	prevent	 it.	This	whole	 sadness	 sometimes	 turns
into	anger.	Now	she	cannot	even	be	angry	with	those	governments;	she	can	only
be	angry	with	me.	But	then	to	be	angry	with	me	is	really	difficult.	It	is	almost	an
impossible	task!	And	those	who	have	to	pass	through	it	know	its	hell.
But	 one	 thing	 is	 good	 about	 it	 --	 there	 is	 always	 something	 good,	 even	 in	 the
worst	situation	--	that	nothing	remains	forever.	You	come	out	of	it,	and	then	you
feel	a	tremendous	freedom	and	joy	and	understanding.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#33
Chapter	title:	Prayer	--	your	psychological	armor
28	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604285
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO33
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 WHEN	 YOU	 WERE	 SPEAKING	 ABOUT	 COMING
CLOSER	TO
YOU,	I	WAS	AWARE	THAT	I	STILL	FEEL	A	THIN	ARMOR	AROUND	ME
THAT
KEEPS	ME	FROM	COMING	CLOSER.	THIS	ARMOR	IS	 INCONGRUOUS
WITH
MY	OPENNESS	TO	YOU.	I	DON'T	KNOW	WHERE	IT	IS	COMING	FROM.
PLEASE	HELP	ME	TO	MELT	IT	AWAY.
Everybody	has	that	kind	of	armor.
There	are	reasons	for	it.	First,	the	child	is	born	so	utterly	helpless	into	a	world	he
knows	nothing	of.	Naturally	he	is	afraid	of	the	unknown	that	faces	him.	He	has
not	yet	forgotten	those	nine	months	of	absolute	security,	safety,	when	there	was
no	problem,	no	responsibility,	no	worry	for	tomorrow.
To	us,	those	are	nine	months,	but	to	the	child	it	is	eternity.	He	knows	nothing	of
the	calendar,	he	knows	nothing	of	minutes,	hours,	days,	months.	He	has	lived	an
eternity	 in	 absolute	 safety	 and	 security,	 without	 any	 responsibility,	 and	 then
suddenly	 he	 is	 thrown	 into	 a	 world	 unknown,	 where	 he	 is	 dependent	 for
everything	on	others.	 It	 is	natural	 that	he	will	 feel	 afraid.	Everybody	 is	bigger
and	more	powerful,	and	he	cannot	live	without	the	help	of	others.	He	knows	he
is	dependent;	he	has	lost	his	independence,	his	freedom.
And	small	incidents	may	give	him	some	taste	of	the	reality	he	is	going	to	face	in
the	future.
Napoleon	Bonaparte	was	defeated	by	Nelson,	but	in	fact	the	credit	should	not	go
to	 Nelson.	 Napoleon	 Bonaparte	 was	 defeated	 by	 a	 small	 incident	 in	 his
childhood.	 Now	 history	 does	 not	 look	 at	 things	 in	 this	 way,	 but	 to	 me	 it	 is
absolutely	clear.
When	he	was	 just	six	months	old,	a	wild	cat	 jumped	on	him.	The	maidservant
who	was	looking	after	him	had	gone	for	something	in	the	house;	he	was	in	the
garden	in	the	early	morning	sun	and	the	fresh	air,	lying	down,	and	the	wild	cat
jumped	on	him.	It	didn't	harm	him	--	perhaps	it	was	just	being	playful	--	but	to
the	child's	mind	it	was	almost	death.
Since	 then,	 he	 was	 not	 afraid	 of	 tigers	 or	 lions;	 he	 could	 have	 fought	 a	 lion
without	any	arms,	with	no	fear.	But	a	cat?	--	that	was	a	different	affair.	He	was
absolutely	helpless.
Seeing	a	cat	he	was	almost	frozen;	he	became	again	a	six-month-old	small	child,
with	no	defense,	with	no	capacities	to	fight.	In	those	small	child's	eyes	that	cat
must	have	looked	very	big	--	it	was	a	wild	cat.	The	cat	may	have	looked	into	the
eyes	of	the	child.
Something	in	his	psyche	became	so	much	impressed	by	the	incident	that	Nelson
exploited	 it.	Nelson	was	no	comparison	 to	Napoleon,	and	Napoleon	was	never
defeated	in	his	life;	this	was	his	first	and	last	defeat.	And	he	would	not	have	been
defeated,	but	Nelson	had	brought	seventy	cats	at	the	front	of	the	army.
The	 moment	 Napoleon	 saw	 those	 seventy	 wild	 cats	 his	 mind	 stopped
functioning.	His	generals	could	not	understand	what	had	happened.	He	was	no
longer	the	same	great	warrior;	he	was	almost	frozen	with	fear,	trembling.	He	had
never	allowed	any	of	his	generals	 to	arrange	 the	army,	but	 today	he	said,	with
tears	in	his	eyes,	"I	am	incapable	of	thinking	--	you	arrange	the	army.	I	will	be
here,	but	I	am	incapable	of	fighting.
Something	has	gone	wrong	for	me."
He	was	 removed,	 but	without	Napoleon	 his	 army	was	 not	 capable	 of	 fighting
Nelson,	and	seeing	the	situation	of	Napoleon,	everybody	in	his	army	became	a
little	afraid:	something	very	strange	was	happening.
A	child	is	weak,	vulnerable,	insecure.	Autonomously	he	starts	creating	an	armor,
a	protection,	in	different	ways.	For	example,	he	has	to	sleep	alone.	It	is	dark	and
he	is	afraid,	but	he	has	his	teddy	bear,	and	he	believes	that	he	is	not	alone	--	his
friend	is	with	him.	You	will	see	children	dragging	their	teddy	bears	at	airports,	at
railway	stations.	Do	you	think	it	is	just	a	toy?	To	you	it	is,	but	to	the	child	it	is	a
friend.	And	a	friend	when	nobody	else	is	helpful	--	in	the	darkness	of	the	night,
alone	in	the	bed,	still	he	is	with	him.
He	will	create	psychological	 teddy	bears.	And	 it	 is	 to	be	 reminded	 to	you	 that
although	 a	 grown-up	man	may	 think	 that	 he	 has	 no	 teddy	 bears,	 he	 is	wrong.
What	is	his	God?	Just	a	teddy	bear.	Out	of	his	childhood	fear,	man	has	created	a
father	figure	who	knows	all,	who	is	all-powerful,	who	is	everywhere	present;	if
you	 have	 enough	 faith	 in	 him	 he	 will	 protect	 you.	 But	 the	 very	 idea	 of
protection,	 the	very	 idea	 that	a	protector	 is	needed,	 is	childish.	Then	you	 learn
prayer	 --	 these	 are	 just	 parts	 of	 your	 psychological	 armor.	Prayer	 is	 to	 remind
God	that	you	are	here,	alone	in	the	night.
In	my	 childhood	 I	 was	 always	 wondering...	 I	 loved	 the	 river,	 which	 was	 just
close	by,	just	two	minutes	walk	from	my	house.	Hundreds	of	people	used	to	take
a	bath	there	and	I	was	always	wondering...	 In	summer	when	they	take	a	dip	in
the	river	they	don't	repeat	the	name	of	God	--	"Hare	Krishna,	Hare	Rama"	--	no.
But	 in	cold	winter	 they	repeat,	"Hare	Krishna,	Hare	Rama."	They	take	a	quick
dip,	repeating,	"Hare	Krishna,	Hare	Rama."
I	was	wondering,	does	the	season	make	a	difference?	I	used	to	ask	my	parents,
"If	these	are	devotees	of	`Hare	Krishna,	Hare	Rama,'	then	summer	is	as	good	as
winter."
But	I	don't	think	that	it	is	God	or	prayer	or	religion;	it	is	simply	the	cold!	They
are	creating	an	armor	with	"Hare	Krishna,	Hare	Rama."	They	are	diverting	their
minds.	It	is	too	cold,	and	a	diversion	is	needed	--	and	it	helps.	In	summer	there	is
no	 need;	 they	 simply	 forget	 all	 about	 what	 they	 have	 been	 doing	 the	 whole
winter.
Our	prayers,	our	chantings,	our	mantras,	our	scriptures,	our	gods,	our	priests,	are
all	part	of	our	psychological	armor.	It	is	very	subtle.	A	Christian	believes	that	he
will	be	saved	--
nobody	 else.	Now	 that	 is	 his	 defense	 arrangement.	 Everybody	 is	 going	 to	 fall
into	hell	except	him,	because	he	is	a	Christian.	But	every	religion	believes	in	the
same	way	that	only	they	will	be	saved.
It	is	not	a	question	of	religion.	It	is	a	question	of	fear	and	being	saved	from	fear,
so	 it	 is	 natural	 in	 a	 way.	 But	 at	 a	 certain	 point	 of	 your	 maturity,	 intelligence
demands	that	it	should	be	dropped.	It	was	good	when	you	were	a	child,	but	one
day	 you	 have	 to	 leave	 your	 teddy	 bear,	 just	 the	 same	 as	 one	 day	 you	 have	 to
leave	your	God,	 just	 the	 same	as	one	day	you	have	 to	 leave	your	Christianity,
your	 Hinduism.	 Finally,	 the	 day	 you	 drop	 all	 your	 armor	 means	 you	 have
dropped	living	out	of	fear.
And	what	kind	of	living	can	be	out	of	fear?	Once	the	armor	is	dropped	you	can
live	out	of	 love,	you	can	 live	 in	 a	mature	way.	The	 fully	matured	man	has	no
fear,	no	defense;	he	is	psychologically	completely	open	and	vulnerable.
At	one	point	the	armor	may	be	a	necessity	--	perhaps	it	 is.	But	as	you	grow,	if
you	are	not	only	growing	old	but	also	growing	up,	growing	in	maturity,	then	you
will	start	seeing	what	you	are	carrying	with	you.	Why	do	you	believe	 in	God?
One	day	you	have	 to	see	for	yourself	 that	you	have	not	seen	God,	you	haven't
had	 any	 contact	with	God,	 and	 to	 believe	 in	God	 is	 to	 live	 a	 lie:	 you	 are	 not
being	sincere.
What	kind	of	 religion	can	 there	be	when	 there	 is	no	sincerity,	no	authenticity?
You	cannot	 even	give	 reasons	 for	your	beliefs,	 and	 still	 you	go	on	clinging	 to
them.
Look	closely	and	you	will	find	fear	behind.
A	mature	person	should	disconnect	himself	from	anything	that	is	connected	with
fear.
That's	how	maturity	comes.
Just	watch	all	your	acts,	all	your	beliefs,	and	find	out	whether	they	are	based	in
reality,	 in	 experience,	 or	 based	 in	 fear.	 And	 anything	 based	 in	 fear	 has	 to	 be
dropped	immediately,	without	a	second	thought.	It	 is	your	armor.	I	cannot	melt
it.	I	can	simply	show	you	how	you	can	drop	it.
It	is	not	a	simple	thing;	there	are	many	things	around	it....	In	India	there	are	so
many	 temples.	Many	people	 don't	 have	houses,	 but	 there	 are	 so	many	gods	 --
thirty-three	million	gods	--	and	they	all	need	their	temples.	In	some	places,	like
Varanasi,	you	will	 find	 two	houses	 then	one	 temple,	 three	houses	 then	another
temple...	the	whole	city	is	a	city	of	temples.	In	Khajuraho,	which	is	a	ruined	city,
still	 there	are	one	hundred	temples,	and	hundreds	of	other	temples	are	in	ruins.
Once	it	must	have	been	a	big	city,	but	looking	at	the	temples,	I	could	not	figure
out	where	men	were	 living,	 because	 the	whole	 city	 seems	 to	 be	 composed	 of
temples	and	temples.	There	seems	to	be	no	space.
I	used	to	go	for	a	morning	walk	in	Jabalpur,	in	a	silent	street,	and	one	man	used
to	follow	me	--	because	we	were	the	only	two	who	used	to	go	for	a	walk	in	the
morning.	His	habit	was	to	pay	respect	to	every	god	on	the	road,	so	this	temple
will	come	and	he	will	pay	respect,	and	that	temple	will	come	and	he	will	pay	his
respect.
I	 told	him,	"Just	 listen,	 if	you	have	to	come	with	me	then	you	cannot	continue
this	stupidity;	otherwise	you	are	free	--	you	can	do	it,	but	I	cannot	wait	at	every
temple.	It	looks	embarrassing:	you	are	doing	this	idiotic	act	and	I	am	standing	by
your	side!"
But	he	loved	me.	He	said,	"I	also	think	that	it	is	useless.	Nobody	else	does	it,	but
my	father	used	to	do	it,	and	because	of	him	it	has	become	almost	a	heritage:	I	am
doing	 it,	my	children	are	doing	 it.	And	now	there	 is	great	 fear...	my	father	has
left	it	with	me,	perhaps	his	father	had	left	it	with	him.	The	fear	is	that	if	you	pass
the	temple	of	any	god	without	paying	respect,	he	may	be	angry	at	you.	And	gods
are	very	revengeful;	 they	are	not	going	 to	 leave	you	alone.	You	will	suffer.	So
the	 fear	 is,	why	unnecessarily	make	enemies,	 powerful	 enemies	 against	whom
there	is	no	other	defense?	It	is	better	to	pay	respect	--	it	costs	nothing."
I	said,	"Then	you	can	do	it,	but	you	cannot	come	with	me."
And	he	loved	to	come	with	me,	so	he	said,	"Tomorrow	I	will	try	--	just	give	me
one	chance,	because	I	can	see	that	you	don't	pay	any	respect,	and	nobody	takes
any	revenge.
Nobody	else	is	paying	respect	--	thousands	of	people	are	passing	and	only	I	am...
It	 seems	all	 the	gods	are	waiting	 for	me	 to	pay	respect,	otherwise	 I	will	 suffer
revenge.	They	are	not	concerned	with	anybody	else."
I	 said,	 "That's	what	 I	 am	 saying	 --	 they	 are	 not	 there.	 There	 is	 nobody	 in	 the
temple;	 all	 temples	 are	 empty.	 There	 are	 no	 gods	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be
afraid.	You	come	with	me,	but	tomorrow	this	habit	has	to	be	stopped;	otherwise
our	friendship	for	this	morning	walk	is	at	an	end."
He	 said,	 "Just	 one	 day..."	 He	 tried	 hard,	 and	 I	 could	 see	 how	 psychological
chains	exist.
He	had	promised	me,	and	I	was	with	him	so	he	could	not	deceive	me.	On	one
side	was	the	god...	and	he	was	caught	between	the	two	sides.	I	could	see	his	feet
stopping;	 I	 could	 see	his	hands	getting	 ready	 to	pay	 respect,	 but	 seeing	me	he
would	drop	his	hands.
It	 took	 almost	 double	 time	 that	 day,	 because	 he	 was	 stopping...	 almost	 an
automatic	break.	And	I	had	 to	stop	and	 look	at	him	severely,	so	he	would	say,
"Okay,	I	will	not	do	it.	But	are	you	certain	there	is	no	god?"
I	said,	"You	just	forget	all	about	gods.	We	have	come	for	a	morning	walk,	and
this	continuous	stopping...	And	there	are	so	many	temples;	I	am	fed	up!"
But	you	will	 be	 surprised.	 In	 the	 evening	he	 came	 to	 see	me.	He	was	 looking
very	happy.
He	said,	"Do	you	know	what?	I	had	to	go	another	time.	When	I	left	you	I	went
again	 to	 pay	 respect	 because	 I	 was	 so	 disturbed	 that	 so	many	 gods	would	 be
angry.	And	I	am	a	poor	man,	how	I	am	going...?	But	now	I	am	feeling	at	ease."
So	he	said,	"That's	perfectly	good:	with	you	I	will	come	and	will	not	pay	respect,
but	I	can	go	twice	--	the	second	time	just	to	pay	respect	to	the	gods."
I	said,	"It	seems	you	are	incurable.	You	see	me	every	day	with	you	--	nobody	is
being	angry,	nobody	is	taking	any	revenge.	You	see	thousands	of	people	passing
by."
He	said,	"I	see	everything,	but	what	am	I	to	do	with	my	own	mind?"
I	said,	"Then	it	is	better	you	go	one	time	and	pay	respect,	and	I	will	stop	going
on	 that	 street.	 I	 will	 go	 on	 another	 street,	 because	 I	 will	 not	 force	 you	 to	 go
twice,	wasting	your	time."
When	people	 are	psychologically	 in	 such	 a	bondage	 they	 always	 find	 reasons.
One	day	he	came	to	me	and	told	me,	"Now	I	go	walking	alone,	without	you,	the
whole	joy	of	the	morning	walk	is	gone.	And	I	know	you	will	not	come	with	me
unless	I	leave	these	gods;	I	have	to	choose.	So	today	I	tried	it	--	perhaps	you	are
right!	So	I	tried	it	on	my	own:	I	didn't	pay	any	respect.	And	when	I	came	home
my	mother	was	dead.	Now	it	is	absolutely	certain	that	I	angered	so	many	gods."
But	I	said,	"Everybody's	mother	is	going	to	die.	Do	you	think	it	 is	because	the
gods	 are	 angry	 that	 mothers	 die?	 and	 that	 only	 your	 mother	 is	 special?
Everybody's	father	is	going	to	die,	everybody	is	going	to	fall	sick,	everybody	is
going	to	have	accidents!"
But	he	said,	"I	cannot	think	of	anything...	when	I	had	gone	for	the	walk	she	was
perfectly	okay	and	when	I	came	back	she	was	dead.	The	doctors	say	she	had	a
heart	attack,	but	I	know	that	really	I	have	killed	her	by	not	paying	respects."
I	said,	"If	you	had	not	paid	respect,	you	should	have	died	from	a	heart	attack,	not
your	mother.	Can't	you	see	a	simple	thing	--	that	your	mother	has	nothing	to	do
with	it."
But	 the	 psychological	 conditioning	 makes	 you	 almost	 blind.	 He	 said	 to	 me,
"This	is	a	warning	to	me,	`Look,	this	time	we	are	taking	your	mother,	next	time
you	are	gone!'	They	have	given	me	an	opportunity,	a	chance	--	a	chance	because
I	have	always	been	 respectful.	They	are	being	kind	 towards	me,	but	now	I	am
not	going	to	listen	to	you."
Your	psychological	armor	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.	You	will	fight	for	it.
Only	you	can	do	something	to	drop	it,	and	that	is	to	look	at	each	and	every	part
of	it.	If	it	is	based	in	fear,	then	drop	it.	If	it	is	based	in	reason,	in	experience,	in
understanding,	then	it	is	not	something	to	be	dropped,	but	something	to	be	made
part	of	your	being.	But	you	will	not	find	a	single	thing	in	your	armor	which	is
based	on	experience.	It	is	all	fear,	from	A	to	Z.
We	 go	 on	 living	 out	 of	 fear	 --	 that's	 why	 we	 go	 on	 poisoning	 every	 other
experience.	We	 love	 somebody,	 but	 out	 of	 fear:	 it	 spoils,	 it	 poisons.	We	 seek
truth,	but	if	the	search	is	out	of	fear	then	you	are	not	going	to	find	it.
Whatever	you	do,	remember	one	thing:
Out	of	fear	you	are	not	going	to	grow.	You	will	only	shrink	and	die.
Fear	is	in	the	service	of	death.
Mahavira	is	right:	he	makes	fearlessness	a	fundamental	of	a	fearless	person.	And
I	can	understand	what	he	means	by	fearlessness.	He	means	dropping	all	armor.	A
fearless	person	has	everything	that	life	wants	to	give	to	you	as	a	gift.	Now	there
is	 no	 barrier.	You	will	 be	 showered	with	 gifts,	 and	whatever	 you	 do	 you	will
have	a	strength,	a	power,	a	certainty,	a	tremendous	feeling	of	authority.
A	man	 living	out	of	 fear	 is	always	 trembling	 inside.	He	 is	continuously	on	 the
point	of	going	 insane,	because	 life	 is	big,	and	 if	you	are	continuously	 in	fear...
And	 there	 is	 every	 kind	 of	 fear.	 You	 can	 make	 a	 big	 list,	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised	how	many	fears	are	there
--	 and	 still	 you	 are	 alive!	 There	 are	 infections	 all	 around,	 diseases,	 dangers,
kidnaping,	 terrorists...	 and	 such	 a	 small	 life.	And	 finally	 there	 is	 death,	which
you	cannot	avoid.
Your	whole	life	will	become	dark.
Drop	the	fear!	The	fear	was	taken	up	by	you	in	your	childhood	unconsciously;
now	consciously	drop	it	and	be	mature.	And	then	life	can	be	a	light	which	goes
on	deepening	as	you	go	on	growing.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	DISCOURSE	WHEN	YOU	SAY	THINGS	LIKE,	"LIVE	TOTALLY	IN	THE
MOMENT,"	 I	ALWAYS	THINK,	"OF	COURSE!...	THAT'S	 IT!	FROM	NOW
ON	I	AM	ALWAYS	GOING	TO	DO	THAT."	AND	OF	COURSE,	A	MOMENT
LATER	 I	 HAVE	 FORGOTTEN	 ALREADY.	 IN	 EVERY	 DISCOURSE	 I
DECIDE	THE	TIME
HAS	 COME	 TO	 BE	 MORE	 MEDITATIVE,	 MORE	 RELIGIOUS,	 MORE
LOVING,	MORE	AWARE	--	AND	I	IMMEDIATELY	FORGET.
IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 THAT	 JUST	 BY	 SITTING	WITH	YOU,	 ONE	OF	 THESE
DAYS	I	WILL	REALLY	GET	IT	IN	SPITE	OF	MYSELF?
It	 is	 possible	 you	 may	 get	 it	 in	 spite	 of	 yourself.	 But	 your	 question	 is	 very
significant.	If	you	look	at	it,	you	can	see	what	is	going	wrong.	You	listen	to	me
talking	about	living	totally,	intensively...	moment	to	moment,	living	now,	living
here	and	you	say	to	yourself,
"Of	course,	that	is	it!	I	am	going	to	do	it."	It	is	not	that	later	on	you	forget	it;	you
have	already	forgotten	it.	By	saying,	"Of	course!	this	is	it,"	by	deciding	that	you
are	going	to	do	it,	you	have	already	postponed	it	for	tomorrow;	by	deciding	that
you	are	going	to	live	this	way,	you	have	already	missed	the	point.
You	have	missed	the	point	now.
You	think	that	later	on	you	find	you	have	forgotten	it	just	a	moment	afterwards.
You	are	not	forgetting	it	just	a	moment	afterwards;	you	have	not	listened	to	it	at
all!	 Otherwise	 you	would	 not	 say,	 "Of	 course!	 This	 is	 it!"	You	would	 simply
understand	it	non-verbally.
You	 would	 not	 verbalize	 it,	 because	 in	 verbalizing	 it	 you	 are	 missing	 the
moment...	the	moment	is	a	very	small	thing.
Your	mind	is	 really	deceiving	you.	Your	mind	is	saying,	"I	have	understood	 it,
don't	be	worried.	Of	course,	this	is	it!	We	are	going	to	live	this	way."	But	when?
The	 question	was	 now,	 and	 your	mind	 has	 already	 postponed	 it.	 The	 question
was	here,	and	the	mind	has	already	brought	the	future	in.	It	is	not	that	you	forget
later	on;	later	on	you	only	recognize	that	you	have	forgotten.	But	the	truth	is	that
you	 have	 not	 even	 understood,	 because	 if	 you	 understand	 it	 there	 is	 no
possibility	of	forgetting	it.
A	truth	has	a	quality:	understood,	it	is	impossible	to	forget	it.	That's	why	if	you
are	a	man	of	truth	you	need	not	remember	it,	but	if	you	are	accustomed	to	lying
then	 you	 need	 a	 very	 good	 memory,	 because	 then	 you	 have	 to	 remember
continually	what	lie	you	had	told	this	man	yesterday,	and	you	have	to	repeat	the
same	lie	--	because	meanwhile	you	may	have	been	lying	to	other	people,	about
other	things.	A	liar	has	to	be	very	very	alert,	and	if	he	is	caught,	then	he	has	to	be
very	logical,	almost	a	sophist,	so	he	can	manage.
One	Sufi	story	is	that	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	chosen	by	the	Shah	of	Iran	to	go	to
the	 king	 of	 India	 as	 his	 messenger,	 to	 make	 a	 friendship	 between	 two	 great
countries.	All	 the	other	 important	people	 in	 the	court	of	 the	Shah	of	 Iran	were
very	 jealous.	 They	 were	 trying	 in	 every	 way	 to	 spoil	 Nasruddin's	 journey,	 to
create	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 the	 king	 antagonism	 against	 Nasruddin,	 and	 they	 were
spying	on	Nasruddin	to	find	out	what	he	was	doing.
What	Nasruddin	did	was	 this:	he	went	 to	 the	emperor	of	 India,	and	before	 the
whole	court	of	the	emperor	he	said,	"Seeing	you	is	a	great	privilege	to	me.	My
king,	the	Shah	of	Iran	is	just	a	young	moon	--	just	two	days	old.	You	are	a	full
moon."
The	emperor	was	certainly	very	much	impressed	--	that	the	ambassador	of	Iran	is
comparing	him	not	with	a	 two-day	old	moon,	which	 is	 rarely	visible	for	a	few
minutes,	but	with	the	full	moon!	He	gave	him	many	presents	to	give	to	his	king
and	said,	"Let	him	know	that	I	am	very	much	pleased	with	his	messenger."
But	the	spies	of	the	Shah's	court,	the	conspirators	against	Nasruddin,	had	reached
the	Shah's	court	before	him.	They	told	everyone	that	Nasruddin	had	insulted	the
Shah	of	 Iran,	calling	him	just	a	young	moon,	 two	days	old,	and	had	compared
him	with	the	emperor	of	India	by	saying	that	the	emperor	of	India	is	a	full	moon,
perfect	in	its	glory!
Naturally	the	Shah	of	Iran	was	very	much	offended.	He	said,	"Let	that	Nasruddin
come!	I	used	to	think	that	he	is	a	wise	man,	but	he	seems	to	be	very	cunning."
Nasruddin	came	with	big,	valuable	presents,	but	the	Shah	was	angry.	He	said,	"I
don't	want	any	presents.
First	you	have	 to	give	 the	explanation	 to	me:	 is	 it	 right	 that	you	compared	me
with	 the	 emperor,	 saying	 that	 I	 am	 just	 a	 two-day	 old	moon,	 and	 he	 is	 as	 the
perfect	full	moon?"
Nasruddin	 said,	 "Yes,	 and	 the	 emperor	 is	 a	 fool!	 He	 did	 not	 understand	 my
meaning."
The	Shah	said,	"What	is	your	meaning?"
He	said,	"My	meaning	is	that	the	full	moon	is	on	its	deathbed,	from	tomorrow	it
will	start	declining.	The	two-day	old	moon	is	on	the	increase:	tomorrow	it	will
be	bigger,	the	day	after	tomorrow	it	will	be	even	bigger!	So	my	Shah	of	Iran	is
expanding,	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	The	emperor	does	not	have	any	future	--
my	Shah	has	a	future;	he	has	only	past,	and	his	future	is	death."
The	Shah	of	Iran	was	very	impressed.	He	gave	all	the	presents	that	were	given
by	the	emperor	of	India	for	him	to	Nasruddin,	and	he	gave	many	more	presents
to	Nasruddin,	and	 told	him,	"You	are	really	a	wise	man."	And	the	whole	court
was	silent,	seeing	that	the	whole	thing	had	changed	completely:	"This	Nasruddin
is	really	a	strange	fellow;	we	had	never	thought	that	he	would	interpret	it	in	such
a	way."
That	night	they	went	to	see	him,	because	now	he	had	become	the	most	important
man	 in	 the	 court,	 second	 only	 to	 the	Shah,	 and	 they	 all	 praised	 him.	He	 said,
"Don't	be	bothered	-
-	 I	 am	 just	 an	 incurable	 liar!	Whatever	 the	 situation	 is,	 I	manage	 somehow	 to
interpret	 it	 in	such	a	way	 that	 it	appeals	 to	 the	party	concerned:	both	 the	 India
emperor	and	the	Shah	of	Iran	are	idiots!	And	I	am	just	an	incurable	liar.	I	don't
mean	anything!"
Truth	has	a	quality,	it	has	a	validity	which	is	intrinsic.	You	need	not	prove	it;	its
experience	is	its	proof.	No	other	logic	is	needed.
So	just	look	into	your	acts,	into	your	thoughts,	into	your	feelings:	you	will	find
the	armor	everywhere.	Wherever	you	see	fear,	you	have	created	it.	It	was	needed
at	one	 time	--	now	it	 is	no	 longer	needed.	A	simple	understanding	 that	 it	 is	no
longer	needed...	now	it	is	a	barrier,	a	hindrance,	a	burden.	If	you	find	something
truthful,	it	will	have	its	own	validity.
But	in	the	armor	you	will	not	find	anything	that	has	any	connection	with	truth.
The	whole	armor	is	made	of	fear	--	layers	and	layers	of	fear.
The	woodcutters	and	the	scientists	who	work	with	wood	count	the	age	of	the	tree
from	the	layers	of	the	bark.	When	you	cut	a	tree	you	will	see	layers	of	the	bark
on	the	trunk.
Each	year	the	tree	gathers	one	layer	--	that's	how	they	manage	to	know	how	old
the	 tree	 is.	 There	 are	 trees	which	 are	 four	 thousand	 years	 old;	 they	 have	 four
thousand	layers.
Your	 armor	 has	 also	 as	 many	 layers	 as	 you	 have	 lived.	 Not	 one	 every	 year;
perhaps	 one,	 two,	 three	 --	 it	 depends	 on	 conditions:	what	 kind	 of	 upbringing,
what	kind	of	education,	what	kind	of	people	you	have	lived	with.	But	each	year
you	are	collecting	layers,	and	the	armor	goes	on	becoming	thicker	and	does	not
allow	you	to	touch	life.	There	is	such	a	gap	between	you	and	life.
You	 are	 carrying	 an	 imprisonment	 around	 yourself.	 But	 because	 you	 yourself
have	created	it,	you	are	capable	of	dropping	it	any	moment...	this	very	moment.
But	don't	postpone,	don't	say,	"I	will	do	 it	 tomorrow."	Tomorrow	never	comes.
And	when	 I	 am	 saying,	 "Do	 it..."in	 fact	 doing	 it	 is	 not	 needed;	 just	 seeing	 is
enough.	If	you	have	seen	it,	don't	verbalize	it:	"This	is	it,"	because	in	verbalizing
it	you	will	miss	--	 the	moment	is	gone.	Without	verbalization,	just	see	it	and	it
will	evaporate.	It	has	no	substantiality.	It	 is	not	something	real.	It	 is	something
unreal	that	you	have	created,	and	this	goes	on	happening	every	day.
I	 tell	you	 to	 live	 intensely	herenow,	but	 the	barrier	which	 is	 there	 immediately
shifts	 it	 into	 the	 future.	You	 feel	 that	you	have	understood	 it;	 right	now	 it	will
shift	 it	 towards	 the	 future	 and	give	you	 the	 feeling	of	understanding.	But	next
moment	 you	 will	 have	 forgotten	 it,	 because	 in	 the	 first	 place	 you	 had	 not
understood	it	at	all.	Understood,	it	is	never	forgotten.
My	professors	in	the	university	were	very	angry	with	me	because	I	would	never
take	any	notes,	and	every	other	student	was	taking	notes.	They	would	see	me	just
sitting,	and	they	would	ask	me,	"Don't	you	want	to	take	notes?"
I	said,	"There	is	no	need.	I	am	trying	to	understand,	and	if	I	understand	it,	there
is	no	need	of	any	notes;	the	understanding	will	remain	with	me.	Understanding
becomes	 part	 of	 your	 blood,	 part	 of	 your	 bones,	 part	 of	 your	 marrow.	 These
people	who	are	 taking	notes	are	 the	ones	who	are	not	understanding.	They	are
thinking	that	by	taking	notes	they	will	be	able	to	remember	--	but	what	will	they
remember?	They	have	not	understood	in	the	first	place.
These	notes	will	be	dead.	Perhaps	they	will	be	able	to	repeat	these	notes	in	the
examination	papers.
"You	 are	 responsible	 --	 because	 these	 people	 will	 take	 these	 notes	 into	 the
examination,	 and	 then	 they	 will	 be	 caught.	 In	 fact	 you	 are	 responsible;	 you
should	have	 stopped	 them	 from	 taking	notes.	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 logic:	 they	are	not
understanding	 and	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 take	 notes.	 They	 can't	 do	 two	 things
together.	In	the	end,	only	the	notes	are	in	their	hands	and	no	understanding,	and
in	 the	examination,	what	will	 they	do?	They	will	 try	 to	bring	 in	 the	notes	 in	a
thousand	different	ways."
People	will	write	small	notes	on	their	hand,	people	will	write	on	their	clothes...
and	in	India	you	wear	a	kurta,	a	very	long	robe,	on	the	underside	you	can	write
big	notes.
Nobody	can	see	it;	only	when	you	want	to	see	it	you	can	just	turn	it	up	and	look
at	the	note,	and	you	are	not	carrying	any	notes	or	anything.	And	the	people	who
are	 a	 dangerous	 type,	 and	 are	 known	 to	 be	 dangerous,	will	 bring	 their	 copies
with	them,	with	a	knife.
They	will	put	the	knife	on	the	table	with	the	copy,	and	they	will	be	copying	from
the	 copy	 before	 the	 teacher	 who	 is	 standing	 there.	 He	 knows	 that	 the	man	 is
dangerous	 and	 that	 the	 knife	 is	 symbolic,	 "If	 you	 prevent	 me	 or	 do	 anything
wrong	to	me,	I	can	do	anything	--	I	can	kill	you."	But	who	is	responsible?
"And	 you,"	 I	 used	 to	 tell	 them,	 "you	 are	 angry	 at	 me,	 who	 is	 trying	 to
understand?"
In	my	 own	 class,	 when	 I	 became	 a	 professor	 in	 my	 own	 turn,	 I	 prevented	 it
completely...
nobody	could	take	notes.	I	said,	"The	mind	can	do	only	one	thing	at	a	time,	so
try	to	understand	so	that	you	need	not	sneak	notes	into	the	examination."
First	my	 students	were	 very	much	 puzzled.	 They	 said,	 "Every	 professor	 says,
`Take	notes,	so	you	don't	forget.'"
I	said,	"The	question	of	forgetting	arises	only	when	you	have	not	understood.	I
am	saying,	Ùnderstand,	and	don't	worry	about	forgetting.'	Anything	understood
is	never	forgotten,	and	anything	not	understood	is	bound	to	be	forgotten."
So	that's	what	is	happening....	I	say,	"Live	now."	You	say,	"This	is	it!	Enough	is
enough,	now	I	am	going	to	live	moment	to	moment."	But	why	the	decision?
Just	 start!	 Whatever	 you	 are	 doing	 here...	 you	 are	 listening	 here,	 just	 listen.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 verbalize	 it.	 The	 mind	 is	 a	 commentator	 --	 it	 goes	 on
commenting	--	but	if	you	try	intensely	to	hear,	the	commentating	mind	will	stop
because	it	is	a	question	of	energy.
You	have	a	certain	energy.	If	you	stake	the	whole	energy	in	listening,	then	this
continuous	commentary	in	the	mind	automatically	stops.	It	has	no	more	energy;
you	are	not	nourishing	it.
And	yes,	it	is	true:	it	is	going	to	happen	in	spite	of	you.	How	long	are	you	going
to	not	listen	to	me?	Just	tired,	one	day	you	will	say,	"Let	us	listen!"
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
GEORGE	GURDJIEFF	SAID,	"BRAVO,	AMERICA!"	AFTER	SEEING	HOW
INHUMANELY	THE	UNITED	STATES	TREATED	YOU,	 I	SAY,	"TO	HELL
WITH
AMERICA!"
BELOVED	MASTER,	WHAT	DO	YOU	SAY?
I	cannot	say	anything	against	Gurdjieff.	I	will	still	say,	"Bravo,	America!"	for	the
simple	 reason	 that	 America	 has	 not	 mistreated	 me.	 The	 small	 group	 of
bureaucrats	who	mistreated	me	are	not	America;	 they	are	mistreating	America
too.	 Don't	 say,	 "To	 hell	 with	 America!"	 say,	 "To	 hell	 with	 the	 American
government!"	Make	it	a	clear	distinction.
America	has	not	much	knowledge	about	me.	It	was	the	American	government's
behavior,	mistreatment,	that	made	me	known	to	every	American.	And	wherever	I
went	 in	those	twelve	days	--	I	passed	almost	all	over	America	--	I	was	greeted
with	 love	 and	 respect	 by	 strangers.	 Everybody	 could	 see	 that	 the	 American
government	was	behaving	 like	 a	 fascist	 government;	 everybody	could	 see	 that
this	was	 religious	persecution,	 that	 this	was	not	 democracy.	Even	 amongst	 the
bureaucrats	who	came	in	contact	with	me	--	the	jailers,	 the	doctors,	 the	nurses,
the	 other	 attendants	 in	 the	 jail,	 the	 inmates	 --	 there	 was	 not	 even	 a	 single
exception.
I	was	 surprised,	 because	 those	 inmates	 had	no	way	of	 knowing	me.	They	had
just	 known	what	was	 happening	with	me	 from	 the	 television	 --	 small	 bits	 and
pieces.	 But	 they	 were	 certain	 that	 I	 was	 being	 persecuted	 by	 the	 Christian
fanatics	 and	 by	 the	 bureaucracy;	 that	 the	 government	 was	 afraid	 for	 some
reasons	and	the	church	was	afraid	for	some	reasons.
They	 simply	wanted	 some	 excuse	 so	 I	 could	 not	 enter	America,	 because	 they
knew	that	if	I	was	out	of	America	my	people,	naturally,	would	disperse.
But	from	the	American	people	I	experienced	great	love.	The	first	jail	I	was	in,	so
many	 telegrams	 and	 so	 many	 telephone	 calls...	 in	 the	 thousands.	 I	 asked	 the
jailer,	"You	must	be	getting	tired?"
He	said,	"No,	we	have	had	to	appoint	three,	four	more	people	to	receive	phone
calls,	open	telegrams."
The	 first	 day	 somebody	 from	Germany	 phoned	 and	 asked	 the	 jailer,	 "Perhaps
Osho	must	be	the	first	in	your	jail	who	is	a	man	of	international	standing?"
And	 the	 jailer	 said,	 "No,	 we	 have	 had	 cabinet	 ministers,	 leaders	 of	 political
parties,	and	many	celebrities."
I	had	no	idea	what	had	happened,	but	as	the	second	day	came	and	flowers	started
coming...	There	were	so	many	that	in	that	jail,	a	big	jail	--	they	had	six	hundred
inmates	 or	more	 --	 they	 had	 no	 place	 to	 keep	 them.	They	 had	 only	 one	 room
empty,	a	big	room,	bigger	than	this	room,	and	it	was	full	of	flowers.
The	jailer	came	to	me,	saying,	"What	to	do	with	the	flowers?"
I	said,	"Send	them	to	schools,	colleges,	universities,	hospitals,	sick	people	in	the
city	--
wherever	you	feel,	just	send	them,	from	me."
He	said,	"One	thing	more,	I	am	sorry	and	I	want	to	apologize.	I	don't	know	the
number	of	the	man	who	called	from	Germany...	you	had	come	recently	and	I	had
no	awareness	of	what	kind	of	man	you	are.	Now,	in	two	days,	I	have	seen	that
the	whole	world	is	interested	in	you.	There	is	not	a	single	country	in	the	world
from	where	 we	 are	 not	 receiving	 calls	 and	 telegrams,	 and	 flowers.	 And	 from
America	everywhere	people	simply	want	to	know	why	you	have	been	arrested.
"So	I	cannot	phone	that	man	and	apologize	to	him,	but	I	can	say	to	you	what	I
want	 to	 say	 to	 him:	 please	 forgive	 me.	 Those	 cabinet	 ministers	 and	 political
leaders	--	you	don't	belong	to	their	category.	Perhaps	we	will	never	have	another
man	like	you	in	this	jail.
These	two	days	have	been	my	life's	most	precious	days."
The	jailer	used	to	take	me	to	the	court	everyday,	and	returning	he	would	say,	"It
is	 sheer	 injustice.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 such	 injustice.	 They	 can't	 prove	 a	 thing
against	you,	and	still	they	are	not	ready	to	give	bail.	This	is	unprecedented,"	he
said,	"in	my	whole	life	--	and	I	have	been	here	for	twenty	years."
On	the	street	people	were	standing	on	both	sides	whenever	I	was	coming	to	the
court,	going	back	from	the	court	--	perhaps	for	hours,	because	they	did	not	have
any	idea	at	what	time	I	would	be	taken	out	--	shouting,	showing	two	fingers	for
victory,	throwing	flowers	on	the	police	cars.
No,	 America	 has	 not	 mistreated	 me.	 The	 government	 --	 and	 that	 is	 a	 totally
different	thing....
The	politicians	and	the	church	conspired;	both	were	in	danger.	And	now	they	are
trying	 to	 create	 the	 fear	 in	 all	 the	 other	 countries	 where	 they	 can	 have	 some
pressure.	Because	 they	help	 the	poor	countries	with	money,	 the	poor	countries
are	 under	 obligation,	 so	 whatever	 America	 says	 to	 them	 they	 have	 to	 follow.
Their	whole	effort	 is	not	 to	 let	me	settle	again	and	create	a	commune,	because
that	 commune	 will	 be	 an	 answer	 that	 proves	 that	 all	 their	 accusations,
allegations,	are	absolutely	wrong.
But	 as	 far	 as	 the	 people	 of	 that	 land	 are	 concerned,	 they	 are	 beautiful.	 And
Gurdjieff	was	right.
This	 government	 is	 not	 going	 to	 last	 long.	 They	 have	 already	 started	 doing
suicidal	acts.
With	the	attack	on	Libya	they	have	shown	their	real	face.	A	small	country	like
Libya,	and	a	nuclear	power	 like	America	--	 there	 is	no	comparison...	The	only
reason	for	attacking	Libya	is	that	the	man	who	leads	Libya,	Kaddafi,	is	really	a
brave	man,	outspoken,	and	he	says	whatever	is	the	truth.	He	is	not	a	politician.
And	 he	 said	 that	Ronald	Reagan	 is	Adolf	Hitler	Number	Two.	This	 statement
was	 the	 root	 cause	 for	 attacking	 Libya;	 all	 other	 things	 were	 not	 of	 any
consideration.	But	he	does	not	know	that	before	attacking	Libya	he	should	attack
me	--	fortunately	I	don't	have	any	land	--	because	I	have	immediately	corrected
Kaddafi:	"You	are	wrong.	Ronald	Reagan	is	not	Adolf	Hitler	Number	Two;	he	is
Adolf	Hitler	Number	One."
The	poor	Adolf	Hitler	of	the	second	world	war	cannot	be	number	one.	He	is	now
second,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 Ronald	 Reagan	 has	 a	 million	 times	 more
power	 than	Adolf	Hitler	 had.	Now	 he	 is	 calling	Kaddafi	 "the	mad	 dog	 of	 the
Middle	East,"	calling	him	"the	bad	smell."
Ronald	Reagan	 and	 his	 government	 started	 dying	 the	 day	 they	 arrested	me.	 It
takes	a	 little	 time.	Let	 them	do	a	 few	more	stupid	 things	and	 let	 the	American
people	 understand	 what	 kind	 of	 a	 government	 they	 have	 got.	 It	 is	 not	 a
democracy:	it	is	not	for	the	people,	it	is	not	of	the	people,	it	is	not	by	the	people.
It	is	a	fascist	gang	that	is	ruling	America,	and	it	will	be	good	that	the	American
people	get	rid	of	it;	otherwise....	People	naturally	think	the	government	and	the
so-called	political	leaders	are	the	leaders	of	the	people.	That	is	not	so.
Just	 recently	 I	 have	 received	 news	 from	 Crete	 about	 a	 few	 incidents	 that
happened	after	they	arrested	me.	Eleven	old	people	--	fifty	to	sixty	years	old	--
just	as	I	left	the	house	with	the	police,	reached	the	house	and	said,	"This	should
not	have	happened	without	us.
Why	did	you	not	 inform	us?	We	have	our	hunting	guns,	we	would	have	come
and	shown	those	police	people	what	it	means	to	misbehave."
One	journalist	had	asked	me,	"Any	message	for	the	people	who	live	here?"
I	said,	"Just	tell	them	to	reach	the	airport	in	the	night	to	show	that	they	are	with
me	 --	 not	 with	 the	 church	 and	 not	 with	 the	 government."	 There	 were	 three
thousand	people	at	the	airport	They	had	waited	for	hours	to	support	me,	and	to
say	 that	what	 the	police	had	done	and	what	 the	government	had	done	was	not
right.	Fifty	people	met	one	 sannyasin;	 they	were	 immensely	 angry	 about	what
had	happened	and	were	asking,	"What	can	we	do?"
Just	 poor	 people,	 simple	 people....	Another	 group	 of	 forty	 people	met	 another
sannyasin,	 and	 they	were	 asking,	 "Show	 us...	 we	want	 to	 do	 something.	 This
thing	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 to	 happen.	And	 everything	 that	Osho	was	 saying
was	right,	about	the	church;	there	was	nothing	wrong	in	it."
These	 simple	 villagers	 understood	 that	what	 I	was	 saying	 about	 the	 church	 is
true;	 nothing	was	wrong	 in	 it.	And	 even	when	 I	 had	 left	Greece,	 people	 from
Crete	sent	a	delegation	to	the	president	saying,	"This	behavior	of	the	police	and
the	government	has	disgraced	us."
So	always	remember	to	make	a	differentiation	between	the	government	and	the
people.
The	government	is	not	necessarily	the	representative	of	the	people.	In	most	cases
it	has	cheated	people,	exploited	people.	It	is	not	for	them.
I	 know...	 the	 question	 is	 from	 Milarepa.	 I	 can	 understand	 your	 anger.	 Every
sannyasin	would	like	to	say,	"To	hell	with	America!"	But	just	say,	"To	hell	with
the	American	government!"
America	is	far	bigger,	far	more	important,	and	I	still	hope	that	the	new	man	will
be	born	in	America.
These	 governments	 come	 and	 go;	 the	 people	 remain.	 The	 people	 are	 the	 very
soul.	A	country	 is	 not	made	of	 land,	 it	 is	made	of	 the	people.	 In	 those	 twelve
days	in	jail,	moving	from	one	jail	to	another,	I	came	in	contact	with	the	common
people	and	with	the	lowest	of	the	low	--	the	criminals	--	and	I	have	seen	so	much
love	in	their	hearts.	Whenever	I	entered	into	a	new	jail	I	was	received...	I	did	not
feel	that	it	was	a	jail	because	the	reception	was	so	warm.
Of	 course	 those	 people	were	 behind	 bars,	 but	 they	were	 shouting,	 "Osho,	 we
know	you,	and	you	are	right!"	in	the	face	of	the	jailer,	the	doctor	and	the	other
officials.	 They	would	 line	 up,	 and	 whenever	 I	 reached	my	 cell,	 soon	 inmates
would	start	coming	with	fruits...
somebody	 with	 milk,	 somebody	 with	 soap,	 somebody	 with	 a	 toothbrush,
somebody	 with	 toothpaste.	 They	 would	 say,	 "These	 people	 will	 not	 give	 you
anything.	They	want	to	torture	you.	But	as	we	had	heard	just	the	day	before	that
you	will	be	brought	here,	we	have	been	saving;	all	these	things	are	fresh."
These	people	are	criminals,	and	Ronald	Reagan	is	not	a	criminal?
And	he	killed	unnecessarily	Kaddafi's	daughter,	bombed	his	three	houses	which
are	in	the	civilian	area.	He	himself	 is	a	mad	dog	--	and	he	is	calling	Kaddafi	a
mad	dog!
I	 can	 understand	 your	 anger,	 but	 remember	 always	 to	 be	 careful	 to	 draw	 fine
lines	so	that	only	the	criminal	is	hit,	not	the	simple,	poor,	innocent	people.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#34
Chapter	title:	Rocks,	the	earth...	they	are	all	alive
29	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604290
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO34
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
101
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HEARD	YOU	 SAY	THAT	 IF	A	 PERSON	CAN	REMEMBER	HIS	 BIRTH
AND
BEING	IN	THE	WOMB,	THEN	THE	MEMORY	OF	HIS	LAST	DEATH	MAY
COME.I	 HAVE	 TRIED	 TO	 REMEMBER,	 BUT	 ONLY	 IMAGINATION	 IS
THERE.	 I	 ALSO	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 IT	 IS	 NOT	 POSSIBLE	 TO
REMEMBER	BEYOND
THREE	TO	FOUR	YEARS	OLD	BECAUSE	THE	BABY	HAS	NO	MIND.
IS	THERE	A	REMEMBRANCE	THAT	IS	NOT	OF	THE	MIND?
There	is	no	remembrance	that	is	not	of	the	mind,	but	you	don't	know	the	whole
mind.
When	you	are	trying	to	remember,	you	are	using	only	the	conscious	mind,	and
the	conscious	mind	can	go	only	up	to	the	age	of	four.	But	below	the	conscious	is
the	unconscious	mind.
Sometimes	in	your	dreams	you	go	deeper	than	the	conscious	mind	can	ever	lead
you.
Many	of	your	dreams	are	memories	of	your	past	lives,	but	you	have	no	way	to
recognize	 that	 they	 are	 of	 a	 past	 life.	 So	 there	 is	 a	 special	 method	 which	 is
something	like	hypnosis.
It	 can	 be	 done	 by	 somebody	 else	 to	 you	 --	which	 is	 simpler	 because	 you	 can
relax	completely,	and	he	can	lead	you	deeper	into	the	past	life.
In	hypnosis	or	in	Buddhist	or	Jaina	terminology	--	because	they	discovered	the
method	first	 --	 it	 is	called	 jati-smaran:	remembering	 the	past	 lives.	 In	hypnosis
you	don't	hear	anybody	else	except	the	person	who	has	hypnotized	you.	He	can
talk	 to	you,	you	can	answer	him,	yet	you	will	 remain	 fast	asleep,	you	will	not
come	 to	 the	 conscious	 mind.	 So	 only	 in	 hypnosis	 can	 your	 unconscious	 be
communicated	with,	asked	questions.
This	 can	 be	 repeated	 again	 and	 again,	 and	 if	 the	 same	 fact	 comes	 up	without
exception,	the	same	memory	comes	up,	the	same	story	comes	up,	then	certainly
it	is	not	imagination.
Another	 thing...	 Through	 hypnosis	 the	 other	 person	 can	 reach	 you,	 but	 not
through	 your	 conscious	mind	 --	 because	 in	whatever	 the	 conscious	mind	 does
there	 is	 an	 effort	 and	 tension,	 and	 that	 prevents	 the	 unconscious	 mind	 from
surfacing.	The	conscious	mind	has	to	be	completely	relaxed	so	the	unconscious
can	surface.	In	hypnosis	it	is	better	to	begin	with	someone	else.	And	it	is	such	a
simple	method	that	anyone	can	do	it	--	it	does	not	need	any	expertise.	I	will	tell
you	about	the	method,	how	you	can	help	each	other.
When	you	have	become	a	good	medium,	so	that	you	can	slip	very	easily	into	the
unconscious,	then	finally	the	unconscious	can	be	told	that	you	are	able	to	reach
your	 past	 lives.	 It	 can	 be	 given	 a	 certain	 symbol	 to	 avoid	 the	 conscious	mind
completely.	For	example,	it	can	be	told	that	if	you	repeat,	"Om,	om,	om,"	three
times,	you	will	 fall	 into	hypnosis.	Before	using	 this	mantra	 --	 anything	can	be
used,	"One,	two,	three,"	it	doesn't	matter,	the	words	are	not	significant	--	before
doing	it,	you	have	to	tell	your	conscious	mind,	"Wake	me	up	after	ten	minutes."
The	other	person	can	also	do	the	same,	but	it	is	easier	for	you	because	you	are
not	doing	anything.	But	once	you	have	been	able	to	go	into	deeper	layers	of	your
past	life	or	past	lives,	the	other	person	can	tell	the	unconscious,
"This	is	your	mantra:	one,	two,	three.	And	whenever	I	say	it,	you	will	fall	into	an
unconscious	state."	But	remember	to	tell	the	conscious	to	wake	you;	otherwise,
who	will	wake	you	out	of	unconsciousness?	It	can	become	a	coma.
The	unconscious	mind	is	nine	times	bigger	than	the	conscious;	it	has	tremendous
treasures,	all	the	memories	of	your	past.	And	below	the	unconscious	there	is	the
collective	unconscious.	One	can	descend	into	the	collective	unconscious	also	--
at	 first	with	somebody's	help.	That	used	 to	be	 the	work	of	a	mystery	school	 --
that	the	master	will	take	you	slowly	towards	the	unconscious	and	the	collective
unconscious.	 In	 your	 collective	 unconscious	 you	 have	 memories	 of	 your	 past
lives	as	animals,	as	birds.
Below	the	collective	unconscious	is	the	cosmic	unconscious.	Slowly,	slowly	one
can	 go	 deeper	 and	 deeper,	 and	 the	 cosmic	 unconscious	 has	memories	 of	 your
being	trees,	rosebushes,	stones.
So	mind	is	not	only	that	which	you	know;	there	is	much	to	be	discovered	in	your
own	mind.	 It	 is	yours,	 it	 is	 there	 --	but	not	 easily	 available.	There	are	 reasons
why	it	 is	not	easily	available.	Nature	makes	barriers,	because	 it	would	confuse
you	 if	 there	were	no	barriers	between	 the	conscious,	 and	 the	unconscious,	 and
the	collective	unconscious,	and	the	cosmic	unconscious.	Even	this	small	mind	--
the	 conscious	mind	 --	 is	 so	 confusing,	 so	 disturbing.	 If	 you	knew	all	 that	 you
have	 lived	 for	millennia,	 from	 the	 very	 beginning,	 naturally	 you	would	 get	 in
such	a	mess,	in	such	a	madness.
For	example,	you	love	a	woman.	She	may	have	been	your	mother	in	a	past	life,
and	if	you	remember	it	 then	you	will	be	in	trouble.	But	she	may	have	been,	 in
your	 collective	 unconscious,	 your	 murderer;	 then	 things	 become	 even	 more
complicated.	And	those	realities	are	as	authentic	as	the	realities	of	your	life.	You
will	get	mixed	up:	how	are	you	going	 to	behave	with	 this	woman	who	is	your
wife,	who	was	your	mother,	who	was	your	murderer?	Whatever	you	do	with	this
woman	will	create	guilt	 in	you.	You	will	not	be	at	ease.	That's	 the	reason	why
nature	goes	on	putting	barriers	between	your	past	existences	and	allows	you	only
this	life's	memories.
The	science	of	hypnosis	has	been	condemned	by	all	religions,	and	the	reason	is
that	 if	 hypnotism	 becomes	 accepted	 as	 a	 scientific	 enquiry	 --	 and	 once	 it	 is
explored	it	has	to	be	accepted,	because	it	fulfills	all	the	criteria	of	being	a	science
--	 then	 there	 will	 be	 trouble:	 Christians	 cannot	 say	 there	 is	 only	 one	 life,
Mohammedans	 can't	 say	 there	 is	 only	 one	 life,	Darwin	 can't	 say	 that	man	has
evolved	from	the	apes.	It	will	depend	on	the	research	done	through	thousands	of
peoples'	total	minds,	and	what	they	say.
Hindus	believe	that	man's	consciousness	has	evolved	from	the	consciousness	of
cows	--
that's	why	they	call	them	"mother."	And	I	think	a	cow	being	a	mother	looks	more
relevant	 than	 a	 monkey	 being	 a	 father.	 The	 Hindus	 are	 saying	 this	 through	 a
certain	research	into	the	mind,	which	has	been	available	for	centuries	in	the	East:
how	to	go	into	past	lives.	And	there	has	not	been	a	single	exception	--	whenever
you	cross	the	border	of	the	collective	unconscious	mind,	you	pass	from	the	body
of	a	cow,	not	from	the	body	of	a	monkey.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 hypotheses.	With	Darwin	 it	 is	 only	 hypothetical,	 just	 a
conjecture,	 and	now	he	 is	being	 refuted,	 even	by	 scientists.	Now	 there	are	not
many	Darwinians;	they	are	out	of	date.
The	latest	research	into	evolution	does	not	help	Darwin	and	his	theory.	They	say
that	for	thousands	of	years	we	have	not	seen	any	monkey	evolving	into	a	man,
and	neither	have	we	seen	the	reverse	--	that	a	man	reverses	into	a	monkey.	And
Darwin	could	not	provide	the	missing	link	--	which	he	was	asked	for	again	and
again	his	whole	life;	it	was	a	nightmare	for	him!	It	cannot	be	just	a	jump	from	a
monkey	to	a	man:	this	moment	you	are	a	monkey	and	next	moment	you	decide
to	be	a	man,	and	you	become	a	man.	There	must	be	a	missing	link...	not	only	a
link,	 perhaps	 many	 links,	 many	 steps	 slowly,	 slowly,	 but	 they	 should	 be
available.
Darwin	could	not	even	find	dead	bodies	that	would	have	been	a	proof	of	a	link.
We	have	been	searching	for	dead	bodies	and	we	have	found	one	ninety	thousand
years	old	--	a	human	body	in	China.	But	it	is	still	human;	it	is	not	a	monkey.	It
was	preserved	by	the	snow.	It	is	still	human,	as	human	as	you	are.
But	Hindus	have	a	totally	different	approach.	It	is	to	be	remembered	that	this	is
the	 only	 point	 on	which	 all	 the	 three	 religions	 that	 were	 born	 in	 India	 agree:
about	 everything	 else	 they	 have	 their	 own	 philosophy,	 but	 about	 reincarnation
they	all	agree.	And	that	is	not	just	an	accident,	because	all	three	religions	were
working	on	the	same	lines	--	looking	into	the	unconscious	of	man	--	and	they	all
found	 the	same	results.	To	call	 the	cow	mother...	 the	whole	world	 laughs	at	 it,
but	I	don't	think	anybody	understands	why	Hindus	call	the	cow	mother.	If	they
are	 right	 --	 the	 cow	 has	 the	 qualities	 of	 a	 mother,	 and	 it	 is	 far	 better	 to	 be
connected	with	the	cows	than	with	the	monkeys.
So	don't	try	to	remember.	It	is	not	a	question	of	remembering.	You	cannot	cross
the	barrier	with	 the	conscious	mind;	you	can	only	imagine,	and	you	will	know
that	it	is	only	imagination	because	it	changes	every	time,	so	you	know	perfectly
well	 that	you	are	 imagining.	Go	 through	a	hypnotic	process.	And	 the	hypnotic
process	is	very	simple	--	the	simplest.
The	mind,	 the	 conscious	mind,	 has	 to	 be	 focused	on	 something	 just	 for	 a	 few
seconds	--
for	example,	an	electric	light	bulb.	Don't	have	anything	in	the	room	so	that	the
mind	can	wander	here	and	there;	just	have	a	bare	room	with	only	one	thing:	an
electric	light	which	is	on	in	the	darkness.	Lie	down,	be	relaxed,	and	take	the	help
of	a	person	whom	you	trust.
That	 is	 the	 most	 important	 thing,	 because	 the	 conscious	 mind	 will	 not	 relax
unless	there	is	trust.	It	will	keep	itself	alert,	because	the	man	may	do	something,
take	you	someplace,	and	you	will	not	be	aware	of	it.	That's	why	I	said	hypnosis
was	part	of	a	mystery	school	where	there	were	masters	whom	people	trusted,	or
there	was	one	great	master	who	helped	you.	You	trusted	him,	and	he	said	to	you,
"This	man	is	going	to	take	you	into	hypnosis.
Your	trust	in	me	should	be	your	trust	in	him	too;	I	am	choosing	him."	Or	if	it	was
possible	for	the	master	himself,	if	the	school	was	small,	then	he	would	do	it	once
in	a	while,	just	to	show	others	what	happens.
The	 process	 is	 very	 simple.	 You	 have	 to	 lie	 down	 relaxed,	 the	 whole	 body
relaxed.
Looking	inside	the	body	starting	from	the	toe,	see	if	there	is	any	tension.	If	there
is	any	tension	near	the	knee	or	near	the	stomach	or	anywhere,	then	relax	it	there.
Bring	that	relaxation	up	to	your	head	--	and	keep	your	eyes	focused	on	the	light.
And	it	is	easy	to	recognize	when	you	have	come	to	the	point	where	you	are	on
the	 border	 of	 conscious	 and	 unconscious:	 your	 face	 changes;	 it	 starts	 looking
sleepy,	 it	 loses	 the	 quality	 of	 awakening,	 and	 at	 that	moment	 the	master	 says,
"Sleep	is	coming...	deep	sleep	is	coming...	you	are	falling	into	a	sleep	which	you
have	never	 fallen	 into	 before."	And	 a	moment	 comes	when	 even	 if	 you	 try	 to
keep	 your	 eyes	 open...	 You	 have	 been	 told	 that	 until	 your	 eyes	 close	 by
themselves,	 in	 spite	 of	 yourself,	 go	 on	 keeping	 them	 open.	 That	 keeps	 the
conscious	mind	engaged.
Soon	--	it	takes	two	minutes,	three	minutes,	at	the	most	five	minutes	--	your	eyes
start	 drooping.	 That	means	 you	 are	 just	 crossing	 the	 border.	 The	master	 says,
"You	 are	 falling,	 and	 I	will	 count	 up	 to	 seven.	With	 each	number	 you	will	 be
going	deeper."	And	he	starts	counting,	"One..."	and	goes	on	repeating,	"the	sleep
is	becoming	deeper.	Two...	the	sleep	is	becoming	deeper.	Three..."	And	at	seven
he	stops	it.	At	seven	he	says,	"You	have	fallen	into	deep	unconsciousness.	Now
you	will	be	available	only	to	me;	you	will	not	hear	anything	else,	anybody	else.
Now	the	only	communication	with	the	world	is	through	me;	you	will	be	able	to
hear	me,	you	will	be	able	to	answer	me..."
And	the	beauty	of	the	unconscious	is	that	it	never	lies,	because	it	has	never	been
part	of	civilization.	 It	has	never	been	educated,	 it	has	never	been	 turned	 into	a
hypocrite;	it	is	very	simple,	very	innocent.	It	simply	says	whatsoever	is	the	case.
Then	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 the	master	 leaves	you,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 settle	 into	 that
state.	And	then	he	starts	asking	you	where	you	are.	Perhaps	you	are	in	the	womb
of	your	mother,	perhaps	you	have	been	conceived,	perhaps	you	are	dying	 in	a
past	life	somewhere.	And	you	will	answer	where	you	are.	He	asks,	"Describe	it
in	detail,"	and	you	will	describe	it	in	detail.	This	can	be	taped,	recorded,	so	that
when	you	come	back	you	can	listen	to	it.
The	 process	 has	 to	 be	 repeated	many	 times,	 because	 this	 is	 the	 proof:	 if	 it	 is
imagination	or	dream	it	will	go	on	changing	every	time	you	do	it,	but	 if	 it	 is	a
reality	then	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	Each	time	you	come	to	that	place	you
will	describe	exactly	what	it	is.
And	all	that	you	say	can	be	recorded,	so	that	it	can	be	compared	later	on	when
you	are	conscious.	If	you	are	saying	the	same	thing	again	and	again	 it	 is	not	a
dream,	 it	 is	 not	 imagination;	 you	 are	 coming	 across	 a	 real	 memory.	 You	 are
reliving	it;	it	is	not	only	remembered,	but	relived.
Once	you	have	succeeded	 in	getting	one	 life	back,	 then	with	 the	same	process
you	can	go	on	deeper,	into	other	lives.	There	will	come	a	barrier	where	human
lives	 stop	 and	 animal	 lives	 start:	 that	 means	 you	 have	 come	 to	 the	 collective
unconscious.
Now	 the	master	needs	 to	put	you	 in	an	even	deeper	unconsciousness,	 and	 that
can	be	done	in	your	unconscious	state.	The	first	thing	was	done	when	you	were
conscious;	it	brought	you	to	the	unconscious.	The	second	step	has	to	be	done	in
the	 same	way:	 "I	 will	 repeat	 seven	 times	 that	 you	 are	 falling	 deeper	 into	 the
collective	 unconscious,	 and	 you	will	 start	 falling."	Giving	 a	 little	 rest,	 he	 can
again	ask	where	you	are,	and	you	may	say,
"I	am	a	 rosebush,"	or	anything	else	 that	you	have	been.	You	 relive	 it;	you	can
make	 every	 detailed	 description.	 Again	 the	 barrier	 will	 come	 when	 you	 pass
from	 animals,	 from	 plants,	 to	 what	 you	 call	 matter	 --	 because	 matter	 is	 also
consciousness,	fast	asleep.
And	 that's	 the	 end	 of	 the	 journey	 in	 the	 lower	 depths	 of	 your	mind.	 If	 this	 is
completed,	your	consciousness	will	go	on	changing.	With	each	new	 revelation
your	 consciousness	 will	 become	 richer.	 And	 then	 a	 point	 comes	 --	 when	 you
have	 traveled	 all	 the	way	 down	 backwards,	 downwards	 --	 that	 you	 can	move
upwards	from	consciousness	to	superconsciousness	until	you	reach	to	the	cosmic
consciousness.	We	 are	 exactly	 in	 the	 middle.	 On	 both	 sides	 of	 the	 conscious
there	 are	 three	 stages:	 below	 it	 is	 unconscious,	 collective	 unconscious	 and
cosmic	 unconscious;	 above	 it	 is	 superconscious,	 super-superconscious,	 and
cosmic	conscious.
Our	mind	has	 seven	worlds.	To	know	 the	past,	 to	know	our	background,	 is	 to
know	 the	whole	 history	 of	 consciousness	 and	 its	 evolution	 until	 this	moment.
But	that	makes	it	clear	that	this	is	not	the	last	stage	--	it	cannot	be.	If	there	is	so
much	 behind	 you,	 there	 must	 be	 something	 ahead	 of	 you.	 So	 what	 Western
psychology	goes	on	doing	is	only	working	with	one	thing:	unconsciousness,	the
first	lower	rung	of	the	ladder.	Eastern	psychology	has	worked	on	all	the	seven.
As	you	move	from	the	conscious	mind,	hypnosis	is	the	method.	And	hypnosis	is
not	yet	recognized	by	the	scientists	because	they	have	not	even	tried	it.	It	is	very
strange.	 Perhaps	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 science	 is	 a	 development	 of	 the	West,	 and
because	 the	 West	 has	 a	 Christian	 conditioning	 it	 simply	 denies	 that	 there	 is
anything	other	than	this	life,	so	from	the	very	beginning	one	is	prejudiced	--	why
bother	about	hypnosis?
A	few	people	have	dared	and	tried,	but	they	were	all	condemned	by	the	society	--
badly.
Mesmer	 tried	 it,	but	was	condemned,	and	 there	was	a	 tradition	of	women	who
Christianity	 condemned	as	witches.	They	were	 trying	hypnosis,	 and	 they	were
closer	to	the	truth	than	Christianity	has	ever	been.	But	thousands	and	thousands
of	witches	were	 burned	 alive;	 their	whole	 tradition	was	 completely	 erased,	 all
their	literature	was	burned.
Only	one	copy	of	each	book	has	been	preserved	in	the	Vatican.
It	 is	 the	 duty	 of	 the	 U.N.	 to	 take	 over	 the	 library	 of	 the	 Vatican.	 It	 is
underground;	 it	has	 tremendous	 treasures	 that	Christianity	has	destroyed.	They
are	 still	 afraid	 to	 bring	 those	 books	 out	 in	 the	 light	 because	 then	 the
condemnation	 for	 Christianity	 will	 be	 immense,	 even	 from	 Christians,	 "What
you	were	saying	was	not	true,	and	those	who	said	the	truth	were	killed,	burned."
But	they	are	keeping	at	least	one	copy	in	their	vast	library.	Nobody	is	allowed	to
enter	into	that	vast	library;	only	when	you	become	a	cardinal	are	you	allowed	in
the	 library,	 but	 by	 that	 time	 you	 are	 so	 much	 conditioned.	 Those	 books	 are
written	in	a	different	way,	particularly	to	avoid	the	attention	of	Christians.	They
have	used	parables,	diagrams,	and	other	things,	as	if	they	are	not	about	religion,
as	if	they	are	about	something	else.
It	is	the	duty	of	all	the	intelligentsia	of	the	world	to	insist	to	the	Vatican:	"That
library	does	not	belong	to	you.	You	have	done	enough	harm;	now	at	 least	give
that	 library	 to	 the	U.N.	 and	 let	 scholars	 find	 out	what	 beautiful	 literature	 you
have	destroyed.	And	it	should	be	published,	and	made	available	to	anybody	who
wants	it."
One	of	the	things	that	got	destroyed	in	this	way	was	hypnosis	--	the	method,	the
science	and	the	results.	It	is	now	simply	a	condemnatory	word.	If	you	love	me,	if
you	trust	me,	anybody	can	say	you	are	just	hypnotized.	He	does	not	know	even
the	meaning	of	the	word;	he	does	not	know	its	implications,	but	he	is	using	it	to
condemn	you.	But	 really,	 to	be	hypnotized	and	 to	go	 into	 the	darker	 realms	of
your	being	is	the	first	step	ingoing	into	the	lighter	realms	of	your	being.
You	 contain	 the	 whole	 evolution	 --	 past,	 present,	 future.	 You	 have	 such	 an
enormous	being,	 and	only	a	 small	window	of	 the	 conscious	mind	 is	 allowed...
this	is	you.
Your	vastness	is	denied.
Your	universality	is	denied.
So	if	you	really	want	to	remember,	not	only	to	remember	but	to	relive,	then	you
will	have	to	use	the	method	of	hypnosis.	I	am	going,	as	we	settle	somewhere,	to
start	a	section	which	will	be	totally	devoted	to	hypnosis	and	its	implications,	and
I	want	every	sannyasin	to	go	through	it.
I	am	reminded	of	two	incidents...	One	is	in	Gautam	Buddha's	life,	and	one	is	in
Vardhaman	 Mahavira's	 life.	 A	 man	 takes	 sannyas,	 becomes	 part	 of	 the
community	of	Buddha,	but	finds	it	hard,	difficult,	arduous.	He	is	sad,	depressed,
and	thinks	many	times	to	leave	it.	One	day	Buddha	called	him	and	told	him	to	sit
in	front	of	him	and	go	into	the	method	of	jati-smaran	--	that	is,	hypnosis.
He	had	not	yet	 tried	 it,	 so	 somebody	gave	him	 the	 instructions	 to	go	 into	past
lives.	And	it	was	an	amazing	revelation:	for	almost	five	lives	in	the	past	he	had
taken	sannyas	and	dropped	it.	That	had	become	a	routine	of	his	consciousness.
So	Buddha	said,	"Now	you	are	doing	it	again.	It	is	up	to	you,	but	you	have	done
it	 five	 times	 before.	 It	 is	 simply	 repetitive;	 you	 are	 wasting	 time.	 Either	 stop
taking	sannyas	and	do	whatsoever	you	want,	or	be	courageous;	if	you	have	taken
it,	then	go	into	it	this	time.	This	should	not	be	repeated.	Five	lives	have	been	a
waste."
Looking	at	his	own	five	 lives...	 the	same	pattern,	almost	mechanical,	 the	same
wheel	moving:	first	getting	attracted	to	a	great	master,	getting	initiated	with	great
enthusiasm,	 and	 then	 seeing	 the	 arduousness,	 the	 difficulties	 of	 transforming
himself	and	escaping,	renouncing	sannyas	itself.	And	he	comes	back	to	it	again
and	again.
Buddha	said,	"You	can	do	it	as	long	as	you	want.	In	your	next	life	you	will	do	it
again.
And	for	five	lives	nobody	reminded	you,	because	the	masters	you	were	working
with	were	not	masters	of	jati-smaran."
The	man	 remained.	 It	 changed	his	whole	 attitude:	 "This	 is	 stupid.	 If	 it	 is	 hard
then	 it	 has	 to	 be	 faced.	 If	 it	 is	 a	 challenge	 then	 it	 has	 to	 be	 taken."	 And	 he
became	one	of	the	enlightened	disciples	of	Buddha.
There	 is	 a	 similar	 story	 in	Mahavira's	 life.	 A	 prince	 becomes	 enchanted	 with
Mahavira's	 individuality,	 but	 he	 does	 not	 know	 that	 Mahavira's	 life	 is	 really
arduous.	Nobody	has	lived	the	way	Mahavira	has	lived	--	naked	in	the	winter,	in
the	 hot	 sun,	 hungry	 for	 months,	 fasting,	 eating	 once	 in	 a	 while,	 barefooted,
walking	on	the	burning	earth	in	the	hot	sun.
He	did	not	use	shoes	because	shoes	were	made	only	of	leather	in	those	days,	and
to	 use	 shoes	 meant	 you	 were	 indirectly	 supporting	 the	 industry	 of	 violence,
because	 the	best	 leather	comes	when	you	kill	young	calves.	 If	you	want	 really
perfect	leather,	then	you	have	to	take	the	leather	from	the	calf	while	it	is	alive;
you	don't	 kill	 him	 first.	 First	 you	 take	 the	 leather,	 and	 in	 taking	 the	 leather	 of
course	 he	 dies.	 That	 leather	 is	 the	 most	 soft	 and	 the	 best.	 Mahavira	 was
absolutely	against	in	any	way	supporting	anything	which	is	based	on	violence.
This	prince	became	--	and	naturally,	you	can	understand	it	--	the	prince	became
impressed	by	the	man,	his	integrity,	his	authority,	his	teaching.	He	was	not	aware
that	 life	 with	 him	 is	 going	 to	 be	 tremendously	 hard	 --	 and	 he	 had	 lived	 very
luxuriously.	But	 in	 a	moment	 of	 enthusiasm	he	 took	 sannyas	 and	 entered	 into
Mahavira's	commune.
Now,	 ten	 thousand	 sannyasins	 used	 to	 move	 with	 Mahavira,	 and	 they	 were
staying	 in	 a	big	 caravanserai,	 and	 it	was	 the	 routine	 that	 the	 elder	ones	 --	 that
means	 those	who	had	been	 longer	 in	sannyas	 --	 should	have	better	places,	and
the	others	accordingly.	This	prince	was	 just	a	one-day-old	sannyasin,	 so	 in	 the
night	 he	 got	 a	 place	 just	 near	 the	 door,	 the	main	 door,	where	 people	 left	 their
shoes,	umbrellas	and	other	 things.	He	was	 the	 son	of	a	king,	 and	by	 that	door
sleeping	 was	 impossible;	 people	 were	 continuously	 coming	 and	 going.	When
there	are	ten	thousand	sannyasins...	He	had	never	slept	in	such	a	situation,	and	he
immediately	thought,	"This	is	not	the	life	I	would	like.	Next	morning	I	will	give
my	apology,	and	I	will	say,	`This	is	not	the	life	for	me.'"
But	 before	 he	 reached	 Mahavir,	 Mahavir	 reached	 him,	 and	 asked	 him	 to	 let
himself	be	taken	into	jati-smaran	--	and	it	was	the	same	process.	For	three	lives
he	 had	 been	 doing	 the	 same	 thing:	 getting	 impressed	 by	 magnetic	 people,
charismatic	people,	and	 then	 finding	 it	difficult	over	small	matters	and	 leaving
them.	In	all	 those	three	lives	he	could	have	become	enlightened,	because	those
three	people	were	capable	of	triggering	the	process	of	enlightenment.
Mahavira	 said,	 "You	 have	missed	 three	 lives,	 and	 you	 are	missing	 the	 fourth.
You	can	decide.	But	you	are	a	warrior,	not	only	a	prince.	Don't	emphasize	that
you	 are	 a	 prince	 and	 you	 have	 lived	 only	 in	 luxury;	 remember	 that	 you	 are	 a
warrior	and	you	have	been	fighting	in	wars.	And	there	is	nobody	in	this	area	who
is	 a	 better	 swordsman,	 a	 better	 archer.	 Don't	 insult	 yourself,	 don't	 humiliate
yourself.	This	is	escape."
And	the	man	remained.	But	the	factor	that	helped	these	two	men	to	remain	was
their	reliving	their	past	experiences.	It	is	of	tremendous	use,	but	in	the	West	it	is
so	 much	 condemned	 that	 the	 condemnation	 has	 reached	 to	 the	 East	 too	 --
because	now	the	East	is	just	a	parrot.	Now	the	East	is	not	the	East	it	used	to	be;	it
is	just	a	shadow	of	the	West.	All	the	Eastern	scholars	are	produced	by	the	West.
They	learn	in	Western	seats	of	education	-
-	in	Paris,	in	London,	in	Oxford,	in	Cambridge,	in	Harvard.
I	 have	 been	 continuously	 fighting,	 in	 many	 universities	 in	 India,	 that	 these
scholars	 should	 not	 be	 called	 Eastern	 scholars	 because	 whatsoever	 they	 have
learned	is	Western;	even	though	it	is	about	Indian	philosophy,	they	have	learned
it	in	Oxford.	This	is	ridiculous	--	that	to	understand	Indian	philosophy	you	have
to	go	to	Oxford.	These	scholars	are	not	Eastern	in	any	way;	their	whole	approach
is	Western.	 So	 there	 is	 no	more	 East	 really,	 now	 it	 is	 all	West.	 The	 East	 has
become	 so	 interested	 in	Western	 success,	 in	materialism,	 in	 technology,	 that	 it
has	forgotten	that	it	has	also	become	successful	in	a	different	world	--	the	world
of	the	inner	--	and	has	reached	the	highest	peaks	of	illumination.
So	don't	try	to	remember,	but	take	the	help	of	someone	whom	you	trust,	who	can
hypnotize	you.
Soon,	as	existence	allows	me	to	settle	somewhere,	I	will	create	people	who	can
help	 everybody	 to	 go	 into	 the	 past,	 and	 experience	 and	 relive	 those	moments.
They	will	 change	your	 every	 attitude.	They	will	make	you	 aware	 that	 you	 are
moving	in	a	circle,	and	it	is	time	to	get	out	of	it,	because	this	is	nonsense:	each
life	you	are	doing	the	same	thing,	moving	in	the	same	circle.	And	you	can	go	on
doing	it	eternally	--	nobody	is	going	to	prevent	you	--	unless	you	decide	to	jump
out	of	this	viciousness.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHILE	TRAVELING	IN	GREECE	WITH	A	GROUP	OF	SANNYASINS	WE
VISITED	 DELPHI,	 THE	 PLACE	 OF	 THE	 ANCIENT	 ORACLE,	 AND
WHERE	IT	IS
SAID	 PYTHAGORAS	 ONCE	 LIVED.	 WE	 ALL	 FELT	 A	 PEACEFUL
HAPPINESS
WHILE	WALKING	AROUND	THE	RUINS,	AND	IN	THE	END	WE	ALL
GATHERED	ON	THE	TOP	OF	THE	STADIUM	AND	SAT	SILENTLY	WITH
EACH
OTHER.	 WHAT	 HAPPENED	 TO	 US?	 WHY	 DOES	 ONE	 HAVE	 SUCH
DIFFERENT
FEELINGS	ABOUT	DIFFERENT	PLACES?
People	 like	Pythagoras,	 Socrates,	 Plotinus,	Gautam	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Chuang
Tzu...	the	people	of	such	state	are	continuously	radiating	--	not	with	any	effort,
but	effortlessly	and	spontaneously.	Their	experience,	just	like	a	candle,	radiates
light;	 their	 consciousness	 has	 become	 a	 light.	 Their	 being	 has	 attained	 to	 a
fragrance,	 to	a	 flowering,	and	everything	around	 them	is	going	 to	catch	 it.	For
centuries	it	will	continue	to	vibrate.
I	have	not	been	to	Delphi.	I	was	thinking	to	go,	but	before	being	at	Delphi	I	was
arrested	 and	 thrown	out	 of	Greece.	But	Delphi	was	 one	 of	 the	 places	 I	would
have	liked	to	visit.
In	India	I	have	visited	a	few	places...	The	place	where	Gautam	Buddha	became
enlightened	is	called	Bodh	Gaya.	It	is	a	small	temple	--	some	follower	made	the
temple	 as	 a	 memorial,	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 tree	 under	 which	 Buddha	 became
enlightened.	That	 tree	still	 remembers	something,	and	I	came	 to	know	later	on
that	the	bodhi	tree	has	a	certain	substance	which	no	other	tree	has,	and	that	is	the
substance	which	makes	a	man	a	genius.
Only	geniuses	have	that	substance	in	their	mind,	and	in	the	world	of	trees	only
the	bodhi	tree	has	that	substance.	Perhaps	it	is	more	perceptive,	more	receptive;
it	has	a	certain	genius.
Buddha	remained	under	that	tree	for	many	years.	The	whole	area	is	still	fragrant,
and	just	by	the	side	of	the	tree	is	the	place	where	he	used	to	walk.	When	he	used
to	get	 tired	of	sitting	and	meditating	 then	he	would	walk	and	meditate,	 so	 that
place	is	marked	by	marble	stones.	But	sitting	under	the	tree	or	walking	on	those
marble	 stones,	 you	 can	 feel	 you	 are	 not	 in	 this	 world,	 that	 this	 place	 has
something	 which	 no	 other	 place	 has.	 Perhaps	 the	 moment	 Buddha	 became
enlightened	something	exploded	in	him	and	was	caught	by	everything	that	could
catch	it.	We	used	to	think	before...	but	it	 is	not	the	case.	Now	it	is	well	proved
that	trees	are	very	sensitive,	more	sensitive	than	man	--	their	sensitivity	just	has	a
different	level.
One	scientist	was	working	on	trees.	He	had	put	on	the	tree	a	certain	mechanism,
just	like	a	cardiogram,	that	takes	the	graph	of	the	feelings	of	the	tree,	and	he	was
surprised	that	when	the	gardener	came...	He	had	told	the	gardener,	"You	go	and
cut	one	of	 the	branches	of	 the	 tree.	 I	want	 to	see	 the	effect."	But	 there	was	no
need	to	cut	the	branch.	As	the	gardener	came	with	his	axe,	the	graph	was	already
going	mad!
The	scientist	said,	"Don't	do	that	--	the	tree	has	already	caught	the	idea	that	you
are	going	to	cut	and	hurt	her."	Later	on	he	became	more	amazed,	because	when
you	cut	one	tree,	all	the	other	trees	in	the	surrounding	area,	their	graphs	go	mad.
When	 the	 same	 gardener	 comes	 to	water	 the	 tree,	 the	 graph	 remains	 perfectly
balanced	--	it	becomes	even	more	harmonious.	It	seems	the	tree	is	able	to	catch
your	thoughts,	your	ideas.
Perhaps	the	same	may	be	found	about	rocks,	the	earth,	because	they	are	all	alive.
Their	life	may	be	on	a	different	level,	but	they	are	all	alive	--	and	certainly	they
are	more	simple	and	more	 innocent.	People	have	been	keeping...	 In	Tibet	 they
have	been	keeping	the	bodies	of	enlightened	people,	because	if	the	trees	and	the
stones	 and	 the	 earth	 are	 impressed	 by	 the	 great	 experience,	 then	 certainly	 the
body	of	the	man,	his	bones,	must	be	impressed	--	they	are	closer.
Perhaps	Tibetans	were	 the	first	 to	understand	it:	 they	have	covered	ninety-nine
great	masters'	bodies	with	gold.	That	used	to	be	the	most	sacred	place	in	Tibet.	It
is	just...	If	you	have	seen	the	picture	of	Potala,	the	palace	of	the	Dalai	Lama,	it	is
just	underneath	it.
Potala	is	high	in	the	mountains,	and	underneath	there	are	many	caves.	One	cave
is	devoted	only	to	those	ninety-nine	bodies.
Why	did	they	stop	at	ninety-nine?	A	strange	figure!	A	hundred	would	have	been
more	appropriate.	They	had	to	stop	because	the	lineage	of	Dalai	Lamas	dropped
from	the	height	it	used	to	be,	and	the	country	could	not	produce	anybody	worthy
of	 taking	 the	hundredth	seat	 in	 the	sacred,	secret	 temple.	 It	was	opened	once	a
year	 for	 the	 people,	 and	 just	 to	 pass	 through	 it	 was	 to	 pass	 through	 another
world.
Now	it	is	completely	closed	so	that	the	communists	cannot	find	it	--	because	they
will	not	be	interested	in	the	bodies;	they	will	be	interested	in	the	gold.	They	will
destroy	 those	bodies	and	 take	 the	gold	 --	and	 it	 is	a	great	quantity	of	gold.	So
before	 the	 Dalai	 Lama	 left	 Lhasa	 because	 of	 the	 communist	 invasion	 of	 the
country,	he	sealed	it	in	every	possible	way	so	that	they	cannot	discover	it.	And
they	have	not	been	able	yet	to	discover	it.
Slowly,	 slowly	 in	 all	 the	 countries	 where	 spirituality	 has	 flowered,	 people
became	 aware	 that	 something	 happens...	 So	 people	 have	 preserved	 things	 that
were	used	by	these	people,	or	just	have	made	memorials	of	their	bodies.	In	India
bodies	are	burned,	but	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	the	remains	left	after
burning	a	body	are	called	"flowers".
Ordinary	 people's	 ashes	 are	 thrown	 into	 holy	 rivers,	 but	 enlightened	 people's
"flowers"
are	 preserved	 in	 samadhis	 --	 in	 beautiful	marble	memorials.	 Just	 to	 go	 and	 sit
there	is	in	itself	a	meditation.	But	the	trouble	is	that	the	world	is	ruled	by	those
who	know	nothing	of	this.
For	 example,	 Delphi	 should	 not	 be	 open	 for	 everybody,	 because	 they	 will
destroy	its	subtle	vibration.	But	the	government	is	interested	in	tourism!
Delphi	 should	 be	 open	 only	 to	 a	 few	 people	 who	 are	 chosen	 --	 chosen	 by	 a
mystery	school	that	should	exist	there.	Delphi	was	a	mystery	school.	In	the	days
of	Pythagoras	and	Socrates,	Delphi	was	the	temple	--	the	most	famous	temple	--
of	 wisdom.	 And	 the	 priestess	 used	 to	 go	 into	 a	 trance.	 While	 praying	 and
dancing	and	singing	in	the	temple,	she	would	go	into	a	trace,	and	in	her	trance
she	 would	 say	 things	 which	 always	 proved	 to	 be	 true.	 She	 herself	 could	 not
remember	anything	when	she	came	back	from	the	trance;	perhaps	the	trance	was
taking	her	higher	into	the	mind,	perhaps	to	the	cosmic	mind.
In	such	a	trance	she	declared	that	Socrates	was	the	wisest	man	in	the	world.	And
a	few	people	visiting	her	from	Athens	were	very	happy,	because	Socrates	was	an
Athenian.
They	reached	Socrates	--	he	was	old	--	before	his	death,	before	his	murder,	and
said,
"You	should	be	happy;	the	oracle	of	Delphi	has	declared	you	the	wisest	man	in
the	world."
Socrates	said,	"It	is	too	late.	When	I	was	very	young	I	used	to	think	that	I	was
very	knowledgeable,	very	wise.	The	more	 I	came	 to	know,	 the	more	 I	became
ignorant	--
aware	that	what	I	know	is	nothing,	and	what	I	do	not	know	is	so	much.	Now,	in
my	old	age,	 I	can	say	without	any	hesitation	 that	 I	do	not	know	anything.	The
oracle,	for	the	first	time	it	seems,	has	missed."
The	people	were	very	much	surprised,	because	Socrates	should	have	been	happy
hearing	 it.	 They	 went	 back	 and	 the	 priestess	 again	 danced,	 fell	 into	 a	 trance.
They	asked	her	in	the	trance,	"You	said	Socrates	is	the	wisest	man	in	the	world,
but	he	denies	it.	He	says,	Ì	do	not	know	anything...'"
And	 the	 priestess	 in	 her	 trance	 said,	 "That's	 why	 he	 is	 the	 wisest	man	 in	 the
world.	Only	idiots	say	that	they	know.	Those	who	are	wise	cannot	say	that."
Places	like	these,	or	Bodh	Gaya,	should	not	be	available	to	tourists	--	which	is	an
ugly	race	with	all	their	cameras,	binoculars,	and	stupid	things.	And	they	are	not
interested	in	the	place	at	all;	they	are	taking	photographs	and	rushing	from	here
to	 there.	 Later	 on,	 sitting	 at	 home,	 they	will	 look	 at	 the	 photographs	 and	 say,
"Great!	Our	tour	has	been	great.	We	visited	beautiful	places	--	you	can	see."
But	they	were	never	there;	they	were	with	their	cameras.	They	should	sit	there,
they	should	allow	themselves	to	absorb	the	subtle	vibe	of	the	place...	Something
of	Gautam	Buddha	must	be	there;	it	has	to	be	there!
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#35
Chapter	title:	Falling	above	the	mind
29	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604295
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO35
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
87
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	MADNESS?
There	are	two	possibilities:
Madness	literally	means	going	out	of	the	mind;	hence	the	two	possibilities.	You
can	go	out	of	the	mind	either	below	the	mind	or	above	the	mind.
Ordinarily,	people	go	below	the	mind	because	it	needs	no	effort,	you	don't	have
to	do	anything.	Any	shock	can	shatter	the	stability	of	your	mind:	somebody	you
loved	died,	 your	 business	 has	 gone	bankrupt	 --	 the	 shock	 is	 so	much	 that	 you
cannot	 keep	 your	 normality.	You	 fall	 below	 the	mind,	 your	 behavior	 becomes
irrational.
But	you	go	beyond	 the	misery	 --	 if	 you	had	 remained	 in	 the	normal	mind	 the
shock	 would	 have	 created	 immense	 misery.	 It	 is	 a	 natural	 way	 to	 avoid	 the
shock.	It	simply	pulls	you	down;	now	you	don't	know	what	has	happened.	Your
business	 has	 gone	 bankrupt,	 your	 wife	 has	 died	 or	 your	 child	 has	 died	 --	 it
doesn't	matter,	in	fact	you	don't	even	remember.
You	have	 entered	 into	 a	 new	phase,	 you	have	become	 a	 new	person.	But	 it	 is
going	 to	 be	 irrational,	 abnormal,	 unpredictable.	 This	 is	 ordinarily	 called
madness,	insanity,	all	over	the	world.
Only	in	the	East	have	we	found	that	there	is	another	kind	of	madness,	too,	that
comes	from	deep	meditation:	going	beyond	the	mind.	Both	are	outside	the	mind;
hence	there	is	some	similarity.	So	sometimes	you	will	find	that	the	madman	once
in	a	while	behaves	almost	as	a	wise	man.	He	has	 insights	 --	he	has	no	control
over	 them,	 they	 are	 just	 flashes,	 but	 sometimes	 he	 can	 see	 things	 which	 you
cannot	see.
In	 the	 East,	 where	 mind	 has	 been	 the	 sole	 center	 of	 all	 research	 down	 the
centuries,	we	have	discovered	 that	you	can	go	above	the	mind.	Sufism	accepts
that	state	and	calls	it	the	state	of	a	masta	--	a	divine	madman.	He	is	mad,	but	he
is	superhumanly	mad.	His	behavior	is	irrational	as	far	as	our	logic	is	concerned.
But	 perhaps	 there	 is	 a	 higher	 logic,	 according	 to	 which	 his	 behavior	 is	 not
irrational.
In	India	such	a	man	is	called	paramhansa.	Ramakrishna,	in	the	last	century,	was
one	of	 the	men	who	was	 called	paramhansa.	The	behavior	of	 a	paramhansa	 is
utterly	 mad,	 but	 intensely	 beautiful,	 and	 has	 a	 depth	 which	 even	 the	 greatest
genius	of	the	mind	does	not	have.
It	happened	that	 in	Ramakrishna's	 time...	He	lived	just	outside	Calcutta,	on	the
bank	of	 the	Ganges	 in	a	 small	 temple.	Now	many	 temples	have	arisen,	 and	 in
Calcutta...	At	that	time	Calcutta	was	the	capital	of	India,	not	New	Delhi,	so	the
cream	of	 intellectuals,	 creative	people,	was	 in	Calcutta.	And	anyway,	Bengalis
are	the	most	intelligent	people	in	India,	mostly	intellectual.
Keshav	Chandra	Sen	was	a	great	genius	as	far	as	intellect	is	concerned,	and	he
was	a	co-founder	of	a	religion,	brahmasamaj	--	the	society	of	the	divine.	He	was
known	all	 over	 India.	Ramakrishna	was	not	 known,	 except	 to	 a	 few	people	 in
Calcutta	 on	 the	 riverbank	 where	 he	 lived.	 He	 was	 uneducated,	 and	 people
thought	he	was	mad	--	 the	people	of	 the	mind	--	because	his	behavior	was	not
explainable	by	mental	concepts.
But	slowly,	slowly	his	influence	was	increasing,	particularly	in	Calcutta	--	which
was	very	close;	people	could	come	to	see	him.
And	Keshav	Chandra	Sen	was	worried	 that	 a	 villager,	 uneducated...	And	 even
professors	 of	 the	 universities	 were	 becoming	 devotees;	 they	 would	 touch	 his
feet.	 And	 whatever	 he	 was	 saying	 was	 so	 ordinary.	 The	 man	 had	 nothing
exceptional.	One	day	finally	he	decided	to	go	and	argue	with	this	man	and	finish
this	whole	thing.
He	went.	Hundreds	of	people	who	knew	Keshav	Chandra	and	a	few	who	knew
Ramakrishna,	 they	 all	 gathered	 to	 see	 what	 would	 transpire.	 Ramakrishna's
followers	 were	 very	much	 afraid,	 knowing	 that	 Keshav	 Chandra	 could	 defeat
anybody	if	it	was	a	question	of	rationality.	He	had	proved	his	mettle	hundreds	of
times,	all	over	India.	He	had	defeated	great	scholars	without	much	effort.	Now,
how	was	poor	Ramakrishna	going	to	stand	up	before	him?
Everybody	among	the	followers	was	nervous,	but	Ramakrishna	was	not.	He	was
again	and	again	asking,	"Keshava	has	not	come	yet?"	He	would	not	use	even	his
whole	 name:	 Keshav	 Chandra	 Sen.	 He	 would	 say	 simply,	 "Keshava	 has	 not
come	yet?"
Finally	Keshav	Chandra	arrived	with	his	great	 following.	Ramakrishna	hugged
him.
Keshav	Chandra	was	not	prepared	for	that.	He	had	come	to	fight,	and	he	made	it
clear	to	Ramakrishna,	"These	things	won't	help.	I	have	come	to	discuss	each	and
every	point	of	your	philosophy.	Don't	try	to	create	a	friendship.	I	have	come	as
an	 enemy:	 either	 you	 defeat	 me	 and	 I	 will	 be	 your	 follower,	 or	 be	 ready	 to
become	my	follower."
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "That	we	will	 be	 doing	 soon	 --	 hugging	 has	 nothing	 to	 do
with	 it!	 I	 have	 always	 loved	you.	Whenever	 I	 have	 heard	 about	 you	 and	your
ideas,	 that	you	say	there	is	no	God...	and	I	know	there	is	God,	but	still	I	enjoy
and	love	you.	In	fact	your	great	intelligence	is	proof	that	existence	is	intelligent;
otherwise	from	where	does	intelligence	come?	You	are	a	proof	to	me	that	God	is
--	but	that	we	will	discuss	later	on.
What	is	the	hurry?	And	there	is	no	need	for	any	enmity.	The	discussion	can	be	in
deep	friendship.
"And	you	know,	I	am	a	poor	man.	I	don't	know	any	logic.	I	have	never	discussed
with	anybody.	It	 is	going	to	be	a	very	easy	 job	for	you,	so	you	need	not	be	so
tense!	I	have	prepared	some	sweet	for	you;	first	take	the	sweet.	I	have	prepared	it
with	much	love.	And	then	you	can	start	your	so-called	discussion."
Keshav	Chandra	was	finding	it	a	little	difficult.	The	man	was	strange;	he	offered
him	 a	 sweet,	 he	 hugged	 him.	 He	 had	 already	 destroyed	 the	 animosity,	 the
aggressiveness	--	in	a	very	subtle	way,	without	saying	a	word.	And	strangest	of
all,	he	says	that	my	presence	--
that	is,	Keshav	Chandra's	presence	--	is	enough	proof	of	God,	there	is	no	need	of
other	proof.	Without	God	how	is	such	intelligence	possible?	The	world	would	be
dead.	 The	 world	 is	 intelligent,	 and	 God	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 intelligence	 of
existence.
After	 taking	 his	 sweet,	 Ramakrishna	 said,	 "Now	 you	 start	 your	 game!"	 And
Keshav	Chandra	was	arguing	against	whatever	he	had	 found	 in	Ramakrishna's
small	books	--	his	followers	collected	his	sayings	and	stories,	anecdotes	from	his
life.	And	Ramakrishna	would	 enjoy	 it,	 and	would	 say	 to	 his	 followers,	 "Look
how	beautifully	he	has	criticized	it!"	And	many	times	he	would	stand	up	and	hug
him	and	say,	"You	are	a	genius!	Your	criticism	is	perfect."
Keshav	Chandra	said,	"I	have	not	come	here	to	get	your	approval;	I	have	come
to	argue."
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "I	 don't	 see	 there	 is	 any	 question	 of	 argument.	You	 are	 the
proof.	I	don't	need	to	give	any	other	proof;	I	can	take	you	to	the	whole	world	as	a
proof	that	God	exists	--	Keshav	Chandra	is	the	proof!"
Keshav	Chandra	had	never	come	across	such	a	man,	and	what	he	was	saying	had
immense	 significance;	 it	 was	 penetrating	 Keshav	 Chandra's	 heart.	 And	 the
presence	 of	 the	 man,	 and	 the	 way	 he	 behaved,	 his	 lovingness...	 Something
happened	to	Keshav	Chandra	that	his	followers	could	not	believe.
By	 the	end	of	 the	discussion,	Ramakrishna	 said,	 "You	 tell	me	who	 is	defeated
and	who	is	victorious,	and	I	will	follow	it.	If	you	are	victorious,	I	will	become
your	 follower.	 But	 I	 don't	 know	 the	ways	 of	 discussion	 and	 I	 don't	 know	 the
judgment.	You	judge;	you	are	efficient	enough	to	make	the	 judgment.	You	can
say	to	me,	`You	are	defeated,'	and	I	am	defeated."
And	Keshav	Chandra's	followers	were	shocked	to	see	that	Keshav	Chandra	fell
at	 the	 feet	of	Ramakrishna.	They	could	not	believe	 their	 eyes!	When	 they	had
gone,	everybody	was	asking,	"Keshav	Chandra,	what	happened	to	you?"
He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 know.	 One	 thing	 is	 certain,	 that	 that	 man	 has	 experienced
something	about	which	I	have	been	only	talking.	I	can	talk	efficiently,	but	he	has
it;	he	radiates	it.	I	have	that	much	intelligence	at	least	to	see	the	aura	of	the	man,
to	 feel	 the	radiance	of	his	 love,	 to	see	his	simplicity,	sincerity;	 to	see	his	 trust,
that	 he	 says	 to	me	 that,	 `You	 decide,	 and	 if	 I	 am	 defeated...'	 And	 he	 has	 not
argued	at	 all.	How	can	you	defeat	 a	person	who	has	not	argued	at	 all?	On	 the
contrary,	 he	 was	 appreciating	 my	 criticism	 and	 he	 was	 telling	 his	 disciples,
`Listen,	this	is	the	way	a	thing	should	be	criticized.'
"And	as	I	was	sitting	by	his	side,	slowly,	slowly	something	melted	in	me	--	the
antagonism,	the	aggressiveness.	And	this	is	the	first	time	this	has	happened	with
anybody.	People	think	he	is	mad,	but	if	he	is	mad,	then	I	would	like	also	to	be
mad.	He	is	far	superior	to	our	so-called	sanity."
It	 was	 very	 difficult	 to	 take	 Ramakrishna	 from	 one	 place	 to	 another	 place,
because	anywhere	on	the	road,	in	the	middle	of	the	road...	And	Calcutta	is	a	very
overpopulated	city,	with	more	than	ten	million	people	in	one	city.	And	the	traffic
is	 the	 worst	 in	 the	 world.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 because	 thousands	 of	 people	 are
walking;	 there	 are	 all	 kinds	 of	 vehicles	 --	 cars,	 trams,	 buses.	 He	 would	 start
dancing	in	the	middle	of	the	road	because	something	reminded	him	of	God.	And
anything	 could	 remind	 him	 of	 God...	 a	 beautiful	 child,	 and	 he	 would	 start
dancing	and	singing.	His	followers	would	feel	very	embarrassed
--	 they	had	 to	protect	him	from	all	 sides	 --	 that	 in	 this	 traffic...	And	 the	police
were	bound	to	come,	and	that	man	was	creating	a	traffic	jam.
But	 outside	 India	 he	 would	 have	 been	 in	 a	 mad	 asylum	 because	 in	 the	West
madness	 is	madness;	 there	are	no	 two	categories.	 In	 India	he	became	almost	a
divine	 being,	 a	 god,	 because	 people	 realized,	 slowly,	 slowly,	 that	 he	 looks
irrational	but	there	is	something	divine	in	his	irrationality.
He	had	been	doing	 things	 from	his	very	 childhood.	His	 family	was	worried	 --
what	is	going	to	happen	to	this	child?	People	suggested	--	as	it	is	customary	in
India	and	 in	other	countries	 too	--	 that	 it	will	be	good	to	marry	him	so	he	will
forget	 all	 about	 God	 and	 all	 about	 meditation	 and	 will	 become	 engaged	 in
worldly	 affairs.	But	 they	 thought	 that	 he	would	 refuse	 --	 and	 that	would	 have
been	the	ordinary	expectation.	But	he	was	a	madman;	he	does	not	follow	your
expectations.
When	his	father	asked,	fearing	that	he	is	going	to	say	no,	Ramakrishna	said	with
great	joy,	"Yes!	But	where	is	the	girl?"
They	 said,	 "This	 boy	 is	 mad!	 This	 is	 not	 the	 right	 way.	 He	 is	 so	 ready...
immediately!
And	he	is	asking,	`Where	is	the	girl?	To	whom	am	I	going	to	be	married?	Do	it
soon!'"
Just	in	a	nearby	village,	another	village,	he	was	taken	on	a	particular	day	to	see
the	girl.
And	in	India	this	is	the	way:	the	girl	will	come	with	some	sweets	to	put	on	your
plate,	 and	 that's	 the	only	moment	you	 can	 see	her	 --	 just	 for	 a	moment	 --	 and
decide.
When	 he	 was	 going	 to	 see	 his	 future	 wife,	 his	 mother	 had	 given	 him	 three
rupees,	 just	 in	 case	 he	 needs	 them.	 When	 the	 girl	 came	 with	 the	 sweets,	 he
looked	at	the	girl,	took	out	his	three	rupees	and	put	them	at	her	feet,	touched	her
feet	and	said,	"Mother,	you	are	the	right	girl.	I	am	going	to	marry	you."
His	 father	 said,	 "You	 idiot,	 you	 don't	 understand	 that	 nobody	 calls	 his	 wife
mother.
But	 everybody	 knew	 that	 he	 was	 a	 little	 eccentric	 --	 first	 putting	 those	 three
rupees	at	 the	 feet	of	 the	girl...	 everybody	was	 shocked.	And	 then	 touching	her
feet	and	 telling	 the	girl	 then	and	 there,	 "Mother,	you	are	 really	beautiful.	 I	 am
going	to	marry	you	--	it	is	settled."
But	 just	by	a	very	 strange	coincidence,	 the	whole	 family	of	 the	girl	wanted	 to
deny	this	marriage	because	they	said,	"This	boy	is	mad,	and	if	he	is	starting	this
way	what	will	happen	in	their	married	life	nobody	knows."	But	the	girl	insisted
that	if	she	will	marry	anybody,	she	will	marry	this	man.
He	 was	 a	 beautiful	 man.	 So	 the	 family	 had	 to	 decide	 for	 the	 marriage.	 The
marriage	happened;	they	lived	together	their	whole	life.	Ramakrishna	continued
to	call	her	mother.
There	was	never	any	husband-wife	relationship	between	them.	On	the	contrary...
In	Bengal	 they	worship	 the	mother	goddess,	Kali.	So	 in	 those	days	when	 they
worship	the	mother	goddess	all	over	Bengal	--	and	in	other	places	also,	wherever
Bengalis	are	in	India...	they	are	the	only	people	in	India	left	who	still	conceive	of
God	as	a	mother.
In	those	days,	every	year	he	would	put	Sharda,	his	wife,	naked	on	a	throne	and
worship	her	--	just	as	naked	as	the	statue	of	the	mother	goddess	is	in	the	temples.
He	would	not	go	to	the	temple;	he	would	say,	"When	I	have	a	living	mother	with
me,	why	should	I	go	and	worship	a	stone	statue?"
Anybody	 will	 say	 this	 is	 madness,	 sheer	 madness.	 But	 in	 so	 many	 ways	 his
madness	 cannot	 be	 categorized	with	 that	 of	 other	mad	people.	His	madness	 is
beyond	 mind,	 not	 below	 mind.	 Each	 of	 his	 statements	 is	 of	 tremendous
importance,	simple	but	full	of	meaning.	Just	like	a	villager,	he	tells	small	stories.
But	 those	 stories	 are	 so	 beautiful	 that	 you	 can	 get	 out	 of	 them	 much	 more
meaning	than	out	of	a	whole	scripture.	And	his	life...
if	 you	 watch	 carefully,	 you	 will	 find	 that	 he	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary	 man;	 he	 is
superhuman.
One	day	Ramakrishna	 and	his	 followers	 are	 passing	 the	Ganges	 in	 a	 boat	 and
suddenly	in	the	middle	he	starts	crying,	"Don't	beat	me!	I	have	not	done	anything
wrong.	Why	are	you	beating	me?"	And	tears	started	flowing.
And	his	people	said,	"Nobody	is	beating	you	--	what	are	you	doing?"	Even	his
own	followers	once	in	a	while	suspected	that	he	was	insane,	because	they	were
only	followers.
Nobody	was	beating	him,	and	he	was	crying.	And	they	could	see	from	his	face
that	he	was	being	whipped	very	badly.
And	he	said,	"You	don't	believe	me?	Just	 look	at	my	back."	They	removed	his
clothes	and	they	could	not	believe	it:	there	were	so	many	lines,	blood	oozing;	he
had	been	whipped	badly.	They	could	not	believe...	what	to	make	of	it?	This	man
is	mad	and	he	is	making	his	followers	mad.
But	when	they	reached	the	other	shore,	they	found	a	man	who	had	been	beaten,
and	there	was	a	crowd.	And	they	looked	at	his	back	and	they	were	surprised:	the
marks	 of	 the	 beating	 were	 exactly	 the	 same	 on	 both	 Ramakrishna's	 and	 this
man's	back.	Such	oneness	of	feeling,	that	when	somebody	else	is	being	beaten	--
innocently,	 he	 has	 not	 done	 anything	 --	 Ramakrishna	 becomes	 part	 of	 that
person,	they	become	one.
This	 is	 not	 madness,	 this	 is	 a	 tremendous	 experience,	 a	 man	 of	 Himalayan
heights...	And	although	he	was	not	a	preacher,	not	a	scholar,	 in	everything	that
he	 says	 you	 can	 find	 the	 insight	 of	 the	 greatest	men	who	 have	walked	 on	 the
earth.	Of	course	his	way	is	that	of	a	villager....
One	man	came	to	Ramakrishna	and	said,	"I	am	going	to	Varanasi	to	take	a	dip	in
the	Ganges	to	get	rid	of	my	sins"	--	that's	Hindus'	belief.
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "Very	good	 idea,	you	can	go.	But	do	you	know	 that	on	 the
bank	of	the	Ganges	there	are	big,	huge	trees?"
The	man	said,	"Yes,	I	know."
He	said,	"When	you	take	a	dip	in	the	Ganges	your	sins	will	leave	you,	but	they
will	 sit	on	 the	 trees.	And	how	 long	can	you	 remain	under	 the	water?	You	will
have	to	come	out,	you	will	have	to	come	home.	And	when	you	are	dressed	and
ready	 to	 go	home,	 those	 sins	 jump	back	on	you.	So	 it	 is	 futile,	 but	 it	 is	 up	 to
you."
He	will	not	say	that	this	is	stupid	--	that	the	Ganges	cannot	take	your	sins	away.
But	he	 says	 it	 in	his	own	way,	without	hurting	 the	man's	 feelings.	And	he	has
said	 it	 in	 a	 beautiful	 way:	 "You	 can	 go.	 The	Ganges	will	 do	 its	 work,	 it	 will
purify	you	--	but	how	long	you	will	remain	in	the	Ganges?	Sooner	or	later	you
will	have	to	come	out.	And	what	do	you	think?	Those	trees	are	standing	there,
they	are	the	resting	places	for	the	sins.
"And	sometimes	it	happens	that	even	other	people'	sins	jump	upon	you.	Seeing	a
better	man,	 they	change.	So	I	will	not	suggest	 it.	Find	some	other	way.	This	 is
dangerous	--	so	many	people	are	taking	a	bath	in	the	Ganges,	and	all	their	sins
are	on	 the	 trees;	 they	get	mixed	up.	And	 then	 it	 is	 up	 to	 them	 to	 choose.	 It	 is
better	 to	have	your	own	sins.	At	 least	you	are	acquainted	with	 them.	You	may
come	back	with	some	new	sins,	more	dangerous.
"But	I	will	not	prevent	you;	I	never	prevent	anybody.	You	can	go	and	try,	but	I
have	told	you	the	whole	story.	Nobody	talks	about	the	trees	because	the	priests
who	 are	 sitting	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Ganges,	 their	 whole	 business	 will	 flop	 if
people	come	to	know	about	the	trees	and	the	real	secret.	And	sins,	nobody	can
see,	they	are	invisible;	so	they	sit	on	the	trees	and	wait."
This	 man,	 in	 India,	 became	 paramhansa.	 Paramhansa	 means	 literally	 "the
greatest	 swan"...	 because	 in	 Indian	mythology	 it	 is	 thought	 that	 the	 swan	 eats
only	pearls;	that	is	his	food.	And	the	swan	is	the	only	bird	in	existence	that	if	you
put	before	him	milk	mixed	with	water	he	will	drink	the	milk	and	leave	the	water
behind.	He	has	the	capacity	to	discriminate	between	water	and	milk.
Paramhansa	 means	 "the	 greatest	 swan"	 who	 has	 become	 capable	 of
discriminating	between	darkness	and	light,	between	right	and	wrong.	It	is	not	an
effort	on	his	part;	 it	has	become	simply	his	nature.	But	his	behavior	may	 look
mad.
This	 is	my	 feeling,	 that	 there	 are	many	madmen	 in	 India	who	 are	 really	mad,
who	have	not	gone	beyond	mind	--	I	have	seen	a	few	--	but	they	are	worshipped
as	paramhansas.
Their	irrational	acts	are	interpreted	by	great	scholars	in	such	a	way	that	they	start
having	meaning.	I	have	watched	these	people	and	they	are	really	mad,	they	are
not	paramhansas.
Perhaps	 the	case	may	be	similar	 in	 the	West;	 there	may	be	a	 few	paramhansas
who	are	living	in	mad	asylums,	because	you	don't	have	any	other	category.	Once
a	man	starts	behaving	in	a	bizarre,	berserk	manner,	he	is	mad.	So	on	both	sides
there	is	confusion.	But	I	think,	still,	the	Eastern	confusion	is	better.	There	is	no
harm	 in	 worshipping	 a	 madman;	 you	 are	 not	 doing	 any	 harm.	 But	 to	 put	 a
paramhansa	 into	 a	madhouse	 and	 force	 him	 through	medicines	 and	 injections
and	treatment	to	come	back	into	the	mind	is	real	harm.
Western	psychology	has	still	no	category	for	the	second	one,	which	it	needs.	But
that	category	will	arise	only	when	it	accepts	supermind.	Before	Sigmund	Freud
it	had	not	even	accepted	the	unconscious	mind	--	only	the	conscious	mind.	For
thousands	of	years	in	the	West	there	was	no	idea	of	the	unconscious	mind.
With	Sigmund	Freud,	the	unconscious	mind	became	established.	With	Jung,	the
collective	 unconscious	mind	 became	 established.	Now	 somebody	 is	 needed	 to
establish	the	cosmic	unconscious	mind.	A	tremendous	field	is	available	for	any
genius	 to	 establish	 it.	 Because	 in	 the	 Eastern	 psychology	 all	 these	 three	 are
accepted,	have	been	accepted	for	thousands	of	years.
And	this	is	below	the	conscious	mind.	Above	the	conscious	mind	are	also	three:
the	 superconscious,	 the	 collective	 superconscious,	 and	 the	 cosmic
superconscious.	On	those,	no	work	has	been	even	started.	The	second	category
of	 madmen	 that	 I	 am	 talking	 about	 is	 somewhere	 in	 these	 three	 categories;
certainly	 in	 the	 superconscious	 but	 perhaps	 if	 it	 grows	 deeper,	 it	may	 become
collective	 superconscious.	 And	 in	 a	 man	 like	 Ramakrishna	 it	 is	 cosmic
superconscious.
When	he	was	dying	he	had	a	cancer	of	the	throat,	and	it	became	impossible	for
him	to	eat	anything	or	drink	anything.	And	his	followers	were	telling	him	again
and	 again,	 "You	 just	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 tell	 the	 existence	 --	 it	 will	 listen	 to
you."	He	would	close	his	eyes,	but	would	forget	all	about	it.	After	a	while,	when
he	 would	 open	 his	 eyes...	 the	 disciples	 were	 waiting;	 they	 would	 say,	 "What
happened?"
He	 said,	 "Nothing,	 because	 when	 I	 close	my	 eyes	 everything	 becomes	 silent.
What	are	you	expecting	to	happen?"
They	said,	"We	had	asked	you	to	ask	existence...."	Finally	they	forced	his	wife,
Sharda:
"Perhaps	only	you	can	persuade	him."
Unwillingly,	reluctantly,	she	asked	him.	With	tears	in	her	eyes	she	said,	"I	don't
want	 to	tell	you	to	do	anything	because	that	 is	 interfering,	and	my	whole	life	I
have	never	said	a	single	word	to	interfere.	You	are	far	above;	my	hands	cannot
reach.	But	because	these	people	are	so	deeply	in	anguish,	I	have	agreed	to	say	to
you,	just	once:	Close	your	eyes	and	ask	existence,	`What	are	you	doing	to	me?
Remove	this	cancer	from	my	throat.'"
He	 said,	 "Because	 you	 have	 never	 asked	 anything	 --	 every	 wife	 is	 asking
everything,	 any	 day,	 every	 day;	 for	 your	 whole	 life	 you	 have	 never	 asked
anything	--	and	this	is	maybe	my	last	day,	or	last	days,	I	will	fulfill	it."
He	closed	his	eyes,	opened	his	eyes	and	said,	 "Sharda,	 I	 asked.	And	 I	heard	a
voice	saying	 to	me,	 `Ramakrishna,	can't	you	drink	with	other	people's	 throats?
Can't	 you	 eat	with	other	people's	 throats?	Do	you	necessarily	need	your	own?
Are	you	still	attached	to	your	own	body?'
"And	I	said,	`No'	--	I	had	to	say	the	truth.	So	the	voice	said,	`From	now	onwards,
you	eat	with	everybody's	throat,	drink	with	everybody's	throat.'"
This	is	the	stage	of	cosmic	consciousness.	This	man	may	look	mad,	may	behave
in	 some	ways	which	 do	 not	 fit	with	 our	mind...	 and	 psychology	 has	 to	 find	 a
place	for	this	man,	separate	from	the	madman	we	know.
So	there	is	a	possibility	of	becoming	mad	below	the	mind,	and	with	that	too	you
can	 be	 on	 three	 levels.	 You	 can	 be	 mad,	 just	 unconscious;	 you	 can	 be	 mad
collectively	unconscious.	And	each	step	down	you	will	become	more	and	more
mad.	You	can	be	mad	at	 the	 level	of	 the	cosmic	unconscious	mind;	 that	 is	 the
worst	that	can	happen	to	a	man.
He	will	 live	 just	 like	a	stone,	a	 rock.	He	has	 lost	all	 touch...	he	 is	so	far	away,
miles	away	from	consciousness.
Psychology	 has	 tried	 to	 pull	 these	 people	 back	 to	 the	 mind	 --	 not	 very
successfully,	but	still,	if	the	person	has	only	fallen	one	step,	it	can	pull	him	back.
From	the	second	step	it	becomes	more	difficult;	and	from	the	third	step	I	don't
think	psychology	has	yet	been	able	to	find	any	way	to	pull	the	person	back.
It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 pull	 the	 person	 down	 from	 superconsciousness,	 but	 it	 is
possible.
And	psychology	is	doing	it	--	at	least	in	the	West	--	with	a	few	people	who	may
not	be	mad	in	the	ordinary	sense.
For	 example,	 Vincent	Van	Gogh	was	 kept	 for	 one	 year	 in	 a	madhouse;	 and	 I
don't	 think	he	was	mad,	he	was	painting	 things	 the	way	we	don't	know	 things
are.	During	that	one	year	in	the	madhouse	he	had	painted	his	best	paintings.	And
that	is	proof	that	he	was	perhaps	in	a	higher	state	than	the	ordinary	mind.
Perhaps	 he	 had	 reached	 the	 superconscious.	 In	 that	 one	 year	 he	 painted	 one
painting	 in	 which	 the	 stars	 are	 spirals.	 And	 everybody	 laughed,	 "This	 is
absolutely	mad!	Who	has	 seen	 stars	 as	 spirals?"	And	 just	 recently,	 a	 few	days
ago,	physics	has	come	to	the	same	conclusion,	that	stars	are	spirals.	It	is	because
of	the	distance	that	we	cannot	see	it.	A	hundred	years	after	Van	Gogh...
Perhaps	 that	man,	when	we	thought	 that	he	was	mad,	was	on	a	higher	 level	of
consciousness	and	was	capable	of	seeing	one	century	ahead	of	science,	with	no
instruments,	with	nothing;	just	with	his	pure	consciousness	--	a	visualization	that
stars	are	spirals.
There	are	other	paintings	in	which	he	has	painted	strange	things.	Perhaps	by	and
by	we	may	come	 to	know	that	 they	are	not	strange,	 they	are	exactly	as	he	has
painted	them.	In	his	whole	life...	After	 this	one	year	he	didn't	 live	long,	but	he
painted	one	painting	in	which	trees	are	going	higher	than	the	stars.	The	stars	are
just	 on	 the	 way,	 and	 trees	 have	 passed	 them	 and	 are	 going	 higher.	 Even	 the
painter's	 friends	 laughed,	 that	 "You	 are	 now	making	 a	 fool	 of	 yourself!	 Trees
going	above	the	stars?"
Van	Gogh	said,	"I	don't	know,	but	whenever	I	sit	by	the	side	of	a	tree	I	feel	the
ambition	of	the	tree:	it	is	the	ambition	of	the	earth	to	go	beyond	the	stars.	I	don't
know	whether	 those	 trees	 are	 lying	 to	me	 or	 I	 am	 deceived,	 but	 this	 happens
every	time	I	sit	by	the	side	of	a	tree.	And	I	suddenly	feel	the	tree	is	saying	to	me,
Ì	am	the	aspiration	of	the	earth	to	go	beyond	the	stars.'"
Perhaps	man	going	to	the	moon,	man	going	to	Mars,	man	going	to	the	stars,	is
also	part	of	 the	same	ambition,	 that	 the	earth	wants	 to	go	as	far	as	possible,	 to
enquire,	to	investigate.
Now,	Van	Gogh	looks	mad,	but	what	he	is	saying	is	not	absolutely	senseless;	it
has	a	certain	credibility	about	it.	If	in	man	there	is	a	desire	to	reach	to	the	stars,
then	in	the	trees	also	there	must	be	a	desire	to	reach	beyond	the	stars,	because	we
are	all	part	of	one	life.
Trees	are	a	different	expression,	we	are	a	different	expression,	but	the	life	is	the
same.
You	ask	me,	"What	is	madness?"	Madness	can	be	defined	as	either	falling	below
the	mind	or	falling	above	the	mind.	Falling	below	the	mind	is	sickness;	falling
above	the	mind	is	health,	wholeness.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
FOR	THE	PAST	SEVEN	YEARS	I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	SPEAKING	ABOUT
TRUTH.	BUT	THIS	 IS	STILL	AN	EMPTY	WORD	FOR	ME.	OFTEN	YOU
SAY
THAT	 ONE	 KNOWS	 TRUTH	WHEN	 ONE	 IS	 SILENT	 INSIDE.	 I	 KNOW
THIS
DELICIOUS	FEELING	THAT	TAKES	ME	OVER	WHEN	I	CLOSE	MY	EYES
AND
BECOME	QUIET	INSIDE,	BUT	WHAT	IS	TRUTH	TO	DO	WITH	THAT?
That	is	the	truth.
Truth	is	not	an	object	that	you	will	find	somewhere	when	you	are	silent.	Truth	is
your	subjectivity.
Just	try	to	understand.	You	are	there,	and	the	whole	world	is	there.	Whatever	you
see	is	an	object,	but	who	is	seeing	it	is	the	subject.
In	silence	all	objects	disappear	--	and	the	word	òbject,	has	to	be	remembered;	it
is	the	same	word	as	òbjection.'	Òbject'	means	that	which	prevents	you.
So	 all	 preventions,	 all	 objects,	 all	 objections,	 disappear;	 you	 have	 the	 whole
infinity,	and	just	silence.	It	is	full	of	consciousness,	it	is	full	of	presence,	of	your
being.	But	you	will	not	find	anything	as	the	truth	--	that	will	become	an	object.
And	truth	is	never	an	object.
Truth	is	subjectivity.
To	 discover	 your	 subjectivity	 --	 unhindered,	 unobjected	 to	 by	 anything,	 in	 its
total	infinity	and	eternalness	--	is	the	truth.
"The	 truth"	 is	only	a	way	of	 speaking;	 there	 is	not	 something	 labeled	 "Truth,"
that	one	day	you	will	find	and	open	the	box	and	see	the	contents	and	say,	"Great!
I	have	found	the	truth."	There	is	no	such	box.
Your	existence	is	the	truth,	and	when	you	are	silent	you	are	in	truth.	And	if	the
silence	is	absolute	then	you	are	the	ultimate	truth.	But	don't	think	of	the	truth	as
an	object	--	it	is	not	an	object.
It	is	not	there,	it	is	here.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
SINCE	BEING	WITH	YOU	SO	MUCH	GROWTH	AND	MATURITY	HAS
HAPPENED	 IN	ME	 --	 I	 HAVE	 CHANGED	 IN	 EVERY	 ASPECT.	 AT	 THE
SAME
TIME,	WHEN	I	LOOK	INTO	MYSELF,	I	FEEL	THE	SAME	AS	I	DID	WHEN
I	WAS
A	LITTLE	CHILD.
IS	THIS	MY	WITNESS,	OR	SOMETHING	ELSE?
It	is	your	witness.
Just	remember	one	thing,	that	the	feeling	of	being	a	child	can	be	experienced	in
two	 ways.	 You	 can	 be	 a	 witness	 and	 the	 experience	 of	 childhood	 can	 be	 an
object.	 Then	 one	 more	 step	 is	 needed:	 You	 have	 to	 become	 the	 purity,	 the
innocence	of	the	child...	not	separate	--	you	are	it.
It	 will	 come.	 This	 is	 how	 it	 comes:	 first	 it	 comes	 as	 an	 object;	 you	 are	 still
separate	 and	 watching	 it.	 This	 is	 beautiful	 and	 a	 great	 experience	 --	 that	 all
rubbish	is	thrown	out	and	you	are	feeling	a	very	pure,	innocent	state	--	but	you
are	still	separate	from	it.	Just	go	on	witnessing	it,	and	soon	even	the	childhood
will	disappear,	and	there	will	be	only	the	witness,	the	subjectivity.	There	will	be
only	the	mirror	without	mirroring	anything.	Then	you	have	arrived	home.
You	can	mirror	beautiful	things,	and	it	is	good,	but	when	the	mirror	is	absolutely
empty...
One	of	the	Buddhist	scriptures	has	the	name	"The	Empty	Mirror."	That	exactly
describes	the	ultimate	state	of	consciousness,	when	you	simply	are	and	there	is
nothing	 --	 not	 even	 childhood,	 not	 even	 silence,	 not	 even	 peace,	 not	 even
blissfulness...	nothing	that	you	can	observe	it.
This	ocean	of	nothingness	surrounding	you	is	nirvana.
There	is	nothing	more	to	explore.
There	is	nothing	more	to	find.
But	as	it	is	going	it	is	good:	you	are	changing,	and	even	to	feel	one's	childhood	is
a	great	experience.	But	greater	experiences	are	ahead.	Don't	stop,	 just	continue
till	only	you	are	left,	alone,	without	a	second.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#36
Chapter	title:	Wake	up	and	you	are	it
30	April	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8604300
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO36
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
106
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	YOU	SPEAK	ABOUT	THE	MANY	STATES	ON	THE	WAY	TO
ENLIGHTENMENT	 I	 AM	NOT	 EVEN	 ABLE	 TO	 SEE	WHERE	 I	 AM	ON
THE	WAY.
I	ALWAYS	THINK	I	MUST	BE	THOUSANDS	OF	LIFETIMES	AWAY	FROM
THE
HIGHEST	STATE.	ON	THE	OTHER	HAND,	YOU	ARE	SAYING	THAT	 IT
CAN
HAPPEN	NOW	AND	HERE,	FOR	ALL	OF	US.	I	CANNOT	IMAGINE	THAT
A	 QUICK	 CHANGE	 CAN	 BE	 POSSIBLE	 --	 FROM	 A	 STATE	 OF
UNAWARENESS
LIKE	 MY	 OWN,	 TO	 A	 STATE	 OF	 TOTAL	 CONSCIOUSNESS.	 IN	 MY
REALITY	 I	 OFTEN	 SEE	 MYSELF	 AS	 AN	 IDIOT,	 VERY	 STUPID.	 I	 DO
HAVE	A	TASTE	OF
UNDERSTANDING,	ESPECIALLY	THROUGH	YOUR	SO-CALLED
CONTRADICTIONS,	 BUT	 THIS	 UNDERSTANDING	 CREATES	 IN	 ME
EVEN
MORE	ABSURDITIES.	FOR	EXAMPLE:	"THE	HIGHEST	FREEDOM	IS	IN
THE
HIGHEST	SLAVERY."
I	 AM	 TOTALLY	 CONFUSED	 --	 AND	 AT	 THE	 SAME	 TIME,	 I	 AM	 NOT.
EVEN
WHEN	 I	 SAY	 THAT	 I	 DON'T	 BELIEVE	 IN	 THE	 UNEXPECTED
HAPPENING
HERE	AND	NOW,	 I	DON'T	BELIEVE	 IN	MY	BELIEVING,	BECAUSE	 IT
MIGHT
BE	JUST	THE	TRICKY	MIND	WHICH	HAS	CARRIED	THE	MEMORY	OF
YOUR
SAYING	THAT	ENLIGHTENMENT	IS	THE	ONLY	THING	THAT	CANNOT
BE
DESIRED.
SO	 I	AM	HERE,	 JUST	ENJOYING,	GRATEFUL	FOR	YOUR	BEING	AND
YOUR
WORDS.	 TO	 BE	 ONE	 OF	 SO	 MANY	 PEOPLE	 IN	 THE	 WORLD	 TO	 BE
ALLOWED
TO	SIT	BY	THE	FEET	OF	THE	MOST	BEAUTIFUL	MAN	IN	THE	WORLD
GIVES
THE	INSIGHT	THAT	EXISTENCE	TAKES	SO	MUCH	CARE	OF	ME	THAT	I
CANNOT	 REALLY	 BE	 AN	 IDIOT;	 AT	 LEAST	 I	 MUST	 BE	 A	 BLESSED
FOOL.
PLEASE	HELP	ME	TO	KNOW	A	LITTLE	BIT	WHO	I	AM.
A	man	asleep	can	dream	himself	anywhere	in	the	universe.	From	that	point,	to	be
awake	will	 look	 thousands	 of	 lives	 away.	But	 it	 is	 a	 dream;	 as	 far	 as	 the	 real
sleep	is	concerned,	awakening	is	just	close	by.
Any	moment	you	can	wake	up.
Any	situation	can	make	you	awake.
And	 the	master's	 work	 is	 to	 create	 devices	 in	 which	 you	 can	 become	 awake.
Sometimes	very	small	things	--	just	throwing	cold	water	in	your	eyes	will	make
you	awake.	Asleep	you	were	so	far	away,	but	when	you	wake	up	then	you	will
see	 that	 it	was	a	dream	 that	created	 the	distance.	Dreaming	 is	 the	distance.	Of
course,	 for	 dreaming,	 sleep	 is	 necessary,	 but	 the	moment	 you	 are	 awake	 sleep
disappears,	and	with	it	the	whole	world	of	dreams	too.
The	truth	is	that	awakening	is	the	nearest	reality	to	you,	just	by	the	side	of	you.	It
is	 not	 far	 away;	 hence	 it	 cannot	 be	 made	 a	 goal.	 All	 goals	 are	 dreaming,	 all
achievements	are	dreaming.	Awakening	cannot	be	a	goal	because	the	man	who	is
asleep	 cannot	 even	 think	 of	 what	 awakening	 can	 be.	 He	 cannot	 make,	 in	 his
sleep,	a	goal	of	enlightenment	--	it	is	impossible.	Or	whatever	he	makes	will	be
totally	different	from	the	reality	of	enlightenment.
Enlightenment	is	part	of	your	waking	consciousness.
In	 the	 East	 we	 have	 four	 layers	 of	 consciousness.	 First,	 that	 one	 we	 know	 is
called	so-called	wakefulness.	It	is	not	really	wakeful,	because	just	underneath	it
dreams	are	floating.	Close	your	eyes	and	you	will	have	a	daydream.	Close	your
eyes	and	you	will	immediately	see	--	imagination	takes	over,	and	you	start	going
away	from	this	moment,	from	here.	In	reality	you	are	going	nowhere,	but	in	your
mind	you	can	go	anywhere.
So	 the	 first	 state	 is	 the	 so-called	waking	state;	 the	 second	state	 is	called	 sleep.
We	are	aware	of	these.
The	 third	 is	called	 the	dreaming	state,	because	sleep	can	be	without	dreaming;
then	 it	 has	 a	 different	 quality.	 It	 is	 very	 peaceful,	 very	 silent,	 dark	 and	deep...
very	rejuvenating.
So	sleep	is	the	second	stage,	below	the	so-called	waking	stage,	and	then	comes
the	 third	 stage,	dreaming.	Most	of	 the	 time	 in	your	 sleep	you	are	dreaming.	 If
you	sleep	eight	hours,	then	six	hours	you	are	dreaming.	Just	here	and	there,	like
small	islands,	you	are	asleep;	otherwise	it	is	continuous	dreaming.
You	don't	remember	it,	that's	why	people	think	this	seems	too	much	--	six	hours
of	dreaming	 and	only	 two	hours	of	 sleep.	You	 remember	only	 the	 last	 dreams
when	you	are	waking	up,	because	only	with	your	waking	up	your	memory	starts
functioning;	 so	 it	 catches	 only	 the	 tail	 end	 of	 your	 dream	 world.	 You	 don't
remember	 all	 the	dreams,	but	only	 the	dreams	 that	happen	 just	before	you	are
waking	up	--	the	morning	dreams.
It	 was	 always	 understood	 in	 the	 East	 that	 these	 six	 hours	 of	 dreaming	 are	 as
essential	as	those	two	hours	of	silent	sleep.	But	in	the	West,	within	the	last	ten
years	 for	 the	 first	 time	 new	 researches	 have	 proved	 the	Eastern	 insight	 totally
right.	 In	 fact,	 the	 new	 findings	 say	 that	 dreaming	 is	 even	more	 essential	 than
sleep,	because	in	dreaming	you	are	throwing	out	the	rubbish	of	your	mind.
The	whole	 day	 the	mind	 is	 collecting	 all	 kinds	 of	words,	 all	 kinds	 of	 desires,
ambitions	--
too	much	dust!	 It	has	 to	be	 thrown	out.	 In	 the	day	you	don't	have	any	 time	 to
throw	 it	 out;	 you	 are	 gathering	more	 and	more.	 So	 in	 the	 night	when	 you	 are
asleep	 the	mind	 has	 a	 chance	 to	 clean	 itself	 up.	Dreaming	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 spring
cleaning.	But	 it	 is	an	everyday	business:	again	you	will	collect,	again	you	will
dream,	again	you	will	collect...
These	 are	 the	 states	 known	 to	 us.	 The	 fourth	 is	 not	 named	 in	 the	 East	 but	 is
simply	called	the	fourth,	turiya.	It	is	a	number,	it	is	not	a	word.	No	name	is	given
to	 it	 so	 that	 you	 cannot	 interpret	 it,	 so	 that	 your	mind	 cannot	play	with	 it	 and
deceive	you.	What	can	the	mind	do,	just	listening	to	the	number	four?	The	mind
simply	feels	paralyzed.	Give	any	name	with	meaning,	then	the	mind	has	a	way	--
meaning	is	its	way.	But	the	number	four	has	no	meaning.
The	fourth	state	is	the	real	awakening.	The	fourth	state	has	to	be	understood	in
reference	 to	 the	other	 three	 states.	 It	has	 something	similar	 to	 the	 first,	 the	 so-
called	waking	state.
The	 so-called	 waking	 state	 is	 very	 thin,	 almost	 negligible,	 but	 it	 has	 some
quality...	The	fourth	consists	only	of	that	quality;	it	is	pure	awakening.	You	are
fully	awake.
It	 also	 has	 some	 similarity	 to	 the	 second	 stage	 --	 the	 sleep.	 Sleep	 has	 silence,
depth,	peacefulness,	relaxation,	but	in	a	very	small	measure	--	just	as	much	as	is
needed	for	day-to-day	affairs.	But	the	fourth	has	its	totality:	total	relaxation,	total
silence,	abysmal	depth.
It	 has	 also	 some	 quality	 of	 the	 dream.	 The	 dream	 takes	 you	 far	 away	 from
yourself.	You	may	go	to	the	moon	in	the	dream,	you	may	go	to	some	star	in	the
dream,	although	you	remain	here,	in	your	bed.	In	reality	you	don't	go	anywhere,
but	in	imagination	--	as	long	as	you	are	dreaming	--	it	looks	absolutely	real.	You
cannot	think	in	a	dream	that	it	is	a	dream.	If	you	can	think	in	a	dream	that	it	is	a
dream,	the	dream	will	be	broken	--	you	are	awake,	and	you	cannot	catch	hold	of
the	dream	again.
One	Sufi	story	about	Mulla	Nasruddin	is	that	one	night	he	dreams	that	an	angel
is	giving	him	some	money,	"Because	you	are	so	virtuous,	so	wise,	God	has	sent
some	reward	 for	you."	But	as	 the	mind	 is,	he	gives	him	 ten	 rupees,	and	Mulla
says,	"This	is	not	a	reward	--
don't	insult	me."	And	slowly	slowly	he	brings	the	angel	up	to	ninety-nine	rupees.
But	Mulla	is	stubborn;	he	says,	"I	will	take	a	hundred	or	I	will	not	take	anything.
What	 a	 miserly	 approach	 it	 is	 --	 and	 from	 God!	 You	 represent	 God	 and	 you
cannot	make	it	a	hundred?."
He	 shouted	 so	 loudly,	 "Either	 a	hundred	or	nothing!"	 that	 it	woke	him	up.	He
looked	all	around	--	there	was	nobody,	just	he	was	sleeping	in	his	bed.	He	said,
"My	God,	 I	 lost	 ninety-nine	 rupees	 unnecessarily,	 just	 being	 stubborn	 for	 one
rupee	more."	He	closed	his	eyes,	 tried	hard,	 "Please	come	back,	wherever	you
are.	Ninety-nine	is	okay;	even	ninety-eight	will	do...	ninety-seven	is	also	all	right
--	anything	will	do.	You	just	come	back!
Where	are	you?"
He	came	back	to	one	rupee,	"I	will	take	only	one	rupee...	anything	from	God	is
great.	I	was	foolish	to	call	God	a	miser;	in	fact,	I	was	greedy.	Forgive	me,	and
give	me	just	one	rupee."	But	the	angel	was	not	there.
You	cannot	catch	hold	of	the	same	dream	again;	once	you	are	awakened	there	is
no	way	to	catch	hold	of	the	same	dream.
A	 dream	 takes	 you	 away	 from	 yourself;	 that's	 its	 basic	 quality.	 Perhaps	 that's
why	it	cleanses	you	and	helps	you	to	have	a	certain	relaxation:	you	forget	your
worries.	 For	 a	 few	moments	 at	 least	 you	 can	 be	 in	 paradise,	 you	 can	 be	 in	 a
situation	you	always	wanted	to	be	in.
The	 fourth	 stage	 also	has	 something	 similar,	 but	 just	 similar.	 It	 also	 takes	you
away	 from	 yourself	 --	 but	 forever.	 You	 cannot	 come	 back	 to	 yourself.	 In	 the
dream	you	cannot	come	back	to	the	same	dream;	in	the	fourth	stage	you	cannot
come	back	to	the	same	self.	It	takes	you	really	so	far	away	that	you	can	be	the
whole	universe.	That's	what	the	Eastern	mystics	have	said:	aham	brahmasmi	--	I
have	become	the	whole.
But	you	have	to	lose	the	self.
You	cannot	come	back	to	it.
This	fourth	stage	has	been	given	different	names.	This	is	the	most	mathematical
name,	 the	 fourth.	 It	 was	 given	 by	 Patanjali,	 who	 was	 a	 very	 scientific	 and
mathematical	mystic.
His	 treatise	 has	 remained	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 the	 only	 source	 of	 yoga.
Nothing	 has	 been	 added,	 because	 nothing	 is	 needed.	 It	 is	 very	 rare	 that	 one
person	 creates	 a	 complete	 system,	 so	 complete	 and	 so	 perfect	 that	 it	 is
impossible	to	change	anything	in	it.
In	the	West	it	used	to	be	thought	that	Aristotle	was	such	a	person	--	he	created
logic,	 the	 whole	 system	 of	 logic	 alone,	 and	 for	 two	 thousand	 years	 it	 has
remained	 the	 same.	 But	 in	 this	 century	 things	 have	 changed,	 because	 new
discoveries	in	physics	have	made	it	absolutely	necessary	to	find	something	better
than	Aristotle.	The	new	findings	 in	physics	have	created	a	problem,	because	 if
you	 follow	 Aristotle's	 logic	 then	 you	 cannot	 accept	 those	 findings.	 Those
findings	are	against	Aristotle's	logic,	but	you	cannot	deny	reality.
Reality	 is	 reality!	You	 can	 change	 the	 logic	 --	which	 is	man-made	 --	 but	 you
cannot	change	the	behavior	of	electrons.	It	is	not	in	your	power,	it	is	existential.
So	a	non-Aristotelian	logic	has	grown	up.
The	 second	 case	was	 geometry.	Euclid	 has	 reigned	 for	 hundreds	 of	 years	 as	 a
perfect	master	as	far	as	geometry	 is	concerned,	but	 in	 this	century	 that	 too	has
got	into	trouble.
Non-Euclidian	geometries	have	evolved.	They	had	to	be	evolved	because	of	the
new	discoveries	of	physics.
For	example,	you	have	heard	that	the	closest	distance	between	two	points	makes
a	straight	line,	but	the	discovery	of	the	physicists	is	that	there	is	no	straight	line
at	all.	A	straight	line	is	impossible,	for	the	simple	reason	that	you	are	sitting	on	a
global	earth.
You	can	draw	a	straight	line	here	on	the	floor,	but	it	is	not	a	straight	line	because
it	is	part	of	a	circle.	If	you	go	on	drawing	it	from	both	ends,	one	day	they	will
meet	somewhere	and	you	will	see	that	it	has	become	a	circle.	So	the	small	piece
that	you	were	thinking	was	a	straight	line	was	not	a	straight	line;	just	it	was	just
such	 a	 small	 part	 of	 a	 circle	 that	 you	 could	 not	 see	 the	 curve.	 The	 curve	was
invisible	--	it	was	so	small,	but	it	was	there.
Where	 are	 you	 going	 to	 draw	 a	 straight	 line?	 --	 because	 all	 stars,	 all	 planets,
everything	is	global,	is	round.	So	wherever	you	draw	a	line,	howsoever	small	it
is,	it	looks	absolutely	straight	--	even	with	scientific	instruments	you	can	see	that
it	is	straight	--	but	go	on	making	it	bigger	and	bigger,	and	it	will	become	a	part	of
a	circle.	So	 it	was	an	arc,	not	a	straight	 line.	 In	 the	same	way	everything	from
Euclid	has	been	cancelled.
Patanjali	remains	the	only	person	yet,	and	perhaps	may	remain	the	only	person,
who	has	created	a	whole	science	alone,	and	has	remained	for	five	thousand	years
without	any	challenge	from	any	corner.	He	calls	it	the	turiya,	the	fourth.	He	is	so
scientific	a	man	that	one	simply	feels	amazed.
Five	thousand	years	ago,	he	had	the	courage,	 the	insight,	 the	awareness,	 to	say
that	God	is	only	a	hypothesis.	It	can	help	you	to	become	awakened	but	it	is	not	a
reality,	 it	 is	 only	 a	 device.	 There	 is	 no	 God	 to	 be	 achieved;	 it	 is	 only	 a
hypothesis.
A	few	people	can	be	helped	by	hypotheses	--	they	can	use	it	--	but	remember,	it
is	not	a	 reality.	And	once	you	have	become	awakened,	 it	disappears,	 the	 same
way	 as	 when	 you	 wake	 up	 your	 dreams	 disappear.	 They	 were	 so	 real	 that
sometimes	it	happens	that	even	after	you	have	awakened	there	is	some	effect	left
of	 the	 reality	 of	 the	 dream:	 your	 heart	 is	 beating	 faster,	 you	 are	 perspiring,
trembling,	still	afraid.	Now	you	know	perfectly	it	was	a	dream,	but	you	are	still
crying,	your	 tears	are	 there.	The	dream	was	non-existential,	but	 it	has	affected
you	because	for	that	period	you	had	taken	it	to	be	real.
So	it	is	possible.	You	can	see	the	devotees	crying	before	their	god,	emotionally
very	much	 affected,	 dancing,	 singing,	worshipping,	 and	 feeling	 the	 truth	 of	 it,
but	it	is	just	a	hypothesis.	There	is	nothing,	no	God,	but	these	people	are	taking
the	hypothesis	as	a	reality.	One	day	when	they	will	be	awake,	they	will	laugh	at
themselves,	that	it	was	only	a	hypothesis.
But	 there	are	other	masters	who	have	given	different	names	according	 to	 their
own	philosophical	 background.	A	 few	have	 called	 it	 enlightenment:	 becoming
full	of	light	--
all	 darkness	 disappears,	 all	 unconsciousness	 disappears	 --	 becoming	 fully
conscious.
There	are	others	who	have	called	it	liberation,	freedom	--	freedom	from	yourself,
remember.	 All	 other	 freedoms	 are	 political,	 social.	 They	 are	 freedom	 from
somebody,	 from	 some	 government,	 from	 some	 country,	 from	 some	 political
party;	but	it	is	always	freedom	FROM...
Religious	freedom	is	freedom	not	from	somebody	else,	but	from	yourself.
You	are	no	more.
Because	you	are	no	more,	a	few	masters	in	the	East	have	called	it	anatta	--	no-
selfness.
Buddha	 called	 it	 nirvana	 --	 which	 is	 very	 close	 to	 anatta,	 no-selfness,	 or
selflessness	--
just	a	zero,	a	profound	nothingness	surrounding	you.	But	it	is	not	emptiness,	it	is
fullness:	fullness	of	being,	of	ultimate	joy,	fullness	of	being	blessed,	fullness	of
gracefulness.	All	that	you	have	known	before	is	no	more	there;	hence	is	it	empty
of	all	that.	But	something	new,	absolutely	new	you	had	not	even	dreamt	about,	is
discovered.
Some	have	called	it	universal	existence,	but	what	name	you	give	does	not	matter.
I	 think	the	fourth	still	 remains	the	best,	because	it	does	not	 lead	you	into	mind
trips;	 otherwise	 you	 are	 going	 to	 think	 about	 it,	 "What	 is	 emptiness?	What	 is
nothingness?"	And	 nothingness	 can	 create	 a	 fear,	 emptiness	 can	 create	 a	 fear,
anatta,	no-selfness,	can	create	a	fear.	The	fourth	is	absolutely	right.
Three	stages	you	know;	the	fourth	is	just	a	little	deeper.	It	is	not	far	away.	The
idea	of	being	lives	away	from	it	is	a	dream.	In	reality	it	is	just	by	the	side...	wake
up	and	you	are	it.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 HEARD	 YOU	 SAYING	 THAT	 ENLIGHTENMENT	 IS	 THE
TRANSCENDENCE	OF
MIND	--	CONSCIOUS,	UNCONSCIOUS,	SUB-CONSCIOUS	--	AND	THAT
ONE
DISSOLVES	INTO	THE	OCEAN	OF	LIFE,	INTO	THE	UNIVERSE,	INTO
NOTHINGNESS.	 I	 ALSO	 HEAR	 YOU	 TALKING	 ABOUT	 THE
INDIVIDUALITY
OF	 HUMAN	 BEINGS.	 HOW	 CAN	 THE	 INDIVIDUALITY	 OF	 AN
ENLIGHTENED
PERSON	MANIFEST	ITSELF	IF	HE	IS	DISSOLVED	IN	THE	WHOLE?
The	 ordinary,	 unconscious	 human	 being	 has	 no	 individuality;	 he	 has	 only	 a
personality.
Personality	 is	 that	 which	 is	 given	 by	 others	 to	 you	 --	 by	 the	 parents,	 by	 the
teachers,	by	the	priest,	by	the	society	--	whatever	they	have	said	about	you.	And
you	 have	 been	 desiring	 to	 be	 respectable,	 to	 be	 respected,	 so	 you	 have	 been
doing	 things	 which	 are	 appreciated,	 and	 the	 society	 goes	 on	 rewarding	 you,
respecting	you	more	and	more.	This	is	their	method	of	creating	a	personality.
But	personality	 is	very	 thin,	 skin-deep.	 It	 is	not	your	nature.	The	child	 is	born
without	a	personality,	but	he	is	born	with	a	potential	individuality.	The	potential
individuality	simply	means	his	uniqueness	from	anybody	else	--	he	is	different.
So	 first,	 remember	 that	 individuality	 is	 not	 personality.	 When	 you	 drop
personality,	 you	 discover	 your	 individuality	 --	 and	 only	 the	 individual	 can
become	enlightened.	The	 false	cannot	become	 the	ultimate	 realization	of	 truth.
Only	 the	 true	 can	meet	with	 the	 true,	 only	 the	 same	 can	meet	 the	 same.	Your
individuality	is	existential;	hence	when	your	individuality	blossoms	you	become
one	with	the	whole.	Here	is	the	question:	if	you	become	one	with	the	whole,	then
how	can	you	remain	individual?
The	 problem	 is	 simply	 a	 non-understanding.	 The	 experience	 of	 becoming	 the
whole	is	of	consciousness,	and	the	expression	of	it	is	through	the	body,	through
the	mind.	The	experience	is	beyond	the	body/mind	structure.	When	one	becomes
absolutely	silent,	goes	into	samadhi,	reaches	the	fourth	stage,	he	is	not	body,	he
is	not	mind.	They	are	all	silent	-
-	he	is	far	above	them.	He	is	pure	consciousness.
This	pure	consciousness	is	universal,	 just	as	 this	 light	 in	all	 these	bulbs	is	one,
but	it	can	be	expressed	differently.	The	bulb	can	be	blue,	the	bulb	can	be	green,
the	bulb	can	be	red;	 the	shape	of	 the	bulb	can	be	different.	The	body/mind	are
still	there,	and	if	the	man	of	experience	wants	to	express	his	experience,	then	he
has	to	use	the	body/mind;	there	is	no	other	way.	And	his	body/mind	are	unique	--
only	he	has	that	structure,	nobody	else	has	that	structure.
So	 he	 has	 experienced	 the	 universal,	 he	 has	 become	 the	 universal,	 but	 to	 the
world,	 to	 the	 others,	 he	 is	 a	 unique	 individual.	 His	 expression	 is	 going	 to	 be
different	from	other	realized	people.	It	is	not	that	he	wants	to	be	different;	he	has
a	different	mechanism,	and	he	can	only	come	through	that	mechanism	to	you.
There	 have	 been	 enlightened	 painters.	 They	 have	 never	 spoken	 because	 word
was	not	their	art,	but	they	have	painted.	And	their	paintings	are	totally	different
from	 ordinary	 paintings,	 even	 of	 the	 great	 masters.	 Even	 the	 greatest	 master
painters	are	unconscious	people;	what	they	paint	reflects	their	unconsciousness.
But	if	a	realized	man	paints,	then	his	painting	has	a	totally	different	beauty.	It	is
not	only	a	painting,	it	is	a	message	too.	It	has	a	meaning	to	be	discovered.	The
meaning	has	been	given	in	code,	because	the	man	was	capable	only	of	painting,
so	his	painting	is	a	code.
You	 have	 to	 discover	 the	 code,	 and	 then	 the	 painting	 will	 reveal	 immense
meanings.	The	deeper	you	go	into	those	meanings,	the	more	and	more	you	will
find.	The	other	paintings	are	just	flat;	they	may	be	made	by	masters,	but	they	are
flat.	The	paintings	made	by	 a	 realized	man	 are	multidimensional,	 they	 are	 not
flat.	They	want	to	say	something	to	you.
If	the	man	is	a	poet,	like	Kabir,	then	he	sings,	and	his	poetry	is	his	expression.
If	 the	 man	 is	 articulate	 in	 speaking	 the	 unspeakable,	 then	 he	 speaks;	 but	 his
words	 will	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 impact.	 The	 same	 words	 are	 used	 by
everybody,	 but	 they	 don't	 have	 that	 impact	 because	 they	 don't	 carry	 the	 same
energy,	 they	don't	come	from	the	same	source.	A	man	of	experience	brings	his
words	 full	 of	 his	 experience	 --	 they	 are	 not	 dry,	 they	 are	 not	 the	words	 of	 an
orator	or	a	speaker.	He	may	not	know	the	art	of	speaking	but	no	orator	can	do
what	he	can	do	with	words.	He	can	transform	people	just	by	their	hearing	him.
Just	by	being	in	the	presence	of	him,	just	by	letting	his	words	rain	over	you,	you
will	feel	a	transformation	happening:	a	new	being	is	born	in	you,	you	are	reborn.
So	when	I	say	that	even	enlightened	people	have	individuality,	I	mean	that	they
remain	 unique	 --	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 have	 a	 unique	 body/mind
structure,	and	anything	that	comes	to	you	has	to	come	through	that	structure.
Buddha	speaks	in	one	way,	Mahavira	speaks	in	another	way.	Chuang	Tzu	speaks
in	absurd	stories	--	he	is	a	great	story-teller	--	but	his	stories,	side	by	side,	go	on
playing	 with	 your	 heart.	 The	 stories	 are	 so	 absurd	 that	 your	 mind	 cannot	 do
anything.	That's	 the	reason	why	he	has	chosen	 the	stories	 to	be	absurd,	so	 that
your	mind	cannot	come	in	between.	With	his	absurd	stories	he	stops	your	mind,
and	 then	his	presence	 is	 available	 to	you	and	 to	your	heart;	 you	can	drink	 the
wine	he	has	brought	for	you.	And	he	has	put	your	mind	away	by	telling	you	an
absurd	story.	The	mind	is	puzzled	and	is	not	functioning.
Many	people	 have	wondered	why	Chuang	Tzu	writes	 such	 absurd	 stories,	 but
nobody	has	been	able	 to	explain	 the	 fact	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	people
who	have	been	thinking	about	why	he	is	writing	the	stories	have	no	idea	that	it	is
a	 device	 to	 make	 the	 mind	 stop	 functioning	 --	 then	 you	 are	 available,	 fully
available	from	your	heart.	He	can	contact	you	in	that	way.
But	 Buddha	 cannot	 tell	 an	 absurd	 story.	 He	 uses	 parables,	 but	 they	 are	 very
meaningful.
He	does	not	want	to	avoid	the	mind...	these	are	the	uniquenesses	of	the	people.
He	 wants	 the	 mind	 to	 be	 convinced	 and	 then,	 through	 that	 conviction	 of	 the
mind,	he	wants	to	go	to	your	heart.	If	the	mind	is	convinced	it	gives	way.	And
Buddha's	 parables,	 his	 discourses,	 are	 all	 logical;	 the	 mind	 has	 to	 give	 way
sooner	or	later.
Different	masters...	For	example,	Jalaluddin	Rumi	did	nothing	but	whirling.	He
became	 enlightened	 after	 thirty	 six	 hours	 of	 continuous	whirling,	without	 any
stop	 --	 non-stop	whirling.	 In	 fact	 every	 child	 likes	 to	whirl.	 Parents	 stop	 him;
they	say,	"You	will	fall.	You	may	have	a	fit	or	you	may	get	hit	by	something	--
don't	do	such	a	thing."	But	all	children	all	over	the	world	love	whirling,	because
somehow	while	 the	 child	 is	 whirling	 he	 finds	 his	 center.	Without	 finding	 the
center	 you	 cannot	 whirl.	 The	 body	 goes	 on	 whirling,	 but	 the	 whirling	 has	 to
happen	on	a	center;	so	slowly,	slowly	he	becomes	aware	of	the	center.
After	 thirty-six	 hours	 of	 continuous	 whirling,	 Rumi	 became	 absolutely	 clear
about	 his	 center.	That	was	his	 experience	of	 the	ultimate,	 the	 fourth.	Then	his
whole	 life	 he	was	 not	 doing	 anything	 but	 teaching	whirling	 to	 people.	 It	 will
look	absurd	 to	a	Buddhist,	 it	will	 look	absurd	 to	any	other	 religion	 --	because,
what	you	can	get	out	of	whirling?	It	is	a	simple	method,	the	simplest	method,	but
it	may	suit	you	or	it	may	not.
For	example,	for	me	it	does	not	suit.	 I	cannot	sit	on	a	swing,	 that	 is	enough	to
create	 nausea	 in	 me.	 And	 what	 to	 say	 about	 sitting	 myself	 on	 a	 swing?	 --	 I
cannot	 see	 somebody	 else	 swinging!	 That	 is	 enough	 to	 give	 me	 a	 feeling	 of
nausea.	Now,	Rumi	is	not	for	me.
And	 there	may	be	many	people	 to	whom	whirling	will	 give	nausea,	 vomiting.
That	means	it	is	not	for	them.
We	are	individually	different.	And	there	is	no	contradiction.	One	can	experience
the	 universal,	 and	 yet	 when	 the	 question	 of	 expression	 arises,	 he	 has	 to	 be
individual.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	OTHER	MORNING	I	HEARD	YOU	SAYING	THAT	THE	SO-CALLED
SELF	IS
JUST	 AN	 IDEA	 OF	 THE	MIND,	 BECAUSE	 IT	 SEEMS	 HARD	 FOR	 THE
MIND	TO
ACCEPT	 THAT	 OUR	 BEING	 IS	 JUST	 PURE	 NOTHINGNESS,
SURPRISINGLY
CONTAINING	THE	WHOLE.	THEN	WHO	AND	WHAT	IS	THE	WITNESS
YOU
TALK	ABOUT	SO	MUCH?	IS	IT	A	MASTERLY	DEVICE	WHICH	HAS	TO
BE
DROPPED	AT	SOME	POINT?
It	 is.	Everything	 is	a	device,	because	 the	 truth	cannot	be	said.	So	only	devices
can	be	given.	You	have	to	be	convinced	about	the	devices,	but	they	will	have	to
be	dropped	at	 the	last	moment	--	but	 that	does	not	mean	that	you	have	to	drop
them	now!	Dropping	them	now	will	not	help;	now	you	have	to	use	them	to	their
utmost	possibility.	And	then	that	moment	will	come	by	itself...	when	the	device
has	reached	to	the	peak,	it	disappears	-
-	and	you	are	in	the	experience	of	the	fourth.
The	whole	problem	arises	because	the	truth	cannot	be	said,	so	something	has	to
be	devised	which	will	bring	you	to	truth.	And	the	device	has	to	be	such	that	 it
will	 not	 become	an	obstruction	 in	 itself.	So	 the	great	master	 is	 one	who	gives
you	 a	 device	 which	 is	 made	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 it	 is	 going	 to	 disappear
automatically,	autonomously,	the	moment	you	come	close	to	truth.
There	are	many	devices	which	are	good	but	dangerous,	because	they	can	become
obstacles.	For	example,	 I	 told	you	that	Patanjali	says	God	is	a	device.	Nobody
before	him	or	after	him	has	ever	said	that.	There	have	been	people	who	have	said
God	is	a	 truth,	and	there	have	been	people	who	have	said	 there	 is	no	God,	but
Patanjali's	attitude	is	totally	different	from	both.	He	is	not	a	theist,	he	is	not	an
atheist,	he	is	simply	a	scientific	mind.
He	 says	God	 is	 a	 hypothesis.	The	 fight	 about	 its	 existence	or	 non-existence	 is
baseless	--
you	 don't	 fight	 about	 any	 other	 hypothesis.	 But	 it	 is	 a	 dangerous	 hypothesis.
Even	in	the	life	of	a	man	like	Ramakrishna	it	became	an	obstacle.
So	the	device	is	not	going	to	leave	you	automatically	at	the	right	moment.	It	is
dangerous
--	it	will	cling,	it	will	obstruct	your	vision.	It	will	take	you	to	the	final	step,	but	it
won't	allow	you	to	take	it.	A	great	attachment	with	the	device	itself	will	become
the	barrier.
Ramakrishna	 was	 a	 devotee	 of	 the	mother	 goddess	 Kali,	 and	 not	 an	 ordinary
devotee,	 not	 formal;	 he	 really	 loved	 her.	 Sometimes	 from	 the	morning	 till	 the
evening	he	would	go	on	dancing	and	singing	in	the	temple.	And	sometimes	he
would	lock	the	temple	for	days	together	and	not	even	go	into	it.	It	was	reported...
because	the	temple	belonged	to	a	very	rich	woman,	Rani	Rasmani;	he	was	a	paid
servant,	he	was	the	priest.	People	said	that	it	is	not	right	that	for	a	few	days	the
temple	does	not	even	open.	Other	devotees	come	and	have	to	go	back	because
Ramakrishna	is	not	in	the	mood	to	open	the	doors.	And	sometimes	Ramakrishna
is	so	much	in	the	mood	that	the	devotees	get	tired...	When	you	go	into	a	temple
you	wait	for	prasad	--	the	food	that	is	offered	to	God	has	to	be	distributed	to	all
the	worshippers	who	are	 there.	 It	 is	 thought	 --	prasad	means	grace	 --	 that	 it	 is
God's	grace	and	his	gift.	So	people	wait	for	it;	but	how	long	can	they	wait?	This
man	 goes	 on	 dancing,	 singing,	 from	morning	 till	 evening...	 worshippers	 have
come	and	gone,	because	the	prasad	can	be	distributed	only	when	the	priest	has
stopped	worshipping.
And	all	priests	are	paid,	so	they	are	always	in	a	hurry.	In	fact	one	priest	will	go
to	many	temples,	so	he	can	get	salaries	from	all	those	temples;	so	he	is	in	such	a
hurry	 that	 he	 does	 as	 short	 a	 worship	 as	 is	 possible	 or	 acceptable,	 and
immediately	 distributes	 the	 prasad	 and	 runs	 to	 another	 temple.	 There	 are	 so
many	temples	in	India	that	a	priest	can	manage	five,	six	temples,	very	easily.	But
Ramakrishna	was	not	 such	a	priest;	he	was	 really	a	 lover.	To	him	 the	goddess
was	not	just	a	statue,	and	the	worship	was	not	just	a	ritual;	it	was	a	reality,	not	a
dream.
The	 owner	 of	 the	 temple,	 Rasmani,	 called	 him	 and	 asked	 him,	 "What	 is	 the
matter?	I	have	been	hearing	different	kinds	of	complaints	about	you.	One	is	that
sometimes	you	worship	the	whole	day.	In	what	scripture	is	this	written?"
Ramakrishna	 said,	 "I	 don't	 know	 any	 scripture,	 and	 I	 had	made	 it	 clear	 even
before	 you	 employed	me	 that	 I	 am	 uneducated.	 I	 don't	 know	 any	 scripture,	 I
know	 only	 devotional	 songs	 --	 so	 I	 sing.	 And	 to	 me	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
worshipping	for	a	certain	time.	Time	disappears	--	I	don't	have	any	idea.	Once	I
am	 in	 it,	 I	don't	know	when	 the	morning	has	become	evening.	So	 if	you	don't
want	me,	I	can	leave.	But	I	am	going	to	be	this	way."
Rasmani	 said,	 "This	 is	 not	 the	 only	 complaint	 --	 because	 this	 can	 be	 allowed.
The	whole	day	worshipping...	 there	 is	no	harm.	But	sometimes	you	don't	open
the	doors	of	the	temple."
He	said,	"That's	true.	Sometimes	I	get	angry	at	the	goddess.	I	love	her,	but	she
does	not	listen	to	me,	and	once	in	a	while	--	after	all,	I	am	a	human	being	--	I	get
cross,	so	I	say,	Òkay,	remain	closed	for	two,	three	days.	That	will	bring	you	to
your	senses.'	No	food,	no	worship!	But	if	you	have	any	trouble	with	this,	I	can
leave."
Rasmani	could	not	tell	him	to	leave	--	the	man	was	so	beautiful	and	so	authentic,
and	what	he	was	saying	had	a	beauty	of	its	own.	Even	not	opening	the	doors	was
part	 of	 a	 love	 affair,	 just	 the	 quarrel	 of	 lovers.	 She	 said,	 "Even	 that	 can	 be
allowed,	because	 I	want	you	 to	be	here.	But	one	 thing	 is	very	bad:	 I	hear	 that
before	offering	the	food	to	the	goddess	you	taste	every	sweet	yourself."
He	 said,	 "That's	 true,	 because	 my	 mother	 used	 to	 make	 these	 sweets"	 --	 and
Bengalis	make	 the	best	sweets	 in	 India	 --	"she	would	make	 them	and	 then	she
would	taste	them.	If	they	were	really	good	then	she	would	will	give	some	to	me,
give	some	to	my	father;	otherwise	not	--	she	would	make	them	again.	My	wife
prepares	 the	 sweets.	She	prevents	me,	 `This	 is	 not	 right.	First	 they	have	 to	 be
offered	 to	 the	 goddess	 and	 then	 they	 can	 be	 distributed.'	 But	 I	 cannot	 offer
anything	which	is	tasteless	or	is	not	made	well;	I	have	to	taste	them	first.	If	you
don't	want	it,	I	am	ready	to	go,	but	I	will	continue	in	the	same	way."
The	man	was	 very	 simple,	 and	what	 he	was	 saying	was	 a	 beautiful	 thing:	 he
cannot	offer	 to	 the	goddess	 something	 that	may	not	be	 the	best.	Only	 the	best
should	be	offered,	but	how	to	find	out?	--	one	has	to	taste	it.
He	worshipped	in	Dakshineswar,	near	Calcutta,	his	whole	life.	Towards	the	end
of	 his	 life,	 just	 a	 few	 years	 before	 he	 died,	 he	 told	 the	 goddess	 one	morning,
"Now	the	doctors	are	saying	that	I	have	cancer	of	the	throat.	It	is	not	growing	but
it	can	start	growing	any	moment,	and	before	I	die	I	want	to	experience	the	truth.
I	am	ready	and	I	will	do	everything:	I	will	dance	today	before	you,	sing	before
you."	In	every	temple	of	mother	Kali	there	always	hangs	a	big	sword,	because	in
the	past	that	sword	was	used	--	and	it	is	still	used	in	the	main	temple	of	Calcutta
--	to	cut	off	the	heads	of	animals	as	sacrifice.
Ramakrishna	was	not	doing	that,	but	the	sword	had	become	part	of	the	temple.
He	said,
"If	 by	 the	 evening	 I	 don't	 have	 the	 experience,	 I	 will	 take	 the	 sword	 and	 kill
myself	--	the	responsibility	will	be	yours."
A	 few	 worshippers	 were	 there.	 They	 rushed	 out	 and	 told	 everybody,	 "That
madman	is	going	to	do	something...	Now	this	is	too	much.	All	that	he	was	doing
before	was	okay,	but	now	he	is	going	to	kill	himself!"
A	great	 crowd	assembled	 in	 the	 temple,	 and	Ramakrishna	danced	madly,	 sang
madly,	 the	whole	day.	And	as	 the	sun	was	setting	he	pulled	out	 the	sword	and
said	to	the	goddess,
"So	I	am	going	to	cut	off	my	head	as	a	sacrifice	to	you.	Either	the	experience	--
or	my	head	will	be	at	your	 feet."	And	as	he	was	going	 to	cut	himself	with	 the
sword,	the	sword	fell	from	his	hands	and	he	fell	down	on	the	floor.	He	remained
there	 for	 six	 hours;	 to	 the	 outside	 world	 he	 was	 unconscious,	 but	 in	 his	 own
experience	he	was	in	samadhi,	in	a	beautiful	state,	utterly	silent	and	blissful.	And
after	six	hours	when	he	was	woken	up,	he	awoke	with	tears	and	he	said,	"Why
have	you	woken	me	up?	You	should	have	left	me	in	the	same	state."
Just	 a	 few	 days	 afterwards	 there	 was	 a	 master	 passing	 by	 who	 heard	 about
Ramakrishna,	 that	 he	 had	 a	 six-hour	 samadhi.	 The	master	 came.	Ramakrishna
was	a	very	humble	man;	he	touched	the	feet	of	the	master	and	said,	"Help	me,
because	I	attained	that	experience	but	it	was	only	for	six	hours	--	then	I	was	back
to	my	old	stage."
The	master	said,	"You	don't	understand,	it	was	not	a	real	experience.	You	forced
that	 experience	 upon	yourself	 by	your	 stubborness	 because	 you	were	 going	 to
kill	yourself.
After	dancing	the	whole	day	and	singing,	your	mind	simply	stopped,	seeing	the
situation
--	`The	man	is	going	to	kill	himself!'	It	had	nothing	to	do	with	Kali	or	anybody;
it	 was	 simply	 the	 stopping	 of	 the	 mind.	 And	 that	 experience	 was	 only	 an
experience	 of	when	mind	 is	 not	 chattering,	 and	 you	 feel	 immense	 silence	 and
beauty	and	joy.	If	you	really	want	the	ultimate	experience,	the	fourth,	then	you
will	have	 to	do	one	 thing	which	 is	very	hard,	 and	 that	 is	 to	 cut	 all	 attachment
with	the	mother	goddess.
That	is	your	problem.	You	have	passed	all	other	barriers,	but	now	this	last	barrier
is	the	most	difficult	because	you	have	staked	everything	on	her.	So	do	as	I	say:
you	sit	in	meditation,	close	your	eyes,	and	when	you	see	the	mother	Kali	arising
near	your	third	eye
--	which	is	going	to	happen..."
He	said,	"Yes,	it	happens.	Whenever	I	close	my	eyes	she	is	there."
So	he	said,	"That's	good.	That	is	the	moment...	this	time	you	are	not	to	cut	your
head;	take	the	sword	and	cut	the	mother	goddess	in	two	pieces."
Ramakrishna	said,	"My	God,	that	is	very	difficult!	I	cannot	hurt	her	--	and	you
are	telling	me	to	kill	her!"
But	the	man	said,	"Unless	you	do	it,	you	will	never	attain.	You	try	it	and	see."
He	would	close	his	eyes,	tears	would	flow	from	his	eyes,	and	there	was	great	joy
on	his	 face,	 and	 radiance.	He	would	open	his	 eyes,	 and	 the	master	would	ask,
and	he	would	say,
"Yes,	I	saw	her,	but	I	 forgot	all	about	killing	her	--	she	 is	so	beautiful,	and	the
attachment	is	so	long...	as	long	as	I	can	remember."	He	was	very	small	when	he
became	the	priest.
Two	or	three	times	he	tried.
The	master	 said,	 "This	 is	 the	 last	 time.	 If	you	cannot	do	 it,	 then	 I	will	do	 it.	 I
have	brought	this	piece	of	glass.	When	I	see	that	tears	have	started	flowing	from
your	eyes	 I	will	know	 that	you	are	 seeing	 the	mother	goddess.	 I	will	 cut	your
forehead	with	the	sharp	piece	of	glass	to	remind	you	that	this	is	the	time:	you	do
the	same,	cut	her	in	two	pieces.	It	is	just	your	idea	--	there	is	nobody	else.	It	is
just	a	hypothesis."
The	master	had	 to	cut	his	 forehead,	 and	 the	mark	 remained	 for	his	whole	 life.
Blood	 started	 flowing	 over	 his	 face,	 but	 deep	 inside	 he	 managed	 to	 gather
courage	and	cut	the	mother	goddess	in	two	pieces.	And	as	she	fell	in	two	pieces,
it	was	as	if	a	door	had	opened	and	the	whole	universe	was	his.
It	 took	six	days	for	him	to	come	back.	The	first	words	that	he	uttered	when	he
came	back	are	immensely	important.	He	said,	"The	last	barrier	has	fallen."
Any	device	can	become	a	barrier	too.	It	may	help	you	to	get	rid	of	other	things,
but	finally	you	have	to	get	rid	of	it	--	and	that	may	be	a	difficult	thing.	It	was	so
difficult	for	Ramakrishna.	And	that	was	the	last	day...	never	again	did	he	go	into
the	temple.
Afterwards	he	lived	three,	four	years;	he	simply	forgot	all	about	Kali.
But	there	are	devices	which	will	not	create	such	a	trouble,	and	there	are	devices
which	will	fall	automatically.	The	moment	when	you	are	reaching	to	the	climax
of	your	being	they	will	simply	fall	down.
I	call	a	master	a	great	master,	the	perfect	master,	who	creates	devices	which	are
going	to	fall	on	their	own	accord	when	the	moment	has	come	for	the	person	to
experience	 the	 ultimate.	Other	 devices	 are	 created	 by	 smaller	 people.	 Perhaps
they	don't	know	that	these	devices	can	become	attachments	themselves.
So	everything	I	say	is	a	device.	My	speaking	to	you	is	a	device	so	that	you	can
just	 be	here	 --	 your	mind	 is	 engaged,	 listening	 to	me,	 and	 something	 invisible
can	go	on	transpiring	between	me	and	your	hearts.	That's	the	real	thing.
The	words	will	help	the	mind	to	remain	engaged.	They	are	like	just	toys.	When
you	don't	want	children	to	disturb	you	--	you	are	studying	--	you	give	them	toys
and	 they	 start	 playing	with	 the	 toys,	 so	 you	 can	 do	 your	work	 or	 study	 or	 do
anything	you	want	to	do,	and	the	children	won't	come	to	you	to	bother	you	and
ask	you	questions	and	this	and	that.
The	mind	is	just	like	a	child.
The	words	are	just	toys	for	the	mind	--	not	truths,	but	simply	toys.	But	while	the
mind	is	engaged	something	can	happen	from	my	depth	to	your	depth.	You	may
not	 understand	 it,	 but	 it	will	 start	 bringing	 changes	 in	 you,	 transformations	 in
your	being.
Sometimes	simply	sitting	silently	with	me...	but	then	there	is	always	the	problem
that	 your	mind	will	 disturb	you.	 I	 have	 tried	 sitting	 in	 silence	with	you,	 and	 I
have	seen	that	the	problem	is,	I	can	reach	your	heart	less;	your	mind	is	disturbing
you	too	much.
Speaking	seems	to	be	a	better	device:	your	mind	remains	engaged,	and	once	in	a
while	 if	 I	give	a	gap	between	two	words,	 the	mind	does	not	disturb.	The	mind
simply	looks	and	waits:	"What	is	going	to	happen?	What	is	going	to	be	said?"
And	meanwhile	the	real	work	is	happening.
The	real	work	is	from	my	heart	to	your	heart.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#37
Chapter	title:	Each	moment	is	insecure
30	April	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8604305
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO37
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	 FEELS	 VERY	 DANGEROUS	 TO	ME,	 THE	WAY	 YOUR	 THERAPISTS
ARE
WORKING	AT	THE	MOMENT:	CLAIMING	TO	BE	ON	THE	SAME	LEVEL
AS
YOU	 ARE,	 AND	 DOING	 THE	 SAME	WORK.	 WHAT	 THEY	 SAY	 THEY
HAVE	TO
OFFER	 --	 FLYING	 SCHOOLS	 AND	 "FREEDOM"	 --	 SOUNDS	 VERY
APPEALING
TO	THE	EGO,	BUT	DOESN'T	SEEM	TO	HAVE	ANY	CONNECTION	WITH
YOUR
WORK.
I'M	CONCERNED	THAT	INNOCENT	PEOPLE,	WANTING	TO	BE	CLOSER
TO
YOU	AND	WANTING	SPIRITUAL	GUIDANCE,	WILL	PUT	THEIR	TRUST
IN
THESE	 PEOPLE	 WHO	 HAVE	 AUTHORITY	 AS	 YOUR	 CHOSEN
THERAPISTS.
WE	 SAW	 WITH	 SHEELA	 WHAT	 HAPPENS	 WITH	 THE	 MISUSE	 OF
WORLDLY
POWER.	THE	MISUSE	OF	SPIRITUAL	POWER	SEEMS	A	FAR	GREATER
MENACE	AS	IT	WORKS	WITH	PEOPLES'	VERY	BEINGS.
YOU	 HAVE	 ALWAYS	 SAID	 THAT	 THIS	 IS	 WHAT	 HAPPENS	 WHEN	 A
MASTER
LEAVES	HIS	BODY.	 IS	THERE	ANY	ADVICE	YOU	CAN	GIVE	NOW	SO
THAT
HISTORY	WILL	NOT	REPEAT	ITSELF	THIS	TIME?
The	unconscious	human	mind	is	the	cause	of	the	whole	trouble.
There	have	been	people	around	me	who	were	doing	all	kinds	of	things	--	there
were	doctors,	there	were	dentists,	there	were	plumbers,	there	were	carpenters	--
but	none	of	them	got	such	an	ego	as	the	people	who	were	working	as	therapists.
Therapy	basically	has	nothing	to	do	with	spirituality.	I	was	using	it	just	to	clean
the	rubbish	that	the	mind	has	gathered	down	the	ages.	The	work	of	the	therapist
with	me	was	exactly	that	of	cleaners,	nothing	superior	to	them	in	any	way.	But	in
the	West	therapy	has	connotations	of	spirituality	because	there	is	nothing	in	the
name	of	spirituality.	There	is	a	vacuum,	and	therapists	seem	to	fill	it.
It	 is	 only	 apparently	 so.	 They	 don't	 fill	 the	 gap,	 they	 cannot;	 they	 themselves
have	no	spiritual	experience.	All	 that	 they	know	are	certain	techniques	through
which	your	mind	can	be	cleaned.	But	even	that	cleaning	of	the	mind	makes	you
feel	 fresh	 only	 for	 a	 few	 days,	 because	 it	 does	 not	 change	 the	 base,	 the
foundation	 of	 your	 being;	 it	 simply	 cleans	 the	 surface.	 You	 remain	 the	 same
person.	You	will	again	collect	the	same	garbage,	so	therapy	will	be	needed	again
and	again	and	again.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 every	 other	 kind	 of	 psychotherapy,	 psychoanalysis,
analytical	 psychology	 --	 they	 are	 just	 different	 names.	 There	 is	 not	 a	 single
person	in	the	whole	world	that	psychologists	can	claim	is	purified	--	now	there	is
no	need	for	him	to	go	through	analysis,	therapy,	or	any	kind	of	processing.
Even	the	psychotherapists,	psychoanalysts	have	to	go	through	therapy,	analysis,
be	under	some	psychotherapist	once	in	a	while,	because	they	are	also	collecting
garbage.	In	fact	they	are	collecting	more	because	so	many	people	are	unloading
themselves	 in	 their	 therapy	 sessions,	 and	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 affect	 the	 therapist.
People	will	become	a	little	lighter,	but	the	therapist	will	become	a	little	heavier	--
he	will	need	therapy	himself.	This	is	a	vicious	circle.
My	 effort	 was	 to	 bring	 the	 West	 closer	 to	 the	 East.	 The	 East	 has	 developed
spiritual	techniques,	but	when	those	techniques	were	developed,	man	was	not	so
loaded	with	 knowledge,	 degrees,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	meaningless	 garbage.	Those
techniques	were	developed	for	innocent	people.
Now	the	situation	is	different:	if	you	give	those	techniques	directly	to	the	people,
the	people	are	so	loaded	that	in	their	garbage	your	techniques	will	be	lost.
My	understanding	was,	and	still	is,	that	therapy	can	be	a	good	beginning,	but	it	is
not	the	end,	it	is	not	the	answer.	It	can	clean	the	mind	only	for	a	short	period,	but
in	 that	 short	 period	 a	 spiritual	 technique	 can	 be	 introduced	 to	 you	 before	 the
mind	gets	loaded	again.
If	the	spiritual	technique	is	introduced	to	you,	then	that	garbage	is	not	going	to
disturb	 you;	 it	 cannot	 create	 confusion,	 and	 you	 do	 not	 need	 any	 therapy
anymore.	You	are	on	the	way	--	now	this	ordinary	garbage	cannot	prevent	you.
But	 if	you	are	 loaded	already,	 then	 to	 introduce	you	 to	a	 spiritual	 technique	 is
futile;	it	is	throwing	seed	onto	stones.	The	seed	is	not	going	to	live,	to	become	a
plant,	to	become	a	tree,	to	blossom.
So	I	was	using	these	therapies	just	for	the	moment	to	clean	the	ground	and	let	me
put	 in	 the	 seed.	 Then	 we	 are	 not	 worried	 about	 the	 garbage	 that	 you	 will	 be
collecting.	 The	 seed	 has	 enough	 force;	 once	 it	 has	 found	 its	 soil,	 there	 is	 no
problem.	It	will	bring	its	branches	and	foliage,	its	fruits	and	its	flowers,	in	spite
of	all	the	garbage	around	--	that	doesn't	matter.
But	 I	 was	 aware	 of	 the	 danger	 --	 that	 these	 therapists	 themselves	 have	 no
spirituality,	and	they	will	start	feeling	as	if	they	are	guides,	spiritual	guides;	as	if
they	are	helping	so	many	people	on	the	path.	It	is	so	easy	to	blow	your	ego	up
bigger	and	bigger.
These	 therapists	 came	 from	 the	West	 to	me	 because	 in	 the	West	 therapy	was
going	out	of	fashion.	People	were	tired,	because	what	is	the	point?	--	for	a	few
days	you	feel	great	and	then	come	the	dumps.	You	feel	worse	than	before.	Then
to	go	again	to	the	therapist	becomes	a	kind	of	addiction.
And	 there	 is	 no	 end	 to	 it.	 People	 go	 on	moving	 from	 one	 therapy	 to	 another
therapy	their	whole	life,	always	feeling,	"This	is	going	to	work."	And	it	seems	to
work	for	a	while,	but	it	does	not	change	anything	basic,	just	superficial	touches,
so	you	are	again	back	to	zero.
All	 these	therapists	had	failed	in	the	West;	nobody	was	coming	to	them.	When
they	came	to	me	they	had	no	need	to	search	for	clients:	thousands	of	sannyasins
were	 coming,	 and	 I	 wanted	 a	 certain	 synthesis	 between	 Western	 methods	 of
therapy	and	spiritual	growth,	so	I	allotted	them	the	work.
But	 these	 therapists	 forgot	 completely	 that	 the	 people	 had	 not	 come	 for	 their
therapies.	 In	 fact	 people	 were	 very	 unwilling	 to	 do	 their	 therapies;	 I	 had	 to
persuade	them.	But	slowly	people	started	understanding	the	fact	that	just	a	little
cleaning	helps	 to	 take	 a	 long	 jump	 into	meditation.	So	 the	people	who	passed
through	therapies	went	deeper	into	meditation	than	the	therapists.	The	therapists
were	going	deeper	into	their	egos.
The	therapists	were	not	meditating.	They	were	not	asking	questions,	because	to
ask	a	question	means	 that	you	are	 ignorant,	you	do	not	know	the	answer	 to	 it;
they	 were	 not	 even	 humble	 enough	 to	 ask	 a	 question.	 And	 they	 were	 happy,
tremendously	happy	 that	now	 there	was	no	burden	on	 them	of	 finding	people.
People	were	coming	by	themselves,	and	I	was	sending	them	to	their	therapies.
I	made	 them	great	 therapists.	 I	 tried	 to	 refine	 their	methods	 to	make	 them	 the
best	possible	therapists.	I	used	to	meet	every	therapy	group	and	ask	the	people
who	had	participated	how	they	were	feeling,	what	had	happened.	And	indirectly
--	 and	 the	 therapist	was	present	 --	 I	was	 suggesting	what	more	could	be	done,
what	should	have	been	done.	I	was	also	asking	the	therapist	what	difficulties	he
was	 finding,	 what	 problems	 were	 arising	 with	 people	 --	 in	 an	 indirect	 way,
because	I	don't	want	to	hurt	anybody,	even	by	giving	advice.
Through	the	years	I	had	worked	on	these	therapists	and	their	therapies,	and	they
started	 feeling	 that	 they	 had	 become	 kinds	 of	 gurus,	masters.	And	 deep	 down
there	 was	 great	 competition	 amongst	 them:	 Somendra	 left	 because	 of	 his
competition	with	Teertha	about	who	was	a	better	therapist	--	just	fights	of	egos.
Deep	down,	unconsciously,	they	must	be	thinking	that	sooner	or	later	I	will	have
to	die.
Teertha	had	taken	it	for	granted,	without	anybody	saying	it	 to	him,	that	he	was
going	to	be	my	successor.	Perhaps	he	was	spreading	the	idea	that	he	was	going
to	be	my	successor.
The	day	I	announced	in	the	commune	that	nobody	is	going	to	be	my	successor,
only	 two	 persons	were	 unhappy	 --	 and	 I	 looked	 at	 both	 the	 persons:	 one	was
Sheela	and	the	other	was	Teertha.	Everybody	was	happy,	rejoicing,	but	these	two
people	 were	 sad.	 That	 was	 their	 aim	 --	 perhaps	 not	 consciously,	 but
unconsciously.	That	was	the	beginning	of	Sheela	trying	to	destroy	the	commune
in	different	ways.
And	when	 the	American	 government...	Now	 all	 the	 governments	 of	 the	world
are	 together	 in	 a	 conspiracy	 against	 a	 single	 man;	 they	 have	 made	 me	 so
important,	so	powerful.	They	are	just	behaving	so	idiotically.	They	have	all	the
powers;	 I	 have	no	power,	 and	 they	 are	 all	 conspiring	 against	me.	Their	whole
effort	is	to	stop	me,	my	work,	not	to	let	me	settle	anywhere,	not	to	allow	another
commune	to	come	into	existence.
Our	therapists	are	immensely	happy,	seeing	the	opportunity	that	now	I	don't	have
a	commune,	and	every	government	is	against	me;	perhaps	I	will	not	find	a	place
anywhere	in	the	world.	This	is	a	great	chance	for	them.
And	all	the	sannyasins	are	in	a	state	of	vacuum,	so	these	therapists	are	trying	to
exploit	 that	 vacuum.	 Now	 they	 are	 telling	 people	 that	 they	 will	 teach	 them
freedom,	 they	 will	 teach	 them	 spirituality,	 they	 will	 teach	 them	 this	 and	 that;
their	whole	effort	is	not	to	miss	this	opportunity.
The	people	are	 in	a	need	because	suddenly...	 they	were	working,	growing,	and
the	 work	 has	 stopped.	 I	 am	 being	 prevented	 from	 every	 direction,	 so	 that	 I
cannot	 work.	 And	 the	 therapists	 are	 immensely	 happy:	 they	 have	 suddenly
become	 spiritual	 masters.	 They	 know	 nothing	 about	 spirituality,	 not	 even	 the
ABC.
But	there	is	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	They	can	only	talk	about	freedom,	and
that	 too	will	be	 just	a	 repetition	of	what	 they	have	heard	me	say	 to	you.	They
don't	have	anything	original	to	say,	anything	coming	out	of	their	own	experience,
so	they	can	only	talk.	Let	them	talk	--	the	talk	is	not	going	to	change	to	people.
And	soon	people	will	feel	that	these	therapists	are	just	exploiting	the	situation.
Meanwhile,	 somewhere	 we	 are	 going	 to	 create	 the	mystery	 school.	 Existence
cannot	be	so	uncompassionate	towards	a	man	who	has	been	working	simply	for
truth,	simply	for	existence.
My	trust	is	absolute.
These	governments	and	churches	don't	matter	at	all.	They	may	try	their	best,	but
the	mystery	school	will	be	established,	although	it	may	take	a	little	time,	a	little
trouble.	And	this	 time	things	will	be	done	in	a	 totally	different	way	so	nobody
gets	this	idea	of	gurudom.
History	will	not	be	repeated,	because	I	am	still	here.	I	know	all	those	therapists,
and	I	know	their	problems.	I	know	they	are	in	the	same	boat	as	their	clients;	they
are	not	in	any	way	of	superior	consciousness.	They	can	give	consultations,	they
can	help	people	 to	 some	clarity,	but	 that	 is	 from	 their	knowledge.	 In	 the	 same
situation	they	don't	have	that	clarity.
To	everybody	else	they	can	show	the	way	of	clarity:	it	is	very	easy	when	you	are
not	in	trouble.	You	can	simply	advise	anybody,	"It	is	simple.	Do	it	this	way."	The
real	 thing	 is,	when	 you	 are	 in	 the	 same	 trouble,	whether	 you	 have	 the	 clarity,
whether	you	are	capable	of	following	your	own	advice	--	and	those	therapists	are
not	capable	of	that.	So	there	is	no	harm.	Let	them	enjoy	a	few	days	of	glory.
They	are	not	 even	mentioning	my	name.	That	 is	 enough	proof	 that	 they	know
that	whatever	they	are	saying	and	doing	is	related	to	me,	and	if	they	mention	my
name	they	will	become	immediately	secondary.	And	for	the	first	time	they	have
got	the	chance	to	be	on	the	top.	With	me,	it	was	impossible.
So	 I	don't	 see	 that	 there	 is	any	problem.	 It	 is	good	 --	 let	 them	enjoy	 for	a	 few
days.	Their	enjoyment	is	not	going	to	last	long.	Soon	they	will	lose	the	people.
Once	 the	 mystery	 school	 starts	 functioning	 nobody	 is	 going	 to	 bother	 about
them.	Even	 they	 themselves	will	have	 to	come	 to	 the	mystery	school,	and	 this
time	 not	 as	 therapists	 but	 simply	 as	 disciples.	 There	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 any
therapy.	Now	the	school	will	function	in	a	totally	different	way.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	ARE	THE	QUALITIES	OF	A	MATURE	PERSON?
The	qualities	of	a	mature	person	are	very	strange.
First,	he	is	not	a	person.	He	is	no	more	a	self.	He	has	a	presence,	but	he	is	not	a
person.
Second,	he	is	more	like	a	child	--	simple	and	innocent.
That's	 why	 I	 said	 the	 qualities	 of	 a	 mature	 person	 are	 very	 strange,	 because
maturity	gives	a	sense	as	if	he	has	experienced,	as	if	he	is	aged,	old.	Physically
he	may	be	old,	 but	 spiritually	he	 is	 an	 innocent	 child.	His	maturity	 is	 not	 just
experience	gained	through	life.
Then	he	will	not	be	a	child,	 and	 then	he	will	not	be	a	presence;	he	will	be	an
experienced	person	--	knowledgeable	but	not	mature.
Maturity	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 your	 life	 experiences.	 It	 has	 something	 to	 do
with	your	inward	journey,	experiences	of	the	inner.
The	 more	 he	 goes	 deeper	 into	 himself,	 the	 more	 mature	 he	 is.	When	 he	 has
reached	the	very	center	of	his	being,	he	is	perfectly	mature.	But	at	that	moment
the	person	disappears,	only	presence	remains...
The	self	disappears,	only	silence	remains.
Knowledge	disappears,	only	innocence	remains.
To	me,	maturity	is	another	name	for	realization:	you	have	come	to	the	fulfillment
of	your	potential,	 it	 has	become	actual.	The	 seed	has	 come	on	a	 long	 journey,
and	has	blossomed.
Maturity	has	a	fragrance.	It	gives	a	tremendous	beauty	to	the	individual.	It	gives
intelligence,	 the	 sharpest	 possible	 intelligence.	 It	makes	 him	nothing	 but	 love.
His	action	is	love,	his	inaction	is	love;	his	life	is	love,	his	death	is	love.	He	is	just
a	flower	of	love.
The	West	has	definitions	of	maturity	which	are	very	childish.	The	West	means
by	maturity	that	you	are	no	longer	innocent,	that	you	have	ripened	through	life
experiences,	that	you	cannot	be	cheated	easily,	that	you	cannot	be	exploited,	that
you	have	within	you	something	like	a	solid	rock	--	a	protection,	a	security.
This	 definition	 is	 very	 ordinary,	 very	worldly.	Yes,	 in	 the	world	 you	will	 find
mature	 people	 of	 this	 type.	 But	 the	 way	 I	 see	 maturity	 is	 totally	 different,
diametrically	opposite	to	this	definition.	The	maturity	will	not	make	you	a	rock;
it	will	make	you	so	vulnerable,	so	soft,	so	simple.
I	 remember...	 a	 thief	 entered	 a	master's	 hut.	 It	 was	 a	 full-moon	 night,	 and	 by
mistake	he	had	entered;	otherwise,	what	can	you	find	in	a	master's	house?	The
thief	was	looking,	and	was	amazed	that	there	was	nothing.	And	then	suddenly	he
saw	a	man	who	was	coming	with	a	candle	in	his	hand.
The	man	said,	"What	are	you	looking	for	in	the	dark?	Why	did	you	not	wake	me
up?	 I	was	 just	 sleeping	 near	 the	 front	 door,	 and	 I	 could	 have	 showed	 you	 the
whole	house."
And	the	man	looked	so	simple	and	so	innocent,	as	if	he	could	not	conceive	that
anybody	could	be	a	thief.
Before	his	 simplicity	and	 innocence,	 the	 thief	 said,	 "Perhaps	you	do	not	know
that	I	am	a	thief."
The	master	said,	"That	doesn't	matter,	one	has	to	be	someone.	The	point	is	that	I
have	been	in	the	house	for	thirty	years	and	I	have	not	found	anything,	so	let	us
search	together!
And	if	we	can	find	something,	we	can	be	partners.	I	have	not	found	anything	in
this	house	--	it	is	just	empty."
The	thief	was	a	little	afraid	--	the	man	seems	to	be	strange.	Either	he	is	mad	or...
who	 knows	 what	 kind	 of	 man	 he	 is?	 He	 wanted	 to	 escape,	 because	 he	 had
brought	things	from	two	other	houses	that	he	had	left	outside	the	house.
The	master	had	only	one	blanket	--	that	was	all	that	he	had	--	and	it	was	a	cold
night,	 so	 he	 told	 that	 thief,	 "Don't	 go	 this	 way,	 don't	 insult	 me	 this	 way;
otherwise	 I	will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 forgive	myself,	 that	 a	 poor	man	 came	 to	my
house	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 and	 had	 to	 go	 empty-handed.	 Just	 take	 this
blanket.	And	it	will	be	good	--	outside	it	is	so	cold.
I	am	inside	the	house;	it	is	warmer	here."
He	 covered	 the	 thief	with	 his	 blanket.	 The	 thief	was	 just	 losing	 his	mind!	He
said,	"What	are	you	doing?	I	am	a	thief!"
The	 master	 said,	 "That	 does	 not	 matter.	 In	 this	 world	 everybody	 has	 to	 be
somebody,	 has	 to	 do	 something.	 You	 may	 be	 stealing;	 that	 doesn't	 matter,	 a
profession	is	a	profession.
Just	do	it	well,	with	all	my	blessings.	Do	it	perfectly,	don't	be	caught;	otherwise
you	will	be	in	trouble."
The	thief	said,	"You	are	strange.	You	are	naked	and	you	don't	have	anything!"
The	master	 said,	 "Don't	 be	worried,	 because	 I	 am	 coming	with	 you!	Only	 the
blanket	was	keeping	me	in	this	house;	otherwise	in	this	house	there	is	nothing	--
and	 the	 blanket	 I	 have	 given	 to	 you.	 I	 am	 coming	 with	 you	 --	 we	 will	 live
together.	And	 you	 seem	 to	 have	many	 things;	 it	 is	 a	 good	 partnership.	 I	 have
given	my	all	to	you.	You	can	give	me	a	little	bit	--	that	will	be	right."
The	thief	could	not	believe	it.	He	just	wanted	to	escape	from	that	place	and	from
that	man.	He	said,	"No,	I	cannot	take	you	with	me.	I	have	my	wife,	I	have	my
children,	and	my	neighbors,	what	will	 they	say?	 --	 `You	have	brought	a	naked
man!'"
He	said,	"That's	right.	I	will	not	put	you	in	any	embarrassing	situation.	So	you
can	 go,	 I	 will	 remain	 in	 this	 house."	 And	 as	 the	 thief	 was	 going,	 the	 master
shouted,	 "Hey!	Come	back!"	The	 thief	had	never	heard	such	a	 strong	voice;	 it
went	just	like	a	knife.	He	had	to	come	back.	The	master	said,	"Learn	some	ways
of	courtesy.	I	have	given	you	the	blanket	and	you	have	not	even	thanked	me.	So
first,	thank	me	--	it	will	help	you	a	long	way.
Secondly,	going	out	--	you	opened	the	door	when	you	came	in	--	close	the	door!
Can't	you	see	 the	night	 is	 so	cold,	and	can't	you	see	 that	 I	have	given	you	 the
blanket	and	 I	 am	naked?	Your	being	a	 thief	 is	okay,	but	as	 far	 as	manners	are
concerned,	I	am	a	difficult	man.	I	cannot	tolerate	this	kind	of	behavior.	Say	thank
you!"
The	thief	had	to	say,	"Thank	you,	sir,"	and	he	closed	the	door	and	escaped.	He
could	not	believe	what	had	happened!	He	could	not	sleep	the	whole	night.	Again
and	again	he	remembered...	he	had	never	heard	such	a	strong	voice,	such	power.
And	the	man	had	nothing!
He	enquired	the	next	day	and	he	found	out	that	this	was	a	great	master.	He	had
not	done	well	--	it	was	absolutely	ugly	to	go	to	that	poor	man;	he	had	nothing.
But	he	was	a	great	master.
The	thief	said,	"That	I	can	understand	myself	--	that	he	is	a	very	strange	kind	of
man.	 In	my	whole	 life	 I	 have	 been	 coming	 in	 contact	 with	 different	 kinds	 of
people,	 from	 the	 poorest	 to	 the	 richest,	 but	 never...	 even	 remembering	 him,	 a
shivering	goes	through	my	body.
"When	he	called	me	back	 I	 could	not	 run	away.	 I	was	absolutely	 free,	 I	 could
have	taken	the	things	and	run	away,	but	I	could	not.	There	was	something	in	his
voice	that	pulled	me	back."
After	a	few	months	 the	 thief	was	caught,	and	in	 the	court	 the	magistrate	asked
him,	"Can	you	name	a	person	who	knows	you	in	this	vicinity?"
He	said,	"Yes,	one	person	knows	me"	--	and	he	named	the	master.
The	magistrate	 said,	 "That's	 enough	 --	 call	 the	master.	His	 testimony	 is	worth
that	 of	 ten	 thousand	 people.	What	 he	 says	 about	 you	 will	 be	 enough	 to	 give
judgment."
The	magistrate	asked	the	master,	"Do	you	know	this	man?"
He	said,	"Know	him?	We	are	partners.	He	is	my	friend.	He	even	visited	me	one
night	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	It	was	so	cold	that	I	gave	him	my	blanket.	He	is
using	 it,	 you	 can	 see.	 That	 blanket	 is	 famous	 all	 over	 the	 country;	 everybody
knows	it	is	mine."
The	magistrate	said,	"He	is	your	friend?	And	does	he	steal?"
The	master	said,	"Never!	He	can	never	steal.	He	is	such	a	gentleman	that	when	I
gave	him	the	blanket	he	said	to	me,	`Thank	you,	sir.'	When	he	went	out	of	 the
house,	he	silently	closed	the	doors.	He	is	a	very	polite,	nice	fellow."
The	magistrate	said,	"If	you	say	so,	then	all	the	testimonies	of	the	witnesses	who
have	said	that	he	is	a	thief	are	cancelled.	He	is	freed."	The	master	went	out	and
the	thief	followed	him.
The	master	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	Why	are	you	coming	with	me?"
He	said,	"Now	I	can	never	leave	you.	You	have	called	me	your	friend,	you	have
called	me	your	partner.	Nobody	has	ever	given	me	any	respect.	You	are	the	first
person	who	has	said	 that	 I	am	a	gentleman,	a	nice	person.	 I	am	going	 to	sit	at
your	feet	and	learn	how	to	be	like	you.	From	where	have	you	got	this	maturity,
this	power,	this	strength,	this	seeing	of	things	in	a	totally	different	way?"
The	master	said,	"Do	you	know	that	night	how	bad	I	felt?	You	had	gone;	it	was
so	cold.
Without	a	blanket	sleep	was	not	possible.	I	was	just	sitting	by	the	window	seeing
the	full	moon,	and	I	wrote	a	poem:	Ìf	I	was	rich	enough	I	would	have	given	this
perfect	 moon	 to	 that	 poor	 fellow,	 who	 had	 come	 in	 the	 dark	 to	 search	 for
something	in	a	poor	man's	house.	I	would	have	given	the	moon	if	I	had	been	rich
enough,	but	I	am	poor	myself.'	I	will	show	you	the	poem,	come	with	me.
"I	wept	 that	night,	 that	 thieves	 should	 learn	a	 few	 things.	At	 least	 they	 should
inform	a	day	or	two	ahead	when	they	come	to	a	man	like	me,	so	we	can	arrange
something,	so	they	don't	have	to	go	empty-handed.
"And	 it	 is	good	 that	you	 remembered	me	 in	 the	court;	otherwise	 those	 fellows
are	dangerous,	they	may	have	mistreated	you.	I	offered	that	very	night	to	come
with	you	and	be	partners	with	you,	but	you	refused.	Now	you	want...	There	is	no
problem,	 you	 can	 come.	Whatever	 I	 have	 I	will	 share	with	 you.	 But	 it	 is	 not
material:	it	is	something	invisible."
The	thief	said,	"That	I	can	feel	--	it	is	something	invisible.	But	you	have	saved
my	life,	and	now	it	is	yours.	Make	whatever	you	want	to	make	of	it.	I	have	been
simply	wasting	it.	Seeing	you,	looking	in	your	eyes,	one	thing	is	certain	--	that
you	can	transform	me.	I	have	fallen	in	love	from	that	very	night."
Maturity	to	me	is	a	spiritual	phenomenon.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
OFTEN	I	HEAR	YOU	SAYING	THAT	WE	CAN	WAKE	UP	ANY	MOMENT.
YOUR
WORDS,	 AND	 HOW	YOU	 SAY	 THEM,	 THRILL	ME	 SO	MUCH	 THAT	 I
OFTEN
START	SHAKING.	WHAT	IS	REALLY	PREVENTING	ME	FROM	WAKING
UP?	IS
THE	 UNCONSCIOUS	 REALLY	 SO	 MIGHTY?	 DO	 I	 NEED	 MORE	 AND
MORE	DRY
CLEANING?
The	unconscious	is	certainly	very	powerful	and	immense.	It	is	your	whole	past,
from	 the	 very	 beginning.	 All	 that	 has	 happened	 in	 existence	 is	 part	 of	 your
unconscious.	 It	 is	 as	 long	 and	 infinite	 as	 your	 past	 --	 but	 so	 is	 your
superconscious.	 It	 is	 as	 long	and	as	 infinite	 as	your	 future.	You	are	 just	 in	 the
middle	--	you	are	always	in	the	middle.
The	 past	 is	 very	 powerful	 because	 it	 has	 already	 happened,	 so	 it	 has	 left	 its
marks	on	you.
The	 future	 is	 not	 so	 powerful	 because	 it	 has	 not	 happened	 yet;	 it	 is	 only	 a
possibility.	The	past	is	a	reality;	it	is	a	history.	Your	unconscious	is	your	history,
and	tremendously	vast;	your	superconscious,	which	means	awakening,	is	only	a
probability.	You	can	go	on	postponing	it.
And	that's	what	your	past	manages	to	do.	It	goes	on	telling	you	the	idea	is	good	-
-	 one	 has	 to	 wake	 up,	 you	 have	 to	 try	 it	 --	 but	 all	 these	 are	 the	 ways	 of
postponing.	The	past	goes	on	questioning	how	to	wake	up.	The	idea	is	appealing,
but	how	 to	wake	up?	That	 "how"	 is	 also	a	way	of	postponing.	So	when	 I	 say,
"Wake	 up!"	 something	 in	 your	 superconscious	 gets	 stirred	 and	 a	 thrill	 goes
through	you.
The	unconscious	is	a	very	thick	wall,	but	it	cannot	prevent	you	from	waking;	it
can	only	postpone	it	--	and	that	too	depends	how	deeply	you	are	listening	to	me,
whether	 you	 are	 only	 hearing	 or	 listening.	 And	 remember	 the	 distinction
between	these	two	words.
Hearing	is	simple,	everybody	who	has	ears	can	hear,	but	listening	is	something
more	 than	 hearing.	 Listening	 means	 hearing	 without	 your	 mind	 coming	 in
between,	 interpreting,	 meddling,	 giving	 colors	 of	 its	 own	 to	 what	 you	 have
listened	 to,	 bringing	 connotations,	 associations	 from	 your	 past	 --	 that	 is,	 from
your	unconscious.
When	 I	 say,	 "Wake	 up!"	 I	 have	 one	meaning.	 If	 you	 hear	 it	 you	may	 have	 a
different	meaning,	but	if	you	listen	to	it	then	you	will	have	the	same	meaning	as
I	have.	Listening	means	putting	the	mind	aside,	so	what	 is	being	transferred	to
you	goes	directly	to	your	very	heart,	to	your	very	being.
Then	perhaps	you	can	wake	up	any	moment.	Any	small	thing	may	trigger	it.	It	is
unpredictable;	one	cannot	say	when,	one	cannot	say	what	will	help.	I	can	only	go
on	explaining	 in	different	ways	so	 the	meaning	of	waking	gathers	around	you.
Then	ANYTHING...
People	have	become	enlightened,	awakened,	 in	strange	situations	--	 there	is	no
causal	 relationship.	 Lao	Tzu	 became	 enlightened	when	 he	was	 sitting	 under	 a
tree	and	a	dry	leaf	started	falling	from	the	tree.	There	was	no	strong	wind	so	the
leaf	was	falling	very	slowly,	like	a	feather,	and	he	simply	watched	it	falling.	And
as	it	rested	on	the	ground,	something	happened	in	him	which	had	nothing	to	do
with	the	leaf.
He	simply	saw	the	way	of	the	leaf,	its	let-go	--	no	effort	to	cling	a	little	longer
with	the	tree.	It	had	been	with	the	tree	its	whole	life,	but	not	even	a	look	back,	no
hurry	to	reach	anywhere,	just	a	tremendous	let-go,	that	wherever	the	wind	takes
it...	A	great	trust.	All	these	things,	with	the	dropping	of	the	dry	leaf,	happened	in
Lao	Tzu.	From	that	day	he	was	a	different	man.
The	master	can	only	do	one	thing:	he	can	go	on	spinning	around	you	meanings
of	a	 thousand	kinds.	Perhaps	one	of	 them	may	 trigger	 the	process,	but	nothing
can	be	said	about	what	was	 the	 trigger;	 it	depends	on	so	many	things	 that	 it	 is
unpredictable.	But	howsoever	big	the	unconscious	may	be,	its	value	is	nothing.
Waking	 up,	 even	 for	 a	 single	 moment,	 has	 tremendous	 value,	 and	 remaining
awakened	you	have	become	an	emperor	in	existence.
To	live	unconsciously	is	to	be	just	a	beggar.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	IS	AN	OLD	SAYING	THAT,	"YOU	ARE	WHAT	YOU	EAT."	BUT	IN
CALIFORNIA	IT'S,	"YOU	ARE	WHAT	YOU	DRIVE,"	IN	ITALY	IT'S,	"YOU
ARE
WHAT	YOU	WEAR,"	AND	IN	FRANCE,	"YOU	ARE	WHAT	YOU	DRINK."
THE	OTHER	DAY	SOMEONE	SAID,	"YOU	ARE	WHAT	YOU	ARE,"	AND
THEN	I	THOUGHT,	"YOU	AREN'T	WHO	YOU	THINK	YOU	ARE."	OSHO,
I'M	GETTING
CONFUSED	--	WHO	ARE	I?
You	simply	are	not!
Don't	 get	 confused,	 because	 there	 is	 nobody.	All	 these	 definitions	 are	 a	 futile
exercise	because	it	 is	defining	something	which	does	not	exist.	You	are	not,	so
no	definition	can	define	you.	Your	nothingness	 is	your	 indefinability.	 It	makes
you	infinite,	it	makes	you	eternal,	it	makes	you	part	of	the	unknowable	mystery
of	existence.
Anything	that	can	be	defined	is	worthless.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
THOSE	OF	US	WHO	HAVE	THE	GOOD	FORTUNE	TO	BE	WITH	YOU	ON
YOUR
VISITS	 TO	 VARIOUS	 COUNTRIES	 OVER	 THE	 PAST	 FEW	 MONTHS
HAVE	HAD
WITH	 US	 CONSTANTLY	 THE	 REMINDER	 OF	 HOW	 PRECIOUS	 OUR
TIME	WITH
YOU	 IS.	 IT	 HAS	 BEEN	 IMPOSSIBLE	 TO	 SLIP	 INTO	 COMPLACENCY
AND
IMAGINE	THAT	YOU	WILL	BE	WITH	US	INDEFINITELY.
LIVING	 IN	 SUCH	 INSECURITY	 COULD	 SEND	 US	 INTO	 A	 PANIC	 --	 A
SELF-DEFEATING	 REACTION	 BECAUSE	 IT	 RENDERS	 US
UNAVAILABLE	TO	THOSE
MOMENTS	WE	DO	HAVE	WITH	YOU.	THE	ALTERNATIVE	IS	TO	RIDE
ON	THE
UNCERTAINTY	WE	LIVE	WITH	TO	SHARPEN	OUR	AWARENESS	AND
SOFTEN
OUR	HEARTS,	AND	THUS	BE	MORE	OPEN	TO	YOU	THAN	WE	HAVE
EVER
BEEN.
I	SEE	YOU	--	WHO	REPRESENT	EVERYTHING	OF	VALUE	TO	BE
CONTRIBUTED	TO	THE	WORLD,	WHO	ARE	THE	MOST	MAGNIFICENT
EXPRESSION	 OF	 EXISTENCE'S	 FULFILLMENT	 --	 ACCEPT	 WITH
GRACE	AND
DIGNITY	 AND	 HUMOR	 WHATEVER	 THAT	 SAME	 EXISTENCE
ORDAINS.
THEN	 HOW	CAN	 I	 BE	 ANYTHING	 BUT	 GRACIOUS,	 AND	GRATEFUL
FOR
WHAT	HAS	BEEN,	FOR	WHAT	IS	RIGHT	NOW,	AND	FOR	WHAT	MIGHT
BE	IN
THE	FUTURE,	EVEN	IF	IT	IS	NOT	OF	OUR	CHOOSING?
It	is	a	great	opportunity	for	you	all.
I	have	been	saying	my	whole	life	 that	we	are	all	 living	in	insecurity.	You	have
listened	to	it,	you	thought	you	had	understood	it,	but	it	was	not	the	case.
Now	it	is	the	reality.	I	need	not	even	say	to	you	that	each	moment	is	insecure.
In	 fact	 that's	how	 it	 is	 always.	All	 these	 stupid	governments	have	 just	made	 it
more	clear	to	you	that	each	moment	is	uncertain,	insecure;	you	cannot	take	me
for	granted.
But	this	has	not	to	make	you	afraid,	to	panic,	to	be	sad,	to	be	worried,	because
all	those	things	will	not	change	the	insecurity.	All	those	things	will	simply	make
you	forget	the	insecurity,	and	they	will	help	you	to	miss	the	present	moment	--
which	you	have	got	already,	which	is	secure.	The	next	moment	may	be	insecure.
So	I	would	like	to	say	to	you:	use	the	moment	that	is	secure	to	the	fullest,	and
don't	be	bothered	with	the	next	moment;	it	is	always	insecure.	In	our	situation	it
has	 become	more	 apparent.	And	 it	 is	 good	 that	 it	 has	 become	more	 apparent.
That	will	throw	you	into	the	present	moment;	otherwise	one	can	be	sleepy.	One
knows	tomorrow	is	there.
But	 in	 the	 situation	 in	 which	 we	 are,	 tomorrow	 is	 not	 certain;	 anything	 can
happen	 tomorrow.	 But	 don't	 panic,	 because	 that	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change	 the
situation.	That	is	simply	missing	the	opportunity.
And	 I	 can	 understand,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 live	 in	 such	 insecurity.	 But	 this	 is	 the
reality,	it	is	not	a	special	case.	The	whole	world	is	living	in	the	same	insecurity,
only	they	are	not	in	such	a	situation	where	the	insecurity	is	so	clear	that	there	is
no	 need	 to	 say	 anything	 about	 it.	 It	 is	 there;	 it	 is	 everywhere.	 There	 is	 no
distinction	at	all,	no	differentiation,	only	you	are	 fortunate	because	you	cannot
miss	 this	moment.	 You	 know	 tomorrow	 I	may	 be	 taken	 away	 from	 you.	 You
cannot	afford	to	miss	this	moment;	this	is	all	you	have	got,	so	you	have	to	drink
of	me.
Coming	here	 and	going	 from	here	 I	 pass	 a	 room	 in	which	 there	 is	 a	 beautiful
carving	of	The	Last	Supper.	Jesus	and	his	followers	must	be	in	a	deep	insecurity
--	tomorrow	anything	is	possible.	But	you	are	even	more	in	insecurity,	because
they	knew	what	was	going	 to	happen	 tomorrow.	 It	was	well	 known	 that	 Jesus
would	be	crucified;	hence	this	was	the	last	supper	with	the	master.	They	would
not	be	eating	with	him	again.	So	in	a	way	it	was	not	so	insecure;	it	was	certain	--
tomorrow	he	is	going	to	be	crucified.	There	was	a	certainty.
Even	that	certainty	is	not	here.	Anything	can	happen	tomorrow	--	to	me,	to	you.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 I	 know	 that	 this	 is	 something	 that	 was	 bound	 to
happen.	Sooner	or	later	the	whole	world	was	going	to	be	against	me,	because	I
was	fighting	against	the	whole	rotten	world.
It	is	a	wonder	that	they	tolerated	so	much.	They	can	destroy	me	very	easily,	they
can	shoot	me,	but	they	are	afraid:	if	they	kill	me	then	they	will	make	the	biggest
religion	in	the	world	ever.	Jesus	had	only	a	dozen	followers	but	his	crucifixion
gained	so	many	sympathizers	--	 if	 they	kill	me	it	will	go	against	 them,	so	they
cannot	kill	me.
All	they	want	is	to	cripple	me,	to	create	such	a	situation	that	I	cannot	enter	any
country,	that	people	cannot	come	to	meet	me,	that	I	am	isolated	from	the	news
media,	 that	 the	people	who	are	working	 for	me	get	 tired,	harassed	so	much	so
that	they	start	thinking,
"This	 is	 too	much,"	 so	 the	whole	work	 stops...	 because	 I	 cannot	 do	 the	whole
work.	The	work	can	stop,	and	I	can	be	isolated,	because	if	they	close	the	doors
of	all	the	countries	wherever	I	go,	if	they	start	closing	the	doors	there...
Now	 they	 are	 doing	 it	 here.	And	 I	 am	 amazed:	 I	 had	 never	 thought	 that	 even
departments	of	 justice	are	nothing	but	cunning	politicians.	They	arrested	me	in
North	 Carolina	 without	 any	 arrest	 warrant.	 They	 would	 not	 tell	 me	 even	 the
reason	why	they	were	arresting	me	--
which	 is	absolutely	 illegal.	They	would	not	allow	me	to	 inform	my	attorney	--
which	is	unheard	of	in	a	democracy.	And	finally	they	could	not	prove	the	case;
they	could	not	prove	anything	against	me.	They	 released	 the	people	who	were
with	me	--	three	were	simply	dismissed	because	they	were	in	a	different	plane,
and	the	three	who	were	with	me	were	released	on	bail	for	seventy-five	thousand
dollars.
Just	 yesterday	we	 received	 a	 letter	 from	 the	 attorney-general's	 office,	with	 the
seal	 of	 the	 department	 of	 justice,	 and	 it	 is	 such	 a	 cunning	 letter	 --	 one	 cannot
imagine!	 Seeing	 that	 they	 are	 going	 to	 fail	 completely,	 they	 have	 nothing	 to
prove,	they	want	to	drop	the	case.
They	harassed	me	for	twelve	days;	they	took	the	personal	things	of	all	the	people
who	were	on	the	plane	and	they	have	not	released	those	things.	And	seeing	that
they	cannot	prove	anything	--	they	don't	have	anything	--	they	want	to	drop	the
case.	But	dropping	 the	case	meant	 that	 they	would	have	 to	 return	 the	 seventy-
five	thousand	dollars	deposited	for	bail	for	three	persons	--	because	if	there	is	not
going	to	be	any	trial	and	you	are	dropping	the	case,	then	that	money	should	be
returned.	Why	should	that	money	be	kept?
But	 you	 can	 see	 the	 greed	 and	 cunningness...	 They	 did	 not	want	 to	 return	 the
money	and	they	wanted	to	drop	the	case.	So	with	the	magistrate's	seal,	what	they
did	was	they	claimed	that	they	had	called	these	three	witnesses	and	they	did	not
appear	 in	 the	 court;	 hence	 their	 deposits	 of	 seventy-five	 thousand	 dollars	 are
confiscated	by	the	government,	and	the	case	is	dropped.
They	 never	 informed	 us	 that	 there	 was	 any	 hearing,	 and	 they	 don't	 have	 any
proof	 that	we	have	 refused.	Our	people	were	 ready	 to	go	and	we	were	asking,
our	attorneys	were	asking	continually,	"When	is	the	date?"	They	never	told	our
attorneys,	never	informed	us.	Even	courts	--	federal	courts	--	are	lying	that	they
informed	us,	and	because	we	did	not	appear	in	the	court	we	have	lost	the	money.
And	they	don't	even	mention	the	personal	effects	--
which	 are	worth	 nearabout	 three	million	dollars.	They	have	not	 returned	 them
either.
They	 have	 sent	 the	 letter	 here.	 About	 me,	 they	 say	 that	 they	 don't	 have	 any
charges	against	me,	but	for	the	future	they	cannot	say	anything.	If	I	assassinate
any	U.S.	official,	 then	 there	will	be	charges	against	me.	And	 they	say	because
one	 of	 my	 sannyasins	 has	 attempted	 murder	 or	 assassination,	 then	 there	 is	 a
possibility....	They	don't	name	the	person.	It	is	Sheela.
I	exposed	her.	I	invited	the	government,	I	told	the	government	all	the	crimes	that
she	 had	 committed,	 and	 now	 they	 are	 associating	 her	 with	 me	 --	 as	 if	 one
Christian	murders	and	that	means	the	pope	is	responsible.	Out	of	five	thousand
sannyasins	in	a	commune,	if	one	sannyasin	commits	some	crime,	that	does	not
mean	that	I	become	a	possible	candidate	for	doing	the	same	thing.
And	strangely	enough,	it	simply	says,	"U.S.	official."	If	I	kill	some	U.S.	citizen,
then	what?	According	to	that	letter	I	am	free	to	kill	U.S.	citizens	--	that	will	not
be	a	charge	against	me	--	only	it	should	not	be	a	U.S.	official!
It	seems	so	stupid	--	either	you	should	state	a	whole	 list	of	all	possible	crimes
that	a	man	can	commit,	or	you	should	not	state	even	a	single	crime.	You	don't
have	any	charges	against	me	right	now.	You	could	have	simply	said,	"We	don't
have	any	pending	charges	against	him."	That's	enough.	Who	is	saying	that	 this
means	that	in	future	if	I	murder	your	president	you	will	not	have	charges	against
me?
But	now	that	you	have	said	that	if	I	assassinate	some	U.S.	official	then	there	will
be	charges,	that	means	I	can	assassinate	anybody	else	--	just	he	should	not	be	a
U.S.	official.
Including	this	one	class	makes	me	free	to	commit	any	crime,	and	you	cannot	put
any	charges	against	me;	otherwise,	why	did	you	not	include	it	in	the	letter?
But	just	to	create	a	fear,	a	paranoia...	Before	the	letter	reached	us,	it	went	to	the
president,	and	he	has	become	shaky,	afraid.
And	 these	people	belong	 to	 the	 same	 race	 --	 the	politicians.	They	 think	 in	 the
same	way.
Their	parties	may	be	different,	 their	countries	may	be	different,	but	 their	basic
reasoning	is	the	same.	If	they	see	that	America	is	afraid,	being	such	a	big	power,
then	a	small	country	like	this	should	not	take	the	risk.
Germany	 is	 insisting	 to	 this	 government,	 to	 every	 government,	 that	 I	 am	 a
dangerous	man.	It	is	not	wrong,	but	the	meaning	they	give	to	"dangerous	man"...
perhaps	I	will	kill	their	president	or	create	a	terrorist	movement	or	start	throwing
bombs	 on	 people	 and	 hijacking	 their	 airplanes.	 What	 do	 they	 mean	 by
"dangerous	man"?
One	man	in	Spain,	a	famous	novelist,	was	very	much	interested	in	me	because
he	has	read	a	few	of	my	books	which	have	been	translated	into	Spanish.	He	was
working	for	one	month	continuously	for	me	to	go	to	Spain,	and	he	is	well-known
in	the	whole	Spanish	speaking	world,	well	respected,	even	by	the	politicians.	He
was	talking	to	the	president,	to	the	prime	minister,	to	the	royal	family,	and	they
were	all	willing	for	me	to	come	there.
Then	these	letters	from	America,	from	Germany,	from	Greece,	from	Italy,	started
pouring	in.
Just	yesterday	he	informed	me,	"Now	it	has	become	difficult.	Even	the	president
has	 told	me,	 `You	 don't	 get	 involved	 in	 it.	 That	man	 is	 very	 dangerous.	 Even
your	association	with	that	man	may	bring	difficulties	to	you;	you	just	keep	out,
don't	mention	his	name!'"
But	he	asked,	"What	danger	is	there?"
He	said,	"You	don't	ask!	It	is	a	very	dangerous	situation."
So	many	countries...	The	European	parliament	is	passing	a	bill	that	I	should	not
be	 allowed	 in	 any	 airport	 in	 Europe.	 Countries	 like	 the	 Bahamas,	 and	 other
countries	--
Panama,	and	a	few	other	islands	near	Panama,	I	have	not	even	heard	their	names
--	and	their	parliaments	have	started	discussing	and	deciding	that	I	should	not	be
allowed	in	their	country.
Every	 man's	 life	 is	 in	 insecurity,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 so	 aware	 of	 it.	 You	 go	 on,
sleepily.	Yes,	people	die,	people	are	murdered,	everything	happens,	cancer	and
AIDS	and	everything,	but	still	you	go	on	thinking	that	it	is	not	going	to	happen
to	you.	But	with	me	it	is	not	a	question	that	it	is	not	going	to	happen:	it	is	already
happening.
So	each	moment	is	insecure.
And	you	have	to	be	courageous,	alert,	and	capable	of	using	the	opportunity	that
may	be	 cut	 any	moment.	Make	 it	 a	 point	 that	 it	 is	 good	 that	 reality,	which	 to
others	is	hidden,	to	us	is	no	longer	hidden;	it	is	clear	and	open.	Face	it!	And	the
only	way	 to	 face	 it	 is	 to	 live	moment	 to	moment	 as	 totally	 and	 intensively	 as
possible.
You	cannot	afford	to	be	sleepy	and	unconscious,	just	dragging	on.	You	have	to
become	alert.	You	have	to	become	a	flame	so	that	whatsoever	happens	the	next
moment	 does	 not	 matter:	 you	 have	 lived	my	 presence,	 my	 love,	 as	 totally	 as
possible.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#38
Chapter	title:	A	world	beyond	time
1	May	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8605010
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO38
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
98
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOUR	VISION	IS	SO	BEAUTIFUL,	AND	MOST	OF	ALL,	SO	SIMPLE.	BUT
WHEN
I	THINK	ABOUT	WHAT	MAN	HAS	TO	CLEANSE	HIMSELF	OF,	IT	SEEMS
TO
GET	 COMPLICATED.	 I	 THINK	 THE	 THING	 HARDEST	 FOR	 MAN	 TO
DROP,	FOR
YOUR	VISION	EVER	TO	BE,	 IS	HIS	SO-CALLED	POWER	 --	WORLDLY
AND
SPIRITUAL.	 TO	 ME,	 SUCH	 PEOPLE	 WOULD	 RATHER	 SEE	 THEIR
WORLD
BLOW	UP	THAN	TO	GIVE	UP	THEIR	PRECIOUS	POWER.	IS	THIS	SO?
It	is	so.	People	are	so	unconscious	that	they	can	do	anything	to	keep	their	power,
their	respectability	--	even	if	it	means	blowing	up	the	whole	world.	They	can	risk
anything	to	save	their	ego.	And	these	are	the	people	who	naturally	reach	to	the
positions	of	power,	because	they	are	the	only	seekers	of	power.
No	creative,	intelligent	person	seeks	power.	No	intelligent	person	is	interested	in
dominating	others.	His	first	 interest	 is	 to	know	himself.	So	the	people	with	 the
highest	quality	of	intelligence	go	towards	mysticism,	and	the	most	mediocre	go
after	power.	That	power	can	be	worldly,	political;	it	can	be	of	money,	it	can	be	of
holding	 spiritual	 domination	 over	 millions	 of	 people,	 but	 the	 basic	 urge	 is	 to
dominate	more	and	more	people.
This	urge	arises	because	you	don't	know	yourself,	and	you	don't	want	 to	know
that	 you	 don't	 know	 yourself.	 You	 are	 so	 afraid	 of	 becoming	 aware	 of	 the
ignorance	 that	 prevails	 in	 the	very	 center	 of	 your	being.	You	escape	 from	 this
darkness	through	these	methods	--
lust	for	money,	lust	for	power,	lust	for	respectability,	honor.	And	a	man	who	has
darkness	within	himself	can	do	anything	destructive.
Creativity	is	impossible	from	such	a	person,	because	creativity	comes	from	your
being	 conscious,	 a	 little	 alert...	 light,	 love.	Creativity	 is	 not	 at	 all	 interested	 in
dominating	 anyone	 --	 for	 what?	 The	 other	 is	 the	 other;	 neither	 you	 want	 to
dominate	anyone,	nor	you	want	to	be	dominated	by	anyone.	Freedom	is	the	very
taste	of	being	just	a	little	alert.
But	 these	 people	 are	 completely	 asleep.	 In	 their	 sleep	 they	 are	making	 atomic
bombs,	 nuclear	 weapons,	 not	 knowing	 what	 they	 are	 doing.	 Only	 one	 thing
keeps	them	moving,	and	that	is:	more	power,	more	power.	And	whoever	comes
in	 their	 way	 has	 to	 be	 destroyed.	 They	 don't	 know	 anything	 else.	 They	 are
barbarians	who	have	not	evolved	 into	human	beings.	Yes,	 they	can	destroy	 the
whole	world;	they	are	already	prepared	to	do	so.
They	are	all	against	me	because	I	am	exposing	them.
And	I	am	surprised:	in	this	big	world	nobody	else	is	there	to	join	hands	with	me,
because	people	are	afraid	of	the	powerful	ones	--	they	can	destroy	them.	One	is
fearless	only	when	he	knows	that	he	is	indestructible;	you	can	kill	him	but	you
cannot	 destroy	 his	 being.	 But	 such	 people	 have	 slowly	 disappeared	 from	 the
earth.	We	have	not	nourished	them.	We	kill	them	and	then	worship	them.
This	 also	 has	 to	 be	 understood,	 why	 all	 the	 people	 that	 we	 have	 killed	 --	 for
example,	 Jesus,	 Socrates,	 Al-Hillaj	 Mansoor,	 Sarmad	 --	 are	 immensely
respectable	 after	 they	 have	 been	 killed.	 When	 they	 were	 alive	 they	 were
condemned	 by	 everybody,	 not	 only	 by	 those	who	were	 in	 power	 but	 even	 by
those	who	were	not	in	power.	Those	who	were	not	in	power	condemned	them	to
show	 to	 the	powerful,	 "We	are	with	you."	And	 the	powerful	 condemned	 them
because	these	people	were	bringing	a	vision.	If	it	succeeds,	then	there	will	be	no
domination	in	the	world;	then	there	will	be	human	beings	--	everybody	unique,
flowering	in	his	own	way.
But	all	these	people	are	worshipped	when	they	are	dead.	That	comes	out	of	guilt.
First	people	kill	them...	It	is	the	powerful	who	kill	them,	and	it	is	the	powerless,
the	 dominated,	who	 support	 them	 --	 unwillingly,	 but	 very	 fanatically,	 because
they	want	 to	show	to	everybody,	"We	are	more	against	 them	than	you	are,	and
we	are	more	in	favor	of	the	powerful	than	you	are."
But	once	 the	man	 is	killed,	 crucified,	poisoned,	 these	are	 the	people	who	start
feeling	guilty,	because	 from	the	very	beginning	 they	were	not	 ready	 to	kill	 the
man.	 They	 had	 no	 problem	with	 the	man;	 he	was	 not	 destroying	 any	 of	 their
vested	 interests.	They	 simply	 supported	 the	powerful	because	 they	were	afraid
that	 if	 they	didn't	 support,	 if	 they	 remained	 silent,	 they	would	be	 suspected	of
supporting	the	person	who	has	been	killed.
A	disciple	of	Jesus	was	in	the	crowd	when	Jesus	was	crucified,	and	he	was	asked
--
because	 he	 looked	 different	 from	 others,	was	 not	 from	 the	 same	 place,	was	 a
foreigner,	 and	 nobody	 recognized	 him	 --	 he	was	 being	 asked	 again	 and	 again,
"Who	 are	 you?	Do	you	know	 this	man	who	 is	 being	 crucified?"	And	he	 said,
"No,	 I	have	never	heard	about	him.	 Just	 seeing	 that	 so	many	people	are	going
this	way,	just	to	see	what	is	happening,	I	have	come."	Even	he	cannot	admit	that
he	is	a	follower	of	Jesus,	because	he	knows	the	result	will	be	another	cross.
So	 finally,	 when	 these	 people	 are	 crucified,	 the	 people	 who	 had	 supported	 it
unwillingly	 start	 feeling	 very	 guilty,	 "What	 have	we	 done	 against	 an	 innocent
man,	who	has	done	no	harm	to	anybody?	And	whatever	he	was	saying,	he	was
right."	They	can	understand	that	these	people	in	power	are	exploiting	everybody.
It	 is	 a	 strange	world.	 You	 know	 people	 now	 as	 kings	 and	 queens,	 and	 if	 you
follow	their	ancestors,	in	the	beginning,	they	were	robbers.	From	where	did	they
get	their	kingdom?
They	are	great	robbers	who	have	killed	many	people,	accumulated	money,	land,
declared	themselves	as	lords	of	 the	land,	and	now	they	have	royal	blood.	They
are	in	the	lineage	of	criminals	--	and	not	ordinary	criminals,	big	criminals.	But
they	have	power,	they	have	money	--	naturally	their	blood	is	special.
The	ordinary	people	have	known	all	along	that	they	are	being	crushed,	murdered
slowly.
They	labor	hard	and	they	cannot	manage	even	one	meal	a	day.	They	produce	--
but	all	that	goes	to	those	people	who	are	in	power.	So	when	they	support	these
people,	 it	 is	 unwillingly.	That	unwillingness,	when	 the	man	 is	dead,	 turns	 into
guilt;	 they	start	feeling	that	 they	have	been	participants	 in	a	criminal	act.	They
have	not	done	anything,	but	they	were	participants	in	a	way;	they	were	showing
that	they	are	in	support	of	the	powerful	people.
To	remove	that	guilt,	worship	arises.	Worship	is	simply	the	removal	of	the	guilt,
to	 wash	 away	 the	 guilt.	 That's	 how	 such	 big	 religions	 like	 Christianity...
otherwise	Jesus	had	not	 that	genius	 to	produce	such	a	big	religion.	There	were
hundreds	of	rabbis	far	more	intelligent,	far	more	scholarly	than	him,	he	was	just
an	uneducated	young	man,	but	the	crucifixion	changed	the	whole	situation.	Once
they	crucified	him,	they	made	him	a	god	--
god	 to	 all	 those	 people,	who	 are	millions,	who	 had	 supported	 the	 crucifixion.
They	started	feeling	guilty.
And	 you	 can	 see	 it,	 if	 you	 look	 deeply.	 Jesus	 was	 killed	 by	 the	 order	 of	 the
Roman	emperor,	by	his	viceroy,	Pontius	Pilate	 in	Judea,	with	 the	agreement	of
the	high	priest	of	 the	 temple	of	 the	 Jews.	Today	Rome	has	been	 the	citadel	of
Christianity	for	 twenty	centuries,	but	 the	order	 to	kill	 that	man	had	come	from
Rome.	 There	 was	 a	 day	 when	 the	 whole	 Roman	 civilization	 turned	 into	 a
Christian	 civilization.	 Today	 the	 pope	 has	 only	 a	 small	 piece	 of	 land	 --	 eight
square	miles	 --	 but	 it	 is	 an	 independent	 country.	 It	 has	 been	 shrinking	 slowly;
once	he	had	the	whole	of	Italy.	He	was	higher	than	the	state.
People	were	killed	in	Rome	for	being	Christians.	Christ	was	the	first	one,	 then
whosoever	turned	Christian	was	killed	in	the	same	way;	hundreds	of	people	were
crucified.	And	this	whole	crucifixion	created	so	much	guilt	in	people	that	a	great
religion	came	out	of	it.	But	such	a	religion	can	only	be	a	psychological	cover-up;
it	cannot	be	a	true	religion.	It	is	simply	covering	up	your	guilt.	The	more	fanatic
a	 religious	 person	 is...	 you	 can	 measure	 by	 his	 fanaticism	 how	 guilty	 he	 is
feeling,	what	he	is	hiding	behind	it.
But	Christianity	became	 the	world's	biggest	 religion	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that
not	only	Christ	but	many	other	people,	who	had	turned	Christian,	were	crucified
without	any	trial.
And	the	masses	were	supporting	the	powerful	people	but	deep	down	feeling	hurt
--	what	is	happening	is	simply	inhuman,	should	not	happen.	But	they	are	poor,
they	have	no	power;	they	cannot	do	anything	except	worship.
A	real	religion	is	always	of	meditation.
A	false	religion	is	always	of	worship.
Worship	 is	a	psychological	method	of	washing	from	your	hands	 the	blood	 that
you	 can	 see	 on	 your	 hands.	 Even	 Pontius	 Pilate...	 the	 first	 thing	 he	 did	 after
ordering	 the	 crucifixion	 of	 Jesus	 was	 to	 wash	 his	 hands,	 because	 he	 was	 not
willing	 to	 kill	 this	 innocent	 man.	 He	 had	 talked	 to	 him,	 he	 had	 listened	 in
disguise	 where	 he	 was	 talking	 to	 his	 disciples,	 and	 he	 had	 started	 loving
something	in	that	man.	He	is	innocent.	He	says	some	crazy	things	but	the	way	he
says	them	is	beautiful.	He	is	uneducated	but	he	speaks	poetry.	He	does	not	know
much,	but	whatever	he	knows	he	presents	it	with	tremendous	authority.	And	he
is	not	doing	any	harm	to	anybody:	if	you	don't	want	to	listen	to	him,	don't	listen;
if	you	don't	want	to	follow	him,	don't	follow.	He	is	not	preaching	any	dangerous
ideas	to	people.
Pontius	Pilate	wanted	him	 to	be	 freed.	He	 tried	 to	persuade	 the	priests	 that	he
should	be	 freed	because	he	 seems	 to	 be	 innocent.	But	 Jews	were	not	 ready	 to
free	him	--	and	they	committed	a	great	mistake.	They	are	responsible	for	creating
Christianity.	So	 all	 the	 bloodshed	 that	Christianity	 has	 done,	 deep	down,	 Jews
are	 responsible	 for,	 and	 Christianity	 has	 taken	 revenge,	 tortured	 Jews,	 killed
Jews,	made	them	homeless.	For	centuries	it	has	been	going	on.
Who	are	the	people	who	became	Christians?	A	few	Jews	who	felt	the	innocence
of	the	person	but	were	afraid	of	the	priesthood,	the	religious	hierarchy	in	power.
But	 many	 more	 people	 were	 crucified	 in	 Rome	 --	 and	 many	 more	 Romans
became	Christians.
It	was	a	convention	that	every	year	the	Jews	were	allowed	to	ask	Pontius	Pilate
to	 save	 one	 life,	 because	 it	 was	 just	 before	 their	 religious	 holiday;	 it	 was	 a
religious	mercy	and	compassion.
Pontius	Pilate	was	hoping	that	they	would	ask	--	because	there	were	three	people
who	 were	 going	 to	 be	 crucified	 --	 that	 they	 would	 ask	 Jesus	 to	 be	 released,
because	the	other	two	were	great	criminals.	But	the	priests	and	the	hierarchy	of
the	 rabbis	 shouted,	 "We	want	 Barabbas!"	 --	 one	 criminal	 who	 had	 committed
seven	murders.	Even	Barabbas	could	not	believe	that	he	was	being	released,	and
this	poor	guy,	Jesus	--	he	knew	him	--
they	were	not	asking	for	him	to	be	released.	And	he	had	not	done	anything!
Barabbas	 was	 saved.	 Christians	 don't	 talk	 much	 about	 Barabbas	 but	 he	 is	 a
tremendously	 powerful	 character,	 and	 very	 important,	 because	 the	 miracle
happened	to	him,	not	to	Jesus.	It	was	expected	that	God	would	save	Jesus.	God
missed	 his	 target.	 Barabbas	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 When	 they	 released	 him	 he
looked	 back	 again	 and	 again	 --	 there	 must	 be	 some	 mistake.	 He	 was	 such	 a
criminal;	there	was	not	any	crime	that	he	had	not	done	--
rape,	murder...	And	he	was	always	drunk,	he	was	a	drunkard.
But	 the	 face	 of	 Jesus	 remained	 in	 his	mind	 and	 tortured	 him.	He	 also	 started
feeling	guilty,	"I	should	not	have	been	released.	It	was	perfectly	right	for	me	to
be	on	the	cross.
That	poor	man...	I	have	taken	his	place	and	he	has	taken	my	place."	He	felt	a	soft
corner	 for	 Jesus.	And	within	 six	months	he	committed	a	 rape,	he	committed	a
murder,	and	he	was	caught	again.
But	 this	 was	 the	 rule,	 that	 once	 the	 Roman	 emperor	 releases	 somebody	 from
crucifixion,	he	cannot	be	crucified	again.	So	they	had	to	find	an	alternative	for
such	people,	because	 those	people	are	bound	 to	do	 something	 if	 they	are	 such
diehard	criminals.	In	Rome	they	had	a	dangerous	coal	mine;	 they	used	to	send
those	people	to	that	coal	mine	to	dig	coal.	It	has	reached	to	such	places	that	once
in	 a	while	 it	 used	 to	 collapse,	 and	 thousands	of	 the	people	who	were	working
under	it	would	be	killed.	That	was	their	way	of	avoiding	crucifixion.
Barabbas	was	sent	to	the	coal	mines	in	Rome.	Within	three	months	the	coal	mine
collapsed.	There	were	 at	 least	 three	 thousand	 people;	 only	Barabbas	 remained
alive,	 everybody	 else	 was	 dead.	 That	 was	 the	 second	 miracle!	 He	 could	 not
believe	what	was	happening!	He	had	been	hanged	on	the	cross	and	then	brought
down.	He	could	not	believe	it	that	day;	he	was	completely	ready	to	be	crucified,
and	he	knew	that	he	had	done	so	many	criminal	things	that	it	was	perfectly	right;
there	was	no	question	of	his	being	released.
Now	 what	 had	 happened?	 Three	 thousand	 people	 had	 died	 and	 only	 he	 was
saved.	Even	the	emperor	of	Rome,	the	empress	of	Rome,	became	aware	that	this
man	seems	to	be	a	man	of	God	--	twice	he	has	returned	from	death.	So	he	was
called	to	Rome.	He	had	become	so	famous	that	people	started	touching	him.	He
had	become	almost	divine;	 just	 to	 touch	him	was	a	great	experience.	Even	 the
empress	wanted	to	touch	Barabbas.
But	 the	 emperor	 said,	 "One	 test	 more;	 these	 two	 things	 may	 have	 been	 just
accidental."
And	 the	 last	 test	 was...	 Every	 year	 they	 had	 games	 in	 which	 criminals	 were
thrown	without	any	weapons	before	hungry	lions,	to	fight	with	them.	Barabbas
was	 thrown	 before	 a	 hungry	 lion,	 and	 he	managed	 a	 third	 time:	 he	 killed	 the
hungry	lion.	Then	even	the	emperor	thought,	"Now	it	cannot	be	an	accident."	He
had	never	seen	before...	All	criminals	were	eaten	by	the	lions!	This	was	the	first
time	that	a	man	had	killed	the	lion;	unscratched,	he	was	victorious.
He	was	freed,	he	was	given	citizenship.	He	was	no	longer	a	slave	--	because	in
those	 days	 there	 were	 two	 categories	 of	 people,	 slaves	 and	 citizens.	 He	 was
given	citizenship.	That	was	a	great	honor,	and	especially	for	a	criminal...	but	he
had	proved	three	times	that	he	can	come	back	from	death.
Christians	 have	 so	much	difficulty	 in	 proving	 that	 Jesus	 is	 a	man	of	miracles.
Barabbas	is	a	man	of	miracles.	They	prove	hard	that	Jesus	is	the	only	begotten
son	 of	God.	 It	 seems	 there	 is	 some	mistake	 --	Barabbas	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only
begotten	son	of	God!
But	all	 these	years	he	was	carrying	 the	 innocent	Jesus'	 face,	and	 feeling	guilty
that	 he	 was	 saved:	 "There	 has	 been	 some	 mistake.	 And	 I	 have	 been	 saved
thrice!"	He	started	meeting	Christians	in	underground	caves,	where	they	used	to
meet	so	that	nobody	would	know.
He	 listened	 for	 the	 first	 time	 to	 what	 Jesus	 used	 to	 say	 --	 and	 he	 became	 a
Christian.	The	day	he	became	a	Christian	he	was	caught	and	crucified,	and	then
no	miracle	happened!	It	is	a	very	strange	story.
But	 the	 Roman	 people,	 who	 are	 now	 Italians,	 started	 feeling:	 Thousands	 of
people	are	being	crucified	just	because	they	are	getting	involved	with	Jesus	and
his	 teachings.	 The	 Roman	 empire	 disappeared,	 and	 the	 whole	 land	 of	 the
Romans	became	Christian.	And	from	there	Christianity	started	moving	all	over
the	world.
A	 guilt	 feeling	 is	 very	 basic	 for	 being	 a	 Christian,	 for	 being	 a	 false	 religious
person.	Real	religiousness	arises	not	out	of	guilt	but	out	of	silence,	out	of	love,
out	of	meditativeness.
These	people	who	are	in	power	are	almost	on	the	brink	of	destroying	the	world,
rather	 than	 lose	 their	 power.	 I	 can	 understand	 their	 logic	 --	 they	 may	 not	 be
aware	 of	 it.	 Their	 logic	 is:	We	 are	 going	 to	 die	 anyway,	 so	what	 if	 the	whole
world	 dies?	Our	 death	 is	 certain,	 so	why	 should	we	 bother	 about	whether	 the
world	lives	after	us	or	not?	We	should	live	in	power	as	long	as	we	are	here,	and
there	is	no	need	to	be	bothered	about	what	will	happen	if	the	world	explodes	into
a	third	world	war.
The	 inner	 logic	 is:	 the	day	one	 is	dead,	 the	whole	world	 is	dead	 for	him.	You
were	not	here	one	day;	whether	the	world	was	here	or	not	would	not	have	made
any	difference	to	you.	You	will	not	be	here	one	day;	whether	the	world	is	there
or	has	been	blown	up	by	nuclear	weapons	will	not	make	any	difference	to	you.
What	makes	 the	difference	 to	 them	is	 that	 they	are	 in	power,	and	 they	want	 to
prove	to	the	whole	world	that	they	are	the	most	powerful	people.
Now	the	competition	has	reached	to	a	suicidal	point,	and	America	is	in	a	hurry
for	 the	 third	 world	 war	 to	 happen.	 Russia	 wants	 to	 delay	 it	 a	 little,	 because
America	 has	 evolved	 certain	microwave	 patterns	 around	 the	whole	 country	 --
billions	of	dollars	have	been	put	 into	 it.	You	cannot	see	 it,	 it	does	not	obstruct
anything;	it	only	obstructs	nuclear	weapons.
If	a	nuclear	weapon	is	fired	at	America,	if	a	missile	comes	to	America,	it	will	be
returned;	it	cannot	enter	the	country.	So	America	is	feeling	safe.	That's	why	this
Libya	episode	happened.
The	 Soviet	 Union	 has	 not	 yet	 been	 able...	 they	 are	 working	 hard	 to	 create	 a
protective	armor	around	the	country.	Their	country	is	big,	vast;	their	finances	are
not	as	great	as	American	finances,	but	still	they	are	preparing	--	there	is	no	other
way.
Those	two	nuclear	powers	are	preparing	their	protection.	Then	America	can	send
missiles	 to	 the	Soviet	Union,	 and	 they	will	 also	be	 returned.	Now,	where	 they
will	fall,	nobody	knows	--	they	will	fall	somewhere.	But	those	two	countries	are
protected,	and	the	whole	world	is	unprotected.	So	the	whole	world	is	in	danger.
Right	 now	 the	Soviet	Union	 is	 not	 ready	with	 its	 protection;	Libya	was	 just	 a
way	 to	check	whether	Russia	 is	 ready	or	not.	 If	 they	had	been	 ready,	 the	 third
world	war	would	have	been	on.
The	Soviet	Union	is	ready	to	support	Libya	but	is	afraid	to,	for	the	simple	reason
that	it	does	not	yet	have	any	protection	for	its	own	country;	it	needs	some	time.
That's	why	the	Soviet	leaders	are	talking	about	cutting	the	production	of	nuclear
weapons	 in	 such	 a	 way,	 step	 by	 step,	 that	 by	 the	 end	 of	 this	 century	 all
production	completely	stops	--	and	the	whole	world	is	impressed	by	it.
America	cannot	accept	it	because	it	has	put	billions	of	dollars	into	the	protective
armor	 that	 will	 be	 useless...	 billions	 of	 dollars	 into	 nuclear	 weapons,	 and	 no
chance	to	use	them.
America	 is	 in	 a	 hurry;	 it	 wants	 any	 excuse.	 And	 the	 gap	 is	 not	 big;	 perhaps
within	 one	 year	 the	 Soviet	Union	will	 be	 ready.	 So	 if	 the	war	 has	 to	 happen,
America	wants	it	quickly.
Kaddafi's	daughter	died	because	America	bombed	his	houses	--	even	his	tent	in
the	desert	they	did	not	leave	--	and	Kaddafi	was	silent,	taking	no	action.	On	the
contrary,	he	said	that	if	America	bombs	anywhere	else,	their	whole	strategy	will
be	to	bomb	the	place	and	blame	Libya	for	it.	Libya	is	a	small	country,	but	Libya
is	 just	 an	 excuse	 to	 provoke	 the	 Soviet	Union.	And	Kaddafi	 said,	 "Next	 time
Libya	 is	bombed	 then	be	certain,	 that	will	 be	 the	beginning	of	 the	 third	world
war."	But	why	next	time?	The	Soviet	Union	needs	a	little	time.
If	the	world	has	some	intelligent	people	in	it,	they	should	protest	together	to	the
U.N.:
"Now	it	 is	 intolerable.	Patience	has	a	 limit,	and	all	nuclear	weapons	should	be
banned,	should	be	thrown	in	the	oceans,	or	some	way	should	be	found	that	they
are	made	useless	or	turned	into	some	creative	force."
Perhaps	we	 are	 not	 far	 away	 now,	 not	 even	 ten,	 fifteen	 years...	America	 is	 in
such	a	hurry,	and	the	hurry	has	a	reason...	before	the	Soviet	Union	completes	its
project	 of	 protection,	 because	 after	 that	 protection	 those	 two	 countries	will	 be
safe.	Then	everybody	else	will	be	killed	who	is	not	fighting,	who	has	nothing	to
do	with	the	fight,	who	is	out	of	the	war	but	they	don't	have	any	protection.	The
returning	nuclear	missiles	will	fall	all	over	the	world.
The	intelligentsia	of	the	world	has	to	create	an	atmosphere	in	the	world	that	now
it	is	a	question	not	of	the	Soviet	Union	and	America;	it	is	a	question	of	the	whole
world.
Because	the	whole	world	is	going	to	suffer,	the	whole	world	should	unite	against
both	these	nations	and	force	both	these	nations	to	stop	this	mad	race	of	nuclear
weapons	and	power.
But	there	seems	to	be	no	protest,	there	seems	to	be	no	worry.	The	world	goes	on
in	a	routine	rut.	It	seems	people	don't	have	any	alertness,	don't	have	any	clarity
about	the	problem.
I	can	see	clearly	that	there	is	more	possibility	of	the	world	blowing	up	than	being
saved,	because	nothing	is	being	done	to	save	it	and	everything	is	being	done	to
blow	 it	 up.	And	 because	 I	 speak	 against	 it,	America	 is	 against	me,	 the	Soviet
Union	 is	 against	me.	 This	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon;	 otherwise	 it	 happens	 that	 if
America	is	against	me,	the	Soviet	Union	will	be	favorable	to	me.	And	vice	versa
too	is	true.	But	both	are	against	me,	because	I	am	not	really	against	America	or
the	Soviet	Union;	I	am	against	this	game	of	power,	which	is	simply	idiotic.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WE	 HAVE	 EXPERIMENTED	 WITH	 COMMUNES	 IN	 BOTH	 THE	 EAST
AND	THE
WEST	 THAT	 DID	 NOT	 LAST.	 BUDDHA	 AND	 OTHER	 ENLIGHTENED
MASTERS
CREATED	COMMUNES	THAT	DID	LAST.
WHAT	IS	THE	DIFFERENCE?
Gautam	Buddha	 and	 other	masters	 never	 created	 communes	 the	way	we	 have
created	 them.	 Buddha	 had	 followers,	 but	 not	 staying	 in	 one	 place...	 moving
continuously.
Mahavira	had	followers,	but	not	staying	in	one	place...	moving	continuously.	So
nobody	has	created	the	way	we	created	communes.	Five	thousand	people	living
together	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 experience	 than	 five	 thousand	 Buddhist	 monks
moving	 from	one	place	 to	another	place,	only	 staying	 three	days	at	one	place.
And	even	in	that,	man's	cunningness	comes	in.
Jaina	 monks	 have	 to	 move	 continuously,	 except	 during	 the	 rainy	 seasons.	 In
India,	before	atomic	experiments	started,	the	seasons	used	to	be	very	fixed.	Even
dates	and	days	were	fixed	--	on	what	day	the	rains	will	begin	and	on	what	day
the	rains	will	stop	--	and	there	were	three	clear-cut	seasons,	four	months	each.	So
for	four	months	in	the	rainy	season	they	had	to	stop.	But	that	also	does	not	mean
that	 thousands	 of	 sannyasins	will	 be	 stopping	 in	 one	 place,	 but	wherever	 they
are.
But	 the	 cunningness	 of	man's	mind	 is	 such	 that	 I	 have	 seen	 Jaina	monks	who
have	 lived	 their	whole	 life	 in	Bombay	 --	 somebody	 is	 there	 for	 fifty	 years...	 I
enquired,	"How	is	it	being	managed?	--	because	it	is	against	their	basic	rule	and
discipline.	After	three	days	they	have	to	move."
And	I	was	told	that	in	Mahavira's	time	there	were	not	such	big	cities	as	Bombay.
Now	 the	 Jaina	 monk	 moves	 from	 one	 part	 of	 Bombay	 to	 another	 part	 of
Bombay,	 and	 in	 this	way	he	goes	on	moving	around	Bombay,	 inside	Bombay,
from	 one	 place	 to	 another	 place.	 But	 he	 remains	 in	 Bombay;	 he	 never	 leaves
Bombay.	Clever	idea!	From	one	suburb	he	will	move	to	another	suburb;	that	is
another	 place.	 And	 in	 Mahavira's	 time	 there	 were	 no	 such	 big	 cities	 these
suburbs	would	have	been	different	cities,	different	towns,	so..."We	are	moving!"
And	they	go	on	circling.
Bombay	has	a	population	of	the	daily	population	is	nearabout	ten	million	people.
Forty	 million	 people	 come	 every	 day	 to	 work,	 from	 nearby	 towns,	 and	 they
return	 in	 the	 evening.	 Sixty	 million	 people	 are	 living	 in	 the	 town.	 They	 are
logically	right,	that	there	was	no	city	in	Mahavira's	time	of	such	population.	But
the	whole	point	is	missed.	The	point	was	simply	that	you	don't	become	attached
to	a	certain	place,	that	you	don't	start	having	friendships,	likes,	dislikes.	In	three
days	you	cannot	do	much.	One	day	you	come,	just	one	day	you	really	stay,	and
the	third	day	you	have	to	move.	It	is	not	enough	time	to	get	into	any	politics,	or
any	 local	 problems.	 To	 avoid	 power	 politics,	 to	 avoid	 local	 problems,
attachments,	the	device	was	created	that	you	move	after	three	days.
But	after	three	days	they	go	on	moving	in	the	same	city	--	for	fifty	years,	sixty
years.
They	have	immense	contact	with	people.	They	are	almost	residents	of	Bombay!
The	people	who	like	them	come	to	listen	to	them	wherever	they	are.
Nobody	 had	 any	 commune	 the	 way	 we	 tried,	 and	 both	 the	 experiments	 have
given	great	 insights	 into	human	nature,	so	nothing	has	been	a	failure.	We	have
learned	much.	So	now	I	am	not	going	to	create	a	commune.	I	am	going	to	create
a	 totally	 different	 thing:	 a	mystery	 school...	 forty,	 fifty	 people	will	 be	 there	 to
take	care	of	the	school,	and	two	hundred,	three	hundred,	five	hundred	people	can
come	for	a	one	month	course,	or	a	two	month	course,	or	a	three	month	course,
and	move	 on.	 And	 slowly,	 slowly	 we	 can	 train	 people	 so	 that	 they	 can	 open
mystery	schools	around	 the	world.	A	school	 is	a	different	 thing.	You	come	for
three	months	to	learn	something,	to	go	through	some	experiences,	and	then	you
are	back	in	the	world,	to	your	work,	to	your	job.
The	 commune	 experiment	 has	 made	 it	 clear	 that	 if	 five	 thousand	 people	 are
living	 in	 a	 commune,	 they	will	 have	 to	 do	many	 things	 --	make	 roads,	make
houses,	make	other	 facilities	 for	 five	 thousand	people,	 and	 for	 the	 guests	who
will	be	coming	for	festivals.
These	people	will	not	have	any	time	left	for	the	real	search	they	had	come	for	in
the	first	place.	They	will	not	have	time	for	meditation.	They	will	not	have	time
to	 go	within	 themselves,	 to	 find	 techniques	 and	work	 upon	 them,	 because	 the
work	is	such	that	you	cannot	just	work	five	hours	a	day,	five	days	a	week;	it	will
never	 be	 completed.	 You	 have	 to	 work	 ten,	 twelve	 hours	 a	 day	 seven	 days	 a
week.	You	are	 tired	--	and	moreover,	what	you	are	doing	is	only	 the	necessary
facilities	 for	 yourself.	 Soon	 you	will	 have	 to	 start	 production;	 otherwise	 from
where	are	you	going	to	get	your	food,	your	clothes?	So	this	is	a	vicious	circle.
And	 when	 five	 thousand	 people	 are	 there,	 then	 there	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 power
politics.	Then	you	have	to	find	group	leaders,	coordinators.	It	is	not	possible	to
give	freedom	to	five	thousand	people:	"Do	whatsoever	you	like"	--	because	they
will	all	go	swimming	and	trekking	and	playing	their	guitars,	but	 then	who	will
make	the	roads	and	the	houses	and	do	the	farming?	And	how	are	your	food	and
your	clothes	to	be	arranged?	How	long	can	we	depend	on	donations?	Sooner	or
later	 you	 will	 have	 to	make	 factories	 and	 you	 will	 have	 to	 create	 something.
Then	 this	 commune	becomes	 just	 an	 ordinary	world	 --	 so	why	make	 so	much
unnecessary	trouble?	Our	basic	reason	was	to	give	you	an	insight	into	yourself.
That	is	completely	forgotten	in	unnecessary	trivia.
So	my	new	phase	of	work	 is	a	mystery	 school.	You	work	 in	 the	world,	where
roads	 are	 already	 there,	 houses	 are	 already	 there,	 you	 need	 not	 make	 them.
Factories	are	already	there...	in	thousands	of	years	the	world	has	created	all	that.
So	 you	 can	 manage	 --	 five	 hours	 work	 five	 days	 a	 week	 is	 enough.	 On	 the
weekend	 you	 can	 meditate,	 you	 can	 go	 into	 silence	 or	 you	 can	 go	 to	 some
isolated	 spot	 and	 just	 relax.	 And	 in	 a	 year	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 earn	 so	much
money,	 save	 so	 much	 money,	 that	 you	 can	 come	 here	 for	 one	 month,	 two
months,	three	months...	as	much	as	you	can	manage.
Then	being	with	me	has	no	connotations	of	work.	Then	being	with	me	is	simply
joy,	 celebration,	 meditation,	 singing,	 dancing.	 Those	 three	 months	 are	 simply
holiday.	You	forget	 the	world	for	 those	 three	months.	They	are	pure	search	for
the	 truth.	 And	 after	 three	 months,	 whatever	 you	 have	 learned,	 continue	 it	 at
home;	there	you	have	time.	Five	hours	you	work	--	you	have	enough	time;	you
can	get	at	least	two	hours	for	yourself.
Not	only	this...	when	you	start	living	with	me	there	is	a	possibility	that	you	may
start	taking	me	for	granted,	that	I	am	always	here.	Nine	months	being	away	will
bring	 you	 closer	 to	me,	 because	 distance	 creates	 longing,	 creates	 love,	 creates
understanding.	So	each	year	you	will	be	coming,	then	going.	Whatever	you	can
manage...	you	can	come	twice.	You	will	not	be	a	burden	on	anybody,	and	there	is
no	need	for	anybody	to	dominate	you;	there	is	no	need	for	any	strict	discipline	--
work	needs	that.	There	is	no	need	for	coordinators,	so	we	can	avoid	the	power
trip.
But	both	our	communes	have	helped	to	bring	us	to	this	point	where	we	can	start
a	mystery	school.	Without	those	two	communes	it	would	have	been	impossible.
This	is	my	way	of	looking	at	things.	Even	failures	bring	you	closer	to	success,
because	each	failure	gives	you	insight	into	what	went	wrong,	how	it	went	wrong.
So	both	the	experiments	have	been	immensely	significant.
Now	we	 are	 in	 a	 position	 to	 create	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 place,	 which	 is
simply	a	festival	all	the	year	round.	People	will	be	coming	and	going.	They	will
take	whatever	 they	 learn	 and	 they	will	 practice	 it	 in	 the	world,	 and	 they	will
come	again	to	renew,	to	refresh,	to	go	further,	deeper.	Only	a	skeleton	crew	will
be	here	to	take	care	of	you.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I'VE	 BEEN	 HERE	 WITH	 YOU	 NOW	 FOR	 TWO	 WEEKS,	 AND	 FIND
MYSELF	NOT
THINKING	OR	TALKING	ABOUT	THE	PLACE	AND	THE	PEOPLE	I	WAS
WITH
BEFORE.	IF	FEELS	AS	IF	I	HAVE	BEEN	HERE	FOR	THREE	MONTHS	OR
MORE,	SO	MANY	THINGS	HAVE	HAPPENED.	HOW	COME	THAT	TIME
LOSES	ALL	ITS
MEANING	WHEN	WE	ARE	WITH	YOU?
Time	is	a	relative	phenomenon.	It	is	nothing	absolute,	so	in	different	contexts	it
will	have	different	meanings.	You	are	in	pain	--	time	will	look	longer.	Your	tooth
is	hurting	--
seconds	 will	 look	 like	minutes,	 minutes	 will	 look	 like	 hours.	 It	 depends	 how
much	 the	 tooth	 is	 hurting!	 In	 pain	 you	 want	 to	 finish	 it,	 finish	 this	 pain,
somehow	to	get	rid	of	it.
You	don't	want	to	prolong	it,	so	time	seems	to	be	long.
Christians	 have	 never	 been	 able	 to	 explain	why	 their	 hell	 is	 eternal,	 and	 they
cannot	 explain	 it	 because	 the	 grounds	 on	which	 they	 have	made	 it	 eternal	 are
foolish.	 If	 it	 is	 punishment,	 then	 it	 is	 absolutely	 impossible	 to	 prove	 that
somebody	 has	 committed	 so	 many	 sins	 that	 his	 punishment	 is	 going	 to	 be
eternal.
Bertrand	Russell,	one	of	 the	genius	minds	of	our	 times,	wrote	a	book,	WHY	I
AM	NOT
A	 CHRISTIAN,	 and	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	 points	 that	 he	 makes	 clear,	 "I	 am
absolutely	against	the	idea	of	eternal	hell,	because	as	far	as	I	know,	if	all	my	sins
in	my	long	life"	--	and	he	lived	long,	almost	a	century	--	"can	be	accumulated,
and	even	 those	 sins	which	 I	 have	not	 committed	but	only	 contemplated,	 those
sins	which	I	have	dreamed	of	but	I	have	not	really	committed...	Combine	all	of
them	and	the	hardest	judge	cannot	give	me	more	than	four	to	five	years	in	jail.
Now,	 eternal	 hell?	 It	 is	 so	 absurd	 and	 illogical	 --	 that	 puts	 me	 off."	 And	 he
recounts	 other	 points.	 The	 Christians	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 answer,	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	they	have	based	their	argument	on	wrong	things.
My	answer	would	have	been	that	because	hell	is	the	idea	of	suffering,	immense
suffering...	 it	 may	 be	 only	 for	 a	 single	 moment	 but	 it	 will	 appear	 as	 eternal,
unending.	It	is	a	relative	concept.	And	Bertrand	Russell	would	have	immediately
understood	 it,	 because	 he	 wrote	 a	 book,	 THE	 ABC	 OF	 RELATIVITY.	 He
understands	the	idea	of	relativity:	when	you	are	joyous	and	happy	with	a	friend,
with	a	lover,	time	becomes	short;	it	seems	to	go	faster.	Hours	pass,	and	suddenly
you	see	 that	so	many	hours	have	passed	but	 it	 seems	only	a	 few	minutes	have
passed.	 In	 pain	 time	becomes	 long	 --	 it	 is	 very	 elastic.	 In	 pleasure	 it	 becomes
very	short.
But	to	be	with	me	is	something	more	than	pleasure;	it	is	peace,	it	is	silence.	It	is
something	that	is	beyond	the	words.	But	my	presence	can	make	you	feel	it:	time
can	disappear	completely.	It	can	be	felt	as	if	time	has	stopped.	This	is	a	beautiful
experience.
Time	stopping	means	you	are	entering	into	a	world	beyond	time.
And	that's	what	I	am	trying	to	do.
To	be	available	to	you,	to	call	you	here	to	be	with	me,	simply	means	that	I	want
to	 give	 you	 some	 taste	 of	 that	 which	 is	 higher	 than	 pleasure.	 And	 in	 that
moment,	time	comes	to	a	standstill.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#39
Chapter	title:	Your	mind	is	not	yours
1	May	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8605015
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO39
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
117
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	IT	THAT	WESTERN	SOCIETY	REACTS	SO	STRONGLY	TO	ANY
INDIVIDUAL	DEVIATING	FROM	THE	NORM,	PARTICULARLY	AS	FAR
AS	HIS
MENTAL	 STATE	 IS	 CONCERNED?	 IT	 LOOKS	 ON	 THOSE	WHO	 HAVE
FALLEN
BELOW	THE	MIND	IN	SUCH	A	WAY	AS	TO	CAST	A	STIGMA	ON	THEM,
AND
REGARDS	THE	POSSIBILITY	OF	GOING	BEYOND	THE	MIND	--
ENLIGHTENMENT	 --	 -WITH	SKEPTICISM.	 IT	DOES	ALLOW	A	SLIGHT
MARGIN
OF	 DEVIATION	 IN	 ITS	 CREATIVE	 PEOPLE	 AND	 GENIUSES;	 HENCE
SUCH
PEOPLE	ARE	EXCUSED	FOR	THEIR	"ECCENTRICITIES."
IT	IS	AS	IF	THE	MIND	IS	THE	TOUCHSTONE	OF	ONE'S	ADJUSTMENT
TO
SOCIETY,	 AND	 ANY	 ABERRATION	 THAT	 MIGHT	 THREATEN	 THE
STATUS
QUO	 IS	 REGARDED	WITH	 FEAR.	WHAT	 IS	 THAT	 FEAR?	 --	 BOTH	OF
THE	SICK
MIND	AND	THE	ENLIGHTENED	NO-MIND?
The	mind	is	within	you,	but	it	is	really	a	projection	of	the	society	inside	you.	It	is
not	yours.
No	 child	 is	 born	 with	 a	 mind.	 He	 is	 born	 with	 a	 brain.	 The	 brain	 is	 the
mechanism;	the	mind	is	the	ideology.	The	brain	is	fed	by	the	society,	and	every
society	creates	a	mind	according	to	its	own	conditionings.	That's	why	there	are
so	 many	 minds	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 Hindu	 mind	 is	 certainly	 separate	 from	 the
Christian	mind,	and	the	communist	mind	is	certainly	separate	from	the	Buddhist
mind.
But	a	fallacy	is	created	in	the	individual	that	the	mind	is	yours,	so	the	individual
starts	acting	according	to	the	society,	following	the	society,	but	feeling	as	if	he	is
functioning	on	his	own.	This	is	a	very	cunning	device.
George	Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 tell	 a	 story...	A	magician	 deep	 in	 the	mountains	 had
many	 sheep,	 and	 to	 avoid	 servants	 and	 to	 avoid	 looking	 after	 the	 sheep	 and
going	 in	 search	 of	 them	 every	 day	 when	 they	 were	 lost	 in	 the	 forest,	 he
hypnotized	all	the	sheep,	and	told	each	sheep	different	stories.	He	gave	different
minds	to	each	sheep.
To	one	he	told,	"You	are	not	a	sheep,	you	are	a	man,	so	you	need	not	be	afraid
that	 one	 day	 you	 will	 be	 killed,	 sacrificed,	 like	 other	 sheep	 --	 they	 are	 only
sheep.	So	you	need	not	be	worried	as	 far	as	 returning	home	 is	concerned."	To
some	he	said,	"You	are	a	lion,	not	a	sheep,"	and	to	some,	"You	are	a	tiger."	And
since	that	day	the	magician	was	at	ease:	the	sheep	started	behaving	according	to
the	mind	that	was	given	to	them.
He	could	kill	 a	 sheep	 --	 every	day	he	used	 to	kill	 sheep	 for	his	own	 food,	his
family's	food	--	and	the	sheep	who	believed	that	they	were	lions	or	men	or	tigers
would	simply	look	and	giggle,	"This	is	what	happens	to	sheep."	But	they	were
not	afraid,	not	like	in	the	old	days.
When	he	killed	a	sheep	before,	all	the	sheep	were	trembling,	afraid,	"Tomorrow
is	going	to	be	my	day.	How	long	can	I	live?"	And	that's	why	they	used	to	escape
in	the	forest	--	to	avoid	the	magician.	But	now	nobody	was	escaping.	There	were
tigers,	there	were	lions...
all	kinds	of	minds	had	been	implanted	in	them.
Your	mind	is	not	your	mind	--	this	is	something	basic	to	be	remembered.	Your
mind	is	an	implantation	of	the	society	in	which	you	have	accidentally	been	born.
If	 you	 were	 born	 in	 a	 Christian	 home,	 but	 immediately	 transferred	 to	 a
Mohammedan	family	and	brought	up	by	the	Mohammedans,	you	would	not	have
the	same	mind;	you	would	have	a	totally	different	mind	that	you	cannot	conceive
of.
Bertrand	Russell,	 one	of	 the	geniuses	of	our	 times,	 tried	hard	 to	get	 rid	of	 the
Christian	mind,	not	because	it	was	Christian,	but	simply	because	it	was	given	to
him	by	others.	He	wanted	his	own	fresh	outlook	about	things.	He	did	not	want	to
see	 things	 from	 somebody	 else's	 glasses;	 he	 wanted	 to	 come	 in	 contact	 with
reality	immediately,	and	directly.	He	wanted	his	own	mind.
So	 it	was	not	a	question	of	being	against	 the	Christian	mind;	 if	he	had	been	a
Hindu	he	would	have	done	the	same,	if	he	had	been	a	Mohammedan	he	would
have	done	the	same,	if	he	had	been	a	communist	he	would	have	done	the	same.
The	question	is	whether	the	mind	is	your	own	or	implanted	by	others	--	because
the	 others	 implant	 a	 mind	 in	 you	 which	 does	 not	 serve	 you,	 but	 serves	 their
purposes.	Now	in	the	whole	Soviet	Union,	each	child	is	being	brought	up	with	a
communist	mind.
One	of	my	friends,	Rahul	Sankritayana,	was	visiting	the	Soviet	Union.	He	went
to	see	a	school	and	he	asked	a	small	boy,	"Do	you	believe	in	God?"	The	small
boy	looked	at	him	in	shock	and	he	said,	"At	your	age,	 in	 this	century,	you	ask
such	a	question!	In	the	past	when	people	were	ignorant	they	used	to	believe	in
God.	There	is	no	God."	Now	this	child	will	believe	for	his	whole	life	that	this	is
his	voice.	It	is	not	so.	It	is	the	voice	of	the	society,	and	it	serves	the	purposes	of
the	vested	interests	of	the	society.
You	 are	 prepared	 by	 the	 parents,	 by	 the	 teachers,	 by	 the	 priests,	 by	 your
educational	system	to	have	a	certain	kind	of	mind,	and	your	whole	life	you	go	on
living	through	that	certain	kind	of	mind.	That	is	a	borrowed	life.	And	that	is	why
there	 is	 so	much	misery	 in	 the	world:	 because	 nobody	 is	 living	 authentically,
nobody	is	living	his	own	self;	he	is	simply	following	orders	implanted	in	him.
Bertrand	Russell	tried	hard	and	wrote	a	book,	WHY	I	AM	NOT	A	CHRISTIAN.
But	in	a	letter	to	a	friend	he	wrote,	"Although	I	have	written	the	book,	although	I
do	not	believe	that	I	am	a	Christian,	I	have	dropped	that	mind,	still,	deep	down...
One	day	I	asked	myself,	`Who	is	the	greatest	man	in	history?'	Rationally	I	know
it	is	Gautam	Buddha,	but	I	could	not	put	Gautam	Buddha	above	Jesus	Christ.
"That	day	I	felt	that	all	my	efforts	have	been	futile.	I	am	still	a	Christian.	I	know
rationally	that	Jesus	Christ	stands	no	comparison	with	Gautam	Buddha	--	but	it
is	only	rational.	Emotionally,	sentimentally	I	cannot	put	Gautam	Buddha	above
Jesus	Christ.
Jesus	 Christ	 remains	 in	 my	 unconscious,	 still	 affecting	 my	 attitudes,	 my
approaches,	 my	 behavior.	 The	 world	 thinks	 I	 am	 no	 longer	 a	 Christian,	 but	 I
know...	 It	 seems	 difficult	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 this	mind!	They	 have	 cultivated	 it	with
such	acumen,	with	such	craftsmanship."
And	 it	 is	 a	 long	 process.	 You	 never	 think	 about	 it.	 A	 man	 lives	 at	 the	 most
seventy-five	 years,	 and	 for	 twenty-five	 years	 he	 has	 to	 be	 in	 the	 schools,
colleges,	 university;	 one	 third	 of	 life	 is	 devoted	 to	 cultivating	 a	 certain	mind.
Bertrand	Russell	failed	because	he	had	no	knowledge	of	how	to	get	rid	of	it.	He
was	fighting,	but	groping	in	the	dark.
There	 are	 absolutely	 certain	methods	 of	meditation	which	 can	 take	 you	 away
from	the	mind,	and	then	it	is	very	easy	if	you	want	to	drop	it.	But	without	first
becoming	separate	from	the	mind	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	drop	 it	 --	who	is	going	 to
drop	whom?
Bertrand	Russell	is	fighting	with	one	half	of	his	mind	against	the	other	half,	and
both	are	Christian	--	it	is	impossible.	And	now	it	has	been	proved	scientifically.
One	 of	 the	 most	 important	 scientific	 contributions	 is	 from	 Delgado.	 He	 has
found	seven	hundred	centers	in	the	brain.	Each	center	is	capable	of	containing	an
immense	quantity	of	knowledge;	it	is	just	like	a	recording.	And	his	experiments
are	very	shocking:	he	touches	a	certain	center	in	the	brain	with	an	electrode,	and
the	man	starts	speaking.	He	takes	away	the	electrode	and	the	man	stops.	He	puts
the	electrode	back	on	the	same	center,	and	the	man	starts	speaking	again	--	from
the	very	beginning.
Delgado	himself	has	not	been	able	yet	to	figure	out	how	the	tape	gets	reversed	--
because	 the	 man	 always	 starts	 from	 the	 beginning.	 Wherever	 you	 leave	 him
makes	no	difference.
It	is	not	that	he	starts	where	you	left	him.	Some	automatic	process	in	the	mind
will	be	discovered...
Some	 electrode	 can	 be	 implanted	 in	 the	 mind,	 permanently,	 and	 it	 can	 be
controlled	from	far	away	by	remote	control.	Delgado	exhibited	it	in	Spain,	in	a
bullfight.	He	planted	an	electrode	in	the	mind	of	the	toughest	bull,	and	he	stood
in	the	field	showing	a	red	flag.
The	 bull	 rushed	 towards	 him	 ferociously,	 and	 the	 people	 almost	 stopped
breathing:	"The	bull	is	going	to	kill	one	of	our	best	geniuses!"	But	they	did	not
know	that	he	had	a	remote	control	switch	in	his	pocket	--	just	a	small	box	with	a
switch.
Just	when	the	bull	was	about	to	attack,	from	one	foot	away,	he	pushed	the	button
and	the	bull	stopped,	just	frozen.	And	he	did	it	many	times.	Again	and	again	the
bull	 came	 with	 the	 same	 ferocity,	 and	 again	 and	 again	 he	 stopped	 whenever
Delgado	pushed	the	button.
Delgado	 says,	 "Sooner	or	 later,	 this	 discovery	 can	 either	become	a	blessing	 to
humanity,	or	it	can	become	a	curse."
Every	child's	mind	can	be	easily	implanted	with	an	electrode.	You	will	have	very
obedient	 people;	 you	 will	 not	 have	 any	 rebels,	 you	 will	 not	 have	 any
revolutionaries,	but	the	whole	charm	of	life	will	be	gone.	People	will	be	simply
vegetables,	enslaved	scientifically.	And	they	will	not	know,	because	the	remote
control	unit	may	be	in	the	capital,	in	the	hands	of	the	government.
It	 can	 be	 useful	 --	 criminals	 can	 be	 prevented,	 murderers	 can	 be	 prevented,
thieves	 can	be	 changed,	 rapists	 can	be	 transformed	 --	 but	 it	 is	 dangerous	 also.
Anybody	who	 is	 in	power	can	make	 the	whole	country	 just	a	crowd	of	slaves.
And	 you	 cannot	 do	 anything,	 because	 you	 don't	 know.	 Remember	 one	 thing,
inside	the	skull,	where	the	brain	is,	you	don't	have	any	sensitivity.	Even	if	a	stone
is	 put	 inside	 your	 skull,	 you	 will	 never	 know;	 you	 just	 don't	 have	 sensitive
nerves	there	which	can	inform	you.
This	came	to	be	known	in	the	second	world	war.	A	man	was	shot	with	a	bullet,
and	 somehow	 the	 doctors	 thought	 that	 the	 bullet	 was	 not	 inside	 him,	 but	 had
missed,	 just	 touching	 his	 head.	 So	 they	 treated	 the	 wound,	 it	 healed	 and	 the
bullet	remained	inside	his	head	for	ten	years	--	and	he	was	never	aware	of	it.	It
was	for	some	other	reasons	that	he	was	being	x-rayed,	and	they	were	surprised	to
find	that	there	was	a	bullet	inside	him.
Then	 the	wound	was	opened	and	 the	bullet	was	 found.	That	made	 it	clear	 that
anything	can	be	planted	in	the	mind.
Delgado's	 mechanism	 is	 scientific,	 but	 society	 has	 been	 doing	 the	 same	 by
planting	 ideas...	 It	 is	 an	 old	 bullock	 cart	method.	 It	 takes	 so	 long,	 twenty-five
years,	and	it	is	not	foolproof,	because	a	few	revolutionaries	escape,	a	few	rebels
are	still	born.	And	it	is	good	that	there	are	people	who	escape	from	the	enslaving
structure	 of	 the	 society,	 because	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 have	 advanced
knowledge,	 who	 have	 given	 all	 scientific	 progress,	 who	 have	 changed	 all
superstitions.
But	the	society	wants	you	simply	to	be	a	carbon	copy,	never	an	original.
The	 strategy	 to	 create	 a	 mind	 in	 you	 is	 to	 go	 on	 repeating	 certain	 things
continuously.
And	even	if	a	lie	is	repeated	continuously	it	starts	becoming	a	truth;	you	forget
that	it	was	a	lie	in	the	beginning.
Adolf	 Hitler	 started	 lying	 to	 the	 German	 people	 that	 all	 the	 misery	 of	 their
country	 is	 because	 of	 the	 Jews.	 Now	 this	 is	 such	 an	 absurd	 thing	 --	 like
somebody	saying	that	all	the	misery	of	the	country	is	because	of	bicycles,	so	if
we	destroy	all	the	bicycles	all	the	misery	will	disappear.
In	 fact	 the	 Jews	were	 the	very	backbone	of	Germany,	 they	had	 created	 all	 the
wealth	 of	Germany.	And	 they	 had	 no	 other	 nation,	 so	 any	 nation	 --	wherever
they	were	--	was	their	nation.	They	had	no	other	alternative	in	their	minds;	they
could	not	betray,	and	they	had	been	doing	all	the	things	that	any	other	German
was	doing	for	the	welfare	of	the	country.
But	Adolf	Hitler	 in	 his	 autobiography	writes,	 "It	 doesn't	matter	what	 you	 say,
because	 there	 is	no	such	thing	as	 truth.	Truth	 is	a	 lie	 that	has	been	repeated	so
often	that	you	have	forgotten	that	it	is	a	lie."	So	the	only	difference,	according	to
him,	 between	 truth	 and	 a	 lie	 is	 that	 the	 lie	 is	 fresh	 and	 truth	 is	 old;	 otherwise
there	is	no	difference.	And	he	seems	to	have	some	insight	in	it.
For	example,	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism	 --	 these	 three	 religions
repeat	 to	 their	 children,	 "There	 is	 a	 God."	 Jainism,	 Buddhism,	 Taoism,	 three
other	religions,	say
"There	is	no	God."	The	first	group	of	three	religions	have	a	certain	mind.	Their
whole	life	is	filled	with	the	idea	of	God,	hell,	heaven,	prayer.	The	second	group
of	 three	religions	has	no	prayer	because	 there	 is	nobody	to	pray	 to,	 there	 is	no
God.	And	the	very	question	does	not	arise.
Now,	half	of	the	world	is	communist.	They	don't	believe	even	in	the	soul	of	man,
and	every	child	 is	continuously	 told	 that	man	is	matter,	 that	when	man	dies	he
simply	 dies,	 nothing	 remains;	 that	 there	 is	 no	 soul	 --	 consciousness	 is	 a	 by-
product.	Now	half	of	the	humanity	repeats	it	--	as	the	truth.
Adolf	Hitler	 cannot	 be	 accused	 of	 being	 absolutely	 absurd.	 It	 seems	 to	 be	 the
case	that	if	you	repeat	anything	to	people,	they	will	slowly,	slowly	start	believing
it.	And	if	it	has	been	repeated	for	centuries,	it	has	become	a	heritage.
Your	mind	is	not	yours.	And	your	mind	is	not	young;	it	is	centuries	old	--	three
thousand	years	old,	five	thousand	years	old.	That's	why	every	society	is	afraid	of
anybody	creating	a	doubt	about	the	mind.
That's	my	crime:	that	I	create	a	doubt	in	you	about	your	mind.	And	I	want	you	to
understand	that	it	is	not	your	mind,	and	your	search	should	be	to	find	your	own
mind.	To	be	under	somebody	else's	impact	is	to	remain	psychologically	a	slave.
And	life	is	not	for	slavery.	It	is	to	taste	freedom.
There	is	something	like	truth,	but	with	this	mind	you	can	never	know	it,	because
this	mind	is	full	of	lies,	repeated	for	century	after	century.	You	can	find	the	truth
when	you	put	this	mind	completely	aside	and	look	at	existence	with	fresh	eyes,
like	a	newborn	child;	then	whatever	you	experience	is	truth.	And	if	you	remain
constantly	 alert	 not	 to	 allow	 others	 to	 interfere	 with	 your	 inner	 growth,	 there
comes	 a	 moment	 when	 you	 become	 so	 attuned	 with	 existence,	 so	 one	 with
existence...
Only	this	experience	is	religious	experience.	It	is	not	Jewish,	it	is	not	Christian,
it	 is	 not	Hindu.	How	 can	 any	 experience	 be	 Jewish,	Hindu	 or	Mohammedan?
You	never	see	its	ridiculousness.	You	eat	something	and	you	say	it	is	delicious,
but	is	it	Christian,	or	Hindu,	or	Buddhist?	You	taste	something	and	you	say	it	is
sweet,	but	is	it	communist?	--
is	it	materialist	or	spiritualist?	These	questions	are	nonsense.	It	is	simply	sweet,
it	is	simply	delicious.
When	you	feel	existence	immediately,	without	any	mediator,	with	no	mind	given
by	anybody	else	to	you,	you	taste	something	which	transforms	you,	which	makes
you	 enlightened,	 awakened,	 which	 brings	 you	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of
consciousness.
A	greater	 fulfillment	 there	 is	 not.	A	higher	 contentment	 there	 is	 not.	A	deeper
relaxation	there	is	not.
You	have	come	home.
Life	becomes	a	joy,	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration.
And	I	call	this	life	religious.
I	 want	 everybody	 to	 be	 religious,	 but	 I	 don't	 want	 anybody	 to	 be	 Christian,
Hindu,	Mohammedan,	because	those	are	the	barriers	which	will	never	allow	you
to	 become	 religious.	 And	 you	 can	 see	 it	 clearly:	 Gautam	 Buddha	 is	 not	 a
Buddhist,	he	never	heard	the	word	Buddhist;	Jesus	Christ	is	not	a	Christian,	he
never	 heard	 the	word	Christian	 and	 certainly	 he	 is	 not	 a	 Jew;	 otherwise	 Jews
would	not	have	crucified	him.
If	Jews	decided	to	crucify	Jesus,	that	simply	means	he	has	dropped	the	mind	that
they	have	given	him	to	carry	his	whole	life,	that	he	is	saying	things	that	are	not
part	of	their	given	mind.	And	Jesus	continuously	reminds	them	of	it.	He	says,	"It
has	been	said	by	the	old	prophets"	--	and	who	were	those	old	prophets?	all	Jews
--	 "it	 has	 been	 said,	Àn	 eye	 for	 an	 eye	 is	 the	 law.'	 But	 I	 say	 unto	 you	 that	 if
somebody	slaps	you	on	one	cheek,	give	him	the	other	cheek	too."
This	was	not	part	of	the	Jewish	mind.	The	Jewish	God	declares,	"I	am	not	a	nice
person!	I	am	a	very	angry	God,	I	am	very	jealous.	Remember	that	I	am	not	your
uncle."	These	are	actually	the	words:	"I	am	not	your	uncle,	I	am	not	nice,	I	am
jealous,	I	am	angry."	And	Jesus	says,	"God	is	love."
I	 am	 trying	 to	 show	 you	 that	 he	 has	 dropped	 the	 Jewish	mind,	 and	 that's	 the
reward	he	got
--	the	crucifixion.	The	crucifixion	was	the	reward	for	dropping	the	Jewish	mind.
He	 was	 dangerous	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 he	 would	 create	 doubt	 in	 other	 people's
minds:	 "Our	 God	 says	 he	 is	 angry,	 jealous	 --	 he	 will	 destroy	 those	 who	 are
against	him,	and	Jesus	is	saying	that	God	is	love.	He	is	going	against	our	vested
interest."
He	 was	 killed	 --	 he	 was	 not	 a	 Jew;	 he	 was	 not	 Christian	 because	 the	 word
`Christian'	 does	 not	 exist	 in	 the	 Hebrew	 language,	 the	 word	 `Christ'	 does	 not
exist	 in	 the	Hebrew	 language.	He	was	 called	 the	messiah	 --	 that	 is	 equivalent
tòChrist.'	 `Christ'	 is	 a	Greek	word.	 It	was	 three	 hundred	years	 later	 that	 Jesus'
sayings	 were	 translated	 into	 Greek;	 then	 messiah	 became	 Christ,	 and	 the
followers	became	Christians.
What	I	am	trying	to	say	to	you	is	that	Gautam	Buddha	was	not	a	Hindu.	He	was
born	in	a	Hindu	family,	but	he	has	renounced	it;	he	renounced	it	the	very	day	he
started	his	search	for	truth.	See	the	simple	point:	the	Hindu	need	not	search	for
the	 truth;	 the	 Hindu	 has	 already	 got	 it	 ready-made.	 It	 has	 been	 given	 by	 the
tradition,	by	the	religion,	by	the	scriptures;	he	need	not	go	in	search.
The	day	Gautam	Buddha	went	in	search	for	truth,	he	dropped	the	Hindu	mind.
And	of	course	he	was	not	a	Buddhist;	that	was	a	name	his	followers	were	given
later	on	by	Hindus,	to	keep	a	distinction.	But	he	had	his	own	mind.
To	have	one's	own	mind	in	the	world	is	the	richest	thing	possible.	But	no	society
allows	 it;	 every	 society	 keeps	 you	 poor.	 On	 your	 account	 every	 society,
particularly	those	who	are	in	power	--	either	through	money	or	through	politics
or	through	religion	or	through	knowledge,	or	for	any	reason	--	those	who	are	in
power	 don't	 want	 people	 to	 have	 their	 own	 minds.	 It	 is	 dangerous	 to	 their
interests.	 They	 want	 not	 men	 but	 sheep,	 not	 individuals	 but	 crowds,	 who	 are
always	 in	need	of	being	 led,	who	are	always	 in	need	of	being	 told	what	 to	do,
what	not	 to	do;	who	don't	have	 their	own	minds,	 their	own	insights,	 their	own
consciousness.	They	are	always	dependent.
The	 fear	 of	 anybody	 being	 different,	 being	 a	 stranger,	 being	 an	 outsider,	 is
always	 the	same	for	 the	simple	reason	 that	no	society	will	have	 the	courage	 to
accept	 you	 --	 because	 that	 society	 has	 not	 made	 your	 mind,	 and	 that	 society
cannot	 trust	 that	 you	will	 always	 be	 obedient	 to	 it,	 that	 you	will	 never	 object
about	anything,	or	create	doubt	about	anything,	or	be	skeptical	about	anything.
For	example,	 in	 India	 the	cow	is	worshipped	as	 the	mother.	Anybody	who	has
not	 been	 brought	 up	 as	 a	 Hindu	 is	 simply	 going	 to	 be	 skeptical,	 "This	 is
nonsense!"	And	this	is	not	all.	Hindus	do	things	that	nobody	can	even	conceive
of:	they	drink	the	urine	of	the	cow	because	it	is	holy,	they	eat	cowdung	because
it	is	holy.
And	it	is	not	only	the	villagers	or	the	uneducated,	or	the	uncultured.	In	Mahatma
Gandhi's	ashram	there	was	a	man,	a	professor,	who	lived	for	six	months	only	on
the	urine	of	cows	and	cowdung	--	not	eating	anything	else,	not	drinking	anything
else.	And	Mahatma	Gandhi	praised	him,	saying	that	he	is	a	saint.
Now,	Hindus	are	angry	at	me	because	 I	 cannot	accept	 this	kind	of	 stupidity	 --
that	it	can	make	somebody	a	saint.	It	simply	proves	that	man	was	an	idiot!	But
Mahatma	Gandhi	is	a	politician;	he	is	also	not	a	saint.	If	he	was	a	saint	he	would
also	have	said,	"This	is	nonsense.	You	cannot	become	holy	by	eating	cowdung."
But	he	is	a	politician	par	excellence,	in	the	garb	of	a	religious	saint.	Saying	that
this	man	is	a	saint,	he	has	satisfied	the	whole	Hindu	community;	now	he	is	the
sole	 leader	 of	 all	 the	 Hindus.	 Anybody	 who	 has	 not	 been	 brought	 up	 by	 the
Hindus	will	not	be	able	to	accept	it.
So	any	deviation	from	the	norm	in	any	society...	There	are	many	people	who	you
call	mad,	but	they	are	not	mad.	They	are	simply	not	agreeing	with	your	madness;
they	have	a	private	madness	of	their	own.	You	have	a	collective	madness.
Now,	 for	 example,	 if	 all	 four	 hundred	 million	 Hindus	 accept	 without	 any
question	the	idea	that	drinking	the	urine	of	cows	makes	you	holy,	and	somebody
starts	drinking	 the	urine	of	a	horse,	 they	say	he	 is	mad.	 I	simply	say	 that	he	 is
privately	mad,	you	are	collectively	mad.	But	you	both	are	mad!
I	 would	 like	 that	 man	 more	 than	 this	 collective	 madness;	 at	 least	 he	 has	 the
courage	 to	 do	 something	 private,	 individual.	 It	 will	 look	 foolish	 to	 all	 the
Hindus,	but	they	will	not	look	foolish	to	themselves,	to	their	own	mind.
No	society	wants	strangers,	outsiders.	Why	 is	 the	whole	world	afraid	of	me?	I
am	not	a	terrorist;	I	am	not	making	bombs	and	killing	people.	I	am	a	nonviolent
person.	But	they	can	accept	terrorists.
In	Germany	 it	 actually	 happened	 at	 the	 same	 time...	 They	 prevented	me	 from
entering	Germany,	passed	a	resolution	that	I	am	a	dangerous	man	and	I	should
not	be	allowed	any	entry	into	Germany,	and	at	the	same	time	they	allowed	all	the
terrorist	groups	of	Europe	to	have	a	world	conference.
I	was	simply	amazed!	All	the	terrorist	groups	that	have	been	murdering	people,
that	have	hijacked	airplanes,	 that	have	bombed	embassies,	 that	have	kidnapped
people	--	their	international	conference	is	allowed,	but	I	cannot	be	allowed	four
weeks	of	being	a	tourist	in	the	country.
Those	terrorists	are	not	of	a	different	mind.
It	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon.	When	Pontius	Pilate	had	asked...	Three	people
were	being	crucified	the	same	day	as	Jesus,	and	it	was	the	convention	that	one
can	be	forgiven
--	and	it	was	the	people's	decision.	And	Pontius	Pilate	was	absolutely	certain	that
they	 would	 ask,	 "Release	 Jesus."	 He	 was	 innocent;	 he	 had	 done	 no	 harm	 to
anybody.	But	the	Jews	shouted,	the	high	priests	shouted,	"We	want	Barabbas"	--
and	 Barabbas	 was	 a	 confirmed	 criminal.	 He	 had	 committed	 seven	 murders,
rapes...	any	kind	of	crime	you	name	and	he	had	done	it.
But	you	should	not	be	surprised,	because	Barabbas	belongs	to	the	Jews.	He	may
be	a	murderer,	but	his	mind	is	still	of	a	Jew.	This	Jesus	may	be	innocent,	but	his
mind	is	no	longer	that	of	the	Jews;	he	is	an	outsider,	he	is	dangerous.	Barabbas	is
not	dangerous.
What	can	he	do?	A	few	more	murders	at	the	most.	But	this	Jesus	can	destroy	the
whole	structure	of	the	society,	because	it	is	standing	only	on	superstitions.
Even	 Barabbas	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 He	 thought	 something	 must	 have	 gone
wrong:	 "There	 is	 not	 another	 criminal	 in	 the	whole	 country	who	 can	 compete
with	me,	and	this	poor	Jesus,	who	has	never	done	anything	except	talking	to	few
people	 here	 and	 there...	 And	 nobody	 is	 asking	 for	 him."	 Not	 a	 single	 voice
shouted	 for	 Jesus	 to	be	 released,	 and	 thousands	of	 people	 shouted,	 "Barabbas!
We	want	Barabbas!"
If	you	go	into	the	psychology	of	it,	it	is	very	simple.	All	those	terrorists	having	a
conference	 in	 Germany	 are	 acceptable:	 they	 have	 the	 same	 mind,	 the	 same
politics.	They	belong	to	the	same	rotten	society.
But	 I	 cannot	 be	 allowed.	 Against	 me	 they	 have	 the	 idea	 that	 I	 will	 corrupt
people.	The	same	was	their	condemnation	of	Socrates	--	that	he	corrupts	people	-
-	and	all	that	Socrates	was	doing	was	teaching	people	to	have	their	own	mind.
All	 the	 great	masters	 in	 the	world	 have	 been	 saying	 only	 one	 thing	 down	 the
centuries,
"Have	your	own	mind	and	have	your	own	 individuality.	Don't	be	a	part	of	 the
crowd;	don't	be	a	wheel	in	the	whole	mechanism	of	a	vast	society.	Be	individual,
on	your	own.
Live	life	with	your	own	eyes;	listen	to	music	with	your	own	ears."
But	we	are	not	doing	anything	with	our	own	ears,	with	our	own	eyes,	with	our
own	minds;	everything	is	being	taught,	and	we	are	following	it.
Deviation	 is	 dangerous	 to	 the	 rotten	 societies.	And	 particularly	 in	 the	West	 --
where	 no	 idea	 of	 enlightenment	 has	 ever	 existed	 --	 it	 is	 more	 so,	 because
enlightenment	 simply	 means	 going	 beyond	 the	 mind.	 And	 going	 beyond	 the
mind	you	will	be	yourself.
The	West	has	never	nourished	the	idea	of	enlightenment.	It	is	against	the	society,
against	the	religion;	they	have	never	bothered	about	it.
Think	 about	 truth	 --	 that	 is	 allowed!	 That's	 why	 in	 the	 West	 philosophy	 has
grown	to	great	heights	and	depths.	But	it	is	always	thinking	about	truth.	It	is	like
madmen	 thinking	 about	 sanity,	 blind	 men	 thinking	 about	 light.	 However	 the
blind	 man	 tries	 to	 think	 about	 light...	 he	 may	 create	 a	 big	 system	 of	 thought
about	what	 light	 is,	but	 it	 is	not	going	 to	be	anything	 like	 light.	For	 light,	you
need	eyes.
You	 cannot	 think	 about	 truth,	 because	 thinking	will	 be	 done	 by	 your	mind	 --
which	 is	 full	of	 lies,	nothing	but	 lies.	How	are	you	going	 to	 think	about	 truth?
Truth	can	be	found	only	when	you	have	put	the	mind	aside.
In	the	East	we	say	truth	is	the	experience	that	happens	in	the	state	of	no-mind	or
in	the	state	of	beyond	mind.	But	in	the	West	the	very	idea	has	not	existed.	And
that	will	make	one	thing	clear	to	you:	philosophy	is	a	Western	thing.	In	the	East
there	is	nothing	like	philosophy.
It	is	very	strange:	the	East	is	far	older,	at	least	ten	thousand	years	old,	but	there	is
nothing	 like	 philosophy	 in	 the	 East.	 What	 is	 called	 Eastern	 philosophy	 is	 a
wrong	name.	 In	 the	East	 it	 is	 called	darshan	 --	 darshan	means	 "to	 see."	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	thinking.	The	very	word	darshan	means	"to	see."
I	 had	 to	 coin	 my	 own	 word	 for	 it:	 I	 call	 it	 philosia,	 as	 against	 philosophy,
because	philosophy	means	"to	 think,"	and	philosia	means	"the	 love	of	seeing."
Philosophy	means
"the	 love	 of	 thinking"	 --	 but	what	 can	 you	 think?	 Just	 to	 avoid	 the	 danger	 of
people	going	beyond	mind,	and	becoming	dangerous	to	the	society,	a	substitute,
a	toy	has	been	created.
That	is	philosophy.
No	 philosopher	 comes	 to	 experience	 anything.	 No	 philosopher	 becomes
enlightened	 or	 awakened;	 he	 remains	 on	 the	 same	 ground	 as	 you	 are,	 as
unconscious	as	you	are.
Darshan	 --	 philosia	 --	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 approach.	 It's	 approach	 is	 by
witnessing	your	mind,	not	by	thinking	but	just	becoming	a	watcher	of	your	mind
and	creating	a	distance	between	you	and	your	 thoughts.	Just	seeing	 them,	as	 if
you	 are	 on	 a	 hill	 and	 the	whole	mind	 and	 its	 traffic	 is	 going	 on	 down	 in	 the
valley,	a	moment	comes	when	thoughts	start	disappearing,	because	their	life	is	in
the	identity.	Their	life	is	the	life	of	a	parasite;	they	suck	your	blood.
If	you	are	far	away	and	you	are	not	giving	any	juice	to	your	thoughts,	they	start
shrinking	and	dying.	And	when	there	are	no	thoughts	around	you	but	immense
silence,	 tremendous	 nothingness,	 just	 a	watcher	 and	 nothing	 to	watch...	 this	 is
the	moment	you	are	freed	from	the	fetters	of	the	mind.	And	this	is	the	moment	of
the	beginning	of	a	new	life.
But	you	may	look	mad	to	people,	because	from	this	moment	your	behavior	will
be	different.	From	this	moment	you	will	have	an	originality;	you	cannot	be	part
of	the	crowd.	People	will	think	you	have	gone	wrong	somewhere.	It	is	strange	--
the	people	are	wrong!	But	in	a	way	it	is	not	strange.	If	you	go	into	a	society	of
blind	people	with	eyes,	nobody	is	going	to	believe	that	you	have	eyes.	You	must
be	having	some	mad	illusion	--
eyes	don't	exist.	Nobody	has	eyes,	how	can	you	have?
The	enlightened	person	in	the	West	will	be	condemned	as	mad.
The	people	who	are	mad	in	the	West	are	mad	because	you	have	created	so	much
tension	and	anxiety	and	anguish,	and	you	have	given	them	such	a	rotten	mind,
that	 it	 cannot	 manage.	 A	 point	 comes	 when	 it	 breaks	 down.	When	 the	 mind
breaks	down,	the	person	falls	below	the	mind;	hence	psychoanalysis	is	a	Western
phenomenon.	In	the	East	there	is	nothing	parallel	to	psychoanalysis.
In	 the	 East	 we	 have	 tried	 for	 a	 breakTHROUGH,	 not	 for	 a	 breakdown.	 The
breakthrough	takes	you	above	the	mind,	and	the	breakdown	simply	pulls	you	to
a	subhuman	level.	But	for	that	too	society	is	responsible.	It	gives	you	too	much
ambition,	which	it	cannot	fulfill.
It	gives	you	too	much	desire	--	for	money,	for	power	--	which	it	cannot	fulfill.	It
only	teaches	you	how	to	go	on	climbing	the	ladder	of	success,	higher	and	higher,
and	tells	you	to	be	quick,	because	you	have	only	a	small	life,	and	so	much	has	to
be	done!	There	is	no	time	for	living,	no	time	for	loving,	no	time	for	rejoicing.
People	 go	 on	 postponing	 everything	 that	 is	 meaningful.	 Tomorrow	 they	 will
laugh;	today,	money	has	to	be	gathered...	more	money,	more	power,	more	things,
more	gadgets.
Tomorrow	they	will	love	--	today	there	is	no	time.	But	tomorrow	never	comes,
and	one	day	they	find	themselves	burdened	with	all	kinds	of	gadgets,	burdened
with	money.	They	have	come	to	the	top	of	the	ladder	--	and	there	is	nowhere	to
go	except	to	jump	in	a	lake.
But	they	cannot	even	say	to	other	people,	"Don't	bother	to	come	here	--	there	is
nothing,"
because	that	will	make	them	look	stupid.	You	have	become	the	president	of	the
country	 and	 you	 are	 saying,	 "Here	 is	 nothing	 --	 don't	 bother.	This	 is	 simply	 a
ladder	which	leads	nowhere"	--	you	will	feel	stupid.
So	 they	 go	 on	 pretending	 that	 they	 have	 achieved,	 that	 they	 have	 found;	 and
deep	down	they	are	empty,	meaningless,	and	they	have	wasted	their	whole	life.
If	they	break	down	under	such	pressure,	the	society	is	responsible.	The	society	is
driving	people	mad.
In	the	East	you	will	not	find	so	many	mad	people,	so	many	people	committing
suicide	--
and	the	East	 is	poor,	so	poor	that	people	can't	manage	to	have	one	meal	a	day.
Logically	 there	 should	be	more	people	committing	 suicide,	more	people	going
mad.	But	no,	they	are	not	going	mad,	they	are	not	committing	suicide.	they	seem
to	be	 in	a	 certain	contentment,	because	ambition	 is	not	being	part	of	 the	mind
given	 by	 the	 society;	 their	 society	 also	 gives	 them	 ambition,	 but	 for	 the	 other
world,	not	for	this	world.	This	world	is	condemned.
You	 try	 to	 understand...	Their	 society	 also	 gives	 them	ambition	 --	 ambition	 to
reach	to	paradise,	to	realize	God	--	but	that	ambition	is	against	the	ambitions	of
this	world.
"Renounce	 this	 world!	 Here	 there	 is	 nothing	 but	 shadows;	 it	 is	 illusory."	 For
thousands	of	years	they	have	thought	it	is	illusory,	it	is	worthless	to	bother	about
it	--	why	not	look	for	the	real	thing?	So	they	don't	go	mad.	In	utter	poverty,	in
sickness,	 in	 death...	 but	 you	will	 not	 find	 them	 tense,	 anxious,	 and	 they	 don't
need	any	psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy	is	absolutely	Western;	it	is	the	need	of	the	Western	mind.	First	the
Western	 mind	 creates	 all	 kinds	 of	 desires	 and	 ambitions,	 which	 are	 going	 to
create	a	breakdown	sooner	or	later;	then	psychotherapy	comes	in.	It	is	now	the
most	 highly-paid	 profession,	 but	 the	 strangest	 thing	 is	 that	 psychotherapists
commit	suicide	more	 than	people	 from	any	other	profession,	 twice	as	much	as
any	other	profession,	and	psychotherapists	go	mad	 twice	as	much	as	any	other
profession.	And	these	are	the	people	who	are	helping	other	people	to	be	sane!	It
is	really	a	mess.
It	can	be	cleaned	up.	It	is	simply	a	question	of	understanding	that	the	mind	that
we	have	is	not	capable	of	encountering	reality,	because	reality	is	contemporary,
and	 the	mind	 is	 two	 thousand	years	old.	The	gap	 is	 big,	 and	 the	mind	 fails	 to
encounter	reality.	The	mind	has	to	go	with	reality,	step	by	step;	it	has	not	to	lag
behind.	And	that	is	possible	only	if	each	individual	has	his	own	mind,	his	own
individuality.
I	am	basically	an	individualist,	because	only	the	individual	has	a	soul.	No	group
can	claim	a	soul	--	they	are	all	dead	arrangements.	Only	the	individual	is	a	living
phenomenon.	We	have	to	help	the	living	phenomenon	to	be	contemporary,	and
to	 remain	 contemporary,	 because	 what	 is	 contemporary	 today	 will	 not	 be
contemporary	tomorrow,	so	you	have	to	learn	the	methods	of	flowing	like	a	river
with	 existence,	 each	moment.	Die	 each	moment	 to	 the	 past,	 and	be	 born	 each
moment	to	the	new.
Unless	 that	 becomes	 your	 religion,	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 in	 trouble,	 and	 your
society	is	going	to	be	in	trouble.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	 IT	THAT	IN	SPITE	OF	THE	VAST	RANGE	OF	SUBJECTS	THAT
YOU
COVER	 IN	 YOUR	 TALKS	 --	 PERHAPS	 A	 WIDER	 RANGE	 THAN	 ANY
MAN	WHO
HAS	 EVER	 LIVED	 --	WHENEVER	 I	 DISCUSS	 YOU	WITH	 PRESS	 AND
ANY
OTHER	 INTERESTED	 PARTIES,	 THEY	 SEEM	 PREOCCUPIED	 WITH
ONLY	ONE
SUBJECT:	SEX?
I	am	reminded	of	Doctor	Johnson.	He	had	made	one	of	the	best	dictionaries	of
his	times.
It	was	a	very	big,	voluminous	book	--	more	than	one	thousand	pages.	Three	old
ladies	 came	 to	 him,	 very	 angry;	 they	 must	 have	 been	 seventy,	 seventy-five,
eighty,	they	all	had	glasses.	And	they	said,	"Are	you	not	ashamed	of	your	book?
There	are	three	words	in	it	which	are	obscene!"
Doctor	Johnson	said,	"My	God,	in	a	book	of	one	thousand	pages,	in	which	there
are	 thousands	 of	 words,	 how	 could	 you	manage	 at	 your	 age,	 with	 such	 thick
glasses,	to	find	three	obscene	words?	You	are	great	researchers.	You	must	have
been	looking	for	them.
Nobody	else	has	objected	to	me;	nobody	has	even	mentioned	them."
I	have	almost	four	hundred	books	in	my	name.	I	have	not	written	anything,	but
these	are	a	collection	of	my	talks.	Out	of	four	hundred	books	there	is	only	one
book	on	sex,	and	that	too	is	not	really	on	sex;	it	is	basically	on	how	to	transcend
sex,	how	to	bring	the	energy	of	sex	to	a	sublimated	state,	because	it	is	our	basic
energy.
It	can	produce	life...	That	is	only	one	thing	that	we	know	about	it,	but	that	even
animals	manage.	And	scientists	say	even	trees	have	their	own	kind	of	sexuality,
so	 the	whole	of	existence	manages	some	kind	of	sexual	energy.	 It	 is	only	man
who	has	the	privilege	to	change	the	character	and	the	quality	of	sexual	energy.
The	 name	 of	 the	 book	 is	 FROM	 SEX	 TO	 SUPERCONSCIOUSNESS	 --	 but
nobody	talks	about	superconsciousness.	The	book	is	about	superconsciousness;
sex	is	only	to	be	the	beginning,	where	everybody	is.	There	are	methods	that	can
start	the	energy	moving	upwards,	and	in	the	East,	for	at	least	ten	thousand	years,
there	has	developed	a	special	science,	Tantra.	There	is	no	parallel	in	the	West	of
such	a	science.
For	 ten	 thousand	years	people	have	experimented	with	how	sexual	 energy	can
become	your	spirituality,	how	your	sexuality	can	become	your	spirituality.	It	 is
proved	 beyond	 doubt	 --	 thousands	 of	 people	 have	 gone	 through	 the
transformation.	Tantra	seems	to	be	the	science	that	is,	sooner	or	later,	going	to	be
accepted	 in	 the	 whole	 world,	 because	 people	 are	 suffering	 from	 all	 kinds	 of
perversions.	That's	why	they	go	on	talking	about	sex	as	if	that	is	my	work,	as	if
twenty-four	hours	a	day	I	am	talking	about	sex.	Their	repressed	sexuality	is	the
problem.
A	great	poet,	Heinrich	Heine,	once	got	lost	in	the	forest.	For	three	days	he	could
not	find	the	way	out.	Hungry,	tired,	worried	about	wild	animals	the	whole	night,
sitting	 in	 the	 trees,	 and	 the	 whole	 day	 stumbling,	 trying	 to	 find	 some	 human
being...	But	for	three	days	he	could	not	meet	anyone	to	show	him	the	way.	The
third	night	was	a	full-moon	night.
He	was	sitting	in	a	tree,	utterly	exhausted.	He	looked	at	the	moon,	and	suddenly
he	laughed.
He	laughed	because	he	had	written	so	many	poems	about	the	moon	and	he	has
read	so	many	poems	about	the	moon.	The	moon	is	such	a	romantic	phenomenon
that	 no	 poet	 of	 any	 standing	 can	 leave	 it	 out,	 no	 painter	 can	 leave	 it	 out.	 Its
impact	 is	 deep,	 its	 beauty	 is	 great.	 So	why	did	he	 laugh?	He	 laughed	because
when	he	looked	at	the	moon,	he	didn't	see	all	those	romantic	things	that	he	was
talking	of	in	his	poems;	he	saw	a	round	loaf	of	bread,	floating	in	the	sky.
He	said,	"My	God!	What	has	happened	to	me?"	After	three	days	of	hunger	and
tiredness,	 it	 is	natural,	but	perhaps	his	experience	was	unique:	nobody	else	has
ever	 seen	 a	 floating	 round	 loaf	 of	 bread	 floating	 in	 the	 sky!	 He	 laughed	 at
himself,	and	for	the	first	time	he	understood	that	what	he	had	been	saying	about
the	moon	had	nothing	to	do	with	the	moon;	it	had	something	to	do	with	himself.
So	 the	 people	who	 talk	 about	 sex	 and	 condemn	me	don't	 understand	 that	 it	 is
their	repression.	I	have	been	speaking	on	thousands	of	subjects,	but	they	are	not
concerned	with	them	because	that	is	not	their	repression.	Sex	has	been	repressed
traditionally	all	over	the	world.	Naturally	it	is	bound	to	come	up	in	some	way	or
other.	You	cannot	avoid	it.
Even	THE	HOLY	BIBLE	has	five	hundred	pages	of	pure	pornography.	And	it	is
not	an	exception	--	all	other	religious	scriptures...	Hindu	scriptures	are	the	worst.
They	 go	 into	 such	 details	 that	 you	will	 be	worried,	 "Are	 these	 people	 talking
about	 spirituality,	 or	 what?"	 They	 have	 even	 made	 temples	 like	 Khajuraho,
Konarak,	 Puri.	 Each	 temple	 has	 thousands	 of	 naked	 women,	 naked	 men,	 in
different	sexual	postures...	temples!	If	you	suppress	something	in	man	it	is	going
to	come	up	somewhere	or	other,	in	some	way	or	other.
This	repression	of	sex	by	all	the	religions	has	helped	the	pornographic	literature
of	the	world	--	magazines	like	PLAYBOY	--	to	be	read	more	than	anything	else.
Now	 PLAYBOY	 is	 published	 in	 almost	 all	 languages,	 and	 there	 are	 many
magazines	of	the	same	kind.
When	I	was	in	jail	in	America,	in	the	first	jail	I	was	surprised:	every	inmate	had
a	BIBLE,	 and	 one	 inmate,	who	was	 just	 next	 to	me,	 every	 day	 ritually	 in	 the
morning,	in	the	evening,	would	put	his	head	on	THE	BIBLE,	kneel	down	on	the
floor	--	THE	BIBLE	on	the	bed,	his	head	on	THE	BIBLE	--	and	pray.	He	looked
really	pious.
But	 I	 asked	him,	 "This	 is	very	beautiful,	you	are	doing	good,	but	why	do	you
have	all	over	 the	 room	 these	pictures	of	naked	women	 that	you	have	cut	 from
magazines?	and	not	a	single	picture	of	Jesus	Christ?	Jesus	Christ	among	all	these
nudes	would	have	looked	very	beautiful."
He	was	shocked	he	said,	"I	never	thought	about	it.	I	am	a	very	devoted	Christian,
a	fundamentalist."
I	 said,	 "You	 must	 be	 a	 fundamentalist;	 otherwise	 how	 to	 explain	 all	 these
pictures?	 For	 these	 pictures	 to	 exist,	 a	 fundamentalist	 Christian	 is	 absolutely
necessary.	 Don't	 be	 worried!	 They	 are	 not	 contradictory,	 they	 are
complementary.	It	is	a	conspiracy	between	the	churches	and	the	people	who	are
exploiting	your	mind."
My	 whole	 effort	 has	 been	 how	 to	 make	 your	 sex	 a	 natural,	 accepted
phenomenon,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 repression	 --	 and	 then	 you	 don't	 need	 any
pornography;	so	that	 there	is	no	repression	--	and	then	you	don't	dream	of	sex.
Then	the	energy	can	be	transformed.	There	are	valid	methods	available	through
which	the	same	energy	that	brings	life	to	the	world	can	bring	a	new	life	to	you.
That	was	 the	whole	 theme	of	 the	book.	But	nobody	bothered	about	 the	 theme,
nobody	bothered	about	why	I	have	spoken	on	it.	Just	the	word	`sex'	was	in	the
title,	and	that	was	enough.
That	 word	 has	 created	 so	 many	 rumors	 that	 I	 am	 really	 amused!	 People	 are
thinking	 that	 we	 are	 having	 sexual	 orgies	 the	 whole	 day.	 People	 really	 have
imagination!	Just	because	out	of	four	hundred	books,	on	one	book	the	word	`sex'
has	appeared	in	the	title,	their	imagination	has	moved	so	far	away.	But	it	reflects
their	mind;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	me.
In	Khajuraho,	the	Indian	temple,	the	most	famous	temple	in	the	world...	there	are
thirty	temples	--	perhaps	it	would	have	taken	thousands	of	years	to	make	those
temples.	As	 sculptures	 they	are	 just	 the	best;	you	cannot	 create	better.	But	 the
sexual	postures	are	so	absurd	that	you	cannot	even	imagine...
Absolutely	 all	 kinds	 of	 postures	 that	man	 --	 sane	 and	 insane,	whoever!	 --	 has
imagined	 are	 there:	men	 are	making	 love	 to	 animals,	 a	man	 and	 a	woman	 are
standing	on	 their	heads	and	making	 love.	Have	you	ever	 imagined...?	But	why
has	this	happened?	--	and	these	people	must	have	worked	hard!	Repress	anything
and	it	will	take	pervert	proportions.
Now	 there	 is	 homosexuality,	 lesbianism,	 sodomy,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 other
perversions,	 and	 nobody	 ever	 thinks	 about	who	 is	 responsible.	Animals	 in	 the
wild	 are	 never	 homosexual,	 but	 in	 a	 zoo,	 if	 females	 are	 not	 available,	 then
animals	turn	homosexual.	That	gives	a	clue.	It	seems	we	have	made	our	society	a
zoo,	not	a	natural	phenomenon.	We	have	repressed	sex	so	much	that	now	it	goes
on	taking	strange	shapes.
For	example,	homosexuality	must	have	been	born	 in	monasteries,	so	I	call	 it	a
religious	thing.	In	monasteries	men	are	kept	separate	--	no	woman	is	available.
In	nunneries	women	are	separate	--	no	men	are	available.	In	Athos,	 in	Europe,
there	is	one	monastery,	one	thousand	years	old,	which	you	can	enter	--	but	you
cannot	get	out	alive.	You	renounce	the	world	forever:	Enter	 the	monastery	and
the	world	 is	 finished.	 In	 this	monastery,	 not	 even	 a	 six-month-old	 baby	girl	 is
allowed.	 I	 sometimes	 wonder:	 are	 monks	 living	 inside,	 or	 monsters?	 A	 six-
month-old	baby	girl	is	not	allowed;	no	woman	of	any	age	has	ever	entered	there,
dead	or	alive.
Now,	you	are	forcing	people...	These	people	will	become	homosexuals,	the	nuns
will	 become	 lesbians,	 and	 you	 go	 on	 preaching	 celibacy!	 You	 still	 go	 on
preaching	that	monks	should	be	celibate,	nuns	should	be	celibate,	and	 they	are
all	reading	pornographic	literature...	of	course,	hiding	it	in	THE	BIBLE!
We	are	living	in	a	very	sick	society,	which	could	have	been	very	healthy,	and	can
be	healthy	immediately...	just	a	question	of	understanding.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#40
Chapter	title:	The	body	does	not	have	beliefs
2	May	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8605020
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO40
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
100
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
HEARING	 YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 HYPNOSIS	 THE	 OTHER	 MORNING,	 I
REACHED
INTO	A	VERY	QUIET,	RELAXED	STATE.	I	FELT	TOTALLY	SAFE	AND
WRAPPED	IN	A	WONDERFUL	SOFTNESS.
WHEN	 I	 DID	 A	 THREE-MONTH	DEHYPNOTHERAPY	WITH	 SANTOSH
AT	THE
RANCH,	 HOWEVER,	 I	 OFTEN	 FOUND	 MYSELF	 IN	 TOTAL	 HORROR
AND	FEAR,	REGRESSING	INTO	MY	EARLY	CHILDHOOD.	WHAT	DID	I
EXPERIENCE	WITH
YOU?
Hypnosis	 is	 such	a	simple,	 innocent	experience,	 that	even	hearing	about	 it	can
give	 you	 a	 taste	 of	 it.	And	 that's	what	 happened.	Even	when	 I	 am	not	 talking
about	hypnosis,	the	same	is	happening	to	those	who	are	really	listening	to	me.	A
softness,	 a	 calmness,	 a	 silence	 starts	 surrounding	 them.	 That	 is	 a	 signal	 that
whatever	is	being	said	is	being	heard	too,	that	I	am	not	talking	to	the	walls.
About	your	experience	with	Santosh	and	his	dehypnotherapy,	I	can	only	say	one
thing:	Santosh	knows	nothing	about	dehypnotherapy.	He	himself	is	so	tense,	so
continuously	worried,	has	so	many	problems...	but	he	had	studied	hypnosis	as	a
student	for	years	in	Germany	so	he	knows	the	technique;	but	he	has	never	been
in	those	spaces	himself.
It	 is	 just	 like...	 you	 can	 read	 the	map	 of	 the	whole	world	 and	 you	 have	 never
been	to	those	places,	ever.	Knowing	where	Constantinople	is	does	not	mean	that
you	have	been	there.
Knowing	 about	 it	 is	 one	 thing;	 being	 there	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon.
And	in	the	schools	only	the	technique,	the	know-how,	is	being	taught.
So	when	Santosh	came	to	me	he	had	the	know-how	of	hypnosis.	I	engaged	him
in	hypnotherapy,	and	I	tried	my	best	to	make	him	understand	that	we	have	first
to	create	a	state	of	de-hypnotherapy	--	because	every	child	is	being	hypnotized,
from	 the	very	childhood.	That's	how	conditioning	happens;	 that's	how	you	get
your	 mind.	 Your	 parents	 may	 not	 know,	 your	 teachers	 may	 not	 know,	 your
priests	 may	 not	 know	 what	 they	 are	 doing:	 they	 are	 practicing	 hypnotic
techniques.	By	the	time	you	leave	the	university,	you	know	all	the	techniques	for
conditioning	others.	So	whoever	comes	to	me	is	already	conditioned.
I	was	 trying	 to	make	 Santosh	 understand,	 "First	 dehypnotize	 these	 people,	 let
them	get	rid	of	what	society	has	forced	upon	them,	and	only	then	will	hypnosis
be	clean,	young,	fresh,	just	born."
He	was	only	a	student,	so	he	changed	the	name	of	his	therapy	to	dehypnotherapy
on	my	suggestion.	But	what	he	has	been	doing	is	still	 the	same	techniques	that
he	had	learned	in	Germany.	And	those	techniques	can	create	horror,	because	first
you	are	filled	with	social	conditionings,	and	on	top	of	it	you	are	hypnotized.
In	hypnosis	you	reach	to	your	unconscious	mind,	where	all	conditionings	exist.
You	 are	 in	 a	 volcanic	 state.	 There	 are	 going	 to	 be	 horrors	 because	 you	 may
remember	 your	 childhood,	 and	 all	 that	 has	 happened	 to	 you	 since	 your
childhood,	which	you	have	repressed.	Remember,	nobody	represses	any	pleasant
experience	--	why	should	one	repress	a	pleasant	experience?	In	fact	one	tries	to
exaggerate	 it,	 to	himself	 and	 to	others,	 as	much	as	he	can.	One	 represses	only
things	which	are	unpleasant.
So	your	unconscious	is	full	of	serpents	and	scorpions	and	dragons	that	you	have
repressed	because	you	did	not	want	 to	know	about	 them	and	you	did	not	want
others	 to	 know	 about	 them.	Without	 unconditioning	 you,	 if	 you	 are	 lead	 into
hypnosis	 directly	 you	 will	 reach	 a	 hell	 of	 your	 own	 creation:	 whatever	 is
repressed	will	show	its	true	face	to	you	--	and	it	is	natural	that	you	will	become
terrified.
The	 problem	 of	 these	 therapists	 like	 Santosh	 is	 that	 they	 have	 never	 gone
through	the	process	themselves;	 they	have	simply	studied	from	a	teacher.	They
have	never	been	part	of	a	mystery	school,	which	would	have	cleaned	them.	And
in	a	mystery	school	the	technique	is	given	to	you	only	when	you	are	able	to	use
it,	 and	 not	 get	 into	 dark	 spots,	 horror	 spaces,	 terrible	 states.	 They	 are	 all
imaginary,	but	when	you	are	in	them	they	are	real.
So	with	Santosh,	what	happened	with	you	was	a	nightmare	that	was	repressed,
and	 he	 opened	 the	 bottle	 and	 the	 djinn	 came	 out.	 These	 kind	 of	 people	 are
dangerous.	I	told	him	again	and	again,	to	the	point	that	he	was	angry	with	me...
because	he	used	to	think	that	he	was	a	hypnotist,	and	he	had	studied	for	twelve
years	 in	Germany	 --	what	more	 could	 anybody	 teach	 him?	 I	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 a
question	of	teaching.	You	have	not	gone	through	these	spaces	into	which	you	are
leading	other	people,	and	you	don't	know	what	will	happen	to	them."
Now	 all	 these	 therapists	 are	 befooling	 themselves.	 Because	 the	 commune	 has
been	destroyed	by	the	American	government,	it	has	been	a	tremendous	blessing
to	the	therapists.
We	 had	 a	 property	 of	 the	 commune	 in	 Laguna	 Beach	 in	 America,	 and	 our
sannyasins	were	 running	 it;	 we	 had	made	 a	 board	 of	 directors.	 It	 was	 a	 three
million	dollar	property.
What	 Santosh	 did	 was,	 he	 took	 three	 hundred	 sannyasins	 from	 the	 ranch	 to
Laguna	Beach,	 and	 all	 the	 sannyasins	 became	members	 of	 the	 Laguna	 Beach
commune	--	and	of	course	 they	changed	 the	whole	board	of	directors.	Santosh
brought	 his	 own	 directors,	 his	 own	 board,	 and	 he	 opened	 a	 dehypnotherapy
institute	in	Laguna	Beach.	My	name	is	not	mentioned.	He	has	appropriated	the
property	without	thinking	of	its	legal	implications.
And	we	had	been	fighting	for	years,	four	years,	to	win	the	case....
It	 was	 a	 strange	 case.	 There	 used	 to	 be	 a	 Christian	 Church,	 but	 of	 a	 very
independent	character.	The	man	who	was	leading	the	church,	the	priest,	did	not
belong	 to	 any	 organization;	 it	was	 independent,	 it	 had	 four	 hundred	members.
But	 the	 priest	 became	 interested	 in	 me.	 He	 and	 his	 wife	 came	 to	 Poona	 and
became	 sannyasins,	 and	 then	he	went	 back.	 Instead	of	THE	BIBLE	he	 started
teaching	 through	 my	 books.	 His	 congregation	 could	 not	 believe	 what	 had
happened.
But	many	of	his	congregation	were	thrilled	--	they	were	tired	of	listening	to	THE
BIBLE,	bored.	Many	of	his	congregation	came	to	Poona	and	became	sannyasins,
almost	 thirty	 persons	 became	 sannyasins.	 And	 then	 there	 was	 a	 conflict.	 The
conflict	was...	the	non-sannyasins	left	the	congregation	because	it	was	no	longer
Christian,	 and	 they	 had	 joined	 it	 because	 it	 was	 Christian.	 So	 they	 left	 the
congregation;	it	became	purely	a	sannyasin	commune.
Then	the	old	priest	retired....	He	used	to	come	to	festivals	in	the	commune	with
his	wife	-
-	he	was	still	alive	and	still	had	love	for	me	--	but	he	wanted	to	retire,	he	was	old.
So	he	retired,	appointing	sannyasins	as	the	priests	of	the	congregation.	When	he
retired,	 the	people	who	had	left	 the	congregation	went	 to	 the	court,	saying	that
the	 buildings	 and	 the	 grounds	 --	 and	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 place,	 Laguna	 Beach	 --
belong	 to	 them,	and	 these	people	are	not	 the	owners	of	 it.	We	had	 to	 fight	 the
case	for	four	years	continually.
The	case	was	decided	 in	our	 favor	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 these	people	had
left	 the	 congregation;	 they	 were	 no	 longer	 members	 of	 it,	 and	 they	 had	 no
right....	They	should	have	remained	part	of	the	congregation	and	appealed	to	the
court,	then	the	situation	would	have	been	different.	They	were	the	majority,	but
they	had	 left,	and	now	seeing	 that	 sannyasins	had	captured	 the	whole	property
and	the	church,	they	wanted	it	back.	The	court	dismissed	the	case	because	they
had	no	right	any	longer.	The	moment	you	leave	the	congregation,	you	have	no
right....
So	 we	 were	 keeping	 that	 property,	 fourteen	 sannyasins	 were	 there,	 and	 we
wanted	to	sell	it;	for	the	new	mystery	school	you	will	need	money!
Santosh	 has	 done	 a	 great	 service	 to	 us.	Now	 he	 is	 the	 head	 priest.	He	 knows
nothing	as	far	as	experience	is	concerned,	and	he	will	destroy	many	people.	So	I
have	informed	our	people	that	something	has	to	be	done	and	Santosh	has	to	be
removed	from	there;	or	he	has	to	pay	three	million	dollars,	and	then	he	can	do
whatever	he	wants	to	do	in	the	property.	And	our	sannyasins	have	to	be	informed
that	his	hypnotherapy	is	not	going	to	help	them.
I	have	 told	you	about	 a	world	 festival	 that	Teertha,	Rajen,	Poonam	and	others
were	 arranging	 in	 Italy.	 Just	 yesterday	 the	 news	 came	 that	 very	 few	 people
reached	 there;	 they	have	made	a	great	 loss	of	 fifteen	 thousand	dollars,	and	 the
whole	 thing	 was	 absolutely	 dead	 and	 flat.	 All	 these	 great	 therapists	 were	 on
stage,	 but	 there	 was	 no	 celebration,	 there	 was	 no	 feeling	 that	 you	 are	 in	 the
presence	 of	 someone	 who	 is	 enlightened.	 People	 left	 disappointed,	 disgusted
with	the	whole	thing.
I	 told	you	 just	a	 few	days	before	 that	 they	will	soon	be	 in	 trouble.	People	will
desert	them,	because	people	were	not	coming	for	them	--	these	therapists	had	got
a	wrong	idea.
But	 for	 fifteen	 years...	 one	 can	 get	 easily	 into	 a	 wrong	 idea,	 that	 people	 are
coming	for	 them.	Soon	they	will	be	lost	 in	 the	crowd.	And	it	 is	good	that	 they
should	be	 lost;	otherwise	 they	will	play	with	people's	psychology,	no	knowing
what	they	are	doing	and	what	is	going	to	happen.
Hypnosis	 is	 really	a	very	soft	method...	very	mellow	music.	 It	can	happen	 just
sitting	by	my	side	in	silence.	It	can	happen	just	by	listening	so	intently	that	all
your	worries,	 tensions	disappear,	and	you	start	moving	deeper	 into	your	being.
But	those	worries,	tensions,	anguishes,	anxieties	should	disappear	first.
And	`hypnotherapy'	is	an	old	word.	`dehypnotherapy'	is	my	construction.	I	told
Santosh	 to	 make	 it	 dehypnotherapy,	 and	 he	 never	 asked,	 "What	 will	 be	 the
difference	 between	 dehypnotherapy	 and	 hypnotherapy?"	 He	 simply	 made	 it
dehypnotherapy.	Now	he	has	become	the	director	of	a	dehypnotherapy	institute,
and	 he	 does	 not	 know	 what	 the	 difference	 is	 between	 dehypnotherapy	 and
hypnotherapy.
The	process	 is	going	 to	be	 totally	opposite.	Hypnotherapy	can	 take	you	 into	 a
deliberate	sleep;	dehypnotherapy	can	take	you	into	a	deliberate	awakening.	But	I
was	puzzled:	he	did	not	even	ask	what	the	difference	between	the	two	will	be.
It	 is	 unfortunate,	 but	 I	will	 have	 to	make	my	 people	 aware	 of	 the	 dangers	 of
these	therapists,	because	they	will	exaggerate	their	claims,	saying	that	they	have
been	 with	 me	 for	 fifteen	 years.	 But	 they	 have	 not	 been	 with	 me	 for	 fifteen
seconds.	They	were	playing	their	own	small	role	of	being	a	guru	to	a	small	group
of	 people.	 They	 had	 come	 for	 themselves,	 but	 they	 forgot	 completely.	 This	 is
what	happens	to	accidental	people:	they	come	for	one	thing	and	buy	something
else.
I	have	heard	about	a	real	estate	agent	who	was	thought	to	be	the	top	man	in	that
profession,	in	a	big	city.	He	was	part	of	a	big	company.	The	boss	was	very	angry
that	day	and	was	waiting	for	 the	man.	And	when	 the	man	came	 the	boss	burst
out	in	anger	and	said,	"This	is	too	much.	The	man	to	whom	you	have	sold	land	at
double	 price	 has	 just	 gone.	 That	 we	 can	 understand;	 you	 are	 clever	 and
intelligent	and	you	managed	that,	and	that's	why	we	pay	you	so	much.	But	the
man	had	come	to	say,	Ìt	has	rained,	and	now	the	land	you	have	sold	me	is	under
eight	feet	of	water.	What	kind	of	company	is	this?	This	is	really	cheating!'"
The	salesman	said,	"Don't	be	worried	boss,	I	will	take	care	of	him.	I	am	going."
And	 after	 an	 hour	 he	 came	 back,	 smiling,	 and	 he	 said,	 "You	 have	 to	 give	me
some	reward	today."
He	said,	"First	you	tell	me	what	happened	to	that	man	and	his	land?"
He	 said,	 "Nothing	 happened.	We	 have	 had	 two	 rotten	 boats	 for	many	 days;	 I
have	 sold	 them	 to	 that	man.	 I	 told	 him,	 `You	 are	 a	 fool.	 Such	 beautiful	 land,
which	becomes	a	lake	in	the	rainy	season...	have	two	boats.	Make	a	house	high
enough	so	you	will	have	both	 things	 together.	When	 it	 is	 the	 rainy	season	you
enjoy	the	lake	--	and	the	boats	I	have	brought	with	me.'	And	those	boats	are	so
rotten	that	 they	will	drown	the	man	the	first	 time	he	sits	 in	 them.	You	don't	be
worried.	They	had	been	 lying	with	 the	 company	 for	 no	one	knows	how	many
years.	And	we	got	a	good	price	for	them."
The	boss	said,	"This	is	too	much!	You	have	still	cheated	that	man	--	and	now	you
have	put	him	in	a	dangerous	situation.	Those	boats	will	kill	him."
The	man	said,	"This	world	goes	on	this	way.	You	don't	have	to	think	about	what
happens	to	others;	you	have	to	just	think	about	your	own	pockets."
And	that	seems	to	be	the	state	of	these	therapists:	 they	are	thinking	about	their
own	pockets.	They	are	not	worried	about	what	happens	to	the	people.	What	they
are	suggesting,	they	themselves	have	not	lived;	it	is	not	their	experience.	And	it
is	dishonest	to	tell	somebody	something	that	is	not	your	experience,	and	put	him
into	a	state	which	can	drive	him	crazy.
Hypnosis	 can	 be	 dangerous	 too.	 In	 wrong	 hands	 anything	 can	 be	 dangerous;
otherwise	 hypnosis	 is	 a	 simple	 form	 of	 relaxation.	 But	 it	 can	 be	 dangerous,
because	the	man,	if	he	is	bent	upon	cheating	you,	in	those	states	when	you	are
under	hypnosis	can	suggest	to	you	things	that	you	don't	want	to	do.	But	you	will
have	to	do	them	when	you	wake	up.
I	used	to	work	with	one	of	my	students.	I	lived	in	his	house	for	six	months.	His
brother	was	my	friend,	and	I	was	alone	and	there	was	no	point	in	getting	a	house
--	and	who	was	going	to	take	care	of	it?	So	he	said,	"You'd	better	stay	with	me."
And	I	discovered	really	a	beautiful	medium	in	his	younger	brother.
I	started	hypnotizing	him.	Just	to	give	an	example	to	you:	one	day	I	told	him,
"Tomorrow,	 exactly	 at	 twelve	 o'clock,	 you	 will	 kiss	 your	 pillow	madly."	 The
second	 day,	 nearabout	 quarter	 to	 twelve,	 he	 started	 looking	 a	 little	 strange,
afraid,	 watching	 everybody,	 everywhere,	 and	 just	 in	 front	 of	 him	 I	 took	 his
pillow	and	locked	it	in	my	suitcase.	I	could	see	tears	coming	into	his	eyes.	I	said,
"What	is	the	matter?	Why	are	you	crying?"
He	said,	"I	don't	know,	but	something	like	this	has	never	happened	to	me.	It	is	so
strange...	I	cannot	describe."	And	exactly	at	twelve	he	came	to	me	and	he	said,
"Please	return	my	pillow."
I	said,	"What	will	you	do	at	twelve?	In	the	evening	I	will	return	it."
He	said,	"You	have	to	return	it	to	me	right	now."
I	gave	him	the	pillow	and	before	six	other	people	he	started	kissing	 the	pillow
madly,	and	 looking	at	people	 thinking	 that	he	must	 look	mad...	and	he	himself
thinking	that	he	is	mad
--	what	is	he	doing?
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	that's	what	everybody	is	doing.	When	a	man	is	kissing
a	 woman,	 a	 woman	 is	 kissing	 a	 man,	 that	 is	 a	 natural	 hypnosis,	 a	 biological
hypnosis;	 the	biology	has	hypnotized	your	chromosomes.	 It	 is	not	 that	you	are
doing	 it...	 and	 feeling	 so	 awkward,	 you	 don't	want	 to	 do	 it	 before	 others,	 you
want	some	lonely	place	of	your	own.
Don't	 be	 worried!	 It	 makes	 no	 difference	 whether	 it	 is	 a	 pillow	 or	 a	 woman.
What	you	are	doing,	you	are	not	doing	--	it	is	your	unconscious	which	is	forcing
you	to	do	it."
He	said,	 "That	 is	 the	 trouble.	That's	what	 I	 feel.	Something	 in	me	says,	 `Kiss,'
and	I	know	that	this	is	stupid.	This	is	only	a	pillow.	Why	should	I	kiss	it?"
You	can,	under	hypnosis,	manage	anything	if	you	are	a	person	who	is	just	trying
to	 cheat	 people.	You	 can	 even	 tell	 the	 person	 to	murder	 someone	 and	 he	will
murder	--	and	he	will	be	punished.	He	may	be	sentenced	to	death,	and	he	will	not
have	any	explanation	to	give.
And	nobody	can	touch	you	who	hypnotized	him,	because	nobody	will	ever	know
what	you	did	in	hypnosis,	while	he	was	asleep.
Hypnosis	can	be	misused.	Everything	great	can	be	misused.	Perhaps	that	is	one
of	 the	 reasons	why	most	 of	 the	 countries	 and	 cultures	 have	 tried	 to	 avoid	 any
entanglement	 with	 hypnosis.	 And	 the	 word	 `hypnotism'	 has	 become	 a
condemnatory	 word.	 But	 that	 is	 not	 right;	 it	 can	 do	 immense	 good	 too.
Somebody	who	has	some	difficulty	in	any	subject	can	be	simply	hypnotized	and
told,	"You	don't	have	that	difficulty.	That	subject	is	simple,	and	you	have	enough
intelligence	to	understand	it."	And	the	man	will	start	behaving	differently	from
the	next	day	--	his	unconscious	got	it.	There	is	no	need	to	fear.
People	can	be	helped	with	diseases,	because	almost	seventy	percent	of	diseases
are	mental.	They	may	be	expressed	 through	 the	body,	but	 their	origin	 is	 in	 the
mind.	And	if	you	can	put	in	the	mind	the	idea	that	the	disease	has	disappeared,
that	 you	 need	 not	worry	 about	 it,	 it	 does	 not	 exist	 any	more,	 the	 disease	will
disappear.
I	 have	 tried	 very	 strange	 experiments	 with	 it.	 My	 work	 was	 concerned	 with
something	 else.	 For	 example	 in	 Ceylon,	 Buddhist	 monks	 every	 year	 on	 the
birthday	 of	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 dance	 on	 red-hot	 burning	 coal	 --	 and	 they	 don't
burn.	One	professor	from	Cambridge	University,	a	professor	of	psychology,	had
gone	 especially	 to	 see	 it,	 because	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 it	 is	 possible.	But
when	he	saw	 twenty	monks	 just	dancing	 in	 the	 flames,	and	 that	 they	were	not
burned,	he	thought,	"If	these	people	can	do	it,	why	cannot	I	do	it?"	So	he	tried...
just	coming	a	little	closer	it	was	so	hot	that	he	ran	away.	He	would	have	died	if
he	 had	 jumped	 into	 the	 pit	 where	 the	 fire	 was	 burning	 and	 the	 monks	 were
dancing.	Now,	it	needs	a	tremendous	effort	of	hypnosis.
I	tried	it	on	the	same	boy,	because	he	was	a	good	medium.	Thirty-three	percent
of	 the	 whole	 population	 are	 good	 mediums,	 and	 you	 should	 remember	 this
thirty-three	percent.
Thirty-three	 percent	 of	 the	 people	 are	 the	most	 intelligent	 too,	 and	 this	 thirty-
three	 percent	 is	 the	 more	 creative,	 most	 innovative	 people	 too.	 These	 are	 the
same	 people	 who	 can	 go	 into	 deep	 hypnosis;	 it	 needs	 immense	 intelligence.
People	with	greater	intelligence
--	if	they	are	ready	to	go	into	it	--	can	go	to	very	deep	layers.	And	the	deeper	the
layers	are,	then	things	can	be	done	which	look	almost	miraculous.
With	this	boy	--	his	name	was	Manoj	--	I	tried	putting	a	hot	burning	piece	of	coal
on	his	 hand	 and	 telling	him	 that	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 roseflower.	He	 saw	 it	 and	he
said,	"So	beautiful,	and	so	fragrant,"	and	it	did	not	burn.	I	tried	otherwise	also:
putting	a	roseflower	on	his	hand	and	telling	him	it	is	a	burning	hot	piece	of	coal.
He	threw	it	immediately,	but	it	burned	his	whole	hand.
Mind	 has	 tremendous	 power	 over	 your	 body.	 The	 mind	 directs	 everything	 in
your	body.
Seventy	percent	of	your	diseases	can	be	changed	by	changing	the	mind,	because
they	start	from	there;	only	thirty	percent	of	diseases	start	from	the	body.	You	fall
down,	and	you	have	a	fracture	--	now,	that	fracture	cannot	be	helped	by	hypnosis
saying	 that	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 fracture.	 You	 will	 still	 have	 the	 fracture.	 The
fracture	has	started	from	the	body	and	the	body	cannot	be	hypnotized.	The	body
has	 its	 own	 way	 of	 functioning.	 But	 if	 the	 process	 starts	 from	 the	 mind	 and
extends	to	some	point	in	the	body,	then	it	can	be	easily	changed.
Religions	have	exploited	it.	There	are	many	religions	in	India	--	Mohammedans
do	it,	Tibetans	do	it,	Burmese	do	it...	dancing	in	the	fire	without	being	burned.
But	 these	 are	 not	 ordinary	 people,	 they	 are	monks.	 For	 years	 they	 have	 been
hypnotized,	and	this	thing	has	settled	in	their	unconscious	--	that	fire	cannot	burn
them.	But	remember,	only	seventy	percent...	And	that	 reminds	me	of	a	strange
phenomenon	 that	physiologists,	medical	people,	 and	others	who	are	concerned
with	man's	body,	are	very	much	disturbed	about	and	have	no	answer...
Allopathy	succeeds	only	in	seventy	percent	of	cases;	homeopathy	succeeds	only
in	seventy	percent	of	cases;	ayurvedic	medicine	succeeds	only	in	seventy	percent
of	 cases;	 Greek	 medicine	 succeeds	 only	 in	 seventy	 percent	 of	 cases;	 Tibetan
medicine	 succeeds	 only	 in	 seventy	 percent	 of	 cases;	 Chinese	 acupuncture
succeeds	only	in	seventy	percent	of	cases	--	all	the	methods	for	curing	the	body
succeed	only	in	seventy	percent	of	cases.
This	is	a	very	strange	coincidence.
Looked	at	from	the	outside	it	is	a	mystery.	Homeopathy	has	nothing	in	it	--	just
small	 sugar	 pills	 --	 but	 it	 succeeds,	 and	 succeeds	 to	 the	 same	percentage.	The
only	 factor	 is:	 it	 succeeds	 if	 the	 person	 believes	 in	 homeopathy.	 The	 only
difference	 in	 allopathy	 is	 that	 you	 need	 not	 believe	 in	 it	 and	 still	 it	 succeeds.
Naturopathy,	homeopathy,	ayurveda	--
their	basic	need	is	that	you	should	believe.
I	had	one	ayurvedic	physician,	a	man	of	rare	intelligence,	a	nice	man.	He	used	to
take	care	of	me,	and	he	was	very	famous	in	that	area.	But	he	became	a	victim	of
tuberculosis.
When	I	heard	it,	I	went	to	his	house	and	there	I	found	out	he	was	in	the	hospital.
I	said,
"This	 is	 strange.	He	 is	 such	 a	 great	 ayurvedic	 physician,	why	 should	he	go	 to
allopathy?"
I	went	to	the	hospital;	I	asked	the	physician,	"This	is	strange	behavior.	You	have
helped	so	many	people	through	your	medicines,	can	you	not	help	yourself	with
your	tuberculosis?"
He	 laughed	 and	 he	 said,	 "No	 I	 cannot,	 because	 the	 basic	 thing	 in	 ayurvedic
medicine	is	that	you	have	to	have	faith	in	it.	I	don't	have	faith	in	it.	I	know	all
about	it	--	it	is	nonsense.	But	if	people	are	healed,	I	keep	my	mouth	shut.	I	don't
say	anything	to	anybody,	but	one	thing	is	certain,	it	won't	help	me.	I	will	die	if	I
take	those	medicines	--
which	 cured	 innumerable	 people,	 even	 of	 tuberculosis!	 So	 don't	 be	 surprised,
and	don't	tell	anybody	anything,	because	if	I	survive	I	will	have	to	continue	my
practice.	If	I	die	then	you	can	tell	the	truth."
But	the	truth	is,	you	need	faith.	It	is	the	faith	that	changes	the	mind	and	affects
the	body	-
-	but	not	vice	versa.	The	body	is	not	superstitious,	nor	is	it	faithful;	it	is	simply
natural.	It	doesn't	care	about	anything	else.
There	used	to	be	a	sect	in	America...	I	think	it	still	survives	in	a	few	places,	but
in	the	beginning	of	this	century	it	was	very	prominent.	It	was	a	Christian	group,
they	used	to	call	themselves	Christian	Scientists.	They	believed	that	everything
can	be	cured,	you	just	have	to	believe	in	Jesus	Christ,	and	that	your	diseases	are
nothing	but	your	beliefs	--	you	believe	that	you	have	tuberculosis,	so	you	have
tuberculosis.
One	young	man	met	on	the	road	with	one	old	woman	and	she	asked,	"I	don't	see
your	father	in	the	meetings..."	They	used	to	have	meetings	every	Sunday.
He	said,	"He's	sick,	very	badly	sick."
The	 old	woman	 said,	 "Nonsense,	 because	we	 are	Christian	 Scientists.	He	 is	 a
Christian	Scientist;	he	only	believes	that	he	is	sick."
The	young	man	said,	"If	you	say	so,	perhaps	he	only	believes	that	he	is	sick."
After	 two,	 three	 days,	 he	 came	 across	 the	 same	woman	 again	 and	 she	 asked,
"What	happened?"
The	young	man	said,	"Now	he	believes	he	is	dead,	so	we	had	to	take	him	to	the
graveyard.	We	tried	to	shake	him	and	shouted,	`Don't	believe	such	a	thing.	You
are	a	Christian	Scientist.	Believe	that	you	are	alive!'	But	nothing	happened	and
the	whole	neighborhood	laughed.	Now	the	poor	man	is	in	a	grave,	still	believing
that	he	is	dead."
The	body	does	not	have	beliefs	or	disbeliefs,	but	 the	mind	has.	And	mind	has
immense	control	over	the	body.
One	of	 the	greatest	sincerities	 in	working	with	people	 is	 to	 take	care	 that	what
you	are	 saying	or	what	you	are	doing	 is	not	going	 to	destroy	 them.	And	 I	 am
afraid	 all	 those	 therapists...	While	 they	 were	 working	 in	 the	 commune	 in	 my
presence	 there	 was	 no	 danger.	 I	 could	 have	 put	 anybody	 back	 into	 his	 right
position.	But	now	they	are	working	without	any	understanding,	they	can	prove	to
be	very	dangerous.
All	 the	 sannyasins	 all	 over	 the	 world	 have	 to	 be	 informed:	 beware	 of	 the
therapists.	In	my	presence	I	allowed	them	to	do	anything	because	there	was	no
problem;	 if	 something	 had	 gone	 wrong	 I	 would	 have	 taken	 care.	 But	 now	 if
something	goes	wrong	--	and	it	 is	bound	to	go	wrong	because	they	themselves
are	wrong	--	then	who	is	going	to	take	care?
The	master's	work	 is	not	easy.	He	has	 to	change	you,	he	has	 to	 transform	you.
But	he	has	not	to	cripple	you,	he	has	not	to	destroy	you.	It	is	almost	like	walking
on	a	razor's	edge,	because	anything	that	can	be	helpful	can	also	be	used	in	such	a
way	that	it	can	be	disastrous.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
TRAVELING	WITH	YOU	OVER	THE	PAST	FEW	MONTHS	AND	SEEING
THE
HARDNESS	 OF	 THE	 WORLD,	 INSTEAD	 OF	 BEING	 HARDENED	 IN
RESPONSE	 I	 FIND	MYSELF	ONLY	BECOMING	SOFTER	AND	SOFTER.
WOULD	YOU
PLEASE	COMMENT?
The	ordinary	response	will	be	to	become	even	more	hard,	but	you	are	not	in	an
ordinary	situation.	Even	a	small	touch	of	meditativeness,	of	silence,	of	love,	of
compassion,	a	small	touch	of	the	master's	presence,	will	mean	you	have	totally
different	responses.
Seeing	 the	 hardness	 of	 the	 world,	 you	 will	 feel	 more	 compassionate	 towards
them,	 you	 will	 feel	 softer.	 You	 will	 not	 react	 violently	 because	 that	 will	 be
joining	them	in	their	same	stupidity.	Being	with	me,	whether	you	know	it	or	not
you	are	learning	thousands	of	things.	One	of	them	is	that	you	cannot	react.
The	world	may	be	hard	--	that	hurts.	It	makes	one	sad	that	unfortunately	man	is
still	barbarous,	but	it	does	not	give	you	the	idea	to	curse	them.	On	the	contrary,	it
gives	you	the	idea	to	help	them,	to	be	compassionate	to	them,	so	they	can	come
out	 of	 their	 hard	 shells.	 Perhaps	 they	 are	 also	 suffering	 in	 their	 hardness,	 and
there	 is	 nobody	 to	 tell	 them	 how	 to	 get	 out	 of	 this	 hardness.	 They	 are	 also
miserable.	It	is	out	of	their	misery	that	they	misbehave,	because	they	have	been
mistreated.	They	know	only	that	violence	is	power.
Seeing	the	world	you	will	see	that	violence	is	not	the	real	power.	The	real	power
is	love,	and	that	love	will	make	you	softer,	forgiving,	without	any	anger;	in	fact
laughing	 at	 the	 whole	 hilarious	 situation	 that	 this	 world	 believes	 that	 it	 is
civilized,	that	Charles	Darwin	thought	that	we	have	evolved	from	animals.	But
our	behavior	shows	that	we	are	still	animalistic.	There	has	been	no	evolution	at
all.	Perhaps	we	have	lost	the	tail,	but	that	is	not	evolution;	perhaps	we	can	stand
on	two	feet,	but	that	is	not	evolution.	We	are	still	behaving	so	crudely,	so	cruelly.
And	nobody	is	there	to	say	it,	because	whoever	is	going	to	say	it	will	be	crushed,
will	be	killed.
And	you	have	chosen	to	be	with	a	man	who	is	saying	it,	and	who	is	going	to	say
it	to	the	very	last	breath.
But	 as	 far	 as	 you	 are	 concerned,	 this	 whole	 experience	 of	 world	 travel,	 and
finding	 the	politicians	 the	 same	everywhere,	 finding	 the	nations,	 governments,
the	 police	 behaving	 in	 the	 same	 manner...	 it	 seems	 that	 we	 are	 living	 in	 a
nightmare.	Only	 someone	who	 is	out	of	 it	 can	 say,	 "This	 is	 a	nightmare!"	But
when	somebody	 in	a	nightmare	 is	 shouting	and	screaming,	you	don't	 feel	hard
towards	him;	you	feel	soft,	you	want	to	help	him.
It	has	been	a	good	experience.	Later	on	when	you	will	recapitulate,	you	will	see
it	has	given	you	a	maturity	which	takes	lives	to	gain.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IT	SEEMS	THAT	MASTERS	HAVE	ALWAYS	BEEN	BETRAYED	BY	THEIR
CHIEF	DISCIPLE.	THE	SAME	HAS	HAPPENED	TO	YOU,	WITH	THOSE
TO
WHOM	YOU	HAVE	GIVEN	SO	MUCH	LOVE	AND	ATTENTION,	AND	ON
WHOM
YOU	HAVE	WORKED	SO	HARD.	OSHO,	IS	IT	THAT	PEOPLE	WHO	HAVE
MORE
POTENTIAL	GO	HIGHER	AND	THEN	CAN	FALL	EVEN	LOWER	THAN
THE
ORDINARY	 HUMAN	 BEING?	 YOU	 HAVE	 BEEN	 HARASSED	 BY	 THE
POLICE
AND	THE	BUREAUCRACY.	I	FEEL	THEY	ARE	NOT	DOING	RIGHT,	BUT
THEY
CAN'T	DO	OTHERWISE;	BUT	WHEN	I	HEAR	ABOUT	OLD	SANNYASINS'
BEHAVIOR,	MY	HEART	CRIES	AND	IT	HURTS	ME	DEEPLY.
The	 sannyasins	 I	 have	 worked	 harder	 on	 are	 not	 the	 ones	 who	 have	 the	 best
potential	--
they	were	 the	worst;	 hence	 they	 needed	 hard	work.	 Those	who	 are	 the	 best	 I
have	not	worked	on	at	all.	Just	my	presence	has	been	enough	for	them,	just	my
love	has	been	enough	for	them.
So	 it	 is	not	 that	 I	worked	hard	on	 them	because	 they	had	more	potential	 to	go
high,	and	 then	 to	fall	even	below	the	ordinary.	 I	worked	on	 them	because	 they
had	no	possibility	 to	go	high.	Even	with	hard	work,	 at	 the	most	 I	 could	bring
them	to	the	normal.	And	they	are	behaving	normally	--	I	am	not	disappointed	in
them.
Whenever	a	person	of	higher	potential	has	come	to	me,	he	has	received	my	love,
but	there	has	been	no	need	to	work	on	him.	He	needs	just	a	slight	push,	and	he
will	 be	 flying	 in	 the	 sky.	None	of	 those	 people	 have	 fallen,	 or	will	 fall	 down,
because	one	who	has	known	the	freedom	of	the	sky	cannot	go	back	to	the	state
where	he	was	not	even	aware	of	his	wings,	and	he	cannot	be	disgraceful	towards
the	master	who	helped	him.	It	is	impossible,	simply	impossible.
His	gratitude	will	grow	more	and	more	because	 the	master	has	not	only	made
him	aware	of	his	wings	but	has	pushed	him	into	the	sky	and	has	given	him	total
freedom.	 How	 can	 you	 be	 ungrateful	 to	 a	 person	 who	 has	 given	 you	 total
freedom	to	be	yourself,	who	has	not	tried	in	any	way	to	impose	any	image,	any
ideal	 on	you?	Most	 of	 the	 sannyasins	 are	 feeling	more	 loving	 than	 ever,	more
grateful	 than	 ever	 --	 and	 it	 is	 really	 a	 time	of	difficulties,	when	your	mettle	 is
tested.
Those	who	have	fallen	from	grace	were	expected	to.	They	never	reached	to	the
point	where	they	could	open	their	wings.	If	they	are	not	grateful	towards	me,	the
simple	reason	is	that	they	have	not	experienced	anything	that	would	make	them
grateful	towards	me.
They	have	remained	closed	in	their	own	darkness,	in	their	own	ego.
Vivek	goes	on	asking	me	again	and	again,	"Why	don't	you	work	on	me?"	And	it
is	difficult	to	explain	that	there	is	no	need	of	any	work	on	her.	She	has	to	work
for	me,	and	in	that	work,	in	that	care,	she	is	growing,	she	is	maturing.
It	 is	a	very	complicated	situation.	 I	have	 to	choose	 to	work	on	 the	worst;	 they
need	the	attention.	Even	if	they	can	grow	a	little	bit	it	will	be	good.	I	don't	hope
that	 they	will	become	enlightened.	Even	with	hard	work	 they	will	not	become
enlightened,	 because	 the	work	 on	 the	worst	 people	 has	 a	 difficulty:	 they	 fight
with	you.	While	working	on	 them,	 they	 are	 continually	 fighting	you!	On	each
single	step	they	don't	want	to	grow;	you	are	doing	something	against	them.	With
the	best	quality	people	it	is	different.	They	want	to	grow.
You	need	not	do	any	hard	work.	Just	looking	in	their	eyes	is	enough,	just	being
with	them	is	enough;	it	is	nourishment.	It	is	nourishment	to	open	their	wings	--
and	they	will	be	grateful.
The	people	on	whom	one	has	to	work	hard	are	not	going	to	be	grateful;	they	will
be	 revengeful,	 because	you	were	working	against	 them.	They	never	wanted	 to
fly.
I	remember	an	old	story	of	a	man	who	loved	freedom	immensely,	who	had	made
his	country	free	from	foreign	rule,	but	was	so	much	in	love	with	freedom	that	he
would	not	take	the	reins	of	the	government	in	his	own	hands.	Once	the	country
became	 free,	he	 left	 the	country	 towards	 the	mountains.	He	 said,	 "My	work	 is
done."
The	last	stop	was	a	caravanserai.	It	had	a	beautiful	parrot,	and	the	owner	of	the
serai	was	also	in	love	with	the	idea	of	freedom.	If	he	had	really	been	a	lover	of
freedom	he	would	have	made	the	parrot	free,	but	the	parrot	was	in	a	golden	cage.
His	 idea	 of	 freedom	 was	 just	 a	 mental	 luxury.	 Because	 he	 loved	 freedom	 so
much	--	 just	 the	 idea	--	he	had	taught	 the	parrot	 to	repeat	 the	word,	"Freedom,
freedom,	 freedom."	 The	 whole	 day,	 the	 parrot	 would	 suddenly	 burst	 into
shouting,	"Freedom,	freedom!"	He	knew	only	one	word.	And	this	man	who	had
fought	for	the	freedom	of	his	country,	had	been	in	jails,	had	been	in	dangers,	he
was	staying	there.
He	 thought,	 "This	 poor	 parrot	wants	 freedom.	He	 is	 not	 happy	 in	 this	 golden
cage,	 nobody	 listens	 to	 him.	 The	 whole	 day	 he	 is	 shouting	 `Freedom!'"	 He
decided	that	 in	the	night	he	would	open	the	cage	and	let	him	be	free,	so	in	the
middle	of	the	night	he	came	to	the	cage,	opened	the	door	of	the	cage,	and	tried	to
pull	out	 the	parrot.	But	 the	parrot	was	hitting	 the	man	with	his	beak,	and	with
one	of	his	legs	he	was	holding	onto	the	cage.
The	man	 could	 not	 understand:	 the	 door	was	 open,	 and	 he	was	 still	 shouting,
"Freedom!"
But	the	man	was	also	a	strong	fighter	for	freedom;	he	somehow	pulled	the	parrot
out	 of	 the	 cage	 and	 threw	 it	 into	 the	 sky.	He	 had	 damaged	 both	 of	 his	 hands;
there	was	blood	on	both	of	his	hands	where	the	parrot	had	scratched.	But	he	was
happy	that	the	poor	parrot	who	longed	so	much	for	freedom	was	at	last	free.
He	went	 to	 his	 room,	went	 to	 sleep,	 but	 in	 the	morning	 he	woke	 up	with	 the
sound	of	the	parrot	who	was	shouting,	"Freedom!"	He	said,	"Strange!	Where	is
the	parrot?"	He	opened	 the	window:	 the	parrot	was	 sitting	 in	 the	cage	and	 the
door	was	open,	and	he	was	repeating	his	routine:	"Freedom...	freedom!"	It	was
just	a	word.
The	 owner	 came	 out;	 he	 knew	 this	 famous	 man.	 He	 looked	 at	 his	 hands,	 he
looked	at	 the	open	cage.	He	said,	 "You	don't	understand,	he	 is	only	a	parrot.	 I
have	taught	him	the	word	`freedom'	because	I	like	the	idea	of	freedom.	He	is	a
parrot;	 he	 does	 not	 even	 know	 the	meaning	 of	 freedom.	You	 should	 not	 have
unnecessarily	tried	and	got	harmed.	A	few	other	people	have	tried	it	before,	but
he	always	comes	back.	Who	wants	to	leave	the	golden	cage?
"As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	it	is	only	an	idea;	otherwise	I	would	have	thrown	him
out	of	the	cage	and	removed	the	cage.	But	I	love	to	hear	the	word	`freedom'.	It	is
my	idea;	I	don't	want	to	do	anything	about	it,	it	is	simply	philosophical	--	neither
does	the	parrot	want	to	do	anything	about	it.	For	him	it	is	not	even	philosophical,
for	him	it	 is	simply	a	recording,	memory...	not	even	mind.	You	are	a	man	who
has	 sacrificed	his	whole	 life	 for	 freedom.	You	are	 in	 a	different	 category.	You
should	not	have	bothered	about	this	parrot
--	he	is	an	idiot.	It	is	just	that	he	has	learned	the	word."
The	sannyasins	who	think	they	have	betrayed	me....	They	have	not	betrayed	me:
they	have	betrayed	themselves.	How	can	they	betray	me?	I	had	no	involvement
of	 any	 kind.	 I	 was	 not	 in	 any	 way	 expecting	 anything	 from	 them.	 I	 worked
because	I	enjoyed,	loved	it.
They	cannot	betray	me,	they	can	only	betray	themselves.	It	does	not	affect	me,	it
will	 only	 affect	 their	 lives.	 They	 will	 get	 again	 into	 their	 cages	 and	 start
shouting,	"Freedom,	freedom!"	and	the	door	will	remain	open.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#41
Chapter	title:	Times	of	crisis	are	just	golden
2	May	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8605025
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO41
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
107
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	SOCIETY'S	HOLD	ON	PEOPLE'S	MINDS	BEGINS	TO	DISINTEGRATE,
IN
TIMES	 OF	 SOCIAL	 CRISIS	 SUCH	 AS	 NOW	 THERE	 SEEMS	 TO	 BE	 A
TENDENCY
FOR	 AN	 INCREASING	 NUMBER	 OF	 PEOPLE	 TO	 FALL	 BELOW	 THE
MIND	INTO
MADNESS.	 ALSO,	 IS	 IT	 TRUE	 THAT	 THIS	 IS	 PARALLELED	 BY	 A
TENDENCY
FOR	PEOPLE	TO	LOOK	AT	THE	POSSIBILITY	OF	GOING	BEYOND	THE
MIND
INTO	ENLIGHTENMENT?
Times	 of	 crisis	 are	 both	 dangerous	 and	 immensely	 important	 --	 dangerous	 for
those	who	have	no	courage	to	explore	new	dimensions	of	life.	They	are	bound	to
disintegrate	into	different	kinds	of	madness,	because	their	mind	was	made	by	the
society.	Now	the	society	is	disintegrating,	the	mind	cannot	remain;	its	roots	are
in	the	society.	It	is	constantly	nourished	by	the	society	--	now	that	nourishment	is
disappearing.
Because	 the	society	 is	disintegrating,	a	great	suspicion,	a	doubt	 that	was	never
there	before,	is	bound	to	arise	in	the	individuals.	And	if	they	were	just	obedient
people	 who	 have	 never	 gone	 beyond	 any	 limit	 that	 society	 has	 decided,	 who
have	always	been	respected,	honorable	citizens	--	in	other	words,	just	mediocre	-
-	they	will	immediately	go	mad.
They	will	start	committing	suicide,	they	will	start	jumping	from	high	buildings...
or	even	if	they	live,	now	they	don't	have	a	mind	which	can	help	them	to	figure
out	 the	 situation	 for	 their	 life.	They	will	 become	 retarded,	 stupid,	 idiotic,	may
become	schizophrenic,	split	into	two	persons	--	or	perhaps	a	crowd.
In	times	of	crisis,	the	danger	is	for	those	who	have	enjoyed	the	times	when	the
society	was	 settled,	when	 there	was	 no	 problem,	 everything	was	 at	 ease,	 they
were	honored,	respected.	These	were	the	people	who	had	enjoyed	the	obedience
of	 the	mind,	 and	 these	 are	 going	 to	 be	 the	 sufferers.	 It	 is	 a	 simple	 arithmetic.
They	 will	 go	 psychotic,	 they	 will	 go	 neurotic	 --	 and	 these	 words	 don't	 make
much	difference.
I	have	heard	a	definition.	One	psychoanalyst	was	asked,	"What	is	the	difference
between	psychosis	and	neurosis?"
And	the	psychoanalyst	said,	"The	psychotic	person	believes	that	two	and	two	are
five.
And	the	neurotic	person	knows	that	two	and	two	are	four,	but	is	not	at	ease	with
the	 fact	 that	 two	and	 two	are	 four."	So	 the	difference	 is	very	 fine.	Both	are	 in
trouble.
But	 times	 of	 crisis	 are	 of	 tremendous	 significance	 for	 those	 daring	 souls	who
have	 never	 bothered	 about	 society's	 respectability,	 its	 honors;	who	 have	 never
bothered	about	what	others	think	about	them,	but	have	done	only	that	which	they
felt	 right	 to	 do;	 who	 have	 in	 a	 certain	 way	 been	 always	 rebellious,
individualistic.	For	these	people	the	times	of	crisis	are	just	golden,	because	the
society	is	disintegrating.	Now	it	cannot	condemn	anybody	--
it	 is	 itself	condemned,	cursed.	 It	cannot	say	 to	others	 that	 they	are	wrong.	 It	 is
itself	proving	wrong;	its	whole	wisdom	is	proving	just	foolish,	superstitious.
The	daring	individual	can	use	this	opportunity	to	go	beyond	mind,	because	now
the	society	cannot	prevent	him,	cannot	hinder	him.	Now	he	is	free.
It	is	almost	like	a	situation	in	a	jail...	when	the	doors	are	open,	the	guards	have
disappeared	and	 the	 jailer	 is	nowhere	 to	be	 found.	The	people	who	have	some
sense,	some	intelligence,	will	use	it	for	freedom.	But	those	who	have	become	so
enslaved	 that	 they	 cannot	 think	 of	 freedom	 --	 imprisonment	 has	 become	 their
home	--	they	will	simply	panic,	"What	is	going	to	happen	today?	No	guards?	No
jailer?	The	doors	are	open!	Who	will	take	care	of	us?	Who	will	provide	food	for
us?"
There	 will	 be	 people	 whose	 slavery	 has	 penetrated	 to	 their	 very	 soul;	 these
people	will	go	berserk.	But	the	people	who	always	were	in	search	of	a	moment
when	 they	can	escape	 from	 the	prison	will	 be	 immensely	happy.	This	was	 the
time	they	have	been	waiting	and	praying	for.	They	will	escape	out	of	the	prison
into	 the	 open	 sky.	Going	 beyond	 the	mind	 is	 going	 into	 the	 open	 sky,	 full	 of
stars,	 the	moon,	 the	 sun	 --	 the	 immensity	 of	 it...	 It	 becomes	 yours;	 the	whole
existence	becomes	yours.
The	mind	is	a	small	cage.
So	moments	 of	 crisis	 are	 both...	 and	 that	 is	 what	 is	 happening	 all	 around	 the
world.	 There	 has	 never	 been	 so	 intense	 a	 search	 for	 spiritual	 growth,	 for
meditation.	 But	 there	 has	 never	 been	 so	 much	 madness	 either.	 Both	 are
happening	because	the	status	quo	is	no	longer	powerful;	it	has	lost	control.
When	Galileo	found	that	the	earth	moves	around	the	sun,	not	vice	versa	as	THE
BIBLE
says,	the	pope	asked	him	to	be	present	in	his	court.	Many	things	happened	that
day.	 One	 was	 very	 important.	 Galileo	 asked,	 "What	 does	 it	 matter	 if	 one
statement	in	THE	BIBLE
is	 proved	 wrong?	 It	 does	 not	 prove	 the	 whole	 BIBLE	 wrong.	 I	 am	 a	 devout
Christian,	a	practicing	Christian,	and	I	don't	see	the	point	that	if	one	statement	is
wrong	it	makes	a	difference."
But	 the	pope	 said,	 "You	don't	 understand"	 --	 and	 the	pope	was	 right.	He	 said,
"When	 one	 statement	 is	 proved	wrong	 then	 thousands	 of	 problems	will	 arise.
One	--	that	God	can	be	wrong.	And	if	he	is	wrong	about	one	statement,	what	is
the	certainty	about	other	statements?"	Just	one	brick	taken	out	of	the	palace,	and
the	whole	palace	may	collapse.
"I	cannot	allow,"	the	pope	said,	"any	statement	in	THE	BIBLE	to	be	wrong."
His	argument	is	significant.	Today	not	only	one	thing	about	the	old	mind,	the	old
society,	is	wrong,	but	so	many	things	are	wrong	that	it	needs	an	absolute	idiot	to
still	believe	in	it.
Just	a	little	intelligence	and	it	is	impossible	to	be	part	of	the	old	mind.	It	has	lost
credibility	 --	 and	 not	 in	 one	 place,	 but	 all	 over	 the	world.	 There	 are	 different
kinds	of	old	traditions,	but	they	all	have	come	to	a	point	where	so	many	things
are	scientifically	proved	wrong.
You	will	be	 surprised	 to	know...	One	 Jaina	monk	had	come	 to	 see	me;	he	had
collected	millions	of	rupees	to	make	a	lab	to	prove	that	man	has	not	reached	the
moon.	He	wanted	my	support,	that	I	should	be	the	director	of	his	lab.	He	would
give	 any	 finance	 that	 was	 needed,	 but	 it	 had	 to	 be	 proved	 that	 no	 man	 has
stepped	on	the	moon.
I	said,	"Why	are	you	so	much	worried	about	it?"
He	said,	"You	don't	understand.	In	Jainism,	the	moon	is	a	god,	not	a	planet.	You
cannot	 walk	 on	 a	 god.	 And	 they	 have	 not	 only	 walked	 on	 a	 god,	 they	 have
brought	stones	and	other	things	from	the	moon	to	be	studied	on	the	earth.	It	has
to	be	proved	that	they	are	deceiving	the	whole	world,	 that	all	 these	things	they
had	taken	from	the	earth,	and	they	have	brought	them	back...	Nobody	has	been
to	the	moon;	nobody	can	have	been,	otherwise	the	whole	system	of	Jainism	will
collapse."	I	said,	"Just	for	a	single	thing,	that	the	moon	proves	to	be	a	planet	not
a	god...?"
He	said,	"If	one	thing	is	wrong,	then	everything	becomes	suspicious.	We	cannot
afford	anything	to	be	wrong."
I	said,	"You	are	too	late!	Many	things	have	already	been	proved	wrong.	You	are
not	 very	 knowledgeable.	 You	 have	 been	 simply	 reading	 the	 newspapers,	 and
because	 it	 is	 a	 recent	 event,	 man	 landing	 on	 the	 moon...	 otherwise	 in	 three
hundred	years	science	has	destroyed	much	that	all	the	religions	have	believed	in
for	centuries."
That	man	was	really	in	tremendous	anguish.	And	I	said,	"For	you,	being	a	monk,
it	 does	not	matter	whether	 anything	 is	wrong	or	 right	 --	your	 search	 is	 for	 the
truth,	 for	 peace	 and	 silence.	 And	 you	 are	 getting	 so	 much	 upset.	 Your	 very
anguish	 shows	 that	 your	 own	mind	 is	 shattered.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 Jaina
scriptures,	or	the	Jaina	tradition,	it	is	a	question	of	your	mind.
"You	 are	 collecting	 all	 this	 money,	 not	 for	 Jaina	 scriptures	 but	 to	 save	 your
sanity;	otherwise	you	would	go	insane.	You	have	sacrificed	your	whole	life,	and
now	 you	 find	 that	 the	 gods	 you	 have	 been	worshipping	 are	 not	 gods	 but	 just
planets,	as	ordinary	as	the	earth,	and	very	poor	--	no	water,	no	plants,	no	life.	It	is
your	mind	 that	 is	going	 to	be	shattered.	How	will	you	account	 for	your	whole
life...?"
This	 is	 the	 situation	 of	 many	 people	 of	 intelligence.	 Either	 they	 are	 going
insane...	 you	 can	 see	 it	 --	 psychotherapy	 and	 other	 schools	 of	 therapies	 are
growing	 fast.	They	 are	 the	most	 highly	 paid	 people,	 people	 are	 going	 through
psychoanalysis	 for	 years	 at	 a	 time.	 In	 fact	 people	 have	 started	 boasting...	 In
women's	 clubs	 you	 can	 go	 and	 hear	 it,	 that	 one	woman	will	 be	 saying,	 "How
many	years	have	you	been	in	psychoanalysis?	--	just	seven	years?	I	have	been	in
psychoanalysis	for	fifteen	years."	It	has	become	something	of	pride.
But	to	be	in	psychoanalysis	simply	means	you	are	insane;	otherwise	why	are	you
taking	the	treatment?	And	it	is	spreading.
But	 the	most	 intelligent	people	are	rushing	 towards	 the	East	 to	find	some	way,
some	method,	 some	meditation	 --	 Yoga,	 Zen,	 Sufism,	 Hassidism.	 Somewhere
somebody	must	know	how	to	get	over	this	critical	stage,	how	to	go	beyond	the
traditional	mind	 and	 still	 remain	 centered,	 sane,	 and	 intelligent.	 Thousands	 of
people	are	moving	towards	the	East.
It	is	very	hilarious	because	thousands	of	people	are	coming	from	the	East	to	the
West	 to	 study	 science,	medicine,	 engineering,	 electronics,	 and	 the	 people	who
know	 all	 these	 are	 going	 to	 the	 East,	 just	 to	 learn	 how	 to	 sit	 silently	 and	 do
nothing.
But	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 time.	 The	 grip	 of	 society	 is	 lost.	 Yes,	 the	 mediocre	 will
suffer,	but	anyway	they	were	not	enjoying,	they	were	not	really	living;	they	were
simply	 being	 hypocrites.	 By	 being	 insane	 at	 least	 they	will	 be	 real,	 authentic.
They	won't	lose	anything
--	of	course	they	won't	gain	much....
But	the	people	who	will	go	beyond	mind	will	create	the	new	man,	the	new	mind.
And	the	most	special	thing	to	be	remembered	about	the	new	mind	is	that	it	will
never	 become	 a	 tradition,	 that	 it	 will	 be	 constantly	 renewed.	 If	 it	 becomes	 a
tradition	it	will	be	the	same	thing.
The	new	mind	has	to	become	continuously	new,	every	day	new,	ready	to	accept
any	unexpected	experience,	any	unexpected	truth...	just	available,	vulnerable.	It
will	be	a	tremendous	excitement,	a	great	ecstasy,	a	great	challenge.
So	I	don't	think	this	crisis	is	bad;	it	is	good.	A	few	people	will	lose	their	masks,
and	will	be	actually	what	they	are	--	neurotic,	psychotic	--	but	at	least	they	will
be	true	and	they	will	be	honest.	You	may	think	they	are	mad;	they	are	not	mad,
they	are	simply	in	a	state	of	very	great	surprise.	They	have	believed	too	much	in
the	old	mind,	and	it	betrayed	them.
But	 the	 best	 of	 the	 intelligence	will	 reach	 to	 heights	 unknown	 before.	 And	 if
even	 in	 a	 traditional	 world,	 a	 man	 like	 Gautam	 Buddha	 or	 Chuang	 Tzu	 or
Pythagoras	 is	 possible,	 we	 can	 conceive	 that	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 that	 the	 new
mind	will	create,	a	thousandfold	more	awakened	people,	enlightened	people	will
become	easily	possible.
If	the	new	mind	can	prevail	then	life	can	become	an	enlightening	process.	And
enlightenment	 will	 not	 be	 something	 rare,	 that	 it	 happens	 once	 in	 a	 while	 to
somebody	very	special;	 it	will	become	a	very	ordinary	human	experience,	 that
only	once	in	a	while	some	really	idiotic	person	misses.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HESITATED	FOR	LONG	TO	ASK	THIS	QUESTION	BECAUSE	IT
SEEMS
TO	REACH	DEEP	DOWN	 INTO	MY	UNCONSCIOUS,	AND	THERE	 IS	A
LOT	OF
FEAR	CONNECTED	WITH	IT.
FOR	THE	PAST	FIFTEEN	YEARS	I	HAVE	EXPERIENCED	TENSION	OF
VARYING	 DEGREES	 IN	 MY	 HEART	 AREA,	 FOR	 WHICH	 THERE	 HAS
BEEN	NO
PHYSICAL	 EXPLANATION.	 IT	 CAN	 VARY	 FROM	 SHARP,	 BREATH-
TAKING
PAIN,	 WHICH	 CAN	 LAST	 FOR	 HOURS,	 TO	 A	 SLIGHT	 FEELING	 OF
PRESSURE.
IT	DISAPPEARS	WHEN	I	LOVE,	MELT,	LET-GO,	AND	WHEN	I	AM	IN
HARMONY	WITH	MY	BODY.	DOES	IT	HAVE	SOMETHING	TO	DO	WITH
THE
NAME	YOU	GAVE	ME?	DO	I	HOLD	BACK?
I	 WOULD	 BE	 GRATEFUL	 IF	 YOU	 COULD	 THROW	 SOME	 LIGHT	 ON
THIS.
The	question	is	from	Premda,	and	his	name	has	certainly	to	do	something	with
the	problem.
It	 is	 not	 physical;	 it	 is	 certainly	 concerned	 with	 relaxation,	 total	 melting,
forgetting	oneself	completely.	 In	 those	moments	 it	disappears,	so	certainly	 it	 is
not	physical.	You	have	to	learn	to	give	more	love.	This	is	not	only	your	problem;
in	varying	degrees	it	is	the	problem	of	everybody.
Everybody	wants	to	be	loved;	that	is	a	wrong	beginning.
It	 starts	 because	 the	 child,	 the	 small	 child,	 cannot	 love,	 cannot	 say	 anything,
cannot	 do	 anything,	 cannot	 give	 anything;	 he	 can	 only	 get.	 A	 small	 child's
experience	of	love	is	of	getting:	getting	from	the	mother,	getting	from	the	father,
getting	 from	 brothers,	 sisters,	 getting	 from	 guests,	 strangers	 --	 but	 always
getting.	So	the	first	experience	that	settles	deep	in	his	unconscious	is	that	he	has
to	 get	 love.	 But	 the	 trouble	 arises	 because	 everybody	 has	 been	 a	 child,	 and
everybody	has	the	same	urge	to	get	love;	nobody	is	born	in	any	other	way.	So	all
are	asking,	"Give	us	love,"	and	there	is	nobody	to	give	because	the	other	person
was	also	brought	up	in	the	same	way.
One	has	to	be	alert	and	aware	that	just	an	incident	of	birth	should	not	remain	a
constant	prevailing	state	of	your	mind.	Rather	than	asking,	"Give	me	love,"	start
giving	love.
Forget	about	getting,	simply	give	--	and	I	guarantee	you,	you	will	get	much.	But
you	are	not	 to	 think	about	getting.	You	are	not	 even	 indirectly,	by	 the	 side,	 to
watch	whether	you	are	getting	it	or	not.	That	much	will	be	enough	disturbance.
You	simply	give,	because	to	give	love	is	so	beautiful	that	getting	love	is	not	so
great.	This	is	one	of	the	secrets.
Giving	love	is	the	really	beautiful	experience,	because	then	you	are	an	emperor.
Getting	love	is	very	small	experience,	and	it	is	the	experience	of	a	beggar.	Don't
be	a	beggar.	At	least	as	far	as	love	is	concerned,	be	an	emperor,	because	it	is	an
inexhaustible	quality	in	you.	You	can	go	on	giving	as	much	as	you	like.	Don't	be
worried	that	it	will	be	exhausted,	that	one	day	you	will	suddenly	find,	"My	God!
I	don't	have	any	love	to	give	anymore."
Love	 is	 not	 a	 quantity;	 it	 is	 a	 quality,	 and	 a	 quality	 of	 a	 certain	 category	 that
grows	by	giving	and	dies	if	you	hold	it.	If	you	are	miserly	about	it,	it	dies.	So	be
really	spendthrift.
Don't	bother	to	whom	--	that	is	really	the	idea	of	a	miserly	mind:	I	will	give	love
to	certain	persons	with	certain	qualities.
You	don't	understand	that	you	have	so	much...	you	are	a	raincloud.	The	raincloud
does	not	bother	where	it	rains	--	on	the	rocks,	in	the	gardens,	in	the	ocean	--	it
doesn't	matter.	It	wants	to	unburden	itself.	And	that	unburdening	is	a	tremendous
relief.
So	the	first	secret	is:	Don't	ask	for	it,	and	don't	wait,	thinking	that	you	will	give	if
somebody	asks	you.	Give	it!
The	 founder	 of	 the	 theosophical	movement,	Madame	Blavatsky	 had	 a	 strange
habit	her	whole	 life	 --	 and	 she	 lived	 long,	 and	 traveled	all	 over	 the	world	and
created	a	world	movement...	In	fact	no	other	woman	has	been	so	powerful	in	the
whole	 history	 of	 man,	 has	 had	 influence	 worldwide.	 She	 used	 to	 carry	 many
bags	with	her,	full	of	seeds	of	flowers.	Her	whole	luggage	was	nothing	but	seeds
of	 flowers.	 Sitting	 in	 the	 train	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 window	 she	 would	 go	 on
throwing	seeds	outside	the	window,	and	people	would	ask,	"What	are	you	doing?
You	 carry	 so	much	 unnecessary	 luggage,	 and	 then	 you	 go	 on	 throwing	 those
seeds	out	of	the	window	for	thousands	of	miles."
She	said,	"These	are	seeds	of	flowers,	beautiful	flowers.	When	the	summer	goes
and	the	rains	come,	these	seeds	will	become	plants.	Soon	there	will	be	millions
of	flowers.	I	will	not	be	coming	back	on	the	route	and	I	will	never	see	them,	but
thousands	 of	 people	 will	 see	 them,	 thousands	 of	 people	 will	 enjoy	 their
fragrance."
She	 actually	made	 almost	 all	 the	 railroads	 in	 India	 full	 of	 flowers,	 and	people
said,
"When	you	will	not	see	them	again,	what	is	your	joy?"
She	 said,	 "My	 joy	 is	 that	 so	 many	 people	 will	 be	 joyful.	 I	 am	 not	 a	 miser.
Whatever	I	can	do	to	make	people	joyful,	happy,	I	will	do;	it	is	part	of	my	love."
She	really	loved	humanity,	and	did	everything	that	she	felt	was	right.
Just	give	your	love	to	anybody	--	a	stranger.	It	is	not	a	question	that	you	have	to
give	 something	very	 valuable,	 just	 a	 helping	hand	 and	 that	will	 be	 enough.	 In
twenty-four	hours,	whatever	you	do	should	be	done	with	 love,	and	 the	pain	 in
your	heart	will	disappear.	And	because	you	will	be	loving	so	much,	people	will
love	you.	It	 is	a	natural	 law.	You	get	what	you	give.	In	fact	you	get	more	than
you	give.
Learn	giving,	and	you	will	find	so	many	people	being	loving	towards	you	who
had	never	looked	at	you,	who	had	never	bothered	about	you.
Your	problem	is	that	you	have	a	heart	full	of	love	but	you	have	been	a	miser;	that
love	has	become	a	burden	on	 the	heart.	Rather	 than	making	 the	heart	blossom
you	have	been	hoarding	it,	so	once	in	a	while	when	you	are	in	a	moment	of	love
you	feel	it	disappearing.
But	why	one	moment?	Why	not	every	moment?	 It	 is	not	 even	a	question	of	a
living	being.	You	can	touch	this	chair	with	a	loving	hand.	The	thing	depends	on
you,	not	on	the	object.
Then	you	will	 find	a	great	 relaxation	and	a	great	disappearance	of	your	self	 --
which	is	a	burden	--	and	a	melting	into	the	whole.
This	is	certainly	a	disease,	in	the	literal	meaning	of	the	word:	it	is	a	dis-ease.	It	is
not	sickness,	so	no	physician	can	help	you.	It	is	simply	a	tense	state	of	your	heart
which	simply	wants	 to	give	more	and	more.	Perhaps	you	have	more	 love	 than
other	people,	perhaps	you	are	more	 fortunate,	and	you	are	making	out	of	your
fortune	a	great	misery	for	yourself.	Share	it,	without	bothering	to	whom	you	are
giving.	 Just	give	 it,	 and	you	will	 find	 tremendous	peace	and	 silence.	This	will
become	your	meditation.
One	can	come	to	meditation	through	many	directions;	perhaps	this	is	going	to	be
your	direction.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	I	FIND	REALLY	AMAZING	ABOUT	YOUR	CHILDHOOD	IS	THAT,
UNLIKE	 MOST	 OF	 US	 AS	 CHILDREN,	 YOU	 SEEM	 TO	 HAVE	 AN
INTRINSIC
AND	UNDENIABLE	UNDERSTANDING	THAT	YOUR	PARENTS'
INTERPRETATION	OF	REALITY	AND	YOUR	EXPERIENCE	OF	REALITY
WERE
OFTEN	TWO	DIFFERENT	THINGS.	YOU	INSIST	THAT	YOU	ARE	NO
DIFFERENT	 FROM	 US,	 YET	 THIS	 FACET	 OF	 YOUR	 CHILDHOOD
ALONE	IS
MORE	 THAN	 ENOUGH	 EVIDENCE	 THAT	 YOU	 HOUSE	 THE	 MOST
UNIQUE
SORT	OF	INTELLIGENCE.
I	WOULD	BE	GRATEFUL	FOR	YOUR	COMMENT.
Every	 child	 understands	 that	 he	 sees	 the	 world	 in	 a	 different	 way	 than	 his
parents.	 As	 far	 as	 seeing	 is	 concerned,	 it	 is	 absolutely	 certain.	 His	 values	 are
different.	 He	 may	 collect	 sea	 shells	 on	 the	 beach	 and	 the	 parents	 will	 say,
"Throw	them	away.	Why	are	you	wasting	your	time?"	And	for	him	they	were	so
beautiful.	He	 can	 see	 the	 difference;	 he	 can	 see	 that	 their	 values	 are	 different.
The	parents	are	running	after	money	--	he	wants	 to	collect	butterflies.	He	can't
see	why	you	are	so	interested	in	money;	what	you	are	going	to	do	with	it?	His
parents	cannot	see	what	he	is	going	to	do	with	these	butterflies,	or	these	flowers.
Every	child	comes	to	know	this,	that	there	are	differences.	The	only	question	is:
he	is	afraid	to	assert	that	he	is	right.	As	far	as	he	is	concerned,	he	should	be	left
alone.	 It	 is	 a	 question	 of	 just	 a	 little	 courage,	 which	 is	 also	 not	 missing	 in
children.	But	the	whole	society	is	managed	in	such	a	way	that	even	a	beautiful
quality	like	courage	in	a	child	will	be	condemned.
I	was	 not	willing	 to	 bow	 down	 in	 the	 temple	 to	 a	 stone	 statue.	And	 I	 said	 to
them,	"If	you	want,	you	can	force	me.	You	have	more	physical	force	than	me.	I
am	small;	you	can	force	me,	but	remember	you	are	doing	an	ugly	act.	It	will	not
be	 my	 prayer,	 and	 it	 will	 destroy	 even	 your	 prayer,	 because	 you	 are	 doing
violence	to	a	little	child	who	cannot	resist	physically."
One	day	while	 they	were	 inside	praying	 in	 the	 temple,	 I	climbed	on	 the	 top	of
the	 temple,	which	was	dangerous.	Only	once	a	year	a	painter	used	 to	climb	 it,
but	 I	 had	 seen	 the	 painter	 and	 how	 he	 had	managed.	 He	 had	 put	 nails	 at	 the
backside	 as	 steps.	 I	 followed	 him	 and	 I	 was	 sitting	 on	 the	 top	 of	 the	 temple.
When	 they	 came	 out	 they	 saw	me	 sitting	 there	 and	 they	 said,	 "What	 are	 you
doing	there?	In	the	first	place,	do	you	want	to	commit	suicide?"
I	 said,	 "No,	 I	 simply	 want	 to	 make	 you	 alert	 that	 if	 you	 force	 me,	 I	 can	 do
anything	that	is	within	my	power.	This	is	the	answer,	for	you	to	remember	that
you	cannot	force	me	to	do	anything."
They	begged	me,	"Be	quiet.	We	will	arrange	for	somebody	to	bring	you	down."
I	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	If	I	can	come	up,	I	can	come	down."	They	had	no	idea
about	those	nails.	I	had	been	particularly	watching	the	painter,	how	he	manages,
because	 everybody	 wondered	 --	 that	 this	 painter	 was	 really	 great.	 He	 was
painting	all	the	temples.
I	came	down.	They	said,	"We	will	never	force	you	about	anything,	but	don't	do
such	a	thing!	You	could	have	killed	yourself."
I	said,	"The	responsibility	would	have	been	on	you."
It	is	not	a	question	that	intelligence	is	not	in	the	children.	It	is	that	they	just	don't
use	their	assertiveness	because	it	 is	condemned	by	everybody.	Now,	everybody
condemned	my	family	because	I	had	gone	up	on	top	of	the	temple	--	that	means
beyond	their	god.	That	was	insulting	to	their	god.	And	I	said,	"If	a	painter	can
go...	 And	 do	 you	 know	 the	 painter	 is	 a	 Mohammedan?	 I	 am	 at	 least	 not	 a
Mohammedan	yet."
My	father	said,	"What	do	you	mean,	that	you	are	not	a	Mohammedan	yet?"
I	 said,	 "Exactly	what	 I	 have	 said.	 If	 you	 torture	me	 too	much	 I	 can	become	a
Mohammedan."
I	had	even	asked	the	malvi	of	the	mosque	nearby,	"Are	you	willing	to	initiate	me
into	Mohammedanism?"
He	said,	"You	want	 to	be	 initiated?	Your	parents...	There	will	be	 trouble	 in	 the
town."
I	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 forcing	 me.	 I	 am	 accepting
Mohammedanism.	I	will	stand	in	front	of	the	mosque	and	tell	my	parents	and	to
the	whole	town	that	I	have	not	been	forced."
He	said,	"This	is	dangerous.	It	may	create	a	riot	in	the	city	and	a	few	people	may
be	killed."
I	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried,	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 be	 a	 Mohammedan.	 You	 just
remember,	 if	my	father	asks	you,	you	say	to	him,	`Yes,	he	has	come,	and	if	he
wants	to	become	a	Mohammedan	we	cannot	refuse.'	I	am	not	going	to	come,	but
this	much	you	have	to	tell	him."
And	my	father	asked	him,	"Has	he	come	to	you?"
He	said,	"He	has	come,	and	he	is	very	insistent."
My	father	said,	"It	is	better	to	leave	him	alone!
They	 had	 a	 meeting	 of	 the	 whole	 family,	 "Leave	 him	 alone;	 he	 is	 really
dangerous.	If	he	becomes	a	Mohammedan	we	will	be	condemned	by	the	whole
city.	And	he	 really	 has	 gone,	 and	he	 is	 insisting,	 Ìf	 anything	happens	 again	 to
force	me,	then	I	am	going	to	change	my	religion.'"
That	was	 the	 last...!	 They	 remained	 silent;	 they	 never	 told	me	 to	 come	 to	 the
temple.	I	never	went	to	the	temple.	Slowly	they	learned	one	thing,	that	I	am	not
dangerous,	just	they	should	not	force	me	into	a	corner.
Each	child	has	 to	be	assertive,	 that's	 the	only	 thing.	And	what	 is	 there	 to	 lose?
But	children	are	so	dependent,	and	I	don't	see	that	they	have	to	be	so	dependent.
They	told	me	many	times,	"We	will	stop	giving	you	food."
I	said,	"You	do	it.	I	can	start	begging	--	in	this	very	city.	I	have	to	survive,	I	have
to	 do	 something.	You	 can	 stop	 giving	me	 food,	 but	 you	 cannot	 stop	me	 from
begging.	Begging	is	everybody's	birthright."
There	is	not	any	difference	of	intelligence,	but	I	see	differences	of	assertiveness
because	children	who	are	obedient	are	honored.
In	my	 family,	my	other	 brothers	would	 be	 called	when	 some	guests	would	be
there;	my	uncles	would	be	called,	"He	has	come	first	class.	He	has	come	this,	he
has	done	this..."
And	 I	would	 introduce	myself,	 "I	 have	done	nothing,	 and	 all	 these	 people	 are
just	at	a	loss	what	to	do	with	me.	They	never	wanted	me	to	be	introduced	to	you,
so	I	thought	I	should	introduce	myself!"
This	happened...	One	member	of	parliament	was	visiting	the	house	--	he	was	a
friend	of	my	 father.	They	were	 introducing	 everybody,	 and	 I	was	not	 called;	 I
was	simply	ignored.
When	 I	 came	 in	 and	 I	 introduced	myself	 to	 him	 he	 said,	 "But	 this	 is	 strange.
Nobody	called	you."
I	said,	"Nothing	is	strange.	These	are	all	obedient	people.	I	am	disobedient	--	and
you	will	have	some	taste	of	it	soon."
And	my	father	said,	"Leave	him	alone.	Why	should	he	have	a	taste?"
I	said,	"He	is	going	to	speak	in	my	school"	--	I	was	in	the	ninth	class	--	"he	is
going	 to	 address	my	 high	 school,	 and	 I	 am	 going	 to	 create	 trouble.	 I	 am	 just
informing	him	beforehand	 that	 I	am	going	 to	ask	questions,	and	he	should	not
think	 that	 because	 he	 is	 a	 great	 orator	 and	 a	 parliamentarian	 that	 I	 will	 be
impressed	by	these	things.	Nothing	impresses	me."
My	 father	 told	him,	 "You	be	aware	of	him.	He	will	 ask	 something,	 something
that	you	cannot	answer,	because	he	is	continuously	harassing	us.	He	will	never
ask	 anything	 that	 you	 can	 answer,	 and	he	has	 a	 capacity	 for	 finding...	 how	he
finds,	we	don't	know.	He	asks	questions	that	you	cannot	answer,	and	in	a	public
meeting	where	you	are	addressing	hundreds	of	people	he	can	make	you	look	a
fool."
That	man	became	really	afraid.	He	asked	me,	"It	will	be	good	if	you	come	with
me,	in	the	car"	--	just	to	persuade	me	not	to	create	any	trouble.
I	 said,	 "Nothing	will	 help.	 I	 can	 come	 in	 your	 car	 that	will	 simply	 shock	my
headmaster,	my	masters,	and	the	whole	school.	But	there	is	no	way	of	giving	me
any	bribe."
He	said,	"You	look	to	be	so	strong...	at	this	age?"
I	said,	"I	am	not	strong,	I	simply	ask	simple	questions	and	I	want	their	answers.
When	you	come	to	address	the	school,	I	have	every	right	to	ask	you	a	few	things.
You	are	continually	asking	in	the	parliament:	I	see	your	name	in	the	newspapers
everyday	--
questions	to	the	prime	minister,	to	this	minister,	to	that	minister	--	you	should	not
be	so	much	afraid	of	a	small	child.	What	can	I	ask?"
But	 he	 said,	 "Your	 father	 is	 so	 afraid,	 and	we	 have	 been	 colleagues,	we	 have
studied	together;	I	trust	in	his	judgment.	And	you	also	look	dangerous."
We	 went	 to	 the	 school.	 He	 started	 speaking;	 I	 stood	 up	 and	 asked	 him,	 "Be
honest	 and	 tell	 everybody,	 why	 have	 you	 brought	 me	 in	 your	 car?	 Just	 be
sincere!"
And	 he	 said,	 "Your	 father	 was	 right.	 You	 ask	 questions	 which	 cannot	 be
answered."
I	 said,	 "This	 is	 a	 simple	 question.	 If	 you	 cannot	 answer	 it	 I	 can	 answer.	 You
know	 the	 answer,	 I	 know	 the	 answer,	 I	want	 everybody	 else	 also	 to	 know	 the
answer."
My	principal	tried	to	settle	the	matter	saying,	"You	sit	down.	He	is	our	guest,	and
much	depends	on	him	for	grants	and	this..."
I	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 my	 business.	 I	 am	 not	 the	 principal	 of	 this	 school,	 I	 am
simply	 a	 student.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 asking	 a	 very	 complicated	 question	 or	 any
question	which	is	dangerous	to	the	security	of	the	country	or	anything.	I	am	just
asking	him	why	he	has	brought	me	in	his	car.	If	he	accepts	it	sincerely	I	will	not
ask	another	question."
He	said,	"I	am	sorry,	but	it	is	true.	What	he	is	saying	is	right	--	it	was	a	bribe.	I
thought	that	sitting	in	my	car	he	would	feel	good	and	he	would	not	harass	me."
But	 he	 looked	 so	 embarrassed	 saying	 such	 small	 things.	 When	 I	 came	 back
home,	my	father	said,	"Did	you	create	any	trouble?"
I	said,	"I	did	not	create	any	trouble,	he	himself	created	it.	He	asked	me	to	sit	in
his	car.	I	was	going	myself,	walking	to	the	school.	He	created	the	trouble."
Each	child,	if	supported	by	the	parents	to	be	courageous,	has	the	intelligence	to
make	clear	that	his	values	are	different,	his	perceptions	are	different.	But	nobody
supports,	everybody	tries	to	repress	the	child.	The	only	difference	you	can	make
is	 in	 that...	 To	 me	 anything	 that	 was	 repressive	 was	 a	 challenge.	 Then	 I	 was
provoked	to	do	something	--
and	they	had	to	learn	the	lesson.
So	the	next	time	I	was	the	first	to	be	called	to	be	introduced,	because	they	knew
that	 I	would	 come	by	myself	 and	 then	 it	would	become	more	difficult.	 It	was
better	to	introduce	me.	But	they	had	nothing	to	say	about	me	--	what	to	say	about
me?
So	 I	 told	 them,	 "You	 can	 say	 exactly	 the	 truth:	 `He	 is	 disobedient;	 he	 is	 a
problem.	 He	 is	 continuously	 creating	 trouble	 for	 the	 family,	 for	 the
neighborhood,	for	the	whole	town	--
teachers,	 students.	 And	 the	 whole	 day	 we	 are	 tired	 of	 listening	 to	 complaints
coming...'
You	can	simply	introduce	me	the	way	I	am.	Why	are	you	so	afraid,	when	I	am
not	afraid?
These	are	true	things."
A	 situation	was	 created	 that	 instead	of	my	being	afraid,	my	whole	 family	was
afraid	 of	me.	 And	 each	 child	 can	 do	 that...	 just	 a	 little	 courage.	 One	 day	my
father	said,	"You	have	to	be	back	in	the	house	before	nine	o'clock	in	the	night."
I	said,	"If	I	don't	come	--	then?"
He	said,	"Then	the	doors	will	not	be	open."
I	said,	"Then	keep	your	doors	closed.	I	will	not	even	knock	on	the	doors,	and	I
am	 not	 going	 to	 come	 before	 nine.	 I	 will	 sit	 outside,	 and	 tell	 everybody!
Whoever	will	be	passing,	they	will	ask,	`Why	are	you	sitting	in	darkness	in	this
cold	night?'	And	I	will	tell	them,	`This	is	the	situation...'"
He	said,	"That	means	you	will	create	trouble	for	me."
I	said,	"I	am	not	creating	it.	You	are	giving	this	order.	I	have	never	thought	about
it,	but	when	you	say,	 `Nine	 is	 the	deadline,'	 then	I	cannot	come	before	nine.	 It
simply	is	against	my	intelligence.	And	I	am	not	doing	anything;	I	will	be	simply
sitting	outside.	And	if	somebody	asks,	`Why	are	you	sitting...?'	And	anybody	is
going	 to	 ask.	 If	 you	 are	 sitting	 in	 the	 road,	 everybody	who	will	 be	 passing	 is
going	to	ask,	`Why	are	you	sitting	here	in	the	cold?'	Then	I	will	have	to	explain,
`This	is	the	situation...'"
He	said,	"Forget	about	that	limit.	You	come	whenever	you	want."
And	 I	 said,	 "I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 knock.	 The	 doors	 have	 to	 remain	 open.	Why
should	the	doors	be	closed	--	just	to	harass	me?	There	is	no	reason	to	close	the
doors."	In	my	part	of	India	the	town	is	awake	up	to	twelve,	because	it	is	so	hot
that	 only	 after	 twelve	 it	 starts	 cooling	 down.	 So	 people	 remain	 awake,	 work
continues.	The	day	is	so	hot	that	they	may	rest	in	the	day	and	work	in	the	night.	I
said,	 "There	 is	 no	 reason	 to	 close	 the	 doors	 when	 you	 are	 sitting	 inside	 and
working.	Leave	the	doors	open.	Why	should	I	knock?"
He	said,	"Okay,	the	doors	will	remain	open.	It	was	my	fault	to	say	to	you,	`Come
before	nine,'	because	everybody	comes	before	nine.'
I	said,	"I	am	not	everybody.	 If	 it	 is	suitable	for	 them	to	come	before	nine	 they
can	come.
If	it	is	suitable	for	me,	I	will	come.	But	don't	cut	my	freedom,	don't	destroy	my
individuality.	Just	let	me	be	myself."
It	 is	a	simple	question	of	asserting	yourself	against	those	who	have	power.	But
you	have	subtle	powers	that	you	can	use	against	them.	For	example,	if	I	said,	"I
will	simply	sit	in	the	road,"	I	am	also	using	power.	If	I	am	sitting	on	top	of	the
temple,	I	am	also	using	power.	If	they	can	threaten	me,	I	can	also	threaten	them.
But	children	simply	fall	in	line	just	to	be	respectable,	just	to	be	obedient,	just	to
be	 on	 the	 right	 path.	 And	 the	 right	 path	 means	 whatsoever	 their	 parents	 are
showing	them.
You	are	right,	I	was	a	little	different.	But	I	don't	think	it	is	any	superiority,	just	a
little	bit	of	difference.	And	once	I	learned	the	art,	then	I	refined	it.	Once	I	knew
how	to	fight	with	people	who	have	power	--	and	you	don't	have	--	then	I	refined
it,	 and	managed	 perfectly	well.	 I	 always	 found	 out	 some	way.	And	 they	were
always	 surprised	 because	 they	 thought,	 "Now	 he	 cannot	 do	 anything	 against
this"	--	because	they	were	always	thinking	rationally.
I	have	no	devotion	to	reason.
My	devotion	is	basically	towards	freedom.
By	what	means	it	is	achieved	does	not	matter.	Every	means	becomes	good	if	it
brings	 freedom	 to	 you,	 individuality	 to	 you,	 and	 you	 are	 not	 enslaved.	 The
children	 just	 don't	 have	 the	 idea.	 They	 think	 that	 their	 parents	 are	 doing
everything	good	for	them.
I	always	made	it	clear	to	them,	"I	don't	suspect	your	intentions,	and	I	hope	you
don't	suspect	my	intentions	either.	But	there	are	things	on	which	we	disagree.	Do
you	 want	 me	 to	 agree	 on	 everything	 with	 you?	 --	 whether	 you	 are	 right	 or
wrong?	 Are	 you	 absolutely	 certain,	 that	 you	 are	 right?	 If	 you	 are	 not	 so
absolutely	certain,	then	give	me	the	freedom	to	decide	for	myself.	At	least	I	will
have	the	pleasure	of	going	wrong	on	my	own	decision,	and	I	will	not	make	you
feel	guilty	and	responsible."
One	 just	 has	 to	 be	 alert	 about	 one	 thing:	 whatsoever	 your	 parents	 say,	 they
cannot	do.
They	cannot	harm	you,	 they	cannot	kill	you,	 they	can	only	 threaten	you.	Once
you	know	 they	 can	 only	 threaten	 you,	 their	 threats	 don't	make	 any	 difference;
you	can	also	threaten	them.	And	you	can	threaten	them	in	such	a	way	that	they
will	have	to	accept	your	right	to	choose	what	you	want	to	do.
I	made	 it	 absolutely	clear	 to	 them,	"If	you	can	convince	me	 that	what	you	are
saying	 is	 right,	 I	 will	 do	 it.	 But	 if	 you	 cannot	 convince	me	 then	 please	 don't
dictate.	Then	you	are	teaching	me	to	be	a	fascist;	you	are	not	helping	me	to	be	a
liberated	man,	but	somebody	imprisoned."
So	there	are	differences,	but	nothing	that	is	special	or	superior.	And	children	can
be	 taught;	 they	 all	 can	do	 the	 same,	because	 I	 have	 tried	 that	 too,	 even	 in	my
childhood.
Students	were	puzzled:	I	harassed	the	teachers,	I	harassed	the	principal,	and	still
they	could	not	do	anything	against	me.	And	they	would	do	something	wrong	and
immediately	they	were	in	trouble.	They	started	asking	me,	"What	is	the	secret?"
I	said,	"There	is	no	secret.	You	have	to	be	very	clear	that	you	are	right	and	that
you	have	a	reason	to	support	it.	Then	whoever	is	against	you	will	see.	Whether
he	is	a	teacher	or	the	principal	does	not	matter."
One	of	my	teachers	went	in	great	anger	into	the	office	of	the	principal	and	fined
me	 ten	 rupees	 for	my	misbehavior.	 I	 just	went	 behind	 him,	 and	while	 he	was
fining	me	I	was	standing	by	his	side.	As	he	moved	away,	with	 the	same	pen	I
fined	him	twenty	rupees	for	his	misbehavior.
He	said,	"What	are	you	doing?	That	register	is	for	teachers	to	fine	the	students."
I	 asked,	 "Where	 is	 it	 written?	 In	 this	 register,	 nowhere	 is	 it	 written	 that	 only
teachers	 can	 fine	 the	 students.	 I	 think	 this	 register	 is	 to	 fine	 anybody	 who
misbehaves.	If	there	is	anywhere	else	where	it	is	written,	I	would	like	to	see	it."
Meanwhile	the	principal	came	in.	He	said,	"What	is	the	matter?"
And	the	teacher	said,	"He	has	spoiled	the	register.	He	has	fined	me	twenty	rupees
for	misbehavior."
The	principal	said,	"That	is	not	right."
I	said,	"Do	you	have	any	written	document	that	says	that	no	student	can	fine	a
teacher,	even	if	the	teacher	is	misbehaving?"
The	principal	said,	"This	is	a	difficult	matter.	We	don't	have	any	document,	it	is
just	a	convention	that	teachers	punish."
I	said,	"It	has	to	be	changed.	Punishment	is	perfectly	right,	but	it	should	not	be
one	sided.
I	will	 pay	 those	 ten	 rupees	 only	 if	 this	man	pays	 twenty	 rupees."	Because	 the
principal	could	not	ask	him	for	twenty	rupees,	he	could	not	ask	me	for	those	ten
rupees,	and	the	fine	is	still	there!	When	after	a	few	years	I	visited	the	school,	he
showed	me,	"Your	fine	is	still	there."
I	said,	"Leave	it	there	for	other	students	to	know."
One	just	has	to	find	ways...!
So	there	must	be	some	difference,	but	it	is	not	of	superiority.	It	is	just	a	question
of	using	your	courage,	your	intelligence,	and	risking.	What	is	the	danger?	What
could	 those	 people	 have	 destroyed?	At	 the	most	 they	 could	 have	 failed	me	 in
their	class	--	of	which	they	were	afraid,	because	that	meant	I	would	be	again	in
their	class	the	next	year!	--	so	it	was	really	favorable	to	me.	They	wanted	to	get
rid	of	me	as	quickly	as	possible.	That	was	the	only	power	in	the	teacher's	hands,
to	fail	a	student.
I	had	made	it	clear	to	every	teacher,	"You	can	fail	me,	it	doesn't	matter.	Whether
I	pass	a	class	in	two	years	or	three	years	does	not	matter.	This	whole	life	is	so
useless	--
somewhere	I	have	to	pass	my	life.	I	can	pass	my	whole	life	in	this	school,	but	I
will	make	your	life	hell,	because	once	the	fear	of	failing	disappears	then	I	can	do
anything."	 So	 even	 the	 teachers	 who	 were	 against	 me	 were	 giving	 me	 more
marks	than	needed	just	to	help	me	move	into	another	class,	so	I	was	no	longer	a
burden	to	them.
If	 parents	 really	 love	 children,	 they	 will	 help	 them	 to	 be	 courageous	 --
courageous	 even	 against	 themselves.	 They	 will	 help	 them	 to	 be	 courageous
against	 teachers,	against	society,	against	anybody	who	is	going	to	destroy	 their
individuality.
And	 that's	what	 I	mean:	 the	 new	mind	will	 have	 these	 different	 qualities.	The
children	born	under	the	new	mind	and	the	new	man	will	not	be	treated	the	way
they	 have	 been	 treated	 down	 the	 centuries.	 They	 will	 be	 encouraged	 to	 be
themselves,	to	be	assertive,	to	be	self-respectful.	And	that	will	change	the	whole
quality	of	life.	It	will	become	more	shiny,	alive,	and	more	juicy.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#42
Chapter	title:	Everybody	is	enough
3	May	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8605030
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO42
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
86
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 GIFT	 OF	 BEING	 HERE	 WITH	 YOU	 IS	 OVERSHADOWED	 BY	 A
SENSE	OF
UNWORTHINESS.	 IT	 TROUBLES	 ME	 BECAUSE	 I	 DON'T	 FEEL	 AS
AVAILABLE
TO	YOU	AS	I	COULD	BE.
CAN	YOU	HELP	ME	TO	DISSOLVE	THIS?
It	 is	something	very	essential	 to	understand,	 that	people	who	are	 really	worthy
always	feel	unworthiness,	and	the	people	who	are	really	unworthy	never	feel	it.
Not	feeling	it	is	part	of	unworthiness;	feeling	it	is	part	of	worthiness.
The	question	is	from	Kirtan.
It	is	good	that	one	feels	it,	because	there	are	no	limits	to	unworthiness	--	you	can
go	as	high	as	you	desire;	 it	 is	 just	 like	the	sky.	And	to	feel	 it	means	the	ego	is
dissolving.	The	ego	never	feels	unworthy;	it	wants	to	prove	that	everybody	else
is	unworthy	and	only	it	 is	worthy.	It	 is	humbleness	that	feels	unworthiness	and
pain	which	can	give	birth	to	a	new	life.
So	 don't	 take	 it	 as	 a	 problem.	Accept	 it	 as	 a	 blessing.	Let	 the	 ego	 completely
dissolve.	It	cannot	stand	the	feeling	of	unworthiness.	There	are	a	few	things	in
life	which	function	in	a	strange	way.	A	real	lover	never	feels	that	he	is	loving	as
much	as	he	should.	He	is	always	feeling	something	more	can	be	done,	something
better	can	be	done.	These	feelings	are	part	of	real	love.	And	a	hypocritical	lover
always	feels	that	he	is	the	biggest	lover	in	the	world.	He	is	fake,	he	has	no	love;
hence	the	feeling	that	more	can	be	done	does	not	arise	in	him.	On	the	contrary	he
will	try	to	prove	that	the	other	is	not	loving	enough.
Life	in	one	sense	is	very	simple,	and	in	another	sense,	very	complex.	Don't	take
it	at	its	face	value.	It	is	perfectly	good	to	feel	unworthy	on	the	way.	It	will	create
humbleness,	egolessness,	gratitude,	selflessness.	And	once	you	have	understood
that	 this	 feeling	of	unworthiness	 is	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	gifts	of	 life,	once
you	start	enjoying	it,	 then	it	goes	on	opening	doors	of	more	mysteries.	A	point
comes	 when	 you	 disappear,	 and	 with	 your	 disappearance	 unworthiness	 also
disappears,	because	it	cannot	hang	on	without	you.
So	go	on	keeping	it	as	a	religious	phenomenon,	as	part	of	your	meditation,	and	it
will	lead	you	to	the	right	place,	where	the	last	trace	of	your	self	disappears.	With
it,	unworthiness	also	disappears.	That	does	not	mean	you	start	feeling	worthy;	it
simply	means	 that	worthiness	 and	or	 unworthiness	 become	 irrelevant.	You	 are
beyond	both.
So	 what	 is	 happening	 to	 you	 is	 perfectly	 right.	 Go	 deeply	 into	 it,	 and	 go	 on
rejoicing	--
not	with	a	sadness,	"I	am	unworthy."	That	sadness	will	prevent...	Not	taking	it	as
a	problem	that	has	to	be	solved,	no.	It	has	not	to	be	solved,	it	has	to	be	dissolved,
but	 the	 dissolution	 is	 not	 in	 your	 hands.	 When	 it	 reaches	 to	 its	 ripeness,	 is
dissolves	 itself.	And	when	one	does	not	 think	 in	 terms	of	worth,	one	becomes
part	of	the	vast	isness	that	surrounds	you.
There	are	millions	of	flowers.	No	flower	feels	unworthy	--	it	may	be	just	a	grass
flower	--
but	 neither	 does	 the	 lotus	 feel	 worthy.	 Those	 qualities	 don't	 exist	 in	 nature
because	 the	 ego	 does	 not	 exist	 there.	All	 our	 problems	 are	 somehow	 or	 other
related	with	the	ego.
If	you	were	 feeling	worthy	 then	 it	would	be	dangerous:	 that	will	 feed	 the	ego,
nourish	the	ego.	But	you	are	feeling	unworthy.	That	is	perfectly	the	right	thing	to
go	deeply	into.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	DISCOURSE	THE	OTHER	MORNING	 I	HAD	A	REALIZATION	THAT
WAS	SO
OBVIOUS	 I	 CANNOT	 BELIEVE	 I	 JUST	 GOT	 IT:	 I'VE	 BEEN
DEHYPNOTIZED.
THE	 PROCESS	 STARTED	 THE	MOMENT	 I	 HEARD	 YOUR	 VOICE	 TEN
YEARS
AGO.	TODAY	 I	 FELT	SO	CLOSE	TO	SOMETHING.	YOU	COULD	HAVE
SAID,
"COUNT	TO	THREE	AND	YOU	WILL	BE	AWAKE."
I	CAN'T	BELIEVE	HOW	DEEPLY	PROGRAMMED	WE	ARE	AGAINST
HYPNOSIS,	AND	HOW	EVER	SO	GENTLY	YOU	HAVE	BEEN	POINTING
THAT
OUT	TO	US	--	SO	MUCH	SO	THAT	WE	EVEN	THINK	IT	 IS	AN	INSULT
WHEN
PEOPLE	 SAY,	 "OSHO	 HAS	 HYPNOTIZED	 YOU,"	 WHEN	 IN	 FACT	 IT'S
THE
GREATEST	GIFT	ON	THE	EARTH.
YOUR	 PATIENCE,	 BRILLIANCE,	 COMPASSION,	 MASTERY	 AND
WISDOM	HAS
ME	IN	CONSTANT	AWE.
I	 was	 really	 going	 to	 say,	 "Kaveesha,	 one...	 two...	 three!"	 But	 I	 thought,
"Dehypnotizing	 Kaveesha	 before	 everybody	 else	 is	 not	 good	 manners!"	 so	 I
remained	silent.	But	she	heard	it	anyway.
What	 she	 is	 saying	 is	 exactly	 true.	 My	 talking	 to	 you	 has	 not	 the	 ordinary
purpose	that	talking	serves:	indoctrination	--	that	is	not	the	purpose	of	my	talks.	I
don't	have	any	doctrine;	my	talking	is	really	a	process	of	dehypnotization.	Just
listening	 to	 me,	 slowly,	 slowly	 you	 will	 be	 free	 of	 all	 the	 programs	 that	 the
society	has	forced	you	to	believe	in.
Just	by	listening	with	an	open	heart,	with	a	receiving	gratefulness,	it	is	bound	to
happen.
There	have	been	hypnotists	but	nobody	has	ever	tried	speaking	itself	as	a	method
of	dehypnotizing.	It	can	become	a	music	in	you;	it	can	relax	you,	can	make	you
silent,	 can	give	a	new	rhythm	 to	your	heart...	 a	new	feeling	of	my	presence,	a
new	perception	of	reality.
And	 I	may	 be	 talking	 about	 anything.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 question	 that	 I	 am	 talking
about	these	things;	these	are	by-products.	I	may	be	talking	about	A	or	B	or	C	--
which	 are	 absolutely	 unrelated	 to	 dehypnosis.	 The	 question	 is	 your	 way	 of
listening.	 If	 it	 is	 right,	 then	whatever	I	am	saying	will	 relax	your	being	 totally,
and	slowly,	slowly	your	conditionings	will	start	falling	apart.
And	I	want	to	do	it	this	way.	I	don't	want	to	hypnotize	you	--	that	means	to	make
you	first	unconscious.	This	way	there	is	no	need	to	make	you	unconscious.	You
become	more	 conscious,	more	 alert.	You	 are	 becoming	 conscious	 and	 alert	 in
order	to	listen	to	me.	But	my	purpose	is	not	to	teach	you	something,	but	to	use
teaching	as	an	excuse	to	make	you	conscious,	alert,	so	you	can	start	touching	the
superconsciousness	in	you.
And	from	superconsciousness	a	higher	quality	of	hypnosis	arises.
The	ordinary	methods	of	hypnosis	can	be	dangerous;	you	can	be	in	the	hands	of
a	person	who	can	use	you	against	yourself,	because	you	are	unconscious.	You
are	not	in	a	better	state	than	your	normal	consciousness.
Nobody	before	 has	 used	 speaking	 to	 help	you	 to	 become	 superconscious,	 so	 I
need	not	 say	 to	 you,	 "Drop	 this,	 drop	 that"	 --	 I	 do	not	 have	 to	 give	 you	post-
hypnotic	suggestions.
Everything	will	be	happening	here-now,	and	it	will	be	happening	in	your	fully-
alert	state,	so	you	cannot	be	used,	cannot	be	misused;	you	cannot	be	exploited.
Hypnotism	 became	 condemned	 because	 people	 started	 exploiting	 it.	 Anybody
who	is	as	unconscious	as	you	are	can	use	the	technique	of	hypnotism.	That's	why
it	became	condemned;	otherwise	such	a	beautiful	phenomenon	which	can	help
you	towards	meditation	would	not	have	been	condemned.
My	 way	 cannot	 be	 misused.	 And	 when	 people	 say	 to	 you	 that	 you	 are
hypnotized,	don't	 feel	hurt.	Tell	 them,	"Yes,	we	have	been	hypnotized	 to	wake
up.	We	 have	 been	 hypnotized	 to	 enter	 into	 superconsciousness.	 We	 have	 not
been	 hypnotized	 to	 go	 into	 lower	 realms	 of	 the	 mind,	 but	 to	 the	 higher
superconscious	or	collective	superconscious"
--	 and	 finally	 if	 you	 simply	 go	 on	 listening	 to	me,	 doing	 nothing,	 the	 cosmic
consciousness	is	going	to	be	your	experience.
But	I	have	never	said	it	before,	and	people	have	always	wondered:	if	I	don't	have
a	 religion,	 don't	 have	 a	 doctrine,	 don't	 have	 a	 teaching,	 then	why	 do	 I	 go	 on
talking	to	people?	I	could	not	tell	them;	they	would	not	understand.	Only	those
who	will	experience	the	relaxation	of	superconsciousness	will	be	able	to	see	the
point.	 And	 then	 certainly,	 as	Kaveesha	 says,	 they	will	 understand	 how	 long	 I
have	 been	 waiting,	 and	 how	 long	 I	 have	 been	 patient,	 and	 how	 I	 have	 been
condemned	for	 things	which	have	nothing	to	do	with	me.	But	I	have	remained
silent	--	because	it	does	not	bother	me;	the	only	thing	that	I	am	interested	in	is
that	my	people	 should	 attain	 to	 the	 state	 from	where	 they	 cannot	 fall	 before	 I
leave	the	body.
I	cannot	give	you	anything	more	precious.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
HOW	MIGHT	WE	SANNYASINS	BEST	RELATE	WITH	ONE	ANOTHER?
WE	 ARE	 SUCH	 AN	 AMAZING	 ASSORTMENT	 OF	 UNIQUE
INDIVIDUALS	--	ALL
DETERMINED	 TO	 BE	 OURSELVES	 AND	 AVOID	 SOCIETY'S
IMPOSITIONS.	YET
WE	ARE	ALL	 JOINED	BY	A	COMMON	THREAD:	 LOVE	 --	 OUR	LOVE
FOR	YOU
--	AND	WE	ALL	LONG	FOR	THE	MOMENT	WHEN	WE	CAN	MELT	INTO
YOU,	WHEN	WE	CAN	FINALLY	COME	HOME.
It	is	not	difficult.
Only	individuals	can	relate;	personalities	cannot.	Personalities	are	like	shadows.
They	cannot	meet,	they	cannot	merge,	because	they	don't	exist.	Personalities	are
fake.	That's	why	in	 the	whole	world	people	are	 talking	of	 love,	but	 there	 is	no
love.	They	are	talking	of	friendship,	but	there	is	no	friendship	--	even	talking	of
trust.	But	for	that	a	tremendously	powerful	individuality	is	needed.	Personalities
cannot	 trust;	 they	are	always	afraid	 --	afraid	 that	 their	 reality	may	be	exposed,
may	be	known.
As	far	as	my	people	are	concerned,	 there	is	no	problem;	it	 is	not	a	question	of
fighting	for	individuality.	I	declare	you	individuals,	so	your	individuality	is	not	a
problem	 --	 that	 you	 have	 to	 protect	 it.	 You	 can	 mix	 and	 merge,	 you	 can	 be
friends,	 you	 can	 be	 lovers.	 You	 can	work	 together;	 you	 can	work	 under	 each
other	 without	 any	 fear	 because	 you	 have	 dropped	 the	 personality,	 which	 was
always	afraid.	Now	you	have	individuality,	a	solid	rock	which	is	fearless.
I	have	told	you	the	story	of	Diogenes,	that	he	was	caught	by	four	thieves.	They
wanted	 to	 sell	 him	 in	 a	 slave	 market.	 They	 were	 very	 happy	 to	 find	 such	 a
beautiful,	healthy	individual.	First	they	were	afraid	and	they	were	hiding	behind
the	 trees	 near	 where	 Diogenes	 was	 sitting,	 thinking,	 "He	 alone	 is	 enough	 to
finish	all	four	of	us!"	He	was	a	strong	man.
Diogenes	was	listening	to	their	whispers,	What	to	do?	We	are	four,	but	he	alone
is	enough..."	Diogenes	finally	said,	"Don't	bother	--	just	come	and	take	me	where
you	want."
They	 were	 very	 much	 afraid:	 what	 kind	 of	 man	 is	 this?	 They	 said,	 "We	 are
thieves	and	we	want	to	take	you	to	the	slave	market,	because	for	you	we	can	get
the	highest	price	anybody	has	ever	got.	We	cannot	normally	find	slaves	of	your
individuality,	beauty,	proportion,	strength."
Diogenes	 said,	 "Don't	 be	worried."	 They	 started	 trying	 to	 tie	 him	 up;	 he	 said,
"Stop,	there	is	no	need	to	bind	me.	You	come	behind	me,	I	know	the	way."
They	 could	not	 believe	 it	 --	 that	man	 is	mad	or	what?	And	he	 started	moving
towards	the	slave	market.	And	everybody	who	saw	them	on	the	way	thought	that
he	was	 the	master	 and	 they	were	 the	 slaves.	 Those	 four	 poor	 thieves	were	 so
afraid:	 "This	 man	 can	 do	 anything.	 We	 got	 unnecessarily	 involved	 with	 this
man!"
And	this	is	what	he	did:	he	stood	on	the	pulpit	where	the	slaves	have	to	stand	so
every	buyer	can	see	them,	go	around	and	look	at	them,	and	he	shouted,	"Listen,
all	you	slaves	who	are	here!	For	the	first	time	a	master	is	for	sale.	If	any	one	of
you	has	guts,	you	can	purchase	me.	And	these	poor	fellows,	four	fellows	you	see
--	they	need	money.	And	it	does	not	matter	to	me	where	I	am.	My	individuality
cannot	be	destroyed."
There	was	great	silence.	The	whole	marketplace	became	utterly	silent,	because
he	had	said,	"A	master	 is	 for	sale."	One	king	who	had	come	 to	 look	for	a	 few
slaves	became	interested,	and	he	was	ready	to	pay	any	price.	Diogenes	asked	the
thieves,	"How	much	do	you	want?	Don't	be	shy	--	just	ask	it.	Get	the	money	and
get	lost!"
They	got	the	money.	Diogenes	sat	on	the	chariot	with	the	king,	and	the	king	said,
"This	is	strange.	You	should	not	have	done	that."
Diogenes	said,	"Those	poor	fellows	were	in	need,	and	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,
wherever	I	am	I	will	remain	myself."	Even	the	king	became	afraid,	because	only
those	two	were	in	the	chariot,	and	the	man	was	so	strong:	grabbing	the	neck	of
the	king,	he	could	have	simply	finished	him.
Diogenes	said,	"But	don't	be	worried.	I	could	finish	you	right	now,	but	I	will	not.
You	have	helped	those	four	poor	men.	I	will	come	with	you,	and	I	will	serve	as	a
slave,	because	even	in	slavery	my	freedom	is	intact.	I	am	choosing	it;	nobody	is
imposing	it	upon	me."
Do	 you	 see	 the	 difference?	 Only	 a	 slavery	 imposed	 is	 slavery;	 a	 slavery
accepted,	 chosen,	 is	 the	 highest	 expression	 of	 freedom.	 You	 are	 so	 certain	 of
your	being,	of	your	individuality,	that	you	are	not	worried,	even	of	becoming	a
slave.	The	king	was	happy.
He	said,	"No,	I	will	not	make	you	a	slave,	but	a	friend.	As	far	as	I	understand
you	must	be	Diogenes.	I	have	heard	about	the	man,	and	I	feel	that	there	cannot
be	many	Diogeneses.	You	must	be	Diogenes."
Diogenes	said,	"I	am,"	and	he	lived	with	the	king	in	the	palace,	naked,	as	he	used
to	 live	 in	 his	 own	 way.	 The	 king	 told	 him,	 "In	 the	 palace	 it	 looks	 odd,
embarrassing.	You	should	use	clothes."
Diogenes	 said,	 "Then	 it	 is	 better	 you	don't	make	me	 a	 friend;	 you	make	me	 a
slave.	 If	 friendship	cannot	allow	freedom,	what	kind	of	 friendship	 is	 this?	You
make	me	 a	 slave,	 then	whatever	 you	 say	 I	 will	 do."	 But	 the	 king	 had	 started
loving	 the	man.	His	 sincerity,	his	 authority,	his	power	was	magnetic.	He	 freed
him.	He	said,	"I	cannot	make	you	a	slave	and	I	know	I	cannot	make	you	a	friend.
In	the	palace,	living	naked,	where	other	kings	come	and	stay,	it	will	be	always	a
problem."
Diogenes	said,	"This	is	your	decision.	I	am	simply	your	slave.	If	you	make	me
free,	 that's	 perfectly	 okay.	 I	 am	 happy	 that	 those	 four	 poor	 people	 have	 been
helped.	 And	 I	 have	 found	 a	 beautiful	 way	 to	 help	 poor	 people:	 if	 sometimes
somebody	is	poor	I	can	tell	him,
`Take	me	to	the	slave	market	and	sell	me.'"
Here	 with	 me	 your	 individuality	 is	 accepted,	 declared,	 so	 you	 need	 not	 be
worried	 that	 it	 will	 be	 taken	 away,	 that	 it	 can	 be	 crushed	 by	 others,	 that
somebody	may	enslave	you,	force	you	to	do	things.
Don't	 be	 worried	 --	 nobody	 can	 force	 you.	 You	 have	 always	 the	 choice.
Ultimately,	you	are	to	decide,	and	it	is	good	to	decide	in	a	way	so	the	people	who
are	with	me	don't	feel	any	antagonism	between	them.	They	love	me	--	that	is	a
joining	 thread.	 There	 is	 no	 organization.	 Each	 sannyasin	 is	 connected	 to	 me
individually,	but	because	he	is	my	sannyasin...	Other	sannyasins	who	are	joined
with	 me	 have	 to	 be	 respectful	 of	 each	 other,	 because	 each	 of	 my	 sannyasins
somehow	represents	me.	Your	love	for	me	must	be	shared	with	my	people	too.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 UNDERSTAND	 YOU	 TO	 HAVE	 SAID	 THAT	 IN	 HYPNOSIS	 ONE'S
PROBLEMS
CAN	 BE	 WORKED	 OUT	 ON	 AN	 UNCONSCIOUS	 LEVEL,	 AND	 THAT
THIS
METHOD	HAS	THE	ADVANTAGE	OVER	PSYCHOTHERAPY	IN	THAT	IT
CAN
COVER	A	LOT	MORE	GROUND	IN	A	FAR	SHORTER	TIME.
IS	 IT	 NECESSARY	 MERELY	 FOR	 THE	 CONTENTS	 OF	 THE
UNCONSCIOUS	TO
SURFACE	DURING	HYPNOSIS,	OR	DOES	THE	CONSCIOUS	MIND	NEED
TO	BE
MADE	AWARE	OF	THOSE	CONTENTS	FOR	THE	CLEARING	TO	BE
COMPLETE?
The	conscious	mind	has	 to	be	made	aware;	otherwise	 there	will	be	no	change.
The	contents	of	the	unconscious	mind	are	repressed	by	the	conscious	mind.	To
reverse	the	process,	they	have	to	be	brought	back	to	the	conscious	mind,	and	the
conscious	mind	has	to	express	them	instead	of	repressing	them.
Because	 of	 repression	 they	 had	 gone	 into	 the	 unconscious;	 unless	 the	 reverse
process	 of	 expression	 is	 there,	 they	will	 remain.	 They	 can	 be	 available	 to	 the
hypnotists,	 but	 the	 conscious	mind	 does	 not	 know	 about	 it.	 For	 the	 conscious
mind	they	are	still	repressed,	and	it	is	only	through	the	conscious	mind	that	they
have	a	way	to	go	out	of	your	being.
From	the	unconscious	mind	directly,	there	is	no	door.	A	contact	can	be	made,	but
there	is	no	way	for	any	content	to	go	out	of	the	unconscious	mind	directly;	first	it
has	 to	 come	 to	 the	 conscious	 mind.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 your	 main	 gate.	 You	 have
entered	at	the	main	gate.	If	you	want	to	go	out	you	will	have	to	go	to	the	main
gate;	otherwise	you	will	remain	confined.
The	deeper	you	go	into	the	unconscious	mind,	the	thicker	the	walls	become.	The
collective	unconscious	mind	has	even	thicker	walls,	and	the	cosmic	unconscious
mind	is	almost	unapproachable.	It	is	very	difficult	even	for	the	hypnotist	to	find
out	what	is	hidden	there.	For	the	first	time	the	unconscious	mind's	contents	are
released	 through	 the	 conscious	 mind,	 bringing	 them	 to	 the	 notice	 of	 the
conscious	mind	 --	 not	 only	 to	 the	 notice,	 but	 the	 recognition,	 acceptance	 and
expression.	 That's	 why	 I	 said	 it	 should	 be	 recorded	 as	 a	 proof;	 otherwise	 the
conscious	mind	will	deny	it.
If	you	say	to	somebody,	"You	want	to	marry	your	mother,"	the	conscious	mind
will	 simply	 deny	 it,	 "It	 is	 all	 nonsense	 --	 what	 are	 you	 saying?	 I	 have	 never
thought	about	it."
And	 he	 is	 right,	 he	 has	 never	 thought	 about	 it.	 But	 his	 mother	 was	 the	 first
woman	in	his	life,	and	he	loved	her	and	he	got	her	love,	and	he	has	been	jealous
of	his	father	since	then.
That's	why	every	society	has	made	it	a	discipline	to	respect	your	father.	That	is
just	to	prevent	the	natural	tendency	of	being	jealous	and	disrespectful.
And	every	society	has	made	it	a	point	that	you	cannot	even	be	allowed	to	think
that	you	would	 like	 to	 love	your	mother;	even	 to	 think	of	 it,	you	will	 feel	 that
you	are	 just	being	mad.	But	 there	was	a	day	 in	your	 childhood	when	you	had
longed	for	it.	Slowly,	slowly	you	repressed	it;	it	was	not	allowable.
If	the	hypnotist	just	tells	you	that	this	thing	is	in	your	unconsciousness,	you	are
not	going	to	accept	it.	So	it	should	be	recorded,	and	not	one	time	but	many	times
so	 that	 you	 can	 be	made	 clearly	 alert	 that	 this	 content	 is	 there.	 Then	 you	 can
relax	and	let	that	content	come	directly	to	your	conscious	mind	--	not	through	the
information	from	the	hypnotist.
You	follow	me?	He	is	telling	you,	but	that	will	not	help.	His	telling	can	only	do
one	thing:	if	he	can	convince	you	that	such	a	content	exists	in	your	unconscious
mind,	 and	you	 allow	 it	 in	your	 silence	 to	 surface	 to	 the	 conscious	mind,	 from
there	it	can	be	released.	You	know	that	it	is	absurd;	it	has	no	meaning.
Perhaps	in	your	childhood	you	had	the	desire,	but	now	you	can	understand	it	is
meaningless	 and	 you	 can	 release	 it;	 rather	 than	 repressing	 it	 inside,	 you	 can
throw	it	out.
And	as	 the	unconscious	becomes	 empty,	 then	 the	 collective	unconscious	 starts
speaking	-
-	 only	 then.	 As	 the	 collective	 unconscious	 becomes	 empty	 then	 there	 is	 a
possibility	for	the	cosmic	unconscious	to	speak.	And	once	the	whole	lower	part
of	your	mind,	 the	depth	of	your	mind,	 is	cleaned	away,	 it	 is	 such	a	 freshening
experience,	as	if	twenty-four	hours	a	day	you	are	taking	showers.	And	once	this
lower	part	is	unburdened,	then	you	are	ready	to	move	upwards	very	easily.
But	the	conscious	mind	is	the	only	door	for	the	higher,	for	the	lower.	So	anything
that	is	going	to	happen	has	to	happen	through	the	conscious	mind.
Sigmund	 Freud	 and	 his	 school	 have	 not	 been	 very	 successful	 for	 the	 simple
reason...	You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	first	he	had	been	an	apprentice	of	a
hypnotist,	a	very	famous	hypnotist	in	France.	It	is	only	there	that	he	developed
the	idea	of	psychoanalysis,	that	what	comes	up	in	deep	hypnosis,	can	be	brought
up	 through	 dreams.	 But	 he	 forgot	 one	 thing,	 and	 that's	 what	 is	 missing	 in
psychotherapy.
First,	 you	 cannot	 remember	 all	 your	 dreams.	 For	 six	 hours	 you	 are	 dreaming;
you	can	remember	perhaps	one	dream	--	the	last,	when	you	were	just	waking	up.
Secondly,	you	cannot	be	convinced	that	a	dream	is	a	reality.	Thirdly,	the	dream	is
not	going	to	repeat	itself;	and	for	any	scientific	work,	repeated	experimentation
is	absolutely	necessary,	so	that	you	can	come	to	a	conclusion	without	exception.
A	dream	may	come	once	and	may	not	come	again,	because	 there	are	so	many
dreams.	 So	 the	 person's	 conscious	 mind	 is	 never	 convinced	 that	 this	 dream
content	has	any	reality.
Fourthly,	 the	 dream	 is	 a	 different	 language.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 language	 of	 the
conscious	mind,	 it	 is	pictorial,	 it	 is	not	alphabetical.	That	 is	one	of	 the	greatest
troubles,	and	because	of	it,	psychoanalysis	has	to	disappear;	it	cannot	continue.
So	the	whole	thing	depends	on	the	psychoanalyst	interpreting.	You	can	tell	him
the	dream,	but	the	dream	says	nothing	unless	he	interprets	it.
Now	that	interpretation	may	be	just	his	personal	prejudice.	That's	how,	if	you	go
to	 Freud,	 everything	 comes	 to	 sex.	 Whatever	 you	 dream,	 you	 cannot	 dream
anything	 which	 he	 will	 not	 conclude	 is	 sexual	 repression.	 You	 take	 the	 same
dream	 to	 Jung	 and	 it	 will	 be	 from	 the	 collective	 unconscious	 --	 a	 myth,	 a
mythology	from	your	past	lives.	Take	the	same	dream	to	Adler	and	it	is	nothing
but	ambition,	will	to	power.	So	if	there	are	thousands	of	interpreters,	there	will
be	thousands	of	meanings	to	the	dream.
In	hypnosis	 it	 is	not	a	pictorial	 language	 that	 the	unconscious	uses.	 It	uses	 the
same	 language	 as	 the	 conscious	mind	 uses,	 because	 it	 is	 talking	 to	 a	 person's
conscious	mind	--
the	hypnotist's.	So	it	is	very	simple	and	very	clear.
Sigmund	Freud	 thought	 that	 he	had	developed	a	better	method,	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	it	discarded	hypnotism	--	because	it	was	condemned,	condemned	by
the	society.	But	psychoanalysis	has	not	helped.
What	I	am	doing	here...	if	you	are	just	listening	to	me	and	your	conscious	mind
becomes	 silent,	 the	 unconscious	 mind	 itself	 starts	 releasing	 its	 vapor.	 No
language	is	needed,	neither	of	dream	nor	ordinary	language;	it	is	just	a	repressed
energy	 that	 starts	 coming	 up	 to	 the	 conscious	 and	 is	 released	 through	 the
conscious.	Once	we	have	cleaned	 the	 lower	mind,	 then	we	can	easily	move	 to
the	upper	realm.	But	for	that	too,	one	has	to	go	through	the	conscious	mind.
And	the	upper	wing	does	not	have	anything;	nothing	is	repressed	there.	So	there
is	 no	 question	 of	 psychoanalysis	 ever	 discovering	 it,	 or	 any	 other	 school	 of
psychology	ever	discovering	it,	because	it	has	no	dreams,	it	has	no	repressions.	It
is	utter	purity.
Clean	the	lower	mind	and	just	a	simple	method	of	meditation	will	give	you	the
wings	to	move	upwards.	There	is	no	barrier.	You	get	more	and	more	into	light,
deeper	and	deeper	into	bliss,	and	finally	you	come	to	a	point	where	even	you	are
no	more...	nirvana.
Question	5
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	 IS	 IT	 THAT	WE	ARE	NEVER	QUITE	 SATISFIED	WITH	WHO	WE
ARE,	AND
WHAT	EXISTENCE	HAS	GIVEN	US?	WE	ARE	ALWAYS	LOOKING	FOR
SOMETHING	BETTER	TO	DO,	LOOKING	FOR	SOMEONE	ELSE	TO	BE,
ALWAYS	WANTING	WHAT	THE	OTHER	ONE	HAS	MORE	THAN	WHAT
WE
HAVE	BEEN	GIVEN.	LIKE	THE	SAYING	GOES,	"THE	GRASS	IS	ALWAYS
GREENER	ON	THE	OTHER	SIDE	OF	THE	FENCE."
WHY	IS	THIS?
It	is	because	you	have	been	distracted.	You	have	been	directed	where	nature	has
not	 meant	 you	 to	 be.	 You	 are	 not	 moving	 towards	 your	 own	 potential.	What
others	wanted	you	to	be,	you	are	trying	to	be,	but	it	cannot	be	satisfying.	When	it
is	 not	 satisfying,	 the	 logic	 says,	 "Perhaps	 it	 is	 not	 enough	 --	 have	more	of	 it."
Then	 you	 go	 after	 more;	 then	 you	 start	 looking	 around.	 And	 everybody	 is
coming	 out	 with	 a	 mask	 which	 is	 smiling,	 happy	 looking,	 so	 everybody	 is
deceiving	everybody	else.	You	also	come	with	a	mask,	so	others	 think	you	are
happier.	You	think	others	are	happier.
The	grass	looks	greener	on	the	other	side	of	the	fence	--	but	from	both	sides.	The
people	who	are	living	on	the	other	side	of	the	fence,	they	see	your	grass	and	it
looks	 greener.	 It	 really	 looks	 greener,	 thicker,	 better.	 That	 is	 the	 illusion	 that
distance	creates.	When	you	come	close,	then	you	start	seeing	that	it	is	not	so.	But
people	keep	each	other	at	a	distance.	Even	friends,	even	lovers	keep	each	other
at	a	distance;	too	much	closeness	will	be	dangerous,	they	may	see	your	reality.
And	you	have	been	misguided	from	the	very	beginning,	so	whatever	you	do	you
will	 remain	miserable.	 Nature	 has	 no	 idea	 of	money,	 otherwise	 dollars	would
have	been	growing	on	the	trees.	Nature	has	no	idea	of	money;	money	is	a	pure
invention	of	man	--
useful,	but	dangerous	too.	You	see	somebody	with	much	money,	and	you	think
perhaps	money	brings	 joy:	 look	at	 that	person,	how	 joyous	he	 seems	 to	be,	 so
run	after	money.
Somebody	is	healthier	--	run	after	health.	Somebody	is	doing	something	else	and
looks	very	contented	--	follow	him.
But	it	 is	always	the	others,	and	the	society	has	managed	so	that	you	will	never
think	about	your	own	potential.	And	the	whole	misery	is	that	you	are	not	being
yourself.	Just	be	yourself,	and	then	there	is	no	misery	and	no	competition	and	no
botheration	that	others	have	more,	that	you	don't	have	more.
And	if	you	like	the	grass	to	be	greener	there	is	no	need	to	look	at	the	other	side
of	the	fence;	you	can	make	the	grass	greener	on	your	side	of	the	fence.	It	is	such
a	simple	 thing	 to	make	 the	grass	greener.	But	you	are	 just	 looking	everywhere
else,	and	all	the	lawns	are	looking	so	beautiful	--	except	yours.
Man	 has	 to	 be	 rooted	 in	 his	 own	 potential,	whatever	 it	 is,	 and	 nobody	 should
give	 him	 directions,	 guidance.	 They	 should	 help	 him,	 wherever	 he	 is	 going,
whatever	he	 is	becoming.	And	 the	world	will	 be	 so	 contented	 that	you	cannot
believe	it.
I	have	never	felt	any	discontent,	even	from	my	childhood,	for	the	simple	reason
that	I	never	allowed	anybody	to	distract	me	from	what	I	was	doing	or	what	I	was
trying	to	be.
That	helped	me	immensely.	It	was	difficult,	and	the	difficulties	went	on	growing,
and	 now	 the	 whole	 world	 is	 against	 me.	 But	 it	 does	 not	 disturb	 me.	 I	 am
perfectly	happy,	perfectly	content.	I	can't	think	that	I	could	have	been	otherwise.
In	any	other	position	I	would	have	been	miserable.
I	don't	have	a	home,	I	don't	have	a	place	to	live,	I	don't	have	any	money.	Still,	I
have	 something	 that	 gives	me	 absolute	 contentment.	 I	 have	 lived	 according	 to
my	potential,	and	even	if	death	comes	it	will	not	upset	me.	I	have	lived	my	way.
The	whole	world	may	be	against	me	 --	 it	does	not	upset	me.	People	get	upset
even	if	one	person	is	against	them.
They	get	so	upset;	I	cannot	even	understand	it.
Hasya	was	saying,	"Osho,	soon	we	will	be	running	out	of	countries."
I	said,	"That	does	not	matter.	First	we	will	run	out	of	countries,	then	we	will	find
something	else.	We	can	have	a	big	boat	and	live	on	the	boat."	Because	I	said	in
Crete,	"If	you	don't	allow	me	any	 land	anywhere,	 I	will	have	a	 jet	plane	and	I
will	be	living	on	that,"	they	immediately	started	a	movement	that	I	cannot	land	at
any	airport	in	Europe.
I	 am	 really	 enjoying	 that	 a	 single	 person	 who	 has	 no	 power	 can	 make	 these
pygmy	 politicians	 just	 go	 out	 of	 their	 minds!	 I	 had	 just	 mentioned	 it,	 and
immediately	 the	 European	 parliament	 tabled	 a	 resolution,	 which	 they	 will	 be
discussing	soon	and	passing,	that	I	cannot	land	at	any	airport	in	Europe.
But	 we	 will	 find	 some	 way...	 In	 Europe	 there	 are	 communist	 countries	 --
Yugoslavia,	Czechoslovakia	--	we	can	land	at	their	airports.	They	cannot	prevent
me	just	landing.	But	we	can	have	a	big	ship	with	thousands	of	sannyasins	on	it,
and	just	live	on	the	ship.	And	let	them	do	what	they	can	do	--	bomb	the	ship	or
do	whatsoever	they	want	to	do	--	but	one	thing	is	certain,	they	cannot	upset	me.
They	tried	in	the	American	jails	 to	upset	me	in	such	ways	that	anybody	would
have	been	upset.	They	would	wake	me	up	at	four	o'clock;	sleep	was	impossible,
so	it	was	not	a	problem	to	me	because	I	was	just	lying	down	with	closed	eyes.
They	would	wake	me	at	four	o'clock,	saying,	"You	get	ready.	At	five	o'clock	the
U.S.	marshal	is	coming	and	he	will	be	taking	you	to	the	airport."	So	I	would	get
ready	and	wait.	From	five	o'clock	in	the	morning	till	five	o'clock	in	the	evening	I
was	 just	 sitting,	 waiting,	 and	 the	 man	 would	 appear	 at	 five	 o'clock	 in	 the
evening.
And	I	 said	 to	him,	"You	must	have	got	 into	some	 trouble	 --	 twelve	hours	 late,
and	you	just	live	three	blocks	away..."	As	we	became	friendly,	after	three	days	he
said,	"These	are	the	tactics	used	to	harass	people.	You	forgive	me.	I	was	going	to
come	at	five	in	the	evening	but	I	said	that	I	would	come	at	five	in	the	morning,
so	the	whole	day	you	would	be	sitting	and	waiting."
But	 I	 said,	 "What	 is	 upsetting	 in	 it?	Anyway	 I	would	 have	 been	 sitting	 and...
there	is	nothing	else	to	do."
The	world	is	against	individuality.
It	is	against	your	being	just	your	natural	self.
It	wants	you	just	to	be	a	robot,	and	because	you	have	agreed	to	be	a	robot	you
are	in	trouble.	You	are	not	a	robot.	That	was	not	the	intention	of	nature,	to	make
a	robot	of	you.
So	because	you	are	not	what	you	were	meant	to	be,	what	you	were	destined	to
be,	you	are	constantly	looking:	"What	is	missing?	Perhaps	better	furniture,	better
curtains,	 a	 better	 house,	 a	 better	 husband,	 a	 better	 wife,	 a	 better	 job..."	 Your
whole	life	you	are	trying	and	rushing	from	one	place	to	another.	But	the	society
has	distracted	you	from	the	very	beginning.
My	effort	 is	 to	bring	you	back	 to	yourself,	 and	you	will	 suddenly	 find	all	 that
discontent	 has	 disappeared.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 more	 --	 you	 are	 enough.
Everybody	is	enough.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#43
Chapter	title:	Logic	should	serve	love
3	May	1986	pm	in
Archive
code:
8605035
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO43
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
95
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 TOLD	 A	 STORY	 ABOUT	 TEN	 YEARS	 AGO	 THAT	 I	 HAVE	 NOT
BEEN	ABLE
TO	UNDERSTAND:
A	SEEKER	IS	LOST	IN	THE	MOUNTAINS;	HE	IS	TIRED	AND	THIRSTY.
IT	IS
NIGHT	AND	HE	SEES	A	SILVER	BOWL	WITH	CRYSTAL	CLEAR	WATER
WHICH	HE	DRINKS	AND	THEN	SLEEPS.	IN	THE	MORNING	LIGHT	HE
SEES
THAT	THE	BOWL	WAS	IN	FACT	A	DIRTY	OLD	SKULL.
HE	LAUGHED	AND	BECAME	ENLIGHTENED.
WHAT	DID	HE	SEE,	OSHO?
The	story	is	simple,	but	with	immense	meaning.	The	seeker	saw	in	the	skull	the
whole	 reality,	 and	 our	 illusions	 about	 it.	 He	 saw	 what	 we	 think	 is,	 and	 what
really	is	--	and	the	difference	is	tremendous.
He	would	not	have	 taken	 that	water,	drunk	 that	water,	 if	he	had	known	 that	 it
was	 in	 a	 dirty	 old	 skull.	He	 thought	 it	was	 a	 beautiful	 bowl	with	 crystal	 clear
water.
Our	life	is	lived	in	illusions	of	crystal	clear	water,	but	reality	is	totally	different.
Seeing	the	difference	he	laughed	at	himself.	And	to	be	able	to	laugh	at	oneself
can	become	a	breakthrough	--	one	can	become	enlightened.
People	laugh	at	others,	and	people	feel	hurt	if	somebody	laughs	at	them,	but	to
come	to	an	understanding	where	you	see	your	own	stupidity...	And	your	whole
life	is	full	of	it.
We	live	in	dreams,	illusions,	hallucinations.	They	do	not	correspond	to	reality	at
all.	 The	 reality	 is	 the	 dirty	 old	 skull.	 He	 laughed	 at	 himself,	 and	 in	 this	 very
laughter	he	became	a	different	man.	Now	he	will	live	with	reality,	whatever	it	is.
Now	no	illusions	will	be	needed,	no	hallucinations	will	be	needed	to	cover	it,	to
hide	it.
He	has	seen	the	point.
The	story	is	simple	but	it	is	the	story	of	the	whole	pilgrimage	from	darkness	to
light,	from	illusions	to	reality.
Just	watch	 your	mind,	 how	 it	 creates	 illusions	 about	 everything	 and	 then	 gets
disillusioned	and	disturbed.	You	love	a	man,	you	love	a	woman	--	you	create	a
certain	illusion	about	the	man	or	the	woman.	It	is	not	the	truth.	Deep	down	you
know	 it	 too.	 You	 are	 imposing	 an	 image.	 Soon	 it	 will	 be	 shattered,	 because
against	reality	no	illusion	can	last	long.	Soon	you	will	find	a	dirty	old	skull.
Then	ordinarily	you	will	be	disappointed,	miserable,	and	you	will	miss	the	point.
If	you	could	have	laughed	you	would	not	have	missed	it.
Even	when	you	understand	that	things	are	not	the	way	you	had	imagined	them	to
be,	you	dump	the	whole	responsibility	on	the	other	person.	A	woman	who	was
beautiful	turns	out	to	be	a	bitch.	A	man	you	had	thought	to	be	a	hero	turns	out	to
be	just	a	henpecked	husband.	You	are	not	going	to	laugh	at	yourselves.	You	will
throw	the	whole	responsibility	on	the	other	person:	that	he	deceived	you,	that	he
pretended	to	be	something	that	he	was	not,	that	she	was	not	so	beautiful	as	she
was	 pretending	 --	with	 all	 the	make-up	 she	 deceived	 him.	 But	 no	make-up	 is
needed.	Your	 illusions,	 your	 hallucinations,	 your	 lust	 is	 enough	 --	 the	 greatest
make-up	in	the	world.
So	 whatever	 you	 want,	 whatever	 you	 desire,	 you	 project,	 and	 when	 that
projection	proves	wrong,	 there	are	 two	possibilities.	One	 is	 to	dump	the	whole
responsibility	 on	 the	 other	 person,	 who	 is	 simply	 innocent	 of	 what	 you	 were
seeing	in	her.
In	fact,	when	you	say	to	a	woman,	"You	are	beautiful..."	and	this	and	that,	she
wonders,	because	she	also	looks	in	the	mirror	and	she	does	not	find	anything	that
you	are	talking	about.	But	why	disturb	yourself	unnecessarily?	Why	not	enjoy?
It	 fulfills	 her	 ego.	 Even	 the	 ugliest	 woman	 will	 not	 object,	 say	 that	 you	 are
wrong.	She	will	smile	and	accept	all	your	compliments.	And	standing	before	a
mirror	she	may	think	that	perhaps	she	is	wrong.
How	can	that	man	be	wrong?	Why	should	he	be	wrong?
In	each	 love	affair	both	 the	persons	are	 innocent,	as	 far	as	 they	are	concerned.
But	both	are	responsible	for	projecting	upon	the	other	something	which	the	other
is	not.
A	 Sufi	 story	 tells	 that	Mulla	Nasruddin	 had	 a	 beautiful	 house	 in	 the	 hills	 and
once	in	a	while	he	used	to	go	there.	And	sometimes	he	would	say	it	would	take
three	weeks	for	him	to	rest	or	two	weeks,	or	four	weeks,	but	he	never	managed
to	keep	the	date	that	he	had	given	for	his	return;	he	would	always	come	sooner.
If	he	had	gone	for	three	weeks,	within	two	weeks	he	would	be	back.
His	friends	started	asking,	"You	plan	for	three	weeks,	then	you	come	back	in	two
weeks,	sometimes	even	in	one	week.	What	is	the	matter?"
He	said,	"You	don't	know.	I	have	an	old	woman	servant."
They	said,	"What	has	that	to	do	with	your	remaining	in	the	hills	and	relaxing?"
He	said,	"First	listen	to	the	whole	thing.	She	is	so	ugly.	That's	why	I	have	chosen
her	--
she	is	my	criterion.	When	she	starts	looking	beautiful	to	me,	then	I	escape,	then	I
know:
`Now,	Mulla,	this	is	not	a	safe	place,	and	you	have	lost	your	mind.	So	I	go	for
three	weeks,	but	what	can	I	do?	In	three	days	she	starts	looking	beautiful.	And	if
I	 stay	 one	 day	 more	 I	 may	 propose.	 And	 she	 is	 really	 ugly.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to
tolerate	her,	but	 I	have	kept	her	specially	 for	 this	purpose,	 so	 that	when	I	 start
losing	my	mind	I	will	know	it	 is	 the	exact	 time	 to	 leave	and	come	back	home
into	the	world."
You	 project;	 the	 projection	 fails.	 If	 you	 could	 laugh	 at	 yourself...	 That	 is	 the
message	of	this	story.
The	man	was	thirsty	in	the	night.	It	was	a	projection.	Even	in	the	full	moon	night
a	skull	is	a	skull	and	the	dirty	water	is	dirty	water.	But	he	was	thirsty;	it	was	his
thirst	that	projected	clean,	crystal	clear	water	in	a	beautiful	bowl.	And	he	drank
with	joy.	In	the	morning	he	was	not	thirsty	and	there	was	sunlight.	He	looked	at
the	bowl;	it	was	a	dirty	old	skull	--	and	he	had	drunk	from	it!	If	he	had	known
that	 it	was	 a	 skull	 filled	with	 dirty	water,	 he	would	 have	 rather	 suffered	 thirst
than	drink	from	it.	But	his	thirst	projected	an	illusion.
We	are	doing	it	every	moment	of	our	lives,	projecting	illusions	--	about	people,
about	things	--	and	getting	frustrated	continuously,	disgusted.
The	story	is	saying	to	you:	these	are	the	moments;	if	you	can	understand	that	it
was	your	projection...	This	is	the	time	to	laugh	at	yourself,	at	your	own	stupidity,
at	your	own	foolishness.	That	will	be	an	act	of	tremendous	intelligence.	And	it
will	 be	 freeing	 you	 from	 that	 constant	 projection,	 frustration	 --	 that	 whole
vicious	circle.
An	old	monk	with	his	young	disciple	was	passing	 through	 the	 forest,	going	 to
another	town.	But	the	young	man	was	very	much	puzzled,	because	the	old	man
had	never	walked	like	that	--	he	was	almost	running	and	clutching	his	bag.	And
once	in	a	while	he	would	feel	something	inside	the	bag.	The	young	man	could
not	imagine	what	he	had	in	the	bag.
And	 the	 old	monk	was	 again	 and	 again	 asking,	 "Will	we	 be	 able	 to	 reach	 the
town	before	sunset?"
The	young	man	said,	"Even	if	we	don't	reach,	we	have	nothing	to	fear.	We	can
stay	in	the	forest.	We	have	stayed	here	many	times,	so	it	 is	not	new.	But	today
you	seem	to	be	strange."
The	old	man	said,	"We	will	discuss	it	later	on.	First,	be	fast.	I	don't	want	to	stay
in	the	forest	tonight."
By	the	side	of	the	road	was	a	well,	and	the	sun	was	just	setting.	Before	the	sun
set	 they	washed	themselves.	They	were	really	 tired.	They	drank,	and	while	 the
old	man	was	washing	his	face	he	gave	his	bag	to	the	young	man	and	told	him,
"Be	careful."
The	young	man	said	to	himself,	"He	has	never	been	this	way	before."	And	out	of
curiosity	he	looked	into	the	bag.	In	the	bag	he	was	carrying	two	bricks	of	gold.
Now	everything	was	clear:	why	the	monk	cannot	stay	in	the	forest,	why	for	the
first	time	he	is	so	afraid.
While	 the	 old	 monk	 was	 washing	 his	 face	 and	 doing	 his	 evening	 prayer,	 the
young	man	 threw	 those	 two	bricks	 into	 the	 forest,	 found	 two	 stones	weighing
almost	the	same	as	the	bricks,	and	put	them	in	the	bag.	The	old	man	finished	his
prayer	in	half	the	time	--	he	was	in	such	a	hurry!	He	immediately	took	the	bag
from	the	young	man	and	the	weight	showed	him	that	everything	was	okay.	They
rushed	on.	After	a	mile,	 it	was	getting	dark.	The	old	man	said,	"It	seems	to	be
difficult	to	reach	to	the	town,	and	this	place	is	dangerous."
But	 the	young	man	said,	"Don't	be	afraid.	As	far	as	 the	danger	 is	concerned,	 I
have	thrown	it	by	the	side	of	the	well."
He	 said,	 "What	 do	 you	mean,	 you	 have	 thrown	 the	 danger	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the
well?"
He	said,	"Look	into	your	bag	and	you	will	know."
He	looked	into	the	bag	and	he	said,	"My	God!"	The	old	man	laughed,	threw	the
bag,	and	sat	under	a	tree;	he	could	not	stop	laughing.
The	young	man	said,	"Why	are	you	laughing	so	much?"
He	said,	"I	am	laughing	because	you	have	done	the	right	 thing,	and	for	almost
one	mile	I	have	still	been	befooling	myself	with	those	stones,	thinking	they	were
gold.	Now	we	can	sleep	under	this	tree.	It	is	good.	There	is	no	fear	and	there	is
no	hurry."
He	 could	 have	 been	 angry	 at	 the	 young	 man	 and	 missed	 the	 point.	 But	 he
laughed,	laughed	madly,	because	he	could	see	the	point:	"It	was	so	stupid	of	me.
The	young	man	has	proved	far	more	intelligent	than	me.	My	own	disciple	had	to
teach	me	the	lesson."
They	slept	the	whole	night,	and	in	the	morning	the	old	man	touched	the	feet	of
the	young	man	and	thanked	him,	"Although	I	am	your	master,	you	helped	free
me	from	an	illusion.
And	I	slept	so	deeply	the	whole	night.	I	had	not	slept	for	a	few	nights	because	of
that	 bag;	 those	 golden	 bricks	would	 not	 let	me	 sleep.	Even	 in	 the	 night	 I	was
groping	in	the	bed	and	trying	to	find	out	whether	they	were	there	or	not.	Those
bricks	 had	 become	 so	 important	 that	 I	 lost	 my	 joy,	 I	 abridged	 my	 prayers,	 I
abridged	my	meditation."
As	far	as	existence	is	concerned,	gold	and	rock	are	not	different	--	 it	 is	human
illusion,	we	have	projected	it.	If	man	is	no	longer	in	this	world,	gold	will	not	be
gold;	 although	 it	 will	 still	 be	 itself,	 there	 will	 be	 no	 difference	 in	 valuation
between	it	and	a	rock.	The	valuation	and	the	difference	is	our	projection	--	and
then	we	suffer.
So	the	insight	in	that	small	anecdote	is	great.	If	you	can	laugh	at	yourself	when
any	of	your	illusions	fall	away,	soon	you	will	be	able	to	live	without	illusions,	to
live	without	hallucinations,	 to	 live	without	projections.	And	 to	 live	without	all
these	 things	means	 to	 live	 in	peace,	and	 to	 live	 in	silence,	and	 to	celebrate	 the
small	things	of	life.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 REMEMBER	 ONCE	 HEARING	 YOU	 TELL	 US	 THAT	 BUDDHA'S
DEFINITION
OF	TRUTH	WAS:	THAT	WHICH	WORKS.
IT	 STRUCK	 ME	 AS	 ALMOST	 AUDACIOUS,	 AND	 YET	 TOTALLY
PRAGMATIC,	AND	FOR	BOTH	REASONS	I	LOVED	IT.
MY	 UNDERSTANDING	 IS	 THAT	 YOUR	 DEFINITION	 OF	 TRUTH	 IS
PROBABLY
THE	SAME,	THAT	YOU	WILL	DO	AND	SAY	ANYTHING	AT	ALL,	IN	THE
NAME
OF	TRUTH,	THAT	MIGHT	PROD	US	IN	THE	RIGHT	DIRECTION.
I	WOULD	LOVE	TO	HEAR	YOU	SPEAK	TO	US	ON	THIS.
It	is	true.	I	can	say	anything	if	it	directs	you	towards	truth.	Of	course	truth	cannot
be	 said,	 it	 can	 only	 be	 pointed	 at.	 I	 can	 use	 anything	 that	 points	 towards	 it.
Perhaps	 for	 different	 people	 different	 pointers	 are	 needed.	 To	 me	 it	 does	 not
matter	what	I	say.	What	matters	is	whether	it	leads	you	in	the	right	direction	--
towards	your	illumination.
Yes,	my	definition	is	exactly	the	same:	truth	is	that	which	works.	It	is	pragmatic,
and	Gautam	Buddha	was	a	very	pragmatic	man,	very	scientific.	This	definition
can	be	called	scientific	also.
All	 definitions	 of	 science	 are	 nothing	 but	 proof	 for	 this	 definition.	 We	 don't
know	what	electricity	is,	we	only	know	how	it	works.	We	don't	know	anything
about	atomic	energy,	what	it	is,	but	we	know	how	it	works.	And	that	knowledge
of	how	it	works	is	the	whole	science	of	it.
The	ultimate	 truth	 is	not	different.	And	 the	master's	 function	 is	 to	 lead	you,	 to
direct	you,	 to	push	you	 in	a	direction	where	you	will	 find	 the	 truth.	He	cannot
give	it	to	you,	but	he	can	create	devices	which	will	lead	you	to	it.	In	a	very	subtle
way	what	the	master	says	is	not	meant	to	be	understood;	it	is	meant	to	be	drunk
so	 that	 it	 reaches	 to	 your	 blood,	 to	 your	 bones,	 to	 your	marrow,	 and	you	 start
moving	in	a	certain	direction	--	not	knowing	where	you	are	going,	but	the	master
knows	where	you	are	going.
If	 you	 are	 going	 on	 the	 right	 track,	 you	 will	 find	 his	 blessings	 and	 his	 love
showering	on	you.	That	will	be	the	only	indication	that	you	are	on	the	right	path.
One	day	you	will	find	the	truth	and	then	you	will	laugh,	because	what	was	said
had	nothing	to	do	with	it.	But	it	certainly	turned	your	attention	towards	it.
I	 have	 always	 told	 this	 story:	A	house	 is	 on	 fire	 and	 small	 children	 are	 in	 the
house	playing.	They	are	so	involved	in	their	play	that	the	whole	neighborhood	is
shouting,
"Come	out!	The	house	is	on	fire!"	But	they	are	enjoying	that	too.	The	flames	are
all	around	and	the	children	are	in	the	middle	of	the	house	--	they	have	never	seen
such	fireworks.
And	they	are	not	listening	to	the	crowd.	Then	comes	the	father	who	had	gone	to
the	market,	and	people	say,	"Now	do	something.	All	your	children	will	be	dead.
The	house	is	almost	going	to	collapse."
The	father	went	close	and	shouted,	"I	have	brought	your	toys	--	all	the	toys	that
you	have	asked	for.	Come	out."	Just	the	back	door	of	the	house	was	not	burning
yet.
They	all	rushed	out	and	asked	the	father,	"Where	are	the	toys?"
And	the	father	said,	"You	will	have	to	forgive	me.	I	have	not	brought	them	today,
but	tomorrow	I	will	bring	them	certainly."
They	said,	"Why	did	you	unnecessarily	disturb	our	game?"
He	said,	"I	have	not	disturbed	your	game.	You	do	not	understand.	The	house	is
on	fire;	you	would	have	been	dead.	I	simply	lied	to	you	about	the	toys,	because	I
knew	that	it	was	the	only	thing	that	could	bring	you	out."
Now	,	toys	and	fire	seem	to	have	no	connection,	but	in	that	particular	situation
the	father	functioned	as	a	master.	He	gave	the	children	an	indication	that	saved
their	lives.	Although	now	they	are	aware	he	lied,	they	will	not	complain	about	it.
He	lied	out	of	compassion.
He	lied	because	he	loved	them;	he	lied	because	he	wanted	to	save	their	lives.
Truth	 cannot	 be	 said,	 so	whatever	 can	be	 said	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 beautiful	 lie	 --
beautiful	 because	 it	 can	 lead	 towards	 truth.	 So	 I	make	 a	 demarcation	 between
lies:	beautiful	lies	and	ugly	lies.	Ugly	lies	are	those	which	take	you	away	from
truth,	and	beautiful	lies	are	those	which	take	you	close	towards	truth.	But	as	far
as	their	quality	is	concerned,	both	are	lies.	But	those	beautiful	lies	work;	hence
in	some	way	they	hold	the	flavor	of	truth.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
A	QUESTION	I	HAVE	HAD	SINCE	I	WAS	A	KID	AND	STARTED	SEEING
THE
WAYS	OF	THE	WORLD	IS:	WHY	DO	PEOPLE	TREAT	EACH	OTHER	LIKE
THEY
DO?	WHERE	IS	THE	LOVE,	THE	COMPASSION	AND	THE	RESPECT	FOR
EACH
OTHER?	 I	 THINK	THAT	EVERYBODY	 IS	LONGING	TO	LIVE	 IN	LOVE
AND
HARMONY	WITH	HIMSELF	AND	ALL	THE	HUMAN	BEINGS	AROUND.
AND	I	DON'T	THINK	THERE	IS	ANY	LONGING	FOR	HATE,	VIOLENCE,
AND	POWER
OVER	OTHER	PEOPLE	--	BUT	THIS	IS	WHAT	I	SEE	HAPPENING.
WHAT	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 MAKES	 PEOPLE	 LIVE	 THIS	 UNNATURAL	 AND
MISERABLE
LIFE?	 IS	 IT	ALL	CONDITIONING,	OR	 IS	THERE	SOMETHING	 IN	MAN
THAT
MAKES	HIM	WILLING	TO	GO	ASTRAY?
It	is	both.
First,	 there	 is	 something	 in	man	 that	 leads	him	astray.	And	secondly,	 there	are
people	whose	 interest	 it	 is	 to	 lead	human	beings	astray.	Both	 together	create	a
false,	 fake	 human	 being.	 His	 heart	 longs	 for	 love,	 but	 his	 conditioned	 mind
prevents	him	from	love.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	Adolf	Hitler	never	allowed	his	girlfriends	to
sleep	 in	his	 room	 for	one	 simple	 reason:	how	can	you	 trust?	The	woman	may
shoot	 you	 in	 the	 night,	mix	 poison	 in	 your	water.	What	 is	 the	 guarantee?	 She
may	be	just	pretending	that	she	loves	you.	It	may	be	just	a	conspiracy.	There	is
no	way	to	find	out	whether	it	is	a	conspiracy	or	true	love	for	him.	To	be	on	the
safe	 side	 he	 never	 allowed	 any	woman	with	whom	 he	 had	 been	 in	 contact	 to
sleep	in	his	room.
He	never	allowed	anyone	to	be	friendly	with	him	--	Goebbels,	or	any	of	his	other
close	associates.	He	always	kept	 them	at	a	distance.	 It	was	said	 that	 there	was
not	a	 single	person	who	could	put	his	hand	on	his	 shoulder,	 like	a	 friend.	Too
much	 closeness	 is	 dangerous	 --	 that	 was	 his	 conditioning.	 The	 other	 may	 do
harm	 to	 you.	He	may	 come	 to	 know	 something	 about	 you	which	 he	may	 use
against	you.	It	is	better	to	keep	him	at	a	distance.	And	everybody	is	ambitious,
everybody	wants	to	be	in	his	place,	so	although	they	are	looking	very	friendly,
deep	 down	 they	 are	 all	 enemies,	 competitors;	 they	 can	 kill	 him.	 He	 had	 no
friends.	 And	what	 kind	 of	 love	 is	 this,	 that	 he	 cannot	 trust	 the	woman	 in	 his
room.
One	of	his	women	remained	for	many	years	in	love	with	him,	and	there	was	no
reason	to	suspect	her.	But	suspicion	needs	no	reason.	One	day	she	wanted	to	go
and	see	her	mother	who	was	ill,	in	the	same	town.	And	Adolf	Hitler	said	no.	Yes
was	very	difficult	for	him	to	pronounce,	for	anything.
There	is	a	deep	psychological	meaning	in	it.	No	gives	you	power.	Yes	does	not
give	you	power.	Whenever	you	say	no,	you	can	feel	power;	whenever	you	say
yes,	you	can	feel	love,	you	can	feel	compassion,	but	not	power.	Words	have	their
own	qualities.	Those	qualities	you	cannot	find	in	the	dictionaries.	But	in	actual
life	 if	 you	 go	 into	 the	 psychology	 of	 words,	 each	 word	 has	 its	 unique
individuality.	No	is	not	simply	a	denial;	it	is	an	assertion	of	power.
There	was	no	need	to	say	no.	She	was	going	just	to	see	her	sick	mother,	and	she
would	be	back	before	he	returned	from	the	office.	But	yes	was	not	his	word.	He
only	knew	how	 to	order,	how	 to	 reject	anybody	else's	 idea.	Even	such	a	 small
thing,	that	had	nothing	to	do	with	power...
He	went	to	the	office;	the	woman	thought	that	she	could	manage:	she	could	go
and	see	her	mother	and	return	--	he	would	not	be	back	yet.	She	went,	came	back,
and	certainly	she	managed.	But	the	first	thing	he	enquired	from	the	guard	of	the
house	was,	"Has	she	been	out?	--	how	long?"
And	Hitler	loaded	his	gun	and	just	went	in	and	shot	her	--	he	did	not	even	ask,	he
did	not	even	give	her	an	opportunity	to	say	anything.	That	was	enough.	And	it
had	to	be	a	proof	for	everybody	else,	that	not	to	follow	his	order	meant	death.
Hitler	longed	for	love,	but	his	mind	longed	for	power	--	and	you	cannot	ask	for
both.
This	is	the	problem.	The	child	is	born	with	a	heart	which	longs	for	love,	but	he	is
also	 born	 with	 a	 brain	 which	 can	 be	 conditioned.	 And	 the	 society	 has	 to
condition	it	against	the	heart,	because	the	heart	will	be	always	rebellious	against
the	society,	it	will	always	follow	its	own	way.	It	cannot	be	made	into	a	soldier.	It
can	become	a	poet,	it	can	become	a	singer,	it	can	become	a	dancer,	but	it	cannot
become	a	soldier.
It	can	suffer	for	its	individuality,	it	can	die	for	its	individuality	and	freedom,	but
it	cannot	be	enslaved.	That	is	the	state	of	the	heart.
But	the	mind...	The	child	comes	with	an	empty	brain,	just	a	mechanism,	which
you	can	arrange	the	way	you	want.	It	will	 learn	the	language	you	teach,	it	will
learn	 the	 religion	you	 teach,	 it	will	 learn	 the	morality	you	 teach.	 It	 is	 simply	a
computer;	you	just	feed	it	with	information.
And	every	society	takes	care	to	make	the	mind	stronger	and	stronger	so	that	 if
there	is	any	conflict	between	heart	and	mind,	the	mind	is	going	to	win.	But	every
victory	of	 the	mind	over	 the	heart	 is	a	misery.	 It	 is	a	victory	over	your	nature,
over	your	being	--	over	you	--	by	others.	And	they	have	cultivated	your	mind	to
serve	their	purposes.
For	example,	,	the	British	government	ruled	in	India	for	three	hundred	years,	and
it	 created	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 education	 that	 only	 produces	 clerks,	 postmasters,
stationmasters....	 The	 whole	 program	 is	 such	 that	 it	 does	 not	 produce	 great
intellectuals,	geniuses,	scientists	--	no.	So	if	a	person	studies	for	one	third	of	his
life,	 he	 comes	out	 of	 the	 factory	of	 the	 university	 just	 a	 clerk.	But	 the	British
government	needed	clerks.
By	the	way,	because	the	capital	of	India	at	 the	beginning	of	 the	British	empire
was	Calcutta,	Bengalis	were	the	first	to	be	indoctrinated	by	the	British	education
system.
They	were	the	first	to	become	mediators	between	the	land	and	its	people,	and	the
rulers.
The	rulers	did	not	know	the	language	of	the	people;	the	people	did	not	know	the
language	of	the	rulers.	These	mediators	knew	both.
They	were	 respected	by	 the	masses	because	 they	were	so	close	 to	 the	 rulers	 --
second	only	 to	 the	 rulers.	But	 the	 rulers	hated	 them.	 It	was	 just	 a	necessity	 to
create	an	army	of	mediators;	otherwise	they	could	not	rule	such	a	huge	country	-
-	there	would	be	no	understanding,	no	communication.
But	they	hated	these	people,	and	just	as	an	example	I	will	tell	you...	They	called
these	 Bengalis	 babus	 and	 the	 word	 babu	 became	 respectful	 all	 over	 India.
Because	the	rulers	were	calling	the	Bengalis	babus,	the	word	babu	became	very
important	--	so	significant	that	even	the	first	president	of	India	was	called	Babu
Rajendra	Prasad.	And	nobody	ever	thought	about	what	this	word	means.
I	told	Rajendra	Prasad,	"You	should	drop	this	and	you	should	make	it	known	to
the	 country	 that	 nobody	 should	 use	 this	word,	 because	 it	 is	 condemnatory."	 It
means	a	man	with	a	bad	smell.	Bengalis	eat	fish	--	fish	and	rice,	that	is	their	only
food	--	and	they	smell	of	fish.	Just	eating	fish	continually...
Bengal	is	a	beautiful	place,	and	you	will	find	there	one	beautiful	thing:	next	to
every	house	you	will	 find	 a	 small	 lake.	The	 richer	people	have	big	 lakes	with
their	palaces.	And	those	lakes	are	there	simply	to	produce	fish.	Those	lakes	are
not	for	any	other	purpose	but	to	get	fresh	fish	--	the	kind	of	fish	the	people	like.
Every	house,	even	a	poor	man's	house	has	a	small	pond	--	it	looks	very	beautiful,
because	a	small	pond	with	palm	trees...	it	may	be	a	small	hut.
But	the	smell	is	too	much.	Only	once	have	I	traveled	in	Bengal,	and	then	I	said,
"I	cannot	go	 further	 than	Calcutta."	 It	 stinks	 --	 everybody	stinks	of	 fish,	 every
house	stinks	of	fish.
That	is	their	main	diet.
Babu	 is	 a	 Persian	word.	 Bu	means	 smell	 and	 ba	means	with.	 The	British	 got
India	from	the	Mohammedans,	whose	languages	were	Persian,	Arabic	and	Urdu,
and	it	was	from	them	that	they	got	this	idea	of	babu.	It	was	a	condemnation,	but
to	the	masses	it	became	the	most	respectful	word.
India	 must	 have	 more	 universities	 than	 any	 other	 country	 --	 one	 hundred
universities	and	thousands	of	colleges	--	and	the	whole	purpose	is	 just	 to	serve
the	 Empire.	 The	whole	 education	 is	 to	 be	 obedient,	 not	 to	 be	 rebellious.	 It	 is
absolutely	against	any	idea	of	revolution.
India	would	have	remained	a	slave	country	for	centuries,	but	Britain	committed
just	 one	 mistake:	 it	 allowed	 a	 few	 rich	 people's	 sons	 and	 daughters	 to	 be
educated	 in	 England,	 and	 that	 was	 the	 trouble.	 These	 were	 the	 people	 who
brought	the	idea	of	freedom	to	India.	No	Indian	educated	in	India	had	any	idea
of	freedom,	but	a	few	rich	people	sent	their	sons,	their	daughters,	to	be	educated
in	England	--	because	if	they	were	educated	in	England	then	they	would	be	given
the	highest	posts	in	India.	A	holder	of	the	same	degree	from	an	Indian	university
would	never	reach	that	post,	but	from	England	he	comes	qualified	for	the	highest
post.
Britain	created	its	own	enemies	unknowingly.	These	were	the	people	who	found
in	 Britain	 a	 different	 kind	 of	 education,	 who	 learned	 about	 democracy,	 who
learned	about	freedom,	who	learned	about	 individual	rights,	who	learned	about
freedom	of	expression.
And	they	came	back	to	their	country	full	of	utopian	ideas	about	how	India	could
become	independent.
So	all	the	fighters	against	the	British	regime	were	basically	educated	in	England.
And	 I	 don't	 think	 the	British	 have	 even	 realized	 the	 fact,	 because	 nobody	 has
noted	it	anywhere.
One	man	who	was	very	 influential	 in	 India,	Subash	Chandra,	was	 educated	 in
Britain.
And	 anybody	 who	 was	 educated	 in	 Britain	 was	 immediately	 absorbed	 in	 the
highest	 government	 service,	 the	 Indian	 Civil	 Service	 --	 I.C.S.	 Every	 student
coming	back	from	England	had	to	give	an	interview	to	the	governor	of	his	state.
And	 Subash	 had	 come	with	 the	 full	 desire	 to	 fight	 the	 British	 Empire,	 not	 to
serve	it.
But	still	he	went	 to	give	his	 interview.	And	Bengalis	have	a	certain	habit:	 they
always	 carry	 their	 umbrellas.	 Nobody	 knows	why.	 I	 have	 asked	many	 people
because	 it	 is	 not	 raining,	 it	 is	 not	 hot...	 But	 traditionally	 it	 is	 part	 of	 them.
Without	an	umbrella	a	Bengali	 is	not	a	 full	Bengali;	his	umbrella	 is	absolutely
necessary.	And	they	give	reasons,	because	they	are	intellectual	people.
They	say,	"Rains	can	come	at	any	time,	it	is	unpredictable.	One	should	always	be
prepared	 for	anything.	Right	now	it	 is	cloudy,	but	 the	sun	can	come	out	and	 it
will	be	hot.
And	moreover,	 there	are	so	many	dogs,	and	for	 this	and	 that	you	can	use	your
umbrella.
Even	if	you	have	to	fight	with	someone,	the	umbrella	is	handy."
So	Subash	went	with	his	umbrella	and	his	hat	into	the	governor's	office,	and	the
governor	was	very	much	annoyed	that	an	Indian	should	behave	in	this	way.	He
should	remove	his	hat,	to	be	respectful	--	and	he	has	come	to	give	an	interview.
So	the	governor	said,	"First	you	remove	your	hat.	You	don't	know	even	how	to
be	respectful."
And	Subash	 took	 his	 umbrella	 out,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the	 table	was	 the
governor.
He	hooked	his	neck	with	his	umbrella	and	said,	"If	you	want	respect,	 then	you
should	be	respectful	too.	You	should	have	stood.	If	you	cannot	stand	you	should
not	expect	any	 respect	 from	me.	And	I	am	not	 interested	 in	your	 I.C.S.	 I	have
just	 come	 to	 see	 how	 you	 behave	 with	 people.	 But	 don't	 think	 that	 you	 can
misbehave	 with	 me.	 People	 like	 you	 used	 to	 polish	 my	 shoes	 in	 England"	 --
naturally	 in	England	a	white	man	will	polish	 the	shoes	--	"so	 just	because	you
are	white	does	not	mean	anything.	Keep	your	service	to	yourself."
These	were	 the	people	who	created	 the	whole	 freedom	movement.	The	British
government	forgot	completely:	if	you	have	created	a	certain	educational	system
in	 India	 to	 produce	 only	 clerks,	 servants,	 slaves,	 then	 you	 should	 not	 allow
Indians	to	be	educated	in	England,	because	these	people	will	be	dangerous	to	the
Empire.	 And	 they	 proved	 dangerous	 --	 they	 destroyed	 the	 Empire	 --	 but	 the
whole	credit	goes	to	the	British	universities.
So	mind	is	empty,	 it	 is	brain;	you	can	put	anything	in	it.	And	with	twenty-five
years	of	education	you	can	make	it	so	strong	that	you	forget	your	heart;	you	will
always	 remain	miserable.	The	misery	 is	 that	your	heart	can	only	give	you	 joy,
can	 only	 give	 you	 happiness,	 can	 only	 make	 you	 dance.	 The	 mind	 can	 do
arithmetic,	 but	 it	 cannot	 sing	 a	 song.	 Those	 are	 just	 not	 the	 capacities	 of	 the
mind.	So	you	are	 torn	apart	between	your	nature,	which	 is	your	heart,	and	 the
society	that	is	in	your	head.	And	certainly	you	are	born	--	everybody	is	born	--
with	these	two	centers.	That	is	the	difficulty.
And	one	center	is	empty.	In	a	better	society	it	will	be	used	in	accordance	with	the
heart,	to	serve	the	heart.	And	then	it	will	be	a	great	life,	full	of	rejoicings.	But	up
to	now	we	have	lived	in	an	ugly	society,	with	rotten	ideas.	They	have	used	the
mind.	And	that	vulnerability	is	there	--	mind	can	be	used.
Now	 communists	 are	 using	 it	 in	 one	way;	 fascists	 used	 it	 in	Germany	 in	 one
way;	all	the	other	religions	are	using	it	in	different	ways.	But	that	vulnerability	is
with	every	individual:	that	you	have	a	mind	which	you	bring	empty.	In	fact	it	is	a
blessing	of	existence	--	but	misused,	exploited.	It	is	given	to	you	empty	so	that
you	 can	make	 it	 perfectly	 subservient	 to	 your	 heart,	 to	 your	 longings,	 to	 your
potential.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	it.	But	the	vested	interests	all	over	the	world	have
found	it	a	beautiful	opportunity	for	them	--	to	use	the	mind	against	the	heart.	So
you	remain	miserable	and	they	can	exploit	you	in	whatever	ways	they	want.
That's	 why	 the	 whole	 world	 is	 miserable.	 Everybody	 wants	 to	 be	 loved,
everybody	wants	to	love;	but	the	mind	is	such	a	barrier	that	neither	does	it	allow
you	to	love,	nor	does	it	allow	you	to	be	loved.	In	both	cases	the	mind	comes	in
the	 way	 and	 starts	 distorting	 everything.	 And	 even	 if	 by	 chance	 you	 meet	 a
person	you	feel	 love	 for	and	 the	person	feels	 love	 for	you,	your	minds	are	not
going	to	settle.	They	have	been	trained	by	different	systems,	different	religions,
different	societies.
One	of	my	friends	married	an	American	girl.	He	was	a	professor	of	physics,	and
while	 studying	 in	America	 he	 fell	 in	 love	with	 a	 girl,	 a	 beautiful	 girl,	 and	 he
married	her	against	his	parents	wishes.	So	they	became	enemies.	His	parents	did
not	receive	them	in	their	home	when	they	came	back	to	India.
I	had	to	give	a	party,	a	reception	for	their	marriage.	But	in	a	month	I	saw	that	it
could	not	last.	One	of	my	friends	was	staying	with	me	and	he	is	a	very	beautiful
person	--	jack	of	all	trades,	master	of	none...	but	he	knows	everything.	So	he	is
very	interesting	and	very	influential.
Superficially	he	will	impress	you	on	any	subject,	on	anything.	You	will	find	out
later	on	that	it	is	just	superficial,	but	by	that	time	he	has	done	his	work.
All	that	he	does	is	borrow	money.	He	is	a	Ph.D.	He	could	have	been	a	professor,
but	he	says,	"I	don't	want	to	bother	with	all	this.	I	enjoy	borrowing."
I	said,	"You	should	think	about	how	long	this	can	last."
He	 said,	 "You	don't	 see.	 I	 never	 borrow	 from	 the	 same	person	 again.	And	 the
world	is	so	big	and	life	is	so	short.	I	will	manage."
So	he	started	flirting	with	the	American	girl.	She	was	very	much	impressed	--	he
is	a	very	impressive	person	--	and	the	professor	who	had	married	her	was	feeling
so	jealous.	He	had	just	an	Indian	mind.	The	Indian	mind	cannot	conceive	that	his
wife	 can	 go	 with	 somebody	 else	 to	 the	 swimming	 pool.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 no
Indian	woman	will	go	 to	 the	swimming	pool	and	even	 if	she	goes,	she	will	go
with	her	husband.	But	she	was	going	with	some	stranger.
She	was	going	out	with	him	on	bicycles;	they	were	playing	cards.	The	husband
was	 in	 the	 university,	 but	 he	was	 continually	worried	 about	 his	wife	 and	 that
fellow	--	because	he	was	completely	free;	he	did	nothing.
Soon	the	marriage	broke	up.	They	were	fighting	continuously.	I	told	them,	"You
love	each	other,	but	you	don't	understand	the	situation.	Your	minds	are	cultivated
very	 differently.	 She	 can't	 see	 that	 there	 is	 anything	wrong	 if	 she	 goes	 to	 the
swimming	pool	with	some	friend.	She	has	been	doing	that	from	her	childhood.
You	cannot	conceive	the	idea.	Your	idea	is	what	you	have	seen	in	your	family,	in
your	 society	 --	 that	 the	wife	 should	not	 even	open	her	 cover."	The	 sari	 that	 is
used	by	 the	 Indian	women	 is	pulled	down	 to	make	a	 cover	over	 the	 face.	She
should	not	take	the	cover	off	before	strangers.
"You	have	been	brought	up	with	such	people;	you	cannot	understand	your	wife
holding	 hands	 with	 some	 stranger.	 They	 are	 enjoying	 and	 playing	 tennis	 and
going	 for	 a	 walk,	 and	 you	 are	 just	 sitting	 and	 boiling	 up	 unnecessarily.	 You
should	have	thought.	Your	parents	were	right	--	that	this	kind	of	marriage	is	not
going	to	succeed."
And	 I	have	not	 seen	any	marriage	between	 Indians	and	 foreigners	 succeeding.
They	always	fail,	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	two	minds	are	brought	up	with
different	ideas,	filled	with	different	programs.
It	is	everybody's	birthright	to	be	happy,	but	unfortunately	the	society,	the	people
with	whom	we	have	been	living,	who	have	brought	us	into	the	world,	have	not
thought	anything	about	 it.	They	have	 just	been	 reproducing	human	beings	 like
animals	--	even	worse	because	at	least	animals	are	not	conditioned.
This	 conditioning	 process	 should	 be	 completely	 changed.	The	mind	 should	 be
trained	to	be	a	servant	of	 the	heart.	Logic	should	serve	love.	And	then	life	can
become	a	festival	of	lights.
Beyond	Psychology
Chapter	#44
Chapter	title:	Watchfulness	is	the	greatest	magic
4	May	1986	am	in
Archive
code:
8605040
ShortTitle:
PSYCHO44
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
103
mins
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	 I	 GO	 TO	 SLEEP	 AT	 NIGHT,	 I	 AM	 SWEPT	 AWAY	 BY	 SUCH
INCREDIBLY
SURREAL	DREAMS	THAT	I	WAKE	UP	IN	THE	MORNING	SURPRISED	I
AM	IN
MY	SAME	BED.
OSHO,	 IS	THERE	A	WAY	TO	CHANNEL	THIS	PHENOMENAL	ENERGY
THAT
GOES	INTO	DREAMING	AT	NIGHT,	INTO	WATCHFULNESS?
The	phenomenon	of	dreaming	and	watchfulness	are	totally	different	things.	Just
try	 one	 thing:	 every	 night,	 going	 to	 sleep,	while	 you	 are	 just	 half	 awake,	 half
asleep,	 slowly	 going	 deeper	 into	 sleep,	 repeat	 to	 yourself,	 "I	 will	 be	 able	 to
remember	that	it	is	a	dream."
Go	on	repeating	it	 till	you	fall	asleep.	It	will	 take	a	few	days,	but	one	day	you
will	be	surprised:	once	this	idea	sinks	deep	into	the	unconscious,	you	can	watch
the	 dream	 as	 a	 dream.	 Then	 it	 has	 no	 grip	 over	 you.	 Then	 slowly,	 as	 your
watchfulness	 becomes	more	 sharp,	 dreams	will	 disappear.	 They	 are	 very	 shy;
they	don't	want	to	be	watched.
They	exist	only	in	the	darkness	of	the	unconscious.	As	watchfulness	brings	light
in,	they	start	disappearing.	So	go	on	doing	the	same	exercise,	and	you	can	get	rid
of	 dreams.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 surprised.	 Getting	 rid	 of	 dreams	 has	 many
implications.	 If	 the	dreams	disappear	 then	 in	 the	daytime	your	mind	chattering
will	not	be	so	much	as	it	used	to	be.
Secondly,	you	will	be	more	 in	 the	moment	--	not	 in	 the	future,	not	 in	 the	past.
Thirdly,	your	intensity,	your	totality	of	action	will	increase.
Dream	is	a	disease.
It	is	needed	because	man	is	sick.	But	if	dreams	can	be	completely	dropped	you
will	attain	a	new	kind	of	health,	a	new	vision,	and	part	of	your	unconscious	mind
will	become	conscious.	So	you	will	have	a	stronger	individuality.	Whatever	you
do,	you	will	never	repent,	because	you	will	have	done	it	with	such	consciousness
that	repentance	has	no	relevance.
Watchfulness	 is	 the	greatest	magic	 that	one	can	 learn,	because	 it	can	begin	 the
transformation	 of	 your	 whole	 being.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 watchfulness	 that
resurrection	happens...	you	are	reborn.
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	IT	DIFFICULT	FOR	SOME	PEOPLE	TO	BE	HYPNOTIZED?	IS	IT
BECAUSE	WE	DO	NOT	TRUST	THE	PERSON	WHO	IS	DOING	IT	TO	US,
OR	ARE
WE	NOT	AS	RECEPTIVE	AS	THOSE	WHO	CAN	BE?
There	 are	 many	 reasons	 possible.	 The	 most	 important	 is,	 if	 the	 person's
intelligence	quotient	is	very	low	he	will	not	be	able	to	understand	what	hypnosis
is,	and	what	he	is	supposed	to	do.	Idiots	cannot	be	hypnotized.	It	is	something	to
be	remembered,	that	animals	can	be	hypnotized,	but	idiots	cannot	be	hypnotized.
Animals	may	not	have	our	kind	of	intelligence,	but	they	are	not	idiots.
The	 idiot	 is	 one	 whose	 mind	 has	 not	 grown	 at	 all,	 who	 is	 zero.	 He	 cannot
understand	what	is	being	said,	where	it	is	going	to	lead	him,	and	why	he	should
do	it.	Intelligent	conversation	is	impossible.	The	idiot	looks	like	man,	but	inside
he	is	far	behind	even	the	animals.
First,	the	idiot	cannot	be	hypnotized.	Second,	the	man	who	is	always	suspicious
of	 everything,	 who	 has	 an	 ingrained	 suspicion,	 cannot	 be	 hypnotized.	 His
suspicion	will	not	allow	him	to	go	with	 the	hypnotist.	Thirdly,	 the	people	who
think	they	are	intellectuals,	who	are	full	of	borrowed	knowledge,	but	don't	have
any	intelligence	of	their	own,	cannot	be	hypnotized,	because	they	have	an	idea
that	intellectuals	cannot	be	hypnotized	--	and	they	are	intellectuals.	Finally	and
basically,	a	man	who	cannot	trust.
It	needs	total	trust,	because	you	are	going	into	darkness,	the	unknown,	and	you
don't	know	what	the	intentions	of	the	man	are,	and	you	don't	know	what	he	can
make	you	do	while	you	are	under	hypnosis.
Once	I	was	in	Bombay,	staying	with	a	very	rich	family,	and	they	insisted	to	me,
"You	 are	 always	 working,	 involved	 with	 people,	 meetings,	 committees;	 this
evening	you	keep	free.
We	are	going	to	invite	a	great	hypnotist	and	he	is	going	to	show	us	a	few	tricks
of	hypnotism	--	you	will	enjoy	it."
Not	 for	 entertainment,	 but	 just	 to	 see	what	 kind	of	 person	 this	 great	 hypnotist
was,	 I	 remained.	 They	 had	 in	 the	 house	 itself	 a	 small	 auditorium.	 They	 had
invited	 their	 rich	 friends,	 so	 there	were	 at	 least	 two	 hundred	 people.	 And	 the
hypnotist	called	for	five	people	--	"Anybody	can	come."
Five	people	went	up.	He	hypnotized	them	and	then	told	them,	"Just	 in	front	of
you	cows	are	 standing.	Now	start	milking	 them."	And	 they	 immediately	 sat	 in
the	 Indian	way	and	started	milking	 the	cows.	There	were	no	cows,	and	people
were	laughing	and	enjoying,	but	the	hypnotized	person	could	not	hear	anybody.
Things	like	this	he	did.
After	 the	 show	he	was	 introduced	 to	me.	 I	 told	him,	 "You	 stop	 this	 nonsense.
Hypnotism	is	condemned	because	of	people	like	you.	Now	the	people	who	have
seen	how	you	befooled	the	ones	who	had	come	to	be	hypnotized	will	never	be
able	to	be	hypnotized.
They	have	lost	trust.	You	will	make	a	laughingstock	of	them.	You	are	not	doing
any	service	to	the	science	of	hypnosis.	You	are	an	enemy.	You	find	some	other
job.	 You	 don't	 see	 the	 simple	 point	 that	 two	 hundred	 people	 are	 seeing	 you
befooling	five	people.	Now	these	people	will	carry	this	idea	in	their	minds."
All	the	intellectuals	all	over	the	world	have	this	idea	that	intellectuals	cannot	be
hypnotized.	But	the	real	reason	is	because	they	cannot	trust.	Trust	needs	a	man
of	 heart,	 of	 feelings,	 not	 of	 thoughts.	 And	 all	 these	 people	 who	 are	 using
hypnotism	as	an	entertainment	should	be	stopped	by	 law	--	 it	 is	a	crime.	They
are	spoiling	a	tremendously	valuable	science.
Only	a	master	should	be	allowed	--	and	then	too,	he	should	hypnotize	only	his
own	 disciples.	 And	 not	 to	 make	 a	 mockery	 of	 it,	 but	 to	 increase	 the
consciousness	 of	 the	 disciples,	 to	 increase	 the	 intelligence	 of	 the	 disciples,	 to
change	their	wrong	habits	to	make	them	more	integrated,	more	consolidated,	to
give	them	more	courage	and	stamina.
And	 when	 other	 students,	 other	 disciples	 will	 see	 that	 hypnotism	 can	 be	 a
blessing	--	the	same	man	who	was	so	much	afraid	has	lost	all	fear,	even	the	fear
of	 death;	 the	 same	man	who	was	 always	miserable	 has	 lost	 his	misery	 and	 is
always	in	a	state	of	joy	--	more	trust	will	be	created,	more	and	more	people	will
be	ready	to	be	hypnotized.	That	readiness,	that	trust,	 that	receptivity	is	missing
because	for	centuries	hypnotism	has	been	misused.
People	 like	 magicians,	 showmen,	 entertainers	 --	 the	 wrong	 kind	 of	 people	 --
have	made	hypnosis	condemned.
It	 can	become	such	a	great	benediction	 to	humanity.	You	need	 trust,	you	need
receptivity,	 you	 need	 intelligence	 to	 go	 into	 it.	 And	 all	 these	 things	 will	 be
strengthened	 when	 you	 attain	 new	 dimensions,	 new	 talents,	 new	 genius.	 And
then	you	will	be	more	able	to	go	back	into	it.
And	 soon	 everybody	 who	 has	 been	 hypnotized	 by	 a	 loving	 compassionate
master,	 who	 cannot	 harm	 you,	 who	 cannot	 imagine	 hurting	 you...	 after	 a	 few
sessions	of	your	being	hypnotized,	he	will	start	a	new	phase:	self-hypnosis.
In	deep	hypnotic	states	he	will	tell	you,	"Now	you	are	able	to	hypnotize	yourself
--	 you	 don't	 need	me,	 you	 don't	 need	 anyone	 else."	 So	 he	 is	 not	 going	 to	 use
hypnosis	 to	create	a	 spiritual	 slavery.	He	will	use	 it	 to	give	you	more	 spiritual
freedom	than	you	ever	had	before.	And	the	day	you	can	hypnotize	yourself	is	a
great	day;	something	valuable	has	been	achieved.
Then	you	can	do	miracles	with	it,	upon	yourself.	You	can	change	things	that	you
have	 always	 been	 trying	 to	 change;	 but	 the	more	 you	 try	 to	 change	 them,	 the
more	difficult	it	becomes.
I	used	to	stay	in	Calcutta	with	an	old	man,	Sonalal.	He	was	famous	all	over	India
as	 the	 greatest	 gambler.	 He	 never	 paid	 a	 single	 cent	 to	 the	 government	 in
taxation	because	he	never	kept	any	books.	I	was	surprised	at	how	he	maintained
all	his	businesses	 --	gamble	winnings	of	millions	 --	how	he	kept	 the	accounts.
And	when	I	stayed	in	his	house,	I	asked	him.	He	took	me	to	his	bathroom	--	all
over	his	bathroom	were	his	books,	on	the	walls.
So	no	income	tax	officer	can	conceive	that	on	his	walls	in	the	bathroom	he	keeps
all	the	accounts	from	different	countries,	of	different	people	--	where,	in	which
bank,	 what	 number,	 telephone	 numbers...	 everything.	 He	 said,	 "This	 is	 my
accounts	office."
And	 even	 in	 his	 bathroom	he	had	 six	 telephones.	He	was	 continuously	 on	 the
phone...
two	phones	always	 in	his	hands.	You	could	not	 talk	with	him	easily;	 it	was	so
difficult.
He	 told	me	 that	he	belonged	 to	a	certain	 religion	which	values	celibacy	as	 the
greatest	spiritual	thing.	He	had	taken	the	vow	of	celibacy	three	times.	One	man
was	with	me	and	he	was	very	much	impressed.	When	Sonalal	had	gone	for	some
work	inside	the	house	he	said,	"This	is	a	great	man	--	three	times!"
I	 said,	 "You	 are	 an	 idiot.	 When	 he	 is	 saying	 three	 times	 he	 took	 a	 vow	 for
celibacy,	that	simply	means	that	the	fourth	time	he	never	took	it.	He	understood
that	it	is	impossible."
He	said,	"But...	I	never	thought	about	it.	I	simply	thought,	`Three	times!'"
Sonalal	came	back	and	I	asked	him,	"What	happened	the	fourth	time?"
He	said,	"I	could	not	gather	the	courage,	because	three	times	I	failed,	and	each
time	I	became	more	guilty,	ashamed	of	myself.	And	I	am	old."	He	was	at	 that
time	seventy	years	old.	 "In	 the	 first	place,	 to	 stand	up	 in	 the	congregation	and
take	 the	vow	for	celibacy,	people	 laugh	--	 they	see	 this	seventy	year	old...	and
that	too	for	the	fourth	time."
I	 said,	 "There	 is	no	need.	Your	 religion	and	your	 religious	 leaders	don't	know.
Celibacy	 is	possible	without	 repression,	 and	at	 such	a	 stage	 I	will	not	 call	 it	 a
crime,	but	it	has	to	be	done	through	self-hypnosis.	There	is	no	need	for	any	vow
to	be	taken."
He	was	 immensely	 excited.	He	 said,	 "Do	whatever...	 but	 I	want	 to	be	 celibate
before	 I	die,	because	 this	 is	 the	only	 thing	 in	which	 I	have	 failed	 in	my	 life.	 I
have	 never	 failed	 in	 anything."	 He	 gave	 millions	 of	 dollars	 to	 the	 freedom
movement.	So	all	 the	 leaders	who	became	prime	ministers,	and	presidents	and
cabinet	ministers	looked	to	him	as	a	father	figure.
Pandit	Jawaharlal	Nehru,	who	was	the	prime	minister,	told	him,	"It	was	okay	not
to	give	taxes	to	the	British	government,	but	now	it	is	your	own	government."
He	 said,	 "Remember,	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 to	me	which	 government	 it	 is.	 I	 can
donate	twice	the	amount	that	you	think	I	should	pay	in	taxation,	but	taxation?	--
that	 I	 cannot	 do.	And	 you	 cannot	 catch	 hold	 of	me,	 because	 I	 don't	 have	 any
books.	 Except	 for	 me,	 nobody	 knows	 how	 much	 money	 I	 have,	 how	 much
money	 is	 invested,	where	 it	 is	 invested,	how	it	 is	 invested.	 I	don't	even	have	a
secretary.	So	never	ask	for	any	tax.
"You	can	always	ask	for	a	donation.	If	your	government	needs	a	donation,	I	am
ready.
Just	as	 I	was	giving	 to	you	when	you	were	 fighting	 for	 freedom,	 I	can	give	 to
you	now,	when	your	government	needs	it."	And	he	never	gave	any	tax,	even	to
the	independent	Indian	government.
He	 said,	 "I	 have	 my	 own	 principles.	 I	 am	 nobody's	 servant.	 But	 about	 this
celibacy	there	is	a	wound	in	me.	Three	times	I	have	failed.	And	I	don't	want	to
die	a	failure	in	anything."	And	he	was	a	man	of	rare	courage.	I	have	seen	people
of	different	kinds,	but	I	have	never	found	any	man	of	that	courage.
When	he	had	met	me	first	in	Jaipur	--	that	was	his	home	town	--	listening	to	me,
he	came,	touched	my	feet	and	gave	me	ten	thousand	rupees.	But	I	said,	"I	don't
need	rupees,	because	I	am	simply	traveling	alone	and	my	friends	can	take	care	of
my	expenses,	traveling,	food,	accommodation.	There	is	no	need."
Tears	came	to	his	eyes,	and	he	said,	"Don't	refuse.	Don't	hurt	me,	because	I	am	a
poor	man.	I	don't	have	anything	I	can	give	to	you	--	I	have	only	money.	You	can't
find	 a	 more	 poor	 man	 than	 me	 --	 just	 money	 and	 nothing	 else.	 So	 when
somebody	refuses	money,	he	is	refusing	me,	because	I	don't	have	anything	else.
Don't	 refuse.	 If	you	want	 to	 throw	 it	you	can	 throw	 it;	once	 I	have	given	 it	 to
you,	it	is	none	of	my	concern."
I	 gave	 that	money	 to	 the	 institution	 that	was	organizing	my	 lectures	 in	 Jaipur,
and	from	that	day	--	he	was	very	old	--	he	became	very	friendly	to	me,	and	he
said,	"I	have	houses	in	all	 the	big	cities	of	India.	So	wherever	you	go,	you	can
stay	in	my	house.	And	just	inform	me	so	I	will	be	there."
He	had	beautiful	mansions	everywhere	--	Bombay,	Hyderabad,	Madras,	Simla,
Calcutta.
He	said,	"I	have	earned	enough,	just	this	celibacy	is	heavy	on	me."
I	said,	"That's	a	very	simple	matter.	At	this	age	it	is	perfectly	right."	I	hypnotized
him	two,	three	times	while	I	was	with	him.	And	then	I	gave	him	a	posthypnotic
suggestion:	now	you	will	be	able	to	hypnotize	yourself.
And	 once	 that	 posthypnotic	 suggestion	 is	 given,	 the	 person	 becomes	 able	 to
hypnotize	himself.	Any	strategy	can	be	used:	Count	from	one	to	seven,	or	one	to
ten,	and	tell	yourself,	"I	will	be	back	in	ten	minutes"	--	never	forget	that,	because
otherwise	there	is	nobody	to	wake	you	up.	You	will	not	die,	but	you	may	spend
almost	 the	same	period	under	hypnosis	as	 in	sleep	--	six	 to	eight	hours.	 If	you
have	 time	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 say	 that,	 because	 the	 hypnotic	 sleep	 has	 a
totally	different	beauty:	 it	 is	so	soft,	 so	silent;	 it	 is	as	 if	you	are	no	more.	And
suddenly	you	come	back.
I	said,	"Before	going	into	hypnosis,	repeat	three	times,	Ì	want	to	remain	celibate,'
and	that's	enough."
After	 six	 months	 I	 met	 him	 again	 in	 Madras,	 and	 I	 asked	 him,	 "What	 about
celibacy?"
He	said,	"This	is	a	wonder.	Without	any	vow,	without	going	to	a	spiritual	head,
confessing,	 it	 has	 simply	disappeared.	 I	 simply	wonder	why	 sex	 so	dominated
me.	I	don't	even	remember	it."
You	will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 in	 hypnosis	 even	 operations	 can	 be	 done;
without	any	anesthesia,	big	operations,	dangerous	operations	can	be	done.	 It	 is
an	unexplored	science,	unnecessarily	condemned	by	a	few	idiots	who	have	been
making	an	entertainment	of	it.
Trust	 is	 the	 foundation	 to	 begin	with.	You	 can	 even	 start	 by	 yourself,	 but	 the
problem	 is,	you	don't	 trust	yourself;	otherwise	 there	 is	no	problem,	 there	 is	no
need	for	anybody	else	to	hypnotize	you.	You	can	hypnotize	yourself.	But	that	is
the	 difficulty:	 nobody	 trusts	 himself.	 You	 know	 yourself,	 you	 know	 how
deceptive	you	are,	you	know	how	cunning	you	are,	you	know	you	say	one	thing
and	you	don't	mean	 it.	You	know	 that	 you	decide	 that	 tomorrow	morning	you
will	get	up	early,	and	when	you	are	deciding	it,	even	at	that	time	you	know	that	it
is	not	going	to	happen.
So	you	cannot	trust	yourself	--	that	is	the	problem.	That's	why	somebody	else	is
needed,	 somebody	 you	 can	 trust,	 somebody	 in	 whose	 hands	 you	 can	 leave
yourself	without	any	fear.	And	the	person	who	hypnotizes	you,	if	he	really	loves
you,	would	like	you	to	get	 into	self-hypnosis	as	soon	as	possible,	because	then
you	are	totally	free.	Then	you	can	do	whatsoever	you	want	to	do	with	it.
If	 you	 want	 to	 stop	 smoking	 you	 can	 do	 it	 so	 easily.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 change
anything	in	you	which	you	think	is	impossible,	you	can	give	it	a	try	--	nothing	is
impossible.	You	have	decided	many	times	to	change	this,	to	change	that,	but	you
have	always	failed,	because	the	decision	remains	in	the	conscious	and	the	action
comes	from	the	unconscious
--	they	don't	meet.
The	 unconscious	 never	 hears	 anything	 that	 the	 conscious	 is	 deciding,	 and	 the
conscious	cannot	control	the	unconscious	--	the	unconscious	is	so	vast.
The	secret	of	hypnosis	is	that	it	takes	you	to	the	unconscious,	and	then	you	can
put	 the	 seed	 of	 anything	 in	 the	 unconscious,	 and	 it	 will	 grow,	 blossom.	 The
blossoming	 will	 happen	 in	 the	 conscious,	 but	 the	 roots	 will	 remain	 in	 the
unconscious.
As	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned,	 hypnosis	 is	 going	 to	 be	 one	of	 the	most	 significant
parts	of	the	mystery	school.	Such	a	simple	method,	which	only	demands	a	little
trust,	a	little	innocence,	can	bring	miraculous	changes	in	your	life	--	and	not	in
ordinary	things	only.
Slowly	it	can	become	the	path	of	your	meditation.
You	meditate,	 but	 you	 don't	 succeed.	You	 don't	 succeed	 in	watching;	 you	 get
mixed	 up	with	 thoughts,	 you	 forget	watching.	You	 remember	 later	 on,	 "I	was
going	 to	 watch,	 but	 I	 am	 thinking."	 Hypnosis	 can	 help	 you;	 it	 can	 make	 the
watcher	and	the	thoughts	separate.
For	spiritual	growth	I	don't	think	there	is	anything	more	important	than	hypnosis.
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
AS	YOU	HAVE	ANNOUNCED	 EACH	NEW	 PHASE	OF	YOUR	WORK,	 I
HAVE
BEEN	 IMMENSELY	 EXCITED	 AND	 SAID	 TO	MYSELF,	 "GREAT!	 NOW
WE	ARE
REALLY	 GOING	 TO	 BEGIN	 THE	 WORK."	 AND	 EACH	 PHASE	 IN	 ITS
TURN	HAS
BEEN	MORE	AMAZING	THAN	THE	ONE	BEFORE	IT.
NOW	YOU	SPEAK	OF	A	MYSTERY	SCHOOL.	MY	MIND	SHOUTS	OUT,
"HEY,	 THAT	 SOUNDS	ESOTERIC,	AND	OSHO	ALWAYS	 INSISTS	 THAT
TRUTH	IS	NOT
ESOTERIC,	 BUT	 ABSOLUTELY	 PRAGMATIC,	 AN	 OPEN	 SECRET."
THAT'S
WHAT	MY	MIND	SAYS.
IF	 THINGS	 ARE	 OTHERWISE	 THOUGH,	 THEN	 COUNT	 ME	 IN.	 I	 AM
COMING
WITH	YOU	ALL	THE	WAY.
ALSO,	THE	MYSTERY	SCHOOL	HAS	BEGUN	ALREADY,	HAS	IT	NOT?"
It	has	begun.	And	truth	is	both:	it	is	pragmatic	and	it	is	esoteric.
I	was	emphasizing	that	it	was	pragmatic,	because	in	those	phases	I	did	not	want
my	people	to	be	involved	in	any	esoteric	work.	The	pragmatic	work	is	the	right
foundation.
Without	 that	foundation,	esoteric	work	is	 just	dreaming.	So	I	was	continuously
against	esoteric	work.
I	am	a	very	mathematical	person,	in	the	sense	that	when	the	foundation	is	being
laid,	you	should	not	talk	about	the	temple	that	 is	going	to	be	built	upon	it,	and
how	it	is	going	to	be,	what	kind	of	architecture	--	because	all	that	will	disturb	the
work	 on	 the	 foundation.	 I	 wanted	 you	 to	 be	 totally	 concerned	 only	 with	 the
foundation,	 so	 that	 later	 on	 we	 can	 forget	 the	 foundation	 and	 we	 can	 start
building	the	temple.
Truth	is	a	mystery,	and	it	can	be	discovered	only	in	a	mystery	school.	And	this
phase	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 most	 valuable.	 All	 that	 we	 have	 done	 before	 was	 a
preparation.	 The	mystery	 school	 will	 create	 the	 purification,	 and	 the	 outcome
will	be	perfection.
That's	why	 people	who	 look	 at	me	 only	 intellectually	will	 find	 contradictions.
But	 those	 who	 have	 a	 more	 comprehensive	 view	 of	 life	 will	 not	 find	 any
contradiction.	I	have	denied	esoteric	work,	knowing	perfectly	well	that	one	day	I
will	have	 to	 introduce	you	 to	 the	esoteric	work.	But	everything	 in	 its	 time,	not
before;	otherwise	it	can	simply	create	confusion.
And	 if	 esoteric	work	 is	 introduced	 to	you	without	any	 foundation,	you	are	not
going	 to	work	 for	 the	 foundation,	 because	 that	 is	 not	 interesting.	 The	 esoteric
work	is	really	very	interesting,	but	I	don't	want	you	to	make	a	temple	without	a
foundation.	It	has	happened	many	times;	then	the	temple	falls	and	destroys	those
who	were	building	it.
The	word	èsoteric'	simply	means:	you	cannot	put	it	objectively,	scientifically.	It
is	 something	 inner,	 something	 subjective,	 something	 so	 mysterious,	 so
miraculous	that	you	can	experience	it	but	you	cannot	explain	it.	You	can	have	it,
but	still	you	cannot	explain	it.	It	remains	beyond	explanation.	And	it	is	good	that
there	is	something	in	life	which	you	cannot	bring	down	to	language,	which	you
cannot	bring	down	to	the	objective	world...
something	which	remains	always	beyond.	You	can	become	one	with	it	--	and	that
is	going	to	be	the	work	of	the	school.
I	 have	 been	 spontaneous	 in	my	work,	 but	 these	 are	 the	mysteries	 of	 life,	 that
existence	itself	has	taken	care.	I	have	left	it	to	existence,	"Whatever	you	want	me
to	do,	 I	will	do."	 I	am	not	 the	doer;	 I	am	 just	a	passage	 for	existence	 to	 reach
people.	So	I	have	never	planned,	but	existence	functions	in	a	very	planned	way.
So	all	the	phases	that	have	passed	were	necessary,	and	now	we	are	ready	to	enter
into	the	last	phase	--	the	ultimate	ecstasy.
Ecstasy	cannot	be	pragmatic.
Love	cannot	be	pragmatic.
Trust	cannot	be	pragmatic.
All	that	is	valuable	is	esoteric.
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
IN	 LAST	NIGHT'S	DISCOURSE,	 LISTENING	TO	YOU,	 I	WENT	 INTO	A
STATE
WHERE	 YOUR	 WORDS	 BECAME	 SOUNDS,	 YOUR	 VOICE	 BECAME
MUSIC,	AND	IN	THE	GAPS	BETWEEN	YOUR	WORDS,	IT	FELT	AS	IF	I
FOUND	MYSELF
RISING	 UP	 INTO	 THE	 SKY.	 AT	 FIRST	 I	 THOUGHT	 I	 WAS	 GOING	 TO
FALL
ASLEEP,	BUT	IT	TURNED	OUT	NOT	TO	BE	LIKE	THIS.
WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	HELP	ME	IN	UNDERSTANDING	THIS?
I	 have	 told	 you	 the	 story	 of	 the	 Sufi	 mystic	 who	 was	 thought	 to	 be	 a	 little
eccentric.	Even	his	disciples	were	afraid	 that	he	could	create	a	situation	which
would	be	very	embarrassing	to	them.
Once	it	happened...	He	was	going	to	the	mosque	to	deliver	a	religious	discourse
and	 he	 sat	 on	 his	 donkey	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 the	whole	 city	 laughed.	And	 the
disciples	 were	 just	 feeling	 ashamed,	 because	 he	 was	 not	 facing	 the	 way	 the
donkey	was	going;	he	was	sitting	with	his	back	towards	the	mosque	where	 the
donkey	was	going	and	he	was	facing	his	students	who	were	following	him.
Naturally	people	came	out	of	the	shops,	out	of	their	houses	and	laughed	and	they
said,
"This	man	is	really	mad.	It	is	strange	that	a	few	people	think	he	is	a	master.	Now
look	at	what	nonsense	he	is	doing.	Is	this	the	way	to	sit	on	a	donkey?"
And	all	the	students	were	feeling	very	badly:	to	go	with	the	master	anywhere	is	a
trouble.
When	 they	 had	 reached	 the	mosque	 the	 students	 asked,	 "Before	 we	 enter	 we
want	some	explanation:	Why	did	you	do	this?"
He	said,	"I	thought	over	it	very	much,	meditated	over	it.	If	I	sit	the	way	people
sit	on	their	animals	then	my	back	will	be	towards	you,	and	that	is	insulting;	that
is	not	being	respectful	towards	you."
One	student	said,	"Then	you	should	have	told	us.	We	could	have	been	ahead	of
you."
He	said,	"Then	it	would	have	been	insulting	towards	me.	Your	back	towards	me?
--	that	would	be	even	worse.	So	finally	I	figured	out	that	the	best	way	is	that	I	sit
facing	you,	and	you	follow	me.	And	there	is	no	religious	scripture	in	which	it	is
written	 that	 you	 should	 always	 sit	 on	 the	 donkey	 in	 such	 a	 way.	 It	 is	 not
irreligious.	There	 is	no	book	of	etiquette	 in	which	 it	 is	written	how	 to	sit	on	a
donkey.
"It	 is	our	donkey	and	nobody	has	the	right	 to	be	bothered	about	 it.	And	I	have
found	absolutely	 the	right	way:	I	am	facing	you,	you	are	facing	me;	nobody	is
being	disrespectful	towards	anybody	else.	What	is	wrong	in	it?"
This	master	was	staying	with	a	devotee,	and	they	were	worried	that	he	may	do
something...	"He	is	bound	to	do	something	to	create	a	scene,	and	the	neighbors
will	gather.	 It	 is	good	 that	he	has	come	in	 the	night.	We	should	put	him	in	 the
basement	and	 lock	 it	 so	no	problem	arises	 --	at	 least	 in	 the	night	 --	 so	we	can
sleep	silently	and	the	neighbors	can	sleep	silently."
But	in	the	middle	of	the	night	they	heard	roaring	laughter	coming	from	the	roof.
They	said,	"My	God,	how	has	he	managed	to	reach	the	roof?"
They	rushed	up,	and	he	was	laughing	and	rolling	around,	and	he	said,	"It	is	such
a	great	experience.	You	did	well	 to	put	me	in	 the	basement,	otherwise	I	would
have	missed."
They	said,	"Please	tell	us,	what	has	happened?"
He	said,	"I	started	falling	upwards.	The	whole	credit	goes	to	the	roof.	Somehow
I	 clung	 to	 the	 roof,	 otherwise	 you	 would	 not	 have	 found	 me.	 I	 was	 falling
upwards	 so	 fast.	 I	have	heard	 that	 things	only	 fall	downwards	 --	 this	 is	 a	new
experience	of	falling	upwards."
The	whole	neighborhood	was	there	and	everybody	was	coming	with	lamps,	and
they	 started	 asking,	 "What	has	happened?"	And	 the	people	of	 the	house	 could
not	even	say	what	had	happened.
The	master	said,	"Don't	be	worried,	I	will	explain;	these	people	cannot.	I	started
falling	upwards."
They	all	 laughed	and	they	said,	"We	have	been	 telling	 these	people,	 `Don't	get
involved	with	that	madman.	He	can	create	any	situation	and	make	you	all	look
foolish.'"
But	 it	 is	a	 famous	Sufi	statement,	 that	one	can	fall	upwards.	The	state	you	are
asking	 about,	 when	 you	 found	 that	 my	 words	 became	 sound,	 that	 my	 voice
became	music,	that	in	the	gaps	between,	you	felt	you	were	rising	upwards...	this
is	what	the	Sufis	mean	by	falling	upwards.	The	story	is	just	symbolic	--	nobody
can	fall	from	the	basement	to	the	roof,	but	it	says	much.
Just	look	at	what	you	felt:	my	words	became	sound.	Sound	is	the	source.	Sound
is	 meaningless;	 when	 a	 sound	 is	 given	 then	 it	 becomes	 a	 word.	 Words	 are
secondary;	sound	is	the	source.
That	 is	 why	 I	 have	 criticized	 the	 Biblical	 story	 that	 there	 was	 word	 in	 the
beginning.	That	 is	 impossible,	because	word	cannot	be	 in	 the	beginning.	Word
means	it	has	to	be	meaningful.	But	who	will	give	it	meaning?	There	was	nobody
else.
In	the	East	they	are	far	more	profound.	Each	ancient	Hindu	scripture	begins	with
OM.
That	 is	 a	 sound;	 it	 is	 not	 a	word.	OM	does	not	mean	 anything.	 It	would	have
been	better	to	say,	"In	the	beginning	there	was	sound."
You	say,	"Then	your	voice	became	music."	That	means	you	are	listening	totally,
so	 totally	 that	 you	 are	 not	 even	 thinking	 about	 what	 is	 being	 said.	 Naturally
meaning	will	disappear,	words	will	become	sound.	And	if	meaning	disappears,
then	 the	voice	will	become	music.	And	 in	 the	gaps	between	 the	sound	and	 the
music,	the	silent	gaps,	you	felt	you	were	rising	upwards.
In	the	East	we	have,	and	science	has	to	accept	it	sooner	or	later,	the	opposite	idea
to	 gravitation.	 It	 is	 called	 levitation:	 just	 as	 things	 fall	 downwards,	 things	 can
rise	upwards.
Gravitation	 is	 a	way	 downwards;	 levitation	 is	 a	way	 upwards.	 In	 utter	 silence
you	 are	 no	 longer	 confined	 to	 your	 body.	 Your	 body	 is	 under	 the	 impact	 of
gravitation;	it	cannot	fall	upwards.
But	you	are	not	the	body,	you	are	pure	consciousness.	In	fact	it	is	a	miracle	that
you	are	in	the	body.	Because	of	the	gravitation	that	affects	the	body,	you	remain
attached	to	the	earth.	But	in	absolute	silence,	suddenly	all	your	attachment	to	the
body	disappears,	your	attachment	to	the	mind	disappears	--	because	now	words
have	become	sound.	The	mind	cannot	conceive	it.	The	voice	has	become	music.
For	the	mind	to	figure	it	out	 is	not	possible,	and	because	the	mind	is	 in	a	state
where	it	cannot	control,	your	connections	with	the	body	become	loose.
Mind	is	your	connection,	and	in	that	looseness	you	can	feel	as	if	you	are	floating
upwards.	Your	body	is	still	sitting	on	the	ground,	so	if	you	open	your	eyes	you
will	be	puzzled.	But	what	you	have	experienced	is	not	imagination;	it	is	as	true
as	gravitation,	it	is	just	invisible.	You	can	feel	it,	but	you	cannot	see	it.	Don't	be
afraid	of	 it.	Let	 it	happen	more	and	more.	Suddenly	one	day	you	will	find	you
are	close	to	the	stars	and	not	to	the	earth.
The	 same	 thing	 can	 be	 possible	 through	 hypnosis.	 If	 a	 person	 is	 deeply
hypnotized	 --	 that	means	he	has	been	hypnotized	many	 times	 and	has	become
more	and	more	trusting...
And	 there	are	ways	 to	check	whether	he	has	come	 to	 the	point	where	you	can
experiment.
You	 can	 simply	 say	 to	 him,	 "Come	 out	 of	 the	 body.	 You	 will	 be	 able	 to
remember	whatever	you	see."
Your	consciousness,	your	soul,	or	whatever	name	you	give	to	it,	will	float	above
you	 like	a	balloon,	still	attached	 to	your	navel	with	a	very	shiny	cord,	 looking
like	silver.	And	you	can	see	your	body	lying	on	the	bed.
In	 a	 mystery	 school	 we	 will	 need	 places	 where	 nobody	 disturbs.	 If	 such	 an
experiment	 is	 being	done,	 any	disturbance	 can	be	dangerous.	The	 cord	 can	be
broken	--	then	the	soul	cannot	enter	the	body	again;	then	the	person	is	dead.	No
harm	to	the	soul,	but	to	the	world	you	have	killed	a	person.	There	should	be	no
disturbance	of	any	kind.
The	 soul	 can	 see	 everything	 from	 above,	 and	 then	 you	 can	 say,	 "Now	 slowly
come	 back	 to	 the	 body."	And	 you	 can	 feel	 that	 you	 are	 settling	 back	 into	 the
body,	slowly	spreading	into	different	parts	of	the	body.	Because	you	are	told	that
you	will	remember	everything,	you	will	be	able	to	tell	about	it	when	you	wake
up	and	you	are	asked	--	you	will	tell	the	whole	thing,	what	has	happened.
And	this	has	been	experimented	with	for	at	least	ten	thousand	years,	and	it	has
been	always	the	same.	That's	why	I	say	it	is	the	science	of	the	interior,	of	your
inner	 being,	 because	 there	 has	 been	 no	 exception.	All	 the	 reports	 from	people
who	have	gone	out	of	the	body	are	exactly	the	same.	For	example,	they	all	feel
that	they	are	connected	by	a	silver	cord	to	the	navel.
Out	of	this	experience	scientists	may	think	that	life	is	centered	in	the	heart,	that
if	 the	 heart	 stops	 you	 are	 dead.	 It	 is	 not	 true.	 There	 have	 been	 experiments
proving	certainly	that	the	heart	can	be	stopped	and	the	person	does	not	die.	After
ten	minutes	he	comes	back,	and	the	heart	starts	again.	According	to	the	spiritual
science,	 life	 is	 just	 two	 inches	 below	 the	 navel.	 The	 child	 was	 joined	 by	 the
navel	 to	 the	mother.	And	 the	 navel	was	 nursing	 the	 source	 inside,	 two	 inches
below...	 It	 has	 been	 cut	 from	 the	 mother's	 life,	 but	 it	 is	 still	 joined	 with	 the
universe	from	the	same	place.	It	is	not	in	the	heart,	it	is	just	two	inches	below	the
navel.
And	because	of	this,	in	Japan	a	certain	thing	developed:	hara-kiri.	Hara-kiri	is	a
special	kind	of	 suicide.	Hara	 is	 the	name	of	 the	center	below	 the	navel,	where
life	 is.	 And	 only	 in	 Japan	 has	 it	 been	 possible	 to	 locate	 it	 exactly.	 A	 certain
development	in	Japanese	tradition	led	to	this	point:	if	you	want	to	kill	yourself,
the	best,	the	quickest,	and	the	most	comfortable	way	is	just	to	put	a	knife	in	the
center	 of	 the	 hara,	 so	 the	 cord	 is	 cut.	 That	 happens	 within	 seconds,	 and	 the
person	is	dead,	but	he	does	not	suffer	any	agony.
And	the	science	of	health,	medicine,	has	to	take	note	of	it,	because	if	it	is	the	real
center	of	life,	then	it	should	be	nourished	when	a	person	is	dying	or	sick.	Rather
than	 working	 on	 other	 places	 which	 are	 only	 offshoots,	 work	 at	 the	 center.
Perhaps	a	totally	new	science	of	medicine	and	health	can	come	out	of	it.
The	hara	has	not	been	recognized	anywhere	except	Japan.	But	Japan	has	proved
it,	that	there	is	the	center	of	life,	because	within	a	second	the	person	is	finished	--
and	with	no	agony,	no	anguish.	His	 face	 is	as	 it	was	when	he	was	alive	 --	not
even	any	tension.
Hara-kiri	 developed	 for	 a	 strange	 reason.	 It	 is	 part	 of	 the	 samurai	 training	 in
Japan.	The	samurai	is	a	special	kind	of	warrior.	He	is	a	meditative	warrior.	Life
and	 death	 are	 equal	 to	 him,	 but	 honor,	 respectability,	 dignity,	 is	 higher	 than
anything	else.	So	if	anything	happens	that	he	feels	is	humiliating,	then	it	is	not
worth	living,	and	he	commits	hara-kiri.
It	is	not	good	to	translate	it	as	suicide,	but	there	is	no	other	way.
Thousands	of	samurai	have	committed	hara-kiri.	You	cannot	hurt	the	integrity	of
any	samurai.	It	is	dangerous	--	he	will	not	kill	you,	he	will	kill	himself.	Life	has
lost	meaning;	 if	 people	 cannot	 respect	 him,	 there	 is	 no	 reason	why	 he	 should
live.	And	he	lives	with	dignity.	The	samurai	is	a	special	development	of	human
individuality,	and	utterly	devoted	to	freedom.	Anything	hurting	him,	or	anything
destroying	his	freedom	or	his	honor...
In	 the	 second	world	war	 it	was	 a	 danger,	 that	 you	 can	 destroy	 Japan	 but	 you
cannot	win.
It	 was	 the	 atomic	 bombs	which	 changed	 the	 situation;	 otherwise	 the	 ordinary
war...
Just	a	few	years	ago,	thirteen	years	after	the	second	world	war,	a	man	was	found
hiding	 in	 a	 forest,	 still	 fighting.	 Whenever	 he	 could	 find	 an	 opportunity,	 he
would	kill	an	American	and	then	go	back	to	the	forest.	He	was	caught	thirteen
years	 after	 the	 second	world	 war,	 and	when	 he	 was	 told	 that	 Japan	 had	 been
defeated,	he	could	not	believe	it.
He	said,	"That	is	impossible.	Japan	can	be	destroyed,	but	cannot	be	defeated.	It
is	a	 land	of	samurais.	We	live	with	dignity,	we	die	with	dignity."	He	could	not
believe	it	--	thirteen	years	had	passed,	and	he	was	still	fighting	for	Japan,	alone.
Meditation	 and	 swordsmanship,	 or	 archery,	 or	 other	ways	 of	 the	warrior,	 have
been	 joined	 together.	 To	 us	 it	 seems	 too	 much,	 that	 a	 person	 should	 destroy
himself,	but	to	those	thousands	who	have	committed	hara-kiri	it	is	not	the	case.
They	are	not	destroying	themselves,	they	are	simply	leaving	this	life	--	this	life	is
not	worth	living,	something	has	gone	wrong.	It	is	against	their	honor	to	be	here.
Through	 hypnosis	 we	 can	 make	 a	 person	 aware	 of	 how	 this	 rising	 upwards
happens,	 and	how	he	 can	 enter	 the	 body	 again.	And	once	you	have	done	 it,	 a
posthypnotic	suggestion	can	be	given,	that	you	can	do	it	on	your	own,	any	time
you	want.	And	it	 is	a	 tremendously	beautiful	experience,	 for	 the	simple	reason
that	for	the	first	time	you	find	that	the	prison	is	not	you.	Your	body	is	one	thing;
you	are	totally	different:	you	are	eternal,	immortal.
Bodies	have	come	and	gone;	you	have	been	here	since	eternity,	and	you	will	be
here	until	eternity.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	The	ostrich	argument
Chapter	title:	Obedience	needs	no	art
Chapter	title:	We	cannot	be	otherwise
Chapter	title:	Come	a	little	closer
Chapter	title:	Falling	above	the	mind
Chapter	title:	Each	moment	is	insecure
Chapter	title:	A	world	beyond	time
Chapter	title:	Everybody	is	enough
Chapter	title:	Logic	should	serve	love
