
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Responses	to	Disciples	Questions
Talks	given	from	27/10/80	am	to	10/11/80	am
English	Discourse	series
15	Chapters
Year	published:	1980
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Whoever	Knocks	is	a	Welcome	Guest
27	October	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8010270
ShortTitle:
COME01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	A	SINNER.	CAN	I	ALSO	BECOME	YOUR	SANNYASIN?
Govind,	 yes,	 absolutely	 yes!	 In	 fact,	 only	 a	 sinner	 can	 become	 a	 sannyasin.
Those	who	think	themselves	saints,	holier-than-thou,	they	are	the	closed	people,
they	 are	 the	 dead	people.	They	have	 become	 incapable	 of	 living,	 incapable	 of
celebrating.
Sannyas	is	celebration	of	life,	and	sin	is	natural:	natural	in	the	sense	that	you	are
unconscious	 --	 what	 else	 can	 you	 do?	 In	 unconsciousness,	 sin	 is	 bound	 to
happen.	 Sin	 simply	 means	 that	 you	 don't	 know	 what	 you	 are	 doing,	 you	 are
unaware,	 so	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 goes	 wrong.	 But	 to	 recognize	 that	 "I	 am	 a
sinner"	is	the	beginning	of	a	great	pilgrimage.	To	recognize	that	"I	am	a	sinner"
is	the	beginning	of	real	virtue.	To	see	that
"I	am	ignorant"	is	the	first	glimpse	of	wisdom.
The	 real	 problem	 arises	 with	 people	 who	 are	 full	 of	 knowledge.	 All	 that
knowledge	is	borrowed;	hence,	rubbish.	The	people	who	think	they	are	virtuous
because	they	have	created	a	certain	character	around	themselves	are	the	people
lost	to	God.	Your	so-called	saints	are	the	farthest	away,	because	God	is	life,	and
your	saints	have	renounced	life.	In	renouncing	life	they	have	renounced	God	too.
God	 is	 the	 hidden	 core	 of	 THIS	 life.	 This	 life	 is	 just	 the	 outermost	 part,	 the
circumference;	 God	 is	 the	 center	 of	 it	 all.	 To	 renounce	 the	 circumference,	 to
escape	 from	 it,	 is	 to	 renounce	 the	 center	 automatically.	You	will	 not	 find	God
anywhere.	The	farther	away	you	go	from	life,	the	farther	away	you	will	be	from
God.	One	has	to	dive	into	life,	and	of	course	when	you	are	unconscious	you	will
miss	the	target	many	times.
The	 original	Hebrew	word	 for	 sin	 is	 very	 beautiful.	By	 translating	 it	 as	 "sin,"
Christians	have	missed	the	very	message	of	Jesus.	The	original	Hebrew	word	for
sin	is	so	totally	different	from	your	idea	of	sin	that	it	will	be	a	surprise	to	you.
The	root	word	means	forgetfulness;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	what	you	are	doing.
The	 whole	 thing	 is	 whether	 you	 are	 doing	 it	 with	 conscious	 being	 or	 out	 of
unconsciousness.	 Are	 you	 doing	 it	 with	 a	 self-remembering	 or	 have	 you
completely	forgotten	yourself?
Any	action	coming	out	of	unconsciousness	is	sin.	The	action	may	look	virtuous,
but	 it	 cannot	 be.	 You	 may	 create	 a	 beautiful	 facade,	 a	 character,	 a	 certain
virtuousness;	 you	may	 speak	 the	 truth,	 you	may	avoid	 lies;	 you	may	 try	 to	be
moral,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.
But	if	all	this	is	coming	from	unconsciousness,	it	is	all	sin.
It	is	because	of	this	that	Jesus	has	a	tremendously	significant	saying.	He	says,	"If
your	right	eye	causes	you	to	sin,	take	it	out	and	throw	it	away.	It	is	much	better
for	you	 to	 lose	a	part	of	your	body	 than	 to	have	your	whole	body	 thrown	 into
hell."
Now,	 if	 you	 don't	 understand	 the	 real	 meaning	 of	 sin,	 you	 are	 bound	 to
misinterpret	 the	 whole	 statement	 and	 Jesus	 will	 look	 too	 harsh,	 too	 hard,	 too
violent.	 Saying,	 "If	 your	 right	 eye	 causes	 you	 to	 sin,	 take	 it	 out	 and	 throw	 it
away,"	 does	 not	 look	 like	 a	 statement	 of	 Jesus.	 A	man	 of	 profound	 love	 and
compassion	 --	 he	 cannot	 say	 it,	 he	 cannot	 be	 so	 violent.	 But	 this	 is	 how
Christians	have	interpreted	him.
What	he	means	 is:	whatsoever	causes	you	 to	 forget	yourself,	even	 if	 it	 is	your
right	eye....
That	is	just	to	emphasize	the	fact.	It	is	simply	a	way	of	talking,	an	emphasis:	"If
your	right	eye	causes	you	to	forget	yourself,	then	take	it	out	and	throw	it	away."
He	is	not	saying	anything	which	has	to	be	taken	literally;	it	is	a	metaphor.	He	is
saying	 that	 it	 is	better	 to	be	blind	 than	 to	be	 forgetful	of	yourself,	because	 the
blind	man	who	remembers	himself	is	not	blind,	he	has	the	real	eye.	And	the	man
who	has	eyes,	 if	he	has	 forgotten	himself,	what	 is	 the	use	of	having	eyes?	He
cannot	see	himself	--	what	ELSE	can	he	see?
Govind,	your	question	is	beautiful.	You	say,	"I	am	a	sinner...."	Everybody	is!	To
be	born	in	this	world	means	to	be	a	sinner.	But	remember	my	emphasis:	it	means
to	forget	oneself.
That's	 the	 whole	 purpose	 of	 the	 world:	 to	 give	 you	 an	 opportunity	 to	 forget
yourself.
Why?	--	so	 that	you	can	remember.	But	you	will	ask	--	and	your	question	will
look	 logical	 --	 "If	 we	 already	 remembered	 before,	 then	 why	 this	 unnecessary
torture	that	we	have	to	forget	ourselves	and	THEN	remember	again?	What	is	the
point	of	this	whole	exercise?	It	seems	to	be	an	exercise	of	utter	futility!"	It	is	not;
there	is	great	significance	in	it.
The	fish	in	the	ocean	is	born	in	the	ocean,	lives	in	the	ocean,	but	knows	nothing
about	 the	ocean	--	unless	you	 take	 the	fish	out	of	 the	ocean.	Then,	suddenly,	a
recognition	arises	in	the	fish.	Only	when	you	lose	something	do	you	remember.
Only	in	that	contrast	does	remembering	happen.	Then	let	the	fish	go	back	to	the
ocean.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 fish,	 it	 is	 the	 same	 ocean,	 the	 same	 situation	 --	 yet
everything	 is	different.	Now	the	 fish	knows	 that	 the	ocean	 is	her	 life,	her	very
being.	Before,	 she	was	 in	 the	ocean	but	unaware;	now,	she	 is	 in	 the	ocean	but
aware.	And	that's	the	great	difference,	the	difference	that	makes	the	difference.
We	have	lived	in	God,	we	all	come	from	the	original	source	of	existence,	but	we
have	 to	 be	 thrown	 out	 into	 the	 world	 so	 that	 we	 can	 start	 searching	 for	 God
again,	searching	for	the	ocean	--	thirsty,	hungry,	starving,	longing.	And	the	day
we	find	it	again	there	is	great	rejoicing.	And	it	is	not	anything	new.
The	day	Buddha	became	enlightened	he	laughed	and	he	said	to	himself,	"This	is
very	 strange!	 What	 I	 have	 gained	 is	 not	 an	 achievement	 at	 all,	 it	 is	 only	 a
recognition.	I	had	it	always,	but	I	was	unaware	of	it."
The	 only	 difference	 between	 a	 sinner	 and	 a	 sage	 is	 that	 the	 sinner	 is	 full	 of
forgetfulness,	and	the	sage	is	full	of	remembering.	And	between	these	two	is	that
hocus-pocus	 being	 called	 the	 saint.	 He	 does	 not	 know	 anything,	 he	 does	 not
remember	anything.	He	has	heard	other	sages	or	may	have	read	 the	scriptures,
and	he	repeats	those	scriptures	like	a	parrot	--	not	only	repeats	but	practices	also.
He	tries	to	behave	like	a	sage.	But	any	effort	to	behave	like	a	sage	shows	only
one	thing:	that	you	are	not	a	sage	yet.
The	 sage	 lives	 simply,	 spontaneously;	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 effort	 at	 all.	He
lives	life	just	as	you	breathe.	He	is	very	ordinary;	there	is	nothing	special	about	a
sage.	But	the	saint	is	very	special,	because	the	saint	is	trying	to	DO	something.
And	 of	 course	 he	 is	 making	 a	 great	 effort,	 because	 it	 is	 not	 his	 own
understanding.	 So	 he	 is	 continuously	 torturing	 himself	 to	 behave	 rightly,
violently	 forcing	himself	 to	behave	 rightly.	Naturally,	he	expects	much	 respect
from	you.	He	can	go	on	doing	all	 this	masochism,	 this	self-torture,	 if	you	give
him	respect.	Just	think:	if	the	so-called	respect	given	to	the	saints	disappears,	out
of	one	hundred	of	your	saints,	ninety-nine	point	nine	percent	will	 immediately
disappear.	They	are	living	only	for	the	ego.
It	is	good,	Govind,	that	you	realize	that	you	are	a	sinner.	This	is	the	beginning	of
something	 tremendously	 significant.	 You	 can	 be	 a	 sage;	 all	 that	 you	 have	 to
avoid	is	being	a	saint!	That	is	the	trouble:	the	saint	is	the	false	coin	which	looks
exactly	like	the	real	coin;	in	fact,	it	looks	more	real	than	the	real	one.	It	has	to,
because	it	has	to	deceive	people.	Avoid	being	a	saint.
That's	what	my	sannyas	is:	living	your	ordinary	life	with	only	one	addition,	that
of	awareness	 --	and	 the	sinner	will	become	a	sage.	The	sinner	becomes	a	sage
through	awareness;	the	sinner	becomes	a	saint	through	cultivating	a	character.
I	 don't	 teach	 you	 character,	 I	 teach	 you	 consciousness.	Hence,	 I	 am	 not	 at	 all
interested	that	you	are	a	sinner	and	that	you	have	been	doing	all	kinds	of	sins	--
that	is	irrelevant.	It	is	accepted	that	in	your	unconsciousness	what	else	can	you
do?
I	accept	you	with	total	love,	respect.
Many	 times	 I	 have	 been	 told,	 particularly	 by	 the	 so-called	 saints,	 "You	 go	 on
giving	sannyas	to	everybody	--	this	is	not	right.	Sannyas	should	be	given	only	to
people	of	character!"
It	 is	 as	 if	 you	 go	 to	 a	 physician	 and	 he	 says,	 "My	 condition	 for	 giving	 you
medicine	is	 that	I	give	it	 to	you	only	when	you	are	healthy.	Come	to	me	when
you	are	healthy.	I	never	give	medicines	to	people	who	are	ill,	I	never	waste	my
medicines	on	ill	people!
First	become	healthy	and	then	come	to	me."	You	can	understand	the	absurdity	of
that.
If	I	say	to	somebody,	"First	go	and	become	WORTHY	of	sannyas,	then	come	to
me,"	that	means	that	if	he	can	become	worthy	of	sannyas	by	his	own	effort,	then
why	 cannot	 he	 become	 a	 sannyasin	 by	 himself?	What	 is	 the	 need	 for	 him	 to
come	to	ME?	He	needs	help,	and	anybody	who	ASKS	for	help	should	be	given
help,	and	it	should	be	given	unconditionally.
There	 is	a	beautiful	statement	of	Mevlana	Jalaluddin	Rumi,	one	of	 the	greatest
Sufi	masters	ever.	Govind,	take	it	to	your	heart.
COME,	COME,	WHOEVER	YOU	ARE;
WANDERER,	WORSHIPPER,	LOVER	OF	LEARNING...
IT	DOES	NOT	MATTER.
OURS	IS	NOT	A	CARAVAN	OF	DESPAIR.
COME,	EVEN	IF	YOU	HAVE	BROKEN	YOUR	VOW
A	THOUSAND	TIMES.
COME,	COME,	YET	AGAIN	COME.
COME,	 COME,	 WHOEVER	 YOU	 ARE...sinner,	 unconscious,	 living	 a	 life
which	is	not	glorious,	divine,	meaningful;	living	a	life	which	has	no	poetry,	no
joy,	a	life	of	hell....
Whosoever	you	 are,	Mevlana	 says,	 "Come,	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 receive	you.	Be	my
guest!"
The	master	 is	 a	 host;	 he	 refuses	 nobody.	 True	 masters	 never	 refuse	 anybody.
They	 cannot.	 If	 THEY	 start	 refusing	 people,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 hope.	 If	 you	 go
under	a	 tree,	a	shady	tree	--	 tired	of	your	 journey	and	the	burning	sun	on	your
head	--	and	the	tree	refuses	you,	it	does	not	give	you	refuge,	it	does	not	shelter
you...?	It	does	not	happen	at	all.	The	tree	is	always	ready	to	give	you	shelter,	its
shadow,	its	fruits,	its	flowers,	its	fragrance.
A	great	Tibetan	story	is....
Once	there	lived	a	master	who	never	initiated	anybody.	His	fame	slowly	became
very	well	known	all	over	the	country,	even	beyond	the	boundaries	of	the	country.
And	 people	 would	 come	 and	 fall	 at	 his	 feet	 and	 ask	 to	 be	 initiated.	 But	 his
conditions	were	such	that	nobody	was	able	to	fulfill	 them,	so	nobody	was	ever
thought	worthy	--	nobody	deserved	initiation.
He	had	only	a	servant,	not	even	a	disciple.	One	day	when	he	was	ill	and	on	his
deathbed,	 he	 called	 his	 servant	 and	 told	 him,	 "Go	 to	 the	 marketplace,	 and
whosoever	wants	to	be	initiated,	bring	them	all.	I	am	going	to	initiate!"
The	servant	was	shocked.	He	said,	"Are	you	talking	in	a	delirium	or	something?
Your	whole	 life	 you	 insisted	 on	 certain	 qualities	 --	 unless	 those	were	 fulfilled
you	 would	 not	 initiate	 --	 and	 nobody	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 fulfill	 your
conditions.	Now	you	are	telling	me	to	go	to	the	marketplace	and	tell	people	that
anybody	who	wants	 to	 be	 initiated	 should	 come?	What	 about	 the	 conditions?
What	 about	 the	prerequisites?	What	 about	 the	 essential	 readiness?	What	 about
the	groundwork?"
The	master	said,	"Don't	waste	my	time	anymore,	because	this	is	my	last	day	on
the	earth.
Simply	 go!	 Do	 what	 I	 am	 saying,	 don't	 argue.	 You	 are	 my	 servant	 --	 simply
follow	the	order.	Go	and	find	anybody	who	wants	to	come!"
The	servant	went,	puzzled.	He	could	not	believe	his	own	ears,	could	not	believe
his	own	eyes.	But	because	the	master	had	ordered,	and	he	was	just	a	servant,	he
had	to	follow.	He	went	into	the	marketplace	very	unwillingly.	He	shouted	in	the
marketplace.	Nobody	believed	him;	they	thought	he	had	gone	mad.	He	said,	"I
am	not	saying	it,	he	himself	has	told	me!	I	also	think	that	he	has	gone	mad,	now
you	are	thinking	that	I	have	gone	mad.	I	am	simply	a	servant.	He	must	have	gone
mad!	He	is	dying,	he	has	lost	all	his	senses.	But	give	it	a	try	--	you	are	not	going
to	lose	anything."
A	few	people,	just	out	of	curiosity,	a	few	people	who	had	nothing	to	do....	It	was
a	 holiday,	 so	 they	 said,	 "Okay,	 we	 are	 coming.	 Let	 us	 see	 what	 happens!"
Somebody	had	quarreled	with	his	wife	and	had	nowhere	to	go,	so	he	said,	"I	am
coming."	A	gambler	and	a	drunkard	who	were	just	on	the	road,	simply	followed
seeing	this	whole	bunch	of	people,	not	knowing	where	they	were	going.
So	this	strange	crowd	reached	the	master's	place,	and	he	started	initiating	them
one	by	one.	The	 first	man	he	 initiated	was	 the	drunkard.	Of	 course	he	was	 so
drunk	that	he	could	not	even	 think	 that	 the	master	was	mad	--	he	did	not	even
realize	that	he	was	being	initiated!	He	was	not	aware	at	all	what	was	happening.
When	the	master	said,	"Do	you	want	to	be	initiated?"	he	simply	nodded	his	head.
The	 servant	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	 He	 said,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?	 This	man	 is
completely	 drunk,	 he	 is	 an	 alcoholic,	 and	 you	 are	 giving	 him	 initiation!	 And
there	is	a	thief	in	the	crowd,	and	one	man	has	come	because	he	is	unemployed
and	he	thought	at	 least	 this	way	he	would	find	some	employment	--	at	 least	he
could	become	a	 saint	 and	people	would	 feed	him.	And	 there	 are	 a	 few	people
who	 have	 come	 because	 it	 is	 a	 holiday.	 A	 few	 others	 have	 come	 just	 out	 of
curiosity:	`Let	us	see	what	is	happening.'	The	man	next	to	the	drunkard	has	come
here	 only	 because	 his	wife	 has	 thrown	 him	 out	 and	 closed	 the	 doors.	He	was
standing	outside,	and	he	said,	Òkay,	so	I	am	coming	also!'	These	are	not	seekers
and	searchers	--	 they	are	not	religious	at	all!	What	are	you	doing?	Your	whole
life	you	were	waiting	for	worthy	people,	people	who	are	deserving!"
The	master	said,	"Listen,	the	truth	is	--	now	I	can	tell	you	--	I	was	not	a	master	at
all!	Just	this	morning	I	have	realized	myself,	but	I	could	not	tell	anybody	that	I
was	not	a	master.
So	rather	than	telling	the	truth,	I	always	tried	to	make	some	impossible	demands
which	could	not	be	fulfilled.	In	that	way	I	saved	my	ego.	But	today	I	have	come
to	 know	 who	 I	 am,	 and	 now	 I	 know	 that	 everybody	 is	 capable	 of	 knowing
because	 everybody	 is	 basically	 the	 same.	 Even	 this	 drunkard	 is	 no	 more
unconscious	than	anybody	else.
Everybody	is	unconscious,	and	unconscious	people	need	initiation;	they	need	the
help	of	those	who	have	become	conscious.	The	conscious	person	can	function	as
a	catalytic	agent."
Mevlana	 is	 right:	 COME,	 COME,	 WHOEVER	 YOU	 ARE;	 WANDERER,
WORSHIPPER,	 LOVER	 OF	 LEARNING...IT	 DOES	 NOT	 MATTER.	 The
master	 is	 ready;	 it	does	not	matter	who	comes	 to	him.	Whoever	knocks	on	his
door	is	a	welcome	guest.
OURS	 IS	 NOT	 A	 CARAVAN	 OF	 DESPAIR.	 Remember	 this	 beautiful
statement:	"Ours	 is	not	a	caravan	of	despair."	I	can	also	say	this.	Ours	 is	not	a
caravan	of	despair,	it	is	a	celebration	--	it	is	the	celebration	of	life.
People	become	 religious	out	 of	misery,	 and	 the	person	who	becomes	 religious
out	 of	 misery	 becomes	 religious	 for	 the	 wrong	 reasons.	 And	 if	 the	 very
beginning	is	wrong,	the	end	cannot	be	right.
Become	religious	out	of	joy,	out	of	the	experience	of	beauty	that	surrounds	you,
out	of	the	immense	gift	of	life	that	God	has	given	to	you.	Become	religious	out
of	 gratitude,	 thankfulness.	 Your	 temples,	 your	 churches,	 your	 mosques	 and
GURUDWARAS	are	 full	 of	miserable	 people.	They	have	 turned	your	 temples
also	into	hells.	They	are	there	because	they	are	in	agony.	They	don't	know	God,
they	 have	 no	 interest	 in	 God;	 they	 are	 not	 concerned	 with	 truth;	 there	 is	 no
inquiry.	They	are	just	there	to	be	consoled,	comforted.	Hence	they	seek	anybody
who	can	give	them	cheap	beliefs	to	patch	up	their	lives,	to	hide	their	wounds,	to
cover	up	their	misery.	They	are	there	in	search	of	some	false	satisfaction.
Ours	is	not	a	caravan	of	despair.	It	is	a	temple	of	joy,	of	song,	of	dance,	of	music,
of	creativity,	of	love	and	life.
You	are	welcome,	Govind	--	join	the	caravan.
COME,	 EVEN	 IF	 YOU	 HAVE	 BROKEN	 YOUR	 VOW	 A	 THOUSAND
TIMES.
It	does	not	matter.	You	may	have	broken	all	the	rules	--	the	rules	of	conduct,	the
rules	 of	morality.	 In	 fact,	 anybody	who	 has	 any	 guts	 is	 bound	 to	 break	 those
rules.	Only	people	who	are	without	guts,	who	have	no	spine	to	their	being	can
follow	 the	 priests	 and	 the	 politicians,	 the	 demagogues,	 the	 people	 who	 have
vested	interests	in	the	establishment.
But	if	you	have	any	intelligence	then	you	will	be	a	rebel.	And	the	rebel	will	be
called	a	sinner,	and	the	obedient	fool	will	be	called	a	saint.
This	starts	happening	from	the	very	childhood.	The	obedient	child	is	praised	by
the	parents,	obviously	--	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	is	not	a	pain	in	their	necks.
He	is	so	dull,	so	dead	that	whatsoever	they	say	he	does.	He	is	an	imitator,	he	is	a
carbon	copy,	and	the	parents'	egos	feel	very	nourished	by	the	child.	He	follows
them,	he	believes	in	them,	he	adores	them.
But	 the	 intelligent	child	will	not	be	respected	by	the	parents.	They	will	always
feel	some	trouble	with	the	intelligent	child,	because	he	will	ask	questions	which
they	can't	answer	because	they	don't	know	themselves.	He	will	ask	such	things
as	will	be	embarrassing	to	them.	He	will	create	situations	in	which	they	will	see
their	 impotence.	 They	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 control	 him	 --	 and	 everybody	 is
interested	 in	 controlling	 everybody	 else;	 nobody	wants	 to	 give	 freedom.	They
will	not	be	able	to	enslave	the	child;	he	will	resist	all	efforts	to	enslave	him,	he
will	give	them	a	good	fight.	In	fact,	he	is	the	child	to	be	loved,	to	be	respected,
because	he	has	some	life,	he	has	some	soul.	But	he	will	be	condemned.
Intelligence	 is	 condemned,	 imitativeness	 is	 respected.	 Original	 faces	 are
distorted	and	masks	are	painted,	beautifully	decorated.	The	true,	the	authentic,	is
denied,	and	the	false,	the	unauthentic,	is	raised	as	high	as	possible.	And	the	same
thing	 goes	 on	 happening	 in	 the	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities.	 The	 whole	 of
society	is	a	repetition	of	the	same	thing	on	a	larger	scale.
Only	very	stupid	people	become	your	presidents,	your	prime	ministers.	You	will
not	 tolerate	 intelligent	 people,	 you	 will	 not	 give	 power	 to	 intelligent	 people,
because	you	will	be	afraid	of	them.	You	will	always	want	some	stupid	people	to
dominate	you,	because	 there	will	always	be	a	certain	affinity	between	you	and
the	stupid.	There	will	be	a	certain	understanding,	a	communication.
Jesus	is	bound	to	be	crucified,	and	Mother	Teresa	of	Calcutta	is	going	to	win	the
Nobel	Prize.	Socrates	 is	going	 to	be	poisoned	and	killed,	but	not	 the	 so-called
professors	 of	 philosophy	 in	 the	 universities;	 they	 are	 very	 respectable	 people.
Socrates	was	not	respectable.	If	he	had	been	respectable,	then	Athens	would	not
have	behaved	in	such	an	ugly	way.	He	was	condemned	like	a	criminal,	but	 the
professors	of	philosophy	who	are	 teaching	Socrates	 are	very	 respected	people;
they	all	have	respectability.	They	write	great	 treatises	on	Socrates,	and	nobody
poisons	them.
One	of	my	professors	wrote	his	thesis	on	the	philosophy	of	Socrates,	and	he	got
a	D.Litt.
in	 it.	 He	 was	 very	 happy,	 and	 all	 his	 students	 gave	 him	 a	 party.	 I	 was	 also
present.	I	asked	him	one	thing:	"Socrates	was	given	poison	and	you	are	given	a
D.Litt.	There	must	be	something	wrong	with	your	treatise!	It	cannot	be	Socratic,
that	much	is	certain.	I	have	not	looked	into	your	treatise,	and	I	am	not	going	to
look	 into	 it	 at	 all	 --	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 waste	 my	 time!	 One	 thing	 is	 certain:
something	is	absolutely	un-Socratic	about	it;	otherwise,	why	should	the	society,
the	university,	give	you	recognition?"
He	could	not	answer	me,	but	he	became	an	enemy.	He	started	avoiding	me,	and	I
started	haunting	him!	Wherever	we	would	meet	alone	--	sometimes	walking	on
the	road	to	the	university,	or	going	for	a	morning	walk,	or	in	the	night	--	I	would
always	look	out	for	him	and	say,	"Hello,	Socrates!"	He	would	become	so	angry!
One	day	he	told	me,	"Why	are	you	after	me?	What	wrong	have	I	done	to	you?"
I	said,	"You	have	not	done	anything	wrong	to	me,	I	am	simply	trying	to	make	the
point	clear	 to	you	 that	writing	a	 treatise	on	Socrates	 is	one	 thing,	and	 to	BE	a
Socrates	 is	 totally	 another.	 If	 you	 were	 a	 Socrates	 you	 would	 have	 been
crucified,	you	would	have	been	stoned	to	death.	The	same	university	would	have
condemned	you;	you	would	have	been	expelled	from	this	university."
And	finally,	HE	was	not	expelled	from	the	university,	I	was	expelled.	And	when
I	was	expelled,	I	went	to	him	and	told	him,	"Look!	I	am	not	even	a	professor,	I
have	not	written	a	treatise	on	Socrates,	and	they	have	expelled	me!"
And	 the	 reasons	 they	 gave	me	were:	 "You	 ask	 embarrassing	 questions	 of	 the
professors.
You	disturb	their	classes.	You	don't	allow	them	to	finish	their	syllabus	and	you
go	on	persisting	with	one	question	for	months	at	a	time."
And	 I	 said,	 "How	 can	 I	 drop	 the	 question	 unless	 it	 is	 answered?	 If	 it	 is	 not
answered,	then	what	are	months?	--	even	a	whole	life	has	to	be	devoted	to	it!"
And	 they	 said,	 "You	 may	 be	 right,	 but	 people	 have	 come	 here	 to	 get	 their
degrees.	 They	 are	 not	 interested	 in	 truth,	 nor	 are	 the	 professors	 interested	 in
truth.	Go	and	find	some	other	place."
And	 then	 no	 other	 university	 was	 ready	 to	 accept	me,	 because	 I	 had	 become
notorious!
One	 university	 accepted	 me	 on	 the	 condition	 that	 I	 would	 never	 ask	 any
question.	Now,	what	kind	of	universities	are	these?	So	when	the	vice-chancellor
said	 to	 me,	 "You	 have	 to	 put	 it	 in	 writing	 for	 me	 that	 you	 will	 not	 ask	 the
professors	any	questions,"	I	said,	"I	can	do	that,	but	then	you	have	to	understand
one	thing:	that	I	will	not	attend	the	classes.	But	you	have	to	give	me	permission
to	appear	 in	 the	examination,	because	 I	will	not	be	 fulfilling	 the	percentage	of
attendance	required	--	seventy-five	percent.	It	is	impossible."
He	said,	"Why?	Why	can't	you	attend	the	classes?"
I	said,	"If	I	attend	the	classes,	then	I	will	not	be	able	to	resist	the	temptation	to
ask	 questions!	 Then	 I	will	 ask	 questions.	 Either	 allow	me	 to	 ask	 questions	 or
give	 me	 the	 attendance	 mark;	 otherwise,	 what	 will	 be	 the	 point	 of	 my	 being
there?"
He	said,	"Okay,	we	will	give	you	the	attendance	mark."
So	 I	never	 attended	 the	 classes	 --	 it	was	 against	 the	 rules,	 but	 they	gave	me	a
ninety	percent	attendance	mark.	I	never	went	to	any	class,	because	one	thing	was
certain,	that	once	I	saw	a	professor	then	I	didn't	care	what	I	had	given	in	writing
--	I	HAD	to	ask	the	questions!
My	 father	used	 to	 tell	me	wherever	he	would	 take	me	with	him,	 "Keep	 silent,
don't	ask	any	question;	otherwise,	please	don't	come	with	me."
I	 would	 promise	 him	 that	 I	 would	 not	 ask	 the	 question,	 and	 I	 would	 ask	 the
question.	And	he	would	come	home	very	heated	--	"You	promised...!"
I	 said,	 "What	 can	 I	 do?	 I	 completely	 forget!	When	 I	 see	 stupid	people	 talking
about	great	things,	I	cannot	resist	--	I	simply	forget.	It	is	not	that	I	want	to	hurt
you	or	anything,	but	what	can	I	do?	That	man	was	talking	about	the	soul	being
immortal,	and	he	knows	nothing.	I	simply	asked	him,	Ìf	I	kill	you,	will	you	be
angry	or	not?	If	the	soul	is	immortal,	allow	me	to	kill	you!	At	least	allow	me	to
slap	you	--	what	to	say	about	killing!
The	soul	is	immortal!'	And	he	was	saying,	Ì	am	not	the	body.'	`So	perfectly	okay
--	I	slap	the	body,	and	you	are	not	the	body!'	And	he	became	angry,	and	you	are
also	becoming	angry.	 I	was	not	asking	anything	wrong,	 I	was	 simply	asking	a
question	that	HE	had	raised!"
People	go	on	talking	nonsense,	but	 this	whole	society	exists	for	 the	lowest,	for
the	mediocre.
I	 agree	 with	Mevlana	 --	MEVLANA	means	 the	 master.	 Jalaluddin	 Rumi	 was
called	Mevlana	by	his	disciples	out	of	great	love.	Mevlana	says:	COME,	EVEN
IF	YOU	HAVE	BROKEN	YOUR	VOW	A	THOUSAND	TIMES.
Intelligent	 people	 are	 bound	 to	 break	 all	 their	 vows	many	 times,	 because	 life
goes	 on	 changing,	 situations	 go	 on	 changing.	 And	 the	 vow	 is	 taken	 under
pressure	 --	 maybe	 the	 fear	 of	 hell,	 the	 greed	 for	 heaven,	 respectability	 in
society....	 It	 is	 not	 coming	 from	 your	 innermost	 core.	When	 something	 comes
from	your	own	inner	being,	it	is	never	broken.
But	then	it	is	never	a	vow,	it	is	a	simple	phenomenon	like	breathing.
COME,	COME,	YET	AGAIN	COME!
Govind,	if	you	want	to	be	a	sannyasin,	you	are	welcome.	Everybody	is	welcome,
without	 any	 conditions.	 You	 do	 not	 have	 to	 fulfill	 any	 requirements.	 Just	 the
longing	 to	 be	 in	 deep	 contact	with	me	 is	 enough,	more	 than	 enough.	 Just	 the
desire	to	be	close	to	me,	to	be	intimate	with	me	is	enough.	That's	what	sannyas	is
all	about.
And	drop	this	idea	of	being	a	sinner,	because	that	must	be	creating	some	guilt	in
you.
That	guilt	 is	one	of	the	oldest	tricks	of	the	priests	for	dominating	people.	They
create	guilt	in	you.	They	give	you	such	stupid	ideas	that	you	cannot	fulfill	them.
Then	guilt	arises,	and	once	the	guilt	has	arisen,	you	are	trapped.
Guilt	is	the	trade	secret	of	all	the	so-called,	established	religions.	Create	guilt	in
people,	make	 them	 feel	 bad	 about	 themselves.	Don't	 let	 them	be	 respectful	 of
their	own	lives;	let	them	feel	condemned.	Let	them	feel,	deep	down,	that	they	are
ugly,	that	they	are	not	of	any	worth,	that	they	are	dust,	and	then	of	course	they
will	be	ready	to	be	guided	by	any	fool.	They	will	be	more	than	ready	to	become
dependent,	in	the	hope	that	"somebody	will	lead	us	to	the	ultimate	light."	These
are	the	people	who	have	been	exploiting	you	for	centuries.
The	 time	 has	 come	 when	 a	 great	 rebellion	 is	 needed	 against	 all	 established
religions.
Religiousness	is	needed	in	the	world	but	no	more	religions	--	no	more	Hindus,
no	more	Christians,	no	more	Mohammedans	--	just	pure	religious	people,	people
who	have	great	respect	for	themselves.
And	 remember,	 only	 a	 person	who	 has	 respect	 for	 himself	 can	 respect	 others,
because	life	is	the	same.	If	you	are	too	hard	upon	yourself	you	will	be	more	hard
on	others,	obviously.
You	will	magnify	 their	sins;	you	have	 to,	 just	 to	give	yourself	consolation	 that
you	are	not	the	only	sinner,	there	are	greater	sinners	than	you.	That	will	be	your
only	 consolation	 in	 life:	 that	 you	 need	 not	worry,	 you	 are	 just	 a	 small	 sinner,
there	are	great	sinners.
That's	 why	 people	 go	 on	 creating	 rumors	 about	 everybody	 else.	 And	 people
believe	rumors	very	easily.	If	somebody	says	something	ugly,	derogatory	about	a
person,	 you	 immediately	 believe	 it.	 But	 if	 somebody	 praises	 him,	 you	 don't
believe	it,	you	ask	for	proofs.	You	never	ask	for	proofs	about	derogatory	remarks
and	rumors.	You	are	very	willing	to	believe	them	for	the	simple	reason	that	you
WANT	to	believe	that	"everybody	is	far	worse	than	I	am."	That's	the	only	way	to
feel	good,	a	little	bit	good,	about	yourself.
The	 priests	 have	 given	 you	 only	 two	 alternatives.	 Either	 you	 follow	 the
impossible	rules	that	they	impose;	then	you	feel	paralyzed,	crippled,	imprisoned.
Or,	if	you	want	to	live	a	life	of	freedom	and	you	want	to	be	natural,	guilt	arises.
In	both	ways	you	are	being	exploited.
I	am	here	to	free	you	from	all	exploitation.
Freedom	is	the	taste	of	sannyas,	the	fragrance	of	sannyas.	My	sannyasins	are	not
trying	to	cultivate	any	character,	they	are	trying	a	totally	different	phenomenon:
they	 are	 raising	 their	 consciousness.	 And	 then	 I	 leave	 everybody	 free	 to	 live
according	to	his	own	light.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	COME	TO	A	DEAD	END.	I	SEE	THE	IMPOTENCE	OF	THE	MIND
AND
FEEL	ALL	ACTION	USELESS.	DOES	THE	MIND	TOTALLY	DIE	ONLY	IN
samadhi?
PLEASE	 SAY	 SOMETHING	 ABOUT	 MIND	 AND	 ACTION	 IN
WITNESSING.
Vinod	Bharti,	you	say,	"I	have	come	to	a	dead	end"	--	but	I	don't	feel	it	so.	Not
yet,	because	when	you	really	come	to	a	dead	end,	a	transformation	immediately
happens.	You	are	coming	closer	to	it,	of	that	much	I	am	certain.	The	dead	end	is
not	far	away,	but	you	have	not	come	to	it	yet.	Your	whole	question	proves	it.
You	are	coming	closer,	you	are	feeling	intuitively	that	it	is	not	far	away	--	but	it
has	not	been	reached	yet.	Still,	there	is	hope.	Still,	deep	down,	you	are	dreaming
that	this	is	not	going	to	be	the	dead	end;	hence	the	question	arises.
You	say,	"I	see	the	impotence	of	the	mind...."	You	have	not	seen	it	yet,	you	only
think	you	have.	Seeing	and	thinking	are	totally	different,	but	one	can	get	mixed
up	very	easily.
Thinking	 can	 pretend	 to	 be	 seeing.	 You	 are	 not	 seeing	 the	 impotence	 of	 the
mind;	 otherwise	 even	 this	 question	 would	 not	 arise.	 If	 the	 mind	 is	 really
impotent,	what	can	it	ask?	What	can	it	think	about?	It	simply	falls	from	you,	it
withers	away.
But	the	shadow	is	on	you,	and	that's	a	good	sign.	The	day	is	not	far	away	when
you	 WILL	 see	 the	 impotence	 of	 the	 mind	 --	 and	 then	 immediately	 the
transformation.	 Then,	 immediately,	 a	 sudden	 enlightening	 experience.	 All
questions	 disappear,	 all	 answers	 disappear,	 because	 when	 the	 mind	 is	 seen,
REALLY	seen	as	impotent,	what	 is	 there	to	ask	and	what	 is	 there	to	find?	The
mind	simply	evaporates.	Then	 life	 is	 left,	pure	 life,	unhindered,	undistorted	by
the	mind.
Then	you	will	not	say	that	you	feel	all	action	useless.	If	you	see	the	impotence	of
the	mind,	the	mind	disappears	but	action	becomes	for	the	first	time	tremendously
beautiful.
There	is	no	question	of	utility	at	all.	Life	has	no	utility	in	itself.	What	is	the	use
of	a	 roseflower?	 --	but	still	 it	goes	on	growing,	still	 it	goes	on	opening,	still	 it
goes	on	releasing	its	fragrance.	What	is	the	use	of	it?	What	is	the	use	of	the	sun
rising	every	day?
Is	there	any	use	for	the	sun	itself?	What	is	the	use	of	the	starry	night?
The	word	"use"	is	part	of	the	paraphernalia	of	the	mind.	Mind	always	thinks	in
terms	of	utility.	The	mind	is	a	Jew;	it	always	thinks	in	terms	of	purpose,	profit,
utility.	When	the	mind	disappears,	action	does	not	disappear,	activity	disappears
--	and	there	is	a	great	difference	between	the	two.	Activity	has	utility;	action	is
pure	joy,	pure	beauty.	You	act	not	because	something	has	to	be	achieved,	you	act
because	action	is	a	dance,	is	a	song.
You	act	because	you	are	so	full	of	energy.
Have	you	watched	a	child	running	on	the	seabeach?	You	ask	him,	"Why	are	you
running?	What	is	the	purpose	of	your	running?	What	are	you	going	to	gain	out
of	it?"
Have	 you	 watched	 the	 child	 collecting	 seashells	 on	 the	 beach?	 You	 ask	 him,
"What	 is	 the	utility	of	 it	 all?	You	can	use	your	 time	 in	a	more	utilitarian	way.
Why	waste	your	time?"
The	child	is	not	concerned	about	utility	at	all,	he	is	enjoying	his	energy.	He	is	so
full	of	energy,	so	bubbling	with	energy	that	it	is	a	sheer	dance	--	any	excuse	will
do.	These	 are	 just	 excuses	 --	 seashells,	 pebbles,	 colored	 stones.	These	 are	 just
excuses	--	 the	sun,	 the	beautiful	beach...just	excuses	 to	run	and	 to	 jump	and	 to
shout	with	joy.	There	is	no	utility	at	all.
"Energy	is	delight"	--	that	is	a	statement	made	by	William	Blake,	one	of	the	most
mystical	poets	of	the	West.	Energy	IS	delight.	When	there	is	great	energy,	what
are	you	going	to	do	with	it?	It	is	bound	to	explode.
Action	 comes	 out	 of	 energy,	 out	 of	 delight.	Activity	 is	 businesslike.	Action	 is
poetry.
Activity	creates	a	bondage	because	it	is	result	oriented:	you	are	doing	it	not	for
its	own	sake,	you	are	doing	it	for	some	goal.	There	is	a	motive,	and	then	there	is
frustration.	Out	of	a	hundred	cases,	ninety-nine	 times	you	will	not	 achieve	 the
goal,	so	ninety-nine	times	you	will	be	in	misery,	frustration.	You	did	not	enjoy
the	activity	itself,	you	were	waiting	for	the	result.	Now	the	result	has	come,	and
ninety-nine	 times	out	 of	 a	 hundred	 there	 is	 frustration.	And	don't	 hope	 for	 the
remaining	one	percent,	because	when	you	achieve	 the	goal,	 there	 is	 frustration
also.	The	goal	is	achieved,	but	suddenly	you	realize	that	all	the	dreams	you	have
been	dreaming	about	the	goal	are	not	fulfilled.
You	have	achieved	 the	money,	but	where	 is	 the	 joy	 that	you	have	always	been
hoping	for	when	 the	money	was	 there?	You	have	 that	great	marble	palace,	but
you	are	the	same	poor	man	--	the	same	emptiness	inside,	the	same	hollowness.
You	 used	 to	 live	 in	 a	 hut,	 now	 you	 start	 living	 in	 a	 palace	 --	 but	 the	 SAME
person.	You	were	miserable	in	the	hut,	and	you	will	be	even	more	miserable	in
the	palace,	because	the	palace	has	more	space	and	of	course	when	there	is	more
space	you	will	be	more	miserable.	What	else	can	you	do	with	that	space?	All	that
you	know	is	how	to	be	miserable.
So	you	see	poor	people	and	you	see	rich	people.	The	only	difference	is	that	the
poor	 people	 are	 still	 hoping.	 There	 is	 hope,	 hence	 poor	 people	 are	 not	 so
frustrated.	Rich	people	have	 lost	 all	 their	 hopes;	 they	 are	more	 frustrated.	The
poor	person	can	still	dream
--	he	can	still	go	on	counting	in	his	mind	how	great	a	bank	balance	he	will	have
next	year	and	the	year	after.	Soon	the	day	will	come	when	he	will	be	rich	and	he
will	have	a	car	and	a	good	house	and	a	good	wife,	and	the	children	will	be	going
to	good	schools.	But	what	can	the	rich	man	dream?	All	that	he	can	dream	about
he	has	already,	and	nothing	is	happening	out	of	it.	The	money	is	there,	but	he	is
as	empty	as	ever.
There	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 poor	 people:	 the	 poor	 poor	 and	 the	 rich	 poor.	 And
remember,	the	second	category	is	far	worse.
Activity	means	there	is	a	goal;	activity	is	only	a	means	to	that	end.	Action	means
that	the	means	and	the	end	are	together	in	it.	That's	the	difference	between	action
and	activity.
Vinod	Bharti,	activity	will	become	useless,	but	then	action	arises	and	action	has
a	totally	different	dimension.	You	act	for	the	sheer	joy	of	acting.	For	example,	I
am	speaking	to	you	--	it	is	not	activity,	hence	I	am	not	concerned	with	the	result
at	all.	It	is	a	pure	act.	I	enjoy	communicating	with	you,	I	enjoy	communing	with
you.	I	am	grateful	to	you	that	you	allow	me.	If	you	don't	allow	me,	I	will	have	to
talk	to	the	trees	or	to	the	rocks,	or	I	will	have	to	talk	to	myself!	I	am	obliged	to
you;	you	need	not	be	obliged	to	me.	It	 is	a	pure	act.	There	is	something	in	me
that	wants	to	relate.	There	is	no	goal	orientation	--	I	am	not	expecting	anything
from	you.	 If	 something	happens,	good;	 if	nothing	happens,	even	better!	 If	you
become	enlightened,	good;	if	you	don't	become	enlightened,	far	out!	--
for	the	simple	reason	that	if	you	all	become	enlightened,	who	am	I	going	to	talk
to?	 So	 please,	 delay	 your	 enlightenment	 as	 long	 as	 you	 can	 --	 this	much	 of	 a
favor	you	have	to	do	for	me!	It	is	a	simple	act.	No	motive,	no	future	in	it	--	just
the	present.
Hence	I	am	not	trying	to	create	a	system	of	thought	--	I	cannot,	because	to	create
a	system	of	thought	you	have	to	be	motivated.	Then	you	have	to	link	everything
in	a	certain	logical	order.	I	can	enjoy	fragments.
When	P.	D.	Ouspensky	wrote	his	first	book	on	Gurdjieff,	he	gave	it	the	title	IN
SEARCH
OF	 THE	 MIRACULOUS.	 He	 was	 a	 man	 of	 a	 philosophic	 bent,	 a	 great
mathematician,	 logician	and	philosopher.	When	he	showed	the	book	to	George
Gurdjieff,	his	master,	Gurdjieff	just	looked	here	and	there	for	a	few	minutes	and
then	he	said,	"Give	it	a	subtitle	too:	FRAGMENTS	OF	A	TEACHING."
He	 was	 a	 little	 puzzled,	 because	 he	 had	 tried	 to	 make	 a	 whole	 system	 and
Gurdjieff	was	suggesting	an	extra	 title.	"The	main	 title,	 IN	SEARCH	OF	THE
MIRACULOUS,"
Gurdjieff	 said,	 "is	 okay,	 but	 it	 needs	 the	 subtitle,	 FRAGMENTS	 OF	 A
TEACHING	--	in	fact,	FRAGMENTS	OF	AN	UNKNOWN	TEACHING."
Ouspensky	asked,	"Why?"
Gurdjieff	 said,	 "Because	 I	 cannot	 create	 a	 system	 of	 thought	 --	 these	 are	 all
fragments."
And	you	 can	 see	 it	 happening	here.	You	 can	 collect	 all	my	 thoughts,	 but	 they
will	be	only	 fragments	 --	 fragments	but	not	 a	 system.	To	create	a	 system,	you
need	to	be	goal	oriented.	You	have	to	follow	a	certain	structure,	and	you	have	to
go	on	like	an	arrow	towards	a	target.
That	is	not	possible	either	for	a	man	like	me	or	Gurdjieff.	We	cannot	follow	any
goal.
Our	every	act	is	complete	in	itself,	entire	in	itself.	It	has	no	relationship	with	the
past	 and	 no	 relationship	with	 the	 future.	 It	 is	 total.	 If	 I	 die	 this	 very	moment,
there	will	be	no	desire	in	me	even	to	have	completed	the	sentence.
Action	 is	 an	 end	 unto	 itself;	 it	 has	 no	 utility.	 When	 the	 mind	 is	 seen	 to	 be
impotent,	the	mind	disappears.	In	that	very	seeing,	the	mind	disappears.	And,	of
course,	with	 it	 all	 utilitarian	 activities	will	 also	disappear,	 because	mind	 is	 the
cause	of	goal	orientation.	It	contains	all	your	motives.	It	contains	your	past	and
the	future;	it	does	not	contain	the	present	at	all.	And	when	there	is	no	mind,	all
that	 is	 left	 is	 pure	 present.	 You	 act	 moment	 to	moment,	 and	 each	moment	 is
enough	 unto	 itself.	Hence	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 statements	 of	 Jesus,	Buddha,	 Lao
Tzu,	because	each	statement	 is	 in	 itself	perfect,	 it	needs	nothing.	You	can	 take
any	statement	from	anywhere,	and	you	can	meditate	over	it	and	it	will	give	you
the	taste	of	TAO,	DHAMMA	--	truth.
Buddha	used	to	say	again	and	again	that	the	taste	of	the	sea	is	the	same.	You	can
taste	it	from	anywhere,	from	any	shore	--	the	taste	is	the	same.	This	shore	or	that
makes	no	difference.	Each	statement	of	a	buddha	has	the	taste	of	truth.	But	it	is
not	concerned	with	utility....
Vinod	Bharti,	you	are	feeling	in	an	intuitive	way	that	something	is	coming	closer
of	which	you	are	afraid:	"the	dead	end."	Everybody	becomes	afraid,	and	out	of
fear	 the	 question	 has	 arisen.	 You	 ask,	 "I	 have	 come	 to	 a	 dead	 end.	 I	 see	 the
impotence	of	the	mind	and	feel	all	action	useless.	Does	the	mind	totally	die	only
in	SAMADHI?"
Just	the	reverse	is	the	case:	when	the	mind	dies	totally,	what	is	left	is	samadhi.
So	I	cannot	say	that	 the	mind	dies	 totally	only	 in	samadhi;	 that	will	be	putting
things	upside	down.	The	mind	dies	first,	and	then	what	is	left	is	called	samadhi.
That	state	of	no-mind	is	called	samadhi.
But	the	death	of	the	mind	frightens,	scares	one.	That's	what	you	are	feeling:	the
shadow	of	death.	It	is	not	YOUR	death,	it	is	the	death	of	the	mind	which	is	not
you.	But	 for	many	 lives	we	 have	 lived	 identified	with	 the	mind,	 so	when	 the
death	of	the	mind	comes	closer	it	feels	as	if	WE	are	going	to	die.	It	is	not	a	dead
end	for	YOU,	it	is	certainly	a	dead	end	for	the	mind.	That	too	has	not	come	yet,
but	the	mind	is	freaking	out,	because	once	it	has	come,	then	there	is	no	way	out
for	the	mind.	If	it	can	escape	just	before	the	dead	end,	then	there	is	a	possibility
of	surviving...hence	the	question.
You	 say:	 "Please	 say	 something	 about	 mind	 and	 action	 in	 witnessing."	 In
witnessing,	 mind	 remains	 only	 as	 a	 biocomputer,	 a	 mechanism,	 but	 separate
from	you;	you	are	no	longer	identified	with	it.	When	you	want	any	memory	you
can	use	the	mind	just	as	you	can	put	on	your	tape	recorder.	Mind	is	REALLY	a
tape	 recorder.	 But	 it	 is	 not	 continuously	 on,	 not	 twenty-four	 hours	 on.	When
needed,	the	witness,	the	man	of	meditation,	the	man	of	awareness,	is	capable	of
putting	the	mind	on	or	off.	He	puts	it	on	when	there	is	some	need.
If	I	am	talking	to	you,	I	have	to	put	the	mind	on;	otherwise	language	will	not	be
possible.
No-mind	 is	 silent,	 there	 is	 no	 language;	 only	mind	 can	 supply	 the	 language.	 I
have	to	use	the	mind	to	relate	with	your	mind;	that's	the	only	way	to	relate	with
your	mind,	so	I	put	it	on.
When	I	go	back	and	sit	in	the	car,	I	put	it	off.	Before	Heeren	turns	the	ignition
on,	 I	 turn	 MY	 ignition	 off!	 In	 my	 room	 I	 don't	 need	 my	 mind.	 When	 my
secretary	comes	with	the	letters,	or	with	some	work,	I	say	to	her,	"Hello!"	And
inside	I	say,	"Hello,	mind.	My	secretary	has	come!"	Otherwise	there	is	no	need
for	the	mind.
When	you	are	witnessing,	 the	mind	 remains,	but	not	constantly	working.	Your
identity	is	broken.	You	are	the	watcher;	the	mind	is	the	watched.	It	is	a	beautiful
mechanism,	one	of	the	most	beautiful	mechanisms	that	nature	has	given	to	you.
So	you	 can	use	 it	when	needed	 for	 factual	memory	 --	 for	 phone	 numbers,	 for
addresses,	for	names,	for	faces....	It	is	a	good	tool,	but	that's	all	it	is.	It	need	not
sit	upon	you	continuously	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	Even	while	you	are	sleeping,
it	 is	 sitting	 on	 your	 chest	 torturing	 you,	 giving	 you	 nightmares.	 All	 kinds	 of
relevant	and	irrelevant	thoughts	go	on	and	on.
It	does	two	harms.	One:	you	lose	your	purity	of	witnessing,	you	don't	remain	a
mirror.
Your	 mirror	 becomes	 so	 covered	 with	 the	 dust	 of	 thoughts	 that	 you	 start
becoming	 closed	 to	 existence,	 you	 cannot	 reflect	 existence.	 The	 full	 moon	 is
there,	but	your	mirror	does	not	reflect	it.	How	many	people	are	there	who	see	the
full	moon?	Even	if	they	see	it,	they	don't	SEE	--	their	seeing	is	not	of	any	value.
They	 don't	 rejoice,	 they	 don't	 dance.	How	many	people	 are	 there	who	 see	 the
flowers?	Just	now	the	birds	are	singing,	but	how	many	people	are	there	who	are
aware	of	the	birds	and	the	wind	passing	through	the	trees?
When	the	mind	is	no	longer	hovering	over	you	continuously,	you	become	aware
of	 infinite	beauty,	of	 truth,	of	 the	celebration	 that	goes	on	and	on	 in	existence.
But	the	mind	is	there,	put	aside	--	you	can	put	it	on	when	needed.
And	when	activity	ceases,	action	is	born.	Action	means	response;	activity	means
reaction.
When	you	are	in	action,	it	means	the	mind	is	put	aside	and	your	consciousness	is
in	 a	 direct	 contact	 with	 existence;	 hence	 the	 response	 is	 immediate.	 Then
whatsoever	you	do	is	not	ready-made.	It	is	not	a	ready-made	answer	given	by	the
mind;	 you	 are	 responding	 to	 the	 reality	 as	 it	 is.	 Then	 there	 is	 beauty,	 because
your	action	is	true	to	the	situation.
But	 millions	 of	 people	 in	 the	 world	 are	 simply	 living	 through	 ready-made
answers.	They	are	already	carrying	the	answer;	 they	don't	 listen,	 they	don't	see
the	situation	confronting	them.	They	are	more	interested	in	the	answer	that	they
are	carrying	within	themselves	than	in	the	question	itself,	and	they	go	on	living
their	 answer	 again	 and	 again.	 That's	 why	 their	 life	 becomes	 a	 boredom,	 a
repetitive	boredom,	a	drag.	It	is	no	longer	a	dance,	it	cannot	be	a	dance.
Action	 is	a	dance;	activity	 is	a	drag.	Activity	 is	always	untrue	 to	 the	situation;
action	is	always	true	to	the	situation.	And	activity	is	always	inadequate	because
it	carries	an	answer	from	the	past,	and	life	goes	on	changing	every	moment,	so
whatsoever	you	bring	from	the	past	 is	never	adequate,	 it	always	falls	short.	So
whatsoever	you	do,	there	is	frustration;	you	feel	that	you	have	not	been	able	to
cope	with	 reality.	You	always	 feel	 something	 is	missing,	you	always	 feel	your
reaction	was	not	exactly	as	it	should	have	been.	And	the	reason	is	that	you	have
simply	 repeated,	 parrot-like,	 a	 ready-made	 answer,	 cheap	 but	 untrue	 --	 untrue
because	the	situation	is	new.
Vinod	 Bharti,	 the	 mind	 will	 be	 there	 but	 with	 a	 new	 status,	 with	 a	 new
functioning.	It	will	be	under	your	control:	you	will	be	the	master,	not	the	mind.
You	will	use	 it	when	 it	 is	needed;	you	will	not	use	 it	when	 it	 is	not	needed.	 It
cannot	insist	that	you	have	to	listen	to	it,	that	you	have	to	go	on	listening	to	it.
Even	if	you	are	sleeping,	 it	goes	on	knocking	on	your	doors;	 it	does	not	allow
you	even	to	have	a	beautiful	sleep.
The	 second	 loss	 is	 that	 because	 the	mind	 is	working	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day,
from	 the	 cradle	 to	 the	grave,	 it	 becomes	mediocre,	 it	 becomes	 stupid.	 It	 never
has	enough	energy,	it	becomes	very	weak;	hence	the	impotence.	If	the	mind	has
time	to	rest,	it	will	again	become	rejuvenated,	it	will	again	be	fresh.
The	 mind	 of	 a	 buddha	 is	 always	 fresh,	 it	 is	 always	 young.	 It	 is	 always
responding	with	 such	 freshness,	with	 such	newness	 that	 it	 seems	unbelievable.
Your	questions	may	be	the	same,	but	the	answers	of	a	buddha	always	have	a	new
nuance	 to	 them,	a	new	flavor,	a	new	fragrance.	You	can	go	on	 listening	 to	 the
buddha	 for	 years,	 and	 still	 you	 will	 remain	 enchanted.	 Even	 if	 he	 repeats
something	it	 is	never	 the	same	--	 the	context	 is	different,	 the	color	 is	different,
the	meaning	is	different.
The	mind	will	be	there,	more	alive,	more	potent,	more	restful,	younger,	fresher	--
not	your	master	but	a	good	servant,	an	obedient	servant.	Activity	will	disappear
totally;	there	will	arise	action.
Action	means	 there	 is	 no	 goal	 to	 it.	 Just	 as	 the	 poets	 say	 "poetry	 for	 poetry's
sake"	or	"art	for	art's	sake,"	the	same	is	the	situation	with	the	mystic.	His	action
is	 for	 action's	 sake;	 there	 is	 no	 other	 goal	 to	 it.	He	 enjoys	 it	 just	 like	 a	 small
child,	innocently	he	enjoys	it.
Vinod	 Bharti,	 witnessing	 is	 the	 miracle	 that	 changes	 everything	 in	 your	 life.
Then	the	dead	end	is	only	a	new	beginning,	a	death	and	a	birth	--	the	death	of	the
old,	 a	 total	 death;	 a	 discontinuity	 with	 the	 old,	 and	 the	 arrival	 of	 something
absolutely	unknown,	 the	arrival	of	 the	new.	 It	 is	a	 resurrection	 --	a	crucifixion
and	a	resurrection.	But	the	resurrection	is	possible	only	after	crucifixion.
The	dead	end	is	going	to	come,	but	it	is	the	beginning	also.	And	you	will	see	the
beginning	 immediately,	when	 the	 dead	 end	 has	 come.	 If	 you	 are	 just	 thinking
about	it,	that	it	is	coming,	it	is	coming...the	mind	can	even	say,	"It	has	come	--
beware,	escape!
While	there	is	time,	run	away!"	Then	you	will	miss	the	other	side	of	it.	You	will
see	only	the	cross,	you	will	miss	the	resurrection.
You	are	 thinking	 the	mind	 is	 impotent.	Your	 thinking	 is	on	 the	 right	 track,	but
thinking	will	not	help,	SEEING	is	needed.	Become	a	witness	so	that	you	can	see
that	the	mind	is	impotent.	FEEL	that	activities	are	useless,	but	not	action.	Action
continues.	 Buddha	 lived	 for	 forty-two	 years	 after	 his	 enlightenment.	 Action
continued,	activities	disappeared.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
PLEASE,	A	FEW	JOKES	TO	TAKE	BACK	TO	ENGLAND.
Veetam,	 I	 am	perfectly	willing,	 but	 you'd	 better	 go	 to	 France	 or	 to	 Italy	 or	 to
America.
Taking	jokes	to	England	is	absolutely	futile!	They	will	think	you	are	mad.	Take
something	serious	for	those	people,	something	gloomy	like	their	climate,	with	no
sun	shining,	all	clouds.	Take	an	umbrella	with	you!	And	if	you	don't	know	how
to	be	really	English,	meet	Proper	Sagar	--	take	a	few	lessons	from	him.	He	is	so
proper	that	even	though	he	has	been	living	here	for	seven	years,	I	have	not	been
able	to	destroy	his	Englishman.
Ordinarily	 I	never	 feel	hopeless,	but	when	 I	 look	at	Proper	Sagar	 sometimes	 I
suspect	 that	 maybe	 with	 Sagar	 I	 have	 to	 feel	 hopeless.	 He	 is	 such	 a	 perfect
English	gentleman!
Veetam,	first	look	at	him...!	As	for	the	jokes,	a	story	about	Jesus'	birth....
After	Jesus	was	born,	Joseph	went	with	Mary	to	visit	the	in-laws.
"We	live	in	Nazareth	now,"	said	Mary.	"The	baby	was	born	in	Bethlehem	just	a
few	days	ago,	in	a	farmer's	barn	because	we	couldn't	find	a	room!"
"You	mean	with	all	the	livestock?"	exclaimed	Mary's	mother.
"That's	right,"	replied	Mary,	"and	just	as	he	was	born,	three	old	men	appeared."
"Three	drunks,"	explained	Joseph.
"And	three	shepherds,"	continued	Mary.
"And	they	got	drunk,	too!"	explained	Joseph.
"You	mean,	you	all	got	drunk?"	said	Mary's	father,	shocked.
"That's	right!"	said	Joseph.
Joseph	must	have	been	a	drunkard.	Jesus	himself	remained	a	drunkard	his	whole
life.
Those	 three	 wise	 men	 from	 the	 East...and	 Joseph	 says,	 "There	 were	 three
drunkards,	three	drunks."
An	American	and	a	Frenchman	are	discussing	how	many	love-making	positions
there	are.	After	much	talk,	they	decide	to	enumerate	them.
The	American	begins	by	saying	that	there	are	one	hundred	positions.	In	the	first
one,	the	woman	lies	on	her	back	and	the	man	rests	on	top	of	her.
"Voila!"	cries	the	Frenchman.	"That	makes	one	hundred	and	one!"
One	can	always	miss	the	obvious!
And	the	last....
The	 Vatican	 announced	 that	 the	 pope	 was	 to	 visit	 one	 of	 the	 few	 Catholic
churches	in	Poland.	The	local	priest	arranged	for	all	the	strong	believers	from	his
community	to	clean	and	make	the	place	tidy.	The	church	was	blessed	to	have	a
special	relic	from	the	time	of	Christ:	a	bunch	of	St.	Peter's	pubic	hairs.	One	of
the	helpers,	thinking	it	was	rubbish,	threw	it	away.
When	 the	priest	did	a	 last	minute	check	of	 the	precious	 relic	before	 the	pope's
arrival,	 he	was	 shocked	 to	 find	 that	 the	 "holy	 remembrance"	 had	 disappeared.
Desperate,	he	reached	beneath	his	robe	and	grabbed	a	few	of	his	own	to	place	in
the	box.
The	priest	was	guiding	 the	pope	 through	 the	church.	When	 they	arrived	at	 the
box	containing	the	relic,	he	said,	"And	this,	Your	Holiness,	is	our	most	holy	gift
from	God!"
"Ugh!"	groaned	 the	pope	when	he	 smelt	 it.	 "You	can	 still	 tell	 our	Peter	was	 a
fisherman!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	From	the	Body	to	the	Soul
28	October	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8010280
ShortTitle:
COME02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	and	Q4	on	video
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
JESUS	 SAYS,	 "SEEK	 AND	 YOU	 WILL	 FIND."	 DOES	 A	 DESIRELESS
SEARCH
EXIST?
Bernd,	Jesus	was	in	a	very	unfortunate	situation:	he	had	learned	all	the	secrets	in
the	East	and	he	was	introducing	something	that	had	never	existed	in	the	Jewish
tradition	before	--
that	was	his	 crime.	The	orthodox,	 the	 traditional,	 the	 conventional	mind	 could
not	understand	him.
Lao	Tzu	was	far	more	fortunate	--	he	had	the	right	people	to	talk	to.	Buddha	was
blessed
--	 he	 could	 say	 things	 in	 as	 subtle	 a	way	 as	 possible.	 In	 that	 sense	 Jesus	was
hoping	against	hope.	It	was	a	great	challenge	and	he	took	the	risk	--	he	sacrificed
his	 life.	But	he	was	misunderstood:	 it	was	bound	 to	happen,	 it	was	 inevitable.
Whenever	you	introduce	a	new	truth,	you	have	to	suffer	for	it,	but	it	is	a	joy	to
suffer	in	the	service	of	truth.
Jesus	could	not	even	say	the	whole	truth	--	that	would	have	been	too	much.	So
whatsoever	statements	have	come	down	in	 the	name	of	Jesus	are	only	half	 the
story;	 the	other	half	has	never	been	 told.	 Jesus	could	not	 say	 it	because	of	 the
Jews	he	was	surrounded	with,	and	Christians	have	been	clinging	 to	 those	half-
truths	for	two	thousand	years.
For	 example,	 this	 statement	 is	only	 a	half-truth:	 "Seek	and	ye	 shall	 find."	The
other	half,	which	has	been	said	by	Lao	Tzu,	is	far	more	important;	without	it	the
first	half	becomes	not	only	meaningless	but	dangerous.	Lao	Tzu	says,	"Do	not
seek	 and	 you	 will	 find.	 Do	 not	 seek	 and	 you	 have	 found	 it	 already."	 Both
statements	will	look	contradictory	to	each	other;	they	are	not.
The	beginning	of	the	pilgrimage	starts	with	searching,	seeking,	inquiring;	there
is	no	other	way	to	begin.	Unless	you	inquire	what	is	the	meaning	of	life,	unless
you	go	in	search	of	the	essential	core	of	existence,	you	will	never	move,	you	will
not	even	take	the	first	step.	Hence,	the	search	has	to	begin.	But	if	you	continue
searching	 forever	 and	 ever,	 if	 your	 search	 never	 comes	 to	 an	 end,	 you	 will
remain	in	the	mind.	It	is	the	mind	which	searches.
Search	is	also	a	subtle	desire.	Even	the	inquiry	into	knowing	is	ambitious.	The
very	 desire	 to	 achieve	 something	 --	 money,	 power,	 prestige,	 meditation,	 God,
whatsoever	it	is,	any	desire,	any	ambition	--	leads	you	into	the	future;	it	distracts
you	from	the	present.
And	the	present	is	the	only	reality,	the	only	truth	there	is.
The	 person	who	 never	 begins	 the	 search	will	 remain	 unconscious;	 the	 person
who	always	remains	in	the	search	will	go	crazy.	The	search	has	to	begin	so	that
you	become	a	little	more	alert,	a	little	more	observant,	vigilant,	aware.	And	then
the	 search	 has	 to	 be	 dropped	 so	 that	 you	 become	 silent,	 so	 that	 the	 mind
disappears,	 so	 that	 the	 future	 evaporates	 and	 you	 are	 simply	 herenow,	 neither
seeking	nor	searching.	In	that	stillness	of	no-search,	truth	is	found.
And	Lao	Tzu	is	right	when	he	says,	"Seek	and	ye	shall	miss.	Seek	not	and	find
immediately."	 But	 his	 statement	 is	 the	 second	 part	 of	 the	 journey.	 Jesus	 was
speaking	to	the	beginners;	he	is	like	a	primary	school	teacher.	Lao	Tzu	is	talking
to	the	adepts,	to	those	who	have	come	a	long	way;	he	is	talking	to	the	initiates.
He	is	talking	to	people	who	can	understand	the	joy	of	not	searching,	the	stillness,
the	tranquility,	the	calmness	of	simply	being	--	no	ambition,	no	desire,	no	future,
no	time,	no	mind.
Bernd,	Jesus'	statement	is	only	half	of	the	truth,	and	the	beginning	half.	It	is	good
for	those	who	have	not	started	the	journey.	It	 is	meaningless,	and	not	only	that
but	 harmful,	 for	 those	 who	 have	 started	 the	 journey	 and	 who	 are	 coming	 to
realize	the	utter	futility	of	all	search.
The	 truth	 is	within	 you,	 and	 every	 search	means	 going	 out,	 going	 somewhere
else,	 leaving	 your	 home.	When	you	drop	 searching	 you	will	 come	back	 home
naturally,	spontaneously;	you	will	settle	at	the	very	core	of	your	being.
You	also	ask,	"Does	a	desireless	search	exist?"
No.	All	search	is	a	manifestation	of	desire.	But	there	is	something	like	a	state	of
consciousness	which	 can	be	 called	non-searching,	non-seeking,	 a	 state	of	 total
rest.	In	that	total	rest	is	samadhi.	In	that	absolute	tranquility	is	realization.
Sylvia	Moses	has	asked	a	similar	question....	She	says,	"For	many	years	I	have
been	 wondering	 what	 the	 difference	 is	 between	 spirituality	 and	 religiousness.
Until	now	I	have	been	unsuccessful	in	obtaining	an	answer.	Can	you	tell	me?"
Sylvia,	the	statement	of	Jesus,	"Seek	and	ye	shall	find,	ask	and	it	shall	be	given
to	you,	knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you,"	contains	religiousness.
Lao	Tzu's	 statement:	 "Seek	not	 and	 find	 immediately,"	 or	Rabiya	 al-Adabiya's
statement	to	Hassan....
Hassan	was	a	Sufi	seeker;	Rabiya	was	a	Sufi	master.	Every	day	Rabiya	used	to
pass	through	the	marketplace,	and	she	would	see	Hassan	kneeling	down	in	front
of	the	mosque	and	praying	to	God	with	raised	hands:	"My	Lord,	how	long	have	I
to	ask	you?	Open	thy	doors	so	that	I	can	enter!"
Rabiya	 had	 heard	 this	 prayer	 thousands	 of	 times.	 One	 day	 she	 came	 up	 to
Hassan,	shook	him	out	of	his	prayer	and	shouted	at	him,	"Stop	all	this	nonsense.
The	doors	are	always	open!	Why	don't	you	enter?"
And	it	was	a	great	revelation	to	Hassan.	Suddenly	he	realized	what	he	had	been
asking:
"Lord,	open	thy	doors	so	that	I	can	enter!"	And	Rabiya	was	saying,	"The	doors
are	 always	 open,	God	 has	 never	 closed	 them.	 If	 you	want	 to	 enter,	 enter,	 but
don't	 go	 on	 playing	with	 this	 stupid	 prayer	 again	 and	 again.	Don't	waste	 your
time	and	don't	waste	his	time!	If	you	want	to	enter,	enter;	otherwise	go	home!	I
don't	want	to	see	you	sitting	here	in	front	of	the	mosque	again!"
Hassan	was	shocked,	bewildered.	But	it	was	the	right	moment,	because	when	a
person	like	Rabiya	says	something	to	somebody	it	is	always	at	the	right	moment
--	when	the	person	is	ready	to	understand.	He	understood,	he	followed	Rabiya.
He	 touched	 her	 feet	 and	 thanked	 her,	 and	 told	 her,	 "You	 are	 right.	 I	 was	 just
being	a	fool!	I	wasted	my	life!"
Rabiya	said,	"Stop!	Don't	talk	nonsense	again!	It	has	not	been	a	wastage.	If	you
had	not	prayed	all	 these	years	here	you	would	not	have	understood	me.	 It	 has
helped.	It	has	not	helped	God	to	open	the	doors	because	the	doors	are	open,	but
it	has	helped	you	to	understand	my	statement	that	the	doors	are	open	for	you	to
enter.	 I	cannot	say	this	 thing	to	anybody	else	 in	 this	 town;	only	you	were	ripe.
The	spring	has	come	only	to	you,	that's	why	the	flower	has	blossomed."
Sylvia,	religiousness	means	the	circumference,	and	spirituality	means	the	center.
Religiousness	 has	 something	 of	 spirituality,	 but	 only	 something	 --	 a	 vague
radiation,	 something	 like	a	 reflection	 in	 the	 lake	of	 the	starry	night,	of	 the	 full
moon.	Spirituality	is	the	real	thing;	religiousness	is	just	a	by-product.
And	one	of	the	greatest	misfortunes	that	has	happened	to	humanity	is	that	people
are	 being	 told	 to	 be	 religious	 not	 spiritual.	 Hence	 they	 start	 decorating	 their
circumference,	 they	 cultivate	 character.	 Character	 is	 your	 circumference.	 By
painting	 your	 circumference,	 the	 center	 is	 not	 changed.	But	 if	 you	 change	 the
center,	the	circumference	automatically	goes	through	a	transformation.
Change	 the	 center	 --	 that	 is	 spirituality.	 Spirituality	 is	 an	 inner	 revolution.	 It
certainly	affects	your	behavior,	but	only	as	a	by-product.	Because	you	are	more
alert,	 more	 aware,	 so	 naturally	 your	 action	 is	 different,	 your	 behavior	 has	 a
different	quality,	a	different	flavor,	a	different	beauty.	But	vice	versa	does	not....
If	 your	 body	 is	 healthy	 then	 your	 lips	 are	 red,	 but	 you	 can	 paint	 them	 with
lipstick	and	they	will	look	red	--	and	ugly.	A	woman	with	lipstick	is	the	ugliest
woman	possible.	 I	sometimes	wonder	who	she	 is	 trying	 to	deceive!	Her	whole
face	is	saying	something	else,	her	whole	body	is	saying	something	else,	and	her
lips	are	so	red....	Such	redness	does	not	happen	naturally;	they	are	painted.
But	there	are	fools	in	the	world	--	she	will	find	some	fool	to	kiss	those	painted
lips	too!
I	 cannot	 believe	 it!	 --	 just	 try	 tasting	 lipstick	 and	 you	will	 understand	what	 I
mean	 when	 I	 say	 I	 cannot	 believe	 it!	 And	 layers	 and	 layers	 of	 lipstick,	 old,
rotten!
People	 are	 living	 with	 painted	 faces,	 wearing	masks.	 These	 people	 are	 called
religious.
Christians,	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	Jainas	--	these	are	religious	people.	Buddha,
Jesus,	Zarathustra,	Krishna,	Lao	Tzu	--	these	people	are	spiritual.
Spirituality	 belongs	 to	 your	 essential	 being,	 and	 religiousness	 only	 to	 the
outermost:	 actions,	 behavior,	 morality.	 Religiousness	 is	 formal;	 going	 to	 the
church	every	Sunday	is	a	social	affair.	The	church	is	nothing	but	a	kind	of	club,	a
Rotary	Club,	a	Lions	Club	--
and	 there	 are	 many	 clubs.	 The	 church	 is	 also	 a	 club,	 but	 with	 religious
pretensions.
The	spiritual	person	belongs	to	no	creed,	to	no	dogma.	He	cannot	belong	to	any
church,	Hindu,	Christian,	Mohammedan...it	 is	 impossible	 for	 him	 to	belong	 to
any.
Spirituality	is	one;	religions	are	many.
My	insistence	here	is	on	inner	transformation.
I	don't	teach	you	religion,	I	teach	you	spirituality.
I	 can	 understand,	 Sylvia,	why	 you	were	 unable	 to	 find	 any	 answer.	You	must
have	been	asking	 the	religious	people	 --	 the	Christians,	 the	bishops,	 the	popes,
the	priests,	or	the	rabbis.	They	will	give	you	answers	because	they	are	supposed
to	know.	They	know	nothing;	they	are	just	supposed	to	know.
"Rabbi,"	asked	Little	Saul	one	day,	"why	do	coachmen	have	brown,	white,	red	or
black	beards,	but	never	green	ones?"
"I	have	to	ponder	on	this,"	replied	the	rabbi.
"Rabbi,"	asked	Little	Saul	again,	 "why	do	you	always	chain	 the	horse	with	 its
tail	towards	the	carriage	instead	of	its	head?"
"I	have	to	think	about	this,"	replied	the	rabbi.
Next	day	 the	 rabbi	 saw	Little	Saul	and	 told	him,	"I	have	 found	 the	solution	 to
both	 your	 questions:	 if	 the	 beard	 of	 a	 coachman	 were	 green	 and	 you	 put	 the
horse	with	 its	 head	 towards	 the	 carriage,	 the	 horse	might	 think	 the	 beard	was
grass	and	eat	it!"
The	rabbis,	the	priests,	the	bishops	--	they	are	supposed	to	know	everything.	You
can	ask	any	question,	sensible	or	not	so	sensible,	making	some	sense	or	making
no	sense	at	all,	but	 they	will	answer.	 It	 is	 their	business	 to	answer	all	kinds	of
stupid	questions.
You	must	have	been	asking	these	people,	Sylvia,	 that's	why	you	have	not	been
successful	in	obtaining	an	answer.	They	don't	have	the	answer.	Only	a	Jesus	can
answer	 your	 question,	 or	 a	 Buddha	 or	 a	 Kabir	 or	 a	 Nanak	 --	 somebody	 who
knows	 life	 from	 his	 innermost	 being,	 who	 has	 come	 to	 know	 the	 eternal	 in
himself.
Spirituality	belongs	to	the	eternal,	and	religion	belongs	to	the	temporal.	Religion
belongs	 to	 people's	 behavior.	 It	 is	 really	 what	 Pavlov,	 Skinner,	 Delgado	 and
others	call	a	conditioning	of	the	behavior.	The	child	is	brought	up	by	Christians	-
-	then	he	is	conditioned	in	one	way,	he	becomes	a	Christian.	Or	he	is	brought	up
by	 Hindus	 --	 he	 is	 conditioned	 in	 another	 way,	 he	 becomes	 a	 Hindu.	 His
conditioning	 is	 an	 imprisonment;	 he	will	 remain	 a	Hindu.	He	will	 think	 like	 a
Hindu	or	 a	Christian	his	whole	 life.	And	 those	 thoughts	 are	not	 his	 own,	 they
have	 been	 put	 into	 his	 head	 by	 others	 --	 by	 the	 vested	 interests,	 by	 the
establishment,	by	 the	 state,	by	 the	church.	They	have	 their	own	 interests:	 they
want	 to	 dominate	 you.	And	 the	 best	way	 to	 dominate	 you	 is	 to	 condition	 you
from	the	very	beginning	so	deeply	that	you	start	thinking	that	this	conditioning	is
what	you	are.
You	 are	 not	 a	 Christian,	 or	 a	 Hindu,	 or	 a	 Mohammedan.	 You	 are	 born	 as	 a
spiritual	 being	 and	 then	 you	 become	 a	 victim	 of	 your	 parents,	 teachers	 and
priests.	And	of	course	these	parents,	these	teachers	and	these	priests	go	on	telling
you,	"Respect	your	parents,	 respect	your	 teachers,	 respect	your	priests."	 If	you
don't	 respect	 them	 you	 will	 fall	 into	 hell;	 if	 you	 respect	 them,	 then	 all	 the
pleasures	of	heaven	are	yours.	This	 is	a	simple	psychological	strategy	 to	make
you	afraid	and	to	make	you	greedy.	These	are	the	two	things	people	are	ruled	by:
fear	and	greed.	And	the	spiritual	person	is	one	who	is	free	of	both.
Just	a	few	days	ago	I	talked	about	one	friend,	Ajai	Krishna	Lakanpal.	He	wanted
to	take	sannyas	one	month	ago,	but	he	wrote	to	me	saying,	"I	am	ready	to	take
sannyas	today	if	you	say	so;	otherwise,	I	will	feel	happier	taking	sannyas	on	the
twenty-fifth	of	October,	on	my	birthday.	 I	want	 to	ask	my	mother.	 I	know	she
will	allow	it,	she	will	not	prevent	me."
So	I	said,	"Okay,	ask	your	mother."	And	his	mother	has	not	prevented	him,	she
has	 permitted	 him	 to	 take	 sannyas.	 Of	 course	 she	 said,	 "I	 will	 not	 feel	 very
happy,	but	if	you	are	feeling	good	about	it	you	can	take	sannyas."
Now	he	has	written	to	me:	"My	mother	will	not	feel	happy,	that's	why	I	cannot
take	sannyas."	First	it	was	the	permission	of	the	mother;	now	the	permission	is
there	but	the	mother	will	not	feel	happy.
Just	a	few	days	ago	I	discussed	it,	and	he	became	very	angry.	He	wrote	an	angry
letter	to	me.	A	few	points	which	he	has	written	are	worth	considering	--	it	shows
how	people	are	being	conditioned.	The	first	thing	he	was	angry	about	was	that	I
told	you	he	is	forty-five	years	old.	He	was	angry	because	he	is	only	thirty-six.	It
does	not	matter	 --	 forty-five	or	 thirty-six,	how	does	 it	matter?	But	 the	anger	 is
caused	by	something	else;	this	is	just	an	excuse	to	find	some	fault.
I	was	informed	wrongly,	so	now	I	am	putting	it	right.	Ajai	Krishna,	you	are	not
forty-five,	 you	 are	 twenty-seven...forty-five	plus	 twenty-seven	divided	by	 two,
and	you	will	be	thirty-six	--	exactly	thirty-six!
And	again	he	goes	on	rationalizing.	He	says,	"My	old	master,	Kamu	Baba,	has
said,
`Never	hurt	the	feelings	of	your	parents.	If	you	hurt	the	feelings	of	your	parents,
then	no	master	can	ever	help	you.'"
True.	 But	 are	 you	 sure,	Ajai	Krishna,	 that	 you	 are	 not	 hurting	 the	 feelings	 of
your	parents?
He	himself	writes	in	his	letter:	"My	father	died	and	I	feel	guilty	because	I	am	an
alcoholic	and	I	did	not	listen	to	him.	I	continued	to	drink	too	much,	and	he	died.
And	now	I	feel	guilty	that	I	was	not	up	to	his	standards."
Did	you	not	 remember	your	Kamu	Baba's	 statement?	Now,	do	you	 think,	Ajai
Krishna,	your	mother	is	happy	with	your	alcoholism?	Are	you	not	hurting	your
mother	by	drinking	 too	much?	But	 that	problem	does	not	arise.	The	 father	has
died,	the	son	feels	guilty	and	still	he	continues	to	drink	--	maybe	a	little	more	so
that	 he	 does	 not	 feel	 guilty.	The	mother	 is	 old,	 sixty-eight,	 or	maybe	 seventy-
eight	--	because	again	it	 is	my	secretary	who	has	informed	me!	Is	your	mother
very	 happy	 with	 your	 alcoholism?	 Are	 you	 not	 hurting	 her?	 Do	 you	 think
alcohol	can	help	when	you	hurt	your	mother?	A	master	cannot	help,	that	is	true	-
-	Kamu	Baba	must	be	right.	But	can	alcohol	help?
And	not	only	 that,	he	quotes	 the	KORAN.	He	says,	"In	 the	KORAN	it	 is	said,
`Don't	hurt	your	parents.	To	be	surrendered	to	your	parents,	to	sit	at	their	feet,	is
to	be	in	paradise.'"
And	 do	 you	 think,	 Ajai	 Krishna,	 that	 the	 KORAN	 says	 to	 go	 on	 drinking	 as
much	as	you	want?	The	KORAN	also	 says	 that	 if	you	drink	you	will	 fall	 into
hell!	So	you	choose	only	that	part	of	the	Koran	which	helps	you	to	do	what	you
want	to	do.
He	also	quotes	Jewish	scriptures,	 that	 they	too	say	to	respect	your	parents.	But
they	 are	 all	 against	 alcohol.	 If	 you	 really	 respect	 your	 mother,	 then	 give	 one
proof:	stop	drinking.
If	 you	 really	 want	 to	 make	 her	 happy,	 stop	 drinking.	 That	 will	 be	 proof;
otherwise	 this	 is	 sheer	 playing	 with	 words,	 rationalization.	 Neither	 are	 you
interested	 in	 Kamu	 Baba,	 nor	 are	 you	 interested	 in	 your	 father,	 nor	 are	 you
interested	in	your	mother.	Your	whole	interest	is:	you	are	afraid	of	sannyas.
And	the	last	thing	which	he	says	in	his	letter	is:	"It	is	not	true	that	I	am	afraid	of
sannyas.
It	is	because	of	compassion	for	my	mother."	And	by	being	an	alcoholic	you	are
being	very	compassionate	to	your	mother...?
But	 all	 the	 religions	 down	 the	 ages	 have	 been	 teaching	 you	 to	 respect	 your
parents.	Why?
Why	 do	 the	 religions	 teach	 that?	 It	 is	 a	 subtle	 strategy	 of	 exploitation.	 Your
religion	 has	 been	 given	 to	 you	 by	 your	 parents,	 and	 if	 you	 go	 against	 your
religion,	they	will	be	hurt.
If	a	Hindu	declares,	"I	am	simply	a	human	being,	no	longer	a	Hindu,"	the	parents
will	be	hurt.	So	the	parents	have	also	taught	him	to	respect	them	and	believe	in
whatsoever	 they	 have	 said	 --	 they	 cannot	 be	 wrong.	 As	 if	 your	 parents	 are
enlightened	people!	As	if	your	parents	know	what	they	are	doing!	Their	parents
did	the	same	thing	to	them,	they	have	done	it	to	you,	and	you	will	do	it	to	your
children.	This	 is	 how	diseases	 go	 on	 being	 transferred	 from	one	 generation	 to
another	generation.
Of	 course	 the	 priests	 will	 say,	 "Respect	 your	 parents,"	 because	 there	 is	 a
conspiracy.	 The	 conspiracy	 is	 that	 all	 their	 interests	 are	 involved	 together	 in
keeping	hold	of	you.
To	be	my	sannyasin	means	to	be	a	rebel.	I	am	not	saying	to	hurt	the	feelings	of
your	parents,	 I	 am	 saying	 to	be	yourself.	Be	 lovingly	yourself,	 be	 respectfully
yourself.	There	is	no	need	to	go	out	of	your	way	to	hurt	your	parents,	but	if	they
don't	allow	you	to	be	yourself	then	it	is	their	responsibility.	If	they	feel	hurt,	that
is	their	responsibility,	not	yours.	Don't	harm	them,	but	don't	harm	yourself	either,
because	 your	 first	 responsibility	 is	 towards	 your	 own	 self;	 everything	 else	 is
secondary.
But	man's	mind	is	very	cunning:	he	will	hide	his	cowardice	in	the	beautiful	word
"compassion";	he	will	rationalize	everything.
Sylvia,	your	religions	are	nothing	but	the	rationalizations	of	fear,	of	greed.	They
are	conspiracies	against	you	by	the	establishment,	by	the	people	who	are	ruling
you	politically,	 religiously,	philosophically,	 in	every	way	 --	by	 the	people	who
have	reduced	humanity	to	a	great	concentration	camp.
And	 you	 must	 have	 asked	 these	 people,	 "What	 is	 the	 difference	 between
spirituality	and	religiousness?"	They	cannot	say	--	they	don't	know	themselves.
Spirituality	 is	rebellion;	religiousness	 is	orthodoxy.	Spirituality	 is	 individuality;
religiousness	 is	 just	 remaining	 part	 of	 the	 crowd	 psychology.	 Religiousness
keeps	you	a	sheep,	and	spirituality	is	a	lion's	roar.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	THAT	YOUR	SANNYASINS	CELEBRATE	DEATH.
Paul,	you	have	heard	rightly!	My	sannyasins	celebrate	everything.	Celebration	is
the	 foundation	of	my	sannyas	 --	not	 renunciation	but	 rejoicing;	 rejoicing	 in	all
the	beauties,	all	 the	 joys,	all	 that	 life	offers,	because	 this	whole	 life	 is	a	gift	of
God.
The	 old	 religions	 have	 taught	 you	 to	 renounce	 life.	They	 are	 all	 life	 negative;
their	whole	approach	is	pessimistic.	They	are	all	against	life	and	its	joys.	To	me,
life	and	God	are	synonymous.	 In	 fact,	 life	 is	a	 far	better	word	 than	God	 itself,
because	God	is	only	a	philosophical	term,	while	life	is	real,	existential.	The	word
"God"	exists	only	in	scriptures;	it	is	a	word,	a	mere	word.	Life	is	within	you	and
without	you	--	in	the	trees,	in	the	clouds,	in	the	stars.	This	whole	existence	is	a
dance	of	life.
I	teach	love	for	life.
I	 teach	 the	 art	 of	 living	 your	 life	 totally,	 of	 being	 drunk	 with	 the	 divine
THROUGH	life.	I	am	not	an	escapist.	All	your	old	religions	have	been	teaching
you	escapism	--	they	were	all	in	a	certain	sense	hip.	The	word	"hippie"	has	to	be
understood.	It	simply	means	one	who	escapes	from	the	battle	of	life,	who	shows
his	hips...!	All	your	old	religions	are	hippie!	They	have	shown	their	hips.	They
could	not	accept	the	challenge	of	life,	they	could	not	confront	and	encounter	life.
They	were	cowards;	they	escaped	to	the	mountains,	to	the	monasteries.
But	 even	 if	you	escape	 to	 the	mountains	 and	 to	 the	monasteries,	 how	can	you
leave	 yourself	 behind?	 You	 are	 part	 of	 life.	 Life	 pulsates	 in	 your	 blood,	 life
breathes	 in	you,	 life	 is	your	very	being!	Where	can	you	escape?	And	all	 those
efforts	to	escape,	considered	correctly,	are	suicidal.	Your	monks,	your	nuns,	your
mahatmas,	 your	 so-called	 saints,	 were	 all	 suicidal	 people;	 they	 were	 trying
gradual	suicide.	Not	only	were	they	suicidal,	they	were	cowards	too	--	cowards
because	 they	 could	 not	 even	 commit	 suicide	 in	 a	 single	 blow.	 They	 were
committing	 suicide	 gradually,	 in	 installments;	 by	 and	 by,	 slowly	 they	 were
dying.	 And	 we	 have	 respected	 these	 unhealthy	 people,	 these	 unwholesome
people,	 these	 insane	people.	They	were	against	God	because	 they	were	against
life.
I	am	in	tremendous	love	with	life,	hence	I	 teach	celebration.	Everything	has	to
be	celebrated,	everything	has	to	be	lived,	loved.	To	me	nothing	is	mundane	and
nothing	is	sacred.	To	me	all	is	sacred,	from	the	lowest	rung	of	the	ladder	to	the
highest	rung.	It	is	the	same	ladder:	from	the	body	to	the	soul,	from	the	physical
to	the	spiritual,	from	sex	to	SAMADHI	--	everything	is	divine!
An	 old	 neo-sannyasin	 told	 an	 actor	 playing	 Hamlet	 that	 he	 himself	 had	 once
played	the	part.
"What	was	your	interpretation	of	the	role?"	asked	the	actor.	"Did	Hamlet	really
make	love	to	Ophelia?"
"I	don't	know	if	Hamlet	did,"	replied	the	sannyasin,	"but	I	certainly	did!"
Celebration	has	to	be	total,	only	then	can	you	be	multidimensionally	rich.	And	to
be	multidimensionally	rich	is	the	only	thing	we	can	offer	to	God.
If	there	is	a	God,	and	someday	you	have	to	face	him,	he	will	ask	you	only	one
question:
"Have	you	lived	your	life	totally	or	not?"	--	because	this	opportunity	is	given	to
you	to	live,	not	to	renounce.
Paul,	my	sannyasins	celebrate	death	too,	because	to	me	death	is	not	 the	end	of
life	but	 the	very	crescendo	of	 life,	 the	very	climax.	 It	 is	 the	ultimate	of	 life.	 If
you	have	lived	rightly,	if	you	have	lived	moment	to	moment	totally,	if	you	have
squeezed	out	the	whole	juice	of	life,	your	death	will	be	the	ultimate	orgasm.
The	sexual	orgasm	is	nothing	compared	 to	 the	orgasm	that	death	brings,	but	 it
brings	it	only	to	the	person	who	knows	the	art	of	being	total.	The	sexual	orgasm
is	a	very	faint	thing	compared	to	the	orgasm	that	death	brings.	What	happens	in
sexual	orgasm?	For	a	moment	you	forget	that	you	are	a	body,	for	a	moment	two
lovers	become	merged	into	one	unity,	into	one	organic	union.	For	a	moment	they
are	not	separate	entities;	they	have	melted	into	each	other	like	two	clouds	which
have	become	one.
But	it	is	only	for	a	single	moment,	then	they	are	again	separate.	Hence	all	sexual
orgasms	 bring	 in	 their	 wake	 a	 kind	 of	 depression,	 because	 you	 fall	 from	 the
height.	 You	 reached	 a	 crescendo,	 and	 for	 only	 a	 fragment	 of	 a	 moment	 you
remained	on	 the	peak	and	 then	 the	peak	disappeared.	And	when	you	 fall	 from
that	height,	you	fall	into	the	depth	of	depression.
This	 is	one	of	 the	 contradictions	of	 sex:	 it	 gives	you	 the	greatest	pleasure	 and
also	 the	greatest	agony.	 It	gives	you	ecstasy	and	agony	--	both.	And	each	 time
you	reach	an	orgasmic	state,	you	know	that	soon	it	will	disappear.	Then	there	is
disillusionment,	disappointment.
Death	gives	you	the	ultimate	in	orgasmic	joy:	the	body	is	left	behind	forever	and
your	being	becomes	one	with	 the	whole.	 It	 is	 immeasurable.	 If	 to	become	one
with	a	single	person	gives	you	so	much	joy,	just	think	how	much	joy	will	happen
in	becoming	one	with	the	infinite!	But	it	does	not	happen	to	everybody	who	dies,
because	 the	 people	 who	 have	 not	 lived	 rightly	 cannot	 die	 rightly	 either.	 The
people	 who	 have	 lived	 in	 deep	 unconsciousness	 will	 die	 in	 deep
unconsciousness.	Death	will	 give	you	only	 that	which	you	have	 lived	 all	 your
life;	it	is	the	essence	of	your	whole	life.
If	your	life	was	of	meditativeness,	awareness,	witnessing,	then	you	will	be	able
to	witness	death	too.	If	your	whole	life	you	remained	cool,	centered	in	different
situations,	death	will	 give	you	 the	ultimate	challenge,	 the	ultimate	 test.	And	 if
you	can	remain	centered,	calm	and	cool	and	watching,	then	you	will	not	die	an
unconscious	 death,	 your	 death	 will	 bring	 you	 to	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of
consciousness.	And	then,	certainly,	it	HAS	to	be	celebrated.
So	whenever	one	of	my	sannyasins	dies,	we	celebrate,	we	dance,	we	sing.	We
give	him	a	good	farewell.
A	midget	had	died	and	left	a	widow.	Friends	came	to	pay	their	condolences	and
look	at	 the	body	lying	in	an	upstairs	room	of	the	house.	After	one	friend	came
down	 he	was	 asked	 by	 the	widow	whether	 he	 had	 shut	 the	 door	 of	 the	 room
where	the	body	lay.
"No,"	said	the	visitor,	"I	didn't	think	it	was	necessary."
"Then	I'd	better	go	upstairs	and	shut	it,"	replied	the	widow.	"The	cat	has	had	him
downstairs	twice	already.	You	know,	my	cat	is	a	neo-sannyasin	and	he	wants	to
celebrate	the	occasion!"
Little	Pierino	goes	camping	with	his	parents.	A	little	while	after,	at	the	end	of	a
day	doing	many	things,	they	bed	down	for	the	evening.	Pierino	cries,	"Mummy,	I
can't	sleep.	There	is	a	dead	ant	on	my	belly!"
"Shhh,	Pierino,"	says	his	mother,	"be	a	good	boy,	just	go	to	sleep	--	it	is	nothing
to	worry	about."
After	a	few	minutes	Pierino's	voice	is	heard	again,	"Mummy,	Mummy,	I	can't	go
to	sleep
--	I've	got	a	dead	ant	on	my	belly!"
"Pierino,"	scolds	his	mother,	"come	on	now,	don't	tell	me	that	a	small	dead	ant
stops	you	from	sleeping!"
"Well,"	replies	Pierino,	"it	is	not	the	dead	ant	really,	it	is	all	his	orange	sannyasin
friends	that	have	come	to	celebrate	his	death!"
Yes,	Paul,	my	sannyasins	celebrate	death	because	they	celebrate	life.	And	death
is	not	against	life;	it	does	not	end	life,	it	only	brings	life	to	a	beautiful	peak.	Life
continues	even	after	death.	It	was	there	before	birth,	it	is	going	to	continue	after
death.	Life	is	not	confined	to	the	small	space	that	exists	between	birth	and	death;
on	the	contrary,	births	and	deaths	are	small	episodes	in	the	eternity	of	life.
We	 celebrate	 everything.	 Celebration	 is	 our	 way	 to	 receive	 all	 the	 gifts	 from
God.	Life	is	his	gift,	death	is	his	gift;	the	body	is	his	gift,	the	soul	is	his	gift.	We
celebrate	everything.
We	love	the	body,	we	love	the	soul.	We	are	materialist	spiritualists.	Nothing	like
this	has	ever	happened	in	the	world.	This	is	a	new	experiment,	a	new	beginning,
and	it	has	a	great	future.
In	the	past	there	have	been	materialists	who	denied	the	soul,	and	there	have	been
spiritualists	who	denied	the	body.	Both	were	agreed	on	one	point:	that	only	one
can	be	accepted,	either	 the	body	or	 the	soul.	They	were	either/or	people.	They
were	not	ready	to	accept	the	whole	as	it	is;	they	were	choosers.
My	 sannyasins	 live	 in	 choiceless	 awareness.	We	 are	 not	 choosers;	 we	 simply
accept	whatsoever	is	the	case.	The	materialists	--	the	Charvakas	in	India	and	the
Epicureans	in	Greece	--	denied	the	soul.	They	said,	"There	is	no	soul.	The	soul	is
just	imagination.	The	soul	is	illusion."	And	the	spiritualists	--	Shankaracharya	in
India	and	Berkeley	in	Europe	-
-	these	people	said	that	matter	is	illusory,	maya.	The	body	does	not	exist	really,	it
is	 only	 your	 imagination.	 It	 is	 a	 dream,	made	 of	 the	 same	 stuff	 as	 dreams	 are
made	of;	 you	 are	 a	 soul.	But	 both	 are	 agreeing	on	one	point:	 that	 they	 cannot
accept	reality	as	it	is,	they	have	to	choose.
It	 is	 as	 if	 one	 electrician	 chooses	 the	 positive	 pole	 and	 another	 electrician
chooses	 the	 negative	 pole,	 and	 each	 denies	 the	 other	 pole.	 There	 will	 be	 no
electricity,	no	light	in	the	world.
That's	 what	 has	 happened:	 the	 spiritualist	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 transform	 the
world,	 the	 materialist	 has	 failed	 also	 --	 because	 the	 world	 exists	 with	 polar
opposites.	Without	polarity	there	is	no	world	at	all.	The	day	is	needed	as	much	as
the	night;	the	body	is	needed	as	much	as	the	soul;	the	world	is	needed	as	much
as	God.	 There	 can	 be	 no	 circumference	without	 a	 center	 and	 there	 can	 be	 no
center	without	a	circumference.	This	is	a	simple	fact.
My	sannyas	is	the	acceptance	of	that	which	is.	We	are	not	choosers.	Who	are	we
to	choose?	And	what	difference	 is	our	choice	going	 to	make?	You	can	choose
whatsoever	you	like,	but	whatsoever	you	don't	like	is	going	to	remain	there.	Just
by	not	choosing	it,	it	is	not	going	to	disappear.	And	because	you	have	not	chosen
it,	you	will	remain	half,	lopsided.
The	East	has	remained	lopsided	because	of	so-called	spirituality.	It	has	remained
poor,	 unscientific	 --	 without	 any	 technology,	 without	 industry.	 It	 has	 become
lousy,	lazy,	lethargic;	it	has	lost	all	joy	in	existence	because	"this	is	all	a	dream,
why	bother	about	it?"
It	is	hungry,	ill,	poor,	but	"this	is	all	illusion.	You	are	simply	dreaming	that	you
are	poor,	you	are	not	really	poor.	You	are	simply	dreaming	that	you	are	starving,
you	are	not	starving."
And	 the	West	 has	 chosen	 materialism,	 so	 there	 is	 great	 technology,	 beautiful
houses,	 better	 roads,	 better	 cars,	 better	 airplanes,	 but	 man	 is	 very	 empty	 and
meaningless.
Without	spirituality	there	is	no	center;	man	falls	apart.	The	Western	man	is	half;
the	Eastern	man	is	half.
My	effort	here	is	to	create	the	whole	man.	To	me	the	whole	man	is	the	only	holy
man.
The	East	and	the	West	have	to	meet;	they	have	to	become	complementaries,	not
antagonists.	 But	 this	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 we	 change	 the	 whole	 philosophical
background.
Hence	I	teach	a	very	contradictory	philosophy.	Spiritual	materialism	is	the	name
that	I	give	to	my	philosophy.
I	want	you	to	be	materialists	and	spiritualists	simultaneously,	in	a	balanced	way.
I	would	love	society	to	have	all	the	facilities,	all	the	comforts	and	conveniences
that	science	and	technology	can	provide,	and	I	would	also	love	people	to	have	a
great	awareness	inside	them	so	that	they	can	enjoy	whatsoever	science	provides.
I	would	like	everybody	to	be	a	buddha,	but	at	the	same	time	I	would	also	like	the
world	to	become	more	and	more	comfortable,	more	and	more	loving,	more	and
more	beautiful.
We	can	transform	this	world	into	a	paradise,	but	then	we	have	to	stop	choosing.
We	have	 simply	 to	 accept	 the	whole	 as	 it	 is,	with	 all	 its	 contradictions.	Those
contradictions	 are	 contradictions	 only	 because	 of	 our	 logical	 obsession;
otherwise	they	are	complementaries.	Life	and	death	--	both	are	beautiful.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DOES	 IT	MEAN	WHEN	A	WOMAN	SAYS	SHE	 IS	AFRAID	OF	A
MAN?
Anand	Prageet,	if	you	had	asked	me	what	it	means	when	a	man	says	that	he	is
afraid	 of	 a	 woman,	 I	 would	 have	 answered	 you	 very	 accurately.	 But	 your
question	is	such	that	it	is	almost	unanswerable.	It	is	very	difficult	to	say	what	it
means	when	a	woman	says	she	is	afraid	of	a	man	--	the	woman	says	one	thing
and	means	another	thing!	She	may	simply	be	making	you	feel	at	ease,	Prageet	--
"Don't	 be	 afraid,	 I	 myself	 am	 afraid	 of	 you!"	 She	 must	 see	 that	 you	 are
trembling!	She	must	be	aware	of	your	fear.
Every	man	is	afraid	of	the	woman	--	he	has	to	be.	From	the	very	beginning	he	is
in	 the	 hands	 of	 a	woman,	 the	mother,	 and	 the	 fear	 is	 created	 from	 those	 very
early	days.	Your	first	impression	of	a	woman	is	that	of	a	mother,	and	the	mother
has	 made	 you	 immensely	 afraid.	 And	 you	 have	 seen	 that	 not	 only	 were	 you
afraid,	but	your	father	was	also	afraid	of	your	mother.	Outside	the	house	he	was
like	a	lion,	and	whenever	he	came	home	he	started	wagging	his	tail!
You	have	seen	this.	Children	are	very	perceptive;	they	go	on	looking	at	what	is
happening.	They	understand	perfectly	well	who	is	really	the	master	of	the	house.
They	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 mother,	 the	 father	 is	 afraid	 of	 the	 mother,	 everybody
seems	to	be	afraid	of	the	mother,	and	naturally	they	become	accustomed	to	the
fear.
And	then	man	is	capable	of	tackling	any	problem	intellectually.	He	is	afraid	of
the	woman	because	her	ways	of	tackling	a	problem	are	very	intuitive,	instinctive.
No	 woman	 is	 intellectual	 --	 intelligent	 of	 course,	 but	 not	 intellectual.	 Man's
intelligence	 is	 of	 one	 kind,	 and	 hers,	 the	 woman's	 intelligence,	 is	 of	 a	 totally
different	 kind.	Man's	 intelligence	 is	 the	 essence	 of	 his	 intellect,	 and	 woman's
intelligence	arises	out	of	her	intuitiveness.
There	 is	 no	 meeting	 ground	 --	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 it.	 They	 are	 polar
opposites,	 that's	 why	 they	 are	 attracted	 to	 each	 other.	 Because	 they	 cannot
understand	 each	other	 there	 is	mystery	between	 them;	 that	mystery	 is	 of	 great
appeal.
A	frustrated	man	was	staring	hopelessly	down	the	platform	at	the	departing	train.
"If	you	hadn't	taken	so	long	getting	ready,"	he	accused	his	wife,	"we	would	have
caught	it."
"Yes,"	 she	 replied,	 "and	 if	you	hadn't	 hurried	me	we	wouldn't	 have	 so	 long	 to
wait	for	the	next	one!"
"Is	this	supposed	to	be	art?	Why	on	earth	did	they	hang	this	picture	here?"	one
woman	asked	another	in	an	art	gallery.
"Maybe	they	couldn't	find	the	painter,"	the	other	replied.
A	beautiful	blonde	filled	in	the	job	application.
The	 personnel	 director	 looked	 it	 over,	 then	 said,	 "Miss	 Johnson,	 under
Èxperience'	could	you	be	a	little	more	specific	than	just	Òh,	boy!'?"
A	girl	 in	a	whorehouse	of	a	 red-light	district	 told	 the	madam	one	day	 that	 she
was	quitting.
"You	can't	do	that,"	protested	the	madam,	"you're	the	best	girl	I've	got.	Why,	I've
seen	you	go	upstairs	thirty	and	more	times	a	night."
"That's	right,"	the	girl	agreed.	"That's	why	I'm	quitting.	My	feet	are	killing	me,
and	it's	on	account	of	those	damn	stairs!"
It	is	very	difficult	for	me,	Prageet,	to	answer	your	question.	You	will	have	to	ask
your	woman	yourself.
Schumann,	the	postman,	was	retiring.	On	his	last	day,	as	usual,	he	delivered	to
Mrs.	Katz,	who	invited	him	in	for	a	fine	breakfast.
When	he	finished	and	was	about	 to	 leave,	she	beckoned	him	into	 the	bedroom
where	 they	 made	 love	 for	 an	 hour.	When	 he	 was	 getting	 ready	 to	 leave,	 she
handed	him	an	envelope	with	a	dollar	bill	in	it.
Schumann	 was	 overwhelmed.	 "Look,	 Mrs.	 Katz,"	 he	 said	 finally,	 "I've	 been
delivering	your	mail	 for	 the	past	 twenty	years	and	you	have	never	 so	much	as
offered	me	a	cup	of	coffee.	So	why	today	did	all	this	happen?"
"Well,"	she	said,	"I	told	my	husband	Sol	that	you	were	retiring	today	and	he	said,
`Fuck	him!	Give	him	a	buck!'	--	the	breakfast	was	my	idea!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	A	Flute	on	the	Lips	of	God
29	October	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8010290
ShortTitle:
COME03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
BELOVED	OSHO,
THIS	POEM	IS	BY	ROBERT	GRAVES:
THOSE	WHO	DARE	GIVE	NOTHING
ARE	LEFT	WITH	LESS	THAN	NOTHING;
DEAR	HEART,	YOU	GIVE	ME	EVERYTHING,
WHICH	LEAVES	YOU	MORE	THAN	EVERYTHING	--
THOUGH	THOSE	WHO	DARE	GIVE	NOTHING
MIGHT	JUDGE	IT	LEFT	YOU	NOTHING.
GIVING	YOU	EVERYTHING,
I	TOO,	WHO	ONCE	HAD	NOTHING,
AM	LEFT	WITH	MORE	THAN	EVERYTHING
AS	GIFTS	FOR	THOSE	WITH	NOTHING
WHO	NEED,	IF	NOT	OUR	EVERYTHING,
AT	LEAST	A	LOVING	SOMETHING.
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,	WHAT	IS	THE	SOURCE	OF	YOUR	INFINITE	SPRING
OF
GIVING?
Chandrikanta	Bharti,	the	source	is	always	the	same.	We	are	just	like	rays	of	the
same	sun.
The	 source	of	existence	 is	what	we	call	God;	 it	 is	better	 to	call	 it	 the	ultimate
source.
From	there	everything	comes,	and	to	there	everything	returns.
But	 the	man	who	 starts	 thinking	 himself	 separate	 from	 the	 source	 is	 bound	 to
become	miserly.	 Not	 knowing	 that	 he	 is	 part	 of	 the	 source,	 he	 becomes	 very
small,	afraid	to	give.
Then	his	mathematics	is:	if	you	give	you	will	have	less;	if	you	go	on	giving,	one
day	you	will	be	a	beggar.
Not	knowing	about	the	infinite	source	is	the	cause	of	our	miserliness.	And	to	be
a	 miser	 is	 to	 be	 in	 misery,	 because	 the	 person	 who	 cannot	 give	 becomes
incapable	 of	 receiving.	 The	 person	 who	 cannot	 give	 becomes	 closed	 --	 he	 is
afraid	to	give.	He	has	to	be	very	cautious	to	keep	his	windows	and	doors	closed,
tightly	closed,	so	nothing	escapes	from	him.	But	these	are	the	same	doors	from
where	 things	 come.	 If	 you	 keep	 your	 doors	 closed,	 the	 sunrays	will	 not	 reach
you,	the	wind	will	not	come	to	you;	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	the	stars	and	the
flowers,	and	the	fragrance	will	not	float	 into	your	being.	The	miserly	person	is
bound	to	be	in	misery	--	he	is	cut	off.	He	lives	as	if	he	were	a	tree	without	roots,
ungrounded,	uprooted.	His	 life	 is	nothing	but	a	process	of	slow	dying;	he	does
not	know	anything	of	abundant	life.
Jesus	says	to	his	disciples,	"Come,	follow	me	and	I	will	give	you	abundant	life."
What	does	he	mean	by	abundant	life?	He	simply	means	that	if	your	ego	can	be
surrendered,	 if	you	can	drop	 the	 idea	of	being	 separate	 from	existence,	 in	 that
very	 dropping	 you	 become	 open	 --	 open	 to	 give,	 open	 to	 receive.	 And	 the
ultimate	miracle	is:	the	more	you	give,	the	more	you	receive;	the	more	you	give,
the	more	you	become	worthy	of	receiving.
It	is	like	a	well.	You	can	lock	up	the	well,	you	can	cover	it	up	in	fear	--	maybe	in
the	 coming	 year	 there	 are	 not	 going	 to	 be	 any	 rains.	 It	 is	 better,	 advisable,	 to
preserve	the	water	in	your	well,	to	prevent	your	neighbors,	to	prevent	everybody
from	drinking	or	taking	water	from	your	well.	You	can	keep	the	well	closed,	but
when	the	time	of	need	arises	you	will	be	surprised:	the	well	water	will	no	longer
be	worth	drinking,	 it	will	have	become	poisoned.	And,	moreover,	 the	well	will
have	lost	its	springs.
If	you	go	on	drawing	water	from	the	well,	the	springs	go	on	feeding	it.	The	more
you	draw	the	water,	the	bigger	the	springs	which	go	on	opening	up.	Your	well	is
just	 a	 small	window	 in	 the	ocean,	 a	 faraway	window;	 it	 is	 connected	with	 the
ocean.	 If	 you	 create	 a	 vacuum	 in	 the	well,	 if	 you	 go	 on	 emptying	 it,	 then	 the
waters	will	be	rushing	in	from	all	sides	to	fill	it	up.	Nature	abhors	a	vacuum	--
physically,	spiritually,	on	every	dimension	and	plane.
Be	empty,	and	you	will	be	surprised:	the	emptier	you	are,	the	more	full	you	will
be.
Hence,	by	giving	you	don't	have	less;	by	giving	you	have	more.	By	giving	you
don't	become	a	beggar;	by	giving	you	become	an	emperor.
Gautam	the	Buddha	came	to	visit	Vaishali,	one	of	 the	big,	beautiful	capitals	of
those	days.	The	king	of	Vaishali	was	very	egoistic:	he	was	not	willing	to	go	to
receive	Buddha	in	his	capital.
His	chief	minister	was	an	old	man	his	father's	age.	He	had	looked	after	the	king's
affairs	for	his	whole	life	since	he	was	just	a	child,	because	when	the	king	was	a
child	his	father	had	died.	He	was	almost	 like	a	father	 to	him,	and	the	king	had
great	 respect	 for	 the	 old	 man.	 The	 old	 man	 said,	 "If	 you	 don't	 go	 to	 receive
Buddha,	then	take	my	resignation!"
The	 king	was	 puzzled,	 he	 could	 not	 believe	 it.	Why	 this	 insistence?	He	 said,
"Why	should	a	king	go	to	receive	a	beggar?"
The	old	man	laughed	and	he	said,	"It	is	just	the	opposite!	You	are	the	beggar	and
he	 is	 the	 king,	 and	 the	 beggar	 has	 to	 go	 to	 receive	 the	 king.	 He	 is	 the	 king
because	he	has	given;	he	is	the	king	because	he	goes	on	giving.	The	more	he	has
given	the	more	he	has.	Either	see	the	point	or	here	is	my	resignation,	because	I
cannot	serve	a	fool!"
The	 king	 understood	 the	 point.	He	went,	 he	 fell	 at	 the	 feet	 of	Buddha	 and	 he
said,
"Excuse	me,	forgive	me!	I	had	always	thought	that	you	were	just	a	beggar;	now	I
can	see	that	I	am	a	beggar	because	I	go	on	clinging	to	whatsoever	small	things	I
have	got.	By	not	clinging	you	have	declared	your	real	power,	your	mastery."
Clinging	shows	that	you	are	not	really	the	master	but	a	slave.
The	 king	 asked	 Buddha,	 "Bless	 me,	 so	 that	 one	 day	 I	 can	 also	 become	 an
emperor	like	you."
This	poem	by	Robert	Graves	is	beautiful.	Poets	come	far	closer	to	the	truth	than
the	philosophers,	the	theologians,	the	priests,	the	scholars,	the	so-called	learned
people.	Poets	are	a	little	bit	crazy;	that's	why	they	can	have	a	few	glimpses	of	the
beyond.	They	 are	not	 logical;	 hence	 they	 can	 comprehend	 something	which	 is
bigger	 than	 logic.	 Theologians,	 philosophers,	 scholars	 --	 they	 are	 just	 fools
hiding	their	foolishness.	And	it	is	because	of	these	so-called	learned	people	that
the	world	has	become	so	poor	physically,	spiritually,	in	every	way.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	was	 reading	 a	 news	 item	 from	Pakistan.	 It	 says	 that	 great
scholars	 of	morality	 are	 nowadays	 busy	 banishing	 the	word	 ISHQ,	 love,	 from
prose	and	poetry	prescribed	for	university	students	in	Pakistan.
Ishq	 is	 far	 more	 significant	 than	 the	 word	 "love."	 Love	 is	 only	 one	 of	 the
dimensions	of	ishq.	"Love"	means	of	the	world.	"Ishq"	has	two	aspects:	either	it
can	be	an	ordinary	 love,	 the	 love	between	a	man	and	a	woman,	or	 it	 can	be	a
love	between	man	and	existence.
Banishing	the	word,	the	very	word	"ishq,"	from	all	prose	and	poetry	prescribed
for	the	university	courses	is	such	a	foolish	idea.	And	these	are	the	great	scholars
of	 morality!	 I	 was	 puzzled	 because	 if	 you	 banish	 the	 word	 "ishq,"	 then
particularly	 in	 the	 language	 that	 is	 spoken	 in	 Pakistan	 --	 that	 is	 the	 official
language	of	Pakistan,	Urdu	--	there	will	not	be	anything	left	at	all,	because	the
whole	of	Urdu	poetry	and	prose	is	centered	on	the	word
"ishq."	 All	 the	 great	 poets,	 from	 Mir	 and	 Ghalib	 to	 Iqbal,	 will	 have	 to	 be
banished.	 In	 fact,	 no	 other	 language	 of	 the	world	 has	 such	 beautiful	 poetry	 as
Urdu.	Urdu	 is	 tremendously	 expressive.	 In	 just	 two	 small	 lines,	Urdu	 can	 say
more	 than	 any	 other	 language	 can	manage	 to	 say	 in	 a	 whole	 page.	 It	 is	 very
telegraphic,	and	it	is	full	of	love.
Banish	the	word	"love"	and	you	banish	all	the	great	poets,	all	the	great	mystics.
You	will	have	to	banish	all	the	Sufis	because	they	talk	about	love.	And	they	are
not	only	banishing	poetry	and	prose	devoted	to	love,	even	the	word	love,	"ishq,"
has	to	be	removed	--	even	the	mention	of	the	word!
These	 are	 the	 fools	 who	 have	 been	 dominating	 humanity	 for	 centuries.	 They
would	like	to	destroy	even	the	possibility	of	love.	There	is	a	certain	logic	in	it,
because	 humanity	 up	 to	 now	 has	 existed	 in	 a	 very	 insane	 way.	 It	 has
continuously	been	preparing	for	war.
There	 are	only	 two	periods	 in	history:	 either	people	 are	 fighting	 --	 that	 is	war
time,	 hot	 war	 --	 or	 people	 are	 preparing	 for	 the	 war	 that	 is	 going	 to	 happen
sooner	or	later.	You	can	call	it	peace	time,	but	it	is	not	peace	time	at	all;	it	is	only
a	gap	between	two	wars.	It	is	needed	because	unless	you	prepare,	how	are	you
going	to	fight?	It	is	cold	war.
The	whole	of	human	history	up	to	now	can	be	divided	into	two	periods:	hot	war
and	 cold	 war.	 And	 because	 man	 has	 been	 continuously	 fighting,	 destroying,
murdering,	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 growing	 roses	 of	 love.	We	 have	 to	make
factories	for	war;	we	have	to	create	soldiers,	not	lovers.
My	sannyasins	are	lovers,	not	soldiers.
They	herald	a	new	beginning.
To	me,	love	is	synonymous	with	God.
These	words	of	Graves	are	tremendously	significant:
THOSE	WHO	DARE	GIVE	NOTHING
ARE	LEFT	WITH	LESS	THAN	NOTHING....
They	look	a	little	crazy	because	they	are	illogical,	they	are	unmathematical	--	but
they	are	absolutely	 true.	They	 transcend	ordinary	economics	and	 its	 laws;	 they
indicate	a	meta-economics.
THOSE	WHO	DARE	GIVE	NOTHING
ARE	LEFT	WITH	LESS	THAN	NOTHING....
Beware!	While	the	time	is	there,	give,	give	as	much	as	you	can,	give	whatsoever
you	can.
Sing	 a	 song,	 share	 a	 joke,	 dance!	Give	whatsoever	 you	 can	 give.	 It	 costs	 you
nothing,	but	it	will	bring	you	more	and	more	joys.
Existence	 goes	 on	 repaying	 you	 tremendously.	 Whatsoever	 you	 give	 to
existence,	it	returns	a	thousandfold;	it	comes	back	to	you.	You	give	one	flower,
and	a	thousand	flowers	shower	on	you.	Don't	be	clingers.	If	you	really	want	to
be	rich,	if	you	want	to	have	an	enriched	inner	world,	then	learn	the	art	of	giving.
THOSE	WHO	DARE	GIVE	NOTHING
ARE	LEFT	WITH	LESS	THAN	NOTHING;
DEAR	HEART,	YOU	GIVE	ME	EVERYTHING,
WHICH	LEAVES	YOU	MORE	THAN	EVERYTHING	--
THOUGH	THOSE	WHO	DARE	GIVE	NOTHING
MIGHT	JUDGE	IT	LEFT	YOU	NOTHING.
GIVING	YOU	EVERYTHING,
I	TOO,	WHO	ONCE	HAD	NOTHING,
AM	LEFT	WITH	MORE	THAN	EVERYTHING
AS	GIFTS	FOR	THOSE	WITH	NOTHING
WHO	NEED,	IF	NOT	OUR	EVERYTHING,
AT	LEAST	A	LOVING	SOMETHING.
I	don't	have	any	other	source	than	you	have,	but	you	are	not	ready	to	accept	that
source;	it	goes	against	your	ego.	You	want	to	be	an	island	unto	yourself,	and	that
is	your	misery,	that	is	your	poverty.	Your	soul	will	remain	undernourished.	You
will	 not	 know	 how	 beautiful	 existence	 is,	 how	 blissful	 every	moment	 can	 be,
what	an	ecstasy	it	is	just	to	breathe	and	to	be.
Give,	give	for	giving's	sake.
Share	for	sharing's	sake.
Don't	ask	anything	in	return,	because	then	it	becomes	a	business	--	and	love	is
not	a	business.	In	fact,	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	whether	anything	returns	or
not,	because	the	very	giving	is	such	an	ecstasy	that	who	cares	whether	anything
returns	or	not?	Be	obliged	to	the	person	who	receives	anything	from	you.	Don't
think	that	he	has	to	be	obliged	to	you.	That	is	wrong,	that	is	absolutely	wrong.
That	is	still	clinging	to	the	miser's	mind.
You	can	be	as	vast	as	God	himself,	but	your	vastness	is	possible	only	if	you	start
giving.
And	it	is	not	a	question	of	what	you	give;	just	a	smile	or	just	a	gesture	of	love	is
enough.
It	costs	nothing	to	be	loving,	to	be	kind,	and	still	it	brings	you	a	great	harvest	--
thousands	of	flowers	start	blossoming	in	your	being.
Chandrikanta	Bharti,	you	ask	me,	"What	is	the	source	of	your	infinite	spring	of
giving?"
I	am	not	the	source,	I	am	not	at	all,	because	the	more	you	are,	the	less	is	the	flow
from	the	source;	the	less	you	are,	the	more	the	flow	from	the	source.
When	YOU	are	not	at	all,	then	you	are	just	a	hollow	bamboo	which	becomes	a
flute	on	the	lips	of	God.	Then	the	song	starts	flowing.	And	to	sing	the	song	of
God,	to	allow	God	to	sing	a	song	through	you,	is	the	greatest	joy	of	life.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 OFTEN	 TELL	 US	 THAT	 WE	 LOST	 OUR	 AWARENESS	 OF	 OUR
BUDDHA	 NATURE	 BECAUSE	 OF	 CONDITIONING	 PROCESSES	 OF
EVERY	KIND.	THIS
FAR,	I	CAN	IMAGINE,	BUT	IF	MANKIND	ORIGINALLY	HAD	THIS
AWARENESS,	HOW	DID	WE	LOSE	IT	IN	THE	BEGINNING?	HOW	DID
CONDITIONING	 START	ORIGINALLY?	AND	 IF	 EXISTENCE	 IS	 JUST	A
FLOWING,	WHY	IS	IT	IMPORTANT	THAT	MANY	PEOPLE	BECOME
ENLIGHTENED?	WHY	DO	 YOU	MAKE	 THE	 EFFORT,	 OR	 DON'T	 YOU
MAKE
ANY?	AND	 IS	YOUR	BEING	HERE,	AND	EVERYTHING,	ALSO	JUST	A
FLOWING?
Corry,	to	know	is	one	thing	and	to	imagine	is	totally	different.	Imagination	can
deceive	you,	it	can	go	on	giving	you	false	coins.	But	remember:	All	that	glitters
is	not	gold.
Imagination	 can	 give	 you	 very	 glittering	 coins,	 but	 they	will	 not	 be	 real	 gold.
You	 will	 have	 to	 know,	 and	my	 knowing	 cannot	 be	 of	 any	 help	 to	 you.	 The
moment	I	share	my	knowing	with	you,	only	imagination	will	be	triggered	in	you;
you	will	start	imagining.
There	is	no	need	to	ask	me	why	it	happened	originally;	you	can	go	to	the	origin
within	yourself	and	see	why	it	happens.	It	is	not	a	question	of	going	into	the	past,
going	 back	 to	 Adam	 and	 Eve;	 you	 have	 to	 go	 within	 yourself,	 because	 it	 is
happening	every	moment.
You	are	at	the	source,	at	the	very	origin	of	things,	and	still	you	are	conditioned.
And	 if	 you	 can	 watch	 the	 process	 within	 yourself,	 you	 will	 have	 known	 the
whole	of	history.
Then	you	will	be	able	to	understand	the	story,	the	biblical	story,	which	is	really
beautiful	and	significant,	of	how	Adam	and	Eve	became	conditioned.
It	was	God	the	Father	who	started	the	whole	nonsense....
In	the	Garden	of	Eden	there	were	millions	of	trees,	and	he	pointed	out	two	trees
in	particular	--	the	fruits	from	these	trees	were	not	to	be	eaten.	One	was	the	Tree
of	Knowledge,	and	the	other	was	the	Tree	of	Immortal	Life.	My	feeling	is	that	if
God	had	not	prohibited	 it,	Adam	and	Eve	would	never	have	been	able	 to	 find
those	two	trees	in	that	tremendously	vast	garden.	But	because	he	pointedly	said
to	 them,	 "Don't	 eat	 the	 fruit	 from	 these	 two	 trees,"	 naturally	 they	 became
obsessed.	It	must	have	started	their	fantasies.	They	must	have	started	dreaming
about	 those	 two	 trees.	 They	 must	 have	 started	 thinking,	 "Why	 has	 God
prohibited	us?	There	must	be	something	in	it."
I	was	a	small	child	and	my	father	 told	me,	"Listen,	you	are	mixing	with	a	few
people	who	smoke	cigarettes	--	don't	ever	start	smoking!"
I	said,	"You	have	started	me	on	it!	I	have	never	thought	about	it;	in	fact	I	have
always	thought	how	foolish	these	people	are.	Rather	than	breathing	the	pure	air,
they	waste	money	and	breathe	smoke!	Taking	the	smoke	in	and	out	looks	very
stupid!"
Things	 like	 that	 have	 always	 looked	 stupid	 to	me.	 From	my	 very	 childhood	 I
have	 never	 taken	 part	 in	 any	 game	 --	 volleyball,	 football...because	 I	 cannot
imagine	what	the	point	is!
You	throw	the	ball	from	here	to	the	other	side;	they	throw	the	ball	back	to	this
side.	You	can	have	 two	balls	 and	both	go	home!	What	 is	 the	point	of	 it?	And
people	are	perspiring	-
-	and	not	only	the	players,	but	the	others	who	have	gathered	to	watch...!
So	I	told	my	father,	"I	was	never	interested,	but	now,	because	you	tell	me	not	to
smoke	I	am	going	to!	Why	are	you	preventing	me?	If	there	is	nothing	in	it,	can't
you	trust	my	intelligence?	And	if	YOU	can't	trust	my	intelligence,	why	should	I
trust	your	intelligence?	It	has	to	be	a	mutual	understanding.	You	are	not	trusting
my	intelligence	--
you	are	telling	me	not	to	smoke.	If	it	is	foolish	I	am	not	going	to	do	it	myself;	if
it	is	not	foolish	then	nobody	can	prevent	me.	And	how	long	can	you	prevent	me?
In	what	ways	can	you	prevent	me?"
And	 he	 understood	 the	 point.	 He	 was	 a	 rare	man	 in	many	ways.	 He	 brought
home	a	packet	of	cigarettes,	handed	it	over	to	me	and	he	said,	"You	experiment,
you	be	finished	with	it!	I	have	understood	your	point."
And	 I	 tried	 and	 I	 was	 finished.	 Tears	 started	 coming	 to	 my	 eyes,	 I	 started
coughing,	and	I	could	not	understand	why	people	should	do	such	stupid	things
and	torture	themselves.
Since	 then,	whenever	 I	 see	anybody	smoking,	 I	 think	he	must	be	an	ascetic,	 a
great	saint	doing	some	penance!
But	Adam	and	Eve	were	treated	by	God	the	Father	as	every	father	treats	every
child.	No	 father	 trusts	 the	 intelligence	 of	 the	 child.	And	 in	 fact,	 the	 child	 has
more	intelligence	than	the	father	because	the	father	has	lived,	experienced	many
things.	 His	 mirror	 has	 become	 covered	 with	 many	 experiences,	 with	 much
knowledge.	His	 clarity	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 same	as	 that	of	 the	 child.	The	 child	 is
utterly	perceptive,	he	can	see	 immediately;	 there	 is	nothing	 to	hinder	him.	The
father's	intelligence	is	covered	with	much	dust.
But	the	father	on	his	side	feels	afraid.	He	thinks	the	child	is	still	a	child	who	does
not	know	what	to	do,	what	not	to	do.	He	may	go	astray.	Out	of	his	concern,	he
prevents	--
and	that's	how	conditioning	begins.
The	biblical	 story	 is	 significant.	 It	 is	 not	 an	historical	 story	because	 the	world
never	began	in	that	sense,	it	has	always	been	there.	There	is	no	beginning	and	no
end.	The	whole	idea	of	beginning	and	end	is	absurd;	the	world	is	eternal.	But	the
story	 is	 significant,	 and	 it	 is	 repeated	 in	 each	 child's	 life.	 It	 is	 a	 psychological
story,	 not	 historical,	 of	 tremendous	 importance.	 Every	 father,	 every	mother	 is
doing	the	same.
I	have	come	across	thousands	of	parables,	but	there	is	no	parable	comparable	to
this	 story.	 The	 Father	 was	 anxious	 that	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 should	 not	 become
interested	in	two	things:	one	was	the	Tree	of	Knowledge...because	the	moment
you	become	knowledgeable	you	lose	your	intelligence.
That's	my	whole	teaching:	unburden	yourself	of	knowledge	so	that	you	can	again
discover	 the	 purity	 of	 your	 intelligence.	Wisdom	 is	 freedom	 from	 knowledge.
And	God	wanted	Adam	 to	 be	wise,	 not	 knowledgeable.	He	wanted	 him	 to	 be
intelligent,	not	an	intellectual.	Hence	he	prohibited	him:	"Don't	eat	from	the	Tree
of	Knowledge."
This	is	significant;	it	shows	the	father's	concern,	his	love,	but	it	also	shows	that
he	does	not	trust	the	child's	own	perceptiveness.	No	father	ever	trusts,	no	mother
ever	trusts,	howsoever	old	the	son	may	be.
Makima's	mother,	Shunyo,	is	old.	She	must	be	over	sixty-five,	and	HER	mother
who	is	ninety	goes	on	writing	letters	to	her:	"You	are	still	a	fool!	What	are	you
doing	there?
Come	home!	Have	you	gone	crazy	or	something?	I	have	always	known	that	you
would	do	something	like	this!"
Now,	 the	 ninety-year-old	 mother	 giving	 messages	 to	 the	 seventy-year-old
daughter...!	But	one	can	see	the	point	because	the	distance	is	the	same	--	twenty
years'	 distance.	When	 Shunyo	 was	 one	 year	 old,	 the	 mother	 must	 have	 been
twenty-one	years	old;	now	she	 is	 seventy,	 and	 the	mother	 is	ninety.	When	 she
will	be	ninety,	if	the	mother	is	still	alive	she	will	be	one	hundred	and	ten	--	the
difference	will	remain	the	same!	And	the	mother	will	always	go	on	thinking	in
those	terms	--	that	she	is	a	fool,	she	does	not	know	anything.
Now	what	 is	 she	 doing	with	 these	 orange	 people	 and	meditating	 and	wearing
orange	clothes?	She	has	gone	crazy!	The	mother	wants	to	protect	her.
The	 Father	 was	 concerned	 for	 Adam	 and	 Eve,	 and	 his	 concern	 is	 significant:
"Don't	become	knowledgeable."	It	is	a	tremendously	meaningful	story,	because
if	you	become	knowledgeable	you	will	lose	your	intelligence.	Intellectuals	have
no	intelligence	at	all.
I	 have	 come	 across	 thousands	 of	 intellectuals,	 the	 so-called	 intelligentsia,	 and
they	are	the	most	stupid	people	you	can	ever	come	across.	You	will	find	farmers,
gardeners,	carpenters,	who	are	far	more	intelligent	than	professors,	theologians,
scholars.	They	are	full	of	rubbish!	Of	course,	they	have	read	much	and	they	can
repeat	all	that	they	have	read;	they	have	great	information,	but	information	is	not
wisdom.	 Information	can	be	 collected	by	a	 computer,	 and	 far	more	 efficiently,
but	a	computer	is	never	wise.	I	don't	think	there	will	come	a	time	when	you	will
come	across	 a	 computer	who	has	become	a	buddha!	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to	happen
ever.	Yes,	a	computer	can	become	an	Albert	Einstein,	certainly,	there	is	no	doubt
about	it.	And	he	will	function	far	better	than	Albert	Einstein,	because	it	will	be
just	a	mechanical	thing.
Mathematics	is	mechanical,	but	love	is	not	mechanical.	No	computer	is	going	to
fall	in	love,	no	computer	is	going	to	experience	beauty,	no	computer	is	going	to
understand	truth.	Yes,	facts	it	can	accumulate....
God	 wanted	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 not	 to	 become	 computers;	 hence	 he	 told	 them,
"Beware	 of	 this	 tree."	 But	 his	 telling	 them	 not	 to	 eat	 from	 this	 Tree	 of
Knowledge	became	a	temptation.
That's	how	conditioning	begins:	with	should	nots,	with	all	good	intentions	--	but
the	ultimate	result	is	harmful.	Even	God	committed	the	same	mistake;	he	had	to
commit	 it	 if	 he	 was	 to	 be	 a	 father.	 And	 he	 is	 the	 supreme	 father,	 hence	 he
committed	the	supreme	mistake!
And	the	poor	serpent	is	unnecessarily	dragged	into	the	story.	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	the	serpent.	How	can	the	serpent	seduce	Adam	and	Eve	to	eat	the	fruit	from
the	Tree	of	Knowledge?	God	had	already	done	 the	basic	work;	he	had	already
triggered	 their	 desires	 for	 knowledge.	 The	 serpent	 only	 convinced	 them	 about
their	own	suspicions.
The	 serpent	 told	 them	 something	 very	 significant.	 He	 told	 them,	 "God	 has
prohibited	 you	 from	 eating	 of	 this	 tree	 because	 he	 is	 afraid	 if	 you	 become
knowledgeable	you	will	be	just	as	great	as	he	is.	So	he	wants	to	eat	the	fruit	of
this	tree	himself	and	he	does	not	want	you	to	eat	from	the	same	tree,	so	you	will
remain	always	inferior	and	lower."
Now	the	ego	is	set	on	fire!	And	the	logic	seems	to	be	very	relevant.	Adam	and
Eve	are	convinced	that	this	must	be	the	cause.	Knowledge	cannot	be	a	bad	thing
--	 how	 can	 knowledge	 be	 bad?	God	must	 have	 been	 afraid;	 that's	why	 he	 has
prohibited	it.
And	 the	 serpent	 told	 them,	 "He	 has	 also	 prohibited	 you	 from	 eating	 from	 a
second	tree,	because	if	you	eat	from	it	you	will	also	become	immortal	just	like
God.	Then	there	will	be	no	difference	between	you	and	God;	you	will	be	equal."
Adam	 and	 Eve	 ate	 from	 the	 Tree	 of	 Knowledge	 and	 were	 thrown	 out	 of	 the
Garden	of	Eden.	They	were	not	given	the	chance	to	eat	from	the	other	tree.	But
why	 had	God	 prohibited	 them	 from	 eating	 from	 the	 other	 tree?	 There	 is	 also
some	 significance	 on	 his	 side.	 God	 wanted	 them	 to	 live	 in	 the	 immediate,
because	that	is	true	life	--	to	live	now	and	here.	The	moment	you	start	thinking
of	immortality,	you	enter	into	the	world	of	the	future,	you	enter	into	the	world	of
time.	You	 lose	 contact	 with	 the	 real	moment,	 you	 lose	 your	 grounding	 in	 the
now;	that's	how	mind	is	created.
These	are	the	two	ways	in	which	the	mind	is	created.	These	are	the	two	parents	-
-	father	and	mother.	They	give	birth	to	the	mind.	One	is	the	desire	for	the	future	-
-	 the	 desire,	 the	 ultimate	 desire,	 to	 become	 deathless	 so	 that	 the	 future	 is
absolutely	certain.	And	the	other	 is	 the	desire	 to	accumulate	knowledge.	These
two	desires	function	as	father	and	mother	for	the	mind.	The	mind	is	the	child	of
these	two	desires	meeting;	the	mind	is	a	by-product.
God	 was	 basically	 right.	 He	 wanted	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 to	 live	 in	 the	 present,
because	 reality	 is	 always	 present.	 But	 he	 was	 wrong	 psychologically.	 To	 tell
them	 not	 to	 eat	 from	 the	 Tree	 of	 Immortality	 made	 them	 suspicious,	 and	 the
suspicion	was	exploited	by	the	serpent.	Of	course,	they	were	thrown	out	before
they	could	eat	from	the	second	tree,	but	since	then	man	has	been	searching	for
immortality.	And	the	search	still	goes	on.
Science	is	still	working	continuously	to	find	a	way	to	prolong	life	--	to	make	it
longer	 and	 longer	 and	 longer,	 and	 then	 ultimately	 to	make	 life	 immortal.	And
now	science	says	that	the	body	has	no	need	to	die;	maybe	they	have	come	very
close	to	the	Tree	of	Knowledge	and	to	the	Tree	of	Immortality.	Science	says	the
body	can	go	on	renewing	itself.	If	it	can	renew	itself	for	seventy	years,	why	not
seven	 hundred	 years?	 Or	 if	 some	 parts	 become	 useless,	 then	 they	 can	 be
replaced.
Sooner	or	 later	science	 is	going	 to	 replace	many	of	your	parts.	Then	 it	will	be
very	simple.	 If	 something	goes	wrong,	you	go	 to	 the	workshop	and	your	parts
can	be	replaced.
Your	heart	is	not	functioning	well	--	you	go	to	the	garage	and	a	plastic	heart	can
be	 implanted	 in	 you.	Slowly	 slowly,	 all	 the	parts	will	 become	plastic,	 because
plastic	is	the	most	immortal	thing	in	existence.	It	goes	on	living	and	living.	You
cannot	destroy	plastic.
There	is	no	natural	process	for	plastic	to	dissolve	into	the	earth.	That	is	creating
a	problem	for	ecologists,	because	so	many	plastic	bottles	and	jugs	and	toys	are
gathering	under	the	earth,	 in	the	riverbeds,	 in	the	ocean.	There	is	a	danger	that
because	plastic	is	never	reabsorbed	by	the	earth	like	everything	else,	it	creates	a
hindrance	to	the	natural	rhythm	and	cycle	of	nature.	Sooner	or	later	there	will	be
so	much	plastic	that	it	will	hinder	all	natural	processes.	Plastic	is	very	immortal!
But	 just	 think	 of	 a	 man	 who	 slowly	 slowly	 becomes	 plastic:	 his	 head	 goes
cuckoo,	it	is	changed;	his	heart	is	not	functioning	well,	it	is	changed;	his	hands,
his	 legs...slowly	 slowly	all	 is	 changed.	Nothing	 is	 left	 of	 the	old	man,	 just	 the
name,	the	label.
Once	I	saw	Mulla	Nasruddin	with	a	very	beautiful	umbrella,	and	I	asked	him,
"Nasruddin,	when	did	you	purchase	it?"
He	said,	"I	have	not	purchased	it,	it	is	very	old,	twenty	years	old."
So	I	said,	"It	is	a	miracle	--	twenty	years	old!	It	looks	so	fresh	and	so	new!	How
did	you	manage	that	for	twenty	years?"
He	said,	"I	am	absolutely	certain	it	is	twenty	years	old.	Of	course,	it	got	changed
at	 least	 two	 hundred	 times.	 Just	 the	 other	 day,	when	 I	was	 coming	 out	 of	 the
mosque,	it	got	changed	again	--	but	it	is	twenty	years	old."
Man	 can	be	 changed,	 and	 still	 the	 label	will	 remain	 the	 same.	Man	 is	 coming
closer	and	closer	 to	discovering	 the	secret	of	 immortality.	Scientists	 say	 that	 if
we	 can	 reprogram	 the	 basic	 cell	 out	 of	 which	man	 grows,	 then	 everything	 is
possible.	When	 your	 mother's	 and	 your	 father's	 basic	 cells	 meet	 and	 you	 are
created,	many	things	are	determined	at	that	moment.	For	example,	what	kind	of
body	you	will	 have,	what	 kind	 of	 hair	 you	will	 have,	 how	 long	 you	will	 live.
Those	 two	 cells	 meeting	 and	 merging	 decide	 it;	 they	 are	 programmed.	 Their
meeting	becomes	a	new	program:	you	will	live	seventy	years,	eighty	years....	If
that	program	can	be	changed	--	for	example	if	they	can	be	told	that	you	will	live
seven	 hundred	 years	 --	 just	 a	 little	 change,	 in	 some	 hormones,	 in	 some
chemicals,	that	will	do	the	miracle.	And	it	is	very	close.	My	feeling	is	that	within
this	century	we	will	be	able	to	discover	the	secret.
Since	 Adam	 was	 thrown	 out	 of	 the	 garden	 he	 has	 been	 working,	 looking,
searching,	for	some	way	to	find	the	secret	of	immortality.	In	the	past,	alchemists
were	doing	the	same	--
trying	to	find	the	way,	some	alchemical	way,	for	man	to	be	immortal.	And	now
science	is	trying	to	do	the	same.	The	obsession	is	still	there.
You	ask	me,	Corry,	"How	did	conditioning	start	originally?"	It	starts	with	every
child,	because	the	parents	would	like	the	child	to	be	just	a	carbon	copy	of	them.
Their	 ego	 would	 like	 the	 child	 to	 represent	 them	 --	 their	 philosophy,	 their
religion,	 their	 ideology,	 their	 politics,	 their	 nationality,	 their	 race,	 everything.
The	child	has	to	be	the	carrier,	the	vehicle,	the	medium	of	all	their	ambitions	and
desires,	of	all	their	frustrations,	failures.
They	are	hoping,	"We	will	die	but	part	of	us	will	live	in	the	child"	--	so	program
the	 child	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 "what	we	 have	 not	 been	 able	 to	 achieve,	 he	will
achieve."
They	are	trying	to	enforce	their	ambitions	on	the	child;	that's	how	conditioning
begins.
They	are	not	allowing	the	child	to	be	himself.	No	parent	ever	allows	the	child	to
be	himself;	it	has	not	happened	up	to	now.	That's	why	humanity	is	living	in	such
misery:	 because	 no	 child	 is	 allowed	 to	 be	 himself.	 How	 can	 he	 be	 happy?
Happiness	happens	only	when	you	are	authentically	yourself.
And	don't	ask	me	how	it	happened	in	the	very	beginning,	because	there	has	been
no	beginning.	Whenever	a	child	is	born	there	is	a	beginning;	otherwise	existence
has	continued	forever	and	forever.
And	you	also	ask,	 "And	 if	existence	 is	 just	a	 flowing,	why	 is	 it	 important	 that
many	people	become	enlightened?"	That's	why:	existence	is	just	a	flowing,	and
many	people	are	not	flowing.
Only	 the	 buddhas	 know	 how	 to	 flow.	 The	 enlightened	 person	 knows	 how	 to
flow,	how	to	be	in	tune	with	existence,	how	to	relax,	how	to	let	go.	The	others
are	fighting,	not	flowing;	they	are	pushing	the	river.	And	you	are	taught	to	fight,
to	 compete,	 to	 struggle,	 to	 achieve,	 to	 be	 ambitious;	 to	 be	 this,	 to	 be	 that,	 to
become	a	president	 or	 a	 prime	minister.	You	 are	 told	 from	 the	very	beginning
until	 you	 come	 back	 from	 the	 university	 that	 you	 have	 to	 become	 this	 --	 and
others	are	deciding	it.	Nobody	is	bothered	about	your	intrinsic	nature.
It	 is	 as	 if	 marigolds	 are	 being	 educated	 in	 the	 university	 and	 told,	 "Become
roses."	They	will	go	berserk!	They	cannot	become	roses;	that	is	not	possible.	At
the	most	they	can	pretend	--	they	can	pretend	that	they	are	roses,	they	can	put	up
masks.	They	will	become	deceivers,	hypocrites,	but	deep	down	they	will	know,
"We	are	marigolds"	--	and	they	will	hate	that	they	are	marigolds.	But	that's	what
they	are.	They	cannot	become	roses	because	that	is	not	in	their	nature,	and	they
cannot	 allow	 their	marigolds	 to	 dance	 in	 the	 sun	 because	 that	 is	 against	 their
education.
You	 have	 created	 a	 real	 problem;	 now	 the	 person	 will	 always	 remain
schizophrenic.	If	he	tries	to	be	a	rose	he	will	know	that	he	is	just	a	hypocrite.	If
he	tries	to	be	a	marigold	he	will	know	that	he	is	falling	short	of	the	ambitions	of
his	parents,	teachers,	professors,	priests,	politicians.	He	will	feel	guilty.	You	will
not	 allow	 him	 to	 rest	 in	 any	 way;	 either	 he	 will	 feel	 guilty	 or	 he	 will	 feel
unnatural.	In	both	ways	he	will	remain	tense,	anxiety	ridden,	full	of	anguish.	The
same	energy	 that	might	 have	become	a	dance,	 a	 song,	 an	 ecstasy,	 has	become
poisoned.	It	is	now	only	anguish	and	nothing	else,	an	agony	and	nothing	else.
Enlightenment	does	not	mean	any	ambition.	If	it	is	an	ambition,	then	again	you
will	start	fighting	for	it.	Enlightenment	simply	means	being	in	a	state	of	let-go.
Enlightenment	 simply	means	undoing	what	 the	 society	has	done	 to	you.	What
your	 parents	 have	 imposed	 upon	 you,	 throw	 it	 away;	 what	 the	 society	 has
conditioned	 you	 to	 be,	 put	 it	 aside.	 Reassert	 your	 being.	 Love	 yourself	 and
respect	yourself,	and	try	to	be	just	yourself.
Socrates	says,	"Know	thyself."	That	is	not	possible.	First	BE	thyself;	otherwise
how	will	you	know?	If	you	try	right	now	to	know	yourself	you	will	not	be	able
to;	you	will	know	somebody	else	who	you	are	not	but	you	are	supposed	to	be.
You	 will	 know	 only	 that	 which	 you	 are	 supposed	 to	 be;	 you	 will	 not	 know
yourself.
Hence	 I	 say	 to	 you,	 first	 BE	 thyself.	 And	 the	 miracle	 is,	 if	 you	 ARE	 just
yourself,	knowing	is	not	difficult	at	all;	 that	 is	very	simple.	Being	oneself,	one
knows	automatically	who	one	is.
Enlightenment	is	not	a	desire,	is	not	a	goal,	is	not	an	ambition.	It	is	a	dropping	of
all	goals,	a	dropping	of	all	desires,	a	dropping	of	all	ambitions.	 It	 is	 just	being
natural.	That's	what	is	meant	by	flowing.
You	ask,	"And	if	existence	is	just	a	flowing"	--	yes	it	is	--	"why	is	it	important
that	many	people	become	enlightened?"
It	is	important	because	people	are	not	natural	--	they	have	not	been	allowed	to	be
natural.
Your	parents	are	sitting	on	your	shoulders,	they	are	guiding	you.	Maybe	they	are
dead,	 but	 still	 their	 voices	 are	 alive	 in	 you.	 Try	 to	 do	 something	 against	 your
father,	and	you	will	 immediately	hear	his	voice	saying:	"Don't	do	 this,	you	are
offending	me!"	Try	to	do	something	which	your	mother	has	put	inside	you,	and
immediately	 you	will	 hear	 your	mama's	 voice	 --	 immediately!	Whether	 she	 is
alive	 or	 not,	 that's	 not	 the	 question;	 it's	 now	 inbuilt	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 there	 like	 a
gramophone	 record;	 it	will	 immediately	 start	 playing.	 It	will	 immediately	 say,
"Stop!	 Think	 of	 your	 dead	 mother!	 She	 never	 wanted	 you	 to	 do	 this.	 Be
respectful	at	least	to	your	dead	mother!	You	were	never	respectful	while	she	was
alive,	but	at	least	now	one	should	be	respectful	towards	the	dead."
This	 is	 bondage.	But	 everybody	 is	 living	 in	 bondage,	 because	 everybody	who
brought	you	up	wanted	to	have	power	over	you,	to	enjoy	the	mastery	over	you.
And	children	are	the	most	helpless	people	in	the	world,	the	most	exploited	class.
It	is	not	the	proletariat	who	are	the	most	exploited	class,	it	is	not	women	who	are
the	most	exploited	class.	It	is	the	children	who	are	the	most	exploited	class	--	and
so	helpless.	The	proletariat	can	revolt
--	they	have	revolted	in	Russia,	in	China	and	in	other	communist	countries.	The
women	 all	 over	 the	world	 are	making	 efforts	 to	 revolt,	 but	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
imagine	 how	 children	 will	 revolt.	 They	 are	 so	 helplessly	 dependent	 on	 their
parents,	they	cannot	think	of	any	revolt.	And	unless	revolution	happens	in	them
all	other	revolutions	are	going	to	be	superficial.	The	basic	conditioning,	the	basic
imprisonment	is	created	in	childhood	when	the	child	is	so	helpless	that	he	has	to
accept	whatsoever	conditions	you	put	upon	him	just	to	survive.
Corry,	enlightenment	simply	means	putting	aside	all	that	has	been	imposed	upon
you	 forcibly.	 It	 is	coming	back	 to	your	nature;	 it	 is	a	 second	birth.	 Jesus	 says,
"Unless	you	are	born	again	you	shall	not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	God."	That's
what	he	means.
In	 the	 East,	 particularly	 in	 India,	 the	 person	who	 comes	 to	 know	 existence	 is
called	DWIJ.	Dwij	means	twice	born,	one	who	has	attained	the	second	birth.	The
first	birth	is	destroyed	by	others;	now	you	can	have	a	second	birth	and	it	will	not
be	 destroyed	 by	 others	 because	 now	 you	 are	 on	 your	 feet,	 strong	 enough	 to
survive.
You	ask	me,	"Why	do	you	make	the	effort,	or	don't	you	make	any?	And	is	your
being	here,	and	everything,	also	just	flowing?"
I	am	not	making	any	effort	at	all.	It	is	not	an	effort,	it	is	not	work,	it	is	just	play.	I
am	 enjoying	 it	 --	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 drama.	 These	 orange	 people,	 this	 Buddha
Hall...this	is	just	a	stage	and	all	my	sannyasins	are	just	actors.	It	is	just	a	play.	It
is	rooted	in	playfulness.	I	am	not	doing	anything.	I	am	the	laziest	person	you	can
find	in	the	world.	That's	why	I	say	I	am	the	lazy	man's	guide	to	enlightenment!
The	third	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	SAY	THAT	ONE	NEEDS	A	MASTER	IN	ORDER	TO	BECOME
ENLIGHTENED,	YET	YOU	ARE	ENLIGHTENED	AND	YOU	HAVE	HAD
NO
MASTER.	HOW	CAN	THIS	BE?
Sharon,	I	am	just	crazy!	I	was	just	fooling	around	with	the	idea	of	enlightenment
and	went	a	little	too	far!
An	unhappy	elderly	woman	was	pushing	a	baby	in	a	pram	down	the	street	when
she	encountered	an	acquaintance.
"Whose	baby	is	it,	Mrs.	Johnson?"	asked	the	other.	"I	know	it	is	not	yours."
"It	 is,	my	dear,"	 said	Mrs.	 Johnson;	 "it	 is	my	husband.	He	was	 fooling	around
with	a	rejuvenation	remedy	and	he	went	too	far!"
The	last	question:
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	ARE	THERE	SO	MANY	JEWS	HERE?
Gandharva,	why	not?	The	last	time	they	missed	Jesus;	this	time	they	don't	want
to	miss!
It	is	so	simple.	And	they	are	very	intelligent	people:	once	they	missed	--	and	they
really	missed!	 --	 and	 now	 they	 feel	 very	 sorry	 because	 if	 they	 had	 been	with
Jesus	they	would	have	been	doing	the	greatest	business	in	the	world!	They	feel
very	jealous	of	the	Vatican.
They	 cannot	 believe	 how	 these	 dumb	 Italians	 defeated	 them!	 It	 was	 basically
their	right.
This	time	they	don't	want	to	miss.	They	have	arrived.
A	Jewish	father	and	his	son	are	standing	in	front	of	a	cathedral.
"Father,	what	is	this	house	with	the	high	steeple?"
"Son,	you	should	know	this.	It	is	a	church."
"What	is	a	church?"
"Well,	the	Christians	say	that	God	lives	there."
"But,	Father,	isn't	God	living	in	Heaven?"
"Yes,	son,	you're	right.	But	this	is	where	he	does	his	business."
Gandharva,	 they	 are	 really	 some	 of	 the	 most	 intelligent	 people	 on	 the	 earth;
hence	they	can	see	what	is	going	to	happen.
During	 the	second	world	war,	a	German	officer	went	 into	Moishe	Finkelstein's
grocery	shop	to	buy	some	matches.
"Matches!"	he	ordered.
Finkelstein	passed	him	some	matches.
"I	want	the	tips	on	the	left	side	instead	of	the	right!"	the	officer	demanded.
Finkelstein	acted	as	though	he	was	finding	another	box	of	matches,	but	instead
he	gave	the	officer	back	the	same	box	of	matches,	reversed.
Satisfied,	the	officer	left	the	shop.	Once	outside,	he	said	to	his	friend,	"Fucking
Jews	--
always	trying	to	fool	you!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	You	Are	the	Question
30	October	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8010300
ShortTitle:
COME04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	and	Q4	on	video
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	ARE	NO	ANSWERS.
Anand	Shari,	 yes,	 there	 are	 no	 answers,	 because	 there	 are	 no	 questions	 either.
Life	is	not	a	problem.	Had	it	been	a	problem	there	would	have	been	no	need	for
religion	--
philosophy	 would	 have	 solved	 it,	 science	 would	 have	 found	 all	 the	 answers.
Because	 life	 is	 not	 a	 problem	 it	 cannot	 be	 reduced	 to	 a	 question	 or	 to	 many
questions.	No	question	is	really	relevant	to	life.
Life	is	a	quest	not	a	question,	a	mystery	not	a	problem,	and	the	difference	is	vast.
The	problem	has	to	be	solved,	can	be	solved,	must	be	solved,	but	the	mystery	is
insoluble;	it	has	to	be	lived,	experienced.	The	question	has	to	be	solved	so	that	it
disappears;	 encountering	 a	 mystery,	 you	 have	 to	 dissolve	 in	 it.	 The	 mystery
remains,	you	disappear.
It	 is	a	 totally	different	phenomenon.	In	philosophy	the	problem	disappears,	but
YOU
remain;	in	religion	the	mystery	remains,	you	disappear,	you	evaporate.
The	 ego	 is	 very	 much	 interested	 in	 questions	 and	 very	 much	 afraid	 of	 the
mystery.	The	questions	arise	out	of	the	ego.	It	plays	with	the	questions,	tries	to
find	out	answers	--	and	each	answer	in	its	own	turn	brings	more	questions.	It	is
an	 unending	 process;	 that's	 why	 philosophy	 has	 not	 come	 to	 any	 conclusion.
Five	 thousand	years	 of	 philosophizing,	 and	 not	 even	 a	 single	 conclusion!	 It	 is
proof	enough	that	philosophy	is	an	exercise	in	sheer	futility;	its	claims	are	very
bombastic.
In	India	we	have	a	proverb	that	you	dig	the	whole	mountain	and	in	the	end	you
find	only	one	rat	--	but	philosophy	has	not	even	been	able	to	find	the	rat.	It	has
been	trying,	and	with	great	effort,	to	find	some	way	out	of	the	questions,	but	it
gets	 more	 and	 more	 lost	 in	 the	 jungle.	 Now	 there	 are	 more	 philosophical
problems	 than	 there	 were	 before,	 and	 they	 will	 go	 on	 increasing	 because	 the
moment	you	assert	a	single	answer	it	immediately	explodes	into	many	questions.
It	solves	nothing,	it	simply	gives	you	more	work	to	do.
Religion	 takes	 life	 from	 a	 totally	 different	 vision.	 Its	 intrinsic	 quality	 is	 to	 be
mysterious,	 and	 a	 mystery	 is	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 reduced	 into	 the	 game	 of
questions	and	answers.
You	 have	 to	 be	 utterly	 silent	 to	 experience	 it,	 you	 have	 to	 be	 a	 no-mind	 to
experience	it.	It	can	be	experienced,	but	the	experience	cannot	be	put	into	words;
it	remains	inexpressible.
Hence	 Buddha	 has	 no	 answer.	 Not	 that	 he	 never	 answered	 questions	 --	 he
answered	questions	for	forty-two	years	just	to	be	polite	to	you.	But	if	you	look
deeply	 into	 his	 answers	 you	will	 find	 that	 rather	 than	 answering	 he	 is	 simply
seducing	 you	 towards	 silence.	 The	 answers	 are	 not	 answers	 but	 strategies	 to
bring	 you	 to	 a	 point	 of	 deep	 understanding	 that	 nothing	 can	 be	 solved.	 The
moment	you	understand	that	nothing	can	be	solved,	your	mind	simply	dies.	The
mind	can	 live	on	only	with	questions,	problems,	puzzles,	 riddles.	The	moment
there	is	nothing	to	be	solved,	the	whole	function	of	the	mind	is	destroyed.	The
very	earth	underneath	 its	 feet	has	been	 taken	away.	Questions	are	nourishment
for	the	mind.
I	have	been	answering	you,	but	none	of	my	answers	is	an	answer.	It	is	simply	a
way	of	bringing	you	to	that	ultimate	jump	from	mind	to	no-mind,	from	thoughts
to	no-thought,	from	questioning	to	living.	And	when	you	start	living	the	mystery,
I	call	it	a	quest.	Then	it	becomes	a	totally	different	phenomenon	--	you	are	not
standing	outside	it.	When	it	 is	a	question,	you	are	standing	outside.	You	tackle
the	 question,	 you	 look	 from	 all	 sides,	 you	 search	 all	 the	 aspects,	 all	 the
possibilities;	you	dissect	it,	you	look	in,	you	try	to	find	some	clue;	you	propose
some	 hypothesis,	 you	 experiment.	 The	 question	 is	 there	 outside	 you,	 on	 the
table,	but	you	are	not	part	of	it.
In	 a	 quest	 YOU	 are	 the	 question;	 there	 is	 no	 division	 between	 you	 and	 the
question.	The	quest	means	you	are	diving	deep	within	yourself.	 In	a	real	quest
there	 is	only	one	question:	"Who	am	I?"	All	else	 fades	away,	and	 finally	even
"Who	am	I?"	starts	dissolving.	Then	a	great	mystery	descends	on	you;	you	are
surrounded	 by	 miracles.	 The	 whole	 of	 life	 is	 transformed;	 it	 becomes
translucent.	Then	it	is	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration.
This	 is	 the	 whole	 approach	 of	 religion.	 Religion	 is	 anti-philosophical,	 and
philosophy	is	basically	anti-religious.	There	can	be	no	religious	philosophy,	and
there	can	be	no	philosophical	religion.
Shari,	you	are	right	when	you	say,	"There	are	no	answers."
But	before	that,	remember,	there	are	no	questions	either.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	SANNYAS?
Moses,	 sannyas	 is	 a	 crazy	way	 of	 living	 life.	 The	 ordinary	way	 is	 very	 sane,
mathematical,	 calculated,	 cautious.	 The	 way	 of	 sannyas	 is	 non-calculative,
beyond	mathematics,	beyond	cunningness,	cleverness.	It	is	not	cautious	at	all;	it
is	knowingly	moving	into	danger.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	says,	 "Live	dangerously."	He	had	 it	written	on	his	 table	 in
golden	letters:	"Live	dangerously"	--	but	he	never	 lived	dangerously!	In	fact,	a
person	who	is	not	living	dangerously	needs	to	be	reminded	of	the	fact	again	and
again	every	day.	On	his	table,	when	he	comes	to	work	--	"Live	dangerously."	If
you	are	living	it,	there	is	no	need	to	be	reminded.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	lived	in	a	very	cowardly	way.	He	had	great	ideas	--	 just	as
all	 philosophers	 have	 --	 but	 they	 were	 mere	 ideas.	 The	 life	 and	 the	 ideas	 of
philosophers	 are	 polar	 opposites:	 they	 say	 one	 thing;	 they	 do	 exactly	 the
opposite.	 There	 is	 no	 rhythm	 in	 their	 being;	 they	 are	 going	 in	 all	 directions
simultaneously.
But	 those	 two	words,	 "Live	dangerously,"	 are	 significant.	Sannyas	 is	 a	way	 to
live	 your	 life	 in	 total	 danger.	 What	 do	 I	 mean	 when	 I	 say	 sannyas	 is	 living
dangerously?	 It	 means	 living	 moment	 to	 moment	 without	 any	 past.	 The	 past
makes	 your	 life	 convenient,	 comfortable,	 because	 the	 past	 is	 known;	 you	 are
familiar	with	it,	you	are	very	efficient	with	it.	But	life	is	never	past,	it	is	always
present.	 The	 past	 is	 that	 which	 is	 no	 more,	 and	 life	 is	 that	 which	 is.	 Life	 is
always	now,	here,	and	all	your	knowledge	comes	 from	the	past.	Trying	 to	 live
the	present	 through	 the	past	 is	 the	way	of	 the	coward;	 it	 is	 the	calculated	way.
People	 call	 it	 sanity,	 but	 it	 is	 very	 superficial	 and	never	 adequate.	There	 is	 no
rapport	with	the	present.
That's	why	millions	of	people	are	so	utterly	fed	up	with	life.	Life	is	such	a	gift,
and	people	are	fed	up	with	it.	It	is	very	strange	and	amazing.	Why	should	people
be	so	fed	up	with	life?	The	reason	is	not	life	itself;	the	reason	is	they	are	carrying
the	mountainous	load	of	the	past:	all	their	experiences,	knowledge,	information	-
-	what	 others	 have	 told	 them.	They	have	 accumulated	great	 junk	 and	 they	 are
carrying	that	junk.	And	the	load	is	so	heavy,	and	their	eyes	are	covered	with	so
much	dust,	that	they	cannot	see	the	beauty	of	the	present.	And	whatsoever	they
do	see	is	something	other	than	the	reality.
The	 rural	 preacher	 ended	 his	 long,	 dull	 sermon	 by	 requesting	 the	 board	 of
deacons	to	remain	for	a	few	minutes	after	the	service.	In	the	group	which	stayed
on	was	a	stranger.
"Pardon	 me,	 sir,"	 said	 the	 minister	 politely,	 "but	 I	 asked	 that	 only	 the	 board
remain."
"That's	why	I	stayed	on,"	retorted	the	man.	"I	was	never	more	bored	in	my	life!"
Your	religions	are	boring	you,	your	philosophies	are	boring	you,	your	scriptures
are	boring	you.	Thousands	of	years	of	 the	past	are	 the	cause	of	your	boredom.
You	cannot	dance	--	you	are	chained	to	the	past,	you	are	imprisoned	in	the	past.
Sannyas	means	 escaping	 from	 that	 prison.	The	 prison	may	be	 of	Hinduism	or
Mohammedanism	 or	 Christianity	 or	 Judaism	 or	 Jainism	 --	 it	 does	 not	 matter
what	 the	name	of	 the	prison	 is.	On	 the	earth	 there	are	 three	hundred	 religions;
that	means	three	hundred	kinds	of	religious	prisons.	And	there	are	thousands	of
ideologies;	 they	 are	 also	 prisons	 within	 prisons.	 And	 there	 are	 sects	 and
subsects....	 You	 must	 have	 seen	 Chinese	 boxes	 --	 boxes	 within	 boxes	 within
boxes.	You	open	one	box,	then	another;	you	open	that	and	then	another;	you	go
on	 opening	 and	 you	 always	 find	 a	 smaller	 box	within.	 Each	 prison	 has	more
prisons	inside	it.	Ultimately	you	are	left	only	in	a	dark	cell.
Sannyas	is	rebellion	against	all	slavery;	it	is	living	life	in	absolute	freedom.	To
live	 life	 in	 absolute	 freedom,	 without	 traditions,	 without	 conventions,	 without
religions,	without	philosophies,	without	ideologies	--	political,	social,	and	others
--	 to	 live	 unburdened	 is	 sannyas.	 But	 it	 will	 look	 crazy	 to	 the	 whole	 world.
Freedom	 looks	 crazy	 because	 everybody	 is	 living	 an	 imprisoned	 life.	 To
prisoners,	the	person	who	escapes	from	the	prison	looks	crazy,	because	for	them
prison	is	comfortable,	convenient,	secure,	safe.
A	Hungarian	secret	police	colonel	was	inspecting	a	strip	of	the	border.
"Too	 many	 people	 have	 been	 slipping	 across	 at	 this	 point,"	 he	 informed	 the
guards.	"I	have	been	ordered	to	test	your	security	precautions."
After	deploying	the	guards	at	strategic	points,	the	colonel	began	creeping	on	all
fours	toward	the	barbed	wire.
"Can	you	see	me	now?"	he	called	out.	When	 they	cried	back	"Yes,"	he	started
again.	On	the	third	attempt	he	slipped	under	the	fence.
"Can	you	see	me	now?"	he	called	back.
"No,	Comrade	Colonel,"	was	the	answer.
"Then	you	will	never	see	me	again!"	 the	officer	shouted	as	he	hastened	on	his
way	to	freedom.
Sannyas	 is	 an	 escape	 from	 the	 prison	 --	 Catholic	 or	 communist,	 it	 does	 not
matter;	it	is	an	escape	into	the	open.	To	live	moment	to	moment	is	a	crazy	way,	a
poetic	way,	the	way	of	the	lover.	People	are	living	lives	of	prose	--	clear-cut	but
mundane,	 superficial.	 Anything	 which	 is	 very	 clear-cut	 is	 bound	 to	 be
superficial.	 Life	 is	 mystery,	 and	 the	 only	 way	 to	 commune	with	 it	 is	 through
poetry,	not	prose.
The	prose	style	of	life	is	the	ordinary	lifestyle.
The	poetic	style	of	life	is	sannyas.
It	is	bound	to	be	a	little	bit	crazy	--	all	poets	are	crazy,	all	painters	are	crazy,	all
dancers	 are	 crazy,	 all	 musicians	 are	 crazy.	 All	 that	 is	 great	 on	 this	 earth	 has
something	of	madness	in	it.
Zorba	 the	Greek	 says	 to	 his	 boss,	 "Boss,	 everything	 is	 right	 in	 you,	 only	 one
thing	is	missing	--	a	little	bit	of	madness!"
And	I	agree	with	Zorba.	Sannyas	gives	you	a	little	bit	of	madness,	but	that	little
bit	of	madness	brings	rainbows	to	your	life.	Multidimensional	is	that	little	bit	of
madness.	 It	 opens	 many	 doors	 which	 have	 remained	 closed	 for	 thousands	 of
years.	 It	 allows	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 rain	 and	 the	wind	 to	 come	 in.	 It	 gives	 you	 a
chance	to	whisper	with	the	clouds	and	the	stars.	It	is	a	way	of	falling	in	love	with
existence.	 To	 live	 without	 falling	 in	 love	 with	 this	 tremendously	 beautiful
existence	 is	 very	 stupid,	 ridiculous.	 That	 is	 missing	 the	 whole	 opportunity	 of
being,	of	being	alive,	of	being	intensely	alive,	passionately	alive.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 risk!	The	people	who	cannot	 take	 any	 risk	 cannot	be	 sannyasins.
Hence	 the	 people	who	 are	Hindu	 sannyasins	 are	 not	 real	 sannyasins;	 they	 are
still	 clinging	 to	 the	 safety	 of	 the	 Hindu	 tradition.	 The	 VEDAS	 and	 the
BHAGAVADGITA	 and	 the	 RAMAYANA	 --	 the	 whole	 past	 gives	 them	 the
feeling	that	they	are	on	the	right	track:
"How	can	so	many	people	be	wrong?"	They	are	following	like	sheep	--	a	large
crowd	of	sheep,	ancient,	very	ancient,	prehistoric!	The	more	ancient	a	tradition
is,	the	safer	it	looks.
The	person	who	cannot	risk,	deals	with	life	in	a	businesslike	way	--	tries	to	cheat
life,	exploit	 life.	He	 tries	 to	give	 less	and	get	more,	because	 that	 is	 the	way	of
profit.
The	 sannyasin	 does	 not	 care	 at	 all	 about	 getting	 anything	 back	 from	 life;	 he
simply	 gives	 in	 sheer	 trust,	 and	 he	 receives	 a	 millionfold.	 But	 that's	 another
matter;	that	is	not	his	consideration	at	all.	The	man	who	is	trying	to	exploit	life
will	not	get	much	out	of	it,	and	whatsoever	he	does	get	will	remain	inessential.
He	will	 remain	a	beggar	and	he	will	die	a	beggar.	He	will	never	know	what	 it
means	to	be	an	emperor.
The	sannyasin	knows	what	it	means	to	be	an	emperor,	because	he	simply	gives;
he	enjoys	giving,	he	loves	sharing.	And	the	miracle	of	life	is:	the	more	you	give
the	more	you	have.
When	 you	 give	 totally,	 the	 whole	 sky	 descends	 on	 you,	 the	 whole	 beyond
becomes	your	within.
Sannyas	 is	 hope	 --	 hope	 against	 all	 hope.	 People	 have	 lost	 all	 hope;	 they	 are
living	hopelessly.	They	are	 living	simply	because	 they	are	cowards	and	cannot
commit	suicide.
The	existentialist	philosophers	are	 right	when	 they	say	 that	 the	most	 important
philosophical	problem	is	suicide:	to	live	or	not	to	live,	to	be	or	not	to	be.	If	this	is
life	that	ordinary	people	are	living,	then	it	does	not	seem	to	be	worth	living	at	all.
What	is	the	point	of	getting	up	every	morning	and	going	through	the	same	empty
gestures	 you	 have	 gone	 through	 thousands	 of	 times?	 The	 same	 breakfast,	 the
same	 nagging	 wife,	 the	 same	 ugly	 husband;	 the	 same	 suspicions,	 the	 same
possessiveness,	the	same	jealousy,	the	same	anger,	the	same	ambition;	rushing	to
the	office,	the	same	boss	--	everything	is	the	same,	a	constant	repetition.
And	 again	 coming	 back	 home	 and	 sitting	 in	 front	 of	 that	 idiot	 box	 called	 the
television,	and	looking	at	 the	same	story,	 the	same	triangles	--	 two	women	and
one	man	or	two	men	and	one	woman	--	the	same	story,	the	same	triangle!	And
you	already	know	the	conclusion;	in	fact,	you	can	write	the	whole	story	yourself.
But	what	else	to	do?	Playing	cards,	listening	to	the	radio,	reading	the	newspaper
--	 it	 is	 almost	 the	 same.	 And	 then	 to	 bed	 again,	 and	 the	 same	 nightmares....
Nothing	 seems	 to	 be	 of	 any	 significance,	 and	 you	 have	 done	 it	 all,	 and	many
times.
The	existentialists	are	raising	a	significant	question:	Why	go	on	living?	The	only
reason	seems	to	be	that	people	are	afraid	of	dying,	they	are	cowardly.	They	are
living	hopelessly	because	at	least	they	have	not	chosen	to	live.	Death	has	to	be
chosen,	and	they	cannot	take	any	decision	on	their	own.
Sannyas	 is	 choosing	 your	 life	 and	 also	 choosing	 your	 death.	 Sannyas	 means
becoming	decisive,	conscious,	deliberate.
No	matter	 how	 bad	 the	 news	might	 be,	 there	 was	 one	 man	 who	 had	 a	 stock
comment:
"Ah	well,	it	might	have	been	worse."
One	day	a	friend	said	to	him,	"I	have	had	an	experience	to	which	you	can't	apply
your	favorite	cliche.	I	dreamed	the	other	night	that	I	died,	went	to	hell,	and	was
doomed	to	everlasting	torment."
"Ah	well,	it	might	have	been	worse,"	said	the	optimist.
"How	in	hell	could	it	have	been	worse?"	cried	the	other.
The	optimist	replied,	"It	might	have	been	true!"
The	way	of	sannyas	is	the	way	of	tremendous	hope,	trust.	Life	is	basically	good,
beautiful,	divine,	so	if	we	are	missing	then	something	is	wrong	with	us,	not	with
life	itself.	Life	is	so	beautiful	that	it	makes	even	death	beautiful.
Sannyas,	Moses,	is	not	a	way	of	doing	anything,	it	is	a	way	of	being.	It	changes
your	 inner	world	 and,	 of	 course,	 your	 outer	world	 changes	with	 it,	 but	 that	 is
secondary.	 It	 changes	 your	 center,	 it	 changes	 your	 awareness,	 and	 then	 your
behavior,	your	actions.
Whatsoever	 you	 do	 has	 a	 new	 quality	 to	 it,	 a	 grace	 that	 descends	 from	 the
beyond	--	a	song	said	or	unsaid,	sung	or	unsung,	but	it	is	there	within	your	heart,
a	dance,	the	quality	of	dance	to	your	feet....
Hence,	Moses,	I	say	it	is	a	crazy	way	of	living,	but	that's	the	only	way	to	live	life
rightly.
A	poetic	way,	the	way	of	the	lover	--	but	only	love	knows.
Logic	is	blind,	love	has	eyes.
Only	love	can	see	the	ultimate	truth	that	surrounds	you	within	and	without.
The	third	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	DO	I	WANT?
Krishna,	nobody	knows	exactly	because	nobody	is	even	aware	of	who	he	is.	The
question	 of	wanting	 is	 secondary;	 the	 basic	 question	 is:	Who	 are	 you?	Out	 of
that,	things	can	be	settled	--	what	your	desires,	your	wants,	your	ambitions	will
be.
If	you	are	an	ego	then	of	course	you	want	money,	power,	prestige.	Then	your	life
will	have	a	political	structure.	You	will	be	in	constant	struggle	with	other	people,
you	 will	 be	 competitive	 --	 ambition	 means	 competition.	 You	 will	 be
continuously	at	others'	throats	and	they	will	be	continuously	at	your	throat.	Then
life	becomes	what	Charles	Darwin	says:	the	survival	of	the	fittest.	In	fact,	his	use
of	the	word	"fittest"	is	not	right.	What	he	really	means	by	the	fittest	is	the	most
cunning,	the	most	animal-like,	the	most	stubborn,	the	most	stupid,	the	most	ugly.
Charles	Darwin	will	 not	 say	 that	Buddha	 is	 the	 fittest	 or	 Jesus	 is	 the	 fittest	 or
Socrates	 is	 the	 fittest.	These	 people	were	 killed	 so	 easily,	 and	 the	 people	who
killed	 them	 survived.	 Jesus	 could	 not	 survive.	Certainly,	 according	 to	Darwin,
Jesus	 is	 not	 the	 fittest	 person.	Pontius	Pilate	 is	 far	more	 fit,	more	on	 the	 right
track.	 Socrates	 is	 not	 the	 fittest,	 but	 the	 people	 who	 poisoned	 him,	 who
condemned	him	to	death	are.	His	use	of	the	word	"fittest"	is	very	unfortunate.
If	you	are	living	in	the	ego,	Krishna,	then	your	life	will	be	a	struggle;	it	will	be
violent,	 aggressive.	 You	will	 create	misery	 for	 others	 and	misery	 for	 yourself
too,	because	the	life	of	conflict	cannot	be	anything	else.	So	it	all	depends	on	you,
who	you	are.	 If	you	are	 the	ego,	 still	 thinking	of	yourself	 in	 terms	of	 the	ego,
then	you	will	have	a	certain	stinking	quality.	Or	if	you	have	come	to	understand
that	you	are	not	the	ego,	then	your	life	will	have	a	fragrance.	If	you	don't	know
yourself,	 you	 are	 living	out	 of	 unconsciousness,	 and	 a	 life	 of	 unconsciousness
can	only	be	one	of	misunderstanding.	You	may	listen	to	Buddha,	you	may	listen
to	me,	 you	may	 listen	 to	 Jesus,	 but	 you	will	 interpret	 according	 to	 your	 own
unconsciousness	--	you	will	MISinterpret.
Christianity	 is	 the	 misinterpretation	 of	 Jesus;	 so	 is	 Buddhism	 the
misinterpretation	 of	 Buddha,	 and	 so	 is	 Jainism	 the	 misinterpretation	 of
Mahavira.	 All	 these	 religions	 are	 misinterpretations,	 distortions,	 because	 the
people	who	follow	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Krishna,	are	ordinary	people	without	any
awareness.	Whatsoever	they	do,	they	will	save	the	letter	and	kill	the	spirit.
A	philosopher	was	walking	around	a	park	and	noticed	a	man	who	was	sitting	in
the	lotus	posture,	eyes	open,	looking	at	the	ground.	The	philosopher	saw	that	the
man	was	 totally	 absorbed	 in	 his	 gazing	 downwards.	After	watching	 him	 for	 a
long	 time,	 the	philosopher	 could	no	 longer	 resist	 and	went	over	 to	 the	 strange
fellow	asking,	"What	are	you	looking	for?	What	are	you	doing?"
The	man	answered	without	shifting	his	gaze,	"I	am	following	the	Zen	tradition	of
sitting	silently	doing	nothing	and	then	the	spring	comes	and	the	grass	grows	by
itself.	I	am	watching	the	grass	growing,	and	it	is	not	growing	at	all!"
There	is	no	need	to	watch	the	grass	growing	--	but	that's	what	always	happens.
Jesus	says	one	thing,	people	hear	it,	but	they	hear	only	the	words	and	they	give
to	those	words	THEIR	meaning.
A	mother	took	her	small	son	to	the	psychiatrist	and	for	at	least	three	hours	told
the	psychiatrist	the	whole	story	of	her	son.	The	psychiatrist	was	getting	tired,	fed
up,	but	the	woman	was	so	absorbed	in	the	telling	that	she	was	not	even	giving
the	 psychiatrist	 an	 opportunity	 to	 prevent	 her.	 One	 sentence	 followed	 another
with	no	gap.
Finally	 the	 psychiatrist	 had	 to	 say,	 "Please,	 now	 stop!	 Let	 me	 ask	 the	 son
something!"
And	 he	 asked	 the	 son,	 "Your	 mother	 is	 complaining	 that	 you	 don't	 listen	 to
whatsoever	she	says	to	you.	Have	you	difficulty	in	hearing?"
The	son	said,	"No,	I	have	no	difficulty	hearing	--	my	ears	are	perfectly	okay	--
but	 as	 far	 as	 listening	 is	 concerned,	 now	you	 can	 judge	 for	 yourself.	Can	you
listen	to	my	mother?
Hear	I	can;	I	have	to.	I	have	even	been	watching	you	--	you	were	fidgeting.	One
has	to	hear,	but	listening	--	at	least	I	am	free	to	listen	or	not.	Whether	I	listen	or
not,	that	is	up	to	me.	If	she	is	shouting	at	me,	hearing	it	is	natural,	but	listening	is
a	totally	different	matter."
You	 have	 heard,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 listened,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 distortions	 have
gathered	around.	And	people	go	on	 repeating	 those	words	without	any	 idea	of
what	they	are	repeating.
You	ask	me,	Krishna,	"What	do	I	want?"	I	should	ask	you	rather	than	you	asking
me,	because	it	depends	where	you	are.	If	you	are	identified	with	the	body,	then
your	wants	will	 be	different;	 then	 food	 and	 sex	will	 be	your	 only	wants,	 your
only	 desires.	 These	 two	 are	 animal	 desires,	 the	 lowest.	 I	 am	 not	 condemning
them	by	calling	them	the	lowest,	I	am	not	evaluating	them.	Remember,	I	am	just
stating	a	fact:	the	lowest	rung	of	the	ladder.
But	 if	 you	 are	 identified	with	 the	mind,	 your	 desires	will	 be	 different:	music,
dance,	poetry,	and	then	there	are	thousands	of	things....
The	body	is	very	limited;	it	has	a	simple	polarity:	food	and	sex.	It	moves	like	a
pendulum	between	these	two,	food	and	sex;	it	has	nothing	more	to	it.	But	if	you
are	 identified	 with	 the	 mind,	 then	 mind	 has	 many	 dimensions.	 You	 can	 be
interested	in	philosophy,	you	can	be	interested	in	science,	you	can	be	interested
in	religion	--	you	can	be	interested	in	as	many	things	as	you	can	imagine.
If	 you	 are	 identified	with	 the	 heart,	 then	 your	 desires	will	 be	 of	 a	 still	 higher
nature,	higher	 than	 the	mind.	You	will	 become	more	aesthetic,	more	 sensitive,
more	alert,	more	loving.
The	mind	is	aggressive,	the	heart	is	receptive.
The	mind	is	male,	the	heart	is	female.
The	mind	is	logic,	the	heart	is	love.
So	it	depends	where	you	are	stuck:	at	the	body,	at	the	mind,	at	the	heart.	These
are	 the	 three	most	 important	places	 from	which	one	 can	 function.	But	 there	 is
also	the	fourth	in	you;	in	the	East	it	is	called	TURIYA.	Turiya	simply	means	the
fourth,	the	transcendental.
If	you	are	aware	of	your	transcendentalness,	then	all	desires	disappear.	Then	one
simply	IS	with	no	desire	at	all,	with	nothing	to	be	asked,	to	be	fulfilled.	There	is
no	 future	 and	 no	 past.	 Then	 one	 lives	 just	 in	 the	 moment,	 utterly	 contented,
fulfilled.	 In	 the	 fourth,	your	one-thousand-petaled	 lotus	opens	up;	you	become
divine.
You	 are	 asking	me,	Krishna,	 "What	 do	 I	want?"	That	 simply	 shows	you	 don't
even	know	where	you	are,	where	you	are	stuck.	You	will	have	to	inquire	within
yourself	--	and	it	is	not	very	difficult.	If	it	is	food	and	sex	that	takes	up	the	major
part	of	you,	 then	 that	 is	where	you	are	 identified;	 if	 it	 is	 something	concerned
with	 thinking,	 then	 it	 is	 the	mind;	 if	 it	 is	concerned	with	 feeling,	 then	 it	 is	 the
heart.	And,	 of	 course,	Krishna,	 it	 cannot	 be	 the	 fourth;	 otherwise	 the	 question
would	not	have	arisen	at	all!
So	rather	than	answering	you	I	would	like	to	ask	you	where	you	are.	Inquire!
Three	pigs	entered	a	bar.	The	first	pig	ordered	a	drink	and	then	asked	the	way	to
the	bathroom.	The	second	pig	ordered	a	drink	and	also	asked	the	bartender	the
way	to	the	bathroom.	Then	the	third	pig	came	up	to	the	bar	and	ordered	a	drink.
"Don't	YOU	want	to	know	where	the	bathroom	is?"	sneered	the	bartender.
"No!"	replied	the	little	pig.	"I	am	the	one	that	goes,	`Wee,	wee,	wee...all	the	way
home!'"
I	should	ask	you,	"Where	are	you?	What	kind	of	identification?	Where	are	you
stuck?"
Only	then	can	things	be	clear	--	and	it	is	not	difficult.	But	it	happens	again	and
again	 that	 people	 ask	 beautiful	 questions,	 particularly	 Indians,	 Krishna.	 They
may	be	stuck	at	their	sex	center,	but	they	will	ask	about	SAMADHI.	They	will
ask,	 "What	 is	 NIRVIKALPA	 SAMADHI,	 where	 all	 thoughts	 disappear,	 that
thoughtless	consciousness?	What	is	it?
What	is	NIRBEEJ	SAMADHI,	the	seedless,	where	even	the	seeds	for	any	future
are	completely	burnt?	What	is	that	ultimate	state	when	one	need	not	return	to	the
earth,	 to	 the	 womb,	 to	 life	 again?"	 These	 are	 just	 foolish	 questions	 they	 are
asking;	they	are	not	their	questions.	They	are	not	at	all	concerned	with	their	real
situation.	 They	 are	 asking	 beautiful	 questions,	metaphysical,	 esoteric,	 to	 show
that	 they	 are	higher	 quality	beings;	 that	 they	 are	 scholarly,	 that	 they	know	 the
scriptures,	 that	 they	 are	 seekers;	 that	 they	 are	 not	 ordinary	 people,	 they	 are
extraordinary,	 religious.	 That	 is	 driving	 the	 Indians	 into	 more	 and	 more	 of	 a
mess.
It	 is	always	good	 to	ask	something	which	 is	 relevant	 to	you	 rather	 than	 to	ask
something	which	is	of	no	concern	to	you.	People	ask	me	whether	God	exists	or
not,	and	they	don't	even	know	whether	they	exist	or	not!
Just	the	other	day,	Divakar	Bharti,	another	Indian,	asked	me,	"Why	am	I	here?"
Divakar,	are	you	really	here?	Ask	yourself,	are	you	really	here?	I	don't	think	that
you	are	here.	Physically	of	course	you	are	here,	but	spiritually,	REALLY,	you	are
not	here.
Unless	you	drop	that	idea	of	being	Indian,	of	being	a	Hindu,	you	cannot	be	here,
you	 cannot	 be	 part	 of	MY	 commune.	You	 have	 carried	 all	 kinds	 of	 nonsense
inside	you	and	you	are	still	clinging	to	it.
Krishna,	 it	 is	 always	good	 to	 ask	 realistic	questions,	because	 then	 it	 can	be	of
some	help	to	you.	If	you	are	suffering	from	the	common	cold	and	you	go	to	the
physician	and	you	ask	about	cancer,	because	a	man	like	you	--	how	can	he	suffer
from	 such	 an	 ordinary	 thing	 as	 the	 common	 cold...?	 Every	 ordinary	 person
suffers	from	the	common	cold,	that's	why	it	is	called	the	common	cold.	But	you
are	such	an	uncommon	person	--	you	are	not	any	Tom,	Harry	or	Dick.	You	are	so
special,	you	have	 to	suffer	from	something	very	special,	so	you	ask	a	question
about	cancer.	And	 if	 the	physician	helps	you	 in	curing	 the	cancer	you	will	get
into	more	 trouble	 --	 that	 treatment	 is	 not	 going	 to	 fit	 you	 at	 all.	 It	will	 create
more	complications	in	you	because	those	medicines	can	kill	you,	because	there
is	nothing	for	them	to	work	upon;	there	is	no	cancer	in	you	and	they	cannot	be	of
any	use	for	the	common	cold.
In	 fact,	 for	 the	 common	 cold	 there	 is	 no	medicine.	 If	 you	 take	medicine,	 the
common	cold	goes	within	seven	days;	 if	you	don't	 take	any,	 it	goes	within	one
week!	In	fact,	it	is	so	common	that	medical	science	has	not	bothered	about	it	at
all.	Who	cares	about	such	small	things?	People	are	concerned	about	going	to	the
moon,	and	about	such	small	matters	as	 the	common	cold	or	a	 leaking	fountain
pen,	who	bothers?	The	fountain	pen	still	leaks!
People	have	reached	the	moon	and	they	have	not	yet	been	able	to	make	a	one-
hundred-percent-guaranteed	fountain	pen	which	is	not	going	to	leak!
Just	look	inside	yourself,	Krishna.	Where	exactly	is	your	problem?
A	general	visiting	a	field	hospital	asks	one	of	the	bed-ridden	soldiers,	"What	is
wrong	with	you?"
"Sir,"	replies	the	soldier,	"I've	got	boils."
"What	treatment	do	you	get?"
"They	swab	me	down	with	iodine	tincture,	sir."
"And	that	helps?"	asks	the	general.
"Yes,	sir!"	replies	the	soldier.
Then	the	general	goes	to	the	soldier	in	the	next	bed	and	finds	out	that	 this	guy
has	hemorrhoids.	He	too	gets	swabbed	down	with	iodine;	 it	helps,	and	he	does
not	 have	 any	 other	 wishes.	 The	 general	 then	 asks	 the	 third	 soldier,	 "What	 is
wrong	with	you?"
"Sir,	I've	got	swollen	tonsils.	I	get	swabbed	down	with	iodine,	and	yes,	it	helps."
"Anything	you	would	like?"	asks	the	concerned	general.
"Yes,	sir!"	replied	the	soldier.	"I'd	like	to	be	the	first	to	be	swabbed	down."
First	you	have	to	see	your	situation,	where	you	are;	only	then	can	you	say	what
you	want.
If	 you	 are	being	 swabbed	down	with	 iodine	 tincture	 after	 these	 two	 fellows	 --
one	who	has	got	boils	and	one	who	has	got	hemorrhoids	--	and	you	are	suffering
only	from	swollen	tonsils,	then	the	problem	is	clear!
Inquire,	 look	 for	 the	 exact	 place	where	you	 are.	As	 far	 as	 I	 am	concerned,	 all
desire	is	a	sheer	wastage,	all	wanting	is	wrong.	But	if	you	are	identified	with	the
body	I	cannot	say	that	to	you	because	that	will	be	too	far	away	from	you.	If	you
are	identified	with	the	body	I	will	say:	move	a	little	towards	higher	desires,	the
desires	 of	 the	mind,	 and	 then	 a	 little	 higher,	 the	 desires	 of	 the	 heart,	 and	 then
ultimately	to	the	state	of	desirelessness.	No	desire	can	ever	be	fulfilled.	This	is
the	 difference	 between	 the	 scientific	 approach	 and	 the	 religious	 approach.
Science	tries	to	fulfill	your	desires	and	of	course	science	has	succeeded	in	doing
many	things,	but	man	remains	in	the	same	misery.	Religion	tries	to	wake	you	up
to	 that	 great	 understanding	 from	 where	 you	 can	 see	 that	 all	 desires	 are
intrinsically	unfulfillable.
One	has	to	go	beyond	all	desires;	only	then	is	there	contentment.	Contentment	is
not	at	the	end	of	a	desire,	contentment	is	not	by	fulfilling	the	desire,	because	the
desire	cannot	be	fulfilled.	By	the	time	you	come	to	the	fulfillment	of	your	desire,
you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	other	desires	have	arisen.	Each	desire	branches
out	into	many	new	desires.	And	again	and	again	it	will	happen,	and	your	whole
life	will	be	wasted.
Those	who	have	known,	those	who	have	seen	--	the	buddhas,	the	awakened	ones
--	have	all	agreed	on	one	point.	It	 is	not	a	philosophical	 thing,	 it	 is	factual,	 the
fact	of	the	inner	world:	that	contentment	is	when	all	desires	have	been	dropped.
It	is	with	the	absence	of	the	desires	that	contentment	arises	within	you	--	in	the
absence.	 In	 fact,	 the	 very	 absence	 of	 desires	 IS	 contentment,	 IS	 fulfillment,
fruition,	flowering.
Krishna,	move	from	lower	desires	to	higher	desires,	from	gross	desires	to	more
subtle	desires,	 then	 to	 the	subtlest,	because	from	the	subtlest	 the	 jump	into	no-
desire,	into	desirelessness,	is	easy.	Desirelessness	is	NIRVANA.
Nirvana	has	two	meanings.	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	words;	any	language
can	be	proud	of	this	word.	It	has	two	meanings,	but	those	two	meanings	are	like
two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	One	meaning	is	cessation	of	the	ego,	and	the	other
meaning	is	cessation	of	all	desires.	It	happens	simultaneously.	The	ego	and	the
desires	are	intrinsically	together,	they	are	inseparably	together.	The	moment	ego
dies,	desires	disappear,	or	vice	versa:	the	moment	desires	are	transcended,	ego	is
transcended.	And	to	be	desireless,	to	be	egoless,	is	to	know	the	ultimate	bliss,	is
to	know	the	eternal	ecstasy.
Krishna,	 that's	what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 the	 quest	 for	 the	 eternal	 ecstasy	 that
begins	but	never	ends.
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	COURAGE?
Premo,	courage	means	going	into	the	unknown	in	spite	of	all	the	fears.	Courage
does	not	mean	fearlessness.	Fearlessness	happens	if	you	go	on	being	courageous
and	more	courageous.	That	is	the	ultimate	experience	of	courage	--	fearlessness;
that	is	the	fragrance	when	the	courage	has	become	absolute.	But	in	the	beginning
there	is	not	much	difference	between	the	coward	and	the	courageous	person.	The
only	 difference	 is,	 the	 coward	 listens	 to	 his	 fears	 and	 follows	 them,	 and	 the
courageous	person	puts	them	aside	and	goes	ahead.	The	courageous	person	goes
into	the	unknown	in	spite	of	all	the	fears.
He	knows	the	fears,	the	fears	are	there.
When	you	go	into	the	uncharted	sea,	like	Columbus	did,	there	is	fear,	immense
fear,	because	one	never	knows	what	is	going	to	happen	and	you	are	leaving	the
shore	of	safety.
You	were	 perfectly	 okay,	 in	 a	way;	 only	 one	 thing	was	missing	 --	 adventure.
Going	into	the	unknown	gives	you	a	thrill.	The	heart	starts	pulsating	again;	again
you	are	 alive,	 fully	 alive.	Every	 fiber	of	your	being	 is	 alive	because	you	have
accepted	the	challenge	of	the	unknown.
To	accept	the	challenge	of	the	unknown	in	spite	of	all	fears,	is	courage.	The	fears
are	 there,	 but	 if	 you	 go	 on	 accepting	 the	 challenge	 again	 and	 again,	 slowly
slowly	those	fears	disappear.	The	experience	of	the	joy	that	the	unknown	brings,
the	 great	 ecstasy	 that	 starts	 happening	 with	 the	 unknown,	 makes	 you	 strong
enough,	gives	you	a	certain	integrity,	makes	your	intelligence	sharp.	For	the	first
time	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 life	 is	 not	 just	 a	 boredom	 but	 an	 adventure.	 Then
slowly	 slowly	 fears	 disappear;	 then	 you	 are	 always	 seeking	 and	 searching	 for
some	adventure.
But	basically	courage	is	risking	the	known	for	the	unknown,	the	familiar	for	the
unfamiliar,	 the	 comfortable	 for	 the	 uncomfortable	 arduous	 pilgrimage	 to	 some
unknown	destination.	One	never	knows	whether	one	will	be	able	 to	make	it	or
not.	It	is	gambling,	but	only	the	gamblers	know	what	life	is.
An	African	 delegation	 to	Moscow	was	 being	 treated	 to	 all	 aspects	 of	Russian
culture.
One	 of	 the	 secret	 service	 agents	 was	 telling	 an	 African	 how	 to	 play	 Russian
roulette	with	a	six-shooter	handgun	with	only	one	bullet	in	the	chamber.
"You	put	it	to	your	head,"	he	said,	"and	pull	the	trigger."
The	African	was	not	 impressed.	 "African	 roulette	 is	much	more	 fearsome!"	he
said.
"Impossible!"	exclaimed	the	Russian,	"Please	explain."
"There	are	six	naked	women,"	said	 the	African,	"and	each	one	will	give	you	a
blowjob	--
you	just	choose	any	one."
"That	needs	no	courage,"	sneered	the	Russian.
"Aha!"	exclaimed	the	African.	"But	one	of	them	is	a	cannibal!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Let	Sannyas	Happen
31	October	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8010310
ShortTitle:
COME05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
EVERY	TIME	I	HEAR	YOU	PRAISING	CAPITALISM	I	GET	ANGRY.	YOU
SAY
SANNYAS	 MEANS	 TO	 GET	 RID	 OF	 ALL	 CONDITIONING	 AND	 TO
ESCAPE	OUT
OF	EVERY	CAGE	WHETHER	IT	IS	RELIGIOUS,	PHILOSOPHICAL	OR
POLITICAL.	 BUT	 ISN'T	 CAPITALISM	 A	 CAGE	 TOO?	 WHY	 CAN'T	 WE
LIVE	A	CREATIVE	LIFE	 IN	WEALTH	AND	 FREEDOM	WITHOUT	ANY
"ISMS"?
Swami	Prem	Vardan,	capitalism	is	not	an	"ism"	at	all;	just	don't	get	too	obsessed
by	the	word.	Sometimes	words	become	too	important	to	us	and	we	tend	to	forget
the	reality.
Capitalism	 is	 not	 an	 ideology;	 it	 is	 not	 imposed	 on	 the	 society,	 it	 is	 a	 natural
growth.	 It	 is	 not	 like	 communism,	 or	 fascism,	 or	 socialism	 --	 these	 are
ideologies;	they	have	to	be	imposed.	Capitalism	has	come	on	its	own.	In	fact,	the
word	"capitalism"	has	been	given	by	the	anticapitalist	thinkers:	the	communists,
the	socialists	and	others.	Capitalism	is	a	state	of	freedom;	that's	exactly	why	I	am
in	support	of	it.	It	allows	you	all	kinds	of	freedoms.	Communism	will	not	allow
you	 all	 kinds	 of	 freedoms;	 communism	 will	 give	 you	 only	 one	 ideology	 to
believe	in	--	there	is	no	question	of	choice.
I	am	reminded	of	Henry	Ford....
When	he	made	his	first	model,	those	cars	were	only	made	in	one	color	--	black.
And	he	himself	used	 to	 take	 the	 customers	 round	his	 showroom;	he	would	go
around	with	 them	and	show	them	the	cars.	He	used	 to	say	 to	people,	"You	are
free	to	choose	any	color,	provided	it	is	black!"
That's	exactly	the	attitude	of	communism:	you	are	free	to	choose	any	ideology,
any	philosophy,	any	religion,	provided	it	is	communism.	In	a	communist	society
there	 is	no	hope	 for	a	multidimensional	humanity	 to	grow;	 it	can	allow	only	a
certain	 type	 to	 grow:	 it	 is	 linear.	 You	 cannot	 conceive	 that	 in	 a	 communist
pattern	even	Karl	Marx	would	be	possible;	he	would	not	be	allowed.	You	cannot
conceive	a	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Krishna,	or	a	Lao	Tzu	being	born	in	a	communist
society;	they	would	be	destroyed	at	the	very	beginning.
Before	 the	 Russian	 revolution,	 Russia	 produced	 the	 greatest	 novelists	 in	 the
world.
Before	the	revolution,	Russia	passed	through	an	immense	period	of	creativity;	it
was	 almost	 an	 explosion.	Nowhere	 else,	 in	no	other	 time,	were	 so	many	great
artists	born	together:	Leo	Tolstoy,	Fyodor	Dostoevsky,	Anton	Chekhov,	Maxim
Gorky,	Turgenev,	and	many	more.	What	happened	to	all	that	creativity	after	the
Russian	revolution?	Not	a	single	Tolstoy,	not	a	single	Dostoevsky,	not	a	single
Maxim	Gorky	 has	 appeared.	 It	 is	 impossible,	 because	 the	 government	 directs
you	about	what	to	write,	what	not	to	write.
The	 bureaucracy	 dictates	 everything.	You	 cannot	 paint	 according	 to	 your	 own
heart,	you	cannot	sing	the	song	that	you	want	to	sing;	you	have	to	dance	to	the
tune	 that	 the	 government	 plays.	 Naturally,	 only	 mediocre	 people	 have	 been
happy	in	Russia.
Untalented	people	will	find	it	very	good,	but	talented	people,	who	are	the	salt	of
the	earth,	will	be	retarded.
Only	one	outlet	is	there,	to	go	into	politics,	and	that	too	is	not	easy.	Once	you	are
in	 power	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 for	 anybody	 else	 to	 replace	 you.	 Joseph	 Stalin
remained	in	power	longer	than	any	other	person,	and	he	was	hated	by	the	people
from	their	very	guts,	but	nobody	was	able	to	say	anything.	He	killed	more	people
than	Genghis	Khan,	Tamerlane,	Nadirshah;	even	Adolf	Hitler	comes	second	 to
him.	And	he	 killed	 very	methodically.	 It	 is	 estimated	 that	 he	must	 have	killed
several	million	people	at	least,	with	no	guilt.
The	 day	 he	 died	 and	 Krushchev	 came	 into	 power,	 Krushchev	 started	 saying
things	against	him.	Even	his	dead	body	was	removed	from	the	Kremlin,	from	the
place	where	it	had	been	ceremoniously	placed.	It	was	dragged	from	the	grave	in
a	very	insulting	way	and	removed	to	a	faraway	place	which	nobody	visits.
Krushchev	 had	 always	 served	 Stalin	 as	 a	 servant,	 and	when	 he	 started	 saying
things	 against	 him....	 In	 one	 of	 the	 meetings	 of	 communist	 workers	 he	 was
talking	 against	 Stalin,	 and	 a	worker	 shouted	 from	 the	 back	 row,	 "Where	were
you	when	he	was	alive?
Why	didn't	you	say	these	things	when	he	was	alive?"
For	a	moment	there	was	a	very	uneasy	silence.	Even	Krushchev	could	not	find
any	 words.	 Then	 he	 asked,	 "Can	 I	 ask	 one	 thing,	 sir?	 Can	 you	 stand	 up,
comrade?	Who	has	asked	 this	question?"	And	Krushchev	 laughed	and	he	said,
"Now	you	know!	That's	my	answer!"
Communism	 is	 an	 "ism";	 capitalism	 is	 not	 an	 "ism."	 Capitalism	 is	 simply	 a
natural	 phenomenon	 that	 has	 come	 on	 its	 own.	 There	 are	 no	 capitalist
philosophers,	 there	 is	 no	 capitalist	 party,	 there	 is	 no	 capitalist	 economy	which
has	been	enforced	on	people;	it	is	a	growth.
But	you	seem,	Vardan,	to	be	too	attached	to	the	word.	Rather	than	looking	at	the
reality	you	have	become	distracted	by	the	word	"capitalism."	It	simply	means	a
state	of	LAISSEZ-FAIRE,	a	state	of	freedom	where	one	is	allowed	to	be	himself.
Capitalism	 is	 not	 an	 "ism"	 but	 a	 natural	 state	 of	 society	 which	 is	 capable	 of
producing	capital,	which	is	capable	of	producing	wealth.
Now	 for	 sixty	 years	 or	 more	 communism	 has	 existed	 in	 Russia.	 Still,
communism	existing	in	Russia	has	not	been	able	to	make	it	a	rich	society;	it	is	a
poor	 country.	 Of	 course	 they	 go	 on	 competing	 as	 far	 as	 war	 technology	 is
concerned,	but	the	people	are	poor.	America	is	far	richer;	in	fact,	it	is	the	richest
society	that	has	ever	existed	on	the	earth.	Even	the	poorest	man	in	America	is	in
a	 far	 better	 situation	 than	 any	 Russian,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 people	 are
allowed	 to	 produce	 wealth	 if	 they	 choose	 to.	 If	 they	 choose	 not	 to	 produce
wealth,	 if	 they	 want	 to	 be	 painters,	 poets,	 they	 are	 allowed	 --	 that	 is	 their
freedom,	that	is	their	birthright.	In	communism	you	don't	have	any	birthright.
And	 remember,	 equality	 is	 a	 very	 unpsychological	 idea.	 People	 are	 not	 equal.
Albert	Einstein,	Karl	Marx,	Gautam	Buddha,	Jesus,	Mohammed,	Ghalib	--	can
you	consider	 that	 these	people	are	equal?	The	 society	consists	of	 thousands	of
types;	 it	 is	 beautiful	 because	 of	 the	 variety.	 Communism	 destroys	 variety.	 It
makes	people	 in	a	certain	pattern,	 it	gives	 them	a	certain	 structure.	The	whole
society	becomes	like	an	army:	everybody	is	regimented,	everybody	is	following
a	certain	ideal.
Don't	 be	 too	 obsessed	 with	 the	 simple	 word	 "capitalism."	 But	 we	 live	 in
words...the	very	word,	 the	mention	of	 the	word,	 can	create	anger	 in	you.	That
simply	shows	anger	is	there.
And	 it	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon,	 particularly	 when	 you	 are	 the	 disciple	 of	 a
master	 --	 deep	 down	 you	 are	 angry	 at	 him.	 There	 are	 reasons	 for	 it,	 because
surrendering	 is	 going	 against	 your	 ego,	 and	 the	 ego	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 take
revenge	--	any	excuse	will	do.
Judas	betrayed	Jesus.	Do	you	 think	he	simply	betrayed	Jesus	because	of	 thirty
silver	coins?	That	 is	not	 the	case.	Judas	would	not	have	betrayed	him	for	only
thirty	 silver	 coins.	 He	 had	 lived	 for	 a	 long	 time	 with	 Jesus,	 had	 loved	 him,
worshipped	him,	was	surrendered	to	him.	Then	what	came	over	him?	And	he	felt
immensely	guilty:	 the	day	Jesus	was	crucified...within	 twenty-four	hours	Judas
committed	suicide	out	of	sheer	guilt.
What	had	he	done?	He	could	not	survive,	he	could	not	live	--	the	guilt	was	too
heavy.
But	 nobody	 has	 looked	 into	 the	 psychology	 of	 Judas.	 So	 many	 people	 have
researched	deeply	into	the	psychology	of	Jesus,	but	nobody	has	bothered	to	look
into	the	psychology	of	Judas,	which	is	worth	studying	because	masters	are	few
and	disciples	are	many,	and	their	psychology	should	be	understood.	And	it	is	not
the	first	case....
Gautam	Buddha	was	 betrayed	 by	 his	 own	 cousin-brother	who	was	 a	 disciple;
Devadatta	was	his	name.	Mahavira	was	betrayed	by	his	own	son-in-law	who	was
his	 disciple.	 It	 is	 almost	 an	 inevitable	 phenomenon	 that	 each	master	 has	 been
betrayed	by	somebody	who	was	very	close.	Why?	There	must	be	some	hidden
reason.	Don't	just	condemn	Judas;	Judas	is	only	one	of	the	examples.
To	 surrender	 to	 a	 master	 creates	 anger.	 Unwillingly	 you	 have	 to	 surrender,
finding	no	other	way.	You	have	tried	every	possible	way	to	be	on	your	own,	but
the	more	 efforts	 you	 have	made,	 the	 deeper	 you	 have	 gone	 into	 the	mess.	 So
ultimately,	 as	 a	 last	 resort,	 you	 surrender.	 But	 the	 unwillingness	 is	 there.	 You
would	 have	 been	 far	more	 happy	 if	 there	 had	 been	 no	 need	 to	 surrender.	 But
because	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 to	 do	 --	 you	have	done	 everything	 and	 it	 has	 all
failed	--	you	need	somebody's	help	and	support,	you	need	somebody's	guidance.
And	in	spiritual	matters,	guidance	is	possible	only	if	you	trust,	if	you	surrender,
if	you	put	your	ego	aside.	So	you	put	it	aside,	but	very	unwillingly,	reluctantly,
and	 it	waits	 for	 its	 own	 time	 to	 take	 revenge.	So	 any	 small	 excuse	becomes	 a
very	big	thing.
Now	the	word	"capitalism"	is	torturing	you.	If	you	understand	me,	what	you	are
saying	is	exactly	what	I	mean	by	capitalism.
You	say:	"Why	can't	we	live	a	creative	life	 in	wealth	and	freedom	without	any
ìsms'?"
That's	 exactly	what	 capitalism	 is!	Drop	 the	word	 "ism,"	 find	 something	else.	 I
am	not	much	concerned	with	words.	I	am	not	a	linguist,	not	a	grammarian.
Noah	Webster,	the	lexicographer,	was	in	his	office	making	love	to	his	secretary,
when	Mrs.	Webster	walked	in.
"Noah!"	she	gasped.	"I	am	surprised!"
Quickly	pulling	his	trousers	up,	he	replied,	"Not	so,	my	dear.	You	are	shocked,	I
am	surprised!"
The	 grammarian,	 the	 lexicographer,	 the	 linguist,	 is	 continuously	 thinking	 of
words.	He	 is	 right!	He	says,	 "No,	you	are	 shocked	 --	you	are	using	 the	wrong
word	--	I	am	surprised!"
But	it	is	not	a	question	of	words	at	all.
Don't	 get	 too	 obsessed	with	words;	 otherwise	 you	will	 be	 getting	 angry	 again
and	again.
If	you	want	to	be	angry,	that's	another	matter;	then	you	can	find	any	excuse.	And
you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	--	I	can	provide	you	with	as	many	excuses	as
possible!
"You	say	sannyas	means	to	get	rid	of	all	conditioning...."	Yes,	and	it	includes	the
obsession	with	words	too.	And	you	say,	"to	escape	out	of	every	cage...."	True.
Capitalism	is	the	only	state	where	you	are	not	forced	to	live	in	a	cage,	you	are
free.	But	capitalism	is	in	a	very	dangerous	state,	for	the	simple	reason	that	there
are	only	a	few	people	who	are	capable	of	creating	wealth,	and	they	create	great
jealousy	in	others.	Those	who	cannot	create	wealth	become	jealous	--	and	there
are	more	of	them.
Just	 think:	 if	 society	 were	 ruled	 by	 poets,	 people	 would	 be	 angry	 at	 poetry,
because	 only	 a	 few	 people	 are	 capable	 of	 creating	 poetry	 --	 a	 Shakespeare,	 a
Milton,	 a	 Kalidas,	 a	 Rabindranath....	 Only	 very	 few	 people	 are	 able	 to	 create
poetry,	 and	 they	 would	 be	 the	 rulers.	 What	 about	 the	 ninety-nine	 point	 nine
percent	of	people	who	are	absolutely	unpoetic?	They	would	become	very	angry.
Or	 if	 the	 society	were	 ruled	 by	musicians,	 then	what	 about	 those	who	 cannot
produce	 music,	 who	 are	 not	 creative	 in	 that	 dimension?	 Then	 Beethoven,
Mozart,	Wagner...a	few	people	would	be	able	to	dominate;	they	would	be	at	the
top.	And	what	about	the	others?	The	millions	would	feel	angry.	The	same	is	true
with	capitalism:	very	few	people	are	capable	of	creating	wealth;	it	is	a	dimension
of	 creativity.	 Not	 everybody	 is	 a	 Ford	 or	 a	Morgan	 or	 a	 Rockefeller.	 This	 is
bound	to	be	so.
But	 to	 understand	your	 jealousy	 and	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 it	 is	 sannyas.	To	understand
your	 jealousy	will	help	you	 tremendously	 to	 find	your	dimension	of	creativity.
Everybody	is	born	with	a	certain	potential,	but	it	is	not	the	same	and	it	is	good
that	it	is	not	the	same.
If	everybody	was	a	Shakespeare,	literature	would	lose	all	joy.	If	everybody	was	a
Jesus,	carrying	his	own	cross,	the	whole	scene	would	look	very	crazy!	And	those
Jesuses	would	go	on	carrying	their	crosses,	and	who	would	crucify	them?	They
would	not	find	anyone	to	crucify	them!	It	would	be	a	very	very	long	and	tedious
journey	 to	 nowhere.	 They	 would	 die	 natural	 deaths,	 carrying	 their	 crosses
unnecessarily.	It	is	good	that	everybody	is	not	a	Jesus,	not	a	Buddha....
Everybody	has	to	be	himself,	and	capitalism	simply	gives	you	the	possibility	to
be	yourself.	Certainly	you	will	have	to	prove	your	mettle,	you	will	have	to	work;
you	will	have	to	create,	you	will	have	to	bring	your	total	energy	to	a	focus.	But
only	then	will	you	be	able	to	shine	forth.
Capitalism	is	basically	individualism,	it	is	not	a	social	structure.	It	is	more	than
that;	 it	 is	 just	 democracy	 and	 freedom.	 But	 when	 you	 allow	 everybody	 to	 be
himself,	certainly	you	will	feel	very	jealous,	because	you	can	only	be	one	thing
and	there	will	be	many	people	who	can	be	many	other	things.	Somebody	will	be
a	poet,	somebody	will	be	a	sculptor,	somebody	will	be	a	novelist,	somebody	will
be	a	musician,	a	dancer,	an	architect,	a	scientist...and	maybe	you	are	just	a	boxer.
But	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	--	you	can	be	the	greatest	boxer	in	the	world!
One	has	to	look	within	oneself	and	discover	one's	potential.
Capitalism	 gives	 you	 the	 freedom	 to	 be	 yourself;	 that's	 why	 I	 support	 it.	My
support	 has	 reasons	 behind	 it.	 I	 am	 not	 supporting	 it	 as	 an	 economical
phenomenon;	 there	 is	 much	 more	 involved	 in	 my	 support.	 And	 to	 my
understanding,	capitalism	will	bring	a	socialism	of	its	own	kind	as	a	by-product,
because	when	people	have	created	too	much	wealth,	what	are	they	going	to	do
with	it?	What	will	you	do	with	the	wealth	when	you	have	created	it?
Albert	 Einstein	 discovers	 the	 theory	 of	 relativity,	 the	 secret	 of	 atomic	 energy;
then	it	becomes	part	of	the	whole	society,	then	sooner	or	later	everybody	is	going
to	be	benefited	by	 it.	A	 few	people	will	create	wealth,	but	 they	will	 reveal	 the
secrets	 of	 how	 to	 create	 wealth.	 Sooner	 or	 later	 this	 whole	 society	 will	 be
benefited	by	it.
A	 real	 socialism	will	 come	out	of	 capitalism	as	 a	by-product.	When	 too	much
wealth	is	created,	people	will	not	be	so	greedy;	the	greed	arises	only	because	the
wealth	is	very	scarce.	And	you	can	see	it	very	clearly	--	you	can	see	it	here.	The
poor	person	is	very	greedy,	the	rich	person	is	not	so	greedy.	The	people	who	are
coming	from	the	West	are	 less	greedy	 than	 the	people	who	are	 living	 in	 India.
The	Indians	TALK	about	no-greed,	greedlessness,	but	they	are	the	most	greedy
people	in	the	world.	They	have	to	be	--	they	are	so	poor,	they	have	to	cling.
It	happens	almost	every	day:	some	Western	sannyasin	will	turn	up	at	the	office
and	will	say,	"I	would	like	to	donate	ten	lakh	rupees,	but	I	don't	want	my	name	to
be	mentioned	because	this	is	not	such	a	big	thing."	But	no	Indian	turns	up	even
with	ten	rupees!	If	you	want	ten	rupees	from	Indians	you	have	to	go	to	them	and
persuade	them.	Then	too	it	will	be	very	difficult	for	them.	They	will	give	you	ten
rupees	only	if	you	convince	them:	"You	will	be	getting	a	thousandfold	more	in
the	other	world."	Then	they	will	give;	otherwise	not.	Unless	they	are	convinced
and	you	prove	through	the	scriptures	that	they	will	get	a	thousandfold,	exactly	a
thousandfold	more;	 unless	 it	 is	 a	 business	 proposal....	 And	 it	 is	 a	 really	 good
business!	You	give	ten	rupees	here,	and	you	get	a	thousandfold	more	there!
Where	can	you	get	that	much	interest?	It	is	almost	like	winning	a	lottery!	Then	it
is	worth	risking	ten	rupees.
I	 had	 to	 stop	 Indians	 completely.	 I	 have	 told	my	 office	 people,	 "Don't	 accept
from	 Indians,	 because	we	 don't	want	money	with	 any	 conditions."	They	 bring
their	 conditions	 also	 --	 they	 are	 donating	 ten	 rupees,	 but	 they	will	 bring	 their
conditions.	And	these	conditions	have	to	be	fulfilled:	"Osho	should	not	say	this;
Osho	 should	 say	 this."	 Just	 because	 they	 are	donating	 ten	 rupees	 they	want	 to
control	 everything	 --	 how	 sannyasins	 should	 behave,	 how	 they	 should	 move
around	in	the	society.	Just	because	of	their	ten	rupees	all	the	sannyasins	have	to
follow	a	certain	moral	code	decided	by	them.
You	 can	 see	 it	 easily:	 the	 West	 has	 created	 enough	 wealth;	 the	 greed	 is
disappearing.	But	in	the	East,	the	greed	has	gone	on	increasing	more	and	more.
In	 fact,	 because	 there	 is	 so	much	 greed,	 people	 talk	 about	 greedlessness.	 The
saints	 go	 on	 teaching	 people,	 "Don't	 be	 greedy,"	 because	 they	 know	 they	 are
greedy;	 otherwise,	why	would	 they	 teach	 that?	 It	would	 be	 stupid	 to	 talk	 that
way.
I	 have	 seen	 the	 most	 ancient	 scriptures.	 They	 all	 talk	 about	 greedlessness,
nonattachment;	they	all	talk	about	nonviolence,	no	stealing,	no	adultery.	Look	on
everybody's	wife	as	your	mother	or	sister	or	daughter,	as	 the	case	may	be...the
most	 ancient	 scriptures!	All	 these	 rules	 of	 conduct	 prove	 only	 one	 thing:	 that
man	 has	 always	 been	 just	 the	 opposite;	 otherwise,	 why	 so	 much	 fuss	 about
committing	 adultery?	The	most	 ancient	 scriptures	 talk	 about	 it:	 "Don't	 commit
adultery."	People	must	have	been	committing	 adultery!	Either	 the	people	were
committing	adultery	or	these	people	who	were	writing	the	scriptures	were	crazy!
People	must	have	been	very	greedy,	because	all	 the	Jaina	scriptures,	almost	on
every	 page,	 talk	 about	 greedlessness,	 as	 if	 that	 was	 the	 only	 obsession	 of	 the
people.
"Renounce,"	 they	 all	 say;	 "gold	 is	 dust."	 If	 gold	 is	 dust,	 why	 renounce	 it?
Nobody	 renounces	 dust!	 Even	 those	 scriptures	 don't	 say,	 "Renounce	 dust
because	 dust	 is	 just	 gold	 and	 nothing	 else,	 so	 renounce	 it.	 Don't	 touch	 dust
because	it	is	just	gold."	But	they	all	talk	about	renouncing	gold,	and	in	the	same
breath	they	go	on	saying	it	 is	dust.	They	are	contradicting	themselves.	And	the
people	they	are	talking	to	must	have	been	very	greedy,	must	have	been	clutching
at	gold.
And	 the	 people	 who	 are	 talking,	 at	 the	 same	 time	 as	 they	 say	 to	 people,
"Renounce	gold,"
they	say,	"Donate	gold	to	the	temples."	Donate	dust	to	the	temples...?	Donate	the
dust	of	the	whole	world	to	the	temples	--	will	that	make	any	sense?	But,	"Donate
gold...."	And	that	too,	Jaina	monks	in	their	scriptures	say,	"Donate	only	to	Jaina
temples."	Donating	dust	only	to	Jaina	temples?	Why	not	to	Hindu	temples	too?
Why	not	 to	Buddhist	 temples	 too?	And	 the	Buddhists	 go	 on	 saying	 the	 same:
"Donate	only	 to	 the	Buddhist	 temples,	because	 they	are	TRUE	temples."	What
difference	 does	 it	 make	 whether	 the	 temple	 is	 true	 or	 untrue?	 You	 are	 only
donating	dust!	Even	if	you	donate	to	the	untrue	temple,	what	is	wrong	with	it?
Brahmins	 say,	 "Only	 donate	 to	 the	 brahmins."	 Jainas	 say,	 "Only	 donate	 to	 the
Jaina	monks."	 And	 Buddhists	 say,	 "Only	 donate	 to	 the	 Buddhist	 monks."	 All
others	are	charlatans;	THEY	are	the	true	people.	That	shows	their	real	intention.
Remember,	a	society	is	possible	which	will	not	be	greedy,	but	that	is	possible	not
through	socialism;	it	is	possible	only	through	the	growth	of	capitalism,	through
the	 growth	 of	 freedom.	Talented	 people	 have	 to	 be	 given	 absolute	 freedom	 to
create	whatsoever	they	can	--	poetry,	wealth,	music.	Whatsoever	they	can	create
let	them	create,	and	their	creativity	will	raise	the	society	to	higher	levels.
Capitalism	 is	 pure	 freedom.	 Of	 course,	 everybody	 is	 not	 capable	 of	 creating
wealth,	hence	 it	creates	 jealousy.	But	we	should	not	be	dominated	by	 jealousy,
we	should	not	be	dominated	by	those	who	are	uncreative.	If	we	are	dominated
by	 the	uncreative,	 by	 the	 jealous,	 then	we	will	 destroy	 all	 the	 talented	people.
And	they	are	the	real	people,	they	are	the	people	who	raise	humanity	to	higher
levels.
Humanity	owes	all	its	growth	to	very	few	people,	not	to	the	masses	--	not	at	all.
The	masses	have	been	the	hindrance;	they	are	like	rocks	preventing	the	growth
of	society.
Society	 has	 been	 benefited	 only	 by	 a	 few	 scientists,	 a	 few	 mystics,	 a	 few
creators;	 the	others	have	been	 just	hindering	 in	 every	possible	way.	And	 these
others	constitute	 the	majority,	and	of	course	 they	are	 jealous.	But	nobody	says
directly,	 "I	 am	 jealous."	 They	 will	 talk	 about	 equality,	 socialism,
communism...beautiful	words	to	hide	something	ugly.
Prem	Vardan,	whenever	 I	 say	 something,	meditate	 over	 it.	 Being	 angry	 is	 not
going	to	help.	Anger	simply	shows	that	something	in	you	is	hurt,	some	wound	is
there.	Maybe	 you	 have	 come	 believing	 in	 socialism,	 communism,	 and	 all	 that
kind	 of	 nonsense.	 There	 are	many	 sannyasins	 who	 have	 belonged	 to	 political
ideologies	in	their	past.	When	they	come	to	me	it	becomes	difficult	for	them	to
drop	all	their	rubbish	--	but	you	have	to	drop	all	your	rubbish.
It	is	easy	for	you	when	I	say,	"Don't	be	a	Christian,"	because	in	fact	you	are	not	a
Christian	 at	 all.	When	 I	 say,	 "Don't	 be	 a	Mohammedan	or	 a	Hindu,"	who	 is	 a
Mohammedan,	 who	 is	 a	 Hindu?	 These	 are	 only	 formalities.	 But	 when	 I	 say,
"Don't	be	a	communist	or	a	socialist,"	then	it	hurts	more,	because	particularly	the
new	generation	is	very	much	addicted	to	the	communist	ideology.
Capitalism	is	not	an	ideology	at	all,	that's	why	I	prefer	it.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	SEVENTY-FIVE	YEARS	OLD.	I	WANT	TO	BECOME	A	SANNYASIN,
BUT	I	DON'T	KNOW	WHY	I	AM	HESITATING.
Prakash	Chandra	Sethia,	 I	 think	you	should	wait	a	 little	more!	Let	death	come
first,	 then	 I	 can	 initiate	 you	 into	 sannyas...because	 when	 death	 has	 already
happened,	 there	will	be	no	hesitation:	you	will	not	be	there	at	all.	Seventy-five
years	 old	 and	 still	 hesitating?	 One	 leg	 is	 already	 in	 the	 grave!	 Ninety-nine
percent	is	almost	dead.	Only	one	percent	can	become	a	sannyasin	now,	and	even
then	you	are	hesitating.	It	almost	always	happens	with	old	people.
The	people	who	followed	Jesus	were	all	young,	almost	all	of	them	his	own	age.
The	people	who	followed	Buddha	were	his	age	or	nearabout.	The	same	was	true
with	Mahavira.	The	older	a	person	becomes,	the	more	cautious	he	becomes,	and
one	 can	 understand	 why.	 He	 has	 lived	 in	 the	 world	 with	 so	 many	 deceptive
people	all	around.	He	has	been	deceived	again	and	again,	he	has	been	cheated,
so	 he	 becomes	 very	 cautious,	 hesitant.	He	 clings	 to	 the	 familiar	 and	 becomes
afraid	of	the	unknown.
But	 sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 your	 very	 cautiousness	 can	 be	 the	 most
destructive	 thing	 in	your	 life,	because	 to	be	very	cautious	means	 to	die	before
your	death.	It	is	a	well-known	psychological	fact	that	people	die	nearabout	thirty
years	of	age.	Of	course,	they	live	on	afterwards,	and	they	actually	die	nearabout
seventy	 or	 eighty.	 So	 what	 are	 these	 fifty	 years?	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 posthumous
existence.
The	gay	couple	were	strolling	down	a	Paris	street.	One	kept	saying	to	the	other,
"Watch	out,	dearie,	don't	step	in	the	doggie-doo!	Watch	out	dearie,	don't	step	in
the	doggie-doo.
Oh	shit!	I	just	stepped	in	the	doggie-doo!"
Making	the	other	cautious,	he	has	forgotten	completely	about	himself!
You	are	becoming	too	wary,	too	cautious,	and	soon	you	will	fall	in	the	doggie-
doo!	And	then	it	will	be	too	late	--	it	is	already	late.	It	is	evening	time,	the	sun	is
setting.	Don't	waste	time.
An	old	man	of	ninety-seven	and	his	wife	of	ninety-two	were	appearing	before
the	judge	because	they	wanted	a	divorce.
The	 judge	was	very	 surprised.	 "You're	 so	old,"	 he	 said.	 "Why	do	you	want	 to
separate	now,	after	all	these	years	of	being	together?"
The	old	man	did	not	 answer.	But	 after	 some	minutes	his	wife	 said	very	 shyly,
"Your	honor,	we	wanted	to	wait	till	all	our	children	died."
Now,	Prakash	Chandra	Sethia,	what	are	you	waiting	for	--	all	the	children	to	die
first?
Now,	what	 is	 the	 point	 of	waiting?	You	 have	waited	 enough!	And	 remember,
death	will	 not	 ask	you,	 it	will	 not	 even	 inform	you,	 it	will	 not	 even	knock	on
your	doors.	It	simply	comes,	and	before	you	have	recognized	it	you	are	finished.
Before	 death	 happens,	 let	 sannyas	 happen,	 because	 sannyas	 in	 fact	 has	 two
functions.	For	you	now	it	can	fulfill	only	one	function.	It	has	two	functions:	the
first	is	the	art	of	life	and	the	second	is	the	art	of	dying.	The	first	you	have	missed
--	next	time	you	are	around	don't	miss	it!	But	the	second	is	still	possible;	you	can
learn	the	art	of	dying.	You	can	die	peacefully,	silently,	blissfully,	surrendered	to
God.	 And	 in	 fact,	 the	 second	 part	 is	 far	 more	 important	 than	 the	 first	 part,
because	 the	 first	 ultimately	 leads	 to	 the	 second.	 The	 art	 of	 life	 is	 only	 a
preparation	for	the	art	of	death.
If	 one	 can	 dance,	 sing	 and	 celebrate	 one's	 own	 death,	 if	 one	 can	 die	 in	 deep
consciousness,	 with	 no	 complaint,	 with	 no	 grudge,	 but	 in	 immense	 gratitude
towards	God,	one	has	fulfilled	one's	mission	in	life.
The	third	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
ARE	ALL	DESIRES	INSANE?
Narayano,	 yes,	 all	 desires	 are	 insane.	 Desire	 as	 such	 is	 insane	 because	 desire
means	living	in	the	future,	and	the	future	does	not	exist	at	all.	What	exists	is	the
present.
To	 live	 in	 the	present	 is	 the	only	 sanity	 there	 is,	but	 to	 live	 in	 the	present	you
have	 to	 drop	 all	 desiring.	 Desire	 takes	 you	 away	 from	 now	 and	 here.	 Desire
means	fantasizing	about	 the	 tomorrow.	Desire	means:	"If	 this	happens,	 if	 I	can
manage	this,	then	I	will	live."	You	are	sacrificing	the	present	for	the	future,	and
the	present	is	and	the	future	is	not.
Sacrificing	that	which	is,	for	that	which	is	not,	is	insanity,	sheer	insanity.
A	 high-pressure	 salesman	 for	 a	 milking-machine	 company	 seemed	 unable	 to
convince	a	farmer	to	buy	his	appliance.
"There's	no	use	talking,"	persisted	the	farmer,	"I've	only	got	one	cow	to	milk."
"But	 this	 machine	 will	 save	 you	 time	 in	 milking	 even	 one	 cow,"	 he	 insisted.
"Look!	It	is	just	about	milking	time	now.	Let's	go	to	the	barn	and	I'll	show	you."
In	 the	 barn	 the	 salesman	 set	 up	 his	 machine	 and	 began	 the	 demonstration,
carrying	on	meanwhile	his	persuasive	flow	of	talk.	The	old	man	began	to	take	a
keen	 interest	 in	 the	 proceedings	 as	 he	 beheld	 the	 wondrous	 efficiency	 of	 the
milker.
"Well,	 mister,"	 the	 farmer	 conceded	 at	 last,	 "I	 admit	 it's	 wonderful.	 I'd	 like
mighty	well	to	have	it,	but	I've	got	no	money	and	no	way	of	borrowing	any."
He	paused	and	looked	longingly	at	the	shining	machine.	"I	tell	you,	though,	what
I'm	willing	to	do,"	he	went	on,	"I'll	let	you	take	the	cow	as	the	first	payment."
That's	what	you	all	are	doing	--	sacrificing	the	present	for	the	future,	sacrificing
that	which	you	have	for	that	which	you	have	not	yet	and	may	not	have	ever.	The
tomorrow	 never	 comes.	 All	 that	 comes	 is	 always	 today,	 and	 you	 can	 become
addicted	to	sacrificing	the	today	for	the	tomorrow.	Then	you	will	go	on	doing	the
same	thing	your	whole	life	--
always	sacrificing	the	now	for	something	which	is	not.
This	 is	 how	 people	 are	 living.	 That's	 why	 their	 life	 remains	 a	 desert	 with	 no
oasis;	nothing	flowers,	nothing	blossoms,	no	fragrance,	no	festivity.	People	look
so	 sad,	with	 such	 long	 faces.	 The	whole	 earth	 seems	 to	 have	 suddenly	 turned
very	religious.
Everybody	looks	like	a	saint	--	so	dead,	so	serious,	so	sad,	that	if	the	old	saints
come	back	 to	 the	earth	 they	will	be	very	much	puzzled:	 "What	has	happened?
Has	the	whole	world	become	saintly?"	Of	course,	they	will	find	a	few	exceptions
--	my	sannyasins!	And	they	will	think	that	my	sannyasins	are	crazy.	That's	what
the	 whole	 world	 thinks	 about	 my	 sannyasins	 because	 they	 are	 still	 enjoying,
living,	loving,	dancing,	singing.
Just	the	other	day	I	received	a	letter	from	an	old	woman	--	I	loved	her	letter.	Her
son	was	a	sannyasin	and	he	died	just	two	weeks	ago	in	a	car	accident.	She	writes
to	me:	"I	am	grateful	to	you,	because	just	before	he	died	he	came	to	see	me	after
many	many	days,	 and	he	was	 so	happy.	 I	have	never	 seen	him	so	happy	 --	he
was	 almost	 dancing.	 And	 he	 was	 so	 loving	 to	me...I	 have	 never	 seen	 him	 so
loving.	 There	 has	 never	 been	 such	 a	 communion	 between	me	 and	 him.	 There
was	always	something	like	a	wall	separating	us,	but	the	day	he	came	to	see	me,
all	barriers	dropped.	Although	he	died	and	I	will	never	be	able	to	see	him	again,
I	am	immensely	happy	and	grateful	to	you	that	you	had	made	him	laugh	and	sing
and	enjoy	and	you	had	helped	him	to	drop	his	seriousness.	He	died	joyously."
It	is	from	a	mother.	It	is	very	difficult	for	a	mother	to	accept	the	death	of	her	son.
But	she	could	accept	even	the	death,	although	she	knows	nothing	of	sannyas	and
she	has	never	been	here.	But	 the	one	 thing	she	understood	was	 that	something
very	essential	had	changed	in	the	life	of	her	son.	She	is	not	at	all	sad	about	his
death.	She	 is	happy	 that	before	he	died	he	had	attained	 something;	he	had	not
lived	in	vain.
Desires	are	crazy.	They	make	you	sad	in	two	ways:	if	they	are	not	fulfilled	you
will	be	 sad,	 frustrated;	 if	 they	are	 fulfilled	you	will	be	 sad	and	 frustrated	 --	 in
fact,	 more	 so,	 because	 when	 your	 desires	 are	 fulfilled,	 then	 you	 suddenly
recognize	that	you	have	been	chasing	shadows,	illusions.	You	have	been	trying
to	catch	hold	of	a	rainbow,	and	all	that	you	find	is	that	your	hands	are	wet,	that's
all!
People	go	on	asking	for	the	impossible;	in	fact,	the	more	impossible	a	thing	is,
the	more	attractive	it	appears	because	it	gives	a	challenge	to	your	ego.	The	ego	is
not	interested	in	the	easy,	it	is	interested	in	the	difficult,	and	if	it	is	impossible	it
is	immensely	interested.
The	ego	exists	only	through	the	difficult	and	the	impossible.	That's	why	the	ego
is	 not	 interested	 in	 God,	 because	 God	 is	 the	most	 simple	 phenomenon	 in	 the
world.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 do	 anything	 to	 achieve	 God,	 because	 he	 is	 already
inside.	You	don't	have	to	do	a	thing.	You	have	just	to	sit	silently	and	watch	and
look	in,	and	you	will	find	him.	It	is	so	easy;	that's	why	the	ego	is	not	interested	in
it	 at	 all.	The	ego	 is	 interested	 in	climbing	Everest.	And	what	are	you	going	 to
find	there?	What	did	Edmund	Hillary	find	on	Everest?	Nobody	asks	him;	there
was	nothing	to	find.
I	have	just	heard	one	story....
When	he	reached	the	peak	of	Everest,	Edmund	Hillary	was	feeling	very	great	to
be	the	first	man	to	reach	there.	Then	he	suddenly	saw	an	Indian	monk	squatting
on	the	ground.
He	was	very	shocked	--	somebody	had	already	reached	there	before	him!	He	was
so	shocked	he	could	not	even	say,	"Hi!	How	are	you?"
Before	he	could	say	anything,	the	Indian	monk	said,	"How	much	for	the	watch?"
And	people	are	going	to	the	moon!	And	what	do	you	think	there	is	on	the	moon?
Nothing	at	all!	They	go	on	bringing	back	a	few	rocks.	You	could	have	gathered
those	rocks	here,	anywhere;	there	was	no	need	to	go	so	far	away!
One	story	I	have	heard....
When	the	Americans	reached	the	moon	for	the	first	time	they	were	very	puzzled,
because	from	the	other	side	of	the	moon	there	was	such	a	noise.	So	they	went	to
see	what	was	happening,	 and	 there	were	 at	 least	 ten	 thousand	Chinese	 talking
and	talking.	And	when	the	Chinese	talk,	"Ching,	ching,	chang,	ching...."
The	Americans	were	very	puzzled.	They	said,	"What	is	going	on?	How	did	you
manage	to	get	here?	We	didn't	think	you	had	the	technology	yet."
And	the	Chinese	said,	"What	technology	are	you	talking	about?	There	is	no	need
for	 any	 technology.	 We	 simply	 went	 on	 standing	 upon	 each	 other	 and	 we
reached!	 What	 technology?	 Our	 population	 is	 enough	 that	 we	 can	 reach	 any
planet	we	decide	to	--	and	we	have	only	come	for	a	holiday,	a	picnic!"
People	are	more	interested	in	reaching	Everest,	the	moon,	Mars,	than	in	reaching
their	own	innermost	self,	because	that	is	no	challenge	to	the	ego.
God	 is	 so	 obvious;	 that's	why	he	 is	missed.	Truth	 is	 so	 easily	 available;	 that's
why	nobody	is	interested	in	it.	Nirvana	is	now,	and	the	mind	is	not	interested	in
now	at	all,	it	is	always	somewhere	else.
A	long	time	ago	in	China,	a	mandarin	had	three	beautiful	daughters.	He	wished
to	marry	them	off	to	nobles	of	wealth	and	status.	In	those	days	a	man's	position
in	society	was	indicated	by	the	number	of	dragons	embroidered	on	the	front	of
his	robe.
The	mandarin	called	his	daughters,	announced	his	intentions	and	asked	the	eldest
what	kind	of	man	she	wished	to	marry.
"Oh,	Daddy,"	she	said,	"I'd	like	to	marry	a	man	with	three	dragons	on	his	chest!"
"Very	good,"	 replied	 the	 father,	 "I	will	 arrange	 it."	Then	 turning	 to	 the	 second
daughter	he	asked,	"What	kind	of	man	would	YOU	like?"
"Oh,	Daddy,	get	me	a	man	with	two	dragons	on	his	chest!"
The	 father	 was	 very	 pleased,	 and	 turning	 to	 the	 youngest	 daughter	 said,	 "I
suppose	you	want	to	marry	a	man	with	one	dragon	on	his	chest?"
In	a	voice	charged	with	emotion	she	replied,	"Oh	no,	Daddy,	I	want	a	man	with
one	draggin'	on	the	floor!"
All	desires	are	insane!
The	only	sanity	is	to	be	desireless.
The	only	sanity	is	to	be	herenow.
This	moment	is	more	than	enough.
And	the	last	question:
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	A	CATHOLIC	NUN.	CAN	I	ALSO	BECOME	A	SANNYASIN?
Mary,	 certainly!	 I	 am	 here	 just	 to	 destroy	 monks	 and	 nuns;	 that's	 my	 very
purpose	for	hanging	around.	It	is	to	sabotage	the	old	idea	of	monks	and	nuns,	it
is	to	bring	a	new	kind	of	sannyasin	into	the	world.	The	monks	and	nuns	of	all	the
religions	 --	Catholic,	Protestant,	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	 Jaina,	Buddhist	 --	have
all	been	escapists.	They	are	people	who	are	basically	afraid	of	life.
I	teach	you	fearlessness.
Live	as	totally	and	passionately	as	possible,	because	it	is	through	intense	living
that	you	will	find	God.	God	is	nothing	but	life	lived	at	the	optimum,	with	total
abandon,	 a	 dance	 danced	 so	 totally	 that	 the	 dancer	 disappears;	 only	 the	 dance
remains.	Then	you	have	found	and	you	have	come	home.
Mary,	 if	 you	 are	 a	 Catholic	 nun,	 then	 be	 quick!	 There	 is	 no	 time	 to	 waste,
because	 it	 will	 take	 time	 for	me	 to	 uncondition	 you.	 The	 Catholics	 condition
people	 in	 a	 very	 scientific	way,	 in	 a	 far	more	 scientific	way	 than	Hindus	 and
Mohammedans	 and	 Buddhists	 can	 do,	 because	 the	 West	 knows	 the	 latest
methods,	techniques,	strategies	to	condition	people.
Buddhist	strategies	are	twenty-five	centuries	old;	Jaina	strategies	are	even	older,
perhaps	 fifty	 centuries	 old.	 Christianity	 has	 been	 learning	 continuously
whatsoever	 becomes	 available	 through	 psychological	 research,	 and	 has	 been
trying	to	use	all	the	modern	methods	of	conditioning	which	have	been	developed
by	Pavlov,	Skinner,	Delgado	and	others.
So	it	will	take	a	little	longer	for	me	to	help	you	get	rid	of	your	nunhood.	But	I
am	also	aware	of	the	latest	--	not	only	the	latest,	I	am	also	aware	of	many	other
techniques	which	have	not	yet	been	developed.	I	have	come	a	little	ahead	of	my
time,	at	 least	one	hundred	years	before,	so	all	 those	 things	can	be	sabotaged.	 I
can	dynamite....
You	are	welcome.	Don't	hesitate	at	all.
The	saints	were	 really	bored,	so	 they	sent	Mary,	The	Holy	Virgin,	 to	Poona	 to
see	what	was	going	on	and	make	a	daily	telephone	report	back	to	them.
The	 first	 call	 was	 answered	 by	 Peter.	 "Hello,	 Peter,	 this	 is	 Mary,	 The	 Holy
Virgin.	Today	I	dyed	all	my	clothes	orange.	What	do	you	think	about	it?"
"That's	okay,"	said	Peter,	"if	everybody	does	it."
The	 next	 call	 came:	 "Hello,	 Peter,	 this	 is	Mary,	The	Holy	Virgin.	Today	 I	 did
Dynamic	Meditation,	what	do	you	think	about	that?"
"Well,"	responded	Peter,	"if	everybody	does	it,	it's	all	right."
On	 the	 third	 day	 the	 call	 came:	 "Hey,	 Peetsey	Weetsey,	 this	 is	Veet	Mary,	 the
Holy...um...er....	Ciao,	bello!"
Mary,	don't	waste	time!
Malcolm	 and	 Eddie	were	 out	 joyriding	when	 they	 smashed	 into	 a	 brick	wall.
When	they	arrived	at	 the	gates	of	Heaven,	Saint	Peter	said	to	Malcolm,	"Since
you	were	a	good	boy	and	didn't	sin	very	much	we're	going	to	give	you	this	new
Buick	to	get	around	in	up	here."
Peter	turned	to	Eddie	and	said,	"You	were	not	so	good,	my	son,	so	you	drive	this
Volkswagen."
Just	as	the	boys	were	about	to	get	into	their	new	cars,	a	big	Lincoln	Continental
pulled	up.	Inside,	a	fat	guy	smoking	a	big	cigar	sat	behind	the	wheel.	He	smiled
and	drove	on.
"Who	was	that?"	Malcolm	asked.
"Oh,"	said	St.	Peter,	"that	was	the	last	pope	John!"
Malcolm	and	Eddie	drove	off	 in	 their	new	cars,	out	 to	 tour	Heaven.	Later	 that
day	Malcolm	saw	Eddie's	Volkswagen	parked	along	the	side	of	the	road.	Eddie
was	a	little	way	away,	rolling	on	the	grass,	laughing	hysterically.
"What's	so	funny,	Eddie?"
"You	won't	believe	this!"	Eddie	roared.	"I	just	saw	Jesus	coming	down	the	road
on	roller	skates!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	A	Thousand	and	One	Ways	to	Laugh
1	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011010
ShortTitle:
COME06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	on	video
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 IN	 DISCOURSE	 YOU	 MENTIONED	 THAT	 WHEN	 A
WOMAN
WEARS	RED	LIPSTICK	 IT	 IS	UGLY,	BECAUSE	 IT	 IS	NOT	NATURAL.	 I
AM
FROM	 NEW	 YORK	 WHERE	 IT	 IS	 REQUIRED	 THAT	 WOMEN	 SHAVE
THEIR
LEGS,	UNDERARMS,	DRESS	STYLISHLY,	HAVE	THEIR	HAIR	NEATLY
COMBED,	WEAR	MAKEUP,	AND	ACT	IN	A	LADYLIKE	MANNER.
YES,	IT	IS	ALL	VERY	ADMIRABLE	HOW	YOUR	SANNYASINS	ARE	SO
NATURAL,	 BUT	 THE	 GIRLS	 AT	 THE	 ASHRAM	 DO	 NOT	 EXCITE	 ME.
YOU	 SEE,	 NATURAL	 IS	 NOT	 ALWAYS	 THE	 BEST	 OR	 THE	 MOST
BEAUTIFUL.
MY	FEELING	IS	THAT	YOU	ARE	SO	AGAINST	MAKEUP	BECAUSE	YOU
HAVE
NEVER	SEEN	GOOD	MAKEUP.	 I	AM	A	FREELANCE	MAKEUP	ARTIST
AND
WOULD	 LIKE	 TO	 DO	 A	 MAKEOVER	 ON	 AN	 ASHRAMITE	 SO	 THAT
YOU	CAN
SEE	 HOW	 MAKEUP	 CAN	 BE	 USED	 TO	 SPIRITUALLY	 ENHANCE	 A
WOMAN'S
NATURAL	BEAUTY.	ANYTHING	TO	SAY?
Philip	Sobel,	there	are	many	things	to	say.	First,	makeup	is	the	invention	of	the
ugly	people.	It	 is	not	that	makeup	is	ugly,	but	makeup	itself	is	the	invention	of
the	ugly.	The	ugly	 feels	 inferior	compared	 to	 the	naturally	beautiful	 --	 jealous,
competitive.	 The	 ugly	 tries	 to	 compensate	 for	 it	 with	 artificial	 methods.	 The
natural	has	no	need	to	compensate.
But	naturally	beautiful	people	are	very	few;	hence	makeup	has	become	almost	a
routine	thing.
For	 thousands	of	years,	man	has	been	 trying	 to	hide	 in	 every	possible	way	all
that	is	ugly	in	him	--	in	the	body,	in	the	mind,	in	the	soul.	Even	people	who	were
naturally	 beautiful	 started	 imitating	 the	 ugly	 and	 the	 artificial,	 for	 the	 simple
reason	 that	 the	 artificial	 can	deceive.	For	 example,	breasts	naturally	 are	not	 as
good	 looking	 as	 they	 can	 be	 made	 to	 look.	 Even	 if	 a	 woman	 has	 naturally
beautiful	 breasts,	 she	 will	 start	 feeling	 that	 the	 women	 who	 have	 no	 natural
beauty	 in	 their	 breasts	 can	 at	 least	 pretend	 and	 show	 that	 they	 are	 far	 more
beautiful.	So	the	naturally	beautiful	also	start	imitating.
Makeup,	and	the	whole	idea	of	makeup,	is	basically	hypocrisy.	One	should	love
and	 accept	 one's	 nature	 --	 and	 not	 only	 on	 the	 physical	 level,	 because	 that	 is
where	 the	 journey	starts.	 If	you	are	 false	 there,	 then	why	not	pretend	 the	same
falseness	as	far	as	mind	is	concerned?	Then	what	is	wrong	in	pretending	to	be	a
saint,	a	sage,	when	you	are	not?	The	logic	will	be	 the	same.	And	sometimes	it
happens	 that	 the	 pretender	 can	 defeat	 the	 real,	 because	 the	 pretender	 can
practice,	can	rehearse,	can	manage	and	manipulate	in	many	ways.
It	happened	in	the	life	of	Charlie	Chaplin....
On	 one	 of	 his	 birthdays	 his	 friends	 arranged	 a	 competition	 for	who	 could	 act
most	like	Charlie	Chaplin.	There	were	going	to	be	three	prizes,	and	from	all	over
the	world	many	people	participated	in	the	competition.	And	the	final	competition
was	going	 to	be	held	 in	London.	Charlie	Chaplin,	 just	 to	have	fun,	entered	 the
competition	from	a	faraway	place.
And	because	there	were	so	many	pretenders,	nobody	could	even	see	that	Charlie
Chaplin	was	part	of	the	competition.	He	was	certainly	hoping	--	in	fact,	he	was
absolutely	certain
--	that	he	would	win	the	first	prize	and	that	he	would	have	the	last	laugh.	But	it
turned	 out	 otherwise.	 He	 got	 the	 second	 prize.	 Somebody	 else	 was	 more
authentically	Charlie	Chaplin	than	Charlie	Chaplin	himself.
It	 is	 possible	 that	 a	 woman	 with	 makeup	 can,	 as	 you	 say,	 Sobel,	 look	 very
beautiful.	But	 she	 has	 to	 be	 ugly	 in	 the	 first	 place;	 otherwise	why	 should	 she
bother?	 And	 it	 is	 not	 that	 I	 have	 not	 seen	 good	 makeup;	 I	 have	 seen	 it.	 For
thousands	of	lives	what	have	I	been	doing	here?	Although	I	have	not	seen	YOU,
I	have	seen	so	many	people	like	you	that	I	can	say	many	things	even	about	you.
The	 first	 thing	 is	 that	 you	 must	 be	 fat.	 If	 you	 are	 not	 you	 can	 stand	 up	 and
everybody	can	 judge.	Only	 fat	people	become	 interested	 in	makeup.	Secondly,
you	must	be	a	"homo,"
because	 only	 "homos"	 become	 interested	 in	 the	 artificial.	 And	 if	 so	 many
beautiful	women	here	are	not	turning	you	on,	that	simply	means	one	thing:	that	a
woman	as	such	cannot	turn	you	on;	you	need	men	to	turn	you	on.	In	that	way,
homosexuality	 is	a	very	great	spiritual	development,	because	heterosexuality	 is
just	natural,	it	is	biological;	homosexuality	is	an	invention	of	man.	The	bisexual
person,	who	is	both,	of	course,	is	far	more	rich.	He	can	be	turned	on	by	both	men
and	women;	he	has	a	far	richer	sexuality.
And	 from	 your	 name	 it	 is	 clear	 that	 you	 are	 a	 Jew.	Now,	 a	 Jew,	 "homo"	 and
fat...what	else	is	needed	to	become	a	freelance	makeup	artist?	You	have	all	 the
qualifications	for	it.
You	say,	"The	other	day	in	discourse	you	mentioned	that	when	a	woman	wears
red	lipstick	it	is	ugly	because	it	is	not	natural."	In	the	first	place,	that	woman	is
ugly	--	that's	why	she	wears	lipstick.	If	she	had	beautiful	lips,	who	would	bother
to	paint	those	beautiful	lips	with	something	tasteless,	ugly?	--	ugly	in	the	sense
that	 your	 lips	 are	 no	 longer	 part	 of	 your	 face.	 They	 stand	 out,	 they	 become
separate;	they	are	no	longer	an	organic	unity.
I	would	like	women	to	have	red	lips,	but	those	red	lips	should	come	through	the
inner	 health	 --	 through	 blood	 circulating	 within	 your	 body,	 through	 exercise,
through	 breathing;	 through	 long	 walks,	 through	 sunbaths,	 lips	 should	 become
red.	 It	 is	 beautiful	 to	 have	 red	 lips,	 but	 to	 pretend...!	 And	 for	 whom	 are	 you
trying	to	pretend?	Everybody	can	see	the	lipstick	is	there.	The	lipstick	does	not
hide	your	lips,	 it	simply	reveals	that	something	ugly	is	hidden	behind	it.	And	I
am	not	saying	that	all	that	is	not	natural	is	bad.	Nature	CAN	be	improved	upon.
That's	what	intelligence	is	for,	but	it	should	not	be	against	nature.	For	example,
the	 lips	 can	be	 red	 through	better	 food,	 through	better	 exercise,	 through	better
medicine.	 That	 too	 is	 improving	 upon	 nature,	 but	 improving	 upon	 nature	 in	 a
natural	way.
Putting	on	 lipstick	 is	cheap;	 it	 is	not	 really	 improving.	 It	 is	good	for	 the	stage.
Makeup	artists	are	needed	for	the	stage,	not	for	real	life.	On	the	stage	it	is	good,
because	 the	 people	who	 are	 looking	 at	 you	 are	 far	 away	 from	you;	 they	 don't
have	to	kiss	you.	They	can	throw	kisses	from	far	away;	that's	perfectly	okay.	But
they	don't	have	to	taste	your	lipstick.	Layers	and	layers	of	lipstick!	It	is	so	rotten
and	 old,	 and	 continuously	 your	 saliva	 is	 giving	 it	 all	 kinds	 of	 germs.	 In	 each
single	 kiss	 at	 least	 one	hundred	 thousand	germs	pass	 between	 the	 lovers.	And
that	 is	when	the	lips	are	without	lipstick.	With	lipstick	nobody	has	yet	counted
what	 is	 being	 transferred.	 And	 when	 the	 lipstick	 is	 there	 you	 never	 come	 in
contact	with	the	lips.
You	must	have	misunderstood	me.	I	am	not	saying	that	improving	upon	nature	is
bad.	I	am	not	saying	that.	Women	can	shave	their	legs	and	underarms.	It	is	good,
it	 is	hygenic;	nothing	 is	wrong	 in	 it.	Unless	you	 take	every	care	 to	clean	your
body....
Sobel,	your	New	York	women	must	not	be	 taking	baths	every	day	 it	 seems.	 If
you	take	a	bath	every	day	and	clean	your	body,	then	the	hairs	under	your	arms
are	not	bad.	There	is	nothing	wrong	about	it.	There	is	no	need	to	remove	them,
they	have	their	place.	But	if	you	are	not	taking	a	bath	and	if	you	are	not	being
hygenic	 and	 clean,	 then	 certainly	 they	 will	 collect	 dust	 and	 they	 will	 collect
perspiration	and	they	will	stink.	Then	it	is	good	to	remove	them.	I	am	not	against
removing	them.	It	is	beautiful	to	shave	the	hairs	on	your	legs	and	give	your	legs
a	beautiful	shape.
Improve	 upon	 nature,	 rather	 than	 impose.	 Make	 people	 more	 aware	 of	 their
beauty	and	how	to	 take	care	of	 it.	Help	 them	in	natural	ways.	Man	 is	 the	only
animal	who	can	go	beyond	nature,	but	he	 should	go	 through	nature,	not	cover
nature.	So	I	am	not	saying	that	that	which	is	not	natural	is	necessarily	ugly.
But	you	must	have	misunderstood	me.	You	must	have	heard	with	your	freelance
makeup	artist's	mind.
One	Negro	from	South	Africa	was	sent	by	his	family	to	study	at	the	university.
So	he	went	to	the	director	to	ask	for	admission.
"Which	branch	would	you	like	to	take?"	asked	the	director.
"Can't	I	have	a	desk	like	everybody	else?"
Now	the	poor	fellow	is	coming	from	Africa.	His	mind	can	understand	only	in	his
own	way...!
Sex	was	a	big	problem	on	the	American	nuclear	submarine	which	was	at	sea	for
months	at	a	stretch.	The	captain,	however,	had	solved	the	problem	by	buying	a
lifesize	rubber	doll	which	he	put	to	frequent	use.	In	fact,	he	became	so	satisfied
that	 his	 crew	 became	 suspicious	 of	 his	 good	 moods	 and	 soon	 discovered	 the
reason.
When	the	captain	was	on	the	bridge,	they	began	to	sneak	into	his	cabin	to	visit
the	doll.
A	few	months	later,	when	the	submarine	returned	to	San	Francisco,	the	captain
went	along	to	the	shop	where	he	had	originally	purchased	the	doll.
"Look,"	he	said,	"I	want	to	congratulate	you	guys	on	the	lifelike	qualities	of	that
doll	I	bought.	You	know,	it	is	so	good	I	even	got	syphilis."
Be	natural.	Try	to	improve	upon	it.
It	 is	good	in	films,	on	the	stage	and	in	theater	to	have	makeup,	because	people
are	 simply	 looking	 at	 you	 --	 and	 from	 a	 distance.	You	 can	 deceive	 them.	But
when	you	are	living	with	a	person,	in	love,	as	a	wife,	as	a	husband,	as	a	son,	as	a
father,	as	a	mother	--	how	can	you	go	on	deceiving?	The	truth	will	be	known	--
your	false	breasts	will	be	discovered!
You	can	deceive	others,	but	how	can	you	deceive	people	who	are	close	to	you?
And	is	it	right	to	deceive	them?	And	if	they	love	you	because	of	your	breasts,	the
moment	they	discover	that	the	breasts	are	false	--	plastic	or	rubber	--	will	 their
love	 remain?	 It	will	 disappear.	The	whole	 of	 humanity	 has	 become	 false.	The
idea	seems	to	be	to	deceive,	to	pretend.
I	am	not	against	your	art,	Sobel,	but	it	has	its	own	place.	Life	is	not	its	place;	life
should	be	lived	naturally.	Yes,	if	some	woman	is	so	ugly,	or	some	man	is	so	ugly
that	 he	 is	 disgusting,	 help	 him.	 Then	 your	 art	 can	 be	 helpful,	 because	 to	 be
disgusting	is	immoral.
When	a	woman	passes	by	and	you	feel	like	vomiting,	then	certainly	Philip	Sobel
is	needed,	just	to	protect	people	from	falling	sick!
He	has	written	a	 letter	 to	me	 in	which	he	says	 that	he	 is	not	 turned	on	by	any
sannyasin,	 although	 they	 are	 so	 beautiful.	 But	 he	was	 turned	 on	 by	 an	 Indian
woman	in	the	Blue	Diamond	Hotel	who	was	wearing	lipstick	and	everything	that
he	would	like	everyone	else	to	wear.
My	own	understanding	is	that	people	become	attracted	only	to	persons	who	are
unavailable.	Now	 that	 Indian	woman	 is	 almost	 an	 impossibility	 for	Sobel.	She
will	 not	 be	 available	 --	 that	 creates	 attraction.	 Whatsoever	 is	 impossible	 is
attractive.
My	sannyasins	are	very	natural	people;	they	are	not	pretenders.	They	are	open,
vulnerable,	available.	 If	 love	knocks	on	 their	doors,	 they	will	not	 reject	 it.	But
there	are	many	people	who	are	attracted	only	 to	 the	 impossible,	 for	 the	simple
reason	 that	 they	 cannot	 get	 it.	 Getting	 it	 creates	 troubles,	 so	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be
infatuated	with	something	you	can	never	get.
Indian	 women	 can	 be	 very	 attractive	 to	Westerners,	 because	 they	 are	 closed,
completely	 closed,	 and	 they	 are	 absolutely	 unavailable.	 And	 that	 very	 thing
makes	them	so	far	away,	like	stars,	that	you	can	become	interested.	In	fact	it	is
one	 of	 the	 oldest	 strategies	 of	 women	 to	 make	 themselves	 as	 unavailable	 as
possible.	That	creates	infatuation	in	people,	that	creates	sexuality	in	people.	That
keeps	 people	 tethered	 to	 the	 lowest	 kind	 of	 sexuality.	 Hence,	 people	 are
interested	 in	 Indian	women,	 they	 are	 interested	 in	 film	actresses,	 because	 they
will	not	be	available	to	them.	They	will	not	be	able	to	pay,	they	will	not	be	able
to	 afford	 them.	They	 are	 always	 attracted	 to	 something	which	 is	 beyond	 their
reach.	It	gives	them	a	challenge.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	this	commune	sexually	free.	And	when	I	say	sexually
free,	 it	 has	 two	meanings.	 In	 the	 beginning,	 people	will	 be	 easily	 available	 to
each	other,	and	in	the	end	the	very	availability	will	make	their	minds	transcend
sex.	And	that	is	happening	every	day.
Hundreds	of	sannyasins	write	to	me,	"What	has	happened?	When	we	came,	we
were	 so	 full	 of	 sex,	 and	 now	 all	 that	 has	 disappeared.	 There	 seems	 to	 be	 no
desire	 for	 it.	Even	 if	we	 are	 interested	 in	 somebody,	 it	 is	more	 like	 friendship
than	any	sexual	relationship.	We	love	to	be	together,	but	there	is	no	need	to	jump
into	bed	immediately."
In	 fact,	 there	 are	 many	 sannyasins	 writing	 to	 me	 that	 sex	 has	 so	 completely
disappeared,	that	for	months	or	for	years	they	have	been	celibate.	Go	and	ask	a
Catholic	monk	 or	 a	Hindu	 sannyasin:	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 be	 celibate,	 and	 their
minds	 are	 full	 of	 sex.	 We	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 be	 celibate	 here,	 but	 celibacy	 is
happening.
Whatsoever	is	easily	available,	automatically	becomes	uninteresting.
In	the	West	many	people	are	turning	towards	homosexuality,	lesbianism,	for	the
simple	reason	that	a	man	seems	for	another	man	to	be	a	faraway	goal	because	he
is	so	unnatural;	a	woman,	for	a	woman,	seems	to	be	a	faraway	goal,	it	seems	so
unnatural.	A	man	and	woman	relationship	is	natural.	So	people	are	turning	into
homosexuals,	 lesbians.	 The	 reason	 is	 that	 when	 you	 make	 anything	 difficult,
condemn	it,	repress	it,	it	will	become	more	and	more	attractive.
In	 my	 commune	 nothing	 is	 repressed,	 hence	 everything,	 by	 and	 by,	 loses	 its
attraction.
One	becomes	more	and	more	calm	and	quiet	and	settled.
You	say,	Sobel,	that	in	New	York	the	women	act	in	a	ladylike	manner.	They	have
been	forced	for	centuries	 to	act	 in	a	 ladylike	manner.	They	have	been	changed
from	women	into	ladies.	To	be	a	woman	is	beautiful;	to	be	a	lady	is	ugly	--	ugly
for	the	simple	reason	that	acting	like	a	lady	is	phony,	it	is	snobbish.	Acting	like	a
woman	 is	 a	 natural	 phenomenon.	And	 of	 course,	when	 you	want	 to	 act	 like	 a
lady	 then	 you	 will	 have	 to	 have	 many	 kinds	 of	 makeups	 on	 many	 planes:
physical,	 psychological,	 spiritual.	 You	 will	 go	 on	 hiding	 yourself	 behind
curtains.	You	will	never	show	your	real	face,	your	authenticity.
You	will	become	just	a	phony	phenomenon.
The	word	"phony"	 is	beautiful.	 It	came	 into	current	use	when	 telephones	were
invented,	because	when	you	speak	on	a	telephone	you	do	not	sound	real.	It	does
not	sound	exactly	like	you;	it	becomes	PHONEY.	The	word	"phony"	is	beautiful
--	you	are	not	in	direct	contact.
When	I	am	talking	to	you,	it	is	a	direct	contact.	When	it	is	a	long-distance	call,
you	sound	phony,	I	sound	phony.	But	that's	how	people	are	living.	They	are	not
allowing	 closeness;	 they	 are	 creating	 all	 kinds	 of	 barriers	 to	 create	 distance.
Lipstick	 is	a	distance,	so	 that	 lips	should	not	come	 in	direct	contact.	 It	gives	a
phoniness.	All	makeup	is	phony.
But	 let	me	 remind	you,	Sobel,	 I	 am	not	 saying	 that	 anything	 that	 is	 natural	 is
good.	It	is	not	inevitably	good.	It	can	be	improved	upon	--	it	has	to	be	improved
upon.	But	it	should	be	improved	according	to	nature,	not	against	nature.	Nature
should	be	helped	to	go	beyond	itself,	it	should	not	be	repressed.
If	nature	is	repressed,	you	start	becoming	schizophrenic.	You	start	having	double
individualities:	one	that	you	are;	one	that	you	show	to	others.	And	you	can	get
very	messed	up	within	yourself.	Who	are	you?	 --	 this	or	 that?	 It	 is	 not	only	 a
question	of	having	two	personalities,	you	will	have	to	have	many	personalities.
The	mother	will	have	one	personality	towards	the	child	--	she	has	to	pretend	to
be	a	mother	 --	and	 to	 the	husband	she	has	 to	pretend	 to	be	a	wife.	And	 to	 the
lover	she	has	to	pretend	to	be	a	lover,	and	so	on,	so	forth.	So	she	will	have	many
personalities	around	herself,	and	in	the	jungle	of	all	these	personalities	her	own
individuality	will	be	 lost.	She	will	 find	it	very	difficult	 to	discover	her	original
face.
You	say	 to	me,	"Makeup	can	be	used	 to	spiritually	enhance	a	woman's	natural
beauty...."
That	is	sheer	nonsense.	Spirituality	cannot	be	enhanced	by	any	makeup.	Spiritual
beauty	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 anything	 that	 can	 be	 done	 from	 the	 outside.
Spirituality	 is	your	original	 face;	 it	 is	 the	discovery	of	your	 intrinsic	nature.	 It
has	not	to	be	tampered	with,	it	has	not	to	be	painted,	it	has	not	to	be	arranged.	It
has	no	hairs	on	the	legs	because	there	are	no	legs,	no	armpits,	no	lips.
Your	innermost	being	is	pure	consciousness.
It	needs	no	makeup.
But	 I	 understand	 Sobel's	 standpoint.	 People	 are	 even	 pretending	 there.	 That's
what	 your	 so-called	 saints	 are	 doing.	 They	 are	 trying	 to	 cultivate	 spirituality.
They	are	trying	to	condition	themselves	in	a	certain	pattern	of	being	holier-than-
thou.	But	the	really	spiritual	person	is	very	simple,	simple	in	the	sense	that	he	is
in	a	natural	flow;	he	is	in	a	let-go	with	existence.
I	will	not	allow	you,	Sobel,	to	work	on	any	one	of	my	sannyasins	--	not	at	all.	It
is	hard	work	 for	me	 somehow	 to	 remove	 their	 lipstick,	 and	 somehow	 to	make
them	drop	their	phoniness,	and	somehow	to	help	them	to	discover	their	original
face.	I	don't	want	you	to	do	some	makeup,	and	I	don't	see	that	you	can	make	any
of	 my	 sannyasins	 more	 beautiful	 in	 any	 way	 by	 makeup.	 The	 makeup	 will
simply	make	her	somebody	else;	she	will	not	be	herself.	She	may	look	like	an
actress,	she	may	look	like	a	model,	but	she	will	not	be	herself.
My	 whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 be	 yourself,	 to	 be	 totally	 free	 from
personalities.
Personality	is	the	false	thing	that	surrounds	you,	and	individuality	is	the	gift	of
God.	 It	 is	 already	 there	 inside	 you.	 If	 you	 drop	 your	 personalities,	 you	 will
discover	it.	The	moment	personalities	are	removed,	it	wells	up.
Rather	than	doing	that,	Philip	Sobel,	I	can	help	you	to	be	natural.	If	you	are	fat,
your	 fatness	 can	 disappear.	Become	 a	 little	more	 loving,	 become	 a	 little	more
natural.	Your	fatness	will	disappear.	Fat	people	are	people	who	are	in	some	way
repressing	 their	 sexuality.	Whenever	 you	 repress	 your	 sexuality,	 you	will	 start
eating	 more.	 That's	 a	 substitute.	 You	 will	 go	 on	 stuffing	 yourself.	 Hence,	 I
suspect	your	Hindu	monks	--
because	they	are	all	so	fat.
Have	you	seen	Muktananda's	guru's	picture?	If	you	have	not	seen	it,	it	is	worth
seeing.	It	is	a	rare	treat.	I	think	he	is	unique	--	Nityananda	IS	unique.	You	may
have	seen	people	with	big	bellies:	Nityananda	is	a	belly	with	a	head!	The	belly	is
so	big,	you	cannot	say	that	he	has	a	big	belly.	You	can	only	say	that	the	belly	has
a	small	man.	And	this	is	bound	to	happen	to	sexually	repressed	people.
But	 rationalizations....	 Muktananda	 writes	 in	 his	 memoirs	 that	 when	 he	 was
practicing	his	great	SIDDHA	YOGA,	his	KUNDALINI	started	rising.	And	what
really	happened	he	describes	in	detail.	Not	knowing	anything	about	Freud,	Jung,
Adler,	 Wilhelm	 Reich...these	 Indian	 so-called	 gurus	 are	 absolutely
uncontemporary.	They	don't	know	anything	that	has	happened	in	these	last	one
thousand	years.	They	are	at	 least	one	 thousand	years	behind.	So	when	he	 talks
about	kundalini,	he	says	that	his	genital	organs	became	so	strong,	so	erect,	that
they	 started	 hurting;	 that	 his	 prick	 was	 so	 erect	 it	 started	 touching	 his	 belly
button.	Kundalini	rising...!
These	 fools	 go	 on	 teaching	 the	West	 that	 this	 is	 the	 kundalini	 rising.	 This	 is
simply	repressed	sex	and	nothing	else.	It	is	such	a	simple	fact.
When	the	kundalini	rises,	something	just	the	opposite	happens.
An	 African	 native	 was	 bathing	 in	 the	 river	 by	 his	 village	 when	 a	 group	 of
tourists	arrived	on	the	scene.	They	stared	in	awe	at	the	enormity	of	his	prick.
The	native	looked	back	at	them,	embarrassed,	and	said,	"Why	is	it	so	amusing?
Don't	yours	shrink	in	cold	water?"
When	the	kundalini	rises	it	is	taking	a	bath	in	cold	water,	in	ice-cold	water...!
But	Nityananda's	disciple	cannot	be	anything	else.	Whenever	you	 repress	your
sex,	you	will	start	eating	more,	you	will	become	fat.	You	will	become	ugly,	you
will	lose	all	proportion.
Philip	 Sobel,	 rather	 than	 trying	 makeup	 out	 on	 any	 of	 my	 sannyasins,	 allow
some	 of	my	 sannyasins	 to	 remove	 some	 fat	 from	 you.	 That	 will	 be	 far	 more
enhancing	for	your	spiritual	beauty.	And	if	you	are	not	turned	on	by	the	beautiful
sannyasins	 here,	 that	 simply	 shows	 that	 you	 have	 become	 fixed,	 fixated	 on
homosexuality.	 Jews	have	suffered	 the	 longest	 from	homosexuality	 --	 from	 the
days	 of	 the	 Old	 Testament.	 Three	 thousand	 years	 of	 homosexuality	 --	 it	 has
become	almost	natural	to	them	by	now.
Let	 my	 people	 help	 you	 to	 become	 a	 little	 bit	 natural.	 It	 is	 beautiful	 to	 be
attracted	to	a	woman.	It	is	a	little	bit	berserk	to	be	attracted	to	a	man;	something
is	wrong.	It	never	happens	to	the	wild	animals	when	they	are	in	a	natural	state.	It
always	happens	when	you	put	 them	 in	a	zoo.	 In	a	 zoo,	 animals	 start	behaving
homosexually.
The	 reason	 is	 that	 each	 animal	 needs	 a	 certain	 space	 and	 freedom.	There	 is	 a
categorical	imperative:	each	animal	needs	a	certain	space	for	his	territory.	When
that	space	is	disturbed,	he	goes	crazy.	Then	he	cannot	see	any	difference,	who	is
who	--	who	is	man,	who	is	woman;	who	is	male,	who	is	female.	He	forgets	all
that,	 and	 he	 becomes	 so	 tense	 that	 he	 wants	 to	 release	 his	 sexual	 energy	 on
anybody.
Mankind	has	become	too	overcrowded;	that	is	creating	homosexuality.	The	earth
has	 become	 like	 a	 zoo.	Nobody	 has	 space,	which	 is	 an	 absolute	 necessity	 for
growth,	 for	 natural	 growth.	 So	 everybody	 is	 becoming	 a	 little	 crazy.
Homosexuality	 is	 not	 a	 good	 sign.	 It	 simply	 shows	 something	 has	 remained
retarded	in	you.
When	 a	 child	 is	 born,	 he	 passes	 through	 many	 stages.	 The	 first	 stage	 is
masturbatory,	 because	he	 loves	himself.	 So	 every	 child	wants	 to	 play	with	his
genital	organ;	 that's	 a	natural	development.	Then	he	moves	 to	 a	 second	phase,
and	 that	 is	 homosexuality.	 The	 boys	 become	 interested	 in	 boys,	 and	 the	 girls
become	interested	in	girls.	That's	how	friendships	arise,	and	that's	how	later	on
you	will	 always	 feel	 that	 those	 friendships	 of	 your	 childhood	were	 something
superb.	Nothing	like	that	happens	again.	It	cannot	happen;	it	was	confined	to	a
particular	phase	of	your	life.	And	if	things	don't	go	wrong,	then	homosexuality
turns	into	heterosexuality.	This	is	natural	growth.
The	 child	 first	 loves	himself.	He	 is	 the	 center	 of	 his	world,	 he	does	not	 relate
with	anybody	else.	That	is	dangerous,	because	if	he	remains	stuck	there	he	will
never	be	able	to	get	on	with	people.	He	will	remain	very	egoistic,	selfish;	he	will
never	be	able	to	share.
The	second	step	is:	he	moves	towards	the	boys	if	he	is	a	boy,	or	towards	girls	if
she	 is	a	girl,	because	moving	 from	oneself	 to	 the	same	sex	 is	easier.	And	 then
from	 that	 point	 he	 can	 move	 to	 the	 opposite	 sex.	 The	 boy	 starts	 becoming
interested	in	girls,	the	girls	become	interested	in	the	boys	--	that's	natural	growth.
These	are	the	three	natural	phenomena.	And	the	fourth,	celibacy,	is	going	beyond
nature.
That	is	the	most	beautiful	phenomenon.
So	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 all	 that	 is	 natural	 is	 beautiful,	 but	 that	 the	 transcendental
should	 come	 through	 the	 natural.	 The	 natural	 should	 be	 transformed	 into	 the
transcendental.
Celibacy	comes	at	the	fourth	stage,	when	you	have	lived	with	the	woman	or	with
the	man,	and	you	have	gone	through	all	the	pleasures	and	all	the	pains.	You	have
suffered,	you	have	enjoyed,	and	you	have	become	ripe	enough,	mature	enough,
to	see	that	that	too	is	a	game	--	a	beautiful	game,	very	engaging,	but	a	game	is	a
game.	Then	you	start	moving	beyond	it.	Then	sexuality	disappears;	then	silence
descends	in	you.	You	relate	with	people	without	any	sexual	idea	behind	it.	Your
relating	with	people	 then	has	a	pure	 fragrance	of	 love,	 and	 it	 comes	more	and
more	close	to	prayer.
I	am	all	for	transcendence,	Sobel,	and	transcendence	is	not	natural.	But	I	am	not
for	artificiality.	Your	art	can	be	used	by	my	theater	group,	by	my	fashion	people,
by	my	other	 artists;	 you	can	be	of	 immense	help	 to	 them.	But	 remember,	 it	 is
only	for	the	stage.
It	is	showmanship;	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	real	life.
The	real	life	has	to	be	natural,	and	the	real	life	has	to	go	one	day	beyond	nature.
But	nature	has	to	become	its	foundation	--	not	against	nature,	not	hiding	it,	but
discovering	the	innermost	core	of	nature.	Then	is	the	transcendence,	and	that	is
the	most	beautiful	experience.	It	beautifies	you,	your	body,	your	mind,	your	soul.
It	 not	 only	beautifies	 you,	 it	 beautifies	 even	people	who	 come	 in	 contact	with
you.	This	beauty	belongs	to	the	beyond;	it	 is	called	grace.	Something	descends
from	the	above	and	floods	you.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	IT	SO	DIFFICULT	FOR	ME	TO	LAUGH?
Sudheer,	it	must	be	that	you	have	come	here	conditioned	by	wrong	people.	And
the	wrong	people	constitute	the	majority,	almost	ninety-nine	point	nine	percent.
The	 religious,	 the	 moralists,	 the	 puritans	 --	 they	 are	 all	 serious	 people.	 They
destroy	 the	very	possibility	of	 laughter	 in	you.	They	destroy	 the	very	 sense	of
humor	in	you.	To	them,	humor	is	something	earthly,	mundane.
That's	why	Christians	say	Jesus	never	laughed.	That	is	absolutely	wrong.	I	know
Jesus.	 It	 is	 impossible	 that	 Jesus	 never	 laughed.	 It	 cannot	 happen.	 But	 the
Christians	 go	 on	 believing	 in	 this	 --	 that	 Jesus	 never	 laughed.	 Two	 thousand
years	of	seriousness	has	made	it	incomprehensible	that	a	man	like	Jesus	can	have
a	sense	of	humor.
Look	at	the	statues	of	Jesus	that	Christians	have	made.	He	looks	so	serious,	as	if
he	 has	 been	 on	 the	 cross	 for	 thirty-three	 years.	 And	 the	 cross	 became	 very
significant	 to	Christianity	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	very	 idea	of	 the	 cross
will	destroy	all	sense	of	humor	in	you.	The	cross	has	become	the	symbol	of	their
religion.
Krishna	 is	 far	closer	 to	 life.	The	 flute	 is	 the	symbol	of	 life,	not	 the	cross.	And
have	you	seen	the	pictures	of	Krishna?	Dressed	beautifully,	standing	in	a	dancing
posture,	the	flute	in	his	hands	on	his	lips,	it	looks	like	he	is	going	to	sing	a	song
at	any	moment.	He	looks	so	alive,	and	he	is	wearing	a	beautiful	crown	of	flowers
with	peacock	feathers.	This	is	far	truer	to	life.	That's	how	life	is.	It	is	tremendous
joy.
But	 Buddhists	 say	 that	 Buddha	 does	 not	 even	 smile.	 And	 Jainas	 say	 that
Mahavira	 has	 no	 sense	 of	 humor,	 cannot	 have.	 All	 these	 people	 are	 trying	 to
create	a	certain	idea	of	religiousness	which	is	devoid	of	laughter.	It	is	as	if	man's
misery	 is	 not	 enough	 for	 them,	 and	 they	 want	 man	 to	 become	 even	 more
miserable.	They	tell	you,	"Carry	your	cross	on	your	shoulders"	--	as	if	your	life
is	not	already	a	cross.
Sudheer,	your	conditioning	of	a	wrong	approach	towards	life	is	why	you	cannot
laugh.
But	you	will	have	 to	 learn	 laughter	here,	because	 to	me	 laughter	 is	one	of	 the
most	essential	qualities	of	a	religious	man.	If	you	cannot	laugh	you	can	never	be
a	sage.	If	you	cannot	laugh	totally,	then	something	is	missing	in	you.	Then	you
have	 not	 understood	 the	 beauty	 of	 existence,	 you	 have	 not	 understood	 the
mystery	of	existence.
Bodhidharma	 laughed	 for	 seven	days	when	he	became	enlightened	 --	 nonstop.
His	friends	became	very	worried;	they	thought	he	had	gone	insane.	They	asked
him,	"What	is	the	matter?	Why	are	you	laughing?"
He	 said,	 "I	 am	 laughing	 because	 now	 I	 see	 the	 whole	 ridiculousness	 of	 my
search.	I	have	been	searching	for	 lives	together	for	 the	truth,	and	it	has	always
been	 within	 me.	 What	 I	 was	 searching	 for	 was	 in	 the	 seeker	 himself.	 I	 was
looking	everywhere	and	it	was	within	me.	I	was	running	hither	and	thither	and
there	was	no	need	to	run	anywhere.	I	could	have	just	calmed	myself	down,	and	it
was	mine.	It	has	always	been	mine.	From	the	very	beginning	it	was	within	me.	It
is	my	innermost	being,	my	very	being.
"The	 seeker	 is	 the	 sought	 --	 that's	why	 I	 am	 laughing.	 I	 cannot	 believe	 how	 I
could	remain	in	such	a	deception	for	so	long,	how	I	managed	to	be	such	a	fool.
And	I	am	also	laughing	because	I	see	all	around	millions	of	people	searching	in
the	same	way	--
searching	 for	 bliss,	 for	 God,	 for	 truth,	 for	 nirvana	 --	 and	 all	 that	 they	 are
searching	and	seeking	and	looking	for	can	be	found	within	themselves.	There	is
no	need	to	go	anywhere.	There	is	no	need	to	do	anything.	Just	close	your	eyes
and	 look	 within,	 and	 the	 kingdom	 of	 God	 is	 yours.	 Hence,	 I	 cannot	 stop
laughing."
The	sense	of	humor	is	very	significant,	particularly	for	my	sannyasins,	because	I
am	 introducing	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 religiousness	 to	 the	 world:	 a	 non-escapist
religiousness,	 a	 religiousness	which	 is	 not	 against	 life.	 I	would	 like	 you	 to	 be
Zorba	 the	 Greek	 and	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 together,	 simultaneously.	 Less	 than
that	won't	 do.	Zorba	 represents	 the	 earth	with	 all	 its	 flowers	 and	greenery	 and
mountains	and	rivers	and	oceans.	Buddha	represents	the	sky	with	all	its	stars	and
clouds,	and	the	rainbows.
The	sky	without	the	earth	will	be	empty.
The	sky	cannot	laugh	without	the	earth.
The	earth	without	the	sky	will	be	dead.
Both	together	--	and	a	dance	comes	into	existence.	The	earth	and	the	sky	dancing
together
--	and	there	is	laughter,	there	is	joy,	there	is	celebration.
Sudheer,	look	around,	watch	life.	Don't	be	too	bothered	with	religious	scriptures.
Ninety-nine	percent	of	those	religious	scriptures	are	written	by	people	who	know
nothing	of	religion.	They	are	written	by	scholars,	theologians.	They	are	written
by	 ascetics,	 anti-life	 people.	 The	 person	 who	 is	 anti-life	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 anti-
laughter,	anti-love	--	he	will	be	anti-everything.	His	whole	life	is	nothing	but	a
denial,	 a	 constant	 denial.	He	 is	 suicidal,	 he	 goes	 on	 cutting	 himself	 chunk	 by
chunk.	He	is	destructive,	he	destroys	himself	--	how	can	he	laugh?
I	teach	you	life,	I	teach	you	love,	I	teach	you	how	to	sing,	how	to	dance.	I	teach
you	how	to	transform	your	life	into	a	festival,	into	a	carnival	of	delight.	Hence,
laughter	has	to	be	one	of	the	most	essential	qualities.	Even	if	you	cry	and	weep,
your	 tears	 should	 have	 the	 quality	 of	 laughter	 in	 them.	 They	 should	 come
dancing	 and	 singing;	 they	 should	 not	 be	 tears	 of	 sadness	 and	 misery.	 They
should	be	tears	of	overflowing	cheerfulness,	of	bliss.
This	 is	 possible	not	 through	 scriptures,	 but	only	 if	 you	 look	at	 life.	All	 that	 is
needed	is	a	clarity.
Sudheer,	you	are	an	Indian	--	that	creates	difficulty.	When	you	look	at	life,	inside
you	 are	 reciting	 the	BHAGAVADGITA,	RAMAYANA...VEDAS	 are	 going	 on
and	 on.	 You	 are	 chanting	 VISHNU	 SAHASTRANAM	 --	 the	 one	 thousand
names	of	God.	How	can	you	see	life?	Stop	all	this	nonsense.
Be	 silent	 and	 look	 at	 life,	 and	 you	 will	 find	 surprises	 everywhere	 --	 each
moment,	on	each	step.
During	 the	 second	 world	 war,	 a	 house	 in	 a	 London	 suburb	 is	 nearly	 totally
destroyed	by	a	direct	hit	of	a	rocket.	All	the	inhabitants	survive;	only	one	man	is
missing.	 Suddenly,	 they	 hear	 a	 tremendous	 laughter	 coming	 out	 of	 the	 toilet
which	stands	undestroyed	amongst	the	ruins.
The	man	climbs	out	of	it	still	laughing	loudly,	and	they	ask	him,	"What	the	hell
are	you	laughing	about?"
"Well,"	he	says,	"isn't	it	funny?	I	pull	the	chain	and	the	whole	house	collapses!"
Just	look	around	and	you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	ways	to	laugh....
Little	Siddhartha,	our	great	sannyasin,	walks	up	to	a	little	girl,	another	sannyasin,
and	asks	her	to	dance.
She	replies,	"No,	thank	you."
He	replies,	"Don't	thank	me.	Thank	God	someone	asked."
A	few	sannyasins	were	talking.	One	asked	the	others,	"What	is	 long,	hard,	and
when	put	into	something	warm	and	wet,	gets	soft	and	drippy?"
And	little	Siddhartha	answered,	"Spaghetti."
The	big	boss	and	his	wife	had	accepted	the	junior	executive's	dinner	invitation.
And	as	dinner	was	being	served,	the	little	son	and	daughter	of	the	host	left	their
beds	 and	walked	 through	 the	 dining	 room	 absolutely	 naked.	The	 polite	 guests
ignored	them.
At	the	first	opportunity,	the	furious	father	went	upstairs	to	scold	them.	But	before
he	 could	 say	 anything,	 the	 little	 boy	 cried,	 "Ah,	 Daddy,	 it	 is	 wonderful.	 We
rubbed	ourselves	 all	 over	with	Mummy's	vanishing	cream,	 and	when	we	went
downstairs	to	the	dining	room	nobody	saw	us!"
In	 a	 small	 German	 town	 a	 Catholic	 priest	 caught	 red-handed	 a	 young	 boy
picking	out	all	of	 the	raisins	from	a	big	 loaf	of	bread	which	the	priest	had	just
brought	from	a	nearby	bakery	shop.
"Are	 you	 not	 ashamed,	 my	 son,	 picking	 out	 all	 the	 raisins	 from	 this	 bread?"
inquired	the	priest.
The	boy	looked	straight	at	him	and	said,	"Firstly,	I	am	not	your	son.	Secondly,
my	mother	ordered	a	loaf	without	raisins.	And	thirdly,	I	am	Protestant	anyway."
While	 visiting	 Pierino's	 parents,	 a	 woman	 keeps	 telling	 them	 how	 much	 she
would	 like	 to	 have	 a	 child	 like	 him,	 but	 that	 the	 stork	 has	 unfortunately	 not
brought	her	anything.
Pierino	says,	"Why	don't	you	change	to	a	cock?"
Just	look	around,	Sudheer,	and	you	will	find	a	thousand	and	one	things	to	laugh
about.
Life	is	full	of	laughter,	full	of	ridiculousness,	full	of	absurdities.	But	if	you	are
serious	you	will	miss	all	that.	If	you	are	nonserious	you	will	be	available.	If	you
are	nonserious	you	will	be	capable	of	seeing	it.
Paddy	had	died	from	dysentery.	While	they	prepared	the	body	for	burial,	it	was
still	excreting.	The	undertaker	thought	carefully	for	a	moment,	then	went	away
to	get	a	cork.
Two	 hours	 later,	 O'Reilly	 and	 Muldoon	 came	 to	 carry	 the	 prepared	 corpse
downstairs	for	the	wake.	As	soft	music	played,	the	two	friends	solemnly	carried
the	body	down	the	stairs.	Suddenly	there	was	a	loud	pop,	and	a	fountain	of	shit
poured	over	O'Reilly's	head.
He	 promptly	 dropped	 the	 body,	 which	 slid	 down	 the	 stairs	 into	 the	 crowd	 of
waiting	guests.
The	 undertaker	 rushed	 up	 to	 O'Reilly	 saying,	 "What	 did	 you	 do,	 you	 clumsy
bastard?"
O'Reilly	looked	at	him	coolly	and	said,	"Look	man,	if	he	can	shit,	he	can	fucking
walk!"
Sartini	stalked	into	a	police	station	and	told	the	desk	sergeant	he	wanted	to	swear
out	a	complaint	against	a	truck	driver	for	assault	and	battery.
"What	happened?"	asked	the	bored	cop.
"I	 was	 in	 a	 phone	 booth,	 and	 this	 creep	 came	 along	 and	 wanted	 to	 use	 the
phone,"
explained	 Sartini.	 "I	 told	 him	 to	 wait	 a	 while,	 but	 he	 could	 not.	 Finally,	 he
slammed	open	the	door	and	yanked	me	out	of	there."
"No	wonder	you	got	mad,"	agreed	the	sergeant.
"Damned	 right,	 I	 got	mad,"	 said	 the	 Italian.	 "The	 son-of-a-bitch	 did	 not	 even
give	my	girlfriend	time	to	put	her	panties	on."
Lady	Maria's	business	is	doing	badly.	As	a	whore	in	downtown	Rome	she	tries
hard,	but	for	some	reason	or	other	it	does	not	work	out	well.
One	 night	 she	 gets	 a	 great	 idea:	 "I	will	 buy	me	 a	 few	 small	 firecrackers,	 and
when	I	am	making	love	to	a	guy	I	will	set	one	on	fire	and	start	screaming	that
something	inside	me	has	been	torn	and	he	should	pay	extra	for	it."
That	night	 she	happens	 to	meet	a	man	and	 takes	him	 to	her	 room,	where	 they
start	 making	 love	 on	 the	 bed.	 She	 slips	 one	 hand	 under	 the	 bed	 and	 lights	 a
firecracker.	 Unfortunately	 she	 lights	 the	 whole	 box	 full	 of	 fireworks,	 and	 an
enormous	explosion	follows.
"Oh,	oh!"	she	screams,	"you	hurt	me	inside.	Ten	dollars	extra."
The	man	looks	at	her	and	groans,	"How	about	a	hundred	dollars	if	you	can	find
my	balls?"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Aes	Dhammo	Sanantano
2	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011020
ShortTitle:
COME07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	 IT	 POSSIBLE	 THAT	 YOU	 ARE	 NOT	 ENLIGHTENED?	 IF	 IT	 IS	 THE
CASE,	WOULD	THAT	MAKE	ANY	DIFFERENCE	FOR	ME?
Devaprem,	 it	 is	 not	 only	 possible,	 it	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 I	 am	 not
enlightened!
Enlightenment	happens	only	when	one	is	not,	hence	ONE	cannot	be	enlightened.
Either	 one	 is,	 or	 enlightenment	 is;	 both	 cannot	 be	 together	 --	 that	 is	 an
impossibility,	 that	 is	 not	 in	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 things.	 Buddha	 will	 say:	 AES
DHAMMO	SANANTANO,	"This	is	the	ultimate	law	of	life."
One	cannot	be	enlightened.	To	be	is	the	barrier,	not	the	bridge.	It	hinders;	in	fact,
it	is	the	only	hindrance.	To	dissolve,	not	to	be,	that	becomes	the	bridge.
Hence	the	word	Buddha	uses	for	enlightenment	is	tremendously	significant	and
beautiful.
It	 contains	 the	 most	 profound	 truth	 ever	 uttered,	 but	 it	 is	 untranslatable;
"enlightenment"
is	a	very	faraway	echo	of	it.	The	very	word	"enlightenment"	gives	you	a	totally
different	 sense.	 Buddha's	 word	 is	 nirvana;	 nirvana	 means	 cessation,
disappearance.	Literally	it	means	when	you	blow	a	candle	out,	when	the	light	of
the	candle	is	blown	out,	when	the	light	disappears....	One	cannot	ask	where	it	has
gone,	one	cannot	say	where	it	is	now;	it	is	simply	no	more.	This	is	nirvana:	the
disappearance	of	the	light.
"Enlightenment"	 gives	 you	 just	 the	 opposite	 meaning.	 It	 makes	 you	 feel	 that
YOU
become	 enlightened,	 that	YOU	become	 full	 of	 light,	 that	 darkness	 disappears,
not	you.
You	 remain;	 in	 fact	 you	 are	 far	more	 than	you	were	before.	Before,	 you	were
hidden	in	darkness;	now,	all	the	darkness	is	gone	and	your	being	is	revealed.
Buddha	 says	 there	 is	 no	being	 in	 you;	 you	 are	 a	 non-being	 --	ANATTA	 is	 his
word.
Anatta	means	no-self,	no-soul,	no-being.	He	not	only	denies	the	ego,	he	denies
every	 possibility	 of	 the	 ego;	 otherwise,	 the	 ego	 is	 so	 cunning	 it	 will	 go	 on
coming	back	again	and	again.	 It	will	 find	 subtle	ways	 to	 catch	hold	of	you.	 It
will	come	in	the	name	of	the	self;	in	fact	it	will	come	very	loudly	in	the	name	of
the	self.
Ordinarily	 people	 write	 "self"	 with	 a	 lower	 case	 "s,"	 and	 the	 people	 who
philosophize	about	the	ultimate	reality	start	writing	"Self"	with	a	capital	"S."	It	is
ego	 magnified,	 it	 is	 ego	 decorated,	 it	 is	 ego	 pretending	 to	 be	 holy,	 it	 is	 ego
pretending	to	be	eternal.
Buddha	uses	the	words	"no-self,"	"no-soul,"	"no-being."	He	leaves	no	possibility
for	the	ego	to	sprout	again;	he	simply	cuts	it	from	the	very	roots.	Never	before
Gautam	the	Buddha	had	it	been	done	so	efficiently.
My	 understanding,	 my	 experience,	 is	 exactly	 the	 same:	 nirvana	 cannot	 be
claimed	by	anyone;	 to	claim	it	 is	 to	 falsify	 it.	The	UPANISHADS	say:	"Those
who	know	cannot	claim,	and	those	who	claim	cannot	know."	The	knower	cannot
say	"I	know,"	because	in	the	knowing	the	"I"	melts	--	there	is	nobody	to	claim,
there	 is	 nobody	 to	 brag.	 Hence,	 Devaprem,	 I	 can	 only	 say	 one	 thing:	 it	 is
absolutely	certain	that	I	am	not	enlightened.
What	is	enlightened	is	not	ME;	it	is	beyond	the	idea	of	I.	It	is	transcendental	to
the	ego,	and	in	that	sense	you	are	also	enlightened.	You	may	not	know	it,	that's
another	matter.
Knowing	 or	 not	 knowing	 makes	 no	 difference	 to	 your	 nature;	 your	 nature
remains	 the	 same,	 exactly	 the	 same.	When	 you	 become	 enlightened	 you	 don't
become	a	new	person.
In	fact	you	don't	gain	anything,	you	only	lose	something:	you	lose	your	chains,
you	lose	your	bondage,	you	lose	your	misery,	you	go	on	losing.
Enlightenment	 is	 a	 process	 of	 losing;	 you	 don't	 gain	 anything.	When	 there	 is
nothing	left	to	lose,	that	state	is	nirvana;	that	state	of	utter	silence	can	be	called
enlightenment.	I	don't	claim	anything....
And	you	ask	me,	"If	 it	 is	 the	case,	would	that	make	any	difference	for	me?"	It
will	make	a	difference,	because	you	are	not	HERE	with	me.	You	are	not	here	in
a	love	relationship,	you	are	here	out	of	your	greed.	If	it	were	not	so,	the	question
would	not	have	arisen	at	all.
Your	 questions	 show	 much	 about	 you.	 Your	 questions	 as	 questions	 may	 be
meaningless,	absurd,	but	they	show	much	about	you;	they	are	indicators.
If	 you	 become	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 I	 am	 not	 enlightened,	 then	 your
relationship	with	me	is	finished.	Then	you	will	start	searching	for	somebody	else
who	 is	 enlightened;	 then	you	have	 to	move	 to	 some	other	master.	You	will	be
caught	by	someone	who	brags,	by	someone	who	has	a	very	subtle	spiritual	ego,
who	 claims,	 who	 tries	 to	 prove	 his	 enlightenment	 through	 the	 scriptures	 or
through	miracles	or	through	some	other	things.
You	need	to	be	convinced	that	you	are	with	the	right	person.	The	greedy	person
asks	for	proofs;	love	never	asks	for	any	proofs.
The	 people	 who	 were	 with	 Jesus	 were	 very	 greedy.	 They	 were	 all	 Jews	 --
obviously	 they	could	not	have	been	otherwise.	They	were	continuously	asking
him,	 "Are	 you	 really	 the	 son	 of	 God	 --	 REALLY?"	 In	 their	 question	 there	 is
suspicion,	 doubt.	 They	 want	 Jesus	 to	 do	 miracles	 --	 walk	 on	 water,	 raise	 the
dead,	 cure	 the	 blind.	And	 even	 then	 they	 are	 not	 convinced	 --	maybe	 there	 is
some	trick	in	it.	Walking	on	water	or	curing	the	blind	man	or	raising	the	dead	--
who	knows,	there	may	be	some	trick;	there	is	every	possibility.
The	whole	story	of	Lazarus	may	just	have	been	a	managed	act.	Lazarus	was	one
of	 the	 friends	 of	 Jesus.	 Jesus	 could	 have	 told	 him,	 "Lie	 down;	 pretend	 to	 be
dead."	He	may	have	taught	him	a	few	yoga	tricks	--	how	not	to	breathe.	Yogis
know	the	tricks,	and	Jesus	had	been	to	India.	He	may	have	learned	a	few	tricks,
how	not	to	breathe,	how	to	stop	breathing.	Now	it	is	a	proven	fact	that	there	are
yoga	exercises	which	can	do	it.
One	yogi	from	south	India,	Brahma	Yogi,	demonstrated	it	in	many	universities	--
in	Oxford,	in	Cambridge,	in	Calcutta,	in	Tokyo,	in	many	universities	--	in	front
of	 very	 learned	 scientific	 gatherings.	 He	 used	 to	 stop	 his	 breathing	 for	 ten
minutes;	for	all	practical	purposes	he	was	not	breathing.	Only	very	sophisticated
instruments	showed	that	there	was	some	slight	breathing	still	going	on,	but	that
was	not	visible	to	the	eyes;	the	pulse	had	stopped.
The	pulse	can	be	 stopped	very	easily,	you	can	 learn	 the	 trick	 --	 the	 trick	 is	 so
easy.	 You	 do	 only	 one	 thing:	 count	 your	 pulse.	 Then,	 every	 day	 early	 in	 the
morning	when	you	get	up,	fresh	--	don't	do	anything	else	--	sit	on	your	bed	and
count	 your	 pulse.	 For	 five	 minutes	 focus	 your	 mind	 on	 the	 pulse	 and	 go	 on
repeating	inside,	"It	is	slowing	down,	slowing	down,	slowing	down..."	and	you
will	be	surprised:	within	a	week	you	will	have	learned	the	art	of	slowing	it	down.
You	can	bring	 it	 lower	and	 lower	as	your	practice	grows.	Within	 three	months
you	will	be	able	to	stop	it	for	a	few	moments,	and	if	you	practice	for	years	you
can	 stop	 it	 for	 a	 few	minutes.	The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 the	 heartbeat	 and	 about
breathing.
In	 front	of	 scientists	Brahma	Yogi	proved	 that	he	was	 capable	of	 stopping	 the
breath.
Now,	Lazarus	may	have	been	just	pretending	that	he	was	dead.	Suspicions	can
never	be	put	aside;	if	you	doubt,	you	will	doubt	everything.	And	I	don't	say	that
there	is	something	wrong	in	doubting	--	the	only	thing	is	that	you	have	not	fallen
in	love	with	Jesus;	the	master-disciple	relationship	has	not	happened.	Hence	the
questions,	hence	the	desire	for	proofs.	But	your	doubting	mind	will	create	new
questions,	will	ask	for	new	proofs.	And	it	is	an	infinite	regression.
I	know	of	a	Bengali	 saint,	Bengali	Baba,	who	once	stopped	a	 train	at	Calcutta
station.	He	created	much	news	all	over	Bengal	and	became	famous	because	of
that;	 otherwise	 nobody	 had	 heard	 about	 him.	 He	 entered	 a	 first-class
compartment.	 The	 ticket	 collector	 came,	 he	 asked	 for	 the	 ticket,	 and	 Bengali
Baba	said,	"I	am	a	fakir,	a	saint,	and	saints	don't	need	any	tickets.	You	get	lost!"
Of	course	the	conductor	became	very	angry.	He	said,	"You	have	to	produce	the
ticket;	otherwise	I	will	throw	you	out!"
Bengali	Baba	said,	"You	can	throw	me	out,	but	remember,	without	me	this	train
cannot	move	even	a	single	inch!"
Now	it	was	a	great	challenge!	He	was	thrown	out;	the	police	were	called	and	he
was	 taken	out.	He	stood	 there	on	 the	platform,	closed	his	eyes,	went	 into	deep
SAMADHI,	 and	 the	 miracle	 happened!	 The	 driver	 tried	 hard,	 the	 guard	 was
waving	 his	 flag	 --	 but	 nothing	 happened.	And	 the	 guard	was	 puzzled	 because
there	was	nothing	wrong	with	the	engine.	Everything	was	working	perfectly,	but
the	train	would	not	move	a	single	inch.
A	 great	 crowd	 gathered,	 all	 the	 passengers	 gathered.	 Even	 the	 station	 master
came	and	touched	the	feet	of	Bengali	Baba	and	said,	"Please,	let	the	train	go!"
Bengali	Baba	 said,	 "It	 cannot	 happen	 this	way.	Bring	 that	man	who	 threw	me
out.	He	has	to	touch	my	feet,	apologize,	and	promise	never	to	ask	a	fakir	for	a
ticket!"
The	 conductor	 was	 very	 unwilling,	 but	 the	 whole	 crowd	 pressed	 him,	 forced
him,	virtually	dragged	him:	"We	have	other	work	to	do	and	the	 train	 is	getting
late	--
somebody	has	 to	attend	the	courts,	somebody	has	 to	go	somewhere	else	--	and
just	because	of	your	foolish	ego!	What	 is	wrong	with	asking	forgiveness?	And
you	have	seen	the	power	of	the	man!"
Finally,	 he	 touched	 his	 feet,	 asked	 the	 Baba	 to	 enter	 the	 train,	 and	 promised
never	to	ask	any	fakir	for	a	ticket.	And	the	moment	the	Baba	entered	the	train,
the	train	moved.
He	became	 famous	all	over	Bengal,	 and	 the	 secret	was	very	simple.	He	was	a
very	good	man;	before	he	died	he	revealed	his	secret.	He	said,	"The	secret	was
this:	I	had	bribed	two	persons,	one	was	the	ticket	collector	and	the	other	was	the
driver.	Just	two	persons	were	bribed,	and	the	whole	show	was	so	perfect!"
So	who	knows	whether	Lazarus	was	pretending	to	be	dead.	It	is	possible.	If	you
doubt,	you	can	doubt	anything.	After	all	 these	miracles,	 still	 the	apostles	were
asking	Jesus	again	and	again,	"Give	us	proof!"	Even	at	the	last	moment,	when	he
was	crucified,	they	were	hiding	in	the	crowd	and	waiting	for	the	ultimate	miracle
to	happen.	And	when	 it	did	not	happen	 they	were	really	very	disappointed.	So
their	whole	life	was	wasted	by	this	man!
He	had	been	doing	all	kinds	of	tricks,	and	now	on	the	cross	everything	failed.	So
there	was	no	God	behind	him;	otherwise	this	was	the	time	to	prove	it!	They	were
all	greedy	people.
Devaprem,	your	question	is	full	of	greed.	So	when	you	ask	me,	"If	it	is	the	case,
would	that	make	any	difference	for	me?"	even	in	asking,	you	know	it	will	make
a	difference,	because	you	are	not	here	for	any	love	affair	--	not	out	of	trust	but
out	of	greed.	You	want	 to	gain	something	--	and	if	 the	man	is	not	enlightened,
then	why	waste	your	time	here?
Move	 somewhere	 else,	 find	 the	 right	 person	 who	 can	 help	 you.	 If	 I	 am	 not
enlightened,	how	can	I	help	you	to	be	enlightened?	So	what	is	the	point	of	being
here?	And	I	say	to	you	it	is	better	that	you	move,	because	I	have	said	clearly	it	is
not	only	possible,	it	is	absolutely	certain	that	I	am	not	enlightened.
So	those	who	are	here	out	of	greed,	spiritual	greed,	should	not	be	here;	this	is	not
the	 place	 for	 them.	 This	 is	 not	 a	 business	 place!	 It	 is	 only	 for	 those	who	 are
gamblers,	who	can	risk.	It	is	only	for	those	who	are	a	little	bit	mad,	drunkards.
I	don't	promise	you	anything.	 I	don't	promise	you	the	kingdom	of	God,	I	don't
promise	 you	 enlightenment	 --	 I	 don't	 promise	 at	 all.	My	whole	 approach	 is	 of
living	moment	 to	moment;	 enlightened	 or	 unenlightened,	what	 does	 it	matter?
Living	 moment	 to	 moment	 joyously,	 ecstatically,	 living	 moment	 to	 moment
totally,	intensely,	passionately....
If	one	lives	passionately,	the	ego	dissolves.	If	one	is	total	in	one's	acts,	the	ego	is
BOUND	to	dissolve.	It	is	like	when	a	dancer	goes	on	and	on	dancing:	a	moment
comes	 when	 only	 the	 dance	 remains	 and	 the	 dancer	 disappears.	 That	 is	 the
moment	of	enlightenment.
Whenever	the	doer	is	not	there,	the	manipulator	is	not	there;	whenever	there	is
nobody	 inside	 you	 and	 there	 is	 only	 emptiness,	 nothingness,	 that	 is
enlightenment.	And	out	of	that	beautiful	space	whatsoever	is	born	has	grace,	has
glory.
Paradise	is	not	something	geographical,	it	is	not	somewhere	else;	it	is	a	way	of
living.	It	belongs	to	those	who	can	live	totally	and	intensely.	Then	immediately,
herenow,	paradise	descends	--	or,	even	better,	wells	up	within	their	own	sources,
within	their	own	beings.
Just	the	space	is	needed	for	it	to	well	up.
And	 I	 don't	 tell	 you	 to	 drop	 the	 ego,	 because	 if	 YOU	 drop	 the	 ego	 then	 the
dropper	 will	 become	 the	 ego.	 I	 don't	 say	 become	 humble,	 because	 if	 YOU
become	humble	then	behind	the	facade	of	humbleness	there	will	be	a	very	subtle
ego	hiding.
So	 my	 devices	 are	 different.	 I	 say	 dance	 to	 abandon,	 sing,	 play	 music!	 Do
whatsoever	you	like	doing	and	move	into	it	so	totally	that	nothing	is	left	behind.
When	nothing	is	left	behind,	the	ego	dissolves	of	its	own	accord.
That's	the	meaning	of	nirvana:	you	have	blown	the	candle	out,	suddenly	it	is	not
there.
Then	whatsoever	is,	is	divine.
The	ego	is	human;	egolessness	is	divine.
The	ego	is	hell;	egolessness	is	paradise.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CAN	I	EVER	BE	HAPPY	WITH	MY	WIFE?
Girdharilal	 Jain,	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible.	Nothing	 is	wrong	with	your	wife,	but
the	 very	 institution	 of	 marriage	 is	 ugly,	 the	 very	 institution	 is	 anti-love.	 It	 is
based	on	denying	love	a	chance	to	flower	within	you.	Marriage	is	an	invention
of	those	who	don't	want	the	earth	to	be	full	of	flowers	of	love.
Love	 is	 dangerous	 to	 the	 establishment,	 the	most	 dangerous	 thing,	 because	 if
people	are	 loving	 then	 this	society	 is	doomed.	This	society	depends	on	hatred,
not	on	love.	Our	whole	politics	and	our	whole	so-called	religions	are	based	on
hatred.	Nations	are	divided
--	 for	what?	The	earth	 is	one,	what	 is	 the	need	for	nations?	India	and	Pakistan
and	Afghanistan...what	 is	 the	 need	 for	 nations?	 Can't	 humanity	 live	 together?
Why	all	these	boundaries?	These	boundaries	are	needed	by	the	politicians.
Without	 the	 boundaries	 the	 politicians	 will	 disappear;	 without	 the	 boundaries
there	 will	 be	 no	 politics.	 These	 boundaries	 create	 the	 whole	 game,	 and	 these
boundaries	are	just	big	prisons.	You	don't	feel	as	if	you	are	imprisoned	because
the	prison	 is	so	big	you	cannot	see	 it.	But	 try	 to	cross	over	 the	boundary	from
India	to	Pakistan,	or	from	Pakistan	to	India,	and	then	you	will	see	that	it	was	all
nonsense	to	think	of	yourself	as	free.	You	cannot	go	beyond	the	boundary:	you
need	a	passport,	a	visa,	a	permit,	a	this	and	that.
Then	suddenly	you	become	aware	that	the	prison	was	so	big	that	you	were	not
aware	of	its	walls	--	but	there	are	walls	all	around	you.
Man	 has	 not	 yet	 become	 civilized	 enough	 to	 be	 allowed	 to	 move	 around	 the
earth	in	freedom.	When	you	pass	from	one	prison	to	another,	you	have	to	fulfill
many	conditions.
And	 these	 nations	 go	 on	 fighting,	 continuously	 fighting.	 Seventy	 percent	 of
human	energy	is	wasted	on	war	--	and	the	people	are	starving	and	the	people	are
dying.	The	 same	 energy	 can	 transform	 the	whole	 earth	 into	 such	 a	 rich	 planet
that	nobody	will	bother	 about	heaven	at	 all.	We	can	create	a	 far	better	heaven
here;	we	are	more	scientifically	equipped.	 I	have	 read	 the	descriptions	of	your
heavens	in	all	the	scriptures	of	the	world.
They	 are	 all	 living	 in	 the	 world	 of	 the	 bullock	 cart;	 they	 don't	 even	 know
anything	about	bicycles.	I	have	never	come	across	any	description	of	angels	on
bicycles!	--	what	to	say	about	anything	else.
Your	 conceptions	of	heaven	were	developed	at	 least	 three	 thousand	years	 ago.
Man	 has	 come	 of	 age.	 We	 now	 have	 a	 far	 better	 technology,	 far	 greater
efficiency	in	creating,	in	producing,	but	for	stupid	reasons	the	whole	thing	goes
into	the	war	effort.
Now,	what	is	the	point	of	Iraq	and	Iran	fighting?	Utterly	foolish	--	but	they	are
destroying	 each	 other.	 And	 in	 destroying	 each	 other	 they	 will	 be	 destroying
everybody	else	too,	because	the	whole	world	depends	on	these	two	countries	for
all	 kinds	of	 things:	 diesel,	 petrol	 and	other	 petroleum	products.	These	 are	 two
giant	 countries,	 and	 they	 are	 destroying	 each	 other's	 capacities.	Once	 they	 are
successful	in	destroying	each	other,	they	will	have	destroyed	the	whole	world	in
a	way;	the	whole	world	will	be	dragged	back.
And	there	seems	to	be	no	point:	the	whole	question	is	of	boundaries,	where	the
boundaries	should	be.	On	the	earth	there	are	no	boundaries,	only	on	the	maps!
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	going	on	an	airplane	trip	--	it	was	his	first	trip.	When	he
was	 passing	 the	 boundary	 of	 India	 and	 Pakistan,	 he	 was	 looking	 out	 of	 the
window	with	his	big	binoculars	trying	to	see	the	boundary,	and	he	could	not	see
anything.
And	 the	 pilot	was	 saying,	 "Just	 two	miles	 ahead	 is	 the	 boundary	 of	 India	 and
Pakistan,	 and	within	 seconds	we	will	 be	 crossing	 it."	 So	 he	was	 looking	 very
intently...but	no	boundary!
He	asked	the	passenger	sitting	by	his	side,	"Where	is	the	boundary?	I	cannot	see
it!"
The	 very	 idea	 that	 the	 boundary	 existed	 on	 the	 earth	 was	 so	 foolish	 that	 his
neighbor	played	a	joke	on	him.	He	said,	"You	look	carefully,	concentrate	on	it.	It
is	a	very	delicate	thing	and	we	are	miles	away,	but	if	you	look	minutely	you	will
see	it."
He	 put	 one	 of	 the	 hairs	 from	 Mulla	 Nasruddin's	 beard	 on	 the	 lens	 of	 the
binoculars,	and	Mulla	said,	"Yes,	now	I	can	see!	Yes,	there	is	the	boundary!	And
at	the	end	of	the	boundary	line	I	can	see	there	is	a	camel	also,	but	such	a	very
strange-looking	camel	I	have	never	seen!"
The	 neighbor	 said,	 "This	 is	 a	 Pakistani	 camel	 --	 how	 can	 you	 have	 seen	 it
before?"
He	was	looking	at	his	own	beard!
On	 the	 earth	 there	 are	 no	 boundaries,	 but	 politicians	 need	 boundaries.
Religiousness	has	no	boundaries,	but	priests	need	them.	Religiousness	is	neither
Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan,	but	then	what	will	the	priests	do?	They
will	be	out	of	a	job,	completely	out	of	a	job,	and	millions	of	people	depend	on
these	boundaries.	Their	whole	business	is	to	go	on	insisting:	"Only	Christianity
is	 the	 right	 religion;	 only	 Hinduism	 is	 the	 right	 religion.	 Unless	 you	 are	 a
Christian	 there	 is	no	hope	for	you."	And	 the	same	 is	 the	claim	of	all	 the	other
religions.	Everybody	is	 trying	 to	pull	you	into	his	fold	because	numbers	create
power.
Society,	up	to	now,	has	existed	in	deep	hatred	--	hatred	for	other	countries,	hatred
for	other	religions,	hatred	for	other-colored	people,	hatred	in	every	possible	way.
So	the	love	quality	has	to	be	destroyed,	and	we	start	destroying	the	qualities	of
love	 from	 the	 very	 childhood.	We	 start	 teaching	 the	 child:	 "You	 are	 a	Hindu,
Mohammedan,	Christian	--
hate	others."	But	we	don't	say	it	directly,	it	is	a	very	indirect	maneuver.	We	start
making	every	child	ambitious,	and	ambition	means	you	cannot	love;	ambition	is
anti-love.
Ambition	needs	fight,	ambition	needs	struggle,	ambition	needs	you	to	use	others
as	a	means.
Love	is	a	totally	different	perspective.	Love	says	respect	the	other	as	an	end	unto
himself	or	herself;	never	use	the	other	as	a	means.	Nobody	is	a	means	for	you,
everybody	 is	 an	 end.	 But	 then	 ambition	 will	 flop,	 and	 our	 whole	 educational
system	 depends	 on	 ambitiousness,	 our	 politics	 depends	 on	 ambition,	 our
religions	depend	on	ambition.
Politics	is	the	religion	of	this	world	and	religion	is	the	politics	of	the	other	world;
that's	the	only	difference	between	the	two.	And	the	politician	and	the	priest	have
been	 in	 a	 deep	 conspiracy	 for	 centuries.	 They	 have	 divided	 everything	 up
amongst	themselves:	"You	will	rule	here,	we	will	rule	there;	you	will	rule	before
death,	we	will	rule	after	death	--
fifty-fifty!"	But	both	have	to	do	one	thing:	destroy	any	potential	for	love.
For	 thousands	 of	 years	 only	 child	 marriages	 were	 allowed.	 It	 was	 a	 subtle
strategy.
Girdharilal	Jain	himself	may	have	got	married	when	he	was	a	child,	not	knowing
what	was	going	to	happen.	Once	you	become	older	it	becomes	difficult	for	you
to	accept	any	woman	or	any	man	as	your	wife	or	husband:	you	will	start	asking
your	 parents	 embarrassing	 questions:	 "I	 don't	 love	 this	 man,	 I	 don't	 love	 this
woman...?"	 Love	 is	 something	 that	 cannot	 be	 enforced	 --	 if	 it	 happens,	 it
happens;	if	it	does	not	happen	it	does	not	happen.	So	the	cunning	people	decide
that	before	you	start	asking	about	love	it	is	better	to	arrange	a	marriage.
All	other	relationships	are	given	by	birth.	There	was	only	one	freedom	for	you:
to	choose	your	wife	or	your	husband.	Even	that	has	been	destroyed.	You	cannot
choose	 your	 mother,	 you	 cannot	 choose	 your	 father,	 you	 cannot	 choose	 your
brothers	and	your	sisters
--	 that	 is	 all	 accidental.	 You	 cannot	 choose	 your	 uncles,	 your	 aunts;	 that	 is
beyond	your	choice.	The	only	freedom	was	that	you	could	choose	your	beloved	-
-	but	that	too	was	denied.
People	were	married	when	they	were	so	small,	six	years	old,	seven	years	old.	In
India	marriages	used	to	be	arranged	even	while	the	child	was	inside	the	womb.
People	used	 to	 arrange	 that	 "if	 your	 child	 turns	out	 to	be	 a	boy,	 and	my	child
turns	 out	 to	 be	 a	 girl,	 or	 vice	 versa,	 we	will	marry	 them."	 The	marriage	was
already	decided	before	the	birth!	This	was	a	strategy	to	poison	love.	So	the	child
would	grow	with	the	wife	or	the	husband	just	as	one	grows	with	one's	brothers
and	sisters:	he	would	become	accustomed,	love	would	never	happen.
The	 society	 is	 very	much	 afraid	of	 love.	 It	 condemns	 love,	 it	 calls	 love	blind.
The	fact	 is,	 love	is	 the	only	phenomenon	which	is	not	blind;	everything	else	is
blind.	Logic	 is	 blind,	 not	 love,	 but	 you	 have	 been	 told	 that	 love	 is	 blind,	 you
have	been	 told	 that	 love	 is	mad.	 In	all	 the	 languages	of	 the	world	 this	 type	of
expression	exists:	 "falling	 in	 love"	 --	as	 if	one	 falls!	 I	would	 like	 to	change	 it.
Whenever	you	are	in	love	never	say,	"I	have	fallen	in	love,"	say,	"I	have	RISEN
in	love."	It	is	reaching	higher	than	you	have	ever	been	before.
It	is	not	a	fall,	it	is	growth.
Girdharilal	 Jain,	you	ask	me,	 "Can	 I	 ever	be	happy	with	my	wife?"	 It	 is	not	a
personal	 question	 at	 all,	 remember,	 and	 I	 am	not	 answering	 you	 in	 a	 personal
way	either;	it	is	a	general	question.	You	cannot	be	happy	with	your	wife	unless
you	 respect	 her	 as	 a	 person	 and	 not	 as	 a	 wife.	 Unless	 you	 accept	 her	 as
independent,	free	to	be	herself,	you	cannot	be	happy.	And	the	man	has	been	told
that	he	is	the	possessor,	the	wife	is	only	a	possession.
In	China,	 for	 centuries	 the	husband	was	 allowed	 to	kill	 his	wife	 if	 he	wanted,
because	the	wife	was	just	a	thing.	In	India,	the	wife	is	thought	to	be	the	property
of	the	husband.
Certainly,	if	the	wife	is	your	property,	how	can	you	be	happy	with	her?	You	are
insulting	her,	you	are	humiliating	her,	you	are	destroying	her	individuality.	She
will	take	revenge.
Of	course	her	ways	will	be	feminine	ways	of	 taking	revenge,	but	she	will	 take
revenge.
She	will	create	a	situation	in	which	you	will	be	in	constant	hell.
Society	 has	 been	 dominated	 by	 the	man	 for	 too	 long,	 and	 he	 has	 reduced	 the
woman	to	a	commodity.	Now	it	cannot	be	done	anymore.	The	woman	has	equal
rights	with	 any	man;	 and	 she	has	 to	be	 respected	 --	 she	 is	 a	human	being	and
nobody's	property!	At	the	most,	the	husband	and	the	wife	are	friends	--	not	more
than	that.	And	don't	take	her	for	granted,	because	nobody	can	take	anybody	for
granted.	One	cannot	be	certain	about	the	tomorrow.
Tomorrow	she	may	be	yours,	she	may	not	be	yours.	This	risk	has	to	be	accepted;
only	then	can	there	be	joy	in	relationship.	When	relationship	is	free,	when	there
is	 freedom	in	 it,	 there	 is	 joy,	because	 freedom	is	 the	ultimate	value;	nothing	 is
higher	than	that.
If	your	love	leads	you	towards	freedom,	then	your	love	will	be	a	blessing;	if	it
leads	towards	slavery	it	is	not	a	blessing,	it	is	a	curse.
On	his	golden	wedding	anniversary	a	man	was	asked	if	his	marriage	had	turned
out	better	or	worse	than	he	had	anticipated.
"Well,"	 he	 said,	 "originally	 I	 thought	 our	 marriage	 would	 be	 a	 fifty-fifty
proposition.	It	has	turned	out	 that	way,	but	not	as	I	expected.	My	wife	has	had
her	way	the	first	fifty	years,	and	I'll	have	my	way	the	second	fifty!"
Something	like	this	arrangement	happens	between	husbands	and	wives.	It	is	an
arranged	phenomenon,	it	is	not	out	of	love.	Both	are	trying	to	get	as	much	out	of
it	as	possible	and	to	give	as	little	as	possible.
"We	 got	 a	 divorce	 because	 we	 were	 incompatible,"	 explained	 one	 bar	 fly	 to
another.	"My	wife	hated	me	when	I	was	drunk,	and	I	couldn't	stand	her	when	I
was	sober."
These	are	arrangements!
The	newly-enlisted	rookie	was	being	examined	by	the	army	psychiatrist.	"What
do	you	do	for	social	life?"	he	was	asked.
"I	just	hang	around	the	house."
"Do	you	ever	go	out	with	girls?"
"No."
"Don't	you	ever	want	to?"
"Yes."
"Then	why	don't	you?"
"My	wife	won't	let	me!"
Husbands	and	wives	are	protecting	each	other,	guarding,	detecting.	They	are	not
friends	but	enemies,	trying	to	prove	in	every	possible	way	who	the	master	is.
How	can	you	be	happy	with	your	wife,	Girdharilal	 Jain?	 If	you	are	a	husband
you	 cannot	 be	 happy.	 The	 very	 word	 "husband"	 is	 ugly;	 it	 comes	 from
husbandry.	The	wife	 is	 thought	 to	 be	 like	 a	 field	 and	 you	 are	 the	 farmer;	 you
have	to	sow	the	seeds	--	the	wife	is	just	like	a	field.	You	are	the	owner,	the	sower
of	the	seeds,	the	reaper	of	the	crops,	and	she	is	just	the	earth.	We	should	change
our	 language.	 Very	 ugly	 words	 still	 go	 on	 being	 used.	 "Husband"	 is	 an	 ugly
word;	it	should	be	dropped	from	all	languages.
The	 wife	 and	 the	 husband	 should	 come	 to	 a	 better	 understanding.	 They	 are
together	 to	make	 life	a	 joy;	 they	are	 together	not	 to	quarrel,	not	 to	nag,	not	 to
destroy	each	other	but	to	enhance	each	other	in	every	possible	way	--	physical,
psychological,	 spiritual.	 Love	 should	 be	 a	 journey,	 a	 pilgrimage	 towards	 the
ultimate.
An	elderly	couple	are	lying	in	bed.	"Joseph,"	she	says,	"you	remember	the	days
you	used	to	kiss	my	ear?"
Joseph	turns	over	and	kisses	her	ear.
"And	Joseph,"	she	says,	"you	remember	the	days	you	used	to	fondle	my	hair?"
Joseph	gently	strokes	her	hair.
"And	 Joseph,"	 she	 continues,	 "you	 remember	 the	 days	 you	 used	 to	 bite	 my
neck?"
Joseph	 gets	 up	 and	walks	 through	 the	 room,	 "Hey,	Marge,"	 he	 says,	 "do	 you
remember	where	I	put	my	false	teeth?"
Love	is	not	a	demand,	love	is	a	deep	understanding.	One	cannot	ask	for	it;	one
should	 give	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 giving.	 Certainly	 it	 comes,	 a	 thousandfold	 it
comes,	but	it	has	not	to	be	asked	for.
There	is	no	future	for	the	institution	of	marriage.	We	will	have	to	discover	new
forms	of	relating,	new	forms	of	loving,	new	dimensions	in	which	people	can	join
together.
Marriage	is	out	of	date,	but	old	habits	die	hard	--	we	go	on	clinging.	Even	young
people....
Just	 the	 other	 day	 a	 girl	 who	 is	 only	 twenty-two	 --	 and	 not	 even	 Indian,	 she
comes	from	Germany	--	 told	me,	"I	want	 to	get	married."	For	what?	Can't	you
see	the	insanity	all	around?	Her	father	has	divorced	her	mother;	her	mother	has
gone	with	some	other	man.
Her	father	is	living	with	some	other	woman,	and	still,	she	wants	to	get	married!
Everybody	 thinks	 that	 his	 life	 is	 going	 to	 be	 an	 exception.	 That	 foolish	 idea
destroys	people's	whole	lives.
The	 first	 thing	 is	 love:	 love	 deeply.	 If	 you	 have	 been	with	 a	 person	 for	 a	 few
years,	 in	deep	love,	and	you	have	experienced	all	 the	joys	and	all	 the	miseries,
and	 still	 you	 decide	 to	 be	 with	 the	 person,	 then	 marriage	 is	 okay.	 Because
marriage	 is	 only	 a	 legal	 arrangement,	 it	 cannot	make	 anything	more	 beautiful
than	it	is.	It	can	only	make	it	ugly,	it	cannot	beautify	it.	Once	it	is	settled	legally,
once	you	start	taking	each	other	for	granted,	things	will	start	going	down	rather
than	rising	high.
So	before	one	settles	with	anybody,	one	should	learn	to	live	with	as	many	people
as	possible.	My	own	understanding	is	that	there	are	no	two	persons	alike;	hence,
unless	 you	 have	 experienced	 many	 love	 affairs	 you	 will	 not	 know	 the
multidimensionality	of	love.
Only	after	knowing	the	multidimensionality	of	love	will	you	feel	enriched.	Only
when	 you	 know	 that	 now	 you	 have	 known	 the	 world	 enough	 and	 you	 have
experienced	 and	 observed	 many	 kinds	 of	 relationships	 with	 many	 types	 of
people...only	 then	can	you	choose.	No	astrologer	can	decide	 it	 for	you,	and	no
parents	can	decide	it	for	you.	Even	YOU,	just	by	your	instinct,	cannot	decide	it.
Love	affairs	have	been	failing,	and	parents	feel	very	happy.	People	come	to	me
and	 they	 say,	 "Look,	 in	 the	West	 love	affairs	have	been	 failing.	Then	why	are
you	 against	marriage?"	 they	 ask	me.	 Love	 affairs	 are	 failing	 because	 first	 the
marriage	was	arranged	by	the	astrologer,	then	it	was	arranged	by	the	parents,	and
now	it	is	being	arranged	by	biology,	by	instinct.	You	suddenly	feel	that	you	like
a	woman,	but	you	don't	know	how	long	this	is	going	to	last	and	you	are	not	even
aware	why	you	like	her.	You	are	not	even	alert	to	what	it	is	in	you	that	likes	her.
Maybe	it	is	just	her	hairstyle.	Now,	are	you	going	to	get	married	to	a	hairstyle?
You	can	get	married,	but	 tomorrow	morning	when	you	see	her	hair	disheveled
you	will	be	at	a	loss:	"Is	this	the	same	woman	I	fell	in	love	with?"
How	long	can	you	be	interested	in	the	hairstyle?	Soon	you	will	get	fed	up.	The
same	hairstyle	again	and	again	--	the	whole	day,	twenty-four	hours	a	day...!
People	 are	 falling	 in	 love	 because	 a	 certain	 man	 has	 a	 certain	 type	 of	 nose.
People	are	falling	in	love	with	fragments!	Nobody	is	bothered	about	the	totality
of	the	person	--	and	it	is	a	vast	thing.	The	nose	does	not	count	for	much	--	after
two	days	you	won't	look	at	it	at	all.	Or	the	color,	or	the	shape,	or	the	proportion
of	 the	 body	 --	 all	 these	 things	 are	 very	 minor.	 The	 real	 thing	 is	 the	 total
functioning	 of	 the	 person,	 and	 that	 can	 be	 experienced	 only	 when	 you	 live
together.	Before	one	decides	to	get	married,	one	should	live	with	many	people	so
one	 can	 choose	 in	 awareness,	 and	 one	 should	 live	 with	 the	 person	 one	 is
choosing	for	a	few	months,	for	a	few	years.
My	own	observation	is	that	nobody	should	get	married	before	the	age	of	thirty-
five.	If	you	are	going	to	live	seventy	years,	 then	thirty-five	is	 the	right	 time;	 if
you	are	going	to	live	more	than	that,	then	you	can	prolong	it.	If	you	are	going	to
die	at	eighty,	then	forty.
If	you	have	decided	to	live	a	hundred	years,	then	fifty.	The	longer	you	wait	the
better,	because	if	you	wait	long	enough	you	may	decide	not	to	get	into	it	at	all!
That's	the	most	beautiful	thing:	if	you	wait	long	enough.
Just	the	other	day	Amrit	Chinmayo	asked	me....	Now,	she	is	nearabout	fifty;	she
is	a	beautiful	woman	and	I	like	her	because	she	is	outrageous!	She	asked	me,	"I
don't	see	many	sannyasins	of	my	age	here.	There	are	beautiful	people,	stunning
people,	 but	 they	 are	 nearabout	 thirty	 or	 at	 the	most	 thirty-five,	 and	 I	 am	 fifty.
There	are	very	few	people	who	are	fifty	or	beyond	fifty.	Am	I	transcending	sex
or	is	it	just	because	I	cannot	find	people	of	my	own	age?"
My	feeling	about	you,	Chinmayo,	is	that	you	have	lived	an	outrageous	life	and	it
is	 time	 to	 transcend.	 Only	 outrageous	 people	 can	 transcend	 quickly.	 The
orthodox,	the	conventional,	the	people	who	live	in	a	lukewarm	way	go	on	and	on
repeating	the	same	stupidity	to	the	very	end.	Even	when	they	are	dying	they	will
be	thinking	of	sex,	women	-
-	 and	 you	 can	 always	 find	 a	 copy	 of	 PLAYBOY	under	 their	 pillow!	Maybe	 a
very	 old	 copy	 from	 when	 they	 were	 young,	 or	 just	 a	 hangover	 they	 are	 still
carrying,	or	something	like	a	memoir	of	their	youth,	their	young	days....
Chinmayo	 is	 a	woman	who	has	 really	 lived,	 and	 if	 you	 live	 totally	 and	 really
authentically,	you	will	get	beyond	all	this	nonsense	sooner.	Fifty	is	the	right	time
to	go	beyond,	but	don't	force	it	because	forcing	will	not	help.	Transcendence	has
to	happen	in	a	silent,	whisperlike	manner.	One	becomes	aware	of	it	only	when	it
has	happened.
But	it	is	going	to	happen	sooner	or	later,	Chinmayo;	it	will	not	take	long	for	you.
Those	who	live	intensely	can	live	more	in	ten	years	than	ordinary	people	can	live
in	fifty	years.
Once	a	man	asked	Emerson,	"What	is	your	age?"
Emerson	said,	"Three	hundred	and	sixty	years."
The	man	could	not	believe	it	--	he	looked	no	more	than	sixty.	And	he	could	not
believe	that	Emerson	would	lie	because	he	was	well	known	for	his	authenticity.
He	thought,	"I	must	have	heard	wrongly."	He	said,	"Pardon	me,	I	could	not	hear.
What	did	you	say?
What	is	your	age?"
And	Emerson	said,	"Three	hundred	and	sixty.	And	you	have	not	heard	wrongly,	I
said	exactly	that:	three	hundred	and	sixty."
The	man	said,	"I	cannot	believe	it."
Emerson	said,	"I	cannot	believe	it	myself,	so	I	don't	expect	you	to	believe	it.	But
I	say	I	have	lived	three	hundred	and	sixty	years	because	ordinarily	people	live	in
such	a	 lukewarm	way	 that	 if	 they	 live	 three	hundred	and	sixty	years	 then	 they
will	come	close	to	me,	although	I	have	lived	only	sixty	years.	But	I	have	lived
intensely	and	totally.	Each	moment	I	have	squeezed	the	juice	of	life;	I	have	not
left	 a	 single	 drop	 behind.	 So	 in	 sixty	 years	 I	 have	 lived	 six	 times	 more	 than
people	ordinarily	live."
And	 that's	my	 feeling	 about	Chinmayo:	 she	 has	 lived	more	 in	 fifty	 years	 than
people	will	live	in	a	hundred	years.	And	it	is	time	to	transcend,	it	is	time	to	go
beyond.
Sex	is	animal,	love	is	human.
And	to	go	beyond	love	is	divine.
Then	arises	prayer.
Sex,	love,	prayer:	these	are	the	three	stages	of	life.
If	you	die	without	knowing	prayer,	you	have	lived	in	vain.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	ARE	YOU	NOT	SERIOUS?	WHY	ARE	YOU	ALWAYS	JOKING?
Gunga	Prasad,	God	is	not	serious	--	what	can	I	do?	God	is	always	joking.	Look
at	your	own	 life	 --	 it	 is	a	 joke!	Look	at	other	people's	 lives,	and	you	will	 find
jokes	and	jokes	and	jokes.
Seriousness	 is	 illness;	 seriousness	 has	 nothing	 spiritual	 about	 it.	 Spirituality	 is
laughter,	spirituality	is	joy,	spirituality	is	fun.
Two	hunters	were	 in	a	forest	 looking	for	game,	when	they	came	across	a	huge
black	bear.
The	first	hunter	took	aim,	but	missed.	The	second	hunter	took	careful	aim	as	the
bear	 drew	 closer	 to	 them,	 but	 his	 gun	 jammed.	The	 two	 hunters	 fled	 in	 terror
with	the	bear	in	hot	pursuit.	They	came	to	a	small	cabin	at	the	edge	of	the	forest,
ran	inside	and	bolted	the	door	just	before	the	bear	reached	them.
The	 enormous	 bear	 circled	 the	 cabin,	 found	 an	 open	 window	 and	 climbed	 in
after	them.
Loud	crashing	and	terror-stricken	screams	ensued,	then	silence....
Finally,	after	three	days,	the	door	burst	open	and	the	first	hunter	staggered	out,
walked	ten	paces	then	fell	face	first	onto	the	ground.
Not	long	after,	the	second	hunter	staggered	out,	walked	about	twenty	paces	then
fell	 to	 the	ground.	Hours	 later	 the	bear	 appeared,	 staggered	up	 the	 track	about
half	a	mile,	then	collapsed.
Shortly	 after,	 a	 beautiful	 young	 lady	 appeared	 at	 the	 door	 of	 the	 cabin.	 She
walked	up	to	the	first	hunter	and	said,	"Him,	he	owes	me	ten	dollars!"
Walking	up	 to	 the	second	hunter,	 she	said,	 "Him,	he	owes	me	 twenty	dollars."
Then	 she	 looked	 up	 and	 began	 scanning	 the	 horizon.	 "Now,	 I	 wonder	 what
happened	to	that	big	guy	in	the	fur	coat?	He	had	another	free	one	comin'!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Silence	and	Song	Meet
3	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011030
ShortTitle:
COME08
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	and	Q4	on	video
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHEN	I	AM	AMONG	PEOPLE,	AFTER	A	WHILE	I	WANT	TO	BE	ALONE.
WHEN
I	AM	ALONE,	AFTER	A	WHILE	 I	WANT	TO	BE	AMONG	PEOPLE.	SO	 I
CANNOT
ENJOY	ONE	OR	THE	OTHER	FULLY.	SHOULD	I	LIVE	ON	THE	 INSIDE
OR	ON
THE	OUTSIDE?
Robert,	this	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	questions	every	human	being	has	to
encounter;	it	is	part	of	the	challenge	that	life	presents	to	us.	The	mind	functions
in	duality;	 it	 is	 like	a	pendulum.	When	the	pendulum	moves	 towards	 the	right,
you	 see	 it	moving	 towards	 the	 right,	 but	 at	 the	 very	 same	 time	 it	 is	 gathering
momentum	to	go	 to	 the	 left.	When	it	 is	moving	 towards	 the	 left	 it	 is	gathering
momentum	to	go	to	the	right.
This	 inner	 duality	 in	 the	 pendulum	 represents	 your	 mind.	 The	 mind	 is	 a
pendulum;	 hence,	 when	 you	 are	 alone	 you	 cannot	 enjoy	 aloneness,	 you	 start
gathering	 momentum	 to	 be	 with	 people,	 and	 as	 you	 start	 thinking	 of	 people,
aloneness	turns	into	loneliness.
Aloneness	is	 tremendously	beautiful;	 it	 is	 like	a	sunlit	peak,	something	beyond
the	clouds.	But	loneliness	is	ugly;	it	is	a	dark	hole.	If	you	cannot	enjoy	aloneness
everything	 goes	 upside	 down:	 the	 peak	 becomes	 the	 valley,	 the	 light	 becomes
darkness.	 You	 are	 bored,	 you	 don't	 know	 what	 to	 do	 with	 yourself;	 you	 feel
empty,	 and	you	want	 to	 stuff	 yourself	with	 something	 --	 either	with	 people	 or
with	food	or	with	a	movie.	These	are	all	different	ways	not	to	feel	lonely.	And
when	you	are	with	people,	the	same	will	happen	again	from	the	other	end.	When
you	 are	with	 people	 you	 feel	 interfered	with,	 trespassed	 upon,	 because	 others
start	encroaching	on	your	space,	they	destroy	your	freedom.	So	being	with	others
is	no	longer	love;	it	becomes	a	bondage.	And	one	hates	bondage	--	one	wants	to
get	rid	of	it	as	quickly	as	possible.	It	is	a	prison;	you	start	feeling	suffocated.
Even	with	 the	person	you	 think	you	 love,	you	start	 feeling	fed	up.	You	cannot
enjoy	 love	 because	 suddenly	 you	 realize	 that	 to	 be	 alone	 is	 beautiful,	 because
now	you	can	see	that	aloneness	is	freedom.	But	when	you	are	alone	you	see	love
as	joy!
This	is	the	dichotomy	of	the	mind.	It	exists	in	every	dimension.	If	you	are	poor
you	hanker	to	be	rich;	this	is	a	well-known	fact.	But	the	other	side	has	not	been
recognized:	everybody	knows	the	beggar	wants	to	be	the	emperor,	but	have	you
not	 watched	 Mahavira	 renouncing	 his	 kingdom,	 Buddha	 escaping	 from	 his
marble	palaces?	What	is	that?	It	is	the	same	phenomenon!	The	poor	man	wants
to	 be	 rich,	 and	 the	 rich	 man	 wants	 to	 be	 poor.	 And	 when	 Buddha	 started
initiating	disciples	he	called	them	BHIKKHUS.
The	word	"bhikkhu"	means	beggar.
Alexander	the	Great,	at	the	last	moment	of	his	life,	realized	that	he	had	wasted
his	life	in	accumulating	unnecessary,	nonessential	things,	and	now	death	would
take	 everything	 away.	 Suddenly	 he	 remembered	 the	 great	 Greek	 mystic
Diogenes	whom	he	had	met	 just	 a	year	before.	Diogenes	was	naked	and	 lived
without	 any	 possessions,	 and	Alexander	 had	 felt	 tremendously	 infatuated	with
him.	He	had	told	Diogenes	exactly	this,	that	"If	I	am	to	come	back	to	the	world	I
will	ask	God	to	make	me	Diogenes	next	time,	and	not	Alexander."
This	 is	 the	 same	dichotomy;	 there	 is	 no	difference.	When	you	are	 a	 child	you
want	to	be	older,	and	when	you	are	older	you	start	thinking	how	beautiful	were
the	days	when	you	were	a	child.	Everybody	as	he	grows	older	starts	fantasizing
about	his	childhood;	he	starts	decorating	it	in	every	possible	way.	And	when	he
was	a	child	he	was	in	a	hurry	to	grow	up.
When	you	are	alive	you	think	of	the	life	that	is	after	death.	People	come	to	me
and	say,
"Tell	us	something	about	what	happens	after	death."	And	I	am	always	intrigued
with	their	question.	Rather	than	answering	them,	I	ask	them,	"First	tell	me	what
happens	before	death!"	Nobody	seems	 to	be	 interested	 in	 that	 --	what	happens
before	 death;	 everybody	 is	 interested	 in	what	 happens	 after	 death.	And	 if	 you
meet	a	ghost,	it	is	absolutely	certain	he	will	tell	you,	"I	am	suffering	very	badly.	I
missed	my	life,	now	I	am	hankering	for	it.	I	would	like	to	have	the	body	again,
the	mind	again,	to	have	all	the	senses	again."
Different	 aspects,	 but	 the	 problem	 is	 the	 same:	 you	 hanker	 for	 the	 opposite
because	the	grass	looks	greener	--	not	your	own	grass	but	the	grass	beyond	the
fence	 in	 the	 neighbor's	 garden.	 It	 always	 looks	 greener.	 It	 is	 a	 simple
phenomenon:	whatsoever	you	have	loses	meaning	--	the	moment	you	have	it,	it
loses	meaning	--	whatsoever	you	have	not	becomes	immensely	significant.	The
mind	 hankers	 for	 that	 which	 it	 has	 not	 got,	 and	 the	 mind	 gets	 bored	 with
whatsoever	it	has	got.
It	 is	 said	 about	 the	 great	 English	 poet	Byron	 that	 he	must	 have	 loved	 at	 least
sixty	women.	He	did	not	live	so	long;	he	died	young	--	and	this	number,	sixty,	is
a	 very	 conservative	 estimate.	 This	 is	 from	 the	 known	 stories;	 there	may	 have
been	other	relationships	which	are	not	known.	When	he	would	go	mad	about	a
woman,	 he	would	 risk	 everything.	He	 risked	 his	whole	 respectability.	He	was
expelled	from	England	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	was	creating	chaos.	He	was
a	beautiful	man	--	very	beautiful,	extraordinarily	beautiful	--	and	a	great	poet.	He
had	all	those	qualities	which	women	are	attracted	to.	He	was	a	legend	in	his	own
time.
It	 had	 become	 a	 routine	 phenomenon	 that	 if	 he	 entered	 a	 restaurant	 the	 men
would	clutch	 the	hands	of	 their	wives	and	 run	away!	He	was	not	allowed	 into
clubs,	he	was	not	allowed	into	good	society.	Everybody	was	afraid	of	the	man;
he	had	some	charm,	some	magnetism,	some	charisma.	And	for	months	he	would
go	mad	and	chase	a	woman.	And	the	moment	he	got	the	woman	he	would	lose
all	 interest,	 all	 interest	 would	 absolutely	 disappear.	 He	 represents	 mind	 in	 its
purity,	in	its	essential	quality.
One	woman	 forced	 him	 to	marry	 her	 because	 she	 insisted	 that	 she	would	 not
allow	him	even	to	kiss	her,	or	even	to	hug	her,	or	even	to	hold	her	hand	unless	he
married	her.	And	he	was	so	mad	about	her	that	he	agreed	to	marriage.	When	they
were	coming	out	of	the	church,	just	married,	and	the	guests	were	taking	leave	of
them,	standing	on	the	steps,	holding	the	hand	of	his	wife,	he	saw	another	woman
walking	down	the	road	and	he	forgot	his	wife.	His	wife	immediately	recognized
it;	she	could	see	that	he	had	forgotten	all	about	her,	and	she	told	him	so.
But	he	was	a	sincere	man	too.	He	said,	"It	is	true,	I	have	lost	all	interest	in	you.
For	 six	months	 I	was	mad	 --	day	 in,	day	out,	 I	dreamed	about	you,	 fantasized
about	you,	wrote	poems	about	you.	I	was	dying!	I	was	thinking	that	without	you
I	could	not	 live	a	single	moment	 longer.	And	now	 that	you	are	mine	and	your
hand	is	in	my	hand,	I	only	feel	perspiration!	That	woman	for	a	moment	caught
my	whole	being.	I	simply	forgot	you."	He	apologized	--	but	apology	is	not	love.
This	is	the	way	the	mind	functions:	its	whole	interest	is	in	that	which	you	have
not	got.
Hence,	Robert,	your	question	is	significant	and	it	has	tortured	humanity	since	the
very	beginning.	And	people	have	been	choosing,	just	as	you	are	asking:	"Should
I	live	on	the	inside	or	on	the	outside?"
Wherever	you	live	you	will	be	in	trouble.	If	you	live	on	the	outside,	 the	inside
will	 function	 like	 a	 magnet.	 If	 you	 live	 on	 the	 inside,	 the	 outside	 will	 go	 on
sending	invitations	to	you:	"Come	out!	It	is	a	beautiful	morning.	The	flowers	are
blossoming	 and	 the	 air	 is	 fragrant,"	 or,	 "It	 is	 a	 tremendously	 ecstatic	 sunset.
Look,	 the	 starry	night...."	And	 if	you	are	outside	you	will	 continuously	worry,
"What	is	inside	me?	Who	am	I?	What	is	this	consciousness?"
Science	has	become	focused	on	the	outside;	religion	has	become	focused	on	the
inside.
Both	are	lopsided,	because	the	inside	and	the	outside	are	not	two	separate	things,
they	are	inseparably	one.	To	separate	them	is	arbitrary,	artificial.
In	the	past	the	monks	decided	to	be	alone	because	they	saw	the	misery	of	love,
they	saw	that	to	be	with	someone	is	to	suffer.	What	Jean-Paul	Sartre	said	in	this
century,	 the	 monks	 all	 over	 the	 world	 --	 Christian,	 Hindu,	 Jaina,	 Buddhist,
Mohammedan	--	have	known	all	along;	it	is	one	of	the	most	ancient	experiences.
Jean-Paul	Sartre	is	not	original	at	all;	he	looks	original	because	nobody	has	said
it	in	exactly	that	way.	Jean-Paul	Sartre	says,	"The	other	is	hell"	--	and	this	is	the
experience	of	all	 the	monks,	of	all	 the	mahatmas,	of	all	 the	saints.	Whatsoever
denomination	they	belong	to	does	not	matter;	on	one	point	they	all	agree:	"The
other	is	hell	--	escape	from	the	other!"
They	 escaped	 to	 the	 Himalayan	 caves,	 they	 escaped	 to	 the	 monasteries,	 they
escaped	 from	 the	world	 --	 they	were	 really	 escaping	 from	 the	 other.	But	were
they	 happy	 in	 their	 monasteries,	 in	 their	 caves?	 That	 question	 has	 not	 been
raised.	It	has	to	be	raised.	Were	they	blissful?	Maybe	they	were	more	silent	than
you	are	--	but	silence	is	not	bliss,	silence	is	not	a	song.	Silence	has	no	warmth;	it
can	be	cold	and	dead.	And	it	WAS	cold	and	dead.
Your	so-called	monks	have	lived	in	such	a	suicidal	way	that	they	have	become
living	corpses.	They	chose	half	of	life,	and	whenever	you	chose	half	you	will	be
in	trouble,	because	what	are	you	going	to	do	with	the	other	half?	You	will	remain
only	fragmentary,	and	the	other	half	will	take	its	revenge.
The	remainder	of	humanity	has	chosen	to	live	in	the	world,	and	it	is	very	rare	to
find	a	person	in	the	world	who	does	not	feel	once	in	a	while	the	desire	to	escape
from	all	this.
The	world	is	too	much;	it	is	anxiety,	anguish;	it	is	nothing	but	suffering.
Psychologists	say	that	the	average	person	thinks	at	least	four	times	in	his	life	of
committing	suicide	--	at	least!	Why	do	people	think	of	committing	suicide?	And
not	 only	 do	 people	 think	 of	 it,	 many	 commit	 suicide.	 That's	 also	 a	 way	 of
escaping	from	the	world,	escaping	totally,	because	if	you	go	to	a	monastery	you
can	 come	 back.	 You	 know	 it	 yourself:	 if	 you	 go	 to	 the	 Himalayas,	 who	 can
prevent	you?	--	you	can	come	back	again.
Suicide	seems	to	be	irreversible.	Suicide	is	a	total	renunciation	of	life,	and	what
you	have	called	 the	 renunciation	of	 life	 is	nothing	but	 slow	suicide,	 suicide	 in
installments	--	the	American	way,	part	by	part!
My	 own	 observation	 is	 that	 both	 extremes	 have	 been	 wrong,	 and	 both	 have
created	a	very	ugly	situation.	There	is	no	need	to	choose;	we	have	to	live	both.
Of	course	it	 is	easier	to	be	silent	in	a	cave,	but	that	silence	will	not	give	you	a
dance,	and	without	a	dance	you	will	remain	dead.	If	you	are	in	the	world	it	will
give	 you	 a	 song,	 but	 the	 song	will	 not	 have	 any	 depth;	 it	 will	 be	 superficial,
formal.
One	needs	silence	in	the	heart,	and	yet	a	silence	which	is	not	cold	but	warm,	a
silence	which	can	sing	and	dance.
When	silence	and	song	meet,	the	man	is	whole.
When	you	are	capable	of	moving	between	the	inner	and	the	outer	easily,	just	as
you	move	in	and	out	of	your	house...in	the	same	way	as	when	it	is	too	cold	in	the
morning	you	simply	move	out	of	the	house	into	the	sun.	You	enjoy	the	warmth
of	the	sun,	and	when	it	becomes	too	hot	you	move	inside.	There	is	no	problem	in
it	 --	 it	 is	 YOUR	 house!	 The	 inner	 is	 as	 much	 yours	 as	 the	 outer,	 and	 to	 be
capable	of	moving	from	the	inner	to	the	outer	and	vice	versa,	in	a	flexible	way,
creates	the	whole	man.	And	I	call	the	WHOLE
man	the	holy	man.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	whole.
Robert,	you	are	not	yet	a	sannyasin.	 If	you	are	 really	 interested	 in	solving	 this
problem,	my	sannyas	is	the	only	way	to	solve	it,	because	I	teach	flexibility.	All
the	 old	 ideas	 are	 rigid:	 "Either	 be	 extrovert	 or	 be	 introvert"	 --	 but	 both	 are
pathological.	The	introvert	becomes	moribund,	the	introvert	becomes	a	little	bit
insane	 because	 he	 loses	 contact	 with	 objective	 reality;	 he	 starts	 hallucinating.
That's	why	it	is	easy	to	experience	God	if	you	go	to	the	Himalayan	caves.	There
is	 no	 objective	 reality	 to	 hinder	 you	 from	 deceiving	 yourself.	 There	 is	 no
objective	reality	to	remind	you	that	this	is	a	dream,	that	what	you	are	seeing	is
not	there,	it	is	a	hallucination.
It	 is	 a	well-known	psychological	 fact	 that	 if	you	 live	 in	deep	 isolation	 for	 just
three	 weeks	 you	 will	 start	 hallucinating.	 And	 you	 can	 hallucinate	 whatsoever
you	want:	if	you	are	a	Christian	you	will	see	Christ,	if	you	are	a	Hindu	you	will
see	Krishna,	if	you	are	a	Buddhist	you	will	see	Buddha.	This	is	very	strange!	No
Christian	ever	sees	Buddha,	no	Buddhist	ever	sees	Christ!	Whatsoever	you	have
been	 conditioned	 for,	 your	 hallucination	 will	 be	 colored	 by	 it.	 You	 will	 start
visiting	heaven,	but	your	heavens	will	be	different.
The	Tibetan	heaven	is	very	warm;	it	has	to	be	--	Tibet	suffers	so	much	from	cold.
The	Tibetan	hell	is	cold,	ice-cold,	but	the	Indian	hell	is	just	fire.	The	very	idea	of
ice	to	the	Indian	will	give	him	great	joy!	The	Indian	idea	of	heaven	is	that	it	is
very	cool	 --	 it	 is	air-conditioned!	The	 Indian	will	dream	about	his	heaven,	and
the	Tibetan	will	dream	about	his	heaven.
In	 the	Mohammedan	 heaven	 there	 are	 rivers	 and	 streams	 flowing	 with	 wine,
because	 the	 KORAN	 is	 very	 much	 against	 wine.	 It	 is	 repression.	 When	 you
repress	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 erupt	 in	 hallucination.	 The	 Mohammedan	 idea	 of
heaven	 is	 that	 you	 will	 have	 beautiful	 women	 there,	 and	 not	 only	 beautiful
women	but	beautiful	boys	too,	because	in	the	Arabic	nations	homosexuality	has
been	 one	 of	 the	 longest	 traditions	 --	 repressed,	 very	 much	 repressed.	 But
whatsoever	 is	 repressed	 is	 bound	 to	 assert	 itself	 somewhere.	 In	 heaven	 even
homosexuality	is	allowed,	available.	Here	it	is	condemned;	there	it	is	allowed.
Hindus	go	on	 saying	 that	 all	 desires	 are	wrong,	but	 in	heaven	you	have	wish-
fulfilling	trees.	You	just	sit	underneath	the	tree	--	KALPATARUS,	wish-fulfilling
trees	 --	 you	 desire	 anything,	 and	 immediately,	 instantly	 it	 is	 fulfilled.	 Instant
coffee	 is	 a	 very	 new	 thing	 --	 Hindus	 have	 known	 instant	 fulfillment	 for	 all
desires!	Just	sit	under	 the	KALPAVRISKSHA.	Here	they	go	on	talking	against
desires,	 and	 there	 the	 same	 desires	 are	 going	 to	 be	 fulfilled.	Here	 they	 go	 on
talking	against	women....
The	Hindu	saint	goes	on	saying	that	the	woman	is	the	door	to	hell,	and	in	their
heaven	 there	 are	 beautiful	 APSARAS,	 beautiful	 women	 --	 Uruvasi,
Menaka...thousands....	They	have	golden	bodies;	they	are	always	young.	In	fact,
they	have	been	stuck	at	the	age	of	sixteen	for	millions	of	years;	they	have	never
grown	 beyond	 it.	 It	 seems	 they	 were	 born	 at	 exactly	 sixteen	 and	 they	 have
remained	sixteen.	Here,	the	woman	is	the	door	to	hell,	and	the	saints	are	hoping
that	 sooner	 or	 later	 all	 this	 austerity,	 asceticism	will	 be	 finished	 and	 they	will
enjoy	heaven	forever	and	forever.	And	what	are	you	going	to	enjoy	there?	--	the
same	women	who	are	the	doors	to	hell	here!
The	same	money,	the	same	gold	which	you	go	on	calling	dust...in	heaven	even
the	flowers	are	made	of	gold.	I	would	not	like	such	a	heaven!	Flowers	made	of
gold	cannot	have	any	perfume.	A	roseflower	made	of	gold	will	be	ugly,	it	will	be
dead.	Gold	cannot	be	alive.
The	extrovert	 is	half:	 he	 is	 continuously	 running	after	 things	 and	continuously
feeling	guilty	that	he	is	missing	the	inner	--	maybe	the	real	bliss	is	there.	Perhaps
the	Buddha	 and	 the	 Jina	 and	 the	Christ	 are	 right,	 that	 the	 kingdom	 of	God	 is
within.	 And	 the	 person	 who	 is	 sitting	 silently,	 looking	 inside,	 is	 continuously
wondering,	"Am	I	wasting	my	time?
People	 are	 enjoying	 and	 I	 am	 foolishly	 sitting	 here,	 waiting	 for	 the	 spring	 to
come	and	the	grass	to	grow	by	itself!	And	who	knows	whether	it	grows	by	itself
or	not?	And	even	if	it	does	grow,	so	what?	It	will	still	grow	whether	I	am	sitting
silently	or	not!	The	spring	will	come	and	the	grass	will	grow,	so	let	it	grow!	And
there	 is	 some	 juicy	party	going	on,	and	 there	are	so	many	beautiful	hotels	and
restaurants	and	clubs	and	nightclubs...."
Even	 a	 man	 like	 Morarji	 Desai...can	 you	 imagine	 Morarji	 Desai	 visiting	 a
nightclub?
Now	he	has	confessed	that	when	he	was	the	prime	minister	--	he	must	have	been
eighty-three	 at	 that	 time	 --	 he	 went	 to	 visit	 a	 nightclub	 in	 Canada,	 of	 course
without	declaring	it.
He	has	kept	 it	a	 secret	up	 to	now.	Why	did	he	suddenly	 talk	about	 it?	He	was
bragging;	 he	 did	 not	 think	 that	 he	 was	 saying	 something	 wrong	 --	 he	 was
bragging.	He	was	telling	the	Gujarat	Vidyapeeth	students	in	Ahmedabad,	"I	have
attained	to	the	ultimate	celibacy.
For	 example,	 I	 visited	 a	 nightclub	 in	 Canada	 just	 to	 see	 what	 was	 going	 on
there."	 But	 why	 should	 a	 man	 who	 has	 attained	 to	 ultimate	 celibacy	 even	 be
interested	to	know	what	is	going	on	there?	Some	rationalization,	some	strategy
of	the	mind	entering	from	the	backdoor.	He	was	not	even	being	honest	enough	to
say,	"I	wanted	to	see	the	naked	women."	No,	he	says,	"I	wanted	to	see	what	was
going	on	there."	But	why	should	he	be	worried	about	it?"
And	 he	 says,	 "When	 I	went	 there,	 knowing	 that	 I	was	 the	 prime	minister,	 the
four	most	beautiful	girls	were	 sent	 to	me	and	 they	 started	dancing	around	me,
making	all	kinds	of	gestures	 --	very	 inviting,	very	appealing	 --	but	 I	 remained
controlled!	 I	was	not	affected	at	all."	He	emphasized	 it	 so	much	 that	 it	 simply
shows	he	must	have	been	affected.
And	those	girls	seem	to	have	been	far	more	intelligent	than	this	poor	guy.	After	a
while	they	said,	"We	thought	you	were	a	man,	but	you	are	just	a	Morarji	Desai!"
Now	do	you	know	what	Morarji	Desai	means?	The	girls	said,	"We	thought	you
were	a	man,	but	you	are	nothing	--	just	a	Morarji	Desai!"
But	he	even	brags	about	that	--	stupidity	is	such!	He	thought	they	recognized	that
he	was	no	ordinary	person,	he	was	Morarji	Desai	--	that	he	was	not	a	man	in	the
ordinary	sense,	he	had	transcended	all	human	weaknesses.
The	people	who	are	living	extrovertly	will	remain	interested	in	the	inner	world,
and	the	people	who	are	living	introvertly	will	remain	interested	in	the	extrovert
world,	and	they	will	both	be	torn	apart.	That	creates	anguish,	strain.
Robert,	my	own	suggestion	is	to	live	a	relaxed	life.	It	is	beautiful	to	be	alone,	it
is	also	beautiful	to	be	in	love,	to	be	with	people.	And	both	are	complementary,
not	contradictory.
When	you	are	enjoying	others,	enjoy,	and	enjoy	to	the	full;	 there	is	no	need	to
bother	about	aloneness.	And	when	you	are	 fed	up	with	others,	 then	move	 into
aloneness	and	enjoy	it	to	the	full.
Don't	try	to	choose	--	if	you	try	to	choose	you	will	be	in	difficulty.	Every	choice
is	going	to	create	a	division	in	you,	a	kind	of	split	in	you.	Why	choose?	When
you	can	have	both,	why	have	one?	And	it	is	a	very	natural	process.	It	is	just	like
when	you	are	hungry	you	eat,	and	when	you	are	full	you	stop	eating.	You	don't
start	saying,	"What	should	I	choose?	Should	I	always	remain	hungry	or	should	I
eat	continuously?"	When	you	are	hungry,	eat,	and	when	you	are	full,	stop	eating
and	forget	all	about	it;	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	other	things	to	do.	There	is
no	 need	 to	 go	 on	 a	 fast,	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 on	 stuffing	 yourself
continuously;	both	are	pathological	states.
The	 same	 is	 true	 about	 love	 and	 aloneness.	 Enjoy	 people	 because	 they	 are
manifestations	of	God,	but	remember	the	other	side	is	also	there.	So	when	you
start	feeling	fed	up	there	is	no	need	to	remain	with	people	just	out	of	politeness.
Don't	 try	 to	 be	 British	 --	 be	 authentic!	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 not	 to	 be	 British,
because	 we	 have	 always	 been	 told	 to	 be	 polite,	 to	 have	 certain	 manners,	 to
follow	a	certain	etiquette.	Even	if	you	are	bored	you	go	on	smiling.	Even	if	you
don't	feel	good	with	somebody	you	say,	"It	is	a	blessing	to	meet	you,"	and	you
are	cursing	them.
Why	do	you	go	on	creating	such	strange	splits	in	yourself?	It	is	time	--	man	has
come	 of	 age	 --	 it	 is	 time	 to	 be	 authentic.	 When	 you	 are	 feeling	 good	 with
somebody,	say	so	and	say	it	totally,	and	when	you	are	not	feeling	good,	then	you
can	just	say,	"Excuse	me...."	I	am	not	saying	to	be	rude,	but	there	is	no	need	to
suffer	the	presence	of	the	other.	Just	say,
"I	would	like	to	be	alone,	I	would	like	my	own	space."
Up	to	now	this	has	not	been	possible.	If	you	love	somebody	you	cannot	say,	"I
would	like	to	have	my	own	space."	This	is	sheer	nonsense,	inhuman!	If	you	love
somebody	you	should	be	sincere	--	that	is	the	indication	of	love	--	you	should	be
able	 to	say,	"Now	I	would	 like	 to	have	my	own	space."	And	you	should	allow
the	other	also	the	same	freedom	to	be	with	you	or	not	to	be	with	you.
It	is	good	if	two	persons	agree	to	be	together	for	a	time;	it	is	beautiful.	But	it	is
also	 good	 to	 be	 alone.	 Aloneness	 will	 give	 you	 peace,	 silence,	 equanimity,
meditativeness,	 awareness,	 a	 sense	 of	 integrity,	 centering,	 rootedness,
groundedness	 --	 all	 these	 are	 great	 values.	 And	 love	 will	 help	 you	 to	 learn
compassion,	prayer,	service	--	they	are	also	great	values,	and	they	will	enhance
each	other.
That's	what	 I	 am	doing	here	with	my	 sannyasins	 --	 letting	 them	enhance	 each
other,	letting	them	become	backgrounds	to	each	other.
Let	your	love	help	your	aloneness.
It	is	like...when	you	look	at	the	sky	in	the	day	you	will	not	see	any	stars.	It	is	not
that	they	have	all	died	or	disappeared	or	evaporated;	they	are	still	there,	but	the
background	of	darkness	is	missing,	that's	why	you	cannot	see	them.	The	sky	is
always	full	of	stars;	day	or	night	makes	no	difference,	but	in	the	night	you	can
see	 the	stars	clearly.	The	darker	 the	night,	 the	brighter	 the	stars	 look.	They	are
not	against	each	other;	they	are	complementary,	not	contradictory.
So	are	the	inner	and	the	outer	world:	the	outer	is	part	of	the	inner,	Robert,	just	as
the	inner	is	part	of	the	outer.	They	are	like	two	wings	--	you	cannot	fly	with	one
wing.	Enjoy	both,	and	don't	create	any	rift,	don't	create	any	fight	between	them.
Learn	the	art	of	being	together	AND	of	being	alone.
Hence	 my	 whole	 teaching	 consists	 of	 two	 words,	 "meditation"	 and	 "love."
Meditate	 so	 that	 you	 can	 feel	 immense	 silence,	 and	 love	 so	 that	 your	 life	 can
become	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration.	You	will	have	to	move	between	the	two,
and	if	you	can	move	easily,	if	you	can	move	without	any	effort,	you	have	learned
the	greatest	thing	in	life.
God	is	both	the	creator	and	the	creation	--	this	infinite	universe	outside	and	this
infinite	consciousness	inside.	And	he	has	to	be	tasted	and	known	in	both	aspects.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
CHOGYAM	TRUNGPA	WRITES	IN	ONE	OF	HIS	BOOKS:
"NOR	 IS	 IT	 HELPFUL	 TO	 CHOOSE	 SOMEONE	 FOR	 YOUR	 MASTER
SIMPLY
BECAUSE	 HE	 IS	 FAMOUS	 --	 SOMEONE	 WHO	 IS	 RENOWNED	 FOR
HAVING
PUBLISHED	STACKS	OF	BOOKS	AND	CONVERTED	THOUSANDS	OR
MILLIONS	 OF	 PEOPLE.	 INSTEAD,	 THE	 GUIDELINE	 IS	WHETHER	 OR
NOT	YOU
ARE	 ABLE	 TO	 ACTUALLY	 COMMUNICATE	 WITH	 THE	 PERSON
DIRECTLY
AND	THOROUGHLY."
THE	KEY	WORDS	ARE	"DIRECTLY"	AND	"THOROUGHLY."	HOW	DOES
THIS
WORK	FROM	THE	SANNYASIN'S	END,	IN	VIEW	OF	YOUR	VIRTUALLY
COMPLETE	PHYSICAL	INACCESSIBILITY?
James,	it	is	true	that	one	should	not	choose	someone	as	a	master	JUST	because
he	is	famous.	Jesus	was	not	famous	when	he	was	alive	nor	was	Lao	Tzu	famous
when	 he	 was	 alive.	 To	 be	 famous	 is	 one	 thing;	 to	 know	 the	 truth	 is	 totally
another.	In	fact,	there	is	a	greater	possibility	that	the	master,	the	real	master,	will
be	notorious	rather	than	famous.
Jesus	 must	 have	 been	 very	 notorious;	 otherwise	 why	 should	 he	 be	 crucified?
And	he	was	crucified	with	two	thieves,	one	on	either	side,	just	to	show	the	world
that	the	people	who	were	crucifying	him	did	not	consider	him	in	any	way	more
significant	than	two	ordinary	thieves.	In	fact	they	thought	he	was	worse.	It	was	a
tradition	 in	 the	 Jerusalem	 of	 those	 days	 that	 each	 year	 one	 person	 could	 be
forgiven.	The	day	 Jesus	was	 crucified	 there	were	 four	persons	 to	be	 crucified,
and	there	was	a	possibility	of	one	person	being	forgiven.
Pontius	 Pilate	 asked	 the	 Jews,	 "Whom	 would	 you	 like	 to	 forgive?"	 He	 was
thinking	they	would	ask	for	Jesus	to	be	forgiven,	because	in	fact	he	had	not	done
any	harm	to	anybody
--	 he	was	 not	 a	murderer,	 he	 was	 not	 a	 thief,	 he	 was	 not	 a	 criminal.	 But	 the
people	 asked	 for	 a	 thief	 to	 be	 forgiven	 and	 insisted	 that	 Jesus	 could	 not	 be
forgiven:	"You	can	forgive	any	of	the	thieves,	but	not	Jesus."	He	must	have	been
very	notorious	--	people	were	so	angry	with	him.
They	killed	Socrates,	they	killed	al-Hillaj	Mansoor,	they	made	many	attempts	on
the	life	of	Gautam	Buddha.	It	simply	shows	these	people	were	not	famous,	not
respected	by	the	crowd;	the	crowd	was	utterly	against	them.	Hence	it	is	true	that
you	should	not	choose	your	master	simply	because	he	is	famous.	He	can	easily
be	 famous	 if	 he	 fulfills	 your	 expectations.	 And	 everybody	 has	 certain
expectations,	everybody	has	in	mind	certain	qualities	that	a	master	has	to	fulfill	-
-	and	anybody	who	fulfills	your	expectations	is	not	a	master	at	all.	No	master	can
fulfill	your	expectations;	 in	 fact	he	will	 sabotage	all	your	expectations,	he	will
destroy	all	your	expectations.	To	fulfill	your	expectations	 is	 to	strengthen	your
ego,	and	no	master	can	do	that.
And	how	can	you	decide	what	the	qualifications	of	a	master	are?	The	Hindu	will
decide	in	one	way,	the	Jaina	will	decide	in	another	way;	in	fact,	their	decisions
will	 be	 diametrically	 opposite	 to	 each	 other.	 The	Hindu	 thinks	Krishna	 is	 the
perfect	master,	and	the	Jainas	have	thrown	Krishna	into	the	seventh	hell.	Hindus
think	 Krishna	 is	 the	 perfect	 master	 because	 he	 lived	 a	 multidimensional	 life.
Jainas	think	that	he	is	one	of	the	greatest	criminals	because	he	was	the	cause	of
the	 great	war	 that	 destroyed	 India	 forever.	 Since	 that	war	 five	 thousand	 years
have	passed	and	India	has	not	been	able	to	stand	on	her	own	feet	again.
Millions	 of	 people	 were	 killed,	 and	 Krishna	 rationalized	 this	 killing	 with
beautiful	logic.
He	 said	 to	Arjuna,	 "Don't	 be	worried	 about	killing	people,	 because	 the	 soul	 is
immortal	 and	 the	 body	 is	 already	 dead,	 so	 you	 are	 not	 killing.	 There	 is	 no
murder,	 there	 is	 no	violence	 at	 all.	The	body	 is	 already	dead,	 so	dust	will	 fall
unto	dust;	and	 the	soul	 is	 immortal,	 so	you	are	only	disconnecting	 them,	 that's
all.	 You	 are	 not	 killing	 anybody;	 nothing	 is	 ever	 killed.	 NA	 HANYATE
HANYAMANE	SHARIRE	--	"By	killing	the	body,	nothing	is	killed."
A	 beautiful	 argument	 for	 violence!	 Now,	 the	 Jainas	 cannot	 forgive	 it.	 Their
criterion	 for	 a	 perfect	 master	 is	 that	 he	 should	 be	 absolutely	 nonviolent	 --
Mahavira	is	their	ideal.
Mahavira	 used	 to	 sleep	 in	 one	position	 the	whole	 night,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	if	he	changed	his	posture,	turned	over	on	his	other	side,	some	ants	or	some
insects	might	be	killed.	It	was	better	to	remain	in	one	position	the	whole	night.	It
is	 unnatural;	 the	 body	needs	 the	 change.	 It	 helps	 the	 digestion	 to	 change	your
position	--	 it	 is	a	 little	bit	of	exercise.	But	Mahavira	remained	 like	a	statue	 the
whole	night.	This	is	their	ideal.
Krishna	cannot	fulfill	 it,	Rama	cannot	fulfill	 it.	Rama	carries	a	bow	and	arrow,
and	 they	 symbolize	 violence.	Even	 Jesus	 cannot	 fulfill	 their	 criterion,	 because
according	 to	 the	 Jainas	 you	 suffer	 only	 because	 of	 your	 past	 karmas.	 Jesus
suffered	on	 the	cross,	and	 that	simply	shows	one	 thing	and	very	definitively	--
that	 in	 his	 past	 lives	 he	 must	 have	 committed	 a	 great	 crime;	 otherwise	 why
should	he	be	crucified?
Who	is	going	to	decide?	How	are	you	going	to	know	who	the	master	is?	Fame
cannot	 decide,	 thousands	of	 followers	 cannot	 decide.	Then	what	 is	 the	way	 to
decide?	 In	 fact,	 logic	 cannot	 decide.	 This	 is	 logic:	 looking	 at	 the	 fame	 of	 the
man,	 looking	 at	 how	 many	 disciples	 he	 has.	 This	 is	 all	 logic,	 calculation,
mathematics;	these	cannot	be	decisive.
Only	one	thing	can	decide:	if	in	your	heart	some	bells	start	ringing	for	no	reason
at	 all,	 illogically.	 Even	 if	 you	 want	 to	 stop	 them	 they	 don't	 stop,	 they	 go	 on
ringing.	It	is	a	heart-to-heart	phenomenon.
So	it	is	true:	one	should	not	choose	a	master	just	because	he	is	famous,	but	the
second	part	is	not	right	either.
Trungpa	says:	"Instead,	the	guideline	is	whether	or	not	you	are	able	to	actually
communicate	 with	 the	 person...."	 The	 master	 has	 no	 personality,	 he	 is	 not	 a
person	 --	he	has	dropped	personality.	 In	 fact,	 in	 the	ultimate	 sense	he	 is	 just	 a
nothing,	what	Buddha	calls	SHUNYATA;	he	is	pure	nothingness.	How	can	you
communicate	with	nothingness?
Yes,	 communion	 is	 possible,	 but	 communication	 is	 not	 possible.	 And
communion	needs	no	direct	personal	contact;	you	can	commune	with	the	master
from	 thousands	 of	 miles	 away.	 The	 physical	 presence	 is	 not	 needed.	 The
physical	presence	is	needed	only	for	the	beginners,	for	the	people	who	are	in	the
kindergarten	class.
As	the	master	starts	working	deeper	and	deeper,	as	he	starts	finding	his	people,
he	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more	 inaccessible	 physically,	 because	 once	 he	 has
found	 the	 right	 people,	 who	 are	 ready	 to	 commune,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for
communication.
So	that	part	is	sheer	bullshit,	that	the	guideline	is	whether	or	not	"you	are	able	to
actually	communicate	with	the	person	directly	and	thoroughly."	The	whole	thing
depends	on	the	disciple.	If	he	can	surrender	his	ego,	then	wherever	he	is	there	is
communion.
Communion	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon	 from	 communication.
Communication	is	from	intellect	to	intellect	--	and	for	that	the	physical	presence
is	helpful	--	but	communion	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	It	is	a	love	affair.
The	hearts	can	beat	in	the	same	rhythm	thousands	of	miles	apart.	Even	if	you	are
on	another	planet,	it	doesn't	matter;	the	hearts	can	dance	in	the	same	rhythm	with
the	master,	and	 then	 there	 is	communion.	You	can	be	here	physically	with	me,
but	 if	 your	 heart	 is	 not	 beating	 with	 me,	 if	 you	 are	 not	 attuned	 to	 me,	 then
communication	is	happening	--	I	am	talking	to	you,	you	are	listening	to	me	--	but
communion	is	not	happening.	The	relationship	between	a	disciple	and	a	master
is	that	of	communion;	it	is	a	love	affair.
Trungpa	 knows	 nothing	 about	 it.	 He	 is	 not	 a	 master,	 just	 a	 teacher.	 And
remember	the	difference	between	a	master	and	a	teacher:	the	teacher	is	one	who
can	inform	you,	 the	master	 is	one	who	can	 transform	you.	The	 teacher	 teaches
you,	the	master	gives	you	a	new	birth.	The	master	is	like	a	midwife:	he	helps	you
come	out	of	the	cocoon	of	your	mind;	he	makes	you	twice	born.
There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 physical	 communication,	 so	 "directly	 and	 thoroughly"
does	not	mean	physically;	"directly	and	thoroughly"	means	something	different.
According	to	me,	if	your	ego	is	completely	put	aside,	if	the	disciple	is	ready	to
trust,	then	there	is	a	direct	communication	--	direct,	immediate.	Even	words	are
not	needed;	nothing	is	needed.	And	it	is	thorough	communion	too	--	total;	it	is	an
immersion.
It	is	like	two	lovers	getting	into	a	deep	orgasmic	state;	that	is	a	physical	orgasm.
The	 same	 thing	 happens	 on	 a	 higher	 plane	 with	 the	 master;	 it	 is	 a	 spiritual
orgasm.	Your	 soul	and	 the	 soul	of	 the	master	meet	and	merge,	melt,	 lose	 their
boundaries.	There	is	 tremendous	joy;	a	great	bliss	surrounds	you,	a	great	grace
descends	in	you.
James,	Buddha	 had	 forty	 thousand	 disciples.	Do	 you	 think	 it	was	 possible	 for
him	 to	 physically	 communicate	 "directly	 and	 thoroughly"	 with	 each	 one?
Mahavira	also	had	forty	thousand	disciples;	it	would	have	been	impossible.	But
Buddha	helped	many	more	people	to	become	enlightened	than	anybody	else	on
the	whole	 earth	 and	 in	 the	whole	 history	 of	man.	And	 how	did	 he	 help?	Yes,
there	was	a	direct	and	thorough	communion,	but	it	was	a	silent	phenomenon.
When	 Maulingaputta,	 a	 great	 philosopher,	 came	 to	 Buddha	 to	 ask	 questions,
Buddha	said,
"If	you	really	want	your	questions	to	be	answered,	for	two	years	sit	silently	by
my	side,	don't	ask	anything,	and	after	two	years	I	will	answer	you."
While	Buddha	was	saying	this,	Mahakashyapa,	one	of	Buddha's	great	disciples,
started	laughing.	Maulingaputta	felt	a	little	embarrassed	and	he	asked,	"Why	is
this	man	laughing?	He	looks	a	little	crazy!"
Buddha	said,	"You	ask	him!"
And	Maulingaputta	asked	Mahakashyapa,	"Why	are	you	laughing?"
Mahakashyapa	 said,	 "I	 am	 laughing	because	 this	man	deceived	me	 too!	And	 I
warn	you,	if	you	want	to	ask	your	questions,	ask	right	now!	After	two	years	you
will	 not	be	 able	 to	 ask.	He	played	 the	 same	 trick	on	me!	For	 two	years	 I	was
sitting	silently	by	his	side,	and	then	slowly	slowly	all	questions	disappeared."
Buddha	 said	 to	Maulingaputta,	 "I	 will	 stick	 to	my	 promise.	 If	 your	 questions
disappear,	then	what	can	I	do?	But	after	two	years	I	will	remind	you."
And	 after	 two	 years	 Buddha	 actually	 reminded	 him.	Mahakashyapa	 was	 also
present.
Maulingaputta	 was	 sitting	 somewhere	 behind,	 afraid	 that	 Buddha	 would	 ask.
Two	 years	 had	 passed,	 and	 Buddha	 asked	 Mahakashyapa,	 "Where	 is
Maulingaputta?	Find	him!	Two	years	have	passed,	 exactly	 two	years	 since	 the
day	he	came.	Now	he	can	ask."
Maulingaputta	stood	and	he	said,	"Forgive	me,	I	have	no	questions.	Now	I	know
why	you	insisted	that	I	should	be	silent."
When	the	mind	becomes	completely	silent,	there	happens	a	direct	and	thorough
communion.	Answers	are	not	given	but	received.	Nothing	is	said	but	everything
is	heard.
So	it	is	not	a	question,	James,	of	how	many	sannyasins	I	have.	I	will	tell	you	a
beautiful	story.
Two	sannyasins	meet	in	London	and	get	into	conversation.	The	first	says,	"Yeah,
I	just	came	back	from	Poona.	Osho	asked	me	to	come	back	to	the	West	and	start
up	a	few	small	buddhafields	here	and	there	to	help	His	work."
The	second	swami	says,	"Oh,	if	there	were	only	a	hundred	sannyasins	like	you!"
The	 first	 continues,	 "Well,	 I'm	 really	 close	 to	 Osho,	 I	 suppose.	 I	 think	 He's
starting	to	send	future	BODHISATTVAS	out	into	the	world.	You	know	--	to	be
in	the	world	and	yet	not	of	it."
The	second	swami	says,	"Oh!	If	there	were	only	a	hundred	sannyasins	like	you!"
The	 first	 swami	goes	on	 speaking,	 "I'm	going	 to	 try	 to	 raise	enough	money	 to
buy	an	island	in	the	Pacific	for	the	new	ashram.	I	know	He	wants	to	leave	India,
and	so	I'm	going	to	find	the	perfect	place	for	Him.	I	expect	I	will	get	to	live	in
His	house	there."
The	 second	 swami	 sighs,	 "Oh!	 If	 there	 were	 only	 a	 hundred	 sannyasins	 like
you!"
"Well,"	the	first	swami	says,	"I	probably	shouldn't	tell	you	this,	but	when	He	told
me	to	go	back	to	the	West,	I	knew	He	was	preparing	me	for	something	special.	I
have	a	feeling	that	I'm	going	to	be	the	first	male	medium	when	I	go	back	there.
He	 said	 a	 few	of	 us	were	 ready	 and	 I	 could	 swear	He	was	 looking	 straight	 at
me."
"Oh!	If	there	were	only	a	hundred	sannyasins	like	you!"	said	his	listener.
"Look,"	laughed	the	first	swami,	"I'm	just	an	ordinary	guy	like	you.	Why	do	you
go	on	saying	if	only	there	were	a	hundred	like	me?"
"That's	why!"	said	the	other.	"If	only	there	were	only	a	hundred	sannyasins	like
you	instead	of	two	hundred	thousand!"
But	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 --	 communion	 is	 possible.	 Two	 hundred	 thousand	 or
twenty	 hundred	 thousand	 makes	 no	 difference.	 As	 far	 as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 to
commune	with	one	person	or	 to	 commune	with	one	hundred	million	people	 is
the	same,	because	communion	from	my	side	is	a	simple	phenomenon.	I	am	just	a
zero.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	preparation	on	your	part:	if	you	are	also	a	zero,	then
two	 zeros	 become	 one	 zero.	 And	 thousands	 of	 zeros	 can	 go	 on	 meeting	 and
disappearing	into	one	zero.
Neither	 fame	 should	be	decisive	nor	your	 expectations,	but	only	your	heart.	 If
your	heart	says	take	the	jump,	then	take	the	jump,	then	risk,	then	be	adventurous.
And	I	will	become	more	and	more	inaccessible.	As	the	new	commune	arrives	I
will	become	more	and	more	inaccessible	to	you	physically	so	that	I	can	become
more	accessible	spiritually.	I	am	going	to	be	silent	sooner	or	later,	I	am	not	going
to	speak	at	all.	So	be	quick	--	get	out	of	your	kindergarten	classes.	Be	fast!	Don't
waste	time	and	don't	postpone.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
DO	 YOU	 WANT	 TO	 ATTRACT	 OR	 PREVENT	 POLACKS	 WITH	 YOUR
JOKES?
Deva	Yachana,	 I	 never	 thought	 that	 you	were	 also	 a	 Polack!	 There	 are	many
Polacks	here
--	through	my	jokes	I	have	discovered	them;	otherwise	they	hide	themselves	so
perfectly!
It	is	my	way	of	discovering	who	are	the	Polacks	among	my	sannyasins.
In	Poland	all	are	not	Polacks,	and	outside	Poland	all	are	not	non-Polacks	either.
So	don't	be	worried	--	 I	am	not	saying	anything	against	Polacks	as	such.	They
are	 beautiful	 people,	 innocent	 people;	 they	 are	 simple	 people.	And	 sometimes
simple	people	are	also	simpletons,	but	 I	 love	 them.	Those	who	can	understand
me	will	 be	 attracted,	 and	 those	who	 cannot	 understand	me,	whether	 I	 tell	 the
jokes	or	not	will	not	make	any	difference	to	them.
A	Polack	traveling	on	a	train	goes	to	the	toilet	for	a	piss.	As	soon	as	he	opens	the
door	 to	 the	 toilet	 he	 sees	 himself	 in	 the	mirror	 opposite	 and	 thinks	 that	 he	 is
someone	else.	He	apologizes	for	the	intrusion	and	closes	the	door.
Ten	minutes	later	he	returns.	"Oh,	sorry!"	he	says,	closing	the	door.
He	comes	back	a	 third	 time	and	 the	same	 thing	happens.	He	can't	hold	on	any
longer.
With	 his	 hands	 thrust	 tightly	 in	 his	 pockets,	 he	 goes	 to	 the	 conductor	 to
complain.
The	 conductor,	 another	 Polack,	 is	 outraged	 and	 goes	 to	 the	 toilet	 with	 the
passenger	 to	 see	 what	 the	 problem	 is.	 He	 opens	 the	 door	 and	 shuts	 it	 again
immediately,	saying,	"Oh,	the	conductor	is	in	there.	Use	another	toilet!"
Prisoner	 Pozinski,	 serving	 a	 twenty-year	 sentence	 in	 a	 Michigan	 jail,	 was
reminiscing	with	a	fellow	inmate	about	his	wife.	"We	used	to	have	such	fun	at
the	seaside	burying	each	other	in	the	soft	white	sand!"
"Must	have	been	nice!"	said	his	cell	mate.
"Yeah!"	said	the	Polack.	"When	I	get	out	I	think	I'll	go	back	and	dig	her	up!"
How	many	Polacks	are	needed	for	an	electrical	repair	job?
Seven:	one	to	be	the	negative	pole,	one	to	be	the	positive	pole,	and	five	to	keep
them	apart!
Do	you	know	why	we	have	a	Polish	pope?
During	the	conference	of	cardinals,	when	they	were	trying	to	choose	a	successor
to	John	Paul	the	First,	the	conference	was	deadlocked	at	three	candidates.
Then	one	of	the	Italian	cardinals	who	had	been	to	America	suggested,	"Look,	in
the	United	States	when	they	have	elections,	they	always	have	a	poll!"	And	that
decided	the	matter.
Finkelbaum	and	Protski	worked	as	chefs	in	a	fine	hotel.
In	time	they	quit	and	Finkelbaum	opened	up	a	Jewish	restaurant.	Protski	opened
up	an	eatery	directly	across	the	street.
Within	six	months	Finkelbaum's	was	thriving,	and	Protski's	was	practically	out
of	business.	He	decided	to	ask	his	old	friend	for	advice.
"It's	easy,"	said	Finkelbaum.	"You	gotta	excite	the	customers.	One	day	I	have	my
waitresses	go	topless,	the	next	day	I	have	them	go	bottomless."
Protski,	 exhilarated	 by	 the	 idea,	 rushed	 back	 to	 his	 restaurant	 and	 called	 his
waitresses	together.
"From	now	on,"	announced	the	Polack,	"one	day	you	are	all	gonna	go	 topless,
the	next	day	bottomless.	So,	tomorrow	no	baboushkas!	The	next	day,	no	boots!"
A	Polack	went	to	the	dentist.	The	diagnosis	was	grim.	"All	the	teeth	need	to	be
removed,	my	friend,"	said	the	dentist.
"My	God!"	said	the	Polack.
"But	no	need	 to	worry,	 it	won't	hurt	a	bit.	We'll	 fix	you	up	with	an	 immediate
denture	--	it	will	be	fitted	straight	into	the	sockets,	it	will	look	great,	and	it	won't
hurt	at	all."
"My	God!"	said	the	Polack.
"If	you	have	any	doubts	you	can	phone	Goldstein,	 the	 town's	 famous	 Jew.	He
had	the	same	thing	six	months	ago,"	the	dentist	told	the	worried	Polack.
"My	God!	My	God!"	said	the	Polack.	"I'll	phone	Goldstein	--	I	know	him	--	and
let	you	know."
He	 phoned	Mr.	Goldstein	 and	 asked	 if	 there	 had	 been	 any	 pain	with	 his	 new
teeth.
Goldstein	replied,	"Pain!	In	the	last	six	months	I've	taken	up	rowing	on	Sundays
with	my	grandchildren.	Last	Sunday,	in	the	middle	of	the	lake	I	lost	one	oar.	As	I
reached	over	 to	get	 the	oar,	 it	 floated	away.	The	boat	 rocked,	and	I	caught	my
balls	in	the	rowlock	--	that	was	the	first	time	in	six	months	I	have	forgotten	the
pain	of	my	new	teeth!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	The	Very	alphabet	of	Love
4	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011040
ShortTitle:
COME09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	LOVE	YOU,	AND	I	HAVE	BEEN	IN	LOVE	BEFORE	AND	BEEN	HURT.	I
AM
AFRAID.	WILL	YOU	HELP	ME?
Mimi	Levinson,	love	never	hurts	anybody.	It	is	something	else	pretending	to	be
love	which	 feels	hurt.	Unless	you	 see	 this	you	will	go	on	moving	 in	 the	 same
circle	 again	 and	 again.	 Love	 can	 hide	many	 unloving	 things	 in	 you.	Man	 has
been	very	clever,	cunning,	in	deceiving	others	and	in	deceiving	himself	too.	He
puts	beautiful	labels	on	ugly	things,	he	covers	wounds	with	flowers.	This	is	the
first	thing	you	have	to	go	into.
Love	ordinarily	is	not	love,	it	is	lust.	And	lust	is	bound	to	feel	hurt,	because	to
desire	somebody	as	an	object	is	to	offend.	It	is	an	insult,	it	is	violent.	When	you
move	 with	 lust	 towards	 somebody,	 how	 long	 can	 you	 pretend	 it	 is	 love?
Something	which	 is	 superficial	will	 look	 like	 love,	 but	 scratch	 a	 little	 bit	 and
hidden	behind	it	is	sheer	lust.	Lust	is	animalistic.	To	look	at	anybody	with	lust	is
to	insult,	humiliate,	is	to	reduce	the	other	person	to	a	thing,	to	a	commodity.	No
person	ever	likes	to	be	used;	that's	the	most	ugly	thing	you	can	do	to	anybody.
No	person	is	a	commodity,	no	person	is	a	means	towards	any	end.
This	is	the	difference	between	lust	and	love.	Lust	uses	the	other	person	to	fulfill
some	of	your	desires.	The	other	is	only	used,	and	when	the	use	is	complete	you
can	 throw	 the	 other	 person	 away.	 It	 has	 no	 more	 use	 to	 you;	 its	 function	 is
fulfilled.	 This	 is	 the	 greatest	 immoral	 act	 in	 existence:	 using	 the	 other	 as	 a
means.
Love	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 it:	 respecting	 the	 other	 as	 an	 end	 unto	 himself	 or
herself.	Had	you	loved	anybody,	Mimi,	as	an	end	unto	himself,	then	there	would
have	been	no	feeling	of	hurt;	you	would	have	become	more	enriched	through	it.
Love	makes	everybody	rich.
Secondly,	love	can	only	be	true	if	there	is	no	ego	hiding	behind	it;	otherwise	love
becomes	only	an	ego	trip.	It	is	a	subtle	way	to	dominate.	And	one	has	to	be	very
conscious	because	 this	 desire	 to	 dominate	 is	 very	deep	 rooted.	 It	 never	 comes
naked;	it	always	comes	hidden	behind	beautiful	garments,	ornaments.
Parents	 never	 say	 that	 their	 children	 are	 their	 possessions,	 they	 never	 say	 that
they	want	 to	dominate	 the	children,	but	 that's	 actually	what	 they	do.	They	 say
they	want	to	help,	they	say	they	want	them	to	be	intelligent,	to	be	healthy,	to	be
blissful,	but	--	and	that
"but"	is	a	great	but	--	it	has	to	be	according	to	their	ideas.	Even	their	happiness
has	 to	 be	 decided	 by	 their	 ideas;	 they	 have	 to	 be	 happy	 according	 to	 their
expectations.	They	have	to	be	intelligent,	but	at	the	same	time	obedient	too.	This
is	asking	for	the	impossible.
The	intelligent	person	cannot	be	obedient;	the	obedient	person	has	to	lose	some
of	his	 intelligence.	 Intelligence	can	 say	yes	only	when	 it	 feels	deep	agreement
with	 you.	 It	 cannot	 say	 yes	 just	 because	 you	 are	 bigger,	 more	 powerful,
authoritative	 --	 a	 father,	 a	mother,	 a	 priest,	 a	 politician.	 It	 cannot	 say	 yes	 just
because	of	the	authority	that	you	carry	with	you.	Intelligence	is	rebellious,	and
no	parents	would	 like	 their	 children	 to	be	 rebellious.	Rebellion	will	be	against
their	hidden	desire	to	dominate.
Husbands	 say	 they	 love	 their	 wives,	 but	 it	 is	 just	 domination.	 They	 are	 so
jealous,	 so	possessive,	how	can	 they	be	 loving?	Wives	go	on	saying	 they	 love
their	 husbands,	 but	 twenty-four	 hours	 they	 are	 creating	 hell;	 in	 every	 possible
way	they	are	reducing	the	husband	to	something	ugly.
The	henpecked	husband	is	an	ugly	phenomenon.	And	the	problem	is	that	first	the
wife	reduces	the	husband	to	a	henpecked	husband	and	then	she	loses	interest	in
him,	because	who	can	remain	interested	in	a	henpecked	husband?	He	seems	to
be	worthless;	he	does	not	seem	to	be	man	enough.
First	 the	husband	 tries	 to	make	 the	wife	 just	his	possession,	 and	once	 she	 is	 a
possession	he	loses	interest.	There	is	some	hidden	logic	in	it:	his	whole	interest
was	to	possess;	now	that	is	finished,	and	he	would	like	to	try	some	other	women
so	he	can	again	go	on	another	trip	of	possession.
Beware	of	these	ego	numbers.	Then	you	will	feel	hurt,	because	the	person	you
are	 trying	 to	 possess	 is	 bound	 to	 revolt	 in	 some	 way	 or	 other,	 is	 bound	 to
sabotage	 your	 tricks,	 strategies,	 because	 nobody	 loves	 anything	 more	 than
freedom.	Even	love	is	secondary	to	freedom;	freedom	is	the	highest	value.	Love
can	be	 sacrificed	 for	 freedom,	 but	 freedom	cannot	 be	 sacrificed	 for	 love.	And
that's	what	we	have	been	doing	for	centuries:	sacrificing	freedom	for	love.	Then
there	is	antagonism,	conflict,	and	every	opportunity	is	used	to	hurt	each	other.
Mimi,	 you	 say	 to	 me,	 "I	 love	 you,	 and	 I	 have	 been	 in	 love	 before	 and	 been
hurt...."	If	you	love	me	in	the	same	way	as	you	have	loved	before,	you	will	be
very	hurt.	In	fact,	all	your	past	hurts	will	be	nothing	compared	to	this	hurt;	this
will	be	the	greatest	wound	in	your	life.	Then	you	will	never	think	of	love	again,
because	with	me	there	can	be	no	relationship	of	lust,	no	relationship	of	ego,	no
relationship	of	any	subtle	kind	of	domination.	With	me	the	only	possibility	is	of
the	purest	love,	of	a	love	that	is	almost	a	prayer.	And	then	there	is	no	question	of
your	being	hurt.
Love	 in	 its	purest	 form	is	a	sharing	of	 joy.	 It	asks	nothing	 in	 return,	 it	expects
nothing;	 hence	 how	 can	 you	 feel	 hurt?	 When	 you	 don't	 expect,	 there	 is	 no
possibility	of	being	hurt.
Then	whatsoever	 comes	 is	 good;	 if	 nothing	 comes,	 that	 too	 is	 good.	Your	 joy
was	to	give,	not	to	get.	Then	one	can	love	from	thousands	of	miles	away;	there	is
no	need	to	be	physically	present	even.
Love	is	a	spiritual	phenomenon;	lust	is	physical.
Ego	is	psychological;	love	is	spiritual.
Mimi,	you	don't	know	what	love	is.	You	will	have	to	learn	the	very	alphabet	of
love.	You	will	have	to	start	from	the	very	beginning,	from	scratch;	otherwise	you
will	 be	 hurt	 again	 and	 again.	 And	 remember,	 except	 you	 nobody	 else	 is
responsible.	Now	even	in	this	question	you	are	trying	to	lay	your	trip	on	me!	You
are	asking:	"I	am	afraid.	Will	you	help	me?"
Only	you	can	help	yourself.	How	can	I	help	you?	I	cannot	destroy	your	ego.	If
you	 cling	 to	 it,	 nobody	 can	 destroy	 it;	 if	 you	 have	 invested	 in	 it,	 nobody	 can
destroy	 it.	 I	can	only	share	my	understanding	with	you.	The	buddhas	can	only
show	the	way;	then	YOU	have	to	go,	then	you	have	to	follow	the	way.	I	cannot
lead	you	holding	your	hand	in	my	hand.
That's	what	you	would	like:	you	would	like	to	play	the	game	of	being	dependent
on	me.
And	 remember,	 the	 person	 who	 plays	 the	 game	 of	 being	 dependent	 will	 take
revenge.
Soon	he	would	like	in	some	way	for	the	other	to	be	dependent	on	him	or	on	her.
If	 the	 wife	 is	 dependent	 on	 the	 husband	 for	 money,	 then	 the	 wife	 makes	 the
husband	dependent	on	her	for	other	things.	It	is	a	mutual	arrangement.	They	both
become	 crippled,	 they	 both	 become	 paralyzed;	 they	 cannot	 exist	without	 each
other.	Even	the	idea	that	the	husband	was	happy	without	the	wife	hurts	the	wife,
that	he	was	laughing	with	the	boys	in	the	club	hurts	her.	She	is	not	interested	in
his	happiness;	in	fact	she	cannot	believe:	"How	did	he	dare	to	be	happy	without
me?	He	has	to	depend	on	me!"
The	husband	does	not	feel	good	that	the	wife	was	laughing	with	somebody,	was
enjoying,	was	cheerful.	He	wants	all	her	cheerfulness	to	be	totally	possessed;	it
is	HIS	property.
The	dependent	person	will	make	you	dependent	also.
My	sannyasins	are	not	dependent	on	me;	I	am	not	dependent	on	them.	This	is	a
relationship	 of	 total	 freedom.	They	 are	 here	 because	 of	 themselves;	 I	 am	here
because	of	myself.	It	is	beautiful	that	somehow	we	have	coincided	to	be	here	in
this	place	--	but	nobody	is	dependent	on	anybody	else.
There	are	a	few	sannyasins	who	think	that	they	are	dependent	on	me.	And	how
do	I	know	they	think	that?	I	have	come	to	know	from	their	questions	and	their
letters.	They	write	angry	letters	to	me,	angry	questions	to	me.	Then	I	know	that
in	 some	 way	 they	 must	 be	 feeling	 dependent	 on	 me	 --	 this	 is	 their	 revenge.
Otherwise	there	is	no	need	to	be	angry	with	me.	I	do	not	possess	you	--	you	can
leave	at	any	moment.	Not	even	for	a	single	moment	will	you	be	prevented	from
leaving.	It	is	absolutely	up	to	you	to	be	here	or	not	to	be	here,	to	be	a	sannyasin
or	 not	 to	 be	 a	 sannyasin.	 I	 am	 not	 obliging	 you	 to	 be	 a	 sannyasin,	 I	 am	 not
obliging	you	by	initiating	you	into	sannyas.	It	is	my	joy.
Remember,	 it	 is	 my	 joy	 to	 share	 my	 vision	 with	 you	 and	 it	 is	 your	 joy	 to
commune	with	me.	Otherwise	there	is	no	dependence	at	all.
Even	in	your	question,	Mimi,	you	are	repeating	your	old	pattern:	"I	am	afraid...."
Fear	 is	 never	 love,	 and	 love	 is	 never	 afraid.	There	 is	 nothing	 to	 lose	 for	 love.
Why	should	 love	be	afraid?	Love	only	gives.	 It	 is	not	business,	 so	 there	 is	no
question	of	loss	or	profit.
Love	enjoys	giving,	just	as	flowers	enjoy	releasing	their	fragrance.	Why	should
they	be	afraid?	Why	should	you	be	afraid?	Remember,	fear	and	love	never	exist
together;	 they	 cannot.	 No	 coexistence	 is	 possible.	 Fear	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of
love.
People	 ordinarily	 think	 hate	 is	 the	 opposite	 of	 love.	That	 is	wrong,	 absolutely
wrong.	Fear	is	the	exact	opposite	of	love.	Hate	is	love	standing	on	its	head;	it	is	a
SHIRSHASAN,	a	headstand,	but	it	is	not	opposite	to	love.	The	person	who	hates
simply	shows	he	still	loves.	Love	has	gone	sour,	but	love	is	still	there.	Fear	is	the
real	opposite.	Fear	means	that	now	the	whole	love	energy	has	disappeared.
Love	 is	 outgoing,	 fearlessly	 reaching	 to	 the	 other,	 tremendously	 trusting	 itself
that	 it	 will	 be	 received	 --	 and	 it	 is	 always	 received.	 Fear	 is	 shrinking	 within
yourself,	closing	yourself,	closing	all	 the	doors,	all	 the	windows	so	no	sun,	no
wind,	no	rain	can	reach	you
--	you	are	so	afraid.	You	are	entering	into	your	grave	alive.
Fear	is	a	grave,	love	is	a	temple.
In	love	life	comes	to	its	ultimate	peak.
In	fear	life	falls	to	the	level	of	death.
Fear	stinks,	love	is	fragrant.
Why	 should	 you	 be	 afraid?	 Be	 afraid	 of	 your	 ego,	 be	 afraid	 of	 your	 lust,	 be
afraid	of	your	greed,	be	afraid	of	your	possessiveness;	be	afraid	of	your	jealousy
--	but	there	is	no	question	of	being	afraid	of	love.
Love	is	divine!
Love	is	like	light.
When	there	is	light,	darkness	cannot	exist.
When	there	is	love,	fear	cannot	exist.
Hence	 I	 am	 against	 all	 words	 like	 "God-fearing,"	 because	 the	 person	 who	 is
God-fearing	 is	 not	 religious	 at	 all,	 although	 in	 all	 the	 languages	 of	 the	world
such	words	 exist	 or	 such	phrases	 exist;	 the	 religious	person	 is	known	as	God-
fearing.	That	 is	 the	most	 stupid	 idea	 one	 can	 imagine.	The	 religious	 person	 is
God-LOVING,	not	God-fearing.	The	God-fearing	person	will	be	angry	at	God.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 God-FEARING,	 that's	 why	 in	 his	 outburst	 of	 anger	 he
says,	 "God	 is	 dead."	You	 have	 heard	 this	 statement,	 but	 it	 is	 only	 half	 of	 the
statement.	The	 full	 statement	 is	worth	consideration,	because	unless	you	know
the	full	statement	you	will	not	understand	the	meaning	of	the	first	half.	The	full
statement	is:	God	is	dead,	and	now	man	is	free.	The	second	part	shows	reality:
he	is	so	afraid	of	God	that	even	his	presence	seems	to	be	anti-freedom.
And	not	only	Nietzsche	is	convinced	of	this	fact,	that	God's	presence	means	fear;
there	have	been	other	thinkers	who	have	simply	denied	God.	The	Charvakas	in
India,	the	Epicureans	in	Greece	--	they	all	denied	God	for	the	simple	reason	that
if	God	exists,	man	cannot	be	free.	If	God	has	made	you,	he	can	destroy	you	at
any	moment.	You	are	just	a	puppet,	and	what	right	has	the	puppet?	The	strings
are	in	God's	hands:	you	are	dancing	his	dance,	it	is	nothing	to	do	with	you.	He
pulls	 this	way	 and	 that	way,	 and	 you	 start	 dancing.	You	 are	 just	manipulated.
This	will	 create	 fear,	 and	unless	God	 is	 dead,	man	 cannot	 be	 free	of	 this	 fear.
Nietzsche	seems	to	be	the	really	religious	person	according	to	the	traditional	idea
of	God-fearing.
God-loving	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.	Jesus	says,	"God	is	love."	If	God
is	love,	how	can	you	be	afraid	of	God?
Omar	 Khayyam,	 one	 of	 the	 Sufi	 mystics,	 says	 in	 his	 RUBAIYAT:	 "Don't	 be
worried	 about	 your	 small	 sins.	 They	 are	 so	 small	 that	 God,	 out	 of	 his	 love,
cannot	even	count	them.	And	God	is	compassionate,	he	will	forgive	you."	Omar
Khayyam	says,	 "I	 guarantee	 that	 you	will	 be	 forgiven,	don't	 be	worried.	What
you	 are	 doing	 are	 just	 small	 things,	 and	God	 cannot	 take	 note	 of	 these	 small
things.	He	cannot	be	so	nasty,	so	small	minded,	so	pigheaded!"
Omar	Khayyam	 is	 right.	God	means	 love,	God	means	 forgiveness;	 there	 is	 no
question	 of	 fear.	 But	 people	 are	 afraid	 of	God	 also	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that
their	God	is	again	a	projection	of	ambition.
The	 day	 Jesus	 was	 going	 to	 be	 crucified,	 he	 gave	 a	 farewell	 party	 for	 his
disciples	--	The	Last	Supper.	He	was	going	to	die	the	next	day,	and	do	you	know
what	 the	 disciples	 were	 asking?	 They	 were	 asking,	 "Lord,	 tell	 us	 one	 thing,
because	now	this	is	the	last	time	we	will	be	able	to	ask	you.	You	will	be	raised	to
divine	glory,	you	will	sit	by	the	side	of	God	on	the	golden	throne,	on	the	right
hand	of	course.	What	will	our	positions	be?"
These	twelve	apostles,	these	twelve	who	had	been	so	long	with	Jesus,	remained
utterly	deaf,	blind;	they	did	not	understood	a	single	word.	They	may	have	heard
him,	but	they	had	not	listened.	They	were	asking,	"What	will	our	positions	be?
Who	 will	 be	 next	 to	 you?"	 Jealousy,	 politics,	 ambition,	 ego!	 Now	 they	 were
worried	about	who	was	going	to	be	next	to	him	--	who	would	be	chosen	as	the
most	beloved	disciple	of	Jesus.
It	is	the	same	politics!	It	does	not	matter	that	it	will	be	in	paradise;	the	mind	is
the	same.
Then	there	will	be	the	fear	--	who	is	Jesus	going	to	choose?	All	twelve	cannot	sit
next	to	him;	one	person	will	be	next	to	him.	Who	is	this	person?
Jesus	must	have	wept	--	the	question	was	so	stupid!	And	these	are	the	apostles
who	created	Christianity.	These	are	the	people	who	are	the	pillars	of	Christianity.
And	 this	 is	 so	 in	 every	 religion,	 everywhere;	 small	 people	 gather	 around	 the
enlightened	 masters.	 The	 enlightened	 master	 talks	 about	 his	 peak,	 the	 sunlit
peak,	 and	 the	 disciples	 listen	 from	 their	 dark	 holes,	 and	 everything	 becomes
distorted.
Mimi,	you	ask	me,	"I	am	afraid.	Will	you	help	me?"	That	is	a	strategy.	I	never
help	 anybody	 --	 you	 have	 to	 help	 yourself.	 I	 am	 available	 like	 a	 river	 is
available,	 but	 if	 you	 are	 thirsty	 you	 have	 to	 help	 yourself.	 You	 have	 to	 come
down	to	the	river,	you	have	to	make	a	cup	out	of	your	hands,	you	have	to	take
the	water	up	to	your	mouth,	you	have	to	drink	it.
The	river	is	available	--	I	am	available.
You	can	drink	out	of	me	as	much	as	you	want	--	there	will	be	no	condition	from
my	side	-
-	but	I	cannot	help	you.	In	that	very	desire	you	are	creating	your	old	gestalt,	your
old	 pattern:	 "Will	 you	 help	 me?"	 And	 then	 immediately	 you	 will	 start
complaining	that	help	has	not	arrived,	or	it	is	not	according	to	your	needs,	your
expectations,	 or	 it	 is	 not	 enough,	 as	 much	 as	 is	 needed.	 You	 will	 start
complaining,	you	will	become	grumpy.	That's	how	you	must	have	destroyed	all
your	love	experiences	before.	Please	don't	destroy	it	again.
Here,	be	loving.	I	am	available.	Drink	as	much	as	you	can,	take	as	much	as	you
can.
Remove	all	 the	hindrances	--	and	that	 is	all	your	responsibility.	I	am	doing	my
work;	about	my	own	work	I	am	absolutely	open	and	available,	but	that's	all	I	can
do.	I	am	like	a	light:	I	can	show	you	the	path,	but	you	have	to	walk.
My	feeling	 is,	Mimi,	 that	you	have	not	yet	 taken	any	mature	step	 in	your	 life;
you	have	remained	immature,	UNgrown	up,	you	are	still	behaving	like	a	child.
You	would	like	a	father	figure	--	I	am	not.	Then	you	can	go	to	the	Polack	pope!
The	 word	 "pope"	 means	 father;	 in	 Italian	 it	 sounds	 even	 better,	 PAPA.	 It	 is
exactly	 the	 same	 as	 "papa"	 in	 English;	 it	means	 father.	 These	 are	 all	 childish
desires:	calling	God,	"the	Father";	then	calling	his	representative	in	the	Vatican,
"Father";	then	calling	his	representative	in	your	local	church,	"Father."	These	are
just	substitutes.	You	want	some	father	figure	to	take	care	of	you;	you	don't	want
to	take	responsibility.
This	is	my	first	requirement:	the	people	who	are	around	me	have	to	be	absolutely
responsible	for	themselves.	Nobody	else	is	responsible.	There	is	no	church	here,
no	 father	 figure	 here,	 no	 creed,	 no	 dogma.	 Everybody	 is	 here	 out	 of	 his	 own
personal	love,	out	of	his	own	individual	understanding.
To	be	totally	responsible	is	the	beginning	of	freedom,	and	freedom	is	the	highest
phenomenon.	Out	of	 the	peaks	of	 freedom	flows	 the	Ganges	of	 love.	Attain	 to
freedom,	and	love	will	surround	you	naturally,	spontaneously.	And	then	love	has
never	hurt	anybody	--	how	can	it	hurt	you?
Something	 else	 is	 masquerading	 --	 uncover	 it.	 At	 least	 be	 naked	 in	 front	 of
yourself,	 and	 then	by	 and	by	 be	 naked,	 totally	 naked,	 to	 your	 friends,	 to	 your
lovers.	And	you	will	be	surprised:	to	be	true	is	such	a	joy,	to	be	authentic	is	such
a	blessing;	there	is	nothing	compared	to	it.
Love	can	make	a	great	celebration	out	of	your	life	--	but	only	love,	not	lust,	not
ego,	not	possessiveness,	not	jealousy,	not	dependence.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	AM	CONVINCED	THAT	THE	RICH	EXPLOIT	THE	MASSES.	NOW	YOU
ARE
TELLING	 ME	 THAT	 CAPITALISM	 IS	 THE	 BEST	 SYSTEM	 FOR
FREEDOM.	I	HAVE	NEVER	SUPPORTED	RUSSIAN	TOTALITARIANISM,
BUT	I	THOUGHT
THAT	MAO	ZEDONG	IMPROVED	LIFE	FOR	THE	MAJORITY	IN	CHINA.
YOUR	 STATEMENT	 ABOUT	 ANTI-CAPITALISTS	 BEING	 JEALOUS
RINGS
TRUE,	 BUT	DON'T	 SOME	RICH	CAPITALISTS	USE	 THEIR	 POWER	 TO
EXPLOIT
OTHERS	 THROUGH	 SUCH	MEANS	 AS	MONOPOLIES,	 SELLING	 AT	 A
LOSS
FOR	 SHORT	 PERIODS	 OF	 TIME	 IN	 ORDER	 TO	 RUIN	 SMALLER
BUSINESSMEN,	 ACQUIRING	 MORE	 LAND	 THAN	 THEY	 NEED,	 AND
THUS	DENYING	POOR
PEOPLE	THE	ABILITY	TO	OWN	AND	USE	LAND,	ET	CETERA?
ALTHOUGH	 THE	 SOVIET-BLOC	 COUNTRIES	 RESTRICT	 FREEDOM,
ARE	NOT
THE	SOCIALIST	AND	COMMUNIST	PARTIES	IN	THE	WEST	DEDICATED
TO
MORE	 PERSONAL	 FREEDOM	 --	 THAT	 IS,	 FREEDOM	 FROM	 THE
POWERFUL,	MANIPULATIVE,	RICH	CAPITALIST?
Dhyan	John,	it	is	true	that	the	rich	exploit	the	masses,	but	the	powerful	in	Russia
exploit	 the	masses	in	the	same	way,	and	the	powerful	in	China	also	exploit	 the
masses.	Only	the	name	has	changed.	Now	the	capitalist	is	not	called	a	capitalist
in	Russia	or	China;	now	the	Communist	Party	functions	instead.	The	people	who
belong	to	the	Communist	Party,	the	power	elite,	they	exploit.
So	the	question	is	not	who	exploits,	the	question	is:	unless	we	produce	so	much
that	the	need	for	exploitation	disappears,	exploitation	will	continue.	Names	will
change;	structures	will	be	different.
Before	capitalism	arrived	on	the	scene	there	was	feudalism,	and	then	the	kings
and	 the	queens	 and	 their	 prime	ministers	were	 exploiting.	Capitalism	 started	 a
different	 pattern	 of	 exploitation.	 Feudalism	 disappeared,	 but	 the	 exploitation
continued.	 Communism	 has	 changed	 the	 structure	 again,	 but	 the	 exploitation
continues.
It	is	time	to	understand	that	two	things	are	needed,	and	the	most	important	is	that
the	 earth	 should	 be	 provided	with	more	 richness	 than	 it	 needs.	Only	 then	will
exploitation	disappear;	otherwise	not.	The	educated	will	exploit	the	uneducated;
how	 can	 you	 prevent	 it?	 In	 India	 the	 exploitation	 is	 there.	 The	 educated	 will
exploit	the	uneducated;	the	brahmin	will	exploit	the	sudra,	the	untouchable;	the
politician	will	destroy	and	exploit	the	non-political	masses.
If	water	is	available	nobody	accumulates	water,	but	if	water	is	scarce	then	people
will	start	accumulating.	And	of	course	those	who	are	powerful	--	and	there	will
be	some	who	will	always	be	more	powerful	than	others	--	they	will	accumulate
water	for	the	times	when	water	will	become	so	scarce	that	people	will	be	dying
without	water.
Right	now,	 in	poor	countries	 the	air	 is	not	polluted	 --	nobody	bothers	about	 it.
But	 sooner	 or	 later	 in	 cities	 like	New	York,	Los	Angeles,	 the	 rich	people	will
start	 finding	 ways	 to	 have	 more	 oxygen	 for	 themselves.	 The	 poor	 will	 suffer
from	the	pollution,	not	the	rich.
And	by	"rich"	I	don't	mean	only	the	rich	who	have	more	wealth,	I	mean	the	rich
in	 any	way	 --	 the	 educated	who	 have	more	 education,	 the	 politician	who	 has
more	power.	In	any	way,	whosoever	is	powerful	will	have	the	first	right.
In	 the	 feudal	 days	 the	 king	 would	 have	 the	 first	 right	 about	 everything.	 If	 a
beautiful	girl	was	born	she	would	first	go	to	the	king's	palace;	if	he	rejected	her,
then	somebody	else	could	have	her.	The	first	fruits	would	go	to	the	king,	the	first
flowers	would	go	to	the	king.
Everything	is	bound	to	go	to	the	hands	of	the	powerful.	For	example,	if	the	earth
becomes	 too	polluted	 then	 the	 rich	and	 the	powerful	will	be	 the	 first	who	will
start	moving	 to	 the	moon	or	 to	Mars.	Of	 course	 everybody	cannot	go	 there;	 it
will	be	too	costly	to	live	there.
Only	 the	 few	will	 be	 able	 to	 afford	 it,	 and	 they	will	 dominate	 the	 earth	 from
there.
The	 question	 is	 two-sided.	 One	 is	 the	 extrovert	 side,	 that	 the	 earth	 has	 to	 be
provided	with	more	facilities	than	are	available.	And	it	can	be	done	by	science
today;	there	is	no	problem	about	it.	Science	can	produce	as	much	wealth	as	we
need	 or	 even	 more,	 so	 that	 is	 not	 a	 big	 problem.	 It	 is	 not	 really	 a	 political
problem;	 it	 is	 changing	 more	 towards	 being	 a	 scientific	 problem:	 more
technology,	 more	 industry,	 more	 science,	 and	 in	 tune	 with	 ecology.	 Then	 the
earth	need	not	in	any	way	suffer	through	exploitation.
This	is	the	outside	of	the	problem,	and	the	inside	of	the	problem	is	to	change	the
greed	to	have	more	than	others,	because	even	if	the	earth	has	enough	there	will
be	mad	people	--
the	braggarts,	the	egoists	--	who	would	like	to	say	that	they	have	more	than	you
have.
Krishna	 is	said	 to	have	had	sixteen	 thousand	wives.	That	was	 the	 time	when	a
person's	wealth	 and	 power	was	measured	 by	wives,	 how	many	wives	 he	 had.
The	 more	 wives	 you	 could	 afford,	 the	 richer	 you	 were.	 And	 obviously,	 how
could	 a	 poor	 man	 afford	 sixteen	 thousand	 wives?	 Even	 to	 afford	 one	 is	 very
difficult!
And	I	don't	think	that	this	is	just	a	story;	it	must	have	been	true	--	because	even
in	the	beginning	of	this	century,	the	twentieth	century,	the	Nizam	of	Hyderabad
had	 five	 hundred	wives.	 So	 if	 in	 the	 twentieth	 century	 a	 person	 can	 have	 five
hundred	wives,	what	 is	wrong	 in	 having	 thirty-two	 times	more?	And	 that	was
five	 thousand	years	 ago,	 so	 it	 doesn't	 seem	 to	 be	 improbable	 or	 impossible.	 It
was	traditional	in	the	Nizam's	family	to	have	at	least	five	hundred	wives	so	that
you	could	say	that	you	were	not	an	ordinary	man.
So	from	the	inside,	 the	greed	has	 to	disappear.	On	the	outside,	more	science	is
needed.
On	the	inside,	more	meditativeness	is	needed	--	or	you	can	call	it	science	AND
religion,	it	is	the	same.	Science	will	help	to	produce	more,	and	religion	will	help
to	 make	 you	 less	 greedy.	 This	 is	 the	 solution	 that	 is	 going	 to	 help,	 not
communism,	not	socialism.
And	to	me,	capitalism	is	the	only	state	where	we	can	experiment	with	all	these
things;	 in	 a	 communist	 society	 it	 is	 impossible.	 There	 are	 nearabout	 fifty
sannyasins	in	Russia,	but	they	cannot	wear	orange,	they	cannot	wear	the	mala	--
they	 cannot	 show	 that	 they	 are	 sannyasins.	 They	 meditate	 but	 they	 have	 to
meditate	 underground	 in	 some	 friend's	 basement;	 they	 cannot	 make	 it	 public.
They	 cannot	 publish	 a	 book	 of	mine	 --	 and	 they	want	 to	 publish	 books	 there.
They	have	translated	at	least	five	books	into	Russian	--
handwritten,	typed,	cyclostyled.	They	are	mixing	with	thousands	of	people,	but
underground.	If	even	a	single	copy	is	seized	they	will	be	in	trouble.
Now,	 in	such	a	society,	how	can	you	 think	of	 tackling	 the	problems	 to	change
them?
There	 is	no	 freedom	 to	 think	at	 all.	And	 the	 same	 is	 true	about	Mao	Zedong's
China.	Just	as	Russians	insulted	Joseph	Stalin	after	his	death...when	he	was	alive
they	 could	 not	 say	 anything	 because	 he	 was	 too	 powerful.	 To	 say	 anything
against	him	only	meant	one	thing:	death.	You	would	disappear	the	next	day	and
you	would	never	be	heard	of	again.
Now	 the	 same	 is	 happening	 to	 Mao	 Zedong.	 Now	 his	 portraits	 are	 being
removed,	his	statues	are	being	removed,	his	name	is	being	brought	down.	Soon
you	will	see	that	Mao	Zedong	has	become	an	ugly	name	in	China,	just	as	Stalin
has	become	an	ugly	name	 in	Russia.	 In	China	Mao	Zedong's	name	 is	going	 to
become	just	the	same.	Why?	Why	this	revenge?	If	Mao	Zedong	has	done	such
great	 work	 and	 helped	 the	 masses,	 why	 should	 the	 masses	 behave	 with	 such
enmity?	It	was	not	really	a	help,	it	was	just	an	imposition.
Forcing	people	violently	to	do	something	is	not	going	to	help.	Any	society	that
creates	slavery	is	not	going	to	help	humanity.
And	 you	 say	 to	me:	 "Your	 statement	 about	 anti-capitalists	 being	 jealous	 rings
true,	 but	 don't	 some	 rich	 capitalists	 use	 their	 power	 to	 exploit	 others	 through
such	means	as	monopolies...?"	Yes,	they	do,	but	somebody	else	will	be	doing	the
same	--	the	communists	will	do	it.
And	you	ask,	"Are	not	the	socialist	and	communist	parties	in	the	West	dedicated
to	more	personal	freedom...?"	Until	they	achieve	power,	everybody	is	dedicated
to	more	freedom.
The	Russian	Communist	Party	was	also	dedicated	to	absolute	freedom,	and	what
came	to	exist	was	absolute	slavery.	The	Russian	Communist	Party	was	dedicated
to	absolute	freedom,	but	the	moment	you	get	the	power	you	are	the	same	type	of
people.	 Your	 communists	 and	 your	 socialists	 are	 not	 meditators,	 they	 are	 not
buddhas.
Only	a	buddha	will	not	change;	whether	he	gets	the	power	or	not	he	will	remain
the	same.
But	 your	 so-called	 socialists	 and	 communists,	 once	 they	 get	 the	 power	 will
behave	in	the	same	way;	it	is	absolutely	predictable.	When	you	don't	have	power
then	it	is	different.
It	happened	in	India....
The	followers	of	Mahatma	Gandhi	were	great	servants	of	the	people.	They	lived
in	 poverty,	 praised	 poverty,	 and	 even	 started	 calling	 the	 poor,	 DHARIDRA
NARAYAN	--
the	 real	 people	 of	God,	God's	 people.	And	when	 they	 came	 to	 power,	 all	 that
changed.
Immediately	all	that	changed;	all	their	service	disappeared.	They	became	masters
and	 rulers,	 and	 they	 started	 exploiting	 more	 than	 anybody	 else.	 Even	 the
Britishers	have	not	exploited	this	country	so	much	as	the	Gandhians	have	done.
This	 country	 has	 never	 been	 in	 such	 a	 dark	 space	 as	 it	 is	 today.	 The	 whole
responsibility	goes	to	Gandhian	followers,	and	they	were	all	good	people	when
they	were	not	in	power.
Power	corrupts,	and	absolute	power	corrupts	absolutely.
The	 people	who	 are	 communists	 and	 socialists	 --	who	 are	 they?	They	 are	 by-
products	of	the	same	society,	with	the	same	ambitions,	with	the	same	desires.
Once	 Diogenes	 saw	 a	 man	 being	 led	 to	 the	 gallows	 by	 the	 magistrates	 and
officers	of	justice.	The	criminal	had	stolen	a	silver	cup	from	the	public	treasury.
A	bystander	asked	him	what	was	going	on.
"Nothing	unusual,"	the	philosopher	replied.	"It	is	merely	the	big	thieves	bringing
the	little	thief	to	justice."
Whosoever	 is	 in	 power	 becomes	 the	 big	 thief	 and	 starts	 torturing	 the	 small
thieves.
We	 have	 to	 change	 the	 outer	 world	 by	more	 science,	 and	 the	 inner	 world	 by
more	religion.	Then	only	can	there	be	a	real	revolution,	not	otherwise.
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Everybody	Can	Laugh
5	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011050
ShortTitle:
COME10
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	and	Q4	on	video
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
YOU	 SAY	 FEAR	 IS	 THE	 OPPOSITE	 OF	 LOVE.	 HAVE	 YOU	 ANY
PRACTICAL	OR
IMPRACTICAL	SUGGESTIONS	HOW	ONE	CAN	DROP	FEAR?
Atta,	love	is	existential;	fear	is	only	the	absence	of	love.	And	the	problem	with
any	absence	is	that	you	cannot	do	anything	directly	about	it.
Fear	is	like	darkness.	What	can	you	do	about	darkness	directly?	You	cannot	drop
it,	you	cannot	throw	it	out,	you	cannot	bring	it	in.	There	is	no	way	to	relate	with
darkness	without	 bringing	 light	 in.	The	way	 to	 darkness	 goes	 via	 light.	 If	 you
want	darkness,	put	the	light	off;	if	you	don't	want	darkness,	put	the	light	on.	But
you	will	have	to	do	something	with	light,	not	with	darkness	at	all.
The	same	is	true	about	love	and	fear:	love	is	light,	fear	is	darkness.	The	person
who	becomes	obsessed	with	fear	will	never	be	able	to	resolve	the	problem.	It	is
like	wrestling	with	 darkness	 --	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 exhausted	 sooner	 or	 later,
tired	and	defeated.	And	the	miracle	is,	defeated	by	something	which	is	not	there
at	all!	And	when	one	is	defeated,	one	certainly	feels	how	powerful	the	darkness
is,	how	powerful	 the	 fear	 is,	how	powerful	 the	 ignorance	 is,	how	powerful	 the
unconscious	is.	They	are	not	powerful	at	all	--	they	don't	exist	in	the	first	place.
Never	 fight	 with	 the	 nonexistential.	 That's	 where	 all	 the	 ancient	 religions	 got
lost.	Once	you	start	fighting	with	the	nonexistential	you	are	doomed.	Your	small
river	of	consciousness	will	be	lost	in	the	nonexistential	desert	--	and	it	is	infinite.
Hence,	Atta,	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 remember	 is:	 don't	make	 a	 problem	out	 of	 fear.
Love	is	the	question.	Something	can	be	done	about	love	immediately;	there	is	no
need	to	wait	or	postpone.	Start	loving!	And	it	is	a	natural	gift	from	God	to	you,
or	from	the	whole,	whichever	term	you	like.	If	you	are	brought	up	in	a	religious
way,	then	God;	if	you	are	not	brought	up	in	a	religious	way,	then	the	whole,	the
universe,	the	existence.
Remember,	love	is	born	with	you;	it	is	your	intrinsic	quality.	All	that	is	needed	is
to	give	it	a	way	--	to	make	a	passage	for	it,	to	let	it	flow,	to	allow	it	to	happen.
We	 are	 all	 blocking	 it,	 holding	 it	 back.	We	 are	 so	miserly	 about	 love,	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	we	have	been	taught	a	certain	economics.	That	economics	is
perfectly	right	about	the	outside	world:	if	you	have	so	much	money	and	you	go
on	giving	that	money	to	people,	soon	you	will	be	a	beggar,	soon	you	will	have	to
beg	yourself.	By	giving	money	you	will	lose	it.
This	economics,	this	arithmetic	has	entered	into	our	blood,	bones	and	marrow.	It
is	true	about	the	outside	world	--	nothing	is	wrong	in	it	--	but	it	is	not	true	about
the	 inner	 journey.	There,	 a	 totally	 different	 arithmetic	 functions:	 the	more	 you
give,	the	more	you	have;	the	less	you	give,	the	less	you	have.	If	you	don't	give	at
all	you	will	lose	your	natural	qualities.	They	will	become	stagnant,	closed;	they
will	go	underground.	Finding	no	expression	they	will	shrink	and	die.
It	is	like	a	musician:	if	he	goes	on	playing	on	his	guitar	or	on	his	flute,	more	and
more	music	will	come.	It	is	not	that	by	playing	on	the	flute	he	is	losing	music	--
he	is	gaining.
It	is	like	a	dancer:	the	more	you	dance,	the	more	efficient	you	become.	It	is	like
painting	-
-	the	more	you	paint,	the	better	the	painting.
Once,	while	Picasso	was	painting,	a	critic	and	friend	stopped	him	in	the	middle
and	said,
"One	 question	 has	 been	 bothering	 me	 and	 I	 cannot	 wait	 anymore,	 I	 cannot
contain	 it.	 I	 want	 to	 know:	 you	 have	 painted	 hundreds	 of	 paintings;	 which	 is
your	best	painting?"
Picasso	said,	"This	one	that	I	am	painting	right	now."
The	 critic	 said,	 "This	 one?	 And	 what	 about	 the	 others	 that	 you	 have	 painted
before?"
Picasso	 said,	 "They	 are	 all	 contained	 in	 it.	And	 the	 next	 one	 that	 I	 do	will	 be
even	better	than	this	--	because	the	more	you	paint	the	greater	is	your	skill,	the
greater	is	your	art."
Such	is	love,	such	is	joy!	Share	it,	Atta.	In	the	beginning	it	will	come	only	like
dewdrops,	 because	 the	miserliness	 has	 been	 very	 long,	 very	 ancient.	But	 once
even	 dewdrops	 of	 love	 have	 been	 shared,	 you	 will	 soon	 become	 capable	 of
sharing	the	whole	oceanic	flood	of	your	being	--	and	you	contain	infinities.	Once
you	have	known	the	higher	mathematics	of	giving	and	gaining,	you	will	find	that
just	by	giving	you	gain.	Not	that	something	is	returned;	 in	the	very	giving	you
are	becoming	richer.	Then	love	starts	spreading,	radiating.	And	one	day	you	will
be	surprised:	where	is	the	fear?	Even	if	you	want	to	find	it	you	will	not	be	able	to
find	it	at	all.
So	it	is	not	a	question	of	dropping	the	fear;	nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	drop	it.
It	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 sharing	 your	 love,	 and	 the	 fear	 is	 dropped	 on	 its	 own
accord.
You	 ask	me:	 "Have	 you	 any	 practical	 or	 impractical	 suggestions...?"	 Practical
suggestions,	no	--	that	is	not	my	business	at	all.	Impractical	suggestions,	yes	--
and	many!
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	ARE	SO	MANY	RELIGIONS	IN	THE	WORLD	WHICH	CAUSE	SO
MANY
DIVISIONS	 AMONGST	 PEOPLE,	 ALTHOUGH	 ALL	 RELIGIONS	 HAVE
GOOD
THINGS	IN	THEM.
WHY	CAN'T	THERE	BE	A	RELIGION	WHICH	HAS	THE	GOOD	THINGS
OF	ALL
RELIGIONS,	 WHICH	 IS	 ACCEPTED	 UNIVERSALLY	 AND	 WHICH
BREAKS
DOWN	 ALL	 DIVISIONS,	 THUS	 CAUSING	 A	 WORLD	 FRATERNITY?
KINDLY
SHOW	THE	WAY.
Ashoka	Agrawal,	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 be	 understood	 is:	 there	 are	many	 types	 of
people	 in	 the	world,	 and	 they	 can't	 belong	 to	one	 religion.	 It	 is	 inevitable	 that
there	will	be	many	religions.	To	impose	one	religion	on	the	whole	of	humanity
will	be	ugly,	it	will	destroy	the	immense	richness	that	variety	brings.	Just	think
of	a	world	where	only	THE	BIBLE
exists	--	no	VEDAS,	no	UPANISHADS,	no	KORAN;	no	DHAMMAPADA,	no
BHAGAVADGITA,	 no	 TAO	 TE	 CHING.	 It	 will	 be	 a	 very	 poor	 world.	 The
world	certainly	needs	a	brotherhood,	a	fraternity,	a	great	love,	a	universality,	but
that	cannot	come	by	 imposing	a	certain	 religion.	Any	 religion	 that	you	choose
will	be	applicable	only	to	a	few	people,	and	the	majority	will	feel	imprisoned.
For	example,	just	look	around....	Mahavira	has	a	certain	appeal,	but	only	to	a	few
people.
I	myself	would	not	like	the	life	that	he	lived.	Still	I	say	he	lived	beautifully,	as
far	as	he	is	concerned.	He	lived	beautifully,	authentically,	but	he	is	not	the	person
that	I	would	like	to	follow.	He	lived	naked,	fasting	for	days	at	a	time.	To	me	that
seems	to	be	a	kind	of	self-torture.
Animals	 live	 naked	 --	 they	 can,	 because	 they	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of
skin,	 a	 thicker	 skin.	 And	moreover,	 whenever	 winter	 comes	 their	 bodies	 start
growing	thicker	hair.	Man	is	no	longer	an	animal,	he	has	lost	that	hairy	growth
on	 his	 body.	 To	 leave	 him	 in	 the	 cold,	 standing	 naked,	 is	 an	 unnecessary
masochistic	 attitude.	 It	may	 suit	 a	 few	 people,	 because	 people	 are	 different	 in
many	ways.	It	must	have	suited	Mahavira	--
nobody	was	imposing	the	idea	on	him	to	live	naked.	He	may	have	had	a	certain
different	kind	of	body	structure,	different	hormones,	hotter	blood,	a	thicker	skin.
I	am	not	 saying	 that	he	 should	not	have	 lived	naked,	and	 I	am	not	 saying	 that
there	is	nothing	beautiful	in	it.	If	somebody	enjoys	it,	if	somebody	feels	beautiful
in	it,	it	is	good,	but	it	cannot	be	made	into	any	universal	religion.	The	whole	of
humanity	shivering	in	the	cold,	in	great	fraternity,	chattering	their	teeth,	will	not
be	a	very	good	scene.	I	cannot	support	it.
Buddha	ate	only	one	time	every	day.	It	may	suit	a	few	people's	bodies;	in	fact,	it
cannot	suit	the	majority	--	because	man	has	come	from	the	monkeys,	that's	what
scientific	research	proves.	And	you	can	watch	the	monkeys	on	the	trees:	they	are
all	Americans,	munching	the	whole	day!	To	force	a	monkey	to	stick	to	one	meal
a	day	will	destroy	his	 life.	 In	 fact,	only	 lions	eat	one	 time	a	day,	because	 their
diet	 is	 nonvegetarian.	 Only	 nonvegetarians	 can	 live	 on	 one	 meal	 a	 day.	 The
vegetarian	cannot	survive,	or	even	if	he	survives,	the	survival	will	be	only	at	the
minimum	 level	 of	 his	 energies.	The	vegetarian	 has	 to	 eat	many	 times,	 at	 least
two	times	and	at	the	most	five	times.	One	meal	a	day	is	not	good	for	vegetarians,
and	if	you	are	pure	vegetarians,	just	living	on	vegetables	and	fruits,	then	you	will
have	 to	 eat	 many	 more	 times	 because	 larger	 quantities	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 and
absorbed.	 Meat	 is	 digested	 food;	 the	 animal	 has	 already	 done	 the	 work,	 but
eating	vegetables	you	have	to	do	the	whole	work	of	digesting.
Now,	 it	 is	 very	 strange	 that	 Mahavira	 and	 Buddha	 are	 both	 in	 favor	 of
vegetarianism,	and	still	 they	insist	on	one	meal	a	day.	I	think	the	reason	is	that
they	both	came	from	nonvegetarian	families,	 they	both	belonged	to	 the	race	of
the	warriors.	They	must	have	become	accustomed	to	eating	meat,	and	so	it	was
easy	 for	 them.	But	 if	people	who	have	 lived	 for	 centuries	on	vegetables	 try	 to
live	 on	 one	 meal	 a	 day,	 they	 will	 be	 living	 in	 a	 state	 of	 undernourishment,
malnutrition.	And	it	not	only	disturbs	your	body,	it	disturbs	your	mental	faculties
too.	 You	 can	 see	 it	 happening	 all	 over	 the	 world:	 only	 very	 rarely	 does	 a
vegetarian	 win	 a	 Nobel	 Prize	 --	 it	 affects	 your	 intelligence.	 You	 become	 a
vegetable!	If	you	are	uneducated,	you	are	a	cabbage,	or	at	the	most	a	cauliflower.
A	cauliflower	is	a	cabbage	with	a	college	education!
People	are	different,	 their	systems	are	different.	For	example,	women	and	men
cannot	 belong	 to	 the	 same	 system.	The	women	 can	 accumulate	more	 fat,	men
cannot;	 that	 is	 a	 biological	 difference.	 The	woman	 needs	 it	 because	when	 she
becomes	pregnant	and	a	child	is	growing	in	her	womb	she	cannot	eat	well.	She
starts	vomiting,	eating	becomes	difficult,	she	feels	sick	and	nauseous.	For	those
emergencies	 the	 body	 accumulates	 layers	 of	 fat.	 Man	 has	 no	 need	 to	 be	 fat
because	he	is	not	going	to	become	pregnant;	hence	man's	physiology	is	different.
That's	why	women	can	fast	very	easily.
This	is	my	observation:	the	Jaina	nuns	are	far	more	true	to	their	religion	than	the
Jaina	monks.	The	Jaina	nuns	can	fast	very	easily;	they	accumulate	fat.	And	what
is	fasting	in	fact?	When	you	fast	you	are	eating	your	own	meat;	that's	why	when
you	fast	one	kilo	of	weight	disappears	every	day.	Where	does	 it	go?	You	have
eaten	it!	Fasting,	in	fact,	is	a	nonvegetarian	activity	--	I	don't	believe	in	it!	It	is
eating	yourself!	The	woman	can	fast	more	easily;	the	man	cannot	--	he	does	not
accumulate	so	much	fat.
Then	in	different	climates,	in	different	geographies,	different	kinds	of	things	are
bound	to	happen.	You	cannot	have	one	religion	around	the	earth.	Yes,	you	can
have	one	kind	of	religiousness,	but	not	one	religion.
You	can	see	gathered	around	me	here	all	kinds	of	people	from	all	countries,	all
races	--
but	we	are	not	a	new	religion.	I	am	not	trying	to	create	one	religion;	we	are	just
creating	 a	 quality:	 religiousness,	 meditativeness,	 prayerfulness,	 trust,	 gratitude
towards	existence.
Yes,	on	these	things	humanity	can	become	a	great	brotherhood,	but	about	details
many	things	are	bound	to	remain	different	--	and	 they	should	remain	different.
There	is	no	reason	to	destroy	this	variety.	It	will	be	like	when	you	love	roses,	so
you	start	growing	only	roses.
One	of	my	friends	is	a	lover	of	roses.	He	has	a	very	big	garden.	Because	he	loves
roses,	 in	 his	 garden	 there	 are	 only	 roses	 --	 no	 other	 flowers,	 no	 other	 plants.
When	I	went	to	see	his	garden	I	told	him,	"This	is	not	a	garden,	this	looks	like	a
field.	Just	as	somebody	grows	wheat,	you	grow	roses.	But	this	is	not	a	garden!"
He	was	a	little	bit	shocked,	but	his	manager	understood	it	immediately.	He	said,
"You	 are	 right;	 that's	 my	 feeling	 too.	 For	 years	 we	 have	 forgotten	 about	 the
garden.	We	are	selling	roses;	we	are	treating	roses	as	a	crop."
When	 you	 have	 only	 roses,	 the	 variety,	 the	 multidimensionality	 is	 lost.	 The
world	will	 be	 really	 very	poor	 if	 you	have	only	Mahaviras	 or	 only	Christs,	 or
only	Buddhas	or	only	Krishnas.	 Jesus	 is	beautiful	with	his	 cross,	 but	 so	many
Jesuses	 all	 trying	 to	 hang	 themselves	 on	 their	 crosses	 won't	make	 a	 beautiful
scene.	It	will	be	like	a	nightmare!
Krishna	 is	 beautiful	 playing	 on	 his	 flute,	 but	 how	 many	 Krishnas	 can	 you
allow...?	If	the	whole	world	is	playing	the	flute	you	will	go	mad!
I	accept	multidimensionality	in	every	field	of	life.
Ashoka	 Agrawal,	 you	 say:	 "There	 are	 so	 many	 religions	 in	 the	 world	 which
cause	so	many	divisions	amongst	people...."	The	divisions	are	not	needed;	that	is
human	stupidity.
If	you	love	the	rose,	good;	there	is	no	question	of	fighting	with	you.	I	love	the
lotus	and	you	love	the	rose,	but	we	both	are	lovers	of	flowers.	That's	the	meeting
point,	 that	 we	 both	 love	 flowers.	 You	 love	 Christ,	 that	 is	 one	 flower;	 I	 love
Buddha,	 that	 is	 another	 flower;	 somebody	 else	 loves	 Lao	Tzu,	 that	 is	 another
flower.	We	are	all	 friends	because	we	 love	 flowers.	And	 I	can	appreciate	your
rose,	you	can	appreciate	my	lotus.	There	is	no	need	to	create	any	divisions.
The	 divisions	 come	 from	 man's	 political	 mind;	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
religions.	 It	 is	 man's	 politics	 that	 brings	 divisions,	 conflicts,	 quarrels,	 wars,
bloodshed.	 The	whole	 history	 of	 humanity	 is	 full	 of	 calamities	 created	 in	 the
name	of	religion,	but	not	created	by	religious	people.
A	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Chuang	Tzu	--	 these	are	not	 the	people	who	create
trouble.	 It	 is	 the	priests	and	 the	politicians.	They	are	a	 totally	different	kind	of
person,	 a	 different	 species,	 but	 they	 hide	 behind	 masks.	 They	 hide	 behind
religious	doctrines,	churches,	and	they	start	playing	their	games	in	a	very	subtle
way.	The	manyness	of	religions	is	not	bad,	but	divisions	in	the	name	of	religion
are	ugly.	That	simply	shows	man	is	not	religious	yet.
You	say	that	"Although	all	religions	have	good	things	in	them...."
True,	but	they	also	have	many	bad	things	in	them.	Each	religion	has	some	good
things	and	some	bad	things,	and	the	problem	is,	those	good	things	and	those	bad
things	 are	 not	 separable;	 you	 cannot	 separate	 them.	 You	 CANNOT	 separate
them.	You	cannot	choose	 just	 the	good	and	 leave	 the	bad;	 that's	 impossible.	 If
you	choose	the	good,	the	bad	comes	in	through	the	backdoor.
For	example,	if	you	choose	the	idea	of	fate....	Many	religions	believe	in	the	idea
of	fate.	It	has	something	good	in	it	because	it	helps	you	to	relax,	it	helps	you	to
trust	existence,	it	helps	you	to	be	unworried.	But	then	there	is	something	bad	in
it	 too:	 it	makes	 you	 lazy,	 lousy.	 It	makes	 you	 Indian!	 It	makes	 you	 slaves,	 it
makes	you	accept	any	humiliation.
For	twenty-two	centuries	India	has	been	in	slavery	for	the	simple	reason	that	it
believes	 in	 fate.	 Now,	 how	 can	 you	 separate	 these	 two	 things?	 If	 everything
happens	according	to	God,	it	will	give	you	a	few	good	things.	You	will	be	able	to
tolerate,	 to	 accept	 many	 miseries,	 sufferings,	 with	 equanimity,	 with	 a	 certain
tranquility,	 calmness,	 quietness.	That	will	 give	you	 strength,	 integrity,	 a	 grace,
but	then	you	will	also	become	a	slave.	Anybody	can	dominate	you,	anybody	can
exploit	you.	And	the	same	is	true	about	every	other	idea.
For	example,	 Jainas	believe	 that	 life	 is	dominated	by	 the	 theory	of	karma,	and
not	 only	 Jainas	 but	Hindus	 and	Buddhists	 too.	All	 the	 three	 great	 religions	 of
India	believe	in	the	theory	of	karma	--	that	whatsoever	you	are	now,	you	are	the
by-product	 of	 your	 past	 karmas.	 You	 have	 something	 to	 fulfill.	 You	 have	 to
suffer	if	you	have	done	anything	bad	and	you	will	be	rewarded	if	you	have	done
anything	good.
Now	there	is	the	Jaina	sect	of	Acharya	Tulsi,	Terapanth.	It	says	that	because	of
the	 theory	 of	 karma,	 one	 should	 not	 interfere	 in	 anybody's	 life.	 For	 example,
somebody	 is	 dying	 of	 thirst	 in	 a	 desert,	 and	 a	 Jaina	 monk	 from	 the	 sect	 of
Acharya	 Tulsi	 comes	 by.	 If	 the	 man	 begs	 for	 water,	 the	 follower	 of	 Acharya
Tulsi	 has	 to	 remain	 utterly	 cool,	 indifferent,	 because	 the	man	 is	 suffering	 his
karma.	You	should	not	interfere;	interference	is	bad.	If	you	give	him	water,	then
he	will	have	to	suffer	someday	again.	You	cannot	escape	from	the	inevitability	of
your	karma,	so	why	postpone?	Let	him	be	finished	with	it!	You	go	on	your	way.
Let	him	die,	let	him	suffer.	This	is	a	logical	consequence	of	the	idea.
Moreover,	they	say,	if	you	save	him,	if	you	give	him	water	and	he	is	saved	and
tomorrow	 he	 commits	 a	 murder,	 then	 you	 will	 also	 be	 responsible	 for	 that
murder;	without	you	the	murder	would	not	have	happened	at	all.	Then	YOU	will
suffer	 in	your	next	 life	 for	a	murder	 that	you	have	not	done,	but	 in	a	way	you
have	been	part	of	it.	So	it	is	better	not	to	interfere	for	his	sake	and	for	your	own
sake.	It	is	a	beautiful	theory	but	it	has	also	a	dark	side	to	it.	You	have	heard	the
saying	that	every	dark	cloud	has	a	silver	lining.	I	would	like	to	remind	you	that
every	silver	lining	also	has	a	dark	cloud	to	it.
Yes,	Ashoka	Agrawal,	 the	 religions	have	good	 things	 in	 them,	 that	 is	 true,	but
those	 good	 things	 also	 have	 bad	 sides.	 And	 a	 truly	 religious	 person	 will	 not
bother	 about	 choosing;	 he	will	 start	 living	 according	 to	 his	 consciousness.	He
will	 not	 follow	 Jesus,	Buddha	 or	Mahavira	 or	Mohammed.	To	 follow	 is	 to	 be
political.	Only	 the	blind	follow,	 the	superstitious	people	follow,	gullible	people
follow.	 The	 people	 who	 are	 intelligent	 try	 to	 understand	 Buddha,	 Mahavira,
Krishna,	 but	 it	 is	 just	 an	 effort	 to	 understand	 the	message,	 what	 these	 people
were	doing,	what	they	were	living.	Finally,	you	have	to	discover	your	own	inner
light.
That's	what	I	call	meditation:	the	moment	you	have	discovered	your	own	inner
insight,	you	follow	it.	Then	you	are	religious	--	neither	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan
nor	 Christian.	 A	 religious	 quality,	 a	 fragrance	will	 surround	 you.	 You	will	 be
more	 loving,	more	compassionate.	And	 these	will	be	 the	qualities:	you	will	be
more	authentic,	more	sincere,	and	you	will	be	able	to	understand	different	points,
different	angles	and	the	different	paths	leading	to	the	same	goal.
Truth	is	like	the	sunlit	top	of	Everest:	thousands	of	paths	can	reach	there;	there	is
no	need	 to	make	one	asphalt	 road.	Let	people	follow	their	own	paths,	 let	 them
discover.	 The	 joy	 of	 discovery	 is	 far	 greater	 than	 the	 joy	 of	 arrival.	 Let	 them
discover	 their	path,	 let	 them	inquire,	and	 let	 them	follow	 their	own	 insight.	Of
course	 they	will	 fall	many	 times,	 they	will	 go	 astray;	 that	 is	 part	 of	 freedom.
That	is	beautiful;	nothing	is	wrong	in	it.
You	 say:	 "Why	 can't	 there	 be	 a	 religion	 which	 has	 the	 good	 things	 of	 all
religions...?"
That	is	impossible;	that	will	be	just	a	hotchpotch.	It	will	be	the	same	as	if	you	are
suffering	 from	 an	 illness	 and	 you	 go	 to	 the	 druggist	 and	 tell	 him,	 "Make	 a
medicine	 out	 of	 all	 the	 good	medicines	 that	 you	 have	 got.	All	 that	 is	 good	 in
every	medicine,	 put	 it	 into	 one	 combination."	 That	 combination	will	 kill	 you!
Certainly	it	will	destroy	your	illness,	because	it	will	destroy	you	too.	Your	illness
needs	a	certain	medicine	only;	you	don't	need	all	 the	medicines	and	all	 that	 is
good	in	all	the	medicines.
You	ask	why	one	religion	cannot	be	accepted	universally.	People	have	so	many
different	minds,	 different	 attitudes,	 different	 visions,	 different	 lifestyles	 --	why
should	they	live	in	one	uniform	way?	They	should	be	allowed	freedom.	Freedom
is	one	of	the	greatest	religious	qualities.	And	if	they	are	allowed	freedom,	then
they	are	free	to	choose.
If	somebody	loves	the	KORAN	I	don't	think	he	will	be	able	to	love	the	TAO	TE
CHING;	they	are	 totally	different	visions.	You	can	recite	 the	KORAN;	there	 is
no	need	even	to	understand	the	meaning	of	it.	The	very	reciting	is	tremendously
beautiful,	 ecstatic.	The	KORAN	IS	 really	meant	 to	be	 recited,	not	understood;
there	is	not	much	to	understand	in	it.
Many	 Mohammedan	 friends,	 many	 of	 my	 Mohammedan	 sannyasins	 go	 on
writing	to	me,
"When	are	you	going	to	speak	on	the	KORAN?"	I	cannot	really	speak	on	it	--	I
have	thought	about	it	many	times	--	because	there	is	not	much	to	say	about	the
KORAN.	It	 is	a	song,	it	 is	a	shout	of	joy.	What	can	you	say	about	it?	You	can
dance	and	sing,	you	can	recite,	but	nothing	can	be	said	about	it.
But	 one	 can	 go	 on	 commenting	 for	 years	 on	 the	 TAO	 TE	 CHING;	 it	 is
inexhaustible.	But	you	cannot	sing	it;	there	is	no	song	in	it.	For	those	people	who
have	a	musical	ear,	 the	KORAN	will	be	 the	 right	 thing.	For	 those	people	who
have	a	philosophical	bent,	the	TAO	TE	CHING	will	be	of	immense	value.	But	to
reduce	the	whole	of	humanity	to	one	type	is	not	a	good	idea.
Ashoka	 Agrawal,	 man	 can	 become	 a	 family	 without	 destroying	 the	 variety.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 destroy	 the	 different	 angles	 of	 seeing;	 they	 all	 enhance
existence.	The	birds	sing	differently,	the	flowers	bloom	differently,	the	trees	have
different	 colors,	 shades,	 different	 leaves.	 Every	 river	 has	 its	 own	 song,	 every
mountain	has	its	own	poetry,	and	so	is	the	case	with	every	individual.
To	me,	each	individual	is	far	more	valuable	than	society	as	a	whole.	Let	me	say
it	in	this	way:	the	individual	is	the	goal,	not	the	universal.	The	universal	is	only
an	abstract	idea.
Have	you	ever	seen	the	universal?	Have	you	ever	met	the	universal?	Have	you
ever	 said	 to	 the	 universal,	 "Hello!	 How	 are	 you?"	 You	 will	 always	 meet	 the
individual.	 The	 individual	 is	 the	 real;	 the	 universal	 is	 only	 an	 abstraction,	 an
idea.
Don't	be	 too	 interested	 in	 ideas;	 they	don't	 exist.	Remain	more	concrete,	more
realistic.
Each	 individual	 has	 uniqueness,	 and	 I	 respect	 that	 uniqueness,	 and	 it	 is	 his
freedom,	whatsoever	he	chooses.	And	it	is	nobody	else's	business	to	give	you	a
religion.	It	is	not	even	your	parents'	business,	or	the	priests',	or	the	society's,	or
the	state's.	 It	 is	nobody's	business	 to	give	you	your	religion.	Everybody	should
be	allowed	to	find	his	own	religion.
That	will	be	the	real	state	of	fraternity.	We	have	to	respect	the	other	with	all	his
uniqueness.	And	we	have	to	say	to	the	other,	"If	it	is	good	for	you,	you	follow	it;
it	is	not	good	for	me	so	I	am	going	on	another	route.	And	if	by	chance	we	meet
somewhere,	it	will	be	beautiful.	I	will	share	my	journey	with	you,	and	you	will
share	your	journey	with	me,	and	we	both	will	be	enriched	in	that	way."
The	third	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 LOVE	 IT	WHEN	 YOU	 CALL	 A	 SPADE	 A	 SPADE	 --	 OR	 THE	 POPE	 A
POLACK.	I	REALIZE	THE	RELIGION	OF	MY	CHILDHOOD	HAUNTS	ME
STILL,	WHEN	I	FEEL	RELIEF	IN	LAUGHING	AT	THE	POPE	AND	ALL	HE
REPRESENTS.	THEN
SOON	 MY	 LAUGHTER	 CHANGES	 TO	 ANGER	 AT	 HOW	 ORGANIZED
RELIGION
HAS	EXPLOITED	MY	FRIENDS,	MY	FAMILY	AND	MYSELF.
WHAT	TO	DO	WITH	THIS	FEELING	OF	OUTRAGE?
Anand	Mary,	it	is	natural.	Humanity	has	been	dominated	by	the	priests	and	the
politicians	for	so	 long	that	 the	people	who	are	able	 to	understand	are	bound	to
feel	enraged,	angry.
They	would	 like	 to	 destroy	 this	whole	 stupidity	 that	 has	 prevailed	 all	 through
human	history.	But	just	by	being	enraged,	you	are	not	going	to	help.	The	past	is
no	more;	nothing	can	be	done	about	it.	The	future	is	not	yet;	nothing	can	be	done
about	it	either.
All	that	we	have	got	is	the	present,	this	moment.	This	very	moment	is	all	that	is
there!
And	my	feeling	is,	Anand	Mary,	that	when	you	laugh,	your	laughter	is	not	total.
Something	 remains	 locked	 up	 within	 you,	 something	 remains	 unexpressed,
repressed.
You	 are	 not	 going	 totally	 into	 the	 laughter;	 you	 are	 holding	 back	 something
unknowingly,	unconsciously.	But	now	become	conscious.	You	must	be	holding
something;	 that	which	you	are	holding	becomes	anger.	 If	you	 totally	allow	 the
laughter,	the	anger	will	disappear.
It	 is	 the	 same	 as	 I	 was	 saying	 a	 few	 moments	 ago:	 when	 there	 is	 love,	 fear
disappears;	when	 there	 is	 laughter,	anger	disappears.	Anger	 is	because	you	are
not	allowing	 the	 laughter	 totally.	 It	may	be	 just	because	of	your	conditionings.
We	 have	 so	 much	 conditioning	 that	 whatsoever	 we	 do	 is	 only	 half-hearted,
fragmentary,	and	the	remaining	part	remains	imprisoned	and	wants	to	come	out.
That	creates	anger.
It	is	not	a	question	of	your	feeling	angry	against	organized	religions.	They	have
been	 there,	but	now	you	are	out	of	 it.	Why	 remain	 so	 related?	Now	you	are	a
sannyasin,	you	are	finished	with	your	childhood	religion	that	has	been	given	to
you.	Now	you	have	found	your	own	kind	of	religiousness.	You	have	found	that
which	fits	with	you,	that	which	is	natural	to	you.
Allow	your	laughter	to	be	total.
A	 total	 laughter	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon.	When	 each	 cell	 of	 your	 body	 laughs,
when	each	fiber	of	your	being	pulsates	with	joy,	then	it	brings	a	great	relaxation.
There	are	a	few	activities	which	are	immensely	valuable;	laughter	is	one	of	those
activities.	Singing	and	dancing,	are	also	of	the	same	quality,	but	laughter	is	the
quickest.	Dancing	you	will	have	to	learn;	it	may	take	years.	Singing	is	a	talent;	it
may	not	be	possible	for	you.	Everybody	can	sing,	but	 to	sing	a	beautiful	song,
talent	is	needed.	You	can	sing	and	drive	your	neighbors	crazy!
Once,	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	a	neighbor	knocked	on	Mulla	Nasruddin's	door.
Mulla	staggered	out	of	his	bed,	opened	the	door	and	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?"
The	man	said,	"Stop	singing,	otherwise	I	will	go	mad!"
Mulla	said,	"What	are	you	talking	about?	I	stopped	one	hour	ago!"
That	man	had	already	gone	mad.	He	could	still	hear	that	Mulla	singing.
Everybody	 can	 sing	 in	 that	 way.	 That's	 why	 people	 sing	 and	 hum	 in	 their
bathrooms	--
except	me!	I	have	never	managed	to	hum	or	sing	in	the	bathroom.	I	have	tried,
but	utterly	 failed,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 I	 am	not	 repressing	 anything.	 If	 I
want	to	sing	I	will	sing	anywhere,	I	will	not	care	whether	it	is	the	bathroom	or
not.	 If	 I	 want	 to	 sing	 I	 will	 sing	 in	 the	 marketplace;	 whatsoever	 happens	 to
others,	that	is	their	problem!
Dancing,	 singing,	 laughing	 --	 of	 these	 three,	 laughter	 is	 the	 most	 simple,	 the
most	 natural	 and	 the	most	 spontaneous	 phenomenon.	You	 don't	want	 to	 learn,
you	don't	need	to	learn	-
-	it	is	a	natural	gift.	Everybody	can	laugh.
And	 what	 happens	 when	 you	 laugh	 totally?	 What	 happens	 when	 you	 dance
totally?	The	dancer	disappears	in	a	total	dance.	That's	my	definition	of	the	total
dance:	the	dancer	disappears,	dissolves;	only	the	dancing	remains.	When	there	is
only	 dancing	 and	 no	 dancer,	 this	 is	 the	 ultimate	 of	 meditation	 --	 the	 taste	 of
nectar,	bliss,	God,	truth,	ecstasy,	freedom,	freedom	from	the	ego,	freedom	from
the	doer.
And	when	 there	 is	no	ego,	no	doer,	 and	 the	dance	 is	going	on	and	 there	 is	no
dancer,	 a	 great	 witnessing	 arises,	 a	 great	 awareness	 like	 a	 cloud	 of	 light
surrounding	 you.	You	 are	watching	 it,	 you	 can	 see	 it	 happen.	You	 are	 not	 the
doer;	it	is	happening	on	its	own.	God	has	taken	possession	of	you.	That's	exactly
the	meaning	of	possession:	when	 the	ego	 is	no	 longer	 there,	God	 immediately
enters	and	takes	possession	of	you.	You	become	a	vehicle,	a	passage,	a	medium,
a	hollow	bamboo,	and	on	 the	 lips	of	 the	whole	 the	hollow	bamboo	becomes	a
flute.
In	 laughter	 it	 happens	more	 easily	 because	 it	 needs	 no	 talent,	 no	 learning,	 no
discipline	--
unless	you	are	a	born	donkey,	and	that's	another	matter.	Laughter	is	simple	--	but
let	 it	be	 total.	 It	has	been	crippled.	Society	has	stopped	you	from	going	 totally
into	it.	If	you	go	into	a	total	laughter	people	think	it	is	hysterical.	It	is	not,	it	is
historical!
Anand	Mary,	a	few	jokes	for	you	--	and	let	it	be	a	total	laughter!
A	 businessman	was	 about	 to	 enter	 a	 hotel	 bar	 after	 a	 heavy	 day	 at	 the	 office
when	 he	 was	 stopped	 by	 a	 nun	 who	 delivered	 him	 a	 lecture	 on	 the	 evils	 of
alcohol,	assuring	him	that	drink	was	the	most	certain	path	to	hell.
"Sister,"	he	 interrupted	at	 last,	"I	am	a	most	 temperate	man	and	only	have	one
drink	every	few	days	to	relax	me.	One	drink	never	hurt	anyone.	Even	Jesus	had
the	odd	glass	of	wine!	Besides,	how	can	you	condemn	something	you	have	never
experienced?	You	should	try	just	one	drink	yourself,	just	so	you	know	what	you
are	talking	about!"
The	nun	protested	 indignantly	at	 this	 suggestion,	but	 in	 the	ensuing	discussion
found	it	more	and	more	difficult	to	rebuke	the	logic	of	the	executive.	"Okay,"	she
said	in	the	end,
"you	have	convinced	me.	I	will	try	a	small	drink	of	whiskey	--	may	God	forgive
me!	But	you	better	bring	it	out	to	me	in	a	teacup	in	case	anyone	sees	me."
The	businessman	agreed	happily	and	entered	the	hotel.	"A	pint	of	beer,	please,"
he	called	to	the	barman,	"and	one	Scotch,	in	a	teacup,	if	you	don't	mind."
The	barman	looked	up	with	a	frown.	"Don't	 tell	me	that	bloody	nun	is	still	out
there!"
A	man	 visiting	 a	whorehouse	was	 astonished	 at	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 girl	 he	was
assigned.
He	said,	"You	look	so	beautiful	and	have	such	fine	manners.	You	actually	look
like	you	come	from	a	very	fine,	wealthy	family."
"Actually,	I	do!"	she	said,	"My	family	is	Catholic	and	they	are	aristocrats."
He	then	noted	how	intelligent	she	was	and	she	told	him	she	had	graduated	cum
laude	from	Vassar.	He	noted	then	that	she	must	have	traveled	worldwide	because
of	her	cultured	ways.	And	she	said	that	indeed	she	had	traveled	the	world	many
times.
Thereupon	he	said,	"Well	how	in	the	world	did	you	ever	come	to	work	in	a	place
like	this?"
She	replied,	"Just	lucky,	I	guess!"
There	 was	 once	 a	 young	 man	 whose	 mind	 was	 filled	 with	 many	 burning
questions	about	life.	He	learned	of	a	wise	old	Catholic	sage	who	lived	on	a	high
mountain,	and	decided	to	undertake	the	arduous	journey.
After	many	months	of	caravans,	hiking	and	climbing,	he	came	upon	the	hermit
sitting	outside	a	small	cave	as	still	and	peaceful	as	any	statue.
The	seeker	knelt	in	front	of	him,	bowed	his	head	respectfully,	and	humbly	asked,
"Why	am	I	here?"
"Why	indeed!"	grumbled	the	old	man.	"I	told	them	to	send	up	a	girl!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	The	Suchness	of	Things
6	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011060
ShortTitle:
COME11
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
LAO	TZU	IS	SAID	TO	HAVE	SAID:
"KNOWING	THE	NOT-KNOWING	--
THAT	IS	HIGH.
NOT	KNOWING	THE	KNOWING	--
THAT	IS	AN	ILLNESS.
THE	ONE	WHO	SUFFERS	FROM	THIS	ILLNESS
IS	NOT	ILL.
THE	WISE	IS	NOT	ILL
BECAUSE	HE	SUFFERS	FROM	THIS	ILLNESS	--
THAT'S	WHY	HE	IS	NOT	ILL."
Eiko,	Lao	Tzu	 is	 one	 of	 those	 few	masters	who	 have	 tried	 to	 say	 the	 truth	 as
accurately	as	it	is	humanly	possible.	He	has	made	tremendous	effort	to	bring	the
inexpressible	to	the	world	of	expression,	to	bring	the	wordless	experience	within
the	confinement	of	small	words.
The	words	we	know	are	mundane;	 they	are	meant	for	ordinary	day-to-day	use.
And	the	experience	that	happens	in	absolute	silence	is	absolutely	beyond	them.
But	still	it	has	to	be	expressed	--	if	not	expressed,	at	least	hinted	at.
Lao	 Tzu's	 words	 are	 fingers	 pointing	 to	 the	moon.	 Don't	 cling	 to	 the	 fingers.
Forget	the	fingers	and	look	at	the	moon,	and	great	insight	will	descend	upon	you.
There	is	no	other	scripture	like	the	TAO	TE	CHING	for	the	simple	reason	that
each	 single	word	 in	 it	 is	 immensely	 pregnant,	 not	 only	with	 the	 unknown	but
also	with	the	unknowable.	Words	have	been	used	only	as	indicators,	milestones
showing	the	way,	telling	you	to	go	ahead,	not	to	stop	there.
These	 words	 are	 very	 significant,	 but	 at	 the	 first	 reading	 they	 will	 look	 very
puzzling,	 confusing,	 paradoxical,	 contradictory	 --	 unless	 you	 have	 tasted
something	of	meditation.
That	taste	makes	everything	clear.
Meditation	 is	 like	 eyes.	When	you	 talk	about	 light	 to	 a	man	who	has	eyes,	he
immediately	understands	what	you	mean.	When	you	talk	to	the	blind	man	about
light,	he	HEARS	the	word	but	listens	to	nothing,	understands	nothing.	His	ears
are	perfect;	 the	word	 reaches	him	but	empty,	with	no	content.	The	content	has
always	to	be	put	by	your	experience.
These	 words	 are	 not	 ordinary	 words.	 Unless	 you	 come	 to	 them	 with	 great
meditation	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 figure	 out	 what	 is	 what.	 If	 you	 come	 with
meditation,	 then	 things	 cannot	 be	more	 simple	 than	 Lao	 Tzu's	 words	 are.	 He
says,	"Knowing	the	not-knowing	--	that	is	high."
The	highest	point	is	that	nothing	can	be	known,	that	everything	is	unknowable	--
and	not	only	unknown,	but	unknowable.	A	distinction	has	 to	be	made	between
the	unknown	and	 the	unknowable;	 these	 two	words	have	 to	be	pondered	over.
The	first	is	the	known.	That	which	is	known	today	was	unknown	yesterday.	That
which	 is	 unknown	 today	 may	 become	 known	 tomorrow	 or	 the	 day	 after
tomorrow.	Hence	the	difference	between	the	known	and	the	unknown.	It	is	not	a
difference	 that	makes	any	difference;	 it	 is	only	a	question	of	 time.	There	 is	no
qualitative	difference	between	the	two.
But	the	unknowable	is	qualitatively	different.	The	unknowable	is	that	which	has
never	been	known	and	will	never	be	known;	unknowability	is	its	intrinsic	nature.
This	is	the	most	profound	truth,	that	life	in	its	totality,	in	its	organic	wholeness	is
absolutely	a	mystery.	It	is	not	a	problem	that	can	be	solved,	it	is	not	a	question
that	can	be	answered.	No	amount	of	knowledge	is	going	to	demystify	it.	It	will
remain	mysterious.
Mysteriousness	is	not	something	accidental	to	it.	You	cannot	take	it	away	from
it;	 it	 is	 its	 very	 soul.	 And	 whatsoever	 we	 know	 is	 just	 superficial,	 very
superficial.	Whatsoever	we	know	is	only	befooling	ourselves.
D.H.Lawrence,	one	of	the	mystic	poets	of	this	age,	and	a	man	I	love	and	respect
very	much,	was	walking	in	a	garden	with	a	small	child.	The	child	asked	him	--
and	 only	 a	 child	 can	 ask	 such	 a	 tremendously	 significant	 question....	 The
knowledgeable	people	always	ask	foolish	questions	because	they	ask	out	of	their
knowledge.	In	fact,	they	have	already	got	the	answer	and	they	are	asking	just	to
see	 whether	 you	 have	 also	 got	 the	 answer	 or	 not.	 They	 are	 searching	 for	 an
argument	to	prove	their	knowledge.	Their	question	is	not	authentic,	 is	not	true.
Any	question	arising	out	of	your	knowledge	is	pseudo.
But	when	small	children	ask	something	they	mean	it;	it	is	not	out	of	knowledge,
it	is	out	of	innocence,	out	of	a	state	of	not	knowing.	Whenever	there	is	a	question
out	of	not	knowing	it	has	immense	beauty,	splendor.
The	child	asked	D.H.Lawrence,	 "Can	you	 tell	me	one	 thing:	why	are	 the	 trees
green?
Why	not	red?	Why	not	blue?	Why	not	black?	Why	not	this,	why	not	that?	Why
are	they	green	and	always	green?"
A	man	of	knowledge	would	have	answered	very	easily.	He	would	have	told	the
child	the	chemistry	of	 the	trees,	 the	biology	of	 the	trees.	He	may	have	told	the
child	 about	 chlorophyll:	 "Why	 are	 the	 trees	 green?	 --	 it	 is	 because	 of	 the
presence	of	chlorophyll."
But	D.H.Lawrence	remained	silent;	he	closed	his	eyes.
The	child	was	puzzled	--	such	a	great	man,	world	famous,	author	of	many	books,
who	could	not	 answer	 such	a	 small	 question?	The	child	nudged	him	and	 said,
"Why	have	you	closed	your	eyes?	Either	you	know	or	you	don't	know!	What	are
you	doing	with	closed	eyes?	If	you	know,	say	it;	if	you	don't	know,	say	so."
D.H.Lawrence	said,	"The	trees	are	green	because	they	are	green."
And	 the	 child	 said,	 "That's	 right!"	 He	 was	 absolutely	 satisfied,	 contented.	 He
said,	"That's	right	--	trees	are	green	because	they	are	green!"
But	only	a	child	can	ask	such	a	question,	and	only	a	child	can	receive	such	an
answer.
What	Lawrence	is	saying	is	exactly	what	Lao	Tzu	is	saying.	To	say	that	trees	are
green	because	they	are	green,	is	to	accept	the	ultimate	mystery,	that	nothing	can
be	said.	It	is	so.
That	was	Buddha's	way	of	answering.	His	word	was	TATHATA.	Tathata	can	be
translated	approximately	as	suchness.	He	was	asked	a	 thousand	and	one	 times,
"Why	is	there	death?"
And	he	would	say,	"Tathata	--	such	is	the	nature	of	things."	It	is	not	an	answer,
remember.	What	kind	of	answer	is	this?	"Such	is	the	nature	of	things	--	that	the
water	 flows	 downwards	 and	 the	 fire	 rises	 upwards."	 Such	 is	 the	 nature	 of
things...?
In	fact,	the	word	DHAMMA,	used	by	Buddha,	which	is	ordinarily	translated	as
religion,	exactly	means	suchness,	the	suchness	of	things,	the	dhamma	of	things.
"Aes	dhammo	sanantano"	--	such	is	the	ultimate	nature	of	things.	Nothing	more
can	be	said	about	it.
That	which	is	born	will	have	to	die.	The	young	will	become	old,	the	child	will
become	young,	the	beautiful	will	become	ugly,	the	healthy	will	become	ill.	Such
is	 the	 nature	 of	 things	 --	 but	 this	 is	 not	 an	 answer,	 remember.	 And	 Buddha
insisted	again	and	again,	"I	am	not	answering	your	questions,	I	am	only	making
your	questions	clear	to	you."
This	is	the	difference	between	a	philosopher	and	a	mystic:	the	philosopher	tries
to	 answer	 your	 questions,	 the	 mystic	 simply	 helps	 you	 to	 understand	 your
questions.
Whenever	Buddha	used	to	go	to	a	new	place,	his	disciples	would	go	ahead	and
declare	to	the	people:	"Please	don't	ask	these	eleven	questions.	It	will	be	a	sheer
waste	of	time,	because	all	that	he	is	going	to	say	is,	`Such	is	the	nature	of	things.'
So	WE	 can	 say	 it	 to	 you!	 This	 will	 be	 his	 answer	 to	 these	 eleven	 questions:
`Such	is	the	nature	of	things.'	So	don't	ask	these	questions."
Neither	is	Buddha	a	philosopher,	nor	Lao	Tzu;	in	fact,	no	one	who	has	KNOWN
is	a	philosopher.	Philosophers	are	blind	people	thinking	about	light.
You	must	have	heard	the	ancient	Panchtantra	story....
Five	blind	men	went	to	see	an	elephant.	They	were	not	five	blind	men,	they	were
five	 philosophers,	 but	 all	 these	 philosophers	 were	 blind.	 That	 story	 has	 two
meanings:	 one	 for	 small	 children	 --	 then	 it	 is	 five	 blind	 people	 --	 and	 one	 for
those	who	are	a	little	more	mature,	and	then	it	means	five	philosophers.
Those	 five	 blind	 men	 touched	 the	 elephant	 from	 different	 sides.	 Somebody
touched	his	feet	and	declared	that	the	elephant	was	like	a	pillar	--	and	so	on,	so
forth.	 They	 all	 described	 the	 elephant	 according	 to	 their	 very	 limited,	 partial
observation.	And	 they	started	quarreling,	arguing.	A	great	argument	arose,	and
the	whole	village	gathered.	They	were	very	argumentative	people.	They	quoted
scriptures,	they	tried	to	prove	that	what	they	were	saying	was	right.	They	were
philosophers,	theologians	and	scholars.	Of	course	there	could	not	have	been	any
conclusion.	 Philosophers	 have	 never	 come	 to	 any	 conclusion	 --	 they	 cannot,
because	a	conclusion	is	possible	only	through	experience,	and	the	experience	has
to	be	total,	absolute,	categorical.
The	 first	 experience	 of	 the	 mystic	 is	 that	 existence	 is	 not	 a	 problem	 but	 a
mystery;	 it	 is	unknowable	 --	not	only	unknown.	Science	divides	existence	 into
two	categories:	the	known	and	the	unknown.	Hence	science	assumes	that	a	day
is	bound	to	come	when	the	whole	unknown	will	be	transformed	into	the	known.
That	will	be	the	end	of	all	inquiry.
But	religion	believes	in	three	categories.	The	known	and	the	unknown	belong	to
the	lower	world	of	knowledge,	and	the	unknowable	belongs	to	the	higher	world
of	knowledge.	That	higher	will	always	remain	the	same;	it	will	be	always	there
to	inquire	into,	to	go	into;	to	merge	with,	to	melt	into,	to	become	one	with.
Lao	 Tzu	 says:	 KNOWING	 THE	 NOT-KNOWING	 --	 knowing	 that	 life	 is
absolutely	mysterious,	that	there	is	no	way	to	know	it	--	THAT	IS	HIGH.	That	is
the	ultimate	of	experience.	There	is	no	beyond	to	it,	nothing	more	transcendental
than	that;	one	has	arrived	home.	The	moment	you	enter	the	mysterious,	you	have
found	the	home.	No	knowledge	can	satisfy	you	unless	you	are	merged	with	the
unknowable.
NOT	KNOWING	THE	KNOWING	--	THAT	IS	AN	ILLNESS.
Lao	Tzu	calls	even	wisdom	an	illness,	because	you	are	falling	from	the	ultimate
health,	ultimate	well-being.
NOT	KNOWING	THE	KNOWING....
Even	 by	 saying,	 "I	 don't	 know,"	 you	 have	 asserted	 something,	 you	 have	 said
something,	you	have	claimed	some	knowledge.	For	example,	if	Socrates	had	met
Lao	 Tzu,	 Lao	 Tzu	 would	 have	 said,	 "You	 are	 ill	 --	 ill	 with	 wisdom!	 A	 good
illness,	but	you	are	just	a	step	below,"	because	Socrates'	famous	statement	is:	"I
know	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 I	 know	 nothing."	 But	 there	 is	 a	 claim:	 "I	 know."
Although	 the	 claim	 is	 that	 "I	 know	 nothing,"	 still	 it	 is	 a	 claim	 of	 knowing,	 a
claim	of	knowledge.	Even	though	it	claims	that	life	is	mysterious,	the	claim	has
come	in.
Even	 to	say	 that	God	 is	 indefinable	 is	a	kind	of	definition.	To	say	 that	 truth	 is
inexpressible	is	in	a	certain	sense	giving	it	some	expression.	To	say	that	the	truth
cannot	 be	 said	means	 you	 have	 said	 something	 about	 it.	 Your	 very	 statement
falsifies	 it;	 it	 is	 self-contradictory.	 Hence	 he	 calls	 it	 illness	 --	 it	 is	 self-
contradictory.
Lao	 Tzu	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most	 consistent	 men;	 it	 is	 rare	 to	 find	 a	 buddha	 so
consistent	 as	Lao	Tzu.	His	whole	 life	he	never	wrote.	All	 the	 teaching	 that	he
gave	 to	 his	 disciples	 was	 not	 a	 teaching	 at	 all;	 his	 whole	 method	 was	 VIA
NEGATIVA.	The	disciple	would	come	to	him	with	all	his	knowledge,	and	Lao
Tzu	would	start	dismantling	his	knowledge,	destroying	his	knowledge;	that	was
his	whole	and	sole	purpose.	He	would	go	on	taking	away	your	knowledge	brick
by	 brick.	 A	 moment	 comes	 when	 the	 whole	 building	 of	 your	 knowledge
collapses;	then	you	are	left	in	a	vacuum.	That	is	the	moment	Lao	Tzu	would	say,
"Now	 you	 can	 sit	 by	my	 side	 --	 just	 sit	 in	 this	 vacuum."	And	 of	 course	 in	 a
vacuum	you	cannot	ask	any	question,	you	cannot	expect	any	answer.	If	you	can
ask,	 if	 you	 can	 expect,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 true	 vacuum	 yet.	 A	 true	 vacuum	means	 no
answer,	no	question;	nothing	is	left,	all	has	disappeared.	The	very	earth	beneath
your	feet	has	been	taken	away;	you	are	falling	into	a	bottomless	abyss.
These	were	 the	 people	 Lao	Tzu	 had	 gathered	 around	 himself.	 They	would	 sit
with	 him,	 they	 would	 walk	 with	 him,	 they	 would	 move	 from	 one	 village	 to
another	village.	But	he	was	not	 like	Buddha	or	Mahavira,	who	were	 teaching,
who	were	trying	to	convey	something	of	the	unconveyable.
His	whole	life	he	was	asked	again	and	again	by	the	kings,	by	the	emperors,	by
the	rich	people,	"Please	write	something	about	your	experience	for	 the	coming
generations.	Don't	take	it	away	with	you.	We	know	you	know,	whether	you	say	it
or	not.	We	know,	because	your	very	presence	is	so	pregnant	it	is	almost	tangible.
We	 can	 touch	 it,	we	 feel	 it,	we	 become	 flooded	with	 it.	We	 know	you	 know!
Please	write	something,	just	a	few	words	for	the	future	generations	to	know	that
a	man	like	Lao	Tzu	has	been	in	existence."	But	he	was	very	reluctant.	He	would
simply	laugh,	he	would	not	even	say	no.
Once	a	disciple	asked,	"At	least	just	to	be	polite	you	can	say	no!"
And	Lao	Tzu	said,	"To	say	no	means	you	are	on	the	way	to	saying	yes!	If	they
can	get	a	no	out	of	me,	sooner	or	later	they	will	get	a	yes	too,	because	yes	and	no
are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin."
And	he	is	right,	he	is	absolutely	right.	If	somebody	says	no	to	you,	that	means
there	is	hope	--	yes	IS	possible.	There	is	a	possibility;	however	far	away	it	may
be,	there	is	a	possibility.	The	no	can	turn	into	yes	because	yes	can	turn	into	no;
they	go	on	changing	into	each	other.	And	you	know	that	your	no	in	the	morning
becomes	yes	in	the	evening,	your	yes	in	the	evening	becomes	no	in	the	morning;
they	 are	 interchangeable.	 They	 are	 not	 so	 contradictory	 as	 they	 appear.
Somewhere	deep	down	they	are	joined.
Lao	Tzu	would	not	even	say	no,	he	would	only	laugh.	Now,	what	to	make	of	this
laugh?
You	cannot	make	anything	out	of	it.	He	is	neither	saying	yes	nor	saying	no;	he	is
not	falling	from	his	high	state.	But	at	the	last	moment	he	was	forced	to	write	--
this	 is	 the	 only	 document	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 humanity	 which	 has	 been
written	under	compulsion,	which	has	been	coerced	--	because	he	wanted	to	go	to
the	Himalayas.	The	Himalayas	divide	China	and	India;	in	one	sense	they	divide,
in	another	sense	they	join.
You	can	see	--	yes	and	no	are	not	very	different!
He	wanted	to	go	to	the	Himalayas.	His	disciples	asked,	"Why?"	He	had	become
very	old.
He	must	have	been	very	old	for	the	simple	reason	that....	The	story	is	beautiful;
true	or	not,	that	is	not	the	point.	I	am	a	lover	of	beauty;	I	don't	bother	whether	it
is	true	or	not!
Beauty	is	something	higher	than	truth.
Truth	is	logical,	beauty	is	aesthetic.
Truth	is	of	the	head,	beauty	is	something	deeper	--	of	the	heart.
I	love	the	story....
Lao	 Tzu	 lived	 in	 his	 mother's	 womb	 for	 eighty-two	 years!	 It	 is	 almost
impossible.	When	he	was	born	he	was	already	eighty-two	years	old,	with	a	long
beard,	 long	hair,	 and	 all	white.	He	was	 already	an	 ancient	man	 --	 and	 then	he
must	have	lived	at	least	eighty	years	more.	That	has	been	the	habit	in	the	East	of
all	 the	 enlightened	 people.	 Buddha	 lived	 eighty-two	 years,	 Mahavira	 lived
eighty-two	 years,	Krishna	 lived	 eighty-two	 years,	 but	 Lao	Tzu	 defeated	 all	 of
them.	He	 lived	 eighty-two	 years	 in	 the	mother's	 womb	 first!	 Then	 to	 balance
things	he	must	have	lived	at	least	eighty-two	years	outside	the	womb.	He	was	a
man	of	balance!
So	 by	 the	 time	 he	 started	 thinking	 about	 finding	 a	 right	 place	 to	 die,	 he	must
have	been	nearabout	one	hundred	and	sixty	years	old.	He	asked	his	friends	and
disciples,	"Now	give	me	permission.	I	would	like	to	go	to	a	faraway	virgin	peak
of	the	Himalayas	to	die	so	that	no	trace	of	me	is	left	behind,	not	even	footprints
on	 the	sands	of	 time.	 I	would	simply	 like	 to	disappear	 into	 the	wildness	of	 the
Himalayas.	Nobody	will	ever	know	where	I	died,	where	my	bones	are,	where	my
body	is,	where	my	grave	is.	I	just	want	to	melt	into	existence."
They	were	 sad,	 but	 they	knew	 their	master	 --	 that	when	he	 said	 something	he
meant	it.
Reluctantly,	they	gave	him	the	farewell.
When	 he	was	 leaving	 the	 country,	 the	 emperor	 of	 the	 country	 ordered	 all	 the
guards	at	all	the	posts:	"Lao	Tzu	is	not	to	be	allowed	to	leave	the	country	unless
he	writes	down	his	experience	in	short,	to	be	preserved	for	future	generations."
He	was	caught	at	 the	border,	and	 the	military	guards	wouldn't	allow	him	leave
until	he	wrote	something.	Under	such	compulsion,	he	sat	 in	one	of	 the	guards'
homes	 for	 three	 days.	 Day	 in,	 day	 out	 he	 wrote	 his	 small	 treatise,	 TAO	 TE
CHING.	 These	 are	 words	 from	 that	 treatise.	 And	 when	 the	 treatise	 was
complete,	he	left.
But	he	begins	the	treatise	with	a	very	strange	statement:	"TAO	cannot	be	spoken.
The	moment	it	is	spoken,	it	is	no	longer	true.	Now	you	can	read	whatsoever	I	am
writing,	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 true;	 it	 has	 already	 fallen.	 It	 has	 come	 down	 from	 its
profound	silence	into	the	noisy	world	of	words."
That's	what	he	calls	illness.	To	say	something	about	the	ultimate	is	a	fall	--	you
have	lost	the	wholeness.	To	be	whole	is	to	be	healthy.	That's	exactly	the	meaning
of	 healthy:	 to	 be	whole.	 Nothing	 is	missing;	 all	 parts	 are	 functioning	 in	 deep
harmony,	 in	 accord,	 in	 tune	 with	 each	 other.	 It	 is	 an	 organic	 unity.	 To	 be	 ill
means	some	parts	are	missing,	nonfunctioning.	The	accord	is	lost,	the	harmony
is	no	longer	there;	some	trouble	has	arisen,	the	balance	has	been	lost.	That's	the
meaning	of	illness.
NOT	KNOWING	THE	KNOWING....
So	 even	 if	 you	 say,	 "I	 don't	 know	 anything	 except	 one	 thing	 --	 that	 I	 know
nothing,"	you	have	already	fallen;	you	have	said	already	something.
There	is	a	Sufi	story....
Four	disciples	of	a	mystic	were	told	by	the	master,	"It	is	time	for	you	to	go	to	the
mountains	and	sit	in	silence	for	at	least	seven	days,	and	then	come	back."
They	went	with	the	vow	to	sit	there	for	seven	days,	in	absolute	silence.	After	just
a	few	minutes	the	first	said,	"I	wonder	whether	I	have	locked	my	house	or	not."
Another	said,	"You	fool!	We	have	come	here	to	be	silent	and	you	have	spoken!"
The	third	said,	"You	are	a	greater	fool!	What	has	it	to	do	with	you?	If	he	spoke,
at	least	YOU	could	have	kept	silent!"
The	fourth	said,	"Thank	God,	I	am	the	only	one	who	has	not	spoken	yet!"
There	is	an	irresistible	urge	to	say	when	you	experience.	You	want	to	share	it	--	it
is	uncontainable.	You	can	see	other	people	searching	for	it,	and	you	have	got	it.
It	is	as	if	you	are	standing	at	a	crossroads:	you	know	the	right	way,	and	people
are	searching	for	it;	how	can	you	remain	silent?	It	is	irresistible!	But	the	problem
is,	the	moment	you	say,
"This	 is	 the	 right	 road,"	 it	 becomes	wrong.	 Saying	 it	 is	 falsifying	 it.	 Truth	 is
infinite	and	words	are	very	finite.
Hence	Lao	Tzu	says:	The	best	is	not	to	say,	the	next	best	is	to	say.	The	best	is	to
be	whole,	 the	next	 best	 is	 to	 be	partially	 true.	But	 remember:	 because	 truth	 is
indivisible,	 you	 cannot	 be	partially	 true.	Hence	his	 insistence	 that	 the	moment
you	say	it,	it	becomes	false.
To	be	partially	 true	means	 to	be	 false,	because	 truth	 is	 indivisible.	But	 still	he
could	understand	the	need	of	the	person	who	has	experienced	to	convey	it,	and
the	need	of	others	who	are	in	search	of	it,	so	he	allowed	it.	He	says:	THE	ONE
WHO	SUFFERS	FROM	THIS	ILLNESS	IS	NOT	ILL.
...I	am	not	condemning	him,	I	am	not	saying	that	he	is	pathological.	All	that	I	am
saying	 is	 that	 he	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 total,	 he	 is	 now	 only	 a	 glimpse,	 a	 faraway
glimpse.	He	is	now	only	a	picture	of	the	sunset,	not	the	sunset	itself.	He	is	now
only	an	echo.	If	this	can	be	remembered,	then	even	the	echo	can	be	used	to	find
the	original	source.	Then	even	 the	picture	of	a	sunset	can	be	of	 immense	help.
But	people	are	such	fools:	they	worship	the	pictures	of	the	sunset,	they	forget	all
about	 the	 sunset.	 In	 fact,	 if	 you	 tell	 them,	 "This	 is	 not	 the	 sunset	 that	 you	 are
worshipping,	this	is	only	a	picture,"	they	will	be	angry.
Go	and	tell	the	Hindus,	"The	gods	that	you	are	worshipping	in	your	temples	are
not	real	gods.	These	are	only	pictures,	photographs,	and	that	too	not	true	to	the
original,	just	imaginary,	metaphorical!"	They	will	be	angry,	they	will	throw	you
out	 of	 their	 temple.	 Or	 to	 the	 Christians,	 or	 to	 the	 Mohammedans,	 or	 to	 the
Jainas...go	anywhere,	they	will	not	listen	to	you.
Go	to	a	Jaina	temple	and	you	will	find	twenty-four	statues	of	their	masters.	And
you	will	 be	 surprised	 --	 they	 all	 look	 alike,	 exactly	 alike.	 Even	 Jainas	 cannot
make	the	distinction!
To	be	able	to	make	the	distinction,	who	is	who,	they	have	made	small	symbols
underneath	the	statues.	So	they	can	tell	who	is	who	--	that	this	is	Mahavira	and
this	 is	 Parshvanath	 and	 this	 is	 Neminath	 --	 they	 just	 make	 small	 symbols;
otherwise	 the	 statues	 are	 exactly	 the	 same.	 These	 statues	 cannot	 be	 authentic;
they	 can	 only	 at	 the	 most	 be	 symbolic.	 Who	 has	 ever	 heard	 of	 twenty-four
persons	exactly	alike?	--	the	same	noses,	the	same	ears....
You	 will	 be	 puzzled:	 all	 their	 ears	 are	 touching	 their	 shoulders.	 The
earlobes...all!	It	may	have	been	that	one	person's	earlobes	may	have	touched,	but
now	it	has	become	absolutely	necessary	for	a	Jaina	TIRTHANKARA'S	earlobes
to	touch	the	shoulders;	otherwise	he	is	not	a	tirthankara.	And	you	can	find	some
absolutely	dumb,	dull,	stupid	person	whose	earlobes	are	touching	his	shoulders	-
-	just	a	donkey!	That	does	not	mean	that	he	has	become	a	tirthankara,	that	he	has
become	 a	 great	 enlightened	 master;	 otherwise	 all	 donkeys	 will	 become	 great
enlightened	masters!	This	is	simply	symbolic.
What	can	the	symbol	be?	The	Jaina	method	of	meditation	is	to	listen,	to	listen	so
absolutely	and	so	silently,	as	if	you	have	become	all	ears	--	that	is	the	symbol.	So
they	 have	 made	 big	 ears	 just	 to	 indicate	 their	 method	 of	 meditation.	 Their
method	 of	 meditation	 is	 listening:	 listening	 to	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 wind	 passing
through	the	pine	trees,	listening	to	the	birds,	just	listening	to	anything.	The	dog
barking	 or	 the	 call	 of	 a	 distant	 cuckoo...just	 listening,	 with	 no	 judgment,	 no
evaluation.	Jainas	say	that	if	a	person	can	listen	totally,	without	any	interference
of	 the	 mind,	 he	 can	 become	 enlightened	 --	 just	 by	 listening:	 nothing	 else	 is
needed.	To	show	this,	to	represent	it	in	the	statue,	they	have	made	big	ears.	But
people	 are	worshipping	 the	 statues.	 They	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 find	 out	where	 the
sunset	 is,	 they	have	forgotten	all	about	 the	sunset.	 It	 is	as	 if	you	have	seen	the
sunset	 through	 the	window.	You	 have	 forgotten	 about	 the	 sunset,	 and	 you	 are
worshipping	the	frame	of	the	window.	Hence,	Lao	Tzu	says	that	the	best	is	not	to
say	anything	about	the	truth,	about	your	experience.
Then	what	is	a	master	supposed	to	do?	He	can	say	how	he	achieved,	he	can	say
what	the	pitfalls	to	be	avoided	are,	he	can	help	you	to	refine	your	methods;	again
and	again	he	can	put	you	on	the	right	path,	he	can	stop	you	from	going	astray.
He	can	 tell	you	about	 all	 the	means	 that	 lead	 to	 the	end,	but	 about	 the	end	he
should	remain	absolutely	silent.
That's	what	I	am	doing	to	you:	about	the	end	I	am	absolutely	silent.	What	I	am
talking	 about	 is	 the	method	 --	 the	meditation,	 the	 prayer.	 These	 are	 the	ways.
When	you	have	arrived,	only	 then	will	you	know	what	 it	 is;	 it	 cannot	be	 said.
The	 moment	 you	 say	 it,	 something	 goes	 "ill"	 --	 something	 goes	 wrong,
something	goes	sour.
But	 still,	 Lao	 Tzu	 feels	 that	 sometimes	 the	 masters	 have	 spoken	 out	 of
compassion	 for	 those	who	 are	 still	 lost	 in	 darkness.	Hence	 he	 says:	 "The	 one
who	suffers	from	this	illness	is	not	ill."	He	himself	is	not	ill,	but	what	he	says	is
ill.	He	himself	is	whole,	but	his	statement	cannot	be	whole.
THE	WISE	IS	NOT	ILL
BECAUSE	HE	SUFFERS	FROM	THIS	ILLNESS	--
THAT'S	WHY	HE	IS	NOT	ILL.
A	strange	statement!	THE	WISE	IS	NOT	ILL	BECAUSE	HE	SUFFERS	FROM
THIS
ILLNESS	 --	 THAT'S	WHY	HE	 IS	 NOT	 ILL.	 This	 illness	 is	 worth	 suffering,
because	it	is	the	closest	point	to	perfect	health.	It	is	a	great	blessing!	Hence,	don't
be	misguided	by	the	word	"ill."	It	is	illness	if	you	compare	it	to	the	highest,	but	if
you	look	back	at	the	journey,	it	is	not	illness.	And	if	it	comes	out	of	compassion
--	and	it	does	come	out	of	compassion....
The	story	about	Buddha	is	that	when	he	became	enlightened,	for	seven	days	he
remained	silent.	He	remained	in	that	ultimate	wholeness,	health,	and	he	was	not
willing	to	come	down	from	there.	It	has	happened	to	everybody	who	has	become
enlightened;	hence	the	story	of	Buddha	is	very	representative.
But,	 the	 story	 says,	 the	 gods	 in	 heaven	 became	 very	much	 disturbed	 because
somebody	 becoming	 enlightened	 is	 such	 a	 rare	 phenomenon.	 Buddha	 was
hesitating	to	say	anything	about	it.	He	was	deciding,	coming	closer	and	closer	to
the	decision	that	 it	 is	better	 to	remain	silent.	But	before	he	came	to	a	decision,
the	 gods	 rushed	 from	 heaven,	 fell	 at	 his	 feet,	 and	 said,	 "Wait!	 Don't	 decide,
because	once	you	have	decided	then	nothing	can	be	done.	Just	listen	to	us	before
you	come	to	a	decision.	It	is	rare	that	a	man	becomes	enlightened	and	there	are
millions	 who	 would	 like	 your	 advice,	 your	 help.	 Don't	 be	 so	 hard!	 And	 you
yourself	have	suffered	--	don't	you	feel	anything	for	the	suffering	humanity?	Tell
them	how	YOU	arrived!"
Buddha	 said	 to	 them,	 "I	have	pondered	over	all	pros	and	cons,	 I	have	 thought
about	all	these	things.	My	own	reasoning	is	that	whatsoever	I	say	will	not	be	the
same	as	I	have	experienced,	and	that	is	betraying	the	truth.	Secondly,	I	am	ready
to	 betray	 it,	 because	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 lose	 anything	 by	 betraying	 it,	 but	 the
moment	 I	 say	 something,	 people	will	 understand	 something	 else	which	 I	 have
not	said	at	all.	The	first	loss	happens	when	I	say	something,	I	come	down	from
my	silence.	And	the	second	loss	--	which	is	far	greater
--	happens	when	people	hear	it,	because	they	start	coloring	it	according	to	their
ideas,	according	to	their	mind.
"The	 third	 loss,	 the	greatest,	happens	when	they	start	 telling	 it	 to	other	people.
And	then	it	goes	on	falling.	Soon	the	flower	of	the	sky	falls	into	the	mud	of	the
earth	 and	 is	 lost,	 trampled	 over	 by	 people.	 So	 what	 is	 the	 point?	 I	 have	 also
thought	 of	 their	 suffering,	 but	 then	 too	 my	 reasoning	 is:	 those	 who	 can
understand	me	will	 be	 able	 to	 find	 it	 by	 themselves.	 If	 they	 are	 so	 capable	 of
understanding	me,	it	won't	take	them	long	to	find	it	on	their	own,	so	why	bother?
Those	who	can	understand	me	will	find	it	sooner	or	later.	It	is	only	a	question	of
time,	and	time	does	not	matter	as	far	as	eternity	is	concerned.	And	telling	those
who	cannot	understand	me	is	not	right;	they	will	MISunderstand."
The	 gods	were	 at	 a	 loss;	 they	 could	 not	 find	 how	 to	 persuade	 this	man.	They
asked	for	some	 time	so	 they	could	go	 in	private	 to	discuss	 the	matter	amongst
themselves	and	find	a	way.	They	just	wanted	to	be	given	one	chance.
They	went	 into	 seclusion,	meditated,	 talked,	 discussed,	 and	 finally	 they	 came
with	 a	 solution.	They	brought	 a	 really	very	beautiful	 solution.	They	 said,	 "We
agree	with	you	 that	out	of	one	hundred	persons	 there	may	be	one	person	who
may	attain	it	by	himself	sooner	or	later,	just	as	you	have	attained.	And	we	agree
that	 out	 of	 one	 hundred,	 at	 least	 ninety-eight	 percent	 of	 people	 will
misunderstand	you,	but	they	don't	matter.	They	are	already	in	misunderstanding	-
-	what	more	misunderstanding	can	there	be?	So	you	will	not	be	harming	them.
So	two	things	are	certain:	you	will	not	be	helping	the	one	percent	who	is	going
to	attain	it	by	himself,	and	you	will	not	be	harming	the	ninety-eight	percent	who
are	anyway	confused	and	will	remain	confused	whether	you	speak	or	not.
"But	what	about	 the	 remaining	one	percent,	 the	borderline	case	who	 is	neither
here	 nor	 there,	 who	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 ninety-eight	 percent	 and	 does	 not
belong	to	the	one	percent	either	--	who	is	just	in	the	middle	of	both?	If	you	say
something,	he	may	be	helped;	if	you	don't	say	something,	he	may	not	be	helped
at	all	for	centuries	to	come.
Can't	you	feel	any	compassion	for	that	one	person?"
And	Buddha	 had	 to	 agree	with	 them	 that	 the	 one	 percent	 certainly	 had	 to	 be
considered:
"I	will	speak	for	that	one	person."
In	fact,	all	the	masters	have	been	speaking	for	that	one	percent.	They	have	been
taking	this	risk	of	coming	down	from	their	sunlit	peaks	into	the	dark	valleys	of
humanity	for	that	one	person.	The	message	of	the	enlightened	people	can	never
be	for	the	masses,	has	never	been	for	the	masses.	The	masses	are	always	against
it;	it	can	only	be	for	very	few	people.	But	even	those	very	few	people	are	enough
to	give	life,	beauty,	grandeur,	splendor.	They	are	the	salt	of	the	earth.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	IS	IT	SO	DIFFICULT	TO	RECOGNIZE	YOU?
Prem	Cordula,	 it	 is	 a	 simple	 phenomenon:	 you	 can	 recognize	 only	 that	which
comes	 within	 your	 experience.	 How	 can	 you	 recognize	 something	 which	 you
have	not	experienced?	What	I	am	saying	to	you	and	what	I	am	being	to	you	is
something	 utterly	 unknown	 to	 you	 --	 not	 only	 unknown,	 but	 much	 of	 it	 is
unknowable	 too.	 Recognition	 needs	 some	 experience	 within	 you	 to	 coincide
with	my	experience.
Those	 who	 are	 falling	 in	 tune	 with	 me,	 recognize	 me,	 and	 only	 they	 can
recognize;	 it	 is	 not	 for	 all.	 It	 is	 only	 for	 the	 disciples	 to	 have	 a	 glimpse	 of
recognition	 and	 it	 is	 only	 for	 the	 devotees	 to	 be	 absolutely	 certain	 of	 the
recognition.
But	 many	 of	 you	 have	 come	 here	 only	 as	 students	 searching	 for	 more
knowledge,	 and	 I	 am	 imparting	 being,	 not	 knowledge.	 You	 have	 come	 with
greed	in	your	heart.	Many	types	of	greed	are	there....
Just	the	other	day	I	received	a	letter	from	a	very	rich	Marwari	from	Orissa.	He
has	never	written	to	me	before;	this	is	the	first	time.	He	writes,	"I	recognize	you
as	the	greatest	incarnation	of	God.	This	is	the	time	for	you	to	prove	whether	you
are	really	a	god	or	not,	because	we	Marwaris"	--	Marwaris	are	the	Jews	of	India	-
-	"are	in	very	great	difficulty	in	Orissa."
In	Orissa,	Marwaris	are	being	thrown	out.	They	have	exploited	the	poor	people
for	 so	 long	 that	 it	 has	 come	 to	 a	 climax.	Now,	 suddenly,	 he	 remembers	me.	 I
have	never	heard	of	the	man;	he	has	never	written	to	me.	Now	he	writes	that	this
is	the	time	for	me	to	prove...!	"We	will	worship	you	forever	if	you	can	save	us
from	the	anger	of	the	masses."
They	are	being	burned,	killed,	looted.	Naturally	he	can	recognize	me.	But	this	is
not	recognition;	this	is	greed,	it	is	fear.
Just	one	day	before	that,	a	young	man	from	Delhi	has	written	another	letter:	"I
am	rich	enough,	but	I	don't	see	any	meaning	in	life.	I	am	so	afraid	of	committing
suicide	that	I	am	staying	in	a	hospital	permanently.	I	am	afraid	that	if	I	am	not
looked	after	continuously	by	doctors	and	nurses,	I	may	kill	myself	any	moment.
If	you	promise	to	save	me	then	I	am	ready	to	come	to	you.	I	am	ready	even	to
become	a	sannyasin!"
Now,	such	a	conditional	sannyas	is	not	possible.
Many	people	come	to	me	--	they	may	not	say	exactly	why	they	have	come,	but
there	 are	 deep	 motives.	 Then	 it	 will	 be	 very	 difficult	 for	 you	 to	 recognize,
because	I	am	not	here	to	fulfill	any	of	your	greed,	to	fulfill	any	of	your	desire,	to
fulfill	any	of	your	expectations.
I	can	share	my	bliss,	 I	can	share	my	truth,	 I	can	share	my	being,	but	very	few
people	 are	 longing	 for	 all	 those	 things;	 their	 longings	 are	 of	 a	 very	 ordinary
nature,	almost	animalistic.
"While	fishing	one	day,"	said	the	old	angler,	"I	ran	short	of	bait	and	did	not	know
what	to	do.	I	looked	around,	and	there	at	my	feet	I	noticed	a	snake	which	held	a
frog	in	his	mouth.	I	removed	the	frog	and	cut	it	up	for	bait,	feeling	very	elated
that	I	had	seen	the	snake	at	that	moment.
"I	did,	 however,	 feel	 somewhat	guilty	 at	 stealing	 the	poor	 reptile's	meal,	 so	 to
repay	him	for	my	supply	of	bait	I	poured	a	few	drops	of	whiskey	into	his	mouth.
My	 conscience	was	 relieved	when	 I	 saw	 the	 snake	 crawl	 away	 in	 a	 contented
mood,	and	I	went	back	to	my	fishing.
"Some	 time	had	passed	when	 I	 felt	 something	hitting	 against	my	 leg.	 Imagine
my	 surprise	 when,	 looking	 down,	 I	 saw	 the	 same	 snake,	 carrying	 three	more
frogs	in	his	mouth!"
Prem	Cordula,	you	ask:	"Why	is	it	so	difficult	to	recognize	you?"	You	come	with
a	 greedy	 heart	 --	 and	 then	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 recognize	 me.	 You	 come	 to	 see
something	 according	 to	 your	 own	 ideas	 --	 and	 I	 don't	 exist	 according	 to
anybody's	ideas.
I	am	simply	just	being	myself!
Hindus	 come	 to	 look	 for	 a	 Krishna	 --	 I	 am	 not.	 Jainas	 come	 to	 look	 for	 a
Mahavira	 --	 I	 am	not.	Christians	come	 to	 look	 for	a	Christ	 --	 I	 am	not.	 If	you
have	come	to	 look	for	somebody	else	 in	me,	you	will	not	be	able	 to	recognize
me,	because	I	am	simply	myself.	I	have	no	obligation	to	be	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha
or	a	Lao	Tzu.	If	Christ	is	free	to	be	himself,	he	need	not	be	me,	why	should	I	be
him?	There	is	no	need.	Such	expectations	create	a	barrier.
An	elephant	is	walking	through	a	forest	and	spies	a	naked	man.	He	looks	at	him
bewildered	and	asks,	"Tell	me,	how	do	you	breathe	through	that	short	thing?"
Just	expectations!	The	elephant	has	his	own	ideas....
A	sannyasin	was	 sitting	by	a	cliff,	 sobbing	uncontrollably.	A	passerby	 stopped
and	asked	what	the	matter	was.
"A	busload	of	politicians	just	plunged	over	this	cliff	to	certain	death!"	sobbed	the
swami.
"That	certainly	is	a	catastrophe,"	sympathized	the	stranger,	"but	I	did	not	 think
you	sannyasins	had	much	love	for	politicians!"
"That's	true!"	said	the	swami	as	he	doubled	up	with	a	fresh	wave	of	grief.	"The
fact	is,	five	of	the	seats	were	empty!"
You	will	 have	 to	drop	your	old	 ideas	 if	 you	want	 to	 recognize	me.	My	whole
approach	towards	life	is	different	from	anybody	who	has	preceded	me.	It	has	to
be	so.	Krishna	lived	on	this	earth	five	thousand	years	ago;	Buddha,	twenty-five
centuries	 ago;	 Jesus	 twenty	 centuries	 ago;	Mohammed	 fourteen	 centuries	 ago;
Kabir	and	Nanak	five	centuries	ago.	Since	then,	so	much	water	has	gone	down
the	Ganges!
Man	 has	 changed,	 the	 whole	 life	 pattern	 has	 changed.	 I	 am	 living	 in	 the
twentieth	century;	I	cannot	adjust	myself	to	anybody	five	thousand	years	old	--
that	is	impossible.
That	would	be	crippling	myself,	paralyzing	myself,	poisoning	myself.	I	have	to
be	now,	here!
But	you	are	all	conditioned.	Although	your	conditioning	has	not	given	you	any
joy,	it	has	not	given	you	any	ecstatic	lifestyle,	still	people	cling	to	the	familiar.
At	a	bar,	a	disheartened	drinker	complained	to	the	man	next	to	him	that	he	had
gone	to	the	tracks	for	a	whole	month	without	backing	a	winner.
"Why	don't	you	quit	betting?"	advised	the	other.
"What!"	 snapped	 the	gambler.	 "And	give	up	 twenty	years'	 experience	 in	horse
betting?"
Twenty	 years'	 experience!	 How	 can	 anybody	 give	 up	 so	 easily?	 And	 your
experience	 of	 religion	 is	 five	 thousand	 years	 old	 or	 even	more.	How	 can	 you
give	it	up?	But	unless	you	give	it	up,	you	cannot	see	me;	your	eyes	will	remain
covered.	That's	why	you	 see	very	 few	old	people	around	me.	Even	 the	people
who	are	old	and	around	me	are	 in	some	way	not	old,	 they	are	very	young	and
fresh.
Sephalie,	 one	 of	 my	 sannyasins	 who	 is	 near	 seventy,	 writes	 to	 me	 again	 and
again,	"I	am	very	puzzled.	I	feel	myself	so	young,	and	nobody	believes	me!"	Just
the	other	day	she	wrote,	"Not	even	your	sannyasins	believe	me!	They	try	to	help
me,	 thinking	 that	 I	 am	 an	 old	 woman.	 They	 are	 very	 good,	 but	 it	 hurts	 me
because	I	am	young!	 I	don't	 feel	old	age	at	all!	The	body	has	become	old,	but
they	don't	see	ME,	and	I	am	not	the	body!"	And	she	is	right.
Back	 in	Europe	she	was	creating	much	confusion	amongst	people	because	she
started	playing	with	small	children.	Her	family	and	her	friends	said,	"What	are
you	 doing?	 A	 seventy-year-old	 woman	 playing	 with	 small	 children,	 laughing,
giggling,	dancing	--	it	does	not	look	right!"
But	 she	 said,	 "I	 feel	 so	young!	 I	 feel	 just	 like	 a	 child!"	And	her	 experience	 is
right.	Her	feeling	is	coming	from	within	her	being.
So	even	the	people	around	me	who	are	old	are	not	old	in	the	ordinary	sense,	they
are	 all	 young.	 Actually,	 only	 young	 people	 have	 come	 to	 me.	 This	 has	 been
always	 so.	 The	 twelve	 apostles	 of	 Jesus	were	 all	 young	 people,	 younger	 than
Jesus.	The	people	who	surrounded	Gautam	Buddha	were	all	young	people.	The
people	who	lived	with	Lao	Tzu	were	very	young	people.	It	has	always	been	so
for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 old	mind	has	 so	many	 conditionings	 that	 unless
those	conditionings	are	fulfilled	he	cannot	see.	Only	somebody	who	is	a	fraud	is
going	to	fulfill	your	conditions.
No	original	man	is	going	to	fulfill	your	conditions	because	no	original	man	has
any	desire	 for	all	 the	 respectability	 that	you	can	give	 to	him.	He	 is	so	blissful;
what	 does	 he	 need	your	 respectability	 for?	Respectability	 is	 a	 substitute.	Only
miserable	people	hanker	for	respectability;	the	blissful	people	have	never	cared	a
bit	about	your	respectability.
I	am	perfectly	happy.	Famous,	notorious,	it	doesn't	matter.	It	makes	no	difference
to	me,	so	I	am	not	going	to	fulfill	any	of	your	expectations.	You	must	be	carrying
expectations	somewhere.
A	Jewish	father	and	his	son	go	together	to	a	Turkish	bath.
"Yuk!	Your	feet	are	so	dirty!"	says	the	father.
"But,	father,	your	feet	are	much	dirtier!"
"How	 can	 you	 compare?"	 says	 the	 angry	 father.	 "I	 am	 thirty	 years	 older	 than
you!"
The	old	mind	always	goes	on	bragging,	as	if	oldness	is	something	very	valuable.
Oldness	simply	means	you	have	been	accumulating	junk!	A	really	alive	person	is
always	young;	to	the	very	moment	of	death	he	is	young.
For	example,	I	know	Sephalie	--	when	she	dies	she	will	die	young	and	fresh,	as
fresh	as	the	freshly	opened	rosebud.	I	have	given	her	the	name	Sephalie	because
"sephali"	is	the	name	of	a	beautiful	flower.	She	will	die	like	fresh	dewdrops	in
the	early	morning	sun.
My	 people	 have	 to	 live	 freshly	 and	 die	 freshly.	 They	 have	 to	 remain
continuously	young.
The	only	way	to	remain	young	is	go	on	dying	to	the	past,	go	on	discarding	the
old,	go	on	dropping	all	your	accumulated	knowledge	so	you	are	always	in	a	state
of	not	knowing.
That	is	the	highest	according	to	Lao	Tzu,	and	according	to	me	also:	remaining	in
a	 state	 of	 not	 knowing.	 "Not	 even	 knowing	 that	 I	 know	 nothing"	 --	 that's	 the
highest,	 the	most	 beautiful	 space	 one	 can	 ever	 be	 in.	 And	 only	 then	 can	 you
recognize	me;	otherwise	there	is	no	way	to	recognize	me.
Prem	Cordula,	meditate,	become	silent,	so	that	you	can	feel	some	meeting,	some
merging	with	me,	so	that	you	can	taste	something	of	the	joy	that	I	have	brought
to	you.	It	is	a	pure	gift!	All	that	is	needed	on	your	part	is	a	little	receptivity.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	IS	THE	CONNECTION	BETWEEN	LAUGHTER	AND	SEX?
Anand	 Devopama,	 there	 is	 certainly	 a	 connection;	 the	 connection	 is	 simple.
Sexual	orgasms	and	laughter	happen	in	the	same	way;	their	process	is	similar.	In
sexual	orgasm	you	go	on	 reaching	a	climax	of	 tension.	You	are	coming	closer
and	 closer	 to	 burst	 forth,	 and	 then	 at	 the	 peak,	 suddenly,	 the	 orgasmic	 release
happens.	 After	 such	 a	 mounting	 tension,	 everything	 suddenly	 relaxes.	 The
contrast	between	the	mounting	tension	and	the	relaxation	is	so	vast	that	you	feel
as	if	you	have	fallen	into	a	calm,	quiet	ocean	--	a	deep	relaxation,	a	deep	let-go.
That's	why	nobody	has	ever	been	known	to	have	died	from	a	heart	attack	while
making	love.	This	is	strange,	because	love-making	is	an	arduous	exercise!	It	 is
great	yoga!	But	nobody	has	ever	died	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 it	brings	such
relaxation.	 In	 fact,	 cardiologists	 and	 heart	 specialists	 have	 now	 started
recommending	 sex	 as	 medicinal	 to	 the	 people	 who	 are	 suffering	 from	 heart
trouble.	Sex	can	be	of	immense	help	to	them;	it	relaxes	tensions,	and	when	the
tensions	are	gone,	your	heart	functions	more	naturally.
The	same	is	the	process	of	laughter:	it	also	builds	up	a	tension	in	you.	A	certain
story,	and	you	go	on	expecting	 that	 something	 is	going	 to	happen.	Then	when
something	 really	 happens	 it	 is	 so	 unexpected	 that	 it	 releases	 the	 tension.	 The
happening	is	not	logical	--
that	is	the	most	important	thing	to	understand	about	laughter.	The	happening	has
to	be	ridiculous,	it	has	to	be	absurd.	If	you	can	logically	conclude	it,	then	there
will	be	no	laughter.
While	you	are	listening	to	a	joke,	if	you	can	logically	conclude	what	is	going	to
happen,	and	if	it	actually	happens	the	way	you	concluded,	then	there	will	be	no
laughter	 because	 there	 will	 be	 no	 build	 up	 of	 tension	 in	 the	 first	 place;	 and
secondly,	 there	 will	 be	 no	 sudden	 change.	 These	 two	 things	 are	 needed:	 a
building	up	of	tension	so	you	become	more	and	more	narrowed,	more	and	more
tense,	and	then	suddenly	an	unexpected	turn	--
the	punch	line.	It	triggers	a	new	process;	the	whole	logic	falls	flat.	All	jokes	are
illogical,	and	because	they	are	illogical	they	bring	great	laughter	to	you.
In	one	other	 sense	 also	 sex	and	 laughter	 are	 joined	 together	deep	 in	 the	mind.
Your	 sex	 organs	 are	 only	 the	 outermost	 part	 of	 your	 sexuality;	 the	 sex	 is	 not
really	there,	the	sex	is	somewhere	in	the	brain	center.	So,	sooner	or	later	man	is
going	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 this	 old-style	 sexuality.	 It	 is	 really	 ridiculous!	 That's	 why
people	make	love	in	the	dark,	at	night,	under	the	blankets.	It	 is	such	an	absurd
activity	that	if	you	watch	yourself	making	love,	you	will	never	think	of	it	again!
So	people	hide;	they	close	their	doors,	they	lock	their	doors.	They	are	very	much
afraid	of	children	in	particular,	because	they	will	see	the	absurdity	immediately	-
-	"What	are	you	doing?	Daddy,	what	are	you	doing?	Have	you	gone	crazy?"	And
it	looks	crazy	--	it	is	like	an	epileptic	fit!
Sooner	or	later	it	is	going	to	be	changed,	because	now	science	has	found	that	the
real	center	is	in	the	brain,	not	in	the	sex	organs.	So	now	a	small	electrode	can	be
fitted	in	the	head,	and	you	need	not	know	about	it,	because	inside	the	skull	there
is	no	sensitivity	at	all;	anything	can	be	put	there.	Even	if	a	small	rock	is	put	there
you	will	not	know.	In	fact,	that's	how	many	people	are	--	they	are	carrying	rocks
inside,	 not	 knowing!	 So	 a	 small	 electrode	 can	 be	 put	 inside	 your	 brain,	 just
inserted	 inside	 your	 brain	 close	 to	 the	 sex	 center,	 and	 you	 can	 use	 a	 remote
control.	You	can	keep	 the	 remote	control	 in	your	pocket	so	 that	whenever	you
feel	like	having	an	orgasm,	you	just	push	it.	Just	a	little	push	on	the	button	will
trigger	the	sex	center	in	the	brain,	and	you	can	have	an	orgasm	anywhere!
Then	 you	 can	 discard	 this	 wife,	 this	 husband,	 this	 relationship,	 and	 all	 this
nonsense.	It	will	be	a	great	freedom!	In	fact,	it	is	the	only	way	humanity	will	be
liberated.	All	the	buddhas	have	failed;	they	could	not	liberate	you	from	sex.	Now
Delgado	 is	 the	 name	 of	 the	 latest	 person	 who	 is	 going	 to	 free	 you	 from	 all
sexuality.	He	has	freed	many	white	rats!	Sometimes	I	wonder	why	they	never	try
black	 rats.	Maybe	 they	 think	 that	 they	 are	 Indians	 and	may	 not	 like	 the	 idea
because	they	are	religious	people,	spiritual.	They	always	try	white	rats!
But	you	will	be	surprised	to	know	--	and	it	is	good	to	remember	--	that	whenever
he	 tried	 with	 rats,	 a	 very	 strange	 thing	 happened.	 That's	 what	 prevented	 him
from	making	it	a	device	on	the	market	available	to	anybody	wanting	to	purchase
it.	The	 thing	 that	 stopped	him	was	 that	when	he	 fixed	 the	 electrode	 inside	 the
head	of	the	white	rat	and	showed	him	the	remote	control	button,	the	rat	pushed
the	switch	in	front	of	him	and	went	through	a	beautiful	spasm,	a	total	orgasmic
joy.	And	then	Delgado	watched....
The	 rat	 looked	all	 around,	 and	 seeing	 that	nobody	was	 looking,	he	pushed	 the
button,	and	went	through	it	again.	You	will	be	surprised:	in	one	hour,	he	pushed
the	button	six	thousand	times	--	till	he	died!	He	forgot	all	about	food,	forgot	all
about	everything.
Beautiful	 damsels	 were	 passing	 by,	 and	 he	 didn't	 even	 care	 about	 all	 those
beautiful	girls	after	whom	he	had	been	going	crazy;	there	was	no	need	now.	No
woman	can	give	a	man	such	a	total	orgasm,	and	no	man	can	give	a	woman	such
a	 total	orgasm,	because	 the	sexual	organs	are	far	away	from	the	center.	By	the
time	 the	message	 reaches	 to	 the	center,	 it	 is	 already	very,	very	diluted.	Hence,
ninety-seven	 percent	 of	 women	 never	 achieve	 orgasmic	 joy.	 And	 those	 are
Western	statistics.	Ninety-seven	percent	in	America	--	what	to	say	about	India?	I
don't	 think	 I	 have	 ever	 come	 across	 a	 single	 woman	 who	 has	 said	 that	 she
achieves	orgasmic	joy.	She	cannot	--	the	culture	does	not	allow	it.	She	has	to	lie
down	 almost	 dead.	 She	 simply	 suffers	 the	whole	 foolishness	 of	 the	man,	 and
deep	down	she	thinks	that	this	man	is	a	sinner	dragging	her	into	hell.	She	is	not
interested	 at	 all	 because	 she	 knows	 nothing	 about	 orgasmic	 joy.	 And	 her
orgasmic	joy	is	far	more	profound	than	man's.	Her	whole	body	is	erotic;	man's
whole	body	is	not	erotic.	He	is	only	partially	erotic,	locally	erotic.
These	centers	of	sex	and	laughter	are	very	close	in	the	brain,	so	sometimes	they
can	overlap.	So	when	you	are	making	love,	if	you	really	allow	it,	the	woman	will
start	giggling.	It	tickles,	because	the	center	is	very	close!	She	may	not	giggle	just
out	of	politeness,	because	the	man	may	feel	offended	--	but	the	centers	are	very
close	 together,	 and	 sometimes	when	 you	 are	 really	 in	 deep	 laughter	 you	may
have	the	same	orgasmic	joy	as	you	have	in	sex.
It	 is	not	a	coincidence	that	many	beautiful	 jokes	are	sexual.	The	centers	are	so
close...what	can	I	do?
The	wealthy	woman	woke	 up,	 looked	 around	 her	 bedroom,	 then	 rang	 for	 her
Chinese	houseboy,	Fu	Ling.
She	asked	him	how	she	got	home	the	night	before,	and	he	said,	"I	bring	missy
home."
Then	she	asked	him	how	she	got	undressed.	Fu	Ling	said,	"I	undress	missy."
She	asked	then	how	she	got	into	bed,	and	he	said,	"I	put	missy	to	bed."
Whereupon	she	said,	"God,	I	must	have	been	tight!"
Fu	Ling	replied,	"First	time,	yes,	missy!	Second	time...no!"
Makowski,	the	agent,	called	his	friend	Lyssky,	the	producer	of	striptease	shows.
"Lyssky,"	he	 shouted,	 "I've	got	 a	girl	 for	you	 that	 is	gonna	make	a	 fortune	 for
both	of	us.
She	is	incredible	--	gotta	a	pair	of	lungs	that	will	knock	your	eyes	out!	Listen	to
these	statistics:	hips	--	forty;	waist	--	twenty-seven;	chest	--	ninety-nine!"
"Incredible!"	said	Lyssky.	"What	kind	of	act	does	she	do?"
"Act?	What	act?!	She	just	crawls	out	and	tries	to	stand	up!"
The	 newlyweds	 arrived	 at	 their	 honeymoon	 hotel.	 The	 excited	 groom,	 quite
pleased	 with	 his	 reputation	 as	 a	 lover,	 and	 eager	 to	 thrill	 his	 bride	 with	 his
expertise,	 quickly	 threw	 her	 upon	 the	 bed	 and	 performed	 with	 the	 skill	 of	 a
champion	sexual	athlete.
When	it	was	over	he	whispered	to	his	bride,	"Ah	yes,	my	dear,	I	could	tell	how
pleased	you	were	--	I	noticed	your	toes	curling	up	in	ecstasy.	I	promise	you	I	will
always	bring	you	such	joy!"
She	 whispered	 in	 reply,	 "Perhaps	 next	 time,	 Romeo,	 you	 could	 remove	 my
pantyhose	first!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	From	Italy	to	Nirvana
7	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011070
ShortTitle:
COME12
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	and	Q4	on	video
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 FELT	 SO	MUCH	 LOVE	 POURING	 FROM	YOU	WHEN	 I	 COULD	NOT
GET	THE
MICROPHONE	 TO	 WORK	 THE	 OTHER	 DAY.	 WITH	 MY	 HANDS
SHAKING,	AND
MY	 HEART	 THUMPING,	 I	 KNEW	 I	 HAD	 TO	 DO	 SOMETHING	 --	 YET
WITH
YOUR	 BIG,	 BROWN	 EYES	 SMILING	 AT	ME,	 I	 JUST	WANTED	 TO	 SIT
THERE
AND	MELT	INTO	YOU.	IT	WAS	AN	EXQUISITE	TENSION.
Anand	Prateek,	 that's	 exactly	what	 I	was	 telling	you	 to	do.	Sit	 silently	 and	do
nothing	--
and	 the	 microphone	 starts	 working	 by	 itself!	 But	 you	 wouldn't	 listen;	 you
continued	doing	something	or	other	--	and	that	was	creating	the	whole	mess!	But
it	is	natural,	it	happens.
One	day	my	Rolls	didn't	start,	and	I	was	telling	Heeren	again	and	again,	"Wait	a
minute!"
But	 he	wouldn't	 wait,	 he	went	 on	 turning	 the	 ignition.	 Just	 one	minute	 I	 was
telling	 him	 to	 wait,	 and	 the	 moment	 I	 left	 in	 the	 other	 car,	 exactly	 after	 one
minute	it	started.	Then	he	realized	that	there	are	some	times	when	if	you	don't	do
anything,	things	settle	on	their	own	accord.	But	it	is	difficult....
A	man	goes	to	a	cocktail	party.	When	the	waiter	brings	round	the	salmon	rolls,
the	lady	standing	next	to	him	bends	over	to	pick	one	up	and	loses	her	glass	eye
amongst	 the	 hors	 d'oeuvres.	 Before	 she	 can	 do	 anything,	 the	man	 picks	 up	 a
salmon	roll	containing	the	glass	eye	and	eats	it.
A	week	 later	 he	 finds	 himself	 suffering	 from	 severe	 constipation.	The	 doctors
cannot	seem	to	cure	it	so	they	decide	to	get	him	into	the	operating	theater	to	stick
a	tube	inside	him	and	see	what	the	problem	is.
The	doctor	takes	one	look	down	the	tube,	looks	up	at	the	patient	and	says,	"You
really	don't	trust	me,	do	you?"
And	moreover,	Prateek,	what	was	the	hurry?	We	were	all	enjoying!	It	was	such	a
beautiful	 joke	 that	 without	 a	 single	 punchline	 to	 it	 people	 were	 bursting	 in
laughter.	 I	 have	 received	many	 letters:	 "What	 happened	 that	 day?	 Even	when
you	are	telling	a	beautiful	joke,	the	laughter	never	goes	so	deep	and	so	total.	But
that	 day	 neither	 were	 you	 telling	 a	 joke,	 nor	 had	 we	 heard	 anything,	 but	 the
laughter	was	happening!"
Recently	 some	 tapes	 other	 than	 Watergate	 have	 been	 discovered	 by
archaeologists,	and	they	shed	light	on	Daniel	in	the	lion's	den.
You	must	know	the	old	story	of	Saint	Daniel	who	was	thrown	into	a	den	of	lions
because	he	refused	to	betray	his	faith.	He	came	out	of	the	den	unharmed.	It	was
thought	 to	 be	 a	 great	miracle.	 But	 this	 recent	 discovery	 by	 the	 archaeologists
says	something	else.	 It	says,	 the	 tapes	reveal,	 that	at	 the	precise	moment	when
the	 lion	was	going	 to	eat	Daniel,	Daniel	quickly	grabbed	one	of	 the	 lion's	ears
and	 whispered	 into	 it,	 "Don't	 eat	 me!	 Remember,	 after	 dinner	 come	 the
speeches!"
So	 there	was	 no	 hurry	 --	 only	 a	 speech	was	 going	 to	 come	 after.	 Even	 if	 the
microphone	was	not	going	to	work,	there	was	no	harm	at	all.	We	would	have	sat,
enjoyed,	laughed	and	said	goodbye	to	each	other!
Learn	to	do	nothing....
"What	are	you	doing	here?"	asks	one	mouse	to	his	friend.
"Nothing	really,	just	sitting	in	the	sun."
"Ah!"	says	the	first	mouse.	"I	guess	that's	what	I	am	doing	too!"
And	that's	what	all	these	orange	people	are	here	to	do	--	nothing.
Prateek,	you	missed	one	opportunity.	But	next	 time,	remember,	 imitation	won't
do!	Just	because	I	am	telling	you,	"Do	nothing,"	it	won't	help	--	you	have	to	be
original.	But	once	it	is	said	and	if	you	follow	it,	the	microphone	is	not	going	to
work	at	all.	That	opportunity	is	lost,	at	least	for	this	life!
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
THE	WORLD	SEEMS	TO	BE	GETTING	MORE	AND	MORE	CRAZY	FROM
DAY
TO	DAY.	NOBODY	KNOWS	WHAT	IS	GOING	ON	AND	EVERYTHING	IS
UPSIDE
DOWN	AND	CONFUSED.	THIS	IS	WHAT	IS	TOLD	IN	THE	NEWSPAPERS.
IS	IT
REAL?	 AND	 IF	 SO,	 IS	 THERE	 ANY	 INTRINSIC	 BALANCE	 IN	 LIFE
WHICH	IS
KEEPING	EVERYTHING	STABLE?
Buddhaprem,	the	world	is	the	same;	it	has	always	been	the	same	--	upside	down,
crazy,	insane.	In	fact,	only	one	thing	new	has	happened	in	the	world,	and	that	is
the	 awareness	 that	we	ARE	crazy,	 that	we	 are	upside	down,	 that	 something	 is
basically	wrong	with	us.
And	this	 is	a	great	blessing	--	 this	awareness.	Of	course	it	 is	only	a	beginning,
just	the	abc	of	a	long	process,	just	a	seed,	but	immensely	pregnant.
The	world	was	never	 so	 aware	of	 its	 insane	ways	 as	 it	 is	 today.	 It	 has	 always
been	the	same.	In	three	thousand	years	man	has	fought	five	thousand	wars.	Can
you	say	 this	humanity	 is	 sane?	One	cannot	 remember	a	 time	 in	human	history
when	people	were	not	destroying	each	other	either	in	the	name	of	religion	or	in
the	name	of	God	or	even	in	the	name	of	peace,	humanity,	universal	brotherhood.
Great	words	hiding	ugly	realities!
Christians	 have	 been	 killing	Mohammedans,	Mohammedans	 have	 been	 killing
Christians,	Mohammedans	have	been	killing	Hindus,	Hindus	have	been	killing
Mohammedans.
Political	 ideologies,	 religious	 ideologies,	 philosophical	 ideologies	 are	 just
facades	for	murder	--	to	murder	in	a	justified	way.
And	all	these	religions	were	promising	the	people,	"If	you	die	in	a	religious	war,
your	heaven	is	absolutely	certain.	Killing	in	war	is	not	sin;	being	killed	in	war	is
a	great	virtue."	This	 is	 sheer	 stupidity!	But	 ten	 thousand	years	of	 conditioning
has	seeped	deep	into	the	blood,	into	the	bones,	in	the	very	marrow	of	humanity.
Each	religion,	each	country,	each	race	was	claiming,	"We	are	the	chosen	people
of	God.
We	are	the	highest;	everyone	is	lower	than	us."	This	is	insanity,	and	everybody
has	suffered	because	of	it.	Jews	have	suffered	immensely	for	one	single	folly	that
they	committed:	the	idea	that	"We	are	the	chosen	people	of	God."	Once	you	have
the	idea	that	you	are	the	chosen	people	of	God,	then	you	cannot	be	forgiven	by
others	because	they	are	also	the	chosen	people	of	God,	and	how	to	decide	it?	No
argument	 can	 be	 conclusive,	 and	 nobody	 knows	 where	 God	 is	 hiding	 so	 you
cannot	ask	him	either;	he	cannot	be	brought	 in	 the	court	 to	be	a	witness.	Then
only	 the	 sword	 is	 going	 to	 decide.	Whosoever	 is	mighty	 is	 going	 to	 be	 right.
Might	has	been	right.
Jews	really	suffered	for	centuries,	but	the	suffering	has	not	changed	them.	In	fact
it	has	 strengthened	 the	 idea	 that	 they	are	 the	chosen	people	of	God.	The	 same
people	who	tell	them,	"You	are	the	chosen	people,"	also	tell	them	that	the	chosen
people	have	to	go	through	many	tests,	many	fires	to	prove	their	mettle.
I	have	heard	about	an	old	rabbi	--	he	must	have	been	a	very	sane	man	--	praying
to	God.
He	was	 praying	 for	 years	 and	 years	 and	 never	 asking	 for	 anything	 --	 and	 you
know,	prayer	is	a	kind	of	nagging:	you	go	on	nagging	God	every	day,	morning,
afternoon,	evening,	night,	five	times	every	day.	God	must	be	getting	tired,	utterly
bored....
And	the	rabbi	was	not	asking	for	anything;	otherwise	there	was	a	way	out.	If	he
had	 been	 asking	 for	 something	 it	would	 have	 been	 given	 and	 the	 rabbi	would
have	been	told,	"Get	lost!"	But	he	was	not	asking	for	anything,	just	praying.
Finally	God	asked	him,	"Why	do	you	go	on	torturing	me?	What	do	you	want?"
And	 the	old	 rabbi	 said,	 "Just	 one	 thing.	 Is	 it	 not	 time	 for	you	 to	 choose	 some
other	 people?	 Please,	 make	 some	 other	 people	 your	 chosen	 people.	 We	 have
suffered	enough!"
But	this	is	not	only	so	with	the	Christians,	Jews,	Mohammedans	and	Hindus;	it	is
exactly	the	same	with	all	the	people	that	have	existed	up	to	now.	The	racial	ego,
the	religious	ego,	the	spiritual	ego	is	far	more	dangerous	than	the	individual	ego,
because	the	individual	ego	is	gross.	You	can	see	it	--	everybody	can	see	it,	it	is	so
visible	on	the	surface.	But	when	the	ego	becomes	racial	--	"Hinduism	is	great"	--
you	 don't	 think	 you	 are	 claiming	 anything	 for	 yourself.	 Indirectly	 you	 are
claiming,	"I	am	great	because	I	am	a	Hindu,	and	Hinduism	is	great."	This	is	an
indirect	 way,	 a	 subtle,	 cunning	 way:	 "I	 am	 great	 because	 I	 am	 a	 Japanese,
because	Japanese	are	the	direct	descendants	of	the	sun	God";	or,	"I	am	a	Chinese
and	the	Chinese	are	the	most	civilized	people,	the	most	cultured."
When	 the	Westerners	 reached	China	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 looking	at	 the	Chinese,
they	laughed.	They	looked	more	like	caricatures;	cartoons	rather	than	men	--	just
four	or	 five	hairs	 sticking	out	of	 your	 face	 and	 that's	 your	whole	beard!	What
kind	of	people	are	these?	The	first	Europeans	wrote	in	their	diaries,	"It	seems	we
have	discovered	the	missing	link	between	the	monkeys	and	man."
And	what	were	the	Chinese	writing	in	their	journals?	Even	the	emperor	of	China
was	very	much	 interested	 in	seeing	 the	Europeans	because	he	had	heard	many
stories	about	them.	They	were	invited	to	his	court,	not	because	he	respected	the
Europeans,	but	just	to	see	what	kind	of	people	these	were.	Never	before...!	And
he	 could	 not	 contain	 his	 laughter;	 he	 started	 laughing	 when	 he	 saw	 the
Europeans.
The	Europeans	were	very	much	embarrassed:	"Why	is	he	laughing?"	They	were
told,
"That	 is	 his	way	of	 appreciating.	He	 always	 laughs,	 enjoys;	 that	 is	 his	way	of
welcoming	the	guests."	But	 the	reality	was	 that	he	could	not	believe	 that	 these
are	human	beings!	He	asked	his	people,	"Have	you	brought	them	from	African
jungles?	They	look	like	monkeys!"
That's	how	the	ego	functions:	the	other	is	always	reduced	to	the	lowest	possible;
and	compared	to	the	other,	one	raises	oneself	higher.
You	 say,	 Buddhaprem,	 "The	 world	 seems	 to	 be	 getting	more	 and	more	 crazy
from	day	to	day."	That	is	not	right;	it	has	always	been	so.	Only	one	thing	new	is
happening,	and	that	is	a	blessing,	not	a	curse	at	all.	For	the	first	time	in	the	whole
history	 of	 humanity,	 a	 few	 people	 are	 becoming	 aware	 that	 the	way	we	 have
existed	up	to	now	is	somehow	wrong;	something	basically	is	missing	in	our	very
foundation.	 There	 is	 something	 which	 does	 not	 allow	 us	 to	 grow	 into	 sane
human	beings.	In	our	very	conditioning	are	the	seeds	of	insanity.
Every	child	 is	born	sane,	and	then,	slowly	slowly,	we	civilize	him	--	we	call	 it
the	process	of	civilization.	We	prepare	him	to	become	part	of	the	great	culture,
the	great	church,	the	great	state	to	which	we	belong.	Our	whole	politics	is	stupid,
and	then	HE	becomes	stupid.
Our	whole	 education	 is	 ugly.	Our	 politics	means	 nothing	 but	 ambition,	 naked
ambition	--
ambition	 for	 power.	And	 only	 the	 lowest	 kind	 of	 people	 become	 interested	 in
power.
Only	 the	 people	 who	 are	 suffering	 from	 a	 deep	 inferiority	 complex	 become
politicians.
They	want	 to	 prove	 that	 they	 are	 not	 inferior;	 they	want	 to	 prove	 it	 to	 others,
they	want	to	prove	to	themselves	that	they	are	not	inferior,	they	are	superior.
But	what	is	the	need	to	prove	it	if	you	are	superior?	The	superior	man	does	not
try	to	prove	anything,	he	is	so	at	ease	with	his	superiority.	That's	what	Lao	Tzu
says:	The	superior	man	is	not	even	conscious	of	his	superiority;	there	is	no	need
at	all.	 It	 is	only	 the	 ill	person	who	starts	 thinking	of	health;	 the	healthy	person
never	 thinks	 about	 health.	 The	 healthy	 person	 is	 not	 self-conscious	 about	 his
health;	 only	 the	 sick,	 only	 the	 ill.	 The	 beautiful	 person,	 the	 really	 beautiful
person	is	not	self-conscious	about	his	or	her	beauty.
It	is	only	the	ugly	person	who	is	constantly	worried	and	making	every	effort	to
prove	that	it	is	not	so.
In	fact,	in	proving	to	others	that	"I	am	not	inferior,	I	am	not	ugly,"	he	is	trying	to
prove	it	to	himself.	The	others	function	as	a	mirror.	If	the	others	can	say,	"Yes,
you	are	great...."
But	they	will	say	it	only	when	you	are	powerful,	when	you	are	rich;	otherwise
they	 are	 not	 going	 to	 say	 anything.	Who	 is	 interested	 in	 your	 ego?	 They	 are
interested	in	THEIR
egos,	but	reluctantly,	when	you	have	power	to	destroy,	they	have	to	accept.
Adolf	Hitler	was	mad,	but	nobody	in	Germany	dared	to	say	it.	Many	felt	that	he
was	mad,	but	the	moment	he	was	defeated	and	committed	suicide,	many	people
started	writing	 that	 they	 had	 always	 felt	 it.	 Even	 his	 own	 physicians	who	 had
never	dared	to	tell	the	person	himself	--	at	least	THEY	were	supposed	to	say	the
truth,	they	were	the	physicians	--	they	had	not	said	that	he	was	sick,	badly	sick,
and	not	only	physiologically	but	psychologically	too.
He	suffered	from	many	nightmares,	he	was	constantly	afraid	of	being	killed.	He
was	obsessed	with	 the	 idea	 that	he	was	going	 to	be	killed,	 so	much	so	 that	he
never	got	married.	He	got	married	only	when	he	had	decided	to	commit	suicide,
just	three	hours	before.	To	avoid	having	a	woman	in	the	same	room,	he	never	got
married	--	because	who	knows,	the	woman	may	be	a	spy,	an	enemy,	and	while
he	is	asleep	she	may	kill	him,	poison	him.	He	never	trusted	even	the	woman	he
pretended	 to	 love.	 He	 had	 no	 friends,	 because	 to	 be	 friendly	 with	 someone
means	to	trust,	and	he	was	so	doubtful.
The	politicians	are	insane,	but	we	teach	our	children	to	be	politicians.	We	teach
our	children	the	same	culture	that	has	tortured	us,	the	same	values	that	have	been
heavy	on	us,	that	have	only	proved	to	be	subtle	chains,	imprisonment.	But	we	go
on	conditioning	our	children.	The	same	education	that	has	destroyed	our	grace,
our	innocence	--	we	go	on	stuffing	the	same	knowledge	into	our	children's	heads.
And	we	go	on	lying	to	our	children	as	our	parents	lied	to	us.
And	this	has	been	going	on	and	on	for	centuries.	How	can	humanity	be	healthy,
wholesome,	 relaxed?	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 crazy.	 Just	 look	 what	 lies	 you	 go	 on
telling	your	children.
A	 little	 boy	 rushed	 into	 his	 mother's	 room	 and	 said,	 "Mommy,	 I	 had	 always
wanted	to	ask	one	question,	but	today	it	is	very	urgent	--	I	want	the	answer	right
now."
The	mother	was	changing	her	clothes,	getting	ready	to	go	out,	and	the	son	asked,
"What	are	these	two	things	on	your	chest?"
The	 mother	 felt	 a	 little	 embarrassed:	 How	 to	 explain	 to	 the	 child	 about	 the
breasts?
Now,	it	is	a	simple	thing	to	explain,	and	children	are	very	understanding.	It	could
easily	 have	 been	 explained	 that	 they	 are	meant	 for	 small	 children	 to	 get	 their
nourishment,	 and	 the	 thing	 would	 have	 been	 finished	 then	 and	 there.	 But	 we
have	become	accustomed	to	such	lies	--	and	the	mother	immediately	invented	a
lie.
She	said,	"These	are	balloons.	When	a	woman	dies,	God	puffs	up	these	balloons.
They	become	bigger	 and	 bigger	 and	 bigger,	 and	 then	 the	woman's	 body	 starts
rising	towards	heaven."
The	child	said,	"Now	I	know	what	is	happening."
The	mother	said,	"What	is	happening?"
He	said,	"Our	maid	servant	is	dying,	but	poor	daddy	is	trying	hard	to	prevent	her.
He	is	lying	on	top	of	the	servant,	holding	her	down,	sucking	her	balloons	to	pull
the	air	out,	and	the	maid	servant	is	saying,	`God,	I	am	coming!'"
Now,	 these	 stupid	 lies	 --	 and	 you	 think	 humanity	 is	 going	 to	 be	 sane?	 It	 has
always	been	insane.	It	has	always	remained	upside	down	and	confused,	because
you	have	been	brought	up	on	lies.
But	one	 thing	good	is	happening	 today:	at	 least	a	few	intelligent	young	people
are	becoming	aware	 that	our	whole	past	has	been	wrong	and	it	needs	a	radical
change.	 "We	 need	 a	 discontinuity	 from	 our	 past.	We	want	 to	 start	 afresh,	 we
NEED	to	start	afresh.	The	whole	past	has	been	an	experiment	in	utter	futility!"
Buddhaprem,	 once	we	 accept	 the	 truth	 as	 it	 is,	man	 can	 become	 sane.	Man	 is
born	sane;	WE	drive	him	crazy.	Once	we	accept	that	there	are	no	nations	and	no
races,	man	will	 become	very	 calm	and	quiet.	All	 this	 continuous	violence	 and
aggression	will	disappear.
If	 we	 accept	 man's	 body,	 its	 sexuality,	 naturally,	 then	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupidities
preached	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion	 will	 evaporate.	 Ninety-nine	 percent	 of
psychological	diseases	exist	because	of	man's	sexual	repression.
We	have	to	make	man	free	of	his	past.	That's	my	whole	work	here:	to	help	you	to
get	 rid	of	 the	past.	Whatsoever	 the	 society	has	done	 to	you	has	 to	be	undone.
Your	 consciousness	 has	 to	 be	 cleaned,	 emptied	 so	 that	 you	 can	 become	 like	 a
pure	mirror	reflecting	reality.	To	be	able	to	reflect	reality	is	to	know	God.	God	is
just	another	name	for	 reality:	 that	which	 is.	And	a	man	 is	 really	sane	when	he
knows	the	truth.
Truth	brings	liberation,	truth	brings	sanity.
Truth	brings	intelligence,	truth	brings	innocence.
Truth	brings	bliss,	truth	brings	celebration.
We	have	to	change	this	whole	earth	into	a	tremendous	festival,	and	it	is	possible
because	man	brings	all	that	is	needed	to	transform	this	earth	into	a	paradise.
The	third	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
IS	IT	TRUE	THAT	YOU	ARE	REALLY	AN	ITALIAN?
Antar	Vittorio,	not	now,	but	I	must	have	been	in	some	of	my	past	lives.	One	has
to	pass	through	all	kinds	of	things;	one	has	to	be	an	Italian	too.	Without	being	an
Italian	 you	 cannot	 become	 enlightened	 --	 that	 much	 is	 absolutely	 certain.	 If
somebody	becomes	 enlightened	without	 being	 an	 Italian	he	will	 have	 to	 come
back;	he	will	relapse	from	his	enlightenment.	Hence	it	is	a	must	to	pass	through.
To	be	an	Italian	is	 just	 the	opposite	of	being	enlightened.	Have	you	ever	heard
about	 any	 Italian	 becoming	 enlightened?	 But	 it	 helps	 --	 to	 touch	 the	 opposite
pole	 is	 very	 necessary;	 only	 then	 the	 journey	 begins	 towards	 the	 source.	 You
have	gone	as	much	astray	as	you	could,	then	the	prodigal	sons	return.	You	have
to	come	back	--	there	is	nowhere	else	to	go.	Once	you	are	an	Italian,	where	else
can	you	go?	What	else	can	you	do?	You	have	reached	the	dead	end	of	the	road.
So	it	is	good	to	be	an	Italian	--	the	sooner	it	happens	the	better!
To	be	an	Italian	is	to	be	really	upside	down,	and	not	half-heartedly!	I	must	have
been	 an	 Italian;	 otherwise	 whatsoever	 I	 am	 now	 today	 would	 not	 have	 been
possible.	And	 I	 can	 say	 the	 same	about	Gautama	 the	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	 Jesus,
Bahauddin:	all	 these	people	must	have	been	Italian	 in	some	of	 their	 lives!	You
cannot	bypass	being	an	Italian.	If	you	bypass,	you	are	bypassing	it	at	your	own
risk;	you	will	 have	 to	 come	back.	The	 Italian	experience	 is	 something	nobody
can	afford	to	miss.
Why	is	there	such	a	low	suicide	rate	among	Italians?
It's	pretty	hard	to	kill	yourself	jumping	out	of	a	basement	window!
A	German,	a	Frenchman	and	an	Italian	were	captured	during	 the	second	world
war	and	brought	to	a	prison	camp.
"How	many	pairs	of	underwear	do	you	need?"	asked	the	quartermaster	sergeant.
"Seven,"	said	the	German;	"a	pair	for	each	day	of	the	week."
"Four,"	said	the	Frenchman;	"one	for	each	week	in	the	month."
"And	how	about	you,	Luigi?"	asked	the	sergeant.	"How	many	pairs	of	underwear
do	YOU	need?"
"Twelve,"	replied	the	Italian.
"What	the	hell	do	you	need	twelve	for?"
"One-a	for	January,	one-a	for	February,	one-a...."
Luigi	 met	 his	 best	 friend	 Giancarlo	 in	 the	 street	 one	 day.	 "Hello,	 Giancarlo,
what-a	you	got-a	inna	your	coat?"
"Well-a,"	 said	 Giancarlo,	 "you	 know-a	 that	 fascist	 bastard	 Francesco?	Well-a,
every	time	I	come-a	to	town,	he	says-a	to	me,	`Hey,	Giancarlo,	how	you	doing
today-a?'	Then	he	punches	me	in	the	chest-a	with	his	fist-a	and	breaks-a	all	my
cigars.	So	today	I	got-a	four	sticks-a	of	dynamite	in	my	pocket.	When	he	comes-
a,	I	am-a	gonna	blow	his	goddamn	hand-a	off!"
Pierino	 comes	 home	 from	 school	 and	 asks	 his	 father,	 "Papa,	 what	 does
`simultaneously'
mean?"
"It	 means	 at	 the	 same	 time,"	 replies	 the	 father.	 But	 Pierino	 still	 does	 not
understand,	so	the	father	explains	it.
"Well,"	he	says,	"if	you	were	born	from	a	relationship	between	your	mother	and
another	man,	not	me,	what	would	I	be?"
"A	cuckold!"	replies	the	little	boy.
"Right!"	says	the	father.	"And	simultaneously	you	would	be	the	son	of	a	bitch!"
The	 Italian	experience	 is	very	 fundamental	 for	 spiritual	growth.	 If	you	are	not
born	an	Italian,	you	can	learn	to	be	an	Italian	--	it	is	easy.	All	that	you	need	to	do
is	 exactly	 the	 same	 that	 you	 do	 in	 meditation,	 just	 a	 little	 bit	 different.	 In
meditation	you	go	beyond	the	mind;	in	being	Italian	you	go	below	the	mind.	In
both	cases	you	go	out	of	 the	mind!	And	it	 is	better	first	 to	 try	 to	go	below	the
mind;	 that	will	give	you	an	out-of-the-mind	experience	 --	 and	 then	 there	 is	no
possibility	of	relapsing.
Once	you	have	tasted	being	an	Italian,	then	you	start	praying	to	God,	"No	more
of	it!
Enough	 is	 enough!"	Then	 you	 start	 praying,	 "I	 don't	want	 any	more	 birth	 and
death.	I	am	fed	up	with	time,	I	want	to	dissolve	into	eternity."	But	without	being
an	Italian,	this	longing	will	not	arise	in	you.
That's	why	I	am	so	much	in	love	with	Italians	--	every	moment	they	are	coming
closer	 to	 enlightenment.	 The	 deeper	 they	 become	 Italians,	 the	 closer	 they	 are
coming	to	enlightenment;	then	the	jump	can	happen	at	any	moment.
There	are	people	who	are	just	in	the	middle	--	neither	here	nor	there;	they	don't
have	much	hope.	For	example,	Indians	--	they	don't	have	much	hope.	They	are
middle-of-the-road	walkers	 --	very	careful,	very	cautious;	 they	never	go	 to	 the
extremes.	 Keeping	 themselves	 in	 the	 middle	 they	 miss	 both	 the	 ultimate	 in
misery	and	the	ultimate	in	ecstasy.
To	be	an	Italian	is	to	be	in	ultimate	misery.	The	only	hope	is	spaghetti;	otherwise
all	 is	misery!	Once	you	have	experienced	 the	ultimate	 in	misery,	now	the	only
possible	way	left	for	you	is	to	search	for	the	ultimate	bliss,	and	nothing	less	than
that	will	help	you.
The	ultimate	misery	can	be	removed	only	by	ultimate	bliss.
It	is	not	an	accident	that	so	many	Italians	are	here.	They	have	tasted	the	misery
there,	they	have	seen.	If	you	have	seen	Italy	you	have	seen	the	whole	world.	It	is
a	miniature	world,	and	once	you	are	 fed	up	with	 Italy	you	are	 fed	up	with	 the
world	too.	Then	nirvana	is	possible.	In	fact,	from	Italy	to	nirvana	there	is	a	direct
route;	that	is	the	most	simple,	direct	and	the	shortest	route.
Italians	live	a	very	earthy	life;	they	are	earthy	people.	That's	what	is	good	about
them	--
they	are	down	to	earth.	They	are	not	too	interested	in	heaven	and	paradise;	they
don't	care	much	about	 that.	This	earth	is	enough.	But	because	it	 is	not	enough,
sooner	or	later	they	start	feeling	an	urge	to	seek	for	something	else.
The	 Indians	 live	 on	 the	 earth,	 they	 are	 very	mundane,	 but	 they	 go	 on	 talking
about	 spirituality.	 That	 keeps	 them	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 illusion.	Because	 of	 their	 talk
they	 think	 they	are	spiritual.	Because	of	 their	beautiful	words	which	 they	have
become	very	efficient	in	repeating...thousands	of	years	of	repeating	and	chanting
mantras.	They	can	do	 it	very	easily	and	befool	others,	but	 that	 is	 secondary	 --
they	can	befool	themselves.	Hearing	themselves	using	beautiful	words,	they	can
become	infatuated	with	their	own	words.
Words	 have	 then	 their	 own	 magnetism.	 If	 you	 use	 great	 words	 you	 will	 be
influenced	 by	 those	 words	 --	 and	 your	 reality	 will	 be	 the	 same,	 it	 will	 not
change.	Words	cannot	change	your	reality,	but	 they	can	hide,	 they	can	cover	 it
up.	They	can	give	you	a	respectability.
The	Indian	lives	in	respectability.	His	whole	effort	is	how	to	remain	respectable,
religious,	spiritual;	how	to	show	others	that	he	is	a	holy	man.	He	is	continuously
making	 deliberate	 and	 not	 so	 deliberate	 efforts	 at	 pretending	 greatness,	 other-
worldliness.	You	can	see	around	him	that	stinking,	ugly	phenomenon	of	holier-
than-thou.
Italians	 are	 beautiful	 in	 that	 way.	 They	 are	 simple	 people,	 down-to-earth,	 no-
nonsense	people.	They	don't	bother	about	spiritual	rubbish.	And	it	is	good	to	be
earthly.	My	own	experience	is,	if	you	have	never	been	earthly,	down-to-earth,	if
you	 have	 never	 been	 really	materialistic,	 absolutely	 earthly,	 if	 you	 have	 never
been	 really	 an	 atheist,	 you	will	 not	 become	 spiritual,	 ever.	Materialism	 has	 to
become	the	base;	your	down-to-earthness	has	to	become	your	foundation.	Then
the	temple,	the	shrine	of	spirituality	can	rise	on	top	of	it.
First	 be	 a	 Charvaka,	 an	 Epicurean,	 a	 Zorba	 the	 Greek;	 only	 then	 can	 you	 be
Gautama	 the	 Buddha,	 Jesus	 Christ,	 Bahauddin,	 Nanak,	 Kabir....	 If	 your
foundation	is	missing,	then	your	spirituality	is	hocus-pocus;	it	is	just	verbal.
I	love	the	Italian	rootedness	into	the	earth,	because	from	there	the	work	can	start.
The	body	has	 to	be	 accepted	 first,	 not	 only	 accepted	but	 respected	 too.	 If	 you
have	 not	 explored	 your	 body	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 explore	 the	 soul.	 The
methodology	 of	 exploration	 is	 the	 same,	 but	 begin	with	 the	 body	 because	 the
body	is	the	visible	part	of	your	soul.	Start	with	the	visible	and	then	slowly	move
towards	the	invisible.	Start	with	the	known	and	then	move	towards	the	unknown.
Start	from	the	periphery	and	then	go	deeper	towards	the	center.
There	are	millions	of	people	 in	 the	world	who	 live	 in	words	 --	 repeating	THE
BIBLE,	 the	 KORAN,	 the	 GITA,	 the	 DHAMMAPADA	 --	 but	 they	 are	 like
parrots,	mechanical;	they	are	gramophone	records.	They	can	repeat	the	scriptures
perfectly,	but	they	know	nothing.
Knowledge	needs	roots	in	the	earth,	 just	as	a	tree	needs	roots	in	the	earth.	The
branches	will	rise	towards	the	sky,	the	branches	will	try	to	reach	to	the	stars.	But
at	 the	 same	 time	 the	 roots	 have	 to	 go	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 the	 earth.
Remember,	there	is	a	balance:	the	higher	the	tree	goes,	the	deeper	its	roots	have
to	go;	it	is	totally	balanced.	You	cannot	have	a	big	tree	with	small	roots.	It	will
fall,	it	will	not	be	able	to	stand.
That's	 how	 India	 has	 fallen...a	 big	 tree	with	 very	 small	 roots.	 The	most	 basic
thing	is	to	grow	roots.	But	the	roots	cannot	be	grown	into	the	sky,	they	have	to
grow	into	the	earth,	into	the	body,	into	matter.	Then	your	branches	can	rise	into
the	sky,	into	the	world	of	the	spiritual.	They	can	reach	to	God.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	right	when	he	says,	"When	a	tree	wants	to	touch	the	feet
of	God,	it	has	to	reach	to	the	very	center	of	hell	through	its	roots.	The	roots	have
to	 go	 to	 the	 very	 rock	 bottom;	 then	 only	 can	 the	 branches	 and	 the	 flowers	 be
offered	to	the	feet	of	God.
By	 Italian	 I	 simply	mean	 a	 certain	 symbol,	 just	 as	 by	 Indian	 I	mean	 a	 certain
symbol.	The	 Indian	 represents	 the	hypocrite.	Wherever	he	 is	born,	 that	doesn't
matter;	he	may	be	born	even	in	Italy.	But	wherever	you	find	a	hypocrite	you	will
find	an	Indian,	and	wherever	you	find	a	realistic,	pragmatic,	practical	person	he
will	be	an	Italian.	To	me	these	words	don't	represent	geography,	they	represent
something	metaphorical.
My	commune	is	going	to	be	one	of	the	richest	communes	that	has	ever	happened
on	the	earth.	I	have	chosen	Deeksha	to	take	care	of	your	bodies	--	an	Italian,	a
perfect	mamma!
And	she	is	taking	care	as	beautifully	as	possible.
My	commune	consists	of	all	kinds	of	people.	They	will	all	pool	 their	different
energies	to	make	it	the	richest	commune	in	the	whole	of	existence	that	has	ever
existed.	Around	Buddha	there	were	only	Indians,	around	Jesus	there	were	only
Jews,	around	Mohammed	there	were	only	Mohammedans.	Around	me	there	are
all	 kinds	 of	 people	 --	 theists,	 atheists,	 materialists,	 spiritualists,	 Catholics,
Communists,	 Jainas,	 Jews,	 Italians,	 Indians,	Germans...all	kinds	of	people,	and
they	have	all	developed	different	sides	of	humanity.
No	country	has	developed	the	whole	human	being,	only	partial	human	beings.
We	can	create	the	whole	human	being,	multidimensional,	immensely	rich,	rooted
in	the	earth	and	yet	longing	for	the	stars.
The	last	question:
Question	4
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	 AM	 LEAVING	 THIS	 WONDERFUL	 BUDDHAFIELD	 TO	 VENTURE
FORTH	INTO
THE	 BIG,	WIDE	WORLD	 TO	GET	 EVERYTHING	 READY	 TO	 BECOME
PART	OF
OUR	NEW	COMMUNE.
PLEASE	TELL	ME	A	JOKE	THAT	WILL	ACCOMPANY	ME	ON	MY
ADVENTURES	 AND	 THAT	 WILL	 REMIND	 ME	 OF	 YOUR	 ETERNAL
LAUGHTER.
Deva	Darshan,	this	is	the	joke	for	you:
A	recently-married	 traveling	salesman	came	home	early	from	his	business	 trip.
He	arrived	at	one	o'clock	in	the	morning	and	tiptoed	up	the	stairs	to	his	bedroom,
not	wishing	to	disturb	his	young	wife.	When	he	opened	the	door,	to	his	horror	he
saw	another	man	sleeping	in	his	bed,	next	to	his	wife.
In	a	burst	of	rage	he	grabbed	the	man	by	the	hair	and	pulled	him	out	of	bed.	He
kicked	him	and	pushed	him	down	the	stairs	and	out	of	the	back	door.	He	forced
the	naked	man	into	the	garden	shed,	grabbed	his	prick	and	put	it	in	a	vice,	which
he	 then	 tightened	 and	 padlocked.	 He	 took	 a	 hacksaw	 from	 the	 shelf,	 very
methodically	removed	the	blade	and	fitted	a	new	one	in.
The	terrified	young	man's	eyes	bulged	at	this	prospect.
"You-you	are	no-no-not	going	to-to	cut	my	prick	off,	are	you?"	he	stammered.
"No,"	 smiled	 the	husband,	handing	 the	 saw	 to	 the	 relieved	young	man.	 "YOU
are!	I	am	going	to	set	fire	to	the	shed!"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	Of	Course	the	Grass	Grows	by	Itself
8	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011080
ShortTitle:
COME13
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
PEOPLE	OF	ALMOST	ALL	THE	RELIGIONS	TRY	TO	CONVINCE	OTHER
PEOPLE	 TO	 FOLLOW	 THEIR	 RESPECTIVE	 RELIGIONS.	 BUT	 I	 HAVE
MET
MANY	OF	YOUR	FOLLOWERS	AND	THEY	ALWAYS	DISCOURAGE	ME
FROM
ADOPTING	THE	WAY	YOU	ARE	PREACHING.	WHY	SO?
Harrinder	 Singh,	 the	 first	 thing:	 what	 I	 am	 teaching	 is	 not	 a	 religion	 but	 a
religiousness.	A	religion	is	a	creed,	a	dogma,	an	ideology;	it	is	intellectual.	You
can	be	convinced	about	it
--	 arguments	 can	 be	 given,	 proofs	 can	 be	 supplied,	 you	 can	 be	 silenced.
Argumentation	 is	a	kind	of	violence,	a	very	subtle	violence.	 It	 is	an	attempt	 to
manipulate	you,	control	you,	enslave	you.	All	the	religions	have	been	doing	that
for	thousands	of	years;	it	is	a	subtle	strategy	to	create	mental	slavery.
What	 I	 am	 doing	 here	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 religion	 at	 all.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of
religiousness	--
no	belief,	no	dogma,	no	church.	It	is	a	love	affair;	you	cannot	be	convinced	of	it.
Do	 you	 think	 Majnu	 can	 convince	 others	 about	 the	 beauty	 of	 Laila?	 It	 is
impossible.	 Nobody	 can	 convince	 anybody	 else	 about	 his	 love	 affair.	 It	 is	 far
deeper	than	the	intellect,	it	is	of	the	heart,	and	the	heart	knows	no	arguments,	no
proofs;	it	is	simply	so.	One	can	dance,	one	can	sing,	but	one	cannot	prove	it.	One
can	shout	with	joy,	one	can	say	"Alleluia!"	but	those	are	not	arguments,	they	are
not	convincing.
The	story	about	Majnu	is	very	significant.	It	is	a	Sufi	story.	It	is	not	an	ordinary
love	story	as	people	have	been	thinking,	it	is	an	allegory.
Majnu	fell	in	love	with	a	woman	called	Laila	who	was	not	beautiful	according	to
others.
According	to	the	public	opinion	she	was	very	ordinary,	homely	--	not	only	that
but	 ugly	 too.	And	Majnu	was	mad,	 so	mad	 that	 the	 very	 name	 of	Majnu	 has
become	 synonymous	 with	 madness.	 He	 was	 continuously	 praying	 to	 God,
continuously	moving	around	 the	city	asking	people	 for	help,	because	he	was	a
poor	man	and	the	woman	he	had	fallen	in	love	with	belonged	to	an	aristocratic
family.	Even	 to	 see	Laila	 from	 far	 away	was	not	 easy.	 It	was	 a	Mohammedan
country,	and	in	a	Mohammedan	country	it	is	very	difficult	to	see	even	the	face	of
a	woman.
Seeing	his	agony,	his	anguish,	even	the	king	became	a	little	concerned.	He	called
Majnu;	he	felt	great	compassion	for	him.	He	told	him,	"I	know	that	woman;	that
family	is	well	known	to	me,	and	if	Laila	had	been	a	beautiful	woman	she	would
have	been	part	of	my	harem.	I	have	not	chosen	her	--	she	is	not	worth	choosing.	I
have	got	all	 the	beautiful	women	from	all	over	the	country,	and	I	feel	so	much
for	 you	 that	 I	 will	 give	 you	 a	 chance.	 You	 can	 choose	 any	 woman	 from	my
harem	and	she	will	be	yours!"	--	and	he	called	the	most	beautiful	women.
Majnu	 looked	 at	 each	 woman	 in	 minute	 detail	 and	 said,	 "This	 is	 not	 Laila!"
Again	 and	 again...he	passed	over	 a	dozen	women,	 and	 the	 remark	was	 always
the	same:	"This	is	not	Laila!"
The	king	said,	"You	must	have	gone	utterly	crazy!	Laila	is	nothing	compared	to
these	 beautiful	 women!	You	 can	 choose	 anyone.	 I	 KNOW	 your	 Laila,	 I	 have
known	the	most	beautiful	women	of	the	world,	and	my	women	are	some	of	the
greatest	that	have	ever	been	on	the	earth."
Majnu	said,	"But	you	don't	understand	me.	And	I	can	understand	that	you	cannot
understand.	It	is	not	a	question	of	choosing	somebody	else;	the	choice	is	not	in
my	hands.
It	has	happened	already;	the	heart	has	chosen!	I	am	nobody,	I	cannot	interfere	in
it.	 The	mind	 is	 only	 the	 circumference;	 the	 heart	 is	 the	 center.	The	 center	 has
chosen,	how	can	the	circumference	interfere?
"And	moreover	--	forgive	me	for	saying	so,	because	you	have	been	so	kind	--	I
still	insist	that	there	has	never	been	a	woman	like	Laila	and	there	will	never	be
again.	But	to	see	the	beauty	of	Laila	you	need	the	eyes	of	a	Majnu,	and	you	don't
have	 those	eyes	 so	nothing	can	be	done	about	 it.	You	have	 to	 see	her	 through
MY	 eyes;	 only	 then	will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the	 grandeur,	 the	 splendor	 of	 her
being."
Remember	 these	 words:	 To	 see	 the	 beauty	 of	 Laila	 you	 need	 the	 eyes	 of	 a
Majnu.
This	is	not	a	religion.	The	people	who	have	gathered	around	me	are	lovers	--	not
intellectually	convinced	of	what	I	am	saying,	but	existentially	convinced	of	what
I	am.	It	is	a	question	not	decided	by	the	mind	but	something	to	be	felt.
Harrinder	Singh,	that's	why	my	people	never	try	to	convince	anybody.	Knowing
perfectly	well	that	you	don't	have	the	eyes	of	a	Majnu,	what	is	the	point	of	going
into	hairsplitting	logic?	It	is	futile!	They	know	perfectly	well	that	it	is	not	their
intellect	that	has	made	them	part	of	my	buddhafield,	it	is	their	hearts.	Something
has	started	ringing	in	their	hearts	--	a	bell	has	started	ringing	in	their	hearts.
Their	hearts	have	felt	a	new	release	of	energy,	a	new	dance.	A	new	melody	has
been	 heard,	 not	 a	 new	 argument	 but	 a	 new	melody.	 Their	 hearts	were	 asleep,
now	they	are	awake.	Their	hearts	were	like	a	desert.	Now	the	spring	has	come,
now	roses	are	flowering,	bees	are	humming.	Their	inner	beings	are	transformed.
It	is	religiousness.
Religiousness	 happens	 only	when	 a	 Buddha	 or	 a	 Krishna	 or	 a	Mahavira	 or	 a
Christ	 is	 alive.	 When	 Christ	 dies	 there	 is	 religion.	 Religion	 is	 the	 corpse	 of
religiousness;	 it	 only	 looks	 like	 a	 real	 person.	 When	 a	 person	 dies	 he	 looks
exactly	like	he	was	when	he	was	alive.	Just	something	very	small	is	missing	--
he	is	no	longer	breathing;	otherwise	everything	is	perfectly	good!	You	can	paint
his	 face,	 you	 can	 put	 his	 hair	 in	 a	 beautiful	 style,	 you	 can	 give	 him	 beautiful
garments,	 and	 he	 will	 look	 very	 young	 and	 very	 alive,	 with	 red	 cheeks	 --
everything	can	be	done.	In	the	West	it	has	become	an	art:	how	to	paint	the	dead
man,	how	 to	make	him	 look	alive.	But	 it	 is	only	an	appearance;	 the	 real	 is	no
longer	 there.	 It	 is	 only	 a	 cage	 --	maybe	 a	 golden	 cage,	 but	 the	bird	has	 flown
away.
When	 religiousness	 dies,	 religion	 is	 born.	Religiousness	 breathes;	 religion	 is	 a
corpse.
But	many	people	feel	good	with	religion;	in	fact,	the	majority.	Ninety-nine	point
nine	percent	of	people	feel	good	with	religion,	because	it	is	not	dangerous	at	all.
What	 can	 the	 corpse	 do	 to	 you?	 You	 can	 do	 anything	 to	 the	 corpse,	 but	 the
corpse	cannot	do	anything	to	you;	the	corpse	is	in	your	hands.
But	when	religion	is	alive	and	breathing	--	that's	what	I	mean	by	religiousness	--
then	you	 are	 possessed	 by	 it,	 but	 you	 cannot	 possess	 it.	You	 cannot	 possess	 a
Buddha	 or	 a	 Lao	 Tzu	 or	 a	 Zarathustra.	 You	 cannot	 possess	 Bahauddin,
Jalaluddin,	 al-Hillaj	 Mansoor...no,	 that	 is	 not	 possible.	 These	 are	 people	 who
have	 known	 the	 ultimate	 freedom	 --	 how	 can	 you	 possess	 them?	They	 cannot
fulfill	your	expectations,	they	cannot	move	according	to	you;	they	will	have	their
own	way.	If	it	suits	you,	you	have	to	be	with	them.	You	will	not	be	able	to	force
them	to	be	with	you;	there	is	no	way	possible.
The	truth	cannot	be	with	you	--	YOU	have	to	be	with	the	truth.	But	the	lie	is	in
your	hands.	You	can	manipulate	it,	you	can	make	it	look	the	way	you	want	it	to
look,	you	can	give	it	colors,	you	can	cut	it;	you	can	give	it	form	and	shape,	you
can	 make	 it	 fit	 with	 your	 unconscious	 life.	 You	 can	 be	 a	 Hindu;	 it	 does	 not
disturb	your	unconsciousness.
You	can	be	a	Mohammedan;	 it	makes	no	 transformation	 in	you.	You	can	be	a
Buddhist	with	no	trouble	at	all,	with	no	danger,	with	no	insecurity.	But	to	be	with
a	buddha	 is	 to	walk	on	fire!	All	 that	 is	nonessential	 in	you	will	be	burned	and
only	the	essential	will	survive	--	and	the	essential	is	very	small	in	you.	So	much
of	you	is	false,	and	it	is	going	to	die.
To	be	with	a	buddha	means	a	death.
Life	comes	afterwards,	but	death	comes	first.
Resurrection	first	is	not	possible;	it	can	follow	only	if	crucifixion	has	happened.
It	comes	after	the	crucifixion.	To	be	with	a	master	is	to	be	ready	to	die	and	ready
to	be	born	anew.
Religion	is	consolation,	conformation.
Religiousness	is	revolution,	rebellion.
Ajai	Krishna	Lakanpal	has	asked	a	long	question	about	the	Sufis	who	have	died
in	 the	past	 --	Muhinuddin	Chisti,	Nijamuddin	Auliya,	Baba	Jan	and	others.	He
has	 asked	 about	 their	MAJALS,	 their	 graves	 --	 have	 they	 any	power?	He	 is	 a
worshipper	of	these	majals	-
-	a	worshipper	of	graves!	And	he	is	asking	me,	"Are	they	not	still	vibrating	with
the	energy	of	those	great	mystics?"
Being	here	with	me	he	has	no	courage,	no	guts	to	be	a	sannyasin,	but	he	goes	to
Ajmer	to	pay	his	respects	to	somebody	who	was	alive	a	few	hundred	years	ago.
And	 I	 know	 perfectly	 well	 that	 if	 Muhinuddin	 Chisti	 was	 alive	 today,	 Ajai
Krishna	 Lakanpal	 would	 not	 go	 there	 at	 all.	 And	 even	 if	 he	 did	 go	 there	 he
would	 ask	 about	 the	 Kaaba,	 Bodhgaya,	 the	 graves	 of	 Buddha,	 Mahavira,
Christ....	Asking	about	the	graves	of	other	enlightened	people	is	such	a	stupidity,
but	it	looks	as	if	you	are	asking	a	religious	question.
Being	 here	 with	 me,	 if	 you	 cannot	 risk	 then	 of	 course	 you	 have	 to	 go	 and
worship	graves.
And	if	you	cannot	feel	the	energy	here,	where	else	can	you	feel	the	energy?	All
that	energy	is	your	projection	and	nothing	else.	I	am	not	saying	that	there	is	not
any	 energy,	 but	 that	 energy	 can	 only	 be	 felt	 by	 those	 who	 have	 felt	 it	 with
someone	who	is	still	alive.
If	you	can	feel	the	energy	here,	if	you	can	get	in	harmony	with	this	energy,	you
may	be	able	to	feel	it	at	the	DARGA	of	Muhinuddin	Chisti	in	Ajmer.	But	if	you
cannot	feel	it	here,	you	cannot	feel	it	there	--	that	is	impossible.	If	you	cannot	see
God	in	man	how	can	you	see	God	in	a	rock?	First	you	have	to	see	God	in	man;
only	then	will	your	insight	deepen	and	will	you	be	able	to	see	God	in	the	rock
too.
First	 you	 have	 to	 be	 in	 contact	 with	 a	 living	 religiousness,	 then	 all	 religions
become	 true	 in	 a	 new	 sense;	 otherwise	 they	 are	 just	 corpses.	 But	 they	 are
comfortable	 --	 you	 can	 go	 and	 offer	 flowers	 and	 you	 can	 bow	 down,	 and	 the
grave	cannot	do	anything	 to	you!	You	can	come	back	with	good	 feelings,	 that
you	 have	 done	 something	 great,	 and	 you	 are	 the	 same	old	 fool	 --	 nothing	 has
happened	to	you.	At	the	most	you	are	a	little	more	foolish	than	you	were	before,
because	now	you	are	a	religious	fool.	Before	you	were	just	an	ordinary	fool;	now
you	have	some	pretensions	of	religion	too.	Now	you	will	come	home	with	that
haughty	 feeling	 of	 holier-than-thou	 --	 just	 by	 going	 to	 a	 grave!	 And	 let	 me
remind	you,	I	am	not	saying	that	those	graves	have	nothing;	they	have	much,	but
only	 for	 those	who	have	eyes.	 If	you	cannot	 see	 it	 in	a	 living	Sufi,	 in	a	 living
master,	you	are	blind,	you	cannot	see	it	in	a	grave	at	all.
But	graves	are	good,	because	you	are	also	dead	and	there	is	a	certain	adjustment.
You	are	dead,	the	grave	is	dead;	it	feels	very	good	--	in	the	right	company.	You
are	a	ghost	and	you	would	like	very	much	to	live	with	the	ghosts.
Harrinder	Singh,	you	ask	me:	"People	of	almost	all	the	religions	try	to	convince
other	people	 to	 follow	 their	 respective	 religions.	Why	so?"	That's	 a	 significant
thing	to	ask.
You	 may	 be	 surprised:	 they	 are	 not	 really	 trying	 to	 convince	 others;	 by
convincing	 others	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 convince	 themselves	 that	 "We	 are	 not
wrong."	When	they	are	able	to	convince	somebody,	again	they	feel	at	ease:	"My
religion	is	right,	I	am	not	wrong.	Look,	even	somebody	who	never	belonged	to
my	religion	is	convinced."	Christians	go	on	converting	people	all	over	the	world.
The	only	reason	is	that	THEY	are	not	convinced	of	Christ	yet.
The	two	most	ancient	religions	in	the	world	have	been	non-converting	religions:
the	 Jews	 and	 the	Hindus.	 The	 Jews	 never	 converted	 anybody	 --	 they	were	 so
utterly	convinced	that	there	was	no	need	to	convince	anybody	else	--	the	Hindus
never	tried	to	convince	anybody.	And	these	are	the	oldest	religions	in	the	world;
in	 fact,	 all	 other	 religions	 are,	 in	 a	 sense,	 branches.	Christianity	 and	 Islam	are
branches	of	Judaism;	Jainism,	Buddhism	and	Sikhism	are	branches	of	Hinduism.
The	most	 ancient	 traditions	 have	 been	 non-converting.	Why?	 The	 reason	was
that	they	were	convinced;	they	were	so	ancient	and	they	were	not	in	need	of	new
converts.	Their	very	ancientness	gave	them	enough	ground	to	be	convinced	that
they	were	right.	Not	that	they	were	right,	but	they	had	this	illusion	of	being	right
because	of	 their	 long	heritage	going	back	 into	prehistoric	 times.	They	had	 the
ancientmost	scriptures,	and	that	was	enough	for	them;	that	served	their	purpose.
But	Christianity	was	a	new	religion;	Christ	had	to	start	from	abc.	Buddhism	was
new;	Buddha	had	to	start	from	abc.	Mohammedanism	was	new;	Mohammed	had
to	start	from	abc	--	he	had	nothing	behind	him	to	fall	back	upon.	The	only	way
for	the	Mohammedans	was	to	convert	others.	They	were	substituting	tradition	by
converting	people	and	creating	a	great	mass	of	followers;	that	was	their	way	of
convincing	themselves.
Hindus	and	Jews	were	convincing	themselves	in	a	different	way,	but	Christians,
Mohammedans	and	Buddhists	could	not	do	that;	that	was	not	possible	for	them.
That	avenue	was	closed;	they	had	to	open	a	new	door.	They	became	converting
religions.	The	most	unconvinced	of	all	these	were	the	Christians	for	the	simple
reason	 that	 the	 Jews	 had	 crucified	 Jesus.	 Now	 there	 was	 a	 great	 fear	 in	 the
followers.
When	Jesus	left	the	world,	the	followers	were	in	a	deep	darkness:	their	founder
had	 been	 crucified	 with	 two	 criminals,	 two	 thieves...on	 both	 sides.	 He	 was
treated	like	a	criminal	and	he	could	not	manage	to	do	any	miracle	on	the	cross.
There	was	a	great	shaking	of	 the	foundations.	The	Christians	were	very	shaky,
they	were	 not	 grounded.	 They	were	 very	much	 afraid:	 "Who	 knows,	we	may
have	fallen	into	a	trap.	Jesus	may	not	be	the	right	messiah.	The	Jews	could	not
recognize	 him	 --	 great	 scholars,	 rabbis,	 saints,	 could	 not	 recognize	 him	 at	 all.
Who	knows...?"	That	doubt	persisted.	The	only	way	to	destroy	that	doubt	was	to
convert	 as	 many	 people	 to	 Christianity	 as	 possible	 --	 "If	 we	 can	 convert	 the
whole	earth,	then	it	will	be	proof	that	we	are	right."
People	think	that	a	majority	in	numbers	proves	whether	you	are	right	or	wrong.
Now,	you	can	take	numbers	in	two	ways:	either	you	can	count	all	the	people	who
have	gone	before	you	in	the	past,	or	you	can	count	the	people	who	are	still	alive.
If	the	door	of	tradition	is	closed,	then	you	have	to	convert	the	contemporaries.
Christians	 became	 great	 converters,	 and	 they	 have	 converted	 almost	 half	 of
humanity.
Still	some	wound	remains,	still	 the	doubt	has	not	disappeared	--	and	this	is	not
the	way	to	make	it	disappear.	The	heart	has	not	yet	become	convinced,	but	the
doubt	still	persists,	the	shadow	lingers	on.
Christians	 go	 on	 writing	 thousands	 of	 books	 proving	 that	 Jesus	 was	 the	 right
messiah.
What	 is	 the	 point?	Who	 are	 you	 trying	 to	 convince?	You	 cannot	 convince	 the
Jews;	you	have	tried	for	two	thousand	years	and	you	have	not	been	successful.
Hindus	are	not	at	all	 interested	whether	Jesus	was	the	right	messiah;	Jainas	are
not	 interested;	 Buddhists	 are	 not	 interested.	Who	 are	 you	 trying	 to	 convince?
You	are	trying	to	convince	yourself.
You	must	 have	known	 this	 psychological	 phenomenon....	When	you	 are	 going
alone	into	the	forest	on	a	dark	night,	you	start	whistling	or	singing	a	song,	as	if
by	singing	a	song	the	danger	is	averted,	or	that	whistling	is	going	to	help.	But	in
a	psychological	way	it	does	something.	When	you	start	whistling	you	forget	all
about	the	fear	--	because	the	mind	can	do	only	one	thing	at	a	time,	so	when	you
are	whistling	you	forget	the	fear.
Moreover,	when	you	start	whistling	you	start	hearing	the	whistle,	and	when	you
start	 hearing	 the	whistle	 it	 gives	 you	 the	 fallacious	 idea	 that	 somebody	 else	 is
there	who	 is	whistling,	 and	 that	makes	 you	 feel	 a	 little	 at	 ease.	 It	 is	 the	 same
phenomenon.
Christians	are	still	whistling,	still	doubtful.	And	they	have	to	be	doubtful	--	they
are	 responsible	 for	 their	 doubts.	 To	 prove	 to	 the	 Jews	 that	 Jesus	 is	 the	 right
messiah,	they	have	to	brag	and	tell	lies.	For	example,	they	say	that	he	was	born
out	of	a	virgin	mother.
That	 is	 sheer	nonsense!	Now,	how	can	you	ever	be	 convinced	of	 it?	You	may
turn	 the	whole	 earth	 towards	Christianity,	 yet	 the	 doubt	will	 persist.	Any	man
who	has	even	a	 little	bit	of	 intelligence	can	 see	 the	point,	 that	 this	 is	 stupid	 --
Jesus	 cannot	have	been	born	out	of	 a	virgin	mother.	And	 then	 they	have	been
saying	that	Jesus	raised	the	dead,	cured	the	blind....
But	Jesus	could	not	prove	anything	on	the	cross,	where	the	real	test	was,	when
one	hundred	thousand	people	had	gathered	to	see	the	miracle.	And	he	had	been
doing	all	 these	small	miracles,	but	only	in	front	of	his	disciples,	and	they	were
not	many.	He	had	only	twelve	apostles	and	they	were	all	villagers,	uneducated	--
fishermen,	 woodcutters,	 carpenters,	 farmers,	 gardeners	 --	 simple	 people.	 He
walked	 on	water	 in	 front	 of	 these	 people;	 he	 raised	 the	 dead	 in	 front	 of	 these
people;	 he	 cured	 the	 blind	 in	 front	 of	 these	 people.	 And	 when	 one	 hundred
thousand	 people	 had	 gathered,	 the	 most	 educated	 and	 sophisticated	 of	 all	 the
rabbis	and	all	 the	scholars	and	all	 the	professors	 in	Jerusalem,	he	could	not	do
anything.
Jesus	was	thirsty	on	the	cross,	and	he	could	not	even	produce	a	cup	of	water	for
himself.
And	he	had	done	miracles	like	transforming	water	into	wine!	He	was	thirsty	and
begging	 for	water	 --	 he	was	 dying.	A	 great	 doubt	 had	 arisen	 even	 in	 his	 own
mind	whether	he	was	really	the	messiah,	whether	he	was	really	the	son	of	God.
He	asked	God,	"Have	you	forsaken	me?	Why	have	you	forsaken	me?	Is	this	the
time	to	leave	me	alone,	to	betray	me?	I	lived	the	whole	of	my	life	in	trust	--	why
are	you	not	doing	something	to	save	me?"
And	nothing	happened.	The	sky	remained	silent	--	no	miracle.	The	people	must
have	gone	home	laughing.	They	must	have	all	enjoyed	the	picnic	and	laughed.	It
must	 have	 been	 the	 gossip	 for	 a	 few	 days	 in	 the	 town,	 and	 people	must	 have
giggled	about	the	whole	affair	--	that	this	man	was	a	fool,	a	pretender.	Christians
have	not	yet	forgotten	it;	the	wound	has	gone	deep.	But	they	are	trying	to	cover
it	up.
Mohammed	came	 later	 still;	 he	 came	 just	 fourteen	hundred	years	 ago.	By	 that
time	 humanity	 was	 almost	 divided;	 it	 was	 very	 difficult	 to	 find	 converts.	 Of
course	when	 he	was	 alive	 he	 turned	many	 people	 on,	 but	 the	moment	 he	was
gone	 it	 was	 impossible	 for	 his	 followers	 to	 find	 converts.	 And,	 as	 far	 as
argument	 was	 concerned,	Mohammedans	 could	 not	 argue	with	 the	 Buddhists.
Buddhism	had	reached	as	far	as	central	Asia.	By	that	time	there	were	temples	of
Buddha	all	over	Asia,	particularly	 in	central	Asia.	And	 to	argue	with	Buddhist
logicians	 is	 the	 most	 difficult	 thing.	 The	 Buddhist	 logicians	 and	 philosophers
have	 touched	 the	 highest	 possibility	 of	 intellectual	 grasp.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to
argue	with	 the	 Jaina	 philosophers.	 Even	 Pythagoras	 remembers	 them.	He	met
them	 in	Egypt.	He	 calls	 them	gymnosophists,	 and	he	describes	 them	as	 naked
people	who	argued	with	such	intelligence	that	it	was	impossible	to	refute	them.
It	is	very	difficult	to	refute	Buddhists	and	Jainas;	it	is	very	difficult	to	prove	that
Mohammed	was	a	greater	miracle	man	than	Jesus.
So	Mohammedans	were	in	a	difficulty,	and	the	only	way	was	the	sword.	Intellect
was	not	going	to	work,	so	they	started	cutting	off	people's	heads.	If	you	cannot
cut	 their	 arguments,	 cut	 their	 heads	 --	 because	might	 is	 right!	They	went	on	 a
rampage.	 They	 killed	 thousands,	 murdered,	 butchered,	 and	 converted	 people
forcibly:	"For	YOUR	sake,	of	course,	for	your	own	good,	because	if	you	are	not
a	Mohammedan	you	are	not	going	 to	achieve	paradise,	you	will	 fall	 into	hell."
They	were	 trying	hard	 to	save	people,	but	 in	fact	 they	were	 trying	 to	convince
themselves	 that	Mohammed	was	 as	 good	 as	 Buddha	 or	 Jesus	 or	Mahavira	 or
Krishna.
My	people	are	not	interested	in	converting	anybody,	because	they	don't	have	any
doubt.
They	are	not	here	with	me	to	be	convinced,	they	are	here	with	me	because	they
are	already	convinced	as	 far	 as	 their	hearts	 are	concerned.	And	 if	 they	are	not
convinced,	they	are	free	to	leave;	there	is	no	need	to	be	here	at	all.
I	 am	 not	 interested	 in	 the	masses	 and	 the	 crowds;	 I	 am	 interested	 only	 in	 the
chosen	 few,	 I	 am	 interested	 only	 in	 the	 spiritually	 aristocratic,	 the	 very	 few
intelligent	people.	So	if	your	heart	is	dancing	with	me,	good.	If	it	is	not	dancing
with	me,	then	this	is	not	the	right	place	for	you	--	you	are	free	to	leave.
And	my	 people	will	 never	 try	 to	 convince	 anybody	 --	 at	 least	 not	while	 I	 am
alive!	When	I	am	gone,	nothing	can	be	done	about	it;	then	there	is	no	guarantee.
While	I	am	alive	they	will	not	try	to	convince	anybody.
But,	Harrinder	Singh,	without	any	of	my	people	convincing	you,	you	have	come
here;	 that	 is	 far	more	 important.	 Something	of	 their	 joy	has	 caught	 you,	 some
glimpse	 in	 their	 eyes	 has	 touched	 you.	 Something	 special	 in	 their	 vibe	 has
brought	 you	 here.	 This	 would	 not	 have	 been	 possible	 if	 they	 had	 argued.
Argument	is	very	gross	and	the	work	of	real	energy	is	very	subtle.
I	 receive	 thousands	 of	 letters	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world:	 "There	 is	 certainly
something	 strange	 in	 your	 orange	 people.	 They	 don't	 argue,	 they	 are	 not	 like
Jehovah's	Witnesses.
They	are	not	like	Hare	Krishna	people,	always	carrying	the	BHAGAVADGITA
and	 trying	 to	 force	 things	 into	your	head	whether	you	are	willing	or	not.	They
don't	interfere	in	anybody's	life."
But	their	non-interference	is	far	more	effective.	That	shows	that	they	have	found
something,	that	shows	that	they	have	discovered	something.	Their	very	being	is
vibrant	with	their	discovery.	They	are	joyous,	they	are	happy,	they	are	cheerful.
They	are	living	their	life	as	creatively	as	possible.
Now	all	kinds	of	creativity	are	happening	here.	There	are	dance	groups,	there	are
music	groups,	there	is	a	theater	group,	there	is	an	art	group,	and	soon	there	will
be	many	more	--
sculptors,	architects,	scientists,	poets,	novelists.	Everybody	is	going	to	be	here,
and	 they	 will	 all	 share	 their	 joy	 through	 creativity.	 If	 their	 creativity	 can
convince	you,	then	that	is	a	totally	different	matter.	If	their	very	life	can	become
a	 light	 to	 you,	 that	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 thing.	But	 they	 are	 not	 going	 to	 force
anybody.	I	am	not	in	favour	of	coercing	people.
You	say	to	me:	"People	of	almost	all	the	religions	try	to	convince	other	people	to
follow	 their	 respective	 religions."	 They	 are	 religious	 and	 this	 is	 only	 a
religiousness	--	at	 least	right	now	it	 is	only	a	religiousness.	It	 is	only	a	quality,
vague,	 fluid,	 flowing,	dynamic;	 it	 has	not	become	 stagnant	yet.	 It	 can	become
stagnant	only	when	 I	 am	gone.	While	 I	 am	alive	 I	will	go	on	 stirring	 --	 I	will
never	 allow	 you	 to	 settle	 anywhere.	 I	 will	 go	 on	 and	 on	 calling	 you	 to	 new
adventures,	challenging	you	to	new	explorations.
Harrinder	Singh,	you	also	say:	"But	I	have	met	many	of	your	followers	and	they
always	discourage	me	from	adopting	the	way	you	are	preaching."	They	are	not
my	followers,	just	my	friends.	To	be	a	follower	is	ugly.	I	am	not	a	leader,	so	how
can	you	be	a	follower?	For	you	to	be	a	follower,	first	I	have	to	be	a	leader,	and
that	very	word	is	ugly.
I	am	nobody's	leader;	I	am	just	living	my	life,	doing	my	thing.	And	the	people
who	enjoy	being	with	me,	 they	are	welcome.	 It	 is	 a	 friendship.	We	are	 fellow
travelers.	Maybe	 there	 is	 a	 little	 difference:	 I	 am	 awake,	 they	 are	 asleep	 --	 so
what?	 I	was	 asleep,	 now	 I	 am	awake.	They	are	 asleep,	 tomorrow	 they	will	 be
awake.	Their	very	sleep	proves	only	one	thing,	that	they	have	the	capacity	to	be
awake.
And	I	don't	disturb	anybody's	sleep	prematurely!	When	I	see	the	person	is	going
to	wake	up	anyhow,	then	I	just	give	him	a	little	nudge.	I	don't	nag	people,	I	don't
go	on	nagging	them,	"Wake	up!	Wake	up!"	because	if	you	nag	a	sleepy	person	to
wake	 up	 too	 much,	 he	 may	 start	 dreaming	 that	 he	 has	 awakened.	 That	 is	 a
difficulty...because	the	mind	can	create	all	kinds	of	dreams.	It	can	even	create	the
dream	that	one	is	awakened,	that	one	is	enlightened.	And	even	here	it	happens	to
a	few	people.
Now	Siddhartha	is	here	from	Germany;	it	is	happening	to	him.	In	his	dream	he
has	 become	 enlightened	 --	 or	 approximately.	 And,	 be	 aware,	 when	 a	 German
becomes	enlightened,	then	he	becomes	perfectly	enlightened!
Just	a	 few	days	ago	 I	was	 talking	about	Proper	Sagar,	 the	perfect	Englishman.
Somebody	has	asked	me,	"Do	you	know	why	he	is	perfect?"	I	know,	but	I	cannot
tell	you	because	he	will	feel	very	offended,	very	offended.	He	is	such	a	perfect
Englishman	that	if	I	tell	you	the	truth	he	will	be	very	offended.	If	you	promise
me	not	to	tell	anybody,	then	I	can	share	it:	he	is	really	a	German	pretending	to	be
an	Englishman.	No	Englishman	can	defeat	him!
There	are	hundreds	of	Englishmen	here	--	has	anybody	the	guts	to	defeat	Proper
Sagar?
Impossible!	When	 a	 German	 tries	 to	 be	 anybody	 he	 is	 always	 perfect.	 To	 be
German	means	to	be	perfect	--	they	are	synonymous.
So	 it	 is	 happening	 in	 Germany:	 Siddhartha	 is	 dreaming	 that	 he	 has	 become
enlightened.
And	 I	go	on	playing	 jokes:	 I	have	given	him	one	of	my	chairs	and	one	of	my
robes!	So	with	my	robe	on	he	sits	in	the	chair	--	and	being	a	German	he	is	very
methodical:	on	one	side	sits	a	woman	who	is	Mukta;	on	the	other	side	are	two
women,	one	who	is	Vivek,	the	other	Laxmi.	And	in	front	of	Laxmi	is	a	man	who
is	Shiva.	Germans	do	things	perfectly!
Another	German,	Gunakar,	 is	 here.	 Siddhartha	 is	 very	 simple,	 a	 nice	 guy,	 but
Gunakar	 is	 an	 advocate,	 a	 great	 legal	 expert,	 so	 he	 is	 going	 about	 it	 more
methodically,	more	legally.
Now	he	has	closed	himself	in	a	room...just	the	way	I	live	in	a	room	he	lives	in	a
room;	he	does	not	come	out,	he	does	not	write....	He	has	a	secretary	--	a	woman,
of	course.	He	does	not	allow	anybody	to	touch	his	body.
The	reason	people	are	prevented	from	touching	my	feet	has	nothing	to	do	with
enlightenment	--	it	 is	just	that	my	toes	are	in	difficulty.	To	touch	my	toes	hurts
them	 badly,	 so	 people	 have	 to	 be	 prevented.	 Gunakar	 must	 have	 seen	 that
nobody	 is	 allowed	 to	 touch	my	 feet	 anymore,	 so	he	 is	preventing	people	 from
touching	him	"because	his	energy	gets	disturbed"!	And	both	of	them	are	here!
So	if	you	try	to	wake	up	people	in	their	sleep,	the	great	danger	is	that	they	may
wake	up,	but	not	really,	only	in	sleep;	they	may	dream	that	they	are	awake	and	in
their	 dreams	 they	 may	 start	 playing	 all	 kinds	 of	 games	 of	 enlightenment,
spirituality,	 religiousness.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 very	 aware	 not	 to	 disturb	 anybody
before	the	right	time.
So	I	persuade	you,	I	seduce	you	towards	awakening.	But	I	am	not	in	a	hurry	--	it
cannot	be	done	in	a	hurry.	I	have	to	wait,	and	when	I	see	that	you	are	just	coming
out	of	your	sleep,	only	then	a	little	shaking	helps	and	you	are	fully	awake.	Even
if	you	are	not	shaken	up	at	the	last	moment,	you	may	awaken.	It	may	be	a	little
later;	 it	 is	 just	a	question	of	 time.	The	master	has	to	be	watchful	not	 to	be	in	a
hurry,	 because	 sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 you	 see	 people	 in	 misery	 and	 you
would	 like	 to	help	 them	immediately,	but	 to	help	 them	immediately	may	harm
them	more	if	they	are	not	ready	to	wake	up.
So	my	people	are	not	my	followers,	they	are	just	my	friends,	my	lovers	--	they
have	fallen	in	love	with	me.	And	as	you	know,	love	is	blind;	it	 is	not	a	logical
thing,	so	how	can	they	convince	you?	They	have	not	connected	themselves	with
me	 through	 logic;	 it	 has	been	an	 illogical	 jump.	They	can	only	 share	 their	 joy
with	you,	and	if	that	brings	you	here	it	is	good.
And	 certainly	 my	 sannyasins	 will	 tell	 you	 not	 to	 follow	 me,	 because	 that's
exactly	 what	 my	 teaching	 is:	 not	 to	 follow	 me.	 Each	 individual	 is	 unique;
nobody	has	to	become	an	imitator.	And	they	will	discourage	you	from	adopting
the	way	I	am	preaching	--	they	will	discourage	you	so	that	you	can	find	yourself.
Otherwise,	people	are	very	willing	to	believe.	Belief	is	so	cheap;	it	costs	nothing
to	believe.
My	people	will	discourage	you	 from	believing,	 from	following,	 from	adopting
the	 way	 I	 am	 teaching.	 If	 you	 become	 interested	 you	 have	 to	 come	 here	 and
explore	yourself.	It	 is	an	exploration.	It	 is	an	adventure	into	the	unknown.	It	 is
going	beyond	the	familiar,	beyond	that	which	can	be	comprehended,	beyond	that
which	the	mind	can	cope	with.	It	is	a	journey	into	the	beyond.	It	is	very	delicate,
far	more	delicate	than	the	petals	of	a	rose.
You	can	destroy	 it	very	easily;	any	coercive	effort	and	 it	 is	destroyed.	So	 they
bring	you	here	without	any	coercion,	without	any	 logic.	They	only	 invite	you,
and	 that	 too	not	directly	 --	very	 indirectly.	And	 they	will	discourage	you	 from
following	me,	because	it	is	not	a	question	of	following	me;	the	real	question	is	of
following	your	own	light.
All	that	I	can	do	is	to	help	you	find	the	way	that	reaches	to	your	own	innermost
light.	 I	 can	 show	you	 the	way.	And	when	you	have	 found	your	 light	 you	will
have	to	live	your	own	life.	It	will	not	be	as	a	Christian,	it	will	not	be	as	a	Hindu,
it	will	not	be	Mohammedan;	it	will	simply	be	your	life,	nobody	else's.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	HAVE	HEARD	YOU	KNOW	SOMETHING	ABOUT	THIS	GUY	MURPHY
AND
SOME	OF	HIS	GOLDEN	RULES.	PLEASE	TELL	US	SOME!
Premraja,	 I	 don't	 know	much	 about	 this	 guy	Murphy,	 but	 I	 don't	 know	much
about	anything	else	either!
I	am	not	a	man	of	knowledge;	I	function	from	a	state	of	not	knowing,	and	I	have
found	that	that	is	the	most	beautiful	space	to	function	from.
I	have	heard	a	few	of	 the	golden	rules	of	 this	guy	Murphy,	so	I	will	 tell	you	a
few.
George	 Bernard	 Shaw	 has	 written	 a	 beautiful	 book,	 MAXIMS	 FOR	 A
REVOLUTIONARY.	The	first	maxim	is	a	beautiful	one:	The	first	golden	rule	is
that	 there	 are	no	golden	 rules.	But	Murphy	has	 improved	upon	 it,	 and	George
Bernard	Shaw	would	have	appreciated	it	very	much.
Murphy's	first	golden	rule	is:	Whoever	has	the	gold	makes	the	rules.
Second:	Never	think	of	the	future	--	it	comes	soon	enough.
Third:	For	every	credibility	gap	there	is	a	gullibility	fill.
Fourth:	Youth	looks	ahead,	old	age	looks	back,	middle	age	looks	worried.
Fifth:	Youth	 is	when	 you	 blame	 all	 your	 troubles	 on	 your	 parents;	maturity	 is
when	you	learn	that	everything	is	the	fault	of	the	younger	generation.
Sixth:	The	best	thing	about	the	golden	old	days	is	that	they	cannot	come	back.
Seventh:	 Being	 frustrated	 is	 disagreeable,	 but	 the	 real	 disasters	 in	 life	 begin
when	you	get	what	you	want.
Eighth:	The	solution	to	a	problem	changes	the	problems.
Ninth:	Almost	anything	is	easier	to	get	into	than	to	get	out	of.
Tenth:	Beauty	is	only	skin	deep,	ugly	goes	to	the	bone.
Eleventh:	Celibacy	is	not	hereditary.
Twelfth:	Friends	come	and	go,	but	enemies	accumulate.
And	thirteenth:	If	you	think	education	is	experience,	try	ignorance.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
YESTERDAY	 IN	 LECTURE	 YOU	 SAID	 THAT	 LAUGHTER	 WAS
NATURAL.	 I	HAVE	ALSO	HEARD	YOU	SAY	THAT	WHAT	IS	NATURAL
IS	EASY	AND
RIGHT.
WHY	 DO	 I	 FIND	 IT	 SO	 DIFFICULT	 TO	 LAUGH	 --	 EVEN	 AT	 YOUR
JOKES?
Anand	Kevala,	 laughter	 is	 natural,	 but	 you	 are	 not	 natural;	 hence	 the	meeting
cannot	happen.	You	will	have	to	be	natural	too.	And,	yes,	I	say	what	is	natural	is
easy	and	 right,	 but	because	you	are	not	natural	you	are	neither	 easy	nor	 right.
Your	whole	upbringing	makes	you	artificial,	arbitrary;	it	destroys	your	nature.	It
imposes	 something	 else	 that	 others	 want	 --	 it	 imposes	 the	 opinions	 of	 others
upon	 you.	 There	 are	 vested	 interests	 that	would	 like	 you	 to	 be	 a	 certain	way.
They	don't	want	you	to	be	natural	--	they	are	afraid	of	nature.
Somewhere	 deep	down	 in	man	 there	 is	 fear	 of	 nature.	That	 fear	 of	 nature	 has
created	many	problems.	 It	has	created	an	ugly	civilization,	 a	 rotten	culture,	 an
anti-nature	technology,	a	science	against	ecology,	a	religion	which	is	not	in	tune
with	your	 innermost	being.	 It	 is	 time	for	man	 to	 revolt	against	all	 this	 that	has
happened	to	humanity	in	the	past!
But	why	is	man	afraid	of	nature?	There	are	reasons.	The	first	is:	nature	is	bigger
than	your	ego,	and	if	nature	is	allowed,	the	ego	cannot	be	in	control.	Then	nature
will	control	you.	Then	you	will	not	feel	that	you	are	in	control,	and	you	would
like	to	be	in	control.
So	rather	than	being	natural,	you	repress	your	nature	and	you	claim	only	a	small
spot	of	your	being.	Only	one	tenth	of	your	being	can	be	controlled	by	the	ego.
Then	you	feel	the	master,	you	are	the	master.	With	nature	you	are	not	the	master;
with	 nature	 you	 are	 nowhere,	 you	 don't	 exist	 at	 all.	 And	 the	 ego	 creates
everything	--	the	ego	creates	morality,	and	morality	is	against	nature.
For	example,	what	can	you	do	if	you	fall	in	love	with	a	woman	who	is	not	your
wife?
That	 falling	 in	 love	 is	 natural,	 but	 you	 have	 to	 look	 to	 other	 things	 --	 your
marriage,	 your	 prestige,	 your	 respectability,	 your	 society,	 your	 religion,	 your
future,	your	salary,	your	job,	your	business	--	and	not	only	in	this	world	but	 in
the	other	world	too.	You	will	have	to	answer	to	God	why	you	fell	in	love.	It	is
better	 to	prevent	nature,	 to	close	nature	completely,	 so	you	 remain	confined	 in
the	rules	and	regulations	of	your	society,	culture,	religion.
You	are	taught	ambitiousness,	and	nature	is	nonambitious.	Nature	has	no	instinct
in	 it	 to	be	 the	president	of	 a	 country	or	 to	be	 the	prime	minister	 of	 a	 country.
Nature	 would	 like	 to	 dance,	 sing,	 love,	 eat,	 sleep,	 to	 go	 swimming,	 take	 a
sunbath....	 But	 nature	will	 not	 bother	 to	 become	 the	 president	 of	 a	 country	 --
nature	 is	not	 that	stupid.	Who	wants	 to	become	President	Reagan?	A	third-rate
film	actor	has	become	the	president	of	America.
Now	all	the	third-rate	people	will	be	feeling	great,	will	be	feeling	that	now	they
can	 also	 make	 it.	 All	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 fools,	 mediocre	 people,	 become	 so
prominent	that	if	you	want	to	be	prominent	you	have	to	be	mediocre.
Nature	is	very	intelligent.	It	is	not	mediocre,	it	is	not	stupid;	it	is	tremendously
clear,	clean,	transparent.	You	have	to	destroy	its	transparence,	and	then	naturally
you	become	sad.	Then	you	cannot	laugh.	Laughter	becomes	impossible...because
laughter	is	a	natural	phenomenon.	You	can	be	sad,	you	can	be	miserable;	that	is
not	natural,	that	is	cultivated.
Kevala,	you	cannot	laugh	because	you	are	not	natural.	Relax	and	drop	all	that	is
unnatural	in	you	--	all	pretensions,	pseudo	coverings,	masks.	Be	just	ordinary.	To
be	ordinary	 is	 the	greatest	 thing	 in	 the	world.	Let	me	 say	 it	 in	 this	way:	 to	be
ordinary	 is	 the	 most	 extraordinary	 thing	 in	 the	 world.	 And	 why	 is	 it
extraordinary?	--	because	the	desire	to	be	extraordinary	is	very	ordinary.	Hence,
to	be	ordinary	 is	 really	extraordinary.	Only	very	 few	people	have	been	able	 to
manage	it	up	to	now.
Just	be	ordinary	and	laughter	will	come	to	you,	unless	it	has	gone	very	deep	in
you	--
unless,	Kevala,	you	have	been	brought	up	by	Catholics,	Jainas,	or	in	some	other
kind	of	unnatural	way	of	life;	unless	you	are	an	ex-nun!	Then	it	will	be	difficult,
but	 not	 impossible.	 I	 have	destroyed	many	nuns	here!	Now	even	 if	 you	 try	 to
find	 them	you	will	be	surprised	 --	you	will	not	be	able	 to	 find	any	monks	and
nuns.
If	you	want	to	know	a	really	destroyed	nun,	meet	Chintana.	She	has	been	a	great
nun.
When	she	came	 it	was	 impossible	 for	her	 to	 laugh,	and	now	I	 think	she	 is	 the
most	laughing	woman	around	here!	Whenever	she	comes	to	see	me	I	always	tell
her	 to	go	 into	gibberish.	She	 is	 the	most	perfect	 at	 gibberish.	She	makes	 such
beautiful	sounds,	meaningless;	she	starts	speaking	all	kinds	of	languages	which
nobody	understands.	But	she	goes	into	it	really	passionately,	deeply.	One	would
never	have	thought	that	a	nun	could	do	this!
How	do	nuns	and	monks	make	love?
Out	of	habit.
Kevala,	 are	 you	 a	 nun?	 Then	 drop	 the	 habit!	 Or	 perhaps	 you	 are	 in	 more
dangerous	waters	 --	you	may	be	a	Polack!	To	be	a	nun	 is	only	a	question	of	a
few	years	of	conditioning,	but	to	be	a	Polack	needs	many	incarnations!
Have	you	heard	the	story	of	the	Polack	lesbian?
She	loved	men.
The	Polack	patient	lying	on	the	operating	table	whispers	to	the	surgical-masked
doctor,
"You	can	take	your	mask	off	now,	doctor,	I	have	recognized	you!"
In	a	school	in	Poland	the	teacher	asks,	"Has	any	of	you	ever	saved	somebody's
life?"
A	little	boy	raises	his	arm,	"Yes,	my	little	nephew's."
"How	did	it	happen?	Tell	us!"	asks	the	teacher.
The	little	Polack	says,	"I	hid	my	sister's	birth	control	pills!"
The	 unmarried	 Polack	 cleaning	 woman	 had	 a	 baby.	 When	 asked	 by	 a	 social
worker	about	the	father	of	the	child,	she	replied	curtly,	"Dunno!	You	think	I	turn
around	every	time	I	clean	the	stairs?"
The	phone	is	ringing	in	the	doctor's	office.	He	picks	it	up	and	hears	the	desperate
voice	of	a	Polack	woman:	"Hello,	Doc!	Did	I	leave	my	underpants	in	your	room
after	the	medical	examination?"
"No,"	replies	the	doctor,	"they	are	not	here."
Half	 an	 hour	 later	 she	 calls	 again.	 "Hello,	 Doc,	 it's	 me	 again.	 Don't	 worry
anymore,	I	found	them	--	they	were	at	the	dentist's!"
Come	out	of	your	unnaturalness!	Come	out	of	your	Polackness!	Kevala,	laughter
is	one	of	 the	most	 important	 things	 in	 life.	The	person	who	misses	 laughter	 is
going	to	miss	God	too.
I	can	tell	you	categorically	that	when	you	reach	God	he	is	not	going	to	ask	you
what	sins	you	have	committed	and	what	virtues	you	have	accumulated.	He	will
ask,	 "Have	 you	 brought	 some	 new	 jokes?"	 He	 always	 asks	 that!	 He	 must	 be
getting	tired	--	since	eternity	he	has	been	sitting	there	doing	nothing.	Of	course
the	 grass	 grows	 by	 itself,	 but	what	 can	 you	 do	with	 the	 grass?	One	 gets	 tired
seeing	the	grass	growing	by	itself!
Kevala,	 collect	 a	 few	beautiful	 jokes	before	you	 leave	 this	body.	Listen	 to	my
suggestion
--	I	am	really	serious	about	it!
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	The	Forgotten	But	Not	the	Lost
9	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011090
ShortTitle:
COME14
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
0
mins
Q2	and	Q4	on	video
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHY	DOES	EVERYBODY	THINK	ENLIGHTENMENT	IS	A	JOKE?
Sarito,	it	is!	But	only	a	child	can	ask	such	a	beautiful	question	--	Sarito	is	only
twelve	years	of	age.	Enlightenment	is	a	joke	because	it	is	not	something	that	you
have	 to	 achieve,	 yet	 you	 have	 to	make	 all	 possible	 efforts	 to	 achieve	 it.	 It	 is
already	the	case:	you	are	born	enlightened.
The	word	"enlightenment"	 is	beautiful.	We	come	from	the	source,	 the	ultimate
source	of	light.	We	are	small	rays	of	that	sun,	and	howsoever	far	away	we	may
have	gone,	our	nature	remains	the	same.	Nobody	can	go	against	his	real	nature:
you	can	forget	about	it,	but	you	cannot	lose	it.	Hence	attaining	it	is	not	the	right
expression;	 it	 is	not	attained,	 it	 is	only	remembered.	That's	why	Buddha	called
his	method	SAMMASATI.
Sammasati	 means	 right	 remembrance	 of	 that	 which	 is	 already	 there.	 Nanak,
Kabir,	Raidas,	 they	 have	 all	 called	 it	 SURATI.	 Surati	means	 remembering	 the
forgotten,	but	not	the	lost.	Whether	you	remember	or	not,	it	is	there	--	it	is	there
exactly	the	same.	You	can	keep	your	eyes	closed	to	it	--	it	is	there.	You	can	open
your	eyes	--	it	is	there.	You	can	keep	it	behind	your	back	--	it	is	there.	You	can
take	a	one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn	and	see	it	--	it	is	there.	It	is	the	same.
George	Gurdjieff	used	 to	call	his	method	self-remembering.	Nothing	has	 to	be
achieved,	nothing	at	all,	but	only	to	be	discovered.	And	the	discovery	is	needed
because	we	go	on	gathering	dust	on	our	mirrors.	The	mirror	is	there	covered	by
the	dust.	Remove	the	dust,	and	the	mirror	starts	reflecting	the	stars,	the	beyond.
Krishnamurti	 calls	 it	 awareness,	 alertness,	 attentiveness.	 These	 are	 different
expressions	for	the	same	phenomenon.	They	are	to	remind	you	that	you	are	not
to	go	anywhere,	not	to	be	somebody	else.	You	just	have	to	find	out	who	you	are,
and	the	finding	is	not	difficult	because	it	is	your	nature	--
just	a	little	reshuffling	inside,	a	little	cleaning.
It	 is	said	 that	when	Bodhidharma	attained	enlightenment,	he	 laughed	for	seven
days	 continuously.	 His	 friends,	 his	 disciples,	 thought	 he	 had	 gone	mad.	 They
asked	him,
"Have	you	gone	mad?"
He	said,	"I	WAS	mad,	now	I	have	become	sane.	I	have	gone	sane!"
"Then	why	are	you	laughing?"	they	asked.
He	said,	"I	am	laughing	because	I	have	been	searching	for	thousands	of	lives	for
something	which	was	already	within	me!	The	seeker	was	the	sought,	and	I	was
looking	everywhere	else	--	I	was	looking	everywhere	except	inside."
The	 famous	 Sufi	 woman,	 Rabiya	 al-Adabiya,	 one	 evening	 when	 the	 sun	 was
setting,	was	found	searching	for	something	just	in	front	of	her	door	on	the	road.
A	few	people	gathered	and	they	said,	"Rabiya,	what	have	you	lost?	We	can	help
you."
She	 was	 an	 old	 woman	 and	 loved	 by	 the	 people,	 loved	 because	 she	 was
beautifully	crazy.
Rabiya	 said,	 "I	 have	 lost	my	needle.	 I	was	 sewing	 and	 I	 lost	my	needle.	 I	 am
searching	 for	 it,	 and	 there	 is	 not	much	 time	 because	 the	 sun	 is	 setting.	 If	 you
want	 to	 help	me,	 help	 quickly,	 because	 once	 the	 sun	has	 set	 and	 darkness	 has
descended,	it	will	be	impossible	to	find	the	needle."
So	they	all	started	a	hectic	search	for	the	needle.	One	of	them	suddenly	thought,
"The	needle	 is	 such	a	 small	 thing	and	 the	 road	 is	 so	big,	 and	 the	 sun	 is	going
down	every	moment,	the	light	is	disappearing	--	unless	we	know	the	exact	spot
where	 it	has	 fallen	 it	will	be	 impossible	 to	 find	 it."	So	he	asked	Rabiya,	 "Will
you	please	tell	us	where	the	needle	has	fallen	exactly?	Then	it	will	be	possible	to
find	it.	Otherwise	soon	there	will	be	darkness,	and	the	road	is	very	big	and	the
needle	is	very	small."
Rabiya	 started	 laughing.	 She	 said,	 "Please	 don't	 ask	 that,	 because	 I	 feel
embarrassed	by	the	question!"
They	all	stopped	searching.	They	said,	"What	is	the	matter?	Why	should	you	feel
embarrassed?"
She	 said,	 "I	 feel	 embarrassed	because	 I	 lost	 the	needle	 INSIDE	 the	house,	but
because	there	is	no	light	there,	how	can	I	find	it?	Outside	on	the	road	there	is	just
a	little	light	from	the	setting	sun."
They	all	said,	"Now	you	have	gone	completely	crazy!	We	had	always	suspected
that	you	were	not	sane,	but	this	is	an	absolute	proof!"
Rabiya	said,	"You	think	me	insane,	yet	you	have	been	doing	the	same	for	lives
together	--
and	YOU	are	sane?	Where	have	you	lost	yourself,	and	where	are	you	trying	to
find	it?
Where	have	you	lost	your	bliss,	and	where	are	you	trying	to	find	it?	It	is	lost	in
your	inner	world,	and	you	are	searching	on	the	outside!"
Everywhere	 people	 are	 running	 with	 great	 speed.	 Time	 is	 short,	 the	 sun	 is
setting;	any	moment	the	darkness	can	descend.	Run	as	fast	as	you	can!	Man	has
been	 inventing	 faster	 and	 faster	ways	 to	 reach,	but	 if	you	ask	him,	 "Where	do
you	want	to	reach?"	he	feels	embarrassed;	he	is	not	really	clear	where	he	wants
to	 reach.	 One	 thing	 he	 is	 clear	 about	 is	 that	 he	 wants	 to	 reach	 there	 quickly,
because	 life	 is	 short	 and	 much	 has	 to	 be	 found.	 The	 soul,	 God,	 bliss,	 truth,
freedom...so	many	things	have	to	be	found,	and	his	hands	are	absolutely	empty.
Sarito,	in	that	sense	enlightenment	is	certainly	a	joke.	If	you	understand	it,	there
is	no	need	to	seek	and	search;	you	can	just	close	your	eyes	and	find	it.	But	this
question	coming	from	a	small	child	 is	beautiful.	The	grown-up	person	will	not
be	 able	 to	 ask	 such	 a	 sane	 question.	 The	 grown-up	 person	will	 ask,	 "What	 is
enlightenment?	How	has	it	 to	be	found?	What	are	the	right	methods,	ways	and
means?	How	should	one	live?	What	virtues	should	be	cultivated?	What	prayers
should	be	said?"	And	all	those	questions	look	very	relevant.
Sarito,	 your	 question	 does	 not	 look	 very	 relevant,	 but	 it	 IS	 relevant,	 more
relevant	than	any	grown-up	person	can	ever	ask.	Grown-up	people	ask	questions
which	 look	 good	 in	 the	 asking,	 but	 they	 are	 not	 really	 interested	 in	 asking	 an
authentic	question	--	they	are	AFRAID	of	asking	the	authentic	question.
In	an	old	Scottish	mansion	the	resident	ghost	is	floating	through	the	living	room.
Everybody	seems	to	be	scared	to	death	except	a	 little	boy	who	is	watching	the
spectacle	with	a	curious	look	on	his	face.
"Hey,	Mister	Ghost,"	he	says,	"have	you	lost	your	handkerchief?"
"No,"	replied	the	ghost,	"that's	not	a	handkerchief,	that's	my	son!"
But	only	a	small	boy	could	have	asked,	"Hey,	Mister	Ghost...."	All	 the	grown-
ups	 were	 very	 much	 scared;	 they	 must	 have	 been	 trembling,	 avoiding,
pretending	that	they	had	not	seen	anything.
One	 little	boy	asked	 the	other,	"Did	 that	play	you	saw	 last	night	have	a	happy
ending?"
The	other	one	said,	"I'll	say.	Everybody	was	happy	when	it	was	over."
The	Christian	 priest	was	 telling	 the	 little	 boy,	 "Herb,	 I	want	 you	 to	 remember
that	we	are	here	to	help	others."
Herb	said,	"Sure,	but	what	are	the	others	here	for?"
"I	never	slept	with	a	man	until	I	married	your	father!"	she	declared	emphatically
to	her	unconventional	teenage	daughter.	"Will	you	be	able	to	say	the	same	thing
to	your	daughter?"
"Yes,	Mother,"	replied	the	girl,	"but	not	with	such	a	straight	face!"
Mummy	and	Daddy	are	talking	about	the	Millers	who	live	next	door.	"Well,	the
stork	is	going	to	pay	them	a	visit	for	the	fourth	time	soon,"	says	Daddy.
Their	little	son	laments,	"They	get	one	baby	after	another.	And	you	--	what	are
you	doing?	Hanging	around	doing	nothing!"
Children	are	very	perceptive!	You	cannot	deceive	them.
They	were	discussing	the	attraction	older	men	have	for	young	girls.
"My	grandfather	was	like	that.	Young	girls	were	crazy	about	him."
"Was	he	crazy	about	them	too?"
"He	certainly	was.	He	used	to	cut	a	notch	on	his	cane	after	every	conquest.	And
that's	what	killed	him."
"How?"
"Well,	one	day	he	made	the	mistake	of	leaning	on	his	cane!"
Sarito,	you	must	have	heard	this	comment	amongst	the	small	sannyasins	in	the
ashram:
"Why	does	everybody	think	enlightenment	is	a	joke?"	This	must	be	coming	from
the	small	boys	and	girls;	they	must	be	thinking,	"Enlightenment	must	be	a	joke.
What	 is	 the	 need	 for	 enlightenment?"	 You	 need	 a	 teddy	 bear	 --	 you	 can
understand	that.	You	need	a	tricycle	--	that	you	can	understand.	You	need	a	toy
gun	--	that	you	can	understand.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 ago	 a	 new	 visitor	 was	 seen	 carrying	 a	 big	 gun.	 The	 guards
became	a	little	bit	concerned;	he	was	continuously	carrying	it	and	even	trying	to
hide	 it,	 but	 it	 was	 too	 big	 to	 hide.	 Then	 one	woman	 sannyasin	 saw	 him	 also
carrying	the	gun	in	the	marketplace.	The	visitor	was	asked,	"Why	do	you	carry
this	gun?"
He	said,	"I	feel	so	embarrassed,	but	what	to	do?	I	have	brought	my	little	son	with
me	and	he	loves	the	gun!	Without	the	gun	he	goes	nowhere,	and	the	gun	is	so	big
he	cannot	carry	it	himself,	so	I	have	to	carry	it;	otherwise	he	won't	go	anywhere,
and	I	cannot	leave	him	alone!	His	mother	has	not	come;	I	was	not	aware	that	I
would	have	to	do	this	thing.
Everywhere	people	are	asking	me,	`Why	are	you	carrying	this	gun?'	And	this	is
only	a	toy	gun!	I	feel	embarrassed,	I	try	to	hide	it,	but	the	more	I	try	to	hide	it	the
more	people	become	curious	--	`Why?'"
Children	have	their	own	interests	and	they	must	be	wondering,	"Why?	What	is
this	 enlightenment?	And	why	 are	 so	many	 people	 interested	 in	 it?	 It	must	 be
some	kind	of	joke!"
In	fact,	it	is	a	cosmic	joke.	It	is	God	seeking	himself.	It	is	a	game	of	hide-and-
seek:	God	hides	himself	and	then	tries	to	find	himself!	Being	alone,	what	else	to
do?
When	I	used	to	travel	in	India	--	for	twenty	years	continuously	--	many	times	it
happened	that	I	would	be	in	a	train	compartment	with	only	one	passenger.	And
because	I	was	not	 interested	in	talking	to	the	passenger,	he	would	start	playing
patience	--	a	game	of	cards	you	can	play	alone,	you	need	not	have	any	partner.
They	would	feel	a	little	embarrassed,	but	I	would	not	pay	any	attention	to	them
so	they	would	start	playing	cards.
One	day	one	man	said,	"You	must	think	that	I	am	crazy	playing	cards	alone."
I	said,	"I	don't	think	you	are	crazy.	This	is	my	business	too!"
He	said,	"What	do	you	mean?	You	also	play	patience?"
I	said,	"No,	but	enlightenment	is	like	patience!"
Enlightenment	is	a	dialogue	with	yourself,	it	is	a	monologue.	You	have	to	ask	the
question	and	you	have	to	give	the	answer.	When	you	see	the	futility,	you	become
silent.
That's	how	Buddha	became	silent!	Then	one	sits	under	the	tree	"doing	nothing,
and	the	spring	comes	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself."	And	what	to	do?	--	when	the
grass	 grows	 you	 have	 to	 cut	 it	 and	AGAIN	 sit	 silently,	 and	AGAIN	 the	 grass
grows	so	you	cut	it	again.	Again	and	again...!
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 was	 talking	 about	 Gunakar.	 This	 is	 the	 third	 time	 he	 has
become	enlightened,	and	he	will	become	enlightened	many	more	times.	Now	he
is	 feeling	 very	 sad	 --	 after	 each	 enlightenment	 he	 feels	 very	 sad.	He	 is	 doing
something	 impossible;	 nobody	 has	 done	 it	 before.	After	 enlightenment	 people
never	feel	sad	again,	but	after	each	enlightenment	he	feels	very	sad.	In	fact,	one
enlightenment	 has	 always	 proved	 enough,	 more	 than	 enough!	 Three	 times	 he
become	enlightened;	then	he	becomes	unenlightened	again	--	and	then	the	great
sadness.
But	he	cannot	 control	himself.	The	urge	 to	become	enlightened	 is	 so	 irrestible
that	 within	 three	 or	 four	 months	 he	 will	 again	 forget	 and	 will	 become
enlightened.	To	be	enlightened	may	be	a	 joke,	but	 to	become	unenlightened	 is
not	a	joke,	it	is	a	really	serious	affair!
So	when	he	came	 for	blessing	 the	other	night	he	could	not	even	 look	at	me.	 I
tried	in	every	way,	but	he	went	on	looking	down,	up,	here,	there,	but	he	wouldn't
look	at	me.	I	forced	his	third	eye	very	much,	but	what	can	you	do?	--	Germans
don't	 have	 any	 third	 eye!	 You	 can	 go	 on	 pushing	 and	 pushing,	 and	 nothing
happens!
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
WHAT	 PART	 OF	 MOSES'	 TEACHING	 IN	 THE	 SINAI	 DESERT	 COULD
BRING
DOWN	 THE	 AGES	 SUCH	 A	 CHAIN	 OF	 SUFFERING	 TO	 THE	 ISRAELI
NATION?
IS	THERE	ANY	FATE	FOR	A	NATION?
AND	 FROM	YOUR	KNOWLEDGE,	 DID	 THE	 JEWS	 HAVE	 ANY	 CHAIN
FOR
TRANSFERRING	THE	TORAH	FROM	ONE	MASTER	TO	THE	OTHER?
Adam	Shapira,	these	two	religions,	Judaism	and	Hinduism,	are	the	most	ancient
religions	in	the	world.	Just	because	they	are	the	most	ancient,	they	are	the	most
rotten	 too!	And	out	of	 this	 rottenness,	what	 else	can	you	expect?	The	mind	of
man	clings	to	the	old.	And	religion	is	not	like	wine,	that	the	older	it	is	the	better;
the	fresher	it	is,	the	better.	Religion	is	not	wine,	it	is	just	a	hot	cup	of	tea,	an	old,
ancient	cup	of	tea....	But	thousands	of	flies,	and	pundits	and	rabbis	will	be	found
in	it;	there	will	not	be	much	tea	in	it	at	all!	And	it	was	bound	to	happen.
The	Hindus	and	 the	Jews	both	became	dominated	by	 the	pundits,	 the	scholars,
theologians,	 rabbis.	 They	 lost	 track	 of	 the	 enlightened	 masters.	 Even	 though
sometimes	 enlightened	 people	 happened	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 rotten	 tradition,	 they
were	not	accepted,	they	were	rejected.
Hinduism	 rejected	 Buddha,	 and	 Buddha	 was	 the	 peak	 of	 the	 whole	 Hindu
consciousness	-
-	 the	greatest	peak,	 the	Everest.	But	Hindus	rejected	him	for	 the	simple	reason
that	 if	 he	 had	 been	 accepted	 that	 would	 have	 meant	 the	 death	 of	 the	 whole
establishment	 --	 the	 exploitation	 and	oppression	by	 the	priests	 --	 and	 they	had
great	vested	interests	in	it.
The	 same	has	been	 true	of	 Judaism.	 Jesus	was	 the	peak,	but	 the	 Jews	 rejected
Jesus.	In	that	very	rejection,	they	rejected	their	own	flowering.	They	remained	a
tree	 without	 flowers,	 in	 fact	 even	 without	 foliage	 --	 just	 a	 dead	 tree	 with	 no
leaves,	with	no	greenery,	with	no	 flowers,	with	no	birds	 singing,	 no	 shade	 for
travelers	to	sit	underneath.
Whenever	enlightened	masters	are	rejected	by	any	tradition,	that	is	an	indication
that	the	tradition	is	absolutely	dead;	it	cannot	absorb	any	new,	fresh	insight.	The
living	tradition	is	that	which	is	capable	of	absorbing	new	insights.	And	they	are
always	 coming	 --	 God	 is	 not	 finished	 yet	 with	 creation.	 The	 idea	 that	 God
finished	within	six	days	and	then	rested	on	the	seventh	is	sheer	nonsense.	God	is
not	finished	yet	--	he	will	never	be	finished.	God	is	not	a	person	but	creativity,
not	a	creator	but	creativity.	It	goes	on	and	on;	God	is	still	working.	And	there	is
no	holiday	for	God,	because	the	work	itself	is	holy,	the	work	itself	is	joy.	When
the	work	is	not	a	joy,	then	you	need	a	holiday;	when	it	is	tiring,	when	you	are	not
in	 love	with	 it,	 then	you	need	a	holiday.	When	you	love	 it,	 it	 is	a	holiday,	 it	 is
relaxation,	it	is	rest.	God	is	still	at	work,	but	the	priest	cannot	accept	it.
The	Hindu	priest	says	that	God	gave	his	message	in	the	Vedas	and	that	was	the
end	of	it.
He	gave	all	that	was	needed	by	man;	nothing	more	is	needed	at	all.	And	the	Jews
think	that	the	Old	Testament	is	the	end	of	the	story.	It	is	only	the	beginning,	not
the	end.	And	beginnings	cannot	be	very	great,	remember,	 they	are	bound	to	be
childish.
Remember	the	difference	between	childlike	and	childish:	to	be	childlike	is	to	be
a	sage,	to	be	childish	is	not	to	be	a	sage.	To	be	childish	means	to	be	immature;	it
needs	much	improvement,	growth,	maturity.
Judaism	and	Hinduism	both	have	remained	immature.	They	had	the	opportunity
to	become	mature.	Buddha	could	have	 transformed	 the	whole	Hindu	world,	he
could	have	given	 it	 splendor,	 but	 he	was	 rejected;	 the	 priests	would	not	 allow
him	entry.	The	Jews	would	have	been	the	most	significant	people	on	the	earth	if
Jesus	 had	 been	 absorbed.	 But	 strange	 are	 the	 ways	 of	 man,	 very	 strange:	 the
Jews	have	been	waiting	and	waiting	 for	 centuries	 for	 this	 same	man,	 Jesus,	 to
come.	 They	 were	 waiting	 for	 the	 Messiah	 to	 come,	 and	 when	 he	 came	 they
rejected	him	--	they	rejected	him	absolutely.
The	priesthood	is	like	a	cancer	to	every	religion.	The	priesthood	destroys	every
religious	 possibility,	 the	 very	 potential;	 it	 poisons	 the	 very	 source.	 Adam
Shapira,	that	is	the	first	thing	to	be	understood.	The	priests	are	businesslike,	they
are	businessmen.	They	are	selling	some	 invisible	commodity	 to	 the	world,	and
because	the	commodity	is	invisible,	it	is	very	easy	to	sell.	Because	it	is	invisible
you	cannot	catch	them	at	what	they	are	doing.
I	have	heard	that	a	New	York	shop	advertised	that	invisible	hairpins	had	arrived,
and	there	was	a	great	queue	of	women.	Invisible	hairpins	--	who	can	miss?	And
they	were	selling	like	hotcakes.
A	woman	went	in,	she	looked	in	the	box	--	they	were	invisible	hairpins,	so	what
was	there	to	see?	--	an	empty	box!	She	said,	"But	are	they	really	there?"
And	the	salesman	said,	"Lady,	they	are	INVISIBLE	hairpins!	In	fact,	the	truth	is
for	 three	 weeks	 we	 have	 been	 out	 of	 stock,	 but	 still	 they	 are	 selling!	 What
difference	can	it	make?
When	the	pins	are	invisible,	whether	they	are	in	stock	or	out	of	stock	makes	no
difference!"
Whether	God	exists	or	not,	whether	there	is	a	heaven	or	not,	whether	there	is	a
hell	or	not	does	not	matter	--	 these	are	 invisible	commodities,	and	priests	have
been	selling	these	invisible	commodities.
People	 like	 Jesus	or	Buddha	are	very	pragmatic,	very	 realistic.	They	don't	 sell
invisible	commodities;	 they	start	making	a	great	effort	 to	make	God	visible	on
the	 earth.	 They	 themselves	 are	 a	 visible	 expression	 of	 God.	 Now,	 the	 priests
cannot	tolerate	this.	What	will	happen	to	their	invisible	commodities?	And	it	is
such	a	vast	establishment.
The	Jews	have	been	dominated	by	 the	 rabbis,	not	by	masters.	The	 rabbi	 is	 the
exact	equivalent	of	a	pundit.	He	knows	the	scriptures,	but	he	is	cunning,	clever.
He	 theorizes,	 he	 exploits	 your	 misery,	 he	 consoles	 you,	 he	 gives	 you
comforts...but	he	is	in	business.
And	because	 the	 enlightened	masters	have	not	been	 accepted	by	 the	 Jews,	 the
whole	community	has	become	a	community	of	businessmen;	it	has	lost	all	other
qualities.
I	have	heard	the	old	story....
God	wanted	to	sell	the	commandments.	He	asked	a	great	Vedic	seer,	Yagnavalka,
"Would	you	like	to	have	the	commandments?"
Yagnavalka	 looked	 at	 the	 commandments	 and	 he	 said,	 "No,	 because	 if	 you
prohibit	 us	 from	 killing,	 our	whole	 religion	will	 be	 destroyed,	 because	 in	 our
YAGNAS,	in	our	worship,	in	our	religious	rituals,	killing	is	a	must."
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 today	 Hindus	 talk	 so	 much	 about
nonviolence,	 but	 they	 are	 the	most	 ancient	 of	 violent	 people	on	 the	 earth.	Not
only	that,	but	they	gave	violence	a	religious	color.	Even	cows	were	slaughtered
in	their	religious	rituals,	and	not	only	cows,	but	even	men	were	slaughtered.	And
still,	once	in	a	while,	it	happens	that	small	children	are	slaughtered	in	a	religious
ceremony,	in	a	religious	ritual.	And	this	country	calls	itself	nonviolent!
Yagnavalka	said,	"No,	we	don't	want	the	commandments.	`Thou	shalt	not	kill'	--
then	what	will	happen	to	our	religion?"
God	asked	 the	French	people.	They	 said,	 "No,	without	 adultery	our	whole	 joy
will	be	lost!	How	can	we	exist	without	adultery?	Adultery	is	the	whole	game	of
life	 that	 makes	 it	 enchanting,	 meaningful,	 that	 gives	 it	 some	 ecstasy,	 some
excitement.	No,	it	is	not	possible"	--	and	so	on	and	so	forth.
God	 went	 to	 all	 the	 races,	 and	 then	 finally,	 as	 a	 last	 resort	 he	 asked	Moses,
"Would	you	like	to	have	the	commandments?"
Moses	asked,	"How	much?"
And	God	said,	"Free	of	charge."
Then	 Moses	 said,	 "I	 will	 have	 ten!"	 He	 never	 looked	 to	 see	 what	 those
commandments	were	--	if	they	are	free,	then	why	not	have	ten?
That's	how	the	Ten	Commandments	came	into	the	hands	of	the	Jews!	The	Jews
became	a	society	basically	of	businessmen.	That	created	great	hatred	against	the
Jews.	They	became	cunning,	clever,	and	people	became	jealous	of	them.
You	ask	me:	"What	part	of	Moses'	teaching	in	the	Sinai	desert	could	bring	down
the	ages	such	a	chain	of	suffering	to	the	Israeli	nation?"
Moses'	 basic	 revolution	 was	 not	 religious,	 it	 was	 political.	 He	 was	 fighting
against	the	slavery	imposed	by	the	Egyptians	on	the	Israelis.	Hence	the	color	of
his	revolution	was	less	religious	and	more	political.	That's	why	in	Judaism	you
will	not	find	enlightened	masters	like	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu	or	Krishna,	but	you	will
find	prophets.
The	word	"prophet"	 is	absolutely	 irrelevant	 in	 the	Eastern	context.	You	cannot
call	 Buddha	 a	 prophet;	 he	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 prophecy.	 You	 cannot	 call
Mahavira	a	prophet,	you	cannot	call	Lao	Tzu	a	prophet	--	the	word	will	not	fit	--
but	all	 the	Jewish	religious	leaders	are	prophets.	The	prophet	 is	a	special	 thing
that	has	happened	to	Judaism.	The	prophet	is	something	in	between	the	religious
master	and	the	political	leader	--	a	crossbreed.	He	is	religious	AND	political.
Moses'	 inspiration	was	 basically	 political.	 Nothing	 is	wrong	with	 it	 --	 he	was
fighting	for	freedom,	he	was	fighting	against	slavery.	It	is	good,	but	the	fight	was
on	 the	 outside;	 the	 religious	 fight	 is	 inner.	 That	 beginning	 made	 Jews	 very
outward,	 very	 extrovert.	 That	 extroversion	made	 them	 businesslike.	 They	 lost
track	of	 the	 inner	world.	Yes,	 once	 in	 a	while	 a	 few	people	 escaped	 from	 this
pattern	--	Jesus	escaped,	but	he	was	crucified.	Then	other	masters	learned	that	if
you	want	 to	 escape	 it	 is	 better	 to	 escape	 silently.	Then	 silent	 societies	 existed,
silent	 mystery	 schools	 existed	 in	 the	 deserts,	 in	 the	 caves.	 And	 Hassidism	 in
particular	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the	 whole	 Judaic	 religion.	 If	 the	 whole	 Judaic
religion	is	destroyed	and	we	can	save	Hassidism,	then	all	is	saved.	It	is	exactly
the	same:	if	we	can	save	Sufism	and	the	whole	of	Mohammedanism	disappears
from	the	world,	nothing	is	lost.	If	we	can	save	Zen	then	the	whole	of	Buddhism
can	be	forgotten,	because	that	is	the	very	essence	of	it.
But	the	Hassids	learned	that	it	was	better	to	live	inside	the	conventional	mode;	it
was	 unnecessary	 to	 get	 crucified.	 After	 Jesus	 they	 learned	 one	 thing:	 don't
proclaim;	 Jews	won't	 accept	 it.	The	extrovert	 people	become	desertlike	 inside,
and	that	creates	hatred	against	them.
A	beggar	asked	a	rich	Jew	for	something	to	eat.
The	Jew	says,	"You	look	very	Jewish	and	I	am	in	a	good	mood	today,	so	if	you
can	guess	rightly	which	of	my	eyes	is	a	glass	eye	I	will	give	you	something."
The	beggar	looks	into	the	Jew's	face	and	after	a	short	glance	says,	"Your	left	one
is	the	glass	eye."
"That's	right!	But,	tell	me,	how	did	you	find	out?"	asks	the	Jew.
"It	looks	human."
Jacob	gets	off	 the	plane	and	arrives	at	customs	with	three	bags	and	one	parrot.
The	customs	officer,	opening	the	first	bag,	sees	that	it	is	full	of	coffee.	"Who's	all
this	coffee	for?"	he	inquires.
"It's	for	the	parrot	to	eat!"	replies	Jacob.
The	customs	officer	 then	opens	 the	second	bag	which	 is	 full	of	 tape	recorders,
radios	and	watches.	"And	who	is	THIS	for?"	he	demands.
"For	the	parrot	to	eat!"	responds	calm	Jacob.
Opening	the	third	bag,	the	officer	stares	unbelievingly	at	a	suitcase	full	of	gold
and	precious	jewels.	"And	these	jewels?"	he	shouts.	"Are	these	for	the	parrot	to
eat	too?"
"Yes,"	replies	our	traveler.	"Everything	is	for	the	parrot	to	eat!"
"And	if	the	parrot	doesn't	eat	these	things?"	says	the	officer	sarcastically."
"If	 the	 parrot	 doesn't	 eat	 them?	 If	 the	 parrot	 doesn't	 eat	 them?"	 repeats	 an
unbelieving	Jacob.	"Well	then,	if	the	parrot	doesn't	eat,	Jacob	sells	everything!"
Sergeant	 Kazawinsky	 of	 the	 Polish	 police	 force	 was	 attending	 the	 entrance
examination	for	officer	training.
"What	are	rabies,	and	how	would	you	treat	them?"	he	was	asked.
The	 Polack	 was	 obviously	 puzzled	 and	 thought	 for	 a	 few	moments.	 Then	 he
brightened	 visibly.	 "Rabies	 are	 Jewish	 ministers,	 and	 I	 treats	 them	 with
contempt!"
In	 a	 German	 prisoner-of-war	 camp	 the	 commandant	 announced	 over	 the
loudspeakers:	"I	have	some	good	news	for	you.	Today	is	sports	day.	The	English
will	 play	 cricket	 on	 the	 cricket	 field,	 the	Americans	will	 play	 baseball	 on	 the
baseball	 field,	 the	 Indians	will	 play	 hockey	 on	 the	 hockey	 field,	 and	 the	 Jews
will	play	hopscotch...in	the	mine	field!"
Adolf,	 the	 greatest	 conqueror	 of	 all	 times,	 asks	 Satan	 for	 a	 forty-eight-hour
holiday	on	earth.	After	some	hesitation,	his	wish	is	granted.	However,	he	is	back
in	hell	after	only	twenty-four	hours.
His	comment:	"Everything	is	 topsy-turvy	on	earth.	The	Jews	are	 into	wars	and
the	Germans	are	into	money	making!"
But	things	are	changing,	Adam	Shapira.	The	time	for	a	great	change	has	come.
The	 Jews	have	 suffered	much,	 but	 the	basic	 cause	 is	within	 themselves.	Their
rejection	 of	 Jesus	 has	 been	 the	 major	 part	 of	 their	 suffering.	 Secondly,	 they
became	 extroverts,	 interested	 only	 in	 money	 and	 power;	 they	 lost	 their
interiority.	 And	 any	 man	 who	 loses	 his	 inner	 world	 becomes	 shallow,	 empty,
hollow,	meaningless.
You	ask	me:	"Is	there	any	fate	for	a	nation?"
No,	we	create	our	fate;	hence	we	can	change	it	any	moment	we	decide.	We	are
born	in	absolute	freedom;	then	it	is	our	choice	what	to	be.
You	 ask	 me:	 "And	 from	 your	 knowledge,	 did	 the	 Jews	 have	 any	 chain	 for
transferring	the	Torah	from	one	master	to	the	other?"
It	has	been	 there,	but	only	 in	 the	Hassidic	 tradition,	not	 in	 the	ordinary	 formal
Jewish	religion.	The	Hassids	have	been	thought	to	be	mad	people,	but	they	carry
the	 real	 essence,	 and	 that	 essence	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 Jews	 or	 Hindus	 or
Mohammedans	or	Christians	or	Jainas	or	Buddhists.	It	is	the	same	--	it	is	a	kind
of	religiousness.	It	has	been	carried	from	the	master	 to	the	disciple.	But	that	 is
not	part	of	 the	main	 tradition;	 that	has	gone	 to	 the	side	--	small	 labyrinths,	but
not	the	main	asphalt	road.	The	main	Jewish	current	has	been	very	worldly;	it	has
lost	track	of	all	religion.	But	a	few	people	have	dared	to	go	into	the	jungles	on
their	 own,	 alone,	 and	 they	 are	 the	 most	 beautiful	 people	 the	 world	 has	 ever
known.
My	 love	 is	 for	Hassids,	 for	Sufis,	 for	Zen	people,	 for	Tantrikas,	 for	Yogis,	 for
Taoists.
These	are	NONformal	people;	they	don't	really	belong	to	any	tradition	as	such,
to	any	church	as	such,	to	any	race	as	such,	but	they	are	the	real	people	of	God.
The	last	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
THERE	ARE	SANNYASINS	LIVING	ALL	OVER	THE	WORLD	WHO	FEEL
A	 DEEP	 CONNECTION	 WITH	 YOU.	 HOWEVER,	 ON	 CELEBRATION
DAYS	THERE
IS	 ALWAYS	 THAT	 LONGING	 TO	 BE	 IN	 YOUR	 SILENT	 PRESENCE	 IN
BUDDHA	 HALL.	 CAN	 YOU	 PLEASE	 SEND	 A	 MESSAGE	 TO	 THE
THOUSANDS	OF
SANNYASINS	 WHO	 WILL	 BE	 CELEBRATING	 IN	 MANY	 COUNTRIES,
BUT	NOT
IN	YOUR	PHYSICAL	PRESENCE?
HOW	ABOUT	A	FEW	SPECIAL	JOKES	FOR	US?
Prem	Vanya,	remember	one	thing:	that	each	of	my	sannyasins	carries	something
of	me,	 each	of	my	 sannyasins	becomes	a	part	 of	me,	 spiritually,	 physically,	 in
every	possible	way.	My	sannyasins	are	not	believers,	my	sannyasins	are	in	a	love
affair.	It	is	a	MAD
phenomenon!	 So	 wherever	 my	 sannyasins	 meet,	 my	 presence	 will	 be	 felt.
Wherever	my	sannyasins	celebrate,	my	message	is	realized,	because	celebration
is	my	message.
Rejoice!	Sing!	Dance!
Dance	so	totally	that	your	egos	melt	and	disappear.
Dance	so	totally	that	the	dancer	is	no	longer	there,	but	only	the	dance	remains.
Then	you	will	find	me	wherever	you	are.
And	 it	has	now	 to	be	a	known	and	 recognized	 fact	 that	my	buddhafield	 is	not
going	 to	 be	 confined	 to	 the	 small	 place	 where	 I	 will	 be	 living	 with	 a	 few
thousand	 sannyasins.	 All	 the	 small	 communes,	 ashrams,	 centers,	 all	 over	 the
world	 will	 become	 little	 buddhafields.	 We	 have	 to	 fill	 the	 whole	 earth	 with
buddhafields!	We	have	to	create	a	chain	of	buddhafields.
And	it	can	be	done:	 if	you	can	take	some	of	my	joy	and	some	of	my	love	and
some	of	my	laughter	with	you	wherever	you	go,	you	will	be	taking	the	fragrance
of	the	buddhafield	there.	You	will	be	taking	seeds.
Scientists	say	that	in	the	beginning	only	one	seed	must	have	reached	the	earth	by
some	coincidence	--	maybe	a	collision	of	stars,	the	explosion	of	a	star.	One	seed,
and	 the	 whole	 earth	 slowly	 slowly	 became	 green.	 One	 seed	 is	 enough	 to
transform	the	whole	earth	into	a	garden.
The	same	is	true	on	higher	planes	too.	Just	a	single	seed	of	love,	awareness,	joy,
is	 enough	 to	 create	 the	 buddhafield.	 So	 wherever	 you	 go,	 wherever	 you	 are,
never	forget	for	a	moment	that	you	are	not	far	away	from	me.
Between	a	master	and	the	disciple	the	question	is	not	of	physical	distance	at	all.
You	can	be	sitting	here	physically,	but	you	may	not	be	in	tune	with	me;	then	you
are	 not	 here.	 You	 may	 be	 thousands	 of	 miles	 away,	 maybe	 on	 the	 moon,	 on
Mars,	 it	does	not	make	any	difference.	But	 if	your	heart	 is	beating	with	me,	 if
you	 are	 attuned	 to	 me,	 if	 there	 is	 an	 inner	 connection,	 then	 you	 are	 in	 my
physical	presence.	Neither	time	makes	any	difference	nor	space.	The	thing	that
makes	the	difference	is	love.
Vanya,	next	 time	when	you	celebrate,	 celebrate	with	 the	 full	 recognition	 that	 I
am	there	amongst	you.	Just	a	recognition	is	needed	and	you	will	find	me	there.
Jesus	 is	 reported	 to	 have	 said,	 "Wherever	 four	 of	 my	 disciples	 are	 gathered
together,	 I	will	be	 there."	And	he	was	not	 so	 fortunate	as	 I	 am	 --	his	disciples
were	 very	 ordinary	 people.	 I	 am	 fortunate	 in	many	ways:	my	 disciples	 are	 in
many	ways	very	creative,	talented,	very	intelligent,	exploding	in	love.	So	I	can
say	 to	you	 that	 not	 even	 four	 are	needed;	 just	 a	 single	 sannyasin	 is	 enough	 to
make	my	presence	felt	by	others.
So	next	time	you	are	celebrating,	Vanya,	make	it	a	point	that	I	am	there,	and	you
will	feel	it.	It	only	needs	a	recognition.	If	the	recognition	is	not	there,	and	even	if
I	suddenly	reach	your	celebration,	you	will	not	recognize	me	at	all.
It	happened	with	Jesus...the	story	is:
When	he	escaped	from	the	cave	in	which	his	body	was	kept,	when	he	resurrected
after	 three	 days,	 obviously	 he	 tried	 to	 find	 out	 where	 his	 followers	 were.	 He
found	two	followers	who	had	lived	with	him	for	years,	and	he	waited	for	them	to
recognize	 him.	 He	 walked	 with	 them	 for	 miles,	 because	 they	 were	 going	 to
another	town.	They	talked	--
they	 talked	 about	 Jesus,	 they	 talked	 about	 the	 crucifixion,	 they	 talked	 about
many	things	-
-	but	those	two	disciples	could	not	recognize	that	the	man	they	were	talking	to
was	Jesus	himself.	It	was	as	if	a	cloud	prevented	them.	The	cloud	was	that	they
were	 thinking	 that	 he	 was	 dead,	 finished,	 so	 there	 was	 no	 question	 of	 even
asking,	 thinking,	 reconsidering	 who	 this	 man	 was.	 They	 recognized	 him	 only
when	 they	sat	 in	a	 small	hotel	 to	eat	 their	 lunch.	When	Jesus	poured	 the	wine
and	served	the	bread	and	the	sweets	to	the	disciples,	then	suddenly	a	recognition
arose	in	them.	This	was	the	way	Jesus	always	used	to	serve	them	--	the	way	he
poured	the	wine,	the	way	he	gave	them	the	bread	and	the	butter	and	the	sweets.
The	gestures,	 the	 very	gestures	were	 so	 unique	 to	 Jesus	 that	 suddenly	 a	 cloud
disappeared	and	they	fell	at	his	feet.
And	Jesus	 said,	 "Why	could	you	not	 recognize	me?	For	 two	hours	we	walked
together	and	 talked	about	every	kind	of	 thing	and	gossiped,	and	yet	you	could
not	recognize	me?"
They	said,	"There	was	no	question	of	it,	because	a	cloud	was	there	in	our	eyes
that	you	are	dead.	We	did	not	even	ask	the	question	to	ourselves."
Remember,	we	take	note	only	of	things	if	we	are	consciously	ready	to	take	note.
If	you	are	not	consciously	ready	to	take	note,	somebody	may	pass	by	your	side
and	you	may	not	see	him	at	all.
Vanya,	next	time	you	are	celebrating,	make	it	a	known	fact	to	all	the	sannyasins
that	I	am	there.	And	those	who	are	in	tune	with	me,	those	who	really	love	me,
those	who	are	surrendered,	those	who	have	known	some	trust,	will	immediately
feel	 the	presence.	The	presence	can	even	be	felt	more	 there	 than	here,	because
here	you	take	it	for	granted	that	I	am	present;	you	need	not	make	any	effort.	But
there	you	will	 have	 to	make	a	 conscious	 effort	 to	 feel	 it.	That	very	 effort	will
make	my	presence	more	penetrating.
And	these	are	a	few	jokes	for	you	to	laugh	at:
Salesgirl	 to	 shopper:	 "Yes,	 madam,	 these	 bras	 come	 in	 four	 sizes:	 small,
medium,	large	and	wow!"
The	 light	 in	 the	whorehouse	was	out	so	Mimi	came	 into	 the	 room	and	did	not
even	 look	 at	 the	 body	 of	 the	 man	 whom	 she	 was	 in	 bed	 with.	 After	 rolling
around	on	the	bed	for	a	while,	she	stopped,	looked	at	the	guy	and	said,	"What	is
this,	man,	don't	you	have	one?"
"Oh	yes,	I	do!"	answered	the	guy.	"What	I	am	missing	is	my	left	leg!"
Two	 Italian	 woodcutters	 were	 working	 in	 the	 forest.	 Suddenly	 one	 of	 them
missed	the	tree	with	his	axe	and	cut	off	his	companion's	right	leg	in	one	blow.
In	between	screams	and	yells	the	other	woodcutter	angrily	shouts,	"If	you	do	that
again,	I'm-a	gonna	kick-a	the	shit-a	out	of	you!"
A	 Frenchman	 who	 recently	 arrived	 in	 New	 York	 was	 invited	 to	 a	 golden
wedding	 anniversary.	 He	 didn't	 understand	 the	 celebration	 and	 asked	 his
American	friend	about	it.
"Do	 you	 see	 those	 two	 old	 people?"	 asked	 his	 friend.	 "Well,	 they	 have	 been
living	 together	 for	 fifty	 years	 and	 now	 they	 are	 celebrating	 their	 golden
wedding."
"Ah,	ah!"	exclaimed	the	Frenchman.	"He	live	with	the	lady	fifty	years,	and	now
he	marry	her.	How	noble!"
It	was	morning,	and	she	was	still	in	her	robe.	Pausing	in	the	half-open	entrance
door	of	her	home,	she	called	to	the	milkman	who	had	just	then	pulled	up	to	the
curb.
"Pardon	me,	but	do	you	have	the	time?"	she	asked.
"Yes,"	he	said,	"but	not	the	inclination."
The	 Polish	 Police	 Department	 send	 their	 officers	 for	 an	 examination	 before
giving	them	promotion.	Kazowinsky	came	back	from	the	examination	with	his
extra	stripe	and	was	warmly	congratulated	by	his	commanding	officer.
"Good	work!	Tell	us	all	about	it!"	said	the	inspector.
"Well,"	 replied	Kazowinsky,	 "we	were	 all	 close	 until	 the	 final	 question	 of	 the
mathematics	 paper.	 They	 asked	 us	 to	 add	 two	 and	 two	 --	 I	 said	 five!"	 he
announced	proudly.
"But	Kazowinsky,	two	and	two	are	four,	not	five!"	said	the	inspector.
"I	know	that	now,"	he	grinned,	"but	I	was	the	closest!"
A	Polack	 answered	 a	nationwide	quiz	program	 that	 gave	 away	money	even	 to
the	dumbest	people.
"Okay,	Mr	Kozakowsky,	for	one	thousand	dollars,	tell	us,	which	famous	French
general	was	defeated	at	the	battle	of	Waterloo?"
The	Polack	looked	puzzled.
"We'll	 give	you	a	 clue,"	 smiled	 the	questioner,	 and	opened	 the	door	of	 a	 large
refrigerator.	 Inside	was	 a	 bottle	 of	Napoleon	 brandy.	Kozakowsky	 still	 looked
bewildered	and	scratched	his	head.
"Just	read	the	name	you	see	and	you	win	one	thousand	dollars.	Now,	what	was
the	name	of	the	general?"
The	Polack	stared	for	a	moment,	then	smiled.
"Of	course,"	he	said,	"it	must	have	been	General	Electric!"
An	 Italian	 frog	 was	 traveling	 to	 America.	 On	 his	 way	 he	 passed	 a	 beautiful
swamp	where	he	met	a	big	fat	American	frog.	He	said,	"How-a	are	you	doing-
a?"
"Great!"	replied	the	frog.	"In	swamp,	out	swamp,	lots	of	food.	Far	out!"
The	Italian	leaped	on	and	met	another	big	American	frog.	"How-a	are	you	doing-
a?"	he	asked.
"Groovy,	man,	just	great!"	came	the	reply.	"In	swamp,	out	swamp,	lots	of	food	--
great!"
The	Italian	began	to	feel	very	happy	about	his	new	land.	He	leaped	on	and	met	a
tiny,	skinny	little	girl	frog.
"What's-a	wrong-a	here?"	he	asked.	 "I	have-a	met-a	 two	big-a	 fat-a	 frogs	who
said,	Ìn-a	swamp-a,	out-a	swamp-a,	 lots-a	of	food-a!'	But	what-a	has	happened
to	you?"
The	tiny	frog	whispered	in	answer,	"I	am	Swamp!"
And	the	last:
"That	 parapsychology	 course	 at	 the	 Osho	Meditation	 University	 is	 fabulous!"
says	Swami	Francesco.	"My	ESP	talents	are	developing	so	fast!"
"That's	hard	to	believe,"	states	his	friend,	Swami	Giovanni,	"you'd	better	prove
it."
"For	instance,	my	telepathy,"	says	Francesco.	"You	just	point	at	any	door,	and	I
shall	give	you	remarkable	particulars	about	the	person	who	answers."
"Okay,	THAT	door,"	points	his	friend.	"Tell	me	what	will	happen."
"Well,"	meditates	Francesco.	 "I	 feel	 that	 a	man	whose	girlfriend	 is	 having	her
period	will	open	the	door...."
"Hello,	 friends,"	 greets	 Swami	Mariano,	 entering	 the	 room	 through	 the	 same
door.
"Does	your	girlfriend	have	her	period?"	asks	Giovanni.
"Shit!"	answers	Mariano,	wiping	his	mouth	and	chin.	"Can	you	see	it?"
Enough	for	today.
Come,	Come,	Yet	Again	Come
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	No	Question	Means	the	Answer
10	November	1980	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
8011100
ShortTitle:
COME15
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
0
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
BELOVED	OSHO,
I	FEEL	TOO	LAZY	TO	THINK	OF	A	QUESTION.	WHAT	TO	DO?
Anand	Chinmaya,	it	cannot	be	true	that	you	really	feel	too	lazy;	otherwise	who
has	written	this	question?
A	man	was	lying	down	on	the	couch	of	a	very	famous	psychoanalyst,	and	he	was
continuously	 talking	 about	 his	 failures	 in	 life,	 failures	 of	 all	 kinds	 in	 all
directions.	He	was	 trying	 to	prove	 that	 he	was	 an	utter	 failure,	 the	ultimate	 in
failure,	 that	 there	was	nobody	 in	 the	world	who	was	more	of	a	 failure	 than	he
was.
The	psychoanalyst	listened	to	him	silently	as	long	as	he	could	tolerate,	and	then
he	said,
"Stop	all	this	nonsense!	You	cannot	be	such	a	failure!"
The	man	said,	"Why?"
The	psychoanalyst	said,	"If	you	were	a	failure	you	would	not	be	able	to	afford
my	 fee!	 If	 you	 can	 afford	 my	 fee	 for	 years	 --	 and	 I	 am	 the	 most	 expensive
psychoanalyst	in	the	world	--	how	can	you	be	a	failure?"
You	can	ask	such	a	beautiful	question	and	you	think	you	are	lazy?	And	still	you
are	asking	what	 to	do.	 If	you	are	 really	 lazy	you	 should	ask	what	NOT	 to	do.
Lazy	you	can	be,	but	at	least	be	consistently	lazy.	Either	you	are	a	philosopher	or
a	Polack!	In	fact,	both	are	synonymous!	If	you	like	big	names,	beautiful	words,
then	think	of	yourself	as	a	philosopher.
In	 the	 past,	 particularly	 in	 the	 Middle	 Ages,	 many	 mystics	 used	 the	 word
"foolosopher"
for	philosopher	--	and	they	were	right.	If	you	want	to	be	down	to	earth,	then	the
fact	 is	 that	 you	 are	 simply	 a	 Polack.	 Philosophers	 are	 expected	 to	 ask	 such
things....
Centuries	after	Hamlet	had	told	us	what	the	question	is	--	"To	be	or	not	to	be?"	--
Gertrude	Stein's	deathbed	utterance	became	a	 familiar	quotation.	Remember	 it,
Chinmaya,	when	you	are	dying!	Just	before	dying	she	opened	her	eyes	and	said,
"What	is	the	answer?"
The	 people	 who	 were	 around	 her	 were	 a	 little	 bit	 puzzled:	 "How	 can	 one
suddenly	ask,
`What	is	the	answer?'	when	even	the	question	has	not	been	mentioned?"
Somebody	 gathered	 courage	 and	 responded	 to	 Stein's	 remark,	 "But	 we	 don't
know	the	question!"
She	smiled	her	beautiful	smile	and	said,	"Okay,	then	what	is	the	question?"
Neither	 the	 question	 is	 known	nor	 the	 answer	 is	 known,	 and	 you	 need	 not	 do
anything.	If	there	is	no	question	at	all,	it	is	simply	far	out!	Why	create	trouble	for
yourself?	Why	hanker	after	trouble?	If	there	is	no	question,	you	have	attained	the
answer!	No	question	means	the	answer.
You	are	not	here	to	ask	questions.	I	am	not	here	to	answer	your	questions.	You
are	here	to	be	ready	to	destroy	all	your	questions;	I	am	here	to	go	on	hammering
on	your	questions	 so	 that	 they	are	 shattered.	 I	will	not	give	you	any	answer,	 I
will	 only	 destroy	 your	 questions.	 And	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 there	 is	 no
question,	no	answer,	and	that	is	the	state	of	samadhi,	that	is	the	state	of	ultimate
consciousness.	 When	 words	 disappear,	 thoughts	 disappear,	 knowledge
disappears,	ignorance	disappears.	When	only	pure	consciousness	is	left	just	like
a	mirror	reflecting	that	which	is,	 just	 like	THIS	moment...a	silent	pause....	You
can	 hear	 the	 traffic	 noise...it	 always	 happens!	 That's	 why	 the	 mystics	 say
existence	 is	 such	 a	 harmony!	 You	 can	 hear	 the	 birds,	 you	 can	 even	 hear	 the
silence...this	throbbing	of	the	hearts.	This	is	the	state	which	we	are	searching	for
--	not	for	questions,	not	for	answers.
The	 philosopher	 was	 at	 his	 favorite	 occupation	 --	 lying	 in	 the	 sun.	 The	 flies
buzzed	around	and	settled	thickly	on	his	face,	but	he	was	too	lazy	to	shoo	them
away.	Finally	a	hornet	lit	among	the	flies	and	stung	his	nose.	This	was	different.
He	slowly	wiped	his	hand	across	his	face.
"As	long	as	some	of	you	won't	behave,"	he	muttered,	"all	of	you	will	have	to	get
off!"
Questions	don't	know	how	to	behave.	They	are	all	 like	hornets	 lit	amongst	 the
flies.	Your	answers	are	like	flies	and	your	questions	are	like	hornets	lit	amongst
the	flies.	They	all	have	to	be	wiped	off.
The	mind	has	to	be	utterly	emptied.
The	empty	mind	is	the	buddha	mind.
But	if	you	don't	want	to	be	a	philosopher,	if	you	are	not	interested	in	wiping	off
all	the	problems,	all	the	questions,	then	you	can	be	a	Polack.	That	is	the	same	in
a	more	gross	way.	The	philosopher	is	subtle,	the	Polack	is	gross,	but	they	belong
to	the	same	ladder.
The	Polack	may	be	the	lowest	rung	and	the	philosopher	the	highest	rung,	but	the
ladder	is	the	same.
Frankowski	showed	up	at	the	practice	field	to	try	out	for	the	high	school	football
team.
"What	position	do	you	want	to	play?"	asked	the	coach.
"Quarterback!"	answered	Frankowski.
The	 coach	 handed	 him	 a	 football	 and	 said,	 "Do	 you	 think	 you	 can	 pass	 this
ball?"
"Hell,"	said	the	Polack,	"if	I	can	swallow	it,	I	can	pass	it	too!"
A	 journalist	visiting	a	 local	penitentiary	 in	 the	heart	of	Poland	 is	being	 shown
around	 by	warden	 Poltowsky.	As	 they	 enter	 the	maximum	 security	 block,	 the
reporter	 is	 surprised	 to	 hear	 a	 shout	 from	 one	 of	 the	 cells,	 "Twenty-two!"
followed	by	raucous	laughter	from	all	the	other	cells.
Another	 voice	 then	 shouts,	 "Forty-three!"	 which	 is	 again	 followed	 by	 loud
outbursts	of	laughter.
"What	is	going	on,	warden?"	asked	the	bewildered	journalist.
"It	 is	 quite	 simple	 really,"	 replies	 the	warden.	 "These	 fellas	 have	 been	 in	 this
block	so	long	that	they	know	each	other's	jokes.	So	now	when	someone	wants	to
tell	a	 joke	he	simply	shouts	out	 the	number.	Everyone	remembers	the	joke	and
laughs."
"Quite	 a	 good	 idea	 really,"	 remarks	 the	 reporter,	 as	 the	number	 thirty-seven	 is
called	out	and	followed	by	peals	of	laughter.
Then	 there	 is	 a	 loud,	 "Seventeen!"	 and	 then	 silence.	 Puzzled	 by	 the	 lack	 of
response,	the	reporter	asks	the	warden	what	went	wrong.
"Ah,	 that	 was	 Jakowsky	 in	 cell	 eight,"	 sighs	 the	 warden,	 "he	 told	 it	 wrong
again!"
An	American,	a	German	and	a	Polack	were	going	on	safari.	They	split	up	in	the
morning	and	met	again	in	the	evening.	Sitting	around	the	camp	fire	they	started
telling	of	their	adventures.
The	German	says,	"I	shot	two	tigers,	an	elephant	and	some	apes."
The	American,	 says,	 "Ah,	 I	 shot	much	more:	 six	 crows,	 four	 tigers	 and	 about
three	elephants."
They	 both	 look	 at	 the	 Polack,	 who's	 saying	 nothing	 at	 all.	 "What	 about	 you,
Polanski?"
they	ask.
"I	shot	sixty-seven	no-no's,"	he	says.
Although	 the	 American	 and	 the	 German	 had	 quite	 a	 bit	 of	 experience	 in	 the
jungle,	they	had	never	heard	of	such	an	animal.	"What	is	a	no-no?"	they	ask.
"Well,"	Polanski	replies,	"they	are	about	six	feet	high,	black,	curly	hair,	big	lips,
and	when	you	point	your	rifle	at	them	they	shout,	`No!	No!'"
Anand	Chinmaya,	you	need	not	be	a	philosopher,	you	need	not	be	a	Polack;	just
be	a	sannyasin!	And	to	be	a	sannyasin	means	not	to	be	bothered	about	questions
and	answers.
The	 whole	 process	 of	 sannyas	 is	 getting	 rid	 of	 the	 mind.	 Mind	 consists	 of
questions	 and	 answers.	 The	 moment	 you	 get	 rid	 of	 the	 mind,	 then	 only
consciousness	is	left	in	its	purity,	with	not	even	a	ripple.	The	lake	is	so	silent,	so
unperturbed,	so	still,	it	starts	reflecting	the	stars,	the	clouds,	the	moon,	the	trees,
the	flowers,	the	birds	on	the	wing.
There	is	a	Zen	saying	that	the	birds	have	no	desire	to	be	reflected	in	the	lake,	the
lake	 has	 no	 desire	 to	 reflect	 the	 birds	 --	 but	 it	 still	 happens.	 The	 birds	 are
reflected,	 the	 lake	 reflects,	although	 the	desire	exists	neither	on	 the	part	of	 the
birds	 nor	 on	 the	 part	 of	 the	 lake.	 In	 this	 desirelessness	 everything	 happens,
nothing	is	done.
A	sannyasin	has	to	relax	to	that	total	state	of	let-go	when	everything	happens	and
nothing	is	done.	Much	happens,	miracles	happen,	but	don't	ask	me	what	to	do.
Ask	me	 only	 one	 thing:	 "How	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 old	 rut	 of	 the	mind?"	And	 it
consists	of	question	and	answers;	it	is	a	question-and-answer	game.
Slip	out	of	 the	mind	like	a	snake	slips	out	of	 the	old	skin.	The	mind	is	always
old.	It	belongs	to	the	past;	it	is	not	in	the	present,	it	has	no	future.	Mind	means
the	 past,	 the	 dead.	 Mind	 is	 like	 a	 rearview	 mirror	 in	 the	 car.	 If	 you	 go	 on
continuously	looking	in	the	rearview	mirror,	you	are	bound	for	a	great	disaster.
The	car	has	 to	go	ahead,	and	you	will	be	 looking	in	 the	rearview	mirror	at	 the
road	that	you	have	already	passed,	at	the	dust	on	the	road	that	you	have	raised.
That	is	not	the	way	you	are	going,	and	you	are	not	looking	where	you	are	going.
Disaster	is	absolutely	certain.
And	this	is	happening	in	everybody's	life.	You	go	on	reading	the	VEDAS	--	that
is	looking	in	the	rearview	mirror.	Five	thousand	years	have	passed,	and	still	you
go	on	looking	at	the	VEDAS,	you	go	on	reading	THE	BIBLE,	you	go	on	reciting
the	KORAN,	 you	 go	 on	 discussing	Kanad,	 Kapil,	 Aristotle,	 Plato,	 Confucius,
Ma	Tzu...but	all	this	is	sheer	wastage	of	time.
Look	at	the	present.
This	very	moment	God	is	within	you	and	without	you.
And	 if	you	can	 live	 this	God	 in	 total	 serenity,	 in	 total	 attunement,	 at-onement,
you	would	know	the	ecstasy	that	I	am	talking	about,	the	bliss,	the	benediction.
The	second	question:
Question	2
BELOVED	OSHO,
GOD	KNOWS	I	WOULD	NEVER	WISH	TO	CONTRADICT	MY	MASTER,
BUT
THE	OTHER	DAY	YOU	WENT	TOO	FAR!	YOU	SAID	THAT	ALL	THE
ENLIGHTENED	ONES	HAVE	BEEN	ITALIANS	IN	ONE	LIFE	OR	OTHER.
NO
DOUBT	 ABOUT	 YOU,	 OR	 JESUS	 OR	 BUDDHA,	 LAO	 TZU	 OR	 EVEN
NANAK,	AND	RAMANA...BUT	KRISHNAMURTI?
MY	 GOD!	 HOW	 CAN	 YOU	 HONESTLY	 ASSERT	 THAT	 SOMEONE	 SO
SANE
AND	SOBER	AS	KRISHNAMURTI	HAS	EVER	BEEN	AN	 ITALIAN?	WE
HOPE
YOU	APOLOGIZE.
Svatantra	Sarjano,	in	fact,	I	myself,	Jesus,	Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Nanak	and	Ramana
may	not	have	been	Italians	at	all;	hence	still	the	attraction.	I	love	the	Italians	--
that	is	proof	enough	I	have	never	been	an	Italian	before!	But	Krishnamurti?	--	it
is	absolutely	certain	that	he	has	been	an	Italian,	and	not	only	in	one	life	but	many
lives;	 otherwise,	 how	can	he	be	 so	 sane	 and	 sober?	The	 Italians	 have	done	 so
much	damage	to	him,	he	has	not	been	able	to	recover	yet	--	he	is	still	under	the
impact.	He	is	so	much	afraid	of	laughing	in	case	somebody	may	discover	that	he
has	been	an	Italian!	His	seriousness	is	just	the	other	extreme.
I	can	understand,	Sarjano,	your	question,	because	Krishnamurti	is	deadly	serious
about	things;	that	is	one	of	his	flaws.	A	really	totally	enlightened	person	cannot
be	so	serious.
Seriousness	 is	 a	 disease	 of	 the	 mind.	 When	 the	 mind	 is	 no	 longer	 there,
seriousness	has	no	ground	to	stand	upon.	But	Indians	have	respected	seriousness
very	much;	it	is	a	long	tradition.	And	Krishnamurti	has	been	brought	up	by	very
serious	people,	the	Theosophists.
That	whole	bunch	of	Theosophists	was	very	determined	to	show	the	world	that
they	are	the	only	spiritual	people.	Their	whole	investment	was	in	proving	to	the
world	 that	 they	 had	 come	 to	 redeem	 the	 world	 of	 all	 its	 problems,	 illnesses,
diseases.	They	were	bound	to	be	serious.	When	you	are	a	savior	you	cannot	joke
around;	 you	 have	 to	 destroy	 your	 sense	 of	 humor	 absolutely.	 You	 have	 to	 be
continuously	 concerned	 about	 the	 misery	 and	 the	 suffering	 that	 people	 are
passing	through.	And	when	people	are	passing	through	so	much	suffering,	how
can	you	laugh?	how	can	you	enjoy?	how	can	you	even	smile?	That	will	be	cruel.
The	 Theosophists	 had	 this	 idea	 --	 a	 very	 ancient	 idea	 that	 has	 clouded	many
people's	 beings	 --	 that	 they	 wanted	 to	 redeem	 the	 whole	 world.	 In	 fact,	 it	 is
nobody's	business	to	redeem	the	whole	world	--	and	who	has	the	right	to	redeem
anybody	 else?	 If	 the	 other	 person	 is	 enjoying	his	 dream,	 you	have	 no	 right	 to
wake	him	up.	At	 least	 his	 permission	 is	 needed,	 at	 least	 you	have	 to	 ask	him.
Unless	he	wishes,	you	have	to	keep	off.	It	is	interference	--	maybe	for	his	own
good,	 but	 who	 are	 you	 to	 decide?	 If	 somebody	 chooses	 hell,	 then	 it	 is	 his
freedom	 to	choose	 it.	You	can	 feel	 compassion	 for	him,	you	would	have	 liked
him	not	to	choose	hell,	but	what	can	you	do?	Who	are	you?
But	these	saviors	of	humanity	are	bound	to	be	serious	people;	they	are	bent	upon
it.
Whether	 you	want	 it	 or	 not,	 they	will	 force	 you	 into	 paradise!	 They	will	 not
leave	 you	 alone.	 And	 the	 Theosophists	 were	 preparing	 for	 a	 great	 event:	 to
declare	a	world	teacher.
They	 had	 chosen	Krishnamurti	 to	 be	 the	messiah.	Of	 course	 they	 conditioned
him	in	every	possible	way:	they	regimented	him,	disciplined	him	for	so	long	that
the	traces	of	it	have	not	left	him	yet;	the	wounds	are	still	there.	For	twenty-five
years	continuously	he	was	in	this	wrong	company.
Sarjano,	 look	 into	 the	 training	 of	 J.	 Krishnamurti,	 and	 it	 will	 help	 you	 to
understand	why	 he	 is	 so	 serious.	He	was	 never	 allowed	 to	mix	with	 ordinary
children	--	to	play	with	them,	to	laugh,	to	giggle,	to	climb	the	trees,	to	swim	the
rivers,	 to	 fight,	 to	 be	 beaten.	He	was	 never	 allowed	 to	 do	 anything	 that	 every
child	has	a	right	to	do.	His	childhood	was	completely	crushed.	He	was	only	nine
years	of	age	when	he	was	taken	away	from	his	parents.	His	mother	had	died,	and
his	father	was	a	poor	clerk,	so	poor,	and	he	was	not	economically	in	a	situation
to	 educate	 his	 children.	 He	 had	 two	 children,	 two	 boys,	 Nityananda	 and
Krishnamurti.
Seeing	that	the	Theosophists	were	interested	in	the	children	he	was	thrilled	--	a
great	opportunity	was	opening	up.	They	would	not	only	 teach	him	 in	ordinary
schools,	 they	 were	 promising	 that	 they	 would	 educate	 him	 at	 Oxford,	 and	 in
some	very	special	schools	meant	only	for	royalty.	They	would	take	him	around
the	world,	 they	would	arrange	 for	private	 tutors,	 the	best	possible.	What	more
could	the	poor	father	have	desired	and	dreamt	of?	He	willingly	gave	the	children
to	the	Theosophists.
And	 then	 a	 long	 struggle	 began	 between	 Krishnamurti's	 father	 and	 the
Theosophists,	because	when	the	father	became	aware	of	what	they	were	doing	to
his	children,	he	was	aghast.	He	could	not	believe	it,	that	they	were	being	forced
like	 slaves....	They	 had	 to	 get	 up	 at	 three	 o'clock	 in	 the	morning	 and	 read	 the
scriptures	--	Tibetan,	Chinese,	Japanese,	Sanskrit.	And	they	were	almost	asleep,
repeating	 them	 in	 their	 sleep.	 Even	 in	 sleep	 they	were	 not	 allowed	 to	 have	 a
normal	 sleep;	 they	 would	 be	 sleeping,	 and	 the	 man	 who	 was	 in	 charge,
Leadbeater,	would	go	on	repeating	sutras	and	scriptures	softly	in	their	ears.
That	was	the	first	experiment	in	teaching	children	through	hypnosis.	Now	it	is	a
recognized	scientific	method,	and	particularly	in	Russia	where	hypno-teaching	is
becoming	 very	 common.	 Children	 can	 be	 taught	 with	 no	 need	 even	 for
somebody	to	sit	by	their	bed.	Earphones	can	be	put	on,	and	the	tape	recorder	can
go	on	repeating	silently,	very	whisperlike,	so	their	sleep	is	not	disturbed	but	still
the	message	can	go	on	penetrating	to	their	unconscious.	Even	in	their	sleep	they
were	not	allowed	the	freedom	to	dream.	Even	their	dreams	were	controlled.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	dreams	can	be	controlled	--	your	dreams	can
be	 managed	 by	 others.	 For	 example,	 when	 you	 are	 falling	 asleep,	 a	 certain
program	 can	 be	 given	 to	 you	 for	 the	 whole	 night	 so	 that	 these	 will	 be	 your
dreams.	 And	 those	 dreams	 can	 be	 manipulated	 from	 the	 outside	 also.	 For
example,	when	you	are	falling	asleep,	there	comes	a	moment,	an	interval,	when
you	are	not	awake	and	you	are	not	yet	asleep	either	--
just	in	between,	that	boundary	line.	That	boundary	line	is	the	most	sensitive	part
of	your	existence	because	you	are	changing	the	gears	from	one	gear	to	another
gear.	Before	 you	 change	 gears	 you	 have	 to	 pass	 through	 the	 neutral	 gear,	 and
when	you	 are	 in	 a	 neutral	 gear	 anything	 can	be	put	 into	your	head.	That's	 the
whole	 secret	 of	 hypnosis:	 the	 neutral	 gear.	 That	 is	 the	 time	 when	 you	 are
absolutely	vulnerable;	you	cannot	defend,	you	cannot	argue.
So	 Leadbeater,	 Annie	 Besant	 and	 others	 would	 be	 sitting	 around	 when
Krishnamurti	was	 falling	 asleep,	waiting	 for	 the	moment,	 for	 indications.	And
there	are	very	simple	methods	to	know	whether	the	child	is	in	the	interval	or	not.
For	 example,	 the	 child	 can	 be	 told,	 "Go	 on	 looking	 at	 the	 roof	 continuously
without	 blinking	 your	 eyes."	A	moment	 comes	when	 the	 eyes	 become	 glassy;
they	are	 seeing	and	yet	not	 seeing.	That	 is	 the	 time	when	 the	neutral	gear	has
come	 into	 existence.	 Wakefulness	 has	 gone,	 sleep	 has	 yet	 to	 come.	 It	 is	 the
evening	time;	the	day	is	no	more,	the	night	is	entering.	It	is	the	most	vulnerable,
the	most	sensitive	 time.	Say	anything	and	it	will	go	directly	 to	 the	heart	of	 the
child.	It	will	condition	the	child	the	deepest.
So	 they	 were	 conditioning	 the	 child,	 even	 managing	 his	 dreams,	 telling	 him,
"You	will	be	dreaming	of	a	great	desert.	For	miles	and	miles	there	is	nobody	--
sand	and	sand	and	sand,	and	you	go	on	and	on...."	And	you	can	help	the	dream
from	the	outside	too.	You	have	put	the	seed	inside;	then	just	a	little	heat	near	the
feet	and	the	child	will	start	dreaming	of	the	desert,	because	the	heat	near	the	feet
will	give	him	the	feeling	of	walking	on	hot	sand.	A	little	heat	near	the	head	and
he	will	 feel	he	 is	 under	 the	hot	 sun,	 and	you	have	 triggered....	You	have	done
both	the	things:	you	have	put	the	idea	in	the	unconscious,	and	you	have	triggered
the	process	from	the	body.	The	child	is	bound	to	dream	about	the	desert,	and	of
course	he	will	follow	the	program	that	you	have	given.
This	 way	 Krishnamurti	 was	 conditioned	 while	 awake,	 while	 asleep.	 He	 was
moved	 from	one	country	 to	another	country.	He	was	never	allowed	 to	become
friendly	with	anybody;	he	had	no	 friends.	How	can	he	know	what	 laughter	 is?
He	was	never	allowed	 to	 fall	 in	 love	with	a	woman,	with	a	girl	 --	how	can	he
know	what	laughter	is?
And	 the	 people	 he	 was	 with	 were	 really	 a	 strange	 group	 of	 people.	 This
Leadbeater	was	a	homosexual;	he	was	not	interested	in	women	and	hence	he	was
very	much	against	women.	And	he	was	found	in	very	suspicious	postures	with
Krishnamurti	--	a	small	child.
When	the	father	became	aware	of	what	was	going	on,	he	went	to	the	courts.	The
case	went	on	for	years	in	the	high	court	of	Madras.	The	father	proved	in	every
way	 that	Leadbeater	was	 a	 homosexual.	He	produced	witnesses	who	had	 seen
him	 doing	wrong	 things	with	 his	 children.	 But	 then	 Leadbeater	 escaped	 from
India,	and	before	the	court	could	decide	that	the	children	should	be	returned	to
the	 father,	Annie	Besant	escaped	with	 the	children	out	of	 India,	 and	 the	 father
could	never	get	the	children	back.
Nityananda,	 the	 elder	 brother,	 died	 because	 of	 all	 the	 work	 that	 was	 being
imposed	upon	them.	When	he	was	suffering	from	delirium,	they	thought	that	he
was	being	influenced	by	great	spiritual	masters	--	Kuthumi,	et	cetera	--	 that	he
was	being	transformed	by	the	spiritual	hierarchy.	And	that	is	all	bullshit!	There
is	no	spiritual	hierarchy,	nothing.
Even	Gunakar	has	started	writing	about	spiritual	hierarchy.	He	has	issued	letters
and	messages	to	all	the	U.N.	members,	and	they	must	think	that	I	am	behind	it,
because	 my	 name,	 my	 picture	 is	 on	 his	 letterhead.	 And	 Gunakar	 goes	 on
suggesting	to	them	that	there	is	a	spiritual	hierarchy	working	in	the	world.	First
he	used	to	call	me	"Master,"	now	he	calls	me	"Elder	Brother."	Sooner	or	later	I
am	waiting	for	him	to	write,	"Dear	Younger	Brother."	He	is	rising	higher	in	the
hierarchy!	Now	I	am	just	an	elder	brother.	It	will	not	be	a	surprise	if	one	day	he
writes,	"My	dear	son."
Leadbeater	was	the	most	cunning	of	 the	people	who	were	trying	to	manipulate
these	small	children	in	the	name	of	some	hierarchy.	He	was	writing	books	in	the
name	 of	 Krishnamurti.	 He	 has	 written	 a	 book	 THE	 PAST	 LIVES	 OF
ALKAYONI.	 Alkayoni	 is	 the	 fictitious	 name	 for	 the	 many	 many	 lives	 of
Krishnamurti.	Because	 in	each	 life	 there	was	a	different	name,	Alkayoni	 is	 the
fictitious	 name	 for	 all	 these	 lives,	 thousands	 of	 lives.	 Leadbeater	 wrote	 these
books	and	they	were	all	signed	by	Krishnamurti.	And	now	Krishnamurti	says,	"I
don't	 remember	 at	 all	when	 I	wrote	 these	 books,	when	 I	 even	 signed.	 I	 know
nothing	about	them."	They	were	all	written	by	Leadbeater.
In	fact,	a	child	of	ten	or	twelve	years	cannot	have	written	those	books;	he	cannot
have	 any	 such	 stupid	 ideas	 --	 no	 child	 can	 be	 so	 stupid.	And	 all	 this	 spiritual
jargon....	And	then,	finally,	Leadbeater	and	his	colleagues	started	writing	a	very
famous	book	which	became	a	world-famous	spiritual	treatise:	AT	THE	FEET	OF
THE	 MASTER.	 That	 too	 was	 published	 in	 the	 name	 of	 Krishnamurti,	 and
Krishnamurti	simply	says	he	knows	nothing	about	it.
These	 twenty-five	 years	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	 unnecessary	 torture,	 no	 ordinary	 life
available....
He	was	not	allowed	to	walk	in	the	gardens	where	other	people	were.	He	was	not
allowed	to	meet	and	mix	with	people,	because	he	was	"the	world	teacher"	--	how
could	 he	mix	 with	 ordinary	 human	 beings?	 Naturally	 he	 has	 lost	 all	 sense	 of
humor.	It	is	sad	--	and	all	because	of	that	idea	of	the	world	teacher.	He	renounced
the	idea	finally,	and	that	is	the	only	good	thing	that	he	has	ever	done	in	his	life.
He	 renounced	 the	 idea	 that	 "I	 am	 a	world	 teacher,"	 but	 that	 renunciation	was
only	 superficial;	 it	 never	 came	 through	 his	 innermost	 core.	 Deep	 down	 he
continues	to	be	the	world	teacher	still.	That's	why	he	becomes	very	angry	if	you
don't	listen	to	him;	he	even	starts	hitting	his	own	head.	Even	talking	to	people,	if
they	don't	understand	him	and	 the	way	he	 talks	 --	 it	 is	so	monotonous,	 it	 is	so
boring,	that	unless	somebody	is	doing	some	research	on	boredom,	nobody	can	be
interested,	people	cannot	understand	--	then	he	starts	beating	his	head,	shouting,
becomes	enraged.	But	the	whole	idea	deep	down	is	to	redeem	the	world.
If	you	don't	understand	me	it	doesn't	matter,	it	is	your	freedom.	It	is	my	freedom
to	 talk;	 it	 is	 your	 freedom	 to	 understand	 or	 not	 to	 understand	 or	 to
misunderstand.	How	can	I	decide	for	you?	I	cannot	be	enraged.	Even	if	you	all
fall	asleep	I	cannot	be	enraged.	I	will	have	a	good	laugh!	Even	the	idea	of	giving
so	many	 people	 a	 good	morning	 sleep	 is	 such	 a	 consolation	 that	 one	 is	 doing
some	service	to	people!
You	say,	Sarjano:	"...but	Krishnamurti?	My	God!	How	can	you	honestly	assert
that	someone	so	sane	and	sober	as	Krishnamurti	has	ever	been	an	Italian?"
For	 me	 to	 assert	 anything	 honestly	 or	 dishonestly	 makes	 no	 difference.
Whatsoever	is	right	at	the	moment,	honest	or	dishonest,	right	or	wrong,	true	or
untrue....	I	believe	in	Gautam	Buddha's	definition	of	truth:	that	which	works.	If
honesty	works,	perfectly	okay.
I	am	a	nonserious	person;	these	are	also	serious	things.	Honest?	--	why	should	I
be	honest?	Things	should	be	taken	playfully.	What	is	wrong	in	being	dishonest
once	in	a	while,	just	for	a	change?
And	you	say,	"...so	sane	and	sober...."	If	a	man	is	one	hundred	percent	sane,	then
he	is	insane.	Something	of	insanity	is	a	basic	ingredient	of	real	sanity.
Zorba	 the	Greek	 says	 to	 his	 boss,	 "Boss,	 everything	 is	 right	 in	 you,	 only	 one
thing	is	missing	--	a	little	touch	of	madness."
A	man	without	a	little	madness	is	flat	--	flat	like	a	flat	tire!	A	little	bit	of	madness
brings	some	spice	to	your	life	--	some	color,	some	intensity,	some	passion,	some
dance,	some	celebration.
Krishnamurti,	 even	 if	 he	 enters	 paradise,	will	 remain	 sane	 and	 serious.	 I	 don't
think	he	will	be	welcome	 there.	He	will	 start	 talking	about	 the	same	 things	he
has	 been	 talking	 about	 on	 the	 earth	 for	 sixty	 years,	 and	 he	will	 beat	 his	 head
because	 even	 the	 angels	 are	 not	 going	 to	 listen	 to	 him!	Angels	 don't	 listen	 to
spiritual	 discourses.	 Their	 whole	 work	 is	 playing	 their	 harps,	 sitting	 on	 the
clouds	 and	 shouting	 "Alleluia!"	 They	 will	 fit	 with	 me	 perfectly,	 but	 can	 you
imagine	 angels	 playing	 "Alleluia!"	 on	 their	 harps	 and	 dancing	 around
Krishnamurti?	He	will	commit	suicide:	All	this	"Alleluia!"	and	the	whole	world
has	to	be	redeemed!	Everybody	is	suffering,	and	these	fools....	But	I	can	enjoy!	I
may	even	start	learning	how	to	play	on	the	harp.	I	have	tried	a	little	bit,	just	in
order	to	be	ready	at	least,	so	I	am	not	an	absolute	outsider	there!
But	if	he	is	so	sane	and	sober,	it	must	be	the	spaghetti	that	has	gone	to	his	head!
Too	much	spaghetti	in	the	head	makes	people	very	sane	and	sober.
And	you	say	to	me,	"We	hope	you	apologize."
I	have	never	done	 that,	 and	 I	 am	never	going	 to	do	 it	 --	 that	 is	not	my	way.	 I
never	repent,	I	never	apologize	--	for	what?	I	am	doing	my	thing.	If	somebody
feels	 angry	he	 can	do	whatsoever	he	wants	 to	do.	He	can	 shout	 at	me,	he	 can
condemn	me;	there	is	no	problem	for	me	at	all.	In	fact,	I	enjoy	all	this.	Whenever
people	become	interested	--	this	is	a	kind	of	interest,	if	somebody	is	offended	--	I
rejoice.	 A	 connection	 has	 been	 made	 --	 not	 a	 very	 good	 connection,	 but	 a
connection	is	a	connection	anyway!	If	it	is	bad	today,	tomorrow	it	can	be	good.
Mrs.	Carbotti	went	to	the	doctor	complaining	of	fatigue.	After	the	examination,
the	doctor	decided	she	needed	a	rest.
"Can	you	 stop	having	 relations	with	your	 husband	 for	 about	 three	weeks?"	he
asked.
"Sure,"	she	replied,	"I	got	two	boyfriends	who	can	take	care	of	me	for	that	long!"
That's	why	I	like	the	Italians	--	they	are	so	human,	so	truly	human!
Giovanni	said	to	his	daughter,	"I	no	like-a	that	Irish	boy	taking	you	out-a.	He	is-a
rough	and	common,	and	besides-a,	he	is-a	a	big-a	dumbell!"
"No,	papa,"	replied	the	girl,	"Tim	is	the	most	clever	fella	I	know."
"Why-a	you	say-a	that?"
"We	have	only	been	dating	nine	weeks	and	already	he	has	cured	me	of	that	little
illness	I	used	to	get	every	month!"
A	vet	goes	to	Giuseppe's	farm	to	artificially	inseminate	his	cows.	While	there,	he
gets	an	urgent	call	to	another	farm.	He	decides	to	give	Giuseppe	the	syringe	and
explain	how	to	do	it,	then	rushes	off.
A	little	while	later	the	local	parish	priest	doing	his	rounds	knocks	on	the	farmer's
door.
Pierino	opens	the	door	and	the	priest	asks	where	his	father	is.
"He	is-a	down	at-a	the	cow-shed,"	replies	the	little	boy,	"but	it	is-a	better	not-a	to
go	 there.	 It	 is-a	 the	 third-a	 time	that	he	 tries	 to	 inseminate	 the	cow	and	he	 is-a
swearing	like	hell-a!"
"What,	what...what	 are	 you	 saying?"	 says	 the	 priest.	 "Ah,	my	God!	And	 does
your	mother	know	what	he	is	doing?"
"Of	course-a,"	replies	Pierino.	"She	is-a	the	one-a	who	keeps-a	the	cow's	fanny
open	and	shouts,	`Come	on-a,	Giuseppe,	this	is-a	time	you	will-a	make	it!'"
Now	these	beautiful	Italians...who	cares	about	enlightenment?
A	teacher	was	getting	acquainted	with	her	fourth-grade	pupils	by	letting	them	get
up	and	talk	about	the	best	thing	they	did	during	the	summer	holidays.
"And	you,	Johnny?"	asked	the	teacher.
"Well,	I	played	with	my	train	set,"	reported	Johnny.
"What	about	you,	Gloria?"
"Ah,	we	 took	 a	wonderful	 trip	 to	 the	mountains	 for	 the	whole	 summer,"	 said
Gloria.
"And	you,	Liza?"	asked	the	teacher	of	Little	Black	Liza.
"I	like	to	fuck!"	reported	Liza.
"Ah,	Liza,	what	 a	 terrible	 thing	 to	 say!	 I	want	you	 to	go	home	and	not	 return
until	you	have	a	note	from	your	mother,	informing	me	that	she	is	aware	of	what
you	have	said!"
demanded	the	teacher.
Two	days	passed	before	Liza	finally	returns	to	class.
"Do	you	have	that	note	I	asked	you	to	bring,	Liza?"	asked	the	teacher.
"No,	teacher,	I	ain't	got	no	note.	I	told	Momma	what	I	said,	then	I	told	Momma
what	you	said,	and	Momma	said	that	if	somebody	don't	like	to	fuck	they	must	be
a	cocksucker,	and	she	don't	want	to	correspond	with	your	kind!"
The	third	question:
Question	3
BELOVED	OSHO,
PLEASE	 TELL	 US	 A	 FEW	 MORE	 MURPHY	 SUTRAS	 AND	 A	 FEW
MURPHY
ANECDOTES	TOO.
Gandharva,	the	Murphy	sutras	are	really	beautiful!
The	first	sutra:	If	wives	were	good,	God	would	have	one.
Second:	Some	people	are	born	silly,	some	people	acquire	silliness,	and	some	fall
in	love.
Third:	After	man	came	woman,	and	she	has	been	after	him	ever	since.
Fourth:	Be	thrifty	when	you	are	young,	and	when	you	are	old	you	will	be	able	to
afford	the	things	that	only	the	young	can	enjoy.
Fifth:	Never	miss	an	opportunity	to	make	others	happy,	even	if	you	have	to	leave
them	alone.
Sixth:	Heredity	is	something	people	believe	in	if	they	have	bright	children.
Seventh:	When	in	Rome,	do	as	the	Romans	do	--	eat	spaghetti.
Eighth:	Some	men	have	no	solution	for	any	difficulty,	but	will	find	a	difficulty
for	any	solution.
If	you	don't	believe	in	this	eighth	sutra	you	can	ask	Asheesh.	He	is	 the	perfect
personification	of	this	sutra!	He	has	no	solution	for	any	difficulty,	but	you	give
him	any	solution	and	he	will	find	the	difficulty!
Ninth:	There	 is	no	time	like	 the	present	for	postponing	what	you	don't	want	 to
do.
Tenth:	Teamwork	is	essential	--	it	allows	you	to	blame	someone	else.
Eleventh:	You	can	make	it	foolproof,	but	you	can't	make	it	damn	foolproof.
Twelfth:	The	height	of	futility	is	to	tell	a	hair-raising	story	to	a	bald	man.
Thirteenth:	What	is	dumber	than	a	dumb	Italian?	A	dumb	Indian.
Fourteenth:	Adam	was	 the	happiest	man	on	earth.	Eve's	mother	never	 told	her
that	nice	girls	did	not	do	it	that	way.
Fifteenth:	You	can't	get	there	from	here,	and	besides	there	is	no	place	else	to	go.
And	a	few	anecdotes	about	Murphy....
The	first:	"I	am	getting	more	and	more	absent	minded,"	said	Murphy	to	a	few	of
his	cronies.	"Sometimes	in	the	middle	of	a	sentence	I...."
"That	fellow	Bobo	is	so	rude:	this	morning	he	was	snoring	in	church!"
"Yes,	I	know,"	said	Murphy.	"He	woke	me	up!"
Murphy	had	recently	become	the	father	of	triplets,	and	the	priest	stopped	him	on
the	street	to	congratulate	him.
"Well,	Murphy,"	he	said,	"so	the	stork	smiled	on	you."
"Smiled	on	me!"	exclaimed	Murphy.	"He	laughed	out	loud!"
One	friend	met	Murphy	at	the	station.	"Where	are	you	going?"	the	friend	asked.
"To	Paris,	for	my	honeymoon,"	said	Murphy.
"Without	your	wife?"
"Listen,	when	you	go	to	Munich,	do	you	take	beer	with	you?"
One	Sunday	morning	the	preacher	was	ill	and	could	not	come	to	the	church	to
perform	 his	 duties,	 so	 Murphy	 was	 doing	 his	 work.	 He	 was	 urging	 his
congregation	to	sing.
"Now	is	the	opportunity	for	all	of	you	gifted	with	wonderful	voices	to	show	your
gratitude	 towards	 the	Lord.	And	for	all	of	you	without	good	voices,	 this	 is	 the
time	to	get	even	with	him!"
Murphy	came	home	an	hour	earlier	than	usual	and	found	his	wife	stark	naked	in
bed.
When	 he	 asked	 why,	 she	 explained,	 "I	 am	 protesting	 because	 I	 don't	 have
anything	to	wear."
Murphy	pulled	open	the	closet	door.	"That's	ridiculous,"	he	said,	"Look	in	here.
There	is	a	yellow	dress,	a	red	dress,	a	print	dress,	a	pant	suit...Hi	Chris!...a	green
dress...."
And	 the	 last:	 The	 son	 was	 sitting	 at	 the	 bedside	 of	 the	 elderly	 gentleman,
Murphy,	who	was	dying.	"Where	do	you	want	to	be	buried,"	the	kid	asked,	"in
Forest	Lawn	or	Hillside	Memorial	Park?"
The	old	man	creaked	up	on	his	elbow	and	answered,	"Surprise	me!"
Enough	for	today.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	You	Are	the	Question
Chapter	title:	Let	Sannyas	Happen
Chapter	title:	Aes	Dhammo	Sanantano
Chapter	title:	Silence	and	Song	Meet
Chapter	title:	Everybody	Can	Laugh
Chapter	title:	The	Suchness	of	Things
Chapter	title:	From	Italy	to	Nirvana
