
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Talks	given	from	30/01/89	pm	to	05/02/89	pm
English	Discourse	series
7	Chapters
Year	published:	1989
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Marx	and	buddha	hand	in	hand
30	January	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8901305
ShortTitle:
FIRE01
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
140
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
YAKUSAN	ASKED	A	MONK,	"WHERE	DO	YOU	COME	FROM?"
"FROM	NANSEN,"	WAS	THE	REPLY.
"HOW	LONG	WERE	YOU	THERE?"	YAKUSAN	CONTINUED.
"FROM	LAST	WINTER	TO	SUMMER,"	REPLIED	THE	MONK.
"THEN	 YOU	 MUST	 HAVE	 BECOME	 A	 GOOD	 OX,"	 COMMENTED
YAKUSAN.
THE	MONK	SAID,	"THE	THING	IS,	 I	WAS	THERE,	BUT	I	DIDN'T	EVEN
GO	TO
THE	DINING	HALL."
"BUT	YOU	CANNOT	GET	BY	JUST	THROUGH	BREATHING	THE	WIND!"
YAKUSAN	COMMENTED.
"IT	WAS	NOT	THAT	BAD,	OSHO,"	SAID	THE	MONK.	"THERE	IS	SURELY
A	MAN	WHO	WILL	HOLD	A	SPOON	FOR	ME."
ON	 ANOTHER	 OCCASION,	 YAKUSAN	 WAS	 RETURNING	 TO	 HIS
TEMPLE
WITH	 A	 BUNDLE	 OF	 FIREWOOD	 WHEN	 A	 MONK	 ASKED	 HIM,
"WHERE	HAVE
YOU	BEEN?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"I'VE	GOT	FIREWOOD."
THE	MONK	POINTED	TO	YAKUSAN'S	SWORD	AND	SAID,	"IT	MAKES
THE
SOUND	`TAP-TAP'.	WHAT	IN	THE	WORLD	IS	IT?"
AT	THIS	THE	MASTER	UNSHEATHED	THE	SWORD	AND	ASSUMED	A
WARRIOR'S	STANCE.
Friends,
There	 is	a	group	of	Soviet	comrades	present	here	 today.	They	have	a	few	very
beautiful	and	simple	questions.	First	I	am	going	to	answer	them.
Question	1
The	first	question:
YOU	HAVE	 DEDICATED	A	 BOOK	 TO	 GORBACHEV.	 SINCE	 YOU	ARE
AGAINST
POLITICIANS,	IS	THIS	A	CONTRADICTION?
Not	at	all,	because	Gorbachev	is	not	a	politician.	His	every	act	proves	that	he	is	a
man	 in	 politics	 but	 not	 a	 politician.	 My	 dedication	 to	 Gorbachev	 and	 the
academic	scientist	Sakharov	was	for	this	simple	reason,	that	he	is	not	a	politician
and	is	immensely	interested	in	having	peace	in	the	world.	He	is	for	friendship	in
the	world,	not	for	war.
The	 politician's	 mind	 is	 always	 concerned	 with	 war.	 Adolf	 Hitler	 in	 his
autobiography,	 MY	 STRUGGLE,	 says	 that	 if	 a	 politician	 wants	 to	 remain	 in
politics	he	has	to	continue	creating	enemies.	If	there	are	no	real	enemies,	create
fictions	 that	 somebody	 is	 going	 to	 attack	 you,	 that	 you	 are	 surrounded	 by
enemies.	Only	that	will	keep	you	in	power	--	not	peace.
And	it	 is	a	factual	 thing	to	know;	your	whole	history	is	filled	with	heroes	who
were	nothing	but	warmongers,	people	who	massacred	millions	of	people.	Your
history	does	not	consist	of	a	single	name	who	was	a	peacemaker.
I	have	dedicated	my	book	with	deep	 love	 to	Gorbachev	and	Sakharov	because
they	are	both	working	for	world	peace.	That	is	not	the	way	of	the	politician,	that
is	the	way	of	a	humanitarian.	That	is	the	way	of	one	who	loves	humanity,	who
loves	 this	beautiful	planet	and	wants	 to	save	 it	at	any	cost.	And	all	his	actions
prove	what	I	am	saying.
Question	2
Their	second	question	is:
AS	A	RELIGIOUS	LEADER,	YOU	ARE	ABOVE	HUMAN	HURTS,	BUT	DO
YOU
CRITICIZE	 AMERICA	 AND	 CHRISTIANITY	 SO	MUCH	 BECAUSE	 YOU
FEEL
HURT?
In	 the	 first	place	 I	am	not	a	 religious	 leader.	 I	am	a	 religious	man.	A	 leader	 is
fundamentally	a	politician.	Whether	or	not	his	politics	is	hidden	behind	religion
does	not	matter;	the	very	word	`leader'	comes	from	politics.
I	don't	have	any	followers	here;	these	are	all	my	friends.	So	please	don't	call	me
a	religious	leader	--	I	am	just	religious.
Secondly,	I	am	not	criticizing	America	and	Christianity	because	they	have	tried
to	destroy	my	body.	That	does	not	matter	to	me.	It	does	not	hurt	me,	because	I
know	 something	 which	 is	 indestructible;	 no	 poison,	 no	 bombs,	 no	 nuclear
weapons	can	destroy	it.	My	being,	my	spirituality	is	beyond	any	destruction.	It	is
eternal	and	immortal.	So	it	is	not	a	question	of	hurting	me.
My	 criticism	of	America	 and	Christianity	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	my	personal
attitude.	 I	 am	 against	 all	 religions,	 not	 only	 Christianity.	 I	 am	 against	 God
because	I	am	against	all	fictions.	I	am	against	hell	and	against	heaven	because	I
don't	want	to	create	a	schizophrenia	in	humanity.	I	don't	want	human	beings	to
live	in	fear	of	hell	and	greed	for	heaven.
And	 I	 don't	 want	 people	 to	 have	 any	 kind	 of	 belief	 system.	 Whether	 it	 is
Christianity	or	Hinduism	or	Buddhism,	it	does	not	matter.	To	me,	any	organized
religion	 --	 and	Christianity	 is	 the	most	 organized	 religion	 in	 the	world	 --	 is	 a
danger	to	human	beings.
Their	individuality,	their	freedom,	their	dignity	is	destroyed.
Jesus	goes	on	saying	to	people,	"You	are	sheep,	and	I	am	the	shepherd."	That	is
the	attitude	of	all	so-called	religions:	"You	don't	know	--	I	know.	And	you	have
simply	 to	 believe	 in	me	 and	 all	 your	 sins	 will	 be	 forgiven."	 Just	 believing	 in
Jesus,	 or	 in	 Krishna,	 or	 in	 Buddha,	 cannot	 erase	 anybody's	 crimes	 and	 sins.
Every	action	has	its	reaction:	if	you	have	done	something	wrong,	you	will	have
some	bitter	experiences	following	it.	If	you	are	doing	something	good,	you	will
have	flowers	showering	on	you,	a	deep	peace,	a	deep	silence,	and	a	growth	of
your	inner	consciousness.
I	have	criticized	America	because	I	have	been	there	for	five	years	and	seen	with
my	 own	 eyes	 that	 this	 is	 the	 most	 hypocritical	 country	 in	 the	 world.	 Talking
about	democracy,	talking	about	freedom,	talking	about	freedom	of	speech	--	and
none	of	these	things	exist	there.
Because	 they	 were	 against	 me	 they	 could	 not	 follow	 their	 own	 constitution
concerning	 freedom	 of	 speech.	 They	 had	 no	 argument	 against	 me.	 Naturally,
they	became	absolutely	mad:	how	to	destroy	me,	how	to	destroy	the	commune?
The	 commune	was	 a	 far	 superior	 version	 of	 communism.	No	 dictatorship,	 no
money	--
in	the	commune	there	was	no	need	for	money.	People	donated	to	the	commune,
but	as	far	as	their	needs	were	concerned,	the	commune	was	responsible	to	fulfill
their	needs.	And	the	commune	was	living	at	a	far	better,	higher	standard	than	any
American.	The	richest	American	was	jealous	of	the	commune.
The	commune	was	 in	 the	midst	of	a	capitalist	world.	And	when	 they	deported
me	the	representative	of	the	attorney	general	of	America,	Ed	Meese,	admitted	in
a	press	conference	that	I	had	not	committed	any	crime.	The	reason	he	gave	for
deporting	me	was:
"We	 wanted	 to	 destroy	 the	 commune.	 That	 was	 our	 priority."	 And	 without
deporting	me,	it	was	impossible	to	destroy	the	commune.
But	why?	Why	did	you	want	to	destroy	the	commune?	Our	commune	was	not	at
all	concerned	with	America.	The	commune	was	located	in	a	desert,	one	hundred
twenty-six	square	miles	of	desert	which	had	been	for	sale	 for	 forty	years.	And
nobody	had	purchased	it,	at	any	price,	because	what	will	you	do	with	a	desert?
But	my	people	converted	the	desert	into	an	oasis.	That	hurt	America	very	much.
My	people	were	living	with	such	joy,	such	laughter,	and	they	were	working	hard.
All	 their	 needs	 were	 fulfilled.	 They	 had	 the	 whole	 commune	 centrally	 air-
conditioned;	they	had	everything	that	they	wanted,	and	there	was	no	exchange	of
money	in	the	commune.	This	made	the	American	government	completely	mad.
They	 arrested	 me	 without	 any	 arrest	 warrant,	 and	 without	 showing	 me	 any
reason	for	arresting	me.	Just	a	piece	of	paper	on	which	there	were	a	few	names	--
"We	 have	 been	 ordered	 from	 above	 that	 these	 people	 should	 be	 immediately
arrested."
I	 said,	 "But	 you	 should	 look	 at	 our	 passports!	My	 name	 is	 not	 on	 this	 paper;
neither	are	the	names	of	the	six	people	who	are	with	me	on	this	paper.	You	are
absolutely	absurd.
Just	 look	at	our	passports	and	compare	with	your	names;	you	are	arresting	 the
wrong	people."	Still,	we	were	arrested.
In	fact,	they	had	no	evidence	at	all	to	arrest	me.	But	they	did	not	give	me	bail	for
twelve	 days.	 They	 arrested	 me	 in	 North	 Carolina,	 and	 the	 flight	 from	 North
Carolina	 to	Oregon,	where	 the	 commune	was	 located,	was	 only	 five	 hours.	 It
took	twelve	days	for	me	to	reach	Portland,	and	they	dragged	me	from	jail	to	jail;
in	twelve	days	I	was	dragged	to	six	jails.
Only	later	on	I	became	aware	of	it,	when	the	British	experts	in	poisoning	looked
into	 my	 symptoms	 and	 gave	 the	 verdict,	 that	 I	 was	 given	 a	 certain	 poison,
thallium.	 It	 is	 not	 detectable	 either	 from	 blood	 or	 from	 urine;	 it	 simply
disappears.	I	had	all	the	symptoms	-
-	when	the	poison	disappears,	 it	 leaves	certain	kinds	of	sicknesses	 in	 the	body.
This	 poison	 has	 been	 used	 against	 political	 prisoners.	 But	 if	 you	 give	 it	 in	 a
bigger	dose,	 the	person	dies	immediately.	That's	why	they	wanted	twelve	days,
to	give	it	to	me	in	small	doses	so	I	would	not	die	in	their	jails	--	they	would	be
condemned	by	the	whole	world.
And	when	they	released	me,	I	was	ordered	to	leave	America	immediately,	within
fifteen	minutes.	My	 car	was	 in	 front	 of	 the	 courthouse,	 and	my	 jet	 plane	was
kept	 with	 its	 engine	 running	 at	 the	 airport;	 I	 should	 leave	 immediately.	 They
were	afraid	that	if	I	stayed	one	day	more,	I	might	appeal	to	the	Supreme	Court.
And	 there	 was	 every	 reason	 for	 me	 to	 win	 the	 case,	 because	 none	 of	 their
charges...	thirty-four	charges	against	a	man	who	was	in	silence,	had	never	moved
out	of	his	house.	How	can	he	commit	thirty-four	crimes?
And	they	had	no	evidence	of	any	crime.
When	I	saw	democracy,	American	style,	at	work...	 it	was	absolute	nonsense	 to
talk	about	democracy.	Their	constitution	is	just	a	showpiece	for	the	world.	The
country	consists	of	criminals	talking	about	freedom.
I	 raised	 the	 question	 that	 they	 are	 all	 foreigners.	 I	 said,	 "All	 Americans	 are
foreigners	 in	 America.	 It	 belongs	 to	 the	 Red	 Indians	 whom	 you	 have	 killed,
whom	 you	 have	 forced	 into	 deep	 forests	 which	 you	 call	 reservations.	 In	 fact,
they	are	the	same	as	the	concentration	camps	of	Adolf	Hitler.	You	are	occupying
the	land	of	somebody	else	and	you	talk	about	freedom?"
Looking	at	American	crime...	when	I	moved	through	those	six	jails	I	could	not
believe	my	eyes.	Every	jail	had	at	least	six	hundred,	seven	hundred	criminals	--
all	were	black!
Not	a	single	white	man	did	I	come	across	in	six	jails.	It	seems	only	black	people
commit	 crimes.	And	 these	black	people	 are	 all	young	people.	America	 is	very
much	afraid	of	a	black	 revolution,	 so	all	 these	young	people	have	been	 forced
into	jail,	without	any	trial.
Whenever	I	arrived	in	a	jail,	the	prisoners	shouted	to	me...	because	they	had	been
seeing	my	face	on	television	continually.	They	were	rejoiced	to	see	me,	and	they
said,	"You	will	be	going	out	of	jail	soon.	The	whole	world	has	been	alerted	about
your	arrest;	thousands	of	telegrams	from	the	most	prominent	people	around	the
world	--	painters,	poets,	actors,	film	producers,	mystics,	Nobel	Prize	winners..."
In	 the	 first	 jail	 so	many	 telegrams	came	 that	 the	 jailer	 came	 to	me	saying	 that
"We	 don't	 have	 space	 for	 so	many	 telegrams,	 and	we	 don't	 have	 space	 for	 so
many	flowers,	and	we	don't	have	enough	personnel	to	receive	all	the	telephone
calls	 that	 are	 coming	 from	 all	 over	 the	 world!	 What	 do	 you	 suppose?	 What
should	we	do?"
I	said,	"It	is	your	problem.	Why	have	you	arrested	me?"
Because	they	were	afraid	of	my	death	--	that	may	create	great	opposition	around
the	world,	particularly	among	the	intellectuals,	intelligentsia,	artists;	all	kinds	of
creative	people	will	be	opposed	to	it	--	they	gave	me	the	poison	in	small	doses.
And	still	they	were	afraid	that	perhaps	those	small	doses	were	not	going	to	kill
me,	so	finally	they	put	a	bomb	under	my	chair.	It	is	by	the	courtesy	of	the	bomb
that	I	am	alive;	it	did	not	go	off	at	the	right	time.	I	had	left	the	chair.	I	heard	it	at
the	 airport	 from	 the	 journalists	 that	 the	 bomb	 did	 not	 go	 off,	 something	went
wrong.
I	am	not	against	the	American	people.	I	love	them	as	I	love	all	the	people	of	the
earth,	and	 I	have	 received	much	 love	 from	the	American	population.	But	 I	am
absolutely	against	the	American	politicians	and	the	American	bureaucracy.	It	is
absolutely	against	humanity.	It	is	suicidal,	murderous	--	it	is	preparing	to	destroy
this	world.
Every	 day,	 more	 and	 more	 nuclear	 weapons	 are	 gathering.	 They	 have	 spent
trillions	of	dollars	on	nuclear	weapons.	And	Ronald	Reagan	has	left	the	post	of
president,	 but	 he	 has	 given	 a	 budget	 of	 one	 and	 half	 trillion	 dollars	 to	 create
more	weapons.	Now	George	Bush	is	at	a	loss	--	from	where	to	get	this	money?
My	criticism	of	American	politicians	is	based	not	on	my	personal	hurts	--	 they
don't	matter.	At	least	to	me	they	don't	matter.	But	I	am	certainly	hurt	because	of
America's	 anti-human	 attitude.	 There	 are	 three	 million	 street	 people	 and	 this
winter	 they	 are	 dying	 in	 thousands.	 America	 goes	 on	 sending	 aid	 to	 poor
countries,	and	it	cannot	save	its	own	poor.
Karl	 Marx	 had	 never	 an	 idea	 that	 communism	 would	 happen	 in	 the	 Soviet
Union.	 His	 idea	 was	 that	 communism	 would	 happen	 first	 in	 America,	 where
exploitation	of	the	poor	has	reached	its	climax.
Russia	was	a	poor	country	with	a	small	group	of	rich	people,	the	czar	and	a	few
other	 rich	 people.	 The	 whole	 country	 was	 poor;	 there	 were	 not	 yet	 class
distinctions.	It	was	a	feudal	country,	it	had	not	yet	become	capitalist.	According
to	Karl	Marx's	analysis,	only	a	capitalist	country	can	move	towards	communism;
a	 feudal	 country	 first	 has	 to	 become	 capitalist.	 Capitalism	 means	 a	 clear-cut
division	of	the	poor	and	the	rich,	and	the	middle	class	simply	disappears.	A	few
move	into	the	rich,	most	of	them	fall	back	into	the	poor,	and	when	one	country	is
divided	clearly	into	the	poor	and	the	rich,	revolution	is	possible.
Russia	was	not	in	such	a	position.	It	was	a	feudal	country.	The	czar	was	a	feudal
lord.
But	 existence	does	 not	work	 according	 to	 logic.	 It	was	 a	 certain	 situation	 that
made	Russia	communist.	The	situation	was	the	first	world	war.	The	czar's	own
soldiers	did	not	have	sufficient	clothes,	boots,	food.	They	turned	against	czar	--
his	own	army	--	and	it	was	a	great	strategy	of	Lenin	to	ride	on	the	wave.	It	was
not	really	a	conflict	between	the	poor	and	the	rich;	it	was	a	conflict	between	the
czar	 and	 his	 own	 armies.	 And	 Lenin	 took	 advantage	 of	 the	 opportunity.	 He
rushed	back	--	he	was	in	Germany	--	he	rushed	back	immediately.	And	he	was	a
man	of	 immense	clarity.	He	 immediately	 rode	on	 the	wave	of	 the	armies.	And
when	the	czar	had	no	armies,	his	own	armies	were	against	him....
Communism	 happened	 as	 an	 accident	 in	 Russia.	 It	 was	 not	 according	 to	 the
economic	analysis	by	Karl	Marx.	But	whatever	the	cause,	it	happened.	It	is	the
first	communist	country	in	the	world,	the	only	hope.
And	 I	 am	 not	 against	 only	Christianity.	 I	 am	 against	 all	 religions	 except	 Zen,
because	Zen	 is	not	a	 religion	but	only	 religiousness.	 I	have	 to	make	 it	clear	 to
you	that	religion	is	a	doctrine,	an	organized	church,	a	belief	system,	a	fictitious
God,	 heaven	 and	 hell,	 and	 a	 great	 priesthood	 which	 functions	 as	 a	 mediator
between	you	and	God	and	exploits	you	in	the	name	of	religion,	in	the	name	of
God.
Zen	 is	 the	 only	 religious	 phenomenon	 in	 the	world	which	 has	 no	 doctrine,	 no
scripture,	 which	 has	 no	 God,	 no	 belief	 system,	 no	 organized	 church.	 It	 is	 an
individual	 phenomenon,	 just	 like	 love.	 You	 don't	 have	 a	 church	 of	 love.	 You
don't	have	a	political	party	for	love.	It	is	an	individual	freedom.
Just	as	love	is	individual,	so	is	meditation.	And	to	me,	religion	only	means	one
thing:	meditation,	going	inwards	and	exploring	your	consciousness.	Just	the	way
science	 explores	 matter,	 meditation	 is	 the	 science	 of	 the	 inner;	 it	 explores
consciousness.
I	have	my	points	of	agreement	with	Karl	Marx,	with	Engels,	with	Lenin,	with
Gorbachev.
I	have	my	points	of	disagreement.
Karl	Marx	and	Friedrich	Engels	were	aware	only	of	two	religions,	Judaism	and
Christianity,	 which	 are	 both	 just	 so-so	 religions.	 Marx	 and	 Engels	 were	 not
aware	of	Zen,	they	were	not	aware	of	Tao,	they	were	not	aware	of	meditation.	It
is	 not	 their	 fault;	 their	whole	 concern	was	 how	 to	make	 society	 economically
equal.	So	they	said	that	man	is	only	matter,	and	consciousness	is	a	by-product	of
matter.	When	 the	man	dies,	 the	consciousness	also	dies.	On	 that	point	 I	 am	 in
absolute	disagreement.
I	am	against	all	religions	because	they	have	been	exploiting	humanity,	and	they
are	exactly	what	Karl	Marx	called	the	"opium	of	the	people."	They	are	giving	the
poor	 consolation,	 that	 "Your	 poverty	 is	 a	 fire	 test.	 Just	 listen	 to	 the	 words	 of
Jesus.	He	says,
`Blessed	are	the	poor,	for	they	shall	inherit	the	earth.'"
If	blessed	are	 the	poor,	 then	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 remove	poverty.	 In	 fact,	make
more	poor	people	so	 they	can	become	more	blessed	people	and	can	 inherit	 the
kingdom	of	God!
Spread	poverty,	breed	like	animals,	as	many	children	as	you	can.	These	all	will
be	the	inheritors	of	God's	kingdom.
Such	 consolation	 has	 been	 given	 by	 all	 religions	 in	 different	ways.	 The	Bible
says,	"Don't	change	anything,	because	God	has	made	it	so,	and	he	is	wiser	than
you."	So	don't	change	any	structure	of	the	society,	don't	change	the	family.	But
God	 never	made	 the	 family.	 In	 fact,	 God	 is	 the	 greatest	 lie	 in	 existence.	And
from	one	central	lie,	thousands	of	lies	go	on	growing.
I	 am	 against	 not	 only	 Christianity,	 I	 am	 against	 Hinduism,	 I	 am	 against
Buddhism,	 I	am	against	Mohammedanism,	because	 they	are	 functioning	 in	 the
same	way	--	only	their	names	are	different.
It	is	not	that	Christianity	has	hurt	me	so	I	am	against	it.	Judaism	has	not	hurt	me,
Mohammedanism	has	not	hurt	me,	Buddhism	has	not	hurt	me,	but	I	am	against
them	on	principle.	These	are	the	people	who	have	been	exploiting	humanity	and
protecting	the	vested	interests.
Hinduism	says	that	you	are	poor	because	of	your	past	life's	bad	actions,	and	you
are	rich	because	of	your	past	life's	good	actions.	They	distract	the	mind	from	the
reality.	The	reality	 is	 that	you	are	poor	because	you	are	being	exploited	by	 the
rich	continuously.	You	are	sucked,	your	blood	is	continuously	being	taken	out	of
you;	your	very	life	is	at	the	minimum	so	that	you	can	function	as	a	slave.	You	are
allowed	to	live	just	because	without	you,	who	is	going	to	be	able	to	create	a	vast
army	of	slaves?
And	 all	 religions	 are	 in	 favor	 of	 the	 rich	 because	 the	 rich	 are	 donating	 to	 the
churches,	to	the	temples,	to	the	religions,	a	small	part,	not	even	one	percent,	of
their	exploitation.	But	they	keep	the	priests	rich,	comfortable,	because	the	priests
are	protecting	the	status	quo.
I	am	against	 the	status	quo.	 I	want	 to	change	 the	whole	society,	 its	structure.	 I
want	a	classless	 society,	a	world	without	boundaries,	without	nations.	A	world
which	is	one,	neither	black	nor	white,	neither	Indian	nor	Russian	nor	American.
This	small	planet	can	live	in	peace.
In	three	thousand	years	the	politicians	have	dragged	humanity	into	five	thousand
wars,	but	you	will	be	surprised:	even	in	five	thousand	wars	politicians	have	not
been	 able	 to	 kill	 more	 people	 than	 religions	 have	 killed.	 They	 have	 their
religions	wars:	crusades,	jihad....
Jesus	says,	"Whoever	is	not	with	me	is	against	me."	Now	these	are	the	words	of
a	politician	--	not	the	words	of	a	religious	man,	not	the	words	of	a	man	who	is
meditative,	 who	 can	 see	 things.	 The	 person	 who	 is	 not	 with	 me	 may	 be	 just
indifferent;	it	 is	not	necessary	that	he	should	be	against	me.	The	person	who	is
with	me	can	be	against	me	any	day,	and	the	person	who	is	against	me	can	be	in
favor	 of	 me	 any	 day.	 And	 there	 is	 a	 third	 category	 which	 Jesus	 completely
forgets:	 the	 indifferent,	 the	agnostic	who	is	neither	 theist	nor	atheist,	who	does
not	believe	in	any	ìsm',	who	simply	wants	to	inquire	into	truth.
I	am	against	Christianity	and	other	religions	because	they	are	preventing	people
from	finding	out	the	truth	of	their	own	being.
To	me,	religiousness	is	acceptable.	It	is	a	quality	--	a	quality	which	brings	grace
to	you,	which	brings	blissfulness	 to	you,	which	brings	a	 silence	 to	your	mind,
which	brings	an	encounter	with	your	original	being.	It	is	absolutely	a	science	--	a
science	of	the	inner	space,	just	as	there	is	a	science	of	the	objective	world.	It	is
not	a	belief	system.	You	don't	have	to	believe	in	any	savior,	in	any	messiah,	in
any	prophet,	in	any	reincarnation	of	God
--	these	are	all	arch-egoists	who	are	pretending	to	save	you.
Question	3
Their	third	question	is:
YOU	 ONCE	 SAID	 IN	 A	 DISCOURSE	 THAT	 LENIN	 WAS	 AGAINST
MARRIAGE
AND	WANTED	TO	DISSOLVE	THE	FAMILY.
IN	 REALITY,	 LENIN	 ALWAYS	 FOLLOWED	 ENGELS	 IN	 SAYING	 THAT
THE
FAMILY	IS	THE	NUCLEUS.
Nucleus	of	what?	Nucleus	of	the	capitalist	society!
Both	Marx	and	Engels,	in	their	analysis	of	the	economic	structure,	are	very	clear
about	 it:	 the	 family	came	 into	being	only	with	private	property.	Before	private
property	there	was	no	family;	hence	it	follows	logically	that	if	private	property	is
dissolved,	marriage	will	 be	 dissolved	 automatically.	 It	 is	 a	 logical	 conclusion;
whether	Lenin	agrees	with	it	or	not,	does	not	matter.	I	don't	care	about	anybody	-
-	 I	 care	 about	 intelligence.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 whether	 Engels	 contradicts
himself.
The	 family	has	been	 the	nucleus	of	all	 the	organized	 religions;	 it	has	been	 the
nucleus	of	 all	 the	 feudal	 and	 capitalist	 societies;	 it	 has	been	 the	nucleus	of	 all
exploitation	and	war.
That	nucleus	has	to	be	completely	withdrawn.	Without	the	family	dying	out,	you
cannot	have	a	real	humanity	arising,	of	individuals.
I	have	not	said	that	Lenin	was	against	marriage.	I	have	said	that	it	is	the	logical
conclusion	from	Marx	and	Engels'	analysis	of	society.	They	say	that	the	family
came	into	being	with	private	property.	Why	did	it	come	into	being	with	private
property?	--
because	every	father	wanted	his	property	 to	be	 inherited	by	his	son.	Hence,	he
had	to	guard	his	wife	so	that	she	would	not	get	pregnant	with	somebody	else.
The	 family	 became	 an	 imprisonment	 of	 the	 woman,	 so	 that	 the	 child	 would
certainly	 be	 the	 son	 of	 the	 father.	 The	 father	 has	 no	 other	 evidence;	 only	 the
mother	 knows	 exactly	 to	 whom	 the	 child	 belongs.	 So	 keep	 the	 mother
completely	 out	 of	 society:	 no	 education,	 no	 economic	 freedom,	 no	 financial
status.	 In	Mohammedan	 countries	 she	 cannot	 even	 show	 her	 face	 to	 anybody.
Keep	the	woman	completely	imprisoned	--	that	is	the	only	security	you	have	that
your	son	is	your	son,	and	the	property	that	you	have	gathered	will	be	inherited
by	your	son.
But	in	a	communist	society,	when	the	property	is	not	private,	there	is	no	need	for
any	 family	 to	 protect	 it.	 The	 property	 belongs	 to	 everyone.	 Then	 why	 bother
about	it,	that
"My	 son	 has	 to	 be	 my	 son."	 In	 fact,	 I	 had	 said	 that	 this	 was	 the	 logical
conclusion.
I	 have	 read	 all	 the	 communist	 literature	 that	 has	 been	 published	 from	Marx,
Engels,	Lenin,	Stalin,	and	I	have	read	all	 the	 literature	 that	has	been	published
against	communism.	I	would	like	my	Soviet	comrades	to	look	at	my	library,	and
they	will	 find	all	 the	communist	 literature	and	all	 the	anti-communist	 literature
there.
It	 is	 my	 understanding	 that	 marriage	 cannot	 exist	 in	 a	 communist	 society.	 A
commune	will	take	the	place	of	marriage.	And	I	have	read	somewhere...	because
for	fifteen	years	I	have	not	been	reading	at	all.	I	have	read	somewhere	that	when
the	 revolution	happened	 in	1917	 in	Russia,	 in	 the	beginning	 they	had	 tried	 for
three,	 four,	or	 five	years	 to	dissolve	marriage,	 to	dissolve	 the	 family.	But	 they
found	it	very	difficult.
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 ancient	 institutions.	 Emotionally,	 sentimentally,
psychologically,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 dissolve	 it.	 It	 was	 difficult	 to	 dissolve
private	ownership	of	property	and	make	it	public	--	Stalin	had	to	kill	at	least	one
million	 Russians	 just	 to	make	 a	 classless	 society	 possible.	 They	 found	 it	 was
difficult:	 "It	 can	 be	 taken	 care	 of	 later	 on	 when	 communism	 becomes	 more
established;	don't	take	on	too	many	problems."
The	whole	world	was	 against	Russia	when	 it	went	 through	 its	 revolution.	The
whole	 world	 wanted	 to	 destroy	 communism.	 If	 communism	 succeeded,	 that
would	be	a	danger	for	other	nations;	 then	the	poor	in	other	nations	would	start
rising	up	and	asking	for	the	same	equality.
After	 five	 years	 of	 failure,	 they	 could	 not	 dissolve	 the	 family.	 But	 my
understanding	 is	 that	 they	 could	 not	 dissolve	 the	 family	 unit	 because	 they
themselves	have	betrayed	Karl	Marx	and	Engels.	The	Soviet	Union	has	become
another	 class	 society:	 the	 bureaucrats	 have	 become	 a	 class	 and	 the	 non-
bureaucrats,	 the	 public,	 are	 another	 class.	 So	 the	 bureaucrats,	 who	 are	 the
communists,	have	replaced	the	capitalists.	The	Soviet	Union	is	still	not	classless;
it	 has	 created	 a	 new	 class	 friction.	 Because	 it	 is	 not	 classless,	 it	 could	 not
dissolve	 the	family;	otherwise	 there	would	be	no	problem	to	dissolve	marriage
and	the	family.	Now	the	family	has	become	the	nucleus	of	communism,	which	is
a	contradiction.
I	follow	my	own	intelligence,	and	my	conclusions	don't	have	to	be	in	agreement
with	anybody	else's.	But	anybody	who	is	intelligent	enough	can	see	the	problem.
Question	4
Their	fourth	question	is:
WHAT	WOULD	YOU	DO	IF	YOU	WENT	TO	THE	SOVIET	UNION?
A	revolution!
It	has	been	too	long	since	the	Soviet	Union	has	seen	revolution.	Of	course,	my
revolution	will	be	of	spirituality.	I	want	the	Soviet	Union	to	add	something	more
to	 its	 dignity:	 meditation.	 Just	 economic	 equality	 is	 not	 enough	 --	 a	 spiritual
equality	is	needed.
Just	 being	 a	body	 is	 so	poor.	 I	want	 the	Soviet	Union	 to	become	 richer	 --	 not
only	richer	 in	objects	but	 richer	 in	consciousness,	 in	enlightenment.	 I	want	 the
Soviet	Union	also	to	have	awakened	people	like	Gautam	Buddha,	or	Lao	Tzu,	or
Chuang	Tzu.
I	would	like	to	introduce	Zen	to	the	Soviet	Union.	That	is	my	revolution.
One	 of	 the	 most	 famous	 spiritualists	 of	 Europe,	 Francis	 Israel	 Regardie,	 a
famous	occult	magician	who	was	regarded	as	a	great	magus	and	scholar	of	 the
Golden	Dawn	Society,	stated	just	prior	to	his	death:	"If	I	were	to	choose	in	what
form	I	would	come	back	in	terms	of	reincarnation,	I	would	like	to	continue	the
great	work	until	I	become	a	Rajneesh."
Just	today	I	received	his	book,	and	I	could	not	believe	what	kind	of	spiritualist
this	fellow	Francis	Israel	Regardie	was.
A	spiritualist,	in	the	first	place,	knows	he	is	not	going	to	be	born	again.	If	he	has
not	come	to	that	point,	he	has	no	right	to	call	himself	a	spiritualist.	A	person	who
has	 known	 his	 spirituality	 has	 no	 need	 to	 come	 back	 to	 any	 body,	 in	 any
reincarnation.	This	 imprisonment	 in	 the	body	is	only	up	to	 the	point	when	you
become	a	buddha.	When	you	become	a	buddha,	you	have	learned	everything	that
life	could	teach	you,	and	you	have	not	only	learned	the	outside	world,	you	have
learned	your	inner	world	also.	Now	there	is	nothing	left.
What	happens	to	a	Gautam	Buddha?	He	simply	dissolves	into	the	universal	life,
into	the	eternal	life.	He	does	not	come	back	to	the	earth	in	a	body.
This	man	Francis	Israel	Regardie	knows	nothing	of	spirituality.	But	in	the	West
it	 is	very	easy	 to	befool	people,	because	 the	West	has	no	understanding	of	 the
inner	world.	So	any	idiot	can	manage	to	deceive	them	--	occultism,	esotericism,
spiritualism,	just	big	words	without	any	experience	supporting	them.
Because	if	this	man	was	really	spiritual,	he	would	not...	at	the	point	of	death	he
wants	a	reincarnation!	But	he	has	a	condition	also:	"I	would	like	to	continue	the
work	until	I	become	a	Rajneesh."	I	was	alive,	he	was	alive,	he	could	have	come
here.	Rather	 than	having	 the	 courage	 and	guts	 to	 come	here,	 he	 is	 thinking	of
becoming	a	Rajneesh	after	death	--	if	there	is	a	reincarnation.	That	is	a	big	if!
He	could	have	come	here.	Thousands	of	people	come	and	go	every	day,	and	ten
thousand	people	 remain	around	me	continuously.	And	 I	am	not	a	 leader,	and	 I
am	 not	 a	 priest,	 and	 I	 am	 not	 teaching	 any	 philosophy	 or	 any	 doctrine.	 I	 am
simply	helping	 them	to	enter	 inwards	--	how	to	 turn	your	eyes	 inwards	so	you
can	see	yourself.	Once	you	have	seen	it,	you	are	the	buddha.
Then	there	 is	no	birth,	no	death.	You	have	gone	beyond	the	circle	of	birth	and
death.
This	 is	 the	only	spirituality,	 the	only	religiousness	 that	I	would	like	 to	 teach	to
my	Soviet	friends.
I	 have	 already	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 at	 least	 three	 hundred	 sannyasins,
underground.
Because	I	was	in	America,	the	KGB	was	thinking	that	I	was	an	American	agent.
They	were	harassing	my	people	in	the	Soviet	Union;	they	burned	my	books,	they
took	away	all	the	books,	and	my	people	were	meeting	underground,	writing	and
typing	my	books	by	hand.
I	would	 like,	 through	my	 comrades	 here,	 to	 help	my	people.	 I	 am	not	 against
communism.	I	am	a	far	bigger	communist	than	you	have	ever	known,	because	I
am	a	spiritual	communist!
Marx	and	Engels	 are	out-of-date.	The	Soviet	Union	needs	 a	new	 revolution,	 a
spiritual	revolution,	and	I	think	Gorbachev	is	making	a	great	mistake	in	allowing
the	old	priests	back	in	the	name	of	opening	the	doors	of	the	Soviet	Union.
Perhaps	he	does	not	understand	 these	old	priests	 --	Catholic	and	Protestant,	or
old	Russian	Orthodox.	They	 belonged	 to	 a	 certain	 society;	 they	 belonged	 to	 a
feudal	society.
They	cannot	belong	to	a	communist	society.
Opening	 the	doors	of	Russia	 is	beautiful.	Open	the	doors	for	science,	open	 the
doors	 for	 art,	 open	 the	 doors	 for	meditation.	But	 that	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you
have	to	open	the	doors	to	all	kinds	of	diseases.
Christianity	 is	a	disease,	and	 if	you	open	 the	doors	 for	 the	pope	you	are	going
against	Karl	Marx,	you	are	going	against	communism.	You	don't	understand	the
implications:	these	are	the	people	who	are	the	real	agents	of	capitalism.	They	are
against	any	revolution.
You	can	see	it	in	India.	In	India,	for	five	thousand	years,	as	far	back	as	history
can	approach...	 India	 is	 far	more	ancient	 than	 five	 thousand	years,	but	 for	 five
thousand	 years	we	 have	 not	 known	 anything	 like	 revolution	 against	 the	 social
structure.	And	India	 is	one	of	 the	poorest	countries,	but	 the	poor	are	given	 the
opium	 continuously,	 that	 "You	 are	 poor	 because	 of	 your	 past	 evil	 acts.	 It	 has
nothing	to	do	with	the	capitalist	people;	they	have	money	because	they	did	good
deeds	in	the	past."
Now	 do	 you	 want	 shankaracharyas	 from	 India	 to	 be	 imported	 to	 the	 Soviet
Union?	They	will	teach	reincarnation,	they	will	teach	that	"You	are	poor	because
of	your	past	actions,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	capitalists.	And	the	capitalist	is
a	capitalist	because	he	has	done	good	deeds	in	the	past,	it	is	a	reward	from	God."
Please	 tell	Gorbachev	 from	me:	 allow	 everything,	 but	 don't	 allow	Christianity
again!
Christianity	 will	 bring	 homosexuality,	 it	 will	 bring	 sodomy,	 it	 will	 bring
bestiality,	it	will	bring	AIDS	to	the	Soviet	Union.	Are	you	opening	the	door	for
all	this?
Be	careful,	 and	very	 alert.	 It	 has	 taken	 seventy	years	 to	preserve	 a	 communist
country	against	the	whole	world.	Don't	take	any	risk.	Opening	the	door	is	good,
but	 be	 on	 guard	 that	 the	 Pope	 the	 Polack	 does	 not	 enter	 Russia,	 and	 that
Christianity	has	no	revival	in	Russia.
Communism	can	be	at	ease	with	Zen,	because	Zen	has	nothing	to	do	with	your
social	structure.	Zen	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	poverty	or	with	your	richness.
Zen	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 outside	world.	Zen	 is	 a	 science	 to	 explore	 the
inner.	 Invite	 Zen	 masters,	 Zen	 mystics;	 that	 will	 be	 inviting	 health	 and
wholeness.
A	man	who	believes	only	in	the	body	is	half,	and	a	man	who	believes	only	in	the
spirit	is	also	half.	I	have	called	Gautam	Buddha	only	half,	because	he	denies	the
body,	he	 renounces	 the	body.	 I	 am	not	 in	absolute	 favor	of	Gautam	Buddha	 --
only	fifty	percent.
And	that	is	my	situation	with	Karl	Marx	also:	I	am	in	agreement	only	with	fifty
percent.
His	acceptance	of	the	body	is	good,	but	his	denial	of	the	spirit	is	wrong.
Buddha	and	Marx	have	to	join	hands	--	that	is	my	revolution.	Bring	Buddha	and
Marx	both	together,	hand	in	hand,	dancing	in	the	Soviet	Union!
If	you	cannot	find	Gautam	Buddha	and	Karl	Marx	--	because	both	are	dead	--	I
can	bring	my	ten	thousand	buddhas	you	see	all	around!	These	people	are	living	a
whole	life	-
-	of	 the	body	and	of	 the	 soul	 in	 absolute	 synchronicity.	 I	 can	bring	all	my	 ten
thousand	buddhas	to	reach	to	every	nook	and	corner	of	the	Soviet	Union.
And	these	are	not	the	only	people	with	me;	there	are	two	million	people	around
the	earth.
If	 you	 have	 a	 real	 opening,	 I	 can	 even	 bring	 two	million	 people	 to	 the	Soviet
Union,	to	bring	a	new	revolution,	a	fresh	revolution	which	will	make	the	Soviet
citizen	a	complete	citizen,	body	and	soul	together.
We	have	to	live	outside	and	we	have	to	live	inside,	in	deep	balance,	in	harmony.
This	man	Regardie	must	have	been	a	hocus-pocus.	At	least	I	hope	that	he	does
not	become	a	Rajneesh!	He	can	have	reincarnation	as	whatever	he	wants.	He	can
become	a	buffalo,	he	can	become	a	donkey,	there	are	so	many	species	available	-
-	just	please	don't	think	about	me!	If	you	had	courage,	then...	at	the	moment	of
death	you	talked	about	me;	in	your	whole	life	you	never	talked	about	me.	Such
chickens!	 Talking	 about	 occultism,	 spiritualism...	 I	 have	 been	 here,	 he	 could
have	come.	I	could	have	turned	him	into	a	meditator.
And	if	your	meditation	starts	blossoming	you	will	not	have	any	other	birth	in	the
body.
You	 will	 simply	 disappear,	 like	 incense	 disappearing	 into	 the	 blue	 sky,	 or
fragrance	of	 roses	disappearing	 into	 the	blue	 sky.	You	will	become	part	of	 the
cosmos.
And	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	unless	you	are	a	meditator	you	cannot	be	truly	a
communist.	Because	as	far	as	the	body	is	concerned,	no	two	persons	are	exactly
equal.	In	their	talents,	in	their	intelligence,	in	their	body,	physical	strength	--	no
two	 persons	 are	 equal	 as	 far	 as	 the	 body	 is	 concerned.	 You	 can	 give	 equal
opportunity	 for	 growth,	 but	 the	 growth	will	 bring	 unequal	 persons.	 Somebody
will	become	a	scientist	and	somebody	will	become	a	shoemaker;	somebody	will
become	a	great	novelist	like	Tolstoy,	or	Turgenev,	or	Chekhov,	or	Dostoevsky,	or
Gorky,	and	somebody	may	become	just	a	flutist.
Everybody	needs	equal	opportunity	to	grow	unequal!	But	as	far	as	spirituality	is
concerned,	 everybody	 can	 be	 equally	 a	 buddha.	 That	 is	 true	 communism	 --
deeper,	higher,	more	authentic.	And	if	we	can	create	a	situation,	an	education	for
people	 to	 understand	 their	 inner	 being,	 they	 will	 come	 out	 of	 it	 with	 great
compassion,	with	love	for	every	being.	They	will	have	a	tremendous	reverence
for	life.	They	cannot	exploit.	In	fact,	spiritual	communism	should	be	first;	only
then	can	the	economic	communism	follow	it	as	a	shadow.
Just	 tell	 Comrade	 Gorbachev:	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 come	 any	 moment.	 Just	 gather
courage,	because	I	am	not	 in	absolute	agreement...	Marx	is	now	old-fashioned,
and	I	don't	know	any	communist	who	ever	reads	DAS	KAPITAL.	It	gathers	dust
just	like	the	Holy	Bible.	I	have	never	come	across	any	communist	in	India	who
has	read	DAS	KAPITAL.	It	is	complicated,	it	is	old,	it	is	out-of-date.	In	its	own
time	it	was	a	great	phenomenon,	but	time	goes	on	changing.	Now	neither	Engels
nor	Lenin	nor	Stalin	are	relevant.	They	were	very	relevant	in	their	own	time.
Now	 Gorbachev	 can	 open	 the	 door	 because	 for	 seventy	 years	 Lenin	 kept	 it
closed,	Stalin	kept	it	closed,	to	protect	communism.	Now	communism	is	strong
enough	to	open	the	doors.	But	be	careful	--	don't	open	the	doors	to	old	diseases.
They	are	just	lurking	by	the	side,	and	very	anxious	to	enter	in.
Mohammedan	priests,	because	you	have	so	many	Mohammedan	countries	in	the
Soviet	Union,	are	ready	to	go	in.	And	that	is	a	third-rate	religion.	Christians	are
very	anxious,	and	Christianity	is	also	not	worthy	to	be	called	a	religion.	It	is	just
an	old	cult.
I	 suggest	 there	 is	only	 religiousness,	which	has	 come	as	 a	 crossbreed	between
Buddha	and	Lao	Tzu.	And	the	crossbreed	is	always	better	than	both	the	parents.
That	crossbreed	is	Zen.	Its	Sanskrit	name	is	dhyan;	its	Pali	name,	which	Buddha
used,	is	zhan.	When	it	reached	China	with	Bodhidharma	it	became	ch'an.	When
it	 reached	Japan	with	Rinzai	 it	became	Zen.	Now	I	am	bringing	 it	back	 to	 the
land	of	Buddha	--	the	circle	is	going	to	be	complete.
It	 went	 out	 of	 India	 because	 of	 the	 brahmin	 priests.	 You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to
know	 that	 for	 two	 thousand	 years	 India	 has	 had	 no	Buddhists.	At	 the	 time	 of
Buddha	 almost	 the	 whole	 country	 was	 impressed	 by	 the	 man.	 But	 what
happened?	The	moment	Buddha	died	--	he	was	against	the	caste	system,	he	was
against	the	rituals	of	the	brahmins,	he	was	against	exploitation	by	the	priesthood
--	 the	moment	he	died,	 the	whole	priesthood	started	killing	Buddhists,	burning
them	alive,	destroying	their	scriptures.	Those	who	could	save	themselves	rushed
all	over	Asia,	to	Tibet,	to	Ladakh,	to	Nepal,	to	Thailand,	to	China,	to	Korea,	to
Taiwan,	to	Japan,	to	Sri	Lanka	--	the	whole	of	Asia	became	Buddhist	EXCEPT
India.
This	 is	 a	 strange	 phenomenon.	 Buddha	 was	 born	 here;	 here	 he	 used	 to	 teach
meditation,	and	this	country	simply	rejected	him.
Beware!	Don't	allow	any	priests	of	any	religion	in	the	Soviet	Union	if	you	want
to	save	communism.	Otherwise,	these	priests	will	prove	just	like	a	cancer.	They
will	 destroy	 the	 whole	 of	 communism	 and	 they	 will	 bring	 all	 the	 old	 rotten
ideologies	back	into	people's	minds.	Beware	of	so-called	religions.
This	 is	my	message	 to	 the	 Soviet	 people.	 I	 love	 them.	 I	 would	 love	 to	 bring
meditation	 into	 their	 life,	 because	 meditation	 brings	 grace,	 peace,	 silence,
blissfulness...	a	freedom	which	nobody	can	take	away	from	you.
The	new	series	begins	today:	COMMUNISM	AND	ZEN	FIRE,	ZEN	WIND.
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
YAKUSAN	ASKED	A	MONK,	"WHERE	DO	YOU	COME	FROM?"
"FROM	NANSEN..."
Nansen	 was	 one	 of	 the	 great	 masters	 of	 Zen.	 The	 monk's	 reply	 is	 that	 he	 is
coming	from	Nansen,	and	Yakusan	immediately	asks,
"HOW	LONG	WERE	YOU	THERE?"
"FROM	LAST	WINTER	TO	SUMMER,"	REPLIED	THE	MONK.
"THEN	 YOU	 MUST	 HAVE	 BECOME	 A	 GOOD	 OX,"	 COMMENTED
YAKUSAN.
I	have	to	tell	you	about	the	ox	--	I	have	told	you	about	it	before.
In	 ancient	 China,	 there	 used	 to	 be	 ten	 cards,	 ten	 beautiful	 pictures	 about	 ox-
herding,	mastering	the	ox.
In	the	first	picture,	the	ox	has	escaped	from	its	owner	into	the	deep	forest.	The
owner	is	looking	all	around,	but	he	can	see	only	trees	and	trees	and	trees,	and	no
ox.
In	the	second	picture,	he	finds	the	footprints	of	the	ox.	Now	there	is	some	hope
he	may	find	the	ox	--	he	follows	the	footprints.	In	the	third	picture,	he	finds	that
the	ox	is	hiding	behind	a	bush;	just	his	tail	and	the	backside	he	can	see.	But	he	is
immediately	happy	--
"He	is	trying	to	deceive	me!"
In	the	fourth	picture	he	has	seen	the	whole	ox.	In	the	fifth	picture,	he	takes	hold
of	the	ox	by	the	horns.	It	 is	a	difficult	struggle;	the	ox	is	far	more	powerful	an
animal	than	man.
With	difficulty	he	manages.	 In	 the	 sixth	picture,	 he	 is	 riding	on	 the	ox.	 In	 the
seventh	he	is	moving	towards	home.
In	 the	 eighth,	 he	has	put	 the	ox	 in	 its	 stable.	 In	 the	ninth	picture,	 he	 is	 sitting
before	his	cottage,	playing	a	flute.
When	these	pictures	came	to	Japan,	the	tenth	picture	was	dropped	out,	thinking
that	 it	might	be	dangerous,	particularly	 for	people	who	are	very	new	and	don't
know	the	whole	world	of	Zen.
The	tenth	picture	shows	that	the	man	is	so	happy...	he	takes	a	bottle	of	wine	and
rushes	 towards	 the	 marketplace,	 perhaps	 towards	 the	 pub,	 to	 enjoy	 with	 his
friends.	He	has	found	his	ox	--	now	this	is	a	celebration.
Being	 afraid	 that	 this	 will	 mean	 that	 you	 can	 drink	 wine	 --	 and	 this	 will	 go
against	Buddha	--	they	dropped	the	tenth	picture.
But	I	 love	 the	 tenth	picture,	because	 it	does	not	 represent	wine;	wine	 is	only	a
symbol	of	being	drunk	with	the	divine.	Wine	is	only	a	symbol	of	being	utterly	at
ease	with	existence
--	 relaxed,	 in	 tune,	 in	harmony,	 in	 accord.	And	his	 rushing	 towards	 the	pub	 is
also	symbolic.	It	is	rushing	towards	your	own	juices	of	life,	to	the	very	center	of
your	being,	where	you	will	get	drunk.
This	kind	of	getting	drunk	is	unending.	Once	you	have	tasted	it,	you	have	tasted
it;	 it	 is	 not	going	 to	 fade	way.	 It	 is	 going	 to	overwhelm	your	whole	 life.	Your
whole	 life	 will	 become	 a	 festival	 of	 lights;	 your	 whole	 life	 will	 become	 a
ceremony	of	laughter,	of	dance,	of	song,	of	music.
The	tenth	picture	was	dropped	out	of	fear,	but	I	want	to	bring	that	tenth	picture
back	--
even	to	Japan.
Ishida	 is	 here,	 sitting.	 She	 has	 come	 from	 Japan,	 from	 a	Shinto	 temple.	 I	will
make	her	my	ambassador	in	Japan	--	I	have	my	ambassadors	all	over	the	world.
Soon	I	will	appoint	an	ambassador	to	the	Soviet	Union.
I	 would	 like	 to	 tell	 Ishida	 that	 the	 tenth	 picture	 has	 to	 be	 added	 to	 the	 nine
pictures,	because	those	nine	pictures	are	incomplete.
This	is	the	story	of	the	ox.
So	when	Yakusan	said,	"THEN	YOU	MUST	HAVE	BECOME	A	GOOD	OX,"
the	monk	said:
"THE	 THING	 IS,	 I	 WAS	 THERE,	 BUT	 I	 DID	 NOT	 EVEN	 GO	 TO	 THE
DINING
HALL."
"BUT	YOU	CANNOT	GET	BY	JUST	THROUGH	BREATHING	THE	WIND!"
YAKUSAN	COMMENTED.
"IT	WAS	NOT	THAT	BAD,	OSHO..."
Osho	 is	 a	 very	 beautiful	word.	 It	 should	 be	 added	 to	 every	 language.	 Just	 the
sound	 is	 beautiful	 in	 the	 first	 place:	 Osho.	 It	 shows	 respect,	 it	 shows	 love,	 it
shows	gratitude.	It	is	not	just	a	dry	word	like	"Reverend."	It	is	a	very	loving	and
friendly	word,	almost	having	the	sense	of	"The	Beloved."
The	man	said,	"IT	WAS	NOT	THAT	BAD,	OSHO."	--	Yakusan	was	also	a	great
master
--	"THERE	IS	SURELY	A	MAN	WHO	WILL	HOLD	A	SPOON	FOR	ME."
Zen	 talks	 in	 symbols;	 that's	why	 it	 has	 remained	 a	 very	 small	 stream	of	 great
mystics	but	it	has	never	became	a	mass	phenomenon.	Perhaps	it	 is	good	that	it
never	 became	 a	 mass	 phenomenon.	 Everything	 that	 becomes	 a	 mass
phenomenon	becomes	 degraded,	 because	 the	majority	 of	 the	 people	 consist	 of
idiots.	And	every	second,	one	idiot	is	born	in	the	world.	They	go	on	increasing.
When	I	was	in	America,	I	just	made	a	comment	to	a	television	interviewer,	that
"All	Oregonians"	--	where	I	was	--	"are	retarded	people."	Obviously,	Oregonians
were	 very	 furious,	 particularly	 the	 attorney	 general	 of	 Oregon,	 David
Frohnmeyer.	And	the	governor,	and	the	all	the	politicians	were	absolutely	angry
that	I	had	called	the	whole	of	Oregon	"retarded."
But	 the	 University	 of	 Oregon	 took	 the	 case	 in	 hand.	 They	 surveyed	 a	 cross
section	 of	Oregon	 society,	 and	 they	 surveyed	my	 commune.	And	 their	 results
silenced	 the	 governor,	 the	 attorney	 general	 and	 all	 the	 politicians.	 The	 results
were	that	the	average	mental	age	of	Oregonians	is	seven	years	--	that	is	the	age
of	retarded	persons.	And	the	age	of	the	commune	people	was	fourteen	--	double
that	of	the	Oregonians.
But	the	idiots	destroyed	the	most	intelligent	commune	in	the	world.	It	had	great
surgeons,	 doctors,	 professors;	 almost	 everybody	 was	 a	 postgraduate	 in	 some
subject,	 hundreds	 were	 Ph.Ds,	 hundreds	 were	 D.Litts.	 It	 was	 absolutely	 an
utterly	intelligent	group	of	people.
Zen	has	remained	a	small,	thin	line,	but	immensely	rich.	It	deals	in	symbols.	If
you	don't	understand	the	symbols,	the	story	is	meaningless.
What	 is	 the	 symbolism	of	what	 the	monk	 said?	 --	 "It	was	 not	 that	 bad,	Osho.
Don't	think	that	I	was	hungry	because	I	never	went	into	the	kitchen.	There	was
always	a	man	who	would	hold	a	spoon	for	me.	That	was	Nansen,	who	was	my
nourishment.	Seeing	that	I	would	not	enter	the	dining	hall,	he	was	always	--	and
he	was	 the	master!	 --	always	bringing	food	for	me.	Not	only	physical	 food,	he
was	also	my	nourishment	spiritually."
"Holding	a	 spoon	 for	me"	means	nourishment.	 "There	was	 someone	who	 took
care	of	me:	my	master,	Nansen.	I	simply	waited	outside	the	dining	room	just	to
see	whether	the	master	takes	care	of	everybody,	whether	he	will	look	out	of	the
window	and	see	one	monk	standing	outside,	not	coming	in.
"So	it	was	not	so	bad	that	I	was	hungry	and	starving;	Nansen	was	always	holding
out	nourishment	for	me,	through	the	window.	And	it	was	not	only	nourishment
for	my	body;	his	attention,	his	care	for	me	was	also	nourishment.	I	am	nobody,
and	 he	 took	 so	 much	 care.	 Every	 day	 he	 remembered	 me,	 that	 I	 would	 be
standing	outside.
"Leaving	his	dining	table,	he	would	come	and	give	me	food,	and	he	never	asked,
`Why	do	you	go	on	standing	outside?'"	--	because	that	is	one	of	the	fundamentals
of	Zen:	don't	interfere	into	anybody's	life.	Everybody	has	a	territorial	imperative,
a	certain	area.	Don't	enter	into	it;	that	is	his	dignity,	that	is	his	pride.	Leave	it	to
his	intelligence.
"And	he	was	not	only	giving	me	food,	he	was	giving	me	spiritual	nourishment.	It
was	not	bad,	Osho.	Don't	misunderstand	me,	and	don't	misunderstand	my	master,
Nansen."
ON	 ANOTHER	 OCCASION,	 YAKUSAN	 WAS	 RETURNING	 TO	 HIS
TEMPLE
WITH	 A	 BUNDLE	 OF	 FIREWOOD	 WHEN	 A	 MONK	 ASKED	 HIM,
"WHERE	HAVE
YOU	BEEN?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"I	HAVE	GOT	FIREWOOD."
THE	MONK	POINTED	TO	YAKUSAN'S	SWORD	AND	SAID,	"IT	MAKES
THE
SOUND	`TAP-TAP'."
Perhaps	 because	 he	 was	 carrying	 the	 firewood,	 and	 the	 sword	 was	 hanging
around	his	waist...	it	may	have	been	hitting	the	firewood	and	making	the	sound
`tap-tap'.	He	said,
"What	is	that	which	makes	the	sound	`tap-tap'?"
AT	THIS	THE	MASTER	UNSHEATHED	THE	SWORD	AND	ASSUMED	A
WARRIOR'S	STANCE.
He	stood	like	a	warrior.
What	is	Yakusan	intending	to	show	to	the	monk?
First,	 the	monk	has	asked,	"Where	have	you	been?"	He	has	not	answered	 that,
because	 what	 is	 past	 is	 past,	 and	 what	 is	 future	 is	 future.	 They	 are	 not	 the
concern	of	Zen.
The	 concern	 of	 Zen	 is	 the	 present	moment.	You	 can	 ask	 a	 question	 about	 the
past,	but	you	cannot	distract	the	master	from	the	present.	So	he	did	not	answer
where	he	had	been;	on	the	contrary,	he	simply	said,	"I	HAVE	GOT	FIREWOOD.
Just	in	the	present,	right	now,	you	can	see	the	firewood	and	you	can	understand
where	I	must	have	been	--
collecting	 firewood.	But	 that	 has	 not	 to	 be	 said.	That	 is	 a	 past	 thing.	 I	 simply
show	you	 the	present.	And	 the	present	 implies	 the	past,	 and	 in	a	 subtle	way	 it
implies	 the	 future,	 but	 nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about	 that.	 That	which	 is	 gone,	 is
gone,	and	that	which	has	not	come	yet,	has	not	come	yet."
We	can	live	only	in	the	present	moment.	That	is	our	only	time.	One	never	knows
what	is	going	to	happen	in	the	next	moment.
Just	 three	 days	 ago,	 a	 Canadian	 sannyasin	 who	 had	 been	 here	 for	 only	 three
days,	was	meditating.	And	before	meditating	he	had	expressed	the	desire	that,	"I
want	 to	 become	 a	 sannyasin	 this	 evening."	 While	 meditating,	 he	 died.	 The
evening	never	came.
People	 thought,	 for	 two	and	a	half	hours,	 that	he	was	meditating.	But	when	he
did	not	move	at	all,	somebody	shook	him	and	found	that	he	was	dead.	But	as	far
as	 I	 am	 concerned,	 because	 he	 was	 intending	 to	 become	 a	 sannyasin	 in	 the
evening	it	is	enough.
He	has	become	a	sannyasin.
Sannyas	is	not	something	outward,	it	is	something	that	arises	in	you,	an	urge,	a
deep	 longing.	And	he	died	 in	meditation	 --	what	better	 initiation	can	 there	be?
He	died	as	a	sannyasin.	 In	utter	silence,	 in	absolute	peace,	he	disappeared	 into
the	beyond.
Zen	does	not	 talk	 about	past	 and	 future.	 Its	whole	 concentration	 is	 in	 the	now
and	here.
I	always	love	to	tell	a	small	story....
A	great	atheist	advocate	had	written	 in	his	sitting	 room,	on	 the	wall,	 in	capital
letters:	GOD	IS	NOWHERE.	Of	course,	everybody	who	came	to	see	him	had	to
read	it;	it	was	in	such	big	letters,	just	in	front	of	their	eyes.
His	first	child	was	born,	and	one	day	he	was	playing	with	 the	child.	The	child
was	learning	the	language	slowly,	so	he	started	reading	the	sentence	on	the	wall.
He	could	read,	"God	is	nowhere,"	but	"nowhere"	was	such	a	big	word,	the	child
could	not	manage	to	read	it	in	one	go.	He	cut	it	in	two.	He	read,	"GOD	IS	NOW
HERE."	The	word
`nowhere'	has	been	cut	into	two	pieces.
For	the	first	time	the	father	looked	at	the	sentence,	and	he	said,	"My	God!	This
child	has	made	me	aware.	Now	I	can	never	read	that	sentence	completely;	I	will
always	remember
"Now	Here."
It	was	a	moment	of	transformation	for	the	advocate.	For	the	first	time	he	started
thinking,
"Do	I	know	really	that	God	is	nowhere?	Have	I	explored	the	whole	space?	Have
I	explored	my	inner	being?"
Just	as	the	theists	are	blind,	so	are	the	atheists.	Both	are	believers.	The	only	right
person	is	an	agnostic,	who	is	neither	theist	nor	atheist,	who	is	simply	in	search	of
the	 truth.	 He	 has	 no	 belief	 system,	 no	 prejudice,	 no	 ideology	 already
programmed.
I	don't	see	much	difference	in	the	atheism	of	the	Soviet	Union	and	the	theism	of
the	Vatican.	The	theism	of	the	Vatican	is	based	on	a	belief.	DAS	KAPITAL	is	the
bible	for	the	Soviet	Union	--	because	Marx	says	there	is	no	God,	it	has	become	a
program	 for	 every	 child.	 In	 seventy	 years	 the	 old	 generation	 has	 disappeared.
Now	every	child	believes	there	is	no	God.	In	India	every	child	believes	there	is
God.	Both	are	beliefs:	one	is	positive	belief,	one	is	negative	belief,	but	belief	is
belief.	Neither	the	Soviet	Union	knows,	nor	the	Vatican.
The	people	who	know,	 say	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 say	 anything	 about	 the	 ultimate
reality.	It	cannot	be	brought	into	language;	it	remains	mysterious.	You	can	enter
into	it,	but	you	cannot	say	anything	about	it.	You	can	enjoy	it,	you	can	rejoice	it,
you	can	dance	it,	but	language	is	too	poor.
This	 is	 the	 real	 poverty	 of	 philosophy,	 that	 it	 cannot	 express	 the	 ultimate
experience	of	meditators.
Only	 the	agnostic	can	be	a	meditator.	He	puts	aside	all	programming,	whether
the	 programming	 is	 from	 the	 theist	 or	 from	 the	 atheist	 does	 not	 matter.	 All
programming,	the	whole	mind,	has	to	be	put	aside,	and	you	have	to	enter	into	a
space	of	no-mind.
In	that	no-mind	there	is	no	time,
just	the	present	moment	and	utter	silence,
and	great	clarity,
and	you	are	a	luminous	being,
Now,	Here.
That's	why	Yakusan	said,	"I	have	got	firewood.	The	rest	you	can	understand.	But
don't	ask	me	about	the	past."
THE	MONK	 THEN	 POINTED	 TO	 YAKUSAN'S	 SWORD	 AND	 SAID,	 "IT
MAKES
THE	SOUND	`TAP-TAP'.	WHAT	IN	THE	WORLD	IS	IT?"
Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 about	 it?	 --	 even	 small	 things	 cannot	 be	 defined.	 If
somebody	asks	you,	"What	is	yellow?"	what	will	you	do?	You	can	point	to	the
color	yellow,	but	you	cannot	give	any	definition.	What	is	yellow?	What	is	red?
You	will	say,	"Red	is	red."	But	that	is	not	giving	the	answer.	This	is	tautology;
you	are	simply	repeating	"A	rose	is	a	rose	is	a	rose,"	but	you	have	gone	nowhere.
You	 have	 not	 defined	 what	 is	 rose.	 You	 can	 only	 indicate	 --	 "This	 is."	 No
definition	is	possible	--	only	indication.
So	when	the	man	asked,	"What	is	that	which	is	making	the	sound	`tap-tap'?"	the
master	did	not	answer,	"It	is	a	sword,"	because	Zen	does	not	believe	in	language;
it	believes	in	existence.
He	 took	 out	 the	 sword	 and	 showed	 the	 man	 a	 warrior's	 stance,	 the	 way	 the
warrior	stands	with	his	sword:	"This	is	it!	If	you	have	eyes	you	can	see.	If	you
don't	have	eyes	I	am	helpless."	But	no	dialogue,	just	existential	indications.
Shiro	wrote:
IN	SNOW-WHITE	MIST
WHERE	SEA	AND	SKY	ARE	ONE,
A	SINGLE	DISK	OF	RED	--	THE	RISING	SUN.
Haikus	are	pictures,	visualize	them.	They	are	not	poetries	in	the	ordinary	sense.
Just	visualize:
IN	SNOW-WHITE	MIST
WHERE	SEA	AND	SKY	ARE	ONE,
A	SINGLE	DISK	OF	RED	--	THE	RISING	SUN.
These	haikus	have	come	out	of	meditation.
Perhaps	 Shiro	 was	 meditating	 by	 the	 seaside,	 and	 as	 he	 opened	 his	 eyes	 IN
SNOW-WHITE	MIST	WHERE	SEA	AND	SKY	ARE	ONE,
on	the	horizon,	suddenly
A	SINGLE	DISK	OF	RED	--	THE	RISING	SUN.
And	utter	silence	on	his	part,	he	is	no	more	there.	He	is	completely	absorbed	in
the	ocean,	in	the	mist,	in	the	rising	sun.
It	happened	to	Picasso	--	it	will	help	you	to	understand.
He	was	painting.	One	man	was	watching	continuously	for	one	and	a	half	hours.
Finally	 he	 could	 not	 resist	 the	 temptation	 --	 because	 he	 could	 not	 understand
what	Picasso	was	painting.	Just	colors,	colors,	but	no	idea	what	he	was	painting.
Finally	he	shook	Picasso	and	asked,	"What	are	you	painting?"
As	if	from	a	trance,	Picasso	was	awakened.	He	said,	"What...?	I	was	not	there.
Just	 the	painting	was	happening,	 I	was	not	painting.	 I	don't	know	what.	When
the	painting	is	complete,	the	critics	will	find	out	what	I	have	painted,	because	I
am	not.	I	am	simply	my	brush,	my	colors,	my	canvas.	Something	is	happening,
something	is	cooking,	but	I	don't	know	exactly."
A	 rich	 young	woman,	 very	 super-rich,	 asked	 him,	 "You	 have	 never	made	 any
portrait..."
He	has	never	made	any	portrait,	because	who	will	ask	him	to	make	a	portrait?
Just	look	at	his	paintings!
He	said,	"I	have	never	done	any	portrait."
The	woman	said,	"I	am	willing	to	pay	any	amount	of	money.	Don't	bother	about
money,	money	does	not	matter."	She	was	a	widow	of	a	super-rich	American.
Just	 to	 avoid	 the	woman,	 Picasso	 said,	 "It	 will	 cost	 one	million	 dollars."	 She
said,
"Agreed,	start!"
He	started	painting	her	portrait.	When	the	portrait	was	complete,	the	woman	was
completely	in	amazement!	She	said,	"Just	one	question.	Where	is	my	nose	in	this
portrait?	Because	 from	 the	 nose	 I	 can	 find	 out	where	my	 eyes	 are,	where	my
mouth	is,	where	my	ears	are.	A	central	point...	Just	one	question,	I	will	not	ask
anything	more."
Picasso	said,	"I	told	you	before,	I	don't	do	portraits!	I	knew	perfectly	well	where
it	was,	but	now	I	don't	know.	I	was	so	lost	in	painting	it	--	who	cares	about	your
nose?	You	can	take	it	 to	 the	critics,	art	connoisseurs.	Show	them;	perhaps	 they
can	find	it."
When	a	meditator	is	in	deep	meditation,	he	is	no	more.	And	the	morning,	early
morning,	when	 it	 is	 still	dark	and	 the	sun	 is	still	under	 the	horizon,	 is	 the	best
time,	the	most	cool.
And	if	you	are	near	the	sea...
the	cool	crisp	salty	breeze
and	the	silence	surrounding	you
and	the	continuous	sound	of	the	waves
creating	a	certain	vibration	of	music...
It	works	almost	 like	a	 lullaby.	Just	as	your	mother	moves	you	 in	her	arms	and
sings	a	 song...	 continuous	waves,	making	 the	same	sound	again	and	again	and
again...	 it	 creates	 a	 lullaby.	 It	 helps	 you	 to	 relax.	 Now	 people	 are	 using	 that
sound	for	sleep.
Shiro	must	be	sitting	on	 the	sea	beach,	utterly	 relaxed,	and	 then	he	opened	his
eyes,	clean	and	clear,	just	like	mirrors,	and	there	is	a	reflection:	the	mist	meeting
the	sea.	And	suddenly	out	of	 the	mist	and	out	of	 the	sea	rises	a	red	disk	--	 the
rising	sun.
These	 haikus	 are	 word-pictures.	 The	 necessity	 of	 a	 meditative	 mind	 as	 a
background	is	absolute.	No	one	except	a	meditator	can	write	haiku.
Now	 many	Westerners	 are	 writing	 haiku.	 They	 don't	 understand	 that	 without
meditation	 you	 cannot	write	 haiku.	You	 can	 compose	 a	 poem,	 you	 know	how
many	syllables	are	in	a	haiku.	You	can	compose,	but	that	composition	is	from	the
mind,	 and	 haiku	 is	 from	 the	 no-mind,	 from	 the	 utter	 silence	 when	 you	 are
nothing	but	a	mirror	--	not	out	of	thought,	but	from	no	thought.
Question	5
Maneesha	has	asked	a	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
IS	 NOT	 THE	 URGE	 TO	 UNDERSTAND,	 ACTUALLY	 THE	 URGE	 TO
BECOME
ONE	--	BOTH	INWARDLY	AND	WITH	OUR	OUTER	WORLD?
Yes,	Maneesha.	It	is	a	very	complicated	question	that	you	have	asked	--	it	looks
simple.
I	have	to	bring	Sigmund	Freud	in.
Sigmund	Freud	was	the	first	man	in	the	world	who	said	that	the	whole	urge	for
finding	the	truth,	liberation,	salvation,	is	arising	out	of	nothing	but	a	deprivation.
The	child	lived	in	the	mother's	womb	for	nine	months,	one	with	the	mother.	That
was	his	whole	world,	his	whole	cosmos;	he	knew	nothing	else.
The	womb	was	the	whole	universe,	and	it	was	so	beautiful,	so	relaxed.	He	had
no	worries	of	going	bankrupt,	he	had	no	worries	about	the	wife,	and	the	children
becoming	hippies.
He	had	no	worries	at	all.	All	nourishment	was	given	by	mother,	all	oxygen	was
given	by	the	mother	--	everything	was	supplied	without	asking.	He	had	lived	for
nine	months	in	paradise.
But	after	nine	months	he	is	thrown	out	of	paradise,	just	the	way	Adam	and	Eve
were	thrown	out	of	the	Garden	of	Eden.	Then	he	encounters	the	whole	world	--
such	 a	 helpless	 child	 --	 and	 the	 world	 is	 too	 big,	 and	 every	 day	 brings	 new
problems.	Every	day	he	has	to	learn	new	things,	problem	upon	problem.
Soon	he	will	be	going	to	school	--	and	there	are	so	many	subjects.	Soon	he	will
be	getting	married	--	and	there	are	so	many	troubles.	Soon	he	will	be	in	business,
or	 in	 service...	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	masks	 he	 will	 have	 to	 wear:	 before	 the	 wife,
before	the	girlfriend,	before	the	boss,	before	the	servant.	He	will	have	to	change
his	mask	continually.	A	tremendous	desire	is	to	go	back	to	the	womb.
According	to	Sigmund	Freud	--	and	I	agree	with	him	--	 the	desire	 to	know	the
truth,	 the	desire	 to	be	 liberated,	 the	desire	 to	become	one	with	existence,	 is	an
extension	 of	 the	 experience	 in	 the	 womb	 of	 the	 mother.	 The	 whole	 cosmos
becomes	your	womb	the	moment	you	enter	into	deep	meditation.
At	the	very	center	of	your	being	you	are	connected	with	the	cosmos;	otherwise
you	cannot	live	even	for	a	single	moment.	Your	life	is	not	your	life,	it	is	the	life
that	the	cosmos	is	pouring	in	you	continuously.	Your	breath	is	not	your	breath,	it
is	the	cosmos	that	is	continuously	pouring	oxygen	in	the	exact	proportion	needed
by	you.	 If	 it	were	 left	 to	you	 to	breathe,	 I	don't	 think	anybody	would	 survive.
You	 will	 forget.	 Somebody	 insults	 you	 and	 you	 will	 forget	 breathing	 --	 first
things	first!	You	see	a	beautiful	woman	and	you	will	forget	that	the	heart	has	to
continue	beating;	it	stops.	It	will	be	so	difficult....
Existence	has	taken	care	to	keep	every	essential	thing	in	its	own	hands.	What	is
given	to	you	is	trivia;	all	essential	things	that	are	absolutely	necessary	for	life	are
still	in	the	hands	of	existence.
When	you	reach	in	deep	meditation	to	your	roots,	you	will	find	that	a	door	opens
into	the	beyond	and	you	know	that	every	moment	life	 is	rushing	into	you.	The
more	you	become	open,	 at	 the	 center,	 the	more	 life	 you	have	 --	 abundance	of
life,	 so	 much	 that	 you	 would	 like	 to	 share	 with	 the	 whole	 world;	 still	 it	 is
inexhaustible.
Yes,	Maneesha,	 the	desire,	 the	urge	 to	understand	 is	 really	 the	urge	 to	become
one	with	the	cosmos.	Then	there	is	no	birth;	then	there	is	no	death.	The	cosmos
is	 eternal.	 It	 has	 never	 been	 created,	 as	 Christians	 have	 been	 telling	 you,	 and
other	religions	also.	It	is	evolving	from	eternity	to	eternity.
I	 am	against	America,	Christianity,	 I	 am	against	President	Ronald	Reagan,	not
because	of	personal	hurts	that	they	have	done	to	me	and	to	my	commune.	I	am
against	 them	because	Ronald	Reagan	made	 a	 tremendous	wound	 in	 the	whole
intelligentsia	 of	 the	 world	 by	 trying	 to	 burn	 all	 Charles	 Darwin's	 books	 --	 in
every	library,	in	every	college,	in	every	school,	in	every	university	--	because	it
teaches	evolution,	and	Christianity	teaches	creation.
These	 are	 two	 contradictory	 concepts.	 Creation	 means	 once	 and	 forever
complete.
Evolution	means	never	 complete,	 always	going	on	 and	on.	Always	 the	goal	 is
just	nearby
--	but	as	you	move	on,	the	goal	also	moves	on.	It	is	just	like	the	horizon:	it	looks
just	a	few	miles	away.	You	drive,	and	as	you	drive	the	horizon	goes	on	moving,
further	 and	 further.	 The	 distance	 between	 you	 and	 the	 horizon	 will	 remain
exactly	the	same	--	you	can	go	around	the	earth	--	because	the	horizon	is	just	an
illusion.
The	goal,	every	goal,	is	an	illusion.	The	man	of	understanding	lives	without	any
goal.	He	simply	loves	to	live,	he	simply	loves	to	love.	He	simply	loves	to	sing
and	 dance	 and	 enjoy	 the	moment,	 the	 opportunity	 that	 existence	 has	 given	 to
him.
In	 that	 total	 dance,	 you	 become	 one.	 In	 that	 total	 singing,	 when	 the	 singer
disappears,	you	become	one.
I	have	 told	you	about	Nijinsky,	one	of	 the	greatest	dancers	 the	world	has	ever
known.	His	greatness	was	not	 just	his	dance.	His	greatness	was	 that	once	 in	a
while,	while	dancing,	he	would	jump	so	high...	which	is	not	possible	according
to	 scientists.	 Because	 gravitation	 is	 pulling	 you	 down,	 there	 is	 a	 limit,	 but	 he
always	 transcended	 the	 limit	 so	much	 that	 it	 was	 a	miracle	 --	 what	 happens?
What	happens	to	gravitation?
And	 not	 only	 this,	 when	 he	 would	 come	 back	 down...	 Gravitation	 pulls	 with
force;	you	will	fall	on	the	stage	with	a	thump!	But	Nijinsky	would	fall	down	like
a	feather,	just	slowly	moving.	That	too	is	against	gravitation.
He	was	asked	again	and	again,	"What	is	the	secret?"	He	said,	"The	secret	I	don't
know.
All	that	I	know	is,	whenever	I	try	to	do	it	I	never	succeed.	In	my	aloneness	I	try
to	do	it	-
-	I	never	succeed.	When	I	forget	myself	completely	in	the	dance,	when	there	is
no	Nijinsky,	only	 the	dance,	suddenly	 it	happens.	It	 is	a	surprise	 to	you,	 it	 is	a
surprise	to	me.
It	is	not	my	doing."
Meditation	 is	 not	 your	 doing.	 You	 simply	 make	 the	 effort,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 your
doing.	 Your	 effort	 is	 needed	 to	 prepare	 the	 ground.	 As	 the	 ground	 is	 ready,
immediately	you	see	you	are	no	more;	the	whole	cosmos	is.	You	have	entered	a
greater	womb,	an	eternal	womb	of	tremendous	peace	and	ecstasy.
Now	it	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.
("SARDARJI,"	AS	HE	IS	AFFECTIONATELY	KNOWN,	HAS	EARNED	THE
DISTINCTION	OF	BEING	"THE	ONLY	MAN	WHO	LAUGHS	BEFORE	THE
JOKE
IS	 TOLD,"	 AND	 THE	 HONOR	 OF	 HAVING	 THIS	 PART	 OF	 THE
DISCOURSE
ANNOUNCED	AS	HIS	SPECIAL	TIME.	TONIGHT,	HIS	HEARTY	AND
INFECTIOUS	LAUGHTER	IS	NOT	HEARD....)
Where	is	Sardar?!	Absent?	Perhaps	in	deep	meditation....
That	 old	dried-up	prune,	Mother	Teresa,	 invites	 that	 old	 rotten	 fruitcake,	Pope
the	Polack,	to	come	and	visit	her	Bleeding	Hearts	Home	for	the	Dead	and	Dying
in	Calcutta.
The	Polack	 is	 thrilled	 to	 receive	 the	 invitation,	 so	 he	 gets	Cardinal	Catzass	 to
pack	their	bags,	and	they	fly	off	to	India.
Their	first	day	is	spent	touring	Mother	Teresa's	Bleeding	Hearts	Home,	blessing
all	the	half-dead	Christian	converts.
The	next	morning,	the	two	Catholic	cowboys	from	Rome	go	out	into	the	streets
of	Calcutta,	to	wave	at	the	crowds	of	starving	Hindus.	But	all	day	long,	Pope	the
Polack	has	been	acting	very	strangely.
Cardinal	Catzass	is	worried	about	the	old	Polack	and	asks	him,	"Your	Holiness,
what	is	the	matter?"
"Listen,"	says	the	old	fruitcake,	"as	soon	as	we	get	back	to	that	Bleeding	Hearts
Home,	the	first	thing	I	want	to	do	is	rip	off	Mother	Teresa's	knickers!"
"Really?"	replies	the	shocked	cardinal.	"Why	do	you	want	to	do	that?"
"Because,"	says	the	pope	with	a	groan,	"they	are	much	too	tight	for	me!"
"How	much	for	a	roast	beef	sandwich?"	asks	Little	Feenie	Finkelstein,	standing
in	Chicken	Chopper's	Sandwich	Shop.
"Two	dollars,"	replies	Chicken	Chopper,	from	behind	the	counter.
"How	much	for	a	cheese	sandwich?"	asks	the	little	Jew.
"One	dollar,"	replies	Chicken.
"What	 about	 a	 ham	 sandwich?"	 asks	Feenie.	But	 before	Chicken	Chopper	 can
reply	there	is	a	loud	clap	of	thunder	in	the	sky	overhead.
Feenie	 Finkelstein	 falls	 to	 his	 knees,	 looks	 up	 at	 the	 sky	 and	 prays	 out	 loud,
"Okay!
Okay!	--	I	was	only	asking!"
Dimmel	 Himmel,	 a	 nice	 Jewish	 boy	 from	 Berlin,	 goes	 to	 live	 in	 America	 to
make	his	fortune,	and	ends	up	in	L.A.,	California.
After	a	few	years,	he	comes	back	to	Berlin	to	visit	his	old	mother,	Mrs.	Hattie
Himmel.
He	walks	through	the	door	in	his	stone-washed	Levi	jeans,	alligator	tennis	shirt,
and	Reebok	sneakers.
"Oy,	veh!"	cries	Mamma	Himmel,	"but	where	are	your	beautiful	long	whiskers?"
"Ah,	Mamma!"	replies	Dimmel.	"Nobody	wears	a	beard	in	L.A."
"Oy,	 my	 baby!"	 cries	 Hettie	 Himmel.	 "But	 tell	 me,	 you	 have	 at	 least	 been
keeping	the	Sabbath?"
"Look,	Mamma,"	says	Himmel.	"Business	is	business!	In	America,	people	work
on	the	Sabbath."
"Ah,	God!"	cries	Mamma	Himmel.	"But	kosher	food	you	still	eat?"
"Listen,	Mamma,"	replies	Himmel,	"I	am	an	American	now.	It	is	very	difficult	to
keep	kosher	in	America."
The	old	lady	looks	at	her	son	in	shock.	She	hesitates	for	a	moment	and	then	goes
up	 to	 him	 and	whispers,	 "Dimmel,	my	 son,	 tell	 me	 one	 thing	 --	 are	 you	 still
circumcised?"
Nivedano...
(Gibberish)
Nivedano...
Be	silent...
Close	your	eyes...	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	 is	 the	 right	 moment	 to	 look	 inwards.	With	 your	 whole	 life	 energy,	 rush
towards	the	center	of	your	being.
Your	total	consciousness	is	needed
to	become	just	an	arrow,
forcing	itself	deeper	and	deeper,
faster	and	faster,
with	an	urgency	as	if	this	is	going	to	be
your	last	moment	on	the	earth.
Without	this	urgency	you	will	never	be	able	to	reach	to	the	center	of	your	being.
That	is	the	point	from	where	you	are	connected	with	the	cosmos.	And	that	is	also
the	point	which	transforms	you	into	a	buddha,	into	an	awakened	one.	That	is	also
the	point	when	you	learn	you	are	immortal:	you	have	been	here	always,	and	you
will	be	here	always	--	whether	in	body	or	no	body.
As	you	are	coming	closer	and	closer	to	your	being,	a	great	silence	descends	over
you,	and	a	great	peace	arises	within	your	being.
The	moment	you	reach	to	the	very	center
you	are	no	more,
the	buddha	is.
The	only	quality	that	buddha	has
is	pure	awareness
consciousness
witnessing.
Witnessing	is	a	key	word	for	all	meditators.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body...
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind...
Witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness.
Suddenly,	great	bliss	arises	in	you
out	of	nowhere
flowers	of	invisible	ecstasy
start	showering	on	you.
You	are	at	the	very	source	of	your	life	juices.
To	make	the	witnessing	clear,	Nivedano...
Relax.
Let	go...	but	keep	on	witnessing.
That	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 you	 have	 to	 remember	 --	 you	 are	 a	 witness	 --	 and
everything	else	will	happen	on	its	own.
I	 can	 see	 ten	 thousand	 buddhas	 utterly	 relaxed	 in	 their	 center.	 Gautam	 the
Buddha	Auditorium	is	changing	into	an	ocean	of	consciousness,	because	you	are
all	melting,	dissolving	your	separation	from	existence.
The	ocean	of	consciousness	is	without	any	waves,
without	any	ripples.
It	is	utterly	calm	and	quiet.
This	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth,	because	everybody	is
concerned	only	with	 the	 trivia	 --	money,	prestige,	power.	Nobody	 seems	 to	be
concerned	to	know	themselves,	and	nobody	seems	to	be	concerned	to	know	their
eternity.
This	moment,	now	and	here,	you	are	experiencing	 the	most	 intimate,	 the	most
ultimate	experience	that	is	possible	to	man.
This	experience	is	going	to	become	your	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind.	The	fire	will	burn
everything	 that	 is	 false	 in	 you,	 and	 the	wind	will	 take	 away	 all	 that	 is	 only	 a
personality.
Out	of	this	fire	and	wind
will	arise	your	pure	gold.
You	will	need	to	understand	the	transformation	that	happens	in	this	moment.	You
have	 lived	 your	 whole	 life	 horizontally,	 in	 a	 line,	 from	 the	 cradle	 to	 the
graveyard.	 In	 meditation	 the	 transformation	 happens:	 you	 are	 no	 more	 a
horizontal	 line,	 you	 become	 vertical.	 You	 reach	 to	 the	 highest	 peak	 of	 your
consciousness,	and	you	reach	to	the	deepest	point	of	your	consciousness.
The	height
and	the	depth
reveal	you
your	godliness.
There	 is	 no	God,	 but	 there	 is	 certainly	 a	 quality	 I	 call	 godliness.	 It	 comprises
compassion,	 love,	 friendship,	 joy,	creativity.	 It	brings	you	new	songs,	 it	brings
you	new	dances.	It	brings	you	the	truth,	and	the	immersion	of	you	into	the	truth.
Collect	as	much	experience	you	can	collect,	because	you	have	 to	bring	 it	with
you.	It	has	to	become	part	of	your	day-to-day	routine	life.
Chopping	wood,	you	should	be	as	silent	as	you	are	now.	Drawing	water	from	the
well,	you	should	be	as	blissful	and	ecstatic	as	you	are	now.
Sitting	silently,	doing	nothing,	you	should	be	as	blissful	as	you	are	now.
And	persuade	the	buddha,	which	is	your	eternal	nature,	to	come	along	with	you.
First,	the	buddha	will	come	as	a	shadow	to	you,	following	you	--	but	even	that
shadow	will	bring	great	grace	and	abundance	of	life,	great	benediction	you	can
shower	all	over	the	world.	But	this	is	only	the	beginning	--	buddha	as	a	shadow.
Soon,	buddha	will	be	ahead	of	you,	and	you	will	become	the	shadow.	That	is	the
second	step.
And	 the	 third	 step...	 you	merge	 into	 the	 buddha;	 even	 the	 shadow	 disappears,
only	buddha	is,	only	pure	awareness	is.
You	have	entered	into	the	cosmic	womb.
Nivedano...
Come	back,	but	come	as	a	buddha,	with	the	same	grace,	with	the	same	silence,
with	the	same	bliss.
Sit	 down	 for	 a	 few	 moments	 just	 to	 recollect	 the	 golden	 path	 that	 you	 have
followed.
And	feel	--	the	presence	of	buddha	is	just	behind	you.
Remember	--	in	every	activity,	howsoever	ordinary,	the	buddha	is	present	behind
you.
His	presence	 transforms	every	ordinary	action	 into	an	extraordinary	act.	Every
word	becomes	 so	 rich	and	so	 full	of	poetry,	 so	 full	of	 truth,	 so	 full	of	 silence.
Every	silence	is	as	deep	as	the	Pacific	Ocean.	Every	moment	in	your	life	you	are
just	moving	upward	in	consciousness,	as	if	you	are	moving	on	the	greatest	peak
of	the	Himalayas,	the	Everest.
I	teach	you	this	Fire	of	Zen.
I	teach	you	this	Wind	of	Zen.
That	 is	 going	 to	 burn	 everything	 that	 is	 wrong,	 that	 is	 going	 to	 take	 away
everything	that	is	wrong	in	you	and	leave	only	the	truth,	the	ultimate	truth.
That	ultimate	truth	brings	freedom.
This	is	the	only	spirituality,
the	only	religion.
It	 is	 individual	 --	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 any	 church,	 with	 any	 organized
religion.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	scripture.	It	has	to	do	only	with	your	inner
search	 and	 finding	 your	 authentic	 nature	 --	what	Zen	 people	 call	 "the	 original
face."
The	buddha	is	your	original	face.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Raise	the	temple	of	consciousness
31	January	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8901315
ShortTitle:
FIRE02
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
171
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
THE	 MONK	 IN	 CHARGE	 OF	 THE	 MONASTERY	 ONCE	 SAID	 TO
YAKUSAN,	"I	HAVE	RUNG	THE	BELL;	PLEASE,	OSHO,	IT	IS	TIME	FOR
THE	REGULAR
DISCOURSE."
YAKUSAN	SAID,	"OKAY.	YOU	COME	AND	FOLLOW	ME,	HOLDING	UP
MY
BOWL."
THE	 MONK	 DIDN'T	 UNDERSTAND	 THE	 MASTER'S	 MEANING,	 AND
UNGAN	--
WHO	WAS	ALSO	PRESENT	--	ASKED,	"MASTER,	WHEN	DID	YOU	LOSE
YOUR	ARMS	AND	LEGS?"
YAKUSAN	SAID,	"YOU	ARE	SIMPLY	WEARING	THE	MONK'S	HABIT."
UNGAN	REPLIED,	"I	AM	NOT	OTHER	THAN	THIS.	WHAT	ABOUT	YOU,
MASTER?"
"I	DON'T	HAVE	SUCH	A	FAMILY,"	COMMENTED	YAKUSAN.
ONCE	YAKUSAN	CALLED	A	BOY	MONK	TO	HIM.	DOGO	ASKED,	"WHY
DO
YOU	CALL	SUCH	PEOPLE?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"BECAUSE	OF	THIS."
DOGO	ASKED,	"WHY	DON'T	YOU	THROW	IT	AWAY?"
"BECAUSE	I	HAVE	USED	IT	FOR	A	LONG	TIME,"	REPLIED	YAKUSAN.
Friends,
Question	1
One	of	the	sannyasins	has	asked	a	question:
WHAT	IS	MISSING	IN	COMMUNISM?
Zen	Fire	and	Zen	Wind	--	that	is	what	is	missing	in	communism.
I	have	to	go	into	a	deeper	analysis...
Karl	Marx	was	 an	 intellectual	 giant,	 but	 he	 had	no	 idea	 of	 religiousness	 other
than	Judaism	and	Christianity.	Both	are	religions	of	prayer.	Both	believe	in	God,
which	 is	 a	 fiction.	 Both	 believe	 in	 things	 which	 are	 irrational.	 For	 example,
Moses	 passing	 through	 the	 sea,	 and	 the	 sea	 giving	 way	 --	 nature	 makes	 no
exceptions.	 And	 Jesus	 pretending	 to	 be	 the	 only	 begotten	 son	 of	 God	 is
absolutely	absurd	to	any	rational	man	like	Karl	Marx.
Jesus'	miracles	are	mythological.	He	made	Lazarus	come	out	of	his	grave,	raised
him	back	to	life	--	and	he	could	not	do	anything	when	he	was	on	the	cross!	He
could	not	even	produce	a	little	water	--	he	was	thirsty,	it	was	a	hot	day,	and	he
was	 asking	 continuously	 for	 water.	 And	 this	 man	 has	 touched	 people	 and
restored	their	eyes;	even	by	touching	his	robe	people	have	lost	their	paralysis.	He
has	walked	on	water,	and	this	man	could	not	fly	with	the	cross	towards	God,	his
father?	He	was	utterly	helpless	on	the	cross.
That	shows	all	those	miracles	are	simply	invented	by	the	Christians	to	befool	the
world.
Even	 Christian	 scholars	 are	 being	 embarrassed	 by	 all	 these	 miracles,	 by	 his
virgin	birth,	by	his	shouting	towards	God	on	the	cross,	"Have	you	forsaken	me?"
Karl	Marx	was	aware	only	of	Judaism	--	he	was	a	Jew,	just	as	Jesus	was	a	Jew	--
and	he	was	 aware	of	Christianity	 and	 all	 its	 crimes	 against	 humanity.	Burning
millions	 of	 women	 alive,	 forcing	 them	 to	 confess	 that	 they	 are	 having
intercourse	 with	 the	 devil,	 continuous	 torture	 to	 any	 woman	 --	 beating,	 not
letting	her	sleep,	not	giving	her	food,	putting	ice	on	her	chest	for	hours....
These	were	the	people	who,	by	chance,	 invented	the	traction	machine,	because
they	were	putting	women	on	a	traction	machine	which	pulled	the	legs	from	one
side	and	 the	head	and	 the	arms	from	the	other	side.	One	woman	was	suffering
from	backache	--	suddenly	her	backache	disappeared.	Now	that	traction	machine
has	 been	 transferred	 from	 the	 churches	 to	 the	medical	 colleges,	 to	 hospitals.	 I
know	it	from	my	personal	experience!
And	when	they	were	torturing	those	people	on	the	traction	machine,	sometimes
the	legs	would	come	out,	sometimes	the	arms	would	be	broken.	Sometimes	the
head	would	be	stretched	so	much	that	the	woman	would	start	saying,	"I	confess
that	I	have	been	having	sex	with	the	devil."	And	once	she	confessed,	then	they
told	 her	 how	 to	 describe	 the	 devil:	 that	 he	 has	 two	 horns,	 that	 his	 sexual
machinery	 is	 forked	 --	all	 the	details	 that	 she	had	 to	confess	 in	a	 special	court
appointed	 by	 the	 pope,	 the	 grand	 jury.	 The	 poor	 woman	 has	 to	 accept	 it;
otherwise	 they	will	 torture	her	 to	death.	So	what	 is	 the	point?	She	knows	 that
confessing	it	means	being	burnt,	but	death	seems	to	be	more	peaceful	than	this
life	of	continuous	torture.
More	people	have	been	killed	by	the	Christian	church	than	by	anybody	else.
Karl	Marx	was	reacting	to	these	two	religions,	which	are	not	religions	at	all	but
fictions,	superstitions,	cults.	He	was	not	aware	of	Taoism,	he	was	not	aware	of
Lao	Tzu,	he	was	not	aware	of	Gautam	Buddha	and	Mahavira.	He	was	not	aware
that	 there	 are	 religions	 in	 the	 world	 which	 don't	 believe	 in	 God,	 which	 don't
believe	 in	 prayer,	 which	 don't	 believe	 in	 heaven	 and	 hell.	 Because	 of	 this
unawareness	 of	 the	 whole	 Eastern	 phenomenon,	 he	 created	 communism	 as
materialism,	dialectical	materialism.
It	was	out	of	ignorance.	Otherwise	I	have	absolute	trust	that	if	he	had	been	aware
of	 the	Eastern	 research	 into	 the	 interior	 space	of	man...	Karl	Marx	was	not	 an
ordinary	 being,	 but	 a	 very	 extraordinarily	 intelligent	 person.	 He	 would	 have
understood	that	Christianity	and	Judaism	are	not	the	only	religions	in	the	world.
Buddhism	has	not	killed	a	single	person,	and	converted	the	whole	of	Asia	just	by
simple	 dialogue,	 just	 by	 intellectual	 conversation,	 just	 by	 leading	 people	 into
meditation.
Karl	Marx	was	 right	 in	his	 reaction	against	Christianity	 and	 Judaism.	There	 is
certainly	no	God	as	 a	 creator.	And	because	he	denied	God,	 as	 a	 corollary	 --	 a
logical	corollary	--
he	 denied	 the	 human	 soul.	 It	 was	 not	 his	 experience,	 it	 was	 simply	 a	 logical
thing.	 To	 accept	 the	 human	 soul,	 which	 is	 not	 material,	 would	 be	 self-
contradictory	in	his	philosophy.
By	vocation	I	am	a	logician,	and	by	mistake	I	am	a	mystic.	But	my	mistake	has
paid	me	tremendously.	Now	I	know	that	logic	is	just	mental	gymnastics.
All	 the	 conclusions	 derived	 by	 Marx	 were	 based	 on	 logic,	 were	 based	 on
thinking,	 philosophizing.	He	was	 not	 aware	 at	 all	 that	 there	 is	 something	 like
meditation,	that	there	is	some	way	to	go	inwards.
And	 the	human	soul,	 the	human	spirit,	 is	not	a	by-product	of	matter.	 It	has	 its
own	 existence.	The	matter	 in	 the	 body	 seems	 to	 be	 alive,	 only	 because	 of	 the
presence	 of	 consciousness	 in	 it.	 Once	 the	 consciousness	 leaves	 the	 body,	 the
body	is	simply	dead,	a	corpse.
But	because	Karl	Marx	had	no	experience	of	meditation...	And	the	West	was	not
the	right	place	for	meditation;	the	whole	Western	mind	was	objective,	and	both
Judaism	and	Christianity	are	objective	--	their	God	is	outside.
There	is	no	God	outside,	it	is	fiction.
Karl	Marx	was	denying	fiction,	not	religiousness,	but	he	thought	this	fiction	was
the	only	religiousness.	Based	on	Karl	Marx's	logic,	the	Soviet	Union	--	the	first
communist	country,	 the	greatest	experiment	 in	 the	whole	history	of	mankind	--
has	remained	hollow	within.	There	is	a	deep	urge	for	significance,	for	meaning,
for	eternity.
A	life	which	is	just	material	has	no	meaning.	You	are	just	a	machine,	a	robot.	At
birth	you	start	breathing,	mechanically,	and	at	death	you	stop	breathing.	If	this	is
the	only	 life,	 between	 the	 cradle	 and	 the	grave,	 then	 this	 life	 has	 no	meaning.
What	meaning	can	it	have?
And	 then	 there	 is	 no	 good	 and	 no	 bad.	 Even	 killing	 a	 person	 you	 are	 not
committing	a	murder,	because	it	is	only	matter.	If	you	kill	your	chair	I	don't	think
any	court	is	going	to	take	action	against	you,	that	you	murdered	the	chair.
In	China,	because	they	believed	that	women	have	no	souls,	husbands	used	to	kill
their	wives.	In	China	there	was	no	law	against	murdering	your	wife,	because	she
is	just	like	furniture.	You	use	it,	and	when	you	think	it	is	useless,	just	finish	with
it!	Find	some	new	furniture.	The	same	is	the	situation	in	Thailand.	The	woman
has	no	soul	and	no	rights;	she	is	not	human.
But	in	accordance	with	Karl	Marx,	the	Soviet	Union	was	based	on	materialism.
It	was	good	in	the	beginning	because	it	destroyed	all	the	orthodox	Christians	and
their	 monasteries	 and	 their	 monks.	 It	 turned	 the	 churches	 into	 hospitals,	 into
schools,	into	colleges.	Big	monasteries	--	because	the	Russian	Orthodox	church
is	one	of	 the	oldest	churches,	older	 than	 the	Vatican,	and	much	more	orthodox
than	any	other	church	in	the	world.
You	will	not	believe	that	in	the	name	of	celibacy,	the	Russian	Orthodox	church
allowed	 men	 to	 cut	 off	 their	 genitals.	 Every	 year	 when	 Christmas	 came,
hundreds	 of	 people	 would	 cut	 off	 their	 genitals	 in	 the	 name	 of	 becoming
celibate.	 Women	 were	 not	 left	 behind:	 they	 would	 cut	 off	 their	 breasts.	 But
neither	 by	 cutting	 off	 your	 breasts	 do	 you	 become	 celibate,	 nor	 by	 cutting	 off
your	genitals	do	you	become	celibate,	because	the	sex	center	exists	in	the	brain,
not	in	the	genitals.	The	genitals	are	an	extension	of	a	center	in	the	brain.
That's	 why	 if	 you	 start	 just	 imagining	 about	 a	 beautiful	 woman,	 immediately
your	genitals	start	moving.	You	are	only	thinking	--	you	can	do	it	right	now!	The
thought	is	in	the	mind.	It	is	immediately	transferred	to	the	genitals,	but	it	always
begins	in	the	mind.
The	genitals	don't	have	any	thinking	power.	They	don't	have	eyes	to	see	which
woman	is	beautiful.	It	is	your	eyes	which	see	and	inform	the	brain,	and	then	the
genitals	start	functioning.
If	you	really	want	celibate	people,	then	they	need	a	brain	operation.	The	center
of	sex	should	be	removed.	But	then	you	will	be	simply	impotent	--	not	celibate.
Karl	Marx	was	 right,	 that	 such	 religions	 should	 be	 finished.	 They	 are	 against
humanity.
They	protect	poverty	and	they	protect	the	rich.	They	are	against	revolution,	they
are	against	any	change	--	obviously,	he	was	right	to	call	them	the	opium	of	the
people,	 the	 hope	 of	 the	 hopeless.	 If	 Christianity	 and	 Judaism	 were	 the	 only
religions,	then	the	Soviet	Union	would	not	have	any	need,	any	urge	to	find	the
inner	world!
But	 just	 think	 about	 it.	You	 cannot	 have	 the	 outside	world	without	 having	 the
inside	world;	they	exist	together	like	two	sides	of	the	coin.
And	there	are	scientific	methods	available.	Zen	is	the	most	scientific	method	to
inquire	into	your	consciousness.	It	takes	you	beyond	mind	into	a	space	called	no-
mind.	 No	 self,	 but	 pure	 awareness,	 and	 you	 have	 a	 taste	 of	 eternity	 and
immortality.	This	is	what	is	missing	in	Soviet	communism.
And	the	danger	is	that	Gorbachev	is	opening	the	doors	and	all	 those	Christians
will	 immediately	 come	 back.	 All	 those	 cockroaches	 and	 rats	 who	 have	 been
thrown	out	 in	 seventy	years'	 time	will	be	 the	 first	 to	 enter.	 Just	 this	Christmas
thousands	 and	 thousands	 of	 Christians	 entered	 to	 celebrate	 Christmas	 in	 the
Soviet	Union.
Today	I	received	the	news....	One	of	the	most	idiotic	cults	is	the	cult	of	HARE
KRISHNA,	HARE	RAMA.	 I	 have	 come	 across	 every	 kind	 of	 idiot,	 but	 these
two	 cults,	 the	Witnesses	 of	 Jehovah	 and	 this	movement	 of	HARE	KRISHNA,
HARE	RAMA	--
these	are	the	worst	idiots	in	the	whole	world!	Now	the	Soviet	Union	has	allotted
them	land	to	make	a	temple	for	Krishna.
Now,	these	idiots...	who	are	mostly	American;	not	a	single	Hindu	is	involved	in
the	Krishna	movement.	It	is	only	the	Americans,	ex-hippies.	I	have	even	talked
with	their	founder,	Prabhupad,	and	he	was	such	a	senile	idiot!	But	he	managed	to
find	 other	 idiots	 to	 be	 followers.	 Now	 giving	 them	 space	 on	 Soviet	 land,
allowing	 them	 to	 make	 a	 temple	 for	 Krishna,	 and	 allowing	 them	 to	 translate
SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA	into	Russian,	is	bringing	poison	into	the	country.
Gorbachev	is	not	aware	what	SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA'S	message	is.	It	is
war.
This	 is	 the	 only	 religious	 scripture	 in	 the	 world	 which	 teaches	 war,	 violence,
destruction.
Now	 allowing	 these	 idiots	 to	 translate	 SHRIMAD	 BHAGAVADGITA	 into
Russian...
And	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 Gorbachev	 is	 trying	 to	 make	 a	 peaceful	 world.	 It	 is
contradictory.
But	 these	people	will	rush	in	from	all	sides	--	all	kinds	of	cults	which	have	no
base	in	reality,	which	don't	have	any	logic,	which	don't	have	any	rationale,	which
don't	have	any	scientific	approach	--	they	will	destroy	the	whole	Soviet	Union's
mind.	Whatever	has	been	achieved	in	seventy	years	is	in	immense	danger.	Again
monks	will	be	living	as	parasites,	because	they	don't	work.	Again	these	people	--
HARE	KRISHNA,	HARE
RAMA	--	will	be	parasites.	They	don't	work.
The	danger	 is	great,	because	 the	Soviet	people	who	are	present	 today	have	no
idea	of	the	revolution.	They	are	almost	all	born	after	the	revolution,	or	when	they
were	very	small	children	the	revolution	happened.	They	don't	have	any	memory
of	it.
I	don't	think	Gorbachev	has	any	idea	what	happened	in	that	revolution	and	how
difficult	it	was	to	destroy	these	stupid	religions,	superstitions.	It	took	tremendous
labor	 to	 clean	 the	 whole	 of	 the	 Soviet	 land	 from	 the	 past,	 the	 hangover	 of
primitive,	barbarious	fears,	greed,	possessiveness.
Now	 calling	 these	 people	 back	 again,	 opening	 the	 doors	 for	 all	 kinds	 of
diseases...	 And	 the	 Soviet	 people	 are	 feeling	 a	 certain	 hollowness	 within
themselves.	 Something	 is	 missing,	 because	 Karl	 Marx	 cannot	 provide	 any
spirituality	to	them.	But	these	bogus	preachers	will	talk	about	spirituality,	and	it
is	 pure	 talk.	 They	 don't	 know	 anything	 about	 spirituality	 either,	 but	 they	 can
manage	to	fill	the	vacuum	in	the	Soviet	heart	with	all	their	belief	systems,	with
all	their	superstitions.
It	is	going	backwards,	not	forwards.
I	warn	the	Soviet	people:	please	be	careful.	Whatever	Gorbachev	is	doing,	he	is
doing	with	great	and	good	intentions.	But	he	is	not	aware	that	once	you	open	the
doors,	 all	 the	 CIA	 agents	 and	 FBI	 agents,	 all	 the	 detectives	 from	 all	 over	 the
world,	will	 be	 entering	 into	 the	 country	 --	 as	monks,	 as	priests,	 as	bishops,	 as
archbishops.
Just	now,	 a	 few	Soviet	 states	which	have	never	 raised	 their	voices,	 are	 raising
their	voices	 that	 "We	want	 independence;	we	want	 to	 separate	 from	 the	Soviet
Union."
In	one	of	the	Soviet	countries	they	have	tried	experimental	elections,	democratic
elections.	The	Soviet	Union	has	been	a	dictatorship	of	the	proletariat	--	only	one
party,	the	party	of	the	proletariat,	the	Communist	Party.	So	there	was	no	question
of	any	election.	Although	elections	were	held,	 there	was	only	one	candidate	 to
vote	for.
Under	Gorbachev's	 direction	 they	 have	 tried	 in	 one	 or	 two	 places	 to	 have	 the
Communist	 Party's	 candidate	 --	 which	 is	 decided	 by	 the	 central	 bureau	 in
Kremlin	--	and	to	allow	the	people	of	that	state	to	have	their	own	candidates.	Of
course,	they	are	also	communists.	But	it	should	be	a	warning,	that	those	people
of	the	locality	have	won	the	election	against	the	centrally	nominated	candidates.
Now	nationalism	is	coming	up.
Mohammedans	would	like	to	separate	--	there	are	a	few	Mohammedan	countries
in	 the	 Soviet	Union.	And	 every	 state	which	 constitutes	 the	Union	 is	 bound	 to
become	more	and	more	nationalistic,	which	is	a	disease.	So	without	knowing	the
consequences,	 Gorbachev	 is	 going	 ahead.	 He	 can	 spoil	 the	 whole	 great
experiment	of	seventy	years.
Once	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 is	 destroyed,	 there	 is	 no	 hope	 for	 other	 communist
countries	 either.	 They	 are	 small	 countries,	 they	 can	 be	 destroyed	 without
difficulty.	The	Soviet	Union	is	the	central	force	of	the	whole	of	communism	in
the	world.	It	has	to	survive!
But	 the	 trouble	 is,	 the	 idiots	will	 rush	 in,	 the	 vested	 interests	will	 rush	 in.	No
right	person,	no	Gautam	Buddha	is	going	to	go	there	unless	Gorbachev	and	the
Soviet	 Union	 invite	 him.	Nobody	 like	 that	 is	 going	 there.	 Those	who	will	 be
rushing	there	on	their	own	have	their	motivations.
If	Gorbachev	 really	wants	 peace	 in	 the	world	 at	 the	 cost	 of	 communism,	 that
peace	is	not	worth	it.	Communism	is	one	of	the	greatest	experiments	in	human
evolution.	 It	 has	 laid	 the	 foundation	 of	 a	 new	 temple	 for	 humanity.	But	 it	 has
only	laid	the	foundation;	the	pillars	are	missing,	the	roof	is	missing.
That	 can	be	done	only	by	people	who	are	 fully	 awakened,	people	whom	 I	 am
calling	the	buddhas	--	not	Buddhists.	Buddhists	are	as	superstitious	as	any	other
organized	religion.
But	the	awakened	people	should	be	invited	from	all	over	the	world.	There	are	a
few	people	still,	in	the	same	space	as	Gautam	Buddha.	They	should	be	invited	to
teach	meditation	in	the	universities,	to	teach	meditation	in	the	colleges,	to	teach
meditation	to	the	public	--	and	meditation	has	nothing	against	communism.
Meditation	will	use	communism	as	the	base,	and	will	put	the	pillars	and	the	roof
on	 the	 base.	The	Soviet	 citizen	needs	 something	of	meditative	 experience	 that
will	 fill	his	hollowness.	Otherwise	 just	work,	and	death...	 there	seems	to	be	no
meaning	and	significance.	If	you	had	not	been	born	there	would	be	no	harm;	if
you	die	nobody	is	going	to	miss	you,	you	will	be	replaced.
Soviet	 citizens	 need	 dignity	 and	 individuality	 and	 a	 certain	 sense	 of	 direction
into	eternity.	That	is	what	is	missing.	And	the	danger	is,	before	the	right	people
can	 be	 invited,	 the	wrong	people	will	 rush	 in	 and	 start	 destroying	 the	 seventy
years'	great	experiment.
I	would	prefer	a	third	world	war	rather	than	the	destruction	of	the	Soviet	Union.
In	the	name	of	peace	Gorbachev	can	go	beyond	the	limits	--	he	is	already	going.
The	 death	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 will	 be	 the	 death	 of	 all	 evolution,	 of	 all
possibilities	 of	 a	 world	 without	 boundaries,	 of	 a	 world	 without	 classes,	 of	 a
world	richer	in	every	sense	of	the	word	--	not	only	money	but	consciousness	too;
not	only	power	but	art	and	music	and	dance.
Have	you	ever	observed?	--	there	is	a	simple	phenomenon	that	will	give	you	the
right	direction.
Before	 the	 revolution,	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 produced	 people	 like	 Leo	 Tolstoy,
Gorky,	Turgenev,	Chekhov,	Dostoevsky.	These	five	names	are	so	great,	as	far	as
literature	 is	 concerned,	 that	 if	 you	want	 to	 find	 ten	 great	 names	 in	 the	whole
world,	 these	 five	 will	 be	 the	 first	 five.	 The	 other	 five	 will	 be	 sixth,	 seventh,
eighth,	 ninth,	 tenth.	But	 these	 five	 cannot	 be	 dropped	 in	 any	 calculation,	 their
creation	is	so	great.	Just	a	single	man,	Fyodor	Dostoevsky,	 is	enough	to	defeat
all	the	creative	novelists	of	the	world.
But	 what	 happened?	 After	 the	 revolution,	 no	 Gorky,	 no	 Turgenev,	 no
Dostoevsky,	 no	 Tolstoy	 --	 what	 happened?	 In	 these	 seventy	 years	 the	 Soviet
Union	has	not	been	able	to	create	a	single	person	of	that	quality.
The	 reason	 is	 clear.	 The	 Soviet	 citizen	 has	 lost	 his	 soul,	 has	 lost	 his
consciousness,	has	believed	in	Karl	Marx	blindly,	that	the	soul	of	man	is	only	a
by-product	of	matter.	If	 the	soul	is	 just	a	by-product	of	matter,	 then	there	is	no
possibility	of	haikus,	no	possibility	for	poetry.
I	have	read	the	poetry	written	before	the	revolution	and	after	the	revolution.	In
fact,	after	the	revolution	the	poetry	should	have	risen	higher,	but	that	is	not	the
case.
Before	the	revolution	when	Russia	was	the	poorest	of	countries...	it	was	not	even
a	capitalist	country,	it	was	a	feudal	country.	Karl	Marx	had	never	expected	that
the	 Soviet	 Union	 was	 going	 to	 be	 born	 out	 of	 the	 poorest	 country,	 the	 most
traditional,	 backward	 in	 every	 sense.	 He	 never	 expected	 that	 it	 was	 going	 to
become	the	first	communist	country.
It	was	not	even	capitalist.
According	 to	Karl	Marx's	calculation,	a	 feudal	society	cannot	move	directly	 to
communism.	It	has	to	move	through	capitalism.	Only	capitalism	creates	classes
clearly,	the	proletariat	and	the	bourgeois.
But	 I	 told	 you,	 logic	 is	 not	 everything.	Life	 has	 its	 own	ways.	 It	 happened	 in
Russia.	But	because	the	philosophy	of	Karl	Marx	has	been	the	foundation,	it	has
destroyed	 all	 flowers	 of	 consciousness.	 No	 literature	 of	 great	 status...	 even
Tolstoy's	 son	 was	 just	 a	 poor	 novelist	 after	 the	 revolution.	 And	 before	 the
revolution,	in	a	poor	country,	such	great	literature	was	born.
It	 shows	 something.	 It	 shows	 that	 unless	 you	 have	 a	 fulfillment,	 a	 certain
contentment	inside	you,	you	cannot	share	it	in	poetry,	in	music.	From	where	will
you	bring	 it?	 It	has	 to	 flow	from	you	 --	you	cannot	 share	 it	because	you	don't
have	it.
The	Soviet	citizen	is	the	poorest,	as	far	as	consciousness	is	concerned.
But	Karl	Marx	has	given	it	a	right	foundation.	That	foundation	is	missing	in	the
East.
This	has	been	the	dilemma	of	the	whole	of	humanity....
In	 the	East	people	have	condemned	the	body,	condemned	matter,	called	matter
"illusory,"
maya	--	 it	does	not	really	exist,	 it	only	appears	to	exist;	 it	 is	made	of	the	same
stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.	They	denied	the	world,	and	that	is	the	reason	for	the
East	remaining	poor,	sick,	in	starvation.
Half	 of	 humanity	 has	 been	 accepting	 the	 inner	 world	 but	 denying	 the	 outer
world.	 The	 other	 half	 of	 humanity	 has	 been	 accepting	 the	material	world	 and
denying	the	inner	world.	Both	are	half,	and	no	man	who	is	half	can	be	contented.
You	have	to	be	whole:	rich	in	the	body,	rich	in	science;	rich	in	meditation,	rich	in
consciousness.	Only	a	whole	person	is	a	holy	person,	according	to	me.
I	want	Zorba	and	Buddha	to	meet	together.	Zorba	alone	is	hollow.	His	dance	has
not	an	eternal	significance,	it	is	momentary	pleasure.	Soon	he	will	be	tired	of	it.
Unless	you	have	inexhaustible	sources,	available	to	you	from	the	cosmos	itself...
unless	you	become	existential,	you	cannot	become	whole.
This	is	my	contribution	to	humanity:	THE	WHOLE	PERSON.
The	East	has	denied	the	body	and	the	outside	world,	and	the	West	has	denied	the
soul	and	the	inner	world;	both	have	lived	half.	And	just	as	there	is	no	half-circle
in	the	world...	a	circle	means	a	complete	circle.	A	half-circle	is	only	an	arc,	it	is
not	a	circle.	So	the	West	has	remained	half,	an	arc;	the	East	has	remained	half,	an
arc.	And	 a	man	 like	Lord	Kipling	wrote,	 "East	 is	 East,	West	 is	West,	 and	 the
twain	shall	never	meet."	Just	bullshit!
They	are	meeting	here,	now.	And	unless	they	meet	there	is	no	hope	for	humanity.
Russia	 has	 the	 foundation.	 It	 needs	 right	 pillars	 and	 a	 roof.	What	will	 you	 do
with	 the	 foundation	 alone?	 It	 needs	 to	 fill	 its	 hollowness	 with	 light,	 with
blissfulness,	with	ecstasy,	with	a	new	luminousness.	Ask	the	awakened	ones	of
the	world	to	enter	 into	Russia	and	teach	people	a	scientific	religiousness	--	not
Christianity,	not	Hinduism,	not	SHRIMAD
BHAGAVADGITA	or	the	Holy	Bible.
The	 Holy	 Bible	 has	 three	 hundred	 eighty-eight	 pages	 of	 pornography,	 sheer
pornography.
And	SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA	is	a	sermon	by	Lord	Krishna	of	the	Hindus,
the	perfect	incarnation	of	God,	in	favor	of	war.
A	great	war	 happened	because	 of	SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA.	 It	 happened
five	thousand	years	ago	and	it	broke	India's	backbone.	After	that	war,	India	has
never	risen	beyond	poverty,	beyond	small	 things.	It	cannot	 look	up	to	 the	stars
and	the	blue	sky.
When	you	are	hungry....
It	will	be	 interesting	for	you	 to	know	that	 there	are	biblical	scholars	who	have
been	prohibited	by	 the	pope.	The	pope	has	said	 that	no	priests	should	 listen	 to
these	biblical	scholars	--	and	they	are	really	the	great	scholars	of	the	Bible,	how
it	was	born,	how	the	gospels	were	created,	what	has	been	left	out....
The	 four	 gospels	 in	 the	New	Testament	 are	 not	 the	 only	 gospels.	 There	were
other	 gospels	 which	 have	 been	 denied	 and	 destroyed.	 Only	 one	 gospel	 has
survived,	 because	 it	was	written	 in	 India.	One	of	 the	 direct	 disciples	 of	 Jesus,
Thomas,	immediately	moved	to	India	and	he	remained	in	South	India,	learned	all
the	arts	of	yoga	and	meditation.
And	you	will	be	surprised:	he	is	the	only	person	in	the	whole	world	whose	body
is	still	intact...	it	is	in	Goa.	Every	year	the	body	is	taken	out	and	you	can	see	it	--
it	is	as	if	he	has	just	died.	And	it	is	not	by	any	scientific	method	that	it	has	been
preserved.	Scientists	have	been	observing	 it,	watching	 it	with	amazement:	 two
thousand	years	ago,	how	did	those	people	manage?	Because	there	is	no	sign	of
anything,	and	the	body	seems	to	be	still	flushed	with	blood.	After	two	thousand
years	it	has	not	deteriorated.
The	 body	 usually	 starts	 deteriorating	 immediately;	 within	 three	 days	 it	 is
stinking.	But	every	year	the	body	of	Thomas	is	taken	out	--	this	is	a	real	miracle
--	 and	 it	 is	 the	 only	 body	 in	 the	 whole	 world	 which	 has	 been	 preserved	 and
scientists	cannot	figure	out	how.
It	has	been	preserved	by	yoga	and	meditation,	not	by	any	scientific	method	from
the	outside.	There	was	no	science	 in	 those	days.	But	Thomas	became	almost	a
sannyasin	 in	 India.	 He	 forgot	 all	 about	 Jesus	 and	 his	 miracles	 and	 all	 his
teachings.	He	became	almost	a	man	of	the	East;	he	started	wearing	the	robe	of	a
sannyasin,	the	ochre	robe.	He	started	using	the	sannyasins'	ancient	sandals,	made
of	wood	--	it	was	very	difficult	to	walk	on	them.	He	was	even	using	the	thread
that	Hindus	wear	around	their	neck	and	waist.	He	shaved	his	head,	just	like	any
yogi,	and	he	was	well	respected.	He	was	allowed	into	the	Buddhist	monasteries
of	Nalanda	and	Takshashila.
Both	 these	monasteries	 Jesus	 had	 also	 visited,	 but	 not	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 So	 he
could	not	get	 into	meditation.	He	heard	about	things	--	which	he	repeats	 in	the
Bible,	which	are	really	Buddha's	statements.
The	biblical	scholars	who	are	the	authentic	scholars	--	and	they	are	all	Christians
--	say	 there	 is	every	possibility	 there	was	no	Jesus	at	all.	 It	 is	a	myth	and	 it	 is
simply	Krishna	whose	name	has	become	Christ.
The	Sanskrit	namèKrishna'	in	Bengali	becomes	`Kristo'.	If	it	can	become	Kristo,
there	 is	 not	much	 to	 do	 to	make	 it	Christ	 --	 from	Krishna	 to	Kristo	 and	 from
Kristo	to	Christ.
These	biblical	scholars	have	found	many	things	which	are	amazing.	It	is	possible
that	it	is	a	myth,	traveling,	that	has	created	Jesus	Christ.
But	Gorbachev	knows	nothing,	and	 to	allow	SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA	to
be	translated	into	Russian	will	be	one	of	the	most	dangerous	steps	against	peace.
Five	 thousand	 years	 ago,	 the	 great	 warrior	 Arjuna,	 seeing	 millions	 of	 people
ready	to	fight	--	because	it	was	a	family	fight....
Arjuna	and	Duryodhana	were	cousin-brothers.	Duryodhana's	father	was	blind	--
in	fact,	he	was	the	elder	brother	of	the	father	of	Arjuna.	He	was	supposed	to	be
the	king	but	he	was	blind,	so	naturally	the	second	oldest	son,	Dhritrashtra,	was
made	 king	 when	 the	 father	 died.	 But	 the	 older	 man,	 who	 could	 not	 get	 into
power,	was	very	ambitious	that	his	son	should	get	into	power.
He	 had	 one	 hundred	 sons,	 because	 he	 had	 many	 wives.	 And	 a	 blind	 man...
nothing	 else	 to	 do!	 He	 knows	 neither	 day	 nor	 night,	 and	 no	 other	 work	 was
allotted	to	him,	so	he	had	one	hundred	sons.	And	the	father	of	Arjuna	had	only
five	sons.
Arjuna	was	a	great	archer,	perhaps	the	greatest	 the	world	has	ever	known.	The
whole	thing	depended	on	Arjuna:	if	he	refused	to	fight	with	his	own	brothers...
And	all	the	relatives	were	divided	between	the	two	sides.	The	teacher	of	Arjuna,
who	 had	 taught	 him	 archery,	 was	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 And	 there	 was	 every
possibility	 that	 the	 other	 side	would	win;	 they	were	 one	 hundred	 brothers	 and
these	were	only	five.	But	they	had	many	relatives	--	they	had	all	come	from	all
over	the	world.
You	will	be	surprised	that	Arjuna's	wife	had	come	from	Mexico.	In	Sanskrit	the
name	of	Mexico	is	Makshika.	It	 is	from	Makshika	that	`Mexico'	is	derived.	So
even	the	Mexican	princes	had	come	to	fight	for	Arjuna.	These	five	brothers	had
only	one	wife,	because	all	five	were	interested	in	this	woman,	who	was	Krishna's
sister.	So	it	was	a	dangerous	problem!	All	the	five	brothers	--	and	the	eldest	was
Yudhishthir,	second	was	Bhima,	third	was	Arjuna,	and	then	two	other	brothers.
So	obviously,	Yudhishthir	had	the	first	right	to	her....
But	Arjuna	was	 the	most	 beautiful	 and	 the	most	 important	 person	 in	 all	 those
millions	of	soldiers	who	had	gathered.
It	 was	 a	 strange	 war,	 because	 on	 both	 sides	 there	 were	 relatives	 of	 relatives,
friends	--
even	Krishna.
When	Krishna	was	asleep,	Duryodhana,	the	head	of	the	other	side,	and	Arjuna,
both	approached	him.	And	of	course,	Arjuna	was	Krishna's	sister's	husband.	But
Arjuna	was	a	humble	man,	as	all	great	men	are	humble.	He	sat	by	 the	 side	of
Krishna's	feet	--	he	was	asleep	--	and	Duryodhana	was	an	arch-egoist;	he	sat	just
by	the	side	of	Krishna's	head.
So	when	Krishna	opened	his	eyes,	first	he	saw	Arjuna.	And	he	asked,	"For	what
have	you	come?"
Arjuna	said,	"Look	behind	you,	my	cousin-brother	is	also	present.	We	have	both
come	for	the	same	purpose:	With	whom	are	you	going	to	fight	in	the	war?	The
preparations	 are	 going	 on	 and	 we	 want	 you	 to	 decide	 on	 which	 side	 you	 are
going	to	be."
Krishna	 was	 a	 great	 politician,	 a	 very	 great	 politician.	 He	 said,	 "Because
Duryodhana	 is	older	 than	you,	 let	him	decide	first.	 I	will	divide:	on	one	side	I
will	be,	and	on	the	other	side	my	whole	army.	You	are	both	my	friends.	So	let
Duryodhana	choose."
Duryodhana	certainly	chose	 the	army,	because	what	 to	do	with	one	man?	And
Krishna	had	 the	greatest	army	in	 the	country.	And	Arjuna	said,	"That's	exactly
what	I	wanted!
You	be	my	charioteer."
So	 on	 that	 first	 day	 of	 the	war,	 both	 the	 armies	 are	 standing	 face	 to	 face	 and
Krishna	brings	 the	chariot	of	Arjuna	 to	confront	 the	enemy.	But	 seeing	all	 the
faces	of	the	friends	on	both	sides,	all	relatives	in	some	way	or	other,	seeing	his
own	 teacher	 on	 the	 other	 side,	 seeing	 his	 own	 great-granduncle,	 who	 loved
Arjuna	 very	much	 but	 was	 considerate	 of	 the	 blind	man	who	 had	missed	 the
kingdom	which	was	his	right...	he	was	there.	Arjuna	became	puzzled.
He	 said,	 "What	 will	 I	 gain	 if	 I	 kill	 all	 these	 people?	 Just	 sitting	 on	 a	 golden
throne	with	 all	 these	 people	 dead?	 I	 don't	 see	 any	 point	 in	 this	war.	 Take	my
chariot	away	from	the	front,	I	am	going	to	the	Himalayas	to	meditate.	This	world
is	 not	 for	me.	 If	 I	 have	 to	 kill	 so	many	 people	 just	 to	 be	 here,	 it	 is	 better	 to
renounce	it."
It	 was	 Krishna	 who	 forced	 him.	 In	 eighteen	 chapters	 of	 SHRIMAD
BHAGAVADGITA	is	his	continuous	argument	in	favor	of	war.	And	when	finally
he	 could	 not	 convince	 him,	 at	 last	 he	 took	 the	 same	 step	 as	 all	 religions	 have
taken:	"It	is	God's	will!	You	cannot	go	out	of	the	war.	What	God	has	chosen	has
to	happen."
That's	what	 the	Bible	 says:	 "Don't	 change	 anything.	Whatever	 is	God's	will	 is
going	to	happen."
Now	if	I	had	been	in	place	of	Arjuna,	I	would	have	said	to	Krishna,	"That's	okay.
This	is	what	God	has	chosen,	I	am	going	to	the	Himalayas."
But	Krishna	has	been	respected	as	the	incarnation	of	God.	Not	only	incarnation	-
-
Hindus	 have	 many	 incarnations	 of	 God	 --	 Krishna	 is	 the	 only	 "perfect"
incarnation.	 He	 was	 so	 powerful	 that	 the	 brahmins	 simply	 praised	 him.	 It	 is
always	power	that	is	praised.
A	man	who	has	captured	sixteen	thousand	women	from	all	over	his	kingdom,	all
the	beautiful	women...	whether	married,	unmarried,	 it	did	not	matter.	His	army
would	just	catch	any	woman	who	was	seen	by	Krishna,	and	he	simply	gave	the
indication,	"Take	her	to	the	palace."	He	collected	sixteen	thousand	women	--	you
cannot	even	remember	their	names!	--	and	he	was	married	only	to	one	woman.
All	these	women	had	their	children,	their	husbands,	their	old	parents	to	take	care
of.	Sixteen	thousand	families	were	destroyed	by	this	man.	And	he	forced	Arjuna,
saying,	 "This	 is	God's	will	 --	 you	 have	 to	 fight!	You	 cannot	 go	 against	God's
will."
God	has	been	used	for	all	kinds	of	crimes.	The	war	happened.	It	was	a	massacre,
millions	of	people	died.	And	the	backbone	of	India	was	broken.	India	became	so
afraid	of	war,	because	 from	every	 family	somebody	was	killed	 --	 the	husband,
the	father,	the	son,	every	family	was	deprived	of	somebody.	The	whole	country
was	sad,	and	that	sadness	has	become	so	deeply	settled	in	India's	mind	that	when
small	 tribes,	 primitive	 tribes	 of	 Turks,	 of	 Mongols,	 of	 Hunas,	 of	 Moguls,	 of
British,	came	to	India,	India	simply	gave	way.	They	had	no	desire	to	fight.
Whoever	came	was	accepted	without	any	difficulty	--	small	groups!	Turks	came
with	only	 five	hundred	people,	 and	 India	was	a	 country	of	 thirty-three	million
people	at	that	time,	two	thousand	years	ago.	Still	India	simply	accepted	them;	it
was	not	ready	to	fight.
It	had	seen	the	war,	it	had	seen	its	destructiveness.
And	who	was	 responsible	 for	all	 this?	Krishna	was	 responsible	 for	all	 this.	To
me,	he	is	not	even	a	human	being,	nothing	to	say	about	an	incarnation	of	God.
When	 I	 saw	 today	 that	 they	 are	 giving	 a	 place	 to	 him	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union,
making	 a	 temple	 for	Krishna	 and	 allowing	 these	 hippies	 from	America...	 that
means	all	kinds	of	idiots	and	stupids	and	superstitious	people	will	enter	into	the
Soviet	Union.	This	opening	can	be	dangerous.
Certainly	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 needs	 spirituality.	 It	 has	 materialism	 --	 that	 is	 the
base.	 It	 needs	 spirituality	 --	 that	will	 raise	 the	 temple	 of	 the	 soul.	 Just	 as	 you
need	 scientists	 for	material	wealth,	 technology,	you	need	buddhas,	 enlightened
people,	to	help	you	become	also	a	buddha.
But	 this	kind	of	people	will	not	come	on	their	own.	You	will	have	to	persuade
them,	you	will	have	to	invite	them.	Only	then	they	can	help	you.	To	a	welcoming
heart,	they	will	pour	all	that	they	know.
And	Marxism	will	become	a	complete	philosophy	if	it	can	be	joined	with	Zen.
That's	why	I	say,	"What	is	missing?	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind."
But	Christianity	should	be	prohibited.	Judaism	should	be	prohibited.	Hinduism
should	 be	 prohibited.	 Islam	 should	 be	 prohibited.	These	 people	 have	 been	 the
cause	of	the	trouble.
Again	you	 are	 falling	back.	Seventy	 years	 of	 struggle	 to	 create	 a	 new	 society,
and	 then	 one	 single	 man	 who	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the	 revolution,	 who	 knows
nothing	 of	 how	 hard	 it	 was	 to	 preserve	 the	 country	 amongst	 all	 the	 anti-
communist	 countries...	 they	were	 all	 ready,	 like	vultures	 all	 around,	 to	destroy
the	 Soviet	 Union	 and	 its	 communism.	 Because	 if	 even	 one	 country	 becomes
communist,	it	is	dangerous.	It	is	dangerous	to	all	the	capitalist	countries	because
that	fragrance	will	start	spreading.
The	Soviet	Union	is	a	hope	for	humanity.
Gorbachev	should	not	take	the	responsibility	of	destroying	the	Soviet	Union.	But
by	opening	it,	he	is	being	praised	by	the	capitalist	press,	by	the	capitalist	news
media	 all	 over	 the	world.	 That	 is	 very	 cunning.	 They	 are	making	 him	 a	 great
hero,	and	by	becoming	a	hero	he	will	completely	forget	the	implications	that	will
follow	the	opening	of	the	doors	of	the	Soviet	Union	to	all	and	sundry,	to	Tom,
and	Dick,	and	Harry.
It	is	a	scientific	experiment.	The	Soviet	Union	has	done	half	the	work,	with	great
difficulty,	with	 tremendous	 sacrifice.	 The	 new	 generation	 is	 not	 aware.	 I	 have
gone	to	the	deepest	roots	of	the	revolution,	and	I	can	see	how	much	the	Soviet
Union	has	suffered	to	be	a	communist	country,	how	much	it	has	sacrificed.	And
it	has	lived	in	constant	danger	of	being	destroyed,	but	now	it	has	come	to	a	point
where	 it	 is	one	of	 the	biggest	world	powers.	 It	 should	not	be	 reduced	 from	 its
power.
It	is	good	to	be	a	peacemaker,	and	perhaps	soon	Gorbachev	will	receive	a	Nobel
Prize....
That	 is	 not	 very	 noble.	 I	 call	 it	 The	 "Ignoble"	 Prize,	 because	 the	 man	 who
created	the	Nobel	Prize	--	it	was	his	name,	Nobel.	But	his	function	was	--	in	the
first	world	war	and	before	that	--	that	he	was	the	biggest	manufacturer	of	arms.
He	 was	 supplying	 arms	 to	 the	 whole	 world.	 Every	 war	 was	 fought	 with	 his
weapons,	 both	 sides	 would	 be	 using	 his	 arms,	 and	 through	 these	 arms	 he
collected	great	richness.
Then	his	Christian	guilt	came	over	him	at	 the	 time	of	his	death,	 that	"I	am	the
greatest	creator	of	war	material	--	and	all	the	people	who	have	died	because	of
my	weapons...
everybody	who	has	died,	has	died	because	of	my	arms."
In	any	country,	anywhere,	both	the	parties	were	using	his	weapons.	He	was	the
only	 person	who	was	 refining	 and	 refining,	 and	making	 better	 and	 better	war
material.	He	became	afraid	of	hellfire.	He	donated	all	his	money	and	created	a
trust,	so	that	every	year,	just	out	of	the	interest,	Nobel	Prizes	should	be	given	to
different	 branches	 of	 science,	 art,	 literature,	 music...	 any	 contribution	 to
humanity.	It	was	simply	trying	to	erase	his	guilt.
And	this	Nobel	Prize	committee...	the	chairman	of	the	committee	is	the	King	of
Sweden.
One	of	my	sannyasins,	who	is	a	Nobel	Prize	winner,	asked	the	king	--	because
only	a	Nobel	Prize	winner	can	nominate	somebody	else's	name	to	the	committee
which	decides	to	whom	the	Nobel	Prizes	should	go.	He	told	the	King	of	Sweden,
"What	about	 this	man?"	 --	and	he	mentioned	my	name.	The	king	said,	 "Never
utter	 that	 name	 again!	My	 suggestion	 for	 you	 is,	 don't	 bring	 that	 name	 to	 the
Nobel	committee,	because	you	will	 feel	embarrassed.	 It	 is	 impossible	for	us	 to
give	this	man	a	Nobel	Prize."
But	 in	 the	 same	 way,	 Leo	 Tolstoy	 was	 denied.	 Every	 fifty	 years	 the	 Nobel
committee	opens	its	records	for	the	public	to	view.	Last	time	when	they	opened
their	public	records,	the	people	found	that	Leo	Tolstoy	had	been	nominated	for	a
Nobel	 Prize,	 but	 was	 denied	 on	 the	 grounds	 that	 he	 was	 not	 an	 orthodox
Christian.	He	was	a	Christian,	but	he	was	not	orthodox,	he	was	very	flexible.	On
these	grounds	--	and	the	question	was	 literature,	not	Christianity!	They	did	not
even	talk	about	his	literature.
The	man	has	created	the	greatest	novels	in	the	world:	ANNA	KARENINA...	or
WAR
AND	 PEACE,	 which	 is	 such	 a	 vast	 world	 that	 the	 man	 must	 have	 been	 the
greatest	mind	of	his	century.	But	the	literature	was	not	discussed.	The	man	who
nominated	him,	had	nominated	him	for	a	literary	prize,	for	literature,	but	he	was
denied	on	the	grounds	that	he	was	not	an	orthodox	Christian.
That	is	strange	--	is	this	prize	only	for	orthodox	Christians?	And	this	Nobel	Prize
has	been	used	as	a	political	weapon.	They	always	give	Nobel	Prizes	 to	Soviet
scientists.	 It	 is	 tricky	 game,	 because	 the	 Soviet	 government	 up	 to	 now	would
prohibit	 the	 person	 from	 accepting	 this	 prize	 from	 the	 capitalist	 world,	 and
prohibit	 the	 person	 from	 going	 to	 the	 Nobel	 Prize	 convention	 to	 accept	 the
prize...
Because	 from	 there,	 the	man	becomes	persuaded	by	 the	capitalists.	The	Nobel
Prize	 comes	with	 almost	 two	 hundred	 thousand	 dollars.	 The	man	 for	 the	 first
time...	In	the	Soviet	Union	you	don't	have	private	property;	for	the	first	time	he
sees	two	hundred	thousand	dollars,	and	for	the	first	time	he	is	out	of	the	Soviet
Union.	He	can	escape	and	ask	 for	 refuge	 in	 any	capitalist	 country,	 and	he	can
release	the	secrets	of	Soviet	scientists	to	the	capitalists	and	gain	prestige,	awards,
money	and	everything.
So	the	Soviet	government	up	to	now	has	been	preventing	people	like	Sakharov
and	 others.	 It	 was	 a	 very	 dangerous	 thing.	 If	 you	 prevent,	 then	 the	 scientist
becomes	angry	with	 the	Soviet	government.	He	 freaks	out,	 he	wants	 to	 accept
the	prize.	Because	he	freaks	out,	the	Soviet	government	has	to	take	measures	to
prevent	him	from	escaping	out	of	the	country.
Even	Sakharov's	insistence	that	he	would	accept	the	Nobel	Prize...	immediately
the	 Soviet	 government	 had	 to	 take	 action.	 He	 was	 removed	 as	 the	 director
general	 of	 the	 science	 academy,	 his	 car	 was	 taken	 back...	 because	 nobody
possesses	 anything,	 everything	 belongs	 to	 the	 nation.	 The	 government	 allots
things	 to	 people.	 And	 he	 was	 reduced	 to	 being	 an	 ordinary	 member	 of	 the
academy.
But	 his	 wife,	 who	 is	 also	 a	 scientist,	 was	 having	 an	 operation	 in	 Paris.	 From
Paris	 she	managed	 to	 go	 to	 the	Nobel	 Prize	 convention,	 and	 on	 behalf	 of	 her
husband	she	accepted	the	Nobel	Prize.
So	 either	 the	 Nobel	 Prize	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 bribe	 to	 take	 secrets	 out	 of	 the	 Soviet
Union,	or	 it	creates	a	 trouble	for	 the	scientist.	 If	 the	government	prevents	him,
and	if	he	wants	to	go	out,	then	he	has	to	be	jailed.	In	some	way,	one	scientist's
life	and	his	contribution	to	the	Soviet	Union	is	destroyed.
Now	the	Nobel	Prize	has	been	given	to	politicians	--	even	a	man	like	Kissinger
gets	a	Nobel	Prize!	And	what	is	his	contribution	to	humanity?
I	 call	 it	 the	 Ignoble	 Prize	 because	 it	 is	 full	 of	 blood,	 the	 blood	 of	millions	 of
people	 who	 were	 massacred	 by	 Nobel's	 weapons.	 No	 man	 of	 dignity	 should
accept	it.
I	told	my	sannyasin,	"You	should	not	have	mentioned	my	name.	I	will	reject	the
Nobel	Prize	if	 they	give	it	 to	me.	It	 is	a	bribe	and	nothing	else,	a	bribe	to	shut
people's	mouths	who	speak	against	capitalism,	a	bribe	 to	 take	secrets	 from	 the
Soviet	Union."
Now	 opening	 the	 doors	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 is	 really	 dangerous	 --	 and	 I	 am
saying	 it	 as	 a	 friend.	 The	 Soviet	 Union	 has	 done	 half	 the	 work;	 the	 base	 is
completely	solid.	All	that	it	needs	is	a	few	pillars	and	a	roof,	and	the	shrine	for
the	human	soul	will	be	ready.
The	 new	man	 can	 come	only	 out	 of	 the	Soviet	Union.	But	what	 is	 happening
makes	me	suspicious.	Soon	Gorbachev	will	have	the	Nobel	Prize,	I	predict	it.	He
is	being	praised	by	all	the	capitalist	press	for	the	simple	reason	so	that	this	praise
gets	into	his	head	and	he	forgets	all	the	implications	of	what	he	is	doing	that	may
destroy	the	Soviet	Union.
A	 seventy-year	great	 experiment	 in	 changing	 the	 structure	of	 the	 society...	 and
they	 have	 succeeded!	 Now	 the	 second	 step	 is	 to	 change	 the	 consciousness	 of
man.	 You	 have	 changed	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 society,	 it	 was	 an	 economic
revolution.	 That's	 why	 I	 said	 yesterday	 that	 if	 I	 come	 to	 Soviet	 Union,	 I	 am
bringing	another	revolution,	a	revolution	which	will	be	spiritual.	That	is	what	is
missing:	a	spiritual	revolution.	If	that	revolution	happens,	the	Soviet	Union	will
be	the	pride	of	humanity.
I	see	both	sides	of	Gorbachev.	He	is	doing	good	in	bringing	freedom,	but	he	is
also	 taking	a	risk	--	which	he	will	not	be	able	 to	prevent	once	all	 these	people
enter	in.	Then	he	will	have	to	start	from	ABC;	it	will	take	another	seventy	years
to	bring	back	this	same	situation.
I	would	like	him	open	the	door	for	scientists,	open	the	door	for	poets,	open	the
door	for	mystics,	open	the	door	for	musicians,	dancers,	painters.	Open	the	door
for	novelists,	open	the	door	for	all	creative	people,	open	the	door	for	meditators	-
-	but	not	for	all	and	sundry;	particularly	not	for	any	organized	religion,	and	not
for	any	stupid	and	idiotic	ideology.
He	does	not	know	anything	about	BHAGAVADGITA,	and	he	has	allowed	these
Hare	Krishna	people	 to	 translate	 it	 into	Russian.	He	does	not	know	that	 this	 is
the	only	scripture	in	the	whole	world	devoted	completely	to	war.	It	was	perfectly
good	for	Adolf	Hitler,	it	was	perfectly	good	for	Benito	Mussolini.	It	is	not	good
for	people	who	want	peace,	for	people	who	want	this	earth	to	drop	its	boundaries
of	nations,	of	religions.	It	is	not	good	for	those	who	want	one	world,	one	earth,
one	humanity.
Question	2
The	second	question	is	from	another	sannyasin.	He	has	asked:	WHY	DO	YOU
NOT	WANT	TO	ALLOW	CHRISTIANITY	TO	ENTER	THE	SOVIET
UNION?
Because	I	love	the	Soviet	Union,	and	I	would	not	like	a	poisonous	snake,	a	cobra
hiding	inside	the	pope,	to	enter	the	Soviet	Union.	He	can	come	to	India,	there	is
no	problem.	He	can	go	around	in	any	capitalist	country,	there	is	no	problem.	But
not	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 because	 I	 consider	 Christianity	 to	 be	 the	most	 criminal
religion	in	the	world.
In	seventy	years	they	have	with	great	difficulty	been	erasing	the	programming	of
Christianity	 from	 the	 Soviet	 mind.	 Now	 the	 Soviet	 mind	 at	 least	 is	 free	 of
Christianity,	 free	 of	 God,	 free	 of	 heaven,	 free	 of	 hell.	 This	 is	 perfectly	 good.
Don't	introduce	all	these	things	again.
But	 one	 thing	 certainly	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 needs,	 which	 Christianity	 cannot
provide.	That	can	be	provided	only	by	Zen.
Zen	 is	 pure	 meditation.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 hell,	 heaven,	 God.	 Jesus'
miracles,	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with.	 It	 does	 not	 even	 talk	 about	 any	 of	 these
things.	It	simply	talks	about	the	science,	step	by	step,	of	how	to	enter	your	own
inner	world	and	see	the	life	eternal.
Once	you	have	seen	your	life	as	eternity	--	from	eternity	to	eternity	--	you	are	a
totally	different	man.
Your	life	becomes	of	great	significance.	Thousands	of	blossoms	start	arising	in
you.	Your	life	becomes	creative.	You	know	that	existence	cares	for	you.
You	 know	 that	 existence	 never	 creates	 a	 carbon	 copy,	 that	 existence	 always
comes	up	with	absolutely	original	 faces.	Nobody	 is	dispensable.	Once	you	are
gone,	your	place	will	 remain	empty	 forever.	This	gives	significance,	 this	gives
meaning,	 this	 gives	 you	 a	 feeling	 you	 are	 needed	 by	 existence.	Without	 you,
something	will	be	missing;	some	place	will	remain	empty	and	nobody	else	can
fill	it.
That's	 why	 yesterday	 I	 argued	 against	 Regardie,	 because	 he	 wanted	 to	 be	 a
"Rajneesh"	 in	his	next	 incarnation.	Existence	never	 repeats,	and	you	cannot	be
anybody	else	than	yourself.
That	 is	 authentic	 religiousness.	 Every	 individual	 has	 his	 own	 uniqueness,	 and
that	gives	him	dignity	and	grace.
I	 don't	want	Christianity	 or	Hinduism	or	Mohammedanism	 to	 enter	 the	Soviet
Union	because	all	these	religions	are	of	prayer.	Prayer	is	extrovert;	meditation	is
introvert.	 If	you	want	 to	allow	people,	 then	allow	 the	people	whose	 religion	 is
based	 on	meditation,	 not	 on	 prayer.	That	 should	 be	 the	 clear-cut	 distinction,	 a
criterion	that	can	be	followed	without	any	fear.
Allow	Lao	Tzu,	 allow	 people	 of	Tao,	 allow	 people	 of	Zen,	 allow	 people	who
belong	to	Sufism,	allow	people	who	belong	to	Hassidism.	These	are	all	people
who	in	some	way	or	other	are	meditative.
But	 Zen	 comes	 to	 the	 very	 highest	 peak	 --	 the	 purest	 meditation,	 refined	 by
centuries	of	mystics	in	India,	mystics	in	China,	mystics	in	Japan.	It	has	moved
through	so	much	refinement,	sharpening	--	continuous	sharpening	--	that	there	is
nothing	else	compared	to	it.
What	will	the	poor	pope	do	in	the	Soviet	Union?	--	just	kiss	the	land!	So	he	can
kiss	in	the	Vatican,	he	has	enough	land	--	eight	square	miles,	a	sovereign	country.
Eight	square	miles	is	not	enough	for	him	to	kiss?	Go	on	kissing!
He	 wastes	 so	 much	 money	 in	 kissing	 different	 lands.	 He	 came	 to	 India	 and
kissed	the	New	Delhi	airport.	I	was	in	Kathmandu	--	I	immediately	gave	a	press
conference	and	told	 them,	"If	he	wanted	to	kiss	cow	dung,	we	could	have	sent
him	a	parcel	full	of	cow	dung!	Why	waste	eight	million	dollars	in	visiting	India
just	to	kiss	the	cow	dung?"	But	cow	dung	gives	you	a	taste	of	Hinduism....
What	has	Christianity	done	for	the	whole	world?	It	has	created	more	poverty	by
preventing	people	from	using	birth	control	methods.	Now	birth	control	methods
are	a	hundred	percent	effective;	at	first	 they	were	not.	The	pill	had	to	be	taken
before	you	made	 love.	Now	 there	 is	 another	pill	 that	you	can	 take	 afterwards;
there	is	no	need	to	take	it	beforehand.	This	is	far	safer.	And	sometimes	the	pill
disturbs	the	hormonal	system	of	the	woman,	so	a	third	pill	has	come	into	being
which	the	man	can	take.	The	woman	need	not	take	anything.	Now	things	are	so
simple,	why	go	on	increasing	unnecessary	population?
And	all	Christian	priests	are	 insisting	 for	more	poverty,	 for	more	orphans.	The
reason	is	that	they	need	more	Catholics,	more	Christians	--	from	these	orphans,
from	these	poor	people,	they	can	get	new	converts.	Already	the	Catholic	church
has	six	hundred	million	people	in	its	fold;	still	 there	is	no	satisfaction.	It	wants
more	and	more	people,	at	the	risk	of	the	whole	planet	committing	suicide!	It	is
because	of	Christianity	--	and	they	have	influenced	all	the	religions	because	it	is
the	greatest	religion	as	far	as	membership	is	concerned,	the	most	powerful.	Other
religions	have	also	followed	the	same	ideas.
Mohammed	married	nine	wives.	He	was	absolutely	uneducated;	he	used	to	have
epileptic	 fits	 and	 he	married	 a	 woman	 just	 for	money.	 The	 woman	was	 forty
years	old	and	he	was	only	twenty-six,	but	the	woman	was	a	widow	and	had	an
immense	 amount	 of	 money.	 She	 was	 the	 first	 Mohammedan!	 She	 turned
Mohammed's	epileptic	 fits	 into	"trances."	 In	his	epileptic	 fit,	he	would	 tremble
and	foam	would	come	out	of	his	mouth,	and	he	would	feel	so	much	trembling
that	all	the	blankets	in	the	house	could	be	put	over	him;	still	he	was	trembling.
And	whatever	he	uttered	in	that	unconscious	state,	his	wife	would	write.
Khadija	 --	 the	woman,	who	was	well	 educated,	 super-rich	 --	 it	 is	 she	who	has
written	the	Koran,	it	is	not	Mohammed.	He	could	not	even	sign	his	name.	And
the	Koran	has	been	written	over	thirty	years'	time,	because	you	have	to	wait	for
the	epileptic	fit	to	come	again.	Then	nobody	knows	whether	Khadija	was	writing
what	Mohammed	was	 saying	 or	 she	 was	 inventing,	 because	 it	 is	 a	 very	 poor
scripture.	There	is	nothing	much	in	it.
Mohammedan	friends	have	asked	me.	"Talk	about	the	holy	Koran!"	They	have
been	 sending	me	 copies,	 the	 latest	 editions,	most	 beautifully	 printed.	 I	 looked
into	 them	 many	 times,	 but	 I	 could	 not	 find	 a	 single	 sentence	 worthy	 to	 be
commented	 upon.	 I	 can	 criticize,	 but	 then	 all	 the	Mohammedans	 will	 be	 just
ready	to	burn	my	community!
That's	what	 the	Greek	church	threatened	to	do	to	me.	When	I	was	in	Greece	it
was	only	for	a	four-week	tourist	visa.	After	two	weeks...	and	I	had	not	gone	out
of	 the	 house.	 The	 house	 was	 on	 a	 small	 island;	 it	 belonged	 to	 the	 best	 film
producer	in	Greece,	he	was	my	host.	It	was	just	on	a	hilltop,	a	direct	drop	to	the
ocean	--	a	very	beautiful	place,	a	beautiful	garden,	and	I	had	never	gone	out	of
the	gate.
But	friends	from	all	over	Europe	came	running	to	Greece	and	the	archbishop	of
the	Greek	Orthodox	church...	which	 is	 the	oldest	church	 in	 the	world.	 It	 is	 the
Greek	 church	 which	 has	 changed	 Christianity	 completely,	 according	 to	 itself.
The	archbishop	threatened	the	president	of	the	country,	the	prime	minister	of	the
country,	and	threatened	me:	"If	the	government	does	not	deport	him	immediately
I	am	going	to	dynamite	the	house	and	burn	all	the	people	inside	--	alive."	This	is
religion!
And	 I	 have	 nothing	 to	 do	with	Greeks.	 There	were	 at	 the	most	 ten	 or	 twelve
Greek	 friends,	whom	 I	 have	 already	 corrupted,	 so	 there	was	no	problem;	 they
were	my	sannyasins.	And	he	was	threatening	the	government	and	saying	that	my
stay	in	Greece	would	corrupt	the	morality,	destroy	the	religion.
I	 said	 when	 they	 deported	 me,	 to	 the	 world	 press	 representatives	 who	 had
gathered	 at	 the	 airport	 to	 take	 my	 interview,	 "This	 country	 has	 the	 weakest
religion	 and	 the	 weakest	 morality.	 They	 have	 had	 two	 thousand	 years	 to
condition	the	mind	of	the	country	to	a	certain	kind	of	morality	which	they	think
is	 virtuous,	 to	 certain	 superstitions	 that	 they	 think	 are	 religion	 --	 and	 they	 are
afraid	of	a	tourist	who	is	going	to	be	here	only	two	weeks	more!	If	a	religion	two
thousand	 years	 old	 can	 be	 corrupted	 by	 a	 tourist	 in	 two	 weeks,	 it	 is	 worth
corrupting.	It	should	be	corrupted."
He	was	threatening	me:	"I	will	organize	a	procession	against	you."
I	informed	him,	"I	will	enjoy	it!"	I	enjoy	all	kinds	of	things....
But	the	procession	never	came,	so	I	asked	Amrito,	my	ambassador	in	Greece	--	a
beautiful	woman,	used	to	be	a	model,	once	was	chosen	to	be	the	beauty	queen	of
Greece.
I	love	beauty.	I	 love	everything	that	is	beautiful	in	this	world.	The	flowers,	 the
faces,	the	stars,	the	moon,	the	ocean	--	everything.	Beauty	is	my	religion.
I	asked	Amrito,	"How	many	people	here	are	Christians?"
She	said,	"Almost	ninety	percent."
And	I	asked	her:	"How	many	attend	the	church?"
She	said,	"Not	more	than	four	percent!"
I	said,	"Who	are	those	four	percent	people?"
She	laughed,	she	said,	"You	won't	believe	--	they	are	the	oldest	women,	ancient
women,	those	whose	one	foot	is	in	the	grave	and	one	foot	in	the	church."
I	said,	"How	many	women	listen	to	this	archbishop?"
She	counted.	She	went	there	--	only	six	women	were	listening	to	his	thundering
sermon!
Of	course	he	could	not	bring	a	procession	of	six	old	women,	it	would	have	been
really	a	great	circus.	I	had	told	my	people,	"When	he	comes,	we	should	join	the
procession!"
That	old	idiot	wanted	to	burn	all	my	people	who	were	living	with	me	--	just	for
two	weeks!	What	has	Christianity	done	for	the	world	that	you	are	asking	me	why
I	don't	want	to	allow	Christianity	to	enter	the	Soviet	Union?
I	love	the	Soviet	Union	because	it	is	a	great	experiment.	It	is	a	milestone	in	the
history	of	man.	Of	course	it	 is	only	half,	but	still	 --	half	 is	better	 than	nothing.
The	other	half	can	be	raised	on	top	of	it.
What	Lenin	and	Stalin	have	produced	has	given	a	good	foundation	for	anybody
to	 raise	 the	 temple	 of	 consciousness.	 And	 this	 temple	 will	 not	 belong	 to	 any
religion;	 it	will	belong	to	all	 individuals	who	want	 to	enter	 into	 initiation,	who
want	to	enter	on	the	path.
The	buddhas	don't	 lead	you,	 they	simply	 indicate	 the	way.	You	have	 to	 follow
your	way	alone,	because	nobody	can	go	inside	you.	The	buddhas	can	point	to	the
place,	but	you	have	to	go	there.	And	it	 is	good	that	nobody	can	go	inside	you;
otherwise	politicians	would	have	reached	before	any	buddha!	It	is	your	privilege,
your	absolute	privilege	and	freedom	--	nobody	else	can	enter	there.
But	if	you	go,	you	will	start	growing	in	a	new	dimension	--	vertical.	Just	as	all
animals	move	horizontally...	at	a	certain	point	in	history	some	animals,	according
to	 Charles	 Darwin,	 stood	 up	 vertically.	 That's	 how	 man	 was	 born:	 from	 the
horizontal	animal,	walking	on	all	fours,	he	started	walking	on	two	feet,	and	two
hands	were	free	for	the	first	time.	These	two	hands	have	created	all	science,	all
technology	--	the	houses,	the	roads,	the	electricity,	the	television.	Everything	that
you	enjoy,	everything	that	is	needed	for	humanity	has	been	created	because	these
two	hands	were	free.	No	animal	can	do	these	things:	all	four	legs	are	engaged	in
walking.
This	is	one	revolution:	the	gorilla	becomes	man	--	from	horizontal	to	vertical.
A	similar	kind	of	state	exists	inside.	Your	consciousness	is	still	horizontal.	Your
body	is	vertical;	your	consciousness	is	still	moving	in	time	--	horizontally.	The
function	of	meditation	is	to	turn	your	consciousness	also	in	a	vertical	direction.
When	your	body	and	consciousness	are	together,	vertical,	you	are	an	enlightened
one.	The	vertical	consciousness	knows	the	ultimate	 truth,	 the	beauty,	 the	good,
the	godliness	of	existence.
The	sutras:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
THE	 MONK	 IN	 CHARGE	 OF	 THE	 MONASTERY	 ONCE	 SAID	 TO
YAKUSAN,	"I	HAVE	RUNG	THE	BELL;	PLEASE,	OSHO,	IT	IS	TIME	FOR
THE	REGULAR
DISCOURSE."
You	should	understand	one	thing	about	Zen	as	a	foundation:	nothing	is	regular.
Everything	 is	 spontaneous.	 The	 whole	 emphasis	 is	 not	 on	 routine	 but	 on
spontaneity.	 If	 the	 master	 feels	 like	 speaking,	 if	 existence	 wants	 to	 become
through	him	a	song,	then	he	sings	the	song	--	otherwise	not.	There	is	no	question
of	regularity.
Spontaneity...	 it	 has	happened	 thousands	of	 times	 that	 the	master	will	 come	 to
the	podium,	stand	there	for	a	few	minutes,	and	nothing	is	coming.	He	will	bow
down	to	the	assembly	and	return	to	his	room.	This	is	how	Zen	was	born....
Buddha	had	never	come	to	his	morning	discourse	with	anything	in	his	hand.	One
day	he	came	with	a	lotus	flower	--	so	strange!	People	who	had	lived	with	him	for
years	had	never	seen	him	carrying	anything.	And	more	strange	was	his	silence.
He	just	went	on	looking	at	the	lotus	flower.	The	minutes	started	becoming	longer
and	longer	and	longer;	one	hour	passed,	and	it	seemed	almost	as	if	a	whole	life
had	 passed.	 Ten	 thousand	 sannyasins	 waiting,	 watching,	 and	 Buddha	 is
completely	silent,	looking	at	the	lotus	flower.
Then	Mahakashyapa,	for	the	first	time...	He	had	been	for	twenty	years	a	disciple
of	Buddha;	he	had	not	spoken	a	single	word,	he	had	not	even	taken	initiation.	He
never	 asked	 Buddha	 to	 initiate	 him,	 he	 simply	 got	 initiated	 on	 his	 own.	 He
shaved	his	head,	brought	yellow	robes,	became	a	monk,	gave	himself	a	name,	sat
under	a	tree	--	the	same	tree	where	he	continued	to	sit	year	after	year.	Everybody
was	wondering	--	"This	fellow	is	strange,	he	seems	to	be	 insane!"	They	would
ask	him	something	and	he	would	simply	say,	"Keep	quiet."
But	 that	 day,	 when	 they	 were	 all	 silent,	 he	 simply	 started	 laughing	 out	 loud.
Everybody	looked	at	him.	"What	happened	to	this	man?	He	has	been	insane	for
twenty	years,	and	suddenly	he	has	become	sane?	Or	vice	versa?"
Buddha	 looked	 at	 him	and	beckoned	him	with	his	 hand:	 "Come	close	 to	me."
This	 was	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 twenty	 years	 that	 Buddha	 had	 called	 him.
Mahakashyapa	came,	and	Buddha	told	the	assembly	of	the	sannyasins,	"What	I
could	 say	 in	 words	 I	 have	 said	 to	 you.	What	 I	 could	 not	 say	 in	 words	 I	 am
transferring	to	Mahakashyapa."
And	he	gave	the	lotus	flower	to	Mahakashyapa.
This	is	how	Zen	was	born.	This	was	the	beginning	of	the	river	of	Zen	--	no	word,
just	something	invisible.	People	just	watched	in	awe	--	what	is	happening?	And
for	the	first	time	Mahakashyapa	touched	Buddha's	feet	--	but	did	not	say	a	single
word.
In	Buddhist	 scriptures	 there	 is	no	other	mention	of	Mahakashyapa,	 simply	 this
mention.
But	Mahakashyapa	is	the	first	Zen	master.
From	one	master	to	another	master,	Zen	has	been	coming	down	--	up	to	me.	If
Mahakashyapa	 is	 the	 beginning,	 I	 am	 perhaps	 at	 the	 very	 end	 of	 a	 long,	 long
heritage	--
twenty-five	 centuries,	 hundreds	 of	 masters,	 transferring	 in	 deep	 silence	 and
meditation	what	cannot	be	said	in	words.
So	the	monk	asked	Yakusan...	Yakusan	is	a	great	master,	without	any	doubt:
"I	HAVE	RUNG	THE	BELL..."
The	bell	is	rung	to	call	all	the	sannyasins	together	in	the	assembly	hall.
"PLEASE,	OSHO,	IT	IS	TIME	FOR	THE	REGULAR	DISCOURSE."
He	 used	 the	 word	 `regular'	 wrongly.	With	 a	 master	 things	 are	 spontaneous	 --
nothing	is	regular.	Even	when	you	see	regularity,	 it	 is	only	in	your	conception.
For	the	master,	it	is	spontaneous.
YAKUSAN	SAID,	"OKAY.	YOU	COME	AND	FOLLOW	ME,	HOLDING	UP
MY
BOWL"	--	because	I	have	not	finished	my	breakfast.
Now	this	was	a	very	strange	situation,	going	to	the	assembly	hall...	is	he	going	to
deliver	the	discourse,	or	eat	his	rice?	And	the	monk	felt	a	little	embarrassed:	"I
am	following	him	with	the	bowl	of	rice.	What	will	people	think	of	me?	--	`That
idiot!	Why	is	he	carrying	the	bowl	with	the	rice,	behind	the	master?'"
THE	MONK	DID	NOT	UNDERSTAND	THE	MASTER'S	MEANING,	AND
UNGAN
--	 WHO	WAS	 ALSO	 PRESENT	 --	 ASKED,	 "MASTER,	 WHEN	 DID	 YOU
LOSE
YOUR	ARMS	AND	LEGS?"
Why	are	you	not	carrying	your	bowl	yourself?	When	did	you	lose	your	arms	and
legs?
Even	 Ungan,	 who	 finally	 became	 enlightened,	 could	 not	 understand	 the
meaning.
The	meaning	was	that	the	discourse	is	nothing	but	a	nourishment.	It	is	a	spiritual
nourishment.	 Just	as	 the	body	needs	 food,	your	spirituality	needs	nourishment.
Carrying	the	bowl	behind	him,	he	was	giving	the	monk	an	insight:	"Think	of	all
your	meditations	and	discourses	in	terms	of	nourishment."
The	 master	 is	 nothing	 but	 food	 --	 food	 for	 your	 soul.	 But	 Ungan	 did	 not
understand	either.	He	thought,	"What	is	the	matter?"	because	every	monk	carries
his	 own	 bowl	 unless	 he	 is	 sick,	 unless	 he	 has	 lost	 his	 arms	 in	 some	 accident.
What	happened?	"WHEN
DID	YOU	LOSE	YOUR	ARMS	AND	LEGS?"
YAKUSAN	SAID,	"YOU	ARE	SIMPLY	WEARING	THE	MONK'S	HABIT."
You	don't	know,	and	you	cannot	know.	You	are	only	wearing	the	monk's	habit,
the	monk's	robe,	but	you	don't	understand	anything.
UNGAN	REPLIED,	"I	AM	NOT	OTHER	THAN	THIS."
This	is	what	I	am.	I	am	standing	utterly	naked	before	you.	If	you	call	me	just	the
monk's	habit...	perhaps.	This	is	what	I	am.
This	was	coming	from	a	deeper	source,	indicating	THISNESS....
Buddha's	 whole	 philosophy	 can	 be	 contained	 in	 the	 simple	 word	 `thisness'	 --
suchness,	TATHATA.	"This	moment,	this	is	what	I	am.	You	can	call	me	anything
you	like,	it	does	not	matter."	This	was	a	great	answer.
UNGAN	REPLIED,	"I	AM	NOT	OTHER	THAN	THIS.	WHAT	ABOUT	YOU,
MASTER?"
YAKUSAN	SAID:	"I	DON'T	HAVE	SUCH	A	FAMILY."
Strange	answer	from	the	master....
What	 does	 he	mean	 that	 he	 does	 not	 have	 such	 a	 family?	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 one
anecdote	to	have	some	feel	of	it.
When	al-Hillaj	Mansoor,	who	was	killed	finally	by	the	Mohammedans...	just	like
Jesus,	but	 in	a	 far	worse	way.	They	cut	him	piece	by	piece.	But	 this	happened
later	on,	when	he	became	enlightened	and	declared:	"Ana'l	haq	--	I	am	the	truth."
And	 Mohammedans	 cannot	 forgive	 anybody	 saying	 this.	 Only	 god	 is	 truth.
Calling	yourself	truth,	you	are	indirectly	calling	yourself	God.
But	he	was	not	calling	himself	God.	He	was	simply	saying,	"I	am	the	truth."	And
he	was	not	claiming	any	monopoly	on	it.	He	was	saying,	"You	are	also	the	truth,
it	is	just	that	you	don't	know	it.	I	know	it."	But	this	came	later	on.
When	he	first	went	to	his	master,	Junnaid...	it	was	a	very	sad	affair.	His	family,
his	wife,	his	children,	his	old	parents,	his	friends,	his	neighbors	--	all	loved	the
young	man.	He	was	so	beautiful,	so	joyous,	just	his	presence	was	a	light.
He	had	been	visiting	all	kinds	of	masters.	Finally	he	decided	to	leave	the	family
and	 to	 go	 to	 Junnaid,	 who	was	 residing	 just	 outside	 the	 village	 in	 the	 forest.
Junnaid	was	a	very	famous	master.	So	out	of	the	town	the	family	came,	friends
came,	wife,	 children,	 neighbors,	 to	 say	goodbye,	 to	 give	him	a	good	 send-off.
And	he	went	towards	the	forest...
but	 again	 and	 again	 he	 looked	 back.	 Those	 people	 were	 still	 standing	 on	 the
boundary	of	the	town.
Finally,	when	he	was	entering	into	the	forest,	he	looked	for	the	last	 time.	They
were	still	standing,	far	away;	he	could	not	figure	out	who	was	who.	And	then	he
reached	Junnaid's	hut.	He	knocked	on	the	door.	Junnaid	said	--	from	the	inside;
he	has	not	seen	the	person	yet	--	he	said,	"First	leave	the	crowd	outside	and	come
alone!"
What	crowd?	He	looked	all	around,	there	was	no	crowd.	He	opened	the	door.
Junnaid	said,	"You	did	not	follow	my	order!	Leave	the	crowd	outside	and	then
come	in."
But	he	said,	"What	crowd?	I	don't	see	anybody.	I	looked	everywhere	--	there	is
nobody."
He	 said,	 "You	 are	 looking	outside	 --	 look	 inside.	The	whole	 crowd	 is	 present.
Your	wife,	your	children,	your	family,	your	parents,	your	neighbors,	your	friends
--
everybody	is	present.	Just	close	your	eyes:	 that	 is	 the	crowd	you	have	to	 leave
outside.
Get	out!	When	you	are	finished	with	the	crowd,	come	in."
It	 took	three	years	for	al-Hillaj	Mansoor	to	sit	outside	till	he	was	finished	with
the	family,	with	the	crowd,	till	he	became	utterly	silent.	He	forgot	completely	to
enter	into	the	hut.
Three	years	is	a	long	time.	He	had	forgotten	the	family,	and	he	had	also	forgotten
the	master.	There	was	no	need	now,	he	was	completely	fulfilled.
Exactly	at	that	moment	Junnaid	came	out	and	said,	"Come	in	now."
He	said,	"But	now	there	is	no	need."
Junnaid	 said,	 "Only	 now,	when	 there	 is	 no	 need,	 can	 I	 start	my	work	 on	 you.
Come	in	and	close	the	doors."
This	is	the	"family"	that	Yakusan	means.	He	is	saying,	"I	am	absolutely	alone.	I
am	utterly	silent.	I	don't	have	a	crowd	of	thoughts,	images,	dreams	in	my	mind.
And	you,	standing	before	me,	although	you	are	saying,	`This	is	what	I	am,'	I	can
see	the	crowd	inside,	the	family.	You	are	not	just	this,	you	are	that	too."
Ungan	must	have	understood,	because	he	did	not	say	a	single	word.	The	master
was	absolutely	correct.
When	the	master	 is	absolutely	correct,	 the	disciple	simply	has	 to	bow	down	in
silence.
There	is	no	question	of	argument	--	with	the	master	you	cannot	argue,	and	if	you
argue	you	are	creating	a	distance	between	yourself	and	the	master.
Come	close	to	the	master	without	any	argument,	without	any	mind,	without	any
thought,	without	any	images,	and	suddenly	there	is	a	synchronicity	--	your	heart
starts	beating	in	tune	with	the	master's	heart.
And	the	master's	heart	is	already	beating	in	tune	with	the	heart	of	the	universe.
So	 in	 an	 indirect	way,	 coming	 closer	 to	 the	master	 is	 the	 first	 step	 of	 coming
closer	to	existence.
He	is	the	window,	the	door.	He	opens	into	existence.	He	gives	you	the	first	taste
of	 dropping	 the	 self,	 of	 dropping	 the	 crowd,	 of	 dropping	 everything	 and	 just
being	a	pure	consciousness.
ONCE	YAKUSAN	CALLED	A	BOY	MONK	TO	HIM.	DOGO	ASKED,	"WHY
DO
YOU	CALL	SUCH	PEOPLE?"
Dogo	 also	 became,	 finally,	 enlightened.	He	was	 a	 brother	 of	Ungan.	Both	 the
brothers	were	disciples	of	Yakusan.
DOGO	ASKED,	"WHY	DO	YOU	CALL	SUCH	PEOPLE?"
Just	a	young	boy	--	how	can	he	understand	the	great	teachings?
That's	where	the	mind	distracts	you.	The	mind	is	interested	in	the	scriptures,	in
the	teachings,	in	the	theology,	philosophy	--	in	all	kinds	of	gymnastics	of	words,
beliefs,	disbeliefs,	arguments.	And	truth	comes	to	those	who	are	innocent.	It	can
come	more	easily	to	a	child	than	to	a	grown-up,	because	what	you	call	growing
up	 is	 nothing	 but	 gathering	 more	 rubbish.	 You	 have	 more	 knowledge,	 but
nothing	of	knowing.
Knowing	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 experience	 than	 knowledge.	 Knowledge	 is
borrowed.
Knowing	 is	 just	 like	a	man	opening	his	eyes	 to	 the	sun,	and	knowledge	 is	 just
like	a	blind	man	writing	a	thesis	on	light.	He	can	write....
Now	there	are	ways	 --	 the	blind	man	can	read,	 the	blind	man	can	write.	But	a
blind	man	writing	about	light...	will	it	have	any	relevance,	any	truth?	It	will	be
all	borrowed.	It	will	be	all	rubbish.	You	can	know	light	only	with	your	own	eyes.
So	when	Yakusan	 called	 this	 young	 boy	monk...	 Dogo	was	 a	 scholar,	 a	 great
knower	of	the	scriptures.	He	said,	"Why	do	you	call	such	people?	What	will	this
boy	understand?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"BECAUSE	OF	THIS."
Because	he	is	so	young,	because	he	is	so	fresh,	because	he	knows	nothing,	he	is
available.
You	are	not	available.	Your	mind	 is	 full	of	 thoughts,	and	 thoughts	are	a	China
wall,	thick
--	they	prevent	any	master	from	approaching	your	heart,	your	being.
Yakusan	 said,	 "Simply	 because	 of	 this	 --	 because	 he	 is	 so	 young,	 so	 fresh,	 so
new.	He	knows	nothing	about	anything.	He	is	innocent."
And	the	innocent	has	more	capacity	to	know	the	truth.	Those	who	have	already
become	 knowledgeable	 will	 have	 to	 drop	 their	 knowledge	 and	 become	 again
childlike.
Unless	you	become	childlike,	innocent,	you	cannot	know	the	truth.	Innocence	is
the	path	that	leads	to	ultimate	truth.
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"BECAUSE	OF	THIS."
DOGO	ASKED,	"WHY	DON'T	YOU	THROW	IT	AWAY?"
He	was	 still	 not	understanding	 the	master.	That	 is	 the	difficulty	with	 so-called
scholars,	professors,	knowledgeable	people.	He	did	not	hear	what	the	master	has
said;	on	the	contrary,	he	is	saying,	"Why	don't	you	throw	it	away?	This	kind	of
boy	is	not	going	to	become	a	buddha."
Yakusan	replied,	"BECAUSE	I	HAVE	USED	IT	FOR	A	LONG	TIME.	I	cannot
throw	him	away,	because	I	have	used	innocence	as	a	path	towards	enlightenment
my	whole	life."	A	beautiful	anecdote....
Meditation	makes	 you	 innocent,	 it	makes	 you	 childlike.	 In	 that	 state,	miracles
are	 possible.	 That	 state	 is	 pure	 magic.	 A	 great	 transformation	 happens	 --	 in
innocence	you	transcend	the	mind,	and	to	 transcend	the	mind	is	 to	become	the
awakened	one,	the	enlightened	one.
This	 is	 the	 only	 revolution,	 real	 revolution:	 the	 great	 rebellion	 that	 happens
within	you.
This	is	what	the	Soviet	Union	needs	today.
Basho	wrote:
LONELY	IS	MY	WAY!
NO	ONE	PASSES	HERE	BUT	I,
LATE	THIS	AUTUMN	DAY.
Just	 visualize	 the	 late	 autumn	 day:	 soon	 the	 sunset,	 soon	 there	will	 be	multi-
colors,	 psychedelic	 colors,	 on	 the	 horizon	 --	 a	 beautiful	 autumn	 day.	 No	 one
passes	here	but	I.
He	is	 talking	about	his	 inside.	"No	one	passes	here	but	I	 --	 lonely	 is	my	way."
Lonely	is	everybody's	way.	The	master	can	only	indicate,	can	point	his	finger	to
the	moon,	but	you	should	look	at	the	moon,	not	at	the	finger.	If	you	look	at	the
finger,	you	miss	the	moon;	you	miss	the	master,	his	indication.
And	that's	what	has	happened	to	all	so-called	religions.	They	are	holding	fingers:
somebody	 the	 finger	 of	 Jesus,	 somebody	 the	 finger	 of	Krishna,	 somebody	 the
finger	of	Mohammed.	Nobody	is	looking	at	the	moon.	And	because	these	people
themselves	don't	understand,	they	are	very	joyful	--	"My	finger	is	being	caught
by	six	hundred	million	Catholics!"	The	pope	is	immensely	happy:	"Six	hundred
million	Catholics	holding	my	finger?"
But	the	question	is	not	the	finger;	the	question	is	the	moon.
And	the	path	is	alone.	It	is	the	moon	within	you.	The	master	can	indicate....
I	am	doing	it	every	day,	indicating	where	to	go,	how	to	go,	how	much	energy	is
needed	 to	 reach	 there,	what	kind	of	experiences	will	be	happening	on	 the	path
and	what	kind	of	experiences	will	be	happening	when	you	have	reached	to	 the
center	of	your	being.	I	can	only	indicate,	but	you	have	to	go.	If	you	don't	go,	I
am	helpless.
Question	3
Maneesha	has	asked	a	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
NEITHER	 COMMUNISM	 NOR	 ZEN	 HAVE	 A	 GOD	 AS	 A	 CENTRAL
HYPOTHESIS
ON	 WHICH	 A	 BELIEF	 SYSTEM	 IS	 BASED.	 DOES	 THIS	 IMPLY	 THAT
RUSSIA	 MIGHT	 HAVE	 A	 GREATER	 AFFINITY	 WITH	 ZEN	 THAN	 THE
WEST	HAS?
Certainly,	 Maneesha.	 The	 Soviet	 Union	 will	 be	 more	 capable	 and	 receptive
because	it	has	dropped	all	gods	and	all	the	superstitions	surrounding	God.	It	has
dropped	all	consolations,	all	opium.	 It	has	dropped	all	 that	has	been	 forced	on
man	for	millennia.
The	Soviet	Union	 is	almost	 in	a	 state	of	 innocence.	But	 the	danger	 is	 that	 this
innocence	can	be	exploited	if	the	Soviet	leaders	are	not	conscious	about	it,	that
there	is	an	innocent	mind	which	has	been	created	in	seventy	years	and	this	can
be	exploited	by	organized	religions	very	easily.
Keep	the	organized	religions	out!	The	Soviet	Union	needs	a	totally	different	kind
of	religiousness	which	these	organized	religions	cannot	supply	--	they	don't	have
it	 themselves.	 The	 Soviet	 Union	 needs	 a	 contemporary	 man	 --	 with	 no	 past,
absolutely	present,	now	and	here	--	who	can	help	this	innocence	to	blossom	into
blue	lotuses.
The	Soviet	Union	has	much	more	possibility	than	the	capitalist	West.	In	fact,	the
capitalist	countries	of	the	West	used	to	call	the	Soviet	Union	"the	East,"	although
it	 is	not	 the	East.	But	 they	 include	 it	 in	 the	East;	 they	don't	consider	 it	 to	be	a
Western	country.
Perhaps	 it	 is	 a	 good	 sign!	 Unconsciously	 they	 have	 called	 it	 the	 East.	 It	 can
really	become	the	East,	and	far	better	than	the	East	is,	because	the	East	is	poor.
The	 East	 has	 the	 roof,	 but	 it	 does	 not	 have	 the	 pillars,	 it	 does	 not	 have	 the
foundation.	 Under	 the	 roof	 people	 are	 being	 crushed,	 dying	 of	 starvation.	 It
knows	the	inner	world	but	it	has	no	idea	that	the	outer	world	is	not	unreal;	it	is	as
real	as	the	inner.
Both	 are	 real,	 both	 are	 existential,	 and	 both	 need	 to	 have	 a	 synchronicity,	 a
harmony	 between	matter	 and	 spirit,	 between	 that	 which	 can	 be	 seen	 and	 that
which	cannot	be	seen.
A	deep	accord	is	needed.
Yes,	 Maneesha,	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 has	 much	 more	 vulnerability,	 much	 more
receptivity	than	the	capitalist	West.	The	capitalist	West	is	too	much	in	the	mind,
too	much	in	the	thinking.	The	Western	part	of	the	world	still	follows	people	like
Aristotle	and	Socrates	--
great	giants,	but	confined	only	 to	 the	 refinement	of	 the	mind.	Socrates	and	his
dialogues	 are	 beautiful,	 the	 highest	 that	 mind	 can	 reach.	 And	 Aristotle	 is	 the
father	of	Western	logic.	All	the	philosophers	of	the	West,	from	ancient	Greece	to
Germany...	 Kant,	 Hegel,	 Feuerbach...	 to	 the	 contemporary	 world	 --	 Sartre,
Jaspers,	Marcel,	Soren	Kierkegaard,	Bertrand	Russell,	Whitehead,	G.E.	Moore	--
they	are	all	in	the	same	line	of	intellectual	giants.	But	they	don't	know	anything
about	meditation,	and	they	will	argue	against	meditation.	They	will	say	there	is
nothing	beyond	the	mind	--	and	without	experimenting!
A	strange	thing	I	remember...	In	Greece,	traditionally	it	was	believed	that	women
don't	 have	 the	 same	number	of	 teeth	 as	men.	Obviously,	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 the
woman	should	be	in	every	way	second-rate	to	man.	How	can	she	have	the	same
number	of	teeth	as	man?
Aristotle	 had	 two	wives,	 not	 one	 --	 he	 could	 have	 asked	wife	 number	 one,	 or
number	two,	"Just	let	me	count	your	teeth."	Or	while	they	were	asleep,	he	could
have	 counted	 their	 teeth.	And	most	women	 are	 continuously	 talking,	 and	 they
don't	have	a	moustache	like	me.	You	cannot	count	my	teeth.	Even	just	when	they
were	talking	he	could	have	managed	to	count,	but	he	depended	on	his	logic	that
certainly	women	are	a	lower	category	than	men	--	just	a	male	chauvinist	idea.	In
his	book	of	logic,	he	writes	that
"Women	have	fewer	teeth	than	men."
Logic	is	non-experimental.
Science	 is	experimental,	and	Zen	--	which	 is	 the	science	of	 the	 inner	 --	 is	also
experimental.	 Just	 the	 inner	 experiment	 is	 called	 "experience,"	 and	 the	 outer
experience	is	called	"experiment."
But	 unless	 you	 experience	 and	 experiment	with	 the	 inner,	 you	 don't	 have	 any
right	to	deny	that	there	is	anything	beyond	the	mind.	Have	you	gone	beyond	the
mind?	Have	you	reached	beyond	the	mind,	just	trying	to	find	out	whether	there
is	something	beyond	the	mind?	No	one	--	neither	Russell	nor	Soren	Kierkegaard
nor	Martin	Heidegger	--
nobody	has	tried	to	reach	beyond	the	mind.
Martin	 Heidegger	 has	 written	 a	 book	 on	 Zen,	 but	 that	 book	 is	 also	 just
intellectual.	And	you	can	see	that	the	man	was	not	a	meditator,	because	he	was	a
follower	of	Adolf	Hitler.
That	was	a	great	intellectual	giant	of	Germany,	and	still	he	followed	a	madman,
a	 crackpot,	 Adolf	 Hitler.	 That	 shows	 the	 level	 of	 his	 insight,	 that	 he	 knows
nothing	about	the	inner.	No	man	of	meditation	will	follow	Adolf	Hitler.
That's	 why	 I	 said,	 by	 vocation	 I	 am	 a	 logician,	 by	 mistake	 I	 am	 a	 mystic.
Because	to	be	sane	in	an	insane	world	is	very	difficult	and	hard.	That's	why	I	call
it	a	mistake.
But	 I	 would	 love	 you	 to	 commit	 the	mistake.	 I	 love	 to	 corrupt	 people!	 Their
morality,	their	religion...	anything	you	give	me	and	I	will	corrupt	it!	Corruption
is	my	business.
It	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.	Now	he	has	come	back,	with	his	rainbow
turban.
Where	is	he	sitting...?
(OSHO	 LOCATES	 SARDARJI	 BY	 HIS	 UNMISTAKEABLE	 LAUGHTER,
AND
ACKNOWLEDGES	HIS	RETURN	WITH	A	SMILE.)
There	is	a	job	opening	at	the	local	zoo	for	two	men	to	clean	out	the	gorilla	cages.
Paddy	and	Seamus	go	directly	from	the	pub	to	apply.
"Before	I	give	you	lads	the	job,"	says	Duckworth	Bird,	the	head	keeper,	"I	want
to	ask	you	a	few	questions."
"Okay,"	says	Paddy,	"I	am	ready!"
"The	first	question,"	says	Duckworth.	"What	bird	does	not	build	its	own	nest?"
"That's	easy,"	says	Seamus.	"It	is	a	canary.	He	lives	in	a	cage."
"That's	not	it,	you	idiot,"	says	Paddy,	digging	Seamus	in	the	ribs	with	his	elbow.
"It's	a	cuckoo!"
"Very	good,	Paddy,"	says	Duckworth	Bird.	"How	did	you	know?"
"Ah!"	replies	Paddy,	"everybody	knows	that	a	cuckoo	lives	in	a	clock!"
Hamish	 MacTavish	 and	 Sandy	 MacPherson	 go	 mountaineering	 in	 the	 Swiss
Alps.
Suddenly,	 Hamish	 loses	 his	 footing,	 slips	 and	 falls	 off	 a	 cliff	 into	 a	 deep
crevasse.
Sandy	MacPherson	pokes	his	head	over	 the	cliff	and	 just	sees	 the	fingertips	of
his	Scottish	friend	clinging	to	a	rock.
"Are	you	all	right,	Hamish?"	shouts	Sandy.
"Not	exactly,"	gasps	Hamish.	"But	if	you	run	down	to	the	village	ten	miles	back,
and	get	some	rope,	I	will	try	to	hang	on	until	you	get	back.	But	hurry,	for	God's
sake!"
Sandy	MacPherson	goes	running	off	down	the	mountainside.
An	hour	later,	his	face	suddenly	reappears	over	the	edge	of	the	precipice.
"Are	you	still	there,	Hamish?"	he	shouts.
"Jeezus	 Christ!	 Just	 barely!"	 shouts	 back	 Hamish,	 hanging	 on	 by	 one	 hand.
"Have	you	got	the	rope?"
"Ah!"	replies	MacPherson,	"No!	Those	 tight	Swiss	bastards	wanted	 two	francs
for	it!"
Old	 Father	 Fumble	 is	 invited	 to	 the	 local	 high	 school	 for	 its	 graduation
ceremonies.	 But	 he	 is	 shocked	 and	 scandalized	 by	 some	 of	 the	 latest	 fashion
outfits	worn	by	the	girls.
"Look	at	that	youngster!"	cries	Fumble	to	the	person	next	to	him	--	"the	one	with
the	orange	hair,	the	cigarette,	and	the	purple	pants.	Is	it	a	boy	or	a	girl?"
"A	girl!"	snaps	his	companion.	"And	by	the	way,	she	is	my	daughter."
"I	am	sorry,	sir,"	says	the	flustered	Fumble.	"Do	forgive	me	--	I	would	never	had
said	anything	had	I	known	you	were	her	father."
"I'm	not,	you	idiot!"	says	the	other.	"I	am	her	mother!"
Nivedano...
(Gibberish)
Nivedano...
Be	silent.
Close	your	eyes.
Feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	to	look	inwards.	Gather	your	whole	life	energy	and	rush
towards	the	center	of	your	being	--	with	total	consciousness,	with	an	urgency	as
if	 this	 is	going	 to	be	your	 last	moment	on	 the	earth.	Without	 this	urgency	you
will	never	reach	to	the	center.
Faster	and	faster...	deeper	and	deeper.
As	you	start	coming	closer	to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you.
The	closer	you	are...	you	find	fountains	of	peace	and	serenity	surrounding	you.
As	you	reach	to	the	very	center,	for	the	first	time	you	know	who	you	are	--	the
buddha.
The	buddha	simply	means	the	awakened	one	--	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	Gautam
Buddha.	He	was	one	of	the	buddhas	among	thousands	of	buddhas...	of	course	the
most	well-known	buddha.	But	his	name	was	not	Buddha,	his	name	was	Gautam
Siddharth.
Buddha	was	his	awakening.
The	same	awakening,	the	same	silence	you	are	in...	the	same	blossoming	of	your
center	into	a	lotus	flower.	You	must	have	seen	Gautam	Buddha's	statues	sitting
on	a	lotus	flower....
This	moment,	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium	is	full	of	ten	thousand	buddhas.
You	have	 to	 remember	 only	 one	 quality.	Buddha	 consists	 only	 of	 one	 quality:
witnessing.
Just	 being	 a	 witness	 --	 without	 any	 judgment,	 without	 any	 identification;	 just
watching	as	if	you	are	only	a	mirror.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
Witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness.	Just	pure	consciousness....
And	 suddenly	 you	 come	 in	 touch	 with	 your	 eternal	 life,	 with	 your	 immortal
being.
Suddenly	you	have	come	very	close	to	the	heartbeat	of	the	cosmos.	Your	being	a
buddha	is	the	door	to	the	cosmos.
To	make	this	witnessing	more	clear,	Nivedano...
Relax...
Let	go	of	the	body,	but	keep	remembering	one	thing:	that	you	are	a	buddha.	And
the	 buddha	 has	 only	 one	 quality;	 he	 is	 made	 up	 of	 only	 one	 thing	 --	 that	 is
witnessing.
The	whole	religious	experience
can	be	reduced	to	a	single	word:
witnessing.
And	as	you	get	deeper	into	witnessing,	you	start	melting	like	ice	into	the	ocean;
the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 suddenly	 turns	 into	 an	 ocean	 of	 pure	 consciousness
without	any	ripples,	without	any	waves	--	just	so	utterly	silent.
Flowers	 from	 the	 beyond	 start	 raining	 on	 you	 in	 celebration	 of	 your
achievement.	This	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth.
The	 evening	was	 beautiful	 on	 its	 own.	 But	 in	 coming	 closer	 to	 your	 ultimate
nature,	buddhahood,	you	have	made	it	a	splendor,	a	miracle,	a	magical	moment.
Just	gather	all	the	flowers
and	the	fragrances
and	the	juices	of	life.
You	have	to	bring	them	with	you.
And	don't	forget
to	persuade	the	buddha
to	come	along.
First	he	will	come,	slowly	slowly,	as	a	shadow	to	you.	He	has	been	hiding	at	the
center	for	millions	of	years.	You	have	to	bring	him	back	from	the	center	to	the
circumference	of	your	life.
First	he	will	be	just	behind	you	as	a	shadow.
In	 the	second	step,	you	will	be	behind	him	as	a	 shadow.	 In	 the	 third	step,	you
will	merge	 into	 the	 buddha	 --	 and	 the	 buddha	 is	 pure	 consciousness;	 hence	 it
casts	no	shadow.	It	is	absolutely	transparent.
The	moment	 you	 become	 a	 buddha	 in	 your	 day-to-day	 existence	 --	 chopping
wood,	carrying	water	from	the	well	--	 that	day	will	be	the	greatest	day	in	your
life.
The	day	of	awakening...	the	day	of	being	reborn	as	a	buddha.
In	this	very	moment	you	are	so	close	to	it.
Persuade	him	to	come	along	with	you.	He	is	your	ultimate	nature,	so	he	cannot
deny	your	request.	Welcome	him.
Nivedano...
Come	back,	but	come	back	with	great	peace,	silence,	tranquility,	serenity.	Come
back	as	a	buddha,	with	all	grace.
Sit	for	a	few	seconds	just	to	remember	where	you	have	been,	what	golden	path
you	have	followed.
Remember	who	is	behind	you	--	the	buddha.
He	has	to	come	in	front	of	you.
These	are	the	three	steps	of	Zen:
First	the	buddha	comes	behind	you	as	a	shadow.
Second,	he	comes	in	front	of	you;	you	become	the	shadow.
Third,	the	shadow	disappears	into	the	buddha.	Only	a	transparent	consciousness
remains	 which	 is	 eternal	 --	 absolute	 freedom,	 love,	 compassion,	 beauty,
godliness.
This	I	call	the	Zen	Fire	and	the	Zen	Wind.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	This	I	call	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
1	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902015
ShortTitle:
FIRE03
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
200
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
THE	 MONK,	 SOMPU,	 WAS	 ONCE	 WASHING	 A	 BUDDHA	 STATUE.
YAKUSAN
CAME	AND	ASKED	HIM,	 "NOW	YOU	ARE	WASHING	THIS,	BUT	CAN
YOU
WASH	THAT?"
SOMPU	REPLIED,	"PLEASE	GET	THAT	AND	BRING	IT	TO	ME."
THE	MASTER	DIDN'T	SAY	ANYTHING.
ON	ANOTHER	OCCASION,	WHEN	YAKUSAN	WAS	SITTING	DOWN,	A
MONK
CAME	UP	 TO	HIM	AND	 SAID,	 "OSHO,	YOU	ARE	 SITTING	 SILENTLY.
WHAT
ARE	YOU	THINKING?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"I'M	THINKING	THE	UNTHINKABLE."
THE	MONK	SAID,	"HOW	DO	YOU	THINK	THE	UNTHINKABLE?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"NON-THINKING."
WHEN	YAKUSAN	WAS	ABOUT	TO	DIE,	HE	YELLED	OUT,	"THE	HALL
IS
FALLING	DOWN!	THE	HALL	IS	FALLING	DOWN!"
THE	MONKS	 BROUGHT	VARIOUS	 THINGS	AND	 BEGAN	 TO	 PROP	 IT
UP.
YAKUSAN	THREW	UP	HIS	HANDS	AND	SAID,	"NO	ONE	OF	YOU
UNDERSTOOD	WHAT	I	MEANT!"
Friends,
Question	1
One	of	the	sannyasins	has	asked:
WHY	 DOES	 COMMUNISM	 NEED	 A	 DICTATORSHIP	 OF	 THE
PROLETARIAT?
WHY	NOT	DEMOCRACY?
In	a	democracy	you	cannot	change	the	status	quo,	you	cannot	change	the	class-
divided	society	into	a	classless	society.
The	 dictatorship	 of	 the	 proletariat	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary	 dictatorship	 of	 an	 Adolf
Hitler	or	Benito	Mussolini.	It	is	a	dictatorship	of	the	poor,	the	have-nots.	Unless
the	have-nots	have	the	power,	they	cannot	stop	the	exploitation	by	the	rich.
In	 a	 democracy	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 for	 the	poor	 to	have	 the	power	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	the	rich	people	have	enough	money	to	fight	elections,	enough
money	 even	 to	 buy	 the	 poor	 and	 their	 votes,	 enough	 money	 to	 buy	 the
politicians.	 It	 is	 impossible	 in	 a	 democracy	 for	 the	 poor	 to	 have	 power,	 and
without	power	there	is	no	possibility	of	changing	the	society.	Hence,	Karl	Marx
proposed	the	idea	of	a	dictatorship	of	the	proletariat.
Karl	Marx	was	not	a	practical	man.	He	was	a	great	 thinker,	a	great	dreamer,	a
great	utopian;	in	short,	he	was	a	stargazer.	He	spent	his	whole	life	in	the	library
of	the	British	Museum.	Before	the	museum	would	open	he	was	standing	at	the
door,	 and	 it	 was	 with	 difficulty	 that	 the	 museum	 staff	 would	 force	 him	 out,
physically,	when	the	museum	was	closing.
It	happened	many	times	that	without	eating,	without	drinking...	he	was	so	deeply
concentrated	in	finding	the	root	causes	of	poverty	and	how	to	destroy	it,	looking
into	different	sources,	all	 the	possible	literature	that	might	give	some	clue,	 that
the	museum	staff	had	to	call	the	ambulance	from	the	hospital,	because	he	would
faint	 on	 his	 table.	 He	 would	 become	 unconscious	 --	 no	 food,	 no	 water,	 just
working	out	the	whole	plan	for	a	utopia.
Communism	 is	 his	 great	 contribution	 to	 the	 world.	 But	 it	 has	 come	 out	 of	 a
thinker's	mind,	dreamer's	mind,	and	practical	life	is	totally	different	from	logic.
His	whole	idea	was	that	soon	the	poor	would	become	poorer	and	the	rich	would
become	 richer	 --	 it	 seems	 perfectly	 logical	 --	 and	 the	 middle	 class	 would
disperse.	A	few	would	rise	up	and	become	richer,	and	more	would	fall	down	and
become	poor.	When	the	society	is	absolutely	divided	between	the	proletariat,	the
have-nots,	and	the	bourgeois,	the	haves....
Obviously	the	bourgeois	cannot	be	in	the	majority,	because	there	is	tremendous
competition;	every	rich	man	 is	 trying	 to	pull	down	other	 rich	men	by	 the	 legs.
Everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 climb	 the	 ladder	 higher	 than	 the	 others.	 So	 those	who
reach	the	highest	point	of	being	super-rich	are	going	to	be,	obviously,	a	minority.
The	 poor	 will	 be	 the	 majority,	 and	 because	 they	 don't	 have	 anything...	 Karl
Marx's	great	work,	THE	COMMUNIST
MANIFESTO,	ends	with	the	line:	"Proletariat	of	the	world	unite.	You	don't	have
anything	to	lose	except	your	chains,	and	you	have	the	whole	world	to	gain,	the
whole	power,	the	whole	society	in	your	hands."
This	is	how	logic	functions,	but	life	does	not	agree	with	it.	He	completely	forgot
the	implications.	He	was	thinking	that	the	first	country	to	become	a	communist
country	would	be	America,	but	America	seems	to	be	going	perfectly	well.	There
is	 no	 question	 at	 all	 of	 America	 becoming	 a	 communist	 country	 unless	 it	 is
invaded	and	forced	to	become	communist.	From	its	inner	sources,	it	is	not	going
to	 become	 a	 communist	 country	 for	 a	 simple	 reason:	 the	middle	 class	 has	 not
disappeared	and	is	not	going	to	disappear.
That	was	completely	overlooked	by	Marx.	He	thought	that	a	few	people	would
become	 richer,	 more	 ambitious,	 more	 competitive,	 more	 efficient.	 The	 others
would	fall	down	and	become	poorer.	But	he	forgot	the	other	side	of	the	coin:	that
a	 few	 rich	 people	will	 go	 bankrupt	 and	 become	middle	 class,	 and	 a	 few	 poor
people	will	 start	 struggling	 and	 fighting	 and	will	 join	 the	middle	 class,	 so	 the
middle	class	is	not	going	to	disappear.	And	it	has	not	disappeared.
And	the	middle	class	is	absolutely	against	any	revolution,	for	the	simple	reason
that	 they	have	much	 to	 lose.	 In	 revolution	 there	 is	going	 to	be	chaos.	And	 the
middle	 class	 is	 not	 going	 to	 share	 its	 possessions	 with	 the	 millions	 of	 poor
people.
Marx	 also	 forgot	 completely	 --	 that	 shows	 how	 just	 thinking	 is	 not	 enough;	 a
practical,	 down-to-earth	 approach	 is	 needed	 to	 change	 the	 society	 --	 he	 forgot
completely	 that	 even	 the	 poor	may	 not	 be	 complete	 have-nots.	 The	American
poor	may	not	have	a	Rolls	Royce,	but	he	has	a	Chevrolet,	he	has	a	house,	he	has
a	wife,	he	has	children.	His	children	are	his	ambitions,	he	is	teaching	them	and
they	will	 become	 richer.	But	 even	 the	 poor	man	 has	 a	 car,	 a	 house,	 and	 he	 is
afraid	that	in	the	sharing	of	wealth	he	may	lose	his	car,	his	house.	The	proletariat
has	 not	 turned	 out	 completely	 to	 be	 have-nots,	 so	 they	 are	 not	 ready	 for	 any
revolution.	Yes,	they	are	ready	for	more	and	more	facilities	for	the	poor,	but	they
are	not	going	to	be	for	the	revolution.
America	has	the	poorest	and	smallest	Communist	Party	in	the	world,	which	has
no	power	at	all.
It	happened	 in	 the	Soviet	Union:	after	 the	 revolution	a	 journalist	was	asking	a
poor	man,
"Are	you	really	a	communist?"	He	said,	"Yes,	I	am	a	communist."	The	journalist
asked,
"If	 you	 had	 two	 cars,	 would	 you	 give	 one	 to	 your	 neighbor?"	 He	 said,	 "Of
course."
"If	you	had	 two	horses,	would	you	give	one	 to	your	neighbors?"	He	 said,	 "Of
course."
"If	 you	 had	 two	 cows,	would	 you	 give	 one	 cow	 to	 your	 poor	 neighbors?"	He
said,	"Yes."
And	 the	 journalist	 finally	asked,	 "If	you	have	 two	hens,	 are	you	going	 to	give
one	hen	to	your	neighbors?"	He	said,	"No!"
The	journalist	said,	"But	this	is	absolutely	illogical."
The	man	said,	"It	is	not	illogical.	I	have	two	hens	--	I	don't	have	two	cars,	I	don't
have	 two	houses,	 I	 don't	 have	 two	horses,	 two	cows.	That	which	 I	don't	 have,
who	 cares?	 --	 I	 can	 give.	But	 two	 hens	 I	 have	 got,	 and	 I'm	 not	 going	 to	 give
them!"
When	you	have	something,	then	the	problem	arises.
So	according	to	Marx	nobody	is	really	a	have-not	in	America;	hence	there	is	no
possibility	of	a	communist	revolution.
In	Russia	it	was	a	miracle,	because	it	was	not	even	a	capitalist	country.	And	that
was	 the	 idea	 of	 Karl	 Marx,	 that	 communist	 revolution	 can	 happen	 only	 in	 a
capitalist	 country	 where	 there	 will	 be	 poor	 people	 in	 the	 majority,	 and	 rich
people	in	the	minority.	The	poor	can	overthrow	the	rich	very	easily,	there	is	no
question	of	much	violence	or	any	trouble.
Russia	 was	 not	 even	 a	 capitalist	 country.	 It	 was	 a	 feudal	 country,	 far	 more
backward	than	a	capitalist	country.	There	were	no	poor,	no	proletariat,	no	labor
unions.	And	 there	was	 not	 a	 class	 of	 rich	 people;	 there	were	 just	 a	 few	 --	 the
emperor,	 the	czar,	a	small	aristocracy.	They	were	not	owners	of	 factories,	 they
were	owners	of	land,	and	on	their	land	they	had	slaves	to	do	the	work.
Now	a	slave	is	taken	care	of	by	the	landlord	because	unless	he	is	strong	enough,
he	will	not	be	able	to	work	on	the	land.	The	slave	is	not	a	machine,	so	he	has	to
be	given	good	food,	good	clothes...	in	winter	he	has	to	be	given	warmer	clothes.
So	 the	 slaves	were	 not	 have-nots;	 in	 fact,	 they	were	 enjoying	 everything.	The
aristocrats	had	 to	keep	 them	 in	good	health	 --	medical	 facilities,	 good	clothes,
houses	which	are	healthy	and	hygienic,	because	unless	those	slaves	are	powerful
and	strong	they	will	not	be	able	to	work	the	vast	lands,	thousands	of	acres.	Miles
and	miles	of	 land	one	aristocrat	would	have,	and	 thousands	of	slaves.	 It	was	a
totally	different	situation.
Marx	 never	 thought	 about	 a	 Soviet	 Russia.	He	 never	 thought	 that	 Russia	was
going	to	become	a	communist	country.	That's	how	theorization	fails.	Life	takes
its	own	course;	it	does	not	follow	your	logic,	your	philosophy.
In	Russia	 the	 revolution	 happened.	 It	was	 not	 a	 communist	 revolution	 in	 fact,
because	it	was	not	a	fight	between	the	have-nots	and	the	haves.
It	happened	during	the	first	world	war.	The	czar	was	not	equipped	well	enough
to	 fight	 Germany.	 Neither	 were	 the	 communists	 ready	 to	 fight	 in	 Russia	 --	 a
small	 group	 of	 thinkers,	 they	 were	 not	 hoping	 that	 there	 was	 going	 to	 be	 a
revolution	there.	Even	capitalism	had	not	come,	which	was	going	to	produce	the
haves	and	have-nots,	so	it	was	very	far	away.
Even	Lenin,	who	was	to	become	the	head	of	the	first	communist	country	in	the
world,	 was	 in	 Germany	 --	 because	 in	 Germany	 the	 emperor	 had	 relaxed	 the
power	 and	 given	 it	 to	 the	 people.	 It	 was	 becoming	 a	 democracy,	 and	 the
Communist	Party	in	Germany	was	the	biggest	party	so	there	was	every	chance	it
would	come	into	power.	Lenin	was	there	to	direct	them.
But	 instead	of	 the	Communist	Party	 --	which	 it	was	 logical	 to	conclude	would
succeed	-
-	Adolf	Hitler	 came	 in	 between.	And	Adolf	Hitler	was	neither	 a	 thinker	 nor	 a
philosopher.	 He	was	 absolutely	 a	 fanatic,	 insane	man,	 and	 his	 party,	 the	Nazi
Party,	 began	with	 only	 nineteen	 soldiers.	These	 soldiers	 had	 been	 found	 to	 be
unfit	for	the	army,	so	they	were	unemployed	and	they	wanted	to	do	something.
Adolf	Hitler	himself	was	thrown	out	of	the	army	because	he	was	psychologically
unfit.
These	nineteen	people	 gathered	 together	 in	 a	 small	 hotel	 and	 created	 the	Nazi
Party	of	Germany,	with	Adolf	Hitler	as	the	leader.	Because	he	was	a	fanatic,	he
was	very	emphatic	about	everything	he	said.	And	his	strategy	was	very	strange	--
because	he	had	not	a	great	following,	he	created	a	new	strategy.	It	looks	absurd,
but	it	worked.
His	whole	 strategy	was	 not	 to	 bother	 about	 gathering	more	 and	more	 people,
gathering	membership	for	the	Nazi	Party;	he	knew	that	was	not	going	to	happen.
He	had	no	philosophy	to	offer,	no	program	for	the	future	--	why	should	they	join
his	 party?	 So	 he	 started	 disturbing	 the	 communist	 meetings.	 Those	 nineteen
people	 --	 they	 were	 all	 soldiers	 --	 would	 sit	 in	 the	 communist	 meetings	 in
separate	places,	and	whenever	the	communist	leader	would	start	speaking,	they
would	 create	 trouble.	 They	 would	 start	 beating	 people,	 whoever	 was	 by	 their
side;	 it	 was	 not	 a	 question	 of	 whom.	 Just	 nineteen	 people	 would	 disturb	 a
meeting	of	ten	thousand	people	or	twenty	thousand	people.	And	when	there	are
beatings	going	on,	you	cannot	speak.	They	were	throwing	stones	at	the	speaker,
they	were	hitting	the	audience.
Slowly	slowly,	it	became	clear	that	you	are	safe	only	in	Adolf	Hitler's	meetings;
you	 are	 not	 safe	 in	 any	 other	 meeting.	 When	 Adolf	 Hitler	 would	 speak,
obviously,	those	nineteen	people	were	standing	around	the	crowd	watching	that
nobody	creates	any	mischief.
People	went	 to	 hear	Adolf	Hitler	 just	 because	 that	was	 the	 only	 safe	meeting.
You	could	come	home	alive!	This	is	how	Adolf	Hitler	came	to	power,	because
he	disturbed	all	meetings	of	 the	communists,	which	was	 the	greatest	party	and
was	 logically	 bound	 to	 succeed	 --	 but	 could	 not	 succeed	 because	 it	 could	 not
approach	 the	 masses.	 Communist	 leaders	 would	 call	 a	 meeting	 and	 nobody
would	come.
Only	 Adolf	 Hitler	 was	 listened	 to	 all	 over	 the	 country,	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 he
started	gathering	followers	because	he	seemed	to	be	the	only	savior.	All	others
had	left	the	area.
And	nobody	knew	his	strategy;	it	became	known	only	after	Adolf	Hitler	wrote	in
his	 autobiography	 about	 how	 he	 came	 into	 power.	 Just	 those	 nineteen	 people
managed	to	do	the	work.
The	 first	 thing	 was	 to	 disturb	 everybody's	 meeting.	 And	 there	 was	 no
propaganda	from	anybody	else	--	if	the	Communist	Party	was	putting	up	posters,
those	 nineteen	 people	were	 removing	 the	 posters	 in	 the	 night.	 In	 the	morning
people	would	see	only	Adolf	Hitler's	posters;	every	other	poster	was	 removed.
They	would	never	know	that	there	were	any	other	posters.
A	very	strange	strategy,	but	he	succeeded	the	emperor.	The	emperor	had	to	leave
his	monarchy	because	 in	 the	first	world	war	Germany	was	defeated	badly,	and
the	 whole	 blame	 went	 to	 the	 emperor	 because	 he	 was	 not	 adequate	 to	 create
enthusiasm	 in	 the	 people	 to	 fight	 for	 their	 country.	 Because	 of	 the	 defeat	 of
Germany	 in	 the	 first	 world	 war,	 the	 emperor	 had	 to	 leave	 it	 in	 the	 hands	 of
democracy.
At	the	same	time	the	Russian	armies,	who	were	fighting	with	Germany,	became
very	 frustrated	 with	 the	 czar,	 because	 the	 czar	 had	 a	 very	 primitive	 army,
absolutely	out-of-date.	No	proper	clothes	in	the	falling	snow,	no	proper	boots,	no
leather	 coats,	 not	 enough	guns,	 not	 enough	 food	either.	So	 the	Russian	 armies
became	so	frustrated	that	they	turned	against	the	czar.
At	 that	moment,	 Lenin	 immediately	 rushed	 from	Germany	 to	Russia.	 Soldiers
are	 soldiers;	 they	 are	 not	 leaders	 of	 men.	 Lenin	 was	 a	 great	 organizer;	 he
immediately	organized	the	soldiers	and	became	the	head	of	the	revolt	against	the
czar.	 It	 was	 the	 birth	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 not	 out	 of	 the	 fight	 between	 the
proletariat	and	the	bourgeois,	but	out	of	the	fight	between	the	czar	and	his	own
army.	The	army	was	angry,	 frustrated	 --	 "We	have	been	 thrown	 into	 a	war	 for
which	we	are	not	ready.	We	are	being	killed	unnecessarily."	And	Lenin	provoked
them.
He	was	a	very	good	organizer.	He	organized	the	army	and	now	the	czar	was	left
alone.
Nineteen	 persons	 of	 the	 czar's	 family	 --	 even	 a	 six-month-old	 baby	 --	 were
immediately	murdered.	If	his	own	armies	are	against	him,	how	can	he	remain	in
power?
Lenin	 was	 a	 good	 organizer.	 But	 if	 he	 had	 remained	 in	 power,	 perhaps
communism	would	not	have	been	possible.	He	was	a	man	of	great	compassion
and	love.	He	was	a	communist	out	of	compassion	and	love;	he	wanted	the	poor
to	disappear	from	the	earth.
But	he	was	not	perfectly	clear.	When	the	power	comes	into	your	hands,	what	are
you	going	to	do	with	it?	How	are	you	going	to	destroy	poverty?
We	have	seen	it	in	India.	This	is	a	very	difficult	problem,	very	complex	problem.
After	forty-two	years	of	freedom,	India	is	in	a	worse	position	than	it	was	under
slavery.	More	poor	people,	more	poverty,	more	population,	and	problems	have
doubled.	 Prices	 have	 gone	 up	 twenty,	 thirty,	 fifty	 times	more,	 and	 the	 salaries
have	remained	almost	the	same.
The	poor	have	become	immensely	poor	and	are	on	the	verge	of	starving	to	death.
What	 happened?	 These	 great	 revolutionaries	 who	 were	 fighting	 against	 the
British	Empire	had	no	program.
My	whole	 family	 was	 involved	 in	 the	 freedom	 struggle.	My	 uncles	 lost	 their
whole	lives;	one	of	my	uncles	was	in	his	graduation	class	in	the	university	and
he	was	caught	and	jailed.	And	once	a	person	was	jailed	under	the	British	Empire,
he	was	 never	 again	 allowed	 to	 enter	 any	university	 or	 college.	Another	 uncle,
who	had	just	passed	matriculation,	was	caught	in	the	freedom	struggle	and	after
he	 was	 released,	 could	 not	 go	 back	 to	 any	 educational	 institution.	 Both	 the
uncles	lost	their	careers	and	the	family	suffered	immensely.
Even	 in	 my	 very	 childhood,	 I	 remember	 I	 used	 to	 ask	 my	 father,	 "I	 can
understand	 that	 you	 are	 against	 the	British	Empire.	This	 is	 freedom	 from.	But
what	are	you	going	to	do	when	you	have	got	the	freedom	--	freedom	for	what?"
And	he	would	shrug	his	shoulders.	He	would	say	to	me,	"The	leaders	know."	But
the	leaders	were	as	much	unaware....
You	may	 have	 sometimes	 seen	 a	 dog	who	 runs	 after	 a	 car,	 barking,	 and	with
great	speed.
And	if	the	man	in	the	car	stops,	the	dog	looks	all	around,	embarrassed	--	"What
to	do	now?"	--	miles	of	unnecessary	running	and	barking.	And	that	happens	to
all	 revolutionaries.	Miles	of	 trouble!	Fighting,	murder,	being	killed,	 jailed,	and
when	they	get	into	power	they	look	just	like	the	dog,	embarrassed.	"What	to	do
now?"
India	 has	 been	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 revolutionaries,	 but	 they	 could	 not	 do
anything.	In	fact,	a	revolutionary	is	not	the	right	person	to	be	in	power.	But	this
is	a	very	difficult	problem.
Because	the	revolutionary	wins	the	freedom,	naturally	he	comes	into	power.	But
he	knows	only	how	to	revolt,	he	does	not	know	how	to	consolidate	a	society.	He
does	 not	 know	 anything	 of	 the	 economics,	 of	 the	 finances,	 of	 the	 people's
psychology.
He	 can	 provoke	 people	 to	 fight,	 to	 destroy	 the	 empire,	 to	 destroy	 all	 kinds	 of
slavery.	 He	 is	 a	 good	 orator,	 influential;	 he	 has	 an	 impressive	 personality,
charisma,	but	when	he	comes	into	power	he	looks	just	like	the	dog,	embarrassed:
"Now	whom	to	provoke?"	He	is	in	power,	and	his	whole	life	has	been	just	a	life
of	provocation,	revolt.	He	has	never	learned	anything	about	how	to	rule.
But	 in	 Russia	 the	 miracle	 happened.	 All	 the	 great	 revolutionaries	 in	 Russia...
Lenin	was	the	main	one,	but	he	had	no	charisma.	He	was	an	organizer	behind	the
scenes,	 he	had	no	personality	which	you	 can	 call	 impressive.	 In	 fact	 he	had	 a
very	deep	inferiority	complex	for	a	strange	reason.	His	legs	were	very	small	in
comparison	to	his	upper	body.	His	legs	never	reached	to	the	earth	while	he	was
sitting	 on	 a	 chair,	 they	 were	 just	 dangling.	 This	 was	 his	 immense	 inferiority
complex.	So	only	behind	 the	 scenes...	He	could	organize,	manage,	give	whole
programs	for	how	to	do	things,	but	he	was	not	a	charismatic	man.
But	he	had	at	his	 right	hand	a	really	charismatic	philosopher,	 thinker,	dreamer,
and	 a	 great	 orator,	 Trotsky.	 So	 Lenin	 was	 behind	 the	 scenes	 organizing,	 and
Trotsky	 was	 the	 great	 revolutionary	 orator,	 very	 impressive	 personality,	 to
provoke	people.	But	he	was	only	a	good	orator.	A	charismatic	personality	is	not
needed	when	you	come	into	power.
What	are	you	going	to	do	with	your	charisma?	There	is	no	public,	no	speech,	no
oratory....
It	 was	 a	 strange	 coincidence	 that	 a	 man	 who	 was	 not	 in	 the	 forefront	 of	 the
revolutionaries,	 Joseph	 Stalin...	 he	was	 just	 the	 general	 secretary	 of	 the	 party,
which	was	a	position	of	no	importance.	Sitting	in	his	secretariat's	room,	he	was
working	on	the	files	and	membership,	and	this	and	that,	correspondence,	letters.
The	public	had	no	idea	of	Joseph	Stalin.
Stalin	was	 not	 his	 real	 name.	 In	Russian,	 Stalin	means	 "a	man	 of	 steel."	 This
man	was	absolutely	practical.	He	had	no	philosophical	bent	of	 the	mind.	Not	a
theoretician,	he	had	nothing	to	do	with	any	philosophical	background;	he	looked
to	the	reality	and	faced	it	brutally.
He	kept	Lenin	under	 the	 influence	of	poison,	because	he	was	 the	head,	and	so
that	 after	 the	 revolution	 Lenin	 could	 not	 really	 come	 into	 power.	 He	 was
suffering	under	continuous	poisoning,	slow	poisoning.	It	took	two	years	for	him
to	 die.	And	 Joseph	 Stalin	was	 behind	 the	 poisoning,	 he	was	 keeping	 his	 own
doctor	to	look	after	Lenin.	Lenin's	wife,	Krupskaya,	wrote	in	her	autobiography,
"I	am	absolutely	certain	that	my	husband	has	been	killed	by	poisoning,	because
he	 never	 became	 as	 healthy	 as	 he	 had	 always	 been."	 For	 two	 years	 he	 was
continuously	 sick,	 and	 the	 doctor	 was	 treating	 him,	 and	 his	 treatment	 was
making	him	sicker	and	sicker.	And	Stalin	was	absolutely	adamant	not	to	bring	in
any	other	doctor.
Just	keeping	Lenin	sick,	Stalin	became	more	and	more	powerful.	In	the	name	of
Lenin,	who	was	almost	in	a	coma,	he	started	ordering	a	mass	murder	of	all	the
revolutionaries	--
Kamenev,	 Zinovyev,	 Trotsky,	 all	 the	 great	 revolutionaries	 who	 had	 come	 into
power.
Trotsky	 was	 the	 defense	 minister.	 Nine	 revolutionaries...	 eight	 simply
disappeared,	nobody	knows	to	where.	Stalin	killed	them	quickly.	He	was	a	very
quick	man.	 Seeing	 the	 situation...	 as	 the	 defense	minister,	 Trotsky	 had	 all	 the
power	over	the	army.	But	he	was	just	a	revolutionary;	he	had	no	idea	what	to	do
with	 the	 army.	He	escaped	 from	Russia,	 but	Stalin	was	not	 a	man	 to	 take	 any
risk.	His	murderer,	a	paid	murderer,	followed	Trotsky.
Trotsky	was	staying	in	Mexico,	hiding,	and	was	writing	the	biography	of	Joseph
Stalin	to	make	clear	to	the	world	that	this	man	had	killed	all	the	revolutionaries
and	taken	over	all	the	power.	As	he	was	finishing	the	biography	of	Stalin	--	it	is	a
big	 book,	 perhaps	 one	 thousand	 pages	 of	 very	 detailed	 description	 of	 each
murder,	how	it	happened,	how	the	person	was	removed	in	the	middle	of	the	night
--	 just	 the	 last	page	he	was	 finishing,	when	he	was	killed	with	an	axe.	Behind
him	was	standing	the	murderer.	As	he	finished	the	paragraph,	the	last	paragraph,
an	axe	cut	his	head	in	two	parts.	The	last	page	is	full	of	blood.
It	looks	very	cruel,	inhuman.	But	it	was	Joseph	Stalin	who	managed	the	Soviet
Union,	because	it	was	confronting	on	enemies	two	sides.	Enemies	from	within...
the	Russian	Orthodox	Church,	the	intellectuals,	the	people	who	did	not	want	to
share	their	property	--
even	the	poor	masses.	As	I	told	you,	a	man	who	has	only	two	hens	will	not	share
--	that's	all	he	has.	The	masses	are	the	greatest	enemy	of	their	own	welfare.	So
you	will	be	surprised	 to	know	that	one	million	Russians	were	killed	by	Joseph
Stalin,	and	these	were	not	the	rich	people.	These	were	the	poor	people	who	were
adamant,	stubborn.
Without	 Joseph	 Stalin,	 communism	 would	 not	 have	 succeeded	 --	 although	 it
succeeded	 out	 of	 violence,	 murder,	 massacre.	 First	 he	 had	 to	 finish	 all	 the
enemies	 inside	 the	 country,	 and	 then	 he	 had	 to	make	 an	 iron	wall	 around	 the
Soviet	 Union,	 because	 the	 whole	 world	 was	 against	 him.	 All	 the	 capitalist
countries	 were	 against	 him,	 against	 communism,	 because	 if	 communism
succeeds	in	one	country	it	is	going	to	succeed	in	every	country.	It	is	better	to	kill
it	in	the	beginning,	because	soon	it	will	be	gaining	more	and	more	strength	and	it
will	become	impossible	to	stop	it.
The	whole	credit	for	protecting	the	Soviet	Union	and	communism	goes	to	Joseph
Stalin.
But	of	course	he	had	to	use	murder,	no	trials	in	the	courts,	no	wastage	of	time.
He	had	not	much	time	to	waste	in	fighting	in	the	courts.	Simply	finishing	people
immediately,	just	on	a	suspicion....
It	used	 to	be	said,	and	 is	still	said	 in	every	capitalist	country,	 that	"You	cannot
kill	 one	 innocent	man,	 even	 if	 you	 have	 to	 leave	 ninety-nine	 criminals	 just	 to
save	one	innocent	man."	Joseph	Stalin	turned	the	whole	thing	upside	down.	He
said,	 "You	 cannot	 leave	 one	 criminal,	 even	 if	 you	 have	 to	 kill	 ninety-nine
innocent	men."
So	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 individuals,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 innocence,	 it	 is	 a
question	of	saving	communism	at	any	cost.
Although	he	is	the	architect	of	Soviet	Union,	his	successors	started	condemning
him	 for	 his	 dictatorial	 methods	 --	 murder,	 massacre,	 mass	 massacre.	 But	 the
successors	don't	know	that	they	would	not	have	been	here	if	Stalin	had	not	done
the	dirty	work	for	them.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know	that	he	was	buried	by	the	side	of	Lenin's	grave	in
Red	 Square	 near	 the	 Kremlin,	 because	 he	 was	 the	 man	 second	 to	 Lenin.	 His
successors	dragged	his	body	from	Red	Square,	and	sent	it	back	to	the	Caucasus
from	where	he	had	come	--	a	mountainous	country,	primitive,	tribal,	so	nobody
can	even	go	there	to	see	his	grave.
I	 can	understand	 the	 successors.	Khrushchev	was	giving	his	 first	 talk	when	he
became	head	of	 the	Soviet	Union	after	Stalin.	And	he	had	been	a	colleague	 to
Stalin	for	almost	his	whole	life.	In	his	first	speech	he	exposed	Stalin,	and	he	said,
"He	was	the	greatest	murderer	humanity	has	known."
Now	the	question	of	communism	became	secondary.	His	murders...	which	were
not	his	personal	grudge	against	anybody;	he	was	simply	trying	to	save	one	of	the
greatest	experiments	in	human	history,	and	there	was	no	other	way	to	do	it.	So	I
know	 it	 is	 evil,	 but	 there	was	no	 alternative.	When	 there	 is	 no	 alternative	you
have	to	choose	the	evil.
Khrushchev,	 addressing	 the	 Communist	 Party,	 said,	 "Stalin	 was	 the	 greatest
murderer,	and	I	am	going	to	remove	his	grave	from	Red	Square.	He	should	not
be	given	any	respect.	And	I	am	going	to	burn	all	his	books."
One	man	from	the	back,	sitting	in	the	dark,	said,	"You	have	been	with	him	your
whole	life.	Why	did	you	not	say	it	before?"
There	 was	 utter	 silence	 for	 a	 moment.	 Then	 Khrushchev	 said,	 "Comrade,
whoever	 has	 said	 it,	 please	 stand	 up."	Nobody	 stood.	Khrushchev	 said,	 "Now
you	know	why	I	was	silent.	I	did	not	want	to	be	murdered,	just	as	you	don't	want
to	 be	murdered.	 Just	 stand	up	 and	you	would	disappear!	So	 I	 had	 to	 keep	my
thoughts	to	myself;	even	walls	had	ears	at	the	time	of	Stalin."
He	had	managed	 in	such	a	way...	he	had	a	party,	a	Communist	Party	 for	small
children,	and	 they	were	 trained	 to	spy	on	 their	parents.	What	 they	said	 in	 their
houses	 the	 children	 had	 to	 report	 to	 the	 Party.	 Then	 the	 youth	 had	 their	 own
youth	 league,	and	 they	had	 to	be	aware	 that	anything	against	communism	--	 it
does	not	matter	whether	 it	 is	 your	mother	or	your	 father	 --	 had	 to	be	 reported
immediately.
Women	 had	 their	 own	 Communist	 Party	 and	 they	 were	 taught	 the	 same
programming,	 that	 it	 is	a	question	of	saving	 this	great	experiment.	Anybody,	 it
does	not	matter	--	he	may	be	your	husband,	but	you	have	to	report	it.	It	may	be
your	wife,	you	have	to	report	it.
And	once	reported	it	was	never	asked	whether	the	report	was	true,	whether	the
report	 was	 reason	 to	 kill	 the	 man.	 In	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 night	 the	 KGB,	 the
Russian	equivalent	of	the	CIA,	would	knock	on	the	door.	The	man	would	open
the	 door,	 and	 the	KGB	 agent	would	 tell	 him	 to	 follow,	 and	 the	 family	 knew:
"That	man	is	gone.	You	will	never	hear	anything	about	that	man."
So	 it	 is	 true,	 it	 was	 a	 very	 cruel	 effort.	 But	 the	 reason	 was	 that	 without	 this
cruelty...	all	around	the	Soviet	Union	there	were	sitting	vultures,	all	the	capitalist
countries	of	the	world,	ready	to	destroy	it.
He	 had	 to	 give	 as	 little	 nourishment	 to	 the	 people	 as	 possible;	 his	 whole
concentration	was	to	create	more	arms	and	a	bigger	army,	because	the	enemies
were	too	many,	and	all	around.	People	can	eat	one	time	a	day,	people	can	have
only	two	or	three	sets	of	clothes	-
-	 there	is	no	need	to	have	many.	We	need	the	army	as	a	priority;	otherwise	we
will	be	destroyed.
It	was	Stalin	who	managed	to	bring	the	Soviet	Union	out	of	a	small	feudal	state,
into	a	world	power,	the	world's	biggest	power.
Now	Gorbachev	 is	 again	 a	 visionary,	 like	Marx,	 and	 does	 not	 understand	 the
practical	necessities	of	reality.	And	you	will	be	surprised	 to	know	--	 the	whole
American	 propaganda	machine	 is	 pressurizing	 the	world	 news	media	 to	make
Gorbachev	a	great	hero.	It	is	the	American	strategy	to	make	him	a	great	hero	and
praise	all	the	things	he	is	doing	by	withdrawing	all	the	iron	curtains,	by	reducing
armaments,	by	 reducing	 the	budget	 for	 the	army	--	 forty	percent	of	 the	budget
has	 been	 reduced	 right	 now,	 and	 every	 year	 he	 is	 going	 to	 cut	 it.	 Nuclear
weapons	 have	 been	 stopped;	 for	 two	 years	 they	 have	 not	 created	 any	 nuclear
weapons.	They	want	Gorbachev	to	become	such	a	big	celebrity	that	it	becomes	a
matter	 of	 his	 personal	 prestige	 --	 not	 communism,	 not	 the	 Soviet	 Union.
Whatever	happens	to	the	Soviet	Union	is	not	the	issue:	Gorbachev	becomes	the
great	man	of	history	who	changed	a	dictatorship	into	a	democracy.
But	once	this	starts	happening,	communism	will	disappear	--	not	only	from	the
Soviet	Union	but	from	every	small	communist	pocket	around	the	world,	because
they	all	depend	on	the	Soviet	Union's	support.
Yesterday	 I	 told	 you	 the	 Hare	 Krishna	 movement	 has	 been	 given	 land	 there.
Today	I	received	the	news	that	a	Vivekananda	center	is	being	opened,	a	branch
of	 the	Ramakrishna	Mission.	Now	 this	 is	 going	 to	 destroy	 the	whole	 country.
These	were	 the	people	Stalin	killed!	These	were	 the	people...	 he'd	 throw	 them
into	Siberia	just	to	die.
These	people	are	now	entering	in	the	name	of	democracy.
My	understanding	is	that	the	Soviet	Union	is	not	yet	ready	to	open	its	doors.	It	is
an	 American	 conspiracy	 to	 praise	 Gorbachev	 through	 the	 news	 media	 --not
directly;	directly	they	will	oppose	him,	but	in	the	news	media	praise	him	highly:
"He	is	doing	a	great	service	to	the	Soviet	people.	What	Stalin	has	done,	he	has	to
undo.	 Withdraw	 the	 dictatorship,	 make	 the	 country	 democratic,	 open	 all	 the
doors."
Now	what	has	the	Vivekananda	center	to	do	in	Russia?	What	has	Ramakrishna
to	do	with	Russia?
Ramakrishna	became	enlightened	only	in	 the	 last	stage	of	his	 life,	and	that	 too
because	of	a	wandering	mystic,	Totapuri.	I	have	told	you	the	story.	But	his	whole
life	he	was	just	suffering	from	epileptic	fits.	His	whole	religion	was	based	on	the
Mother	Goddess;	 it	was	 emotional,	 it	was	 a	 religion	 of	 prayer.	He	was	 a	 nice
man,	 he	 would	 dance	 before	 the	 Mother	 Goddess,	 he	 would	 sing	 songs	 and
praise	the	Mother	Goddess,	but	the	Mother	Goddess	is	more	primitive	than	the
Father	God!
The	Mother	Goddess	came	into	existence	before	the	family	came	into	existence.
At	 that	 time	you	were	not	 certain	who	was	your	 father.	You	were	certain	who
was	your	mother	because	the	mother	gave	birth,	and	the	mother	was	raising	the
children.	The	family	had	not	yet	come	into	existence.	Of	all	the	people	who	were
the	right	age,	one	of	them	must	be	the	father,	but	nobody	knew.
So	you	will	not	be	surprised	to	know	that	the	word	ùncle'	 is	more	ancient	than
the	word
`father'.	All	people	of	the	age	of	the	probable	father,	were	called	uncles.	It	was	a
tribal	world;	the	mother	was	certain	and	everybody	else	was	an	uncle,	someone
anonymous	must	have	been	the	father.	And	because	there	was	no	fixed	family,
the	mother	was	not	bound	to	have	only	one	person	to	love	her;	even	she	might
not	 be	 certain	who	made	 her	 pregnant.	 It	was	 a	 very	 flowing	world,	 in	which
partners	 were	 continuously	 changing	 and	 there	 was	 nobody	 who	 was	 called
father.
So	 the	 Father	 God	 is	 a	 very	 recent	 invention.	 After	 the	 family	 became
established	and	 the	 father	became	 the	head	of	 the	 family,	 then	God	 the	Father
came	as	a	fiction.	Before	that,	the	whole	world	was	a	matriarchy;	the	mother	was
the	most	important	phenomenon.
Obviously,	the	mother	was	projected	as	the	goddess	who	has	created	the	world.
Ramakrishna	was	worshipping	in	the	most	primitive	religion,	and	I	don't	support
him	until	the	point	when	he	met	Totapuri	--	that	was	the	very	last	phase.
I	 was	 surprised...	 I	 have	 met	 many	 Ramakrishna	Mission	 sannyasins,	 monks,
well	 known,	 world	 famous,	 but	 they	 don't	 mention	 the	 last	 phase	 when
Ramakrishna	 accepted	 Totapuri	 as	 his	 master.	 They	 hide	 that	 fact,	 because
Ramakrishna	accepting	somebody	as	a	master	feels	humiliating	to	these	people.
Totapuri	helped	Ramakrishna	to	become	enlightened,	but	it	happened	only	in	the
last	days	of	his	life.	Those	days	and	the	meeting	of	Totapuri	are	not	mentioned,
are	 not	 even	 known	 by	 the	 monks	 of	 Ramakrishna	 Mission.	 They	 go	 on
propagating	Ramakrishna's	emotional	worship	of	the	Mother	Goddess.
Now	today	they	have	been	given	land	to	build	a	big	center,	Vivekananda	Center,
a	 branch	 of	 the	 Ramakrishna	 Mission.	 What	 will	 they	 do?	 They	 will	 teach
worship	of	a	very	primitive	kind.
As	 I	 told	you,	whatever	Gorbachev	 is	doing	 looks	 right,	but	 it	 can	backfire.	 It
can	destroy	 the	whole	experiment.	Dictatorship	was	absolutely	needed	because
there	were	so	many	enemies	all	around.
You	 know	 perfectly	 well	 how	 our	 commune	 in	 America	 has	 been	 destroyed,
because	we	had	no	armies	to	fight,	and	we	were	just	a	small	pocket	with	a	vast
world	 power	 around	 us.	 Violently,	 illegally,	 against	 their	 constitution	 they
destroyed	the	commune.
The	 same	 was	 the	 situation	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 after	 the	 revolution.	 It	 was
surrounded	 by	 the	 whole	 world,	 and	 everybody	 wanted	 to	 destroy	 it.	 It	 was
Joseph	 Stalin's	 great,	 earthbound	 policies	 that	 protected	 the	 Soviet	 Union.	 He
finished	with	all	 the	monks,	all	 the	Christians,	all	 the	priests.	And	 the	Russian
Orthodox	Church	is	one	of	 the	most	orthodox	churches	 in	 the	world	--	used	to
be,	now	perhaps	it	will	be	again.	He	forced	the	monks	to	work	in	the	fields.	This
is	possible	only	in	a	dictatorship.	In	a	democracy	it	is	not	possible,	and	if	you	do
it	in	a	democracy	then	your	democracy	is	a	hypocrisy.
At	 least	 Joseph	Stalin	was	 absolutely	honest:	 he	 called	 it	 dictatorship.	And	he
made	it	clear,	that	"I	don't	want	to	waste	time.	Any	suspicion	that	you	are	against
communism	and	you	will	be	finished."
He	 changed	 all	 the	 churches	 into	 schools,	 hospitals,	 universities	 --	 there	were
great	monasteries	that	became	universities	--	and	he	made	the	monks	work	in	the
fields,	 in	 the	 orchards,	 because	 "You	 cannot	 have	 food	 if	 you	 don't	 work.
Worship	 is	 your	 private	 affair,	 but	 work.	 The	 society	 feeds	 you,	 you	 have	 to
work.	 In	 the	 night	 you	 can	 pray	 and	 do	whatever	 you	want,	 it	 is	 your	 private
time."	And	he	completely	destroyed	the	organized	religions	of	 the	Jews,	of	 the
Christians,	of	the	Mohammedans.
It	looks	bad	to	our	eyes,	but	I	have	a	more	comprehensive	vision.	I	am	against
dictatorship,	 but	 for	 the	 interim	 course,	 while	 the	 society	 is	 moving	 from
capitalism	to	communism,	dictatorship	is	one	of	the	necessary	steps.
And	Marx	also	thought	in	the	same	way,	that	dictatorship	will	remain	only	as	an
interim	 process.	 Once	 the	 society	 becomes	 classless,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of
dictatorship;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 of	 the	 state.	 He	 was	 in	 favor	 of	 no	 classes,	 no
government,	no	bureaucracy.	That	will	be	the	ultimate	flowering.
But	as	I	told	you,	he	was	a	thinker,	not	a	practical	man.	He	did	not	see	the	point
that	 one	 country	 may	 become	 communist,	 may	 become	 classless,	 but	 all	 the
other	 countries	 around	 it	 are	 capitalist.	 You	 cannot	 withdraw	 the	 state,	 you
cannot	withdraw	 the	 dictatorship;	 otherwise	 all	 the	 surrounding	 countries	 will
enter	 into	 it.	 All	 the	 superstitions	 you	 have	 thrown	 out	 will	 come	 back	 with
tremendous	force.	And	they	are	coming....
Gorbachev	seems	to	be	a	nice	man,	has	a	very	deep	respect	for	democracy,	but
does	not	understand	that	 in	 the	name	of	democracy	America	is	conspiring,	and
puffing	up	his	personal	ego	 that	he	 is	a	great	 leader,	a	great	pacifier.	 If	all	 this
gets	into	his	head	it	is	going	to	kill	communism,	and	that	will	be	a	great	loss	to
humanity.
The	 second	question	 is	 connected	with	 the	 first.	Another	 sannyasin	has	 asked:
Question	2
WHY	HAS	THE	STATE	NOT	DISAPPEARED	AFTER	SEVENTY	YEARS?
Because	the	world	is	still	not	communist.	Unless	the	whole	world	is	communist,
the	state	cannot	disappear;	neither	can	dictatorship	disappear.	You	will	have	 to
wait.
Marx's	idea	was	that	once	the	whole	world	becomes	capitalist,	it	will	soon	turn
to	communism.	That	idea	did	not	work.	The	capitalist	countries	have	remained
capitalist,	and	two	great	countries...	the	Soviet	Union,	which	was	not	capitalist,
has	become	 the	 first	 communist	country.	And	 the	 second	great	country,	China,
which	was	also	not	capitalist,	has	become	the	second	great	communist	country.
And	he	was	not	aware	of	personal	egos.	He	was	not	a	student	of	psychology,	he
was	 purely	 a	 student	 of	 economics.	 But	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 man,	 you	 have	 to
understand	everything	through	his	psychology.	The	money	may	be	the	same,	but
in	a	miser's	hand	it	has	a	different	meaning;	in	a	playboy's	hand	it	has	a	different
meaning.	In	a	businessman's	hand	it	has	a	different	meaning,	in	a	hungry	man's
hand	it	has	a	different	meaning.
And	it	has	different	value	in	different	hands.	In	a	rich	man's	hand,	one	rupee	has
no	value	at	all,	but	in	a	beggar's	hand	one	rupee,	perhaps,	has	come	for	the	first
time	into	his	vision.	It	is	the	greatest	richness.	So	the	value	differs	according	to
the	 psychology	 and	 the	 personality.	 And	 Marx	 was	 not	 aware	 of	 the	 total
personality	of	man.
I	have	been	interested	in	the	total	personality	of	man:	his	body,	his	mind,	his	no-
mind,	his	mortal	existence	and	his	immortal	existence.
Marx	was	a	pure	economist,	 so	he	 thought	 that	once	 the	 society	 is	 equal...	He
forgot	two	things:	one,	those	who	will	be	in	power	for	the	interim	period	--	who
is	 going	 to	 take	 the	 power	 out	 of	 their	 hands?	 Because	 power	 corrupts	 and
corrupts	 absolutely.	 The	 people	 who	 are	 in	 power	 are	 not	 going	 to	 leave	 the
power	so	easily	as	Marx	thought.	"When	the	society	becomes	classless,	the	state
will	disappear"	--	but	it	is	not	so	easy.	Those	who	are	in	power	are	not	going	to
leave	their	power.	He	was	not	aware	of	the	psychology.
He	thought	 that	when	two	countries	became	communist,	 they	would	drop	 their
boundaries.	 He	 was	 not	 at	 all	 aware	 of	 personal	 egos.	 For	 instance,	 China	 is
against	 the	Soviet	Union,	and	both	are	communist	countries.	And	the	reason	is
absolutely	 trivial.	 The	 reason	 is,	 communism	 believes	 in	Marx	 as	 the	 founder
and	Engels	as	the	second	founder
--	both	were	together.	Engels	himself	was	a	capitalist,	he	owned	many	factories.
It	was	because	of	Engels	 that	Marx	 could	 live	without	working,	 just	 studying,
studying,	 and	 finding	 causes	 and	 finding	 clues.	 It	was	 possible	 because	 of	 the
support,	 financial	 support	 from	 Engels;	 otherwise	 Marx	 would	 have	 been
working	 and	 there	 would	 not	 have	 been	 a	 DAS	KAPITAL	 or	 COMMUNIST
MANIFESTO.
So	 Engels	 is	 number	 two	 in	 the	 hierarchy	 of	 the	 founders.	 Number	 three	 is
Lenin.	 Stalin	 was	 hoping	 that	 when	 he	 died	 he	 would	 be	 number	 four,	 and
certainly	he	deserves	it.
With	 all	 his	 faults,	with	 all	 his	 violence,	 he	 has	 protected	 a	 great	 experiment.
Men	after	all,	have	to	die;	it	is	not	such	a	great	problem	to	make	so	much	fuss.
Mao	Zedong,	who	brought	China	 to	 communism,	was	 supported	 by	Stalin	 for
thirty	years
--	 because	 the	 revolution	 continued	 for	 thirty	 years;	 it	 was	 the	 greatest	 and
longest	revolution	in	world	history.
Chiang	Kai-Shek,	who	was	the	dictator	of	China,	was	a	very	strong	man.	He	was
thought	 to	be	one	of	 the	 strongest	men	amongst	 five	 strong	men	 in	 the	world.
And	China	is	such	a	vast	country.	Over	each	inch	there	was	a	fight,	inch	by	inch.
Stalin	 gave	 them	 complete	 support:	 arms,	 armies,	 training	 for	 the	 Chinese	 --
because	they	share	their	boundaries;	China	and	Russia	meet	on	their	boundaries.
So	he	was	 training	Chinese	communists	 to	be	soldiers,	and	he	was	sending	all
kinds	of	arms	to	Mao	Zedong.	For	thirty	years	he	supported	him	financially	and
in	every	possible	way.
And	when	Mao	Zedong	came	to	power	and	Chiang	Kai-shek	was	thrown	out	to
his	 small	 island	 of	 Taiwan,	 which	 he	 had	 kept	 as	 his	 personal	 property,	Mao
wanted	to	be	number	five	in	the	hierarchy.	After	Stalin,	he	wanted	his	name;	that
was	 the	 clash.	 The	 Communist	 Party	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 was	 not	 willing,
because	he	had	not	contributed	anything	new,	anything	original,	to	communism.
And	in	fact,	it	was	the	Soviet	Union	who	had	supported	him	and	brought	him	to
power.
He	himself	had	not	even	been	a	success	on	his	own,	so	he	could	not	be	put	as
fifth	 in	 the	 hierarchy.	 This	 was	 the	 clash,	 a	 personal	 clash,	 which	 Karl	Marx
would	 have	 never	 thought	 --	 that	 even	 personal	 clashes,	 egos,	 will	 keep	 two
communist	 countries,	 based	 on	 the	 same	 idea,	 separate.	Not	 only	 separate	 but
inimical.
Now	China	is	moving	closer	and	closer	to	America,	because	China	is	afraid:	the
Soviet	 Union	 is	 far	 more	 powerful;	 unless	 America	 supports	 China,	 there	 is
danger.	And	America	 is	very	happy	 that	 a	great	 communist	 country	 is	 coming
closer.	 China	 is	 also	 opening	 its	 doors	 because,	who	was	 trained	 by	 Stalin,	 is
dead.
In	forty	years	in	India,	nothing	has	happened.	China	became	communist	in	1951,
four	 years	 after	 India	 became	 independent.	Within	 ten	 years,	 by	 1961,	 China
became	a	world	power.	It	was	because	of	the	training	of	Stalin	and	following	the
whole	strategy	of	Stalin	that	China	has	raised	itself	to	a	world	power.
Now	America	wants	China	 to	open	 its	 doors.	That	will	 be	 the	 end	of	Chinese
communism.	And	 the	world	press	 is	praising	Gorbachev	 too	much,	puffing	up
his	ego,	pumping	up	his	personality	into	that	of	a	big	hero.	That	is	the	greatest
danger	to	Soviet	communism.
It	is	true	that	Marx	has	this	idea	that	the	state	will	disappear,	and	I	love	the	idea
because	I	am	an	anarchist	myself.	I	don't	want	any	government	in	the	world,	but
my	not	wanting	is	not	going	to	change	anything.	Till	all	crime	disappears,	till	all
rapes	 disappear,	 the	 state	will	 be	 needed.	 So	when	Marx	 says	 that	 finally	 the
state	 will	 disappear,	 don't	 think	 that	 the	 "finally"	 is	 coming	 soon.	 It	 will	 be
finally.
It	 is	 a	 good	 idea	 --	 the	 greatest	 idea	 is	 anarchism.	And	 if	 out	 of	 communism,
anarchism	can	grow	--	which	 is	not	practical,	because	 those	who	are	 in	power
will	 not	 easily	 leave	 their	 power	 --	 and	 two	 communist	 countries,	 as	 Marx
thought,	would	dissolve	into	one...
that	 has	 not	 happened.	 Yugoslavia	 remained	 under	 Tito,	 a	 separate	 country,
because	Tito	himself	wanted	to	be	in	the	hierarchy.	Just	personal	egos,	of	which
Marx	never	thought	anything;	he	was	not	a	psychoanalyst.
And	now	again	Gorbachev	has	completely	forgotten	the	great	struggle,	the	great
bloodshed	out	of	which	communism	has	somehow	survived.	They	have	removed
Stalin's	name	from	the	hierarchy.	Now	there	are	only	three	--	Marx,	Engels	and
Lenin	 --	 and	 perhaps	 Gorbachev	 is	 thinking	 he	 will	 be	 the	 fourth.	 But	 most
probably	he	will	be	the	end	of	communism	in	the	Soviet	Union.
To	be	absolutely	frank	and	truthful,	if	he	is	not	awakened	quickly,	and	closes	the
doors	 to	all	kinds	of	enemies	which	are	entering	fast	and	quick,	he	will	be	 the
end	of	a	tremendously	beautiful	idea.	And	humanity	will	never	forgive	him.
But	he	has	now	become	absolutely	powerful.	The	president	in	the	Soviet	Union
used	to	be	nominal,	the	prime	minister	was	the	real	power.	And	behind	the	prime
minister,	the	more	real	power	was	the	secretary	general	of	the	Communist	Party
and	the	Communist	Party's	central	group,	the	Politburo.
All	 the	 states	 had	 their	 one	 representative	 in	 the	 Politburo	 --	 that	 was	 the
commanding	body	--	and	the	general	secretary	was	the	head	of	the	commanding
body.	Stalin	continued	to	be	the	general	secretary	and	the	prime	minister,	so	he
was	holding	total	power.
The	 same	Gorbachev	 has	 done.	He	 has	 changed	 the	 constitution	 of	 the	Soviet
Union	 according	 to	 America	 --	 perhaps	 he	 must	 have	 been	 feeling,	 meeting
"President"	Ronald	Reagan	 and	he	 is	 just	 a	 prime	minister...	So	now	he	 is	 the
president	of	the	Soviet	Union.
The	 prime	minister	 is	 no	 longer	 powerful;	 it	 is	 a	 nominal	 post,	 just	 a	 rubber
stamp.	 The	 president	 has	 all	 the	 power.	 And	 he	 has	 changed	 the	 whole
commanding	body	of	the	Communist	Party;	he	has	put	in	his	men.	And	he	is	also
the	general	secretary	of	the	Communist	Party.
The	third	powerful	agency	is	the	KGB.	That	is	their	central	intelligence,	which
has	 immense	 power,	more	 power	 than	 any	 other	 intelligence	 body	 around	 the
world.	He	has	changed	the	head	of	the	KGB	and	put	his	own	man	as	head	of	the
KGB.	So	 now	 everything	 is	 in	 his	 hands	 --	 president,	 general	 secretary	 of	 the
Communist	Party,	and	the	KGB	is	in	his	hands	--	his	man	is	there.	So	he	has	in
fact	 more	 power	 than	 any	 man	 on	 the	 earth.	 If	 he	 uses	 it	 rightly,	 by	 making
communism	 more	 prosperous,	 by	 making	 communism	 more	 creative,	 more
spiritual,	more	 scientific,	 he	will	 be	 a	great	 benediction	not	 only	 to	 the	Soviet
Union	but	to	the	whole	world.
But	he	can	go	wrong.	And	when	one	person	has	all	the	power	and	goes	wrong	it
is	 a	 suicidal	 phenomenon.	And	 there	 seems	 to	 be	 every	 possibility;	 he	 can	 go
either	way.
I	 would	 like	 him	 to	 understand	 clearly	 that	 we	 need	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 as	 a
communist	stronghold	in	the	world,	because	sooner	or	later	the	whole	world	has
to	be	turned	to	communism.	Communism	has	to	become	the	base,	because	it	is	a
materialist	philosophy	and	on	that	base	can	be	raised	the	temple	of	spirituality.
But	 that	 temple	 will	 not	 be	 created	 by	 orthodox	 Christians	 or	 Hare	 Krishna
people,	or	Jehovah's	Witnesses,	or	the	Ramakrishna	Mission.	These	out-of-date,
absolutely	 belonging	 to	 the	 bullock-cart	 age...	 when	 the	 bullock	 cart	 was
invented,	nobody	knows.
These	 religions	 belong	 to	 the	 bullock-cart	 age.	 They	 are	 not	 going	 to	 help
communism,	 which	 is	 a	 contemporary	 phenomenon.	 It	 needs	 not	 to	 go
backwards.	 It	 needs	 a	 future	 orientation,	 not	 a	 past	 orientation.	 That's	what	 is
possible	 from	 Gorbachev's	 opening	 the	 doors	 --	 all	 past-oriented	 people	 will
enter	into	the	country	and	destroy	it.
He	should	be	absolutely	clear:	open	the	doors,	but	open	the	doors	for	the	future-
oriented	people.	Open	the	doors	not	for	organized	religions,	not	for	missions	and
missionaries	--
they	 may	 be	 Christian	 or	 Hindu,	 it	 does	 not	 matter	 --	 open	 the	 doors	 for
individual	awakened	people	who	will	not	create	any	kind	of	organized	obstacles
for	the	growth	of	communism.
Every	religion	will	be	against	communism	--	Gorbachev	does	not	understand	it.
Hinduism	is	against	communism	--	now	what	is	a	Vivekananda	center	going	to
do	in	Russia?	Teaching	people	that	poverty	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	capitalists,
that	 your	 whole	 revolution	 is	 wrong,	 that	 you	 were	 suffering	 from	 your	 past
lives'	 karmas,	 bad	 and	 evil	 acts,	 and	 you	 have	 done	 a	 great	 injustice	 to	 the
capitalist	 people	 who	 were	 enjoying	 their	 past	 lives'	 good	 karmas,	 good	 acts.
This	is	the	Hindu	philosophy.	This	is	what	Ramakrishna	believed	in	and	this	is
what	Vivekananda	believed	in.
What	is	Christianity	going	to	say	to	them?	Don't	disturb	anything;	let	the	world
be	as	God	created	it.	No	revolution	--	God	has	not	given	the	idea	of	revolution	at
all,	in	any	of	his	scriptures.
He	 has	 written	 so	 many	 scriptures!	 He	 is	 a	 great	 scholar;	 he	 writes	 the	 four
Vedas	of	the	Hindus,	Koran	Sharif	of	the	Mohammedans,	the	Holy	Bible	of	the
Christians.	God	seems	to	be	a	great	scholar	--	but	very	contradictory,	because	all
these	scriptures	contradict	each	other.	And	these	religions	will	again	bring	God
into	 the	Soviet	Union	 --	who	has	been	 forced	out	by	 Joseph	Stalin,	 out	of	 the
gates	of	the	Soviet	Union	the	same	way	he	turned	Adam	and	Eve	out	of	the	gates
of	paradise.
The	Soviet	Union	 is	 in	a	very	vulnerable	state,	because	all	 the	old	people	who
have	seen	the	revolution,	who	have	been	participants	in	the	revolution,	are	dead.
The	new	generation	knows	nothing.
Here	is	Haridas.	He	is	one	of	my	oldest	sannyasins.	He	is	German	and	he	heard
Adolf	Hitler's	name	for	the	first	time	from	me!	Can	you	believe	it?	But	he	was
born	after	the	second	world	war.
Now	 in	Russia	nobody	 exists	who	has	 seen	 the	 revolution,	who	has	 seen	how
Stalin	established	communism	with	difficulty.
Gorbachev	is	not	aware	of	the	whole	past	and	he	is	bringing	the	same	enemies
back	in.
They	will	disrupt	 the	whole	society.	And	for	seventy	years	 the	new	generation
that	has	come	 into	existence	after	 the	 revolution	has	been	 taught:	 "There	 is	no
God,	there	is	no	hell,	there	is	no	heaven.	There	is	no	future	life,	there	is	no	past
life	 --	 this	 is	 all."	 But	 they	 are	 feeling	 a	 tremendous	 hollowness	 within
themselves	 and	 that	 is	 a	 red	 signal	 for	 danger.	 Because	 they	 are	 feeling	 a
hollowness	 --	 that	 everything	 is	 good	 outside,	 but	 inside	 there	 seems	 to	 be
nothing	 --	 these	 people	 will	 rush	 in	 and	 fill	 their	 inside	 with	 beliefs,	 with
SHRIMAD	BHAGAVADGITA,	with	the	Koran,	with	the	Bible,	with	Vedas,	and
destroy	a	great	opportunity	for	meditation.	None	of	these	people	are	meditative.
Open	the	doors	for	scientists,	for	mystics,	for	meditators,	for	poets,	for	painters,
for	 engineers,	 for	 doctors,	 for	 psychoanalysts.	 But	 don't	 open	 the	 door	 for
orthodox,	 fanatic,	 organized	 religions.	 Don't	 open	 the	 door	 for	 capitalists	 and
their	 agents.	 Otherwise	 you	 will	 spoil	 something	 so	 precious	 that	 all	 the
utopians,	all	the	people	who	have	any	vision	for	the	future,	have	been	dreaming
of	for	centuries.
In	 the	 RIGVEDA,	 the	 ancientmost	 book	 in	 the	 world,	 comes	 the	 sentence,
VASUDHAIVA	 KUTUMBAKAM	 --	 "this	 whole	 earth	 should	 become	 one
family."
Ninety	thousand	years	ago	some	visionary,	some	mystic,	was	thinking	in	terms
of	 this	 whole	 earth	 turning	 into	 one	 family.	 That	 was	 the	 old	 language	 for
communism:	this	whole	world	becomes	one	commune.
Rather	 than	 looking	 at	 possibilities	 for	 how	 to	 turn	 the	 whole	 world	 into
communes,	 which	 will	 be	 supportive	 to	 all	 communist	 revolutions...	 and	 as	 I
said,	I	can	bring	to	the	Soviet	Union	the	second	revolution.	The	first	revolution
was	 material;	 the	 second	 revolution	 will	 be	 spiritual.	 Only	 then	 will	 Soviet
citizens	 be	 able	 to	 cope	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 idiots.	 Right	 now	 these	 idiots	 will
destroy	 their	 innocence.	Then	they	will	 turn	 them	towards	being	exactly	as	 the
whole	world	is.
A	great	country	--	one	of	the	biggest	countries	in	the	world;	it	is	one	sixth	of	the
whole	 earth	 --	 and	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 tremendous	 loss	 if	Gorbachev	 does	 not
understand	the	 implications.	Communism	has	 to	be	saved	and	communism	has
to	be	 transformed	 into	a	great	 spiritual	 revolution.	He	can	do	 it;	he	has	all	 the
power.	And	only	when	the	whole	of	humanity	is	meditative	is	the	state	of	no	use.
When	the	whole	of	humanity	has	become	one	family	there	is	no	need	of	anybody
to	dictate.	When	the	whole	of	humanity	has	become	intelligent,	when	the	whole
of	humanity	has	dropped	all	miseries	and	is	immensely	blissful,	the	state	has	no
function.
The	 powerful	 will	 feel	 absolutely	 out-of-date,	 old	 hat.	 They	 will	 disappear
because	their	function	is	no	more.
When	 no	 criminal	 turns	 up	 in	 the	 courts,	 what	 is	 the	 function	 of	 the	 courts?
When	there	is	no	prostitution	--	and	that	is	possible	only	if	there	is	no	marriage	--
what	is	the	need	of	a	registrar	for	marriage,	and	licenses	for	prostitutes?
Things	 are	 very	 clear	 if	 you	 have	 the	 clarity	 that	 comes	 only	 when	 you	 go
beyond	the	mind.	The	higher	you	go	the	more	you	have	a	bird's-eye	view	of	the
whole	situation	of	humanity.
Gorbachev	himself,	 before	 he	 does	 any	 act	 against	 communism,	 needs	 a	 great
training	in	meditation.	And	after	that,	whatever	he	will	do	will	be	right.	I	can	see
the	man	is	certainly	intelligent	and	has	good	intentions	for	humanity,	is	a	peace-
loving	person,	but	he	has	no	depth	of	meditation.	These	are	all	superficial	mind
values,	which	don't	go	deep	enough.
They	are	only	skin	deep	--	scratch	just	a	little	and	all	those	values	disappear.
Meditation	 brings	 transformation	 from	 the	 inside.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 imposition	 of
morality	and	commandments	from	outside.	Anything	that	comes	from	outside	is
worthless	--
morality,	 religion,	 spirituality,	whatever	 you	 call	 it.	Only	 that	which	 blossoms
within	you	like	a	lotus	has	ultimate	value.	Out	of	that	arising	of	consciousness,
you	cannot	do	evil.
Your	 every	 action	will	 be	 spontaneous;	 it	will	 come	 from	your	 deepest	 being,
and	the	deepest	being	cannot	do	any	harm.
Then	the	state	disappears.	Then	the	world	needs	no	hierarchy,	no	bureaucracy,	no
presidents,	no	prime	ministers,	no	KGB,	no	CIA.
Every	individual	has	to	contribute	to	that	final	utopia	--	and	I	am	preparing	you
for	that	final	stage	when	the	state	is	useless,	when	the	police	are	useless,	when
armaments	 are	 useless,	 when	 armies	 are	 just	 stupid,	 when	 we	 can	 all	 work
together,	create	together,	love	together,	rejoice	together.
This	 very	 body	 the	 buddha	 --	 this	 very	 earth	 the	 lotus	 paradise.	 But	 it	 will
happen	only	-
-	 not	 according	 to	Marx	 but	 according	 to	me	 --	 it	will	 happen	 only	when	 the
whole	world	 is	 full	 of	 buddhas.	 There	 is	 no	 other	way.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 economic
revolution;	 neither	 is	 it	 a	 social	 revolution.	 It	 is	 a	 spiritual	 revolution,	 an
individual-to-individual	rebellion.
Every	heart	starts	blossoming.
When	millions	of	hearts	start	blossoming	it	becomes	a	chain	reaction.	Just	 like
one	candle	aflame	can	make	thousands	of	candles	aflame	--	just	bring	the	other
candle	 close	 enough	and	 suddenly	 the	 flame	 jumps	 to	 the	unlit	 candle.	The	 lit
candle	loses	nothing	and	the	unlit	candle	gains	everything.	The	whole	life	is	in
the	flame.
This	I	call	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind.
Unless	 the	 whole	 world	 goes	 through	 the	 Zen	 Fire	 and	 becomes	 pure	 gold,
unless	 the	 whole	 world	 becomes	 a	 Zen	 Wind	 passing	 through	 every	 heart,
connecting	every	heart	to	the	universal	heartbeat	--	this	utopia	is	not	possible.
But	 I	 hope,	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain,	 that	 every	 man's	 destiny	 is	 to	 become	 a
buddha.	So	whether	 it	happens	 today	or	 tomorrow	or	day	after	 tomorrow	does
not	 matter.	 There	 are	 only	 seven	 days	 in	 the	 week.	 It	 will	 happen	 Monday,
Tuesday,	Wednesday,	maybe	Thursday,	Friday,	Saturday,	Sunday	--	on	some	day,
it	 is	 going	 to	 happen,	 I	 am	 absolutely	 certain.	 Because	 I	 understand	 human
nature.	 It	 cannot	 be	 satisfied	 with	 this	miserable	 world.	 It	 cannot	 be	 satisfied
with	 this	 ugly	 and	 violent	 world.	 It	 can	 only	 be	 satisfied	 when	 it	 finds	 its
ultimate	source	of	blissfulness,	eternal	source	of	life.
And	that	is	what	meditation	is	a	scientific	methodology	for.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
THE	 MONK,	 SOMPU,	 WAS	 ONCE	 WASHING	 A	 BUDDHA	 STATUE.
YAKUSAN
CAME	AND	ASKED	HIM,	 "NOW	YOU	ARE	WASHING	THIS,	BUT	CAN
YOU
WASH	THAT?"
What	 does	 Yakusan	mean?	 The	monk	 is	 washing	 the	 statue	 of	 the	 buddha	 --
Yakusan	calls	 the	statue	this	and	he	calls	 the	living	buddha	that.	"You	are	only
washing	a	stone	statue	--	this	is	okay,	but	can	you	wash	that,	the	living	buddha
which	is	within	you?"
THE	 MONK,	 SOMPU	 WAS	 ONCE	 WASHING	 A	 BUDDHA	 STATUE.
YAKUSAN
CAME	AND	ASKED	HIM,	 "NOW	YOU	ARE	WASHING	THIS,	BUT	CAN
YOU
WASH	THAT?"	He	 is	 indicating	 towards	 the	 interiormost	 hidden	 buddha,	 the
living	buddha:	"Can	you	wash	that?"
I	call	that	washing	"meditation."
People	condemn	me	around	 the	world	 that	 I	am	washing	people's	brains.	 I	am
washing	something	deeper	--	brains	I	don't	care	about	at	all.	I	am	throwing	the
brains	out	of	the	door!	I	am	washing	the	buddha	inside	who	has	been	covered	in
dust	for	centuries.	A	dry-cleaning	is	needed,	and	I	am	doing	the	dry-cleaning.	So
when	anybody	says	to	you	--
and	 there	 are	 millions	 of	 people	 around	 who	 will	 say	 it	 --	 that	 I	 am	 doing
brainwashing,	 tell	 him,	 "Our	master	 does	 not	 do	 ordinary	 things.	Certainly	 he
does	a	dry-washing,	but	 that	 is	not	of	 the	mind.	He	does	a	dry-cleaning	of	 the
ancient	 buddha,	 the	 eternal	 buddha	who	 is	 covered	with	 dust	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
garbage."	Don't	feel	offended.	Rather,	turn	the	question	against	them.
There	is	now	a	new	profession	arising	in	the	West	of	deprogrammers.	And	many
of	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 been	 forced...	 just	 now	 one	 sannyasin	 is	 back	 from
Canada.	The	parents	had	called	her	with	great	love,	saying,	"Come	here	and	visit
because	we	 have	 not	 seen	 you	 for	 so	 long."	And	when	 the	 sannyasin	 reached
there,	it	was	a	totally	different	matter.
They	had	two	deprogrammers	arranged	and	they	started	talking	against	me	and
telling	her	that	I	have	brainwashed	her.	"You	are	living	in	a	trance,	in	hypnosis,
and	 we	 are	 here	 to	 take	 you	 out	 of	 your	 trance."	 But	 the	 reality	 is,	 they	 are
brainwashing	you!
I	 don't	 wash	 such	 dirty	 things.	 Only	 Christians	 do	 such	 dirty	 things:	 they	 are
brainwashing	you	and	forcing	you	back	again	into	the	old	program.
They	call	themselves	"deprogrammers."	That	is	a	wrong	word	they	are	using	for
themselves;	they	are	REprogrammers.	What	has	been	thrown	out	by	meditation,
they	are	forcing	back	into	your	head.
You	will	 be	 facing	 this,	many	 of	 you,	when	 you	 go	 back	 home.	 Parents	 have
been	known	even	to	abduct	their	children	--	who	are	young	people,	adults,	and
keep	 them	 physically	 imprisoned	 in	 houses	 with	 deprogrammers	 who
continuously	harass	 them.	And	 there	 is	 a	 certain	 stage	when	you	become	very
weak.	If	you	are	not	allowed	to	sleep	for	three	days,	on	the	fourth	day	you	will
become	 very	 vulnerable.	 If	 somebody	 says:	 "God	 is,"	 you	 don't	 have	 enough
strength	to	say	no.	Perhaps	in	this	weakness...	God	is	born	out	of	weakness,	out
of	fear,	out	of	dread,	and	they	have	created	all	the	dread	and	fear	and	weakness
and	now	they	say,	"God	is.	If	you	pray,	everything	will	be	alright."
These	are	 reprogrammers.	As	 far	as	 I	 am	concerned	 I	have	no	 interest	 in	your
mind	at	all,	or	in	your	brain.	My	concern	is	far	more	ultimate.	It	 is	beyond	the
mind.	My	function	is	to	clean	the	space	of	no-mind.
Those	 deprogrammers	 or	 reprogrammers	 have	 not	 even	 heard	 about	 the	 no-
mind.	 They	 are	 ordinary	 psychoanalysts	 turned	 into	 deprogrammers.	 But	 they
can	do	harm	if	you	 listen	 to	 them,	so	I	have	 to	 tell	you	because	I	 received	 the
letter	from	the	Canadian	sannyasin.	She	said,	"I	have	been	treated	very	badly.	I
am	still	shaking.	All	the	old	stuff	that	has	been	dropped	they	have	again	forced
into	the	mind."
So	 if	 you	 come	 across	 any	 deprogrammer,	 remember	 this.	 Rather	 than	 them
deprogramming	you,	you	should	deprogram	them!	Never	answer	their	questions.
Whenever	they	ask	you,	answer	with	another	question.	If	they	ask	you,	"Is	there
God?"	--
you	 ask	 them,	 "Have	 you	 any	 proof?	 Give	 me	 the	 proof.	 I	 want	 absolute
evidence	of	God.
And	if	you	cannot	prove	his	existence,	don't	speak	nonsense.	Have	you	been	to
hell?
Then	how	are	you	back?	--	because	from	the	Christian	hell	nobody	comes	back,
it	 is	eternal.	Do	you	know	anything	about	hell?"	If	 they	say	no	 then	ask	 them:
"Do	you	know	anything	about	heaven?	Have	you	seen	Socrates	in	heaven?	Have
you	seen	Gautam	Buddha	in	heaven?	--	because	these	people	did	not	believe	in
God."
Have	I	told	you	the	story	of	Edmund	Burke?	He	had	a	great	friendship	with	the
archbishop	 of	 England.	 He	 was	 a	 great	 orator,	 Edmund	 Burke,	 and	 the
archbishop	 used	 to	 come	 to	 listen	 to	 his	 lectures.	 They	were	 delicious,	 just	 a
deep	nourishment,	but	the	archbishop	was	surprised	that	although	every	Sunday
he	gave	a	sermon,	Edmund	Burke	had	never	come.	At	least	for	courtesy's	sake
he	should	have	come	one	time.
Finally,	 seeing	 that	he	was	not	going	 to	 come,	 the	 archbishop	 invited	him.	He
said,	"I	come	to	all	your	lectures,	whenever	I	know	that	you	are	going	to	deliver
a	lecture.	This	Sunday	I	am	preparing	specially	for	you;	you	have	to	come	to	the
church."
Edmund	Burke	said,	"You	should	have	asked	before.	I	will	be	coming."
He	went....
The	 archbishop	 of	England	 is	 the	 highest	 authority	 of	 the	Church	 of	England,
equivalent	 to	 the	 pope.	He	 had	 prepared	with	 great	 effort;	 otherwise	Christian
preachers	don't	prepare.	They	have	four	or	five	ready-made	sermons.
I	used	to	know	a	Christian	monk.	He	became	very	friendly	to	me.	I	asked	him,
"How	many	sermons	do	you	have?"
He	said,	"How	did	you	come	to	know...?"	He	said,	"I	have	three	sermons.	One
for	ten	minutes,	one	for	 twenty	minutes,	one	for	forty	minutes,	as	the	occasion
demands.	 And	 I	 never	 stay	 in	 a	 city	 more	 than	 three	 days,	 so	 I	 am	 always
original!"
But	 Edmund	Burke	was	 coming	 so	 the	 archbishop	 prepared	with	 great	 effort,
consulted	 dictionaries	 and	 encyclopedias	 and	 theological	 books	 and	 biblical
research,	and	he	made	 it	 really	a	very	scholarly	sermon.	But	he	was	surprised.
He	was	watching	--	Edmund	Burke	was	sitting	just	in	front	of	him	--	and	there
was	 no	 sign	whether	 he	was	 appreciating	 it	 or	 not.	 He	was	 sitting	 just	 like	 a
statue.
When	the	sermon	was	over,	they	walked	out	together.	The	archbishop	could	not
gather	courage	 to	ask	him,	 "How	was	 it?"	But	 finally	he	managed.	As	he	was
entering	 his	 car	 he	 asked	 Edmund	Burke,	 "One	 thing	 at	 least	 you	 should	 say,
whether	you	liked	it	or	not."
He	 said,	 "That	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 The	 point	 is,	 you	were	 saying	 that	 those	who
believe	in	Jesus	Christ,	God,	and	the	Holy	Ghost,	and	those	who	follow	all	the
Christian	 virtues	 and	 don't	 commit	 sins,	will	 go	 to	 heaven.	Do	 you	 remember
saying	this?"
The	archbishop	said,	"But	perfectly	--	I	have	said	exactly	this."
"Do	you	see	any	contradiction	in	it?"
The	archbishop	said:	"I	don't	see	any	contradiction	in	it."
Edmund	Burke	said,	"I	see	 the	contradiction	and	I	want	you	to	answer.	This	 is
my	 question:	 If	 a	man	 believes	 in	 Jesus	 and	 his	 virgin	 birth,	 the	Holy	Ghost,
God,	 all	 the	miracles,	 resurrection,	 but	 does	 not	 do	what	 you	 call	 `virtue'	 and
commits	sins,	what	will	happen?
"Secondly:	 The	 person	 who	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 God,	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 the
Holy	 Ghost,	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 Jesus	 Christ,	 but	 follows	 all	 the	 virtues	 and
commits	no	sin	--	what	will	happen?"
The	archbishop	was	at	a	loss,	completely	at	a	loss.	The	question	was	immensely
important.	He	said,	"You	will	have	to	give	me	at	least	seven	days'	time	to	figure
it	out."
Edmund	Burke	said,	"I	will	come	again	next	Sunday;	you	prepare."
But	for	seven	days,	day	and	night,	the	archbishop	could	not	sleep.	Howsoever	he
tried	it	was	not	fitting.	If	he	says	that	a	person	who	commits	sins	and	does	not
follow	the	virtues,	but	believes	in	Jesus	Christ,	the	Holy	Ghost	and	God,	goes	to
paradise,	it	does	not	look	right.	The	person	is	a	sinner!
If	he	says	that	a	person	who	follows	the	virtues	and	does	not	commit	any	sin,	but
does	not	believe	in	God	or	Jesus	Christ	or	the	Holy	Ghost,	goes	to	paradise,	that
means	 the	belief	 in	God,	 the	Holy	Ghost	 and	 Jesus,	 is	 absolute	nonsense.	You
can	go	directly	--	why	unnecessarily	have	this	hypothesis?	So	he	was	caught,	in
what	 is	called	 in	 logic,	on	 the	horns.	Both	 the	sides	 --	 if	you	go	 this	 side,	 this
horn;	if	you	go	that	side,	that	horn.	This	is	called	"the	horns	of	a	dilemma."
Seven	days	passed,	but	no	possibility	of	any	answer.	He	went	early	to	the	church
to	pray	to	Jesus	before	the	gathering	came	in	and	Edmund	Burke	appeared.	But
he	had	not	slept	for	seven	days,	so	while	he	was	praying	he	fell	asleep.	And	he
saw	in	a	dream...	because	for	seven	days	that	was	his	only	thought,	how	to	solve
it.	He	 saw	 in	 the	 dream	 that	 a	 train	 is	 running	 fast	 and	 he	 is	 in	 the	 train.	He
inquired,	"Where	is	this	train	going?"
They	said,	"It	is	going	to	heaven."
He	said,	"This	is	good!"	He	thought	inside,	that	"This	is	good.	I	will	be	able	to
see	 for	 myself.	 Because	 Buddha	 never	 believed	 in	 God,	 never	 believed	 in
anything.	 Socrates	 never	 believed	 in	 God,	 never	 believed	 in	 heaven,	 never
believed	in	hell.	If	I	find	these	people	in	paradise,	the	answer	is	that	whether	you
believe	 in	 God	 or	 not,	 that	 is	 not	 the	 issue.	 If	 I	 do	 not	 find	 these	 people	 in
heaven,	that	means	that	even	if	you	follow	the	virtues	and	you	don't	commit	sins,
still	you	will	go	to	hell."
But	if	he	finds	these	people	in	heaven,	that	means	believing	in	God	or	Jesus	does
not	matter;	all	that	you	have	to	do	is	to	be	virtuous	and	not	to	commit	sins.	He
was	immensely	happy.
But	as	the	train	stopped	at	the	station	in	paradise,	he	could	not	believe	his	eyes.
It	looked	so	dull	and	dismal,	far	more	dismal	than	England,	and	he	saw	all	kinds
of	saints,	so	ugly	and	shrunken,	just	skeletons	moving	here	and	there	around	the
station.	 Even	 the	 signboard	 on	 the	 station	 which	 said	 `Paradise'	 had	 faded
millions	 of	 years	 before.	You	 had	 to	 concentrate	 very	much	 on	 the	 board	 and
only	then	you	could	figure	out,	yes	it	says	Paradise.
He	 asked	 the	 stationmaster,	 "Have	 you	 heard	 anything	 of	 Socrates,	 Gautam
Buddha,	Lao	Tzu,	Bodhidharma?	Are	they	here?"
The	 stationmaster	 said,	 "Never	 heard.	 Nobody	 with	 those	 names	 has	 ever
appeared	here.
But	you	can	go	around,	have	a	look;	there	are	only	a	few	saints	playing	on	their
harps,	Àlleluia,	Alleluia'	--	no	other	work.	Everybody	is	dull."
So	 he	 went	 around...	 no	 work,	 because	 in	 paradise	 you	 don't	 need	 any	 food.
Everybody	was	so	sad,	because	in	paradise	you	cannot	have	any	entertainment.
No	parties	or	going	anywhere	 --	no	 restaurants,	not	even	a	Zorba	 the	Buddha!
Everything	was	so	dull	and	dirty,	stinking.
He	rushed	back	to	the	station	and	he	said,	"Is	there	any	train	direct	to	hell	from
here?"
The	stationmaster	said,	"It	is	going	just	now,	you	get	in."
So	he	went	 to	hell	 and	he	was	 surprised.	As	 the	 train	 entered	hell...	 such	 lush
greenery,	such	beautiful	roses,	ponds	with	flowers	and	swans.	The	whole	station
looked	as	if	it	had	been	freshly	painted.
He	said,	"This	is	strange!	This	should	be	paradise,	but	right	on	top	of	the	station
in	neon	lights	it	is	written	--	Hell."	He	got	down,	he	met	the	stationmaster,	a	very
nice	and	beautiful	fellow	who	was	just	going	to	the	golf	course.
The	archbishop	said,	"Golf?	In	hell?"
He	 said,	 "Since	 these	 people	 have	 come	 here	 --	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 Lao	 Tzu,
Socrates,	Pythagoras,	Heraclitus,	Bodhidharma	--	since	these	people	have	come
here	 they	have	changed	 the	whole	 scene.	 It	 used	 to	be	very	dirty,	but	now	we
have	the	best	golf	course	in	the	whole	world,	the	best	roses,	the	best	food.	Just
go!	See,	there	in	the	field,	Socrates	is	sowing	seeds."
He	saw	Socrates,	who	looked	so	beautiful,	so	healthy,	so	young,	as	he	had	never
been	on	earth.	He	asked	about	Gautam	Buddha.
Socrates	 said,	 "Look	under	 that	 tree.	He	 is	meditating.	But	 since	he	has	come,
the	whole	air	is	fragrant	with	his	meditations.	You	will	find	all	the	great	people
here."
"But,"	he	said,	"what	about	sinners?"
The	 stationmaster	 said,	 "We	 don't	 know	 any	 sinners.	 Since	 these	 people	 have
come,	they	have	transformed	all	sinners	into	sannyasins.	Hell	is	no	more	the	old
place.	You	don't	know	about	me	--	I	used	to	be	the	devil!	Now	they	have	posted
me	as	the	head	stationmaster.	And	so	many	people	are	coming	that	we	don't	have
one	 station,	 we	 have	 twelve	 stations.	 All	 around	 hell,	 beautiful	 stations	 --
gardens,	lawns,	beautiful	houses...
and	since	scientists	started	coming	we	have	electricity,	ecology	programs.	They
don't	allow	me	to	cut	the	trees	to	create	hellfire	--	they	have	air-conditioned	the
whole	of	hell!"
At	 that	moment,	 from	shock,	he	woke	up.	He	said,	"My	God!	What	a	dream!"
He	saw	that	people	had	started	coming,	and	the	first	to	enter	was	Edmund	Burke.
He	was	an	honest	man,	the	archbishop.	He	said,	"I	don't	know	the	answer,	but	I
have	seen	this	dream.	I	will	relate	the	dream	and	you	can	conclude	whatever	you
want."
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 belief	 in	 any	God,	 in	 any	 Jesus,	 in	 any	Krishna,	 in	 any
Rama.	It	is	a	question	of	being	a	meditative	person,	so	all	that	you	do	is	virtuous.
Out	of	meditation	only	--	flowers	of	virtue,	eternal	flowers	of	good,	of	love,	of
laughter.
So	when	Yakusan	said	to	the	monk,	"Now	you	are	washing	this	stone	statue,	but
can	 you	wash	 that?"	 he	must	 have	 pointed	 to	 the	 heart,	 the	 very	 being	 of	 the
monk.
SOMPU	REPLIED,	"PLEASE	GET	THAT	AND	BRING	IT	TO	ME."
He	 said,	 "I	 don't	 know	who	 you	 are	 indicating	within	me;	 just	 please	 bring	 it
out."
...	When	I	was	looking	at	"Sompu,"	I	 thought	of	"shampoo,"	because	shampoo
seems	to	be	the	right	thing	for	washing.	So	I	will	call	him	"Shampoo."
Shampoo	replied,	"PLEASE	GET	THAT	AND	BRING	IT	TO	ME.	 I	will	give
him	a	good	washing."
THE	MASTER	DID	NOT	SAY	ANYTHING.
Because	 that	which	 is	hidden	within	you...	only	you	can	go	 there.	 It	cannot	be
brought	to	you.	You	are	asking	an	absurd	question;	hence	the	silence.	The	master
must	have	thought,	"The	man	is	not	yet	ready."
ON	ANOTHER	OCCASION,	WHEN	YAKUSAN	WAS	SITTING	DOWN,	A
MONK
CAME	UP	 TO	HIM	AND	 SAID,	 "OSHO,	YOU	ARE	 SITTING	 SILENTLY.
WHAT
ARE	YOU	THINKING?"
That's	 how	 ordinary	 people	will	 ask.	 If	 you	 are	 sitting	 silently,	 they	will	 ask,
"What	are	you	thinking?"	because	people	do	that	continuously.	"Perhaps	there	is
some	great	problem	that	you	are	solving?	Some	anxiety	that	you	are	figuring	out
how	to	deal	with?
What	are	you	thinking?"
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"I	AM	THINKING	THE	UNTHINKABLE."
He	is	saying,	"I	am	not	thinking.	I	am	just	being,	and	facing	the	unthinkable.	You
cannot	think	it;	it	is	not	a	thought,	it	is	not	a	thing.	It	is	an	experience,	a	taste."
You	 taste	 something	 sweet.	What	 can	 you	 say	 about	 sweetness?	You	will	 say,
"Sweetness	is	sweetness."	But	 that	 is	not	 the	answer.	All	you	can	do	is	 to	give
the	other	person	a	little	sweet	to	taste,	and	tell	him,	"This	is	it."
Experiences,	especially	deeper	experiences,	are	far	beyond	language,	far	beyond
thought,	 far	 beyond	mind.	 Thinking	 the	 unthinkable	 is	 not	 thinking	 at	 all,	 but
facing	the	clarity	of	space	within	you.
THE	MONK	SAID,	"HOW	DO	YOU	THINK	THE	UNTHINKABLE?"
He	could	not	understand.	He	 thought,	 "Perhaps	 there	 is	 something	unthinkable
that	he	is	thinking.	If	it	is	unthinkable,	how	can	you	think	it?"	--	HOW	DO	YOU
THINK	THE
UNTHINKABLE?
YAKUSAN	REPLIED,	"NON-THINKING."
That	 is	 the	way	 to	 think	 the	 unthinkable:	 stop	 thinking.	 Just	 be	 in	 a	 space	 of
meditation,	 utterly	 silent.	 Not	 even	 a	 single	 thought	 moving	 on	 the	 screen	 of
your	mind	--	just	the	pure	screen,	and	suddenly	you	are	able	to	see	the	eternal,
the	 ultimate,	 the	 very	 beyond	 which	 never	 even	 comes	 close	 to	 language	 or
thought.
WHEN	YAKUSAN	WAS	ABOUT	TO	DIE,	HE	YELLED	OUT,	"THE	HALL
IS
FALLING	DOWN!	THE	HALL	IS	FALLING	DOWN!"
THE	MONKS	 BROUGHT	VARIOUS	 THINGS	AND	 BEGAN	 TO	 PROP	 IT
UP.
YAKUSAN	THREW	UP	HIS	HANDS	AND	SAID,	"NO	ONE	OF	YOU
UNDERSTOOD	WHAT	I	MEANT!"
He	was	 not	 talking	 about	 the	 hall,	 he	was	 talking	 about	 himself	 --	 "My	body,
where	I	used	to	live	for	so	many	years,	is	falling	all	apart.	The	moment	for	my
departure	has	come."
But	Zen	always	uses	symbols,	and	those	monks	were	just	like	ordinary	people.
They	could	not	see	that	it	is	not	that	the	hall	is	falling...	But	because	the	master	is
saying	 the	hall	 is	 falling,	 perhaps	he	 is	 predicting	 some	 future	 catastrophe.	So
they	started	putting	up	props	to	keep	the	hall	together.
And	poor	Yakusan	threw	up	his	hands	in	utter	frustration	--	"NO	ONE	OF	YOU
UNDERSTOOD	WHAT	I	MEANT!	--	I	am	falling	down.	The	body	which	used
to	 be	my	 house	 is	 falling	 apart.	 Soon	 I	will	 be	 on	 the	wings	moving	 into	 the
eternal	sky."	And	saying	this,	he	died.	That	was	his	last	statement:	"NO	ONE	OF
YOU	UNDERSTOOD
WHAT	I	MEANT."
It	 is	very	 rare	 that	a	master	 is	understood;	most	probably	he	 is	misunderstood.
Only	very	few	people	have	such	courage	and	such	sharpening	of	their	innermost
space	that	they	can	understand	the	master.
To	understand	the	master	is	to	understand	the	whole	mystery	of	existence.
After	attending	a	funeral,	Ikkyu	wrote:
WHEN	WE	COME	AND	SEE
HERE	ALSO
IS	THE	BURNING	HOUSE	--
WHY	DO	PEOPLE	SAY
"GOOD	TO	LIVE	IN"?
He	is	saying,	"At	a	funeral	a	body	is	burning,	and	people	are	standing	around	the
funeral	pyre,	but	nobody	is	aware	that	it	is	not	just	this	body	that	is	burning.	It	is
not	 an	 exception,	 it	 is	 the	 rule.	 Your	 body	 is	 also	 going	 to	 burn	 on	 a	 funeral
pyre."
This	 house	 is	 not	 eternal.	This	 house	made	 of	matter	 is	 going	 to	 collapse	 any
moment.
Then	why	do	people	say,	"GOOD	TO	LIVE	IN	--	to	live	in	this	body	is	good"?
Why	do	people	say	this,	when	the	body	is	nothing	but	a	carriage	that	takes	you
from	the	cradle	towards	the	grave?
To	live	in	the	body	is	not	good.	To	be	in	the	body	but	be	as	a	witness,	to	know
that	"It	is	not	me"	--	that	is	a	great	experience.	You	are	discarding	the	body	even
while	you	are	alive;	you	are	discarding	 the	mind	even	while	you	are	alive.	So
when	death	comes	it	cannot	take	anything	from	you,	you	have	discarded	all	that
it	can	take	and	you	have	saved	the	eternal,	which	it	cannot	touch.
It	 is	 absolutely	 essential	 for	 every	 intelligent	 person:	 before	 death	 comes	 he
should	become	completely	clear	that	he	is	not	the	body	and	he	is	not	the	mind;
he	is	only	a	pure	consciousness.
Question	3
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
THERE	 WAS	 NO	 PLACE	 FOR	 ANY	 GOD	 IN	 THE	 WORK	 OF	 THE
RUSSIAN
MYSTIC,	GEORGE	GURDJIEFF,	YET	HE	DID	NOT	ATTRACT	A	LARGE
NUMBER	 OF	 DISCIPLES	 IN	 WESTERN	 EUROPE	 OR	 IN	 HIS	 HOME
COUNTRY.
WAS	 THIS	 MORE	 A	 REFLECTION	 OF	 HIS	 ABILITIES	 AS	 A
COMMUNICATOR
OR	WERE	 THE	 RUSSIAN	 PEOPLE	 SIMPLY	 NOT	 READY	 TO	 RECEIVE
HIM?
In	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 revolution,	 communism	 was	 programming	 people	 for
atheism.
Communism	as	propagated	by	Marx	and	Engels	is	atheist,	and	to	be	an	atheist	is
to	be	again	a	believer.	The	only	difference	between	the	theist	and	the	atheist	is,
the	 theist	 is	a	positive	believer	 --	he	believes	 that	God	 is.	The	atheist	 is	also	a
believer	--	his	belief	is	that	God	is	not.
In	the	beginning	of	the	revolution	--	George	Gurdjieff	was	in	Russia	at	the	time
when	the	revolution	began	--	he	had	to	escape	from	Russia;	otherwise	he	would
have	been	killed	by	the	atheist	revolutionaries.
Now	it	is	a	different	matter.	The	reason	why	it	is	different	after	seventy	years	is
because	a	negative	belief	cannot	be	a	nourishment	to	your	inner	being.	One	can
go	on	deceiving	oneself	with	a	positive	belief	 for	centuries,	because	a	positive
belief	fills	a	gap.	A	negative	belief	does	not	fill	any	gap.
In	 seventy	years'	 time,	 the	Russian	people	have	become	aware	of	 an	 immense
hollowness	 within	 them.	 The	 negative	 belief	 is	 not	 of	 any	 help.	 The	 positive
belief	 at	 least	 gives	 you	 a	 false	 religion	 --	 a	 prayer,	 a	 god,	 a	 church,	 a	 bible,
something	 to	 fill	 in	 the	gap.	All	 junk!	 --	but	 still	you	can	 fill	your	hollowness
with	the	junk.
What	do	you	think	you	go	on	keeping	in	your	refrigerators?	All	kinds	of	junk	--
chocolate,	ice	cream,	and	you	go	on	stuffing....
Have	you	ever	watched?	Whenever	a	man	or	a	woman	are	in	love,	they	don't	eat
much.
What	happens?	Why	don't	they	eat	much?	Because	love	is	such	a	nourishment,
who	cares	about	chocolate	and	chewing	gum	and	ice	cream?	But	once	they	get
married,	the	woman	starts	getting	bigger	and	bigger	and	bigger.	What	happened?
Now	there	is	no	more	love;	now	she	is	replacing	love	with	ice	cream.
Why	 do	 husbands	 bring	 ice	 cream	 when	 they	 come	 home?	 Love	 is	 no	 more
there;	 perhaps	 ice	 cream	 will	 cool	 down	 the	 atmosphere!	 And	 whenever	 a
husband	 brings	 ice	 cream	 the	 wife	 suspects:	 "He	 must	 have	 committed
something	that	he	is	trying	to	cover	up."
So	it	is	very	difficult.	If	you	don't	bring	ice	cream,	the	atmosphere	is	very	hot.	If
you	bring	ice	cream,	 the	wife	 looks	out	of	 the	corner	of	her	eye,	 looks	at	your
coat	--	any	hair	from	some	woman?
Mulla	Nasruddin	was	 caught	 again	 and	 again	with	 some	woman's	 hair	 on	 his
coat.	He	asked	a	friend	what	to	do.	The	friend	said,	"It	is	simple.	Before	entering
the	house,	you	just	clean	your	coat.	Keep	a	brush	with	yourself."
He	said,	"That's	a	good	idea!	It	never	occurred	to	me	--	so	simple!"	So	one	day
he	found	a	brush.	Outside	the	house	he	completely	cleaned	his	coat,	and	suit,	and
shirt,	and	entered	the	house.
The	wife	looked	at	his	coat,	at	his	pants,	and	simply	started	beating	her	head	and
crying	and	screaming!	He	said,	"What	has	happened?	There	is	no	hair	at	all!"
She	said,	"That's	why	I	am	crying.	It	seems	you	have	started	loving	some	bald
woman!"
It	is	difficult	any	way.	Whichever	way	you	try,	it	does	not	work.
Today	 the	 situation	 is	 totally	different	 than	 it	was	 seventy	years	before.	Today
the	 Russian	 people	 feel	 immense	 emptiness.	 You	 cannot	 live	 on	 negatives.
Positive	 things	 may	 not	 be	 authentic,	 but	 at	 least	 they	 help	 you	 to	 fill	 the
hollowness.	 Hence	 I	 say	 theism	 is	 more	 dangerous	 than	 atheism,	 because	 the
atheist	sooner	or	later	has	to	realize	that	"It	is	not	helping	me	in	any	way.	I	am
utterly	empty."
The	 theist	may	 be	 able	 to	 deceive	 himself	 for	 lives	 together,	 because	 he	 feels
full.	He	knows	the	prayer,	he	knows	the	scripture,	he	knows	God	is	taking	care.
But	the	atheist	sooner	or	later	is	bound	to	be	aware	that	atheism	is	not	fulfilling,
it	is	negative.	No	God,	no	heaven,	no	scripture,	nothing.	You	have	to	encounter
your	hollowness.
So	 I	 say	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 an	 atheist	 than	 to	 be	 a	 theist.	 But	 still	 better	 is	 the
agnostic,	who	does	not	believe	in	God,	who	does	not	disbelieve	in	God,	who	is
simply	open	and	ready	to	find	out	what	is	the	truth	--	in	his	own	consciousness,
because	that	is	the	closest	thing	which	is	alive.
Look	deep	 into	your	 throbbing	 life	and	you	will	 find	 the	quality	of	 the	divine.
You	will	not	find	a	God	but	you	will	find	a	godliness,	a	truth,	an	awakening,	a
buddha.
Gurdjieff	could	not	attract	many	disciples	in	the	West.	The	reason	was,	he	was
not	 an	 articulate	 person.	He	knew	only	 the	Caucasian	 language.	He	was	born,
strangely,	in	the	same	place	where	Joseph	Stalin	was	born.	They	both	learned	in
the	 same	 seminary,	 they	were	 colleagues	when	 they	were	 small	 children.	And
both	had	the	same	quality	of	steel.
Joseph	Stalin	proved	his	steel,	and	in	the	same	way	but	in	a	different	direction,
George	Gurdjieff	 also	proved	his	 steel.	He	was	perhaps	 the	 strongest	man	you
can	 imagine,	 stronger	 than	 Stalin,	 because	Gurdjieff	 had	 no	 power;	 his	 power
was	inner.	You	could	give	him	as	much	alcohol	as	possible,	and	you	could	not
make	 him	 drunk	 --	 that	was	 his	 power	 --	 no	 drug	 had	 any	 effect	 on	 him,	 his
witnessing	was	so	great.	He	would	go	on	moving	behind	the	alcohol,	the	alcohol
would	not	be	able	to	distract	his	witnessing.
But	he	knew	only	his	mother	tongue,	the	Caucasian	language.	He	learned	a	little
bit	of	English	but	it	was	very	broken,	he	could	not	make	a	complete	sentence.	So
language	was	a	barrier,	and	his	methods	were	a	barrier.
His	methods	he	learned	because	his	father	died	when	he	was	nine	and	his	mother
had	died	already,	before	his	father	died,	so	he	was	left	an	orphan.	His	father	was
a	gypsy,	so	he	was	left	with	a	gypsy	group,	and	he	learned	whatsoever	he	could
learn	with	the	gypsies.	They	are	not	great	scholars;	they	are	vagabonds	moving
from	one	place	to	another	place.
You	 will	 be	 surprised	 to	 know	 that	 gypsies	 belong	 to	 India,	 Rajasthan.	 They
moved	from	Rajasthan	 to	Egypt,	and	 from	Egypt	 to	Europe.	 It	 is	because	 they
moved	from	Egypt	to	Europe	that	they	are	called	"gypsies."	The	name	is	derived
from	"Egypt,"	but	their	language	is	Hindi.	It	has	changed,	but	you	will	find	that
seventy	 percent	 is	 Hindi	 and	 thirty	 percent	 is	 derived	 from	 Hindi	 words,
changed.
So	 Gurdjieff	 was	 moving	 with	 one	 gypsy	 group,	 and	 when	 he	 had	 learned
everything	 from	 that	 group,	 he	would	move	 to	 other	 gypsy	 groups	 --	 they	 are
always	on	the	move.
He	 learned	every	method	 from	 the	gypsies,	 and	 those	methods	are	very	crude,
very	hard
--	 and	 not	 at	 all	 attractive	 to	 the	Western	 people	who	were	 living	 in	 comfort,
luxury.	So	those	who	came	to	him	turned	back	immediately,	seeing	his	methods.
First,	 he	 would	 feed	 people	 --	 he	 was	 a	 great	 cook	 --	 and	 very	 exotic	 foods,
which	Western	 people	 had	 never	 known.	He	 had	 learned	 from	different	 gypsy
groups	 to	 prepare	 strange	 kinds	 of	 foods,	 with	 strange	 spices.	 His	 whole
monastery	where	he	used	to	live	near	Paris	was	full	of	foodstuff,	spices,	alcohol,
all	kinds	of	drugs.	These	were	his	methods.
He	would	force	people	to	eat	too	much	till	they	started	vomiting;	he	would	force
people	 to	 go	 on	 drinking,	 go	 on	 drinking,	 till	 they	 fell	 flat	 on	 the	 ground	 and
started	doing	gibberish	 --	what	you	do	every	day	without	any	alcohol!	And	he
would	sit	by	them	and	listen	to	what	they	were	saying,	because	what	they	were
saying	was	more	true	than	what	they	say	when	they	are	in	their	consciousness.	It
was	a	very	crude	psychoanalysis.
He	would	tell	people	to	dig	trenches	in	the	ground,	the	whole	day	in	the	hot	sun.
People	 who	 had	 never	 worked	 were	 digging	 trenches,	 people	 who	 were
philosophers,	professors	of	philosophy.	They	had	dealt	with	books	and	libraries,
they	were	not	 laborers,	but	 they	were	digging.	The	master	was	walking	by	 the
side,	 looking	at	 all	 the	disciples	digging	ditches.	And	 in	 the	evening	when	 the
ditches	were	complete	he	would	say,	"Now	fill	the	ditches	back	in.	Bring	them
back	to	the	same	condition	as	they	were	before	you	started	digging."
Now,	 by	 the	 evening	 they	 are	 utterly	 exhausted!	 A	 few	will	 faint,	 just	 out	 of
exertion.
And	 he	will	 watch	 their	 faces	when	 they	 faint.	 A	 few	will	 succeed,	 to	 find	 a
strange	 phenomenon:	 when	 they	 feel	 absolutely	 exhausted,	 he	 will	 go	 on
insisting,	"Don't	be	worried.	Continue!"	And	if	somebody	followed	him	--	which
was	difficult	 --	 then	suddenly	he	would	 find,	when	 the	exhaustion	came	 to	 the
peak,	a	sudden	release	of	a	new	energy	and	he	would	be	as	fresh	as	one	is	fresh
in	the	morning.	What	happened?
He	was	teaching	that	you	have	three	layers	of	energy.	The	first	layer	is	for	day-
to-day	work;	 it	 exhausts	 itself	 very	 easily.	Exhaust	 it	 completely	 --	 and	 if	 you
exhaust	it	completely	the	second	layer	will	immediately	come	up	and	you	will	be
filled	with	fresh	energy,	as	you	have	never	known.	If	you	continue	to	work	for
months	and	months	together,	the	second	layer	will	also	be	one	day	finished;	then
the	third	layer	--	which	is	inexhaustible,	which	is	the	very	life	itself	--	will	pop
up	in	you.	You	will	see	that	you	have	an	eternal	source	of	energy.
But	this	is	a	very	crude	method.	I	can	do	it	within	six	minutes!	Gurdjieff	needed
six	 years	 to	 do	 it	 --	 just	 bullock-cart	 methods.	 Certainly	 he	 was	 not	 very
attractive	 to	 the	Western	 intelligentsia.	Only	very	 few	people	 --	 not	more	 than
twelve,	or	at	the	most,	twenty	--
used	to	 live	 in	his	monastery.	Most	of	 them	were	refugees	from	Soviet	Russia.
They	 were	 just	 seeking	 shelter	 because	 the	 communists	 had	 thrown	 out
everybody	who	was	not	with	them.	They	followed	Jesus	on	that	point	--	anybody
who	is	not	with	you	is	against	you.
Either	kill	him	or	throw	him	out	of	the	country.
He	had	a	beautiful	campus	near	Paris,	a	 few	miles	away.	Huge	 trees	and	a	big
forest,	an	old	monastery	deserted	by	the	monks...	Now	professors,	painters,	poets
--	 almost	 half	 the	 group	 of	 people	 in	 his	 campus	 --	 were	 those	 who	 became
interested	in	him	because	of	his	great	disciple	P.D.	Ouspensky,	who	was	a	very
great	mathematician	and	had	a	tremendous	quality	of	articulateness.
I	have	never	come	across	books	written	so	well	as	P.D.	Ouspensky's.	His	every
sentence	is	so	condensed;	it	has	so	much	to	say...	It	was	because	of	Ouspensky	--
Ouspensky	had	a	 school	 in	London	 --	 that	people	were	 attracted.	And	 then	he
would	 send	 them	 to	 Gurdjieff	 and	 from	 there,	 ninety	 percent	 would	 escape
within	 twenty-four	 hours:	 "That	man	was	 crazy!	 The	 whole	 day	 no	 food,	 the
whole	 day	 you	 had	 to	work	 hard,	 to	 exhaust	 your	 energy,	 and	 in	 the	 night	 he
would	cook	exotic	foods	which	were	not	suitable	to	your	stomach..."
So	his	assembly	was	a	very	strange	assembly.	Somebody	is	vomiting,	somebody
is	flat,	foaming	at	the	mouth.	Somebody	is	making	some	utterances	and	nobody
understands	what	 he	 is	 saying.	 Only	Gurdjieff	 was	 conscious;	 everybody	 else
was	unconscious.	First	food,	then	drink	--	and	hard	liquor,	not	soft	wine	that	you
sip	 and	enjoy	 just	 to	 relax.	 It	was	not	 to	 relax,	 it	was	 to	bring	you	 inside	out.
Next	morning,	when	you	wake	up	amongst	all	kinds	of	strange	people	shouting,
screaming,	 vomiting	 all	 around	 you,	 it	 is	 better	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 doors	 before
Gurdjieff	catches	you	again!
His	methods	were	 certainly	 useful	 but	 they	were	 too	 old,	 too	 tribal;	 hence	 he
could	not	attract	the	Western	intelligentsia.	And	he	could	not	attract	the	Russians
because	they	were	going	through	the	revolution	and	atheism	was	their	theme.
He	died	a	frustrated	master,	one	of	the	great	masters	of	this	century.	He	died	just
in	1950.
His	life	is	a	sad	life....
Hence	comes	the	time	of	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh!
Manuel	Labor,	 the	defeated	South	American	dictator,	 is	 trying	 to	get	back	 into
power.	He	is	addressing	a	meeting	of	workmen	to	organize	support	for	himself.
"When	the	revolution	comes,"	shouts	Manuel,	"you	will	enjoy	 the	pleasures	of
the	rich!
You	will	walk	down	Main	Street	wearing	a	gold	watch!"
"Excuse	 me,"	 interrupts	 Pancho,	 the	 dog	 catcher,	 "but	 I	 like	 to	 wear	 my	 old
Timex	watch."
"Or	 if	 you	 prefer	 it	 --	 a	 Timex	watch!"	 continues	Manuel.	 "You	will	wear	 an
Yves	St.
Laurent	three-piece	suit	and	Gucci	shoes..."
"Excuse	me,"	interrupts	Pancho,	again.	"But	I	am	more	comfortable	in	my	blue
jeans	and	sneakers."
"Very	well	--	blue	jeans	and	sneakers,	if	you	insist,"	snaps	Manuel	Labor,	getting
annoyed.	"And	you	will	ride	to	work	in	a	Cadillac..."
"Excuse	me,"	interrupts	Pancho,	"but	I	would	rather	use	my	bicycle."
Furious,	Manuel	 jumps	 off	 the	 platform,	 strides	 through	 the	 crowd	 and	 grabs
Pancho	by	the	neck.
"Listen,	you	idiot!"	hisses	the	ex-dictator.	"When	the	revolution	comes,	you	will
do	what	you	are	bloody	well	told!"
Newton	Hooton	gets	up	one	morning,	walks	into	the	bathroom,	turns	on	the	tap,
but	it	does	not	work.	So	he	calls	out	to	his	wife,	Helen	Hooton,	in	the	bedroom,
"Hey,	honey,	the	water	tap	doesn't	work!"
"Well,	sweetie,"	calls	back	Helen,	"you	are	the	man	in	the	house	--	you	fix	it!"
"Hey,	I'm	no	plumber,"	replies	Newton.
Then	he	goes	over	to	the	clothes	closet	to	get	his	suit,	and	the	door	handle	comes
off	in	his	hand.
"Hey,	Helen,"	shouts	Newton,	"the	closet	door	handle	is	broken!"
"Well,	darling,	you	are	the	man	in	the	house,"	shouts	back	Helen,	"You	fix	it!"
"Hey,	I'm	no	carpenter!"	snaps	Newton,	and	he	goes	downstairs	for	his	breakfast.
But	when	he	switches	on	the	light	in	the	kitchen,	the	bulb	pops.
"Hey,	honey,"	shouts	out	Newton.	"The	light	is	busted!"
"Well,	sugar-pie,"	calls	back	Helen,	"why	don't	you	fix	it?"
"Hey,	I'm	no	electrician,"	shouts	back	Newton,	and	he	goes	off	to	work.
That	evening,	Newton	comes	home	and	sees	a	new	light	bulb	in	the	kitchen.	He
goes	upstairs,	and	the	door	handle	on	the	closet	is	fixed.	Then	he	goes	into	the
bathroom,	and	the	water	tap	works.
"Hey,	 honey,"	 shouts	 out	 Newton.	 "Who	 fixed	 all	 these	 broken	 things	 in	 the
house?"
"Well,	baby-cakes,"	calls	back	Helen,	"Burton	Belch	from	next	door	must	have
heard	us	shouting	this	morning,	so	he	came	over	and	offered	to	fix	everything."
"That's	great,	honey,"	shouts	Newton.	"But	what	did	he	want	in	payment?"
"Well	 dearie,"	 replies	Helen,	 "he	 said	 I	 could	 either	 screw	him	or	 bake	 him	 a
cake."
"Hey,	 honey,"	 shouts	Newton,	 "that	 is	 nice	 --	what	 kind	of	 cake	did	you	bake
him?"
"Hey,	poopsie,"	calls	out	Helen,	"I'm	no	baker!"
Little	Ernie	is	doing	his	homework	one	evening	and	has	a	problem.
"Dad,"	he	says,	"what	is	the	difference	between	ànger'	and	èxasperation'?"
"Well,	son,"	says	his	father,	"I	will	give	you	a	practical	demonstration."
His	dad	then	goes	to	the	phone	and	dials	a	random	number.
"Hello,"	comes	a	voice	at	the	other	end.
"Hello,"	says	Ernie's	father.	"Is	Melvin	there?"
"There	is	no	one	called	Melvin	here!"	comes	the	reply.	"Why	don't	you	learn	to
look	up	numbers	before	you	dial	them?"
"You	see?"	says	Ernie's	father.
"That	man	was	not	at	all	happy	with	our	call.	But	watch	this!"
He	then	dials	the	same	number	again,	and	says,	"Hello,	is	Melvin	there?"
"Now	 look	here!"	 comes	 the	 angry	 reply.	 "I	 told	you	 there	 is	 no	Melvin	here!
You	have	got	a	lot	of	nerve	calling	again!"	And	then	he	slams	down	the	receiver.
"Did	you	hear	that?"	asks	Ernie's	father.	"That	was	anger.	Now,	I	will	show	you
what	exasperation	is!"
He	 picks	 up	 the	 phone	 and	 dials	 the	 same	 number	 again,	 and	when	 a	 violent
voice	shouts,
"HELLO!"	Ernie's	father	says,	"Hello!	This	is	Melvin.	Have	there	been	any	calls
for	me?"
Nivedano
(Gibberish)
Nivedano
Be	silent.	Close	your	eyes	and	feel	your	body	 to	be	completely	frozen.	This	 is
the	right	moment	to	look	inwards.
Gather	 your	 whole	 life	 energy	 and	 rush	 towards	 your	 center	 with	 total
consciousness	and	with	an	urgency	as	 if	 this	 is	going	 to	be	 the	 last	moment	of
your	 life	 on	 the	 earth.	Without	 this	 urgency,	 nobody	 has	 ever	 reached	 to	 his
center.
Faster	and	faster,	deeper	and	deeper....
As	you	come	closer	 to	your	 center,	 a	 great	 silence	descends	over	you.	A	 little
closer	and	flowers	of	peace	start	springing	up	all	around	you.
A	little	more	close	and	you	start	feeling	the	Zen	Wind	--	a	cool	breeze.
Still	closer	and	you	start	 feeling	 the	Zen	Fire	 --	 it	 is	not	 the	fire	 that	you	have
known.	It	is	the	very	energy	arising	from	your	center	of	being.	These	flames	are
cool,	they	are	like	lotus	petals.
Reaching	to	the	center,	you	suddenly	realize	you	are	no	more	but	buddha	is.
The	buddha	simply	means	pure	witnessing.	The	buddha	is	only	a	symbol	of	your
eternal	existence.
Just	remember	one	word	--	witnessing.
This	simple	word	is	the	whole	of	religion,
is	the	whole	of	spirituality,
is	the	whole	of	all	that	is	known
as	truth,	as	beauty,	as	good,	as	godliness.
Just	witness	--	you	are	not	the	body.	Witness	you	are	not	the	mind,	witness	that
you	are	only	a	witness,	just	a	pure	consciousness.
This	is	your	buddha.
This	is	your	very	nature.
This	is	your	intrinsic	potential.
A	great	ecstasy	will	arise.	You	will	feel	almost	drunk,	but	remain	a	witness.
To	make	the	witnessing	more	clear,	and	deeper...
Nivedano
Relax,	let	go.	Just	remember	one	thing	--	forget	everything	else	--	you	are	only	a
witness	and	nothing	else.
The	moment	you	are	only	a	witness	you	are	a	buddha,	and	your	consciousness
starts	melting	and	merging	into	the	cosmos.
Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 at	 this	 moment	 is	 turning	 into	 an	 ocean	 of
consciousness.
Ten	thousand	buddhas	have	melted	into	one	pure,	oceanic	consciousness.
The	evening	was	beautiful	on	its	own,	but	your	entering	the	innermost	mystery
of	 being	 has	 made	 it	 a	 great	 splendor,	 a	 miracle,	 a	 magical	 evening.	 At	 this
moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth.
Collect	all	the	experience	that	is	happening	at	the	center.	Collect	all	the	flowers,
the	 fragrances	 of	 the	 beyond,	 the	 flames	 of	 Zen	 Fire	 --	 they	 are	 so	 cool,	 so
serene.
Gather	 the	Zen	Wind	which	 is	passing	 through	you	like	a	song,	 like	a	melody,
and	persuade	the	buddha	to	come	along	with	you.
Every	 day	 he	 is	 coming	 closer	 and	 closer,	 inch	 by	 inch.	 Your	 life	 is	 going
through	a	transformation,	a	breakthrough.	You	will	never	be	the	same	again.	The
past	is	dropping	and	you	are	settling	into	the	herenow.
The	buddha	is	your	nature.
It	 has	 remained	 hidden	 at	 the	 deepest	 center	 of	 your	 being	 because	 you	 never
called	it,	you	never	welcomed	it.
It	does	not	come	without	invitation.
Invite	him,	request	him;	he	will	come.
The	first	step	of	meditation	is,	buddha	comes	behind	you	like	a	shadow.
The	second	step:	the	buddha	is	in	front	of	you,	and	you	become	the	shadow.
And	the	third	step:	you	merge	into	the	buddha.	There	is	no	shadow	anymore	--
only	pure	awareness,	so	transparent	that	it	cannot	create	a	shadow.
That	 day	when	 it	 happens	 to	 you	will	 be	 the	most	 fortunate,	 the	most	 blessed
day.	You	will	become	the	awakened	one.
We	have	to	spread	this	Zen	Fire	and	this	Zen	Wind	around	the	globe.	This	is	the
only	hope	for	humanity.
Now	Nivedano...
Come	back,	but	come	as	a	buddha	with	great	peace,	silence,	grace.	And	sit	for	a
few	 moments	 just	 to	 recollect	 where	 you	 have	 been,	 which	 space	 you	 have
touched,	what	golden	path	you	have	traveled.	And	look	who	is	standing	behind
you,	just	behind	your	consciousness.
A	new	guest	--	the	buddha.
Every	day	you	are	gaining	more	and	more.
Your	 victory	 is	 absolutely	 guaranteed,	 because	 you	 are	 not	 struggling	 against
anyone;	 you	 are	 simply	 trying	 to	 bring	 your	 own	 nature	 to	 its	 ultimate
blossoming.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	I	am	a	spiritual	terrorist
2	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902025
ShortTitle:
FIRE04
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
147
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONE	DAY,	UNGAN	WAS	 SWEEPING	 THE	GARDEN	WITH	A	BAMBOO
BROOM.
HIS	 BROTHER	 DOGO	 CAME	 OVER	 TO	 HIM	 AND	 SAID,	 "HEY,	 YOU
LOOK
TERRIBLY	BUSY!"
UNGAN	 SAID,	 "ALTHOUGH	BUSY,	 THERE	 IS	 SOMETHING	WHICH	 IS
NOT
BUSY."
DOGO	SAID,	"THAT	MEANS	THERE	ARE	TWO	MOONS."
THEN	UNGAN	PUT	THE	BROOM	ON	THE	GROUND	AND	SAID,	"WHAT
MOON
IS	THIS?"
DOGO	SILENTLY	LEFT.
AT	 ANOTHER	 TIME,	 UNGAN	 ASKED	 A	 MONK,	 "WHERE	 ARE	 YOU
FROM?"
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	CAME	WITH	INCENSE."
UNGAN	ASKED,	"DID	YOU	SEE	BUDDHA?"
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"YES,	I	DID."
"WHERE	DID	YOU	SEE	HIM?"	UNGAN	ASKED.
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	SAW	HIM	IN	THE	LOWER	WORLD."
UNGAN	SAID,	"THE	OLD	BUDDHA!	THE	OLD	BUDDHA!"
Friends,
Question	1
One	sannyasin	has	asked:
WHAT	 IS	 THE	 DIFFERENCE	 BETWEEN	 COMMUNISM	 AND
SOCIALISM?
A	vast	difference	--	the	same	difference	that	there	is	between	me	and	Comrade
Gorbachev.	I	am	a	spiritual	communist,	and	Comrade	Gorbachev	is	a	socialist.
Socialism	 is	 a	 compromise,	 a	 compromise	 with	 capitalism.	 Communism	 is	 a
totally	revolutionary	step.	The	closer	I	have	been	looking	at	Gorbachev	and	his
statements,	the	sadder	I	am	feeling.	He	is	not	a	revolutionary;	he	is	a	reactionary,
he	is	going	backwards.
Just	 today	 Anando	 has	 given	 me	 a	 small	 summary	 of	 his	 books.	 Just	 a	 few
sentences	 I	 heard,	 and	 I	 told	 her,	 "Close	 it"	 --	 because	 he	 is	 talking	 about
bringing	private	property	back	into	the	Soviet	Union,	and	with	private	property
capitalism	 comes	 in.	 He	 is	 saying	 that	 the	 communist	 motto	 was,	 "Each
according	to	his	need"	--	and	what	is	his	motto?
"Each	according	to	his	work."
But	 that's	 exactly	 the	 motto	 of	 capitalism:	 each	 according	 to	 his	 work.
Obviously,	 if	 you	 give	 to	 people	 according	 to	 their	 work	 and	 efficiency,	 then
there	 will	 be	 richer	 people	 and	 there	 will	 be	 poorer	 people.	 The	 classes	 will
come	back	again.
As	 I	 have	 told	you	 again	 and	 again,	 physically,	 people	 are	not	 equal.	You	can
give	equal	opportunity	to	all,	but	still	a	Picasso	will	be	a	Picasso,	all	people	are
not	 going	 to	 become	 Picassos.	A	Henry	 Ford	will	 be	 a	Henry	 Ford;	 to	 create
wealth	is	an	art	in	itself,	and	everybody	cannot	be	a	Henry	Ford.
Now	 if	 Gorbachev	 introduces	 the	 idea	 of	 each	 according	 to	 his	work	 and	 his
efficiency...
his	 intentions	 are	 absolutely	 good.	 I	 don't	 have	 even	 a	 small	 doubt	 about	 his
good	 intentions	 for	 his	 people,	 for	 his	 land,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 a	 buddha.	He	 is	 an
unconscious	man	as	everybody	else	is.	The	unconscious	man	does	not	know	that
his	intentions	may	be	good	but	the	results	may	go	wrong.
I	 am	 in	 absolute	 favor	 of	 communism	 because	 I	 think	 it	 is	 the	 foundation	 for
spiritual	growth.	But	I	am	against	socialism.	It	is	a	compromise	with	capitalism,
and	when	you	compromise	with	capitalism,	capitalism	will	drown	you.
It	seems	Gorbachev	has	become	too	much	interested	in	America	--	the	high-rise
buildings,	miles	and	miles	of	cars	--	the	richness	has	overwhelmed	his	mind.	He
has	been	reported	to	have	said,	"What	should	I	call	my	revolution?"	It	 is	not	a
revolution	in	the	first	place,	it	is	anti-revolutionary.	And	then	he	thought	about	it,
and	said,	"Perhaps	I	should	call	it	socialist	capitalism,	or	capitalist	socialism."	In
both	ways,	capitalism	will	be	the	victor	and	communism	will	be	the	defeated.	He
has	already	stopped	talking	about	communism,	he	is	talking	about	socialism.
Socialism	I	have	been	against	always,	because	it	is	an	effort	to	keep	the	capitalist
incentive	for	people	to	work.	What	is	the	capitalist	incentive	for	people?	Private
property:	my	house,	my	car,	my	wife,	my	children.	That	is	the	incentive,	and	it
creates	competition.
My	house	should	be	better	than	your	house.	My	wife	should	be	more	beautiful
than	 your	 wife.	My	 children	 should	 be	 educated	 better	 than	 your	 children.	 It
starts	 competition,	 it	 starts	 ambition.	 Of	 course,	 people	 start	 working	 harder.
That's	what	Gorbachev	 is	 thinking,	 that	 people	 are	 not	working	 as	 hard	 in	 the
Soviet	Union	as	they	are	working	in	every	capitalist	country.
It	is	true,	because	Karl	Marx	is	not	a	complete	communist.	He	has	no	idea	that
man	 is	 not	 just	 an	 economic	 animal;	 he	 has	 a	 mind	 and	 he	 has	 a	 soul.	 He
thought,	absolutely	wrongly,	that	once	the	financial	conditions	change,	once	the
society	changes	its	structure,	consciousness	will	change	also.	That	is	wrong.	It	is
taking	things	from	the	wrong	end.
If	consciousness	changes,	then	certainly	the	social	structure	will	change,	because
the	social	structure	is	just	a	projection	of	man's	mind.	But	Karl	Marx,	Friedrich
Engels,	or	Vladimir	Ilyich	Lenin,	have	no	idea	what	the	mind	is.	The	question	of
going	beyond	the	mind	does	not	arise.
They	worked	hard	for	seventy	years	to	bring	communism	in	Russia,	but	slowly
slowly...
In	the	beginning	there	was	some	incentive,	because	the	poor	were	thinking	they
would	 become	 rich,	 that	 everybody	would	 be	 equal.	But	 slowly	 slowly	 it	was
found	 that	 as	 all	 the	 property	 was	 taken	 from	 the	 individuals	 it	 was	 a	 great
struggle.	 In	 that	 struggle	 one	million	 people	were	 killed.	By	 not	 changing	 the
mind	 first,	 this	 was	 the	 outcome.	 People's	 minds	 have	 lived	 for	 centuries,
thousands	of	years,	with	the	idea	of	private	property.
Their	only	incentive	is	that	if	it	is	going	to	help	their	ego,	if	it	is	going	to	help
them	rise	higher	than	others,	only	then	they	are	going	to	work	hard.
It	is	said	about	Henry	Ford	--	he	was	a	poor	man	as	far	as	his	birth	is	concerned,
but	he	became	one	of	 the	 richest	men	 in	 the	world	 --	 it	 is	 said	 that	he	used	 to
come	to	his	office	at	eight	o'clock,	early	in	the	morning.	The	peon	used	to	come
at	ten	o'clock	to	open	the	doors	and	clean	the	office.	The	clerks	used	to	come	at
eleven	o'clock,	 the	manager	used	 to	 come	at	 twelve	o'clock.	And	 the	manager
would	 leave	 by	 two	 o'clock,	 the	 clerks	would	 leave	 at	 five	 o'clock.	 The	 peon
would	 leave	 at	 six	 o'clock,	 and	 Henry	 Ford?	 --	 there	 was	 no	 time	 for	 him.
Sometimes	 eight	 o'clock	 in	 the	 night,	 sometimes	 nine	 o'clock,	 sometimes	 ten
o'clock.	A	great	incentive	to	work	hard,	because	he	was	such	an	ambitious	man
and	he	wanted	to	be	the	richest	man	in	the	world.	And	he	succeeded.
In	Russia	that	incentive	has	disappeared.	As	the	years	went	on,	people	saw	that
instead	of	becoming	rich	 they	were	as	poor	as	ever.	Because	Russia	was	not	a
capitalist	 country,	 there	was	 no	 capital	 to	 be	 distributed	 --	 only	 poverty	 to	 be
distributed.	 There	 were	 a	 few	 landlords,	 and	 their	 property	 was	 taken.	 Their
property	was	 the	 land,	 but	 that	 land	was	 not	 given	 to	 the	 poor	 because	 of	 the
communist	 ideology.	 Everything	 had	 to	 be	 centralized;	 nobody	 had	 anything
private.
People	saw	that	their	poverty	was	the	same,	and	they	could	not	adjust	to	the	new
phase.
Their	minds	were	hankering	to	be	better	than	others,	to	be	more	successful,	to	be
richer	-
-	and	that	possibility	had	disappeared.	Now	what	is	the	point	of	working	hard?
Now	there	were	vast	lands	belonging	to	the	state,	running	for	miles	on.	It	was	a
beautiful	 phenomenon...	 not	 small	 patches,	 pieces	 of	 land	 which	 go	 on	 being
divided	every	generation	into	even	smaller	pieces.
You	can	see	it	in	India.	If	the	father	has	five	acres	and	five	sons,	each	son	will
have	one	acre	of	land.	And	then	the	son	will	have	his	own	sons.	Then	that	one
acre	 of	 land	 will	 be	 divided	 again	 into	 as	 many	 sons	 as	 he	 has.	 Such	 small
patches	of	 land	that	 they	cannot	nourish	you,	and	you	cannot	use	 tractors,	new
technology	on	those	small	patches	of	land.
You	don't	have	the	means;	neither	is	the	land	big	enough	to	use	bigger	machines,
more	chemicals.	The	poor	go	on	becoming	poorer.
Private	property	will	certainly	bring	an	incentive.	People	will	work	hard.	But	all
people	are	not	equal	as	far	as	working	hard	is	concerned.	Those	who	are	able	to
work	hard	will	become	richer,	and	those	who	are	not	able	to	work	that	hard	will
become	even	poorer	than	they	are	now.
This	was	the	whole	program	to	dissolve	the	classes,	and	Gorbachev	is	bringing
those	classes	back.	Soon...	just	now	he	has	dropped	the	word	`communism';	he	is
no	 longer	 mentioning	 the	 word	 `communism'	 at	 all.	 He	 is	 talking	 about
socialism,	and	has	started	talking	about	whether	to	call	it	"capitalist	socialism"	or
"socialist	capitalism."	Whatever	you	call	 it,	 it	 is	capitalism!	Socialism	 is	 just	a
word	to	deceive	the	masses.
Gorbachev	 is	 going	 against	 all	 the	 basic	 principles	 of	 communism.	 First	 he	 is
talking	 about	 patriotism	 --	 communism	 is	 absolutely	 against	 nations	 and
patriotism.	 Its	 whole	 idea	 is	 to	 dissolve	 all	 nations	 into	 one	 humanity;	 it	 was
from	its	very	foundation	an	international	movement.	Now	Gorbachev	is	talking
about	patriotism,	nationalism.
He	is	also	talking	about	decentralization,	which	is	against	 the	foundation	of	all
communism.	Decentralization	is	an	idea	of	Gandhism.	Soon	Gorbachev	will	be
having,	 just	 like	Morarji	Desai,	 a	 spinning	wheel!	Decentralization	means	you
cannot	 use	 modern	 technology;	 modern	 technology	 can	 be	 used	 only	 in	 a
centralized	 world	 where	 the	 fields	 are	 miles	 and	 miles	 long.	 But	 if	 you
decentralize	and	divide	the	land	back	again	to	the	same	people	from	whom	it	has
been	taken...	They	were	poor	then	and	they	will	be	poor	again,	far	poorer	 than
they	are	now.
But	he	is	too	much	infatuated	by	America.	I	want	him	to	remember:	American
capitalism	has	 a	 three-hundred-year-old	 life.	 It	will	 take	 at	 least	 three	hundred
years	for	you	to	have	the	same	pollution	as	L.A.,	 the	same	high-rise	buildings,
one	hundred	stories,	one	hundred	twenty	stories	high.	You	cannot	do	it	just	like	a
miracle.	And	still,	America	has	three	million	beggars.	At	least	the	Soviet	Union
has	 no	 beggars.	 It	 is	 not	 as	 rich	 as	 America,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 as	 poor	 as	 India.
Dividing	 the	 land,	 distributing	 property	 to	 individual	 hands,	 will	 not	 make	 it
America;	it	will	make	it	India.
And	because	he	has	opened	 the	doors,	 it	will	be	 too	 late	now	for	him	 to	close
them.
Journalists	are	there;	each	nook	and	corner	of	the	Soviet	Union	is	being	filmed,
televised,	and	they	are	bringing	out	all	those	things	which	the	closed	doors	were
hiding.	Twenty	percent	of	 the	people	 in	 the	Soviet	Union	are	 living	below	 the
minimum	nourishment	level.	Now	he	has	to	go	against	all	the	statistics	that	have
been	given	to	the	world	by	the	Soviet	leaders	up	to	now.
He	 is	 against	 vodka.	He	 himself	 does	 not	 drink.	 That	 is	 the	 trouble	 of	 people
who	 don't	 drink:	 they	 become	 saints.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 not	 drink	 without
becoming	 a	 saint.	 Then	 they	 want	 everybody	 to	 stop	 drinking.	 Now	 he	 is
proposing	prohibition	of	all	alcohol.
That	 has	 been	 the	 poor	 Russian's	 only	 relaxation,	 only	 enjoyment,	 only
entertainment	--
vodka.	Otherwise	he	has	no	beautiful	car,	no	house,	nowhere	to	go,	no	money...
it	was	vodka	 that	was	keeping	him	alive!	At	 least	 in	 the	evening	he	can	drink,
and	with	his	friends	he	can	dance	and	rejoice.	Even	that	is	being	taken	away.
I	 have	 heard	 that	 the	 youth	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 are	 absolutely	 against
prohibition.	They	should	be	against	it,	because	prohibition	has	never	succeeded
anywhere	in	the	world.	It	seems	people	never	learn.
In	India	we	have	tried	twice	--	and	India	must	be	the	best	place	to	try	prohibition
--	 but	 both	 times	 we	 have	 failed.	 It	 was	Morarji	 Desai,	 both	 times,	 who	was
responsible	for	prohibition:	once	when	he	was	the	deputy	prime	minister	under
Indira	Gandhi.	Then	he	enforced	prohibition,	and	prohibition	killed	thousands	of
Indians,	because	people	started	drinking	spirit,	people	started	making	alcohol	--
homemade,	and	they	don't	know	how	to	make	it!	So	hundreds	and	hundreds	of
people	 --	 in	 Calcutta,	 in	 Patna,	 in	 Madras,	 everywhere	 --	 were	 dying	 of
poisoning.
It	is	an	art	to	create	a	refined	wine	that	gives	you	a	little	forgetfulness	about	your
anxieties,	 gives	 you	 a	 little	 laughter,	 a	 little	 dance,	 a	 little	 music.	 There	 are
connoisseurs....
I	have	heard	about	one	connoisseur,	one	man	who	could,	just	by	tasting	the	wine
or	any	kind	of	alcoholic	beverage,	tell	what	trademark	the	wine	is,	and	how	old.
Ten	years	old,	twenty	years	old,	thirty	years?	--	because	the	older	the	wine	is,	the
better.
He	used	 to	go	 to	pubs	and	he	would	put	one	hundred	dollars	on	 the	 table,	and
convince	the	owner:	"Give	me	any	alcohol	and	I	will	tell	you	the	trademark,	the
country	in	which	it	was	manufactured,	and	how	old	it	is.	If	I	fail,	these	hundred
dollars	are	yours.	If	I	succeed...	put	a	hundred	dollars	by	the	side;	both	the	notes
will	be	mine."
And	every	pub	owner	 thought	 that	 this	would	be	an	impossible	 job.	He	had	so
many	kinds	of	alcohol	 --	how	is	 this	man	going	 to	manage?	So	he	would	give
him	 a	 glass	 and	 the	man	would	 immediately	 say,	 "Thirty	 years	 old,	 a	 French
wine,"	 and	 a	 certain	 trademark.	 Amazed,	 the	 whole	 pub	 crowd	 would	 gather
around,	and	he	would	take	both	the	notes	and	say,	"Do	you	want	another	try?"
The	owner	would	say,	"Okay,	you	put	another	hundred	dollars."	So	he	would	put
down	one	hundred	dollars.	The	owner	would	again	put	one	hundred	dollars,	give
him	another	wine,	and	immediately,	just	by	tasting	it	--	such	a	refined	taste,	such
sensitivity	--	he	would	tell	everything	about	it.
Once	 it	went	 on	 for	 ten	 times,	 and	 the	 owner	was	 losing	 one	 hundred	 dollars
every	time.
He	said,	"My	God!	This	man	is	unbelievable."	Then	suddenly	a	man	came	from
the	crowd	and	gave	the	man	a	cup.	He	took	one	sip,	and	he	said,	"My	God!	This
is	 human	urine!"	And	 the	man,	who	had	gone	behind	 the	 crowd	 again,	 asked,
"But	whose?	Unless	you	tell	whose,	you	are	a	loser!	How	old...?"
Intoxicating	 drugs	 are	 as	 ancient	 as	 man.	 No	 country	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to
prohibit	them.
Alcohol	 has	 been	 prohibited	 by	 many	 countries,	 and	 they	 all	 failed	 finally
because	 it	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 more	 dangerous.	 People	 were	 taking	 all	 kinds	 of
things,	and	people	were	creating	all	kinds	of	things	in	the	name	of	"medicine."
But	it	was	all	illegal	so	there	was	no	way	to	check	on	it	and	see	whether	it	was
the	right	stuff.	Nobody	knew	its	constituents.	So	it	killed	thousands	of	people	in
every	country,	wherever	there	was	prohibition.	And	it	attracted	more	people	who
had	never	been	drinking	before.
Prohibition	always	attracts.	You	prohibit	anything,	and	just	see:	people	who	have
never	bothered	about	 it	will	start	searching	for	 it,	 thinking	that	"There	must	be
something	in	it;	otherwise	why	is	the	government	so	interested	in	prohibiting	it?"
Just	 try.	 Prohibit	 ice	 cream,	 and	 suddenly	 you	 will	 see	 the	 whole	 country
becomes	interested	in	ice	cream	--	people	who	have	never	bothered	about	it.	And
when	there	is	such	a	great	demand,	there	will	be	suppliers.	And	it	will	not	be	the
right	 stuff,	 because	 ice	 cream	 can	 be	made	 of	 blotting	 paper;	 just	 the	 blotting
paper	has	to	be	soaked	in	water,	mixed	with	milk,	and	you	can	have	ice	cream
made	out	of	blotting	paper!	It	 looks	exactly	like	ice	cream!	Just	prohibit	 it	and
people	will	 find	ways,	 and	 even	 those	who	were	never	 interested	will	 become
interested.
Now	Gorbachev	wants	 to	prohibit	Russians	 from	drinking	alcohol.	This	 is	not
revolution.
If	 you	want	people	not	 to	drink,	 you	have	 to	give	 them	something	higher	 that
takes	away	their	anxieties.	They	drink	because	they	are	tense,	they	drink	because
there	is	anxiety,	they	drink	because	they	want	to	forget.	They	want	to	forget	the
wife,	 they	want	 to	 forget	 the	husband,	 they	want	 to	 forget	 the	small	kids,	 they
want	to	forget	their	business,	they	want	to	forget	their	financial	troubles.
Unless	you	give	them	a	higher	consciousness	which	can	solve	these	problems	--
then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 forget	 anything	 --	 unless	 you	 give	 them	 such	 a	 deep
alertness	and	awareness	that	they	can	see	the	root	cause	of	their	misery,	and	they
don't	want	just	to	cover	it	with	alcohol	but	want	to	cut	it	from	the	roots...	Except
meditation	there	is	no	way	that	intoxicant	drugs	can	be	prohibited.
Meditation	is	real	spiritual	alcohol!	It	takes	you	to	such	deep	blissfulness...	you
don't	have	to	forget	your	blissfulness.	Do	you	want	to	forget	your	blissfulness?
Alcohol	only	helps	you	to	forget.	Whether	it	is	anxiety	or	ecstasy,	whether	it	is
tension	or	relaxation,	it	simply	helps	you	to	forget.	Once	you	are	blissful,	happy,
once	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 tensions,	 you	 will	 not	 drink	 because	 the	 drink	 will
simply	destroy	your	blissfulness,	your	joy,	your	dance,	your	song.
Give	people	some	new	spiritual	awakening.
That	is	revolution.
This	is	not	revolution,	this	is	a	very	reactionary	step.	People	are	already	sad,	and
you	want	 them	 to	become	sadder.	But	what	 reason	has	he	 to	prohibit	 alcohol?
The	reason	is	that	he	thinks	that	because	of	alcohol	people	don't	work	efficiently.
He	wants	 people	 to	work	 efficiently,	 to	work	 hard.	The	 harder	 they	work,	 the
more	they	will	need	alcohol	just	to	relax	for	the	night!	--	because	in	the	morning
again	the	torture	begins.
If	you	 take	away	 the	alcohol	 it	will	not	help	efficiency,	 it	will	not	help	people
work	more,	 it	will	simply	make	people	more	sad,	more	aloof,	not	 interested	 in
anything.	It	is	not	going	to	make	the	country	richer,	just	sadder.
And	creating	the	idea	of	patriotism	is	the	foundation	of	fascism.	Fascism	lives	on
patriotism:	 you	 are	 Germans,	 you	 are	 born	 to	 rule	 over	 the	 world;	 you	 are
Russians,	you	are	the	chosen	people.	But	you	will	have	to	find	God	if	you	want
to	be	chosen	people	--
and	 Gorbachev	 is	 allowing	 churches,	 the	 Ramakrishna	 Mission,	 the	 Hare
Krishna	 movement.	 And	 other	 idiots	 will	 soon	 follow:	 snake	 charmers	 from
India,	 Satya	Sai	Baba	 from	 India,	making	miracles,	 and	 all	 those	miracles	 are
nothing	but	street	magic.
Magicians	 will	 be	 coming.	 Russia	 will	 soon	 become	 an	 ordinary	 capitalist
country;	it	will	lose	its	dignity	and	power.
One	 man	 in	 Germany	 has	 found	 a	 certain	 program	 which	 can	 transform	 the
armies	 into	 only	 defensive	 forces,	 they	 will	 never	 attack	 on	 their	 own.	 And
Gorbachev	has	sent	his	personal	aides	to	learn	the	technique.	I	think	he	is	naive.
He	does	not	know:	if	a	person	cannot	attack,	he	cannot	defend	either,	because	in
defense	also	he	will	have	to	attack.
How	are	you	going	to	defend	without	attacking?
The	oldest	policy	of	all	warmongers	--	from	Chanakya	in	India,	three	thousand
years	ago,	to	Machiavelli	in	Europe	--	has	been	the	same	policy.	Chanakya	and
Machiavelli	--
three	 thousand	 years'	 difference,	 but	 the	 policy	 is	 the	 same:	 the	 best	 way	 to
defend	is	to	attack.	Once	you	are	on	the	defensive,	you	have	already	lost	half	the
battle,	and	particularly	in	a	time	when	the	war	is	not	going	to	be	a	slow	war	with
small	weapons.
When	the	war	is	going	to	be	nuclear,	it	is	only	a	question	of	ten	minutes	and	the
whole	world	will	be	finished.	Whoever	attacks,	perhaps	may	survive.	If	you	are
on	the	defensive	there	is	no	chance	to	survive.
My	 own	 understanding	 is,	 America	 is	 playing	 a	 great	 role	 behind	 the	 whole
scene.	It	is	a	great	conspiracy	of	American	politicians,	but	very	indirect:	they	are
influencing	Gorbachev	towards	a	suicidal	step	for	communism.
I	am	absolutely	in	support	if	the	country	is	opened	for	chosen	persons	who	will
help	 the	 country	 become	 a	 spiritual	 land,	who	will	 help	 the	 country	with	 new
economic	plans,	a	new	financial	structure.	But	the	churches	and	the	Witnesses	of
Jehovah	 are	not	 going	 to	 change	 the	 economic	 status	of	 the	 country.	They	 are
going	to	destroy	whatever	has	been	achieved	in	seventy	years.
Mahatma	Gandhi	was	in	favor	of	decentralization	--	but	even	his	own	followers
saw	 the	 point,	 that	 it	 is	 good	 to	 make	 his	 statues,	 it	 is	 good	 to	 call	 him	 the
"Father	 of	 the	 land";	 it	 is	 good	 to	 put	 his	 pictures	 everywhere,	 in	 all	 the
government	offices,	but	don't	listen	to	him.	Because	if	you	listen	to	him,	he	will
take	you	back	to	the	age,	thousands	of	years	back,	when	the	spinning	wheel	was
invented.
Gandhi	wanted	 the	spinning	wheel	 to	be	 the	 last	word	 in	 technology:	after	 the
spinning	wheel,	whatever	 has	 been	 invented	 should	be	destroyed.	The	bullock
cart	 should	 be	 the	 only	 vehicle	 in	 the	world	 and	 the	 spinning	wheel	 the	 only
technology.	He	was	in	favor	of	decentralization.
Of	 course,	 if	 you	 decentralize	 you	 cannot	 have	 new	 technology;	 it	 needs
centralization,	and	particularly	 in	a	country	which	 is	communist.	 In	a	capitalist
country	the	state	and	the	capitalists	are	separate.	The	capitalists	have	individual
freedom	to	exploit	people,	although	they	are	supported	by	the	government	from
the	back	door,	because	 they	support	 the	politicians	 in	 their	elections.	So	 it	 is	a
combination,	but	on	the	surface	it	seems	to	be	separate.
The	capitalist	has	no	power	and	the	politician	has	no	money,	so	they	go	together
well.
But	 at	 least	 the	 capitalist	 has	 no	 power,	 so	 he	 cannot	 harass	 people;	 and	 the
politician	depends	on	votes,	so	he	has	also	to	be	aware	not	to	harass	people	too
much;	otherwise	they	won't	give	him	their	votes.
In	 a	 communist	 country	 the	 state	 is	 both:	 it	 is	 the	 only	 capitalist	 --	 it	 owns
everything	in	the	country	--	and	it	has	all	the	power.	And	because	there	is	only
one	 party,	 the	 communist	 party,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 any	 voting.	 Elections
happen,	but	 they	are	 just	mock	elections.	Only	 the	communist	party	 is	 there	 --
who	is	going	to	fight?	And	anybody	who	stands	against	the	communist	candidate
will	disappear	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	night;	 it	will	not	be	known	where	 that	man
has	gone.	So	nobody	else	has	been	standing	for	election.	One	person	stands	and
the	whole	population	is	told	to	vote	for	him;	it	is	not	a	question	of	choice.	In	a
communist	country	everything	is	centralized.	But	if	communism	knows	how	to
transform	 people's	 minds,	 how	 to	 make	 them	 clear	 of	 the	 past	 of	 private
ownership,	of	possessiveness,	how	to	make	them	more	meditative	and	silent	so
that	their	actions	come	out	of	their	silence	and	peace	and	love	and	compassion,
then	communism	becomes	a	spiritual	revolution.
Gorbachev	is	calling	what	he	is	doing	a	revolution.	I	say,	absolutely	no!	If	you
want	 to	 be	 really	 a	 revolutionary,	 the	 only	 way	 is	 bring	 spiritualism	 to	 your
country,	not	capitalism.
That	 is	 going	 backwards	 in	 time,	 and	 destroying	 the	 whole	 effort	 of	 seventy
years,	and	destroying	the	whole	sacrifice	of	millions	of	people	who	died.
I	 am	 a	 spiritual	 communist	 --	 a	 spiritual	 terrorist!	 And	 I	 don't	 care	 either	 for
George	Bush	or	Comrade	Gorbachev.	His	books	have	come	 into	my	hand	 just
today	--	they	are	ugly.	He	is	sabotaging	his	own	people!	And	he	has	taken	all	the
power	into	his	hands,	so	there	is	no	possibility....
But	he	is	not	aware	that	even	presidents	can	be	shot	dead,	and	if	he	is	trying	to
make	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 another	 America,	 remember:	 twenty	 percent	 of	 the
presidents	of	America	have	been	shot	dead!
What	Gorbachev	is	doing	is	going	against	the	whole	revolution,	and	not	only	in
the	Soviet	Union.	 If	 the	Soviet	Union	 turns	 into	a	country	of	capitalism	it	will
not	 only	 destroy	 itself,	 its	 dignity	 and	 power,	 it	 will	 destroy	 other	 small
communist	countries	which	are	dependent	on	 it.	He	has	already	started	cutting
support	to	other	small	countries.
He	has	stopped	supporting	Cuba.	Now	Cuba	is	so	small	--	once	the	Soviet	Union
is	not	supporting	it,	America	is	going	to	take	it	over	within	a	minute.
What	will	happen	to	Czechoslovakia,	Yugoslavia?	And	China	is	already	on	the
way	 towards	 being	 capitalist	 again,	 but	 it	 has	 not	 been	 talked	 about	 much
because	the	communist	leaders	of	China	are	very	silent.	They	are	not	doing	it	in
the	cities,	in	big	towns,	but	eighty	percent	of	China	is	in	the	villages;	they	have
already	been	for	two	years	distributing	land	to	private	owners	in	the	villages.	But
they	 have	 not	 been	 making	 much	 fuss	 about	 it.	 They	 know	 that	 they	 are
betraying	the	communist	revolution	and	coming	closer	and	closer	to	America.
When	 Richard	 Nixon	 was	 found	 guilty	 of	 immense	 crimes	 against	 his	 own
people	and	had	to	 lose	his	presidentship...	 that	was	 the	only	way	for	him	to	be
forgiven.	The	president	has	 the	power	 to	 forgive	 crimes,	 so	his	vice-president,
Ford	--	as	Nixon	retired	from	the	presidency,	Ford	became	the	president,	and	this
was	 the	 mutual	 understanding,	 that	 once	 Ford	 becomes	 the	 president	 he	 will
immediately	forgive	Nixon.	So	Nixon	had	not	to	face	the	Supreme	Court,	he	had
not	to	face	any	court,	and	he	had	not	to	face	the	Senate	or	the	people.
The	first	man	to	invite	Richard	Nixon,	after	he	was	no	longer	the	president,	was
Mao	Zedong	of	China.	He	sent	his	own	plane	to	take	Nixon	to	China,	and	what
he	said	 to	him	is	worthy	of	being	remembered.	He	said,	"What	kind	of	people
are	 yours?	 Just	 small	 things,	 listening	 and	 taping	 other	 people's	 phone	 calls	 --
this	is	not	a	crime.	Every	politician	does	it.	I	do	it!"	Mao	Zedong	said	it	clearly:
"Every	politician	has	to	do	it	out	of	necessity,	to	be	alert	about	where	enmity	is
growing,	from	the	where	attacks	can	come.
Because	once	you	are	in	power,	you	are	always	in	danger."
Now	nobody	 is	going	 to	kill	Richard	Nixon.	You	don't	know	where	he	 is,	you
never	see	his	name	in	the	newspapers.	You	will	see	some	time,	when	he	dies,	a
small	 note	 on	 the	 fourth	 page,	 that	 "The	 ex-president	 of	 America,	 Richard
Nixon,	is	dead"	--	finished.	And	he	was	in	the	headlines	for	years.
Mao	was	surprised:	"What	kind	of	people	are	Americans?	They	forced	out	their
own	president?	If	I	was	in	your	place,	I	would	have	killed	the	whole	country!"
But	once	Mao	died	his	enemies,	whom	he	had	been	keeping	out	of	power,	came
into	 power.	 They	 immediately	 killed	 Mao's	 wife,	 who	 was	 a	 very	 powerful
influence	 on	Mao.	 In	 fact,	 she	was	 behind	Mao,	 ruling	 the	 country.	Mao	was
getting	 old;	 she	 was	 young.	 She	 was	 a	 film	 actress.	 There	 was	 great	 age
difference	 between	 her	 and	Mao.	Mao	 was	 getting	 senile,	 and	 thirty	 years	 of
revolution	can	destroy	anybody's	mind.	 Just	 fighting	and	 fighting	and	 fighting,
and	escaping	and	fighting....	In	his	old	age	he	married	this	film	actress.	And	the
film	 actress	 was	 not	 interested	 in	 Mao,	 certainly,	 because	 neither	 was	 he
beautiful,	nor	was	he	young.	No	child	was	born	out	of	the	marriage,	so	you	can
understand	where	he	stood.
The	only	reason	for	this	woman	to	marry	Mao	--	a	very	beautiful	woman	--	was
simply	to	have	power.	She	was	dictating	in	the	name	of	Mao	--	she	was	the	real
dictator.	And	she	threw	all	 the	people	out	of	 the	Communist	Party,	out	of	 their
powerful	positions,	who	she	thought	were	against	Mao,	or	who	she	thought	were
against	her.
When	Mao	died	those	people	returned	to	power,	and	the	first	thing	they	did	was
to	 hang	 the	woman	 and	 the	 four	 other	 people	who	were	 her	 supporters.	 Then
many	 others	 were	 hanged,	 and	 the	 whole	 group	 around	Mao	 was	 completely
erased.
Now,	 these	 people	 have	 no	 idea	 exactly	what	 communism	 is.	And	 seeing	 that
America	 is	 flourishing,	 they	 started	 distributing	 the	 land	 to	 private	 ownership.
The	 next	 step	 will	 be	 in	 the	 cities,	 in	 the	 towns:	 distribute	 everything	 to
individual	owners,	because	that	brings	incentive.	People	start	struggling	hard	for
success,	out	of	ambition.	That	is	the	old	mind.
Unless	that	old	mind	is	completely	transformed,	and	people	start	feeling	for	the
whole	humanity...	Then	they	work	out	of	love,	not	out	of	ambition.	And	I	have
actual	experience	of	 it	 --	you	are	here.	In	 the	American	commune	people	were
working	not	out	of	any	ambition	but	just	out	of	love,	out	of	joy,	the	very	joy	of
creating	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 commune	 that	 the	 world	 has	 never	 known.	 But	 their
foundation	was	meditation.
What	 Russia	 needs	 is	 not	 capitalism.	 Comrade	 Gorbachev,	 you	 should	 not
deceive	your	people	by	calling	it	"socialist	capitalism"	--	that	is	a	contradiction
in	terms.	And	it	is	not	going	to	help,	it	is	going	just	to	help	America	destroy	you
without	any	war	--	and	not	only	destroy	you,	but	all	the	communist	countries	that
are	dependent	on	you	and	your	support.	The	great	utopian	experiment	evaporates
just	because	of	one	man's	misunderstanding.
And	if	Gorbachev	wants	his	armies	not	to	attack,	he	should	be	aware:	they	will
not	 be	 able	 to	 defend	 either.	 These	 are	 two	 sides	 of	 one	 coin.	 That	 man	 in
Germany,	if	he	is	given	the	job,	must	be	an	agent	of	America.	America	has	not
sent	anybody	to	that	man	to	learn	the	art	of	how	not	to	attack	but	only	to	defend.
Gorbachev	was	the	first,	immediately	sending	people	to	him.
I	 have	 asked	 German	 sannyasins	 to	 immediately	 send	me	 the	 literature	 about
what	kind	of	programming	that	man	is	suggesting.	It	cannot	be	anything	else	but
post-hypnotic	 suggestion.	 You	 can	 suggest	 to	 a	 person	 in	 deep	 hypnosis	 that,
"You	will	 never	 attack	 anybody,	 but	 if	 somebody	 attacks	 you,	 you	 can	 defend
yourself."	Just	a	few	sessions	to	the	whole	army	and	they	will	become	absolutely
immobile	when	the	question	of	attack	comes.
I	 have	 been	 working	 on	 every	 dimension	 of	 your	 mind	 and	 no-mind.	 I	 was
working	 on	 a	 young	 student	 of	 mine	 with	 post-hypnotic	 suggestions.	 I
hypnotized	him....	Hypnosis	is	a	simple	matter:	you	just	look	at	something	very
bright	 that	dazzles	your	eyes.	These	 lights	of	Niskriya's	are	enough	--	you	 just
look	 at	 them,	 and	without	 blinking	your	 eyes...	 hold	your	 eyes	 so	 they	do	not
blink,	whatever	happens.
The	 hypnotist	 is	 sitting	 by	 your	 side,	 telling	 you,	 "Hold	 on,	 don't	 close	 your
eyes."	And	when	he	sees...	and	it	 is	very	clear	when	a	person	is	going	to	close
his	 eyes,	 and	 has	 come	 to	 his	 limit.	 Just	 within	 three	minutes,	 his	 face	 starts
relaxing	and	you	can	see	it;	 it	 is	not	something	that	you	have	to	infer.	You	can
see	exactly	that	the	man	is	feeling	sleepy,	the	face	is	relaxing.
Then	you	start	suggesting	to	him,	"Your	eyes	are	feeling	very	heavy.	Although
you	 are	 trying	your	 best,	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 succeed	 any	 longer,	 they	 are
closing,	they	are	closing,	they	are	closing"...	in	a	very	sleepy	voice.
And	the	person	is	told	beforehand	that	he	has	to	fight:	at	the	last	moment	when	it
becomes	impossible,	when	he	cannot	do	anything,	when	in	spite	of	him	the	eyes
close,	and	what	can	he	do...?	There	comes	a	moment	that	in	spite	of	him,	he	feels
his	eyes	are	closing	and	he	cannot	do	anything	about	it	anymore.	And	the	person
is	 giving	 instructions:	 "Your	 eyes	 are	 becoming	 heavy,	 you	 are	 feeling	 very
sleepy.	You	will	 fall	 into	 a	 deep	 sleep."	 Just	within	 five	minutes	 the	person	 is
snoring.
And	while	 you	 are	 going	 deeper	 into	 sleep...	Hypnosis	means	 sleep.	The	 very
root	 of	 the	 word	 simply	 means	 sleep,	 nothing	 else;	 deliberate	 sleep,	 created
sleep.	But	the	created	sleep	goes	much	deeper	than	your	natural	sleep.
And	 the	medium,	 the	 person	who	 is	 being	 hypnotized,	 is	 told,	 "You	will	 hear
only	 my	 voice	 and	 nothing	 else.	 No	 other	 sound	 will	 reach	 to	 you,	 only	 my
voice."	And	that	actually	happens.	All	his	senses	become	relaxed	and	closed;	he
hears	nobody.	 If	 you	 shout	his	name	he	will	 not	hear,	 but	 if	 the	hypnotist	 just
whispers	 he	 will	 hear.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 opening	 left,	 a	 very	 narrow	 opening;
everything	else	is	closed.
That	is	the	time	when	you	can	give	any	post-hypnotic	suggestion.	Post-hypnotic
suggestion	means	 that	 it	will	 be	 applicable	when	you	are	out	of	hypnosis.	For
example,	 I	 told	 this	 boy,	 "The	 pillow	 you	 are	 sleeping	 on	 right	 now	 --	 I	 am
making	 on	 the	 pillow	 a	 cross	 with	 red	 ink.	 And	 tomorrow,	 exactly	 at	 eleven
o'clock,	you	will	kiss	that	cross."
This	 is	 a	 post-hypnotic	 suggestion	 for	 tomorrow,	 when	 he	 will	 not	 be	 in
hypnosis,	but	it	has	entered	into	his	unconscious.
The	next	day,	nearabout	fifteen	minutes	before	eleven,	he	became	fidgety	--	not
knowing	why.	I	asked,	"What	is	the	problem?	Why	do	you	look	so	tense?"
He	said,	"I	don't	know,	but	something	seems	to	be	happening	inside	me."
I	said,	"Nothing	is	happening."	I	 took	his	pillow	--	he	watched	--	and	I	put	the
pillow	in	my	suitcase	and	locked	it.	He	became	more	and	more	troubled.	Exactly
as	it	was	coming	to	be	eleven,	he	looked	at	the	clock	and	he	asked	me,	"Please
give	me	the	key."
I	said,	"Why?"
He	said,	"I	want	my	pillow	back."
I	said,	"What	are	you	going	 to	do	with	 it	at	eleven	o'clock?	In	 the	night	 I	will
give	it	to	you."
He	said,	"No!	Just	give	me	the	key!"
I	gave	him	the	key,	he	opened	the	suitcase.	It	was	exactly	eleven;	the	clock	was
striking	 the	hour	of	eleven.	He	pulled	out	 the	pillow,	hugged	 it	as	 if	 it	was	his
girlfriend,	and	started	kissing	exactly	the	point	where	I	had	marked	with	red	ink.
I	said,	"What	are	you	doing?"
He	said,	"I	don't	know!	I	am	feeling	absolutely	insane.	This	is	a	pillow,	I	know	--
why	I	am	hugging	it	I	don't	know.	And	why	am	I	kissing	it?	I	have	never	kissed
any	pillow	in	my	whole	life!"
But	such	romance!	You	should	have	seen	his	face,	so	romantic.	He	had	fallen	in
love,	just	as	you	fall	in	love.
Do	you	think	you	fall	in	love	in	a	different	way?	It	is	biological	hypnosis!	And
do	you	think	you	are	kissing	something	else	than	a	pillow?	What	are	you	kissing,
have	you	ever	thought	about	it?	It	is	just	a	biological	insistence	from	inside.	The
same	insistence	can	be	created	by	hypnosis.
But	 it	 is	 a	 dangerous	 program.	 If	 Gorbachev	 agrees	 to	 use	 that	 man,	 whole
armies	can	be	hypnotized	without	any	 trouble.	And	armies	are	 the	most	easily
hypnotized	because	 they	are	obedient	 to	orders.	So	when	 the	hypnotist	 orders,
they	will	 follow	more	 easily	 than	 anybody	 else,	 because	 they	have	 spent	 their
whole	life	turning	left,	turning	right,	going	backwards,	going	forwards,	nobody
asking	 why.	 They	 are	 trained	 for	 obedience;	 they	 are	 more	 vulnerable	 to
hypnosis	 than	anybody	else	 in	 the	world.	And	you	can	 just	 tell	 them	 that	 they
will	never	attack.
But	this	is	a	dangerous	policy:	a	person	who	cannot	attack	cannot	defend	either.
And	that	is	what	he	is	saying,	that	"I	will	simply	take	away	the	idea	of	attacking
and	leave	the	defensive	idea."	But	in	defense	also	you	have	to	attack!	They	will
be	simply	paralyzed,	they	will	not	know	what	to	do.
And	in	 the	conditions	we	are	 living	in...	 It	 is	a	nuclear	age.	If	America	attacks
the	Soviet	Union,	the	Soviet	Union	is	finished,	because	it	 is	only	a	question	of
ten	minutes.	If	the	Soviet	soldiers	are	not	able	to	attack	they	will	not	be	able	to
defend	 either;	 they	 will	 be	 in	 a	 confusion	 about	 what	 to	 do.	 They	 will	 feel
paralyzed.	 And	 because	 it	 is	 a	 question	 of	 a	 very	 small	 amount	 of	 time,	 ten
minutes,	the	whole	country	can	be	blasted,	finished.
With	 good	 intentions,	Gorbachev	 is	 going	 in	 a	wrong	 direction,	 suicidal.	And
America	is	trying	to	puff	up	his	ego	as	much	as	possible	so	that	whatever	he	is
doing	 he	 should	 go	 on	 doing.	 Bring	 all	 kinds	 of	 snake	 charmers,	 street
magicians,	bishops,	cardinals,	the	pope.
Soon	 the	 Shankaracharya	 of	 Puri,	Mohammedan	 priests,	 Ayatollah	 Khomeini,
will	be	visiting	the	Soviet	Union.	This	one	man	can	destroy	a	great	hope	for	the
whole	of	humanity.
I	am	saying	these	words	just	 to	make	him	aware.	He	has	all	 the	powers	at	 this
moment.
He	 can	 transform	 the	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 into	 a	 spiritual	 country.	 And	 out	 of
meditation	creativity	arises;	out	of	love	people	will	work.	Not	out	of	ambition	--
that	is	the	old	strategy.	Not	out	of	possessiveness	--	that	is	falling	back	into	the
dark	ages	again.
I	know	the	Soviet	Union	is	not	as	rich	as	America,	but	there	is	no	need	to	be	so
rich.	 Just	 bring	 about	 a	 comfortable	 existence:	 and	 bring	 meditativeness	 to
people;	then	they	will	work.	But	this	work	will	be	a	work	of	dedication,	a	work
dedicated	to	the	ultimate	revolution	which	will	involve	the	whole	humanity.
He's	 talking	 of	 patriotism	 --	 which	 is	 a	 disease.	 All	 wars	 have	 come	 out	 of
patriotism,	 nationalism.	 And	 soon	 he	 is	 bound	 to	 allow	 foreign	 money	 to	 be
invested	in	the	Soviet	Union,	on	the	condition	--	this	is	my	prediction	--	on	the
condition	 that	 foreign	money	will	 not	 be	 nationalized,	 that	 the	 foreign	money
will	be	available	to	the	outside	owners	and	they	can	take	it	back	any	time	they
want.	This	is	the	only	way	left	for	him	to	make	the	social	economy	of	the	Soviet
Union	rise	higher.
But	this	will	create	the	capitalist	class	again,	and	the	laborers,	the	proletariat.
Without	knowing,	Gorbachev	 is	working	against	Marx,	against	Engels,	 against
Lenin	--
against	all	 the	people	who	have	worked	so	hard	 to	create	a	new	kind	of	social
structure,	but	 they	were	missing	on	one	point.	That	point	was	 spirituality.	 Just
add	 spirituality	 to	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 and	 it	 will	 have	 the	 most	 joyous,	 most
loving,	most	compassionate	people	in	the	world.
You	 have	 seen	 the	 Soviet	 crew	which	was	 here	 from	 Soviet	 television.	 There
have	been	all	kinds	of	television	crews,	all	kinds	of	journalists	from	all	over	the
world,	 but	 it	 is	 only	 the	 Soviet	 crew	who	went	with	 tears	 in	 their	 eyes.	 They
loved	you;	they	loved	your	commune	so	much,	so	deeply.	They	have	gone	with
the	promise	that	when	they	have	their	holidays	for	ten	days	in	June,	they	are	not
going	 anywhere	 else.	 They	 are	 going	 to	 come	 here	 for	 ten	 days	 to	 live	 in	 the
commune	as	sannyasins,	meditating,	doing	groups.
You	 can	 see	 the	 difference.	 When	 the	 American	 journalist	 comes,	 he	 starts
looking	 immediately	 to	 find	 something	 sensational.	 If	 he	 cannot	 find	 it,	 he
creates	 and	 invents	 it,	 because	 America	 is	 interested	 only	 in	 sensationalism.
These	people	behaved	in	a	totally	different	way.	This	was	for	the	first	time	that	a
Russian	crew	has	come.	When	you	were	doing	your	meditations,	dancing,	they
forgot	all	about	photographing.	They	dropped	their	cameras	and	started	dancing!
They	loved	the	sannyasins.
Their	 questions	 were	 absolutely	 non-sensational.	 Significant,	 meaningful,	 but
not	 sensational	 --	utterly	concerned	with	human	welfare.	And	Anando	 told	me
that	they	had	tears	in	their	eyes	when	they	left	the	gate;	they	did	not	want	to	go.
They	wanted	to	stay	for	the	whole	series,	but	their	office	from	Delhi	called	them,
saying,	"You	come	back,	there	are	other	assignments."
They	will	 be	 back	 in	 June	 for	 ten	 days,	 to	 have	more	 experience	of	what	 you
have.	They	want	to	taste	it.	They	want	to	be	insiders,	not	outsiders.
And	 this	 is	 the	 state	 of	 the	whole	 Soviet	Union:	 the	 people	 have	 become	 like
children.	No	church,	no	programming,	no	God,	no	prayer	--	they	have	become	so
innocent	 that	 meditation	 will	 go	 deep	 down	 in	 them,	 faster	 than	 in	 any	 other
country.
Question	2
The	second	question,	which	is	connected:
IS	 IT	 NOT	 TRUE	 THAT	 IN	 THE	 RUSSIAN	 PEOPLE	 THE	 ZORBA	 IS
ALREADY	SO
MUCH	 ALIVE	 THAT	 IT	 IS	 EASIER	 TO	 BRING	 BUDDHA	 IN	 THAT
COUNTRY
THAN	 IN	 ANY	 OTHER?	 AND	 IS	 IT	 REALLY	 DEPENDENT	 ON
COMMUNISM,	BECAUSE	PEOPLE	ARE	LESS	CONDITIONED?
Zorba	 is	 certainly	 there.	 But	 if	 vodka	 is	 denied	 to	 the	 Zorba,	 that	 will	 be	 a
disaster!
I	 am	 absolutely	 against	 Gorbachev's	 idea	 of	 prohibition.	 Vodka	 is	 every
Russian's	birthright!	That	is	all	they	have.	Don't	take	away	their	dance	and	their
joy	unless	you	can	provide	something	better.	That's	my	very	simple	arithmetic:
don't	 take	 anything	 from	 anybody	 unless	 you	 can	 give	 something	 better	 in	 its
place.
And	I	don't	know	that	Gorbachev	has	anything	better	to	offer.	He	himself	does
not	know	anything	better.
Rather	 than	 sending	 those	 people	 to	 Germany	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 how	 not	 to
attack,	he	should	come	here,	and	send	his	people	here.	I	will	teach	them	how	to
dance,	how	to	love.
And	if	there	is	a	need	to	attack	you	should	be	the	first,	not	the	second!	You	have
the	 tremendous	 responsibility	 of	 protecting	 a	 great	 experiment	 that	 has	 never
been	done	before.
Yes,	 it	 is	 true:	 they	 are	 less	 conditioned,	 simpler	 people;	 hence	 they	 can	more
easily	enter	 into	 the	world	of	no-mind.	The	Zorba	 is	 there;	 I	can	 introduce	 the
Buddha	also.	But	Gorbachev	has	no	idea	of	 the	Buddha.	His	eyes	are	fixed	on
America	 and	 American	 money,	 and	 American	 capitalism's	 success.	 He	 is	 not
looking	eastward	towards	Zen,	which	is	the	only	solution	for	the	Soviet	Union	to
protect	communism	and	its	dignity,	and	to	spread	communism	all	over	the	world.
Zorba	has	 to	come	first;	Buddha	will	come	once	Zorba	becomes	established.	 I
can	take	away	the	vodka	because	I	can	give	the	Buddha.	Who	cares	about	vodka
when	you	have	the	Buddha	in	you?
But	Gorbachev	seems	 to	be	on	a	power	 trip,	utterly	dangerous.	A	single	man's
ego	has	to	be	fulfilled	by	destroying	a	valuable,	immensely	valuable	experiment!
And	once	the	Soviet	Union	fails,	is	scattered,	it	will	take	centuries	for	humanity
to	 again	 take	 the	 risk	 of	 creating	 communism.	Once	 a	 thing	 fails	 people	 lose
their	hope;	it	takes	centuries	for	them	to	forget	and	begin	anew.	So	it	is	not	only
a	question	for	today,	it	is	a	question	for	future	generations	too.
And	my	concern	 is	absolutely	 impartial.	 I	have	been	 interested	 in	communism
from	my	very	childhood.	The	Soviet	crew	has	been	to	my	library,	and	they	were
amazed	to	see	the	communist	literature	there	--	perhaps	there	is	no	book	that	is
missing	from	my	library.
And	 they	were	 amazed	 to	 see	 that	 I	 have	 signed	 and	 dated	 each	 book	 before
1950.	 I	was	 absolutely	 concerned	 to	 know	about	 communism,	 everything.	 For
three	years,	1948,	1949,	and	1950,	I	had	collected	all	the	literature	possible.	And
I	stopped	at	1950.	I	have	not	read	anything	after	1950	about	communism,	for	or
against.
It	 is	very	strange...	 I	go	on	forgetting	small	 things.	I	cannot	count	up	to	five	--
after	the	third	finger	I	start	hesitating,	whether	it	is	fourth	or	third.	But	in	these
forty	years	I	have	not	forgotten	a	single	name	of	the	communist	revolutionaries.
Small	 details	 are	 so	 vivid	 before	me,	 because	 that	was	my	 first	 entry	 into	 the
intellectual	world.	It	got	deeply	rooted	in	me.	But	I	never	became	a	member	of	a
communist	party,	because	I	could	see	something	was	missing.
It	is	a	grand	plan	for	humanity,	but	something	central	is	missing:	it	has	no	soul,	it
is	a	corpse.
Because	nothing	new	was	happening,	 I	 stopped	 reading.	And	nothing	new	has
happened	since	then,	except	Gorbachev.	So	I	am	talking	about	Gorbachev.
First	 I	 was	 deeply	 interested	 in	 communism,	 but	 finding	 that	 it	 is	 a	 corpse	 I
became	interested	in	anarchism	--	that	was	also	a	Russian	phenomenon	--	Prince
Kropotkin,	 Bakunin,	 Leo	 Tolstoy.	 All	 three	 were	 anarchists:	 no	 state,	 no
government	in	the	world.
But	 I	 saw	 the	 point	 that	 they	 have	 a	 beautiful	 dream	 but	 with	 this	 criminal
humanity,	with	this	stupid	mass,	if	there	is	no	government	and	no	court	and	no
police	there	will	be	simply	chaos,	not	anarchism.
I	 have	 been	 always	 very	 scientific	 in	 my	 approach,	 either	 outside	 or	 inside.
Communism	can	be	the	base.	Then	spiritualism	has	to	be	its	growth,	to	provide
what	is	missing.	Once	a	society	is	given	equal	opportunity	--	to	be	unequal,	to	be
unique	 --	 and	 once	 that	 society	 becomes	 interested	 in	meditation	 and	 spiritual
growth,	then	there	is	a	possibility	of	anarchism.	That	will	be	the	very	final	stage,
when	there	is	nobody	who	is	interested	in	committing	crime.	Only	then	can	the
state	 be	 removed,	 not	 before	 it.	 Bakunin,	 Kropotkin,	 and	 Leo	 Tolstoy	 are
perfectly	 right,	 but	 not	 relevant	 now.	 First	 communism	 has	 to	 be	 aided	 by
spirituality.
Once	spirituality	gains	ground	in	your	very	being,	crime	becomes	impossible.	To
do	anything	wrong	becomes	 impossible.	Obviously,	 the	state	will	wither	away.
When	 there	 is	nobody	committing	any	crime,	how	 long	are	you	going	 to	keep
your	courts	 empty	and	 judges	 sitting	 there?	Soon	you	will	 feel	 that	 it	 is	better
that	 these	 judges	go	 into	 the	fields	and	work.	How	long	are	you	going	 to	keep
unnecessary	policemen	standing	around?
Armies,	 millions	 of	 people	 unnecessarily	 being	 fed,	 clothed	 --	 and	 they	 are
getting	 the	 best	 food,	 the	 best	 clothes,	 and	 they	 are	 not	working	 at	 all.	 Every
country	is	filled	with	millions	of	people	in	armies.	They	should	be	brought	back
to	the	world,	to	work.
But	this	is	possible	only	if	communism	steps	into	spiritualism;	then	spiritualism
can	 flower	 into	 anarchism.	 These	 are	 simple	 steps.	 But	 if	 communism
disappears,	 then	 it	 becomes	 very	 difficult	 to	 transform	 the	 capitalist	 world
towards	spirituality.	It	is	a	difficult	job.	And	anarchism	becomes	a	very	faraway,
remote	possibility	--	may	be,	may	not	be.
Hence	my	support	for	communism:	because	I	would	love	the	world	one	day	to
have	no	nations,	no	religions,	no	boundaries,	no	policemen,	no	armies,	no	guns,
no	murderers.
Healthy	 people,	 spiritually	 loving,	 growing	 deeper	 and	 growing	 higher
simultaneously,	getting	roots	and	getting	wings	together,	simultaneously	--	these
will	be	the	real	superhuman	beings,	the	new	man	I	have	been	working	for.
I	 see	 in	 the	 Soviet	Union	 great	 possibilities,	 great	 potentialities.	 If	Gorbachev
does	not	go	wrong,	those	opportunities	can	be	transformed	into	a	reality.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONE	DAY,	UNGAN	WAS	 SWEEPING	 THE	GARDEN	WITH	A	BAMBOO
BROOM.
HIS	 BROTHER,	 DOGO,	 CAME	 OVER	 TO	 HIM	 AND	 SAID,	 "HEY,	 YOU
LOOK
TERRIBLY	BUSY!"
UNGAN	 SAID,	 "ALTHOUGH	BUSY,	 THERE	 IS	 SOMETHING	WHICH	 IS
NOT
BUSY."
That	 is	 your	 consciousness,	 that	 is	 your	 buddha	 inside.	You	may	 be	 busy	 but
there	 is	 someone,	 the	witness,	who	 is	 never	 busy.	 It	 has	 no	 business	 at	 all.	 It
simply	is,	like	a	mirror.
When	the	mirror	reflects	you,	do	you	think	it	is	doing	something?	It	is	not	doing
anything.	To	mirror	 is	 its	nature;	 it	 is	simply	there.	It	 is	 just	a	coincidence	that
you	happen	to	stand	before	it.	Once	you	are	gone	the	empty	mirror	will	be	there.
When	Ungan	 said,	 "Although	 busy,	 there	 is	 something	which	 is	 not	 busy,"	 he
was	saying,
"On	 the	 surface	 you	 can	 see	me	 busy	 but	 inside	 I	 know	 someone	who	 is	 just
sitting	silently,	doing	nothing.	And	that	is	more	essential	and	more	fundamental.
This	busy-ness	will	end	soon."
DOGO	SAID,	"THAT	MEANS	THERE	ARE	TWO	MOONS"	--	one	busy	and
one	not	busy.
THEN	UNGAN	PUT	THE	BROOM	ON	THE	GROUND	AND	SAID,	"WHAT
MOON
IS	THIS?"
Now	he	is	no	longer	busy.	He	dropped	the	broom	on	the	ground	and	sat	silently
and	asked,	"What	moon	is	this?"
DOGO	SILENTLY	LEFT	--	not	knowing	what	to	say	now.
In	a	metaphorical	way	there	are	millions	of	moons.	When	the	full	moon	arises	in
the	 night,	 in	 every	 small	 pond,	 in	 every	 river,	 in	 every	 ocean...	 millions	 of
reflections,	 uncountable	 reflections.	But	 they	 are	only	 reflections,	 not	 realities.
The	moon	is	one	--
reflections	 many,	 millions.	 The	 consciousness	 is	 one	 --	 reflections	 many,
millions.
As	you	move	towards	your	consciousness,	you	are	moving	towards	oneness.	As
you	go	back	towards	the	circumference	there	are	millions	of	moons,	but	they	are
only	reflections.
Whatever	 you	 are	 doing	 is	 nothing	more	 than	 a	 reflection.	What	 you	 are	 is	 a
reality,	eternal	reality.	Only	the	eternal	can	be	called	the	real.	The	momentary	is
so	passing,	it	does	not	matter.
So	when	Ungan	 put	 the	 broom	 down	 on	 the	 ground	 and	 sat	 there	 and	 asked,
"What	moon	is	this?"	Dogo	could	not	understand.
They	were	brothers.	Both	finally	became	enlightened,	but	Ungan	seems	to	have
a	deeper	understanding.	Even	before	his	enlightenment,	he	is	coming	very	close.
AT	 ANOTHER	 TIME,	 UNGAN	 ASKED	 A	 MONK,	 "WHERE	 ARE	 YOU
FROM?"
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	CAME	WITH	INCENSE."
This	 is	 the	world	 of	 Zen.	 You	 should	 not	 expect	 Socratic	 dialogues.	 There	 is
nothing	 else	 in	 the	world	 to	 compare	with	Zen,	 it	 is	 unique	 and	 a	 category	 in
itself.
Ungan	 has	 asked,	 "Where	 are	 you	 from?"	 and	 the	 man	 does	 not	 answer	 the
question.
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	CAME	WITH	INCENSE."
The	present	moment.	"What	are	you	bothering	about,	from	where	I	am	coming
and	where	I	am	going?	Just	 look	at	my	hand:	I	have	come	with	 incense."	And
incense	also	is	symbolic.	It	is	offered	to	the	Buddha,	the	fragrance	and	the	smoke
of	the	incense	continuously	rising	towards	the	blue	sky	and	disappearing.
All	 these	 are	 very	 significant	 symbols.	 People	 have	 forgotten	 their	 symbology
because	people	very	quickly	become	ritualistic.
I	have	 told	you	about	a	woman,	a	nun,	who	had	a	small	golden	Buddha.	Now
there	are	temples	in	Japan,	in	China	--	and	she	was	in	China.	One	temple	has	ten
thousand	 statues	 of	 Buddha	 --	 unbelievable!	 The	 whole	 mountain	 has	 been
carved;	 the	 mountain	 has	 disappeared,	 only	 Buddha's	 statues,	 statues	 upon
statues,	ten	thousand	Buddhas.	And	every	temple	has	many	Buddhas.
So	this	nun	was	always	in	trouble:	"MY	Buddha!"	When	she	would	worship	in
the	morning...	now	the	incense	knows	nothing	about	whose	Buddha	and	whose
incense...
sometimes	it	would	start	moving	with	the	breeze	to	some	other	Buddha.
All	 the	 statues	 were	 of	 the	 same	 man,	 but	 such	 is	 the	 possessive	 mind:	 she
wanted	the	incense	to	reach	to	HER	Buddha.	And	her	Buddha	was	very	small	--
it	was	pure	gold	--
and	 there	 were	 huge	 Buddhas	 standing,	 sitting,	 lying	 down,	 in	 all	 kinds	 of
postures.	The	incense	has	no	idea	of	possessiveness,	and	the	wind	has	no	idea.
So	 the	 wind	 would	 come	 and	 the	 incense	 would	 go	 to	 this	 Buddha	 or	 that
Buddha,	and	that	woman	was	very	angry.
"This	 is	 absolutely	 wrong.	 It	 is	 my	 incense	 and	 MY	 Buddha	 is	 not	 getting
anything!"
So	she	devised	a	small	technique:	she	cut	a	bamboo,	hollow	bamboo,	and	she	put
the	 hollow	bamboo	over	 the	 incense	 and	 the	 smoke	which	was	 going	 to	 other
Buddhas.	She	put	the	other	end	of	the	bamboo	to	her	golden	Buddha's	nose.	But
a	disaster	happened.
The	golden	Buddha's	nose	became	black!	So	she	went	to	the	priest	of	the	temple:
"How	to	clean	my	Buddha's	nose?"
He	said,	"How	did	it	happen?"	Then	she	told	the	whole	story.	The	priest	was	a
master.	He	 laughed;	he	said,	"Such	is	 the	human	mind,	so	utterly	retarded!	All
these	Buddhas	are	just	the	reflection	of	one	Buddha	--	your	Buddha	included.	So
whosoever	is	getting	the	incense,	Buddha	is	getting	the	incense.	You	should	not
have	been	so	possessive.	My	Buddha,	my	incense!	--	now	your	possessiveness
has	destroyed	your	Buddha's	nose.	I	cannot	help."
She	was	 in	 tears.	She	 said,	 "You	are	an	old	master,	 and	you	know	everything.
Some	way	 to	 clean	my	Buddha's	 nose...	 and	 I	 don't	want	 to	 scratch	 it,	 I	 don't
want	to	destroy	my	beautiful	Buddha."
He	 said,	 "This	whole	 idea	 of	 `MY	Buddha,	MY	Buddha'	 is	 the	 cause	 of	 your
Buddha's	nose	becoming	black!	Drop	this	idea!	And	leave	your	Buddha	with	me.
Tomorrow	morning	you	can	take	it	away.	The	nose	will	be	cleaned,	but	first	drop
this	idea;	otherwise	it	will	happen	again.	What	is	the	point?	If	you	are	going	to
use	 that	 hollow	bamboo	 you	will	 destroy	 your	Buddha.	Let	 the	wind	 take	 the
incense	anywhere	it	takes	it.
It	always	reaches	to	the	one	Buddha."
There	are	not	two	Buddhas;	all	are	reflections.
The	moon	is	one,	reflected	in	millions	of	ponds,	millions	of	rivers,	oceans.
But	reflections	are	reflections.
Our	 actions	 are	 nothing	more	 than	 reflections,	momentary;	 they	go	 and	 come,
the	buddha	remains.	He	is	always	there,	the	eternal	presence.
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	CAME	WITH	INCENSE."
He	is	saying,	"I	have	come	in	search	of	a	buddha.	I	came	with	incense,	and	you
are	asking	nonsense	questions."	Ungan	immediately	understood.
UNGAN	ASKED,	"DID	YOU	SEE	BUDDHA?"
If	you	have	come	with	incense,	that	means	you	are	looking	for	the	buddha.	Did
you	see	the	buddha?"
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"YES,	I	DID."
"WHERE	DID	YOU	SEE	HIM?"	UNGAN	ASKED.
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	SAW	HIM	IN	THE	LOWER	WORLD."
UNGAN	SAID,	"THE	OLD	BUDDHA!	THE	OLD	BUDDHA!"
This	is	a	very	strange	anecdote.	The	monk	said,	"I	SAW	HIM	IN	THE	LOWER
WORLD."
You	have	to	understand	the	idea	of	the	lower	world....
Buddha	said	in	his	statements,	"If	there	is	a	hell	I	will	go	there,	because	who	will
take	care	of	 the	people	 in	hell?	Who	will	 teach	 them	the	way	 to	be	out	of	hell
and	misery?
Until	hell	is	emptied,	I	will	remain	there."
And	the	second	story	says,	when	he	emptied	hell	completely	of	all	the	people,	he
reached	the	gate	of	heaven.	There	was	great	rejoicing	and	the	doors	were	opened
for	him.	There	were	roses	on	the	road,	and	people	were	standing	on	both	sides	of
the	 road	 leading	 to	 the	place	 they	had	chosen	 for	Buddha	 to	 live.	But	Buddha
said,	"I	am	not	going	to	enter	--
please	 close	 the	 doors.	 I	 will	 stand	 here	 till	 every	 living	 being	 has	 passed
through.	 I	 have	 emptied	 hell,	 but	 the	 earth	 is	 full	 of	 unconscious	 people.	 Let
them	 all	 pass,	 there	 is	 no	 hurry.	 I	 will	 stand	 here	 outside	 the	 gate."	 And	 the
parable	says,	he	is	still	standing	there.
That	will	help	you	to	understand	the	monk	when	he	says,	"I	saw	him	in	the	lower
world."
`Lower	world'	is	the	Buddhist	way	of	saying	hell.	The	upper	world	is	heaven;	in
the	middle	is	this	earth.	We	are	the	middle	world.
UNGAN	SAID,	"THE	OLD	BUDDHA!	THE	OLD	BUDDHA!	His	compassion
is	so	great,	he	must	have	entered	hell."
He	 is	 immensely	 touched	by	 the	 fact	 that	Buddha	has	gone	 into	hell.	 "The	old
Buddha,	with	his	eternal	compassion,	can't	resist	the	temptation	to	go	into	hell!
He	will	suffer	hellfire,	that	is	not	a	problem,	but	he	will	empty	hell."
So	this	statement	--	"THE	OLD	BUDDHA!	THE	OLD	BUDDHA!"	--	is	of	great
gratitude.	He	is	remembering	the	old	Gautam	Buddha,	his	compassion,	his	love,
his	effort	to	transform	the	whole	world	into	absolute	awareness.
"Every	 living	 being	 has	 to	 become	 a	 buddha."	 That	was	 his	message	 --	 not	 a
Buddhist,	but	THE	BUDDHA.
Buson	wrote:
PLUM	SCENT
HALOING
THE	MOON.
The	 scent	 of	 the	 plum	 is	 reaching	 the	 moon,	 and	 creating	 a	 halo	 around	 the
moon.	Only	meditators	can	experience	such	refined,	beautiful	experiences.
Plum	scent	 reaching	 to	 the	moon,	haloing,	making	a	halo	around	 the	moon.	A
tremendous,	beautiful,	vivid	picture.
Sometimes	you	see	the	halo	of	the	moon.	When	it	goes	behind	a	cloud,	then	you
can	see	the	halo.	Inside	you	can	see	the	moon	and	just	around	it,	a	little	fainter
but	still	beautiful,	very	beautiful,	a	round	circle.
Buson	must	have	arisen	out	of	his	meditation	and	seen	 the	moon,	and	smelled
the	plum	perfume.
Zen	masters	used	 to	write	 their	experiences	 immediately	after	meditation.	And
every	 Zen	 master	 was	 asked	 before	 his	 death	 to	 write	 one	 haiku	 to	 be
remembered	for	centuries	--
"This	is	your	last	word."	So	every	Zen	master	has	written	before	dying	a	small
haiku	which	comprehends	his	whole	experience	of	 life.	Before	moving	beyond
life	he	leaves	the	last	signature	and	the	last	message,	compressed,	of	his	whole
life's	experience.
It	happened	in	one	Zen	master's	life	that	the	disciples	forgot	--	they	were	in	such
sadness
--	to	ask	him	to	write.
So	he	died,	it	is	said,	and	they	took	him	out	of	his	cottage	and	were	preparing	the
funeral	 pyre.	 Then	 the	master	 opened	 his	 eyes	 and	 he	 said,	 "Listen,	 you	 have
forgotten	one	thing..."	They	were	shocked!	He	said,	"Bring	the	book.	Otherwise
what	will	the	coming	generations	say?	`What	kind	of	master	died	without	giving
any	message?'	Bring	the	book!"
The	book	was	immediately	brought.	He	wrote	a	small	haiku,	signed	it,	closed	his
eyes,	and	died	again.
Now	they	were	very	cautious,	they	took	their	time.	Somebody	put	his	ear	to	the
master's	heart	--	no	sound,	no	beat.	Somebody	brought	a	mirror	close	to	his	nose
--	maybe	some	small	breath,	then	the	mirror	will	show	the	vapor.	But	no	vapor.
They	shook	him	--	no	reaction,	no	response.	Finally,	they	decided,	"It	seems	he
has	died."	And	he	laughed.
He	said,	"Now	I	am	really	dying.	This	time	don't	try	to	check.	Because	you	were
checking,	I	waited.	Laughter	is	my	last	message	--	write	it	down!"	And	he	really
died.
But	he	tricked	them	two	times.	So	when	I	die,	remember:	Don't	be	in	a	hurry!
Question	3
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
IT	SEEMS	THAT	THE	FREEDOM	OF	CAPITALISM	ALWAYS	MEANT	THE
FREEDOM	 OF	 THE	 JUNGLE	 AND	 THE	 VICTOR	 OF	 THE	 MOST
POWERFUL
EGO.	 IN	AMERICA,	NORTH	AS	WELL	AS	SOUTH	AMERICA,	 IT	ALSO
MEANT
STARVATION	 OF	 THE	 POOR	 AND	 ORGANIZED	 PROSTITUTION	 AND
CRIME
ON	A	VERY	WIDE	 SCALE.	 IS	 NOT	 SOCIALISM	AND	COMMUNISM	A
NECESSARY	 STEP	 IN	 THE	 DEVELOPMENT	 OF	 A	 MORE	 HUMANE
SOCIETY?
Maneesha,	communism	is	certainly	a	necessary	step	for	a	more	humane	society,
but	 not	 socialism.	 You	 don't	 understand	 the	 difference	 between	 socialism	 and
communism.	Most	people	think	they	are	synonymous.
Socialism	is	a	cowardly	compromise	with	capitalism.	Communism	is	absolutely
no	 compromise	 with	 capitalism,	 and	 no	 compromise	 with	 anything	 that
constitutes	capitalism.
Up	 to	 now	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 has	 been	 a	 communist	 country.	 Now	 Comrade
Gorbachev	is	trying	to	bring	it	down	to	socialism.	That	is	destroying	its	dignity;
that	is	a	defeat.	I	hope	he	understands	before	it	is	too	late.
It	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh...	because	I	don't	want	to	be	too	late!
(THE	 ASSEMBLY	 LAUGHS	 APPRECIATIVELY,	 REMEMBERING	 LAST
NIGHTS'
THREE	AND	A	HALF	HOUR	DISCOURSE)
Dick	Puller	is	the	office	playboy,	and	all	the	guys	go	to	him	for	advice	on	how	to
score	with	women.	One	 afternoon,	Muffin	Snuffler	 takes	Dick	 aside,	 and	 asks
him,	 "Tell	me,	Dick,	 how	 do	 you	manage	 it?	You	 are	 a	married	man	 but	 you
have	a	different	girlfriend	every	night.	What	is	your	secret?"
"It	is	simple,"	replies	Dick	Puller.	"It	is	all	in	the	approach.	I	will	tell	you	how	to
do	it.
Tonight,	 take	 the	 five	 o'clock	 train	 from	 Penn	 Central	 Station	 and	 get	 off	 at
Trenton.	At	Trenton	you	will	find	dozens	of	women	waiting	for	their	husbands.
And	there	are	always	some	husbands	who	have	to	work	late,	so	all	you	have	to
do	is	be	charming	and	let	nature	take	its	course."
So	Muffin	catches	 the	five	o'clock	train	from	Penn	Station	but	dozes	off	 in	his
seat.	He	wakes	up	with	a	start	and	finds	that	he	has	gone	past	Trenton	and	he	has
to	get	out	at	Westchester.
Muffin	is	about	to	catch	a	train	to	go	back,	when	he	sees	a	woman	standing	on
the	platform,	looking	very	available.
Muffin	casually	walks	over	to	her	--	one	thing	leads	to	another	and	they	end	up
in	bed	together	at	her	place.
They	are	really	beginning	to	enjoy	themselves	when	the	door	swings	open	and
Dick	Puller	comes	in.
Dick	 takes	one	 look	at	 his	wife	 in	bed	and	 shouts,	 "Dammit,	Betty!	So	 this	 is
what	you	do	when	I	work	late!	And	as	for	you,	Muffin,	you	idiot	--	I	told	you	to
get	off	at	Trenton!"
It	is	four	o'clock	on	that	fateful	day	on	Calvary	Hill.	Jesus	has	been	nailed	up	to
the	cross	since	lunchtime	and	is	beginning	to	feel	really	hang-dog.
All	 of	 his	 disciples	 have	 deserted	 him,	 except	 one.	 Alone	 and	 standing	 right
underneath	the	cross,	in	the	hot	baking	sun,	is	Jesus'	unknown	thirteenth	apostle,
Reginald	 the	 homosexual.	Reginald	 looks	 up	 at	 the	 nearly-naked	 Jesus	 on	 the
cross,	and	whispers,
"Jesus!	Ah!	Jesus!"
Jesus	looks	down	and	says,	"What	is	it,	Reggie?"
"My	Lord!"	replies	Reginald,	looking	up	at	him.	"From	where	I	am	standing,	I
have	to	say	--	you	are	really	well	hung!"
Jack	Jerk	is	watching	as	his	wife,	Jill,	tries	on	her	new	"Betty	Boobs"	brand	bra.
"What	the	hell	did	you	buy	that	thing	for?"	asks	Jack	Jerk.	"You	have	nothing	to
put	into	it!"
"Cool	it,	Jack!"	snaps	Jill.	"Do	I	complain	about	you	wearing	underpants?"
Nivedano...
(Gibberish)
Nivedano...
Be	silent...
Close	your	eyes...	and	feel	your	bodies	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	for	looking	inwards.
Gather	your	life	forces,	and	rush	towards	the	center	of	your	being	--	with	your
total	consciousness,	and	with	an	urgency	as	if	this	is	going	to	be	the	last	moment
of	your	life.
Faster	and	faster...
Deeper	and	deeper...
As	you	come	closer	 to	your	being,	 a	great	 silence	descends	over	you	 just	 like
rain,	very	soft	rain	of	silence,	cool.
Closer...	and	you	find	flowers	of	peace	blossoming	all	around	you.
Still	closer...	and	you	see	for	the	first	time	your	original	face.	This	is	the	buddha.
The	 buddha	 is	 everyone's	 original	 face,	 and	 the	 buddha	 simply	 means
witnessing.
Witness:	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness:	you	are	not	the	mind.
Witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness	and	nothing	else,	and	suddenly	you	are	at	the
very	center	of	your	being.
A	great	ecstasy	arises	in	you,	a	deep	blissfulness	is	felt.
You	disappear...	just	like	incense	smoke	disappearing	into	the	blue	sky...	only	the
buddha	is	left.
To	make	the	witnessing	deeper	and	clearer,	Nivedano...
Relax.
Let	go...	but	continue	to	witness.	Continue	to	be	a	buddha.
This	is	your	nature.
This	is	your	ultimate,	eternal	existence.
At	this	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth.
The	 evening	was	 beautiful	 on	 its	 own,	 but	 your	meditation,	 your	 becoming	 a
buddha,	a	witness,	has	added	to	the	beauty	of	the	evening	tremendously.	Now	it
is	a	miracle.
As	your	witnessing	becomes	more	and	more	clear,	you	start	melting	like	ice	in
the	ocean.
Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 is	 turning	 into	 an	 ocean	 of	 consciousness
without	waves,	without	any	ripples,	just	a	silent	ocean.
Ten	thousand	buddhas	were	just	reflections	--	now	there	is	only	one	buddha.	Ten
thousand	reflections	have	disappeared	into	oneness,	the	ocean.
This	is	the	authentic	buddha.
When	you	become	one	with	existence,	the	cosmos,	you	have	entered	the	ultimate
immortal	existence.
Collect	as	much	of	 the	 juices	of	 life	as	possible.	You	have	 to	bring	 them	back
with	you.
Collect	the	fragrances	of	the	beyond,	the	flowers	that	are	showering	on	you,	the
silence,	the	ecstasy,	the	peace,	the	serenity.
And	don't	forget	to	persuade	the	buddha	to	come	a	little	closer	to	your	ordinary
day-today	existence.
These	are	the	three	steps:
First,	 buddha	 will	 become	 a	 shadow	 to	 you,	 always	 following	 behind	 you.
Second	step,	you	will	become	a	shadow	of	buddha,	always	following	him.
The	 third	 and	 final	 step,	 you	 will	 merge	 into	 the	 buddha	 --	 a	 transparent
consciousness,	 it	 does	not	make	 any	 shadow.	The	moment	you	merge	 into	 the
buddha,	 only	 buddha	 remains:	 you	 are	 no	 more.	 That	 is	 the	 greatest,	 most
blissful	day	of	your	life.
Nivedano...
Come	 back,	 but	 remember	 the	 grace	 of	 a	 buddha,	 the	 beauty,	 the	 silence,	 the
serenity.
Sit	down	for	a	few	moments	 just	 to	remember	where	you	have	been,	what	has
been	 the	 experience	 at	 the	 center	 of	 your	 being,	 what	 golden	 paths	 you	 have
traveled	on....
And	 feel	 the	 presence	 of	 buddha	 just	 behind	 you.	He	 is	 almost	 touching	 you;
every	day	he	is	coming	closer	and	closer.	Every	day	your	life	is	becoming	more
and	more	graceful,	more	and	more	of	a	deeper	understanding	of	 the	 secrets	of
the	cosmos,	more	and	more	mysterious.	Soon	you	will	find	yourself	one	of	the
greatest	mysteries	in	existence.	That	day	will	be	the	day	of	your	awakening,	of
your	enlightenment.
It	is	not	far	away.
It	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 bringing	 more	 intensity,	 more	 totality,	 more	 sense	 of
urgency.	And	 the	Zen	Fire	will	burn	all	 that	 is	 false	 in	you,	and	 the	Zen	Wind
will	take	it	away	from	you.	You	will	remain	just	pure	gold.
This	pure	gold	of	your	being	has	the	face	of	the	buddha.
To	 be	 a	 buddha	 is	 the	 only	meaning,	 the	 only	 significance	 of	 life.	Those	who
miss	it	have	missed	all.	Those	who	have	found	it	have	found	everything	that	is
valuable	in	this	existence.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Socialism	is	a	judas
3	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902035
ShortTitle:
FIRE05
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
180
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ON	 ONE	 OCCASION,	 A	 MONK	 ASKED	 MASTER	 DOGO:	 "EVEN	 IF
THERE	IS	NO
CLOUD	FOR	THOUSANDS	OF	MILES,	 IT	 IS	NOT	YET	THE	ORIGINAL
SKY.
WHAT	IS	THE	ORIGINAL	SKY?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"TODAY,	IT	IS	GOOD	TO	DRY	WHEAT."
ON	ANOTHER	OCCASION,	DOGO	WAS	ASKED	BY	ANOTHER	MONK,
"WHAT
IS	THE	DEEPEST?"
DOGO	 CAME	 DOWN	 FROM	 HIS	 SEAT,	 MADE	 OBEISANCE	 IN	 THE
MANNER
OF	WOMEN	AND	SAID,	 "YOU	HAVE	COME	FROM	FAR,	AND	 I	HAVE
NO
ANSWER	FOR	YOU."
AT	 ANOTHER	 TIME,	 SEKISO	 KEISHO	 ASKED	 DOGO,	 "AFTER	 A
HUNDRED
YEARS,	 IF	 SOMEONE	 ASKS	 ABOUT	 THE	 ABSOLUTE	 MEANING	 OF
THE
UNIVERSE,	WHAT	SHALL	I	SAY	TO	HIM?"
DOGO	CALLED	THE	BOY	ATTENDANT,	WHO	CAME,	AND	TOLD	HIM
TO	FILL
UP	THE	WATER	BOTTLE.	DOGO	WAITED	A	WHILE,	AND	THEN	SAID
TO
SEKISO,	"WHAT	WAS	IT	YOU	ASKED	JUST	NOW?"
SEKISO	REPEATED	THE	QUESTION.	DOGO	THEREUPON	WENT	BACK
TO	HIS
ROOM,	AND	AT	THIS,	SEKISO	BECAME	ENLIGHTENED.
Friends,
First,	I	am	going	to	answer	a	few	questions	from	the	Australian	TV	crew.	They
have	 been	 here	 for	 almost	 one	 month.	When	 they	 had	 come,	 they	 were	 very
serious	people,	as	Australians	are	supposed	to	be.	But	this	morning	they	filmed
me,	 and	 they	 have	 completely	 changed.	 They	 were	 smiling	 and	 laughing	 and
enjoying.
Ecstasy	 is	 contagious.	 It	 is	 dangerous	 to	 enter	 this	 gateless	 gate!	But	 they	 are
very	 nice	 people	 and	 very	 perfectionist.	 They	 have	 been	 doing	 a	 film	 on	 the
commune,	 its	 lifestyle,	 its	 philosophical	 approach	 to	 existence.	And	of	 course,
on	 me,	 the	 spiritual	 terrorist	 behind	 the	 commune!	 --	 or	 in	 other	 words,	 the
center	of	this	cyclone	which	is	going	to	grow	every	day	bigger	and	bigger	and	is
going	to	envelop	the	whole	earth.
When	 they	go	back	 to	 their	 homes,	 their	wives	will	 be	 absolutely	 surprised	 --
whatever	 happened	 to	 these	 guys?	 The	 very	 air	 of	 the	 commune	 changes
personalities.	Your	joy,	your	laughter,	your	blissfulness,	your	silence,	touches	the
very	heart	of	anyone	who	is	alive.
This	morning	I	saw,	these	people	are	not	dead.	They	are	really	alive!	So	now	I
can	 trust	 that	 their	 film	 and	 their	 program	 for	 television	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 real
shock	to	the	whole	of	Australia.	If	they	can	create	the	shock,	I	am	coming!
Question	1
Their	first	question	is:
ARE	EITHER	COMMUNISTS	OR	CAPITALISTS	READY	FOR	THE
CONSCIOUSNESS	REVOLUTION	OF	A	SPIRITUAL	TERRORIST	LIKE
YOURSELF?
They	are	not	ready,	but	I	am	going	to	make	them	ready!	The	time	is	ripe.	They
will	have	to	be	ready,	because	unless	they	become	more	and	more	conscious	and
alert,	the	destiny	of	this	earth	is	doomed.
If	anyone	loves	this	earth,	the	beautiful	birds	and	animals	and	human	beings,	if
anyone	 has	 a	 sense	 of	 this	 tremendous	 phenomenon...	 because	 the	 whole
universe	 is	 without	 any	 greenery,	 without	 any	 flowers,	 without	 any	 oceans,
without	 any	 rivers.	 This	 place,	 this	 small	 earth	 --	 very	 small	 --	 has	 a	 special
position	 in	 the	 world.	 In	 the	 whole	 of	 existence	 it	 is	 only	 this	 earth	 that	 has
produced	buddhas,	enlightened	people.	This	earth	has	become	holy,	just	because
so	many	buddhas	have	traveled	on	it.
And	because	the	criminal	politicians	have	come	to	the	end	of	the	rope,	now	they
don't	 know	 what	 to	 do	 except	 create	 a	 war.	 To	 counteract,	 to	 create	 an
atmosphere	 in	 the	world	against	any	possible	war,	 the	only	way	 is	 to	 raise	 the
consciousness	of	the	people.
I	know	perfectly	well	that	neither	capitalists	are	ready	nor	communists	are	ready.
But	first	communists	will	be	ready	--	then	the	capitalists,	because	the	capitalists
are	 full	 of	 vested	 interest.	 The	 Soviet	Union	 and	 the	 people	 living	 there	 have
nothing	to	lose.	They	are	all	equally	poor,	and	seventy	years	of	revolution	have
created	 a	 complete	 vacuum	 in	 their	 being.	 That	 vacuum	 can	 be	 filled	 only	 by
meditative	awareness.
As	 I	 have	 told	 you	 again	 and	 again,	 nobody	 can	 live	 on	 negative	 ideas.	 The
positive	idea	may	be	wrong,	may	be	fiction,	may	be	just	a	hope,	a	consolation,
but	 still	 it	 fills	 your	 being.	 It	 keeps	 you	 unaware	 of	 the	 hollowness.	 But	 the
negative	idea	does	not	fill	your	inner	being.	The	positive	means	your	fridge	may
be	full	of	rubbish,	junk,	but	still	--
when	you	open	it,	it	is	full.
When	somebody	starts	believing	in	no	God,	in	no	heaven,	in	no	hell	--	drops	all
fictions,	 all	 the	consolations	humanity	has	 lived	with	 for	 thousands	of	years	 --
then	suddenly	he	feels	a	great	vacuum,	a	hollowness,	a	meaninglessness.	Hence,
I	always	give	more	priority	to	the	atheist	than	the	theist.	The	atheist	is	in	every
way	ready,	he	just	has	to	be	hit	on	the	right	point.	He	has	no	God,	he	has	nothing
to	cling	to.
In	the	communist	ideology	he	is	left	absolutely	alone.	That's	what	is	missing	in
communist	ideology:	it	cannot	fill	people's	hearts,	it	cannot	nourish	their	beings;
hence	 the	 communists	 are	 going	 to	 be	 first	 to	 rise	 in	 consciousness.	 The
capitalist	has	too	much	vested	interest.	He	has	so	many	troubles	and	problems,
so	much	money,	so	many	businesses.	He	has	no	time	even	to	look	inside	and	see
that	he	is	hollow.
I	have	heard	about	a	very	super-rich	man.	When	he	died,	then	he	realized	that	he
used	to	be	alive	--	but	only	when	he	died.	In	the	grave	where	he	was	buried,	he
realized	for	the	first	time,	"My	God!	I	have	been	alive	for	eighty	years	and	never
thought	about	what	it	is	to	be	alive!"
There	are	many	people	who	only	realize	the	value	of	 life	at	 the	point	of	death.
But	 then	 it	 is	 too	 late.	 Life	 keeps	 them	 engaged.	 The	 capitalist	 has	 too	many
things	 to	 remain	 engaged	 and	 involved	 in.	The	 communist	 has	 nothing;	 hence
the	great	possibility	that	the	communist	may	be	ahead	of	the	capitalist	as	far	as
consciousness-raising	is	concerned.
The	 capitalist	 goes	 on	 postponing.	 Even	 though	 he	 sees	 the	 poverty	 he	 is
creating,	the	beggars	he	is	creating,	the	starving	people	he	is	creating,	he	goes	on
thinking	that	a	few	reforms	will	do.	A	little	higher	wages,	a	few	more	facilities
for	 the	 poor,	 for	 the	 proletariat	 --	 that's	what	 I	 call	 socialism.	 Socialism	 is	 an
invention	of	the	capitalist	mind	to	distract	people	from	communism.	Socialism	is
reformist,	 it	 is	 not	 revolutionary.	And	 reforms	 can	 keep	 people	 hoping.	 It	 is	 a
welfare	 state;	 it	 is	 just	 renovating	 the	 old	 house	which	 is	 getting	 ready	 to	 fall
down	any	moment.
Revolution	 means	 demolishing	 the	 old	 completely	 and	 creating	 the	 new,
discontinuous	with	the	past.
I	love	always	to	tell	a	small	story....
There	used	to	be	a	very	ancient	church,	so	ancient	that	even	the	priest	was	afraid
to	go	inside.	When	there	was	a	strong	wind,	the	church	used	to	wave	like	a	tree.
Any	moment	there	was	a	possibility	that	it	would	fall	down.
So	the	priest	used	to	hold	his	assembly	outside,	far	away	from	the	church,	under
the	trees.
But	finally	something	had	to	be	done.	The	trustees	of	the	church	met	--	they	also
met	outside	--	and	they	proposed	a	few	things	to	be	done.
First,	 the	 church	was	 too	 old,	 a	 new	 church	was	 needed.	 But	 this	 is	 how	 the
reformist	mind	functions....	Their	second	proposal	was,	"We	will	create	the	new
church,	 but	we	will	make	 the	 new	 church	 from	 the	materials	 --	 the	 doors,	 the
bricks,	the	statues,	everything	--	of	the	old	church.	We	will	make	the	new	church
exactly	the	same	as	the	old	church,	with	the	same	materials."
And	their	third	proposal	was,	"We	will	not	destroy	the	old	church	until	the	new
one	is	ready."
Now	how	can	you	manage	 it?	The	reformist	goes	on	patching	 things,	covering
things,	covering	wounds	and	cancers.
Socialism	is	a	renegade,	it	 is	a	Judas.	It	 is	because	of	the	communist	danger	to
the	capitalists	that	they	are	proposing	a	new	form,	socialism.	It	sounds	good,	but
the	intention	is	very	evil.
I	am	worried	about	Gorbachev	because	he	 is	not	using	 the	word	 `communism'
anymore.
He	is	using	the	word	`socialism'	--	perhaps	unconsciously,	not	being	aware	that
socialism	 is	 a	 conspiracy	 of	 the	 capitalist	 world	 to	 prevent	 an	 international
revolution	 that	 will	 transform	 the	 whole	 world	 into	 a	 communist	 world,	 with
equal	opportunity	for	everybody	to	attain	to	his	potential.
And	when	 the	world	 is	 one,	 there	 is	 no	need	of	 any	government	 --	 that's	why
Karl	Marx	says	the	state	will	wither	away.	But	it	can	wither	away	only	when	the
whole	world	is	communist.
I	have	every	hope	that	because	of	the	oncoming	possibility	of	a	third	world	war...
if	it	happens	it	will	be	the	last	world	war,	and	there	will	be	no	one	left	even	to
write	the	history	about	it.
When	Albert	Einstein	was	asked,	"Can	you	say	something	about	the	third	world
war?"
his	reply	was	amazing.	He	said,	"No,	I	cannot	say	a	single	thing	about	the	third
world	war,	but	I	can	say	something	about	the	fourth."
The	questioner	 said,	 "You	 can	 say	 something	 about	 the	 fourth	 and	you	 cannot
say	anything	about	the	third?	This	is	strange."
Albert	Einstein	laughed;	he	said,	"It	is	not	strange.	I	can	say	about	the	fourth	that
it	will	 never	happen.	But	 about	 the	 third,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 say.	The	calamity
will	be	so	big	that	man	will	have	never	seen	such	calamity.	Within	ten	to	fifteen
minutes	the	whole	world,	all	life,	every	living	thing	on	the	earth,	will	be	dead."
Just	 America	 alone	 has	 enough	 nuclear	 weapons	 to	 destroy	 life	 on	 this	 earth
seven	times,	although	there	is	no	need.	Only	one	man,	Jesus,	is	supposed	to	have
been	resurrected,	and	I	don't	think	even	he	will	be	able	to	resurrect	seven	times.
One	 time	he	managed	 to	 escape	 from	a	 cave	 and	befool	 the	whole	world,	 but
seven	times?	It	will	be	impossible.
He	never	went	back	 to	 Jerusalem,	because	once	he	managed	 to	befool	people;
now	it	is	impossible.	If	he	is	caught	again	he	will	be	crucified.
What	is	the	purpose	of	accumulating	so	many	nuclear	weapons?	And	seeing	the
situation,	 the	Soviet	Union	has	 stopped	 creating	more	nuclear	weapons.	There
are	enough	in	the	Soviet	Union	also	to	destroy	the	whole	of	humanity,	all	living
beings.	Now	there	is	no	point.	They	seem	to	be	more	intelligent,	understanding
that	if	you	have	enough	nuclear	weapons	to	destroy	the	whole	world,	why	go	on
wasting	money	piling	up	nuclear	weapons?
The	totality	of	the	war	is	a	new	phenomenon	to	be	encountered.	All	the	wars	in
the	past	were	small,	local.	Even	our	second	world	war	was	nothing	compared	to
the	possibility	of	 the	 third	world	war.	 I	 call	 it	 a	 total	war,	because	 it	will	be	a
total	destruction	of	 the	planet	Earth.	This	 creates	 a	 certain	 situation	which	has
never	been	there	before.
The	time	is	short,	perhaps	not	more	than	ten	or	eleven	years.	By	the	year	2000,
most	probably	we	will	have	either	committed	suicide	or	we	will	have	changed
the	whole	structure	of	the	human	mind	and	raised	the	consciousness	and	created
millions	 of	meditators	 and	 thousands	 of	 buddhas.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 alternative:
War	or	meditation.
War	or	spiritual	revolution.
And	 the	 war	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 as	 the	 culmination	 of	 our	 whole	 human
history.	It	is	not	coming	from	the	sky	--	it	is	coming	from	our	past,	accumulating
more	 and	more	 anger,	more	 and	more	violence,	more	 and	more	weapons.	The
first	world	war	was	smaller,	the	second	became	bigger.	The	third	is	going	to	be
total.
Because	 it	 is	 a	 total	war,	 every	 person	 has	 to	 understand	 his	 responsibility.	 In
smaller	wars	it	was	nothing	to	be	worried	about.	If	it	was	going	on	in	Vietnam...
who	 cares	 about	 Vietnam?	 Many	 people	 have	 not	 even	 heard	 the	 NAME
Vietnam.	 If	 it	 is	 happening	 in	 Afghanistan,	 who	 cares?	 --	 small	 pieces	 of
humanity	 are	 involved.	 But	 this	 time	 it	 is	 the	 whole	 existence	 of	 life	 and	 all
living	beings	with	us:	trees,	and	roses,	and	lotuses....
And	we	are	coming	closer	to	the	point	where	man	can	become	a	superman.	Now
we	 cannot	 afford	 a	 war.	 We	 cannot	 afford	 a	 global	 suicide.	 We	 have	 to
understand	how	to	transcend	the	mind	that	the	past	has	created	and	programmed
for	wars	and	destruction	and	violence.
That's	my	whole	work:	to	erase	the	past	from	your	mind	and	give	you	a	present
orientation	to	look	at	reality	with	clean	eyes.	And	your	future	will	be	golden	if
your	present	is	clean.	Out	of	this	clean	presence	will	arise	a	new	future,	which
will	not	have	any	continuity	with	the	past;	it	will	be	a	quantum	leap.
If	communists	are	turned	towards	a	revolution	for	consciousness,	capitalists	will
not	be	 far	behind	 --	 just	 as	 they	are	not	 far	behind	as	 far	as	war	 is	 concerned,
destruction	is	concerned.	It	 is	a	competitive	world.	If	communists	turn	towards
consciousness,	that	will	be	a	great	impetus	for	the	capitalists	to	try	to	be	ahead	of
them.	Nobody	wants	to	be	behind!
So	my	whole	strategy	is,	the	communists	should	be	turned	towards	a	revolution
of	consciousness.	That	will	become	a	Zen	Fire	and	a	Zen	Wind,	going	around	the
earth,	 and	 turning	 everybody	 towards	 a	 new	 competition	 that	 they	 have	 never
known	before:	who	becomes	the	buddha	first?
Question	2
The	second	question:
YOU	HAVE	TALKED	ABOUT	THE	GREAT	RUSSIAN	EXPERIMENT.	CAN
YOU
TALK	ABOUT	THE	GREAT	EXPERIMENT	OF	YOUR	COMMUNE	HERE?
My	 commune	 here	 is	 a	 far	 greater	 experiment	 than	 any	 communism.
Communism	was	only	an	economic	revolution,	changing	the	economic	structure
of	the	society.	It	was	very	partial;	that's	why	the	Russians	are	feeling	a	little	sad,
something	is	missing.
A	 partial	 revolution	 is	 bound	 to	 fail.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 only	 one	 part	 of	 your	 body	 is
healthy	and	the	rest	of	the	body	is	sick.	What	are	you	going	to	do	with	one	hand
healthy	and	the	whole	body	sick?
Revolution	 has	 to	 be	 total	 on	 every	 plane	 --	 economic,	 social,	 psychological,
spiritual.
Unless	 it	 is	 a	 total	 revolution	man	 is	going	 to	 feel	himself	 crippled,	 as	 if	your
head	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger	and	your	body	remains	the	same.	Soon
you	will	be	in	trouble.
I	have	heard	about	a	circus....
The	manager	declared,	"Now	comes	our	last	and	greatest	entertainment	for	you.
Wake	up	everybody!	We	bring	to	the	stage	our	greatest	dancer."	So	a	few	people
who	had	fallen	asleep	woke	up,	sat	up	in	their	chairs,	alert.	The	greatest	dancer?
Then	 the	curtain	opened	and	 they	 saw	a	woman	 lying	 flat	on	her	 chest	on	 the
floor.	 They	 could	 not	 think	 what	 kind	 of	 dance	 was	 going	 to	 be	 happening.
Finally,	the	woman	tried	hard	to	get	up.	Her	breasts	were	so	big	that	just	to	get
up	was	the	dance!	When	she	stood	up	everybody	was	clapping!	They	had	never
seen	 such	 a	 dance	 --	 the	 woman	 was	 doing	 a	 miracle!	 Her	 breasts	 were	 still
touching	the	earth!
The	manager	came	back	and	he	said,	 "Have	you	seen	 the	dance?"	And	people
laughed;	they	said,	"It	is	really	the	greatest	dance	we	could	have	ever	imagined!"
Partial	 revolution	 is	 not	 revolution.	 Only	 the	 total	 revolution	 --	 and	 total
revolution	has	to	arise	from	your	very	center.
That	 is	my	work	here.	 I	want	every	 individual	 to	clean	 the	past	 from	his	mind
completely.
All	his	prejudices,	all	his	thoughts	--	political,	social,	religious	--	everything	has
to	be	dropped.	Just	a	clean	slate,	and	you	have	arrived	to	the	space	of	no-mind.
No-mind	 is	 meditation,	 and	 no-mind	 is	 the	 revelation,	 and	 no-mind	 is	 the
greatest	rebellion	that	has	ever	happened.
In	the	past	only	very	few	people...	a	Gautam	Buddha	here	and	there,	thousands
of	years	pass	and	then	comes	one	person	who	blossoms	into	a	buddha.	But	now
there	is	no	more	time.	You	cannot	postpone	for	tomorrow.	Whatever	you	want	to
do	has	to	be	done	now!
For	 the	 first	 time	 the	present	 is	becoming	more	and	more	 important.	Each	day
you	 are	 coming	 closer	 to	 choosing	 the	 alternative:	 either	 move	 towards
becoming	a	buddha,	or	move	towards	becoming	a	corpse.
I	don't	think	anybody	wants	to	die,	particularly	when	all	life	is	at	risk.
This	third	world	war	cannot	happen.	We	are	going	to	prevent	it!
Our	 ways	 are	 very	 different...	 that's	 why	 I	 love	 your	 expression	 for	 me,	 a
"spiritual	terrorist."	I	don't	have	any	weapons,	I	don't	have	any	nuclear	missiles,
but	I	have	something	greater	and	something	far	more	effective.	It	is	not	to	kill,	it
is	to	bring	life	to	those	who	are	living	almost	as	if	they	are	dead.	It	is	bringing
awareness	to	those	who	are	behaving	like	somnambulists,	walking	in	their	sleep,
talking	in	their	sleep,	not	knowing	exactly	what	they	are	doing	and	why	they	are
doing	it.
I	want	people	to	be	so	awake	that	their	whole	consciousness	goes	to	the	deepest
part	of	their	being,	and	also	to	the	highest	peak.	A	vertical	growth	--	just	like	a
tree	grows.	Its	roots	go	down	into	the	earth,	and	its	branches	spread	towards	the
stars.	Its	blossoms	flower	into	the	sky,	 its	nourishment	comes	from	the	deepest
part	of	the	earth.	It	 is	always	balanced:	the	higher	the	tree	goes,	 the	deeper	the
roots.	You	cannot	have	a	 cedar	of	Lebanon	 tree,	 four	hundred	or	 five	hundred
years	 old,	 rising	 so	 high	 in	 the	 sky,	 with	 small	 roots.	 It	 will	 fall	 down
immediately.
Life	 needs	 a	 balance	 between	 the	 depth	 and	 the	 height.	 I	 teach	 you	 both
simultaneously.
In	your	entering	to	the	center	in	meditation,	you	are	growing	your	roots	deeper
into	the	cosmos.	And	bringing	the	buddha	out	from	the	hidden	center	is	bringing
your	fragrance,	bringing	your	grace,	bringing	your	ecstasy	higher,	where	it	can
blossom	into	the	sky.
Your	 ecstasy	 is	 a	 movement	 towards	 the	 height	 and	 your	 meditation	 is	 a
movement	 towards	 the	 depth.	 And	 once	 you	 have	 both,	 your	 life	 becomes	 a
celebration.
That	is	my	work,	to	transform	your	life	from	a	sad	affair	into	a	celebration.
If	we	can	fill	the	earth	with	laughter	there	is	not	going	to	be	any	war.	If	we	can
teach	 the	 soldiers	 to	 tell	 jokes	 to	 the	 enemy,	 there	 is	 not	 going	 to	be	 any	war.
They	will	throw	their	guns	and	sit	down	and	share	jokes!	And	when	somebody	is
telling	a	 joke,	can	you	kill	him?	When	he	 is	bringing	 laughter	 to	you,	can	you
destroy	him?
Every	man	now	is	responsible	to	create	a	buddhafield	around	himself,	an	energy
field	 that	 goes	 on	 becoming	 bigger	 and	 bigger.	 Create	 as	 many	 vibrations	 of
laughter,	joy,	celebration,	as	possible;	dance,	sing,	let	the	whole	of	humanity	by
and	by	catch	the	fire	of	Zen	and	the	wind	of	Zen.
Nobody	is	really	interested	to	be	sad.	Nobody	is	interested	to	torture	himself.	It
is	your	religions	and	your	politicians	who	go	on	making	you	sad	and	miserable,
because	in	your	misery	is	their	whole	business.	If	you	start	laughing,	if	you	start
dancing,	throwing	the	gun	away;	if	you	take	up	a	guitar....
Jesus	 says	 to	 his	 disciples,	 "Carry	 your	 cross	 on	 your	 shoulders."	 I	 say,	 don't
listen	 to	 such	 nonsense.	 Carry	 your	 guitar	 on	 your	 shoulders,	 and	 fresh	 and
fragrant	 laughter	 on	 your	 lips.	Make	 this	whole	world	 a	merry-go-round.	You
don't	 have	 that	word.	You	 have	 the	word	 `SORRY-go-round'.	 I	 have	 to	 create
language	for	you!
Just	 your	 laughter	 will	 be	 enough	 to	 prevent	 the	 war.	 Your	 celebration,	 your
dance,	 will	 be	 enough	 to	 prevent	 the	war.	 Your	 ecstasy,	 your	meditation,	 will
create	a	tremendous	force	which	will	be	far	higher	because	it	is	life-affirmative.
Your	religions	are	life-negative.	Your	politicians	are	life-negative.	Your	religions
prepare	you	for	beyond	life,	not	to	live	here	joyously.	And	your	politicians	create
weapons	 to	 kill	 you.	 Politicians	 kill	 you	 and	 priests	 console	 you:	 "Don't	 be
worried.	After	your	death	you	will	be	entering	paradise	--	beautiful	women	and
rivers	 of	 wine."	 No	 prohibition,	 no	 marriage...	 have	 you	 ever	 heard	 that	 in
paradise	there	are	marriages?
I	am	creating	a	paradise	herenow.	I	don't	wait	for	death	--	why	should	one	wait
for	death?	And	if	there	is	going	to	be	a	paradise	after	death,	please	prepare	for	it!
Be	 ready	 for	 it!	 Enjoy	 here,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 enjoy	 there.	Only	 those	who	 are
capable	of	enjoying	here,	and	dancing	here,	and	singing	here,	and	 loving	here,
will	be	able	to	enjoy	paradise...
not	your	saints,	only	my	people!
Your	 saints	 will	 be	 sitting	 there	miserable,	 not	 looking	 at	 beautiful	 women	 --
with	closed	eyes,	shrinking	into	themselves.	And	what	to	do?	--	there	is	no	water
available,	only	wine,	and	all	around	beautiful	women,	naked,	dancing.
One	Hindu	saint	died	a	few	years	ago,	Swami	Muktananda.	You	must	have	heard
his	name;	many	of	you	may	have	seen	him.	But	you	don't	know	what	happened
in	paradise.
One	of	his	disciples	was	so	miserable	because	his	guru	had	died,	he	committed
suicide.
He	wanted	to	go	with	the	guru.	He	reached	just	a	little	late,	but	he	reached.	And
what	he	saw	--	he	could	not	believe	his	eyes!	He	saw	Muktananda	lying	naked
under	 a	 tree,	 and	 on	 top	 of	 him	 was	 an	 American	 actress,	 Marilyn	 Monroe,
making	love	to	Muktananda.
He	could	not	believe	that	Muktananda,	who	was	always	teaching	celibacy....
In	 his	 book,	 CHIDVILAS	 --	 "Play	 of	 Consciousness",	 he	 describes	 that	 his
discipline	of	celibacy	came	to	such	a	point	that	his	prick	would	rise	so	high	that
it	would	 touch	his	 navel....	The	disciple	 had	 read	 it.	And	what	 is	Muktananda
doing?	Has	he	forgotten	everything?	But	anyway,	Muktananda	is	his	master,	so
he	has	to	pay	his	respects.
He	did	not	look	at	what	was	happening,	he	just	touched	Muktananda's	feet	and
said,
"Baba,	I	think	this	must	be	the	reward	for	all	your	virtues."
And	Marilyn	Monroe	said,	"You	idiot!	This	is	not	the	reward	for	this	idiot,	this	is
punishment	for	me!"
I	want	you	to	prepare,	because	paradise	is	going	to	be	really	great!	Far	out!	But
you	 have	 to	 be	 ready.	 So	 love,	 drink,	 dance	 --	 this	 is	 the	 preparation,	 the
discipline	for	entering	into	paradise.	I	am	an	utter	hedonist,	and	only	a	hedonist
has	the	right	to	enter	into	paradise.
People	 who	 are	 masochists,	 torturing	 themselves,	 need	 to	 go	 to	 hell	 because
there	they	will	not	have	to	torture	themselves,	the	Devil	and	his	whole	army	will
torture	them.	That	will	be	their	joy.
Hell	 is	 for	 saints,	heaven	 is	 for	 sinners	 --	 this	 is	absolutely	 logical.	This	 is	my
revolution!	Once	we	enter	into	heaven,	we	are	going	to	throw	all	the	saints	into
hell:
"You	enjoy	torture	--	get	tortured!	We	enjoy	luxury,	we	enjoy	every	comfort.	Let
us	possess	paradise;	you	have	lived	here	long	enough.	Just	get	out!"
I	am	not	going	alone,	you	are	all	coming	with	me!	Because	I	am	a	 lazy	guy,	 I
will	be	going	still	sitting	in	my	chair.	If	Mohammed	can	go	riding	on	his	horse,
what	 is	wrong	with	 it?	 If	 Jesus	 can	go	directly,	 alive,	 and	pulls	his	mother	up
after	him,	what	is	the	problem?
Perhaps	I	may	reach	a	little	earlier	than	you,	because	my	podium	is	a	little	higher
--	 but	 you	won't	 be	 too	 late.	 I	will	 greet	 you	 there,	 "Hi!	So	you	have	 arrived.
Now	do	the	work
--	throw	all	those	saints	towards	hell."
They	deserve	 it.	They	have	been	disciplining	 themselves	 for	 it.	We	have	been
disciplining	 ourselves	 for	 paradise.	 Our	 whole	 expertise,	 our	 whole
specialization	is	to	possess	the	kingdom	of	God.
Question	3
The	 third	 question	 is	 from	 a	 sannyasin.	 A	 sannyasin	 has	 asked:	 I	 CANNOT
HELP	FEELING	SHOCKED	AT	THE	IDEA	THAT	SINCE	PEOPLE
HAVE	TO	DIE	ANYWAY,	THERE	IS	NO	HARM	IN	THEM	DYING	BY	THE
THOUSANDS	 TO	 PRESERVE	 COMMUNISM.	 WHAT	 IS	 IT	 THAT
HORRIFIES	ME
ABOUT	THIS?
It	 is	not	only	you,	 there	may	be	a	 few	more	who	have	been	shocked.	Majid	 is
sitting	there
--	he	must	be	shocked,	and	other	Italians,	because	they	have	a	political	prejudice
in	 their	mind.	They	 think	 they	are	 radicals,	and	 they	don't	understand	even	 the
ABC	of	radicalism.
When	 I	 said	 that	 Joseph	Stalin	 killed	 one	million	 people	 to	 save	 communism,
you	did	not	give	much	thought	to	it.	Who	were	the	one	million	people?	Priests,
bishops,	cardinals,	archbishops	--	those	were	the	people,	and	they	were	not	ready
to	give	away	the	possessions	of	the	church	to	the	society.	These	were	the	people,
whether	 rich	 or	 poor	 it	 does	 not	matter,	 who	 resisted	 revolution,	 who	wanted
their	things	to	be	theirs.
Those	 things	may	not	 be	much	 --	 a	 house,	 a	 little	 piece	of	 land,	maybe	 a	 few
trees,	maybe	a	few	cows	or	horses.	But	for	centuries	man	has	been	programmed
to	possess,	 and	 to	 go	on	possessing	more	 and	protect	 and	defend	whatever	 he
already	possesses.
So	these	were	the	people	who	were	obstacles	to	revolution.	The	revolution	was
for	 twenty	 million	 people	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union.	 And	 at	 that	 time	 the	 idea	 of
revolution	was	not	national,	it	was	an	idea	of	international	revolution.
You	will	be	surprised	to	know...	I	was	very	small	when	I	became	acquainted	with
a	man,	one	of	the	most	intelligent	men	I	have	come	across,	who	was	with	Lenin
and	Trotsky	 in	 the	Soviet	 revolution.	His	name	was	Manvendra	Nath	Roy.	He
was	 one	 of	 the	 members	 of	 the	 international	 commanding	 body	 of	 the
communists,	the	Politburo.	He	was	the	only	Indian	who	ever	rose	to	that	status,
and	he	fought	in	the	revolution	side	by	side	with	Lenin.
After	 the	 revolution	 he	 thought,	 "Now	my	work	 is	 in	 India.	 I	 have	 to	 go	 and
create	revolution	in	India."	But	here	he	found	himself	in	utter	difficulty,	because
the	 Hindu	 mind	 is	 more	 possessive	 than	 any	 other	 mind.	 It	 talks	 about	 non-
possessiveness,	 it	 talks	 about	 celibacy,	 it	 talks	 about	 morality.	 But	 always
remember,	 people	 who	 talk	 about	 these	 things	 are	 the	 people	 who	 are
suppressing	just	the	opposite.
A	 person	 who	 praises	 celibacy	 knows	 perfectly	 well	 that	 he	 is	 not	 celibate.
People	who	are	greedy,	their	religion	will	be	teaching	no	greed.	Otherwise	why
should	 religions	 teach	 no	 greed?	 For	 five	 thousand	 years,	 from	 Manu	 to
Yagnavalkya	 to	Buddha	 to	Mahavira	 to	Mahatma	Gandhi	 --	all	 the	 teachers	of
this	 country	 are	 talking	 to	 people	 about	 "non-attachment."	 Why?	 Certainly
people	are	too	much	attached;	otherwise...	their	whole	history	is	the	teaching	of
non-attachment!	People	must	be	greedy;	hence	the	teaching,	"no	greed."	People
must	be	violent;	hence	the	teaching	of	non-violence.
Always	remember	this	as	a	fundamental.	Look	at	the	teachings	of	the	scriptures
and	you	will	know	what	kind	of	people	they	were	--	just	the	opposite,	otherwise
there	is	no	need.
Why	does	Buddha	go	on	telling	people	his	whole	life,	forty-two	years	after	his
enlightenment,	"Don't	be	attached	to	things.	Be	non-possessive."	And	the	same
continues....
When	 M.N.	 Roy	 came	 to	 India,	 he	 found	 himself	 in	 an	 absolutely	 different
world.	 He	 was	 thinking	 that	 because	 everybody	 had	 been	 teaching	 non-
possessiveness,	 communism	would	be	 the	easiest	 thing	 in	 India.	This	 is	where
logic	fails.	He	had	read	--	he	had	lived	his	whole	life	in	the	West	--	he	had	only
read	about	Indian	scriptures,	that	they	have	been	teaching	non-possessiveness	for
centuries	 and	 centuries.	 So	 he	 thought	 people	must	 be	 ready	 to	 give	 all	 their
possessions	to	the	collective;	they	will	not	have	much	difficulty	in	dropping	their
private	possessions.
But	when	he	came	to	India	he	was	utterly	surprised.	Nobody	was	ready;	the	very
word
`communism'	 was	 anathema.	 And	 because	 he	 was	 a	 well-educated	 man,	 well
dressed,	used	to	smoke	cigarettes,	the	Indian	mind	turned	absolutely	against	him.
Mahatma	 Gandhi	 crushed	 that	 man,	 who	 was	 far	 more	 intellectual,	 far	 more
significant	 than	Mahatma	 Gandhi	 himself.	 But	Mahatma	 Gandhi	 crushed	 him
because	people	would	rather	follow	Mahatma	Gandhi,	half-naked	--	it	appeals	to
people.	"This	is	a	mahatma.
And	 what	 kind	 of	 mahatma	 is	 this	 who	 is	 smoking	 cigarettes,	 who	 is	 well
dressed	in	a	poor	country?"
Nobody	listened	to	M.N.	Roy.	Perhaps	I	was	the	only	person	who	became	very
deeply	interested	in	him.	It	was	just	by	chance	that	I	met	him,	in	a	train.	I	was
going	 for	 my	 studies,	 traveling	 from	 my	 village	 to	 the	 bigger	 city	 to	 join	 a
university.	And	just	on	the	platform	we	were	both	waiting	for	the	train...	because
in	 India	no	 train	 ever	 arrives	on	 time.	Only	once	has	 it	 arrived	on	 time	 in	my
experience.	 For	 twenty	 years	 I	 was	 traveling	 in	 trains	 continually	 --	 only	 one
time....
In	Allahabad,	 the	 train	 arrived	 exactly	 at	 six	 o'clock	 in	 the	morning.	 It	was	 a
miracle!	 I	 ran	 to	 thank	 the	 driver,	 and	 I	 told	 him,	 "You	 have	 done	 it!	 I	 was
waiting	for	a	day	when	somebody	would	bring	the	train	at	the	right	time."
He	 looked	 very	 ashamed.	 I	 said,	 "Why	 are	 you	 looking	 ashamed?"	 He	 said,
"This	is	yesterday's	train."
By	that	 time	the	conductor	had	come,	and	 the	stationmaster	had	come.	I	asked
the	stationmaster,	"This	seems	to	be	stupid.	If	every	train	is	going	to	be	late,	why
publish	the	timetable?"
He	said,	"The	timetable	is	absolutely	needed;	otherwise	how	will	we	know	how
much	the	train	is	late?"	So	the	timetable	is	published	in	India	to	know	how	much
the	train	is	late.
I	said,	"That	seems	to	be	absolutely	right."
The	train	was	late	and	I	was	sitting	on	the	bench,	and	M.N.	Roy	came	and	sat	by
my	side.
I	was	reading	a	book	by	Lenin,	his	collected	works.	He	was	surprised,	because	I
was	 so	 young	 --	 may	 have	 been	 seventeen	 years	 old.	 He	 looked	 at	 the	 big
volume,	and	he	asked	me,	"Where	did	you	get	this	collected	works	of	Lenin?"
I	said,	"I	have	the	whole	library	of	Marx,	Engels,	Lenin,	Stalin,	everybody."
He	said,	"You	are	the	first	man...	I	have	been	here	for	seven	years,	continuously
trying.
Are	you	a	communist?"
I	said,	"Right	now	I	am	nobody.	But	who	knows?	I	may	turn	out	a	communist.	I
am	 looking	 in	 every	 direction	 without	 any	 prejudice.	 Whichever	 dimension
fulfills	me	totally,	I	will	be	that.	Communism	is	my	study,	I	am	not	a	communist.
I	 have	 to	 study	 many	 more	 things	 before	 I	 can	 decide.	 I	 have	 to	 look	 into
anarchism,	I	have	to	look	into	socialism,	I	have	to	look	into	capitalism,	I	have	to
look	into	spiritualism.	Before	that	I	cannot	say	anything.	I	am	just	a	seeker."
We	became	friends.	He	talked	about	his	experiences	in	the	Soviet	revolution,	and
he	became	a	constant	visitor	to	my	small	house.
I	was	 living	outside	 the	 city	 in	 a	 very	 small	 house.	Nobody	 else	was	 ready	 to
take	 that	 house	 because	 it	was	 known	 as	 being	 haunted	 by	 ghosts.	 So	when	 I
asked	 the	 owner,	 he	 said,	 "Without	 any	 rent	 you	 can	 live	 there.	 At	 least
somebody	living	there	may	create	 the	idea	in	people	that	 it	 is	not	haunted.	If	a
small	boy	is	living	there	alone..."	So	he	said,	"It	is	good.	If	you	need	anything	I
will	support	you.	I	want	to	sell	it,	but	neither	can	I	sell	it	nor	is	anybody	ready	to
rent	 it.	 And	 I	 myself	 am	 afraid!	 My	 wife	 is	 not	 willing	 to	 move	 with	 me,
otherwise	 we	 could	 sell	 this	 house	 and	 move	 there.	 That	 house	 is	 in	 a	 very
beautiful	location."
It	was	absolutely	alone.	For	miles	there	were	no	other	houses,	and	behind	were
the	beautiful	Satpura	Mountains.	It	was	so	peaceful	there.	He	said,	"I	purchased
it	just	to	live	there,	but	nobody	is	willing.	So	you	start	living	there."
I	started	living	there,	but	I	continued	to	create	the	fear	in	everybody	that	it	was
haunted	by	ghosts	because	if	somebody	purchased	it,	I	would	be	thrown	out.	The
owner	heard	that	I	was	continuing	to	create	the	rumor.	He	came	to	me:	"This	is
strange.	I	gave	it	to	you	free	of	charge..."
I	 said,	 "I	will	keep	 it	 free	of	 charge!	But	 remember,	 it	 is	haunted	with	ghosts.
Don't	come	here	--	whenever	you	want	me,	just	phone	me	and	I	will	come	--	it	is
dangerous!"
He	said,	"And	it	is	not	dangerous	for	you?"
I	said,	"I	know	a	few	secrets	about	ghosts.	They	are	afraid	of	me.	Do	you	know
anything?"	He	said,	"No,	I	don't..."	I	said,	"You	simply	go	back."
And	I	lived	in	that	house	for	almost	ten	years	without	any	rent.	On	the	contrary,	I
would	order	him,	"Send	me	something"	--	and	he	would	bring	it	--	"otherwise	I
will	leave	the	house."
M.N.	 Roy	 used	 to	 come,	 and	 he	 loved	 the	 place.	 He	 used	 to	 live	 in	 the
Himalayas	 in	 Nainital,	 but	 he	 said,	 "Even	 there	 it	 is	 too	 crowded,	 too	 many
people	have	come.	Roads,	airport,	buses	--	it	is	no	more	the	old	Nainital	I	used	to
know	in	my	childhood	before	I	left	India.	But	your	place..."
I	said,	"This	place	will	remain	as	it	is,	as	long	as	I	want	to	live	in	it.	For	miles
nobody	can	build	a	house,	because	not	only	this	house	is	haunted,	the	whole	area
is	haunted!"	I	went	on	creating	the	rumor	and	making	the	area	bigger.	Nobody
was	ready,	even	at	the	cheapest	rate,	to	purchase	the	land.
When	I	 talked	with	M.N.	Roy,	he	said,	"What	do	you	think	is	 the	cause	of	my
unsuccessfulness?	 I	 was	 such	 a	 successful	 member	 of	 the	 international	 high
command	of	the	communists.	I	fought	in	the	revolution,	I	was	a	close	friend	of
Lenin	 and	Trotsky,	who	were	 the	 architects	 of	 the	 revolution.	And	here?	 I	 am
nobody;	nobody	is	ready	to	listen."
I	said,	"Here,	you	will	have	to	change.	You	will	have	to	be	a	hypocrite.	You	will
have	 to	 smoke	 in	 your	 bathroom,	 not	 in	 public	 --	 in	 public,	 speak	 against
smoking.	You	will	have	to	wrap	yourself	in	a	small	cloth	just	covering	you	down
to	your	knees,	just	like	Mahatma	Gandhi	--	or	even	smaller	will	be	better.	Shave
your	 head	 and	 become	 a	mahatma,	 and	 I	 can	manage	 everything	 for	 you.	But
first	 become	 a	 mahatma.	 I	 will	 call	 a	 barber	 here,	 and	 he	 will	 make	 you	 a
mahatma."
He	said,	"My	God	--	first	I	have	to	become	a	mahatma?"
I	said,	"Without	becoming	a	mahatma,	in	this	country	you	don't	have	any	appeal.
This	country	 is	 so	 fucked	up	 that	 first	you	have	 to	pretend	all	kinds	of	 things.
You	don't	drink	tea	--	if	somebody	sees	you	drinking	tea,	finished!	You	are	not	a
mahatma.
"In	the	cold,	you	have	to	remain	half-naked.	You	will	get	accustomed,	don't	be
worried.
All	the	animals	are	accustomed,	and	you	are	an	intelligent	animal	so	you	will	get
accustomed.	It	is	only	a	question	of	two	or	three	years	and	then	heat	or	cold,	all
are	the	same,	because	your	skin	becomes	thicker	and	thicker.	And	your	skull	also
becomes	 thicker	 and	 thicker!	 You	 will	 be	 a	 mahatma,	 and	 everybody	 will	 be
listening	to	you."
He	said,	"I	cannot	do	that."
I	said,	"Then	forget	all	about	 leadership."	And	he	died	an	unknown	man.	If	he
had	lived	in	the	Soviet	Union	he	would	have	been	a	cabinet	minister.
This	country	is	so	prejudiced.
Your	question	comes	out	of	 a	prejudice.	You	don't	 understand	 the	mechanism,
the	dynamics	of	life.
Adolf	 Hitler,	 Benito	 Mussolini,	 Hirohito	 of	 Japan	 --	 all	 three	 together	 killed
thirty	million	people,	and	for	no	purpose	at	all,	just	a	personal	egoistic	desire	to
become	the	whole	and	sole	owner	of	 the	earth.	Genghis	Khan,	Tamerlane,	and
Nadirshah	--	three	generations	of	one	family	--	amongst	the	three	they	killed	one
hundred	million	people	for	no	purpose.	And	you	don't	bother	about	these	people.
How	many	 people	 did	 Napoleon	 kill?	 How	many	 people	 did	 Alexander	 kill?
And	how	many	people	has	the	Catholic	church	killed?	--	you	don't	bother	about
it	--	and	for	no	reason!
Stalin	was	not	killing	for	any	personal	reason,	and	he	was	not	killing	those	who
were	 ready	 to	understand	 the	 revolution	and	participate	 in	 it.	He	had	 to	kill	 to
remove	 all	 obstacles	 from	within,	 because	 he	was	 surrounded	 on	 all	 sides	 by
enemies	ready	to	enter	 the	country	and	finish	it.	 If	he	had	had	to	face	both	the
enemies,	 inside	 and	 outside,	 there	 would	 have	 been	 no	 possibility	 for	 that
experiment	ever	to	succeed.
And	 the	 people	 he	 killed...	 don't	 think	 they	 were	 individuals.	 They	 were	 just
robots,	as	the	masses	are.	No	individuality,	no	dignity,	no	understanding	--	 just
greed	and	lust	and	the	old	mind,	that	"My	things	are	mine.	I	will	not	give	them	to
the	collective."	And	he	 is	miserable	because	what	he	has	 is	not	enough	for	his
own	nourishment	 or	 his	 family,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 ready	 to	 create	 a	 collective	 land
where	 tractors	 and	 other	 modern	 mechanisms	 can	 be	 used	 to	 sow	 the	 seeds.
When	the	land	is	miles	long,	airplanes	can	be	used	to	sow	seeds.	Tractors	can	be
used	to	prepare	the	land.	On	a	small	piece	of	land	this	is	not	possible.
Whatever	communism	was	saying	to	them	was	absolutely	correct,	but	just	their
prejudices....
And	when	I	said	that	it	does	not	matter,	everybody	has	to	die	anyway,	I	meant	it.
Unless	you	are	a	buddha,	it	does	not	matter.	Only	the	death	of	a	buddha	matters.
What	are	you	going	to	contribute?	What	are	you	going	to	do	tomorrow,	except
repeat	today?	You	can	live	for	thirty	years	repeating	the	same	circle,	morning	to
evening,	 evening	 to	morning,	what	 is	 the	point?	Where	are	you	going?	Round
and	round,	reaching	nowhere.
To	 these	people	 the	experiment	of	communism	was	not	at	 all	 important.	Their
own	 prejudice	 was	 important,	 that	 "Our	 things	 cannot	 be	 taken	 away	 by
anybody."	And	those	things	were	their	misery!	Even	a	beggar	was	not	ready	to
give	his	things,	and	what	did	he	have?
The	whole	 idea	was	 that	 all	 the	 land,	 the	whole	property	 and	 everything	 in	 it,
should	belong	to	the	collective.	Soviet	means	a	commune.	The	village	turns	into
a	 soviet,	 it	 becomes	a	 commune.	Families	disappear;	only	 individual	members
contribute	whatsoever	 they	can	and	 the	commune	will	 fulfill	 their	needs	 --	not
according	to	their	worth,	but	according	to	their	need.
Somebody	may	 not	 be	 such	 a	 hard	worker	 and	 somebody	 else	may	 be	 a	 hard
worker,	 but	 in	 a	 commune	 it	 is	 a	 bigger	 family.	 You	 have	 to	 understand	 that
somebody	is	weaker,	somebody	is	sick,	somebody	is	old,	but	their	needs	have	to
be	fulfilled.
Now	Gorbachev	 is	 saying,	 "Each	 according	 to	 his	work."	What	 about	 the	 old
people?
They	will	not	be	able	to	work	the	same	way	as	the	young	people.	What	about	the
children?	They	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	work	 the	 same	 as	 the	 young	 people.	What
about	the	women?	They	cannot	be	put	into	any	muscular	work.
The	communist	idea	was	far	higher	and	superior:	"Each	according	to	his	needs."
An	old	man	has	his	own	needs.	He	may	not	be	able	to	work,	but	he	has	worked
enough	his	whole	 life.	A	 child	 has	 not	worked	yet,	 but	 one	day	he	will	work.
And	he	has	needs	right	now.
Now	Gorbachev	is	saying,	"Each	according	to	his	work,"	and	that	is	the	motto	of
capitalism.	He	is	deceiving	and	betraying	the	whole	communist	approach.
Just	think	--	Majid	is	here	--	if	revolution	comes	to	Italy,	are	you	going	to	allow
the	pope	 to	continue	 the	Vatican?	Are	you	going	 to	allow	 the	Vatican	Bank	 to
change	 black	 money,	 heroin	 money,	 into	 white	 money	 and	 earn	 billions	 of
dollars	 per	 year?	 Are	 you	 going	 to	 allow	 all	 the	 priests	 and	 bishops	 and
archbishops	 and	 all	 the	 churches	 to	 continue	 as	 they	 are?	They	will	 all	 resist,
because	it	is	their	vested	interest.	Then	what	are	you	going	to	do?	Just	sit	before
the	churches	and	cry	like	small	babies?	You	will	have	to	finish	these	people	or
throw	them	out	in	the	ocean	--	and	you	have	such	a	beautiful	ocean.
Revolution	 does	 not	 care	 for	 these	 parasites.	 It	 is	 against	 these	 parasites,	 and
these	parasites	will	create	every	kind	of	difficulty	for	you,	from	inside	and	from
outside.	Now	the	Catholics	number	six	hundred	million	around	the	world.	If	you
do	anything	against	the	pope	he	will	fight,	and	the	six	hundred	million	Catholics
around	 the	 world	 will	 create	 great	 pressure	 on	 you	 from	 every	 government:
"Don't	 touch	 the	 Vatican;	 otherwise	 we	 will	 disconnect	 our	 relationship	 with
you."
That's	 what	 had	 happened	 in	 Russia.	 All	 other	 countries	 dropped	 their
connections	with	Russia.	All	 the	countries	called	their	ambassadors	back,	 there
was	no	communication	with	Russia	--	boycott,	absolute	boycott.
You	have	only	heard	one	side	of	the	story,	which	America	goes	on	propagating,
that	 Stalin	 created	 an	 "iron	 curtain."	 It	 was	 not	 Stalin	 who	 created	 the	 iron
curtain,	it	was	all	the	countries	who	withdrew	from	the	Soviet	Union,	boycotting
it	 completely.	 Then	 it	 was	 absolutely	 necessary	 that	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 should
create	 a	 situation	 where	 nobody	 could	 enter.	 All	 kinds	 of	 agents	 to	 provoke
people...	and	people	were	ready	to	be	provoked	because	they	were	very	sad	that
their	personal	things	had	been	taken.	People	become	so	attached	to	their	personal
things	--	small	 things.	They	were	ready	to	be	provoked,	and	the	whole	country
was	 full	 of	 spies	 from	 every	 capitalist	 country	 trying	 to	 provoke	 people	 to
destroy	the	collectives,	to	burn	the	collectives.
All	 the	different	Christian	sects	agreed	on	the	point	 that	communism	is	against
religion	--
and	 all	 the	Mohammedans,	 all	 the	 Buddhists...	 because	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 has
three	religions.	One	part,	Mongolia,	is	Buddhist;	another	part	near	Afghanistan	is
Mohammedan.	The	 third	part	 is	 orthodox	Christian.	Now	 these	 three	 religions
were	agreed:	"Communism	is	against	religion,	so	we	have	to	give	a	fight."	And
all	the	people	had	belonged	to	some	religion.	Everybody	had	belonged	to	some
religion	--	either	to	the	Buddhists,	to	the	Mohammedans,	or	to	Christianity.	How
to	deal	with	the	situation?
I	don't	see	that	except	Stalin	there	was	anybody	else	in	the	Communist	Party	at
that	 time	 to	 deal	with	 the	 situation.	And	 the	 poor	 fellow	has	 been	 condemned
because	he	saved	communism;	otherwise	these	people	would	have	destroyed	it.
It	was	a	chaos.	Once	the	czar	was	killed	there	was	no	system,	there	was	no	order
in	 the	country.	Trains	were	running	--	nobody	knew	where	 they	would	end	up,
where	 they	 were	 going,	 because	 people	 had	 taken	 out	 railway	 lines,	 had
destroyed	the	bridges.	Trains	were	moving	--	burning.	These	were	the	people	for
whom	 the	 revolution	 had	 been	made,	who	were	 burning	 the	 trains,	who	were
burning	the	palaces	of	the	governors,	who	were	burning	the	palaces	of	the	czar.
And	the	Communist	Party	was	trying	to	tell	them,	"Now	all	these	belong	to	you.
Don't	destroy	 them!	The	czar	 is	 finished,	 it	 is	your	property."	But	nobody	was
listening,	and	people	were	carrying	things	to	their	homes.
I	have	heard	that	after	the	Czar's	family	was	taken	out	of	his	palace	--	it	used	to
be	one	of	 the	biggest	palaces	in	 the	world,	 the	richest;	 it	was	one	of	 the	oldest
royalties	--
people	were	taking	everything	from	the	palace	to	their	homes.	Even	the	carpet...
it	was	so	huge	that	nobody	could	take	it	alone,	so	people	were	cutting	the	carpet
with	 scissors,	 just	 enough	 for	 their	 home	 --	 take-away!	Now	what	 can	you	do
with	these	people?
There	 was	 no	 time	 to	 convince	 them.	 There	 was	 no	 time	 to	 make	 them
understand	that,
"Everything	belongs	 to	you	and	you	are	destroying	 it."	Except	Stalin...	 neither
Lenin	was	able	to	do	it	nor	Trotsky	was	able	to	do	it.	This	man	had	certainly	a
heart	of	steel:	at	any	cost,	revolution	had	to	survive.
And	as	 I	have	 told	you	again	and	again,	 the	masses	 are	 the	greatest	 enemy	of
themselves;	 they	 don't	 know	what	 they	 are	 doing.	 So	 the	 bullet	 was	 the	 only
answer,	and	he	killed	for	an	absolutely	right	end.	There	are	times	when	you	have
to	use	means	which	are	apparently	wrong	--	violence,	murder.	But	what	can	you
do	with	 this	 humanity?	 If	 you	 are	 in	 power	 you	will	 suddenly	 realize	 that	 the
only	 way	 is	 to	 put	 people	 back	 to	 their	 senses.	When	 one	 person	 is	 killed,	 a
hundred	 persons	 absolutely	 understand	 that	 "this	 is	 a	 difficult	 problem,	 keep
quiet."	 Those	 one	 million	 people	 killed	 made	 twenty	 million	 people	 silent,
settled.
But	you	have	your	prejudices.	You	are	shocked	--	but	that	is	my	business.	When
I	was	criticizing	Christianity	you	were	not	shocked,	you	were	happy.	Now	let	the
Christians	be	happy,	because	everybody	has	his	own	time.	The	Catholics	would
have	been	shaken	--
they	 were	 shaken.	 The	 whole	 seminary,	 *which	 consists	 of	 five	 hundred
missionaries	being	trained,	and	must	be	at	least	one	hundred	professors	to	teach
them,	was	agog	with	only	one	thing:	they	wanted	to	hear	what	I	have	said.	One
student	 came	 here	 the	 next	 day,	 saying,	 "The	whole	 seminary	 is	 talking	 about
only	one	thing	--	so	you	bring	the	tape	or	the	video."	And	I	sent	Prasad,	because
he	had	already	been	to	the	seminary	to	talk	to	them,	to	explain	my	philosophy	to
them,	so	he	was	acquainted	with	the	authorities	there.
He	went	there	but	the	authorities	said,	"We	don't	have	equipment	and	it	will	take
time	to	arrange	for	equipment,	so	we	cannot	do	it."
A	group	of	students	from	a	local	seminary	attended	one	discourse	recently,	and
their	 questions	 were	 addressed	 throughout	 the	 series,	 CHRISTIANITY,	 THE
GREATEST
POISON	AND	ZEN,	THE	ANTIDOTE	TO	ALL	POISONS.
Prasad	 said,	 "Don't	 be	 worried	 about	 the	 equipment.	 I	 will	 bring	 all	 the
equipment	with	me."
Then	 they	 changed	 immediately.	They	 said,	 "But	 first,	 permission	 from	higher
authorities	is	needed."	It	was	not	needed	before.	Now	the	permission	from	higher
authorities	is	needed!
The	 next	 day	 he	went	 again	 and	 asked,	 "Has	 permission	 been	 granted?"	They
said,	"We	are	waiting."	And	finally	they	phoned:	"You	don't	have	to	come	here.
We	hope	that	within	two	and	a	half	weeks	permission	will	be	obtained."
I	 don't	 think	 permission	 will	 be	 obtained.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 delaying	 process;	 after
another	 two	 and	 a	 half	weeks...	 and	who	 are	 the	 higher	 authorities?	They	 live
there	in	the	campus!	It	takes	two	and	a	half	weeks	to	reach	their	bungalow?	And
they	go	every	day	to	the	office....
But	 you	 were	 not	 worried	 then.	 Somebody	 else	 was	 being	 hit	 and	 you	 were
enjoying.
Now	it	is	your	turn.	Let	others	enjoy!
I	am	against	every	kind	of	prejudice.	This	is	just	a	prejudice.	If	you	understand
the	practicality	of	it	you	will	not	be	against	it.	Theoretically	you	can	go	on	and
on	 thinking	 about	 it:	 "One	million	 individuals..."	 Forget	 that	 word	 --	 there	 is
rarely	an	individual.
One	million	phonies,	who	were	obstructing	a	revolution	which	was	going	to	be
one	of	the	greatest	experiments	in	human	history.
It	was	worth	it.	And	when	I	said	anyway	you	have	to	die,	I	could	immediately
feel	that	you	became	very	shocked.	But	still	I	repeat:	Anyway	you	have	to	die.
Don't	die	against	revolution.	If	you	have	to	die,	die	for	revolution.	Don't	die	for
the	status	quo;	if	you	have	to	die,	die	for	rebellion.
Everyone	has	to	die,	and	as	far	as	I	am	concerned,	whether	Stalin	kills	them	or
Adolf	Hitler	or	Mussolini	or	Hirohito,	 it	doesn't	matter;	he	only	kills	 the	body.
The	soul	immediately	gets	into	another	woman's	womb.	Nothing	is	killed,	only
houses	are	changed.	Do	you	think	those	one	million	people	are	finished?	Many
of	them	may	be	here!
If	not	now,	soon.
To	me,	these	people	seem	to	be	absolutely	absurd,	who	are	against	violence	and
still	 talk	about	eternal	 life.	They	don't	 see	 their	contradiction.	 If	 life	 is	 eternal,
then	death	does	not	matter:	 life	will	continue	 in	new	forms	somewhere	else.	 If
not	in	the	Soviet	Union,	then	in	China,	and	if	you	are	killing	China	then	India	is
always	available.	From	where	do	you	think	all	these	Indians	go	on	growing?
Hitler	kills,	Stalin	kills,	Hirohito	kills	 --	whoever	kills,	 India's	population	goes
on	growing.	India	gives	ready-made	wombs	to	everybody.	People	may	be	dying
of	starvation	but	they	brag	that	they	have	twenty	children.	So	what	is	great	about
it?	Look	at	a	bull	--	a	bull	has	thousands	of	children,	so	do	you	think	the	bull	is
greater	than	you?
And	poor	people	are	bound	to	produce	more	children	because	they	have	no	other
entertainment.	 By	 the	 evening	 --	 they	 don't	 have	 electricity,	 they	 don't	 have
television,	 they	don't	have	 too	much	to	eat	so	 that	 their	bellies	become	too	big
and	they	cannot	reach	the	woman.	So	the	whole	dark	night,	and	cold,	not	enough
blankets...	the	woman	is	warm,	is	a	good	blanket,	and	no	other	thing	to	do	in	the
dark,	so	people	go	on	producing	children.	They	cannot	go	to	see	a	film,	it	takes
money;	they	cannot	go	to	have	dinner	in	a	restaurant,	it	takes	money.	Sex	is	free.
So	 everywhere	 you	 kill,	 India	 is	 ready	 to	 receive!	 From	 four	 hundred	million
people,	 just	 forty	 years	 ago,	 today	 there	 are	 more	 than	 nine	 hundred	 million
people.	 It	 seems	 every	 year,	 ten	million	 people	 are	 added.	 By	 the	 end	 of	 this
century	 the	population	will	 have	gone	beyond	one	billion	people.	From	where
are	all	these	people	coming?
Richer	 countries,	 more	 educated	 countries,	 are	 losing	 population	 --	 because
educated	people	understand	 that	 this	 is	 stupid,	 creating	people	and	making	 the
country	poorer.
They	are	using	all	kinds	of	methods	 to	prevent	 the	explosion	of	population,	 in
spite	of	all	the	popes	and	the	bishops.	Who	cares?	These	people,	even	Catholics,
don't	 care;	 it	 is	 just	 a	 formal	 respectability.	 But	 there	 are	 countries	which	 are
promoting	 programs	 for	 giving	 birth	 to	 more	 children.	 Their	 population	 is
shrinking	 and	 the	 fear	 is	 that	 they	 may	 disappear	 in	 the	 vast	 third-world
population	 which	 is	 growing.	 Soon	 they	 will	 be	 rushing	 all	 over	 Europe;	 no
boundaries	will	be	able	to	prevent	them.
Already	 in	Germany,	 that	 is	 the	 problem.	 From	Turkey,	 so	many	 people	 have
entered	Germany	that	there	is	a	great	problem	of	unemployment.	And	you	will
be	surprised	to	know	that	the	Nazi	Party	of	Adolf	Hitler	is	again	raising	its	head.
One	of	Adolf	Hitler's	men	has	organized	a	party	which	won	eleven	seats	in	the
parliament	just	now,	on	the	basis	that	all	these	Turkish	people	should	be	thrown
out	of	Germany,	otherwise	Germany	will	be	drowned.
Adolf	Hitler	was	 throwing	 out	 Jews	 --	 now	 it	 is	 the	Turkish	 people.	And	 this
party	 has	 won	 eleven	 seats.	 This	 is	 the	 beginning...	 and	 why	 have	 people
supported	an	ex-Nazi	officer?	Because	the	German	people	are	becoming	afraid:
"If	these	populations	go	on	immigrating	to	Germany,	we	will	be	poorer.	We	will
have	to	give	employment	to	these	people.	We	will	have	to	share	our	money	with
these	people,	our	land	with	these	people,	our	houses	with	these	people."	And	this
caravan	 of	 immigrants	 is	 going	 to	 grow	 every	 day,	 because	 Mohammedan
countries	allow	one	man	to	marry	four	women,	so	Mohammedans	increase	four
times	more	than	anybody	else.
You	 can	 create	 only	 one	 child	 in	 a	 year,	 at	 the	 most,	 with	 great	 difficulty.
Mohammedans	 can	 create	 four	 children.	 That's	 why	 in	 India,	 just	 forty	 years
ago,	Mohammedans	took	away	Bangladesh	and	Pakistan,	but	within	forty	years
again	 they	 are	 so	many	 that	 the	biggest	Mohammedan	 country	 in	 the	world	 is
India	 --	 not	 Saudi	 Arabia,	 not	 Pakistan,	 not	 Bangladesh	 or	 any	 of	 the	 other
Middle	East	countries.	The	biggest	Mohammedan	country	is	India	--	second	to
the	Hindus	are	the	Mohammedans,	and	soon	they	will	be	the	first	because	they
have	four	women	and	you	have	only	one.	And	 it	continues	 in	 the	name	of	not
interfering	 in	 anybody's	 religion	 --	 the	 government	 allows	 Mohammedans	 to
have	four	wives	and	Hindus	only	one.
This	kind	of	stupidity	can	be	prevented	only	if	you	are	really	hard.
I	would	like	the	population	explosion	in	India	to	be	stopped,	on	a	war	scale.	The
whole	 army	 should	 be	 sent	 to	 every	 village	 and	 if	 people	 are	 not	 ready
voluntarily,	then	compulsorily	they	have	to	be	sterilized.	You	will	say,	"It	is	not
democratic."	But	is	it	democratic	that	five	hundred	million	people	will	die	by	the
end	 of	 this	 century?	 Problems	 are	 very	 connected.	 Whenever	 you	 look	 at	 a
problem,	 look	 from	 all	 sides	 and	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 what	 I	 am
saying.
And	drop	your	preconceived	ideology.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 you	 to	 a	 space	 of	 no-mind.	 And	 from	 no-mind,
function	--
then	 you	 function	 directly,	 looking	 at	 the	 situation.	 Whatever	 is	 right
immediately	arises	in	you,	and	you	do	it.	Neither	is	it	a	question	of	morality	nor
is	it	a	question	of	religion;	it	is	a	question	of	immediate	response	to	a	situation.
And	immediate	response	comes	only	through	meditation.
I	shock	your	mind	on	purpose,	and	I	go	on	finding	ways.	I	will	not	leave	anyone!
People	are	wondering	--	Jews	are	wondering,	"Maybe	our	turn	is	coming."	Wait,
it	will	come!
I	am	going	to	speak	against	all	ideologies	of	the	past,	all	moralities	of	the	past.	I
am	against	the	whole	past	of	humanity	--	in	toto	--	I	don't	make	any	exception.	I
want	a	totally	new	man	to	arise	on	the	earth	--	the	superman.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ON	 ONE	 OCCASION,	 A	 MONK	 ASKED	 MASTER	 DOGO:	 "EVEN	 IF
THERE	IS	NO
CLOUD	FOR	THOUSANDS	OF	MILES,	 IT	 IS	NOT	YET	THE	ORIGINAL
SKY.
WHAT	IS	THE	ORIGINAL	SKY?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"TODAY,	IT	IS	GOOD	TO	DRY	WHEAT."
This	is	the	way	of	Zen.	Don't	waste	your	time	in	unnecessary	theoretical	things	-
-
"Although	 there	are	 thousands	of	miles	with	no	cloud...	but	 this	 sky	 is	not	 the
original	sky,	because	beyond	this	sky	there	will	be	another	sky	and	beyond	that
another	sky.
Where	is	the	original	sky?"
But	Master	Dogo	said,	"Forget	all	about	it!	Today,	it	is	good	to	dry	wheat.	The
day	 is	 sunny,	 the	 sky	 is	open,	 there	 is	no	cloud.	Be	 in	 the	present!	Today	 it	 is
good	to	dry	wheat."
And	once	you	are	 in	 the	present	you	will	 become	aware	of	 the	original	 sky	 --
which	is	not	said.	The	original	sky	is	within	you.	It	is	not	outside,	thousands	of
miles	or	millions	of	miles	don't	matter.	You	will	never	come	to	the	end	of	the	sky
outside.
But	there	is	a	sky	inside	which	is	the	original,	out	of	which	you	are	living,	you
are	getting	your	nourishment.	Your	roots	are	in	that	original	sky.	Just	go	inwards
and	it	is	not	thousands	of	miles	away.	It	is	only	thousands	of	thoughts	away.
So	it	is	only	a	question	of	reducing	the	thoughts	and	the	mileage	is	reduced.
If	you	don't	have	any	thoughts,	you	are	in	it.
You	are	it.
You	 don't	 have	 to	 go	 anywhere;	 you	 have	 to	 simply	 go	 on	 throwing	 your
thoughts.
That	is	the	purpose	of	our	gibberish	before	the	meditation.	Just	a	time	to	throw
everything,	without	inhibition.
These	creatures	that	you	throw	out	are	eating	your	head	continuously,	destroying
your	 intelligence.	Catch	them	and	throw	them	out,	and	don't	be	worried	with	a
moral	 question	 that	 they	 may	 enter	 into	 somebody	 else's	 mind.	 No,	 your
creatures	are	accustomed	to	your	mind.	Even	if	you	throw	them,	they	will	wait
outside	on	the	bamboos,	and	when	you	are	going	to	the	canteen	they	will	jump!
And	 you	 can	 see	 in	 the	 canteen	 --	 I	 never	 go	 there	 --	 but	 so	 much	 talk,
discussion...	 all	 the	 creatures	 are	 back.	So	beware	of	 the	bamboos!	 Just	watch
out	that	these	creatures	don't	enter	in	your	head	again	--	run!	And	in	the	canteen
be	silent.	The	more	you	open	your	mouth,	the	more	they	get	in.	They	know	you
perfectly	well,	 they	will	not	enter	 into	anybody	else.	Nobody	wants	foreigners,
strangers;	everybody	wants	to	enter	into	his	own	place,	into	his	own	house.	You
don't	 enter	 somebody	 else's	 house.	 You	 don't	 pick	 up	 somebody	 else's	 rented
bicycle....
Everybody	finds	his	own	rented	bicycle,	in	thousands	of	bicycles.	Strange!
Those	creatures	are	very	well	acquainted	with	you	and	they	know	how	much	you
love	 them.	What	 is	 the	 guarantee	 that	 the	 other	 person	will	 be	 loving	 towards
them?	--	may	not	be	even	friendly,	and	you	have	been	feeding	 them	year	after
year.
So	when	you	are	throwing,	throw	them	so	far	away	that	they	get	mixed	up,	start
fighting	with	each	other,	and	meanwhile	you	escape	to	the	canteen.
The	 inner	 sky	 is	only	as	 far	 away	as	 the	number	of	 thoughts	you	have.	 If	you
don't	have	any	thoughts,	you	are	just	in	the	present.	That's	what	Dogo	means:
"TODAY,	IT	IS	GOOD	TO	DRY	WHEAT."
Just	be	now	and	here,	and	without	saying	anything	about	the	original	sky...	that
is	 the	 way	 of	 Zen,	 to	 indicate.	 If	 you	 have	 intelligence,	 just	 an	 indication	 is
enough.	If	you	don't	have	intelligence,	even	if	one	goes	on	hammering	on	your
head,	it	doesn't	matter.
Dogo	showed	the	monk	where	the	original	sky	is.	It	is	within	you,	if	you	are	in
the	present.
To	be	in	the	present	is	to	be	out	of	the	mind.	To	be	in	the	present	is	to	be	in	the
beyond,	in	the	space,	in	the	sky	which	is	your	very	being.
ON	 ANOTHER	OCCASION	DOGO	WAS	 ASKED	 BY	ANOTHER	MONK,
"WHAT
IS	THE	DEEPEST?"
DOGO	 CAME	 DOWN	 FROM	 HIS	 SEAT,	 MADE	 OBEISANCE	 IN	 THE
MANNER
OF	WOMEN	AND	SAID,	 "YOU	HAVE	COME	FROM	FAR,	AND	 I	HAVE
NO
ANSWER	FOR	YOU."
In	fact,	he	has	given	the	answer.	What	is	the	deepest?	--	humbleness,	gratitude,
nobodiness.	He	is	a	man,	but	he	bowed	down	in	 the	manner	of	a	woman	--	no
distinction	between	man	and	woman,	because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 the	body.
And	a	woman	is	more	humble,	more	grateful,	more	loving.	So	he	is	showing	it:
create	the	female	qualities	of	love,	of	gratitude,	of	compassion,	of	humbleness;
just	 be	 a	 nobody.	 And	 he	 came	 down	 and	 made	 obeisance,	 bowed,	 to	 the
stranger.
He	has	answered.	But	the	stranger,	the	monk,	has	not	understood	--	that's	why	he
is	saying,	"YOU	HAVE	COME	FROM	FAR,	AND	I	HAVE	NO	ANSWER	FOR
YOU."	If	you	want	an	answer	in	language,	I	don't	have	it.
This	 is	 also	 done	 out	 of	 compassion.	He	 has	 answered	 that	 humbleness	 is	 the
deepest,	 nobodiness	 is	 the	 deepest;	 to	 be	 nothing,	 to	 be	 utterly	 selfless	 is	 the
deepest.	 There	 is	 no	 further	 depth	 possible.	 He	 has	 given	 the	 answer	 by	 his
action,	 but	 the	 man	 looked	 as	 if	 he	 did	 not	 understand.	 It	 is	 also	 out	 of
compassion,	not	to	make	the	man	feel	embarrassed,	not	to	make	him	feel	that	he
has	not	understood.
Dogo	said,	"You	have	come	from	very	far	away,	and	I	have	no	answer	for	you."
He	takes	the	responsibility	on	himself:	"It	is	not	your	fault.	You	have	done	great
work,	you	have	come	from	very	far,	and	I	don't	have	any	answer	for	you."	He
takes	 the	 responsibility	on	himself	 --	 although	 the	 reality	 is	 that	 the	monk	has
missed	the	answer.
This	is	the	beauty	of	a	master.	It	shows	in	so	many	different	colors,	in	so	many
rainbows.
Unless	you	understand	it,	you	will	not	be	able	even	to	see	it.	Just	reading	it,	you
would	have	missed	it.
AT	 ANOTHER	 TIME	 SEKISO	 KEISHO	 ASKED	 DOGO,	 "AFTER	 A
HUNDRED
YEARS,	 IF	 SOMEONE	 ASKS	 ABOUT	 THE	 ABSOLUTE	 MEANING	 OF
THE
UNIVERSE,	WHAT	SHALL	I	SAY	TO	HIM?"
You	will	 be	gone.	After	 a	 hundred	years	 you	will	 be	no	more;	 otherwise,	 you
could	 have	 answered	 him.	 Just	 give	 me	 the	 answer	 so	 if	 somebody	 asks	 the
question	after	you	are	gone,	I	can	give	him	your	answer.
But	that	is	impossible.	You	cannot	give	my	answer	unless	it	is	also	your	answer.
Repeating	my	 answer	will	 be	 simply	borrowed,	 it	won't	 have	 life	 and	 it	won't
have	any	charisma	 in	 it.	 It	won't	penetrate	 the	heart	of	 the	person.	Unless	 it	 is
alive,	 throbbing	with	 life	and	radiant	with	 life	and	 luminous	with	great	energy,
coming	out	of	your	own	experience...	Then	perhaps	the	other,	if	he	is	intelligent
enough,	meditative	enough,	receptive	enough,	may	get	it.
DOGO	CALLED	THE	BOY	ATTENDANT,	WHO	CAME,	AND	TOLD	HIM
TO	FILL
UP	THE	WATER	BOTTLE.
He	 did	 not	 pay	 any	 attention	 to	 Sekiso's	 question.	 Not	 paying	 attention	 to
Sekiso's	question	is	also	an	answer.	He	is	saying,	"Don't	ask	absurd	things.	Find
out	the	answer	yourself,	by	your	own	experience.	My	answer	is	not	going	to	help
so	I	am	not	going	to	give	it."
So	he	simply,	as	if	he	has	not	heard	--	he	has	heard	it	perfectly	--	calls	the	boy
attendant	and	tells	him	to	fill	up	the	water	bottle.
DOGO	WAITED	A	WHILE...
It	is	strange:	the	master	is	not	answering	the	question.
AND	THEN	SAID	TO	SEKISO,	"WHAT	WAS	IT	YOU	ASKED	JUST	NOW?"
As	if	he	has	not	heard:	"What	was	it	you	asked	just	now?"
SEKISO	REPEATED	THE	QUESTION.	DOGO	THEREUPON	WENT	BACK
TO	HIS
ROOM,	AND	AT	THIS,	SEKISO	BECAME	ENLIGHTENED.
He	had	answered	the	first	time,	but	Sekiso	did	not	get	it,	that	what	he	was	saying
was,
"Don't	ask	such	things	which	are	available	only	to	your	own	experience,	alone."
But	because	he	did	not	understand,	Dogo	waited	a	while:	perhaps	he	may	catch
it.
AND	THEN	SAID	TO	SEKISO,	"WHAT	WAS	IT	YOU	ASKED	JUST	NOW?"
SEKISO	REPEATED	THE	QUESTION.
That	 shows	he	 had	not	 understood	 the	 answer	 that	Dogo	had	 indicated	by	not
paying	attention	 to	his	question.	At	 this,	Dogo	went	back	 to	his	 room	without
answering	him	again.
This	time	he	got	it,	that	it	is	not	a	question	which	can	be	answered:	you	have	to
go	inside	your	room.
The	word	`room'	 is	very	beautiful.	 It	simply	means	space.	And	you	sometimes
use	 it	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 space,	 that	 this	 place	 has	 "enough	 room."	What	 do	 you
mean	by	it,	"enough	room"?	Enough	space,	no	unnecessary	furniture.
I	 used	 to	 stay	 with	 a	 very	 rich	 man	 in	 a	 place	 called	 Saugar.	 He	 was	 an
accumulator	of	junk.	He	had	enough	money,	so	all	kinds	of	things...	whether	he
needed	them	or	not	was	not	the	question,	he	could	afford.
There	was	no	television	in	those	days	in	Saugar....	I	used	to	stay	with	him,	and
he	had	a	special	guest	room,	filled	with	all	his	 junk.	I	saw	a	 television	there.	 I
asked,	 "Are	you	mad?	There	 is	no	 television!"	At	 that	 time	 it	was	not	 even	 in
Bombay,	not	in	New	Delhi;	 television	had	not	been	introduced	in	India.	"What
are	you	doing	with	a	TV	set?"
He	said,	 "I	had	gone	 to	London,	and	 I	 just	 liked	 it."	 I	 said,	 "Just	 liked	 it?"	He
said,
"Sometime	 television	will	 come."	 And	 he	was	 at	 that	 time	 seventy-five	 years
old.
I	 said,	 "At	 least	 not	 in	 your	 lifetime."	 He	 said,	 "What?"	 I	 said,	 "You	 don't
understand	 that	 you	 are	 seventy-five..."	 But	 he	 said,	 "It	 is	 not	 good	 to	 say	 to
anybody	 `not	 in	your	 lifetime'.	That	means	you	are	 already	 thinking	about	my
death!"
I	said,	"I	am	not	thinking	about	your	death,	I	am	thinking	about	your	city.	It	 is
still	one	thousand	years	behind!	Even	in	New	Delhi	the	television	has	not	come.
In	your	city	 it	will	 take	at	 least	a	century,	and	I	don't	 think	you	will	be	able	 to
make	it."
But	he	was	very	angry,	and	he	said,	"I	have	put	it	here	for	your	entertainment."
I	 said,	 "I	 am	 not	mad.	 This	 box	 cannot	make	 any	 kind	 of	 entertainment.	 It	 is
dead,	because	there	is	no	connection	to	it	anywhere."
And	then	I	saw	many	radios,	lined	up,	all	kinds	of	models	of	radios.	I	said,	"One
is	 enough."	 He	 said,	 "But	 I	 can	 afford	 them,	 so	 whenever	 some	 new	 model
comes,	some	new	manufacturer	comes	in..."
I	said,	"In	this	room	I	cannot	stay.	I	will	go	insane,	because	there	is	no	room	at
all!"
Things	upon	things,	things	upon	things!	Just...	you	had	to	somehow	make	your
way	 to	 the	bed,	and	 if	 it	was	night	 --	and	 there	was	no	electricity	 there	 --	you
could	 not	 even	 go	 to	 the	 bathroom	 without	 having	 multiple	 fractures	 and
destroying	his	many	valuable	things.
So	I	said,	"Forgive	me.	You	just	give	me	a	plain	room."	He	said,	"Plain	room?"
I	 said,	 "Yes,	 because	 I	 sometimes	 go	 to	 the	 bathroom	 also."	 He	 said,	 "The
bathroom	is	there."
I	said,	"In	the	dark	night,	and	there	is	no	electricity....	And	your	room	is	simply
mad!	I	will	have	nightmares	here,	I	cannot	tolerate	all	this!"
There	were	all	kinds	of	clocks,	old,	ancient,	and	they	were	all	making	noise	at
different	times.	No	clock	was	at	the	same	time	as	another	clock.	I	said,	"Do	you
want	me	to	sleep	or	not?"
He	said,	"You	are	the	first	guest	who	is	making	so	much	fuss."	I	said,	"I	am	not
making	fuss,	I	simply	want	a	room."	He	said,	"This	is	a	room!"
I	said,	"You	don't	understand	the	meaning	of	the	word	`room'.	This	is	not	a	room,
this	is	a	junkyard!"
So	when	the	master	Dogo	went	to	his	room,	he	was	again	giving	another	chance
to	Sekiso:	"Just	go	into	the	silent	space	within	you.	As	I	am	going	into	my	room,
you	go	 into	your	 room,	 into	your	own	space."	And	 this	 time	Sekiso	got	 it.	He
became	enlightened.
The	 master	 goes	 on	 repeating	 the	 same	 thing	 in	 different	 ways,	 in	 different
words,	in	different	gestures,	with	the	hope	that	some	day,	at	some	point,	you	are
going	to	get	it.
How	can	you	escape?
I	will	go	on	hitting	you	from	every	angle,	poking	you	from	every	possibility,	into
every	 rib.	 I	 don't	 care	 whether	 you	 are	 getting	 fractures	 or	 not,	 I	 will	 go	 on
hitting	you.	My	hits	are	more	subtle	than	those	of	the	Zen	people.	Their	hits	are
more	primitive.
So	 whenever	 you	 get	 upset	 and	 disturbed,	 remember,	 it	 is	 a	 hit.	 Just	 take	 a
shower	and	sit	down	to	meditate.	No	need	to	think	about	it,	 it	was	just	a	hit	 to
wake	you	up.
My	speaking	to	you	is	not	that	of	an	orator	or	that	of	a	philosopher.	My	talking
to	you	is	that	of	a	master	who	knows	how	to	disturb	you.	And	your	function	is
not	to	be	disturbed	whatever	happens,	whatever	I	say.
I	may	call	Jesus	a	crackpot,	don't	be	worried.	Just	enjoy	and	have	a	good	shower
if	 some	 trouble	 arises...	 because	what	 have	 I	 to	 do	with	 Jesus?	My	concern	 is
with	you!	If	I	see	somewhere	in	your	head	Jesus	lurking,	then	I	immediately	hit
Jesus.	I	am	hitting	you.
What	concern	have	I	with	Jesus?	In	fact,	nobody	knows	whether	this	fellow	ever
was	there	or	not.
But	when	I	talk	about	Stalin,	don't	get	worried.	I	have	nothing	to	be	concerned
with	Stalin.	He	is	not	my	disciple,	you	are!	And	you	are	on	your	own	--	in	spite
of	 me.	 I	 am	 trying	 every	 possible	 way	 to	 throw	 you	 out,	 but	 you	 still	 go	 on
coming.
You	know	perfectly	well	that	my	words	should	not	be	taken	at	face	value.	They
are	strategies	and	devices.	The	whole	problem	is	how	to	shock	you	and	shatter
your	mind	completely	 so	you	can	enter	 into	 the	 inner	 room	and	 see	with	your
own	eyes	your	vast	sky.
Basho	wrote:
A	COLD	RAIN	STARTING,
AND	ME	WITHOUT	A	HAT.
ON	SECOND	THOUGHT,	WHO	CARES?
This	is	the	beauty	of	Zen.
A	COLD	RAIN	STARTING,
AND	ME	WITHOUT	A	HAT.
ON	SECOND	THOUGHT,	WHO	CARES?
Remember	it.	On	second	thought,	don't	care	at	all	about	anything.	Perhaps	on	the
first	 thought	you	may	not	be	able,	but	on	second	thought,	don't	miss	 it.	Sekiso
did	not	miss	on	second	thought.
Question	4
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
EMMA	GOLDMAN,	THE	ANARCHIST,	WROTE	IN	ONE	OF	HER
REVOLUTIONARY	 ESSAYS,	 EARLIER	 THIS	 CENTURY,	 THAT
"FRIEDRICH
NIETZSCHE	IS	DESCRIBED	AS	A	HATER	OF	THE	WEAK	BECAUSE	HE
BELIEVED	 IN	 THE	 SUPERMAN.	 IT	 DOES	 NOT	 OCCUR	 TO	 THE
SHALLOW
INTERPRETERS	OF	THAT	GIANT	MIND	THAT	THIS	VISION	OF	THE
SUPERMAN	 ALSO	 CALLS	 FOR	 A	 STATE	 OF	 SOCIETY	 WHICH	 WILL
NOT	GIVE
BIRTH	TO	A	RACE	OF	WEAKLINGS	AND	SLAVES."
WITH	 THE	 FLAME	 OF	 ZEN	 IN	 ONE	 HAND,	 YOU	 ARE	 THE
COMPLETION	OF
THE	CIRCLE	OF	MAN'S	 SEARCH	 FOR	 INNER	 INTEGRITY;	WITH	THE
FLAME
OF	 SPIRITUAL	 ANARCHISM	 IN	 THE	 OTHER	 HAND,	 ARE	 YOU	 NOT
ALSO	THE
COMPLETION	 OF	 THE	 CIRCLE	 OF	 MAN'S	 SEARCH	 FOR	 OUTER
INTEGRITY?
Maneesha,	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 misunderstood	 giants	 of
mankind.	And	nobody	can	feel	for	him	more	than	I	feel,	because	I	am	also	in	the
same	category	--	even	more	misunderstood	a	man	than	Friedrich	Nietzsche.
When	 I	 say	 I	hate	poverty,	people	 think	 I	hate	 the	poor	people.	 I	hate	poverty
because	 I	 want	 to	 destroy	 poverty	 completely!	 There	 will	 be	 no	 poor	 people
when	the	poverty	is	destroyed.
The	same	was	the	situation	with	Nietzsche.	When	he	said,	"I	hate	weaklings,	and
I	proclaim	 the	coming	of	 the	 superman,"	people	misunderstood.	They	 thought,
"This	man	is	in	favor	only	of	the	powerful,	superior	people,	and	he	is	against	the
ordinary,	average	humanity."	That	was	not	the	case.
Emma	Goldman	is	right.	She	is	one	of	the	few	women	of	history	who	has	had	a
very	 clear-cut	 intellectual	 understanding.	 Very	 few	 women	 think	 about	 great
problems,	 their	world	 is	 very	 limited	 --	 the	 neighborhood,	who	has	 got	 a	 new
sari....
A	woman	rushed	into	the	house	and	said	to	her	husband,	"You	have	to	do	either
one	thing	or	the	other."
He	said,	"What?"
The	woman	said,	"The	neighbor	has	purchased	a	new	car.	Either	you	purchase	a
new	 car,	 or	 change	 neighborhoods.	We	will	 move	 into	 some	 other	 house,	 we
cannot	live	in	this	house.	I	cannot	stand	to	see	a	new	car	in	his	garage,	when	in
our	garage	is	an	old	Ford.	So	you	be	quick!	Either	find	a	new	house	--	we	move
out	of	this	house	--	or	bring	home	a	new	Cadillac!"
The	woman's	world	has	been	very	limited.	It	has	been	made	limited	by	man,	but
the	woman	is	also	responsible;	she	accepted	it.	When	somebody	enslaves	you,	of
course	that	person	is	responsible	--	but	don't	think	that	you	are	not	responsible.
You	are	also	responsible:	you	could	have	died	instead	of	becoming	a	slave;	then
how	could	he	have	made	you	a	slave?
So	whenever	 there	 is	 such	 a	 phenomenon,	 people	 only	 think	with	 compassion
and	pity	about	 the	victim,	but	 they	don't	 think	 that	 the	victim	somehow	agrees
with	the	status	quo.
Otherwise,	if	all	the	women	just	go	on	a	one-day	strike	all	over	the	world,	men
will	 be	 massaging	 their	 feet:	 "You	 are	 not	 only	 equal,	 you	 are	 superior!	 Just
come	back	to	the	kitchen."
I	know	about	myself...	I	cannot	even	make	a	cup	of	tea.	I	have	tried	and	burned
myself.
Just	once	was	enough,	then	I	said,	"It	is	not	my	thing."
Have	you	ever	thought,	if	you	have	to	sleep	with	your	little	baby	what	is	going
to	 happen	 in	 the	 night?	 Either	 you	 will	 throw	 the	 baby	 out	 of	 the	 window...
because	these	small	babies	are	such	rascals,	you	won't	believe.	They	will	sleep
the	whole	day	and	they	will	stay	awake	the	whole	night.	And	every	moment	they
want	 this,	 and	 they	 want	 that;	 and	 if	 nothing	 else,	 they	 want	 to	 go	 to	 the
bathroom!	They	will	drive	you	crazy	just	within	one	night.	Either	you	will	shoot
yourself,	or	throw	out	the	baby	and	have	a	peaceful	night.
The	woman	is	immensely	patient.	She	has	no	problems	about	what	will	happen
when	third	world	war	happens.	Who	cares?	Right	now,	 the	question	 is	 that	 the
husband	has	not	come	home.	Where	is	he?	With	which	woman?	She	is	just	going
down	the	list	of	all	the	women	she	knows....
And	when	the	husband	comes	back	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	she	immediately
inquires,
"Where	have	you	been?"	And	he	says,	"I	was	with	my	friend	such-and-such."
And	the	wife	has	all	the	information.	She	has	phoned	all	the	friends.	"That	friend
is	not	at	home,	so	where	have	you	been?	Be	truthful	and	honest!	I	have	inquired,
I	have	your	diary,	all	the	phone	numbers.	That	fellow	is	not	at	home!	WHERE
HAVE	YOU	BEEN?"
Now	you	 are	 caught	 red-handed!	Nobody	 can	 escape	 a	wife's	 scrutiny.	 I	 have
never	heard	of	a	 single	man	who	has	escaped	 the	 scrutiny	of	a	wife.	They	are
such	great	detectives	that	sometimes	I	think	they	should	all	enroll	in	the	CIA,	the
FBI,	 the	CID	 --	 they	will	 do	 far	 greater	work!	Their	 concern	 is	 so	 limited,	 so
their	whole	concentration....
Very	few	women,	like	Emma	Goldman,	have	ever	thought	about	such	problems
as	anarchism.	She	was	really	a	rare	woman.	No	husband	could	tolerate	her,	she
was	too	intellectual.	Every	husband	will	feel	inferior	to	her.
She	 is	 perfectly	 right	 about	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche,	 that	 when	 he	 talked	 about
superman	and	he	 said,	 "I	hate	 the	weaklings"	 --	people	have	missed	 the	point.
They	think	he	is	a	hater	of	the	average	humanity	and	only	wants	the	superman,	a
superior	quality,	intellectual	giants.	That	is	not	the	case.
His	 conception	 of	 the	 superman	 and	 the	 society	 that	 will	 come	 with	 the
superman	 is	 that	 such	 a	 society	 will	 not	 allow	 weaklings	 to	 be	 born.	 That's
exactly	 my	 conception	 too.	 And	 I	 am	 being	 criticized	 all	 around	 the	 world
because	 I	 have	 been	 saying	 that	man	 should	 not	 be	 allowed	 anymore	 to	 give
birth	to	accidental	children.
Up	to	now	the	whole	humanity	has	been	accidental.	Now	we	have	every	means
to	choose	the	right	child.	We	can	create	a	humanity	in	which	everybody	will	be	a
superman.
Nietzsche	was	only	an	intellectual	--	a	great	intellectual,	perhaps	the	greatest.	I
have	left	intellect	far	behind.	I	use	it	just	for	you.
In	 my	 vision	 we	 don't	 have	 to	 wait	 for	 biological	 engineering	 to	 create	 the
superman.	It	will	go	against	all	the	masses,	all	the	societies.	All	the	religions	will
become	hindrances,	they	won't	allow	it.	Because	I	have	proposed	it,	I	am	being
criticized.	I	have	received	from	all	over	the	world	criticism	of	my	book,	*THE
GREATEST	CHALLENGE,	THE
GOLDEN	FUTURE,	saying	that	I	am	a	fascist	just	like	Friedrich	Nietzsche	was
a	fascist.
But	they	don't	understand	me.	Neither	have	they	understood	Friedrich	Nietzsche.
And	they	will	misunderstand	me	even	more	because	I	am	not	going	to	wait	for
biological	 engineering.	 I	 am	 going	 to	 create	 the	 superman	 by	 a	 very	 different
methodology.
My	methodology	is	meditation.
I	can	change	the	ordinary,	average	human	being	into	a	buddha.	There	is	no	need
right	now	to	go	 into	changing	 the	ordinary	structure	of	 reproduction.	Finally	 it
has	to	be	done,	because	that	will	be	the	easiest	way.	And	if	I	have	supermen	to
work	with,	then	meditation	will	be	so	easy,	immediately	understood.
But	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 had	 no	 idea	 about	 meditation.	 I	 can	 change,	 through
meditation,	the	very	ordinary	and	average	person	into	a	superman.	The	moment
you	enter	into	your	being	--	centered,	silent,	the	whole	sky	within	has	no	clouds
of	thought	--	you	are	turning	into	a	superman.	I	call	that	superman	the	buddha.
Maneesha,	you	are	right	--	because	I	am	looking	at	man	from	every	angle:	from
his	 body,	 from	 his	mind,	 from	 his	 soul.	 I	 am	 looking	 at	man	 as	 a	 totality.	 So
many	half-circles	are	going	to	be	complete	in	me.	Buddha	was	looking	only	at
the	spiritual;	Marx	was	looking	only	at	the	material;	Sigmund	Freud	was	looking
only	at	the	psychological.
My	 approach	 is	 total,	 from	 all	 dimensions	 and	 directions.	 And	 I	 have	 gone
through	 all	 these	 people	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible,	 and	 I	 know	where	 they	 stand,
where	 they	 have	 stopped.	 Nietzsche	 has	 stopped	 with	 intellectual	 analysis,
Sigmund	 Freud	 has	 stopped	 with	 psychoanalysis,	 Marx	 has	 stopped	 with	 an
economic	analysis	of	the	society.
But	man	is	not	partial.	Don't	deal	with	man	part	by	part.
You	can	deal	with	a	machine	in	a	partial	way	--	you	can	change	one	part	if	it	is
not	functioning	well	--	but	man	is	an	organic	unity;	you	cannot	do	that	with	man.
You	 have	 to	 take	 the	whole	man	 into	 your	 vision.	My	vision	 is	 for	 the	whole
man.
And	the	moment	you	also	understand	all	your	dimensions,	all	your	directions,	all
your	 potentialities,	 suddenly	 a	 great	 transformation	 happens:	 the	 superman	 is
born	 in	 you.	 You	 don't	 have	 to	 wait	 because	 you	 cannot	 change	 your
programming	of	biology	now.
Perhaps	 your	 children's	 children	 may	 gather	 courage	 enough	 to	 change	 the
biology	of	man.
When	I	am	talking	to	you,	I	am	taking	care	not	only	about	you	but	about	your
children's	children's	children.	My	approach	is	not	only	concerned	with	you	--	it
is	 certainly	 concerned	with	 you,	 but	 not	 only	with	 you.	My	vision	 reaches	 far
deeper.	 I	 am	 saying	many	 things	which	 should	 be	 said	 only	 one	 century	 from
now.	That's	what	creates	controversies	about	me,	unnecessary	condemnation	of
me,	but	I	am	helpless.
In	fact,	I	enjoy	all	the	controversies,	all	the	condemnation.	At	this	moment,	I	am
the	most	condemned	man	in	the	whole	world.	That	gives	me	great	joy!	At	least	I
am	something....
This	brings	us	to	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh.
Guiseppe	and	Martino,	two	Italians,	are	at	the	movie	house	watching	a	spaghetti
western	and	feeling	bored.
Martino	leans	over	in	the	dark	and	taps	his	friend	on	the	arm.	"Hey-a,	Guiseppe,"
whispers	Martino,	 "I	 am-a	 really	 bored!	 You	 see-a	 this	 guy	 in	 front	 with	 the
bald-a	head?
I	give-a	you	a	thousand	lira	if	you	smack	him	over	the	head!"
Guiseppe	immediately	takes	the	money,	stands	up	and	hits	the	bald	man	in	front
--
POW!	--	over	the	head.
The	man	turns	around	in	a	daze.
"Hey-a!	Francesco!"	says	Guiseppe.	"Good-a	to	see	you!"
"I	am	not-a	Francesco!"	replies	the	man,	shakily,	and	he	turns	back	to	watching
the	movie.
Five	minutes	pass,	and	Martino	is	bored	again.
"Hey-a	Guiseppe!"	he	whispers.	"I	give-a	you	two	thousand	lira	if	you	hit-a	the
bald-a	guy	again!"
Guiseppe	takes	the	money,	stands	up	and	hits	the	bald-headed	man	--	BONK!	--
on	the	head.
The	bald	man	spins	around	and	is	just	about	to	climb	over	the	back	of	his	seat,
when	Guiseppe	says,	"Hey-a!	Francesco!	Good-a	to	see	you!"
"I	 tell-a	you!"	 snaps	 the	bald	man.	 "I	 am	not-a	Francesco!"	 and	he	 storms	out
and	goes	and	sits	upstairs	in	the	balcony.
Ten	minutes	later,	Martino	is	bored	again.
"Hey-a!	Guiseppe!"	he	whispers,	"I	am-a	bored!	Let's-a	go	upstairs!"
The	two	friends	go	to	sit	in	the	balcony	just	behind	the	bald-headed	man.
"Hey-a!	Guiseppe!"	whispers	Martino.	"I	give-a	you	ten	thousand	lira	if	you	hit-
a	the	man	with	the	bald-a	head	again!"
Guiseppe	puts	the	money	into	his	pocket,	gets	to	his	feet,	and	hits	the	bald	head	-
-
SMACK!	--	with	his	hand.
The	man	spins	around	in	his	seat.
"Hey-a!	Francesco!"	says	Guiseppe.	"You	know,	downstairs	 there	 is	a	guy	 that
looks	just-a	like	you!"
One	day,	Joseph	Stalin	wants	to	find	out	what	the	people	of	Russia	really	think
about	him.	So	he	disguises	himself	with	a	big	black	beard	and	an	overcoat	and
goes	out	into	the	streets	of	Moscow.	He	walks	around	for	a	while	and	then	goes
into	a	favorite	communist	pub,	the	Czar's	Head.
He	walks	up	to	the	bar,	orders	a	double	vodka	and	begins	to	sip	it	slowly.	Then
he	 turns	 to	 the	man	next	 to	him,	Comrade	Popov,	and	casually	asks,	 "Tell	me,
comrade,	what	do	you	think	of	Joseph	Stalin?"
Comrade	Popov	turns	white,	looks	over	both	shoulders,	grabs	Stalin	by	the	arm,
and	whispers,	"Are	you	crazy?	We	can't	talk	here	--	follow	me!"
The	 two	Russians	go	outside	 through	 the	back	door,	 into	 the	quiet	back	street.
Popov	looks	around	frantically,	 then	leads	Stalin	into	a	dark	alley.	Then	Popov
looks	around	and	says,	"We	are	still	not	safe	here!	These	walls	have	ears!	Come
with	me."
He	takes	Stalin	through	a	maze	of	unlit	passages	and	side	streets	before	arriving
at	a	small,	hidden	garden.	They	climb	over	the	fence,	and	finally	crouch	behind
some	bushes.
"Okay,"	says	Popov,	"we	can	talk	here.	You	want	to	know	what	I	think	of	Joseph
Stalin?"
"That's	right,"	replies	Stalin.
"Well,"	 says	Popov,	 "I	 could	 not	 say	 it	 in	 the	 pub,	 but	 personally	 --	 I	 like	 the
guy!"
Igor	and	Becky	Ivanovich,	a	Moscow	couple,	keep	a	parrot	called	Boris	in	their
apartment.	Boris	likes	to	cry,	"Down	with	communism!"	at	the	top	of	his	voice,
and	one	day	the	neighbors	hear	him	and	report	him	to	the	KGB.
When	the	police	arrive,	Igor	quickly	hides	Boris	in	the	freezer.
The	KGB	officers	search	everywhere	throughout	the	apartment	and	cannot	find
anything.
But	just	before	they	leave,	one	of	them	decides	to	have	a	look	in	the	freezer	and
finds	a	frozen	Boris.
When	Boris	finally	thaws	out	he	starts	shouting	at	the	top	of	his	voice:	"Hurray
for	 Gorbachev!	 Long	 live	 communism!"	 The	 KGB	 men	 are	 very	 happy	 and
leave	the	apartment.
When	they	are	gone,	Igor	grabs	Boris.
"I	 don't	 understand,"	 says	 Igor.	 "Why	 did	 you	 suddenly	 start	 praising
communism?"
"Look,"	 replies	 Boris,	 "you	would	 do	 the	 same	 if	 you	 had	 just	 returned	 from
Siberia!"
Nivedano...
(Gibberish)
Nivedano...
Be	silent.
Close	your	eyes.
And	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	to	look	inwards.
Gather	your	whole	life	energy	and	rush	towards	your	very	center	of	being,	with
total	consciousness	and	with	an	urgency	as	if	this	is	going	to	be	the	last	moment
in	your	life.
Without	 such	 urgency	 nobody	 has	 ever	 reached	 to	 his	 very	 being,	 the	 center
which	is	your	original	face,	which	is	your	door	into	the	divine.
Faster	and	faster,
deeper	and	deeper....
As	you	come	closer	 to	yourself,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you,	almost	 like
soft	rain.
A	little	closer...	and	you	find	a	tremendous	peace	blossoming	around	you.
A	little	more...	and	fragrances	from	the	beyond	fulfill	your	being.
Now	you	can	see	your	original	face.	This	is	the	buddha,	hidden	at	the	center	of
your	being	for	centuries.	This	is	your	superman.
The	only	quality	of	 the	buddha	 is	witnessing,	and	as	your	witnessing	deepens,
your	blissfulness	deepens	also.
As	your	witnessing	becomes	greater,	 a	 tremendous	 ecstasy	 arises	 in	your	very
being.	It	is	not	something	coming	from	outside,	it	is	something	that	is	arising	in
you	and	blossoming	in	you	like	a	lotus	flower.
But	it	all	happens	--	this	whole	miracle	of	meditation	is	nothing	but	witnessing.
A	single	word,	and	the	whole	of	religion	is	intrinsic	in	it.
At	this	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth.
To	make	the	witnessing	a	little	deeper,	Nivedano...
Relax,	let	go.	Just	continue	to	witness.	Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body,	witness
that	you	are	not	the	mind.
Witness	that	you	are	only	a	witness,
just	a	buddha,
a	pure	consciousness,
and	eternal	life
suddenly	becomes	clear	to	you.
You	have	been	changing	bodies	again	and	again	and	again	but	your	life	goes	on
flowing	from	eternity	to	eternity.	It	is	infinite;	it	is	immortal.
And	as	you	relax	you	start	melting	like	ice.	All	separations	dissolve.	Gautam	the
Buddha	 Auditorium	 suddenly	 becomes	 an	 ocean	 of	 ten	 thousand	 buddhas
melting	 their	 consciousness	 into	 oneness,	 without	 any	 waves,	 without	 any
ripples.
The	evening	was	very	beautiful	on	its	own	but	your	totality,	your	urgency,	your
tremendous	longing	to	reach	to	the	center	have	made	it	a	miraculous	evening	--	a
great	splendor.
Meditation	is	the	only	magic	in	the	world	and	the	only	miracle.
Before	Nivedano	calls	you	back,	gather	all	the	flowers	that	are	showering	on	you
--	of	ecstasy,	of	joy,	of	peace,	of	a	deep	serenity,	silence,	a	fire	within	you.	The
fire	of	eternal	life,	which	is	very	cool,	and	a	breeze	which	is	so	fragrant,	of	the
beyond.
This	I	have	called	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind.	We	have	to	fill	the	whole	earth	with	Zen
Fire	 and	 Zen	Wind.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 possibility	 for	 saving	 humanity	 and	 this
beautiful	planet	from	destruction,	from	the	politicians	and	from	the	priests.
And	don't	 forget	 to	persuade	 the	buddha	 to	come	with	you.	He	has	 to	become
your	daily	life.	In	each	of	your	activities,	in	each	of	your	gestures,	in	every	bird,
in	every	silence	--
he	has	to	be	a	constant	presence,	just	behind	you.	Just	his	presence	behind	you
will	start	changing	your	lifestyle.	It	will	bring	grace	and	beauty	and	benediction
and	compassion	that	you	have	never	dreamt	of.
Meditation	makes	the	greatest	dream	a	reality.
Nivedano...
Come	back,	but	come	back	as	buddhas,	silently,	peacefully,	with	deep	gratitude
and	great	grace.
Sit	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 just	 to	 remember	where	 you	 have	 been,	 to	what	 sky,	 to
what	 space,	what	 golden	 path	 you	 have	 traveled.	And	 just	 feel	who	 is	 behind
you,	the	presence	of	the	buddha.
These	are	the	three	steps	before	you	become	enlightened:	Buddha	comes	behind
you	like	a	shadow,	the	first	step.
Buddha	comes	before	you	and	you	become	the	shadow,	the	second	step.
Your	shadow	disappears	 in	 the	buddha.	You	are	no	more,	only	buddha	 is...	 the
third	and	the	final	step.
The	moment	your	shadow	disappears	in	the	buddha,	you	will	find,	suddenly,	that
buddha	is	only	a	transparent	consciousness.	When	there	is	something	transparent
it	makes	no	shadow.
And	buddha	is	your	very	nature,	so	there	is	not	much	problem	to	bring	him	from
the	hidden	sources	and	to	make	him	your	whole	being.
He	 is	 just	 a	 seed	 at	 the	 center.	As	 you	 bring	 it	 out	 the	 seed	 breaks	 down	 and
suddenly	out	of	your	mud,	dirty	mud,	of	all	kinds	of	desires,	 jealousies,	anger,
violence,	arises	a	beautiful	lotus.
This	 lotus	 is	 the	 flowering	 of	 your	 very	 potential.	 This	 will	 make	 you	 a
superman.
Nietzsche	can	only	talk	about	you:	I	can	transform	you	into	the	superman.
Superman	is	my	very	teaching.
I	 teach	 you	 the	 superman,	 the	 buddha.	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 discipline,	 any
philosophy	--
I	simply	help	you	to	bring	out	your	own	consciousness	into	a	state	of	flowering.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Wolves	in	a	sheep's	skin
4	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902045
ShortTitle:
FIRE06
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
240
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
DOGO	VISITED	NANSEN,	WHO	ASKED	HIM,	"WHAT	IS	YOUR	NAME?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"MY	NAME	IS	ENCHI."
NANSEN	 ASKED,	 "HOW	 DO	 YOU	 EXPRESS	 THE	 PLACE	 WHERE
WISDOM
DOESN'T	REACH?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"I	WOULD	NEVER	EXPRESS	IT."
NANSEN	 SAID,	 "THAT'S	 RIGHT.	 IF	 YOU	 EXPRESS	 IT,	 HORNS	 WILL
GROW
AND	YOU	WILL	BECOME	A	BEAST."
A	 FEW	 DAYS	 LATER,	 DOGO	 AND	 UNGAN	WERE	 SITTING	 OUTSIDE
THE
DORMITORY	 AND	 DOING	 SOME	 WORK.	 NANSEN	 WAS	 TAKING	 A
WALK,	AND	WHEN	HE	SAW	DOGO,	HE	ASKED,	 "ENCHI,	THE	OTHER
DAY,	YOU	SAID
YOU	WOULD	NEVER	EXPRESS	THE	PLACE	WHERE	WISDOM	DOESN'T
REACH.	NOW,	HOW	ARE	YOU	PRACTICING	IT?"
HEARING	 THIS,	 DOGO	 SLIPPED	 INTO	 THE	 DORMITORY,	 WAITED
THERE
UNTIL	NANSEN	WALKED	AWAY	AND	THEN	APPEARED	AGAIN.
UNGAN	 ASKED	 DOGO,	 "WHY	 DIDN'T	 YOU	 ANSWER	 WHEN	 OSHO
ASKED
YOU	THE	QUESTION?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"WHAT	A	CLEVER	CHAP	YOU	ARE!"
THEN	UNGAN	CAME	UP	TO	NANSEN	AND	ASKED,	"OSHO,	YOU	HAVE
ASKED
A	 QUESTION	 JUST	 NOW	 OF	 MY	 BROTHER-DISCIPLE,	 ENCHI.	 HOW
SHOULD
ONE	ANSWER	TO	IT?"
NANSEN	SAID,	"HE	IS	QUITE	GOOD	AT	THE	BEASTS'	WAY."
UNGAN	ASKED,	"WHAT	is	THE	BEASTS'	WAY?"
NANSEN	SAID,	"YOU	MUST	HAVE	HEARD	THAT	YOU	SHOULD	NEVER
EXPRESS	 THE	 PLACE	 WHERE	 WISDOM	 DOESN'T	 REACH.	 IF	 YOU
EXPRESS	 IT,	 HORNS	WILL	 GROW.	 IF	 YOU	 NAME	 IT	 SO-AND-SO,	 IT
WILL	ALREADY	BE
WRONG.	YOU	SHOULD	IMMEDIATELY	GO	THE	BEASTS'	WAY."
Friends,
Comrade	Gorbachev	seems	to	be	bent	upon	destroying	communism,	root	and	all.
He	has	even	stopped	using	the	word	`comrade'.
Sangeet	has	been	going	through	his	books,	because	I	don't	waste	my	time	on	any
rubbish.
She	 has	 found	 a	 few	 points	which	 I	would	 like	 to	 discuss	with	 you.	The	 first
point	is	about	women.
It	 was	 one	 of	 the	 great	 contributions	 of	 Joseph	 Stalin	 to	 bring	 about	 equality
between	men	and	women	in	every	sphere	of	 life.	He	allowed	women	the	same
education,	 the	 same	 financial	 freedom	 as	 the	 men.	 He	 allowed	 the	 women
freedom	to	work	equally	with	men.
He	 brought	 the	 woman	 out	 of	 the	 prison	 of	 the	 home.	 Russia	 was	 the	 only
country	in	the	world	where	women	were	given	back	their	dignity,	and	the	whole
credit	goes	to	Joseph	Stalin.
Now	Gorbachev	 is	 forcing	 the	woman	 back	 into	 the	 kitchen.	His	 idea	 is	 only
valid	in	the	sense	that	unless	the	family	is	again	enforced,	it	will	be	difficult	to
bring	private	property	and	capitalism	to	the	Soviet	Union.	He	is	almost	playing
into	the	hands	of	the	Western	capitalist	countries.	Now	he	wants	the	woman	not
to	be	given	equal	work,	or	equal	education;	she	should	go	back	and	be	a	wife,	a
mother.	The	house	and	the	family	is	to	be	her	only	field.
All	 over	 the	world	women	 are	 fighting	 for	 freedom.	And	 freedom	 is	 possible
only	if	the	woman	is	educated,	has	the	capacity	to	earn	money	for	herself,	is	not
dependent	on	the	husband's	bank	account;	if	she	is	not	forced	to	remain	within
the	boundaries	of	the	house,	taking	care	of	the	children,	preparing	food,	washing
dishes	and	clothes.	But	that's	what	Gorbachev	is	trying	to	do	now.
All	the	women	of	the	Soviet	Union	should	revolt	against	it,	and	all	 the	women
outside	the	Soviet	Union	should	support	the	Soviet	woman's	fight	for	freedom.
These	are	small	strategies	for	bringing	capitalism	back.	Once	the	family	is	solid,
and	 the	woman	 has	 lost	 her	 equality,	 private	 property	 can	 be	 brought	 back	 in
very	easily.
Gorbachev	is	already	talking	about	private	property;	he	is	already	talking	about
socialism,	 he	 has	 dropped	 the	 word	 `communism'	 also.	 And	 socialism	 is	 a
cunning	conspiracy	of	the	capitalists.
All	over	the	world	there	are	socialist	parties,	and	their	only	function	is	to	prevent
people	 from	becoming	communist.	They	are	being	paid	by	 the	capitalists	 --	as
far	as	India	is	concerned	I	am	absolutely	certain.	I	know,	because	the	same	man
offered	me	money	also....
The	head	of	 India's	biggest	 super-rich	 family	was	Jugal	Kishore	Birla.	He	was
giving	monthly	salaries	to	Jaiprakash	Narayan,	who	was	the	head	of	the	Socialist
Party	of	India.
Seeing	 my	 meetings,	 where	 fifty	 thousand	 or	 one	 hundred	 thousand	 people
would	attend,	he	was	immensely	interested.
And	 I	 used	 to	 stay	 in	Delhi	with	 one	 of	 the	members	 of	 parliament	 from	my
constituency,	Dr.	Seth	Govinddas.	Both	Seth	Govinddas	and	Jugal	Kishore	Birla
belong	to	the	same	caste,	of	marwaris	--	they	are	the	Jews	of	India	--	so	he	had
found	 a	medium	 to	 reach	me.	 He	 asked	Govinddas,	 "A	meeting	 is	 absolutely
necessary.	You	arrange	it."
Govinddas	said	to	me,	when	I	was	staying	with	him	in	Delhi	for	a	few	days,	"It
will	be	immensely	helpful	for	your	work."
I	 said,	 "In	 what	 way	 can	 Jugal	 Kishore	 Birla	 help	 my	 work?	My	 work	 is	 to
destroy	 Birlas,	 and	 Tatas,	 and	 Sahus"	 --	 the	 three	 great	 super-rich	 families	 of
India	--	"how	can	he	help	me?"
He	said,	"But	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	meeting	the	man."	I	said,	"Okay."
So	I	met	the	man,	and	he	immediately	made	an	offer	 to	me:	"I	will	give	you	a
blank	check,	as	I	have	given	to	Mahatma	Gandhi."	And	he	had	been	supporting
the	freedom	movement,	and	had	a	very	clear	vision	of	the	future,	that	sooner	or
later	these	people	would	be	the	presidents,	 the	prime	ministers,	so	whatever	he
was	giving	them	was	an	investment.	Then	he	would	take	the	advantage	--	and	he
was	 taking	 advantage,	 after	 the	 freedom	 of	 India.	 People	 who	 had	 been	 on	 a
monthly	salary	from	him...	he	had	purchased	their	souls.
He	told	me,	"Jaiprakash	Narayan	is	on	my	payroll."
I	 said,	 "If	 you	 can	 give	 me	 a	 blank	 check	 without	 any	 conditions,	 I	 will	 be
grateful	to	you.
But	I	don't	accept	any	conditions.	I	cannot	sell	myself."
He	said,	"Conditions	are	bound	to	be	there;	otherwise	why	should	I	give	you	a
blank	check?	I	am	a	businessman."
I	said,	"You	may	be	a	businessman,	I	am	not."
He	said,	"But	my	conditions	are	very	simple:	preach	Hinduism	to	the	world.	And
the	 second	 condition	 is,	 create	 a	 great	movement	 in	 India	 to	 protect	 the	 cows
from	being	slaughtered."
I	simply	got	up	and	I	said,	"Throw	your	blank	check	to	the	dogs!	I	am	going."
Govinddas	was	 very	much	 embarrassed,	 because	 they	 all	 felt	 great	 respect	 for
his	money	and	his	support.
And	 I	 told	 him,	 "You	 have	 asked	 me	 to	 come,	 and	 you	 have	 insulted	 me!
Nothing	can	be	more	insulting	than	offering	money	as	a	bribe,	trying	to	purchase
a	man.	You	cannot	purchase	me	--	nobody	can	purchase	me.	I	am	going	to	speak
against	 Hinduism	 my	 whole	 life!	 You	 have	 strengthened	 my	 idea;	 you	 have
reminded	me	that	I	have	to	take	care	of	Hinduism.	And	I	am	going	to	fight	with
all	those	people	who	are	trying	to	stop	cow	slaughter."
That's	how	I	came	to	be	the	arch-enemy	of	the	Shankaracharya	of	Puri,	because
he	is	the	head	of	the	movement	to	stop	cow	slaughter.
So	I	know	from	the	very	man	himself,	Jugal	Kishore	Birla,	that	the	head	of	the
Socialist	Party	and	perhaps	other	leaders	were	on	his	payroll.
Why	was	 he	 paying	 the	 socialists?	What	 is	 the	 function	 of	 the	 socialist?	 The
function	is	to	divide	the	proletariat,	to	create	barriers	so	the	proletariat,	the	poor
people,	the	labor	unions,	don't	go	to	the	communists.
And	it	is	easy	for	the	socialists	to	do	it,	because	the	socialists	agree	with	all	the
superstitions	 of	 the	masses.	 They	 agree	with	 all	 their	 superstitions,	 they	 don't
disturb	 their	 religion.	 They	 don't	 disturb	 anything	 in	 their	 prejudices,	 they
support	it,	so	obviously	the	masses	are	attracted	to	them	more	easily	than	to	the
communists	who	are	non-compromising,	who	hit	hard	on	everybody's	 religion,
on	 everybody's	 theism,	 belief	 in	 God,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 fictitious	 ideas	 and
superstitions.	 Naturally,	 the	 Communist	 Party	 in	 India	 --	 which	 is	 one	 of	 the
oldest	communist	parties	in	the	world	--	has	not	been	able	to	gather	any	power	or
any	great	number	of	people	to	be	members.	And	it	is	not	going	to.
Socialists	 pretend	 that	 they	 are	 Marxists,	 and	 that	 they	 are	 going	 to	 bring
equality,	they	are	going	to	bring	social	justice,	but	without	disturbing	anybody's
superstitions.	 Now	 they	 are	 talking	 in	 absolute	 contradictions!	 Without
destroying	the	masses'	prejudices,	 their	past-orientation,	 their	superstitions,	you
cannot	bring	equality.
God	has	created	only	man	in	his	own	image,	not	woman.	The	woman	has	been
created	by	taking	a	rib	out	of	man,	so	she	is	just	to	be	a	servant	to	the	husband.
She	cannot	claim	equality.	How	can	a	rib	bone	be	equal	to	a	man?	She	is	almost
reduced	to	being	just	a	body	and	not	a	soul.
How	are	 you	 going	 to	make	 people	 equal	when	God	has	made	 them	unequal,
unless	you	strike	God	completely	dead?	And	how	are	you	going	to	bring	social
justice	to	the	masses	who	believe	that	their	poverty	is	because	of	their	past	life's
evil	 acts?	They	 are	 perfectly	 satisfied	with	 their	 poverty	 --	 it	 is	 a	 punishment.
And	they	don't	think	that	the	rich	people	are	responsible	for	their	poverty	--	they
are	 enjoying	 the	 good	 acts	 of	 their	 past	 life.	 If	 you	 don't	 disturb	 these
superstitions,	how	are	you	going	to	bring	equality	to	man?
So	 socialism	 is	 a	 strategy	 to	 prevent	 the	 proletariat	 from	 going	 to	 the
communists.	 It	 is	 a	 very	deep	 and	 subtle	 conspiracy	 against	 communism.	And
Gorbachev	 has	 started	 calling	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 a	 socialist	 country,	 not	 a
communist	country.	Already	he	has	started	making	compromises.
The	second	thing	Sangeet	has	found	is	about	democracy.	He	wants	a	democracy
of	the	people	--	the	same	way	as	America	has	democracy	"for	the	people,	of	the
people,	 by	 the	 people."	 But	 a	 democracy	 can	 exist	 only	 the	way	 it	 existed	 in
Athens,	in	a	city-state	--
even	 there	 it	was	not	perfect	 --	with	direct	democracy,	no	 representatives.	The
whole	city	would	gather	and	decide.
That's	how	they	decided	to	poison	Socrates.	Fifty-one	percent	of	the	population
of	Athens	voted	that	he	should	be	given	the	punishment	of	death	by	poisoning:
"He	 has	 been	 corrupting	 people's	 morals,	 he	 has	 been	 corrupting	 people's
religion.	 He	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 God.	 He	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 anything	 --	 he
believes	 only	 in	 rational,	 logical	 things,	 and	 that	 destroys	 our	 morality.	 That
destroys	 our	 religion,	 our	 superstitions,	 and	 those	 are	 our	 only	 consolations	 in
life."	 Just	 by	 a	 very	 small	majority	 --	 fifty-one	 percent	were	 against	 him,	 and
forty-nine	 percent	 were	 in	 favor	 of	 his	 being	 set	 free.	 But	 a	 majority	 is	 a
majority;	whether	it	is	one	man's	majority	or	two	men's	majority	does	not	matter.
But	 even	 in	Athens	 it	was	 not	 a	 total	 democracy.	 It	was	 direct,	 there	were	 no
representatives	--	because	once	the	representatives	come	in,	it	is	not	the	people
who	rule,	it	is	the	representatives	who	rule.	And	for	five	years	they	have	absolute
power.	Just	once	every	five	years	they	become	servants	of	the	people,	just	for	a
few	days	while	the	election	is	on;	after	the	election	the	people	don't	matter	at	all.
Then	they	go	on	doing	whatever	they	want	to	do.	But	in	Athens,	the	larger	part
was	 made	 up	 of	 slaves.	 What	 kind	 of	 democracy?	 --	 where	 people	 were
auctioned,	women	were	 auctioned.	 And	 these	 slaves	were	 not	 citizens,	 so	 the
greater	 part	 of	 the	 population	 of	 the	Athens	was	 not	 able	 to	 vote,	 not	 able	 to
participate	 in	 the	so-called	direct	democracy.	Athens	has	come	closest,	but	 that
kind	of	demacracy	is	possible	only	in	small	cities,	not	in	vast	nations.
In	vast	nations	you	can't	have	a	government	by	the	people,	of	the	people,	for	the
people.
In	 vast	 lands	 you	 have	 to	 fall	 back	 on	mediators.	 So	 it	 is	 just	making	 people
blind,	 giving	 them	 good	 slogans,	 but	 in	 fact	 democracy	 exists	 nowhere.	 It	 is
always	the	politicians	who	are	the	rulers	of	the	people.
But	as	I	have	told	you,	Gorbachev	is	too	much	impressed	by	America	and	wants
the	Soviet	Union	to	be	another	America.	He	is	not	saying	it	directly,	but	slowly
slowly	he	is	coming	closer	to	it.
Democracy	will	destroy	seventy	years'	experiment	completely.	Democracy	will
bring	 the	 rich	 back,	 the	 poor	 back;	 a	 classless	 society	 will	 become	 again	 a
society	with	classes.
And	 whenever	 there	 are	 rich	 people,	 they	 are	 the	 real	 rulers	 of	 the	 country
because	they	can	purchase	the	politicians.	Politicians	don't	have	money,	and	they
need	money	 for	 their	 elections.	No	poor	man	can	 stand	 for	 election	because	 it
takes	so	much	money	to	fight	an	election.
Even	in	a	poor	country	like	India	you	need	at	least	a	million	rupees	to	fight	an
election.
From	where	are	the	people	going	to	get	that	much	money?	And	that	one	million
rupees	 is	 the	minimum.	 It	 depends	 on	 the	 constituency,	 and	 it	 depends	 on	 the
rival	 candidate.	 If	 he	 is	 throwing	 away	 two	million	 rupees,	 you	have	 to	 throw
away	more	than	two	millions;	otherwise	you	are	finished.	And	in	a	poor	country,
an	uneducated	country,	people	are	ready	to	sell	their	votes.
In	 India,	anybody	who	has	money	can	win	an	election.	Not	a	 single	poor	man
has	 reached	 the	 parliament	 in	 forty	 years'	 time,	 and	 it	 will	 never	 be	 possible,
because	how	can	you	 fight?	You	need	hundreds	of	 jeeps,	 you	need	 to	 pay	 the
poor	--	because	the	poor	are	not	interested	in	who	goes	to	the	parliament.	It	is	all
the	 same;	 only	 faces	 change,	 nothing	 else	 changes.	The	 poor	 go	 on	 becoming
poorer,	 the	 rich	 go	 on	 becoming	 richer,	 and	 all	 these	 politicians	 only	 go	 on
giving	promises.
Even	a	man	like	Mahatma	Gandhi	had	promised	that	the	first	president	of	India
would	be	a	woman,	and	not	only	a	woman	but	a	woman	belonging	to	the	sudras,
the	untouchables.
These	two	classes	have	suffered	the	most,	because	of	the	Hindu	ideology	that	the
untouchables	are	not	human	beings	but	beasts	of	burden,	and	the	woman	has	no
rights	of	her	own.	For	centuries....
So	just	to	get	the	attention	of	the	women,	and	the	votes	and	the	attention	of	the
untouchables...	And	Gandhi	changed	 the	name	 --	politicians	are	very	clever	 in
changing	names	 --	he	started	calling	 the	untouchables,	harijans.	Harijan	means
"people	of	God."
Now	 if	 harijans	 are	 the	 people	 of	 God,	 then	 why	 are	 they	 suffering	 for	 five
thousand	years?	And	those	who	are	not	the	people	of	God	are	exploiting	them,
reducing	them	to	cattle.
Strange...	but	even	the	untouchables	enjoyed	the	word,	the	change	of	the	word.	It
gave	them	a	great	consolation	that	they	are	the	chosen	people	of	God.	It	does	not
take	 away	 your	 poverty,	 it	 does	 not	 give	 you	 food,	 it	 does	 not	 give	 you	 any
dignity,	but	just	the	change	of	the	name....
It	happened	a	few	years	before....
There	is	a	certain	animal	in	the	Himalayas	which	looks	like	a	cow,	but	it	is	not	a
cow.	Its	color	is	bluish,	so	it	is	called	the	"blue	cow."	For	centuries	that	has	been
its	name.	It	is	not	a	cow	--	it	is	a	wild,	ferocious	animal,	and	it	comes	down	from
the	Himalayas	and	destroys	whole	crops	in	North	India.	And	it	has	been	growing
in	population,	just	like	the	Indians	are	growing.
A	 time	 came	 that	 the	 population	 of	 these	 blue	 cows	 grew	 so	 big	 that	 the
parliament	had	to	decide	to	do	something,	otherwise	on	the	one	hand	there	is	a
population	explosion	of	human	beings	and	on	the	other	hand	this	animal	goes	on
destroying	the	crops.	But	Hindus	were	absolutely	against	it	because	of	the	name,
"blue	 cow."	They	 are	worshippers	 of	 the	 cow.	So	 there	was	 great	 agitation	 all
over	India,	"You	cannot	kill	or	shoot	the	blue	cows."
And	 in	 this	 way	 you	 can	 understand	 how	 cunning	 politicians	 are.	 Pandit
Jawaharlal	 Nehru,	 the	 grandfather	 of	 Rajiv	 Gandhi,	 changed	 the	 name.	 He
proposed	 to	 the	parliament	 that	"We	have	 to	kill	 these	blue	horses."	 Instead	of
neelgaay,	blue	cow,	he	called	them	neelghora,	blue	horses.
And	no	Hindu	protested!	They	were	shot	in	the	thousands	and	thousands,	almost
their	whole	race	was	finished.	They	don't	come	anymore	to	North	India.	And	not
a	 single	Hindu,	not	 even	 this	mad	Shankaracharya	of	Puri,	 could	understand	a
simple	strategy	of	the	politicians.	When	they	were	blue	cows,	the	whole	of	India
was	in	an	uproar.	When	they	became	blue	horses,	who	cares?	And	they	are	the
same	people!
Gandhi	promised	that	he	would	make	the	first	president	of	India	a	woman,	and
not	 only	 a	 woman	 but	 an	 untouchable	 woman.	 But	 when	 India	 became
independent,	he	completely	forgot	the	promise.	And	he	is	worshipped,	not	only
in	India	but	outside	India,	as	a	great	man	of	truth	--	just	because	he	has	written
his	autobiography	and	titled	it,	AN
EXPERIMENT	 WITH	 TRUTH.	 But	 he	 was	 continuously	 lying	 to	 his	 own
people.
The	first	president	of	India,	and	the	first	prime	minister	of	India...	all	were	high-
caste	 people.	 Pandit	 Jawaharlal	Nehru	was	 a	 brahmin,	 and	 the	 brahmins	 have
been	ruling	this	country	for	centuries.	Again	the	rule	goes	to	the	brahmin	priests.
And	the	miracle	of	the	name....
Rajiv	Gandhi	is	not	a	Hindu,	but	nobody	has	said	it.
I	have	to	say	it:	Rajiv	Gandhi	is	a	crossbreed.	His	father,	Feroze	Gandhi,	was	a
Parsee;	and	his	mother,	Indira	Gandhi,	was	a	Hindu.	But	the	name	--	Gandhi	--
gives	 the	 feeling	 as	 if	 he	 is	 Hindu,	 because	Mahatma	Gandhi	 was	 Hindu.	 So
people	think....
And	Parsees	are	not	known	very	much;	they	are	confined	to	Bombay,	and	a	few
people	in	Poona,	a	few	people	in	Surat	--	just	this	small	territory.	Basically	they
are	 confined	 to	Bombay,	 so	 all	 over	most	 of	 India	nobody	knows	 about	 them,
that	they	also	have	a	surname,	Gandhi.
The	word	 gandhi	 comes	 not	 from	 caste	 or	 religion;	 it	means	 a	man	who	 sells
perfumes.
Gandh	means	 perfume,	 and	 gandhi	 means	 a	 perfume	 seller.	 So	 anybody	 who
sells	 perfumes	 becomes	 "Gandhi."	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 religion,	 it	 has
nothing	to	do	with	caste.
Feroze	Gandhi's	family,	sometime	in	the	past,	must	have	been	selling	perfume.
And	that	was	also	true	of	Mahatma	Gandhi's	parents	or	forefathers.	Somewhere
back,	they	must	have	been	selling	perfume;	both	are	called	"gandhis."
This	word	 `Gandhi'	 gives	 the	 impression	 to	 the	whole	 of	 India	 that	Rajiv	 is	 a
Hindu.	 He	 is	 not.	 Rajiv	 is	 half	 Hindu	 and	 half	 Parsee.	 If	 the	 whole	 of	 India
comes	to	know	it,	it	will	be	very	difficult	for	Rajiv	to	come	back	to	power	again.
I	want	the	whole	of	India	to	know	it:	he	is	a	crossbreed,	but	the	word	`Gandhi'	is
hiding	him.	And	he	goes	 to	 the	shankaracharyas	and	to	all	 the	so-called	Hindu
saints	and	nobody	objects,	because	they	all	think	he	is	a	Hindu.	I	have	to	expose
him.	This	man	is	just	like	a	blue	horse	who	used	to	be	a	blue	cow.
Changing	 names	 is	 an	 old,	 very	 ancient	 strategy	 of	 the	 politicians.	 Now
"comrade"	is	dropped	because	it	was	very	significant,	and	only	communists	used
it.	And	it	 is	a	beautiful	word.	Comrade	means	friend,	brother,	belonging	 to	 the
same	 path.	 And	 Gorbachev	 has	 dropped	 the	 word	 `communism'	 and	 is
continually	 talking	 in	 his	 two	 books	 about	 socialism,	which	was	 never	 before
mentioned	 in	 the	 seventy	years	of	 the	Soviet	Union's	 life.	 It	was	 a	 communist
country.	For	the	first	time	we	hear	it	is	a	socialist	country.
And	 he	 wants	 private	 property	 to	 come	 back,	 he	 wants	 foreign	 money	 to	 be
invested	in	the	Soviet	land.	He	is	completely	destroying	everything	for	which	so
much	sacrifice	has	been	made.
It	is	still	time	for	the	Soviet	Union	to	stand	up	against	this	man.	His	whole	desire
is	to	be	a	world	leader.
Just	a	 few	days	ago	 I	had	 told	you	 that	 soon	he	will	be	getting	a	Nobel	Prize.
Today	his	name	has	been	nominated.	It	has	not	been	long,	and	my	prediction	has
come	 true.	 These	 names	 have	 been	 nominated:	 Gorbachev	 is	 first,	 Ronald
Reagan	is	second,	Rajiv	Gandhi	is	third,	Dalai	Lama	is	fourth.	And	the	head	of
the	International	Football	Federation	is	the	fifth!
Nobody	has	ever	heard	that	the	head	of	the	International	Football	Federation	is
contributing	something	to	human	evolution	--	football!	And	in	what	way	is	this
football	contributing	to	peace?	--	because	he	has	been	nominated	to	be	given	a
Nobel	Prize	for	peace.	Strange...?
And	 what	 has	 the	 Dalai	 Lama	 done?	 He	 escaped	 from	 Tibet	 when	 China
attacked.	If	he	was	really	in	favor	of	the	Tibetan	people	he	should	have	remained
with	his	people,	even	if	he	was	to	be	murdered.
And	 when	 he	 escaped	 he	 did	 not	 bring	 the	 Buddhist	 scriptures	 with	 him,	 he
brought	 seventeen	camels	 loaded	with	gold,	because	he	knew	 that	 it	would	be
impossible	to	get	back	to	Tibet.	A	man	who	has	betrayed	his	own	people...	and
they	are	being	killed	every	day.	He	has	taken	the	money	of	the	people.	It	was	not
his	 private	 money.	 No	 lama	 can	 have	 private	 money	 --	 a	 lama	 is	 a	 Buddhist
bhikkshu,	he	cannot	possess	anything.	The	money	belonged	to	the	taxpayers,	the
poor	 Tibetans.	All	 the	 gold	 that	was	 in	 the	 possession	 of	 the	 Lhasa	 Palace	 of
Dalai	Lama	--	he	ran	away	with	all	 the	gold,	 leaving	the	Tibetan	people	 in	 the
hands	of	China.	And	they	are	being	killed	every	day,	butchered,	tortured.
And	you	will	not	believe...	Every	child	has	to	learn	Chinese	now,	not	Tibetan.	So
they	are	not	only	destroying	people's	political	freedom,	they	are	even	destroying
their	literature,	their	whole	heritage.	The	children	will	be	Chinese,	because	they
will	 be	 speaking	 Chinese.	 Soon,	 when	 the	 old	 people	 die,	 even	 the	 Tibetan
language	will	die.	And	Tibetan	scriptures	will	disappear.
This	 is	 an	 absolute	 crime	 against	 a	 culture	 --	 they	 have	 brought	 not	 just	 a
political	 slavery	 to	 Tibet,	 they	 are	 destroying	 Tibet's	 whole	 ancient	 culture,
which	has	something	beautiful	in	it.	They	have	destroyed	all	the	monasteries	of
Buddhist	monks.	They	have	been	 turned	 into	hospitals,	 into	 schools.	And	 they
have	 brought	 a	 great	 number	 of	 Chinese	 to	 become	 residents	 of	 Tibet.	 The
number	 of	 Chinese	 is	 now	 more	 than	 the	 Tibetans.	 So	 now	 they	 will	 bring
democracy	to	Tibet,	because	now	in	any	case	Tibetans	cannot	win	the	elections;
more	Chinese	have	been	infiltrated.
And	what	has	Dalai	Lama	done?
His	younger	brother	has	died	just	a	few	days	before,	because	his	younger	brother
--	his	name	was	Panchen	Lama	--	proved	far	more	courageous	than	Dalai	Lama.
Dalai	Lama	was	the	head	of	state	and	Panchen	Lama	was	number	two;	if	Dalai
Lama	 dies	 or	 something	 happens,	 then	 Panchen	Lama	would	 be	 the	 head.	He
was	not	 the	head,	but	he	 took	over	as	Dalai	Lama	escaped.	He	did	not	 escape
with	Dalai	Lama,	 he	 remained	with	 his	 people,	 and	 he	 tried	 in	 every	 possible
way	to	prevent	this	invasion.	But	Tibet	had	no	armies,	Tibet	had	no	arms.	Tibet
had	nothing	to	fight	with,	no	roads,	no	tanks,	no	bombs.
Tibet	had	only	twenty-one	guns	belonging	to	the	guards	of	Dalai	Lama's	palace	-
-	that	was	all.	There	were	no	courts,	no	police	--	because	the	Tibetan	people	are
such	a	silent	people,	such	a	meditative	people.
That's	why	I	feel	for	the	Tibetan	people.
If	 the	 Nobel	 Prize	 was	 given	 to	 the	 Tibetan	 people,	 it	 would	 have	 been
absolutely	right.
They	are	suffering	and	their	meditativeness	is	being	laughed	at.	They	are	being
forced	not	to	meditate,	but	to	go	to	the	fields	and	work.	Under	loaded	machine
guns,	meditators	are	being	forced	to	work.
And	Panchen	Lama	died	 just	 four	 or	 five	 days	 ago,	 because	 in	 a	 international
conference	in	Beijing	he	directly	hit	 the	Chinese	government.	He	made	it	clear
that	Tibet	 is	being	completely	destroyed	--	not	only	its	people	are	being	killed,
its	scriptures	are	being	burnt,	its	temples	are	being	destroyed.	Nobody	can	learn
Tibetan	anymore.	The	language	is	being	destroyed,	the	children	are	being	forced
to	learn	Chinese	and	to	speak	Chinese.
This	is	a	real	generation	gap,	where	children	will	not	be	able	to	understand	their
own	parents.	Their	parents	will	not	be	able	to	say	anything	to	the	children;	they
will	not	understand	each	other's	language.
And	he	 lashed	out	 against	China,	 risking	his	 life.	Because	 the	 conference	was
international,	he	wanted	the	whole	world	to	know	what	is	happening	in	Tibet	at
the	hands	of	the	Chinese.	So	he	exposed	the	whole	situation,	and	that	very	night
he	 was	 found	 dead	 in	 his	 hotel.	 No	 autopsy	 was	 made,	 no	 certificate	 from	 a
doctor	that	he	has	died	a	normal,	natural	death	--	he	was	a	young	man,	perfectly
healthy	--	and	he	was	buried.	Now	they	will	put	someone,	their	agent	--	he	may
be	Tibetan	--	as	the	head	of	Tibet.
For	what	is	the	Dalai	Lama	getting	a	nomination?	He	is	not	even	the	head	of	the
International	 Football	 Federation!	 And	 he	 is	 a	 coward.	 Cowardice	 is	 being
rewarded	by	a	Nobel	Prize.
And	what	has	Rajiv	Gandhi	done?	He	has	come	accidentally	into	power	because
his	 mother,	 Indira	 Gandhi,	 was	 assassinated.	 Naturally	 the	 whole	 nation's
sympathy	was	with	Rajiv,	 her	only	 son.	The	other	 son,	Sanjay,	 had	died	 in	 an
airplane	accident.	But	one	should	see	the	politician's	mind....
Sanjay	 Gandhi	 was	 very	 much	 interested	 in	 flying	 airplanes;	 he	 had	 a	 small
airplane	and	he	went	flying	in	it	just	over	his	own	house.	Just	two	or	three	blocks
from	Indira	Gandhi's	house,	where	Sanjay	lived	with	his	mother,	something	went
wrong.	And	 there	 is	 every	 suspicion	 that	 there	must	 have	 been	 some	 political
conspiracy,	 because	 the	 examiner	 at	 the	 airport	who	 checked	 the	 plane	 before
Sanjay	 took	 it	 said	 that	 there	 was	 nothing	 wrong	 with	 it,	 it	 was	 absolutely
perfect.	But	just	within	five	minutes...	there	is	a	possibility	of	some	sabotage.
And	 as	 Indira	was	 informed	 --	 immediately,	 because	 she	was	 just	 two	 blocks
away;	she	had	seen	the	airplane	falling	down	--	as	she	was	informed,	she	rushed
immediately	 to	 the	 place.	 I	 have	 heard	 that	 her	 first	 question	 was	 not	 about
whether	 Sanjay	 was	 alive	 or	 dead	 --	 this	 is	 the	 politician's	 mind	 --	 her	 first
question	was,	"He	was	carrying	two	keys.	Where	are	those	two	keys?"
One	of	those	two	keys	belonged	to	all	the	money	that	she	was	gathering	for	the
coming	elections,	and	the	other	key	was	to	a	safe	in	which	she	was	keeping	all
the	files	against	all	the	politicians,	files	that	she	inherited	from	her	father.
Those	files	are	immensely	valuable,	because	all	politicians	commit	crimes	but	if
they	are	 in	 the	ruling	party	 then	nobody	ever	knows	what	 they	have	done.	But
the	prime	minister	knows.	He	keeps	a	record	of	it,	what	this	man	has	done.	If	he
turns	 against	 the	 prime	 minister,	 then	 he	 will	 be	 exposed	 immediately	 to	 the
public	as	a	criminal.
So	all	those	files	belonged	to	Indira.	And	Sanjay	was	very	ambitious	to	become
the	 prime	minister	 after	 Indira	 Gandhi.	 He	 was	 younger	 than	 Rajiv	 but	 more
political	 and	more	 crazy	 for	 power.	 The	 rumor	 is	 that	 he	 even	 slapped	 Indira
Gandhi	once	because	she	would	not	give	him	the	keys.
Finally	 he	 got	 those	 two	 keys,	 which	 were	 of	 immense	 importance:	 all	 the
money	 --	 one	never	knows	how	much	money	 it	was;	 it	must	have	been	a	 few
million	 rupees	 or	 even	 more.	 And	 the	 second	 was	 even	 more	 important.	 To
control	all	enemies	completely,	just	the	fear	was	enough,	that	the	file	is	there	and
immediately	an	investigation	can	be	started	and	they	will	lose	all	face,	all	their
hypocrisy	will	be	exposed.
She	did	not	ask	what	happened	 to	Sanjay.	She	 immediately	asked,	 "Where	are
those	two	keys	he	was	carrying	with	him?"	So	they	said,	"Those	two	keys	have
been	put	 in	the	hands	of	 the	police.	You	can	get	 them	from	the	police	station."
She	 did	 not	 go	 directly	 to	 the	 hospital	 to	 see	 Sanjay,	who	was	 dead;	 first	 she
went	to	the	police	station,	got	the	keys.
Then	she	went	to	the	hospital.
When	Rajiv	Gandhi	 came	 to	power,	he	 told	 the	 country,	 "I	promise	you	 that	 I
will	 lead	 the	 country	 into	 the	 twenty-first	 century."	 And	 after	 the	 election	 he
never	said	that	again.
Now	he	is	talking	about	simple	methods,	simple	solutions	for	complex	problems.
He	is	talking	about	the	past	and	the	heritage,	the	great	culture,	of	India.	Now	he
is	not	looking	forward.
Nobody	can	take	the	country	into	the	twenty-first	century	except	me!	I	can	take
it	 to	 the	 twenty-second	 century!	 There	 is	 no	 problem,	 we	 can	 have	 quantum
jumps.	But	he	cannot.
He	has	no	plan	for	the	country;	all	his	promises	are	lies.
Four	days	ago	he	spoke	to	an	international	conference	of	scientists	in	New	Delhi,
and	 then	he	said,	"Nations	should	disappear;	 there	should	be	no	boundaries	on
the	 earth.	 The	 whole	 earth	 is	 one."	 I	 suspect	 he	 must	 have	 been	 reading	 my
books!	If	he	is	not	reading	them,	then	it	must	be	the	secretary	who	is	preparing
his	speeches.	"We	should	dissolve	all	differences	--	nations,	boundaries,	races	--
and	create	one	humanity."	That	was	in	front	of	the	international	conference.
And	 four	 days	 later	 he	 was	 speaking	 to	 a	 Hindu	 conference,	 and	 there	 he
completely	forgot	about	dissolving	the	boundaries.	He	started	talking	about	the
great	Indian	heritage
--	"We	have	to	protect	it."	The	great	Indian	morality	--	"We	have	to	protect	it."
If	you	are	going	to	protect	the	Indian	heritage,	why	should	Germans	not	protect
their	 heritage?	 Why	 shouldn't	 Japanese	 protect	 their	 heritage,	 and	 Americans
protect	their	heritage?	Where	has	the	one	earth	gone?
But	 people	 are	 blind	 and	 utterly	 in	 darkness;	 they	 cannot	 see	 simple
contradictions.	The	man	talks	to	the	international	conference,	and	talks	in	terms
of	one	world.	And	when	he	talks	to	the	Hindus,	then	he	says,	"Our	culture	is	the
best	in	the	world."
But	 that's	 the	 stupidity	 which	 everybody	 is	 doing.	 That's	 how	 nations	 are
divided,	 races	 are	 divided	 against	 each	 other,	 religions	 are	 divided,	 because
everybody	is	claiming,	"We	are	the	best!"
He	 talks	 about	 making	 things	 simple,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 he	 has	 started
creating	 nuclear	 weapons.	 Nuclear	 weapons	 are	 simple	 things?	 It	 is	 the	 most
complex	 and	 the	 most	 ultra-modern.	 And	 in	 what	 way	 does	 it	 belong	 to	 the
Hindu	heritage?	You	should	go	back	to	bullock	carts,	and	you	should	go	back	to
the	 spinning	 wheel	 --	 that	 is	 the	 only	 technology	 that	 belongs	 to	 the	 Hindu
heritage.	 You	 should	 return	 to	 satipratha	 --	 killing	 women	 alive	 on	 their
husband's	 funeral	 pyre,	 and	 you	 should	 keep	 the	 untouchables	 as	 animals,	 as
Hindus	have	kept	them	for	centuries.	This	is	the	Hindu	heritage!
But	all	these	people	have	no	dedication	to	any	truths.	These	are	all	opportunists.
A	Nobel	Prize	for	Rajiv	Gandhi?	What	has	he	done?	But	this	is	part	of	bringing
him	 together	 with	 Gorbachev,	 because	 India	 and	 Russia	 are	 in	 a	 treaty	 for
another	thirty	years	in	the	future:	they	will	be	friends	and	they	will	defend	each
other,	and	they	will	fight	for	each	other.	If	somebody	attacks	Russia,	India	will
fight.	 If	 somebody	 attacks	 India,	 Russia	 will	 fight.	 And	 Russia	 has	 been
absolutely	 supporting	 India,	 in	 every	 possible	way.	 But	 now,	 as	Gorbachev	 is
moving	towards	America,	it	is	good	to	give	a	Nobel	Prize	to	Rajiv	Gandhi	also,
so	both	can	move	together	towards	America.	There	is	no	other	reason	except	a
political	strategy	to	give	these	people	a	super-ego.
And	 I	 was	 surprised...	 it	 is	 perfectly	 okay	 to	 give	 a	 Nobel	 Prize	 to	 the
International	 Football	 Federation's	 head,	 but	 what	 has	 Ronald	 Reagan	 done?
There	are	so	many	crimes	that	he	has	committed	under	his	regime	that	it	is	just	a
coincidence	that	he	has	not	been	arrested	and	brought	to	the	Supreme	Court	--	a
coincidence,	a	very	strange	coincidence.
The	American	Constitution	gives	 the	Supreme	Court	absolute	power.	Even	 the
president	cannot	overrule	the	Supreme	Court's	orders.	But	the	president	has	one
power	in	his	hands:	if	one	of	the	judges	--	and	there	are	nine	judges	on	the	whole
Supreme	Court	bench	--	if	one	of	the	judges	dies,	then	the	president	can	appoint
a	 new	 judge.	 From	 the	 best	 judges	 of	 all	 the	 state	 supreme	 courts,	 or	 high
courts...	anybody	he	wants	he	can	appoint.
Those	people	who	made	the	constitution	never	conceived	that	five	judges	could
suddenly	 retire.	The	 time	of	 retirement	 for	 five	 judges	had	come	when	Ronald
Reagan	 was	 in	 power,	 so	 if	 five	 of	 the	 judges	 retired	 --	 it	 is	 just	 a	 rare
coincidence	--	he	could	appoint	five	men	of	his	own.	Now	in	the	Supreme	Court,
five	out	of	nine	judges	are	Reagan's	men,	and	four	are	a	minority.	That's	how	he
has	 escaped	 being	 punished	 for	 his	 criminal	 acts	 during	 his	 presidency.	 The
Supreme	Court	 cannot	 do	 anything	 because	 the	majority	 of	 the	 judges	 are	 his
men.	He	has	come	out	of	the	White	House	completely	white,	snow-white,	clean.
There	 were	 rumors	 all	 over	 America	 and	 all	 around	 the	 world	 --	 "What	 will
happen	 about	 all	 the	 crimes	 he	 has	 commited?	 Will	 he	 be	 impeached?"	 But
nothing	has	been	done.	And	he	has	been	doing	things	against	the	Senate,	he	has
been	doing	things	against	the	constitution,	he	has	been	doing	things	against	the
common	law	of	the	country...	and	now	he	deserves	a	Nobel	Prize!
They	should	start	giving	Nobel	Prizes	to	the	great	criminals.	Why	not	be	frank?
That	will	be	more	truthful.
None	of	these	people	deserve	anything.
Gorbachev	is	getting	a	Nobel	Prize	because	he	is	destroying	a	seventy-year-old
great	experiment	for	the	human	future.
Ronald	Reagan	is	being	given	the	Nobel	Prize	for	all	his	crimes	which	prevented
any	change	in	the	social	structure,	in	the	social	status	quo	of	America.
Rajiv	 Gandhi	 is	 being	 given	 the	 Nobel	 Prize	 because	 he	 is	 preventing	 the
communists,	 he	 is	 preventing	 any	 kind	 of	 revolutionary	 step	 in	 India.	 He	 is
keeping	the	same	bureaucracy....
Albert	 Einstein	 during	 his	 whole	 life	 was	 working	 on	 the	 speed	 of	 light,	 and
finally	he	figured	it	out.	And	then	he	wondered:	the	speed	of	light	is	the	greatest
speed	 in	 the	 world...	 what	 is	 the	 lowest?	 He	 could	 not	 find	 out,	 and	 he	 died
before	I	could	have	told	him.
The	lowest	speed	is	the	Indian	bureaucracy.	The	file	moves	so	slowly	from	one
table	to	another	table...	and	on	each	table	you	have	to	bribe.	Then	the	file	moves
to	another	table.
Then	you	have	 to	bribe	again.	Then	 it	moves	 to	 the	 third	 table.	By	 the	 time	 it
reaches	the	final	table,	perhaps	you	may	be	finished!
I	 know	about	 a	 case	 against	 one	of	my	very	 respected	 friends.	He	was	 an	old
man,	but	it	has	been	my	strange	fate	to	be	in	contact	with	the	oldest	people.	This
man	was	a	revolutionary,	Pandit	Sunderlal,	and	he	fought	his	whole	life	against
the	British	government.	Somewhere	 in	1914,	when	he	was	young,	very	young,
he	wrote	a	book	on	Indian	history	in	which	he	contradicted	what	the	British	were
teaching	in	the	schools	about	Indian	history.
Those	histories	were	written	by	 the	British,	 so	naturally	 they	were	not	 talking
about	the	brutalities	the	British	had	committed.	But	he	collected	all	the	facts	and
he	wrote	a	history.
The	British	 government	 started	 a	 case	 against	 four	 persons:	 the	 publisher,	 the
writer,	the	editor,	and	the	printer.	In	the	Allahabad	high	court	the	case	started.
I	saw	Pandit	Sunderlal	in	1970	for	the	last	time	--	he	was	very	old.	I	asked	him
what	had	happened	with	the	case.	He	said,	"Don't	ask.	Somebody	has	to	write	a
history	 about	 the	 case,	 because	 all	 the	 judges	 who	 tried	 it	 are	 dead;	 all	 the
advocates	from	my	side	and	from	the	government's	side	are	dead.	The	case	was
started	 against	 four	 persons	 --	 three	 are	 dead,	 only	 I	 am	 alive.	 The	 case	 was
started	by	a	government	which	is	no	longer	here!
Now	India	is	free,	but	the	case	continues.	It	will	end	only	when	I	am	dead."
There	is	no	way.	Such	is	the	bureaucracy...	sixty	years	continuously,	an	ordinary
case,	 and	 everybody	 died!	Even	 the	British	Empire	 died!	And	 now	 the	 Indian
government	is	carrying	the	case.	Great	bureaucracy....
I	could	have	told	Albert	Einstein	that	I	have	found	that	 the	Indian	bureaucratic
files	 have	 the	 slowest	 speed	 in	 the	world.	Nothing	moves	 slower.	And	 if	 you
don't	bribe,	it	does	not	move	at	all.
You	can	go	into	any	bureaucrat's	office	and	you	will	see	on	every	clerk's	table,
piles	of	files.	You	won't	see	the	clerk,	you	will	see	two	piles;	the	clerk	is	hiding
behind.	You	give,	 from	underneath	 the	 table,	a	 ten-rupee	note,	and	your	 file	 is
brought	to	the	top.	But	after	half	an	hour	another	person	comes	and	he	gives	ten
rupees	--	his	file	goes	on	top	of	your	file.	After	a	month	you	find	your	file	has
reached	to	the	same	old	place,	it	is	on	the	same	table.	And	the	clerk	needs	high
piles	so	you	can't	see	his	face.	You	just	find	his	hand	underneath	the	table	with
your	hand,	and	you	cannot	even	 report	who	has	asked	you	 for	money	because
you	have	never	seen	the	face,	you	just	see	the	hand!
And	 these	 people	 like	 Rajiv	 Gandhi	 are	 keeping	 the	 same	 British	 Empire
bureaucracy	--
no	change	at	all.
The	 country	 is	 becoming	 every	 day	 poorer,	 with	 more	 population,	 more
population....	 No	 guts	 in	 this	 man	 Rajiv	 Gandhi!	 Because	 now,	 birth	 control
needs	almost	military	action	-
-	nothing	else	will	help.	And	armies	are	sitting	around	unnecessarily.	Bring	those
armies	to	every	village	and	sterilize	people!
But	the	fear...	in	the	election	these	people	will	defeat	you,	and	the	fear	is	right.
Indira	 Gandhi	 got	 defeated	 on	 the	 same	 point,	 because	 Sanjay	 was	 too	much
interested	in	birth	control,	sterilization.	And	he	was	absolutely	right,	but	because
of	him	Indira	Gandhi	was	condemned	that	she	was	giving	him	the	power	and	he
was	going	too	far.
Not	 voluntary	 birth	 control	 --	 because	 voluntary	 birth	 control	 won't	 succeed.
People	 believe	 that	 children	 are	 given	 by	God	 and	 to	 interfere	 in	 the	work	 of
God	 is	 a	 sin.	 So	 unless	 it	 is	 compulsory,	 such	 that	 either	 you	 get	 sterilized	 or
otherwise	you	get	shot...
You	 can	 choose	 --	 this	 is	 freedom	of	 choice.	But	 no	 politician	 has	 the	 guts	 to
give	this	freedom	of	choice.
Just	within	 two	days	all	 this	nonsense	of	population	explosion	can	be	stopped.
Within	 two	 days!	 Just	 bring	 the	 guns	 and	 give	 the	 freedom	 to	 the	 people	 to
choose	--	either	the	doctor	or	the	army!	But	please	don't	misunderstand	me	--	I
simply	 want	 that	 something	 drastic	 should	 be	 done	 to	 prevent	 the	 population
explosion.	 Things	 can	 be	 done	 only	 Stalin-style,	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 But
Joseph	Stalin	 never	 got	 the	Nobel	 Prize,	 and	 these	 pygmies	 are	 getting	Nobel
Prizes.
The	third	thing	Sangeet	has	found	in	Gorbachev's	book	is	about	cutting	back	the
army	and	weapons.
American	 experts	 are	 suggesting	 to	 President	 George	 Bush	 that	 he	 go	 on
increasing	 weapons,	 nuclear	 weapons,	 more	 refined	 missiles,	 and	 not	 stop	 it.
What	will	be	the	outcome	of	it?	If	Russia	cuts	back	its	army	and	weapons,	and
America	goes	on	piling	up	nuclear	weapons,	 there	will	be	no	need	of	any	war.
Just	 a	 threat	will	 be	 enough	 to	 finish	Russia	 --	 just	 a	 threat,	 that	 "If	 you	don't
listen	to	us	we	are	going	to	attack	you."
A	great	world	power,	just	because	of	one	man,	is	losing	all	its	dignity.	I	hope	that
somebody	 shoots	 this	 man!	 He	 deserves	 it;	 rather	 than	 destroying	 a	 whole
country,	 it	 is	 better	 to	 get	 rid	 of	Gorbachev.	 Just	 put	 him	 to	 eternal	 peace	 --	 I
don't	mean	 it	 literally,	 but	Gorbachev	has	 to	be	 removed	 from	office.	There	 is
still	time....
And	you	can	see	his	workings.	He	is	talking	about	democracy	and	he	has	taken
all	the	power	in	his	hands.	He	is	the	most	powerful	man	in	the	whole	of	Russia's
history	--	even	Stalin	had	not	that	much	power.
He	has	become	the	president	of	the	country,	and	the	prime	minister	has	become
nominal,	and	has	no	power.	He	has	changed	the	whole	Communist	Party's	high
command,	the	Politburo.	All	the	old	people	have	been	thrown	out,	and	he	has	put
all	his	own	people	into	the	commanding	body.	He	has	changed	the	head	of	 the
KGB,	which	is	the	country's	most	powerful	agency,	and	he	has	put	his	own	man
as	the	head.
Now	he	is	in	complete	control	of	the	KGB,	the	Communist	Party,	and	he	is	also
the	secretary	of	 the	Politburo,	 the	general	secretary	of	 the	Communist	Party	of
the	 Soviet	 Union.	 So	 he	 has	 all	 the	 powers	 --	 and	 he	 is	 the	 president	 of	 the
government.	 These	 are	 the	 three	most	 important	 posts;	 he	 is	 holding	 all	 three
himself.
You	can	see	that	he	is	not	a	democratic	man	at	all.
The	 academician	Sakharov	 used	 to	 be	 the	 director	 general	 of	 the	Academy	of
Sciences.
Because	 he	 accepted	 the	 Nobel	 Prize...	 Gorbachev	 himself	 asked	 him	 not	 to
accept	 the	Nobel	Prize.	And	because	he	did	not	 listen...	Sakharov	 is	 a	man	of
some	integrity;	he	knew	perfectly	well	that	this	could	mean	a	lifelong	sentence
in	 a	 concentration	 camp	 in	 Siberia.	 Before	 him,	 three	 scientists	 from	 his	 own
academy	 had	 received	 the	Nobel	 Prize,	 but	 because	 they	 did	 not	 listen	 to	 the
government	they	were	thrown	into	Siberia,	into	labor	camps.	He	knew	this	could
happen	to	him	also,	but	he	risked.	And	he	had	some	influence	over	the	Russian
masses	as	a	very	great	scientist.	Perhaps	he	is	 the	greatest	scientist	alive	in	the
world.
Gorbachev	 removed	 him	 from	 the	 directorship	 of	 the	 academy.	 And	 a	 small
meanness...
he	took	away	his	car	also,	which	was	given	to	him	as	a	director,	so	he	could	not
have	 much	 freedom	 of	 movement.	 Now	 Sakharov	 is	 only	 a	 member	 of	 the
academy.
The	Academy	of	Sciences	in	Russia	has	a	certain	quota	in	the	parliament.	A	few
members	are	chosen	by	the	academy	for	the	parliament,	and	Sakharov	stood	for
a	post,	 and	he	was	perfectly	certain	 that	he	would	be	chosen.	He	has	been	 the
director	 of	 the	 academy,	 all	 these	 people	 know	 him,	 they	 have	 worked	 under
him.	There	was	no	question	that	he	would	not	be	chosen.	But	he	was	not	chosen
because	Gorbachev	is	behind	the	idea	that	he	should	not	be	chosen.	He	does	not
want	 any	 other	 man	 of	 world	 renown	 in	 the	 parliament	 except	 him.	 This	 is
democracy!
And	now	Gorbachev	has	to	see	what	happens	to	his	Nobel	Prize.	If	he	is	a	man
of	 any	 honesty	 he	 should	 refuse	 it	 --	 because	 he	 has	 been	 forcing	 Soviet
scientists	 to	 refuse	 the	Nobel	 Prize;	 now	 the	 question	 has	 come	 to	 him.	 If	 he
accepts	 the	Nobel	Prize,	 that	man	 is	a	chicken!	He	should	 refuse	 immediately;
even	the	nomination	he	should	refuse:	"I	don't	want	to	be	nominated."
Show	some	consistency,	some	honesty!	And	why	have	you	prevented	Sakharov
from	being	chosen?	The	whole	academy	must	have	been	forced	by	the	KGB	--
"You	cannot	choose	him,	or	your	life	is	at	risk."
Now	Sakharov	has	led	thousands	and	thousands	of	people	in	a	procession	--	this
must	 be	 the	 first	 procession	 in	 seventy	 years	 --	 to	 President	 Gorbachev's
Kremlin,	shouting	slogans	like	"Where	is	your	democracy?"	and	"Where	is	your
socialism?"	 and	 "Where	 is	 your	 openness	 to	 the	world?	What	 happened	 to	 all
that?"	Thousands	and	 thousands	of	people	 joined	 the	march	at	 the	risk	of	 their
lives.
Sakharov	 is	 loved	 immensely.	Gorbachev	must	 have	 felt,	 "This	man	 can	 be	 a
competitor,	so	don't	 let	him	enter	 into	 the	parliament."	Now	Sakharov	 is	being
supported	by	 the	people,	and	 they	have	asked	him:	"You	stand	 --	not	 from	 the
academy,	 you	 stand	 as	 a	 general	 candidate	 against	 the	 Communist	 Party
candidate,	 and	we	will	 support	you."	Now	he	 is	 standing	 for	election	 from	his
district	where	he	lives,	and	I	hope	he	succeeds.	I	hope	he	confronts	Gorbachev	in
the	parliament	on	every	point.
People	say	one	thing,	do	something	else,	and	think	something	else.	These	are	the
politicians	of	the	world.
Now	it	is	absolutely	stupid,	but	it	is	a	compromise:	Gorbachev	will	get	a	Nobel
Prize	if	he	cuts	down	his	army	and	weapons.	If	he	opens	the	doors	of	the	Soviet
Union	 to	 capitalism,	 he	 will	 be	 given	 a	 Nobel	 Prize.	 And	 a	 world-famous
leader...	 he	 will	 become	 the	 topmost	 leader	 in	 the	 world,	 but	 at	 the	 risk	 of
destroying	 the	 sacrifice	 of	 twenty	 million	 Russians	 and	 a	 tremendously	 great
experiment	in	changing	the	social	structure	of	the	society.	Nobody	for	hundreds
of	years	will	be	able	to	do	it	again.
The	 fourth	 thing	 he	 has	 been	 insisting	 is	 to	 cut	 down	 military	 aid	 to	 small
communist	countries.
One	 can	 see	 clearly	 that	 his	 mind	 is	 determined	 to	 completely	 demolish
communism	 from	 the	 earth.	 Now	 those	 small	 countries	 like	 Cuba,	 or
Czechoslovakia,	or	Yugoslavia	--
they	are	so	small	that	if	the	Soviet	Union	is	not	behind	them,	capitalist	countries
can	run	over	them,	there	is	no	problem.	Cuba	will	be	immediately	finished.	Once
the	 Soviet	 Union	 withdraws	 its	 armies	 from	 Cuba,	 America	 will	 take	 over	 it
without	any	difficulty.
Gorbachev	 is	 behaving	 very	 unconsciously,	 not	 understanding	 exactly	 the
implications	for	humanity.	He	is	playing	into	the	hands	of	enemies.
Question	1
One	sannyasin	from	the	Soviet	Union	--	she	is	here	--	has	asked	me	a	question:
WHILE	GROWING	UP	IN	THE	SOVIET	UNION	I	HAD	ALWAYS	OPPOSED
THE
USSR'S	 CLOSED-DOOR	 POLICIES,	 AND	 SOMEWHERE	 FELT
DISAPPOINTED
THAT	I	WAS	BORN	THERE.	NOW	AFTER	EXPERIENCING	LIFE	IN	THE
WEST
AND	 HEARING	 YOUR	 REVOLUTIONARY,	 MIND-BLOWING
DISCOURSES	ON
THE	VALUE	OF	THE	SEVENTY-YEAR	DICTATORIAL	REGIME,	I	CAN	SO
CLEARLY	 SEE	 THE	 DEPTH,	 THE	 WISDOM,	 THE	 TRUTH	 OF	 YOUR
WORDS.
AND	 IN	 THE	 DEPTH	 OF	 MY	 HEART	 I	 FEEL	 SO	 FORTUNATE	 AND
GRATEFUL
THAT	I	HAD	THE	OPPORTUNITY	TO	LIVE	THERE.
DO	YOU	THINK	THAT	THE	PEOPLE	OF	THE	SOVIET	LAND	WILL	BE
ABLE	TO
SEE	THE	VALUES	OF	THEIR	COUNTRY'S	PAST	DICTATORIAL	REGIME
WITHOUT	 HAVING	 TO	 GO	 THROUGH	 THE	 EXPERIENCE	 OF	 THE
WESTERN
STYLE	LIVING,	AND	WITHOUT	FALLING	INTO	THE	TRAP	OF	TRYING
TO
IMITATE	THE	WEST?
It	is	very	difficult	to	predict,	and	I	am	not	a	prophet.	I	can	only	hope	for	the	best,
that	 one	man	 cannot	 undermine	 twenty	million	people.	 Somebody	 is	 bound	 to
finish	him,	because	other	than	that,	nothing	is	going	to	help.
And	anyway	the	Soviet	Union	has	enough	experience	of	what	the	dictatorship	of
Stalin	managed	to	do:	raise	the	poorest	country	in	the	world	to	the	highest	peak
of	 power.	 Even	 America	 was	 threatened,	 continuously	 living	 in	 paranoia.	 A
single	man	managed	to	raise	the	country	to	such	a	power....
Millions	 of	 people	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 must	 be	 feeling	 that	 Gorbachev	 is
destroying	 their	 dignity.	 They	 will	 belong	 to	 a	 backward	 country.	 Once	 their
doors	 are	 open	 to	 capitalist	 money	 and	 to	 all	 kinds	 of	 spies	 from	 capitalist
countries,	once	Gorbachev	reduces	his	army	and	weapons,	the	country	will	be	in
need,	just	as	other	poor	countries	are	in	need,	of	foreign	aid.
I	 hope	 somebody	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 or	 somebody	 who	 understands	 the
revolutionary	strategy	from	outside	the	Soviet	Union,	can	do	something	to	stop
this	 insane	man	 from	 the	destructive	 step	 that	 he	 is	 going	 to	 take	 --	 that	 he	 is
already	taking.
Question	2
The	second	question:
REVOLUTIONARIES	HAVE	ALWAYS	CLAIMED	THAT	IT	IS	SOCIETY'S
REPRESSIVE	INSTRUMENTS	OF	CONTROL	THAT	DEFORM	HUMANITY
AND
PRODUCE	THE	UGLY	BEHAVIOR	OF	MAN.
THE	REACTIONARIES	HAVE	CLAIMED	THE	OPPOSITE:	THAT	HUMAN
NATURE	 IS	 INHERENTLY	 UGLY,	 AND	 THAT	 IT	 IS	 ONLY	 THE
INSTRUMENTS
OF	 CONTROL	 THAT	 LIMIT	 THIS	 UGLINESS	 AND	 ALLOW	 WHAT
LITTLE
CIVILIZATION	THERE	IS.	THEY	SAY	THAT	WITHOUT	SUCH	CONTROL,
THIS
UGLY	BEHAVIOR	WOULD	RAPIDLY	REDUCE	US	TO	BARBARITY.
IT	SEEMS	THAT,	AS	ALWAYS,	YOUR	APPROACH	IS	COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT	AND	TOTALLY	UNIQUE.	WOULD	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	THIS
CENTURIES-OLD	CONTROVERSY?
The	truth	is,	the	whole	controversy	is	absolutely	wrong.	It	is	based	on	prejudices,
not	on	an	experience	of	human	nature.
I	 speak	 from	 the	 experience	 of	my	 own	 humanity,	 that	 the	 deeper	 you	 go	 the
more	cultured	you	are;	the	deeper	you	go	the	more	graceful	you	are.	The	deeper
you	reach	the	more	human	you	become.	So	I	can	say	with	absolute	certainty	and
guarantee	that	man	is	not	by	nature	ugly.
Man	 by	 nature	 is	 born	 absolutely	 innocent,	 neither	 ugly	 nor	 cultured,	 just	 a
tabula	rasa.
Whatever	you	want	to	write	on	him	he	will	become.
If	you	are	alert	and	aware,	you	will	not	write	anything;	you	will	leave	the	child
alone.
You	will	help	him	 to	be	stronger,	you	will	help	him	 to	be	well-nourished,	you
will	help	him	to	be	more	healthy,	you	will	take	every	care,	in	the	way	a	gardener
takes	 care	of	 a	 rosebush.	You	will	 not	 force	 anything	on	 the	 rosebush	 --	 roses
will	come	in	their	own	time,	they	are	hidden;	you	have	just	to	take	care.
Every	 child	 has	 roses,	 lotuses,	 buddhas	 hidden	 in	 him,	 in	 his	 innocence.	Help
him	to	remain	innocent.	Don't	force	so-called	culture,	society,	in	the	fear	that	"if
we	don't	force,	he	will	become	a	barbarian."
Without	any	experimentation,	this	controversy	has	been	going	on	for	centuries.	I
know;	 I	 have	 been	 fighting	 in	my	 university	with	my	 professors,	 because	 the
same	thing	comes	up	again	and	again	in	every	psychological	and	social	effort	to
understand	 what	 to	 do	 with	 the	 child.	 And	 my	 standpoint	 from	 the	 very
beginning	has	been	not	to	do	anything	with	the	child;	you	simply	protect.
Your	 function	 is	 to	 nourish	 the	 child,	 to	 make	 him	 healthy,	 to	 keep	 him
intelligent.	 Let	 him	 be	 himself,	 his	 innocence	 intact	 --	 he	 will	 find
meditativeness	very	easy.	If	you	want,	 if	your	temptation	to	teach	is	 too	much,
teach	meditation.	 That	 will	make	 him	more	 innocent.	 Don't	 teach	 knowledge,
culture,	 civilization.	 That	 becomes	 the	 burden,	 that	 becomes	 the	 false
personality,	that	becomes	the	hypocrisy.
We	 are	 living	 in	 a	 hypocrite	 world,	 not	 a	 cultured	 world.	 It	 is	 not	 really	 a
cultured	 or	 civilized	 world.	 H.G.	 Wells	 was	 right....	 He	 was	 writing	 a	 world
history	and	he	had	almost	completed	it	--	it	is	one	of	the	greatest	histories	ever
written,	by	a	man	of	a	very	clear	insight	into	things.	A	friend	asked,	"You	know
about	the	whole	of	world	history.
What	is	your	idea	about	civilization?"
H.G.	Wells	said,	"It	is	a	good	idea,	but	it	has	to	happen.	It	has	not	happened	yet.
Somebody	has	to	bring	it	to	humanity.	Humanity	is	still	barbaric."
Just	 look	 at	 your	 armies,	 just	 look	 at	 your	 arms,	 just	 look	 at	 your	 nuclear
weapons.	 Even	 barbarians	 are	 not	 that	 barbaric;	 even	 animals	 are	 not	 that
animalistic.	Have	you	seen	any	animal	killing	his	own	species?
A	 dog	will	 never	 kill	 another	 dog.	 Sometimes	 you	 can	 see	 them	 fighting,	 but
watch	closely.	Be	a	witness,	 and	you	will	 be	 surprised	 to	discover...	 because	 I
have	been	watching.	I	have	not	only	been	watching	human	beings,	I	have	been
watching	all	kinds	of	beings.	I	have	never	missed	any	opportunity	 to	watch,	 to
figure	out	what	is	happening.
When	two	dogs	are	fighting,	you	can	see	they	are	not	really	hitting	each	other,
they	 are	 just	 barking.	Everybody	 is	 showing	his	 power	 and	both	 are	watching
each	other:	"Who	is	more	powerful?"	This	is	arithmetic!	Once	it	is	decided,	both
understand	clearly	 that	one	 is	weaker,	 then	 the	weaker	one	simply	puts	his	 tail
underneath	his	legs.	Just	a	symbol,	that	"There	is	no	point.	I	am	weaker,	you	are
stronger.	 Finished."	 And	 they	 stop	 barking,	 and	 the	 stronger	 does	 not	 take
advantage	of	the	weaker.	That	will	be	too	un-dogly.
Once	the	weaker	has	accepted	that	he	is	weaker,	then	the	stronger	simply	moves
away;	 there	 is	 no	 point	 in	 fighting.	 In	 fact,	 they	may	 become	 friends	 --	most
often	they	become	friends.	Once	things	are	settled,	that	one	is	weaker	and	one	is
stronger,	what	is	the	point	of	fighting,	unnecessary	killing?
And	there	is	no	humiliation	in	accepting	your	weakness.	If	you	are	weak,	what
can	you	do?	You	are	weak,	you	are	simply	accepting	the	truth.	There	is	no	insult,
there	is	no	humiliation.	You	are	simply	giving	the	signal	to	the	other	person	that
"I	am	weak,	and	if	you	want	 to	kill	me	you	can	kill."	But	 that	will	not	be	fair,
and	 that	will	not	be	 just,	and	 the	stronger	person	 immediately	understands	 that
"this	poor	fellow	needs	protection	rather	than	attack."	They	become	friends.
No	 animal	 species	 kills	 its	 own	 people	 except	 man.	 And	 no	 animals	 have
weapons,	so	the	fight	is	face	to	face,	it	is	an	encounter,	direct.	It	has	a	dignity	in
it.	 It	 is	 only	man	who	 has	 invented	weapons.	And	what	 is	 the	 purpose	 of	 the
weapons?	To	shoot	the	enemy	from	far	away,	so	you	don't	have	encounter	him
face	to	face,	eye	to	eye.
First,	man	invented	arrows	and	the	bow	to	kill	faraway	animals,	faraway	birds.
You	don't	know...	you	cannot	fight	even	with	a	strong	dog.	You	cannot	fight	with
a	monkey,	although	Charles	Darwin	says	you	are	the	evolution	of	monkeys.	But
your	retarded	brothers	are	far	stronger	than	you.
Even	a	man	like	Vivekananda,	who	was	really	fat,	big,	and	an	arch-egoist...	He
was	 passing	 somewhere	 in	 the	Himalayas	 and	 one	monkey	 started	 threatening
him.	And	Vivekananda	 started	 running,	 forgot	 all	 about	God,	 forgot	 all	 about
spiritual	powers.	The	monkey	looked	very	strong	--	they	are	strong,	you	cannot
compete	with	them.	From	tree	to	tree	they	go,	from	house	to	house	they	jump.
You	cannot	do	that.
As	 far	 as	 monkeys	 are	 concerned,	 my	 feeling	 is	 they	 must	 be	 thinking	 that
human	beings	are	a	 fallen	 race,	not	evolved,	because	you	have	 fallen	 from	the
trees	onto	the	ground.
They	are	still	higher	than	you!	They	must	be	laughing	at	Charles	Darwin's	one-
sided	judgment.	Nobody	has	asked	a	monkey	--	it	is	a	one-sided	judgment.	Man
is	 deciding	 on	 his	 own	 that	 he	 is	 the	 evolution	 of	 apes,	 of	 gorillas,	 of
chimpanzees.
Have	 you	 seen	 chimpanzees	 and	 gorillas	 and	 apes?	 Just	 one	 chimpanzee	 is
enough	for	five	men!	Within	minutes	you	will	be	finished.
Man	started	with	arrows,	but	the	idea	was	to	be	able	to	kill	from	a	distance.	This
was	 a	 cowardly	 idea,	 so	 that	 the	 animal	 cannot	 attack	 you;	 the	 animal	 is	 far
away.	 Then	 came	 gunpowder,	 even	 more	 powerful.	 And	 your	 so-called	 great
hunters	sit	up	in	a	tree	where	the	lion	cannot	reach.	To	deceive	the	lion	they	put	a
goat	underneath	the	tree,	so	the	lion	smells	the	goat,	and	he	comes	to	catch	the
goat.	And	when	he	is	killing	the	goat,	you	--
from	the	top	of	the	tree	where	he	cannot	reach	--	shoot	him.	And	you	are	a	great
hunter!
I	have	heard	about	a	hunter.	His	wife	was	always	asking	him,	"Sometimes	you
should	take	me	also."	This	 time	she	was	adamant.	She	said,	"Either	I	come,	or
you	don't	go.	And	not	only	I	am	coming,	my	mother	is	also	coming."
The	hunter	thought	for	a	moment,	and	he	said,	"If	your	mother	is	also	coming,
then	come."
They	put	 the	old	woman	 in	a	cave	 to	watch	 the	scene	and	 they	both	sat	 in	 the
tree,	the	husband	and	wife.	The	wife	suddenly	nudged	the	husband	and	told	him,
"Look!	One	lion	has	entered	into	the	cave	where	my	mother	is!"
The	 hunter	 said,	 "It	 is	 the	 lion's	 own	 fault.	 I	 cannot	 help.	Why	 has	 that	 idiot
entered	there?	Now	he	will	suffer	as	I	am	suffering."
Now	 there	 are	 missiles,	 which	 are	 the	 ultimate:	 you	 can	 kill	 somebody	 in
America	 from	 here,	 and	 you	 don't	 have	 to	 see	 the	 enemy	 at	 all.	Missiles	 are
computerized	--	you	simply	tell	the	computer,	you	press	a	button.	And	you	don't
know	where	the	missile	is.	It	may	be	somewhere	in	the	ocean	on	a	warship,	but
the	computer	knows	where	it	is	and	the	computer	knows	where	it	has	to	go.	You
can	sit	inside	your	house	and	destroy	the	whole	of	America,	or	the	whole	of	the
Soviet	Union,	or	the	whole	of	India,	just	by	pressing	buttons	on	the	computer	--
it	 is	 exactly	 like	 a	 typewriter.	 This	 is	 the	 remotest	 way	 of	 killing	millions	 of
people,	not	encountering	them.
Now	there	are	airplanes	without	pilots;	the	computer	manages	the	plane.	It	will
go	to	any	city,	 it	will	drop	the	hydrogen	bombs,	or	atom	bombs,	whatever	you
want	the	computer	to	do.	The	computer	manages	the	flight,	and	the	airplane	will
drop	the	bombs	at	the	right	place	and	turn	back	and	come	home.	And	there	is	no
need	for	any	human	being	to	be	inside	the	plane,	because	that	is	dangerous.
This	 is	 the	 latest	 development	 of	 the	 arrow.	 The	 arrow	 was	 the	 beginning	 of
remote	killing.	The	highest	development	of	the	arrow	are	the	missiles	controlled
by	computers.
Man	is	the	most	barbarious	animal,	and	he	kills	man.	And	just	now	it	had	been
discovered...	perhaps	it	has	been	discovered	before	but	was	kept	secret	for	a	right
time	 to	 release	 it.	 Hirohito,	 the	 emperor	 of	 Japan,	 has	 died,	 and	 immediately
America	 released	 the	 news	 that	 after	 the	 second	 world	 war	 when	 Japan	 was
defeated,	there	were	many	Japanese	on	small	islands,	in	the	forests	--	guerillas,
fighting.	Because	Japan	was	defeated,	Germany	was	defeated,	these	people	were
left	in	the	jungles	of	Burma.	Having	no	food,	they	started	eating	the	dead	bodies
of	the	British	soldiers	in	the	jungles	of	Burma.	They	have	released	that	news	just
now,	when	Hirohito's	 funeral	was	about	 to	 take	place.	That	has	created	a	great
problem.	The	Prince	of	Wales	was	going	to	attend,	but	he	refused.	Then	Prince
Philip,	 the	 husband	 of	Queen	Elizabeth,	was	 asked	 to	 go	 to	 the	 funeral	 of	 the
emperor	of	Japan.	He	said,	"I	can	go,	but	I	belong	to	a	special	club	that	has	been
created	by	Mountbatten."	Mountbatten	was	the	viceroy	in	Burma	for	almost	his
whole	life;	only	in	the	last	part	of	his	life	he	came	to	India.	He	created	a	special
club	of	all	the	royal	princes	and	old	royalties	of	the	world.	So	Prince	Philip	is	a
member	of	that	Burma	Club.
I	had	never	heard	about	the	club,	because	it	was	a	secret	club.	Just	now	Prince
Philip	 has	 said,	 "If	 I	 go,	 then	 I	will	 be	 immediately	 expelled	 from	 the	Burma
Club.	So	I	don't	think	it	is	right	for	me	to	go."
Just	 to	 prevent	 every	 important	 person	 around	 the	world	 from	participating	 in
Hirohito's	funeral,	that	news	release	was	waiting.
Now,	 it	 is...	 The	 second	 world	 war	 ended	 in	 1945.	 For	 what	 reason	 has	 this
release	been	kept	back?	Just	to	insult	Emperor	Hirohito	in	his	death!	This	is	ugly
behavior.	 And	 my	 feeling	 is	 that	 even	 Prince	 Philip,	 in	 the	 position	 of	 those
Japanese	 soldiers	 who	 had	 been	 hungry	 for	 months,	 would	 have	 eaten	 the
corpses.	 He	 should	 just	 think	 for	 a	 moment,	 "If	 I	 was	 in	 their	 position,	 what
would	I	do?"
I	 know	 about	 the	 famous	 famine	 in	 Bengal	 --	 even	 mothers	 ate	 their	 own
children.	There	is	a	limit...	man	is	very	frail.	A	woman	who	has	been	hungry	for
one	month,	and	the	breast	is	no	longer	bringing	any	milk,	the	child	is	hungry...	it
is	a	double	problem.	She	is	suffering	from	hunger	so	she	cannot	give	milk.	There
is	no	milk,	she	has	become	a	skeleton,	and	the	child	is	dying	without	milk.	Just
put	yourself	in	that	situation....
So	 the	 women	 ate	 their	 own	 children,	 or	 those	 who	 were	 a	 little	 more
conscientious	sold	their	children,	so	others	ate	them	and	they	got	the	money	to
purchase	something	to	eat.
But	it	is	the	same,	just	a	little	roundabout.
And	 there	 are	 cannibals,	 you	 know,	 in	 Africa.	 All	 the	 missionaries	 know	 --
missionaries	 are	 the	 only	 people	 who	 get	 caught	 by	 the	 cannibals,	 because
nobody	 else	 goes	 into	 their	 forests.	 They	 used	 to	 be	 three	 thousand	 in	 the
beginning	 of	 this	 century;	 now	 they	 are	 only	 three	 hundred.	 They	 have	 eaten
their	own	people	--	what	to	do?
Once	 in	 a	while	 a	missionary	 comes.	 Then	 there	 is	 great	 rejoicing,	 drums	 are
beaten,	the	whole	tribe	gathers,	and	the	missionary	thinks	that	they	are	gathering
to	listen	his	sermon.
And	sometimes,	if	the	missionary	is	thin	and	not	worth	boiling	at	this	point,	they
keep	 him,	 feeding	 him	 fruits,	 whatever	 is	 possible,	 and	 the	missionary	 thinks
these	are	very	good	people:	"Unnecessarily	they	have	been	called	cannibals,	and
they	are	serving	me!"
And	when	he	becomes	really	fat,	then	the	drums	beat	again....
I	 have	 heard	 about	 one	missionary.	When	 he	 was	 put	 in	 a	 big	 pot	 in	 boiling
water,	he	could	not	think	what	to	say	to	these	people.	He	said,	"Just	wait	a	little.
You	can	kill	me	later	on	--	first	let	me	give	you	a	little	taste	of	Christianity."
They	said,	"Wait!	That's	what	we	are	 trying.	When	we	drink	 the	soup,	we	will
have	a	taste	of	Christianity!	You	just	wait,	don't	be	in	a	hurry	--	and	anyway	you
cannot	escape."
Man	 is	 the	 ugliest	 animal	 in	 the	 sense	 that	 the	 people	 who	 think	 they	 have
civilized	him,	they	have	cultured	him,	are	absolutely	wrong.	All	their	culture	and
civilization	 only	 goes	 skindeep.	 Just	 scratch,	 and	 immediately	 comes	 the
barbarian.
The	 only	 thing	 to	 make	 man	 really	 and	 authentically	 cultured	 is	 to	 bring	 up
children	 in	 their	 innocence,	 and	 help	 their	 bodies	 to	 be	 healthy	 and	 their
innocence	to	be	meditative.
The	 child	 can	 reach	 his	 center	 very	 easily	 because	 he	 has	 nothing	 to	 obstruct
him,	no	ideas,	no	thoughts,	no	prejudices.	He	is	not	Catholic,	he	is	not	Hindu;	he
knows	nothing.
So	when	you	say,	"Go	in,"	he	simply	goes	in.	And	the	road	is	clean,	because	no
Bibles,	no	Korans,	no	Bhagavadgitas	are	standing	like	a	China	Wall	preventing
him.	Children	can	learn	meditation	more	easily	than	anybody	else.
So	 my	 suggestion	 in	 response	 to	 your	 question	 is	 that	 every	 child	 is	 born
innocent.
Neither	barbaric	nor	a	very	cultured	and	religious	person	--	just	innocent.	And	all
that	 the	 child	 needs	 from	 the	 parents	 and	 the	 society	 is	 not	 knowledge,	 but	 a
deepening	of	innocence.	Meditation	is	the	only	way	of	deepening	innocence,	and
if	 a	 child	 grows	with	 his	 center	 blossoming	 you	will	 have	 for	 the	 first	 time	 a
society	which	 is	 cultured,	 a	 society	of	 the	buddhas,	 the	awakened	ones.	That's
my	whole	effort	here.
Now	the	sutras:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
DOGO	VISITED	NANSEN,	WHO	ASKED	HIM,	"WHAT	IS	YOUR	NAME?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"MY	NAME	IS	ENCHI."
Enchi	 in	 Chinese	 means	 "round"	 and	 "wisdom."	 A	 man	 of	 wisdom	 becomes
round.
Not	 physically	 --	 if	 he	 becomes	 round	 physically,	 he	 will	 have	 to	 become	 a
member	of	the	TV	Couch	Potatoes!	He	will	have	to	be	in	America.	Then	just	sit
on	your	sofa	and	watch	 television	for	seven	and	a	half	hours	per	day,	average.
And	 you	 cannot	 leave	 a	 sensational	murder	 or	 rape	 story.	You	 cannot	 leave	 a
man	who	is	raping	a	woman,	in	the	middle,	can	you?	So	a	special	club	is	being
created	which	is	called	the	TV	Couch	Potato	Club.	You	become	a	member	of	the
club	with	a	certain	fee,	and	you	have	a	card	and	a	number.	Whenever	you	feel
that	you	need	ice	cream,	or	you	need	your	lunch,	or	your	supper,	or	your	dinner,
whatever	--	you	simply...	By	your	side	is	the	phone.	You	go	on	watching	the	TV,
the	rape.	Nobody	wants	to	miss	any	details.	Just	phone	the	number	and	give	your
membership	number	from	the	Potato	Club,	and	tell	the	hotel,	"Bring	my	dinner
here."	And	immediately	your	dinner	will	be	served	just	in	front	of	you.	You	can
go	on	watching.
People	are	even	making	love	doggie-style	because	 the	man	wants	 to	watch	 the
TV	 and	 the	 woman	 also	 wants	 to	 watch	 the	 TV.	 So	 a	 totally	 new	 fashion,
absolutely	original	and	American	--	more	particularly,	Californian.
I	don't	know	who	gave	this	name	to	California,	because	it	should	be	Californiac.
"Fornication"	 --	 that	 is	 the	 basic	 root	 from	 which	 California	 should	 come.
Whether	it	comes	from	that	or	not	I	don't	bother.
Enchi	means	 a	man	who	 is	wise.	 And	when	 a	man	 is	wise	 he	 does	 not	 have
corners.	 His	 whole	 consciousness	 becomes	 round,	 shapely,	 graceful.	 The
roundness	represents	grace.
And	if	you	have	sharp	corners	here	and	there,	that	means	you	are	dangerous,	you
can	kill	anybody	with	your	corners.
You	know,	in	America	they	call	the	old-fashioned	people	"squares."	The	square
has	 four	 corners.	 Hippies	 brought	 that	 word	 into	 existence.	 "Squares"	 --	 they
have	corners,	 they	are	 just	 looking	 to	hit	 somebody.	They	are	 just	 ready	 to	be
angry	and	enraged.
In	 ancient	Chinese	 symbolism,	 roundness,	 enchi,	 is	 a	 symbol	 of	wisdom.	One
has	lost	all	the	corners	of	anger,	violence,	murder,	rape,	crime.	One	has	lost	all
corners	 and	 has	 become	 completely	 round.	 The	 round	 shape	 certainly	 gives	 a
feeling	of	peacefulness,	settledness,	grace,	beauty,	perfection.
So	when	Nansen	 asked	Dogo,	 "What	 is	 your	 name?"	DOGO	REPLIED,	 "MY
NAME	IS
ENCHI"	--	wise	and	round.	Certainly	it	was	not	his	name.	He	was	describing	his
inner	being.
The	name	is	just	a	label	put	on	you	by	your	parents.	You	can	change	it.	Just	go	to
any	court	and	change	your	name,	there	is	nothing	in	it.	It	has	no	deep	connection
with	 you,	 it	 is	 just	 on	 your	 skin.	 You	 are	 labeled,	 it	 is	 a	 social	 convenience,
because	if	everybody	lives	namelessly	it	will	be	very	difficult.	Somebody	wants
to	call	you	--	now	what	to	do?	How	to	call	you?	How	to	address	you?	Somebody
falls	in	love	with	you	and	wants	to	write	a	love	letter.	To	whom?	He	will	have	to
write,	"To	Whomsoever	It	May	Concern"!
You	are	all	nameless,	born	nameless.	And	you	know	it:	that	name	is	a	fiction.	So
when	a	man	 like	Nansen,	a	great	master,	a	great	buddha,	asks	Dogo,	"What	 is
your	name?"...
Dogo	was	his	name,	but	he	did	not	say,	"Dogo	is	my	name."	Because	a	master
like	Nansen	will	not	ask	about	labels,	he	will	ask	about	your	very	being.
Nansen	 could	 not	 deceive	 Dogo,	 although	 there	 was	 every	 possibility	 to	 be
trapped,	because	he	was	asking,	 "What	 is	your	name?"	And	 if	Dogo	had	 said,
"My	name	is	Dogo,"
he	would	have	fallen	in	the	eyes	of	the	master	--	"He	is	not	worth	much.	It	may
be	a	wastage	of	time	to	accept	him	as	a	disciple."
But	Dogo	said,	"My	name	is	Enchi"	--	wisdom,	and	perfectly	round.
NANSEN	 ASKED,	 "HOW	 DO	 YOU	 EXPRESS	 THE	 PLACE	 WHERE
WISDOM
DOES	NOT	REACH?"
You	are	saying	you	are	wise,	and	you	are	saying	you	are	perfectly	round.	Okay,
just	tell	me	the	place	where	wisdom	does	not	reach.
Certainly	there	is	a	place	inside	you	where	there	is	only	silence,	absolute	silence.
An	eternal	space,	infinite	sky,	but	nothing	can	reach	there,	not	even	wisdom.
DOGO	REPLIED,	"I	WOULD	NEVER	EXPRESS	IT."
The	master	 is	 asking,	 "How	do	you	 express	 the	place	where	wisdom	does	not
reach?"
Another	trap.	But	Dogo	is	really	meditative.	He	says,	"I	would	never	express	it."
Nobody	can	express	 that	 space	where	wisdom	cannot	 reach.	 If	wisdom	cannot
reach	it,	how	can	you	express	it?	--	"So	I	will	never	express	it.	I	will	experience
it,	enjoy	it,	love	it,	dance	it,	but	I	will	not	express	it.	No	explanation	is	possible."
NANSEN	 SAID,	 "THAT'S	 RIGHT.	 IF	 YOU	 EXPRESS	 IT,	 HORNS	 WILL
GROW
AND	YOU	WILL	BECOME	A	BEAST."
You	will	 become	 just	 an	 idiot,	 a	 buffalo.	 If	 you	 start	 expressing	 that	which	 is
inexpressible,	 you	 will	 fall	 below	 human	 intelligence.	 It	 is	 right	 that	 you	 are
saying	 you	will	 never	 express	 it.	 Remember:	 IF	YOU	EXPRESS	 IT,	HORNS
WILL	GROW	AND
YOU	WILL	BECOME	A	BEAST	--	a	buffalo,	utterly	content,	chewing	grass.
Still,	 buffalos	 are	 not	 prohibited	 by	 any	 government:	 "Don't	 chew	 grass"	 --
"grass"	 in	 inverted	 commas;	 you	 know	what	 grass	 I	mean.	 But	 buffalos	 don't
bother,	they	go	on	chewing	the	whole	day.	And	so	contented...	they	have	never
shown	 their	 discontent,	 they	 have	 never	 taken	 a	 procession	 against	 the
government.	They	are	not	interested	in	any	revolution,	they	are	perfectly	at	ease
with	existence.
In	utter	ignorance,	also,	a	certain	contentment	happens.	But	it	is	a	contentment	of
ignorance.	Another	 contentment	 happens	when	you	 are	 luminous;	 all	 darkness
disappears,	all	ignorance	is	gone.	That	contentment	is	possible	only	if	you	are	a
buddha,	not	a	buffalo.
Nansen	 said,	 "That's	 right.	 You	 are	 a	 right	 person	 who	 has	 come	 to	 me.	 But
remember,	 even	 by	 mistake	 if	 you	 express	 it,	 immediately	 you	 will	 become
subhuman."	That's	what	symbolically	he	means:	you	will	become	an	animal,	a
beast,	you	will	grow	horns.	So	please	keep	 it	a	secret,	hidden	deep	 inside	you.
You	 know	 it,	 that's	 enough.	Don't	make	 it	 a	 knowledge,	 and	 don't	make	 it	 an
explanation,	an	expression.
A	 FEW	 DAYS	 LATER,	 DOGO	 AND	 UNGAN	WERE	 SITTING	 OUTSIDE
THE
DORMITORY	 AND	 DOING	 SOME	 WORK.	 NANSEN	 WAS	 TAKING	 A
WALK,	AND	WHEN	HE	SAW	DOGO,	HE	ASKED,	"ENCHI"	--	HE	DID	NOT
USE	THE
NAMÈDOGO';	he	said,	"Enchi,	the	other	day	you	said	you	would	never	express
the	place	where	wisdom	does	not	reach.	Now,	how	are	you	practicing	it?"
Another	 trap.	 The	master's	 function	 is	 to	 create	 traps	 and	 your	 function	 is	 to
jump,	 not	 to	 get	 trapped.	 This	 way	 the	 master	 helps	 you	 to	 come	 closer	 and
closer	to	the	truth.
He	 asked,	 "ENCHI,	 THE	OTHER	DAY	YOU	 SAID	YOU	WOULD	NEVER
EXPRESS
THE	 PLACE	 WHERE	 WISDOM	 DOES	 NOT	 REACH.	 NOW,	 HOW	 ARE
YOU
PRACTICING	IT?"
In	a	very	different	way...	If	 the	man	is	bogus	and	not	authentic,	 if	he	is	simply
repeating	some	answer	which	he	has	heard	or	read,	he	will	be	caught.	The	master
will	try	from	every	angle	possible.	Now	he	is	not	asking	about	expressing,	he	is
asking	about	practicing.
You	cannot	practice	your	enlightenment.	You	may	not	have	thought	about	it....
Enlightenment	simply	is.	You	cannot	practice	it.	It	overflows	you,	it	expresses	in
every	gesture.	 It	 is	 all	 around	you,	but	you	don't	have	 to	practice	 it.	 It	 is	your
very	nature.	Do	you	practice	anything	that	is	your	very	nature?
The	blood	is	circulating	in	your	body	--	are	you	practicing	it?	The	food	is	being
digested	by	your	 stomach	 --	are	you	practicing	 it?	One	day	 try:	 try	 to	practice
digesting	 the	 food,	 and	your	whole	 stomach	will	 be	 upset	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in
your	life,	and	it	will	be	very	difficult	to	put	it	back.
You	cannot	practice.	What	is	natural	is	already	happening.	Your	practice	may	be
a	disturbance	but	not	a	help,	a	hindrance	but	not	a	help.
When	he	asked,	"How	are	you	practicing	it?"	very	nicely,	he	was	setting	the	trap.
If	 Dogo	 says,	 "I	 am	 practicing	 it	 this	 way	 or	 that	 way,"	 he	 is	 caught.	 Then
Nansen	 could	 have	 said,	 "All	 that	 you	 have	 said	 before	 is	 borrowed,	 it	 is	 not
yours."
But	it	was	certainly	his.
HEARING	 THIS,	 DOGO	 SLIPPED	 INTO	 THE	 DORMITORY,	 WAITED
THERE
UNTIL	NANSEN	WALKED	AWAY,	AND	THEN	APPEARED	AGAIN.
UNGAN	ASKED	DOGO,	 "WHY	DID	YOU	NOT	ANSWER	WHEN	OSHO
ASKED
YOU	THE	QUESTION?"
When	the	master	asked	you	the	question,	why	did	you	not	answer?	Ungan	was
Dogo's	brother.
But	 he	 has	 answered.	 By	 slipping	 into	 the	 dormitory	 and	 waiting	 there	 until
Nansen	walked	away,	he	has	answered	by	his	action.	He	is	saying,	"It	is	so	deep,
just	like	my	slipping	back	into	the	dormitory	so	that	you	cannot	even	see	me.	It
is	 so	 deep,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 practicing	 it;	 it	 is	 simply	 there.	 It	 is
spontaneously	functioning,	not	practicing!"
So	 just	 to	 avoid	 the	 answer	 in	 language,	 he	 gave	 it	 in	 a	 gesture:	 "Whenever	 I
want	to	feel	it,	to	experience	it,	I	simply	slip	inside	myself,	hide	myself	from	the
whole	 world.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of	 practicing.	 Don't	 ask	 such	 a	 question."
That's	why	he	has	not	paid	any	attention	to	the	master's	question.
UNGAN	ASKED	DOGO,	 "WHY	DID	YOU	NOT	ANSWER	WHEN	OSHO,
the	master,	aSKED	YOU	THE	QUESTION?"
DOGO	REPLIED,	"WHAT	A	CLEVER	CHAP	YOU	ARE!"
You	are	just	a	clever	chap;	you	don't	understand	anything.
A	"clever	chap"	does	not	mean	a	man	who	knows.	A	"clever	chap"	simply	means
a	man	who	intellectually	comprehends	that	which	is	incomprehensible.
Dogo	became	enlightened	before	Ungan.	Ungan	lagged	far	behind	because	of	his
intellectuality,	 his	 cunningness.	 His	 clevernesses	 were	 all	 obstacles.	 They	 are
good	in	the	outside	world,	but	in	the	inner	world	they	are	great	obstacles.	Don't
be	clever,	just	be	innocent.
THEN	UNGAN	CAME	UP	TO	NANSEN	AND	ASKED,	"OSHO,	YOU	HAVE
ASKED
A	 QUESTION	 JUST	 NOW	 OF	 MY	 BROTHER-DISCIPLE,	 ENCHI.	 HOW
SHOULD
ONE	ANSWER	TO	IT?"
NANSEN	SAID,	"HE	IS	QUITE	GOOD	AT	THE	BEASTS'	WAY."
UNGAN	ASKED,	"WHAT	IS	THE	BEASTS'	WAY?"
NANSEN	SAID,	"YOU	MUST	HAVE	HEARD	THAT	YOU	SHOULD	NEVER
EXPRESS	 THE	 PLACE	WHERE	WISDOM	 DOES	 NOT	 REACH.	 IF	 YOU
EXPRESS
IT,	 HORNS	 WILL	 GROW.	 IF	 YOU	 NAME	 IT	 SO-AND-SO,	 IT	 WILL
ALREADY	BE
WRONG.	YOU	WILL	IMMEDIATELY	GO	THE	BEASTS'	WAY."
Your	brother	is	very	wise.	He	knows	how	to	avoid	the	beasts'	way.
When	he	said,	"He	is	quite	good	at	the	beasts'	way,"	he	is	saying	that	he	is	quite
good	at	knowing	what	 is	 the	beasts'	way	and	how	to	avoid	it.	"He	avoided	my
question	 completely,	 did	not	 answer.	And	 in	 a	 subtle	way	he	 expressed	by	his
gesture	of	hiding	deep	in	the	dormitory,	that	in	the	same	way	that	space	is	hidden
inside	 you.	 It	 comes	 to	 explosion	 on	 its	 own	 accord.	 There	 is	 no	 question	 of
practicing	it."
You	cannot	practice	enlightenment;	you	can	become	enlightened.
So	all	those	who	are	trying	to	practice	are	going	on	the	beasts'	way.	Those	who
are	not	practicing	but	 just	 relaxing	 into	 their	 innermost	being,	are	avoiding	 the
beasts'	way.	And	they	will	be	the	only	ones	who	will	become	enlightened.
It	is	a	beautiful	anecdote	to	be	understood.
Shiki	wrote:
ALONE,	I	GO	THROUGH	A	TINY	VILLAGE,
A	DARK	WINTER	DAY.
A	DOG	BARKS	AND	BARKS.
These	haikus	are	so	different	in	every	way	from	anything	that	has	been	written
by	man	anywhere	else.	Superficially	you	will	see	what	 is	here:	ALONE,	I	GO
THROUGH	A	TINY	VILLAGE,
A	DARK	WINTER	DAY.
A	DOG	BARKS	AND	BARKS.
Unless	I	give	you	the	key	you	will	not	be	able	to	understand	it.
What	 is	 he	 saying?	 ALONE,	 I	 GO	 THROUGH	 A	 TINY	 VILLAGE...	 He	 is
saying,	alone	I	go	through	the	tiny	village	of	the	mind.	It	is	full	of	thoughts,	but	I
pass	alone,	silently,	without	getting	identified	with	the	villagers	of	my	mind,	the
whole	crowd.	I	remain	alone	even	in	the	crowd.
ALONE,	I	GO	THROUGH	A	TINY	VILLAGE.	Of	course,	your	skull	is	a	very
tiny	place
--	 but	 still	 so	 full	 of	 crowd,	 so	 many	 images,	 so	 many	 dreams,	 so	 many
projections,	so	many	thoughts,	almost	incalculable.
...	A	DARK	WINTER	DAY.
A	DOG	BARKS	AND	BARKS.
The	mind,	when	 you	 enter	 into	meditation,	 becomes	 almost	 a	 barking	 dog.	 It
creates	as	much	noise	as	possible	to	bring	you	back:	"Where	are	you	going?	Are
you	mad?	Leaving	the	mind	and	going	out	of	it?	--	that	is	the	way	of	madness!
Just	come	back	in	immediately	and	close	the	door!"
In	 India	 they	have	a	beautiful	proverb.	The	elephant	 is	 thought	by	 the	Indians,
symbolically,	 to	be	one	of	 the	wisest	animals	 in	existence.	And	why	have	 they
thought	that	 it	 is	 the	wisest?	--	because	whenever	an	elephant	passes	through	a
village	 all	 the	 dogs	 gather...	 they	 cannot	 tolerate	 such	 a	 big	 animal;	 it	 is	 too
hurtful	 to	 their	 egos.	 Just	 a	 mountain!	 and	 they	 look	 so	 tiny.	 Now	 it	 is
unbearable;	something	has	to	be	done.
So	all	 the	dogs	--	and	every	village	 in	India	has	so	many	stray	dogs	you	won't
believe,	 because	 no	 corporation,	 no	 municipal	 committee	 is	 allowed	 to	 kill
anything,	 not	 even	 mad	 dogs.	 So	 they	 go	 on,	 everything	 in	 India	 goes	 on
growing.	As	many	dogs	start	barking,	others	who	are	far	away	immediately	run	-
-	"Something	great	 is	happening."	So	 the	whole	population	of	dogs	 follows	an
elephant.
The	 proverb	 says,	 "Dogs	 go	 on	 barking,	 but	 the	 elephant	 does	 not	 even	 pay
attention."	He	does	not	even	stand	and	look	at	the	dogs,	he	just	goes	on	his	way
as	 if	he	has	not	heard	 them.	 It	 is	because	of	 this	 --	 that	he	does	not	get	 into	a
fighting	 mood	 with	 the	 dogs.	 He	 pays	 no	 attention,	 remains	 absolutely
indifferent.
And	that	is	the	way	of	a	meditator:	be	indifferent	to	all	the	barking	dogs	of	your
mind.	It	is	a	tiny	village	and	there	are	many	stray	dogs,	which	are	going	to	bark
at	you	with	great	arguments.	They	will	give	evidence:	"It	is	wrong	to	go	out	of
the	mind.	Have	you	not	heard	that	every	man	who	becomes	mad,	becomes	mad
because	 he	 has	 gone	 out	 of	 the	mind?	And	where	 are	 you	 going?	Out	 of	 the
mind!	Just	come	back.	Regain	your	intelligence,	don't	lose	it."
All	the	dogs	bark,	but	the	meditator	goes	on	like	an	elephant	without	paying	any
attention.	What	 they	are	 saying	 is,	 in	 a	way,	 true:	you	can	go	out	of	 the	mind
from	two	doors.	Either	you	fall	below	the	mind	--	then	you	are	insane.	If	you	fall
above	the	mind,	then	you	are	enlightened.
There	 is	 a	 little	 similarity	 between	 the	 madman	 and	 the	 enlightened	 man,
because	both	are	out	of	the	mind.	That	is	the	similarity.	But	one	has	gone	beyond
the	mind,	and	one	has	gone	below	the	mind	--	although	both	have	gone	outside
the	mind.	So	the	mind	has	a	certain	truth	in	the	argument,	"Don't	go	out	of	the
mind;	that	is	the	way	of	becoming	mad.	Come	back	home."
But	 the	 meditator	 goes	 alone,	 just	 like	 an	 elephant	 --	 dogs	 barking,	 barking,
barking....
Slowly	slowly,	their	barking	fades	away,	far	away,	as	if	it	is	just	an	echo	in	the
valleys,	or	maybe	a	dream	you	have	seen	somewhere.	The	farther	you	go	beyond
the	mind,	 the	 less	 and	 less	 you	 hear	 the	 barking	 of	 the	 dogs,	 their	 arguments,
their	 ideologies,	 their	 philosophies.	 Their	 religions,	 their	 theologies,	 their
political	beliefs,	their	social	beliefs,	their	educational	conditioning...	all	goes	on
barking,	 barking,	 but	 you	 go	 on	 like	 an	 elephant,	 reaching	 farther	 and	 farther,
deeper	into	yourself.	Soon	you	will	be	so	far	away,	you	won't	even	listen	to	the
barking	of	the	dogs.
And	once	you	are	that	far	away,	dogs	lose	interest.	They	go	on	their	way	to	do
the	work	they	had	been	doing,	separately.	Now	there	is	no	need	of	the	assembly,
the	 elephant	 has	 gone.	 Perhaps	 they	 believe	 he	 has	 gone	 because	 they	 were
barking	--	this	is	how	mind	functions:	"Perhaps	the	elephant	became	afraid."
I	have	heard...
One	elephant	was	passing	over	a	bridge	with	a	small	fly	sitting	on	his	head.	The
bridge	started	wavering	--	it	was	an	old	bridge	--	and	the	fly	said	to	the	elephant
after	they	had	passed	the	bridge...	It	didn't	fall,	but	it	was	wavering	and	there	was
every	possibility.	The	fly	said	 to	 the	elephant,	"Son,	we	were	 too	much	for	 the
bridge!"
The	elephant	heard	somebody	saying	something.	He	said,	"Who	are	you?	And
where	 are	 you?	And	 as	 far	 as	my	mother	 is	 concerned,	 she	 cannot	 sit	 on	my
head."
The	fly	came	closer	to	his	eyes...	and	it	is	strange	that	elephants	are	so	big,	but
their	 eyes	 are	 very	 small.	 That	 shows	God	 has	 not	made	 this	world.	 Such	 an
unscientific	attitude!
Such	a	big	animal,	and	with	such	tiny	eyes...	must	be	the	work	of	some	idiot.	It
cannot	be	the	work	of	an	intelligent	God.
So	the	elephant	looked	at	the	fly,	and	he	said,	"Mother,	it	is	right.	Because	of	us
two,	the	bridge	was	shaking."
The	idea	that	elephants	are	very	wise	comes	from	such	stories.	He	accepted	it:
"Don't	bother,	don't	argue	with	this	stupid	fly	who	calls	me	her	son,	and	thinks
that	because	of	both	of	us	the	bridge	was	shaking.	There	is	no	point	in	arguing.	It
is	better	to	accept	that,
`Mother,	you	are	right,'	and	just	go	on	your	way."
Don't	be	distracted.
Not	to	be	distracted	is	wisdom.
Flies	will	be	there,	and	mosquitoes	will	be	there	--	although	you	have	the	biggest
mosquito	net	 in	 the	whole	world!	But	 they	are	waiting	outside!	They	are	very
silent	 people,	 and	 very	musical;	 when	 they	 get	 you	 caught,	 they	 sing	 a	 small
song.	And	 they	are	 the	ancient	enemies	of	 the	meditators,	but	you	have	not	 to
bother.	You	have	to	go	on.
Mosquitoes,	 and	 flies,	 and	 dogs	 --	 the	 whole	 world	 in	 fact,	 is	 against	 the
meditator.	They	will	all	be	barking	at	you!	If	you	are	sitting	silently	your	wife
will	come	rushing	in,
"What	are	you	doing?	Why	are	you	silent?	Speak!"	And	if	you	speak,	you	are	in
trouble.
Just	open	your	mouth,	and	you	have	not	even	completed	 the	sentence,	and	 the
wife	jumps	on	you.	Whatever	you	do	you	are	in	trouble.
The	 whole	 world	 is	 against	 the	 meditator,	 because	 the	 meditator	 is	 doing
something	which	 the	world	 is	 avoiding.	He	 is	 trying	 to	 become	 a	 buddha,	 an
Everest	of	consciousness	--	that	hurts	everybody.	Everybody	will	try	to	distract
you.	 The	 priest,	 the	 politician,	 the	 parents,	 the	 neighbors,	 the	 friends	 --
everybody	will	try	to	bring	you	out:
"What	are	you	doing	wasting	time?"
My	whole	childhood	I	had	to	listen	to	everybody...	finally	they	decided,	"Either
he	is	going	to	be	insane,	or	who	knows?	He	may	become	a	buddha.	But	he	is	not
going	to	be	a	normal	human	being."	Because	everybody	was	telling	me...
My	uncles	would	 come	 to	me,	my	 aunts	would	 come	 to	me,	 and	 it	was	 a	 big
joint	family.
Wherever	 you	 go	 somebody	 is	watching,	 "What	 are	 you	 doing?	Why	 are	 you
sitting	silently?"
I	would	just	tell	them,	"I	am	not	sitting	silently;	silence	is	just	happening	to	me,
what	can	I	do?"
"Happening	to	you?	It	does	not	happen	to	us."
I	 said,	 "What	 can	 I	 do	 if	 it	 does	 not	 happen	 to	 you?	 It	 happens	 to	me!	Don't
disturb	me."
By	 and	 by	 they	 became	 accustomed	 of	 me,	 so	 much	 accustomed	 that...	 My
mother	is	here.	I	would	be	sitting	in	the	house	and	she	would	ask	me,	"Have	you
seen	 anybody	 here?	 Because	 I	 want	 some	 vegetables	 to	 be	 fetched	 from	 the
market."
And	 I	would	 say,	 "I	 have	 not	 seen	 anybody.	 If	 I	 see	 anybody	 I	will	 report	 to
you."	People	finally	accepted	that	"This	man	is	absent.	Just	don't	count	on	him."
Once	 or	 twice	 they	 depended	 on	 me,	 and	 felt,	 "He	 is	 not	 reliable."	 In	 the
morning	they	would	send	me	to	fetch	some	vegetables.	In	the	middle	of	night	I
would	come	back	to	ask,	"I	have	forgotten	for	what	you	have	sent	me."	And	they
had	been	waiting	the	whole	day,	and	they	would	beat	their	heads:	"Where	have
you	been	the	whole	day?"
I	said,	"You	know,	on	every	point	there	are	people	ready	to	argue	with	me.	And
then	 I	get	 so	much	 involved	 in	 the	argument,	by	 the	 time	 I	 reach	 the	market	 I
have	completely	forgotten	for	what	 I	had	gone	 there.	Seeing	no	reason,	 I	went
into	meditation;	I	went	to	the	river."
One	day	one	of	my	aunts	sent	me,	saying,	"You	can	bring	some	bananas."
I	said,	"You	really	mean	bananas?	I	can	bring	many!	The	whole	city	consists	of
bananas."
She	said,	"I	don't	mean	that	banana,	I	mean	the	fruit!"
I	 said,	 "Okay,	 I	 am	 going."	 So	 I	 went	 to	 the	 first	 shop	 in	 the	 market,	 the
vegetable	market,	and	I	asked	 the	man,	"Which	are	 the	most	precious	and	best
bananas	you	have?"
And	the	man	knew	me,	that	I	had	never	come	into	the	vegetable	market.	He	was
the	first	shop	near	the	door	of	the	market.	He	knew	that	I	was	a	little	eccentric,
so	he	gave	me	the	worst	bananas,	almost	rotten,	and	asked	me	the	highest	price.	I
gave	him	the	highest	price	and	brought	those	rotten	bananas	back.
I	could	see	what	was	happening,	but	I	said,	"This	is	a	good	device	to	get	rid	of
these	bananas	forever."	So	I	gave	those	bananas	to	my	aunt.	She	said,	"Are	you
mad?	These	are	all	rotten!"
I	 said,	 "I	 asked	 the	man	 to	give	me	 the	best	 and	 said	 I	would	pay	 the	highest
price.	So	I	have	paid	the	highest,	and	you	call	them	rotten?	Now	that	man	knows
better	about	bananas	than	I	know.	I	have	no	concern	with	bananas,	either	human
or	fruit."
She	said,	 "Just	 take	 them	out!	There	 is	a	beggar	woman	sitting	under	 the	 tree;
just	give	them	to	her."
Even	she	did	not	accept	them.	She	told	me,	"Throw	them	away.	Do	you	think	I
am	mad	just	like	you?	These	bananas...	In	your	whole	life,	for	the	first	time	you
have	 come	 to	 give	 me	 something.	 These	 rotten	 bananas	 --	 just	 throw	 them!
Nobody	is	going	to	accept	them."
I	said,	"That's	okay."	So	I	threw	them	into	the	gutter.	After	that	nobody	asked	me
to	 bring	 anything.	 I	 was	 accepted	 as	 an	 absent	 member	 of	 the	 family.	 And	 I
enjoyed	 it	 because	 that	 relieved	 me	 of	 all	 the	 trouble,	 all	 kinds	 of	 barking.
Nobody	talked	with	me;	nobody	even	took	any	note	that	I	was	present.
Even	my	mother	was	asking	me,	"Have	you	seen	anybody?"	--	and	I	am	there,
present!
And	I	would	say,	"Although	I	have	not	seen	anybody	in	the	house	--	the	whole
house	seems	to	be	empty	--	if	I	come	across	somebody,	I	will	inform	you."
The	whole	world	 is	 against	 the	meditator	because	 the	meditator	 is	becoming	a
stranger.
Everybody	is	going	outward	and	you	are	going	inward.
One	drunkard	was	driving	his	car	and	his	wife	was	continuously	nagging	him,
"Be	careful,	be	careful,	be	careful!"
The	drunkard	said,	"Don't	be	worried.	We	must	be	reaching	home	because	I	am
hitting	more	people.	As	I	go	ahead,	hitting	more	and	more	people,	that	means	the
village	is	coming	closer.	Don't	be	worried!	And	I	am	going	fast	so	that	I	will	hit
less	 people;	 otherwise,	 if	 I	 go	 slow,	 I	will	 hit	more.	 So	 don't	 be	worried,	 you
keep	quiet."
And	she	told	him,	"Where	are	your	glasses?"
He	 said,	 "With	 glasses	 on	 and	 this	 drunk,	 one	 starts	 seeing	 elephants	 and
kangaroos	and	zebras	and	all	kinds	of	things!	I	never	wear	my	glasses	when	I	am
driving.	Then	you	simply	hit	human	beings.	 If	you	hit	an	elephant	which	does
not	exist,	you	are	in	trouble."
The	wife	simply	sat	silently.	"There	is	no	point,	this	man	is	absolutely	drunk	--
can't	 see,	because	 I	know	his	 eyesight.	And	going	 so	 fast	 and	hitting	 so	many
people...	but	still	he	is	logical.	That	village	is	coming	closer."
When	everybody	is	going	outward	and	you	are	going	inward	then	you	are	hitting
many,	many	people	and	everybody	 is	angry:	"Where	are	you	going?	When	 the
whole	 crowd	 is	 going	 this	 way,	 where	 are	 you	 going?	 Against	 the	 current,
against	us	all	--	do	you	think	we	are	mad?"
So	 remember:	 don't	 pay	 any	 attention	 to	 barking	 dogs.	 That's	 what	 Shiki	 is
saying:	Alone,	move	 silently.	Don't	 pay	 any	 attention	 to	 anybody.	Dogs	 or	 no
dogs,	they	will	be	barking;	that	is	their	nature.
Question	3
A	question	from	Maneesha:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
ONCE	AGAIN	YOU	ARE	THE	ICONOCLASTIC	VISIONARY	WHO	HAS	A
TOTALLY	ORIGINAL	VIEW	OF	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING,	WHILE	WE	HAVE
SWALLOWED	WHOLESALE	THE	NEW	GOSPEL	ACCORDING	TO	THE
INFORMATION	INDUSTRY,	WHOSE	CURRENT	CREED	IS	THAT	STALIN
IS
BAD	AND	GORBACHEV,	GOOD.
WHY	DO	WE	KEEP	BUYING	INTO	NEW	GOSPELS?
Maneesha,	 there	 is	a	 tendency	in	 the	human	mind	always	to	be	a	victim	of	 the
new.	To	prevent	this	tendency	every	society	tries	to	program	you	that	the	old	is
gold.	 Every	 society	 from	 the	 very	 childhood	 conditions	 the	 mind	 against	 the
natural	 tendency	 for	 the	 new	 --	 turns	 it	 almost	 diametrically	 opposite:
"Everything	 old	 is	 good.	 The	 more	 ancient	 the	 scripture,	 the	 more	 truthful."
Every	religion	tries	to	prove	that	their	scripture	is	the	most	ancient.
Why	 this	 attraction	 for	 the	 ancient?	Every	 society	 thinks	 they	have	passed	 the
golden	age.
These	 are	 the	 conditionings	 from	 society.	 Culture	 --	 whatever	 you	 have	 --
religion,	education...	these	are	to	prevent	you	from	falling	for	the	new.
Otherwise,	the	natural	tendency	is	to	believe	the	new.	But	neither	to	believe	the
old	is	right,	nor	to	believe	the	new	is	right.	Not	to	believe	is	right.
Without	 believing	 anything,	 just	 be	 clear,	 like	 a	mirror	 without	 any	 dust,	 and
respond	to	reality	with	your	totality.	And	you	will	always	find	the	truth.	No	news
media	 can	 deceive	 you	 --	 nobody	 can	 deceive	 you.	You	 get	 deceived	 because
your	clarity	is	not	there,	your	mirrorlike	ability	to	reflect	the	reality	as	it	is,	is	not
there.	You	are	thinking	through	prejudices.
When	 the	 whole	 news	 media	 says	 that	 Stalin	 is	 a	 bad	 guy,	 it	 fits	 with	 your
morality,	with	your	puritan	upbringing,	your	Christianity,	your	Hinduism.	It	fits
with	your	upbringing	that	because	he	killed	so	many	people....
Majid	was	 saying	 to	Amrito,	my	 personal	 physician,	 that	 it	 is	 not	 only	 in	 the
Soviet	Union	that	Stalin	killed	one	million	people;	he	also	killed	revolutionaries
in	Spain,	 in	 Italy,	 in	 other	 countries.	 It	 is	 true,	 but	 I	want	Majid	 to	 know	 that
there	are	revolutionaries	and	revolutionaries.	There	are	revolutionaries	who	are
really	counter-revolutionaries,	but	they	pretend	to	be	revolutionaries.	They	are	in
the	service	of	the	status	quo.
And	 Stalin	 certainly	 murdered	 people	 outside	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 because	 his
conception	was	not	that	of	a	nationalist.	His	conception	belonged	to	the	original
Marxian	idea	of	one	earth;	the	revolution	has	to	happen	all	over	the	world,	and	if
it	is	not	coming	from	within	a	country	on	its	own,	then	the	countries	which	have
become	communist	should	help	to	bring	the	revolution	to	 these	other	countries
also.	And	 every	 country	which	 is	 capitalist,	 to	 prevent	 the	 communists,	 create
pseudo-revolutionaries.	They	talk	of	socialism,	they	talk	of	beautiful	things,	but
all	these	things	are	just	to	create	barriers	and	confusion	in	the	proletariat.
So	 Majid	 is	 right	 that	 Stalin	 killed	 many	 revolutionaries	 outside	 the	 Soviet
Union,	but	he	does	not	know	whether	those	revolutionaries	were	revolutionaries,
or	anti-revolutionaries	pretending	 to	be	 revolutionaries.	Their	whole	effort	was
to	counteract	the	oncoming	revolution	of	communism,	and	they	succeeded	to	a
large	extent	in	deceiving	people.
Stalin	was	not	deceived.
I	see	that	man	with	very	clear	eyes.	He	knew	who	was	a	counter-revolutionary,
who	was	a	wolf	in	the	skin	of	a	sheep.	So	you	see	that	he	is	killing	a	sheep,	but
he	is	killing	a	wolf.
And	so	much	fuss	will	be	made	by	the	countries	where	so-called	revolutionaries
are	killed	because	those	are	the	agents	of	the	capitalists.
They	were	not	revolutionaries.
Joseph	Stalin's	understanding	about	revolution	was	very	pragmatic	and	practical.
He	was	not	a	dreamer.	He	could	see	exactly	how	things	are	happening.
I	can	see	it	happening	in	India.	The	Socialist	Party	of	India	is	known	all	over	the
world	as	a	revolutionary	party,	but	they	are	paid	by	the	capitalists	and	they	are
the	agents	of	the	capitalists.	One	of	Mahatma	Gandhi's	closest	disciples,	Vinoba
Bhave...	 it	 is	 said	 that	Gandhi	had	 two	 successors.	One	was	Pandit	 Jawaharlal
Nehru,	 his	 political	 successor,	 and	 one	 was	 Vinoba	 Bhave,	 his	 spiritual
successor.
Vinoba	Bhave	created	a	very	great	movement.	He	walked	all	over	 the	country
for	almost	 twelve	or	 thirteen	years,	 and	he	created	 the	 idea	 in	 the	mind	of	 the
people	that	this	was	real	revolution,	because	he	was	asking	from	the	landlords....
Eighty	percent	of	India	 is	 in	 the	villages,	and	eighty	percent	of	 its	poor	people
are	in	the	villages.	So	Vinoba	Bhave	would	approach	the	village,	sing	devotional
songs,	his	disciples	would	sing	devotional	songs...	and	he	was	considered	to	be
Mahatma	Gandhi's	spiritual	successor,	almost	a
"mini-mahatma."
So	 people	would	 gather,	 the	 landlords	would	 gather,	 and	 he	would	 talk	 about
VEDAS
and	UPANISHADS	--	which	are	appealing	to	the	people	--	he	would	talk	about
Ramayana,	and	give	interpretations	which	are	absolutely	wrong,	but	appealing	to
the	people.
And	he	would	ask,	after	he	had	talked	to	people,	that	"Those	who	have	lands	--	if
you	have	five	children,	let	me	be	your	sixth	child.	Give	me	the	sixth	part	of	your
land	and	 I	will	distribute	 it	 to	 the	poor."	And	he	collected	millions	of	acres	of
land.	But	he	became	very	much	disappointed....
He	was	supported	by	all	the	landlords,	capitalists,	the	government	--	even	Pandit
Jawaharlal	Nehru,	who	never	 liked	 the	man	before	 India	 became	 independent,
because	Jawaharlal	was	an	ultra-modern	man,	educated	in	the	West.	Although	he
was	 a	brahmin,	 he	was	not	 a	vegetarian;	 he	was	 eating	meat,	 he	was	drinking
alcohol.	He	was	an	ultra-modern,	Western	man,	and	Vinoba	Bhave	is	absolutely
antique.	So	Jawaharlal	never	liked	the	man,	but	he	was	very	close	to	Gandhi	so
he	had	to	suffer	his	presence.
But	after	freedom	Jawaharlal	started	going	to	Vinoba	Bhave.	Whenever	Vinoba
Bhave	 was	 having	 annual	 conventions,	 Pandit	 Jawaharlal	 Nehru	 was	 present
there,	 because	 thousands	 and	 thousands	 of	 people	would	 gather.	He	 could	 not
miss	the	opportunity	to	show	them	that	he	was	in	support	of	Vinoba	Bhave,	and
Vinoba	 Bhave	 would	 feel	 great	 that	 the	 prime	 minister	 comes	 to	 his	 every
conference.
So	 it	 was	 a	 mutual	 conspiracy.	 And	 it	 was	 said	 even	 by	 the	 capitalists	 that
Vinoba	 Bhave	 had	 to	 be	 supported	 because	 he	 was	 diverting	 the	 poor	 people
from	the	communists.	Poor	people	were	thinking	that	if	just	by	being	asked,	the
landlords	are	giving	their	land,	what	is	the	problem?	Why	unnecessary	violence?
Why	does	revolution	have	to	be	violent	when	without	violence	people	are	giving
their	land?
And	they	thought,	if	people	are	giving	land,	they	will	also	give	money...	because
Vinoba	Bhave	was	not	yet	working	in	the	big	cities.	First	he	wanted	to	transform
the	bigger	part	of	India	which	lives	in	the	villages	and	later	on...	the	big	cities	are
not	many.	If	he	succeeds	in	transforming	eighty	percent	of	India,	he	will	be	able
to	 transform	 the	 remaining	 twenty	 percent	 without	 any	 difficulty.	 And	 he
certainly	became	one	of	the	greatest	hindrances	for	the	communists.
Communists	believe	that	revolution	has	to	be	violent,	there	is	no	way	out	of	it.
People	are	not	going	to	drop	their	private	property	easily.	But	Vinoba	proved	that
they	were	dropping	it,	so	even	communist	strongholds	became	weaker.
But	the	reality	is	that	all	the	land	that	was	given...	and	when	it	was	distributed,
somebody	got	 half	 an	 acre,	 somebody	got	 one	 acre	because	 they	had	 a	bigger
family.	 It	was	distributed	according	 to	 the	number	of	people	 in	 the	family.	But
what	 are	you	going	 to	do	with	one	 acre?	And	 finally	 it	was	 found	 that	 all	 the
land	that	he	had	received	was	absolutely	useless,	unfertile.	Those	landlords	were
giving	land	that	was	so	stony,	on	the	hills...	Vinoba	never	went	to	those	places	to
see	 what	 kind	 of	 land	 he	 was	 receiving,	 he	 was	 just	 receiving	 it	 in	 public
meetings.	When	it	was	distributed,	then	it	was	found	that	the	poor	people	refused
to	take	it,	saying,	"What	will	we	do	with	this	land?"
And	those	who	received	it	were	at	a	loss,	because	just	the	land	is	not	enough.	In
the	 first	 place	 it	was	 too	 small	 a	 piece	 of	 land;	 it	was	 not	 going	 to	 give	 them
enough	 nourishment,	 they	 would	 remain	 undernourished.	 Secondly,	 they	 need
bullocks,	they	need	a	plow,	they	need	seeds,	they	need	manure.	They	don't	have
anything,	what	to	do	with	the	land?	And	the	land	is	so	stony,	unless	hard	work	is
done	those	stones	cannot	be	removed.
They	needed	 tractors	and	bigger	mechanical	devices	 to	make	 their	 land	 fertile;
but	they	were	so	poor,	from	where	to	get	all	these	technological	devices?	They
could	not	even	purchase	two	oxes	to	work	for	them.	And	not	only	that,	it	became
a	trouble	for	them	because	they	had	to	pay	property	tax.	And	the	land	is	not	even
giving	anything	to	them	--
property	tax!
So	they	gave	the	land	back	to	the	distributing	committee	of	Vinoba	Bhave,	and
Vinoba	Bhave	was	 so	disappointed	 that	 he	went	 back	 to	his	 ashram	 in	Pavnar
near	Wardha.
But	 for	 thirteen	 years	 he	 was	 thought	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	 great	 spiritual
revolutionaries.	 And	 the	 government	 and	 the	 capitalists	 all	 supported	 him,
because	 "this	 man	 can	 divert	 the	 poor	 from	 the	 communist	 party."	 And	 he
certainly	diverted	them	for	a	time.
So	you	have	to	understand,	Majid,	that	all	revolutionaries	are	not	revolutionaries.
Many	of	them	are	wolves	wearing	a	sheep's	skin.	They	could	not	deceive	Josef
Stalin.	He	killed	them	--	he	was	killing	the	wolf.	You	saw	that	he	was	killing	a
sheep.
It	needs	immense	clarity	to	see	the	world	as	it	really	is,	and	to	see	how	society
creates	certain	dynamics,	certain	pseudo	phenomena	to	protect	 itself.	There	are
more	counter-revolutionaries	in	the	world	pretending	to	be	revolutionaries	than
there	 are	 authentic	 revolutionaries.	 But	 it	 needs	 a	 tremendous	 clarity,	 coming
only	out	of	meditation,	so	that	you	can	figure	it	out.
I	know	you	have	been	 in	deep	 love	with	me.	That's	why	I	can	hit	you	without
mercy	--
mercy	is	for	the	enemies,	not	for	the	friends.	Even	Jesus	has	not	said,	"Love	your
friends."	He	has	said,	 "Love	your	enemies."	That's	good!	As	 far	as	 friends	are
concerned,	hit	them!	This	is	my	improvement	on	Jesus.
Majid	belongs	to	a	radical	party	in	Italy.	The	head	of	that	radical	party	wanted	to
come	to	me	and	discuss	with	me	how	things	should	to	be	done.	Of	course	Majid
was	 the	 mediator;	 he	 had	 persuaded	 the	 man	 to	 come	 to	 me.	 But	 I	 saw	 an
interview	he	had	given	to	a	journalist,	in	which	the	journalist	asks,	"We	hear	that
you	are	going	to	Poona.	Are	you	interested	in	the	philosophy,	in	the	ideology	of
Osho	Rajneesh?"
And	he	said,	"I	have	nothing	to	do	with	his	philosophy	or	with	his	meditations	or
with	 his	 ideology.	 My	 sole	 concern	 is	 that	 if	 he	 can	 give	 me	 ten	 thousand
sannyasins	in	Italy	to	become	members	of	the	Radical	Party,	I	will	go	and	kiss
his	feet."
When	 I	 saw	 that	 interview,	 I	 could	 see	 that	 the	man	 is	bogus.	And	 I	 informed
Majid	that
"I	don't	want	to	see	that	man.	His	whole	interest	is	that	I	should	tell	sannyasins	in
Italy	to	join	the	party."
It	is	not	a	radical	party,	Majid;	it	is	not	revolutionary.	And	you	can	see	it,	even
though	you	are	not	 so	clear	about	 things.	 Just	 to	get	votes,	your	Radical	Party
leader	arranged	a	woman...	 she	must	have	been	a	prostitute	or	must	have	been
having	 the	mind	 of	 a	 prostitute.	 She	 remained	 sitting	 in	 the	 square,	 the	main
square	of	Rome,	with	uncovered	breasts	and	said	to	people,	"I	will	allow	you	to
play	with	my	breasts,	 I	will	allow	you	 to	kiss	my	breast,	or	 to	kiss	me,	 if	you
become	part	of	the	Radical	Party."	A	membership	drive,	and	she	managed	to	get
ten	thousand	people	to	become	party	members.
Do	you	think	this	is	revolution?	This	is	absolutely	prostitution!	And	the	people
who	have	become	members	of	your	party	don't	understand	anything	about	your
party.	These	must	be	the	most	third-rate	people	in	Italy,	because	I	can't	think	that
people	who	were	standing	in	queues	to	play	with	her	breasts...	I	don't	think	any
intelligent	 person,	 any	 person	 who	 has	 any	 self-respect,	 will	 stand	 in	 those
queues.	These	must	have	been	the	worst	people,	pimps	and	all	kinds	of	idiots.
A	 crowd	 was	 there	 watching	 all	 this	 scene.	 And	 that	 woman	 must	 be	 just	 a
vegetable	--	a	cabbage,	not	even	a	cauliflower.	I	make	a	distinction	between	the
two,	although	they	are	 the	same.	But	a	cauliflower	 is	a	cabbage	with	a	college
education.	These	people	who	have	become	members	of	the	Radical	Party	just	by
touching	the	breast	of	an	idiot	woman,	you	think	are	revolutionaries?
But	the	head	of	your	party	was	behind	the	whole	scene.	I	refused.	I	said,	"Don't
bring	 him	 here	 because	 he	 is	 not	 a	 revolutionary.	 He	 simply	wants	 to	 have	 a
great	 ego,	 become	 more	 powerful."	 Perhaps	 he	 hopes	 to	 become	 the	 prime
minister	of	Italy.
I	don't	prevent	my	sannyasins.	They	are	free	to	join	anything,	but	I	would	always
remind	them:	join	something	out	of	your	meditativeness,	out	of	your	clarity.	I	am
not	in	any	way	preventing	anybody.	Your	freedom	is	absolutely	sacred	to	me.	I
will	not	interfere	--
even	 if	 you	 are	 going	wrong,	 I	 will	 not	 interfere.	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 that	 you	 are
going	wrong,	but	you	are	free	to	go.
Now	I	could	not	tell	my	people	to	belong	to	the	Radical	Party.	It	is	not	a	radical
party.
Majid,	 I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 create	 a	 real,	 authentic	 revolutionary	 party.	 Don't
collect	pimps	and	prostitutes.
And	Maneesha,	just	as	Stalin	is	a	bad	guy,	and	you	have	accepted	it	because	all
the	 propaganda	 of	 the	 communist	 world	 was	 small	 in	 comparison	 to	 the
propaganda	of	the	capitalist	world...	The	capitalist	world	has	all	the	newspapers,
magazines,	 television	stations,	 radio	stations.	They	have	 the	whole	propaganda
machine	in	their	hands.	So	when	they	propagated	that	Stalin	is	a	bad	guy...	just
repeat	any	lie	again	and	again	and	again	and	it	becomes	almost	true.	If	not	truth,
then	at	least	a	truism.
Now	 those	 same	people	 of	 the	 same	 capitalist	 propaganda	machine	 are	 telling
you	Gorbachev	is	a	good	guy.	I	don't	bother	what	they	are	saying.	I	look	who	is
behind	 the	 screen.	 Who	 is	 forcing	 these	 people	 to	 propagate	 the	 idea	 that
Gorbachev	is	a	good	guy?
The	same	people,	because	they	want	Gorbachev	to	become	personally	involved
in	 his	 ego.	 That	 will	 be	 their	 success	 and	 that	 will	 be	 the	 destruction	 of	 the
Soviet	Union	and	 the	great	 experiment	of	communism	I	have	been	 telling	you
about.
But	 unless	 you	 have	 the	 eyes	 of	 a	meditator,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult.	One	German
Biblical	scholar	has	written	a	book	comparing	me	and	Jesus.	A	very	honest	man
--	because	he	 is	a	Christian;	still	he	praises	me	higher	 than	Jesus,	compares	us
point	by	point,	and	on	every	point	my	score	is	better	than	that	of	Jesus.	He	writes
in	his	book	a	 few	very	 revealing	 facts	about	why	 in	Germany	 the	whole	news
media	is	creating	rumors	and	lies	about	me.	And	that's	what	people	read,	that's
what	people	believe.
The	 reason	 is	 that	 the	 whole	 propaganda	 machine	 in	 Germany	 is	 owned	 by
Christians,	 and	 they	 are	 cutting	 out	 anything	 positive	 about	me.	 I	 know	what
happened	to	one	of	the	STERN	journalists.	He	had	come	here	and	STERN	was
interested	only	 in	 something	 sensational.	Whether	 it	 is	 true	or	not,	who	cares?
Sensational	stories	sell.	They	bring	more	subscribers	to	the	magazine.
But	Satyananda	became	so	interested	and	involved	that	he	became	a	sannyasin	--
I	 don't	 know	what	 his	German	 name	 used	 to	 be.	 He	 became	 a	 sannyasin.	 He
thought	that	it	would	be	far	better	to	write	the	story	from	the	inside,	joining	all
the	 meditations,	 joining	 all	 the	 groups.	 "I	 will	 be	 reporting	 more	 intimately,
honestly.	 Just	 being	 a	 spectator	 from	 outside	 is	 one	 thing,	 but	 to	 be	 a
meditator..."
So	 he	 became	 a	 sannyasin	 and	 he	meditated	 and	 he	 joined	 the	 groups	 and	 he
really	became	involved.	In	the	beginning	it	was	just	to	have	an	inside	view.	But
once	you	are	inside,	it	is	very	difficult	to	get	outside!	He	wrote	a	beautiful	story
about	 the	 commune	 and	what	 is	 happening	 here,	 and	when	 he	went	 back,	 the
STERN	 owners	 simply	 refused	 to	 print	 anything	 because,	 "He	 has	 been
hypnotized.	Otherwise	how	can	he	write	such	a	story?	He	has	been	completely
brainwashed	--	and	why	have	you	become	a	sannyasin?"
He	said,	"I	wanted	to	write	honestly,	and	to	write	honestly	was	possible	only	if	I
became	an	insider.	In	the	beginning	it	was	just	a	show	that	I	was	a	sannyasin,	so
I	could	get	in.
But	as	I	experienced	meditation	and	groups	and	the	change	that	came	to	me,	now
I	am	really	a	sannyasin.	And	I	am	not	hypnotized	and	I	am	not	brainwashed."
But	they	would	not	publish	his	story.	He	simply	renounced	his	post	--	and	he	was
their	best	journalist	--	and	came	back	to	India.	And	he	lived	here,	he	lived	in	the
commune	in	Germany,	in	America,	and	he	is	making	money	to	come	back	here
so	that	he	can	be	here	forever.
This	 man	 writes	 that	 all	 the	 magazines	 that	 go	 on	 propagating	 against	 me	 in
Germany	are	owned	by	the	Christians,	Catholics	or	Protestants.	So	they	cut	out
anything	 that	will	strike	a	sympathetic	note	 in	people's	minds.	They	just	go	on
creating	antagonism;	on	any	point,	they	invent	something.	And	it	is	very	easy	to
invent	lies.
Now	Gorbachev	 is	 a	 "good	 guy"	 because	 this	 is	 the	 way	 to	 persuade	 him	 to
destroy	 communism.	 I	would	 like	Majid	 to	 create	 a	 really	 revolutionary	party,
and	my	sannyasins	will	be	helping	you.	And	Italy	is	one	of	the	lands	I	own!	It	is
very	 strange	 --	 Italy	 I	 own,	Germany	 I	 own,	 Japan	 I	 own.	These	 are	 the	 three
countries	which	were	fighting	together	against	the	whole	world!
It	 is	 very	 strange	 that	 amongst	 my	 sannyasins	 number	 one	 are	 the	 Germans,
number	 two	are	 the	 Japanese,	 number	 three	 are	 the	 Italians;	others	 are	here	 in
very	small	numbers.	But	these	three	countries	were	together	in	the	second	world
war,	so	something	brings	them	to	me.	They	are	utterly	fed	up	with	war,	they	are
utterly	fed	up	with	fascism,	they	are	utterly	fed	up	with	people	like	Adolf	Hitler,
Benito	 Mussolini,	 Hirohito.	 That	 frustration	 brings	 them	 here	 in	 search	 of	 a
world	which	will	 not	 have	wars,	 because	 they	 have	 suffered	 so	 badly.	 Others
have	not	suffered	so	badly.	That's	why	I	own	these	three	countries.
And	 I	would	 like	 you	 to	 create	 a	 revolutionary	 party	 on	 your	 own.	Why	be	 a
second-hand	man	 in	 that	Radical	Party?	Be	 the	 leader	of	a	 revolutionary	party
and	I	will	support	you!
And	more	 and	more	 Italians	 are	 going	 to	 come;	 just	 all	 that	we	 need	 is	more
spaghetti!
It	is	time	for	Gurudayal	Singh.	He	always	manages	to	find	the	right	place	and	the
right	time.
Gorbachev	is	 intent	upon	really	getting	rid	of	the	memory	of	Joseph	Stalin.	So
he	orders	Stalin's	bones	to	be	removed	from	his	grave	in	the	little	village	in	the
Caucasus,	and	tries	to	find	some	other	country	where	Stalin	can	be	buried.
Gorbachev	calls	up	Margaret	Thatcher	in	London,	and	asks	her	if	Stalin	can	be
buried	in	England.
"Sorry,	old	chap,"	replies	Thatcher,	"but	we	already	have	Karl	Marx	buried	here.
Two	big-time	communists	would	be	too	much	and	too	many	for	us!"
Then	Gorbachev	dials	Berlin,	and	asks	if	Stalin	can	be	buried	there.
"Sorry,	comrade,"	says	Helmut	Hamburger,	the	government	spokesman,	"but	we
already	have	Adolf	Hitler	buried	here.	Two	such	tyrants	in	one	place	would	be
too	much	for	us."
But	 Rubin	 Rosenbaum,	 from	 the	 Israeli	 government,	 hears	 of	 Gorbachev's
problem	and	phones	the	Kremlin.
"Since	Stalin	fought	against	the	Nazis,"	says	Rubin,	"we	agree	to	bury	him	here,
in	Jerusalem."
"Thanks,"	 replies	 Gorbachev,	 "but	 no	 thanks!	 We	 cannot	 risk	 another	 idiot
getting	resurrected!"
Gorgeous	 Gloria	 goes	 to	 have	 her	 eyes	 checked	 with	 Doctor	 Peek,	 the	 eye
specialist.
"Doctor,"	says	Gloria,	anxiously,	"I	think	I	am	going	blind!"
So	 Doctor	 Peek	 gives	 Gloria	 a	 thorough	 check-up,	 but	 cannot	 find	 anything
wrong.
"Your	eyesight	seems	perfect	to	me,"	says	Peek.	"Twenty-twenty	vision."
"Yes,	 but	 you	 don't	 understand!"	 insists	 Gloria.	 "The	 problem	 happens	 every
time	I	make	love."
"Really?"	 says	Doctor	Peek,	 eyeing	Gloria.	 "Well,	 in	 that	 case,	 I	 shall	 have	 to
make	a	more	thorough	examination!"
"Ah!	Doctor!"	says	Gloria,	taking	off	her	clothes,	and	lying	down	on	the	couch.
"If	you	insist!"
A	few	minutes	later,	Doctor	Peek	is	huffing	and	puffing,	and	Gloria	is	moaning
and	groaning.
"I	still	don't	see	any	problem,"	gasps	Doctor	Peek.
"Go	on!	Go	on!"	cries	Gloria,	moaning	louder	and	louder.
Suddenly,	 Gloria	 lets	 out	 a	 loud,	 orgasmic	 shriek	 --	 "Now,	 doctor!	 NOW!	 I
cannot	see	a	thing!"
Paddy	makes	a	lot	of	money	on	his	used	furniture	stall	one	year,	so	he	shuts	up
shop	and	goes	to	Paris	for	a	holiday.
Two	weeks	later	he	is	back	in	Ireland,	sitting	in	the	pub	and	telling	Seamus	all
about	his	adventures.
"Oh!	It	was	great!"	says	Paddy.	"Paris	is	out	of	this	world!"
"Really?"	 says	Seamus.	 "But	how	did	you	get	on,	without	knowing	a	word	of
French?"
"It	was	simple,"	says	Paddy.	"For	example,	I	met	a	girl	in	the	park.	So	I	took	out
a	 pencil	 and	 a	 piece	 of	 paper	 and	 drew	 a	 picture	 of	 a	 taxi.	 She	 knew	what	 I
meant,	so	we	went	for	a	drive.	Then	I	drew	a	picture	of	a	knife	and	fork	and	she
knew	that	I	wanted	to	take	her	out	to	dinner."
"That	sounds	great,"	says	Seamus.
"I'm	 not	 finished	 yet,"	 says	 Paddy.	 "Then	 I	 drew	 two	 people	 dancing	 and	we
went	to	a	night-club.	At	the	end	of	the	evening,	she	took	the	pencil	from	me	and
drew	a	big	double	bed."
"Amazing!"	 cries	 Seamus.	 "She	 even	 knew	 that	 you	 were	 in	 the	 furniture
business!"
Nivedano...
(Gibberish)
Nivedano...
Be	silent.	Close	your	eyes	and	feel	your	bodies	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	to	enter	in	and	rush	towards	your	very	center	of	being.
Gather	your	whole	 energy,	your	 total	 consciousness	 and	 rush	 faster	 and	 faster,
deeper	and	deeper....
As	you	come	close	to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you.
Just	 like	 soft	 rain...	 so	 cool,	 so	 serene,	 so	 peaceful...	 as	 if	 in	 the	 Buddha
Auditorium	there	is	no	one.
A	little	deeper	and	you	will	find	tremendous	blissfulness.
Just	one	step	more	and	you	are	at	the	very	center	of	your	being.
A	 great	 ecstasy	 arises	 in	 you,	 a	 great	 divine	 drunkenness;	 you	 feel	 almost
drowned	in	ecstasy,	and	you	encounter	your	original	face	for	the	first	time.
Your	original	face	is	the	same	as	the	buddha's	face.
Everybody	is	a	born	buddha.	Whether	he	realizes	it	or	not,	that	is	his	choice.	The
buddha	 has	 only	 one	 quality,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 that	 quality	 because
only	if	you	understand	that	quality,	buddha	can	become	your	reality,	your	day-to-
day	reality.
Then	you	don't	 need	meditation.	Your	whole	 life	 is	meditative.	That	quality	 is
witnessing.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	body.
Witness	that	you	are	not	the	mind.
Witness	that	you	are	only	the	witness.
At	this	moment	you	are	the	buddha,	the	awakened	one.	This	is	your	birthright.
At	this	moment	you	enter	into	an	eternal	life,	immortal	existence.	All	the	cosmic
doors	open	for	you.
At	this	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth	because	everybody
on	the	earth	is	involved	in	trivia	--	money,	power,	prestige.	You	are	moving	into
a	 totally	 different	 dimension,	 diametrically	 opposite	 --	 just	 trying	 to	 find	 the
origin	of	your	life.
The	origin	is	also	the	goal.
When	the	origin	is	found,	you	have	found	the	goal.	The	circle	is	complete.	From
the	 same	 silent	 space	 you	 had	 arisen,	 just	 like	 a	wave	 arises	 in	 the	 ocean	 and
again	 disappears	 in	 the	 ocean...	 Meditation	 is	 a	 way	 of	 disappearing	 as	 a
dewdrop,	as	a	wave,	and	appearing	as	the	ocean.
To	make	the	witnessing	more	clear,
Nivedano...
Relax,	let	go.	But	remember	only	one	thing:	You	are	a	witness.
As	your	witnessing	deepens,	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium	starts	turning	into
an	ocean.
You	start	disappearing	like	dewdrops,	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf	into	the	ocean.
No	waves,	no	ripples.	Absolute,	perfect	silence.
This	is	your	very	nature,	dhamma.
This	is	your	very	being,	the	buddha.
This	very	body	is	the	buddha	and	this	very	earth	the	lotus	paradise.	Only	people
in	deep	meditation	can	understand	such	a	tremendous	sutra.
Gather	the	many	flowers	that	are	growing	all	around	you,	gather	the	ecstasy	and
drunkenness	which	is	divine.
You	have	to	bring	this	drunkenness,	this	ecstasy,	all	these	flowers	of	blissfulness,
to	your	day-to-day	life.	And	don't	forget,	you	have	to	persuade	buddha	to	come
along	with	you.
He	has	to	come,	he	is	your	nature.	It	is	just	that	you	have	never	asked	him,	never
invited	him.	He	has	remained	just	a	seed	hidden	deep	in	the	center	of	your	being.
Once	you	start	asking	him,	requesting	him,	welcoming	him,	he	has	to	come.
These	are	the	three	steps	of	your	enlightenment:
First	he	will	be	coming	just	 like	a	shadow	behind	you.	But	his	shadow	will	be
almost	 tangible,	you	can	 touch	 it,	you	can	feel	 it.	He	will	surround	you	with	a
strange	fragrance	from	the	beyond.
Second	step:	you	will	become	his	shadow.
And	the	third	step:	you	will	disappear	into	the	buddha.	You	will	not	be	anymore;
only	the	buddha,	only	the	existence.	You	are	burned	in	the	Zen	Fire,	and	the	Zen
Wind	has	taken	all	your	ashes	far	away.
Nothing	is	left.
This	nothing	is	your	inner	sky.
This	nothing	is	your	very	nature.
Buddha	 is	 nobody.	 Buddha	 is	 a	 pure	 nothingness,	 an	 open	 space,	 infinite	 and
eternal.
Nivedano...
Come	back,	but	remember	to	come	as	a	buddha	--	with	the	same	grace,	the	same
silence,	the	same	beauty,	the	same	blissfulness.
Sit	for	a	few	moments	just	to	recollect	what	space	you	had	entered.	Remember
you	 had	 gone	 beyond	 your	 mind,	 remember	 you	 had	 touched	 the	 greatest
experience	in	the	world
--	 of	witnessing	 --	 and	you	 followed	 a	 golden	path	which	 leads	 exactly	 to	 the
hidden	buddha,	to	the	hidden	splendor	inside	you.
And	 just	 feel,	 the	 buddha	 is	 behind	 you.	 His	 coolness	 is	 almost	 tangible,	 his
fragrance	 fills	 your	 whole	 being.	 His	 luminosity	 makes	 you	 more	 and	 more
drunk.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	create	drunkards,	drunks	of	the	divine	--	people	who
have	 found	 their	 buddha,	 their	 dhamma,	 their	 nature.	 Once	 you	 find	 it,
everything	 starts	 growing	 in	 you,	 to	 your	 very	 potential.	 You	 will	 reach	 the
highest	 peak,	 the	 Everest	 of	 consciousness,	 and	 you	will	 reach	 to	 the	 greatest
depth	of	the	Pacific	Ocean	of	your	being.
The	 day	 you	merge	with	 the	 buddha,	 the	 day	 you	 disappear	 and	 only	 buddha
remains,	will	be	the	greatest	day	of	your	life.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Communism	and	Zen	Fire,	Zen	Wind
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	My	interest	is	in	you
5	February	1989	pm	in	Gautam	the	Buddha	Auditorium
Archive
code:
8902055
ShortTitle:
FIRE07
Audio:
Yes
Video:
Yes
Length:
142
mins
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
WHEN	 UNGAN	 HIMSELF	 BECAME	 A	 MASTER,	 HE	 ONCE	 SAID	 --
WHEN
ADDRESSING	AN	ASSEMBLY	OF	MONKS	--	"HERE	IS	A	CHILD	FROM	A
RESPECTABLE	 FAMILY:	 WHATEVER	 YOU	 ASK,	 THERE	 IS	 NOTHING
HE
CAN'T	ANSWER."
ONE	 OF	 HIS	 DISCIPLES,	 TOZAN,	 STEPPED	 FORWARD	 AND	 ASKED,
"HOW
MANY	BOOKS	ARE	THERE	IN	HIS	HOUSE?"
UNGAN	 REPLIED,	 "HE	 DOESN'T	 HAVE	 ANY	 BOOKS,	 NOT	 EVEN	 A
SINGLE
LETTER."
TOZAN	THEN	ASKED,	"HOW	COULD	HE	BE	SO	WELL	INFORMED?"
"HE	SELDOM	SLEEPS	DAY	OR	NIGHT,"	WAS	UNGAN'S	RESPONSE.
"I	WANT	TO	ASK	SOMETHING	OF	THE	CHILD,"	CONTINUED	TOZAN.
"IS	IS
POSSIBLE?"
"HE	COULD	ANSWER,	BUT	HE	WOULD	NOT,"	REPLIED	UNGAN.
ON	ANOTHER	OCCASION,	 UNGAN	ASKED	A	MONK,	 "WHERE	 HAVE
YOU
BEEN?"
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	HAVE	BEEN	TALKING	ABOUT	THE	DHARMA
TO	A	ROCK."
UNGAN	ASKED,	"DID	THE	ROCK	NOD?"
THE	MONK	HAD	NO	ANSWER	AND	UNGAN	COMMENTED,	"IT	NODS
BEFORE
YOU	TALK."
Friends,
First,	a	little	bit	of	news.
The	first	failure	of	Comrade	Gorbachev:
The	central	committee	of	the	Communist	Party	of	the	Soviet	Union	has	declared
that	 Gorbachev's	 first	 act	 of	 reform,	 to	 eradicate	 alcoholism,	 has	 failed.	 The
party	declared	that	Gorbachev's	radical	changes	have	not	yet	been	achieved;	on
the	contrary,	the	sale	of	illicit	liquor	has	grown,	state	liquor	revenues	have	fallen,
and	 the	 masses	 have	 been	 constantly	 complaining	 about	 long	 queues	 to	 buy
vodka.
Second:
Over	 the	past	 year	Comrade	Gorbachev	has	 allowed	 the	 following	 symbols	 of
capitalism	 to	 do	business	 in	Russia:	Coca-Cola,	MacDonald's,	Kentucky	Fried
Chicken,	and	Fast	Food	Pizza.
This	 is	all	 junk	 that	America	wants	 to	pour	on	 the	very	 innocent	people	of	 the
Soviet	Union.
Third:
Just	 today	 he	 has	 allowed	 the	 world's	 largest	 advertising	 agency,	 Saachi	 and
Saachi,	 to	 begin	 advertising	 campaigns	 in	 Russia	 for	western	 goods.	 Saachi's,
who	 are	 advertising	 agents	 for	Margaret	Thatcher,	 said	 they	would	 also	 like	 a
contract	"to	polish	Gorbachev's	image,	although	he	does	not	really	need	it	at	the
moment."
On	the	one	hand,	he	is	saying	that	Russia's	economy	is	failing,	and	on	the	other
hand,	he	is	giving	contracts	to	advertising	companies	to	advertise	western	goods
in	Russia.	Do	you	see	the	contradiction?
The	latest	data	about	the	economy	of	Russia	is	that	twenty	percent	of	the	people
are	 living	 below	 an	 adequate	 nourishment	 level.	 But	 in	 America,	 fourteen
percent	of	 the	people	are	below	 this	 level	 --	 the	difference	 is	only	 six	percent.
For	 just	 six	 percent,	 if	 communism	 has	 to	 be	 thrown	 out	 and	 American
capitalism	has	to	be	brought	in,	it	is	a	total	tragedy.	Six	percent	of	the	people	can
be	helped	without	bringing	American	capitalism	in.
There	was	no	need	to	declare	to	the	world	that	they	are	no	longer	making	nuclear
weapons.	There	was	no	need	to	tell	the	world	that	they	are	cutting	their	military
budgets	 and	 armies.	They	 should	 have	 done	 it	 silently,	 and	 raised	 the	 level	 of
those	six	percent	without	any	problem!	It	 is	so	simple,	but	Gorbachev	is	going
about	 things	absolutely	 irrationally.	He	 is	 throwing	out	 the	baby	with	 the	wash
water!
His	 effort	 is	 absolutely	 against	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 and	 this	 first	 failure	 of	 his
policy	 will	 not	 be	 the	 only	 failure.	 This	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 end.	 All	 his
policies	are	going	to	fail	because	all	his	policies	are	against	basic	fundamentals
of	communism.	And	one	man	cannot	undo	seventy	years'	sacrifice	of	millions	of
people	who	have	created	communism
--	 the	 first	 experiment	 in	 human	 history	 to	 bring	 a	 classless	 society	 into
existence.
Now	the	questions....
Question	1
The	first	question:
ACCORDING	TO	YOUR	VISION,	WHAT	EXACTLY	IS	COMMUNISM?
Communism	 simply	 means	 moving	 private	 property	 into	 the	 hands	 of	 the
collective	--
because	 private	 ownership	 of	 property	 creates	 classes,	 the	 oppressed	 and	 the
oppressors.
Money	brings	more	money,	attracts	more	money;	poverty	attracts	more	poverty.
And	 a	 man	 who	 sees	 all	 around	 him	 people	 having	 money,	 beautiful	 houses,
cars,	and	he	has	not	even	food	to	eat...	his	dignity	as	a	human	being	is	destroyed.
He	starts	 feeling	subhuman,	 inferior,	unsuccessful,	and	 to	create	 this	 feeling	 in
millions	of	people	just	for	the	sake	of	a	few	who	will	be	rich	is	against	the	whole
of	humanity.
Communism	brings	dignity	to	everybody	because	all	the	properties,	the	land	and
everything,	belong	to	the	collective.	Nobody	can	be	richer	than	you	and	nobody
can	 be	 poorer	 than	 you.	 Equality	 is	 equivalent	 to	 communism,	 and	 equal
opportunity	 for	 everyone	 to	 blossom	 into	 whatsoever	 he	 has	 hidden	 in	 his
potentiality.
Communism	is	only	the	first	step	of	a	great	experiment.	Once	people	are	without
inferiority	 complex,	 once	 religions	 are	 removed	 --	 that	 is	 part	 of	 communism,
that	there	is	no	god	and	the	so-called	religions	are	just	the	opium	of	the	people.
Once	 religions	 are	 removed,	 soon	 a	 tremendous	 vacuum	 will	 be	 felt	 by
everybody,	because	these	religions	have	been	stuffing	you	with	systems	of	belief
which	are	all	fiction.	But	they	help	you	to	feel	that	you	are	full.
I	have	come	across	poor	aboriginals	in	Bastar,	in	the	central	provinces	of	India,
who	 sometimes	 don't	 get	 even	 one	 meal	 in	 a	 day.	 And	 without	 food,	 sleep
becomes	absolutely	difficult.	The	stomach	is	asking	for	food,	goes	into	cramps,
and	you	cannot	sleep.	I	have	seen	with	my	own	eyes,	people	just	drinking	water
to	 fill	 the	stomach,	 to	deceive	 the	stomach,	and	putting	a	brick	on	 their	bellies
and	binding	it	around	themselves	with	a	rope,	so	the	stomach	feels	that	it	is	not
empty	 --	 inside	water,	outside	 the	brick.	You	can	deceive	 the	stomach	by	such
false	methods,	but	that	is	not	going	to	give	you	nourishment.
So	they	are	just	skeletons.
Religions	have	been	giving	you	false	ideas,	fictions,	to	console	you.
Communism	means	removing	all	fictions	from	the	human	mind,	giving	it	a	good
cleaning	of	all	the	past	that	has	filled	it	with	rubbish.
Marx's	vision	never	reached	beyond	that,	but	my	understanding	and	my	vision	is
far	more	perfect.	To	me,	communism	is	only	the	first	stage	--	not	the	last.	And	as
communism	 succeeds,	 people	 will	 drop	 the	 inferiority	 complex	 --	 which	 is
needed	by	the	priests,	which	is	needed	by	the	people	who	are	driving	humanity
into	different	kinds	of	slavery.
And	when	there	is	no	God,	there	is	no	guilt	--	without	guilt	no	organized	religion
can	live.	It	is	guilt	that	takes	people	to	the	churches,	because	they	become	afraid:
they	 have	 committed	 sins,	 now	 they	 will	 suffer	 hellfire	 for	 eternity.	 So
something	has	to	be	done	to	remove	the	guilt.
All	religions	provide	fictions.
In	 India	 just	 now	 there	 has	 been	 a	 kumbha	mela;	 it	 is	 going	 on	 in	Allahabad.
Millions	of	people	--	perhaps	this	is	the	biggest	fair	in	the	world	--	just	go	to	the
Ganges....	 To	 take	 a	 dip	 in	 the	 Ganges	 means	 all	 your	 sins	 are	 taken	 by	 the
Ganges	 and	 you	 come	out	 absolutely	 clean.	That	 does	 not	mean	 that	 you	will
stop	committing	sins;	that	simply	means	you	have	found	a	very	cheap	method	to
get	 rid	 of	 your	 sins	 and	 guilt,	 so	 you	 can	 commit	 as	many	 sins	 as	 you	want!
There	is	no	problem,	just	a	small	journey	to	Allahabad,	take	a	dip	in	the	Ganges,
and	 all	 your	 rapes	 and	 murders,	 and	 anything	 that	 you	 have	 committed,	 the
Ganges	takes	away.	This	is	the	Hindu	strategy	to	keep	you	feeling	guilty.
And	the	priests	are	 there,	you	cannot	 take	the	dip	alone.	The	priest	has	 to	 take
you	into	the	Ganges	in	a	boat.	And	he	will	be	reciting	mantras,	and	then	you	take
the	dip,	and	you	have	to	pay	the	priest.	The	priest	is	the	agent	of	the	God	who
does	not	exist.
In	the	Catholic	religion,	you	have	to	go	to	the	priest	to	confess	your	sins,	and	for
just	 ten	 dollars	 and	 five	 "Hail	Marys"	 your	 sins	 are	 erased.	God	 has	 forgiven
you.
I	have	always	wondered	 that	not	a	single	Catholic	 theologian	 --	and	 they	have
great	 theologians,	 very	 intellectual	 --	 has	 raised	 the	 question	 that	when	 a	man
rapes	a	woman	and	God	forgives	him	just	because	he	has	given	ten	dollars	to	the
priest	and	done	five
"Hail	Marys,"	 is	God	 absolutely	 unaware	 of	 the	woman	who	 has	 been	 raped?
The	 criminal	 is	 forgiven	 --	 and	 the	 victim?	 Not	 a	 single	 theologian	 of	 any
religion	has	ever	thought,	"What	about	the	victim	who	has	suffered?"
A	man	kills	someone	and	he	goes	to	the	priest	and	he	is	forgiven.	He	goes	to	the
Ganges,	gives	some	money	 to	 the	priest,	 takes	a	dip,	and	he	 is	 forgiven.	What
about	the	murdered?
God	does	not	 seem	 to	be	 just.	He	 is	 in	 favor	of	 the	criminals	and	sinners.	For
them	he	 is	a	 father	who	forgives	 --	but	what	about	 the	victims?	There	 is	not	a
single	word	 in	any	scripture	of	 the	organized	religions	which	 takes	note	of	 the
victims.	 God	 seems	 to	 be	 favorable	 to	 the	 sinners,	 to	 the	 criminals,	 but	 not
favorable	to	the	victims.	He	has	no	sympathy	for	the	victims.
Just	today	I	received	a	letter	from	a	sannyasin	who	has	been	abused	by	her	father
in	 her	 childhood,	 sexually	 abused.	 And	 now	 she	 suffers	 continuously	 the
nightmare	 that	 her	 father	 exploited	 her	 innocence.	 She	 did	 not	 know	 anything
about	sex,	and	her	own	father....
Now	that	father	must	have	gone	to	the	church	and	been	forgiven	by	God.	What
about	 this	 girl,	who	 is	 suffering	 even	 now?	God	 has	 no	 consideration	 for	 this
girl.	 Because	 the	 father	 has	 abused	 her,	 she	 has	 become	 afraid	 of	 sex,	 so	 she
cannot	fall	in	love.	The	image	of	the	father	comes	in	between.	So	she	is	suffering
because	of	the	father,	she	has	nightmares	about	her	father	and	all	the	abuse	that
he	has	done	to	her,	and	because	of	all	that,	she	has	become	frightened	of	love.	If
anybody	approaches	her	she	will	escape,	so	she	will	suffer	more	because	she	will
never	be	nourished	by	 love.	Because	her	own	 father	has	destroyed	her	 trust	 in
love,	her	trust	is	completely	finished.	If	the	father	cannot	be	relied	upon,	then	on
whom	are	you	going	to	rely?	But	God	has	no	consideration....
This	 God	 is	 an	 absolute	 fiction	 created	 by	 the	 priests.	 Communism	 dissolves
these	 priests,	 dissolves	 organized	 religion,	 takes	 away	 all	 the	 opium	 that	 they
have	been	giving	to	the	people.
Marx	was	not	aware	that	this	was	not	going	to	be	the	complete	phenomenon.	I
can	see	with	more	clarity	than	any	Karl	Marx	or	Lenin	or	Stalin.
Communism	has	created	a	vacuum.
You	must	 be	 surprised,	 you	must	 be	 continuously	 talking	 amongst	 yourselves;
Amrito	informed	me	that	in	the	canteen	it	seems	like	the	early	days	of	the	Soviet
Union	before	 the	 revolution,	when	all	 the	young	people	were	discussing	about
communism	and	revolution.	The	whole	Soviet	Union	before	the	revolution	was
agog;	everybody	was	talking	about	what	this	revolution	is	going	to	be	--	"What
is	communism?"	And	there	were	anarchists	like	Prince	Kropotkin	and	Bakunin,
who	were	talking	about	a	world	without	the	state,	without	government,	without
any	kind	of	domination,	and	all	this	was	discussed.
For	all	these	days	you	have	been	discussing	--	only	the	Indians	had	disappeared.
They	have	come	back	today,	knowing	that	 this	 is	 the	last	day.	Such	cowards	--
and	 they	 think	 they	are	 spiritual!	And	 if	 any	problem	 is	going	 to	happen,	 it	 is
going	to	happen	to	me,	not	to	them.	They	are	just	listeners,	nobody	is	going	to
put	 them	 in	 jail,	 and	 they	 are	not	 going	 to	be	 shot,	 but	 they	 all	 disappeared.	 I
have	been	watching.	Already	 there	 are	no	more	 than	half	 a	dozen	people	who
come	from	Poona,	but	they	also	disappeared,	seeing	the	danger.
Communism	creates	a	vacuum	--	that	is	why	I	support	it.	My	whole	vision	is	that
that	 vacuum	 can	 be	 only	 filled	 by	 meditation.	 And	 I	 am	 against	 Gorbachev
because	 he	 is	 filling	 it	with	Coca-Cola,	 bringing	 the	 priests	 back,	 opening	 the
churches.	I	have	some	fundamental	reason	to	oppose	him	because	he	is	opening
the	doors	to	all	the	rubbish	that	took	the	communists	seventy	years	to	finish.
Now	is	the	time	that	meditation	should	be	introduced	in	the	Soviet	Union.	The
door	should	be	opened	only	to	the	people	who	are	awakened,	enlightened	--	the
buddhas	--
because	 they	 can	 fill	 the	 vacuum,	 not	 with	 any	 fiction	 but	 with	 your	 own
potential	growing	into	the	vacuum	and	blossoming	into	lotus	flowers.
So	communism	is	a	first	step.	The	second	step	is	spiritualism,	and	the	third	step
is	 anarchism.	Anarchism	 is	 not	 possible	 unless	 people	 are	 really,	 authentically
spiritual.
Prince	Kropotkin,	Tolstoy,	Bakunin	--	all	were	unaware	of	the	fact	that	they	were
talking	about	 the	 flowers	but	 they	had	 forgotten	about	 the	 roots	and	 the	 trunk.
You	cannot	create	flowers	without	roots,	without	a	trunk.
Communism	is	just	the	roots,	and	the	trunk	will	be	meditation.	And	the	flowers
will	be	a	world	without	any	domination,	without	any	interference	with	individual
growth	 --	 a	 world	 without	 states,	 a	 world	 without	 boundaries.	 Just	 a	 world
consisting	of	individuals	-
-	not	organizations,	not	nations,	not	races.
These	 are	 the	 three	 steps,	 and	 I	 can	 see	 them	 clearly	 because	 I	 have	 no
identification	with	any	--	neither	communism	nor	spiritualism	nor	anarchism.	I
am	just	a	witness.	I	have	no	involvement	with	anybody.	I	am	just	a	mirror	who
can	reflect	the	whole	situation	as	it	is,	and	even	the	future	as	it	can	grow	if	the
right	nourishment	is	given.
So	don't	think	that	I	am	a	communist.	I	don't	identify	with	anything.	Don't	think
that	 I	 am	 an	 anarchist.	 I	 don't	 identify	with	 anything.	Don't	 think	 that	 I	 am	 a
spiritualist.	I	don't	identify	with	anything.
I	 am	 just	 a	 pure	 awakened	 being,	 just	 a	 mirror	 who	 reflects	 --	 who	 has	 no
involvement,	no	commitment	to	anything.
I	don't	belong	to	any	organization,	I	don't	belong	to	any	party,	I	don't	belong	to
any	'ism'.
You	have	to	understand	clearly:
I	simply	see	things	because	I	have	gone	beyond	thoughts.	My	no-mind	is	just	a
pure	 space	 in	which	 I	 can	 see	 the	 actual	 growth	 of	 consciousness	 and	 how	 it
should	happen.
So	communism,	to	me,	is	just	a	basic	ground.	It	is	the	roots.	Spirituality	is	going
to	be	 the	 trunk	and	 the	branches	and	 the	 foliage.	And	 then	at	 the	highest	peak
comes	 the	 absolute	 freedom	 from	 all	 kinds	 of	 dominations,	 oppressions,
suppressions,	from	all	priests,	from	all	politicians.
You	blossom	like	a	buddha.
My	only	interest	is	to	bring	out	your	buddha	as	a	fully-opened	lotus	in	the	early
morning	 sun,	with	 small	 dewdrops	 shining	 so	 beautifully	 that	 even	 real	 pearls
cannot	compete	with	them.
I	am	not	a	politician,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	I	am	not	interested	in	human
welfare.
And	 I	will	 say	 things	which	may	hurt	 your	 prejudices.	 I	want	 to	 destroy	 your
prejudices	 completely.	 I	 want	 to	 create	 a	 vacuum.	 That	 vacuum	 is	 absolutely
needed;	otherwise	you	don't	have	space	to	grow	your	potential.
You	are	 filled	with	 religious	 rubbish,	you	are	 filled	with	political	 rubbish,	you
are	filled	with	economic	rubbish,	all	kinds	of	ideas	that	you	have	borrowed.	You
are	not	having	your	own	insights	--	that	rubbish	prevents	it,	it	keeps	you	blind,	it
gives	you	a	sense	of	fulfillment	which	is	false.
So	remember	it.	It	will	be	very	difficult	for	outsiders	to	understand	me,	almost
impossible.	Misunderstanding	is	the	only	possibility	for	me	as	far	as	the	outside
world	is	concerned.	But	at	least	you	should	not	misunderstand	me.
I	have	no	interest	in	Stalin,	and	I	have	no	interest	in	Gorbachev.	My	interest	is	in
you!
And	when	I	see	that	you	are	filled	with	a	certain	prejudice	I	have	to	bring	that
prejudice	 to	 the	 surface	 so	 you	 can	 see	 it.	 All	 kinds	 of	 moral,	 puritan
programming	--	I	have	to	fight	so	many	enemies	that	you	are	nursing	within	you!
But	my	whole	concern	is	to	make	you	utterly	empty.
So	I	am	not	preaching	anything;	I	am	not	supporting	anything.	I	don't	have	any
doctrine,	 no	 philosophy,	 no	 cult,	 no	 creed.	 My	 whole	 effort	 is	 to	 clean	 your
inside	completely	from	all	that	the	society,	the	education,	the	religion,	the	family,
have	 forced	 into	you.	Unless	 you	get	 rid	 of	 it	 you	 cannot	 grow	 in	meditation.
You	cannot	become	a	buddha.
Communism	 is	 a	 better	 opportunity	 than	 any	 other	 kind	 of	 social	 structure
because	it	 is	negative,	because	it	 is	without	God,	without	heaven,	without	hell,
without	the	idea	of	reincarnation.	And	it	creates	a	certain	equality	of	opportunity
for	man	and	woman.
I	 have	 told	 you	 just	 a	 few	 days	 ago	 that	 Gorbachev	 cannot	 succeed	 in
prohibition.	 You	 cannot	 succeed	 in	 prohibition	 even	 in	 India,	 a	 hot	 country
which	does	not	need	any	alcohol.	 It	 is	 absolute	nonsense	 in	 a	 country	 like	 the
Soviet	Union	which	 is	 half	 the	 year	 covered	with	 snow.	 Taking	 poor	 people's
vodka,	which	keeps	them	warm,	is	an	absolute	impossibility!	He	started	with	a
wrong	policy.	That	shows	he	does	not	understand	simple	arithmetic.	If	he	wanted
to	be	successful	he	should	have	declared	 that	nobody	can	drink	his	own	urine.
He	would	have	been	successful	 --	of	course	you	are	allowed	 to	drink	anybody
else's,	but	not	your	own	 --	and	he	would	have	been	hailed	as	a	messiah!	Only
one	person,	Morarji	Desai	in	India,	would	have	felt	a	heart	attack,	but	who	cares
about	Morarji	Desai?	In	fact,	he	needs	a	heart	attack!	That	program	would	have
successful	 immediately.	 The	 whole	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 would	 have	 hailed
Gorbachev	as	the	greatest	man	of	their	history.
Just	 choose	 the	 right	 things,	 which	 are	 going	 to	 be	 a	 success.	 Gorbachev	 is
choosing	wrong	things.
Now	his	second	policy	is	that	women	should	go	backwards.	No	woman	is	going
to	go	back	to	the	kitchen.	Women	are	professors,	women	are	engineers,	women
are	doctors.
They	are	pilots	in	the	army,	and	they	proved	in	the	second	world	war	that	they
could	 fight	 shoulder	 to	 shoulder	 with	 any	 man	 on	 every	 front.	 They	 were
bombers,	they	were	flying	planes	to	bomb.	Now	you	cannot	force	them	back.	It
is	as	impossible	as...	once	you	have	taken	the	toothpaste	out	of	the	tube,	then	try
to	force	it	back,	and	you	will	understand	how	unsuccessful	Gorbachev	is	going
to	be.	Just	a	small	experiment	you	can	do	in	your	bathroom	--	nobody	will	know
about	your	failure....
Now	 these	 women	 who	 have	 lived	 as	 professors,	 doctors,	 and	 engineers	 and
pilots	 and	 scientists	 and	 academicians	 --	 you	 want	 them	 to	 go	 back	 to	 the
kitchen?	It	is	impossible!
The	whole	of	womankind	in	the	Soviet	Union	will	oppose	Gorbachev.
I	have	heard	that	his	wife	is	very	intelligent,	is	a	law	graduate	just	as	he	is	a	law
graduate.
In	fact,	she	should	start	a	revolution	against	Gorbachev!	She	can	understand	the
situation	of	women	far	better	than	Gorbachev.
And	for	what	is	he	doing	this?	Again	reducing	women	to	a	second-class	category
of	 citizens	 --	what	 is	 the	 reason?	 Just	 those	 six	percent...	 If	women	are	 forced
back	 into	kitchens	 and	 imprisoned	 to	 take	 care	of	 the	babies	 and	 the	husband,
and	their	financial	independence	is	destroyed,	there	will	be	more	posts	vacant	for
men	to	occupy.	It	is	because	of	this	small	unemployment	that	is	creating	a	certain
undernourishment	 --	 just	 to	give	men	more	opportunities,	withdraw	all	women
from	 the	 status	 that	 they	 have	 gained.	 Do	 you	 think	 he	 can	 succeed	 in	 it?	 A
woman	who	has	lived	as	a	free	individual,	not	dependent	on	her	husband's	bank
account...	Only	 in	 the	Soviet	Union	do	women	have	 their	 own	bank	 accounts,
their	own	salaries,	their	own	way	of	living.	Only	in	the	Soviet	Union	are	women
free	 to	move.	 They	 have	 their	 own	 clubs,	 they	 have	 their	 own	 societies,	 they
have	everything	they	want.
All	over	the	world	the	woman	is	immobile.	She	is	completely	crushed,	and	her
birthright	to	freedom	of	movement	has	been	taken	from	her.	She	can	go	only	to
the	church	--	that's	why	in	churches	and	temples	you	will	find	only	women.
Once	I	was	addressing	a	meeting	on	the	birthday	of	Krishna,	and	I	was	amazed:
there	 were	 only	 women!	 It	 was	 a	 huge	 temple	 devoted	 to	 Krishna,	 and	 the
speaker	 of	 the	 assembly	 in	 that	 state	 where	 the	 meeting	 was	 held	 was	 the
inaugurator	of	the	meeting.
And	that's	why	I	say	these	politicians	are	retarded....	He	was	the	speaker	and	the
chancellor	 of	 the	 university.	 And	 he	 was	 inaugurating	 the	 meeting,	 not	 even
seeing	 that	 these	women	were	sitting	keeping	 their	backs	 towards	him	because
they	were	gossiping	with	each	other	and	looking	at	each	other's	clothes	and	each
other's	 ornaments.	Who	 cares	 about	 Krishna?	 They	 have	 only	 this	 possibility,
only	this	chance	to	meet	with	other	women.
There	must	have	been	at	least	twenty	thousand	people,	maybe	one	thousand	men
and	nineteen	thousand	women.	And	they	were	grouped	in	separate	small	groups,
because	 you	 cannot	 talk	with	 nineteen	 thousand	women,	 so	 four	women,	 five
women	were	making	a	group.	The	whole	meeting	was	divided	into	small	groups,
and	great	gossip,	and	so	much	noise!
And	that	 idiot	speaker...	his	name	was	Pandit	Kunjilal	Dube.	Kunji	means	key,
but	it	can	also	be	kunj.	Kunj	means	a	beautiful	grove	of	flowering	trees.	So	the
name	was	given	by	his	parents	because	Krishna	used	to	play	his	flute	by	the	side
of	the	Jamuna	River	in	a	beautiful	kunj,	in	a	beautiful	grove	of	mango	trees.	So
he	was	named	after	Kunjbihari,	which	is	another	name	for	Krishna.	His	parents
must	have	given	him	the	namèKunjilal'
thinking	that	kunj	is	a	sacred	word	for	the	worshippers	of	Krishna.
But	in	Hindi	kunji	also	means	key	--	and	chabi	means	key.	But	with	kunji	there
is	a	difficulty,	it	can	also	mean	kunj.	So	the	whole	university	where	he	was	the
chancellor	called	him	Pandit	Chabilal	Dube,	because	chabi	exactly	means	kunji,
exactly	means
"key."	No	problem	about	chabi,	there	is	only	one	meaning	to	it.
...	 So	Pandit	Chabilal	Dube	was	 inaugurating	 the	meeting,	 and	 I	 pulled	on	his
shirt	and	I	told	him,	"To	whom	are	you	talking?	Nobody	is	listening!	Women	are
sitting,	keeping	their	backs	to	you	--	what	kind	of	retarded	mind	have	you	got?
Perhaps	the	students	are	right	when	they	call	you	Pandit	Chabilal	Dube.	You	are
just	retarded!"
And	he	was	very	angry	with	me,	because	I	was	in	his	university	--	a	professor	in
his	own	university...!	But	he	knew	me,	and	that	if	he	makes	any	fuss,	I	will	take
him	 to	 task	 and	 I	 won't	 care	 about	 any	 professorship.	 I	 used	 to	 carry	 my
resignation	always	in	my	pocket.	And	I	used	to	show	people	that,	"Only	the	date
has	 to	be	 signed.	Any	moment	you	want	my	 resignation	 it	 is	here.	 I	keep	 it	 --
typed	--	in	my	pocket.	Who	knows	at	what	time...?"
I	refused	to	speak.	The	organizers	were	very	much	disturbed.	They	said,	"What
to	 do	 with	 these	 women?"	 They	 were	 shouting	 on	 the	mike	 again	 and	 again,
"Stop	gossiping!
Turn	 towards	 the	 speaker!"	 Nobody	 was	 interested.	 Everybody	 knows	 about
Krishna,	what	are	you	going	to	say	about	Krishna?
And	 I	 simply	 refused	 to	 speak.	 I	 said,	 "I	 am	not	 an	 idiot.	And	 this	 is	my	 last
time.	I	will	never	again	accept	any	invitation	by	any	organized	religion.	Anyway
you	 are	 fortunate	 that	 I	 am	 not	 speaking,	 because	 I	 was	 going	 to	 condemn
Krishna	as	much	as	possible!	So	these	women	have	saved	you.	I	am	going."	And
I	told	Pandit	Chabilal,	"You	come	with	me.	Why	are	you	sitting	here?	You	have
inaugurated,	just	be	finished!	Come	with	me."
I	had	to	call	him	out	because	he	had	the	car.	And	out	of	fear	he	started	calling	me
"Panditji."	I	said,	"Never	use	that	dirty	word	for	me.	You	are	Pandit	Chabilal,	I
am	not.	I	am	not	a	pandit!"	--	Pandit	means	rabbi,	bishop,	priest.	"You	think	it	is
honorable	--	I	think	it	is	a	four-letter	word.	You	just	drop	it.	Don't	ever	use	that
word	for	me,	otherwise	I	will	hit	you"	--	in	his	own	car!
He	said,	"Don't	say	it	so	loudly,	the	chauffeur	is	there."
I	 said,	 "I	 don't	 care!	 He	 knows	 absolutely	 about	 you,	 who	 you	 are."	 And	 the
chauffeur	 started	 laughing.	 It	 was	 a	 limousine,	 so	 he	 immediately	 closed	 the
window;	he	said,	"You	are	a	dangerous	man	--	in	my	own	car...?"
I	said,	"This	car	belongs	to	the	state,	it	is	not	your	own	car.	It	belongs	to	me	as
much	as	it	belongs	to	you."
He	said,	"What?"
I	said,	"Yes!	It	is	owned	by	the	state,	and	I	am	as	much	a	citizen	of	this	state	as
you	are.
And	you	are	a	public	servant	--	I	am	the	public."
He	started	looking	out	the	window	just	to	avoid	me.	But	I	said,	"I	will	continue	-
-	you	have	to	listen.	Why	have	you	taken	me	in	your	car?"
He	said,	"Strange.	You	called	me	out!"
I	 said,	 "I	 had	 to	 call	 you,	 because	 I	 have	 not	 brought	my	 car.	 The	 organizers
brought	me	in	their	car;	now	that	I	have	told	them	I	am	going	to	speak	against
Krishna,	they	are	not	going	to	give	me	their	car.	I	needed	a	car,	I	don't	need	you.
You	can	get	out	if	you	want!
And	your	chauffeur	is	in	my	favor:	you	saw	how	he	laughed."
He	said,	"You	don't	understand	that	I	am	also	the	chancellor	of	the	university."
I	 said,	 "I	don't	 care	about	chancellors	and	vice-chancellors."	 I	 showed	him	 the
card	that	was	my	resignation.
He	said,	"Why	are	you	showing	me	this	card?"
I	said,	"I	have	just	to	put	the	date,	and	finished!	You	are	no	more	my	chancellor
and	 I	can	 throw	you	out	of	 the	car.	 I	 am	 just	being	courteous	 to	your	old	age,
because	the	danger	is	you	may	be	finished	if	I	throw	you	out.	So	keep	quiet,	and
don't	harass	me."
He	said,	"Strange!?	You	are	harassing	me	--	in	my	own	car!"
And	it	used	to	happen	with	that	Pandit	Chabilal	Dube	in	many	places,	because
he	was	a	speaker	of	the	state	and	a	great	scholar	of	Hinduism,	and	the	chancellor
of	the	university.
Just	by	virtue	of	holding	the	office,	every	speaker	of	the	parliament	becomes	the
chancellor	of	that	particular	university	where	I	was	a	professor.
So	I	told	him,	"You	are	not	really	even	worthy	to	be	a	lecturer	in	the	university.
You	are	only	B.A.,	Ll.B.	--	that	too,	third	class."
He	said,	"Who	told	you?"
I	said,	"I	have	my	sources	--	your	wife.	She	showed	me	your	certificates	also.	I
have	taken	photocopies	of	them,	and	if	you	make	any	trouble	for	me	I	am	going
to	publish	all	those	certificates	in	the	newspapers.	A	third-class	B.A.,	Ll.B.	who
is	not	even	a	postgraduate	is	the	chancellor	of	the	university!"
He	 said,	 "It	 is	 better	 not	 to	 fight.	 I	 am	 sorry	 that	 I	 disturbed	 you,	 but	 don't
publish	anything."	I	had	no	copies	of	the	certificates	or	anything,	but	I	knew	he
was	a	third-class	Ll.B.	and	had	become	a	politician	because	he	could	not	succeed
in	the	court.
The	same	was	the	situation	of	Mahatma	Gandhi.	He	became	a	politician	because
the	 first	 time	 he	 entered	 court...	 The	 whole	 night	 he	 had	 been	 preparing	 and
preparing	his	first	appearance	in	the	Bombay	High	Court.	And	he	was	a	barrister
from	England.	As	he	entered	the	court,	his	legs	started	trembling,	and	he	could
speak	only	two	words	--
"Your	 Honor"	 --	 and	 he	 flopped	 down	 perspiring	 and	 had	 to	 be	 carried	 out.
That's	why	he	became	a	politician!
But	nobody	bothers	about	the	realities	of	life.	These	failures	become	politicians
because	 politics	 needs	 no	 qualifications,	 has	 no	 standards.	 This	 is	 the	 only
profession	which	any	idiot	can	enter.
Communism,	to	me,	is	a	very	significant	step	towards	the	ultimate	buddhahood.
Question	2
The	second	question:
APPARENTLY	 WHEN	 RONALD	 REAGAN	 OR	 GEORGE	 BUSH	 GO	 TO
THE
CHURCH	TO	KNEEL	AND	PRAY	TO	THEIR	GOD,	AT	THEIR	SIDE	IS	AN
AIDE
WHO	CARRIES	THE	BRIEFCASE	WITH	THE	CODES	THAT	ALLOW	THE
PRESIDENT	TO	SIGNAL	AN	IMMEDIATE	LAUNCH	OF	THEIR	NUCLEAR
ARSENAL,	 THEREBY	 EFFECTIVELY	 TERMINATING	 ALL	 LIFE	 ON
EARTH.
BUT	STILL	STALIN	IS	THE	BAD	GUY.	IS	THERE	ANY	LIMIT	TO	OUR
HYPOCRISY?
Even	 in	 the	 church	 --	 this	 is	 a	 fact!	When	 Ronald	 Reagan	 used	 to	 go	 to	 the
church	--
and	 now	 George	 Bush,	 because	 the	 White	 House	 has	 its	 own	 church,	 the
presidential	 church	 --	 one	 aide	 would	 carry	 a	 briefcase.	 And	 people	 became
concerned:	 what	 is	 in	 the	 briefcase?	Why	 every	 day	 when	 Ronald	 Reagan	 is
kneeling	 down	 and	 praying	 to	 God,	 does	 one	 man	 stand	 by	 his	 side	 with	 a
briefcase?
Finally	it	was	discovered	that	the	briefcase	is	not	an	ordinary	briefcase,	it	has	all
the	buttons	inside	for	nuclear	weapons	to	be	launched,	immediately	--	from	the
church!	If	there	is	not	time	enough	to	reach	to	the	White	House	where	they	have
all	the	buttons	for	the	nuclear	weapons...	This	was	a	portable	death	to	the	whole
earth.
But	 it	 is	 still	 carried;	 now	 it	 is	George	Bush	who	 is	 kneeling.	And	 one	 never
thinks	about	what	kind	of	hypocrisy...	You	are	praying	to	God,	you	are	kneeling
down,	and	you	are	keeping	by	your	side	death	for	the	whole	planet.
There	is	certainly	no	limit	to	our	hypocrisy.	We	have	succeeded	only	in	creating
a	hypocrite	world.	It	is	not	civilized,	it	is	not	cultured.
Question	3
The	third	question:
IN	 THE	 USA,	 AWASH	 WITH	 DRUGS,	 VIOLENCE,	 MENTAL	 ILLNESS,
AND
GENERAL	 ALIENATION,	 IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 MARX'S	 MUCH-AWAITED
CRISIS	OF
CAPITALISM	HAS	COME.	BUT	IT	IS	A	SPIRITUAL	RATHER	THAN	AN
ECONOMIC	CRISIS.	WOULD	YOU	PLEASE	COMMENT?
This	 is	 the	USA:	 full	 of	 drugs,	 and	 full	 of	 nuclear	weapons,	mental	 illnesses,
violence	--
violence	 without	 purpose.	 I	 have	 told	 you	 that	 just	 recently	 six	 people	 were
killed	in	L.A.
because	the	cars	were	delayed,	some	accident	somewhere	miles	away	must	have
happened.	Now	people	get	 angry,	 they	want	 to	 reach	 their	 home	as	quickly	 as
possible.	 In	L.A.	or	 in	New	York,	 in	San	Francisco,	you	can	 reach	your	home
from	the	office	by	walking	more	quickly	than	by	driving.
This	was	 discovered	when	 once	 it	 happened	 that	 for	 three	 days	 the	 electricity
went	out	in	almost	half	the	northern	part	of	America.	All	the	lights	disappeared;
elevators	could	not	work,	signals	on	the	road	stopped	working.	So	the	traffic	had
to	stop;	otherwise	there	would	have	been	tremendous	clashes.	When	there	are	no
signals	giving	a	red	or	green	light	to	stop	or	to	go...	so	all	 the	traffic	had	to	be
stopped,	 and	 people	 had	 to	 walk.	 Then	 they	 discovered	 that	 by	 walking	 they
reached	to	the	office	more	quickly,	they	reached	their	homes	more	quickly!
Now	cars	in	America	are	moving	with	less	speed	than	bullock	carts	in	India!	For
hours	 the	 traffic	 is	 jammed,	and	it	certainly	creates	anger.	You	are	hungry,	you
want	to	go	home	to	eat	something,	to	drink	something,	and	here	you	are	sitting
in	the	car	just	boiling,	honking	your	horn.	But	that	is	useless	because	everybody
is	honking	his	horn	for	miles.	So	you	only	hear	horns,	honking	and	honking.
Then	a	few	people	became	so	furious	 that	 they	forgot	completely	 that	 the	man
ahead	is	in	the	same	trouble.	He	is	not	preventing	you	--	nobody	knows	who	is
preventing;	 nobody	 knows	 what	 has	 happened	 far	 away.	 Maybe	 a	 truck	 has
upturned,	maybe	a	crash	of	six	cars,	and	unless	that	is	removed....
Until	 the	 police	 come,	 it	 cannot	 be	 removed,	 because	 the	 police	 have	 to	 take
care.	 Until	 the	 insurance	 agent	 comes	 it	 cannot	 be	 removed,	 because	 the
insurance	agency	has	to	pay	the	price	of	the	car.	If	a	man	has	died,	there	is	even
more	delay.	One	never	knows	what	is	happening.
But	people	--	six	people,	not	one;	just	in	one	day!	--	went	so	mad	that	they	took
out	their	guns	and	shot	the	people	just	ahead,	who	were	not	at	all	responsible.
But	 in	 anger,	 in	 rage,	 you	 become	 absolutely	 blind.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 that	 love	 is
blind	--
hate	 is	 much	 blinder,	 but	 nobody	 has	 said	 it.	 "Love	 is	 blind"	 --	 nobody	 says
about	hate,	how	blind	hate	can	be.
Now	this	anger	is	absolute	madness	--	shooting	the	poor	fellow	ahead,	who	is	in
the	 same	 jam	 as	 you	 are.	 And	 then	 immediately	 the	 sale	 of	 machine	 guns,
automatic	 rifles	went	up.	Every	person	who	had	 a	 car	purchased	 an	 automatic
gun,	because	it	 is	dangerous	--	at	least	if	somebody	kills	you,	you	can	also	kill
somebody.	It	does	not	matter	who	is	killed,	but	somebody	is	killed.	At	least	you
can	show	the	gun.	And	people	hang	their	guns	above	their	heads	 in	 the	car,	so
everybody	can	know:	"Beware!	If	you	honk	too	much	behind	me	or	ahead	of	me,
I	am	going	to	shoot!"
America	is	perhaps	the	only	country	where	there	is	no	special	license	needed	for
keeping	 such	 dangerous	 arms,	 automatic	 guns.	 One	 gun	 can	 kill	 one	 hundred
sixty	people	without	 reloading	 the	bullets,	and	you	can	purchase	one	from	any
dealer.	The	dealer	needs	 the	 license	 to	 sell,	 but	 the	people	who	purchase	don't
need	any	license.
And	 in	 mental	 illness,	 America	 is	 far	 ahead	 of	 any	 other	 country.	 So	 many
psychoanalysts,	 so	 many	 different	 schools	 of	 psychoanalysis,	 psychiatry,
psychology,	psychosynthesis,	analytical	psychology,	and	many	kinds	of	therapies
are	available	 to	people.	Millions	of	people	are	 suffering	 from	mental	 sickness.
Millions	 of	 people	 are	 suffering	 from	 too	much	 eating.	Millions	 of	 people	 are
suffering	because	they	don't	have	any	food,	any	clothes.
This	decadent	America,	this	absolutely	sick	country	--	and	Gorbachev	wants	to
imitate	 America!	 He	 wants	 to	 become	 another	 President	 Ronald	 Reagan	 or
George	Bush,	 and	 he	wants	 his	 beautiful	 Soviet	 land	 to	 be	 turned	 into	 a	 sick,
decadent,	rotten	America.
Yesterday	I	was	 telling	you	 that	Ronald	Reagan	has	also	been	nominated	for	a
Nobel	 peace	 prize.	 I	 thought	 and	 thought:	 What	 peace	 has	 he	 created	 in	 the
world?	Then	I	remembered	that	he	has	done	something	peaceful,	and	he	needs	a
Nobel	Prize	for	it.
Many	 of	 you	 must	 remember	 Rajneeshpuram,	 our	 commune	 in	 Oregon,	 in
America.	 It	 was	 a	 desert,	 one	 hundred	 twenty-six	 square	 miles	 of	 just	 pure
desert.	It	had	been	for	sale	for	forty	years	and	nobody	purchased	it	--	what	will
you	 do	with	 a	 desert?	We	 purchased	 it,	 and	we	 transformed	 the	 desert	 into	 a
beautiful	 oasis.	 Five	 thousand	 sannyasins	 were	 living	 there,	 working	 there,
dancing,	singing,	meditating.	It	was	one	of	the	most	joyous	places	in	the	whole
world	 --	 so	much	 dancing,	 so	much	 joy,	 so	much	 love,	 such	 friendliness.	 No
family	--	the	whole	commune	was	one.
So	 I	 remembered:	Ronald	Reagan	has	destroyed	Rajneeshpuram	violently,	 and
he	 has	 restored	 the	 peace	 of	 the	 desert.	 That	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 reason	 for	 his
nomination	 for	 the	Nobel	 peace	 prize.	Now	 it	 is	 peaceful	 again:	 no	 dance,	 no
singing....
The	day	I	arrived	there	was	only	one	house	which	they	had	made	for	me.	There
was	not	a	single	bird.	I	was	amazed	to	see,	it	looked	like	a	nightmare!	All	around
just	bare	mountains	with	no	trees,	with	no	birds.	In	the	morning	you	could	not
hear	 a	 cuckoo,	 you	 could	 not	 hear	 any	 chirping	 and	 tweeting	 of	 all	 kinds	 of
birds.	Neither	 in	 the	evening	could	you	see	 thousands	of	birds	coming	back	 to
their	trees.	It	was	a	dead	desert!
We	cultivated	it,	we	made	it	green.	We	made	small	artificial	rivers,	we	made	a
big	dam.
Even	 if	 for	 five	 years	 there	 had	 been	 no	 rain,	 we	 had	 enough	 water	 for	 five
thousand	people.	And	at	the	time	of	festivals	there	were	twenty	thousand	people,
and	we	had	 beautiful	 tents	 for	 fifteen	 thousand	 people.	We	had	 created	 a	 new
kind	 of	 tent.	 And	 rather	 than	 giving	 us	 a	 reward	 for	 the	 new	 tent,	 we	 were
punished!	A	court	case	was	put	against	us	saying	that	these	people	have	created,
without	permission,	a	permanent	structure.	A	tent	is	not	a	permanent	structure!
We	had	made	a	 tent	which	can	work	all	 the	year	 round	--	 in	 rains,	 in	summer,
when	 the	 snow	 is	 falling	 in	winter,	when	 it	 is	 too	 cold.	 It	 could	 be	 heated,	 it
could	be	air-conditioned;	there	was	no	question	of	any	rains	or	any	snow	getting
inside	it.	It	was	a	totally	new	phenomenon.	All	those	who	saw	it	were	immensely
impressed,	 that	we	 had	made	 something	which	 could	 have	 a	world	market.	 In
Saudi	Arabia,	or	in	deserts	where	people	live	in	tents,	but	in	the	hot	sun	the	tent
is	just	boiling...	an	air-conditioned	tent	you	have	never	heard	of!	And	in	snow,	in
winter,	the	tent	can	be	heated.	It	was	absolutely	safe	all	the	year	round.
And	 a	 court	 case	 was	 filed	 against	 us	 saying	 that	 we	 had	 made	 a	 permanent
structure.	I	told	my	attorneys,	"Just	take	a	tent	in	a	truck,	take	it	inside	the	court"
--	because	it	takes	only	ten	minutes	to	put	it	up,	and	ten	minutes	to	take	it	down.
"A	 building	 that	 can	 be	 put	 up	 in	 ten	minutes	 and	 taken	 down	 in	 ten	minutes
cannot	be	called	permanent.	If	the	judge	has	any	eyes	to	see,	there	is	no	need	for
any	argument.	It	is	not	a	question	of	law,	it	is	a	question	of	whether	the	judge	has
eyes	or	is	blind."
Can	you	put	the	White	House	together	in	ten	minutes	and	then	within	another	ten
minutes	take	it	down?
They	called	it	a	"permanent	structure."	A	permanent	structure	needs	a	license	or
permission	 from	 the	 government.	 We	 never	 thought	 that	 a	 tent	 could	 be	 a
"permanent	structure."
With	 violence,	with	 lawlessness	 against	 their	 own	 constitution,	 they	 destroyed
the	 commune.	 That	 I	 remembered	 yesterday,	 that	 perhaps	 because	 he	 has
restored	the	peace	of	that	dead	desert,	Ronald	Reagan	deserves	the	Nobel	Prize.	I
don't	know	of	any	other	peace	that	he	has	created.
Gorbachev	 is	 trying	 to	bring	 this	decadent	 and	mentally	 sick	America	 into	 the
Soviet	 Union	 where	 there	 is	 no	 psychoanalysis,	 no	 psychiatry.	 People	 are	 as
mentally	 healthy	 as	 they	 have	 ever	 been	 anywhere,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that
their	food	is	simple,	nourishing	but	not	fattening;	their	work	is	simple,	their	life
has	 no	 complications.	 The	 wife	 earns,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 problem	 of	 continuous
fighting	that	she	wants	a	fur	coat,	she	wants	a	new	car,	or	she	wants	this	and	she
wants	 that	 and	 you	 cannot	 afford	 it,	 you	 are	 going	 bankrupt,	 so	 rather	 than
fulfilling	her	wishes	you	jump	from	a	one	hundred-story	building.	The	business
is	finished,	the	wife	is	torturing	you,	what	else	to	do?
So	many	people	 jump	out	of	 their	windows.	Do	you	 think	all	 these	people	are
taking	LSD?	--	because	LSD	is	the	only	drug	that	gives	the	idea	that	you	can	fly.
So	LSD	has	to	be	taken	only	under	guidance	and	all	doors	and	windows	have	to
be	closed,	because	it	creates	the	absolute	certainty	in	the	mind	that	you	can	fly:
you	just	jump	out	of	the	window	and	open	your	wings.
America	has	been	discovered	many	times,	and	always	has	been	hushed	back	up.
Now	 that	 moment	 has	 come	 again.	 America	 has	 to	 be	 hushed	 up	 again	 and
forgotten.	Columbus	has	not	done	a	great	service	to	humanity.	He	is	one	of	the
enemies.
Seven	 hundred	 years	 ago,	 America	 was	 known	 but	 then	 hushed	 up.	 Five
thousand	years	ago	America	was	known	but	was	hushed	up,	because	whenever...
it	seems	the	very	land	is	poisonous.	It	drives	people	crazy.
So	 it	 is	 not	 for	 the	 first	 time	 that	we	will	 have	 to	 hush	 it.	 It	 has	 been	 hushed
many	times,	discovered	again,	hushed	again.	Now	if	you	don't	hush	it	again,	it	is
going	to	destroy	the	whole	world.
And	this	poor	fellow	Comrade	Gorbachev,	who	is	no	more	a	comrade,	wants	the
Soviet	Union	to	become	America.	He	has	forgotten	that	even	if	you	become	like
America	you	will	be	second-rate.	The	Soviet	Union	had	a	dignity	of	its	own,	far
more	healthy	mentally,	far	more	healthy	physically.
It	was	the	Soviet	Union	who	stopped	the	second	world	war.	If	Adolf	Hitler	had
not	 gone	more	 insane...	 because	 for	 years	 he	 had	 success,	 continuous	 success,
and	 no	 western	 power	 was	 able	 to	 prevent	 him.	 Great	 nations	 like	 France
surrendered	in	twenty-four	hours.	Naturally,	he	had	a	pact	with	Stalin	before	he
started	 the	 war,	 that	 "We	 will	 remain	 friends.	 Neither	 you	 have	 to	 attack
Germany,	nor	will	we	attack	you."	Because	he	knew	perfectly	well	 that	 in	 the
first	world	war	it	was	because	of	Russia's	snows	that	Germany	was	defeated	--
not	by	Russia's	armies;	just	the	snow	is	enough	to	destroy	any	enemy.
When	Russian	snow	starts	falling,	you	cannot	move	an	inch.	All	your	tanks,	all
your	trucks,	all	your	food	supply	is	blocked.	The	snow	is	heavy,	and	it	goes	on
falling	 for	 six	months	 continuously.	Your	 soldiers	 are	 covered,	 your	 tanks	 are
covered;	 even	 helicopters	 cannot	 find	where	 to	 drop	 the	 food.	 Everything	 has
disappeared	under	a	vast	cover	of	white	snow.
In	 the	 first	world	war	 it	was	not	 the	czar's	 soldiers,	because	 they	had	 returned
home,	but	snow	started	falling	and	Germany	got	defeated.	Hitler	was	aware	of	it.
He	first	made	a	pact	and	treaty	with	Stalin,	that	"You	will	not	attack	us,	and	we
will	not	attack	you."
Hitler	went	on	winning	for	years	continuously,	all	over	Europe,	and	Japan	was
winning	 continuously	 for	 years	 --	 even	 Calcutta	 was	 ordered	 to	 be	 evacuated
because	Japanese	armies	had	reached	Rangoon,	and	the	second	attack	was	to	be
on	Calcutta.	The	third	attack	was	to	be	on	Jabalpur	--	where	I	used	to	teach,	but
not	at	the	time	of	the	second	world	war	--	because	Jabalpur	was	the	very	center
of	 India	 and	 because	 of	 its	 position	 the	 British	 government	 had	 its	 biggest
factory	for	armaments	there.	So	after	Calcutta,	the	next	target	was	Jabalpur.	Even
Jabalpur	 was	 getting	 ready	 to	 be	 evacuated.	 Once	 they	 attacked	 Calcutta,
Jabalpur	would	have	to	be	evacuated.
Such	tremendous	success	got	into	the	head	of	that	madman	Adolf	Hitler,	and	he
started	attacking	the	Soviet	Union.	He	forgot	the	treaty,	he	forgot	that	the	Soviet
Union	had	kept	its	word	and	had	not	interfered	at	all.	And	that	was	the	point	of
his	defeat.	 It	was	Stalin	who	was	 responsible	 for	 saving	 the	world	 from	Adolf
Hitler	and	Hirohito	and	Benito	Mussolini.
Just	 not	 to	 give	 the	 whole	 glory	 to	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 America	 immediately
rushed	 to	help	Europe.	Up	 to	now,	America	had	been	keeping	aloof,	but	when
they	 saw	 that	 the	 Soviet	 Union	was	 going	 to	 have	 the	whole	 glory	 of	 saving
Europe	 and	 the	 whole	 world,	 they	 immediately	 rushed	 in	 on	 both	 fronts.
MacArthur	was	sent	with	great	armies	to	fight	Japan,	and	Eisenhower	was	sent
to	Europe.	If	Adolf	Hitler	was	going	to	be	finished,	the	glory	should	be	shared
by	the	Soviet	Union	and	America	both,	not	only	the	Soviet	Union.
But	it	was,	in	fact,	only	the	Soviet	Union	who	ended	the	second	world	war	and
the	desire	of	fascism	to	rule	over	the	whole	world.
Question	4
The	fourth	question:
HEARING	 YOU	 TALK,	 I	 HAVE	 THE	 FEELING	 THAT	 CHRISTIAN
FASCISM
WON'T	 REST	 UNTIL	 IT	 HAS	 DESTROYED	 EVERY	 TRACE	 OF
COMMUNISM.	 I	 FEEL	 CHRISTIANS'	 VENGEANCE	 AGAINST
COMMUNISM	FOR	POWERFULLY
CHALLENGING	THEIR	WORD	OF	GOD.
That's	 true.	 The	 whole	 of	 Christianity	 is	 against	 communism	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	the	communists	have	thrown	the	Bible	and	thrown	God	and	thrown
all	the	Christian	missionaries	and	Christian	priests	out	of	the	Soviet	land.
The	whole	 of	Christianity	 is	 sitting	 on	 a	 volcano.	And	America	 is	 basically	 a
fundamentalist,	fascist	Christian	country.	It	is	so	fascist	in	its	ideologies	that	all
Charles	Darwin's	books,	Ronald	Reagan	wanted	to	burn.	His	teachings	should	be
prevented	 in	 every	 school,	 college,	 university,	 research	 institute,	 and	 all	 his
books	in	all	the	libraries,	all	the	colleges,	schools,	universities,	should	be	burned.
Why?	Because	his	idea	of	evolution	goes	against	the	Christian	idea	of	creation.
This	is	real	fascism.
Certainly	Christianity	will	take	every	chance	to	destroy	communism,	but	it	is	not
going	 to	 succeed.	 Seventy	 years	 has	 made	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 strong	 enough.
Gorbachev	will	be	thrown	out;	Russia	is	not	going	on	the	way	of	capitalism	and
Christianity.	 The	 time	 has	 come	 when	 the	 Soviet	 Union	 should	 say	 to
Gorbachev,	"Good-bye	comrade,"	and	expel	him	from	the	Soviet	Union.	He	can
have	the	Nobel	Prize	and	go	to	America	and	become	a	Yankee.
The	sutra:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
WHEN	 UNGAN	 HIMSELF	 BECAME	 A	 MASTER,	 HE	 ONCE	 SAID	 --
WHEN
ADDRESSING	AN	ASSEMBLY	OF	MONKS	--	"HERE	IS	A	CHILD	FROM	A
RESPECTABLE	 FAMILY:	 WHATEVER	 YOU	 ASK,	 THERE	 IS	 NOTHING
HE
CAN'T	ANSWER."
You	have	to	understand	a	few	symbols.	Ungan	himself	became	a	master,	became
an	enlightened	buddha.	Addressing	 an	 assembly	of	monks,	 he	 said,	 "Here	 is	 a
child..."
Unless	 you	 become	 a	 child	 again,	 you	 cannot	 be	 a	 buddha.	That	 innocence	 is
needed,	and	I	am	destroying	all	your	conceptions	in	every	possible	way,	just	to
clean	your	mind	and	bring	it	closer	to	that	of	a	child	who	knows	nothing.
"HERE	IS	A	CHILD	FROM	A	RESPECTABLE	FAMILY."
He	is	not	talking	about	ordinary	families.	In	Zen	the	"family"	means	the	whole
lineage	 of	 Zen	masters.	 That	 is	 called	 the	 "dhamma	 family,"	 from	Buddha	 to
Mahakashyapa,	 to	 Bodhidharma,	 to	 Rinzai	 --	 this	 is	 the	 family.	 He	 is	 not
referring	to	his	ordinary	family.
Whenever	you	come	across	the	word	`family'	in	a	Zen	anecdote,	remember:	they
are	referring	to	their	masters,	who	have	given	them	their	second	birth.	The	first
birth	is	physical,	which	parents	give	to	you;	the	second	birth	is	spiritual,	which
only	one	who	is	enlightened	can	give	you.	It	comes	from	master	to	disciple.
This	 is	 the	 family;	 it	 goes	 back	 twenty-five	 centuries	 to	 Gautam	 Buddha.	 So
when	Ungan	said,	"HERE	IS	A	CHILD	FROM	A	RESPECTABLE	FAMILY,"	he
is	 saying,	 "Here	 is	 another	 buddha	 again,	 from	 the	 lineage	 of	 thousands	 of
buddhas.	That	 is	my	family,	 I	am	coming	out	of	 it.	My	master	has	given	me	a
new	birth.
"WHATEVER	YOU	ASK,	THERE	IS	NOTHING	HE	CAN'T	ANSWER."
This	child,	this	innocent	clarity,	can	answer	any	question.	Whatever	you	want	to
ask,	you	can	ask	and	you	will	receive	the	answer.
ONE	 OF	 HIS	 DISCIPLES,	 TOZAN	 --	 who	 finally	 became	 an	 enlightened
master	--
STEPPED	 FORWARD	AND	ASKED,	 "HOW	MANY	BOOKS	ARE	 THERE
IN	HIS
HOUSE?"
You	are	talking	about	the	child,	and	he	is	asking,	"How	many	books	are	in	the
house	of	the	child?"	Because	at	that	moment	he	was	only	a	scholar	and	he	knew
only	that	unless	you	have	scriptures,	you	cannot	answer	all	the	questions.	From
where	will	you	get	the	information?	He	had	no	idea	that	there	is	another	source,
transformation,	 from	where	answers	simply	arise	 --	not	out	of	 information,	but
out	of	an	inner	revolution.	At	this	moment	he	was	only	a	scholar,	so	of	course	he
asked,	"How	many	books	are	in	that	child's	house?"
UNGAN	 REPLIED,	 "HE	 DOES	 NOT	 HAVE	 ANY	 BOOKS,	 NOT	 EVEN	 A
SINGLE
LETTER."
He	 is	 saying	 that	 for	 a	man	who	 is	 awakened	 there	 is	not	 even	a	 single	 letter,
nothing	 to	 say	 about	 a	 thought,	 nothing	 to	 say	 about	 scriptures.	 That	 child	 is
absolutely	innocent.
There	is	no	knowledge,	no	information;	there	is	only	a	clarity.
Out	of	that	clarity	a	response	comes.	That	response	is	original	and	authentic,	to
any	question.
TOZAN	THEN	ASKED,	"HOW	COULD	HE	BE	SO	WELL	INFORMED?"
If	the	child	you	are	talking	about	has	no	books,	not	even	a	letter,	then	how	he	can
be	so	well	informed	that,	as	you	are	saying,	he	can	answer	all	your	questions?
This	 is	 the	way	of	 the	 scholar.	He	 cannot	 go	 beyond	 the	words,	 he	 cannot	 go
beyond	the	scripture.	He	cannot	go	beyond	information.
Information	comes	from	outside	and	transformation	comes	from	inside.	He	is	not
aware	that	there	is	another	way	also.	Not	that	the	childlike	consciousness	--	that
purity,	that	innocence	of	a	buddha	--	has	all	 the	answers	in	it.	No,	nothing	--	it
has	no	answers,	but	as	your	question	arises	that	purity	responds.	It	is	a	mirror.	It
shows	your	face;	it	reflects.
Out	of	nothingness,	out	of	silence,	arises	a	right	answer.
TOZAN	ASKED,	"HOW	COULD	HE	BE	SO	WELL	INFORMED?"
Ungan's	response	is	very	important.	He	says,
"HE	SELDOM	SLEEPS	DAY	OR	NIGHT."
His	awareness	is	so	complete	that	there	is	no	trace	of	sleep	left	in	him.	No	trace
of	any	unconsciousness,	no	 trace	of	any	darkness	 --	everything	has	become	so
luminous	and	light....
It	 is	 from	 this	 alertness,	 day	 and	 night	 --	 awareness,	 day	 and	 night	 --	 that	 his
answers	come.
Anando	comes	to	wake	me	up	at	3:30	in	 the	afternoon.	It	 is	a	difficult	 task,	 to
wake	 somebody	who	 is	 awake.	 So	 poor	Anando,	 as	 she	 opens	 the	 door	 I	 say,
"Hello,	Anando."
She	 has	 never	 had	 a	 chance	 to	 wake	 me	 up	 to	 now.	 Just	 hiding	 behind	 my
blanket,	I	say,
"Hello,	Anando!"
Just	the	other	day	she	was	asking,	"It	is	strange	--	I	open	the	door	so	silently	and
you	are	hiding	in	your	blanket	and	you	immediately	respond."
Amrito	 knows	 that	 it	 is	 absolutely	 impossible	 for	me	 to	 sleep.	 He	 tries	 every
possible	medicine	and	he	brings	all	kinds	of	compact	disks	which	create	sleep,
and	 the	whole	night	 I	 have	 to	 listen!	But	 I	 am	not	 at	 all	 tired.	 In	 the	morning
when	I	wake	up	from	my	whole	night	of	awakening,	I	have	lost	the	very	sense	of
time.
That's	why	 last	 night	 I	went	 on	 and	 on.	 I	would	 have	 gone	 on	 and	 on,	 just	 I
remembered	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh;	otherwise	there	was	no	question.	Only	in
the	car,	Anando	told	me,	"You	know	it	is	11:05!"
I	 said,	 "My	God,	 that	 is	 a	 record!	 If	 I	 had	 not	 remembered	 Sardar	Gurudayal
Singh,	 last	 night	 was	 going	 to	 be	 a	 marathon	 discourse.	 Only	 early	 in	 the
morning	when	 sun	was	 rising,	 I	would	 have	 allowed	 you	 to	 go	 for	 breakfast!
Some	day	it	is	going	to	happen....
"I	WANT	TO	ASK	SOMETHING	OF	THE	CHILD,"	CONTINUED	TOZAN.
"IS	IT
POSSIBLE?"
"HE	could	ANSWER,	BUT	HE	WOULD	NOT,"	REPLIED	UNGAN.
Now	he	is	saying	something	very	important.	He	could	answer,	but	he	would	not
because	the	answer	will	not	be	as	authentic	as	his	experience.	The	answer	will	be
far	below	the	truth.	He	can	answer,	he	knows	the	truth,	but	he	would	not	answer
because	he	cannot	betray	the	truth.
So	every	buddha	 is	 talking	around	and	around,	hoping	 that	 somehow	you	will
look	at	the	center	at	some	point.	But	he	goes	on	round	and	round,	taking	you	in
circles,	pointing	always	to	the	center	but	never	saying	a	single	word	about	your
center.
You	have	to	experience	it.
You	are	the	answer.
So	Ungan	 replied,	 "HE	COULD	ANSWER,"	 because	 he	 knows	 it,	 "BUT	HE
WOULD
NOT,"	because	language	does	not	allow	it.
ON	 ANOTHER	OCCASION,	 UNGAN	ASKED	A	MONK,	 "WHERE	 HAVE
YOU
BEEN?"
THE	MONK	REPLIED,	"I	HAVE	BEEN	TALKING	ABOUT	THE	DHARMA
TO	A	ROCK."
UNGAN	ASKED,	"DID	THE	ROCK	NOD?"
...	Because	in	Zen	the	rocks	are	as	alive	as	you	are.	They	grow.	The	trees	are	as
sensitive	as	you	are	--	perhaps	more	sensitive.	You	can	talk	to	them.	So	Ungan
does	 not	 question	 the	 fellow	 --	 "Are	 you	 mad,	 talking	 to	 a	 rock?"	 --	 on	 the
contrary,	he	asks,	"DID	THE
ROCK	NOD?"
The	question	is	not	that	you	were	talking,	the	question	is	whether	the	rock	was
listening.
If	it	was	listening	it	would	have	nodded.
THE	MONK	HAD	NO	ANSWER	AND	UNGAN	COMMENTED,	"IT	NODS
BEFORE
YOU	TALK."
That's	what	makes	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh	special.	He	laughs	before	you	tell	the
joke.
Everybody	 laughs	 after	 the	 joke,	 that	 is	 very	 normal,	 but	 laughing	 before	 the
joke	shows	immense	trust	that	something	great	is	going	to	happen.
Ungan	said,	"IT	NODS	BEFORE	YOU	TALK.	If	you	are	really	in	tune	with	the
rock,	 it	nods	before	you	start	 talking.	And	you	have	not	even	received	 the	nod
after	 you	 stopped	 talking."	 Of	 course	 the	 man	 was	 completely	 embarrassed,
shocked:	what	is	this	man	saying,	that	the	rock	nods	before?
It	really	nods	before.
You	 have	 to	 be	 a	 master	 --	 then	 everything	 around	 you	 is	 always	 receptive,
always	ready	to	receive	something	from	you.	Even	rocks	are	not	rocks;	they	also
have	a	heart,	perhaps	of	a	different	kind.
The	 whole	 existence	 is	 alive.	 Nothing	 is	 without	 life.	 This	 is	 one	 of	 the
fundamentals	of	Zen,	that	the	whole	existence	is	alive.	That's	why	it	can	discard
the	 concept	 of	God.	There	 is	 no	need.	The	whole	 existence	 is	 alive,	 sensitive,
intelligent,	is	capable	of	growing	into	a	divine	experience	of	being	the	awakened
one.
Basho	wrote:
ALL	THE	CUCKOOS
DANCING
IN	THE	TREES.
The	cuckoo	is	the	sweetest	musician.	The	cuckoo	creates	the	sweetest	songs.	Its
body	 is	 ordinary;	 if	 you	 see	 the	 cuckoo,	 it	 looks	 just	 like	 a	 crow,	 not	 much
different,	but	it	has	a	tremendous	spirit.	When	it	sings	there	is	no	comparison	to
it.
Basho	must	have	opened	his	eyes,	sitting	in	a	mango	grove,	because	cuckoos	are
found	 more	 often	 in	 mango	 groves.	 They	 like	 the	 mangoes.	 The	 mango	 is
thought,	 particularly	 in	 the	 East,	 to	 be	 the	 king	 of	 all	 the	 fruits.	 It	 is!	 Its
sweetness	 is	 such	 that	wherever	 there	 are	mango	 trees,	 you	will	 find	 cuckoos
waiting	for	the	mangoes	to	become	ripe.	And	when	they	become	ripe	then	they
go	 really	 cuckoo!	 Dancing,	 singing,	 "The	 mangoes	 are	 ripe!"	 They	 love	 the
mangoes.	So	Basho	must	have	been	either	by	the	side	of	a	mango	grove	or	inside
it.
Buddha	 always	 loved,	 his	 whole	 life,	 to	 have	 his	 camps	 --	 because	 he	 was
continuously	moving	 --	 in	mango	groves.	Perhaps	 India	has	more	mango	 trees
than	 any	other	 country,	 and	 at	Buddha's	 time	 it	 had	 even	more	because	 it	was
thought	to	be	one	of	the	virtues	to	plant	mango	trees.	All	the	kings,	all	the	rich
people	 tried	 to	 create	 as	 many	 mango	 trees	 as	 possible;	 all	 roads	 were
surrounded	 for	 hundreds	 of	 miles	 by	 mango	 trees.	 And	 every	 village,	 every
town,	had	its	own	mango	grove	outside	the	town,	by	the	riverside	or	by	the	lake,
because	the	mango	grove	was	the	shelter	of	all	the	wandering	mystics.
The	trees	are	very	thick,	shadowy	trees,	and	when	there	are	thousands	of	mango
trees	 they	 give	 a	 great	 cool	 breeze	 even	 in	 the	 hottest	 summer.	 When	 the
mangoes	are	ripe,	cuckoos	come	running	from	all	over	because	the	mango	has	a
very	special	fragrance.
That	 fragrance	 brings	 the	 cuckoos	 from	 far	 away	 and	 as	 long	 as	 the	mangoes
last,	 they	 remain	 in	 the	 mango	 groves,	 singing	 and	 dancing.	 Their	 song	 is
certainly	the	sweetest	song	in	existence.
So	Basho	must	 have	 come	out	 of	 his	meditation,	 and	 suddenly	 he	 saw	 all	 the
cuckoos	dancing	in	the	trees.
Just	 visualize	 these	 haikus,	 always.	 See	 the	mango	 trees,	 see	 the	 hundreds	 of
cuckoos	dancing,	singing,	and	their	sweet	song	will	fill	your	very	heart.
Question	5
Maneesha's	question:
OUR	BELOVED	MASTER,
HEARING	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	COMMUNISM	BEING	COMBINED	WITH
ZEN,	 MARX	 COMBINED	 WITH	 BUDDHA,	 I	 HAD	 THE	 FLASH	 THAT
ROSA
LUXEMBURG	WOULD	BE	DELIGHTED	TO	HEAR	YOU.
I	HAVE	THE	 FEELING	THAT	THIS	 IS	WHAT	SHE	WAS	LOOKING	FOR
AND
COULD	NOT	FIND	OR	EXPRESS	 IN	HER	TIME,	BUT	SHE	MUST	HAVE
HAD
THE	LONGING	IN	HER	ALREADY.
SHE	 WROTE	 THE	 FOLLOWING	 WHILE	 SHE	 WAS	 IN	 PRISON	 IN
BRESLAU,	GERMANY,	IN	1917.
"HERE	I	AM	LYING,	ALONE,	WRAPPED	IN	THESE	BLACK	FOLDS	OF
DARKNESS,	BOREDOM,	IMPRISONMENT,	THE	WINTER	--	AND	AT	THE
SAME	 TIME,	 MY	 HEART	 BEATS	 WITH	 AN	 UNBELIEVABLE,
UNKNOWABLE,	UNKNOWN	INNER	JOY....
"IN	 THE	 DARKNESS	 OF	 LIFE	 I'M	 SMILING,	 AS	 IF	 I	 KNOW	 SOME
MAGIC
SECRET	 THAT	 GIVES	 THE	 LIE	 TO	 ALL	 EVIL	 AND	 SADNESS	 AND
CHANGES	IT
INTO	BRIGHT	LIGHT	AND	HAPPINESS.	I'M	LOOKING	FOR	A	REASON
FOR
THIS	 HAPPINESS	 AND	 I	 DON'T	 FIND	 ANY,	 AND	 I	 HAVE	 TO	 SMILE
AGAIN.	I	THINK	THAT	THE	SECRET	IS	NOTHING	ELSE	THAN	LIFE	IN
ITSELF."
WOULD	YOU	LIKE	TO	COMMENT?
Maneesha,	I	have	always	loved	the	woman	revolutionary,	Rosa	Luxemburg.	She
is	 the	 topmost	revolutionary	as	far	as	women	are	concerned.	She	had	the	same
quality	of	 revolution	as	Lenin	 --	and	she	was	a	woman,	 so	certainly	she	had	a
totally	different	approach	 to	revolution.	 It	has	not	 to	be	 just	of	 the	body,	 it	has
also	 to	 be	 of	 the	 soul.	 It	 has	 not	 be	 just	 on	 the	 outside	 of	man,	 in	 the	 social
structure;	it	has	to	be	of	man	in	his	consciousness	also.
Certainly	she	was	not	aware	of	any	meditative	rebellion	within.	That's	why	she
says,	 "I'm	 looking	 for	 the	 reason."	And	she	 thinks	she	has	 found	 the	 reason	 in
life	 itself	 --	but	 that	 is	 a	very	 superficial	 reason.	Without	meditation	you	don't
know	the	secrets	of	life,	you	know	only	the	surface	of	life.	Even	that	much	gives
you	enough	joy,	but	you	don't	know	the	depth,	the	abysmal	depth	and	the	infinite
height,	immeasurable	both.	Once	you	know	this	vertical	dimension	of	height	and
depth,	life	becomes	a	pure	joy,	a	laughter,	a	song,	a	dance,	an	ecstasy.
Rosa	Luxemburg	was	in	a	wrong	place.	She	should	have	been	in	the	East.	Out	of
all	 the	 revolutionaries	 in	 the	West,	 perhaps	 she	was	more	 sensitive	 and	would
have	learned	the	Eastern	way	of	getting	deeper	into	life,	not	just	on	the	surface.
On	 the	 surface	 life	 becomes	 "eat,	 drink,	 be	 merry."	 It	 is	 superficial,	 you	 get
bored	sooner	or	later.	Unless	you	reach	to	the	abysmal	depth	and	infinite	height,
simultaneously,	you	don't	know	what	a	miracle	life	is,	what	a	mystery	life	is.
But	she	was	in	search;	she	died	before	she	could	have	found	it.	But	death	is	not
death.
Rosa	Luxemburg	may	be	here	--	if	not	today,	then	tomorrow.
All	those	who	are	seeking	the	depth	of	life	and	the	secret,	the	ultimate	secret	of
consciousness,	 are	 bound	 to	 move	 --	 knowingly	 or	 unknowingly	 --	 towards
someone	who	has	already	reached	the	whole.
...	It	is	time	for	Sardar	Gurudayal	Singh	again.
Officer	Dopeski,	of	 the	Warsaw	Police	 traffic	control	 team,	 is	sitting	 in	his	car
eating	a	potato	sandwich	when	he	sees	a	bright	red	Ferrari	speed	past	him	at	one
hundred	and	eighty	miles	per	hour.
Officer	Dopeski	 nearly	 chokes	 on	 his	 sandwich	 in	 excitement	 as	 he	 slams	 his
door,	starts	his	car,	flicks	on	his	red	flashing	lights,	flicks	on	his	siren,	fastens	his
seat	 belt,	 checks	 his	 pistol,	 opens	 the	 glovebox	 and	 looks	 for	 his	 ticket	 book,
slams	the	gearshift	into	GO,	and	stomps	on	the	gas	pedal.
One	hour	and	two	hundred	miles	later,	Officer	Dopeski	finally	manages	to	stop
the	speeding	Italian	sports	car.
"Okay,"	 says	 Dopeski,	 fumbling	 nervously	 with	 his	 ticket	 book.	 "Just	 tell	 me
your	name!"
The	 driver	 of	 the	 Ferrari	 looks	 up	 and	 says,	 "My	 name	 is-a	Alfonso	 de	Villa
Martino	Rivera	Giovanni	Tortoni	Baloni."
"Well..."	replies	Officer	Dopeski,	perspiring,	"...	don't	do	it	again!"
Newton	Hooton	 drops	 into	 the	Lucky	Luke	 Saloon	 one	 evening,	 and	 orders	 a
triple	martini.
"What	a	coincidence,"	says	Max,	the	bartender.	"Just	an	hour	ago,	I	was	saying
that	nobody	ever	orders	a	triple	martini	any	more."
As	Max	is	mixing	the	drink,	both	he	and	Newton	look	up	as	Lucy	Leggs	rushes
in	and	asks	for	a	triple	martini.
Newton	and	Max	look	at	each	other	in	amazement.
"Hey,	 lady!"	cries	Max.	"That	 is	 incredible!	The	gentleman	here	 just	ordered	a
triple	martini,	 and	we	were	 just	 discussing	how	nobody	 ever	 orders	 that	 drink
these	days.	This	is	really	a	coincidence!"
"Well,"	says	Lucy,	"I	am	celebrating	a	very	special	occasion.	My	husband	and	I
have	been	married	for	nine	years,	and	we	have	always	wanted	a	child.	Just	today,
I	have	learned	that	I	am	pregnant!"
The	 two	 men	 congratulate	 Lucy	 and	 then	 Newton	 says,	 "Well	 that	 is	 a
coincidence,	because	I	am	also	celebrating	a	very	special	occasion.	I	have	been
breeding	exotic	chickens	for	years,	and	I	have	been	trying	to	produce	a	purple-
spotted	hen.	And	just	today,	I	found	out	that	I	have	been	successful."
"What	a	coincidence,"	says	Lucy.	"How	did	you	manage	it?"
"Well,"	replies	Newton,	"I	just	changed	cocks."
"Wow!"	cries	Lucy.	"That	really	is	a	coincidence!	Me	too!"
Comrade	Gorbachev	 has	 heard	 rumors	 that	 his	 policies	 are	 being	 discussed	 in
Poona,	 India,	 so	 he	 decides	 to	 go	 and	 check	 it	 out.	When	 his	 plane	 arrives	 at
Poona	airport,	the	Indian	Army	is	there	to	welcome	him.
As	 Gorbachev	 steps	 off	 the	 plane,	 the	 military	 guard	 of	 honor	 fires	 off	 the
traditional	twenty-one	gun	salute.
"What	were	those	shots?"	asks	Swami	Deva	Coconut,	standing	in	the	crowd.
"Gorbachev	has	arrived!"	says	the	man	next	to	him.
"Really?"	 replies	 Coconut.	 "You	 mean	 they	 could	 not	 get	 him	 with	 just	 one
shot?"
Nivedano...
(Gibberish)
Nivedano...
Be	silent.	Close	your	eyes	and	feel	your	body	to	be	completely	frozen.
This	is	the	right	moment	to	turn	in.	Gather	your	whole	energy	and	rush	towards
your	center	of	being,	with	your	total	consciousness	and	with	an	urgency	as	if	this
is	going	to	be	your	last	moment	of	life	on	the	earth.
This	urgency	is	absolutely	needed	to	reach	to	the	center.
Faster	and	faster,	deeper	and	deeper...
As	you	start	coming	closer	to	your	center,	a	great	silence	descends	over	you	like
soft	rain.
It	is	so	tangible,	you	can	feel	it.
As	you	come	even	closer
a	great	peace	arises	from	your	very	sources
surrounding	you
into	great	fragrance
of	the	beyond.
Just	a	little	more
and	you	are	on	the	center
facing	your	original	face.
Your	original	face
is	the	face	of	the	buddha,
the	awakened	one.
At	this	moment	you	are	the	buddha.	I	teach	the	buddha,	I	don't	teach	Buddhism.
The	only	quality	buddha	has	is	witnessing.	He	is	a	pure	witness	--	no	judgment,
no	identification,	just	watching	without	having	any	opinion.
Witness,	you	are	not	the	body.	Witness,	you	are	not	the	mind.	And	witness...	you
are	only	 the	witness.	And	as	you	relax	 into	witnessing,	a	great	ecstasy,	a	great
divine	 drunkenness	 overtakes	 you.	 You	 suddenly	 become	 aware	 of	 your
immortality,	of	your	eternal	life.
To	make	this	witnessing	deeper,	Nivedano...
Relax,	let	go.
But	 go	 on	 remembering	 you	 are	 a	 buddha,	 a	 pure	 witness.	 And	 as	 your
witnessing	goes	on	becoming	deeper	and	deeper	and	deeper	and	deeper,	you	start
melting	like	ice	in	the	ocean.
I	 can	 see	 it.	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 Auditorium	 is	 turning	 into	 an	 ocean	 of
consciousness.
Ten	thousand	buddhas	have	melted	into	one	ocean.
A	pure	ocean	of	consciousness
without	any	ripples	or	waves.
At	this	moment	you	are	the	most	blessed	people	on	the	earth,	 just	because	you
are	centered	at	your	very	ultimate	nature.
The	buddha	is	your	dhamma,
he	is	your	very	nature.
The	 evening	 was	 beautiful	 on	 its	 own,	 but	 your	 totality,	 your	 intensity,	 your
urgency,	 your	 honesty,	 has	 made	 it	 a	 great	 splendor.	 The	 whole	 existence
surrounding	you	is	celebrating	your	great	victory.
There	is	no	other	victory	greater	than	this.
To	 become	 a	 buddha	 is	 the	 most	 important,	 the	 most	 significant,	 the	 only
meaningful	act	in	your	whole	life.
Gather	as	much	experience	and	as	many	juices	of	life...	and	the	blossoms	and	the
flowers	and	the	fragrances,
the	peace,	the	silence,	the	serenity,
the	divine	drunkenness,	the	ecstasy.
Collect	all	of	them.	You	have	to	bring	them	to	your	life.	Your	life	has	to	become
a	life	of	songs,	a	life	of	dances,	a	life	of	eternal	music,	a	life	of	divine	ecstasy.
This	is	the	transformation	which	Zen	Fire	and	Zen	Wind	brings	to	you.
And	never	forget	to	persuade	the	buddha	to	come	along	with	you.	He	is	coming
every	 day	 closer	 and	 closer	 and	 closer.	You	will	 feel	 his	 presence	 just	 behind
you,	coming,	following,	like	a	shadow.
This	is	the	first	step	of	meditation:	buddha	coming	behind	you	as	a	shadow.	But
the	shadow	is	very	solid,	very	tangible;	you	can	touch	it,	you	can	feel	it,	you	can
have	a	tremendous	fragrance	arising	from	it.
The	 second	 step:	you	become	 the	 shadow	and	buddha	comes	ahead	of	you,	 in
front	of	you.
The	 third	 step:	 your	 shadow	 disappears	 into	 the	 transparent	 awareness,
awakening,	enlightenment	of	the	buddha.
You	are	no	more,	only	the	buddha	is.
You	are	no	more,	only	the	existence	is.
This	 is	 the	 ultimate	 revolution,	 the	 ultimate	 evolution	 --	 the	 ultimate	 truth,
beauty,	godliness.
Nivedano...
Come	 back.	But	 come	 as	 buddhas,	with	 the	 same	 grace,	 the	 same	 beauty,	 the
same	joy,	the	same	ecstasy.
Sit	just	for	a	few	seconds	to	remember	and	to	remind	yourself	where	you	have
been	 --	 to	what	 depth,	 to	what	 height	 you	 have	 reached...	 to	what	 opening	 of
space	you	have	experienced.
And	see	that	the	fragrance	of	the	innermost	has	come	with	you,	surrounding	your
being.
And	watch,	feel...	the	buddha	is	standing	behind	you.
He	is	your	very	nature,	he	is	your	blissfulness.	He	is	your	benediction.
And	the	day	is	not	far	away	when	you	will	take	the	second	step	and	become	the
shadow	of	 the	buddha.	Once	you	become	 the	 shadow	of	 the	buddha,	 the	 third
step	becomes	very	easy.	The	shadow	can	disappear	into	the	buddha	without	any
trouble.
When	only	the	buddha	is	left,	alone,	you	have	come	home.
This	 is	 the	 search	 of	 all	 human	 consciousness;	 this	 is	 the	 search	 of	 all	 living
beings.	 This	 is	 the	 source	 from	where	 we	 have	 come,	 and	 this	 is	 the	 goal	 to
where	we	are	going.
Once	 the	 circle	 is	 complete	 --	 the	 source	 and	 goal	meet	 together	 --	 you	 have
come	to	a	perfection	of	which	you	cannot	even	have	a	dream.	You	cannot	even
visualize	what	 that	perfection	 is.	Even	after	 reaching	 it,	you	cannot	manage	 to
describe	it,	you	cannot	manage	to	explain	it,	you	can	simply	dance.
Your	eyes	will	shine	with	it,
your	silence	will	become	a	song	about	it.
Your	words	may	carry	a	little	fragrance	of	it.
Your	very	existence	will	radiate
with	the	light	that	you	have	found
in	the	completion	of	the	circle.
The	source	and	the	goal	meeting...	now,	once	this	happens	to	any	consciousness,
any	human	being,	he	is	not	to	be	born	again	into	a	prison	of	body,	of	bones	and
blood	and	flesh.	Then	he	disappears	into	the	cosmos	and	becomes	one	with	the
cosmos.
Just	a	sincere	passion
to	disappear	into	the	cosmos
is	needed.
It	is	not	a	long	journey,
it	is	just	a	quantum	leap.
And	you	are	trying	the	best	that	you	can	do.
I	 am	 absolutely	 happy	 about	 you.	 And	 the	 day	 when	 you	 all	 will	 start
blossoming	into	buddhas	will	not	only	be	a	day	of	happiness	for	you,	it	will	be	a
day	of	great	celebration	for	the	whole	of	existence.
Okay,	Maneesha?
Yes,	Beloved	Master.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Socialism	is	a	judas
