1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Talks	given	from	1/1/80	to	31/1/80
Darshan	Diary
31	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001015
ShortTitle:	RAFTER01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Susan)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Nartano.
Nartano	means	dance	and	dance	is	the	essential	core	of	sannyas.
I	 don't	 believe	 in	 renunciation,	 I	 believe	 in	 rejoicing.	Life	 should	be	 a	 song,	 a
dance,	not	sadness.	The	so-called	saints	have	been	too	heavy,	sad,	sombre,	and
they	have	created	an	atmosphere	of	 sadness	all	over	 the	world.	Churches	have
become	 cemeteries,	 they	 are	 no	 more	 celebrations.	 Even	 if	 celebrations	 are
arranged,	 they	 are	 done	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 they	 lose	 the	 very	 quality	 of
celebration.	They	become	formal.
They	are	no	more	fun,	they	are	serious.	Holiness	has	become	too	identified	with
seriousness.
My	work	is	to	destroy	that	identification	totally.	Holiness	should	be	wholeness,
and	wholeness	is	always	a	dancing	state,	a	state	where	the	dancer	disappears	into
the	dance....	Dance	your	way	to	God.	Dance	 till	 the	stars	come	down	from	the
rafters.	 Dance	 creates	 the	 fire	 in	 which	 all	 that	 is	 useless	 is	 burned,	 only	 the
essential	remains.	Dance	creates	the	fire	in	which	gold	becomes	purer	and	purer
and	purer,	and	ultimately	only	purity	is	left.
(To	 Amy)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Gito.	 Gito	 means	 song.	 Become	 a
song...	just	a	small	song	will	do!	Good!
(To	 Helmut)	 --	 Your	 name:	 Swami	 Helmut.	 Helmut	 means	 courage,	 great
courage.	Sannyas	needs	it.	It	 is	 the	most	fundamental	requirement	because	you
will	be	moving	 from	 the	known	 into	 the	unknown,	 from	 the	mind	 to	no-mind,
from	the	visible	to	the	invisible.
Ordinary	courage	is	not	enough,	total	courage	is	needed.	Because	one	almost	has
to	die,	to	die	to	the	past	so	that	the	new	can	be	born.	It	is	a	rebirth.	But	it	can	be
managed,	it	is	not	impossible.	We	have	the	potential	to	do	it.
Existence	requires	of	you	only	that	which	you	can	do;	it	never	requires	anything
impossible,	difficult,	arduous,	of	course,	but	not	 impossible.	 It	 is	 tremendously
paying.	When	one	moves	from	the	mind	to	no-mind	one	is	passing	through	death
deliberately.	The	thrill	is	immense	and	the	surprise	is	infinite.
For	the	first	time	one	starts	experiencing	life	in	its	utter	beauty.	That	experience
is	God.
(To	Mauro)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anand	Mauro.	 Anand	means	 bliss.
Mauro	means	dark.
Bliss	 can	be	 looked	at	 in	both	ways,	 as	 light	 and	dark,	 because	 it	 is	 both	 it	 is
neither.	It	is	light	certainly,	because	there	is	great	luminosity,	and	it	is	dark	also,
because	 there	 is	 great	 depth.	 That	 depth	 gives	 it	 darkness,	 but	 the	 darkness	 is
luminous,	that	is	its	paradox.	That	darkness	is	full	of	light,	that	darkness	is	light
itself.
The	 same	 paradox	 persists	 in	 all	 religious	 experiences:	 death	 becomes	 eternal
life,	darkness	becomes	infinite	light,	matter	becomes	divine...	because	existence
is	basically	one.
Darkness	and	light	are	two	polarities	of	the	same	phenomenon.	One	has	to	learn
to	be	blissful	in	both	ways;	one	has	to	be	blissful	in	life	and	one	has	to	be	blissful
in	death,	blissful	when	one	is	succeeding	and	blissful	when	one	is	failing.	When
you	are	blissful	irrespective	of	the	situation,	then	only	you	are	blissful.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Iaia.	It	is	a	beautiful	name...	it	means	the	creative	heart.
For	 centuries	 religion	 has	 been	 uncreative,	 because	 it	was	 escapist,	 because	 it
believed	in	renouncing	the	world;	hence	it	could	not	be	creative.	It	was	afraid	of
beauty,	it	was	afraid	of	form,	it	was	afraid	of	everything.	It	knew	only	one	way
to	reach	god	and	that	was	slow	suicide.	It	created	a	very	suicidal	humanity.
My	approach	is	just	the	opposite:	god	is	not	against	life,	god	is	life;	god	is	not
against	beauty,	god	is	the	ultimate	beauty.	God	is	the	very	heart	of	existence	and
god	 is	 the	 creator.	 The	 only	 way	 to	 participate	 in	 his	 space	 is	 to	 create
something.	The	creative	person	comes	closest	to	god;	not	the	worshipper,	but	the
creator,	 not	 the	 people	who	 go	 on	 doing	 religious	 rituals,	 but	 the	 people	who
sing,	the	people	who	make	art,	the	people	who	paint;	the	musicians,	the	dancers,
the	scientists	--	all	the	people	who	in	some	way	create.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Creativity	 to	me	 is	 real	worship.	And	when	you	are	 lost	 in	your	creativity	you
are	 in	god,	you	pulsate	with	him,	your	being	 is	 in	 rhythm	with	his	being,	 and
those	 are	 the	 moments	 of	 eternity.	 You	 transcend	 time,	 you	 enter	 into	 the
deathless	dimension.
(To	Andrea)	--	Your	name:	Ma	Andrea.	Andrea	means	courage.
What	 is	 courage?	 The	 most	 significant	 definition	 is	 the	 capacity	 to	 drop	 the
familiar,	 the	 known,	 because	 that's	what	mind	 is;	 the	 familiar,	 the	 known,	 the
past.	And	 the	moment	you	drop	 the	past	you	open	up	 to	 infinities.	But	man	 is
afraid	to	be	so	open,	man	feels	lost	in	that	vast	space.
Mind	is	a	small	thing.	It	feels	cozy,	warm.	It	is	like	a	golden	cage:	it	is	beautiful,
you	can	decorate	it	--
and	everybody	tries	to	decorate	it.	That's	what	our	education	is	for:	to	decorate
the	golden	cage	and	make	it	so	beautiful	 that	 it	becomes	almost	 impossible	for
you	to	leave	it.	You	start	clinging	to	it.	You	forget	that	you	have	wings,	that	the
whole	sky	 is	a	challenge,	 that	you	have	 to	go	 to	 the	stars,	 that	 there	 is	a	 long,
long	journey	ahead.
Hence	my	definition	of	 courage	 is	 the	capacity	 to	drop	 the	golden	cage	of	 the
mind	 and	 to	 go	 into	 the	 unknown	 in	 spite	 of	 all	 the	 fears,	 in	 spite	 of	 the
insecurity	of	it	all.	Only	that	person	who	has	that	quality	is	religious.	Others	are
pretenders:	Christians,	Hindus,	Mohammedans	--	all	pretenders.
(To	Izaba):	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Izaba.	Izaba	means	the	essential	man.
Much	is	accidental,	 incidental.	One's	being	Hindu	or	Christian,	black	or	white,
man	or	woman,	poor	or	rich,	educated	or	uneducated	--	these	are	all	accidental
things,	not	essential.
The	 only	 thing	 that	 is	 essential	 is	 awareness.	And	 people	 are	 lost	 in	 the	 non-
essential.	They	have	become	oblivious	of	the	essential,	they	are	ready	to	sell	the
essential	 for	 the	 non-essential.	That's	 how	 everybody	has	 sold	 his	 soul	 for	 the
non-essential.	That's	how	everybody	has	sold	his	soul	and	become	soul-less.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	reclaim	one's	soul	back.	So	from	this	moment	awareness
becomes	 your	 essential	 endeavor,	 your	 essential	 target.	 Everything	 can	 be
sacrificed	for	it	but	is	cannot	be	sacrificed	for	anything.
(To	Anne)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anne.	Anne	means	grace.
Grace	is	spiritual	beauty.
There	 is	a	beauty	which	can	be	described	as	physical.	 It	 is	of	 the	 form,	of	 the
proportion,	of	the	body.
But	physical	beauty	does	not	make	a	person	necessarily	beautiful,	because	a	very
ugly	soul	can	exist	in	a	very	beautiful	body.	And	it	happens	more	often,	because
the	people	who	have	beautiful	bodies	don't	care	much	about	 the	soul;	 they	are
satisfied	with	 the	 beautiful	 body.	 They	 have	 already	 'got	 it'	 they	 feel,	 there	 is
nothing	else	to	achieve,	god	has	given	them	enough,	so	they	remain	confined	to
the	body,	and	deep	down	an	ugly	ungraceful	soul	exists.
This	is	one	of	the	problems:	when	people	fall	in	love	with	each	other	they	fall	in
love	with	their	physical	beauty	--	naturally	because	that	is	apparent,	you	can	see
it.	Slowly,	slowly,	when	you	live	together	you	start	becoming	aware	of	the	inner.
It	needs	a	little	intimacy,	time,	patience,	different	situations,	different	contexts,	in
which	 the	 inner	 can	 become	 revealed.	 And	 the	 moment	 the	 inner	 becomes
revealed,	 problems	 arise;	 the	 honeymoon	 is	 over.	 Then	 there	 is	 conflict	 and
jealousy	and	domination,	and	all	kinds	of	ugly	things	start	surfacing.
Grace	means	 inner	 beauty:	 the	 beauty	 of	meditation,	 prayer,	 love	 compassion.
The	 contemporary	 mind	 is	 too	 concerned	 with	 the	 physical.	 There	 are	 many
beauticians,	hairdressers,	and	so	much	goes	on	in	the	name	of	physical	beauty;
almost	 seventy	 per	 cent	 industry	 in	 the	world	 is	 concerned	with	 the	 physical.
And	nobody	seems	to	be	concerned	with	the	spiritual	beauty.	That's	exactly	our
concern.
Sannyas	means	 an	 effort	 to	 create	 inner	 beauty,	 a	 beauty	 which	 is	 not	 of	 the
body,	not	even	of	the	mind,	but	of	your	consciousness.	And	this	is	the	mystery:
once	 your	 consciousness	 has	 grace,	 your	 whole	 body	 becomes	 beautiful,
suffused	with	 the	 inner.	 The	 inner	 starts	 filtering	 out	 of	 the	 physical,	 it	 starts
radiating.
There	 are	 two	 traditions	 about	 Jesus.	One	 tradition	 says	he	was	very	ugly,	 the
other	tradition	says	he	was	very	beautiful.	Down	the	ages	Christians	have	been
quarreling	about	what	was	actually	the	case,	and	they	cannot	decide.	My	feeling
is	that	he	was	both.	He	must	have	been	physically	ugly	and	then	suddenly	when
the	inner	explosion	happened,	the	grace	started	flowing	though	his	ugly	body,	he
must	have	looked	beautiful,	tremendously	beautiful.	So	those	who	could	not	see
the	inner	must	have	thought	him	ugly	and	those	who	could	see	the	inner	--	his
disciples,	 his	 followers,	 his	 lover,	 his	 friends	 --	 they	 thought	 him	 immensely
beautiful.
I	 don't	 see	 any	 contradiction	 because	 both	 can	 exist	 together.	 Remember,	 the
inner	beauty	has	to	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
created	--	and	to	create	it	is	the	whole	art	of	religion.
(To	Julien)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sanatan.	Sanatan	means	the	eternal
one.
We	are	not	born	at	our	birth	and	we	don't	die	at	our	death.	Birth	and	death	are
only	episodes	in	our	eternal	journey.	Life	has	no	beginning	and	no	end	--	and	to
know	this	is	to	know	god.	There	is	no	other	god.
To	feel	this	eternal	flow	of	life	is	to	experience	god,	tao,	dhamma.
As	you	become	silent,	as	you	go	deeper	into	your	being,	slowly,	slowly	you	start
feeling	that	you	are	not	the	body,	you	are	not	the	mind.	They	are	such	absolutely
certain	experiences,	the	certainty	is	so	absolute	that	you	cannot	doubt	it.	You	are
the	eternal	hidden	inside	the	temporal.	The	temporal	is	only	like	a	house.
We	have	changed	many	houses	and	we	will	change	many	houses.
Once	 this	 experience	 becomes	 settled	 all	 fear	 disappears,	 because	 death
disappears	--	how	can	there	be	fear?	All	anxiety,	anguish	disappears,	all	tensions
disappear;	 one	 becomes	 at	 rest.	 Nothing	 can	 destroy	 you,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to
destroy	you.
Krishna	 in	 the	Gita	 says:	Fire	 cannot	burn	you,	 swords	cannot	kill	you.	When
this	becomes	your	experience,	not	just	a	belief,	the	life	is	tremendously	relaxed,
you	are	at	home.	Then	yon	can	one	enjoy	the	dance,	of	the	stars.	Only	then	can
one	participate	in	the	dance	of	the	stars,	one	can	sing	with	the	birds.	then	one	has
no	 personal	 problems	 at	 all.	 Then	 one	 can	 become	 part	 of	 the	 universal.	 One
knows	one	is	part	of	the	universal.
(To	Jos)	 --	This	 is	your	new	name:	Swami	Puratan.	Puratan	means	 the	ancient
one.
Nobody	 is	 new,	 all	 are	 very	 ancient	 pilgrims.	We	have	 always	been	here	 --	 in
different	forms,	in	different	bodies,	doing	different	things,	but	we	have	been	here
and	we	are	going	 to	be	here	 forever.	There	 is	no	way	for	us	 to	disappear	 from
existence.	Nothing	can	be	destroyed	and	nothing	can	be	added	to	existence.
Existence	is	always	exactly	the	same.
Now	even	science	accepts	 that	we	cannot	destroy	anything	and	we	cannot	add
anything;	only	forms	change.	The	river	goes	on,	only	waves	change.	Sometimes
there	are	big	waves,	 sometimes	 small,	 sometimes	no	waves,	but	 it	 is	 the	 same
river.	With	waves,	big	waves,	small	waves,	no	waves,	it	is	the	same	river.
This	 insight	 takes	 you	 beyond	 time	 --	 and	 to	 go	 beyond	 time	 is	 to	 go	 beyond
misery.	To	know	the	timeless	is	to	enter	into	the	world	of	bliss.	Your	name	will
remind	you	again	and	again	 that	you	are	 the	ancient	one,	 the	 timeless	one,	 the
eternal	 one.	 So	 no	 need	 to	 be	 worried	 about	 small	 things,	 no	 need	 to	 be	 too
concerned	about	mundane	things;	they	come	and	go,	you	abide.	Remember	that
which	abides,	which	never	comes,	never	goes.	That	is	god,	and	that	is	within	you
as	it	is	within	everybody	else.
(To	Peter)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	Gynodaya.	Gynodaya	means	 the
rise	of	true	wisdom.
Knowledge	is	easy	and	cheap.	One	can	accumulate	as	much	as	one	wants,	one
can	borrow	it	from	others.	But	wisdom	is	costly,	very	precious.	One	has	to	pay
for	it	with	great	effort,	awareness,	meditativeness.	Nobody	can	give	it	to	you	and
nobody	can	take	it	away	from	you.	It	is	absolutely	your	individual	effort	that	will
release	 your	wisdom.	 It	 is	 there	 like	 a	 seed,	 but	 only	 like	 a	 seed.	 It	 has	 to	 be
planted,	nourished,	nurtured,	watered,	taken	care	of	--	and	that's	what	meditation
is	all	about.	Slowly	 it	 starts	growing.	Then	you	become	a	 rose	bush	and	many
flowers	come.	The	moment	those	flowers	open	up	and	your	fragrance	is	released
to	the	winds	there	is	great	joy	--	not	only	in	you	--	the	whole	existence	rejoices
with	you.
Whenever	one	person	becomes	enlightened,	the	whole	of	existence	takes	a	step
ahead.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8001025
ShortTitle:	RAFTER02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	 Zina)	 --	 Your	 name:	Ma	 Zina.	 Zina	 is	 from	 Persian.	 It	 simply	means	 the
feminine.	 It	 is	 significant,	 particularly	 in	 the	 search	 for	 truth.	 One	 has	 to	 be
feminine.	 By	 feminine	 I	 mean	 receptive,	 open.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 a	 woman.	 By
woman	I	mean	just	like	a	womb.	Whether	one	is	male	or	female	is	irrelevant.
Unless	one	becomes	a	womb	one	never	becomes	pregnant	with	god.	One	cannot
conquer	god,	one	can't	be	aggressive	--	that	is	the	sure	way	to	fail.	One	can	only
surrender	 and	 allow	 god	 to	 happen.	 That's	what	 the	 quality	 of	 being	 feminine
really	is.	That	is	the	essential	core	of	meditation.
(To	Regina-Celia)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Regina	Celia.	Regina	comes	 from
Latin;	it	means	the	queen.
Celia	 also	 comes	 from	Latin;	 it	 comes	 from	 a	woman	 saint,	Cecilia,	who	was
tortured,	killed.	But	she	went	on	singing	while	she	was	being	tortured	and	killed.
She	died	singing,	hence	she	became	the	patron	saint	of	music.
Both	words	are	beautiful.	Everyone	is	born	as	a	king	or	a	queen,	but	we	have	to
discover	 it.	 It	 is	not	 apparent,	not	on	 the	 surface.	 It	 is	hidden	deep	 inside;	our
kingdom	is	there.
And	music	is	of	immense	importance	for	a	sannyasin,	because	music	is	the	most
natural	 door	 to	meditation.	 All	 other	meditations	 are	more	 artificial.	Music	 is
natural	because	nature	is	full	of	music:	the	sound	of	running	water	and	the	wind
passing	through	the	trees	and	the	birds	singing	and	the	bees	humming.
The	whole	of	existence	is	a	deep	melody:	one	has	to	learn	to	listen	to	it.
The	way	to	listen	to	it	 is	 to	be	simply	available,	open,	vulnerable,	not	 thinking
about	it.	Thinking	is	a	disturbance,	a	distraction.	It	is	just	listening	without	any
thinking.	Then	it	penetrates	to	your	very	core	and	it	can	become	the	first	glimpse
of	 your	 inner	 kingdom.	Music	 can	 reveal	 the	 queen	 in	 you,	music	 can	 confer
queenship,	kingship.	It	releases	you	from	all	kinds	of	bondage	because	it	releases
you	from	mind	and	mind	is	the	only	prison	there	is.
(To	Regina)	--	This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Regina.	Regina	can	have	two	meanings:
one	 from	Latin,	 then	 it	means	 the	 queen,	 the	 other	 from	 the	 Teutonic,	 then	 it
means	purity.	Both	meanings	can	be	joined	together.
Only	purity	will	make	you	a	queen,	nothing	else;	not	the	riches	of	the	world,	not
wealth,	not	political	power.
Those	are	all	ego	trips	and	basically	they	keep	you	a	beggar	because	you	go	on
desiring	more	and	more.
That's	what	the	state	of	a	beggar	is.
The	state	of	a	king	or	a	queen	is	when	there	is	no	desire	left	and	that's	exactly
what	purity	is.	when	all	desires	are	gone	the	gold	is	pure.	When	all	 the	desires
are	gone	the	mind	is	gone,	the	ego	is	gone;	there	is	noting	which	can	make	you
impure	any	more.	And	that	lotuslike	purity,	that	innocence	is	divine,	That's	what
gives	you	the	first	evidence	of	god,	the	first	proof	that	god	is	not	only	a	concept
bu	a	reality	that	permeates	the	whole.
(To	Keith)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Keith.	Keith	means	wind.
The	life	of	a	sannyasin	can	be	most	appropriately	represented	by	the	wind.	It	is
freedom:	 freedom	 from	 all	 conditioning,	 freedom	 from	 all	 ideology,	 freedom
from	words,	theories,	freedom	from	min.	One	becomes	just	like	the	wind;	then
the	whole	sky	is	yours.
Ordinarily	people	are	living	in	cages:	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian,	German,
English,	 Indian,	 Communist,	 Fascist,	 Socialist,	 all	 kinds	 of	 cages	 --	 political,
religious,	social.	A	Sannyasin	has	to	come	out	of	all	prisons	and	be	just	like	the
wind.	then	all	directions	are	your,	the	whole	of	existence	is	yours.	And	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
freedom	 is	 the	highest	value	 in	 life.	There	 is	nothing	higher,	more	 sacred	 than
freedom.
(To	Allan)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Allan.	Allan	has	two	meanings;	both	are
beautiful,	significant.
One	is	cheerfulness	and	the	other	is	harmony.
Harmony	can	be	achieved	only	by	 the	cheerful	one.	The	 sad	person	can	never
attain	to	harmony.	Misery	means	nothing	but	disharmony.	When	you	are	not	in
accord	with	yourself	and	with	existence	that	is	misery.
When	 you	 are	 deep	 in	 accord	 within	 yourself	 and	with	 the	 without	 too,	 bliss
arises.
Cheerfulness	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 harmony	 and	 also	 a	 stepping	 stone	 towards
harmony.	One	 can	 either	 begin	 by	 being	 cheerful,	 and	 harmony	 is	 attained,	 or
one	can	begin	from	the	other	end	by	being	harmonious
,	and	cheerfulness	is	attained,	But	both	always	happen	together.	you	cannot	have
one.	The	harmonious	person	is	bound	to	be	cheerful,	overflowing	with	joy	and
the	joyous	person	cannot	be	but	harmonious.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 give	 you	methods	 of	 both	 kinds.	 It	 sirs	 a	 few	 to	 start	 by
being	cheerful;	those	who	are	alert	enough	to	snap	out	of	their	settled	misery	--
which	is	just	a	mind-phenomenon,	which	is	just	like	a	dream,	a	nightmare.	Those
who	are	capable	of	snapping	our	of	it	can	start	be	being	cheerful,	by	singing,	by
dancing,	 and	 they	will	 become	 harmonious.	 If	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 ...	 For	 a	 few
people	the	nightmare	seems	so	real	that	they	go	round	and	round	but	they	cannot
come	out	to	it.	It	seems	impossible	for	them	to	come	it.
Whatsoever	 they	 do	 feeds	 the	 nightmare.	 Then	 they	 have	 to	 start	 by	 being
harmonious.	Then	dancing	and	singing	are	not,,	and	cannot	be	their	beginning.
Then	they	have	to	so	something	like	zazen,	vipassana...
Some	 silent	meditation	which	 creates	 harmony	 first.	Once	 it	 is	 there	 they	 can
dance	and	they	can	sing.
For	you	it	will	be	good	to	start	being	cheerful.	You	can	manage	it!
(To	 Ingo)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Ingo.	 Ingo	 comes	 from	 eng.	 Ing	 is	 a
mythological	god	of	peace	and	prosperity.
Be	peaceful	and	you	are	prosperous...	but	not	in	the	ordinary	sense	of	the	word
'prosperity'.	 Not	 that	 you	 will	 become	 wealthy,	 not	 that	 you	 will	 have	 many
possessions	 by	 being	 peaceful,	 but	 one	 thing	 is	 certain:	 by	 being	 peaceful,
whatsoever	you	have	will	be	more	 than	enough,	you	will	be	contented	with	 it.
That	is	prosperity.
There	was	one	Indian	mystic	who	used	to	call	himself	'Emperor';	his	name	was
Rama	but	he	always	called	himself	Emperor	Rama.	The	first	book	that	he	wrote,
he	entitled	SIX	ORDERS	OF	EMPEROR
RAMA.	When	 he	went	 to	America	 people	 used	 to	 ask	 him	 'Why	 do	 you	 call
yourself	Emperor?	We	don't	see	anything	 in	you,	 in	 fact	you	seem	to	be	 just	a
beggar.'	A	begging	bowl	was	his	only	possession.	He	would	laugh	and	we	would
say	'That's	why	I	call	myself	an	emperor	because	I	desire	nothing	and	I	possess
the	whole	of	existence!'
When	 you	 don't	 desire,	 a	 tremendous	 prosperity	 happens;	 that	 of	 non-desire.
Peace	 brings	 prosperity,	 prosperity	 of	 the	 inner,	 prosperity	 not	 on	 the	material
plane	but	on	the	spiritual	plane.
Learn	 how	 to	 be	 peaceful.	 That	 is	 the	most	 secret	 art	 to	 be	 learned.	The	 only
thing	worth	learning	in	life	is	peace.	Meditate,	sing,	dance,	and	learn	to	be	more
peaceful.	As	you	become	peaceful	you	will	be	surprised	that	immense	prosperity
starts	surrounding	you.
You	may	be	a	beggar	on	the	surface	but	deep	down	you	become	the	emperor	and
that	is	real	richness	because	it	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.	Not	even	death
can	take	it	away	from	you.
(To	Nanni)	This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Vijayo.	Vijayo	means	victory.
There	are	two	kinds	of	victory.	One	is	violent,	aggressive	--	you	have	to	attack,
you	have	to	be	destructive.	But	that	victory	remains	superficial.	The	other	can	be
killed,	 destroyed,	 reduced	 to	 a	 slave,	 but	 deep	 down	 he	 still	 remains
unconquered.	You	can	conquer	the	body	of	a	person	but	you	cannot	conquer	his
soul.
There	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	victory	that	comes	through	love,	not	through
violence.	 That	 is	 true	 victory.	 It	 conquers	 the	 soul.	 But	 the	 problem	with	 true
victory	is	that	you	have	to	surrender	to	conquer.	It	is	very	paradoxical.	You	have
to	be	ready	to	be	defeated,	joyously,	willingly.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is.
(To	June)	This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Sadhyo.	Sadhyo	means	the	end,	the	goal.
The	goal	is	not	outside
--	you	are	the	goal.	The	target	is	not	somewhere	else	--	you	are	the	target.	You
are	both	the	means	and	you	are	the	end.
Unless	 one	 discovers	 oneself	 one	 remains	 just	 a	means.	 The	moment	 one	 has
discovered	oneself	one	has	 found	 the	end.	The	circumference	of	your	being	 is
the	means:	the	body,	the	mind,	the	heart.	Use	all	of	them	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	reach	the	innermost	core,	 the	very	center	--	and	that	 is	 the	end.	In	finding	it
one	finds	everything	that	 is	needed	to	be	found.	In	knowing	it	all	 is	known.	In
reaching	it	one	reaches	god.
(To	Elmy):	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Yogo	means	the	meeting	--	the	meeting	of
the	dewdrop	with	the	ocean,	the	meeting	of	the	individual	with	the	universal,	the
meeting	 of	 the	 part	 with	 the	 whole...	 and	 that's	 what	 we	 are	 seeking	 and
searching	for.
Sannyas	is	nothing	but	a	bridge,	a	rainbow	bridge,	a	bridge	between	the	part	and
the	whole,	a	bridge	between	you	and	god.	But	one	thing	has	to	be	fulfilled:	you
have	 to	slowly	slowly	disappear.	 In	 the	same	proportion	as	you	disappear,	god
starts	appearing.	As	the	ultimate	meeting	point	you	are	not	found	at	all,	only	god
is	found.
Sannyas	is	a	death	and	a	resurrection:	death	of	the	small	ego	and	rebirth	of	the
ultimate,	death	of	the	momentary	and	birth	of	the	eternal.
(To	Henk):	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Pravasi.	Pravasi	means	stranger.
We	are	all	strangers	here.	This	is	not	our	home,	our	home	is	somewhere	else.	We
are	in	a	foreign	land.
To	remain	outside	oneself	is	to	remain	homeless;	to	come	in	is	to	be	back	home.
Now	 ever	 effort	 has	 to	 be	made	 to	 come	 in.	 No	 stone	 is	 to	 be	 left	 unturned,
everything	has	 to	be	risked,	because	nothing	is	more	precious	than	this	 turning
in.	everything	can	be	lost	for	it,	sacrificed	for	it,	because	all	else	is	trivia.
Remember	 that	sannyas	simply	means	 the	beginning	of	a	 long	 inward	 journey.
But	to	take	the	first	step	is	almost	half	the	journey.
(To	 Peter):	 This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Surodaya.	 Surodaya	 means	 the
sunrise.
Sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	a	new	day,	it	is	sunrise;	hence	the	color	orange.	It	is
the	color	of	the	morning	when	the	east	starts	turning	orange,	ready	for	the	sun,
ready	to	welcome	it.	It	is	like	spreading	a	red	carpet	for	the	sun.
Prepare	the	way	for	god	to	come	in,	be	ready	to	receive	the	sun,	the	light.	and	the
only	thing	that	is	needed	is	to	become	more	and	more	aware,	less	and	less	in	the
mind	and	more	and	more	outside	the	mind,	watching	it,	not	getting	involved,	just
become	a	detached	observer.	That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	word
'ecstasy'	--	to	stand	out.
Learn	to	stand	out	of	the	mind	and	you	have	learned	all	that	there	is	to	learn.	All
the	 religions,	 in	 different	 ways,	 in	 different	 languages,	 teach	 only	 one	 secret:
how	to	stand	out	of	your	own	mind.	And	the	day	you	succeed	is	the	greatest	day
in	 your	 life.	 That	 day	 you	 are	 reborn.	 That	 day	 you	 are	 no	 more	 part	 of	 the
physical	world,	you	become	part	of	god.
(To	 Julia):	 --	 This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	Ma	Nartana.	 Nartana	means	 the	 dance.
Dance	 is	 a	 very	 symbolic	 activity,	 the	most	 significant	 to	 be	 understood	 by	 a
spiritual	 seeker,	 because	 in	 dance	 the	 actor	 and	 the	 action	 become	 one:	 the
dancer	disappears	 into	 the	dance,	he	becomes	the	dance.	And	that	 is	 the	whole
secret	of	meditation,	 the	meditator	has	 to	become	meditation,	 the	singer	has	 to
become	the	song.	Dance	represents	that	merger,	that	melting,	more	prominently
than	any	other	activity.
Krishnamurti	says:	In	the	ultimate	moment	of	meditation	the	observer	becomes
the	observed.	he	is	right.
That's	actually	the	definition	of	meditation.
Dance	 more	 and	 more,	 and	 remember	 to	 be	 lost	 in	 it,	 don't	 hold	 back.	 Go
wholeheartedly	 into	 it	 so	 that	 only	 dance	 remains	 and	 there	 is	 no	 dancer.
Whenever	 that	 happens	 you	 have	 come	 to	 know	 the	 very	 secret	 of	 all
meditations.	Then	you	can	use	the	same	key	in	any	other	activity:	cooking	food
or	taking	a	shower	or	going	for	a	walk.	You	can	use	the	same	key	to	unlock	all
the	doors.	It	is	a	master	key.
To	Grant:	 This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	Daso.	 Daso	means	 the	 surrendered
one.	 That's	 what	 sannyas	 is:	 a	 deep,	 total	 surrender,	 a	 surrender	 of	 all	 that	 is
false,	 a	 surrender	 of	 all	 that	 is	 untrue,	 a	 surrender	 of	 the	 ego,	 a	 surrender	 of
unconsciousness,	a	surrender	of	the	mind,	a	surrender	of	misery,	a	surrender	of
past	and	a	surrender	of	future	--	all	 that	 is	basically	untrue,	which	is	not	really
there.	You	only	 imagine	 that	 it	 is	 there,	you	believe	 it,	and	by	believing	 it	you
make	it	real.	Belief	is	a	way	to	make	unreal	things	real.
Give	all	your	beliefs	to	me	so	that	knowing	can	be	yours.	Give	your	ego	to	me	so
that	 you	 can	 attain	 to	 your	 self.	 Give	 your	 mind	 tome	 so	 that	 the	 no-mind
becomes	available	to	you.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
--	Three	days.
--	That's	 great!	 In	 three	 days	 you	 can	 do	 three	 things:	They	 are	 known	 as	 the
three	great	shelters	in	Buddhism:	Buddham,	sharanam,	gachchammi.
First	 day:	 I	 go	 to	 the	 feet	 of	Buddha.	And	 the	 second	 day:	 Sangam	 sharanam
gachchami	--	I	go	to	the	feet	of	the	Buddha's	commune.	And	the	third	day,	the
last	shelter:	dhammam	sharanam	gachchami	--	I	go	to	the	feet	of	the	eternal	law,
the	 dhamma,	 tao.	 So	 three	 days	will	 do!	 (much	 laughter)	Have	 you	 lost	 three
teeth?
That	is	symbolic.	Do	these	three	things!	Good!
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001035
ShortTitle:	RAFTER03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Gunnar,	Jill	and	Alven)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Antar	Gunnar.	Antar
means	inner.	Gunnar	means	warrior.
Man	has	been	in	three	kinds	of	war.	One	is	with	nature;	out	of	that	war	science
was	born.	Another	is	with	other	human	beings;	our	of	that	politics	was	born.	And
the	third	and	the	most	important	war	is	within	oneself,	with	oneself;	out	of	that
religion	was	born.
The	 real	 fight	 is	 against	 the	 unconscious.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 transformed	 into
consciousness.	 Unless	 it	 is	 transformed	 into	 consciousness	 our	 lives	 remain
unfulfilled,	the	opportunity	is	lost,	the	seed	never	grows.
But	 the	unconscious	can	be	 transformed	 into	 light.	All	 that	 is	needed	 is	a	 total
determination,	a	total	commitment.	When	it	becomes	a	one-pointed	phenomenon
in	which	everything	becomes	non-essential,	only	one	thing	becomes	essential	--
that	you	have	 to	 transform	your	 inner	world	 into	 light	 from	darkness,	 into	 life
from	 death,	 into	 eternity	 from	 time,	 into	 consciousness	 from	 mind....	 This	 is
what	sannyas	is	all	about:	a	total	commitment,	a	total	determination.
(To	 Jill)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Antar	 Jill.	 Antar	 means	 inner.	 Jill	 means
youthful.	The	 inner	 is	always	young,	 it	never	grows	old.	 It	never	ages.	 It	 is	as
young	as	 it	was	when	you	were	a	child	and	 it	will	be	 the	same	when	you	will
become	very	old.
The	body	changes;	the	body	belongs	to	the	world	of	time	and	change.	The	mind
changes	because	the	mind	is	nothing	but	the	subtle	part	of	the	body.	But	beyond
both	 of	 these	 there	 is	 a	witness.	 That	witness	 never	 changes.	 That	 is	 the	 only
phenomenon	in	existence	which	is	eternally	the	same.	To	find	it	is	to	find	eternal
life,	abundant	life,	immortal	life.
The	way	 to	 that	 inner	point	 is	meditation.	Meditation	 simply	means	becoming
more	 and	 more	 watchful,	 alert	 about	 your	 acts,	 your	 thoughts,	 desires,
imagination,	everything,	so	 that	slowly	slowly	a	disidentification	happens.	You
become	the	observer	and	everything	becomes	the	observed.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Once	 everything	 becomes	 the	 observed	 and	 only	 consciousness	 remains	 as	 an
observer,	 a	 sudden	 shift	 in	 your	 being	 happens,	 a	 radical	 change,	 a
transformation.	Immediately	you	are	no	more	the	body,	no	more	the	mind.	That
experience	is	the	experience	of	god.
(To	Alven)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anand	Alven.	Anand	means	bliss;
alven	means	friend	of	all	--	a	blissful	friend	of	all.
(To	Usha):	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Usha.	Prem	means	love.	Usha	means
of	distinguished	quality.
Love	can	be	the	lowest	thing	in	life,	it	can	be	lust;	and	it	can	also	be	the	highest
thing	in	life,	 it	can	be	prayer.	Love	is	a	ladder	between	heaven	and	hell.	It	can
create	hell,	it	can	create	heaven.	It	all	depends	on	how	conscious	you	are.	If	you
are	 unconscious	 then	 love	 will	 remain	 simply	 lust.	 It	 will	 simply	 remain	 a
biological,	 sexual	 phenomenon.	 But	 if	 you	 become	 conscious	 it	 starts	 rising
higher;	consciousness	becomes	its	wings.	At	the	ultimate	peak	of	consciousness
love	transforms	into	golden	prayer.	It	is	the	whole	spectrum	of	life.
The	lowest	has	not	to	be	denied,	rejected,	repressed;	that	is	not	a	solution.	That	is
creating	more	problems,	more	 complexities.	The	 lowest	 has	 to	 be	 transformed
into	the	highest	by	bringing	consciousness	to	it.	Love	plus	consciousness	--	that's
the	whole	work	of	sannyas.
When	love	is	total	and	consciousness	is	also	total,	the	result	is	god.
(To	Stuart)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Stuart.	Anand	means	bliss.	Stuart
means	of	helpful	spirit.
Only	 a	 blissful	 person	 can	 be	 of	 help	 to	 others.	 Only	 bliss	 can	 make	 you
compassionate,	only	bliss	can	create	a	beautiful	energy	in	your	life	which	can	be
of	help	to	others,	of	service	to	others.	Without	bliss	you	cannot	serve	anybody.
You	may	think	you	are	serving,	you	will	be	simply	harming.	You	may	think	you
are	helping,	you	may	be	doing	something	else.
A	miserable	person	can	only	give	misery	to	others.	We	can	give	only	that	which
we	have.	It	is	not	a	question	of	god	wishes.	You	may	wish	to	help,	but	you	may
be	doing	something	else.
A	miserable	person	can	only	give	misery	to	others.	We	can	only	give	that	which
we	have.	 It	 is	not	a	question	of	god	wishes.	You	may	wish	 to	help,	but	unless
there	is	a	blissful	energy	inside	you,	overflowing,	you	are	bound	to	harm.
This	is	a	basic	distinction	that	I	want	to	make,	because	up	to	now	in	the	name	of
religion	 many	 people	 have	 been	 serving	 humanity;	 they	 are	 themselves
miserable	and	they	become	great	servants	of	humanity.
They	serve	the	poor	and	they	serve	the	crippled	and	they	serve	the	ill,	they	open
hospitals	and	schools	and	they	do	all	kinds	of	things.	They	only	create	mischief.
They	don't	help	anybody	at	all.	Their	whole	trip	is	an	ego	number.
Parents	think	that	they	are	helping	their	children,	and	they	simply	destroy.	I	am
not	saying	that	they	don't	want	to	help;	they	want	to	help	but	they	are	incapable
of	 it.	Their	parents	destroyed	 them	and	now	they	are	destroying	 their	children,
and	 their	 children	 will	 do	 the	 same	 to	 their	 children,	 so	 misery	 continues,
accumulates,	becomes	bigger	and	bigger.
Hence	 I	 don't	 say	 to	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 be	 servants	 of	 humanity;	 I	 say	 to	 be
meditators,	 be	 dancers,	 rejoice,	 and	 then	 service	 will	 come.	 No	 need	 to	 talk
about	it:	it	comes	of	its	own	accord	as	a	shadow,	it	follows	you,	and	then	it	is	a
benediction.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Anand	Ra.	Anand	means	 bliss.	Ra	 is	 the	Egyptian
name	for	sun,	for	the	sun	god.
There	 are	 two	 types	 of	 people.	 Just	 as	 physically	 there	 are	men	 and	 there	 are
women,	psychologically	the	same	distinction	also,	the	same	division	exists.	But
a	man	may	be	physically	a	man	and	may	not	be	psychologically	a	man;	he	may
have	a	feminine	psyche.	Hence	things	become	complicated.	A	woman	may	have
a	 masculine	 psyche.	 There	 is	 no	 necessity	 that	 the	 body	 should	 decide	 the
psyche.
The	woman,	the	feminine	quality	I	call	the	moon	type,	and	the	masculine	quality
I	call	the	sun	type.
Their	paths	are	bound	to	be	different.	Of	course	the	goal	is	the	same;	they	reach
the	same	peak	but	they	follow	different	paths.
The	 feminine	 psyche	 follows	 the	 path	 of	 love.	 Sufism	 is	 basically	 a	 feminine
approach	 towards	 existence.	 The	 masculine	 spirit	 will	 not	 find	 any	 appeal	 in
Sufism,	 in	 the	 path	 of	 love;	 it	 will	 be	 more	 attracted	 to	 Zen,	 the	 path	 of
meditation.	The	path	of	love	is	more	of	feelings,	emotion;	it	is	greener.	The	path
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	meditation	has	the	beauty	of	a	desert,	the	silence,	the	infinity	of	a	desert.
And	if	you	have	been	in	the	desert	at	night,	there	is	nothing	more	beautiful	than
that:	the	total	silence	--
no	birds,	no	animals,	no	 trees,	no	people,	and	 the	stars	seem	so	close	 that	you
can	touch	them,	and	the	air	is	so	pure,	so	unpolluted,	so	transparent.	The	path	of
meditation	 is	 the	path	of	 the	desert.	 It	 is	not	 an	accident	 that	many	meditators
have	moved	to	the	deserts,	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	corresponds	to	their	inner
work.....
For	you,	the	path	of	meditation	will	be	the	right	path.	Try	to	understand	the	spirit
of	Zen	more	and	more,	the	spirit	of	being	silent,	the	spirit	of	being	alone.	Love
means	 being	 together,	 it	 is	 a	 dialogue.	Meditation	means	 just	 being	 alone	 and
rejoicing	in	that	aloneness.	It	is	not	a	dialogue,	it	is	utter	silence.
One	 more	 thing	 to	 be	 remembered	 so	 that	 you	 don't	 become	 frightened:
following	 the	path	of	meditation	does	not	mean	 that	you	cannot	 love,	but	 love
remains	secondary.	It	can	help	your	meditation	but	it	can't	become	the	focus	of
your	life.	Following	the	path	of	love	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	meditate,	but
it	will	remain	secondary,	it	will	enhance	your	love.
So	whether	one	follows	the	path	of	 love	or	 the	path	of	meditation,	 the	other	 is
always	there	running	side	by	side,	parallel	to	it	--	very	close,	but	secondary.	It	is
only	a	question	of	a	different	emphasis.
(To	Polyxeni):	This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Amrito.
Amrito	means	 that	which	never	dies.	The	body	 is	 born	 and	 the	body	dies,	 the
mind	is	born	and	the	mind	dies,	but	you	are	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind.	You
are	something	transcendental	to	both,	something	which	never	dies	and	which	is
never	born.	You	have	always	been	here	and	will	always	be	here.
The	moment	one	starts	 feeling	 it	 the	whole	perspective	on	 life	starts	changing.
Whatsoever	has	been	important	up	to	that	moment	becomes	unimportant:	money,
power,	 prestige	 and	 all	 that.	And	whatsoever	 has	 never	 been	 important	 before
suddenly	gains	great	importance:	love,	compassion,	meditation,	prayer,	god.
Remember	that	within	you	there	is	something	which	is	eternal.	My	function	here
is	only	to	remind	you,	to	help	you	recognize	that	which	you	already	are	and	have
always	been	and	will	always	be.
(To	Annemarie)	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Masto.	Masto	means	one	who	is	utterly
drunk,	the	drunkard...
drink	with	the	divine,	of	course!	(more	laughter)	And	that's	what	you	have	to	do:
drink	as	much	as	you	can.
Allow	yourself	 to	be	 immersed	 in	 the	energy	 that	 is	being	made	available	her.
Don't	 remain	 a	 spectator:	 take	 a	 jump,	 a	 plunge.	 Get	 involved	 --	 that's	 the
beginning	of	sannyas.	Become	an	insider	and	don't	hold	back.
Open	yourself	up	totally	for	the	first	time,	be	utterly	nude,	with	nothing	to	hide,
nowhere	to	hide.
The	 moment	 one	 gathers	 courage	 to	 be	 utterly	 exposed	 to	 existence,	 one
becomes	truth	in	that	very	exposure.	But	we	go	on	hiding,	covering	up,	lying	to
others	 and	 lying	 to	 ourselves.	 Then	 there	 are	 layers	 and	 layers	 of	 lies	 which
surround	us	and	we	become	more	and	more	unauthentic.	A	sannyasin	has	to	be
basically	an	authentic	person.	And	the	miracle	is	that	the	more	authentic	you	are,
the	 less	 and	 less	 do	 you	 have	 an	 ego.	 The	 moment	 you	 become	 absolutely
authentic	the	ego	disappears.	Then	you	are	no	more	a	person	but	only	a	presence.
And	that	presence	is	immensely	beautiful,	blissful,	ecstatic.
(To	 Cornelia)	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Mitro.	 Mitro	 means	 friend.	 Befriend
existence.
We	 have	 ben	 taught	 to	 be	 enemies	 of	 existence,	 we	 have	 been	 taught	 life-
negative	ideologies,	and	it	has	been	done	for	so	long	that	it	has	become	part	of
our	 blood,	 bones,	 marrow.	 We	 don't	 love	 life,	 we	 hate	 it,	 and	 the	 so-called
religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 people	 that	 life	 is	 a	 punishment,	 that	 you	 are
punished	for	the	original	sin.
Life	 is	 not	 a	 punishment,	 it	 is	 a	 reward,	 it	 is	 a	 gift.	 Befriend	 it	 totally.	 The
moment	you	start	befriending	 life	you	will	be	surprised	by	how	beautiful	 it	 is,
how	poetic	 it	 is,	how	musical	 it	 is.	Once	your	 idea	of	negating	disappears	and
something	 positive	 settles	 inside,	 a	 secret	 door	 opens,	 life	 starts	 revealing	 its
mysteries	 to	you.	Those	mysteries	can	be	revealed	only	 to	friends;	 they	cannot
be	revealed	to	anybody,	they	cannot	be	made	public.	Only	when	you	are	in	deep
intimate	 relationship	 with	 life	 does	 life	 open	 its	 heart	 to	 you.	 In	 that	 very
opening	one	comes	to	know	what	truth	is,	what	love	is,	what	bliss	is,	what	god
is.
Sannyas	is	life-affirmative.	Categorically,	absolutely	with	no	exceptions.	Life	is
good	to	me,	life	is	all	to	me,	there	is	nothing	more.	One	has	not	to	seek	another
kind	of	life,	one	has	to	go	deep	into	this	life	and	the	other	kind	is	found	hidden	in
it.	 The	 other	 shore	 is	 hidden	 on	 this	 shore,	 the	 other	 world	 is	 hidden	 in	 this
world.	We	have	not	to	go	away	from	it,	we	have	to	go	deeper	into	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001045
ShortTitle:	RAFTER04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Renate)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Bhora.	Bhora	means	the	early	dawn;	those
beautiful	moments	when	the	night	is	over	and	the	day	has	not	yet	arrived	--	that
little	interval,	that	gap.
Sannyas	is	exactly	that	interval:	you	are	leaving	the	past,	your	mind,	all	that	you
have	known	yourself	 to	be.	The	old	will	be	gone	and	the	new	will	 take	a	 little
time	to	come.	And	between	these	two,	great	courage	is	needed.	The	man	who	is
not	courageous	enough	can	fall	back,	can	become	afraid	of	the	emptiness,	can	be
frightened	that	the	familiar	is	disappearing	and	there	seems	to	be	no	sign	of	truth
arising.	That's	why	very	few	people	take	the	initiative	to	move	into	the	unknown,
and	god	is	the	most	unknown,	the	most	unknowable	phenomenon.
The	function	of	the	master	is	to	help	you	in	this	interval.	Once	the	sun	has	risen
then	there	is	no	problem;	then	the	new	mind	has	arrived,	the	new	man	is	born.
Now	 you	 can	 live	 again	 with	 the	 new,	 through	 the	 new;	 the	 old	 is	 no	 more
needed.	 But	 before	 the	 new	 arrives	 and	 the	 old	 is	 gone,	 you	 are	 in	 a	 kind	 of
limbo	--	don't	be	afraid	of	it.
And	 never	 think	 of	 falling	 back	 --	 that	 is	 cowardly.	 And	 a	 cowardly	 person
cannot	be	religious.	Religion	is	only	for	the	brave	ones.
(To	 Gerdi)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	 Gerdi.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name;	 it	 means
courageous	 spirit.	 and	 Courage	 is	 the	 most	 significant	 religious	 quality,
everything	else	is	secondary,	because	without	courage	there	is	no	possibility	of
being	 sincere,	 truthful,	 meditative.	 without	 courage	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of
growing,	because	growth	means	going	constantly	beyond	the	known.	when	the
seed	 becomes	 a	 sprout	 it	 is	 going	 into	 something	 unknown,	 when	 the	 sprout
starts	 growing	 flowers	 it	 is	 again	movement	 into	 the	 unknown.	And	when	 the
fragrance	leaves	the	flowers...	again	a	quantum	leap	into	the	unknown.
Life	 needs	 courage	 at	 each	 step.	 Wherever	 courage	 is	 lacking	 we	 become
dormant.	Courage	keeps	us	flowing,	alive.
(To	Vera)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Vera.	Vera	means	truthful,	sincere,	faithful.
Those	are	great	things.
And	 if	 from	 right	now	you	 start	growing	 in	 these	directions,	 they	can	happen.
They	 very	 rarely	 happen	 and	 to	 only	 a	 few	 people,	 but	 only	 those	 people	 to
whom	these	qualities	happen	are	fortunate.
Everybody	 is	 capable	 but	 much	 work	 has	 to	 be	 done.	 Start	 from	 now!	 Good
Vera!
(To	Reinhard)	--	This	is	your	name.	Reinhard	means	pure	heart/	In	fact	the	heart
is	never	impure.	It	is	a	repetition	to	say	pure	heart;	the	heart	means	purity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	head	can	be	impure	but	the	heart	cannot	be	impure.	The	head	can	be	impure
because	it	can	have	desires,	memories,	thoughts.	Even	when	it	has	good	desires
it	 is	impure.	Even	if	 the	dust	is	golden	it	 is	dust	and	it	covers	the	mirror.	Even
when	you	desire	god	you	are	creating	impurity.	Impurity	simply	means	that	you
are	bringing	something	alien,	 foreign	 into	yourself.	The	head	 is	always	 impure
and	the	heart	is	always	pure.
So	the	question	is	not	how	to	make	the	heart	pure	or	how	to	make	the	head	pure;
the	question	is	how	to	move	from	the	head	to	the	heart.	Movement	from	the	head
to	the	heart	is	movement	from	impurity	to	purity
--	and	that's	what	meditation	is.	When	we	say	that	meditation	is	no-mind,	we	are
simply	saying	that	meditation	is	the	heart.
(To	Wim)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Dharmo.	Dharmo	means	 the	 ultimate
law,	the	tao,	 the	logos,	 the	law	that	keeps	the	whole	universe	going,	 that	keeps
the	whole	universe	 together,	 the	 invisible	 thread	 running	 through	 the	whole	of
existence.	Without	it	things	will	fall	apart.	But	nothing	falls	apart.	It	is	such	an
immense	existence	but	it	runs	with	such	harmony,	with	such	rhythmic	joy.	It	is
so	deeply	connected,	interlinked,	that	to	contemplate	upon	it,	just	to	think	of	it,
fills	one	with	great	mystery.
Now	your	work,	the	work	of	a	sannyasin,	is	to	be	in	tune	with	this	ultimate	law,
to	be	in	tune	with	the	whole.	Ordinarily	man	lives	apart,	he	tries	to	lie	a	separate
existence.	That's	what	ego	is:	an	effort	to	live	as	a	separate	entity.	It	is	bound	to
fail,	it	is	doomed	to	fail.	And	it	brings	great	misery.
Sannyas	means	dropping	that	whole	project	of	the	ego,	of	living	separately	from
existence,	moving	with	 existence,	with	 the	whole,	 in	 absolute	 surrender.	 Then
there	is	no	misery,	no	anguish,	no	anxiety.	Then	all	is	good	and	when	all	is	good,
all	is	god.
(To	Klaus)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Sarthi.	Sarthi	means	the	charioteer.
Man's	body	 is	 like	a	chariot	and	man's	consciousness	should	be	 the	charioteer.
But	it	is	fast	asleep	and	the	chariot	goes	on	moving	according	to	the	horses.	The
five	 senses	 are	 five	 horses.	 They	 have	 their	 own	 different	 ideas	 and	 they	 are
running	 in	 all	 directions;	 hence	 the	 misery,	 the	 chaos.	 It	 is	 a	 miracle	 that
somehow	we	keep	on	going.
The	charioteer	has	to	be	awakened,	he	has	to	take	the	reins	in	his	hands.	That's
what	sannyas	is:	the	beginning	of	an	inner	mastery,	the	beginning	of	a	sense	of
direction,	the	beginning	of	a	center	in	your	being,	a	rootedness,	a	groundedness.
Each	 movement	 has	 to	 be	 made	 consciously,	 only	 then	 can	 life	 become
something	significant,	otherwise	it	remains	accidental.
(To	China)	 --	 This	 is	 you	 new	 name:	Ma	 Sargam.	 Sargam	 literally	means	 the
seven	notes	of	music.
Music	 consists	 of	 seven	 notes	 and,	 exactly	 like	 that,	 man	 consists	 of	 seven
centers.	Man	is	 like	a	rainbow:	he	has	seven	colors.	When	all	 the	seven	colors
meet	 in	 deep	 harmony	 white	 is	 created.	White	 is	 not	 a	 single	 color,	 it	 is	 the
harmony	between	 the	 seven	 colors.	When	 all	 the	 seven	 colors	 are	 absent,	 it	 is
black.
Black	is	also	not	a	color,	it	is	absence	of	all	the	colors.	White	is	the	presence	of
all	 the	 colors,	 but	 a	 presence	 with	 a	 certain	 condition:	 a	 presence	 in	 deep
harmony.
When	there	are	seven	notes	of	music	they	can	either	create	noise	--	if	there	is	no
harmony;	or	they	can	create	beautiful	music	if	there	is	harmony.	Ordinarily	every
man	is	a	chaos:	his	seven	centers	are	not	functioning	in	harmony.	His	head	says
one	 thing,	 his	 heart	 says	 another.	One	 center	 goes	 to	 the	 north,	 another	 center
goes	 to	 the	 south.	One	part	 longs	 for	one	 thing,	another	part	 longs	 for	 just	 the
opposite.	And	it	is	not	possible	to	have	both.
For	example,	either	you	can	have	light	in	the	room	or	you	can	have	darkness	in
the	room.	If	part	of	you	wants	darkness	and	part	of	you	wants	light,	then	there	is
going	 to	 be	 trouble:	 you	 will	 be	 torn	 apart	 and	 nothing	 will	 ever	 make	 you
contented.	 If	 there	 is	 light	 one	 part	 will	 start	 feeling	 frustrated;	 if	 there	 is
darkness	the	other	part	starts	freaking	out.	It	is	impossible	because	it	is	not	in	the
nature	of	things	to	have	both.
We	have	seven	centers	and	all	 the	centers	can	demand	opposite	 things.	This	 is
the	natural	state	of	humanity;	hence	everybody	is	more	or	less	neurotic	Neurosis
is	a	common	quality.	Unless	one	makes	a	great	effort	to	create	harmony,	unless
one	 bridges	 all	 these	 seven	 centers,	 seven	 notes	 into	 oneness,	 unless	 all	 these
seven	become	integrated	and	start	functioning	as	a	unity,	sanity	is	not	born.
Sannyas	 is	 an	effort	 to	bring	you	out	of	neuroses,	out	of	 insanity,	 into	a	 saner
space.	 it	 is	 an	effort	 to	create	music	out	of	noise,	 a	cosmos	out	of	chaos.	And
unless	is	happens	life	is	futile.
So	let	this	moment	be	decisive....	work	upon	yourself.	Now	life	will	not	be	the
same	 old	 accidental	 life,	 driftwood	 life;	 from	 now	 onwards	 you	 have	 to	 live
consciously.	And	slowly	slowly	things	start	settling.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	 takes	 time.	 But	 once	 you	 start	 feeling	 that	 things	 have	 started	 settling	 and
some	music	is	heard,	then	the	journey	becomes	easier;	then	you	know	you	are	on
the	right	track.	And	as	you	move	deeper	and	deeper	into	this	harmony,	more	and
more	joy,	more	and	more	ecstasy	arises.	At	the	ultimate	point	all	the	seven	colors
meet	and	you	explode	into	white	light.	That	experience	is	called	god.	God	is	not
a	person	but	the	ultimate	experience	of	harmony.
(To	Jose)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Purvesh.	Purvesh	means	the	God	of
the	East.	Symbolically,	 the	East	 represents	spirituality,	and	 the	West	 represents
materialism.	The	East	represents	religion,	and	the	West	represents	science.
Becoming	a	sannyasin	means	becoming	Eastern.	This	 is	a	new	birth.	The	East
has	nothing	to	do	with	geography;	remember,	it	is	a	metaphor	just	as	the	West	is
a	metaphor.	For	example,	I	would	not	count	China	as	the	East,	it	is	the	West;	it	is
so	materialistic,	so	communistic.
I	would	count	 Jesus,	Eckhart,	Francis,	 as	Eastern.	Although	 they	were	born	 in
the	West,	it	does	not	make	much	difference,	they	are	as	Eastern	as	Buddha,	Lao
Tzu,	Kabir,	Nanak.	There	are	people	in	the	West	who	are	Eastern,	and	there	are
people	in	the	East	who	are	Western.	So	symbolically,	geography	is	one	thing,	but
geographical	divisions	cannot	be	decisive.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 becoming	 part	 of	 the	 East,	 part	 of	 the
tremendous	 tradition	 of	 spirituality,	 of	 the	 tremendous	 rebellion	 of	 spirituality.
Rejoice!	You	are	accepted,	you	are	welcomed.
Now	let	your	Western	attitudes,	approaches,	disappear	--	the	Western	hurry,	the
Western	speed,	the	Western	grip	on	things,	the	Western	possessiveness.	Let	them
all	be	part	of	the	past.
Relax!	 Forget	 hurry.	 The	 moment	 you	 forget	 hurry,	 worry	 disappears.	 The
moment	 you	 are	 not	 speedy,	 you	 cannot	 be	 tense.	 The	 moment	 you	 are	 not
possessive,	 great	 relaxation	 happens.	 And	 the	 miracle	 is	 that	 when	 you	 don't
possess	anything	you	possess	the	whole.	The	whole	kingdom	of	God	is	yours.
(To	 Eric)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Arupam.	 Arupam	 means	 the
formless,	the	nameless.
God	 has	 no	 form,	 no	 name,	 no	 definition.	 God	 is	 indefinable,	 indescribable,
inexpressible.	 Hence	 whatsoever	 has	 been	 said	 about	 god	 is	 all	 wrong.	 The
moment	it	is	said,	it	becomes	wrong.
One	can	be	right	about	god	only	if	one	remains	silent.	Utter	a	single	word	and
you	 have	 missed	 the	 point.	 Nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about	 god,	 but	 god	 can	 be
experienced.	 There	 is	 no	 proof,	 no	 logical	 certainty,	 but	 there	 is	 something
existential.	You	have	to	move	into	a	new	space.	It	is	a	new	space,	it	is	a	new	life
style,	 it	 is	a	new	vision	of	 the	world.	 It	 is	a	new	way	of	 looking	at	 things	The
whole	 remains	 the	 same,	 it	 is	 just	 that	 you	 start	 looking	 is	 a	 new	 way	 and
immediately	everything	changes.
Sannyas	 is	 a	new	way	of	 looking	at	 things.	 It	 is	 a	way	of	 looking	at	 things	 in
such	a	way	that	slowly	slowly	god	starts	emerging	from	everywhere.	Although
he	has	no	form,	he	starts	expressing	himself	 in	all	forms	possible.	Or	you	start
feeling	him	in	all	forms.
In	one	sense	no	wave	is	the	ocean;	in	another	sense	every	wave	is	the	ocean.	In
one	sense	no	form	is	god;	in	another	sense	every	form	is	divine.
Mind	 cannot	 know	 because	mind	 can	 only	 catch	 hold	 of	 forms.	 To	 know	 the
formless	you	will	have	to	go	beyond	the	mind,	you	will	have	to	drop	the	mind	at
least	 for	 a	 few	moments	 every	 day,	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be	 bathed	with	 god.	And
those	few	moments	are	the	real	moments.	These	are	the	only	moments	that	you
have	 lived,	 all	 other	moments	will	 go	down	 the	drain;	 they	will	 not	 be	 saved.
Only	those	moments	that	you	have	lived	with	god,	with	the	presence	of	god,	are
saved.
(To	Donna)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Satori.	Satori	 is	a	Japanese	name;	it
means	a	state	of	no-mind.
Mind	is	only	a	mechanism,	but	it	is	so	close	that	we	have	become	identified	with
it.	We	have	completely	forgotten	 that	we	are	separate.	 It	 is	as	 if	man	was	born
sitting	in	a	car...	from	the	very	beginning	he	is	just	sitting	in	a	car,	driving	a	car,
and	there	is	no	time,	no	opportunity	for	him	to	get	out	of	the	car.	Slowly	slowly
he	will	 become	 identified	with	 the	 car.	Naturally,	 because	 he	 has	 no	 time,	 no
opportunity	to	see	the	separation.	That's	exactly	the	case	with	the	mind:	we	are
born	 in	 it,	with	 it,	 and	 there	 is	 no	way	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 so	we	 never	 know	 the
separation.	 This	 is	 the	 only	 problem	 that	 has	 to	 be	 solved;	 all	 other	 problems
arise	out	of	it.
Watch	the	mind.	Become	a	little	more	distant.	See	the	functioning	of	the	mind:
thoughts	 passing,	 coming	 and	 going,	 desires	 arising,	 disappearing,	 memories
passing.	It	is	like	a	screen	and	you	are	the	spectator,	you	are	the	watcher.	When
this	experience	becomes	strengthened,	when	it	becomes	very	solid,	that	you	are	a
witness,	the	shift	happens.	Suddenly	the	gestalt	changes:	You	are	no	more	mind,
but	a	new	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
state	has	 arisen,	 the	 state	of	no-mind.	And	 that	 is	 a	great	 liberation.	After	 that
moment	there	are	no	problems	in	existence,	after	that	moment	there	is	no	misery.
Then	all	is	joy	and	song	and	dance	and	celebration.
(To	Elena)	--	This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Mouna.	Mouna	means	silence	--	and
that	is	going	to	be	the	key	for	you.	Be	more	and	more	silent.	Whenever	you	have
the	opportunity	just	sit	silently	doing	nothing,	not	even	doing	meditation.	Just	sit
silently,	for	no	reason,	for	no	purpose,	slowly	slowly	silence	grows.	It	becomes
an	overwhelming	experience.
And	when	silence	has	permeated	you	through	and	through,	you	will	know	who
you	are	and	you	will	know	what	this	life	is	all	about.	In	knowing	it	one	knows
god.
(To	Evangelos)	 --	This	 is	your	new	name:	Swami	Veetmano.	Veetmano	means
beyond	the	mind.
Truth	is	beyond	the	mind.	Philosophy	fails	for	the	simple	reason	that	philosophy
is	mind	and	nothing	else	and	truth	is	never	going	to	be	a	conclusion	of	the	mind.
it	is	an	experience	when	mind	ceases	to	exist.
When	all	the	noise	that	mind	makes	has	disappeared,	then	you	know	something
within	yourself;	something	surfaces	from	you	own	depths	--	and	that	is	truth.	It
is	 not	 a	 conclusion	 arrived	 at	 by	mind,	 it's	 something	 that	 surfaces	 only	when
mind	is	no	more	present.
Mind	is	the	barrier,	the	block.	It	is	like	a	rock:	it	does	not	allow	your	own	inner
depth	to	speak	to	you	My	work	here	consists	only	of	one	thing:	helping	you	to
go	beyond	the	mind.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001055
ShortTitle:	RAFTER05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Ghira,	 for	her	daughter)	 --	This	 is	her	name:	Ma	Deva	Renu.	Deva	means
divine,	renu	means	dust	--
divine	dust.
Man	is	both:	from	the	outside	he	is	dust,	from	the	inside	he	is	divine.	If	we	just
look	from	the	outside	we	can	never	find	the	divine.	The	divine	has	to	be	found
with	closed	eyes	inside.
(To	Itil)	--	Come	here...	come	here.	What	is	the	meaning	of	Itil?
--	It	is	a	Persian	name...	from	Mullah	Nasrudin	country.
--	Mm!	That's	good,	but	what	does	it	mean?
--	But	I'm	an	American	citizen	now.
--	What	does	it	means?
--	Itil	was	a	great	king	that	started	an	empire.
--	Mm	mm.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
--	...	which	became	Jewish	and	later	became	Arab,	Muslim.
--	Mm	mm.	Good.	And	now	he	is	becoming	a	sanyasin!	(much	laughter).	Close
your	eyes.	Good,	Itil,	come	here.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Itil.	Deva	means	divine	and	itil	is	a	treat	king	--
divine	king.
All	 the	masters	 of	 all	 the	 ages,	 have	 declared	 that	 everybody	 is	 born	 a	 divine
king,	but	 is	utterly	unaware	of	 the	fact.	Not	knowing	our	own	inner	world,	we
remain	unaware	of	our	kingdom.	And	because	we	are	unaware	of	 the	kingdom
that	belongs	to	us,	that	is	forever	ours,	we	go	on	desiring	small	things,	begging
for	small	things.	we	are	dreaming	that	we	are	beggars.	The	moment	one	wakes
up,	one	 is	 in	 for	a	great	 surprise:	one	 finds	one	 is	not	a	beggar,	one	 is	a	king.
That's	the	whole	purpose	of	meditation,	to	make	you	aware	of	your	kingdom,	to
make	you	aware	of	your	highest	potential.	And	once	you	start	becoming	aware
then	 the	 journey	 is	not	difficult.	Only	 the	 first	 step	 is	 the	most	difficult.	 Just	a
little	awakening	and	then	the	sleep	is	almost	gone,	then	things	become	easier.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	wake	up.	Tossing	and	turning	in	your	sleep	--	that's	what
sannyas	is.	From	the	very	distance	you	have	heard	that	you	are	a	king,	even	in
your	 sleep	 it	 is	 resounding.	But	unless	you	are	 awake	 it	 cannot	be	 a	 reality,	 it
cannot	be	a	realization.
(To	Wilfred)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Veet	Wilfred.	 Veet	means	 beyond,
Wilfred	means	will.
Man	has	to	go	beyond	his	will	so	that	he	can	become	part	of	the	divine	will.	One
has	 to	drop	one's	 own	will,	 it	 is	 the	whole	 trouble.	Once	our	will	 is	 dissolved
then	god	starts	functioning	through	us.	Then	there	is	no	misery,	no	anxiety;	one
is	 utterly	 relaxed.	 There	 is	 no	 problem.	 All	 problems	 arise	 out	 of	 your	 will,
because	will	means	fighting	with	the	whole.	It	is	struggle,	and	struggle	is	bound
to	bring	tension.	And	you	are	doomed	to	fail;	hence	however	hard	one	fights	one
knows	deep	down	in	the	heart,	deep	down	somewhere	that	it	is	futile,	one	cannot
succeed	against	the	whole.	One	can	succeed	only	with	the	whole,	not	against	the
whole.
Sannyas	means	 surrendering	your	will,	 going	beyond	 it.	And	 the	moment	 you
surrender	your	will,	all	is	yours.	Suddenly	the	whole	universe	opens	its	doors	for
you,	all	the	mysteries	become	available	to	you,	all	the	secrets	are	handed	over	to
you,	 all	 the	 keys.	 The	 paradox	 is:	 in	 surrendering	 the	 will	 you	 become	 the
master,	and	in	keeping	the	will	and	fighting	for	it,	you	will	remain	a	slave.
(To	Christer)	 --	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Christer.	Prem	means	 love.
Christer	means	a	follower	of	Christ.
Love	is	the	message	of	all	the	Christs.	I	am	not	using	the	singular	word	'Christ',	I
am	using	the	plural
'Christ'	because	to	me	Jesus	is	only	one	of	the	Christs.	Lao	Tzu	is	also	a	Christ,
Buddha	too,	Mohammed,	Zarathustra,	Socrates	--	these	are	all	Christs.	Christ	is	a
state	 of	 ultimate	 consciousness,	 just	 as	 Buddhahood	 is:	 Christ	 is	 synonymous
with	Buddhahood.
And	 the	 message	 of	 all	 the	 Christs	 is	 love.	 It	 is	 through	 love	 that	 reality	 is
revealed.	It	 is	through	love	that	we	become	aware	of	the	tremendous	beauty	of
existence.	 It	 is	 through	 love,	 and	 only	 through	 love,	 that	 one	 enters	 into	 the
temple	of	god.
(To	Hans)	 --	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Swami	 Jivan	Hans.	 Jivan	means	 life.	Hans
means	a	gift	of	god.
Life	 is	 a	 gift	 of	 god	 --	 never	 forget	 it.	 Everybody	 has	 forgotten	 it.	Nobody	 is
thankful	 to	god	 for	 life.	On	 the	 contrary	people	 are	 continuously	 complaining.
They	are	not	grateful.	Such	a	precious	gift,	 such	an	 incomparable,	unique	gift,
but	people	are	so	stupid	that	they	can't	appreciate	it.	They	take	it	for	granted,	as
if	it	were	their	right.	It	is	not	our	right,	we	cannot	claim	it.	We	don't	deserve	it,
we	are	not	worthy	of	it.	It	is	given	to	us	not	because	we	deserve	it,	but	because
god	cannot	resist	the	temptation	of	giving	it.	He	has	to	share	it:	he	is	overflowing
with	 life	 energy,	 he	 does	 not	 know	 what	 to	 do	 with	 it,	 hence	 he	 goes	 on
showering	it.	Worthy,	unworthy,	deserving,	undeserving,	sinners,	saints;	 it	does
not	matter,	god	goes	on	giving.	That	is	his	intrinsic	nature.	He	gives	because	he
has	so	much	that	if	he	does	not	give	it	it	will	become	a	burden	on	him.	He	is	like
a	cloud	full	of	rainwater,	it	has	to	rain.	It	will	rain	on	the	stones,	it	will	rain	on
the	rocks,	it	will	rain	anywhere.	It	has	to	rain.
To	 understand	 it	 is	 to	 be	 religious.	 This	 understanding	 brings	 a	 shift	 in	 your
consciousness.	Then	you	are	no	more	complaining,	 then	you	are	 tremendously
grateful	--	and	that	gratefulness	is	prayer.
(To	John)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Gyandeva.	Gyandeva	means	the	god
of	Wisdom.	We	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
born	 with	 infinite	 wisdom	 but	 we	 go	 on	 losing	 our	 wisdom	 in	 collecting
knowledge.	Knowledge	 is	 rubbish,	 it	 is	mundane,	 it	 is	 trivia.	We	go	on	giving
away	the	precious	for	the	absolutely	meaningless.
To	be	 a	 sannyasin	means	 an	 effort	 to	 reclaim	your	 lost	wisdom.	And	 the	only
way	 is:	 become	 ignorant	 again	 of	 so-called	 knowledge.	 Unburden	 yourself	 of
knowledge,	 unlearn	 it,	 and	 the	 moment	 all	 knowledge	 has	 been	 unlearned,
wisdom	 starts	 welling	 up	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 your	 intrinsic	 nature.	 It	 has	 not	 to	 be
learned,	it	has	not	to	be	searched	for,	you	have	not	to	go	outside	seeking	for	it.	It
is	your	innermost	core	of	being.
Meditation	means	unlearning	knowledge	so	that	wisdom	can	assert	life	again.
(To	Kurt)	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Ramraj.	Ramraj	means	the	kingdom	of
god.
Jesus	says	that	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you.	That	is	the	essential	teaching
of	 all	 the	 wakened	 ones:	 don't	 go	 anywhere,	 don't	 seek	 and	 search	 outside
yourself,	 you	will	 not	 find	 anything	 there.	You	will	 remain	 empty,	 unfulfilled,
frustrated,	because	the	real	kingdom,	the	real	riches	are	part	of	your	interiority,
of	your	subjectivity,	of	your	soul.
Ordinary	humanity	is	extrovert.	That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	worldly	man:
extrovert.	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	will	be	moving	in	exactly	the	opposite
direction:	 it	 is	 introversion.	Not	 that	 I	 am	 against	 the	world,	 but	 not	 to	 know
oneself	 is	very	dangerous.	Once	you	know	yourself	you	can	 roam	all	over	 the
world	sharing	your	joy	and	living	your	joy;	then	there	is	no	problem.	If	you	are
rooted	in	your	being	you	can	be	as	extrovert	as	you	want,	nothing	can	harm	you.
You	can	live	in	the	marketplace	but	your	meditation	will	remain	undisturbed.
But	 the	 first,	 the	 foremost	 thing	 is	 to	 settle	within,	 to	be	acquainted	with	your
inner	 reality.	And	my	whole	 effort	 is	 to	 turn	you	 in,	 in	 every	possible	way,	 to
help	you	to	go	in.
I	 cannot	 give	 you	 the	 truth,	 nobody	 can,	 but	 I	 can	 indicate	 where	 it	 is	 to	 be
found.	It	is	not	to	be	found	on	the	moon,	it	is	not	to	be	found	on	Everest;	it	is	to
be	found	just	within	you.	Learn	to	close	your	eyes	and	see	within.
(To	Marilyn)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Prabhato.	Prabhato	means	the	early
dawn.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 early	 dawn.	 It	 is	 an	 end	 and	 a	 beginning,	 it	 is	 a	 death	 and	 a
rebirth.	it	is	the	interval	between	the	two.
You	 will	 have	 to	 drop	 the	 past,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 drop	 clinging	 to	 the	 old,
whatsoever	 it	 is,	 good	 or	 bad.	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 choosing	 the	 good	 and
dropping	 the	 bad:	 the	 past	 has	 to	 be	 dropped	 totally.	 One	 has	 to	 disconnect
oneself	from	the	past;	only	then	toes	the	rebirth	become	possible,	only	then	does
the	sun	rise.
The	sun	is	always	ready	to	rise,	it	is	just	that	we	go	on	clinging	to	the	past,	and
the	past	is	nothing	but	a	dark	night.
Enough	is	enough.	Now	drop	the	old	and	let	the	new	be	born	in	you.	And	always
remember:	Sannyas	is	not	something	like	an	event,	it	is	a	process.	It	is	not	that
one	day	you	become	a	sannyasin	and	then	it	is	finished.	It	is	like	breathing:	you
have	to	go	on	breathing	continuously.
Sannyas	is	a	process	not	an	event,	so	you	will	have	to	go	on	dropping	the	past
continuously,	because	every	day	we	accumulating	the	past.	Today	you	can	drop
it;	 again	 tomorrow,	 twenty-four	 hours	will	 have	 passed	 and	 those	 twenty-four
hours	will	be	there	and	you	can	cling	to	them.
Sannyas	means	the	awareness	that	'now,	I	am	not	going	to	cling	to	that	which	is
no	more.	The	moment	is	gone,	it	is	gone,	I	am	finished	with	it	and	that	is	that...	a
full	pint,	no	 looking	back.;	And	 then	a	great	miracle	happens:	when	you	don't
look	back,	for	the	first	time	you	become	aware	of	the	present,	and	the	beauty	of
it.
That	beauty	is	god.	Now	is	another	name	for	god.
(To	Renee)	 --	This	 is	 your	 new	name:	Ma	Nisargo.	Nisargo	means	 nature.	Be
more	and	more	natural	from	now	non.
The	 society	 imposes	 artificiality	 on	 everybody.	 It	 calls	 it	 culture,	 civilization,
education.	It	gives	it	big	names,	but	the	real	thing	is	that	it	makes	you	artificial.
It	teaches	you	to	repress	nature.
My	whole	 effort	 is	 to	 help	you	 to	be	natural	 again,	 because	 it	 is	 only	 through
nature	 that	 one	 can	 come	 to	 god.	The	more	 artificial	 one	 becomes,	 the	 farther
away	one	is	from	god.	So	now	remember	it:	you	will	need	civilization,	culture,
education,	but	don't	get	identified	with	them	They	are	games.	One	can	play	them
because	one	has	to	live	in	a	society	where	everybody	is	living	those	games,	but
remember	that	they	are	games	and	they	are	not	realities.	Watch	so	that	you	don't
get	identified	with	them,	and	whenever	they	are	not	needed	be	natural.
'Nature'	 has	 to	 be	 the	 key	 word	 for	 you.	 And	 that	 is	 going	 to	 help	 you
immensely,	that	will	bring	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
radical	change	needed.
(To	Lilly)	 --	This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Nirvano.	Nirvano	means	cessation	of
the	ego,	dropping	of	the	ego.	And	that's	essentially	what	religion	is.
The	irreligious	person	lives	in	the	ego;	he	thinks	"I	am	separate	from	the	whole."
The	religious	person	lives	egolessly;	he	knows	that	"I	am	part	of	the	whole,	an
intrinsic	 part	 of	 the	 whole,	 not	 at	 all	 separate."	 To	 know	 it	 --	 that	 "I	 am	 not
separate	 from	 the	 whole"	 brings	 tremendous	 freedom.	 It	 brings	 vastness.	 The
whole	sky	is	yours.	You	are	no	more	identified	with	a	small,	very	small	ego.
We	are	vast	but	we	have	become	confined	in	small	spaces,	that's	why	there	is	so
much	misery.	This	misery	is	natural.	It	is	like	forcing	and	ocean	into	a	dewdrop.
We	are	birds	with	wings	who	need	to	have	the	whole	sky,	but	we	are	encaged.
Nobody	is	encaging	us,	the	irony	is	that	we	go	on	encaging	ourselves.	We	are	the
prison	and	we	are	the	prisoner	and	we	are	the	gaoler-there	is	nobody	else.
That's	why	the	mystics	call	it	a	dream:	it	is	a	dream.	In	a	dream	you	are	all.	The
moment	you	wake	up	you	find	that	this	is	strange:	"I	was	chased	by	a	lion,	but	I
was	 the	 lion	 and	 I	was	 chased	 and	 I	was	 the	 spectator	 too,	 the	witness	 to	 the
whole	thing."	This	is	how	life	is,	like	a	dream.
Now	it	 is	 time...	 If	children	play	with	stupid	games	 they	can	be	 forgiven,	 they
need	 to	go	astray,	 they	need	 to	commit	many	mistakes.	But	as	you	grow	older
you	 cannot	 be	 forgiven.	 And	 the	 ego	 is	 the	 most	 stupid	 game	 because	 it	 is
against	reality,	it	is	against	god.
Sannyas	simply	means	becoming	aware	of	the	fact	that	the	ego	is	a	false	entity,
our	own	creation,	our	own	projection...	and	 the	we	are	caught	 in	 it.	 It	 is	 like	a
spider's	 web:	 the	 spider	 brings	 it	 out	 from	 itself.	We	 go	 on	 creating	 our	 own
prisons	 out	 of	 ourselves	 --	 our	 imagination,	 our	 desire,	 our	 memory,	 our
ambition,	our	jealousy.	And	they	all	go	on	spinning	subtle	structures	around	us.
The	whole	structure	is	called	the	ego.
Whatsoever	the	mind	does,	the	whole	work	of	the	mind	is	called	the	ego.
From	this	very	moment	become	aware	of	it,	and	slowly	slowly	get	out	of	it.	It	is
not	going	to	be	difficult	to	get	out	of	it;	and	it	is	time	to.
Before	 one	 leaves	 the	 body	 one	 should	 be	 able	 to	 leave	 the	 ego.	 Then	 death
becomes	tremendously	beautiful,	 it	becomes	a	door	to	the	divine.	Then	it	 is	no
more	ugly,	no	more	painful,	on	the	contrary,	it	is	a	blessing,	a	benediction.
(To	Michael)
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sudas.	Sudas	means	the	surrendered	one	--	and
that	 is	going	 to	be	your	path.	Be	utterly	surrendered	 to	existence;	no	 fight	any
more,	no	conflict	any	more,	no	more	private	goals	of	your	own.	Let	 the	whole
possess	you,	 let	 the	whole	guide	you.	Then	wherever	 it	 takes	you	 is	good	and
whatsoever	it	makes	out	of	you	is	good.
Man	 alone	 cannot	 do	 right,	 he	will	 only	 do	wrong.	Right	 happens	 only	when
man	allows	god	to	function	through	him.
So	allow	god	to	function	through	you.	Trust.	If	this	whole	universe	is	going	so
beautifully,	why	can't	it	take	care	of	you?	Why	should	you	be	worried,	anxious
about	yourself?	No	rose	bush	is	worried,	no	bird,	no	animal,	no	star.	It	is	just	the
stupid	human	mind	that	creates	so	many	worries	--	and	the	simple	reason	is	that
it	 thinks	 it	 is	 separate.	 Naturally,	 if	 you	 are	 separate	 then	 the	 whole	 worry	 is
yours;	if	you	are	not	separate	then	the	whole	will	take	care.
Jesus	says:	'Thy	kingdom	come,	they	will	be	done'.	Let	that	be	your	prayer	too.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Archive	code:	8001065
ShortTitle:	RAFTER06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Fred)
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Sat	Fred.	Sat	means	true.	Fred	means	peace.
Peace	 is	 untrue	when	 it	 is	 only	 a	 negative	phenomenon.	Then	 it	 is	 absence	of
conflict,	absence	of	tension,	absence	of	struggle,	but	there	is	nothing	present;	it
is	empty.	something	is	absent	but	nothing	is	present.	It	is	just	like	the	peace	that
exists	in	the	world:	it	is	cold	war.	War	is	not	happening	but	everybody	is	ready	to
explode	into	war	at	any	moment.	It	is	only	absence	of	war,	but	it	is	not	presence
of	peace.
Presence	 of	 peace	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon,	 it	 is	 something	 utterly
positive.	 And	 negative	 peace	 cannot	 transform	 one,	 only	 positive	 peace	 can.
Positive	 peace	 comes	 not	 through	 cultivation,	 it	 comes	 through	 meditation.
Negative	peace	comes	through	cultivation:	you	can	cultivate	a	certain	character
and	 that	 character	 surrounds	 you	 and	 keeps	 you	 quiet.	 You	 don't	 come	 into
unnecessary	conflict	with	people,	with	others,	you	remain	a	little	alert,	cautious.
But	this	is	not	a	transformation	and	this	is	not	going	to	lead	you	to	the	ultimate
truth.
True	peace	is	a	by-product	of	meditation.	It	wells	up	within	you,	it	rises	within
you.	It	is	something	like	a	fragrance	of	your	soul,	the	light	of	your	inner	being.
(To	 Bruno)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Sundaram	 Bruno.	 Sundaram	means
beauty	and	bruno	means	darkness	--	the	beauty	of	darkness.
It	is	very	easy	to	see	the	beauty	of	light,	it	is	very	difficult	to	see	the	beauty	of
darkness.	We	are	afraid	of	darkness,	hence	the	difficulty	in	seeing	the	beauty	of
it.	Out	of	 fear	we	 love	 light	 and	hate	darkness,	but	darkness	 is	 as	profound	as
light.	 It	 has	 a	 totally	 different	 quality,	 its	 depth,	 its	 silence.	 when	 you	 are
surrounded	by	darkness	you	are	surrounded	by	an	infinity.
Light	is	always	finite,	it	has	limits.	And	light	is	always	caused	by	something,	it	is
temporary.	Even	 the	sun	 is	 temporary:	 sooner	or	 later	 it	 is	going	 to	die,	 it	will
cease	giving	light.	A	candle	dies	in	the	night,	a	sun	takes	millions	of	years,	but	it
is	only	a	question	of	degree.	Darkness	 is	without	beginning,	without	 end;	 it	 is
always.	It	is	non-temporal,	it	has	something	of	eternity	in	it.
Start	meditating	on	darkness	because	that	will	reveal	many	mysteries	to	you.	If
you	can	love	darkness	one	day	you	will	be	able	to	love	death	too,	because	death
is	also	darkness.	If	you	can	love	darkness	you	will	be	able	to	fall	deeply	in	love,
because	love	is	also	darkness.	If	you	are	able	to	love	darkness	you	will	be	able	to
move	into	the	unknown,	because	the	unknown	is	dark,	it	is	familiar.	The	known,
the	familiar,	is	full	of	light.	The	moment	you	cross	the	boundary	of	the	familiar,
you	are	moving	into	some	eternal	abyss.
So	 meditate	 on	 darkness	 and	 it	 will	 help	 you	 also	 on	 the	 inward	 journey...
because	when	you	first	start	moving	inwards	you	come	across	a	great	darkness.
Ultimately	you	come	to	light,	but	on	the	way	you	have	to	pass	through	darkness.
and	if	you	are	afraid	of	 it,	you	will	escape.	That's	why	only	a	very	few	people
have	been	able	to	reach	to	their	innermost	core.
(To	Robert)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Satyam	Robert.	Satyam	means	 truth.
Robert	means	fame.
Fame	is	good	only	if	it	comes	as	a	by-product	of	experiencing	truth,	otherwise	it
has	no	beauty	in	it.
Adolf	Hitler	is	famous,	Genghis	Khan	is	famous,	and	all	kinds	of	criminals	and
murderers	are	famous.
History	 is	 full	 of	 them.	 In	 fact	 history	 consists	 only	 of	 these	 people.	 But	 that
fame	is	ugly,	evil.
Unless	 one	 can	 be	 famous	 because	 of	 truth,	 not	 for	 any	 other	 reason,	 fame	 is
futile.	 A	 Buddha,	 a	 Jesus,	 a	 Zarathustra	 --	 their	 fame	 arises	 from	 a	 totally
different	 source.	 It	 arises	 from	 god	 himself,	 it	 is	 not	 their	 fame.	 They	 are	 no
more:	only	god	is.	Now	god	is	shining	forth	through	them,	radiating.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 fame	 of	 Moses	 or	 a	 Lao	 Tzu	 or	 a	 Mohammed	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
Mohammed,	Lao	Tzu	or	Moses.	 It	 is	not	personal,	 it	 is	divine,	 it	 is	godly,	 it	 is
universal.	These	people	have	become	 just	vehicles,	 vehicles	of	 truth.	They	are
utterly	empty,	egoless.	Hence	their	fame	has	no	stink	of	ego,	it	has	the	fragrance
of	egolessness.
(To	Georg)	--	This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Georg.	Deva	means	divine.	Georg
means	a	farmer.
Buddha	has	said:	I	am	a	divine	farmer.	I	sow	the	seeds	of	divinity	 in	people.	 I
water	 peoples'	 heart	 with	 prayers.	 I	 help	 them	 to	 grow	 and	 train	 them	 to	 be
patient	 and	 to	 wait	 for	 the	 spring,	 so	 they	 will	 suddenly	 burst	 forth	 into
thousands	of	flowers.
That's	 really	 the	message	 of	 all	 the	masters:	 life	 should	 be	 transformed	 into	 a
divine	farming.	I	should	not	be	taken	for	granted.	Whatever	you	have	got	is	only
the	seed.	You	have	to	bring	it	to	the	ultimate	flowering.	That	is	the	task	of	life,
the	goal,	the	very	purpose	--	and	without	fulfilling	it	one	never	feels	blissful.
(To	Gwen)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Gwen.	Anand	means	bliss.	Gwen
means	white.
White	is	the	symbolic	color	of	bliss.	White	represents	a	deep	harmony	of	all	the
colors.	 It	 is	 the	 whole	 rainbow,	 in	 such	 a	 harmony,	 that	 you	 cannot	 not	 see
separate	colors.	They	have	lost	their	separateness	into	it,	they	have	become	one,
they	have	fallen	in	a	deep	accord.	Because	of	that	deep	accord	white	has	become
the	symbol	of	ultimate	bliss.
Bliss	 is	 possible	 only	when	 your	 life	 has	 become	 an	 accord:	 your	 body,	 your
mind,	your	soul,	all	in	deep	harmony;	and	you	in	a	deep	synchronicity	with	the
whole.	And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	creating	a	space	in	you	where	all
the	 conflicting	 elements	 lose	 their	 conflict,	 become	 friends,	 hold	 hands,	 start
dancing	and	create	a	harmony.	Then	bliss	arises.
Bliss	is	the	flowering	of	a	white	lotus.
(To	Maya)	Hello	Maya!	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?
--	It	means	illusion.
--	Who	has	given	it	to	you?
--	A	friend.
--	A	friend	has	given	it	?	Good!
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Veet	 Maya.	 Veet	 means	 going	 beyond.	 Maya	 means
illusion.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 bridge	 that	 can	 take	 you	 beyond	 all	 illusions.	 Sannyas	 is	 the
alchemy	to	help	you	to	transcend	illusions	and	reach	reality.
All	 illusions	 exist	 in	 the	 mind	 --	 in	 desires,	 in	 memories,	 in	 thoughts,	 in
imagination.	When	 all	 these	 processes	 have	 stopped,	when	 the	mind	 is	 utterly
silent,	not	functioning	at	all,	you	transcend	illusion,	you	transcend	the	world	of
dreams:	you	become	awakened.	That's	what	a	Christ	 is,	what	a	Buddha	is:	one
who	has	awakened	and	dreams	no	more.	And	the	moment	you	know	the	taste	of
awakening	you	have	experienced	the	ultimate	bliss.
There	is	nothing	higher	that	 it,	 there	is	nothing	deeper	that	 it.	 It	 is	 the	ultimate
experience	of	life	in	all	its	beauty,	grandeur,	splendor.
(To	 Patrick)	 Man	 is	 born	 enlightened,	 but	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 up	 bringing
makes	him	unenlightened.
Everybody	 is	 born	 a	Buddha,	 but	 the	 society	does	not	 allow	 the	 self-nature	 to
function.	 It	 imposes	 a	 pseudo	 nature	 on	 top	 of	 it,	 because	 the	 pseudo	 can	 be
manipulated	 easily.	The	 society	 is	 very	 afraid	 of	 self-nature	 because	 it	 is	 such
intelligence	 that	you	can	 reduce	cannot	 reduce	a	person	 to	a	 slave,	you	cannot
destroy	the	person	and	his	freedom.	He	will	not	be	a	part	of	any	country,	church,
state,	because	he	will	be	able	to	see	through	and	through.	He	cannot	be	deceived,
he	cannot	be	cheated,	he	cannot	be	exploited.	And	the	society	wants	people	who
can	 be	 exploited,	 enslaved,	 imprisoned;	 hence	 it	 creates	 a	 pseudo	 personality
around	the	self-nature.	It	rewards	the	pseudo	personality	and	it	punishes	the	self-
nature.
The	function	of	initiation	into	some	spiritual	school	simply	means	one	thing:	it	is
a	 de-conditioning,	 a	 de-hypnosis.	 It	 is	 destroying	 the	 structure	 created	 by	 the
society	so	that	your	self-nature	can	be	free	to	function	according	to	itself.
(To	Lea)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Tarika.	Tarika	means	a	star,	a	shining	star.	We
are	all	carrying	within	ourselves	a	star	of	infinite	beauty.	We	are	stars.	Of	course
we	are	surrounded	by	much	smoke	and	clouds,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
and	if	one	looks	from	the	outside	nothing	of	the	star	can	be	found.
The	 function	 of	 meditation	 is	 to	 penetrate	 through	 these	 dark	 clouds	 that
surround	you	and	to	reach	to	the	center	where	eternal	light	is	present,	where	life
is	 a	 flame	 of	 joy,	 of	 bliss,	 of	 tremendous	 beauty.	 The	 experience	 of	 that
innermost	flame	is	the	experience	of	god.
The	 journey	 is	 difficult	 but	 worth	 taking.	 And	 it	 is	 only	 difficult	 in	 the
beginning.	 As	 you	 become	 accustomed	 to	 the	 joy	 of	 the	 unknown	 and	 the
freedom	of	 the	unknown	and	 the	 thrill	of	 the	unknown,	 it	 is	no	more	difficult.
Then	each	moment	of	it	is	of	such	precious	beauty,	of	such	exquisite	joy,	of	such
tremendous	ecstasy	 that	one	 is	ready	to	go	through	any	hardships.	One	is	even
ready	to	die	for	it	because	now	one	knows	that	even	death	is	not	a	death.
(To	Guiseppe)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Satgyano.	Satgyano	means	true
knowing.
The	false	knowing	is	borrowed,	the	true	knowing	is	intrinsic.	The	false	knowing
comes	from	the	outside	and	the	true	knowing	arises	within	you;	 it	 is	your	own
treasure,	it	is	your	own	kingdom.	The	false	knowing	can	be	taken	away,	the	true
knowing	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.	Even	death	cannot	separate	you	from
your	true	knowing.
That	is	the	only	treasure	that	we	can	take	beyond	death.	Everything	else	will	be
left	 behind.	 So	 all	 the	 trouble	 that	 we	 take	 in	 accumulating	 other	 things
ultimately	 proves	 to	 be	 futile.	 It	 proves	 to	 be	 simply	 a	 wastage	 of	 time	 and
energy.	Only	those	few	moments	in	which	you	worked	for	your	inner	exploration
are	saved.
Meditation	 is	 the	 way	 to	 explore	 inwards.	 From	 now	 onwards,	 focus	 your
energies	on	meditation,	give	as	much	time	and	energy	to	meditation	as	you	can
manage,	because	all	else	is	futile:	At	the	most	it	keeps	you	occupied,	at	the	most
it	is	just	entertainment;	at	the	worst	it	is	a	nightmare.
(To	Annemarie)	 --	This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Nishavdo.	Nishavdo	means	 the
wordless,	the	silent	one.
And	that	is	going	to	be	your	work	on	yourself:	get	out	of	the	jungle	of	words,	get
out	of	 the	constant	chattering	of	 the	mind.	Remember	constantly:	 'I	am	not	 the
mind,	but	the	watcher,	the	witness.',	and	slowly	slowly	the	witness	arises	out	of
the	 clouds	 like	 a	 sun.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 experienced	 your	 absolute
separation	 and	 transcendence	 from	mind,	 you	 are	 liberated.	 There	 is	 no	 other
bondage,	no	other	prison	then	the	words.	Our	prison	is	not	made	of	bricks,	it	is
made	 of	 words.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 gross	 phenomenon.	 It	 si	 a	 very	 subtle,	 transparent
thing,	made	of	mind.
So	 watch	 more	 and	 more.	 Create	 a	 distance	 between	 you	 and	 the	 mind,	 and
remember	 again	 and	 again	 as	 many	 times	 as	 possible	 'I	 am	 not	 the	 mind.'
Whatever	 you	 start	 getting	 involved	 in	 the	 mind,	 remind	 yourself	 and
immediately	relax	and	get	out	or	it.
In	 the	beginning	 it	will	be	only	for	moments,	 then	for	minutes,	 then	for	hours,
then	for	days.	 In	 fact	 the	day	one	can	manage	 to	be	out	of	 the	mind	for	 forty-
eight	minutes,	one	 is	 free.	That	 is	 the	experience	of	 all	 the	Buddhas	of	 all	 the
ages:	forty-eight	minutes...	and	then	the	mind	has	not	power	over	you.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001075
ShortTitle:	RAFTER07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Sunita)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Sunita.	Anand	means	bliss.	Sunita
means	virtue.
My	message	is	simple:	bliss	is	virtue,	misery	is	sin.	Avoid	being	miserable.	Don't
get	into	those	traps	which	your	mind	goes	on	creating.	If	you	can	avoid	the	traps
of	the	mind	that	create	misery,	jealousy,	possessiveness,	ego,	then	there	is	bliss.
Bliss	is	your	nature	and	out	of	bliss	is	all	virtue,	out	of	bliss	is	all	holiness.
(To	Sharon)	 --	This	 is	 your	name:	Ma	Deva	Sharon.	Deva	means	god.	Sharon
means	beloved.
The	word	'sharon'	appears	in	THE	SONG	OF	SOLOMON,	as	the	rose	of	sharon;
it	symbolizes	the	beloved.	The	whole	existence	loves	you,	but	we	are	insensitive
to	 that	 love;	 hence	 we	 never	 become	 aware	 of	 it	 and	 we	 go	 on	 remaining
miserable.	We	go	on	seeking	and	searching	 for	somebody	 to	 love	us	while	 the
whole	existence	 is	ready	to	shower	all	kinds	of	 love	on	us.	but	you	need	to	be
open,	available.
That's	 what	 sannyas	 is:	 being	 open,	 being	 available,	 being	 vulnerable,	 so	 that
existence	can	go	through	you,	through	and	through,	so	that	the	wind	and	the	rain
and	the	sun	can	all	pass	through	you,	dancing.
When	 you	 allow	 existence	 to	 penetrate	 you	 to	 the	 very	 core	 bliss	 arises.	 The
meeting	of	existence	with	you,	the	meeting	of	the	individual	with	the	universal,
is	bliss.	And	that	is	the	search	of	all	beings.
(To	Loredana)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Loredana.	Anand	means	bliss.
Loredana	means	victorious	spirit.
One	is	victorious	only	when	one	has	become	blissful,	otherwise	life	is	a	failure
and	a	frustration.	Keep	on	reminding	yourself:	you	can	possess	the	whole	world
but	 if	your	heart	 is	not	dancing	with	 joy	all	 those	possessions	are	useless,	 they
are	burdens.	They	will	make	you	a	captive,	a	prisoner.	They	will	not	help	you,
they	will	hinder	your	growth.	One	can	have	all	 the	 riches,	power,	prestige	and
yet	be	immensely	poor,	terribly	poor,	totally	poor.
The	only	real	richness	is	bliss,	and	bliss	is	something	which	can	happen	within
you	without	 your	 possessing	 anything,	 because	 it	 is	 something	 that	 is	 already
there,	we	have	only	to	discover	it.	We	have	lost	track	of	it	but	it	is	there,	just	a
little	digging	is	needed.
We	go	on	searching	on	the	outside.	We	will	not	find	it	there,	it	is	not	there.	It	is
in	your	interiority.	It	is	the	fragrance	of	your	subjectivity.
Soren	Kierkegaard	says:	'God	is	subjectivity'.	He	is	right,	god	is	interiority.	The
interiority	of	 the	whole	existence	 is	god,	When	you	enter	 into	your	 interiority,
you	are	entering	from	a	door	into	existence	itself.
You	disappear,	as	you	go	deeper	into	yourself	you	disappear.	Then	the	vast	sky
remains,	and	the	joy	and	the	freedom	of	that	vastness,	of	the	infinity....
(To	Kiran)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Anand	Kiran.	Anand	means	 bliss;	 kiran
means	a	ray	--	a	ray	of	bliss.	And	that's	enough:	just	a	ray	of	bliss	is	enough	to
liberate	 us,	 and	 just	 a	 ray	 of	 bliss	 is	 enough	 to	 destroy	 all	 our	 darkness	 and
misery.
Darkness	has	no	power,	so	when	you	bring	a	small	candle	into	a	dark	room	the
darkness	simply	disappears.	It	was	so	much,	so	thick,	and	the	candle	is	so	small,
but	 it	 is	 enough.	 The	 darkness	 may	 have	 been	 very	 ancient,	 maybe	 for	 years
nobody	had	entered	the	room,	yet	the	newly	lit	candle	can	destroy	the	darkness
of	millions	of	years.	So	is	the	case	with	the	ray	of	bliss.	One	just	has	to	be	open
to	receive	it.	It	comes	from	the	beyond	or	from	the	within...	which	both	means
the	same.
In	the	dictionaries	the	word	"beyond"	and	the	word	"within"	are	different,	but	in
existence	itself	the	beyond	is	the	within	and	the	within	is	the	beyond.	They	are
the	same,	they	are	not	different.
One	has	to	learn	to	be	silent	so	that	one	can	be	capable	of	receiving	the	ray	of
light,	the	ray	of	bliss.
Learn	to	be	silent.	Sit	in	silence	every	day	for	one	hour	at	least.	Slowly	slowly
the	knack	is	learned.
(To	 Giovanni)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anand	 Giovanni.	 Anand	 means
bliss.	Giovanni	means	a	gift	of	god.
Bliss	 is	never	our	achievement,	 it	 cannot	be	because	 it	happens	only	when	we
have	disappeared.	If	we	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	still	there	to	claim	that	we	have	achieved	it,	it	is	a	pseudo	bliss,	it	is	not	true.
It	is	just	a	dream,	soon	it	will	be	gone	and	you	will	fall	back	into	misery.	Mind
has	 played	 a	 trick	 on	 you.	 And	 mind	 is	 very	 cunning,	 very	 political,	 very
diplomatic.	 It	goes	on	 finding	ways	and	means	 to	keep	you	hanging	around	 it.
And	the	ultimate	trick,	the	last	trick	that	it	can	play	is	to	create	a	false	sense	of
bliss.
The	real	bliss	 is	always	a	gift	from	god.	And	it	can	happen	only	when	the	ego
dies.	The	ego	is	the	barrier.	The	moment	you	are	not,	god	is,	and	the	experience
of	god	happening	 in	your	 total	 silence	 and	nothingness	 is	 bliss.	That	 dance	of
god	in	your	absolutely	silent	space,	with	nothing	to	interfere-no	mind,	no	ego	to
distort	it,	to	hamper	it,	to	hinder	it	--	that	is	bliss.
The	work	of	meditation	is	negative.	It	is	to	destroy	the	ego.	Then	bliss	comes	on
its	own.
(To	Claudine)	 --	This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Anand	Claudine.	Anand	means	 bliss.
Claudine	means	humble	heart.
Bliss	is	possible	only	in	absolute	humbleness,	but	the	humbleness	should	not	be
a	practiced	one,	otherwise	it	is	pseudo.	It	is	just	ego	playing	the	game	of	being
humble.	And	it	can	be	detected	very	easily:	If	 in	your	humbleness	there	is	still
some	competition,	if	you	still	think	that	you	are	the	most	humble	person,	nobody
is	as	humble	as	you	are,	that	you	are	the	humblest	person	in	the	world,	then	it	is
not	humbleness.
Then	it	is	just	ego	standing	upside	down;	not	claiming	that	'I	am	the	greatest',	but
claiming	that	"I	am	the	humblest.'	It	is	the	same.
The	 claim	 can	 never	 be	 humble.	That's	what	 happens	 to	 so-called	 saints:	 they
cultivate	 humbleness,	 they	decorate	 their	 ego,	 they	make	 the	 ego	 stand	upside
down.	They	teach	the	ego	a	headstand,	but	then	you	can	see	it	in	their	eyes.	They
say	that	they	are	just	dust,	that	they	are	nothing,	but	you	can	see	in	their	eyes	that
they	are	waiting	for	you	to	say	that	'We	have	seen	many	saints,	but	you	are	the
most	humble.	You	are	great	because	you	are	humble.'	Their	humbleness	is	again
just	a	strategy	coming	in	from	the	backdoor	to	be	grat.
Real	 humbleness	 comes	 only	when	 you	 have	 seen	 in	 deep	meditation	 that	 the
ego	is	a	false	entity,	that	it	exists	not.	Not	that	you	make	it	humble.	When	you
see	that	it	is	just	imagination,	it	has	no	reality,	in	that	seeing	the	ego	evaporates,
and	 when	 the	 ego	 is	 not	 found	 then	 true	 humbleness	 arises	 in	 you.	 It	 has	 no
claim,	it	has	no	comparison,	it	has	no	competition.	You	don't	even	know	that	you
are	 humble,	 you	 simply	 are.	 That	 natural	 humbleness	 is	 the	 real	 treasure,	 the
kingdom	of	god.
Jesus	 is	 right	when	he	says;	Blessed	are	 the	meek,	blessed	are	 the	humble,	 for
theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.
(To	Tine)	--	This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Tine.	Prem	means	love.	Tine	means	a
follower	of	Christ.
Love	is	the	message	not	only	of	Jesus	Christ,	but	of	all	the	awakened	ones	of	all
the	 ages.	 It	 has	 been	 so	 in	 the	 past	 and	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 so	 in	 the	 future	 too
because	love	is	the	method	to	transform	the	lower	o	you	into	the	higher,	the	base
metal	 into	 gold.	Love	 is	 alchemy.	 It	 is	 the	 basic	methodology	of	 transforming
consciousness
Love	all,	 for	nor	 reason	at	all.	 If	 there	 is	a	 reason	 then	 it	 is	not	 love.	Love	all
unconditionally,	 just	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 love.	 Feel	 grateful	 that	 they	 received
your	love,	they	accepted	it;	they	could	have	rejected.	And	when	I	say	all	I	really
mean	 all,	 not	 only	 human	 beings	 but	 animals,	 birds,	 trees,	 rocks,	 because	 the
whole	 existence	 is	 overflowing	 with	 go's	 presence.	 So	 whatever	 we	 pour	 our
love,	we	are	offering	it	to	god.	This	is	the	only	real	prayer.
(To	Shabda	Nur)	 --	This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Shabda	Nur.	Shabda	means	 the
word;	nur	means	the	light
--	 the	 light	 of	 the	 word.	 But	 the	 word	 has	 a	 specific	 meaning,	 exactly	 the
meaning	that	it	has	in	the	Old	Testament	when	it	says	'In	the	beginning	there	was
the	word	and	god	was	with	the	word	and	god	was	the	word.
In	 the	East	we	 call	 it	 omkar,	 the	 soundless	 sound.	 It	 is	 vibrating	 in	 the	whole
universe,	it	is	vibrating	in	you.	On	just	has	to	become	attuned	to	listen	to	it
It	is	because	of	this	vibrating	sound	that	music	has	such	tremendous	appeal.	The
higher	 the	 music	 is	 in	 the	 same	 proportion	 the	 closer	 it	 comes	 to	 this	 inner
soundless	sound.
In	Taoist	scriptures	they	say:	When	the	musician	has	attained	the	ultimate,	when
he	has	known	the	ultimate	music,	he	throws	the	instrument	away,	because	that	is
now	a	disturbance.	The	ultimate	music	cannot	be	created,	it	can	only	be	heard.	It
is	already	there;	you	need	not	create	it.
Shabda	means	 the	word	 that	was	 in	 the	 beginning	 and	 that	 is	 now	 and	 that	 is
going	 to	be	always	 there.	 it	 is	not	meaningful.	 It	has	 tremendous	music	but	no
meaning.	If	you	can	hear	this,	your	life	will	become	full	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	light
The	mystics	have	always	said	 that	 if	on	can	 listen	 to	 the	 innermost	sound,	one
starts	radiating	light.	That	very	experience	becomes	an	explosion	of	light.	Now
modern	 scientists	 also	 agree	 from	 a	 totally	 different	 angle.	 They	 also	 say	 that
light	 and	 sound	 are	deeply	 related.	 In	 act	 they	 say	 that	 sound	 is	 nothing	but	 a
formation	 of	 light.	 Sound	 is	 electricity.	 they	 are	 not	 two	 separate	 phenomena,
they	are	one.
Mystics	have	always	experienced	 it...	 that	whenever	 that	 inner	 sound	 is	heard,
light	 is	 simultaneously	 experience.	 They	 happen	 together,	 instantly	 both	 are
there,	so	that	no	distinction	can	be	made.	And	that	is	the	ultimate	experience	of
ecstasy:	you	are	 full	 of	harmony	and	 light.	This	 is	 the	goal	of	 all	meditations,
this	is	the	goal	of	sannyas	too.
(To	 Piet)	 --	 This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anand	 Piet.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Piet
means	a	rock.
Before	the	bliss	can	happen,	you	have	to	become	integrated	like	a	rock.	People
are	like	sand,	just	thousands	of	fragments,	a	crowd,	a	multitude;	they	are	not	one.
And	bliss	can	happen	only	when	you	are	one,	otherwise	your	 inner	crowd	will
go	on	creating	noise,	conflict,	struggle,	tension,	anguish.	The	whole	crowd	has	to
be	melted	into	one	unity.
When	that	integration	happens	bliss	naturally	comes	as	a	by-product.	Bliss	is	a
by-product	of	inner	integrity,	and	the	rock	represents	integration.
(To	Dick)	--	This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Amiteshwar.	Amiteshwar	means	god
is	infinite,	god	is	unbounded.
Everything	 is	 infinite	 because	 everything	 is	 divine.	 Everything	 is	 unbounded
because	everything	participates	in	the	nature	of	god.	Boundaries	are	created	by
our	 senses,	 they	are	not	 there	at	 all.	Everything	 is	 joined	with	everything	else,
but	our	senses	create	boundaries.	It	is	as	if	you	look	from	a	window	and	it	gives
a	frame	to	the	sky.	The	sky	is	unframed	but	 the	frame	of	 the	window	becomes
the	frame	of	the	sky.
Your	eyes	are	windows,	whatsoever	you	see	through	the	eyes	becomes	framed.
Your	 ears	 are	 windows,	 whatsoever	 you	 hear	 from	 the	 ears	 is	 immediately
framed.	 All	 our	 senses	 are	 continuously	 framing	 things	 which	 are	 basically
without	frame.
To	 remember	 it	will	 give	 you	 tremendous	 insight.	Then	 the	 dewdrop	becomes
the	ocean,	then	the	pebble	on	the	seashore	is	as	big	as	the	whole	universe,	then	in
a	small	leaf	is	the	whole	biography	of	the	universe.
Then	wherever	you	go	you	encounter	god,	both	within	and	without.	And	to	live
in	that	infinity	consciously	is	the	greatest	joy	possible.	More	than	that	cannot	be
conceived,	more	than	that	is	not	possible.	That	is	the	ultimate	peak.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001085
ShortTitle:	RAFTER08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
(To	Meesha)
--	What	is	the	meaning	of	Meesha?
--	It	is	an	old	Jewish	name.	The	meaning	is	'carrier	of	the	light'.
--	Carrier	of	the	light?	Good!	Close	your	eyes...
It	is	a	beautiful	name	--	I	will	keep	it	as	it	is:	Swami	Meesha.
Light	 always	 represents	 god.	 Light	 also	 represents	 consciousness.
Unconsciousness	 is	 dark,	 it	 is	 like	night.	 consciousness	 is	 like	 the	 sunrise,	 the
dawn.
The	ancientmost	religions	were	all	sun	worshippers	for	the	simple	reason	that	the
sun	is	the	source	of	light.	And	we	are	part	of	it,	we	are	carriers	of	light.	In	fact
we	are	 just	 rays	of	 light	 an	nothing	else.	 If	 the	 sun	ceased	 to	 exist,	within	 ten
minutes	 the	whole	of	 life	 on	 earth	would	disappear.	 I	would	 take	 ten	minutes,
because	 ten	minutes	are	 taken	by	 the	 rays	 to	 reach	 the	earth,	 so	you	would	be
living	on	old	rays	for	ten	minutes.	We	can	exist	only	for	ten	minutes	without	the
sun.	In	fact	we	are	part	of	it.
And	our	sun	itself	is	part	of	some	greater	sun	which	has	not	yet	been	discovered
by	 science	 but	 which	 is	 suspected	 exists	 because	 there	 must	 be	 some	 source
around	which	it	moves.	It	moves,	that	much	is	certain,	but	we	have	not	yet	been
able	 to	 find	 out	where	 the	 center	 is	 around	which	 it	moves.	 The	 earth	moves
around	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 sun	 moves	 around	 some	 greater	 sun.	 And	 maybe	 as
science	goes	deeper	 and	deeper	 into	 the	mystery	of	 light,	 it	will	 stumble	upon
god.
(To	Sibylle)
Your	name:	Ma	Sibylle	Sibylle	means	will	of	god.
We	can	exist	as	separate	from	god	in	imagination	only,	not	in	reality.	In	reality
we	are	part	of	god,	part	of	his	will.	We	are	like	waves	in	the	ocean,	an	intrinsic
part	of	the	ocean.	The	idea	of	separation	is	only	a	mind	game,	but	it	creates	great
misery.
The	moment	we	 become	 attached	 to	 the	 false,	misery	 happens.	And	 the	most
illusory	thing	is	the	idea	of	the	ego;	that	we	are	separate,	that	we	have	our	own
will.	 That	 is	 the	 most	 absurd	 idea	 that	 can	 happen	 to	 a	 mind.	 But	 the	 mind
revolves	around	it.
Sannyas	means	dropping	that	absurd	idea	and	recognizing	oneself	as	part	of	the
whole.	That	is	holiness.
A	saint	is	one	who	no	longer	more	has	his	own	will,	who	is	just	like	a	dry	leaf	in
the	wind,	in	the	wind	of	god.	And	wherever	the	wind	takes	him,	he	is	available	--
joyously	 dancing,	 ecstatically.	 he	 is	 not	 reluctant,	 not	 resistant...	 because	 once
you	drop	the	idea	of	ego	there	is	no	possibility	of	resistance,	reluctance.	You	are
simply	available,	you	are	availability.
In	that	space	of	availability	god	starts	flowing	through	you.	You	become	part	of
his	will.	Then	there	is	only	joy,	bliss	and	benediction.
(To	Peter)
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anand	 Peter.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Peter	 means
strength,	inner	strength,	just	as	a	rock	has	an	integrity,	a	solidity
To	be	blissful	 one	needs	 a	 centering,	 a	grounding.	To	be	blissful	 one	needs	 to
become	one.	Ordinarily	we	are	many	many	fragments	spread	all	over	the	place,
we	are	divided	--	and	if	we	remain	divided	we	can	never	be	individuals.
The	process	of	individuation	simply	means	one	thing:	that	all	 the	parts	that	are
falling	apart	have	to	be	integrated	into	one	whole.	They	have	to	be	crystallized,
they	have	to	be	melted	into	one	unity	so	that	a	rocklike	center	arises	in	you.	That
becomes	spiritual	strength	and	only	then	is	there	bliss.
An	man	who	is	a	crowd	inside	cannot	be	blissful,	he	is	 just	 insane.	A	man	has
become	one	is	naturally	blissful,	all	insanity	disappears.	He	has	really	become	an
individual	--	literally	indivisible.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	John.	Anand	means	bliss.	John	means	a	gift	of
god.	Bliss	is	always	a	gift,	never	an	achievement.	You	cannot	do	anything	to	be
blissful.	Whatever	you	do	will	bring	more	misery,	because	the	very	idea	of	your
being	 is	 the	source	of	all	misery.	The	ego	 is	 the	 root	of	misery;	hence	 the	ego
cannot	attain	bliss.
Bliss	is	a	failure	of	the	ego,	not	an	achievement.	You	will	be	surprised	to	know
that	enlightenment	is	really	a	failure,	not	a	success.	It	is	a	failure	of	all	that	you
can	 do.	 It	 is	 utter	 failure,	 absolute	 failure.	 But	 in	 that	 very	 failure,	 when	 you
come	to	realize	that	nothing	can	be	done,	nothing	at	all,	the	ego	evaporates	and
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	is	great	light,	great	bliss.
The	experience	of	that	failure	of	the	ego	is	the	experience	of	god.	Hence	the	real
seeker	of	truth	is	really	seeking	suicide.	but	the	resurrection	is	possible	only	after
the	death	of	the	ego.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Lucia.	Lucia	means	light,	the	shining	one,	the	luminous,
the	resplendent.	That	is	our	real	being.	That's	what	we	are	made	of.	That	is	our
very	core.	But	we	never	 look	withinwards,	hence	we	 live	 in	darkness.	Outside
there	is	darkness	and	darkness,	outside	is	hell.	Inside	is	light,	inside	is	paradise.
Look	within.	Become	more	and	more	attuned	with	your	own	inner	being.	That's
what	sannyas	is	all	about.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Claus.	Claus	means	the	victorious	heart.	The	heart	is
always	victorious.	It	knows	no	defeat,	it	cannot	know	defeat,	because	it	is	part	of
god.	God	beats	 through	 it,	 god	has	 a	 connection	with	 you	 through	your	 heart.
The	heart	is	the	link.
The	mind	 is	 yours,	 the	 heart	 is	 god's	 --	 it	 is	 god's	 penetration	 into	 you.	Mind
knows	 no	 victory,	 it	 knows	 only	 frustration,	 failure.	 And	 the	 heart	 knows	 no
failure,	 it	knows	only	victory;	because	god	cannot	 fail,	 that	 is	 impossible.	And
man	 cannot	 succeed,	 that	 too	 is	 impossible.	Man	 succeeds	 only	when	 he	 is	 in
tune	with	god.	That	is	god's	success.	Man	inevitably	fails	whenever	he	is	not	in
tune	with	god	--	that	is	man's	failure.
All	failure	is	ours	and	all	success	is	god's	--	remember	it.
That	very	 remembrance	will	help	you	 to	attain	 to	clarity.	Function	 through	 the
heart	 and	 victory	 is	 yours.	 Function	 through	 the	 head	 and	 you	 are	 bound	 for
frustration.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Sue.	Deva	means	divine.	Sue	means	grace.
Beauty	 is	human,	grace	 is	divine.	Beauty	 is	of	 the	 form,	grace	 is	of	 the	 spirit.
Beauty	 belongs	 to	 the	 circumference,	 grace	 belongs	 to	 the	 center,	 hence	 only
deep	meditation	 releases	 it.	A	 person	 can	 be	 beautiful	without	meditation,	 but
cannot	be	graceful.	And	grace	is	the	real	beauty.	The	body	is	momentary.
Today	it	is	there,	tomorrow	it	is	gone,	today	it	is	young,	tomorrow	it	will	be	old.
But	grace	is	eternal,	it	is	forever.
Anything	that	belongs	to	the	center	of	your	being	is	eternal:	it	does	not	change,	it
remains	the	same.	And	because	it	remains	the	same	it	can	become	your	home,	it
can	become	your	resting	place.
Be	 more	 and	 more	 meditative,	 release	 grace.	 Everybody	 is	 carrying	 it	 inside
himself	 as	 a	 seed.	 But	 is	 has	 to	 grow.	 It	 has	 to	 become	 a	 big	 tree	with	 great
foliage,	fruits,	flowers,	fragrance.
This	 is	your	new	name:	Swami	Kamaleshwar.	Kamaleshwar	means	 the	god	of
the	lotus.	The	lotus	is	very	symbolic.	It	really	represents	the	essential	meaning	of
sannyas.	The	lotus	grows	out	of	mud	--	the	most	beautiful	flower	grows	out	of
dirty	mud.
Prayer	grows	out	of	sexuality	and	the	soul	grows	out	of	the	body,	which	is	just
mud,	and	god	grows	out	of	the	world.	On	the	surface	it	looks	impossible.	If	you
look	 at	mud	you	 cannot	 believe	 that	 it	 can	produce	 lotuses.	 If	 you	 look	 at	 the
lotus	you	cannot	believe	that	it	can	come	out	of	dirty	mud.	But	that's	how	it	is,
the	 lowest	 is	 connected	with	 the	 highest.	 The	 highest	 is	 in	 the	 lowest	 and	 the
lowest	is	in	the	highest,	everything	is	bridged.	And	life	is	a	ladder.
That's	 my	 basic	 teaching:	 nothing	 has	 to	 be	 denied,	 not	 even	 the	 dirty	 mud.
Everything	has	to	be	transformed	into	a	lotus.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	Vimaleshwar.	 Vimaleshwar	means	 the	 god	 of
purity.	Purity	does	not	mean	anything	more...	because	morality	 is	a	calculative
step,	 it	 is	cunning.	 It	 is	out	of	desire:	one	 is	hankering	for	 the	other	world,	 for
heavenly	 joys	 and	pleasures.	The	 same	 stupid	mind	 that	 hankers	 for	money	 is
now	hankering	for	meditation.	It	is	the	same	desire,	only	the	object	has	changed.
But	 by	 changing	 the	 object	 of	 desire	 nothing	 is	 changed	 unless	 desire	 itself
drops,	disappears.
So	 by	 purity	 I	 do	 not	 mean	 moral	 purity,	 virtuousness	 and	 all	 that.	 I	 mean
innocence,	 a	 state	 of	 not-knowing,	 a	 state	 of	 childlike	wonder,	 of	 tremendous
awe,	readiness	to	be	surprised	by	existence	and	life.
And	 that's	 how	 one	 comes	 to	 know	 god,	 not	 by	 being	 moral	 but	 by	 being
innocent.
Of	course	innocence	brings	a	morality	of	its	own,	but	that	is	quite	another	matter.
It	 is	 not	 a	 calculated	 thing,	 it	 is	 a	 by-product.	 The	 innocent	 person	 cannot	 do
harm.	Whatsoever	he	does	is	a	blessing.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Devopam.	 Devopam	 means	 divine,	 godly.
Remember,	it	is	not	a	question	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
achieving	 something,	 we	 have	 only	 forgotten	 who	 we	 are.	 We	 have	 only	 to
remember	it,	we	have	to	be	reminded	of	it.
The	truth	is	never	lost.	That	which	can	be	lost	is	not	truth.	The	truth	by	its	very
nature	is	that	which	cannot	be	lost.	And	our	godhood	is	the	ultimate	truth.
The	whole	existence	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	god,	we	just	have	to	remember	it;
we	 have	 to	 relearn	 the	 language.	 It	 comes	 as	 a	 recognition,	 not	 as	 an
achievement.	Meditation	is	just	an	effort	to	recall.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Virendra.	Virendra	means	god	of	courage.	Courage	is
the	most	important	quality	for	a	seeker	because	everything	else	follows	it.	One
cannot	be	honest	without	courage.	One	cannot	be	truthful	without	courage.	One
cannot	be	 living	without	courage.	One	 in	 fact	 cannot	have	any	beauty	 in	one's
life	without	courage.	Courage	is	the	gate,	the	gate	of	the	temple.	Unless	you	pass
through	it	you	cannot	enter	into	anything	that	is	of	any	worth.
Sannyas	means	a	jump	into	the	unknown.	Great	courage	is	needed.	We	all	have
it,	we	just	never	use	it.
And	 any	 faculty	 that	 is	 not	 used	 for	 long	 becomes	 dead.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 revived
again.	Once	it	starts	functioning	you	will	be	surprised,	nobody	is	born	a	coward,
everybody	 is	 born	 courageous,	 rebellious.	 But	 the	 society	 represses	 it.	 It	 is
against	all	courage.	It	needs	cowards	of	all	kinds.	But	anything	repressed	always
remains	there	somewhere	deep	inside	you.	We	have	to	dig	and	search	for	it.	That
search	starts	today.
Find	more	and	more	courage	to	move	into	the	unknown,	into	the	insecure.	Life
should	be	an	adventure,	always	an	exploration	into	unknown	territory.	Than	only
can	one	come	across	god.	There	is	no	shortcut.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Darshano.	Darshano	means	the	capacity	to	see.
One	 cannot	 think	 about	 god,	 one	 cannot	 think	 about	 truth,	 one	 cannot	 think
about	anything	that	really	matters.	It	has	to	be	seen,	it	has	to	be	experienced.	It	is
not	a	question	of	speculation,	philosophizing.	The	mind	is	incapable	of	entering
into	the	unknown	for	a	certain	reason.	It	can	only	move	within	the	world	of	the
known,	 it	 can	only	 think	of	 that	which	 it	 has	 already	known.	The	unknown	 is
absolutely	 unavailable	 to	 the	 mind.	 It	 cannot	 even	 conceive	 of	 it.	 Even	 to
imagine	something,	you	have	to	know	something	about	it,	you	have	to	have	had
experience	of	it	before	you	can	imagine	it.
Mind	has	no	way	 to	penetrate	 the	mystery	of	 the	unknown	 --	 and	existence	 is
tremendously	mysterious.
It	 is	 not	 only	 unknown,	 it	 is	 unknowable.	 So	 the	 only	way	 is	 to	 create	 a	 new
faculty	 in	 you	which	 can	 see	 and	 experience.	 It	 is	 there.	 In	 the	 East	we	 have
called	it	the	third	eye	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	gives	you	the	capacity	to	see
the	truth.	It	is	only	symbolically	the	third	eye.	There	is	no	third	eye	somewhere,
it	is	only	a	metaphor.
Man	has	five	senses	which	are	available	,	and	the	sixth	sense,	which	is	the	most
important,	 is	 dormant	 All	 techniques	 of	 meditation	 are	 efforts	 to	 make	 that
dormant	 center	 function.	 Once	 it	 starts	 functioning	 you	 are	 transported	 into
another	world,	you	start	seeing	things	as	they	are.	Then	everything	is	divine	and
every	moment	 is	 of	 such	 exquisite	beauty	 that	 one	 could	die.	 Just	 for	 a	 single
moment	one	could	pay	the	price	with	one's	whole	life.	It	seems	to	be	even	more
valuable	than	that.
Sannyas	is	creating	a	space	within	you	so	that	the	hidden	capacity,	the	dormant
capacity	 for	 seeing,	 experiencing	 the	 unknown	 and	 the	 unknowable	 becomes
active.	It	is	our	real	 life.	Without	it	we	are	just	dreaming;	with	it,	reality	opens
up	its	doors.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001095
ShortTitle:	RAFTER09
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
(To	Dolphin,	with	his	mother	Gyanraje)
Good,	Dolphin.	Come	here	--	your	mala.	Just	look	at	me.	Good.
His	 name	 is	 good:	 Swami	 Anand	 Dolphin.	 Anand	 means	 bliss,	 blissful.	 And
Dolphin	 is	 a	 good	 name...(laughter)	 It	 represents	 intelligence.	 There	 is	 every
possibility	 that	 dolphins	 have	 better	 intelligence	 than	 human	 beings.	 At	 least
they	have	a	bigger	brain
Good,	Dolphin.	Look	here!	(much	laughter)	Good,	Raje.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Anand	 Kristen.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Kristen	 means	 a
follower	of	Christ.
Bliss	is	the	essential	religion.	Whether	you	follow	Christ	or	Buddha	or	Lao	Tzu,
it	doesn't	matter:	if	you	are	blissful	you	are	following	all	the	awakened	ones,	all
the	Christs,	all	the	Buddhas,	all	the	Krishnas.	If	you	are	not	blissful	you	can	only
be	a	Christian,	a	Buddhist	and	a	Hindu	--	but	that	is	pseudo,	that	is	not	true.
There	 are	millions	 of	Christians.	 They	 are	 not	 concerned	 at	 all	with	Christ	 or
Christ-consciousness,	they	have	no	inner	search,	no	enquiry	into	the	truth.	Their
religion	 is	 formal,	 accidental;	 they	 are	 born	 in	 a	 Christian	 family	 so	 they	 are
Christians.	That	is	not	the	way	to	be	a	Christian.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 becoming	 a	 Christian	 for	 the	 first	 time,
Christian	in	the	sense	that	now	you	will	be	moving	more	and	more	towards	bliss,
love,	truth.	And	these	are	the	qualities	that	prepare	the	ground	for	god	to	descend
in	to	you.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Antar	Ulrich.	Antar	means	 the	 inner,	 ulrich	means
rule	--	one	who	rules	over	his	own	inner	world.
It	 is	 easy	 to	 rule	 the	 outer,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 become	 an	Alexander	 or	 a	Napoleon.
However	difficult	it	appears,	it	is	not	so	difficult.	But	to	be	a	Buddha	is	only	for
the	 very	 few	because	 it	 is	 climbing	 the	 highest	 peak	of	 consciousness	 and	 the
journey	is	arduous,	risky,	hazardous.	And	the	fight	is	not	with	anybody	else	but
with	 your	 own	 unconsciousness,	 with	 your	 own	 darkness,	 with	 your	 own
unintelligence.
The	moment	one	conquers	one's	unconsciousness	and	becomes	totally	conscious
is	the	moment	of	the	greatest	experience	possible.	One	can	call	it	the	experience
of	god	or	of	nirvana	or	of	enlightenment.	Those	are	all	just	ways	to	describe	the
indescribable.
--	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?	--	Mali.
--	Gardener.
--	Who	has	given	it	to	you?
--	Myself...
--	Mm	mm.	That's	good!
This	will	be	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Mali.	Prem	means	 love	and	mali	means
gardener.
Love	 has	 to	 be	 grown.	 Seeds	 are	 available,	 the	 soil	 is	 available,	 everything	 is
available	--	just	the	gardener	is	fast	asleep.	Hence	seeds	are	rotting	and	the	soil	is
becoming	a	desert.	Otherwise	it	can	become	full	of	roses,	roses	of	love	and	bliss
and	truth	and	joy.	But	 the	gardener	is	asleep,	 the	only	thing	missing	is	 that	 the
gardener	is	asleep.	The	gardener	is	there	but	not	awake,	so	whether	he	is	there	or
he	is	not,	makes	no	difference.	An	asleep	gardener	and	no	gardener	are	the	same.
The	gardener	has	to	be	awakened.
You	have	chosen	a	beautiful	name...	but	you	have	chosen	a	name	which	will	now
need	much	 effort	 to	make	 it	 a	 reality.	Go	 deeper	 into	meditations	 so	 you	 can
become	more	aware.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Inge.	Prem	means	love.	In	Norse	mythology	Inge	is
the	name	of	the	goddess	of	peace.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	both	happen	 together	 then	 something	 really	valuable	happens.	They	can
happen	 separately,	 but	 then	 it	 is	 not	much.	One	 can	 be	 peaceful	without	 love.
That's	 what	monks	 and	 nuns	 have	 been	 doing	 down	 the	 ages,	 renouncing	 the
world.	 Renouncing	 the	 world	 means	 renouncing	 all	 possibilities	 of	 love,	 all
situations	where	love	can	arise,	escaping	from	all	those	contacts.	It	is	easy	to	be
peaceful	without	love,	there	is	nothing	to	disturb	one.
Love	creates	the	greatest	disturbance,	chaos,	but	only	out	of	chaos	are	stars	born.
So	 love	 cannot	 be	 rejected	 simply.	 It	 releases	 great	 energy,	 and	 if	 you	 are	 not
capable	 of	 transforming	 it	 into	 creativity	 it	 can	 become	 destructive,	 it	 does
become	destructive.	Either	make	 it	 a	great	 creative	explosion	or	 it	 is	bound	 to
turn	sour	and	bitter	and	poisonous.	It	is	going	to	eat	your	heart.
So	people	have	become	afraid	of	love	and	for	centuries	they	have	been	escaping
it,	choosing	peace	against	love	--	but	that	peace	is	dull,	dead,	sad.	It	cannot	sing,
it	 cannot	 dance,	 it	 cannot	 celebrate.	 There	 is	 nothing	 to	 celebrate,	 nothing	 to
dance	 for,	 nothing	 to	 sing	 about,	 because	 all	 dance,	 all	 song,	 all	 celebration	 is
rooted	in	the	energy	of	love.
Love	 is	 also	 possible	 without	 peace,	 but	 then	 it	 drives	 you	 crazy.	 Again	 and
again	it	brings	you	to	the	brink	of	insanity,	of	suicide.	It	is	playing	with	fire.
But	when	 both	 are	 together	 something	 tremendously	 beautiful	 happens.	When
love	has	peace	at	 the	very	center	of	 it,	 it	 is	no	more	destructive,	 it	 is	no	more
feverish,	 it	 is	 no	more	 insane.	 It	 is	 healthy,	whole,	 creative.	 It	 is	 a	 blessing	 to
oneself	and	to	others.	And	when	peace	is	rooted	in	love	there	is	great	rejoicing.
That	very	rejoicing	is	god.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 grow	 these	 two	 apparently
diametrically	opposite	energies	together.	It	is	a	great	experiment,	more	difficult
than	 all	 other	 religious	 experiments	 that	 have	 been	 made	 up	 to	 now,	 more
complex	 too.	 But	 if	 one	 succeeds	 one	 reaches	 to	 the	 highest	 peak.	 And	 the
potential	for	success	is	there	in	everyone,	it	just	has	not	been	tapped	rightly.
This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	 Jeannine.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name;	 it	means	 the	 beloved
disciple	and	that's	what	you	have	to	become.
It	is	easy	to	be	a	student,	it	is	difficult	to	be	a	disciple.	The	student	is	interested
only	 in	 the	 superficial,	 he	 is	 not	 committed.	 The	 disciple	 is	 committed,	 the
disciple	is	ready	to	gamble	all	that	he	has	for	something	unknown,	for	something
of	the	beyond.	Only	a	gambler	can	be	a	disciple.	The	businesslike	mind	cannot
be	 a	 disciple.	 It	 is	 always	 calculating,	 cunning,	 always	 thinking	 in	 terms	 of
getting	 more	 and	 giving	 less.	 the	 disciple	 is	 one	 who	 gives	 all,	 without	 any
conditions,	 unconditionally,	 one	 who	 surrenders	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of
surrendering.	 But	 then	 great	 things	 start	 happening	 to	 the	 disciple	 because	 he
becomes	 open,	 absolutely	 open	 to	 the	 master.	 He	 becomes	 the	 beloved,	 he
becomes	capable	of	absorbing	the	love	of	the	master.	Not	only	his	love,	but	his
being	 also	 starts	 overlapping	 the	 being	 of	 the	 disciple.	 And	 that's	 real
communion.	In	the	East	we	call	it	satsang:	when	the	master's	being	overlaps	the
being	 of	 the	 disciple.	 Ultimately	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 the	 disciple	 and	 the
master	 become	 one;	 that	 is	 the	 state	 of	 the	 devotee.	 But	 being	 a	 disciple	 is	 a
necessary	step	towards	that	ultimate	state.
So	 let	your	name	become	a	 reality	 for	you...	 and	much	more,	much	more	 that
you	can	ever	imagine,	much	more	than	you	can	conceive	is	going	to	happen.	But
you	have	to	be	available,	you	are	not	to	hold	back	anything.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Two	more	days.
--	Good.	Next	time	come	for	a	longer	period.	But	things	will	continue	wherever
you	are,	just	continue	to	meditate.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Veet	Asho.	Veet	means	going	beyond;	asho	means
hope	--	going	beyond	hope.
Hope	 is	 a	 disguised	 form	 of	 desire.	 And	 unless	 one	 drops	 all	 desiring	 in	 all
forms,	 disguised,	 one	 cannot	 attain	 to	 one's	 own	 reality.	 When	 we	 hope	 we
project	the	future,	when	we	hope,	we	hope	in	the	future.
Nobody	can	hope	 in	 the	present.	Hope	brings	 in	 the	 future,	hope	 is	 the	 future.
And	it	is	behind	hope	that	the	mind	goes	on	playing	thousands	of	games,	it	goes
on	deceiving	you.	It	goes	on	promising	you:	 tomorrow,	 tomorrow,	 tomorrow....
And	 tomorrow	 never	 comes,	 it	 can't	 come	 in	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 things.	 It	 is
always	today.
There	 is	 no	 other	 time	 then	 now.	 All	 other	 times	 are	 just	 mind-fabrications,
fantasies.	To	be	in	meditation	means	to	be	in	the	present,	and	to	be	in	the	present
one	has	to	cut	the	root	of	all	desire,	the	root	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	all	hope.
Remember,	 by	 cutting	 the	 root	 of	 hope	 you	 don't	 become	 hopeless,	 because
when	 there	 is	no	hope	 there	 is	no	possibility	of	hopelessness	either.	They	both
disappear.	Hopelessness	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 hope	 is	 there,	 it	 is	 a	 by-product	 of
hope.	When	hope	is	not,	hopelessness	also	is	not.	And	your	whole	sky,	inner	sky,
is	clear	of	all	the	clouds	of	hopes,	of	hopelessness,	of	desires,	of	frustrations,	of
expectations.	Your	whole	sky	is	simply	unclouded	and	the	sun	shines	forth	--	the
sun	of	truth,	the	sun	of	your	own	being.
This	will	be	your	new	name:	Swami	Shantamo.
Shantamo	means	 the	 silent	 one	 and	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the	 device	 for	 you:	 be
more	and	more	silent.
Speak	 less,	become	telegraphic.	Speak	only	 that	which	 is	absolutely	necessary,
delete	all	 that	is	unnecessary,	superfluous.	And	whenever	you	can	find	time,	as
many	 times	 in	 the	 day	 as	 possible,	 even	 in	 small	 gaps	 --	 ten	minutes,	 fifteen
minutes	--	just	close	your	eyes	and	sit	silently.
Sitting	silently	is	going	to	be	your	device.	Slowly	slowly	things	will	calm	down
and	the	mind	will	start	evaporating.	And	one	day,	one	is	left	without	the	mind.
Then	joy	explodes.	Time	disappears,	eternity	appears.	Then	one	is	neither	birth
nor	 life	 nor	 death,	 one	 is	 something	 transcendental.	 With	 the	 transcendental
comes	liberation	--	liberation	from	all	misery,	from	all	pain,	from	all	ignorance,
from	all	stupidity.
This	is	you	new	name:	Swami	Chaitanyo.	Chaitanyo	means	consciousness	--	and
that	has	to	be	the	key	for	you,	the	golden	key	that	opens	the	door	of	god.
Become	more	and	more	conscious	of	all	that	you	do,	of	all	that	you	think,	of	all
that	you	desire,	imagine,	dream.	Just	remember	that	you	have	to	be	conscious	of
everything.	Walking	,	be	conscious	of	it,	eating,	be	conscious	of	it,	thinking,	go
on	 watching	 what	 thoughts	 are	 passing	 in	 the	 mind.	 One	 day	 you	 will	 be
surprised,	when	you	have	learned	the	knack	of	it,	it	continues	even	in	sleep.	You
go	on	watching	the	dreams,	you	know	what	kind	of	dreams	are	passing	by	and
you	know	that	they	are	dreams.
That	day,	when	one	can	watch	one's	own	dreams,	 is	of	a	great	 transformation.
From	that	moment	onwards	you	are	a	new	being.	Then	you	enter	into	the	world
of	 reality.	 By	 watching	 dreams,	 thoughts,	 desires,	 slowly	 slowly	 we	 become
disidentified	 with	 all	 that	 we	 are	 watching,	 we	 become	 the	 witness.	 And	 that
witness	is	the	ultimate	reality.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sudhiro.	Sudhiro	means	the	wise	one.
Wisdom	is	our	nature.	Ignorance	is	only	an	accident,	it	is	like	falling	ill.	Health
is	your	nature,	 illness	 is	only	an	accident;	hence	 illness	can	be	cured	and	your
health	starts	flowing	again.	Illness	is	only	a	little	disturbance	in	the	flow	of	your
health.	So	ignorance	is	a	little	disturbance	in	the	flow	of	your	wisdom.	And	the
point	 to	 understand	 is	 that	 knowledge	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 the	 creation	 of
ignorance.
The	more	you	know,	the	more	ignorant	you	become,	because	you	start	flowing
to	 the	 superficial	 knowledge	 and	 you	 start	 forgetting	 your	 real	 wisdom.	 You
cling	 to	 the	 information	given	by	others,	which	 is	all	borrowed.	And	 truth	can
never	be	borrowed,	it	has	to	be	one's	own.
So	whatsoever	one	knows	about	truth	is	not	truth.	But	knowing	about	truth	can
give	 you	 the	 feeling	 as	 if	 you	 know,	 and	 you	 can	 cling	 to	 it.	 Hence	 the
knowledgeable	people	are	the	most	ignorant	people	in	the	world.
If	one	wants	to	destroy	one's	ignorance	one	has	to	destroy	one's	knowledge.	And
that's	 my	 whole	 effort	 here,	 to	 help	 you	 drop	 your	 knowledge.	 In	 that	 very
dropping,	ignorance	disappears	and	wisdom	wells	up	--
it	 starts	 flowing	 again.	 And	 that	 flow	 of	 wisdom	 is	 freedom,	 is	 bliss,	 is
benediction.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
10	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001105
ShortTitle:	RAFTER10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Deva	Gerard.	Deva	means	 divine.	Gerard	means	 a
loyal	heart.
A	loyal	heart	is	the	beginning	of	the	experience	of	god.	The	head	can	be	logical
but	never	loyal,	the	heart	can	be	loyal	but	never	logical.	To	be	loyal	is	something
illogical:	it	is	love,	not	logic.	And	the	heart	knows	only	the	ways	of	love.
To	be	loyal	means	to	be	committed,	to	be	totally	involved,	to	be	so	surrendered
that	there	is	no	holding	back,	risking	all	for	no	gain,	for	no	profit,	for	no	future
promise	but	for	the	sheer	joy	of	risking.	There	is	tremendous	joy	when	one	risks
just	for	the	sake	of	it.
And	that	is	from	where	you	start	moving	into	the	world	of	the	divine.	That	very
moment	you	are	 transported:	you	are	n	 the	world,	but	 the	world	 is	no	more	 in
you.	God	has	penetrated	your	heart	like	an	arrow.
Inaki	is	your	name?	What	does	it	mean?
--	I	don't	know?
I	will	 keep	 it	 --	 it	 sounds	 good.	 It	 has	 some	music	 to	 it,	 and	 that	 is	 far	more
important	than	meaning.	All	meanings	are	arbitrary.	Music	is	more	natural.
So	this	will	be	your	name:	Anand	Inaki.	Anand	means	bliss.	That's	the	ultimate
search.	 In	 what	 ever	 name	 we	 are	 seeking,	 we	 seek	 bliss.	 Nobody	 is	 really
seeking	god.	Who	cares	about	god?	People	are	only	 seeking	god	because	 they
have	 been	 told	 for	 centuries	 that	 I	 you	 find	 god	 you	 will	 be	 blissful.	 God	 is
secondary,	blissfulness	is	primary.
And	the	same	is	true	about	truth.	If	truth	brings	misery,	who	would	seek	truth?	A
few	 masochists	 maybe,	 a	 few	 mad	 people,	 self-destructive,	 suicidal;	 but	 no
healthy	 and	 wholesome	 person	 would	 seek	 truth.	 Truth	 is	 sought	 because	 it
brings	bliss.
So	remember:	god,	truth,	nirvana,	enlightenment,	are	different	names	for	bliss.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Sef.	 Prem	means	 love;	 sef	means	 increasing
faithfulness.
Love	is	the	beginning	of	faith	and	the	end	too.	The	beginning	and	the	end	are	not
separate.	The	difference	 is	only	of	 that	between	a	seed	and	a	 flower.	The	seed
contains	the	flower	and	the	flower	is	nothing	but	the	expression	of	the	seed.	So	is
love	and	faith:	love	is	the	seed,	faith	is	its	flowering.
Hence	anybody	who	is	trying	to	believe	in	god	without	love	is	deceiving	himself
and	wasting	his	time.
And	how	can	you	love	god?	--	you	don't	know	him!
So	my	teaching	is	not	to	love	god,	my	teaching	is	to	love.	Whom	you	love	is	not
so	relevant:	people,	animals,	birds,	trees,	music,	poetry,	painting.	What	you	love,
the	object	of	love,	is	not	so	important,	but	that	you	love	is	important.
And	as	love	increases,	slowly	slowly	it	brings	a	faith	into	you	being,	a	faith	in
existence.	That	is	true	religion.	The	untrue	religion	remains	belief-oriented.	The
true	religion	originates	in	love	and	ultimately	blooms	and	flowers	as	faith.
And	remember:	believe	and	faith	are	not	synonymous,	notwithstanding	what	the
dictionaries	say.	Belief	is	pseudo	faith,	it	is	something	basically	false.	Faith	is	a
totally	different	phenomenon.
Start	with	love	and	blossom	into	faith.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	love	and
faith.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Anand	 Maria.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Maria	 means
fragrance.	Bliss	is	more	like	fragrance	than	like	a	flower.	A	flower	is	something
visible,	material;	you	can	catch	hold	of	it.	Fragrance	is	invisible,	immaterial;	you
cannot	 catch	 hold	 of	 it.	 Still	 you	 can	 experience	 it.	 All	 that	 you	 need	 is	 a
sensitivity	and	you	will	experience	it	--	but	it	is	an	experience.
A	 flower	 can	 be	 known	 even	 by	 those	who	 have	 no	 sensitivity	 for	 fragrance,
even	by	 those	whose	noses	are	almost	dead.	A	 flower	can	at	 least	be	 touched,
even	by	a	blind	man.	One	can	hold	the	flower	in	one's	hand.	It	is	measurable,	it
is	matter.	Nobody	can	deny	it,	it	is	proof	unto	itself.
But	fragrance	is	very	subtle.	One	can	deny	it	and	there	is	no	way	to	prove	it.	If
somebody	says,	'No,	there	is	no	fragrance,'	you	cannot	prove	that	there	is.	At	the
most	you	can	say,	 'I	experience	 it.'	But	 the	other	person	could	say	you	may	be
deluded.	 You	 may	 be	 hallucinating,	 you	 may	 be	 dreaming.	 You	 may	 be
deceiving	 them	 or	 you	may	 be	 deceived	 yourself.	 You	may	 be	 hypnotized.	A
thousand	 and	 one	 things	 could	 be	 said,	 and	 you	 cannot	 prove	 it.	 Still	whether
you	can	prove	it	or	not,	you	know	it.
That	 is	 exactly	 the	 case	 with	 bliss,	 with	 god,	 with	 love,	 with	 all	 the	 higher
values.	 The	 higher	 you	 move	 in	 the	 hierarchy	 of	 values,	 the	 more	 and	 more
difficult	it	becomes	to	prove	them.	God	is	the	most	difficult	experience	to	prove
because	it	is	the	ultimate	value,	the	culmination	of	all	values.
Bliss	 is	 another	name	 for	god.	 It	 can	be	experienced,	 it	 can	be	 lived.	One	can
dance	with	it.	One	can	be	overflooded	with	it.	One	can	be	transformed	by	it.
Your	name	is	beautiful:	Ma	Brigitte.	It	comes	from	the	same	root	from	where	the
word	'bridge'	comes.
Man	 is	 a	 bridge.	Man	 is	 not	 the	 goal	 but	 only	 a	 ladder,	 a	 passage,	 a	 bridge,
between	 the	 animal	 and	 the	 divine.	 One	 should	 not	 be	 satisfied	 by	 being	 just
human;	that	is	not	enough.	That	is	making	your	house	on	the	bridge;	it	is	not	safe
and	the	bridge	is	not	meant	for	that	purpose.	The	bridge	has	to	be	transcended,
passed	over;	its	function	is	to	take	you	to	the	other	shore.
Man	 is	not	a	being	but	a	bridge.	Animals	have	being	and	buddhas	have	being,
but	man	is	only	a	bridge.
He	 has	 no	 being,	 he	 is	 a	 becoming.	He	 goes	 on	 becoming,	 changing,	moving
from	one	point	to	another.	He	is	a	journey,	a	pilgrimage.
This	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	 unless	 one	 becomes	 enlightened,	 never	 to	 be
satisfied	before	that.	Remain	in	a	divine	discontent	to	the	last	moment	when	you
explode	into	light,	when	you	become	light,	when	light	becomes	your	being.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Saul.	Deva	means	god;	saul	means	demanded,
desired.
God	 is	 continuously	 demanding,	 'Come	 to	me!'	 Since	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 left	 the
garden	 of	 Eden,	 he	 has	 been	 calling	 forth,	 'Come	 back	 home!'	 And	 all	 these
messengers	 and	 prophets	 and	Buddhas,	 they	 are	 nothing	 but	messengers.	And
the	message	is	simple:	that	god	is	waiting,	that	you	have	wandered	enough,	gone
astray	enough.	It	is	the	right	time	to	come	back.
Sannyas	is	a	coming	back.	It	is	turning	inwards.	And	it	is	in	your	innermost	core
that	 the	 garden	 of	 Eden	 exists.	 It	 is	 at	 your	 inmost	 core	 that	 god	 is	 present,
calling	you	forth.
We	are	moving	on	the	outside,	 ignoring	 the	 inside.	That	 is	 ignorance.	 Ignoring
you	inner	world	is	ignorance,	knowing	your	inner	world	is	wisdom.
You	have	a	beautiful	name:	Swami	Gurumukh.	It	means	the	voice	of	the	master,
the	mouthpiece	of	the	master.
The	 word	 'guru'	 is	 untranslatable,	 in	 a	 sense,	 because	 it	 has	 a	 certain
metaphorical	 meaning.	 Guru	 literally	 means	 'one	 who	 dispels	 darkness'.	 The
master	 is	 just	 approximate,	 not	 exactly	 the	 same;	 but	we	 can	 give	 it	 the	 same
meaning.	 The	master	 is	 one	 who	 helps	 you	 to	 become	 enlightened;	 that's	 the
function	of	the	master:	he	dispels	your	darkness.
And	to	become	a	voice	of	the	master	means	to	be	so	totally	surrendered	that	you
do	not	speak	your	own	mind	but	the	no-mind	of	the	master	speaks	through	you.
It	means	that	you	have	dropped	your	will	--	the	master's	will	functions	through
you.	 A	 master	 has	 dropped	 his	 will	 already,	 so	 in	 fact	 the	 master	 is	 only	 a
medium,	and	god	starts	functioning	through	you.
Surrendering	to	the	master	is	just	an	excuse	for	surrendering	to	god.	Because	we
cannot	 surrender	 to	 the	 invisible,	 we	 need	 a	 master	 --	 something	 visible.	 A
master	is	just	standing	between	the	visible	and	the	invisible;	half	of	the	master	is
visible	and	half	of	the	master	is	invisible.	So	those	who	come	to	the	master	not
in	a	deep	surrendered	attitude,	they	will	see	only	the	visible	part;	and	those	who
surrender,	they	will	see	the	invisible	part.	Then	the	master	is	no	more	there.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	why	in	the	East,	the	disciple	thinks	of	the	master	only	in	terms	of	god,	in
no	other	way.
How	long	you	will	be	here?
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Thanasis.	Thanasis	means	the	immortal	one.	That	is
our	true	reality.	Mortality	is	only	of	the	body,	mortality	is	only	of	the	outer	shell.
But	our	inner	consciousness	is	immortal.	To	be	identified	with	the	body	and	to
start	thinking,	'I	am	the	body'	is	the	foolishness	that	creates	the	fear	of	death.
The	moment	you	know	 that	 you	 are	no	more	 the	body	or	 the	mind	 all	 fear	 of
death	disappears.	And	life	starts	only	in	the	day	that	the	fear	of	death	disappears,
because	 then	you	can	 live.	Otherwise	death	 is	 always	hanging	 in	 front	of	you.
How	 can	 you	 live?	How	 can	 you	 enjoy?	How	 can	 you	 rejoice?	How	 can	 you
sing	and	dance?	Celebration	is	impossible:	death	is	always	around	the	corner;	it
can	take	you	away	at	any	moment.	People	are	living,	but	in	deep	trembling,	fear,
anguish,	anxiety.
It	 is	 only	 through	meditation	 that	 a	 person	 becomes	 free	 of	 fear	 of	 death.	He
comes	 to	 know	 that	 he	 is	 immortal,	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 die.	 Death	 has	 never
happened,	cannot	happen.	Death	is	an	impossibility.
To	know	it	through	your	own	experience	is	the	beginning	of	a	totally	new	kind
of	life:	the	life	of	eternity,	not	of	time,	the	life	that	always	abides,	the	life	that	is
forever.	And	that's	what	god	is.
Your	name	is	beautiful:	Ma	Konstanze.	It	means	a	devoted	spirit.
Religion	 needs	 devotion;	 not	 only	 intellectual	 conviction	 but	 a	 heartfelt
devotion.	Conviction	is	superficial	and	it	can	be	changed	very	easily,	just	a	few
arguments	can	change	your	conviction.	Hence	the	people	who	live	in	conviction
are	always	afraid	--	afreaid	of	facts,	now	discoveries,	of	people	who	are	against
their	ideas.	They	are	afraid	because	they	know	that	their	conviction	can	collapse
at	any	moment;	just	a	single	argument	can	destroy	the	whole	edifice.	Hence	they
will	 not	 red	 others'	 scriptures,	 they	 will	 not	 listen	 to	 others.	 They	 will	 avoid
them,	 they	will	 not	 argue.	 They	 are	 constantly	 on	 guard...	 but	 really	 they	 are
afraid	and	are	cowards.
A	man	who	is	of	a	devoted	heart	has	no	fear.	He	cannot	be	unconvinced,	that	is
impossible,	because	he	 is	not	 convinced	 in	 the	 first	place.	 It	 is	 a	devotion.	No
argument	 can	 destroy	 it,	 no	 logic	 can	 harm	 it.	 In	 fact	 no	 intellectuality	 ever
reaches	it;	it	is	far	beyond	that.
Unless	one	moves	in	religion	with	a	devotion	one	remains	superficially	religious.
Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan	 --	 these	 are	 all	 superfluous	 things.	 If	 you	 are
really	moving	with	devotion	you	don't	become	a	Christian,	you	become	a	Christ;
you	don't	become	a	Buddhist,	you	become	a	Buddha.	Why	should	one	become	a
Buddhist	when	on	has	 the	capacity	 to	become	a	Buddha?	The	Christian	 is	one
who	is	convinced.
The	Buddha	is	one	who	has	known.
And	knowing	happens	in	the	heart,	not	in	the	head.	Knowing	is	a	quality	of	love,
a	by-product	of	love.
The	more	you	love,	the	more	you	become	capable	of	seeing	things	as	they	are.
So	love	deeply,	love	totally.	Love	this	existence	with	deep	devotion,	with	great
prayer.
Just	today	I	was	reading	about	a	man,	a	very	intellectual	man.	He	has	written	a
whole	Hindu	prayer	on	a	board	in	his	bedroom,	and	every	night	before	going	to
sleep	he	would	look	at	the	sky	and	say	to	god,	'Please	god,	read	it.'	Why	bother
to	repeat	it	every	day?	Just	put	it	up	--	god	can	read	it!
There	is	no	way	from	intellect	to	god,	from	scholarship	to	god.	The	only	way	is
through	devotion.	And	devotion	needs	courage	because	you	have	 to	drop	your
mind,	your	head.	Devotion	requires	you	to	cut	off	your	head	completely.
That's	 the	 work	 of	 the	master:	 to	 behead	 his	 disciples!	 And	 once	 the	 head	 is
dropped	 great	 doors	 open	 to	 existence.	 All	 locks	 disappear.	 All	 secrets	 which
were	hidden	before	become	absolutely	clear.	Nothing	is	hidden	anymore.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Virato.	Virato	means	the	infinite,	the	vast.	Man	is	not
as	 small	 as	he	appears	 from	 the	outside.	He	contains	 the	whole	 sky	within,	he
contains	all	the	oceans.	Yes,	he	looks	like	a	dewdrop,	but	his	appearance	is	very
deceptive.	And	science	is	still	working	on	his	appearance,	the	dewdrop.
Those	who	have	penetrated	deeper	into	human	consciousness	were	surprised	to
find	that	as	you	go	deeper,	man	becomes	vast.	When	you	reach	his	very	core,	he
is	the	whole	universe.	And	that	is	the	experience	of	god.
Meditate	and	go	deeper	inwards.	It	is	already	there	--	we	just	have	to	uncover	it.
This	 is	 your	 new	name:	Swami	Anubhavo.	Anubhavo	means	 the	 state	 of	 total
immersion	in	the	whole.
When	the	ego	is	lost,	when	you	don't	feel	yourself	separate,	when	suddenly	there
are	no	boundaries	to	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
anymore,	 you	 are	 melting	 and	 merging	 with	 the	 universe	 --	 that	 state	 is
anubhava.	And	that	state	can	come	only	through	love	and	meditation.
One	has	to	become	more	and	more	silent	and	one	has	to	become	more	and	more
loving.	Both	are	needed,	and	both	together	bring	the	ultimate	transformation,	the
merger,	the	disappearance	of	the	individual	and	the	appearance	of	the	universal.
It	 is	 within	 your	 capacity	 to	 allow	 it	 or	 not	 to	 allow	 it.	 If	 we	 are	 ready	 to
surrender,	it	happens;	if	we	resist,	it	can't	happen.
Sannyas	means	a	readiness	to	surrender,	a	readiness	to	be	in	a	state	of	let-go.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Dharmesh.	 Dharmesh	 means	 the	 god	 of	 the
ultimate	 law.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 translate	 the	 word	 'dharma'	 Ordinarily	 it	 is
translated	as	the	ultimate	law,	the	universal	law,	the	eternal	law,	the	cosmic	law;
but	they	are	only	approximations.	In	Chinese	there	is	the	right	word	for	it	 'tao';
and	Christianity	has	the	right	word	for	it,	'logos'.
Dharma	means	that	invisible	thread	that	keeps	the	whole	cosmos	together.	This
togetherness	 can't	 be	 without	 any	 fundamental	 cause,	 otherwise	 things	 would
start	 falling	 apart.	 We	 know	 that	 the	 earth	 does	 not	 fall	 apart	 because	 of
gravitation,	 things	 do	 not	 fall	 away	 from	 the	 earth	 because	 of	 gravitation.	But
why	 doesn't	 the	 whole	 universe	 fall	 apart?	 --	 there	 must	 be	 something	 like
gravitation.	That	is	dharma.
And	the	only	way	to	find	it	is	to	go	within,	because	there	it	is	the	closest	to	us.
You	can	find	it	in	the	trees	and	in	the	socks,	but	then	it	is	far	away.	You	will	have
to	understand	 the	 language	of	 the	 rock,	 the	being	of	 the	 rock,	 and	 it	will	 be	 a
very	 very	 impossible	 almost	 impossible	 job.	The	 easiest	 is	 to	 understand	 your
own	being	because	 that	 is	 the	closest.	Once	you	have	seen	 it	 there	you	will	be
able	to	see	it	in	the	rock	too	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	it	in	the	trees	and	you
will	be	able	to	see	it	in	the	stars.	Once	seen	inside,	the	whole	universe	becomes
absolutely	clear	and	transparent	to	you.
That	 experience	 of	 interlinkedness,	 of	 interdependence,	 has	 such	 exquisite
beauty	and	creates	such	a	great	ecstasy	that	 it	 is	not	possible	to	imagine	it,	not
possible	 to	express	 it,	not	possible	even	to	give	a	few	hints	about	 it.	So	all	 the
masters	have	been	doing	only	one	 thing:	 they	show	you	 the	path	 to	attain	 it	 --
then	you	will	know.	There	is	no	other	way.	You	have	to	know	it	to	know	it.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Garimo.	Garimo	means	the	splendor,	the	glory.
Existence	is	full	of	splendor	and	glory,	but	we	are	blind,	we	are	deaf.	We	can't
hear	the	music	and	we	can't	see	the	beauty.
Hence	we	have	to	ask,	'Where	is	god?	What	is	god?'
If	we	can	see	the	beauty,	if	we	can	experience	the	joy,	the	dance	of	the	stars	and
the	trees	and	the	wind	and	the	rain,	we	will	not	ask	such	stupid	questions:	'What
is	god	and	where	is	god?'	and	whether	god	exists	or	not.	We	will	know	that	this
beauty	is	god,	that	this	splendor	is	god,	that	this	dance,	this	celebration,	is	god.
My	 whole	 approach	 is	 to	 make	 you	 more	 sensitive	 towards	 the	 beauties	 of
nature,	 life,	 existence,	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 valid	way	 to	 become	 aware	 of
god.	There	is	no	other	way.	There	has	never	been	and	there	will	never	be.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Sarjan.	Sarjan	means	creativity.	Creativity	is	the	real
worship.
In	the	past	religious	people	have	been	very	uncreative.	They	were	life-negative,
hence	 they	 could	not	be	 creative.	Creativity	means	 that	 you	are	 affirming	 life,
that	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 enrich	 it,	 that	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 make	 it	 a	 little	 more
beautiful	than	it	is.	And	that's	how	one	should	server	god:	by	making	his	world	a
little	 more	 beautiful,	 a	 little	 more	 musical,	 a	 little	 more	 poetic,	 a	 little	 more
colorful.
Remember	it:	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	do	it	with	this	vision,	that	it	will	help
the	world	to	become	more	rich.	In	some	way	or	other	contribute	to	the	world's
richness.	And	then	whether	you	go	to	the	church	or	not	does	not	matter	--	god	is
yours.	Whether	 you	 remember	 god	 or	 not	 does	 not	 matter.	 Your	 creativity	 is
enough	proof	of	your	remembrance.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Visarjan.	Visarjan	means	dissolving,	dissolution,
melting	and	dissolving	into	the	whole.
Don't	keep	yourself	separate.	Seeing	a	rose,	become	the	rose.
Seeing	 the	 sunset,	 be	 lost	 in	 it.	 Don't	 remain	 aloof,	 cold.	 Don't	 remain	 just	 a
spectator,	become	a	participant.	Seeing	the	sky	full	of	stars	you	also	become	part
of	it,	a	small	star.	But	participate	in	the	dance.
To	me	 that's	what	 religion	 is,	dissolving	oneself	 in	 the	whole.	 Just	 like	a	 river
disappears	in	the	ocean	you	disappear	into	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001115
ShortTitle:	RAFTER11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
What	 does	 it	 mean?	 --	 his	 name,	 Osho	 asks	 Atta,	 the	 other	 of	 the	 aspiring
sannyasin,	two-and-a-half-year-old	M'Ocean.
--	It	began	with	the	motion	in	my	womb.	And	we	had	a	boat	at	the	time	so	we
changed	the	spelling.
--	(to	the	child)	Come	here!
He	is	malaed.	Osho	bent	to	touch	him	but	his	gaze	is	averted.
You	missed!	This	is	your	name:	Swami	O'Ocean.
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Rami.	Prem	means	 love;	 rami	means	exalted.
Love	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 exalted	 experiences	 in	 life.	 It	 is	 the	 peak	 of	 being	 in
ecstasy.	It	is	the	ultimate	orgasmic	joy.	God	is	simply	another	name	for	it.
Love	 as	 profoundly	 as	 possible.	 Love	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 loving,	 not	 for	 any
motive,	not	for	any	desire.
The	moment	desire	enters	love,	love	loses	all	exaltedness.
And	there	is	one	very	fundamental	law	of	life:	if	you	fall	from	the	peak	you	fall
the	lowest.	The	higher	you	go,	the	more	is	the	danger.	And	love	takes	you	to	the
highest,	hence	one	has	to	be	very	very	aware,	alert	not	to	fall	from	those	peaks,
otherwise	one	goes	deep	down	into	the	mud.
That's	what	lust	is,	it	is	muddy.	Love	has	fallen.	It	is	as	if	the	diamond	has	fallen
into	 the	mud	and	is	 lost.	 It	can	be	reclaimed,	 it	has	 to	be	reclaimed,	but	 if	one
had	been	a	 little	more	aware	 it	would	not	have	happened	 in	 the	 first	place.	So
one	cannot	move	higher	without	awareness.
Love	more,	 and	 love	 with	more	 awareness.	 Awareness	 is	 the	 only	 prevention
against	desire.
Buddha	has	said:	When	you	are	aware	it	is	like	a	house	where	people	are	awake.
The	guard	is	awake,	the	house	is	full	of	light.	thieves	do	not	dare	to	enter	it.	The
unaware	person	is	like	a	house	full	of	darkness,	no	light.	The	guard	is	drunk,	the
master	fast	asleep,	the	doors	are	open.	It	is	an	invitation	for	thieves.
Anger	and	lust	and	greed	and	jealousy,	these	are	all	thieves,	far	more	dangerous
than	ordinary	thieves	because	they	go	on	stealing	chunks	of	your	being.	Slowly
slowly	they	leave	behind	only	a	hollow	person	with	no	substance,	with	no	soul.
Love	plus	awareness	is	the	whole	of	religion.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Veet	Silvia.	Veet	means	going	beyond;	silvia	means	the
sudden	terror	that	people	feel	in	the	profound	solitude	of	a	forest.
The	moment	you	feel	absolutely	alone	a	great	terror	arises	in	your	being.	When
you	are	surrounded	by	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
rocks	 and	 trees	 and	 not	 people	 with	 whom	 you	 can	 relate,	 communicate,	 on
whom	you	can	depend	in	some	dangerous	situation,	a	terror	arises	from	the	very
depth	of	your	being	and	takes	possession	of	you,	as	if	your	very	soul	had	started
trembling.	That	is	silvia.	One	has	to	go	beyond	it,	because	unless	one	is	ready	to
go	beyond	it	one	cannot	move	into	meditation.
Meditation	takes	you	into	the	inner	forest	where	eternal	silence	prevails,	where
you	are	absolutely	alone	and	where	you	cannot	 invite	anybody	to	be	with	you,
where	you	have	to	be	alone.	It	 is	 impossible	not	 to	be	alone	in	your	 innermost
being.	That's	why	millions	of	people	never	try	to	go	in,	for	the	simple	reason	that
they	have	an	unconscious	understanding;	something	instinctive	 in	 them	says	 to
them	'Don't	enter	there.	It	is	dangerous	--	you	will	be	all	alone.	Even	if	you	shout
there	will	be	nobody	to	hear.'
And	the	deeper	you	go,	the	more	alone	you	are.	When	you	reach	the	very	source
of	your	being	the	aloneness	is	absolute	and	the	silence	is	eternal.	Nothing	stirs.
Afraid	 of	 that,	 people	 go	 on	 rushing	 outside	 doing	 this	 and	 that,	 remaining
occupied	with	something	or	other.	Even	stupid	things	they	become	involved	in.
Just	 a	 football	 match...	 and	 thousands	 of	 people.	 Or	 a	 cricket	 match...	 and
thousands	of	people	are	so	excited.	If	somebody	comes	from	another	planet	and
watches	our	cricket	matches	and	football	matches	he	will	not	be	able	to	believe
it:	 'What	 are	 these	 humans	 beings	 doing?'	 So	 much	 shouting	 and	 so	 much
excitement	 and	 so	 much	 quarrelling	 and	 slogans,	 and	 so	 much	 fight...	 and
bloodshed	 can	 happen	 at	 any	 moment.	 'What	 are	 these	 people	 doing?'	 These
people	are	simply	avoiding	themselves.	They	are	getting	involved	in	anything	--
any	stupid	thing	is	excuse	enough	to	remain	away	from	oneself.	Sannyas	is	just
the	reverse	process.	You	have	to	drop	all	stupid	occupations.	Do	the	necessary,
but	not	because	you	want	to	remain	occupied.	And	whenever	you	have	time	go
in,	 explore	 the	 inner	 territory.	 It	 is	 unmapped,	 uncharted	 --	 trememdously
beautiful	once	you	become	attuned	to	it.	Once	you	lose	the	fear	great	joy	arises
in	you,	and	a	joy	that	cannot	be	taken	away.	The	very	energy	that	becomes	fear
becomes	bliss.
And	unless	a	man	is	capable	of	being	alone	he	is	not	capable	of	being	at	all.	He
is	not	really	a	being.	He	is	so	superficial	that	to	call	him	a	being	is	to	misuse	the
word.	He	is	just	the	circumference	without	any	center,	a	shadow	without	a	soul.
So	now	this	is	the	work:	you	have	to	go	inwards.	Learn	the	ways	of	silence	and
being	alone.	And	I	am	not	saying	not	to	relate	with	people.	In	fact,	you	can	relate
only	if	you	know	how	to	be	alone.	Then	you	are	and	you	can	relate,	otherwise
your	 relationships	are	again	occupations.	You	are	 relating	 just	 to	keep	yourself
occupied,	 the	other	 is	 relating	 just	 to	keep	himself	occupied.	And	all	 these	so-
called	love	relationships	are	nothing	but	games	people	go	on	playing	to	avoid	the
reality.
When	a	man	is	able	to	be	alone	he	is	also	able	to	love.	And	his	love	has	a	totally
different	 quality,	 a	 different	 beauty,	 a	 different	 fragrance	 to	 it.	 It	 is	 something
divine,	 it	 is	 something	 of	 the	 beyond.	 It	 is	 deeply	 fulfilling.	 It	 brings	 great
contentment.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Judith.	Anand	means	bliss;	judith	means	praise	of
the	lord.
My	understanding	is	that	the	only	praise	of	god	is	through	being	blissful.	It	need
not	be	verbal	 --	 in	fact	 it	can't	be	verbal.	Words	are	so	futile,	so	empty;	words
can't	contain	it.	One	has	to	praise	god	existentially,	not	intellectually.	Every	fibre
of	your	being	has	 to	pulsate	with	 joy,	every	cell	of	your	being	has	 to	dance	 in
prayer.	When	you	become	a	celebration	you	are	 in	prayer.	 In	 fact	you	become
prayer	 itself.	Only	 then	are	you	 in	prayer.	Then	nothing	 is	 said	and	all	 is	 said.
There	is	no	need	then	to	go	to	the	church	or	to	the	synagogue	or	to	the	temple.
Then	wherever	you	are	you	are	joyous.	Joyous	for	the	simple	reason	that	god	has
chosen	you	to	be,	that	he	has	created	you,	joyous	that	he	has	given	you	a	chance,
an	opportunity	to	see	the	beauty	of	the	world,	to	see	this	mysterious	existence,	to
be	part	of	 it,	 to	partake	of	 it,	 to	drink	from	it,	 to	be	drunk	with	 it.	Just	for	 that
simple	 reason	 one	 fells	 thrilled,	 ecstatic.	One	 can	 dance,	 one	 can	 sing,	 or	 one
may	 simply	 sit	 silently,	 but	 one	 is	 praising.	 Only	 that	 praise	 reaches	 to	 god.
Words	are	very	heavy	things.
They	fall	back	to	the	earth,	they	can't	move	beyond	the	earth.	Only	a	silent	joy
can	penetrate	the	ultimate	reality.
So	 be	 cheerful,	 be	 blissful.	 And	whenever	 you	 feel	 like	 praying,	 dance,	 sing.
Forget	about	god.	It	is	not	a	question	of	addressing	him	or	talking	to	him	--	that
is	all	nonsense.	What	can	be	said	to	god?	What	is	there	to	say,	except	yes?	And
that	can	be	said	only	by	your	dance,	it	can't	be	said	in	any	world	Words	are	so
inadequate,	 they	have	 their	 limitations.	They	are	good	 for	worldly	use,	but	 the
moment	 you	 start	moving	 into	 the	 other	world,	 the	world	 of	 the	 beyond,	 they
become	absolutely	irrelevant.
Your	 name	 is	 really	 difficult!	 To	 make	 any	 sense	 out	 of	 it,	 even	 for	 me	 is
difficult!	But	we	will	make	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
sense	 somehow.	Swami	Wolfgang	Maria:	Wolfgang	means	 the	walk	 of	 a	wolf
and	maria	means	rebellion.
So	let	us	think	over	what	to	make	out	of	it.
The	 only	 thing	 possible	 is	 that	 the	 walk	 of	 the	 wolf	 is	 very	 graceful;	 hence
Germans	 became	 addicted	 to	 this	 name	Wolfgang.	 It	 walks	 really	 beautifully.
The	grace	and	the	beauty	of	the	walk	is	enchanting,	hypnotic.	And	the	wolf	also
walks	with	 great	 awareness.	He	 is	 alert,	watchful.	He	 is	 very	 courageous,	 but
always	on	guard	too.
Those	two	qualities	can	be	used	by	a	sannyasin.	The	first	is	grace,	the	second	is
watchfulness.
And	maria	means	 rebellion.	 Out	 of	 grace	 and	 out	 of	watchfulness	 a	 rebellion
arises	 that	 transform	you.	 It	 is	 something	 inner.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 any
outer	structure,	 the	society,	the	state,	 the	church.	It	 is	not	against	anybody,	it	 is
against	 one's	 own	 unconscious,	 against	 one's	 own	 mechanical	 habits,	 against
one's	own	robotlike	existence.
One	has	to	rebel	gracefully,	watchfully,	against	all	that	keeps	one	a	prisoner.	And
that	 which	 keeps	 you	 a	 prisoner	 is	 something	 within	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 really	 the
society	that	keeps	you	a	prisoner.	It	can	force	you	into	a	prison	but	still	it	cannot
touch	your	soul,	your	soul	still	remains	free.	And	if	we	remain	unconscious	we
may	 be	 free	 on	 the	 outside,	 but	 deep	 down	we	 are	 chained.	An	 invisible	wall
surrounds	us.	We	 carry	 around	ourselves	 a	 transparent	 prison.	And	 that	 prison
has	to	be	broken.
Sannyas	 means	 a	 decision	 to	 rebel	 against	 all	 that	 remains	 unconscious	 and
keeps	you	a	prisoner,	tethered	to	the	robotlike	existence.	And	this	has	to	be	done
with	grace;	it	has	not	to	be	done	in	a	crude	way,	it	has	not	to	be	done	violently.	It
has	to	be	done	very	lovingly,	because	it	is	your	life	and	it	is	your	energy	which
has	 to	 be	 very	 very	 silently	 persuaded	 to	 change.	You	 cannot	 attack	 it.	 If	 you
attack	 you	 create	 a	 conflict.	 If	 you	 attack	 you	 become	 split,	 you	 become
schizophrenic.
Gracefully,	silently,	one	has	to	transform	oneself.	Then	great	beauty	arises.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Antar	 Kranti.	 Antar	 means	 inner;	 kranti	 means
revolution	--	the	inner	revolution.
There	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 revolutions.	 One	 is	 against	 the	 society:	 the	 political
revolution.	 It	 is	 always	 a	 failure,	 it	 has	 never	 succeeded.	 It	 is	 never	 going	 to
succeed.	We	 can	 change	 the	 structure	 but	 unless	 people's	 consciousnesses	 are
changed	 they	will	 create	 the	 same	 structure	 again,	 because	 the	 structure	 arises
out	of	the	inner	structure	of	consciousness.
That's	what	 happened	 in	Russia.	They	 rebelled,	 revolted	 against	 the	Czar,	 and
what	they	created	is	far	worse	slavery.	Stalin	proved	to	be	a	bigger	czar	that	even
Ivan	 the	Terrible,	 because	 the	 consciousness	of	 the	people	 remained	 the	 same,
they	only	destroyed	the	outer	structure.	And	if	the	consciousness	is	the	same	it
will	 create	 the	 same	 structure	 again.	And	 of	 course,	 next	 time	 it	will	 create	 a
better	structure	than	before	--
stronger,	 far	more	 solid.	 That's	what	 has	 happened	 in	Russia.	 That's	what	 has
been	happening	down	the	ages	 in	almost	all	 the	countries.	Each	revolution	has
failed.
But	there	is	hope	--	hope	because	there	is	another	kind	of	revolution	possible:	the
inner	 revolution.	 You	 start	 rebelling	 against	 the	 very	 source	 of	 slavery.	 Our
consciousness	is	only	partially	conscious,	only	one	tenth	of	it	is	conscious.	Nine
tenths	 of	 it	 is	 unconscious,	 a	 dark	 continent.	 That	 unconsciousness	 has	 to	 be
dispelled,	that	darkness	has	to	be	dispelled.	We	have	to	create	more	light	inside.
And	that's	the	function	of	meditation.	Meditation	is	only	the	alchemy	of	creating
more	 inner	 light.	 And	when	 your	 whole	 being	 is	 full	 of	 consciousness,	 when
your	 inside	 is	 full	 of	 light,	 the	 revolution	 has	 happened.	 The	 Buddha	 or	 the
Christ	is	born.	Sannyas	is	the	first	step	towards	that	ultimate	goal.
This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Viram	Mano.	Viram	means	stopping;	mano	means
the	mind	--	stopping	the	mind.
That's	the	golden	secret,	the	innermost	secret	of	sannyas.	We	don't	know	how	to
turn	the	mind	off,	it	always	remains	on.	From	birth	to	death	it	continues	to	work.
Of	course,	if	you	work	so	much	with	the	mind	it	becomes	mediocre,	it	becomes
stupid.	 It	 never	 has	 any	moment	 for	 rest,	 it	 cannot	 rejuvenate.	 The	 body	 can
sleep	in	the	night,	but	the	mind	still	goes	on	working.	In	the	day	it	thinks	,	in	the
night	it	dreams.	It	is	the	same	process;	the	work	continues.
Meditation	means	 learning	 the	 art	 of	 turning	 the	mind	 off.	 It	 is	 almost	 like	 a
switch.	You	can	turn	the	light	on	and	you	can	turn	the	light	off.	Once	you	know
how,	it	is	simple;	if	you	don't	know	how,	it	is	very	difficult.	If	you	were	to	bring
a	 villager	 who	 has	 never	 seen	 electricity,	 how	 would	 not	 be	 able	 to	 find	 the
switch	through	his	own	investigation.
That	 actually	 happened.	When	 for	 the	 first	 time	 electricity	 came	 to	Vienna,	 a
friend,	a	villager	came	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
see	Sigmund	Freud.	At	night	he	was	unable	to	turn	the	light	off	and	he	could	not
sleep	for	the	whole	night.
Her	was	also	afraid	to	ask	--	because	what	wold	people	thing?	You	cannot	even
turn	the	light	off?	He	tried	every	way	that	he	knew.	He	knew	how	to	put	a	lamp
out,	how	to	put	a	candle	out.	He	even	stood	on	a	table,	he	tried	to	blow	it	out,	but
nothing	happened.	He	tried	in	every	possible	way.	And	you	have	to	forgive	him.
How	could	he	 imagine	 that	 just	behind	 the	door	 there	was	a	 switch?	He	could
not	imagine	it	--	you	cannot	expect	him	to	at	all.
In	the	morning	when	Freud	asked	him,	'Did	you	sleep	well?'	he	said,	'Sleep	well?
I	could	not	sleep	at	all!
I	am	so	tired.	And	now	I	have	to	tell	you	the	whole	thing...	I	was	trying	to	look
knowledgeable,	 so	 I	 didn't	 ask,	 it	 felt	 humiliating.	 But	 that	 light	 kept	 me
occupied	 for	 the	whole	night.	 I	 thought	 about	how	 to	 turn	 it	 off	 and	 I	 tried	 in
every	possible	way	but	I	could	not.	Is	there	any	way	to	turn	it	off	or	does	it	have
to	remain	on?'
Then	Freud	took	him,	and	just	behind	the	door	there	was	a	switch.
That	is	exactly	the	case:	there	is	a	switch	in	the	mind.	The	name	of	the	switch	is
watchfulness,	awareness,	witnessing.	If	you	start	witnessing	the	mind	it	begins	to
stop.	The	more	that	witnessing	grows,	the	more	and	more	do	you	become	aware
of	a	secret	key,	that	the	mind	can	be	stopped	easily.	And	that	moment	is	of	treat
liberation,	when	you	can	turn	the	mind	off	for	hours.	And	when	it	comes	back,
when	you	recall	it,	it	comes	back	rejuvenated,	fresh.
Hence	meditators	are	bound	to	be	more	intelligent	than	other	people.	If	they	are
not	then	their	meditation	is	false,	then	they	don't	know	what	meditation	is;	they
are	 doing	 something	 else	 in	 the	 name	 of	 meditation.	 A	 meditative	 person	 is
bound	to	be	more	sensitive,	more	intelligent,	more	creative,	more	loving,	more
compassionate.	These	qualities	grow	of	their	own	accord.	And	the	whole	secret
is	in	one	thing:	learn	to	stop	the	mind.	The	moment	you	know	how	to	stop	the
mind	you	become	the	master,	and	then	mind	is	a	beautiful	mechanism.	You	use	it
when	 you	want	 to	 use	 it,	when	 it	 is	 needed,	 and	 you	 put	 it	 off	when	 it	 is	 not
needed.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Viramo.	Viramo	means	total	rest,	relaxation.
Meditation	 can	 flower	 only	 in	 deep	 relaxation;	 relaxation	 is	 the	 right	 soil	 for
meditation	to	happen.
Meditation	is	not	concentration,	remember.	Concentration	is	a	strain,	it	can't	be
relaxed,	 it	 is	 tension,	 it	 cannot	 be	 restful.	 Concentration	 means	 that	 you	 are
focusing	 your	mind-energies	 onto	 one	 point,	 excluding	 everything	 else.	 It	 is	 a
great	 effort,	 and	 tiring.	 It	 is	 useful	 in	 science.	 Science	 functions	 through
concentration	because	science	never	goes	beyond	mind.	And	mind	functions	at
its	 highest	 peak	 and	 pitch	when	 it	 is	 concentrated	 --	 naturally,	 because	 all	 the
energies	become	pooled	at	one	point.
Religion	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 go	 beyond	 the	mind.	Concentration	 is	 not	 of	 any	 help
there.	Hence	concentration	and	meditation	are	not	synonymous	--	not	only	they
are	not	synonymous,	they	are	polar	opposites	of	each	other.	Meditation	means	a
totally	 relaxed	state,	 so	 relaxed	 that	 the	mind	melts.	 Just	 as	 in	concentration	 it
becomes	stronger	and	stronger	--	the	more	concentrated	it	is,	the	more	strong	it
is.	In	relaxation	it	becomes	waker	and	weaker,	because	noting	is	excluded,	all	in
included.	And	 there	 is	no	strain,	no	 tension;	 there	 is	no	need	for	 them	because
you	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 focus	 yourself.	You	 are	 simply	 available	 and	 open.	That
availability,	 that	 openness	 to	 existence	 is	 meditation.	 It	 needs	 a	 very	 restful,
relaxed	background.
So	whenever	you	have	time,	relax.	And	just	be	alert	about	all	that	is	happening
around:	 the	 dog	 barking	 in	 the	 distance,	 the	 neighbors	 quarrelling,	 the	 traffic
noise.	 Nothing	 should	 be	 taken	 as	 a	 distraction;	 in	 meditation	 nothing	 is	 a
distraction.	 Distraction	 can	 only	 be	 there	 if	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 concentrate.	 Of
course	 if	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 concentrate	 then	 anything	 that	 disturbs	 you	 is	 a
distraction.	But	in	meditation	there	is	no	possibility	of	distraction	because	in	the
first	 place	we	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 concentrate	 at	 all.	 So	 nothing	 can	 disturb	 and
nothing	can	distract;	all	is	absorbed.
In	that	openness,	mind	slowly	slowly	starts	disappearing,	evaporating,	and	a	few
glimpses	 of	 no-mind	 start	 arriving.	 Those	 are	 great	 experiences.	 And	 slowly
slowly,	 one	 day	 it	 happens	 that	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 out	 of	 the	 mind,
completely	out	of	the	mind.	You	have	gone	beyond.
Hence,	sometimes	mystics	almost	look	like	mad	people,	because	mad	people	go
out	of	their	mind,	they	fall	below	the	mind,	and	mystics	also	go	out	of	the	mind	-
-	 they	 go	 beyond	 the	mind.	Both	 lose	 the	mind	 in	 different	ways,	 in	 different
directions,	but	one	thing	is	similar.	So	it	 is	possible	that	the	mystic	may	look	a
little	mad,	and	vice	versa,	the	madman	may	look	a	little	mystical.
Sannyas	is	a	door	leading	into	harmony	with	the	whole,	a	bridge,	so	that	you	can
slowly	drop	your	fight	with	existence.	We	are	fighting;	knowingly,	unknowingly,
consciously,	we	are	fighting.	We	have	been	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
brought	up	to	fight.	We	have	been	told	that	it	is	a	continuous	fight,	the	survival
of	 the	 fittest,	 so	 we	 have	 to	 fight,	 we	 have	 to	 struggle.	 It	 is	 a	 tooth-and-nail
struggle.	Everybody	is	at	your	neck	and	you	have	to	be	at	everybody	else's	neck.
We	 have	 been	 brought	 up	 with	 this	 idea,	 in	 such	 a	 wrong	 atmosphere...,	 it
becomes	so	engrained	that	we	need	not	be	aware	of	it.	It	goes	on	working	there.
We	are	constantly	fighting,	and	this	is	how	we	dissipate	our	energies.
Man	is	part	of	the	whole.	There	is	no	question	of	any	struggle.	How	can	the	part
fight	the	whole?	We	have	to	submerge	ourselves	into	it,	we	have	to	be	in	deep
harmony	with	 it.	That	 is	sargamo,	 that	 is	 real	music:	when	you	are	no	more	 in
any	conflict,	when	you	are	 simply	 in	 a	 let-go	 flowing	with	 the	 river,	 not	 even
swimming,	just	flowing	with	the	river,	floating.	Wherever	the	river	is	going	you
are	floating	with	it.	It	is	already	going	to	the	ocean.	It	will	take	you	to	the	ocean,
you	need	not	struggle.
This	 idea	 is	 very	 basic	 to	 my	 sannyas,	 the	 idea	 of	 let-go,	 the	 idea	 of	 non-
resistance,	the	idea	of	no	struggle.	Then	great	music	is	heard,	then	great	music	is
experienced	 and	 lived.	 You	 can	 call	 that	 music	 god,	 you	 can	 call	 that	 music
paradise.	 Those	 are	 only	 names	 of	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 absolute	 harmony
between	the	individual	and	the	universal.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001125
ShortTitle:	RAFTER12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Gunther.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Gunther	 means
bold.
Love	without	boldness	is	impossible.	Love	requires	guts.	The	greatest	courage	in
life	is	to	lose	yourself
--	 and	 that's	 the	 primary	 requirement	 of	 love.	 Unless	 you	 lose	 yourself	 you
cannot	be	in	love.	You	can	play	the	game	called	love,	but	you	will	never	know
the	reality	of	love.	You	will	be	doing	something	else	in	the	name	of	love.	Deep
down	it	will	only	be	an	ego	trip	--	and	love	can	never	be	an	ego	trip.
Ego	 has	 to	 be	 dissolved,	 only	 then	 does	 love	 flow	 in	 you.	 And	 that	 is	 real
courage.	 In	a	deep	sense	 it	 is	committing	suicide	 --	not	of	 the	body	but	of	 the
mind.	It	is	becoming	mindless.	Hence	love	looks	to	people	like	something	mad,
insane.	In	a	way	it	is	true,	it	is	mad.	Going	beyond	the	mind	is	a	certain	kind	of
madness.	Of	course	it	is	divine	madness	and	it	brings	a	sanity	of	its	own	kind.	It
beings	 an	 insight,	 an	understanding,	 but	 is	 is	 totally	different	 from	 intellectual
understanding.	It	is	not	of	the	mind,	it	is	of	the	beyond.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anand	Vedo.	Anand	means	bliss,	vedo	means	the
scripture	--	the	scripture	of	bliss.	That	is	what	we	are	meant	to	be:	scriptures	of
bliss,	 sermons	 of	 joy,	 messages	 of	 god,	 flowerings	 of	 wisdom.	 That	 is	 our
essential	being,	but	we	don't	allow	it	to	happen,	to	grow,	to	explode.	We	prevent
it	in	every	possible	way.	We	are	our	own	enemies.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	to	become	a	friend	to	yourself.	And	mow	start	looking
for	your	intrinsic	potential.	Don't	be	bothered	about	what	others	say	you	should
be,	listen	to	your	own	inner	voice	and	be	it!
And	 whatsoever	 is	 the	 risk,	 risk...	 because	 without	 risk	 there	 is	 no	 growth,
without	 risk	 the	 seed	 can	 never	 become	 a	 sprout,	 without	 risk	 the	 child	 will
never	be	born	out	of	the	womb.
Ashen	means	hope.	There	 is	great	hope	because	man	can	become	god.	 there	 is
great	hope	because	man	can	blossom	 into	 thousands	of	 flowers.	There	 is	great
hope	because	man	can	transcend	death,	can	become	immortal.
Come	again!	There	is	great	hope	(much	laughter)	...	come	again!
(To	Judy,	Serge's	little	sister)
Such	a	good	sannyasin!	(laughter)
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	Ma	Gitima.	 Gitima	means	 poetry,	 a	 song.	 Become	 a
song.	Sing	and	dance	--	that	is	your	meditation!
The	name	is	tremendously	beautiful,	and	this	is	my	whole	approach	towards	life,
the	meaning	of	your	name.	Mirella	means	wonder,	awe.
Man	can	function	in	two	ways,	either	through	knowledge	or	through	wonder.	If
he	functions	through	knowledge	he	never	comes	to	know	the	great	mysteries	of
life.	Of	course	he	collects	many	stupid	facts	called	data,	but	he	never	comes	to
know	the	inner	reality	that	joins	those	facts	together.	He	knows	only	fragments
and	never	 the	 harmony	 that	 runs	 through	 all	 of	 then	 that	 keeps	 them	 together.
That's	what	 science	goes	on	doing.	The	very	word	 'science'	means	knowledge.
When	you	function	through	knowledge	you	function	through	the	mind.
Religion	 functions	 through	 the	heart.	To	 function	 through	 the	heart,	wonder	 is
the	quality	required.
When	you	are	in	a	moment	of	wonder	and	awe	you	are	again	a	child.	Again	the
same	freshness	overwhelms	you,	as	 if	 the	whole	existence	has	become	bathed,
all	dust	has	disappeared,	and	the	mirror	is	so	clean	that	it	can	reflect	the	subtlest
nuances	of	existence.
Religion	is	born	out	of	the	experiences	of	awe
Seeing	the	sunrise	or	the	sunset,	be	overwhelmed.	Those	are	the	great	moments.
Seeing	the	sky	full	of	stars,	be	drunk,	be	lost,	utterly	lost	in	it.	Become	a	small
star	yourself,	not	a	separate	spectator	but	a	participant.	When	you	participate	in
existence	 you	 know	 the	 mystery.	 God	 is	 nothing	 but	 another	 name	 for	 the
mysterious	that	one	discovers	through	wonder	and	awe.
Function	from	a	state	of	innocence==that's	the	only	way	to	know.	Knowledge	is
not	the	way	to	know.	It	is	only	pretension.	Innocence	is	the	way	to	know,	and	for
innocence	one	has	 to	 sacrifice	 all	 knowledge.	One	has	 to	 put	 it	 aside	 as	 sheer
garbage.	And	it	is	exactly	that.	It	is	all	crap!
--	What	exactly	is	the	meaning	of	your	name	(Livio)?
--	I	don't	know.
(To	Lalita,	translator	and	Osho's	librarian)
--	Lalita,	do	you	have	some	idea?
--	It	is	the	name	of	a	great	Roman	family.
--	Mm,	but	what	does	it	mean?
--	It	might	come	from	Silviano	--	the	god	of	the	forest...	but	that's	a	guess.
--	(To	Livio)	So	we	will	accept	Lalita's	guess.	She	is	my	researcher!
The	solitary	person	is	in	a	negative	space.	He	is	feeling	lonely,	he	is	hankering
for	the	other.	He	is	in	a	deep	sadness	because	he	does	not	know	how	to	be	with
himself,	 he	 does	 not	 know	 how	 to	 enjoy	 himself,	 he	 does	 not	 know	 how	 to
celebrate	 himself.	 All	 that	 he	 knows	 is	 relationship,	 so	 whenever	 he	 is	 in
relationship	 he	 feels	 at	 ease.	 Whenever	 he	 is	 with	 somebody	 he	 can	 forget
himself.	To	be	with	somebody	is	something	like	alcohol,	it	is	an	intoxicant.	It	is
simply	 drowning	 yourself,	 your	 worries,	 anxieties,	 your	 very	 existence	 in	 the
other.	 And	 the	 other	 is	 doing	 the	 same	 with	 you.	 That's	 what	 people	 call
relationship.	Each	is	using	the	other	as	a	means	to	avoid	himself.
Solitude	is	totally	different.	It	is	not	loneliness,	it	is	aloneness.	It	is	aloneness.	It
is	 not	 negative,	 it	 is	 utterly	 positive.	 It	 is	 not	 the	 experience	 that	 the	 other	 is
absent	but	the	experience	that	'I	am	present.'	It	is	so	overwhelming	an	experience
of	 one's	 own	 presence	 that	 everything	 else	 fades	 from	 the	 ind	 and	 one	 starts
feeling	ecstatic.	The	sheer	joy	of	breathing,	the	sheer	joy	of	being,	the	sheer	joy
of	participating	in	existence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	enough.	It	is	a	wonder	to	be,	the	wonder	of	wonders.
Bliss	makes	 real	 solitude.	 Then	 solitude	 becomes	 a	 temple,	 bliss	 becomes	 the
deity	in	it.	And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	the	art	of	changing	loneliness
into	aloneness,	the	alchemy	of	changing	solitariness	into	solitude.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Madak.	Prem	means	love,	madak	means	intoxicant.
Love	 is	 the	only	 real	 intoxicant.	And	 it	 has	 a	 very	paradoxical	 quality	 to	 it:	 it
intoxicates	you	and	yet	it	makes	you	more	aware.
That's	 the	miracle	 of	 love.	 It	 does	 not	make	you	unconscious.	 It	 it	makes	you
unconscious	it	is	lust,	not	love.
If	 it	makes	 you	 drunk	 and	 yet	 in	 the	 deepest	 core	 of	 your	 being	 you	 become
more	and	more	alert	and	conscious,	then	it	is	love.
One	can	be	aware	without	love,	but	then	awareness	is	almost	like	a	wasteland,	a
desert.	Nothing	grows,	no	flowers,	no	trees.	Love	can	be	without	awareness	but
then	 it	 is	 simply	 sexuality,	 animal	 lust,	 nothing	 higher	 than	 that	 --	 something
biological,	physical,	chemical.	But	when	both	are	together,	love	and	awareness,
they	create	a	great	harmony.
So	this	has	to	be	your	work	on	yourself,	love	plus	awareness.	Be	drunk	as	much
as	 you	 can	 and	 yet	 remain	 aware.	When	 this	 paradox	 is	 experienced	 one	 has
experienced	god.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	Deva	Abhilash.	Deva	means	 divine.	Abhilash
means	 thirst	 for,	 a	 deep	 deep	 longing	 for	 the	 divine.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 a	 desire,
because	 desire	 is	 of	 the	mind.	 Hence	 I	 call	 it	 thirst.	 It	 is	 far	 deeper.	 You	 are
involved	totally	 in	 it,	your	very	existence,	your	every	fibre,	every	cell	 is	dying
without	it	It	is	as	if	a	man	were	lost	in	a	desert	and	is	feeling	thirsty	but	cannot
find	water.	 First	 it	 is	 in	 the	mind,	 then	 slowly	 he	 starts	 feeling	 it	 in	 the	 body.
Then	slowly	it	becomes	so	total	that	he	is	just	thirst	and	nothing	else.	Not	even
the	word	'thirst'	is	there.	He	is	thirst.	That	is	the	meaning	of	abhilash.
In	English	 there	 is	no	word	 to	 express	 it	 exactly,	 that's	why	 the	 explanation	 is
needed.	The	dictionaries	translate	it	as	desire,	then	they	miss	the	whole	point.	In
Sanskrit	 we	 have	 many	 words	 for	 different	 kinds	 of	 desires.	 Abhilash	 is	 the
highest,	 the	purest	kind	of	 longing,	 the	 longing	for	 the	ultimate,	 the	 longing	 to
transcend	 oneself,	 the	 longing	 to	 come	 home,	 the	 longing	 to	wake	 up.	 It	 is	 a
divine	longing,	it	is	a	divine	discontent.	And	the	person	who	feels	it	is	blessed.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Gyandas.	Gyandas	means	a	servant	of	wisdom.
The	 only	 thing	 to	 be	 remembered	 always	 it	 that	 wisdom	 does	 not	 mean
knowledge,	it	means	just	the	opposite.	It	means	a	state	of	not-knowing.	It	means
innocence.
Knowledge	 in	one	of	 the	nourishment	 for	 the	ego,	 the	most	vital	nourishment.
The	more	you	know,	the	more	you	feel	that	you	are	somebody.	Even	riches	don't
give	 that	 much	 ego,	 not	 even	 political	 power	 gives	 so	 much	 ego	 as
knowledgeability	does.	And	ego	is	the	barrier	to	knowing.
Ego	is	a	false	phenomenon,	and	if	we	cling	to	it	we	cannot	know	the	real.	The
false	has	to	cease	for	the	real	to	be,	and	the	only	way	is	to	detach	yourself	from
all	knowledge.	Yes,	spiritual,	esoteric,	all	kinds	of	knowledge	are	included	in	it.
One	 should	 become	 more	 and	 more	 innocent,	 childlike.	 Wondering	 is	 good,
looking	 into	 existence	 with	 no	 idea	 of	 what	 it	 is,	 is	 good,	 living	 without
conclusions	is	virtue.
That	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 your	 name.	 You	 have	 to	 transform	 it	 into	 a	 reality,
because	this	is	the	only	key	that	unlocks	the	doors	of	god's	temple.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Nirguno.	Nirguno	is	one	of	the	names	of	god.
In	 India	we	 have	 one	 thousand	 names	 for	 god.	There	 is	 one	 scripture,	Vishnu
Sastranath.	The	whole	scripture	is	devoted	only	to	the	names,	the	one	thousand
names	of	god.	But	each	name	has	a	beauty.	It	reminds	you	of	a	certain	aspect.
In	 the	East	we	say	 that	god	has	one	 thousand	hand,	mm?	--	 just	 to	 signify	 the
vastness,	the	multi-dimensionality	of	it,	 the	infinity	of	it.	Nirguno	is	one	of	the
names.	 It	 means	 that	 god	 is	 without	 any	 attributes.	 Literally	 it	 means
attributeless.	 That	 is	 the	 fundamental	 attribute,	 that	 god	 has	 not	 attributes.	 So
whatever	we	say	about	him	is	going	to	be	only	approximately	true,	it	can	never
be	the	truth.	And	approximately	true	simply	means	a	beautiful	way	to	say	that	it
is	a	lie,	because	truth	is	either	true	or	not	rue.
Approximately	 true	 is	 not	 possible.	 Either	 a	man	 is	 dead	 or	 alive;	 if	 you	 say
'approximately	 alive'	 it	 doesn't	 mean	 anything.	 Either	 you	 are	 in	 love	 with
somebody	 or	 not.	 If	 you	 say	 'approximately	 in	 love',	 that	means	 nothing.	 It	 is
simply	a	polite	way	of	saying,	'Excuse	me.'
The	 fundamental	 quality	 of	 god	 is	 that	 he	 has	 no	 qualities.	 That's	 why	 he	 an
manifest	in	millions	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
qualities.	He	has	no	form,	that's	why	he	can	manifest	in	all	kinds	of	forms.	He	is
very	liquid,	flexible,	not	static,	not	like	rock	but	like	water.	So	you	put	it	in	a	cup
and	 it	becomes	 the	form	of	 the	cup,	and	you	put	 in	 in	a	bottle	and	 it	 takes	 the
form	of	the	bottle.	It	is	very	non-resistant.	It	is	willing	to	take	any	form.
So	on	one	hand	god	has	no	forms	and	on	the	other	hand	all	forms	are	his.	And
both	 these	 things	 have	 to	 be	 remembered	 constantly	 so	 that	 you	don't	 become
attached	to	any	particular	form.
Christ	is	only	a	particular	form...	Buddha	also,	Krishna	also.	But	there	are	people
who	have	become	attached	to	them.	Now,	there	are	people	who	are	attached	to
Krishna,	so	obsessed,	 that	 they	cannot	think	of	any	other	manifestation	of	god.
Buddha	they	will	deny,	Christ	 they	will	deny,	Mohammed	they	will	deny;	they
will	say	'Krishna	is	the	only	true	god.'	And	the	same	is	true	about	the	Christian.
Just	 the	 other	 day	 I	 saw	 an	 eighteen-page	 report	 against	me	 published	 by	 the
German	Protestant	Church	and	distributed	to	all	the	churches	in	Germany	saying
'Beware	 of	 this	man,	 because	 this	man	 talks	 like	 Jesus,	 and	 that	 is	 dangerous.
And	this	man	should	not	be	quoted	anywhere,	should	not	be	referred	to	 in	any
church,	in	any	sermon,	from	any	pulpit.'
Now	 what	 is	 the	 fear?	 The	 whole	 fear	 is	 that	 a	 few	 Christians	 may	 become
attracted,	and	Christ	is	the	only	true	messenger,	there	is	no	other	messenger,	the
only	 begotten	 son	 of	 god.	 And	what	 about	 everybody	 else?	 Are	 all	 bastards?
(laughter)
In	the	East	we	are	no	so	fanatical.	All	are	his,	all	forms	are	his.	Everybody	is	his
son,	he	 fathers	 the	whole	existence.	He	 it	only	 the	 father	of	 Jesus	Christ.	That
would	 be	 a	 very	 poor	 god	 who	 fathers	 only	 on	 son	 and	 who	 cannot	 father
Buddha	and	who	cannot	father	Lao	Tzu	and	who	cannot	father	Zarathustra.	He
would	be	a	poor	god.	When	he	can	father	the	whole	existence,	why	make	him	so
poor?
The	report	accepts	that	his	man	--	it	says	about	me	--	is	extraordinary,	but	that	is
the	danger!	He	 is	 a	 human	being	 and	 Jesus	 is	 god	 --	 that	 difference	has	 to	 be
remembered.
Nobody	is	a	human	being,	everybody	is	god!
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Veet	Parad.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Parad	means
mercury.	Mercury	represents	the	mind.	It	is	a	metaphor	for	the	mind	because	the
mind	 is	 very	mercurial,	 changing	 continuously.	 It	 has	nothing	permanent	 in	 it.
Not	even	an	iota	remains	the	same.	Not	even	for	two	consecutive	moments	does
the	mind	remain	the	same,	it	is	constant	flux.
Because	we	are	 trying	to	 live	 through	the	mind	and	we	are	 trying	to	hold	onto
the	mind,	which	goes	on	changing,	we	are	constantly	 in	misery.	We	cling	 to	 it
and	it	slips.	It	is	exactly	like	mercury.
If	you	don't	cling	to	mercury	you	can	keep	it	in	your	hand,	but	if	you	close	your
fist	 it	will	 slip	out,	and	once	 it	 falls	onto	 the	 floor	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	collect	 it
again.	We	are	cling	to	the	mind	so	much.	It	goes	into	fragments	and	they	all	go
on	 slipping	 our	 of	 our	 hand,	 and	 because	 they	 go	 on	 slipping,	 we	 cling	 even
more.
And	 the	more	we	 cling,	 the	more	we	 are	 in	misery,	 because	 all	 our	 efforts	 to
cling	are	bound	to	be	frustrated.	Wee	need	some	eternal	shelter.	That	shelter	 is
within	you,	but	is	is	not	the	mind.	It	is	the	witness	if	the	mind.
So	go	beyond	the	mind,	watch	the	mind,	destroy	the	identity	with	the	mind	and
remind	yourself	again	and	again	'I	am	the	watcher,	I	am	the	witness	of	it	all.	I	am
not	 it.'	 Slowly	 slowly	 it	 sinks	 into	 your	 being	 and	 the	 forgotten	 language	 is
remembered	 again.	The	 day	 you	 recognize	 absolutely,	 totally,	 that	 you	 are	 the
witness,	 you	 have	 awakened	 from	 sleep.	 That	 awakening	 brings	 bliss,
benediction.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Sandhano.	Sandhano	means	the	ultimate	enquiry.	The
ultimate	enquire	is
'Who	am	I?'	 It	 is	not	about	god,	 it	 is	not	about	heaven	and	hell,	 it	 is	not	about
past	lives,	it	is	not	about	ANYthing,	but	about	yourself.
Maharishi	Ramana	used	to	give	only	one	meditation	to	his	disciples:	Who	am	I?
Go	into	this	enquiry.
Watch,	search,	disentangle	yourself	from	all	identifications	with	the	body	and	the
mind.	Slowly	slowly	you	begin	to	see	that	you	are	not	the	body.	You	live	in	the
body,	obviously,	but	the	body	is	only	an	abode,	a	caravanserai,	an	overnight	stay
--	 in	 the	morning	 you	 go.	 And	 so	 is	 the	 case	 with	 the	mind.	 It	 is	 even	more
fleeting	than	the	body.
You	are	beyond	both,	and	that	which	is	beyond	both	is	unchanging.	It	is	the	same
from	the	very	beginning	,	if	there	was	any	beginning,	and	it	will	remain	the	same
to	the	very	end,	it	there	is	going	to	be	any	end.	In	fact	there	is	no	beginning	and
no	end:	your	being	is	eternal.	That's	what	is	meant	when	I	say	that	you	are	gods,
gods	who	have	fallen	asleep.	The	enquiry	will	wake	you	up.
So	 this	 is	going	 to	be	your	meditation.	Sitting,	walking,	go	on	enquiring	 'Who
am	I?'	Not	verbally,	not	intellectually	--	existentially.	Watch	whether	you	are	the
body.	When	you	are	hungry,	watch	--	are	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
feeling	 hungry	 or	 are	 you	 simply	 becoming	 aware	 that	 the	 body	 is	 hungry?
When	you	have	a	headache	watch	whether	you	have	the	pain	or	you	are	 just	a
watcher	who	knows	that	the	head	is	suffering	from	pain.
And	 it	 is	not	difficult,	 slowly	slowly	 to	become	aware	 that	all	 these	 things	are
happening	around	you	but	you	are	not	any	of	them.
That	 transcendence	 it	 the	 real	 experience	 of	 truth.	 And	when	 you	 know	 your
inner	truth	you	become	capable	of	knowing	the	truth	of	the	whole	existence.	But
the	most	fundamental	step	has	to	be	taken	inside	yourself.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Premgyan.	Premgyan	means	love	is	true	wisdom	--
not	 logic,	but	 love,	not	 the	head,	but	 the	heart.	We	are	all	hung	up	 in	 the	head
and	we	have	completely	forgotten	the	heart.	To	ignore	the	heart	is	ignorance.	Not
to	ignore	the	heart	is	wisdom.	And	our	whole	education	is	rooted	in	this	strategy:
it	 teaches	 people	 how	 to	 ignore	 the	 heart.	 It	 condemns	 the	 heart,	 it	 condemns
feeling,	it	appreciates	thinking.	It	is	devoted	to	the	god	of	logic,	and	logic	is	very
poor	compared	to	love.	Logic	is	empty,	hollow,	with	no	soul	in	it,	just	a	shadow.
It	 is	 only	 love	 that	 can	 fulfil	 one,	 it	 is	 only	 love	 that	 can	 give	 you	 authentic
growth.	 So	 move	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart.	 That	 is	 the	 whole	 journey	 of
sannyas.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001135
ShortTitle:	RAFTER13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Daan.	Anand	means	rejoice.	Daan	means	god
is	my	 judge.	And	 that	 is	one	of	 the	most	 fundamental	 things	 to	 remember:	we
can	rejoice	only	because	god	is	our	judge.
When	 love	 is	 the	 judge	 one	 need	 not	 be	 afraid	 because	 love	 knows	 how	 to
forgive.	Love	 cannot	 punish,	 it	 can	 only	 reward.	 It	 is	 large	 enough,	 it	 is	wide
enough.	 It	 is	not	mean,	 it	cannot	be	mean.	God	 is	 love,	 so	 there	 is	no	 fear,	no
need	to	fear.	One	can	rejoice	in	one's	very	ordinariness.	One	need	not	be	a	saint.
One	 can	 be	 absolutely	 normal,	 ordinary	 if	 one	 remembers	 'God	 is	my	 judge.'
Then	there	is	no	reason	to	live	out	of	fear.
For	centuries	religious	people	have	lived	out	of	fear.	They	pray	our	of	fear,	they
worship	out	of	 fear,	 they	 fast	out	of	 fear,	 they	do	all	kinds	of	penances	out	of
fear.	But	whenever	you	do	something	out	of	fear	it	never	brings	freedom.	When
you	do	something	out	of	love,	it	brings	freedom.
God	 is	 love,	 hence	 you	 can	 respond	 in	 a	 loving	 way.	 And	 when	 love	 is	 in
judgement,	 then	 all	 is	 to	 be	 forgiven.	 Saints	 and	 sinners,	 all	 to	 be	 forgiven.
Neither	are	virtues	going	to	be	more	valuable	nor	are	sinners	going	to	suffer.
God	 is	not	 an	ordinary	 judge,	 hence	 rejoice.	Rejoice	 in	your	ordinariness,	 and
that	very	rejoicing	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
changes	the	quality	of	your	life.	It	becomes	extraordinary.
My	effort	here	is	not	to	make	saints	out	of	you.	My	effort	here	is	to	make	blissful
people,	people	who	are	able	to	rejoice,	people	who	are	capable	of	celebrating.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Anand	David.	 Anand	means	 bliss.	 David	means	 a
friend.	Be	a	blissful	friend	to	existence,	not	in	conflict,	not	in	any	struggle.
We	are	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	we	go	on	fighting	with	life	consciously	and
unconsciously.	We	are	taught	that	life	is	our	enemy.	Our	very	blood	is	poisoned
by	society.	We	have	to	conquer,	and	that	is	such	a	nonsensical	thing	--	the	very
idea	 of	 conquering	 life	 and	 existence	 --	 because	 the	 part	 cannot	 conquer	 the
whole.	The	part	can	only	dissolve	into	the	whole.	Yes,	victory	is	a	surrender.	One
becomes	 victorious	 not	 against	 the	 whole	 but	 with	 the	 whole.	 The	 whole	 is
always	victorious,	and	the	part	if	in	conflict	is	always	doomed	to	fail.
My	teaching	is	based	on	love,	on	friendship.	Be	in	a	love	affair	with	existence,
with	the	trees	and	the	rocks	and	the	people,	just	in	a	deep	love	relationship.	And
friendship	is	the	highest	fragrance	of	love.	Love	has	something	earthly	about	it,
friendship	is	simply	divine.	Love	has	something	physiological	in	it,	friendship	is
pure	 spirituality.	 Love	 has	 some	 biological	 roots,	 friendship	 has	 no	 biological
roots;	 hence	 friendship	 exists	 only	 between	human	beings.	And	whenever	 any
animal,	 a	 dog,	 a	 wold,	 a	 horse,	 and	 elephant,	 shows	 friendship,	 it	 shows
tremendous	intelligence.	Yes,	a	few	animals	show	friendship,	and	that's	why	they
are	higher	animals.	They	are	very	close	to	humanity,	just	on	the	boundary	line.
The	very	existence	of	 friendship	 in	 their	being	shows	 that	 they	are	very	close.
Just	one	step	more	and	they	will	be	human	beings	in	their	next	life.
So	this	is	not	just	to	be	your	name,	this	has	to	become	your	path:	friendship	with
all,	unconditionally,	with	no	motive.	That	is	prayer	and	that	is	meditation.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Paresh.
Remember	one	thing,	that	sannyas	is	not	in	any	way	renunciation.	That	was	the
old	idea	of	sannyas,	to	renounce	life,	 to	escape	from	life.	I	am	all	for	life.	One
has	to	be	more	aware	in	living,	that	is	true,	more	intelligent	in	living,	that	is	true,
more	artful,	that	is	rue	--	but	escapism	is	suicidal.
I	 am	 against	 the	 escapist	 tradition,	 and	 all	 the	 religions	 up	 to	 now	 have	 been
deeply	 involved	with	 the	escapist	attitude.	Because	of	 that	 they	have	made	 life
on	 earth	 very	 poor.	 They	 have	 not	 contributed	 anything	 to	 life,	 they	 have	 not
been	creative,	they	have	not	enriched	it.	On	the	contrary	they	have	impoverished
it.	 Patricularly	 in	 this	 country,	 because	 religion	 has	 been	 very	 predominent
millions	 of	 people	 became	 escapists.	 That's	 why	 no	 science	 was	 born.	 Who
would	 give	 birth	 to	 science:	 --	 because	 all	 the	 intelligent	 persons	 became
escapists.	They	rushed	towards	the	mountains.	Sitting	in	the	caves,	doing	stupid
postures,	they	wasted	the	great	opportunity	that	god	had	given	to	them.
Somebody	would	 be	 standing	 on	 his	 head,	 somebody	would	 be	 distorting	 his
body	 or	 lying	 on	 a	 bed	 of	 thorns,	 somebody	 would	 be	 fasting.	 All	 kinds	 of
foolish	things	have	existed	in	the	name	of	religion	and	have	been	thought	very
holy	 and	 spiritual.	 They	 are	 simply	 different	 kinds	 of	 diseases	 --	 neuroses,
psychoses,	schizophrenia.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 a	whole	 human	 being,	 an	 integrated	 human	 being,
life-affirmative.	Creativity	 is	my	approach.	If	you	can	create	something	in	 life,
think	 that	 you	 are	 doing	god's	work.	That	 is	 the	only	 service	 required	 and	 the
only	prayer	worth	doing.	Other	prayers	are	for	people	who	cannot	be	creative.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Mahesvar.	Maheshwar	means	the	great	god.
Man	contains	the	greatness,	the	infinity,	the	eternity	of	god.	Man	contains	all	the
glory	 and	 all	 the	 splendor	 that	 belongs	 to	 god.	 But	 is	 has	 to	 becomes	 an
expression.	Ordinarily	it	is	dormant,	it	has	to	be	stirred.	All	the	meditations	are
devised	in	such	a	way	so	that	it	can	be	stirred,	so	that	it	starts	welling	up,	so	that
it	starts	growing.
Everybody	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 produce	 infinite	 flowers	 of	 beauty,	 sensitivity,
awareness,	and	ultimately	of	enlightenment.	No	one	is	born	small.	If	somebody
remains	small	that	is	his	own	decision.	That	is	like	a	seed	deciding	not	to	grow.
Yes,	 a	 seed	 can	 die	 as	 a	 seed	 without	 ever	 knowing	 the	 joys	 of	 growth,	 of
bringing	 great	 foliage,	 branches	 and	 leaves,	 flowers	 and	 fruits,	 f	 having	 a
dialogue	with	 the	 stars	 and	 the	moon	and	 the	 sun,	 of	 releasing	 its	 energies,	 of
pouring	its	being	into	existence	and	knowing	the	orgasmic	joy	that	comes	out	of
that	pouring.
Seeing	 a	 seed	 nobody	 can	 believe	 that	 it	 will	 contain	 beautiful	 flowers.	 By
cutting	the	seed	you	cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
find	 those	flowers	 in	 it.	By	analyzing	 the	seed	you	will	never	be	able	 to	know
what	it	was	meant	to	be.
Hence	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 psychoanalysis,	 it	 is	 more	 a	 question	 of
psychosynthesis.	 And	 every	 psychosynthesis	 is	 only	 a	 preparation;	 ultimately
growth	is	a	question	of	transcending	the	mind	completely.
Our	whole	education	believes	in	analysis,	hence	synthesis	has	to	be	emphasized,
to	 put	 things	 into	 balance.	 And	 once	 there	 is	 balance	 then	 transcendence	 is
possible.
Sannyas	is	not	just	a	formal	phenomenon.	It	is	getting	ready	for	a	radical	change,
nothing	less	than	a	great	revolution	in	your	inner	being.	It	is	giving	birth	to	god
in	your	innermost	core.	It	is	an	effort	to	become	a	temple	for	him.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Deva	Gatha.	Deva	means	divine.	Gatha	means	story.
Life	 is	 a	 divine	 story.	 It	 is	 not	 your	 biography,	 it	 is	 god's	 biography.	We	 are
simply	pages	in	it,	paragraphs	in	it,	footnotes	in	it.	Existence	is	a	great	orchestra,
we	are	small	notes,	small	instruments.	We	can	play	in	tune	with	the	whole,	that
brings	bliss.	We	can	play	against	the	whole,	that	brings	misery.	It	is	as	simple	as
that.	So	whenever	you	feel	miserable	remember	that	knowingly	or	unknowingly
you	are	doing	something	against	 the	whole.	Put	 it	 right.	Nobody	is	responsible
except	 you.	 Take	 the	 whole	 responsibility	 on	 yourself.	 That	 is	 one	 of	 the
fundamentals	of	sannyas:	responsibility,	total	responsibility.
And	when	ever	you	feel	blissful,	learn	from	that	moment.	You	must	have	fallen
in	tune	with	the	whole.
So	remember	how	it	happened	and	create	 the	same	context	again	and	again	so
that	it	can	happen	more	and	it	can	happen	more	deeply.
Misery	and	bliss	are	great	teachers.	If	we	can	simply	watch	and	learn	from	these
two	teachers	no	other	scripture	is	needed.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	Ma	 Deva	 Parinito.	 Deva	 means	 god.	 Parinito	 means
married	to.
Sannyas	is	a	marriage	to	god.	It	is	getting	deeply	involved	in	the	ultimate	destiny
of	existence.	It	is	dropping	the	coldness	of	a	spectator	and	becoming	warm.	It	is
a	passionate	affair	of	commitment,	of	involvement,	of	participation.
God	is	not	an	object	that	you	can	know	by	standing	aside	as	a	spectator,	you	can
know	god	only	if	you	participate.	God	is	a	dance	that	you	have	to	participate	in
to	know	the	real	meaning	of	 it.	God	is	a	song	 that	you	have	 to	sing,	 then	only
will	you	know	the	beauty	of	it.	God	is	a	wine	that	you	have	to	drink;	only	then
do	you	become	intoxicated.	Just	watching	the	wine	like	a	spectator	is	not	going
to	 help.	 It	 is	 not	 going	 to	 quench	 your	 thirst,	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 make	 you
intoxicated.
Sannyas	means	that	you	are	dropping	the	ordinary	status	of	a	spectator	and	your
are	becoming	 involved,	getting	 into	deeper	waters.	But	 that	 is	 the	only	way	 to
come	to	reality.	When	you	are	utterly	drowned	in	it,	drunk	with	it,	then	only	do
you	know	the	sheer	joy	of	it,	the	ecstasy	of	it.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sureshwar.	Sureshwar	means	god	of	gods	--	and
that	is	our	reality.
To	be	a	human	being	is	an	accident,	to	be	a	man	or	a	woman	is	an	accident,	to	be
a	tree	or	a	bird	is	an	accident.	The	intrinsic	it	the	same.	At	the	innermost	core	we
are	all	gods,	but	on	the	periphery	we	are	different.	The	forms	are	different,	 the
garments	are	different,	 the	bodies	are	different,	 the	minds	are	different,	but	 the
soul?	--	it	is	not	different	at	all.	In	fact	we	don't	have	different	souls.	The	whole
existence	has	only	one	soul,	the	whole	existence	has	only	one	center.
To	be	reminded	of	it	is	all.	Once	you	start	remembering	it,	recognizing	it	not	just
as	an	intellectual	idea	but	as	something	felt	in	the	heart,	the	transformation	has
set	 in.	Then	you	cannot	fall	back,	 then	there	 is	no	going	back.	The	growth	has
started,	you	have	started	moving	for	the	first	time.
People	only	appear	 to	be	moving,	 they	are	not	moving,	 they	 remain	 the	 same.
They	go	on	moving	in	circles.	They	keep	up	the	pretension	that	they	are	moving,
bu	because	they	move	in	circles	there	is	no	growth,	no	achievement,	no	arrival.
Unless	you	arrive	at	god,	remember,	you	have	not	arrived	anywhere.
And	 this	 can	 be	 made	 possible,	 this	 is	 my	 whole	 effort	 here:	 to	 create	 the
context,	the	space	where	you	can	be	challenged	towards	for	this	great	adventure
of	 knowing	yourself.	By	knowing	oneself	 one	 knows	 all,	 and	 by	 not	 knowing
oneself	one	may	know	all	--	it	is	worthless	(To	the	son	of	an	ashram	resident.)
Come	here.	So	finally	you	decided!	(laughter)	Good!	I	was	waiting	for	you.	You
have	 been	 avoiding	 and	 avoiding,	 but	 how	 long	 can	 one	 avoid?	 --	 that	 is	 the
question.	 (laughter)	This	 is	 your	new	name:	Swami	Prem	Deven.	Prem	means
love.	Deven	means	divine.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	is	the	most	divine	quality.	Grow	in	love	and	you	are	growing	towards	god.
Stop	 growing	 in	 love	 and	 you	 have	 stopped	 growing	 completely;	 there	 is	 no
growth	 other	 than	 love.	 And	 people	 go	 on	 going	 that	 A	 few	 people	 go	 on
accumulating	wealth	and	they	think	that	they	are	achieving	something.	They	are
not	achieving	anything.	All	that	wealth	will	be	left	behind.	They	will	not	be	able
to	take	it	with	them.	It	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	a	great	opportunity,	collecting	trivia.
A	 few	 people	 accumulate	 knowledge	 --	 that	 too	 is	 futile.	 Only	 your	 memory
becomes	bigger	and	bigger,	but	your	being	remains	the	same.	By	knowing	much
nothing	 happens	 to	 your	 being.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 love	 that	 something	 starts
happening	 to	 your	 being.	A	 new	 freshness	 arises,	 a	 new	 breeze	 starts	moving
through	you,	new	light	penetrates	you,	new	wonder	and	awe	arises	in	you.	For
the	first	time	you	start	looking	into	existence	not	through	the	head,	but	through
the	heart.
And	that	is	the	true	window.
Once	that	window	opens,	all	that	was	impossible	before	becomes	possible.	Then
one	is	entitled	to	miracles.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001145
ShortTitle:	RAFTER14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	will	be	your	new	name:	Swami	Juno
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name	 so	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 change	 it.	 And	 it	 is	 also	 of
tremendous	meaning.	 It	means	purity.	But	 remember	 that	purity	has	nothing	 to
do	with	morality.	A	moral	person	is	pure	only	from	the	outside.	He	has	cultivated
a	 certain	 character	 but	 his	 inside	 is	 as	 unclean	 as	 anybody	 else's.	 He	 has	 a
beautiful	facade	but	it	is	just	a	facade.	The	so-called	saints	and	the	sinners	differ
only	in	their	faces.
Real	purity	is	something	totally	different	from	morality.	It	cannot	be	cultivated.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	character,	it	has	something	to	do	with	consciousness.	It
is	 a	 transformation	 of	 consciousness.	 When	 one	 becomes	 very	 alert	 in	 one's
innermost	 core,	 aware	 and	 meditative,	 then	 a	 purity	 arises	 which	 is	 beyond
morality	 and	 immorality,	 which	 is	 beyond	 sinners	 and	 saints.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of
innocence.	The	mirror	 is	 absolutely	without	 any	dust.	And	when	 the	mirror	 is
pure	it	reflects	god.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Aki.	Aki	means	early	morning	--	and	that's	what	sannyas
is,	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 day.	 The	 night	 is	 over,	 the	 sun	 has	 not	 yet	 risen.	 A
sannyasin	is	just	in	the	middle	of	these	two.	He	has	left	the	old	and	he	is	waiting
for	 the	 new	 to	 arrive.	 The	 new	 comes	 inevitably,	 but	 patience	 is	 needed	 This
interval	 between	 the	 night	 and	 the	 day	 is	 of	 immense	beauty,	 of	 great	 silence,
because	it	is	a	passage	where	darkness	becomes	light,	death	becomes	life,	matter
disappears	and	there	is	only	god	left	behind.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Come	here.	Close	your	eyes...	close	your	eyes.
Good.	Ruth,	come	here.	Just	look	at	me.	Good.
This	 is	your	name:	Ma	Ruth.	Ruth	means	compassionate.	 It	has	other	meaning
too:	 beauty,	 a	 vision	 of	 beauty,	 the	 capacity	 to	 see.	 But	 I	 will	 choose
compassionate.
Sannyas	is	the	alchemy	of	transforming	passion	into	compassion.	Passion	is	the
lowest	state	of	consciousness	and	compassion	the	highest.	The	lower	has	not	to
be	denied	but	to	be	transforms.	The	lower	has	to	be	used	as	a	stepping	stone.	In
the	 past	 the	 so-called	 religious	 people	 have	 been	 very	 much	 against	 it,	 and
because	 of	 their	 centuries	 of	 teachings	 they	 have	 created	 a	 schizophrenic
humanity.	They	have	divided	man	 into	 two,	 the	 lower	and	 the	higher,	 and	 that
division	is	the	cause	of	misery,	anguish,	anxiety.
When	 you	 start	 thinking	 in	 terms	 of	 yourself	 as	 being	 two,	 the	 lower	 and	 the
higher,	there	is	constant	conflict.	You	are	trying	to	overcome	the	lower,	to	fight
with	 it,	 to	 destroy	 it	 --	 and	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 destroy	 it.	 Transformation	 is
possible,	destruction	is	not	possible.	Nothing	can	be	destroyed	in	existence.
Yes,	things	can	be	changed.	Water	can	become	vapor	or	water	can	become	ice,
but	 this	 is	 just	 a	 change.	 You	 cannot	 make	 water	 disappear	 totally.	 You	 can
analyze	it,	then	it	will	become	hydrogen	and	oxygen,	but	is	remains.	There	is	no
way	to	annihilate	it.	Nothing	can	ever	be	annihilated	and	nothing	new	can	ever
be	created.	Only	combinations	change.
So	 because	 of	 this	 long	 long	 tradition	 of	 dividing	 man	 into	 two	 the	 whole
humanity	is	suffering.	My	effort	is	to	help	you	to	drop	the	division,	to	drop	this
schizophrenia	which	as	been	perpetuated	in	the	name	of	religion.
Religion	 has	 not	 proved	 a	 blessing.	 It	 has	 proved	 to	 be	 the	 greatest	 calamity.
Jesus,	Buddha,	Zarathustra
--	they	are	blessings,	but	Christianity,	Buddhism,	Hinduism,	Jainism	--	they	are
not	blessings.
All	 the	 great	masters	 of	 the	world	were	 teaching	methods	 to	move	 your	 inner
being	into	higher	planes.
They	were	helping	people	to	grow	wings.	And	all	the	churches	have	been	trying
to	divide	you,	because	 that	 is	 the	 fundamental	way	 to	 rule	over	people:	divide
and	 rule.	 You	 can	 divide	 easily,	 and	 once	 a	 person	 is	 divided	 he	 becomes
powerless,	his	energies	start	fighting	within	him,	he	becomes	a	chaos,	then	you
can	rule	him.	And	all	the	churches	are	interested	not	in	transforming	you	but	in
enslaving	you,	in	ruling	you,	in	exploiting	you.
Passion	is	the	lowest	rung	and	compassion	is	the	highest	rung	of	the	ladder,	but
both	belong	to	the	same	ladder.	Remember,	when	passion	becomes	conscious	it
becomes	 compassion.	When	 passion	 is	 unconscious	 it	 is	 cruel,	 it	 is	 ugly,	 it	 is
animal.
Just	 bring	 more	 consciousness	 to	 your	 being	 and	 you	 start	 moving	 toward
divinity;	from	the	animal	 to	god.	Man	is	only	a	 ladder	stretched	between	these
two	eternities.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anne.	Anne	has	many	meanings:	prayer,	mercy...	but	the
most	beautiful	is	grace.
So	remember	grace.	Grace	is	something	that	descends	from	above.	You	cannot
create	it,	you	can	only	receive	it.	You	can	be	open	to	the	beyond,	available,	in	a
state	of	let-go,	and	something	starts	showering	on	you.	It	is	invisible	but	one	can
feel	it	and	the	freshness	that	it	brings	and	the	rejuvenation.
Prayer	 is	 only	 a	 method	 to	 help	 you	 to	 attain	 grace.	 And	 mercy	 is	 only	 an
expression	 of	 the	 achievement	 of	 grace.	 These	 are	 the	 three	 meanings	 of	 the
word:	 prayer,	 grace,	mercy.	 Attain	 to	 grace,	 use	 prayer	 as	 a	method	 and	 then
mercy	 as	 an	 expression.	 Prayer	 precedes,	 mercy	 follows,	 but	 the	 real
phenomenon	is	grace.
And	the	only	way	to	attain	it	is	to	drop	the	ego.	That	is	the	only	barrier.	We	are
closed	to	god	because	of	it.
The	moment	 the	ego	 is	put	aside	we	are	one	with	god.	He	starts	 flowing	 in	us
and	we	start	flowing	in	him.
And	that	is	the	state	of	grace.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Gudrun.	Gudrun	means	divine	wisdom.	It	is	a	repetition
because	 in	 fact	 all	 wisdom	 is	 divine.	 There	 is	 no	 other	wisdom	 in	 the	world.
Knowledge	is	human,	wisdom	is	divine.
Knowledge	 is	 concerned	 with	 the	 facts,	 wisdom	 is	 concerned	 with	 the	 truth.
Facts	are	superficial	things.
It	is	a	fact	that	you	are	a	woman,	but	it	is	not	a	truth.	Truth	is	that	you	are	a	pure
consciousness,	neither	man	or	woman.	The	fact	is	that	you	are	a	body,	the	truth
is	that	you	are	not	the	body,	you	are	the	spirit.	But	the	fact	is	easily	available,	it
is	objective,	and	the	truth	is	subjective.
Soren	 Kierkegaard	 says	 'Truth	 is	 subjectivity.'	 His	 definition	 is	 of	 great
significance.	Fact	is	objective	--
it	 can	be	proved,	experimented	with.	That's	why	science	only	believes	 in	 facts
and	 that's	why	science	and	 religion	cannot	communicate	with	each	other:	 their
dimensions	are	different.	Science	 talks	about	 the	 facts,	 religion	 talks	about	 the
truth.
Science	has	no	idea	of	truth	because	truth	is	something	invisible.	You	can	feel	it,
you	can	experience	it,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
but	you	cannot	show	it	 to	others,	while	objective	facts	can	be	shown	to	others,
they	can	be	proved.	Wisdom	is	not	possible	through	learning.	Through	learning
only	 knowledge	 is	 possible.	 Wisdom	 is	 possible	 only	 thought	 a	 state	 of	 not-
knowing,	 a	 state	 of	 innocence.	 By	 the	 process	 of	 unlearning	 one	 comes	 to
wisdom	and	by	the	process	of	learning	one	comes	to	knowledge,	hence	there	can
be	no	school,	no	university	for	wisdom.
For	knowledge	all	kinds	of	schools	are	possible.
What's	why	wisdom	has	disappeared	 from	 the	world	 slowly	 slowly:	 the	world
has	become	too	burdened	with	knowledge.
To	be	 a	 sannyasins	means	 taking	 a	 quantum	 leap	 from	knowledge	 to	wisdom,
from	the	objective	to	the	subjective,	from	the	outer	to	the	inner,	from	the	fast	to
the	truth,	from	the	visible	to	the	invisible,	from	the	known	to	the	unknown.	It	is
the	 greatest	 adventure	 of	 life,	 and	 unless	 one	 comes	 to	 know	 one's	 innermost
being,	 the	 truth,	 the	 subjectivity,	 one	 has	 not	 known	 anything.	 One	 can
accumulate	 much	 knowledge	 but	 that	 is	 all	 rubbish.	 It	 is	 only	 wisdom	 that
liberates,	it	is	only	wisdom	that	transforms.	It	is	only	wisdom	that	becomes	the
door	to	the	divine,	hence	all	wisdom	is	divine.
Your	name:	Swami	Alan.	Alan	means	harmony,	and	harmony	is	 the	goal	of	all
true	religious	enquiry.
Man	live	in	discord.	Man	lives	like	a	crowd;	there	are	many	people	inside	you,
not	 one,	 and	 they	 are	 all	 fighting,	 quarrelling	 and	 they	 all	 pretend	 to	 be	 the
master.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say:	Man	is	like	a	house	whose	master	has	gone	away	or	has
fallen	asleep	and	all	the	servants	are	drunk.	In	their	drunken	state	every	servant
thinks	that	he	is	the	master	and	there	is	great	quarrel	and	fighting	going	on.
He	was	right.	That's	generally	the	situation	of	a	human	being.	All	is	fragmentary
and	 each	 fragment	wants	 to	 go	 its	 own	way	 and	 no	 two	 fragments	 are	 in	 any
agreement.	That's	why	ordinary	human	beings	 cannot	make	 a	promise.	 If	 they
promise	they	cannot	keep	it,	because	the	person	who	promises	'Tomorrow	I	will
meet	you,'	may	not	be	in	power	tomorrow.	The	wheel	goes	on	moving,	another
spoke	come	up.
In	the	evening	you	decide	'Tomorrow	morning	I	am	going	to	get	up	at	four	and
meditate'	and	the	decision	seems	to	be	total	and	you	are	determined	and	you	are
happy	that	you	are	determined.	But	when	the	alarm	goes	at	four,	you	throw	away
the	 alarm,	 you	 pull	 the	 blanket	 over	 you	 and	 you	 say	 'We	will	 see	 tomorrow.'
Now	this	is	somebody	else.	And	when	you	get	up	at	eight	o'clock	in	the	morning
you	 are	 miserable,	 repentant,	 feeling	 guilty	 that	 you	 could	 not	 keep	 promise
given	 to	 yourself	 --	 and	 you	 really	 wanted	 it,	 you	 had	 meant	 it.	 Now	 this	 is
another	person...	and	so	on,	so	forth,	it	goes	on.
Man	needs	integration,	an	integration	of	all	these	fragments	into	one	whole,	into
one	harmony.	And	that	 is	 the	whole	effort	of	 religion.	The	very	word	 'religion'
means	 that	which	 binds	 you	 together.	That's	 exactly	 the	meaning	of	 yoga	 too;
yoga	means	union.	Religion	and	yoga	are	synonymous.
When	you	become	crystallized,	when	you	become	one,	when	all	these	parts	that
are	falling	apart	melt	and	merge	into	one	unity	a	tremendous	joy	arises	because
all	the	conflict	is	gone.	And	when	the	conflict	is	gone	celebration	begins.	All	the
meditative	 techniques	 are	 devised	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 they;	 can	 bring	 your
quarrelling	fragments	closer	to	each	other,	 into	a	friendship,	into	harmony,	into
accord.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Narayano.	 Narayano	 means	 god.	 The	 whole
existence	is	made	of	god:	the	rocks,	the	trees,	the	animals,	man.	God	is	the	only
stuff.	There	is	nothing	else	available.	We	differ	only	in	forms.
The	tree	is	green	but	is	is	god	who	is	green	in	the	tree,	and	the	red	in	the	flowers.
He	is	the	mud,	he	is	the	water	and	he	is	the	lotus.	He	is	in	the	lowest	and	he	is	in
the	highest.
So	there	is	no	question	of	any	inferiority	or	superiority;	we	are	part	of	the	whole.
To	remember	it	is	to	become	holy.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Bhagwato.	Bhagwato	means	divine.
Man	 has	 forgotten	 only	 one	 thing,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 door	 to	 the	 divine.	 He	 has
become	lost	in	so	many	things	and	there	are	millions	of	things	that	one	can	get
lost	 in.	And	one	can	forget	god	very	easily.	One	can	forget	god	easily	because
god	is	already	the	case.	There	is	no	gap	between	you	and	god,	hence	it	is	easy	to
forget.
It	is	just	like	the	fish	in	the	ocean.	The	fish	in	the	ocean	does	not	know	the	ocean
unless	somebody	pulls	the	fish	out	of	the	ocean	and	the	distance	is	created.	Then
the	fish	remembers,	then	she	longs	for	the	ocean.
Now	the	fish	understands	what	has	been	missed.
That	can	be	done	as	far	as	a	fish	is	concerned	but	that	cannot	be	done	with	man,
because	all	is	god.	You	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
cannot	be	pulled	out	of	god.	A	distance	cannot	be	created,	so	that	is	not	the	way
to	remind	you.	The	only	way	to	remind	you	is	 to	make	you	aware	 that	all	 that
you	are	involved	with	is	trivia,	mundane,	superfluous.
Even	if	you	achieve	it	nothing	is	achieved.	And	death	will	take	everything	away
from	you	anyway.
Before	 death	 comes,	 attain	 something	 of	 eternity,	 have	 a	 taste	 of	 something
which	 is	 timeless,	 deathless,	 then	death	 cannot	 destroy	you.	Then	you	 can	die
dancing,	singing,	laughing.	And	to	be	able	to	die	singing,	laughing,	dancing,	is
the	greatest	achievement	of	life.	That	is	the	very	culmination	of	life,	that	is	the
goal	 of	 sannyas.	 And	 one	 who	 can	 die	 joyously,	 naturally	 is	 bound	 to	 live
joyously.
So	live	joyously,	live	with	a	deep	enquiry	within	yourself	'Who	am	I?',	because
there	 is	 the	 door	 to	 the	 divine.	 You	 are	 the	 temple	 of	 god.	 Just	 don't	 go	 on
running	hither	and	tither,	come	back	home.	Look	within!
It	is	not	far	away.	It	is	very	close.	In	act	even	to	say	that	it	is	close	is	not	right,
because	closeness	is	also	a	kind	of	distance.
He	exists	in	you	as	you,	so	you	have	to	know	who	you	are.	The	moment	that	you
know	who	you	are,	you	have	known	god	too,	simultaneously.
This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Vimal.	Vimal	means	purity,	 innocence.	Literally	 it
means	without	any	dust,	without	any	mud.
Man	 is	 a	 mirror	 --	 and	 we	 go	 on	 collecting	 dust	 on	 the	 mirror.	 Thoughts,
memories,	desires	--	they	are	all	dust.	Layers	and	layers	of	dust	are	there,	and	the
mirror	is	completely	lost,	it	mirrors	nothing,	it	cannot,	because	so	many	layers	of
dust	are	upon	it.
The	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	clean	the	mirror.	Nothing	else	is	needed,
just	a	 little	cleaning	 inside.	And	once	 the	mirror	 is	clean	you	need	not	be	 told
that	god	is,	you	will	know.
I	don't	expect	you	to	believe	in	god,	because	all	beliefs	are	false.	My	function	is
to	help	you	see	god,	to	know	god.	Seeing	is	of	importance,	not	believing.	Belief
is	again	another	 layer	of	dust	--	 religious	dust,	holy	dust,	but	dust	 is	dust.	And
one	has	to	clean	the	mind	totally,	completely.
When	 the	 mind	 is	 without	 any	 thoughts,	 memories,	 imagination,	 even	 for	 a
single	moment,	you	 immediately	become	aware	of	god.	That	 awareness	 fulfils
you,	 makes	 your	 life	 meaningful.	 Your	 song	 bursts	 forth,	 a	 great	 ecstasy	 for
which	we	have	been	searching	and	searching	for	many	many	lives,	arises	in	your
being.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Nirmal.	Nirmal	means	innocence.
Jesus	is	right	when	he	says:	Unless	a	man	is	born	again	he	cannot	enter	into	the
kingdom	of	god.	And	he	also	says:	Unless	you	are	like	small	children	you	will
not	enter	into	my	kingdom	of	god.
One	day	he	is	standing	in	the	marketplace,	a	crowd	has	gathered	to	listen	to	him,
and	a	rabbi	asks	him:	Who	is	entitled	to	enter	the	kingdom	of	god	that	you	go	on
talking	 about?	 Jesus	 looks	 around,	 finds	 a	 small	 child,	 takes	 him	 up	 on	 his
shoulders,	and	says,	Those	who	are	like	this	small	child.
The	 rabbi	was	 offended,	 obviously,	 because	 he	was	 thinking	 that	 Jesus	would
point	 towards	 him;	 he	 was	 the	 most	 knowledgeable	 person	 in	 the	 town.	 And
others	were	also	offended.	Somebody	was	the	most	virtuous	and	somebody	else
was	the	most	saintly	and	somebody	else	was	the	most	respectable.	All	kinds	of
people	were	there,	and	he	has	chosen	just	an	ordinary	child!	But	Jesus	is	right:
man	has	to	learn	to	be	a	child	again.
The	first	childhood	is	bound	to	be	lost.	The	first	childhood	is	a	natural	thing.	It	is
like	something	of	which	you	are	not	aware	and	cannot	be	aware	unless	you	lose
it.	You	have	to	lose	it,	and	only	later	on	when	you	become	aware	what	have	you
done?	 What	 have	 you	 gained	 by	 losing	 it?...	 Then	 you	 start	 searching	 for	 it
again.	A	second	childhood	is	needed.
That	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 your	 name:	 a	 second	 childhood.	One	 has	 to	 be	 twice-
born,	it	is	a	spiritual	birth.
And	then	all	is	possible,	even	the	impossible	is	possible.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Satyamo.
Satyamo	means	 the	 ultimate	 truth.	 Truth	 is	 not	 available	 through	 the	 intellect.
Truth	 is	 available	 only	 through	 intuition.	 Truth	 cannot	 be	 found	 by	 logic,	 by
thinking,	by	the	head;	it	can	only	be	found	by	the	heart,	by	feeling,	by	love.
So	the	whole	problem	before	a	seeker	is	how	to	shift	the	energy	from	the	head	to
the	heart.	The	whole	gestalt	has	 to	be	changed.	Our	 society	 teaches	us	how	 to
take	the	whole	energy	to	the	head.	It	excludes	all	other	centers,	it	denies	energy
to	all	other	centers,	it	takes	everything	towards	the	head.
Our	society	is	head-oriented,	so	it	is	not	an	accident	that	millions	of	people	are
crazy,	mad,	insane.	Their	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
heads	are	boiling	with	 too	much	energy	and	 their	hearts	are	empty	because	no
energy	moves	there.	The	heart	remains	undernourished,	goes	on	shrinking	--	and
it	is	through	the	heart	that	one	can	be	bridged	with	life,	with	god.	Only	through
the	heart	is	there	a	possibility	of	rejoicing,	of	becoming	sane,	of	attaining	to	the
ultimate	truth.
Sannyas	 is	 only	 a	 beginning,	 a	 small	 beginning,	 of	 changing	 the	 gestalt,	 of
moving	 the	 energy	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart.	 It	 can	 be	 done,	 energy	 can	 be
moved	to	any	center.	It	is	only	a	question	of	understanding	what	our	problem	is.
Once	we	 know	 the	 problem	 the	 solution	 is	 not	 far	 away.	 In	 fact	 the	 problem
contains	 the	 solution.	 Understood	 rightly,	 you	 will	 find	 the	 solution	 in	 the
problem,	you	will	find	the	answer	in	the	question	itself.
So	now	this	is	going	to	be	your	work:	shifting	your	energy	from	the	head	to	the
heart.	Feel	more,	 sing,	dance,	participate	 in	music;	watch	 the	 stars,	 the	 sunset,
the	sunrise,	the	flowers,	the	trees,	and	you	will	feel	yourself	coming	closer	to	the
heart.	 And	 avoid	 argumentation,	 logic-chopping,	 hair-splitting.	 Avoid	 that,	 it
leads	nowhere.	It	takes	you	more	and	more	into	the	desert,	more	and	more	away
from	you	and	your	truth.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001155
ShortTitle:	RAFTER15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	a	beautiful	name.	 It	can	be	of	 tremendous	significance	and	can	bring	a
transformation	to	your	consciousness.
Jed	means	Jehovah	is	a	friend,	god	is	a	beloved.
Religion	is	a	love	affair	with	existence.	It	is	not	our	of	fear,	it	is	out	of	love	that
real	prayer	arises.	 It	 is	not	 that	god	 is	powerful,	 that	we	have	 to	bow	down	 to
him,	but	that	he	is	pure	friendliness,	pure	love,	the	fragrance	of	love	and	nothing
else.
Surrendering	to	love	is	not	a	surrender,	it	is	a	victory.	Surrendering	to	power	is
humiliating,	it	is	ugly.
But	 remember,	 god	 is	 not	 a	 person.	 God	 is	 another	 name	 for	 the	 totality	 of
existence.	From	this	very	moment	don't	look	at	god	as	a	father	figure,	don't	look
at	gos	as	the	creator,	as	the	ruler.	Drop	those	ideas,	those	are	all	political	ideas.
Think	of	god	always	as	a	friend.	You	can	laugh	with	him,	you	can	share	a	joke
with	him.	You	need	not	be	afraid,	he	understands.	If	he	cannot	understand	you,
then	 nobody	 can	 understand	 you.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 any
understanding	at	all.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Gemma.	Gemma	means	fullness	--	and	that's	the	goal	of
sannyas.
Man	ordinarily	is	empty,	hollow.	That	is	his	misery.	He	wants	to	be	full,	hence
he	goes	on	stuffing	with	food,	with	sex,	with	alcohol,	with	money,	with	things,
with	 all	 kinds	 of	 gadgets	 that	 technology	 makes	 available.	 But	 still	 the	 inner
emptiness	remains	as	empty	as	ever.	In	fact	one	starts	feeling	it	more	when	one
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	surrounded	by	all	kinds	of	things.	In	contrast	the	inner	looks	very	poor.
The	 search	 for	 money,	 power	 and	 prestige	 is	 basically	 to	 create	 a	 fullness	 of
being,	but	it	is	a	wrong	direction.	That	is	not	the	way	to	become	full.	The	way	to
become	 full	 its	 love,	prayer,	grace.	The	way	 to	become	 full	 is	only	one:	 to	be
pregnant	with	god,	to	be	available	to	god	and	to	all	his	glory	and	splendor.
That's	what	my	teaching	is	in	essence:	Love	the	existence	and	you	will	be	full.
Love	unconditionally	and	you	will	be	overflowing.	And	the	moment	one	starts
overflowing	 is	 the	 moment	 of	 coming	 home.	 One	 has	 arrived.	 There	 is
tremendous	contentment.
This	 is	your	new	name:	Swami	Avinasho.	Avinasho	means	 the	eternal	one,	 the
indestructible	 one,	 the	 immortal	 one.	That's	 your	 reality.	You	were	 never	 born
and	you	will	never	die.	You	don't	exist	as	part	of	time.	You	penetrate	time,	but
you	 exist	 as	 eternity.	You	 are	 reflected	 in	 time	 but	 time	 is	 only	 a	mirror.	 The
reality	is	beyond	it.
Birth	means	the	beginning	of	the	reflection	in	the	mirror.	But	the	one	who	was
reflected	remains	forever.
Mirrors	go	on	changing	but	the	mirrored	one	is	eternal,	it	is	deathless.
To	 be	 reminded	 of	 it	 is	 the	 purpose	 of	 meditation.	 Meditation	 changes	 your
consciousness	 from	 the	 mirror	 to	 the	 original	 face,	 from	 the	 reflection	 to	 the
original	face.	And	to	know	one's	original	face	is	to	know	god.	Your	original	face
is	god's	face	too.	They	are	not	different.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Nibbano.	Nibbano	means	cessation	of	the	self,	of	the
ego,	of	 the	very	 idea	 that	 'I	 am.'	The	moment	 that	 the	 idea	of	one's	 separation
from	existence	disappears,	god	appears	 immediately.	God	 is	 always	 there,	 it	 is
just	that	the	ego	is	functioning	like	an	iron	curtain,	you	cannot	see	through	it.
Once	the	ego	is	put	aside	all	the	values	of	life	go	through	a	radical	change.	What
was	 important	before	 is	no	more	 important	because	all	 that	was	 important	was
nothing	 but	 nourishment	 for	 the	 ego.	Now	 something	 else	 is	 important	 --	 that
which	nourishes	your	being.	So	all	priorities	change.	You	live	as	you	were	living
before	yet	you	are	no	more	 the	 same	person.	Your	presence	has	 changed.	The
body	is	the	same	and	everything	is	the	same,	but	something	at	the	center,	at	the
very	 core	 has	 become	 full	 of	 light,	 joy.	 It	 starts	 radiating.	 It	 starts	 reaching	 to
other	people	too.	It	can	trigger	the	process	in	other's	lives	also.
'Nibbano'	 is	 Buddha's	 word	 for	 ultimate	 enlightenment	 when	 the	 ego	 is
completely	dissolved	into	the	whole,	when	the	dewdrop	disappears	in	the	ocean
and	becomes	the	ocean	itself.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Prabhat.	Prabhat	means	the	dawn.
Sannyas	is	a	bridge	between	the	night	and	the	day.	It	is	the	end	of	the	night	and
the	beginning	of	the	day.
It	is	hard	to	drop	the	old,	but	is	has	to	be	dropped	because	only	then	is	the	new
possible.	 It	 is	 hard	 to	 accept	 the	 new	because	 it	 is	 new	and	we	 are	 unfamiliar
with	it.	It	is	a	stranger,	and	deep	down	we	are	apprehensive	and	afraid.	But	one
has	to	learn	to	love	the	now,	otherwise	there	is	no	growth	possible.
Growth	 simply	means	 the	courage	 to	drop	 the	old	and	 the	courage	 to	 love	 the
new.	And	 this	 has	not	 to	be	done	only	once,	 it	 has	 to	be	done	 every	moment,
because	 every	 moment	 something	 is	 becoming	 old	 and	 something	 new	 is
knocking	at	the	door.	Whenever	that	is	happening,	listen	to	the	new	and	become
utterly	deaf	to	the	old.	The	old	functions	as	a	bondage,	the	new	brings	freedom.
Truth	is	always	new.	God	is	always	fresh,	as	fresh	as	the	dewdrops	in	the	early
morning	sun.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	Dasen.	Dasen	means	 the	 surrendered	 one,	 the
humble	 one,	 one	who	 is	 ready	 to	 become	 a	 slave	 to	 god.	 But	 by	 becoming	 a
slave	to	god	one	becomes	a	master.	By	trying	to	be	a	master	on	one's	own	one
remains	a	slave	of	a	thousand	and	one	things.
The	ego	wants	 to	be	as	master	on	 its	own,	but	you	are	not	 the	ego,	and	 if	you
support	 the	 ego	 you	 are	 supporting	 your	 own	 enemy.	 Surrendering	 to	 god,
becoming	a	slave	to	god	simply	means	that	you	have	become	absolutely	aware
of	the	trap	of	the	go	and	you	are	no	longer	going	to	help	it,	to	co-operate	with	it.
You	have	dropped	all	connections	with	it.
In	that	very	moment	something	immensely	beautiful	happens.	For	the	first	time
you	become	aware	of	your	vastness,	of	what	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god.	But
the	way	to	enter	into	it	is	to	be	humble.
Jesus	 is	 right	when	he	says:	Blessed	are	 the	meek	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	kingdom	of
god.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Paritosho.	 Paritosho	means	 total	 contentment,
pure	contentment	for	no	reason	at	all.	If	there	is	a	reason	for	it,	it	is	not	total.	It	is
total	only	when	it	is	uncaused,	when	it	comes	out	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	 your	 understanding.	 When	 you	 see	 all	 the	 gifts	 that	 the	 existence	 has
bestowed	upon	you,	a	gratitude	arises	on	its	own.	One	feels	immensely	loved	by
existence.	One	is	no	more	an	alien,	a	stranger,	an	outsider.
The	whole	existence	becomes	one's	home.	We	belong	to	it,	it	belongs	to	us.	All
alienation	disappears.	Then	each	moment	is	so	full	of	joy,	it	is	so	overflowing	in
ecstasy,	 that	 one	 can	 only	 be	 contented.	 There	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 being
otherwise.
Meditation	is	the	key	to	open	the	door,	the	door	of	absolute	contentment.	Mind	is
always	discontented.,	hence	meditation	means	creating	a	state	of	no-mind.	That
space	is	always	contented.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Gangotri.	Gangotri	is	the	source	of	the	river	Ganges.
It	is	thought	to	be	one	of	the	holiest	places	in	the	world.	That	is	only	symbolic.
Ordinarily	 river	 move	 further	 and	 further	 away	 from	 the	 source,	 that	 is	 the
natural	 course.	 But	 in	meditation	 one	 starts	moving	 toward	 the	 source.	Hence
Gangotri	became	a	metaphor.	It	simple	means	that	we	have	to	reach	the	source
from	where	we	have	come.	Unless	we've	found	the	source	of	our	life	energies,
we	will	not	find	god	anywhere.
So	we	have	to	go	in	more	and	more,	 to	 the	point	where	no	more	possibility	of
going	in	is	left.	Then	you	have	arrived	at	the	source.	And	the	source	is	the	goal
too.	 That's	 what	 we	 are	 tying	 to	 do	 here:	 bringing	 people,	 slowly	 slowly
persuading	them	to	come	to	the	source.
The	source	is	within	you.	One	need	not	go	anywhere.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Anando.	Anando	means	the	ultimate	bliss.	It	is	not
pleasure.	Pleasure	is	of	the	body.	It	is	very	superficial,	momentary	and	it	always
contains	its	opposite	in	it,	pain.
Every	 pleasure	 brings	 its	 own	 kind	 of	 pain	 in	 its	 wake,	 like	 a	 shadow.	 You
cannot	avoid	the	pain.	If	you	choose	pleasure	you	have	also	chosen	pain	in	the
bargain.	 That's	 the	 problem	 of	 all	 pleasure-seekers:	 one	moment	 they	 look	 so
high,	 another	 moment	 so	 low.	 One	 moment	 they	 are	 on	 the	 peaks,	 the	 sunlit
peaks,	 another	 moment	 they	 are	 in	 the	 dark	 valleys.	 One	 moment	 it	 is	 all
paradise,	another	moment	it	is	all	hell.
Bliss	is	not	pleasure,	nor	is	bliss	happiness.	Happiness	is	something	higher	than
pleasure;	it	is	psychological.	But	is	also	contains	its	opposite,	unhappiness.
The	 body	 and	 the	 mind	 cannot	 go	 beyond	 duality.	 Pleasure	 is	 more	 animal,
gross.	 Happiness	 is	 a	 little	 human,	 a	 little	 subtle.	 Listening	 to	music,	 reading
poetry,	 painting,	 watching	 a	 sunset	 these	 are	 higher	 phenomena	 than	 sex	 and
food,	but	they	bring	their	own	unhappiness.	And	because	they	are	higher	the	fall
is	 greater.	So	 the	ordinary	pleasure-seeker	 is	 not	 in	 so	much	pain,	 because	his
pleasure	is	also	not	so	much.
But	the	person	who	can	be	happy	can	be	very	miserable.	He	moves	between	two
diametrically	 opposite	 poles,	 between	 happiness	 and	misery,	 like	 a	 pendulum.
And	it	is	a	constant	change	from	one	point	to	the	other.	It	makes	one	feel	insane.
Bliss	is	beyond	duality,	bliss	is	spiritual.	It	knows	no	opposite,	it	has	no	opposite.
It	is	just	pure	joy,	without	any	shadow.
You	may	have	heard	a	beautiful	parable,	it	exists	in	almost	all	the	cultures	of	the
world,	that	in	heaven	angels	don't	make	any	shadows.	When	they	walk	there	is
no	shadow.	That	is	a	metaphor,	that	is	saying	something	about	bliss.	Heaven	is
nothing	 but	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 bliss.	 No	 shadow	 is	 cast.	 One	 becomes
transparent,	so	transparent	that	no	shadow	is	possible.	A	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Lao
Tzu,	 these	people	 live	 in	bliss.	They	don't	 know	 its	 opposite;	 they	don't	 know
what	misery	is,	what	pain	is.	Not	that	their	bodies	will	not	suffer.	When	Buddha
is	ill	his	body	suffers,	but	he	is	only	a	watcher	of	the	pain,	he	does	not	become
identified	with	it.	He	remains	aloof,	cool	far	away;	the	distance	is	always	there.
Even	in	death	he	knows	that	it	is	only	the	body	that	is	going	to	die.
Bliss	has	been	the	goal	of	all	the	religions,	and	bliss	is	the	goal	for	my	sannyas
too.	Forget	all	about	god,	paradise,	remember	only	bliss.	And	if	you	can	attain	to
bliss	you	will	have	attained	god	and	paradise	--	all	without	even	thinking	about
them.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Amito.	Amito	means	the	infinite	one.
Man	appears	very	finite,	very	small,	just	like	a	dewdrop,	but	he	contains	all	the
oceans	in	him,	he	contains	all	the	skies	in	him.	he	contains	all	the	skies	in	him.	If
you	 look	 from	 the	outside	he	 is	 very	 small,	 tiny,	 just	 dust,	 nothing	much:	 just
unto	 just.	 But	 if	 you	 look	 from	 his	 inside,	 from	 his	 center	 he	 is	 the	 whole
universe.
That's	the	difference	between	science	and	religion:	science	looks	at	man	from	the
outside	 and	 finds	 nothing	 spiritual,	 nothing	 divine,	 just	 physiology,	 chemistry,
biology	--	another	kind	of	animal.	Hence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
scientists	go	on	studying	animals	to	understand	man.	Animals	are	more	simple,
easily	 manipulatable,	 so	 they	 go	 on	 researching	 on	 rats,	 and	 whatsoever	 they
conclude,	they	go	on	insisting	that	this	is	the	case	with	humanity	too.	It	is	a	little
more	complex	of	course,	but	basically	it's	the	same.
Science	 has	 reduced	 man	 to	 rats.	 And	 man	 can	 only	 be	 understood	 not	 by
studying	rats	or	dogs...	Pavlov	used	to	study	dogs	to	understand	man	and	Skinner
goes	 on	 studying	 rats	 to	 understand	 man.	 Man	 can	 be	 understood	 only	 by
understanding	Buddhas,	Christs,	Krishnas.	Always	remember	that	this	is	one	of
the	fundamentals,	you	cannot	understand	the	lower,	but	you	can	understand	the
lower	by	understanding	the	higher.	The	higher	contains	the	lower	but	the	lower
does	not	contain	the	higher.
The	 only	 way	 to	 understand	 man	 is	 not	 from	 the	 outside,	 not	 through
observation,	but	through	meditation.	One	has	to	enter	into	one's	interiority,	into
one's	 own	 subjectivity.	 Standing	 from	 there	 one	 comes	 to	 know	 the	 greatest
wonder	and	the	suprememost	awe	--	that	man	is	nothing	but	god.
The	mystics	in	India	have	declared:	Aham	Brahmasmi	--	I	am	god.	And	Skinner
declares;	I	am	a	rat.
Now	it	is	for	you	to	choose!	(laughter)	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	one	renounces
all	Skinners	 and	one	chooses	 the	people	who	have	declared	 that	 the	highest	 is
within	you.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Amito.	It	means	the	infinite	one,	the	eternal
one,	the	vast	one.	It	is	another	name	for	god.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001165
ShortTitle:	RAFTER16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Amrito.	It	mean	the	immortal	one.
Only	the	body	dies,	we	never	die.	We	go	on	changing	bodies	 like	one	changes
clothes,	but	the	real	one	is	beyond	birth	and	death.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Veet	Hilde.	Veet	means	beyond,	hilde	means	war.
Man	is	constantly	is	a	state	of	war	with	others	and	with	himself.	We	have	been
taught	 to	be	 always	 in	 a	kind	of	 struggle.	We	have	become	conditioned	 to	 the
idea	that	life	is	a	struggle,	the	survival	of	the	fittest.
Consciously	we	fight,	unconsciously	we	fight.	Even	when	we	love	there	is	fight.
The	fight	has	become	so	engrained	that	it	has	almost	become	our	nature.	Sooner
or	later	the	fight	will	erupt	with	whoever	is	close	to	you.
Now	the	psychologists	have	started	calling	lovers	intimate	enemies,	and	there	is
truth	in	it.	There	is	a	kind	of	intimacy,	they	are	close,	but	enmity	is	there.	Even	in
a	 loving	 relationship	 there	 is	war,	 anger,	 aggression,	 an	 effort	 to	 dominate	 the
other,	an	effort	not	to	be	dominated	by	the	other.	One	is	constantly	on	guard.	One
cannot	relax.	And	without	relaxation	there	is	no	religion.	Without	total	relaxation
there	is	not	god.	It	is	only	in	a	relaxed	state,	utterly	relaxed,	that	you	come	to	feel
the	presence	of	something	divine	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
permeates	and	pervades	the	whole	existence.
To	be	a	sannyasins	means	going	beyond	all	kinds	of	conflict,	falling	in	love	with
love	itself.
This	 is	 your	name:	Ma	Sonia.	 It	 has	many	meanings	 and	 all	 the	meanings	 are
beautiful	and	very	deeply	related.	Although	they	come	from	different	languages,
a	subtle	undercurrent	connects	them.
The	 first	 meaning	 is	 Greek	 --	 it	 means	 wisdom.	Wisdom	 is	 your	 capacity	 to
understand	existence.	It	is	not	a	question	of	being	well-informed,	well-educated,
well-studied.	One	may	be	absolutely	uneducated,	one	may	know	nothing	about
books,	 yet	 one	 can	 be	 absolutely	 intelligent.	 That	 intelligence	which	 does	 not
come	 from	 the	 outside	 is	wisdom.	 It	 grows	within	 you.	You	 are	 born	with	 it.
Nobody	is	born	with	knowledge,	everybody	is	born	with	wisdom.	Knowledge	is
given	later	on,	it	is	a	conditioning.	But	wisdom	is	our	innermost	core.
To	attain	to	wisdom	one	has	to	put	knowledge	aside.	Knowledge	functions	as	a
barrier,	like	a	rock.
Springs	of	wisdom	cannot	know.	Hence	 those	who	have	 really	understood	 life
and	existence,	all	agree	on	one	thing,	one	has	to	be	innocent	to	be	wise.	Socrates
is	 right	when	he	says:	 I	know	only	one	 thing,	 that	 I	know	nothing.	That	 is	 the
quintessence	of	wisdom.
The	second	meaning	comes	from	Persian.	In	Persian	sonia	means	purity.	If	one	is
innocent	one	is	pure,	one	need	not	try	to	be	pure.	Innocence	has	the	fragrance	of
purity.	 Purity	 does	 not	 mean	 moral,	 virtuous,	 etcetera.	 It	 simply	 means	 a
childlike	 capacity	 to	wonder,	 to	 be	 in	 awe.	 Seeing	 the	 sunset,	 the	 stars	 in	 the
night,	one	is	simply	silent.	The	beauty	is	so	overwhelming	that	the	mind	stops.
And	the	stopping	of	the	mind	is	purity,	no-mind	is	purity.
The	 third	meaning	comes	 from	Hebrew.	 In	Hebrew	 it	means	 the	seer...	not	 the
knower	 but	 the	 seer.	 The	 blind	man	 can	 know	 about	 light,	 but	 he	 cannot	 see.
Knowing	about	 light	 is	not	knowing	light	 itself,	 to	know	light	 itself	one	has	 to
see.	 And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 with	 truth,	 with	 god.	 One	 seeds	 new	 eyes,	 a	 new
capacity	to	see.
And	the	fourth	meaning	comes	from	the	Indian	languages;	the	it	means	golden.
Wisdom,	purity,	 the	capacity	 to	 see	 --	 these	are	 the	most	valuable	phenomena.
They	are	golden,	real	gold.
So	remember	all	these	meanings	and	remember	that	they	have	to	be	transformed
into	reality.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Robert.	Anand	means	bliss,	joy,	cheerfulness.
Robert	means	bright,	radiant.
Bliss	 cannot	 be	 otherwise.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 radiant.	 It	 vibrates,	 it	 pulsates,	 it
creates	an	aura	around	you.
Those	who	have	eyes	can	see	it,	and	those	who	have	ears	can	hear	the	music	of
it,	and	those	who	have	hearts	can	feel	the	love	flowing	through	it.
Bliss	has	one	intrinsic	quality:	it	wants	to	be	shared,	it	wants	to	reach	others.	It	is
just	 the	opposite	of	misery.	When	you	are	miserable	you	want	o	be	closed	you
shrink.	You	 don't	 want	 to	 see	 anybody,	 you	 don't	 want	 to	meet	 anybody.	 The
extreme	is	suicide.
Suicide	simply	means	 'I	don't	want	to	be	seen	again	or	to	see	anybody	again.	I
don't	want	to	relate	in	any	way.	I	disconnect	myself	from	life	totally.'	That	is	the
extreme	of	misery.	One	wants	simply	to	disappear	form	life	itself,	because	if	you
are	 alive	 you	 will	 have	 to	 relate.	 Some	 way	 or	 other	 you	 will	 have	 to
communicate	and	misery	does	not	want	to	relate	or	communicate.	Misery	makes
you	a	windowless	phenomenon.	You	become	encapsulated.
It	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 bliss.	 Bliss	 opens	 you	 up.	You	 become	 all	windows.
Walls	 disappear.	You	 are	 simply	windows	 and	windows.	You	 are	 just	 an	 open
phenomenon,	 available,	 vulnerable.	Suddenly	you	 start	 exploding,	your	 energy
starts	 spreading.	 A	 single	 blissful	 person,	 a	 Jesus	 or	 a	 Buddha,	 changes	 the
quality	of	the	whole	of	the	earth.
We	cannot	think	of	humanity	without	Buddha,	Jesus,	Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu.	Just
delete	one	dozen	names	from	the	history	of	humanity	and	man	would	be	back	to
the	animal	stage.	Man	would	have	lost	all	that	is	valuable.	These	few	individuals
became	so	blissful	that	they	made	the	whole	earth	radian	t	with	their	existence.
Buddha	says:	When	one	single	person	becomes	enlightened	the	whole	existence
takes	a	step	upwards.,	the	plane	of	consciousness	changes	immediately.
This	 is	 your	 name:	Swami	Hans.	Hans	means	 a	 gracious	 gift	 of	 god.	We	 take
your	life	for	granted,	that's	why	;we	never	become	aware	of	its	immense	value.
We	take	it	so	much	for	granted	that	we	never	thank	existence	for	it,	we	never	feel
grateful.	On	the	contrary,	we	are	full	of	complaints.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	changing	 the	whole	gestalt	 from	complaints,	because
whatsoever	 has	 been	 given	 to	 us	 is	more	 that	 we	 deserve.	We	 cannot	 ask	 for
more.	Even	what	has	been	given	is	already	more,	we	are	not	worthy	of	it.
But	this	is	the	stupidity	of	the	human	mind.	Whatsoever	you	give	to	it,	it	starts
taking	for	granted,	its	starts	feeling	it	has	a	birthright	to	it,	and	then	from	there	it
starts	asking	for	more.	And	if	more	is	not	given	then	there	is	great	misery.
Everybody	 is	 miserable	 because	 of	 this	 constant	 hankering	 for	 more.
Contentment	 arises	 the	 moment	 you	 see	 that	 whatsoever	 has	 been	 given	 is
already	 more,	 more	 than	 you	 could	 have	 ever	 expected,	 more	 than	 you	 are
worthy	of,	more	than	you	have	ever	earned.	When	you	see	that	gracious	gift	of
love,	 of	 life,	 of	 all	 that	 you	 are	 capable	 of	 --	 music,	 poetry,	 beauty,	 of
experiencing	a	thousand	and	one	things	--	you	will	feel	grateful,	grateful	to	some
unknown	 energy.	 Call	 it	 god,	 existence,	 truth,	 the	 universe,	 but	 you	 will	 feel
grateful.	 And	 the	 moment	 gratefulness	 arises	 you	 are	 changing	 from	 an
irreligious	person	into	a	religious	person.
Religion	does	not	mean	going	regularly	to	the	church	or	to	the	temple.	It	means
gratefulness,	being	constantly	 in	a	 state	of	gratitude,	 in	a	 thankfulness.	That	 is
what	prayer	is.	There	is	no	need	for	any	other	prayer.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Vinito.
Vinito	means	humble.	But	humble	does	not	mean	what	it	ordinarily	means	in	the
dictionaries.	There	it	means	that	one	has	to	cultivate	a	quality	of	humbleness.
When	I	use	the	word	'humble'	I	mean	egolessness,	nothing	to	do	with	cultivating
a	certain	quality	of	humbleness.	If	the	ego	remains	inside,	you	can	cultivate	the
quality	of	being	humble	but	it	will	simply	be	ego	in	a	new,	beautiful	garment.	It
will	be	pious,	but	it	will	be	the	same	ego.	Nothing	has	changed;	you	remain	the
same.	In	fact	it	is	far	more	dangerous,	because	now	it	will	be	difficult	for	you	to
find	it;	it	will	be	hiding	in	deeper	recesses	of	your	being.	The	ordinary	egoist	is
on	the	surface,	the	pious	egoist	is	very	subtle,	he	hides	deep	down.
Humbleness	to	me	simply	means	egolessness.	It	is	not	a	virtue	to	be	cultivated,
but	it	is	a	consciousness	to	be	raised;	it	is	something	inner.	You	have	to	drop	the
idea,	 "I	 am	 separate	 from	 existence."	 The	 moment	 you	 drop	 the	 idea	 of
separation,	all	ideas	of	superiority	or	inferiority	disappear.	That	disappearance	of
superiority	and	 inferiority	 is	 true	humbleness,	authentic	humbleness.	That's	 the
goal	of	sannyas.
We	don't	cultivate	a	character,	we	create	a	consciousness.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sahajo.	Sahajo	means	natural,	spontaneous.
Man	can	function	in	two	ways.	One	is	out	of	memory.	Then	whatsoever	he	does
is	a	kind	of	reaction.	He	is	not	responding	to	reality,	he	is	functioning	out	of	his
past.	He	is	not	spontaneous.	He	has	some	principles	about	what	to	do,	what	not
to	do.	He	has	a	certain	 ideology	 to	be	 followed.	Rather	 than	responding	 to	 the
reality	 that	 he	 is	 encountering	 he	 is	 responding	 to	 his	 past	 ideology.	 He	 will
always	be	missing	the	point.
And	that	creates	great	frustration	in	life,	because	you	always	go	on	missing	the
target,	you	are	always	falling	short.	You	always	reach	the	station	when	the	train
has	left.
One	has	to	be	spontaneous	in	life,	one	has	to	be	responsible.	By	responsibility	I
don't	mean	 that	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very	 dutiful.	 That	 is	 the	wrong	meaning	 of	 the
word	 'responsibility'.	 Responsibility	 simply	 means	 capacity	 to	 respond	 not
according	to	the	past	but	according	to	the	present	moment,	reflecting	the	reality
that	is	in	front	of	you.
Act	out	of	your	presence,	awareness,	act	out	of	your	totality.	Then	you	action	is	a
response,	it	is	no	more	a	reaction,	and	every	response	brings	a	deep	fulfillment.
If	 life	 becomes	 responsible	 in	 this	 sense,	 then	 each	moment	 brings	more	 and
more	maturity,	growth,	fulfillment,	contentment	and	you	start	feeling	grounded,
rooted,	 centered,	 integrated.	 And	 to	 be	 integrated	 is	 to	 be	 reborn.	 That	 is	 the
beginning	 of	 a	 real	 life.	 Before	 that	 we	 are	 only	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 womb,	 a
psychological	womb.	One	has	to	come	out	of	it.
Socrates	has	said:	The	function	of	 the	master	 is	 that	of	a	midwife.	He	 is	 right.
The	function	of	 the	master	 is	exactly	 that	of	a	midwife.	He	helps	you	 to	come
out	of	the	psychological	womb.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Abhinavo.	Abhinavo	means	the	new,	the	fresh.
Don't	live	in	the	past.	That	is	dead,	that	is	gone	and	gone	forever.	Don't	live	in
the	future	either.	That	is	not	yet,	and	it	is	not	going	to	be	according	to	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	 in	 the	moment.	Moment	 to	moment	 living	 is	 sannyas,	 neither	 bothering
about	the	past	not	about	the	future.	This	moment	is	enough.	One	lives	with	one's
totality	because	there	is	nothing	that	is	holding	one	back	and	there	is	nothing	that
has	already	gone	ahead.	You	are	totally	here,	totally	now,	not	in	fragments.
People	are	in	fragments.	Ninety	per	cent	are	somewhere	in	the	womb	and	if	you
look	 in	 the	 present	 there	 is	 nothing.	 Between	 their	 past	 and	 their	 future	 their
present	disappears.
This	is	the	wrong	way	to	live,	the	stupid	way	to	live.	The	right	way	to	live	is	to
let	 your	 past	 and	 future	 disappear	 so	 that	 your	 whole	 energy	 pours	 into	 the
present.	That	is	meditation,	and	that	is	the	only	way	to	meet	god	because	god	is
always	now	and	here.	And	 it	will	 keep	you	young	 and	 fresh.	 It	will	 keep	you
always	 alert	 and	 aware.	And	 the	more	 aware	you	 are,	 the	more	you	know	 the
beauty	of	existence,	the	joy	of	existence,	the	sheer	grandeur	of	it	all.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Pradipo.	Pradipo	means	a	lamp.
The	last	statement	of	Gautam	the	Buddha	to	his	disciples	was:	Be	a	lamp	onto
yourself.	That	is	a	tremendously	significant	message.
Nobody	else	can	be	a	light	for	you.	Buddhas	can	point	the	way	but	you	have	to
walk,	and	you	have	to	walk	according	to	your	light.	The	capacity	to	create	light
is	there.	All	that	is	needed	to	create	the	light	is	inside	you,	it	is	just	that	you	have
not	looked	there.
Once	you	search	within	you	will	find	everything	that	is	needed	to	create	a	flame.
Nothing	has	to	be	imported	from	the	outside,	the	inner	is	so	absolutely	rich.	We
are	born	with	everything	that	is	really	needed,	but	we	become	so	much	interested
in	the	unnecessary,	in	the	accidental,	that	we	completely	forget	the	intrinsic,	the
inner,	the	innate.
Sannyas	 has	 to	 be	 a	 turning	 point,	 a	 one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	 turn	 from
the	outside	 towards	 the	 inner.	And	soon	you	will	be	surprised	 that	all	 that	you
have	been	desiring	and	longing	for	has	been	waiting	there	for	you	since	the	very
beginning.
Jesus	says:	The	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you....	But	you	are	not	there.	You	are
rushing	in	all	directions.
To	ignore	oneself	is	the	only	ignorance	in	the	world,	and	to	know	oneself	is	the
only	phenomenon	worth	knowing,	the	only	knowledge,	the	only	real	knowledge.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Chinmayo.	Chinmayo	means	consciousness.
Consciousness	is	our	true	reality.	We	are	not	the	body,	we	are	not	the	mind;	we
are	the	witness	of	it	all.
We	can	watch	the	mind	and	its	functionings;	we	are	the	watcher.
One	has	to	become	more	and	more	centered	in	the	process	of	watching.	One	has
to	disidentify	oneself	from	the	bodymind	complex	and	this	is	the	whole	process
of	meditation:	the	process	of	disidentification.
That	 is	 the	negative	part	of	 the	process.	And	 the	positive	part	 is	centering	 into
the	process	of	witnessing,	becoming	more	and	more	rooted	in	watchfulness.
These	two	things	done,	the	negative	and	the	positive	--	disidentification	with	the
bodymind	complex	and	centering	in	the	process	of	awareness	--	that's	the	whole
of	religion.	Nothing	else	is	needed.	No	scripture,	no	doctrine,	no	dogma.	This	is
enough	to	liberate.	More	than	that	is	an	unnecessary	burden.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001175
ShortTitle:	RAFTER17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Jochen.	Anand	means	rejoice.	Jochen	means
appointed	by	god.
Each	person	is	appointed	by	god.	No	one	is	accidental.	Everybody	has	to	fulfil	a
certain	 destiny,	 everybody	has	 to	 attain	 a	 certain	 realization,	 everybody	has	 to
deliver	a	certain	message.	 It	 is	not	only	 that	Moses	and	Buddha	and	Jesus	and
Mohammed	are	the	messengers	of	god,	everybody	is.	They	know	it,	others	don't
know	it	--	that's	the	only	difference.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 deliberately,	 consciously,	 becoming	 a	 messenger	 of
god,	 becoming	 available	 to	 him	 so	 that	 he	 can	 fulfil	 whatsoever	 he	 wants,
withdrawing	 all	 our	 desires	 so	 that	 we	 don't	 interfere,	 withdrawing	 ourselves
totally,	so	that	we	become	just	like	a	hollow	bamboo	flute	so	that	he	can	sing	his
song.
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Samarpan	Philip.	Samarpan	means	 surrendered	and
Philip	means	a	 strong	 spirit.	On	 the	 surface	 it	will	 look	 like	a	contradiction	 in
terms.	It	is	not	so.	It	is	one	of	the	deepest	fundamental	laws	of	life.
Those	 who	 are	 surrendered	 to	 God	 become	 victorious.	 Those	 who	 are
surrendered	 to	 God	 become	 tremendously	 strong	 because	 the	 inexhaustible
sources	of	God	are	theirs.	Those	who	are	not	surrendered	--
they	 are	 poor,	 they	 are	 weak,	 they	 are	 impotent.	 The	 surrendered	 person	 can
become	 omnipotent,	 omniscient,	 omnipresent,	 because	 the	 moment	 you
disappear	you	become	one	with	the	whole.	Then	all	the	stars	are	within	you,	then
you	are	as	vast	as	the	universe.
It	is	the	ego	that	keeps	us	small,	tiny,	mean.	The	moment	the	bubble	of	the	ego	is
burst	 we	 are	 one	 with	 the	 whole.	 That	 oneness	 is	 the	 real	 strength,	 the	 real
power.	 It	does	not	belong	 to	you,	 remember,	 it	belongs	 to	God.	All	 that	 is	 real
belongs	to	God	and	all	that	is	unreal	belongs	to	you.	You	are	unreal	--	you	are	a
separate	entity.	You	also	become	real	when	you	are	no	more	separate	from	God.
That	is	the	meaning	of	surrender:	the	river	disappearing	in	the	ocean.
Sannyas	is	the	art	of	surrendering;	surrendering	the	ego	and	all	other	utilities	that
cling	to	the	ego.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Bengt.	Prem	means	love.	Bengt	means	blessed
by	god.
Love	 is	 always	 blessed	 by	 god	 and	 always	 condemned	 by	 the	 society.	 The
society	 is	against	 love,	god	 is	 for	 love;	hence	deep	down	the	society	 is	against
god.	It	pretends	to	be	religious	but	it	is	only	a	facade.	The	religion	that	exists	in
the	society	is	a	Sunday-religion,	a	formality,	something	very	pseudo,	phony.
The	real	religion	is	totally	different.	But	the	moment	you	are	really	religious	the
society	is	absolutely	against	you	because	you	become	a	danger	to	the	society	--
to	 the	state,	 to	 the	church,	 to	all	 the	vested	 interests,	 to	all	 the	powers	 that	are
exploiting,	oppressing	people.
Jesus	was	pure	love.	He	was	blessed	by	god,	but	crucified	by	the	society.	Love	is
always	crucified	by	the	society.	And	society	has	created	por	substitutes	for	love	-
-	marriage,	etcetera.	Those	are	just	plastic	substitutes	to	keep	you	engaged,	toys
to	keep	you	occupied	so	that	you	don't	feel	the	need	for	real	love.	But	real	love	is
a	totally	different	phenomenon,	and	it	is	not	ordinarily	available	unless	you	raise
the	level	of	your	consciousness.
To	attain	to	real	love	you	have	to	go	through	many	transformations,	because	love
is	 the	ultimate	flowering	of	your	consciousness.	It	 is	no	ordinary	phenomenon.
That	 it	 happens	 is	 a	 miracle.	 That	 it	 happens	 is	 magic,	 but	 whenever	 it	 does
happen	blessings	shower	on	you	from	god.
Jesus	is	blessed	even	in	his	death	--	and	other	people	are	not	blessed	even	while
they	are	alive.	He	is	blessed	even	when	he	is	carrying	his	own	cross	--	and	other
people	are	not	blessed,	not	at	all,	they	know	nothing	of	blessings.	They	have	all
the	money	the	world	can	give	and	the	power	and	the	prestige,	yet	they	are	empty,
hollow.	There	 is	nothing	 inside	 them,	 just	 a	darkness,	 the	darkness	of	a	grave.
Deep	down	they	are	dead.
It	is	love	that	brings	life,	it	is	love	that	stirs	life.	And	god	blesses	life,	god	cannot
bless	death.
My	religion	consists	simply	of	love.	Love	more	and	more,	love	unconditionally,
love	for	the	sheer	joy	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
loving	and	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	any	church	or	any	temple,	no	need	to	repeat
any	stereotype	formulas,	no	need	to	repeat	any	rotten	prayers.	Just	love	and	you
will	be	prayer.	Love	and	one	day	suddenly	you	will	see	that	a	door	has	opened
and	god	has	entered	into	your	life.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Deva	Anuragi.	Deva	means	god,	anuragi	means	a
lover	--	a	lover	of	god.
God	is	not	available	through	thinking,	he	is	available	only	through	feeling.	One
cannot	connect	oneself	with	god	 through	 the	head.	The	only	possible	bridge	 is
through	the	heart.	One	can	argue	for	years	or	for	lives,	but	one	will	not	come	to
any	conclusion	about	god.	Logic	is	not	in	that	direction,	that	dimension.	It	is	not
logic	but	love	that	brings	you	to	a	conclusion.	In	fact	logic	never	brings	one	to
any	 conclusion,	 it	 goes	 around	 in	 circles.	 Love	 takes	 a	 quantum	 leap	 and
immediately	arrives	at	a	conclusion.	It	is	not	through	a	process,	it	is	intuitive,	it
is	sudden.
God	 has	 disappeared	 from	 the	 world	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 love	 has
disappeared,	 and	 god	 cannot	 be	 brought	 back	 to	 the	 world	 unless	 we	 start
creating	more	 and	more	 vibrations	 for	 love,	 unless	we	 change	 the	milieu	 that
exists	 on	 earth	 today,	 the	 atmosphere,	 the	 neo-sphere.	 It	 is	 very	 logical,
scientific,	 but	 it	 is	 absolutely	 anti-god.	Even	 those	who	believe	 in	god	believe
only	through	logic.	And	to	believe	in	logic	is	not	to	believe	at	all,	it	is	worthless.
Unless	it	is	a	love	affair,	a	mad,	mad	love	affair,	it	means	nothing.
I	teach	the	madness	that	love	brings	and	the	sanity	that	love	brings.	They	are	the
same	 thing,	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	The	world	will	 think	you	 insane,	 and
those	who	know,	they	will	think	you	sane.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Aradhan.	Aradhan	means	prayer,	worship.
Prayer	has	to	be	something	absolutely	individual.	It	has	to	be	spontaneous,	it	has
not	to	be	learned.	A	learned	prayer	is	a	false	prayer.	Then	you	are	repeating	like
a	parrot.	It	is	meaningless,	senseless	--	empty	words.	But	when	a	prayer	arises	in
your	 heart,	 when	 it	 has	 something	 of	 you	 in	 it	 then	 it	 has	 tremendous
significance.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 tale	 told	 by	 an	 idiot,	 full	 of	 fury	 and	 noise,
signifying	nothing.	It	has	tremendous	meaning	and	music.
One	 has	 to	 learn	 to	 communicate	with	 existence.	 Talk	 to	 the	 stars,	 talk	 to	 the
rivers,	talk	to	the	trees,	talk	to	the	rocks.	And	don't	feel	embarrassed	because	this
is	how	god	has	manifested	himself.	Everything	that	is,	is	a	manifestation	of	god.
Start	communication	with	 the	manifest	god	and	only	 then	one	day	will	you	be
able	to	communicate	with	the	unmanifest.	Start	with	the	visible	and	then	you	can
take	a	quantum	leap	into	the	invisible.	Talk	to	the	earth,	to	the	grass.
It	may	not	 look	religious	at	all	 in	 the	beginning,	but	 just	saying	hullo	 to	a	 tree
has	something	beautiful	in	it,	something	spiritual,	something	holy,	because	you
recognize	the	spirit	of	the	tree,	you	recognize	the	presence	of	the	tree,	you	don't
ignore	it.	And	if	a	person	can	learn	only	one	thing	--	not	to	ignore	god	in	all	his
manifestations	--	then	ignorance	disappears	and	wisdom	arises,	arises	from	your
innermost	core.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Vijayo.	Vijayo	means	victory.
Sannyas	is	a	strange	victory.	It	is	victory	through	surrender.	It	is	victory	through
let-go.	 It	 is	 victory	 through	 dropping	 the	 very	 idea	 of	 being	 victorious.	 It	 is
action	without	action,	effort	without	effort,	victory	without	conquest.
The	very	idea	of	fighting	and	conquering	is	ugly.	The	part	cannot	win	against	the
whole.	 It	 is	 utterly	 stupid.	The	 part	 can	 only	win	with	 the	whole,	 through	 the
whole.	The	part	can	only	win	if	it	allows	the	whole	to	win	through	it	--	allowing
god	 to	 function	 through	 you,	 letting	 his	 will	 be	 your	 will,	 not	 having	 any
separate	will	of	one's	own,	not	having	any	separate	goal,	destiny	of	one's	own,
moving	with	the	whole	in	total	accord,	flowing	with	the	whole	wherever	it	leads.
In	 that	 let-go	 all	 fear,	 anxiety,	 anguish,	 disappears.	 and	when	 there	 is	 no	 fear
there	 is	 love,	and	when	 there	 is	no	anguish	 there	 is	 joy.	And	when	you	are	no
more	separate	there	is	no	death.
Man	never	really	dies.	Nothing	dies.	The	very	idea	that	we	are	separate	creates,
as	 a	by-product,	 the	phenomenon	of	death.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 the	 idea	of	being
separate	is	false	and	so	is	death,	its	by-product.
Death	is	one	of	the	most	false	things	in	existence,	but	it	looks	very	real	if	the	ego
is	there;	it	is	the	shadow	of	the	ego.	Drop	the	ego	--	and	dropping	the	ego	is	the
beginning,	 the	beginning	of	 a	 tremendously	 significant	 pilgrimage.	And	 in	 the
very	first	step,	you	have	arrived.	The	first	step	 is	 the	 last	step.	 In	dropping	 the
ego	one	becomes	victorious.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001185
ShortTitle:	RAFTER18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Deva	Glorianda.	Deva	means	 divine,	 glorianda	means
glory.
All	glory	is	god's.	The	moment	we	start	thinking	that	it	is	ours	we	start	falling,
falling	from	grace,	and	soon	the	glory	disappears.	The	glory	exists	only	in	those
moments	when	you	are	not.	The	moment	you	come	back,	the	glory	is	no	more.
The	glory	and	the	ego	exist	together,	their	co-existence	is	impossible.	One	has	to
choose	either	one	or	the	other.
If	 one	 chooses	 the	 ego	 one	 chooses	 a	 life	 without	 glory,	 without	 fragrance,
without	 joy.	 If	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 choose	 egolessness	 then	 all	 glory	 starts
descending	on	you,	starts	radiating	through	you.	You	become	a	vehicle	of	god,	a
medium,	a	hollow	bamboo	flute,	and	a	song	starts	flowing	through	you.
The	whole	art	of	 sannyas	 is	 that	 --	not	 to	be,	because	 that	 is	 the	way	of	being
divine.
Ma	 Deva	 Eileen.	 Deva	 means	 divine.	 Eileen	 means	 ever	 joyful,	 cheerful,
blissful,	ecstatic.
Man	 alone	 is	 misery.	 Man	 plus	 god,	 and	 all	 misery	 disappears;	 misery	 is
transformed	 into	 ecstasy.	 But	 man	 has	 to	 become	 part	 of	 god,	 man	 has	 to
dissolve	 into	god.	One	has	 to	 learn	 the	art	of	dying	 in	god,	because	 that	 is	 the
way	of	resurrection.
Ecstasy	 is	 possible.	 Each	moment	 can	 be	 ecstatic	 and	 each	moment	 can	 be	 a
higher	ecstasy	than	the	preceding	one.	One	can	go	on	from	one	peak	to	a	higher
peak,	from	peak	to	peak.	Only	one	requirement	has	to	be	fulfilled	and	that	is	that
we	should	not	think	of	ourselves	as	separate.	We	are	not	separate.
To	 think	 of	 ourselves	 as	 separate	 from	 existence	 is	 illusory,	 and	 that	 illusion
creates	fear,	anxiety,	anguish.	That	illusion	gives	us	the	idea	of	birth	and	death,
and	with	birth	and	death	we	are	crushed.	Between	these	 two	rocks	we	can't	be
ecstatic,	it	is	impossible.	When	death	is	there,	how	can	you	be	overflowing	with
joy?	It's	impossible.	How	can	you	ignore	death?
But	the	moment	you	start	learning	that	you	are	not	separate	from	the	whole	there
is	no	death.	You	have	always	been	here	before	your	birth,	and	you	will	always	be
here	 after	 your	 death.	 You	 are	 an	 intrinsic	 part	 of	 the	 totality,	 of	 the	 cosmos.
Then	 immediately	all	 fear,	 all	misery,	 all	 sadness,	disappears.	And	what	 is	 left
behind	is	ecstasy.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Anand	 Lynn.	 Anand	 means	 bliss.	 Lynn	 has	 two
meanings;	 both	 are	 beautiful	 and	 significant.	 One	 is	Welsh,	 then	 Lynn	means
idol,	an	idol	of	bliss,	an	image	of	bliss.	The	other	meaning	is	Anglo-Saxon,	then
it	means	waterfall.	That	is	far	more	beautiful:	a	waterfall	of	bliss.
Bliss	 has	 some	 qualities	 of	 the	waterfall.	One,	 Lao	Tzu	 has	 said	 that	 the	way
towards	god	is	a	watercourse	way.	The	water	always	seeks	the	humblest	place.	It
always	goes	to	the	place	which	is	the	lowest.	It	is	non-ambitious.	It	stands	at	the
back.	It	has	no	ego.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Jesus	says:	Those	who	are	first	 in	 the	world	will	be	 the	 last	 in	my	kingdom	of
god,	and	those	who	are	the	last	here	will	be	the	first	in	my	kingdom	of	god.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	like	water:	humble,	egoless,	a	nobody.	Yes,	that	is	exactly
the	definition	of	sannyas,	the	quality	of	nobodiness.	Everybody	is	trying	to	brag
that	 they	 are	 somebody	 --	 through	 money,	 power,	 prestige.	 A	 sannyasin	 has
nothing	to	brag	about.	He	is	simply	ordinary,	a	nobody.	But	 the	miracle	 is	 that
when	you	are	nobody	you	become	extraordinary.	The	miracle	is	 that	when	you
can	stand	at	the	back,	suddenly	you	have	become	the	first,	at	least	for	those	who
understand.	 And	 only	 their	 opinion	 has	 any	 meaning.	 Those	 who	 don't
understand,	their	opinion	has	no	significance.
Bliss	 is	also	a	waterfall	because	 it	 comes	 from	 the	beyond,	 it	 showers	on	you.
You	are	at	 the	 receiving	end,	You	cannot	create	 it,	you	can	only	be	open	 to	 it.
You	 can	 open	 your	 doors,	 your	 heart,	 and	 wait	 patiently.	Whenever	 the	 right
moment	is	there,	whenever	you	are	ready	--	and	by	ready	I	mean	whenever	you
are	really	a	nobody	--	it	immediately	starts	falling	on	you.	It	falls	like	a	waterfall.
You	are	bathed,	purified,	transformed	through	it.	But	it	comes	from	the	beyond.
It	is	not	of	the	earth,	it	is	divine,	it	is	godly.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Agnete.	Deva	means	divine,	Agnete	means	meek.
Jesus	 says:	 "Blessed	 are	 the	 meek	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god."	 In	 that
simple	statement	he	has	stated	the	whole	truth.	Nothing	more	can	be	added	to	it,
it	 contains	 all	 the	 scriptures.	 But	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 understood,	 by	 meek,
neither	Jesus	nor	I	mean	cultivated	meekness,	not	something	practised,	because
then	 it	 is	 no	 more	 meek.	 Then	 it	 is	 simply	 a	 facade...	 a	 beautiful	 facade	 but
hidden	behind	it	is	the	ego	and	that's	what	you	will	find	in	the	so-called	religious
people.	They	walk	--	that	glint	in	their	eyes	if	you	watch	and	observe	--	you	can
see,	 that	 holier-than-thou	 look.	And	 they	 are	 trying	 to	 prove	 that	 they	 are	 the
meekest,	nobody	can	compare	with	them.	That	is	again	the	same	game	--	the	old
game	of	the	ego	--	played	now	in	the	name	of	meekness,	humbleness.
One	has	 to	be	very	watchful	because	mind	is	so	cunning	that	 it	can	cultivate	a
certain	quality	which	will	be	only	on	the	surface,	just	like	a	painted	smile.
Real	meekness	arises	out	of	meditativeness,	not	out	of	cultivation.	It	arises	out	of
understanding,	it	arises	by	seeing	the	falsity	of	the	ego.
The	 moment	 you	 see	 that	 the	 ego	 is	 false,	 it	 disappears.	 You	 don't	 have	 to
cultivate	meekness.	Simply,	 the	ego	 is	no	more	 there.	And	when	 the	ego	 is	no
more	 there,	 you	 are	meek,	without	 any	 cultivation,	without	 any	practise.	Then
one	is	truly	meek,	unself-consciously	meek.
If	 you	 are	 self-consciously	meek,	 it	 is	 false.	When	 you	 are	 unself-consciously
meek,	 then	 it	 has	 tremendous	 beauty.	 It	 opens	 the	 door	 to	 all	 the	mysteries	 of
life.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Eberhard.	Prem	means	love.	Eberhard	means	as
strong	as	the	wild	bear.
Love	needs	 tremendous	 strength.	 It	 cannot	 exist	 in	 a	 cowardly	heart,	 it	 cannot
grow	in	fear.	It	needs	courage,	guts.	And	the	greatest	courage	in	the	world	is	in
merging	with	the	other,	losing	oneself	in	the	other.
The	ego	is	very	afraid	of	it,	because	once	you	know	the	taste	of	being	egoless,
even	 for	a	moment,	you	can	never	be	 the	same	again.	You	can	never	get	back
into	your	ego	again	with	the	same	identity,	the	same	old	gestalt.
Even	if	for	a	moment	you	have	seen	that	the	ego	is	not	a	necessity,	that	it	can	be
put	aside,	you	would	not	like	to	carry	it	any	more,	because	it	 is	only	a	burden,
unnecessary,	 futile.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 one	 is	 trying	 to	 swim	with	 a	 rock	 around	 one's
neck.
Once	you	have	seen	that	the	ego	can	be	put	aside	you	feel	so	free.	Such	a	great
freedom	starts	happening	to	you	that	you	would	not	like	to	get	into	the	old	prison
again.	 Once	 you	 have	 seen	 an	 egoless	 moment	 you	 will	 feel	 so	 blissful	 that
instantly	you	will	understand	that	all	the	misery,	the	whole	hell,	was	created	by
the	ego.
Ego	is	hell	and	egolessness	is	heaven.	Once	this	has	been	understood	life	starts
moving	into	a	new	dimension.
That	dimension	is	sannyas.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anand	Bernhard.	Anand	means	bliss.	Bernhard	means
the	same	as	eberhard:	bear-strong.
Love,	 bliss,	 meditation,	 truth	 --	 they	 all	 need	 a	 great	 strength.	 One	 has	 to	 be
together.	Ordinarily	people	are	just	fragments.	Thousands	of	pieces	are	there	but
there	 is	not	 any	 integrity.	To	be	weak	means	 to	be	divided,	 to	be	undivided	 is
strength.	And	whenever	you	are	undivided	you	become	an	 individual,	 literally;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
individual	 means	 indivisible.	 It	 brings	 strength,	 and	 strength	 becomes	 the
foundation	of	god.
All	 the	meditations	 are	 devices	 to	 bring	 your	 fragments	 together,	 to	melt	 into
each	other,	 to	create	a	kind	of	oneness	 in	you,	 to	bring	a	center	 to	your	being.
Once	 that	 center	 starts	 growing	 you	 will	 have	 enough	 courage	 to	 go	 into	 the
unknown,	then	you	will	risk	all.	And	god	asks:	Risk	all	--	only	then	can	you	be
blissful,	 loving,	 truthful,	 divine.	 Only	 then	 can	 you	 be	 a	 real,	 authentic
sannyasin.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Visarjano.	Visarjano	means	dissolution.
Man	has	to	dissolve	himself	into	the	whole,	but	we	go	on	doing	just	the	contrary:
we	 go	 on	 protecting	 ourselves,	 safeguarding.	We	 go	 on	 continuously	 avoiding
any	merger,	meeting.	We	go	on	becoming	harder	and	harder	and	closed.	That's
how	we	have	become	rocklike.	And	that	was	your	old	name,	Peter.	Peter	means
rock.	 It	 is	 good	 that	 you	 have	 decided	 to	 change	 the	 old	 name.	Now	 become
waterlike,	fluid,	flowing,	vulnerable,	open.
The	moment	 one	 is	 ready	 to	 die	 in	 the	whole	 there	 is	 the	 beginning	of	 a	 new
birth.	 That's	 the	whole	meaning	 of	 Jesus'	 resurrection:	 fist	 the	 crucifixion	 and
then	resurrection.
Dissolution	means	 crucifixion.	 If	 you	 can	 pass	 through	 it	 then	 resurrection	 is
inevitable.	What	 you	 loose	 is	meaningless	 and	what	 you	 gain	 has	 tremendous
meaning.	What	you	lose	is	only	illusory,	what	you	gain	is	the	reality	itself.	What
you	lose	is	hell,	what	you	gain	is	heaven.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Narayani.	Narayani	means	divine,	godly.	From	this
moment	start	thinking	in	terms	of	being	divine.
Science	goes	on	telling	people	"You	are	nothing	but	animals.	Human	beings	are
only	a	species	of	animal,"	they	say.	And	for	three	hundred	years	they	have	been
propagating	the	idea.	It	has	penetrated	very	deeply	into	our	blood	and	bones	and
marrow.	We	are	not	animals.	In	fact	animals	themselves	are	not	animals.	We	are
divine,	so	are	the	animals.
Religion	 is	 rooted	 in	 this	 vision	 of	 man	 being	 divine,	 of	 the	 universe	 being
divine.	 Science	 reduces	 everything	 to	 the	 lowest	 denominator.	 If	 you	 bring	 a
lotus	flower	to	the	scientist,	he	will	say,	"It	is	nothing	but	mud;	because	it	grows
in	mud,	it	comes	out	of	mud."
If	you	bring	mud	to	a	mystic	he	will	say,	"Don't	be	worried	--	there	are	thousands
of	lotuses	hidden	in	it,	because	lotuses	grow	out	of	mud."
The	 world	 needs	 again	 religious	 vision.	 My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 give	 you	 this
perspective	 that	 you	 are	 not	mud,	 that	 you	 are	 lotuses.	Even	mud	 is	 not	mud,
because	it	contains	lotuses,	because	it	can	be	transformed	into	lotuses;	it	is	only
a	raw	form	of	lotus.
Religion	looks	from	the	highest	point	and	makes	the	highest	point	 the	decisive
factor.	Science	looks	at	the	lowest	and	makes	it	the	decisive	factor.
From	 this	moment	 this	 has	 to	 be	 your	 vision:	 you	 are	 divine,	 so	 is	 the	whole
universe.	With	that	vision	it	is	easy	to	move	upwards,	because	if	there	is	nothing
upward,	 no	 possibility	 of	 anything	 higher,	 then	 one	 forgets	 all	 about
transforming	oneself.	If	 there	is	a	possibility	then	one	starts	groping	for	it.	The
possibility	is	there;	the	buddhas	are	enough	proof,	enough	evidence	for	it.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Devapriyo.	Devapriyo	means	beloved	of	god.
Start	 your	 journey	 of	 sannyas	with	 this	 as	 a	 seed:	God	 loves	 you.	We	 are	 not
orphans.	 God	 fathers	 and	 mothers	 existence.	 He	 is	 both	 father	 and	 mother,
because	he	is	not	a	person	but	a	presence.	The	whole	existence	is	surrounded	by
a	divine	energy	that	protects	you,	cares	for	you,	is	always	available.	If	you	go	on
missing	it,	it	is	only	because	of	you.	If	you	keep	your	doors	closed,	the	sun	may
be	outside	but	you	will	live	in	darkness.	Even	if	the	doors	are	open	and	the	sun	is
there,	you	can	keep	your	eyes	closed	and	you	will	still	live	in	darkness.	So	is	the
case	with	god:	his	love	is	always	there	but	our	hearts	are	not	open,	our	hearts	are
closed.
Sannyas	means	the	opening	of	the	heart,	making	your	heart	available	to	god	so
that	you	can	receive,	so	that	you	can	pulsate	with	the	whole,	in	accord	with	the
whole.	The	art	of	meditation	is	nothing	but	the	art	of	pulsating	with	the	whole,	in
tune	with	the	whole.
And	then	great	benediction	is	yours.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Prabhu	 Mayo.	 Prabhu	 means	 god,	 mayo	 means
magic	--	god's	magic.
The	whole	existence	is	a	magical	phenomenon.	It	 is	miracle,	 it	 is	mystery,	it	 is
unfathomable.	 It	 is	 really	 unknowable	 --	 not	 only	 unknown,	 but	 unknowable.
The	more	wise	a	person	becomes,	the	more	he	knows	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	 he	 knows	 nothing.	 And	when	 everything	 starts	 becoming	mysterious	 and
you	 are	 surrounded	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 mysteries...	 which	 is	 the	 fact.	 We	 are
surrounded	by	all	kinds	of	mysteries.	It	is	just	that	we	are	so	much	enclosed	in
our	heads	 that	we	go	on	overlooking,	 ignoring,	and	 that	 impoverishes	our	 life.
Ignoring	the	mysteries	of	life	becomes	our	ignorance.
One	has	 to	be	available	 to	 life's	mysteries,	 its	magic,	and	 then	suddenly	one	 is
again	a	child	--	 innocent,	 full	of	wonder	and	awe.	That	wonder	and	awe	is	 the
fundamental	 quality	 of	 a	 religious	 person.	A	 Jesus	 lives	with	 that	wonder	 and
awe,	a	Buddha	lives	with	that	wonder	and	awe.	In	their	lives	all	the	Buddhas	are
illogical,	paradoxical,	for	 the	simple	reason	that	 they	are	surrounded	by	magic,
not	by	mathematics;	they	are	surrounded	by	love,	not	by	logic.
Start	unlearning	the	ways	of	the	calculating	mind	and	start	learning	the	ways	of
the	uncalculating	heart.
And	 any	 moment,	 suddenly	 the	 door	 is	 open.	 In	 fact	 it	 has	 always	 remained
open.	It	is	just	that	we	are	not	looking	at	it.	We	go	on	looking	at	the	wall.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Ramaprem.	It	means	love	for	god.
God	cannot	be	reduced	to	a	question.	If	you	reduce	god	to	a	question	you	miss
the	whole	 point.	 Then	 you	will	 get	many	 answers	 but	 no	 answer	will	 quench
your	thirst.	God	is	a	thirst,	not	a	question.	It	is	a	hunger.	It	is	the	hunger	of	the
heart,	and	the	hunger	of	the	heart	is	called	love.	One	has	to	be	hungry	for	god.
My	 work	 here	 is	 to	 create	 an	 appetite	 in	 you.	 All	 these	 meditations,	 dances,
music,	 are	 nothing	 but	 appetizers.	 Slowly	 slowly	 a	 tremendous	 hunger	 takes
possession	of	you.	Then	god	becomes	your	quest.
Then	without	god	you	cannot	 live.	Then	 life	 seems	 to	be	meaningless	without
him.	God	is	met	only	at	that	point	when	you	are	ready	to	sacrifice	life	for	him,
never	before	it.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001195
ShortTitle:	RAFTER19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Deva	 Beate.	 Deva	 means	 divine,	 beate	 means
bringer	of	joy.
Sannyas	 is	 absolutely	 meaningless	 if	 it	 is	 not	 grounded	 in	 bliss.	 The	 very
fragrance	 of	 sannyas	 has	 to	 be	 bliss,	 joy.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 serious	 phenomenon.
Religious	people	have	looked	at	life	too	seriously	and	they	have	made	the	whole
thing	very	sad.	We	have	to	change	the	whole	gestalt.	Instead	of	sadness,	instead
of	 seriousness,	 religious-consciousness	 has	 to	 become	 overflowing	 with	 joy,
cheerfulness,	playfulness.	It	has	to	be	more	fun.
Humanity	 can	 only	 be	 religious	 if	 religion	 becomes	more	 playful,	 otherwise	 a
sad	religion	attracts	only	sad	people,	psychologically	 ill	people.	 Insane	people,
either	 sadists	 or	 masochists	 are	 attracted	 towards	 sadness.	 A	 really	 healthy
person	takes	life	in	a	very	joyous	way.	That	is	the	sign	for	health.	He	is	bubbling
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
with	joy	and	he	shares	his	joy,	he	overflows	with	joy.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Tom.	Deva	means	divine,	tom	means	a	seeker
of	truth	--	a	seeker	of	divine	truth.
Truth	can	only	be	divine.	Anything	less	than	that	is	only	guesswork.	The	human
mind	 can	 only	 guess,	 it	 cannot	 know	 truth,	 it	 cannot	 come	 to	 any	 conclusion
about	 truth.	 Truth	 has	 to	 be	 experienced	 in	 a	 place	 far	more	 deep	 than	 in	 the
mind.
Mind	is	the	superficial	layer	of	your	being,	it	is	the	circumference,	and	truth	has
to	be	experienced	at	 the	very	center	of	your	being.	At	 the	very	center	of	your
being	there	is	silence,	no	thought,	eternal	silence,	virgin	silence.	No	thought	has
ever	penetrated	there,	no	thought	can	ever	penetrate	there.
Thoughts	 can	 only	 exist	 on	 the	 surface,	 just	 like	waves	 can	 exist	 only	 on	 the
surface,	not	in	the	depth	of	the	sea,	because	only	on	the	surface	do	they	come	in
close	 contact	 with	 the	 winds.	 Your	 mind	 is	 on	 the	 surface,	 it	 comes	 in	 close
contact	with	all	kinds	of	winds.	The	society,	the	people,	situations,	problems.
They	are	all	winds	stirring	your	surface.	But	at	the	deepest	core	you	are	utterly
silent.
Only	in	that	silence	is	truth	discovered.	Hence	a	seeker	of	truth	has	to	go	within
himself.	 If	 he	 is	 only	 curious	 about	 truth	 then	 he	 will	 think	 about	 it:	 he	may
become	a	great	thinker	like	Kant	of	Hegel,	he	may	become	a	great	philosopher
like	Aristotle	or	Plato,	but	he	will	not	come	to	know	what	truth	is.
To	 know	 truth	 one	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 thoughts.	 Thoughts	 have	 to	 be	 left	 far
behind,	 not	 even	 their	 echoes	 reach	 you.	 Only	 then	 in	 that	 silence	 do	 you
discover	truth.	Truth	is	your	nature	--	just	silence	is	needed.	And	silence	is	also
there	but	you	go	on	swimming	on	the	surface,	you	never	dive	deep.
Sannyas	means	diving	deep	into	your	own	being.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Urte.	Deva	means	divine,	Urte	means	the	earth	--
the	divine	earth.
Almost	all	 the	organized	 religions	 in	 the	past	have	condemned	 the	earth.	They
have	denied	 the	earth,	 they	have	negated	 it,	 they	have	condemned	 it.	The	 idea
was	 that	 if	you	condemn	 the	earth	you	can	praise	heaven,	 if	you	condemn	 the
earthly	life	you	can	praise	the	spiritual	life.	Their	spiritual	life	was	very	partial,
in	 fact,	very	 impotent.	 It	was	not	capable	of	absorbing	 the	earthly	 into	 it.	And
whenever	something	is	unearthly	it	becomes	ghostly,	spooky.	It	looses	reality.
My	effort	here	is	to	create	a	new	quality	of	religiousness:	earth	and	heaven	have
to	meet	in	my	sannyasins.	My	sannyasins	have	to	be	as	earthly	as	possible	and	as
spiritual	 as	 possible,	 and	 both	 have	 to	 be	 simultaneous.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to
create	 any	 division	 between	 your	 body	 and	 soul;	 they	 are	 existing	 in	 perfect
harmony.	There	is	no	need	to	create	any	division	between	the	earth	and	god;	they
are	in	perfect	harmony.
And	 a	 religious	 person	 also	 should	 be	 capable	 of	 living	 in	 this	 harmony.	 It	 is
only	the	weaker	ones	who	escape	from	the	earthly	life,	because	they	are	afraid:
they	may	not	be	able	to	face	the	challenges.	They	are	afraid	they	may	get	lost.
They	 are	 afraid	 of	 their	 own	 desires,	 of	 their	 own	 bodies.	 They	 are	 afraid	 of
themselves	 and	 they	 are	 escaping	 from	 themselves	 which	 is	 utterly	 foolish.
Where	can	you	go?
How	can	you	escape	from	yourself?	There	is	no	possible	way.	Wherever	you	go,
you	 will	 be	 there	 and	 you	 will	 be	 the	 same.	 No	 escape	 is	 of	 any	 help.
Transformation	is	needed,	not	escape.
And	 this	 is	 the	 fundamental	of	 transformation:	 the	 fundamental	meeting	of	 the
polar	opposites	brings	richness.	When	silence	and	sound	meet,	music	is	created.
Music	 is	 not	 only	 sound;	 if	 it	 is	 only	 sound	 it	 is	 noise.	 It	 is	 not	 only	 silence
either.	If	it	is	only	silence	it	is	dead.	It	is	both;	it	is	silence	and	sound	together,
hand	 in	 hand,	 dancing.	 Only	 then	 there	 is	 richness.	 The	 higher	 the	 harmony
between	sound	and	silence,	the	greater	the	music.	And	so	is	the	secret	of	life.
Your	name	will	remind	you	that	the	earth	is	divine,	that	the	earth	is	godly,	that
the	 body	 is	 divine,	 that	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 create	 any	 division	 of	 lower	 and
higher,	that	darkness	is	as	divine	as	light	and	death	is	as	divine	as	life.
When	this	vision	opens	up,	you	are	transported	into	another	world	--	the	world
of	harmony,	accord.
And	that's	 really	 the	meaning	of	entering	 into	god:	entering	 into	 total	harmony
with	existence.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Prem	Matthias.	Prem	means	love,	Matthias	means	a
gift	of	the	lord.
Love	is	something	that	we	cannot	create,	we	cannot	manufacture.	It	is	always	a
gift	of	the	god.	We	can	become	available	to	it,	we	can	be	open	to	it,	receptive	to
it,	but	we	cannot	create	it.	It	is	beyond	human	creativity.	It	always	comes	from
the	beyond,	so	it	happens	only	to	people	who	allow	it	to	happen,	who	are	ready
to	be	in	a	state	of	let-go,	who	are	relaxed	enough	for	it	to	happen.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
In	the	modern	world	love	has	almost	disappeared.	Much	talk	about	love	is	there,
much	poetry,	many	films,	many	stories,	novels	--	they	are	there	just	to	cover	up
the	lack	of	love.	We	are	talking	too	much	about	love	in	the	world	for	the	simple
reason	that	we	are	missing	it.	But	by	talking	about	it,	you	cannot	get	it.	It	is	like
hungry	 people	 talking	 about	 food	 and	 they	 go	 on	 talking	 about	 food	 and	 they
read	 novels	 about	 food	 and	 they	make	 films	 about	 food...	 and	 they	 can	 have
pornographic	magazines	about	 food,	nude	 food!	And	 they	can	 see	 the	colorful
pictures,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 nourish	 them.	 It	 is	 just	 trying	 to	 avoid	 the	 real
problem:	they	are	hungry,	they	need	love.
No	other	time,	no	other	century,	has	talked	so	much	about	love	as	we	are	talking
about	it.	And	the	constant	talk	about	it	gives	an	illusion,	as	if	we	know	what	love
is.	We	 are	 deceiving	others	 and	we	 are	 deceiving	ourselves	 too.	Man	 is	 dying
without	love	because	as	the	body	needs	food,	the	soul	needs	love.	It	 is	a	must.
But	food	you	can	manufacture,	you	can	create,	you	can	cultivate.	About	love	you
have	 to	 learn	 a	 totally	 new	 technique	 --	 the	 technique	 of	 being	 relaxed,	 open,
available.
It	is	risky,	it	is	dangerous	to	be	open,	to	be	vulnerable,	because	one	never	knows
what	 is	going	 to	happen.	And	so	people	keep	 themselves	closed;	 in	closedness
they	feel	secure.	Security	is	there,	but	life	disappears	--	they	are	dead	even	when
they	 are	 alive.	 They	 are	 almost	 in	 their	 graves	 --	 secure,	 safe,	 everything
guaranteed,	 no	 fear	 --	 but	 if	 there	 is	 no	 life	 what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 all	 these
guarantees?
A	real	 life	 is	always	adventurous	and	love	is	 the	greatest	adventure.	It	 is	going
into	 the	 unknown,	 it	 is	 allowing	 existence	 to	 take	 possession	 of	 you.	 And
existence	can	take	possession	of	you	only	if	you	are	ready	to	dissolve	into	it.	In
that	 dissolution	 love	 grows.	 When	 you	 are	 not,	 love	 is	 and	 that's	 how	 god
happens.
Love	 is	 the	beginning	of	god,	 love	 is	 the	harbinger	of	god;	 the	 first	 ray	of	 the
sun.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Aukje.	Anand	means	bliss,	aukje	means	precious
one.
Bliss	 is	 the	 most	 precious	 experience	 in	 life.	 People	 may	 say	 that	 they	 are
searching	 for	 god	 but	 they	 are	 really	 searching	 for	 bliss.	 They	may	 think	 that
they	 are	 searching	 for	 truth	 but	 deep	 down	 they	 are	 searching	 for	 bliss.	 Even
when	they	are	searching	for	love	they	are	searching	for	bliss.
Every	search	can	be	reduced	to	the	fundamental	search,	and	that	is	for	bliss.	If
love	gives	no	bliss	nobody	will	seek	it.	If	truth	brings	no	bliss,	who	will	bother
about	 truth?	 If	 god	 and	 the	 experience	 of	 him	 brings	 hell	 and	 misery,	 then
nobody	is	going	to	be	interested	in	him	except	a	few	suicidal	people.
So	behind	all	our	search,	seeking,	there	is	only	one	goal	--	that	is	bliss.	Bliss	is
our	 source	 and	 bliss	 is	 our	 goal.	We	 are	 searching	 for	 bliss	 because	we	 have
come	 from	 the	 land	 of	 bliss	 and	we	 are	missing	 it	 very	much.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of
homesickness.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Satyaprem.	Satyaprem	means	love	for	truth.
Curiosity	 is	 not	 enough.	Curiosity	 is	 very	 superficial.	Truth	 can	be	 discovered
only	when	it	 is	a	 love	affair.	Only	when	you	cannot	 live	without	 it,	only	when
you	are	willing	to	sacrifice	all,	only	when	it	is	a	constant	fire	within	you,	when
you	are	aflame	with	the	desire	for	truth.
Curiosity	means	just	something	in	the	head.	It	is	with	all	kinds	of	ifs	and	buts.	It
is	childish.	It	has	no	intensity.	At	the	most	it	can	make	you	a	thinker,	but	not	a
mystic.
And	it	is	only	by	being	a	mystic	that	one	come	to	know.
The	thinker	only	thinks	about	it;	he	goes	about	an	about.	The	word	'about'	means
around.	He	moves	around	and	around	in	the	same	circle	.	He	spins	many	words.
He	can	make	many	systems	out	of	those	words	but	those	systems	are	like	houses
made	 with	 playing	 cards,	 they	 are	 of	 no	 use.	 Yes,	 once	 in	 a	 while	 you	 can
become	 intrigued,	 utterly	 interested	 in	 it,	 but	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 only	 a
momentary	phenomenon.	With	a	 little	breeze	 the	hole	house	collapses	and	you
start	laughing	at	your	won	stupidity.	What	were	you	doing?
Truth	needs	devotion,	 commitment,	 a	kind	of	 total	 intensity.	And	 that's	what	 I
mean	 by	 love.	 A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 a	 lover	 of	 truth,	 not	 only	 curious	 but
devoted	 to	 the	search.	When	truth	becomes	a	higher	value	 than	 life	 itself,	only
then	can	you	find	it.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	Hariprem.	Hariprem	means	 love	 for	 god.	God	 can
never	be	just	a	belief.	If	it	is,	it	is	a	false	god.
The	believer	goes	on	deceiving	himself.	By	believing	for	long	periods	of	time	he
starts	 thinking	 that	he	knows,	but	he	knows	nothing.	Belief	 simply	means	 that
you	 don't	 know	 but	 you	 are	 not	 even	 courageous	 enough	 to	 accept	 your
ignorance,	 you	 are	 not	 even	 sincere	 enough	 to	 say	 'I	 don't	 know.'	Belief	 gives
you	an	illusion	of	knowing.	There	are	believers	and	believers	all	over	the	world	-
-	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	are	 three	hundred	religions	on	the	earth,	 that	means	three	hundred	belief
systems.	You	can	choose	whichever	appeals	to	you.	But	they	are	all	false.	Belief
as	 such	 is	 false	 so	 it	 doesn't	 matter	 whether	 it	 is	 Hindu	 or	 Christian	 or
Mohammedan	or	Communist.
Knowing	is	a	totally	different	matter.	My	interest	here	is	not	in	convincing	you
about	 certain	 dogmas,	 in	 converting	 you	 to	 a	 belief	 system.	 My	 effort	 is	 to
shatter	all	belief	systems,	to	destroy	all	dogmas	so	that	you	are	free	to	know,	to
experience.	Belief	is	not	needed	but	love	will	be	needed.
Belief	 is	 just	 a	 head	 thing,	 love	 is	 of	 the	 heart.	 When	 one	 starts	 searching
through	the	heart,	one	finds.
When	one	goes	on	playing	with	the	head,	one	only	deceives	oneself.	Beware	of
the	head.	Your	head	can	play	so	many	tricks	upon	you,	it	 is	so	cunning	and	so
clever,	 because	 it	 has	 been	 in	 existence	 for	 centuries	 and	 it	 has	 learned	many
tricks	down	the	ages.
The	first	step	of	a	sannyasin	is	to	be	aware	of	one's	own	head,	and	to	be	aware	of
one's	 own	 head,	 one	 has	 to	 be	 constantly	 watchful	 of	 its	 cunningnesses,	 its
strategies,	 its	diplomatics,	 its	political	games.	Then	 slowly	 slowly	your	energy
starts	 moving	 towards	 the	 heart.	 That	 day	 is	 of	 a	 great	 rejoicing,	 when	 you
energy	finds	your	heart	and	your	heart	starts	pulsating	for	 the	first	 time.	When
the	heart	 pulsates	with	your	 energy	 a	window	opens;	 you	 are	 in	 tune	with	 the
cosmos.	That	experience	is	the	experience	of	god.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Prembindu.	Prembindu	means	a	drop	of	love,	but
a	drop	contains	all	the	oceans.	The	drop	is	not	just	a	drop,	it	has	all	the	secrets	of
all	the	oceans.	If	you	can	understand	a	single	drop	of	water,	you	have	understood
the	whole	mystery	of	water.	 If	 you	 can	 find	out	 the	 secret	 of	 a	 single	 drop	of
water,	that	is	H2O,	you	have	understood	all	the	water	wherever	it	is,	on	the	earth,
on	the	moon,	on	some	other	planet,	on	some	other	star.	Wherever	water	exists,
the	secret	is	going	to	be	the	same,	it	will	be	H2O.	And	so	is	the	case	with	love.
Just	a	drop	of	love	is	enough	to	give	you	the	secret	key	to	god.
So	don't	hanker	for	much,	there	is	no	need	for	much.	Just	become	a	dewdrop	of
love:	fresh,	humble,	ready	to	disappear,	evaporate,	 into	the	sun,	ready	to	die	in
the	cosmos,	ready	to	create	space	for	god	to	come	i,.
That	readiness	is	love,	and	one	who	is	ready	to	die	into	existence	is	resurrected,
is	resurrected	on	a	higher	plane,	in	a	new	dimension,	into	eternity.	He	disappears
from	 time	and	 is	born	 into	eternity,	and	we	are	capable	of	 it.	Although	we	are
just	dewdrops,	we	contain	oceans.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Paritosh.	Paritosh	means	total	contentment,	absolute
contentment.
Mind	is	basically	discontented.	It	is	always	hankering	for	more.	There	is	no	way
to	satisfy	it.
Whatsoever	 you	give	 to	 it,	 it	will	 always	 ask	 for	more.	To	 ask	 for	more	 is	 its
nature.	It	is	incapable	of	feeling	contented,	it	can	only	complain.	It	is	a	beggar.	It
can	only	desire.
The	moment	you	become	a	little	distant	from	the	mind	--	that's	what	meditation
is,	 creating	 a	 distance	 between	 you	 and	 the	 mind	 --	 you	 start	 feeling	 a	 new
climate,	the	climate	of	contentment.	Suddenly	there	is	no	hankering	for	anything.
Suddenly	the	future	is	no	more	your	interest,	the	past	is	no	more	your	obsession.
whatsoever	you	have	seems	to	be	so	fulfilling;	it	may	not	be	much	but	it	seems
so	fulfilling.	Even	ordinary	things	of	life	can	give	such	tremendous	contentment
that	one	could	have	never	believed	 it	before.	 Just	 sipping	a	cup	of	 tea	 is	more
than	 one	 can	 ask	 for,	 or	 just	 breathing	 or	 just	 listening	 to	 the	 wind	 passing
through	the	pine	trees	or	just	the	moon	reflected	on	the	water.	The	whole	world
becomes	a	totally	different	kind	of	world	when	you	are	moving	away	from	the
mind.	For	the	first	time	you	start	seeing	with	clear	eyes.
A	clarity	arises	because	there	is	no	complaint,	no	grudge.	And	when	there	is	no
complaint,	no	grudge,	no	desire,	the	whole	energy	that	was	involved	in	all	those
activities	is	released	and	the	same	energy	becomes	gratitude.	One	feels	gratitude
for	no	reason	at	all.	That	is	true	prayer.
And	when	 you	 are	 really	 distant	 from	 the	mind	 --	 that	means	when	 you	 have
experienced	the	state	of	no-mind,	the	state	in	which	there	is	no	thought,	none	at
all,	and	the	mind	has	completely	disappeared	--
absolute	 contentment	 starts	 showering	 on	 you	 like	 a	 rain	 of	 flowers.	 That	 is
Buddhahood,	that	is	enlightenment.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Paripurna.	Paripurna	means	absolutely	perfect.
Man	 is	not	 imperfect.	Nothing	 is	 imperfect,	nothing	can	be	 imperfect,	because
all	is	made	of	god.	And	god	is	perfection.
So	we	are	not	to	become	perfect,	we	have	simply	to	see	that	we	are	perfect.	We
have	 to	recognize	 it,	 to	remember	 it.	We	have	forgotten	 it,	 that's	all.	 It	 is	not	a
question	of	becoming.	It	is	a	question	of	a	long,	long	pilgrimage	to	some	distant
goal.	It	is	only	a	question	of	awakening	so	that	you	can	see	who	you	are.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	moment	you	see	yourself	you	know	that	all	 is	perfect,	nothing	 is	missing.
everything	is	as	it	should	be.	And	that	moment	of	knowing	that	everything	is	as
it	 should	be	opens	 the	doors	of	all	 the	mysteries	of	existence	 for	you.	Then	 in
this	very	moment	one	is	transported	into	paradise.	Then	this	very	earth	becomes
paradise	and	this	very	body	the	Buddha.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001205
ShortTitle:	RAFTER20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Iona.	Anand	means	bliss.	Iona	means	grace.
It	 is	 bliss	 that	 expresses	 itself	 as	 grace,	 as	 beauty.	 Misery	 is	 always	 ugly,
awkward,	because	misery	creates	disharmony	and	discord	inside.	And	the	inner
discord	 is	bound	 to	be	 reflected	on	 the	outside;	 in	your	behavior,	 the	way	you
walk,	the	way	you	sit,	the	way	you	live,	the	way	you	do	things.	It	is	bound	to	be
reflected	by	everything.
The	miserable	person	cannot	be	graceful,	cannot	be	really	beautiful.	His	beauty
can	only	be	very	superficial,	skin-deep.	But	the	person	who	has	attained	to	bliss,
who	is	living	in	his	innermost	core	joyously,	has	a	grace,	has	a	beauty.	He	is	a
blessing	to	himself	and	to	the	world.
That's	what	a	sannyasin	has	to	be:	a	blessing	to	himself	and	to	the	world.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Elena.	Anand	means	bliss.	Elena	means	light.
Misery	 is	 like	 darkness.	 Bliss	 is	 full	 of	 light,	 bliss	 is	 light.	 This	 can	 be
experienced	 by	 everybody	 and	 can	 be	 observed.	Whenever	 you	 are	miserable
you	become	dark,	all	lights	disappear.	Whenever	you	are	in	misery	you	become
closed,	you	 love	an	encapsulated	existence,	windowless,	doorless;	no	wind,	no
rain,	no	sun	enters	you.	You	life	becomes	a	grave,	and	inside	a	grave	there	can
be	no	light.
Light	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 you	 are	 open	 to	 existence.	 When	 you	 are	 all
windows	and	no	walls	then	there	is	infinite	light.	Only	in	a	blissful	state	can	one
be	open.
The	whole	effort	of	meditation	is	to	create	joy	in	you.	It	can	be	created	because
the	 potential	 is	 always	 there.	 It	 has	 only	 to	 be	 directed	 in	 the	 right	 direction,
channelized.	If	it	is	not	channelized	in	the	right	direction	it	becomes	destructive.
It	 is	 the	 same	 energy	 that	 becomes	 misery.	When	 your	 energy	 goes	 astray	 it
becomes	misery,	when	 it	 is	on	 the	 right	 track	 it	 is	bliss.	Misery	 is	going	away
from	god,	bliss	is	coming	closer	to	god.	And	the	closer	you	come,	the	more	you
receive	the	light	of	god.	When	you	dissolve	into	god	you	become	light	itself.
Your	name:	Swami	Hans.	Hans	in	Hebrew	means	a	gracious	gift	of	god.	That's
what	life	is,	a	gift.	But	we	are	so	unaware	of	it	that	we	never	thank	existence,	we
don't	feel	any	gratitude.	so	much	is	given	yet	we	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
remain	complaining.	We	go	on	asking	for	more	and	more.	And	the	misery	of	the
mind	is	that	the	more	you	give,	the	more	it	asks	for.	It	becomes	more	demanding,
more	stubborn,	more	arrogant,	more	violent,	more	aggressive	--	and	that	 is	not
the	way	to	be	blissful.	That	is	the	way	to	hell!
The	 way	 to	 bliss	 goes	 through	 gratitude,	 thankfulness.	 Feel	 thankful	 for
existence.	It	has	given	so	much.
Don't	 ask	 for	more,	and	more	shall	be	given	 to	you.	Ask	and	 it	 shall	never	be
given	 to	 you.	 It	 is	 given	 only	 to	 those	 who	 are	 grateful.	 In	 gratefulness	 they
become	receivers.	In	gratefulness	 they	become	worthy.	Ask	and	you	are	bound
to	miss.	Never	ask	anything	from	existence.	Just	go	on	thanking	it	for	all	that	it
has	already	done,	and	you	will	be	surprised	that	you	have	found	the	key.	You	can
have	the	whole	of	existence	without	asking	for	anything.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Sagaresh.	Sagaresh	means	the	god	of	the	oceans.
The	ocean	is	a	tremendously	meaningful	metaphor.	It	is	a	metaphor	for	vastness,
for	 infinity.	 And	 those	 are	 our	 innermost	 qualities.	 We	 are	 vast	 and	 we	 are
infinite,	we	are	oceanic,	but	we	have	become	encaged	in	the	body	and	the	mind
and	we	have	completely	 forgotten	our	vastness.	We	have	become	so	 identified
with	this	small	self,	the	bodymind	structure,	that	we	think	we	are	it.	This	is	the
root	 cause	 of	 our	misery.	And	we	 can	 never	 be	 blissful	 unless	 this	 identity	 is
broken.
One	has	to	be	aware	that	one	is	not	the	body.	One	is	in	the	body	but	not	the	body,
in	the	mind	but	not	the	mind.	The	body	and	the	mind	are	just	like	a	caravanserai,
just	an	overnight's	stay,	and	in	the	morning	we	go	on	a	further	journey.	We	have
been	in	many	bodies	and	many	minds.	This	is	not	the	first	caravanserai	you	are
staying	in.	It	is	a	long,	long	journey.
The	 way	 to	 become	 aware	 "I	 am	 not	 the	 body,	 I	 am	 not	 the	 mind"	 is	 what
meditation	 is	 all	 about.	Watch,	watch	 your	 body	walking,	 sitting,	 lying	 down,
and	you	will	be	able	to	see	that	you	are	the	watcher,	not	 the	body.	Watch	your
mind	in	anger,	in	hatred,	in	love,	in	greed,	in	misery,	in	joy,	and	you	will	become
aware	one	day	that	you	are	not	these	things	that	happen	in	the	mind;	you	are	the
watcher.
Slowly	 slowly	 the	watcher	 becomes	 crystallized.	 That	 is	 the	 birth	 of	 the	 soul.
That	day	you	are	really	born,	that	day	your	real	life	begins.	From	that	moment
god	is	a	reality	for	you,	and	the	only	reality.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Shanto.	Shanto	means	silence.
Silence	 is	 the	 door	 to	 god,	mind	 is	 the	 door	 to	 the	world.	Mind	 is	 the	world,
silence	 is	 god.	Mind	means	 a	 constant	 traffic	 of	 thoughts,	 desires,	 memories.
Mind	 is	 always	 in	 turmoil.	 It	 is	 noisy,	 it	 is	 a	marketplace,	 a	 thousand	and	one
things	go	on	and	on.
But	beyond	the	mind	there	is	a	small	still	point	in	your	being	where	no	thought
ever	 arises,	 where	 no	 traffic	 ever	 happens,	 where	 you	 are	 utterly	 alone.	 That
center	has	 to	be	searched	for.	That's	 the	whole	search	of	religion.	The	day	you
discover	that	point	within	yourself	you	have	discovered	god.	And	by	discovering
it	 you	 have	 discovered	 bliss,	 love,	 truth	 --	 all	 that	 is	 worth	 looking	 for.	 By
discovering	it	you	discover	that	which	is	deathless	in	you,	timeless	and	eternal.
In	knowing	it	one	becomes	free	of	all	fear.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Gyanmayo.	Gyanmayo	means	the	wise	one.
Worship	nature.	To	go	into	a	church	is	to	go	into	something	manmade.	Go	into
the	 forest,	 go	 to	 the	 river,	 go	 to	 the	 ocean.	 Then	 you	 are	 going	 to	 something
godmade,	 and	 god	 is	 closer	 when	 you	 are	 close	 to	 his	 creation.	 When	 you
worship	his	creation...	that's	the	only	way	to	worship	him.	He	is	invisible	but	his
creation	is	visible.	His	creation	has	to	become	the	bridge.
By	 worshipping	 his	 creation,	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 his
tremendous	presence.	He	is	present	around	a	tree,	around	a	rock,	around	a	man,
around	 a	woman.	But	 first	worship,	 because	worship	will	 help	 you	 to	 see	 the
presence,	the	invisible	presence.	Then	it	becomes	almost	visible,	almost	tangible.
You	can	touch	it.
And	the	moment	you	are	able	to	feel	it	so	deeply	it	transforms	you.	You	become
part	of	it,	you	melt	and	merge	with	it.
This	 is	your	new	name:	Ma	Sadhan.	Sadhan	means	 the	method,	 the	 technique,
the	way,	the	path.
We	have	forgotten	who	we	are,	hence	certain	devices	are	needed	to	remind	us	of
our	reality.	We	have	gone	very	far	away	from	ourselves,	hence	certain	ways	are
needed	so	that	we	can	bring	ourselves	back,	so	that	we	can	come	back	home.
All	the	methods,	all	the	techniques,	all	the	ways	and	all	the	paths	are	basically,
essentially	the	same.	The	essence	is	how	to	wake	you	up.	We	have	fallen	asleep
and	gone	deep	into	dreams.	One	dram	creates	another	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
dream,	and	there	are	dreams	within	dreams	within	dreams.	I	is	very	puzzling	to
find	a	way	to	come	out	of	those	dreams,	but	certain	device	can	help.
For	 example,	 just	 an	 alarm	 clock	 --	 it	 is	 a	 device.	 It	 simply	 wakes	 you	 up
suddenly.	The	moment	you	wake	up	you	start	 feeling	a	 little	 ridiculous.	 Just	 a
moment	before	you	were	dreaming	so	many	things	and	they	have	all	gone.	You
feel	a	 little	embarrassed	at	how	you	could	believe	 in	 those	 things	which	never
existed.	And	so	is	the	case	with	the	world	--	it	is	our	dream.
The	function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	create	devices.	Different	people	need	different
devices.	There	are	people	who	cannot	be	awakened	by	an	alarm	clock.	When	the
alarm	 goes	 they	 start	 dreaming	 about	 the	 alarm,	 they	 start	 creating	 a	 dream
inside.	They	think	it	is	sunday	and	that	they	have	come	into	the	church	and	that
church	bells	 are	 going	on.	They	have	 avoided	waking	up,	 they	have	 created	 a
dream	around	the	clock,	around	the	alarm.	They	may	need	could	water	 thrown
on	them,	or	maybe	more	hammerlike	methods	so	that	their	skulls	can	be	simply
shattered	--	only	then	will	they	come	out	of	their	dreams.
There	 are	 dreamers	 and	dreamers,	 hence	down	 the	 ages	 thousands	 of	methods
have	 been	 created	 for	 different	 people.	One	method	may	 be	 applicable	 to	 one
person	and	may	not	be	applicable	to	another.	One	it	may	help,	another	it	may	not
help	at	all,	on	the	contrary	it	may	even	hinder.
For	example,	sufis	have	a	method	that	they	call	vigilance,	keeping	alert	for	the
whole	night;	sleep	in	the	day	but	keep	alert	for	the	whole	night.	But	this	won't
work	 with	 somebody	 who	 suffers	 from	 insomnia.	 He	 will	 be	 tremendously
happy,	 he	 will	 be	 perfectly	 okay.	 He	 will	 say	 'Good.	 This	 is	 what	 I	 always
needed.'
But	it	is	not	going	to	help	him	at	all.	It	will	fit	his	state,	it	will	not	disturb	him.
Fasting	can	help	somebody	and	somebody	it	may	not	help.	There	are	people	who
don't	want	to	eat	at	all.
They	 are	 suffering	 from	 a	 certain	 disease	 in	which	 the	 body	 rejects	 food.	 For
them	fasting	won't	help	at	all.
Each	person	needs	certain	methods,	and	the	function	of	the	master	is	to	see	what
kind	of	method	is	going	to	help	you.	Each	person	needs	different	times	to	wake
up	and	each	person	takes	different	periods	to	wake	up.	It	depends	on	how	long
you	have	been	asleep,	 it	depends	on	what	kind	of	dreams	you	are	dreaming.	 It
depends	on	a	thousand	and	one	things.
The	function	of	a	master	is	really	delicate,	the	most	delicate	work	in	the	world.
Sadhan	means	the	method,	the	technique,	the	way.	For	you	Vipassana	is	going	to
be	the	way,	so	learn	Vipassana.	Here	we	have	Vipassana	groups.	Do	other	groups
first	 to	cleanse	yourself	and	then	do	Vipassana.	Then	Vipassana	has	 to	become
your	companion.
Vipassana	simply	means	watching	your	breath	--	the	art	of	watching	your	breath
without	disturbing	it	at	all.	It	is	a	subtly	art,	because	the	moment	you	watch	you
start	 disturbing.	 Slowly	 slowly	 the	 knack	 is	 learned.	 Once	 you	 know	 how	 to
watch	the	breath	without	disturbing	it	you	have	found	the	right	key.	This	is	going
to	be	the	method	for	you.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Jyotimaya.	 Jyotimaya	 means	 full	 of	 light,
overflowing	with	light,	overflooded	with	light,	radiating	light.
Light	 has	 to	 be	 your	 meditation.	Meditate	 on	 the	 rising	 sun,	 meditate	 on	 the
setting	 sun,	meditate	 on	 the	 stars,	 on	 the	moon,	meditate	 on	 a	 small	 candle	 in
your	room.	Use	light	as	the	object	of	your	meditation.
Light	is	going	to	help	you.
Slowly	slowly	watching	the	sunrise	you	will	be	able	to	drop	your	ind.	Then	there
will	be	no	observer	and	no	observed.	You	will	be	lost	in	that	moment.	You	will
become	the	sunrise	and	you	will	become	the	sunset	and	you	will	be	the	candle.
When	 that	 starts	 happening	 it	means	 that	 now	 the	meditation	 has	 entered	 into
your	being,	has	sunk	deep	into	you.	That	means	that	you	have	go	it.
So	 use	 all	 kinds	 of	 lights	 as	 devices.	Do	 other	meditations	 but	 remember	 that
light	has	to	become	your	central	meditation.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Pujan.	Pujan	means	worship...	but	not	a	formal
worship,	not	worshipping	in	a	church	or	a	temple,	not	worshipping	any	idol	but
worshipping	existence	--	 the	 trees,	 the	rocks,	 the	rivers.	Be	a	pagan	--	worship
nature.
To	go	into	a	church	is	to	go	into	something	manmade.	Go	into	the	forest,	go	to
the	river,	go	to	the	ocean.
Then	you	 are	 going	 to	 something	God-made,	 and	God	 is	 closer	when	you	 are
close	 to	 his	 creation.	When	 you	worship	 his	 creation...	 that's	 the	 only	way	 to
worship	 him.	 He	 is	 invisible	 but	 his	 creation	 is	 visible.	 His	 creation	 has	 to
become	the	bridge.
By	 worshipping	 his	 creation,	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 his
tremendous	presence.	He	is	present	around	a	tree,	around	a	rock,	around	a	man,
around	a	woman.	But	first	worship,	because	worship	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
will	help	you	to	see	the	presence,	the	invisible	presence.	Then	it	becomes	almost
visible,	almost	tangible.
You	can	touch	it.
And	the	moment	you	are	able	to	feel	it	so	deeply	it	transforms	you.	You	become
part	of	it,	you	melt	and	merge	into	it.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Vedam.	 Vedam	 means	 real	 wisdom,	 authentic
wisdom,	not	borrowed	from	others	but	your	own,	not	a	belief	but	an	experience.
God	 should	never	 be	made	 an	object	 of	 belief	 because	 that	 is	 the	 sure	way	 to
miss	it.	God	has	to	be	experienced,	not	believed	in.	God	has	to	be	known,	and	it
is	only	by	knowing	him	that	you	move	from	the	ordinary	mundane	existence	into
the	world	of	the	sacred	--	not	by	belief.	Everybody	believes.	Somebody	is	Hindu,
somebody	is	Mohammedan,	somebody	is	Christian	--
everybody	has	a	belief	system.	But	those	belief	systems	have	not	worked,	they
have	 not	 transformed	 the	 earth.	 On	 the	 contrary	 they	 have	 been	 the	 cause	 of
much	 mischief,	 bloodshed,	 war.	 In	 fact	 those	 belief	 systems	 are	 nothing	 but
politics	in	disguise.	Beware	of	all	belief	systems	--	they	will	keep	you	ignorant
forever.
The	true	way	to	wisdom	is	not	through	the	scriptures	or	through	the	churches	or
through	the	priesthood.
God	needs	no	mediators.	God	needs	meditators	but	not	mediators.	You	can	relate
to	him	directly,	there	is	no	need	for	an	agent	to	function	between	you	and	him.
The	real	masters	never	stand	between	you	and	god.
They	 stand	by	 the	 side,	 they	 point	 to	 god	 and	 they	 disappear.	They	 leave	 you
alone	with	your	god,	because	only	in	that	aloneness,	in	that	intimacy,	do	miracles
happen.	Something	transpires.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Ramo.	 Ramo	 means	 god.	 Everyone	 is	 god,
everything	is	god.	Existence	and	god	are	two	words	for	the	same	phenomenon.
So	don't	think	of	god	in	terms	of	a	person	who	created	the	world,	who	controls
the	world,	who	manages	the	whole	affair.	Don't	think	of	him	as	a	supreme	boss.
There	is	nobody	like	that.	God	is	not	somebody,	god	is	a	quality.	It	is	far	better	to
call	it	godlyness.	It	is	a	fragrance.	It	simply	says	one	thing	,	that	the	world	does
not	consist	only	of	the	visible,	it	also	contains	the	invisible.	The	world	does	not
consist	 only	 of	 the	measurable	 --	 that	 is	 the	meaning	 of	matter,	matter	means
measurable	 --	 the	 world	 also	 contains	 the	 immeasurable.	 The	 world	 does	 not
consist	only	of	the	outside,	it	also	has	the	dimension	of	interiority.	That's	all	that
is	meant	by	god,	the	dimension	of	interiority.
And	you	have	 to	explore	 it	now.	That's	what	sannyas	 is	all	about:	going	 into	a
deep	exploration	of	who	you	are,	of	what	this	consciousness	inside	you	is,	who
this	witness	 is	 inside	you	that	can	witness	 the	body,	 that	can	witness	 the	mind.
Who	 is	 this	 witness?	 From	 this	 moment	 that	 question	 should	 become
suprememost.	That	should	be	your	first	priority.	Your	whole	energy	should	start
moving	around	it.
And	once	 it	 becomes	your	deepest	 concern,	 your	ultimate	 concern,	 doors	 start
opening.	suddenly	inside	you,	you	start	finding	ways	and	means	and	paths	that
you	have	never	 travelled.	They	are	all	 there,	 everything	 is	 ready,	 it	 is	 just	 that
you	are	not	moving	 in.	You	are	 focussed	on	 the	outside.	Your	back	 is	 towards
your	interiority.
Turn	 in.	 A	 one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	 turn	 is	 needed.	 And	 once	 you	 start
knowing	who	you	are	--
just	 little	glimpses	 in	 the	beginning	--	 tremendous	 joy	will	arise.	Your	 life	will
become	 that	 of	 great	 surprise,	 excitement.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 boredom,	 never.
Boredom	never	crosses	the	path	of	the	man	who	goes	inwards.
He	is	never	tired	because	each	moment	new	mysteries	go	on	cropping	up,	now
mysteries	go	on	flooding	in.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001215
ShortTitle:	RAFTER21
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Anand	 Bettina.	 Anand	 means	 blissful,	 bettina	 means
consecrated	to	god.
Man	can	worship	god	either	out	of	misery	or	out	of	bliss,	either	out	of	fear	or	out
of	 love.	 But	 the	 person	 who	 worships	 god	 out	 of	 misery	 and	 fear	 remains
unbridged.	His	approach	 is	basically	wrong.	He	will	never	find	god.	And	if	he
ever	goes	find	god	it	will	be	his	own	creation,	it	will	not	be	the	true	god.	It	will
be	just	his	mind-projection.	He	will	create	it	because	he	is	in	such	misery,	lonely,
fearful.	It	will	be	an	invention,	not	a	discovery.
God	can	be	discovered	only	when	you	approach	it	in	the	right	mood,	blissfully,
out	of	love.	Then	one	is	bridged.	Then	god	is	not	far	away.	And	then	you	need
not	project,	you	discover.	You	come	to	know	the	true	god.
And	one	can	be	consecrated	only	out	of	love,	not	out	of	fear.	But	for	thousands
of	years	man	has	lived	out	of	fear	and	the	priests	have	exploited	man's	fear,	his
loneliness.
My	work	is	to	help	you	understand	that	you	are	not	to	start	your	journey	out	of
fear,	otherwise	the	first	step	has	gone	wrong,	and	when	the	first	step	goes	wrong,
everything	 goes	 wrong.	 Go	 in	 search	 out	 of	 joy,	 go	 in	 search	 cheerfully,
playfully.	God	 is	 not	 the	 enemy,	one	need	not	 be	 afraid	of	 him.	We	belong	 to
him,	he	belongs	to	us.	We	are	part	of	each	other.	We	are	part	of	him,	he	is	part	of
us.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Luisa.	Prem	means	love,	luisa	means	victory.
Love	 is	 the	only	way	 to	 be	victorious.	Everything	 else	 is	 bound	 to	 fail	 except
love.	Money	fails,	power	fails,	prestige	fails.	Finally	they	all	prove	stupid	games.
In	 the	 last	 reckoning	only	 love	 succeeds,	 but	 love	 succeeds	 for	 a	 very	 strange
reason:	 it	 succeeds	because	 it	 does	not	want	 to	 succeed.	 It	 becomes	victorious
because	 it	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 victory	 at	 all;	 on	 the	 contrary	 it	 wants	 to	 be
defeated	by	god.
Love	is	ready	to	surrender,	not	to	fight.	Love	means	dropping	your	quarrelsome
attitudes.	Love	means	 the	 total	acceptability	of	existence	as	 it	 is,	accepting	not
out	of	resignation	but	out	of	deep	understanding.
If	 one	 tries	 to	 watch	 and	 understand,	 this	 existence	 is	 the	 most	 perfect	 one
possible.	 It	 cannot	 be	 improved	 upon.	 Its	 beauty,	 its	 joy,	 its	 glory,	 are
unsurpassable.	One	can	only	feel	grateful	that	one	is	alive.
One	can	only	be	thankful.	And	out	of	that	thankfulness	prayer	grows.
Prayer	 is	 surrender,	 surrender	 to	 the	 infinity,	 surrender	 to	 the	 wide	 wide	 sky,
surrender	to	this	eternity.
But	in	surrender	the	miracle	happen,	one	becomes	victorious.	This	is	the	greatest
paradox	of	 life:	 those	who	want	 to	be	victorious	are	bound	 to	be	defeated	and
those	who	are	willing	to	surrender	are	inevitably	victorious.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Liv.	Deva	means	divine,	liv	means	life.
Life	is	divine,	life	is	godly,	life	is	another	name	for	god.	But	we	have	been	told
just	the	opposite.	We	have	been	told	that	life	has	to	be	renounced,	negated,	that
life	 is	 something	against	god,	 that	we	have	 to	 turn	our	back	 towards	 life,	only
then	can	we	face	god.	That	utter	nonsense	has	been	perpetuated	for	so	long	that
is	has	almost	become	a	truth.	The	whole	humanity	has	become	hypnotized	by	it.
Hypnosis	is	nothing	but	an	are	of	repeating	the	same	thing	again	and	again	and
again,	 so	 that	 slowly	 slowly	 it	 goes	 on	 sinking	 deep	 into	 you.	 Any	 untruth
repeated	long	enough	starts	appearing	to	be	true.	And	that's	what	has	happened.
Down	 the	 ages	 the	 priests	 have	 been	 condemning	 life,	 making	 people	 life-
negative.	Anything	that	belongs	to	life	has	been	condemned	a	sin,	and	the	saintly
person	 is	 one	who	 has	 renounced	 all	 life.	 He	 is	 almost	 dead,	 only	 then	 is	 he
saintly.	 He	 commits	 a	 slow	 suicide,	 then	we	 say	 about	 him	 that	 he	 is	 a	 great
saint.
My	work	 is	 difficult.	 It	 is	 difficult	 because	 it	 goes	 against	 the	hypnosis	of	 the
centuries.	God	is	not	against	life,	in	fact	there	is	no	other	god	except	life.	God	is
only	a	metaphor	for	life.	To	me	the	holy	person	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	one	who	lives	life	totally,	wholly,	one	who	loves	life,	rejoices	in	it,	one	who	is
absolutely	dedicated	to	life,	committed	to	life,	to	all	that	it	contains,	to	all	that	it
implies.
Nothing	 is	 mundane,	 everything	 is	 sacred.	 And	 this	 whole	 existence	 is	 the
temple.	Wherever	we	are,	we	are	on	sacred	earth	and	whatsoever	we	are	doing,
we	are	doing	god's	work.	Even	the	sinner	is	as	much	in	god	as	the	saint.
This	has	to	be	proclaimed	from	the	housetops,	that	to	love	life	is	true	religion.	To
worship	life	should	be	the	essential	core	of	a	religious	consciousness.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	 life-affirmative.	Their	method	to	come	to	god	is	not
renunciation	but	rejoicing.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Rudolf.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Rudolf	 has	 two
meanings;	 one	 is	 the	 loyal	 one,	 the	 other	 is	 the	 courageous	 one.	But	 both	 are
symbolic	meanings.
Literally	rudolf	means	the	wold,	but	the	wold	does	have	these	tow	qualities.	It	is
very	loyal,	it	knows	how	to	love,	it	knows	how	to	sacrifice	out	of	love,	it	can	be
trusted,	 it	 is	 never	 disloyal.	 And	 the	 second	 quality	 is	 also	 in	 the	 wolf,	 it	 is
courageous.	It	is	not	a	coward.
Sannyas	needs	both	qualities.	You	have	to	be	loyal,	trusting,	faithful.	These	are
the	qualities	of	the	heart.
Only	 through	 these	qualities	 does	 the	heart	 grow.	Only	 in	 this	 context	 can	 the
heart	 blossom.	 It	 needs	 the	 atmosphere,	 the	 climate	 of	 loyalty.	 Trust	 is	 like	 a
spring	for	the	heart.
And	 sannyas	 also	 needs	 courage,	 great	 courage,	 because	 by	 becoming	 a
sannyasin	you	are	moving	beyond	boundaries,	the	boundary	of	being	a	Christian,
a	 Jew,	 a	 Hindu,	 a	 Mohammedan,	 the	 boundary	 of	 being	 white	 or	 black,	 the
boundary	of	the	ind	itself,	the	boundary	of	the	body	too.
Sannyas	means	knowing	'I	am	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind,'	And	it	is	only	in
that	knowing	that	the	fragrance	of	love	arises	out	of	you.	If	you	are	attached	to
the	 body	 identified	 with	 the	 body,	 whatsoever	 you	 call	 love	 is	 not	 love,	 it	 is
another	name	for	sexuality.	If	you	are	identified	with	the	mind	then	your	love	is
nothing	but	lust.
When	 these	 identities	 are	 broken	 and	 you	 start	 seeing	 yourself	 as	 a	 pure
consciousness,	 just	 consciousness	 and	 nothing	 else,	 then	 love	 arises	 from	 the
very	 center	 of	 your	 being	 like	 a	 flame,	 an	 eternal	 flame.	 And	 those	 ate	 the
greatest	moments	of	life.
Sannyas	 simply	 creates	 the	 fight	 space	 for	 love	 to	 happen.	 Sannyas	 is	 the
method,	love	is	the	goal.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Sanatan.
Sanatan	means	eternal,	timeless,	deathless.
These	are	our	 real	qualities.	We	are	never	born	and	we	never	die.	The	body	 is
only	a	shelter,	we	are	not	 it.	 It	 is	only	like	a	garment	which	one	has	 to	change
when	it	is	too	old.	And	we	have	changed	the	garment	so	many	times.	We	differ
from	other	people	only	if	the	form	and	the	shape	and	the	color	and	the	size	of	the
garment.	The	innermost	reality	is	the	same.
To	find	it,	to	find	that	which	is	never	born	and	never	dies,	is	the	real	goal	of	all
religious	enquiry.	One	can	call	 it	god,	 liberation,	nirvana,	enlightenment.	They
are	different	names	for	 the	same	phenomenon.	And	it	 is	not	 to	be	searched	for
somewhere	else,	 it	 is	within	you.	It	 is	you,	so	you	have	to	dive	deep	into	your
own	nature.
Sannyas	is	a	pilgrimage	from	the	periphery	to	the	center,	from	your	own	surface
to	your	depth.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Premsindhu.	Premsindhu	means	ocean	of	love.
Man	is	born	with	that	potential,	he	can	become	an	ocean	of	love.	But	very	few
people	attain	their	 total	potential.	They	never	become	even	aware	of	what	 they
are	carrying	within	themselves.	They	remains	seeds,	they	never	become	flowers.
Their	potential	dies,	it	never	becomes	actual.
Sannyas	is	the	process	of	self-actualization.	Whatsoever	is	hidden	has	to	become
manifest,	and	whatsoever	is	possible	has	to	be	made	real.	Nothing	has	to	be	left
as	 a	 seed.	Then	man	 has	multi-dimensional	 possibilities.	 In	 his	 small	 body	 he
contains	the	whole	sky.
The	heart	is	small	but	its	capacity	to	love	is	infinite.	But	the	society,	the	people,
the	 culture,	 the	 civilization,	 the	 church,	 the	 state	 --	 they	 are	 all	 against	 the
individual.	The	individual	seems	to	be	the	enemy.
They	 destroy	 the	 individual,	 they	 sacrifice	 the	 individual	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 the
collective.	And	the	collective	does	not	need	any	live,	the	collective	needs,	on	the
contrary,	more	hatred.
The	Christians	have	to	hate	the	Mohammedans,	the	Mohammedans	have	to	hate
the	Hindus,	the	Hindus	have	to	hate	the	Christians	and	so	on,	so	forth...	because
the	collective	can	remain	together	only	if	it	hates	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
somebody.	 It	 needs	 a	 common	enemy.	One	nation	needs	 to	hate	other	nations,
otherwise	 it	 will	 start	 falling	 apart.	 The	 greater	 the	 hatred,	 the	 more	 the
integrated	the	nation	becomes	integrated,	cemented.	That's	why	in	times	of	war
counties	 become	 very	 united.	 When	 the	 war	 is	 there	 no	 more	 they	 start
quarrelling	within	themselves.
Adolf	Hitler	has	written	in	his	autobiography	MEIN	KAMPF,	that	if	there	is	no
real	enemy	of	your	country,	create	false	enemies.	Always	keep	the	people	aware
that	they	are	in	danger,	because	only	when	they	feel	that	they	are	in	danger	are
they	together.	The	moment	they	feel	that	there	is	no	danger	they	start	quarrelling
amongst	themselves,	fighting	amongst	themselves.	Then	their	small	things	start
taking	great	proportions.
Collectivities	 live	 out	 of	 hate,	 hence	 they	 have	 to	 destroy	 all	 possibilities	 for
love.	The	individual	can	grow	only	through	love	and	the	collectivity	needs	more
and	more	hate;	hence	 there	 is	a	conflict	between	 the	 interests	of	 the	 individual
and	those	of	the	collective	mob,	the	mass,	the	crowd.
One	has	to	be	very	watchful	not	to	be	exploited	by	the	crowd.	One	has	to	be	very
intelligent,	 alert	 so	 that	 one	 can	 save	 one's	 potential.	 It	 is	 in	 constant	 danger
because	everybody	is	against	it.	and	unless	you	are	very	very	alert	you	are	bound
to	 lose	 this	great	opportunity	--	of	 life,	of	growing	up,	of	becoming	mature,	of
attaining	to	the	highest	peak	that	was	your	birthright.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001225
ShortTitle:	RAFTER22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Anando	 Dominique.	 Anando	 means	 blissful.
Dominique	means	one	who	belongs	to	God.
Everyone	belongs	to	God	--	there	is	no	other	way.	We	are	born	in	God,	we	live	in
God,	we	die	in	God.
Our	 energy	 is	 God's	 energy.	 God	 is	 simply	 the	 name	 of	 the	 total	 energy	 of
existence.	 But	 the	 total	 is	 not	 arithmetical,	 the	 total	 is	 mysterious.	 It	 is	 not
mechanical,	 it	 is	 organic.	 There	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 the	 two	 which
needs	to	be	understood.
The	mechanical,	the	mathematical	total	is	nothing	but	the	sum	total	of	the	parts.
The	 organic	 total	 is	 something	 more	 than	 the	 sum	 total	 of	 the	 parts.	 A	 great
painting	 is	 an	 organic	 unity.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 the	 sum	 total	 of	 the	 canvas	 and	 the
colors.	So	it	is	with	life.
God	simply	means	that	existence	is	more	than	it	appears.	It	is	more	than	can	be
measured,	it	is	more	than	science	can	ever	experiment	with.	And	religion	is	the
search	for	that	more,	that	mysterious,	illusive	quality.	Hence	everybody	belongs
to	God	but	very	few	people	are	aware	of	the	fact.	Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	become
aware	of	it.
The	moment	you	know	it	on	your	own	--	not	because	I	say,	not	because	Buddha
says,	not	because	Jesus	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
says,	 but	 because	 you	 feel	 it	 --	 that	moment	 you	 are	 transformed.	All	misery
disappears.	Life	becomes	light	and	a	joy,	a	bliss	and	a	benediction.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Allen.	Deva	means	divine;	allen	means	cheerful
--	divine	cheerfulness.
Cheerfulness	can	be	of	two	kinds.	One	is	mundane.	One	is	cheerful	because	one
has	 just	 succeeded	 in	 something.	 One	 has	 purchased	 a	 house	 that	 one	 always
wanted	to	purchase.	one	has	got	the	woman	that	one	has	always	fancied.	But	this
kind	 of	 cheerfulness	 is	 momentary.	 It	 comes	 like	 a	 breeze	 and	 it	 goes	 like	 a
breeze,	and	you	are	empty	again.	In	fact	you	are	more	in	despair	than	you	were
before	because	before	there	was	a	hope,	now	even	that	hope	has	gone...
You	 were	 hoping	 that	 being	 with	 this	 woman	 or	 this	 man	 is	 going	 to	 give
meaning	and	music	to	your	life.	That	hope,	that	dream,	was	very	enchanting.	It
was	mesmeric,	hypnotic.	You	were	living	in	that	dream,	in	that	projection.	Now
the	woman	is	there	but	the	meaning	has	not	happened,	the	music	has	not	arrived.
Suddenly	you	are	disillusioned,	utterly	disappointed.	The	hope	is	shattered.	You
will	feel	more	in	despair	that	before.
That's	 what	 happened	with	 ordinary	 cheerfulness.	 Each	 time	 you	 are	 cheerful
you	will	have	to	pay	for	it.
And	really	one	has	 to	pay	 too	much.	The	cheerfulness	 is	not	worth	 that	much.
The	cheerfulness	stays	only	for	moments	and	then	the	dark	night	comes	and	it	is
very	long.
But	man	 is	 so	 foolish	 that	 he	 starts	 hoping	 again.	Maybe	 some	 other	woman,
some	other	house,	some	other	post,	some	other	power	will	fulfil	him.	Again	you
are	running,	chasing	after	shadows	--	and	 the	same	thing	 is	going	 to	happen....
This	is	a	mundane	kind	of	cheerfulness.	This	is	not	worth	striving	for.
If	it	happens	just	by	the	way,	enjoy	it,	but	never	strive	for	it.	I	am	not	against	it,
remember.	If	it	happens	by	the	way,	if	somebody	offers	you	a	cup	of	tea,	enjoy
it.	 If	 somebody	 invites	you	 to	 live	 in	a	big	palace,	don't	miss	 (laughter)	 ...	but
don't	 hanker	 for	 these	 things.	 If	 they	come	on	 the	way...	A	woman	comes	and
holds	 your	 hand	 and	 it	 is	 good,	 so	 walk	 hand	 in	 hand.	 And	when	 she	 leaves
you...	 you	will	 feel	 greatly	 relived,	 there	will	 be	 no	 despair.	You	will	 feel	 the
freedom	of	being	alone	again.
I	am	not	saying	not	to	enjoy	things	that	happen	on	the	way,	but	they	are	not	the
goals	of	life.	Yes,	a	beautiful	flower	by	the	side	of	the	road...	it	suddenly	attracts
you.	stand	for	a	while,	smell	it,	thank	god	for	it,	and	move	on.	Don't	cling,	don't
become	attached,	because	if	you	cling,	if	you	become	attached,	soon	you	will	be
in	despair,	the	flower	cannot	be	forever.	Soon	it	will	wither	away,	soon	the	petals
will	fall	onto	the	earth,	soon	the	perfume	will	disappear	and	nothing	will	be	left.
And	by	then	you	will	also	be	in	a	state	of	falling	apart.
Mundane	kind	 of	 cheerfulness	 is	 good	 if	 it	 comes	 on	 its	 own	 and	you	 remain
aware	 not	 to	 become	 attached	 to	 it.	 In	 fact,	 if	 you	 don't	 desire	 it	 you	 don't
become	attached	to	it.	Then	it	is	just	happening.	You	are	travelling	in	a	train	and
you	 become	 friendly	 with	 a	 person	 and	 you	 chitchat	 and	 you	 share,	 you
commune.	Then	his	station	comes	and	he	gets	down	and	you	wish	him	good	luck
and	he	wishes	 you	good	 luck	 and	 it	 is	 finished	 there.	Mundane	 life	 should	 be
taken	in	theat	way.
But	there	is	another	kind	of	cheerfulness	--	divine	cheerfulness.	It	has	nothing	to
do	with	anything	on	the	outside.	It	wells	up	in	you.	It	is	possible	only	if	you	go
inwards,	 if	 you	 become	 attuned	 to	 your	 own	 center,	 if	 you	 become	 silent,
meditative.	So	 silent	 that	 thoughts	are	 there	no	more,	 so	 silent	 that	 there	 is	no
past,	no	future,	but	only	the	present,	the	purity	of	now	and	the	utter	freshness	of
here.
Then	you	stumble	upon	a	new	kind	of	cheerfulness.	It	happens	for	no	reason	at
all,	 it	 simply	 starts	 flowing	 within	 you.	 It	 is	 absurd.	 You	 cannot	 explain	 to
anybody,	 it	 is	 unexplainable.	 You	 cannot	 make	 people	 understand	 what	 is
happening	 to	you,	 they	will	 think	 that	you	are	mad.	They	have	always	 thought
that	way;	because	they	know	only	one	kind	of	cheerfulness,	which	has	a	cause
outside.	 If	 you	 can	 show	 the	 cause,	 that	 you	 have	 won	 the	 lottery,	 they
understand	it.
But	you	have	not	won	the	lottery,	you	have	not	been	chosen.
If	you	have	got	it,	you	have	got	the	whole	world.	If	you	have	got	it,	you	have	got
the	very	goal	of	life.
The	very	purpose	is	fulfilled.
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Devendro.	Devendro	means	god	of	gods.	That's	our
true	 reality,	 that's	 what	 we	 are,	 we	 are	 not	 less	 then	 that.	 But	 that	 is	 not	 our
awareness,	 that	 is	 not	 our	 understanding.	 We	 think	 of	 ourselves	 as	 beggars,
begging	for	this	and	begging	for	that,	because	we	have	become	too	engulfed	in
desires.	And	the	more	desires	you	have,	the	bigger	is	you	begging	bowl.	And	it
is	so	big	that	there	is	no	way	to	full	it,	in	fact	it	is	bottomless.	You	go	on	pouring
things	into	it	and	they	go	on	disappearing.
We	 are	 dreaming	 that	 we	 are	 beggars.	 Desires	 are	 dreams.	 The	 moment	 one
wakes	up	in	the	morning,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
one	 laughs	 at	 oneself,	 one	 feels	 ridiculous:	 What	 kind	 of	 dreams	 was	 one
dreaming	And	how	real	they	appeared	when	they	were	there	and	when	you	were
asleep!	The	real	world	had	become	unreal	and	 the	unreal	had	become	the	real.
This	is	a	miracle	that	we	pass	through	every	night:	the	unreal	becomes	the	real
and	the	real	becomes	the	unreal,	and	every	morning	we	recognize	it	but	again	we
fall	into	the	same	trap.
The	 same	 is	 true	 on	 a	 higher	 plane.	 There	 is	 an	 awakening	 --	 call	 it
enlightenment,	samadhi,	nirvana,	it	doesn't	matter	what	words	are	being	used	for
it,	 but	 the	 essence	of	 it	 is	 that	 there	 is	 a	higher	kind	of	 awakening.	When	one
wakes	 up	 from	 this	 metaphysical	 sleep	 in	 which	 we	 are	 dreaming,	 desiring,
thinking	twenty-four-hours	a	day,	when	suddenly	a	stop	comes	to	all	thought	and
desires,	the	real	dawn	has	arrived.
Then	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	see	how	 long	you	have	been	 in	a	 stupid	state.	You
have	been	almost	like	a	drunkard.
Real	life	begins	only	then,	when	you	know	who	you	are,	when	you	are	so	alert,
so	 awake,	 that	 you	 recognize	 your	 reality.	 In	 that	moment	 you	 are	 the	 god	 of
gods,	 you	 are	 the	 suprememost	 reality.	 Nothing	 is	 lacking	 in	 you,	 you	 are
perfect.	Nothing	 has	 ever	 been	 lacking	 in	 you.	Nothing	 needs	 to	 be	 unproved
upon.
Nothing	at	all	needs	to	be	done	to	you,	you	are	as	you	should	be.	Only	one	thing
is	missing,	you	are	fast	asleep.
Initiation	into	sannyas	means	that	you	are	ready	to	be	awakened,	you	are	saying
'Wake	 me!',	 you	 are	 surrendering	 to	 be	 awakened.	 It	 is	 a	 painful	 process.
Dreaming	is	beautiful.	One	can	have	sweet	dreams	to	one's	heart's	content,	you
can	go	on	dreaming	whatsoever	you	want	to	dream,	they	are	your	projections.
When	for	the	first	time	you	are	taken	out	of	your	dreaming	state	it	hurts.	Reality
is	not	under	your	control,	your	dreams	are	under	your	control.	With	reality	you
have	to	be	under	its	control.
But	 the	 paradox	 is	 that	 in	 dreams	when	you	 think	you	 are	 a	master	 you	 are	 a
slave,	 and	when	you	become	a	 slave,	 and	when	you	become	a	 slave	 to	 reality
you	become	the	master.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Premendra.	Premendra	meas	god	of	love.
Love	and	god	are	 synonymous,	not	 in	 the	dictionaries	of	 course	but	 in	 reality,
existentially.	They	are	 two	names	 for	 the	 same	phenomenon.	God	 is	 the	name
given	by	the	philosophers	and	love	is	the	name	given	by	the	mystics.
Love	 is	 far	 closer	 to	 truth,	 because	god	 seems	 to	 be	 almost	 incomprehensible.
You	hear	 the	word	but	 nothing	 stirs	 in	your	heart.	The	word	 'god'	 resounds	 in
your	ears	but	 there	 seems	 to	be	nor	 response,	no	bells	 ring	 in	your	being.	The
same	is	not	true	about	love.
Love	 is	 the	 only	 experience	 which	 is	 both	 comprehensible	 and
incomprehensible.	A	part	of	 it	 is	human	and	a	part	of	 it	 is	divine.	A	part	of	 it
penetrates	 into	 time	 and	 the	 other	 part	 remains	 beyond	 in	 eternity.	 We	 can
understand	a	little	bit	of	love,	but	that	little	bit	becomes	the	bridge.	It	may	not	be
easy	to	define	what	love	is,	but	everybody	understands	in	an	intuitive	way	what
it	is.
There	are	many	realities	which	are	not	definable.	For	example,	 time	--	nobody
has	been	able	 to	define	what	 it	 is	exactly,	but	everybody	knows	what	 it	 is	and
everybody	uses	time,	lives	in	time,	moves	in	time,	feels	its	flow.	but	if	you	force
somebody	to	explain	what	exactly	it	is,	he	finds	it	is	impossible	to	explain.	So	is
the	case	with	love.
But	because	love	can	at	least	be	felt,	it	can	become	the	beginning.	Lowly	slowly
it	 will	 take	 you	 farther	 and	 farther	 away	 from	 the	 shore	 into	 the	 sea.	 Slowly
slowly...	and	the	ways	of	love	are	very	gently.	It	is	a	gentleman:	it	will	take	you
slowly	 slowly,	 persuade	 you,	 seduce	 you	 towards	 the	 unknown.	And	 you	will
never	 become	 exactly	 aware	 of	 when	 you	 have	 crossed	 the	 boundary	 of	 the
known	and	have	entered	into	the	unknown.	That's	the	beauty	of	love.
To	be	with	a	master	is	to	be	in	a	love	affair,	because	between	the	disciple	and	the
master	something	very	mysterious	starts	happening.	And	that	is	the	beginning	of
god.	 The	 presence	 of	 something	 mysterious,	 miraculous,	 becomes	 more	 and
more	overwhelming.	 It	 starts	 surrounding	you	 like	 a	 cloud,	 it	 starts	 raining	on
you	like	flowers.
And	 if	 you	 can	 take	 the	 first	 step	 into	 love	 one	 has	 almost	 covered	 half	 the
journey,	 because	 there	 are	 only	 two	 steps.	 The	 first	 is	 love	 and	 the	 second	 is
death.	You	start	loving	and	then	you	have	to	dissolve	yourself.	That	is	death,	real
death.	 But	 if	 one	 can	 die	 lovingly,	 if	 one	 can	 dissolve	 into	 deep	 love,	 one	 is
resurrected	immediately.	One	is	born	in	a	new	spirit,	in	a	new	form.	That	form	is
divine,	that	form	is	immortal.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Premyog.	Premyog	means	the	path	of	love.
There	are	 two	paths	possible,	because	 there	are	 two	types	of	psychoanalysis	 in
the	world.	The	world	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
always	 divided	 into	 tow,	 everything	 is	 divided	 into	 two:	 biologically,
psychologically,	 physiologically.	 The	 world	 is	 a	 duality.	 Light	 can	 exist	 only
with	darkness.	Compassion	can	exist	only	with	anger,	peace	can	exist	only	with
war.	There	are	like	negative	and	positive	poles	of	electricity.
Man	and	woman	are	biological	polarities.	Exactly	in	the	same	way	there	are	two
paths;	 they	 are	 polar	 opposites	 but	 they	 lead	 to	 the	 same	 goal.	One	 path	 is	 of
meditation,	awareness.	Buddha,	Mahavira,	Lao	Tzu
--	these	are	the	people	who	have	followed	the	path	of	meditation.	On	the	path	of
meditation	 love	 is	not	discussed	at	all.	There	 is	no	 reason	 to	discuss	 love.	Not
that	love	does	not	happen,	but	is	happens	only	in	the	end.	When	the	traveller	has
reached	the	ultimate	goal,	then	suddenly	he	finds	that	he	has	been	following	the
path	of	meditation	but	that	like	a	shadow,	a	by-product,	love	has	happened.
Buddha	has	said:	When	meditation	flowers	totally	the	first	indication	is	that	one
becomes	 absolutely	 loving,	 one	 becomes	 compassionate.	 When	 meditation
blooms,	love	spreads	like	a	fragrance.
On	the	path	of	love,	awareness	is	not	discussed	at	all.	Rather	just	the	opposite	is
needed,	a	kind	of	drunkenness,	 a	kind	of	 intoxication.	 In	awareness	you	 try	 to
self-remember,	to	ask	'Who	am	I?'	In	love	you	try	to	dissolve,	whoever	you	are,
X,	Y,	Z,	it	doesn't	matter.	Who	cares?	--	It	has	to	be	dissolved.	So	whatever	it	is,
X,Y,Z,	is	irrelevant.	Whatsoever	it	 is,	 it	has	to	be	dissolved,	it	has	to	be	lost	in
the	thou.
Existence	becomes	the	thou,	the	beloved	--	call	it	god	--	and	the	seeker	becomes
the	lover.	He	starts	dissolving	himself,	he	starts	disappearing,	evaporating.
When	the	ego	evaporates	totally,	when	you	are	in	a	state	of	not-being,	you	have
arrived.	And	in	that	moment	of	arrival	you	are	in	for	a	great	surprise.	You	have
dissolved	 yourself,	 you	 have	 not	 even	 left	 any	 trace	 of	 your	 ego,	 and	 now
suddenly	you	find	that	you	are	for	the	first	time	a	real	being.	The	ego	has	been
dissolved,	 but	 that	was	 a	 false	 entity.	And	 because	 it	 has	 been	 dissolved,	 you
have	now	found	your	real	self,	the	supreme	self.
But	 it	 comes	 as	 a	 by-product.	On	 the	 path	 of	 love	 awareness	 comes	 as	 a	 by-
product,	and	vice	versa:	on	the	path	of	awareness	love	comes	as	a	by-product.
Let	love	be	your	way,	your	path.	Let	love	be	your	very	being.	Love	existence	in
its	 multi-dimensionality,	 it	 its	 tremendous	 beauty.	 Love	 people,	 love	 trees,
clouds,	stars.	It	is	not	the	point	what	you	love,	the	point	is	that	you	love.	Become
love
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anugit.	Anugit	means	a	little	song,	like	a	haiku,
a	sonnet.
Man	is	very	small	compared	to	the	universe.	The	universe	is	a	great	orchestra.	If
you	can	contribute	a	little	beauty	to	existence,	just	a	little,	that's	enough;	more	is
not	 required,	 not	 needed.	 Existence	 never	 asks	 you	 for	 the	 impossible,	 it	 asks
only	for	 that	which	is	possible.	But	man's	ego	always	demands	the	impossible.
Man's	ego	always	wants	to	become	something	great.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	just	a	small	song.	That's	his	offering	to	god.	A	song	means
a	celebration,	a	song	means	a	little	laughter,	cheerfulness,	a	little	dance.	Life	is
so	small,	so	short,	so	momentary.	If	we	can	sing	a	little	song,	that's	enough.
A	 Zen	master	 was	 invited	 by	 the	 emperor	 of	 Japan	 to	 address	 his	 court.	 The
master	came,	he	stood	before	the	court.	Everybody	was	so	expectant,	for	months
they	had	waited.	The	emperor	was	 there,	 the	queen	and	all	 the	court	was	 there
and	may	 people	were	 invited;	 it	 was	 a	 great	 gathering.	 The	master	 had	 never
come	to	any	other	place	to	speak.	They	were	sitting	silently	and	the	master	stood
up.	There	was	absolute	silence	as	if	they	had	even	stopped	breathing.	What	was
he	going	 to	 say?	He	 simply	 took	out	 a	 small	 flute,	 played	 a	 short	 note	 on	 the
flute	and	left	the	court!
The	emperor	ran	after	him,	fell	at	his	feet	and	said	'What	about	the	address?'	He
said	'This	is	my	address
--	just	a	short	note.	I	have	said	all	that	I	can	say,	all	that	can	be	said.	More	than
that	is	not	possible.	Nobody	has	ever	said	more	that	that.'
So	be	a	small	note	on	a	flute,	and	life	is	fulfilled.	Don't	hanker	to	be	something
great,	 something	 special,	 holy,	 saintly.	All	 that	 is	 rubbish.	 Just	 be	 ordinary,	 so
ordinary	that	nobody	ever	comes	to	know	of	you,	so	ordinary	as	if	you	had	never
existed.	And	don't	leave	any	footprints.	Just	like	the	birds	fly	in	the	sky	--	they
don't	 leave	any	 footprints.	That's	what	 Jesus	means	when	he	 says:	Blessed	are
the	meek,	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001235
ShortTitle:	RAFTER23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	 your	 name:	Ma	Antar	 Steffanie.	Antar	means	 inner,	 steffanie	means	 a
voice	--	the	inner	voice.
God	does	not	speak	from	the	outside,	he	does	not	speak	through	the	scriptures.
He	speaks	from	your	innermost	core.	But	we	never	hear,	because	we	are	in	the
turmoil	of	the	head	so	much	that	the	still,	small	voice	of	the	within	is	lost.
Sannyas	means	 the	 science	 of	 stilling	 the	mind	 so	 that	 the	 inner	 voice	 can	 be
heard.
Once	you	have	 started	hearing	 the	 inner	voice	no	other	guide	 is	needed.	Then
god	 is	your	guide.	Then	 there	 is	no	question	of	choosing	between	alternatives,
then	he	continuously	directs	you	towards	that	which	is	right.	He	is	still	directing
us	but	we	are	not	available,	we	are	pre-occupied.
Learn	 the	 art	 of	making	 the	mind	 silent.	 It	 is	 not	 difficult.	 In	 the	 beginning	 it
appears	 difficult,	 but	 don't	 be	 deceived	by	 the	 appearance.	Go	on	 trying	 again
and	again	and	again,	and	be	patient.	Remain	alert	to	the	fact	that	it	has	happened
to	many	people,	it	can	happen	to	you,	because	we	are	all	potentially	the	same....
If	 one	 can	 become	 a	 Jesus	 or	 a	 Buddha,	 then	 everybody	 has	 the	 potential	 to
become	that.
And	the	art	can	be	reduces	to	a	simple	maxim:	watch	you	mind.	See	what	go	on
inside	 the	 mind,	 detached,	 aloof,	 just	 like	 a	 bystander.	 Don't	 condemn,	 don't
appreciate,	don't	be	friendly	and	don't	be	inimical.	Just	be	neutral,	a	pure	watcher
with	 no	 vested	 interest	 in	 it,	 like	 a	mirror.	Anything	 that	 comes	 by	 the	mirror
reflects.	It	does	not	say	that	it	is	beautiful,	it	does	not	say	that	it	is	ugly.
If	you	can	watch	your	mind,	by	and	by	it	becomes	silent	of	its	own	accord.	And
the	day	the	mind	is	silent	one	hears	the	inner	voice	for	the	first	time	and	one	has
found	the	guide,	the	true	master.
The	outer	master	helps	you	find	the	inner	master.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Dirk.	 Prem	 means	 love,	 dirk	 means	 full	 of
justice.
Love	is	full	of	 justice,	and	only	love	can	be	full	of	 justice	because	love	knows
how	 to	 forgive.	 Love	 knows	 how	 to	 be	 compassionate.	 Love	 knows	 how	 to
accept	the	limitations	of	human	beings.	Love	knows	that	nobody	is	perfect.	Love
does	 not	 demand	 the	 impossible.	 It	 is	 the	 unloving	 people	 who	 demand	 the
impossible.	They	demand	perfection.	They	demand	such	things	which	cannot	be
fulfilled,	and	then	they	have	an	excuse	to	go	on	living	a	life	without	love.
The	 excuse	 is,	 "Where	 is	 the	 person	 whom	 I	 can	 love?	 Nobody	 seems	 to	 be
worthy	 enough."	 This	 is	 just	 a	 strategy	 to	 avoid	 love:	 make	 demands	 which
cannot	be	fulfilled	by	human	beings.
True	 love	knows	how	to	accept	 the	person	with	all	his	 limitations,	with	all	his
imperfections,	and	out	of	that	understanding	justice	is	born.
Grow	in	love.	The	more	you	love,	the	more	just	you	will	be.	And	to	be	just	is	to
be	religious.	But	love	is	the	secret,	love	is	the	alchemy	that	can	transform	your
being	into	a	blessing	to	yourself,	to	others,	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
existence	itself.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Antar	 Dirk.	 Antar	 means	 inner.	 Dirk	 has	 two
meanings;	one	is,	full	of	justice;	the	other	is,	a	king,	a	ruler.
You	have	 to	be	a	 ruler	of	 the	 inner	world.	We	have	a	kingdom	inside,	 the	 true
kingdom.	We	all	want	to	be	kings	but	we	go	on	searching	in	the	wrong	direction,
we	go	on	searching	outside.	And	one	can	become	a	king,	one	can	have	all	 the
wealth	and	all	 the	power	and	the	prestige;	still,	deep	down	one	knows	that	one
has	missed.	One	is	still	poor,	one	is	still	empty.	Nothing	is	yet	fulfilled	and	life
has	slipped	out	of	your	hands	in	collecting	rubbish.
Alexander	dies	as	poor	as	any	beggar.	So	the	whole	show	is	just	a	deception.	The
true	kingdom	is	of	the	inner.	A	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Jesus	--	these
are	true	kings	because	they	rule	themselves.
Ordinarily	 we	 are	 slaves,	 pretending	 to	 be	 rulers.	 Unless	 one	 conquers	 one's
unconsciousness	 one	 remains	 a	 pretender,	 one	 remains	 a	 slave	 and	 goes	 on
playing	all	kinds	of	games	of	pretension	and	deception,	goes	on	proclaiming	 'I
am	 not	 what	 you	 think	 I	 am.'	 And	 he	 knows	 what	 he	 is	 and	 everybody	 else
knows	too,	because	everybody	else	is	doing	the	same	thing.	All	are	beggars	and
all	are	hidden	behind	masks.
Be	 a	 true	 king.	 And	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 inner	 kingdom	 is	 that	 there	 is	 no
competition.	You	have	your	 kingdom,	 I	 have	my	own,	 and	 they	never	 collide,
they	 never	 overlap.	 Each	 person	 has	 an	 inner	 world	 so	 vast,	 and	 there	 is	 no
competition,	no	fight,	no	quarrel	with	anybody.
Sannyas	is	initiation	into	the	inner.	It	is	a	turning	point	in	life.	Withdraw	yourself
more	 and	more	 from	 the	 outside,	 from	unnecessary	 occupations,	 and	 put	 your
energy	more	and	more	into	the	inner	search.
I	am	not	saying	to	renounce	the	world	because	one	has	to	do	a	few	things	on	the
outside.	One	has	to	keep	the	body	together,	one	has	to	earn	a	livelihood,	one	has
to	take	care	of	many	things.	Whatsoever	is	necessary	and	needful	has	to	be	done,
but	 the	 needful	 is	 very	 small.	 Our	 needs	 are	 not	 many	 --	 our	 desires	 are
impossible.	Needs	can	be	fulfilled,	desires	cannot	be	fulfilled.	When	a	need	goes
mad	it	becomes	desire.
Desire	means	that	now	you	are	caught	in	such	a	vicious	circle	that	you	will	never
be	 able	 to	 come	out	 of	 it	 unless	 you	 really	 try	 hard	 to	 get	 out	 of	 its	 clutches.
Needs	 are	 perfectly	 okay,	 they	 have	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 but	 that	 takes	 a	 very	 little
amount	of	your	energy.	In	fact	ninety	per	cent	of	your	energy	becomes	available
for	 the	 inner	search,	 ten	per	cent	 is	enough	for	 the	outer	work.	And	ninety	per
cent	of	your	energy	is	a	vast	amount	of	energy,	it	is	enough.	You	can	just	ride	on
that	wave	and	go	inwards.
My	work	here	is	to	help	you	to	reduce	your	desires	to	the	necessary	needs	and
then	 the	 remaining	 energy	 will	 take	 you	 inwards.	 Then	 the	 process	 is	 very
simple.	 If	 the	 energy	 is	 available	you	can	 simply	 float	with	 it.	The	problem	 is
that	people	waste	 their	energy	outside	so	much	 that	when	 it	comes	 to	going	 in
they	 don't	 have	 any	 energy,	 they	 fall	 asleep.	Whenever	 they	 sit	 for	meditation
they	 fall	 asleep.	 No	 energy	 is	 available.	 They	 have	 wasted	 all	 their	 energy
outside.	Utterly	tired,	exhausted,	they	try	meditation.
Meditation	needs	more	energy	than	anything	else	in	the	world,	remember	it,	and
energy	has	to	be	saved.
You	 have	 only	 a	 certain	 amount	 of	 energy.	 So	 be	 very	 careful,	 don't	waste	 it,
because	it	is	through	this	saved	energy	that	the	inner	kingdom	can	be	conquered.
There	is	no	other	way.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Sylvia.	Anand	means	bliss.	Sylvia	means	the	god
of	solitude,	the	solitude	that	prevails	in	deep	woods	and	forests.
People	 are	 afraid	 of	 solitude,	 hence	 sylvia	 also	 means	 the	 sudden	 terror	 that
catches	one	when	one	is	absolutely	alone	in	a	forest.
Solitude	 in	 itself	 is	 tremendously	beautiful,	blissful,	 it	 is	a	benediction,	but	we
don't	know	how	to	make	contact	with	solitude,	how	to	befriend	it.	All	that	we	do
know	 is	 absolutely	wrong.	What	we	know	about	 solitude	 is	not	 about	 solitude
but	about	solitariness.	And	those	two	things	are	as	different	as	two	things	can	be.
Solitariness	is	a	negative	state.	One	feels	lonely,	lost	empty,	afraid	of	one's	own
emptiness.	 Solitude	 is	 positive.	 It	 is	 not	 loneliness,	 it	 is	 aloneness.	 It	 is
overflowing	energy.
William	Blake	says:	Energy	is	delight.	When	you	are	really	in	solitude	you	are
so	full	of	energy,	it	is	overflowing,	you	are	overwhelmed	by	it.	You	are	not	really
lonely,	you	are	with	yourself.	In	solitariness	you	are	lonely.	There	is	nobody	you
can	be	with	and	you	don't	know	how	to	be	with	yourself.	In	solitude	you	know
how	to	be	with	yourself,	how	to	be	totally	centered	in	you	own	being.	Great	bliss
arises	out	of	that	centering,	out	of	that	grounding.
Meditation	is	an	approach	towards	your	inner	solitude.	Somewhere	deep	down	in
you	 there	 is	 a	 point	 where	 everything	 else	 disappears,	 the	 whole	 world
disappears.	You	are	left	absolutely	alone.	There	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nobody,	not	even	the	thought	of	somebody,	not	even	the	image,	no	desire	for	the
other.	 And	 you	 are	 so	 intrigues	 with	 that	 silent	 presence	 of	 yourself	 that	 you
don't	want	to	disturb	it.	You	are	not	frightened,	you	are	rejoicing	tremendously
that	you	have	found	your	inner	space,	that	you	have	found	a	corner	within	your
being	where	you	can	always	move,	where	the	world	cannot	reach	you,	where	the
worries	of	the	world	cannot	reach	you.	You	have	found	a	point	within	yourself
which	is	untouchable,	unreachable.	You	are	really	for	the	first	time	an	individual.
For	the	first	time	you	have	privacy,	because	nobody	can	penetrate	that	aloneness.
Slowly	slowly	one	has	to	move	away	from	the	body	and	the	mind,	from	all	kings
of	thoughts,	desires,	memories,	imagination.	And	the	farther	away	you	go	from
the	mind,	 the	closer	you	come	to	yourself.	A	moment	comes	when	the	mind	is
thousands	 of	miles	 away	 fro	 you,	 you	 cannot	 even	 hear	 its	 noise.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 it
were	no	more.	Then	you	are,	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	are:	 tremendously	you
are,	totally	you	are.	It	is	a	blissful	state.	There	is	no	need	to	be	in	terror,	there	is
no	need	to	be	afraid	or	scared.
The	function	of	a	master	is	to	help	you	to	understand	this	solitude.	Not	only	to
understand	it	but	to	love	it,	to	rejoice	in	it.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Harald.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Harald	means
warrior.
Sannyas	 is	 just	 the	 opposite	 of	 being	 a	 soldier.	 The	 soldier	 is	 interested	 in
conquering	the	world	and	the	sannyasin	is	interested	in	conquering	himself.	The
warrior	fights	with	others,	the	sannyasin	has	no	fight	with	anybody	in	the	world.
He	has	dropped	all	conflict,	all	struggle.	He	does	not	think	in	terms	of	war.	He	is
at	 pease	 with	 existence,	 he	 has	 surrendered	 to	 existence;	 hence	 there	 is	 no
question	of	war.	But	in	that	very	surrender	he	becomes	a	conqueror,	because	in
that	very	surrender	he	becomes	a	vehicle	of	the	whole.	He	is	no	more	apart,	he	is
no	more	separate.	He	is	no	more	small.	The	dewdrop	has	slipped	into	the	ocean.
Yes	on	the	one	hand	the	dewdrop	has	died.	But	on	the	other	hand	the	dewdrop
has	become	the	ocean.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Veet	Nito.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Nito	means
morality.
Religion	is	going	beyond	the	moral	and	the	immoral.	It	is	a	transcendence	of	all
duality.	 It	 is	 going	beyond	 the	good	 and	 the	bad.	 In	 fact	when	you	have	gone
beyond	good	and	bad	you	are	good.	When	you	have	gone	beyond	the	moral	and
the	immoral	you	are	for	the	first	time	really	moral.
These	three	words	have	to	be	understood.	One	is	sinner.	The	sinner	is	one	who
lives	an	immoral	life	against	the	nature	of	the	whole.	That	is	sin	--	going	against
the	totality.
The	 other	 word	 is	 "saint".	 He	 lives	 a	moral	 life,	 he	 tries	 hard	 to	 be	 with	 the
whole,	 but	 his	 effort	 creates	 a	 tension.	 His	 very	 desire	 to	 be	 with	 the	 whole,
never	 to	 go	 against	 it,	makes	 him	 egoistic.	He	 thinks	 himself	 holier-than-thou
because	he	is	following	a	moral	life,	a	virtuous	life,	the	religious	life.
And	the	third	word	is	"sage".	The	sage	is	one	who	is	neither	sinner	nor	a	saint,	A
sage	 is	 one	who	 has	 transcended	 all	moral	 and	 immoral	 ideas,	who	 is	 neither
trying	 to	 go	 against	 nor	 trying	 to	 go	with,	who	 is	 not	 trying	 at	 all,	who	 is	 so
relaxed,	 so	 utterly	 relaxed.	 Out	 of	 that	 relaxation	 he	 is	 in	 harmony	 with	 the
whole.	Out	of	that	let-go	he	lives	as	part	of	the	whole.	He	cannot	live	otherwise,
he	has	no	ego	anymore.
Ego	can	exist	only	when	you	are	striving	for	something	--	good	or	bad,	it	doesn't
matter.	Ego	can	exist	only	when	you	are	making	efforts	to	achieve	something.
The	sage	is	not	trying	to	achieve	anything	at	all.	My	sannyasins	have	to	be	sages,
not	saints.	The	saint	is	in	a	very	low	state,	a	little	better	than	the	sinner,	but	just	a
little	better	 and	not	 always.	Sometimes	 it	 is	 even	worse	 than	being	a	 sinner,	 it
depends.	Sometimes	the	sinner	is	humble	because	he	knows	he	is	a	sinner;	that
makes	him	humble.	And	the	saint	is	very	egoistic.	Of	course	his	is	a	very	pious
ego,	 but	 the	more	 pious	 the	 ego	 is,	 the	more	 poisonous	 it	 is.	 It	 has	 happened
many;	times	that	sinners	have	come	to	god's	door	more	easily	than	saints.
But	 my	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 remember	 that	 he	 has	 to	 transcend	 both.	 He	 has	 to
become	a	sage.
A	 sage	 is	 one	who	 is	 not	 striving	 for	 anything	 in	 particular,	who	has	 no	 goal,
who	 is	 not	 trying	 to	 achieve	 enlightenment,	moksha,	 nirvana,	 the	 kingdom	 of
god.	Those	are	all	gos	goals.	They	are	very	subtle	but	they	are	ego	goals.
The	 sage	 is	 one	 who	 has	 dropped	 the	 whole	 idea	 of	 achievement,	 who	 has
dropped	the	very	achieving	mind,	who	lives	moment	to	moment,	who	is	utterly
ordinary.	When	he	is	hungry	he	eats,	when	he	is	thirsty	he	drinks,	and	when	he	is
tires	 he	 sleeps;	 his	 life	 is	 very	 ordinary.	 But	 in	 that	 very	 ordinariness	 god	 is
found.
That	very	ordinariness	is	enlightenment.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Veet	Ahmo.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Ahmo	means
the	ego.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	 the	whole	process	of	 sannyas,	going	beyond	 the	ego.	Going	beyond	 the
idea	 'I	 am'.	 While	 this	 idea	 persists	 god	 cannot	 be	 experienced.	 This	 is	 the
barrier,	the	only	barrier,	there	is	no	other	barrier.	The	more	you	feet	that	you	are,
the	more	difficult	it	is	to	feel	the	presence	of	god,	because	that	presence	is	very
subtle	and	the	ego	is	very	gross.	The	ego	is	like	a	rock	and	the	presence	of	god	is
like	a	fragrance.	It	 is	not	even	like	a	flower	but	like	a	fragrance.	Now	the	rock
cannot	feet	the	fragrance,	it	is	insensitive.
The	ego	has	to	be	dissolved,	and	it	can	be	dissolved	because	it	is	a	false	entity.
We	have	created	 it.	 It	 is	a	created	phenomenon,	 it	does	not	exist	 in	reality.	We
are	not	born	with	it,	it	is	cultivated	later	on.	Slowly	slowly	we	teach	the	child	to
be	an	ego.	In	fact	the	day	the	child	says	"I	am,"	he	becomes	part	of	our	society.
Before	 that	he	remains	a	 little	wild,	before	 that	he	remains	more	natural,	more
spontaneous.
It	happens	somewhere	near	about	the	age	of	three	to	four.	In	girls	it	happens	near
about	 three,	 in	 boys,	 near	 about	 four.	 Boys	 are	 always	 lagging	 behind.	 Girls
come	to	maturity	a	little	sooner...	in	everything!
About	the	ego	also,	they	become	aware	of	it	first.	Even	small	girls	become	very
concerned	 about	 their	 image,	 their	 face	 --	 they	 look	 in	 the	mirror	 for	 hours	 --
their	dress	 and	 things	 like	 that	 ,	which	are	 all	 just	 arrangements	 for	 creating	a
beautiful	ego.
It	is	because	of	those	--	that	we	become	egos	near	about	three	or	four	--	that	we
can	only	 remember	after	 that	point.	 If	you	 try	 to	 remember	backward	you	will
come	to	remember	only	up	to	that	point	when	you	become	an	ego.	Before	that
there	is	blankness,	a	gap.
One	can	remember	things	that	happened	at	the	age	of	four	or	three.	And	that	will
be	decisive,	that	will	decide	when	the	ego	entered	into	your	world,	because	when
the	ego	enters	it	starts	collecting	memories.	It	is	a	great	collector	of	junk.	It	make
albums	of	all	kinds	of	stupid	things.
Before	 it	 comes	 into	 existence	 one	 lives	 moment	 to	 moment.	 Who	 cares	 to
remember	 the	 past?	 So	 the	 child	 up	 to	 the	 third	 or	 fourth	 year	 remains
spontaneous,	 wild,	 natural,	 outside	 society,	 on	 the	 fringe.	 It	 is	 a	 cultivated
phenomenon,	hence	it	can	be	dropped.	If	it	were	natural	there	would	be	no	way
to	drop	it.
Because	it	is	put	together	by	society	it	can	be	easily	dismantled.	And	that's	what
sannyas	is	all	about,	dismantling	the	ego.
The	process	is	painful	because	you	have	to	become	too	attached	to	it.	But	once
you	understand	that	the	ego	is	the	root	cause	of	all	your	misery,	you	are	ready	to
go	through	the	surgery.	It	is	better	to	be	finished	with	it	in	one	stroke	rather	than
to	go	on	being	miserable	for	your	whole	life.
The	 more	 intelligent	 a	 person	 is,	 the	 more	 ready	 he	 is	 to	 drop	 the	 ego.
Whatsoever	the	pain,	he	is	ready	to	accept	 it.	Once	the	ego	is	dropped	all	pain
disappears.	Life	takes	on	a	totally	different	color	and	form.
Then	you	function	without	any	idea	of	the	I.	You	function	as	part	of	the	whole	--
like	 trees,	 like	 clouds,	 like	 stars.	And	 certainly	 the	 same	 beauty	 and	 the	 same
grandeur	 is	 yours.	 The	 same	 beauty	 of	 the	 trees	 and	 the	 clouds	 and	 the	 stars
becomes	your	beauty.	And	 the	 same	silence	and	 the	 same	music	and	 the	 same
joy	and	the	same	celebration	prevails	in	your	being.
So	that	is	going	to	be	your	work:	kill	the	ego.	That	is	the	only	price	needed.	We
have	to	pay	it,	only	then	are	we	available	to	god,	and	god	is	available	to	us.	And
by	god	I	mean	the	whole	universe;	not	some	person	but	the	divine	presence	that
permeates	everything,	the	melody	of	all,	the	harmony	of	the	whole.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001245
ShortTitle:	RAFTER24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Satyam	Johannes.	Satyam	means	the	truth.	Johannes
means	god's	gift.
Truth	 is	never	an	achievement,	 it	 is	always	a	gift	 from	 the	beyond.	We	cannot
come	 to	 truth	 trough	 our	 own	 efforts,	 because	 whatsoever	 we	 do	 we	 will	 be
doing	 out	 of	 all	 kinds	 limitations,	 imperfections,	 unconsciousness,	 we	will	 be
doing	it	out	of	our	minds.	And	mind	has	no	capacity	to	know	the	unknown.
Mind	 can	 only	 mechanically	 repeat	 that	 which	 is	 already	 known.	 It	 is	 a
mechanism.	No	machine	can	ever	know	truth.
The	 body	 is	 a	 machine	 and	 the	 mind	 is	 a	 machine,	 but	 something	 in	 you	 is
beyond	both	body	and	mind.
That	is	the	capacity	to	be	aware,	when	there	is	only	awareness	and	nothing	else,
when	you	are	not	tethered	to	the	bodymind	complex	at	all,	truth	descends	upon
you.	It	comes	like	a	bird	descending	on	a	tree.
That	 is	 the	meaning	of	the	beautiful	story	of	when	Jesus	was	baptized	by	John
the	Baptist	in	the	river	Jordan	a	white	dove	descended	on	Jesus	from	the	above.
That	is	not	literally	true,	it	is	a	metaphor.	That	white	dove	represents	truth.
Remember	that	we	have	to	be	more	receptive,	more	open,	more	sensitive.	That's
all	 that	 is	needed	on	your	part.	When	you	are	 ripe,	 ready,	 truth	always	comes,
inevitably,	without	fail.	 It	always	comes	from	the	beyond,	and	 the	name	of	 the
beyond	is	god.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Alastair.	Dhyan	means	meditation.	Alastair	is
a	form	of	Alexander.	It	means	helper	of	mankind.
The	only	help	for	you	and	for	others	too,	comes	from	meditation,	because	it	 is
meditation	that	gives	you	roots	in	the	earth	and	wings	in	the	sky.	It	is	meditation
that	creates	that	space	in	which	your	potential	can	become	actual.	It	is	meditation
that	 functions	 like	 a	 soil	 for	 the	 seed	 to	 sprout.	And	 you	 can	 be	 a	 blessing	 to
others	only	if	you	have	first	been	a	blessing	to	yourself.	You	can	help	others	only
if	you	have	helped	yourself.	If	you	are	not	rooted,	centered,	mature	enough,	even
if	you	want	to	do	good	to	others	you	are	bound	to	do	harm.
That's	what	all	do-gooders	do:	 they	are	all	mischievous	people.	More	mischief
has	 been	 perpetuated	 by	 the	 so-called	 servants	 of	 humanity	 than	 by	 anybody
else.	 And	 the	 reason	 is	 not	 that	 their	 intention	 is	 bad	 --	 I	 never	 doubt	 their
intention,	 their	 intention	 is	 sincere	 --	 but	 they	 are	 not	 in	 that	 kind	 of	 space
themselves.
What	 they	 want	 to	 bring	 to	 others	 they	 themselves	 don't	 have.	 They	 want	 to
share	 love	but	 love	 is	not	 there	 in	 their	hearts.	They	want	 to	be	compassionate
but	compassion	comes	only	after	meditation,	it	is	a	shadow	of	meditation.	They
want	to	serve	people,	but	service	is	possible	only	when	the	ego	has	disappeared.
Otherwise	in	the	name	of	service	you	will	be	simply	going	on	an	ego	trip,	a	very
subtle	ego	trip.
Hence	 my	 effort	 here	 is	 not	 to	 make	 you	 servants	 of	 humanity,	 helpers	 of
humanity...	Not	that	I	am	against	serving	people	and	helping	people,	but	because
first	you	need	to	be	helped.	And	once	you	are	settled	in	your	being	and	the	chaos
has	disappeared,	once	you	have	become	really	grown	up,	you	will	serve.	There	is
no	 need	 to	 say	 anything	 about	 it,	 it	 has	 not	 even	 to	 be	mentioned.	 It	 is	 a	 by-
product.
If	you	grow	trees	and	they	bloom	they	are	bound	to	release	fragrance.	You	need
not	go	and	tell	the	flowers	'Please,	now	release	your	fragrance'.	And	if	they	are
plastic	flowers	you	can	go	on	telling	them	but	they	can't	do	it.
Meditation	has	to	become	the	center	of	your	life,	and	then	on	the	circumference,
ten	 thousand	 things	 become	 possible.	 Ten	 thousand	 things	 is	 a	 Chinese
metaphor;	it	means	millions	of	things	become	possible.
In	fact	everything	becomes	possible.	Even	the	impossible	is	no	more	impossible.
Meditation	 is	 the	 greatest	 miracle	 there	 is.	 Devote	 all	 your	 energies	 to
meditation.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Antar	Laura.	Antar	means	inner.	Laura	means	victory.
The	real	victory	is	always	inner.	It	is	victory	over	yourself.	The	unreal	victory	is
over	others	and	it	is	ugly.	To	conquer	somebody	else	is	to	destroy,	is	to	reduce
him	 to	 a	 thing,	 because	 by	 conquering	 you	 become	 the	 possessor	 and	 he
becomes	 the	 possessed.	The	very	 effort	 to	 conquer	 somebody	 else	 is	 basically
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
inhuman.	But	there	is	a	desire	to	be	victorious.	It	needs	the	right	direction.
Desire	 in	 itself	 is	 not	wrong,	 but	 if	 it	moves	 outwards	 it	will	 bring	misery	 to
others	and	misery	to	you	too,	because	whenever	you	are	trying	to	conquer	others
they	 are	 bound	 to	 react;	 sooner	 or	 later	 they	 will	 take	 revenge,	 and	 with	 a
vengeance.	 It	brings	violence	 to	 life,	 it	brings	conflict.	And	 to	 live	 in	violence
and	conflict	is	to	live	in	misery.
The	desire	to	be	victorious	has	to	be	directed	inwards.	And	there	there	are	real
enemies	to	be	conquered:	anger,	greed,	jealousy,	and	so	on,	so	forth.	These	are
the	 real	 enemies.	 They	 can	 all	 be	 reduced	 to	 a	 single	 enemy,	 that	 is
unconsciousness.	They	all	grow	out	of	it.
The	 unconscious	 has	 to	 be	 conquered,	 the	 unconscious	 has	 to	 be	 made
conscious.	That	is	victory,	true	victory.	And	when	you	are	full	of	consciousness,
when	not	even	a	small	pocket	of	unconsciousness	remains	in	you,	when	not	even
in	nooks	and	corners	is	any	darkness	left	behind,	then	life	is	known	for	the	first
time	with	all	its	beauty,	with	all	its	splendor.	And	to	know	that	is	to	know	god.
God	 is	 nothing	 but	 life	 in	 its	 true	 colors,	 life	 in	 its	 true	music,	 life	 in	 its	 true
celebration.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anne	Marie.	Anne	means	prayer.	Marie	means	fragrance.
Prayer	 is	 a	 flower,	 the	 ultimate	 flowering	 of	 consciousness.	 There	 is	 nothing
higher	 than	 that,	 it	 is	 love	 at	 its	 crescendo.	 And	 naturally	 great	 fragrance	 is
released.
A	man	of	prayer	 is	a	man	of	great	 love.	He	is	 in	 total	 love	with	existence.	His
whole	life	is	a	love	affair.
Each	moment	is	a	joy	because	each	moment	brings	new	surprises,	each	moment
brings	great	gifts.	No	moment	is	ever	empty.
It	is	because	of	our	blindness	that	we	cannot	see	the	beauty.	It	is	because	of	our
deafness	 that	we	cannot	hear	 the	music,	otherwise	 the	music	 is	 all	 around,	 the
beauty	is	surrounding	you.	But	you	have	to	rise	to	a	higher	level	to	experience	it.
These	are	the	three	planes	that	human	energy	can	give	rise	 to	take.	The	first	 is
sex,	the	second	is	love,	the	third	is	prayer.	It	is	the	same	energy	moving	higher,
becoming	less	and	less	gross,	becoming	more	and	more	subtle.
Sex	is	energy	moving	downwards.	It	functions	under	the	law	of	gravitation.	The
earth	pulls	it	down.	It	is	earthy,	it	is	physiological,	biological,	chemical.	Science
can	study	it.	It	is	available	to	scientific	methodology.	It	is	material.
Love	 is	higher.	 It	 is	exactly	 in	 the	middle	of	sex	and	prayer.	a	 little	bit	of	 it	 is
available,	just	a	little	bit	penetrates	times.	A	part	of	it	 is	available	to	all	human
beings,	 but	 the	 other	 part	 is	 available	 only	 to	 those	who	 start	moving	 into	 the
inner	search,	only	to	the	religious	people.
The	 first	 part	 that	 is	 available	 to	 ordinary	 human	 beings	 is	 unconscious.	 The
second	part	is	conscious.
When	love	becomes	conscious	then	you	experience	for	the	first	time	something
that	is	beyond	gravitation,	that	does	not	go	downwards	but	goes	upwards.
And	the	third	is	prayer.
Sex	goes	downwards,	 love	goes	upwards,	prayer	goes	nowhere.	 It	 is	a	 state	of
being.	Sex	is	movement,	so	is	love;	they	move	is	polar	opposite	directions.	But
prayer	 is	 a	 still	 point,	 there	 is	 no	movement,	 no	 journey,	 no	 pilgrimage.	 You
simply	are.
In	that	profound	silence	and	stillness	when	you	simply	are,	you	become	aware	of
god.	The	whole	existence	becomes	full	of	godliness.	And	it	is	not	only	that	you
experience	godliness.	People	who	will	come	close	to	you,	people	who	are	open
to	you,	will	also	feel	something	strange,	mysterious,	miraculous.	They	will	have
a	whiff	of	the	unknown.	In	some	moments	they	may	become	aware	of	a	certain
aura	around	you.
That	is	the	fragrance	of	prayer.
We	have	depicted	 it	as	a	white	aura	around	Buddhas,	Krishnas,	Christs,	 just	 to
give	an	indication	that	something	mysterious	surrounds	these	people.	Of	course
not	 everybody	 becomes	 aware	 if	 it.	 The	 people	who	 crucified	 Jesus	were	 not
aware	 of	 it,	 otherwise	 they	would	 not	 have	 been	 able	 to	 kill	 him.	 They	were
blind,	utterly	blind.
One	needs	a	certain	sensitivity.	The	higher	the	phenomenon,	the	more	sensitivity
is	 needed.	And	prayer	 is	 the	highest	 phenomenon,	 nothing	 is	 higher	 than	 that.
Everything	is	lover	than	that.
So	a	few	people	who	are	open,	available,	who	can	look	upwards	towards	the	sky
full	of	stars,	who	can	see	the	beauty	of	the	sunset,	who	can	see	the	beauty	of	a
sunrise,	these	are	the	people	who	will	be	able	to	feel.	It	is	a	feeling.	You	cannot
grasp	it,	you	cannot	cling	to	it.	It	is	not	matter,	not	measurable,	it	is	not	visible.
But	it	is	a	feeling.	The	heart	starts	dancing.	That	is	the	fragrance.
Anne	Marie	is	a	beautiful	name...	But	you	have	to	change	it,	you	have	to	give	it
to	Laura.	Right?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anutoshen.	Anutoshen	means	contentment.
Mind	 lives	 in	 discontentment.	 That	 is	 its	 food.	 To	 be	 discontented	 is	 its
nourishment.	 If	 you	 become	 contented	 mind	 dies	 out	 of	 starvation...	 and	 the
mind	 has	 to	 die,	 only	 then	 you	 can	 know	who	 you	 are.	 So	 learn	 the	ways	 of
being	contented.
Whatsoever	is,	feel	grateful	for	it.	Don't	ask	for	more	and	you	will	be	cutting	the
very	roots	of	the	mind.
Mind	 lives	 in	 the	more.	 If	 you	have	money	 it	 says,	 "Have	more."	 If	 you	have
knowledge	it	says,	"Have	more."	Whatsoever	you	have	--	it	doesn't	matter	what
it	is	--	mind	says	"More",	and	it	goes	on	saying
"More,	more..."	When	you	have	attained	that,	again	it	is	there	asking	for	more.
That	more	is	unquenchable.
Seeing	 the	 absurdity	 of	 it,	 one	 drops	 it.	 One	 no	 more	 runs	 after	 the	 horizon
because	one	knows	there	is	no	horizon.	It	only	appears.	It	looks	so	close	by,	just
ten,	 fifteen	miles	away.	 If	you	 run	you	can	 reach	within	 two	hours,	but	by	 the
time	you	reach	there,	it	is	not	there;	it	is	again	fifteen	miles	ahead.	It	is	always
fifteen	miles	ahead.	There	is	no	way	to	bridge	the	gap.
The	more	 is	 the	horizon	and	mind	 is	always	asking	 for	 it;	hence	mind	 lives	 in
misery.	Mind	 is	 hell.	 And	 the	 best	 way	 to	 cut	 its	 roots	 is:	 to	 drop	 asking	 for
more.	Rather	start	enjoying	that	which	is	available.	Rather	than	being	miserable
because	you	don't	have	more,	be	blissful	for	whatsoever	you	have	and	enjoy	it,
relish	 it,	 rejoice	 in	 it.	And	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 immediately	 you	 are	 the
richest	person	in	the	world,	immediately	you	are	no	more	a	beggar.
And	once	the	more	disappears,	the	mind	disappears.	Mind	is	equivalent	to	more
and	more	and	more.	Let	the	mind	die	so	that	you	can	be	reborn.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anugiten.	Anugiten	means	a	little	song,	a	small
song	--	and	that's	all	that	is	required	to	a	sannyasin:	a	little	singing,	a	little	dance,
a	little	of	the	art	and	knack	of	rejoicing	in	life.
Life	consists	of	small	things,	but	if	one	knows	the	art	of	transforming	them	then
small	things	start	becoming	extraordinary.
Sannyas	is	a	magic	touch.	It	transforms	dust	into	gold,	dust	into	divine.	And	the
art	is	simple,	it	is	not	complicated.	The	fundamental	is	to	cut	yourself	from	the
past.	It	hangs	around	your	neck	like	a	heavy	weight.	There	are	many	rocks	and
you	are	carrying	them,	it	is	such	a	burden.	Drop	them	and	immediately	you	feel
a	 great	 relief.	 You	 would	 like	 to	 sing	 and	 dance	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 being
relieved	of	all	that	burden.
The	 second	 part	 of	 the	 secret	 is,	 don't	 imagine	 the	 future,	 don't	 project	 in	 the
future,	because	 that	 also	creates	a	burden.	Once	you	expect	 something	you	arr
creating	difficulties	for	yourself.	It	is	never	going	to	happen	the	way	you	expect
it	for	the	simple	reason	that	you	are	a	small	part	of	such	a	vast	universe	and	the
universe	 cannot	 follow	 your	 whims.	 It	 goes	 its	 own	 way,	 unconcerned	 about
what	 you	 expect,	 that	 you	want.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 neutral	 about	 your	wants	 and
desired.	 It	 cares	 for	 you	 but	 it	 does	 not	 care	 for	 your	 desires,	 no,	 not	 at	 all,
because	if	it	starts	caring	about	everybody's	desires	the	whole	universe	will	be	in
a	chaos.	It	will	never	be	at	rest	again.	There	will	be	no	cosmos.	All	harmony	will
disappear.
So	 it	 cares	 for	 you,	 but	 is	 does	 not	 care	 for	 all	 kinds	 of	 insane	 desires	 and
expectations	and	plans.	So	whenever	you	desire	you	are	creating	a	situation	 in
which	you	will	feel	frustrated.	Expect,	and	you	are	bound	to	feel	frustrated.	Cut
yourself	 off	 from	 the	past	 and	 the	 future	 and	 live	 in	 the	present,	 and	your	 life
becomes	a	song	and	a	dance.	Then	just	eating,	drinking,	taking	a	bath,	going	for
a	morning	walk...	 and	all	 is	 suddenly	golden,	 and	 so	many	 flowers	 shower	on
you	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all.	 You	 can't	 contain	 it	 --	 so	 much	 bliss	 arrives.	 You
become	overflooded,	you	have	to	share	it.
That's	what	a	song	is	--	sharing	your	bliss,	expressing	your	bliss,	inviting	others
to	partake	of	your	bliss.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anutosho.	Anutosho	means	absolutely	satisfied,
utterly	satisfied,	no	desire	for	anything	else,	a	state	of	non-desire.
Desire	means	that	you	are	not	satisfied	with	the	way	things	are.	You	would	like
things	 according	 to	 you....	 Satisfaction	 means	 that	 you	 are	 surrendered	 to
existence	 so	whatsoever	 it	 gives,	 you	 are	 grateful.	 If	 it	 gives	 nothing	 you	 are
grateful	that	it	gives	nothing.
A	Sufi	mystic	used	 to	 thank	god	every	day.	After	his	prayers	he	would	almost
shout	with	 joy	 'God,	how	much	you	give	me,	how	much	you	 take	care	of	me,
how	much	you	love	me!	How	can	I	ever	repay?'	And	he	would	cry	tears	of	joy.
His	 disciples	 were	 a	 little	 worried	 because	 they	 could	 not	 see	 why	 he	 was
thanking	god	so	much.	But	they	could	not	say	anything,	 in	the	East	 the	master
has	to	be	respected,	obeyed.	But	deep	down	in	their	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
minds	the	question	was	always	there,	and	a	situation	arose	in	which	they	felt	that
now	it	was	absolutely	right	to	ask.	They	were	travelling,	going	to	Kaaba	for	the
holy	pilgrimage,	and	for	three	days	they	could	not	get	any	food,	and	no	village
was	 ready	 to	give	 them	shelter	because	 the	master	was	a	known	 revolutionary
and	the	people	ware	very	orthodox.
So	for	three	nights	they	has	to	sleep	in	the	desert,	and	the	desert	was	very	cold.
Without	 food,	without	water,	 they	were	 utterly	 tired.	And	 the	 third	 day	 again,
after	his	prayer	the	mystic	started	crying	with	joy	and	said	'God,	how	much	you
do	 for	me!	How	can	 I	 ever	 repay	 it?	How	much	care	you	 take?	How	can	you
remember	 me?	 You	 have	 to	 take	 care	 of	 such	 a	 vast	 universe	 --	 still	 you
remember	me.'
The	disciples	gathered	together	and	they	said	'Enough	is	enough.	Now	what	are
you	thanking	him	for?
For	three	days	we	have	no	food,	no	water,	no	shelter.	We	are	dying	from	the	cold
nights...	and	you	are	thinking	god	and	crying	tears	of	joy.	For	what?'
The	master	said	'It	is	good	that	you	have	asked.	I	always	know	that	you	carried
this	question	within	you	but	you	were	not	courageous	enough	to	ask.	Now	I	can
answer	it.	I	am	thanking	him	for	keeping	me	for	three	days	without	food,	without
water,	without	shelter,	because	this	is	what	I	needed.	He	always	gives	that	which
is	needed.	It	is	not	a	question	of	my	expectations	being	fulfilled,	it	is	his	will	that
has	 to	be	 fulfilled	 and	whatsoever	he	wills	 is	 right.	We	may	understand	 it,	we
may	not.	But	this	was	my	need	and	he	has	fulfilled	it	and	I	am	grateful.'
This	 is	what	 I	mean	 by	 true	 contentment.	And	 if	 one	 can	 be	 in	 such	 a	 space,
nothing	else	is	needed.
Meditation	arrives	on	its	own,	because	mind	dies.	You	need	not	do	anything	to
destroy	it,	it	disappears	of	its	own	accord.
Mind	is	like	darkness	and	contentment	is	like	light.	Bring	contentment	in	and	the
darkness	disappears.
And	then	you	can	see.	For	the	first	 time	you	can	see	and	for	the	first	 time	you
can	 hear	 and	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 can	 feel.	 Because	 mind	 is	 hindering
everything,	 it	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 see,	 it	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 hear.	 It	 is
standing	between	you	and	existence.	Once	it	is	not	there	you	are	available	to	god
and	god	is	available	to	you.	That	is	liberation,	nirvana,	enlightenment.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Anugito.	It	means	a	song.
My	 approach	 towards	 life	 is	 of	 total	 affirmation.	 I	 don't	 teach	 renunciation,	 I
teach	rejoicing.	I	want	you	to	love	life	with	you	total	heart.	When	you	are	in	life
with	a	total	heart	thousands	of	songs	will	arise	out	of	you.	Each	moment	brings	a
song.	Slowly	slowly	your	whole	life	becomes	just	an	instrument	of	music.	And
once	you	have	known	that	great	music	is	possible	through	you,	you	have	come
to	recognize	your	potential.
Then	 there	 is	no	end	 to	 it.	You	can	go	on	playing	new	songs,	new	music.	You
can	go	on	creating.
That	 creativity	 is	 sannyas.	 Creating	 music	 out	 of	 your	 heart	 is	 sannyas.
Becoming	a	song	is	sannyas.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Vipassana.	Vipassana	is	one	of	the	most	significant
methods	of	meditation.
Buddha	 became	 enlightened	 through	 it	 and	 many	 more	 people	 have	 become
enlightened	 through	 it	 than	 through	 any	 other	 method.	 It	 is	 tremendously
beautiful	and	yet	very	simple.	Even	a	child	can	do	it.
The	method	consists	of	watching	your	breath.	Whenever	you	have	 time,	when
you	have	nothing	to	do,	just	sit	silently,	seeing	the	breath	coming	in.	Follow	it.	It
goes	 to	 the	 very	 depth.	 Then	 there	 is	 a	 pause,	 for	 a	 moment	 there	 is	 no
movement,	 the	 breath	 stops	 there.	 Watch	 that	 pause.	 That	 is	 very	 important
because	 that	 is	 the	 door	 into	 your	 being.	 Then	 the	 breath	 starts	 coming	 out.
Watch	it	again.	It	goes	out	completely,	then	again	there	is	a	pause,	for	a	moment
breathing	stops.	That	too	is	a	door.
One	is	the	door	into	the	inner	reality,	the	other	is	the	door	into	the	outer	reality.	If
you	enter	from	the	inner	door	you	enter	from	the	self	into	god.	If	you	enter	from
the	outer	door	you	enter	 through	god	into	the	self.	They	are	two	aspects	of	 the
same	coin.
But	 remember,	 the	 breathing	 is	 not	 to	 be	 changed,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 natural	 as	 it	 is
always.	You	are	not	to	make	any	effort	to	make	it	longer,	deeper.	There	should
be	no	change	at	all,	leave	it	as	it	is.	The	only	thing	that	has	to	be	introduced	is	a
witness,	a	watcher.
So	you	name	is	going	to	be	your	method	of	liberation.	First	do	it	sitting	and	then
slowly	slowly	you	will	manage	to	do	it	walking,	then	finally	you	will	manage	to
do	it	while	doing	other	kinds	of	things:	cooking,	taking	your	bath,	cleaning	the
floor.	 Only	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 remembered:	 never	 to	 it	 in	 the	 night	 --	 only
between	sunrise	and	sunset.
If	 you	 do	 it	 in	 the	 night	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 sleep,	 because	 it	 creats	 such
wakefulness.	 So	 only	 between	 sunrise	 and	 sunset...	 And	 if	 you	 feel	 that	 your
sleep	 is	 being	 disturbed,	 then	 reduce	 the	 time.	 Then	 do	 it	 not	 even	 between
sunset	and	sunrise,	but	for	two	hours	after	sunrise	or	for	two	hours	before	sunset,
just	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
between	 that	 time.	 You	 have	 to	 find	 out...	 because	 it	 differs	 from	 person	 to
person.
There	are	a	few	people	who	can	enjoy	it	even	in	the	night,	but	it	is	very	rare.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Dhyano.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Dhyano	 means
meditation.
Love	 is	 a	path	unto	 itself,	 and	 so	 is	meditation.	One	can	 follow	either	 love	or
meditation;	 both	 lead	 to	 the	 same	 goal.	 But	 there	 are	 a	 few	 people	 who	 can
follow	both,	and	of	course	their	journey	is	far	richer.	And	that	is	going	to	be	the
work	for	you:	love	as	deeply	as	possible	and	meditate	as	deeply	as	possible	and
go	on	moving	between	the	two.	Remain	fluid,	flexible.
The	lover	finds	it	difficult	to	meditate	because	he	needs	the	other	and	meditation
means	 to	be	alone.	The	meditator	 finds	 it	difficult	 to	 love	because	he	becomes
accustomed	to	being	alone	and	the	freedom	of	being	alone.	The	very	presence	of
the	other	seems	to	be	a	transgression,	an	interference,	a	disturbance.
So	ordinarily	 it	 is	 simple	 to	 follow	one,	but	 if	you	can	manage	both	 then	your
life	will	have	more	richness.	The	meditator	knows	only	the	beauty	of	aloneness.
He	knows	nothing	of	the	beauty	of	togetherness.	The	lover	knows	the	beauty	of
togetherness	 but	 is	 unaware	 of	 the	 beauty	 of	 being	 alone.	 And	 there	 is	 no
necessity	that	one	should	miss	the	beauty	of	the	other,	just	one	has	to	be	a	little
more	 intelligent	 to	 follow	 both,	 because	 things	 become	 complicated.	 You	 are
handling	a	more	complicated	process.
So	when	you	are	with	somebody	--	with	a	friend,	with	a	beloved,	with	the	trees,
with	the	clouds,	with	the	moon	--	dissolve	yourself	totally	into	it;	forget	yourself,
as	if	you	are	not,	be	drunk.	And	when	you	close	your	eyes,	forget	the	clouds,	the
woman,	the	friend,	the	stars,	as	if	the	world	has	disappeared.	You	are	alone	and
there	exists	nothing	else;	 all	 else	 is	 illusory.	Go	on	moving	between	 these	 two
with	a	natural	ease,	and	you	will	be	surprised	that	then	they	enhance	each	other.
When	you	have	been	 together	with	somebody	and	you	go	 into	aloneness,	your
aloneness	 has	 more	 depth.	 When	 you	 have	 been	 alone	 and	 you	 move	 with
somebody,	your	love	has	more	energy	to	share.	It	has	more	intensity.	It	is	more
warm.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 difficult	 task...	 but	 try!	And	 if	 you	 fail,	 if	 you	 find	 it	 very
difficult,	then	you	can	always	choose	one.	But	my	feeling	is	that	you	will	be	able
to	manage	both	together.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001255
ShortTitle:	RAFTER25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Douglas.	Deva	means	divine.	Douglas	means
dark	water.
For	 centuries	 gos	 has	 ben	 thought	 of	 as	 light.	 That	 is	 because	 of	 our	 fear	 of
darkness.	Not	that	god	is	only	light,	god	is	as	much	light	as	he	is	darkness.	God
has	 to	 be	 both,	 otherwise	 darkness	 would	 not	 exist	 at	 all.	 God	 has	 to	 be	 the
lowest	and	the	highest,	matter	and	mind.	God	has	to	be	the	whole,	and	the	whole
contains	the	polar	opposite.	God	cannot	be	only	light.	It	is	because	of	our	fear	of
darkness	that	we	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
never	thought	of	god	as	dark,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	god.	And	to	approach	god
through	fear	 is	not	 the	right	approach.	God	should	be	approached	fearlessly,	 in
deep	love	but	not	out	of	fear.
If	you	look	with	fear	you	will	project	your	fear,	you	will	see	things	which	are	not
there	and	you	will	not	see	things	which	are	there.	When	you	are	not	afraid	you
look	with	absolute	clarity.	Fear	is	like	smoke	surrounding	you,	like	clouds,	and
god	can	be	seen	only	with	clarity,	absolute	clarity,	unconditional	clarity,	clarity
and	nothing	else.	Then	god	is	both,	he	is	as	much	light	as	dark.	Then	he	is	both
summer	and	winter,	life	and	death.	Then	the	duality	disappears	and	a	tremendous
oneness	 arises	 in	 your	 vision.	 That	 oneness	 brings	 bliss.	 That	 oneness	 brings
freedom.
We	are	bound	by	the	dual	and	we	can	be	freed	only	by	the	one.	As	Plotinus	says:
the	search	for	god	is	a	flight	of	the	alone	to	the	alone.
Hence	 Douglas	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name	 --	 dark	 water.	 I	 am	 simply	 adding	 a	 new
depth	it	it.	I	am	calling	it	divine	dark	water.	Start	looking	at	darkness	as	divine.
start	looking	at	everything	as	divine,	because	all	is	divine	whether	we	know	it	or
not,	whether	we	 recognize	 it	 or	 not.	Our	 recognition	 is	 irrelevant,	 existence	 is
divine.	 If	 we	 recognize	 it	 we	 rejoice;	 if	 we	 don't	 recognize	 it	 we	 suffer
unnecessarily.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Deva	 Henner.	 Deva	 means	 divine.	 Henner	 means
home.
Man	has	to	be	a	host	to	god.	Man	has	to	be	a	womb,	a	home,	receptivity.	That	is
the	most	fundamental	thing	to	be	understood	about	god.	A	woman	simply	means
man	with	a	womb.	That	is	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	word	woman:	womb-man.
One	cannot	conquer	god,	one	can	only	be	conquered.	One	cannot	be	aggressive
towards	 truth,	 the	 very	 aggressiveness	 will	 be	 the	 barrier.	 One	 can	 only	 be
vulnerable,	available,	open.	One	has	to	become	a	host.
The	moment	one	is	really	a	host	god	appears	as	a	guest.
Become	a	home	of	god!	Unless	that	happens	life	has	been	meaningless.
Sannyas	is	just	the	art	of	making	you,	preparing	you	to	be	a	home	for	god,	as	a
residence	 for	 the	 truth,	 for	 the	 ultimate,	 as	 a	 receptacle	 for	 that	 which	 is.	 Of
course	ultimately	the	guest	and	the	host	become	one.	It	is	only	in	the	beginning
that	you	are	a	host	and	god	is	the	guest.	The	moment	he	enters	into	the	host	both
disappear	 into	 one	 unity.	 Then	 the	 guest	 is	 not	 found,	 the	 host	 is	 not	 found;
something	new	arises	out	of	this	meeting.	That	is	resurrection.	That	is	the	birth
of	the	unknown	and	the	unknowable	in	you.	And	one	knows	life	at	its	ultimate
peak,	in	its	absolute	joyousness,	as	a	blessing,	as	a	benediction,	only	then	when
the	host	and	the	guest	become	one.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Sandy.	Anand	means	bliss,	sandy	means	a	helper
of	mankind	--	a	blissful	helper	of	mankind.
One	can	become	a	helper	 for	 two	reasons:	either	out	of	misery	or	out	of	bliss.
One	can	be	a	servant	to	humanity	out	of	misery,.	One	can	become	interested	in
others'	misery	 just	 on	 avoid	one's	misery.	 Just	 to	 remain	occupied	with	others'
problems,	so	that	one	need	not	look	at	one's	own	problems.	One	can	become	too
involved	with	others'	problems,	for	the	simple	reason	that	their	problems	are	so
big,	so	great,	so	complicated,	that	in	comparison	your	problems	look	very	tine,
small,	meaningless.
Out	 of	 one	 hundred,	 ninety-nice	 so-called	 public	 servants	 are	 public	 servants
only	because	of	misery.
They	are	miserable	people	and	they	have	not	the	guts	to	encounter	their	misery,
they	are	not	courageous	enough	to	face	it	so	the	best	way	is	to	become	involved
in	 others'	 misery.	 It	 gives	 you	 consolation,	 you	 are	 not	 the	 only	 one	 who	 is
miserable.	Millions	 are	miserable,	more	miserable	 than	 you	 are.	What	 is	 your
misery	compared	to	their	misery?	That	is	a	great	consolation.
But	a	person	who	becomes	a	helper	or	a	servant	out	of	misery	is	never	really	a
helper,	he	harms	people.
Because	you	can	give	to	people	only	that	which	you	have	got	in	the	first	place.	If
you	are	miserable	you	will	carry	infections	of	misery	with	you,	you	will	vibrate
misery,	you	will	pulsate	misery,	you	will	create	misery	in	people	in	such	subtle
ways	that	you	may	not	even	become	aware	of	what	you	are	doing.
That's	what	the	so-called	missionaries	of	all	the	religions	have	been	doing	down
the	ages.	They	go	 to	help	people	but	 they	simply	make	 them	feel	more	guilty.
They	 create	 misery	 for	 others.	 In	 the	 name	 of	 service	 they	 destroy	 people's
integrity,	 their	confidence,	 their	self-respect.	In	 the	name	of	service	they	create
such	guilt	in	them	that	they	lose	all	confidence	in	themselves.	They	become	self-
condemnors.	They	start	feeling	that	they	are	sinners	and	that	they	are	doomed...
their	sins	are	so	much	that	they	are	bound	to	go	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
hell.	Their	lives	become	burdened.	And	this	is	because	of	the	people	who	wanted
to	help	them.
All	 the	so-called	 religious	people	have	been	harming	and	poisoning	people	 for
the	 simple	 reason	 that	 their	 own	 misery	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 their	 so-called
service,	help,	mission.
In	my	 approach	 only	 a	 blissful	 person	 can	 be	 a	 helper	 of	mankind,	 because	 a
blissful	person	can	share	his	bliss	and	a	blissful	person	can	accept	people	with	all
their	 limitations.	He	understands,	he	 is	capable	of	understanding.	And	he	 is	 so
blissful	 that	he	cannot	call	people	sinners,	he	cannot	see	any	sin	anywhere.	He
sees	only	gods	and	goddesses	everywhere.	It	is	impossible	for	him	to	believe	that
there	is	a	hell.	If	there	is	a	god	there	cannot	be	a	hell.	If	there	is	hell	then	there
can	 be	 no	 god,	 because	 god	 means	 compassion.	 If	 god	 cannot	 forgive	 small
sins...	who	will	be	able	to	forgive	if	even	god	is	incapable	of	forgiving?
And	what	are	people's	sins?	Somebody	is	smoking	cigarettes...	and	that	is	sin.	It
may	 be	 a	 little	 stupid,	 silly,	 taking	 the	 smoke	 in	 and	 out,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of
pranayama,	a	stupid	kind	of	pranayama.	You	could	have	 taken	fresh	air	 in	and
out	 and	 it	would	 have	 been	 far	more	 hygienicly	 and	 healthy	medically	 too.	 It
may	be	a	little	suicidal	but	it	is	not	sin.
But	 people	 have	 been	 condemned	 for	 small	 things.	 There	 are	 religions	 that
condemn	tea	as	a	sin.
Drinking	tea	means	that	you	are	bound	for	hell.	If	 that	is	true	then	I	am	bound
for	hell!	(laughter)	I	must	drink	more	tea	than	anybody	else	in	the	whole	world.
Everything	becomes	a	condemnation.	Because	of	their	misery	the	person	wants
to	 condemn,	 he	 wants	 to	 create	 more	 problems	 for	 you.	 That	 is	 his	 way	 of
distracting	his	own	mind,	he	directs	it	towards	others'
problems.	And	 these	well-wishers,	 these	 do-gooders	 have	destroyed	 the	whole
dignity	 and	beauty	 of	 human	beings.	They	have	 been	 a	 calamity.	Real	 service
arises	out	of	bliss.
So	 I	 don't	 talk	 about	 service,	 I	 don't	 talk	 about	helping	others	 --	 in	 that	way	 I
teach	 you	 selfishness.	 I	 teach	 you	 to	 be	 blissful	 because	 I	 know,	 and	 I	 know
absolutely,	that	if	you	are	blissful	you	are	bound	to	share	it.	Nobody	can	contain
it.	If	you	are	blissful	you	are	bound	to	serve	people.	And	when	service	comes	out
of	bliss	it	has	a	fragrance	of	its	own,	a	beauty,	a	grace.	It	is	something	divine.	Its
very	touch	is	healing.	It	transforms	dust	into	gold.
So	first	become	a	blissful	person	and	then	you	can	be	Sandy!
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Prem	Maria.	Prem	means	love.	Maria	means	fragrance.
Love	can	exist	on	many	planes.	 It	 is	 like	a	 ladder	with	many	 rungs	which	 run
from	the	lowest	to	the	highest,	from	the	earthly	to	the	heavenly.	The	lowest	kind
of	 love	 expresses	 itself	 as	 sex.	 It	 is	 gross,	 it	 is	 physical,	 biological,	 chemical,
hormonal.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 grain	 of	 love	 in	 it.	 Ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 of	 it	 is
something	else,	but	one	per	cent	of	 love	exists	 in	 it.	And	that	one	per	cent	can
take	you	higher.	That	one	per	cent	can	become	the	small	thread	that	joins	you	to
the	higher	planes	of	love.	That's	why	I	am	not	against	sex,	because	it	contains	a
bridge	--	a	very	small	bridge	and	available	only	to	very	alert	people.	Otherwise
ninety-nine	per	cent	of	it	is	just	mud,	only	one	per	cent	is	lotus.
To	 find	 that	one	per	cent	one	has	 to	be	very	meditative,	very	alert.	Sex	has	 to
become	 a	 meditation,	 only	 then	 can	 you	 find	 out	 where	 that	 one	 per	 cent	 is.
That's	the	whole	art	of	Tantra,	making	sex	a	meditation.
Then	slowly	slowly	you	start	stumbling	upon	those	few	moments	which	are	not
sexual	at	all	but	which	happen	through	sex,	those	few	moments	when	you	take
off.	Of	 course	 the	ground	 is	 sex,	 but	 you	 take	off	 from	 the	ground.	For	 a	 few
moments	you	are	not	on	the	earth.
Those	moments	when	you	dissolve,	when	 the	other	disappears,	when	 there	are
not	two	bodies	but	one,	not	two	minds	but	one,	not	even	two	souls	but	one,	are
really	 the	 orgasmic	moments.	 For	 a	moment	 the	 ego	 has	 evaporated,	 time	has
stopped	 and	 you	 are	 in	 contact	with	 eternity.	But	 the	moment	 is	 so	 small	 that
unless	 you	 are	 very	 meditative	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 miss	 it.	 You	 may	 come	 to
realize	it	later	or	when	it	is	no	more,	but	then	it	is	pointless,	it	is	only	a	memory.
People	 go	 on	 doing	 that.	 They	 imagine	 that	moment,	 hence	 the	 hankering	 for
sex.	They	continuously	 imagine	 that	moment,	 that	 it	 is	going	 to	happen,	 some
day,	 somewhere,	 with	 someone.	 They	 fantasize,	 it	 is	 in	 the	 future.	 For	 they
remember	it:	it	happened	somewhere,	some	time,	with	someone	--	but	it	is	past.
Both	are	non-existential.	The	past	is	no	more,	the	future	is	not	yet.
Meditation	 means	 catching	 the	 orgasmic	 reality	 of	 sex	 in	 the	 present,	 not
somewhere	 else	 but	 now	 and	 here.	When	 you	 are	 deeply	 involved	 in	 sex	 you
have	to	be	very	very	alert	so	that	you	don't	miss	the	orgasmic	moment	and	you
can	see	through	it.	It	becomes	transparent,	 it	brings	the	world	of	the	beyond	to
you.
For	the	first	time	you	become	aware	that	sex	contains	something	which	is	non-
sexual.	In	fact	that's	the	real	center	of	the	whole	sexuality.	To	miss	it	is	to	miss
all.	Just	as	the	body	contains	the	soul	and	matter	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
contains	the	spirit,	sex	contains	something	which	is	not	sex	--	that	is	love.	And
once	you	have	become	aware	of	it	you	can	start	growing	more	and	more	towards
it,	you	can	start	changing	more	and	more	energy	towards	it.	You	will	know	the
knack	of	it.	Just	by	becoming	aware	of	what	it	is,	you	will	know	how	to	create
more	and	more	energy,	moving	in	that	direction	you	will	know	how	to	create	that
space	more	and	more.
Soon	one	can	create	it	without	any	sex	at	all,	without	any	need	of	the	other.	That
is	 the	 day	 of	 great	 celebration	 in	 life,	when	 you	 can	 be	 orgasmic	without	 any
need,	without	any	dependence	on	the	other.	Then	love	becomes	a	pure	fragrance.
Then	it	is	not	even	a	flower	but	an	invisible	fragrance.	That	fragrance	is	the	goal,
the	 goal	 of	 life,	 and	 unless	 one	 attains	 it	 one	 remains	 unfulfilled.	 Unless	 one
attains	it	one	remains	just	a	seed	which	does	contain	the	fragrance,	but	first	it	has
to	become	a	 tree	 and	 then	 it	 has	 to	 bloom	and	only	 then	 can	 the	 fragrance	be
released.	You	cannot	find	it	by	cutting	the	seed.	You	will	simply	destroy	the	seed
and	 you	will	 not	 find	 anything,	 no	 fragrance,	 It	 is	 there,	 but	 unmanifest.	 Sex
contains	 love	 in	 an	 unmanifest	 form.	 It	 has	 to	 be	 manifested,	 and	 the	 more
manifest	it	becomes	less	and	less	does	sex	remain	in	your	life.	A	moment	comes
when	your	life	is	pure	love.	Then	even	if	you	are	in	a	sexual	relationship	it	is	not
sexual.	It	may	appear	to	others	as	a	sexual	relationship	but	it	is	not.
This	has	to	be	your	meditation:	you	have	to	attain	to	that	fragrance	called	love,
called	god.	God	is	another	name	for	love.
Love	is	liberation.	To	live	without	love	is	to	live	in	a	bondage	--	the	bondage	of
the	body,	the	bondage	of	the	physical,	the	bondage	of	the	gross.	The	seed	is	in	a
bondage;	the	fragrance	is	free,	the	fragrance	is	freedom.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Prem	 Ingrid.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Ingrid	 means	 inner
beauty.
A	man	without	love	remains	ugly,	inwardly	ugly.	He	may	have	a	beautiful	body
but	 that	 is	only	superficial.	He	will	 lack	all	 inner	poetry.	He	will	not	have	any
inner	 light	which	can	radiate	from	his	being	and	can	reach	to	other	people.	He
Will	be	like	a	corpse,	a	body	without	a	soul.
It	 is	 love	 that	 releases	 your	 inner	 beauty.	 And	 when	 a	 person	 is	 inwardly
beautiful,	even	 if	his	body	 is	not	beautiful,	he	will	be	experienced	as	beautiful
because	he	will	pulsate	with	a	certain	kind	of	energy.
So	 love	 as	much	 as	 you	 can.	For	 love's	 sake	 love	 --	 for	 no	 other	motive.	The
moment	a	motive	enters	love	disappears.	Love	can	only	be	unmotivated.	When
you	start	desiring	something	out	of	it	you	destroy	it.
Never	 desire	 anything	 out	 of	 love.	 Give	 as	much	 as	 you	 can	with	 no	 idea	 of
getting	anything	back.	Not	 that	you	will	not	get	anything	back,	you	may	get	a
thousandfold,	but	that	should	not	be	your	motive.	That	is	besides...	that	is	just	a
by-product.
And	love	not	only	man,	don't	make	any	barriers	for	your	love.	Love	trees,	rocks,
animals,	birds,	clouds,	 stars.	 It	does	not	matter	what	 you	 love,	what	matters	 is
that	you	love.	So	if	you	start	living	all	that	is	available	a	revolution	is	bound	to
happen	 in	 your	 heart.	 Your	 heart	 will	 have	 a	 different	 beat,	 you	 will	 have	 a
different	 kind	 of	 soul.	You	will	 start	 feeling	 fresh,	 young	 like	 a	 child	 again	 --
innocent,	pure.	And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	releasing	your	capacity	for
love	so	that	you	can	be	beautiful.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Prem	 Claudia.	 Prem	 means	 love.	 Claudia	 means	 of
humble	heart.
Love	 is	 possible	 only	 in	 a	 humble	 heart.	 Love	 and	 ego	 cannot	 exist	 together.
They	are	 like	 light	and	darkness.	 If	you	bring	 light	 into	 the	 room	the	darkness
disappears.	Exactly	the	same	happens	with	love.
Bring	love	in	and	the	ego	disappears;	or,	drop	the	ego	and	suddenly	love	rushes
into	your	being	from	all	directions.
And	be	humble	heart,	remember,	I	don't	means	something	cultivated.	One	should
not	try	to	be	humble.
If	you	try	to	be	humble	you	will	never	be	humble	because	the	very	effort	brings
its	own	ego:	'I	am	humble,	I	am	the	humblest.'	But	the	I	is	hidden	in	it,	the	I	is
hidden	in	such	a	subtle	way	--	it	has	used	humbleness	as	a	facade.
Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 to	 many	 people:	 You	 have	 a	 very	 beautiful	 facade.
Humbleness	 is	 a	beautiful	 facade,	 religiousness	 is	 a	very	beautiful	 facade.	But
these	are	all	garments	used	by	the	ego,	deceptions.
When	 I	use	 the	word	 'humble'	 I	don't	mean	 something	cultivated,	practiced.	 If
you	understand	the	functioning	of	the	ego	and	the	ugliness	of	it	and	the	misery
of	it..in	that	very	understanding	ego	disappears.
And	 what	 is	 left	 behind	 is	 an	 uncultivated	 humbleness,	 raw,	 unpracticed
humbleness,	natural,	spontaneous.
That	is	true	humbleness.	It	is	so	natural	that	you	cannot	claim	any	credit	for	it.
You	cannot	even	say	'I	am	humble.'	If	you	can	say	that,	it	is	not	true	humbleness.
The	humble	person	knows	nothing	of	humbleness.	He	knows	nothing	of	pride,
he	knows	nothing	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
humbleness	 either.	He	 is	 simply	what	he	 is,	 he	 is	 authentically	natural.	 In	 that
authenticity,	 in	 that	naturalness	 love	blooms,	 love	grows.	That	 is	 the	 right	 soil
and	the	right	climate	for	love	to	happen.	And	love	is	our	target.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	like	an	arrow	moving	towards	the	target	of	love.
(To	Hans	Werner)
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Pavitro.	Pavitro	means	the	pure	one.	But	purity
has	no	moral	connotation.	Purity	to	me	means	innocence.
A	moral	person	is	never	pure.	His	purity	is	calculated,	it	is	cunning,	it	is	clever.
His	 purity	 is	 motivated,	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 achieve	 something	 through	 it,	 it	 is
businesslike.	 He	 wants	 heavenly	 pleasures,	 paradise	 and	 all	 that	 nonsense,
through	his	purity.	He	is	simply	doing	business.	He	is	trying	hard	to	be	pure	as
the	 price	 one	 has	 to	 pay	 for	 heavenly	 pleasures.	 But	 his	 target	 is	 far	 away,
beyond	death.	He	is	not	satisfied	with	the	pleasures	available	on	the	earth	--	his
greed	 is	 too	much.	And	how	can	a	greedy	man	be	pure?	His	greed	 is	so	much
that	life	seems	to	be	not	worth	striving	for.	He	wants	something	more	permanent,
more	 eternal,	 something	 that	 cannot	 be	 taken	 away	 from	 him.	 He	 is	 greedy,
totally	greedy.
My	concept	of	purity	is	not	that	of	a	moral,	religious	man.	My	concept	of	purity
is	 that	 of	 a	 small	 child	 who	 knows	 nothing,	 who	 lives	 out	 of	 a	 state	 of	 not-
knowing.	To	live	from	that	point	is	to	live	through	wonder.	It	is	to	live	through
awe.
And	when	one	has	eyes	full	of	wonder	and	awe	one	meets	god	everywhere.	Then
even	mundane	things	are	transformed	into	the	sacred,	then	ordinary	life	becomes
absolutely	extraordinary.	Then	small	joys	of	life	are	more	than	any	paradise	can
promise.	Then	there	is	no	need	to	hanker	for	any	paradise.	The	innocent	person
lives	in	paradise	wherever	he	lives.	Wherever	he	is	there	is	paradise.
(To	Wil)
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Agamya.	Agamya	means	incomprehensible.
Truth	 is	 incomprehensible.	 It	 can	 be	 felt	 through	 the	 heart	 but	 is	 cannot	 be
known	 through	 the	 head.	 It	 is	 incomprehensible	 through	 logical	 processes,
through	thinking,	though	contemplation,	but	it	is	available	to	love.
Truth	 is	 a	 mystery	 and	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 de-mystify	 it.	 Agamya	 means	 the
mysterious,	 the	 incomprehensible.	 It	 is	 incomprehensible	 but	 it	 is	 there,	 it
surrounds	you.	This	whole	 life	 is	 a	mystery.	 It	 is	 just	 that	we	have	become	so
dead,	so	insensitive	that	we	don't	feel	it.
My	work	here	is	to	help	you	to	become	more	sensitive,	more	alive,	so	that	you
can	 start	 feeling,	 seeing,	 listening.	 If	 you	 can	 listen	 deeply	 than	 the	 whole
existence	 is	 full	 of	music,	 if	 you	 can	 see	 deeply	 then	 the	whole	 existence	 has
such	tremendous	colors.	If	you	can	feel	deeply	then	each	rock	has	a	god	hidden
in	it.
But	all	that	will	not	make	you	knowledgeable;	it	will	make	you	wise,	certainly,
but	not	knowledgeable.	You	cannot	say	'I	know	god.'	You	can	only	say	''I	feel.'
Those	who	say	 that	 they	know	are	simply	egoistic.	The	 real	mystics	have	said
'We	feel.'
Feeling	cannot	be	proved,	there	is	no	way	to	argue	for	it	hence	the	Buddhas	only
show	 the	 way.	 They	 say	 'This	 is	 how	 I	 have	 come	 to	 feel,	 you	 can	 also	 try.'
Perhaps	one	day	you	may	also	 feel	 it.	But	 it	 remains	a	perhaps,	 it	cannot	be	a
logical	certainty.
One	of	the	greatest	Buddhas	of	the	world,	Mahavira,	used	to	start	every	sentence
with	the	word
'perhaps'''.	He	would	never	make	any	statement	without	that	word	for	the	simple
reason	that	it	is	so	mysterious	that	nobody	can	say	anything	for	certain.	Certainly
destroys	its	beauty	and	mystery,	certainty	makes	it	more	mundane.
Science	is	certain,	religion	can	only	say	perhaps.	But	the	religious	perhaps	is	far
more	valuable	than	all	the	certainly	of	science.
Science	de-mystifies	existence.	That's	why	the	more	that	science	has	grown	and
people	 have	 become	 educated	 through	 a	 scientific	 outlook,	 their	 lives	 have
become	very	ordinary.	There	seems	to	be	no	surprise.
They	 seem	 to	 know	 all,	 nothing	 surprises	 them.	 And	 man	 is	 dead	 is	 nothing
surprises	 him.	 A	man	 is	 alive	 only	 in	 proportion	 to	 how	much	 surprise	 he	 is
capable	of	feeling.	That	decides	his	being	alive,	his	aliveness.
So	become	alive	again,	become	available	again.	Open	all	 the	doors	and	all	 the
windows	so	that	the	wind	and	the	rain	and	the	sun	can	come	and	visit	you.	God
comes	in	these	ways.	His	ways	are	very	subtle.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001265
ShortTitle:	RAFTER26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Your	name	has	beautiful	meanings.	It	has	two	meanings:	one	from	Teutonic	and
the	 other	 from	 old	 French.	 The	 first	 meaning	 is	 wise,	 the	 second	 meaning	 is
kingly.
A	wise	man	is	naturally	kingly.	He	may	be	a	beggar,	but	he	 is	still	a	king.	His
kingdom	is	of	the	within.
He	 has	 inexhaustible	 treasures.	 He	 has	 overcome	 his	 unconsciousness.	 That's
what	wisdom	 is.	Wisdom	 is	 not	 knowledge;	 it	 is	 conquering	 the	 unconscious,
making	your	whole	being	conscious,	full	of	light.	Not	even	islands	of	darkness
are	left	in	it.	When	your	being	is	full	of	light	whether	you	have	anything	or	not
does	not	matter,	you	are	kingly.
So	this	will	remain	your	name:	Swami	Raymond.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Angela.	 Angela	 means	 a	 bringer	 of	 truth	 and	 also	 a
messenger	of	god.	Both	meanings	are	synonymous.
To	be	 a	messenger	 of	 god	 can	only	mean	bringer	 of	 truth	 because	 truth	 is	 his
message.	 In	 fact,	 truth	 is	 god	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 start	 living	 a	 true	 life,
authentic,	 you	 become	 a	 messenger.	 Not	 in	 the	 ordinary	 sense	 of	 carrying	 a
message,	 but	 in	 a	 very	 extraordinary	 sense	 of	 being	 a	 message.	 Because	 the
carrier	of	a	message	may	know	nothing	of	it.	He	may	be	just	a	postman.	He	may
not	 even	 be	 able	 to	 read	 the	 letter	 that	 he	 is	 carrying.	He	may	 be	 completely
unaware	of	it.	Even	doves	can	do	that	--	they	can	carry	letters.
Machines	 can	 do	 it	 perfectly	 well	 --	 they	 carry	 messages,	 but	 they	 are	 not
messengers.
A	messenger	is	one	who	has	become	the	message.	His	whole	being	radiates	the
truth,	 the	beauty,	 the	 joy,	 the	celebration	 that	god	 is.	Everybody	can	become	a
messenger.	It	is	not	something	that	one	is	born	with,	it	is	something	that	has	to
be	 grown.	 Everybody	 brings	 the	 seed	 --	 very	 few	 people	 grow	 it,	 very	 few
people	bring	it	 to	flowering.	Those	who	bring	it	 to	flowering	we	call	prophets,
messengers,	Buddhas,	Christs,	but	in	fact	every	person	is	born	with	the	potential,
but	only	with	the	potential.	You	have	to	make	every	possible	effort	to	transform
it	into	an	actuality.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 one	 commits	 oneself	 to	 this	 particular	 work	 of
transforming	 one's	 potential	 into	 the	 actual.	 The	 day	 your	 total	 potential	 is
translated	 as	 actual,	 is	 the	day	of	 fulfillment	 --	 the	day	one	 is	 freed,	 liberated.
That	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas,	 that	 has	 been	 the	 goal	 of	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the
world.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Swami	 Antar	 Herbert.	 Antar	 means	 inner.	 Herbert	 means
warrior.
Man	can	either	be	a	warrior	on	the	outside	or	a	warrior	within.	The	warrior	on
the	outside	remains	political.	His	whole	effort	is	ultimately	futile.	Whatsoever	he
gains	 will	 be	 lost	 in	 death,	 and	 whatsoever	 he	 gains	 he	 gains	 at	 great	 cost
because	 the	 same	 energy	 could	 have	 turned	 inwards.	 The	 same	 energy	would
have	 become	 an	 inner	 conquest,	 an	 inner	 glory.	 The	 same	 energy	would	 have
created	a	mastery	within	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
being.	It	would	have	been	possible	for	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha	to	be	born	in	you	but
you	 waste	 the	 energy	 in	 accumulating	 unnecessary	 things:	 money,	 power,
prestige	 --	 that	 is	 all	 junk.	But	mind	 has	 the	 tendency	 to	 collect	 junk	 because
mind	is	basically	extrovert.	It	knows	no	way	to	go	in.
When	you	start	going	in,	mind	is	left	behind.	It	can't	go	inside	with	you,	it	can
only	go	with	you	outside.
It	has	only	one	possibility,	it	is	one-dimensional.	Mind	makes	a	person	a	warrior
in	the	political	sense.
Meditation	makes	him	a	warrior	in	the	religious	sense.
So	 become	 an	 inner	warrior.	Much	 has	 to	 be	 conquered	 there.	 There	 is	much
darkness	 which	 has	 to	 be	 dispelled,	 much	 unconsciousness	 which	 has	 to	 be
transformed,	much	raw	energy	which	has	to	be	purified.
It	is	a	great	task,	the	greatest	that	life	gives	you	to	fulfil.	The	great	challenge	is	to
become	a	fully	grown	up	person,	to	come	to	the	crescendo	of	your	potentiality,
to	 reach	 the	 highest	 peak,	 the	Everest	 of	 your	 consciousness.	 Then	 one	 really
starts	living	for	the	first	time.	Before	that	it	is	all	dreaming,	not	real	life.
Before	that	we	are	in	the	womb,	not	yet	really	born.
Jesus	says:	Unless	a	man	is	born	again	he	will	not	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	god.
He	means	this	birth,	the	birth	of	consciousness	in	you.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Veet	Hedwig.	Veet	means	surpassing,	transcending,	going
beyond.	Hedwig	means	taking	refuge	in	war.
That's	 the	natural	animal	 tendency	 in	man,	 to	 take	 refuge	 in	war.	Man	hankers
for	any	excuse	to	fight,	to	quarrel,	to	destroy.	If	he	cannot	find	a	real	excuse	he
invents	an	excuse,	but	he	cannot	live	without	war.	In	three	thousand	years,	five
thousand	wars	have	been	fought.	And	what	is	the	achievement?	What	have	they
achieved	 through	 all	 this	 nonsense,	 violence,	 bloodshed?	 Either	 humanity	 is
insane	or	very	suicidal.
The	whole	 past	 is	murderous,	 and	 the	 reason	 is	 that	we	go	on	 listening	 to	 the
mind.	Mind	has	come	to	learn	a	few	things,	they	are	of	animal	heritage.	Man	has
grown	out	of	animals.
Charles	Darwin	is	true	in	a	certain	sense.	Man	is	part	of	evolution.	Maybe	he	is
the	highest	animal	but	still	he	is	an	animal.	And	over	millions	of	yours	the	mind
has	become	conditioned	 to	 function	 in	 a	particular	way.	 It	 knows	only	how	 to
fight,	it	knows	only	the	way	of	violence.	Unless	a	man	learns	how	to	go	beyond
it	he	never	becomes	truly	human,	he	remains	animal.	This	is	the	quantum	leap,
when	you	stop	taking	refuge	in	war	and	you	take	refuge	in	a	Buddha,	you	take
refuge	in	a	Christ,	you	take	refuge	in	the	awakened	one.
Then	you	are	moving	beyond	 the	 animal	 in	you	and	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	are
reaching	for	the	human.	The	human	has	tremendous	beauty,	and	the	human	is	the
beginning	 of	 the	 divine.	 But	 the	 first	 thing,	 the	 first	 step	 is	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 the
animal	heritage.
The	Buddhists	have	what	they	call	three	refuges.	The	first	refuge	they	call	refuge
in	the	Buddha,	in	the	awakened	one.	That	is	becoming	a	disciple,	surrendering	to
a	master.	And	the	second	refuge	they	call	taking	refuge	in	the	commune,	taking
refuge	 in	 the	 family	 of	 the	 master	 --	 not	 only	 surrendering	 to	 the	 master	 but
surrendering	to	the	commune	that	is	happening	around	the	master.	And	the	third
they	call	taking	refuge	in	Dhamma,	in	the	ultimate	law	of	life....
A	Buddha	is	a	Buddha	because	he	has	become	one	with	the	ultimate	law	of	life.
His	commune	is	a	commune	of	a	Buddha	because	the	people	who	have	gathered
around	him	are	tying	to	reach	to	the	ultimate	law	of	life.	So	the	ultimate	refuge,
the	final	refuge	is	in	Dhamma,	in	the	universal	law.	These	are	the	three	refuges.
Not	refuge	in	war,	but	refuge	in	peace,	refuge	in	love,	refuge	in	bliss,	refuge	in
god.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Svarajya.	Svarajya	means	independence,	freedom.
Freedom	is	one	of	the	most	significant	qualities.	In	fact,	it	is	out	of	freedom	that
all	that	is	great	blooms.
You	can	love	only	if	you	are	free.	You	can	seek	truth	only	if	you	are	free.	You
can	 be	 joyous	 only	 if	 you	 are	 free.	 Hence	 freedom	 has	 to	 become	 the	 very
foundation	of	sannyas.
I	don't	want	you	to	belong	to	the	church,	to	a	creed,	to	a	nation,	to	a	race.	Those
are	 all	 ugly	 things.	 One	 should	 be	 free	 of	 all	 that	 nonsense.	 One	 should	 be
simply	human.	There	 is	no	need	 to	be	a	Christian,	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan,
and	no	need	to	be	Indian,	an	American	or	a	German.	One	should	be	free	of	all
these	bondages.	These	are	prisons	which	keep	your	spirit	encaged.	Break	out!
And	 it	 is	 all	 up	 to	 you.	 If	 you	 cooperate	 with	 all	 these	 things	 you	 are	 co-
operating	with	your	slavery.
Stop	 co-operating.	 Nobody	 else	 is	 keeping	 you	 in	 bondage.	 It	 is	 your	 own
unawareness.	So	become	 aware	 of	 how	you	 co-operate	with	 your	 slavery,	 and
that	very	awareness	is	enough	to	get	rid	of	all	slavery.
Freedom	is	your	nature.	It	is	not	to	be	achieved.	When	all	slavery	disappears	one
is	 free,	when	 the	 slavery	 is	 no	more	 present	 freedom	 starts	welling	 up	within
your	 being.	And	out	 of	 freedom	 life	 starts	 taking	on	 tremendous	beauty.	Then
everything	is	possible	--	love,	truth,	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Veet	 Asmitam.	 Veet	 means	 going	 beyond.
Asmitam	means	the	ego.
The	ego	is	the	only	barrier	between	you	and	god,	between	you	and	love,	between
you	 and	 truth,	 between	 you	 and	 freedom.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 barrier.	 A	 single
barrier	prevents	you	from	all	that	is	great	in	life.	And	it	is	good	that	there	is	only
one	barrier.	It	can	be	very	easily	destroyed	because	it	is	not	a	reality	but	only	our
own	 creation.	Because	we	 believe	 in	 it,	 it	 is	 there,	 the	moment	 you	withdraw
your	belief	 it	disappears.	Your	belief	gives	 life	 to	 it,	your	withdrawal	of	belief
becomes	its	death....
Being	a	 sannyasin	means	 that	now	you	will	 not	be	 supporting	 the	 ego,	 slowly
slowly	you	will	withdraw.
As	 you	 become	 aware	 you	 will	 go	 on	 withdrawing	 yourself	 from	 all	 ego
projects,	ego	trips,	ego	gems,	ego	numbers.	The	day	that	you	are	completely	free
of	the	ego	you	are	available	to	god	and	god	is	available	to	you.	The	moment	the
ego	disappears	you	become	deathless,	you	become	immortal,	you	become	part	of
eternity.	The	moment	 the	ego	disappears	 there	 is	no	cause	 for	 any	misery	 left,
you	are	blissful.	Or	to	be	more	exact,	you	are	bliss.	You	are	not	there,	only	bliss
is	there.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Veet	Atito.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Atito	means
the	past.
One	 has	 to	 be	 constantly	 alert,	 otherwise	 the	 unconscious	 habit	 is	 to	 go	 on
collecting	the	past.	It	is	dead,	but	we	go	on	collecting	it.	We	become	too	attached
to	memories,	we	live	in	a	kind	of	nostalgia.	We	live	in	the	past.	The	past	is	no
more,	yet	we	go	on	living	in	the	past.	It	is	just	a	fantasy	world,	and	because	of	it
you	cannot	live	in	the	herenow	and	the	herenow	is	the	only	reality	there	is.
And	the	person	who	lives	in	the	past	also	lives	in	the	future.	The	future	is	a	by-
product	of	the	past.
The	future	simply	means	that	you	would	like	to	repeat	a	few	things	of	the	past
which	you	liked,	loved;	that	is	your	future.	And	you	would	like	not	to	repeat	a
few	things	which	are	nightmarish,	painful;	that	is	your	future.	Your	future	is	your
edited	past.	A	 few	 things	you	have	chosen,	a	 few	 things	you	have	not	chosen,
and	now	you	are	projecting	the	chosen	things	into	the	future.	Between	these	two
reality	is	crushed	and	completely	forgotten.	And	people	go	on	living	either	in	the
past	or	in	the	future.
To	 live	 in	 the	past	 or	 in	 the	 future	 is	 to	 live	 asleep.	This	 is	what	 is	 called	 the
metaphysical	sleep.	It	is	a	kind	of	disease.	The	whole	humanity	suffers	from	it,
the	whole	 humanity	 lives	 in	 this	 state	 of	 sleep.	 It	 is	 very	 rarely	 that	 a	 person
becomes	awakened.
Sannyas	is	initiation	into	awakening.	And	the	first	step	is	not	to	live	in	the	past
any	more.	Whenever	 your	mind	 starts	 going	 into	 the	 past	 bring	 it	 back	 to	 the
present.	In	the	beginning	it	will	be	difficult.	Just	out	of	old	habit	mind	goes	on
slipping	back.	You	bring	it	back	again	and	again	and	again,	and	slowly	slowly	it
stops	 going	 into	 the	 past.	And	when	 it	 stops	 going	 into	 the	 past	 it	 disappears,
because	mind	can	exist	only	in	the	past	or	in	the	future.	In	the	present	there	is	no
mind.
To	be	 in	 the	present	 is	 to	be	 in	meditation	and	 to	be	 in	 the	present	 is	 to	be	 in
god...	Man	 becomes	what	 he	 really	 should	 be,	 an	 inexhaustible	 source	 of	 joy,
love,	truth.	He	radiates	godliness.	He	becomes	evidence	that	god	exists.
This	 is	your	name:	Swami	Bhajan.	Bhajan	means	singing	 in	 the	praise	of	god.
That	is	going	to	be	your	path.
Praise	 the	 Lord.	 Praise	 the	 beauty	 that	 surrounds	 us	 all,	 but	 of	 which	we	 are
unaware.	Praise	the	sunrise,	the	sunset,	the	stars,	the	clouds,	the	trees,	the	people,
because	these	are	all	manifestations	of	god.	Become	a	song	of	praise.	Look	with
the	eyes	of	praise.	Drop	being	critical.	Being	critical	is	the	sure	way	of	missing
all	that	is	significant.
Be	creative,	don't	be	critical.
And	one	can	be	creative	only	if	one	knows	how	to	praise.	Out	of	that	very	praise
creativity	arises.	You	start	sharing	your	being.	And	when	you	see	the	beauty,	the
splendor	of	 existence,	 you	would	 like	 to	make	 it	 a	 little	more	beautiful,	 just	 a
little	 more.	 That's	 how	 creativity	 is.	 It	 is	 an	 effort	 to	 make	 life	 a	 little	 more
beautiful,	just	a	little	more.	That's	how	creativity	is	born.	It	is	an	effort	to	make
life	a	 little	more	beautiful,	 to	bring	a	 little	smile,	a	 little	 laughter,	a	 little	 joy,	a
little	love	into	existence,	to	leave	existence	a	little	better	than	you	found	it.	That's
what	creativity	is	all	about	--	helping,	contributing	to	beautifying	existence.	And
that	is	true	worship.
But	the	critical	person	only	complains,	he	only	finds	what	is	wrong.	If	you	take
him	to	the	rose	bush	he	will	count	the	thorns,	he	will	overlook	the	flowers.	And
when	 he	 has	 counted	 thousands	 of	 thorns	 and	 has	 become	 wounded	 on	 his
hands...	It	 is	natural,	 it	 is	bound	to	happen	when	you	count	thorns,	you	will	be
wounded.	Then	 he	 is	 very	 angry,	 he	 is	 in	 a	 rage.	Now	he	 cannot	 see	 flowers.
Even	if	you	say	that	they	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	he	will	say	"It	is	impossible.	How	amongst	thousands	of	thorns	can	flowers
be	born?	It	is	impossible,	it	is	illogical.	How	out	of	so	many	thorns	can	beautiful
roses	 be	 born?	 You	 must	 be	 imagining	 it."	 He	 will	 say,	 "You	 must	 be
fantasizing."
And	it	is	very	difficult	to	prove	that	there	are	flowers,	very	difficult	to	prove	that
there	is	beauty,	very	difficult	to	prove,	almost	impossible,	that	there	is	love,	that
there	is	god.
A	sannyasin	lives	the	life	of	creativity	but	not	of	criticism.	He	is	not	negative,	he
is	not	searching	for	some	faults.	Whatsoever	you	search	you	will	find.
If	you	search	for	faults	you	will	find	millions.	If	you	search	for	flowers	you	will
find	millions.	 It	 depends	 on	 you.	 If	 you	want	 to	 live	 surrounded	 by	 thoughts,
search	for	them;	if	you	want	to	live	surrounded	by	flowers,	search	for	them.	And
when	you	are	surrounded	by	flowers	sooner	or	later	you	will	become	a	flower.
There	 is	 a	 synchronicity:	 when	 you	 are	 surrounded	 by	 all	 that	 is	 beautiful,
something	 inside	you	 starts	 responding,	 something	 transpires	between	you	and
that	which	surrounds	you.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
27	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001275
ShortTitle:	RAFTER27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Your	name:	Swami	Robert.	Robert	means	the	shining	one,	the	bright	one.
Man	shines	only	when	bliss	arises.	In	misery	it	is	impossible.	Misery	is	dark,	it
can't	 be	 bright.	 Misery	 is	 dull.	 It	 is	 really	 something	 dead.	 Miserable	 people
carry	dead	weights.	They	are	like	black	holes,	they	don't	contribute	to	existence;
on	 the	 contrary	 they	 suck	 from	 existence.	 They	 are	 suckers,	 they	 suck	 energy
from	whomsoever	they	come	in	contact.	Their	very	presence	is	destructive.	But
as	 one	 becomes	 blissful,	 one	 becomes	 creative,	 one	 becomes	 intelligent,	 one
becomes	wise,	one	becomes	bright.	One	starts	shining	like	a	star.
Meditation	is	 the	way	from	misery	to	bliss.	Transform	your	darkness	 into	 light
and	transform	all	that	is	negative	in	you	into	something	positive.	Transform	your
no	into	yes.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
Your	 name:	 Swami	 Gordon.	 Gordon	 is	 a	 significant	 name.	 It	 means	 the
ascending	one.
When	 you	 are	 climbing	 towards	 the	 heights,	 reaching	 towards	 god	 --	 because
that	is	the	only	true	height,	everything	else	is	far	below	--	when	you	are	trying	to
reach	towards	god	you	become	the	ascending	one.
And	 the	 miracle	 is	 that	 when	 you	 start	 ascending	 towards	 god,	 god	 starts
descending	towards	you.
The	meeting	always	happens	somewhere	in	between,	it	is	not	one	way.	It	is	not
only	 that	 the	seeker	moves	 towards	god,	 the	moment	 the	seeker	starts	moving,
god	starts	moving;	it	is	simultaneous.	It	is	in	fact	one	process	and	there	are	two
polarities	of	the	one	process,	the	seeker	and	the	sought;	it	is	one	phenomenon.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	god	cannot	descend	in	you	unless	you	start	ascending.
People	go	on	living	as	if	this	mundane	life	is	all	there	is.	People	go	on	living	as
if	 there	 is	 nothing	 higher	 possible.	 There	 is	 immense	 possibility.	 Man	 comes
with	a	great	potential.	The	ultimate	height	of	every	man's	being	is	god.
Sannyas	 exactly	means	 golden.	 Start	 ascending	 towards	 the	 peaks.	That	 is	 the
only	true	prayer,	because	god	can	hear	you	only	when	you	act...	not	through	your
words,	but	only	 through	your	actions.	A	 real	prayer	 is	always	non-verbal.	One
lives	it,	it	is	not	something	to	be	said.	Start	ascending	--	that	is	prayer.	And	it	is
always	heard.	Inevitably	god	starts	descending	in	you.
It	is	not	only	that	man	is	seeking	god,	god	is	also	seeking	man.	If	it	were	only	a
one-way	affair	it	would	not	be	so	beautiful,	it	would	be	cold	from	the	other	side.
It	is	not	so.	It	is	a	hot	love	affair.
Your	 name:	 Swami	 Axel.	 Axel	 has	 two	 meanings.	 Both	 are	 tremendously
beautiful	and	will	be	of	great	help	on	the	path.
The	 first	comes	 from	the	Teutonic.	 In	Teutonic	axel	means	divine	 reward.	The
second	 meaning	 comes	 from	 Hebrew.	 In	 Hebrew	 axel	 means	 peace.	 Both
meanings	come	from	two	different	sources	but	are	really	two	aspects	of	the	same
coin.
Peace	 is	 the	divine	 reward.	You	cannot	 attain	peace,	you	can	only	prepare	 the
way	 for	 it	 to	 come,	 for	 it	 to	 happen.	Your	 created	 peace	will	 not	 be	 of	mush
value.	If	you	are	living	in	conflict,	misery,	then	your	peace	will	also	reflect	you.
It	will	be	miserable,	it	will	be	dark	and	dismal.	It	will	not	be	really	peace,	it	will
be	only	a	facade,	just	a	mask.
Real	peace	always	comes	from	the	beyond.	All	that	is	required	of	us	is	to	prepare
the	 ground,	 and	 the	 first	 essential	 thing,	 and	 the	 most	 essential	 too,	 is	 the
disappearance	of	the	ego.	That	is	the	rock	that	does	not	allow	anything	from	the
beyond	to	penetrate	into	your	being.
Drop	 the	 ego	 and	 all	 that	 belongs	 to	 the	 ego:	 anger,	 greed,	 possessiveness,
jealousy,	 violence.	All	 that	 belongs	 to	 the	 ego	 and	 supports	 the	 ego	 has	 to	 be
dropped	with	the	ego.	The	ego	is	the	center,	and	all	that	is	negative	in	you	is	the
periphery	of	 the	center.	Drop	 the	center	and	 let	 the	periphery	also	go	and	 then
you	are	available,	open,	open	to	the	beyond.	And	then	peace	starts	showering.	In
thousands	 of	 ways	 you	 will	 find	 peace	 reaching	 you	 from	 every	 direction.	 It
showers	like	flowers,	with	great	beauty	and	with	great	fragrance.
Your	name:	Swami	John.	John	means	gracious	gift.
Very	rarely	do	we	recognize	it.	Very	rarely	do	we	see	that	we	have	been	given
great	opportunities	to	grow,	to	be.	Even	misery	is	an	opportunity,	even	darkness
is	 an	 opportunity,	 because	 it	 is	 only	 out	 of	 darkness	 that	 the	 desire	 for	 light
arises.	It	is	only	because	of	misery	that	one	starts	searching	for	bliss.
The	 world	 is	 an	 opportunity.	 The	 world	 means	 all	 that	 it	 contains,	 the	 ten
thousand	 things	 both	 god	 and	 bad,	 both	 thorns	 and	 flowers,	 both	 success	 and
failure,	both	life	and	death	--	all	are	god's	gracious	gift.
If	one	starts	 looking	rightly	 then	there	 is	nothing	which	is	not	a	gift.	Then	one
will	be	continuously	grateful,	then	one	will	become	simply	gratitude.	and	that's
what	true	prayer	is,	what	true	love	is.
Sannyas	means	 recognizing,	 remembering	 all	 that	 has	been	given	 to	you.	And
you	are	not	in	any	way	worthy	of	all	that	has	been	given	you.	Nobody	is	worthy
of	 it.	We	 don't	 deserve	 it	 --	 life	 and	 love	 and	 prayer	 and	 the	 beauty	 and	 the
splendor	of	existence.	We	have	not	earned	it	and	yet	we	are	not	thankful!	Man	is
so	stupid	and	so	miserly	when	being	thankful.
To	be	thankful	to	existence	is	sannyas.	It	is	nothing	formal,	it	is	something	of	the
heart.	Learn	more	and	more	gratitude,	and	as	you	learn	gratitude	you	will	come
closer	to	god.	When	one	becomes	just	gratefulness	then	god	has	arrived	in	you.
When	you	have	become	the	host	and	he	has	become	the	guest.	And	that	ultimate
meeting	is	the	search.
Your	 name:	 Swami	 Muni	 Ashok.	 Ashok	 is	 a	 Buddhist	 name	 with	 a	 very
profound	meaning.
Buddha	 tried	 in	 every	 possible	 way	 never	 to	 use	 any	 positive	 word	 for	 the
ultimate	 because	 all	 the	 positive	 words	 were	 misused	 too	much.	 The	 greatest
problem	with	 a	 positive	 word	 is	 that	 people	 become	 desirous	 of	 it,	 they	 start
longing	for	it.
Before	 Buddha	 the	 ultimate	 state	 was	 called	 ananda,	 bliss.	 But	 that	 creates
desires,	one	starts	hankering	for	bliss.	And	to	hanker	for	bliss	is	the	barrier.	Bliss
happens	only	when	there	is	no	desire.
The	is	the	paradox	of	the	seeker	--	it	has	to	be	understood.	--	if	you	desire	you
will	miss,	because	desire	is	the	way	of	missing.	When	there	is	no	desire	and	one
is	absolutely	calm	and	quiet...	desires...	Desires	are	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
like	 winds,	 they	 create	 waves	 in	 your	 consciousness,	 they	 disturb	 your
consciousness.	When	 there	 are	 no	 winds	 blowing,	 no	 desires,	 you	 are	 utterly
calm	 and	 quiet,	 you	 start	 reflecting	 the	 truth.	 You	 become	 like	 a	 mirror,	 you
reflect	that	which	is.
Hence	Buddha	 changed	 all	 positive	 terms	 into	 negative	 ones.	 Instead	 of	 using
ananda,	he	started	using	ashoka.	Ananda	means	bliss,	ashoka	means	no-misery.
He	will	 never	 say	 'You	will	 attain	 to	bliss,'	 he	will	 only	 say	 'There	will	 be	no
misery;.'	 Now,	 it	 is	 a	 tremendously	 beautiful	 device.	 You	 cannot	 long	 for	 no-
misery,	it	doesn't	seem	worth	desiring.	Bliss	immediately	creates	a	longing	in	the
heart.	 Something	 starts	 ringing	 in	 the	 heart.	 You	 want	 it,	 you	 want	 it
immediately,	you	become	impatient.	But	no-misery	simply	leaves	you	aloof	and
cool.
Ashoka	means	no-misery;,	it	is	a	negative	way	of	saying	bliss.	But	Buddha	had
to	 use	 the	 negative	way	 because	 the	 positive	 had	 become	 too	 associated	with
wrong	people.	For	centuries	the	positive	has	been	used
--	rather	misused	--	andpeople	had	got	lost	because	of	the	positive.
Buddha	 would	 never	 say	 that	 when	 you	 attain	 you	 will	 become	 perfect.	 He
would	 simply	 say	 that	when	you	attain	you	will	 be	 a	 total	 nothingness.	 It	 is	 a
negative	way	 of	 defining	 perfection,	 hence	 to	 understand	Buddha	 one	 needs	 a
very	 intelligent	 mind.	 Buddha	 disappeared	 from	 this	 country	 for	 the	 simple
reason	that	nobody	was	interested	in	the	positive.	But	he	was	creating	something
of	great	value.
So	remember	that,	never	make	god,	truth,	moksha,	nirvana,	a	goal.	They	are	not
goals.	 Never	 make	 them	 objects	 of	 your	 desire.	 The	 moment	 they	 become
objects	of	your	desire	the	whole	point	is	missed.	They	happen	only	when	you	are
totally	desireless.	That	is	the	message	in	the	name.
And	muni	means	the	silent	one.	It	is	not	only	that	one	is	not	speaking	--	that	is
not	 true	 silence.	One	 can	 speak	 and	yet	 be	 silent,	 and	one	may	not	 speak	 and
may	 not	 be	 silent.	 The	 real	 thing	 is	 inner	 silence.	 One	 should	 speak	 out	 of
silence.	Then	your	words	will	 have	 a	beauty.	Then	you	words	will	 have	 some
truth	in	them.	Then	your	words	will	have	some	poetry,	music.	Then	your	words
will	not	be	just	yours,	they	will	come	from	the	beyond.
So	both	words	have	some	significance	and	some	indications	for	you	to	work	on:
become	desireless	and	become	silent.
Your	name:	Swami	Thomas.	Thomas	means	a	seeker	of	truth.	It	defines	sannyas.
Sannyas	 is	 not	 a	 process	 of	 believing;	 it	 is	 a	 process	 of	 searching.	 Belief	 is
against	 search.	The	moment	you	believe,	 the	search	stops.	There	 is	no	need	 to
seek	and	search	any	more,	you	have	already	believed.	The	true	seeker	is	one	who
will	 never	believe	unless	he	has	 found.	And	when	you	have	 found	 there	 is	 no
need	 to	 believe,	 you	 know.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 believe.	 So	 belief	 is
unnecessary	at	both	the	stages.	When	you	don't	know,	belief	 is	a	barrier;	when
you	know,	belief	is	unnecessary.
A	seeker	has	 to	be	an	agnostic,	neither	a	believer	nor	a	disbeliever.	That	 is	 the
fundamental	approach	of	a	seeker.	He	simply	says	"I	don't	know,	so	how	can	I
believe	or	disbelieve?	I	cannot	say	that	god	is,	I	cannot	say	that	god	is	not.	All
that	I	can	say	with	certainty	is	only	one	thing	--	that	I	know	nothing.
This	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 true	 seeker,	 this	 is	 the	 first	 step	 towards	 truth,	 to
recognize	one's	ignorance.
And	half	the	journey	is	complete	the	moment	you	recognize	that	you	don't	know.
The	 ego	 falls	 flat	 on	 the	 ground.	 It	 cannot	 exist	 with	 this	 recognition	 of
ignorance	so	it	claims	knowledgeability.	It	is	the	ego	that	makes	you	an	atheist,
that	 makes	 you	 a	 theist,	 that	 makes	 you	 a	 Christian,	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan,
Communist.	It	is	the	ego.
The	 agnostic	 is	 one	 who	 says	 "I	 am	 simply	 ignorant"	 --	 but	 his	 ignorance	 is
beautiful.	 There	 is	 no	 ego	 in	 it.	 How	 can	 you	 claim	 any	 ego	when	 you	 don't
know	anything.	And	from	that	state	of	not-knowing	the	search	begins.
My	work	here	is	first	to	take	away	all	your	beliefs,	all	your	knowledge,	so	that
you	 can	 become	 innocent	 again,	 like	 a	 child.	 Then	 there	 is	 not	 much	 of	 a
problem.	Truth	is	very	close.
If	you	are	innocent,	truth	is	not	far	away.	If	you	are	knowledgeable,	it	is	as	far
away	in	the	same	proportion,	to	the	amount	of	knowledge	you	have.
Renounce	 knowledge	 and	 become	 childlike.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 immensely
fulfilled.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Devagita.	Devagita	means	divine	song.
Every	heart	is	full	of	divine	song.	It	wants	to	burst	forth,	but	our	mind	goes	on
preventing	 it.	 Our	 mind	 represses	 the	 heart,	 our	 mind	 condemns	 the	 heart.	 It
says,	"You	are	mad,	keep	quiet.	I	know	what	is	to	be	done.	I	know	how	it	is	to	be
done."	The	mind	is	very	calculative,	very	mathematical,	very	logical,	and	as	far
as	argument	 is	concerned	 the	mind	will	always	win.	The	heart	cannot	argue,	 it
knows	no	argument.	It	is	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
thinking,	it	is	feeling.
Sannyas	 means	 changing	 the	 gestalt,	 jumping	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart,
listening	 to	 the	 heart	 instead	 of	 the	 head.	 And	 suddenly	 a	 great	 change	 takes
over,	a	revolution	--	not	less	than	that.	A	radical	transformation	happens.	For	the
first	 time	 you	 start	 living,	 and	 you	 start	 living	 feelingly,	 lovingly.	 Your	 life
becomes	more	and	more	of	a	song	than	a	syllogism,	a	dance,	a	celebration.	And
it	is	only	through	celebration	that	we	come	to	know	god.	There	is	no	other	way.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	utter	celebrants,	absolutely	mad	in	love	with	life.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	singers	and	dancers.	They	have	to	fill	the	whole	earth
with	song	and	dance	--	that	has	to	be	their	contribution	to	the	world.	They	have
to	be	creative,	creators	of	beauty	and	love	and	joy.	And	these	are	ways	to	come
closer	to	god.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Satyartha.	Satyartha	means	the	meaning	of	truth.
Truth	is	not	a	conclusion.	It	is	not	something	that	you	arrive	at	by	thinking.	It	is	a
meaning,	it	is	music.
You	arrive	 through	living,	not	by	thinking.	It	 is	not	a	by-product	of	 the	 logical
mind,	 it	 is	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 illogical	 heart.	 One	 has	 to	 be	 courageous	 to
know	truth.
Mind	can	give	you	only	hypotheses.	They	are	arbitrary,	they	are	your	inventions.
And	what	 seems	 to	 be	 true	 today	may	 not	 seem	 true	 tomorrow,	 because	 new
facts	 are	 always	being	discovered.	What	was	 truth	 to	Newton	was	not	 truth	 to
Rutherford,	what	was	 truth	 to	Rutherford	was	not	 truth	 to	Albert	Einstein.	But
what	was	 truth	 to	Krishna	was	 truth	 to	Jesus,	and	what	was	 truth	 to	Jesus	was
truth	to	Buddha,	and	what	was	truth	to	Buddha	is	truth	to	me	and	can	be	truth	to
you.	Truth	is	eternal,	it	is	not	arbitrary.	But	the	eternal	arrives	through	the	heart,
it	arrives	through	living.
Sannyas	has	to	be	your	life...	not	just	an	impotent	gesture,	but	a	commitment,	an
involvement,	 a	 total	 commitment.	One	has	 to	be	 ready	 to	 risk	all	 for	 it,	 it	 is	 a
gamble.	But	only	gamblers	have	arrived	at	truth.
Business	 people	 cannot	 arrive	 at	 truth.	 Business	 people	 cannot	 arrive	 at	 truth.
Truth	is	not	businesslike	at	all.
(beginning	is	missed	as	tape	gets	stuck)
..and	 searching	 can	 create	 tensions.	 There	 is	 no	 need.	 Whenever	 you	 are
absolutely	open	god	arrives.	It	has	always	been	so	and	it	 is	going	to	be	always
so.	It	is	the	universal	law.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001285
ShortTitle:	RAFTER28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Barbara.	Barbara	means	stranger.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	is	a	homesickness.	Here,	we	are	strangers.	In	the	body,	in	the	mind,	we
are	not	at	home.	We	reside	in	the	bodymind	complex,	we	even	become	identified
with	it.	And	we	suffer	much	because	of	that	identification,	because	basically	it	is
wrong,	false.	We	don't	belong	to	the	earth,	we	belong	to	the	beyond.
Religion	as	such	is	this	feeling,	that	although	we	are	here,	it	is	only	for	the	time
being.	And	this	time	has	to	be	used	for	preparation	for	the	real	journey	towards
home.
Mind	is	going	away	from	home,	meditation	is	going	towards	home.	It	is	a	one-
hundred-degree	turn.
Mind	is	extrovert,	meditation	is	introversion.	The	moment	you	reach	your	own
center,	which	 is	neither	body	nor	mind,	which	 is	only	pure	consciousness,	you
have	arrived	home.	Then	you	are	no	more	a	stranger.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Antar	Dieter.	Antar	means	inner;	dieter	means	ruler	--
the	inner	ruler.
Our	kingdom	 is	 of	 the	 inner.	On	 the	outside	we	 are	 bound	 to	 remain	beggars.
Whatsoever	we	do	that	fundamental	fact	cannot	be	changed.	We	can	have	much
money,	power,	prestige,	but	behind	all	that	facade	the	beggar	will	be	hiding,	the
beggar	will	remain	there.
Look	deeply	 into	 rich	peoples'	eyes	and	you	can	see	 the	beggar.	Look	 into	 the
eyes	of	politicians,	 the	powerful	people,	and	you	will	see	 the	beggar.	They	are
hiding,	they	are	trying	in	every	possible	way	not	to	allow	anybody	to	know	who
they	are.	They	are	creating	a	camouflage	around	themselves,	but	they	know,	and
everybody	 else	who	 has	 any	 intelligence	 is	 bound	 to	 know,	 that	 the	 beggar	 is
there.
As	you	turn	inwards	the	beggar	disappears.	You	enter	 into	the	kingdom	of	god
and	for	the	first	time	you	are	really	a	king.	For	his	whole	life	Jesus	was	talking
about	this	inner	kingdom,	but	he	was	misunderstood.
As	 has	 always	 been	 the	 case	 with	 all	 the	 awakened	 persons;	 they	 have	 been
misunderstood.
The	politicians,	the	rulers,	thought	that	he	was	talking	about	this	world	and	this
worldly	 kingdom.	 They	 thought	 that	 he	 was	 a	 politician	 and	 was	 provoking
people	 into	 rebellion.	 They	 were	 utterly	 wrong.	 They	 were	 just	 proving
themselves	stupid.
Jesus	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 this	 world	 or	 the	 kingdom	 of	 this	 world	 or	 the
power	of	this	world.	He	was	talking	of	something	else,	he	was	using	these	words
as	metaphors.
The	real	kingdom	is	inside	you.	And	it	is	already	there,	you	have	not	to	create	it,
it	 has	 only	 to	 be	 remembered.	 All	 techniques	 of	meditation	 are	 techniques	 of
self-remembering.
This	 is	 your	 name:	 Ma	 Antar	 Tomiko.	 Antar	 means	 inner.	 Tomiko	 means
treasure.
The	treasure	is	within.	Don't	look	without	any	more.	The	treasure	has	not	to	be
achieved.	 It	 is	 your	 innermost	 nature.	 It	 has	 only	 to	 be	 discovered	 or,	 better,
rediscovered.	We	have	only	forgotten	about	it.
Hence	 the	 spiritual	 journey	 in	only	a	 journey	 in	 the	metaphorical	 sense,	 in	 the
symbolic	 sense.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 real	 journey.	You	 are	 not	 going	 from	 one	 point	 to
another.	You	are	not	going	anywhere,	you	are	simply	becoming	awakened	at	the
same	point	where	you	had	always	been.	It	is	an	awakening.
It	is	as	when	you	wake	up	in	the	morning.	You	don't	have	to	come	back	home,
though	 in	 the	dreams	you	had	gone	far	 far	away,	maybe	 to	 the	moon.	But	you
don't	have	 to	come	back,	you	don't	wake	up	on	 the	moon.	 In	 the	morning	you
wake	up	in	your	room	and	all	those	dreams	simply	fade	away.
The	 world	 is	 nothing	 but	 our	 dreams...	 because	 we	 are	 asleep	 and	 we	 are
dreaming	many	kinds	of	dreams.	Now	it	 is	 time	to	wake	up.	Enough	you	have
dreamt	and	enough	you	have	slept.	It	is	only	a	question	of	deciding	that	"enough
is	enough	and	now	I	decide	 to	wake	up."	 In	 that	very	decision,	 if	 it	 is	 intense,
passionate,	 total,	 the	 awakening	 happens	 and	 one	 finds	 oneself	where	 one	 has
always	 been.	And	 then	 you	 have	 the	 inexhaustible	 treasure	 of	 joy,	 of	 love,	 of
celebration.	It	is	a	multi-splendored	phenomenon.	All	the	colors	of	the	rainbow
and	all	the	notes	of	music	are	there.
And	 it	 is	 not	 something	 separate	 from	 you	 so	 it	 cannot	 be	 taken	 away.	 You
cannot	lose	it,	even	if	you	want	to	lose	it,	you	cannot.	You	are	it.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Agyan.	Veet	means	going	beyond;	Agyan	means
ignorance	--	going	beyond	ignorance.
There	is	only	one	ignorance	and	that	is	not	knowing	yourself.
The	word	 'ignorance'	 is	beautiful.	 It	comes	from	ignoring.	To	 ignore	oneself	 is
ignorance.	And	we	are	all	ignoring.	We	become	so	much	occupied	with	the	non-
essential	 that	 the	essential	 is	 ignored.	We	become	so	much	concerned	with	 the
outside	that	 the	inner	is	 ignored,	so	much	so	that	slowly	slowly	we	completely
forget	about	it;	that	it	even	exists.
We	start	living	on	the	outside.	We	live	in	the	marketplace,	in	the	crowds,	in	the
clubs,	 in	 the	 hotels,	 in	 the	 theaters.	We	never	 come	back	 to	 our	 own	 self.	We
don't	give	even	little	gaps,	intervals,	to	have	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
glimpse	of	who	we	are.	And	that	is	the	fundamental	question	for	a	sannyasin	to
ask	--	who	am	I?	And	nobody	can	answer	it	for	you.	You	have	to	find	it	yourself.
Everybody	has	to	find	it	on	one's	own.	And	it	is	beautiful	that	nobody	else	can
answer	 it,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 rejoice	 in	 finding	 yourself.	 A
borrowed	answer	is	bound	to	be	a	borrowed	answer.	It	will	not	penetrate	to	the
very	core	of	your	being.	It	will	remain	in	the	head,	in	the	memory.
And	it	has	been	answered	--	in	the	Vedas,	in	the	Koran,	in	the	Bible	--	you	can
learn	 all	 those	 things	 but	 that	 learning	 is	 not	 knowing.	 Knowledge	 is	 not
knowing.	In	fact	one	can	also	use	knowledge	to	ignore	oneself.	Knowledge	can
become	one	of	the	most	deceptive	things	in	life,	because	it	can	give	you	a	false
feeling	of	knowing	while	you	know	nothing.	It	can	give	you	a	false	feeling	that
you	 have	 arrived	 while	 really	 you	 are	 fast	 asleep	 and	 snoring.	 You	 are	 only
dreaming	that	you	have	arrived.	Knowledge	is	dreaming	that	"I	have	arrived."	It
is	not	dispersion	of	ignorance.
Ignorance	 disappears	 only	 through	 meditation;	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 Not	 by
knowledge,	not	by	mind.
Mind	is	incapable	of	destroying	ignorance.	On	the	contrary	it	covers	it	up.
Being	a	sannyasin	means	you	are	entering	in	the	world	of	meditation	and	that	is
the	greatest	adventure	 in	 life:	going	beyond	mind,	going	beyond	 thoughts,	 and
becoming	more	 and	more	 centered	 in	 pure	 consciousness.	 Just	 a	witnessing	 --
that's	 what	 you	 are.	 The	 day	 you	 experience	 that	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond
ignorance	is	a	day	of	great	blessings,	great	benediction.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Surodaya.	Surodaya	means	sunrise.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 day,	 sannyas	 is	 the	 dawn.	 Let	 the	 night
disappear,	don't	cling	to	it.
Become	more	alert	so	that	the	night	cannot	take	possession	of	you	again.	Night
means	 unawareness,	 day	 means	 awareness.	 Night	 means	 living	 a	 life
mechanically,	day	means	living	a	life	with	awareness,	consciously.
Each	 act	 has	 to	 become	 a	 meditation.	 The	 ordinary	 acts	 of	 life	 have	 to	 be
transformed.	Walking,	walk	more	consciously.	Breathing,	be	more	alert;	see	the
breath	 going	 in,	 coming	 out.	 Just	 don't	 move	 in	 life	 like	 a	 zombie.	 Start
destroying	that	zombiness,	and	slowly	slowly,	chunk	by	chunk	it	disappears.
And	when	your	heart	 is	full	of	 light,	 life	has	arrived	for	 the	first	 time.	You	are
really	 born,	 spiritually	 born.	 Jesus	 calls	 it	 rebirth.	 In	 the	 East	 we	 call	 such	 a
person	a	dvija,	twice-born.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Apurvo.	Apurvo	means	the	unique	one.
Each	individual	is	unique,	no	two	individuals	are	alike.	God	is	very	original.	He
never	repeats	himself,	he	creates	one	person	only	once.	Through	the	whole	of	the
past,	 in	 the	 long	 long	past,	 there	has	never	been	 a	person	 like	you,	 and	 in	 the
whole	infinite	future	there	will	never	be	a	person	like	you.
Respect	 yourself.	 God	 has	 given	 you	 so	 much	 respect,	 god	 has	 showered	 so
many	blessings.	And	the	greatest	is	that	he	makes	you	unique.
A	sannyasin	 is	one	who	has	no	ego	but	 tremendous	self-respect.	He	 thinks	 the
ego	is	all.	It	is	not.
Self-respect	 is	 very	 humble,	 very	 simple.	 Ego	 is	 comparative,	 it	 says,	 "I	 am
higher	than	you."
Self-respect	 simply	 says,	 "I	 am	 unique,	 you	 are	 unique	 --	 there	 is	 no
comparison."	It	is	a	non-comparative	phenomenon.	And	the	moment	you	respect
yourself,	 you	 start	 respecting	 the	 whole	 existence:	 the	 people,	 the	 trees,	 the
animals,	because	 they	are	all	unique.	and	seeing	 this	unique	universe	you	start
feeling	the	presence	of	a	great	creator.	It	is	not	the	work	of	an	assembly	line,	it	is
not	 the	work	of	 a	manufacturer.	 It	 is	 the	work	of	 a	 creator,	 and	 a	 creator	who
must	be	 infinite,	 inexhaustible.	Otherwise,	 sooner	or	 later	one	 starts	 repeating.
But	god	never	repeats.
Seeing	 this	universe	 it	 is	 impossible	not	 to	feel	 the	presence	of	a	great	creator.
And	 only	with	 that	 feeling	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 god,	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 creator,
does	one	start	 feeling	prayer	arising	 in	 the	heart,	gratitude	arising	 in	 the	heart,
thankfulness	arising	 in	 the	heart.	And	 to	be	 thankful	 is	 to	be	 religious.	To	 feel
gratitude	is	the	most	glorious	experience	of	life	because	it	is	live	in	its	absolute
profundity,	depth	and	height.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Prem	 Smrati.	 Prem	 leaves	 love.	 Smrati	 means
remembrance.
Remember	that	you	are	love.	The	society	makes	everybody	forget.	The	society
creates	all	kinds	of	conditionings	which	don't	allow	you	 to	 remember	 that	you
are	love....
Jesus	says:	God	 is	 love.	 If	god	 is	 love	 then	all	 is	 love	because	all	comes	 from
him.	If	the	source	is	love	then	we	can't	be	anything	else.	But	the	society	loves	on
hate,	anger,	greed,	ambition,	violence,	war.	Up	to	now	that	has	been	the	way	of
the	 society.	 It	 is	 very	 animalistic.	 Even	 animals	 are	 not	 so	 ugly,	 even	 animals
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
have	some	grace.	Man	has	lost	even	that.
To	be	initiated	into	sannyas	means	to	be	initiated	into	love.	For	me	sannyas	and
love	are	synonymous.	If	you	can	love	totally,	unconditionally,	then	god	is	not	far
away.	Then	god	is	in	the	very	heartbeat	of	your	being.
Wherever	love	is,	god	is.	Love	is	the	fragrance	of	god's	presence.
So	 remember	 it	 and	 destroy	 all	 that	 society	 has	 created	 in	 you	 to	 prevent	 you
from	remembering	your	reality.	We	are	made	of	love	and	we	are	made	for	love.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Dinesh.	Dinesh	means	the	sun.
The	sun	is	not	only	the	source	of	light,	the	sun	also	represents	in	a	visible	form
the	ultimate	light	--	god.
Hence	 sun-worship...	 In	 all	parts	of	 the	world	 the	 sun	has	been	worshipped	as
god.	It	is	symbolic:	god	is	light	and	sun	is	the	visible	source	of	light.	The	sun	is
an	image	of	god.
The	outer	light	indicates	the	inner.	Just	as	there	is	a	sun	in	the	outer	sky	there	is	a
sun	in	the	inner	sky.
But	we	have	to	begin	with	the	outer	because	we	know	only	the	outer.	The	inner
has	disappeared	from	our	vision.
For	sannyasins	we	have	chosen	the	color	of	the	sun,	the	color	of	the	sunrise	for
the	simple	reason	that	god	is	light,	that	god	is	a	sunrise.
Start	meditating	more	and	more	on	 light	and	 that	will	be	 immensely	helpful	 to
you.	Early	 in	 the	morning	when	 the	 sun	 is	 rising	 look	at	 it	 for	 a	 few	 seconds,
then	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 look	 at	 it	 with	 closed	 eyes.	 In	 the	 night	 look	 at	 the
moon	 or	 the	 stars,	 or	 inside	 your	 room,	 at	 just	 a	 small	 candle...	 That	 too
represents	god	in	its	own	small	way,	like	a	dewdrop	represents	the	ocean...	Look
at	the	candle	flame	for	a	few	minutes,	then	close	your	eyes	and	see	it	with	closed
eyes.	Soon	you	will	be	able	to	see	it	inside.	The	outer	will	only	trigger	a	process
in	you	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	light	inside.
The	day	it	happen	that	one	starts	seeing	one's	inner	being,	full	of	light,	radiating,
one	has	taken	a	turn.
You	have	moved	towards	the	inner,	you	have	taken	the	first	essential	step	and	the
most	important	step.
Everything	else	then	is	easy.	The	first	step	is	the	most	difficult	because	one	has
to	take	a	total	turn.
For	centuries	and	centuries	we	have	ben	going	out	and	out	and	now	suddenly	to
turn	 in...	 our	 mechanism	 does	 not	 work.	 Hence	 it	 takes	 a	 little	 time,	 a	 little
practicing,	so	that	the	mechanism	starts	functioning	again.
It	becomes	flexible	and	a	little	liquid	and	you	can	move	inwards.
One	 day	 it	 happens	 that	 one	 can	 see	 the	 inner	 sun.	 That	 day	 is	 the	 day	 of
liberation,	hence	it	is	called	enlightenment.	You	become	light.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001295
ShortTitle:	RAFTER29
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Veronica.	Veronica	means	true	hearted.
The	 heart	 is	 always	 seeking	 and	 searching	 for	 truth,	 because	 truth	 is	 its
nourishment.	Without	truth	the	heart	starts	dying.	It	can	live	only	in	the	climate
of	truth.
The	head	lives	in	all	kinds	of	lies.	It	is	very	cunning,	diplomatic.	In	fact	it	cannot
live	with	truth	at	all.
Truth	is	poison	to	the	head	and	elixir	for	the	heart.	Lies	are	food	for	the	head	and
poison	 for	 the	 heart.	 And	 the	 whole	 question	 of	 inner	 transformation	 can	 be
reduced	 to	a	single	point,	 the	 jump	from	the	head	 to	 the	heart.	 It	 is	a	quantum
leap.
The	head	cannot	decide	to	jump	because	that	is	going	to	be	suicidal	to	the	head.
The	head	is	bound	to	condemn	it.	It	will	call	it	illogical,	mad,	insane,	crazy...	all
kinds	of	names.	For	centuries	it	has	called	love	madness.	For	centuries	the	head
has	been	against	the	Buddhas,	the	awakened	ones.	It	has	crucified	Jesus.
It	is	not	the	Jews,	it	is	the	head	that	crucified	Jesus.	It	is	the	head	that	poisoned
Socrates.	 It	 is	 the	 head	 that	 tried	 to	murder	Buddha.	 They	 are	 both	 in	 a	 deep
inner	 conflict,	 the	 head	 and	 the	 heart.	Only	one	 can	 live.	 Either	 the	 heart	 can
live,	 then	 the	head	has	 to	disappear,	 or	 the	head	 can	 live,	 then	 the	heart	 starts
shrinking,	dying.	Millions	of	people	have	decided	to	live	with	the	head	because
the	head	is	very	successful	in	the	world.	If	you	are	after	money,	power,	prestige,
then	the	head	is	very	successful.	The	heart	will	be	a	failure	there.	But	in	the	inner
world	 just	 the	 opposite	 is	 the	 case:	 the	 heart	 wins,	 the	 head	 is	 doomed.	 It	 is
bound	to	fail.
Sannyas	means	that	you	are	moving	from	the	head	to	the	heart.	In	spite	of	all	the
condemnation	of	the	head,	you	are	still	moving	towards	the	heart.	Once	you	start
tasting	the	beauty	of	the	heart	and	the	blessings	and	the	fragrance	that	arises	out
of	it,	once	you	start	seeing	the	truth	of	the	heart,	then	there	is	no	problem.
The	whole	difficulty	is	that	before	you	have	tasted	it	the	head	can	go	on	saying
things	against	the	heart.
Once	 you	 have	 tasted	 the	 nectar	 then	 the	 head	 simply	 escapes,	 it	 cannot	 say
anything	against	the	heart	any	more.	Now	you	know	what	it	is	and	you	cannot	be
deceived.	The	head	can	deceive	only	if	you	have	not	tasted	the	heart.
My	work	here	consists	in	helping	you	to	taste	something	of	the	heart.	Just	a	little
glimpse	and	it	sets	off	a	process	of	inner	revolution.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Veet	Thomas.	Veet	means	going	beyond.	Thomas	is
the	 name	 of	 one	 of	 the	 disciples	 of	 Jesus	who	 became	 associated	with	 doubt,
who	in	the	scriptures	has	been	called	doubting	Thomas.
He	loved	Jesus,	he	surrendered	to	Jesus,	but	the	doubt	persisted.	The	surrender
was	not	total,	the	trust	was	not	total.	And	it	is	natural	--	he	cannot	be	condemned
for	 that.	 How	 can	 one	 expect	 somebody	 to	 be	 total	 from	 the	 very	 beginning?
Even	to	be	partially	involved	with	a	man	like	Jesus	of	Buddha	is	more	than	can
be	 expected.	 So	 there	 is	 no	 condemnation	 of	 doubt,	 but	 doubt	 had	 to	 be
transformed	into	trust.
It	is	all	right	to	begin	with	doubt,	but	to	remain	there	stuck,	is	bad.	One	has	to	go
beyond,	one	has	to	transcend	doubting.
Doubt	is	a	good	beginning	but	not	a	good	end.	One	can	use	doubt	as	a	stepping
stone	 towards	 truth,	 trust,	 surrender,	 love,	 but	 one	 should	 use	 it	 as	 a	 stepping
stone,	one	should	not	be	blocked	by	it.	And	that's	what	Thomas	did:	finally	he
overcame	his	 doubt.	His	 trust	 became	 total.,	 he	became	one	of	 the	 apostles	 of
Jesus.
The	story	of	Thomas	is	the	story	of	every	human	being.	Everybody	has	to	begin
with	doubt,	because	the	mind	cannot	say	yes	easily.	No	is	very	easy	because	the
say	no	 is	not	against	 the	ego,	 to	 say	yes	goes	against	 the	ego.	To	say	no	 is	an
attitude	of	 fight,	 resistance,	defence.	To	say	yes	 is	surrender.	And	naturally	we
are	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	we	don't	know	the	beauty	of	surrender	and	we
don't	know	the	joy	of	love	and	we	don't	know	the	splendor	of	trust.
We	know	only	doubt.	Our	schools,	colleges,	universities	they	all	cultivate	doubt
in	us.	Our	whole	 scientific	 structure	depends	on	doubt.	And	 the	more	you	can
doubt,	the	more	you	are	thought	to	be	a	clever	person,	an	intelligent	person.	And
that	 is	 true	as	 far	as	science	 is	concerned:	science	 is	 rooted	 in	doubt.	And	 it	 is
good	also	in	the	outer	world	because	doubt	keeps	you	on	guard,	otherwise	you
will	be	cheated,	you	will	be	deceived	by	everybody,	you	will	be	lost,	robbed	by
everything.	Doubt	 helps	 you.	 So	 nothing	 is	wrong	 in	 doubt.	But	 as	 you	move
inwards	it	is	useless.	It	is	more	harmful	than	helpful.	It	becomes	a	rock	around
your	neck.
In	the	inner	world	trust	is	needed,	just	as	in	the	outer	world	doubt	is	needed.	In
science	doubt	is	needed,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
in	 religion	 trust	 in	 needed;	 hence	 the	 conflict	 between	 religion	 and	 science...
That	is	very	fundamental,	it	is	not	superficial.	It	is	not	about	this	theory	or	that.
Those	things	can	be	settled	--	and	they	are	not	important	either.
Whether	the	earth	is	flat	or	round,	who	bothers?	How	does	it	matter?	Nobody's
life	 depends	 on	 it.	 It	 may	 be	 flat,	 it	 may	 be	 round,	 it	 is	 okay.	 Who	 bothers
whether	the	earth	goes	around	the	sun	or	the	sun	goes	around	the	earth?	It	is	all
the	same	for	you.
If	 the	 sun	 goes	 round	 the	 earth	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 change	 your	 life.	 You	 will
remain	the	same,	just	as	you	were	before,	when	the	earth	used	to	go	around	the
sun.
About	 these	 futile	 things	 settlements	 can	 be	 reached,	 that	 is	 not	 of	 much
importance.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 fundamental	 problem	 and	 there	 is	 no	 compromise
about	 that.	 Science	 is	 rooted	 in	 doubt	 and	 religion	 is	 rooted	 in	 trust.	 Religion
grows	only	when	you	start	saying	yes	and	the	yes	has	to	be	total,	not	partial.
So	 slowly	 slowly	 grow	 beyond	 doubt.	 use	 it	 as	 a	 stepping	 stone,	 but	 don't	 be
used	by	it.
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Dhyan	Lex.	Dhyan	means	meditation.
Meditation	 is	a	 state	of	no-mind,	when	you	are	utterly	silent,	when	not	even	a
single	 thought	 is	moving	 inside	you,	when	 the	constant	chattering	of	 the	mind
has	 stopped,	when	 there	 is	no	desire,	no	memory,	no	 imagination.	When	all	 is
quiet,	 utterly	 still,	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 world	 has	 stopped,	 time	 has	 stopped,	 all
movement	inside	has	topped,	you	have	come	to	a	still	point.
That	still	point	is	the	goal	of	meditation.	And	out	of	the	experience	of	that	still
point	within	you	everything	else	arises	as	a	by-product:	bliss,	love,	compassion...
all	 that	 is	 beautiful,	 all	 that	 really	 makes	 you	 meaningful,	 all	 that	 gives	 you
music	and	poetry,	 all	 that	makes	your	heart	dance	with	 joy,	 all	 that	 transforms
your	life	from	misery	into	a	celebration.
Lex	is	part	of	Alexander.	Alexander	means	a	helper	of	mankind.	That	is	also	the
meaning	of	lex:	one	who	helps.	But	you	can	help	only	if	you	have	arrived	at	that
still	point,	otherwise	you	cannot	help.	You	cannot	help	if	you	are	miserable,	you
will	only	contaminate	people's	lives	with	your	misery.	You	cannot	help	if	you	are
full	 of	 darkness,	 you	 will	 create	 shadows	 in	 other	 people's	 lives.	 If	 you	 are
stinking	you	cannot	share	your	fragrance	with	others.	What	fragrance?	--	there	is
no	fragrance	at	all.	You	are	simply	stinking!	you	will	be	sharing	whatsoever	you
have.
If	you	are	angry	you	will	share	anger,	if	you	are	greedy	you	will	share	greed,	if
you	are	 full	of	 lust	you	will	 share	your	 lust.	We	can	share	only	 that	which	we
have,	we	cannot	share	that	which	we	don't	have.	This	has	to	be	the	fundamental
thing	to	be	remembered;	hence	the	first	step	is	meditation	and	the	second	step	is
compassion.
First	help	yourself.	I	teach	absolute	selfishness,	because	this	is	my	observation,
my	 experience,	 that	 if	 you	 can	 be	 truly	 selfish,	 out	 of	 that	 true	 selfishness
altruism	 is	 born	 and	 only	 out	 of	 that.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 A	 truly	 selfish
person	is	one	who	tries	in	every	possible	way	to	be	blissful,	to	be	peaceful.	The
truly	selfish	person	is	one	who	first	tries	to	find	god	for	himself.	His	concern	is
absolutely	selfish.	He	is	not	concerned	with	anybody	--	the	poverty	in	the	world
and	the	ill	people	and	the	old	people	and	this	and	that	--
he	is	simply	concerned	with	one	thing,	his	effort	is	one-pointed.	Like	an	arrow
he	goes	withinwards	to	find	that	still	point	from	where	life	goes	trough	a	radical
change.
One	 that	 point	 is	 reached	 then	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	 a	 simple	 phenomenon	 --
compassion,	service,	help.	You	can	help	then.	It	will	be	a	joy	to	be	shared.	You
won't	feel	any	ego,	that	you	are	helping	people,	you	won't	feel	holier-than-thou,
you	 will	 be	 simply	 rejoicing.	 You	 won't	 gather	 any	 kind	 of	 ego	 out	 of	 you
compassion.	The	ego	is	already	gone,	it	is	dead.	It	died	in	your	meditation,	now
it	 cannot	 come	 back.	And	 a	man	without	 the	 ego	 can	 be	 of	 tremendous	 help.
Otherwise	 the	 so-called	 helpers	 of	 mankind	 and	 missionaries	 and	 servants	 of
people,	they	are	all	mischievous	people.	They	have	created	more	mischief	in	the
world	than	anybody	else.	Beware!
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Prem	 Agnivesh.	 Prem	 means	 love;	 agnivesh
means	attired	in	fire,	aflame
--	aflame	with	love.
Love	is	fire.	It	burns	all	that	is	gross	in	you.	It	burns	all	that	is	non-essential	in
you.	It	burns	all	that	is	accidental	in	you.	Only	that	which	is	pure	gold	remains.
Hence	 people	 are	 afraid	 of	 love.	 They	 talk	 about	 love,	 they	 even	 deceive
themselves	 that	 they	are	 loving.	They	call	many	kinds	of	games	 love.	But	 real
love	 is	 passing	 through	 fire.	 It	 is	 not	 child's	 play.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest
challenges	in	life,	in	fact	there	is	not	greater	adventure	than	love.	It	is	easier	to
climb	 the	Himalayas	 and	easier	 to	 reach	 the	moon	 than	 to	be	 in	 love,	because
climbing	 and	 reaching	 to	 the	moon	needs	 technology,	 but	 it	 leaves	 you	 intact.
You	remain	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
same.
Love	is	not	science,	love	is	not	technology,	love	is	not	craft.	It	is	a	death,	but	a
death	that	brings	resurrection.	It	is	a	cross,	and	everybody	has	to	carry	their	own
cross.	Nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.
And	we	are	so	attached	to	the	non-essential,	we	are	so	identified	with	all	kinds	of
stupidities	 that	 they	all	hinder	 the	growth	of	 love.	We	are	so	 jealous,	so	full	of
possessiveness,	that	it	is	impossible	for	us	to	be	in	love.
And	we	have	heard	so	much	about	love,	we	know	so	much	about	love...	that	too
is	one	of	the	greatest	barriers,	because	to	know	about	love	is	not	to	know	love.
The	 word	 'about'	 means	 around.	 So	 one	 goes	 about	 and	 about,	 around	 and
around,	but	one	never	penetrates	the	center.	And	love	belongs	to	the	center,	not
to	the	circumference.
So	we	have	to	move	inwards	to	the	very	center	of	our	being.	And	whatsoever	it
costs	it	is	worth	it.	It	is	a	higher	value	than	life	itself.	So	even	if	live	has	to	be
sacrificed	for	it	one	should	not	give	it	a	second	thought,	one	should	simply	jump
into	 the	 fire	 of	 love.	 And	 one	 comes	 out	 purified,	 one	 comes	 out	 totally
transformed.	It	is	a	new	birth...	a	new	being.
For	sannyas	we	have	chosen	the	color	of	fire	for	the	simple	reason	that	sannyas
is	nothing	but	another	name	for	love,	love	for	existence	itself.
This	 is	 your	 new	name:	Swami	Anand	Pardeshi.	Anand	means	 bliss.	 Pardeshi
means	a	stranger.
Misery	 is	very	common.	Misery	 seems	 to	be	part	of	our	 earthly	experience.	 It
seems	 to	 be	 natural.	Bliss	 seems	 to	 be	 something	 of	 a	 stranger,	 that's	why	we
have	not	understood	 Jesus,	Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu,	Buddha.	These	were	blissful
beings.	 We	 could	 not	 absorb	 them.	 There	 was	 a	 gap	 between	 us	 and	 them,
something	 unbridgeable,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	were	 talking	 a	 totally
different	kind	of	language.
They	were	 talking	a	 totally	different	kind	of	 language.	They	were	 talking	as	 if
from	 some	 other	world,	 from	 some	 other	 plane	 of	 existence,	 from	 some	 other
dimension	of	which	we	are	not	at	all	aware,	not	even	in	our	dreams.
We	 live	 in	 misery	 and	 we	 understand	 the	 language	 of	 misery.	We	 have	 only
heard	 the	word	 'bliss'	 but	we	 don't	 understand	what	 exactly	 it	 is.	 It	 is	 not	 our
experience.	It	remains	an	empty	word.	But	it	can	become	an	experience.	We	are
potentially	capable	of	bringing	the	beyond	to	the	earth,	of	bringing	eternity	into
time,	of	bringing	eternal	life	into	this	momentary,	temporary	existence.
We	can	manage	to	make	bliss	start	moving	on	the	earth,	at	least	in	our	hearts.	It
will	remain	a	stranger	here	because	the	world	will	remain	drowned	in	its	misery.
But	 if	 you	 are	 blissful	 you	 can	 help	 a	 few	 people	 because	 you	 can	 become	 a
proof	 for	 them	 that	 bliss	 is	 possible,	 that	 bliss	 is	 not	 impossible.	 If	 this	 is
experienced	by	people	as	happening	in	somebody's	 life,	 then	they	start	seeking
and	 searching	 for	 it.	 Then	 it	 is	 no	more	 an	 empty	word,	 somebody	 has	 given
substance	to	it.
And	 that's	what	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 do.	 They	 have	 to	make	 bliss	walk	 on
earth,	dance	on	earth.	They	have	to	bring	the	greatest	stranger	into	the	world	--
and	bliss	is	that	greatest	stranger.	We	have	to	provoke	bliss,	we	have	to	bring	it
into	the	physical	body.	We	have	to	create	the	space	so	that	it	can	pulsate	and	can
reach	many	people.
The	earth	has	loved	so	long	in	misery	that	it	appears	as	if	misery	is	natural.	It	is
only	 a	 chronic	 disease	 of	millions	 of	 years	 but	 because	 it	 has	 persisted	 for	 so
long,	we	think	it	is	natural.
There	is	a	valley	in	Mexico	where	a	small	tribe	lives.	The	whole	tribe	is	blind.
Every	 child	 is	 born	 with	 eyes	 but	 within	 three	 months	 time	 he	 goes	 blind,
because	 a	 certain	 fly	 there	 exists.	 Once	 the	 child	 is	 bitten	 by	 the	 fly	 he	 goes
blind.	So	the	tribe	believed	that	everybody	is	born	blind	and	that	to	be	blind	is	a
natural	 thing.	Until	 they	came	in	contact	with	people	who	had	eyes	 they	never
suspected.	In	their	whole	history	everybody	had	been	blind.	They	have	become
adjusted	to	their	blindness.	They	work	in	their	blindness.
They	go	to	their	fields,	they	take	care	of	their	cattle,	and	they	bring	up	children
and	they	have	become	adjusted.	It	is	difficult,	very	difficult,	but	what	to	do?	--	if
this	is	life,	then	this	is	life.
But	once	they	came	across	people	who	had	eyes,	then	problems	started	arising	in
their	minds.	Then	something	is	wrong	with	them,	and	something	has	to	be	done
immediately.
This	is	what	the	situation	is	in	the	world:	everybody	is	living	in	misery.	We	have
to	create	a	few	blissful	people	so	that	they	can	become	proofs	that	bliss	can	exist
on	the	earth.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
30	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001305
ShortTitle:	RAFTER30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Jivano	Jeannine.	Jivano	means	life.	Jeannine	means	grace
of	god.
Life	is	a	gift.	It	is	given	to	us	for	no	reason	at	all.	It	is	not	that	we	have	earned	it,
it	 is	not	that	we	deserve	it.	In	fact	we	are	very	undeserving,	unworthy,	but	still
god	has	given	it	to	us.
Why	he	has	given	life	to	us	is	one	of	the	most	significant	questions	to	be	asked.
He	 gives	 because	 he	 has	 too	 much...	 not	 that	 we	 deserve	 but	 because	 he	 is
overflowing.	God	is	overflowing	energy,	and	energy	delights	in	sharing.	God	is
not	a	person	but	pure	energy,	a	flood	of	energy;	hence	this	whole	existence,	this
multi-dimensional	expression...	So	many	flowers,	so	many	trees,	so	many	birds,
animals,	stars,	people	--	it	is	unbelievable	how	many	forms	he	has	taken.
The	 moment	 you	 start	 seeing	 this	 unbelievable	 mystery,	 this	 incredible
phenomenon	 that	 we	 call	 life,	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 feel	 grateful.	 And	 that
gratefulness	is	the	beginning	of	sannyas	because	it	is	the	beginning	of	prayer.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Deva	Donja.	Deva	means	divine.	Donja	means	worthy.
We	 may	 not	 know	 it	 but	 we	 have	 infinite	 potential.	 We	 may	 be	 absolutely
oblivious	to	it	but	we	have	contain	the	seeds	of	god.	We	can	become	gods,	and
unless	we	do	there	can	never	be	any	contentment	in	our	hearts.
Contentment	 comes	 only	 as	 a	 by-product.	When	 one	 achieves	 one's	 potential,
when	the	seed	becomes	the	flower,	there	is	contentment,	there	is	great	rejoicing.
Religion	 is	 the	 art	 of	 the	 seed	 growing	 towards	 the	 flower,	 of	 removing
hindrances,	obstacles,	of	dropping	all	that	hinders	and	co-operating	with	all	that
helps.	It	is	a	subtle	art	and	it	comes	only	slowly	slowly.
Once	 you	 have	 got	 the	 hang	 of	 it	 life	 starts	moving	 very	 quickly.	 It	 jumps	 in
leaps	 and	 bounds.	 But	 the	 preparation	 is	 long	 an	 arduous.	 And	 the	 greatest
problem	is	patience.
Be	patient	and	learn	the	ways	of	growth,	learn	the	ways	of	going	in.	They	are	all
available	here.
Whatsoever	is	needed	is	available	here.	Not	it	is	up	to	you	to	imbibe	the	spirit	of
it.	So	don't	be	a	spectator.
Participate,	and	participate	 totally,	because	 if	sannyas	means	anything	 it	means
trust.
You	are	entering	into	the	world	of	trust,	you	are	leaving	doubt	behind.	You	are
leaving	mind	itself	behind.	You	are	moving	into	the	dimension	of	the	heart.	It	is
only	through	love	that	one	grows,	not	through	logic.
This	is	your	name:	Ma	Anando	Daniela.	Anando	means	rejoice.	Daniela	means
god	is	my	judge	because	god	is	love	and	love	cannot	harm.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	knows	how	to	forgive.	Love	can	only	forgive,	because	the	essential	core	of
love	 is	 compassion.	 So	 all	 the	 ideas	 of	 hell	 and	 punishment	 are	 inventions	 of
cruel	human	minds,	inventions	of	religious	sadists.
They	were	trying	to	hide	their	sadism	behind	hole	garbage,	but	they	were	simply
pathological.
If	god	is,	there	can	be	no	hell,	if	god	is,	there	can	be	no	punishment.	If	god	is,
then	there	are	only	rewards	and	rewards	because	god	is	love!
That	is	my	essential	message:	don't	live	out	of	fear,	because	there	is	no	question
of	 being	 punished.	 Live	 fearlessly	 because	 only	 then	 do	 you	 live	 totally.	 Fear
naturally	closes	you,	it	does	not	allow	you	to	open	up.
You	have	to	consider	a	thousand	and	one	things	before	you	can	do	a	single	thing
--	whether	it	is	right	or	wrong,	moral	or	immoral,	according	to	the	church	or	not,
whether	the	scriptures	favor	it	or	is	against	it.	And	you	will	get	more	and	more
confused	the	more	you	think	about	it.
Even	 a	 very	 simple	 thing	 can	 be	 converted	 into	 a	 confusion.	 There	 ar	 Jaina
monks	in	India	who	are	afraid	to	breathe	because	their	scriptures	say	that	when
you	breath	you	kill	small	cells	that	live	in	the	air.	So	they	are	afraid	to	breaths.
Now	such	a	small	thing,	such	a	natural	thing	has	become	a	problem.	They	cannot
run	because	then	they	will	be	breathing	fast,	so	 they	have	to	walk	slowly.	And
they	continuously	wear	a	strip	of	cloth	on	their	noses	so	that	the	flow	of	the	air	is
not	strong.	Now	how	can	these	people	live	at	all?
They	cannot	even	breathe!
If	 you	 look	 around	 in	 the	 so-called	 religious	 lives	 one	 thing	 is	 certain,	 every
religion	has	been	destructive.	It	has	hampered	them,	obstructed	them,	made	them
so	 afraid	 of	 everything	 that	 small	 joys	 of	 life,	 drinking	 tea,	 becomes	 sin.
Drinking	 water	 in	 the	 night	 becomes	 sin.	 And	 once	 you	 start	 moving	 in	 that
direction,	of	making	things	into	sins,	you	cannot	live,	you	only	drag.
My	 approach	 is	 totally	 different.	 There	 are	mistakes	 but	 there	 is	 no	 sin	 at	 all.
There	are	errors	but	no	sin.
And	one	can	commit	errors	because	it	is	only	through	committing	errors	that	one
learns.	Only	one	thing	has	to	be	remembered,	don't	commit	the	same	error	again
and	again	because	that	is	stupid.
One	should	explore	life,	and	in	exploring	sometimes	you	go	astray.	If	you	are	too
afraid	of	going	astray	you	cannot	 explore.	Then	 the	whole	adventure	of	 life	 is
crushed,	killed,	destroyed.	And	that's	what	so-called	religious	people	have	done:
they	have	made	religion	so	serious,	so	sombre,	they	have	given	religion	such	a
long	face.
My	 effort	 is	 to	 give	 you	 joy,	 gusto	 for	 life,	 courage	 to	 adventure,	 to	 move
fearlessly,	 exploring	 all	 possibilities	 that	 life	 makes	 available,	 fearless	 in
expanding	and	being	open	and	vulnerable.	Because	god	is	our	judge	we	need	not
be	afraid.
Finally	at	 the	judgement	day	when	you	see	god,	you	can	tell	him,	"Yes,	I	have
been	drinking	tea,	please	forgive	me.	I	have	tried	a	few	other	things	also."	And	I
think	he	will	understand	--	don't	be	worried!
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Anand	Jayen.	Anand	means	bliss.	Jayen	means
victory.
The	inward	journey	is	the	only	way	to	find	bliss.	And	when	you	have	reached	to
the	center	of	your	being	for	the	first	time,	you	feel	victorious;	otherwise	you	are
a	failure.	On	the	outside	nobody	ever	is	victorious.
On	the	outside	there	is	only	defeat	and	defeat	and	defeat,	because	what	we	are
searching	is	not	there	at	all,	so	we	are	doomed;	our	very	search	is	doomed.	Even
a	man	like	Alexander	the	Great	died	as	a	failure.
Only	very	few	people	have	died	victorious:	a	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Kabir.
And	the	reason	for	their	victory	was	not	that	they	were	great	conquerors	of	the
world	 --	 they	 conquered	 themselves.	 They	 had	 the	 greatest	 adventure	 of	 life:
they	moved	to	their	center.
We	live	on	the	circumference.	Sannyas	means	a	decision,	a	commitment	to	move
from	 the	 circumference	 to	 the	 center.	 At	 the	 center	 is	 bliss,	 at	 the	 center	 is
victory.	On	 the	 circumference	 is	misery	 and	defeat.	 It	 is	 up	 to	 you	whether	 to
make	your	life	a	joy,	a	work	of	art,	a	piece	of	music,	or	to	just	go	on	collecting
junk.
This	 is	 your	 new	name:	Ma	Usho.	Usho	means	 the	 dawn,	 just	 those	 beautiful
moments	when	the	night	is	over	and	the	sun	has	not	yet	arrived,	when	it	is	just
about	 to	 arrive.	The	East	 is	 becoming	orange	 and	 the	 earth	 is	 getting	 ready	 to
welcome	 the	sun.	The	birds	have	started	singing,	 the	 trees	are	waking	up.	The
whole	earth	is	excited,	life	is	again	stirring	out	if	its	slumber.	A	new	day	is	just	to
begin.	Those	are	the	most	beautiful	moments.
And	 sannyas	 is	 exactly	 like	 that	 in	 the	 inner	 world.	 It	 is	 a	 dawn,	 the	 early
moments,	the	interval	between	the	night	and	the	day,	the	gap.	Hence	the	orange
color	has	been	chosen.	 It	 is	 the	color	 if	 the	morning	sun.	 It	 is	 the	color	of	 the
flowers,	 it	 is	 the	color	of	blood,	of	 life.	It	 is	 the	color	of	 the	spring	in	 the	East
because	 the	whole	of	nature	become	so	colorful...	and	so	many	flowers.	There
are	forests	which	look	as	if	they	ar	on	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
fire...	so	many	red	flowers.
Make	 as	 much	 use	 as	 possible	 of	 these	 potential	 moments.	 These	 are	 very
pregnant	moments.	The	sun	is	not	very	far,	but	the	night	also	has	not	gone	very
far	away.	One	can	turn	back	and	move	into	the	dark	night	again,	one	can	close
one's	 eyes	 and	may	not	 see	 the	 sun.	Our	habits	die	hard	 and	we	have	 lived	 in
darkness	long,	too	long;	we	have	become	accustomed	to	darkness,	to	blindness.
To	receive	something	absolutely	new	needs	courage,	needs	tremendous	courage,
needs	the	heart	of	a	gambler.
So	 be	 ready	 for	 it!	 remember	 not	 to	 turn	 back.	Remember	 that	 one	 has	 to	 go
ahead,	whatsoever	 the	risk	and	whatsoever	 the	cost	because	growth	 is	possible
only	if	we	risk	all.	If	we	are	miserly	in	risking,	growth	cannot	happen.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Gitama.	Gitama	means	song.
Live	 life	 as	 a	 song.	Make	ordinary	 life	 as	 joyful	 as	 possible.	Make	 something
extraordinary	out	of	it.
Don't	condemn	the	ordinary	--	 that	 is	 the	way	of	the	foolish	person.	Transform
the	ordinary	--	that	is	the	way	of	the	wise.	The	mundane	is	not	against	the	sacred,
the	mundane	is	only	a	stepping	stone	towards	the	sacred.
Religions	 have	 condemned	 life	 too	 much;	 hence	 they	 have	 been	 destructive
towards	 all	 joy,	 singing,	dancing,	 celebrating.	They	praise	 the	other	world	 and
the	condemn	this	world.	To	me	this	and	that	are	one.
There	 are	 not	 two	 worlds,	 there	 is	 only	 one	 world,	 and	 if	 you	 condemn	 this
world	you	cannot	praise	 the	other.	 If	you	want	 to	praise	 the	other,	you	have	 to
praise	 this.	And	once	you	 learn	how	 to	 live	on	 this	earth	beautifully,	 joyously,
you	will	become	aware	of	the	presence	of	god	everywhere.
So	live	life	as	a	song	--	that	is	my	message	for	you.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Swami	 Visarjan.	 Visarjan	 means	 dissolution,
disappearing,	evaporating.
Man	has	to	disappear	for	god	to	be.	One	has	to	be	ready	to	die	as	an	ego,	as	a
separate	 entity,	 only	 then	 can	 one	 feel	 the	 totality,	 the	whole.	And	 to	 feel	 the
whole	 is	 to	 be	 holy.	 To	 allow	 the	 whole	 to	 take	 possession	 of	 you	 totally	 is
sannyas.	It	 is	like	a	river	disappearing	into	the	ocean.	It	will	lose	its	identity,	it
will	love	its	name	and	form,	but	it	will	gain	much.	It	will	gain	the	whole	ocean.
Sannyas	means	a	 river	dissolving,	 ready	 to	dissolve	 into	 the	ocean.	 In	 the	 real
sense	 it	 is	 a	 suicide.	Not	 the	 ordninary	 suicide	 in	which	 one	 kills	 one's	 body.
That	 is	 stupid	 because	 one	will	 be	 entering	 into	 another	 body	within	 seconds.
And	because	on	has	been	destructive	towards	the	body	one	will	get	a	far	worse
body	 than	 on	 had	 before...	 because	 one	 has	 not	 been	 grateful,	 one	 had	 shown
one's	ungratefulness.
Sannyas	 is	a	real	suicide.	One	drops	 the	ego,	one	no	more	thinks	of	oneself	as
separate,	one	becomes	part	of	the	whole.	Then	there	is	no	anxiety.	How	can	there
be	 anxiety	 then?	You	are	no	more	 --	who	 is	 going	 to	be	 anxious?	There	 is	 no
anguish	possible.	All	anguish	 is	a	shadow	of	 the	ego	--	 the	bigger	 the	ego,	 the
bigger	the	anguish.	There	can	be	no	fear	any	more,	not	even	the	fear	of	death.	It
is	the	ego	that	is	afraid	of	death,	and	you	have	already	dropped	that.	Now	there	is
no	death	for	you.	You	have	moved	into	eternal	life.
A	 river	 is	 afraid	 to	 die,	 but	 not	 the	 ocean.	 A	 dewdrop	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 afraid,
sooner	or	later	it	has	to	die.
But	not	the	ocean,	the	ocean	is	forever.
We	 are	 like	 dewdrops.	 Becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 that	 we	 are	 taking	 the
greatest	quantum	leap	possible,	we	are	ready	to	disappear	as	we	are	to	become
that	which	is	our	real	destiny	--	the	whole..	And	with	that	comes	all	benediction.
Infinite	joys	start	showering	on	you,	and	they	go	on	showering.	Then	there	is	no
end	to	it.
This	 is	 your	 new	 name:	 Ma	 Sangitama.	 Sangitama	 means	 music,	 harmony,
melody.
Man	lives	in	a	very	unharmonious	way	because	his	whole	effort	is	to	live	an	an
entity	 separate	 form	 the	whole.	He	wants	 to	 live	 as	 a	 person.	He	 is	 trying	 the
impossible.	He	is	part	of	the	whole	and	can	only	be	part	of	the	whole.	The	very
effort,	the	very	idea	that	'I	am	separate,'	creates	disharmony	between	you	and	the
whole.	That	is	misery.	You	start	lagging	behind	the	whole,	you	are	never	in	tune
with	 the	whole.	Something	 is	always	missing,	 something	seems	 to	be	 standing
between	you	and	the	whole.	And	that	which	stands	between	you	and	the	whole	is
your	own	ego,	your	own	projection,	your	own	idea	of	being	separate.
Let	that	ego	die	and	great	music	explodes,	because	you	are	then	in	harmony	with
the	whole.	Then	you	live	in	tune	and	to	be	in	tune	with	the	whole	is	bliss.	Not	to
be	in	tune	with	the	whole	is	misery.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 do	 only	 one	 thing,	 that	 is,	 he	 has	 to	 die	 as	 a	 person	 to	 be
reborn	as	part	of	the	whole.
And	the	paradox	is	that	a	part	of	the	whole	is	not	less	than	the	whole.	A	part	of
the	whole	is	as	big	as	the	whole,	because	the	part	is	the	whole.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
This	goes	against	ordinary	mathematics,	but	this	is	part	of	a	higher	mathematics.
That	higher	mathematics	is	religion.	And	religion	is	capable	of	living	all	kinds	of
paradoxes,	 of	 understanding	 all	 kinds	 of	 paradoxes.	 Science	 tries	 to	 explain
away	those	paradoxes,	religion	accepts	them.	It	never	tries	to	explain	them	away
but	it	absorbs	them,	it	tries	to	live	the	whole	paradox	without	any	choice,	without
choosing	this	part	or	that.
Living	choicelessly,	accepting	the	whole	with	all	its	contradictions,	its	polarities,
makes	one	aware	 that	 the	part	 is	 equal	 to	 the	whole,	 the	whole	 is	 equal	 to	 the
part,	and	that	by	disappearing	into	the	whole	you	don't	lose	anything.	You	gain
everything,	 you	 gain	 the	whole.	 Then	 stars	 start	moving	within	 you,	 then	 the
whole	 sky	 is	 yours.	 You	 become	 spread	 all	 over	 existence.	 You	 are	 no	 more
confined	in	a	small	body,	you	become	unbounded,	you	become	infinite.
And	 that	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas,	 to	 become	 unbounded,	 to	 become	 infinite,
because	only	then	is	there	freedom,	is	there	bliss,	is	there	ecstasy.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Ramo.	Ramo	means	god.
Everyone	 is	 god,	 everything	 is	 god.	 Existence	 and	 god	 are	 two	words	 for	 the
same	phenomenon.	 so	don't	 think	of	god	 in	 terms	of	a	person	who	created	 the
world,	who	controls	the	world,	who	manages	the	whole	affair.	Don't	think	of	him
as	a	 supreme	boss	 --	 there	 is	nobody	 like	 that.	God	 is	not	 somebody,	god	 is	 a
quality.	 It	 is	 far	better	 to	call	 it	godliness.	 It	 is	 a	 fragrance.	 It	 simply	 says	one
thing,	 that	 the	 world	 does	 not	 consist	 only	 of	 the	 visible,	 it	 also	 contains	 the
invisible.	The	world	does	not	consist	only	of	the	measurable
--	the	world	also	contains	the	immeasurable.	The	world	does	not	consist	only	of
the	outside,	 it	 also	has	 the	dimension	of	 interiority.	That's	 all	 that	 is	meant	by
god,	the	dimension	of	the	interiority.
And	you	have	 to	explore	 it	now.	That's	what	sannyas	 is	all	about:	going	 into	a
deep	exploration	of	who	you	are,	of	what	this	consciousness	inside	you	is,	who
this	witness	 is	 inside	you	that	can	witness	 the	body,	 that	can	witness	 the	mind.
Who	 is	 this	 witness?	 From	 this	 moment	 that	 question	 should	 become
suprememost.	That	should	be	your	first	priority.	Your	whole	energy	should	start
moving	around	it.
And	 once	 it	 becomes	 your	 deepest	 concern,	 you	 ultimate	 concern,	 doors	 start
opening.	suddenly	inside	you,	you	start	finding	ways	and	means	and	paths	that
you	have	never	 travelled.	They	are	all	 there,	 everything	 is	 ready,	 it	 is	 just	 that
you	are	not	moving	 in.	You	are	 focussed	on	 the	outside.	Your	back	 is	 towards
your	interiority.
Turn	 in.	 A	 one-hundred-eighty-degree	 turn	 is	 needed.	 And	 once	 you	 start
knowing	who	you	are	--	just	little	glimpses.
Each	moment	you	are	in	for	surprise.	Life	becomes	a	dance,	a	celebration.	Your
eyes	 become	 full	 of	 wonder	 and	 awe.	 And	 that's	 what	 religiousness,	 true
religiousness,	is.
Dance	Til	the	Stars	Come	Down	From	the	Rafters
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
31	January	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8001315
ShortTitle:	RAFTER31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
purposes	only.]
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Peter.	Deva	means	divine,	peter	means	rock	--
divine	rock.
A	rock	seems	to	be	the	most	material	thing	in	existence,	the	most	undivine.	But
it	is	only	an	appearance.
even	the	rock	has	its	heart,	even	the	rock	has	its	soul.	even	the	rock	has	its	own
interiority.	It	is	divine.
To	 symbolize	 this	 in	 the	 east	 we	 have	 made	 images	 of	 Buddha,	 Mahavira,
Krishna,	out	of	rocks.	It	is	a	tremendously	significant	metaphor.	It	says	that	even
a	 rock	 can	 be	 transformed	 into	 god,	 so	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 feel	 hopeless.
Wherever	you	are,	you	are	always	above	the	rock.	If	even	a	rock	can	become	a
Buddha,	why	not	you?
And	 to	 see	god	 in	 rocks	means	 that	you	can	 see	god	everywhere.	One	who	 is
capable	of	seeing	the	divinity	of	a	rock	cannot	condemn	anybody	as	a	sinner.	It
will	be	impossible,	because	even	in	the	sinner	he	will	see	god.	God	is	all	that	is.
All	are	his	forms.
To	remember	it	is	to	become	enlightened.
So	this	is	good:	Ma	Suni.
The	sun	symbolizes	many	things.	The	most	 important	 is	 that	 it	 is	 the	center	of
the	 solar	 system.	 Just	 as	 the	 sun	 is	 the	 center	 of	 the	 solar	 system,	 god	 is	 the
center	 of	 the	 whole	 universe.	 And	 just	 as	 the	 sun	 is	 the	 center	 of	 the	 solar
system,	inside	you	also	is	a	sun.	At	the	very	center	of	your	being	it	is	also	light.
There	 is	 only	 one	 difference:	 the	 sun	 is	 exhaustible,	 but	 the	 inner	 light	 is
inexhaustible.
This	is	the	German	meaning,	but	there	is	an	Indian	meaning	to	the	word	which	is
far	more	important.
Suni	means	empty,	utterly	empty,	a	state	of	no-mind.
The	 constantly	 chattering	 mind	 keeps	 you	 always	 full	 of	 garbage.	 Once	 the
chattering	mind	stops	all	garbage	disappears.	For	the	first	time	you	start	feeling
spacious...	 yes,	 spaced	 out!	You	 start	 feeling	 as	 if	 you	 contain	 the	whole	 sky.
And	 the	 moment	 you	 are	 absolutely	 empty	 something	 of	 the	 beyond	 starts
penetrating	you.
God	can	be	a	guest	inside	you	only	when	you	are	empty,	because	he	needs	all	the
space.	If	you	are	too	full	of	yourself	there	is	no	space	inside	you.	To	be	utterly
empty	is	to	be	ready	to	receive	god.
Remember	both	meanings:	become	a	light	unto	yourself	and	become	absolutely
empty.	If	these	two	things	can	be	fulfilled,	life	is	fulfilled.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Abol.	Abol	means	an	inner	state	of	no-thought,
of	absolute	silence,	nothing	to	say,	nothing	to	express:	As	if	one	is	so	much	full
of	 awe	 that	 the	 mind	 has	 stopped,	 the	 words	 have	 disappeared,	 and	 one	 has
tasted	for	the	first	time	the	primordial	silence	that	prevailed	before	the	world	was
created.	It	can	still	be	tasted,	it	can	still	be	lived.	All	that	is	needed	is	the	art	of
dispersing	the	crowd	inside	you.
We	 go	 on	 inviting.	 Rather	 than	 dispersing	 the	 crowd	 we	 go	 on	 accumulating
more	 and	 more	 crowds	 inside.	 All	 the	 information	 that	 you	 collect,	 all	 the
knowledge	 that	 you	 accumulate,	 all	 the	 memories,	 the	 whole	 past,	 they	 are
crowding	you.	And	it	is	not	only	that	the	past	is	there,	the	future	also	--	you	go
on	 imagining	 about	 it.	 You	 are	 crushed	 between	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future...	 so
many	memories	and	so	many	imaginations,	fantasies.	You	never	know	a	single
moment	when	the	mind	stops	speaking.	Even	in	sleep	it	goes	on	talking	to	itself.
In	the	night	it	dreams,	in	the	day	it	thinks	--	both	are	the	same	processes.
Thinking	 is	 verbal;	 it	 is	 verbal	 dreaming.	 And	 dreaming	 is	 non-verbal.	 It	 is
thinking	in	a	pictorial	way.
Two	sides	of	 the	same	coin.	One	has	 to	 learn	how	 to	stop	 this	nuisance	called
mind;	and	once	you	know	how	to	stop	it,	then	you	can	even	use	it,	because	you
become	the	master.	Then	the	mind	is	a	beautiful	slave,	it	can	do	many	things.	It
can	serve	the	master,	but	the	master	is	asleep	and	the	servant	is	pretending	to	be
the	master:	This	is	the	situation.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	getting	involved	in	a	process	where	the	whole
situation	has	to	be	put	right.	The	master	has	to	be	the	master	and	the	slave	has	to
be	the	slave.	When	everybody	is	in	his	own	place	great	harmony	arises	and	great
joy	 if	 followed.	 It	comes	on	 its	own	accord.	All	 that	 is	needed	 is	 to	put	 things
right	inside	you.	Everything	is	there	but	upside	down.	All	that	is	needed	to	make
you	cosy,	comfortable,	joyous.	Bliss	is	there,	but	everything	is	jumbled.	It	is	like
a	room	after	an	earthquake:	all	the	furniture	is	there	but	nothing	is	in	its	place.	It
needs	 a	 new	 arrangement,	 a	 re-arrangement	 rather.	 And	 that's	 the	 function	 of
sannyas,	 to	 create	 a	 new	 arrangement	 into	 your	 being,	 otherwise	 nothing	 is
missing.	Things	are	just	in	the	wrong	places.	They	have	to	be	put	right.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	mind	has	to	function	as	a	slave	and	you	have	to	come	out	of	your	sleep.
You	have	to	become	conscious,	you	have	to	be	more	aware.
Only	by	becoming	more	aware	can	you	reclaim	your	mastery.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Veet	Moha.	Veet	means	going	beyond,	moha	means
attachment.
Sannyas	 simply	 means	 that:	 going	 beyond	 attachment.	We	 become	 too	 easily
attached,	we	become	attached	to	everything.	Life	is	a	flux,	nothing	remains	the
same,	but	we	hope	and	we	desire	that	it	will	remain	the	same.	There	is	so	much
frustration	in	the	world	because	all	our	expectations	remain	unfulfilled.
Each	expectation	brings	a	disaster.
Attachment	means	clinging	to	something,	wanting	it	the	way	it	is	forever.	That	is
asking	for	the	impossible.	The	young	person	wants	to	remain	young	forever,	and
that	is	impossible,	sooner	or	later	he	has	to	become	old.	But	then	old	age,	rather
than	 bringing	 joy,	 brings	 suffering.	 Otherwise	 old	 age	 should	 be	 the	 very
crescendo	of	life.	It	should	be	the	highest	peak,	snow-covered	--	but	it	is	a	dark
hole.	It	is	a	dark	hole	because	we	have	been	clinging	to	youth.	We	cling	to	the
body,	but	the	body	has	to	go	one	day.	Live	in	it,	love	it,	respect	it,	take	care	of	it,
but	 don't	 become	attached.	Remember	 it	 is	 a	 caravanserai,	 an	overnight's	 stay.
But	in	the	morning	we	have	to	go.
And	so	is	the	case	with	everything.	You	fall	in	love	with	a	person,	you	become
attached,	and	immediately	misery	starts.	You	become	possessive,	you	are	afraid
he	may	fall	in	love	with	somebody	else.
You	start	hindering,	obstructing	his	freedom,	you	start	reducing	him	to	a	thing.
All	 respect	 and	 love	 starts	 disappearing.	 It	 becomes	 only	 a	 continuous	 fight
between	two	egos.	You	want	to	possess	him	and	he	wants	to	possess	you.	How
can	love	exist	in	such	a	constant	war?	Attachment	destroys	love.	It	is	poison	to
love.
Love	 deeply,	 profoundly,	 but	 don't	 bring	 possessiveness	 and	 jealousy	 in.	They
are	bound	to	come	in	if	you	become	attached.	The	greatest	art	to	learn	in	life	is
to	float	unattached.	Pass	through	life	but	be	untouched	by	anything.	Things	will
come	 and	 go,	 you	 remain	 centered	 in	 your	 being,	 undistracted,	 undisturbed.
That's	what	sannyas	is.	And	if	a	person	can	manage	this	state	all	bliss	is	his.	He
can	have	the	whole	universe.
This	is	a	miracle:	the	universe	belongs	to	those	people	who	are	non-possessive.
Love	belongs	to	those	who	are	non-jealous.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Amitrup.	Amitrup	means	infinite	beauty.
God	 is	 truth,	 god	 is	 beauty,	 god	 is	 bliss,	 god	 is	music.	God	 is	 all	 the	 possible
values,	the	ultimate	values.
No	single	value	defines	him,	neither	truth	nor	beauty	nor	bliss	--	he	is	all.	But	to
conceive	 the	 infinity,	 that	 multi-dimensionality	 go	 god	 is	 very	 difficult.	 It	 is
better	to	focus	yourself	on	one	aspect	of	god.	If	you	attain	that,	that	becomes	the
door.	 By	 entering	 into	 the	 temple	 the	 whole	 temple	 is	 yours	 --	 and	 there	 are
many	doors	to	the	temple.
A	few	people	enter	from	truth,	they	seek	and	search	for	truth.	A	few	people	enter
trough	love,	a	few	people	enter	through	virtue	and	so	on,	so	forth.	A	few	people
have	entered	though	beauty	too	--	and	that	 is	going	to	be	your	meditation,	you
path.	Contemplate	 the	beauty	of	people.	The	more	you	can	feet	 the	beauty,	 the
closer	you	will	come	to	dog.
When	you	see	 the	beauty	 in	a	 flower	or	 in	a	star...	 the	 flower	and	star	are	 just
excuses,	 vehicles,	 the	beauty	belongs	 to	 god.	The	beauty	 is	 equivalent	 to	 god,
that's	why	 science	 cannot	 find	 it	 anywhere.	And	 it	 immeasurable,	 it	 cannot	 be
measured.	It	is	infinite,	it	has	no	boundaries.	So	one	who	is	lost	in	the	beauty	of
existence	is	lost	into	infinity.
Lose	yourself	more	and	more	 in	 the	sunset,	 in	 the	sunrise,	 in	 the	 laughter	of	a
child,	in	the	rearing	waves	of	the	ocean.	Lose	yourself	more	and	more	wherever
you	encounter	beauty.	Let	that	be	your	encounter	with	god.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Amito.	Amito	means	the	immeasurable.
The	English	word	'matter'	means	the	measurable.	It	comes	from	the	root	which
means	measure.	That	which	can	be	measured	is	matter.	Science	believes	only	in
matter	because	it	believes	only	in	the	measurable.
That	which	cannot	be	measured,	science	simply	denies.	That	denying	is	 just	 in
self-defense,	 because	 to	 allow	 the	 immeasurable	 means	 you	 are	 allowing
mysteries	 in.	 And	 science	 is	 very	 much	 afraid	 of	 the	 mysterious.	 It	 is	 very
disturbing.
The	 mysterious	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 paradoxical.	 It	 cannot	 be	 reduced	 to	 logical
statements.	 You	 cannot	 make	 a	 system	 out	 of	 it.	 It	 is	 illusive,	 it	 escapes	 all
formulations.	The	more	you	try	to	catch	hold	of	it,	the	farther	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
away	it	is.	It	is	mercurial,	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	it,	you	cannot	have	it	in	your
fist.	 You	 can	 have	 it	 in	 an	 open	 hand	 but	 not	 in	 a	 fist.	 And	 science	 is	 a	 fist,
religion	is	an	open	hand.
Religion	 is	 not	 afraid	 of	 the	 immeasurable.	 In	 fact,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 it	 is
enchanted	by	the	immeasurable.
It	takes	the	challenge	of	the	immeasurable;	it	goes	on	that	adventure.	It	risks	all.
The	moment	you	are	ready	 to	risk	for	 that	which	 is	 invisible,	 for	 that	which	 is
beyond	 words,	 beyond	 logic,	 beyond	 mind,	 for	 that	 which	 can	 never	 be
measured,	 for	 that	which	 can	 never	 be	 reduced	 to	 a	 system,	 you	 are	 taking	 a
quantum	 leap.	The	mind	will	 call	 it	mad,	but	 that	madness	 is	 real	 sanity.	That
madness	is	the	most	precious	phenomenon	in	existence.
It	is	because	of	a	few	mad	people	that	humanity	has	not	lost	contact	with	God.	A
Buddha	here,	a	Jesus	there,	a	Mohammed	somewhere	else	--	just	a	few	people,
but	 they	 remained	 in	 contact	 with	 God.	 And	 through	 them,	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	has	remained	in	contact	with	God.
Sannyas	means	 taking	 the	 jump	 into	 the	unknown,	 into	 the	 immeasurable,	 into
the	 unbounded.	 It	 needs	 courage	 because	 the	 boat	 is	 very	 small	 and	 you	 are
going	into	the	infinite	ocean.	But	even	if	you	are	lost	in	the	infinity	of	the	ocean,
you	will	 have	 gained.	 Even	 if	 you	 are	 drowned	 in	 it	 you	will	 be	 gaining	 not
losing,	you	will	be	resurrected.	You	will	attain	to	a	higher	plane	of	being.
And	those	who	go	on	clinging	to	the	shore,	afraid	of	the	ocean	--	so	much	so	that
they	deny	it	--	say,
"There	 is	no	ocean	at	all.	This	 is	all	 imagination	--	poetic,	mystic	 imagination.
There	is	no	ocean.	This	shore	is	all."	They	may	live	in	comfort,	in	a	little	cozy,
small	world	of	their	own,	but	they	are	losing	every	moment.	They	are	losing	the
great	opportunity	of	growing	up,	of	becoming	mature,	of	going	beyond	death,	of
entering	into	God.
Sannyas	is	a	challenge.	It	is	accepting	the	invitation	of	the	infinite.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Haritama.	Haritama	means	the	green	one,	greenery.
Green	represents	the	trees,	the	forest,	the	wild	jungles.	It	represents	nature	--	and
god	is	closest	when	you	are	in	communion	with	nature.	Talk	with	the	trees,	with
rivers,	with	rocks.	In	the	beginning	it	is	very	embarrassing,	a	little	awkward,	you
feel	 as	 if	 you	 are	 going	 mad.	 But	 soon	 things	 settle,	 soon	 you	 start	 feeling
responses.	It	is	not	you	talking	alone	to	the	tree,	the	tree	responds	in	its	own	way.
Of	 course	 nature	 cannot	 speak	human	 languages,	 it	 knows	only	 one	 language,
the	language	of	silence.	So	to	commune	with	nature	you	have	to	be	utterly	silent.
Just	being	present	 to	nature	 is	enough,	 the	nature	start	 responding	 to	you.	And
between	 these	 two	 silences,	 your	 silence	 and	 the	 silence	 of	 nature,	 something
mysterious	transpires.	That	mysterious	phenomenon	is	god.
It	is	because	green	represents	nature	that	Sufis	have	chosen	green	as	their	color.
It	 also	 represents	 peace,	 because	nature	 is	 peaceful.	 Just	 look	 at	 trees	 and	you
eyes	start	feeling	a	subtle	peace.
So	come	closer	and	closer	to	nature	and	you	will	be	coming	closer	and	closer	to
ourselves	 in	a	very	 indirect	way.	Soon	you	will	see	god	 in	flowers,	 in	 trees,	 in
rivers,	 in	 clouds.	And	 that	god	 is	not	Christian,	not	Hindu,	not	Mohammedan.
That	god	is	simply	god.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Devaprem.	Devaprem	means	divine	love.
Everything	 is	 divine,	 but	 love	 is	 more	 divine	 than	 anything	 else.	 Love	 is	 the
highest	quality	a	man	can	have	pulsating	around	him.	It	is	the	greatest	music	that
you	can	play	upon	your	heart.	More	people	have	arrived	home	through	love	than
by	any	other	path.
So	let	this	become	your	very	center.	Don't	try	to	understand	nature	or	existence.
Try	to	love.	Love	brings	its	own	understanding,	not	that	of	the	intellect	but	of	the
heart.	And	when	you	understand	something	by	the	heart,	 though	the	heart,	you
really	understand.
When	you	understand	only	intellectually	your	understanding	is	very	superficial,
it	is	not	real	understanding.	You	understand	words,	language,	grammar,	but	that
is	 not	 the	 real	 point.	 For	 example	 if	 you	 are	 listening	 to	 poetry	 and	 you
understand	all	the	words	and	the	grammar	and	the	language	and	the	metre,	that
does	 not	mean	 that	 you	 understand	 poetry.	 Poetry	 is	 something	more	 than	 all
that.	 Poetry	 is	more	 than	 the	 sum	 total	 of	 its	 parts.	And	 that	 is	 available	 only
through	the	heart.
God	is	the	poetry	of	existence	and	love	is	the	poetry	of	your	inner	being.	When
you	are	full	of	love	you	are	in	a	poetic	mood,	your	windows	are	open.	You	are
open	to	the	sun,	to	the	wind,	to	the	rain.	And	when	you	are	full	of	love	suddenly
you	see	the	whole	existence	full	of	love.	It	is	a	synchronicity:	when	you	are	full
of	 love	existence	responds.	 It	 rises	 to	meet	you,	 it	 immediately	comes	close	 to
you.	It	starts	pulsating	with	you.
And	 to	pulsate	with	nature	 is	 to	know	what	 life	 is,	what	god	 is,	what	 truth	 is,
what	beauty	is.	Meaning	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
felt	for	the	first	time	when	you	pulsate	with	existence.
My	 whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be	 in	 harmony,	 not	 in
conflict	with	 the	world.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	world.	 It	 is	 as	 perfect	 as	 it	 can	 be,	 it
cannot	be	improved	upon.	But	we	are	not	in	tune.	We	are	lagging	behind,	we	are
not	in	step.
To	be	a	sannyasins	simply	means	to	decide	that	now	you	will	not	try	to	conquer
the	world,	but	will	be	conquered	by	it.	And	that's	what	love	is	too,	a	desire	to	be
conquered,	a	desire	to	dissolve	into	the	whole.
Deep	down	love	is	a	let-go,	but	in	that	let-go	comes	victory.	When	you	are	ready
to	be	conquered	by	existence,	 existence	crowns	you,	because	 for	 the	 first	 time
you	know	that	you	are	not	separate.	The	whole	existence	celebrates.	the	moment.
This	is	your	new	name:	Ma	Yasha.	Yasha	means	the	glorious	one.
We	all	come	with	a	glory	hidden	in	our	being,	but	it	remains	hidden.	We	never
work	to	make	it	manifest.	We	remain	like	seeds	and	we	die	like	seeds.	We	never
become	 trees,	 we	 never	 bloom,	 we	 never	 come	 to	 flower.	 We	 take	 life	 for
granted,	as	if	this	were	all.	This	is	not	all.	This	is	not	even	the	beginning.
The	life	we	ordinarily	live	is	just	keeping	ourselves	occupied.	Between	birth	and
death	nothing	really	happens.	People	go	on	keeping	themselves	occupied,	that's
another	matter,	but	nothing	really	happens.
Neither	love	nor	truth	nor	god	--	nothing	really	happens.	They	hope,	they	desire,
they	expect,	but	hose	are	not	the	ways	for	real	happenings.	For	real	happenings
some	inner	work	is	needed	--	and	the	most	important	work	is	meditation.
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 manifesting	 that	 which	 is	 unmanifest	 in	 you,	 of
expressing	 that	 which	 is	 just	 a	 potential.	 Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 self-
actualization.
Man	 is	 born	 only	 as	 an	 opportunity,	 just	 as	 an	 opportunity.	One	 can	miss	 the
opportunity.	And	the	majority	of	people	go	on	missing	it.	Don't	miss	it,	then	only
will	you	be	a	 true	sannyasin.	The	work	 to	enter	 in	 is	hard.	Everything	great	 is
difficult,	 everything	great	 is	 an	uphill	 task.	But	 if	 a	 few	people	have	managed
you	can	also	manage	it,	because	essentially	we	are	not	different.	If	a	Buddha	can
manage,	 a	 Jesus	 can	manage,	 you	 can	manage,	 because	 essentially	we	 are	 not
different.	They	were	people	exactly	like	us,	but	they	worked,	they	worked	hard
to	 grow.	 They	 poured	 their	 whole	 energy	 into	 one	 phenomenon,	 and	 that	 is
meditation.
So	while	you	are	here	go	deeper	 into	meditation.	Learn	at	 least	one	method	so
deeply	that	when	you	go	away	from	here	you	can	continue	that	method.	It	takes
time	and	patience,	but	great	 is	 the	fulfillment	when	it	happens,	great	 is	 the	 joy
when	meditation	matures.
This	is	your	new	name:	Swami	Yoga	Vigyan.	Yoga	means	meeting,	meeting	with
god,	 the	 ultimate	meeting,	 and	 vigyan	means	 the	 science	 --	 the	 science	 of	 the
ultimate	meeting.
That's	what	sannyas	is.	It	is	a	science	of	the	inner	world.	It	is	not	objective,	it	is
subjective.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	things	but	is	has	everything	to	do	with	your
consciousness.	It	is	an	effort	to	raise	your	consciousness	to	its	absolute	potential.
And	 when	 your	 consciousness	 has	 risen	 to	 its	 highest	 possible	 peak,	 bliss
descends	on	you,	peace	descends	on	you,	god	starts	hovering	around	you.	And
for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 immortal,	 eternal,	 that	 nothing	 can
destroy	you,	that	there	is	no	need	to	be	afraid.	And	when	all	fear	disappears	one
starts	living,	only	then	can	one	start	living.	Fear	paralyzes	people	--	and	all	the
religions	have	tried	to	exploit	fear.
I	 am	 giving	 you	 a	 totally	 new	 vision	 of	 religion.	 It	 is	 not	 based	 on	 fear,	 it	 is
rooted	 in	 fearlessness.	So	I	don't	 teach	you	any	dogma,	any	belief	system,	any
philosophy.	I	simply	give	you	the	science	of	going	in,	of	waking	up	your	soul.
And	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.	Nobody	can	do	it	on	your	behalf,	you	have	to
do	it.
The	master	can	only	indicate	the	way	--	you	have	to	follow	it.
Once	even	a	little	stirring	in	your	consciousness	starts	happening	the	process	is
triggered.	Then	it	goes	on	growing	on	its	own.	The	first	step	is	the	most	difficult.
The	seed	falling	into	the	soil,	ready	to	die,	 that	 is	 the	most	difficult	step.	Once
that	has	ben	taken	and	the	seed	has	died	in	the	soil,	the	sprout	starts	growing.
Just	 two	leaves	come	in	 the	beginning	and	then	soon	a	great	 foliage	and	many
branches	and	a	huge	tree	with	millions	of	flowers....
Initiation	into	sannyas	is	just	like	a	seed	falling	into	the	soil.	The	disciple	has	to
die	in	the	master,	he	has	to	disappear	as	an	ego,	and	then	the	work	starts.	Then
you	 are	 really	 born.	 The	 first	 birth	 is	 through	 the	 mother	 and	 the	 father,	 the
second,	the	true	birth,	is	through	the	master.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
