
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Talks	on	Zen
Talks	given	from	11/06/76	am	to	20/06/76	am
English	Discourse	series
10	Chapters
Year	published:	1977
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	Never	Pretend,	Even	About	Skulls
11	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606110
ShortTitle:
DANG01
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
96
mins
THE	MASTER	FUGAI	WAS	CONSIDERED	VERY	WISE	AND	GENEROUS,
YET
HE	WAS	MOST	SEVERE	BOTH	WITH	HIMSELF	AND	HIS	DISCIPLES.
HE	WENT	TO	THE	MOUNTAINS	TO	SIT	IN	ZEN.	HE	LIVED	IN	A	CAVE,
AND
WHEN	HE	WAS	HUNGRY	HE	WENT	TO	THE	VILLAGE	FOR	SCRAPS.
ONE	 DAY	 A	 MONK	 CALLED	 BUNDO,	 ATTRACTED	 BY	 FUGAI'S
AUSTERITIES,	 CALLED	 AT	 THE	 CAVE	 AND	 ASKED	 TO	 STAY	 THE
NIGHT.
THE	MASTER	SEEMED	HAPPY	TO	PUT	HIM	UP,	AND	NEXT	MORNING
PREPARED	RICE	GRUEL	FOR	HIM.	NOT	HAVING	AN	EXTRA	BOWL	HE
WENT
OUT	 AND	 RETURNED	 WITH	 A	 SKULL	 HE	 FOUND	 LYING	 NEAR	 A
TOMB.	HE
FILLED	IT	WITH	GRUEL	AND	OF	OFFERED	IT	TO	BUNDO.
THE	GUEST	REFUSED	TO	TOUCH	IT,	AND	STARED	AT	FUGAI	AS	IF	HE
HAD
GONE	MAD.
AT	 THIS	 FUGAI	 BECAME	 FURIOUS	 AND	 DROVE	 HIM	 OUT	 OF	 THE
CAVE
WITH	 BLOWS.	 'FOOL!'	 HE	 SHOUTED	 AFTER	 HIM.'HOW	 CAN	 YOU,
WITH
YOUR	WORLDLY	NOTIONS	OF	FILTH	AND	PURITY,	THINK	YOURSELF
A	BUDDHIST?'
SOME	 MONTHS	 LATER	 THE	 MASTER	 TETSGYU	 VISITED	 HIM	 AND
TOLD	HIM
THAT	HE	THOUGHT	IT	A	GREAT	PITY	THAT	HE	HAD	FORSAKEN	THE
WORLD.	 FUGAI	 LAUGHED	 LOUDLY	 AND	 SAID:'OH,	 IT'S	 EASY
ENOUGH	TO
FORSAKE	 THE	 WORLD	 AND	 BECOME	 A	 BONZAI,	 THE	 DIFFICULT
THING	IS
THEN	TO	BECOME	A	TRUE	BUDDHIST.'
TRUTH	IS	ONE,	but	it	can	be	approached	in	many	ways.	Truth	is	one,	but	it	can
be	expressed	in	many	ways.
Two	ways	are	very	essential;	all	the	ways	can	be	divided	into	two	categories.	It
will	be	good	to	understand	that	basic	polarity.
Either	you	approach	 truth	 through	 the	mind	or	you	approach	 truth	 through	 the
heart.	 So	 there	 are	 two	 types	 of	 religions	 in	 the	 world	 --	 both	 true,	 both
meaningful,	but	both	opposite	 to	each	other	--	 the	religion	of	 the	mind	and	the
religion	of	the	heart.
The	religion	of	the	mind	believes	that	if	you	become	thoughtless,	if	the	mind	is
dropped,	 you	 attain	 to	 truth.	 The	mind	 is	 the	 barrier;	 the	 no-mind	will	 be	 the
gate.	Buddhism,	Jainism,	Taoism	--	these	are	the	religions	of	the	mind.	They	are
religions	 of	 deep	 analysis,	 religions	 of	 deep	 awareness,	 religions	 of
enlightenment.
Then	 there	 are	 religions	 of	 the	 heart:	 Judaism,	 Christianity,	 Islam,	 Hinduism.
They	 believe	 that	 the	 path	 goes	 through	 the	 heart,	 that	 the	 heart	 has	 to	 be
dissolved	into	the	beloved,	into	the	Divine.
The	 first	 religions	are	 the	 religions	of	meditation.	The	word	 'meditation'	 is	not
exactly	 right	 but	 there	 is	 no	 other	 word	 to	 translate	 DHYANA	 into	 English,
because	the	language	has	never	known	a	religion	of	meditation	so	the	word	does
not	 exist.	All	Western	 languages,	 in	 fact,	 have	 known	only	 the	 religion	 of	 the
heart	 so	 they	have	 the	 perfect	word	 for	 that	 path	 --	 prayer.	But	 for	DHYANA
they	don't	have	any	word	so	meditation	is	the	only	word	that	can	be	used.	In	fact,
DHYANA	means	exactly	 the	opposite;	DHYANA	means	 just	 the	contrary.	The
word	'meditation'	comes	from	a	Greek	root
'medonai'	 which	 means	 to	 think	 about.	 The	 word	 'meditation'	 means	 to	 think
about,	and	DHYANA,	which	we	are	translating	as	meditation,	means	how	not	to
think	about;	how	to	be	 in	a	state	of	no	 thought;	how	to	come	to	a	point	where
you	 are	 but	 there	 is	 no	 thinking;	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind,	 pure	 awareness.	 But
meditation	is	the	only	word	so	we	will	use	it.
Zen	is	the	culmination	of	the	Buddhist	search.	Zen	is	the	uttermost	flowering	of
the	 path	 of	 meditation.	 The	 word	 'zen'	 comes	 from	 DHYANA.	 DHYANA
became	 'chen'	 in	China,	 then	 'chen'	became	 'zen'	 in	Japan.	Remember	this:	Zen
originated	in	India	with	Gautam	Buddha.	When	Gautam	Buddha	attained	to	his
ultimate	enlightenment,	the	state	of	no-mind,	the	world	came	to	know	the	path	of
analysis,	the	path	of	right	thinking,	the	path	of	right	remembering,	and	the	path
of	how	to	dissolve	all	thinking	by	becoming	more	and	more	aware	of	thoughts.
Just	by	watching	thoughts,	slowly,	slowly,	they	fade	out	--	you	become	simply	a
watcher,	you	are	not	identified	with	your	thinking,	you	stand	aside	and	you	go	on
watching,	 just	 as	 if	 you	 are	 standing	by	 the	 side	of	 the	 road	 and	watching	 the
traffic.	The	mind	 is	 like	 traffic,	very	circular,	goes	on	moving	 in	a	circle,	very
repetitive,	almost	a	mechanism.	You	go	on	doing	the	same	thing	again	and	again
and	again.	Your	whole	 life	 is	nothing	but	a	prolonged	 repetition,	very	circular.
The	mind	 is	 a	mandala,	 a	 circle,	 and	 it	 moves.	 If	 you	watch,	 by	 and	 by	 you
become	aware	of	the	circle,	of	the	vicious	circle	of	the	mind.	Again	and	again	it
brings	the	same	emotions:	the	same	anger,	the	same	hatred,	the	same	greed,	the
same	ego....	And	you	go	on.	You	are	just	a	victim.
Once	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 the	mind	 and	 you	 start	 watching	 it,	 the	 bridge	 is
broken,	you	are	no	more	 identified	with	 the	mind.	Once	you	are	not	 identified
with	 the	 mind,	 the	 mind	 disappears	 because	 it	 needs	 your	 co-operation	 to	 be
there.
These	coming	ten	days	we	will	be	talking	about	Zen.	But	to	understand	it	rightly,
you	have	 to	understand	 the	opposite	also	 --	 the	opposite	becomes	a	contrast,	 a
background.
The	path	of	prayer	does	not	analyse;	it	does	not	try	to	be	aware	or	alert.	On	the
contrary,	 the	 path	 of	 prayer	 dissolves	 itself	 completely	 into	 the	 prayer.	 You
should	 not	witness,	 you	 should	 not	 be	 a	watcher;	 you	 should	 be	 drunk	 like	 a
drunkard	and	lost,	completely	lost.
On	the	path	of	prayer,	love	is	the	goal.	You	should	be	loving;	you	should	be	so
full	of	love	that	your	ego	dissolves	into	your	love,	melts	into	your	love.	On	the
path	of	prayer,	God	is	a	necessary	hypothesis.	I	call	it	a	hypothesis	because	it	is	a
need	on	the	path	of	prayer	but	it	is	not	a	need	on	the	path	of	meditation.
On	the	path	of	meditation	no	God	is	needed,	hence	the	influence	and	the	appeal
of	Zen	 in	 the	West.	God	has	become	almost	 incomprehensible.	The	very	word
'God'	looks	dirty.
The	moment	you	say	 'God'	you	put	people	off.	Hence	the	appeal	of	Zen	in	the
West.
Christianity	is	dying	because	that	hypothesis	has	been	used	too	much,	has	been
exploited	too	much.	The	other,	just	the	opposite,	is	needed.
On	the	path	of	prayer	you	are	to	be	drunk;	on	the	path	of	meditation	you	have	to
be	alert.
In	both	the	ways	the	ego	disappears.	If	you	are	fully	alert	there	is	no	ego	because
in	full	awareness	you	become	so	transparent	that	you	don't	create	any	shadow.	If
you	are	 fully	drunk,	 in	deep	 love	with	God,	again	you	disappear	 --	because	 in
LOVE	you	cannot	be.
The	ultimate	is	the	same:	the	ego	disappears.	And	when	the	ego	is	not	there	you
come	to	know	what	truth	is.
Nobody	has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 say	what	 it	 is;	 nobody	will	 ever	 be	 able	 to	 say
what	it	is.
The	experience	is	so	ultimate,	so	vast,	that	it	is	indefinable.	It	is	so	unlimited	it
cannot	 be	 put	 into	 words	 --	 words	 are	 very	 narrow	 and	 the	 experience	 is
tremendously	vast.	But	from	both	the	paths,	people	reach	to	the	same	goal.
Truth	is	one.	Vedas	say,	'Truth	is	one	but	it	has	been	seen	in	different	ways	by	the
seers.'
So	 remember	 that.	All	 religions	are	basically,	 intrinsically,	 leading	 to	 the	 same
goal.	Even	when	they	appear	very	opposite,	even	when	they	appear	diametrically
opposite,	they	are	leading	to	the	same	goal.
So	it	depends	on	you	which	path	you	would	like	to	choose.	If	you	have	a	feeling
for	God
--	not	a	belief,	belief	alone	won't	do,	belief	is	just	a	dead	thing	--	if	you	have	a
feeling	for	God,	if,	by	hearing	the	word	'God',	you	start	a	subtle	throbbing,	you
feel	 a	 trembling,	 you	 feel	 inspired,	 your	 heart	 starts	 beating	 faster,	 if	 the	 very
word	'God'	gives	you	a	great	awe,	then	you	can	move	on	the	path	of	prayer.	Then
Zen	is	not	for	you,	then	Zen	is	to	be	simply	forgotten,	because	then	Zen	will	be	a
disturbance.
But	if	the	word	'God'	has	no	meaning	for	you,	if	it	has	really	died	for	you,	if	God
is	 really	 dead,	 it	 provokes	 no	 feeling	 in	 you,	 no	 emotion	 in	 you,	 it	 does	 not
vibrate	 you,	 it	 does	 not	 pulsate	 you,	 it	 does	 not	 whirl	 your	 being	 into	 the
unknown,	then	Zen	is	for	you.	More	and	more	people	will	have	to	be	moving	on
the	path	of	Zen	because	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Islam,	Judaism	--	all,	in	a	way,
have	been	exploited	too	much.	They	have	lost	their	appeal.
Buddhism	is	still	unspoiled,	still	fertile,	and	for	the	modern	mind	particularly	it
has	 a	 very	 deep	 appeal	 --	 because	 the	 modern	 mind	 is	 made	 of	 a	 scientific
attitude	and	Zen	is	absolutely	scientific,	super-scientific.	It	goes	to	the	very	roots
of	your	mind	and	it	does	not	ask	you	to	believe	in	anything.	It	has	no	hypothesis
whatsoever.	 It	 does	 not	 ask	 that	 you	 should	 believe	 in	 something,	 it	 has	 no
superstition.
The	 word	 'superstition'	 is	 very	 beautiful.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	 Latin	 'superstes'
which	 means:	 that	 which	 survives,	 remnants	 of	 the	 past,	 things	 which	 have
become	futile	but	persist	out	of	habit.	You	go	to	the	church	but	you	don't	have
any	 feeling	 for	 going	 there,	 and	 every	 night	 before	 going	 to	 the	 bed	 you	may
pray	also	--	but	it	is	just	an	impotent	gesture	because	there	is	no	heart	in	it.	You
simply	repeat	with	the	lips;	you	pay	lip-service	to	it.	It	is	maybe	just	an	old	habit,
an	old	conditioning:	you	have	been	taught	from	your	very	childhood	to	pray,	so
you	continue.	The	mind	goes	on	repeating	the	familiar.
So	this	has	to	be	decided	by	you.	Nobody	else	can	decide	it	for	you.	You	have	to
search	in	your	own	heart.	If	you	still	have	that	innocence	which	is	needed	for	the
path	of	prayer,	if	you	are	still	like	a	child,	if	you	still	can	trust,	can	believe,	if	you
still	can	have	faith,	then	there	is	no	need	to	bother	about	Zen	because	it	will	be
an	unnecessarily	arduous	path.	You	can	simply	melt	and	merge	into	God.
I	was	reading	one	anecdote	--	I	loved	it.
One	evening	a	priest	who	was	visiting	Ireland	was	walking	along	a	country	road,
when	he	 came	upon	an	 elderly	gentleman.	As	 they	walked	 along	enjoying	 the
evening	together,	a	storm	suddenly	arose	and	they	took	shelter.	They	talked	for	a
while	 and	 then	when	 silence	 came	 upon	 them,	 the	 old	man	 took	 out	 a	 prayer
book	and	began	to	pray.
The	American	priest,	observing	him,	was	struck	very	deeply	by	a	certain	kind	of
hallowedness	around	him	as	he	prayed.	Unintentionally	he	said	aloud,
'You	must	be	very	close	to	God.'
The	old	man	paused,	smiled	and	said,	'Yes,	he	is	very	fond	of	me.'
'Yes,	he	is	very	fond	of	me.'	That	is	what	prayer	is	all	about.	It	is	not	only	that
you	 love	God	--	 that	alone	won't	help.	 If	you	can	also	feel	God's	 love	flowing
towards	you,	only	 then;	 if	you	can	 feel	his	presence	all	 around	you,	only	 then
will	prayer	become	possible.
Prayer	is	possible	as	a	shadow	of	his	felt	presence.	You	cannot	pray	in	an	empty
room	if	he	is	not	present.	To	whom	will	you	pray?	To	whom	will	you	utter	your
heart?	To	whom?
Prayer	is	futile	if	the	presence	is	not	felt.	If	the	presence	is	felt,	then	you	are	in
prayer	--
whether	you	say	something	or	not.	You	may	not	say	a	single	word,	you	may	be
simply	 so	 full	with	awe	 that	you	 remain	 silent,	but	you	will	 feel	 the	presence.
Yes,	to	feel	the	presence	of	God	is	what	prayer	is	all	about.
But	if	God	is	dead,	if	you	don't	feel	anything,	if	no	song	arises	in	your	heart	for
God,	if	the	presence	has	disappeared	from	the	world	--	you	look	at	trees	and	you
only	see	trees	and	no	God	hidden	there,	you	look	at	the	sky	and	you	only	see	the
sky	and	not	his	infinite	presence	--	then	Zen	is	going	to	be	your	path.
Zen	is	going	to	be	the	religion	of	the	coming	century	because	science	has	killed,
or	damaged	very	badly,	the	capacity	to	trust.	But	there	is	nothing	to	be	worried
about	--	you	can	move	from	another	direction.	But	then	there	is	no	question	of
love,	of	presence,	of	God,	of	prayer	--	nothing	of	the	sort.
When	the	Western	world	for	the	first	time	became	aware	of	Buddhism,	Jainism,
Tao,	they	could	not	believe	it.	What	type	of	religions	are	these?	There	is	no	God
in	them.	They	could	not	believe	that	religion	could	exist	without	the	concept	of
God;	God	has	always	been	the	centre	of	religion.	So	they	thought	that	these	must
be	just	moral	codes.	They	are	not.	They	are	a	totally	different	kind	of	religion.
And	 India,	 in	 the	 days	 of	 Buddha	 and	Mahavir,	 twenty-five	 centuries	 before,
reached	 to	 the	 same	 scientific	 attitude	 as	 the	Western	world	 has	 reached	 now.
Twenty-five	centuries	before,	India	realised	--	at	least,	those	who	were	very,	very
intelligent,	 brilliant,	 alert	 --	 they	 realised	 that	 the	 old	 God	 was	 dead.	 They
realised	that	the	God	of	prayer	was	dead.
To	say	this	was	simply	to	say	that	the	heart	of	man	was	dead;	it	was	no	longer
functioning.	 So	 a	 new	 path	 had	 to	 be	 found	 in	 which	 heart	 was	 not	 a	 basic
necessity.
Buddha	 and	 Mahavir	 worked	 out	 a	 new	 sort	 of	 religion	 --	 the	 religion	 of
meditation,	without	any	God,	without	any	prayer,	without	any	belief.	Nothing	is
required	of	you	except	a	seeking,	except	a	searching	mind,	except	a	deep	enquiry
--	that's	all.
The	world	is	going	to	be	more	and	more	'zenist'.	Zen	is	the	ultimate	flowering	of
the	Buddha-mind.
Before	we	enter	into	the	world	of	Zen,	some	things	are	needed	to	be	understood
about	 the	mind.	One	 thing:	mind	 functions	 because	 of	 your	 co-operation.	You
can	 stop	 it	 if	 you	withdraw	 your	 co-operation.	Without	withdrawing	 your	 co-
operation	you	cannot	stop	it.
So	the	whole	method	of	Zen	is	how	to	withdraw	the	co-operation.	Many	people
try	 to	 stop	 the	mind	without	withdrawing	 the	 co-operation	 --	 then	you	will	 go
crazy,	 then	you	will	do	something	absurd,	 impossible.	On	one	hand	you	go	on
pouring	energy	into	the	mind	and	on	the	other	hand	you	go	on	trying	to	stop	it.
It	is	as	if	you	are	driving	a	car	and	you	go	on	pushing	the	accelerator	and	at	the
same	 time	 you	 go	 on	 pushing	 the	 brake	 as	 well.	 You	 will	 destroy	 the	 whole
mechanism;	you	are	doing	two	contradictory	things	together.
Zen	is	not	in	favour	of	stopping	the	mind	directly,	it	is	in	favour	of	withdrawing
your	cooperation	from	the	mind	in	a	subtle	way.	As	more	energy	is	withdrawn
from	the	mind	it	starts	falling	on	its	own	accord	and	a	moment	comes	when	the
mind	simply	disappears	--
because	it	is	you	who	are	supporting	it;	it	is	you	who	are	maintaining	it;	it	is	you
who	unknowingly,	 continuously,	goes	on	pouring	energy	 into	 it.	Through	your
desires,	 through	your	discriminations,	 through	your	choices,	 through	your	likes
and	dislikes,	you	go	on	pouring	energy	into	it.
So	Zen	says,	if	you	really	want	the	mind	to	stop....	There	is	no	other	way	for	Zen
to	come	 to	know	the	 truth	unless	 the	mind	stops.	Because	 if	 the	mind	goes	on
functioning,	it	is	a	projector.	Then	the	reality	functions	as	a	screen	and	you	go	on
projecting	your	mind	onto	it,	you	go	on	seeing	that	which	you	want	to	see,	you
go	on	hearing	what	you	want	to	hear.
You	never	 see	 reality	 as	 it	 is,	 you	never	 see	 that	which	 is,	 you	corrupt	 reality.
Mind	is	a	great	corruptor.
So	mind,	the	projector,	has	to	be	stopped.	Then	suddenly	the	reality	appears	as	it
is,	because	nothing	is	projected	onto	it.	You	are	sitting	in	a	movie	house,	you	just
see	a	white	screen,	and	then	the	projector	starts.	Then	the	screen	disappears	and
you	see	the	film,	a	great	story	unfolding.	You	forget	completely	the	screen,	the
whiteness,	the	purity	of	it,	 the	virginity	of	it	--	everything	is	forgotten.	You	are
lost	 in	a	dream-world.	Then	 the	projector	 stops	and	suddenly	you	 realise	 there
has	been	nothing.	The	screen	has	been	empty.	It	was	just	a	game	of	shadows	--
you	were	befooled,	you	were	deceived.
In	 India	we	 call	 the	world	MAYA,	 illusion.	 It	means:	 it	 is	 not	 that	 there	 is	 no
truth	 in	 it,	 but	 the	 truth	 is	hidden.	The	 truth	 is	hidden	 like	a	white	 screen	 in	a
movie	house	and	you	have	projected	your	desires	and	your	dreams	on	top	of	it
and	have	forgotten	completely	what	reality	is.
Zen	says	stop	the	projector,	put	it	off,	and	you	will	be	able	to	know	what	is.	And
to	know	that	which	 is,	 is	 freedom;	 to	know	that	which	 is,	 is	 to	be	 liberated;	 to
know	that	which	is,	is	to	be	enlightened.
So	mind	 is	 the	barrier.	And	mind	 is	a	continuous	repetition.	Because	you	have
never	watched	it,	you	are	not	aware	of	it.	Nothing	new	ever	happens	in	the	mind;
it	is	always	the	rotten	old.	Nothing	new	can	ever	happen	in	the	mind	because	it	is
a	mechanism.	The	mechanism	can	only	go	on	playing	the	same	thing	again	and
again	--	it	is	like	a	gramophone	record.
Look	 at	 it	 and	 by	 and	 by	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 the	 mechanicalness	 of	 it.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	if	a	man	realises	that	he	is	a	mechanism	then	there	is	a
possibility.	If	a	man	realises	that	he	is	only	a	machine,	then	there	is	a	possibility
to	go	beyond	the	machine.
Then	a	man	can	become	conscious.
I	was	 reading	a	very	beautiful	anecdote.	There	 is	no	story	 in	 it,	 just	an	extract
from	a	petty-cash	ledger.
Nov.	1	Advertisement	for	secretary	.50
Nov.	2	Flowers	for	secretary's	desk	.80
Nov.	8	Week's	salary	for	secretary	L30.00
Nov.	9	Perfume	for	secretary	L6.00
Nov.	11	Sweets	for	wife	.10
Nov.	13	Lunch	for	secretary	and	self	L9.45
Nov.	15	Weeks	salary	for	secretary	L35.00
Nov.	17	Bingo	for	wife	and	self	L1.00
Nov.	18	Theatre	for	secretary	and	self	L6.00
Nov.	19	Sweets	for	wife	.10
Nov.	20	Doreen's	salary	L40.00
Nov.	21	Theatre	and	dinner	for	D	and	self	L20.00
Dec.	2	Harley	Street	Clinic	L150.00
Dec.	3	Fur	coat	for	wife	L700.00
Dec.	4	Advertisement	for	male	secretary	.50
Just	 take	 note.	Make	 a	 small	 diary	 of	 your	mind	 and	 you	will	 see	 circles	 and
circles	 moving.	 To	 make	 a	 diary	 is	 good,	 but	 make	 it	 for	 yourself,	 not	 for
somebody	else	to	read	it.	Then	look	at	it,	watch	it,	and	you	will	see	--	the	same
pattern	again	and	again	bubbles,	surfaces.	This	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	life	because
nothing	new	is	happening	in	it.
Truth	 is	always	new	and	mind	 is	always	old.	That's	why	mind	and	 truth	never
meet.	Mind	is	always	of	the	past,	truth	is	always	of	the	present.	That's	why	mind
and	truth	never	meet.	Mind	is	that	which	you	have	already	known;	truth	is	that
which	is	yet	to	be	known.
Mind	is	the	known	and	truth	is	the	unknowable	or	the	unknown.	Mind	is	just	a
record	of	all	that	has	happened.	Mind	is	not	an	adventure;	truth	is	an	adventure.
There	is	an	old	proverb	which	says,	'There	is	nothing	new	under	the	sun.'	If	you
think	about	the	mind	the	proverb	is	true.	But	if	you	think	about	truth,	the	proverb
is	absolutely	false.	Then	there	is	another	proverb	--	which	is	true	--	which	says,
'There	 is	nothing	old	under	 the	sun.'	Everything	 is	absolutely	 fresh	and	new	--
like	a	fresh	leaf	coming	out	of	 the	tree.	Truth	is	always	young,	mind	is	always
old.	 That's	 why	 Jesus	 says	 to	 his	 disciples,	 'Unless	 you	 become	 like	 small
children,	you	will	not	be	able	to	enter	into	my	Kingdom	of	God.'
Mind	is	very	cunning	and	clever,	but	not	intelligent.	Intelligence	is	a	quality	of
awareness	 and	 cunningness	 and	 cleverness	 are	 just	 substitutes	 for	 intelligence.
So	mind	goes	on	playing	tricks	of	cleverness	and;n	that	cleverness,	mind	itself	is
caught.	In	its	own	cleverness	and	cunningness	it	is	lost.	Remember	this	that	you
will	not	become	intelligent	by	being	clever,	you	will	become	intelligent	by	being
more	 aware.	 Cleverness	 need	 not	 be	 necessarily	 a	 sign	 of	 intelligence.	 Even
stupid	people	can	be	clever.	Cleverness	comes	out	of	experience:	you	do	things
many	times,	you	learn.	The	mind	becomes	like	a	computer	--	each	experience	is
fed	 into	 it	and	 it	goes	on	 learning	and	accumulating	knowledge	and	 it	goes	on
using	that	knowledge.
Intelligence	has	a	totally	different	quality:	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	experience,	it
has	 something	 to	 do	 with	 awareness.	 Cunningness	 comes	 out	 of	 experience;
intelligence	 comes	 out	 of	 awareness.	 That's	 why	 old	 people	 become	 very
cunning...	 and	 hippies	 are	 right	when	 they	 say	 never	 believe	 a	 person	who	 is
more	 than	 thirty.	 Because	 by	 that	 time	 a	 person	 becomes	 cunning,	 one	 has
learned	the	tricks	and	the	ways	of	the	world.
But	a	child	is	intelligent	because	a	child	is	more	alert,	more	radiantly	alert.	See	a
child	watching	something.	 If	a	child	 is	watching	a	snail	 just	watch	 the	child	 --
how	alert,	how	totally	in	the	moment	he	is.	It	is	as	if	he	has	become	just	the	eyes;
his	whole	being	 is	pouring	 through	 the	eyes.	A	child	 is	 intelligent,	an	old	man
becomes	cunning	and	clever.
A	child	has	no	experience	so	he	cannot	use	the	past.	He	has	to	face	the	present.
And	the	whole	Zen	attitude	is	 that	you	will	have	to	become	a	child	again;	you
will	have	to	attain	a	second	childhood	in	which	you	drop	all	experiences.	Mind
is	 nothing	 but	 a	 name	 for	 the	 whole	 accumulated	 past.	Mind	 is	 not	 an	 entity
really,	 just	 a	piled-up	past.	 If	you	disperse	 it,	 if	 the	dust	of	 the	past	 is	 cleaned
away	 from	 the	 mirror	 of	 your	 being,	 you	 will	 become	 intelligent.	 And	 only
intelligence	can	know	what	truth	is.
After	a	lecture	a	student	said	to	Hegel,	'Professor	Hegel,	I	am	confused	by	your
teaching	because	reality	looks	quite	different.'
Hegel	said,	'My	dear	friend,	all	the	worse	for	reality.'
Zen	is	not	a	philosophy	because	philosophy	means	some	doctrine	about	reality.
Zen	is	a	pure	encounter	with	reality.	It	has	no	doctrine,	 it	has	no	philosophy,	it
has	no	scriptures.	It	is	just	a	direct	encounter	with	reality.	All	scriptures	belong
to	 the	 mind,	 all	 philosophies	 belong	 to	 the	 mind	 and	 all	 doctrines	 are	 the
cleverness	 of	 the	 mind.	 The	 mind	 goes	 on	 consoling	 itself	 through	 creating
philosophies	that	it	knows.
It	is	very	difficult	to	remain	in	ignorance	because	it	is	very	ego-shattering.	So	the
mind	creates	philosophies	and	gives	you	an	illusion	of	knowledge.
Zen	is	a	way	of	knowing.	It	has	no	knowledge.	It	is	just	a	methodology	to	know,
to	face,	to	encounter	--	immediate,	herenow,	direct.	It	is	a	direct	transmission.
Clemenceau,	 the	 French	 statesman,	was	 asked	 by	 a	 diplomat	what	 he	 thought
about	diplomats.
Clemenceau	 said,	 'Diplomats	 are	 people	 who	 solve	 problems	 that	 have	 been
created	by	other	diplomats.'
That's	what	philosophers	also	do	and	that's	what	the	whole	function	of	the	mind
is.	Mind	creates	the	problem	and	then	mind	tries	to	solve	it.
Zen	completely	drops	out	of	 this	whole	game.	It	 is	not	a	mind	game.	Zen	says
there	 are	 no	 problems	 to	 be	 solved	 and	 there	 are	 no	 solutions	 to	 be	 made,
because	there	are	no	problems	in	the	first	place.	Zen	says	there	has	never	been	a
problem	in	existence.	It	is	the	tricky	mind	which	first	creates	a	problem	--	and	of
course,	when	you	have	a	problem,	you	have	to	solve	it.	So	it	creates	a	solution.
The	problem	is	 false,	so	how	can	you	find	a	 true	solution	for	a	false	problem?
The	solution	is	also	false.	Then	the	solution	creates	ten	more	problems	--	and	so
on	and	so	forth	it	goes.	Philosophies	upon	philosophies	are	created	and	they	are
all	 empty,	 all	 gibberish,	 all	 scrap.	 Zen	 is	 absolutely	 against	 philosophising
because	Zen	is	against	mind.
Now	this	Zen	story.
THE	MASTER	FUGAI	WAS	CONSIDERED	VERY	WISE	AND	GENEROUS,
YET
HE	WAS	MOST	SEVERE	--	BOTH	WITH	HIMSELF	AND	HIS	DISCIPLES.
Zen	is	severe.	It	is	a	very	arduous	path.	It	is	not	a	game	to	play	with,	it	is	playing
with	fire.	You	will	never	be	the	same	again	once	you	enter	into	the	world	of	Zen.
You	 will	 be	 totally	 transformed,	 so	 much	 so	 that	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to
recognise	yourself.	The	person	who	enters	into	the	world	of	Zen	and	the	person
who	 comes	 out	 are	 two	 totally	 different	 entities.	 There	 is	 no	 continuity,	 you
become	discontinuous	with	your	past.	All	continuity	is	of	the	mind;	all	identity	is
of	the	mind;	all	name,	all	form,	is	of	the	mind.
When	the	mind	is	dropped	you	suddenly	become	discontinuous	with	the	past	--
not	only	with	the	past,	you	become	unconnected	with	time.
And	that	is	the	whole	secret	of	Zen:	to	become	unconnected	with	time.	Then	you
become	 connected	 with	 eternity.	 And	 eternity	 is	 here-now;	 eternity	 knows	 no
past	and	no	future;	eternity	is	pure	present.	Time	knows	no	present	--	time	is	past
and	 future.	Ordinarily	we	 think	 that	 time	 is	divided	 into	 three	categories:	past,
present	 and	 future.	 That	 is	 absolutely	 wrong.	 Time	 is	 divided	 only	 into	 two
categories:	past	and	future.	The	present	is	not	part	of	time	at	all.	Just	watch,	just
see.	When	is	the	present?	The	moment	you	recognise	that	this	is	the	present,	it	is
already	past.	The	moment	you	say,	'Yes,	this	is	the	present,'	it	is	already	gone,	it
is	past.	Or	if	you	say,	'This	is	going	to	be	the	present,'	it	is	still	future.
You	 cannot	 recognise	 present,	 you	 cannot	 finger	 present,	 you	 cannot	 indicate
present.	In	the	world	of	time	there	is	no	present.
When	you	look	at	the	clock	it	is	already	moving,	not	for	a	single	moment	has	it
stopped.
When	 you	 were	 watching	 it,	 then	 too	 it	 was	 moving.	 That's	 what	 Heraclitus
means	 when	 he	 says,	 'You	 cannot	 step	 twice	 in	 the	 same	 river.'	 The	 river	 is
flowing.	 The	 past	 is	 there,	 the	 future	 is	 there,	 and	 the	 future	 is	 continuously
being	converted	into	the	past.	Not	for	a	single	moment	is	there	present,	not	for	a
single	moment	does	the	clock	stop,	not	for	a	single	moment	does	the	river	stop.
Heraclitus	is	right.	You	cannot	step	twice	in	the	same	river.	One	of	his	disciples
said	to	him,	'Master,	I	tried,	you	are	right.	But	one	thing	more	I	would	like	to	add
--	you	cannot	step	even	once	in	a	river.'	That's	exactly	how	it	is.	When	you	touch
the	 river,	 when	 your	 foot	 touches	 the	 river,	 the	 river	 is	 flowing.	 When	 you
penetrate	one	 inch	 into	 the	 river,	 the	 river	 is	 flowing.	When	you	penetrate	 two
inches	into	the	river,	the	river	is	flowing.	By	the	time	you	reach	the	bottom	the
river	has	 flowed	 so	much	 that	 you	 cannot	 say	you	 stepped	even	ONCE	 in	 the
same	river.
In	time	there	is	no	present;	present	is	not	part	of	time.	Present	is	part	of	eternity.
Present	means	now	and	now	knows	no	past	and	no	future.
Once	 you	 are	 discontinuous	with	mind,	 you	 are	 discontinuous	with	 time.	And
time	and	space	are	together.
In	 this	 century	 Einstein	 discovered	 that	 time	 and	 space	 are	 not	 two	 separate
things;	they	are	one	thing,	or	two	aspects	of	the	one	thing.	So	he	called	the	whole
thing	 'spatio-time'	 to	 emphasise	 the	 fact	 that	 time	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 fourth
dimension	of	space.	If	time	disappears,	space	also	disappears.
So	a	man	who	has	gone	beyond	his	mind	is	beyond	time	and	space.	He	is,	but
you	 cannot	 say	where	 he	 is;	 he	 is,	 but	 you	 cannot	 say	when	 he	 is.	When	 and
where	all	dissolve.	He	simply	is,	without	any	definition	of	where	and	when.	This
is	 what	 Buddha	 called	 enlightenment.	 This	 is	 freedom,	 absolute	 freedom.
Nothing	confines	you.
But	the	path	is	very	severe.	It	has	to	be	so	because	it	is	a	sort	of	ultimate	suicide.
You	commit	suicide.	You	commit	a	mind	suicide.	You	drop	out	of	the	mind,	you
drop	out	of	time,	you	drop	out	of	space.	The	world	that	you	have	known	up	to
now	disappears	and	something	totally	new,	something	indefinable,	arises	in	your
consciousness.
THE	MASTER	FUGAI	WAS	CONSIDERED	VERY	WISE	AND	GENEROUS,
YET
HE	WAS	MOST	SEVERE...
A	Zen	Master	has	to	be	severe	because	he	is	trying	to	kill	you.
Just	 a	 few	 days	 before,	 a	 sannyasin	 came	 and	 I	 asked	 her	 how	 long	 she	was
going	to	stay	here.	She	said	three	months.	So	I	said,	'Okay,	that	will	be	enough	to
kill	you.'	She	said,
'What!?'	But	now	she	has	understood	the	point	--	getting	ready	to	die.
...	 BOTH	 WITH	 HIMSELF	 AND	 HIS	 DISCIPLES.	 HE	 WENT	 TO	 THE
MOUNTAINS
TO	SIT	IN	ZEN.
Zen	simply	means	sitting.	In	Japanese	they	have	the	full	word,	'zazen'.	It	means
sitting	silently,	doing	nothing.
All	 doing	 is	 of	 the	 mind.	 Whenever	 you	 do,	 the	 mind	 comes	 into	 being.
Whenever	 you	 want	 to	 do	 something,	 the	 mind	 immediately	 starts	 planning.
With	even	the	idea	of	doing	you	start	pouring	energy	into	the	mind.
Zen	 is	 a	 simple	 sitting.	Not	 doing	 anything,	 not	 even	meditating...	 because	 to
meditate,	from	the	back	door	the	doing	again	comes	in.	Zen	simply	says,	sit	and
don't	do	anything.
Don't	 think	 in	 terms	of	 doing,	 think	 in	 terms	of	 being.	 Just	 be.	So	 for	 years	 a
seeker	of	Zen	simply	sits.	It	is	the	hardest	thing	in	the	world	to	do	and	I	can	feel
you	will	understand	it.	It	is	the	hardest	thing	in	the	world	to	do	--	just	to	sit.	You
would	like	something	to	do	because	that	something	keeps	you	preoccupied,	and
you	go	on	feeling	that	you	are	doing	something,	that	you	are	somebody.	And	at
least	it	never	gives	you	any	opportunity	to	face	yourself.	Your	doing	is	an	escape
from	yourself,	so	that	you	never	come	face	to	face,	so	that	you	never	encounter
your	own	being.	You	go	on	avoiding.
So	 people	 go	 on	 doing	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things,	 many	 of	 them	 absolutely
unnecessary.
Not	only	are	they	unnecessary,	many	of	them	simply	create	trouble	for	them.	Just
think	about	yourself.	What	have	you	done?	You	have	created	a	hell	around	you
but	still	you	go	on	doing.
People	come	to	me	and	they	ask,	'What	should	we	meditate	upon?	What	mantra
should	we	chant?'	And	if	I	say,	 'Nothing,	you	simply	sit.	You	just	face	the	wall
and	sit	silently	and	let	time	pass	and	don't	do	anything.	Things	will	settle	on	their
own	 accord.	 You	 simply	 sit.	 Because	 if	 you	 come	 in	 and	 interfere	 you	 will
muddle	things	more.	You	please	just	sit	on	the	bank.	Let	the	river	flow	--	'	they
say,	 'But	how	can	one	sit	without	doing	anything?	At	least	give	us	a	mantra	so
we	 can	 repeat	 it	 inside.	 If	 there	 is	 no	 activity	 outside,	 then	 let	 us	 have	 some
activity	inside.'
That's	 why	 in	 America,	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi	 has	 certain	 appeal.	 The
transcendental	meditation	is	nothing	but	the	transfer	of	activity	from	the	outside
to	 the	 inside.	And	 the	American	mind	 is	almost	neurotic.	Something	has	 to	be
done.	If	you	are	not	doing	something	you	are	wasting	time.	Do	something!	What
it	is	is	not	the	point,	but	do	something.	Speech	and	activity	and	aggressiveness	--
do	something,	go	on	doing	something,	go	on	moving,	fast,	fast.
Now,	 if	 you	 simply	 say,	 'Don't	 do	 anything,	 sit	 silently,'	 it	 looks	 almost
impossible.	How	can	one	sit	silently?'Give	us	some	inner	activity.'	So	a	mantra	is
given.	So	you	repeat	inside,	'Aum,	aum,	aum;	Ram,	Ram,	Ram,'	--	anything	will
do.	Any	abracadabra.	You	can	make	your	own	mantra.	You	are	foolish	to	go	and
ask	somebody	else	for	a	mantra,	you	can	create	your	own:'Blah,	blah,	blah!'	That
will	give	you	the	same	silence	and	tranquillity	as	any	transcendental	meditation.
Just	an	inner	activity	and	you	feel	good.
Zen	has	no	mantra.	Zen	is	not	transcendental	meditation.	It	is	the	most	arduous
thing	man	has	ever	tried...not	to	do	anything,	zazen,	just	sitting.
It	is	unbelievable	that	sometimes	a	Zen	seeker	has	sat	for	twenty	years	not	doing
anything
--	then	came	the	light.	Everything	became	so	silent	in	him,	not	even	a	flicker	of
energy,	 no	 occupation,	 nothing.	 He	 was	 almost	 dead	 because	 all	 activities
disappeared.	Then	one	comes	 face	 to	 face	with	being,	 then	you	come	 to	know
who	you	are.
Mind	is	activity.	And	if	one	has	to	drop	mind,	one	has	to	drop	activity.
HE	WENT	TO	THE	MOUNTAINS	TO	SIT	IN	ZEN.	HE	LIVED	IN	A	CAVE,
AND
WHEN	HE	WAS	HUNGRY	HE	WENT	TO	THE	VILLAGE	FOR	SCRAPS.
Only	 for	 a	 few	 scraps	would	 he	 come	 down	 to	 the	 village,	 otherwise	 he	was
sitting	in	his	cave	doing	nothing.
That	 which	 you	 are	 seeking	 is	 already	 within	 you.	 But	 you	 are	 too	 much
occupied	with	other	things	so	you	cannot	fall	into	it.	When	all	activity	is	lost,	all
clinging	disappears.
You	cannot	cling	 to	anything,	you	simply	go	on	 falling	 in	and	 in	and	 in.	Your
troubles	 arise	 because	 you	 hanker	 for	 activity.	 Have	 you	 ever	 heard	 about
anybody	who	was	troubled	by	the	'in'?	The	'in'	has	never	troubled	anybody.	That
'in',	the	inner,	that	very	core	of	your	being,	is	available	to	you	right	now,	but	you
are	not	available	to	it.	You	are	standing	with	your	back	towards	it.
Activity	is	SANSAR,	activity	is	the	world;	and	when	Zen	people	say	leave	the
world,	 they	don't	mean	 leave	 the	house,	 leave	 the	market,	 they	mean	 leave	 the
attachment	to	activity.	Even	if	you	have	to	do	something,	do	it	very	passively.	If
you	 are	 walking	 on	 the	 street,	 walk,	 but	 walk	 very	 passively.	 Inside,	 zazen
continues;	inside,	you	remain	sitting,	only	outside	you	move.	If	you	are	eating,
eat,	 but	 inside	 you	 remain	 sitting.	 By	 and	 by	 that	 inner	 posture	 is	 attained	 --
when	one	can	do	things	and	yet	be	without	activity.
Taoists	call	it	WU	WEI,	action	without	action.	Once	you	know	how	to	sit	inside,
then	 you	 can	 do	 things,	 then	 it	will	 not	 be	 a	 disturbance.	But	 first	 one	 has	 to
come	to	roots,	to	a	deep	grounding,	to	a	centering.
ONE	 DAY	 A	 MONK	 CALLED	 BUNDO,	 ATTRACTED	 BY	 FUGAI'S
AUSTERITIES,	 CALLED	 AT	 THE	 CAVE	 AND	 ASKED	 TO	 STAY	 THE
NIGHT.
THE	MASTER	SEEMED	HAPPY	TO	PUT	HIM	UP,	AND	NEXT	MORNING
PREPARED	RICE	GRUEL	FOR	HIM.	NOT	HAVING	AN	EXTRA	BOWL	HE
WENT
OUT	 AND	 RETURNED	 WITH	 A	 SKULL	 HE	 FOUND	 LYING	 NEAR	 A
TOMB.	HE
FILLED	IT	WITH	GRUEL	AND	OFFERED	IT	TO	BUNDO.
THE	GUEST	REFUSED	TO	TOUCH	IT,	AND	STARED	AT	FUGAI	AS	IF	HE
HAD
GONE	MAD.
You	can	go	mad	in	two	ways.	One	is	a	wrong	way,	another	is	a	right	way.	You
can	go	mad	if	you	are	completely	lost	in	your	mind.	Then	you	are	uprooted	from
your	being.
And	you	may	not	appear	mad	to	others	but	you	will	be	mad.	You	may	not	appear
mad	 to	 others	 because	 others	 are	 also	 mad	 like	 you.	 This	 earth	 is	 a	 great
madhouse.	 Normally	 everybody	 is	 mad;	 in	 fact,	 not	 to	 be	 mad	 is	 almost	 an
abnormality.	 People	 differ	 in	 degrees	 but	 all	 are	mad.	And	when	 psychiatrists
help	 you	 to	 be	 normal	 they	 simply	 bring	 you	 back	 to	 the	 level	 of	 the	 social
madness,	they	bring	you	to	the	level	which	is	allowed	legally.	You	were	going	a
little	 beyond	 the	 social	 limit	 so	 they	 pull	 you	 back.	 That's	 what	 they	 call
readjustment.
But	a	man	can	become	mad	in	another	way,	in	a	right	way.	One	can	fall	out	of
the	mind	into	the	inner	silence,	 into	the	inner	thoughtlessness,	 inner	emptiness.
Then	he	will	immediately	appear	mad	to	us.	If	you	look	into	the	eyes	of	a	man
who	has	attained	to	zazen	you	will	be	frightened.	His	eyes	will	be	like	an	abyss,
bottomless;	you	will	avoid	his	eyes.	His	eyes	will	be	empty.	He	will	look	to	you
and	yet	he	will	not	be	looking	at	you.	His	eyes	will	be	vacant,	and	you	will	feel
that	he	has	gone	mad.	In	a	way	he	has	gone	beyond	the	mind,	and	to	go	beyond
the	mind	is	to	go	mad.
So	all	great	people	 like	Jesus	or	Buddha	or	Mansoor,	 they	all	appeared	mad	to
their	 contemporaries.	When	 Jesus	was	crucified	he	was	 crucified	as	 a	neurotic
who	was	creating	 trouble,	who	had	gone	out	of	his	mind.	He	was	crucified	as
one	 of	 the	 most	 dangerous	 criminals.	 When	 Socrates	 was	 poisoned,	 he	 was
poisoned	because	he	was	mad	in	a	certain	way.	He	was	leading	other	people	to
madness.
Society	 has	 always	 been	 afraid	 of	 people	 who	 attain	 to	 zazen	 because	 their
appeal	 is	great	but	 their	behaviour	 is	 incomprehensible.	Their	behaviour	has	 to
be	 incomprehensible	because	 they	 function	 from	a	 totally	different	 centre	 than
yours.
For	a	man	of	zazen	there	is	no	difference	between	a	skull	or	a	bowl.	A	skull	is
made	of	earth	as	a	bowl	is	made	of	earth.	All	skulls	by	and	by	will	dissolve	into
earth	 again	 and	 then	 you	 can	 make	 a	 bowl	 of	 the	 earth	 and	 you	 will	 not	 be
bothered.	But	if	a	skull	is	brought	to	you	it	will	be	impossible	to	touch	even;	to
drink,	to	eat	out	of	it	will	be	nauseating,	vomiting.	Impossible.
But	for	a	man	of	zazen	the	inside	has	happened	--	all	is	the	same.	It	is	the	same
reality	 in	 different	 forms.	 Out	 of	 the	 same	 gold	 you	 can	 make	 one	 sort	 of
ornament	 or	 another	 sort	 of	 ornament,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference.	 It	 is	 the	 same
reality	which	becomes	the	skull,	it	is	the	same	reality	which	becomes	the	bowl.
So	what	is	the	difference?
A	man	who	has	been	deep	inside	himself	knows	that	the	whole	reality	consists	of
one	elemental	force,	it	is	one	energy	even	if	it	takes	different	forms.
And	the	man	could	not	 touch	the	skull,	could	not	believe	that	somebody	could
offer	it	as	a	bowl	to	eat	out	of.	What	was	he	thinking?	His	mind	was	weaving,
spinning,	 'This	 is	 a	 skull	of	man.'	The	 idea,	 the	very	 idea,	was	nauseating.	He
thought	that	this	man	Fugai	had	gone	mad.
AT	 THIS	 FUGAI	 BECAME	 FURIOUS	 AND	 DROVE	 HIM	 OUT	 OF	 THE
CAVE
WITH	 BLOWS.'FOOL!'	 HE	 SHOUTED	 AFTER	 HIM,	 'HOW	 CAN	 YOU,
WITH
YOUR	WORLDLY	NOTIONS	OF	FILTH	AND	PURITY,	THINK	YOURSELF
A	BUDDHIST?'
All	notions	are	of	the	mind.	To	say	that	this	is	beautiful	and	this	is	ugly	is	of	the
mind.	 In	 fact,	 nothing	 is	beautiful	 and	nothing	 is	ugly.	 If	 the	mind	disappears,
then	what	will	be	beautiful	and	what	will	be	ugly?	Likes	and	dislikes	all	belong
to	the	mind.
You	 just	 think	 of	 the	 world.	 Man	 has	 disappeared,	 the	 third	 world	 war	 has
happened	and	man	has	disappeared.	The	earth	will	remain	the	same.	The	flowers
will	 flower,	 but	 will	 they	 be	 beautiful?	 They	 will	 be	 simply	 themselves,	 not
beautiful,	not	ugly.	Everything	will	be	itself	but	there	will	be	no	evaluation	about
it	because	the	valuer	has	disappeared.
The	mind	of	a	man	who	attains	to	zazen	has	disappeared.	He	is	no	more	a	man,
because	all	his	conceptions,	values,	attitudes,	prejudices,	have	disappeared.	Now
he	looks	without	any	prejudices,	without	for	and	against.	He	simply	looks.	His
eyes	are	empty	because	he	has	nothing	to	project.	Then	things	appear	in	a	totally
different	way.
But	to	ordinary	human	beings	he	will	look	almost	mad	because	madness	simply
means	one	who	 is	out	of	his	mind.	 In	 fact,	he	 is	out	of	his	mind	 --	but	he	has
moved	into	his	being.
So	 there	 are	 two	 types	of	madnesses:	you	can	be	out	of	your	mind	and	not	 in
your	 being,	 then	you	 are	 unhealthy;	 you	 can	be	 out	 of	 your	mind	 and	 in	 your
being,	then	you	attain	to	real	health.	You	become	whole,	you	become	holy.
'FOOL!'	 HE	 SHOUTED	 AFTER	 HIM,	 'HOW	 CAN	 YOU,	 WITH	 YOUR
WORLDLY
NOTIONS	OF	FILTH	AND	PURITY,	THINK	YOURSELF	A	BUDDHIST?'
Discrimination	is	of	the	mind;	non-discrimination	is	of	the	no-mind.
Fugai	was	trying	to	create	a	situation	for	this	poor	man.	The	man	missed.	Fugai
was	creating	a	device	so	that	this	man	could	be	awakened.	He	was	shaking	him
hard	to	pull	him	out	of	his	dreams	of	likes	and	dislikes,	purity	and	filth,	beauty
and	ugliness,	good	and	bad.	The	whole	effort	was	to	shatter	his	mind	because	the
whole	of	Buddhism	consists	only	of	that	--	how	to	shatter	the	mind.
It	 is	said	of	a	Zen	Master,	who,	 in	his	younger	days,	was	a	disciple	of	another
Master,	that	he	had	been	working	hard	at	his	meditation	for	months	together.	The
one	day	the	Master	came,	sat	in	front	of	him	with	a	brick	and	started	rubbing	the
brick	on	the	stone.	The	sound	was	there	and	it	was	distracting	and	disturbing	to
the	young	disciple.
Finally,	irritated,	the	young	man	asked,	'What	are	you	doing?'
The	Master	said,	'I	am	trying	to	make	a	mirror.'
The	 disciple	 said,	 'Have	 you	 gone	 mad?'	 Just	 by	 polishing	 a	 brick	 a	 mirror
cannot	be	made,	you	may	polish	it	for	your	whole	life.	Mirrors	are	not	made	that
way.'
And	the	Master	said,	'Then	I	have	nothing	to	say	to	you.	You	are	trying	to	polish
your	mind.	Mirrors	are	not	made	that	way	either.	I	throw	this	brick	--	see	--	you
do	the	same.'
Drop	the	mind.	It	 is	not	a	question	of	polishing	the	mind,	modifying	the	mind,
making	it	more	and	more	clear.	It	is	not	a	question	of	changing	the	mind,	it	is	a
question	of	dropping	it	utterly.
Buddhism	is	an	effort	to	drop	the	mind	totally.	But	how	to	drop	the	mind?	If	you
continue	in	thinking	--	likes	and	dislikes,	prejudices,	 this	is	good,	this	is	bad	--
then	 you	 cannot	 drop	 the	 mind	 because	 it	 is	 the	 mind	 which	 distinguishes,
discriminates,	it	is	the	mind	which	divides,	categorises.	All	categories	are	of	the
mind.	That's	why	Buddhists	don't	say	that	God	is	good	and	Devil	is	bad,	because
for	a	Buddhist	God	and	Devil	are	both	of	the	mind	--	good	and	bad.	That's	why
Buddhists	don't	say	choose	heaven	and	avoid	hell	because	they	say	both	are	of
the	mind	--	hell	and	heaven.	Drop	the	whole	mind.	And	by	the	dropping	of	the
mind,	all	distinctions	are	dropped	and	you	are	in	a	deep,	undiscriminated	reality.
That	is	what	truth	is.	It	is	not	God,	it	is	not	Devil;	it	is	not	light,	it	is	not	darkness
--	it	is	beyond	both.
SOME	 MONTHS	 LATER	 THE	 MASTER	 TETSGYU	 VISITED	 HIM	 AND
TOLD	HIM
THAT	HE	THOUGHT	IT	A	GREAT	PITY	THAT	HE	HAD	FORSAKEN	THE
WORLD.	 FUGAI	 LAUGHED	 AND	 SAID:	 'OH,	 IT'S	 EASY	 ENOUGH	 TO
FORSAKE
THE	 WORLD	 AND	 BECOME	 A	 BONZAI,	 THE	 DIFFICULT	 THING	 IS
THEN	TO
BECOME	A	TRUE	BUDDHIST.'
It	is	very	easy	to	forsake	the	world,	it	is	very	easy	to	renounce.	Any	coward	can
do	that.	It	is	easy	to	escape	from	the	world,	but	escape	is	not	a	transformation.	It
is	very	easy	to	sit	outwardly	like	a	bonzai	--	you	can	become	a	statue,	still	not
moving	at	all	--	but	the	real	problem	is	to	drop	the	movement	of	the	mind,	the
inner	working	of	the	mind.	You	can	sit	silently	from	the	outside	but	if	the	inside
turmoil	continues	then	you	are	not	a	Buddhist.
A	 Buddhist	 means	 one	 who	 has	 become	 a	 Buddha,	 one	 who	 has	 attained	 to
enlightenment.	 And	 that	 happens	 only	 when	 inner	 movements	 have	 ceased,
when	 thinking	 has	 stopped,	 when	 the	 mind	 is	 no	 more	 the	 master.	When	 the
mind	no	 longer	manipulates	you,	when	the	mind	no	longer	controls	you,	when
the	mind	is	just	a	mechanism	--	if	you	need,	you	use	it,	otherwise	you	put	it	aside
--	you	are	free	of	the	mind,	you	have	attained	your	own	masterhood.
It	 is	 easy	 to	 change	 from	 the	 outside,	 the	 real	 change	 has	 to	 happen	 inside.
Remember	that.	Use	the	outside	to	help	the	inside	to	change,	but	never	believe
that	 the	outside	change	 is	all.	Sit	silently,	because	 the	sitting	posture	will	help.
When	 the	 body	 sits	 completely	 immobile	 it	 helps	 the	 mind	 to	 relax,	 because
body	and	mind	are	not	two	separate	things	--	they	are	one.	You	are	not	body	and
mind,	you	are	bodymind.	You	are	psychosomatic,	so	everything	that	happens	in
the	 body	 has	 subtle	 vibrations	 in	 the	 mind;	 and	 anything	 that	 happens	 in	 the
mind	reaches	to	the	body.
That's	how	if	you	take	alcohol,	the	mind	becomes	drunk.	The	alcohol	goes	into
the	 body	but	 it	 affects	 the	mind.	 If	 you	 take	LSD	or	marijuana	 or	 some	other
drug,	 it	affects	 the	mind.	You	 take	 it	 into	 the	body,	you	 inject	 it	 into	 the	body,
and	it	reaches	to	the	mind.	Or,	if	you	train	your	mind,	discipline	your	mind,	that
reaches	to	your	body	also.	If	your	mind	is	happy,	if	you	have	trained	it....
For	example,	there	are	positive	philosophies	to	train	the	mind,	like	Emile	Coue's
philosophy:	 go	 on	 auto-hypnotising	 yourself,	 suggesting	 to	 yourself,	 'I	 am
getting.better	 and	 better	 and	 every	 day	 I	 am	 becoming	 more	 and	 more
compassionate,	 kind,	 loving.'	 If	 you	 go	 on	 repeating	 this	 again	 and	 again,	 the
subtle	 idea	 will	 settle	 in	 the	mind,	 it	 will	 affect	 your	 body.	 That's	 how	many
diseases	can	be	cured	by	hypnosis	--	because	in	the	first	place	they	may	be	just
your	 suggestions	 and	 not	 real	 diseases.	 Out	 of	 a	 hundred	 diseases	 almost
seventy-five	 are	 just	 pure	mental	 things,	 but	 they	 affect	 the	 body.	 If	 the	mind
takes	them	in,	if	the	mind	is	affected,	then	sooner	or	later	the	body	follows.	Both
mind	and	body	are	one,	so	whatsoever	affects	one	affects	the	other	also.	They	are
parallel,	running	together.	A	deep	subtle	balance	is	kept	between	the	two.
So	I	am	not	saying	don't	use	the	outside	--	you	have	to	use	it,	but	don't	think	that
that	is	all.	Use	the	outside	to	change	the	inside.	Then	you	will	not	just	become	a
bonzai,	then	you	will	not	be	just	a	statue,	you	will	become	a	real	Buddha.
It	happened	that	a	Zen	seeker	came	to	a	Master	and	asked	him,
'I	have	come	from	a	very	 long	distance,	 I	have	 travelled	 thousands	of	miles	 to
come	to	your	feet.'
The	Master	asked,	'For	what?	What	do	you	want?'
The	man	said,	'I	would	like	to	become	a	Buddha.'
The	Master	said,	'Get	out	from	here!	Already	we	have	too	many	Buddhas	here.'
The	Master	used	to	live	in	a	temple	which	is	called	'the	Temple	of	One	Thousand
and	One	Buddhas'.	There	were	one	thousand	and	one	statues	of	Buddha.
So	he	said,	 'Get	out	of	it!	Immediately	out	of	it.	We	are	tired.	We	already	have
one	thousand	and	one	Buddhas	here,	we	don't	need	anyone	else.	But	if	you	want
to	become	yourself,	you	can	come	in.'
Remember,	Zen	is	not	an	imitation.	No	Zen	Master	can	ever	think	of	writing	a
book	like	Thomas	Campus'	book	'imitation	of	Christ'.	Impossible.	The	very	title
will	be	laughed	at.
The	real	religion	is	not	imitation	of	anybody	else,	it	is	a	search	to	find	out	your
own	 authentic	 self,	 who	 you	 are.	 So	 just	 outer	 discipline	 will	 not	 help;	 outer
discipline	can	be	used	as	a	means,	but	it	is	not	the	goal.
So	remember	that	the	basic	thing	has	to	happen	inside	you.
'OH,	 IT'S	EASY	ENOUGH	TO	FORSAKE	THE	WORLD	AND	BECOME	A
BONZAI,	 THE	 DIFFICULT	 THING	 IS	 THEN	 TO	 BECOME	 A	 TRUE
BUDDHIST.'
The	difficult	thing	is	always	to	become	a	true	Christian,	a	true	Mohammedan,	a
true	 Hindu,	 a	 true	 Buddhist,	 a	 true	 Sikkha,	 because	 the	 difficult	 thing	 is	 to
become	true.
Man	 is	 a	 deceiver.	 He	 goes	 on	 deceiving	 himself.	 And	 it	 is	 much	 easier	 to
become	 someone,	 to	 pretend	 to	 be	 someone;	 it	 is	 much	 easier	 to	 act	 like
someone,	than	to	be.	To	be	is	arduous.	You	will	have	to	pass	through	many	fires;
you	will	have	to	pass	through	many	deaths	and	rebirths;	you	will	have	to	move
through	 a	 great	 revolution,	 a	 total	 mutation.	 It	 is	 difficult.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to
pretend,	it	is	very	easy	to	be	pseudo.	The	whole	world	is	full	of	pesudo-religious
people.	They	go	to	the	church,	they	go	to	the	mosque,	they	pray,	they	pretend	to
meditate,	 but	 one	 is	 simply	 surprised.	 Whom	 are	 they	 deceiving?	 They	 are
deceiving	themselves	and	nobody	else.
This	should	be	remembered	because	you	are	on	the	path,	you	are	here	as	seekers.
The	 greatest	 pitfall	 for	 a	 seeker	 is	 to	 become	 a	 victim	 of	 self-deception;	 it	 is
cheap	and	it	looks	like	a	short-cut.	Never	pretend.	Once	pretension	settles	in,	you
have	 taken	a	wrong	move	and	 it	will	be	very	difficult	 for	you	 to	attain	 to	 any
reality.	And	you	will	have	to	go	back	one	day	or	other	because	unless	you	drop
that	pretension	you	will	never	grow.
For	example.	If	you	are	at	the	age	of	twenty-five	and	you	pretend	and	you	go	on
pretending	up	 to	 the	age	of	 fifty,	and	 then	you	 realise	 that	a	certain	pretension
happened	at	 the	age	of	 twenty-five,	you	will	have	to	go	back	and	undo	it.	You
will	have	to	relive	those	twenty-five	years	again.	You	will	create	an	unnecessary
complexity	and	life	is	already	too	complex.	Unless	you	go	and	drop	that	layer	of
pretension	at	the	age	of	twenty-five,	all	your	house	will	be	on	a	wrong	base.
That's	 what	 the	meaning	 of	 Primal	 Therapy	 is:	 you	 have	 to	 go	 back,	 regress.
Wherever	something	has	gone	wrong,	you	have	to	re-traverse	the	path,	move	to
that	point,	undo	that	knot	and	move	again.
So	don't	create	any	unnecessary	complexity.	You	are	here	with	me	--	remember
one	thing:	not	to	pretend.	Because	you	will	not	be	deceiving	anybody,	you	will
only	be	deceiving	yourself.
Don't	become	a	bonzai.	Truth	has	 to	be	earned.	 It	 is	not	cheap	and	 there	 is	no
short-cut	to	it.
I	was	reading	a	story	about	a	famous	Hassid	rabbi.	He	used	to	tell	this	story	to
his	disciples.
There	was	once	a	man	who	was	very	stupid.	When	he	got	up	in	the	morning	it
was	so	hard	for	him	to	find	his	clothes	that	at	night	he	almost	hesitated	to	go	to
bed	for	thinking	of	the	trouble	he	would	have	on	waking.
One	 evening	 he	 finally	made	 a	 great	 effort,	 took	 paper	 and	 pencil,	 and	 as	 he
undressed,	 noted	 down	 exactly	 where	 he	 put	 everything	 he	 had	 on.	 The	 next
morning,	very	well	pleased	with	himself,	he	took	the	slip	of	paper	and	read:'Cap'
--	there	it	was.	He	set	it	on	his	head.'Pants'	--	there	they	lay.
He	got	into	them.	And	so	it	went	until	he	was	fully	dressed.
'That's	 all	 very	 well,	 but	 now	 where	 am	 I	 myself?'	 he	 asked	 with
consternation.'Where	in	the	world	am	I?'
He	looked	and	looked	but	it	was	a	vain	search.	He	could	not	find	himself.
'And	that	is	how	it	is	with	us,	'	said	the	rabbi	to	his	disciples.
Remember,	you	may	dress	like	a	SANNYASIN,	you	may	be	in	the	ochre	robe,
but	 that	doesn't	make	much	difference	unless	you	know	where	you	are,	unless
you	know	who	you	are.	You	may	be	well	--	dressed	like	a	SANNYASIN	but	that
is	not	going	to	help	much.
So	don't	believe	in	cheap	things.	It	is	a	great	help	in	a	way	it	is	a	gesture	that	you
have	 become	 SANNYASINS,	 it	 is	 a	 gesture	 that	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 come	 to
yourself,	it	is	a	great	gesture	that	you	are	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown,	into	the
unfamiliar,	it	is	going	to	make	great	difference	--	but	don't	take	it	as	the	whole.	It
is	just	the	beginning	of	the	journey,	not	the	end.
One	 great	 poet,	 Robert	 Frost,	 used	 to	 say,	 'TWO	ROADS	DIVERGED	 IN	A
WOOD
AND	I,	I	TOOK	THE	ONE	LESS	TRAVELLED	BY	AND	THAT	HAS	MADE
ALL
THE	DIFFERENCE.
You	have	chosen	with	me	a	path	not	ordinarily	travelled	by	people,	not	travelled
by	the	majority,	by	the	crowd,	by	the	mass.	It	is	going	to	make	a	great	difference,
but	it	 is	just	a	beginning.	Never	for	a	single	moment	forget	it	 that	this	is	just	a
beginning.	And	the	end	is	very	far	and	much	effort,	much	discipline,	much	inner
transformation	will	be	needed.
And	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.	You	have	to	be	born	for	yourself,	nobody	else
can	be	born	for	you.	You	have	to	live	for	yourself,	nobody	else	can	live	in	your
place.	And	you	have	to	love	and	you	have	to	die,	nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you.
Life	is	intrinsically	individual.	All	that	is	meaningful,	all	that	is	significant,	has
to	be	done	by	you.	That	which	can	be	done	by	servants	is	irrelevant;	that	which
can	be	done	by	the	priest	is	irrelevant.	This	transformation	you	have	to	bring	to
yourself.	It	is	going	to	be	arduous,	but	take	it	as	a	challenge.	It	is	good	that	the
path	is	arduous	otherwise	where	are	we	going	to	prove	our	soul?	Where	are	we
going	to	prove	our	crystallised	soul?
This	challenge	is	a	blessing.	But	never	try	to	pretend.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	Magicless	Magic
12	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606120
ShortTitle:
DANG02
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
100
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
YESTERDAY	WHILE	SITTING	IN	ZAZEN	I	FELT	MYSELF	GET	HIT	WITH
A	STICK	ON	MY	HEAD.	BUT	PRADEEPA	THAT	TIME	HAD	NOT	HIT	ME.
ALSO
TODAY	DURING	THE	LECTURE	I	GOT	HIT	TWICE	ON	THE	HEAD	BUT
NO
STICK-HITTER	WAS	AROUND.	IS	THIS	MAGICLESS	MAGIC?
It	is	sheer	imagination,	and	on	the	path	of	meditation	imagination	is	the	greatest
pitfall.
Be	 aware	 of	 it.	 You	 can	 imagine	 so	 deeply	 and	 you	 can	 believe	 in	 your
imagination	so	intensely	that	it	can	appear	more	real	than	the	real.
Imagination	is	a	great	force.	On	the	path	of	meditation,	imagination	is	a	barrier;
on	 the	path	of	 love,	 imagination	 is	 a	help.	On	 the	path	of	 love,	 imagination	 is
used	 as	 a	 device:	 you	 are	 told	 to	 imagine	 as	 intensely	 and	 passionately	 as
possible.	But	on	the	path	of	meditation	the	same	thing	becomes	a	barrier.
Imagination	simply	means	that	you	visualise	a	certain	thing	but	you	put	so	much
energy	 into	 it	 that	 it	 almost	 becomes	 real.	 Every	 night	 we	 all	 dream.	 While
dreaming,	 every	 dream	 looks	 real.	 To	 come	 to	 know	 in	 a	 dream	 that	 this	 is	 a
dream	will	be	 the	end	of	 it;	 then	you	will	 find	yourself	awake.	The	dream	can
continue	 only	 if	 you	 believe	 that	 it	 is	 real.	 And	 even	 people	 who	 are	 very
skeptical,	 doubting,	 of	 the	 scientific	 attitude,	 even	 they	 go	 on	 believing	 in	 the
night,	they	go	on	believing	in	their	dreams.
Every	morning	you	find	 that	 it	was	 just	 imagination	but	again	every	night	you
become	a	victim	to	it.	And	again	when	the	dream	unfolds	you	start	believing	it.
On	 the	 path	 of	meditation	 that	 hold	 of	 the	 dream	 faculty	 has	 to	 be	 loosened.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	to	his	disciples.	'Unless	you	can	remember	in	a	dream	that
it	is	a	dream,	you	will	never	awake.'
This	 whole	 world	 is	 a	 dream	 --	 a	 dream	 is	 a	 private	 world,	 the	 world	 is	 a
common	dream.
If	you	cannot	awake	while	dreaming,	 it	will	be	impossible	to	awake	while	you
are	awake,	because	now	the	dream	is	very	big,	and	it	is	not	only	your	energy	that
is	 creating	 the	dream,	 it	 is	 the	 energy	of	 all.	 It	will	 be	 difficult.	 If	 you	 cannot
come	to	see	that	something	in	your	dream	is	false,	when	you	alone	are	to	decide
and	nobody	else	can	interfere....	 It	 is	nobody	else's	business.	You	cannot	 invite
anybody	else	into	your	dream	because	it	is	so	private.
It	 happened	 that	 two	 patients	 of	 a	 psychoanalyst	 tried	 to	 play	 a	 trick	 on	 the
analyst.	It	was	the	first	of	April	and	perfectly	appropriate.
They	 decided	 that	 the	 next	 day	 they	would	 come,	 separately,	 and	 they	would
relate	 the	 same	 dream	 --	 they	 decided	 on	 the	 details	 of	 the	 dream	 --	 to	 the
psychiatrist	and	watch	how	he	 feels.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	dream	the	same	dream
together,	two	persons	have	never	dreamed	one	dream	together,	so	they	wanted	to
shock	him.
The	 first	 related	 his	 dream.	When	 he	 left	 the	 second	 came	 and	 he	 related	 his
dream.	 And	 he	 waited	 for	 some	 hint	 that	 the	 psychiatrist	 was	 shocked	 or
surprised,	 but	 he	 was	 not	 surprised	 at	 all.	 He	 simply	 listened	 as	 if	 there	 was
nothing	out	of	common,	as	if	it	was	just	usual,	as	if	it	were	an	everyday	affair.
The	man	asked,	'Are	you	not	surprised?'
The	psychiatrist	said,	'This	is	the	third	time	I	have	heard	this	dream.'
The	man	said,	'Third	time?	Who	is	the	third	person?'
He	was	shocked	because	only	two	persons	knew	about	the	dream.	Who	was	this
third	person?
The	 psychiatrist	 laughed.	 He	 said,	 'You	 cannot	 play	 a	 trick	 like	 that	 on	 me,
because	no	two	persons	can	dream	the	same	dream.	It	is	impossible.'
It	does	not	happen	that	way	because	a	dream	is	an	absolutely	private	world.	You
cannot	 invite	 anybody	 else	 into	 your	 dream,	 you	 cannot	 ask	 anybody	 else's
opinion	about	your	dream	--	whether	it	is	true	or	untrue.	It	depends	absolutely	on
you.	And	 if	you	cannot	even	awake	 in	 this,	how	will	 it	be	possible	 for	you	 to
awake	in	the	great	MAYA,	the	great	illusion	that	the	world	is?
So	Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	the	first	effort	is	to	awake	in	a	dream	and	see	the
dream	as	a	dream.	He	had	a	 few	 techniques	 for	how	 to	awake	 in	a	dream.	He
would	teach	his	disciples	that	every	night,	when	they	went	to	sleep,	they	should
go	 on	 repeating	 as	 deeply	 as	 possible,	 as	 passionately	 as	 possible,	 'This	 time
when	I	start	dreaming	in	the	night	I	will	raise	my	hand	and	touch	my	head.	And
immediately	when	I	touch	my	head	the	remembrance	will	happen	to	me	that	this
is	 a	dream.'	For	months	 together	 the	disciple	would	 think,	 auto-suggest.	Every
night	falling	into	sleep	they	would	repeat	it	again	and	again	with	deep	passion,
so	that	it	entered	into	the	very	unconscious	layers	of	the	mind.
When	it	enters	deeper	than	the	dream	then	one	day	it	happens;	while	dreaming,
automatically	the	hand	goes	to	the	head	and	suddenly	he	remembers	that	this	is	a
dream.
But	the	moment	he	remembers	that	it	is	a	dream,	the	dream	simply	withers	away,
fades	out.	He	is	awake	while	asleep,	and	the	dream	has	left	him.
If	 it	 happens	 that	 you	 awake	 in	 a	 dream,	 in	 the	morning	 the	whole	world	 has
changed.	 It	 is	 no	more	 the	 same	world	 because	 your	 eyes	 are	 clear,	 you	 have
attained	to	a	certain	clarity	of	perception.	Now	dreams	cannot	deceive	you,	now
you	see	things	as	they	are.
You	don't	project.
Beware	of	 imagination.	You	would	like	me	to	 tell	you	that	yes	 it	was	me.	You
will	feel	very	much	fulfilled	if	it	was	me	hitting	your	head.	People	like	to	believe
in	miracles;	hence	miracles	happen	because	people	 like	 to	believe.	People	 feel
happy	believing	in	their	dreams;	they	go	on	giving	energy	to	their	dreams.	That's
how	you	have	lived	for	many,	many	lives	in	a	dream	world.
I	am	not	going	to	cooperate	with	you	in	any	way.	It	was	sheer	imagination,	you
imagined	it.	Now	you	want	my	help	also.
I	have	heard.
The	rabbi	of	Chelm	was	distracted	by	children	as	he	was	preparing	a	sermon.	He
hollered	out	the	window	to	chase	them	away,	 'Hurry	down	to	the	river	where	a
terrible	monster	is	in	the	water.	He	is	breathing	fire,	and	is	an	ugly	dragon.'
The	 children	 ran	 to	 see	what	was	 going	 on.	 People	 followed	 them,	 the	 crowd
grew.
As	the	rabbi	saw	the	mob	running,	he	asked,	'Where	is	everyone	going?'
'Down	 to	 the	 river	where	 there	 is	 a	monster	breathing	 fire.	 It	 is	 an	ugly	green
dragon.'
The	rabbi	joined	the	race.'True,	I	did	make	it	up,	'	he	thought	as	he	panted.'Still,
you	never	can	tell.'
You	 may	 be	 creating	 something	 but	 if	 others	 start	 believing	 it	 you	 will	 start
believing	it.
This	 is	 your	 imagination.	 If	 I	 say,	 'Yes,	 it	 was	 true,'	 then	 you	 will	 suddenly
believe	in	it,	and	you	will	think	that	you	have	believed	in	me.	You	have	simply
taken	my	support	for	your	own	dream.
Mind	is	a	great	liar,	it	goes	on	lying	to	you.	Beware	of	the	tricks	of	the	mind.
A	little	girl	was	always	lying.	She	was	given	a	St.	Bernard	dog,	and	this	little	girl
went	out	and	told	all	the	neighbors	that	she	had	been	given	a	lion.
The	mother	called	her	and	 said,	 'I	 told	you	not	 to	 lie.	You	go	upstairs	and	 tell
God	you	are	sorry.	Promise	God	you	will	never	lie	again.'
She	went	upstairs	and	said	her	prayers	and	then	came	down.
Her	mother	said,	'Did	you	tell	God	you	are	sorry?'
The	little	girl	said,	'Yes,	I	did	and	God	said	that	sometimes	he	finds	it	hard	to	tell
my	dog	form	a	lion	too.'
That's	how	it	goes	on.	But	I	am	not	going	to	help	you	in	any	way,	because	any
hint	of	help	will	be	destructive	for	you.	On	the	path	of	meditation,	on	the	path	of
Zen,	all	imagination	has	to	be	avoided.	You	have	to	be	indifferent	about	it.
And	the	more	you	enter	into	meditation,	the	more	and	more	imagination	will	try
to	 distract	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 new	 phenomenon,	 it	 has	 always	 happened.	 All	 the
great	meditators	have	come	across	it.	Buddha	is	distracted	by	Mara,	the	god	of
devils.	 Jesus	 is	 distracted	 by	 the	 devil.	 Sufi	 mystics	 are	 distracted	 by	 Satan.
There	is	no	Satan,	no	Mara,	no	devil	--
the	real	devil	is	in	your	mind,	the	imagination.
There	are	stories	of	Hindu	seers	 that	when	 they	 reach	 to	 the	 final	 step	of	 their
meditation	they	are	distracted	by	Indra.	He	sends	beautiful	maidens,	APSARAS,
to	distract	them.
But	why	 should	 anybody	distract	 these	poor	 saints?	Why?	They	are	not	doing
anybody	any	harm.	They	have	left	the	world,	they	are	sitting	under	their	trees	or
in	their	caves	in	the	Himalayas,	why	send	beautiful	maidens	to	them?
Nobody	is	sending	anybody.	There	is	no	agency	like	that.	Imagination	is	playing
the	last	tricks,	and	when	your	meditation	goes	deep,	deeper	layers	of	imagination
are	provoked.
Ordinarily,	when	meditation	is	not	there,	you	live	on	the	surface	of	the	mind.	Of
course,	 your	 imagination	 is	 also	 superficial	 then.	 The	 deeper	 you	 move	 in
meditation,	 the	more	 the	deeper	 layers	of	 imagination	will	 be	 revealed	 to	you,
they	will	be	more	real.	They	will	be	so	real	that	you	cannot	even	think	that	they
can	be	imagination.
Now	you	can	even	bring	proofs	that	they	are	not	imagination.	For	example,	this
SANNYASIN	who	has	been	hit	 twice,	he	can	even	show	his	head	and	you	can
find	the	marks.	Now,	he	will	say,	'How	can	it	be	imagination?	Nobody	has	hit	me
--	and	these	marks	are	here?'	Then	you	ask	people	who	know	about	hypnosis.	In
deep	hypnosis,	the	hypnotist	suggests	that	he	is	putting	fire	in	your	hand,	and	he
puts	nothing	--	but	the	hand	gets	burnt.	Now	what	happened?	It	was	just	that	the
imagination	 worked	 so	 tremendously.	 The	 body	 is	 also	 under	 control	 of
imagination.	So	if	you	think	yourself	beautiful	you	will	become	beautiful.	If	you
think	yourself	ugly	you	will	become	ugly.
Your	imagination	will	give	a	mould	to	your	body.
That's	how	there	are	fire-walkers.	If	your	imagination	takes	it	deeply	that	you	are
not	going	to	be	burnt	and	God	is	protecting	you,	you	will	not	be	burnt.	You	can
pass	through	a	pit	full	of	burning	coals	without	being	burnt.	But	even	if	a	slight
suspicion	arises	in	your	mind,	then	immediately	you	will	be	burnt.	Because	that
slight	 suspicion	 is	 a	 loophole	 in	 your	 imagination.	 Then	 you	 are	 no	 longer
protected	by	the	seal	of	your	own	imagination.
So	the	deeper	you	go	in	meditation,	the	deeper	will	be	the	games	of	imagination.
Sometimes	 it	will	 come	as	APSARAS,	beautiful	maidens,	dancing,	provoking,
seducing	you.	Sometimes	it	will	come	as	tremendous	fire-monsters	throwing	fire
from	their	mouths.	Or,	anything	that	you	can	imagine	will	surround	you.	And	if
you	get	caught	into	it,	if	for	a	single	moment	you	forget	that	this	is	imagination,
then	 the	 imagination	 has	 destroyed	 your	 penetration	 into	 meditation.	 You	 are
thrown	back	to	the	surface	again.
Then	you	will	have	to	seek	the	path	again.	So	if	you	are	sitting	in	zazen,	as	the
SANNYASIN	has	said,	then	remember	it.
But	 this	 is	 a	 good	 indication.	 That	 you	 could	 imagine	 so	 deeply	 shows	 that
meditation	 is	 going	 deep.	 The	 deeper	 the	 meditation,	 the	 deeper	 will	 be	 the
imagination.	Only	at	the	last	point	does	meditation	take	over.	Until	the	last,	the
struggle	 continues	 between	 imagination	 and	 meditation.	 And	 sometimes	 the
imagination	is	so	beautiful....	This	is	not	such	a	beautiful	imagination,	you	have
been	hit	twice!	Still	you	want	to	believe	in	it,	because	just	to	think	that	miracles
have	started	to	happen	to	you,	just	to	think	that	your	Master	is	working	hard	on
you,	just	to	think	that	he	goes	on	making	you	aware	and	hits	on	your	head	when
you	were	falling	asleep,	is	very	ego	fulfilling.
There	are	many	beautiful	 imaginations	 --	 they	will	 come.	Flowers	will	 shower
on	you	and	you	can	almost	smell	them.	It	is	possible	that	you	can	imagine	very
deeply	that	roses	are	falling	on	you	and	you	can	smell	them.	That's	okay	--	but
somebody	 else	 passing	by	your	 side	may	be	 able	 to	 smell	 your	 roses!	Then	 it
becomes	tremendously	powerful.
It	means	 your	 imagination	 is	 not	 only	 passive,	 it	 has	 become	 active.	 You	 are
creating	a	certain	smell	inside	your	body	by	your	imagination.	Your	body	has	all
that	the	earth	has.
The	earth	creates	the	rose.	If	the	rosebush	is	not	there	you	cannot	smell	roses	in
the	earth,	there	is	no	smell.	But	if	you	put	a	rosebush	there,	one	day	suddenly	it
flowers	 and	 the	 smell	 is	 there.	 The	 earth	 was	 containing	 the	 smell	 and	 the
rosebush	 helped	 the	 smell	 to	 come	 to	 an	 expression.	 Your	 body	 is	 earth,	 it
contains	 all	 that	 is	 contained	 by	 earth.	 If	 your	 imagination	 is	 tremendous,	 not
only	you	will	smell,	others	also	can	smell	the	rose.
But	 still	 it	 is	 imagination.	Your	 imagination	 functioned	 just	 like	 a	 rosebush;	 it
helped	to	express	something	that	was	hidden	within	you.
Man	 is	 earth.	 The	word	 human	 comes	 from	 'humus'.	Humus	means	 the	 earth.
The	Hebrew	word	'adam'	comes	from	a	Hebrew	root	which	means	the	earth.	We
are	made	 of	 earth,	we	 are	miniature	 earths.	We	 carry	 all	 that	 is	 hidden	 in	 the
earth,	that	is	our	potentiality	also.
Once	you	help	through	imagination	your	potential	starts	becoming	actual.
But	 on	 the	 path	 of	meditation	 even	 beautiful	 experiences	 like	 these	 are	 to	 be
avoided.
Because	 once	 you	get	 into	 them	you	 are	 getting	 into	 the	mind,	 and	 the	whole
effort	is	how	to	drop	the	mind,	how	to	get	rid	of	the	mind.	Once	the	mind	is	not
there	then	you	are	completely	separate	from	the	body	--	mind	is	the	bridge,	mind
connects	you	with	the	body.	Mind	dropped,	there	is	the	body,	the	earth,	and	there
is	you,	the	sky	--	totally	separate	realities.	Then	you	have	become	a	witness.
So	if	next	time	it	happens	--	this	magicless	magic	--	to	you,	and	you	feel	a	hit	on
the	 head,	 don't	 be	 concerned	 by	 the	 hit,	 simply	 remain	 aware.	 Just	 watch.
Whether	 it	 is	 true	 or	 untrue	 is	 irrelevant,	 remain	 a	 witness.	 Simply	 remain	 a
watcher,	don't	get	involved	in	it	in	any	way	and	soon	it	will	disappear.	And	once
you	have	 learned	 the	 technique	of	 how	 to	drop	 the	games	of	 imagination	 it	 is
going	 to	 be	 tremendously	 beneficial	 to	 you.	 Because	 the	 more	 you	 go	 into
meditation,	the	more	and	more	imagination	will	be	coming.
Stronger	 and	 stronger	waves	of	 imagination	will	 pass	 through	your	being,	 and
you	will	have	to	be	aware	and	alert.
If	it	is	difficult	for	you,	impossible	for	you,	then	the	path	of	meditation	is	not	for
you.
Then	 the	 path	 of	 love,	 then	 the	 path	 of	 BHAKTI	 and	 devotion,	 where
imagination	is	not	avoided	but	used,	is	for	you.	Then	you	forget	all	about	zazen,
that	path	is	not	for	you.
Then	you	forget	all	about	Buddha,	Mahavira,	that	path	is	not	for	you.	Then	you
move	into	the	world	of	Meera,	Chaitanya,	Mohammed.	Then	you	move	into	the
world	of	devotion.
Remember,	one	 thing	can	be	 a	help	on	one	path,	 and	 the	 same	 thing	can	be	 a
hindrance	on	another	path.	For	example,	there	are	rails,	 the	train	runs	on	them,
they	are	a	help,	without	rails	the	train	will	not	run.	But	if	you	start	moving	a	car
on	those	rails	you	will	be	in	difficulty.	They	are	a	help	for	trains	but	they	cannot
be	 a	 help	 for	 cars.	 Cars	 need	 a	 more	 free	 way,	 more	 freedom.	 So	 remember
always,	 a	 thing	which	 is	 a	 hindrance	 on	 one	 path	 need	 not	 be	 a	 hindrance	 on
another	path.
But	if	you	choose	zazen....	I	think	the	SANNYASIN	who	has	asked	this	question
will	be	 tremendously	benefited	on	 the	path	of	zazen	because	 such	 imagination
that	he	could	believe	it	to	be	true	simply	shows	that	his	sitting	is	helping.	He	is
relaxing	into	deeper	layers	of	consciousness.
The	second	question:
Question	2
WHILE	 PRACTICING	 ZAZEN,	 JUST	 SITTING,	 I	 DISCOVERED	 THAT	 I
HAD
BECOME	 THE	 GREATEST	 FOOL	 ON	 EARTH.	 BUT	 SUDDENLY	 I
REMEMBERED
ONE	 PROVERB:	 WHEN	 IGNORANCE	 IS	 BLISS,	 IT	 IS	 FOLLY	 TO	 BE
WISE.
THOUGH	 THIS	 STUPIDITY	 HAS	 MADE	 ME	 A	 FOOL,	 I	 HAVE	 NEVER
BEEN	SO
FULL	AS	I	AM	NOW.	I	HAVE	NOW	FALLEN	IN	LOVE	WITH	THIS	ZAZEN
STUPIDITY.	I	 INVOKE	YOUR	BLESSINGS	SO	THAT	I	REMAIN	A	FOOL
TILL
ETERNITY.
Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 foolishness	 which	 is	 wisdom,	 there	 is	 a	 foolishness	 which	 is
enlightened.
There	 is	 a	 foolishness	of	 the	wise.	Why	call	 it	 foolishness?	 It	 is	 foolish	 in	 the
eyes	 of	 the	world,	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	worldly	 because	 it	 belongs	 to	 a	 different
realm.	It	is	not	of	the	world	of	calculation,	cleverness.	It	is	innocent.
Jesus	looked	like	a	fool.	Lao	Tzu	also	looked	like	a	fool.	In	India	for	the	fool	we
have	a	term,	BUDDHU	--	it	comes	from	Buddha.	Buddha	must	have	looked	like
a	 fool,	 tremendously	 like	 a	 fool,	 hence	 the	 term	 BUDDHU.	 We	 call	 a	 man
BUDDHU	if	we	want	to	call	him	an	idiot.	BUDDHU	means	buddha-like.
Buddha	must	 have	 looked	 like	 a	 fool	when	 he	 renounced	 his	 empire.	He	was
going	 to	 be	 the	 king	 and	 he	 became	 a	 beggar.	 Can	 you	 find	 more	 foolish	 a
person?	He	had	the	most	beautiful	women	around	him	and	he	escaped	from	the
palace.	What	 foolishness!	When	Buddha	 escaped,	 renounced,	 he	 didn't	 stay	 in
his	 father's	 kingdom	because	 the	 spies	 of	 his	 father	would	 have	 followed	 him
and	 they	 would	 have	 caught	 hold	 of	 him	 again.	 He	 immediately	 left	 the
kingdom,	went	outside,	and	entered	into	another	kingdom.
But	the	king	was	a	friend	of	his	father.	So	when	the	king	came	to	know	he	came
to	 see	Buddha	 and	he	 said,	 'What	 foolishness	 you	 are	 doing!	 If	 you	 are	 angry
with	your	 father,	don't	be	worried,	you	come	 to	my	palace.	Get	married	 to	my
daughter	and	be	a	king	here.
If	there	is	some	trouble	with	your	father,	forget	all	about	it.	I	am	just	as	loving
towards	you	as	your	father.	He	is	my	old	friend,	and	my	kingdom	is	not	 lesser
than	 your	 father's	 kingdom.	 So	 come!	 But	 what	 nonsense	 you	 are	 doing!
Begging	 on	 the	 street?	 You	 are	 not	 a	 beggar.	 Your	 family	 has	 been	 royal	 for
centuries.'
Buddha	laughed	and	he	said,	 'As	far	as	I	know	I	have	been	a	beggar	for	many
lives.	I	don't	know	about	my	family,	but	I	know	about	me.	And	I	come	through
my	father	but	I	don't	belong	to	him.	He	has	just	been	a	passage.'
Yes,	if	you	move	deeper	than	the	mind,	you	will	start	looking	foolish	to	others	--
even	to	yourself	you	will	start	looking	foolish,	because	you	will	fall	out	of	line.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	word	'idiot'	--	one	who	has	his	own	idiom	of	life,	his
own	private	style	of	life.	That	is	the	meaning	of	'idiot'.	If	you	have	a	language	of
your	own	nobody	will	be	able	to	understand	it.	Then	people	will	say,	 'Why	are
you	talking	like	an	idiot?	It	is	gibberish.'	You	may	be	using	a	perfect	language	of
your	 own	 coinage,	 but	 unless	 it	 is	 social	 it	 cannot	 be	 accepted	 as	 language.
Unless	your	life	belongs	to	the	society	you	cannot	be	thought	intelligent.	People
who	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 intelligent	 are	 those	 who	 are	 in	 the	 rat	 race	 in	 this
competitive	world,	 hankering	 to	 cut	 each	 other's	 throat,	 trying	 to	 reach	 to	 the
topmost,	trying	to	become	the	first	in	the	world.
Jesus	says	blessed	are	the	meek,	the	non-competitive;	blessed	are	the	poor,	those
who	have	nothing.	Of	course	he's	talking	nonsense.	If	Jesus	is	right	then	all	the
politicians	 are	 foolish.	 If	 Jesus	 is	 right	 then	 all	 the	 rich	men	are	 foolish.	Then
what	about	Alexander	the	Great?	If	Alexander	the	Great	is	right,	then	of	course
Jesus	 is	 a	 fool.	And	Alexander	 the	Great	 seems	 to	be	 right	because	 the	 crowd
believes	 in	 him.	 Jesus	 is	 lonely,	 Lao	 Tzu	 is	 lonely,	 Zen	Masters	 are	 lonely	 --
solitary	beings,	idiots,	they	have	their	own	idiom.	They	live	their	life	according
to	their	own	being,	they	don't	bother	a	bit,	they	don't	fulfil	the	formalities	of	the
society.	 They	 live	 as	 individuals,	 that	 is	 their	 foolishness.	 They	 don't	 live	 just
like	mechanical	parts	of	society,	they	are	not	robots.	They	are	alive	beings.
If	 you	 are	 alive,	 if	 you	 are	 really	 alive	 and	 vibrating	with	 life,	 you	will	 look
foolish;	 that's	why	children	 look	like	fools.	Old	people	 look	wise	because	 they
are	dead,	stiff	 --	all	 life	has	oozed	out	of	 them.	They	are	alive	only	for	name's
sake.	They	may	have	died	a	long	time	before.
I	have	heard	about	one	man	who	made	a	will	when	he	died.	And	in	the	will	he
said,
'Write	 on	 my	 tomb:	 Born	 such-and-such	 year,	 died	 when	 thirty,	 buried	 when
seventy.'
Almost	always	it	happens	that	people	die	near	about	thirty,	then	they	are	buried
at	seventy.	That's	another	thing:	burial	is	one	thing,	dying	is	another	thing.	When
society	comes	to	know	that	you	are	dead	that's	another	thing.
I	 have	heard	 about	 a	 priest	 --	 a	Catholic	 priest	 of	 course	 --	who	died,	 and	 for
three	 days	 he	 could	 not	 understand	what	 had	 happened.	 Then	 he	 came	 to	 his
church	and	tried	to	communicate	with	his	successor,	and	said,	'Be	aware.	I	died,
but	for	three	days	I	did	not	think	that	I	was	dead	because	I	was	more	dead	while
I	was	alive.	I	was	feeling	more	alive	so	I	did	not	think	that	I	was	dead.	It	took
three	days	for	me	to	realise	the	fact	that	I	had	died.'
Children	 look	 foolish,	 and	 Jesus	 says,	 'Unless	 you	 are	 like	 small	 children	 you
will	not	be	able	to	enter	into	my	Kingdom	of	God.	In	fact	he	is	saying,	'Blessed
are	the	fools.'
Children	 are	 fools,	 that's	why	 everybody	 tries	 to	make	 the	 children	wise.	 The
very	effort	to	make	them	wise	simply	kills	them.	By	and	by	they	become	afraid
to	 live;	 their	 streaming	 life	 is	 crippled	 from	 everywhere,	 only	 a	 very	 narrow
passage	which	is	socially	acceptable	is	allowed	for	them	to	live	in.	Then	through
that	 tunnel	 only,	 they	 somehow	 cling	 to	 life.	 That	 tunnel	 is	 just	 a	 very	 small
thread	--	they	don't	die,	that's	all,	but	they	don't	live	either.	They	don't	live	at	all.
They	somehow	drag.
So	if	you	sit	 in	zazen	and	you	move	deeply	into	it,	your	mind	will	start	falling
away,	 and	 your	 mind	 has	 up	 to	 now	 been	 your	 cleverness,	 your	 so-called
intelligence.	Your	mind	 has	 accumulated	 all	 your	 experiences,	 your	 past.	And
when	 the	 past	 starts	 withering	 away	 and	 you	 become	 fresh	 and	 alive	 in	 the
moment,	you	are	again	like	a	child,	again	a	fool.
Lao	 Tzu	 said,	 'Everybody	 is	 clever	 except	 me.	 Everybody	 seems	 to	 be	 very
calculating,	I	am	just	muddle-headed.'
It	is	related	that	Rabbi	Hanuk	told	this	story.
For	a	whole	year	I	felt	a	longing	to	go	to	my	master,	Rabbi	Bonon,	and	talk	with
him.	 But	 every	 time	 I	 entered	 the	 house	 I	 felt	 I	 was	 not	 man	 enough.	 Once
though,	when	I	was	walking	across	the	field	and	weeping,	I	knew	that	I	must	run
to	the	rabbi	without	delay.
He	asked,	'Why	are	you	weeping?'
I	answered,	'I	am	after	all	alive	in	this	world,	a	being	created	with	all	the	senses
and	all	the	limbs,	but	I	do	not	know	what	it	is	I	was	created	for,	and	what	I	am
good	for	in	this	world.'
'Little	fool,'	he	replied.'That's	 the	same	question	I	have	carried	around	with	me
all	my	life.
You	will	come	and	eat	the	evening	meal	with	me	today.'
Ordinarily	we	 think	people	who	know	answers	are	wise.	They	may	be	 learned
but	 they	 are	 not	 wise.	 They	may	 be	 very	 well	 informed,	 but	 information	 has
nothing	to	do	with	wisdom.	People	who	are	really	wise,	in	fact,	have	no	answers.
They	have	a	quest,	an	enquiry,	a	 tremendous	enquiry	 in	 them,	but	no	answers.
By	and	by	 they	come	to	understand	 that	all	questions	are	meaningless,	so	 they
drop	questions	also.	A	man	becomes	perfectly	wise	when	he	has	no	answers	and
no	questions.
Ordinarily,	if	you	have	many	answers	you	will	be	thought	wise.	But	religiously,
in	 the	 Zen	way,	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 any	 answers	 and	 no	 questions....	 Questions
exist	in	the	mind	and	then	mind	tries	to	find	out	answers,	then	through	answers
mind	 creates	more	 questions,	 and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth	 it	 goes.	 It	 is	 an	 endless
chain,	it	goes	on	ad	nauseam.
Once	you	understand	this	--	that	this	whole	game	is	a	mind	game	--	you	simply
drop	it.
You	don't	 hesitate	 in	dropping	 it,	 you	don't	 postpone	 it	 for	 tomorrow	 --	 'I	will
drop	it	tomorrow'	--	you	drop	it	right	now.	You	say,	'This	is	just	foolish.'
Then,	 of	 course,	when	 you	 drop	 your	 foolishness,	 you	will	 look	 a	 fool	 to	 the
world.	 If	 somebody	asks	you,	 'Who	are	you?'	 and	you	 say,	 'I	don't	know,'	will
you	 look	 wise?	 He	 will	 think	 either	 you	 are	 a	 fool	 or	 a	 madman.'You	 don't
know?	You	 don't	 know	 your	 name?	You	 don't	 know	who	 you	 are?	You	 don't
know	your	identity?'	The	man	will	become	suspicious	of	you,	he	will	report	 to
the	police	immediately	that	here	is	a	man	who	seems	to	be	suspect,	who	could	be
dangerous.	 But	 if	 you	 say,	 'Yes,	 my	 name	 is	 this.	 My	 address	 is	 this,'	 then
everything	is	settled.
Socrates	said	in	his	last	days,	'When	I	was	young	I	knew	many	things,	and	I	used
to	think	of	myself	as	the	wisest	man	in	the	world.	The	more	I	grew,	the	more	I
became	aware	that	I	didn't	know	much.	And	then	the	last	thing	happened	--	one
day	I	suddenly	realised	that	I	knew	nothing.'
It	is	said	that	the	oracle	at	Delphi	declared	that	Socrates	was	the	wisest	man	in
the	world.
People	who	had	heard	the	oracle	came	to	Socrates	and	told	him	that	the	oracle
has	declared	that	he	was	the	wisest	man	in	the	world.	Socrates	looked	shocked
and	he	said,
'There	must	have	been	 some	mistake,	because	 just	 today	 I	have	 realised	 that	 I
don't	know	anything	at	all.	I	am	the	most	ignorant	man	in	the	world!	You	please
go	and	correct	the	oracle.'	And	they	went	and	they	told	the	oracle	that	Socrates
himself	 says	 that	 he	 is	 the	 most	 ignorant	 man	 in	 the	 world.	 The	 oracle	 said,
'That's	why	I	have	declared	him	the	wisest.'
The	more	open	you	become,	the	more	innocent,	the	more	childlike	you	become,
the	more	the	winds	of	existence	start	flowing	in	and	out	of	you.	The	more	you
are	knowing	and	have	the	gesture	of	knowledge,	the	more	you	are	closed.	Then
you	 don't	 allow	 the	 winds	 of	 existence	 to	 enter	 you,	 then	 you	 are	 always
distrustful,	you	don't	trust	life.	A	fool	is	one	who	goes	on	trusting;	a	fool	is	one
who	goes	on	trusting	against	all	his	experience.
You	deceive	him,	 and	he	 trusts	you;	 and	you	deceive	him	again,	 and	he	 trusts
you;	and	you	deceive	him	again,	and	he	trusts	you.	Then	you	will	say	that	he	is	a
fool,	he	does	not	learn.	His	trust	is	tremendous;	his	trust	is	so	pure	that	nobody
can	corrupt	it.
Be	 a	 fool	 in	 the	 Taoist	 sense,	 in	 the	 Zen	 sense.	 Don't	 try	 to	 create	 a	 wall	 of
knowledge	around	you.	Whatsoever	experience	comes	to	you,	let	it	happen,	and
then	go	on	dropping	it.	Go	on	cleaning	your	mind	continuously;	go	on	dying	to
the	past	so	you	remain	in	the	present,	here-now,	as	if	just	born,	just	a	babe.	In	the
beginning	it	is	going	to	be	very	difficult.	The	world	will	start	taking	advantage	of
you...	let	them.	They	are	poor	fellows.
Even	 if	 you	 are	 cheated	 and	 deceived	 and	 robbed,	 let	 it	 happen	 because	 that
which	 is	 really	 yours	 cannot	 be	 robbed	 from	 you,	 that	 which	 is	 really	 yours
nobody	can	steal	from	you.	And	each	time	you	don't	allow	situations	to	corrupt
you,	that	opportunity	will	become	an	integration	inside.	Your	soul	will	become
more	crystallised.
I	have	heard.
A	thief	visited	the	house	of	a	Sufi	mystic	at	night,	and	spread	his	shawl	to	wrap
up	the	loot.	After	a	long	search	he	had	not	found	anything.	In	the	meantime	the
dervish	 sleeping	 on	 the	 floor	 had	 rolled	 over	 onto	 the	 shawl.	When	 the	 thief
came	to	pick	up	his	shawl,	he	saw	the	dervish	sleeping	on	it.
Just	as	he	was	leaving	empty-handed,	the	dervish	woke	up	and	called	after	him,
'Please	shut	the	front	door.'
'Why	should	I?'	the	thief	answered.'I	came	and	supplied	your	mattress,	someone
else	might	come	and	bring	your	blanket	too.'
So	remain	open,	don't	be	worried	--	even	a	thief	cannot	steal	anything	from	you.
He	 may	 supply	 a	 mattress	 or	 a	 blanket,	 that	 is	 another	 matter.	 He	 may	 give
something	to	you	but	he	cannot	take	anything	from	you,	because	that	which	can
be	taken	is	not	yours.	That	which	cannot	be	taken,	only	that	is	yours.
Be	a	fool.	Zen	is	 the	effort	of	dropping	the	mind,	destructuring	it,	so	 that	your
innocence	that	has	become	hidden	behind	the	structure	reveals	itself	again.	You
were	 born	without	 knowing	 anything.	You	were	 born	with	 clear	 eyes	with	 no
thoughts	 in	 them,	 with	 no	 clouds.	 Your	 inner	 sky	 was	 pure.	 Then	 you	 were
taught,	 conditioned	 --	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 --	 and	 you	 became	 cluttered
with	 knowledge,	 from	 the	 school,	 the	 college,	 the	 university,	 and	 life's
experiences.	 And	 you	 were	 taught	 how	 to	 doubt	 --	 because	 doubt	 is	 the
intelligence	of	the	wordly	man.
Trust	is	the	intelligence	of	the	religious	man.	You	were	taught	to	doubt,	trained
to	doubt,	 but	because	of	doubt	you	became	closed.	A	man	who	doubts	 cannot
remain	 open;	 a	 man	 who	 doubts	 always	 feels;insecure.	 A	 man	 who	 doubts
always	 thinks	 about	 the	 world	 as	 if	 it	 is	 the	 enemy;	 the	 man	 who	 doubts	 is
constantly	 fighting.	 That	 fight	 is	 going	 to	 end	 in	 your	 defeat	 because	 the	 part
cannot	win	over	the	whole.	That's	not	possible.
So	you	are	 fighting	a	doomed	 fight.	You	are	going	 to	be	defeated	 finally.	You
may	 have	 small	 victories	 here	 and	 there,	 but	 they	 don't	 count.	 Finally	 death
comes,	and	all	 is	 taken	away.	And	in	 this	fight	you	could	not	enjoy,	you	could
not	delight	in	life.	To	delight	in	life	one	needs	to	be	a	fool,	trusting.
Read	 Dosteovsky's	 'the	 Idiot'.	 The	 main	 character	 in	 'The	 Idiot'	 is	 a	 Zen
character,	a	Tao	character,	a	prince	who	is	foolish,	totally	foolish.	But	his	doors
are	 open,	 he	 is	 not	 in	 any	way	 fighting	 the	world.	He	 is	 relaxed.	All	 tensions
gather	 in	 you	 because	 of	 doubt,	 all	 tensions	 make	 their	 abode	 in	 your	 being
because	of	fear,	insecurity.	And	you	are	just	a	small	wave	in	the	ocean	but	you
are	 afraid	 of	 the	 ocean	 and	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 fight	 with	 the	 ocean.	 You	 will
simply	 waste	 an	 opportunity	 which	 could	 have	 become	 a	 celebration,	 which
could	have	become	festive.
The	 same	 energy	 which	 could	 have	 laughed	 is	 turned	 sour	 and	 bitter	 and
becomes	poisonous.	To	be	alive....	When	I	say	'to	be	alive'	I	mean	to	be	alive	in
the	whole	 spectrum	of	 life.	Alive	 to	 cry	and	alive	 to	 laugh;	 alive	 to	weep	and
alive	 to	 love	 --	 the	 whole	 spectrum.	 I	 see	 thousands	 of	 people	 living	 half-
heartedly.	 They	 have	 chosen	 a	 certain	 colour	 of	 the	 spetrum	 and	 they	 have
narrowed	 down	 their	 being.	 Now	 they	 are	 missing,	 they	 are	 missing	much	 --
because	you	can	enjoy	life	only	when	you	are	a	rainbow.
A	man	was	deeply	in	love	with	a	woman,	but	he	was	a	very	shy	man.	Finally	he
succeeded	in	persuading	her	to	be	at	least	friendly	towards	him.
This	man	was	a	friend	of	Henry	Miller,	and	Henry	Miller	was	asking	again	and
again,
'What	is	happening	in	your	love	affairs?'
One	day	he	came	and	he	said,	 'I	was	almost	on	 the	verge	of	succeeding.	 I	had
succeeded	 so	much	 that	 I	 persuaded	 her	 to	 undress	 completely,	 but	more	 than
that	she	would	not	do.
What	do	you	suggest	I	should	have	done?'
Miller	said,	'Why,	you	should	have	wept.'
'Wept?'	The	man	could	not	believe	what	he	was	saying.
He	said,	'What	else	can	you	do?	Laughter	I	cannot	see	in	you,	it	is	impossible.	It
is	very,	very	far	away	because	you	have	not	even	wept	yet.'
Laughter	is	possible	only	if	one	is	able	to	cry	and	weep	deeply.	The	child	cries	--
that	is	 the	first	relationship	with	the	world.	Every	child	born	cries	first.	That	is
the	first	rung	of	the	ladder.	Miller	says	rightly,	'You	should	have	wept	because	I
don't	know	that	you	can	do	anything	else.	But	this	much	you	can	do	because	this
much	you	must	have	done	when	you	were	born.	You	should	have	wept.'
A	fool	is	one	who	lives	the	whole	rainbow	--	he	cries,	tears	are	flowing	from	his
eyes,	 he	 is	 not	 blocked	 in	 any	way.	 He	 can	 cry	 in	 the	marketplace,	 he	 is	 not
ashamed	of	life.
Unashamedly	he	lives,	and	lives	totally.	That's	why	he	is	a	fool,	or	thought	to	be
a	fool.
He	laughs,	and	he	delights.	He	is	a	rainbow.	And	God	comes	only	to	those	who
are	like	a	rainbow.
Blessed	are	the	fools.
The	third	question:
Question	3
I	FEEL	THE	WORD	 'GOD'	HAS	NO	HEARTFELT	POTENTIAL,	YET	THE
SKY
AND	 PLANTS	 CAN	 BRING	 ME	 TO	 MY	 KNEES	 AND	 THERE	 IS	 A
HEARTACHE
FOR	 SOMETHING	 UNKNOWN.	 ZEN	 ATTRACTS	 ME	 WITH	 ITS
FRESHNESS,	 COOLNESS,	 BUT	 ITS	 DEMANDS	 MAKE	 ME	 FEEL
IMPOTENT.	YOU	SEEM	THE
MOST	 ATTRACTIVE,	 YOU	 WARM	 MY	 HEART	 AND	 HAVE	 THE
COOLNESS	OF
A	 STREAM.	 ARE	 YOU	 POSSIBLY	 A	 THIRD	 WAY?	 BECAUSE	 I	 CAN'T
DECIDE.
I	am	not	a	way	at	all,	I	am	just	a	presence.	You	have	to	understand	it	because	you
are	going	to	be	with	me.	You	have	to	understand	it	as	deeply	as	possible.
I	am	not	a	way.	A	way	leads	you	somewhere,	it	connects	you	with	the	there,	and
my	whole	effort	is	to	bring	you	HERE.	A	way	is	there	--	oriented,	and	I	am	here-
oriented.	A	way	is	needed	if	the	goal	is	far	away	from	you.	If	the	goal	is	away,
distant,	 then	the	way	is	needed.	As	I	see	it,	 the	goal	 is	within	you;	you	are	 the
goal,	you	are	the	target.	So	there	is	nowhere	to	go,	a	way	is	not	needed.	In	fact,
dropping	 all	 the	 ways,	 dropping	 the	 very	 search	 and	 just	 being	 yourself	 is
enough.	Because	you	cannot	do	that	you	have	to	be	shown	a	few	ways	to	walk
and	get	tired	on.	That	is	just	to	exhaust	you.
The	whole	 effort	 is	 to	 exhaust	 you.	When	 the	 effort	 is	 exhausted	 and	 you	 are
really	tired	and	you	fall	down,	and	you	say,	'Now	I	don't	want	to	go	anywhere,'
and	you	relax...	you	reach.	Seeking	is	not	the	way	to	reach,	but	seeking	is	needed
because	you	are	very	active.
Even	 to	 reach	 God,	 ways	 are	 needed	 --	 and	 God	 is	 here-now.	 He	 is	 your
surround,	he	is	within	you	and	without.	It	is	as	foolish	as	a	fish	seeking	the	ocean
and	living	already	in	the	ocean.	You	are	in	truth	because	there	is	no	other	way;
only	in	 truth	can	you	be.	You	may	have	forgotten	it	or	you	may	not	be	able	 to
recognise	it	because	it	is	so	obvious.	It	is	so	close	that	there	is	no	distance	to	see
it	 --	distance	 is	needed	 to	have	a	perspective,	you	cannot	see	 things	 from	very
close.	And	God	is	not	only	close,	he	is	not	only	the	closest	--
he	is	you.	God	is	not	a	'seen',	he	is	in	the	see-er;	God	is	not	a	goal,	he	is	in	the
seeker.	The	seeker	is	the	sought.
So	I	am	not	a	way.	I	talk	about	ways	because	you	are	mad.	I	talk	about	medicines
because	 you	 are	 ill	 and	you	 cannot	 understand	 the	 vision	of	 no-way.	You	will
have	to	walk,	seek,	get	frustrated.	When	I	say	there	are	two	ways,	I	mean	there
are	two	ways	to	get	frustrated.
One	is	of	love,	and	another	is	of	meditation.
But	I	am	not	a	way.	I	am	just	a	presence.	And	those	who	will	understand	me	will
not	need	anything	more	than	just	being	with	me.	That's	what	in	the	East	we	call
SATSANG	-
-	just	being	with	me,	just	being	in	my	presence,	just	relaxing	in	my	presence,	just
allowing	me	to	enter	you,	not	resisting,	not	fighting	with	me.
And	 suddenly	 one	 day	 you	 will	 start	 dancing,	 singing,	 celebrating.	 One	 day
suddenly	 you	 will	 start	 laughing.	What	 were	 you	 seeking?	 You	 were	 seeking
yourself.	How	can	you	seek	yourself?	You	are	already	that.
The	questioner	says:	I	FEEL	THAT	THE	WORD	'GOD'	HAS	NO	HEARTFELT
POTENTIAL....	 I	know	it.	Theologians	have	killed	 it.	They	have	killed	a	very
beautiful	word,	'God'.
Jews	were	right	because	they	were	very	reluctant	to	call	the	name	of	God	in	any
way.
They	were	very	reluctant.	They	were	right	because	if	you	use	the	name	of	God,
too	much	 use	will	 destroy	 its	 beauty.	 Before	 Jesus,	 Jews	were	 not	 allowed	 to
utter	the	name	of	God.
Even	now,	if	you	look	in	Jewish	books,	and	if	they	write	God,	they	don't	write
G-o-d.
They	simply	write	G-d;	they	leave	out	the	'o'.	Because	how	can	you	pronounce
his	 name	 in	 totality?	 He	 is	 so	 big.	 Whatsoever	 you	 call	 him	 is	 going	 to	 be
incomplete,	so	they	write	G-d,	not	G-o-d	--	the	'o'	is	left	out.	And	it	is	good	that
they	leave	out	 'o'	--	 'o'	 is	the	symbol	of	emptiness,	SHUNYA.	 'O'	is	void,	zero.
That	is	the	very	soul	of	God,	 'O',	zero,	that	is	his	very	being	--	so	they	leave	it
out.
For	many	centuries	only	the	high	priest	in	the	temple	of	Jerusalem	was	allowed
to	utter	the	name	of	God,	and	that	too	only	once	in	a	year,	and	that	too	in	total
aloneness.	People	would	wait,	millions	of	people	would	wait	together	outside	the
temple.	Then	 the	high	priest	would	go	 into	 the	 innermost	 shrine,	 all	 the	doors
would	be	closed,	nobody	will	be	able	to	hear,	and	there,	in	the	innermost	shrine,
he	would	whisper	the	name.	That's	all.
It	 was	 good	 because	 words	 like	 'God',	 'love',	 should	 not	 be	 used	 too	 much
otherwise	their	beauty	is	lost.	Theologians	killed	the	beautiful	word	'God'.	Now
it	is	almost	ugly,	it	is	almost	vulgar.
How	 theologians	 have	 killed	 it	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 Each	 of	 you	 has	 a
theologian	inside.
You	have	been	conditioned	for	so	many	centuries	that	the	theologian	has	almost
become	a	part	of	you.	God	is	wild,	has	to	be,	but	the	theologian	is	always	afraid
of	the	wild	God,	the	theologian	is	always	afraid	of	anything	alive.	So	by	and	by
he	cuts	out	all	wildness	from	God.	He	polishes,	 trains,	and	conditions	 the	very
word	'God'.
If	you	go	 to	 the	old	scriptures	of	 the	world,	God	was	wild,	as	wild	as	you	can
imagine.	He	used	 to	be	angry	also;	he	used	 to	 fall	 in	 love	also;	he	used	 to	 run
after	women	also.	He	was	very	human,	down-to-earth,	and	very	alive,	throbbing
and	kicking.
But	 then	 it	 was	 not	 acceptable	 to	 the	 theologians	 because	 it	 was	 difficult	 to
categorise	him	and	it	was	difficult	to	use	him.	So	by	and	by,	limb	by	limb,	they
destroyed	 God.	 Now	 only	 a	 mummy,	 a	 dead	 body	 exists,	 preserved	 by
chemicals,	in	churches.	Churches	are	the	tombs	of	God,	their	God	has	died.	They
made	God	more	and	more	further	away	from	man	because	it	was	impossible	for
their	 egos	 to	 understand	 that	 God	 could	 be	 in	 any	 way	 related	 to	 man.	 The
creator	 and	 the	 created,	 the	 creator	 and	 the	 creature,	 how	can	 they	be	 related?
No!	The	creator	 is	 far	away	 in	 the	seventh	heaven	and	we	are	 just	 like	worms
crawling	on	the	earth,	sinners	asking	to	be	forgiven.	They	condemned	man	and
they	went	on	 raising	God	higher	and	higher.	A	moment	came	when	 the	bridge
broke.
It	is	so	simple	to	see	that	the	creator	has	to	be	related	with	the	creation.	A	poet	is
deeply	 related	with	 his	 poetry,	 has	 to	 be	 so,	 he	 loves	 his	 poetry.	 A	 painter	 is
deeply	related	with	his	painting	--	it	is	his	life,	his	flowering,	his	expression.	A
sculptor	loves	the	statue	he	has	made.	Watch	a	sculptor	when	he	has	finished	a
statue,	how	he	touches	and	feels	it	--
almost	as	 if	 it	 is	 the	girl	of	his	dreams,	his	beloved.	Watch	a	sculptor	when,	 in
difficult	circumstances,	he	has	to	sell	his	art	work.	Tears	come	to	his	eyes.
If	God	is	the	creator,	he	has	to	be	close	to	creation,	he	has	to	be	deeply	in	love
with	his	creation.	But	then	you	cannot	condemn	man	and	then	you	cannot	make
man	feel	guilty.
And	if	you	cannot	force	man	to	feel	guilty,	then	churches	cannot	exist,	then	their
whole	business	disappears.	The	whole	business	of	the	church	exists	only	if	you
are	guilty.
Because	 of	 your	 guilt	 you	 need	 their	 help;	 because	 of	 your	 guilt	 you	 need
salvation.
If	God	is	already	close	to	you,	and	if	God	is	already	breathing	in	you,	singing	in
your	heart,	then	what	is	the	need	of	any	salvation?	If	God	has	created	you,	then
how	can	you	be	sinners?	Then	you	cannot	be	condemned,	the	signature	of	God	is
on	you.
But	then	the	whole	business	of	religion	disappears.	So	they	went	on	making	God
more	 and	 more	 clinical.	 Now	 he	 smells	 almost	 like	 a	 hospital	 --	 no	 life,	 but
everything	clean.
They	became	 so	 afraid	 of	 the	 germs	of	 life	 that	 they	killed	 all	 the	 germs.	But
God	also	is	killed.
The	word	'God'	has	lost	the	heartfelt	potential.
One	 of	 my	 SANNYASINS	 has	 sent	 a	 beautiful	 anecdote	 to	 me.	 Listen	 to	 it,
meditate	over	it.
The	anecdote:
Yesterday	somebody	knocked	on	my	door,	and	I	opened	it	and	it	was	God.	And
he	asked	me	if	he	could	use	my	bathroom.	I	said,	'Sure,	come	on	in.'
When	he	finally	came	out	of	the	bathroom,	he	explained	that	he	had	been	having
some	trouble	finding	somebody	who	would	let	him	use	their	bathroom	because
most	people	like	to	think	God	never	has	to	go	to	the	bathroom.	Then	he	thanked
me	and	told	me	he	was	looking	for	somebody	to	be	the	Messiah	and	he	thought	I
showed	promise.
I	asked	him	if	he	really	thought	so.	And	he	said	he	liked	my	bathroom.
God	is	eccentric,	otherwise	why	should	he	create	such	an	eccentric	world?
But	 theologians	have	killed	him	completely.	They	cannot	 think	 that	he	needs	a
bathroom,	there	is	no	provision	in	heaven	for	that.	He	simply	sits	on	his	throne,
he	never	goes	to	the	bathroom.	An	inhuman	God	is	a	dead	God.	God	has	to	be
made	 alive	 again,	 he	 has	 to	 be	 brought	 home.	 Then	 your	 heart	 will	 start
throbbing	for	him.	If	you	drop	theology	then	religion	is	beautiful,	but	if	theology
is	always	there	between	you	and	religion,	then	the	theology	is	ugly	and	it	makes
religion	look	ugly	also.
I	FEEL	THAT	THE	WORD	'GOD'	HAS	NO	HEARTFELT	POTENTIAL,	YET
THE
SKY	AND	THE	PLANTS	CAN	BRING	ME	TO	MY	KNEES.	AND	THERE	IS
A	HEARTACHE	FOR	SOMETHING	UNKNOWN....	That's	 good.	That's	 how
one	should	approach	God,	without	theology.	Don't	use	even	the	word	'God',	there
is	no	need,	because	the	word	'God'	is	not	God.	The	word	'love'	is	not	love	--	drop
the	word,	you	just	carry	the	innermost	core	of	it,	the	significance	of	it,	the	song
of	 it.	That's	 the	 only	 real	way	 to	 enter	 into	 his	 temple	 --	 nature,	 the	 trees,	 the
birds,	 the	 sun	 and	 the	 stars.	He	 is	 all	 around	 you,	 calling	 you	 in	many,	many
ways.	Don't	go	to	the	church.	That	is	the	last	place	you	can	hope	for	him	to	visit.
Last!	Maybe	in	some	crisis,	but	otherwise	not.
He's	alive	in	the	flowers,	he's	alive	in	the	rainbows,	he's	alive	in	the	birds.	Listen
to	him.
In	fact,	if	you	learn	how	to	listen,	you	cannot	avoid	him	for	long.	Love	--	if	you
know	how	to	love	you	cannot	escape	from	him	for	long.	Love	is	his	shrine	and
listening	is	the	way	to	help	him	come	into	you.
There	is	an	anecdote	in	the	annals	of	Hasidism.
'Where	is	the	dwelling	of	God?'	This	was	the	question	with	which	the	Rabbi	of
Coates	surprised	a	number	of	learned	men	who	happened	to	be	visiting	him.
They	laughed	at	him.'What	a	thing	to	ask,	Rabbi!	Is	not	the	whole	world	full	of
his	glory?'
Then	the	Rabbi	answered	his	own	question.'God	dwells	wherever	man	lets	him
in.'
Let	 him	 in.	 He	 is	 knocking	 at	 your	 doors,	 allow	 him	 in.	 You	 need	 not	 go
anywhere.	Just	relax,	trust.	His	hand	is	already	searching	you.	Just	allow	him	to
find	you,	and	immediately	a	great	transformation	happens.
So	that	is	the	right	way.
Question	4
...THE	 SKY	 AND	 THE	 PLANTS	 CAN	 BRING	ME	 TO	 MY	 KNEES	 AND
THERE	IS	A	HEARTACHE	FOR	SOMETHING	UNKNOWN.
Yes,	God	is	the	eternally	unknown.	Even	by	knowing	him,	one	never	knows	him;
even	by	knowing	him,	he	remains	unknown.	His	unknowability	 is	his	mystery.
And	 it	 is	 good	 that	man	 cannot	 know	 him,	 otherwise	 he	 will	 become	 part	 of
science,	otherwise	he	will	be	just	caught	in	a	test	tube	somewhere	in	a	lab.	And
you	 know	what	 scientists	 can	 do.	 They	will	 torture	 him	 if	 they	 can	 find	 him.
They	 will	 poke	 him	 from	 here	 and	 there	 to	 find	 out	 secrets,	 just	 as	 they	 are
torturing	monkeys	and	other	animals.	They	will	torture	God	if	they	can	find	him.
No,	God	 can	 never	 become	 knowledge.	The	word	 'science'	means	 knowledge.
God	can	never	become	knowledge	and	can	never	become	science.	He	 is	not	 a
riddle	to	be	solved,	he	is	a	mystery	to	be	lived,	a	dance	to	be	danced,	a	song	to
be	sung,	a	 love	 to	be	dissolved	 in.	Yes,	you	can	come	to	 feel	him	but	you	can
never	come	to	know	him.	The	unknown	God	is	the	only	God	there	is.
There	is	a	story	about	St.	Paul.	When	he	came	to	Athens	to	the	Greek	world	to
preach	Christianity,	he	was	very	much	surprised.	 In	 the	centre	of	Athens	 there
was	a	 temple	dedicated	 to	 the	Unknown	God.	There	was	no	 image,	 the	 temple
was	absolutely	empty	and	silent.	There	was	no	one	inside	it.	Just	on	the	door	of
the	temple	there	was	an	inscription:	Dedicated	to	the	Unknown	God.	And	people
used	to	come	to	pray	there,	to	feel	God	there.	There	was	no	priest	and	there	was
no	theology	and	no	philosophy	around	it.
St.	Paul	 destroyed	 it	 because	he	 started	 teaching	people	 and	he	 laughed	 at	 the
stupidity	 of	 this	 temple.	 He	 is	 reported	 to	 have	 said	 that	 it	 was	 absolute
foolishness.	How	 can	 you	 love	 an	 unknown	God?	Here	 he	was	 and	 he	would
show	them	the	known	God.	God	had	become	known	in	Jesus	Christ.
He	was	thinking	that	he	was	doing	a	great	service	to	humanity	but	he	is	one	of
the	greatest	criminals.	He	destroyed	the	concept,	or	no-concept,	of	an	unknown
God.	That	 is	 the	only	God	 there	 is.	He	may	have	been	reflected	 in	 the	eyes	of
Jesus	but	he	still	remains	unknown.	In	fact,	by	knowing	him,	he	is	not	known,
you	also	become	part	of	his	mystery	and	become	unknown.	Jesus	has	become	a
mystery	by	knowing	him	--	not	that	he	has	become	known	through	Jesus.	There
is	 no	way.	 He	 is	 so	 vast	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 put	 him	 down	 as	 a	 formula,	 as	 a
theory,	as	a	dogma,	as	a	creed.
Forget	the	word	'God'.	Don't	make	that	your	obsession.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with
God.
You	 can	 drop	 the	word.	Dropping	 the	word	will	 be	 helpful,	 because	with	 that
word,	all	 that	 theologians	have	done	up	 to	now	will	be	dropped.	You	just	 look
around,	 look	 into	 the	 eyes	 of	 a	 child,	 or	 into	 the	 eyes	 of	 your	 beloved,	 your
mother,	your	 friend	 --	or	 just	 feel	a	 tree.	Have	you	ever	hugged	a	 tree?	Hug	a
tree.	And	one	day	you	will	come	to	know	that	it	is	not	only	that	you	have	hugged
the	tree	but	that	the	tree	also	responds,	the	tree	also	hugs	you.	Then	for	the	first
time	you	will	be	able	 to	know	that	 the	 tree	 is	not	 just	 the	form,	 it	 is	not	 just	a
certain	species	the	botanists	talk	about,	it	is	an	unknown	God	--	so	green	in	your
courtyard,	so	full	of	flowers	in	your	courtyard,	so	close	to	you,	beckoning	you,
calling	you	again	and	again.
Forget	 the	 word.	 Forget	 all	 words!	 If	 you	 can	 dedicate	 your	 being	 to	 the
unknown,	 that	 is	 the	best	dedication	possible.	Theologians,	priests,	 and	people
who	do	the	business	of	religion	have	different	things	in	their	minds.	They	are	not
concerned	with	 you	 or	with	God.	Religion	 has	 become	 a	 great	 investment.	 In
fact,	it	is	the	biggest	trade	in	the	world.
No	millionaire	 is	 so	 rich	 --	 and	 he	 cannot	 be	 --	 as	 churches	 are.	No	 company
Burmah	 Shell	 or	 Standard	 Oil	 --	 is	 so	 rich,	 they	 cannot	 be.	 When	 religion
becomes	 an	 investment,	 then	 there	 are	 other	 reasons	 than	 religious,	 other
considerations.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote	--	it	happened	in	a	Jewish	temple.	Jewish	temples	and
synagogues	do	not	pass	the	plate	as	do	the	Christian	churches,	consequently	they
have	to	raise	money	in	other	ways.	One	of	them	is	the	sale	of	tickets	for	reserved
seats	for	the	high	holy	days	when	business	is	best.
On	one	holiday	a	young	man	went	to	the	synagogue	in	Philadelphia	to	look	for
his	uncle.
The	guard	refused	him	admittance	because	he	had	no	ticket.
'Look',	the	youngster	said,'it	is	very	important.'
'Not	a	chance,'	said	the	guard.'Everybody	says	that.	Nobody	gets	in	here	without
a	ticket.'
But	the	boy	pleaded,'	It	is	a	matter	of	life	and	death.	Please,	I	will	only	be	two
minutes.'
'Well	 okay,	 if	 it	 is	 so	 important,'	 the	 guard	 said.'But	 don't	 let	 me	 catch	 you
praying!'
This	 can	happen	 in	 this	 ashram	also.	This	 happens	 always.	Because	whenever
something	 of	 the	 unknown	 descends	 on	 the	 earth,	 immediately	man's	 cunning
mind	 starts	 changing	 it	 into	 a	 commodity	 that	 can	 be	 sold	 in	 the	 market.
Immediately	 the	 profit	 motive	 comes	 in.	 The	 word	 'God',	 the	 churches,	 the
temples,	the	synagogues,	they	have	become	marketplaces.	You	cannot	find	your
heart	 there.	The	only	way	 to	 find	your	heart	 is	 to	see	 the	unknown	again.	You
will	have	to	move	alone,	you	will	have	to	go	alone.	You	cannot	follow	a	crowd.
If	you	follow	a	crowd	you	will	reach	some	temple,	or	some	synagogue,	or	some
church.	If	you	want	to	find	the	wild	God,	the	God	of	this	universe,	the	unity,	the
cosmos,	then	you	will	have	to	seek	on	your	own,	alone.
Pray	to	a	tree,	pray	to	a	river,	pray	to	a	rock.	Feel,	there	is	no	need	for	words.	Let
your	heart	communicate.	Melt	yourself	into	the	world	and	let	the	world	melt	into
you.	This	communion	is	prayer.
The	person	who	has	asked	the	question	will	be	helped	if	he	moves	on	the	path	of
love.
Zen	will	not	be	helpful	for	him.	He	has	a	very	feeling	heart.	Listen	to	the	heart.
Many	other	questions	are	there,	questions	about	making	a	synthesis	of	love	and
meditation,	 of	 heart	 and	mind,	 of	 thought	 and	 feeling	 --	 because	many	people
would	like	to	move	on	both	the	ways	together.
Synthesis	comes,	but	you	cannot	make	it.	If	you	follow	the	path	of	meditation,
one	day	you	will	attain	to	love	as	a	consequence.	If	you	follow	the	path	of	love,
one	 day	 you	will	 attain	 to	meditation	 as	 a	 consequence.	 Synthesis	 comes,	 but
you	 will	 have	 to	 follow	 one	 path.	 If	 you	 try	 to	 follow	 two	 you	 will	 be	 in
confusion.	Synthesis	comes	at	the	end	on	its	own	accord,	so	don't	be	worried.
It	is	always	so:	if	meditation	happens,	love	is	bound	to	happen.	If	love	does	not
happen,	 then	 that	 simply	 shows	 meditation	 has	 not	 happened	 yet.	 If	 love
happens,	meditation	also	happens	as	a	shadow.	 If	meditation	has	not	happened
through	love,	then	your	love	is	not	yet	real.	If	it	has	not	happened	yet,	you	may
be	thinking	about	it,	but	you	have	not	moved	into	the	world	of	love.	So	don't	be
worried	about	synthesis.	You	cannot	make	a	synthesis.
It	 is	 not	 for	 you	 to	worry	 about	 it.	 Follow	one,	whichever	 feels	more	 close	 to
you.
There	are	a	few	questions	which	ask,	'Both	seem	to	be	almost	fifty-fifty,	so	what
to	do?'
If	 both	 seem	 fifty-fifty,	 then	 Zen	 is	 your	 way.	 Because	 a	 person	 who	 cannot
decide	is	not	the	man	of	the	heart;	a	person	who	cannot	decide	is	the	man	of	the
mind.	If	 it	 is	heart	 it	 is	always	decisive.	Have	you	ever	fallen	in	love	with	two
women	together,	 fifty-fifty?	If	you	fall	 that	way,	 then	one	 thing	 is	certain,	 it	 is
not	love.	There	may	be	other	considerations.	One	is	rich,	another	is	a	daughter	of
a	prime	minister	or	something	like	that.	Love	is	not	a	consideration.	If	love	is	the
consideration	then	immediately	you	choose	one,	then	there	is	no	problem.
So	 if	you	have	a	problem	 to	decide,	 then	 it	 is	decided:	you	are	 the	mind	 type,
you	will	have	to	follow	Zen.	If	you	can	decide,	then	good;	if	you	cannot	decide
then	 take	 it	 for	granted	 that	 the	very	doubt,	 the	 indecisiveness,	 shows	 that	you
are	 a	mind	 type,	 thinking,	 doubting,	 analyzing,	 thinking	 about	 pros	 and	 cons.
And	then	your	greed	says,	'Is	there	not	a	way	to	make	a	compromise	of	both?'
Remember,	 compromise	 is	 not	 a	 synthesis.	 Compromise	 is	 a	 dead	 thing;
synthesis	is	organic	unity.	You	can	make	a	compromise	but	through	compromise
nobody	has	ever	grown;	you	cannot	make	a	synthesis,	it	comes.
You	start	growing	on	one	path,	because	both	the	paths	use	different	devices,	not
only	different,	diametrically	opposite.	 If	you	try	 to	make	a	compromise,	 it	will
be	impossible	because	one	goes	to	the	south,	another	goes	to	the	north.	So	one
leg	will	be	going	to	the	south,	another	will	be	going	to	the	north.	You	will	not	be
able	 to	 reach,	 you	 will	 be	 divided,	 you	 will	 become	 split.	 In	 making	 the
compromise	you	will	become	a	schizophrenic.	That's	how	the	human	mind	has
become	schizophrenic,	split.
Don't	 bother	 about	 compromise.	 It	 always	 comes.	 Those	 who	 have	 attained
through	zazen	have	attained	to	the	same	love	as	those	who	have	reached	through
devotion,	BHAKTI.
A	man,	a	Christian,	came	with	the	Bible	to	a	Zen	Master	and	started	reading	the
Sermon	on	the	Mount.	After	a	few	lines	the	Master	said,	'Stop,	there	is	no	need.
Whosoever	has	said	these	words	is	a	Buddha.'
He	 had	 never	 known	 anything	 about	 the	 Bible,	 he	 had	 never	 heard	 anything
about	Jesus,	he	used	to	live	in	a	far-away	cave,	completely	out	of	the	society.	But
he	 said,	 'No	need	 to	 read	 it	 anymore.	Even	one	 sentence	 is	 enough.	 It	 has	 the
taste	of	the	sea.	Whosoever	has	said	this	is	a	Buddha	--	is	enlightened.'	If	you	ask
Buddha,	Meera	 is	enlightened,	Chaitanya	 is	enlightened.	 If	you	ask	Meera	and
Chaitanya,	Buddha	is	enlightened,	Bodhidharma	is	enlightened.
Let	me	put	in	this	way.	If	you	follow	love,	devotion,	surrender,	one	day	you	will
suddenly	find	you	are	full	of	meditation.	If	you	follow	meditation,	one	day	you
will	find	the	beloved	has	come,	he	has	knocked	at	the	door.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	'As	within,	so	without'
13	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606130
ShortTitle:
DANG03
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
100
mins
AFTER	BANKEI	HAD	PASSED	AWAY,	A	BLIND	MAN	WHO	LIVED	NEAR
THE
MASTER'S	TEMPLE	SAID	TO	A	FRIEND:	'SINCE	I	AM	BLIND	I	CANNOT
WATCH	 A	 PERSON'S	 FACE,	 SO	 I	 MUST	 JUDGE	 HIS	 CHARACTER	 BY
THE
SOUND	OF	HIS	VOICE.
ORDINARILY	 WHEN	 I	 HEAR	 SOMEONE	 CONGRATULATE	 ANOTHER
UPON
HIS	 HAPPINESS	 OR	 SUCCESS,	 I	 ALSO	 HEAR	 A	 SECRET	 TONE	 OF
ENVY.
WHEN	 CONDOLENCE	 IS	 EXPRESSED	 FOR	 THE	 MISFORTUNE	 OF
ANOTHER,	 I	 HEAR	 PLEASURE	 AND	 SATISFACTION,	 AS	 IF	 THE	 ONE
CONDOLING	WAS
REALLY	GLAD	THERE	WAS	SOMETHING	LEFT	TO	GAIN	IN	HIS	OWN
WORLD.
'IN	ALL	MY	EXPERIENCE	HOWEVER,	BANKEI'S	VOICE	WAS	ALWAYS
SINCERE.	 WHENEVER	 HE	 EXPRESSED	 HAPPINESS,	 I	 HEARD
NOTHING	BUT
HAPPINESS,	 AND	 WHENEVER	 HE	 EXPRESSED	 SORROW,	 SORROW
WAS	ALL	I	HEARD.'
MAN	IS	SPLIT.	Schizophrenia	is	a	normal	condition	of	man	--	at	 least	now.	It
may	 not	 have	 been	 so	 in	 the	 primitive	 world,	 but	 centuries	 of	 conditioning,
civilization,	 culture	 and	 religion	 have	 made	 man	 a	 crowd	 --	 divided,	 split,
contradictory.	One	part	goes	one	way,	the	other	part	goes	in	just	the	diametrically
opposite	way	and	it	is	almost	impossible	to	keep	oneself	together.	It	is	a	miracle
that	man	is	existing	at	all.	He	should	by	now	have	disappeared	long	before.
But	 because	 this	 split	 is	 against	 his	 nature,	 deep	 down	 somewhere	 hidden	 the
unity	still	survives.	Because	the	soul	of.man	is	one,	all	 the	conditionings	at	the
most	destroy	the	periphery	of	the	man.	But	the	centre	remains	untouched	--	that's
how	man	continues	to	live.	But	his	life	has	become	a	hell.
The	whole	effort	of	Zen	is	how	to	drop	this	schizophrenia,	how	to	drop	this	split
personality,	 how	 to	 drop	 the	 divided	mind	 of	man,	 how	 to	 become	undivided,
integrated,	centred,	crystallised.
The	way	you	are,	you	cannot	say	that	you	are.	You	don't	have	a	being.	You	are	a
marketplace	 --	 many	 voices.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 say	 'yes',	 immediately	 the	 'no'	 is
there.	You	cannot	even	utter	a	simple	word	'yes'	with	totality.	Watch...	say	'yes',
and	deep	inside	the
'no'	 also	 arises	 with	 it.	 You	 cannot	 say	 a	 simple	 word	 like	 'no'	 without
contradicting	 it	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 In	 this	 way	 happiness	 is	 not	 possible;
unhappiness	 is	 a	 natural	 consequence	 of	 a	 split	 personality.	 Unhappiness,
because	 you	 are	 constantly	 in	 conflict	 with	 yourself.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 are
fighting	with	the	world,	you	are	every	moment	fighting	with	yourself.	How	can
there	 be	 peace?	How	can	 there	 be	 silence?	How	can	you	be	 for	 even	 a	 single
moment	 at	 rest?	Not	 for	 a	 single	moment	 are	 you	 at	 rest.	Even	while	 you	 are
sleeping	you	are	dreaming	a	thousand	and	one	things.	Even	while	sleeping	you
are	tossing	this	way	and	that	--	a	continuous	conflict.	You	are	a	battlefield.
You	say	to	somebody	'I	love	you',	and	the	more	you	say	it,	the	more	you	have	to
repeat	it.
It	appears	there	is	suspicion	behind	it.	If	you	really	love	there	is	no	need	even	to
say	it,	because	words	do	not	matter.	Your	whole	being	will	show	your	love;	your
eyes	will	show	your	love.	There	will	be	no	need	to	say	it,	there	will	be	no	need
to	repeat	it	continuously.
You	 repeat	 to	 convince	 the	other	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 to	 convince	yourself	 --
because	 deep	 down,	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 hatred,	 the	 urge	 to	 dominate,	 a
deep	power	politics,	are	hidden.
In	his	epistles	St.	Paul	uses	'in	Christ'	one	hundred	and	sixty-four	times.	He	must
have	been	a	little	doubtful	about	it.'In	Christ.	In	Christ.	In	Christ...'	one	hundred
and	sixty-four	times!	It	is	too	much.	Once	would	have	been	enough.	Even	once
is	more	than	enough.	It	should	be	your	being	that	shows	that	you	live	in	Christ	--
and	then	there	is	no	need	to	say	it.
Watch.	Whenever	you	repeat	a	 thing	 too	many	 times,	go	deep	within	yourself.
You	must	be	carrying	it.	But	you	cannot	falsify	it,	that	is	the	problem.	Your	eyes
will	show	that	it	is	hidden	behind.
Have	 you	 watched?	 You	 go	 to	 somebody's	 house	 and	 he	 welcomes	 you.	 But
there	is	no	welcome	in	his	presence.	He	says,	'I	am	very	happy	to	see	you,	glad
to	see	you.'	But	you	don't	 see	any	gladness	anywhere;	 in	 fact,	he	 looks	a	 little
anxious,	worried,	apprehensive.
He	looks	at	you	as	 if	 trouble	has	come	to	his	home.	Have	you	watched	people
saying	 to	you	 'take	any	seat'	 and	simultaneously	 showing	you	a	certain	 seat	 to
take?	They	say	 'take	any	seat'	but	they	show	you,	in	a	subtle	gesture,	 'take	this
seat'.	They	go	on	contradicting	themselves.
Parents	go	on	telling	their	children,	 'Be	yourself,'	and	at	 the	same	time	they	go
on	teaching	how	one	should	be.'Be	independent'	--	and	at	the	same	time	they	go
on	 forcing	 the	 child	 to	 be	 obedient.	 They	 have	 their	 own	 idea	 about	 how	 the
child	 should	 be	 and	when	 they	 say,	 'Be	 yourself,'	 they	mean,	 'Be	 the	way	we
want	you	to	be.'	They	don't	mean,	'Be	yourself.'
Continuously	something	else	is	there	present	and	you	cannot	really	falsify	it.	But
man	has	become	cunning	about	 that	 also.	We	don't	 look	 into	each	other's	 eyes
because	eyes	can	show	the	truth,	so	it	is	thought	to	be	part	of	etiquette	to	avoid
eyes.	Don't	 look	into	somebody's	eyes	 too	much	or	you	will	be	 thought	a	 little
uncultured	 --	 transgressing,	 trespassing.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 falsify	 the	 eyes.
You	 can	 falsify	 the	 tongue	 very	 easily,	 because	 the	 tongue,	 the	 language,	 is	 a
social	by-product.	But	eyes	belong	to	your	being.
You	say	something	but	your	eyes	continually	show	something	else,	hence	in	all
the	societies	of	the	world	people	avoid	each	other's	eyes.	They	don't	encounter	--
because	that	will	be	looking	into	the	truth.
But	you	can	watch	 these	contradictions	 in	yourself	 and	 it	will	be	a	great	help.
Because	unless	your	'in'	is	just	like	your	'out'	and	your	'out'	is	just	like	your	'in',
you	can	never	be	at	rest.
In	 Tibet,	 in	 Egypt,	 they	 say,	 'As	 above,	 so	 below.'	 Zen	 says,	 'As	 within,	 so
without.'
Unless	your	within	becomes	as	your	without	you	can	never	be	at	 rest	because
your	periphery	will	continuously	be	in	conflict	with	your	centre.	The	problem	is
that	 the	 periphery	 cannot	 win.	 Ultimately	 only	 the	 centre	 can	 win.	 But	 the
periphery	can	delay,	postpone;	the	periphery	can	waste	time	and	life	and	energy.
If	you	go	on	living	on	the	periphery	and	just	go	on	pretending,	not	really	living,
you	will	have	many	faces	but	you	will	not	have	your	original	face.
I	have	heard.
Abrahamson	had	reached	the	grand	old	age	of	eighty	and	decided	 to	celebrate.
All	his	 life	he	had	been	orthodox,	had	worn	a	 long	beard,	black	hat,	black	suit
and	black	overcoat.
Now	 to	 celebrate	 his	 birthday	 the	 old	man	 shaved	 off	 the	 beard,	 replaced	 his
sombre	black	clothes	with	the	latest	style	green	checked	suit,	a	burgundy	tie	and
blue	striped	shirt	and	headed	for	the	massage	parlour.
As	Abrahamson	crossed	the	street	he	was	struck	by	a	truck	and	killed.	In	heaven
he	spoke	to	his	maker,	God,	 'Why	me?	I	was	a	good	husband,	I	gave	to	all	the
charities,	I	have	always	been	a	religious	man.''To	tell	the	truth,'	said	the	Lord,	'I
did	not	recognise	you.'
And	I	would	like	to	tell	you	even	God	will	not	be	able	to	recognise	YOU	either.
He	 changed	 his	 dress	 only	 once	 and	 became	 unrecognisable	 and	 you	 change
your	periphery	every	moment,	you	change	your	dress	every	moment,	you	change
your	face,	your	mask,	every	moment.	Forget	about	God	--	you	cannot	recognise
yourself.	You	cannot	say	who	you	are.
In	Zen	they	have	a	koan,	a	deep	object	for	meditation,	to	find	out	one's	original
face.	 The	 Master	 says	 to	 the	 disciple:	 'Go	 and	 sit	 silently	 and	 find	 out	 your
original	face.'	They	mean	the	face	you	had	before	you	were	born	or	the	face	that
you	will	have	after	you	have	died	--	because	the	moment	 the	child	is	born,	 the
society	starts	giving	him	false	faces;	the	moment	the	child	takes	his	first	breath,
corruption	starts.	The	child	has	entered	 into	 the	world	of	politics,	 falsification,
untruth.	Now,	layer	upon	layer,	there	will	be	many	faces.
And	the	clever	man	has	many	more	faces	 than	 the	simple	man.	So	whatsoever
the	need	he	immediately	changes	his	face.	He	adjusts	his	face.
Have	you	watched?	You	are	sitting	in	your	room	and	your	servant	passes	by.	You
have	a	different	 face	 for	 the	 servant,	 a	very	 indifferent	 face.	 In	 fact,	 you	don't
look	at	your	servant,	he	is	not	worth	looking	at.	You	don't	recognise	that	a	man,	a
human	 being	 just	 like	 you,	 has	 entered	 the	 room.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 a	mechanism	 has
passed.	You	don't	recognise	the	humanity	of	the	servant.	But	if	your	boss	comes
into	 the	 room	 immediately	 you	 are	 standing,	wagging	 your	 tail,	 smiling	 --	 all
smiles.	You	have	a	different	face	for	your	boss.
If	your	wife	comes	you	have	a	different	face,	if	your	mistress	comes	you	have	a
different	face.
Continuously	 you	 go	 on	 adjusting,	 manipulating.	 One	 has	 to	 understand
otherwise	one	cannot	find	one's	original	face.
A	man	who	has	 an	original	 face	 has	 a	 unity.	He	 remains	 the	 same.	Buddha	 is
reported	to	have	said	that	the	taste	of	an	enlightened	man	is	just	like	the	taste	of
seawater	--	wherever	you	taste	 it,	whenever	you	 taste	 it,	 it	always	 tastes	of	 the
salt.
The	 enlightened	 person	 always	 shows	 one	 face.	Not	 that	 he	 is	monotonous....
Remember,	don't	misunderstand	me	--	he	is	not	monotonous	at	all.	In	fact,	you
are	monotonous	because	your	 faces	 are	 all	 dead.	He	 is	 alive,	 growing,	 but	 his
face	is	his.	The	face	goes	on	growing,	it	goes	on	becoming	richer	and	richer,	it
goes	 on	 taking	 on	more	 and	more	 awareness,	 it	 goes	 on	 becoming	more	 and
more	 radiant,	 alive,	 beautiful,	 a	 grace	 goes	 on	 increasing	 around	 it,	 it	 is
surrounded	by	a	light,	but,	it	remains	the	same	face.	You	can	recognise	it.	There
is	a	discontinuous	continuity	or,	 a	continuous	discontinuity.	He	changes	yet	he
remains	 the	same.	He	remains	 the	same	and	yet	he	goes	on	changing.	You	can
recognise	the	continuity	and	you	can	also	recognise	a	constant	growth.
Growth	 always	 happens	 to	 the	 original	 face	 --	 remember.	 False	 faces	 cannot
grow,	 they	are	dead.	They	have	no	 life	 in	 them,	how	can	 they	grow?	You	can
bring	plastic	flowers	--
they	cannot	grow.	You	can	keep	them,	you	can	deceive	people,	but	they	cannot
grow.
Real	flowers	grow.	Only	life	grows.
If	you	are	not	growing	you	are	dead.	Remember	that	each	moment	should	be	a
growth	moment.	One	should	continuously	go	on	moving	and	yet	remain	centred,
rooted	in	one's	being.
You	 can	 deceive	 others,	 you	 cannot	 deceive	 yourself.	 But	 there	 are	 also	 very,
very	clever	people	who	can	deceive	themselves	also.	They	are	the	worst	enemies
of	themselves.
Mulla	Nasruddin	had	been	pulled	from	the	river	in	what	the	police	decided	was	a
suicide	 attempt.	When	 they	were	 questioning	 him	 at	 headquarters	 he	 admitted
that	he	had	tried	to	kill	himself.	This	is	the	story	he	told:
'Yes,	I	tried	to	kill	myself.	The	world	is	against	me	and	I	wanted	to	end	it	all.	I
was	 determined	 not	 to	 do	 a	 half-way	 job	 so	 I	 bought	 a	 piece	 of	 rope,	 some
matches,	some	kerosene	and	a	pistol.	Just	in	case	none	of	those	worked	I	went
down	by	the	river.	I	threw	the	rope	over	a	limb	hanging	out	over	the	river,	I	tied
the	 rope	around	my	neck,	poured	kerosene	all	over	myself	and	 lit	 the	match.	 I
jumped	off	the	bank,	put	the	pistol	to	my	head	and	pulled	the	trigger.
'Guess	 what	 happened!	 I	 missed.	 The	 bullet	 hit	 the	 rope	 before	 I	 could	 hang
myself	so	I	fell	into	the	river	and	the	water	put	out	the	fire	before	I	could	burn
myself.	And	you	know,	if	I	had	not	been	a	good	swimmer,	I	would	have	ended
up	drowning	my	fool	self!'
That's	how	things	go....	You	want	to	do	a	thing	and	yet	you	don't	want	to	do	it.
You	go	on	and	yet	you	don't	want	to	go.	You	live	and	yet	you	don't	want	to	live.
You	even	try	to	commit	suicide	and	yet	you	don't	want	to	commit	suicide.	That's
why	out	of	ten	suicide	attempts	only	one	succeeds.	And	that	too	seems	to	be	by
some	error.	Nine	attempts	fail.
People	are	contradictory.	They	just	don't	know	how	to	do	a	thing	totally.	And	it
is	natural.
It	can	be	understood	that	when	they	try	to	commit	suicide	they	cannot	be	total,
because	they	have	never	been	total	in	their	lives.	They	don't	know	what	totality
is.	They	have	never	done	a	single	act	with	their	total	being.	Whenever	an	act	is
total,	 it	 liberates;	 whenever	 it	 is	 half-hearted	 it	 simply	 creates	 a	 conflict.	 It
dissipates	energy,	it	is	destructive,	it	creates	bondage.
In	India	you	have	heard	the	word	KARMA	--	the	very	cause	of	all	bondage.	A
KARMA	is	a	KARMA	only	if	it	is	half-hearted	--	then	it	binds	you.	If	it	is	total	it
never	 binds	 you,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 bondage	 for	 you.	 Any	 act	 lived	 totally	 is
finished.	You	transcend	it,	you	never	look	back.	Any	moment	lived	totally	leaves
no	 trace	 on	 you	 --	 you	 remain	 unscratched,	 untouched	 by	 it.	 Your	 memory
remains	 clean,	 you	 don't	 carry	 a	 psychological	 memory	 about	 it.	 There	 is	 no
wound.
If	you	have	 loved	a	woman	 totally	and	she	dies,	 there	 is	no	wound	 left.	But	 if
you	 have	 not	 loved	 her	 totally	 and	 she	 dies	 then	 she	 continues	 to	 live	 in	 the
memory.	Then	you	weep	for	her,	you	cry	for	her,	because	now	you	repent.	There
was	time,	there	was	opportunity	when	you	could	have	loved	her,	but	you	could
not	love	her.	And	now	there	is	no	opportunity;	now	she	is	there	no	more.	Now
there	is	no	way	to	fulfil	your	love.
Nobody	weeps	and	cries	for	somebody's	death	--	you	cry	and	weep	for	the	lost
opportunity	to	love.	Your	mother	dies.	If	you	have	loved	her	really,	totally,	then
death	is	beautiful,	 there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.	You	go	and	say	goodbye	to	her
and	 you	 don't	 carry	 any	wound.	 You	may	 be	 a	 little	 sad	 --	 naturally,	 she	 has
occupied	your	heart	for	so	long	and	now	she	will	not	be	there	--	but	that	is	just	a
passing	mood.	You	don't	 carry	 a	wound,	 you	don't	 go	 on	 crying	 continuously,
you	don't	 hang	with	 the	past.	You	did	whatsoever	you	could	 --	you	 loved	her,
you	respected	her	--	now	it	is	finished.	One	understands	the	helplessness	of	life.
You	are	also	going	to	be	finished	one	day.	Death	is	natural;	one	accepts	it.
If	you	cannot	accept	death	 that	simply	shows	there	has	been	a	contradiction	 in
your	life.
You	loved	and	yet	you	were	withholding	yourself.	Now	that	withholding	creates
the	problem.
If	you	have	enjoyed	food,	you	forget	all	about	it.	Once	you	are	finished,	you	are
finished.
You	don't	go	on	thinking	about	it.	But	if	you	were	eating	and	you	were	not	eating
totally,	if	you	were	thinking	about	a	thousand	and	one	other	things	and	you	were
not	at	the	dining	table	at	all	--	you	were	just	physically	there	but	psychologically
you	were	somewhere	else
--	then	you	will	think	about	food.	Then	food	will	become	an	obsession.
That's	how	sex	has	become	an	obsession	in	the	West.	Making	love	to	a	woman
or	to	a	man	you	are	somewhere	else.	It	is	not	a	total	act,	it	is	not	orgasmic,	you
are	not	lost	in	it,	so	a	greed	arises.	You	try	to	satisfy	that	greed,	that	unfulfilled
desire,	in	a	thousand	ways:	pornography,	blue	movies,	and	fantasy,	your	private
movie.	You	go	on	fantasizing	about	women.	When	a	real	woman	is	there	and	she
is	ready	to	love	you,	you	are	not	there.	And	when	the	woman	is	not	there,	you
have	a	woman	in	your	fantasy.
This	 is	 a	very	 sad	 state	of	affairs.	When	you	are	eating,	you	are	not	 there	and
then	you	are	thinking	about	food,	fantasizing	about	it.	This	is	happening	because
you	are	not	total	in	your	act,	you	are	always	divided.	While	making	love	you	are
thinking	of	BRAHMACHARYA,	celibacy.	Then	while	being	a	celibate	you.are
thinking	of	making	love.	You	are	never	in	tune,	never	in	harmony.
And	 one	 goes	 on	 pretending	 that	 everything	 is	 okay	 so	 one	 never	 faces	 the
problem.
I	have	heard	about	one	couple	who	was	known	all	over	Poland	as	the	most	ideal
couple	ever.	Sixty	years	of	married	life	and	never	had	there	been	a	conflict.	The
wife	was	never	known	to	nag	the	husband,	the	husband	was	never	known	to	be
rude	to	the	wife.	They	had	lived	very	peacefully	--	at	least	it	appeared	so.
They	were	celebrating	 their	 sixtieth	wedding	anniversary.	A	 journalist	 came	 to
interview	them.
'How	old	is	your	wife?'	enquired	the	journalist.
'She	 is	 eighty-seven,'	 said	 the	husband,	 'and	God	willing,	 she	will	 live	 to	be	 a
hundred.'
'And	how	old	are	you?'	enquired	the	journalist.
'Eight-seven	 too,'	 answered	 the	 husband,	 'and	God	willing,	 I	 will	 live	 to	 be	 a
hundred	and	one.'
'But	why,'	 asked	 the	 journalist,	 'would	you	 like	 to	 live	a	year	 longer	 than	your
wife?'
'To	tell	the	truth,'	said	the	old	octogenarian,	'I	would	like	to	have	at	least	one	year
of	peace.'
Appearances	 are	 very	 deceptive.	Appearances	may	 give	 you	 respectability	 but
they	cannot	give	you	contentment.	And	some	day	or	other,	in	some	way	or	other,
the	truth	has	a	way	of	surfacing.
Truth	cannot	be	repressed	forever.	If	it	can	be	repressed	forever,	eternally,	then	it
is	not	truth.	In	the	very	definition	of	truth	one	should	include	the	fact	that	truth
has	a	way	of	bubbling	up.	You	cannot	go	on	avoiding	it	 forever	and	ever.	One
day	or	other,	knowingly	or	unknowingly,	it	surfaces,	it	reveals	itself.
Truth	is	that	which	reveals	itself.	And	just	the	opposite	are	lies.	You	cannot	make
a	lie	appear	as	truth	forever	and	ever.	One	day	or	other	the	truth	will	surface	and
the	lie	will	be	there	condemned.
You	cannot	avoid	truth.	It	is	better	to	face	it,	it	is	better	to	accept	it,	it	is	better	to
live	it.
Once	 you	 start	 living	 the	 life	 of	 truth,	 authenticity,	 of	 your	 original	 face,	 all
troubles	 by	 and	 by	 disappear	 because	 the	 conflict	 drops	 and	 you	 are	 no	more
divided.	Your	voice	has	 a	unity	 then,	your	whole	being	becomes	 an	orchestra.
Right	now,	when	you	say	something,	your	body	says	something	else;	when	your
tongue	says	something,	your	eyes	go	on	saying	something	else	simultaneously.
Many	 times	people	come	 to	me	and	 I	ask	 them,	 'How	are	you?'	And	 they	say,
'We	are	very,	very	happy.'	And	I	cannot	believe	it	because	their	faces	are	so	dull	-
-	no	joy,	no	delight!	Their	eyes	have	no	shining	in	them,	no	light.	And	when	they
say,	'We	are	happy,'
even	 the	 word	 'happy'	 does	 not	 sound	 very	 happy.	 It	 sounds	 as	 if	 they	 are
dragging	it.
Their	 tone,	 their	 voice,	 their	 face,	 the	 way	 they	 are	 sitting	 or	 standing	 --
everything	 belies,	 says	 something	 else.	 Start	watching	 people.	When	 they	 say
that	they	are	happy,	watch.
Watch	 for	 a	 clue.	Are	 they	 really	 happy?	And	 immediately	 you	will	 be	 aware
that	something	else	is	saying	something	else.
And	then	by	and	by	watch	yourself.	When	you	are	saying	that	you	are	happy	and
you	are	not,	there	will	be	a	disturbance	in	your	breathing.	Your	breathing	cannot
be	natural.	 It	 is	 impossible.	Because	 the	 truth	was	 that	you	were.	not	happy.	 If
you	had	said,	'I	am	unhappy,'	your	breathing	would	have	remained	natural.	There
was	 no	 conflict.	 But	 you	 said,	 'I	 am	 happy.'	 Immediately	 you	 are	 repressing
something	--	something	that	was	coming	up,	you	have	forced	down.	In	this	very
effort	your	breathing	changes	its	rhythm;	it	is	no	longer	rhythmical.	Your	face	is
no	longer	graceful,	your	eyes	become	cunning.
First	watch	 others	 because	 it	will	 be	 easier	 to	watch	 others.	You	 can	 be	more
objective	about	them.	And	when	you	have	found	clues	about	them	use	the	same
clues	about	yourself.	And	see	--	when	you	speak	truth,	your	voice	has	a	musical
tone	to	it;	when	you	speak	untruth,	something	is	there	like	a	jarring	note.	When
you	 speak	 truth	 you	 are	 one,	 together;	 when	 you	 speak	 untruth	 you	 are	 not
together,	a	conflict	has	arisen.
Watch	 these	 subtle	 phenomena,	 because	 they	 are	 the	 consequence	 of
togetherness	 or	 untogetherness.	Whenever	 you	 are	 together,	 not	 falling	 apart;
whenever	you	are	one,	in	unison,	suddenly	you	will	see	you	are	happy.	That	is
the	meaning	of	the	word	'yoga'.
That's	what	we	mean	by	a	yogi:	one	who	is	together,	in	unison;	whose	parts	are
all	interrelated	and	not	contradictory,	interdependent,	not	in	conflict,	at	rest	with
each	other.
A	great	friendship	exists	within	his	being.	He	is	whole.
Sometimes	 it	 happens	 that	 you	 become	 one,	 in	 some	 rare	moment.	Watch	 the
ocean,	the	tremendous	wildness	of	it	--	and	suddenly	you	forget	your	split,	your
schizophrenia;	you	relax.	Or,	moving	in	 the	Himalayas,	seeing	 the	virgin	snow
on	the	Himalaya	peaks,	suddenly	a	coolness	surrounds	you	and	you	need	not	be
false	because	there	is	no	other	human	being	to	be	false	to.	You	fall	together.	Or,
listening	to	beautiful	music,	you	fall	together.
Whenever,	 in	 whatsoever	 situation,	 you	 become	 one,	 a	 peace,	 a	 happiness,	 a
bliss,	surrounds	you,	arises	in	you.	You	feel	fulfilled.
There	is	no	need	to	wait	for	these	moments	--	these	moments	can	become	your
natural	life.	These	extraordinary	moments	can	become	ordinary	moments	--	that
is	the	whole	effort	of	Zen.	You	can	live	an	extraordinary	life	in	a	very	ordinary
life:	 cutting	wood,	 chopping	wood,	 carrying	water	 from	 the	well,	 you	 can	 be
tremendously	at	 ease	with	yourself.	Cleaning	 the	 floor,	 cooking	 food,	washing
the	clothes,	you	can	be	perfectly	at	ease	--	because	the	whole	question	is	of	you
doing	your	action	totally,	enjoying,	delighting	in	it.
The	society	is	not	in	favour	of	an	integrated	man,	so	remember,	society	cannot
help	you.
It	 will	 create	 all	 sorts	 of	 hindrances	 for	 your	 growth.	 Because	 only	 a
disintegrated	man	 can	be	manipulated	 --	 the	 politicians	 can	dominate	 him,	 the
teachers	can	dominate	him,	 the	 religious	priests	can	dominate	him,	 the	parents
can	dominate	him.	Only	a	disintegrated	soul	can	be	forced	into	slavery.
Integrated,	you	are	free;	integrated,	you	become	rebellious;	integrated,	you	start
doing	your	own	thing;	integrated,	you	listen	to	your	own	heart,	wherever	it	leads.
Such	types	of	individuals	can	be	dangerous	for	the	dead	so-called	society.	They
can	create	trouble	--
they	 have	 always	 created	 trouble.	 A	 Jesus,	 a	 Socrates,	 a	 Buddha...	 they	 have
always	 been	 troublesome	 because	 they	 are	 so	 integrated	 that	 they	 can	 be
independent.	And	they	are	living	so	blissfully	that	they	don't	bother	about	other
nonsense.
Try	to	understand	it.	If	you	are	unhappy,	you	will	become	ambitious;	if	you	are
happy,	ambition	will	disappear.	Who	bothers	to	become	a	prime	minister	unless
you	 are	 a	 little	 insane?	Who	 bothers	 to	 become	 the	 richest	man	 in	 the	 world
unless	 you	 are	mad?	Who	 bothers	 about	 fame?	You	 cannot	 eat	 it,	 you	 cannot
love	it,	you	cannot	sleep	with	it.	In	fact,	the	more	famous	you	become,	the	more
difficult	it	becomes	to	be	happy.
The	richer	you	are,	the	more	worries	you	have	--	problems	of	security,	future.
Whatsoever	 you	 have,	 you	 have	 to	 hold	 it.	You	 have	 to	 hold	 it	 against	 others
because	 they	 are	 constantly	 watching	 for	 a	 right	 opportunity	 to	 take	 it	 back.
Whatsoever	you	hold,	you	hold	out	of	violence.	And	of	course,	if	you	have	been
violent	 then	 others	 can	 be	 violent	 to	 you.	 They	 are	 just	 waiting	 for	 the	 right
moment.	The	richer	you	get,	 the	more	worries,	more	problems,	more	fears	you
have.	Who	bothers,	if	one	is	happy?
It	is	said	that	a	Taoist	mystic	was	sought	by	the	emperor	of	China	because	he	had
heard	 that	 the	mystic	was	 very	wise	 and	 he	wanted	 him	 to	 become	 his	 prime
minister.
Ambassadors,	 with	 a	 golden	 chariot	 following	 them	 and	 with	 many	 presents
from	the	court,	were	sent	to	him.
The	two	ambassadors	were	puzzled	because	they	found	this	wise	man	sitting	on
the	 bank	 of	 a	 small	 river	 fishing,	 very	 poor,	 just	 ordinary.	 But	 the	 king	 had
ordered	so	they	told	him,	'The	king	wants	you	to	become	his	prime	minister.	You
are	welcome.	We	have	come	to	take	you.'
The	mystic	looked	at	the	ambassadors	and	then	he	looked	around.	A	turtle	was
wagging	his	 tail	 in	 the	mud,	enjoying,	 just	by	 the	 side	of	 the	 river,	by	a	 small
pool.
The	mystic	said,	'Look	at	that	turtle!'
The	ambassadors	said,	'We	don't	understand.	What	do	you	mean?'
He	 said,	 'I	 have	 heard	 there	 is	 a	 turtle	 in	 the	 emperor's	 palace	 three	 thousand
years	old	--
dead	of	course	 --	encased	 in	gold,	with	valuable	diamonds,	very	precious.	The
dead	turtle	is	worshipped.	If	you	ask	this	alive	turtle,	'Would	you	like	to	become
the	dead	turtle	in	the	king's	palace?	You	will	be	encased	in	gold,	surrounded	with
precious	stones	and	you	will	be	worshipped	by	the	king	himself,	 '	what	do	you
think	this	turtle	will	choose?
Would	he	like	to	go	to	the	palace	or	would	he	like	to	wag	his	tail	in	the	mud?'
They	said,	'Of	course,	he	would	like	to	wag	his	tail	in	the	mud.'
The	mystic	 said,	 'Do	 you	 think	 I	 am	more	 foolish	 than	 the	 turtle?	Go	 back!	 I
would	like	to	wag	my	tail	here	in	this	mud	--	I	would	like	to	be	alive.'
Who	 has	 ever	 heard	 of	 anybody	 living	 in	 a	 palace	 and	 being	 alive?	Difficult,
almost	 impossible.	If	you	are	unhappy	then	you	become	ambitious,	because	an
unhappy	 person	 thinks,	 'If	 I	 attain	 much	 wealth	 I	 will	 become	 happy.'	 The
unhappy	person	thinks,	'If	I	become	the	prime	minister,	the	president,	then	I	will
become	 happy.'	 An	 unhappy	 person	 starts	 projecting	 into	 the	 future;	 a	 happy
person	lives	here	and	now.	And	he	is	so	happy,	so	infinitely	happy,	that	he	has	no
future.	He	has	no	concern	for	the	future.
That's	 just	what	Jesus	means	when	he	says,	 'Think	not	of	 the	morrow.	Look	at
the	 lilies	 in	 the	 fields.	Even	 the	 great	Emperor	Solomon	was	 not	 so	 beautiful,
arrayed	in	his	precious	dresses,	as	these	poor	lily	flowers.	Look	at	the	grandeur!
And	they	toil	not	and	they	think	not	of	the	morrow.'
The	 whole	 society	 depends	 on	 creating	 ambition	 in	 you.	 Ambition	 means	 a
conflict,	ambition	means	that	whatsoever	you	are,	you	are	wrong	--	you	have	to
be	 somewhere	 else.	 Wherever	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 wrong	 --	 you	 have	 to	 be
somewhere	 else.	 A	 constant	 madness	 to	 be	 somewhere	 else,	 to	 be	 somebody
else,	is	what	ambition	is.
So	 every	 child	 is	 corrupted,	 destroyed.	 The	 parents	 were	 destroyed	 by	 their
parents,	and	 they	go	on	destroying	 their	children	--	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	Of
course	 they	 don't	 know	 what	 else	 to	 do.	 They	 simply	 repeat	 the	 old	 pattern:
whatsoever	was	 done	 to	 them	 by	 their	 parents,	 they	 do	 to	 their	 children.	 The
parents	 say,	 'Go	 to	 school	 and	come	 first.	Go	 to	university	 and	attain	 the	gold
medal.'	Then	for	 their	whole	 life	 they	are	always	chasing	and	chasing	 the	gold
medals.	They	 live	 in	a	dream	--	and	because	of	 this	 they	have	 to	 follow	many
things	which	 are	 against	 their	 nature,	 they	 have	 to	 do	many	 things	which	 are
against	 their	 nature.	 If	 they	 are	 to	 attain	 some	 goals	 in	 society	 they	 have	 to
follow	the	society.
And	society	is	constantly	trying	to	force	something	on	you:	a	certain	morality,	a
certain	 religion.	Whether	 it	 suits	 you	 or	 not	 is	 not	 the	 problem;	 whether	 it	 is
going	 to	 help	 your	 being	 flower	 is	 not	 the	 problem.	 The	 society	 goes	 on
enforcing	things	on	you.
One	 day	 I	 met	 Mulla	 Nasruddin	 on	 the	 road.	 He	 was	 walking	 with	 his	 two
children.
So	I	said,	'How	are	your	two	children?'
He	said,	'Both	are	good.'
I	said,	'How	old	are	they?'
He	said,	'The	doctor	is	five	and	the	lawyer	is	seven!'
Already	the	future	is	fixed	in	the	mind	of	the	father.	One	has	to	become	a	doctor,
the	other	has	to	become	something	else.	The	children	have	not	been	asked.	Now
the	father	will	enforce.	He	can	enforce,	he	has	power.	The	children	are	helpless.
And	if	the	child	was	going	to	become	a	singer	and	he	cannot	become	a	singer	but
has	to	become	a	doctor,	he	will	never	feel	at	ease.	He	will	be	false.	He	will	be
carrying	something	false	--
continuously	 dragging	 himself.	 His	 whole	 life	 will	 be	 destroyed.	 It	 will	 be	 a
sheer	 wastage.	 There	 are	 doctors	 who	 would	 have	 been	 beautiful	 singers	 or
dancers	or	poets	and	 there	are	poets	who	would	have	been	better	 to	have	been
doctors	or	surgeons.	There	are	poets	who	should	have	been	engineers,	scientists,
and	 there	 are	 scientists	 who	 should	 have	 been	 somewhere	 else.	 It	 seems	 that
everybody	 is	 in	 some	 wrong	 place	 because	 nobody	 has	 been	 allowed	 to	 be
spontaneous	and	to	be	himself.
The	 society	 forces	you	 to	be	 something	 that	you	are	not	meant	 to	be.	Nobody
else	can	know	who	you	are	meant	to	be,	your	destiny	has	to	unfold	within	you.	It
is	 only	 you,	 left	 to	 yourself.	A	 society	 can	 help.	 If	 a	 real,	 right	 society	 exists
some	day	in	the	world,	it	will	simply	help	you.	It	will	not	give	you	directions,	it
will	give	you	all	support	to	be	yourself.
But	this	society	first	tries	you	to	make	somebody	else	--	imitators,	carbon	copies
--	and	when	you	have	become	carbon	copies	then	people	start	saying	that	you	are
not	yourself.
A	Jewish	momma	found	herself	sitting	next	to	a	young	man	on	a	bus.	She	looked
at	 him	 quizzically	 for	 a	 few	 moments,	 then	 nudged	 him	 in	 the	 ribs	 and	 said
confidentially,	'You	are	a	Jewish	boy,	aren't	you?'
He	said,	'Er,	no,	as	a	matter	of	fact,	I'm	not.'
She	laughed	and	said,	'Oh,	go	on,	I'm	Jewish	myself	--	I	can	always	tell.	You're
Jewish,	aren't	you?'
He	said,	'No,	missus,	I'm	not.'
She	said,	'What's	the	matter?	You	ashamed	of	it	or	something?	You're	Jewish.'
So	just	to	keep	her	quiet,	the	young	chap	said,	'All	right,	if	it'll	make	you	happy	-
-	yes,	I'm	Jewish.'
She	said,	'That's	funny,	you	don't	look	Jewish....'
That's	how	it	goes	on.	First	everybody	is	trying	to	convince	you	that	you	are	this,
and	once	you	are	this,	suddenly	you	find	--	and	everybody	else	starts	saying	--
that	you	don't	 look	yourself.'What	 is	wrong	with	you?	You	 look	unhappy,	you
look	sad,	you	look	frustrated,	you	look	depressed	--	what	is	the	matter	with	you?'
First	 they	 try	 to	 force	you	 to	be	somebody	else	 that	you	are	not	and	 then	 they
want	you	to	be	happy	also.	This	is	impossible!
You	can	be	happy	only	 if	you	become	yourself.	Nothing	can	be	done	about	 it,
that	 is	 how	 it	 is.	 You	 can	 be	 happy	 only	 if	 you	 are	 yourself	 --	 but	 it	 is	 very
difficult	 to	find	out	now	who	you	are	because	you	have	been	so	confused,	you
have	been	so	crippled.	And	society	has	entered	so	deep	down	in	you	that	it	has
become	your	conscience.	Now	your	parents	may	be	dead,	your	teachers	may	be
dead	--	or	even	if	they	are	alive	they	are	no	longer	sitting	on	your	head	--	but	still
whatsoever	they	have	taught	you	goes	on	speaking	in	subtle	whisperings	within
you.
It	has	become	your	conscience.	The	parental	voice	has	become	your	ego.	If	you
do	 something	 against	 it,	 it	 immediately	 condemns	 you.	 If	 you	 do	 something
accordingly,	 it	applauds	you,	appreciates	you.	Still	you	go	on	being	dominated
by	the	dead.
I	have	heard.
Rothstein	 owed	 a	 hundred	 dollars	 to	 Wiener.	 The	 debt	 was	 past	 due	 and
Rothstein	was	broke,	so	he	borrowed	the	hundred	dollars	from	Spevak	and	paid
Wiener.	A	week	later	Rothstein	borrowed	back	the	hundred	dollars	from	Wiener
and	 paid	 Spevak.	 Another	 week	 went	 by	 and	 Rothstein	 borrowed	 back	 the
hundred	dollars	 from	Spevak	 to	pay	back	Wiener.	He	 repeated	 this	 transaction
several	times	until	finally	he	called	them	up	and	said.
'Fellers,	this	is	a	lot	of	bother.	Why	don't	you	two	exchange	the	hundred	dollars
every	week	and	keep	me	out	of	it!'
This	is	how	it	has	happened.	First	your	mother,	your	father,	your	teachers,	your
priests	--
they	have	put	things	in	your	mind.	Then	one	day	they	come	and	they	say,	'Now
you	be	on	your	own.	Keep	us	out.'	Now	the	conscience	goes	on	functioning	as	a
subtle	agent.
Remember,	the	conscience	is	your	bondage.	A	real	man	is	conscious	but	he	has
no	conscience.	An	unreal	man	is	unconscious	and	has	a	very	strong	conscience.
Conscience	is	given	by	others	to	you;	consciousness	has	to	be	attained	by	you.
Consciousness	 is	 your	 earned	 being,	 your	 earned	 quality	 of	 awareness.
Conscience	is	given	by	others	who	wanted	to	manipulate	you	in	their	own	ways.
They	had	their	own	ideas	and	they	manipulated	you,	they	coerced	you,	tortured
you	 into	 certain	 directions.	 They	 may	 not	 have	 been	 aware	 of	 it	 themselves
because	they	were	tortured	by	their	parents.
This	is	how	the	future	is	dominated	by	the	past	and	the	present	is	dominated	by
the	dead.
A	real	man	has	to	drop	his	conscience.	The	parental	voice	has	to	be	dropped.
There	are	a	few	sayings	of	Jesus	which	are	very	rude	but	true	to	the	very	core.
He	says,
'Unless	you	hate	your	father	and	mother	you	will	not	be	able	to	follow	me.'	Now
this	 looks	 very	 rude.	 The	 language	 is	 rude	 but	 what	 he	 means	 is	 what	 I	 am
saying	to	you	--
drop	the	conscience.	He	is	not	saying	you	should	hate	your	father	and	mother,	he
is	saying	you	should	hate	the	mother's	and	father's	voice	inside	you.	Unless	you
drop	 that	 you	 will	 never	 be	 free;	 you	 will	 remain	 split,	 you	 will	 have	 many
voices	in	you,	you	will	never	become	one.
You	 have	 lost	 your	 original	 face.	 People	 have	 painted	 your	 face	 too	 much
according	 to	 their	own	 ideas.	They	have	made	you.	Now	you	have	 to	 take	 the
whole	process	in	your	hands	you	have	to	become	aware	that	you	are	not	here	to
fulfil	anybody's	expectations.
You	are	here	to	attain	your	destiny.
So	don't	 choose	 the	 safer	way	which	you	have	been	choosing	up	 to	now.	 It	 is
safer	to	follow	society	because	then	society	does	not	create	trouble	for	you.	It	is
very,	 very	 dangerous	 to	 follow	 your	 own	 voice,	 very	 dangerous	 to	 follow
yourself,	because	then	you	are	alone	and	society	is	not	there	to	support	you.
They	used	to	tell	a	story	of	the	Russian	dictator,	Stalin.	The	dictator	walked	into
a	movie	 incognito	 and	 sat	 in	 the	 last	 row.	Suddenly	his	 picture	 flashed	on	 the
screen	and	everybody	rose	in	salute.	He	remained	seated,	enjoying	the	spectacle
of	 his	 power,	 when	 suddenly	 an	 usher	 poked	 him	 in	 the	 back	 and	 whispered
harshly:	 'You'd	better	get	up	 too	 if	you	know	what's	good	 for	you.	 I	don't	 like
him	any	more	than	you	do,	but	you'd	better	get	up.	It's	safer.'
We	 have	 been	 choosing	 the	 safer,	 the	 secure,	 the	 socially	 approved.	 You	will
have	to	get	out	of	it.	There	are	two	ways	to	get	out	of	the	socially	approved:	one
is	 the	way	of	 the	sinner,	 the	criminal;	another	 is	 the	way	of	 the	saint,	 the	holy
man.	These	are	the	two	ways	to	get	out	of	the	structured	being	that	the	society
has	given	to	you,	cut	of	the	role	that	the	society	has	given	you	to	play.
One	is	the	criminal	way.	That	is	a	reactionary	way,	foolish.	It	is	not	going	to	help
you.
You	may	get	out	of	the	social	structure	but	you	will	find	yourself	in	prison.	That
is	not	going	to	help	much;	you	cannot	go	very	far	on	that	way.	That	too	is	a	way
of	getting	out	of	the	bondage	of	society	--	the	criminal	is	also	trying	to	be	free.
Of	course,	he	does	not	know	how	to	be	free,	so	he	gets	more	into	bondage.	But
his	desire	is	the	same	as	that	of	the	saints.	He	is	moving	in	the	wrong	direction,
but	 his	 desire	 is	 the	 same.	 Society	 has	 forced	 many	 people	 to	 be	 criminals
because	the	structure	is	too	strong	and	people	don't	know	how	to	get	out	of	it.	So
they	do	something	wrong,	just	to	get	out	of	it.
The	saint	is	also	doing	the	same	but	he	is	trying	to	create	devices.	Meditation	is	a
device,	zazen	is	a	device	to	get	out	of	society	without	becoming	a	criminal.
So	remember,	that	danger	is	there.	If	you	understand	me	and	you	think,	'Right,	I
will	get	out	of	society,'	and	you	don't	understand	what	I	mean	by	meditation,	you
will	become	a	criminal.
That's	what	hippies	are	doing	in	the	West.	They	are	hankering	for	freedom	and
their	desire	 is	 right,	absolutely	right,	 they	have	absolute	birthright	 to	be	free	 --
but	they	don't	yet	know	the	way	of	the	saint.	So	knowingly,	unknowingly,	they
are	moving	onto	the	path	of	the	sinners.	Sooner	or	later	they	will	be	crushed	by
society.
Just	to	be	free	of	society	is	not	enough.	To	be	free	and	responsible,	to	be	free	and
responsibly	 free	 --	 only	 then	 are	 you	 free,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 caught	 in
another	pattern.
The	hippie	is	reacting,	the	people	of	Zen	are	rebelling.	In	reaction	you	just	go	to
the	opposite:	if	the	society	says	no	drugs,	you	say	drugs	are	the	only	panacea.	If
the	society	says	do	this,	you	immediately	do	just	the	opposite.	But	remember,	in
doing	 the	 opposite,	 you	 are	 still	 in	 the	 trap	 of	 society	 because	 society	 has
decided	 what	 you	 should	 do.	 Even	 the	 opposite	 is	 decided	 by	 society.	 The
society	said	no	drugs	so	you	say,	 'I	am	going	 to	 take	drugs.'	By	saying	no,	 the
society	has	decided	your	direction.
So	the	one	who	is	conventional	is	within	the	society	and	the	one	who	has	reacted
against	it,	again	gets	caught	in	the	society.	One	says	yes	to	the	society,	another
says	no	the	society,	but	both	react	to	the	society.	The	man	who	really	wants	to	be
free	says	neither	yes	nor	no.
The	language	is	created	by	the	society	so	the	language	is	simply	contradictory.
Either	you	have	to	say	yes	or	you	have	to	say	no.	Sometimes	you	don't	want	to
say	either	yes	or	no	but	there	is	no	word.	Just	lately	Edward	de	Bono	has	done	a
great	service	to	humanity.
He	has	 invented	a	new	word,	 'po'	 --	 just	 in	 the	middle	of	no	and	yes.	Because
there	are	situations	when	you	would	 like	 to	say	po.	You	mean,	 'I	don't	want	 to
say	yes,	I	don't	want	to	say	no,	I	don't	want	to	take	any	alternative	between	these
two.	I	want	to	be	free.	If	I	say	yes,	I	am	caught	--	you	decided	my	yes;	if	I	say
no,	you	decided	my	no	in	the	opposite	direction.	I	say	po.'
A	Zen	person	says	po,	the	hippie	says	no	--	and	much	is	the	difference,	great	is
the	difference.
The	language	is	decided	by	the	contradictory	mind	so	everything	is	divided	into
two:	heaven	and	hell,	god	and	devil,	yes	and	no,	good	and	bad,	the	sinner	and	the
saint.
Everything	is	divided	into	two,	and	in	life,	in	fact,	it	is	totally	different	--	it	is	a
rainbow.
All	the	seven	colours	are	there.	There	are	many	stages	between	the	saint	and	the
sinner;	there	are	many	possibilities	between	yes	and	no.	And	dark	and	light	are
not	only	two	possibilities	--	they	are	two	poles.	Between	these	two	poles	are	all
the	rays,	all	the	colours	of	the	rainbow.
But	the	aristotelian	logic,	which	is	the	logic	of	the	society,	divides	only	into	two.
That	two	creates	a	falsity	in	man.	If	you	don't	want	to	say	yes	and	you	don't	want
to	say	no,	the	language	does	not	give	you	any	other	alternative.	Somebody	says,
'Do	you	love	me?'
What	are	you	going	to	say?	If	you	say	yes	it	may	not	be	true,	if	you	say	no	that
also	may	not	be	true.	You	may	like	to	remain	uncommitted,	you	may	like	simply
to	 shrug	 your	 shoulders	 --	 but	 in	 language	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 shrug	 your
shoulders.
I	have	heard	about	a	man	who	went	to	visit	a	church	with	his	wife.	The	church
had	over	the	portal	the	inscription:	This	is	the	house	of	God.	This	is	the	Gate	of
Heaven.
The	man	must	have	been	a	logician,	a	follower	of	Aristotle.
He	glanced	at	these	words,	tried	the	door	and	found	it	locked.
Then	he	turned	to	his	wife	and	said,	'In	other	words,	go	to	hell!'
Because	the	door	to	heaven	is	closed,	where	to	go?'In	other	words,	go	to	hell!'
Life	is	divided	into	two	--	that	is	too	miserly	a	division.	Life	is	much	richer.	Life
is	neither	white	nor	black,	it	is	grey.	White	is	one	end	of	it,	black	is	another	end
of	it,	but	life	is	grey.
If	 you	 don't	 know	 that	 language	 is	 also	 a	 social	 trap,	morality	 is	 also	 a	 social
trap,	formality	is	also	a	social	trap,	etiquette	is	also	a	social	trap,	you	will	not	be
able	to	get	out	of	it.	And	this	is	possible	only	if	you	become	very,	very	aware,
very	 keenly	 aware,	 sincerely	 aware.	Then	 you	will	 see	 traps	 all	 around.	Don't
react	to	them.	Sinners	have	always	been	there,	criminals	have	always	been	there
--	they	tried	to	break	out	of	the	bounds	of	the	society,	but	they	never	could	get
very	far;	they	were	always	caught.
The	 only	 way	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 is	 a	 very	 subtle	 one,	 and	 that	 is	 to	 get	 within
yourself	so	deeply	that	the	society	cannot	reach	there.	That's	the	only	way	--	to
become	true,	to	get	to	your	centre.	That's	what	Zen	is	all	about.
Once,	 at	 a	 scientific	 gathering,	 a	 young	 physicist	 approached	 the	 British
astronomer	Sir	Arthur	Eddington	and	asked:
'Is	 it	 true,	Sir	Arthur,	 that	you	are	one	of	 the	only	 three	men	in	 the	world	who
really	understands	Einstein's	theory	of	relativity?'
Then	 noticing	 the	 look	 of	 discomfort	 that	 came	 into	 the	 astronomer's	 face,	 he
apologised.
'I'm	sorry,'	he	said.'I	didn't	mean	to	embarrass	you.	I	know	how	modest	you	are.'
'Not	at	all,'	said	Eddington.'I	was	just	wondering	who	the	third	man	could	be.'
All	your	social	formality,	modesty,	politeness,	is	just	a	layer,	a	very	thin	layer	--
like	when	you	pour	oil	on	water	and	a	thin	film	of	the	oil	covers	it.	It	is	not	even
skin	deep.
Don't	be	deceived	by	 it.	The	only	way	 to	get	beyond	 is	 to	go	within.	You	can
become	 rude	 --	 that	 is	 happening.	 Just	 to	 become	 sincere,	 some	 people	 are
becoming	 rude.	 That	 is	 not	 the	 way.	 Just	 to	 be	 honest,	 people	 are	 becoming
violent.	Just	to	be	true,	they	are	becoming	angry	and	insane.	That	is	not	the	way.
If	you	want	to	be	true,	move	to	the	centre	--	because	if	you	remain	on	periphery
you	will	remain	untrue.	Let	your	centre	dominate	the	periphery.	You	move	to	the
centre.
And	be	in	a	hurry.	I	don't	mean	be	impatient.	I	mean	don't	be	lazy.	Because	the
problem	is	that	if	you	have	lived	too	long	in	the	society	and	you	have	followed
its	rules	and	regulations	for	too	long,	one	becomes	accustomed	to	it.	One	forgets
that	it	is	a	bondage,	one	forgets	that	these	are	chains.	The	chains	start	appearing
like	ornaments.	You	in	fact	start	protecting	them.
It	happened.
To	 celebrate	 their	 thirtieth	wedding	 anniversary,	Mulla	Nasruddin	 came	 home
and	 presented	 his	 wife	 with	 a	 little	 monkey.'Are	 you	 crazy	 or	 something?'
shouted	Mistress	Nasruddin.'Where	the	hell	are	we	gonna	keep	a	monkey?'
'Don't	worry,'	said	Nasruddin.'He	will	sleep	right	in	the	bed	with	us.'
'And	what	about	the	smell?'
'If	I	could	stand	it	for	thirty	years,	he	will	get	used	to	it	soon.'
Be	in	a	hurry	because	once	you	get	settled	it	will	be	difficult.	Difficult	because
you	will	not	realise	that	you	are	in	bondage.	If	you	can	escape	younger,	it	will	be
easier.	The	older	you	grow,	the	more	difficult	it	becomes.
Now,	the	story.
AFTER	BANKEI	HAD	PASSED	AWAY,	A	BLIND	MAN	WHO	LIVED	NEAR
THE
MASTER'S	TEMPLE	SAID	TO	A	FRIEND:	'SINCE	I	AM	BLIND	I	CANNOT
WATCH	 A	 PERSON'S	 FACE,	 SO	 I	 MUST	 JUDGE	 HIS	 CHARACTER	 BY
THE
SOUND	OF	HIS	VOICE.'
'ORDINARILY	WHEN	 I	 HEAR	 SOMEONE	 CONGRATULATE	 ANOTHER
UPON
HIS	 HAPPINESS	 OR	 SUCCESS,	 I	 ALSO	 HEAR	 A	 SECRET	 TONE	 OF
ENVY.
WHEN	 CONDOLENCE	 IS	 EXPRESSED	 FOR	 THE	 MISFORTUNE	 OF
ANOTHER,	 I	 HEAR	 PLEASURE	 AND	 SATISFACTION,	 AS	 IF	 THE	 ONE
CONDOLING	WAS
REALLY	GLAD	THERE	WAS	SOMETHING	LEFT	TO	GAIN	IN	HIS	OWN
WORLD.'
'IN	ALL	MY	EXPERIENCE,	HOWEVER,	BANKEI'S	VOICE	WAS	ALWAYS
SINCERE.	 WHENEVER	 HE	 EXPRESSED	 HAPPINESS,	 I	 HEARD
NOTHING	BUT
HAPPINESS,	 AND	 WHENEVER	 HE	 EXPRESSED	 SORROW,	 SORROW
WAS	ALL	I	HEARD.'
This	is	the	greatest	homage	that	can	be	done	to	a	man,	to	the	memory	of	a	man.
Bankei	was	one	of	 the	greatest	Zen	Masters.	This	blind	man	who	used	 to	 live
near	 the	 temple	 could	 not	 see	 people's	 faces.	 Blind	 people	 become	 very,	 very
perceptive.	Because	 they	are	blind	 they	become	very	perceptive.	Because	 their
eyes	are	not	functioning,	the	whole	energy	and	the	capacity	to	see	moves	to	their
ears.	Their	ears	become	substitutes	for	eyes.
And	there	is	a	difference	between	eyes	and	ears.	Eyes	are	linear,	they	look	only
in	one	direction.	Ears	are	not	linear.	The	ears	hear	from	all	directions,	the	sound
is	caught	from	all	directions.	Ears	are	more	total	than	eyes.	Eyes	just	focus;	eyes
are	more	concentrated.
Ears	are	more	meditative;	hence	all	the	meditators	close	the	eyes,	because	with
the	eyes	the	mind	becomes	linear.	It	is	easy	to	concentrate	with	the	eyes;	difficult
to	meditate.
Remember	 the	 difference:	 when	 you	 concentrate,	 you	 focus	 your	 mind
exclusively	on	something,	and	everything	else	is	excluded	out	of	it.	You	include
only	 the	 certain	 thing	 on	 which	 you	 are	 concentrating,	 and	 everything	 is
excluded.	You	focus.	But	ears	are	more	meditative.	They	include	all,	everything
that	 happens	 around.	 If	 you	 are	 listening	 to	 me,	 you	 are	 also	 listening	 to	 the
birds.	It	is	simultaneously	happening.	To	the	ears,	existence	is	simultaneous;	to
the	eyes	it	 is	linear,	gradual.	If	I	start	 looking	from	this	side	to	that	side,	first	I
will	see	Amida,	then	Teertha,	then	somebody	else,	then	somebody	else
--	you	are	all	here	 together.	But	eyes	will	create	a	 linear	procession	which	 is	a
falsification	of	reality.	You	are	not	here	in	a	queue,	you	are	all	here	together.	But
if	I	listen	with	my	ears,	with	closed	eyes,	to	your	breathing,	your	being	--	then
you	are	all	here	together.
Ears	are	closer	to	existence	than	eyes,	and	it	is	a	misfortune	that	ears	have	been
neglected	and	eyes	have	become	very	predominant.	Psychologists	say	that	eighty
per	cent	of	human	knowledge	is	gained	through	the	eyes.	Eighty	per	cent!	It	 is
too	much.	It	has	become	almost	dictatorial.	The	eyes	have	become	the	dictators.
Ears	are	closer	to	the	existence,	to	the	diffused	existence,	to	the	togetherness	of
existence.
There	 are	 methods,	 particularly	 in	 Zen,	 where	 one	 simply	 sits	 and	 listens	 --
listens	 to	 existence,	 not	 concentrating	 anywhere.	 It	 is	 easier	 for	 eyes	 to	 be
closed;	you	can	open	them,	you	can	close	them.	Your	mind	can	manipulate	your
eyes,	but	your	ears	you	cannot	close.	They	are	always	open.
So	if	your	emphasis	moves	from	eyes	to	ears,	you	will	become	more	open.	The
eyes	 can	 be	manipulated	more	 easily,	 the	mind	 can	 play	 tricks	with	 the	 eyes.
With	ears	it	is	more	difficult	to	play	tricks.
If	you	have	come	across	a	blind	man,	you	will	see,	it	happens.	He	starts	seeing
by	 his	 ears.	 And	 he	 can	 see	many	 subtle	 nuances	which	 eyes	 cannot	 see.	 He
becomes	more	perceptive.	By	the	sound,	by	the	tone,	by	small	waverings	in	the
tone,	fluctuations,	he	starts	seeing	deeply	into	you.	And	because	he	is	not	part	of
the	society	--	society	belongs	to	those	who	have	eyes	--	a	blind	man	is	almost	an
outcast,	out	of	the	society.	So	you	don't	know	how	to	deceive	a	blind	man.	You
know	how	to	deceive	people	who	have	eyes	but	you	don't	know	how	to	deceive
a	blind	man.	You	have	never	practised	it,	it	has	never	happened.	Rarely	do	you
come	across	a	blind	man.
He	 starts	 seeing	 many	 things.	 Even	 by	 your	 footsteps,	 by	 the	 sound	 of	 your
footsteps,	he	starts	recognising	many	things	in	you.	Are	you	a	man	rooted	in	the
earth?	Grounded	in	the	earth?	A	blind	man	can	see	just	by	your	footsteps	--	he
can	hear	whether	you	are	grounded	or	not.
Every	person	moves	 in	 a	 different	way,	walks	 in	 a	 different	way.	 If	 a	Buddha
walks	he	is	tremendously	grounded.	His	legs	are	almost	like	the	roots	of	a	tree.
He	 is	 in	deep	contact	with	 the	earth.	He	 is	nourished	by	 the	earth,	 the	earth	 is
nourished	by	him.	There	is	a	continuous	transfer	of	energy.
Ordinarily	 people	 are	 uprooted	 trees.	 They	walk	 as	 if	 they	 are	 uprooted;	 they
don't	 have	 roots	 in	 the	 earth,	 they	 are	 not	 grounded.	 You	 try	 sometimes.	 Just
stand	with	naked	feet	on	 the	earth	or	on	 the	sand	on	a	beach	and	 just	 feel	 that
your	legs	are	like	roots	and	that	they	are	reaching	deep	into	the	earth.	And	start
swaying	with	the	wind	like	a	tree.	Forget	that	you	are	a	man,	think	of	yourself	as
a	tree,	and	soon	you	will	see	something	transpiring	between	you	and	the	earth.	It
may	take	a	little	time	because	you	have	forgotten	the	language	but	one	day	you
will	see	something	is	transpiring.	Something	is	given	by	the	earth	to	the	feet	and
you	are	also	returning,	responding.	And	the	day	it	happens	you	will	start	walking
in	 a	 totally	 new	way	 --	 rooted,	 solid,	 not	 fragile,	 not	 sad,	 more	 alive,	 full	 of
energy.	You	will	be	less	tired	and	your	footsteps	will	have	a	different	quality.
A	blind	man	can	immediately	say	whether	this	man	is	rooted	in	the	earth	or	not.
A	man	who	 is	a	 thief	walks	 in	a	different	way	--	continuously	afraid.	The	fear
enters	into	the	footsteps,	into	the	sound	of	the	footsteps.	A	man	who	is	walking
in	his	own	home	--	at	home,	at	ease	--	walks	in	a	different	way.
The	blind	man	who	 lived	near	Bankei's	 temple	must	have	known	thousands	of
people.	He	was	a	beggar.	He	said,	when	Bankei	died,
'ORDINARILY	WHEN	 I	 HEAR	 SOMEONE	 CONGRATULATE	 ANOTHER
UPON
HIS	 HAPPINESS	 OR	 SUCCESS,	 I	 ALSO	 HEAR	 A	 SECRET	 TONE	 OF
ENVY.'
When	people	congratulate	others,	deep	down	they	are	jealous.	The	envy	is	there.
It	is	just	a	social	formality	that	they	are	fulfilling.	Their	voice	will	show	it.	You
watch,	you	start	watching	life.	It	is	a	beautiful	thing	to	watch.	Many	things	are
happening	 around	 you	 continuously.	You	 are	missing	 tremendous	 experiences.
Watch	people's	voices	--
someone	congratulating	someone.	Try	to	see	what	his	voice	says	--	not	what	he
is	 saying,	but	what	his	voice	says.	And	 immediately	you	will	understand	what
this	blind	man	means.	There	is	a	subtle	jealousy,	envy,	pain,	misery,	frustration	--
that	 somebody	 else	 has	 succeeded	 and	 he	 has	 not	 succeeded.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 lip
service.
'WHEN	 CONDOLENCE	 IS	 EXPRESSED	 FOR	 THE	 MISFORTUNE	 OF
ANOTHER,	I	HEAR	PLEASURE	AND	SATISFACTION....'
The	second	thing	is	still	deeper.	The	first	thing	you	can	understand.	You	can	say,
'Right,	 true.	There	 is	 jealousy	when	you	congratulate	somebody.'	But	 the	blind
man	says	that	when	you	condole,	when	you	see	somebody	has	died	or	somebody
has	 gone	 bankrupt	 or	 somebody's	 house	 has	 burned,	 and	 you	 go	 and	 you
sympathize	 and	 you	 say,	 'It	 was	 very	 bad,'	 deep	 down	 there	 is	 a	 subtle
satisfaction	 and	 pleasure.	 Because	 deep	 down	 you	 are	 feeling	 good	 that	 your
house	 has	 not	 been	 burned,	 somebody	 else's	 has;	 that	 your	wife	 has	 not	 died,
somebody	else's	has;	at	 least	your	child	is	still	alive,	somebody	else's	has	died.
God	has	not	been	so	cruel	to	you.	You	feel	a	subtle	joy.
Whenever	 you	 sympathize	 or	 express	 condolence,	watch.	Or	when	 you	watch
others	doing	that,	just	look	deep	down	into	their	voice	--	something	else	is	also
present;	bound	to	be	so.	In	your	 love,	hatred	is	present.	Even	when	you	laugh,
something	deep	down	goes	on	crying	within	you.	Your	laughter	is	not	pure;	your
laughter	can	be	changed	into	crying	very	easily,	your	crying	can	be	changed	into
laughter	very	easily.	You	know	it.
You	love	a	person	and	you	can	hate	him	any	moment.	You	were	ready	to	die	for
him,	and	now	you	are	ready	to	kill	him.	A	friend	can	become	foe	any	moment.
Man	is	contradictory,	schizophrenic.
And	the	blind	man	said,
'IN	ALL	MY	EXPERIENCE,	HOWEVER,	BANKEI'S	VOICE	WAS	ALWAYS
SINCERE.	 WHENEVER	 HE	 EXPRESSED	 HAPPINESS,	 I	 HEARD
NOTHING	BUT
HAPPINESS...'
It	was	pure,	uncontaminated	by	the	opposite,	uncorrupted,	uncontradicted.	It	was
simple.
It	was	not	complex.	It	was	sincere.
'...AND	 WHENEVER	 HE	 EXPRESSED	 SORROW,	 SORROW	 WAS	 ALL	 I
HEARD.'
This	simplicity	is	the	goal	of	Zen;	this	sincerity	is	the	goal	of	Zen.
I	 was	 reading	 a	 few	 lines	 of	 T.	 S.	 Eliot	 the	 other	 day:	 A	 CONDITION	 OF
COMPLETE	SIMPLICITY	(COSTING	NOT	LESS	THAN
EVERYTHING)	 AND	 ALL	 SHALL	 BE	 WELL	 AND	 ALL	 MANNER	 OF
THINGS
SHALL	BE	WELL	WHEN	THE	 TONGUES	OF	 FLAME	ARE	 IN-FOLDED
INTO	THE
CROWNED	KNOT	OF	FIRE	AND	THE	FIRE	AND	THE	ROSE	ARE	ONE.
They	express	the	very	essence	of	Zen.	AND	THE	FIRE	AND	THE	ROSE	ARE
ONE.
There	comes	a	moment	of	simplicity	when	the	energy	that	is	invested	in	hatred
and	 the	energy	 that	 is	 invested	 in	 love	are	 released	 from	 their	polar	opposites.
AND	THE	FIRE
AND	THE	ROSE	ARE	ONE.
Then	 a	man	 is	 simply	 simple.	He	 has	 no	 contradictions	 in	 him.	You	 can	 taste
him;	his	 taste	 is	always	the	same.	And	whatsoever	he	does	he	does	it	 totally	--
there	is	no	other	way.	He	cannot	do	even	a	small	thing	without	being	total	in	it.
Even	a	small	gesture	of	his	hand	and	he	is	totally	there	in	that	gesture.	He	looks
at	you	and	he	is	there	in	his	look	--
totally	there.	He	touches	you	--	it	is	not	only	his	hand	that	touches	you,	it	is	his
whole	being.
Ordinarily	 we	 are	 manipulating	 things	 --	 chairs,	 tables,	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
things	--	and	we	have	forgotten	 that	hands	are	meant	for	something	more	also,
not	just	manipulating	things.	So	when	you	touch	your	beloved's	hand,	you	touch
as	 if	 you	were	 touching	 a	 table.	You	 have	 forgotten	 that	 hands	 are	 not	 just	 to
manipulate,	they	are	to	give	also.	The	hands	have	become	dead.
When	 a	man	 like	Bankei	 touches,	 then	 you	will	 know	what	 touch	 is.	He	will
flow	through	his	touch	totally	into	you;	he	will	pour	himself	into	you.	His	touch
will	be	a	gift,	his	look	will	be	a	gift,	because	he	has	attained.	He	has	given	the
ultimate	gift	of	his	own	being	to	himself	--	AND	THE	FIRE	AND	THE	ROSE
ARE	ONE.
Listen	 to	 your	 heart,	 move	 according	 to	 your	 heart,	 whatsoever	 the	 stake:	 A
CONDITION	OF	COMPLETE	SIMPLICITY
COSTING	NOT	LESS	THAN	EVERYTHING....
To	be	simple	is	arduous,	because	to	be	simple	it	costs	everything	that	you	have.
You	have	to	lose	all	to	be	simple.	That's	why	people	have	chosen	to	be	complex
and	they	have	forgotten	how	to	be	simple.
But	only	a	simple	heart	throbs	with	God,	hand	in	hand.	Only	a	simple	heart	sings
with	God	 in	 deep	 harmony.	 To	 reach	 to	 that	 point	 you	will	 have	 to	 find	 your
heart,	your	own	throb,	your	own	beat.
'THIS	 IS	 MY	 WAY,'	 Nietzsche	 used	 to	 say.	 'WHERE	 IS	 YOURS?	 THUS	 I
ANSWERED	THOSE	WHO	ASKED	ME	THE	WAY.	FOR	THE	WAY...THAT
DOES
NOT	EXIST.'
'THIS	IS	MY	WAY,	WHERE	IS	YOURS?	THUS	I	ANSWERED	THOSE	WHO
ASKED	ME	 THE	WAY.	 FOR	 THE	WAY...THAT	 DOES	 NOT	 EXIST.'	 Only
ways	exist
--	THE	way	does	not	exist.	Your	way,	my	way,	yes	--	but	THE	way,	no.
Zen	 is	 an	 absolutely	 individual	 path.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 religion	 in	 the	 sense	 of
Christianity,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 religion	 in	 the	 sense	 of	 any	 organization.	 One	 has	 to
become	individual.	The	word
'individual'	 is	 good.	 It	 simply	 means:	 one	 who	 cannot	 be	 divided.	 Indivisible
means	individual.	You	are	not	yet	individuals	because	you	are	split.	Become	one
and	you	will	become	individuals.
Great	is	the	stake,	great	is	the	risk,	but	it	is	worth	it.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	When	Grapes	Are	Sour
14	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606140
ShortTitle:
DANG04
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
104
mins
The	first	question:
'HAPPINESS	 IS	 NOT	 BEING	 SMART	 ENOUGH	 TO	 KNOW	 WHAT	 TO
WORRY
ABOUT.'	PLEASE	COMMENT.
This	must	have	been	said	by	a	very	unhappy	man,	and	yet	a	very	egoistic	one.
He	cannot	recognise	the	fact	that	unhappiness	is	created	by	being	unintelligent.
He	is	trying	to	save	his	ego.	He	is	saying	that	the	grapes	are	sour.
To	be	unhappy	no	intelligence	is	needed.	Everybody	is	capable	of	being	unhappy
but	 happiness	 is	 very,	 very	 rare.	 Great	 talent	 is	 needed.	 Not	 only	 intellect,
intelligence	is	needed.	Only	rarely	does	a	Buddha,	a	Krishna,	become	happy.	It	is
almost	impossible	to	be	happy.
So	let	us	try	to	understand	what	unhappiness	is.	Unhappiness	is	the	incapacity	to
understand	 life,	 the	 incapacity	 to	understand	oneself,	 the	 incapacity	 to	create	a
harmony	between	you	and	the	existence.	Unhappiness	is	a	discord	between	you
and	 reality;	 something	 is	 in	 conflict	 between	 you	 and	 existence.	 Happiness	 is
when	nothing	is	in	conflict	--	when	you	are	together,	and	you	are	together	with
existence	 also.	When	 there	 is	 a	 harmony,	when	 everything	 is	 flowing	without
any	 conflict,	 smooth,	 relaxed,	 then	 you	 are	 happy.	Happiness	 is	 possible	 only
with	great	understanding,	an	understanding	like	the	peaks	of	the	Himalayas.	Less
than	that	won't	do
Anybody	is	capable	of	being	unhappy	any	moment,	that's	how	the	whole	world
is	so	unhappy.	To	be	happy	you	will	have	to	create	such	a	great	understanding
about	 you	 and	 about	 the	 existence	 in	which	 you	 exist,	 that	 everything	 falls	 in
line,	 in	deep	accord,	 in	 rhythm.	And	between	your	 energy	and	 the	 energy	 that
surrounds	you	a	dance	happens	and	you	start	moving	in	step	with	life.
Happiness	is	when	you	disappear.	Unhappiness	is	when	you	are	too	much.	You
are	the	discord,	your	absence	will	be	the	accord.	Sometimes	you	have	glimpses
of	happiness	--
when	by	some	accident	you	are	not	 there.	Looking	at	nature,	or	 looking	at	 the
stars,	or	holding	 the	hand	of	your	beloved,	or	making	 love...in	 some	moments
you	are	not	there.	If	you	are	there,	even	there	there	will	be	no	happiness.	If	you
are	making	 love	 to	 your	 beloved	 and	 it	 is	 really	 as	 you	 express	 it,	 a	 'making',
then	there	will	be	no	happiness.
Love	cannot	be	made.	You	can	be	in	it	or	not	in	it,	but	there	ii	no	way	to	make	it.
The	English	expression	is	ugly.	To	'make	love'	is	absurd.	How	can	you	make	it?
If	 the	maker	 is	 there,	 the	doer	 is	 there,	 the	 technician	goes	on	existing.	And	 if
you	are	following	some	techniques	from	Masters	and	Johnson	or	Vatasyayana	or
some	other	source,	and	you	are	not	lost	in	it,	happiness	will	not	happen.	When
you	are	lost	you	don't	know	where	you	are	going,	you	don't	know	what	you	are
doing,	you	are	possessed	by	the	whole,	the	part	does	not	exist	separate	from	the
whole...	then	there	is	an	orgasmic	experience.	That	is	what	happiness	is.
For	 happiness	 you	 will	 need	 tremendous	 intelligence.	 And	 I	 say
INTELLIGENCE,	 not	 intellect,	 knowingly.	 Intellect	 you	 can	 get	 from	 the
market,	 intellect	 you	 can	 get	 from	 the	 books,	 intellect	 you	 can	 get	 from	 the
university.	Intellect	is	transferable,	intellect	is	mechanical,	intellect	is	of	the	bio-
computer	you	call	mind.	Intelligence	is	not	of	the	mind,	intelligence	is	of	the	no-
mind	 --	 what	 Zen	 people	 call	 no-mind.	 Intelligence	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
information,	 knowledge;	 it	 has	 only	 one	 element	 and	 that	 element	 is	 of
awareness.
If	 you	 are	 intelligent	 then	 your	 life	 will	 be	 of	 happiness.	Why	 is	 intelligence
needed?
Because	life	in	itself	is	meaningless.	Meaning	is	not	something	sitting	there	and
you	have	just	to	reach	and	possess	it.	Meaning	has	to	be	created.	People	come	to
me	and	they	ask,'What	is	the	meaning	of	life?'	As	if	life	has	any	meaning.	Life
has	no	meaning	--	that	is	the	beauty	of	life.	That's	why	it	is	freedom.	You	are	free
to	create	your	own	meaning	and	 I	 am	 free	 to	 create	my	meaning.	 If	 life	has	a
meaning	 then	 we	 will	 all	 be	 just	 slaves	 and	 that	 meaning	 will	 not	 be	 worth
anything.	 Life	 is	 freedom.	 It	 does	 not	 impose	 any	meaning	 on	 you;	 it	 simply
gives	you	an	opportunity	 to	 create	your	own	meaning.	The	meaning	has	 to	be
created.	It	is	not	like	a	thing	that	you	can	uncover,	you	will	have	to	become	your
meaning,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 give	 a	 rebirth	 to	 yourself.	 That's	 why	 I	 say	 much
intelligence	 is	needed.	Only	when	you	 feel	meaning	 in	 life	will	you	be	happy,
not	before	it.
Life	has	no	meaning	in	itself,	you	have	to	bring	meaning	into	it.	Life	is	just	raw
material,	you	have	to	create	your	meaning	out	of	it.	You	have	to	create	your	God.
God	is	not	there	waiting	for	you.	You	have	to	create	it	within	your	heart,	within
your	innermost	core	of	being.	Only	then	will	you	be	happy.
To	create	meaning	you	will	have	to	be	a	creator.	Painters	paint,	create	paintings;
poets	write,	create	poetry;	dancers	create	dance...	but	these	are	all	just	fragments.
A	religious	person	creates	himself;	the	religious	person	is	the	greatest	artist	there
is.	All	 other	 artists	 are	 just	 finding	 substitutes	 and	 one	 day	 or	 other	 they	will
become	 frustrated.	 You	 have	 written	 many	 poems,	 then	 one	 day	 you
realise,'What	is	the	point?	Why	go	on	writing?'
You	 have	 painted,	 then	 one	 day	 suddenly	 you	 realise,'What	 is	 the	 point?	 For
whom?	For	what?'	One	day	you	will	die	and	all	will	be	left	and	will	disappear.
So	what	is	the	point?
Unless	you	feel	a	point	of	immortality	in	whatsoever	you	are	doing	you	cannot
be	happy,	and	that	point	of	immortality	is	felt	only	when	you	create	immortality
within	yourself.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say,	and	very	rightly,	that	man	is	not	born	with	a	soul.	All	other
religions	say	that	man	is	born	with	a	soul,	but	Gurdjieff's	saying	is	tremendously
significant	--	man	is	not	born	with	a	soul.	And	unless	you	create	it	you	will	not
have	any	 soul,	 you	will	 exist	 empty	 and	you	will	 die	 empty.	You	will	 have	 to
create	it,	that's	why	I	say	great	intelligence	is	needed.
This	statement	must	have	been	made	by	someone	who	was	very	unhappy	and	yet
so	egoistic	that	he	could	not	or	would	not	recognise	the	fact	that	it	is	he	who	is
creating	 his	 unhappiness.	 So	 he	 says,	 'HAPPINESS	 IS	NOT	BEING	 SMART
ENOUGH	TO	KNOW
WHAT	 TO	WORRY	 ABOUT.'	 He	 is	 saying	 that	 to	 be	 happy	 one	 has	 to	 be
ignorant,	to	be	happy	one	has	to	be	stupid.	Then	a	Buddha	is	stupid,	then	a	Jesus
is	stupid,	then	people	who	are	in	madhouses	are	the	only	intelligent	people	in	the
world.
But	this	man	is	trying	to	save	his	ego.	To	be	intelligent	is	arduous,	it	will	need
tremendous	 effort	 on	your	part.	You	will	 have	 to	destroy	much	 that	 is	 rubbish
within	you,	you	will	have	to	create	almost	a	fire	of	consciousness	so	that	what	is
useless	is	burned	and	only	that	which	is	pure	gold	is	saved.	Very	few	people	are
ready	 to	 go	 through	 that	 hardship,	 through	 that	 discipline	 which	 creates
intelligence.	People	want	short-cuts.
A	man	went	to	see	his	psychiatrist	and	said	that	every	night	he	was	visited	by	a
ten-foot	monster	with	two	heads.	And	he	was	suffering	tremendously,	sleep	was
not	possible,	he	was	becoming	more	and	more	miserable	and	any	day	he	could
collapse.	He	had	even	thought	about	committing	suicide.
'Well,	I	think	I	might	be	able	to	cure	you,'	said	the	psychiatrist,'but	I	am	afraid	it
will	be	a	lengthy	process	and	it	will	cost	you	about	three	hundred	dollars.'
'Three	hundred	dollars?'	 said	 the	man.'Forget	 it!	 I	will	 just	go	home	and	make
friends	with	it.'
That's	how	to	be	intelligent	is	so	difficult	and	it	costs	so	much.	You	have	to	put
at	 stake	 whatsoever	 you	 have.	 It	 is	 a	 cross.	 In	 fact,	 you	 have	 to	 die	 to	 be
intelligent	because	only	when	you	are	reborn	will	you	be	intelligent,	not	before
it.	And	the	cross	has	to	be	carried	on	one's	own	shoulders,	nobody	else	can	carry
your	cross.	You	will	have	to	carry	your	cross	to	your	own	Golgotha,	there	is	no
other	way.	Many	times	you	will	stumble	on	the	road,	many	times	you	will	be	so
tired	 and	 exhausted	 that	 you	will	 have	 to	 rest.	Many	 times	you	will	 think	 that
people	who	have	never	desired	intelligence,	awareness,	are	blessed.'What	have	I
chosen?'	Many	 times	doubt	 and	 suspicion	will	 arise	 in	your	mind.'Is	 there	 any
goal	 or	 am	 I	 simply	 carrying	 a	 cross	 and	 wasting	 my	 life?'	 Many	 times	 you
would	like	to	go	back	to	the	world,	many	will	be	the	temptations.	But	if	you	can
stick	 it,	 if	 you	 can	 remain	 on	 the	 path	 against	 all	 odds,	 one	 day	 intelligence
flowers.
It	is	almost	like	a	seed:	the	seed	cannot	know	what	is	going	to	happen,	the	seed
has	never	known	 the	 flower.	And	 the	seed	cannot	even	believe	 that	he	has	 the
potentiality	 to	become	a	beautiful	 flower.	Long	 is	 the	 journey,	and	 it	 is	always
safer	 not	 to	 go	 on	 that	 journey	 because	 unknown	 is	 the	 path,	 nothing	 is
guaranteed.	Nothing	can	be	guaranteed.
Thousand	and	one	are	the	hazards	of	the	journey,	many	are	the	pitfalls	--	and	the
seed	is	secure,	hidden	inside	a	hard	core.	But	the	seed	tries,	it	makes	an	effort,	it
drops	the	hard	shell	which	is	its	security,	it	starts	moving.	Immediately	the	fight
starts:	 the	 struggle	with	 the	 soil,	with	 the	 stones,	with	 the	 rocks.	And	 the	 seed
was	very	hard	and	the	sprout	will	be	very,	very	soft	and	dangers	will	be	many.-
There	was	no	danger	 for	 the	 seed,	 the	 seed	could	have	 survived	 for	millennia,
but	 for	 the	 sprout	 many	 are	 the	 dangers.	 But	 the	 sprout	 starts:	 towards	 the
unknown,	towards	the	sun,	towards	the	source	of	light,	not	knowing	where,	not
knowing	why.	Great	is	the	cross	to	be	carried	but	a	dream	possesses	the	seed	and
the	seed	moves.	One	day....	And	there	is	much	competition:	other	trees	are	there,
other	plants	are	there,	and	he	has	to	cross	all	of	them	because	only	then	will	the
sun	and	the	sky	be	available.	And	then,	no	one	knows.
But	one	day	it	flowers,	it	happens.
The	same	is	the	path	for	man.	It	is	arduous.	Much	courage	will	be	needed.
It	 is	 said	 about	 Dr.	 Albert	 Schweitzer	 that	 he	 was	 playing	 host	 to	 several
European	visitors	at	the	hospital	in	Lambarene	in	French	Equatorial	Africa.
'This	heat	is	unbearable,'	one	of	the	visitors	moaned.'What	is	the	temperature?'
'I	don't	know,'	said	Schweitzer.'I	don't	have	a	thermometer	here.'
'No	thermometer?'
'No,'	 replied	 the	 doctor.	 'If	 I	 knew	 how	 hot	 it	was	 I	 don't	 think	 I'd	 be	 able	 to
endure	it	either.'
People	 remain	unintelligent	because	 if	you	know,	 if	you	start	understanding,	 it
will	be	almost	impossible	to	endure	the	life	that	you	are	living.	You	are	living	in
hell.
I	have	heard	about	a	man,	a	very	intellectual	man,	a	philosopher,	who	died.	He
came	naked	before	God	and	God	opened	 the	book	of	 the	 life	of	 the	man.	God
went	 on	 to	 recount	 all	 the	 sins	 of	 the	man	written	 therein.	The	man	 had	 been
guilty	 of	 practically	 all	 sins	 including	 cruelty,	 lack	 of	 charity,	 thievery,
ingratitude,	 disloyalty,	 lust	 and	 lack	 of	 love.	 To	 all	 these	 charges	 the	 man
answered,	'Even	so	did	I.'
Thereupon	God	closed	 the	book	of	 the	 life	of	 the	man	and	said,	 'Surely,	 I	will
send	you	to	hell.'
The	man	said	he	could	not	do	so	because	hell	was	where	he	had	always	lived.
So	 then	God,	 feeling	a	 little	disturbed	 that	he	 could	not	 send	 this	man	 to	hell,
feeling	almost	impotent,	not	knowing	what	to	do....	Because	he	was	right	--	how
can	you	send	a	man	to	hell	who	has	always	lived	in	hell?	So	then	God	said	he
would	send	him	to	heaven
--	-just	to	save	his	ego.
And	the	man	cried	out,'Thou	canst	not!'
And	God	said,	'Wherefore	can	I	not	send	thee	to	heaven?'
And	the	man	answered	and	said,	'Because	never,	in	no	place,	have	I	been	able	to
imagine	it.'
And	there	was	silence	in	the	House	of	Judgement.
How	can	you	send	a	man	to	heaven	who	cannot	even	imagine	it,	who	has	never
tasted	it?
How	 can	 you	 send	 a	man	 to	 heaven	who	 has	 not	 created	 it	 in	 his	 own	 soul?
Impossible.
He	defeated	God.	Hell	is	not	possible	because	he	has	lived	there	and	there	is	no
other	hell.	Heaven	is	not	possible	unless	you	create	it.	Unless	you	carry	it	within
yourself	you	cannot	find	it	anywhere.
It	is	said	in	all	the	religious	books	of	the	world	that	saints	go	to	heaven,	but	it	is	a
half-statement.	They	go	to	heaven	because	they	live	in	heaven;	they	go	to	heaven
because	they	have	created	their	heaven.	In	fact,	to	be	in	heaven,	you	will	have	to
have	heaven	within	you	--	there	is	no	other	way.
To	be	intelligent	is	to	create	your	own	heaven,	is	to	create	your	own	happiness,
otherwise	there	is	none.	If	you	create	it,	you	have	it.	It	is	just	like	breathing:	if
you	breathe	you	are	alive,	 if	you	don't	breathe	you	are	not	alive.	 If	you	create
happiness,	 you	 are	 happy;	 if	 you	 don't	 create,	 you	 are	 unhappy.	 Unhappiness
needs	no	creativity	on	your	part.
Unhappiness	 is	 a	 negative	 state,	 it	 need	 not	 be	 created.	 Happiness	 is	 not
negative,	it	is	a	positive	state,	it	has	to	be	created.	Absence	can	be	there	but	the
presence	has	to	be	created.
Remember	 it	 and	 don't	 become	 victims	 of	 such	 quotes.	 In	 the	West	 there	 are
many	foolish	statements	in	circulation.	These	statements	may	appear	to	be	very
penetrating	--
they	are	not.
The	second	question:
Question	1
DURING	 MY	 DANCING	 MEDITATION	 I	 KEPT	 HAVING	 FLASHES
ABOUT
WHAT	YOU	SAID	CONCERNING	THE	SOCIETY,	DRUGS,	ETC.	AND
WONDERING	 THAT	 NOW	 THAT	 I	 AM	 INTOXICATED	 BY	 THE
ULTIMATE
DRUG,	 YOU,	 OSHO,	 CAN	 ANYONE	 TAKE	 THAT	 AWAY	 FROM	 ME?
BRING	ME
DOWN	FROM	THAT	ETERNAL	HIGH?
No	one	except	you.	You	can	destroy	it,	nobody	else.	It	 is	 totally	your	creation.
You	can	destroy	it	or	you	can	nourish	it.	Remember	it,	because	it	is	very	difficult
to	move	on	heights.	We	are	not	attuned	for	heights,	we	are	attuned	for	crawling
on	the	earth.	That's	why	whenever	you	attain	to	a	high	you	cannot	remain	on	that
altitude	for	long.	Sooner	or	later	you	descend	back	into	the	dark	valley	of	your
life.	Then	it	becomes	just	a	memory.
Not	 only	 that,	 it	 becomes	 a	 frustration	 because	 now	 you	 know	 that	 height	 is
possible.	And	you	have	 lost	your	path,	you	are	back	 in	 the	valley.	 In	 fact,	you
were	better	before,	in	a	way	--	you	had	not	known	the	height,	you	had	not	known
the	light,	so	you	were	thinking	that	the	valley	is	the	only	life.	Now	that	you	have
tasted	something	you	will	never	be	at	rest	in	the	valley.
So	 if	 you	 are	 feeling	 high,	 if	 you	 are	 touching	 some	 altitude	 within	 your
consciousness,	if	some	sky	is	opening,	then	be	very	careful	because	very	fragile
is	the	flower	of	consciousness	--	very,	very	fragile.	It	can	be	destroyed	in	a	single
moment	of	unawareness.	It	needs	lives	together	to	create	it	and	a	single	moment
of	unalertness	to	destroy	it.	It	is	very	fragile.
But	nobody	else	can	take	it	from	you,	that	thing	is	certain,	nobody	can	rob	you
of	it.	It	is	something	within	you.	So	you	can	be	killed	but	it	cannot	be	killed.	It	is
absolutely	yours.
Even	if	I	want	to	take	it	back	from	you,	I	cannot	take	it	because,	in	fact,	I	have
not	given	it	to	you.	You	have	given	it	to	yourself.
My	presence	may	have	helped	as	a	catalytic	agent	but	 that's	all.	Even	I	cannot
take	it	back	from	you.
But	don't	be	satisfied	with	 this	--	 that	nobody	can	take	 it	 --	you	can	destroy	it.
The	danger	will	come	from	you,	the	trouble	will	come	from	you.	So	don't	look
around	 for	 the	 enemy,	 look	 within.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 gift	 that	 you	 have	 given	 to
yourself,	now	watch	for	the	inner	enemy:	the	anger,	the	hatred,	the	jealousy,	the
envy.	They	are	watching.	They	are	watching	you	flying	so	high,	they	are	getting
ready	 to	 pull	 you	 down,	 to	 pull	 you	 back	 to	 the	 valley	where	 they	 think	 you
belong.	Watch	there	--	the	enemy	is	within	just	as	the	friend	is	within.
Mahavir	 has	 said	 that	 you	 are	 your	 enemy	 if	 you	 are	 not	 alert,	 you	 are	 your
friend	if	you	are	alert.
A	 great	 treasure	 is	 happening	 to	 you.	 You	 cannot	 remain	 unconscious	 as	 you
were	 before	 because	 before	 you	 had	 no	 treasure,	 there	 was	 nothing	 to	 be
guarded.	Now	 the	more	 you	grow	 inside,	 the	more	 you	will	 have	 to	 guard,	 to
protect.
The	third	question:
Question	2
I	KEPT	WONDERING	WHAT	YOU	MEANT	ABOUT	OUR	HAVING	TO	GO
ASTRAY	--	WONDERING	WHAT	I	WOULD	HAVE	TO	DO,	AND	THEN
SUDDENLY	REALISED,	WE	ARE	ASTRAY.'
True.	A	great	 insight	has	happened	 to	you.	Man	 is	 astray.	The	 sin	 is	not	 to	be
committed,	it	has	already	been	committed.	That	is	the	meaning	of	the	Christian
parable	that	Adam	committed	the	sin	--	the	first	man.	Man	is	born	astray,	that	is
the	meaning	of	it,	we	are	already	in	sin.
The	word	 'sin'	 is	 very,	 very	 beautiful.	 The	 original	 root	 from	which	 it	 comes
means
'missing	the	target'.	Sin	does	not	mean	sin,	it	simply	means	missing	the	target.
We	have	gone	astray,	from	the	very	beginning	man	is	astray,	so	there;s	nothing
for	you	 to	do	 to	go	astray.	Wherever	you	are	you	are	missing	your	goal,	 your
target.	 You	 don't	 know	who	 you	 are,	 you	 don't	 know	why	 you	 are,	 you	 don't
know	 where	 you	 are	 headed	 --	 and	 for	 what.	 You	 just	 go	 on	 like	 driftwood,
wherever	the	winds	carry	you.
Remember,	 this	 is	 the	first	 realisation,'I	am	astray,'	which	will	make	you	come
back	to	the	path.	The	moment	Adam	realised,'I	have	committed	the	sin,'	he	was
returning	 back	 home.	 The	 moment	 you	 realise	 that	 whatsoever	 you	 are	 and
wherever	you	are	you	are	wrong....	 It	 is	 very	difficult	 to	 realise	 it	 because	 the
mind	tries	to	protect,	to	rationalise.
The	mind	belongs	to	the	world.	It	goes	on	protecting	you	--	not	exactly	you	but
your
'astrayness'.	You	will	have	to	drop	all	protections,	all	rationalisations.	Once	you
understand	 that	 you	 are	 astray,	 you	 suddenly	 realise	 that	 you	 have	 nothing	 to
save	in	this	world	--	the	wealth,	the	power,	the	prestige,	nothing	is	of	worth.	It	is
all	 rubbish.	And	 you	 are	 losing	 something	 tremendously	 valuable	 for	 rubbish;
you	are	selling	yourself	and	purchasing	toys;	you	are	destroying	the	possibility
of	creating	a	soul	for	nothing.
This	is	a	basic	realisation,	the	first	breakthrough.	Feel	happy	about	it	if	you	have
recognised	the	fact	that	you	are	astray,	if	you	have	recognised	the	fact	that	you
are	wrong
--	not	wrong	 in	any	particular	way,	but	 in	a	general	 sense.	Not	wrong	because
you	are	angry,	not	wrong	because	you	are	full	of	hatred,	not	wrong	because	you
have	done	this	or	that	--	not	in	any	particular	way	but	in	a	general	sense	one	feels
one	 is	 astray.	 Then	 only	 the	 door	 opens	 for	 growth,	 then	 suddenly	 you	 start
looking	 in	 another	 dimension.	 Then	 you	 don't	 look	 out,	 you	 start	 looking	 in
because	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 outside	 will	 lead	 you	 more	 and	 more	 away.	 The
more	 you	 chase	 shadows	 outside,	 the	more	 you	will	 be	 losing	 yourself	 in	 the
world.
One	 starts	 closing	one's	 eyes,	 one	 starts	 feeling	 and	 touching	one's	 being.	The
first	 thing	 to	 know	 is	 'who	 am	 I?'	 --	 everything	 else	 is	 secondary.	And	 if	 this
basic	 thing	 is	 solved,	 if	 this	 basic	 problem	 is	 solved,	 if	 this	 basic	 mystery	 is
penetrated,	then	all	else	is	solved	automatically.	And	if	you	don't	solve	this,	and
you	don't	answer	the	basic	quest	of	man	--
'Who	am	I?'	--	'then	whatsoever	you	do	is	irrelevant.
What	 are	 you	 doing?	You	 are	 not	 trying	 to	 realise	 yourself,	 you	 are	 trying	 to
compete	 with	 others.	 Nobody	 is	 trying	 to	 be	 oneself,	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to
defeat	the	other.	The	whole	world	lives	like	a	competitive	madhouse:	somebody
purchases	a	car,	now	you	have	to	purchase	a	car,	and	a	bigger	one.	You	may	not
need	it	but	now	your	ego	is	hurt.
Somebody	makes	 a	 big	 house,	 now	 you	 have	 to	make	 one,	 and	 a	 bigger	 one.
This	is	how	life	goes	on	being	wasted.	Why	should	you	be	worried	what	others
are	doing?	That	is	their	thing	to	do;	if	they	feel	good,	let	them	do	it.	You	should
look	at	your	own	need.
But	there	are	two	types	of	people	ordinarily:	one	who	is	competing	with	others
and	 another	 type	who	 goes	 on	 condemning	 others	 that	 they	 are	 doing	wrong.
Both	are	wrong.
Who	 are	 you	 to	 decide?	 If	 somebody	 is	making	 a	 big	 house,	who	 are	 you	 to
decide	if	he	is	doing	right	or	wrong?	It	is	none	of	your	concern.	It	is	for	him	to
think	about.	You	should	only	think	about	whether	what	you	are	doing	is	for	you
to	do.
People	go	to	absurd	lengths	in	competition,	and	people	go	on	dying	every	day.
One	 day	 death	 possesses	 you,	 then	 you	 remember	 that	 your	 whole	 life	 was
wasted	 with	 fighting	 others.	 And	 it	 was	 pointless.	 You	 should	 have	 put	 your
whole	energy	into	realising	yourself.
I	have	heard	a	very	beautiful	anecdote.
A	Catholic	church	and	a	synagogue	happened	to	be	on	opposite	sides	of	the	same
street.
And	 a	 rivalry	 sprang	 up	 between	 the	 parish	 priest	 and	 the	 rabbi.	 When	 the
church	 was	 repainted,	 the	 synagogue	 had	 to	 be	 stuccoed.	 When	 the	 priest
organised	a	parish	procession	of	one	 thousand	witnesses	 through	 the	 town,	 the
rabbi	organised	a	procession	of	two	thousand	of	the	faithful.
The	priest	bought	a	new	car,	so	 the	rabbi	bought	a	bigger	one.	Then	 the	priest
had	a	solemn	ceremony	outside	his	church	of	blessing	his	new	car	and	the	rabbi
came	out	with	a	large	pair	of	pliers,	went	up	to	his	car	and	cut	three	inches	off
the	exhaust	pipe.
Circumcision!	 People	 go	 on	 to	 absurd	 lengths.	 One	 has	 to	 defeat	 the	 other
anyhow.	One	has	to	take	over	the	other.
Remember,	 this	foolishness	is	very	ingrained	in	humanity,	and	unless	you	drop
this	 foolishness	you	will	not	be	able	 to	know	yourself,	you	will	not	be	able	 to
come	 back	 home.	 You	 will	 go	 on	 moving	 more	 and	 more	 further	 away,
becoming	more	and	more	astray.	And	one	day	suddenly	you	will	realise	that	the
whole	edifice	has	collapsed.	It	was	foundationless,	you	were	making	a	house	of
cards.	A	small	breeze	came	and	everything	disappeared.	Or,	you	were	trying	to
sail	in	a	paper	boat.
Man	 as	 he	 is,	 is	 simply	 living	 in	 a	 dream	 --	 the	 dream	 of	 the	 ego,	 ambition,
power,	prestige.	The	 religious	man	 is	one	who	has	come	 to	understand	 that	all
this	is	going	astray.
One	day	it	happened	that	I	was	at	Mulla	Nasruddin's	house.	Mulla	Nasruddin's
teenager	son	had	dented	a	fender	of	the	family	car.
'What	did	your	father	say	when	you	told	him?'	I	asked	him.
'Should	I	leave	out	the	cuss	words?'	he	said.
'Yes,	of	course.'
'In	that	case,'	said	the	boy,'he	did	not	say	a	word.'
One	day	when	you	look	back	on	your	life	you	will	not	see	a	single	act	that	was
intelligent
--	all	were	stupidities,	foolishnesses.	You	will	feel	simply	ashamed.	The	sooner
you	realise	it,	the	better.
This	is	what	SANNYAS	is	all	about:	a	recognition	that	the	way	you	have	lived
up	 to	now	was	absurd;	 a	gesture	 that	you	would	 like	 to	discontinue	with	your
past.	By	changing	the	name	and	by	changing	the	dress	nothing	is	changed,	it	is	a
simple	gesture	that	now	you	feel	ashamed	with	the	old	identity.	It	was	so	foolish
that	it	is	better	to	forget	all	about	it.
A	new	nucleus,	a	new	name,	so	you	can	start	afresh.
And	it	is	easier	to	drop	the	past	than	to	renovate	it.	It	is	easier	to	be	completely
cut	off	from	the	past	rather	than	to	modify	it.	You	can	paint	a	foolish	thing,	you
can	modify	it,	but	you	cannot	make	it	wise	--	it	will	remain	foolish.	It	is	better	to
drop	it.
So	if	this	recognition	has	come	to	you	that	we	are	astray,	feel	blessed,	and	don't
forget	it.
Remember	 it	 continuously.	 Unless	 you	 have	 come	 back	 to	 the	 path,	 go	 on
remembering	 it.	 Just	 recognising	 it	 once	 won't	 do,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 live	 it,
remember	 it	 for	 a	 long	 time	 continuously,	 again	 and	 again,	 so	 the	 hammering
continues	--	whatsoever	you	have	done	in	the	past,	it	is	finished.
At	least	if	you	remember	that	it	was	all	wrong...	and	I	say	ALL	wrong.	Don't	try
to	decide	that	a	few	things	were	good.	I	 insist:	either	ALL	things	are	wrong	or
ALL	things	are	right.	There	is	no	other	way.	It	is	not	possible	that	a	foolish	man
can	do	a	few	things	that	are	right.	And	the	vice	versa	is	also	not	possible	that	a
wise	man	can	do	a	few	things	that	are	wrong.	A	wise	man	does	ALL	right	and	a
fool	goes	on	doing	ALL	wrong.	But	the	fool	would	like	to	choose	at	least	a	few
things	right,	the	fool	would	say,'Yes,	I	have	done	many	things	wrong,	but	not	all.'
Then	those	things	that	he	saves	and	says	were	right	will	become	the	centre	for
his	ego	again.	So	be	totally	frustrated	with	your	past.
Fritz	 Perls	 used	 to	 say	 that	 all	 therapy	 is	 nothing	 but	 skillful	 frustration.	 The
great	 therapist	 is	one	who	goes	on	frustrating	you	skillfully	--	 that's	what	I	am
doing	here.	I	have	to	show	you	that	whatsoever	you	have	been	doing	was	wrong,
because	 only	 that	 understanding	 can	 save	 you.	 Once	 you	 recognise	 that	 the
whole	past	was	wrong,	you	simply	drop	it,	you	don't	bother	to	choose.	There	is
nothing	 to	 choose.	 It	 all	 came	 out	 of	 your	 unawareness	 and	 it	was	 all	wrong.
Your	hatred	was	wrong,	your	love	also;	your	anger	was	wrong,	your	compassion
also.	 If	 you	 seek	 deep	 down	 you	 will	 always	 find	 wrong	 reasons	 for	 your
compassion	 and	 wrong	 reasons	 for	 your	 love.	 A	 foolish	 man	 is	 foolish	 and
whatsoever	he	does	is	foolish.
So	 it	 will	 have	 to	 be	 remembered	 continuously,	 it	 should	 become	 a	 constant
remembrance
--	what	Buddha	used	to	call	mindfulness.	One	should	remain	mindful	so	it	is	not
repeated	again.	Because	only	mindfulness	will	protect	and	you	will	not	be	able
to	repeat	your	past	again	--	otherwise	the	mind	tends	to	repeat	it.
The	fourth	question:
Question	3
OSHO,	 I	HAVE	FALLEN	 IN	LOVE	WITH	CHUANG	TZU,	WITH	 JOSHU,
WITH
MUMON,	WITH	BODHIDHARMA.	HOW	CAN	I	NOT	FOLLOW	THEM?	I
FEEL
ALREADY	 THEY	 HAVE	 TRANSFORMED	 ME.	 HOW	 CAN	 I	 NOT	 BE
THANKFUL?
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote	first.
When	 Rabbi	 Nor,	 Rabbi	 Moudekai's	 son,	 assumed	 the	 succession	 after	 his
father's	death,	his	disciples	noted	that	there	were	a	number	of	ways	in	which	he
conducted	himself	differently	to	his	father,	and	asked	him	about	this.
'I	do	just	as	my	father	did,'	he	replied.'He	did	not	imitate	and	I	do	not	imitate.'
Meditate	 over	 this	 anecdote.	 He	 said,'I	 do	 just	 as	 my	 father	 did.	 He	 did	 not
imitate	and	I	do	not	imitate.'	If	you	really	understand	Joshu,	Bodhidharma	or	me,
you	will	not	imitate
--	because	I	have	not	imitated,	because	Bodhidharma	never	imitated	anybody.
Joshu	used	to	say	to	his	disciples,'If	you	utter	Buddha's	name,	go	and	rinse	your
mouth	immediately.'	Joshu	also	used	to	say,'If	you	meet	the	Buddha	on	the	way,
kill	him	immediately.'	And	he	used	to	worship	Buddha	every	day.
Ordinarily	Zen	looks	puzzling,	but	it	is	clear-cut.	It	is	following	Buddha.	When
Joshu	says,'If	you	meet	 the	Buddha	on	 the	way	kill	him,'	he	 is	a	 right	disciple
because	that	was	Buddha's	essential	message.	When	Buddha	was	dying,	his	last
utterance	in	this	world	was,'APPO	DEEPO	BHAVA'	--	'Be	a	light	unto	yourself.'
Don't	follow	anybody.	Anand	was	crying,	weeping	because	Buddha	was	leaving
the	 body	 and	 he	 said	 to	 Buddha,'You	 are	 leaving	 and	 I	 have	 not	 yet	 become
enlightened.	 What	 about	 me?	 What	 will	 happen	 to	 me?	 The	 world	 will	 be
absolutely	 dark	 for	 me	 --	 you	 were	 the	 light.	 And	 now	 you	 are	 going.	 Have
compassion	on	us.'	Buddha	opened	his	eyes	and	said,'APPO	DEEPO
BHAVA.	Be	a	light	unto	yourself,	Anand,	nobody	can	be	a	light	for	you.'
When	 Joshu	 says,'Kill	 the	 Buddha	 if	 you	meet	 him	 on	 the	 way,'	 he	 is	 a	 true
follower	of	Buddha.	In	Zen,	following	is	very,	very	delicate.	Great	 intelligence
will	 be	 needed	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 a	 follower	 of	 Zen.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 be	 a
Christian	 or	 a	 Hindu;	 it	 is	 very	 mathematical.	 To	 follow	 Zen	 it	 is	 very,	 very
delicate	and	poetic	--	because	the	very	following	means	not	following;	because
that	is	the	message	of	the	Zen	Masters,	don't	follow.
It	is	reported	that	it	happened	in	China	that	a	Zen	Master	had	organised	a	great
celebration.	People	asked	him	about	it	because	that	type	of	celebration	was	only
arranged	at	one's	Master's	birthday.	Nobody	had	ever	known	this	man	to	follow
anybody.	He	had	been	to	a	certain	Master	but	it	was	known	that	the	Master	had
refused	to	accept	him	as	a	disciple.	So	for	whom	was	he	celebrating?
He	 said,'Because	 that	 Master	 refused	 to	 accept	 me	 as	 his	 disciple,	 he	 is	 my
Master.'
They	 said,'We	don't	 follow.	What	do	you	mean?	When	he	 refused,	he	 refused.
He	never	accepted	you	as	his	disciple.'
He	said,'That's	why	I	am	celebrating.	If	he	had	accepted	me	I	would	have	been
lost.	He	threw	me	to	me,	to	myself.	He	said,	"Be	a	light	unto	yourself."	When	he
rejected,	he	accepted	me.	He	said,	"I	will	not	allow	you	to	imitate	me.	I	will	not
allow	 you	 to	 become	 a	 disciple	 of	 mine.	 I	 will	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 become	 an
imitator,	a	carbon	copy."	His	compassion	was	great,	he	loved	me	tremendously,
that's	why	he	rejected	me.'
Zen	 is	 a	 little	 difficult	 to	 understand;	 its	 ways	 are	 very	 poetic,	 zig-zag.
Christianity	 is	 like	 a	 super-highway;	Zen	 is	more	 like	 a	 zig-zag	 labyrinth	 in	 a
forest.	It	turns,	moves,	sometimes	in	this	direction,	sometimes	in	that,	sometimes
in	almost	the	opposite	direction
--	you	were	going	to	the	east	and	suddenly	you	turn	and	start	moving	to	the	west.
But	that's	how	it	is	and	that's	how	it	should	be,	because	life	is	not	mathematics
and	 life	 is	not	 like	a	super-highway.	Life	 is	wild.	 In	 fact,	no	path	exists	 --	you
walk	and	you	create	your	own	path.
The	questioner	has	said,	I	HAVE	FALLEN	IN	LOVE	WITH	CHUANG	TZU....
Good,	but	falling	in	love	with	Chuang	Tzu	means	falling	in	love	with	oneself.	If
you	want	 to	 follow	Chuang	Tzu	 you	will	 have	 to	 follow	 yourself,	 there	 is	 no
other	way.	People	like	Chuang	Tzu	don't	give	you	ordinary	commandments,	they
don't	give	you	ten	commandments	--	do	this,	don't	do	that.	They	don't	give	you	a
morality.	 In	 fact,	 they	 don't	 give	 you	 any	 discipline,	 they	 simply	 impart	 their
awareness,	 because	 they	 know	 that	 any	 commandment,	 any	 fixed
commandment,	is	going	to	become	a	slavery	to	you,	it	will	not	liberate	you.	And
life	changes	so	much	that	something	that	is	right	this	moment	may	not	be	right
the	next	moment,	and	you	will	be	caught	in	your	discipline.	Discipline	is	rigid,
discipline	 is	 dead,	 discipline	 never	 changes,	 discipline	 is	 not	 a	 process.	 Once
fixed,	 it	 is	 fixed	 forever.	 Look	 at	 the	 Judaic	 ten	 commandments.	Moses	 fixed
them,	he	brought	these	commandments	written	on	a	stone,	slabs	of	stone,	dead.
Now	Jews	and	Christians	have	 followed	 them	and	you	may	not	 improve	upon
them,	you	may	not	 change	 them.	Life	goes	on	changing.	They	have	become	a
dead	weight	and	nobody	follows	them,	but	still	people	go	on	paying	lip	service
to	them.
Zen	Masters	have	not	given	any	rigid	discipline	to	anybody.	They	simply	impart
their	 awareness.	 They	 say,'You	 be	 aware	 and	 you	 will	 find	 your	 discipline
moment	to	moment.'
I	have	heard,	it	happened.
The	 sales	 manager	 believed	 in	 super-efficiency.'Jones,'	 he	 said	 to	 the	 new
traveller,'you	will	take	the	nine	forty-five	to	Leeds.	Your	task	there	will	take	you
two	hours	and	fifty	minutes	and	you	will	have	time	for	a	sandwich	and	a	cup	of
tea	 in	 the	 station	 buffet	 before	 catching	 the	 three	 forty-five	 to	Manchester.	At
Manchester	go	straight	to	Mennin	and	Company	and	get	the	details	of	that	order.
That	will	 take	you	 thirty-five	minutes	which	will	enable	you	 to	catch	 the	 five-
thirty	back	here.	Is	that	all	clear?'
'Yes,	sir,'	said	the	helpless	representative.	And	off	he	went.
But	at	one	 the	 sales	manager	was	enraged	 to	 receive	a	 telegram	 from	 the	new
salesman	which	read:	'Leeds	buffet	out	of	sandwiches.	Stop.	What	shall	I	do?'
This	is	going	to	happen.	If	details	are	so	important,	this	is	going	to	happen.
Zen	Masters	have	not	given	any	details.	They	simply	impart	their	awareness	and
say,'You	be	aware.	Awareness	will	show	you	the	way	in	each	moment.	What	is
needed,	 you	 will	 know.	 Respond	 knowingly,	 alert,	 that's	 all.'	 How	 can	 it	 be
decided	beforehand	what	you	should	do?	Who	knows?	Each	circumstance	is	so
unique	 that	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 decide.	 And	 people	 who	 decide	 always	 encage
humanity,	imprison	humanity.
Zen	is	a	path	of	liberation.	It	liberates.	It	is	freedom	from	the	first	step	to	the	last.
You	are	not	required	to	follow	any	rules;	you	are	required	to	find	out	your	own
rules	and	your	own	life	in	the	light	of	awareness.
So	keep	your	light	of	awareness	there,	keep	your	lamp	burning	--	that's	all.	Then
you	know	what	to	do,	where	to	move,	where	not	to	move.	Once	a	rigid	discipline
is	given	it	makes	you	a	prisoner.
So	if	you	love	Bodhidharma	you	are	falling	in	a	very	dangerous	love.	If	you	love
me	you	have	 fallen	 in	 a	very	dangerous	 love.	 I	 am	not	going	 to	give	you	 any
rigid	discipline.
People	 ordinarily	 expect	 everything	 ready-made.	 They	want	 somebody	 else	 to
fix	their	lives	--	because	that's	how	they	have	been	brought	up.	Everybody	says
to	them	from	the	very	childhood,'Do	this,	don't	do	that.'	They	have	lived	on	do's
and	don't's.	From	the	mothers	milk	they	have	received	commandments	and	they
don't	 know,	 if	 they	are	 left	 to	 themselves,	what	 to	do.	Even	 if	 sometimes	 they
want	 to	be	left	by	themselves	--	because	there	 is	a	deep	urge	to	be	free	--	 they
don't	 know	what	 to	 do.	Again	 they	will	 start	 finding	 somebody	 to	 lead	 them.
People	 have	 been	 forced	 to	 become	 followers.	 You	 are	 not	 being	 trusted	 to
become	your	own	leader	and	your	own	follower.
Zen	is	a	way	which	makes	you	the	follower	and	the	master.	The	Master	is	there
just	to	indicate:	subtle	indications,	very	indirect.	And	if	you	are	looking	for	rigid
rules	you	are	looking	in	a	wrong	direction.
And	remember,	you	say	that	you	have	fallen	in	love	with	them,	how	can	you	not
follow	 them?	Love	does	not	 force	anybody	 to	 follow:	 love	wants	 to	make	you
free,	love	wants	to	give	you	freedom.	In	fact,	 the	person	who	is	forcing	you	to
follow	him	may	be	on	an	ego	trip	himself,	may	be	trying	to	dominate	you,	may
be	 trying	 to	 destroy	 you,	may	 be	 trying	 to	 cripple	 you.	No,	 people	who	 have
known	don't	destroy	you.	They	help	you	to	be	yourself,	they	don't	force	you	to
follow	them.	They	only	want	you	to	understand	them.
That's	enough.	Understanding	is	more	than	enough.	Nothing	else	is	needed.
Imitation	 is	 a	 substitute	 for	 understanding,	 and	 a	 very	 poor	 substitute.	 If
understanding	is	there,	there	is	no	question	of	imitating	or	of	following:	you	will
follow	understanding.
Keep	 this	 very	 clear:	 if	 you	 follow	your	 understanding,	 you	will	 be	 following
me.	By	and	by	you	will	see	that	your	path	and	my	path	are	running	parallel.	By
and	by	you	will	see	that	you	are	following	me	if	you	follow	your	understanding.
If	you	follow	me	and	forget	your	understanding	sooner	or	later	you	will	see	that	I
am	gone	and	you	are	left	in	darkness.	The	real	way	to	follow	me	is	not	to	follow
me	but	to	follow	your	understanding
--	then	even	when	I	am	gone	you	will	be	following	me.	It	looks	paradoxical	but
Zen	is	paradoxical.
HOW	CAN	I	NOT	FOLLOW	THEM?	I	FEEL	THAT	ALREADY	THEY	HAVE
TRANSFORMED	ME	THROUGH	YOU.	HOW	CAN	I	NOT	BE	THANKFUL?
Be	thankful,	be	grateful,	but	there	is	no	need	to	follow	them	or	imitate	them.
Gratefulness	is	a	totally	different	thing.	Thankfulness	is	a	totally	different	thing
than	following	a	person.	Gratitude	is	needed,	it	is	good	to	be	grateful,	it	will	help
you	to	flower.	Gratitude	never	cripples	anybody,	but	if	just	because	of	gratitude
you	 think	 that	 you	 have	 to	 follow,	 then	 already	 you	 have	 destroyed	 gratitude,
already	 you	 have	 destroyed	 the	 freedom,	 the	 flowering	 that	 gratitude	 gives	 to
you,	already	you	have	started	to	pay.
If	you	think	by	following,	you	are	paying	a	debt,	then	you	are	not	grateful,	you
are	bargaining.
One	day	suddenly	you	will	see	that	you	have	paid	enough.	Or	you	may	even	get
annoyed	 that	 you	 have	 paid	 more	 than	 enough.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 paying	 your
Master	 in	 any	way	 trying	 to	 pay	 the	 debt	 --	 then	 you	 don't	 love	 your	Master,
because	 these	 things	 cannot	 be	 returned	 back,	 there	 is	 no	 way.	 You	 can	 pay
everybody	else	back	but	you	can	never	pay	your	Master	back	--	because	it	is	not
a	bargain,	it	is	not	a	commodity.	He	gives	you	out	of	his	fullness,	he	gives	you
because	he	has	too	much	and	he	does	not	know	what	to	do	with	it,	he	gives	you
because	he	has	 to	give	 --	 in	 fact,	he	 is	grateful	 to	you	 that	you	accept	 it,	he	 is
grateful	to	you	that	you	didn't	reject	his	gift.	You	could	have	rejected	it.	It	is	such
a	 deep	 exchange	 that	 the	 Master	 is	 grateful	 to	 the	 disciple	 that	 the	 disciple
accepted	his	gift,	and	the	disciple	 is	grateful	 to	 the	Master	 that	he	 thought	him
worthy.	But	there	is	no	returning,	you	cannot	pay	it	back.	That	would	be	almost
profane,	a	sacrilege.
Be	grateful,	be	thankful	forever	and	ever,	but	don't	try	to	make	it	a	duty	--	that
because	you	are	grateful	you	have	to	follow	--	otherwise	sooner	or	later	you	will
get	very	angry.
If	you	are	grateful	towards	me	because	you	have	to	be,	then	sooner	or	later	you
will	be	angry	also.
Duty	is	not	a	good	word,	it	is	a	four-letter	dirty	word.	Love	is	religious;	duty	is
social.
Love	is	spiritual;	duty	is	moral.	Love	is	of	the	transcendental;	duty	is	legal.	You
serve	your	mother	because	you	say,'This	is	my	duty.'	Better	not	serve	her,	leave
her	and	let	her	die,	but	don't	call	it	duty,	it	is	ugly.	If	it	is	love,	from	where	does
this	word	 'duty'	 come	 in?	Duty	 is	 something	 forced	upon	you;	 reluctantly	 you
have	 to	do	 it,	 it	 is	a	 social	obligation,	a	commitment.	 It	 is	because	she	 is	your
mother	 that	you	have	 to	do	 it	 --	not	because	of	 love.	 If	you	 love	her	 then	you
serve	her,	but	then	service	has	a	fragrance.	You	are	not	burdened,	deep	down	you
are	not	thinking	about	when	she	is	going	to	die,	deep	down	you	are	not	planning
that	 when	 she	 dies	 you	 will	 be	 finished	 with	 this	 burden.	 You	 are	 flowing,
flowing	while	you	are	serving	her;	you	are	enjoying	it,	 it	 is	a	delight	 that	your
mother	is	still	alive.	When	your	wife	is	just	your	wife	and	not	your	beloved,	then
it	is	a	duty,	but	when	you	love	your	wife,	then	it	is	different.
A	friend	of	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	talking	to	him.	He	said,'My	wife	is	an	angel.'
Mulla	said,'But	mine	is	still	alive.'
We	don't	love	each	other,	we	have	forgotten	the	language	of	love.
Feel	 thankful,	 feel	 loving,	deep	 in	gratitude,	but	go	on	your	way.	Try	 to	create
more	awareness	and	understanding	and	intelligence.	Radiate	with	intelligence	to
express	your	gratitude	--	there	is	no	other	way.
The	fifth	question:
Question	4
I	HAVE	GOT	A	FUTURE-EGO.	 IT	KEEPS	TELLING	ME	WHAT	A	SUPER
PERSON
I	AM	GOING	TO	TURN	OUT	TO	BE	IN	A	FEW	YEARS'	TIME	WHEN	I	AM
FINISHED	 WITH	 THIS	 TRIP.	 IT	 IS	 VERY	 SMUG	 AND	 IN	 THE
MEANTIME,	LIKE
RIGHT	NOW,	IT	IS	PRETENDING	TO	BE	SO	HUMBLE,	SO	MALLEABLE,
SO
ADAPTABLE,	AND	SO	UNTOUCHABLE.	COULD	YOU	HELP	ME	TO	GET
AT	IT?
IT	IS	BUGGING	ME.
Who	is	this	me?
If	you	think	the	ego	is	bugging	you,	who	are	you?	It	is	again	an	ego	trip.	Now
the	ego	is	taking	a	very	subtle	form.	When	the	ego	is	not,	you	are	not.	Ego	is	all
that	 defines	 you,	 that	 makes	 you	 say	 'i'	 or	 'me'.	 Ego	 is	 your	 definition,	 your
boundary,	ego	divides	you	from	others.	It	 is	ego,	that's	why	you	can	say	 'i'	and
'you'.	If	the	ego	disappears,	who	is	'i'
and	who	is	'you'?
Now	you	are	taking	a	very	subtle	form.	You	say	the	ego	is	bugging	you.	Who	are
you	then?	Just	see	the	point.	If	you	don't	see	the	point	you	can	go	on	playing	the
game	ad	infinitum.	You	can	become	humble	and	the	ego	will	be	there.	You	can
even	 become	 egoless	 and	 the	 ego	 will	 be	 there.	 Ego	 is	 very	 subtle	 and	 very
cunning	are	its	ways.
A	psychiatrist	once	asked	his	patient,	Mulla	Nasruddin,	if	the	latter	suffered	from
fantasies	of	self-importance.
'No,'	 replied	 the	Mulla.'On	 the	 contrary,	 I	 think	of	myself	 as	much	 less	 than	 I
really	am.'
Now	 you	 are	 going	 on	 a	 very	 pious	 trip.	 The	 ego	 can	 become	 pious.	 It	 can
become	so	humble	that	nobody	can	feel	it.	You	may	even	start	feeling,'Now	it	is
not	bugging	me,'
but	if	'me'	is	there,	it	is	there.
The	poison	has	become	very	purified	but	a	purified	poison	 is	more	poisonous.
That's	 why	 ordinary	 people	 have	 ordinary	 egos,	 but	 the	 so-called	 religious
people	have	pious	egos	--
they	are	more	dangerous.
And	you	say,	I	HAVE	GOT	A	FUTURE-EGO.	No,	the	ego	is	always	of	the	past,
it	cannot	be	of	the	future.	Even	when	you	are	thinking	of	the	future	it	is	nothing
but	projected	past.	Even	if	you	are	thinking,'Tomorrow	I	am	going	to	become	the
greatest	 man	 in	 the	 world,'	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 greatest	 man	 and	 the	 idea	 of	 the
tomorrow	both	come	from	your	past.	The	past	accumulated	 is	 the	substance	of
the	ego.	In	the	past	many	things	were	happy	and	many	things	were	unhappy	--	in
the	future	you	will	like	to	modify.	You	would	like	to	drop	all	that	was	unpleasant
and	you	would	like	to	collect	all	that	was	pleasant.	That	is	your	future	ego,	but	it
is	not	future,	it	is	simply	the	past	reshuffled,	chosen	again,	selected.	In	the	past
there	were	many	things	you	did	not	like	--	in	the	future	you	will	drop	them.	But
the	ego	belongs	to	the	past,	ego	IS	of	the	past,	ego	is	a	ghost	following	you	--	it
comes	from	the	past.	And	it	is	always	dead.
Just	think:	if	you	have	no	past,	can	you	have	any	ego?	Meditate	over	it.	If	your
mind	 is	 suddenly	 completely	 washed	 of	 the	 past	 --	 now	 there	 are	 techniques
available,	mindwashing	techniques	--	if	your	mind	is	completely	washed	of	the
past	will	you	have	any	ego?	How	will	you	have	an	ego?	You	will	again	become
like	a	child,	again	innocent,	you	will	again	have	to	start	from	ABC.	Again	you
will	create	an	ego	because	mindwashing	cannot	help,	 the	roots	are	deeper.	The
seeds	are	hidden	very,	very	deep	inside	you;	they	will	again	sprout,	again	the	tree
of	the	ego	will	start	spreading.	But	it	is	of	the	ego,	it	is	of	the	past.
You	don't	know	 the	 future	 so	how	can	you	 think	about	 it?	You	can	only	 think
about	the	past	redecorated,	refined,	modified.
IT	KEEPS	TELLING	ME	WHAT	A	SUPER	PERSON	I	WILL	TURN	OUT	TO
BE	IN
A	FEW	YEARS'	TIME	WHEN	I	AM	FINISHED	WITH	THIS	TRIP.	If	this	is	a
trip,	you	will	never	be	finished	with	it.	You	may	be	finished	with	this	but	 then
you	will	choose	another	trip.	Trips	never	end,	they	never	come	to	any	end	--	one
changes	one	train	for	another,	one	town	for	another,	one	master	for	another,	one
religion	for	another,	but	 the	trip	continues.	If	 this	 is	not	a	 trip,	only	then	can	it
end.	If	to	be	with	me	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	future,	if	to	be	with	me	is	of	the
present,	 if	 you	 are	 here	 now	with	me,	 then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 trip.	We	 are	 not	 going
anywhere	 --	 at	 least,	 I'm	 not	 going	 anywhere.	 You	may	 be	 but	 I'm	 not	 going
anywhere.	So	with	me	there	is	going	to	be	no	trip.	If	you	want	to	be	with	me	you
have	to	drop	all	trips.
SANNYAS	is	not	a	trip.	It	is	an	understanding	in	which	you	drop	all	the	trips,	in
which	 you	 say,'Now	 I	 have	 arrived.	 Finished.	Now	 I	 am	 not	 going	 anywhere.
Now	 there	 is	no	 future	and	no	desire	 to	go	anywhere.	Now	 I	have	 to	come	 to
terms	with	the	present,	now	I	will	be	living	in	the	herenow.'
If	 SANNYAS	 is	 also	 a	 trip	 for	 you	 then	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help	much.	 It	 will
become	like	other	trips,	sooner	or	later	you	will	be	fed	up	with	it,	frustrated	with
it.	Every	trip	is	going	to	end	in	a	frustration,	no	trip	can	fulfil	you,	because	the
fulfillment	is	in	the	herenow.	A	trip	is	directed	somewhere	else.	A	trip	is	desire,
hope.	And	fulfillment	is	not	a	desire,	not	a	hope;	fulfillment	is	just	to	be	herenow
and	just	to	accept	the	way	you	are,	the	being	you	are.
And	 start	 enjoying.	 I	 am	 not	 preparing	 you	 for	 any	 subtle	 enjoyment	 in	 the
future,	my	whole	method	is	to	enjoy	it	right	now.	Who	knows?	There	may	be	no
future.	Why	waste	this	moment?	Enjoy,	delight!	There	is	no	need	to	sacrifice	this
moment	for	any	other	moment,	because	any	other	moment,	if	it	is	ever	to	come,
is	going	to	be	just	like	this	moment.	So	why	sacrifice	this	moment?	I	am	against
all	sacrifice.	I	don't	tell	you	to	sacrifice	the	present	for	the	future	--	that	has	been
told	to	you	by	your	parents,	your	teachers,	your	educational	system,	your	society.
They	all	 say	 sacrifice	 the	present	 for	 the	 future.	 I	 say	don't	 sacrifice	 anything.
Live	it,	delight	in	it,	so	that	you	can	learn	how	to	be	blissful.	Once	you	know	it,
even	in	the	future	you	will	be	able	to	delight.
Those	moments	are	going	to	be	the	same,	can't	you	see	the	fact?	In	the	past	it	is
the	same	time.	In	fact,	the	very	idea	that	time	is	passing	is	stupid.	We	are	in	time,
nothing	is	passing.	It	is	our	desire	that	gives	the	delusion	of	passing	time.	Once
you	drop	the	desire	suddenly	you	start	 laughing:	nothing	is	passing,	everything
IS.	It	is	the	same,	it	has	always	been	the	same,	it	will	always	be	the	same.	It	is
the	 same	 eternity	 surrounding	you	 like	 an	 ocean.	Live	 in	 it,	 enjoy	 it.	Through
enjoyment	 you	will	 become	 capable	 of	more	 enjoyment	 --	more	 brings	more.
The	richer	people	become	richer,	poorer	people	become	poorer.	Says	Jesus	--	a
very	Zen	saying	--	that	if	you	have,	more	will	be	given	to	you,	and	if	you	don't
have,	even	that	will	be	taken	away.	Very	anti-communist,	very	Zen.	If	you	have,
more	will	be	given	to	you.	And	if	you	don't	have,	even	that	will	be	taken	away
from	you.	It	looks	unjust.
But	 Jesus'	 saying	 is	 tremendous	 truth.	 Yes,	 that	 is	 the	 truth,	 one	 of	 the	 most
fundamental.
If	you	have,	more	will	be	given	to	you	because	you	will	create	the	capacity	by
having	it.
Nobody	is	going	to	give	unless	you	have	more	capacity.
Have	you	watched?	If	you	don't	use	a	machine,	it	lasts.	If	a	watch	is	guaranteed
for	 ten	years	and	you	don't	use	 it	 too	much	 it	will	 last	 for	 twenty	years,	 thirty
years.
But	just	the	opposite	is	the	case	with	life.	If	you	don't	use	it,	it	will	not	last	more,
it	will	simply	disappear	from	you.	If	you	don't	use	your	legs,	legs	will	disappear;
if	you	don't	use	your	eyes,	eyes	will	disappear;	if	you	don't	use	your	awareness,
awareness	 will	 disappear.	 That's	 why	 man	 is	 not	 a	 machine.	 Don't	 use	 the
machine	and	it	lasts	longer;	don't	use	man,	don't	use	your	potentiality,	don't	use
your	body-mind,	and	you	will	start	disappearing.
It	is	life's	nature	--	the	more	you	use	it,	the	more	you	get.
Enjoy,	 otherwise	 your	 capacity	 to	 enjoy	 will	 disappear,	 will	 be	 atrophied,
paralysed.	And	tomorrow	you	will	be	 there	paralysed,	atrophied	--	 then	who	is
going	to	enjoy	tomorrow?
Omar	Khayam	says	that	he	is	worried	about	these	religious	people.	They	say	that
in	 heaven	 wine	 is	 flowing	 in	 streams	 --	 Mohammedans	 say	 that	 --	 but	 they
prohibit	wine	here	on	the	earth.	So	Omar	Khayam	says,'I	am	very	much	worried
about	 these	 people.	 If	 they	 don't	 get	 accustomed	 here,	 how	 are	 they	 going	 to
enjoy	 heaven?	 And	 in	 heaven	 there	 are	 beautiful	 women,	 but	 these	 religious
people	say	don't	enjoy	them	here.	That	is	a	sin.'
Omar	Khayam	seems	to	be	absolutely	logical.	He	says,'What	will	you	be	doing
there?'
When	I	was	reading	Omar	Khayam	I	remembered	an	anecdote.	Two	old	women
were	talking	--	eighty	years	old.	One	woman	said	to	the	other,	'Are	you	aware	or
not	 that	 your	 husband	 is	 chasing	 girls?'	 She	 said,'I	 know	 it,	 but	 let	 him	 chase
them.	He	is	like	a	dog	who	chases	a	car	but	when	he	gets	it,	he	cannot	drive	it.'
So	these	religious	people,	if	they	enter	heaven	some	day,	they	will	be	like	dogs
chasing	cars.	Once	they	get	it,	they	don't	know	what	to	do,	they	cannot	drive	it!
Enjoy.	 Heaven	 is	 not	 in	 the	 future,	 it	 is	 herenow,	 already	 present.	 It	 is	 your
surround.	The	more	you	enjoy,	the	more	you	become	capable	of	enjoying.
Yes,	 Jesus	 is	 right.	 If	 you	have,	more	will	 be	given	 to	 you;	 if	 you	don't	 have,
even	that	will	be	taken	away	from	you.
And	 when	 I	 say	 these	 things,	 remember,	 everything	 is	 addressed	 to	 you
personally.	 The	 mind	 is	 very	 cunning.	 If	 I	 say	 something	 you	 can	 always
rationalise	 that	 I	 am	 saying	 it	 to	 somebody	 else.	 This	 is	 not	 your	 question
certainly,	so	I	am	addressing	it	to	somebody	else	--	you	can	laugh	and	enjoy.	The
question	may	be	anybody's	but	my	answer	is	addressed	to	you	personally.	Never
think	of	the	neighbour;	think	only	of	yourself.
I	will	tell	you	one	anecdote.
Father	Loran	was	delivering	his	Sunday	sermon.'Someday'	he	said,'every	man	in
this	parish	will	die.'
Suddenly	 the	 priest	 heard	 MacLean	 laughing	 in	 the	 third	 row,	 but	 he
continued.'As	I	was	saying,	every	man	 in	 this	parish	will	die.'	Again	MacLean
began	chortling.
Father	 Loran	 looked	 at	 him	 and	 said,'Why,	 why	 do	 you	 laugh	 when	 I	 say
everyone	in	this	parish	will	die	someday?'
'Ha	Ha!'	exclaimed	MacLean.'I	am	not	from	this	parish.'
Remember	it!
The	sixth	question:
Question	5
YESTERDAY	 IN	 YOUR	 DISCOURSE	 YOU	 SAID	 THAT	 ONE	 HAS	 TO
CHOOSE
THE	 PATH	 BEST	 SUITED	 TO	 ONE'S	 TEMPERAMENT	 --	 EITHER	 THE
PATH	OF
MEDITATION	 OR	 THE	 PATH	 OF	 THE	 HEART	 --	 BUT	 I	 DO	 NOT	 FEEL
BOTH
PATHS	TO	BE	TOTALLY	SEPARATE.	CAN	ONE	TRAVEL	A	PATH	THAT	IS
SOMEHOW	A	FUSION	OF	THE	TWO?
Never	heard	of	it.	A	fusion	is	not	possible	and	in	the	name	of	fusion	only	a	dead
compromise	will	happen.
The	directions	are	so	totally,	diametrically,	opposite.	If	you	love,	you	will	have
to	 use	 imagination,	 dreams,	 all	 the	 faculties	 of	 dreaming,	 of	 auto-hypnosis.	 If
you	meditate,	 you	will	 have	 to	 drop	 all	 the	 dreaming	 faculties,	 auto-hypnosis,
imagination,	love	--
everything	you	have	 to	drop.	But	don't	be	afraid.	 If	meditation	happens,	 in	 the
end	you	will	find	that	love	simply	follows.	And	then	that	love	is	totally	different
from	 that	 love	 that	 you	were	 trying	 to	 fuse	with	 in	 the	 beginning.	 It	 is	 totally
different.	It	comes	out	of	your	meditation,	out	of	your	silence.	It	has	no	desire	in
it,	no	passion	in	it.	It	is	cool.	It	is	not	a	disturbance,	it	is	not	an	excitement,	it	has
no	madness	in	it.
And	 if	 you	 follow	 the	 path	 of	 love,	 one	 day	 meditation	 will	 come,	 and	 the
meditation	 will	 be	 totally	 different	 to	 what	 you	 can	 think	 of	 right	 now.	 That
meditation	will	not	be	dry	like	a	desert,	it	will	be	like	an	oasis.	That	meditation
will	not	make	you	renounce	the	world,	it	will	make	you	capable	of	enjoying	and
delighting	in	it	more.	That	meditation	will	not	be	against	love.
But	 you	 have	 to	 follow	one	 path.	A	 fusion	 is	 not	 possible	 because	 both	 paths
move	in	different	directions,	use	different	techniques.
And	if	you	make	a	fusion,	who	will	be	making	it?	You	will	be	making	the	fusion.
What	is	your	understanding?	How	can	you	synthesise?	Synthesis	is	possible	only
when	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond.	When	 you	 have	 become	 greater	 than	 love	 and
meditation	 both,	 then	 you	 can	 synthesise	 --	 not	 before	 it.	 A	 Buddha	 can
synthesise,	 but	 he	 never	 synthesises	 because	 he	 knows	 that	 synthesis	 has
happened	in	him.	And	if	he	synthesises	it	will	not	be	of	use	to	anybody.	It	will	be
simply	useless,	abstract.	He	insists	on	the	path	of	meditation	--	so	much	so	that
he	has	to	deny	the	path	of	 love;	he	has	to	say	that	 it	 is	absolutely	wrong.	If	he
says,'Not	absolutely	wrong,'	then	you	will	start	thinking,'Then	why	not	move	on
both?
Why	not	be	safe?	Who	knows	which	is	right?	So	be	clever.'	But	your	cleverness
will	help	only	your	ego-confusion	to	persist	and	nothing	else.
I	have	heard.	George	M.	Pullman	decided	 to	build	a	model	 community	on	 the
outskirts	of	Chicago	many	years	ago.	It	was	during	the	early	part	of	1880	and	the
Pullman	 Company	 had	 purchased	 more	 than	 four	 thousand	 acres	 of	 prairie,
twelve	 miles	 south	 of	 the	 Chicago	 business	 district.	 On	 this	 tract	 there	 were
going	to	be	constructed	shops	and	a	town	to	house	almost	ten	thousand	people.
Mr.	Pullman	engaged	the	services	of	Solon	Spencer	Berman,	a	well-known	New
York	architect,	who	was	to	be	the	master	designer	of	the	master-town	which	was
to	be	completed	in	1884.
As	the	town	was	nearing	completion	Berman	was	so	proud	of	his	new	city	with
its	 public	 buildings,	 residences,	 paved	 streets,	 paths,	 playgrounds,	 freeway
system	and	water-supply	that	he	went	to	Mr.	Pullman	one	day	and	suggested	that
it	would	be	quite	appropriate	to	name	the	city	'berman'	after	its	architect.
Pullman	 freely	 admitted	 that	Berman	was	 a	 pretty	 name	 and	 that	Berman	 had
done	 a	 great	 deal	 to	 bring	 his	 dream	 to	 fruition	 but	 in	 response	 to	 Berman's
request	he	said,
'Berman,	I	will	compromise	with	you.	We	will	use	the	first	syllable	of	my	name
and	the	second	syllable	of	your	name.	The	city	will	be	called	Pullman.'
This	 is	 how	 ego	 goes	 on	 trying	 for	 its	 own	 way.	 It	 was	 going	 to	 be	 called
Pullman	anyway;	now	he	shows	that	he	has	made	a	compromise	--	he	has	taken
in	half	of	the	name	of	the	architect.
Don't	be	clever	otherwise	you	will	remain	the	same,	you	will	not	change.	Half-
techniques	on	the	path	of	love	and	half-techniques	on	the	path	of	meditation	will
create	much	confusion	in	you.	They	will	not	help.	They	may	destroy	you.	You
may	go	berserk.
It	is	as	if	you	are	trying	two	different'-pathies'	together:	allopathy	and	ayurvedic.
It	 can	 be	 dangerous.	Or	 allopathy	 and	 naturopathy,	 it	 can	 be	 dangerous.	Their
whole	understanding	 is	different,	 their	gestalt	 is	different.	Both	work,	but	 they
are	complete	systems.	Once	you	accept	one	 it	 is	better	 to	accept	 that	and	don't
bother	to	create	any	synthesis	on	your	own.
Why	does	this	idea	of	synthesis	arise?	Because	you	are	so	confused	you	cannot
understand	which	path	is	your	path.	Rather	than	recognising	your	confusion	you
start	 creating	 a	 compromise.	Drop	 all	 idea	 of	 compromise,	 just	 recognise	 that
you	are	confused.	These	are	 the	three	possibilities:	one,	 the	person	knows	well
that	he	is	a	man	of	the	path	of	love,	or,	second,	he	knows	that	he	is	the	man	of
the	path	of	meditation,	or,	one	knows	the	third	possibility	--	that	he	is	confused.
If	the	first	two	are	the	case	then	there	is	no	need;	if	the	third	is	the	case	then	I	am
here	 to	 help	 you.	 But	 to	 ask	 for	 help	 is	 against	 the	 ego,	 so	 you	 try	 to
compromise.	 This	 compromise	 will	 be	 more	 dangerous,	 it	 will	 confuse	 you
more,	because,	made	out	of	confusion,	it	will	create	more	confusion.
So	try	to	understand	why	you	hanker	for	compromise.	Sooner	or	later	you	will
be	 able	 to	 understand	 that	 compromise	 is	 not	 going	 to	 help.	And	 compromise
may	be	a	way	of	not	going	in	either	direction,	or	it	may	be	just	a	repression	of
your	 confusion.	 It	 will	 assert	 itself.	 Never	 repress	 anything,	 be	 clearcut	 about
your	situation.	And	if	you	are	confused,	remember	 that	you	are	confused.	This
will	 be	 the	 first	 clear-cut	 thing	 about	 you:	 that	 you	 are	 confused.	 You	 have
started	on	the	journey.
I	have	heard.
A	friend	of	Mulla	Nasruddin	said	to	him,'Come	and	have	a	drink.'
Mulla	Nasruddin	came	up	and	took	a	drink	of	whisky.
'How	is	this,	Mulla?'	asked	a	bystander.'How	can	you	drink	whisky?	Sure	it	was
only	yesterday	ye	told	me	ye	was	a	teetotaller.'
'Well,'	said	Nasruddin,'you	are	right.	I	am	a	teetotaller,	it	is	true,	but	I	am	not	a
bigotted	one.'
People	 go	 on	 finding	 some	 way	 or	 other.	 But	 on	 the	 path	 of	 growth	 these
deceptions	are	not	good.
Another	anecdote.
Flagherty	 sneaked	 into	 the	 room	 and	 started	making	 love	 to	 his	 sleeping	wife
until	she	awakened	and	shouted,'Is	that	you?'
'It	better	be,'	snorted	Flagherty.
'When	 are	 you	 gonna	 stop	 this	 sinning?'	 she	 demanded.'Moody	 quit	 smoking,
Paine	stopped	gambling,	what	are	you	gonna	give	up?	'All	right,'	said	Flagherty
through	bloodshot	eyes,	'from	now	on,	you	sleep	in	the	bedroom	and	I	will	sleep
in	the	spare	room.'
Three	 weeks	 went	 by	 with	 Mrs.	 Flagherty	 sleeping	 alone.	 Finally,	 unable	 to
contain	 herself	 for	 one	 night	more,	 she	 tip-toed	 to	 the	 spare	 room	 and	 tapped
lightly	on	the	door.
'What	is	it?'	shouted	Flagherty.
'I	just	wanted	to	tell	yer,'	said	his	wife,'that	Moody	has	started	smoking	again.'
You	 cannot	 repress	 anything.	 Howsoever	 subtle	 are	 your	 ways	 you	 cannot
repress	anything,	you	will	have	to	face	it.	If	you	are	confused,	face	it.
The	last	question:
Question	6
ARE	YOU	THE	TRICK	OR	THE	TREAT?
Po!
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Two	Ladies	And	A	Monk
15	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606150
ShortTitle:
DANG05
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
88
mins
THERE	WAS	 AN	 OLD	WOMAN	 IN	 CHINA	WHO	 HAD	 SUPPORTED	 A
MONK
FOR	OVER	TWENTY	YEARS.	SHE	HAD	BUILT	A	HUT	FOR	HIM,	AND
SHE	FED
HIM	WHILE	HE	WAS	MEDITATING.
ONE	DAY	SHE	DECIDED	TO	FIND	OUT	JUST	WHAT	PROGRESS	HE	HAD
MADE
IN	ALL	THIS	TIME.
SHE	OBTAINED	THE	HELP	OF	A	GIRL	RICH	IN	DESIRE,	AND	SAID	TO
HER:
'GO	 AND	 EMBRACE	 HIM,	 AND	 THEN	 ASK	 HIM	 SUDDENLY,	 "WHAT
NOW?"'
THE	GIRL	CALLED	UPON	THE	MONK	AND	IMMEDIATELY	STARTED
CARESSING	 HIM,	 AND	 ASKING	 HIM	WHAT	 HE	WAS	 GOING	 TO	 DO
ABOUT	IT.
'AN	OLD	TREE	GROWS	ON	A	ROCK	IN	WINTER,'	REPLIED	THE	MONK
SOMEWHAT	POETICALLY,	'NOWHERE	IS	THERE	ANY	WARMTH.'
THE	GIRL	RETURNED	AND	RELATED	WHAT	HE	HAD	SAID.
'TO	THINK	I	FED	THAT	FELLOW	FOR	TWENTY	YEARS!'	EXCLAIMED
THE
OLD	 WOMAN	 IN	 ANGER.	 'HE	 SHOWED	 NO	 CONSIDERATION	 FOR
YOUR
NEED,NO	 DISPOSITION	 TO	 EXPLAIN	 YOUR	 CONDITION.	 HE	 NEED
NOT	HAVE
RESPONDED	 TO	 PASSION,	 BUT	 AT	 LEAST	 HE	 SHOULD	 HAVE
EXPERIENCED
SOME	COMPASSION.'
SHE	 AT	 ONCE	 WENT	 TO	 THE	 HUT	 OF	 THE	 MONK	 AND	 BURNT	 IT
DOWN.
An	ancient	proverb	says:
SOW	A	THOUGHT,	REAP	AN	ACT.	SOW	AN	ACT,	REAP	A	HABIT.	SOW	A
HABIT,	REAP	A	CHARACTER.	SOW	A	CHARACTER,	REAP	A	DESTINY.
And	I	say	to	you:	sow	nothing,	and	reap	meditation	or	love.
Sowing	 nothing	 --	 that's	 what	 meditation	 is	 all	 about.	 And	 its	 natural
consequence	is	love.
If,	at	the	end	of	the	journey	of	meditation,	love	has	not	flowered,	then	the	whole
journey	has	been	futile.	Something	went	wrong	somewhere.	You	started	but	you
never	reached.
Love	is	the	test.	For	the	path	of	meditation,	love	is	the	test.	They	are	two	sides	of
one	coin,	two	aspects	of	the	same	energy.	When	one	is	there,	the	other	has	to	be
there.	If	the	other	is	not	there,	then	the	first	is	also	not	there.
Meditation	is	not	concentration.	A	man	of	concentration	may	not	reach	to	love;
in	fact,	he	will	not.	A	man	of	concentration	may	become	more	violent	because
concentration	is	a	 training	to	remain	tense,	concentration	is	an	effort	 to	narrow
down	the	Mind.	It..is	deep	violence	with	your	consciousness.	And	when	you	are
violent	 with	 YOUR	 consciousness	 you	 cannot	 be	 non-violent	 with	 others.
Whatsoever	you	are	with	yourself,	you	are	going	to	be	with	others.
Let	this	be	a	fundamental	rule	of	life,	one	of	the	most	fundamental:	whatsoever
you	are	towards	yourself,	you	will	be	towards	others.	If	you	love	yourself,	you
will	 love	others.	 If	 you	 are	 flowing	within	your	 being,	 you	will	 be	 flowing	 in
relationships	also.	If	you	are	frozen	inside,	you	will	be	frozen	outside	also.	The
inner	tends	to	become	the	outer;	the	inner	goes	on	manifesting	itself	in	the	outer.
Concentration	 is	 not	 meditation;	 concentration	 is	 the	 method	 of	 science.	 It	 is
scientific	 methodology.	 A	 man	 of	 science	 needs	 the	 deep	 discipline	 of
concentration,	but	a	man	of	science	is	not	expected	to	be	compassionate.	There
is	no	need.	In	fact,	a	man	of	science	becomes	more	and	more	violent	with	nature.
All	 scientific	 progress	 is	 based	 on	 violence	 towards	 nature.	 It	 is	 destructive
because,	in	the	first	place,	the	scientific	man	is	destructive	to	his	own	expanding
consciousness.	 Rather	 than	 expanding	 his	 consciousness	 he	 narrows	 it	 down,
makes	it	exclusive,	one-pointed.	It	is	a	coercion,	violence.
So	 remember,	 meditation	 is	 not	 concentration	 but	 neither	 is	 meditation
contemplation.	 It	 is	 not	 thinking.	Maybe	 you	 are	 thinking	 about	 God	 --	 even
then,	it	is	thinking.	If	there	is
'about',	 there	 is	 thinking.	 You	 may	 be	 thinking	 about	 money,	 you	 may	 be
thinking	about	God	--	it	basically	makes	no	difference.	Thinking	continues,	only
objects	change.	So	if	you	are	thinking	about	the	world,	or	about	sex,	nobody	will
call	 it	contemplation.	If	you	are	thinking	about	God,	virtue,	if	you	are	thinking
about	Jesus,	Krishna,	Buddha,	then	people	will	call	it	contemplation.
But	Zen	is	very	strict	about	it	--	it	is	not	meditation,	it	is	still	thinking.	You	are
still	 concerned	with	 the	 other.	 In	 contemplation	 the	 other	 is	 there,	 although	of
course	 not	 so	 exclusively	 as	 it	 is	 in	 concentration.	 Contemplation	 has	 more
fluidity	than	concentration.
In	concentration	the	mind	is	one-pointed;	in	contemplation	the	mind	is	oriented
towards	one	subject,	not	towards	one	point.	You	can	go	on	thinking	about	it,	you
can	 go	 on	 changing	 and	 flowing	with	 the	 subject,	 but	 still,	 on	 the	whole,	 the
subject	remains	the	same.
Then	 what	 is	 meditation?	 Meditation	 is	 just	 being	 delighted	 in	 your	 own
presence;	meditation	is	a	delight	in	your	own	being.	It	is	very	simple	--	a	totally
relaxed	state	of	consciousness	where	you	are	not	doing	anything.	The	moment
doing	enters,	you	become	tense;	anxiety	enters	immediately.	How	to	do?	What	to
do?	How	to	succeed?	How	not	to	fail?	You	have	already	moved	into	the	future.
If	you	are	contemplating,	what	can	you	contemplate?	How	can	you	contemplate
the	unknown?	How	can	you	contemplate	the	unknowable?	You	can	contemplate
only	 the	known.	You	can	 chew	 it	 again	 and	 again,	 but	 it	 is	 the	known.	 If	 you
know	 something	 about	 Jesus,	 you	 can	 think	 again	 and	 again;	 if	 you	 know
something	 about	 Krishna,	 you	 can	 think	 again	 and	 again.	 You	 can	 go	 on
modifying,	 changing,	 decorating	 --	 but	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 lead	you	 towards	 the
unknown.	And	God	is	the	unknown.
Meditation	is	just	to	be,	not	doing	anything	--	no	action,	no	thought,	no	emotion.
You	just	are.	And	it	is	a	sheer	delight.	From	where	does	this	delight	come	when
you	 are	 not	 doing	 anything?	 It	 comes	 from	 nowhere,	 or,	 it	 comes	 from
everywhere.	It	is	uncaused,	because	the	existence	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	joy.
It	 needs	 no	 cause,	 no	 reason.	 If	 you	 are	 unhappy	 you	 have	 a	 reason	 to	 be
unhappy;	if	you	are	happy	you	are	simply	happy	--	there	is	no	reason	for	it.	Your
mind	tries	to	find	a	reason	because	it	cannot	believe	in	the	uncaused	because	it
can	 not	 control	 the	 uncaused	 --	 with	 the	 uncaused	 the	 mind	 simply	 becomes
impotent.	So	the	mind	goes	on	finding	some	reason	or	other.	But	I	would	like	to
tell	 you	 that	 whenever	 you	 are	 happy,	 you	 are	 happy	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all,
whenever	 you	 are	 unhappy,	 you	 have	 some	 reason	 to	 be	 unhappy	 --	 because
happiness	 is	 just	 the	 stuff	 you	 are	 made	 of.	 It	 is	 your	 very	 being,	 it	 is	 your
innermost	core.	Joy	is	your	innermost	core.
Look	at	 the	trees,	 look	at	 the	birds,	 look	at	 the	clouds,	 look	at	 the	stars...and	if
you	 have	 eyes	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 joyful.
Everything	is	simply	happy.	Trees	are	happy	for	no	reason;	they	are	not	going	to
become	prime	ministers	or	presidents	and	they	are	not	going	to	become	rich	and
they	will	never	have	any	bank	balance.	Look	at	the	flowers	--	for	no	reason.	It	is
simply	unbelievable	how	happy	flowers	are.
The	 whole	 existence	 is	 made	 of	 the	 stuff	 called	 joy.	 Hindus	 call	 it
SATCHITANAND,	ANANDA,	joy.	That's	why	no	reason,	no	cause	is	needed.	If
you	 can	 just	 be	with	 yourself,	 not	 doing	 anything,	 just	 enjoying	 yourself,	 just
being	with	yourself,	just	being	happy	that	you	are,	just	being	happy	that	you	are
breathing,	 just	 being	 happy	 that	 you	 are	 listening	 to	 these	 cuckoos	 --	 for	 no
reason	then	you	are	in	meditation.	Meditation	is	being	here	now.	And	when	one
is	 happy	 for	 no	 reason,	 that	 happiness	 cannot	 be	 contained	within	 yourself.	 It
goes	on	 spreading	 to	others,	 it	 becomes	 a	 sharing.	You	 cannot	 hold	 it,	 it	 is	 so
much,	it	is	so	infinite.	You	cannot	hold	it	in	your	hands,	you	have	to	allow	it	to
spread.
This	is	what	compassion	is.	Meditation	is	being	with	yourself	and	compassion	is
overflowing	with	that	being.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	was	moving	into	passion
that	becomes	compassion.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	was	narrowed	down	into	the
body	or	into	the	mind.	It	is	the	same	energy	that	was	leaking	from	small	holes.
What	is	sex?	Just	a	leakage	of	energy	from	a	small	hole	in	the	body.	Hindus	call
these	--
exactly	--	holes.	When	you	are	flowing,	overflowing,	when	you	are	not	moving
through	 the	 holes,	 all	walls	 disappear.	You	 have	 become	 the	whole.	Now	 you
spread.	You	cannot	do	anything	about	it.
It	is	not	that	you	have	to	be	compassionate,	no.	In	the	state	of	meditation	you	are
compassion.	Compassion	is	as	warm	as	passion	--	hence	the	word	'compassion'.
It	 is	 very	 passionate	 but	 the	 passion	 is	 unaddressed	 and	 the	 passion	 is	 not	 in
search	of	any	gratification.	The	whole	process	has	become	just	the	reverse.	First
you	were	seeking	some	happiness	somewhere	--	now	you	have	found	it	and	you
are	expressing	it.	Passion	is	a	search	for	happiness;	compassion	is	an	expression
of	 happiness.	 But	 it	 is	 passionate,	 it	 is	 warm,	 and	 you	 have	 to	 understand	 it
because	it	has	a	paradox	in	it.
The	 greater	 a	 thing,	 the	 more	 paradoxical	 it	 is,	 and	 this	 meditation	 and
compassion	is	one	of	the	highest	peaks,	the	uttermost	peak.	So	there	is	bound	to
be	a	paradox.
The	paradox	is	 that	a	man	of	meditation	is	very	cool,	not	cold;	cool	yet	warm,
not	hot.
Passion	is	hot,	it	is	almost	feverish,	it	has	a	temperature.	Compassion	is	cool	yet
warm,	welcoming,	receptive,	happy	to	share,	ready	to	share,	waiting	to	share.	If
a	person	of	meditation	becomes	cold,	he	has	missed.	Then	he	 is	 just	a	man	of
repression.	 If	you	 repress	your	passion	you	will	become	cold	 --	 that's	how	 the
whole	humanity	has	become	cold.
Passion	has	been	repressed	in	everyone.
From	 the	 very	 childhood	 your	 passion	 has	 been	 crippled	 and	 repressed.
Whenever	you	started	becoming	passionate,	there	was	somebody	--	your	mother,
your	 father,	 your	 teacher,	 the	 police	 --	 there	was	 somebody	who	 immediately
became	suspicious	of	you.
Your	 passion	 was	 curbed,	 repressed.	 'Don't	 do	 it!'	 Immediately	 you	 shrunk
within	yourself.	And	by	and	by	one	learned	that	to	survive	it	is	better	to	listen	to
people	who	are	around	you.	It	is	safer.	So	what	to	do?	What	is	a	child	supposed
to	 do	when	 he	 feels	 passionate,	when	 he	 feels	 full	 of	 energy	 and	 he	wants	 to
jump	and	run	and	dance	and	his	father	 is	reading	the	newspaper?	It	 is	rubbish,
but	he	is	reading	his	newspaper,	and	he	is	a	very	important	man,	he's	the	master
of	the	house.	What	to	do?	The	child	is	doing	something	really	great	--	in	him	it	is
God	who	is	ready	to	dance	--	but	the	father	is	reading	his	newspaper	so	there	has
to	be	silence.	He	cannot	dance,	he	cannot	run,	he	cannot	scream.	He	will	repress
his	energy;	he	will	try	to	be	cold,	collected,	controlled.
Control	has	become	such	a	supreme	value.	It	 is	not	a	value	at	all.	A	controlled
person	 is	 a	 dead	 person;	 a	 controlled	 person	 is	 not	 necessarily	 a	 disciplined
person.
Discipline	is	totally	different.	Discipline	comes	out	of	awareness;	control	comes
out	of	 fear.	People	who	are	 around	you	are	more	powerful	 than	you,	 they	 can
punish	you,	they	can	destroy	you.	They	have	all	the	power	to	control,	to	corrupt,
to	repress.	And	the	child	has	to	become	diplomatic.
When	sex	energy	arises,	 the	child	 is	 in	difficulty.	The	society	 is	against	 it;	 the
society	says	it	has	to	be	channelised.	And	it	is	flowing	all	over	the	child.	It	has	to
be	cut.
In	 the	 schools	 what	 are	 we	 doing?	 In	 fact,	 the	 schools	 are	 not	 so	 much
instruments	 for	 imparting	 knowledge	 as	 instruments	 of	 control.	 For	 six,	 seven
hours	a	child	is	sitting	there.	This	is	to	curb	his	dancing,	to	curb	his	singing,	to
curb	his	joy;	this	is	to	control	him.	Sitting	for	six,	seven	hours	every	day	in	an
almost	prison-like	atmosphere,	by	and	by	the	energy	deadens,	the	child	becomes
repressed,	frozen.	Now	there	is	no	streaming,	the	energy	does	not	come,	he	lives
at	the	minimum	--	that's	what	we	call	control.	He	never	goes	to	the	maximum.
Psychologists	 have	 been	 searching	 and	 they	 have	 come	 to	 recognise	 a	 great
factor	 in	 human	misfortune	 --	 that	 is,	 that	 ordinarily	 persons	 live	 only	 ten	 per
cent.	They	 live	 ten	per	 cent,	 they	breathe	 ten	per	 cent,	 they	 love	 ten	per	 cent,
they	enjoy	ten	per	cent	--	ninety	per	cent	of	their	life	is	simply	not	allowed.	This
is	sheer	wastage.	One	should	live	at	the	hundred	per	cent	capacity,	only	then	is
flowering	possible.
So	meditation	 is	not	control,	 it	 is	not	 repression.	 If	somehow	you	have	got	 the
wrong	idea
--	you	are	repressing	yourself	--	then	you	will	become	very	controlled,	but	then
you	 will	 be	 cold.	 Then	 you	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more	 indifferent,	 not
detached.	 Indifferent,	 non-caring,	 unloving	 --	 you	will	 almost	 commit	 suicide.
You	will	be	alive	at	the	minimum.
You	 can	 be	 called	 'just	 so-so'	 alive.	You	will	 not	 be	 burning	 from	 both	 sides,
your	flame	will	be	very	dim.	Much	smoke	will	be	there	but	almost	no	light.
It	happens	to	people	who	are	on	the	path	of	meditation	--	Catholics,	Buddhists,
Jains	--
that	 they	 become	 cold,	 because	 to	 control	 comes	 easily.	 Awareness	 is	 very
arduous.
Control	 is	 very	 easy	 because	 control	 needs	 only	 a	 cultivation	 of	 habits.	 You
cultivate	habits,	then	those	habits	possess	you	and	you	need	not	worry.	Then	you
go	on	with	your	habits,	they	become	mechanical	and	you	live	a	robot	life.	You
may	look	like	a	Buddha	but	you	will	not	be.	You	will	be	just	a	dead	stone	statue.
If	 compassion	 has	 not	 arisen	 in	 you,	 then	 apathy	 will	 arise.	 Apathy	 means
absence	of	passion;	compassion	means	transformation	of	passion.	Go	and	watch
Catholic	monks,	Jaina	monks,	Buddhist	monks,	and	you	will	see	very	apathetic
figures	--	dull,	stupid,	non-radiant,	closed,	afraid,	continuously	anxious.
Just	 the	other	day	I	was	reading	an	article	on	Oscar,	 the	founder	of	Arica.	The
man	 who	 was	 interviewing	 him	 was	 a	 little	 surprised	 to	 see	 that	 he	 was
continuously	smoking,	so	he	asked,	'Why	are	you	smoking	so	much	and	why	do
you	smoke?'	At	least	Oscar	was	true.	He	said,	'Whenever	I	feel	nervous	I	smoke,
it	helps.'
If	a	person	like	Oscar,	who	has	become	a	master	to	many	people	in	America,	is
still	nervous	and	needs	smoking	to	help	his	nervousness,	 then	what	 is	going	to
happen	to	help	his	followers?	He	must	have	controlled	himself.
Controlled	 persons	 are	 always	 nervous	 because	 deep	 down	 turmoil	 is	 still
hidden.	If	you	are	uncontrolled,	flowing,	alive,	then	you	are	not	nervous.	There
is	no	question	of	being	nervous	 --	whatsoever	happens,	happens.	You	have	no
expectations	 for	 the	 future,	 you	 are	 not	 performing.	 Then	why	 should	 you	 be
nervous?
If	you	go	to	Catholic,	Jaina,	Buddhist	monks,	you	will	find	them	very	nervous	--
maybe	 not	 so	 nervous	 in	 their	 monasteries,	 but	 if	 you	 bring	 them	 out	 to	 the
world,	 you	 will	 find	 them	 very,	 very	 nervous	 because	 on	 each	 step	 there	 is
temptation.
A	man	of	meditation	comes	to	a	point	where	there	is	no	temptation	left.	Try	to
understand	 it.	Temptation	never	comes	from	without,	 it	 is	 the	 repressed	desire,
repressed	 energy,	 repressed	 anger,	 repressed	 sex,	 repressed	 greed,	 that	 creates
temptation.	Temptation	comes	 from	within	YOU,	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	 the
without.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 a	 devil	 comes	 and	 tempts	 you,	 it	 is	 your	 own	 repressed
mind	that	becomes	devilish	and	wants	to	take	revenge.	To	control	that	mind	one
has	to	remain	so	cold	and	frozen	that	no	life	energy	is	allowed	to	move	into	your
limbs,	 into	 your	 body.	 If	 energy	 is	 allowed	 to	 move,	 those	 repressions	 will
surface.	That's	why	people	have	learned	how	to	be	cold,	how	to	touch	others	and
yet	 not	 touch	 them,	how	 to	 see	people	 and	yet	 not	 see	 them.	People	 live	with
cliches	--	'Hallo.	How	are	you?'	Nobody	means	anything.	These	are	just	to	avoid
the	real	encounter	of	two	persons.	People	don't	look	into	each	other's	eyes,	they
don't	hold	hands,	they	don't	try	to	feel	each	other's	energy,	they	don't	allow	each
Other	to	pour.	Very	afraid.	Somehow	just	managing.	Cold	and	dead.	In	a	strait-
jacket.
A	man	 of	 meditation	 has	 learned	 how	 to	 be	 full	 of	 energy,	 at	 the	 maximum,
optimum.	He	lives	at	the	peak,	he	makes	his	abode	at	the	peak.	Certainly	he	has
a	 warmth	 but	 it	 is	 not	 feverish,	 it	 only	 shows	 life.	 He	 is	 not	 hot,	 he	 is	 cool,
because	he	 is	not	carried	away	by	desires.	He	is	so	happy,	 that	he	 is	no	longer
seeking	 any	 happiness.	 He	 is	 so	 at	 ease,	 he	 is	 so	 at	 home,	 he	 is	 not	 going
anywhere,	he	is	not	running	and	chasing...	he	is	very	cool.
In	 Latin	 there	 is	 a	 dictum:	 agere	 sequitur	 esse	 --	 to	 do	 follows	 to	 be;	 action
follows	being.
It	is	tremendously	beautiful.
Don't	 try	 to	 change	 your	 action;	 try	 to	 find	 out	 your	 being,	 and	 action	 will
follow.	The	action	is	secondary;	being	is	primary.	Action	is	something	that	you
do;	being	 is	 something	 that	 you	are.	Action	comes	out	of	you,	 action	 is	 just	 a
fragment.	Even	if	all	of	your	actions	are	collected	together	they	will	not	be	equal
to	 your	 being	 because	 all	 actions	 collected	 together	 will	 be	 your	 past.	 What
about	your	future?	Your	being	contains	your	past,	your	future,	your	present;	your
being	contains	your	eternity.	Your	actions,	 even	 if	 all	 collected,	will	 just	be	of
the	past.	Past	is	limited.	Future	is	unlimited.	That	which	has	happened	is	limited,
it	 can	 be	 defined,	 it	 has	 already	 happened.	 That	 which	 has	 not	 happened	 is
unlimited,	 indefinable.	Your	 being	 contains	 eternity,	 your	 actions	 contain	 only
your	past.
So	it	is	possible	that	a	man	who	has	been	a	sinner	up	to	this	moment	can	become
a	 saint	 the	next.	Never	 judge	a	man	by	his	 actions;	 judge	a	man	by	his	being.
Sinners	 have	 become	 saints	 and	 saints	 have	 fallen	 and	 become	 sinners.	 Each
saint	has	a	past	and	each	sinner	has	a	future.	Never	judge	a	man	by	his	actions.
But	 there	 is	 no	other	way	because	you	have	not	 known	even	your	own	being,
how	can	you	see	the	being	of	others?	Once	you	know	your	own	being	you	will
learn	the	language,	you	will	know	the	clue	of	how	to	look	into	another's	being.
You	can	see	into	others	only	to	the	extent	that	you	can	see	into	yourself.	If	you
have	 seen	 yourself	 through	 and	 through,	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 seeing	 into
others	through	and	through.
So	a	few	things	before	I	enter	into	this	beautiful	story.
If	by	your	meditations	you	are	becoming	cold	 --	beware.	 If	your	meditation	 is
making	you	more	warm,	more	loving,	more	flowing	--	good,	you	are	on	the	right
path.	If	you	are	becoming	less	loving,	if	your	compassion	is	disappearing	and	an
apathy	 is	 settling	 inside	you	 --	 then	 the	 sooner	you	 change	your	direction,	 the
better.	Otherwise	you	will	become	a	wall.
I	have	heard.
When	Ford	was	Vice-President	he	went	to	Israel	and	asked	Golda	Meir	to	see	the
Wailing	Wall.	 Prime	Minister	Meir	 took	 him	 to	 the	wall	whereupon	 the	Vice-
President	began	to	pray,	Help	Mr.	Nixon	guide	our	country.'
He	turned	to	Mrs.	Meir	and	asked,	'Is	that	nice?'
'That's	nice,'	she	answered.
'Thank	you	for	making	me	the	Vice-President,'	he	directed	to	the	wall	and	then	to
the	Prime	Minister,	'Is	that	nice?'
'That's	nice,'	she	replied.
'Let	Israel	give	back	the	land	they	took	from	the	Arabs	so	there	will	be	peace	in
the	Middle-East.	Is	that	nice?'
And	Golda	Meir	said,	'You	are	talking	to	a	wall.'
Don't	become	a	wall.	Remain	alive,	throbbing,	streaming,	flowing,	melting.
Of	course	 there	 are	problems.	Why	have	people	become	walls?	Because	walls
can	 be	 defined.	 They	 give	 you	 a	 boundary,	 a	 definite	 shape	 and	 form	 --	what
Hindus	call	NAM
ROOP,	 name	 and	 form.	 If	 you	 are	 melting	 and	 flowing	 you	 don't	 have
boundaries;	 you	 don't	 know	where	 you	 are	 and	where	 you	 end	 and	where	 the
other	 begins.	 You	 go	 on	 being	 together	 with	 people	 so	 much	 that	 all	 the
boundaries	by	and	by	become	dream-like.
And	one	day	they	disappear.
That	is	how	reality	is.	Reality	is	unbounded.	Where	do	you	think	you	stop?	At
your	skin?
Ordinarily	we	think,	'Of	course,	we	are	inside	our	skins	and	the	skin	is	our	wall,
the	boundary.	'	But	your	skin	could	not	be	alive	if	the	air	was	not	surrounding	it.
If	your	skin	is	not	constantly	breathing	the	oxygen	that	is	being	supplied	by	the
surround,	your	skin	cannot	be	alive.	Take	away	the	atmosphere	and	you	will	die
immediately.	 Even	 if	 your	 skin	 has	 not	 been	 scratched	 you	 will	 die.	 So	 that
cannot	be	your	boundary.	There	are	two	hundred	miles	of	atmosphere	all	around
the	 earth	 --	 is	 that	 your	 boundary?	 That	 too	 cannot	 be	 your	 boundary.	 This
oxygen	and	this	atmosphere	and	the	warmth	and	the	life	cannot	exist	without	the
sun.	 If	 the	 sun	ceases	 to	 exist	 or	drops	dead....	One	day	 it	 is	 going	 to	happen.
Scientists	say	that	in	four	thousand	years	more	the	sun	will	cool	down	and	drop
dead.	Then	suddenly	this	atmosphere	will	not	be	alive.	Immediately.	you	will	be
dead.	So	is	the	sun	your	boundary?
But	now	physicists	 say	 this	 sun	 is	 connected	 to	 some	central	 source	of	 energy
which	we	have	not	yet	been	able	 to	find	but	 is	suspected	--	because	nothing	is
unrelated.
So	where	do	we	decide	where	our	boundary	is?	An	apple	on	the	tree	is	not	you.
Then	you	eat	 it,	 it	becomes	you.	So	 it	 is	 just	waiting	 to	become	you.	 It	 is	you
potentially.	It	is	your	future	you.	Then	you	have	defecated	and	you	have	dropped
much	rubbish	out	of	 the	body.	Just	a	moment	before,	 it	was	you.	So	where	do
you	decide?
I	 am	 breathing.	 The	 breath	 inside	me	 is	me,	 but	 just	 a	moment	 before	 it	may
have	been	your	breath.	It	must	have	been	because	we	are	breathing	in	a	common
atmosphere.	We	are	all	breathing	into	each	other;	we	are	members	of	each	other.
You	are	breathing	in	me,	I	am	breathing	in	you.
And	it	is	not	only	so	with	breathing,	it	is	exactly	so	with	life.	Have	you	watched?
With	 certain	 people	 you	 feel	 very	 alive,	 they	 come	 just	 bubbling	with	 energy.
And	something	happens	in	you,	a	response,	and	you	are	also	bubbling.	And	then
there	people...just	their	face	and	one	feels	one	will	flop	down.	Just	their	presence
is	enough	poison.	They	must	be	pouring	something	into	you	which	is	poisonous.
And	when	you	 come	 around	 a	 person	 and	you	become	 radiant	 and	happy	 and
suddenly	 something	 starts	 throbbing	 in	your	heart,	 and	your	heart	 beats	 faster,
this	man	must	have	poured	something	into	you.
We	are	pouring	into	each	other.	That's	why,	in	the	East,	SATSANG	has	become
very,	 very	 important.	 To	 be	 with	 a	 person	 who	 has	 known,	 just	 to	 be	 in	 his
presence,	is	enough
--	 because	he	 is	 constantly	 pouring	his	 being	 into	you.	You	may	know	or	 you
may	not	know.	You	may	 recognise	 it	 today	or	you	may	not	 recognise	 it	 today,
but	someday	or	other	the	seeds	will	come	to	flower.
We	 are	 pouring	 into	 each	 other.	 We	 are	 not	 separate	 islands.	 A	 cold	 person
becomes	like	an	island	and	it	is	a	misfortune,	it	is	a	great	misfortune	because	you
could	have	become	a	vast	continent	and	you	decided	to	become	an	island.	You
decided	to	remain	poor,	when	you	could	have	become	as	rich	as	you	wanted	to
be.
Don't	 be	 a	 wall	 and	 never	 try	 to	 repress,	 otherwise	 you	 will	 become	 a	 wall.
Repressed	people	are	just	like	you...they	have	masks,	faces.	They	are	pretending
to	be	somebody	else.
I	have	heard.
A	 wealthy	 farmer	 went	 to	 the	 church	 one	 Sunday.	 After	 the	 service	 he	 said,
'Father,	that	was	a	damned	good	sermon	you	gave,	damned	good!'
'I	 am	happy	 you	 liked	 it,'	 said	 the	 priest,	 'but	 I	wish	 you	would	 not	 use	 those
terms	in	expressing	yourself.'
'I	can't	help	it,'	said	the	rich	farmer.	'I	still	think	it	was	a	damned	good	sermon.	In
fact,	I	liked	it	so	much	I	put	a	hundred	dollar	bill	in	the	collection	basket.'
'The	hell	you	did!'	replied	the	priest.
A	 repressed	 person	 is	 carrying	 the	 same	world	 as	 you.	 Just	 an	 opportunity	 is
needed,	 a	 provocation,	 and	 immediately	 the	 real	 will	 come	 out.	 That's	 why
monks	disappear	from	the	world	--	because	there	are	too	many	provocations,	too
many	 temptations.	 It	 is	 difficult	 for	 them	 to	 remain	 contained,	 to	 hold	 on.	 So
they	go	to	the	Himalayas	or	to	the	caves,	they	retire	from	the	world	so	that	even
if	ideas,	temptations,	desires	arise,	there	is	no	way	to	fulfil	them.
But	this	is	not	a	way	of	transformation.
The	people	who	become	cold	are	the	people	who	were	very	hot.	The	people	who
take	vows	of	remaining	celibate	are	the	people	who	were	extremely	sexual.	The
mind	 turns	 from	one	 extreme	 to	 another	 very	 easily.	 It	 is	my	 observation	 that
many	people	who	are	too	obsessed	with	food	one	day	or	other	become	obsessed
with	fasting.	It	has	to	happen	because	you	cannot	stay	in	one	extreme	long.	You
are	doing	too	much	of	it,	soon	you	will	get	fed	up	with	it,	tired	of	it.	Then	there
is	no	other	way,	you	have	to	move	to	the	other	extreme.
The	people	who	have	become	monks	are	very	worldly	people.	The	market	was
too	much,	they	had	moved	too	much	in	the	market,	then	the	pendulum	moved	to
the	other	extreme.
Greedy	people	renounce	the	world.	This	renunciation	is	not	of	understanding	--
it	 is	 just	 greed	 upside-down.	 First	 they	 were	 holding,	 holding...now	 suddenly
they	see	the	pointlessness	of	it,	the	futility	of	it	and	they	start	throwing	it.	First
they	were	afraid	to	lose	a	single	pai,	now	they	are	afraid	to	keep	a	single	pai,	but
the	fear	continues.	First	they	were	too	greedy	about	this	world,	now	they	are	too
greedy	about	the	other	world,	but	the	greed	is	there.
Silverstein,	 the	 inveterate	 joiner,	 came	 rushing	 home	 proudly	 holding	 a
membership	card	to	his	newest	organisation....
There	are	people	who	go	on	joining	everything.	I	have	known	one	person	who
was	a	member	of	five	political	parties,	all	against	each	other.	When	he	told	me	I
said,	'What	are	you	doing?'	He	enjoyed	membership.
....Silverstein,	 the	 inveterate	 joiner,	 came	 rushing	 home,	 proudly	 holding	 a
membership	card	to	his	newest	organisation.	'Look,'	said	Silverstein	to	his	son,	'I
just	joined	the	Prostitute	Club.'
'What?'	said	the	boy.	 'Let	me	see	that	card.'	After	reading	it	he	announced,	 'Pa,
that	is	the	Parachute	Club.'
'All	I	know	is,'	said	Silverstein,	'they	guaranteed	me	three	hundred	and	sixty-five
jumps	a	year.'
These	people	one	day	or	other	are	bound	to	join	a	monastery	--	then	they	become
great	 celibates,	 great	 renouncers.	 But	 it	 does	 not	 change	 their	 nature.	 Except
awareness,	nothing	changes	a	man,	nothing	at	all.
So	 don't	 try	 to	 pretend.	 That	 which	 has	 not	 happened,	 has	 not	 happened.
Understand	it,	and	don't	try	to	pretend	and	don't	try	to	make	others	believe	that	it
has	happened,	because	nobody	is	going	to	lose	in	this	deception	except	you.
People	who	 try	 to	control	 themselves	have	chosen	a	very	 foolish	way.	Control
will	 not	 happen,	 but	 they	will	 become	 cold.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 way	 a	man	 can
control	himself	 --	 to	become	 frozen	 so	 that	 energy	does	not	 arise.	People	who
take	the	vows	of	celibacy	will	not	eat	much;	in	fact,	they	will	starve	their	bodies.
If	more	energy	 is	created	 in	 the	body,	 then	 there	will	be	more	 sex	energy,	and
then	they	don't	know	what	to	do	with	it.	So	Buddhist	monks	eat	only	once	a	day
--	and	then	too,	not	enough.	They	eat	only	enough	that	bodily	needs	are	fulfilled,
very	minimum	needs,	so	no	energy	is	left.	This	type	of	celibacy	is	not	celibacy.
When	you	are	flowing	with	energy	and	the	energy	starts	transforming	itself	into
love,	then	a	celibacy,	a	BRAHMACHARYA,	which	is	beautiful,	happens.
The	sweet	old	lady	came	into	the	store	and	bought	a	package	of	mothballs.	The
next	 day	 she	 was	 back	 for	 another	 five	 packets.	 Another	 day	 passed	 and	 she
came	in	for	a	dozen	more.
'You	must	have	a	lot	of	moths,'	said	the	salesman.
'Yes,'	 replied	 the	 old	 dear,	 'and	 I	 have	 been	 throwing	 these	 things	 at	 them	 for
three	days	now	and	I	have	only	managed	to	hit	one!'
Through	control	you	will	not	even	be	able	to	hit	one.	That	is	not	the	way.	You
are	fighting	with	leaves,	branches	--	cutting	them	here	and	there.	That	is	not	the
way	to	destroy	the	tree	of	desire;	the	way	is	to	cut	the	roots.	And	roots	can	be	cut
only	when	you	have	reached	to	the	roots	of	desire.	On	the	surface	there	are	only
branches	--	jealousy,	anger,	envy,	hatred,	lust.	They	are	just	on	the	surface.	The
deeper	you	move,	the	more	you	will	understand:	they	are	all	coming	out	of	one
root	and	that	root	is	unawareness.
Meditation	 means	 awareness.	 It	 cuts	 the	 very	 root.	 Then	 the	 whole	 tree
disappears	on	its	own	accord.	Then	passion	becomes	compassion.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 very	 great	 Zen	Master	who	 had	 become	 old	 and	 almost
blind	 at	 the	 age	 of	 ninety-six	 and	 no	 longer	 able	 to	 teach	 or	 work	 about	 the
monastery.	Yama	Moto	was	his	name.
The	 old	 man	 then	 decided	 it	 was	 time	 to	 die	 because	 he	 was	 of	 no	 use	 to
anybody,	he	could	not	be	of	any	help.	So	he	stopped	eating.
When	 asked	 by	 his	 monks	 why	 he	 refused	 his	 food,	 he	 replied	 that	 he	 had
outlived	his	usefulness	and	was	only	a	bother	to	everybody.
They	told	him,	'If	you	die	now'	--	it	was	January	--	'when	it	is	so	cold,	everybody
will	be	uncomfortable	at	your	funeral	and	you	will	be	an	even	greater	nuisance.
So	please	eat.'
This	can	happen	only	in	a	Zen	monastery,	because	disciples	love	the	Master	so
deeply,	their	respect	is	so	deep,	that	there	is	no	need	for	any	formality.	Just	see
what	they	were	saying.	They	were	saying,	'If	you	die	now,	and	it	is	January,	see,
it	is	so	cold,	everybody	will	be	uncomfortable	at	the	funeral	and	you	will	be	an
even	greater	nuisance.	So	please	eat.'
He	thereupon	resumed	eating.	But	when	it	became	warm	again	he	stopped,	and
not	long	after	he	quietly	toppled	over	and	died.
Such	compassion!	One-lives	then	for	compassion;	one	dies	then	for	compassion.
One	is	even	ready	to	choose	a	right	time	to	so	that	nobody	is	bothered	and	one
need	not	be	a	nuisance.
I	have	heard	about	another	Zen	Master	who	was	going	to	die.
He	said,	'Where	are	my	shoes?	Bring	them.'
Somebody	asked,	'Where	are	you	going?	The	doctors	say	are	going	to	die.'
He	said,	'I	am	going	to	the	cemetery.'
'But	why?'
He	said,	 'I	don't	want	to	trouble	anybody.	Otherwise	you	will	have	to	carry	me
on	your	shoulders.'	He	walked	to	the	cemetery	and	died	there.
Tremendous	 compassion!	What	 manner	 of	 man	 is	 this,	 not	 to	 give	 even	 that
much	trouble	to	anybody?	And	these	people	helped	thousands.	Thousands	were
grateful	 to	 them,	 thousands	became	full	of	 light	and	 love	because	of	 them.	Yet
they	would	not	like	to	bother	anybody.	If	they	are	useful	they	would	like	to	live
and	help,	if	they	are	not	useful	then	it	is	time	to	leave	and	go.
Now,	the	story.
THERE	WAS	 AN	 OLD	WOMAN	 IN	 CHINA	WHO	 HAD	 SUPPORTED	 A
MONK
FOR	OVER	TWENTY	YEARS.	SHE	HAD	BUILT	A	HUT	FOR	HIM,	AND
SHE	FED
HIM	WHILE	HE	WAS	MEDITATING.
It	 is	 a	 miracle	 that	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 East.	 The	 West	 is	 still	 unable	 to
understand	it.	For	centuries	in	the	East,	if	somebody	was	meditating,	the	society
would	feed	him.	It	was	enough	that	he	was	meditating.	Nobody	would	think	that
he	was	a	burden	on	the	society	-
-	 'Why	should	we	work	for	him?'	Just	because	he	was	meditating	was	enough,
because	 the	East	came	to	know	that	 if	even	one	man	becomes	enlightened,	his
energy	 is	 shared	 by	 all;	 if	 even	 one	 man	 comes	 to	 flower	 in	 meditation,	 his
fragrance	becomes	part	of	the	whole	society.	And	the	gain	is	so	tremendous	that
the	East	has	never	said,	'Don't	sit	there	and	meditate.	Who	is	going	to	feed	you?
Who	is	going	to	clothe	you?	And	who	is	going	to	give	you	shelter?'	Thousands
and	thousands	--	Buddha	had	ten	thousand	monks,	SANNYASINS,	moving	with
him	but	people	were	happy	to	feed	them,	to	shelter	them,	to	clothe	them,	to	look
after	them,	because	they	were	meditating.
Now	it	is	very,	very	impossible	in	the	West	to	think	that	way.	Even	in	the	East	it
is	 becoming	 difficult.	 In	 China	 now,	monasteries	 are	 being	 closed,	meditation
halls	 are	 being	 converted	 into	 hospitals	 or	 school	 rooms.	 Great	 Masters	 are
disappearing.	They	are	forced	to	work	in	the	fields	or	in	the	factories.	Nobody	is
allowed	to	meditate	because	a	great	understanding	is	lost.	The	whole	mind	is	full
of	materialism,	as	if	matter	is	all	that	exists.
If	a	man	in	a	town	becomes	enlightened,	the	whole	town	is	benefited.	It	is	not	a
wastage	 to	 support	 him.	 For	 nothing	 you	 are	 going	 to	 get	 such	 tremendous
treasure.	 People	 were	 happy	 to	 help.	 For	 twenty	 years	 this	 woman	 helped	 a
monk	who	was	meditating	and	meditating	and	meditating	and	doing	nothing.	He
was	sitting	in	zazen.	She	built	a	hut	for	him,	she	looked	after	him,	she	took	every
care.	One	day	when	she	had	become	very	old	and	was	going	to	die	she	wanted	to
know	whether	meditation	 had	 flowered	 or	 not,	 or	whether	 this	man	 had	 been
simply	 sitting	 and	 sitting	 and	 sitting.	Twenty	 years	 is	 a	 long	 enough	 time,	 the
woman	was	getting	old	and	was	going	to	die,	so	she	wanted	to	know	whether	she
had	been	serving	a	man	of	real	meditation	or	just	a	hocus-pocus.
ONE	DAY	SHE	DECIDED	TO	FIND	OUT...
The	 woman	 must	 have	 been	 of	 great	 understanding	 herself	 because	 the
examination,	the	test	that	she	tried,	was	full	of	understanding.
ONE	DAY	SHE	DECIDED	TO	FIND	OUT	JUST	WHAT	PROGRESS	HE	HAD
MADE
IN	ALL	THIS	TIME.
If	meditation	is	progressing	then	the	ONLY	criterion	of	its	progress	is	love,	the
ONLY
criterion	of	its	progress	is	compassion.
SHE	OBTAINED	THE	HELP	OF	A	GIRL	RICH	IN	DESIRE,	AND	SAID	TO
HER:
'GO	AND	 EMBRACE	HIM,	 AND	 THEN	ASK	HIM	 SUDDENLY,	 "	WHAT
NOW?"'
Three	 are	 the	 possibilities.	 One:	 if	 for	 twenty	 years	 he	 had	 not	 touched	 a
beautiful	woman,	the	first	possibility	was	that	he	would	be	tempted,	would	be	a
victim,	would	 forget	 all	 about	meditation	 and	would	make	 love	with	 this	 girl.
The	other	possibility	was	 that	he	would	remain	cold,	controlled	and	would	not
show	 any	 compassion	 towards	 this	 girl.	 He	 would	 simply	 hold	 himself	 back,
hard,	so	that	he	could	not	be	tempted.	And	the	third	possibility	was:	if	meditation
had	come	to	fruition,	he	would	be	full	of	love,	understanding,	compassion	and	he
would	try	to	understand	this	girl	and	would	try	to	help	her.	She	was	just	a	test	for
these	possibilities.
If	 the	first	was	 the	possibility,	 then	all	his	meditation	was	simply	a	wastage.	 If
the	 second	 was	 the	 possibility	 then	 he	 had	 fulfilled	 the	 ordinary	 criterion	 of
being	 a	 monk	 but	 he	 had	 not	 fulfilled	 the	 real	 criterion	 of	 being	 a	 man	 of
meditation.	If	the	second	was	the	possibility	then	it	simply	showed	that	he	was	a
behaviourist,	that	he	had	made	a	habit,	controlled	his	behaviour.
You	must	have	heard	the	name	of	Pavlov	the	Russian	behaviourist.	He	said	there
is	no	consciousness	in	man	or	in	animals	or	anywhere	--	the	whole	thing	is	just	a
mind	mechanism.	You	can	train	the	mind	mechanism	and	then	it	starts	working
in	that	way	--	it	is	all	a	question	of	conditioning.	Mind	functions	as	a	conditioned
reflex.
If	 you	 put	 food	 before	 your	 dog	 he	 immediately	 comes	 running,	 his	 tongue
hanging	forward,	dripping.	He	starts	to	salivate.	Pavlov	tried.	Whenever	he	gave
food	to	 the	dog	he	would	ring	a	bell.	By	and	by,	 the	bell	and	the	food	became
associated.	 Then	 one	 day	 he	 simply	 rang	 the	 bell	 and	 the	 dog	 came	 running,
tongue	hanging	out,	dripping.
Now	this	is	absurd,	no	dog	has	ever	been	known	to	react	to	a	ringing	bell	in	this
way.	The	bell	is	not	food.	But	now	the	association	has	conditioned	the	mind.
Pavlov	says	man	can	be	changed	in	the	same	way.	Whenever	sex	arises	in	you,
punish	yourself.	Go	 for	a	 seven	day	 fast,	 flog	your	body,	 stand	 in	 the	cold	 the
whole	 night,	 or	 beat	 yourself,	 and	 by	 and	 by	 the	 body	 will	 learn	 a	 trick.
Whenever	 sex	arises,	 it	will	 repress	 it	 automatically	because	of	 the	 fear	of	 the
punishment.
Reward	and	punishment	 --	 this	 is	 the	way	 to	condition	 the	mind	 if	you	 follow
Pavlov.
This	monk	must	have	been	doing	that,	many	are	doing	that.	Almost	ninety-nine
per	cent	of	people	 in	 the	monasteries	are	doing	 that	 --	 just	 reconditioning	 their
minds	and	bodies.
But	consciousness	has	nothing	to	do	with	it.	Consciousness	is	not	a	new	habit;
consciousness	 is	 to	 live	 a	 life	 with	 awareness,	 not	 confined	 to	 any	 habit,	 not
possessed	by	any	mechanism	--	above	the	mechanism.
AND	SHE	SAID	TO	HER:'GO	AND	EMBRACE	HIM,	AND	THEN	ASK	HIM
SUDDENLY,	"	WHAT	NOW?"'
'Suddenly'	is	the	clue	to	the	whole	thing.	If	you	give	a	little	time	then	the	mind
can	start	working	in	the	conditioned	way	for	which	it	has	been	prepared.
'So	 don't	 give	 any	 time.	Go	 in	 the	middle	 of	 the	 night	when	 he	will	 be	 alone
meditating.
Just	go	inside	the	hut'	--	he	must	have	been	living	outside	the	town,	alone	--	'go
inside	the	hut	and	simply	start	caressing	him,	embracing	him,	kiss	him.	And	then
immediately	ask,
"What	 now?"	 Watch	 his	 reaction,	 what	 happens	 to	 him,	 what	 he	 says,	 what
colours	pass	on	his	face,	what	his	eyes	indicate,	how	he	reacts	and	responds	to
you.'
THE	GIRL	CALLED	UPON	THE	MONK	AND	IMMEDIATELY	STARTED
CARESSING	 HIM,	 AND	 ASKING	 HIM	WHAT	 HE	WAS	 GOING	 TO	 DO
ABOUT	IT.
'AN	OLD	TREE	GROWS	ON	A	COLD	ROCK	IN	WINTER,'	REPLIED	THE
MONK
SOMEWHAT	POETICALLY,	'NOWHERE	IS	THERE	ANY	WARMTH.'
He	has	conditioned	his	dog;	he	has	conditioned	his	body/mind.	Twenty	years	is	a
long	 enough	 time	 to	 condition.	 Even	 this	 sudden	 attack	 could	 not	 break	 his
habitual	pattern.
He	 remained	 controlled.	He	must	 have	been	 a	man	of	 tremendous	 control.	He
remained	cold,	with	not	even	a	flicker	of	energy,	and	he	said,	 'AN	OLD	TREE
GROWS	ON	A	COLD	ROCK	 IN	WINTER.'	Not	 only	was	 he	 controlled	 and
cold,	 he	 was	 so	 controlled,	 he	 remained	 so	 cold,	 that	 in	 such	 a	 dangerous
situation,	 provocative,	 seductive,	 he	 could	 use	 poetic	 words	 to	 reply.	 The
conditioning	must	have	gone	very,	very	deep,	to	the	roots.
'AN	OLD	TREE	GROWS	ON	A	COLD	ROCK	IN	WINTER,'	REPLIED	THE
MONK
SOMEWHAT	POETICALLY,	'NOWHERE	IS	THERE	ANY	WARMTH.'
He	said,	'I	am	like	a	cold	rock	in	winter.	Nowhere	is	there	any	warmth.'	That's	all
he	said.
THE	GIRL	RETURNED	AND	RELATED	WHAT	HE	HAD	SAID.
'TO	THINK	I	FED	THAT	FELLOW	FOR	TWENTY	YEARS!'	EXCLAIMED
THE
OLD	WOMAN	IN	ANGER.
His	meditation	had	not	flowered.	He	had	become	cold	and	dead,	corpse-like;	he
had	not	become	enlightened	or	a	Buddha.
'HE	SHOWED	NO	CONSIDERATION	FOR	YOUR	NEED...'
A	man	of	compassion	always	 thinks	about	you,	about	your	need.	He	 remained
coldly	 self-centred.	 He	 simply	 said	 something	 about	 himself	 --	 'An	 old	 tree
grows	on	a	cold	rock	in	winter,	nowhere	is	there	any	warmth.'	He	did	not	utter	a
single	word	about	the	woman.
He	did	not	even	ask,	 'Why	did	you	come?	Why?	What	do	you	need?	And	why
have	you	chosen	me	out	of	so	many	people?	Sit	down.'
He	should	have	listened	to	her.	She	must	be	in	a	deep	need.	Nobody	comes	in	the
middle	of	the	night	to	a	withered-away	monk	who	has	been	sitting	in	meditation
for	twenty	years.	Why	had	she	come?	He	did	not	pay	any	attention	to	her.
Love	 always	 thinks	 of	 the	 other;	 ego	 only	 thinks	 of	 oneself.	 Love	 is	 always
considerate;	ego	is	absolutely	inconsiderate.	Ego	has	only	one	language	and	that
is	of	self.	Ego	always	uses	 the	other;	 love	 is	ready	to	be	used,	 love	 is	ready	to
serve.
'HE	SHOWED	NO	CONSIDERATION	FOR	YOUR	NEED,NO	DISPOSITION
TO
EXPLAIN	YOUR	CONDITION.'
When	you	go	to	a	man	of	compassion	he	looks	at	you,	he	looks	deeply	into	your
heart.
He	tries	to	find	out	what	your	problem	is,	why	you	are	in	such	a	situation,	why
you	 are	 doing	 the	 thing	 that	 you	 are	 doing.	 He	 forgets	 himself.	 He	 simply
becomes	focused	on	the	person	who	has	come	to	him	--	his	need,	his	problem,
his	anxiety,	is	his	consideration.	He	tries	to	help.	Whatsoever	he	can	do	he	will
do.
'...NO	DISPOSITION	TO	EXPLAIN	YOUR	CONDITION.
HE	NEED	NOT	HAVE	RESPONDED	TO	PASSION...'
That's	true.	A	man	of	compassion	cannot	respond	in	a	passionate	way.	He	is	not
cold	 but	 he	 is	 cool.	 He	 can	 give	 you	 his	 warmth,	 nourishing	 warmth,	 but	 he
cannot	 give	 you	 any	 fever.	He	 has	 none.	 Remember	 the	 difference	 between	 a
feverish	body	and	a	warm	body.
A	feverish	body	is	not	healthy,	a	warm	body	is	simply	healthy.	In	passion,	people
become	feverish.	Have	you	watched	yourself	deep	in	passion?	You	are	almost	a
raving	maniac,	mad,	wild,	doing	something	you	don't	know	why	--	and	in	a	great
fever,	with	the	whole	body	trembling,	in	a	cyclone	with	no	centre.
A	man	of	warmth	is	simply	healthy.	Just	as	when	a	mother	takes	her	child	to	her
breast	and	the	child	feels	the	warmth,	surrounded	by	the	warmth,	nourished	by	it,
welcomed	by	 it,	 so	when	you	enter	 into	 the	 aura	of	 a	 compassionate	man	you
enter	a	motherlike	warmth,	you	enter	into	a	very	nourishing	energy	field.	In	fact,
if	 you	 come	 to	 a	man	 of	 compassion,	 your	 passion	will	 simply	 disappear.	His
compassion	will	 be	 so	powerful,	 his	warmth	will	 be	 so	great,	 his	 love	will	 be
showering	on	you	so	much	that	you	will	become	cool,	you	will	become	centred.
'HE	 NEED	 NOT	 HAVE	 RESPONDED	 TO	 PASSION,	 BUT	 AT	 LEAST	 HE
SHOULD
HAVE	EXPERIENCED	SOME	COMPASSION.'
SHE	AT	ONCE	WENT	 TO	 THE	HUT	OF	 THE	MONK	AND	BURNED	 IT
DOWN.
It	was	 just	 a	 symbolic	 gesture	 that	 those	 twenty	 years	 that	 he	was	meditating
there	--
during	which	they	had	been	hoping	that	he	had	been	progressing	--	had	been	a
wastage.
It	is	not	enough	just	to	be	a	monk	superficially,	just	to	be	a	monk	repressed	and
cold	--
coldness	is	an	indication	of	repression,	a	very	deep	repression.
That's	what	 I	 have	 been	 telling	 you:	 if	 you	move	 into	meditation,	 compassion
and	love	will	come	automatically,	on	its	own	accord.	It	follows	meditation	like	a
shadow.	 So	 you	 need	 not	 be	 worried	 about	 any	 synthesis.	 The	 synthesis	 will
come.	It	comes	by	itself,	you	don't	have	to	bring	it.	You	choose	one	path.	Either
you	 follow	 the	 path	 of	 love,	 devotion,	 dancing,	 KIRTAN,	 BHAJAN,	 dissolve
yourself	 completely	 into	 your	 love	 towards	 the	 Divine.	 That	 path	 is	 of
dissolving,	 no	 awareness	 is	 needed.	 You	 are	 needed	 to	 be	 drunk,	 completely
drunk	with	God,	 you	will	 need	 to	 become	 a	 drunkard.	Or,	 choose	 the	 path	 of
meditation.	 There	 you	 are	 not	 needed	 to	 be	 dissolved	 into	 anything.	 You	 are
needed	to	become	very	crystallised,	you	are	needed	to	become	very	integrated,
alert,	aware.
Follow	the	path	of	love	and	one	day,	suddenly,	you	will	see	that	meditation	has
flowered	 within	 you	 --	 thousands	 of	 white	 lotuses.	 And	 you	 have	 not	 done
anything	for	them,	you	were	doing	something	else	and	they	flowered.	When	love
or	devotion	comes	to	its	climax,	meditation	flowers.
And	 the	 same	 happens	 on	 the	 path	 of	 meditation.	 Just	 forget	 all	 about	 love,
devotion.	You	simply	become	aware,	 sit	 silently,	enjoy	your	being	 --	 that's	all.
Be	with	yourself	that's	all.	Learn	how	to	be	alone	--	that's	all.	And	remember,	a
person	who	knows	how	to	be	alone	is	never	lonely.	People	who	don't	know	how
to	be	alone,	they	are	lonely.
On	the	path	of	meditation,	aloneness	is	sought,	desired,	hoped	for,	prayed	for.	Be
alone.
So	much	so	 that	not	even	 in	your	consciousness	does	any	shadow	of	 the	other
move.	On	the	path	of	love,	get	so	dissolved	that	only	the	other	becomes	real	and
you	become	a	shadow	and	by	and	by	you	completely	disappear.	On	the	path	of
love,	God	 remains,	 you	 disappear;	 on	 the	 path	 of	meditation,	God	 disappears,
you	appear.	But	 the	 total	and	 the	ultimate	 result	 is	 the	same.	A	great	 synthesis
happens.
Never	try	to	synthesise	these	two	paths	in	the	beginning.	They	meet	in	the	end,
they	meet	at	the	peak,	they	meet	in	the	temple.
One	of	Rabbi	Moshe's	disciples	was	very	poor.	He	complained	to	the	Zaddik	that
his	wretched	circumstances	were	an	obstacle	to	learning	and	praying.
'In	 this	 day	 and	 age,'	 said	 Rabbi	 Moshe,	 'the	 greatest	 devotion,	 greater	 than
learning	and	praying,	consists	in	accepting	the	world	exactly	as	it	happens	to	be.'
The	 person	who	 is	moving	 into	meditation,	 or	 who	 is	moving	 on	 the	 path	 of
love,	will	be	helped	if	he	accepts	the	world	as	it	is.	Worldly	people	never	accept
the	world	as	it	is	--
they	are	always	trying	to	change	it.	They	are	always	trying	to	make	something
else,	 they	are	always	trying	to	fix	 things	into	a	different	order,	 they	are	always
trying	 to	 do	 something	outside.	The	 religious	 person	 accepts	whatsoever	 is	 on
the	outside	as	 it	 is.	He	is	not	disturbed,	he	is	not	distracted	by	the	outside.	His
whole	work	consists	of	moving	inside.	One	moves	through	love,	another	moves
through	meditation,	but	both	move	inside.	The	religious	world	is	the	world	of	the
within.	And	the	within	is	the	beyond.
In	Latin	 'sin'	 has	 two	meanings:	one	 is	 'missing	 the	 target',	 and	another	 that	 is
even	more	beautiful	--	'without'.	Sin	means	to	be	without,	to	be	outside	yourself.
Virtue	means	to	be	within	--	to	be	inside	yourself.
Soon	after	the	death	of	Rabbi	Moshe,	Rabbi	Mendel	of	Kotyk	asked	one	of	his
disciples:
'What	was	most	important	to	your	teacher?'
The	disciple	thought	and	then	replied:	'Whatever	he	happened	to	be	doing	at	the
moment.'
The	moment	 is	 the	most	 important	 thing.	 So	whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing	 at	 the
moment,	if	you	are	on	the	path	of	love,	do	it	with	deep	love,	as	if	you	are	doing
it	for	God.	Make	it	a	sacrifice.	The	word	'sacrifice'	comes	from	the	same	root	as
'the	 sacred'.	 Sacrifice	means	making	 a	 thing	 sacred.	 If	 you	 are	 on	 the	 path	 of
love,	make	everything	that	you	are	doing	a	sacrifice,	a	holy	thing,	as	if	you	are
preparing	 for	 God.	 He	 is	 to	 come,	 the	 guest	 is	 to	 come	 and	 you	 are	 doing
everything	for	him.
And	 in	 fact,	 it	 is	 so.	 The	whole	 of	 life	 is	 a	 preparation	 for	 the	 guest	 and	 the
whole	of	life	is	a	preparation	to	become	the	host,	so	that	when	he	comes,	you	are
ready,	when	he	knocks	at	the	door	everything	is	ready	to	receive	him.
If	 you	 are	 on	 the	 path	 of	 meditation,	 then	 too	 --	 this	 moment	 is	 the	 most
important	moment.	On	 the	 path	 of	meditation,	 the	 past	 has	 to	 be	 dropped,	 the
future	has	to	be	dropped.	You	have	to	be	just	here-now.
So	 remember,	 on	 both	 paths	 many	 things	 are	 similar;	 many	 things	 are	 basic
requirements	on	both	paths.	But	many	things	are	very,	very	polar	opposite.
So	 please,	 don't	 you	 try	 to	 make	 a	 synthesis.	 You	 simply	 follow	 one	 path.
Whatsoever	 is	essential	 is	similar	--	 that	 is,	 to	be	 in	 the	moment,	accepting	the
world	as	it	is,	remaining	in	a	mood	of	celebration.	The	BHAKTO.,	the	devotee,
goes	 on	 celebrating	 life	 because	 God	 is;	 and	 on	 the	 path	 of	 meditation	 the
SADHAKA,	the	yogi,	the	Zen	follower,	goes	on	celebrating	because,	'I	am	here,
I	AM.'	That	very	amness,	that	very	amness,	is	his	celebration.
So	don't	be	worried.	Many	questions	have	come	to	me	full	of	worries,	anxieties,
as	if,	if	you	follow	one	path,	you	will	be	missing	something.	Nothing.	You	will
be	missing	nothing.	By	following	one,	you	will	be	following	both;	by	following
both,	you	will	not	be	following	either.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Joy	Is	The	Criterion
16	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606160
ShortTitle:
DANG06
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
101
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
HOW	CAN	I	KNOW	IF	DETACHMENT	OR	INDIFFERENCE	IS	GROWING
WITHIN?
It	is	not	difficult	to	know.	How	do	you	know	when	you	have	a	headache	and	how
do	you	know	when	you	don't	have	a	headache?	It	is	simply	clear.	When	you	are
growing	in	detachment	you	will	become	healthier,	happier;	your	life	will	become
a	life	of	joy.	That	is	the	criterion	of	all	that	is	good.	Joy	is	the	criterion.	If	you	are
growing	in	joy,	you	are	growing,	and	you	are	getting	towards	home.
With	 indifference	 there	 is	no	possibility	 that	 joy	can	grow.	 In	 fact,	 if	you	have
any	joy,	that	will	disappear.
Happiness	is	health,	and,	to	me,	religion	is	basically	hedonistic.	Hedonism	is	the
very	essence	of	religion.	To	be	happy	is	all.
So	remember,	if	things	are	going	right,	and	you	are	moving	in	the	right	direction,
each	 moment	 will	 bring	 more	 joy	 --	 as	 if	 you	 are	 going	 towards	 a	 beautiful
garden.	The	closer	you	come,	the	air	will	be	fresher,	cooler,	more	fragrant.	That
will	 be	 the	 indication	 that	 you	 are	 moving	 in	 the	 right	 direction.	 If	 the	 air
becomes	less	fresh,	less	cool,	less	fragrant,	then	you	are	moving	in	the	opposite
direction.
The	existence	is	made	out	of	joy.	That	is	its	very	stuff.	Joy	is	the	stuff	existence
is	made	of.	So	whenever	you	are	moving	towards	becoming	more	existential	you
will	be	becoming	more	and	more	full	of	joy,	delight,	for	no	reason	at	all.	If	you
are	moving	into	detachment,	love	will	grow,	joy	will	grow,	only	attachments	will
drop	 --	 because	 attachments	bring	misery,	 because	 attachments	bring	bondage,
because	 attachments	 destroy	 your	 freedom.	 But	 if	 you	 are	 becoming
indifferent....	Indifference	is	a	pseudo-coin,	it	looks	like	detachment,	but	it	only
LOOKS	like	detachment.	Nothing	will	be	growing	in	it.	You	will	simply	shrink
and	die.
So	go	and	see:	there	are	so	many	monks	in	the	world	--	catholic,	Hindu,	Jaina,
Buddhist	-
-	 watch	 them.	 They	 don't	 give	 a	 radiant	 feeling,	 they	 don't	 have	 the	 aura	 of
fragrance,	they	don't	look	more	alive	than	you	are;	in	fact,	they	look	less	alive,
crippled,	paralysed.
Controlled	 of	 course,	 but	 not	 in	 a	 deeper,	 inner	 discipline;	 controlled	 but	 not
conscious;	following	a	certain	conscience	that	society	has	given	to	them	but	not
yet	 aware,	not	yet	 free,	not	yet	 individuals.	They	 live	as	 if	 they	are	already	 in
their	grave,	just	waiting	to	die.
Their	life	becomes	morose,	monotonous,	sad	--	it	is	a	sort	of	despair.
Beware.	Whenever	 something	 goes	wrong	 there	 are	 indications	 in	 your	 being.
Sadness	 is	 an	 indicator,	 depression	 is	 an	 indicator;	 joy,	 celebration	 is	 also	 an
indicator.	More	songs	will	happen	to	you	if	you	are	moving	towards	detachment.
You	will	be	dancing	more	and	you	will	become	more	loving.	Remember,	love	is
not	attachment,	love	knows	no	attachment,	and	that	which	knows	attachment	is
not	love.	That	is	possessiveness,	domination,	clinging,	fear,	greed	--	it	may	be	a
thousand	and	one	things,	but	it	is	not	love.
In	the	name	of	love	other	things	are	parading,	in	the	name	of	love	other	things
are	hiding	behind,	but	on	the	container	 the	label	 'love'	 is	stuck.	Inside	you	will
find	many	sorts	of	things	but	not	love	at	all.
Watch.	If	you	are	attached	to	a	person,	are	you	in	love?	Or	are	you	afraid	of	your
aloneness,	so	you	cling?	Because	you	cannot	be	alone	you	use	this	person	so	as
not	to	be	alone.	Then	you	are	afraid.	If	the	person	dies	or	moves	somewhere	else
or	falls	in	love	with	someone	else	then	you	will	kill	this	person	and	you	will	say,
'I	was	so	much	attached.'	Or	you	may	kill	yourself	and	you	will	 say,	 'I	was	so
much	 attached	 that	 I	 cannot	 live	 without	 her	 or	 without	 him.'	 It	 is	 sheer
foolishness.	It	is	not	love,	it	is	something	else.
You	are	afraid	of	your	aloneness,	you	are	not	capable	of	being	with	yourself,	you
need	somebody	to	distract	you.	And	you	want	to	possess	the	other	person,	you
want	 to	 use	 the	 other	 person	 as	 a	 means	 for	 your	 own	 ends.	 To	 use	 another
person	as	a	means	is	violence.
Immanuel	Kant	has	made	it	one	of	his	fundamentals	of	moral	life.	It	is.	He	used
to	say	that	to	treat	a	person	as	a	means	is	the	greatest	immoral	act	there	is.	It	is.
Because	when	you	treat	another	person	as	a	means	--	for	your	gratification,	for
your	sexual	desire,	for	your	fear,	or	for	something	else	--	when	you	use	another
person	 as	 a	 means,	 you	 are	 reducing	 the	 other	 person	 to	 be	 a	 thing,	 you	 are
destroying	his	or	her	freedom,	you	are	killing	his	or	her	soul.
The	 soul	 can	grow	only	 in	 freedom.	Love	gives	 freedom.	And	when	you	give
freedom,	you	are	free,	that's	what	detachment	is.	If	you	enforce	bondage	on	the
other,	you	will	be	in	imprisonment	on	your	own	accord.	If	you	bind	the	other,	the
other	will	bind	you;	if	you	define	the	other,	the	other	will	define	you;	if	you	are
trying	to	possess	the	other,	the	other	will	possess	you.	That's	how	couples	go	on
fighting	for	domination	for	their	whole	life:	the	man	in	his	own	way,	the	woman
in	her	own	way.	Both	struggle.	It	is	a	continuous	nagging	and	fighting.	And	the
man	thinks	that	in	some	ways	he	controls	the	woman	and	the	woman	thinks	that
in	some	ways	she	controls	the	man.	Control	is	not	love.
Never	 treat	 any	 person	 as	 a	means.	 Treat	 everybody	 as	 an	 end	 in	 himself,	 in
herself	--
then	you	are	a	religious	person.	Then	you	don't	cling,	then	you	are	not	attached.
You	 love	 but	 your	 love	 gives	 freedom	 --	 and,	 when	 you	 give	 freedom	 to	 the
other,	you	are	free.
Only	in	freedom	does	your	soul	grow.	You	will	feel	very,	very	happy.
The	 world	 has	 become	 a	 very	 unhappy	 thing.	 Not	 because	 the	 world	 is	 an
unhappy	 thing,	 but	 because	 we	 have	 done	 something	 wrong	 to	 it.	 The	 same
world	can	become	a	celebration.
You	 ask,	 HOW	 CAN	 I	 KNOW	 IF	 DETACHMENT	 OR	 INDIFFERENCE	 IS
GROWING
WITHIN?	If	you	are	feeling	happy,	if	you	are	feeling	happy	with	whatsoever	is
growing,	 more	 centred,	 more	 grounded,	 more	 alive	 than	 before,	 then	 go
headlong	 into	 it.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 fear.	 Let	 happiness	 be	 the	 touchstone,	 the
criterion	--	nothing	else	can	be	the	criterion.	Whatsoever	the	scriptures	say	is	not
a	 criterion	 unless	 your	 heart	 is	 throbbing	 with	 happiness;	 whatsoever	 I	 say
cannot	be	the	criterion	for	you	unless	your	heart	is	throbbing	with	happiness.
The	moment	you	were	were	born,	a	subtle	 indicator	 is	placed	within	you.	 It	 is
part	 of	 life	 that	 you	 can	 always	know	what	 is	 happening,	 you	 can	 always	 feel
whether	 you	 are	 happy	 or	 unhappy.	Nobody	 asks	 how	 to	 know	whether	 he	 is
happy	or	unhappy.	Nobody	has	ever	asked.	When	you	are	unhappy,	you	know;
when	you	are	happy,	you	know.	Then	it	 is	an	intrinsic	value.	You	know	it,	you
are	 born	 knowing	 it,	 so	 let	 that	 intrinsic	 indication	 be	 used	 and	 it	 will	 never
falsify	your	life.
But	 if	 you	 look	 in	 the	 scriptures	 there	 is	 danger,	 because	 for	 the	 person	who
wrote	a	certain	book	it	may	have	been	a	growth,	but	it	may	not	be	a	growth	for
you.	He	felt	happy.	Mahavir	felt	very	happy	with	fasting;	Buddha	never	felt	so
happy	with	fasting.	So	what	to	do?	To	whom	to	listen?	Both	are	perfect	beings.
If	you	 listen	 to	Buddha	 there	 is	a	possibility	 that	you	will	 start	distorting	your
own	 feelings;	 if	 you	 listen	 to	 Mahavir,	 there	 is	 the	 same	 possibility.	 Krishna
lived	in	the	world,	loved	many	women,	enjoyed	himself.
He	 was	 a	 totally	 different	 man,	 perfectly	 happy.	 He	 was	 always	 singing	 and
dancing.	He	had	his	own	feeling	--	maybe	his	feeling	suits	you	or	not.
So	never	 try	any	outer	criterion;	never	 try	 the	outside	criterion	 for	your	 inside
otherwise	there	is	a	danger	you	may	falsify	your	inner	mechanism,	the	intrinsic
mechanism.	Listen	to	your	heart.
I	 am	 here	 not	 to	 give	 you	 any	 criterion	 but	 to	make	 you	 aware	 of	 your	 own
criterion,	just	to	make	you	aware	of	your	own	intrinsic	awareness.	Feel	--	and	it
is	so	clear	that	nothing	else	is	needed	to	help	it.
The	second	question:
Question	2
WHEN	 MY	 MIND	 IS	 THE	 CAUSE	 OF	 MY	 UNHAPPINESS	 EITHER	 I
DON'T
KNOW	HOW	TO	COME	OUT	OF	MIND	OR	I	MUST	STILL	ENJOY	BEING
IN	MY
MIND,	DREAMS,	FANTASIES.
If	the	house	is	on	fire	and	you	see	the	flames	of	fire	you	will	escape.	And	you
will	know	how	to	escape,	you	will	 find	a	way.	When	 the	house	 is	on	fire	who
worries	whether	you	are	getting	out	of	the	right	door	or	whether	you	are	getting
out	of	the	back	door	or	getting	out	of	the	window?	Who	bothers?	Once	you	feel
that	the	house	is	on	fire	you	will	not	even	think	about	how	to	get	out.	You	will
get	out	first	and	then	you	will	think.	And	then	you	will	wonder	how	it	happened.
Buddha	used	to	say	that	you	ask	about	techniques	because	you	are	not	yet	aware
that	the	house	is	on	fire.
When	you	 come	 across	 a	 snake	on	 the	 path	do	you	 ask	how	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the
way?	And	you	may	not	have	come	across	a	snake	in	your	whole	life.	This	may
be	for	the	first	time.
And	you	may	never	ever	have	heard	anybody	talking	about	how	to	get	out	of	the
way	of	a	snake,	but	still	you	will	get	out	of	the	way	--	you	will	jump.	You	will
not	sit	there	and	think	about	what	to	do,	how	to	do	it,	whom	to	consult,	where	to
find	a	guru.	You	will	not	think,	you	will	simply	jump.
The	questioner	says,	WHEN	MIND	IS	THE	CAUSE	OF	MY	UNHAPPINESS
EITHER
I	DON'T	KNOW	HOW	TO	COME	OUT	OF	MIND	OR	I	MUST	STILL	ENJOY
BEING
IN	MY	MIND,	DREAMS,	FANTASIES.
WHEN	MIND	IS	THE	CAUSE	OF	MY	UNHAPPINESS....	Still	 it	 is	not	clear
to	you.
You	may	 have	 heard	me	 saying	 again	 and	 again	 that	mind	 is	 the	 cause	 of	 all
unhappiness.
You	 have	 listened	 to	me,	 you	 have	 become	 like	 a	 parrot	 --	 now	 the	 question
arises.	But	you	have	not	yet	felt	 it.	If	you	have	felt	 that	mind	is	the	cause	then
you	will	 jump	out	of	 it,	you	will	know	the	way.	The	way	is	 there,	 the	way	has
always	been	there.
It	 is	 not	 your	 realisation.	 And	 you	 must	 still	 be	 enjoying	 your	 dreams,	 your
fantasies,	because	the	mind	stops	immediately,	the	moment	you	stop	enjoying	it.
There	is	no	other	way	to	stop	it.	It	is	just	like	a	bicycle:	you	go	on	pedaling	it,	it
goes	on	moving.	If	you	stop	pedaling	it,	it	may	go	a	little	further	because	of	the
past	momentum	but	then	it	will	stop.
Mind	needs	constant	co-operation,	constant	 infusion	of	energy	 from	your	 side,
constant	 identification.	The	mind	needs	your	help,	 it	 is	a	mechanism,	 it	cannot
run	on	its	own	accord.	Deep	down	you	are	helping	it.	When	the	body	lies	there
and	 the	 soul	has	disappeared,	 the	mind	 stops	 instantly.	 It	 cannot	work	without
you.
You	must	be	enjoying	 it.	 In	 fact,	 religion	 is	 also	one	of	your	 fantasies;	God	 is
your	biggest	dream.	Listening	to	religious	people,	seeing	their	ecstasy,	watching
their	grace,	a	greed	has	arisen	in	you.	Your	mind	fantasises.	It	would	be	beautiful
to	 be	 in	 nirvana,	 it	 would	 be	 beautiful	 to	 be	 enlightened.	 Your	 mind	 starts
dreaming	about	it.	Then	you	come	to	hear	that	the	mind	has	to	be	dropped.
Three	persons	were	talking.	One	said,	'If	in	a	dream	you	get	one	million	rupees,
what	are	you	going	to	do?	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	am	going	for	a	world	tour.
That	has	been	my	dream	from	my	very	childhood.	What	are	you	going	to	do?'
The	other	said,	 'If	I	get	one	million	rupees,	I	am	not	going	anywhere.	I	am	just
going	to	rest	 in	my	house.	Why	bother?	I	am	going	to	stop	going	and	just	rest
and	relax	and	enjoy.
Who	bothers	to	go	from	here	to	there?'
And	they	asked	the	third	man,	'If	you	get	one	million	rupees	in	a	dream,	what	are
you	going	to	do?'
He	said,	'I	will	immediately	close	my	eyes	and	sleep	again,	to	dream	more	to	get
many	 more	 millions.	 If	 you	 can	 get	 one	 million	 rupees	 in	 one	 dream,	 I	 will
dream	the	same	dream	again	to	get	one	million	more.'
Your	mind	 is	your	dream,	your	 fantasy.	You	are	 still	 in	 it.	Even	when	you	are
thinking	about	how	to	get	out	of	the	mind,	that	too	is	a	mind	fantasy.	And	you
must	be	enjoying	it.
I	have	heard.
Mulla	Nasruddin	stormed	out	of	his	office	and	yelled,	'Something	has	got	to	be
done	about	those	six	phones	on	my	desk.	For	the	past	five	minutes	I	have	been
talking	to	myself.'
Mind	is	nothing	but	talking	to	yourself.	What	else	is	it?	The	inner	talk,	the	inner
chattering,	 the	 rehearsing	 for	 the	 future,	 the	 chewing	 again	 and	 again	 the	 past
experiences
--	you	are	talking	to	yourself.	It	is	a	monologue.	With	nobody	else	to	talk	to,	you
talk	to	yourself.
If	windows	were	possible	into	your	mind	and	people	could	look	inside,	or	there
was	a	system....	Someday	there	may	be.	Science	will	find	a	way	to	magnify	your
mind.	Your	mind	can	be	attached,	wired,	to	an	instrument	and	the	instrument	will
start	broadcasting	what	 is	going	on	inside	your	mind.	Then	you	will	be	simply
amazed	 to	 see	 that	 you	 are	mad.	You	will	 not	 allow	 anybody	 to	 connect	 your
mind	 to	 an	 instrument.	 Sometimes	write	 down	what	 goes	 on	 in	 your	mind	 on
some	blank	paper.	Close	 the	doors	 and	windows	 so	nobody	 comes	 in	 and	 just
write	 it	 down.	 Don't	 deceive,	 because	 nobody	 will	 ever	 see,	 you	 can	 burn	 it
immediately.	Just	write	down	whatsoever	goes	on.	Don't	improve	upon	it,	don't
add	 something,	 don't	 delete	 anything.	 Photographically	 simply	write	 down	 the
way	the	mind	goes	on.	Within	ten	minutes	you	will	see	how	mad	you	are.
What	is	going	on?
But	we	never	look.	We	look	outside,	we	never	look	into	the	mind.	Looking	into
the	mind	is	what	meditation	is	all	about
Bodhidharma,	 the	real	 founder	of	Zen,	used	 to	say,	"Looking	face	 to	face	with
the	mind	 is	all.	Looking	directly	 into	your	mind	 is	all.'	Once	you	start	 looking
directly	you	will	 be	 surprised.	You	will	 come	 to	know	 that	 you	 are	 carrying	 a
madman;	not	one	really,	a	madhouse	--	many	madmen	inside,	running	hither	and
thither,	all	against	each	other,	fighting,	struggling,	warring.
If	you	look	deep	inside	into	the	mind	directly,	first	you	will	be	amazed,	mystified
as	to	why	you	go	on	carrying	this	mind.
And	the	second	thing	you	will	realise	is	 that	you	are	not	the	mind,	you	are	the
looker,	the	watcher,	the	witness,	who	is	seeing	into	the	mind.	And	that	will	give
you	a	freedom	that	you	have	not	yet	known.	You	are	confined	in	the	body,	then
you	are	confined	in	the	mind.	Once	you	come	to	know	that	you	are	neither	the
body	nor	the	mind,	suddenly	you	become	unconfined	--	you	are	as	big,	as	vast	as
the	sky.	Then	there	is	no	boundary	line	around	you;	then	you	are	one	with	this
ocean	of	life;	then	you	are	one	with	God.'That	art	thou	--	'TAT	TWAMASI.'	Then
you	come	to	know	that	'i	am	that',	the	witness.
So	the	only	thing	you	can	do	is	just	to	look	deeply	inside	the	mind.	It	will	have
two	aspects.	First	you	will	feel	very,	very	crazy,	going	mad.	Don't	try	to	escape
from	that	madness	because	if	you	escape,	again	you	will	escape	outside.	Stick	to
it,	let	it	be	mad	--
but	 go	 on	 looking	 into	 it,	 go	 on	 looking	 into	 it.	 Sometimes	 it	 takes	 months,
sometimes	 it	 takes	 years	 but	 it	 is	worth	 it,	 even	 if	 it	 takes	 lives.	 If	 you	 go	 on
looking,	 unwaveringly,	 not	 getting	 distracted	 here	 and	 there,	 then	 one	 day	 the
second	aspect	arises	in	you	--	that	you	are	a	witness.	Your	mind	looks	very,	very
far	 away,	 very	 distant,	 on	 some	 other	 planet,	 only	 sounds	 are	 heard,	 a	 few
flickering	waves	 come	 to	 you.	The	more	 you	 become	 a	witness,	 the	more	 the
energy	 gathers	 together	 in	 becoming	 a	 witness,	 the	 more	 and	more	 energy	 is
taken	away	from	the	mind.	The	mind	starts	withering.	One	day	you	are	there	all
alone	without	any	mind.	Then	you	are	in	a	state	of	'nowhereness'.
I	have	heard	about	two	hobos	who	were	caught	by	the	police	and	were	brought
to	the	court.	The	policeman	suspected	they	had	not	committed	anything	wrong,
but	their	way	of	life,	their	style	was	suspicious.
The	magistrate	asked	the	first	hobo,	'Where	do	you	live?'
He	said,	'Nowhere.'
He	asked	the	second,	'Where	do	you	live?'
He	said,	'I	am	this	guy's	neighbour.'
The	first	guy	lives	nowhere,	the	other	is	the	neighbour	--	the	answer	is	pure	Zen.
When	 you	 come	 to	 know	 yourself,	 you	 come	 to	 know	 that	 you	 are	 nowhere,
'nowhen',	because	there	is	no	time,	no	space.	Suddenly	you	are	the	whole,	spread
all	over	reality.
This	is	what	we	in	the	East	call	MOKSHA,	absolute	freedom.
But	you	must	be	enjoying	your	mind,	that's	why	you	are	asking	how	to	get	out	of
it,	what	 the	way	 is	 to	get	out	of	 it.	These	are	 the	questions	of	people	who	are
trying	to	deceive	 themselves.	You	don't	want	 to	get	out	of	 it	so	you	ask	 'how?'
because	with	the	'how?'
postponement	is	possible.	The	'how?'	cannot	be	done	right	now,	you	will	have	to
practise	it,	it	can	happen	only	tomorrow,	it	cannot	happen	right	now.	The	'how?'
gives	you	time	--
tomorrow.	and	then	you	say,	'Okay,	so	we	will	do	it	tomorrow.	It	cannot	happen
right	now.'
People	 ask	me,	 'Can	enlightenment	happen	 right	now?'	 If	 I	 say	 'yes',	 they	 say,
'Then	why	is	it	not	happening?'	Then	they	think	it	is	not	going	to	happen	to	them
because	 if	 it	was	going	 to	happen,	 it	would	have	happened	already.	 It	happens
right	now!	If	I	say	to	them,
'You	will	have	to	work	for	it,	you	will	have	to	do	hard,	arduous	work,	you	will
have	to	move	in	deep	discipline,'	then	they	say,	'Then	it	is	okay.	So	somewhere
in	the	future	it	will	happen.'	And	they	are	relieved.	So	it	is	not	going	to	happen
right	now	--	someday	--
so	what	is	the	hurry?
Whether	it	is	tomorrow	or	the	day	after	tomorrow,	it	makes	no	difference	--	it	is
tomorrow.	Both	ways	they	find	a	way	to	postpone.
Now	let	me	give	you	a	paradox	to	meditate	on:	it	always	happens	right	now	but
one	 has	 to	 work	 for	 it.	 It	 never	 happens	 in	 the	 tomorrow,	 it	 always	 happens
today,	because	there	is	no	tomorrow.	But	one	has	to	work	hard;	one	has	to	gather
together	 all	 one's	 energies	 and	 to	 put	 them	 at	 stake.	 If	 all	 your	 energies	 are
together	 right	 now,	 if	 you	 desire	 intensely,	 passionately,	 if	 your	 desire	 has
become	almost	a	flame	and	you	are	aflame	with	one	desire,	only	with	one	desire
--	to	attain	to	enlightenment	--	it	can	happen	right	now.	If	you	are	so	thirsty	that
you	disappear	 and	only	 thirst	 remains,	 then	God	 starts	 pouring	 into	you.	Then
you	have	earned,	you	have	earned	the	capacity.	You	have	become	receptive.
WHEN	MIND	 IS	 THE	 CAUSE	 OF	 MY	 UNHAPPINESS....	 Never	 ask	 such
questions.
You	 still	 think	 it	 is	 not	 so.	 This	 is	 a	 hypothetical	 question;	when,	 if,	 etc.,	 are
hypothetical	questions.
WHEN	MIND	IS	THE	CAUSE	OF	MY	UNHAPPINESS....	No,	either	it	is	or	it
is	 not,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 'when'.	 Either	 you	 know	 that	 it	 is	 the	 cause	 of
unhappiness	or	you	know	that	it	is	not	the	cause	of	unhappiness.	Decide.	If	it	is
not	 the	cause	of	unhappiness,	 then	things	are	clear:	 there	is	nothing	to	be	done
with	mind.	In	fact,	if	it	is	not	the	cause	of	unhappiness,	then	the	cause	must	lie
somewhere	outside	you.	That's	what	Communists	say	--	Marx	and	Mao.	That's
what	they	say	--	that	the	cause	of	happiness	is	somewhere	outside	you	not	inside
you:	 in	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 society,	 the	 economic	 system	 of	 society,	 in	 the
political	world	--	somewhere	outside	you.
If	your	misery	comes	from	outside	there	is	no	way	to	get	out	of	it.	Because	the
cause	is	outside	you,	how	can	you	destroy	it?
Because	of	 this	 fact,	Freud	by	and	by	became	very	despondent	 in	his	 later	 life
and	finally,	before	he	died,	he	wrote	 in	a	 letter:	Man	can	never	be	happy;	 it	 is
impossible.	Man's	desire	to	be	happy	is	an	impossible	desire.	Man	can	never	be
happy	because	it	is	not	in	his	hands	to	be	happy.
But	Freud	is	wrong.	I	am	here	and	I	say	 to	you	that	I	am	happy.	So	it	 is	not	a
question	 of	 my	 belief.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 belief	 that	 I	 am	 happy.	 Buddha	 is	 happy,
Krishna	is	happy,	Jesus	is	happy.	But	Freud	--	why	does	he	think	that	man	cannot
be	happy?	And	he	 is	not	 a	man	 to	make	meaningless	 statements.	He	 is	 a	very
sincere	man.	Forty,	fifty	years	of	deep	observation	has	brought	him	to	make	the
statement	that	man	cannot	be	happy.	The	reason	is	that	he	was	also	looking	for
the	cause	somewhere	beyond	man.
Marx	 looks	 for	 it	 in	 the	social	 structure,	Freud	 looks	 for	 it	 in	 the	unconscious.
But	the	very	definition	of	unconscious	is	that	which	is	not	available	to	you,	that
of	which	you	are	not	conscious.	It	is	outside	you,	you	are	in	your	consciousness.
It	is	outside	you,	it	is	somewhere	you	don't	know	where.	From	where	does	your
misery	come?	How	can	you	change	it?
Religion	 takes	 a	 radically	 and	 diametrically	 opposite	 standpoint:	 you	 are	 the
cause.	It	makes	one	sad	in	the	beginning	that	'i	am	the	cause	of	my	misery'	but
really	 one	 should	 be	 happy.	 If	 I	 am	 the	 cause,	 then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility,	 then
there	 is	 hope	 --	 because	 I	 can	 stop	 it.	 I	 can	 try	 not	 to	 be	 the	 cause	 of	 my
unhappiness.
With	 religion,	 man	 becomes	 responsible;	 with	 communism,	 man	 becomes
irresponsible.
With	 religion,	man	becomes	a	 free	agent	 in	 this	world;	with	communism,	man
becomes	 a	 mechanical	 thing,	 a	 robot-like	 thing.	 With	 religion,	 you	 attain	 to
being	a	soul,	you	become	a	soul;	with	communism,	the	soul	disappears,	you	are
no	more	there.
If	the	cause	of	happiness	is	outside,	if	the	cause	of	misery	is	outside,	then	your
soul	 is	 outside	 --	 it	 is	 not	within	 you.	Then	 you	 are	 to	 be	manipulated	 by	 the
state,	then	you	are	nothing	but	a	hollow	puppet	and	the	strings	are	somewhere	in
the	 Kremlin	 --	 somebody	 is	 manipulating	 from	 there.	 Then	 life	 is	 almost
meaningless	--	not	only	meaningless,	horrible.	Man	is	not	a	hollow	puppet;	man
has	a	substantial	being	in	him.
So	 when	 you	 say,	 WHEN	 MIND	 IS	 THE	 THE	 CAUSE	 OF	 MY
UNHAPPINESS,	 you	 have	 taken	 my	 statement	 as	 true	 without	 realising	 it,
without	becoming	a	witness	to	it.
Never	do	that,	otherwise	questions	arise	unnecessarily.	It	is	better	not	to	answer
hypothetical	questions	because	 they	will	 create	more	hypothetical	questions.	 If
you	are	unhappy	because	of	your	mind,	recognise	the	fact.
Somebody	 insults	 you.	 Do	 you	 think	 you	 are	 unhappy	 because	 somebody
insulted	you	or	do	you	 think	you	are	unhappy	because	you	have	a	very	 subtle
ego	which	felt	hurt	by	this	insult?	Now	the	possibilities	are	only	two.	Either	you
are	 unhappy	 because	 he	 insulted	 you.	 If	 that	 is	 the	 possibility,	 the	 only
possibility,	then	you	can	never	be	happy	because	the	world	is	vast	and	how	can
you	manage	that	nobody	will	insult	you	ever?	It	is	beyond	you.	If	it	is	your	ego
which	feels	hurt,	 then	the	possibility	exists	that	you	can	drop	the	ego.	Then	let
the	whole	world	insult	you,	you	can	go	on	laughing,	it	makes	no	difference.
Mulla	Nasruddin	and	one	of	his	friends	had	been	drinking	all	evening	in	a	bar.
The	friend	finally	passed	out	and	fell	to	the	floor.	The	Mulla	called	a	doctor	who
rushed	him	to	a	hospital.
When	he	came	to,	the	doctor	asked	him,	'Do	you	see	any	pink	elephants	or	little
green	men?'
'No,'	groaned	the	patient.
'No	snakes	or	alligators?'	the	doctor	asked.
'No,'	the	drunk	said.
'Then	just	sleep	it	off.	You	will	be	all	right	in	the	morning,'	said	the	doctor.
But	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	worried.
'Look,	doctor,'	he	said,	'that	boy	is	in	bad	shape.	He	said	he	could	not	see	any	of
them	animals	and	you	and	I	know	the	room	is	full	of	them.'
What	I	say	will	not	make	much	difference	if	you	know	the	room	is	full	of	them.
Finally	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 the	 deciding	 factor.	 So	watch	 your	mind.	 Is	 your
mind	the	cause	of	misery?	If	it	is	not	then	you	cannot	be	a	religious	man.	Then
one	 day	 or	 other	 you	 are	 going	 to	 be	 a	 communist.	 These	 are	 the	 two
alternatives:	religion	and	communism.
Everybody	has	to	decide.	And	I	would	suggest	to	you	that	if	you	feel	that	your
mind	is	not	the	cause	of	misery,	then	become	a	communist	--	nothing	wrong	in
it,	be	sincere.
Sooner	 or	 later	 you	 will	 be	 frustrated,	 and	 a	 frustrated	 communist	 becomes
religious	 very	 easily.	 Many	 people	 need	 that	 frustration	 because	 then	 that
alternative	 is	 finished.	Then	 there	 is	only	one	alternative.	Never	hang	between
the	two,	never	be	in	the	limbo.
Many	 people	 are	 in	 the	 limbo.	 They	 go	 to	 the	 church	 but	 their	 heart	 is
communistic.
When	 I	 say	 communistic	 I	 don't	 mean	 they	 belong	 to	 the	 communist	 party,	 I
mean	that	they	believe	that	the	cause	of	their	misery	is	outside.
A	stubborn	old	Dubliner	stepped	into	the	dentist's	office	with	a	terrific	toothache.
He	could	not,	however,	muster	up	enough	courage	to	have	the	tooth	pulled.	So
the	dentist	gave	him	a	glass	of	whisky	to	bolster	him.
Then	the	dentist	said,	'Right,	ready	now?'
'Not	quite,'	said	the	man	smacking	his	lips.
Two	more	drinks	of	whisky	and	finally	he	finished	up	the	entire	bottle.
'Now	step	into	the	chair,'	the	dentist	begged.
The	Irishman	came	out	swinging	into	the	middle	of	the	room.
'I	would	like	to	see	the	swine	who	would	dare	to	touch	my	tooth	now!'
You	 are	 almost	 drunk	 with	 your	 mind.	 And	 I	 am	 going	 to	 touch	 your	 teeth,
remember.
You	have	to	become	a	little	sober,	you	have	to	become	a	little	more	aware.	Once
you	have	a	little	awareness	you	will	start	seeing	that	it	is	your	mind,	nothing	else
but	your	mind	that	goes	on	spinning	new	webs	of	misery.	It	is	just	like	a	spider:
he	goes	on	creating	a	net	and	goes	on	being	caught	into	himself.
The	first	thing	to	be	decided	is	whether	you	realise	the	fact	that	your	mind	is	the
cause	 of	 your	 misery,	 of	 your	 unhappiness.	 Once	 this	 is	 decided	 everything
becomes	clear.	Then	there	is	no	need,	really,	to	ask	how	to	get	out	of	it.	And	if
you	have	not	yet	decided	and	I	help	you	in	some	way	to	get	out	of	it,	I	will	be	in
trouble.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote	to	make	the	thing	clear.
The	woman	bather	had	got	 into	a	hole	and	she	could	not	 swim.	Nor	could	 the
young	man	on	the	end	of	the	pier.	But	when	she	came	up	the	first	 time	and	he
caught	 sight	 of	 her	 face	 he	 could	 yell,	 and	 he	 did.	 Just	 then	 a	 big	 fisherman
walked	by.
'What	is	up?'	he	asked.
'There!'	 hoarsely	 cried	 the	 young	 man.'My	 wife,	 drowning.	 I	 can't	 swim.	 A
hundred	dollars	if	you	save	her!'
In	a	moment	the	fisherman	was	in	the	water;	in	another	he	was	out	of	it	with	the
rescued	woman.
He	approached	the	young	man.'Well,	what	about	the	hundred	dollars?'
If	the	young	man's	face	had	been	ashen-gray	before,	now	it	was	dead	white	as	he
gazed	upon	the	features	of	the	rescued	woman.
'Yes	I	know,'	he	gasped,	'but	when	I	made	the	offer	I	thought	it	was	my	wife	who
was	drowning	and	now,	now	it	turns	out	it	was	my	wife's	mother!'
'Just	 my	 luck,'	 said	 the	 fisherman	 sadly,	 thrusting	 his	 hand	 into	 his	 trouser
pocket.'How	much	do	I	owe	you?'
So	first	you	decide	whether	your	mind	is	your	wife	or	your	mother-in-law.	Then
only	can	something	be	done	about	it.	Otherwise	you	will	be	angry	with	me.	If	I
pull	you	out	of	your	mind	and	you	were	still	fantasising	and	dreaming,	you	will
be	 tremendously	 angry	 and	 annoyed	 and	 irritated.	 And	 if	 you	 were	 dreaming
sweet	dreams,	 then	more	so,	because	you	were	hoping	that	something	was	just
going	to	be	fulfilled.
One	day	Mulla	Nasruddin's	wife	woke	him	up	 in	 the	morning	 and	he	 became
very,	very	angry	and	he	said,	'You	foolish	woman.	Is	this	the	right	time?'
She	said,	'But	the	sun	is	up.'
He	said,	'It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	sun.	I	was	dreaming	about	a	man	who	was
offering	me	a	hundred	rupees	and	just	at	the	moment	I	was	going	to	take	it,	you
came.	You	have	destroyed	the	whole	thing.'
He	tried	again	 to	create	sleep,	 tried	 to	close	his	eyes,	 turned	this	way	and	that,
but	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	a	dream.	Once	it	is	gone	it	is	gone.	And	he	started
saying,	'Okay,	I	will	accept	even	ninety,	eighty,	seventy,	whatsoever	you	give,	I
will	accept,	but	give	it!'
But	there	was	nobody	to	give.
If	 you	 are	 dreaming,	 then	 dream	 a	 little	 more.	 Nobody	 is	 ever	 fulfilled	 by
dreaming	 but	 one	 has	 to	 figure	 it	 out	 oneself	 --	 'Enough	 is	 enough.	 I	 have
dreamed	 enough,	 fantasised	 enough,	 and	 nothing	 comes	 except	misery,	 except
frustration.'	 Each	 desire	 brings	more	 frustration,	 each	 expectation	 turns	 finally
into	frustration.
Once	YOU	understand	it,	 there	will	be	no	need	to	take	you	out	of	it;	once	you
understand	 it,	 the	 very	 understanding	 becomes	 the	 coming	 out	 of	 it.	 The	 very
understanding	means	freedom	from	mind.
The	third	question:
Question	3
YOU	 TALK	 ABOUT	 A	 LIVING	 RELIGION	 YET	 IN	 SOME	 CENTRES
PEOPLE
KNEEL	 OVER	 THE	 CAST	 OF	 YOUR	 FEET.	 I	 AM	 REMINDED	 OF	 THE
CATHOLIC
RELIGION	WHERE	 I	 LOST	 THE	MEANING	OF	 THE	 TEACHINGS	AND
INSTEAD
VENERATED	THE	SYMBOL.	PLEASE	TELL	ME	WHY	WE	NEED	YOUR
SYMBOLS.	THEY	ARE	NOT	YOU,NOR	YOUR	TEACHING.
It	is	a	very	subtle	question.	You	will	have	to	be	very	alert	to	understand	it.
Yes,	 religion	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 symbols.	 Religion	 in	 its	 essence	 is
absolutely	 pure,	 just	 an	 experiencing,	 a	 knowing.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
outside	symbols.	But	that	is	not	the	question.	That	pure	religion	is	not	possible
for	you	as	you	are;	the	way	you	are	you	will	need	symbols.
Once	it	happened,	Joshu	was	sitting	in	front	of	his	temple.	A	great	Zen	Master.	A
seeker	 came	 and	 he	 asked	 Joshu,	 'Master,	where	 is	Buddha?	Who	 is	Buddha?
What	is	this	Buddhahood?'
Joshu	 looked	 into	 the	 eyes	of	 the	man	and	 said,	 'You	ask	who	 is	Buddha?	Go
inside	the	temple.	He	is	there.'
The	man	 laughed	and	said,	 'There	 is	only	a	 stone	statue.	And	 I	know	and	you
know	that	a	stone	statue	is	not	Buddha.'
Joshu	said,	'Perfectly	right.	A	stone	statue	is	not	Buddha.'
Then	the	man	said,	'Then	tell	me,	who	is	Buddha?'
Joshu	looked	again	into	his	eyes	and	said,	'Go	into	the	temple,	you	will	find	the
Buddha	there.'
Now	this	is	very	puzzling.	The	questioner	is	not	yet	able	to	understand	the	non-
symbolic.
Though	intellectually	he	understands	that	the	statue	is	just	a	stone	statue	and	is
not	Buddha,	it	is	only	intellectual	understanding
If	your	lover	gives	you	a	small	handkerchief,	has	it	any	more	meaning	than	any
other	handkerchief	of	the	same	make,	of	the	same	value?	If	it	is	lost,	tears	may
come	 to	 your	 eyes.	 Your	 mind	 is	 still	 symbolic,	 still	 lives	 in	 symbols.	 That
handkerchief,	 a	 small,	 valueless	 handkerchief	 given	 by	 your	 lover	 or	 beloved,
carries	 a	 certain	 meaning	 which	 nobody	 else	 can	 see.	 It	 is	 an	 ordinary
handkerchief	but	 to	you	 it	 is	very	symbolic.	 It	has	a	message,	a	 love	message.
That	handkerchief	is	worth	a	kingdom.	It	is	personal	and	somebody	has	given	it
to	 you	 as	 a	 deep	 gesture	 of	 his	 love.	 It	 is	 no	 more	 a	 commodity	 in	 the
marketplace,	it	is	no	more	a	part	of	the	world	of	things	--	that	handkerchief	has	a
personality,	almost	a	soul.	Have	you	not	watched	this	inside	you?
If	this	is	so,	then	symbols	are	still	meaningful	for	you	and	you	cannot	just	drop
them	 unless	 the	whole	mind	 is	 dropped.	 It	 depends	 on	 you.	 If	 those	 symbols
have	a	certain	response	in	your	heart	they	are	alive.
When	a	Buddhist	goes	to	the	Buddhist	temple	and	bows	down	before	the	stone
statue	of	Buddha,	if	it	is	really	a	heartfelt	prayer,	if	he	is	really	bowing	down	in
deep	 humbleness,	 then	 don't	 bother	 about	 the	 statue.	 The	 real	 thing	 is	 the
humbleness,	 the	 desire,	 the	 love,	 the	 heartfelt	 urge.	 That	 stone	 statue	 is	 just
instrumental.
If	you	go	and	you	are	not	a	Buddhist	and	you	have	no	heart	for	Buddha,	then,	of
course,	it	is	a	stone	statue.	A	Buddhist	has	a	love	affair	with	Buddha.	If	you	call
that	stone	statue	just	a	stone,	he	will	be	hurt	because	he	sees	something	more	in
it.	That	something	more	is	in	his	eyes,	certainly	so,	absolutely	so	--	it	is	not	there
in	 the	 statue.	But	 in	 front	 of	 the	 statue	 something	 responds	 in	 him,	 something
starts	 singing	 in	 his	 heart.	 His	 heart	 beats	 faster,	 he	 feels	 transfigured.	 That
transfiguration	is	meaningful.	It	does	not	matter	if	the	statue	is	Buddha	or	not,	it
does	not	matter	at	all.	But	it	helped.
For	example:	you	come	across	a	rope.	It	is	getting	dark,	the	sun	has	set,	the	night
is	descending,	and	on	a	 lonely	path	in	the	forest	you	come	across	the	rope	and
you	 think	 it	 is	 a	 snake.	You	 start	 running,	perspiring.	There	 is	no	 snake	but	 is
your	perspiration	real	or	not?	If	there	was	a	real	snake	would	the	perspiration	be
a	more	real?	Is	your	running	real	or	not?	Would	it	have	been	more	real	if	there
had	been	a	real	snake?	To	you	it	is	real.
Buddha	has	a	definition	of	truth	--	a	very	strange	definition.	He	says,	'That	which
affects	 is	 true.'	 That	which	 affects	 is	 true.	 If	 a	 rope	 is	 taken	 as	 a	 snake	 and	 it
affects	you,	it	is	true.	To	you	it	is	true.	It	is	almost	a	snake.
A	symbol	is	real	if	it	affects	you;	if	it	does	not	affect	you,	of	course,	it	is	not	a
symbol	at	all.	The	very	word	'symbol'	means	that	a	thing	has	some	greater	value
than	is	available	to	the	naked	eyes,	a	thing	has	some	greater	value	than	a	scientist
can	give	to	it.	That	greater	value	makes	it	symbolic.
I	have	heard	about	a	Hasid	rabbi,	Rabbi	Sadagora.	He	used	to	say	to	his	hasidim,
'You	can	learn	something	from	everything.	Everything	can	teach	us	something,
and	not	only	everything	God	has	made	or	created,	but	what	man	has	made	also
has	something	to	teach	us.'
'What	can	we	learn	from	a	train?'	one	Hasid	asked	dubiously.
'That	because	of	one	second	one	can	miss	everything.'
'And	from	the	telegraph?'
'That	every	word	is	counted	and	charged.'
'And	the	telephone?'
'That	what	we	say	here	is	heard	there.'
Then	everything	becomes	symbolic,	and	life	takes	on	a	different	dimension.
If	your	heart	feels	something	for	the	cross,	then	it	is	not	just	a	cross,	you	become
connected	through	it	with	Jesus.	That's	not	a	scientific	thing	but	religion	is	not	a
scientific	thing.	It	 is	more	poetic;	 it	 is	more	like	love	and	less	like	reason;	it	 is
more	like	feeling	and	less	like	analysis.	It	is	not	logic,	it	is	a	very	deep	romance
with	reality.
If	you	drop	all	symbols	--	as	many	people	have,	 thinking	that	symbols	are	 just
empty	symbols,	 there	 is	nothing	in	 them	--	why	do	you	shake	hands	with	your
friend?	It	is	simply	foolish	taking	somebody's	hand	and	simply	shaking	it.	Can't
you	see	the	foolishness	of	it?	Why	do	you	kiss	your	woman?	Can't	you	see	the
lack	of	hygiene	in	it?
The	sheer	unmedicalness	of	it?	Two	persons	transferring	their	diseases...in	each
kiss	millions	of	minute	cells	are	transferred.	What	are	you	doing?	When	you	say
to	your	woman,	 'I	 love	you,'	what	are	these	words	--	 '	 I	 love	you'?	Just	words?
Nothing	more?
Words	are	symbols.	The	word	'love'	is	not	love,	so	drop	it.	If	you	go	on	dropping
in	that	way	what	will	be	left?
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
The	 battered	 old	 man	 got	 up	 one	 night	 during	 a	 revival	 meeting	 and	 said,
'Brothers	 and	 sisters,	 you	 know	 and	 I	 know	 I	 ain't	 been	what	 I	 ought	 to	 have
been.	I	have	stole	hard	and	told	lies	and	got	drunk	and	always	been	in	fights	and
shooting	 crap	 and	playing	poker	 and	 I	 have	 cursed	 and	 swore,	 but	 I	 thank	 the
Lord	there	is	one	thing	I	ain't	never	done.	I	ain't	never	lost	my	religion.'
Then	what	type	of	religion	is	left?	If	you	drop	all	symbols,	you	drop	language;	if
you	drop	all	symbols,	you	drop	poetry;	if	you	drop	all	symbols,	you	drop	even
mathematics.
Then	what	is	left?
Man	 is	 a	 symbolic	 creature,	 man	 lives	 in	 a	 world	 of	 symbols.	 Even	 science
cannot	do	without	symbols.	Science,	which	is	expected	to	be	absolutely	factual,
cannot	work	without	symbols.	In	fact,	there	is	no	possibility	of	growing	without
symbols.	 That's	 why	 animals	 are	 not	 growing;	 they	 cannot	 grow	 unless	 they
move	into	the	dimension	of	symbols.	So	everything	is	a	symbol.
Once	it	happened	that	Ramakrishna	was	talking	to	his	disciples.	He	was	talking
about	 ANAHAT	NAD,	 the	 soundless	 sound,	 and	 he	 said	 that	 by	 the	 constant
chanting	of	AUM
YOU	will	come	to	a	point	where	soundless	sound	is	heard.
An	intellectual,	a	logician,	was	present	there	and	he	was	getting	very	irritated	by
this	uneducated	man.	Ramakrishna	was	uneducated,	he	went	only	to	the	second
grade,	he	never	studied	anything,	never	knew	anything	about	scriptures.	So	the
man	 was	 getting	 annoyed.	 And	 people	 were	 listening	 so	 intently	 to	 this
uneducated	 fellow	 that	 he	was	 boiling	 inside	 and	 he	 tried	 to	 find	 a	 chance	 to
show	his	knowledge.
Then	he	said,	'Stop.	This	is	all	nonsense.	Just	by	repeating	a	sound,	AUM,	AUM,
AUM,	nothing	is	going	to	happen.	Because	AUM	is	just	a	symbol,	nothing	else.
It	is	just	a	word
--	not	even	a	word,	a	meaningless	sound.	So	what	is	going	to	happen	out	of	it?
You	can	go	on	repeating	and	nothing	will	happen.'
And	he	started	quoting	scriptures.	He	was	a	learned	man.	Ramakrishna	listened
to	him	for	half	an	hour,	very	intently,	then	suddenly	he	looked	at	him	and	said,
'You	stupid.	Now	stop!	Don't	utter	a	single	word!'
That	man	was	very	much	disturbed.	This	illiterate	fellow	called	him	stupid!	But
he	became	afraid	also	because	this	man	was	thought	to	be	very	religious,	a	great
mystic,	and	he	said,	'Don't	utter	a	single	word	otherwise	you	will	repent.'	So	he
became	very	 afraid	because	when	 this	mystic's	 devotees	were	 there,	 if	 he	 said
something,	they	might	jump	over	him.	And	who	knows?	This	man	might	know
something.	So	he	kept	quiet	but	he	was	almost	fire.
For	 two	 or	 three	 minutes	 Ramakrishna	 again	 started	 talking	 about	 AUM	 and
ANAHAT
NAD,	 the	 soundless	 sound.	Then	 after	 two	minutes	 he	 looked	 at	 the	man.	He
was	perspiring	yet	it	was	a	winter	evening.	Ramakrishna	said,	 'Look,	sir.	Just	a
small	word
'stupid'	 and	 look	what	 it	 has	 done.	 You	 are	 perspiring	 and	 you	 are	 getting	 so
aflame	that	if	these	people	were	not	here	you	would	have	killed	me.	Just	look	at
it.	Just	a	small	symbol
'stupid'	and	look	what	it	has	done!'
The	whole	human	consciousness	has	grown	out	of	symbolism.	All	our	languages
--	the	language	of	science,	the	language	of	religion,	the	language	of	poetry	--	are
all	symbols.
Our	whole	life	of	love,	relationship,	is	nothing	but	symbolism.
Unless	you	have	come	to	a	point	where	the	whole	mind	disappears,	symbols	are
meaningful.	The	questioner	asks:	YOU	TALK	ABOUT	A	LIVING	RELIGION
YET	IN
SOME	 CENTRES	 PEOPLE	 KNEEL	 OVER	 THE	 CAST	 OF	 YOUR	 FEET.
Those	feet	are	irrelevant,	their	kneeling	is	relevant.	Those	feet	are	just	symbolic,
but	their	kneeling	is	real.	That	is	not	symbolic.	They	are	affected	by	it.
So	 when	 I	 say	 'a	 living	 religion'	 I	 mean	 a	 religion	 which	 is	 still	 moving	 the
hearts.	 If	 somebody	 is	moved	 by	 a	 cross	 he	 is	 still	 encountering	Christ	 --	 the
religion	is	living	to	him.	And	if	you	simply	bow	down	because	it	is	a	formality
to	be	fulfilled,	then	the	religion	is	dead.	Because	the	symbol	is	dead	and	there	is
nothing	 inside	 you,	 the	 religion	 is	 dead.	 The	 symbol	 is	 always	 dead	 but	 if	 it
affects	you	and	starts	a	movement	in	your	energy,	then	it	is	alive.
A	religion	is	alive	in	the	heart,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	temples	and	churches.	If
you	are	moved,	if	a	rhythm	arises	in	you,	if	you	start	dancing	seeing	Krishna	or
his	statue,	suddenly	the	flute	on	his	lips	is	no	longer	just	a	symbol	to	you,	it	has
become	a	real	dance.	You	can	listen	to	his	tune,	you	can	hear	his	tune.
I	AM	REMINDED	OF	THE	CATHOLIC	RELIGION	WHERE	I	LOST	THE
MEANING	 OF	 THE	 TEACHINGS	 AND	 INSTEAD	 VENERATED	 THE
SYMBOLS.	It	is	your	fault.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	church.	If	you	missed
the	meaning	and	started	venerating	 the	symbols,	 it	 is	your	 fault.	Now	that	you
have	 become	 so	 afraid	 of	 symbols	 it	 simply	means	 you	 have	 reacted	 to	 your
upbringing;	you	have	not	yet	become	a	revolutionary,	you	have	just	reacted.
Because	 a	 few	 symbols	 were	 given	 to	 you	 in	 your	 childhood	 and	 they	 never
became	alive,	now	you	are	afraid	of	all	symbols.	You	will	be	very	poor	for	that.
Don't	be	afraid.
If	one	set	of	symbols	has	not	worked,	another	set	of	symbols	can	work.	And	now
you	are	not	a	child.	Those	symbols	did	not	work	because	 they	were	 forced	on
you	by	your	parents,	but	if	you	choose	your	own	religion....	Now	remember	this,
this	is	my	continuous	emphasis:	if	you	want	to	be	religious,	you	have	to	choose
your	religion	--	then	it	is	alive.
Only	through	choice,	voluntary	choice,	is	it	alive.	If	it	has	been	enforced	on	you
then	 it	 is	dead,	 then	 it	 is	 somebody	else's	 religion,	 it	 is	 somebody	else's	 trip	 --
your	parents'	trip.
And	you	are	simply	carrying	it	like	a	load.
You	have	chosen	to	walk	with	me,	it	is	your	choice,	it	is	your	voluntary	choice.
It	is	your	will	to	be	with	me.	Then	between	me	and	you	whatsoever	transpires	is
going	to	be	alive.
That	may	not	be	 so	with	your	 children	when	 I	 am	gone.	You	would	 like	your
children	also	to	be	in	orange	--	then	something	may	not	happen	because	then	it
will	 be	 your	 trip	 and	 you	will	 be	 enforcing	 your	 trip	 on	 your	 children.	Never
enforce	your	trip	on	anybody	else.
If	 YOU	 choose	 hell,	 even	 hell	 is	 heaven;	 if	 you	 are	 forced	 and	 coerced	 into
heaven,	then	heaven	will	become	a	hell.	Freedom	is	the	most	fundamental	value;
nothing	 is	 more	 valuable	 than	 freedom.	 If	 you	 choose	 Christ	 or	 Krishna	 or
Buddha	 --	 if	 you	 choose,	 remember	 --	 then	 they	become	 contemporaries,	 then
there	is	no	gap	of	twenty	centuries	between	you	and	Christ,	no.	Then	he	walks
with	you,	then	he	talks	with	you,	then	he	is	a	constant	companion.	Then	his	cross
is	your	cross	and	your	cross	is	his	cross.	Then	he	is	with	you	in	your	misery	and
he	is	with	you	in	your	happiness	--	and	he	shares	himself	with	you.	But	it	has	to
be	your	choice.
PLEASE	TELL	ME	WHY	WE	NEED	YOUR	SYMBOLS.	THEY	ARE	NOT
YOU
NOR	YOUR	TEACHINGS	HERE.	They	 are	neither	me	nor	my	 teachings	but
you	cannot	see	me	yet.	Whatsoever	you	see	is	just	a	symbol	--	my	body	is	just	a
symbol,	it	is	not	me;	my	photograph	is	a	symbol,	it	is	not	me;	whatsoever	I	am
saying	is	symbolic,	it	is	not	me.
And	what	I	am	saying	is	not	my	teaching	because	my	teachings	cannot	be	said.
Nobody's
--	Buddha's	nor	Christ's	--	nobody's	can	be	said.	Whatsoever	is	being	said	is	not
the	real	thing.	The	real	is	elusive.	Truth	cannot	be	uttered.
But	I	have	to	talk	to	you	to	persuade	you	to	become	silent.	This	is	a	very	absurd
effort,	but	this	is	how	it	is!	I	have	to	seduce	you	towards	silence	through	words.
Words	 are	 just	 symbols;	 silence	 is....	Remember,	when	 I	 say	 silence,	 the	word
'silence'	is	not	silence.
Yes,	Joshu	was	right.	The	Buddha	is	in	the	temple.
The	man	said,	'But	there	is	no	Buddha,	there	is	only	a	stone	statue.	How	can	an
enlightened	man	like	you	say	that	a	stone	statue	is	a	Buddha?'
And	Joshu	said,	'You	are	right.	It	is	just	a	stone	statue.'
Then	the	man	said,	'Now	tell	me,	where	is	Buddha?'
Joshu	said,	'Go	into	the	temple,	he	is	there.'
If	you	have	the	eyes	to	see	then	you	can	see	even	in	a	stone.	If	you	don't	have	the
eyes	to	see	you	may	come	across	Jesus	and	you	may	not	recognise	him.	Many	of
you	were	there	when	Jesus	was	there,	many	of	you	were	there	when	Buddha	was
there	and	you	never	 recognised	him.	Many	of	you	are	here	 just	 in	 front	of	me
and	you	may	never	recognise	me.	So	the	deepest	question	is	of	your	recognition.
If	you	can	recognise	something	in	a	stone,	if	you	can	recognise	something	in	a
cast	of	my	feet,	yes,	Buddha	is	there.
The	whole	 thing	 is	yours	 --	your	Buddha,	your	Christ,	your	me.	Everything	 is
yours,	 you	 are	 the	only	one.	This	 is	 the	beauty,	 the	drama	of	 life:	 you	 are	 the
actor,	you	are	the	director,	you	are	the	audience,	you	are	the	story-writer,	you	are
the	play-back	singer,	you	are	all,	alone.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
The	wholesale	company	sold	a	bill	of	goods	to	a	merchant	at	a	small	cross-road
village.
When	 the	goods	arrived	he	 refused	 them.	The	wholesale	 firm	prepared	 to	start
suit	for	collection	and	wrote	to	the	railroad	agent	of	the	village	for	information
about	the	arrival	of	the	merchandise.	They	also	wrote	the	president	of	the	bank
for	information	concerning	the	financial	standing	of	the	customer,	to	the	Mayor
of	the	town	asking	him	to	recommend	a	good	lawyer	to	handle	the	case,	and	to
the	merchant	threatening	suit	if	he	did	not	make	payment	at	once.
The	company	receive	 this	 reply:	 'I	 received	a	 letter	 telling	me	I	had	better	pay
up.	 I	 am	 the	 railroad	 agent	 here	 and	 also	 received	 the	 letter	 you	wrote	 to	 the
agent.	I	am	president	and	sole	owner	of	the	local	bank	and	can	assure	you	as	to
my	financial	standing.	As	Mayor	of	the	town	I	hesitate	to	refer	to	you	a	lawyer
since	 I	 am	 the	 only	member	 of	 the	 bar	 in	 this	 vicinity.	 If	 I	were	 not	 also	 the
pastor	of	the	town's	one	church	I	would	tell	you	to	go	to	hell.'
Now	this	is	the	case	--	you	are	all	in	all.	If	a	symbol	is	alive	to	you,	it	is	alive	--
you	bring	life	to	it,	you	pour	life	into	it.
When	 somebody	 is	 bowing	 down	 before	 the	 cast	 of	 my	 feet,	 for	 him	 they
become	alive	--
he	pours	his	life	into	them.	You	may	be	standing	there	looking	at	the	foolishness.
What	is	he	doing?
Yes,	it	is	foolish	for	you	because	those	feet	are	not	alive	for	you,	that	symbol	is
not	throbbing	for	you,	you	have	not	poured	your	life	into	it.
So	don't	be	bothered	about	others	--	let	them	do	their	thing.	They	must	be	finding
something	in	it.	If	you	are	not	finding	something	there,	then	find	it	somewhere
else.	You	may	find	something	in	my	words	--	words	are	as	symbolic	as	the	cast
feet	 and,	 of	 course,	 less	 substantial.	 Words	 are	 less	 substantial:	 uttered,	 they
disappear.	They	are	very	dreamlike.	Or	you	may	be	pouring	your	energy	into	the
symbol	of	this	body	here	now	--
that	too	will	disappear,	that	too	is	not	the	ultimate	thing.
The	ultimate	is	that	which	always	remains.	You	can	see	that	ultimate	anywhere	--
just	make	your	eyes	a	little	more	perceptive.
And	don't	still	be	dominated	by	your	Catholic	upbringing	because	that	will	be	a
great	loss	to	you.	If	you	go	on	dropping	all	symbols	you	will	become	very,	very
poor.	Nobody	will	be	at	a	loss,	only	you.
Symbols	make	life	rich,	poetic.
I	have	heard.
Two	businessmen	were	relaxing	in	the	clubhouse	after	a	round	of	golf.
'I	 don't	 know	 why	 you	 don't	 sack	 your	 secretary,'	 said	 one.'Her	 typing	 is
atrocious	 and	 she	 spends	more	 time	 on	 your	 private	 phone	 than	 you	 do.	 Take
away	her	gorgeous	hair,	her	beautiful	eyes,	her	sensuous	lips,	her	lovely	figure,
and	what	have	you	got?'
The	other	businessman	grunted	and	said,	'My	wife.'
Beware.	Don't	go	on	dropping	symbols	otherwise	nothing	will	be	left.
Yes,	that	is	the	highest	peak;	get	ready	for	it.	Symbols	will	help	you	to	reach	that
highest	peak	but	if	you	drop	them	right	now	you	will	never	reach	to	that	height.
One	has	to	move	up	a	staircase.	When	one	has	reached	the	top	one	has	to	leave
the	 staircase.	 But	 if	 you	 leave	 at	 the	 very	 beginning	 you	 will	 remain	 on	 the
bottom	floor.
Symbols	are	 to	be	 left	only	when	you	have	come	to	see	 the	non-symbolic,	not
before	that.
Otherwise	you	will	remain	very	low	--	somewhere	crawling	on	the	earth.
Once	you	have	symbolism	it	gives	a	vision	to	your	life,	a	style.	Then	you	are	not
haphazard,	 then	 you	 become	 an	 order,	 you	 are	 not	 a	 chaos.	 Then	 things	 start
crystallising	inside	you	and	everything	starts	gaining	a	significance	--	your	life
has	a	direction,	you	have	a	sense	of	direction.
'In	the	synagogue	I	heard	men	praying,'	said	the	puzzled	young	boy.'It	must	be
awfully	hard	for	God.'
'Why?'	asked	the	rabbi	gently.
'The	woodcutter	was	praying	for	cold	weather.'
'Naturally,'	said	the	rabbi.'He	makes	his	living	cutting	wood	for	our	stoves.	The
colder	it	is,	the	more	wood	he	sells.'
'But	the	fruitseller	prayed	for	mild	weather.'
'Well,'	said	the	rabbi,	'he	stores	autumn	fruit	to	sell	in	winter.	Severe	cold	would
freeze	his	stored	fruit.'
'The	 farmer	 prayed	 for	 rain	 and	 the	 brickmaker	 for	 dry	weather.	 They	 are	 all
godly	men:	how	does	God	know	how	to	answer	all	their	prayers?'
'How	is	the	weather	now?'	asked	the	rabbi.
'Dry	and	mild.'
'And	last	week?'
'Let	me	see.	On	Monday	and	Tuesday	it	rained	and	on	Thursday	it	was	cold.'
'See?'	said	the	rabbi.
Once	you	have	a	symbol	you	can	see.	Then	God	is	fulfilling	everybody's	needs:
someday	it	is	raining,	someday	it	is	dry,	someday	it	is	hot,	someday	it	is	cold	--
God	is	fulfilling	everybody's	desires.
But	if	you	have	the	symbol	of	God	then	the	whole	thing	is	no	longer	disorderly.
If	you	don't	have	 that	 symbol	 then	you	are	 simply	 surprised:	you	 find	persons
praying	 in	 the	 synagogue	 and	 everybody	 asking	 for	 different	 weather,	 and	 it
looks	 almost	 foolish.	And	 they	all	 are	good	people,	 religious	people	 --	 how	 is
God	going	to	fulfil	them?	In	fact,	if	you	don't	have	the	symbol	of	God,	those	five
prayers	are	chaotic,	you	cannot	make	any	sense	out	of	them.	Once	you	have	the
symbol,	that	symbol	crystallises	everything.
'See?'	said	the	rabbi.
The	last	question:
Question	4
IT	IS	AN	UNIMPORTANT	POINT	IN	A	VERY	INTERESTING	INSPIRING
DISCOURSE,	 BUT	 WHY	 DO	 YOU	 SAY	 THAT	 THE	 SUN	 WILL	 BE
FINISHED	IN
FOUR	 THOUSAND	 YEARS?	 MY	 ATLASES	 OF	 THE	 EARTH	 AND	 THE
UNIVERSE
GIVE	 A	 FIGURE	 FOR	 THE	 NEXT	 MAJOR	 CHANGE	 IN	 THE	 SUN'S
PRESENT
OUTPUT	 --	 TO	A	RED	GIANT	 STAGE	 --	 TO	BE	ABOUT	FIVE	BILLION
YEARS
OR	 SO	 --	 WHICH	 WOULD	 ANNIHILATE	 LIFE	 ON	 EARTH.	 ARE	 YOU
TRYING	TO
START	A	STAMPEDE?	OR	IS	THIS	AN	'INTENTIONAL	IMPERFECTION'
INSERTED	INTO	YOUR	DISCOURSE	AS	IN	A	PERSIAN	RUG?
The	 questioner	 says:	 IT	 IS	 AN	 UNIMPORTANT	 POINT	 IN	 A	 VERY
INSPIRING
DISCOURSE	--	but	nothing	else	has	inspired	the	questioner	to	ask.	So	this	must
have	been	the	most	important	thing.
There	are	people	who	are	interested	in	non-essential	things	and	they	make	much
fuss	about	them.	And	they	forget	that	because	of	that	fuss	much	is	being	missed.
If	it	makes	you	happy,	you	can	make	it	five	billion	years	--	or	why	five	billion?
Why	 not	 five	 hundred	 billion?	 If	 it	makes	 you	 happy	 you	 can	make	 as	 big	 a
figure	as	you	can.
I	have	heard	one	anecdote.
A	scientist	was	speaking	about	the	same	truth	and	he	said,	 'In	five	billion	years
the	sun	will	cool	down.'
A	 woman	 sitting	 in	 front	 of	 the	 audience	 started	 trembling,	 perspiring,	 was
almost	going	to	faint.	So	the	scientist	had	to	stop	his	talking.
He	said,	'What	is	going	on?	Why	are	you	becoming	so	afraid?	You	need	not	be
afraid,	it	is	five	billion	years.'
The	woman	said,	'Thank	God!	I	thought	you	said	five	million.'
What	difference	does	it	make?	You	will	be	dead	within	fifty	years.	Whether	the
earth	continues	or	the	sun	continues	for	five	billion	or	five	million	years	makes
no	difference.
These	are	irrelevant	things.
My	point	was	that	if	the	sun	becomes	cold	someday,	we	will	not	be	able	to	live.	I
was	trying	to	explain	to	you	that	you	don't	end	at	your	skin.	I	am	not	a	scientist
and	I	am	very	happy	that	I	am	not.	I	was	simply	saying	that	the	skin	is	not	your
boundary.	 It	 is	 difficult	 to	 say	 where	 your	 boundary	 is	 because	 it	 is,	 in	 fact,
nowhere.
The	sun	 is	 there	--	without	 the	sun	you	will	not	be	able	 to	 live.	Your	skin	will
simply	wither	away	and	you	will	die.	That	was	the	whole	point.
And	 I	 am	not	 trying	 to	create	 a	 stampede.	 If	 a	 stampede	 is	 to	be	created,	 four
thousand	years	won't	help.	Tomorrow...	and	 that	 too	 is	doubtful.	Even	 if	 I	 said
that	tomorrow	the	sun	is	going	to	cool	down	completely	then	too	it	is	difficult	to
see	 that	a	 stampede	will	be	created.	You	are	 so	 lazy	you	will	 say,	 'Tomorrow?
Tomorrow	never	 comes.'	And	 you	may	 start	 living	 even	more	madly	 because,
'Tomorrow?	Maybe	 this	man	 is	 right.'	So	whatsoever	you	have	not	done	up	 to
now,	do	 it.	You	were	 thinking	about	murdering	a	man	 --	murder.	Or	you	were
thinking	about	kidnapping	a	woman	--	kidnap;	because
'tommorrow?	Who	knows?	Maybe	this	man	is	right.'
No	I	am	not	creating,	or	trying	to	create,	any	stampede.	To	me	it	is	an	irrelevant
thing:	 four	 thousand	 years,	 four	 million	 years,	 four	 billion	 years,	 four	 trillion
years	--
whatsoever.
But	 you	 missed	 my	 point.	 And	 you	 showed	 your	 mind	 by	 raising	 a	 very
unimportant	question.	 If	 such	questions	are	meaningful	 to	you,	you	will	go	on
missing	 me.	 Then	 you	 are	 simply	 watching	 for	 something	 absolutely
meaningless.
I	have	heard.
Junior	was	 in	 the	habit	of	coming	to	 the	 table	with	a	dirty	face	and,	of	course,
had	to	be	sent	to	wash	every	day.
One	time	his	mother,	losing	her	patience,	said	to	him,	'Junior,	why	do	you	persist
in	coming	to	the	table	without	washing?	You	know	I	always	send	you	away.'
'Well,'	replied	Junior,	'once	you	forgot.'
Just	once,	and,	who	knows,	you	may	forget	again.
There	 are	 minds	 who	 go	 on	 watching	 for	 such	 things.	 Be	 alert	 about	 this
tendency.
I	am	not	a	scientist,	neither	was	Jesus	or	Buddha.	There	are	many	people	now
who	deny	 Jesus	because	he	was	not	 a	 scientist	 because	he	 said	 the	world	was
created	four	 thousand	years	before.	Now	look.	This	 four	 thousand	seems	 to	be
very	meaningful.	I	said,	'After	four	thousand	years	it	is	going	to	drop,'	and	Jesus
said,	'Just	four	thousand	years	ago	the	world	was	created.'
Now	scientists	 find	fault.	 It	 is	 faulty.	The	world	was	not	created	four	 thousand
years	before.	Then	why	was	 this	man	 saying	 it?	This	man	was	not	 a	 scientist;
this	man	was	saying	something	not	as	a	fact	but	as	a	parable.	He	was	not	talking
about	a	scientific	theory	for	the	creation,	he	was	not	interested	in	any	scientific
theory	--	he	was	simply	talking	in	parables.	He	was	emphasising	one	fact:	 that
the	 world	 is	 not	 going	 to	 be	 forever	 and	 it	 has	 not	 been	 there	 forever.	 It	 is
dreamlike.	It	has	been	created	and	it	will	disappear.
So	don't	be	too	involved	in	it,	it	is	not	the	real	thing	--	seek	the	creator,	find	out
who	is	the	creator.	Don't	waste	too	much	time	with	the	creation.
But	 now	 there	 are	 scientists	 who	 will	 prove	 that	 he	 is	 wrong	 and	 there	 are
Christians	 who	 will	 try	 to	 prove	 that	 he	 is	 right.	 And	 both	 do	 the	 same
foolishness:	you	must	take	a	parable	for	a	fact,	you	can't	understand	a	beautiful
story,	you	can't	understand	poetry.
Now	I	have	come	across	scientists	who	have	written	great	treatises	proving	that
Jesus	is	wrong.	And	I	have	come	across	treatises	which	have	tried	to	refute	him.
For	example,	scientists	say	 that	now	there	are	proofs	 --	and	 there	are	proofs	 --
that	 the	 world	 has	 existed	 for	millions	 of	 years.	We	 have	 found	 bones	 in	 the
earth,	skulls	in	the	earth	which	are	at	least	fifty	thousand	years	old.	So	not	only
the	world	but	man	has	existed	for	at	least	fifty	thousand	years	and	Jesus	says	that
the	world	was	created	only	four	thousand	years	before.	Now	how	to	answer	it?
I	 was	 reading	 a	 Christian	 theologian.	 He	 says,	 'God	 is	 Almighty.	 When	 he
created	the	world,	he	created	skulls	fifty	thousand	years	old,	just	to	test	the	faith
of	people.'	Now	what	 to	do	with	 these	people?	He	has	put	fifty	 thousand-year-
old	skulls	inside	the	earth.
He	created	the	earth	four	thousand	years	ago	just	to	see	who	the	doubters	are	and
who	the	real	believers	are!
Don't	waste	your	time	in	such	things.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Be	A	Light	Unto	Yourself
17	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606170
ShortTitle:
DANG07
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
90
mins
LONG	AGO,	IN	JAPAN,	A	BLIND	MAN	VISITING	A	FRIEND	ONE	NIGHT,
WAS
OFFERED	A	PAPER-AND-BAMBOO	LANTERN	TO	CARRY	HOME	WITH
HIM.
'I	DO	NOT	NEED	A	LANTERN,'	HE	SAID,	'DARKNESS	OR	LIGHT	IS	ALL
THE
SAME	TO	ME.'
'I	 KNOW	YOU	DO	NOT	NEED	A	 LANTERN	TO	 FIND	YOUR	WAY,	HIS
FRIEND
REPLIED,	 'BUT	 YOU	MUST	 TAKE	 IT	 BECAUSE	 IF	 YOU	 DON'T	 HAVE
ONE
SOMEONE	ELSE	MAY	RUN	INTO	YOU.'
THE	 BLIND	MAN	 STARTED	OFF	WITH	 THE	 LANTERN	AND	BEFORE
HE	HAD
WALKED	 VERY	 FAR	 SOMEONE	 RAN	 SQUARELY	 INTO	 HIM.	 'LOOK
OUT
WHERE	 YOU	 ARE	 GOING!'	 HE	 EXCLAIMED	 TO	 THE	 STRANGER.
'CAN'T	YOU
SEE	THIS	LANTERN?'
'YOUR	 CANDLE	 HAS	 BURNT	 OUT,	 BROTHER,'	 REPLIED	 THE
STRANGER.
KNOWLEDGE	 IS	 not	 enough,	 to	 rely	 on	 it	 is	 dangerous.	 Knowledge	 is
borrowed,	it	is	not	knowing.	Knowing	grows	with	you,	knowing	is	a	growth,	an
evolution,	 knowledge	 is	 implanted	within	 you	 from	me	 outside,	 knowledge	 is
borrowed,	 it	 is	counterfeit.	 It	 looks	 like	knowing,	 it	 is	not.	 It	deceives,	 it	gives
you	a	feeling	that	you	know	you	don't.
On	the	path	of	Zen	the	first	thing	to	be	aware	of	is	knowledge:	the	tradition,	the
scripture,	 that	which	 has	 been	 handed	 over	 to	 you	 others.	 Those	 eyes	 are	 not
yours,	that	light	is	not	yours,	and	it	is	better	to	remain	ignorant	than	to	become
knowledgeable	 --	because	at	 least	 ignorance	 is	yours.	A	 least	 it	 is	authentic,	at
least	it	is	true,	at	least	it	belongs	to	you	Out	of	the	truth	of	ignorance,	knowing
can	grow,	but	out	of	the	falsity	of	knowledge,	you	will	be	lost.	Nothing	can	grow
out	of	it.	Knowledge	is	an	accumulation	of	dead	facts	and	information.	It	has	no
life	in	it.	It	is	like	stones	piled	up,	one	upon	another.	It	can	rise	to	a	very	great
height,	but	it	has	no	growth	because	it	has	no	sap	of	life	in	it.
A	 tree	 is	 totally	 different.	 It	 so	 goes	 higher	 and	 higher	 but	 it	 has	 an	 organic
growth,	a	 sap	of	 life,	 running	 through	 it.	 It	 is	growing	on	 its	own	accord.	 It	 is
rooted	in	life.	It	is	an	alive	process.	You	can	keep	a	plastic	tree	and	it	will	look
just	like	any	other	tree:	it	can	be	even	more	green,	it	can	be	even	more	deceptive,
more	beautiful	--	but	it	will	be	dead.	It	will	not	have	any	roots	anywhere,	it	will
not	be	grounded	in	existence,	it	will	not	be	at	ease	and	at	home,	it	will	not	be	an
insider.	It	will	be	a	foreigner,	it	will	be	alien..
This	is	the	first	thing	to	understand	--	then	only	can	you	understand	the	radical
attitude	of	Zen.	It	is	very	easy	to	borrow	knowledge.	That's	what	the	schools,	the
colleges,	 the	universities,	 are	 doing.	They	go	on	 transferring	 information	 from
one	 generation	 to	 another.	 They	 are	 the	 via	 media.	 And	 people	 who	 collect
knowledge	 from	 them	 start	 feeling	 that	 they	 know.	But	 how	 can	 you	 know	 if
YOU	have	not	known	it?
I	can	talk	about	love	to	you,	you	can	listen	to	me,	you	can	even	agree	with	me,
but	 your	 agreement	 is	 not	 the	 point.	 I	 may	 be	 logical	 and	 clever	 enough	 to
persuade	you	 to	agree	with	me	but	 that	will	not	give	you	any	 taste	of	 love.	To
know	love,	you	will	have	to	fall	in	love.	To	know	love,	you	will	have	to	travel
the	path	of	love.	To	know	love,	you	will	have	to	take	the	dangerous	journey.
Knowledge	is	more	of	a	certainty;	knowing	is	more	uncertain.	That's	why	people
choose	knowledge.	Knowledge	is	more	guaranteed,	it	has	authority,	centuries	are
standing	behind	 it.	That's	why	every	 religion	 tries	 to	prove	 that	 it	 is	 the	oldest
religion	 in	 the	 world.	 Why?	 Because	 the	 older	 a	 religion	 is,	 the	 greater	 the
authority	it	has.	Hindus	say	that	the	Vedas	are	the	oldest	scriptures	in	the	world;	-
-	Bibles	and	Korans	and	Guru	Nankers	are	just	very	late	arrivals.	The	Vedas	are
very,	 very	 old.	Why	 so	much	 insistence?	Because	 the	 older	 a	 scripture	 is,	 the
longer	 it	 has	 stood	 the	 test	 of	 time,	 the	 greater	 the	 authority	 it	 has	 gathered
around	it.	Millions	of	seers	are	witnesses	to	it.
Zen	 says	 truth	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 authority,	 truth	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with
tradition,	 truth	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 past	 --	 truth	 is	 a	 radical,	 personal
realisation.	YOU	have	to	come	to	it.
Knowledge	is	certain;	the	search	for	personal	knowing	is	very,	very	hazardous.
Nobody	can	guarantee	it.	If	you	ask	me	if	I	can	guarantee	you	anything,	I	say	I
cannot	guarantee	you	anything.	I	can	only	guarantee	danger,	that	much	is	certain.
I	can	only	guarantee	you	a	long	adventure	with	every	possibility	of	going	astray
and	never	reaching	the	goal.	But	one	thing	is	certain:	 the	very	search	will	help
you	to	grow.	I	can	guarantee	only	growth.
Danger	will	be	there,	sacrifice	will	be	there;	you	will	be	moving	every	day	into
the	unknown,	into	the	uncharted,	and	there	will	be	no	map	to	follow,	no	guide	to
follow.	Yes,	there	are	millions	of	dangers	and	you	can	go	astray	and	you	can	get
lost,	but	that	 is	 the	only	way	one	grows.	Insecurity	is	 the	only	way	to	grow,	to
face	danger	is	the	only	way	to	grow,	to	accept	the	challenge	of	the	unknown	is
the	only	way	to	grow.	So	I	can	guarantee	only	growth.
Knowledge	 guarantees	 everything.	 There	 will	 be	 no	 danger	 if	 you	 follow	 the
Veda,	if	you	follow	the	Bible	--	then	you	need	not	worry.	Now	it	is	Christ	who
has	 to	worry	about	 it,	and	he	knows.	You	have	simply	to	 imitate	him.	And	the
seers	of	the	Vedas	know	and	Mohammed	knows,	so	there	is	no	need	for	you	to
make	your	own	private	 effort.	 It	 has	 already	been	known,	you	 simply	believe.
All	that	is	required	from	you	by	ordinary	religions	is	belief.
Zen	says	belief	is	counterfeit,	borrowed.
You	have	to	grow	and	you	have	to	take	the	risk.	I	can	guarantee	you	risk.	In	the
open	sky	of	the	truth	one	searches,	with	trial	and	error;	many	times	going	astray,
and	again	and	again	coming	back	to	the	right	path.	That's	the	only	way.
Truth	is	not	cheap;	belief	is	very	cheap.	Truth	is	very	costly	--	you	will	have	to
pay	with	your	life.	Truth	requires	total	sacrifice,	nothing	less	will	do.
Zen	says	that	if	you	are	believing	scriptures,	tradition,	others....	It	is	irrelevant	if
they	are	wrong	or	right,	that	is	not	the	point.	Remember,	Zen	doesn't	say	that	the
Bible	 is	 wrong,	 Zen	 doesn't	 say	 that	 the	 Veda	 is	 wrong	 --	 Zen	 says	 they	 are
irrelevant.	 I	 t	has	nothing	to	do	with	right	and	wrong.	They	may	be	right,	 they
may	be	wrong,	but	 that	 is	 not	 the	point	 to	be	 considered	 at	 all.	Through	 them
growth	 is	 not	 possible.	 Those	 who	 have	 written	 them	were	 grown-up	 people,
mature.	They	have	asserted	something	that	they	have	known
--	but	for	them	that	was	KNOWING,	for	you	it	will	be	knowledge.
Knowing	means	 that	 you	 have	 seen	 it	with	 your	 own	 eyes;	 knowledge	means
you	 have	 heard	 it	 from	 others.	 It	 is	 very	 poor,	 and	 one	 who	 remains	 with
knowledge	remains	poor.
A	pundit,	a	so-called	learned	man,	is	the	poorest	man	in	the	world.	He	has	only
counterfeit	money	and	he	goes	on	counting	it.
WE	ARE	THE	HOLLOW	MEN,	WE	ARE	THE	STUFFED	MEN	LEANING
TOGETHER	 HEADPIECE	 FILLED	 WITH	 STRAW.	 ALAS!	 OUR	 DRIED
VOICES,	 WHEN	 WE	 WHISPER	 TOGETHER	 ARE	 QUIET	 AND
MEANINGLESS	AS	WIND	IN
DRY	 GRASS	 OR	 RAT'S	 FEET	 OVER	 BROKEN	 GLASS	 IN	 OUR	 DRY
CELLAR.
These	beautiful	lines	from	T.	S.	Eliot	described	exactly	the	situation	of	the	man,
of	the	mind,	who	has	remained	with	knowledge.	STUFFED	WITH	STRAW	and
OUR
VOICES...like	RAT'S	FEET	OVER	BROKEN	GLASS.
Look	 at	 your	 head	 --	 it	 is	 almost	 rubbish.	A	 collection,	 accumulation,	 but	 not
knowing	at	all.	And	unless	you	are	free	from	this	rubbish	your	eyes	will	not	have
clarity,	you	will	remain	blind.	I	can	give	you	my	lamp	in	your	hand,	it	will	not
help.	Sooner	or	later	the	flame	will	be	gone.	In	fact,	the	flame	goes	immediately,
the	 moment	 I	 give	 my	 lamp	 to	 you.	 In	 the	 very	 transfer	 the	 flame	 goes	 out
because	 the	 flame	 cannot	 be	 transferred.	You	will	 have	 to	 become	 a	 flame	on
your	own	accord.
You	can	learn	how	to	kindle	your	flame	but	you	cannot	borrow	it,	it	is	not	a	thing
that	can	be	transferred.	At	the	most	I	can	give	you	a	thirst	to	seek	it,	I	can	give
you	almost	a	madness	to	search	for	it.	I	can	drive	you	crazy	enough	to	go	after	it,
but	 I	 cannot	 give	 it	 to	 you.	 Nobody	 has	 ever	 given	 it	 to	 anybody	 else,	 it	 is
untransferable.
Wittgenstein	says:'Philosophy	leaves	everything	as	it	is.'	You	can	become	a	great
philosopher,	 you	 can	 know	 much,	 but	 philosophy	 leaves	 everything	 as	 it	 is.
Nothing	changes	through	it,	it	has	no	revolution	in	it.
Belief	is	communal,	knowledge	is	also	communal;	knowing	is	personal,	trust	is
personal.
You	have	to	relate	to	God	or	to	truth	directly,	immediately.	You	have	to	come	to
truth.
And	it	is	going	to	be	arduous	because	each	step	will	require	tremendous	changes
in	you.
You	cannot	go	to	truth	as	you	are,	you	will	have	to	drop	many	things	--	and	the
first	thing,	Zen	says,	is	to	drop	borrowed	knowledge.
If	you	ask	Christians	what	is	to	be	dropped	first,	they	will	say	sin.	But	they	have
forgotten	what	the	original	sin	was.	The	original	sin	was	that	Adam	and	Eve	ate
from	the	Tree	of	Knowledge.	That	story	comes	closer	to	Zen.	They	ate	the	fruit
of	the	Tree	of	Knowledge	--	that	became	the	fall.	That	is	the	real	sin,	the	original
sin.	Sin	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	acts	--	moral,	immoral	--	sin	has	something
to	do	with	knowledge.	The	parable	is	so	clear	but	still	Christian	theologians	have
misinterpreted	it	for	centuries.
So	 the	 original	 sin	 is	 to	 become	 knowledgeable,	 to	 eat	 from	 the	 Tree	 of
Knowledge.
Then	 what	 will	 be	 surrender?	 Then	 what	 will	 be	 virtue?	 Virtue	 will	 be
surrendering	 the	 knowledge,	 vomiting	 the	 knowledge,	 cleaning	 your	 head
completely,	 throwing	 all	 knowledge	 out.	 The	 apple	 that	 Adam	 swallowed	 is
sticking	in	everyone's	throat.
And,	 of	 course,	 for	 Adam,	 knowledge	 was	 just	 a	 beginning.	 We	 have
accumulated	more	than	Adam	because	for	centuries	and	centuries	we	have	been
eating	from	the	same	tree.
We	 have	 completely	 lost	 the	 space,	 the	 inner	 purity,	 the	 inner	 innocence	 that
comes	 when	 one	 throws,	 renounces,	 one's	 knowledge.	 Renounce	 your
knowledge.
In	 the	Bible	 there	 is	 another	 beautiful	 parable	 --	 the	 parable	 of	 the	 three	wise
men.
Jesus	is	born	in	a	stable	in	the	poorest	of	poor	situations.	Then	three	wise	men
from	 the	 East	 go	 seeking	 and	 searching	 for	 him	 because	 according	 to	 their
astrological	 analysis	 they	have	come	 to	 feel	 that	 something	of	 the	beyond	was
entering	 into	 time.	They	are	very	wise	men	--	 learned,	so	 learned	 that	kings	of
many	countries	consult	them	and	touch	their	feet.	But	still	 they	go	in	search	of
this	 small	 child	 to	 touch	 his	 feet.	 Their	 learning	 is	 nothing	 compared	 to	 the
innocence	of	this	small	child,	just	born.
This	child	has	not	yet	eaten	the	fruit	of	knowledge	and	this	child	is	such	that	he
is	not	going	to	eat	the	fruit	of	knowledge.	He	is	going	to	insist	on	remaining	pure
of	 knowledge,	 he	 is	 not	 going	 to	 pollute	 his	 being,	 contaminate	 his	 being.
Something	from	the	beyond,	something	of	the	Divine	has	entered	into	the	world
of	time.
Those	three	wise	men	travel.	It	is	arduous,	the	journey	is	long,	and	the	three	wise
men	are	very,	very	old,	very	experienced,	 learned	 in	many	arts.	They	know	all
that	can	be	known	but	they	don't	know	how	to	be	in	a	state	of	knowing.	And	they
are	going	to	search	for	this	boy,	this	small	boy,	to	look	into	his	pure	eyes,	to	look
into	 his	 virgin	 eyes,	 to	 find	 out	 how	 one	 can	 be	 simply	 there	 without	 any
knowledge.
They	 are	 very	 old	 and	 nobody	 knows	where	 Jesus	 is	 born	 --	 but	 the	 story	 is
beautiful.	The	story	says:	 look	 into	 the	sky	 to	 find	a	path	on	 the	earth.	This	 is
strange.	To	find	a	path	on	the	earth,	you	have	to	look	on	the	earth,	but	they	look
in	the	sky.	And	a	star	guides	them.
If	you	want	to	find	a	way	on	earth	you	have	to	look	at	the	sky.	If	you	want	your
feet	to	move	rightly	you	will	have	to	look	at	the	uttermost	height	of	life.	You	will
have	 to	 look	at	 the	stars.	 If	your	eyes	are	moving	 towards	 the	height	your	 feet
will	follow	the	right	track.
That	is	the	only	way.	If	you	are	crawling	on	the	earth	and	looking	on	the	earth,
you	will	miss	all	paths.
A	star	guides	them.	They	reach	the	town,	they	reach	the	stable	and	the	star	stops
there.
When	 you	 reach	 home	 everything	 stops	 because	 the	 home	means	 simply	 that
now	 there	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go.	You	 have	 come	 to	 the	 point	 from	where	 one	 has
nowhere	to	go.	The	ultimate	has	come.
These	 wise	 three	 men	 bow	 down	 into	 the	 feet	 of	 this	 small	 babe.	 This	 is
knowledge	 bowing	 down	 before	 knowing,	 experience	 bowing	 down	 before
innocence,	Adam	bowing	down	before	Jesus,	respectability	bowing	down	before
revolution.
And	they	offer	many	presents	to	Jesus:	gold	they	offer,	incense	they	offer,	myrrh
they	offer.	Those	are	symbolic	offerings.	In	the	East,	gold	is	offered	to	kings	and
this	poorest	of	 the	poor	 is	 the	king	of	 the	kings.	So	 they	offer	gold.	 Incense	 is
offered	to	the	priests	and	this	boy	is	not	a	priest	yet	he	is	going	to	be	the	highest
priest	 possible.	 They	 offer	 incense.	 And	 in	 the	 East,	 myrrh	 is	 offered	 to
somebody	who	is	on	their	deathbed.	Why	do	they	offer	myrrh	to	this	boy	who	is
just	born?	They	know,	 they	feel,	 that	 this	boy	is	going	to	die	on	the	cross	--	 is
destined.	Because	unless	somebody	dies	totally	there	is	no	resurrection.
They	offer	whatsoever	they	have	and	they	come	back.	The	story	says	that	they
go	back	 to	 their	 home...their	 home	was	 in	 Iran.	So	 they	 come	back	home	and
they	 bring	 the	message	 that	 they	 have	 looked	 and	 found	 in	 the	 eyes	 of	 Jesus
something	of	the	unknown.
They	bring	the	message	but	Iran	never	became	a	Christian	country,	never.	That
too	 is	very	symbolic.	The	 three	wise	men	were	 the	first	 to	encounter	Jesus	but
still	 they	could	not	bring	the	message	back	home.	The	experience	was	so	deep
and	profound	that	it	could	not	be	expressed.	They	may	have	become	dumb,	they
may	have	remained	silent	for	 the	rest	of	 their	 life,	 they	may	not	have	talked	to
anybody,	 they	 may	 not	 have	 said	 anything	 to	 anybody.	 Nobody	 knows	 what
happened	 to	 those	 three	wise	men.	Because	 they	had	come	 to	 the	very	source,
they	may	have	become	silent.
This	is	a	Zen	parable.	The	first	thing	to	be	dropped	is	knowledge.	Once	you	drop
knowledge	you	attain	to	clarity.	Look	at	small	children	--	 let	 that	be	your	ideal
and	become	a	child	again.	Only	children	have	eyes	to	see.	Our	eyes	are	too	full
of	ideas.
We	go	on	collecting	knowledge,	opinions,	but	deep	down	we	remain	the	same,
nothing	changes.	We	just	go	on	painting	our	personality	on	the	surface.
I	have	heard.
Cohen	 and	 Goldberg	 were	 partners	 in	 the	 dress	 business.	 And	 business	 was
terrible.
A	discouraged	Cohen	announced	to	his	partner	that	he	was	going	to	change	his
name	for	good	luck.
'From	now	on,'	he	said,	'I	am	O'Brian.'
That	night	Goldberg	decided	he	would	change	his	name	too.
Both	men	instructed	the	switchboard	operator	to	answer	the	phones,	'O'Brian	and
O'Brian.'
Everything	went	well	until	 a	caller	demanded	 to	 speak	 to	Mr.	O'Brian.	 'Which
O'Brian	do	you	want?'	asked	the	operator.	'Cohen	or	Goldberg?'
Everything	that	we	go	on	doing	on	the	surface	will	be	just	like	changing	a	name.
Inside	you	will	remain	the	same.	Your	persona	can	never	become	more	than	skin
deep	--	your	know	ledge,	your	identity	in	the	world	is	nothing	but	a	persona,	a
dressing.
Zen	 says	 you	 are	wasting	 your	 life.	Go	 deep,	 go	 beyond	 your	 knowledge,	 go
beyond	your	name	and	your	 form,	go	beyond	 that	 identity	 that	 the	 society	has
given	to	you.	Zen	Masters	give	koans	to	their	disciples	to	look	into	their	original
face	--	the	face	that	you	had	before	you	were	born.	Now	you	have	a	false	face;	it
has	been	given	to	you	by	the	society,	it	is	just	a	formality.	And	if	you	think	it	is
you,	you	are	in	a	very	bad	shape.
Somebody	 is	a	Christian,	 somebody	 is	a	Hindu,	 somebody	 is	a	Mohammedan,
somebody	is	a	Buddhist	--	all	these	are	just	superficial	things,	accidents	of	birth.
You	are	not	a	Christian,	because	Christ	has	not	touched	your	heart	yet.	You	are	a
Christian	 because	 you	 were	 born	 in	 a	 Christian	 home.	 You	 are	 a	 Buddhist
because	 it	 was	 just	 an	 accident	 of	 birth,	 co-incidence.	 It	 happened	 that	 your
father	and	mother	were	Buddhist	--	hence	you	are	a	Buddhist.	But	Buddha	has
not	yet	happened	to	you.
Remember,	 this	 is	 very	 cheap.	Drop	Christianity,	 drop	 Islam,	 drop	Buddhism,
drop	that	which	has	been	given	to	you	by	the	society,	by	birth,	by	association,	by
culture,	by	country.	Drop	all	that	so	that	you	can	find	out	who	you	really	are.
These	 things	will	 be	 taken	 away	by	 death;	 death	will	 burn	 your	 persona.	And
then	you	will	come	face	to	face	with	your	being	and	you	will	not	even	be	able	to
recognise	 it,	 because	 you	 never	 knew	 that	 this	 was	 your	 face.	 We	 live	 very
superficial	lives.
I	have	heard.
A	beggar	clutched	at	the	sleeve	of	a	benevolent-looking	passerby.
'Five	cents,	sir,	for	a	cup	of	coffee,'	he	whined.
The	other	turned	and	surveyed	him.
'Why,'	he	asked,	'should	I	give	you	money?	What	brought	you	to	this	sad	plight?'
'A	 terrible	 catastrophe,	 sir,	 '	 the	 beggar	 replied.	 'Two	 years	 ago	 I	 was	 a
prosperous	business	man	like	you,	I	worked	industriously.	On	my	desk	was	the
motto	 'Think	 Constructively,	 Act	 Decisively'.	Money	 poured	 in	 and	 then,	 and
then'...the	 beggar's	 frame	 shook	 convulsively...'the	 cleaning	 woman	 burnt	 my
motto!'
Just	the	burning	of	the	motto!'The	cleaning	woman	burnt	my	motto!'	--	that	has
made	him	a	beggar.
Have	you	anything	more	than	just	a	motto?	What	do	you	call	your	name?	What
do	 you	 call	 your	 identity?	 It	 can	 be	 burnt;	 death	 will	 take	 it	 away.	 Death	 is
nothing	 but	 a	 cleaning	 woman.	 It	 will	 clean	 it	 away	 and	 you	 will	 cry
convulsively.	Then	you	will	say,	'Death	has	killed	ME.'
Death	has	never	killed	 anybody;	death	has	no	power	 to	kill;	 death	 is	 the	most
impotent	 thing	 in	 the	world.	You	make	 it	potent	by	clinging	 to	 the	 superficial.
The	power	of	death	is	not	intrinsic	to	death,	the	power	of	death	is	given	by	you.
Death	is	empowered	by	you	because	you	go	on	clinging	to	the	superficial.	Death
can	take	only	the	superficial,	it	cannot	enter	the	depths	of	your	being.
But	if	you	think	your	clothes	are	you,	your	body	is	you,	your	mind	is	you,	then
you	have	given	power	to	the	hands	of	death.	Death	will	destroy	this	and	then	you
will	convulsively	weep	that	'I	have	been	killed'	and	for	your	whole	life	you	will
be	afraid	of	death.
Zen	 says	 that	 if	 you	 drop	 knowledge	 --	 and	 within	 knowledge	 everything	 is
included,	 your	name,	your	 identity,	 everything,	 because	 this	 has	been	given	 to
you	by	others	--	 if	you	drop	all	 that	has	been	given	by	others,	you	will	have	a
totally	different	quality	to	your	being	--	innocence.	This	will	be	a	crucifixion	of
the	persona,	the	personality,	and	there	will	be	a	resurrection	of	your	innocence;
you	will	become	a	child	again,	reborn.
Hindus	call	this	state	DWIJ,	twice	born.	This	is	a	second	birth.	A	man	becomes
really	a	Brahmin	when	he	has	gone	through	the	cross	--	the	personality	burnt	and
destroyed	by	death.	Or	he	has	renounced	it	himself	voluntarily,	 then	 innocence
arises	and	he	is	reborn.
Then	he	is	a	Brahmin	because	then	only	does	he	come	to	know	what	truth	is.
But	 we	 have	 decided	 to	 follow	 the	 short-cut,	 the	 way	 of	 the	 belief.	 We	 are
hoping	against	hope	that	somebody	else's	eyes	will	do	the	work	for	us.
It	happened.
In	 Buddha's	 time	 there	 was	 a	 blind	 man	 in	 a	 certain	 village.	 He	 was	 a	 great
logician,	a	great	thinker,	and	nobody	was	able	to	convince	him	that	light	existed
because	he	would	argue	against	it.
He	would	 say,	 'If	 light	 exists,	 I	 would	 like	 to	 touch	 it,	 because	 anything	 that
exists	can	be	touched.	If	 light	exists,	I	would	like	to	taste	it	or	at	 least	I	would
like	to	smell	it.	Or,	you	can	throw	it	on	the	floor	--	at	least	I	can	hear	the	sound
of	it.'
He	 said,	 'These	 are	 the	 four	 senses,	 so	 any	 sense	 that	 is	 available	 to	 me	 can
become	a	proof	for	it.'
But	there	is	no	way	to	touch	light,	no	way	to	smell	it	--	it	has	no	smell.	And	there
is	no	way	to	throw	it	on	the	floor	to	create	sound.	There	is	no	way	to	taste	it.	It	is
difficult,	very	difficult	to	prove.
And	then	that	blind	man	would	laugh	and	he	would	say,	'You	are	trying	to	befool
me!
You	simply	want	to	prove	that	light	is,	so	that	you	can	prove	that	I	am	blind.	But
I	 am	 not	 blind.	 Everybody	 is	 blind	 --	 and	 there	 exists	 nothing	 like	 light.	You
don't	try	to	befool	me.'
One	day	the	blind	man	was	invited	to	a	friend's	house.	A	preparation	of	milk	was
made	and	he	liked	it	very	much	and	he	asked	of	what	it	was	made.	They	said,	'Of
milk.'
He	said,	'Tell	me	something	more	about	milk.	How	does	it	looks?'
They	said,	'It	looks	white.'
He	 said,	 'White?	 You	 will	 have	 to	 prove	 because	 I	 don't	 believe	 that	 colours
exist.	It	is	just	imagination	of	man.	What	is	white?'
They	said,	'White	--	just	like	a	white	cow.'
He	 said,	 'Now	you	 are	 creating	more	 problems.	What	 is	 a	 cow?	What	 does	 it
look	like?'
Finding	no	other	way,	one	man	invented	a	method.	He	came	near	the	old	man,	he
put	his	hand	before	him,	made	a	gesture	as	if	this	is	the	head	of	the	cow.	And	he
said,	'Touch	my	hand.	The	head	of	the	cow	feels	like	this	and	these	two	fingers
are	the	two	horns.	Feel.'
He	 tried	 to	 feel	and	he	 laughed	and	said,	 'Now	I	know.	That	milk	 looks	 like	a
bent	hand.'
Absolutely	logical	--	because	his	basic	question	was	about	milk.
Finding	it	difficult	they	brought	him	to	Buddha	--	Buddha	was	in	the	vicinity	--
and	they	said	to	Buddha,	 'We	have	tried	hard	but	we	cannot	convince	this	man
that	light	exists	or	that	colours	exist.	He	is	blind	but	he	is	very	argumentative.'
Buddha	said,	'He	is	not	wrong,	you	are	wrong.	Rather	than	bringing	him	to	me,
take	 him	 to	 a	 physician	 who	 can	 cure	 his	 eyes.	 He	 does	 not	 need	 any	 other
conviction,	no	other	conviction	 is	possible.	 It	cannot	be	proved	 to	a	blind	man
that	light	exists	and	if	the	blind	man	agrees	he	may	be	agreeing	only	to	be	polite.
How	can	a	blind	man	agree	that	light	exists?	If	he	cannot	feel	its	existence,	then
there	is	no	way	to	feel	it.	You	take	him	to	a	physician.'
And	Buddha	said,	'I	know	a	great	physician'	--	Buddha's	own	physician,	Jeevika
was	his	name	--	'You	go	to	Jeevika.	He	may	be	able	to	find	some	way.'
And	it	happened	that	the	man	was	not	really	blind,	he	had	a	certain	disease	in	the
eyes	 from	 the	 very	 birth.	After	 six	months	 of	 treatment	 he	 started	 seeing.	He
danced	the	whole	way	to	Buddha's	place,	he	fell	at	his	feet	and	he	said,	'Excuse
me,	 light	 is,	but	 there	was	no	way	for	me	to	recognise	 it	before	I	had	my	own
eyes	opened.'
The	same	is	true	about	God,	the	same	is	true	about	truth.	No	argument	can	prove
that	God	exists,	no	proof	exists	which	can	help	unless	your	eyes	are	opened.
So	 Zen	 doesn't	 bother	 about	 philosophising,	 about	 concepts.	 It	 says	 the	 only
effort	worth	doing,	the	only	thing	worth	putting	your	whole	energy	into	is	how	to
attain	eyes.
Lopos	 Pachio,	 a	 great	 poet,	 has	 a	 few	 beautiful	 lines:	 REMOVE	 FROM	MY
EYES	THIS	MIST	OF	THE	CENTURIES.	I	WANT	TO	SEE
THINGS	LIKE	A	CHILD.
That	 is	 what	 the	 whole	 effort	 of	 Zen	 is	 --	 removing	 the	 mist	 of	 centuries,
removing	 the	 mist	 of	 the	 past.	 It	 is	 a	 great	 cleansing	 of	 the	 eyes,	 and	 your
perception	once	is	clear	and	once	you	have	attained	clarity	 to	see,	 truth	 is,	and
nothing	else	is.	Truth	is	not	lost	--	you	have	lost	your	eyes.
People	 come	 to	 me	 and	 they	 say,	 'Where	 is	 God?'	 I	 say,	 'Drop	 that	 subject
completely.
That	is	irrelevant.	Have	you	got	eyes?	That	is	the	relevant	question	to	ask.	If	you
don't	have	eyes,	even	 if	 I	manage	 to	produce	God	before	you,	you	will	not	be
able	to	see.'
You	can	see	only	that	which	you	can	see.	You	will	need	a	greater	clarity	to	move
into	the	subtle	mysteries	of	life.	God	is	the	subtlest	mystery.	For	it,	very	refined
eyes	are	needed.
So	Zen	says	that	there	is	no	need	to	talk	about	God;	all	talk	about	God	is	useless.
They	don't	talk	about	God;	all	talk	about	heaven	and	hell	is	useless.	They	don't
talk	 about	 that,	 they	don't	 talk	 about	 truth,	 they	don't	 talk	 about	 reality	 --	 they
have	no	metaphysics.
Buddha	was	very	 reluctant	 to	 talk	 about	 any	metaphysical	 problem.	He	would
either	keep	quiet,	he	would	not	answer,	or	he	would	say	something	which	was
totally	 different	 to	what	 the	 questioner	 had	 in	 his	mind.	He	was	 almost	 silent
about	 all	 the	 great	 questions	 humanity	 has	 been	 discussing,	 arguing	 about,
thinking	 about,	 contemplating,	 philosophising	 about.	 If	Plato,	Aristotle,	Hegel,
Kant,	and	people	like	that	had	gone	to	him,	they	would	have	thought	him	mad.
He	 would	 not	 answer	 a	 single	 question	 of	 Hegel's	 or	 Kant's	 or	 Plato's	 or
Aristotle's.	At	the	most	he	would	laugh	at	their	foolish	questions.	He	will	insist
on	only	one	 thing,	 'APPO	DEEPO	BHAVA	--	Be	a	 light	unto	yourself.'	Kindle
your	inner	light	so	you	can	see.	We	can	see	only	that	which	we	can	see.
A	small	girl	came	once	to	me	and	I	asked	her,	'Do	you	want	to	say	something	to
me?'
She	said,	'I	would	like	to	sing	a	small	song.'
She	was	a	very	small	girl	and	she	sang	a	small	song	and	I	loved	it.
The	song	was:
PUSSYCAT,	PUSSYCAT,	WHERE	HAVE	YOU	BEEN?	I	HAVE	BEEN	TO
LONDON	 TO	 LOOK	 AT	 THE	 QUEEN.	 PUSSYCAT,	 PUSSYCAT,	 WHAT
SAW	YOU
THERE?	I	SAW	A	MOUSE	UNDER	THE	CHAIR.
Of	course,	a	cat	cannot	see	the	Queen,	it	is	impossible.	A	cat	can	only	see	the	rat.
The	Queen	was	there	sitting	on	the	chair,	but	the	cat	could	not	see	--	she	saw	a
mouse	under	the	chair.
And	it	is	absolutely	logical.	A	cat	has	eyes	for	the	mouse	and	for	the	rat,	she	has
no	eyes	for	the	Queen.	We	see	only	that	which	we	can	see.
If	 you	 don't	 see	God	 in	 existence	 then	 you	 have	 to	 remember	 one	 thing:	 you
don't	yet	have	eyes	for	God.	So	work	hard	to	have	eyes.	And	don't	borrow	eyes	-
-	 eyes	 are	 not	 like	 glasses.	 You	 can	 borrow	 somebody	 else's	 glasses	 and
sometimes	they	may	even	fit,	but	eyes	are	not	like	glasses.
And	when	I	or	Zen	people	are	talking	about	eyes,	they	are	not	like	your	ordinary
eyes.	It	is	an	inner	vision.	Even	these	eyes	can	be	transferred	--	you	can	have	my
eye,	my	physical	eye,	I	can	have	your	physical	eye,	they	can	be	transplanted;	but
the	inner	vision,	the	inner	eye,	the	third	eye,	is	impossible	to	transfer.
So	 remember,	 ignorance	 is	 better	 than	borrowed	knowledge.	 It	 is	 at	 least	 true.
Recognise	the	fact	that	'I	don't	know';	recognise	it	so	deeply	that	your	whole	ego
disappears.
Because	the	ego	exists	through	knowledge;	knowledge	is	the	most	vital	food	for
the	ego.
That's	why	we	go	on	pretending	about	things	which	we	don't	know	--	we	go	on
pretending	that	we	know.
It	 happened	 in	 church.	 The	 old	 priest	 of	 the	 church	was	 getting	 ready	 for	 his
morning	sermon.	It	was	Sunday,	early	morning,	and	he	was	preparing	his	notes.
A	young	priest	came	running	and	he	said,	'Look!	What	are	you	doing?	Jesus	has
come	and	he	is	worshipping	at	the	altar.'
The	 old	 priest	 said,	 'Jesus?'	 It	was	 almost	 a	 shock.	 Jesus	 had	 never	 come	 and
nobody	had	ever	thought	that	he	was	to	come.
Even	priests	who	go	on	saying	that	he	is	going	to	come	next	time,	that	he	will
come	 again,	 even	 they	 don't	 believe.	 Who	 believes?	 Priests	 are	 the	 most
unbelieving	 people	 because	 they	 know	 the	 very	 secrets	 of	 the	 trade.	They	 say
things	for	others.
He	could	not	believe	it	but	he	started	trembling.	He	became	afraid.	Both	came	to
the	door	and	looked	inside.	Yes,	there	was	a	figure	exactly	like	Jesus	Christ	and
he	was	worshipping	at	the	altar.
The	young	priest	said,	'Now	what	do	we	do?'
He	 said,	 'Look	busy.	What	 else	 can	we	do?'	Look	busy!	That's	 how	we	go	on
pretending.
It	is	the	most	difficult	statement	in	the	world	to	say	'I	don't	know'.
If	somebody	asks,	 'Is	there	God?'	either	you	say,	 'Yes,	there	is'	or	you	say,	 'No,
there	is	no	God	in	the	world.'	Both	answers	are	stupid.	If	you	have	been	brought
up	in	a	religious	home,	you	say,	 'Yes,	 there	is.'	 If	you	have	been	brought	up	in
Soviet	 Russia	 or	 China,	 you	 say,	 'No,	 there	 is	 no	 God.'	 But	 these	 are	 your
conditionings	speaking,	not	you.
Wait	 a	 minute,	 think	 twice	 --	 do	 you	 know?	 Yes	 and	 no	 both	 show	 your
knowledge.	 The	 man	 who	 says	 no	 is	 pretending	 absolute	 knowledge.	 He	 is
saying	that	he	has	searched	the	whole	of	existence	and	has	not	found	him.	The
man	who	says	yes	--	he	says,	'Yes,	I	have	looked	into	the	Koran,	into	the	Bible,
into	the	Vedas,	and	they	all	say	he	is,	and	I	believe	that	he	is.'	But	the	truth	is	that
they	both	are	asserting	something	which	has	no	personal	experience	behind	it.
A	real	and	true	person	will	say,	'I	don't	know.'	The	moment	you	say	'I	don't	know'
you	are	available,	your	doors	are	not	closed.	Then	you	can	seek	and	search,	then
the	whole	journey	opens	for	you.	Once	you	say	yes	or	no,	doors	are	closed.	You
become	smug	in	your	knowledge.
Knowledge	makes	 you	 blind.	 It	 closes	 your	 eyes.	 It	 fills	 your	 eyes	with	 dust.
Knowledge	is	a	sort	of	blindness	--	you	will	have	to	come	out	of	it,	you	will	have
to	jump	out	of	it.	If	you	can	show	that	much	courage	only	then	can	you	walk	the
path	of	truth,	can	you	meditate,	can	you	sit	in	zazen.
'I	don't	know'	is	the	beginning	of	zazen.	'I	don't	know	'this	recognition	is	the	first
step	towards	knowledge.
Now	the	story.
LONG	AGO	IN	JAPAN,	A	BLIND	MAN,	VISITING	A	FRIEND	ONE	NIGHT,
WAS
OFFERED	A	PAPER-AND-BAMBOO	LANTERN	TO	CARRY	HOME	WITH
HIM.
Now,	 it	 is	 absurd	 to	 offer	 a	 lantern	 to	 a	 blind	 man	 because	 he	 cannot	 see.
Darkness	and	light,	both	are	the	same	to	him.	It	is	foolish.	What	is	he	going	to	do
with	 the	 lamp?	 It	will	 be	 just	 a	 burden.	A	 lamp	 is	 beautiful	 and	helpful	 and	 a
light	on	your	path	--	if	you	have	eyes;	otherwise	the	lamp	is	a	burden.
Knowledge,	if	it	is	yours,	is	a	light	on	the	path.	Knowledge,	if	it	is	just	learned
from	others,	is	a	burden.	Then	your	head	becomes	heavy,	then	you	are	carrying
stones	 in	 your	 head.	 Then	 you	 cannot	 fly	 because	 for	 flying	 you	 need	 to	 be
weightless.	Knowledge	becomes	a	weight	on	you.
It	was	foolish	to	offer	a	lantern	to	a	blind	man.	But	the	man	who	offered	it	must
have	been	very	logical.	He	had	some	logic	behind	it.	Whenever	we	do	something
foolish	we	always	rationalise	it	--	because	it	is	very	difficult	for	the	ego	to	do	a
simple,	foolish	thing.
We	 rationalise	 it,	we	 find	some	argument	 for	 it.	Whatsoever	we	do	we	always
find	some	argument	to	give	it	support,	to	at	least	give	it	a	face	so	that	it	doesn't
look	foolish.
'I	DO	NOT	NEED	A	LANTERN,'	HE	SAID,	'DARKNESS	OR	LIGHT	IS	ALL
THE
SAME	TO	ME.'
The	blind	man	is	simple	and	he	knows	what	a	light	can	do	for	him.	He	cannot
see	--	day	and	night	are	the	same	to	him.
'I	KNOW	YOU	DO	NOT	NEED	A	LANTERN	TO	FIND	YOUR	WAY,'	HIS
FRIEND
REPLIED,'	 BUT	 YOU	MUST	 TAKE	 IT	 BECAUSE	 IF	 YOU	 DON'T	 HAVE
ONE
SOMEONE	ELSE	MAY	RUN	INTO	YOU.'
Now	 he	 has	 found	 a	 beautiful	 argument	 for	 it.	 And	 even	 to	 the	 blind	man	 it
appealed.	It	 looks	right.	You	may	not	be	able	to	see,	but	with	a	lantern	in	your
hands	at	least	others	will	be	able	to	see	you	and	they	will	not	run	into	you.	It	was
difficult	to	deny	this,	the	logic	is	clear.
That's	how	we	have	accepted	many	things:	for	certain	reasons,	for	certain	logic
behind	them.	You	don't	know	if	God	is,	then	somebody	says,	'Can	you	think	of	a
watch	 being	 made	 without	 a	 maker?'	 Of	 course	 you	 cannot.	 It	 looks	 almost
impossible	 that	 just	 by	 co-incidence,	 by	 chance,	 a	 watch	 will	 come	 into
existence.	 Inconceivable.	 rt	 looks	 logical	 that	 if	 a	 small	 watch,	 a	 small
mechanism,	 cannot	 come	 into	 existence	 by	 itself,	 then	 how	 can	 this	 whole
universe,	this	cosmos,	so	infinite	and	so	complex	and	yet	running	in	such	deep
order	 and	 discipline?	 How	 can	 this	 whole	 existence	 come	 into	 being	 without
there	being	a	maker?	It	appeals,	it	looks	logical,	it	is	difficult	to	deny	it.	So	the
blind	man	agrees;	so	you	say,	'Yes,	there	must	be	a	God.'
Look!	You	are	accepting	something	which	you	cannot	see,	which	you	have	never
felt.
But	the	argument	seems	to	be	weighty	and	it	seems	to	be	difficult	to	deny	it.	You
have	accepted	God,	you	have	accepted	 the	soul,	you	have	accepted	a	 thousand
and	one-things	just	because	they	are	supported	by	weighty	arguments.
But	they	don't	help.	Life	is	not	an	argument.	You	have	to	live	it	to	know	it.	And
the	danger	is	that	because	of	the	argument,	once	you	accept	God	--	'Yes,	God	is,
because	the	maker	is	needed,	the	creator	is	needed	for	the	creation'	--	you	may
forget	by	and	by	that	you	don't	know	this	creator.	This	acceptance	may	become	a
dangerous	thing,	a	fatal	thing
--	 then	you	will	not	 search,	you	will	 think	you	already	know.	Your	knowledge
can	 deceive	 you	 and	 you	 can	 start	 feeling	 that	 you	 already	 know.	Millions	 of
people	in	the	world	go	on	thinking	that	they	know	God	exists.
That's	what	happened	to	this	poor	blind	man.
THE	BLIND	MAN	STARTED	O	WITH	THE	LANTERN	AND	BEFORE	HE
HAD
WALKED	 VERY	 FAR	 SOMEONE	 RAN	 SQUARELY	 INTO	 HIM.	 'LOOK
OUT
WHERE	 YOU	 ARE	 GOING!'	 HE	 EXCLAIMED	 TO	 THE	 STRANGER.
'CAN'T	YOU
SEE	THIS	LANTERN?'
'YOUR	 CANDLE	 HAS	 BURNT	 OUT,	 BROTHER,'	 REPLIED	 THE
STRANGER.
Now,	 the	danger	 is	 that	 the	blind	man,	 if	he	had	no	 lantern	 in	his	hand,	would
have	 walked	 more	 cautiously.	 He	 is	 a	 blind	 man	 and	 he	 has	 always	 been
walking.	He	knows	he	is	blind	so	he	takes	all	precautions.	Today	he	must	have
left	 all	 precautions	 behind	 --	 he	 had	 a	 lantern	 in	 his	 hand.	He	 believed	 in	 the
lantern,	so	there	was	no	need	to	be	cautious.
He	must	have	walked	at	leisure,	thinking	that	the	lantern	was	there	and	nobody
can	run	into	him.
For	his	whole	life	he	had	been	walking	the	same	road	and	nobody	had	run	into
him	because	he	was	cautious.	Today	there	was	no	need	to	be	cautious	--	that	is
the	danger	of	borrowed	knowledge.
If	 you	 are	 ignorant	 you	 are	 more	 cautious,	 you	 walk	 with	 more	 alertness,
awareness,	you	behave	more	cautiously.	 If	you	 think	you	know,	 then	you	start
moving	like	a	robot:	there	is	no	need	to	be	cautious,	there	is	no	need	to	be	alert,
you	can	fall	asleep,	you	can	become	unconscious.
That's	what	 happened	 to	 the	 blind	man.	He	must	 have	walked,	 thinking	 other
thoughts.
There	was	no	need	to	think	about	the	road,	about	other	people,	about	himself.	He
trusted,	he	believed	in	the	lantern.
That's	how	millions	of	people	are	walking	in	life	--	trusting	in	the	Bible,	in	the
Vedas,	in	the	Koran,	trusting	in	others.	Their	very	belief	is	dangerous.	It	is	better
to	be	aware	and	alert	and	to	move	cautiously.
THE	BLIND	MAN	STARTED	OF	WITH	THE	LANTERN	AND	BEFORE	HE
HAD
WALKED	 VERY	 FAR	 SOMEONE	 RAN	 SQUARELY	 INTO	 HIM.	 'LOOK
OUT
WHERE	YOU	ARE	GOING!'
He	 must	 have	 been	 angry,	 annoyed.	 Somebody	 was	 going	 against	 the	 logic,
somebody	was	behaving	 irrationally.	He	had	a	 lantern	and	 the	 friend	had	 said,
and	said	very	convincingly,	 that	nobody	will	 run	 into	him	now.	People	will	be
able	to	see	him.	And	here	comes	this	man.	'Are	you	blind?'	he	must	said	to	him.
'Can't	you	see	this	lantern	in	my	hand?	What	are	you	doing?	Are	you	mad?	Don't
you	understand	simple	logic?'
But	life	does	not	believe	in	logic;	life	is	very	illogical,	it	is	very	irrational,	it	is
almost	absurd.	And	here	comes	the	absurdity;	life	always	has	surprises	for	you.
The	 blind	 man	 was	 thinking	 that	 the	 lamp	 was	 there	 and	 so	 there	 was	 no
problem.
'CAN'T	YOU	SEE	THIS	LANTERN?'	YOUR	CANDLE	HAS	BURNT	OUT,
BROTHER.'
Now	this	is	a	surprise.	And	how	can	the	blind	man	see	that	the	candle	is	burnt
out,	 that	 he	 is	 carrying	 a	 dead	 lamp	which	 has	 no	 light?	He	 is	 carrying	 just	 a
dead	weight.
All	your	beliefs	are	like	the	lamp	which	has	no	light	in	it.	Your	Koran	is	dead,	it
has	no	light	although	it	may	have	been	full	of	life	and	full	of	light	in	the	hands	of
Mohammed.
Your	Gita	is	dead,	the	candle	is	burnt	out.	It	may	have	been	full	of	light	in	the
hands	 of	Krishna	 because	 that	man	 had	 the	 eyes.	He	 could	 have	 replaced	 the
burnt-out	candle	any	moment.
For	centuries	you	have	carrying	scriptures	--	burnt-out	candles.	And	everybody
was	 running	 into	 everybody	 else.	 Can't	 you	 see	 that?	 The	 whole	 conflict	 of
humanity	--
Hindus	 fighting	 with	 Christians,	 Christians	 fighting	 with	 Mohammedans,
Mohammedans	 fighting	with	 Buddhists,	 everybody	 running	 into	 each	 other	 --
can't	you	see	this	agony,	this	conflict?	The	whole	of	humanity	is	struggling,	is	at
war.	 Sometimes	 it	 is	 hot,	 sometimes	 it	 is	 cold,	 but	 all	 the	 time	 it	 is	 warm.
Sometimes	you	are	fighting,	sometimes	you	are	preparing	for	a	fight,	but	all	the
time	it	is	fight.
And	 it	 is	 not	 only	 religions	 that	 are	 fighting	 --	 nations	 are	 fighting,	 persons....
Everybody	is	fighting:	the	husband	with	the	wife,	the	wife	with	the	husband,	the
friend	with	the	friend,	the	brother	with	the	brother,	the	children	with	the	parents,
the	parents	with	the	children.	Everybody,	everywhere,	is	running	into	each	other.
It	is	as	if	we	are	all	blind	and	everybody	thinks	that	he	is	carrying	a	lamp	in	his
hand....
And	the	candle	is	burnt	out.
In	 fact,	 as	 far	 as	 the	 candle	of	 truth	 is	 concerned,	 the	moment	 it	 is	 transferred
from	one	hand	to	another,	it	dies.	The	Gita	died	when	Krishna	was	transferring	it
to	 Arjuna.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 Arjuna	 will	 carry	 the	 light	 at	 least	 a	 few	 steps,	 it	 is
impossible.	When	I	am	saying	something	to	you,	I	can	see	it	dying	continuously
between	you	and	me.	The	moment	it	reaches	you	it	is	already	dead.
There	is	no	way	to	transfer	it.	Then	why	do	I	go	on	talking?	Sometimes	people
come	and	ask	me,	 'Why	do	you	go	on	talking	if	 there	is	no	way	to	transfer	it?'
There	is	no	way	to	transfer	it,	there	has	never	been	a	way	to	transfer	it.	But	still	I
have	 to	 talk,	 just	 to	 show	you	 the	 impossibility.	You	cannot	understand	what	 I
am	saying	but	it	will	be	impossible	for	you	to	understand	if	I	am	silent.	If	you
cannot	understand	my	words,	you	will	not	be	able	to	understand	my	silence.	If
you	 misunderstand	 my	 words,	 you	 will	 misunderstand	 my	 silence.	 But	 still	 I
have	 to	 talk	 to	you	because	 that	 is	 the	only	way	possible	 to	communicate	 that
there	is	something	within	me	which	cannot	be	communicated,	that	I	am	carrying
something,	that	I	am	pregnant	with	something	which	is	incommunicable.	Being
with	me,	 listening	 to	me	again	and	again,	again	and	again,	watching	me,	some
day	you	may	understand	 the	point.	 I	cannot	make	you	understand	 it	but	 if	you
persist	long	enough	YOU	may	be	able	to	understand	it.
But	understanding	will	arise	within	you,	it	will	not	be	a	transfer	from	me.	I	can
push	you	and	pull	you	here	and	there	but	I	will	have	to	wait.	And	if	you	can	also
wait	 with	me,	 someday	 your	 own	 inner	 flame	will	 arise.	 It	 needs	 patience,	 it
needs	 contact	 with	 a	 Master,	 but	 it	 cannot	 be	 transferred.	 The	 Master	 can
function	only	as	a	catalytic	agent.
My	presence	will	make	you	more	and	more	thirsty;	my	presence	will	make	you
more	and	more	mad;	a	great,	an	 intense,	an	 impossible	desire	will	arise	within
you	--	you	will	become	a	passionate	search.	In	that	passion	your	own	candle	will
start	burning.	You	will	become	your	own	fuel.
So	all	that	I	can	do	is	not	to	transfer	truth	but	only	to	support,	to	help,	so	that	you
don't	become	impatient,	so	that	you	don't	lose	your	interest	in	truth,	so	that	you
continue	 in	 your	 desire	 and	 you	 go	 on	 putting	 more	 and	 more	 at	 stake.	 The
moment	will	come	--	just	as	it	comes	when	you	heat	water.	You	go	on	heating	it
and	at	a	hundred	degrees	it	jumps	and	becomes	vapour,	evaporates.	All	that	I	am
doing	 is	 trying	 to	 heat	 you	 as	 much	 as	 I	 can.	 The	 jump	 will	 be	 yours,	 the
evaporation	will	be	yours.
If	you	allow	and	 if	you	are	able	 to	suffer	patiently	 the	pain	of	waiting	and	 the
pain	that	the	heat	will	bring	and	the	pain	that	your	intense	desire	will	create	--	if
you	are	ready	to	suffer	happily,	patiently,	then	one	day	it	is	your	flame	that	will
arise	within	you.	It	will	be	absolutely	yours.
And	 I	 talk	 also	 for	 this	 reason:	 whenever	 truth	 happens,	 it	 has	 to	 be	 shared.
Unshared,	it	starts	dying;	shared,	it	lives.	It	is	not	that	I	can	give	you	truth,	but
sharing	with	you,	making	an	effort	 to	share	with	you,	 truth	can	remain	alive.	 I
am	talking	for	 the	same	reason	as	birds	sing	or	flowers	bloom	or	stars	shine.	 I
dig	it.	If	you	also	start	digging	it	with	me,	if	you	co-operate	with	me,	then	when
it	 happens	 to	 you,	 you	 will	 know	 that	 it	 has	 not	 been	 a	 transfer	 but	 that
something	authentically	yours	has	arisen.	It	is	individual.
Truth	is	revealed	individually.
I	would	like	to	tell	you	a	few	anecdotes.
The	old	fellow	was	a	crossing-tender	at	a	spot	where	an	express	train	made	quick
work	of	an	auto	and	 its	occupants.	Naturally,	he	was	 the	chief	witness	and	 the
entire	 case	 hinged	 upon	 the	 energy	 with	 which	 he	 had	 displayed	 his	 warning
signal.
A	gruelling	cross-examination	left	him	unshaken	in	this	story:	the	night	was	dark
and	 he	 had	 waved	 his	 lantern	 frantically,	 but	 the	 driver	 of	 the	 auto	 paid	 no
attention	to	it.
Later,	the	division	superintendent	called	the	flagman	to	his	office	to	compliment
him	on	the	steadfastness	with	which	he	had	stuck	to	his	story.
'You	did	wonderfully,'	he	said.	'I	was	afraid	at	first	that	you	might	waver	in	your
testimony.'
'No,	sir,'	said	the	fellow,'but	I	was	afraid	every	minute	that	that	damn	lawyer	was
going	to	ask	me	if	the	lantern	was	lit.'
Ask	yourself	again	and	again	--	is	the	lantern	that	you	are	carrying	lit?	Otherwise
waving	it	in	the	dark	night	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	energy.	Is	your	Bible	lit?	Is	your
Gita	lit?	If	not,	then	drop	them.	Then	it	is	better	not	to	have	these	illusions.
Another	anecdote.
As	the	rookie	cop	passed	a	store	he	heard	a	noisy	argument.	He	paused,	listened
again,	 then	 stepped	 inside	 to	 investigate.	 'What's	 going	 on?'	 he	 demanded.
'What's	all	the	noise	about?'
'It's	nothing,'	said	the	proprietor.	'There's	no	argument.	I'm	all	alone!'
'Wait	a	minute,	mac,'	said	the	cop.	'I	distinctly	heard	an	argument	going	on.'
'You	 don't	 understand,	 officer,'	 said	 the	 store	 owner.	 'I'm	 alone	 in	 the	 store.
Business	is	terrible.	So	to	pass	the	time	away	I	talk	to	myself,	and	when	I	talk	to
myself,	there's	bound	to	be	an	argument.'
'How	can	you	argue	with	yourself?'	asked	the	cop.
'It's	easy,'	said	the	store	owner,	'because	I	hate	a	liar!'
Look,	 watch	 what	 goes	 on	 inside	 your	 mind.	 There	 is	 a	 continuous	 inner
chattering,	a	continuous	argument	with	yourself.
Truth	 is	 possible	 only	 when	 this	 inner	 talk	 stops,	 when	 you	 are	 left	 in	 deep
emptiness,	no	argument,	no	for/against,	no	pro	con,	no	word,	no	thought.	When
the	 inner	 talk	 is	 simply	 suspended,	 in	 that	moment	 of	 suspended	 inner	 talk	 a
window	opens	towards	the	sky.
The	third	anecdote.
A	miserly	man	was	approached	by	a	friend	who	did	his	best	to	persuade	him	to
dress	more	in	accordance	with	his	station	in	life.	'I'm	surprised,'	said	the	friend,
'that	you've	allowed	yourself	to	become	shabby.'
'But	I'm	not	shabby,'	said	the	miser.
'Yes,	you	are,'	insisted	his	friend.	 'Take	your	grandfather.	He	was	always	neatly
dressed.
His	clothes	were	always	well	tailored	and	of	the	best	material.'
'You	 see!'	 cried	 the	 other	 triumphantly.	 'These	 clothes	 I'm	 wearing	 ARE
grandfather's.'
Watch,	 are	 the	 thoughts	 that	 you	 are	 carrying	 yours?	 Or	 somebody	 else's?
Centuries	 old,	 long	 ago	 dead	 and	 buried	 and	 you	 go	 on	 carrying	 those	 dead
thoughts.	 Gather	 courage,	 this	 shabbiness	 of	 the	 mind	 is	 a	 great	 disrespect
towards	yourself.	Those	clothes	are	dirty.
People	are	not	ready	to	use	somebody	else's	clothes	but	you	are	very	easily	ready
to	use	somebody	else's	thoughts.
I	have	heard.
A	philosopher	went	to	a	shoemaker.	He	wanted	his	shoes	to	be	repaired	but	he
had	only	one	pair.	So	he	said,	'I	will	wait,	you	repair.'
The	shoemaker	said,	'It	is	difficult,	it	is	closing	time.	You	come	tomorrow	and	I
will	get	them	ready.'
The	philosopher	said,	'I	have	got	only	one	pair	and	it	will	be	difficult	for	me	to
walk	without	shoes.'
The	shoemaker	said,	 'Okay,	keep	this	pair'	--	he	gave	him	one	pair	--	 'with	you
and	tomorrow	you	return	it	and	take	yours.'
The	philosopher	was	very	annoyed.	He	said,	'What!	To	use	somebody	else's	used
shoes?
What	do	you	think	I	am?'
The	shoemaker	 laughed	and	he	 said,	 'If	you	can	carry	others'	used	 thoughts	 in
your	head,	then	what	is	wrong	in	using	somebody	else's	shoes?	They	will	just	be
on	your	feet.	Your	head	is	borrowed.	So	what	is	wrong	in	it?'
We	are	at	ease	in	borrowing	our	soul,	hence	we	are	beggars.	Stop	this	borrowing.
If	you	don't	have	your	own	soul	it	is	better	not	to	have	any	soul	at	all.	And	once
you	gather	that	courage	you	will	start	attaining	to	your	own	soul.	It	is	not	very
far	away,	it	is	just	hidden	behind	these	borrowed	clothes,	thoughts,	philosophies,
doctrines,	dogmas.	Be	yourself.
You	have	heard	the	famous	Greek	dictum	of	Socrates:'Know	thyself.'	But	that	is
not	a	primary	thing.	More	primary	is:'Be	thyself.'	Unless	you	are	yourself,	who
are	you	going	 to	 know?	So	 I	would	 like	 to	 tell	 you	 that	more	basic	 and	more
fundamental	 is	 the	 dictum:'Be	 thyself.'	 Then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 to:'Know
thyself.'	 If	you	are	not,	 then	who	are	you	going	to	know	and	WHO	is	going	to
know?
A	religious	man	is	not	a	borrowed	man,	a	religious	man	is	not	a	hollow	man,	he
is	 not	 a	 stuffed	man.	A	 religious	man	 is	 absolutely	 empty	of	 others	 --	 and	 the
moment	you	are	empty	of	others	you	 fill	your	own	 inner	 space	 --	 that	 is	what
fulfillment	is,	that	is	what	nirvana	is,	that	is	what	liberation	is.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Another	Sunday
18	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606180
ShortTitle:
DANG08
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
100
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
AS	A	CHILD,	 SUNDAYS	HAVE	BEEN	SOMETHING	VERY	SPECIAL	TO
ME.
NOW,	SINCE	A	FEW	DAYS,	I	WAKE	UP	EVERY	MORNING	AND	GO	OUT,
SEE
THE	SUN	SHINING	THROUGH	THE	TREES,	HEAR	THE	BIRDS	SINGING
AND
GET	 THIS	 FEELING,	 'AH,	 ANOTHER	 SUNDAY.'	 I	 PUT	 ON	 MY	 BEST
CLOTHES
AND	HAVE	SUNDAY	FOR	THE	WHOLE	DAY.	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING	TO
ME?
Don't	make	a	problem	out	of	it.
The	 mind	 is	 constantly	 searching	 for	 something	 to	 pounce	 upon	 --	 even
happiness.	 It	makes	a	problem	out	of	happiness	also.	 If	you	are	 feeling	happy,
you	ask,	'Why?'	That	question	is	dangerous.
If	 you	 are	 suffering	 it	 is	 good	 to	 ask	 'why?'	 because	 the	 suffering	 has	 to	 be
dissolved,	 transcended;	ways	and	means	have	 to	be	found	to	get	out	of	 it	 --	so
the	'why?'	is	relevant.
But	when	you	are	happy,	then	to	ask	'why?'	is	to	disturb	it.	There	is	no	need	to
ask	any	questions.	When	happiness	surrounds	you	accept	 it	 totally	without	any
questioning.
If	you	are	ill,	diagnosis	is	needed,	analysis	is	needed,	because	the	disease	has	to
be	found.
But	 if	 you	 are	 healthy	 you	 don't	 go	 to	 the	 doctor	 to	 ask,	 'Why	 am	 I	 healthy?
Diagnose	my	health.	What	is	happening	to	me?'	You	don't	go.
It	is	a	habit	of	the	mind	because	it	has	been	always	living	in	misery,	unhappiness,
and	always	the	'why?'	has	been	relevant.	So	when	clouds	disappear	for	the	first
time	and	the	sun	shines	in	your	life,	the	old	question	goes	on	persisting	--	'Why?'
Learn	 to	 accept	 happiness,	 learn	 to	 enjoy	 it	 without	 any	 questioning,	 learn	 to
trust	 happiness,	 don't	 doubt	 it,	 because	 the	 very	 doubt	 will	 be	 a	 poisoning.
Happiness	rarely	happens.	Those	moments	are	very	few	and	far	between.	When
they	 come,	welcome	 them,	 open	your	 door,	 receive	 them	with	 your	 full	 heart,
don't	withhold	anything.	Even	a	question	will	become	a	very,	very	strong	wall
between	you	and	your	happiness.
Every	day	is	a	Sunday.	It	should	be	so.	Every	day	is	a	holiday.	It	should	be	so.
Because	all	days	belong	to	him.	Each	moment	is	holy.	Once	you	understand	it,
you	will	stop	asking	questions	like	this.
Don't	 think	 that	 any	 particular	 day	 is	 needed	 for	 you	 to	 be	 happy	 --	 only	 a
particular	 mind.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 time;	 everything	 depends	 on	 the
attitude,	how	you	look	at	life.	There	are	people	for	whom	even	a	Sunday	is	not	a
Sunday.	There	is	no	light,	no	sun	rising	--	even	on	a	Sunday.	They	are	clouded	in
their	own	darkness,	shrouded	in	their	own	misery.	They	carry	their	hell	around
them.	Even	 if	 you	 force	 them	 into	heaven,	 they	will	 go	on	 carrying	 their	 hell.
They	will	live	in	their	hell.	Nobody	can	force	them	out	of	their	hell	unless	they
decide	to	drop	it.	It	is	your	decision	to	be	happy	or	to	be	unhappy.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 Sufi	mystic	who	was	 always	 happy,	 always	 and	 always.
Nobody	had	ever	seen	him	unhappy.	It	was	as	if	he	did	not	know	that	language,
as	if	the	only	way	he	knew	how	to	be	was	happy.
He	became	very	old	and	one	day	a	man	asked	him,	'Will	you	please	tell	me	your
secret?
How	you	remain	so	happy?	How	you	remain	so	unperturbed?	How	each	moment
you	can	be	so	blissful?	It	is	impossible.	It	is	unbelievable.	What	is	your	secret?'
The	old	man	laughed	and	he	said,	 'Long	before,	I	 found	one	simple	 thing:	 that
each	morning,	when	I	opened	my	eyes,	there	are	two	alternatives	to	choose	for
that	day	--
either	to	be	happy	or	to	be	unhappy.	And	I	always	chose	to	be	happy.	Simple	is
my	secret:	each	day	gives	me	only	two	alternatives	to	choose	--	to	be	happy	or	to
be	unhappy.
And	I	always	choose	to	be	happy,	that's	all.	There	is	nothing	more	to	it.'
But	you	will	not	believe	in	this.	You	will	say	this	old	man	is	deceiving.	He	must
have	some	other	secret.
But	 I	 also	 tell	 you	 this	 is	 the	 secret.	 All	 great	 truths	 are	 simple	 truths,	 very
simple.	 Try	 tomorrow	 morning.	 Before	 you	 open	 your	 eyes	 have	 a	 clear-cut
vision	of	 two	alternatives:	 being	 in	hell	 or	 in	heaven.	Visualise	misery	on	one
hand,	visualise	blissfulness	on	another	hand.	See	deeply	into	both.	Don't	be	in	a
hurry.	Look	into	both	as	deeply	as	possible	and	wait	--	then	decide.	If	you	want
to	be	unhappy	then	decide,	let	it	be	your	decision	--	and	then	be	truly	unhappy
the	whole	day.	Be	committed	 to	your	decision	and	don't	 try	 to	 escape	 from	 it.
Whatsoever	happens,	you	remain	miserable.	And	if	you	decide	to	be	happy,	then
stick	to	it	and	soon	you	will	realise	that	your	life	is	your	decision.
You	 are	 suffering	 because	 you	 go	 on	 deciding	 in	 that	 way;	 you	 are	 suffering
because	you	go	on	clinging	to	your	suffering.	You	have	made	a	habit	out	of	it.	It
is	just	mechanical.
Good,	 you	 should	 feel	 grateful	 that	 it	 is	 happening	 to	you	 --	 that	 every	day	 is
becoming	a	holiday.	Holidays	are	disappearing	from	the	world.	In	the	legal	sense
people	have	more	holidays.	Workdays	are	being	reduced	all	over	the	world,	from
six	 to	 five,	 from	 five	 to	 four,	 and	 soon	 even	 that	will	 not	 be	 so	 --	 in	 the	very
highly	developed	technological	societies,	one	day	of	the	week	will	do	and	for	six
days	people	can	have	holidays.	But
'holiday'	is	disappearing	--	that	quality	of	sacredness,	that	quality	of	holiness	is
disappearing.
I	have	heard	about	a	very	reformed	temple.	Of	course	it	is	in	Southern	California
because	everything	in	California	is	a	little	far-out,	even	religion.
There	 is	 a	 reformed	 temple	 in	 Beverley	 Hills	 that	 is	 so	 reformed	 that	 on	 the
holiest	of	the	days,	Yom	Kippur,	 there	is	a	sign	on	the	door	saying:	Closed	for
the	Jewish	Holidays.
That	quality,	that	consciousness	is	disappearing	from	the	world.
People	have	more	leisure	--	that	is	another	thing.	But	what	do	they	do	with	their
leisure?
They	 create	more	misery	 for	 themselves	 or	 for	 others.	 Finding	 nothing	 to	 do,
they	do	harm	to	themselves	or	to	others.	More	accidents	happen	on	the	holidays
--	more	car	accidents,	more	murders,	more	suicides.	And	after	the	holiday	people
are	so	tired	that	they	need	a	whole	week's	rest	to	recuperate,	to	recover.	They	do
a	thousand	and	one	things	on	holidays	just	to	keep	busy,	because	not	to	be	busy
is	to	be	with	oneself	and	that	has	become	almost	impossible.
To	be	with	oneself	and	to	be	happy	with	oneself	--	that	dimension	is	completely
lost.
That's	what	a	holiday	is,	or	should	be.	One	is	so	full	of	God,	so	full	of	being,	that
there	is	no	need	to	do	anything,	there	is	no	need	to	be	occupied.	Occupation	is
just	an	escape.	It	is	a	good	way	to	avoid	encountering	yourself,	encountering	life.
Holidays	are	disappearing.
It	is	good	that	every	day	a	feeling	arises	in	you	that	this	is	a	holiday.	It	is.	If	it
was	 not	 so	 before,	 then	 you	 were	 missing	 something.	 Now	 it	 has	 started
happening,	don't	make	it	a	question.
I	used	 to	know	a	man	who	was	an	atheist.	Once	I	heard	 that	he	had	become	a
theist.	I	could	not	believe	it.	So	when	I	came	across	him	I	asked	him,	'How	come
you	decided	to	become	a	theist?'
'Well,'	he	said,	'I	used	to	be	an	atheist	but	I	gave	it	up.'
'Why?'	I	enquired.
He	said,	'No	holidays.'
If	you	are	an	atheist	then	there	are	no	holidays,	then	there	is	no	God,	then	there
are	 no	 Sundays.	 The	Christian	 parable	 says	 that	God	 created	 the	world	 in	 six
days	and	on	the	seventh	day,	Sunday,	he	rested.	That	rest	was	very	beautiful,	it
was	out	of	great	creation.
He	was	feeling	fulfilled.	He	had	created	the	whole	world	and,	on	the	sixth	day,
he	looked	and	he	said,	 'Good,	very	good.'	And	he	rested.	He	was	happy,	 like	a
small	child	who	has	made	something	and	looks	from	every	side	and	says,	'Good.
I	have	done	it.'	He	rested	on	the	seventh	day.	That	rest-day	was	a	fulfillment-day.
The	 parable	 has	much	 significance.	 It	 says	 that	 you	 can	 have	 a	 rest-day	 only
after	creation.	If	you	don't	create	anything,	your	life	will	be	restless;	you	will	not
be	able	to	have	a	holiday.	Create	something	--	only	then	you	can	rest.	Rest	is	a
by-product.	You	cannot	directly	rest	--	first	you	have	to	be	so	creative,	you	have
to	feel	so	good	about	yourself,	so	happy	with	yourself,	so	worthy,	that	you	can
allow	rest	for	yourself,	that	you	can	allow	a	day	just	for	fun.
Ordinarily	people	can't	allow	a	day	of	 rest	 for	 themselves	because	 they	feel	so
condemnatory	 about	 themselves,	 they	 feel	 so	 unworthy	 because	 they	 have	 not
done	 anything	 worthwhile,	 that	 they	 have	 not	 experienced	 any	 fulfillment,
nothing	has	happened,	they	have	not	blossomed.	Hence	continuous	occupation,
continuous	activity	is	needed.
Many	 people	 go	 on	 working	 and	 working	 and	 working	 and	 one	 day	 they
die...because	their	work	is	not	creative.	When	is	the	work	creative?	The	work	is
creative	when	you	love	it,	the	work	is	creative	when	you	feel	in	tune	with	it,	the
work	 is	 creative	when	 you	 enjoy	 it,	 the	work	 is	 creative	when	 you	 choose	 it,
when	it	fits	with	your	being	and	there	is	a	great	harmony	between	you	and	your
work.
Once	that	happens,	whatsoever	you	do	is	creative.	And	when	after	each	creative
moment	you	can	relax,	that	relaxation	is	earned.	Yes,	God	earned	relaxation	for
the	seventh	day.
For	six	days	he	worked	hard,	he	created	the	whole	world;	on	the	seventh	day	he
had	earned	relaxation,	he	was	worthy	of	it.	That's	the	meaning	of	the	parable.
If	you	are	creative	only	then	can	you	have	holidays,	not	otherwise.	If	you	want
to	have	holidays	become	more	and	more	creative.	I	am	not	saying	be	creative	in
the	 eyes	 of	 others	 --	 that	 is	 irrelevant	 --	 just	 be	 creative	 in	 your	 own	 eyes,
whatsoever	you	do.	If	you	love	it	then	do	it,	otherwise	don't	do	it	--	choose	some
other	way.	Life	is	vast.	Says	Jesus,
'There	 are	many	mansions	 in	my	God's	 house.'	There	 are	many	dimensions	 in
life.	There	is	enough	opportunity	to	choose.
If	you	are	not	feeling	fulfilled	in	something	that	you	are	doing,	then	don't	do	it,
because	 this	will	be	a	sheer	wastage	and	you	will	not	have	earned	holidays.	A
man	who	has	 lived	according	 to	his	being,	who	has	done	his	own	 thing,	earns
death.	Then	he	dies,	but	the	death	is	a	Sunday;	then	he	dies,	but	he	dies	fulfilled.
He	has	no	complaints.	He	lived	the	way	he	wanted	to	live.
If	I	am	going	to	die	and	God	asks	me,	'If	I	send	you	back,	how	would	you	like	to
live?'	I	will	say,	'The	same.	I	loved	it.	I	enjoyed	it.	I	would	like	to	live	the	same
way.'	Just	think	about	you.	If	you	die	and	God	asks	you,	'If	you	are	sent	back	to
the	world	what	changes	would	you	like	to	make	in	your	life?'	Will	you	be	able	to
say	that	you	would	like	to	live	the	same	way,	absolutely	the	same	way?	If	not,
then	you	are	doing	something	wrong	with	your	life.	Then	you	are	dragging	your
life,	 then	you	are	not	living	it.	Then	you	are	simply	killing	time	--	as	they	say.
Then	 you	 are	 simply	wasting	 your	 energies,	 they	 are	 simply	 dissipated.	 They
will	not	become	an	integral	force	and	there	is	not	going	to	be	any	blossoming	--
your	tree	is	going	to	remain	without	any	fruits	and	flowers.	Then	how	can	you	be
happy	and	how	can	you	enjoy?
Time	 as	 holy	 opportunity,	 that	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 holiday	 --	 a	 holy	 day,	 a	 day
which	is	not	profane,	a	day	which	is	not	ordinary.	And	once	you	know	how	to	be
creative,	each	moment	becomes	holy.
Whenever	 you	 create	 something	 you	 participate	 with	 the	 creator	 --	 you	 have
become	a	small	creator	in	your	own	right.	If	you	write	a	small	poem	or	you	sing
a	 song,	maybe	 nobody	 likes	 it,	 nobody	 applauds	 it,	 but	 that	 is	 irrelevant.	You
enjoyed	it.	Singing,	you	were	happy,	you	participated	in	that	moment	with	God,
you	helped	him	to	create	a	song,	you	became	instrumental.	In	fact,	whatsoever	is
created	is	created	by	him	--	you	allowed	him	to	create	a	small	song	through	you.
Then	you	feel	tremendously	good,	good	about	yourself.
And	 that	 is	one	of	 the	basic	qualities	of	a	 religious	man:	he	always	feels	good
about	himself.	He	is	not	in	any	way	guilty,	guilt	does	not	exist	in	him	--	because
he	lived	life	as	he	wanted	to	live	it;	he	loved	his	life	the	way	it	happened;	it	was
the	only	life	he	wanted	to	live.	Then	there	is	no	guilt.	Remember,	a	guilty	person
is	 not	 a	 religious	 person.	 A	 guilty	 person	 is	 ill,	 a	 guilty	 person	 is	 neurotic,	 a
guilty	person	needs	psychiatric	help.
A	 religious	 person	 feels	 tremendously	 good	 about	 himself;	 whatsoever	 he	 is
doing,	he	is	doing	something	intrinsically	valuable.	This	should	be	insisted	upon
as	 much	 as	 possible:	 worth	 in	 life	 arises	 only	 when	 you	 do	 something
intrinsically	valuable.
There	are	two	types	of	values	in	life.	One	is	intrinsic	value.	You	sing	a	song	--	it
has	an	intrinsic	value,	it	is	the	means	and	it	is	the	end	also.	Or	you	sing	a	song	in
the	marketplace	 to	earn	a	 little	money.	That	money	is	not	 intrinsic	 to	 the	song,
that	money	 is	 an	outside	value.	And	 if	you	are	 singing	your	 song	only	 for	 the
money,	the	activity	is	no	longer	holy,	it	is	profane.	If	you	are	singing	your	song
for	the	happiness	that	it	brings	to	you....	Maybe	as	a	by-product	it	brings	money
also,	but	that	is	irrelevant.	If	it	brings,	it	is	good,	if	it	does	not	bring,	that	too	is
good	 --	 but	 your	 activity	 has	 an	 inner	 glow	 to	 it,	 it	 is	 intrinsically	 valuable	 in
itself.	 If	 you	 are	 happy	 that	 you	 could	 sing,	 you	 are	 happy	 that	 you	 had	 an
opportunity	to	sing,	then	every	day	will	become	meditative,	holy.
If	 you	 are	 doing	 the	 meditations	 here	 correctly,	 this	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 to
everybody.
That's	my	whole	effort	here:	to	help	you	enjoy	each	moment	as	it	comes.
AS	A	CHILD,	 SUNDAYS	HAVE	BEEN	SOMETHING	VERY	SPECIAL	TO
ME.
NOW,	 SINCE	 A	 FEW	 DAYS,	 I	 WAKE	 UP	 EVERY	MORNING,	 SEE	 THE
SUN
SHINING	THROUGH	THE	TREES,	HEAR	THE	BIRDS	SINGING	AND	GET
THIS
FEELING:	'AH,	ANOTHER	SUNDAY.'	I	PUT	ON	MY	BEST	CLOTHES	AND
HAVE
SUNDAY	FOR	THE	WHOLE	DAY.	WHAT	IS	HAPPENING	TO	ME?
Something	 tremendously	 beautiful	 is	 happening	 to	 you.	 'Allow	 it	 to	 happen.
Don't	help	your	mind	to	create	any	trouble.
The	mind	will	try	because	the	mind	feels	happy	only	when	there	is	some	misery.
Mind's	 happiness	 is	 not	 your	 happiness	 and	 your	 happiness	 is	 never	 mind's
happiness.	Your	 goals	 are	 different;	 in	 fact,	 diametrically	 opposite.	Mind	 feels
happy	only	when	you	are	miserable	--	then	there	is	something	to	do,	then	mind
becomes	dominating,	then	he	can	dictate:	do	this,	do	that.	One	has	to	fight	with
the	misery	so	one	has	to	take	the	advice	of	the	mind.	When	you	are	happy,	mind
is	not	needed.	You	can	discard	it,	there	is	no	need	for	it.
It	is	just	like	when	the	country	is	at	war	the	army	is	needed.	Then	suddenly	you
see	the	army	becomes	predominant	--	everywhere	you	see	soldiers,	the	military,
moving	from	here	to	there,	all	the	trains	full	of	them.	When	the	war	disappears
they	also	by	and	by	disappear,	 then	you	don't	see	 them	so	much,	 then	 they	are
discarded.	Not	completely	--
because	 our	 peace	 is	 not	 complete;	 our	 so-called	 peace	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 gap
between	 two	 wars.	 They	 recede	 back	 into	 their	 cantonment	 areas,	 into	 their
camps,	 but	 they	 go	 on	 parading	 there,	 preparing	 there	 for	 some	 war	 that	 can
happen	any	moment.	But	 they	are	no	 longer	dominant.	And	 if	a	country	really
attains	to	peace	then	the	military	will	have	to	be	disbanded,	it	will	not	be	needed.
Or	 think....	 You	 are	 ill,	 then	 suddenly	 the	 physician,	 the	 doctor,	 becomes
important	 in	 your	 mind.	 When	 you	 are	 healthy	 you	 forget	 completely	 that
doctors	 exist.	When	you	 are	 ill,	 then	 suddenly,	 passing	on	 the	 street,	 you	 read
doctors'	 name	plates	 --	 they	 become	predominant,	 they	 become	 the	 figure	 and
the	rest	of	life	becomes	just	a	background.
When	you	are	not	ill	and	you	are	healthy	they	are	no	longer	figures.	The	gestalt
changes.
The	same	 is	happening	with	 the	mind.	 If	you	are	miserable,	mind	 is	needed	 to
get	rid	of	the	misery.	If	you	are	happy,	mind	is	not	needed;	you	can	simply	throw
it,	you	can	put	it	aside.
Mind	 feels	 neglected	when	you	 are	 happy	 so	 it	 starts	 creating	 problems	 about
happiness.
The	mind	can	say,	'Look,	don't	be	foolish.	It	is	not	possible.	Every	day	cannot	be
a	Sunday.	Look	at	the	calendar:	 this	is	Monday	or	Friday,	it	cannot	be	Sunday.
This	is	just	illusion.	And	every	moment	cannot	be	a	moment	of	happiness	--	who
has	ever	heard	that	a	person	can	live	always	in	happiness?	This	is	not	possible.
You	 must	 be	 getting	 some	 wrong	 notions,	 some	 delusions.	 Or	 you	 have
hypnotised	 yourself.	 Or	 something	 has	 gone	 wrong.	 Beware!	 This	 is	 not
humanly	possible!'
Mind	thinks	that	only	misery	is	possible;	it	has	a	great	investment	in	misery.
Remember	 it.	 Working	 here	 with	 me,	 by	 and	 by	 this	 moment	 will	 come	 to
everybody.	It	has	to	come.	That's	what	we	are	working	for.	When	it	comes,	don't
listen	to	the	mind.
People	come	 to	me.	They	say,	 'We	are	 feeling	so	happy.	How	come?	We	have
never	felt	so	happy.'	And	if	I	look	at	their	faces	it	seems	that	something	has	gone
wrong.	Because	 they	 are	 feeling	 happy,	 it	 appears	 to	 them	 that	 something	 has
gone	wrong.
I	 have	 heard	 about	 a	 great	 priest	who	was	 teaching	 his	 disciples	 how	 to	 give
religious	sermons.
The	 priest	 was	 instructing	 his	 newly-minted	 ministers	 on	 the	 importance	 of
facial	expression	harmonising	with	the	speech.
'When	 you	 speak	 of	 heaven,	 let	 your	 face	 light	 up,	 let	 it	 be	 irradiated	with	 a
heavenly	gleam,	let	your	eyes	shine	with	reflected	glory.	But	when	you	speak	of
hell	--	well,	then	your	ordinary	faces	will	do.'
Misery	 has	 settled;	 it	 has	 almost	 become	 your	 character.	 To	 be	miserable	 has
become	your	ordinary	existence.	When	happiness	comes	you	cannot	believe	 in
it,	you	cannot	trust	in	it.
This	is	a	very	ill	state	of	affairs,	but	it	is	how	it	is.	You	will	have	to	learn	how	to
trust	happiness,	you	will	have	 to	 learn	how	 to	 trust	 joy,	you	will	have	 to	 learn
how	to	be	nondoubting	when	happiness	comes	--	to	be	vulnerable,	open.	If	you
cannot	learn	that,	happiness	may	knock	at	your	door	and	you	may	not	open	it.
Watch	your	patterns	and	don't	be	so	identified	with	them.	People	go	on	repeating
the	old	tapes	again	and	again	and	again.	It	is	not	that	happiness	has	not	knocked
at	your	door,	it	has	knocked	many	times.	And	it	is	not	that	God	has	not	stretched
his	hand	towards	you,	he	has	been	groping	for	you	for	millennia.	But	you	have
become	very	clever	and	cunning	in	dodging	him.
If	the	Devil	comes	and	gets	hold	of	you,	you	immediately	surrender	because	you
say,
'What	can	I	do?'	If	God	comes	to	you,	you	cannot	surrender,	because	in	the	first
place	 you	 cannot	 believe	 that	God	 exists.	 This	 is	 really	 something!	 There	 are
people	who	say	there	is	no	God	but	still	they	believe	in	the	Devil.	It	is	difficult	to
believe	in	God,	it	 is	not	so	difficult	 to	believe	in	the	Devil.	It	 is	easier;	 in	fact,
without	the	Devil	how	will	you	be	miserable?	Without	the	Devil,	on	whom	will
you	throw	your	responsibilities?	Whom	will	you	find	as	an	excuse?	The	Devil	is
your	excuse.	You	can	remain	miserable	and	you	can	say	that	the	Devil	is	making
you	miserable.
And	this	Devil	goes	on	changing	his	form.	It	has	taken	many	forms:	sometimes
it	was	fate;	sometimes	it	was	the	Devil.	Now,	according	to	Freudians,	it	is	your
unconscious;	 to	Marxists,	 it	 is	 the	social	 structure.	But	 there	 is	 somebody	who
goes	on	creating	misery	for	you.
Nobody	is	creating	misery	for	you.	You	are	clinging	to	it.
But	this	is	very	hard	to	accept	because	then	your	whole	image	becomes	neurotic
--	and	you	carry	a	very	golden	image	of	yourself.
I	have	heard	a	very	beautiful	anecdote.	It	is	a	rare	beauty.
Senior	 citizens	 Israel	 and	Emma	met	 at	 a	 singles'	 dance	on	Miami	Beach,	 and
within	two	weeks	they	were	married.	They	felt	it	was	a	perfect	match,	for	they
were	both	ninety	years	old.
On	 the	 first	 night	 of	 their	 honeymoon,	 they	 got	 into	 bed	 and	 the	 old	 man
squeezed	Emma's	hand.	She	squeezed	back	and	they	fell	asleep.
The	second	night,	Israel	squeezed	her	hand	again.	Emma	squeezed	back	and	they
went	right	to	sleep.
On	the	third	night,	Israel	once	more	squeezed	his	bride's	hand.	'Not	tonight,'	said
Emma,
'I've	got	a	headache!'
People	go	on	repeating	old	tapes	to	the	very	end.
This	is	an	old	tape	that	is	creating	the	question,	'What	is	happening	to	me?'	It	is
as	if	something	like	a	catastrophe,	or	something	like	a	calamity	is	happening	to
you.	 Nothing	 is	 happening	 to	 you,	 you	 are	 coming	 back	 home.	 Nothing	 is
happening	to	you,	you	are	dropping	nonsense,	you	are	dropping	the	rotten	mind,
you	are	stopping	playing	the	old	tapes.
The	second	question:
Question	2
OSHO,	 I	AM	HAVING	A	GREAT	STRUGGLE	DEEP	INSIDE	ME	BEFORE
TAKING
THE	 FINAL	 STEP,	 BUT	 LAST	 NIGHT,	 WHEN	 I	 SLEPT	 IN	 ORANGE
CLOTHES,	 I	 FELT	 MYSELF	 A	 DIFFERENT	 PERSON.	 WHAT	 ARE	 YOU
DOING?
It	 is	dangerous	 to	 take	responsibility	 for	you	because	one	day	 things	are	going
well,	another	day	they	are	going	bad.	I'm	not	doing	anything!
I	have	heard	about	a	Sufi	mystic	who	had	a	small	school	and	guests	used	to	visit
him	from	far-away	places.	One	day	a	prince	came	to	visit	him	and	the	Sufi	did
not	have	the	right	pots,	utensils,	in	which	to	prepare	and	offer	food	to	this	prince.
So	he	went	to	the	king	and	he	told	him,	 'A	prince	has	come	to	our	poor	school
and	we	will	need	a	few	pots,	golden	and	silver,	from	you.	We	will	return	them
tomorrow	because	by	tomorrow	morning	he	will	be	leaving.'
So	he	 took	 seven	pots.	The	next	day	he	came	with	nine	pots.	The	king	asked,
'You	 took	only	 seven,	why	have	you	brought	nine	pots?	These	 two	 small	 pots
don't	belong	to	me.'
He	said,	 'What	can	I	do?	Last	night	your	big	pot	gave	birth	to	these	two	twins.
These	are	the	twins.'
The	 king	 could	 not	 believe	 it,	 could	 not	 think	 that	 it	 could	 happen,	 but	 greed
overtook	him.	He	 said,	 'What	 is	wrong	 in	 it?	This	man,	by	 some	mistake,	 has
brought	 these	pots,	so	why	not	accept?'	He	accepted.	He	said,	 'Very	good.	You
are	a	very	honest	man.
Otherwise	who	brings	babies?	If	pots	give	babies,	people	keep	the	babies.'
After	a	month	the	Sufi	came	again.	He	said,	'Again	the	prince	has	come	and	we
need	more	pots	because	he	has	brought	 a	 few	 friends	also.'	So	he	 took	almost
twenty	pots.	But	then	he	never	came	for	two,	three	days.
The	king	called	him,	'What	happened?	You	have	not	returned.'
He	said,	'I	am	sorry.	Ten	of	them	died.'
Now	the	king	was	very	mad.	He	said,	'Have	you	gone	mad?	How	can	pots	die?'
He	said,	'Just	think	of	that	other	time.	If	pots	can	give	birth	to	babies,	why	can't
they	die?'
So	 today	 it	 was	 good,	 but	 I	 am	 not	 going	 to	 accept	 responsibility	 because
tomorrow	it	will	be	bad	and	then	you	will	come	to	me	and	say,	'Osho,	what	are
you	doing	to	me?'
It	is	you	and	only	you.	Don't	throw	your	responsibilities	anywhere.
That	night	you	were	a	little	good	to	yourself,	you	allowed	something	to	happen.
Question	3
I	AM	HAVING	A	GREAT	STRUGGLE	DEEP	INSIDE	BEFORE	TAKING
THE.FINAL	 STEP,	 BUT	 LAST	 NIGHT,	 WHEN	 I	 SLEPT	 IN	 ORANGE
CLOTHES,	 I	 FELT	 MYSELF	 A	 DIFFERENT	 PERSON.	 WHAT	 ARE	 YOU
DOING?
I	am	not	doing	anything	at	all	--	it	was	just	the	gesture	of	wearing	orange.	The
person	 is	 not	 a	 sannyasin	yet;	 that	 is	 his	 struggle.	He	 is	 thinking	 continuously
about	whether	to	take	sannyas	or	not	to	take	sannyas.
You	allowed	something.	It	was	just	like	a	rehearsal:	you	slept	in	orange	clothes
just	 to	 see	 what	 happens.	 The	 very	 idea	 that	 something	was	 going	 to	 happen
helped	it	happen.	You	relaxed	in	orange	clothes,	the	mind	was	more	at	ease	--	at
least	you	have	done	something.
A	very	small	gesture	but	yet	you	have	done	something.	At	least	you	decided	to
sleep	in	orange.
A	person	who	has	been	continuously	in	conflict,	for	him	even	a	slight	decision
gives	such	a	relaxation	that	others	cannot	even	imagine	it.	It	will	be	difficult	for
others	to	see	because	they	sleep	in	orange	every	night;	they	cannot	believe	that
something	could	happen	just	because	of	orange.
The	 person	 who	 has	 asked	 the	 question	 is	 in	 deep	 conflict,	 struggle,	 divided.
Even	this	small	gesture	helped	him	to	relax.	Even	this	much	courage...although	it
was	not	much,	because	he	must	have	put	 the	 light	off	 so	nobody	could	 see!	 It
was	not	much	but	still	something!	He	took	courage	in	the	darkness	of	the	night
to	become	a	sannyasin.	He	must	have	felt	good,	relaxed.
Whenever	you	come	to	any	decision	you	feel	good.	And	the	greater	the	conflict,
the	greater	the	happiness	that	will	come	out	of	this	decision.
But	don't	bring	me	in	because	it	is	very	dangerous.	Don't	play	that	game	at	all.
Let	me	tell	you	one	anecdote.
'Rabbi	 Jacobs,	 I	 need	 fifty	 dollars	 to	 get	 out	 of	 debt,'	 sobbed	Gottlieb.	 'I	 keep
praying	to	God	for	help	but	he	doesn't	send	it!'
'Don't	lose	faith,'	said	the	rabbi.	'Keep	praying.'
After	Gottlieb	 left	 his	 house,	 the	 rabbi	 felt	 sorry	 for	 him.	 'I	 don't	make	much
money,'	he	thought,	'but	that	poor	man	needs	it.	I'll	give	him	twenty-five	dollars
out	of	my	own	pocket.'
A	week	later,	the	rabbi	stopped	Gottlieb	and	said,	'Here,	God	sent	this	to	you!'
Back	in	his	home,	Gottlieb	bowed	his	head.	'Thank	you,	Lord!'	he	said.	'But	next
time	you	send	money,	don't	send	it	through	Rabbi	Jacobs	--	that	crook	kept	half
of	it.'
So	 please	 be	 direct.	 Don't	 bring	me	 in.	 Otherwise	 some	 day	 or	 other	 you	 are
going	to	be	angry	with	me.
From	 the	 very	 beginning	 it	 is	 better	 to	 be	 clear.	 This	 man	 is	 going	 to	 take
sannyas	some	day	--	he	will	have	to	--	so	I	have	to	make	him	completely	clear
that	it	is	his	decision	to	take	sannyas,	it	is	not	my	persuasion.	It	is	his	decision	to
jump	into	the	fire.	I	will	keep	myself	completely	clear	--	out	of	it.	Only	then	does
your	decision	help	you	to	crystallise.
When	you	take	it	on	your	own,	absolutely	on	your	own,	you	become	centred.
Sannyas	will	make	you	more	free,	not	less.	Sannyas	is	not	a	sort	of	slavery,	it	is
freedom
--	 freedom	 from	 the	 formalities	 of	 the	 society,	 freedom	 from	 the	 oppressive
burdens	of	the	others,	freedom	to	be	yourself.	Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	become	an
individual.	 My	 help	 is	 available	 here	 but	 it	 is	 only	 your	 decision	 which	 will
change	you.	Even	if	YOU	take	my	help,	it	is	you	who	takes	it.	I	am	like	a	river
flowing	--	it	is	your	decision	to	drink	out	of	me	or	not.	It	is	absolutely	yours,	and
let	it	be	so.
It	needs	much	courage	to	take	all	the	responsibility	on	one's	shoulders.	But	that
courage	is	a	device.
Feingold,	on	his	deathbed,	was	surrounded	by	his	children.	 'Don't	worry,	Papa,
we'll	 have	 a	 big	 funeral,'	 declared	 his	 eldest	 son.	 'There'll	 be	 a	 hundred
limousines,	ten	cars	with	flowers.'
'We	don't	need	all	that!'	interrupted	Feingold's	second	son.	'Fifty	limos	and	five
cars	with	flowers	is	more	than	enough!'
'Whatta	ya	makin'	such	a	big	deal?'	said	the	dying	man's	youngest	son.	'We	don't
need	any	flowers.	We'll	just	have	the	immediate	family!	Two	cars	is	enough!'
At	that	moment,	Feingold	raised	himself	up	and	said,	'Listen,	boys!	Just	hand	me
my	pants	and	I'll	walk	to	the	cemetery!'
You	have	 to	walk!	Don't	wait	 for	 one	 hundred	 limousines	 and	 ten	 cars	 full	 of
flowers.
Nothing	doing.	Get	into	your	pants	and	walk!
But	be	on	your	own.	Only	that	way	one	grows.	There	is	no	other	way	to	grow.
The	mind	 always	wants	 to	 throw	 responsibility	 onto	 somebody	 else;	 the	mind
always	wants	to	become	a	slave.	The	mind	is	a	slave.	It	is	afraid	of	freedom,	it	is
afraid	 of	 responsibility	 --	 hence	 so	many	 churches	 and	 so	many	 organisations
exist	in	the	world,	because	so	many	people	are	ready	to	fall	in	their	traps.	In	fact
churches	are	not	responsible,	 it	 is	 the	people's	need.	Because	 they	need	certain
types	of	imprisonments	somebody	is	going	to	provide	them.
The	 economists	 say	 that	 in	 life	 there	 is	 a	 subtle	 law	 working	 of	 supply	 and
demand,	 demand	 and	 supply.	 You	 demand	 and	 somebody	 is	 bound	 to	 come
along	to	supply	it.
People	 demand	 slaveries	 for	 themselves	 --	 hence	 the	 existence	 of	 Hinduism,
Christianity,	Islam,	and	thousands	of	others	who	are	ready	to	make	a	sheep	out
of	you.	They	say,
'Come	here.	Here	is	the	shepherd'	and	you	become	just	part	of	the	crowd.
I	am	not	here	to	make	you	a	sheep.	You	have	been	a	sheep	for	too	long	already.	I
am	here	 to	make	a	man	out	of	you.	 It	 is	going	 to	be	arduous,	but	you	have	 to
start	becoming	responsible	for	your	own	life.	Once	you	start	feeling	responsible
for	your	own	 life	you	 start	 growing,	because	 then	 there	 is	no	point	 in	wasting
time	in	postponing,	in	waiting.
Nobody	is	coming	to	help	you.	All	waiting	is	futile,	all	waiting	is	sheer	wastage.
So	 if	 there	 is	 a	 conflict	 go	 deep	 into	 it.	 Decide	 something.	 Only	 through
decisions	do	you	become	more	and	more	conscious,	only	 through	decisions	do
you	become	more	and	more	crystallised,	only	through	decisions	do	you	become
sharp.	Otherwise	one	becomes	dull.
People	go	on	 from	one	guru	 to	 another,	 from	one	master	 to	 another,	 from	one
temple	 to	 another	 --	 not	 because	 they	 are	 great	 seekers	 but	 because	 they	 are
incapable	of	decision.
So	they	go	from	one	to	another.	This	is	their	way	to	avoid	commitment.
The	same	happens	in	other	human	relationships:	a	man	goes	from	one	woman	to
another,	goes	on	changing.	People	think	he	is	a	great	lover	--	he	is	not	a	lover	at
all.	He	is	avoiding,	he	is	trying	to	avoid	any	deep	involvement	because	with	deep
involvement,	problems	have	to	be	faced,	much	pain	has	to	be	gone	through.	So
one	 simply	 plays	 safe;	 one	 makes	 it	 a	 point	 never	 to	 go	 too	 deeply	 into
somebody.	If	you	go	too	deep	you	may	not	be	able	to	come	back	easily.	And	if
you	go	deeply	into	somebody,	somebody	else	will	go	deeply	into	you	also	--	it	is
always	proportionate.	If	I	go	very	deep	in	you	the	only	way	is	to	allow	you	also
to	go	 that	deep	 in	me.	 It	 is	 a	give	and	 take,	 it	 is	 a	 sharing.	Then	one	may	get
entangled	too	much,	and	it	will	be	difficult	to	escape	and	the	pain	may	be	much.
So	 people	 learn	 how	 to	 play	 safe:	 just	 let	 surfaces	 meet	 --	 hit-and-run	 love
affairs.	Before	you	are	caught,	run.
This	is	what	is	happening	in	the	modern	world.	People	have	become	so	juvenile,
so	childish;	they	are	losing	all	maturity.	Maturity	comes	only	when	you	are	ready
to	face	the	pain	of	your	being;	maturity	comes	only	when	you	are	ready	to	take
the	challenge.	And	there	is	no	greater	challenge	than	love.	To	live	happily	with
another	 person	 is	 the	 greatest	 challenge	 in	 the	 world.	 It	 is	 very	 easy	 to	 live
peacefully	 alone,	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 live	 peacefully	 with	 somebody	 else,
because	two	worlds	collide,	two	worlds	meet	--	totally	different	worlds.	How	are
they	attracted	to	each	other?	Because	they	are	totally	different,	almost	opposite,
polar	opposites.
It	is	very	difficult	to	be	peaceful	in	a	relationship,	but	that	is	the	challenge.	If	you
escape	from	that,	you	escape	from	maturity.	 If	you	go	 into	 it	with	all	 the	pain,
and	still	continue	going	into	it,	then	by	and	by	the	pain	becomes	a	blessing,	the
curse	becomes	a	blessing.
By	and	by,	 through	 the	conflict,	 the	 friction,	crystallisation	arises.	Through	 the
struggle	you	become	more	alert,	more	aware.
The	other	becomes	like	a	mirror	to	you.	You	can	see	your	ugliness	in	the	other.
The	other	provokes	your	unconscious,	brings	it	to	the	surface.	You	will	have	to
know	 all	 hidden	 parts	 of	 your	 being	 and	 the	 easiest	 way	 is	 to	 be	 mirrored,
reflected,	in	a	relationship.
Easier,	I	call	it,	because	there	is	no	other	way	--	but	it	is	hard.	It	is	hard,	arduous,
because	you	will	have	to	change	through	it.
And	when	you	 come	 to	 a	Master	 an	 even	greater	 challenge	 exists	 before	 you:
you	have	to	decide,	and	the	decision	is	for	the	unknown,	and	the	decision	has	to
be	 total	 and	 absolute,	 irreversible.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 child's	 game;	 it	 is	 a	 point	 of	 no
return.
So	much	conflict	arises.	But	don't	go	on	continuously	changing,	because	this	is
the	way	 to	avoid	yourself.	And	you	will	 remain	soft,	you	will	 remain	babyish.
Maturity	will	not	happen	to	you.
I	have	heard.
After	taking	off	her	clothes	for	an	examination,	Mrs.	Greenberg	sat	on	the	table.
'Lady,'	said	the	doctor,	'I	have	to	tell	you	that	you	are	by	far	the	dirtiest,	filthiest,
most	unclean	woman	I	have	ever	examined	in	my	life!'
'How	d'ya	 like	 that!'	said	Mrs.	Greenberg.	 'The	doctor	I	went	 to	yesterday	said
the	same	thing!'
'Then	why	did	you	come	here?'
'I	wanted	to	get	another	opinion!'	answered	Mrs.	Greenberg.
People	go	on	collecting	opinions.	Be	finished.	Take	courage.	You	have	enough
opinions	with	you	already.	Decide.
One	thing	is	certain:	the	past	which	you	have	lived	has	not	been	an	enrichment
for	 you,	 so	 there	 is	 nothing	 in	 deciding	 for	 it.	 The	 known	 has	 nothing	 to	 be
decided	for	it,	only	the	unknown.	Only	the	unknown	should	have	a	call	for	you
because	that	you	have	not	yet	lived;	you	have	not	moved	in	that	territory.	Move!
Something	new	may	happen	there.
Always	 decide	 for	 the	 unknown,	 whatsoever	 the	 risk,	 and	 you	 will	 grow
continuously.
But	go	on	deciding	for	the	known	and	you	move	in	a	circle	with	the	past	again
and	again.
You	go	on	repeating	it;	you	have	become	a	gramophone	record.
And	 decide.	 The	 sooner	 you	 can	 do	 so,	 the	 better.	 Postponement	 is	 simply
stupid.
Tomorrow	you	will	also	have	to	decide,	so	why	not	today?	And	do	you	think	that
tomorrow	you	will	be	wiser	than	today?	Do	you	think	that	tomorrow	you	will	be
livelier	than	today?	Do	you	think	that	tomorrow	you	will	be	younger	than	today,
fresher	than	today?
Tomorrow	you	will	 be	older,	 your	 courage	will	 be	 less;	 tomorrow	you	will	 be
more	 experienced,	 your	 cunningness	will	 be	more;	 tomorrow	 death	will	 come
closer	--	you	will	start	wavering	and	being	more	afraid.	Never	postpone	for	the
tomorrow.	And	who	knows?	Tomorrow	may	come	or	may	not	come.	If	you	have
to	decide	you	have	to	decide	right	now.
Dr.	Vogel,	the	dentist,	finished	his	examination	on	a	pretty	young	patient.	 'Miss
Baseman,'	he	said,	'I'm	afraid	I'm	going	to	have	to	pull	out	your	wisdom	teeth!'
'Oh,	my!'	exclaimed	the	girl.	'I'd	rather	have	a	baby!'
'Well,'	 said	Dr.	Vogel,	 'could	 you	make	 up	 your	mind	 so	 that	 I	 can	 adjust	 the
chair?'
Make	up	your	mind.	Don't	go	on	postponing	infinitely.
The	third	question:
Question	4
SOMETIMES	 IT	 SEEMS	 LIKE	 WHEREVER	 I	 GO	 I	 AM	 FACING	 THE
WALL.
The	wall	 is	not	outside,	 the	wall	 is	 inside	you.	So	wherever	you	go,	you	carry
your	wall.
When	you	are	alert,	you	feel	it;	when	you	are	not	alert,	you	don't	feel	it	--	but	the
wall	is	inside	you.
The	wall	is	of	your	own	ego	--	ego	surrounds	you	like	a	wall.	It	persuades	you
that	by	surrounding	you	in	 this	way	it	will	protect	you.	That's	 the	seduction	of
the	 ago.	 It	 goes	on	 telling	you	 again	 and	 again,	 'If	 I	 am	not	 there	you	will	 be
unprotected,	you	will	become	too	vulnerable,	and	there	will	be	too	much	risk.	So
let	me	guard	you,	let	me	surround	you.'
Yes,	 there	 is	 a	 certain	 protection	 in	 the	 ego,	 but	 the	 wall	 becomes	 your
imprisonment	also.	There	is	a	certain	protection,	otherwise	nobody	would	suffer
the	miseries	that	ego	brings.	There	is	a	certain	protection,	it	protects	you	against
the	enemy	--	but	then	it	protects	you	against	the	friends	also.
It	is	just	like	when	you	close	your	door	and	hide	behind	it	because	you	are	afraid
of	the	enemy.	Then	a	friend	comes	but	the	door	is	closed,	he	cannot	enter.	If	you
are	too	afraid	of	the	enemy	then	the	friend	also	cannot	enter	into	you.	And	if	you
open	the	door	for	the	friend,	there	is	every	risk	that	the	enemy	may	also	enter.
One	has	to	think	about	it	deeply;	it	is	one	of	the	greatest	problems	in	life.	And
only	a	very	few	courageous	people	tackle	it	rightly,	others	become	cowards	and
hide	and	then	their	whole	life	is	lost.
Life	 is	 risky;	death	has	no	 risk.	Die,	and	 then	 there	 is	no	problem	for	you	and
nobody	 is	 going	 to	 kill	 you	 because	 how	 can	 anybody	 kill	 you	when	 you	 are
already	dead?	Enter	a	grave	and	be	finished.	Then	there	is	no	illness,	then	there
is	no	anxiety,	then	there	is	no	problem	--	you	are	out	of	all	problems.
But	 if	 you	 are	 alive,	 then	 there	 are	millions	 of	 problems.	 The	more	 alive	 the
person,	 the	more	 problems	 there	 are.	But	 there	 is	 nothing	wrong	 in	 it	 because
struggling	with	problems,	fighting	with	the	challenge,	is	how	you	grow.
The	ego	is	a	subtle	wall	around	you.	It	does	not	allow	anybody	to	enter	into	you.
You	feel	protected,	secure,	but	this	security	is	deathlike.	It	is	the	security	of	the
plant	 inside	 the	seed.	The	plant	 is	afraid	 to	sprout	because	--	who	knows?	The
world	is	so	hazardous	and	the	plant	will	be	so	soft,	so	fragile.	Behind	the	wall	of
the	seed,	hiding	inside	the	cell,	everything	is	protected.
Or	 think	 of	 a	 small	 child	 in	 the	 mother's	 womb.	 Everything	 is	 there	 --
whatsoever	the	need	of	the	child	it	is	fulfilled	immediately.	There	is	no	anxiety,
no	fight,	no	future.	The	child	simply	 lives	blissfully.	Every	need	 is	 fulfilled	by
the	mother.
But	 would	 you	 like	 to	 remain	 always	 in	 your	 mother's	 womb?	 It	 is	 very
protective.	If	 it	was	given	to	you	to	choose,	would	you	choose	always	to	be	in
the	 mother's	 womb?	 It	 is	 very	 comfortable,	 what	 more	 comfort	 is	 possible?
Scientists	 say	 that	 we	 have	 not	 yet	 been	 able	 to	 make	 a	 situation	 more
comfortable	 than	 the	 womb.	 The	 womb	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 last,	 the	 ultimate	 in
comfort.	In	fact,	Freud	and	his	followers	say	that	the	desire	of	moksha	is	nothing
but	the	desire	for	the	same	lost	womb	of	the	mother.	So	comfortable	--
no	 anxiety,	 no	 problem,	 no	 need	 to	 work.	 Sheer	 existence.	 And	 everything	 is
supplied	automatically	--	the	need	arises	and	immediately	it	is	supplied.	There	is
not	even	the	trouble	of	breathing	--	the	mother	breathes	for	the	child.	There	is	no
bother	about	food	--
the	mother	eats	for	the	child.
But	would	you	like	to	remain	in	the	mother's	womb?	It	 is	comfortable	but	it	 is
not	life.
Life	is	always	in	the	wild.	Life	is	there	outside.
The	 English	 word	 'ecstasy'	 is	 very,	 very	 significant.	 It	 means:	 to	 stand	 out.
Ecstasy	means	to	get	out	--	out	of	all	shells	and	all	protections	and	all	egos	and
all	comforts,	all	deathlike	walls.	To	be	ecstatic	means	to	get	out,	to	be	free,	to	be
moving,	 to	 be	 a	 process,	 to	 be	 vulnerable	 so	 that	 winds	 can	 come	 and	 pass
through	you.
We	have	 an	 expression,	 sometimes	we	 say,	 'That	 experience	was	 outstanding.'
That	exactly	is	the	meaning	of	ecstasy:	outstanding.
When	a	seed	breaks	and	the	light	hidden	behind	starts	manifesting;	when	a	child
is	born	and	 leaves	 the	womb	behind,	all	 the	comforts	and	all	 the	conveniences
behind,	moves	 into	 the	unknown	world	--	 it	 is	ecstasy.	When	a	bird	breaks	 the
egg	and	flies	into	the	sky,	it	is	ecstasy.
The	ego	is	the	egg	and	you	will	have	to	come	out	of	it.	Be	ecstatic!	Get	out	of	all
protections	and	shells	and	securities.	Then	you	will	attain	to	the	wider	world,	the
vast,	the	infinite.	Only	then	you	live,	and	you	live	abundantly.
But	fear	cripples	you.	The	child,	before	he	gets	out	of	 the	womb,	must	also	be
hesitating	about	whether	to	get	out	or	not.	To	be	or	not	to	be?	It	must	take	one
step	forward	and	another	step	back.	Maybe	that's	why	the	mother	goes	through
so	much	 pain.	 The	 child	 is	 hesitating,	 the	 child	 is	 not	 yet	 totally	 ready	 to	 be
ecstatic.	The	past	pulls	it	back,	the	future	calls	it	forth,	and	the	child	is	divided.
This	is	the	wall	of	indecision,	of	clinging	with	the	past,	of	clinging	with	the	ego.
And	you	carry	 it	everywhere.	Sometimes,	 in	rare	moments,	when	you	are	very
alive	 and	 alert,	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 it.	 Otherwise,	 although	 it	 is	 a	 very
transparent	wall,	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	it.	One	can	live	his	whole	life	--	and
not	 one	 life,	many	 --	without	 becoming	 aware	 that	 one	 is	 living	 inside	 a	 cell,
closed	from	everywhere,	windowless	--	what	Leibnitz	used	 to	call	 'monad'.	No
doors,	no	windows,	just	closed	inside	--	but	it	is	transparent,	a	glass	wall.
SOMETIMES	 IT	 SEEMS	 THAT	 WHEREVER	 I	 GO	 I	 AM	 FACING	 THE
WALL.
Not	facing	it	exactly,	you	are	carrying	the	wall	in	front	of	your	eyes.	When	your
eyes	 have	 a	 clarity	 then	 you	 see	 it;	 when	 your	 eyes	 are	 dull	 and	 you	 are
unconscious	you	can't	see	it.
This	ego	has	to	be	dropped.	One	has	to	gather	courage	and	shatter	it	on	the	floor.
People	go	on	feeding	it	in	millions	of	ways,	not	knowing	that	they	feed	their	own
hell.
Mrs.	Cochrane	was	 standing	 beside	 the	 coffin	 of	 her	 dead	 husband.	Their	 son
stood	at	her	elbow.	The	mourners,	one	by	one,	passed	in	review.
'He's	feeling	no	pain	now,'	said	Mrs.	Croy.	'What	did	he	die	of?'
'Poor	fella,'	said	Mrs.	Cochrane.	'He	died	of	gonorrhoea!'
Another	woman	gazed	at	the	corpse.	'He's	well	out	of	it	now,'	she	said.	'He's	got
a	smile	of	serenity	on	his	face.	What	did	he	die	from?'
'He	died	of	gonorrhoea!'	said	the	widow.
Suddenly,	the	son	pulled	the	mother	aside.	'Mom,'	he	said,	'that's	a	terrible	thing
to	say	about	Pop.	He	didn't	die	of	gonorrhoea.	He	died	of	diarrhoea!'
'I	know	that!'	said	Mrs.	Cochrane.	'But	I'd	rather	have	them	thinkin'	he	died	like
a	sport	--
instead	of	the	shit-he	was!'
To	the	very	end	they	go	on	playing	games	continuously.
The	ego	does	not	allow	you	to	be	true,	it	goes	on	forcing	you	to	be	false.	The	ego
is	the	lie,	but	that	one	has	to	decide.	It	needs	great	courage	because	with	it	will
shatter	all	that	you	have	been	nursing	up	to	now.	It	will	shatter	your	whole	past.
With	it	YOU	will	shatter	completely.	Somebody	will	be	there	but	you	will	not	be
that	person.	A	discontinuous	entity	will	arise	within	you	--	fresh,	uncorrupted	by
the	past.	Then	there	will	be	no	wall;	then	wherever	you	will	be,	you	will	see	the
infinite	without	any	boundaries.
The	old	man,	entering	his	favourite	bar,	found	that	the	usual	barmaid	had	been
replaced	by	a	stranger.	He	was	nonplussed	at	first,	but	gallantly	told	her	that	she
was	'the	best-looking	girl	I've	seen	in	a	long	time'.
The	new	barmaid,	a	haughty	type,	tossed	her	head	and	replied	acidly,	'I'm	sorry	I
can't	return	the	compliment.'
'Oh	well,	my	dear,'	the	old	man	answered	placidly,	'Couldn't	you	have	done	as	I
did?
Couldn't	you	have	told	a	lie?'
All	our	formalities	are	nothing	but	helping	each	other's	ego.	They	ARE	lies.	You
say	something	to	somebody	and	he	returns	the	compliment.	Neither	you	nor	he	is
true.	We	go	on	playing	 the	game:	etiquette,	 formalities,	 the	civilised	 faces	and
masks.
Then	you	will	 have	 to	 face	 the	wall.	And	by	 and	by,	 the	wall	will	 become	 so
thick	 that	you	will	not	be	able	 to	see	anything.	The	wall	goes	on	getting	more
and	more	thick	every	day	--	so	don't	wait.	If	you	have	come	to	feel	that	you	are
carrying	a	wall	around	you,	drop	 it!	Jump	out	of	 it!	 It	 takes	only	a	decision	 to
jump	out	of	it,	nothing	else.	Then	from	tomorrow	don't	feed	it.	Then	whenever
you	see	that	you	are	again	nursing	it,	stop.	Within	a	few	days	you	will	see	it	has
died,	because	it	needs	your	constant	support,	it	needs	breastfeeding.
The	last	question:
Question	5
WHEN	THE	OTHER	BANK	 IS	THIS	VERY	BANK,	THEN	THERE	 IS	NO
NEED
FOR	 ENLIGHTENMENT.	 IF	 ONE	 IS	 ALIVE	 IN	 THIS	 MOMENT,	 THEN
WHY
SHOULD	ONE	DREAM	OF	ENLIGHTENMENT?
These	questions	with	'then'	and	'if'	are	very	cunning	questions.	And	you	are	not
deceiving	anybody	else,	you	are	deceiving	yourself.	Listen	to	the	question	again.
WHEN	THE	OTHER	BANK	 IS	THIS	VERY	BANK,	THEN	THERE	 IS	NO
NEED
FOR	ENLIGHTENMENT.
If	you	have	come	to	know	that	 the	other	bank	 is	 this	very	bank	 then	you	have
already	become	enlightened,	there	is	no	need.	This	is	what	enlightenment	is	all
about.	If	you	have	come	to	know	that	this	moment	is	all	and	the	place	that	you
are	in	is	 the	whole,	and	that	 this	world	is	 the	other	world	--	you	have	attained,
you	are	 liberated.	Because	 if	 there	 is	no	other	world	 there	can	be	no	desire.	 If
this	moment	is	all,	all	desire	ceases.
WHEN	THE	OTHER	BANK	 IS	THIS	VERY	BANK,	THEN	THERE	 IS	NO
NEED
FOR	ENLIGHTENMENT.
Absolutely	true.
IF	ONE	IS	ALIVE	IN	THIS	MOMENT,	THEN	WHY	SHOULD	ONE	DREAM
OF
ENLIGHTENMENT?
There	is	no	need.
But	these	questions	won't	help.	It	has	not	happened	to	you.	This	bank	is	not	yet
the	other	bank	and	this	moment	is	not	yet	the	eternity.
You	have	listened	to	me	and	you	have	become	parrot-like.	I	say	that	there	is	no
need	for	any	enlightenment,	the	very	search	for	enlightenment	is	nightmarish	--
but	that	is	not	going	to	help.	You	will	have	to	drop	all	searching,	then	you	will	be
able	to	realise	the	fact	that	you	are	already	enlightened.
There	 is	nowhere	 to	go,	you	are	 already	THERE;	you	have	always	been	 there
from	the	very	beginning,	there	has	been	no	going	astray.	We	have	lived	in	God,
we	have	lived	as	Gods,	there	is	no	other	way.
If	 you	 have	 understood	 this	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 enlightenment,	 it	 has
already	happened.	If	you	have	not	understood	it	 --	you	have	simply	listened	to
me	 and	you	 are	 playing	with	words	 --	 then	you	will	 be	 getting	 into	more	 and
more	confusion.
Your	 desire	 will	 not	 stop	 by	 these	 'whens'	 and	 'ifs';	 it	 will	 continue.	 Your
ambition	will	not	disappear.	Be	more	practical	--	don't	become	theoretical,	don't
become	metaphysical,	don't	become	philosophical.	Be	more	practical.	Listen	to
your	 own	 state.	 You	 have	 desires,	 you	 have	 desires	 for	 tomorrow,	 you	 have
hopes	 for	 a	 future,	 you	 are	 continuously	 hoping	 that	 something	 is	 going	 to
happen	 --	 something	 great,	 something	 extraordinary,	 something	 special.	 And
only	to	you	and	to	nobody	else.
These	'ifs'	and	'whens'	will	not	stop	that.	If	you	can	drop	all	hoping,	all	desiring	-
-	 what	 Zen	 people	 call	 TRISHNA	 --	 if	 you	 can	 drop	 all	 desire	 to	 become
somebody	 or	 something,	 if	 you	 can	 drop	 becoming,	 if	 you	 understand	 the
foolishness	 of	 hoping	 and	 it	 disappears	 and	 you	 are	 left	 without	 any	 trace	 of
desire,	that's	what	enlightenment	is.
Then	there	is	no	need.	But	be	practical.
I	have	heard.
Scientists	 concluded	 that	 the	 ice	 cap	 was	 going	 to	 melt	 and	 the	 whole	 world
would	be	flooded	within	six	months.
When	 the	 news	 broke,	 religious	 leaders	 went	 into	 deep	 conference.	 The
Protestant	 hierarchy	 released	 a	 statement:	 'Because	 of	 the	 impending	 disaster,
Protestants	will	go	to	church	and	pray	for	two	hours	every	day.'
The	Catholics	made	an	announcement:	'Because	of	the	coming	deluge,	Catholics
will	make	every	other	day,	all	day,	a	day	of	prayer,	for	the	next	six	months.'
Rabbis	 from	all	over	 the	 land	convened,	 then	 they	 too	 issued	a	message	 to	 the
world:
'Because	the	whole	world	will	be	flooded,	learn	how	to	live	under	water.'
Be	more	practical,	be	more	of	a	Jew.
Otherwise	my	words	can	mislead	you.	I	have	no	intention	even	to	guide	you,	but
my	words	can	misguide	you	because	you	can	take	them	on	the	surface.
You	 can	 say,	 'Yes,	Osho	 says	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 enlightenment,	 so	 forget	 all
meditation	and	be	 the	fool	you	have	always	been.'	This	 is	not	going	 to	change
you.
Try	to	understand	each	word	that	I	say	to	you-.	Each	word	that	I	utter	is	pregnant
with	tremendous	meaning	but	you	will	have	to	decode	it.
The	rabbi	had	stood	before	the	synagogue's	board	of	directors	for	almost	an	hour
pleading	with	them	to	buy	a	chandelier	for	the	temple.
When	he'd	finished,	Blum,	the	elderly	president,	stood	up.	 'What're	we	wasting
time	talkin'	for?'	he	demanded.	 'First	of	all,	a	chandelier	--	we	ain't	got	nobody
who	could	even	SPELL	it!'
'Second,	we	ain't	got	nobody	here	who	could	PLAY	it!'
'And	third,	what	we	need	in	the	synagogue	is	more	LIGHT!'
That's	 how	 things	 go.	 That's	 what	 the	 poor	 rabbi	 is	 saying	 all	 the	 time	 --	 a
chandelier	is	needed.
What	I	am	saying	to	you	is	that	you	need	a	deep	centering	in	the	herenow	so	that
no	desiring	of	the	world	distracts	you,	no	desire	of	liberation	distracts	you.	You
are	 so	 deeply	 herenow	 that	 you	 ARE	 simply	 herenow;	 your	 mind	 is	 moving
nowhere	else,	your	mind	is	not	wandering	anywhere.
In	that	pure	moment,	completely	centred	and	grounded,	YOU	are	enlightened	--
but	you	will	have	to	attain	to	that	moment.	And	that	cannot	be	attained	by	great
philosophical	talk
--	you	will	have	to	work	hard,	you	will	have	to	be	very	practical.
Right	now,	as	you	are,	you	are	completely	drunk,	drunk	with	desire.
He	had	been	to	a	party	and	had	imbibed	a	little	too	freely.	Along	about	four	in
the	morning	he	was	staggering	home.	Crossing	a	bridge	he	met	a	policeman.	The
cop	was	a	friend,	and	they	leaned	over	the	bridge	rail	to	converse	a	bit.
'What's	that	down	there	in	the	water?'	the	drunk	suddenly	asked.
'Look	again.	That's	the	moon,"	said	the	cop.
He	looked	again,	shook	his	head,	and	then	demanded,	'Okay,	okay.	But	how	the
hell	did	I	get	way	up	here?'
'Because	the	moon	is	so	far	down,	how	the	hell	did	I	get	way	up	here?'
I	go	on	talking	to	you	knowing	well	that	you	are	drunk	with	a	thousand	and	one
desires.	 I	 am	 telling	you	 to	drop	 these	 thousand	and	one	desires.	And	you	 are
ready	to	drop	them...if	I	can	give	you	a	new	desire	for	them,	if	I	can	give	you	a
bigger	 substitute,	 if	 I	 can	 give	 you	 one	 great	 desire	 so	 that	 all	 desires	 can	 be
sacrificed	 for	 it.	You	are	 ready	 to	drop	your	desires	but	you	are	 ready	 to	drop
them	only	 for	 a	greater	desire.	That	 I	 cannot	do	 --	 the	greater	desire	will	be	a
greater	bondage	to	you.	Hence	Zen	people	say	that	enlightenment	is	a	nightmare.
Hence	Zen	people	say	don't	try	to	become	a	Buddha	otherwise	you	will	fall	into
the	 seventh	 hell.	 Don't	 try	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 ultimate	 reality	 because	 your	 very
desire	to	reach	it	will	hinder	you.	All	desiring	is	a	hindrance	--	the	desire	for	God
and	liberation	also.
You	would	like	me	to	give	you	a	big	desire,	a	desire	with	capital	letters,	so	big
that	you	can	pour	your	small,	tiny	desires	into	it.	But	that	is	not	what	I	am	going
to	 do.	 I	 want	 you	 to	 drop	 all	 your	 desires	 and	 not	 to	 substitute	 them	 with
anything	else.	Only	then	can	you	be	desireless.
Desireless,	you	are	enlightened.
Enlightenment	is	not	somewhere	waiting	for	you,	it	is	already	here.	It	surrounds
you	right	now.	It	is	within	you	and	without	you.	It	is	in	every	beat	of	your	heart.
But	YOU	are	not	here	--	you	are	chasing	your	desires	far	away,	somewhere	 in
the	future,	on	some	planets.
You	are	not	to	find	enlightenment	somewhere	else,	the	only	thing	that	you	have
to	do	is	to	come	back	home.	Enlightenment	is	waiting	for	you	there.	You	simply
don't	go	anywhere	--	that's	all.	The	whole	effort	is	negative	--	don't	go	anywhere.
Enlightenment	is	not	a	journey,	it	is	your	deepest	core	of	being.
It	 is	 like	 you	 sleep	 in	 Poona	 and	 you	 dream	 in	 the	 night	 that	 you	 are	 in
Philadelphia.	 And	 you	 are	 in	 Poona	 all	 the	 same,	 whether	 you	 dream	 of
Philadelphia	or	not.	You	are	lying	down	here	sleeping	in	your	room	and	in	your
dream	you	are	in	Philadelphia.	In	the	morning	you	open	your	eyes	and	you	say	it
was	all	a	dream	because	you	find	yourself	in	Poona,	not	in	Philadelphia.
Those	 who	 have	 awakened	 have	 found	 themselves	 in	 enlightenment.
Philadelphia	was	a	dream.	This	world	is	a	dream	--	when	you	awake,	this	world
disappears	and	you	find	yourself	in	the	other	world.	This	bank	is	a	dream.	When
you	awake,	suddenly	you	find	you	have	been	always	on	the	other	bank	and	you
were	dreaming	about	this	bank.	Desire	is	a	dream,	desire	is	a	dreaming	process.
It	leads	you	away,	but	it	leads	you	away	only	in	the	mind	not	in	reality.	In	reality
you	are	gods	--	in	minds,	it	depends.	You	can	make	anything	out	of	your	mind.
That's	what	Hindus	say:	that	it	is	mind	which	makes	you	a	tree,	it	is	mind	which
makes	you	a	tiger,	it	is	mind	which	makes	you	a	cuckoo,	it	is	mind	which	makes
you	a	man.
When	there	 is	no	mind,	you	are	a	god.	God	is	your	reality	and	everything	else
that	you	see	is	just	dream.
If	 you	 understand,	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 enlightenment.	 If	 you	 don't
understand	 then	 be	 alert:	 listening	 to	 me	 can	 be	 dangerous.	 You	 can	 stop	 all
meditations,	you	can	stop	all	work	and	you	can	say	 there	 is	no	need.	But	 then
you	will	remain	in	Philadelphia.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
19	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606190
ShortTitle:
DANG09
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
104
mins
HO-SHAN	USED	TO	GIVE	THE	FOLLOWING	SERMON:	'TO	DISCIPLINE
OURSELVES	IN	LEARNING,	IS	CALLED	HEARING;	TO	REACH	A	POINT
WHERE	ANY	MORE	LEARNING	NO	MORE	AVAILS,	IS	CALLED
APPROACHING.	WHEN	ONE	GOES	BEYOND	THESE	TWO	STAGES	HE
IS	SAID
TO	HAVE	TRULY	TRANSCENDED.'
ONCE	A	MONK	ASKED:	'WHAT	THEN	IS	TRULY	TRANSCENDING?'
WITHOUT	UTTERING	A	WORD	HO-SHAN	MOTIONED	AS	IF	BEATING
A	DRUM,	SAYING:	'DANG,	DANG,	DOKO	DANG,	DOKO	DANG.'
TO	 ALL	 SUCH	 QUESTIONS	 HO-SHAN'S	 ANSWER	WAS	 ALWAYS	 THE
SAME:
'DANG,	DANG,	DOKO	DANG,	DOKO	DANG.'
WHAT	IS	truth?
This	 is	 the	 question	 every	man	 has	 to	 answer	 on	 his	 own.	And	 unless	 a	man
answers	this	question	he	is	not	truly	a	man.
This	 question	 has	 haunted	 humanity	 down	 the	 centuries.	 It	 is	 as	 old	 as	 man
himself	--
because	man	became	man	only	when	he	 asked	 this	question.	Unless	we	know
what	truth	is,	our	whole	effort	to	live,	our	whole	to	make	a	meaning	out	of	life	is
futile.
It	is	ultimate,	but	urgent	also,	to	know	from	where	life	has	arisen	--	and	to	want
to	know	 the	 source	 and	 the	goal,	 to	know	 the	 inner	 running	current	 that	holds
everything,	to	know	the	thread	which	is	the	ultimate	law	of	existence.
When	we	ask	the	question,	'What	is	truth?'	we	are	entering	into	the	world	of	man
for	 the	 first	 time.	 If	 you	 have	 not	 asked	 the	 question	 yet	 then	 you	 live	 below
human	beings.	Ask	 the	question,	and	you	become	part	of	humanity.	And	when
the	question	is	dissolved	you	go	beyond	humanity,	you	become	a	God.
Below	the	questioning	you	remain	part	of	the	animal	kingdom;	with	the	question
you	enter	on	the	path;	and	again	being	with	out	the	question	you	have	come	to
realise	that	you	have	come	home.
The	question	 is	very	difficult	because	 just	by	asking,	 it	 cannot	be	 solved.	One
has	to	put	one's	whole	life	at	the	stake.
This	 is	 the	question	 that	Pontius	Pilate	asked	Jesus.	At	 the	 last	moment,	when
Jesus	was	going	to	be	crucified,	Pontius	Pilate	asked	him,	 'What	is	 truth?'	And
Jesus	 did	 not	 answer	 him.	 Christian	 mystics	 have	 pondered	 over	 it.	Why	 did
Jesus	not	answer	it?	Why	did	he	remain	silent?
There	are	three	possibilities.	One,	that	the	question	was	not	sincere.	A	man	like
Jesus	answers	only	when	the	question	is	sincere.	When	is	a	question	sincere?	A
question	is	sincere	when	a	questioner	 is	ready	to	do	something	about	 it.	 If	 it	 is
just	curiosity	then	it	is	not	worth	answering.	If	it	has	an	intense	passion,	a	deep
desire,	 so	deep	 that	 the	questioner	 is	 ready	 to	put	his	whole	 life	at	 the	stake	 --
nothing	 less	will	do	 --	 then	only	 is	 the	question	sincere.	A	man	 like	Jesus	will
answer	only	when	the	question	has	been	asked	from	the	very	core	of	one's	being.
So	 the	 first	 possibility	 is	 that	 Pilate's	 question	 was	 not	 sincere.	 Seeing	 the
insincerity,	Jesus	remained	silent.
Pilate	was	a	well-educated	man,	a	man	who	had	succeeded	--	at	least	in	the	eyes
of	the	world.	He	was	the	viceroy,	a	Roman	Governor-general.	He	was	at	the	peak
of	his	career	-
-	power,	prestige,	wealth,	everything	was	his.	Whatsoever	he	had	been	doing	in
his	life	had	paid	him	well.	Facing	him	was	Jesus,	almost	a	hobo,	a	failure,	one
who	had	not	achieved	anything	 --	at	 least	 in	 the	eyes	of	 the	world.	He	had	no
power,	no	prestige,	not	even	respectability.	He	was	just	at	the	other	end	of	life,	a
tremendous	failure,	mocked,	jeered,	insulted.	Whatsoever	he	had	been	doing	had
all	failed.	It	had	not	paid	him	in	any	way.	His	life	was	futile	--	at	least	for	others.
The	successful	man	asked	the	failure,	'What	is	truth?'
There	 are	 two	 types	of	 successes	 in	 the	world.	One,	 the	worldly,	which	 is	 not
really	a	success	but	just	trying	to	deceive	yourself,	just	trying	to	keep	up	faces,
appearances.	 The	 eyes	 are	 full	 of	 tears	 but	 you	 go	 on	 smiling;	 the	 heart	 is
miserable,	but	you	go	on	showing	something	else,	just	the	opposite,	to	the	world.
They	say	'nothing	succeeds	like	success'
but	I	would	like	to	tell	you	'nothing	fails	like	success'.	As	far	as	the	inner	journey
is	concerned,	as	far	as	the	transcendental	is	concerned,	nothing	fails	like	success
and	nothing	succeeds	like	failure.
The	first	possibility	is	that	the	question	was	not	sincere,	it	was	asked	just	by	the
way.	 The	 man	 was	 well-educated,	 well-trained	 in	 philosophical	 concepts.	 He
could	have	asked	the	question	as	a	philosophical	question.	Then	Jesus	remained
silent	because	the	question	was	not	really	asked	and	there	was	no	need	to	answer
it.
The	second	possibility	is	that	the	question	was	sincere,	that	the	question	was	not
just	a	childish	curiosity,	 that	 there	was	passion	behind	 it,	 that	 it	was	authentic.
Then	why	did	 Jesus	 remain	 silent?	He	 remained	 silent	because	 if	 this	ultimate
question	 is	 authentically	 asked	 then	 silence	 is	 the	 answer,	 because	 there	 is	 no
way	to	answer	it	except	silence.	The	question	is	so	profound	that	words	will	not
be	capable	of	answering	it.	The	question	is	so	deep	that	words	will	not	be	able	to
reach	it,	to	touch	it	--	only	silence	will.
If	the	second	is	the	case	then	Jesus	did	answer	it,	but	he	answered	it	by	silence.
A	 third	 possibility	 is	 also	 there:	 that	 the	 question	 was	 sincere	 and	 yet	 not	 so
sincere,	 that	 it	 was	 ambiguous,	 split	 --	 which	 was	 probably	 the	 case	 because
where	can	you	find	a	man	who	is	total?	A	part	of	him	was	authentically	asking,
another	part	was	pretending,	'Even	if	you	don't	answer	I	am	not	in	a	hurry.	And
even	if	you	don't	answer,	I	don't	mind	because	in	fact	I	don't	need	it.	 In	fact,	 I
know	the	answer	already,	I	am	asking	just	to	test	you.'
The	 question	 was	 ambiguous,	 Janus-faced.	 That	 seems	 to	 be	 more	 probable
because	that	is	how	man	is	and	has	always	been	--	split.	A	part	of	Pilate	feels	the
truth	of	this	man	who	is	standing	before	him	--	a	complete,	utter	failure	but	yet
his	eyes	are	luminous,	yet	he	has	a	glow.	Pilate	can	feel	it,	can	almost	touch	it.
Yet	another	part,	 the	egoist	part,	 is	not	 ready	 to	surrender	so	he	pretends	he	 is
asking	only	casually	--	'Even	if	you	don't	answer,	don't	be	worried.	It	is	not	my
need.	In	fact,	I	already	know	the	answer.'
If	this	ambiguity	was	the	case,	then	Jesus	would	also	remain	silent	because	when
a	 question	 is	 ambiguous	 and	 the	 person	 is	 divided,	 no	 answer	 is	 possible.
Because	the	answer	can	be	understood	only	in	your	undivided	consciousness,	the
question	can	be	answered	only	when	you	are	no	longer	split,	when	you	are	one,
when	you	are	in	a	unison,	unity.	Only	then	can	you	understand	it.
Jesus'	 silence	 before	 Pontius	 Pilate	 is	 very	 significant,	 pregnant	 with	 many
meanings.	But	Jesus	has	answered	the	question	somewhere	else,	it	is	recorded	in
the	New	Testament.
Somewhere	else	he	says,	'I	am	the	Truth.'
I	 would	 like	 you	 to	 go	 a	 little	 bit	 into	 history	 then	 it	 will	 be	 very	 easy	 to
understand	today's	parable.
Homer	asked	the	same	question	in	850	B.C.	and	he	answered	that	'the	Whole	is
supported	by	Fate	and	Fate	is	the	Truth'.
This	is	not	really	an	answer;	in	fact,	it	is	avoiding.	When	you	say,	'It	is	Fate,'	you
don't	say	much;	in	fact,	you	are	not	saying	anything,	you	are	simply	playing	with
a	word.	You	have	simply	shifted	the	question.	It	doesn't	answer.	If	somebody	is
miserable	and	you	say,	 'It	 is	Fate,'	how	have	you	answered	 it?	Your	answering
has	not	added	anything	to	the	already	known	situation.	You	have	simply	labelled
it.	'One	is	suffering	because	it	is	Fate.'
But	why	is	it	so?	Why	is	Fate	so?	No,	it	is	not	a	real	answer.	In	fact,	it	is	a	lie.
But	 one	 can	believe	 in	 such	 things.	Many	people	 still	 do	 as	Homer	 did.	They
have	not	risen	above	that	level	of	consciousness.
Then	 came	 Thales,	 575	 B.C.	 He	 said	 that	 the	 whole	 consists	 of	 nothing	 but
water.	Water	is	the	basic	element	of	truth,	of	life,	of	existence.
Better	than	Fate,	something	more	tangible,	but	very	fragmentary.	Water	does	not
go	 very	 deep,	 does	 not	 explain	much.	 It	 is	 reducing	 the	 higher	 to	 the	 lowest.
Thales	must	have	had	a	scientific	mind	--	that's	what	science	goes	on	doing.	You
ask	about	mind	and	they	say	it	is	nothing	but	matter.	The	higher	is	reduced	to	the
lower;	the	sky	is	explained	by	the	earth.	Mind	is	a	great	evolution.	To	explain	the
mind	by	matter	is	a	scientific	fallacy.
Thales	was	the	first	scientist	of	the	world.	He	tried	to	explain	the	unknowable	by
something	known:	he	called	it	water,	the	liquid	element,	the	liquidity,	the	flow.
But	the	answer	is	very	fragmentary.	It	has	something	of	truth	in	it	but	not	all	of
it.	And	a	fragmentary	truth	is	almost	more	dangerous	than	a	lie	because	it	has	a
certain	appearance	of	truth	and	it	can	deceive	more.	That	fragment	of	truth	can
become	very	deceptive	--	it	can	cover	the	whole	lie	and	make	it	appear	as	if	it	is
the	truth.
Then	 came	 Pythagoras,	 530	 B.C.	 He	 says	 that	 the	 whole	 consists	 only	 of
numbers,	mathematical	symbols.	He	has	even	more	of	a	scientific	attitude	than
Thales	--
mathematics.	Meaningful,	 but	mathematics	 is	 not	 life.	 In	 fact,	 all	 that	 is	 very
alive	 is	 non-mathematical.	 Love	 is	 non-mathematical,	 you	 cannot	 reduce	 it	 to
numbers.	 Poetry	 is	 non-mathematical.	 Just	 think	 of	 a	 life	 consisting	 only	 of
numbers	--	one,	two,	three,	four	--	all	poetry	disappears,	all	love	disappears,	all
dreaming	disappears.	Life	will	not	be	worth	living.
That's	 how	 it	 is	 happening	 today.	 Scientists	 have	 reduced	 everything	 to
mathematics.	Life	 is	 not	 equal	 to	 equations	 howsoever	 accurate	 the	 equations;
life	is	more	than	mathematics	can	ever	explain.	The	mathematics	cannot	explain
the	mathematician,	the	mathematician	who	deals	in	numbers	is	higher	and	bigger
than	numbers.	It	has	to	be	so	--	those	numbers	are	just	toys	in	his	hands.	But	who
is	 this	player?	Whenever	 life	 is	reduced	to	mathematics	 it	 loses	charm,	 it	 loses
charisma,	 it	 loses	 mystery.	 And	 suddenly	 everything	 seems	 to	 be	 worthless.
Mystery	is	needed;	it	is	subtle	nourishment	for	growth.
I	 have	 heard	 two	 mathematicians	 talking.	 One	 said	 to	 another,	 'Is	 there	 any
meaning	in	life?	Is	there	any	worth?	Is	there	any	purpose?'
The	other	said,	'But	what	else	can	you	do	with	it?'
The	 first	 asked,	 'Is	 there	 any	meaning	 to	 live	 for	 in	 life?'	 and	 the	 other	 says,
'What	else	can	you	do	with	it?'	If	life	has	to	be	lived	just	as	if	you	are	a	victim,	as
if	 somebody	 is	 playing	 a	 trick	 upon	 you,	 as	 if	 you	 are	 being	 thrown	 into	 this
torture	chamber,	into	this	concentration	camp	called	the	earth,	then	even	if	you
live,	you	don't	live	enough.	You	slowly	commit	suicide.	You	by	and	by,	by	and
by,	go	on	disappearing.	Suicide	becomes	a	constant	 thought	 in	 the	mind	 if	 life
has	no	mystery.
Then	came	Anaxagoras,	450	B.C.	and	his	answer	 is	mind.	Certainly	he	 took	a
great	 leap	 from	water,	 number,	 fate	 --	 he	 took	 a	 great	 jump.	Anaxagoras	 is	 a
great	milestone	in	the	history	of	humanity.	'Mind,'	he	says.	'The	whole	existence
is	made	up	of	the	stuff	called	mind.'
Better,	but	Jesus	would	not	agree,	Buddha	would	not	agree.	Yes,	certainly	better
than	what	others	were	saying,	but	Zen	would	not	agree.	Matter,	mind...Zen	says
no-mind.	One	has	 to	go	higher	 still	 because	mind	 still	 carries	 the	duality	with
matter.
Good,	 great	 in	 a	 way,	 a	 radical	 step	 --	 from	 object	 Anaxagoras	 turns	 to	 the
subject,	 from	the	outer	he	 turns	 to	 the	 inner.	He	opens	 the	door.	He	 is	 the	first
psychologist	 in	 the	 world	 because	 he	 emphasises	 mind	 more	 than	 matter.	 He
says	matter	is	also	made	of	mind:	he	explains	the	lower	with	the	higher.
You	can	explain	in	two	ways.	Go	and	see	beautiful	white	lotus	flowers	in	a	pond;
they	 come	 out	 of	 the	 dirty	 mud.	 Then	 there	 are	 two	 possibilities:	 either	 you
explain	the	lotus	by	the	dirty	mud	or	you	explain	the	dirty	mud	by	the	lotus.	And
both	will	 lead	 you	 in	 totally	 different	 dimensions.	 If	 you	 say	 that	 this	 lotus	 is
nothing	 but	 dirty	 mud	 because	 it	 comes	 out	 of	 it,	 your	 life	 will	 lose	 all
significance,	meaning,	beauty.	Then	you	will	live	in	the	dirty	mud.
That's	what	Freud	has	been	doing;	that's	what	Marx	has	done.	They	have	great
skill	 in	 reducing	 everything	 to	 the	 dirty	 mud.	 Buddha	 attains	 to
enlightenment...ask	Freud	and	he	will	say	it	is	nothing	but	sex	energy.	There	is	a
truth	in	it,	because	it	arises	out	of	sex,	but	the	sex	functions	like	dirty	mud	and
out	of	it	arises	the	lotus.
Ask	Buddha...he	will	say	sex	is	nothing	but	the	beginning	of	enlightenment,	the
very	first	steps	of	nirvana.	That's	how	Tantra	was	born.
These	are	 two	ways	and	you	will	have	 to	 remember	 that	your	 life	will	depend
more	or	 less	on	 the	way	you	 interpret,	on	 the	way	you	choose.	You	can	 try	 to
reduce	the	lotus	to	dirty	mud	--	it	can	be	done	and	it	is	very	scientific.	It	can	be
done	very	scientifically	because	all	that	this	lotus	has	was	in	the	mud.	It	can	be
dissected	and	everything	can	be	found,	and	then	the	mud	can	be	dissected,	and
whatsoever	the	lotus	has,	everything	will	be	found	in	the	mud	--	nothing	special,
nothing	extra,	nothing	from	the	outside	has	entered	into	the	lotus	so	it	is	nothing
but	the	mud.	If	you	are	choosing	your	life	with	this	attitude,	your	life	will	be	just
nothing	but	mud.
But	the	person	who	says	that	the	mud	is	nothing	but	potential	white	lotuses,	that
the	mud	is	nothing	but	a	waiting	to	manifest	 its	beauty	in	lotuses,	has	a	higher
standpoint...the	standpoint	of	a	religious	man.	Then	the	whole	life	becomes	full
of	 splendour,	 significance,	 glory.	 Then	wherever	 you	 look,	 you	 can	 find	God,
you	can	find	 the	white	 lotus.	Then	everything	 is	moving	 towards	a	peak.	Then
there	 is	 evolution.	 Then	 there	 is	 future,	 possibility.	 Then	 even	 the	 impossible
becomes	possible.
With	the	first	attitude	--	the	dirty-mud-attitude	I	call	it	even	the	possible	seems	to
be	 impossible.	But	with	 the	 second	attitude	 --	 the	 lotus-attitude	 I	 call	 it	 --	you
can	see	deeply	into	mud	and	you	can	see	hidden	lotuses	there.	And	the	dirty	mud
is	no	more	dirty	mud,	 it	 is	 just	 potentiality.	Then	 sex	becomes	potentiality	 for
samadhi,	 the	 body	 becomes	 potentiality	 for	 the	 soul,	 the	 world	 becomes	 the
abode	of	God.
Anaxagoras	was	one	of	the	greatest	revolutionaries,	a	radical	thinker.	This	word
'radical'
is	beautiful.	 It	means:	pertaining	to	 the	roots.	He	changed	the	outlook.	He	said
mind.	He	took	a	necessary	step,	but	that	too	was	not	enough.
Then	came	Protagoras,	445	B.C.	and	he	said	'Man'.	Now	his	standpoint	is	more
total.
Mind	is	a	fragment	of	man.	Man	is	many	things	more,	mind	plus.	If	Anaxagoras
is	thought	to	be	absolutely	true	then	you	will	remain	in	the	head	--	that	is	what
has	happened	to	many	people.	They	have	not	moved	beyond	Anaxagoras.	They
go	on	living	in	the	head	because	mind	is	all.	Then	mind	becomes	dictatorial,	 it
goes	on	a	great	ego	trip.	It	starts	dominating	everything	and	crippling	everything.
It	becomes	a	destructive	force.
No,	you	are	not	only	mind.	You	are	mind,	certainly,	but	plus.	Many	more	things
are	there.
A	lotus	cannot	exist	alone;	the	flower	cannot	exist	alone.	It	will	need	many	more
things	to	exist:	the	pond,	the	water,	the	air,	the	sun,	its	connection	with	the	mud,
and	leaves	--
and	a	thousand	and	one	things.	So	if	you	think	only	in	terms	of	the	lotus	and	you
forget	all	connections	with	the	universe,	your	lotus	will	be	a	plastic	lotus.	It	will
not	 be	 a	 real	 lotus,	 it	 will	 not	 be	 inter-connected,	 it	 will	 not	 be	 rooted	 in
existence.
Protagoras	has	a	more	holy	attitude,	wholistic	attitude.	Man,	and	the	totality	of
man	--	the	body,	the	mind,	the	soul	--	becomes	truth.
Then	 came	 Socrates,	 435	 B.	 C.	 and	 he	 said:	 wisdom,	 knowing,	 knowledge.
When	man	attains	to	maturity,	he	becomes	wise;	when	man	comes	to	fulfillment,
then	wisdom	arises.
Wisdom	is	 the	essence	of	man,	 the	fragrance	of	 the	 lotus	flower.	A	still	higher
attitude.
And	then	came	Jesus	who	says,	'I	am	the	truth.'	This	one	statement	is	one	of	the
greatest	 statements	 ever	made	 in	 the	world.	 Either	 it	 is	 the	 greatest	 truth	 ever
uttered	 or	 it	 is	 the	 most	 egoistic	 and	 arrogant	 statement	 ever	 made.'I	 am	 the
truth.'	It	depends	how	you	decode	it.	Ordinarily,	when	you	hear	that	Jesus	says,	'I
am	 the	 truth,'	 you	 think	 this	 man	 is	 a	 megalomaniac,	 has	 gone	 mad.	 He	 is
uttering	nonsense.	This	man	is	truth?	Jesus	is	truth?
Then	what	about	us	all?
Jesus	is	not	saying	that,	you	have	misunderstood	him.	When	he	says,	'I	am	truth,'
he	is	not	saying,	'Jesus,	son	of	Mary	and	Joseph,	is	the	truth.'	What	he	is	saying
is	totally	different.
He	is	saying	'I	am-ness,	I	am,	is	the	truth,	'	so	wherever	there	is	this	'I	am-ness'
there	is	truth.	When	you	say	'I	am'	you	are	uttering	truth.	Your	'I	am'	and	my	'I
am'	are	not	 two	 things,	we	both	participate	 there.	Your	name	 is	different,	your
form	is	different,	my	name	is	different,	my	form	is	different,	but	when	I	say	'I,	I
am'	and	you	say	'I	am'	we	refer	to	some	common	experience,	we	refer	to	some
common	 root.	 Your	 'I	 am-ness'	 and	 my	 'I	 am-ness'	 are	 not	 different,	 are	 not
separate,	they	belong	to	one	'I	am-ness'	of	God.	When	Jesus	says	'I	am	the	truth'
he	means	wherever	this	integration	is	felt	of	being	totally	'I	am',	there	is	truth.
Ordinarily	 you	 are	many	 i's.	You	 don't	 have	 any	 capital	 I;	 you	 have	many	 i's,
lower	case.
Gurdjieff	used	to	say	that	we	should	not	use	the	word	'i',	only	God	can	use	it	--
because	you	don't	have	any	single	 'i',	you	have	many	 i's	 like	a	crowd.	For	one
moment	one	i	comes	on	the	top,	and	becomes	the	ruler;	in	another	moment	it	is
gone	and	another	i	comes	over	and	rules.	You	can	watch	it.	It	is	so	simple.	One
moment	you	say,	'I	am	happy.	I	am	tremendously	happy,	at	the	top	of	the	world'
and	the	next	moment	you	are	unhappy,	at	the	lowest	bottom	of	the	world,	in	the
seventh	hell.
Are	 both	 these	 i's	 the	 same?	 One	 moment	 you	 were	 flowing	 and	 you	 were
compassionate	and	loving	and	another	moment	you	were	closed	and	frozen	and
dead.	Are	these	two	i's	the	same?	One	moment	you	could	have	forgiven	anything
and	another	moment	just	any	small	tiny	thing	and	you	cannot	forgive.	Are	these
two	 i's	 the	same?	One	moment	you	are	sitting	 in	silence,	 in	zazen,	meditating,
and	you	 look	 so	Buddha-like,	 and	 another	moment,	 for	 a	 small	 thing,	 you	 are
nagging,	fighting.	You	will	yourself	feel	ridiculous	later	on.	For	what	were	you
getting	so	hot?	For	what	were	you	creating	so	much	 fuss?	 It	was	not	worth	 it.
But	another	i	was	ruling	over	you.
You	are	like	a	wheel	of	many	i's	--	those	i's	are	like	spokes.	The	wheel	goes	on
moving,	one	spoke	comes	on	top	--	hardly	before	it	has	come	it	starts	declining.
It	goes	on	changing.	Again	 it	will	come	up	and	again	you	will	 feel	a	different
being	existing	there	within	you.
Watch.	Have	you	got	an	 'i'?	Any	substantial	 'i'?	Any	essential	 'i'?	Can	you	say
that	you	have	some	permanent	'i'	in	you?	A	crystallised	'i'	in	you?
You	promise,	and	next	moment	you	have	forgotten	your	promise.	Gurdjieff	used
to	say	that	unless	you	have	a	permanent	 'i',	who	will	promise?	You	will	not	be
able	to	fulfil	it.
Who	will	fulfil	it?	You	say	to	a	woman,	'I	love	you	and	I	will	love	you	forever
and	 forever.'	Wait!	What	 are	 you	 uttering?	What	 nonsense!	 Forever	 and	 ever?
How	can	you	promise?	You	don't	know	what	is	going	to	happen	tomorrow,	you
don't	know	who	is	going	to	rule	you	tomorrow.	Your	promises	will	create	trouble
for	 you.	 You	 cannot	 promise	 because	 you	 are	 not	 there.	 Only	 a	 man	 like
Gurdjieff	or	Jesus	can	promise.	Yes,	he	can	promise	because	he	knows	 that	he
will	remain	the	same;	whatsoever	changes	in	 the	world	will	not	affect	him.	He
will	remain	the	same,	he	has	come	to	a	crystallised	soul.
Now	he	knows	that	his	wheel	has	stopped.	He	is	in	total	possession	of	his	being.
He	can	promise.
But	 ordinarily	 people	 go	 on	 promising,	 and	 you	 never	 see	 the	 fact	 that	 no
promise	has	ever	been	fulfilled	by	you.	You	completely	forget	about	it.	You	don't
even	remember	it	because	that	remembrance	will	be	like	a	wound.	You	find	out
ways	and	means	to	rationalise:	you	cannot	fulfil	it	because	the	other	person	has
changed,	 you	 cannot	 fulfil	 it	 because	 the	 circumstances	 have	 changed,	 you
cannot	fulfil	it	because	you	were	foolish	at	the	time	you	made;t.	And	again	you
will	make	promises.
Man	is	an	animal	who	goes	on	promising,	never	fulfilling	any	promise	because
he	cannot	fulfil	it	--	man	as	he	exists	has	too	many	i's.
When	Jesus	says	'I	am	the	truth'	he	is	saying	that	whosoever	attains	to	'I	am-ness'
is	truth.
And	this	truth	is	not	something	philosophical,	this	truth	is	something	existential.
You	cannot	come	to	it	by	logic,	argumentation;	you	cannot	come	to	it	by	finding
a	right	premise	and	then	moving	to	a	right	syllogism	and	then	reaching	to	a	right
conclusion.	No,	that	is	not	the	way.	You	will	have	to	come	to	it	through	an	inner
discipline.	That's	what	Zen	is	all	about.
Now	this	story.
This	story	says	everything	that	is	needed	for	a	seeker	to	come	to	truth,	the	truth
of	 'I	 amness'.	 It	 is	 'I	 am'	 that	holds	 the	whole	 existence	 together.	Moses	 asked
God	on	Mount	Sinai,	'I	will	go	back	to	my	people	and	I	will	say	that	I	have	seen
God,	but	they	will	not	believe	me.	So	please	tell	me	how	I	am	to	convince	them.
And	they	will	ask	"Who	is	God?"	So	please	tell	me	what	is	your	name,	who	you
are,	so	that	I	can	convince	them.
Otherwise	they	will	not	be	ready	to	believe	me.'	And	God	said	to	Moses,	'Go	and
tell	them	I	am,	I	am.'	No	name,	simply	I	am,	I	am.	This	is	what	Jesus	is	saying	--
'I	am	the	truth.'
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	Jesus,	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	person,	it	 is	your
innermost	core	--	which	is	absolutely	impersonal.	It	is	never	born	and	never	dies.
It	is	your	innermost	current	of	life.	It	is	from	where	you	are	connected	with	God.
It	is	from	where	you	are	one	with	existence.
This	has	to	be	found,	not	by	thinking	but	by	a	great,	deep	discipline.
Now	this	story.
HO-SHAN	USED	TO	GIVE	THE	FOLLOWING	SERMON:	TO	DISCIPLINE
OURSELVES	IN	LEARNING	IS	CALLED	HEARING.
This	is	the	first	step.
TO	DISCIPLINE	OURSELVES	IN	LEARNING	IS	CALLED	HEARING.
First	one	has	to	discipline	oneself.	What	is	discipline?
Ordinarily	 the	 word	 has	 very	 wrong	 connotations.	 Somebody	 else	 disciplines
you	--	your	parents,	the	society.	Always	it	is	the	other	who	disciplines	you	so	the
very	 word	 has	 wrong	 associations.	 It	 has	 been	 wrongly	 used,	 misused.	 A
beautiful	word	has	been	very	much	corrupted.	Discipline	is	not	from	the	outside.
Nobody	else	can	discipline	you.
Discipline	 is	 from	 the	 inside;	 discipline	 is	 an	 understanding.	 And	 that	 is	 the
word's	meaning	 also.	 It	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root	 as	 disciple.	Can	 somebody
make	 you	 a	 disciple?	Think	 of	 it.	Can	 disciplehood	be	 thrown	over	 you?	Can
you	be	forced	to	become	a	disciple?	No,	you	can	either	take	it	or	reject	it.	The
ultimate	decision	is	yours.
To	 become	 a	 disciple	 means	 to	 voluntarily	 surrender.	 If	 the	 surrender	 is	 not
voluntary,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 surrender.	 If	 you	 are	 being	 forced	 to	 surrender	 then	deep
down	you	will	resist	and	you	will	wait	for	the	right	moment	when	you	can	throw
off	this	slavery.
The	 first	Christians,	 those	who	had	 the	great	opportunity	 to	 live	with	Jesus,	 to
imbibe	 his	 spirit,	 they	 used	 to	 call	 themselves	 slaves	 of	 Jesus.	 The	 first
Christians	used	the	word
'slave'	but	their	slavery	was	not	a	slavery	forced	on	them.	Even	if	a	freedom	is
forced	 on	 you	 it	 is	 a	 slavery	 and	 if	 you	 accept	 a	 slavery	 on	 your	 own	 it	 is
freedom.	They	were	freed	by	Jesus,	liberated	by	Jesus,	and	they	loved	the	man
so	much	they	called	themselves	slaves.
A	disciple	is	one	who	surrenders	according	to	his	own	heart.	Nobody	is	forcing
him	to	surrender.	If	any	force	is	used	then	exactly	there	something	goes	wrong.
If	you	are	a	Christian	because	your	parents	forced	you	to	become	a	Christian,	or
if	you	are	a	Hindu	because	your	parents	 forced	you	 to	become	a	Hindu...that's
how	 people	 are	 Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 and	 Christians.	 They	 have	 been
forced.	 The	 parents	 have	 somehow	 conditioned	 their	 minds	 to	 be	 Hindus,
Christians	or	Mohammedans.	It	is	not	their	own	choice.	Then	out	of	it	discipline
cannot	arise;	in	fact,	out	of	it	rebellion	arises,	out	of	it	a	great	resistance	arises,
out	of	 it	your	 innermost	 life	energy	becomes	angry,	 annoyed,	 irritated,	 and	 for
your	whole	life	you	can	never	forgive	those	people	who	forced	you.
And	 religion	 is	a	very	delicate	matter	 --	more	delicate	 than	 love.	 Just	 think.	 If
you	 are	 forced	 to	 love	 a	woman	 or	 a	man,	 the	 very	 effort	 that	 you	 are	 being
coerced	into	loving	will	destroy	love.	Even	if	there	was	love	it	will	disappear,	it
will	evaporate.
I	 have	 heard	 a	 very	 beautiful	 story	 about	 an	 Egyptian	 king.	 He	 was	 in	 love,
deeply	in	love	with	a	woman	but	the	woman	was	not	in	love	with	him.	He	could
have	forced	it	on	her	but	his	wise	advisors	prevented	him.
They	said,	 'Don't	do	that.	You	can	force	it,	she	is	your	subject.	You	can	simply
bring	her	to	your	palace,	but	it	will	be	almost	a	rape,	not	a	love.	You	may	even
get	children	out	of	her	but	you	will	never	get	her	heart.	That	is	not	the	way.'
The	king	said,	'What	to	do?	I	cannot	live	without	her.	And	she	is	not	in	love	with
me,	that's	a	fact,	so	the	only	way	is	to	force.	What	do	you	suggest?'
They	asked	him,	'Is	she	in	love	with	somebody	else?'
The	king	said,	 'Yes,	she	is	in	love	with	one	of	my	servants.	And	this	is	foolish,
stupid.
She	is	blind!'
That's	what	so-called	clever	people	have	always	been	saying.	They	think	of	other
things:	economics,	finance,	respect	and	other	things	--	but	not	of	love.
The	king	 said,	 'She	 is	 foolish.	She	 cannot	 see	 the	point	 It	 is	 so	 simple.	She	 is
blind,	mad.	I	can	give	her	a	thousand	and	one	slaves	and	she	is	in	love	with	one
of	my	poor	servants.
And	I	am	the	king.	So	what	to	do?'
Those	wise	people	 suggested	a	very	novel	 experiment.	 It	 has	never	been	done
before	and	I	don't	know	that	it	has	ever	been	done	again.
They	said,	 'Catch	them	both.	Bring	them	both	to	the	palace	and	just	in	front	of
the	palace,	bind	them	both	together	naked,	 in	deep	embrace.	And	bind	them	to
the	pillar	and	leave	them	there.'
The	king	said,	'What	will	that	do?'
They	said,	'Just	wait.'
So	 they	 both	were	 caught	 and	 undressed.	They	were	 ordered	 to	 embrace	 each
other,	forced	to	be	loving	to	each	other,	and	they	were	bound	to	a	marble	pillar.
And	 for	 twenty-four	 hours	 they	 were	 left	 there	 to	 be	 looked	 at	 by	 the	 whole
town.
By	and	by	they	started	getting	angry	at	each	other	because	the	lover	thought,	'It
is	because	of	her	I	am	suffering	this	calamity.'	And	the	woman	started	thinking,
'Because	 of	 him.'	 And	 because	 they	 were	 forced	 to	 be	 together	 they	 started
resisting.	They	wanted	 to	 separate	 but	 there	was	 no	way.	They	were	 bound	 in
chains.	Twenty-four	hours	--	just	think	--	with	your	beloved,	bound	on	a	pillar.
By	and	by,	more	and	more	anger	came.	Then	they	started	smelling	each	other's
perspiration,	hot.	And	 then	 they	couldn't	 sleep.	And	 they	pissed	on	each	other.
And	they	vomited.	And	it	became	a	very	ugly	affair,	a	nightmare.
And	 the	story	says	 that	after	 twenty-four	hours,	when	 they	were	released,	 they
escaped	in	different	directions	and	never	saw	each	other	ever	again.
If	 you	 are	 forced	 to	 love,	 forced	 to	 be	 together	 with	 someone,	 that	 very
enforcement	will	kill	something	subtle	within	you.	That's	why	husbands	cannot
forgive	their	wives	and	wives	cannot	forgive	their	husbands.	It	is	impossible	to
forgive	 those	 with	 whom	 you	 are	 forced	 to	 live	 by	 the	 law,	 by	 society,	 by
responsibility,	or	by	your	own	conscience	--	but	forced.
Disciplehood	is	an	even	higher	thing	than	love.	Nobody	can	force	you	to	become
a	 disciple.	 And	 discipline	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root	 --	 it	 means	 'with	 full
awareness	you	accept	something	on	your	own'.	It	is	your	heart's	desire.
TO	DISCIPLINE	OURSELVES	IN	LEARNING	IS	CALLED	HEARING.
And	Buddhists	call	the	first	step	of	learning,	of	knowing,	hearing;	right	hearing	-
-
'SAMYAK	 SHRAVAN'.	 If	 somebody	 has	 attained	 the	 truth,	 if	 somebody	 has
attained,	then	listen	to	him.	Nothing	else	is	needed.	Listen	to	his	vibes,	listen	to
his	being,	listen	to	the	murmur	of	his	inner	sound.	Just	listen.	If	you	can	find	a
person	who	has	come	home,	then	just	listen	to	his	calmness,	his	tranquillity,	his
bliss.
By	'right	listening'	is	meant	'to	be	receptive'.	Learning	is	not	active,	it	is	passive.
You	are	not	 to	do	anything	about	 it,	you	cannot	be	aggressive	about	 truth,	you
can	simply	allow	it
--	 that's	 all.	 You	 can	 simply	 be	 there	 in	 front	 of	 it,	 in	 close	 vicinity,	 passive,
allowing,	not	resisting,	not	creating	any	barrier.	Remove	all	barriers	and	be	in	the
presence	 of	 a	man	who	 has	 attained	 this	 right	 listening.	 If	 he	 says	 something,
listen	to	his	word;	if	he	does	not	say	something,	listen	to	his	silence.
When	 he	 is	 not	 saying	 something,	 then	 too,	 go	 on	 listening,	 and	 in	 his	 non-
saying	you	will	find	tremendous	expression.	And	when	he	is	saying	something,
go	on	 listening	deeply,	because	when	he	 is	saying	something	he	 is	at	 the	same
time	 transferring	his	silence	 to	you.	When	he	 is	 speaking	he	 is	silent	also,	and
when	 he	 is	 silent	 he	 is	 speaking	 also.	 A	 tremendous	 quality	 of	 listening	 is
needed.
If	you	cannot	find	any	person,	don't	be	worried,	then	listen	to	nature,	then	listen
to	the	winds	passing	through	the	pines,	then	listen	to	the	waterfall,	go	and	listen
to	the	ocean	--
wild.	 Go	 and	 listen	 to	 the	 birds	 --	 anything	 will	 do.	 This	 is	 something	 very
important	 to	 remember:	 if	 right	 listening	 is	 there,	 then	 even	 listening	 to	 a
waterfall	will	do.	And	if	right	listening	is	not	there,	then	even	listening	to	Jesus
or	Buddha	won't	do.
The	truth	happens	when	you	are	in	the	mood	of	right	listening.	It	has	nothing	to
do	 with	 the	 object	 of	 listening;	 it	 has	 everything	 to	 do	 with	 the	 quality	 of
listening.	But	we	have	forgotten	how	to	listen.	Even	when	we	are	silent	we	are
not	listening.	Even	when	we	pretend	to	show	that	yes,	we	are	listening,	we	are
not	 listening;	 we	 are	 doing	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 in	 the	 mind.	 Many
thoughts	 are	 crowding	 in.	Politely	we	 show	 that	yes,	we	are	 listening,	politely
sometimes	we	nod	also	--	we	are	listening	--	but	deep	inside	us	is	the	madhouse.
How	can	you	listen?
To	 listen	 you	will	 have	 to	 drop	 your	 thinking.	With	 thoughts,	 listening	 is	 not
possible.	If	you	are	speaking	inside	and	I	am	speaking	here,	how	can	you	listen
to	me?	Because	you	are	closer	to	yourself	than	me,	your	thoughts	will	be	closer
to	you,	they	will	make	a	ring	around	you	and	they	will	not	allow	my	thoughts	to
enter.	They	will	allow	only	those	thoughts	which	are	in	tune	with	them,	they	will
choose	 and	 select.	 They	 will	 not	 allow	 anything	 that	 is	 strange,	 unfamiliar,
unknown.	Then	it	is	not	worth	listening	because	you	are	simply	listening	to	your
own	 thoughts.	And	 it	 is	 dangerous	 because	 now	 you	will	 think	 that	 you	 have
listened	to	me.	Right	listening	means	to	be	in	a	totally	receptive,	silent	mood.
In	Zen	 the	disciple	sits	 for	many	months,	sometimes	years,	before	he	becomes
capable	of	listening.	Whenever	anybody	came	to	Buddha	he	would	say,	'For	one
year	or	two	years	you	simply	sit	here.	Nothing	else	has	to	be	done.	You	simply
learn	how	to	sit.'	People	would	say,	'We	know	already	how	to	sit.'	And	Buddha
would	 say,'I	 have	never	 come	 across	 a	 person	who	knows	how	 to	 sit,	 because
when	I	say	sit,	I	mean	sit	--	no	turmoil,	no	movement	of	thought,	totally	silent,
utterly	 silent,	 no	movement	 in	 the	body,	 no	movement	 in	 the	mind.	A	pool	 of
energy	with	no	ripples.'
TO	DISCIPLINE	OURSELVES	IN	LEARNING	IS	CALLED	HEARING.
So	the	whole	Buddhist	discipline,	Zen	discipline,	starts	by	right	listening.
TO	 REACH	 A	 POINT	 W	 HERE	 ANY	 MORE	 LEARNING	 NO	 MORE
AVAILS,	IS
CALLED	APPROACHING.
Then	 there	 comes	 a	 moment	 when	 you	 become	 so	 silent	 that	 the	 listener
disappears.	 First	 your	 thoughts	 disappear,	 then	 your	 thinker	 disappears.	 The
thinker	 is	 nothing	but	 the	 inter-link	between	 thoughts,	 the	 thinker	 cannot	 exist
without	 thoughts;	 when	 thoughts	 are	 no	 more	 there,	 suddenly	 the	 thinker
evaporates.	When	 you	 are	 listening	 so	 totally	 that	 there	 is	 no	 thought	 arising,
passing,	coming	and	going,	then	the	listener	also	disappears.
...	WHERE	 ANY	MORE	 LEARNING	 NO	MORE	 AVAILS.	 This	 then	 is	 the
moment	 where	 from	 the	 outside	 nothing	 can	 be	 got,	 learning	 no	more	 avails,
now	 there	 is	 no	 need,	 now	 you	 are	 enough	 unto	 yourself.	 This	 is	 what	 Zen
people	call	 'approaching'.	Now	you	are	coming	home,	 approaching,	 closer	 and
closer	and	closer.
So	first	you	are	full	of	thoughts.	To	drop	those	thoughts,	hearing	is	emphasised	--
hear	 the	Master,	or	 the	winds,	or	 the	 thundering	clouds.	Listening	 is	used	as	a
device	to	drop	thoughts.	When	thoughts	are	dropped	one	day	you	will	realise	the
thinker	 has	 disappeared.	 Now	 there	 is	 no	 longer	 anything	 like	 a	 listener.	 The
device	has	worked,	the	work	is	over.	Now	there	is	no	need	to	listen	to	the	outside
because	now	there	 is	no	need	 to	 learn	from	the	outside.	This	 is	what	Zen	calls
'approaching'.	Now	 you	 are	 approaching	 home,	 now	 everything	 is	within	 you,
you	are	coming	to	the	innermost	shrine.
Thought	does	not	allow	you	to	listen	and	the	thinker	does	not	allow	you	to	enter
into	yourself.	The	thinker	 is	 the	subtlest	part	of	 thoughts	--	 thoughts	are	gross-
thinker	 and	 thinker	 is	 subtle	 thoughts.	Thoughts	 prevent	 you	 from	 listening	 to
the	outside	and	the	thinker	prevents	you	from	listening	to	the	inside.	First	drop
thoughts	because	the	gross	can	be	dropped	more	easily,	then	you	can	listen	to	the
outside.	Then	the	thinker	disappears.	Now	you	can	listen	to	the	inside.	Then	the
Master	speaks	from	the	innermost	core	of	your	heart.	The	outer	Master	is	just	a
help	 to	 create	 the	 inner	Master;	 the	 outer	Master	 is	 just	 a	 provocation	 for	 the
inner	 Master	 to	 come	 into	 full	 swing,	 to	 come	 into	 its	 full	 being.	 The	 outer
Master	is	just	a	situation	so	that	the	inner	Master	can	awaken.
AND	WHEN	ONE	GOES	BEYOND	THESE	TWO	STAGES	ONE	IS	SAID	TO
HAVE
TRULY	TRANSCENDED.
Now	comes	 the	 last	 point.	 First	 you	drop	 thoughts,	 then	you	drop	 the	 thinker.
First	the	outside	Master	disappears,	the	outside	object	disappears,	then	you	come
to	 the	 inside.	But	 the	 inside	can	exist	only	with	 the	outside.	As	 I	 told	you,	 the
thinker	 can	 exist	 only	with	 thoughts;	 in	 exactly	 the	 same	way,	 the	 inside	 can
exist	 only	 with	 the	 outside.	 If	 the	 outside	 disappears,	 the	 inside	 disappears,
because	 they	 are	 both	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 So	 first	 the	 outside
disappears,	 then	you	come	 in	and	suddenly	you	 find	one	day	 that	 the	 inside	 is
also	disappearing,	because	it	is	nothing	but	the	innermost	core	of	the	outer.
They	 are	 both	 together.	 How	 can	 you	 have	 an	 inside	 if	 you	 don't	 have	 an
outside?
Just	think	of	a	house	which	has	only	an	inside,	no	outside.	How	can	it	have	only
an	inside	without	the	outside?	Or	how	can	it	have	only	the	outside	without	any
inside?	They	both	exist	together.
When	 inside	 and	 outside	 both	 disappear	 Ho-shan	 says,	 '...ONE	 IS	 SAID	 TO
HAVE
TRULY	TRANSCENDED.'	Then	there	is	neither	out	nor	in,	neither	thoughts	nor
thinking,	neither	outside	Master	nor	inside	Master.	It	is	a	tremendous	emptiness.
Nothing	 is,	 or,	 only	 nothing	 is.	 This	 is	 transcendence,	 this	 is	 nirvana,
enlightenment.	Then	freedom	is	utterly	complete	because	there	is	no	boundary	--
you	are	without	boundary.
This	is	what	Jesus	means	when	he	says,	'I	am	the	truth.'	This	is	what	'I	am'	is.
ONCE	A	MONK	ASKED,	'	WHAT	THEN	IS	TRULY	TRANSCENDING?'
Now	 this	 is	 a	 foolish	 question	 to	 ask,	 a	 stupid	 question	 to	 ask.	Because	when
there	is	no	outside,	no	inside,	no	thinker,	no	thought,	then	there	is	no	possibility
of	 any	 answer.	 If	 you	 have	 understood,	 then	 you	 will	 not	 ask	 what	 this
transcendence	is.	It	is	meaningless.
You	have	come	to	a	point	where	no	question	can	be	asked.
This	monk	must	not	have	understood.	So	he	asked,	'WHAT	THEN	IS	TRULY
TRANSCENDING?'	The	question	again	brings	you	back	to	the	first	step.	Now
right	 listening	is	needed.	You	see	 it?	The	question	again	brings	you	to	 the	first
step.	The	monk	has	not	transcended	the	first	step.	He	has	not	listened,	otherwise
he	would	have	understood.	He	must	have	been	there	listening	ordinarily.	He	had
ears	so	he	could	listen.
And	 he	 must	 have	 understood	 these	 words,	 because	 he	 could	 use	 the	 words,
'THEN
WHAT	IS	TRULY	TRANSCENDING?'	He	must	know	language,	of	course,	and
he	has	ears	so	he	can	hear.	He	is	not	deaf	that's	certain.
But	still	he	missed.	Now	the	Master	has	 to	start	 from	the	very	beginning.	And
Ho-shan	used	to	tell	this	story	almost	every	day.	That	was	his	only	one	sermon.
Every	morning	he	will	start	his	sermon	the	same	way.
TO	DISCIPLINE	OURSELVES	 IN	LEARNING	 IS	CALLED	HEARING.	TO
REACH
A	POINT	WHERE	ANY	MORE	LEARNING	NO	MORE	AVAILS	IS	CALLED
APPROACHING.	WHEN	ONE	GOES	BEYOND	THESE	TWO	STAGES	ONE
IS
SAID	TO	HAVE	TRULY	TRANSCENDED.
No	question	can	be	asked	if	you	understand.	You	can	touch	the	Master's	feet	and
thank	him,	or	you	can	have	a	good	laugh,	or	you	can	roll	your	mat	and	go	home.
A	question	is	now	irrelevant.
BUT	THE	MONK	ASKED	'WHAT	THEN	IS	TRULY	TRANSCENDING?'
And	what	did	Ho-shan	do?
WITHOUT	UTTERING	A	WORD....
It	is	useless	to	utter	a	word	now,	because	he	will	have	to	repeat	the	same.
WITHOUT	UTTERING	A	WORD	HO-SHAN	MOTIONED	AS	IF	BEATING
A	DRUM.
Many	things	are	implied	in	it.	With	this	gesture	--	AS	IF	BEATING	A	DRUM	--
he	is	saying,	'Are	you	deaf	or	something?	Do	you	need	a	drum	to	be	beaten	only
then	 you	 will	 understand?	 Are	 you	 deaf	 or	 something?	 Your	 question	 simply
shows	that	you	have	not	heard	what	I	have	been	saying	all	the	time.'
HO-SHAN	 MOTIONED	 AS	 IF	 BEATING	 A	 DRUM,	 SAYING,	 'DANG,
DANG,	DOKO	DANG,	DOKO	DANG.
One	meaning,	 just	 on	 the	 surface,	 is	 that	 he	 is	 saying	 to	 the	 person	 that	 he	 is
deaf.'You	don't	need	me,	you	need	a	drum	to	be	beaten,	only	then	will	you	listen,
otherwise	you	will	not	listen.	These	things	are	very	subtle.	They	are	not	for	you.'
That	is	one	thing,	just	on	the	surface.
The	 second	 thing:	 the	 drum	 is	 a	 very,	 very	 meaningful	 symbol	 in	 Buddhism
because	a	drum	is	empty	inside	and	Buddhism	believes	in	emptiness.	Emptiness
is	virtually	the	God	of	Buddhism.	A	drum	is	empty	but	if	you	beat	it,	it	creates
much	sound.	Buddhism	says	that	the	innermost	core	of	existence	is	empty,	only
just	on	the	surface	is	it	like	a	drum.
You	can	go	on	beating	and	creating	sound.
All	 language	 is	 like	 beating	 a	 drum,	 but	 all	 meaning	 is	 more	 in	 tune	 with
emptiness	than	in	tune	with	the	beating	of	the	drum.	All	is	noise;	the	innermost
core	can	be	known	only	 in	 silence.	All	philosophy	 is	beating	 the	drum.	 If	you
enjoy,	 good,	 you	 can	 enjoy,	 but	 you	 will	 never	 enter	 into	 the	 really	 real,	 the
ultimately	real.	It	is	empty.
And	 the	 third	meaning:	 answering	a	question	 in	 this	way	 is	very	absurd.	Only
Zen	Masters	 are	 courageous	 enough	 to	do	 that.	You	cannot	 think	of	 any	other
tradition	which	 is	 so	 courageous	 to	 use	 such	 outlandish	modes	 of	 expression:
Dang,	 dang,	 doko	 dang,	 doko	 dang.	He	 is	 saying,	 'Your	 question	 can	 only	 be
answered	 in	 an	 absurd	 way.	 The	 question	 is	 absurd,	 the	 answer	 cannot	 be
anything	else	than	that.	You	are	illogical	so	I	will	have	to	be	illogical	with	you.'
One	 great	Christian,	 Tertullian,	 has	 said	 a	 tremendously	meaningful	 thing.	He
says,
'Credo	quia	impossible'	--	'I	believe	because	it	is	impossible.'	He	says,	'I	believe
in	God	because	God	is	impossible.'	In	fact,	logically	he	should	not	be.	In	fact,	if
the	world	is	rational,	God	should	not	be.	Tertullian	says,	'I	believe	because	it	is
impossible.'
Rationally	there	is	no	reason	to	believe,	but	life	is	more	than	reason,	deeper	than
reason.
Life	is	more	than	logic,	vaster	than	logic	--	logic	is	very	narrow.	Logic	is	man-
made,	 life	 is	not	man-made	--	on	the	contrary,	man	is	 life-made.	Life	 is	bigger
than	man	so	naturally	it	has	to	be	bigger	than	logic.
The	 third	meaning	 of	Ho-shan's	 gesture	 is	 that	 you	 are	 asking	 such	 an	 absurd
question	that	it	can	only	be	answered	through	an	absurd	gesture.
TO	 ALL	 SUCH	 QUESTIONS	 HO-SHAN'S	 ANSWER	WAS	 ALWAYS	 THE
SAME:	DANG,	DANG,	DOKO	DANG,	DOKO	DANG.
He	had	found	even	a	better	way	than	Buddha;	he	must	have	had	a	better	sense	of
humour	 than	Buddha	 himself.	Buddha	 always	 kept	 silent	whenever	 somebody
asked	 a	metaphysical	 question.	About	 something	which	 transcended	 language,
logic,	he	would	keep	quiet	or	he	would	change	the	subject	or	he	would	talk	about
something	 else.	But	Ho-shan	 found	 a	more	 alive	way,	with	 a	 certain	 sense	 of
humour.	Somebody	was	asking	a	question	which	by	its	very	nature	was	absurd,
because	 by	 its	 very	 definition	 the	 transcendental	 is	 that	 which	 goes	 beyond,
beyond	 all	 dualities.	We	 can	 talk	 about	 dualities	 but	we	 cannot	 talk	 about	 the
non-dual.
Let	me	tell	you	a	story,	a	very	famous	story	from	the	Upanishads.
Vidagdh	 Sakalya	 asked	 a	 great	 Upanishadic	 teacher,	 Yagyavalka,	 'How	many
gods	are	there,	Yagyavalka?'
He	answered	in	the	words	of	a	prayer,	'There	are	as	many	gods	as	there	are	in	the
hymn	to	the	Vishwa-devas	--	three	thousand	three	hundred.'
'Yes,'	he	said,	'but	how	many	are	there	REALLY,	Yagyavalkya?'
'Thirty-three.'
'How	many?'
'Six.'
'How	many?'
'Three.'
'No,	how	many	really?'
'Two.'
'How	many?'
'One	and	a	half.'
'Now	come	on.	How	many	really?'
'One.'
Now	if	you	ask	beyond	this	then	Yagyavalkya	will	also	have	to	beat	a	drum.
It	happened.	There	was	a	great	discussion	in	the	court	of	Janak,	a	great	emperor
and	a	very	wise	man.	He	had	requested	all	the	wise	persons	alive	to	come	to	the
court	and	they	were	trying	to	define	the	nature	of	God.
Yagyavalkya	went	there,	he	defeated	all	the	participants	and	he	was	just	going	to
be	declared	victorious	when	a	woman	arose.
Yagyavalkya	 must	 have	 felt	 a	 little	 afraid	 because	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to
communicate	with	a	woman.	If	you	argue	with	a	woman	either	you	are	defeated
or	 the	 argument	 remains	 incomplete	 --	 there	 is	 no	 other	 way.	 Because	 the
feminine	mind	functions	in	a	totally	different	way;	it	has	no	logical	coherence;	it
jumps	from	one	place	to	another;	it	leaps.
The	male	mind	goes	 step	by	step...	 so	 they	never	meet.	The	greatest	 and	most
impossible	thing	is	to	communicate	with	a	woman	--	and	if	you	are	in	love	then
it	is	even	more	impossible.	If	you	are	not	in	love	then	maybe	a	certain	way	can
be	found.
Yagyavalkya	must	have	felt	a	 little	shiver	around	his	spine.	The	woman	asked,
'Who	 is	 holding	 up	 this	 existence?	 Who	 is	 supporting	 this	 existence?'	 And
Yagyavalkya	said,	'Of	course,	God,	Brahma,	is	the	support	of	all.'	He	said,	'He	is
the	support	of	all.	He	is	the	ultimate	support.'
And	the	woman	asked,	'Then	who	is	supporting	him?'
Now	this	was	going	beyond.	He	had	said,	'He	is	the	support	of	ALL.	Nothing	is
left.'	He	 had	 said	 that	 it	was	 the	 ultimate,	 so	 you	 cannot	 ask	 logically	who	 is
supporting	God	because	now	nothing	is	left.
Yagyavalkya	said,	 'This	 is	an	absurd	question'	 --	what	 in	India	 they	call	UTEE
PRASAN,	absurd	question.	Absurd,	because	by	the	very	definition	of	the	word
'ultimate',	 nothing	 is	 left.	 It	 cannot	 be	 asked.	 If	 you	want	 to	 be	 logical,	 if	 you
want	to	be	coherent,	if	you	want	to	communicate	rightly,	then	it	cannot	be	asked.
And	if	it	can	be	asked	then	there	is	going	to	be	no	end	to	it.
He	said	 to	Janak,	 'If	 this	question	is	allowed	then	it	 is	better	 that	I	should	stop
now	because	then	there	is	no	end.	It	will	become	a	regress	ad	infinitum.	If	I	say
that	God	is	supported	by	something	 then	she	will	ask,	"Who	is	supporting	 that
something?"	And	 if	 I	say	something	else	she	will	say,	"Who	is	supporting	 that
something?"	It	is	going	to	be	foolish	and	endless	if	it	is	going	to	be	allowed;	it	is
better	that	I	should	drop	out	of	it	right	now.'
He	was	right,	because	when	we	say	'all'	then	nothing	is	left.
Ho-shan	was	saying,	'All	duality	is	transcended'	and	language	can	function	only
in	 duality.	A	man	 has	 to	 be	 defined	 by	 a	woman.	A	man	 is	 one	who	 is	 not	 a
woman	and	a	woman	is	one	who	is	not	a	man.	Matter	is	to	be	defined	by	mind;
night	 is	 to	 be	 defined	 by	 day;	 God	 is	 to	 be	 defined	 by	 the	Devil	 --	 language
exists	 in	 duality	 otherwise	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 defining	 it.	 The	 other	 is
needed,	and	the	transcendental	means	that	now	there	is	no	other,	the	nondual	has
come.	Now	it	is	all	one,	you	have	reached	to	the	indefinable.
But	Ho-shan,	 of	 course,	 is	 a	 better	man	 than	Yagyavalkya.	Yagyavalkya	must
have	been	very	serious;	he	said	to	the	king,	'I	had	better	stop	now	because	if	this
woman	 is	 allowed	 to	 ask,	 she	will	 create	 regress	 ad	 infinitum.'	And	 he	was	 a
little	 angry	 also.	He	 said	 to	 the	woman,	 'No	more	 questioning	 otherwise	 your
head	will	fall	off.'	He	was	right	but	a	little	irritated	and	annoyed.
Ho-shan	 has	 more	 sense	 of	 humour;	 he	 is	 not	 so	 serious.	 And	 that's	 how	 an
enlightened	person	should	be.	About	Yagyavalkya	I	have	always	felt	that	he	may
have	been	a	great	philosopher,	a	great	man	of	learning,	learned,	but	he	was	not
yet	enlightened.	Otherwise	there	was	no	need.	He	could	have	laughed.	He	could
have	also	gestured	as	if	he	was	beating	a	drum;	he	could	have	said,	'Dang,	dang,
doko	dang,	doko	dang.'
But	no,	this	quality	of	Zen	is	special	to	Zen.	It	is	tremendously	beautiful.	They
can	turn	an	ugly	situation	into	laughter,	and	laughter	brings	you	home	as	nothing
else.
The	one	cannot	be	expressed.	To	know	 that	one,	one	has	 to	become	more	and
more	silent,	silent	and	silent.	To	know	that	one,	to	experience	that	one,	one	has
to	lose	language	by	and	by,	so	that	language	completely	disappears	and	you	are
left	without	any	language,	without	any	mind.
Last	night	I	was	reading	a	few	lines	of	Pablo	Neruda	--	beautiful.
SO	 THAT	YOU	CAN	HEAR	ME,	AT	 TIMES	MY	WORDS	GET	 FAINTER
AND
FAINTER,	LIKE	THE	MARKS	MADE	BY	SEAGULLS	ON	THE	SAND.
A	Master,	 the	more	you	grow	with	him,	 starts	becoming	more	and	more	silent
and	 his	 words	 get	 fainter	 and	 fainter	 --	 LIKE	 THE	 MARKS	 MADE	 BY
SEAGULLS	ON	THE
SAND.	 The	 more	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 hearing,	 the	 more	 the	 Master	 has
nothing	to	say	to	you.	When	you	are	not	capable	of	hearing	he	has	to	say	many
things	 to	 you	 to	make	 you	 capable	 of	 hearing.	When	 you	 become	 capable	 of
hearing	--	look	at	the	absurdity	of	it	all	--	when	you	become	capable	of	hearing,
his	words	become	fainter	and	fainter.	When	you	are	really	capable	of	hearing,	he
stops,	because	now	there	is	no	need	to	say	anything,	now	silence	can	meet	with
the	 silence,	 now	 silence	 can	 melt	 and	 merge	 into	 silence.	 Now,	 language
dropped,	mind	 put	 aside,	 being	 can	 communicate	with	 being.	 Communication
can	be	direct,	immediate.	Now	something	can	transpire,	existentially.
But	at	that	moment	don't	be	stupid	like	that	monk	who	asked,	'WHAT	THEN	IS
TRULY
TRANSCENDING?'	Because	his	question,	if	accepted,	brings	you	back	to	ABC.
Again	he	has	to	be	taught	how	to	hear.
Ho-shan	did	well.	He	said,	 'Are	you	deaf	or	something?'	by	making	the	gesture
of	beating	a	drum.	And	he	said,	 'Sound	and	words	and	mind	and	language	and
concepts	and	philosophies	and	creeds	and	dogmas	and	scriptures	are	just	on	the
surface.	Deep	inside	the	drum	is	nothing.'
Have	you	ever	 tried	 to	open	a	drum	and	 see	what	 it	 is	 inside	which	makes	 so
much	sound
--	so	much	beautiful	sound	also?	Small	children	do	it	sometimes.
Somebody	gave	Mulla	Nasruddin's	child	a	drum	and	it	became	a	nuisance	for	the
whole	 neighbourhood.	 One	 day	 I	 was	 sitting	 at	 his	 home	 and	 the	 child	 came
running	 in	with	a	broken	drum.	He	had	a	knife	 in	his	hand	with	which	he	had
broken	it.
I	said,	'What	happened?'
He	said,	'The	neighbour	gave	me	the	knife	and	said,	"Try	to	see	what	is	inside."
So	I	looked	inside,	there	is	nothing.'	The	same	happens	with	all	philosophies.	A
Master	 is	 there	 to	 give	 you	 a	 knife	 to	 look	 inside	 the	 drum.	 If	 you	 push	 your
knife	deep	enough	into	philosophies,	there	is	nothing,	only	emptiness.	All	words
are	 empty.	 They	make	much	 sound,	 that's	 right,	 but	 don't	 be	 befooled	 by	 the
sound.	Have	a	penetrating	knife,	a	sharp	knife,	with	you	--	that's	what	meditation
is	all	about.	It	is	like	sharpening	a	knife	so	you	can	put	it	through	all	words	and
reach	to	the	innermost	core	of	it	all,	which	is	emptiness.
Yes,	Ho-shan	did	well.	His	assertion	about	all	metaphysical	questions	--	DANG,
DANG,	 DOKO	 DANG,	 DOKO	 DANG	 --	 was	 so	 absurd	 but	 tremendously
beautiful.	He	says,
'We	 here	 in	 Zen	 are	 not	 concerned	with	words,	 logic,	 intellect,	 syllogism.	We
here	in	Zen	are	concerned	with	existence,	with	being.	And	if	you	ask	an	absurd
question,	you	will	get	an	absurd	answer.'
The	story	says	nothing	about	what	happened	to	the	monk	who	asked	it.	If	he	had
been	 a	 little	 alert	 he	 may	 have	 even	 become	 more	 alert.	 This	 sudden	 absurd
response	of	the	Master	--	DANG,	DANG,	DOKO	DANG,	DOKO	DANG	--	may
have	brought	him	a	 little	 satori.	But	 the	 story	 says	nothing.	The	man	may	not
have	 been	 even	 that	 alert	 that	 he	 could	 understand	 this.	 He	may	 have	 turned
away,	thinking	that	this	man	was	mad.
The	Zen	people	are	mad	in	a	way	because	they	are	trying	to	pull	you	towards	the
ultimate	which	is	beyond	you.	They	are	trying	to	pull	you	beyond	yourself;	they
are	trying	to	pull	you	out	of	yourself.	They	ARE	mad	people,	but	 if	you	allow
them	they	can	give	you	a	glimpse	of	the	eternal,	and	once	the	glimpse	happens
you	are	never	the	same	again.
Let	 this	story	penetrate	your	heart	as	deeply	as	possible	and	whenever	you	are
becoming	 a	 victim	 again	 of	 theories,	 dogmas,	 doctrines,	 philosophies,	 say
loudly,	 'DANG,	DANG,	DOKO	DANG,	DOKO	DANG.'	 It	will	 be	 helpful;	 it
will	suddenly	bring	you	back	to	the	earth.
Ludwig	Wittgenstein	used	 to	say	 that	he	did	not	solve	philosophical	problems,
he	 dissolved	 them.	Everything	 is	 left	 as	 it	 is	 but	 perhaps	 for	 the	 first	 time	we
come	to	see	things	as	they	are.
Zen	is	a	way	of	dissolving	philosophical	problems,	not	of	solving	them.	It	 is	a
way	of	getting	rid	of	philosophy	because	philosophy	is	a	sort	of	neurosis.
Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	Lady	You	Need	Love!
20	June	1976	am	in	Buddha	Hall
Archive
code:
7606200
ShortTitle:
DANG10
Audio:
Yes
Video:	No
Length:
99
mins
The	first	question:
Question	1
I	 HAVE	 TOO	MUCH	 SEXUAL	 ENERGY	 BURNING	WITHIN	MY	 BODY.
WHEN	 I	 DANCE,	 SOMETIMES	 I	 FEEL	 I	 AM	 GOING	 TO	 KILL	 THE
WHOLE	WORLD	AND
AT	 SOME	 STAGES	 SO	 MUCH	 ANGER	 AND	 VIOLENCE	 BUBBLES
WITHIN	MY
BODY	THAT	I	CAN'T	CHANNELISE	THE	ENERGY	INTO	MEDITATION
TECHNIQUES	AND	IT	DRIVES	ME	CRAZY.	I	DON'T	FEEL	TO	GO	INTO
THE
SEX	ACT	BUT	VIOLENT	ENERGY	IS	STILL	BURNING	LIKE	VOLCANIC
FIRE.	 I	 CAN'T	 BEAR	 IT	 AND	 IT	MAKES,	ME	 SOMETIMES	 SUICIDAL.
PLEASE
EXPLAIN	HOW	TO	GIVE	A	CREATIVE	OUTLET	TO	THIS	ENERGY.
The	problem	is	created	by	the	mind,	not	by	the	energy.	Listen	to	the	energy.	It	is
showing	 you	 the	 right	 direction.	 It	 is	 not	 sexual	 energy	which	 is	 creating	 the
problem	--	it	has	never	created	any	problems	in	the	animals,	in	the	trees,	in	the
birds.	 The	 energy	 creates	 problems	 because	 your	 mind	 has	 a	 wrong	 attitude
about	it.
This	 question	 is	 from	an	 Indian	 lady.	 In	 India	 the	whole	upbringing	 is	 against
sex.	Then	you	create	the	problem.	And	then,	whenever	there	is	energy	you	will
feel	 sexual	 because	 something	 is	 incomplete	 within	 you.	 Something	 that	 is
unfulfilled	will	always	wait	and	it	will	assert	energy,	exploit	energy.
In	 the	 dynamic	 methods	 of	 meditation	 much	 energy	 is	 created.	Many	 hidden
sources	 are	 tapped	 and	new	 sources	 become	available.	 If	 sex	has	 remained	 an
unfulfilled	 desire	 then	 this	 energy	 will	 start	 moving	 towards	 sex.	 You	 will
become	more	and	more	sexual	if	you	meditate.
Let	 me	 tell	 you	 one	 thing	 that	 happened	 in	 India.	 Jaina	 monks	 completely
stopped	meditating	because	of	 sexual	 energy.	They	 forgot	 all	 about	meditation
because	they	were	repressing	sex	so	much	that	whenever	they	meditated,	energy
would	 rise.	Meditation	 gives	 you	 tremendous	 energy.	 It	 is	 a	 source	 of	 eternal
energy,	you	cannot	exhaust	it.	So	whenever	energy	arose	they	would	start	feeling
sexual.	 They	 became	 afraid	 of	 meditations.	 They	 dropped	 them.	 The	 most
essential	 thing	 that	 Mahavira	 had	 given	 to	 them	 they	 dropped,	 and	 the	 non-
essential	--	fasting	and	keeping	rituals	--	they	continued.
They	fit	with	an	anti-sexual	attitude.
I	am	not	anti-sexual	because	I	am	not	anti-life.	So	there	is	not	the	problem	where
you	think	it	is:	the	problem	is	in	your	head,	not	in	your	sexual	glands.	You	will
have	 to	change	your	attitude	otherwise	whatsoever	you	do	will	be	coloured	by
your	sexuality.
You	meditate	 and	 it	will	become	sexual;	you	 look	at	 somebody	and	your	eyes
will	 become	 sexual;	 you	 touch	 somebody	 and	 your	 hand	will	 become	 sexual;
you	eat	something	and	eating	will	become	sexual.
So	 people	 who	 deny	 sex	 start	 eating	 more.	 You	 can	 watch	 it	 in	 life.	 Freely
flowing,	sexually	flowing	people	will	not	be	very	fat,	they	will	not	eat	too	much.
Love	is	so	satisfying,	love	is	so	fulfilling,	they	will	not	go	on	stuffing	their	body
with	food.	When	they	can't	 love,	or	when	they	can't	allow	themselves	 to	move
into	love,	they	start	eating	too	much.	That	becomes	a	substitute	activity.
Go	and	see	Hindu	monks.	They	go	on	gathering	unnecessary	fat.	They	become
ugly.	That	 is	another	extreme.	At	one	extreme	are	Jaina	monks	who	cannot	eat
because	 they	 are	 afraid	 that	 once	 they	 eat,	 food	 will	 release	 energy	 and	 the
energy	will	 immediately	move	 to	 the	 incomplete	 desire	waiting	 for	 it.	 First	 it
goes	to	the	uncompleted	experience	which	is	hanging	in	the	middle	--	that	is	the
first	 requirement	 so	 energy	 moves	 there.	 The	 body	 has	 a	 certain	 economy:
wherever	energy	is	needed	first,	energy	moves	there	first.	There	is	a	hierarchy	of
needs.	A	person	who	has	been	denying	sex	will	have	a	hierarchy	--	sex	will	be
first	on	the	list.	And	whenever	energy	is	available	it	will	start	moving	to	the	most
unfulfilled	 desire.	 So	 Jaina	monks	 cannot	 eat	well,	 they	 are	 afraid,	 and	Hindu
monks	 eat	 too	much.	The	 problem	 is	 the	 same	 but	 they	 have	 solved	 it	 in	 two
extreme	ways.
If	you	eat	 too	much	you	start	getting	a	certain	sexual	enjoyment	by	eating,	by
filling	your	belly	too	much.	Too	much	food	brings	lethargy.	And	too	much	food
is	always	a	substitute	for	love	because	the	first	thing	the	child	comes	in	contact
with	is	the	mother's	breast.	That	breast	is	the	first	experience	in	the	world	and	the
breast	gives	two	things	to	the	child:	love	and	food.
So	 love	and	 food	become	deeply	entangled	with	each	other.	Whenever	 love	 is
missing,	your	childish	mind	will	think,'Get	more	food.	Supplement	it.'	Have	you
ever	watched?
When	you	are	feeling	very	full	of	 love	your	desire	 to	eat	disappears,	you	don't
feel	so	much	appetite.	But	whenever	love	is	missing,	you	start	eating	too	much,
you	don't	know	what	to	do	now.	Love	was	filling	a	certain	space	inside	you,	now
that	space	is	empty	and	you	don't	know	any	other	way	to	fill	 it	 than	food.	You
create	problems	by	denying	nature,	by	rejecting	nature.
So	I	would	like	to	tell	the	questioner	that	it	is	not	a	question	of	meditation.	Lady,
you	need	love.	You	need	a	lover.	And	you	need	courage	to	move	into	it.
It	is	difficult	to	move	into	love	--	there	are	very	hidden	fears	in	it.	Love	creates
as	much	fear	as	nothing	else	can	because	the	moment	you	start	approaching	the
other	you	have	to	go	outside	yourself.	And	who	knows?	The	other	may	accept
you	or	may	reject	you.	The	 fear	arises.	You	start	 feeling	hesitant	 --	whether	 to
take	the	move	or	not,	whether	 to	approach	the	other	or	not.	Hence	all	over	 the
world	 the	 coward	 ages	 of	 the	 past	 have	 decided	 for	marriage	 instead	 of	 love,
because	if	people	were	left	open	to	love,	very	few	people	would	be	able	to	love.
Most	would	die	without	 love;	 they	would	 live	and	drag	out	 their	 lives	without
love.
Because	love	is	dangerous....	The	moment	you	start	moving	towards	somebody
else	you	are	coming	close	to	colliding	with	another	world.	Who	knows	if	your
approach	will	be	accepted	or	rejected?	How	can	you	be	certain	the	other	is	going
to	 say	 yes	 to	 your	 need	 and	 to	 your	 desire?	 That	 the	 other	 is	 going	 to	 be
compassionate,	loving?	How	do	you	know?	He	may	reject	you.	He	may	say	no.
You	may	say,'I	love	you'	but	what	is	the	guarantee	that	he	will	also	feel	love	for
you?	 He	 may	 not.	 There	 is	 no	 necessity	 for	 it.	 The	 fear	 of	 rejection	 is	 very
shattering.
So	cunning	and	clever	people	decide	not	to	move	at	all.	Keep	to	yourself,	then	at
least	you	are	not	rejected.	And	you	can	go	on	enhancing	your	ego	with	the	idea
that	nobody	has	ever	rejected	you,	even	though	that	ego	is	absolutely	 impotent
and	is	not	enough	to	fulfil	you.	You	need	to	be	needed;	you	need	somebody	to
accept	you;	you	need	somebody	to	love	you	because	only	when	somebody	else
loves	 you,	 will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 love	 yourself,	 not	 before	 it.	 When	 somebody
accepts	you,	you	will	be	able	to	accept	yourself,	not	before	it.	When	somebody
else	feels	happy	with	you;	you	will	start	feeling	happy	with	yourself,	not	before
it.	The	other	becomes	a	mirror.
Each	 relationship	 is	 a	 mirror.	 It	 reflects	 you.	 How	 can	 you	 know	 yourself
without	the	mirror?	There	is	no	way.	Others'	eyes	become	mirror-like,	and	when
somebody	 loves	 you,	 that	mirror	 is	 very,	 very	 sympathetic	 towards	 you;	 very,
very	 happy	 with	 you;	 delighted	 with	 you.	 In	 those	 delighted	 eyes	 you	 are
reflected	and	for	the	first	time	a	certain	acceptability	arises.
Otherwise	you	have	been	rejected	from	the	very	beginning.	It	is	part	of	the	ugly
structure	 of	 society	 that	 each	 child	 comes	 to	 feel	 that	 he	 is	 not	 accepted	 for
himself.	If	he	does	something	good	--	of	course,	whatsoever	the	parents	think	is
good	--	if	he	does	that,	he	is	accepted;	if	he	does	something	wrong	--	what	the
parents	think	is	wrong	--	he	is	rejected.
The	child	sooner	or	later	starts	feeling,'I	am	not	accepted	for	myself,	not	as	I	am,
not	 intrinsically,	but	 for	what	 I	do.	Not	my	being	 is	 loved	but	my	doing.'	And
that	creates	a	deep	self-rejection,	a	deep	self-hatred.	He	starts	hating	himself.
If	you	don't	fall	in	love,	if	you	don't	find	lovers	and	friends	who	can	accept	you,
you	will	 remain	with	 that	 rejection	your	whole	 life.	Love	 is	 a	must.	You	must
move	through	it.
You	 can	 come	 out	 of	 it	 one	 day,	 you	 can	 transcend	 it	 one	 day	 --	 it	 has	 to	 be
transcended	--
but	how	can	you	transcend	it	if	you	never	enter	into	it?
So	don't	be	afraid.	And	drop	all	nonsense	from	the	head.	Yes,	there	is	fear.	You
may	be	rejected	but	don't	be	afraid	of	 that	fear.	That	risk	has	 to	be	 taken,	only
then	somebody	will	come	and	accept	you.	If	you	knock	at	a	hundred	doors	and
ninety-nine	remain	closed,	don't	be	afraid	--	one	will	open.	Somebody	is	waiting
for	 you.	 Somebody	 will	 be	 fulfilled	 through	 you	 and	 you	 will	 be	 fulfilled
through	 somebody.	 Somebody	 is	waiting	 to	 become	 a	mirror	 for	 you	 because
somebody	is	waiting	to	make	you	a	mirror	for	himself.
And	there	 is	no	other	way	to	find	out	who	that	one	 is	 than	 to	go	on	knocking,
groping.	It	is	risky,	but	life	is	risky.
So	very	clever	people	miss	life,	they	never	take	the	risk.	Afraid	of	falling,	they
never	walk;	afraid	of	drowning,	they	never	swim;	afraid	of	rejection,	they	never
move	in	love;	afraid	of	failure,	they	never	make	any	effort	to	succeed	in	anything
--	 their	 life	 is	 not	 life	 at	 all.	They	 are	dead	before	 their	 death.	They	die	many
times	before	they	really	die.	Their	whole	life	is	nothing	but	a	gradual	death.
Live,	 and	 live	 intensely,	 and	 don't	 take	 it	 as	 a	 personal	 offence	 if	 somebody
cannot	love	you	--	there	is	no	necessity.	You	were	ready,	you	were	available.	If
the	other	is	not	willing,	that	is	for	him	to	decide.	Don't	make	it	a	wound,	it	is	not.
It	simply	says	that	you	two	don't	fit	--	that's	all	--	it	doesn't	say	anything	about
you	or	about	the	other.	Don't	say	that	the	other	is	wrong	and	don't	think	that	it	is
because	you	are	wrong	that	you	are	not	accepted.	It	is	just	you	could	not	fit.
And	it	is	good	that	the	other	did	not	deceive	you,	that	he	said,'Sorry,	I	don't	feel
any	love	for	you.'	At	least	he	was	sincere	and	authentic.	Because	if	he	had	said	a
formal	yes,	 then	your	whole	 life	would	have	been	a	mess.	Be	 true.	When	you
love,	say	it,	and	when	you	don't,	say	that	too.	Be	true	and	sincere.
And	there	are	so	many	beautiful	people	in	the	world,	why	remain	with	yourself?
Walk	a	few	steps	with	somebody.	Feel	that	rhythm	also.	That	rhythm	will	satisfy
you	and	the	urge	will	disappear.	And	when	the	urge	disappears,	your	meditation
will	be	the	first	in	the	hierarchy.	Meditation	can	be	the	first	in	the	hierarchy	only
if	you	have	not	been	denying	yourself	that	which	is	natural.
A	person	who	has	been	fasting	cannot	meditate	because	whenever	he	meditates
he	thinks	about	food,	whenever	he	closes	his	eyes	he	visualises	food.	A	man	who
is	denying	love	cannot	meditate;	whenever	he	meditates,	immediately	sexuality
surrounds	him.
Fulfil	all	natural	needs,	nothing	is	wrong	in	them.	What	is	wrong	in	food,	in	sex?
Nothing	is	wrong.	Fulfil	them.	Be	so	natural	that	when	you	meditate	there	is	no
other	 thing	waiting	for	your	attention.	 If	you	fulfil	your	natural	needs	you	will
see	 that	 your	 dreams	will	 disappear.	 In	 the	 night	 you	will	 not	 dream	 because
there	is	nothing	to	dream	about.
Fast,	then	you	will	dream	about	food;	force	celibacy	on	yourself,	then	you	will
dream	about	sex.	If	you	are	moving	naturally,	if	you	have	found	a	tune	between
you	and	nature....	That's	what	I	call	DHARMA,	that's	what	I	call	the	ultimate	law
of	life.	Find	yourself	almost	always	in	rhythm.	Sometimes	even	if	you	go	out	of
step	come	back	again;	remember	and	fall	into	line	again.	Remain	with	nature	and
you	will	reach	to	the	goal;	remain	with	nature	and	you	will	find	God.	You	can
even	forget	about	God,	then	too	you	will	find	him	--	if	you	remain	true	to	nature.
Because	when	lower	needs	are	fulfilled,	higher	needs	arise;	when	higher	needs
are	fulfilled,	ultimate	needs	arise.	This	is	the	natural	economy	of	life.
If	a	person	is	hungry,	how	can	he	understand	music?	It	is	sheer	absurdity	to	ask
him	to	listen	to	classical	music	when	he	is	hungry.	Or	to	tell	him	to	meditate	or
to	sit	in	zazen.
He	 cannot	 think	 anything	 about	 Buddha,	 cannot	 think	 anything	 about	 God	 or
Jesus.	He	cannot	meditate,	his	mind	will	flicker	and	waver;	it	will	go	again	and
again	to	his	empty	stomach.	No,	he	cannot	love	poetry	and	he	cannot	love	music
when	 the	 first	 needs	 are	 unfulfilled.	Give	 him	 fulfillment	 in	 the	 first,	 primary
needs	--	food,	shelter,	love	--	and	then	suddenly	the	energy	is	released	from	the
lower	world	 and	he	will	 start	 reading	poetry,	 listening	 to	music;	 he	will	 enjoy
dancing.	Now	higher	needs	are	arising:	he	would	 like	 to	paint	or	sculpt.	These
are	luxuries.	They	only	come	into	existence	when	lower	needs	are	fulfilled.	And
when	 these	higher	needs	are	also	 fulfilled	 --	you	have	 loved	music,	 listened	 to
music;	you	have	loved	poetry,	enjoyed	it;	you	have	painted,	danced	--
one	day	you	will	see	a	new	realm	of	needs	is	arising	called	the	ultimate	needs:
meditation,	God,	prayer.
If	the	first	needs	are	not	fulfilled,	the	second	will	not	arise	--	and	the	third	is	out
of	the	question.	If	the	first	needs	are	fulfilled	then	there	is	the	possibility	for	the
second	needs	to	arise	and	a	glimpse	of	the	third	to	happen	also.	When	the	second
is	fulfilled,	the	third	arises	automatically	on	its	own	accord.
Just	the	other	day	in	kundalini	meditation	two	dogs	were	watching.	After	a	while
one	dog	 looked	at	 the	other	and	 said,'When	 I	 act	 like	 that	 they	give	me	worm
pills.'
Of	 course,	 a	 dog	 has	 a	 dog's	 mind.	 He	 has	 his	 own	 world,	 terminology,
understanding,	concepts.	He	can	only	think	that	people	who	are	doing	kundalini
either	have	worms	in	their	stomach	or	have	gone	crazy.	And	that	is	natural	to	a
dog's	understanding.
Your	 mind	 has	 been	 conditioned	 for	 centuries	 by	 people	 who	 have	 not
understood	your	real	needs.	They	have	not	bothered	at	all.	They	were	looking	for
something	else	 and	 they	have	managed	 that	 very	well...	 they	were	 looking	 for
how	to	dominate	people.	And	the	easiest	way	is	to	create	a	guilty	conscience	--
then	it	is	very	easy	to	dominate	people.
Once	the	guilt	exists	you	will	be	dominated	by	one	or	the	other,	by	this	or	that,
but	you	will	be	dominated.	A	guilty	person	never	feels	at	ease	with	himself,	he
cannot	have	any	confidence;	he	knows	that	he	is	wrong	so	he	goes	and	finds	a
leader,	 he	 goes	 and	 finds	 some	 church,	 he	 goes	 and	 finds	 somebody	 to	 guide
him.	He	is	unconfident,	hence	the	need	arises.	Politicians,	priests,	have	worked
very	hard	to	create	a	guilty	conscience	in	everybody.	Now	that	guilty	conscience
is	creating	trouble.
Drop	 it.	 Life	 is	 yours.	 It	 belongs	 to	 nobody	 else.	 No	 politician,	 no	 priest	 has
anything	to	do	with	it.	Don't	allow	anybody	to	meddle	with	your	life.	It	is	totally
yours.
And	 your	 body	 is	 giving	 you	 the	 right	 indication;	 the	 body	 is	 very	wise.	 The
mind	is	a	very	late	arrival.	The	body	has	lived	millions	of	years,	it	knows	what	is
needed.	 It	 is	 the	 mind	 that	 interferes.	 Mind	 is	 very	 immature,	 body	 is	 very
mature.	Listen	to	the	body.
And	when	I	say	listen	to	the	body,	I	don't	mean	remain	confined	to	the	body.	If
you	 listen	 to	 the	body,	 the	body	will	not	have	anything	 to	say	 to	you	 --	 things
will	be	settled.	And	when	the	body	is	at	ease,	 relaxed,	and	 there	 is	no	 tension,
and	the	body	is	not	fighting	for	something,	is	not	trying	to	attract	your	attention
because	you	are	not	fulfilling	a	need,	when	the	body	is	calm	and	quiet,	you	can
float	high,	you	can	fly	high,	you	can	become	a	white	cloud.	But	only	when	body
needs	are	truly	looked	after.	The	body	is	not	your	enemy,	it	is	your	friend.	The
body	 is	 your	 earth,	 the	 body	 has	 all	 your	 roots.	 You	 have	 to	 find	 a	 bridge
between	you	and	your	body.	If	you	don't	find	that	bridge,	you	will	be	constantly
in	conflict	with	your	body	--	and	a	person	who	is	fighting	with	himself	is	always
miserable.
The	 first	 thing	 is	 to	 come	 to	 a	 peace-pact	with	 your	 body	 and	 never	 break	 it.
Once	you	have	come	to	a	peace-pact	with	your	body,	the	body	will	become	very,
very	friendly.	You	look	after	the	body,	the	body	will	look	after	you	--	it	becomes
a	vehicle	of	tremendous	value,	it	becomes	the	very	temple.	One	day	your	body
itself	is	revealed	to	you	as	the	very	shrine	of	God.
The	second	question:
Question	2
FOR	THE	LAST	TEN	DAYS	I	HAVE	FELT	TREMENDOUSLY	HAPPY	--	AS
I	NEVER	DID	BEFORE.	JUST	BEING	MYSELF	AND	ACCEPTING	ME	AS	I
AM
FEELS	GREAT.	SOMETIMES	THIS	INCREDIBLY	GOOD	FEELING	IS
DISTURBED	BY	TWO	THOUGHTS.	FIRST,	WILL	THIS	STAY	THAT	WAY?
CAN	I	KEEP	THIS	FEELING	IN	THE	FUTURE?	AND	SECOND,	WHY	DID	I
HAVE	TO
BECOME	 SO	 OLD	 BEFORE	 I	 REACHED	 THIS	 POINT?	 I	 CANNOT
FORGET	AND
STILL	I	FEEL	SORRY	FOR	ALL	THOSE	YEARS	THAT	I	DID	NOT	LIVE	AT
ALL.
PLEASE	 EXPLAIN	 HOW	 TO	 GET	 RID	 OF	 THESE	 DISTURBANCES	 OF
MY
HAPPINESS.
This	 has	 been	 asked	 by	 Swami	 Prem	Dhyan.	When	 he	 came	 just	 six	months
before,	he	was	one	of	the	most	miserable	persons	I	have	ever	come	across.	And
it	 has	 been	 a	 miracle!	 He	 has	 changed	 totally!	 Now	 I	 can	 say	 just	 the
opposite,'He	is	one	of	the	most	happy	persons	around	here.'
These	 two	 questions	 are	 natural	 because	 now	 he	 is	 going	 to	 leave,	 he	will	 be
going	back	home.	The	fear	arises.	Will	he	be	able	to	keep	this	happiness	that	has
happened	to	him?
The	future....	And	the	second	question:	he	feels	sorry	for	all	those	years	that	he
lived	but	did	not	really	live,	that	he	missed.	He	could	have	lived	those	years	as
happy	as	he	is	now.
The	past....
These	 are	 the	 two	 dangers	 to	 be	 alert	 about.	 Whenever	 you	 become
tremendously	happy	immediately	mind	starts	spinning	its	web.	And	two	are	the
methods	of	the	mind,	because	mind	exists	either	with	the	past	or	with	the	future.
It	immediately	says,'Look,	you	could	have	been	so	happy	your	whole	life.'	Now
the	mind	is	distracting	you.	Say	to	the	mind,'What	does	it	matter?	Those	twenty
years,	or	thirty	years,	or	fifty	years,	are	gone.
Whether	 I	 lived	 them	 happily	 or	 unhappily,	 they	 are	 gone	 --	 it	 makes	 no
difference.'	In	the	morning,	when	you	awake,	what	difference	does	it	make	that
you	 dreamed	 a	 very	 sweet	 dream	or	 that	 it	was	 a	 nightmare?	What	 difference
does	it	make?	When	you	awake	in	the	morning	both	were	dreams.	And	the	night
is	over	and	you	are	no	more	asleep.
When	the	mind	says,	'Look,	you	could	have	been	this	happy	always,'	the	mind	is
creating	an	absurd	desire.	You	cannot	go	back,	you	cannot	do	anything	about	the
past,	the	past	is	gone	and	gone	forever,	irreversibly	gone.	Just	think,	even	if	you
had	 been	 happy	 all	 those	 fifteen	 years,	 what	 difference	 does	 it	 make	 now?
Whether	 happy	 or	 unhappy,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 memory.	 In	 fact,	 whether	 your	 past
existed	or	not,	what	difference	does	it	make	now?
Bertrand	Russell	has	written	somewhere	that	sometimes	he	starts	brooding	about
whether	 the	 past	 really	 existed	 or	whether	 he	 simply	 imagines	 that	 it	 existed;
were	you	a	child	really	or	did	you	simply	dream	about	being	a	child?	How	can
you	differentiate	now?
Both	are	in	the	memory	--	whether	you	dreamed	about	it	or	whether	you	lived	it,
both	are	part	of	memory	and	there	is	no	way	to	differentiate.	The	past	is	in	the
memory	--	real,	unreal,	both.
And	 psychologists	 say	 that	when	 people	 say	 something	 about	 their	 past,	 don't
trust	 them,	 because	 in	 their	 past	many	 imaginations	 and	 dreams	 have	mingled
and	 mixed.	 Their	 past	 is	 not	 factual.	 And	 there	 is	 no	 way	 now	 because
everything	is	contained	only	in	the	memory.	Whether	you	were	really	living	it	or
you	had	just	dreamed	it,	both	have	mixed	and	melted	into	each	other.
Past	 is	 just	memory	but	 the	mind	can	create	great	 trouble,	and	by	creating	that
fuss	it	will	deprive	you	of	the	happiness	that	is	available	right	now.	You	just	say
to	 the	mind,'I	 am	 finished	with	 the	 past	 and	 I	 don't	 care	 a	 bit	whether	 it	 was
happy	or	unhappy,	it	is	gone	and	gone	forever.	Now	is	the	only	moment.'
If	 you	 don't	 listen	 to	 this	 trap	 then	 the	mind	 has	 another	 trap	 for	 you.	 It	 will
say,'Okay,	the	past	is	gone	but	the	future	--	what	about	the	future?	At	least	you
can	 manage	 the	 future.	 It	 has	 yet	 to	 happen.	 You	 can	 plan	 for	 it.	 And	 this
beautiful	space	in	which	you	are	now,	won't	you	like	it	 to	be	there	forever	and
ever?'	Again	the	desire	will	arise.	Don't	say	yes	to	it	because	again	it	will	 lead
you	away	from	the	present.
And	happiness	 is	 always	 herenow.	Happiness	 is	 something	 that	 belongs	 to	 the
present.
Now	say	to	the	mind,'I	am	not	worried	about	the	future	at	all	because	if	I	can	be
happy	now,	this	moment,	I	can	be	happy	forever	because	the	future	never	comes
as	 future,	 it	always	comes	as	 the	present.	And	now	I	know	 the	secret	of	being
happy	in	the	present	so	why	bother	about	the	future?	Tomorrow	will	not	come	as
tomorrow,	it	will	come	as	today.	And	I	have	the	key	to	open	the	door.	At	 least
this	 moment	 I	 am	 happy	 and	 I	 know	 how	 to	 be	 happy	 in	 this	 moment.	 All
moments	that	will	come	will	come	always	like	this	moment.'
Have	 you	 watched?	 There	 is	 no	 difference	 between	 one	moment	 and	 another
moment.
Time	is	completely	beyond	discrimination.	It	is	always	pure	now.
So	beware.	These	are	the	two	traps	of	the	mind.	Mind	cannot	live	without	misery
so	mind	is	 trying	to	create	misery	so	 it	can	disturb	your	peace.	Then	it	will	be
perfectly	happy.
Once	you	start	feeling	sorry	for	your	past	--	it	does	not	matter	for	what	you	feel
sorry	 --	 if	 you	 feel	 sorry,	 you	 start	 getting	 sad,	 depressed.	And	once	 you	 start
getting	 too	 concerned	 about	 the	 future,	 you	 become	 full	 of	 desire,	 tense	 --
worried	whether	you	will	be	able	to	manage	or	not,	whether	you	will	be	able	to
perform	or	not.
Between	 these	 two	 rocks	 the	 fragile	moment	of	 the	present	 is	crushed.	So	you
have	to	be	very	alert.	When	one	is	unhappy	one	can	remain	without	alertness	--
one	 has	 nothing	 to	 lose.	When	 one	 is	 happy,	 one	 has	 to	 be	 very	 careful	 and
cautious	 --	now	one	has	a	 treasure	 to	 lose.	And	 it	can	be	 lost	within	a	second,
within	a	split	second.	One	step	wrong	and	it	can	be	lost.	And	these	are	the	two
directions	in	which	you	can	lose	your	treasure.
A	person	who	is	poor,	a	beggar,	need	not	be	worried	that	he	can	be	robbed.	But	a
person	 who	 has	 treasures	 has	 to	 be	 very	 cautious.	 When	 Buddha	 walked	 so
cautiously,	 why	was	 he	 walking	 so	 cautiously?	 He	 had	 something,	 something
tremendously	 fragile	 which	 could	 be	 dropped	 in	 any	moment	 of	 unawareness
and	be	lost.
There	 is	 a	Zen	 story.	A	king	 in	 Japan	used	 to	visit	 his	 capital	 every	night.	He
became	 aware	 that	 a	 beggar	 was	 always	 sitting	 alert	 under	 his	 tree;	 he	 never
found	him	asleep.
The	 king	went	 at	 different	 times	 but	 he	was	 alert	 the	whole	 night,	 just	 sitting
there,	completely	immobile,	with	his	eyes	open.
Out	of	 curiosity	he	asked	 the	beggar,'What	 are	you	being	 so	cautious	 for?	For
what	are	you	guarding?	I	can't	see	that	you	have	anything	that	could	be	stolen	or
that	anybody	could	cheat	you.	Why	do	you	go	on	sitting	like	that	and	watching?'
The	beggar	laughed	and	he	said,'Sir,	as	far	as	I	am	concerned	I	would	like	to	ask
you	 the	 same	question.	Why	 so	many	guards?	Why	 so	much	army	around	 the
palace?	 I	 don't	 see	 that	 you	 have	 anything	 to	 be	 guarded.	 I	 have	 never	 seen	 a
bigger	 beggar	 than	 you.	 You	 are	 completely	 empty,	 I	 can	 see	 through	 and
through	you.	I	don't	see	any	treasure	there.
What	are	you	creating	so	much	fuss	about?	As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	I	have	a
treasure	and	I	have	to	be	alert	about	it.	A	single	moment	of	unconsciousness	and
it	can	be	lost.'
And	 the	beggar	said,'Look	 into	my	eyes,	because	my	 treasure	 is	hidden	within
me.'
And	it	 is	said	 that	 the	king	looked	into	 the	eyes	of	 the	beggar,	entered	into	his
eyes	and	was	completely	lost.	It	was	a	tremendously	luminous	space.	He	became
a	disciple	to	this	beggar.
This	beggar	was	a	Zen	Master	and	the	king	had	been	in	search	for	many	years
and	 he	 had	 been	 to	 many	 Masters	 but	 he	 could	 never	 feel	 the	 vibe	 of	 the'
unknown.	With	 this	 beggar	 he	 could	 feel	 it	 almost	 crystallised	 in	 front	 of	 his
eyes,	he	could	touch	it.	Something	Divine	had	happened	to	this	man.
So	when	you	have	a	little	treasure	to	guard,	guard	it.	Now	these	two	will	be	the
thieves	--
the	past	and	the	future.	You	be	alert.	Nothing	else	is	needed,	just	alertness.	Just
shake	 yourself	 out	 of	 sleep.	 Whenever	 you	 start	 falling	 into	 the	 trap,	 give
yourself	a	jerk	and	remember.
I	would	like	to	tell	you	one	of	the	most	beautiful	parables	that	has	been	written
down	 the	 centuries.	 Parables	 have	 almost	 disappeared	 from	 the	world	 because
those	 beautiful	 people	 --	 Jesus,	 Buddha,	 who	 created	 many	 parables	 --	 have
disappeared.
A	 parable	 is	 not	 an	 ordinary	 story,	 a	 parable	 is	 a	 device	 --	 a	 device	 to	 say
something	which	cannot	ordinarily	be	said,	a	device	to	hint	at	something	which
can	be	hinted	at	only	very	indirectly.
This	parable	is	written	in	this	age;	a	very	rare	man,	Franz	Kafka,	has	written	it.
He	was	really	a	rare	man.	He	struggled	hard	not	to	write	because,	he	said,	what
he	wanted	to	write	could	not	be	written.	So	he	struggled	hard	but	he	could	not
control	the	temptation	to	write,	so	he	wrote.
And	 he	 wrote	 in	 one	 of	 his	 diaries,'I	 am	writing	 because	 it	 is	 difficult	 not	 to
write,	and	knowing	well	that	it	is	difficult	also	to	write.	Seeing	no	way	out	of	it,	I
am	writing.'	And	when	he	died,	he	left	a	will	in	the	name	of	one	of	his	friends	to
say,'Please	 burn	 everything	 that	 I	 have	 written	 --	 my	 diaries,	 my	 stories,	 my
parables,	my	sketches,	my	notes.	And	burn	them	without	reading	them.	Because
this	 is	 the	only	way	 that	 I	can	get	 rid	of	 that	constant	anxiety	 that	 I	have	been
trying	to	say	something	which	cannot	be	said.
And	I	could	not	resist	so	I	have	written.	Now	this	is	the	only	way.	I	have	written
it	because	I	could	not	control	myself.	I	had	to	write	knowing	well	that	it	could
not	 be	 written,	 so	 now,	 without	 reading	 it,	 destroy,	 burn	 everything	 utterly.
Nothing	should	be	left.'
But	the	friend	could	not	do	it.	And	it	is	good	that	he	did	not.
This	is	one	of	Kafka's	parables.	Listen	to	it,	meditate	over	it.	I	gave	order	for	my
horse	to	be	brought	from	the	stable.	The	servant	did	not	understand	me.	I	myself
went	 to	 the	 stable,	 saddled	 my	 horse	 and	 mounted.	 In	 the	 distance	 I	 heard	 a
bugle	call.	I	asked	him	what	this	meant.	He	knew	nothing	and	had	heard	nothing.
At	the	gate	he	stopped	me,	asking,'Where	are	you	riding	to,	Master?'
'I	don't	know,'	I	said,	'only	away	from	here.	Away	from	here,	always	away	from
here.
Only	by	doing	so	can	I	reach	my	destination.'
'And	so	you	know	your	destination?'	he	asked.
'Yes,'	I	answered.	'Did	not	I	say	so?	Away	from	here	--	that's	my	destination.'
'You	have	no	provisions	with	you,	'	he	said.
'I	need	none,'	I	said.	 'The	journey	is	so	long	that	I	must	die	of	hunger	if	I	don't
get	anything	along	the	way.	No	provisions	can	save	me	because	the	journey	is	so
long,	I	cannot	carry	enough	provisions	for	it.	No	provisions	can	save	me	because
it	is,	fortunately,	a	truly	immense	journey.'
Now	 this	 is	 the	 parable.	 'The	 destination,'	 he	 says,	 'is	 away	 from	 here.	 Away
from	here	is	my	destination.'	That's	how	the	whole	world	is	moving:	away	from
here,	away	from	now.
You	don't	know	where	you	are	going	but	one	 thing	 is	certain	 --	you	are	going
away	from	here,	away	from	now.
The	parable	says	it	 is	an	immense	journey.	It	 is	really	endless	because	you	can
never	 reach	 away	 from	here.	How	can	 you	 reach	 'away	 from	here'?	Wherever
you	will	 reach,	 it	will	 be	here.	And	again	you	will	 be	 trying	 to	go	away	 from
here.	There	is	no	way	to	reach	this	destination.	If	away	from	here	is	the	destiny
then	there	is	no	way	to	reach	it.	And	we	are	all	escaping	away	from	here.
Watch.	 Don't	 allow	 this	 parable	 to	 become	 your	 life.	 Ordinarily	 everybody	 is
doing	this	--
knowingly,	unknowingly.	Start	moving	into	the	here,	start	moving	into	the	now.
And	then	there	is	tremendous	happiness	--	so	much	so	that	it	starts	overflowing
from	you.	Not	only	YOU	delight	 in	 it,	 it	 starts	overflowing,	 it	 starts	becoming
your	 climate,	 it	 becomes	 like	 a	 cloud	 around	you.	So	whoever	 comes	 close	 to
you	becomes	full	of	it.	Even	others	will	start	partaking	of	it,	participating	in	it.
And	the	more	you	have,	the	more	you	will	be	drowning	into	the	herenow.	Then	a
moment	comes	when	you	don't	have	any	space	left	for	yourself	--	only	happiness
exists;	you	disappear.
But	of	two	things	--	the	past	and	the	future	--	be	alert.
And	now,	Prem	Dhyan,	you	have	something	to	lose	--	you	are	fortunate	because
you	have	 something	 to	 lose.	And	you	have	 a	 tremendous	 responsibility	 not	 to
lose	it.	The	mind	will	go	on	trying	its	ways	for	a	time	being.	When	you	become
so	alert	that	the	mind	cannot	penetrate	you	and	cannot	disturb	and	distract	you,
then	by	and	by	the	mind	starts	dropping.	Then	one	day	it	understands	well	that
now	there	is	no	way	with	you	--	so	it	leaves	you.	Then	it	stops	haunting	you.
That	day	will	also	come.	As	you	could	not	believe	before	that	this	happiness	was
possible,	you	may	not	be	able	to	believe	what	I	am	saying	now.	The	day	will	also
come	when	there	will	be	no	distraction.
Then	 again	 you	 will	 have	 to	 be	 even	 more	 alert	 because	 you	 will	 start
crying,'Why	did	I	waste	so	many	years	with	this	distraction?'	And	then	you	will
become	again	concerned	with	the	future.	Many	times	you	will	come	to	face	this
past	 and	 future	 in	many,	many	 different	ways.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 person	 going	 to	 the
peak	of	a	hill	 --	he	moves	round	and	round	the	hill,	 the	path	moves	round	and
round,	and	many	 times	you	come	 to	 the	same	view,	 to	 the	same	place.	A	 little
higher,	 but	 the	 same	 place	 --	 the	 same	 trees,	 the	 same	 sky.	 Again	 and	 again,
many	times	before	you	reach	to	the	peak,	you	come	to	the	same	point	--	a	little
higher	of	course,	but	the	same	point,	again	and	again.	Many	times	you	will	come
again	 and	 again	 to	 this	 same	 distraction	 of	 past	 and	 future.	 This	 is	 just	 the
beginning.
But	one	day	one	reaches	the	peak	and	when	one	reaches	the	peak,	all	becomes
available	simultaneously:	the	valley,	the	sky,	the	clouds,	the	height,	the	depth	--
everything	becomes	available.	That's	what	enlightenment	is.
The	third	question:
Question	3
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 I	 TOOK	 A	 PIECE	 OF	 PAPER	 AND	 DID	 A	 LITTLE
DOODLING
OR	FREE	WRITING,	AND	I	WAS	PAINED	TO	FIND	THAT	I	WAS	FULL	OF
SELF-CONDEMNATION	 AND	 SELF-PITY.	 I	 HAD	 NOT	 A	 NICE	 WORD
FOR	ME	IN
THAT	 LONG	 NOTE.	 IS	 IT	 THAT	 I	 AM	 TOO	 IDEALISTIC	 AND	 SELF-
CENTRED
AND	IS	THERE	A	WAY	OUT	OF	THIS	DARKNESS?
Everybody	 is	 brought	 up	 in	 such	 a	way	 that	 everybody	 has	 become	 idealistic.
Nobody	is	realistic.	The	ideal	is	the	common	disease	of	humanity.
Everybody	is	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	everybody	goes	on	thinking	that	they
have	 to	be	 something,	 somebody,	 somewhere	 in	 the	 future.	An	 image	 is	given
and	you	have	to	be	like	it.	That	gives	you	a	tension	because	you	are	not	it,	you
are	something	else,	yet	you	have	to	be	it.
So	one	goes	on	condemning	the	real	for	 the	unreal	--	 the	unreal	 is	unreal.	And
the	ideal	goes	on	pulling	you	towards	the	future,	out	of	the	present.
The	 ideal	 becomes	 a	 constant	 nightmare	 because	 it	 goes	 on	 condemning.
Whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 imperfect	 because	 you	 have	 an	 ideal	 of	 perfection.
Whatsoever	you	attain	is	still	not	fulfilling	because	you	have	a	mad	expectation
which	can	never	be	satisfied.
You	 are	 human,	 in	 a	 certain	 time,	 in	 a	 certain	 space,	 with	 certain	 limitations.
Accept	 those	 limitations.	 Perfectionists	 are	 always	 on	 the	 brink	 of	 madness.
They	are	obsessed	people	--	whatsoever	they	do	is	not	good	enough.	And	there	is
no	way	to	do	something	perfectly	--	perfection	is	not	humanly	possible.	In	fact,
imperfect	is	the	only	way	to	be.
So	what	do	I	teach	you	here?	I	don't	teach	you	perfection,	I	teach	you	wholeness.
That	is	a	totally	different	thing.	Be	whole.	Don't	bother	about	perfection.	When	I
say	be	whole,	I	mean	be	real,	be	here;	whatsoever	you	do,	do	it	totally.	You	will
be	imperfect	but	your	imperfection	will	be	full	of	beauty,	it	will	be	full	of	your
totality.
Never	try	to	be	perfect	otherwise	you	will	create	much	anxiety.	So	many	troubles
are	there	already;	don't	create	more	troubles	for	yourself.
I	have	heard.
It	 happened	 that	 bedraggled,	 worried	Garfinkel	 sat	 in	 a	 train	 holding	 a	 three-
year-old	boy.
Every	few	minutes	Garfinkel	spanked	the	child.
'If	you	strike	that	baby	one	more	time,'	said	a	woman	sitting	across	from	him,	'I'll
give	you	so	much	trouble	you	won't	forget	it!'
'Trouble?'	said	Garfinkel.	'You're	gonna	give	me	trouble?	Lady,	my	partner	stole
all	my	money	and	ran	off	with	my	wife	and	car.	My	daughter	is	in	the	parlor	car,
six	months	pregnant,	and	she	ain't	got	no	husband.	My	baggage	 is	 lost,	 I'm	on
the	wrong	 train,	and	 this	 little	stinker	 just	ate	 the	 tickets	and	 threw	up	all	over
me.	And	lady,	YOU'RE	gonna	give	me	trouble?'
Now	what	more	trouble	can	there	be?	Don't	you	think	enough	is	enough?
Life	 itself	 is	 so	 complicated,	 please	 be	 a	 little	 more	 kinder	 towards	 yourself.
Don't	create	ideals.	Life	is	creating	enough	problems	but	those	problems	can	be
solved.	 If	 you	are	 in	 a	wrong	 train	you	can	change	 the	 train;	 if	 the	 tickets	 are
lost,	 they	 can	 be	 purchased	 again;	 if	 your	 wife	 has	 run	 away,	 you	 can	 find
another	 woman.	 The	 problems	 that	 life	 gives	 to	 you	 can	 be	 solved	 but	 the
problems	that	idealism	gives	to	you	can	never	be	solved	--	they	are	impossible.
Somebody	is	trying	to	become	Jesus....	Now	there	is	no	way;	it	does	not	happen
that	 way,	 nature	 does	 not	 allow	 it.	 Jesus	 happens	 only	 once,	 and	 only	 once;
nature	does	not	tolerate	any	repetition.	Somebody	is	trying	to	become	a	Buddha	-
-	 now	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 do	 the	 impossible.	 It	 simply	 does	 not	 happen,	 cannot
happen;	it	is	against	nature.	You	can	be	only	yourself.	So	be	total.	Wherever	you
are	and	whatsoever	you	are	doing,	do	it	totally.
Move	into	it,	let	it	become	your	meditation.	Don't	be	worried	whether	it	will	be
perfect	or	not	--	it	is	not	going	to	be	perfect.	If	it	is	total	it	is	enough.	If	it	was
total	you	enjoyed	doing	 it,	you	felt	a	 fulfillment	 through	 it,	you	moved	 into	 it,
you	were	absorbed	into	it,	you	came	out	of	it	new,	fresh,	young,	rejuvenated.
Each	act	that	is	done	totally	rejuvenates,	and	each	act	that	is	done	totally	never
brings	 any	bondage.	Love	 totally	 and	 attachment	 does	 not	 arise;	 love	 partially
and	attachment	arises.
Live	totally	and	you	are	not	afraid	of	death;	live	partially	and	you	are	afraid	of
death.
But	forget	the	word	'perfection'.	It	is	one	of	the	most	criminal	words.	This	word
should	 be	 dropped	 from	 all	 the	 languages	 of	 the	 world,	 it	 should	 be	 dropped
from	the	human	mind.
Nobody	has	ever	been	perfect	and	nobody	can	ever	be.	Can't	you	see	it?	Even	if
God	is	there	and	you	come	to	meet	him,	can't	you	find	faults	with	his	creation?
So	many,	 that's	why	he	 is	hiding.	He	 is	almost	afraid	of	you.	Faults	and	 faults
and	faults.	Can	you	count	them?	Infinite	faults	you	will	find.	In	fact,	if	you	are	a
fault-finder	you	cannot	find	anything	right	--	in	the	right	time,	in	the	right	place.
Everything	seems	to	be	just	a	mess.
Even	God	 is	not	perfect;	God	 is	 total.	He	enjoyed	doing	 it,	he	 is	still	enjoying
doing	it.
But	he	is	not	perfect.	If	he	were	perfect	then	the	creation	could	not	be	imperfect.
Out	of	perfection,	perfection	will	come.
All	the	religions	of	the	world	say	that	God	is	perfect.	I	don't	say	so.	I	say	God	is
whole,	 God	 is	 holy,	 God	 is	 total	 --	 but	 not	 perfect.	 Although	 he	may	 still	 be
trying....	How	can	he	be	perfect?	If	he	were,	 the	world	would	be	dead	by	now.
Once	something	is	perfect,	death	happens	because	there	is	no	future,	there	is	no
way.	Trees	are	still	growing,	babies	are	still	born	--	things	continue.	And	he	goes
on	improving.	Can't	you	see	the	improvement?
He	goes	on	improving	on	everything.	That's	the	meaning	of	evolution:	things	are
being	 improved.	 Monkeys	 have	 become	 man	 --	 that's	 an	 improvement.	 Then
man	will	become	Divine	and	God	--	that	is	evolution.
Teilhard	de	Chardin	says	there	is	an	omega	point	where	everything	will	become
perfect.
There	is	none.	There	is	no	omega	point.	There	cannot	be.	The	world	is	always	in
the	 process;	 evolution	 is	 there;	 we	 are	 approaching	 and	 approaching	 but	 we
never	 reach	 because	 once	 we	 reach	 --	 finished.	 God	 still	 goes	 on	 trying	 in
different	ways,	improving.
One	 thing	 is	 certain:	 he	 is	 happy	 with	 his	 work	 otherwise	 he	 would	 have
abandoned	it.	He	is	still	pouring	his	energy	into	it.	When	God	is	happy	with	you
it	 is	 sheer	nonsense	 to	be	unhappy	with	yourself.	Be	happy	with	yourself.	Let
happiness	 be	 the	 ultimate	 value.	 I	 am	 a	 hedonist.	 Always	 remember	 that
happiness	 is	 the	 criterion.	 Whatsoever	 you	 do,	 be	 happy,	 that's	 all.	 Don't	 be
bothered	whether	it	is	perfect	or	not.
Why	this	obsession	with	perfection?	Then	you	will	be	 tense,	anxious,	nervous,
always	uneasy,	troubled,	in	conflict.	The	English	word	'agony'	comes	from	a	root
which	means:	to	be	in	conflict.	To	be	constantly	wrestling	with	oneself	--	that	is
the	meaning	of	agony.
You	will	 be	 in	 agony	 if	 you	 are	 not	 at	 ease	 with	 yourself.	 Don't	 demand	 the
impossible,	be	natural,	at	ease,	loving	yourself,	loving	others.
And	 remember,	 a	 person	 who	 cannot	 love	 himself	 because	 he	 goes	 on
condemning,	 cannot	 love	 anybody	 else	 either.	 A	 perfectionist	 is	 not	 only	 a
perfectionist	 about	 himself,	 he	 is	 about	 others	 also.	 A	 man	 who	 is	 hard	 on
himself	is	bound	to	be	hard	on	others.	His	demands	are	impossible.
In	 India	 just	 a	 few	 years	 before,	 there	 was	Mahatma	 Gandhi,	 a	 perfectionist,
almost	a	neurotic.	And	he	was	very	hard	with	his	disciples	--	even	tea	was	not
allowed.	Teal	Because	it	has	nicotine.	If	somebody	was	found	drinking	tea	in	his
ashram	it	was	a	great	sin.	Love	was	not	allowed.	If	somebody	fell	in	love	with
somebody	it	was	such	a	great	sin	that	it	was	as	if	the	whole	world	was	going	to
be	drowned	because	of	it.	He	was	continuously	spying	on	his	disciples,	always
sitting	at	the	keyhole.	But	he	was	that	way	with	himself.	You	can	be	with	others
only	as	you	are	with	yourself.
But	these	types	of	people	become	great	leaders	because	they	create	much	guilt	in
others.
The	more	guilt	you	can	create	in	people,	the	greater	the	leader	you	can	become.
Because	 more	 and	 more	 people	 feel	 that	 yes,	 you	 can	 help	 them	 to	 become
perfect.	They	are	imperfect	so	you	can	help	them	to	become	perfect.
I	am	not	here	to	help	you	to	become	perfect;	I	am	not	concerned	with	any	sort	of
nonsense.	 I	 am	 just	 here	 to	 help	 you	 to	 be	 yourself.	 If	 you	 are	 imperfect,
beautiful;	if	you	are	perfect,	that	too	is	beautiful.
Don't	 try	 to	become	 imperfect	because	 that	 can	become	an	 ideal!	You	may	be
perfect	already	--	then	listening	to	me	can	create	a	trouble	for	yourself!	This	man
says	be	imperfect!	There	is	no	need.	If	you	are	perfect	accept	that	too!
Try	to	love	yourself.	Don't	condemn.	Once	humanity	starts	a	deep	acceptance,	all
churches	will	disappear	and	all	politicians	and	priests	will	disappear.
I	have	heard.
A	man	was	 fishing	 in	 the	North	Woods	and	one	night	around	 the	campfire	his
guide	was	 telling	him	of	 the	 time	he	had	guided	Harry	Emerson	Fosdick	on	a
fishing	trip.
'Yes,'	said	the	guide,	'he	was	a	good	man	except	for	his	swearing.'
'But	look,'	said	the	fisherman,	'surely	you	don't	mean	to	say	that	Dr.	Fosdick	was
profane?'
'Oh,	but	he	was,	sir,'	protested	the	guide.	'Once	he	caught	a	fine	bass.	Just	as	he
was	about	to	land	him	in	the	boat,	the	fish	wiggled	off	the	hook.	So	I	say	to	the
Doctor,	"That's	a	damned	shame!"	and	the	Doc	comes	right	back	and	says,	"Yes,
it	is!"	But	that's	the	only	time	I	ever	heard	him	use	such	language.'
Now	 this	 is	 the	mind	of	 a	perfectionist.	The	Doctor	has	not	 said	 anything.	He
simply	 says,'Yes,	 it	 is.'	 But	 that	 too	 is	 enough	 for	 a	 perfectionist	 to	 find	 fault
with.
A	perfectionist	is	neurotic.	And	not	only	is	he	neurotic,	he	creates	neurotic	trends
around	 him.	 So	 don't	 be	 a	 perfectionist,	 and	 if	 somebody	 is	 a	 perfectionist
around	 you	 escape	 away	 from	 him	 as	 fast	 as	 you	 can	 before	 he	 pollutes	 your
mind.
All	perfectionism	is	a	sort	of	deep	ego	trip.	Just	to	think	of	yourself	in	terms	of
ideals	 and	 perfection	 is	 nothing	 but	 to	 decorate	 your	 ego	 to	 its	 uttermost.	 A
humble	person	accepts	that	life	is	not	perfect.	A	humble	person,	a	really	religious
person,	accepts	that	we	are	limited,	that	there	are	limitations.
Look...	 that	 is	 my	 definition	 of	 humbleness.	 Not	 to	 try	 to	 be	 perfect	 is	 to	 be
humble.
And	a	humble	person	becomes	more	and	more	 total	because	he	has	nothing	 to
deny,	nothing	to	reject.	He	accepts	whatsoever	he	is,	good,	bad.	And	a	humble
person	 is	 very	 rich	 because	 he	 accepts	 his	 wholeness;	 his	 anger,	 his	 sex,	 his
greed	 --	 everything	 is	 accepted.	 In	 that	 deep	 acceptance	 a	 great	 alchemical
change	 happens.	All	 that	 is	 ugly	 by	 and	 by	 disappears	 on	 its	 own	 accord.	He
becomes	more	and	more	harmonious,	more	and	more	whole.
I	 am	 not	 in	 favour	 of	 a	 saint	 but	 I	 am	 in	 favour	 of	 a	 holy	man.	 A	 saint	 is	 a
perfectionist;	a	holy	man	is	totally	different.	Zen	Masters	are	holy	men;	Catholic
saints	are	saints.	The	very	word	'saint'	is	ugly.	It	comes	from	'sanctos'	--	one	who
has	 been	 given	 sanction	 by	 the	 authority	 that	 he	 is	 a	 saint.	 Now	 who	 can
authorise	anybody	to	be	a	saint?	Is	it	a	sort	of	degree?	But	the	Christian	Church
goes	on	doing	that	foolish	thing.
Even	 posthumous	 degrees	 are	 awarded.	 A	 saint	may	 have	 died	 three	 hundred
years	 before,	 then	 the	Church	 revises	 its	 ideas,	 or	 the	world	 has	 changed,	 and
after	 three	 hundred	 years	 the	Church	 gives	 a	 posthumous	 degree	 --	 a	 sanction
that	that	man	was	really	a	saint,	we	could	not	understand	him	at	the	time.	And
the	church	may	have	killed	 that	man	--	 that's	how	Joan	of	Arc	became	a	saint.
They	 killed	 her,	 but	 later	 on	 they	 changed	 their	 idea.	 People	 by	 and	 by	 came
closer	and	closer	 to	Joan	of	Arc	and	it	became	difficult	not	 to	accept	her.	First
they	 killed	 her,	 then	 they	worshipped	 her.	 After	 hundreds	 of	 years,	 her	 bones
were	 found	 and	 worshipped.	 She	 was	 burned	 by	 the	 same	 people,	 the	 same
Church.
No,	the	word	'saint'	is	not	good.	A	holy	man	is	a	holy	man	because	of	himself,
not	because	some	church	decides	to	award	him	sainthood.
I	have	heard.
Jacobson,	 aged	 ninety,	 had	 lived	 through	 beatings	 in	 Polish	 pogroms,
concentration	camps	in	Germany,	and	dozens	of	other	anti-Semitic	experiences.
'Oh,	Lord!'	he	prayed,	sitting	in	a	synagogue.	'Isn't	it	true	that	we	are	your	chosen
people?'
And	from	the	heavens	boomed	a	voice:'Yes,	Jacobson,	the	Jews	are	my	chosen
people!'
'Well,	then,'	wailed	the	old	man,'isn't	it	time	you	chose	somebody	else?'
Perfectionists	 are	 the	 chosen	 people	 of	 God,	 remember.	 In	 fact,	 the	 day	 you
understand	 that	 you	 are	 creating	 your	 own	misery	 because	 of	 your	 ideas,	 you
break	all	ideas.	Then	you	simply	live	out	of	your	reality	--	whatsoever	it	is.	That
is	a	great	transformation.
So	don't	try	to	be	chosen	people	of	God,	just	be	human.	For	God's	sake,	just	be
human!
The	fourth	question:
Question	4
THE	 OTHER	 DAY	 YOU	 SAID	 THAT	 EFFORT	 IS	 DANGEROUS,	 BUT
HARD
WORK	 IS	 NEEDED	 IN	 THE	MEDITATIONS.	 FOR	MY	 GERMAN	MIND,
EFFORT
EQUALS	HARD	WORK.	IS	THERE	HARD	WORK	WITHOUT	EFFORT?
The	point	is	delicate.	Effort	is	always	half-hearted,	effort	is	always	partial.	You
are	doing	it	because	you	don't	see	any	way	you	can	attain	to	the	result	you	desire
without	doing	it.
If	there	was	any	way	you	would	drop	the	effort	and	jump	to	the	conclusion.	One
is	never	totally	in	his	effort,	cannot	be,	because	the	idea	is	of	the	future,	the	end
result.	Effort	is	future-oriented,	result-oriented.	One	is	doing	it	only	for	the	sake
of	some	future	result,	some	profit,	some	greed,	some	good	pay-off.
That's	why	Zen	Masters	say	effortless	effort	 is	needed.	What	do	 they	mean	by
effortless	 effort?	 They	 say	 hard	 work	 is	 needed	 but	 it	 should	 not	 be	 future-
oriented.	 You	 should	 enjoy	 it.	 Not	 for	 some	 other	 goal	 --	 even	 if	 nothing	 is
attained	through	it,	 it	 is	beautiful	 in	 itself.	And	that	 is	 the	hardest	 thing	for	 the
human	mind	 to	 do.	 That's	why	 I	 call	 it	 hard	work.	 The	 hardest	 thing	 is	 to	 do
something	for	 its	own	sake,	 to	sing	a	song	for	 its	own	sake,	 to	meditate	for	 its
own	sake,	to	love	for	its	own	sake.	That	is	the	hardest	thing	for	the	human	mind
because	mind	is	future-oriented.	It	says,'For	its	own	sake?	Then	why?
What	is	going	to	happen	out	of	it?'
People	come	to	me	and	they	ask,'We	can	meditate	but	what	will	we	attain?	We
can	become	 sannyasins	but	what	 are	we	going	 to	gain	out	 of	 it?'	This	 is	what
mind	is	--
always	greedy.
Let	me	tell	you....
One	day	Mulla	Nasruddin	was	watching	the	street	through	the	window	when	he
saw	 his	 creditor	 approaching	 the	 house.	 Knowing	what	 the	 fellow	was	 up	 to,
Mulla	called	his	wife	and	told	her	to	handle	the	visitor.
Accordingly,	the	wife	opened	the	door	and	said,'Yes,	sir,	I	know	we	haven't	yet
been	able	to	pay	you.	And	although	Mulla	himself	is	not	home	at	this	moment,
he	thinks	day	and	night	about	ways	to	get	some	money	and	pay	you	back.	He	has
even	asked	me	to	watch	the	street	and	whenever	a	flock	of	sheep	passes	to	go	out
and	pick	up	any	pieces	of	wool	that	might	have	been	caught	on	the	bushes.	This
way,	when	we	get	enough	wool,	we	can	spin	 it,	make	a	couple	of	 shawls,	 sell
them	and	with	the	money	pay	you	back.'
When	she	got	to	this	point,	the	man	started	to	laugh,	whereupon	Mulla	came	out
of	his	hiding	and	said,'You	rascal,	now	that	you	smell	money,	you	start	to	grin.'
The	mind	is	that	rascal.	Once	it	gets	any	hint	of	any	sort	of	future	it	starts	to	grin.
It	 immediately	 jumps	 on	 it,	 catches	 hold	 of	 it	 --	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 herenow.
Meditation	is	for	its	own	sake	as	love	is	for	its	own	sake.
Ask	a	rose	why	he	flowers.	He	simply	flowers.	It	is	so	beautiful	to	flower.	There
is	no	motive	in	it.	Ask	the	birds	why	they	are	singing.	They	are	simply	singing.
They	enjoy,	they	delight	in	it,	there	is	no	motive	in	it.
Drop	the	mind	and	motive	disappears.	So	at	least	for	a	few	hours	in	a	day	go	on
doing	things	for	their	own	sake:	dance,	sing,	play	on	the	guitar,	sit	with	friends,
or	 just	 watch	 the	 sky.	 At	 least	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 go	 on	 devoting	 your	 time	 to
intrinsic	activities.	These	activities	are	the	hard	work.	And	I	know,	mind	is	very
lazy.	It	likes	to	dream,	it	doesn't	want	to	work,	that's	why	it	continuously	thinks
of	the	future.	But	mind	is	very	lazy.	It	only	thinks	of	the	future	so	that	the	present
can	be	avoided	and	the	challenge	of	the	present	can	be	avoided.
I	have	heard	an	anecdote.
While	walking	along	a	creek	bank	a	man	came	across	a	young	fellow	lying	lazily
under	 a	 tree	with	 a	 fishing	 line	 in	 the	water,	 on	which	 the	 cork	was	 bobbling
frantically.
'Hey,	you've	got	a	bite!'	he	said.
'Yeah.'	drawled	the	fisherman.	'Would	you	mind	pulling	it	out?'
The	walker	did	so,	only	to	have	the	recumbent	one	ask,'Would,	you	mind	taking
the	fish	off,	rebaiting	the	hook,	and	tossing	it	back	in	the	creek?'
This	was	done	and	the	man	commented	jokingly,'As	lazy	as	you	are,	you	ought
to	have	some	kids	to	do	these	things	for	you.'
'Not	 a	 bad	 idea,'	 yawned	 the	 fisherman.	 'Got	 any	 idea	 where	 I	 could	 find	 a
pregnant	woman?'
That's	how	the	mind	is;	it	does	not	want	to	do	anything.	It	simply	hopes,	desires,
postpones.	The	future	 is	a	 trick	 to	postpone	 the	present;	 the	future	 is	a	 trick	 to
avoid	 the	 present.	 Not	 that	 you	 are	 going	 to	 do	 anything	 in	 the	 future,	 no	 --
because	again	the	same	mind	will	be	there	and	it	will	say	tomorrow,	tomorrow.
You	will	die	and	you	will	not	do	anything,	you	will	only	think.	And	that	thinking
helps	you	to	keep	face:	you	don't	feel	lazy	because	you	think	so	much	of	doing,
doing	great	things	always,	dreaming	about	great	things	and	not	doing	the	small
things	that	are	really	to	be	done	right	now.
Hard	work	means	to	be	present	and	to	do	that	which	the	present	has	brought	you
as	a	challenge.
THE	OTHER	DAY	YOU	SAID	THAT	EFFORT	IS	DANGEROUS	BUT	HARD
WORK	WAS	NEEDED	 IN	 THE	MEDITATIONS.	Yes,	 hard	work	 --	 because
you	will	have	to	go	against	the	mind.	The	hardness	is	not	in	the	work	--	the	work
is	beautifully	simple,	the	work	is	very	easy	--	the	hardness	comes	from	the	fact
that	because	you	are	so	fogged	by	the	mind	you	will	have	to	come	out	of	it.
FOR	 MY	 GERMAN	 MIND,	 EFFORT	 EQUALS	 HARD	 WORK.	 That	 I
understand	--
but	all	minds	are	German.	That's	why	everybody	 is	 in	such	 trouble,	 that's	why
everybody	 finds	 his	 own	 fascism,	 his	 own	 nazism,	 his	 own	 Adolf	 Hitler.
Everybody	 does.	Mind	 is	 fascist	 and	mind	 looks	 continuously	 for	 leaders,	 for
somebody	to	lead.	It	was	a	surprise	to	the	whole	world	when	Germany	fell	into
the	trap	of	Adolf	Hitler.
Nobody	could	believe	it,	it	was	almost	illogical.	Such	a	beautiful	race	with	such
a	great	tradition	of	learning,	of	learned	men,	of	great	philosophy,	of	Kant,	Hegel,
Feuerbach,	Marx....	Such	a	great	culture	with	such	refined	intellect;	a	culture	of
great	scientists,	of	great	musicians,	of	great	novelists	and	poets;	 the	country	of
the	philosophers	and	professors....'Professor'	has	never	been	such	a	 respectable
word	in	any	other	country	as	in	Germany.	What	happened	to	such	an	intelligent
race	that	it	fell	into	the	hands	of	a	stupid,	almost	idiot	person,	Adolf	Hitler?
But	this	has	to	be	understood:	that	all	learning,	if	it	is	superficial,	if	it	is	of	the
mind,	is	not	going	to	help.	The	learning	only	remains	at	the	surface	--	deep	down
you	 remain	 childish.	Those	professors,	 even	 a	man	 like	Martin	Heidegger	 --	 a
great	philosopher,	you	could	say	the	greatest	that	this	century	has	produced	--	he
also	became	a	follower	of	Adolf	Hitler.	What	happened	to	these	giants	following
this	man	who	was	almost	mad?
It	 has	 to	 be	 understood;	 it	 can	 happen,	 it	 has	 always	 happened.	 These	 great
minds	are	 just	great	on	the	surface,	deep	down	their	existence	is	very	childish;
only	their	intellect	has	grown,	they	have	not	grown.
Martin	Heidegger's	mind	is	very	grown-up,.his	being	is	very	childish.	His	being
is	childish;	it	is	waiting	for	somebody	to	lead	it.	A	really	mature	person	does	not
throw	his	responsibility	on	to	anybody	else;	he	becomes	responsible	for	his	own
being.
Now	 this	 whole	 country	 of	 scientists,	 philosophers,	 professors,	 poets,	 giant
intellectuals,	 fell	victim	 to	a	very	ordinary,	mediocre	man.	And	 that	man	ruled
over	it.
This	must	help	everybody	to	understand	the	foolishness	of	intellect.	Intellect	 is
superficial.	One	should	grow	in	being	otherwise	one	is	always	prone,	one	always
tends	to	become	a	victim	of	such	people.	They	always	happen.
Mind	is	conditioned	from	the	outside;	it	can	be	ruled	from	the	outside.	You	have
to	grow	into	no-mind,	only	then	can	you	not	be	ruled	from	the	outside.	Only	a
man	of	no-mind	 is	a	 free	man,	 independent.	He	 is	neither	German,	nor	 Indian,
nor	English,	nor	American	--
he	 is	 simply	 free.	 American,	 Indian,	 German...these	 are	 the	 names	 of	 your
prisons,	these	are	not	your	freedom	skies.	These	are	not	skies	to	fly	in,	these	are
the	prisons	to	live	in.
A	free	man	belongs	to	himself	and	nobody	else.	A	free	man	is	simply	an	energy
with	no	name,	 no	 form,	no	 race,	 no	nation.	The	days	of	 nations	 and	 races	 are
past,	 the	days	of	 the	 individual	 are	 coming.	 In	 a	 better	world	 there	will	 be	no
Germans,	no	Indians,	no	Hindus,	no	Christians	--	there	will	be	pure	individuals,
perfectly	free,	living	their	life	in	their	own	way,	not	disturbing	anybody's	life	and
not	allowing	anybody	to	disturb	their	lives.
Otherwise,	 mind	 is	 childish	 and	 yet	 cunning.	 It	 can	 fall	 victim	 to	 any	 Adolf
Hitler,	to	any	chauvinist,	to	any	mad	person	who	is	bold	enough...and	people	are
bold,	 they	never	hesitate.	That	was	 the	appeal	of	Adolf	Hitler.	He	was	so	bold
that	he	was	absolutely	bold.
He	 would	 never	 hesitate,	 he	 was	 absolutely	 certain.	 And	 people	 who	 are
uncertain	in	their	being	immediately	find	a	deep	appeal	in	such	a	person.	This	is
a	man	who	is	so	certain	about	truth	that	he	must	have	attained	to	truth.	They	start
falling	in	line	with	him.
Because	of	your	uncertainty	you	become	a	victim	to	somebody	who	is	mad.	But
mad	people	are	always	certain,	only	very,	very	alert	and	aware	people	hesitate.
Their	hesitation	shows	their	awareness	and	the	complexity	of	life.
And	mind	is	very	cunning.	It	can	rationalise	everything.
I	have	heard.
Berger,	hiding	with	his	wife	from	the	Nazis	in	a	secluded	Berlin	attic,	decided	to
get	 a	 breath	 of	 fresh	 air.	While	 out	walking	 he	 came	 face	 to	 face	with	Adolf
Hitler.
The	German	leader	pulled	out	a	gun	and	pointed	to	a	pile	of	horse	manure	in	the
street.
'All	right,.Jew!'	he	shouted.	'Eat	that	or	I'll	kill	you!'	Trembling,	Berger	did	as	he
was	ordered.
Hitler	began	laughing	so	hard	he	dropped	the	weapon.	Berger	picked	it	up	and
said,'Now,	you	eat	the	manure	or	I'll	shoot!'	The	Fuhrer	got	down	on	his	hands
and	knees	and	began	eating.
While	he	was	occupied,	Berger	sneaked	away,	ran	through	an	alley,	climbed	over
a	fence,	and	dashed	up	the	stairs	to	the	attic.	He	slammed	the	door	shut,	bolted
and	locked	it	securely.	'Hilda!	Hilda!'	he	exclaimed	to	his	wife.	'Guess	who	I	had
lunch	with	today!'
Mind	goes	on	rationalising.	Even	if	you	eat	horse	manure	it	can	make	it	a	lunch	-
-	and
'Hilda,	 Hilda,	 guess	 who	 I	 had	 lunch	 with	 today'!	 Beware	 of	 the	 traps	 of	 the
mind.	And	the	more	you	become	alert,	 the	more	you	will	be	able	to	live	in	the
moment,	 in	the	act,	 totally.	Then	there	is	no	motivation:	you	do	it	because	you
delight	in	it.
And	that's	why	I	call	 it	 the	hardest	work.	To	get	out	of	 the	mind	is	 the	hardest
work.	But	it	is	not	effort,	it	is	awareness;	it	is	not	effort,	it	is	intense	alertness.
The	last	question:
Question	5
FOR	ENLIGHTENMENT	DOES	ONE	NEED	A	HUMAN	BODY?	CAN'T	A
DOG	OR
A	TREE	WHICH	IS	FLOWERING	GET	ENLIGHTENED?
Dang,	dang,	doko	dang,	doko	dang.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	Magicless	Magic
Chapter	title:	When	Grapes	Are	Sour
Chapter	title:	Joy	Is	The	Criterion
Chapter	title:	Another	Sunday
Chapter	title:	Dang	Dang	Doko	Dang
