1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Talks	given	from	1/4/80	to	30/4/80
Darshan	Diary
28	Chapters
Year	published:	none
Unpublished
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004015
ShortTitle:	84POEM01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	impossible	to	express	the	ultimate	truth.
It	is	like	a	taste.	If	you	have	tasted,	you	know	If	you	have	not	tasted
There	is	no	way	to	convey	it.
A	man	who	has	not	tasted	honey	cannot	be	made
To	know	what	sweetness	is.
The	man	who	has	never	seen	light	is	incapable
Of	understanding	anything	said	about	light.
The	person	who	has	known	and	experienced
Even	 he	 finds	 it	 almost	 impossible	 to	 express	 it	 Because	 language	 falls	 very
short.
The	experience	is	so	vast
And	language	is	so	small.
The	experience	is	so	sacred
And	language	is	so	mundane
That	there	is	no	possibility	of	any	bridging.
Hence	truth	has	been	known	many	times
And	all	those	who	have	known
Have	tried	to	express	it
But	they	have	all	failed.
We	are	grateful	that	they	tried
Because	out	of	that	effort	life	has	been	enriched.
We	have	beautiful	scriptures:	the	sayings	of
Zarathustra,	Jesus,	Lao	Tzu,	Buddha
Are	so	beautiful,	so	precious
That	without	them	there	would
Have	been	no	humanity
We	would	have	been	utterly	poor.
But	howsoever	beautiful	they	are
They	have	not	been	able	to	express	it.
And	they	all	say	that	they	have	failed.
They	have	tried	with	their	heart
They	have	tried	in	thousands	of	ways
In	every	possible	way.
Buddha	spoke	for	forty-two	years	continuously
But	again	and	again	the	same	cul-de-sac.
Something	seems	to	be	elusive,	it	escapes.
Just	this	morning
I	was	reading	a	Zen	master,	Sotoba.
The	day	he	experienced	truth
The	day	he	became	enlightened
He	wrote	these	beautiful	lines:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
'The	mountain	--	Buddha's	body
The	torrent	--	his	preaching.
Last	night,	eighty-four	thousand	poems.
How,	how	make	them	understand?'
The	experience	is	so	vast
As	if	eighty-four	thousand	poems
Have	suddenly	arisen	in	you.
And	you	cannot	express	even	a	single	poem!
He	says,	'How,	how	make	them	understand?
Every	awakened	person	has	felt
A	tremendous	compassion	for	people
And	he	has	tried	his	best.
But	something	in	the	very	experience
Is	such	that	it	cannot	be	expressed.
If	one	wants	to	know	it
One	has	to	experience	it.
Truth	can	only	be	an	experience.
Then	certainly
Eighty-four	thousand	poems	arise	in	you.
You	are	full	of	stars,	full	of	flowers
But	absolutely	incapable	of	transferring	it
To	anybody.
It	is	untransferrable,	it	cannot	be	taught.
But	those	who	are	alert
They	can	catch	a	glimpse	of	it.
It	cannot	be	taught	but	it	can	be	caught.
And	that's	the	whole	purpose
Of	being	a	sannyasin:
Being	here	around	me	to	catch	something
Which	I	cannot	teach.
This	is	a	beginning
The	beginning	of	a	new	life
The	beginning	of	a	new	vision
The	beginning	of	a	new	way	of	being.
You	will	have	to	drop	much,	you	will	have
To	disconnect	yourself	from	all	that	is	gone,
From	the	past.
Don't	carry	it	any	more.
It	is	an	unnecessary	burden
It	hinders	growth,	it	paralyses.
Slowly	slowly	it	becomes	such	a	mountain
That	one	is	crushed	underneath	the	mountain.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
One	should	be	capable	of	dying	to	the	past
Every	moment	so	that	it	is	never	accumulated.
That's	the	path	of	sannyas
Dying	to	the	past	every	moment
So	that	you	are	always	young	and	fresh	and	alive	So	that	you	are	always	present
in	the	present.
To	be	present	in	the	present
Is	to	be	present	before	god.
The	first	birth	is	an	ordinary	birth.
It	is	only	the	birth	of	the	body-mind,
Physiological,	biological.
The	second	birth	happens	through	meditation.
Then	the	spirit	is	born
Then	one	becomes	a	soul.
And	that	is	the	real	birth
One	becomes	twice-born.
Remember	that	sannyas	is	not	something	formal.
It	has	to	be	such	a	deep	commitment
Such	an	absolute	surrender	of	the	ego
That	it	gives	you	a	new	birth
That	you	are	no	more	the	same
That	you	become	discontinuous	with	your	past.
A	new	being	arrives.
Man	is	born	only	as	an	opportunity.
He	has	great	potential
But	remember
A	potential	is	only	a	potential.
It	has	to	be	transformed	into	a	reality
It	has	to	be	actualized.
And	great	effort	is	needed.
It	is	an	uphill	task.
One	has	to	be	industrious.
One	cannot	attain	to	bliss
By	just	hoping	for	it.
Just	desiring	it	is	not	enough.
You	have	to	put	all	your	energies	to	the	task.
And	it	is	the	greatest	achievement	of	life
Hence	it	needs	your	total	commitment.
Less	than	that	won't	do.
Love	is	the	greatest,	the	suprememost	religion.
It	is	the	very	essence	of	religion.
If	one	is	loving	then	nothing	else	is	needed
No	church,	no	temple,	no	dogma
No	creed,	no	scripture.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Love	contains	all.
Love	itself	becomes	the	greatest	temple
And	the	greatest	scripture.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you
To	become	more	and	more	loving.
I	don't	want	you	to	be	Christians
Or	Hindus	or	Mohammedans.
All	those	ugly	things	have	to	be	forgotten.
Humanity	has	suffered	much
Through	those	ideas.
Love	--	that	is	the	message	of	Christ
And	that	is	the	message	of	Buddha
And	that	is	the	message
Of	all	the	awakened	ones.
The	religion	of	love	needs	no	priests.
And	the	religion	of	love	needs	nobody
To	teach	you	what	it	is.
We	all	have	an	intrinsic	feel	for	it.
Nobody	teaches	anybody	what	love	is
In	fact	it	cannot	be	taught
But	everybody	knows	what	love	is.
Yet	very	few	people	make	it	their	religion.
It	remains	just	a	fragment	of	their	life.
Let	it	become	the	center	of	your	life.
Your	whole	life	should	be	coloured	by	it.
Then	god	is	yours.
You	need	not	go	in	search	of	him
He	will	come	in	search	of	you.
To	me	goodness,	or	virtue,
is	not	something	moral
It	has	something	to	do	with	meditation
Not	with	morality.
It	is	a	by-product	of	meditation.
The	more	silent	you	are
The	more	aware	you	are
The	more	meditative	you	are
The	more	virtuous	you	become
Without	any	cultivation
Of	virtue	on	your	part.
Virtue	comes	of	its	own	accord.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Morality	is	a	cultivation	of	virtue
And	a	cultivated	virtue	is	not	virtue.
It	is	only	a	facade,	a	pseudo	coin.
It	can	deceive	others
But	it	can't	help	you	in	an	inner	revolution.
In	fact,	it	makes	you	a	hypocrite
one	thing	on	the	surface
And	just	the	opposite	inside.
Meditation	functions
In	a	totally	different	way	than	morality.
Meditation	starts	form	your	very	centre.
It	is	not	concerned	at	all	with	virtue
It	is	concerned	with	awareness.
But	the	miracle	is,	when	you	are	aware
You	can't	do	wrong,	you	can't	harm	anybody
You	can't	be	cruel,	you	can't	be	violent.
When	you	are	aware	you	are	naturally	loving
Naturally	compassionate,	naturally	non-greedy.
And	when	these	things	happen
Naturally,	spontaneously
They	have	a	beauty	of	their	own.
My	sannyasin	has	to	be	virtuous
Not	through	morality
But	via	meditation.
It	is	only	through	awareness
That	one	becomes	noble,	one	attains	to	glory
That	one	comes	to	know	the	splendour	of	life.
Otherwise	life	is	a	drag.	Otherwise	life
Is	nothing	but	a	long	long	boredom.
It	is	a	suffering.
But	it	is	our	responsibility
If	it	is	a	suffering.
We	can	change	it	into	a	blissing.
All	that	is	needed	is	that	we	should	bring
three	kinds	of	awareness	to	our	life.
The	first	is	about	our	actions,
That	is	the	outermost	circumference	of	our	life.
The	second	is	about	our	thoughts,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	is	a	little	closer	to	the	inner	world.
The	third	is	about	our	feelings,
That	is	still	more	close	to	the	inner.
And	the	fourth	is	awareness	of	our	being.
The	three	you	have	to	practise
The	fourth	happens	of	it	own	accord.
When	the	three	are	fulfilled
The	fourth	is	the	reward.
There	are	only	two	possibilities	open	in	life.
One	is	what	is	known	as	politics.
Ut	us	ab	effort	to	rule	others
It	is	ugly,	violent.
The	very	idea	of	dominating	someone	is	inhuman.
The	very	idea	of	possessing	people
In	your	power,	in	your	grip,	is	to	destroy	them.
It	is	to	reduce	them	to	things.
Hence	there	is	nothing	more	ugly
Than	power	politics.
And	all	politics	are	power	politics,
There	is	no	other	kind.
The	other	alternative	is	religion.
It	is	an	effort	to	be	a	master	of	oneself
Not	to	be	a	slave	of	unconscious	forces
Instincts,	biological	urges,	emotions.
Man	is	a	slave.
So	many	unknown,	unconscious	forces.
He	goes	on	thinking	that	he	is	the	master.
That	is	very	ego-fulfilling.
But	he	is	not.
When	anger	arises,	are	you	the	master?	Con	you	turn	it	off.?
Can	you	say	no,	and	it	disappears?
Or	when	thoughts	are	moving	in	your	mind
Can	you	turn	the	whole	process	off?
Is	it	in	your	power	to	turn	it	on	or	off?
Or	are	you	just	a	victim?
You	cannot	even	get	rid	of	a	dream
What	to	say	of	anything	else?
If	it	persists,	it	persists.
One	of	the	great	Russian	novelists,	Turgenyev
Suffered	for	his	whole	life	from	a	single	dream.
And	a	man	of	the	quality	of	Turgenyev	is	rare
He	was	very	intelligent.
In	fact,	if	you	try	to	find
ten	great	names	in	literature	in	this	century
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	will	have	to	find	a	place	for	Turgenyev.
One	out	of	ten	great	names	of	this	century
As	far	as	literature	is	concerned
is	bound	to	be	his.
He	has	written	a	few	of	the	greatest	works
But	he	could	not	get	rid	of	a	single	dream!
And	he	tried	hard.	It	became	a	nightmare.
It	was	a	simple	dream,	but	very	nightmarish.
Every	night	in	his	dream	he	would	see
a	vast	desert,	unending
As	far	as	he	could	see,	just	desert
And	nothing	else
Not	enen	a	single	tree
No	Shade,	no	shelter,	no	oasis.
And	two	feet,	not	the	whole	man	just	two	feet
With	no	shoes	on,	walking,	going	towards	the	horizon	And	this	would	go	and	on.
It	became	a	torture	to	him.
But	it	depicts	his	life
And	the	life	of	millions	of	people.
It	depicts	life	as	a	desert4rt.
As	people	live	it,	it	is	futile,	meaningless
Utterly	absurd,	ridiculous.
People	are	going,	but	not	knowing	where.
They	go	on	and	on
For	the	simple	reason	theat	they	cannot	stop
They	don't	know	how	to	stop.
There	seems	to	be	no	break	in	their	mechanism
Just	an	accelerator
So	they	go	on	accelerating.
And	the	second	thing	it	says	is
That	man	is	not	whole,	just	parts
Just	legs	walking,	head	thinking
Hands	doing	something	else.
There	is	no	co-ordination.	Man	is	not	a	unity.
So	the	head	may	be	dong	one	thing
And	the	legs	may	be	doing	something	else
Just	the	opposite.
One	hand	may	be	compassionate
your	other	hand	may	be	cruel.
With	one	hand	you	may	be	creative
With	the	other	you	may	be	destructive.
But	the	dream	persisted
And	the	more	he	tried	to	get	rid	of	it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	more	impossible	it	became.
Nobody	could	help	him.
A	simple	thing	would	have	helped	him:
If	he	had	enjoyed	it,	it	would	have	disappeared!
But	because	he	was	antagonistic,	afraid
The	whole	day	he	was	afraid
Constantly	thinking	that	the	night	was	com	ing	And	the	dream	would	occur.
So	he	was	hypnotized	g	himself	the	whole	time.
For	twenty-four	hours	a	day	he	was	talking	to	people;	About	his	dream	and	how
to	get	rid	of	it.
He	was	so	obsessed,
That	very	obsession	was	its	root	cause.
Man	is	just	a	victim
Of	so	many	unconscious	forces.
One	can	become	a	master
But	then	one	has	to	transform	one's	unconscious	Into	a	conscious	phenomenon.
That's	the	whole	purpose
Of	sannyas	and	meditation.
It	is	an	alchemy,	a	simple	method
To	bring	more	awareness	to	your	being.
The	more	aware	you	are
The	more	you	are	a	master.
When	you	are	fully	aware
You	have	attained	to	the	kingdom	of	god.
There	is	nothing	more	divine	than	light.
Light	is	a	scientific	name	for	god
God	is	a	poetic	name	for	light
But	they	are	really	synonymous.
We	are	born	of	light,	we	are	made	of	light.
The	whole	existence	consists	of	light
And	nothing	else.
Except	for	light	all	is	unreal.
To	know	it	is	to	be	transformed
To	know	it	is	to	be	enlightened.
When	there	is	no	darkness
There	is	no	fear,	no	death.
The	devil	exists	only	in	darkness
Ti	is	another	name	for	darkness.
And	because	we	are	living	with	closed	eyes
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
We	are	living	in	darkness.
Open	your	eyes	and	all	is	full	of	light.
Sannyas	is	a	process	of	opening	your	eyes.
Not	only	the	outer	but	the	inner	too.
The	ultimate	sound	is	heard	only
When	the	mind	is	completely	silent.
It	is	the	sound	of	silence.
It	is	silence	dancing,	it	is	silence	vibrating.
To	hear	it	is	the	goal	of	all	meditation.
ONce	you	have	heard	it
You	are	transformed	into	a	totally	new	being
Transmuted	in	a	new	dimension.
You	are	no	more	a	mind,	you	become	a	no-mind.
And	that	is	the	most	beautiful	experience
To	be	a	no-mind,	to	be	utterly	silent.
But	that	silence	is	not	dead
It	is	so	musical	that	all	music	is	nothing	but	noise.
Make	every	effort	to	be	silent
So	that	you	can	hear	the	ultimate	sound.
It	is	this	sound
That	the	Bible	talks	about
In	the	beginning	was	the	word,
The	Word	was	with	god	and	the	word	was	god.
To	translate	it	as	word	is	wrong
It	would	have	been	far	more	true	and	closer
To	truth	if	it	were	translated	as	sound:
In	the	beginning	was	sound.
Or	even	silence
Would	have	been	better	than	word.
'Word'	is	not	the	right	word.
The	people	who	were	writing	the	Bible
Must	have	experienced	the	tremendous	silence
That	comes	out	of	meditation.
Life	is	full	of	divine	glory
But	we	are	unconscious.
We	are	so	deeply	asleep
That	we	go	on	missing	the	glory	of	it.
It	is	the	most	perfect	existence	possible,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	most	beautiful,	the	most	magnificent.
It	cannot	be	improved	upon.
But	we	are	asleep
Hence	we	cannot	have	any	connection	with	it.
It	is	as	if	it	is	spring
And	the	trees	are	flowering
And	the	birds	are	singing
And	the	wind	is	dancing	through	the	trees
And	you	are	asleep.
You	will	not	know	the	sunrays	coming	to	you
Through	the	trees
And	the	beautiful	patterns
They	are	creating	around	you.
You	will	not	see	the	flowers,	their	colours.
You	will	not	see	the	dance
Of	the	trees	and	the	wind.
You	will	not	even	know	that	you	are	in	a	garden!
You	will	have	no	connection	with	the	spring.
You	will	be	enclosed	within	yourself.
You	may	be	having	a	nightmare
And	you	may	be	suffering	in	your	nightmare.
You	may	be	suffering	in	your	nightmare.
You	may	be	screaming,	crying	and	weeping.
It	has	no	relationship	with	the	reality
Surrounding	you.
That's	exactly	the	situation	of	man.
Existence	is	always	in	spring
But	one	has	to	be	awake
To	know	it,	to	feel	it,	to	live	it.
And	once	you	have	tasted	of	the	joy
That	surrounds	you,	you	are	religious
Because	great	gratitude	arises	in	you
And	thankfulness	and	prayer.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
4	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004045
ShortTitle:	84POEM02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
By	going	beyond	all	religions
One	becomes	religious.
The	true	religion
Is	neither	Christian	nor	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan.
The	true	religion	is	a	transcendence
Of	all	creeds,	dogmas,	scriptures.
The	true	religion	is	not	a	religion	in	fact
But	a	kind	of	religiousness.
It	is	not	a	noun	but	a	verb.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	organisation.
It	has	something	to	do	with	the	individual.
It	is	something	inner.
Not	that	you	go	to	a	particular	church
And	you	become	a	Catholic	or	you	go	to	the	temple	And	you	become	a	Hindu	--
no.
You	go	into	your	own	being
And	you	become	religious.
And	to	be	religious	is	enough.
There	is	no	need	for	any	adjective.
Jesus	is	not	a	Christian,	remember
And	Buddha	is	not	a	Buddhist.
And	Krishna	is	not	a	Hindu.
These	people	are	far	beyond	beyond	all	these
Small	small	sects,	doctrines,	creeds,	churches.
These	people	live	in	a	kind	of
Boundaryless	existence,	without	boundaries.
When	you	live	in	a	world	of	no	limits
Then	you	are	truly	religious.
My	sannyas	is	not	a	religion.
Ti	is	a	new	type	of	vision:	it	is	religiousness.
You	love,	you	meditate
You	make	every	effort	to	be	authentic.
You	try	to	be	responsible,	not	according
To	any	commandments	given	by	somebody	else
But	according	to	your	own	inner	light.
You	become	a	light	unto	yourself.
Up	to	now	you	have	been	only	formally	a	follower	of	Christ.
Now	you	are	really	becoming	one.
Remember,	Christ	has	nothing	to	do	with	Christianity.
The	Jews	and	the	Romans	only	destroyed	the	body	of	Jesus.	But	Christianity	has
destroyed	his	very	 soul.	He	was	not	 really	crucified	 in	 Jerusalem,	he	has	been
crucified	in	the	Vatican.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	if	somebody	really	wants	to	be	a	Christian	now,	he	should	not	be	a	Christian
at	all	in	the	first	place.
Avoid	Christianity,	because	it	is	a	fabrication	of	the	priests.
Follow	anyone	who	is	awakened	and	you	are	following	Christ.
Never	follow	the	priests,	follow	the	prophet.
People	follow	the	priests	because	they	are	born	in	a	certain	community.
To	follow	a	prophet	means	to	choose.	It	is	risky,	it	is	dangerous.	One	can	never
be	certain,	there	is	no	guarantee.
To	go	with	a	prophet	is	going	into	the	unknown.
And	this	is	what	is	happening	right	now:	You	are	moving	now	into	a	dangerous
journey.
But	to	live	dangerously	is	the	only	way	to	live.
All	other	ways	are	ways	of	dying.
In	my	vision	courage	is	the	most	divine	quality.
Everything	else	is	secondary,	courage	is	primary	Because	if	courage	is	there
Everything	else	follows.
If	courage	is	missing,	then	all	is	missing.
Only	a	courageous	person	can	be	sincere
Truthful,	loving,	religious.
Only	a	courageous	person	can	go
In	search	of	the	ultimate
Because	the	search	is	arduous
It	is	an	uphill	task.
It	is	easy	to	go	downwards
Gravitation	helps	you
But	to	go	uphill	is	difficult.
And	the	higher	you	move
The	more	and	more	difficult	it	becomes.
Before	the	ultimate	is	reached
One	is	tested	to	the	utmost.
Only	a	few	courages	people	have	passed
The	ultimate	examination	of	life	and	existence.
These	are	the	Buddhas,	the	Christs,	the	Krishnas.
But	everyone	has	the	capacity
To	become	a	Buddha.
If	anything	is	missing	it	is	courage
And	courage	can	be	gathered.
Even	a	cowardly	person	can	gather	courage.
He	has	the	ingredients.
He	just	has	to	pt	them	together.
Sannyas	is	a	courageous	step.
It	may	lead	you	into	many	difficulties.
Face	them	joyously,	enjoy	facing	them.
And	you	will	be	surprised
That	each	difficulty	becomes	a	blessing
And	each	challenge	proves	a	tremendous	gift	of	god	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Because	it	integrates	you
It	makes	you	more	and	more	solid.
It	gives	steel	to	your	spine
It	makes	you	a	man	of	steel.
A	man	of	courage	is	always	a	king.
Only	cowards	are	slaves.
But	to	really	be	a	king	one	has	to	be
A	master	of	oneself	--	not	of	others.
That	is	very	easy	and	cheap
Because	there	are	millions	of	cowards	in	the	world	Who	are	really	hankering	for
somebody
To	enslave	them,	who	cannot	live	on	their	own.
They	are	always	longing
Tor	somebody	to	dictate	to	them.
They	cannot	move	even	an	inch	in	their	lives
By	their	own	light.
They	want	to	cling.
They	want	to	be	guided,	led,	like	sheep
They	always	need	shepherds.
Hence	it	is	very	easy	to	become
A	ruler	of	people	--	that	is	not	worth	much.
The	real	problem,	the	real	challenge,	is
To	be	a	master	of	oneself.
And	that	is	the	whole	purpose	of	sannyas:
To	make	you	a	master	of	yourself.
One	should	not	be	a	slave	of	one's	own	unconscious.
That's	what	people	are.
Everybody	believes	he	is	a	master.
In	fact	that	belief	is	very	dangerous
Because	it	never	allows	you	to	see	the	truth.
It	keeps	you	befooled.
Somebody	insults	you	and	you	are	angry
And	you	say,	'	I	was	angry.'
That	is	wrong	because	you	can	say	'I	was	angry!'
Only	if	you	are	capable	of	not	being	angry.
But	you	were	not	capable	of	not	being	angry.
You	were	possessed	by	anger
You	were	not	a	chooser,	there	was	no	choice.
Somebody	insulted	you,	he	pushed	a	button
And	the	anger	came
Just	as	you	push	a	button	and	light	comes.
It	was	mechanical.	You	were	not	the	Master	of	it.
You	behaved	like	a	machine.
When	somebody	insults	you	and	you	are	the	chooser	Of	wether	 to	be	angry	or
not
Then	you	are	a	master.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	the	same	is	true	for	all	your	instincts:
Greed,	lust,	ego.
If	you	are	a	chooser,	then	there	is	no	problem.
But	if	you	are	not	a	chooser
But	only	reacting	in	a	mechanical	way
Then	you	are	not	yet	a	man.
Only	by	becoming	master	of	your	own	consciousness	Do	you	become	a	man.
It	happens	only	through	meditation.
There	is	no	other	way.
Meditation	is	the	alchemy	of	transforming
The	unconscious	into	the	conscious.
It	gives	you	a	tremendous	power
Far	greater	than	anger,	greed	and	lust.
Then	you	can	control	without	repressing.
Then	you	can	direct,	channelize	your	forces.
You	can	transform	your	energies	into	higher	realms.
Then	life	really	becomes
A	great	experiment	in	growth.
Man	remains	almost	unaware	of	his	glory
Of	the	great	splendor	that	he	brings	into	the	world.
Because	he	never	looks	inwards.
He	remains	a	beggar
Although	in	fact	he	is	a	king.
He	remains	a	beggar
Because	he	goes	on	looking	outside,	hankering
For	this	and	that	and	always	for	more...
And	there	is	no	end	to	it.
Hence	our	so-called	emperors	are	also	beggars.
Nobody	is	ever	satisfied.
But	a	person	who	turns	in
Suddenly	 bedtime	 contented	 because	 he	 comes	 across	 The	 immeasurable
treasure	of	his	own	being.
And	the	glory	is	so	tremendous
The	ecstasy	so	incredible
The	joy	so	overflowing
That	not	only	does	it	make	one	contented.
Whosoever	comes	in	contact	with	such	a	person
Starts	feeling	something	of	the	unknown
Something	of	the	mysterious.
That's	how	masters	have	been	able
To	transform	millions	of	people.
They	have	become	aware	of	their	splendor
And	everybody	who	comes	close	to	them
Becomes	aware	of	the	splendor
Not	only	of	the	master
But	finally	of	his	own	self	also.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	beginning	of	disciplehood
Is	to	be	aware	of	the	glory	of	the	master.
And	the	end	is	to	be	aware	of	your	own	glory.
They	are	not	two	different	things.
One	can	be	full	of	justice
Only	if	one	is	free	from	one's	mind,	otherwise	not.
The	mind	is	always	prejudiced	for	or	against
Hence	it	can	never	be	just.
The	mind	lives	with	conclusions.
Even	before	looking	at	facts	it	has	already	decided.
The	mind	has	decided	wether	there	is	a	god	or	not.
A	few	people	are	atheists,	many	are	theists
But	all	are	in	the	same	boat
The	boat	of	the	mind.
They	have	decided	without	ever	exploring.
That	is	the	way	of	the	mind
It	decides	without	enquiring.
Enquiry	needs	intelligence.
Enquiry	needs	tremendous	love	for	truth.
And	enquiry	needs	as	a	basic	requirement
That	the	mind	be	put	aside	so	that	you
Can	look	directly	without	any	prejudice
Coloring	your	eyes.
And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about.
Putting	the	mind	aside.
Then	one	is	just,	always	just.
One	cannot	be	unjust,	that	is	impossible.
Be	meditative,	be	more	and	more	meditative
So	that	you	can	know	what	no-mind	is.
Out	of	no-mind	blooms	the	flower	of	justice.
A	divine	voice	is	always	there	in	the	heart
Always	calling	you.
But	you	are	not	available
You	are	engaged	in	some	mundane	affairs
In	some	ordinary	things.
Your	mind	is	full	of	unnecessary	rubbish
Busy	without	business.
So	you	go	on	missing	the	still	small	voice	within.
Once	the	mind	is	silent,	once	thoughts	disappear	Once	you	are	left	without	any
thoughts
Suddenly	the	voice	is	heard.
And	to	hear	god	directly	from	your	hart
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Is	the	beginning	of	transformation
It	is	revelation.
God	always	comes	as	a	revelation
Never	as	knowledge	but	always	as	revelation.
Remember	it.
And	it	is	not	far	away.	He	is	always	there
Twenty-four	hours	a	day
Waiting	for	you.
But	people	go	on	running	hither	and	thither.
They	waste	their	whole	life
In	 such	 stupid	 nonsense	 that	 it	 seems	 unimaginable	 That	 man	 can	 be	 so
unintelligent.
But	he	is.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	intelligent.
He	has	to	reconsider	his	whole	life-style.
This	is	the	beginning	of	a	great	pilgrimage.
I	am	not	in	favour	of	renouncing	the	world.
I	want	my	sannyasins	to	live	in	the	world
But	very	skillfully.
To	live	in	such	a	way
That	nothing	affects	you
To	live	in	such	a	way
That	you	are	in	the	world	an	yet	not	of	it.
That	is	non-attachment.
Renouncing	is	very	easy.
One	can	escape	to	the	mountains,	to	a	monastery	And	forget	all	about	the	world
and	its	worries.
That	is	very	easy;	any	coward	can	do	that.
And	to	live	in	the	world	and	be	worried
Is	also	easy;	everybody	is	doing	that.
I	am	telling	you	to	do	something
Totally	different	from	both	these	extremes.
I	don't	want	you	to	be	a	worldly	man
Although	I	want	you	to	be	in	the	world.
I	don't	want	you	to	go	to	a	monastery
Although	I	am	initiating	you	into	a	monkhood.
I	am	trying	to	give	you
A	very	paradoxical	way	of	life
But	it	is	only	through	paradox	that	one	grows.
Life	is	a	dialectical	process
So	the	more	paradoxically	you	live
The	higher	the	peaks	you	will	achieve.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
5	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004055
ShortTitle:	84POEM03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	lotus	represents
The	ultimate	unfolding	of	consciousness.
The	lotus	is	the	biggest	flower	in	the	world
And	in	the	East	the	most	respected	flower
For	two	reasons/
One:	it	grows	in	the	mud,	in	the	dirty	mud.
One	 cannot	 conceive	 that	 out	 of	 such	 dirty	 mud	 Such	 a	 beautiful	 flower	 is
possible.
Hence	it	represents	something	in	man.
Man	ordinarily	is	nothing	but	dirt
Just	dirty	mud
But	hidden	in	it	is	the	possibility
Of	a	lotus	flower.
So	just	don't	condemn	the	dirt
And	don't	condemn	ordinary	humanity.
Secondly:	the	lotus	grows	in	water.
Out	of	dirty	mud	it	rises	and	floats	on	the	water.
It	has	a	very	miraculous	quality:
It	is	so	velvety	that	the	water	cannot	touch	it.
It	remains	in	the	water
But	remains	untouched	by	the	water.
That	is	the	quality	of	a	sannyasin.
A	sannyasin	has	to	live	in	the	world.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Where	else	to	live?
There	is	no	other	world,	this	is	the	only	world.
One	has	to	live	here	and	yet
One	can	live	like	a	lotus,	untouched,	unaffected.
Pleasure	comes,	pain	comes,
One	simply	watches	and	everything	passes	by.
Pleasure	passes	by,	pain	also	passes	by.
Soon	you	realise	that	nothing	remains
Only	you	abide.
The	consciousness	abides,	your	witnessing	abides.
That	is	your	true	self,
That	is	your	real	being	that	abides.
Everything	else	is	like	a	cloud	coming	and	going	You	are	the	sun.	Many	clouds
will	come	and	go	Don't	be	affected	by	them.
The	day	you	don't	cling	to	pleasure
And	you	are	not	afraid	of	pain	and
You	take	both	as	if	they	are	the	same...
In	fact	they	are
They	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
When	you	are	absolutely	indifferent	to	both
Whatsoever	comes	you	accept
Whatsoever	goes	you	say	good-by	to.
When	it	comes	you	say	hello
When	it	goes	you	say	goodbye
Then	you	are	a	real	sannyasin.
Once	Picasso	was	asked	the	meaning	of	one
Of	gis	paintings	that	he	was	just	finishing.
He	remained	silent	for	a	few	moments
Then	he	took	the	hand	of	the	man
Who	had	asked	the	question,	a	great	critic,
Took	him	outside	the	house	in	the	garden
Pointed	to	a	rose,	and	said
'What	meaning	does	the	rose	have?'
Of	course	the	critic	said
'There	is	no	meaning	in	a	rose.'
And	Picasso	said	;If	the	rose	can	exist
Without	any	meaning	why	can't	my	paintings
Exist	without	any	meaning	at	all?
If	god	can	create	things	with	no	meaning
Why	can't	I	create	things	in	the	same	way?'
It	is	a	beautiful	anecdote,	of	tremendous	import.
A	rose	is	beautiful,	but	it	has	no	meaning
In	the	sense	that	a	commodity	has	meaning.
It	is	not	a	commodity,	it	has
No	utilitarian	purpose,	it	is	non-utilitarian.
You	can	enjoy	it.
But	it	is	not	bread,	it	is	not	butter
You	cannot	live	on	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	sheer	joy	to	see	it
There	is	no	end	to	it;	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.
And	that's	how	life	is.
It	is	not	a	means	to	anything	else
It	is	an	end	unto	itself.
It	exists	for	no	other	purpose
It	simply	exists.
God	creates	non-purposively
He	creates	because	he	cannot	help	it.
He	is	creativity,	he	is	overflowing	energy.
He	is	delight,	he	delights	in	playing	with	things.
This	whole	existence	is	his	leela,	his	play.
And	that's	how	a	sannyasin	has	to	look	at	life	And	at	himself	too
With	the	joy	af	a	poet,	a	painter,	a	musician
Not	with	the	eyes	of	a	businessman.
Once	you	can	see	life
An	having	no	purpose	at	all,
Just	being	for	its	own	sake,
You	enter	into	a	world	of	tremendous	celebration.
Then	it	is	all	dance	and	all	song	and	all	joy.
That's	how	my	sannyasins	have	to	look	at	life.
Bela	 is	 another	 flower,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 fragrant.	 It	 is	 an	 eastern	 flower.	 It
happens	only	in	a	hot	climate.	The	hotter	the	climate,	the	more	fragrant	are	the
flowers.	The	colder	the	climate,	 the	less	fragrant	are	the	flowers.	In	fact,	many
western	flowers	have	no	perfume.	The	cold	does	not	allow	their	perfume	to	be
released.	A	 certain	 heat	 is	 needed.	And	 the	 same	 is	 true	 about	man.	A	 certain
effort	that	creates	heat	in	you	is	needed	to	release	your	perfume,	your	fragrance.
It	is	not	just	accidental	that	many	more	Buddhas	happen	in	the	East	than	in	the
West.	It	is	the	same	law.	It	is	just	as	flowers	are	more	fragrant	in	the	East	than	in
the	West.	 The	 sun	 is	 hotter,	 it	 releases	 the	 energies	 of	 the	 flowers.	 In	 a	 cold
country,	in	a	cold	climate,	people	are	bound	to	become	materialistic	because	they
have	 to	 protect	 their	 bodies,	 otherwise	 the	 cold	 will	 kill	 them.	 They	 have	 to
remain	so	concerned	about	the	body	that	they	become	body-oriented.	In	a	hotter
climate	people	need	not	worry	 about	 the	body	 too	much;	 they	 can	 live	naked.
Now,	 one	 cannot	 conceive	 of	 a	 Mahavira	 happening	 in	 the	 West	 --	 he	 lived
naked.	It	is	possible	in	India.	In	fact,	to	wear	clothes	in	India	is	uncomfortable,
to	be	naked	is	far	more	luxurious.
The	East	became	more	and	more	concerned	about	something	more	inner	than	the
body,	because	the	body	was	not	a	problem	and	life	was	very	secure	and	safe.	The
climate	was	such	and	the	soil	was	so	fertile	 that	 just	a	 little	effort	was	needed.
India	is	poor	today	for	the	simple	reason,	that	the	population	has	grown	beyond
its	capacities.	In	Buddha's	time	there	were	only	two	crore	people	in	India;	now
there	are	seventy-crore	--	almost	fifty	times	more,	and	the	earth	is	the	same.	So
people	were	 very	 easily	 happy	with	 their	 physical	 life,	 there	 was	 no	 problem
about	it.	Even	just	fifty	years	ago	it	was	the	routine	thing	that	only	one	man	in
the	whole	family	would	earn	and	the	whole	family	would	live	without	earning.	It
was	 enough.	 People	 were	 satisfied	 with	 small	 comforts,	 their	 needs	 were	 not
many,	 hence	 their	 whole	 consciousness	 turned	 inwards.	 They	 started	 making
efforts	to	reach	their	innermost	core.
Bela	 is	 an	 eastern	 flower	 just	 as	 religion	 is	 an	 eastern	 flower.	 Science	 is	 a
western	flower.	Science	can	happen	only	in	a	cold	climate	where	people	have	to
struggle	 with	 nature,	 fight	 with	 nature.	 In	 the	 East	 nature	 was	 very	 very	 co-
operative.	There	was	no	problem	to	fight;	the	idea	has	never	existed.
Books	like	The	Conquest	of	Nature	have	never	been	written	in	India.	The	very
idea	was	thought	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
be	absurd.	It	is	not	a	question	of	conquering	.	Nature	was	already	giving	so	much
that	people	were	thankful.	But	in	a	cold	climate	you	have	to	fight,	struggle.	And
the	struggle	is	so	long,	that	it	makes	your	whole	consciousness	focussed	on	the
poverty.	But	now	it	 is	possible	 that	 the	East	and	West	can	meet.	That's	what	 is
happening	here.	Now	for	 the	first	 time	 it	 is	possible	 that	 the	earth	can	become
one.	Now	religion	can	even	grow	in	the	West	and	science	can	grow	in	the	East.
Remember	 Bela	 as	 representative	 of	 the	 eastern	 fragrance,	 the	 fragrance	 of
Buddha,	Mahavira,	 Krishna,	 Kabira.	 The	message	 is	 to	make	 a	 total	 effort	 to
awaken	 yourself.	 That	 very	 effort	 creates	 the	 heat,	 the	 right	 heat,	 the	 right
temperature	in	which	the	fragrance	is	released.
Just	one	Champak	flower	is	enough
To	make	the	whole	house	full	of	fragrance.
Just	one	flower	in	the	garden
And	the	whole	garden	will	be	perfumed.
And	it	is	a	small	flower.
Appearance-wise	it	is	not	beautiful	at	all
Appearance-wise	it	is	very	ordinary.
But	don't	be	deceived	by	appearances.
It	is	said	that	Jesus	was	not	a	beautiful	man
In	fact	he	was	an	ugly	man.
Many	people	simply	laughed	at	his	ugliness.
They	missed	the	point,	they	could	not	see	deeper.
If	you	come	across	the	champak	flower
You	will	see	a	very	ordinary	flower
Not	worth	looking	at	twice.
But	it	is	the	most	precious	of	flowers.
It	contains	the	greatest	perfume	possible.
So	always	remember:	the	appearance
Is	not	the	real	determining	factor	in	life.
The	container	is	of	no	importance
But	the	content	is.
The	body	may	be	ordinary,	homely,	and	yet
It	may	have	a	soul	which	is	beyond	comprehension.
The	body	may	be	very	beautiful
And	bay	be	utterly	empty,	with	no	soul	at	all.
This	will	happen	many	times	in	your	life
You	will	come	across	beautiful	people
Who	have	no	souls	at	all
And	 you	will	 come	 across	 people	who	 are	 very	 homely	But	 have	 tremendous
qualities.
Never	be	deceived	by	appearances.
Always	look	deeper,	search	deeper.
Look	at	the	centre,	not	at	the	circumferences.
And	the	same	is	true	about	yourself	too:
Don't	be	too	concerned
About	the	circumference	and	its	decorations.
Think	of	the	centre
Of	whether	there	is	a	centre	or	not.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
If	there	is	not	then	create	it
Because	to	live	without	a	centre
Is	not	to	live	at	all.
Life	begins	only	when	a	centre	has	arisen.
And	not	everybody	has	got	a	centre,	remember.
A	centre	has	to	be	created	by	tremendous	effort.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
Man	is	not	mortal,	he	only	appears	to	be.
The	appearance	is	because	of	the	body.
The	body	is	born	and	one	day	dies.
Whatsoever	begins	ends
But	there	is	something	within	you
Which	never	begins	and	never	ends.
That's	your	reality,	that's	your	being.
It	is	immortal.
There	is	no	way	for	it	to	die.
It	can't	commit	suicide.
Death	does	not	exist	for	it
Just	as	darkness	does	not	exist	for	light.
The	moment	you	know	yourself
You	know	that	there	is	no	death.
And	in	knowing	it	one	is	freed	from	all	fear
One	is	freed	from	all	agony,	anguish,	anxiety.
Knowing	this	one	knows	'I	am	part	of	god.'
And	that	is	the	ultimate	realisation.
Without	it	there	is	no	fulfilment,	no	flowering.
Life	remains	empty.
Be	as	wide	as	god	himself.
Believe	in	no	limitations,	in	no	boundaries
In	no	adjectives:
Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan
Jewish,	Indian,	Chinese,	Japanese.
Drop	all	limitations.
Feel	more	and	more	just	a	pure	consciousness
And	your	horizons	will	become	wider	and	wider.
A	moment	 comes	 when	 you	 are	 as	 big	 as	 god	 himself	 Because	 you	 are	 pure
consciousness.
Pure	consciousness	is	another	name	for	god.
But	we	cling	to	narrow	limits
We	cling	to	our	prison	cells.
We	think	that	these	walls	that	surround	us
Are	very	secure.
Outside	the	walls	there	seems	to	be	insecurity	So	we	don't	go	out,	we	remain	in
our	black	holes.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Small	black	holes...
That's	what	our	life	has	become.
And	we	go	on	crawling	and	fighting
And	 quarrelling	 with	 each	 other	 for	 small	 things	 While	 the	 infinite	 waits	 to
receive	us.
God	waits	to	welcome	us.
He	is	ready	to	take	you	into	his	very	heart.
But	you	don't	listen	to	the	message	of	the	vast	Of	the	oceanic
You	remain	with	your	small	holes
Clinging	out	of	fear
Afraid	of	insecurity	and	safety
And	believing	that	these	are	not	prison	cells
That	these	are	beautiful	palaces.
And	you	have	decorated	the	walls.
You	have	painted	the	walls
You	have	made	it	a	little	bit	comfortable	there.
But	howsoever	comfortable	it	is
A	prison	is	a	prison.
It	may	even	be	luxurious
But	a	prison	is	a	prison.
One	has	to	know	the	unlimited	sky
Only	then	does	one	know	what	truth	is.
Everybody	is	born	only	semi-precious.
But	by	becoming	a	sannyasin
You	are	moving	towards	becoming	really	precious!
Just	a	few	things	which	have	gathered
Around	the	real	jewel	will	have	to	be	dropped.
They	are	clinging	to	the	real	jewel
And	we	think	that	they	are	part	of	it.
They	are	not	part	of	it;	they	may	be	just	mud.
They	may	have	been	with	 the	 jewel	 for	 centuries	They	have	become	almost	 a
part	of	it.
My	work	here	is	to	make	you	aware
Of	what	is	real	in	you	and	what	is	unreal	in	you	What	is	essential	in	you
And	what	is	accidental	in	you.
Once	you	are	aware
Of	the	essential	and	the	non-essential
Then	the	non-essential	can	be	dropped	easily.
There	is	no	problem.
In	fact	the	moment	you	know
That	it	is	non-essential
It	drops	of	its	own	accord.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	very	seeing	becomes	a	transformation.
The	very	understanding	brings	its	own	revolution.
There	is	no	revolution	apart	from	understanding.
Everybody	comes	here	as	a	semi-precious	jewel
And	we	start	hammering	and	cutting.
The	work	is	hard	in	the	beginning.
It	hurts	too,	it	is	painful.
But	if	you	are	ready	to	go	through	the	process	One	day	only	that	which	is	real
That	which	is	eternal	will	be	left
And	all	else	will	disappear.
That	day	you	have	discovered	yourself.
And	the	whole	life
Is	nothing	but	a	pilgrimage	to	self-discovery.
In	discovering	oneself	one	discovers	bliss
One	discovers	truth,	one	discovers	beauty.
One	discovers	all	the	splendours
And	the	glories	of	existence.
And	ultimately	one	discovers	god.
Nobody	is	born	noble.
The	whole	idea	of	aristocracy	is	sheer	nonsense.
One	hat	to	achieve	it,	one	is	not	born	with	it.
It	is	an	art	to	be	learned.
One	has	to	be	reborn
Only	then	does	one	become	noble.
One	has	to	become	full	of	light,	awareness,	love	Then	is	one	noble.
Ordinarily	people	are	so	full	of	poisons
All	kinds	of	poisons
How	can	they	be	noble?
Whether	they	are	born	in	a	poor	family
Or	a	very	famous	family
It	doesn't	matter	--	they	are	all	unconscious
The	poor	as	well	as	the	rich
The	anonymous	as	well	as	the	royal	ones.
But	one	can	become	noble.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	bring
A	new	life	to	you
A	release	of	new	energy
Which	is	potentially	there	but	dormant.
It	has	to	be	made	dynamic.
It	is	almost	frozen;	it	has	to	be	heated	up
Through	love	and	warmth	so	that	it	can	melt.
People	are	ordinarily	ice-cold	in	their	being.
Their	smiles	are	pretensions.
Deep	down	they	are	dead,	deadly	cold.
Unless	your	being	starts	warming	up
You	are	not	noble.
And	the	moment	your	being	warms	up
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	are	full	of	prayer
Full	of	love	for	the	whole.
You	are	full	of	gratitude	to	god.
That	warmth	brings	thousands	of	rewards.
It	is	the	true	beginning
The	beginning	of	a	real,	authentic	life.
A	humble	heart
Is	the	very	essence	of	religiousness.
But	beware	of	one	thing:
That	is	false	humility.
There	are	thousands	of	people
Who	are	deceived	by	it.
It	is	better	not	to	be	humble
Than	to	be	humble	in	a	pseudo	way
Because	the	person	who	is	not	mumble
Sooner	or	later	will	have	to	recognize
That	all	his	suffering	is	coming	from	his	ego
And	for	how	long	can	you	cling	to	something
Which	goes	on	giving	you	suffering?	For	how	long?
The	more	intelligent	you	are
The	sooner	you	will	drop	out	of	it.
The	pseudo	humbleness	can	recreate	trouble
For	you	because	it	hides	the	ego
It	covers	up	the	ego.
It	is	like	covering	your	wound	with	a	rose	flower	So	you	don't	see	the	pus
And	the	stink	of	the	wound
You	see	the	flower
The	beauty	and	the	fragrance	of	the	flower.
And	meanwhile	the	wound	goes	on	deepening
Meanwhile	the	wound	is	turning	into	a	cancer.
The	pseudo-humbleness	is	created,	cultivated.
It	is	ego	standing	on	its	head,	upside	down.
That's	what	is	being	taught
By	all	the	organised	religions:
Be	humble,	try	to	be	humble
Learn	manners,	etiquette	that	help	you	to	be	humble.
But	this	is	all	from	the	outside.
My	effort	here	is	that	your	heart	should	open	up.
You	should	not	cultivate
The	quality	of	humbleness.
It	should	be	a	by-product	when	your	heart	opens	up.
It	comes	of	its	own	accord.
A	cultivated	humbleness	is	not	humbleness	at	all;	It	is	just	its	opposite.
It	is	not	a	friend
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	a	foe	hiding	itself	as	a	friend
Hence	it	is	more	dangerous	than	the	foe	itself.
Real	humbleness
Comes	through	silence,	meditativeness,	awareness.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	humbleness	directly
It	always	comes	as	a	consequence.
Be	more	and	more	meditative
Silent,	alert,	watchful
And	many	things	will	come
In	the	wake	of	your	meditativeness.
Humbleness	will	be	the	first	guest.
Then	it	is	true
And	then	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
Light	is	synonymous	with	god.
The	whole	existence	is	made	of	light.
That	has	been	the	experience
Of	all	the	mystics	down	the	ages.
Now	even	physicists	agree	with	it
In	their	own	way.
They	also	say	existence
Consists	of	electricity,	electrons.
Electrons	are	nothing	but	light,	pure	light.
This	is	the	first	time
That	mystics	and	physicists	agree	an	one	point.
They	have	come	to	the	conclusion
Through	different	directions
Totally	different,	diametrically	opposite.
But	how	long	can	you	avoid	the	truth?
If	the	truth	is	there
And	your	search	is	authentic
Sooner	or	later	you	are	bound	to	discover	it.
Your	path	may	be	physics,	it	may	be	mysticism
It	may	be	poetry,	it	may	be	music
It	may	be	meditation.
Whatsoever	path	you	have	been	following
If	your	search	is	true,	if	you	are	really	a	seeker	Who	is	ready	to	risk	all
Then	one	day	you	are	bound	to	discover	the	truth.
Now	this	is	the	truth:	we	are	made	of	light
But	we	live	in	darkness,	we	all	live	in	darkness	We	stumble	in	darkness.
This	is	very	strange:	we	are	made	of	light
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
6	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004065
ShortTitle:	84POEM04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	has	to	be	a	lamp	unto	himself.
Drop	the	whole	idea
That	you	can	get	guidance	from	scriptures
That	knowledge	is	possible	by	borrowing.
That	is	one	of	the	greatest	hindrances
In	the	spiritual	search.
Nothing	is	needed	from	the	outside
God	has	provided	you	with	everything
That	you	will	need	on	the	journey.
The	light	is	there
And	only	your	own	inner	light	can	help	you
To	distinguish	the	right
From	the	wrong
Can	help	you	not	to	go	astray
Can	help	you	to	always	be	moving	towards	god.
Those	who	depend	on	others
Are	simply	wasting	their	opportunity.
My	effort	here	is	not	to	guide	you
Not	to	give	you	directions
Not	to	give	you	certain	character	styles
Structures,	patterns
But	only	to	help	you	to	be	yourself.
I	am	not	here	to	distract	you	from	your	being.
That	is	what	is	being	done	all	over	the	world
By	all	the	so-called	organised	religions.
The	past	of	humanity	has	been	very	uncreative
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
For	the	simple	reason	that	religions
Were	teaching	renunciation,	not	creativity.
Religions	were	teaching	that	the	world
Is	illusory.	If	the	world	is	illusory
What	is	the	point	of	creating	anything?
The	religions	were	teaching	people
To	become	drop-outs
They	were	teaching	people	to	become	escapists.
And	their	impact	has	been	great
They	have	poisoned	the	whole	humanity.
Otherwise	every	child	is	born
With	a	tremendous	capacity	to	be	creative.
But	we	destroy	him,	we	cripple	him
We	paralyse	him.
My	approach	is	just	the	opposite.
I	would	like	you	to	be	more	and	more	creative
Because	only	by	being	creative
Can	you	participate	with	god.
Whenever	you	are	creative
You	are	part	of	god,	the	creator.
There	is	no	other	way	to	participate	with	him.
So	what	you	create	is	immaterial,
That	is	up	to	you,	but	create	something.
Anyone	creative	--	a	potter	--	is	far	closer	to	god.
Than	a	professor,	than	a	priest.
A	shoemaker	is	far	closer	to	god
Than	a	politician,	than	a	prime	minister
Or	a	president.
If	god	is	a	creator,	then	of	course
All	his	blessings	are	for	those	who	are	creators.
Every	sannyasin	who	belongs	to	me
Has	to	prove	his	mettle	by	creating	something,	Whatsoever	it	is.
Find	out	what	you	would	love	to	create.
There	is	no	need	to	become	world-famous
There	is	no	need	to	become	a	Nobel	laureate
There	is	no	need	that	everybody	should	know
And	appreciate	your	creativity;
That	is	not	the	point.
If	you	are	enjoying	it
If	you	are	delighted	in	doing	it	that's	enough.
That	means	god	is	happy	with	you.
If	you	are	delighted	that	means	god	is	delighted.
It	is	his	delight	that	reaches	to	you.
Prayer
Has	been	very	much	misunderstood	down	the	ages	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	much	so	that	it	has	taken	on
A	totally	wrong	meaning.
Now	prayer	means	saying	something	to	god.
Even	a	man	like	Martin	buber	thinks
Prayer	as	a	dialogue	with	god.
What	to	say	about	ordinary	people?
Martin	Buber	is	a	rare,	intelligent	human	being	One	of	the	greatest	philosophers
of	this	age.
But	even	he	goes	on	carrying	the	same	old
Rotten	meaning	of	having	a	dialogue	with	god	--
As	if	something	has	to	be	said	to	god.
There	is	nothing	to	say.
Prayer	is	not	saying	something	to	god
It	is	listening	to	god.
When	you	are	all	ears,	just	ears	--
Open,	available,	ready	to	listen
Ready	to	be	guided,	surrendered,	in	a	let-go	--
That	is	prayer.
If	this	meaning	is	understood
Then	prayer	and	meditation
Are	no	more	different	at	all,	then	they	are
Two	different	names	for	the	same	phenomenon.
Both	mean	silence.
Both	mean	a	receptivity,	an	availability	to	god.
What	can	you	say?
And	whatsoever	you	do	say	will	be	stupid.
All	prayers	are	stupid!
Man	 is	 stupid,	 so	whatsoever	he	can	bring	 forth	From	his	mind	 is	going	 to	be
stupid.
It	will	be	part	of	his	ignorance
Of	his	unawareness,	of	his	unconsciousness.
It	will	be	nothing	but	his	desires,	demands
Complaints.
One	has	to	be	silent
Before	existence.
That	is	prayer.	Sitting	silently	by	a	river
Or	sitting	silently	by	a	rosebush
Or	sitting	silently	under	the	moon
Or	 sitting	 silently	with	 a	 friend	holding	hands	That	 is	 prayer...	 because	 god	 is
everywhere.
Wherever	you	are	silent	you	are	in	prayer.
Basically	prayer	is	gratitude	--	gratitude
For	all	that	god	has	done	for	you	already.
It	is	gratefulness,	it	is	a	deep	feeling
Of	thankfulness.	Reduced	to	the	minimum
It	is	a	non-verbal	thank-you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	need	not	say	it,	you	have	only	to	feel	it.
The	prayerful	person	is	constantly	feeling
That	everything	is	a	gift	of	god.
Life	is	a	gift,	love	is	a	gift
Consciousness	is	a	gift.
You	are	here
And	becoming	a	sannyasin	is	gift!
When	each	moment	of	your	life	becomes	permeated	By	an	unspoken	thank	you,
that	is	prayer.
Then	it	goes	on	resounding	in	you;
Even	while	you	are	asleep	it	goes	on	and	on
Deep	inside	you	like	an	undercurrent.
You	are	not	saying	it
It	is	not	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular
Because	god	has	no	address
At	least	no	postal	address!
It	is	unaddressed,	unspoken	,	but	it	is	there
Throbbing	in	every	beat	of	your	heart.
That	is	prayer.
Feel	it,	be	it,	and	you	will	come	to	know
The	greatest	experience	of	your	life
The	greatest	ecstasy.
By	worship	I	don't	mean	any	ritual.
Ritual	is	not	worship.
Love	is	worship	and	love	is	never	a	ritual.
Rituals	are	repetitive,	formal.
Love	is	informal,	non-repetitive,	spontaneous.
Be	in	love	with	existence	--	that	is	worship.
And	love	in	as	many	ways	as	possible
Don't	hold	back.
That's	my	whole	teaching.
Jump	into	life	totally,	wholly.
When	you	are	wholly	in	life,	totally	in	life
You	become	religious,	you	become	holy.
That	is	the	only	way	to	be	holy.
Your	so-called	saints	are	not	holy
They	are	simply	dead.
Dance	is	the	most	symbolic	act.
Nothing	represents	god	better	than	dance.
God	is	a	dancer.
And	why	do	I	say
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	nothing	represents	him	better?
Because	dance	is	the	only	activity	known	to	us	In	which	the	actor	and	the	action
are	one.
If	you	paint
The	painter	becomes	different	from	the	painting.
If	you	sculpt
You	become	separate	from	your	creation.
Dance	is	the	only	activity
Which	is	inseparable	from	the	dancer;
You	cannot	take	the	dance	away	from	the	dancer.
Existence	is	the	dance	of	god;
They	are	together.
Hence	he	has	to	be	found	in	this	dance:
The	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees
The	sound	of	running	water
The	song	of	the	birds	in	the	morning
The	freedom	of	the	clouds
The	beauty	of	the	flowers.
God	has	to	be	found	now	and	here
In	this	very	dance.
This	whole	existence	is	his	temple.
There	is	no	need	to	make	any	churches
Any	temples,	any	mosques.	The	are	all	false
And	they	go	on	distracting	people
from	the	true	religion.
True	religion
Is	a	devotion	towards	life	and	existence.
Remember	it:	in	every	leaf	of	grass	is	god.
It	is	his	gesture.
In	thousand	of	moods	and	in	thousands	of	gestures	He	is	dancing	all	over.
He	is	dancing	within	you	and	without	you.
Hence	I	teach	my	sannyasins	to	dance
And	to	dance	with	such	abundance
That	you	are	lost	in	it.
That	will	give	you	the	first	taste
Of	what	it	is	to	have	a	meeting	with	god
To	have	a	date	with	god.
My	sannyas	is	not	to	be	serious
It	is	not	to	be	sad.
My	sannyas	has	to	be	a	song,	a	celebration
A	rejoicing	in	life.
I	don't	teach	renunciation	because	to	me
God	is	 life,	and	 if	you	cannot	find	him	in	 life	You	will	not	 find	him	anywhere
else.
God	is	not	to	be	found	in	the	monasteries
Or	in	Himalayan	caves;
He	is	to	be	found	in	life
In	all	kinds	of	situations
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Which	one	has	to	encounter	in	life.
God	has	to	be	found	in	all
The	 bitter	 experiences	 and	 the	 sweet	 experiences	 That	 life	makes	 available	 to
you;
In	the	days,	in	the	nights
In	the	summers,	in	the	winters
In	the	thorns,	in	the	flowers.
God	has	to	be	found	here	in	the	thick	of	life.
A	sannyasin	is	one	who	goes
With	a	singing	heart	into	the	darkest	night.
And	if	you	can	go	with	a	singing	heart
In	the	darkest	night
Even	the	darkness	becomes	luminous.
Light	is	pure	energy
Life	has	nothing	but	light	in	it.
The	whole	existence	consists	of	light.
Matter	is	an	illusion
It	only	appears	because	we	cannot	see	clearly
Because	we	cannot	penetrate	deeply	--
That's	why	it	appears,	otherwise	it	disappears.
There	 is	 only	 light,	 an	 immense	 ocean	 of	 light	 And	 we	 are	 waves	 in	 that
immense	ocean.
To	know	it	is	not	only	to	be	transformed
To	know	it	is	to	be	reborn.
The	old	dies	totally
And	something	absolutely	new	arrives
Which	is	not	connected	with	the	other	at	all	--
It	is	disconnected,	discontinuous.
It	is	the	death	of	the	old
And	the	resurrection	of	the	new.
And	once	you	feel	yourself	as	just	light
You	will	start	feeling	others	also	as	pure	light.
Then	life	is	a	dance	of	light,	an	eternal	dance.
And	to	know	this	is	to	know	what	delight	is.
Delight	is	the	experience
That	life	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	light.
Then	there	is	only	celebration.
When	there	is	no	darkness
There	is	no	death,	no	hell,	no	misery.
There	is	eternal	celebration,	halleluja!
We	have	been	here	forever
And	we	are	going	to	be	here	forever.
Every	person	is	born	with	a	divine	voice
Although	we	never	hear	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	a	still	small	voice.
It	is	the	voice	of	god.
But	our	heads	are	so	full	of	other	voices	--
Voice	of	America...
And	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	voices.
We	can't	hear	the	still	small	voice.
And	in	our	heads	all	the	stations	are	on
Simultaneously;
It	is	so	noisy	inside	that	even	if	god	shouts
You	won't	hear.
And	he	never	shouts,	he	whispers.
Love	always	whispers
Because	to	shout	is	a	little	violent.
Love	knows	to	wait,	hence	god	waits.
Love	knows	to	hope,	hence	god	hopes.
If	not	today,	then	tomorrow...
Some	dau	you	are	going	to	hear.
Sannyas	is	nothing	but	an	effort
To	make	your	noisy	mind	a	little	quieter
So	that	you	can	hear	your	own	voice.
Once	you	have	heard	it	your	life	is	transfomed.
Then	you	don't	need	any	Bible,	any	Gita,	any	Koran.
You	have	your	own	Bible,	your	own	Gita
Your	own	Koran.
There	is	no	need	to	depend	on	others.
There	is	no	need	to	depend	on	borrowed	knowledge.
So	become	more	and	more	silent;
Less	and	less	noisy	so	that	you	can	hear
The	whisper	of	god	within	you.
That's	the	beginning	of	a	new	life
Of	a	life	that	is	eternal.
It	is	tenderness	that	makes	you	vulnerable
That	makes	you	open,	that	makes	you	sensitive
To	the	mysterious	that	surrounds	us.
People	who	are	not	tender
Who	are	hard	like	rock,	go	on	missing	life.
Life	passes	by:	it	cannot	penetrate	them
They	are	impenetrable.
One	should	be	like	a	rose	flower,	very	tender:	The	one	comes	to	know
The	mysterious	and	the	miraculous.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Life	is	full	of	surprises
But	only	for	those	who	have	a	tender	heart.
But	we	all	have	been	brought	up	in	such	a	way
That	we	become	hard,	because	we	have	been	told	That	life	is	a	struggle,	it	is	a
conflict
It	is	a	constant	struggle	for	survival
So	one	has	to	be	hard.
If	you	are	not	hard	you	will	not	be	able	to	compete.
And	that	is	true:	You	will	not	be	able	to	compete	But	competition	leads	nowhere.
It	is	a	sheer	wastage.
One	should	live	a	non-competitive	life
Then	only	does	one	know	what	god	is.
Jesus	says:
Those	who	are	the	last	in	this	world
Will	be	the	first	in	my	kingdom	of	god.
Now	he	is	teaching	non-competitiveness:
Those	who	are	the	last	in	this	world
Will	be	the	first	in	my	kingdom	of	god.
But	remember
Don't	be	the	last	in	order	to	be	the	first
Otherwise	you	miss	the	whole	point.
Enjoy	being	the	last.
And	to	be	the	first	in	the	kingdom	of	god
Is	a	consequence,	it	is	not	a	goal.
Life	is	such	a	joy	for	those	who	are	tender
Soft,	loving,	compassionate,	sensitive.
That	life	itself	is	proof
In	thousands	of	ways	it	proves	that	god	is.
But	to	the	hard,	to	the	rocklike	person,
There	is	no	proof	for	god.
God	cannot	be	proved	for	him
Because	he	has	no	sensitivity	to	feel.
He	has	lost	all	feeling
He	lives	only	in	the	thinking.
He	has	lost	his	heart,	he	is	just	a	head.
And	the	head	is	just	rubbish!
Be	a	heart.
Even	if	you	have	to	lose	the	head	lose	the	head	--
It	is	worth	it.
It	is	beautiful	to	be	headless
But	it	is	ugly	to	be	heartless.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	heartful	and	headless.
That	is	the	very	definition	of	my	sannyas.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
There	is	a	peace
That	is	not	imposed	form	the	outside.
One	can	pretend	to	be	peaceful	--
That	is	hypocrisy,	that	is	ugly.
Real	peace	arises	from	within,	it	arises
Out	of	understanding,	awareness,	meditation.
It	is	not	something	imposed
It	is	not	like	a	mask	that	you	wear.
It	radiates	from	the	very	centre	of	your	being.
One	cannot	cultivate	it.
A	cultivated	peace	is	false,	is	not	even	skin-deep.
Scratch	a	little	and	immediately	the	ugly
The	animal-like,	the	angry	person	is	there.
All	peace	is	gone.
But	a	really	peaceful	person	is	peaceful	all	over	From	the	circumference	to	the
centre.
You	can	go	digging
You	will	find	more	and	more	peace.
The	more	you	dig	into	him
The	more	you	will	find	fresh	layers	of	peace.
When	you	reach	the	very	centre	of	his	being
You	will	find	ultimate	peace.
That	is	another	name	for	god.
Bliss	is	possible
Only	to	those	few	people	who	are	courages;
In	cannot	happen	to	the	cowards.
Courage	is	the	price	we	have	to	pay	for	it.
A	coward	is	bound	to	remain	in	misery
Because	a	coward	cannot	drop	his	clinging
To	old	patterns;	it	feels	safer	to	be
With	the	old,	known,	familiar.
Even	though	they	are	creating	misery
It	feels	more	safe,	comfortable,	cosy
Than	moving	into	the	unknown
Into	the	unpredictable.
Hence	cowards	go	on	crawling	within	their	limits	Within	their	small	holes.
Bliss	is	possible
Only	when	you	go	beyond	your	known	limits.
When	you	go	beyond	the	boundaries
When	you	start	adventuring	into	the	unknown.
That	needs	tremendous	courage
Hence	I	say	courage
Is	the	most	fundamental	religious	quality.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Jesus	is	courageous,	that	is	the	meaning
Of	carrying	his	cross	on	his	own	shoulders.
That	means	one	is	ready	to	die	any	moment
For	one's	convictions,	for	one's	commitments
For	one's	promises.
One	is	even	ready	to	sacrifice	one's	life
Joyously,	with	no	complaint,	with	no	grudge.
Just	the	other	day	in	Rome,	the	pope
Enacted	the	carrying	of	the	cross	to	the	hill.
It	is	a	drama.
Thousands	of	pilgrims	were	following	him
With	torches	and	flags	and	crosses	of	their	own.
And	he	carried	a	beautifully	carved	cross
On	his	shoulders.
And	it	was	thought	that	something
Tremendously	beautiful	was	happening.
It	is	simply	ugly.
It	is	befooling	yourself	and	others.
Carrying	one's	own	cross	is	not	a	drama
It	is	a	risk.
You	cannot	enact	it,	you	have	to	live	it.
And	the	drama	was	not	even	completed	--
At	least	they	should	have	crucified	him!
What	is	the	point
Of	carrying	the	cross	to	the	hill	and	coming	back	All	happy	that	 it	was	a	good
picnic!
Bliss	is	not	a	human	achievement,
It	is	a	gift	from	god.
It	comes	from	the	beyond.
We	cannot	manufacture	it
It	is	beyond	our	capacities	to	create	it.
But	we	can	be	available	to	it
We	can	be	ready	for	it
We	can	be	a	host	for	it.
Amd	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about:
Being	a	host	for	god
Waiting	with	 great	 longing	 but	with	 no	 anxiety	With	 great	 expectancy	 but	 no
expectation.
The	difference	is	subtle	but	of	tremendous	import.
If	one	can	wait	in	hope,	in	trust
And	one	can	surrender	and	say	yes	to	god
One	day	it	happens.
It	happens	suddenly,	it	never	happens	gradually.
It	is	not	that	it	comes	slowly	slowly,	in	parts.
It	suddenly	explodes.
It	suddenly	takes	possession	of	you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
From	all	directions
You	are	engulfed,	encompassed	by	it
The	experience	of	bliss
Is	an	encompassing	experience.
One	is	drowned	in	it!
The	ego	disappears	totally
And	when	you	come	back	you	are	no	more	the	same,	The	old	person	is	nowhere
to	be	found
Not	even	a	trace	is	found.
In	fact	it	never	existed	in	the	first	place.
It	was	just	a	dream...	and	you	are	awakened.
Hence,	never	make	bliss	a	goal.
People	start	making	bliss	a	goal.
That	is	the	first	step	in	missing	it.
You	are	moving	in	a	wrong	direction.
Bliss	is	not	a	goal;	nobody	has	ever	achieved	it.
It	has	come	to	many,	but	it	has	always	come:
It	comes	of	its	own	accord.
That	does	not	mean	that	we	have	nothing	to	do	--
We	do	have	something	to	do.
We	have	to	prepare	the	ground,	we	have	to	be
Utterly	empty	so	that	it	can	penetrate	us.
We	have	to	open	all	the	doors	and	all	the	windows	We	have	to	drop	all	fear	of
the	unknown
Of	the	mysterious,	of	the	miraculous.
And	we	have	to	be	ready	to	be	surprised.
That	means	we	have	to	drop	all	knowledge
And	we	have	to	start	functioning	from	a	state
Of	not-knowing.
We	have	to	be	innocent.
In	a	single	word	'innocence'
Is	the	essence	of	religion.
And	then	it	comes,	surely	it	comes
Absolutely	it	comes,	inevitably	it	comes
And	possesses	you	so	totally
That	it	does	not	leave
A	single	nook	or	corner	within	you
Where	misery	or	darkness	can	hide.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
7	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Archive	code:	8004075
ShortTitle:	84POEM05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Prayer,	grace	and	mercy	are	three	dimensions
Of	a	really	religious	life.
A	religious	life	begins	in	prayer	and	ends	in	mercy.
A	religious	life	means	a	deep	"Yes"	to	god	--
That	is	prayer:
A	total	yes	to	god,	not	holding	yourself	back,	A	whole-hearted	"Yes".
And	once	that	"Yes"	has	happened
Your	life	becomes	full	of	grace.
It	attains	to	a	beauty	that	is	not	of	this	world	That	belongs	to	the	beyond
That	starts	showering	on	you.
And	not	only	you	feel	it
Even	others	start	feeling	it.
It	surrounds	you.
It	is	like	an	aroma,	an	aura,	a	fragrance.
It	is	true	beauty.
And	when	 grace	 has	 started	 descending	 in	 your	 life	All	 your	 energy	 becomes
compassion,	mercy.
It	transform	your	energy.
It	makes	your	life	full	of	love.
There	is	nothing	else	to	do.
All	desires	disappear	and	you	are	so	full	of	energy	That	you	start	sharing	your
life,	your	love,
Whatsoever	you	have.
That	sharing	is	compassion.
These	are	the	three	dimensions.
Between	these	three	is	born
The	religious	consciousness.
Your	name	contains	the	whole	art	of	religion.
Matthias	was	one	of	the	disciples	of	Jesus
One	of	the	twelve	apostles.
He	 is	 symbolically	 represented	 by	 a	 young	 angel	 To	 signify	 Jesus	 Christ's
humanity.
He	was	the	most	human	disciple
Out	of	all	the	disciples	of	Jesus.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Once	you	become	interested	in	god
You	start	becoming	more	and	more	super-human.
It	happens	naturally:
You	start	transcending	humanity
You	start	surpassing	humanity.
Matthias	remained	utterly	a	human	being
And	became	a	representative	of	Jesus'	humanity.
All	the	twelve	disciples	represent	something.
They	are	twelve	aspects	of	Jesus.
Nobody	represents	Jesus	in	his	wholeness
He	is	so	vast
But	each	disciple	can	represent	him	at	least
In	a	single	aspect.
Matthias	represents	his	humanity
And	that	is	of	great	significance
Because	in	the	East
Buddha	is	thought	to	be	absolutely	super-human.
All	the	stories	that	we	have	written	about	Buddha	Have	taken	away	everything
human	from	him.
He	is	just	an	abstraction
He	is	almost	intangible.
He	looks	more	like	a	myth	than	like	a	reality.
And	so	is	the	case	with	Krishna	and	Mahavira:
Everything	human	has	been	taken	away.
It	is	not	that	they	were	not	human,
They	were	human,	very	human,
But	the	idea	was	that	a	,am	of	god
Has	to	go	beyond	humanity.
For	example
Mahavira	is	said	not	to	have	perspired
Because	that	is	too	human.
Now,	in	India	not	to	perspire...
It	is	a	super-human	feat!
It	is	easier	to	walk	on	water
Than	not	to	perspire	in	India!
And	he	lived	in	the	hottest	part	of	the	country,	In	Bihar,	and	he	lived	naked
And	he	walked	bare-footed	on	muddy	paths
In	dirt	and	dust	and	in	the	burning	sun.
But	the	stories	say	that	he	never	perspired
Never	urinated,	never	defecated.
These	are	human	things	too	human!
The	followers	of	Mahavira,	cannot	conceive
Him	urinating.
That	looks	below	Mahavira,	too	below:
He	is	a	god!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	can	always	think	of	him	sitting
In	deep	meditation.
That's	the	only	activity	left	for	him.
In	that	way	Jesus	is	far	more	human.
He	enjoys	eating	and	drinking
And	mixing	with	people	and	laughing	and	joking.
He	 enjoyed	 company,	 and	 the	 company	 of	 all	 kinds	 Of	 people	 --	 gamblers,
drunkards,	prostitutes.
He	is	really	human!
And	Matthias	is	the	most	human	of	all
His	disciples,	he	represents	his	humanity.
My	effort	here
Is	to	make	religion	as	human	as	possible.
It	should	not	be	airy-fairy!
We	have	to	bring	it	down	to	earth.
And	I	allow	my	sannyasins	to	perspire!
There	is	nothing	wrong	in	it,	no	sin	is	committed.
Even	a	sauna	bath	is	perfectly	virtuous!
Perspire	as	much	as	you	can.
Remember	that	religion	has	not	to	be	unearthly.
It	has	to	be	rooted	in	the	earth
Only	then	is	it	alive.
When	it	becomes	too	cloudy,	uprooted
It	looses	all	greenness,	it	looses	all	aliveness.
It	becomes	just	an	abstract	philosophy.
That's	what	has	happened	in	the	East.
Hence	Jainas	cannot	believe	in	Jesus,
Neither	can	Buddhists	believe	in	Jesus
Because	he	is	too	human.
But	I	am	all	for	Jesus
Simply	because	he	is	so	human!
We	want	a	religion	which	is	human.
Of	course	one	has	not	to	end	with	humanity
One	has	to	go	beyond	it,	one	has	to	transcend	it	But	one	should	remain	rooted.
A	tree	is	rooted	in	the	earth
Yet	it	goes	above	the	earth.
It	reaches	into	the	sky
It	whispers	with	the	clouds
It	has	a	dialogue	with	the	winds.
It	blooms,	but	it	remains	rooted	in	the	earth.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
A	truly	religious	person	will	have	wings
And	will	also	have	roots
Roots	in	the	earth	and	wings	in	the	sky.
That	is	the	true	synthesis.
And	then	religion	is	complete,	total,	whole.
God	loves	playfulness.
This	whole	existence	is	out	of	his	playfulness.
He	loves	celebration.
This	whole	existence
Is	in	a	continuous	celebration.
He	loves	songs	and	dances.
But	 our	 so-called	 religious	 people	 are	 very	 sad	Very	 serious	 --	 pathologically
serious.
And	I	know	why	they	cannot	find	god:
God	avoids	them!
Who	would	like	their	company?
The	moment	god	gets	any	news
That	they	are	coming	close,	he	escapes!
He	abhors	saints	like	people	abhor	death.
Even	sinners	are	far	better	company	than	saints	For	the	simple	reason	that
At	least	the	sinners	can	sing	and	dance
And	laugh	and	love.
Saints	can't	do	anything.
They	can	only	remain	serious,	dead,	cold.
God	is	utterly	afraid	of	your	saints!
My	sannyasins
Are	not	to	become	so-called	saints.
They	have	to	become	singers	and	dancers.
I	believe	in	a	god	who	is	a	dancer
Who	is	a	singer,	who	is	a	musician.
His	existence	is	not	a	business	project.
It	is	out	of	fun	that	he	creates.
And	when	you	also	start	living	life	as	fun
You	start	growing.
When	life	becomes	a	non-serious	affair
Then	you	have	no	limits
Then	the	whole	sky	is	yours.
That	we	are	beloveds	of	god
Is	something	to	be	constantly	remembered.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Man	has	forgotten	it	completely,	hence
There	is	so	much	a	feeling	of	being	outsiders
As	if	we	don't	belong	to	the	existence
As	if	the	existence	does	not	care
As	if	the	existence	is	indifferent
As	if	we	are	just	accidental,	not	essential.
The	whole	world
Is	dominated	ba	a	dark	cloud	of	alienation.
And	the	reason	is	that	we	have	forgotten
A	simple	truth:	God	loves	us,	hence	we	are.
We	are	his	love-products.
His	love	is	the	very	base	of	our	life.
We	can't	breathe	without	his	love
Our	hearts	will	stop	beating	without	his	love
His	love	is	our	existence.
But	because	it	is	so	close	tu	us
It	is	easy	to	forget	about	it.
There	is	no	distance	between	it	and	us
Hence	we	can't	see	it	and	we	become	oblivious
Of	anything	we	can't	see.
It	has	to	be	consciously	remembered,	and	as
The	remembrance	deepens	all	alienation	disappears.
The	dark	cloud	is	found	no	more	and	the	world
Is	full	of	sunshine.	It	is	a	joy	to	be
Because	this	is	our	home	and	we	are	not	accidental	We	are	absolutely	essential,
we	are	needed.
We	are	serving	some	grater	purpose,	something
Greater	than	we	are,	something	bigger	than	we	are.
Man	unaware	of	himself	is	a	beggar.
Man	aware	of	himself
Is	the	greatest	emperor	possible
Because	the	moment	you	become	aware	of	yourself	The	whole	kingdom	of	god
is	yours.
It	has	already	been	given	to	you
It	is	just	that	you	are	asleep.
It	is	there,	but	you	are	not	looking	at	it.
Your	eyes	are	focussed	on	the	outside.
The	whole	effort	here	is
To	help	your	eyes	turn	inwards.
Sannyas	is	an	inner	pilgrimage.
We	are	born	with	a	great	treasure
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	vast,	so	great	that	it	is	inexhaustible.
But	we	live	in	utter	poverty
Because	we	never	dig	within	our	own	being.
We	go	on	looking	everywhere	else.
This	is	the	most	strange	thing	about	man
That	he	searches	and	seeks	everywhere.
He	is	ready	to	go	to	Everest
He	is	ready	to	go	to	the	moon
But	he	is	not	ready	to	go	within.
The	moment	you	say	"Go	within"
It	falls	on	deaf	ears.
And	it	is	there	the	treasure	is.
So	we	go	on	carrying	the	treasure	with	us
And	still	remain	beggars.
Sannyas	means	a	radical	change
From	this	stupid	approach
From	this	idiotic	behavior;
Your	reality	is	within
And	you	go	on	seeking	and	searching	without.
The	first	enquiry	should	be	made	within.
If	you	don't	find	it	there,	then	of	course
You	can	go	on	exploring	the	whole	world.
But	that	has	never	happened.
Those	who	have	gone	within	have	always	found	it.
Meditation	is	a	simple	process
Of	watching	your	own	mind.
Not	fighting	with	the	mind
Not	trying	to	control	it	either
Just	remaining	there,	a	choiceless	witness.
Whatsoever	passes	you	simply	take	note	of	it
With	no	prejudice	for	or	against.
You	don't	call	it	names
That	this	should	not	come	to	my	mind
That	this	is	an	ugly	thought	and
This	is	a	very	beautiful	and	virtuous	thought.
You	should	not	judge
You	should	remain	non-judgmental
Because	the	moment	you	judge,	you	lose	meditation.
You	become	identified.
Either	you	become	a	friend	or	you	become	a	foe.
You	create	relationships.
Meditation	means
Remaining	unrelated	with	your	thought	process
Utterly	unrelated,	cool,	calm
Watching	whatsoever	is	passing.
And	then	a	miracle	happens:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Slowly	slowly	one	becomes	aware
That	less	and	less	thoughts	are	passing.
The	more	alert	you	are,	 the	 less	 thoughts	pass	The	less	alert	you	are,	 the	more
thoughts	pass.
It	is	as	if	traffic	depends	on	your	awareness.
When	you	are	perfectly	aware
Even	for	a	single	moment,	all	thinking	stops.
Immediately,	there	is	a	sudden	stop
And	the	road	is	empty,	there	is	no	traffic.
That	moment	is	meditation.
Slowly	slowly	those	moments	come	more	and	more	Those	empty	spaces	come
again	and	again
And	stay	longer.
And	you	become	capable	of	moving	easily
Into	those	empty	spaces	with	no	effort.
So	whenever	you	want	you	can	move
Into	those	empty	spaces	with	no	effort.
They	are	refreshing,	rejuvenating
And	they	make	you	aware	of	who	you	are.
Freed	from	the	mind	you	are	freed
From	all	ideas	about	yourself.
Now	you	can	see	who	you	are	without	any	prejudice.
And	to	know	oneself
Is	to	know	all	that	is	worth	knowing.
And	to	miss	self-knowledge	is	to	miss	all.
A	man	my	know	everything	in	the	world
But	if	he	does	not	know	himself
He	is	utterly	ignorant
He	is	just	a	walking	Encyclopaedia	Britannica.
Freedom	without	awareness	is	only	an	empty	idea.
It	contains	nothing.
One	cannot	be	really	free	without	being	aware
Because	your	 unconscious	goes	on	dominating	you	Your	unconscious	goes	on
pulling	your	strings.
You	may	think,	you	may	believe	that	you	are	free	But	you	are	not	free,	you	are
just	a	victim
Of	natural	forces,	blind	forces.
So	there	are	two	types	of	people.	The	majority	Follows	the	tradition,	the	society,
the	state.
The	orthodox	people,	the	conventional
The	conformists	--	they	follow	the	crowd
They	are	not	free.
And	then	there	are	a	few	rebellious	spirits
Drop-outs,	bohemians,	artists
Painters,	musicians,	poets;
They	think	they	are	living	in	freedom
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	they	only	think.	Just	by	rebellion
Against	the	tradition	you	don't	become	free.
You	are	still	under	the	rule	of	natural	instincts.
You	are	possessed	by	lust,	by	greed,	by	ambitions.
And	you	are	not	a	master	of	these	things
You	are	a	slave.	Hence	I	say
Freedom	is	only	possible	through	awareness.
Unless	one	transforms	ones	unconsciousness
Into	consciousness	there	is	no	freedom.
And	that	is	where	only	very	few	people
Have	succeeded	--	a	Jesus,	a	Lao	Tzu
A	Zarathustra,	a	Buddha
Just	a	few	people
Who	can	be	counted	on	one's	fingers.
They	have	really	lived	in	freedom
Because	they	lived	out	of	awareness.
That	has	to	be	the	work	for	every	sannyasin:
To	create	more	and	more	awareness.
Then	freedom	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Freedom	is	the	fragrance	of	the	flower	of	awareness.
Decisiveness	is	a	very	essential	quality.
There	are	many	people	who	are	incapable
Of	deciding,	who	go	on	thinking.
They	waste	their	whole	life	in	thinking
Whether	to	do	this	or	not	to	do,
To	be	or	not	to	be.
And	they	are	always	hesitating,	they	can't	act	And	without	action	life	is	futile.
They	can't	decide,	and	without	decision
There	is	no	possibility	of	your	growth.
Yes,	one	should	look
At	all	the	possible	alternatives
But	not	for	too	long.
It	should	not	become	a	habit.
One	should	look	at	all	the	alternatives
And	then	one	should	be	able	to	decide.
One	should	not	wait	for	a	perfect	decision
Remember,	because	in	life
There	can	never	be	any	perfect	decision.
I	have	heard	about	a	man
Who	was	searching	for	a	perfect	wife.
He	died	unmarried	obviously.
When	he	was	dying	somebody	asked
'You	travelled	all	over	the	world
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	searched	for	a	perfect	wife.
Couldn't	you	find	a	single	woman	who	was	perfect?'
He	said,'Yes,	I	came	across	a	few
But	they	were	searching	for	perfect	husbands!.
If	one	is	a	perfectionist
One	is	doomed	to	fail.
Perfectionists	are	indecisive	people.
Nothing	satisfies	them,	everything	falls	short.
Their	ideal	is	too	high.
Everything	seems	to	be	unsatisfactory.
Decisiveness	means	knowing
That	life	is	imperfect	and	life	is	short
Knowing	that	we	have	limitations
Yet	we	have	to	decide.
Alternatives	are	limited,	we	cannot	wait	forever.
One	you	decide	then	you	go	wholeheartedly	into	it	You	risk	all.
One	has	to	be	a	gambler
Then	only	something	is	possible:
Growth	is	possible
A	new	birth	is	possible,	a	new	being	is	possible.
Otherwise	nothing	is	possible.
Decisiveness	is	absolutely	necessary.
And	it	is	good	that	you	have	decided	t
To	be	a	sannyasin.
Now	go	into	it	totally,	wholeheartedly.
Let	it	be	a	commitment,	a	deep	involvement.
Don't	remain	on	the	periphery
Move	towards	the	very	centre	of	it.
Only	then	some	revolution
Some	transformation	can	be	hoped	for.
God	has	no	form,	neither	do	we	have	any	form.
The	form	belongs	to	the	body.
It	is	as	if	you	look	out	of	your	window
And	the	sky	seems	to	be	framed	be	the	frame
Of	the	window,	although	the	sky	has	no	frame.
If	you	come	away	from	the	window
You	will	be	surprised:
There	is	no	frame	around	the	sky.
Hence	a	few	modern	painters	have	dropped
Framing	their	paintings,	for	the	simple	reason	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	the	frame	is	arbitrary.
If	you	paint	a	sunset	there	is	no	frame
But	when	you	paint	a	painting	you	put
A	frame	on	it;	it	begins	somewhere
And	ends	somewhere.
But	the	real	sunset	does	not	begin	anywhere
And	does	not	end	anywhere.	It	is	infinite.
Our	body	and	our	mind	give	us	a	certain	form
But	that	is	not	our	truth.	We	are	formless.
One	has	to	know	it;	unless	one	knows	it
One	is	not	aware	of	god
One	cannot	be	aware	of	god.
God	is	not	somebody	sitting	there
In	the	seventh	heaven,	directing,	guiding...
A	super-boss	or	something	like	that.
God	is	within	you!
If	you	look	in	and	if	you	can	find
Something	which	is	formless,	you	have	found	god.
And	then	you	will	come	across	him	everywhere.
In	the	trees,	in	the	mountains,	in	the	people
You	will	be	able	to	see	the	formless.
All	forms	are	arbitrary:	reality	is	formless.
And	when	one	is	formless	one	is	oceanic.
That	vastness	gives	so	much	ecstasy
It	brings	such	blessing,	such	benediction
That	one	cannot	imagine	it.
Unless	it	has	happened.
The	sky	is	not	really	blue,	it	has	no	colour
But	because	it	is	infinite	it	appears	blue.
The	blue	is	only	an	appearance.
Whenever	the	river	is	deep	it	will	appear	blue	Although	the	water	has	no	colour.
Depth	gives	it	an	appearance	of	blueness.
That's	why	in	India	you	will	come	across
Krishna	painted	as	if	he	were	blue.
Now,	nobody	is	born	blue.
There	are	black	people	and	there	are	white
People	and	there	are	red	people	and	yellow
People.
But	nobody	is	born	blue
Except	a	few	blue	children	who	die
Who	cannot	survive.
But	Krishna	is	painted	as	if	he	were	blue.
The	very	word	'krishna'	means	the	blue	one.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
He	is	painted	blue	for	the	simple	reason	that
Blueness	represents	depth,	infinity,	vastness.
Remember	it,	the	body	is	not	our	reality.
It	is	just	a	caravanserai,	an	overnights's	stay.
Nor	is	the	mind	our	reality.
We	are	as	vast	as	the	sky.
Once	 you	 know	 this	 vastness	 as	 your	 real	 being	You	 are	 freed	 from	 all	 small
identities.
From	all	mediocre,	mundane	confinements.
You	are	freed	from	all	prisons.
And	that	freedom	is	sannyas.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
8	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004085
ShortTitle:	84POEM06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	can	function	in	two	ways.
Either	he	can	function	as	a	thinking	machine
Just	like	a	computer...
That's	what	our	schools,	colleges	and	universities	Are	preparing	people	for:
To	function	as	skilful,	efficient	computers.
But	then	they	destroy	your	soul.
You	become	commodities	in	the	marketplace.
Your	life	becomes	a	drag.
You	can't	experience	beauty
You	can't	experience	ecstasy
You	can't	experience	love.
No	computer	will	ever	be	able	to	feel	love
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Or	to	experience	beauty	or	attain	to	ecstasy.
The	computer	can	do	everything
That	Albert	Einstein	can	do
But	the	computer	cannot	become	enlightened.
It	cannot	do	that	which	only	a	Buddha	can	do.
Humanity	is	dying,	and	dying	so	slowly
That	we	are	not	even	becoming	aware	of	it.
The	death	is	happening
Through	a	very	slow	poisoning.
Man	is	transformed	more	and	more	into	a	biocomputer.
Sannyas	is	a	rebellion
Against	this	whole	nonsense.
My	effort	here	is	to	bring	to	your	notice
That	the	heart	is	your	real	centre.
Don't	neglect	it,	don't	be	indifferent	to	it.
Use	the	mind	but	don't	be	used	by	the	mind.
Use	the	mind	as	a	beautiful	machine:
As	a	car,	as	a	computer,	as	a	friend
As	an	air	conditioner...	but	not	more	than	that!
Remain	rooted	in	the	heart
Function	from	the	heart.
Let	feelings	be	decisive.
Howsoever	illogical	they	appear,	let	them	be	decisive	And	your	life	will	have	a
dance	of	its	own
A	beauty	of	its	own,	a	bliss	of	its	own
A	benediction	of	its	own.
Ordinarily	people	only	think,	they	don't	feel.
Even	when	they	say	that	they	are	feeling
They	are	only	thinking	that	they	are	feeling.
The	mind	has	possessed	everybody	so	totally	that	It	has	not	left	any	space
For	the	heart	to	function.
The	mind	is	a	dictator:
It	has	pushed	the	heart	completely
Out	of	existence.
And	the	heart	is	your	real	treasure.
God	cannot	be	thought,	god	can	only	be	felt.
Love	cannot	be	thought,	love	can	only	be	felt.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
All	that	is	significant
All	that	makes	life	meaningful
Can	only	be	felt.
And	we	have	stopped	the	heart	from	functioning.
That	is	our	misery,	the	root	cause	of	our	misery.
My	sannyasins	have	to	change
This	whole	structure,	the	whole	gestalt:
Think	less,	feel	more.
Slowly	slowly	let	the	heart	be	the	master
And	the	mind,	the	servant	--	that's	its	right	place.
It	is	good	as	a	servant	but	very	bad	as	a	master.
The	heart	is	always	true.
The	heart	is	never	untrue
And	the	head	is	never	true.
The	head	lives	in	lies,	it	lives	on	lies.
It	exists	in	all	kinds	of	falsehoods.
The	heart	is	authentic,	it	is	sincere.
It	is	simple,	it	is	not	cunning.
It	is	tremendously	intelligent	but	not	cunning.
It	simply	reflects	that	which	is.
That's	its	beauty	and	its	truth.
God	is	never	known	through	the	head.
Anything	that	has	any	value
Is	never	known	through	the	head.
Love,	beauty,	god
They	are	all	known	through	the	heart.
The	heart	is	the	gateless	gate	to	reality.
Move	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
We	are	all	hung	up	in	the	head.
That	is	our	only	problem,	the	only	one	problem	And	there	is	only	one	solution:
Get	down	from	the	head	into	the	heart
And	all	problems	disappear.
They	are	created	by	the	head.
And	suddenly	everything	is	so	clear
And	so	transparent	that	one	is	surprised
How	one	was	continuously	inventing	problems.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Mysteries	remain	but	problems	disappear.
Mysteries	abound	but	problems	evaporate.
And	mysteries	are	beautiful.
They	are	not	to	be	solved
They	have	to	be	lived.
Love	is	the	only	nourishment	for	the	soul.
Without	love	the	soul	remains	weak.
Just	as	without	food	the	body	will	be	weak
Love	is	food	for	the	soul.
The	ore	you	love,	the	stronger	becomes	your	spirit.
And	the	beauty	of	the	strength	that	love	brings	Is	that	it	is	non-egoistic.
One	can	be	strong,	but	if	one	becomes	egoistic	Then	the	whole	point	is	missed.
Egoistic	strength	is	self-destructive
Because	ego	is	your	enemy.
Making	it	stronger	is	cutting	your	own	throat.
It	is	digging	a	ditch
Into	which	you	are	going	to	fall.
But	when	your	spirit	becomes	stronger
Through	love	a	miracle	happens:
Ego	cannot	function	with	love.
The	first	requirement	of	love	is	egolessness
So	the	ego	is	cut	from	the	very	root.
And	when	the	spirit	is	strong	without	ego
And	overflowing	with	love,	you	have	arrived	home.
God	is	no	more	a	far-away	phenomenon
He	is	as	close	as	your	own	breathing.
That's	why	Jesus	says	god	is	love.
Loneliness	is	a	negative	state
It	is	the	negative	aspect:
You	are	missing	the	other
You	are	feeling	empty
You	are	hankering	for	the	other
You	are	longing	for	the	other.
You	are	nothing	but	a	longing	and	a	waiting
Hence	loneliness	is	misery.
But	aloneness	is	joy,	it	is	the	positive	aspect.
You	are	not	missing	anybody,
You	are	feeling	your	own	presence.
You	are	so	full	of	your	own	presence	that
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
There	is	no	question	of	missing	anybody	at	all.
Very	few	people	know	what	aloneness	is.
Millions	know	what	loneliness	is.
That	is	very	ordinary
As	common	as	the	common	cold.
Everybody	suffers	from	loneliness.
But	only	a	Jesus	or	a	Buddha	or	a	Lao	Tzu
reach	to	the	highest	peak	of	aloneness.
The	same	difference	exists	between
Solitariness	and	solitude.
Solitariness	is	ugly,	solitude	is	beautiful.
Solitariness	is	dark	and	dismal
Solitude	is	full	of	light	and	joy	and	bliss.
Unless	 one	 is	 absolutely	 present,	 alert	 and	 aware	 One	 will	 not	 know	 what
aloneness	or	solitude	are.
The	only	way	to	know	them	is	meditation.
Meditation	is	the	method	to	transform
Your	loneliness	into	aloneness.
And	that	is	the	greatest	miracle
That	can	happen	to	anybody:
Darkness	becomes	luminous
Emptiness	becomes	fulfilment.
To	be	in	total	rest	is	to	be	in	prayer.
Prayer	has	not	to	be	done.
It	is	not	an	activity,	it	is	absolute	rest.
One	can	be	in	prayer	but	one	cannot	do	prayer.
Learn	to	relax.
The	more	relaxed	you	are,	the	closer	you	are
To	your	innermost	core
Because	all	activity	is	on	the	circumference.
The	centre	of	the	cyclone.
And	it	is	at	the	centre
That	one	realises	oneself
And	one	also	discovers	god.
Every	human	being	brings	a	truth	into	the	world.
Every	human	being	is	a	messenger	of	god,
Not	only	Jesus	Christ	or	Buddha	or	Zarathustra.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
They	know	they	are.
Others	don't	know	that	they	are.
But	the	moment	you	are	born
You	bring	a	truth	in	your	being.
And	unless	that	truth	is	expressed
You	will	not	feel	contented.
Unless	you	deliver	the	message	to	the	world
You	will	feel	a	deep	is	comfort	because
You	are	not	fulfilling	your	duty	towards	god.
You	have	to	sing	the	song	of	your	heart.
You	have	to	dance	your	dance.
You	have	to	be	utterly	individual,
Not	an	imitation,	not	a	carbon	copy.
You	 have	 to	 bring	 out	 your	 original	 face.	 The	moment	 you	 are	 able	 to	 reveal
Your	original	face	to	the	world
Your	life	is	fulfilled.
Tremendous	joy	arises	out	of	it.
The	moon
Is	one	of	the	most	significant	metaphors.
It	represents	cool	energy.
The	sun	is	very	hot,	feverishly	hot;	it	can	burn.
The	moon	is	very	soothing.
The	sun	is	passion,	mad	passion.
The	moon	is	compassion.
The	moon	represents	Buddha	energy
The	energy	of	an	enlightened	one.
One	has	to	move	from	the	sun	to	the	moon.
We	are	all	born	with	sun	energy
Because	we	are	born	out	of	passion.
We	have	to	transform	passion	into	compassion.
We	have	to	bring	this	heated,	feverish	state
Of	our	being	to	a	calm	and	quiet	and	cool	space.
That's	the	whole	endeavour	of	sannyas.
Sannyas	is	a	process	of	surrendering	the	will
Because	the	will
Is	nothing	but	an	expression	of	the	ego.
And	unless	you	surrender	your	will
You	can't	allow	god's	will
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
To	function	through	you.
When	you	surrender	your	will
When	you	drop	it	totally
Then	god's	will
Can	start	functioning	through	you.
You	become	a	vehicle.
That's	what	Jesus	means	when	he	says
'Thy	kingdom	come,	thy	will	be	done':
Not	mine	but	thine,	not	I	but	thou.
That's	the	difference	between
An	ordinary	person	and	a	religious	person:
The	ordinary	person	is	full	of	I	and	I	and	I.
And	the	religious	person
Is	full	of	thou,	thou,	thou.
Only	 a	 little	 difference	 on	 the	 surface	 but	 deep	 down	 There	 is	 the	 biggest
difference
As	big	as	one	can	imagine.
Remember	it:	the	will	has	to	be	dropped.
It	is	difficult	because	we	have	been	trained
To	cling	to	our	will,	to	enforce	it
To	strengthen	it.
And	there	are	stupid	people	around	the	world
Who	go	on	teaching	how	to	increase	your	will-power.
There	are	thousands	of	books	in	existence
Which	sell	in	millions,	teaching	people
How	will-power	can	be	increased
And	how	you	can	succeed	in	everything
Through	the	will-power.
It	is	will-power	that	brings	man
To	utter	frustration,	to	utter	failure.
Man	has	to	be	absolutely	empty	of	his	own	power.
That	power	trip	has	to	be	dropped.
When	you	are	empty
And	you	can	say	'Thy	will	be	done'
You	have	entered	into	a	new	path
A	new	style	of	life.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
A	song	of	joy
Is	exactly	the	definition	of	sannyas,
Nothing	more,	nothing	less.
It	is	precisely	the	definition:	a	song	of	joy.
Sannyas	is	not	renunciation
It	is	not	against	life,	it	is	all	for	life.
I	don't	divide	the	ordinary	life
From	the	spiritual	life.
They	are	one,	they	are	inseparably	one.
To	separate	them	is	to	create	a	split	humanity	A	schizophrenic	humanity.
Life	is	a	unity,	an	organic	unity,	indivisible.
Nothing	is	higher	and	nothing	is	lower.
There	is	no	hierarchy.
Everything	exists	simultaneously
On	the	same	plane.
So	nothing	has	to	be	renounced
Nothing	has	to	be	rejected.
Of	course	everything	has	to	be	transformed
And	transformed	through	love
Transformed	through	bliss,	transformed	through	joy.
If	you	can	bring	dance	to	your	life
You	are	a	sannyasin.
There	is	no	need	to	think	of	god
There	is	no	need	to	go	to	the	churches
And	the	temples.
If	you	can	bring	dance	to	your	life
If	each	moment	of	your	life	can	become	a	melody	If	it	can	become	a	rhythmic
experience
Then	god	is	bound	to	come	to	you.
Everything	is	a	gift.
We	have	not	earned	it,	we	don't	even	deserve	it.
Seeing	a	beautiful	sunset
Have	you	ever	pondered	over	the	matter:
Do	you	deserve	it?
Listening	to	a	distant	call	of	the	cuckoo
Have	you	ever	thought:	do	you	deserve	it?
Or	the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Or	the	river	dancing	towards	the	ocean
And	the	sky	full	of	stars...
What	have	we	done
To	have	this	beautiful	universe?
We	have	not	paid	for	it,	we	are	not	worthy	of	it.
It	is	out	of	this	experience-
That	we	don't	deserve	it
Yet	it	has	been	given	to	us-
That	religious	consciousness	arises
Gratitude	arises.
One	starts	feeling	tremendously	grateful
To	the	unknown	hands,	the	invisible	hands
that	have	created	this	beautiful,
This	tremendously,	unbelievably
Beautiful	existence.
In	that	gratitude	one	is	religious,
Not	by	being	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu
Or	a	Mohammedan
But	just	by	being	grateful.
Learn	the	art	of	being	grateful.
And	there	are	so	many	situations
Millions	of	them.
Every	moment	you	come	across	 something	or	other	Which	can	make	you	 feel
immensely	grateful.
But	we	have	forgotten	the	language	of	gratefulness.
Our	minds	go	on	complaining	and	complaining
Asking	for	more.
The	religious	person	has	no	complaint
But	only	gratitude.
He	does	not	ask	for	more.
He	simply	bows	down	to	the	unknown	energy
That	has	given	so	much	already...
And	we	had	not	asked	for	it.
It	has	been	given	out	of	god's	abundance.
His	overflowing	delight	is	the	cause	of	creation.
It	is	out	of	his	blissfulness,	his	playfulness	That	existence	has	arisen.
Remember:
If	you	can	start	feeling	more	and	more	grateful	You	will	be	transformed	by	that
gratefulness.
That	is	the	secret	formula	of	inner	change
Of	a	radical	change.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
One	needs	to	be	industrious
One	needs	to	accept	challenges	which	provoke	one	For	the	upward	journey.
It	is	hard,	it	is	dangerous
But	it	brings	out	the	best	in	you.
It	creates	integrity
Ultimately	it	creates	a	soul	in	you.
Georges	Gurdjieff	used	to	say
That	everybody	is	not	born	with	a	soul.
He	is	right.	Everybody	is	born	only	with
The	possibility	of	a	soul;
Very	few	actually	attain	it.
To	actualize	your	being	means	tremendous	effort.
One	has	to	put	one's	total	energies	to	the	task	Only	then...
One	has	to	risk	all,	only	then...
But	then	life	blooms,	flowers.
It	becomes	a	joy,	a	fulfilment,	a	contentment
A	blessing.
Osho	asks	Gogo,	a	young	German:	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?	Are	you
a	go-go	boy?
Gogo:	 IT	 WAS	 THE	 FIRST	 WORD	 I	 SAID	 WHEN	 I	 WAS	 A	 BABY.	 MY
PARENTS	GAVE	ME
THE	NAME.
Osho:	No,	it	is	beautiful	--	it	sounds	good!
In	fact	this	is	the	best	German	name	I	have	come	across!	It	has	some	poetry	in	it,
some	music	 in	 it,	 some	 laughter	 in	 it	 otherwise	German	names	are	 so	 serious:
Wolfgang...	And	in	every	name	there	is	something	concerned	with	war,	battle...
It	is	good	--	be	a	go-go	boy!...
Now	you	have	to	make	it	a	point
To	be	constantly	blissful.
That	is	the	meaning	of	anand.
Life	should	be	a	dance,	a	song,	a	celebration.
And	come	back	--	this	is	your	home!
Man	is	homeless	in	this	world	unless	he	finds	god.
Man	is	homeless	unless	he	becomes	enlightened
Because	only	in	ultimate	awakening
Is	there	shelter.
Otherwise	we	go	on	passing
From	one	caravanserai	to	another
From	one	life	to	another.
It	is	a	long,	long	weary	pilgrimage
Utterly	futile,	meaningless;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
We	almost	go	on	in	circles
Reaching	nowhere,	finding	nothing;
Always	hoping,	dreaming
But	ultimately
There	is	only	frustration	in	the	hands.
The	home	certainly	exists
But	only	very	few	people	have	found	it	up	to	now.
And	the	few	who	have	found
Have	found	it	in	the	most	unexpected	place:
They	have	found	it	within	themselves.
That's	why	we	remain	homeless.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
9	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004095
ShortTitle:	84POEM07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	can	live	life	either	as	prose	or	as	poetry.
If	you	live	life	as	prose
Life	remains	business,	arithmetic.
If	you	live	life	as	poetry
Life	becomes	an	incredible	experience
Of	beauty,	of	love,	of	joy	and	ultimately	of	god.
Poetry	is	a	way	towards	god.
Prose	 takes	 you	 away	 from	 all	 that	 is	 significant	 From	 all	 that	 is	 intrinsically
beautiful.
It	keeps	you	engaged	with	the	utilitarian	.
But	beauty	has	no	utility,	love	has	no	utility	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Bliss	has	no	utility,	meditation	has	no	utility.
They	are	all	part	of	a	poetic	vision.
Poetry	is	non-utilitarian.
I	would	like	my	sannyasins
To	be	absolutely	non-utilitarian
Because	that	is	the	only	possible	door
To	enter	into	the	divine.
Life	can	be	lived	either
As	a	downhill	phenomenon	or	as	an	uphill	task.
If	you	are	moving	downhill
It	is	convenient,	comfortable.
No	effort	is	needed	on	your	part,	no	risk
No	challenge	--	but	no	gain	either.
You	simply	drift	from	birth	to	death.
Life	remains	a	vast	emptiness.
Now	you	have	to	make	it	a	point
To	be	constantly	blissful.
That	is	the	meaning	of	anand.
Life	should	be	a	dance,	a	song,	a	celebration.
And	come	back	--	this	is	your	home!
Man	is	homeless	in	this	world	unless	he	finds	god.
Man	is	homeless	unless	he	becomes	enlightened
Because	only	in	ultimate	awakening
Is	there	shelter.
Otherwise	we	go	on	passing
From	one	caravanserai	to	another
From	one	life	to	another.
It	is	a	long,	long	weary	pilgrimage
Utterly	futile,	meaningless;
We	almost	go	on	in	circles
Reaching	nowhere,	finding	nothing;
Always	hoping,	dreaming
But	ultimately
There	is	only	frustration	in	the	hands.
The	home	certainly	exists
But	only	very	few	people	have	found	it	up	to	now.
And	the	few	who	have	found	have	found	it	in	the	most	unexpected	place:	They
have	found	it	within	themselves.
And	everybody	is	searching	for	it
Everywhere	else	except	within	themselves.
That's	why	we	remain	homeless.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
We	are	not	aware	of	how	precious	we	are.
We	are	not	aware	of	the	inexhaustible	treasure	That	we	are	carrying	within	us.
And	because	we	are	not	aware	of	it
We	go	on	desiring	small	things
Quarrelling	about	mundane	things
Fighting,	competing	for	something	trivial.
The	moment	you	become	aware
Of	your	own	inner	beauty
All	this	struggle	on	the	outside	disappears.
Life	becomes	calm	and	cool
Life	attains	to	a	grace.
One	is	no	more	interested	in	the	non-essential.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:
Awareness	of	the	inner,	and	the	transformation	That	it	brings	on	the	outside.
Inside	you	become	more	and	more	meditative
Outside	you	become	more	compassionate.
The	universe	is	vast,	unbounded
And	so	are	we	because	we	are	part	of	it.
And	the	part	is	indivisibly	one	with	the	whole	So	whatsoever	is	the	quality	of	the
whole
That	is	the	quality	of	th	part	too.
Just	remember	a	very	small	formula:
That	if	all	the	parts	are	finite
Then	the	total	cannot	be	infinite.
If	the	total	is	infinite
Then	all	the	parts	must	be	infinite	too.
And	we	are	part	of	this	infinite	existence
We	are	also	infinite.
Hence	the	Eastern	seers	have	declared
'Aham	Brahmasmi'	--	I	am	god.
Al	Hillaj	Mansoor	says	'Ana'l	Haq'	--	I	am	truth.
These	are	tremendously	important	declarations.
They	have	declared	it
On	behalf	of	the	whole	humanity.
These	are	not	egoistic	assertions
They	are	simply	statements	of	facts.
And	just	to	feel	it,
That	you	are	part	of	an	infinite	existence
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Which	begins	nowhere,	ends	nowhere
You	immediately	feel	uplifted,	weightless.
Your	small	worries	and	small	problems	drop.
they	become	so	insignificant
Compared	to	the	vastness	that	you	are.
They	lose	all	meaning
They	simply	become	irrelevant.
So	remember	it	again	and	again:
Seeing	the	sky	know	that	you	are	also	the	sky.
Seeing	the	stars	know	that	the	stars	are	within	you.
As	much	as	you	are	within	the	sky
The	sky	is	within	you.
Slowly	slowly	your	whole	gestalt	will	change
And	in	that	next	gestalt
Small	problems	can't	arise
They	become	ridiculous.
Somebody	has	insulted	you	--
Now	can	anybody	insult	the	sky?
If	you	spit	on	the	sky
The	spit	will	fall	upon	you.
It	is	absurd,	it	is	ridiculous,
The	person	is	stupid,	that's	all.
You	will	feel	all	compassion	for	the	person
You	will	not	be	angered	by	his	insult.
That's	how	the	real	man	of	religion
Passes	through	life:
Unaffected,	calm	and	cool	and	tranquil
Centred	and	rooted	in	his	being.
Nothing	can	make	him	waver,	not	even	death
Because	even	death
Cannot	take	anything	away	from	him.
He	has	become	one
With	that	which	is	eternally	abiding.
Rosemary	is	a	flower
Which	symbolises	remembrance.
It	is	very	significant	to	understand
The	word	'remembrance'.
The	whole	religion
Is	contained	in	that	small	word.
God	is	not	lost	but	only	forgotten.
We	have	only	to	remember	him.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	not	a	question	of	seeking	and	searching.
He	is	already	here,	he	is	with	us
He	is	our	very	life,	our	very	being.
We	cannot	lose	him,	there	is	no	way	to	lose	him.
The	only	possiblility	is	that	we	can
Forget	all	about	him	and	he	is	so	close
That	it	is	very	easy	to	forget	him.
There	is	no	distance,	hence	we	become	oblivious.
All	meditations,	all	prayers,	all	methods
Developed	down	the	ages	are	nothing	but
Devices	to	make	you	remember
That	which	you	have	forgotten.
The	moment	you	remember	it	you	cannot	believe
How	for	so	long	you	remained	in	darkness
While	the	light	was	waiting	within	you.
How	did	it	happen	in	the	first	place
That	you	remained	a	beggar
When	the	whole	kingdom	of	god	was	yours?
It	is	the	ultimate	puzzle,	with	no	solution.
But	it	is	a	fact	that	we	have	forgotten.
Buddha	was	asked	again	and	again
'	How	have	we	forgotten?'
He	said,'Don't	ask	that
Ask	how	to	remember.'
When	you	have	remembered
Then	you	can	enquire	how	you	forgot
Because	nobody	knows	how	we	have	forgotten.
But	there	are	methods	to	remember.
And	that	is	the	real	thing.
Sannyas	means	now	it	is	going	to	be
A	twenty-four-hour-a-day	remembrance
In	every	possible	way.
Seeing	a	flower	remember	god.
Not	 only	 rosemary,	 but	 each	 flower	 and	 each	 tree	 And	 each	 cloud	 and	 each
person
Should	represent	him
Because	in	fact	only	he	exists	and	nothing	else.
One	has	to	learn	to	see
Divineness	even	in	darkness.
It	is	easy	to	see	light	as	god
It	does	not	need	much	intelligence.
But	to	see	darkness	as	god
Needs	tremendous	insight.
It	is	easy	to	see	life	as	divine
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	to	see	death	as	divine	needs
A	total	transformation	of	your	vision.
Only	very	few	religions	have	achieved	that	peak.
Christianity,	Islam,	Judaism,	Zorastrianism	--
They	all	remain	confined	to	the	duality
The	fight	between	good	and	evil,	god	and	devil.
They	have	not	been	able	to	reconcile	this	conflict.
And	this	conflict	has	to	be	reconciled	Because	the	universe	is	one
It	can't	be	divided	into	two.
Darkness	and	light	are	not	two	different	forces.
Darkness	simply	beans	less	light,
Light	simply	means	less	darkness;
The	difference	is	only	of	degree.
The	difference	is	exactly	like	that
Between	cold	and	hot.
They	are	not	two	things.
It	is	the	same	phenomenon,	so	you	can	measure	it	By	the	same	method,	by	the
same	thermometer.
The	good	and	the	bad,	the	sinner	and	the	saint	Are	not	separate	but	two	sides	of
the	same	coin.
This	is	one	of	the	greatest	synthesis
That	has	been	achieved	in	the	East.
This	is	the	ultimate	synthesis
Where	god	and	the	devil
Are	no	more	thought	to	be	enemies;
They	disappear	into	each	other
They	become	one	energy.
And	that's	what	I	would	like	you
To	see,	feel,	understand:
That	darkness	too	is	divine,	death	too	is	divine.
Even	the	sinner	is	a	phase	of	divine	energy.
There	is	nothing	bad	in	existence
Because	all	is	god
All	are	manifestations	of	one	energy.
The	cloud	represents	a	few	things.
One:	it	represents	absolute	freedom.
It	is	not	tethered	to	anything.
It	is	completely	free,	it	floats	in	freedom.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That's	how	a	sannyasin	has	to	be:
Like	a	cloud,	untethered.
Secondly,	the	cloud	has	no	fixed	form.
It	is	not	static
It	is	constantly	moving	and	changing.
Not	even	for	the	consecutive	seconds	is	it	the	same.
That	represents	something	very	essential:
Life	is	movement;	only	death	is	not	a	movement.
Only	dead	thins	don't	change
Things	which	are	alive	are	constantly	changing.
That's	how	a	sannyasin	has	to	be:
Always	on	the	move,	changing
REaching	for	newer	horizons
Exploring	for	newer	pastures.
A	sannyasin	is	as	unpredictable	as	a	cloud;
Nobody	can	say	what	form
It	is	going	to	take	next	moment.
And	thirdly,	the	cloud	has	no	ego	of	its	own.
It	is	utterly	surrendered	to	the	winds
So	wherever	the	winds	take	the	cloud
It	moves	without	any	resistance.
It	has	no	will	of	its	own
It	does	not	insist	that
'I	want	to	go	to	the	East	or	to	the	West'
It	simply	goes	with	the	wind
Wherever	the	wind	goes.
That	also	has	to	be	an	essential	quality
Of	a	sannyasin.
He	should	not	have	his	own	will.
His	will	is	surrendered	to	god.
He	says	to	god,	every	moment,	with	every	breath
'Thy	will	be	done.'
Gratitude	is	in	essence
The	very	foundation	of	all	religion.
Gratitude	is	prayer.
It	is	trough	gratitude
That	one	becomes	aware	of	the	presence	of	god;	Not	vice	versa.
People	 thing	 that	when	they	become	aware	of	god	They	will	 feel	very	grateful
towards	him.
That's	nonsense!	It	can't	happen	that	way.
First	you	have	to	learn	how	to	be	grateful
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Only	then	can	you	become	aware
Of	the	presence	of	god.
Gratitude	means	that	you	have	become
Aware	of	one	thing:
That	the	existence	has	done	so	much	for	you
And	you	have	not	even	thanked	it.
On	the	contrary
You	have	been	continuously	complaining.
This	is	my	experience	here
Working	with	thousands	of	sannyasins:
You	go	on	doing	everything	for	them
But	they	don't	have	any	sense	of	gratitude.
And	every	day	I	receive	letters	of	complaint
That	this	has	not	been	done	for	them
That	they	are	not	being	taken	care	of
That	nobody	is	taking	any	note
That	they	are	here.
But	very	rarely
Does	somebody	come	to	feel	gratitude.
We	have	lost	the	very	sense	of	gratefulness.
So	whatsoever	happens	to	us	we	accept	it
As	if	we	deserve	it.	We	don't	deserve	a	thing!
But	we	start	taking	everything	for	granted.
I	am	always	surprised
By	the	insensitivity	of	human	beings.
For	a	few	people	I	have	done	so	much	for	years	But	no	sense	of	gratitude	ever
arises	in	them.
And	there	seems	to	be	no	possibility
That	it	will	ever	arise.
And	if	whatsoever	has	been	done	for	them
Is	dropped,	if	something	is	no	more	done
Then	they	are	there	immediately
To	make	a	complaint.
They	take	it	for	granted
They	think	they	have	earned	it:
It	has	to	be	given	to	them.
And	man	has	not	earned	anything
We	have	not	earned	these	trees
And	these	flowers	and	these	birds
And	these	stars	and	these	mountains.
This	immensely	beautiful	existence
Has	been	given	to	us.
Start	feeling	grateful	for	it!
It	is	not	a	question	of	to	whom,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	is	not	the	point,	it	is	irrelevant.
Just	start	feeling	grateful
That	you	have	been	showered	with	so	many	gifts	From	some	unknown	energy,	x
y	x,
Whatsoever	it	is.
Call	it	god,	or	if	that	word	annoys	you
Then	call	it	something	else.
But	some	unknown	force
Has	been	showering	its	love	on	you.
Start	feeling	grateful
And	soon	you	will	be	connected	with	it
And	soon	you	will	be	bridged
And	more	will	start	happening.
And	you	will	be	surprised
That	one	cannot	feel	grateful	enough.
It	is	never	enough	because	the	existence
Goes	on	doing	so	much	for	you.
We	cannot	repay	it
But	at	least	we	can	be	thankful.
That	is	prayer	and	that	is	sannyas.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
10	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004105
ShortTitle:	84POEM08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Sannyas	is	not	a	religion.
It	is	not	a	church,	it	is	not	a	sect.
It	is	not	an	effort	to	force	you
According	to	some	pattern.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	just	to	help	you	to	be	totally	free
So	that	you	can	be	yourself.
My	effort	here	is
To	give	you	a	taste	of	freedom.
Once	you	have	tasted	freedom
Nobody	can	enslave	you.
And	the	politicians	and	the	priests
Are	all	for	enslaving	people.
They	don't	want	people	who	are	intelligent
People	who	are	free,	people	who	are	rebels.
They	want	slaves	because	slaves	can	be
Exploited	easily,	oppressed	easily,
Manipulated	easily,	dominated	easily.
And	I	am	creating	fire	here!
Each	of	my	sannyasin	has	to	prove	a	danger
To	all	the	old	rotten	structures	of	society.
Each	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	sabotage.
That's	why	I	have	chosen
The	colour	of	fire	for	sannyas.
And	we	have	to	make	so	many	sannyasins
That	they	cannot	manage	so	many	fire	brigades!
Sannyas	 is	a	 rebellion	against	all	 conventions	Against	all	 conformities,	 against
all	ideologies	Against	all	traditions,
In	short	against	the	whole	past.
Unless	one	gets	rid	of	the	past
One	is	never	available	to	the	present
And	only	the	present	exists
And	only	in	the	present	can	god	be	found,
Not	in	the	past,	not	in	the	future	either.
Both	are	non-existential.
Past	is	no	more,	future	is	not	yet.
This	moment,	this	now	is	all	there	is.
To	rebel	against	the	past	means
To	be	herenow
And	then	life	has
A	totally	different	significance:
It	is	divine,	it	is	ecstatic,	it	knows	no	death.
We	are	all	forms	of	god.
Everything	is	a	form	of	god
Because	nothing	else	exists.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
God	and	existence	are	synonymous,
Remember	it.
Looking	at	a	tree	remind	yourself
That	you	are	looking	at	a	god.
Looking	at	a	mountain	remind	yourself.
Even	looking	at	a	dog	remind	yourself.
Maybe	the	dog	is	god	a	little	bit	upside	down
But	the	energy	is	the	same
It	is	one	energy.
And	the	more	you	remind	yourself
The	more	you	will	start	feeling	it.
It	is	only	a	question	of	constant	hammering.
And	one	day	when	it	explodes	one	is	surprised
Utterly	surprised	that	one	has	been	living
Amidst	so	many	forms	of	god
And	yet	missing	him.
There	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere	to	search	for	him	He	is	all	around	you.
He	is	within
He	is	without.
Make	it	your	meditation.
God	has	no	form	although	all	forms	are	his.
He	has	no	colour	although	all	colours	are	his.
He	does	not	exist	in	some	particular	place
Because	he	exists	everywhere.
Only	because	he	has	no	form
Can	he	manifest	himself	in	millions	of	forms.
If	you	have	a	certain	form
Then	you	are	bound	to	that	form
Then	you	cannot	be	multi-dimensional.
If	you	are	a	man	then	you	cannot	be	a	woman.
If	you	are	a	woman	you	cannot	be	a	man.
If	you	are	a	tree	you	cannot	be	a	rock.
If	you	are	a	rock	you	cannot	be	a	river.
But	he	is	all
Because	he	is	no	one	in	particular.
These	two	things	have	to	be	remembered.
All	images	are	false	because	god	has	no	form.
Worship	him	in	his	formlessness
Worship	him	an	all	forms
But	 don't	 become	 attached	 to	 any	 particular	 form:	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan.
Let	the	whole	existence	be	his	temple.
I	teach	a	religionless	religion
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
A	godless	godliness.
I	don't	make	any	division	between
God	the	creator	and	the	creation.
It	is	the	same:	god	is	his	creation.
God	is	like	a	dancer.
You	cannot	separate	the	dance	and	the	dancer.
So	love	him	an	all	forms
And	remember	that	he	has	no	form.
So	don't	become	attached	to	any	form.
If	this	mindfulness	can	be	carried
You	will	be	surprised:
It	will	bring	you	many	many	precious	experiences	And	ultimately	the	goal	will
be	fulfilled,
The	goal	of	realising	the	formless.
You	will	realise	it	within	yourself
Because	you	are	also	formless.
The	body	is	not	you,	nor	is	the	mind.
You	are	the	consciousness
Which	has	no	form,	no	limitation.
It	is	as	vast	as	the	sky.
A	humble	heart	is	one	of	the	greatest	virtues
For	one	who	is	in	search	of	truth.
Only	those	who	are	humble	can	know	truth.
The	egoists	are	prohibited.
The	ego	itself	becomes	the	barrier.
It	cuts	you	away	from	existence.
Ego	means	you	are	thinking
You	are	separate	form	the	whole.
And	you	are	not!
We	are	not	islands,	no	man	is	an	island.
We	are	part	of	an	infinite	continent.
The	ego	gives	us	a	false	feeling	of	separation	And	because	of	that	false	feeling
of	separation	Slowly	slowly	we	become	enclosed	in	ourselves.
We	become	too	self-conscious,	self-centred
Utterly	closed	to	the	world.
Closed	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon
To	the	wind,	to	the	rain.
We	become	encapsulated.
That	is	a	kind	of	living	death.
We	start	carrying	our	grave	around	ourselves.
It	is	a	very	invisible	grave
But	it	is	a	grave	all	the	same.
Sannyas	means	dropping	that	grave
Coming	out	of	the	grave
Just	as	Lazarus	came	out	of	the	grave
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
When	Jesus	called	him,	'Lazarus,	come	out!'
That	has	been	the	function
Of	all	the	masters	down	the	ages:
Calling	Lazaruses	to	come	out	of	graves.
It	is	a	beautiful	parable,	not	history
Bot	one	of	the	most	is	significant	myths,
Of	tremendous	import.
Every	sannyasin	has	to	go	through	that	myth
He	has	to	live	it.
When	you	come	to	me	you	are	in	the	grave.
When	you	come	to	me	you	are	Lazarus,	dead.
When	you	start	dropping	your	deadness
When	you	start	dropping	your	ego
Which	is	the	cause	of	your	death
You	start	attaining	to	a	new	vision	of	life
A	new	style	of	life.
You	are	resurrected.
But	it	needs	a	humble	heart,
One	who	is	not	egoistic
One	who	is	ready	to	surrender
One	who	can	say	to	god,
'Let	thy	will	be	done.'
Jesus	says	god	is	love.
I	say	love	is	god
Because	when	you	say	god	is	love
It	means	god	may	be	many	more	things	too.
Love	may	be	one	of	his	qualities
Among	other	qualities,	with	other	qualities.
But	I	say	love	is	god,	there	is	no	other	quality.
So	to	be	loving	is	to	be	religious.
To	be	in	real	love	with	existence
Is	to	be	in	prayer.
There	is	no	need	to	go	into	the	scriptures
And	no	need	to	learn	theology
And	no	need	to	ponder	over	stupid	nonsense
Called	philosophy.
There	is	no	need.
One	has	to	love	the	flowers	and	the	birds
And	the	trees	and	the	stars	and	the	people,
And	that's	enough!
One	has	to	go	on	improving	one's	quality	of	love.
One	has	to	make	it	more	and	more
Unconditional,	unmotivated,	undemanding
Non-dominating,	non-egoistic.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
When	your	love	is	absolutely	pure
You	have	attained	to	god.
There	is	nothing	more	to	it.
You	have	attained
To	the	ultimate	perfection	of	life.
Love	is	the	essence
So	let	that	become	your	path.
Loyalty	is	one	of	the	qualities
That	has	disappeared	from	the	world.
People	have	forgotten	loyalty
They	have	forgotten	commitment
They	don't	know	what	involvement	is	any	more.
All	 their	 relationships	 are	 hit	 and	 run	 affairs	 Hence	 they	 don't	 know	 what
intimacy	is.
And	intimacy	grows	only	in	time,	it	takes	time.
It	is	not	a	seasonal	flower
It	takes	one's	whole	life.
And	one	needs	to	be	loyal,	only	then	can	one	grow.
Maturity	means	the	decisiveness
To	commit	yourself	to	something
With	your	totality.
Yes,	think	as	much	as	you	can
Before	you	take	the	jump
But	don't	go	on	thinking	and	thinking	forever.
Thinking	is	only	secondary.
It	should	be	a	help	for	the	jump,	not	a	hindrance.
And	once	you	have	taken	a	jump
Don't	look	back,	that	is	below	dignity.
Risk	all	and	go	ahead.	Don't	be	worried.
Then	whatsoever	the	consequence
Whatsoever	the	sacrifice...
Only	then	can	one	create	a	soul	within	oneself.
It	comes	only	at	a	certain	height	of	effort
At	a	certain	peak	of	your	will.
When	you	are	not	holding	back	anything
Then	only	does	it	happen.
But	when	it	happens	it	is	a	joy.
It	is	as	if	thousands	of	lowers	have	bloomed
In	your	being.
You	become	full	of	fragrance
Overflowing	with	ecstasy.
Unbounded	bliss	is	yours
But	the	price	has	to	be	paid	with	loyalty.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Silence	has	two	aspects	to	it.
One	is	silence	of	the	mind
When	thoughts	disappear.
That	is	the	first	step.
As	you	start	meditating	you	have	to	begin
By	watching	the	thoughts.
Just	by	watching,	one	day	they	disappear.
Then	begins	the	second	step:
The	silence	of	the	heart
That	comes	by	watching	the	feelings.
It	is	a	more	subtle	phenomenon
Far	deeper	than	the	first
But	the	process	is	the	same.
If	one	succeeds	in	the	first
One	will	be	able	to	succeed	in	the	second	too,	It	is	the	same	method	of	watching.
And	one	day	feelings	disappear	too.
Then	the	second	silence	is	achieved.
And	when	both	these	silences	are	there
Then	for	the	first	time	you	know
That	the	watcher	also	has	disappeared
Because	there	is	nothing	to	watch.
When	there	is	nothing	to	know
The	knower	disappears.
That	is	the	ultimate	silence.
The	first	two	are	steps	towards	the	ultimate
And	it	is	only	that	silence
Which	Buddha	calls	nirvana
And	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god.
There	are	only	two	conditions
To	truly	be	a	follower	of	Christ.
One	is:	you	should	not	be	a	Christian
Because	Christ	was	not	a	Christian.
Neither	was	he	a	Jew.
If	he	had	been	a	Jew
He	would	not	have	been	crucified.
He	behaved	in	a	very	non-Jewish	way
He	rebelled	against	the	Jewish	tradition.
And	he	was	certainly	not	a	Christian
He	had	never	heard	even	the	word	Christian.
And	if	he	comes	back	again
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
He	will	be	crucified	by	the	Christians,
This	time	in	the	Vatican.
That	time	it	was	through	the	Romans
And	this	time	again	it	will	be
Through	the	Italians,	the	same	people.
These	Italians	are	dangerous	people
The	Mafia	is	very	ancient!
So	 the	 first	 condition	 is:	 don't	 be	 a	 Christian	 Don't	 be	 a	 Hindu.	 Don't	 be	 a
Mohammedan.
If	one	really	wants	to	be	a	follower	of	Christ-To	be	religious-one	has	to	drop	all
religions.
And	the	second	condition	is...
Christ	became	Christ
Only	because	he	dropped	his	being	a	Jesus.
One	has	to	drop	one's	small	identity
With	the	body,	with	the	mind,	with	the	birth
Only	then	does	one	become	vast.
Christ	is	no	more	a	Jesus
Buddha	is	no	more	a	Gautam.
Those	were	their	old	names.
When	Gautam	Buddha	came	back
After	his	enlightenment
His	father	was	very	angry
Because	he	had	escaped	from	the	house
And	after	twelve	years	roaming	like	a	hippie
He	came	back	home.
He	was	the	son	of	a	king
And	the	king	was	really	furious.
He	was	the	only	son.
The	old	man	shouted	an	told	him
'I	never	thought	that	you	would	do
Such	a	thing	to	me	in	my	old	age.
Feel	ashamed	of	yourself!
And	Buddha	laughed	and	he	said
'But	who	are	you	talking	to?
The	man	who	left	your	palace	has	died.
I	am	no	more	Gautam,	your	son	is	dead
I	have	risen	out	of	his	corpse.
I	am	a	totally	new	person.
Just	look	again	at	me!'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
When	the	father	became	a	little	cooler
He	looked	again:
'Yes,	this	man	looks	different
He	appears	the	same:
The	same	features,	the	same	body
But	the	depth	of	the	eyes
The	joy	on	the	face
The	aroma,	the	fragrance	that	surrounds	him
Is	totally	different.'
He	recognised	that.
He	bowed	down	and	touched	Buddha's	feet.
He	said,'Yes,	now	I	can	see
I	am	unnecessarily	getting	furious	at	you.
You	have	changed,	you	are	radically	different.
The	same	and	yet	not	the	same.'
So	with	these	two	things	fulfilled
One	really	becomes	a	follower	of	Christ.
Why	say	a	follower	of	Christ?
One	becomes	a	Christ	oneself.
And	never	settle	for	anything	second-rate
When	you	can	be	first-rate!
A	man	without	meditation	becomes	mediocre.
His	consciousness	gathers	rust.
His	consciousness	becomes	covered	with	dust
He	loses	all	brightness,	all	intelligence.
Slowly	slowly	he	completely	forgets	who	he	is.
He	becomes	so	stupid.
That	is	the	utmost	in	stupidity,
To	forget	who	you	are.
And	that	has	happened	to	the	whole	humanity.
Through	meditation
Consciousness	ban	be	again	sharpened
Dust	can	be	removed
Rust	can	be	washed	away.
Your	mirror	can	again	become	bright.
And	when	your	consciousness	is	bright
It	reflects	reality.
And	god	is	another	name	for	reality.
To	know	god	is	to	know	all
Not	to	know	god
Is	to	live	in	ignorance,	darkness,	death.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Bliss	is	the	goal	of	all	life.
Consciously	or	unconsciously
We	are	all	searching	for	bliss.
To	search	unconsciously	means
One	is	not	going	to	find	it.
It	is	groping	in	the	dark
Not	knowing	what	exactly	you	are	searching	for	Where	you	are	searching,	how
you	are	searching.
One	is	walking	in	deep	sleep,	leke	a	somnambulist.
Everybody	seeks	bliss
But	very	few	people	have	found	it
For	the	simple	reason	that	very	few	people
Have	searched	for	it	consciously.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means
Changing	your	search	for	bliss
into	a	deliberate,	conscious	effort.
So	from	this	very	moment	you	have	to	seek	bliss	In	a	very	conscious	way:
Watchful,	alert,	meditatively.
And	we	have	arranged	every	kind	of	device	here	To	help	you	 to	become	more
alert,	more	watchful	So	that	you	don't	go	on	falling	asleep.
Sleep	is	your	old	habit
It	takes	a	little	time	to	get	rid	of	it.
But	once	you	have	got	rid	of	it
Life	becomes	a	dance,	a	benediction.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
11	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004115
ShortTitle:	84POEM09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	is	the	way.
The	only	requirement	on	the	way	is
That	your	love	should	be	unconditional
That	your	love	should	be	non-possessive
That	your	love	should	be
For	the	sheer	joy	of	sharing.
It	should	not	ba	a	bargain	and	a	business.
Then	love	comes	the	way	to	god.
All	these	things	are	not	different	things
They	are	aspects	of	the	same	phenomenon.
In	short	it	can	be	said
That	your	love	should	not	be	ego-rooted.
Your	love	should	be	ego-free
Then	love	is	the	surest	way	to	god.
Nothing	succeeds	like	love
In	finding	god,	in	finding	bliss
In	finding	freedom,	in	finding	truth.
Gautam	the	Buddha	has	called	his	religion
The	noble	religion,	the	religion	of	the	Aryans.
By	Aryans	he	does	not	mean	any	race
By	Aryans	he	means	the	people
Who	have	attained	enlightenment.
Adolf	Hitler	also	used	the	word	'Arya'
But	with	a	totally	different	meaning,
He	used	it	as	the	most	noble	race:
The	Nordics	are	the	Aryans
The	purest	Aryans,	the	noblest.
No	race	is	great	in	itself
And	no	race	has	any	hierarchy	over	others.
Blood	cannot	be	decisive,	only	inner	intelligence.
And	that	can	happen	to	anybody.
To	anybody	who	is	ready	to	work	for	it
To	prepare	for	it,	to	strive	for	it
To	anybody	who	is	ready	to	work	for	it
To	prepare	for	it,	to	strive	for	it
To	anybody	who	is	ready	to	accept	the	challenge	It	can	happen.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	challenge	is	great
Because	the	world	does	not	like	intelligent	people.
It	 likes	mediocre	 people	 because	 the	mediocre	 are	 Very	 easily	 enslaved,	 very
easily	dominated
Very	easily	manipulated.
They	are	good	people	but	they	are	pure	cow	dung!
They	don't	have	any	soul.
You	can	call	them	holy	cow	dung
That	doesn't	make	much	difference.
Intelligence	is	rebellious.
Intelligence	tries	to	live
According	to	its	own	light
And	the	crowd	does	not	like	it.
The	crowd	wants	you	to	be	a	part	of	the	crowd.
It	does	not	like	individuals.
That	is	the	challenge.
And	if	one	really	wants	to	be	noble
One	has	to	get	rid	of	the	crowd	psychology
One	has	to	free	oneself	from	all	mob	attitudes	Rotten	traditions,	the	ugly	past,
Stupid	institutions,	all	kinds	of	superstitions.
And	this	whole	garbage	is	being	forced	upon	you	From	the	very	childhood.
The	day	one	decides	to	from	it	all
One	feels	so	light,	one	can	almost	fly.
One	feels	so	weightless,	as	if	wings	have	grown.
Then	you	are	becoming	noble.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	noble
Noble	in	the	sense	of	being
Intelligent,	rebellious,	non-conformists
Individuals,	free	in	every	sense.
Freedom	has	to	be	your	god
If	you	really	want	to	become	noble.
Worship	freedom
And	sacrifice	everything	for	freedom
And	then	nobility	is	born.
We	have	to	pay	that	price	for	it.
But	the	treasure	is	so	immense
That	it	is	cheap	at	any	cost.
Even	if	the	whole	life	is	lost	for	it
It	is	far	more	valuable	than	life	itself.
It	is	better	to	die	a	noble	death
Than	to	live	an	ignoble	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
One	is	not	born	noble,	one	has	to	become	noble.
It	needs	great	intelligence
Great	meditativeness,	great	love
To	become	noble.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	birth.
It	is	one	of	the	rarer	achievements	in	life.
Jesus	is	noble.
Of	course	he	cannot	claim	a	noble	birth.
He	is	not	an	aristocrat
He	is	the	son	of	a	poor	carpenter.
If	he	had	not	been	born	to	a	poor	carpenter
Nobody	would	have	ever	heard	about	Joseph	and	Mary.
Of	course	later	on	people	tried	to	connect
His	lineage	with	King	David.
But	that	is	sheer	nonsense,	it	is	simply	fiction.
To	avoid	the	fact
That	he	was	a	poor	carpenter's	son
They	invented	the	theory	of	virgin	birth.
People	can	go	to	extreme	lengths
For	some	stupid	ideas.
A	simple	thing	needed	to	be	accepted:
That	nobility	has	nothing	to	do	with	birth.
But	that	would	have	gone	against
All	the	aristocrats	of	the	world
And	they	are	powerful	people.
Those	who	wield	power	manage	everything.
They	manage	history,	what	should	be	written
And	what	should	not	be	written.
They	distort	history,	they	invent	history
They	change	history.
Hence	history	becomes	almost	fictitious.
It	becomes	all	bunk.
It	is	more	hysteria	than	history.
Remember	it
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	CAn	become	noble
A	door	opens	up	for	you.
Meditation	creates	that	right	milieu
That	right	climate,	that	perspective
In	which	one	can	find	bliss
Because	meditation
Makes	you	more	and	more	conscious.
Ultimately	you	become	pure	consciousness.
At	that	very	moment	you	are	bliss	too.
Then	consciousness	and	bliss
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Are	not	separate	any	more
They	are	one	phenomenon.
Whether	the	gift	is	god's	or	not	will	be	decided	Only	by	your	own	experience.
But	one	thing	is	certain:
That	gift	is	of	tremendous	significance,	of	immense	value,	Immeasurable	value,
inestimable	value.
What	can	be	more	precious	than	life?
What	can	be	more	precious	than	love?
What	can	be	more	precious	than
The	experience	of	bliss	or	silence
Or	poetry	or	music?
There	cannot	be	anything	more	precious
Than	these	things.
And	life	is	full	of
So	many	beautiful	experiences,	one	cannot	count	them.
The	whole	path	of	life	is	studded
With	diamonds	and	emeralds	and	pearls.
Eighty-four	thousand	poems	every	day...
In	fact	every	moment	poems	are	showering	on	you	From	every	direction,	every
dimension.
But	we	are	so	utterly	insensitive
That	we	are	not	aware	of	anything.
We	go	on	living	in	our	dark	misery
In	our	dark	holes.
There	are	very	few	men	in	the	world.
There	are	millions	of	mice	but	not	men
Because	everybody	is	living
In	his	small,	dark	hole.
And	if	you	tell	them	to	come	out
They	ask:	How?	How	can	one	come	out?
The	dark	hole	is	so	comfortable,	so	cosy
And	they	have	decorated	it
And	they	have	done	great	work.
And	not	only	they	but	their	parents
And	their	parent's	parents,	 they	have	all	 lived	there;	And	they	have	prepared	it
for	their	children.
How	can	they	leave	such	great	work
To	which	for	centuries	they	have	devoted
Their	time	and	energy	to	create?
And	what	is	the	outcome?	--	just	misery.
And	outside	there	is	the	whole	sky
Available	for	them.
And	the	stars	are	waiting	for	them
But	they	will	not	come	out.
And	even	if	they	come
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
They	will	come	with	closed	eyes
Because	they	have	become	so	accustomed	to	darkness	That	when	they	come	into
the	light
Their	eyes	go	blind.
They	are	so	dazzled	by	the	light
That	they	close	their	eyes.
Become	aware	of	all	this	that	surrounds	you.
And	by	becoming	aware	of	it
You	will	become	aware	of	the	great	giver.
Call	it	nature,	call	it	god.
They	mean	the	same	thing.
Man	is	like	a	dewdrop
Existence	is	like	the	ocean
And	we	are	trying	to	keep	ourselves
Separate	from	it.
That	is	the	root	cause	of	our	misery.
Only	one	thing	is	needed:
A	jump	into	the	ocean	so	the	dewdrop	disappears.
It	does	not	really	disappear
It	only	loses	its	small	boundaries.
It	becomes	oceanic,	it	becomes	the	ocean	itself.
But	in	a	sense	it	disappears.
You	cannot	find	it	any	more.
It	loses	its	old	identity
Its	old	nameplate	and	its	old	address.
It	has	become	part	of	such	vastness
That	there	is	no	way	to	find	it.
It	cannot	stand	out,	that	is	the	fear.
That's	why	we	go	on	keeping	ourselves
Away	from	the	ocean.
Sannyas	means	an	effort	to	gather	courage
To	disappear	into	the	ocean.
And	that	day	is	the	greatest	day	in	life
When	you	die	into	the	ultimate
Because	then	you	become	the	ultimate.
It	is	not	death,	it	is	resurrection.
Time	dies,	eternity	is	born.
Finitude	dies	but	infinity	is	born.
Smallness	dies	but	greatness	is	born.
It	is	worth	truing!
Purity	comes	through	dropping	the	ego.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	ego	is	the	course	of	all	inner	impurity;
It	is	the	cancer	of	the	soul.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	moving
Into	a	totally	different	way	of	life	--
The	life	of	egolessness.
From	this	moment	onwards	be	alert
Not	to	feed	your	old	ego,	starve	it.
Don't	co-operate	with	it
Because	it	lives	with	your	co-operation.
If	you	stop	co-operating	with	it
It	dies	of	its	own	accord.
Sooner	or	later	it	loses	its	strength
Its	power,	its	grip	over	you,
Because	in	itself	it	has	no	substance
It	is	a	shadow.
You	pour	substance	into	it.
So	once	you	stop	pouring...
Yes,	it	will	go	on	for	a	few	days
Out	of	the	old	momentum.
But	soon	that	old	momentum	is	finished
And	then	arises	a	pure	paradise	within	your	heart.
Its	beauty	is	indescribable.
Its	joy	inexpressible.
So	remember,	this	is	the	sutra	for	you.
You	have	to	from	the	ego	and	then	purity	will	happen.
I	am	ton	saying	anything	about	moral	purity;
That	is	an	egoistic	effort.
It	is	ego	decorating	itself
With	morality,	character,	and	all	that	nonsense.
I	am	simply	saying	drop	the	ego
Cut	the	tree	from	the	very	root
And	then	comes	a	tremendous	emptiness	in	you
And	that	emptiness	is	pure.
And	out	of	that	purity	arises
The	experience	of	god.
Prayer	has	been	very	much	misunderstood
In	the	past.
It	has	become	part	of	the	belief	in	a	god
Hence	those	who	don't	believe	in	god	can't	pray.
That	has	deprived	millions	of	people	of	prayer.
Prayer	has	to	be	freed	from	the	belief	in	god.
In	fact	prayer	comes	first,	god	comes	later	on.
God	is	not	a	prerequisite	to	praying
It	is	a	consequence	of	prayer.
If	you	are	in	prayer
You	will	become	aware	of	the	existence	of	god.
Then	there	will	be	no	need	to	believe	in	god.
All	beliefs	are	false.
You	may	believe	for	your	whole	life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	you	cannot	make	a	belief	true
Through	meditation,	 awareness,	 love,	 intelligence	You	 can	 be	 twice	 born,	 you
can	be	born	anew
Only	then	will	you	be	noble.
And	everybody	should	achieve	nobility.
Without	achieving	it	if	one	lives	and	dies
One	has	lived	in	vain	and	died	in	vain.
Bliss	is	the	fundamental	principle	of	life.
Animals,	birds,	trees
Wherever	life	exists,	in	whatsoever	form,
It	is	seeking	and	searching	for	bliss.
Bliss	is	the	regulating	principle.
But	it	is	the	privilege	of	man
To	seek	bliss	consciously.
Otherwise	one	seeks	bliss	and	finds	misery.
Everybody	seeks	bliss	and	everybody	finds	misery.
The	 reason	 is	 not	 that	 there	 is	 no	 bliss	 in	 life	The	 reason	 is	 that	we	 start	 in	 a
wrong	direction.
And	we	cannot	do	otherwise
Unless	we	become	more	conscious.
Sannyas	means	bringing	consciousness
To	your	fundamental	search
Making	your	search	a	conscious,	deliberate	effort.
Then	bliss	is	found.	It	is	not	very	far	away
All	that	is	needed	is	a	conscious	seeker
Not	one	who	is	just	groping	in	darkness.
Just	by	believing	in	it.
You	can	hypnotise	yourself
You	can	think	it	is	the	truth	but	it	remains	a	lie.
God	should	not	be	made	a	prerequisite	for	prayer.
Prayer	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	god.
there	is	no	need	to	believe	in	god.
Prayer	means	thankfulness,	gratitude.
What	is	the	need	of	believing	in	god
To	feel	grateful?
Can't	you	feel	grateful	for	your	life
Grateful	to	existence?
Can't	you	feel	grateful	for	all	these	flowers
And	the	stars	and	the	people	and	the	birds
And	this	mysterious	existence?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	does	not	matter	to	whom;	that	is	irrelevant.
The	question	is	not	to	whom	to	feel	grateful
The	question	is	to	feel	grateful
To	xyz,	it	doesn't	matter.
Call	it	god,	call	it	existence,	call	it	nature.
Or	if	you	don't	want	to	give	it	any	name
There	is	no	need.	But	feel	grateful
Because	so	much	has	been	given	to	us.
Who	has	given,	we	don't	know.
Why	he	has	given,	we	don't	know.
Wether	there	is	somebody	as	a	person
Who	is	giving	us	all	this,	we	don't	know.
But	one	thing	is	certain
That	there	are	beautiful	sunsets.
Whether	anybody	paints	them	or	not
Is	beside	the	point;	they	are	beautiful	They	are	immensely	beautiful
That	not	to	feel	grateful	is	to	show	insensitivity.
Prayer	has	nothing	to	do	with	religion
Prayer	is	basically	the	approach	of	an	artist.
Prayer	is	an	aesthetic	phenomenon
Not	o	religious	phenomenon.
But	if	you	start	feeling	grateful
And	thankful	towards	existence
Slowly	slowly	you	are	surprised
That	a	presence	starts	surrounding	you
Which	you	had	never	felt	before.
It	is	only	a	thankful	heart
That	starts	feeling	a	new	vibe.
That	vibe	is	god.
God	only	comes	at	a	later	stage
But	then	it	comes	as	an	experience,
Then	god	is	liberation,	then	god	is	nirvana.
But	start	by	prayer,	never	start	by	god
Because	that	god	will	be	false.
And	if	you	are	believing	in	a	false	god
Your	prayer	is	false.
First	make	your	prayer	as	deep	as	possible
As	heartfelt	as	possible
And	then	god	comes	of	his	own	accord.
I	am	not	worried	about	god
But	I	am	certainly	worried	about	prayer.
If	people	miss	prayer
Then	there	is	no	possibility,	no	hope.
If	god	is	dead	that	is	not	our	business.
But	if	prayer	is	dead
Then	it	 is	certainly	a	question	of	great	concern	Because	without	prayer	all	will
be	lost-1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
All	that	is	beautiful,	all	that	is	great.
So	learn	to	be	prayerful.
A	sannyasin	has	to	go	beyond	all	hardness
He	has	to	surpass	hardness.
The	quality	of	being	hard
Has	been	much	praised	in	the	past
Because	it	was	the	quality
That	made	a	man	a	soldier.
And	the	soldiers	were	the	most	important	people.
They	still	are,	unfortunately.
A	sannyasin	is	just	the	opposite	of	a	soldier.
So	whatsoever	are	the	qualities	of	a	soldier
Are	DISqualifications	for	a	sannyasin.
The	soldier	has	to	be	hard	like	a	rock
And	the	sannyasin	has	to	be	soft	like	a	rose.
The	soldier	has	to	kill,	hence	he	has	to	be	hard.
His	whole	profession	is	that	of	murder
He	is	a	professional	murderer.
Destruction	is	his	way	of	life.
The	sannyasin	is	not	destructive,	he	is	creative	He	is	non-violent.
He	is	love.
Not	violence,	not	hatred,	not	anger.
How	can	he	be	hard?
The	soldier	has	to	live	constantly	in	fear
Hence	he	has	to	protect	himself
In	thousands	of	ways
Because	if	you	are	going	to	murder	people
Then	you	can	be	murdered
The	sannyasin	is	vulnerable.
Even	if	he	is	murdered,	and	many	sannyasins
Have	been	murdered	down	the	ages,
He	dies	joyously,	with	a	dance	in	his	heart.
But	he	does	not	become	hard.
He	dies	with	a	song	in	his	being.
His	death	also	is	a	poem.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	remember	that.
Hardness	has	to	be	dropped.
Become	a	little	more	soft,	tender,
Vulnerable,	open
Because	we	are	not	going	to	conquer	anybody.
In	fact	we	are	inviting	god	to	conquer	us.
The	bee	does	not	cling	to	any	flower.
It	gathers	from	all	kinds	of	flowers
But	it	remains	unattached.
It	will	go	to	the	rose
It	will	go	to	the	marigold
It	will	go	to	the	lotus
It	will	move	from	flower	to	flower	gathering	honey	But	it	is	not	attached,	it	does
not	cling.
And	that's	how	a	sannyasin	has	to	be.
In	fact	Buddha	told	his	sannyasins
Never	to	beg	from	only	one	house...
Because	his	sannyasins	were	renunciates,
They	 had	 renounced	 life.	 They	 lived	 like	 beggars	 Hence	 they	 are	 known	 as
bhikkhus.
Bhikkhu	means	a	beggar.
He	had	told	them	never	to	beg	from	one	house
But	to	beg	from	many	houses:
A	little	bit	from	here,	a	little	bit	from	there	So	you	are	not	a	burden	to	anybody.
Because	of	that	the	Buddhist	monks'	begging
Is	called	madhukari.
Madhukari	means	begging	like	a	bee.
Literally	it	means	begging	like	a	bee.
The	second	thing	to	be	remembered	is	that
Although	the	bee	gathers	honey	from	many	flowers	It	never	destroys	any	flower.
It	 is	 very	 artful,	 very	 gracious,	 it	 does	 not	 hurt	 In	 fact	 the	 flower	 feels
tremendously	joyous
When	a	bee	comes	to	it.	It	is	really	a	compliment.
And	the	bee	is	never	destructive.
It	collects	whatsoever	it	needs
But	in	such	an	artful	way,	with	such	skill
That	the	flower	remains	absolutely	the	same.
That's	how	a	sannyasin	has	to	be.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Live	in	such	a	way	that	nobody	is	harmed	by	you.
Live	in	a	creative	way,	with	skill	and	art
Live	in	a	sensitive	way.
And	never	become	attached.
Enjoy	all	kinds	of	experiences,	all	kinds	of	flowers	But	remain	moving,	don't	get
caught	anywhere
And	then	you	are	bound	to	reach	god.
In	ancient	mythology
The	wolf	represents	two	things.
First,	it	represents	courage
And	secondly,	it	represents	grace.
The	walk	of	the	wolf	is	a	graceful	phenomenon.
To	watch	it	is	to	watch	something	beautiful.
In	fact	animals	have	a	certain	grace
Which	man	has	lost.
Because	animals	still	live	spontaneously
Moment	to	moment.
They	don't	carry	the	past
They	don't	have	a	burden	on	their	head
Hence	their	walk	is	light
Hence	their	walk	has	the	quality	of	dance.
Man	drags,	he	does	not	walk.
It	is	very	rare	to	find	a	man
Whose	walk	has	the	quality	of	dance.
But	that's	what	a	sannyasin	is	supposed	to	find.
He	has	to	become	again	spontaneous
He	has	to	live	in	the	same	innocence	as	animals	With	only	one	difference:	he	has
to	be	conscious.
Animals	are	unconscious.
And	the	same	is	true	about	courage:
Animals	are	courageous
The	wolf	is	courageous
But	his	courage	is	instinctive.
Man	has	to	be	courageous	consciously.
Instinctive	courage	can't	help	much.
It	is	better	than	being	a	coward
It	is	far	better
But	it	will	land	you	in	many	difficulties.
It	will	make	your	life	more	and	more	difficult	Because	it	will	be	unconscious.
If	your	courage	becomes	conscious
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Then	you	start	moving
Towards	the	ultimate	peaks	of	life.
And	slowly	slowly
Your	life	becomes	an	integrated	phenomenon.
It	has	grace,	it	has	beauty,
It	has	courage,	it	has	joy.
It	is	no	more	mundane
It	is	holy,	it	is	sacred.
Life	is	music,	mind	is	noise.
And	because	of	the	noisy	mind	we	are	unable	to	hear	The	music	of	life.
Unless	we	stop	the	mind	and	its	noise
We	will	never	come	to	know
The	beautiful	music	of	life.
So	the	whole	effort	here
Is	to	help	you	in	two	things.
First	is	the	negative	part:
How	to	stop	the	noisy	mind.
And	the	second	is	the	positive	part:
How	to	train	your	ears	so	that	you	can	hear
Your	own	inner	music.
If	these	two	things	are	fulfilled
Nothing	else	remains.
Life	achieves	its	ultimate	peak
Its	bliss	and	its	benediction.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
12	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004125
ShortTitle:	84POEM10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Love	is	a	small	word	but	it	contains
The	whole	of	religion	and	the	whole	of	art.
It	contains	all	that	is	precious	in	life
All	that	is	valuable.
That	which	is	not	contained	in	love
Is	not	of	any	worth.
Let	love	be	your	religion,	your	god.
Worship	love	--	and	the	only	way	to	worship	love	Is	to	be	loving.
Be	loving	to	everyone	for	no	reason	at	all
Just	for	the	joy	of	loving.
Love	the	trees	and	the	animals	and	the	people
The	stars,	the	birds,	the	rocks.
This	whole	existence	is	our	home
And	we	are	an	intrinsic	part	of	it.
It	gives	us	so	much	and	we	don't	respond.
The	moment	you	start	loving	it
You	will	be	surprised:
Your	love	is	returned	in	a	thousandfold	way.
It	starts	pouring	from	all	directions
And	in	all	dimensions.
You	are	simply	bathed	every	moment.
It	goes	on	and	on	showering.
Then	life	is	a	celebration.
And	unless	life	becomes	a	celebration,	remember	You	have	not	known	life	yet.
It	has	to	be	discovered.
(Osho	gives	sannyas	to	a	young	blind	woman)
Premdevi	means	goddess	of	love.
In	fact	there	is	no	other	god	except	love.
Love	more	and	more,	become	love.
Love	whatsoever	surrounds	you.
Love	yourself,	love	others.
Make	it	a	point	that	every	breath,	slowly	slowly	Becomes	full	of	the	fragrance	of
love.
That	is	going	to	be	your	path	to	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	don't	be	worried	about	the	outer	eyes,
They	are	insignificant
Love	will	open	the	inner	eye
Which	is	the	real	eye	because	only	through	that	Can	god	be	seen.
And	you	will	be	able	to	see	god	--	rest	assured!
I	cannot	give	that	much	guarantee
To	people	who	have	outer	eyes
Because	they	have	a	thousand	and	one	distractions.
You	are	fortunate,	you	have	nothing	to	distract	you.
You	can	easily	go	in,	you	are	already	there.
While	you	are	here	enjoy	the	time	as	much	as	you	can.
Feel	it	as	your	home.
God	does	not	exist
Unless	your	heart	is	full	of	love.
Without	love	there	is	no	bridge
Between	you	and	god.
So	wether	he	exists	or	does	not	exist
Makes	no	difference	to	you.
Hence	the	real	problem
Is	not	wether	god	exists	or	not.
The	real	problem
Is	wether	the	bridge	exists	or	not.
People	go	on	talking	about	god,	arguing	about	god.
All	those	arguments	are	futile.
Exercises	in	utter	futility.
The	authentic	seeker	will	create	a	bridge.
Love	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	that	which	is,	Whatsoever	it	is.
God,	nature,	tao,	dhamma,	logos
The	universe,	existence...
They	are	different	names
But	the	reality	is	the	same.
One	thing	is	certain
That	there	is	something	that	surrounds	you:
The	vast	universe.
One	thing	is	certain
That	it	existed	before	we	were	born
And	it	will	exist	when	we	are	gone.
What	it	is,	there	is	no	way	to	know
Unless	love	creates	a	bridge	between	you
And	the	reality.
Only	the	heart	full	of	love	comes	to	know.
Knowing	does	not	happen	through	the	head
It	happens	through	the	heart
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Not	through	logic	but	through	love.
Love	has	to	be	your	path,	your	way,	your	practice.
There	are	two	paths	and	there	are	only	two	paths.
Either	one	has	to	follow	awareness
Or	one	has	to	follow	love.
Both	reach	the	same	goal
But	they	move	through	different	territories.
The	path	of	awareness	is	a	masculine	path.
The	path	of	love	is	a	feminine	path:
It	is	far	more	beautiful,	it	is	far	more	joyous.
It	is	full	of	greenery
And	many	flowers	bloom	on	the	path.
The	path	of	awareness	is	dry,	more	like	a	desert.
But	both	reach	the	same	point.
A	few	people	love	deserts.
Then	it	is	perfectly	good	for	them
To	follow	the	path	of	awareness.
Buddha	follows	the	path	of	awareness.
Jesus	follows	the	path	of	love.
Both	reach	the	same	peak.
But	if	one	can	follow	the	path	of	love
Then	why	bother	about	going	into	a	desert?
If	it	is	impossible	to	follow	the	path	of	love	Then	only	do	I	suggest	the	bitter	pill.
The	path	of	love	is	a	sugar-coated	pill.
Wisdom	is	a	by-product	of	meditation.
It	does	not	come	through	learning
On	the	contrary	it	comes	through	unlearning.
Unlearn	whatsoever	you	know.
First	become	completely	 empty	 through	unlearning,	 Just	 a	 clean	 slat,	 and	 then
suddenly
A	writing	starts	appearing	on	your	clean	slate.
And	the	handwriting	is	not	yours	--	it	is	god's!
Suddenly	from	your	own	inner	being
You	start	having	new	insights,	new	visions.
And	they	are	so	fresh	and	so	alive
That	just	to	have	them	is	to	have
The	greatest	treasure	in	the	world.
And	those	insights
Which	arise	within	your	own	being
Are	always	right	because	they	are	not	borrowed.
They	are	coming	from	a	source	deeper	than	you
Higher	than	you,	far	beyond	you.
That	wisdom	liberates.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Knowledge	becomes	a	bondage
Because	it	is	borrowed.
Wisdom	liberates
Because	it	is	your	own	inner	nature.
The	only	condition
That	a	seeker	of	truth	has	to	fulfil	is:
He	should	start	with	an	absolutely	empty	mind
With	no	belief,	with	no	prejudice,
With	no	ideology.
Nothing	should	be	accepted	a	priori.
Everything	should	be	experienced,	lived,
And	only	then	accepted.
Those	who	believe	never	find	truth.
They	are	not	seekers,	they	are	believers;
They	deceive	themselves.
Belief	is	a	deception;	and	it	is	cheap.
You	don't	have	to	do	anything	--
You	can	simply	believe.
That's	why	millions	of	people	believe,
Only	very	few	people	seek.
But	unless	you	seek	you	cannot	find.
Belief	is	the	greatest	barrier
In	seeking	and	searching.
Drop	believing,	start	experimenting.
And	always	start	from	a	state	of	not-knowing
And	then	truth	is	not	far	away.
But	that	basic	condition	has	to	be	fulfilled.
Patience
Is	a	fundamental	quality	of	the	seeker.
Impatience	is	a	barrier	in	the	search.
You	can't	be	in	a	hurry	as	far	as	god	is	concerned	Because	god	lives	in	eternity,
and	hurry	means	You	are	counting	minutes	and	seconds	and	hours.
That	won't	do.
If	you	want	to	know	god,	if	you	want	to	know	truth	You	have	to	know	the	way
of	eternity.
That's	why	patience	is	needed.
Forget	all	about	time,	don't	be	in	a	hurry
Don't	be	impatient.	Wait.	Wait	lovingly
With	great	expectancy	but	no	expectation
Full	of	joy	that	the	guest
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
May	be	coming	any	moment.
But	don't	feel	frustrated	if	he	has	not	come	yet.
Keep	everything	ready	to	receive	him.
Go	on	preparing.
If	he	has	not	come
That	simply	means	you	are	not	yet	ready.
So	there	is	nothing	to	feel	frustrated	about.
Just	look	around,	prepare	and	prepare	and	prepare	The	moment	your	preparation
is	perfect
Your	 silence	 is	 perfect,	 your	 emptiness	 is	 perfect	He	comes	 --	 immediately	he
comes!
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	absolutely	peaceful
Amongst	all	the	turmoil	of	the	world
He	has	to	be	peaceful	in	the	marketplace.
Because	I	am	against	escapism.
It	is	easy	to	be	peaceful	in	a	monastery.
What	else	can	you	do	there	except	be	peaceful?
But	that	peace	is	dead.
It	is	closer	to	impotence.
Then	if	one	is	impotent
One	can	be	a	celibate	very	easily
In	fact	what	else	is	he	supposed	to	do?
But	not	to	be	impotent	and	to	be	a	celibate
Is	a	totally	different	phenomenon.
My	sannyasins	have	to	live	in	the	world
They	have	to	be	part	of	the	world
And	yet	utterly	silent,	peaceful.
The	world	is	a	great	challenge	if	you	can	learn	The	art	of	being	silent	amongst
all	distractions.
Only	then	is	your	silence	true,	authentic,	alive	Can	god	come	to	you.	God	is	life.
A	dead	peace	is	absolutely	worthless.
So	be	in	the	world	but	don't	be	of	the	world.
Live	in	the	world
But	don't	let	the	world	enter	in	you.
Move,	pass	through	the	world,	but	remain	unaffected.
It	is	possible.
It	is	the	greatest	miracle	but	it	is	possible.
And	when	it	becomes	possible
One	knows	for	the	first	time	what	ecstasy	is.
Sannyas	is	not	for	the	coward.
It	is	for	the	courageous	one
Because	it	is	going	into	your	inner	world.
No	map	exists	and	nobody	can	accompany	you	there.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	will	be	alone,	absolutely	alone
And	it	is	very	dark	there
At	least	in	the	beginning.
As	you	go	deeper,	it	becomes	lighter.
When	you	reach	the	very	centre	of	your	being
It	is	full	of	light.
But	the	first	experience
Is	of	immense	darkness	and	aloneness:
No	map,	no	friend,	no	companion.
Courage	is	certainly	needed.
So	gather	courage	for	the	journey.
Everybody	has	that	much	courage
People	just	never	use	it.
The	 difference	 between	 the	 coward	 and	 the	 courageous	 Is	 not	 that	 the
courageous	has	some	quality
Which	is	lacking	in	the	coward	--	no.
Both	have	the	same	qualities.
The	coward	does	not	use	it
And	the	courageous	uses	it.
And	when	you	use	a	certain	quality
You	become	capable	of	using	it	more.
When	you	don't	use	it
When	it	remains	out	of	use	for	a	long	time
It	gathers	rust,	it	stops	functioning.
Our	real	being	is	in	our	innermost	core
It	is	not	somewhere	outside.
One	need	not	go	anywhere
One	has	simply	to	come	back	home.
Sannyas	is	not	a	journey	from	here	to	there
On	the	contrary
It	is	a	journey	from	there	to	here.
We	are	already	there	and	we	have	to	be	here
We	are	always	then	and	we	have	to	be	now.
So	whether	your	mind	starts	moving	somewhere
Bring	it	back	here.
When	it	starts	moving	to	the	past,	to	the	future	Bring	it	to	the	now.
Remember	these	two	words:	'now'	and	'here'.
That	is	going	to	be	your	practice.
Slowly	slowly	one	starts	living	herenow
And	that	is	the	only	way	we	can	meet	god
Because	he	is	always	herenow
And	we	are	never	herenow.
The	moment	we	are	also	herenow
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	meeting	happens,	is	bound	to	happen.
Madhav	is	one	of	the	names	of	Krishna.
Krishna	is	one	of	the	rarest	human	beings
Who	has	walked	on	the	earth,
One	of	the	very	few	enlightened	persons.
But	literally	it	means	the	sweet	one.
Krishna	has	been	called	Madhava
Because	the	words	of	an	enlightened	person
are	sweet,	they	are	pure	poetry
Because	they	come	from	his	inner	silence.
Even	though	they	may	not	have	the	form	of	poetry	Their	spirit	is	poetic
Their	very	essence	is	poetic
Their	soul	is	poetic.
And	they	are	as	sweet	as	honey
Because	they	quench	the	thirst
The	eternal	thirst	for	truth.
They	are	a	nourishment.
Become	 silent,	 so	 silent	 that	 your	 inner	 being	 Also	 explodes	 into	 eighty-four
thousand	poems
Of	peace,	love,	sweetness,	joy,	ecstasy.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	poets
Not	literally	but	metaphorically.
Not	that	they	have	to	compose	poetry
But	that	they	have	to	live	poetry.
They	have	to	make	life	a	graceful	art
They	have	to	live	it	skilfully.
People	live	in	a	very	gross	way.
With	anger,	with	jealousy,	with	possessiveness	With	ego,	how	can	you	be	a	poet?
You	can	be	a	murderer	but	you	can't	be	a	poet.
And	even	if	you	write	poetry
Your	poetry	will	be	full	of	blood.
One	should	remove
All	these	gross	elements	from	one's	being
Because	they	are	destroying	so	much	energy
Wasting	so	much	opportunity.
All	these	energies	should	be	transformed
Into	songs,	into	joy,	into	love,	into	peace.
Then	life	becomes	poetry.
Then	it	is	a	sheer	joy	to	be.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Just	to	be	is	more	than	one	can	ask	for
Just	to	breathe	is	enough	proof	that	god	exists	Because	each	single	breath
Brings	so	much	ecstasy	with	it.
Life	becomes	such	a	harmony	and	melody
Such	a	dance
That	one	cannot	believe	it	is	possible.
One	can	believe	it	only	when	it	happens.
I	say	it	to	you	on	my	own	authority
I	have	experienced	life	that	way
I	am	experiencing	it	that	way	every	moment.
And	I	would	like	you	also	to	experience	it
In	the	same	way.
Become	more	meditative	and	it	will	happen.
It	is	bound	to	happen,	it	is	inevitable.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
13	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004135
ShortTitle:	84POEM11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Love	is	the	door	to	the	divine.
It	is	the	only	way
To	relate	oneself	to	the	ultimate.
But	before	you	can	know	what	love	is
You	have	to	go	through	many	purifications
Because	what	is	ordinarily	known	as	love
Is	not	only	love,
Many	other	things	are	mixed	in	it.
It	is	very	much	polluted,	it	is	not	pure.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Maybe	one	per	cent	of	it	is	love
But	ninety-nine	per	cent	is	something	else.
And	that	ninety-nine	per	cent
Is	dominating,	overpowering,	overwhelming.
The	one	per	cent	is	crushed,	destroyed
By	that	ninety-nine	per	cent.
One	has	to	drop	that	ninety-nine	per	cent.
There	is	so	much	jealousy	in	your	love
And	jealousy	is	poison.
There	is	so	much	possessiveness	in	your	love
And	possessiveness	is	destructive.
Love	is	a	very	delicate	flower
And	to	be	possessive
Means	throwing	a	rock	on	the	flower.
There	is	a	deep	desire	to	dominate	the	other
It	is	very	unconscious,	but	it	is	there
And	it	is	very	powerful.
Then	love	becomes	just	a	facade	and	behind	it
You	are	just	on	an	ego	trip.
And	the	same	is	also	the	case
With	the	person	with	whom	you	are	in	love.
So	quarrel	arises,	fighting	arises.
Both	become	destructive	to	each	other.
After	a	few	experiences	of	love	affairs
One	becomes	weary,	tired.	One	starts	feeling
That	love	is	the	greatest	nuisance	in	life.
One	feels	one's	fingers	are	burnt
One	starts	avoiding	it.
That's	what	is	happening	in	the	West.
People	are	going	far	more	towards	pure	sex
And	avoiding	love,	because	at	least	pure	sex
Does	not	have	that	much	trouble,	it	is	simple.
Of	course	it	cannot	take	you	to	the	heights
But	neither	does	your	so	called	love
Take	you	to	the	heights.
On	the	contrary
Your	so-called	love	takes	you	to	such	hells.
Sex	cannot	take	you	to	such	hells	either.
It	simply	keeps	you	healthy.
It	is	hygienic,	healthy,	normal.
It	keeps	you	a	fit	animal,	that's	all.
It	has	always	happened	in	the	past	also:
Whenever	a	society	allows	freedom	for	love
People	become	tired	of	love
Because	in	the	name	of	love
So	much	ugliness	starts	happening	that
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
People	start	leaning	towards	pure	sex.
It	seems	more	convenient,	more	comfortable
With	no	risk.
It	can	be	purchased	easily.
It	is	sellable,	purchasable.
Love	cannot	be	sold	and	cannot	be	purchased.
It	is	not	a	commodity.
Sex	is	a	commodity
It	is	part	of	our	materialistic	world.
Either	this	happens	or
Society	becomes	very	repressive	towards	love
And	forces	marriage	upon	people
So	that	they	stick	to	one	person
And	 that	 too	 not	 for	 love	 but	 for	 other	 reasons:	 For	 progeny,	 to	 give	 birth	 to
children
So	that	they	can	take	care	of	your	properties
When	you	are	no	more
And	they	can	carry	your	name	down	the	ages.
Love	is	no	more	a	consideration
Because	people	have	become	so	afraid	of	it.
People	think	of	the	family,	of	richness
Of	culture,	of	education,	of	nobility,	aristocracy	And	all	kinds	of	things.
They	consult	astrologers	and	palmists
But	they	don't	think	of	love	at	all
They	avoid	love.
They	take	everything	else	into	consideration
Except	love	--	that's	what	an	arranged	marriage	is.
So	these	two	things	happen	again	and	again.
Whenever	love	is	free
Whenever	there	is	more	freedom
Society	becomes	tired	of	love.
People	start	moving	towards	sex.
Then	sooner	or	later	they	become	tired	of	sex	too	Because	it	is	unfulfilling.
Then	they	fall	back	upon	the	old	patterns.
Again	they	forget	the	old	lessons
They	decide	to	go	into	marriage.
This	is	how	it	moves	in	a	vicious	circle.
India	has	completed	th	circle	manu	times
Because	it	is	one	of	the	most	ancient	societies.
Many	times	it	has	seen	freedom	of	love
Many	times	it	has	seen	freedom	of	sex.
Then	a	puritanical,	repressive	society
Then	again	a	rebellion.
And	the	same	thing	goes	on	and	on.
But	the	reason,	the	basic	reason	nobody	looks	for.
The	basic	reason	is	not	love
The	basic	reason	is	that	love
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Is	mixed	with	other	things.
We	have	to	learn	to	drop	those	other	things.
Love	is	beautiful
Love	is	the	greatest	gift	of	god.
But	it	is	like	a	raw	phenomenon.
It	has	to	be	polished,	refined,	cut.
It	is	like	a	diamond:
Much	has	to	be	done	before	people	can	know
Its	beauty	and	its	splendour.
And	that's	my	whole	work	here:
To	help	you	refine	your	raw	love
Into	a	refined,	polished,	cultured	phenomenon
So	that	it	can	become
A	source	of	upliftment	for	your	soul
So	that	it	can	become	a	door	to	the	divine.
Compassion	is	the	transformation	of	passion.
Passion	is	using	the	other	as	a	means
For	your	own	fulfilment.
Compassion	is	sharing	your	being,	your	joy
Your	bliss,	your	love,	with	others
For	the	sheer	joy	of	sharing
Because	each	individual	is	an	end	unto	himself.
No	individual	should	be	used	as	a	means.
That	is	cruelty,	that	is	animality.
Compassion	is	the	highest	form	of	your	energy
And	passion,	the	lowest	form	of	your	energy.
The	same	energy	passing	through	meditation
Becomes	compassion.
Meditation	is	the	transforming	force.
And	when	a	person	lives	in	compassion
He	lives	in	pure	love.
That	is	true	prayer,	true	godliness.
There	is	no	other	god	than	that	purity
Which	love	brings,	which	compassion	brings.
God	is	only	a	symbol
That	represents	many	beautiful	things.
Freedom,	love,	bliss,	truth,	compassion
All	that	is	valuable
All	that	has	intrinsic	value
Is	represented	by	the	name	god.
God	is	not	a	person	at	all
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	the	ultimate	crescendo
Of	all	the	beautiful	qualities	of	life
Of	all	the	virtues,	of	all	the	values.
And	compassion	is	one	of	the	most	important,
The	most	significant	parts,
To	be	evolved	by	the	seeker.
Be	friendly,	be	loving,	be	compassionate.
Help	in	every	possible	way	that	you	can
And	you	will	be	helped.
And	you	will	be	helped	a	thousandfold!
--	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Maji?
--	It	came	to	me	in	a	dream.
It's	good.
In	Hindi	'maji'	means	the	boatman,	the	ferryman	One	who	takes	you	to	the	other
shore.
Anand	means	bliss	--	a	blissful	boatman.
Everybody	has	to	take	himself	to	the	other	shore.
He	has	to	be	a	boat	for	himself.
He	is	the	boat	and	he	is	the	boatman	too.
They	are	not	separate.
And	once	you	have	been	to	the	other	shore
You	can	help	others	also.
Those	who	go	to	the	other	shore
And	never	come	back
And	forget	all	about	this	shore
Are	called	Arhatas.
Those	who	come	back	to	help	others
To	show	the	way
Are	called	Bodhisatvas.
They	create	bigger	boats	so	many	people
Can	be	taken	to	the	other	shore.
When	Buddha	died
His	religion	was	divided	into	two	parts.
It	was	bound	to	happen	because	the	Arhats
Behaved	in	a	totally	different	way.
They	wouldn't	help.
And	the	Bodhisatvas	were	so	concerned
For	others,	for	their	misery
That	they	were	ready
To	go	make	any	sacrifice,	to	go	through	any	suffering	To	help	others.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
These	two	sections	were	known	as	Hinayana
The	section	that	belonged	to	the	Arhats
Was	called	Hinayana;	the	small	boat	people.
The	boat	is	so	small,	only	you	can	sit	in	it
You	cannot	carry	anybody	else	in	it.
And	the	other	section	was	called	Mahayana:
The	great	boat	people.
They	created	big	ships
So	thousands	could	be	taken	to	the	other	shore.
First	become	a	boat	for	yourself
And	then	you	can	decide
Wether	to	come	back	to	this	shore
Or	forget	all	about	it!
A	beautiful	name	has	come	in	your	dream!
The	lion	represents	two	things.
One:	it	never	moves	in	a	crowd.
It	is	always	alone,	it	loves	solitude.
It	is	an	individual,	utterly	an	individual.
It	is	not	like	sheep.The	sheep	can	exist
Only	with	the	crowd,	with	the	mob.
Alone	it	is	very	frightened
Alone	it	is	very	nervous.
It	does	not	know	what	to	do,	where	to	go.
It	depends	on	the	crowd	to	be	led,	to	be	guided.
And	the	irony	is
That	others	are	also	dependent	on	the	same	crowd.
So	everybody	is	dependent	on	everybody	else
Thinking	that	others	know	better.
They	all	live	in	an	illusion.
But	that's	the	situation
Of	the	ordinary	human	being	too.
They	live	as	part	of	the	mob	psychology
They	don't	have	their	own	psyche	yet.
Hindu	--	yes,	Mohammedan	--	yes,	Christian	--	yes	But	it	is	very	rare	to	find	an
individual.
They	can	become	Communistic	very	easily.
That	is	another	crowd.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	individuals.
Each	sannyasin	has	to	depend	on	himself.
That's	why	I	am	not	giving
Detailed	instructions	to	you
So	you	cannot	depend	on	anything.
You	have	to	fall	upon	yourself.
Sometimes	it	looks	cruel
But	that's	the	only	compassionate	way	to	help:	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Unless	you	are	thrown	back	again	and	again
You	are	not	going	to	be	an	individual
You	will	remain	part	of	a	crowd.
You	can	change	crowds,	that's	not	difficult.
You	can	change	your	affiliations,	your	labels
But	the	basic	thing	is	missing:
You	don't	have	an	independent	soul.
The	lion	represents	individuality.
And	secondly
The	lion	represents	immense	courage.
It	never	escapes	from	any	challenge.
It	may	die	but
It	will	not	turn	its	back.
It	is	better	to	die	than	to	be	a	coward.
To	be	a	coward	is	a	far	uglier	phenomenon.
Death	is	not	ugly.
Death	can	be	beautiful	if	you	die	courageously.
If	you	die	accepting	a	challenge
Joyously,	dancingly,
As	Socrates	died,	as	Jesus	died,	as	Mansoor	died,	It	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful
phenomena	On	the	earth.
Death	depends	on	you.
If	you	are	a	coward	even	life	is	ugly
What	to	say	about	death?
If	you	are	courageous	even	death	is	beautiful
What	to	say	about	life?
So	remember	these	two	things.
Be	an	individual	and	be	absolutely	courageous.
That's	the	way	of	sannyas:
Individuality	and	courage.
Unless	one	is	ready	to	risk	all
One	cannot	find	god.
God	is	freedom.
Freedom	is	another	name	for	god
And	a	far	better	name!
The	priests	have	used	god	to	create	a	slavery
In	people's	minds.	In	the	name	of	god
They	have	exploited	humanity	for	centuries.
Hence	I	insist	again	and	again
That	god	is	freedom,	religion	is	freedom.
And	if	anything	makes	you	a	slave
Then	its	not	religion
And	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	god.
Let	freedom	be	the	criterion
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Always	judge	be	freedom.
Whatever	gives	you	freedom
Will	make	you	more	religious.
And	whatever	gives	you	freedom
Will	bring	you	closer	to	god.
And	when	you	are	capable	of	being	totally	free	You	become	one	with	god.
Hence	in	India	we	don't	talk
About	the	ultimate	as	god,	but	as	moksha.
Moksha	means	absolute	freedom.
Buddha	never	talked	about	god.
Mahavira	never	mentioned	god
For	the	simple	reason	that	they	saw
What	priests	have	done	in	the	name	of	god.
They	only	talked	about	freedom.
So	be	free	--	free	from	all	traditions	Free	from	all	dogmas,	free	from	all	churches
Free	from	all	priests,	scriptures
Free	from	all	ideologies.
And	start	living	in	freedom	--	that's	sannyas.
To	live	in	freedom	is	sannyas.
--	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?
--	It's	a	short	form	of	a	name	of	a	magic	mushroom.
--	 Mm!	 That's	 good.	 That's	 perfectly	 good!	 Now	 you	 will	 be	 an	 orange
mushroom!
An	orange	mushroom	becomes	more	magical,	it	becomes	more	psychedelic.
Good,	Swami	Filpz	--	be	psychedelic!
Enjoy	life	like	a	drunkard.
And	there	is	no	higher	psychedelic
Than	meditation.
There	is	no	greater	magic	than	meditation
Because	it	releases	your	inner	sources
Of	tremendous	joy,	insight.
It	makes	life	colourful
It	makes	life	a	dreamland.
In	fact	it	is	because	of	meditation
And	a	desire	for	deeper	experiences
Of	one's	own	being
That	people	are	attracted	to	magic	mushrooms
And	marijuana	and	hashish	and	alcohol.
And	from	the	very	ancient	days,	even	in
The	 ancientmost	 scripture	 of	 the	 world,	 Rigveda	 They	 talk	 about	 a	 certain
mushroom	called	soma.
And	the	ancient	seers	were	mad	about	soma.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Aldous	Huxley	has	said
When	LSD	is	perfected	totally
It	should	be	again	called	soma.
His	suggestion	is	beautiful.
But	he	was	in	an	illusion:
He	thought	that	by	taking	LSD
He	was	experiencing	the	same	ecstasy
As	Buddha	experienced	and	Kabir	experienced
And	Al	Hillaj	experienced.
There	he	was	wrong.
It	was	not	the	same	ecstasy.
What	he	was	experiencing
Was	just	a	chemical	imitation	of	it
A	chemical	carbon	copy	of	it.
It	was	a	deception.	It	was	not	real	gold.
It	was	glittering	like	gold.
But	it	was	not	real	gold.
Real	gold	has	to	be	found	within	oneself.
You	cannot	take	it	in	from	the	outside.
And	it	is	already	there.
Every	being	is	born
With	an	infinite	capacity	to	be	ecstatic
But	we	never	search	for	it.
We	always	go	for	cheaper	things.
They	are	easier	and	available,
You	can	purchase	them	and	you	can	inject	them.
Meditation	seems	to	be	a	long	long	journey.
And	we	are	in	such	a	hurry.
Drop	the	impatient	mind	and	search	within
And	become	as	silent	as	possible.
You	will	come	across	a	source	of	nectar	 in	you	Which	is	 the	greatest	magic	 in
the	world
Because	it	releases
The	most	miraculous	experiences	in	you
It	opens	the	doors	af	all	the	mysteries.
Mind	lives	in	time.
Mind	divides	reality	into	past,	present	and	future.
Mind	functions	like	a	prism.
A	ray	of	light	passing	through	a	prism
Becomes	divided	into	seven	colours.
That's	how	the	rainbow	is	created.
The	rainbow	is	created	by	small	raindrops
Hanging	in	the	air.
They	function	like	a	prism:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Sunrays	passing	through	those	raindrops
Become	divided.	Otherwise	sunrays	are	white.
But	once	the	white	ray	passes	through	a	prism
It	goes	through	a	great	division,	a	great	split.
It	becomes	seven.
In	the	same	way	mind	functions	like	a	prism.
Eternity	passing	through	the	mind	becomes	time.
It	is	divided	into	three:
Past	present	and	future.
But	the	whole	thing	is	illusory.
You	cannot	catch	hold	of	a	rainbow.
It	is	empty,	there	is	nothing.
So	is	time:	time	is	empty,	there	is	nothing.
One	has	to	go	beyond	the	mind	to	know	the	real.
The	real	is	eternal,	the	real	is	always	now.
The	real	is	never	past,	never	future
It	is	always	present.
And	that's	the	beauty	of	meditation:
It	brings	you	to	the	present.
Slowly	slowly	you	settle	into	the	present.
You	settle	in	your	own	being
So	silently	that	you	forget
All	about	the	past	and	the	future.
And	this	moment	becomes	so	overwhelming
So	tremendously	overwhelming
That	there	is	nothing	beyond	it.
To	know	this	moment's	totality	is	to	know	god.
To	go	beyond	time	is	to	go	into	god.
To	remain	in	time	is	to	remain	in	mind.
Meditation	means	getting	out	of	the	mind.
Mind	is	synonymous	with	no-time.
Get	out	of	mind	and	time.
Rest	and	relax	into	the	now	and	here
So	totally	that	nothing	else	is	left:
No	dust	of	the	past,	no	smoke	of	the	future.
In	that	clarity,	in	that	transparent	clarity
You	become	able	to	see	that	which	is.
In	fact	god	is	an	ancient	symbol.
G	used	to	stand	for	that
O	for	which,	and
D	for	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	a	code	word	for	that	which	is.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
14	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004145
ShortTitle:	84POEM12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Right	 religion	 does	 not	 mean	 a	 religion	 at	 all	 But	 a	 certain	 quality	 of
religiousness.
There	is	no	god	but	there	is	godliness	And	there	is	no	religion
But	there	is	religiousness.
It	is	a	quality,	it	is	a	feel,	not	a	thing.
Hence	no	religious	person
Can	be	Christian	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan.
These	names	are	just	political	strategies
Political	games	in	the	name	of	religion.
True	religion	has	no	adjectives
True	religion	is	simply	like	love.
Can	love	be	Christian	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan?
Can	joy	be	Christian	or	Hindu	or	Mohammedan?
Can	beauty	be	Hindu,	Christian	or	Mohammedan?
It	would	be	nonsense	to	talk	of	Hindu	beauty
Or	Hindu	love	or	Hindu	joy.
The	same	is	true	about	religion.
True	religion	is	not	religion	at	all
But	a	feeling	of	religiousness
A	feeling	of	gratitude	towards	the	whole.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	be	religious.
I	teach	a	religionless	religion,	a	godless	god.
That	you	are	becoming	a	sannyasin
Is	enough	to	prove	your	courage.
To	be	with	me	is	dangerous.
It	has	always	been	so:
To	be	with	any	master	is	dangerous.
While	the	master	is	alive	it	is	dangerous
When	the	master	is	dead	it	is	very	convenient.
When	Jesus	was	alive
There	were	only	a	few	people	with	him
Very	courageous	ones.
But	after	his	death	thousands	gathered.
Now	almost	half	of	the	earth	is	Christian.
But	it	is	pointless.
When	the	master	is	dead	you	can	worship
And	you	can	enjoy	the	feeling
That	you	are	religious
But	you	are	not	religious.
Religion	transpires	only	when	the	master	is	alive.
It	is	something	that	happens
Between	an	alive	master	and	the	disciple.
It	can't	happen	when	the	master	has	disappeared	And	to	be	with	me	is	even	more
courageous
Than	to	be	with	Jesus	or	to	be	with	Buddha
Because	they	were	still	talking
In	terms	of	tradition
They	were	still	using	the	past	heritage.
The	time	has	come	for	humanity
To	be	discontinuous	with	the	past.
It	is	absolutely	disgusting!
We	have	to	disconnect	ourselves	from	the	past
Only	then	is	there	a	future
Otherwise	humanity	on	this	earth	is	finished.
Within	these	twenty	years	it	will	be	decided:
Either
We	disconnect	ourselves	from	the	ugly	past,
Then	there	is	a	future	and	there	is	hope,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Or
We	cling	to	the	dead	past	and	we	die	with	it.
Just	as	there	is	a	sun	on	the	outside
There	is	a	sun	inside	too.
The	outside	sun	rises	and	sets
But	the	inside	sun	is	always	there.
It	never	rises,	it	never	sets	--	it	is	eternal.
Unless	we	know	the	inner	light
And	the	source	of	it
We	live	in	darkness.
Make	every	possible	effort	to	move	inwards.
In	the	beginning	it	is	arduous
But	only	in	the	beginning.
It	is	just	like	learning	any	art.
Learning	to	swim	is	difficult	in	the	beginning	But	once	you	know	the	knack	of	it
It	is	so	easy	that	one	wonders	later	on
Why	it	was	so	difficult.
One	can	simply	float	in	the	river.
No	need	to	do	anything.
And	that's	how	it	starts	happening	inside:
Just	in	the	beginning	there	is
A	little	effort	involved,	a	little	struggle.
Soon	one	can	simply	float
In	the	river	that	moves	inwards.
And	it	takes	you
To	deeper	and	deeper	realms	af	bliss
To	more	and	more	light,	to	eternity,	to	god.
Diligence	is	what	is	needed	to	be	a	sannyasin.
Only	two	things	are	needed:
Intelligence	and	diligence.
Intelligence	without	diligence	is	impotent.
Diligence	without	intelligence	is	blind.
One	is	not	enough,	both	have	to	be	together
Only	then	is	your	life	enriched.
So	be	intelligently	diligent.
Act,	but	act	through	awareness.
Do	a	thousand	and	one	things	in	life
But	don't	be	controlled	by	unconscious	instincts.
Then	slowly	slowly	life	becomes
Such	a	divine	experience.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	delicious!
But	one	has	to	learn	the	art	of	tasting	it.
And	all	other	arts	are	small
Compared	to	the	art	of	living.
These	two	things	have	to	be	remembered:
Be	intelligent	and	be	diligent.
They	very	rarely	happen	together.
Intelligent	people	are	not	diligent
Then	their	intelligence	is
Just	an	exercise	in	futility.
They	go	on	thinking	and	thinking	and	thinking
And	by	thinking	nothing	is	ever	achieved.
And	then	there	are	people	who	are	very	diligent	But	without	any	intelligence.
They	go	on	doing	harm	to	others	and	to	themselves.
They	do	much,	but	not	knowing	what	 they	are	doing	They	are	bound	to	create
more	misery	in	the	world	For	themselves	and	for	others	too.
Remember	this
That	these	two	things	have	to	be	two	aspects
Simultaneous	aspects	of	your	growth.
And	then	life	starts	growing	so	fast
That	in	moments	one	can	make	quantum	leaps.
Egolessness	is	the	goal	of	all	meditation.
That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas	itself.
the	ego	is	the	only	problem
And	then	it	creates	a	thousand	and	one	problems.
It	creates	greed,	it	creates	anger
It	creates	lust,	it	creates	jealousy
And	so	on,	so	forth.
And	people	go	on	fighting
With	greed,	with	anger,	with	lust
But	it	is	futile.
Unless	the	root	is	cut
New	branches	will	always	be	coming	up.
You	can	go	on	pruning	the	branches	and	leaves.
That	is	not	going	to	help.
In	fact	by	your	pruning
The	tree	will	become	more	and	more	thick
The	foliage	will	become	more	and	more	thick.
The	tree	will	become	stronger.
My	insistence	is:	don't	fight	with	the	symptoms	Go	to	the	very	root	of	the	matter
And	that	is	simply	one	--	it	is	the	ego.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Cut	it	from	there	and	all	other	problems
Disappear	as	if	they	had	never	existed	before.
If	you	can	learn	only	one	thing	here
Just	to	be	without	an	ego
To	be	as	if	one	is	not
To	be	a	nobody,	a	nothingness
Then	the	ultimate	is	achieved.
There	is	no	higher	goal	than	that.
And	it	can	easily	be	done
Because	ego	is	a	false	phenomenon
Hence	it	can	be	dropped.
It	is	not	a	real	thing.
It	is	imaginary,	it	is	a	shadow.
If	you	go	on	believing	in	it,	it	is.
If	you	look	deeply	into	it
It	is	not	found	at	all.
Meditation	simply	means
Looking	deeply	inside	for	the	ego
Searching	every	nook	and	corner	of	your	being
For	where	it	is.
It	is	not	found	anywhere.
The	moment	it	is	not	found	anywhere
It	is	finished	and	you	are	born	anew.
My	effort	here	is
To	teach	you	not	righteousness,	but	awareness.
As	awareness	deepens,	righteousness	comes
But	it	does	not	become	an	ego	trip.
It	can't	become	an	ego	trip
Because	the	first	condition	for	awareness
Is	the	dropping	of	the	ego.
If	one	is	not	aware	and	tries	to	be	righteous
Then	naturally
That	righteousness	will	be	exploited	by	the	ego.
It	will	make	you	a	puritan
A	moralist,	a	pious	egoist.
And	that	is	far	more	dangerous
Than	the	ordinary	ego.
The	ordinary	ego	is	easy	to	drop
But	 the	 spiritual	 ego	 is	very	difficult	 to	drop	Because	 it	 is	very	 subtle,	 it	 goes
deep	in	you.
It	has	to	be	uprooted	from	your	very	depth.
The	ordinary	ego	is	only	on	the	surface
It	is	very	easily	removeable.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Hence	I	don't	teach	righteousness
I	teach	awareness
And	righteousness	comes	of	its	own	accord.
Only	the	wise	can	be	settled.
The	unwise	man	is	always	restless.
The	unwise	is	always	running	hither	and	thither	Knowing	not	where	he	wants	to
go
Why	he	wants	to	go
Knowing	nothing,	he	feels	he	has	to	do	something.
He	can't	sit	silently.
It	is	impossible	for	him	to	sit	silently.
The	greatest	difficulty	for	him
Is	to	do	nothing.
Only	the	wise	man
Is	capable	of	living	a	settled	life.
Wisdom	arises	out	of	meditation.
It	is	a	fragrance	of	the	flower	of	meditation.
Then	one	is	always	at	home	wherever	one	is
And	always	at	rest
And	life	starts	having	roots	in	existence
Hence	a	feeling	of	settlement...
All	the	chaos
And	the	smoke	of	the	chaos	disappear.
Instead	there	arises	a	clarity.
You	can	see	things	as	they	are
and	you	can	act	accordingly.
And	any	act	coming	out	of	wisdom	is	liberating.
Purity	has	nothing	to	do	with	morality.
A	moral	person	is	never	pure.
The	pure	person	is	always	moral.
Morality	is	pseudo,	it	is	imposed
It	is	cultivated,	it	is	a	facade,	it	is	a	mask.
It	does	not	really	purify	you
It	only	paints	purity	on	your	face.
It	makes	you	a	good	actor.
And	you	have	to	be	very	alert	about	it
Because	the	Japanese	culture
Makes	people	very	good	actors.
For	centuries	Japan
Has	lived	with	a	beautiful	facade.
People	are	taught	to	smile.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Even	when	they	could	hit	you,	they	smile.
It	is	a	very	polished	culture,	but	very	false.
One	has	to	be	more	authentic.
A	little	uncivilisedness	is	not	bad
If	it	brings	your	natural	flavour	back	to	you.
And	there	is	a	different	kind	of	purity,
The	true	purity.
It	always	comes	from	meditation.
It	is	nothing	to	do	with	morality.
It	comes	from	inner	silence.
As	you	become
More	and	more	silent	and	centred	inside
Your	life	starts	having	an	aura	of	purity.
But	that	is	a	by-product.
You	are	not	cultivating	it
It	is	happening	of	its	own	accord.
When	these	things	happen	of	their	own	accord
They	have	a	beautiful	colour,	shape,	form.
When	they	are	cultivated	they	are	ugly.
Thomas	was	one	of	the	disciples	of	Jesus	--
One	of	the	twelve	apostles.
He	has	become	well-known
As	'Doubting	Thomas'.
This	time,	please	don't	do	that!
The	name	Thomas	is	beautiful.
It	has	to	be	relieved	of	the	burden	of	doubt.
Literally	it	means	a	seeker	of	truth.
But	one	cannot	seek	truth
If	one	is	full	of	doubt;
It	is	impossible.
Doubt	is	not	a	bridge,	it	is	a	barrier.
It	is	not	a	bridge,	it	is	a	wall;
It	closes	you.
It	does	not	make	you	available	to	the	truth
That	is	present	everywhere.
And	because	you	are	constantly	doubting
You	cannot	act;	doubt	is	impotent.
Action	needs	trust;	only	a	man	of	trust	can	act.
And	the	journey	towards	truth
Is	the	greatest	act	of	life.
Tremendous	trust	is	needed.
So	try!
Last	time	you	missed	--	This	time	don't	miss	it!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Rest,	relaxation	has	to	be	your	path.
Relax	and	rest	more	and	more	int	yourself.
Don't	be	in	a	hurry.
There	is	no	need	to	be	in	a	hurry.
the	whole	eternity	is	available
It	is	all	ours.
Don't	be	impatient.	Enjoy	each	moment.
Enjoy	it	totally
Without	any	worry	about	the	future.
The	best	moments	are	those
When	you	are	utterly	relaxed.
Doing	nothing,	sitting	silently
Spring	comes	and	the	grass	grows	by	itself.
Man	ordinarily	gathers	dust	around	his	being
And	loses	the	brightness	which	is	his	birthright.
Everybody	is	born	bright
And	everybody	becomes	mediocre.
By	the	time	one	dies,	one	is	almost	stupid.
This	is	a	strange	phenomenon.
And	people	call	it	evolution	--	it	is	involution.
Children	are	more	bright,	more	alive
More	clear	about	everything
Without	any	confusion.
As	they	start	growing
They	start	gathering	confusion	from	everywhere.
We	wait	until	they	become	twenty-one	years	of	age	Then	we	give	them	the	right
to	vote
Because	 be	 that	 time	 everybody	 loses	 brightness	 Everybody	 becomes	 dull,
stupid.
Then	you	are	called	adult.
You	are	really	adulterated
Completely	adulterated
But	people	say	'now	you	have	become	adult
You	have	come	of	age.'
Certainly	politicians	are	afraid
To	give	voting	rights	to	children
Because	they	will	see	through	and	through.
Voting	rights	can	be	given	to	you
Only	when	you	have	lost	all	capacity	to	see,
When	you	are	utterly	blind.
My	effort	here
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Is	to	help	you	to	drop	your	rust,	your	dust
To	cleanse	your	mirror
So	you	can	again	be	your	original	face.
Just	as	a	river	dissolves	into	the	ocean
Dissolve	into	the	divine.
Don't	think	yourself	separate	from	existence.
Meet,	merge	more	and	more.	We	go	on	insisting	that	we	are	separate.
That	is	the	only	irreligious	act:
To	emphasise
Separation.
To	emphasise	unity	is	religion.
It	has	to	become	a	conscious	effort.
Seeing	a	sunset,	dissolve	into	it.
Don't	just	remain	an	observer
Let	the	observer	and	observed	become	one.
Slowly	slowly	you	will	learn	the	knack	of	it.
Then	sitting	by	the	side	of	a	tree	you	can	have	A	deep	feeling	of	unity	with	the
tree.
And	these	small	experiments	can	lead	you
Ultimately	to	feel	oneness	with	the	whole.
And	that	experience	is	god.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	songs.
They	have	to	learn	playfulness
Light-heartedness,	a	sense	of	humour.
And	they	have	to	learn	how	to	rejoice
In	the	small	things	of	life.
There	are	no	great	things	in	life
Life	consists	of	small	things.
But	if	you	know	how	to	rejoice	in	them
You	transform	them	into	great	things.
In	the	hands	of	a	Buddha
Even	ordinary	water	becomes	wine.
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	miracle
That	is	said	to	have	been	done	by	Jesus:
That	he	turned	water	into	wine.
Only	fools	think	that	it	is	literally	true.
It	is	symbolically	true.
In	the	hands	of	Jesus	water	is	wine.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	can	get	drunk	on	simple,	pure	water.
It	depends	on	how	you	drink.
It	does	not	depend	on	the	drink
It	depends	on	the	drinker.
And	I	am	telling	you	from	my	experience.
I	don't	mix	soda	and	whisky
I	mix	soda	and	soda	--	and	it	works!
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
15	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004155
ShortTitle:	84POEM13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Sannyas	means	to	become	consecrated	to	god
Surrendered	to	god.
Sannyas	means	allowing	god	to	live	through	you.
You	simply	stand	aside
You	don't	come	in	between,	you	don't	hinder.
You	open	all	the	doors	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon	To	the	wind,	to	the	rain
To	all	the	messengers	of	god.
You	are	simply	available	to	existence
With	your	whole	heart
Without	holding	anything	back.
In	that	very	moment
When	you	are	not	holding	anything	back
Prayer	has	happened.
In	that	very	moment	the	ego	is	no	more
The	barrier	has	fallen
And	suddenly	we	are	one	with	the	whole.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	to	be	one	with	the	whole
Is	bliss,	is	benediction.
To	remain	separate	form	the	whole	is	misery
Because	it	is	not	according	to	nature
It	is	not	according	to	the	fundamental	law.
It	is	not	true	--	that's	why	it	creates	misery.
When	we	are	one	with	the	whole
We	have	accepted	the	truth	and	dropped	the	lie.
To	be	true
Is	enough	to	bring	tremendous	bliss	to	you.
Peace	is	one	of	the	most	important	things
For	a	sannyasin	to	understand
And	not	only	to	understand	but	to	be.
It	has	not	to	become
Only	an	intellectual	understanding
But	an	existential	feeling	--
You	have	to	experience	it.
Mind	is	never	at	peace.
That	is	not	its	nature.
One	cannot	make	the	mind	peaceful.
All	that	one	can	do	is	to	slip	out	of	the	mind	And	get	rooted	in	the	heart.
Suddenly	there	is	peace.
If	you	try	to	make	the	mind	peaceful
You	will	create	even	more	turmoil.
Now	this	will	be	a	new	problem.
Already	there	are
A	thousand	and	one	problems	in	the	mind.
Now	a	new	problem	arises:
How	to	make	all	these	problems	disappear
How	to	create	peace.
Hence	the	people
Who	become	interested	in	creating	peace	of	mind	Become	very	unpeaceful
More	unpeaceful	than	the	ordinary	human	beings	Who	are	never	bothered	about
it.
That's	why	you	will	find	in	ordinary	life
Something	of	peace	on	people's	faces
But	the	so-called	religious	seem	to	be	very	tense.
Your	so-called	saints	look	very	tense.
There	is	great	anxiety,	great	turmoil.
They	are	constantly	living	in	a	nightmare
Of	their	own	creation
Because	they	are	trying	to	do	the	impossible.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	is	not	the	way	to	be	peaceful.
You	have	to	change	the	gestalt.
You	cannot	make	the	mind	peaceful
But	you	can	slip	out	of	it.
And	the	moment	you	slip	out	of	it
It	loses	energy.
It	is	your	energy,	it	is	your	cooperation	That	keeps	it	going;	you	go	on	pedaling.
The	moment	you	slip	out	of	it
And	you	move	towards	the	heart
Suddenly	there	is	peace,	with	no	effort	at	all.
So	my	suggestions	are	totally	different
Than	the	ordinary	ideas	about	peace.
One	just	has	to	get	out	of	the	mind.
Meditation
Is	not	a	method	to	make	the	mind	peaceful,
It	is	a	method	of	getting	out	of	the	mind
And	entering	into	the	heart.
Suddenly	mind	loses	all	turmoil
Because	you	are	no	longer	there
To	help	it	to	go	on	running.
Without	any	energy	it	falls	flat.
Maybe	for	a	few	days	it	goes	on
Out	of	the	old	momentum
But	it	can't	go	on	for	long.
And	then	you	know	the	secret:
Whenever	you	want	peace,	exist	in	the	heart.
And	if	you	want	peace	twenty-four	hours	a	day
Exist	in	the	heart	and	use	the	mind	from	there.
Then	the	mind	is	just	a	tool,	an	instrument
A	beautiful	machine	in	your	hands.
And	you	are	the	master.
Mind	as	a	machine	is	beautiful
But	when	the	machine	becomes	the	master
And	the	master	is	completely	forgotten
The	real	master	completely	forgotten
Then	the	whole	of	life	is	topsy-turvy.
Everything	is	a	gift.
Some	unknown	source	of	energy
Call	it	god,	Jehova,	existence,	nature
Is	very	generous.
It	seems	it	is	overflowing.
It	can't	contain	itself,	it	has	to	give
Not	because	you	deserve	it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	because	it	has	too	much.
It	is	like	a	rain	cloud,	it	has	to	shower.
It	does	not	matter	where
Or	whether	the	earth	deserves	it	or	not
It	may	shower	on	a	rock.
The	rock	will	not	be	benefitted	by	it.
That's	the	meaning	of	the	word	'gift'.
It	is	a	beautiful	word
It	has	a	great	message	in	it.
If	we	start	looking	at	it	meditatively
It	can	transform	your	whole	life.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
Looking	at	life	in	its	reality
imply	makes	one	feel	grateful
To	the	unknown,	to	the	unknowable.	One	bows	down.
That	very	bowing	down,	that	gratitude
Makes	one	a	sannyasin.
And	out	of	that	gratitude
A	thousand	and	one	flowers	bloom.
Everyone	is	born	bright
But	sooner	or	later	the	whole	structure
Of	the	society,	the	whole	conditioning,	is	such	That	the	brightness	is	destroyed,
it	is	crippled	It	is	covered	with	stupid	superstitions.
The	intelligent	child
Finds	it	difficult	to	remain	intelligent
Because	intelligence	doubts,	enquires,
Argues,	rebels.
Intelligence	is	individual.
Sometimes	it	says	yes	and	sometimes	it	says	no.
Intelligence	lives	in	its	own	light
It	is	not	imitative
And	the	parents	don't	like	that.
They	want	the	child
To	be	an	imitator,	a	yes-sayer.
Whatsoever	they	say
He	should	accept	it	with	no	argument.
They	know	and	he	does	not	know
So	they	have	to	decide
What	he	has	to	do,	what	he	has	not	to	do.
Hence	the	intelligent	child
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Finds	himself	in	a	difficult	situation.
If	he	wants	to	be	intelligent
He	is	constantly	in	trouble
There	is	trouble	in	the	home
There	is	trouble	in	the	school
There	is	trouble	in	the	college
In	the	university.
Wherever	he	goes	there	is	trouble.
Unless	one	is	really	courageous
Enough	to	accept	all	these	troubles
And	yet	to	insist	on	remaining	intelligent,
Which	is	certainly	very	rare,
One	is	bound	to	compromise	sooner	or	later.
The	whole	pressure	is	too	much.
The	child	is	so	helpless
The	child	is	so	small,	so	tiny
And	the	people	who	are	pressuring	him
Are	powerful	people.
They	 force	 him	 to	 behave	 in	 an	 unintelligent	 way	 A	 way	 against	 his	 own
intelligence.
Slowly	slowly	he	forgets	what	intelligence	is.
He	becomes	dull.
The	more	dull	he	is,	the	more	he	is	respected.
If	he	is	really	stupid	he	becomes	a	saint.
People	worship	him.
Jesus
Could	not	become	a	saint	for	the	simple	reason	That	he	remained	intelligent.
He	resisted	all	attempts
To	destroy	his	intelligence
Hence	he	was	crucified.
But	the	pope	in	the	Vatican
Is	not	an	intelligent	man.
Polacks	are	not	known	to	be	intelligent!
Now	this	is	a	beautiful	combination:
A	Polack	and	a	pope.
In	fact	from	now	onwards
Only	Polacks	should	be	popes.
He	is	worshipped.
And	that	happens	all	over	the	world.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	aware	of	it
And	they	have	to	REclaim	their	intelligence.
It	is	still	there
It	is	simply	hidden	behind	much	garbage.
That	garbage	has	to	be	removed
So	you	can	again	become	bright
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	that	you	can	again	claim
Another	childhood,	another	innocence.
That	innocence	brings	purity
And	that	innocence	brings	joy
And	that	innocence	brings	insight	into	reality.
It	is	not	through	knowledge
That	one	comes	to	know	god
It	is	through	innocence.
It	is	not	through	belief
That	one	comes	to	know	god
It	is	through	intelligence.
Tremendous	intelligence	is	needed	to	know	god.
Excellence	is	a	by-product	of	meditation
Because	intelligence	itself
Is	a	by-product	of	meditation.
Ordinarily	people	behave	in	a	very	unintelligent	way	For	the	simple	reason	that
They	are	living	mechanically,	unconsciously.
They	are	not	masters	of	their	being.
But	slaves	of	their	instincts.
What	excellence	can	they	have?
They	are	not	even	men	yet.
It	is	only	through	meditation
That	you	start	becoming	a	man
You	start	getting	out	of	the	animal	kingdom.
Something	greater	than	the	animal
Starts	happening	to	you	through	meditation.
On	the	one	hand	it	makes	you	a	human	being
On	the	other	hand	it	brings	great	excellence
In	whatsoever	you	do.
The	secret	is
That	meditation	releases	awareness	in	you.
To	me	awareness	is	the	only	virtue
And	unawareness	the	only	sin.
Learn	to	be	aware
And	all	else	will	follow	of	its	own	accord.
God	has	many	aspects.
You	can	look	at	god	through	love
Then	god	is	love.
You	can	look	through	beauty
Then	god	is	beauty.
You	can	look	through	bliss
Then	god	is	bliss.
It	depends	from	what	angle	you	look	towards	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
God	is	multi-dimensional
But	bliss	 is	one	of	 the	most	fundamental	aspects	And	bliss	 is	 the	search	for	us
all.
To	be	blissful	is	to	be	religious.
And	when	your	bliss	is	absolute
You	have	arrived	home.
Parijat	is	a	beautiful	flower
With	great	fragrance.
Man	is	also	a	flower
But	we	are	absolutely	unaware	of	our	potential.
We	are	born	as	seeds,	and	unfortunately
We	remain	seeds.	we	never	grow.
We	never	grow	to	the	point
Where	flowers	can	bloom	in	us.
To	be	a	Buddha	means	to	bloom	as	a	flower
To	release	one's	fragrance.
Remember,	we	are	born	as	seeds.
But	we	should	die	as	flowers.
Then	life	has	been	a	beautiful	experience
Then	life	has	been
A	journey	of	tremendous	fulfilment.
Otherwise	it	is	sheer	wastage.
Meditation	will	help	you	to	move
From	the	seed	towards	the	flower.
We	are	not	the	body	and	we	are	not	the	mind.
We	are	pure	consciousness
And	pure	consciousness	is	what	god	is.
Sannyas	is	a	journey
From	the	body-mind	to	pure	consciousness.
It	is	an	inward	pilgrimage
From	the	circumference	to	the	centre.
When	you	reach	your	own	centre
You	are	surprised:
You	don't	find	yourself	there	at	all
You	find	god	himself.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
He	is	not	to	be	found	anywhere	else
He	is	just	residing	in	you	at	your	very	centre	Waiting	for	you	to	come	home.
Innocence
Is	the	most	precious	thing	to	be	achieved
Because	it	is	only	to	the	innocent	heart
That	all	that	is	valuable	can	happen.
To	the	cunning	nothing	happens.
To	the	cunning	love	is	impossible
To	the	cunning	bliss	is	impossible
To	the	cunning	anything	of	value	is	impossible.
To	the	cunning	money	is	possible
Power	is	possible,	prestige	is	possible.
They	are	all	valueless	things.
Death	destroys	them	all.
But	to	the	innocent	something	happens
Which	even	death	cannot	take	away.
So	this	is	the	fundamental	quality
For	a	sannyasin:	To	be	innocent.
Jesus	says:	Be	like	small	children.
That's	what	he	means:
Be	innocent,	then	god	is	yours.
Drop	all	cunningness,	all	cleverness
All	knowledge,	all	that	gives	you	the	idea
That	you	know.
Move	towards	god
With	a	wondering	heart,	with	awe
And	then	success	is	sure.
A	ten	-year	old	German	girl	receives	her	mala
and	the	sheet	of	paper	bearing	her	sannyas	name:	Nirmala.	It	means	purity,	Osho
explains.
He	 leans	 forward	 to	 expand	 on	 its	 implications,	 then	 pauses,	 chuckling
involuntarily	You	are	still	pure!
Don't	allow	the	world	to	destroy	your	purity.
Don't	allow	the	world	to	corrupt	you.
Your	sannyas	will	protect	you.
The	people	who	have	become	grown-up
Are	in	a	difficulty.
First	they	have	to	unlearn	many	things.
You	are	in	a	good	situation.
You	need	not	unlearn	anything
Because	you	have	not	learned	anything	yet.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	can	start	moving	directly	towards	god!
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
16	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004165
ShortTitle:	84POEM14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Sannyas	is	a	growth	process.
Very	few	people	grow	at	all.
The	average	mental	age	is	only	twelve	years.
The	person	may	be	eighty
But	he	carries	the	mind	of	a	twelve-year-old.
This	is	a	very	strange	situation:
He	only	appears	mature
Deep	down	he	remains	immature,	utterly	immature.
Without	meditation	there	is	no	way.
It	is	only	through	meditation
That	one	becomes	really	mature,	integrated.
It	is	through	meditation
That	one	becomes	really	mature,	integrated.
It	is	through	meditation
That	your	consciousness	starts	rising	upwards
That	you	start	creating	a	bridge	to	the	beyond.
A	man	is	really	grown	up
When	he	starts	feeling	the	presence	of	god.
That	is	the	only	criterion.
Remember	that	as	a	goal
And	put	your	total	energy
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Your	whole	heart	into	it.
It	can	still	be	achieved,	it	is	never	too	late.
All	that	is	needed	is	a	great	intensity.
And	if	one	can	know	god	before	death	comes
Then	death	never	comes.
The	body	dies
But	now	you	know	that	you	cannot	die.
You	are	eternal.
Everyone	brings	a	truth	in	his	being.
The	truth	has	not	to	be	invented
It	has	only	to	be	discovered
Or	rather,	REdiscovered.
We	are	already	in	possession	of	it
But	we	have	become	completely	oblivious
Of	the	fact.
We	have	only	fallen	asleep
And	forgotten	who	we	are.
All	that	is	needed	is	a	remembering.
George	Gurdjieff	used	to	teach	his	disciples
Only	one	method,	the	method	of	self-remembering.
Buddha	calls	it	right-mindfulness
Krishnamurti	calls	it	awareness
Christ	calls	it	watchfulness
Shankara	calls	it	witnessing.
But	it	is	the	same	phenomenon.
You	have	to	become	alert
You	have	to	become	more	conscious.
Nothing	is	missing
It	is	only	that	you	are	dreaming
Dreaming	that	you	are	a	beggar
And	you	are	not	a	beggar.
Once	the	dream	is	broken,	once	you	wake	up
Suddenly	you	find	what	ridiculous	dreams
You	have	been	in.
The	greatest	treasure	is	yours
The	eternal	life	is	yours
The	kingdom	of	god	is	yours
The	ultimate	truth	is	yours.
And	we	have	brought	it	with	ourselves.
We	are	it!
So	it	is	not	a	question
Of	seeking	and	searching	somewhere	else
It	is	simply	a	question
Of	putting	your	total	energy	into	waking	up.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Life	is	like	a	nightmare:
If	you	are	suffering	in	a	nightmare
All	that	you	need	is	to	put	your	total	energy
Into	waking	up.
Nothing	else	is	needed.
If	you	are	being	chased	by	a	lion
You	need	not	kill	the	lion
Because	there	is	no	lion	at	all.
If	you	are	being	crushed	under	a	rock
You	need	not	remove	the	rock.
It	may	be	just	your	own	pillow.
All	that	you	need	is	to	wake	up!
A	middle-aged	American	woman	presents	herself	for	sannyas.	She	had	written	to
Osho	 earlier	 in	 the	 year	 telling	 of	 her	 eight	 years's	 involvement	 with	 a
community	of	Gurdjieff	followers.
Something	was	 still	missing,	 she	 felt;	now	she	was	 reaching	out	and	 'planning
for	a	miracle.'
Osho	explains	that	her	sannyas	name,	Anubhuti,	means	experiencing.
Truth	cannot	be	contemplated	on
It	can	only	be	experienced.
It	is	nothing	intellectual
It	is	something	existential.
You	have	to	know	the	taste	of	it.
You	cannot	conclude	by	philosophising.
There	are	thousands	of	people	in	the	world
Who	go	on	thinking	about	truth
And	about	and	about	they	go
Around	and	around	they	go	in	circles.
Their	conclusions	are	futile.
Howsoever	beautiful	those	conclusions	may	appear	They	don't	have	any	life,	any
soul	in	them.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means
You	are	dropping	philosophising
You	are	renouncing	the	ways	of	the	mind	and
You	are	moving	into	a	totally	different	gestalt:	The	ways	of	the	heart
The	way	of	love,	not	of	logic.
Singing	is	far	closer	to	truth
Than	the	process	of	thinking.
It	looks	very	absurd:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
How	can	you	come	to	know	truth	by	dancing?
But	there	have	been	people
Who	have	come	to	know	truth	through	dancing.
Jalaluddin	Rumi	came	to	know	truth
Simply	by	dancing.
He	danced	and	danced	and	he	danced	for	hours;
It	is	said,	for	thirty-six	hours
Without	any	break.
He	fell	into	a	kind	of	total	drunkenness.
He	became	so	drunk	from	dancing!
And	when	he	came	back
He	was	totally	a	different	man.
Hence	he	invented	a	new	method.
The	whirling	dervishes
Are	the	followers	of	Jalaluddin	Rumi.
Through	dancing	he	arrived.
Nobody	before	had	arrived	through	dancing.
Rumi	stumbled	upon	a	new	truth.
Dancing	is	more	existential.
Through	singing	many	have	arrived.
Just	by	sitting	silently,	doing	nothing
Many	have	arrived.
But	if	you	are	thinking,	you	are	doing	something.
A	state	of	no-thought	is	needed	to	experience.
So	I	am	giving	you	the	name	'experiencing'
To	remind	you	again	and	again
Not	to	go	into	the	old	grooves	of	the	mind.
Metaphorically,	symbolically,	be	headless!
And	here	you	can	see	so	many	headless	people
Running	hither	and	thither!
People	like	Christ	cannot	be	followed.
You	can	become	a	Christ
But	you	cannot	be	a	follower	of	Christ.
To	be	a	follower	is	to	be	an	imitation.
It	is	not	the	real	thing
So	it	may	look	paradoxical	but	this	is	how	it	is:	To	really	be	a	follower	of	Christ
One	has	to	cease	to	be	a	follower
One	has	to	be	a	Christ	oneself.
And	the	same	is	true	about	Buddha
And	Krishna	and	Zarathustra.
These	people	can	easily	be	followed.
Their	personalities	are	hypnotic
They	have	a	magnetic	charm,	a	charisma.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
One	would	like	to	follow	in	their	footsteps.
But	they	are	unique	people,
Nobody	can	follow	in	their	footsteps.
All	followers	look	pathetic.
Mm?	--	you	wearing	the	shoes	of	Christ
Or	his	garments	and	carrying	his	cross...
It	may	be	okay	in	a	drama	but	in	life
You	will	be	simply	crazy!
You	have	to	be	a	Christ	yourself.
And	remember:	Christ	does	not	mean	a	Jesus.
Christ	simply	means	one	who	has	come	home
One	who	has	attained
The	full	flowering	of	consciousness.
You	can	call	Buddha	a	Christ
And	you	can	call	Christ	a	Buddha.
There	is	no	difference.
Remember	it
Love	Christ,	love	Buddha,	love	Lao	Tzu
Imbibe	their	spirit
But	don't	follow	their	lives	in	detail.
Never	be	a	follower.
Always	be	authentic,	true,	yourself.
And	I	say	that	is	the	only	way	to	follow	them.
God	can	be	your	strength	only	if	you	surrender.
If	you	dissolve	yourself	totally
If	you	are	no	more,	then	god	is	your	strength.
Then	he	is	the	one	who	exists	within	you.
He	is	your	consciousness
And	he	is	your	life	and	he	is	your	love.
He	is	all	in	all.
But	you	have	to	disappear,	you	have	to	give	way.
We	are	so	full	of	ourselves;
That's	why	god	is	not	our	strength.
And	we	cannot	be	strong	on	our	own.
How	can	a	leaf	be	strong	on	its	own?
Without	the	nourishment
The	constant	nourishment	of	the	tree?
How	can	the	tree	be	strong	on	its	own
Without	being	nourished
By	the	earth	and	the	sun	and	the	moon?
We	are	part	of	this	immense	existence
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	we	go	on	keeping	ourselves	separate.
We	create	a	boundary	around	ourselves	--
We	defend	that	boundary.
We	say,	"Trespassers	will	be	prosecuted."
We	don't	allow	anybody	to	trespass	across	our	boundary.
Even	if	god	comes,	if	he	want	to	come	in
You	won't	allow	him.
Because	his	coming	in	means	only	one	thing:
Your	going	out.
You	both	cannot	occupy	the	same	space.
You	can	be	there	only	if	he	is	not	allowed	in.
He	is	vast.
When	he	comes,	he	comes	like	a	storm.
When	he	comes,	he	comes	like	a	flood.
It	takes	away	all	garbage,	all	rubbish	from	you;	It	cleanses	you	of	yourself	--
Of	the	very	idea	of	the	ego.
But	 then	a	beautiful	phenomenon	starts	happening:	For	 the	first	 time	you	don't
feel	weak
For	the	first	time	you	are	nourished
By	inexhaustible	sources.
You	are	as	strong	as	god	himself
Because	you	have	become	part	of	him.
Peace	is	something	that	you	have	lost.
It	has	been	stolen	by	the	world,
You	have	to	steal	it	back.
It	has	been	destroyed	by	the	world,
You	have	to	claim	it	back.
George	Gurdjieff	used	to	say
That	the	true	seeker	has	to	be	a	little	sly
Because	the	world	is	very	cunning,	very	deceptive.
If	you	are	not	alert	it	will	go	on	deceiving	you,	It	will	go	on	cheating	you.
It	has	cheated	you	of	all	your	treasures,
And	it	has	handed	over	to	you
All	kinds	of	rubbish	instead.
You	have	to	be	alert,
Very	alert	and	a	little	sly,
So	that	you	cannot	be	deceived	any	more
So	that	you	can	detect
Whenever	the	world	is	trying	to	deceive	you.
And	you	also	have	to	be	sly
To	escape	from	all	kinds	of	entanglements,
Without	creating	too	much	fuss.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	like	a	prisoner	trying	to	escape
From	goal.
If	he	makes	too	much	fuss	he	will	be	caught.
He	has	to	be	very	silent,	utterly	silent
As	if	nothing	is	happening.
And	he	has	to	do	much;
He	has	to	break	the	wall,
Maybe	he	has	to	cut	the	bars	of	the	window.
He	has	to	make	some	connections	outside.
Maybe	he	has	to	throw	a	rope	over	the	wall,
Beyond	the	wall,
Climb	the	rope	and	jump	from	the	wall.
And	everything	has	to	happen
In	such	a	silent	way,	as	if	nothing	is	happening,	As	if	everything	is	normal.
Of	course	he	has	to	be	sly	--
He	has	to	be	a	thief!
Of	course	he	is	only	trying
To	gain	what	has	been	robbed	from	him.
But	he	has	to	be	a	thief,
To	steal	that	which	belongs	to	him.
Hence	all	the	methods	need	great	intelligence.
Stupid	people	cannot	get	out	of	the	world,
Cannot	get	out	of	the	traps.
Tremendous	intelligence	is	needed.
And	meditation
Certainly	releases	great	intelligence.
It	is	the	only	method
Which	releases	intelligence	in	you,
Which	makes	you	bright,
Which	sharpens	your	consciousness,
Which	helps	you	to	see	clearly,
Which	makes	you	more	alert,	more	conscious.
Which	keeps	you	always	on	guard.
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	One	week
--	Then	come	back	again.	One	week	is	not	enough	to	get	out	of	the	jail.
One	week	is	enough	if	you	want	to	get	into	the	jail	but	to	get	out	of	it	takes	time!
Sadhvi	means	one	who	is	innocent.
That	is	the	secret	of	knowing	the	truth:
To	be	innocent,	innocent	like	a	child.
Unlearning	is	the	whole	process.
We	have	learned	too	much
We	are	burdened	with	knowledge
And	that	is	all	rubbish
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Because	it	is	all	borrowed.
Unless	something	is	your	own
It	has	no	value,	no	meaning
So	put	aside	all	that	is	not
your	own	experience.
Save	only	that	which	is	your	own	experience,
Howsoever	little	it	is.	But	it	is	enough.
Base	your	life	on	that
And	you	will	be	putting	down	a	right	foundation.
Basing	your	life	on	borrowed	knowledge
Is	making	a	house	on	the	sands:
It	is	bound	to	fall.
It	is	trying	to	get	to	the	farther	shore
In	a	paper	boat.	Scriptures	are	paper	boats.
And	now	the	time	has	come
When	you	have	to	know	something	on	your	own
Because	only	that	will	be	going	with	you.
All	that	is	borrowed
Will	have	to	left	on	this	shore
But	that	which	is	known	by	you
Cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.
Even	death	cannot	destroy	it	--	it	is	eternal.
And	the	only	way	to	become	innocent
Is	to	be	watchful	of	the	mind	--
Non-judgmental	watchfulness.
Don't	judge:	'This	is	good,	this	is	bad'
Because	the	moment	you	judge
You	lose	your	awareness.
Simply	 watch	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 the	 thoughts	 Whatsoever	 is	 passing	 has
nothing	to	do	with	you.
You	are	separate	from	it.
Don't	get	identified
Either	with	good	or	with	bad.
Simply	remain	aloof,	distant
A	watcher	on	the	hill
And	slowly	slowly	the	procession	of	thoughts
And	memories	and	desires	start	disappearing.
One	day	it	happens,	the	road	is	empty
There	is	no	traffic.
In	that	very	moment	turning	in	happens.
When	there	is	nothing	to	observe	in	the	mind
The	observer	turns	upon	itself.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	ancient	symbol...
Many	mysteries	schools	have	used	that	symbol:
The	snake	swallowing	itself.
It	represents	this	process.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
When	there	is	nothing	to	swallow
The	snake	swallows	itself.
When	there	is	nothing	to	observe
The	observer	starts	observing	himself.
And	that	is	the	beginning	of	enlightenment.
Then	for	the	first	time
Your	light	falls	upon	yourself
And	it	liberates
It	liberates	you	from	all	kinds	of	bondage.
So	innocence	has	to	be	your	golden	key.
For	centuries	the	religious	person
Has	been	missing	a	sense	of	humour.
The	saints	have	not	laughed	for	centuries.
Laughter	has	lost	all	connections	with	spirituality.
Laughter	has	not	been	a	loser
But	spirituality	has	lost	much.
Spirituality	has	become	dull,	sad
Serious,	ill,	pathological.
It	has	become	more	and	more	deathlike
It	has	lost	aliveness.
Without	laughter	there	is	no	life
And	without	laughter	there	is	no	love	either.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	bring	laughter
Back	to	the	spiritual	dimension.
The	saints	should	be	able
In	fact	only	he	should	be	able	to	laugh	totally.
But	the	so-called	saints
Are	very	afraid	of	laughter.
They	go	on	keeping	long	faces
Long	faces	are	being	worshipped.
To	laugh	seems	to	be	mundane.
In	fact,	laughter
Is	one	of	the	greatest	spiritual	qualities.
In	deep	laughter	the	ego	disappears
Just	as	in	deep	dance	the	ego	disappears.
When	you	really	have	a	belly	laugh
You	 are	 no	 more	 there,	 only	 laughter	 is	 happening	 You	 are	 not	 there	 as	 an
observer
You	are	totally	immersed	in	it.
And	that	gives	you	a	taste	of	meditation.
That's	how	your	whole	life	should	be:
Whatsoever	you	are	doing
You	should	be	totally	immersed	in	it
Then	only	can	meditation	become	like	breathing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	can	spread	all	over	your	life.
Even	in	sleep	it	remains	with	you
Like	a	subtle	undercurrent
Of	joy,	of	peace,	of	silence.
The	ultimate	law	itself	is	god.
There	is	no	god	as	a	person	somewhere.
'God'	is	only	a	way	of	speaking.
What	really	is,	is	a	fundamental	law
That	keeps	the	whole	existence	together.
The	universe	is	a	great	harmony.
It	is	not	a	chaos,	it	is	a	cosmos.
There	is	great	order
And	this	order	is	possible	only
If	there	is	something	that	keeps	everything
Connected	and	joined	together.
That	something	is	called	dharma,	the	law.
To	know	it	and	to	be	in	tune	with	it
Is	to	be	blissful.
Not	to	know	it	is	to	be	miserable
Because	without	knowing	it
You	cannot	be	in	tune	with	it.
Maybe	once	in	a	while
Accidentally	you	may	be	in	tune
Then	 there	 will	 be	 a	 little	 glimpse	 of	 happiness	 But	 that	 is	 accidental	 --	 you
cannot	depend	on	it.
Meditation	brings	you	a	clear	vision	of	the	law	And	helps	you	to	surrender	to	the
law
Helps	you	to	drop	all	resistance	to	the	law.
And	once	you	are	consciously	in	tune
With	the	ultimate	law
Your	life	is	bliss,	pure	bliss
And	nothing	but	bliss.
The	moon	represents	two	things
Which	are	very	essential	for	a	sannyasin.
One	is	that	the	moon	is	a	mirror:
It	simply	reflects	the	rays	of	the	sun.
A	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	mirror
Just	a	clean	mirror	so	he	can	reflect
That	which	is.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	the	second	thing	is	that	the	moon
Not	only	reflects	the	rays	of	the	sun,
In	reflecting	them	it	transforms	their	quality.
The	very	process	of	reflecting	is	such
That	those	rays	go	through	an	alchemical	change.
When	they	come	from	the	sun
They	are	hot,	burning	hot
When	they	come	reflected	through	the	moon
They	are	cool.	That	is	the	miracle	of	the	moon.
The	world	 is	very	hot	 --	 it	 is	hot	because	of	 lust	Because	of	anger,	because	of
hatred.
It	is	hot	because	of	a	thousand	and	one	passions.
It	is	boiling.
A	sannyasin	has	to	live	in	this	world
But	he	can	live	in	it	only	if	he	comes	to	know	The	alchemical	process
Of	transforming	everything
That	comes	to	him
Into	a	cool	experience.
You	can	insult	the	Buddha
But	when	it	is	reflected	back	to	you
It	comes	as	a	fragrance	of	a	flower.
You	can	throw	an	arrow	at	the	Buddha
But	when	it	comes	back	to	you
It	is	a	rose	flower.
That's	what	a	sannyasin	has	to	be,
These	two	things:	a	mirror...
And	not	only	a	mirror	but	also	an
Alchemical	process	of	constantly	transforming
Al	that	is	hot,	ugly,	violent,	into	cool	energy.
The	sannyasin	lives	in	tremendous	coolness.
He	lives	in	the	fire	of	the	world
But	he	remains	cool.
The	day	it	happens
Then	you	know	that	your	meditation	has	succeeded	You	have	achieved	the	fruit
of	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
17	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004175
ShortTitle:	84POEM15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
To	be	a	disciple	is	something	of	immense	value.
It	means	surrender
It	means	putting	your	ego	aside
It	means	a	heart-to-heart	communion
With	the	master.	It	is	a	love	affair.
It	is	not	a	question	of	being	convinced
By	the	ideas	of	the	master.
It	is	being	convinced	by	the	presence,
By	the	divine	presence	of	the	master.
It	is	being	convinced	that	the	master	is	no	more	But	god	is	flowing	through	him.
Then	only	can	one	become	a	disciple.
To	be	a	student	is	easy.
It	doesn't	require	much	from	your	side.
But	to	be	a	disciple	is	very	demanding.
It	requires	trust,	tremendous	trust
But	once	you	have	tasted
The	beauties	of	disciplehood
Then	there	is	nothing	sweeter	than	that.
It	happened	in	many	other	times	too:
Many	of	the	disciples	of	Buddha
Became	enlightened	but	they	wouldn't	leave	him.
And	he	would	insist
'Now	that	you	are	enlightened
You	have	become	Buddhas	in	your	own	right.
You	should	go	and	spread	the	word,	reach	people!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	they	would	say,
'No.	We	still	want	to	remain	disciples
We	don't	ant	to	be	Buddhas.'
They	said	to	Buddha...
Manjushree,	the	first	disciple	of	Buddha
Who	became	enlightened
Fell	at	his	feet,	cried	and	wept.
He	said,'I	was	not	thinking
That	enlightenment	would	happen	so	soon.
Pleas	let	me	hang	around!
I	don't	want	to	go	anywhere.
I	am	ready	to	drop	this	enlightenment
But	I	am	not	ready	to	drop	my	disciplehood.'
Buddha	said,	'That	is	impossible.
Once	enlightened,	you	are	enlightened	forever.
There	is	no	going	back!'
But	there	is	significance
In	his	crying	and	weeping:
He	would	still	like	to	be	a	disciple
He	would	still	like	to	be	in	the	same	communion	In	the	same	love	affair.
He	does	not	want	to	come	to	the	end
Of	that	beautiful	journey.
So	be	truly	a	disciple.
And	the	word	'disciple'	simply	means
One	who	is	capable	of	learning
One	who	is	available	to	learn
One	who	is	receptive.
A	loyal	heart	is	the	beginning	of	sannyas:
A	heart	that	can	trust
And	a	heart	that	can	be	committed
That	can	get	involved
A	heart	which	is	capable	of	dropping	all	doubt.
Only	such	a	heart
Can	become	a	boat	to	the	farther	shore
Only	a	loyal	heart	can	know	what	god	is.
The	doubting	person	thinks	much
But	knows	nothing.
The	trusting	person	thinks	nothing
But	knows	all.
This	is	just	the	beginning,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	beginning	of	something
That	will	go	on	becoming	vaster	and	vaster.
Even	the	greatest	rivers
Start	with	a	tiny	spring.
But	if	one	goes	on	working
If	one	goes	on	pouring	one's	energies
Soon	it	becomes	a	vast	river.
And	only	big	rivers	can	reach	the	ocean.
Man	has	to	become	an	increasing	river
Of	faithfulness,	of	trust,	of	love
Only	then	is	there	a	possibility	to	reach
The	ocean,	god,	the	ultimate.
Small	faith	is	bound
To	be	lost	somewhere	on	the	way.
And	people	have	such	small	faiths,	like	dewdrops	Just	a	little	heat	is	enough	and
they	evaporate.
Increasing	faithfulness	means
Whatsoever	happens	your	faith	remains	unmoving.
Even	if	everything	goes	against	it
Your	faith	remains	unmoving.
There	is	a	Sufi	parable:
Junaid,	the	master	of	Al	Hillaj	Mansoor
Was	seen	with	a	woman	by	the	side	of	a	river.
The	woman	was	pouring	some	liquid	into	a	glass.
It	appeared	that	he	was	drinking	wine
Because	the	container	was	like	that	of	wine.
A	few	people	rushed	to	Al	Hillaj
Caught	hold	of	him	and	said
'Come	here.	You	trust	this	man?'
They	looked	from	far	away
Hidden	behind	the	trees
Al	Hillaj	saw	the	master	drinking	wine.
He	laughed.
Those	people	said,'Now	what	do	you	say?'
He	said,'My	eyes	must	have	gone	wrong.
I	don't	trust	my	eyes	but	I	trust	my	master!'
This	is	faith!
He	 cannot	 deny:	 He	 is	 seeing	 a	 woman	 pouring	 something	 And	 Junaid	 is
drinking
And	he	seems	to	be	almost	drunk.
But	those	people	were	not	going	to	leave	him.
They	said,'Then	you	come	close,	come	with	us.'
They	forced	him	to	go	there
But	when	they	went	there	it	was	nothing:
The	woman	was	nobody	else
But	the	master's	mother.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	there	was	no	wine	--	it	was	only	a
Wine	flask	--	it	was	pure	water.
But	Al	Hillaj	said.	'Even	if	it	had	been	wine
And	the	women	had	been	a	prostitute
I	would	have	still	stuck	to	my	first	statement	That	my	eyes	are	seeing	something
Which	is	not	there,	which	is	not	possible.
My	eyes	can	go	wrong;	my	master	cannot	go	wrong.
If	 such	 trust	 is	 possible,	 then	miracles	happen	And	miracles	only	happen	with
such	trust.
Yoshimi	means	the	lucky	one.
It	is	really	fortunate	to	be	a	sannyasin
It	is	a	rare	privilege.	It	is	available	to	all	But	very	few	will	be	able	to	receive	it,
Only	the	lucky	ones.
Feel	grateful	to	god	that	you	have	been	able
To	gather	enough	courage	to	take	this	jump.
Feel	grateful	to	existence
That	it	has	brought	you	here
That	something	immensely	valuable
Becomes	possible	now.
Sannyas	is	only	a	door	to	the	divine
But	if	you	are	at	the	door
The	divine	is	not	far	away.
Just	go	on	remembering
That	you	have	to	go	inwards,	into	the	temple.
Because	there	are	a	few	people	who	return
Even	from	the	door	--	the	unlucky	ones.
Prove	that	you	are	really	a	lucky	one,	Joshimi!
And	Yoshime	also	gas	another	meaning;
It	means	watchfulness.
That	has	to	be	your	method
The	work	upon	yourself.
The	definition	of	a	sannyasin
Is	one	who	is	on	guard,	alert,	aware.
Watchful	of	the	world	around
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Watchful	of	the	mind	inside
Watchful	of	all	kinds	of	thoughts,	desires
Images	that	float	in	the	mind
Watchful	of	the	watcher	too.
And	that	is	the	ultimate	in	watchfulness
In	vigilance:	To	be	aware	of
Awareness	itself.
First	become	aware	of	the	world	--
Which	is	the	easiest	--	aware	of	the	trees
And	the	birds	and	the	sun	and	the	moon.
Then	become	aware	of	your	body
Then	become	aware	of	your	mind	and
You	are	coming	closer	and	closer	to	the	centre.
These	are	all	concentric	circles	around	the	centre.
Then	become	watchful	of	your	feelings.
And	then	finally
Become	watchful	of	your	watching.
The	day	one	is	capable
Of	watching	one's	watchfulness
Is	the	greatest	day	in	life.
Paradise	simply	descends	in	you
Bliss	starts	showering	like	thousands	of	flowers.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	song
A	song	in	every	possible	way.
He	has	to	be	a	celebration.
He	has	to	live	life	in	all	its	dimensions.
He	has	to	be	a	dance
He	has	to	create	music	in	his	being.
Unless	one	creates	music	in	one's	being
Unless	one	starts	living	life	as	a	dance
Unless	one	celebrates	existence
There	is	no	possibility	of	knowing	god
Because	god	is	the	ultimate	crescendo
Of	dance,	song,	celebration
God	is	not	for	the	sad	people.
It	is	for	those	who	are	capable
Of	love	and	laughter.
This	existence	is	a	tremendous	play.
Don't	take	it	seriously!
Take	it	with	a	song	in	your	heart
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Take	it	joyfully.
Move	in	the	world	with	a	light	foot
With	a	laughter	in	your	heart
And	then	suddenly	the	whole	existence
Starts	turning	into	a	divine	experience.
The	mundane	becomes	extraordinary.
My	sannyas	is	not	renunciation	of	the	world.
It	is	rejoicing	about	the	world,	in	the	world.
Everyone	is	here	to	become	a	proof
For	god's	existence
And	unless	one	becomes	a	proof
For	god's	existence
Life	 is	 not	 fulfilled,	 life	 is	 empty	 and	 hollow	 Meaningless,	 without	 any
significance.
Become	aware	of	it,	that	life	is	carrying
Something	tremendously	significant	inside	it
But	it	is	only	a	seed	at	the	moment.
Sannyas	can	become	the	right	soil	for	it.
And	in	the	right	season,	when	the	spring	comes	You	can	bloom,	you	can	release
fragrance.
Only	then	is	there	contentment.
Otherwise	people	live	in	discontentment
And	die	in	discontentment.
Their	whole	life	is	nothing
But	an	exercise	in	futility.
The	sooner	one	becomes	aware	of	it,	the	better	Because	time	is	very	short.
One	never	knows	about	tomorrow:
It	may	come,	it	may	not	come.
Hence	everything	has	to	be	done	now.
Now	the	real	battle	begins!
It	is	easy	to	fight	with	others.
The	real	fight	is	with	one's	own	darkness
The	real	fight	is	with	one's	own	ego.
The	ego	is	the	only	evil,	the	only	devil.
And	if	you	can	kill	the	devil
You	become	victorious.
But	very	few	people	enter	into	that	fight.
They	fight	with	everybody	else	in	the	world
They	fight	many	kinds	of	battles
But	the	real	battle	remains	unfought.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Sannyas	means	the	beginning	of	the	real	war.
It	is	a	war	between
Your	consciousness	and	your	unconsciousness.
Your	consciousness	is	very	tiny
Just	one-tenth	of	your	being.
And	the	unconsciousness	is	vast
Nine-tenths	of	your	being.
So	be	a	mighty	warrior
Only	then	can	one	hope	to	win.
But	if	one	gives	a	good	fight	victory	is	certain.
It	may	take	time,	patience	will	be	needed.
But	victory	has	happened.
If	it	has	happened	to	a	few	people
It	can	happen	to	everybody
Because	we	are	all	potentially	the	same.
Victory	can	be	ugly	if	it	is	violent
If	it	is	forced	upon	somebody;	then	it	stinks
Stinks	of	blood,	murder,	death.
But	victory	can	also	be	a	fragrant	phenomenon.
Then	the	process	is	totally	different.
It	has	not	to	be	forced	on	somebody.
You	have	not	to	conquer	somebody
You	have	to	conquer	yourself
You	have	to	become	a	master	of	your	own	being
Then	victory	is	fragrant,	then	it	has
The	fragrance	that	is	not	of	this	earth
It	has	the	fragrance	of	the	beyond
It	has	divine	fragrance.
The	Buddha,	the	Christ,	they	are	surrounded
With	the	aura,	with	that	fragrance.
They	are	victorious	people
really	victorious	people	--
Not	Alexander	and	Adolf	Hitler.
Their	victory	is	ugly.
Anything	that	is	based	on	violence
Is	going	to	be	ugly.
Unless	you	have	conquered	all	your	ugly	desires	Of	destructiveness,	of	ego,	of
greed
Of	jealousy,	of	hatred
You	will	not	know	what	love	is.
When	all	these	ugly	things
Have	been	dropped,	transformed
You	will	be	full	of	love
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Buddha	also	conquers	other	people
But	not	with	a	sword,	he	conquers	with	his	love.
Jesus	also	conquers.
His	victory	is	far	more	permanent	than
The	victory	of	Alexander	the	Great.
That	is	very	tiny,	momentary.
But	the	victory	of	Jesus
Will	go	down	the	centuries.
He	will	not	be	here
But	his	fragrance	will	continue.
The	fundamental	is
First	to	be	a	master	of	yourself
Then	you	know	what	love	is.
And	through	love	the	whole	world	can	be	conquered.
Love	--	that	one	word
Contains	all	that	is	worth	having	in	life,
Worth	possessing	in	life.
One	can	forget	god,	nothing	is	lost.
But	if	one	forgets	love	then	everything	is	lost.
If	love	is	there,	god	is	bound	to	happen
Because	god	is	the	ultimate	peak
Of	the	experience	of	love.
But	without	love	even	god	is	not	possible,
Without	love	nothing	is	possible:
No	bliss,	no	benediction,	no	truth,	no	freedom.
Love	is	nectar
It	gives	you	the	experience	of	immortal	life,
It	is	the	bridge	between	time	and	eternity.
Peace	is	a	by-product	fo	meditation.
It	cannot	be	achieved	directly.
If	one	tries	to	be	peaceful
Then	the	peace	will	be	false.
It	will	appear	to	be	a	flower
But	it	will	not	be	a	true	flower
It	won't	have	any	fragrance.
Real	peace
Arises	only	as	a	by-product	of	meditation
Hence	only	a	man	of	meditation
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Can	be	a	man	of	peace.
The	goal	should	be	meditation
The	effort	should	be	for	meditation.
And	when	you	achieve	meditation
When	you	become	more	and	more	calm	and	quiet
When	you	become	more	and	more	thoughtless
More	and	more	conscious
Then	suddenly	peace	explodes.
It	is	not	that	you	achieve	it
It	comes	as	a	gift	from	god,	as	a	reward
For	your	coming	to	your	centre.
You	have	left	the	circumference	of	the	mind
And	you	have	penetrated	the	very	core
Or	your	being.
Make	every	possible	effort	to	meditate
So	that	your	name	can	become	a	reality.
There	are	two	kinds	of	mercifulness.
One	is	when	the	other	is	in	misery
And	you	feel	sorry	and	you	would	like	to	help.
That	is	accidental.
You	are	not	really	merciful
Only	in	a	certain	situation	are	you	affected.
If	the	other	had	not	been	in	misery
If	the	other	had	not	been	in	a	sad	situation
You	would	not	have	felt	mercy.
It	is	not	your	state
It	is	only	a	momentary	emotion.
It	is	sentimentality	--	it	is	not	of	much	value.
The	second	kind	of	mercy	is	really	valuable.
Then	it	is	a	state	of	being.
It	does	not	depend	on	other's	misery
You	are	simply	merciful.
Whether	the	other	is	in	misery	or	not
Is	irrelevant.
Even	if	the	other	is	blissful
Still	you	are	merciful
Still	you	are	compassionate.
To	be	compassionate	is	your	nature	now
So	you	are	simply	compassionate
Irrespective	of	what	is	happening	around.
Then	only	it	is	no	more	sentimentality
It	is	no	more	just	a	passing	phase
An	emotion,	a	good	emotion.
Then	it	is	something	solid	and	substantial.
Then	it	is	intrinsic,	not	accidental.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
This	second	kind	of	mercy	is	possible
Only	through	deep	meditation.
The	first	can	be	cultivated	as	a	character
The	second	cannot	be	cultivated.
It	comes	as	a	consequence	of	deep	inner	search.
It	is	the	ultimate	result	of	an	inner	pilgrimage.
And	one	thing	more:	The	first	kind	of	mercy
Will	make	you	egoistic,	piously	egoistic;
Very	holy,	but	egoistic	all	the	same.
And	the	holy	ego	is	far	more	ugly
Than	any	other	kind	of	ego.
The	second	kind	of	mercy
Will	be	absolutely	egoless.
It	can	happen	only	when	the	ego	has	disappeared.
It	blooms	only	when	the	ego	is	no	more	found.
The	first	kind	of	mercy	you	will	find
In	Christian	missionaries	and	public	servants
And	the	so-called	do-	gooders.
They	are	mischievous	people.
They	are	exploiting	other	people's	misery
For	their	own	virtue,	for	their	own	paradise.
They	are	using	others	as	stepping	stones.
The	second	kind	of	mercy	you	will	find
Only	in	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha	or	a	Krishna	--
People	who	are	fully	awakened.
I	emphasise	the	second	kind.
Make	a	clear	distinction	between	the	two
Because	sometimes	the	pseudo	coin
Can	go	on	deceiving	you	for	your	whole	life.
Nobody	is	born	noble.
That	 idea	 is	 pure	 nonsense	 --	 that	 a	 few	 people	 Are	 born	 noble,	 aristocratic,
royal.
That	is	utter	nonsense.
Everybody	is	born	alike
Everybody	is	born	unconscious.
Nobility	is	attained	when	you	become	conscious.
Then	one	really	becomes	an	aristocrat
An	aristocrat	of	the	soul,
One	attains	a	certain	aristocracy
A	certain	nobleness,	a	certain	grace	and	beauty	But	it	comes	through	one's	own
efforts.
It	is	impossible	to	be	noble
If	you	are	unconscious.
In	unconsciousness	how	can	one	expect	to	behave	In	a	noble	way?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
One	is	like	a	robot
And	robots	are	not	noble,	cannot	be:
Machines	are	machines.
It	is	only	through	becoming	more	conscious
That	you	come	out	of	your	robotlike	existence
That	glimpses	of	freedom,	of	love,	of	joy
Start	arising	in	you.
And	these	are	the	things
Which	transform	your	very	being.
They	give	you	a	new	form,	a	new	flavour
A	new	fragrance.
Then	you	live	in	the	world
But	you	are	not	of	the	world	--	that	is	nobleness.
You	move	through	the	world
And	all	the	fires	of	the	world
But	you	keep	your	cool,	it	remains	undisturbed.
That	is	undistractedness,	that	centredness
Is	nobleness.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
18	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004185
ShortTitle:	84POEM16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	is	a	moon.
It	is	far	closer	to	the	moon	than	to	the	sun
Because	bliss	is	peace,	silence,	calmness
And	these	are	the	qualities	of	the	moon.
The	sun	is	hot,	passionate.
The	moon	is	compassionate,	cool.
Happiness	is	closer	to	the	sun	--
It	is	an	excitement.	So	is	pleasure.
It	is	even	hotter	than	happiness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Happiness	is	just	in	between	pleasure	and	bliss.
But	bliss	is	absolutely	cool,	not	cold	--	remember.
Fully	alive	but	absolutely	peaceful
Utterly	peaceful.
We	cannot	understand	it
Unless	we	have	experienced	it
Because	we	have	known	many	kinds	of	joys
But	they	are	all	hot.
They	are	all	kinds	of	excitement.
And	that	is	the	difference
Between	bliss	and	pleasure
Bliss	is	not	hot	at	all.
It	is	so	cool	that	not	only	the	person
Who	experiences	it	becomes	cool,
Whosoever	comes	close	to	him
Also	feels	the	coolness
As	if	a	subtle	cool	breeze
Surrounds	the	man	of	bliss.
Remember	it
That	we	have	to	move	from	the	hot	sun
From	the	passionate,	hot	energies
Towards	the	cool	energies	of	the	moon.
The	moon	represents	something	spiritual
The	sun	represents	something	sexual.
The	sun	represents	life
The	moon	represents	something	higher	than	life	Transcendental	to	life.
Hence	in	many	old	cultures	the	sun	was
Never	considered	to	be	as	important	as	the	moon.
And	many	ancient	calenders	are	based	on	the	moon	Not	on	the	sun
For	the	simple	reason	that
Although	mathematically
The	calender	based	on	the	sun
Is	far	more	scientific...
The	calendar	based	on	the	moon	is	not	so	exact.
In	cannot	be,	it	is	far	more	poetic
Not	so	arithmetical,	not	so	scientific,
It	cannot	be.
But	if	we	look	deep	into	the	human	body
Then	we	will	be	surprised.
Now	researchers	are	working	on	it
And	they	find	there	is	a	synchronisity
Between	the	human	body	and	the	moon.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	woman's	monthly	course,	her	monthly	period	Depends	on	the	moon,	not	on
the	sun,
Hence	it	comes	every	twenty-eight	days.
And	now	researchers	are	finding
That	there	is	something
Exactly	like	it	in	man's	body	too
Something	like	a	period,	a	monthly	period.
Of	course	there	is	no	visible	sign
But	just	as	for	four	or	five	days
The	woman	goes	into	a	turmoil
The	man	also	goes	into	a	certain	turmoil
Every	month,	after	twenty-eight	days.
And	now	they	have	found
That	many	more	people	commit	suicide
On	moon-lit	nights	than	on	no-	moon	nights.
Many	more	people	go	mad	on	moon-lit	nights
Than	on	no-moon	nights.
And	it	has	been	a	long,	long	established	fact
That	many	more	people	have	become	enlightened
On	the	full-moon	night	than	on	any	other	night.
Certainly	one	has	never	heard
Of	a	man	becoming	enlightened	in	the	day.
Up	to	now	it	has	not	happened.
Something	seems	to	be	very	deeply	connected
With	the	moon	and	the	phases	of	the	moon.
So	 remember	 it,	 that	 bliss	 is	 a	 cool	 phenomenon	And	become	more	 and	more
cool	and	calm
And	quiet	and	collected.
That	is	the	preparation	for	bliss	to	descend.
Remember	always
That	unless	you	have	attained	unshakeable	bliss	Life	is	a	defeat,	a	failure.
Even	if	you	possess	the	whole	world
You	have	failed.
You	may	be	Alexander	the	Great
Still,	you	miss	the	whole	point.
Bliss	has	to	be	attained.
And	bliss	means	a	joy
That	is	not	dependent	on	anybody	else
That	is	not	dependent	on	anything	at	all
That	is	simply	yours
That	wells	up	within	your	being.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Pleasure	is	dependent	on	others
Hence	it	is	a	kind	of	slavery.
It	is	sometimes	nice	and	sometimes	bitter
But	it	is	a	slavery
And	a	slavery	cannot	be	very	nice.
Maybe	we	can	manage	to	sugar-coat	it
We	can	make	chains	out	of	gold
But	chains	are	chains.
We	can	decorate	the	prison
But	a	prison	is	a	prison,	it	is	not	a	home.
Pleasure	is	dependent	on	others.
Bliss	is	independent,	totally	independent.
That's	is	beauty.
You	can	be	blissful	all	alone,	by	yourself.
It	gives	you	absolute	freedom.
That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Bliss	is	always	unique.
Pleasure	is	the	same	--	it	is	not	much	different.
You	possess	a	beautiful	house
Somebody	else	possesses	a	beautiful	house	--
It	is	the	same	kind	of	thing
Nothing	special	about	it.
Because	the	house	is	something	outside	you
It	is	an	objective	thing.
But	bliss	is	a	subjective	phenomenon.
It	is	absolutely	yours
Nobody	can	participate	in	it
Nobody	can	go	with	you	to	share	it	with	you,
You	are	all	alone	there.
It	is	utterly	individual
It	is	absolutely	unique	,	it	is	virgin.
Everything	else	in	life	is	used	by	others.
It	is	always	second-hand,	it	is	never	virgin.
But	bliss	is	virgin:	nobody	can	us	it
Nobody	can	have	any	approach	to	it.
It	is	simply	unapproachable.
Only	you	can	enter
Into	that	innermost	shrine	of	your	being
In	your	total	aloneness.
You	can't	even	take	your	friends	there.
That's	the	beauty	of	it:	its	utter	virginity
Its	absolute	individuality,	its	authenticity.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Seek	and	search	for	bliss
And	don't	be	distracted
By	the	small	pleasures	of	life.
Put	your	whole	energy	into	the	real	search.
Sannyas	is	a	decision,	a	commitment
A	great	commitment	to	this	ultimate	search,
This	search	for	bliss
Bliss	is	god;	god	is	another	name	for	bliss.
The	first	half	of	your	name,	Holger,
Comes	from	'holmi'
Which	means	an	island.
And	remember,	no	man	is	an	island.
We	are	part	of	a	vast	continent.
The	very	idea	of	being	an	island	is	egoistic.
We	are	not	islands,	we	are	part	of	infinity.
Unbounded	we	are
There	is	no	definition,	no	limit	to	us.
So	go	beyond	the	idea	of	the	island.
And	the	second	part,	'geirr,'	means	spear	--
That	is	even	more	dangerous.
But	the	ego	is	always	violent
The	ego	always	has	a	spear.
Or	if	it	is	very	modern
Then	it	has	an	atom	bomb.
But	the	ego	is	always	destructive.
The	spear	represents	destructiveness.
So	you	have	to	go	beyond	both
You	have	to	go	beyond	holger.
From	now	onwards	remember
Your	name	is	VEET	Holger:
One	who	is	trying	to	go	beyond	holger.
You	are	not	to	be	a	spear
You	are	not	to	be	an	island.
You	have	to	be	love	and	you	have	to	be	vast
As	vast	as	the	whole	sky	is.
Life	can	be	either	just	a	heap	of	flowers
Or,	it	can	be	transformed	into	a	garland.
If	it	is	just	a	heap	of	flowers
It	has	no	organic	unity,	it	is	only	a	crowd
Of	many	selves,	of	many	I's
All	struggling	and	fighting	for	supremacy.
Man	lives	in	a	constant	inner	war,	and	every	self	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Tries	to	pull	you	in	a	different	direction.
You	are	always	falling	to	pieces.
Life	can	be	lived	in	a	totally	different	way.
Those	flowers	which	are	separate
Can	be	connected	by	a	thread,
By	something	that	runs	through	all	of	them
By	a	sense	of	direction,	by	awareness
By	being	more	conscious.
Then	life	is	no	more	accidental
Then	it	is	no	more	a	crowd,
You	start	having	an	integrated	being.
And	the	more	crystallised	and	integrated	you	are,	The	more	joy	is	possible.
How	much	bliss	you	will	be	able	to	receive
Depends	on	your	integrity.
The	fragmentary	person	remains	miserable
The	integrated	person	attains	to	bliss.
Sannyas	has	to	become	the	thread
So	that	you	can	join	all	the	flowers
Of	your	life	in	a	kind	of	togetherness
So	life	becomes	not	just	a	noise
But	an	orchestra.
Then	there	is	great	beauty	and	great	bliss.
Life	in	its	reality	is	unbounded,	it	is	infinite	It	is	not	confined	to	the	body
Not	confined	to	the	mind	either.
It	is	not	confined	at	all;	it	is	oceanic.
Even	oceans	have	certain	limits
But	life	has	no	limits	at	all,
It	has	no	beginning	and	no	end.
But	we	have	become	too	identified
With	the	body	and	the	mind.
We	have	completely	forgotten
That	this	is	not	our	reality.
The	body	is	only	a	caravanserai.
We	have	lived	in	many	bodies,
This	is	not	the	first	time
That	you	are	staying	in	a	hotel,
You	have	stayed	in	many	hotels.
And	even	though	it	is	a	five-star	hotel
It	is	only	a	hotel.
And	you	are	not	it.
You	are	the	traveller,	the	pilgrim,	the	life
The	consciousness	that	goes	on	moving
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
From	one	body	to	another,	from
One	mind	to	another,	from	one	form	to	another.
The	day	we	realise	that	we	are	formless
Is	a	great	day.	That	is	the	day	of	revelation.
After	that	we	are	never	the	same	again.
After	that	we	are	part	of	god
And	god	is	part	of	us.
We	don't	know	who	we	are,
That's	the	only	problem
And	out	of	that	one	problem
A	thousand	and	one	other	problems	arise.
And	people	go	on	trying
To	solve	those	thousand	and	one	problems.
They	cannot	be	solved
Because	the	root	problem	remains.
And	out	of	the	root	new	sprouts	go	on	coming	up.
We	have	to	cut	the	root
We	have	to	know	the	most	fundamental	thing
Of	ourselves,	about	ourselves:	who	we	are.
And	the	only	way	is	meditation.
When	the	mind	is	absolutely	silent
Suddenly,	when	the	noise	is	no	more	there,
All	is	clear,	you	are	transparent	to	yourself.
Suddenly	you	see	you	are	godly
And	so	is	the	whole	existence.
Then	there	is	no	problem,	no	anxiety
Because	there	is	no	death.
Everything
That	was	important	before	becomes	unimportant
And	everything
That	you	had	never	thought	was	important
Becomes	important.	It	is	a	radical	change.
No	one	is	less	than	a	god
Because	only	god	exists	and	nothing	else.
In	the	rock	god	exists	as	rock
In	the	sun	god	exists	as	the	sun
In	man	god	exists	as	man
In	woman	god	exists	as	woman.
These	are	all	his	forms.	There	is	no	hierarchy:	Nobody	is	higher	and	nobody	is
lower.
The	whole	idea	of	hierarchy	is	egoistic.
Man	thinks	himself
The	highest	manifestation	of	god.
That	is	all	bullshit!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
A	rose	flower	is	as	high	as	anything	can	be.
It	is	a	different	manifestation
And	a	different	dimension	--
There	is	no	comparison	possible.
To	look	at	life	as	one	existence
Is	the	beginning	of	a	great	pilgrimage.
And	dropping	the	idea	of	hierarchy
Is	dropping	the	very	foundation	of	the	ego.
Nobody	is	lower,	nobody	is	higher.
We	are	made	of	the	same	stuff,
Hence	the	rock	is	as	divine	as	you	are.
Treat	the	whole	existence	as	divine.
And	the	moment	you	start
Treating	the	whole	existence	as	divine
New	visions,	new	horizons	open	up
Which	were	never	available	to	you
Because	your	eyes	were	too	clouded
With	the	ego	and	egoistic	clouds
And	there	was	too	much	smoke:
You	could	not	see	clearly.
In	the	Upanishads	the	ancient	mystics	declared
'Aham	Brahmasmi'	--	I	am	god.
The	great	Sufi	mystic,	Al	Hillaj	Mansoor
Declared	'Ana'l	Haq'	--	I	am	truth.
But	remember,	they	are	using	the	word	'I'
Not	to	represent	the	ego,
In	their	I	all	the	'I'	of	the	world	are	included	Nothing	is	excluded.
Sunrise	is	the	color	of	sannyas,	orange	is	the	color	of	sannyas.	It	represents	the
end	 of	 the	 night	 and	 the	 beginning	 of	 a	 new	 day.	 Initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 a
sunrise	and	a	sunrise	that	never	stops:	once	it	has	risen,	it	has	risen.	In	fact	it	has
always	been	there.	We	were	just	not	aware	of	it.	It	is	eternally	there.	The	inner
light	is	always	there:	it	never	rises,	it	never	sets.
But	metaphorically	we	can	say	 it	 is	 a	 sunrise	because	 the	moment	we	become
aware	is	the	moment	of	the	beginning	for	us	at	least.
Think	of	sannyas	as	a	discontinuity	with	the	past.	Let	the	whole	past	be	the	night
and	let	it	be	lost	in	the	darkness	of	the	night.	It	was	all	a	dream.	Now	start	a	new
style	of	life,	the	life	of	awareness.
Each	gesture	has	its	own	significance.
For	example
Hitler	made	the	fist	his	symbolic	gesture.
That	represents	violence
That	represents	the	animal	side	of	man.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	too	is	a	mudra,	but	the	ugliest	possible.
It	is	destructive.
Buddha	sitting	silently
Represents	a	divine	gesture.
And	whatsoever	he	used	to	say	to	people
Was	at	the	same	time
Also	communicated	by	his	hands.
If	he	was	talking	about	love,	his	hands
Were	showing	a	certain	gesture	of	love.
If	he	was	talking	about	nirvana,	then	his	hands	Were	showing	something	about
nirvana.
Buddha	is	the	first	person
In	the	whole	history	of	humanity
Who	used	body	language	to	its	utmost.
Only	now,	recently,	within	twenty	years
Scientists	have	started	to	discover	body	language.
Without	saying	a	word
The	body	goes	on	saying	many	things.
You	may	be	sitting	with	somebody
Not	saying	a	single	word
But	if	you	are	not	feeling	good	with	his	presence	Your	body	is	in	a	withdrawal
posture.
It	may	not	be	possible	to	actually	withdraw,
Maybe	you	are	sitting	in	a	train	or	in	a	bus
And	you	cannot	escape	anywhere
But	your	whole	body	will	show
That	you	are	leaning	away	from	him.
If	you	love	the	company	of	the	person
You	may	not	say	a	single	word
But	your	body	will	be	leaning	towards	him.
These	are	all	unconscious	gestures.
But	when	a	Buddha	uses	his	body	as	language
They	are	all	conscious	gestures
They	are	all	divine	gestures.
The	way	he	walks,	the	way	he	moves	his	hands
The	way	he	eats,	are	all	divine	gestures
They	are	all	mudras.
And	if	one	becomes	conscious
Of	one's	body	language
It	is	a	tremendous	leap	into	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	be	conscious	of	your	body	language
Watch	what	your	body	is	saying.
Start	by	being	aware	of	the	body
Then	move	towards	a	subtler	awareness
Of	the	mind
Then	move	to	the	even	more	subtle	awareness
Of	feelings.
These	are	the	three	layers:	body,	mind,	heart.
And	when	you	have	become	aware
Of	all	these	three
Then	you	can	take	the	ultimate	jump
And	become	aware	of	your	being.
That	is	the	fourth
That	is	self-realisation	or	god-realisation.
To	be	a	disciple
Is	one	of	the	greatest	experiences	in	life
Because	it	means	dissolving	yourself
With	the	energy	of	your	master
Losing	yourself	in	something
Which	is	far	bigger	than	you.
It	is	like	a	river	disappearing	in	the	ocean.
Tremendous	love	is	needed
Only	then	can	one	gather	enough	courage.
Trust	is	needed,	and	not	ordinary	trust;
Absolute	trust	is	needed.
If	it	is	not	whole-hearted
Then	you	will	go	only	so	far.
And	with	a	master
You	have	either	to	got	totally	or	not	at	all;
It	is	a	question	of	either-or.
Those	who	go	half-heartedly
Are	cunning	people,	calculative	people.
They	miss	the	whole	opportunity.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin
You	are	becoming	a	disciple.
This	is	the	beginning
Of	a	great	experiment	in	your	life
Of	dropping	the	ego
Of	dropping	all	attachments
With	your	personality
Of	dropping	all	your	identity
And	moving	into	the	unknown.
Once	you	have	moved
Once	you	have	tasted	the	freedom	of	the	unknown	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Then	there	is	no	problem.
Only	the	first	step	is	the	problem
The	second	step	follows	easily.
The	first	is	followed	by	the	second
Without	any	effort	on	your	part.
The	first	step	is	the	greatest	problem
Because	the	first	step	goes	against
All	your	past	experience.
A	disciple
Has	to	be	ready	to	drop	the	whole	past
And	in	fact	there	is	nothing	much	in	the	past.
We	unnecessarily	cling	to	it.
There	is	only	misery,	but	still	we	think
'It	is	our	past',	so	we	go	on	carrying	it.
Just	look	--	what	is	there	to	carry?
What	is	there	to	cling	to?
Seeing	that	there	is	nothing	to	cling	to
The	past	drops	out	of	your	hands
Suddenly	you	move	in	the	present.
And	the	master	can	be	contacted	only
In	the	present	because	he	lives	in	the	present	He	has	no	past	and	no	future.
Unless	the	disciple	also	lives	in	the	present
There	is	no	communion	possible.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
19	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004195
ShortTitle:	84POEM17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Sannyas	is	a	resolution.
It	is	a	resolution	to	grow
It	is	a	resolution	to	discover	oneself
It	is	a	resolution	to	find	what	it	is	all	about.
This	life,	this	existence,
Is	it	just	accidental	or	is	there	a	meaning?
If	it	is	just	accidental
Then	there	is	no	possibility	of	religion
Then	the	whole	endeavour
Is	an	exercise	in	futility.
Religion	is	possible	only
If	there	is	some	meaning.
Of	course	the	meaning	is	hidden
And	it	has	to	be	discovered	--
That	is	a	challenge	and	that	challenge	needs
A	great	resolution	on	your	part.
The	wavering	mind	cannot	go	into	this	enquiry.
The	indecisive	mind
Cannot	even	take	the	first	step.
So	let	sannyas	be	a	great	involvement
Let	it	be	a	matter	of	life	and	death,
Only	then	is	there	a	possibility
To	discover	meaning.
Unless	one	risks	all,	one	cannot	discover	it.
And	to	live	without	discovering
The	truth	of	life
Is	not	to	live	at	all.
We	are	all	born	as	rocks
And	we	all	have	to	become	roses.
The	rock	has	the	capacity	to	become	a	rose.
It	looks	impossible	but	it	only	looks	impossible.
It	has	happened	many	times;
It	can	happen	to	you	too.
If	it	can	happen	to	Jesus,	it	can	happen	to	you.
And	I	am	talking	from	my	own	experience:
Everybody	 is	born	as	a	 rock,	but	very	few	people	Try	 to	make	 the	best	of	 this
great	opportunity	And	become	roses	--	very	few,	very	rare	people	Others	simply
live	like	rocks,	rolling	stones
Accidentally	moving	with	the	river
Hither	and	thither,	gathering	no	moss
And	then	dying.
They	are	born	as	rocks,	they	die	as	rocks.
Nothing	happens	in	your	life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Unless	you	become	a	rose.
The	colour	that	I	have	chosen	for	sannyas
Is	the	colour	of	roses;
It	symbolises	that	you	are	getting	ready
For	the	transformation.
It	is	an	uphill	task,	no	doubt	about	it
But	it	is	a	beautiful	journey.
Hard,	but	very	exciting
Arduous,	but	very	ecstatic.
In	ancient	mythology
The	wolf	represents	two	qualities:
One	is	courage,	another	is	faithfulness.
The	wolf	is	utterly	faithful	to	the	master
He	is	ready	to	risk	his	life	at	any	moment.
His	faith	is	absolute:
You	can	depend	on	it,	you	can	rely	on	it.
The	same	faith	is	needed	in	a	disciple	too.
And	remember,	faith	is	not	belief.
Belief	is	something	intellectual.
You	believe	in	a	certain	philosophy
In	a	certain	dogma,	in	a	certain	creed	--
That	is	belief,	that	is	of	no	value	at	all.
It	is	intellectual	gymnastics.
Faith	is	of	the	heart,	belief	is	of	the	head.
Belief	has	no	value
But	faith	has	tremendous	value.
It	is	a	heart-to-heart	relationship.
Unless	you	are	related	to	me	heart	to	heart
You	are	not	related	at	all.
If	you	are	convinced	only	by	what	I	say
You	will	be	a	believer.
If	you	are	convinced	of	what	I	am
Then	faith	arises.
It	is	a	totally	different	phenomenon
It	is	existential,	not	intellectual.
It	is	a	love	affair!
One	can	change	one's	beliefs	easily
But	one	cannot	change	one's	faith.
Once	it	happens,	it	happens	forever.
It	colours	your	being	so	deeply
That	it	is	impossible	to	change	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
A	Christian	can	become	a	Hindu
A	Hindu	can	become	a	Christian	--
That	is	very	easy,	there	is	no	problem	in	it:
One	has	one	belief	instead	of	another.
But	a	man	who	has	loved	Jesus
One	who	has	fallen	in	love	with	Jesus...
And	that	can	happen	only	while	Jesus	is	alive.
Faith	can	happen	only
Between	an	alive	master	and	a	disciple.
Belief	can	happen
Between	a	dead	master	and	the	follower.
For	centuries	this	can	go	on	happening.
But	belief	is	impotent.
Remember	the	difference	between	faith	and	belief	And	try	to	help	faith	arise	in
your	heart.
That	will	be	your	deliverance
That	will	be	your	salvation.
You	can	bless	others
Only	when	you	are	blissful,	never	before	it.
You	can	give	to	others	only	that	which	you	have.
Unless	you	are	overflowing	with	bliss
You	cannot	bless	;	your	overflowing	bliss
Will	be	a	blessing	for	all.
Become	blissful.
It	is	our	birthright;	we	can	become	blissful
We	are	meant	to	be	blissful.
If	we	grow	naturally	it	is	bound	to	happen.
It	is	not	something	supernatural
It	is	the	climax	of	our	natural	growth.
But	we	never	look	inwards
We	go	on	searching	on	the	outside.
And	on	the	outside
There	is	only	desert	and	nothing	else.
You	may	collect	a	few	seashells
And	coloured	stones	an	the	sea-beaches
But	that's	all;	the	real	treasure	is	inwards.
Go	in,	rest	in	your	own	being
And	slowly	slowly	as	the	rest	becomes	deeper
As	your	relaxation
Starts	becoming	a	settled	phenomenon
When	nothing	distracts	you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
When	you	become	the	centre	of	a	cyclone
Then	bliss	arises.
And	of	course	a	blissful	person
Is	a	blessing	to	the	world
Just	as	a	miserable	person
Is	a	curse	to	the	world.
If	one	can	remember	only	that	one	is	divine
It	is	enough	of	a	meditation.
If	it	becomes	a	constant	remembrance
Just	like	an	undercurrent	in	you
Then	nothing	else	is	needed.
And	it	is	not	only	a	question
Of	remembering	that	you	are	divine.
When	you	remember	that	you	are	divine
You	naturally	remember	that	everybody	is	divine.
You	can	be	divine	only
If	everybody	else	is	also	divine.
You	can	be	divine	only	in	a	divine	existence.
We	are	part	of	one	organic	unity.
So	remember	it	as	often	as	possible.
Let	it	become	like	breathing
And	it	will	reveal	many	mysteries	to	you.
When	you	are	looking	at	people	remind	yourself:	They	are	all	divine,
And	the	trees	and	the	rocks	and	the	stars.
And	when	you	start	feeling	surrounded
By	thousands	of	divine	forms
Naturally,	it	becomes	impossible	to	be	miserable.
One	simply	feels	as	if	one	is	flying
One	becomes	weightless,	one	starts	growing	wings.
This	is	your	meditation,	this	is	your	prayer.
Everybody	is	a	man	of	god
We	have	just	forgotten	it.
We	have	to	remember	it.It	is	not	something
That	we	have	to	create,	invent
It	is	something	that	has	to	be	discovered.
It	is	there,	just	covered	with	a	forgetfulness.
All	methods	of	meditation	do	only	one	thing:
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
They	help	you	to	remember	who	you	are
They	make	you	aware	of	a	forgotten	language.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
This	is	going	to	be	your	work	upon	yourself:
Be	as	blissful	as	possible,	be	cheerful
Smile	an	laugh.
Don't	wait	for	any	reason	to	laugh
Just	laugh	like	a	madman,	for	no	reason	at	all!
Laughter	in	itself	is	enough,	it	needs	no	reason.
It	is	so	health-giving
It	is	such	a	good	exercise
For	the	body	and	for	the	soul,	both.
So	wherever	you	are	sitting
Just	have	a	good	laugh
And	then	others	will	start	laughing
Seeing	you	laughing	for	no	reason.
Then	you	will	laugh
At	those	people	who	are	laughing
And	then	it	goes	on	and	on
And	there	is	no	end	to	it.
Stop	only	when	tears	start	coming	to	your	eyes.
That	means	full	stop!
--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Six	weeks	more.
--	That's	good!	This	is	your	work	for	six	weeks:	laugh	as	much	as	you	can!
The	ultimate	void	is	another	name	for	god.
The	word	'god'	has	become	ugly.
The	priests	have	exploited	the	word	so	much
That	it	has	lost	all	beauty.
The	ultimate	void	simply	means
That	from	which	everything	arises
And	into	which	everything	disappears	finally,
The	source	and	the	goal	of	all.
Meditation	is	the	only	way	to	experience	it.
Meditation	means	moving	inwards	to	the	point
Where	that	ultimate	void	is	still	in	existence.
Our	body	has	a	form,	our	mind	has	a	form
But	our	consciousness	is	formless.
When	you	move	deeper	than	the	body	and	the	mind	Suddenly	,	you	stumble	into
an	ultimate	void	--
Don't	be	afraid	of	that.
It	is	the	most	beautiful	experience	of	life
It	is	the	experience!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Courage	is	the	greatest	religious	quality,
Everything	else	is	secondary.
You	cannot	be	truthful	if	you	are	not	courageous	You	cannot	be	loving	if	you	are
not	 courageous	You	 cannot	 be	 trusting	 if	 you	 are	 not	 courageous	You	 cannot
enquire	into	reality
If	you	are	not	courageous;
Hence	courage	comes	first
And	everything	else	follows.
But	the	so-called	religious	people
Have	been	teaching	just	the	opposite.
Rather	than	helping	people	to	be	courageous
They	help	people	to	be	more	and	more	afraid.
They	create	fear	of	god	in	people
Fear	of	hell,	fear	of	punishment
And	out	of	fear	they	hope	to	create	love	for	god.
That	is	sheer	nonsense,	that	is	impossible.
It	is	only	out	of	fearlessness
That	love	can	arise.
It	is	only	out	of	fearlessness
That	one	can	go	into	the	enquiry	of	the	ultimate.
It	is	a	long	voyage
And	it	is	a	voyage	into	the	unknown.
Cowards	won't	be	able	to	leave	this	shore.
And	religion	means	a	great	longing
For	the	other	shore,	the	farther	shore
Which	is	not	visible	from	this	side.
So	gather	courage!
By	becoming	a	sannyasin
You	are	taking	the	first	step
Into	something	absolutely	unknown.
And	that	is	the	first	step	into	god.
There	is	only	one	victory
And	that	is	over	oneself.
All	other	victories	are	pseudo	substitutes
All	other	victories	are	only	toys	to	play	with.
Money,	 power	 and	 prestige	 can	 keep	 you	 occupied	 But	 they	 are	 utterly
meaningless.
They	may	attract	the	childish	mind
But	they	can't	attract	a	mature	person.
A	mature	person	becomes	interested
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
In	only	one	thing:
How	to	be	a	master	of	oneself.
Before	death	comes
This	miracle	has	to	be	made	possible.
No	stone	should	be	left	unturned.
Every	effort	should	be	made	to	conquer
The	unconscious	darkness	within	oneself.
And	once	consciousness
Has	conquered	the	unconscious,	life	is	a	joy
And	a	joy	forever,	one	that	knows	no	ending.
It	is	eternal.
Unless	you	love	the	world	you	cannot	be	creative	unless	you	love	the	beauty	of
the	world
you	cannot	be	creative.
If	you	don't	love	the	beauty	of	the	trees
why	would	you	paint	trees?
If	you	don't	love	the	song	of	the	birds
why	should	you	sing?
If	you	don't	love	the	music
of	the	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees
why	should	you	play	on	a	violin?
Only	somebody	who	is	in	deep	love	with	existence	can	be	creative.
And	 the	 old	 idea	 of	 sannyas	 -	 of	monks	 and	 nuns	was	 very	 uncreative.	 They
destroyed	many	people;	many	creative	potentialities	remained
just	potentialities	because	of	the	old	idea.
The	idea	was	basically	wrong.
My	sannyas	has	to	be	creative.
My	message	is:
To	be	creative	is	the	only	way	to	be	religious.
If	god	is	a	creator,	then	to	be	creative
is	the	only	way	to	participate	with	god,
to	participate	in	his	being,
to	rejoice	in	his	being.
Osho	 hands	 an	 American	 woman	 her	 sannyas	 name	 and	 tells	 her	 that	 Kirtan
means	singing	in	praise	of	god.	Then	he	pauses	and	comments
--	Seeing	you,	I	feel	singing	will	be	difficult	for	you,	that's	why	I	am	giving	you
the	name.
You	look	serious	and	you	look	afraid	also.
Drop	all	this	seriousness	and	all	this	fear
Be	free	of	fear	and	be	free	of	seriousness.
Take	life	as	fun	--	it	is	a	beautiful	play.
So	many	beautiful	games	are	going	on:
If	you	can	participate,	good;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
If	you	cannot	participate
At	least	you	can	be	a	good	spectator.
But	enjoy	anyway.
Either	as	a	participant	or	as	a	spectator
Enjoy!
Don't	miss	a	single	moment
Squeeze	the	whole	juice	out	of	every	moment
Otherwise	god	will	not	forgive	you!
He	will	ask	what	you	did	with	your	life
Why	you	were	serious.
Life	is	not	for	being	serious:
Dead	people	can	be	that
Life	is	not	needed	for	that.
When	you	are	in	your	grave,	be	serious	--
Gravely	serious!
But	right	now	become	a	singing,	a	hallelujah.
The	definition	of	a	sannyasin	is	one	who	is	on	guard,	alert,	aware.
Watchful	of	the	mind	around,	watchful	of	the	mind	inside.
Watchful	of	all	kinds	of	thoughts,	desires.
Images	that	float	in	the	mind
Watchful	of	the	watcher	too.
And	that	is	the	ultimate	in	watchfulness.
In	vigilance:	To	be	aware	of	awareness	itself.
First	become	aware	of	the	world	-
Which	is	the	easiest	-	aware	of	the	trees.
And	the	birds	and	the	sun	and	the	moon.
Then	become	aware	of	your	body.
Then	become	aware	of	your	mind
and	you	are	coming	closer	and	closer	to	the	center.
These	are	all	concentric	circles	around	the	center.
Then	become	watchful	of	your	feelings.
And	then	finally
Become	watchful	of	your	watching.
The	day	one	is	capable
Of	watching	one's	watchfulness
Is	the	greatest	day	in	life.
Paradise	simply	descends	in	you.
Bliss	starts	showering	like	thousands	of	flowers.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#18
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
20	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004205
ShortTitle:	84POEM18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only)
Bliss	is	the	most	godly	quality	in	existence
And	misery	the	most	ungodly.
But	the	irony	is	that	people	remember	god	only	When	they	are	in	misery.
And	that	is	the	most	difficult	moment
To	have	any	connection	with	god.
You	are	as	distant	from	god	as	possible.
In	misery	one	becomes	closed
In	misery	one	becomes	without	windows
There	is	no	opening	and	there	is	no	possibility	Of	making	a	bridge	with	god.
In	bliss	one	opens	up
Like	a	lotus	opening	its	petals.
Then	there	is	a	communion	with	the	sun
And	the	wind	and	the	rain.
The	most	precious	moment
Is	when	you	are	feeling	blissful	--
That	is	the	time	to	remember	god.
But	unfortunately	that	is	the	time
When	nobody	remembers	god.
Who	cares	about	god
When	you	are	feeling	blissful?	For	what?
This	has	to	be	remembered:
When	you	are	feeling	blissful,
That	is	the	time	to	pray
That	is	the	time	to	meditate.
You	are	as	close	to	god	as	you	ever	will	be.
Just	a	little	effort...
And	a	sudden	meeting	and	a	sudden	light
And	a	sudden	opening	of	the	heart.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Make	it	a	point
not	to	remember	god	when	you	are	in	misery.
The	natural	tendency
Is	to	remember	god	when	you	are	in	misery.
Millions	of	people	remember	god
But	very	few	people	have	found	him
For	the	simple	reason
That	they	remember	him	at	the	wrong	time.
Whenever	you	are	feeling	good,	healthy
Peaceful,	happy,	cheerful
When	you	are	feeling	like	dancing	and	singing
that	is	the	moment	--	don't	miss	that	moment!
Make	it	a	moment	of	prayer	and	remembrance
And	meditation
And	god	will	become	a	reality	to	you.
Swami	East	West.
Just	West	is	half	and	just	East	is	too
And	both	have	lived	separately	so	long.
You	become	the	meeting	place!
Man	will	be	total	only	when	East	and	West	meet.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become	a	synthesis.
They	have	to	absorb
All	that	is	beautiful	in	the	East
And	all	that	is	beautiful	in	the	West.
There	is	much
Which	both	the	hemispheres	have	contributed
But	there	is	much	which	is	ugly	too
And	the	ugly	has	to	be	dropped.
And	if	they	remain	separate
The	ugly	cannot	be	dropped.
That	is	something	to	be	understood.
The	West	is	basically
Scientific,	materialistic,	objective.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	being	scientific
But	to	think	that	science	is	the	end	is	wrong.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	knowing	the	secrets	of	matter	But	to	think	that	by	knowing
matter
You	have	known	all	that	is	worth	knowing
Is	absolutely	wrong.
But	if	the	West	remains	the	West
Then	that	is	going	to	continue,	that	old	idea
Of	the	materialistic,	objective,	scientific	approach.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	East	believes	in	and	has	experienced	too
Something	more	than	matter,	but	it	became
So	infatuated	with	that	something	more
That	it	simply	became	indifferent	to	matter,
Which	is	wrong.
That's	why	the	East	is	suffering	so	much
From	poverty,	starvation,	disease:
For	the	simple	reason	that	the	East
Has	given	its	total	attention	to	the	spiritual,	Neglecting	the	material.
It	is	religious,	it	is	mystical,	it	is	subjective	But	at	the	cost	of	being	scientific.
It	goes	beyond	science
But	science	is	needed,	it	is	a	must.
There	is	a	great	difference
Between	a	song	and	a	pice	of	bread
In	fact	there	seems	to	be	no	connection.
But	if	you	are	hungry,	the	song	will	disappear.
The	song	is	possible	only
When	you	are	not	hungry
When	your	body	is	satisfied;
Only	then
Do	higher	satisfactions	become	possible.
The	East	has	to	learn
Western	materialism	and	the	scientific	approach	And	the	West	has	to	learn
Eastern	mysticism	and	the	subjective	approach.
Then	only	can	the	whole	man	be	created.
In	my	vision,	up	to	now	the	whole	man
Has	not	existed;	he	has	yet	to	come.
And	my	sannyasins	have	to	become
The	herald	of	the	new	man,	of	the	whole	man.
Man	can	know	god	only
If	he	is	utterly	vulnerable,	soft	and	tender
Almost	feminine.
Only	then	can	you	soak	up	the	presence	of	god
Only	then	can	you	allow	it	to	sink	deep
Into	your	being.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
God	surrounds	you,	god	is	everywhere
But	we	are	so	hard,	impenetrable,	rocklike
And	we	go	on	asking,	'Where	is	god?
What	is	the	proof?'
To	the	person	who	lives
In	a	rocklike,	enclosed	existence,
Encapsulated	in	hardness,	god	cannot	be	proved	Because	god	is	not	an	argument
It	is	an	experience.
You	have	to	be	very	soft,	utterly	soft.
Then	there	is	no	need	to	ask	for	the	proof.
Each	moment	there	are	a	thousand	and	one	proofs.
Wherever	you	turn	you	will	find	god
Encountering	you,	facing	you:
In	the	sun,	in	the	moon,	in	the	flowers
In	the	birds,	in	people,	in	animals.
Once	you	are	soft	god	is	everywhere.
If	you	are	hard	god	is	nowhere.
All	depends	on	your	being	soft.
Dhyan	means	meditation.
Rosie	has	two	meanings;	one	is	German.	That	you	have	to	avoid,	that	you	have
to	drop	completely;	it	means	horse.
But	that's	how	the	German	language	is:
so	many	wolves
and	so	many	horses,	bears...
and	all	kinds	of	things
I	have	to	come	across	every	day!
Remember	the	Latin	meanings.
The	Latin	meanings	are	very	beautiful.
There	are	two	--	one:	the	flower	rose,	and	the	second:	giver	of	love	--	which	are
both	beautiful.
Meditation	will	help	your	heart	to	become	a	rose.
Ordinarily	the	heart	is	like	a	bud
As	if	the	rose	is	closed.
When	you	start	becoming	a	little	more	aware
A	little	more	silent,	a	little	more	peaceful
That	bud	starts	opening	its	petals.
And	when	the	rose	opens,	fragrance	is	released.
When	your	heart	releases	its	fragrance
That	is	love.
The	heart	is	a	rose
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	the	open	heart	is	a	giver	of	love.
It	gives	for	the	sheer	joy	of	giving.
Wen	love	becomes	a	joy	in	itself,
Not	as	a	means	to	get	something
But	as	an	end	unto	itself
Then	life	is	fulfilled.
Then	love	is	synonymous	with	god
Then	they	don't	mean	different	things.
Jesus	says	god	is	love,	and	he	is	right
And	he	is	the	first	person
In	the	whole	history	of	humanity
Who	has	said	it	so	clearly.
Sonja	has	four	meanings
All	the	meanings	come	from	different	languages	and	yet	are	interrelated
The	Greek	meaning	is	wisdom,
the	Persian	meaning	is	purity,
the	Hebrew	meaning	is	a	seer,
the	Hindi	meaning	is	golden.
Wisdom	arises	out	of	purity.
It	arises	out	of	innocence.
And	when	wisdom	arises	you	become	a	seer
You	start	seeing	things
Which	you	have	never	seen	before.
For	the	first	time	you	have	eyes.
Before	it	you	were	blind.
And	this	is	the	most	golden	experience.
So	start	with	the	Persian	meaning:
Become	innocent.
And	the	Greek	meaning
Will	come	out	of	that	innocence;	wisdom.
And	it	will	open	you	closed	eyes	--
That	is	the	Hebrew	meaning:	You	will	become	a	seer.
The	whole	experience	is	the	most	precious	one.
That	is	the	Hindi	meaning.
It	is	the	ultimate	experience
The	golden	experience.
One	of	the	greatest	meditations	is
To	be	contented	with	everything	as	it	is.
Naturally,	the	mind	starts	stopping..
The	mind	can	live	only	in	discontent.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
In	contentment	it	dies
It	cannot	survive	with	contentment.
Create	the	climate	of	contentment
And	mind	surely	dies,	inevitably	dies.
Essentially	you	are	divine
So	anything	that	happens	to	you
Is	only	a	passing	moment	--
Don't	be	distracted	by	it.
If	it	is	pleasure,	watch	it.
If	it	is	pain,	watch	it.
Pleasure	passes,	pain	passes.
These	are	just	like	clouds
Moving	in	the	infinite	sky	of	your	being.
The	sky	is	not	affected	by	the	clouds.
They	may	be	dark	clouds
They	may	be	beautiful	white	clouds
It	doesn't	matter	--	the	sky	remains	unscratched.
To	remember	that	'I	am	god'
Means	to	remember	'I	am	the	sky.'
And	all	the	experiences	that	happen	in	life
Are	like	small	clouds:	they	come	and	go.
They	are	not	worth	paying	much	attention	to.
Take	no	notice.	Let	that	be	your	meditation.
Remember	always
You	are	the	sky,	the	infinite	sky
No	clouds	can	distort	you.
Slowly	slowly	the	clouds	will	not	come	to	you.
They	never	come	uninvited.
You	may	not	have	invited	the	pain
But	you	invite	the	pleasure,	and	the	pain
Is	the	other	side	of	the	same	phenomenon:
Invite	one	and	the	other	comes.
They	cannot	be	divorced,	they	are	always	together.
When	you	stop	inviting	them
These	guests	start	disappearing.
Soon	a	moment	comes	when	you	remain	unclouded
And	that's	what	Buddha	calls	nirvana
And	Jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
God	is	available	only	to	the	wise	ones
Never	to	the	knowledgeable	ones.
The	ignorant	person	may	know	god
But	the	knowledgeable	person	cannot.
That	is	impossible,	that	has	never	happened.
The	knowledgeable	 thinks	 that	he	already	knows	And	he	knows	nothing,	he	 is
deceiving	himself.
He	lives	in	a	great	deception.
The	seeker	of	truth
First	has	to	destroy	all	deceptions
And	the	fundamental	deception	is	that	'I	know.'
The	seeker	of	truth	has	to	start
From	a	state	of	not-knowing,	of	'I	don't	know.'
He	is	neither	a	believer	nor	a	non-believer
He	is	neither	a	theist	nor	an	atheist
He	is	neither	Hindu	nor	Christian	--
He	cannot	be!
How	can	a	seeker	become	identified
With	any	ideology?
He	keeps	himself	free.	He	is	ready	to	enquire
But	he	remains	unprejudiced.
That's	what	I	call	a	state	of	not-knowing.
He	always	functions	from	a	state	of	not-knowing	And	this	state	of	not-knowing
Slowly	grows	into	wisdom.
Wisdom	does	not	come
From	scriptures	or	from	others.
It	grows	within	you.
If	you	are	capable
Of	keeping	yourself	undeceived	by	the	mind
Wisdom	is	bound	to	happen.
It	is	your	intrinsic	nature
We	just	never	give	it	an	opportunity.
We	go	on	stuffing	in	knowledge
So	there	is	no	space	for	the	wisdom	to	grow.
Throw	all	knowledge	out
Make	yourself	spacious	enough
For	the	wisdom	to	take	place
For	the	wisdom	to	happen.
And	it	is	wisdom
That	brings	you	ultimately	to	god.
Meditation
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Is	 only	 a	 negative	 method:	 it	 simply	 helps	 you	 To	 throw	 the	 knowledge	 out,
that's	all.
It	is	like	medicine:
Medicine	simply	throws	the	disease	out,
It	does	not	help	you	to	be	healthy.
Health	arises	in	you	--	that	is	your	nature.
Medicine	only	keeps	the	disease	out
t	cuts	the	roots	of	the	disease,	that's	all,
Then	your	nature	starts	functioning.
When	your	nature	starts	functioning
Then	health	is	not	difficult
It	is	a	natural	outcome.
So	is	wisdom:	it	is	health.
Meditation	is	medicine.
It	keeps	the	disease	of	knowledge	out	of	you
It	prevents	the	disease	from	getting	in
From	getting	roots	in	you
From	making	roads	in	you.
It	uproots	the	weeds,	and	once	the	soil	is	clean	Roses	start	sprouting	of	their	own
accord.
The	ultimate	music	does	not	consist	of	sounds
It	consists	of	silence.
It	does	not	consist	of	words
It	is	utterly	wordless.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	instrument.
The	Zen	people	call	it
The	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
That	is	impossible:	one	hand	cannot	create	sound.
You	will	need	two	things;
Only	then,	by	friction,	can	sound	be	created.
But	one	hand	can	create	silence
And	that	is	the	meaning	of	the	Zen	expression.
And	silence	is	more	musical	than	any	sound.
In	taoist	circles	in	China	it	is	said
That	when	the	musician	becomes	perfect
He	throws	away	his	instruments.
When	the	archer	becomes	perfect
He	throws	away	his	bow	and	arrows	--
They	are	only	for	the	beginners
For	those	who	are	trying	to	learn.
But	when	one	becomes	a	master
Then	nothing	is	needed.
One's	own	being	is	enough	unto	itself.
It	is	the	music,	the	music	of	all	music.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	the	poetry,	the	poetry	of	all	poetry.
It	is	the	art	of	all	art.
Seek	and	search	for	it	--	it	is	not	far	away.
You	just	have	to	learn
How	to	dive	within	yourself.
And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
21	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004215
ShortTitle:	84POEM19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.)
God	is	only	for	the	lions
He	is	not	for	the	crowd,	for	the	sheep.
He	is	only	for	the	courageous	ones
Not	for	the	cowards.
Cowards	 cannot	 know	 god;	 they	 can	 believe	 in	 god	 But	 their	 belief	 is	 also
because	of	fear.
That	too	is	part	of	their	cowardice.
Courage	is	needed	to	love,	courage	is	needed
To	change	yourself	so	that	you	can	love.
Courage	 is	 needed	 to	 accept	 your	 responsibility	Courage	 is	 needed	 to	 drop	 all
that	is	rotten,
And	almost	ninety-nine	per	cent	is	rotten.
The	coward	clings	to	it,	he	protects	it
He	feels	secure	with	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Only	the	courageous	have	enough	guts
To	drop	all	that	is	rubbish
To	drop	all	that	is	rotten,	to	slip	out	of	it
To	risk	all	for	the	unknown.
To	risk	the	known	for	the	unknown	--
That's	exactly	what	courage	is.
Each	sannyasin	has	to	be	a	lion	of	god.
The	ultimate	goal	of	all	meditation	is
To	hear	the	unhearable,	to	see	the	unseeable
To	touch	the	untouchable
To	experience	the	unexperiencable.
The	ultimate	experience	of	life	is	a	paradox.
It	is	the	sound	of	silence.
Now,	logically	that	is	absurd:	either	something	Can	be	sound	or	it	can	be	silence
--
It	can't	be	both	together.
But	those	who	have	known	all	agree	about	it
That	it	is	the	sound	of	silence
It	is	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
All	those	who	have	known	agree	about
The	 paradoxical	 nature	 of	 the	 ultimate	 reality	 Because	 it	 contains	 the	 polar
opposites.
It	is	night	and	day	simultaneously
It	is	life	and	death	together.
Logic	divides,	experience	unites.
Logic	creates	opposites
Experience	makes	you	aware	that
There	are	no	opposites	at	all,	not	at	all.
All	opposites	are	just	complementaries.
Bliss	is	really	the	search	of	everyone
Not	only	of	human	beings
But	of	animals,	of	trees,	of	rivers,	of	stars.
Knowingly	or	unknowingly
Everybody	is	groping	for	bliss.
A	sannyasin	is	one
Who	makes	it	a	conscious,	deliberate	search.
And	only	those	few	people	have	arrived
Who	have	made	it	a	conscious	search.
Unconsciously	you	can	seek	bliss
But	you	will	find	misery.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	only	through	a	conscious	search	that
One	can	avoid	misery	and	can	attain	to	bliss.
Become	a	conscious	seeker	of	bliss.
Let	meditation	be	your	nest,	your	home
Your	refuge,	your	shelter
Because	without	meditation
One	simply	gropes	in	darkness
One	goes	on	stumbling,	one	goes	on	falling
In	the	same	ditches	again	and	again.
Without	meditation	one	is	blind.
It	is	meditation	that	gives	you	eyes
Inner	eyes	to	see,	and	a	clarity.
It	creates	a	perspective,	the	right	perspective	In	which	things	can	be	seen	as	they
are.
You	are	no	more	clouded
The	sky	is	clear,	unclouded.
The	sun	is	bright.	You	are	full	of	light.
Without	meditation	you	live	in	thoughts
Without	meditation	you	make	your	home	in	the	mind	There	is	no	other	place.
These	are	the	only	two	alternatives	available:	Mind	or	meditation.
Either	make	your	nest	in	the	mind
Or	make	your	nest	in	the	meditation.
If	you	make	your	nest	in	the	mind
As	millions	have	chosen	--	because	it	is	cheap	It	is	easy,	it	 is	not	arduous,	it	 is
downhill...
But	then	you	will	miss	something
That	can	give	your	life	meaning,	significance
Grandeur,	splendour:	you	will	miss	godliness.
You	will	simply	drag	from	one	event	to	another.
Your	life	will	be	such	boredom,
A	tiring	phenomenon.
Nothing	will	ever	happen	to	you
Which	can	make	you	ecstatic.
You	will	live	at	the	minimum,	a	very	lukewarm	life.
One	can	say	only	that	you	will	not	be	dead
You	will	 just	be	 living	somehow,	managing	somehow	But	 there	cannot	be	any
rejoicing.
Make	meditation	your	nest,	your	home:
Move	from	mind	to	meditation.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Mind	is	the	process	of	thought
Meditation	is	awareness,	simple	awareness.
Just	be	aware	of	your	mind
And	the	process	of	thoughts
And	slowly	slowly
You	will	move	away	from	the	mind
And	you	will	enter	into	a	new	world	of	no-mind.
That	is	meditation.
The	day	you	enter	meditation
You	have	entered	the	temple	of	god.
Meditation	creates	ecstasy	in	you
Such	joy	that	you	cannot	contain	it.
It	starts	overflowing.
It	is	so	much	that	you	disappear	in	it.
You	are	no	more	--	there	is	only	joy.
That	is	rapture.
The	ego	drowns	in	the	rapture
And	is	never	found	again:
It	dissolves,	disappears,	evaporates.
You	are	left	with	only	a	deep	joy	in	the	heart	A	joy	which	is	not	of	time
A	joy	which	is	not	of	this	earth
A	joy	which	belongs	to	the	beyond
To	the	farther	shore.
And	only	out	of	that	joy,	that	rapture
That	ecstasy,	does	reverence	arise:
Reverence	for	existence.
In	religious	terms
You	can	call	it	reverence	for	god.
Reverence	is	far	more	important	than	god	itself.
Without	reverence	there	is	no	god
If	there	is	reverence,	god	is	bound	to	happen
It	is	inevitable.
So	my	effort	here	is	to	create	reverence	in	you.
If	reverence	arises	in	your	heart,	god	is:
Suddenly	you	start	feeling	his	presence.
Everywhere,	all	around,	within	and	without.
In	the	moment	of	reverence	the	whole	existence	Is	transformed	into	godliness.
Then	trees	are	divine	and	rocks	are	divine.
Wherever	 you	 look	with	 a	 heart	 full	 of	 reverence	You	 can	 only	 find	 god	 and
nothing	else.
Without	reverence
Everything	is	there	except	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
With	reverence
Only	god	is	there	and	nothing	else.
The	nectar	which	makes	you	immortal
Is	meditation,	it	is	nothing	chemical.
It	is	your	inner	awareness.
Once	you	become	awake,	you	know	you	are	immortal.
It	does	not	make	you	immortal	in	reality,
You	are	immortal;
It	simply	reveals	the	fact	to	you.
It	makes	you	aware	of	it.
It	is	a	revelation,	it	is	a	discovery
Of	something	that	has	always	been	there.
But	people	are	profoundly	asleep.
They	know	not	who	they	are
They	know	not	what	they	are	doing.
They	go	on	doing	something	or	other
Just	to	keep	themselves	engaged.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	have	to	learn
The	art	of	being	UNengaged,	of	being	unoccupied	Of	remaining	alone.
Whenever	you	can	find	time
Don't	waste	it	in	unnecessary	occupations.
Don't	kill	time,
It	is	the	most	precious	thing	in	life.
Once	gone,	it	gone	forever.
There	is	no	way	to	recapture	it.
Whenever
You	can	find	time	to	be	alone,	to	be	silent
Be	silent,	be	alone.
Dive	deep	within	yourself
Because	it	is	by	knowing	yourself
That	you	will	know	you	are	beyond	time
You	are	eternal,	you	are	deathless.
Knowing	it,	one	becomes	free	of	all	fear
And	to	be	free	af	fear	is	freedom.
Abraham	is	one	of	the	most	important	names
In	the	history	of	human	consciousness.
The	mythology	is	that	god	chose	Abraham
To	be	the	father	of	a	new	race	of	man.
It	is	as	if	with	Abraham	humanity	reached
A	new	height,	a	new	peak:	Abraham	became
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	end	of	the	old	and	the	beginning	of	the	new.
That	has	to	be	remembered.
Each	sannyasin	in	a	certain	sense	IS	Abraham:
He	has	to	end	the	old	and	begin	the	new.
He	has	to	move	into	the	unknown
Into	a	new	dimension
Into	something	which	has	no	map,	no	measure
Into	something	which	is	not	conceivable
To	the	mind.
Each	sannyasin	has	to	herald	a	new	consciousness.
And	particularly
At	this	moment	in	the	history	of	man
Something	tremendously	radical	is	needed.
The	whole	humanity	is	rotten
It	has	lived	its	course,	it	is	finished.
There	is	no	hope	for	it,	it	has	to	die.
The	hope	lies	in	something	new.
Before	the	old	dies,	the	new	has	to	be	born.
And	that's	my	whole	effort	here:
To	create	as	many	Abrahams	as	possible.
They	will	release	humanity	from	the	bondage
Of	the	old,	the	traditional,	the	conventional.
They	will	free	humanity
From	all	kinds	of	beliefs	and	ideologies.
Man	needs	a	new	impetus	to	live
A	new	meaning	to	live	for
A	new	poetry	to	resound	in	his	being
And	a	new	dance	and	a	new	celebration.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
22	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004225
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
ShortTitle:	84POEM20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	has	four	planes.
One	is	the	bodily	plane.
Mm?	--	that	is	the	most	superficial
The	material	plane,	the	objective	plane.
Millions	only	live	on	this	first	plane
The	gross.	They	don't	know	that	they	have
Other	possibilities	inside	them
Other	heights	inside	them
They	are	not	aware	at	all.
The	second	plane	is
That	of	the	mind,	of	thoughts.
A	few	people	move	into	the	second	plane.
They	become	great	thinkers,	philosophers
Idealists,	scientists
They	use	the	faculty	of	their	mind
The	live	in	the	mind.
The	third	plane	is	that	of	the	heart
The	world	of	feelings.
Even	less	people	move	to	that.
Those	are	the	poets,	the	painters
The	sculptors,	the	dancers,	the	musicians	--
The	people	who	live	in	a	world	of	feelings
Of	sensitivity,	not	of	thoughts.
And	beyond	these	three	is	the	fourth,
The	world	of	consciousness,	pure	consciousness	Only	the	mystics	move	into	it.
And	that	is	where	the	sannyasins	have	to	go.
All	the	other	three
Have	to	be	slowly	slowly	left	behind
So	you	can	move	to	the	fourth.
Turiyo	means	the	fourth
It	means	pure	consciousness,	your	very	being,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Neither	the	body	nor	the	mind	nor	the	feeling
But	simple	being	Your	pure	existence,	your	isness.
It	is	called	the	fourth	for	the	simple	reason
That	it	is	not	advisable	to	give	it	any	name.
Hence	'the	fourth's	it	is	not	a	name
Just	a	number,	to	keep	it	unlimited	and	open
Because	any	name	will	become	a	limitation.
The	fourth	is	only	an	indicator.
Go	beyond	the	three	which	have	names	--
The	physical,	the	mental,	the	emotional
They	have	names,	they	have	their	definitions
But	the	fourth	has	no	definition.
It	is	indefinable
Hence	it	is	called	the	fourth.
But	that	is	the	goal	of	the	mystics
Of	the	sannyasins
That	is	the	goal	of	Christ,	Buddha
Krishna,	Lao	Tzu
And	that	is	the	goal	here.
Gautam	the	Buddha	was	called	well-gone
Because	he	would	not	be	coming	back	again,
That	was	his	last	life.
One	becomes	a	well-gone
Only	when	one	becomes	enlightened
Then	there	is	no	more	birth,	death
No	more	the	vicious	circle	of	birth	and	death
The	wheel	of	birth	and	death.
One	has	gone	beyond,	to	the	farther	shore
Beyond	the	beyond.
One	has	disappeared	into	the	universal
One	need	not	be	born	in	a	body	again.
People	are	born	in	a	body	again	and	again
Because	they	have	desires.
It	is	because	of	desires
That	they	have	to	come	into	the	body
Because	those	desires	can	be	fulfilled
Only	through	the	body.
Once	all	desires	have	been	seen	for
What	they	actually	are
Once	their	meaninglessness	is	understood
One	withdraws	oneself	from	all	desiring
One	stops	desiring.
Seeing	the	futility	of	desire,	seeing	that
It	always	brings	pain	and	anxiety	and	anguish	Seeing	that	desire	is	hell
One	becomes	free	of	desire
One	simply	lives	with	no	desire	for	 the	future,	Neither	 in	 this	world	nor	 in	 the
other.
Then	one	becomes	a	well-gone.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	is	the	ultimate	category.
Remember	it	--	everybody	has	to	become	a	well-gone.
If	 one	 puts	 one's	 total	 energy	 into	 meditation	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 happen,	 it	 is
inevitable.
Only	a	man	of	meditation	lives	in	freedom.
Others	pretend,	others	believe
But	the	belief	does	not	correspond	to	reality.
Political	freedom	is	not	real	freedom
Economic	freedom	is	also	not	real	freedom.
They	are	good	--	I	am	not	against	them
But	one	should	not	be	satisfied	with	them.
The	real	freedom	is	spiritual	freedom
And	spiritual	freedom	comes	only	through	one	way,	There	is	no	alternative	way
to	arrive	at	it,
And	that	is	creating
More	and	more	meditative	energy	in	yourself
Becoming	more	silent,	alert,	watchful.
Ordinarily	man	lives	like	a	machine.
The	meditator	has	to	learn
Not	to	live	as	a	machine
He	has	to	de-automatise	himself
He	 has	 to	 become	 something	 more	 than	 a	 machine	 Something	 more	 than	 a
computer.
And	that	miracle	can	happen.
It	has	happened	to	a	few	people	in	the	past
It	can	happen	to	many	more	people	now
Because	humanity	has	come	of	age.
If	in	the	past	there	could	be	only
A	few	Buddhas	and	a	few	Christs
Now	there	can	be	many	more.	The	time	is	ripe
For	a	great	explosion	of	consciousness.
It	has	never	been	ripe,	because	life	is	evolving	And	we	are	coming	to	a	climax.
If	 we	 don't	 attain	 to	 a	 radical	 transformation	 Then	 this	 same	 state	 of	 evolved
humanity
Will	become	a	strain	on	us.
Man	is	no	more	a	child
And	if	he	continues	to	wear	the	old	clothes
Which	were	made	for	children
He	is	bound	to	be	in	difficulty.
He	will	remain	unnecessarily	crippled
For	the	simple	reason	that	the	clothes	are	small	And	he	has	become	big.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Christianity,	Hinduism,	Jainism,	Mohammedanism	These	are	all	clothes
Made	for	another	state	of	humanity
When	man	was	more	childish.
Now	they	don't	fit,	 they	are	utterly	out	of	date	It	 is	ridiculous	to	see	Christians
and	Hindus
And	Mohammedans	--	absolutely	ridiculous!
They	are	not	contemporaries
They	are	living	a	thousand	years	back
And	trying	to	fit	themselves	into	clothes
Which	are	not	meant	for	them.
They	have	grown	huge,	they	have	become	adults
Those	clothes	were	right	for	a	certain	time
Now	they	are	not	right	at	all.
But	we	have	become	so	attached
To	the	old,	to	the	traditional
We	love	antiques	so	much!
That	anything	old	seems	like	gold.
Anything	new	we	are	suspicious	of.
That's	why	people	are	suspicious	of	me
Because	I	am	saying	something	new
Which	has	never	been	said	in	this	way.
The	time	is	right	to	change	all	clothes
The	time	is	ripe	to	change	the	whole	of	man
A	total	overhauling	is	needed.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about.
One	is	strong	really,	only	when	one	is	not.
This	is	one	of	the	paradoxes	of	life:
The	ego	is	never	strong.
It	pretends	to	be	strong	but	it	is	very	weak.
It	is	bound	to	be	weak	because	it	is	false.
It	has	no	substance	to	it,	it	is	only	a	shadow.
How	can	the	shadow	be	strong?
Man	cannot	be	strong	on	his	own.
He	will	remain	weak,	he	will	remain	poor.
He	can	be	strong	only	if	he	disappears
And	gives	way	to	god.
If	he	allows	god	to	descend	in	him
Then	he	is	as	strong	as	god	himself.
Then	a	totally	different	quality	of	strength
Arises	in	you,	which	is	yours	in	a	way
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Because	it	is	coming	through	you
And	yet	it	is	not	yours
Because	it	is	coming	from	god.
You	are	just	a	vehicle,	a	medium.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	medium	for	god.
He	 has	 to	 be	 utterly	 empty	 so	 there	 is	 no	 hindrance	 To	 god's	 energy	 flowing
through	him.
He	has	to	remove	all	the	rocks
So	that	the	stream	of	god's	energy.
Can	flow	through	him	unhindered.
Then	you	are	strong
But	there	is	no	claim	of	strength	on	your	part	There	is	no	bragging	on	your	part
There	is	no	pride	on	your	part.
You	have	immense	intelligence	available
Great	insight	is	yours,	but	you	remain	humble.
The	more	the	strength	flows	through	you
The	more	humble	you	become.
The	more	you	become	aware	that	god
Is	penetrating	you,	the	more	grateful	you	feel.
Through	meditation	one	dies	as	an	ego
And	allows	god	to	live	through	one.
That's	my	whole	work	heres
To	help	you	die	as	an	ego.
That's	the	only	way	to	know	god
And	that's	the	only	way	to	be	in	communion
With	the	whole.
And	the	only	way	to	be	blissful,	to	be	peaceful.
The	courageous	person	always	leaves	the	known
For	the	unknown,	each	moment.
And	then	his	life	goes	on	widening.
Goes	on	becoming	vast	as	the	ocean,	as	the	sky.
And	when	there	are	no	boundaries	left
When	you	have	not	only	left	the	known
But	you	have	even	gone	beyond	the	unknown
Into	the	unknowable...
That	is	the	last	ultimate	step	of	courage:
Taking	the	jump,	the	plunge	into	the	unknowable	Knowing	perfectly	well	that	it
cannot	be	known	That	i	is	impossible	to	know	it,
Nobody	has	ever	known	it
That	its	very	nature	is	unknowable
That	it	is	intrinsically	unknowable
There	is	no	way	to	reduce	it	to	the	known.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	first	start	learning
To	move	from	the	known	towards	the	unknown
And	your	life	will	become	a	great	excitement
A	great	joy,	a	great	surprise,
Every	moment	there	is	something	new	happening.
And	then	take	the	ultimate	risk	one	days
Love	from	the	unknown	to	the	unknowable.
The	difference	is	that
The	unknown	will	become	known
And	the	unknowable	will	never	become	the	known.
That	unknowable	is	god.
But	first	learn	to
Move	from	the	known	to	the	unknown.
That	is	learning	to	swim	in	shallow	water.
And	when	you	have	learned	swimming
Then	go	into	the	ocean	with	no	fear
With	absolute	fearlessness
And	then	your	life	will	know	what	ecstasy	is.
With	the	unknown
You	will	know	excitement
With	the	unknowable
You	will	come	to	know	ecstasy.
One	of	the	most	essential	qualities
For	a	sannyasin	is	to	be	anonymous,	a	nobody
To	forget	all	desire	for	name	and	fame
To	 live	 ordinarily,	 naturally	 authentically,	 spontaneously	 Not	 to	 bother	 about
what	others	say
Not	to	be	worried	about	other's	opinions;
Their	opinions	carry	no	value	at	all.
They	are	all	asleep,	fast	asleep.
In	sleep	they	go	on	saying	something
They	don't	know	what	they	are	saying.
They	don't	mean	it	either;	it	is	all	gibberish.
They	are	blind,	they	see	nothing.
That	is	the	value	of	their	opinion?
But	people	hanker	for	name	and	fame
They	hanker	to	convince	blind	people
That	'I	am	beautiful.'
They	hanker	to	convince	madmen
That	'I	am	a	great	creator.'
If	you	understand	the	situation
In	which	humanity	is	and	has	always	been
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	will	not	be	bothered	about	all	these	things.
There	is	no	need	to	put	any	effort	into	it.
Just	live	your	life
As	peacefully	and	silently	as	possible
As	if	you	are	non-existent.
To	live	anonymously,	to	live	like	a	nobody
Is	the	exact	definition	of	sannyas.
It	is	dropping	the	whole	ego	trip.
And	all	trips	are	ego	trips	--	remember	it.
The	moment	you	drop	the	ego	trip
All	trips	are	dropped	you	relax
You	start	resting	in	your	being
And	in	that	very	rest	great	joy	arises
Overflooding	bliss	arises
Life	becomes	a	benediction,	a	sacred	phenomenon.
Remember	only	one	thing:
My	idea	of	sannyas	is	very	simple
It	has	nothing	esoteric	about	it,
It	is	very	scientific
Nothing	is	hidden	in	it,
Everything	is	an	open	secret.
There	is	no	ritual
But	a	simple	process	of	meditation	--
That	is	its	foundation.
Not	even	prayer	is	needed,	just	meditation.
Prayer	is	not	scientific
And	can	never	be	scientific.
But	meditation	is	utterly	scientific.
Just	as	the	scientist
Watches,	observes	the	objective	phenomenon
The	meditator	watches	the	psychological	phenomenon.
It	is	the	same	process:	a	detached	watching
Unprejudiced	 observation,	 with	 no	 conclusions,	 Because	 if	 you	 have	 a
conclusion	already
Then	there	is	no	point	in	watching.
Then	you	will	manage	to	prove	your	conclusion
Then	the	whole	process	is	unscientific.
The	essential	core	of	science	is	that
It	depends	not	on	prejudices	but	on	experiments	Experience,	on	facts,	observed
facts.
Hence	a	person	who	is	trained	scientifically
Can	very	easily	understand	meditation.
It	has	no	superstition	about	it
It	is	as	simple	as	two	plus	two	is	four.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	 only	 difference	 between	 science	 and	 religion	 Is	 that	 science	 is	 concerned
with	the	objective	With	that	which	is	outside.	There.
And	 religion	 is	 concerned	 with	 who	 observes	 With	 that	 which	 is	 inner,	 the
subjective.
The	same	process	of	observation
Has	to	be	turned	towards	your	own	mind.
One	becomes	oneself	a	lab,	a	great	experiment
Of	observation:	one	watches	one's	thoughts
Desires,	memories,	anger,	greed,	lust
With	no	a	priori	conclusion,	with	no	judgement:	This	is	good,	this	is	bad,..	non-
judgmental
Then	a	miracle	happens.
When	you	are	absolutely	non-judgmental,
With	no	prejudice,	no	conclusion,
When	your	observation	is	pure,	simple,	innocent,	That	which	you	observe	starts
disappearing.
That's	where	science	and	religion
Start	differing:
The	more	you	observe	in	science
The	more	real	the	fact	becomes.
It	was	not	so	real	before	observation.
You	may	have	missed	it
But	now	you	cannot	miss	it,	it	is	there.
It	becomes	more	solid.
When	 you	watch	 your	mind	 this	 is	 the	 difference:	 If	 you	watch	 your	 anger	 it
starts	evaporating
It	cannot	exist.
Slowly	slowly	the	whole	mind	ceases	to	be.
When	there	is	no	mind	left	to	watch,
The	watcher	turns	upon	itself.
That	is	the	moment	of	realisation
Self-realisation,	samadhi.
That	if	the	ultimate	goal
Of	all	mystical	approaches.
To	know	oneself	is	to	know	all.
And	that	is	the	only	thing	that	I	emphasise:
No	belief,	no	dogma,	no	creed
No	church,	no	religion.
By	a	simple	process	of	inner	observation
You	come	to	realise	yourself.
And	the	moment	you	know	who	you	are
Immediately	you	know	the	essential	core
Of	the	whole	existence,	of	life	itself
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Because	you	are	part	of	it.
If	we	can	understand	a	single	drop	of	water
We	have	understood	all	the	water
That	exists	anywhere.
And	each	man	is	a	dewdrop	of	god
If	we	can	understand	one	man
And	the	easiest	and	the	closest
Is	your	own	existence.
Once	the	mystery	is	understood
Once	the	door	is	open
You	know	now	that	you	are	just	a	dewdrop
Of	the	same	ultimate	reality
That	pervades	the	whole	existence.
Then	there	is	no	death,	no	fear,	no	greed,	no	lust.
One	lives	in	absolute	freedom
Bliss	and	benediction.
So	make	it	a	point	that	now	meditation
Has	to	be	your	constant	work	upon	yourself.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
23	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004235
ShortTitle:	84POEM21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only)
Religion	is	rebellion:
Rebellion	against	tradition,	convention
Rebellion	against	the	past	and	the	dead.
Unless	one	is	free	completely	of	the	past
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
One	never	knows	what	life	is.
The	past	encapsulates	one	against	life.
It	surrounds	you	like	the	China	Wall
It	doe	not	allow	you	to	penetrate	the	present.
Rebellion	means	destroying	all	these	walls.
To	live	in	the	present	is	the	greatest	rebellion	And	to	live	in	the	present
Is	to	live	in	meditation,	and	to	become	capable	Of	living	totally	in	the	present
Is	to	be	able	to	enter	god.
Rebellion	against	the	priests
Helps	you	to	commune	with	god.
Rebellion	against	the	scriptures
Helps	you	to	commune	with	truth.
Meditation
Is	the	only	anchor	in	the	ocean	of	life.
Without	it	one	is	always	just	driftwood.
With	meditation	you	are	anchored.
You	can	stay	centred
And	you	can	choose	your	direction.
With	meditation
You	start	becoming	a	master	of	yourself.
Without	meditation
You	are	at	the	mercy	of	unconscious	forces.
That's	how	millions	of	people	go	on	living:
Victims	of	the	winds.	They	don't	know
Where	they	are	going,	why	they	are	going
It	is	just	that	the	wind
Is	blowing	in	that	direction.
Meditation	is	the	most	essential	thing	in	life.
It	is	food,	nourishment	for	the	soul.
Without	it	man	is	without	a	soul.
Devote	your	energies	more	and	more
Towards	getting	deeper	into	meditation.
And	by	meditation	I	simply	mean	awareness.
A	three-dimensional	awareness	is	needed
First,	you	have	to	be	aware	of	your	actions
Second,	you	have	to	be	aware	of	your	thoughts
Third,	you	have	to	be	aware
Of	your	Emotions,	feelings.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Once	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 these	 three	 dimensions	 The	 fourth	 awareness
happens	on	its	own.
Once	these	three	awarenesses	are	there
You	become	aware	of	your	being
You	need	not	make	any	effort	for	that.
You	just	prepare	the	ground
By	being	aware	of	these	three	things
And	the	fourth	comes	as	a	gift	from	god.
People	are	living	in	their	egos
And	that	is	the	root	cause	of	misery.
To	live	in	the	ego	is	to	live	in	darkness
To	remain	in	the	ego	is	to	remain	blind.
One	has	to	come	out	of	the	ego.
The	idea	of	god	is	only	a	device
So	that	you	can	surrender	your	ego.
It	will	be	difficult	for	you	to	surrender	it
Without	someone	there	to	receive	it.
There	have	been	people
Who	have	surrendered	without	a	god.
Buddha	did	it.
There	is	no	problem	in	it
Intrinsically	it	is	not	imossible
But	it	is	very	difficult,	certainly.
With	the	idea	of	god...
And	god	is	simply	an	idea
It	is	a	device	to	help	you	surrender	your	ego.
It	feels	easier	to	surrender	your	ego
With	the	idea	that	god	will	take	care.
There	is	no	need	to	be	taken	care	of.
You	are	not	insecure.
You	are	not	a	stranger	to	existence
You	are	part	of	it.
Existence	is	constantly	nursing	you
Helping	you	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways.
But	one	is	afraid.	One	thinks
'I	have	to	take	care	of	myself
Otherwise	who	will	take	care	of	me?'
Hence	people	cling	to	the	ego.
But	once	the	idea	is	there	that	there	is	a	god	And	you	can	surrender	your	ego
That	he	is	omnipotent
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	you	will	be	in	far	better	hands
That	he	is	omnipresent	and	he	is	omniscient...
Your	ego	is	very	limited	and	small
His	powers	are	infinite
So	it	is	a	good	bargain:
Drop	the	ego	and	let	him	take	care	of	you!
It	appeals	to	the	mind
To	our	businesslike	intellect
To	our	arithmetic,	to	our	logic.
It	seems	to	be	convincing.
But	in	fact	god	is	not	a	person
It	is	only	a	device	to	help	you	to	drop	the	ego.
Once	the	ego	is	dropped	you	will	know
That	it	was	a	device.	But	it	worked!
Your	thorn	was	false	in	the	first	place
No	real	needle	was	needed	to	take	it	out.
Only	a	false	needle	was	needed	to	take	it	out.
Your	disease	was	false	in	the	first	place
Hence	homeopathic	sugar	pills	will	do.
Seventy	per	cent	of	illnesses	are	false
That's	why	with	seventy	per	cent	of	illnesses
any	pathy	succeeds.
It	 depends	 on	 whether	 you	 believe	 in	 the	 pathy:	 Homeopathy,	 naturopathy,
ayurvedic...
Or	you	can	invent	your	own.
Any	pathy	works	if	you	believe	in	it
Because	in	the	first	place	the	illness	is	false.
All	that	you	need	is	a	support
So	that	you	can	drop	it
A	place	somewhere	to	drop	it
Just	a	wastepaper	basket	to	throw	in.
That's	what	Patanjali,
One	of	the	greatest	seers	of	the	world
Has	said,	'God	is	a	device'.
And	I	perfectly	agree	with	him
And	it	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	devices
Because	it	makes	it	easy
It	makes	surrender	smooth.
But	the	whole	purpose	is:
One	has	to	drop	the	ego	any	way;
This	way	or	that	is	irrelevant.
Remember	this	much
That	the	ego	has	to	be	surrendered.
Don't	cling	to	the	ego.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	the	very	surrender	transforms	you
Opens	your	eyes,	the	darkness	disappears.
You	are	full	of	light,	you	are	light
You	are	transmuted;	you	are	no	more	part
Of	the	mundane,	ordinary	world.
Suddenly,	doors	of	all	the	mysteries
Are	open	for	you,	the	miraculous	is	yours.
Your	life	starts	taking	on
A	new	colour,	a	new	joy,	a	new	song.
It	starts	becoming	a	new	dance.
In	the	East,
we	have	always	looked	at	existence
as	if	everything	is	divine.
In	the	beginning	it	is	'as	if'.
When	you	start	the	journey	it	is	'as	if'.
But	when	you	end	the	journey
it	is	the	truth:
the	sun	is	god,
the	moon	is	god,
the	rivers	are	goddesses,
the	stars	are	gods,
the	trees	are	gods.
Christianity	has	condemned	this	idea	very	much;	they	think	this	is	paganism.
It	has	a	tremendous	beauty,	this	paganism.
In	 fact	 the	 pagan	 is	 the	 only	 religious	 person	 because	 he	 lives	 surrounded	 by
gods.
He	transforms	everything	into	the	divine.
And	of	course	when	the	whole	existence	is	divine,	you	are	also	divine.
You	cannot	exclude	yourself.
The	whole	existence	is	divine	inclusive	of	you.
God	is	no	more	a	person	in	the	East.
It	is	a	quality.
It	is	life	itself,	it	is	existence	itself.
So	in	the	East	people	worship	everything.
And	that	has	a	beauty	--
a	tremendous	sacredness	about	it.
They	will	worship	the	moon,
they	will	worship	the	river	--
any	excuse	is	enough!
The	point	is	not	the	object	of	worship
the	point	is	worshipping.
Whom	you	worship	is	irrelevant.
So	in	the	East,
the	father	is	worshipped;
the	mother	is	worshipped.
There	have	even	been	people	like	Ramakrishna
who	used	to	worship	his	own	wife!
Once	in	a	while	he	would	call	to	Sharda,	his	wife,
"Become	a	goddess,	sit	upon	a	throne!"
He	had	a	small	throne	for	her;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	of	course	the	wife	had	to	follow	the	orders	because	in	the	East	the	husband
is	a	god!
You	cannot	say	no	to	the	husband.
So	she	would	sit	on	the	throne
and	he	would	worship	her.
People	would	think	that	he	had	gone	mad,
completely	mad.
But	he	was	the	most	sane	person
of	those	times	in	the	East.
You	see	the	beauty	of	it?
Any	day	he	would	say,
"Sharda,	I	feel	like	worshipping	you	--
come	here	and	become	a	goddess!"
It	is	fun,	it	is	play:
there	is	no	need	to	be	fanatics;
in	that	you	can	worship	only	Christ.
You	can	worship	your	own	child!
There	is	no	question,	as	the	Mohammedans	say,
that	there	is	only	one	god	and	no	other	god.
The	pagan	attitude	is	that	everything	is	divine.
There	is	no	god	because	everything	is	divine.
There	is	no	god	but	everyone	is	a	god.
Remember	it	--	the	moon	is	only	one	of	the	gods.
The	Indian	scriptures	say
there	are	three	hundred	and	thirty	million	gods.
How	they	manage	to	count	is	a	puzzle!
It	seems	to	be	just	any	figure	--
the	biggest	figure	that	they	could	think	of.
In	those	days	India	had	that	size	population;
so	the	idea	of	so	many	gods	is	very	good.
Gods	everywhere;
in	the	marketplace,
at	the	railway	station,
in	the	buses.
Gods	fighting,	gods	quarrelling,
gods	talking,	gods	getting	married	and	divorced	--
all	gods!
This	is	a	totally	different	view
than	 that	 which	 Judaism	 has	 given	 to	 the	 world;	 and	 Christianity	 and
Mohammedanism
are	simply	offshoots	of	Judaism.
There	are	only	two	religions	in	the	world:
Judaism	and	Hinduism.
Judaism	believes	in	one	god;
it	is	very	non-democratic,	it	is	dictatorial.
God	seems	to	be	like	Adolf	Hitler
or	Joseph	Stalin	or	Mao	Tse	Tung.
Hinduism	believes	in	a	very	democratic	existence:	everybody	is	the	same,	all	are
divine!
Remember	it,
let	it	become	your	very	feeling	about	everything	--
trees,	moon,	sun,	stars.
And	that	will	help	you	immediately
to	go	into	deep	meditation.
Be	here	as	long	as	possible.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	will	not	find	more	beautiful	gods	anywhere...	and	crazy	too!
Love	is	more	like	a	fragrance
Than	like	a	flower	or	a	seed.
These	 three	 things	 have	 to	 be	 understood	 deeply:	 The	 seed,	 the	 flower.	 the
fragrance.
Sex	is	more	like	a	seed	--	very	gross
All	is	just	potential.	nothing	is	actual	yet.
And	the	flower,	the	ordinary	love,
Which	is	a	little	higher,
Goes	a	little	beyond	sex.
It	has	no	sexual	overtones	any	more.
It	can	be	just	friendship
It	can	exist	between	two	friends.
It	can	exist	between	husband	and	wife
In	fact	unless	it	does	there	is	no	intimacy.
Sex	never	makes	you	intimate.
Animals	are	never	intimate.
Sexuality	never	brings	you	really	together.
It	brings	your	bodies	together	but	not	you.
You	are	far	bigger	than	the	body
Far	more	than	the	body.
When	your	psyche
Starts	coming	into	close	intimacy
That	is	the	beginning	of	love,	the	ordinary	love.
Sex	remains	but	becomes	secondary
Love	becomes	primary.
This	is	the	state	of	the	flower.
And	the	third	state	is
When	sex	simply	disappears	and	love	remains
Just	a	pure	fragrance,	not	even	a	flower.
You	can	catch	hold	of	a	flower.
But	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	a	fragrance.
You	can	very	well	possess	a	seed
You	can	even	keep	it	locked	in	a	box.
You	cannot	lock	up	a	flower.
If	you	do	it	will	die.
The	seed	will	remain	but	the	flower	will	die.
It	is	far	more	fragile.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	have	to	be	a	little	more	careful.
It	is	a	higher	phenomenon,	more	delicate.
But	a	fragrance	you	cannot	even	catch	hold	of.
It	is	already	free,	it	is	freedom.
That	is	the	ultimate	in	love
Where	love	takes	the	flavour	of	prayer.
The	majority	of	people	remain	at	the	seed	stage.
Only	a	few	arrive	at	the	second	stage	and
Very	rarely	does	a	person	arrive
At	the	third	stage;	only	once	in	a	while
A	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Krishna.
But	that	should	remain	the	goal.
Unless	you	attain	to	the	fragrance	of	love
You	have	not	known	life	in	its	totality
In	its	wholeness	you	have	not	explored	it.
You	have	remained	just	on	the	periphery
You	have	not	entered	the	very	core	of	it.
And	at	the	very	core	of	it	is	the	treasure
The	kingdom	of	god.
Happiness	is	temporal:
One	moment	it	is	there,	another	moment	it	is	gone.
Hankering	for	it	is	futile.	Whatsoever	you	do
It	is	not	going	to	stay	with	you.
It	 is	 a	 prostitute,	 it	 cannot	 be	yours	 forever	 It	 promises,	 it	 is	 very	generous	 in
promising
But	it	betrays	you	every	day.
And	people	are	such	fools:
They	go	on	believing	in	the	promises
Again	and	again	--	the	same	promises
For	the	same	kind	of	happiness.
To	become	aware	of	this	fact
Is	the	beginning	of	the	real	search	for	bliss.
Then	one	does	not	want	happiness
Because	what	is	the	point	of	having	it
When	tomorrow	it	will	be	lost
And	again	you	will	be	in	the	same	despair?
In	fact,	in	more	despair	than	before
Because	you	would	have	tasted	something	of	joy	And	that	will	make	you	even
sadder.
The	real	search
Has	to	be	the	search	for	something	eternal
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Something	abiding.
And	it	is	there,	but	one	cannot	find	it
Looking	out	from	oneself	--	it	is	not	there.
There	you	will	find	only	temporary	relief,
Moments	of	happiness	And	then	long	periods	of	misery.
It	is	a	totally	futile	exercise.
For	those	small	moments	one	pays	so	much	--
It	is	not	worth	it.
With	the	same	energy	turning	in
You	can	find	eternal	bliss.
It	is	your	intrinsic	nature.
The	whole	thing	depends	on	where	you	are	looking.
If	you	are	looking	in	the	outside	world
You	can	find	only	moments
Only	oases	in	the	desert	of	life.
But	if	you	look	in
You	will	find	eternal	bliss,
Eternal	peace,	eternal	life.
Once	found	it	is	yours	forever,
Even	death	cannot	take	it	away.
A	sannyasin	has	to	learn	pure	acting.
He	has	to	look	at	the	world	as	a	great	drama.
A	thousand	and	one	plays	are	going	on
And	you	have	to	participate	in	many	games.
You	are	constantly	moving
From	one	stage	to	another:
From	the	house	to	the	office
From	the	office	to	the	church
From	the	church	to	the	club	And	so	on,	so	forth.
They	are	all	different	stages,	different	sets
And	you	have	to	play	different	roles
But	they	are	all	roles	--
Don't	take	them	seriously.
There	is	no	need	to	renounce	them.
To	renounce	them	means
You	have	--	taken	them	seriously.
That's	why	I	say	never	to	renounce	anything.
Live	your	role,	enjoy	it,	it	is	fun
But	take	it	lightly,	take	it	easily.
It	is	not	worth	worrying	about.
So	whatsoever	role
You	have	to	play	in	a	certain	circumstance
Play	to	your	utmost	ability,	play	it	totally
But	once	it	is	finished
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Whether	you	have	succeeded	or	failed	Is	irrelevant.
Don't	look	back,	go	ahead:
There	are	other	plays	you	have	to	play.
Failure	or	success	are	unimportant.
What	is	important	is	the	awareness
That	everything	is	a	game.
When	your	whole	life
Becomes	full	of	this	awareness
You	are	freed,	then	nothing	binds	you
Then	you	are	no	more	tethered	to	anything
Then	you	don't	have	any	chains	on	your	hands
Then	you	are	no	more	imprisoned	by	anything.
You	use	masks	but	you	know
That	that	is	not	your	original	face
And	you	can	remove	the	mask
Because	now	you	know	it	is	a	mask
It	can	be	removed,	it	is	removeable.
And	now	you	can	know	your	original	face	too.
The	man	who	is	aware	that	life	is	a	game
Comes	to	know	his	original	face.
And	to	know	one's	original	face
Is	to	know	all	that	is	worth	knowing
Because	that	is	the	face	of	god
That	is	the	face	of	truth
That	is	the	face	of	love
That	is	the	face	of	freedom.
Sugata	means	well-gone
One	who	is	no	more	part	of	this	world
Who	has	really	gone;
What	exists	here	is	just	a	shadow.
He	is	no	more	earthly
He	exists	no	more	in	the	body	because
He	is	no	more	the	body,	he	is	no	more	the	mind	He	eats,	but	he	eats	not
He	drinks,	but	he	drinks	not
He	talks,	but	he	talks	not,	because	even	while	He	is	talking	he	is	absolutely	silent
And	even	when	he	is	eating	he	is	just
A	watcher	of	it,	he	is	not	the	eater.
While	walking	he	is	just	a	witness
Not	the	walker.
Doing	all	kinds	of	things	he	is	never	a	doer
Because	there	is	no	ego	any	more.
The	ego	is	gone	forever,	hence
He	is	called	well-gone
Gone	to	the	farther	shore.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
He	lingers	on	this	shore	a	little	while
To	help	those	who	are	seeking	and	searching
For	the	way
To	tell	them	that	he	has	found	it
To	convey	the	message
To	tell	them	that	they	can	also	find	it
To	encourage	them
To	give	them	a	few	indications	and	hints.
To	share	his	experience	he	tries	to	linger
A	little	bit	on	this	shore,	but	in	fact
Ninety-nine	per	cent	of	his	being
Is	already	gone.
When	Buddha	was	dying
His	disciples	started	crying	--	naturally.
Even	his	closest	disciple,	Ananda
Started	crying,	tears	started	coming.
He	was	older	than	Buddha,
Buddha	was	eighty-two,	he	was	eighty-four:
A	man	of	eighty-four	crying	like	a	small	child.
Buddha	said	'Stop	this	nonsense,	Ananda!
What	are	you	doing?'
And	Ananda	said,	'I	can't	listen	to	you	any	more.
At	least	in	this	last	moment	allow	me
To	do	whatsoever	I	feel	like	doing.
Don't	say	anything.
I	am	feeling	miserable.
You	are	dying,	 I	have	not	become	enlightened	yet	And	once	you	are	gone,	 all
hope	is	gone.
You	were	my	hope!'
Buddha	said,	'I	am	dying?	--
What	nonsense	are	you	talking?
I	died	forty	years	ago,
I	died	the	very	day	I	became	enlightened.
Since	then	only	a	shadow
Has	been	lingering	with	you.'
This	is	the	meaning	of	Sugatas	well-gone.
And	 that	 is	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 for	 every	 sannyasin:	 He	 should	 become	 a	 well-
gone.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
24	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004245
ShortTitle:	84POEM22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Truth	is	available	only	to	the	lover
Not	to	the	logician.
Truth	opens	itself	only	when	you	drop	the	mind	And	listen	from	the	heart.
One	can	go	on	thinking	about	truth	and	one	can	Create	great	systems	of	thought
about	truth	But	to	think	about	truth	is	not	to	know	truth.
It	 is	 an	 experience,	 not	 a	 question	 of	 thinking	And	 experience	 needs	 a	 totally
different	approach.
And	for	centuries	we	have	been	trained
In	logic,	not	in	love	--
That's	why	we	go	on	missing	truth.
Everybody	wants	to	seek	truth	It	is	something	intrinsic	It	is	something	so	deep-
rooted	in	man	That	one	cannot	avoid	seeking	it,	it	is	a	must.
But	one	can	seek	in	a	wrong	way
Then	one	will	not	find.
Mind	is	the	wrong	approach
The	heart,	the	right	approach.
The	initiation	into	sannyas	means	A	shift	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
Meditation	is	alchemical
It	transforms	your	whole	being
It	destroys	all	limitations,	all	narrowness
And	makes	you	wide.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	helps	you	to	get	rid	of	all	boundaries:
The	boundaries	of	religion,	nation,	race.
Awareness	helps	you	not	only	to	get	rid	of
All	kinds	of	logical,	 ideological	confinements,	Imprisonments,	but	also	it	helps
you	to	transcend	The	limitation	of	the	body,	the	mind.
It	makes	you	aware	that	you	are
Pure	consciousness	and	nothing	else.
The	body	is	only	your	house,	you	are	not	it.
Mind	is	only	a	mechanism	to	be	used.
It	is	not	the	master,	it	is	just	a	servant.
As	you	become	aware
That	you	are	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind
You	start	expanding,	you	become	wider	and	wider	You	start	becoming	oceanic,
skylike.
That	transformation	brings	glory	to	you
And	also	it	brings	victory	to	you.
A	man	who	lives	without	meditation
Lives	in	defeat	and	failure.
A	man	without	meditation
Lives	an	undignified	life	because	he	lives
In	prison,	in	a	small	dark	hole	while
His	birthright	is	to	be	as	big	as	the	sky.
Even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit!
Put	your	total	energy	into	becoming
More	aware,	more	watchful,	more	alert;
Aware	of	,	your	body,	aware	of	your	thoughts
Aware	of	your	feelings.
In	the	beginning	it	is	difficult
Because	for	centuries,	for	millions	of	lives
We	have	lived	in	an	unconscious	way
Hence	it	has	become	almost	second	nature
For	us	to	live	the	life	of	a	prisoner.
We	have	forgotten	completely
That	it	is	a	prison	in	which	we	are	living.
We	have	started	believing	in	the	chains.
Not	only	do	we	rationalise	our	chains
We	decorate	our	chains,	we	colour	them
We	decorate	them	in	beautiful	ways.
We	not	only	deceive	others,	we	deceive	ourselves	That	 they	are	not	chains	but
ornaments.
We	can	make	our	chains	golden
We	 can	make	 our	 chains	 Studded	with	 diamonds	 and	 emeralds	We	 can	make
beautiful	chains	--	very	artistic
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	then	we	can	fall	in	love	with	the	chains.
That's	what	has	happened.
And	it	has	been	such	a	long	process
That	we	have	completely	forgotten
The	language	of	freedom	--	we	have	become	slaves.
Sannyas	means	a	tremendous	awakening
A	great	commitment	to	wake	up.
It	is	an	arduous	effort,	it	is	an	uphill	task
But	it	is	worth	it.
Because	it	is	only	through	awareness
That	you	will	know	what	life	is:
Its	beauty,	its	poetry,	its	significance
Its	glory,	its	victory,
All	these	can	be	said	in	a	single	word
And	that	word	is	god.
God	is	only	a	metaphor	--	it	represents
All	that	is	beautiful	and	valuable
All	that	is	significant.
It	represents	eighty-four	thousand	poems.
Go	beyond	following.
If	you	want	to	be	a	Christ
The	most	significant	thing	to	understand	is
That	following	is	not	going	to	help	you,
It	is	a	hindrance,	it	is	a	barrier.
All	followers	are	imitators
All	followers	are	false	and	pseudo.
Each	individual	has	to	be	himself	or	herself.
Jesus	is	an	authentic	individual
He	is	not	a	follower	of	anybody.
He	is	not	a	follower	of	Moses
He	is	not	a	follower	of	Abraham.
These	were	enlightened	people,	Abraham	and	Moses.
Jesus	loved	them,	but	he	was	not	a	follower.
He	appreciated	the	beauty	of	these	people
He	appreciated,	he	imbibed	their	spirit
But	he	was	not	a	follower.
He	tried	to	be	himself
That's	why	he	was	punished.
The	society	does	not	like	individuals.
It	wants	followers,	imitators,	pseudo	people.
It	is	afraid	of	real	human	beings
It	is	perfectly	at	ease	with	the	phony	ones.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	authentic	individual	is	bound	to	be	punished.
That's	why	Jesus	was	crucified:
He	became	Christ.	Christ	means	he	attained
Realisation	of	his	own	being.
You	cannot	be	a	follower	of	Christ.
You	can	be	a	Christ,	you	can	be	a	Buddha	--
They	are	synonymous.
'Buddha'	is	the	eastern	word	with	the	same	meaning
'Christ'	is	the	western	word
For	the	same	experience.
But	never	be	a	Buddhist
And	never	be	a	Mohammedan,	never	be	a	Christian	--
Just	be	yourself!
My	whole	effort	here	 is	 to	help	you	 to	be	 free	From	all	kinds	of	 religions	and
churches
And	Bibles	and	Gitas	and	Korans
So	that	you	can	grow
According	to	your	intrinsic	nature.
Certainly	the	day	you	are	awakened
You	are	a	Christ.
Why	settle	for	being	a	Christian?
Christ	was	not	a	Christian	--	remember.
And	if	you	meet	Christ	he	will	immediately	say,
'Don't	be	a	Christian.
It	is	not	a	beautiful	phenomenon	to	be	a	Christian.
Be	a	Christ!'
Christ	means	the	crowned	one,	the	annointed	one,	The	blessed	one.
So	you	have	to	transcend	all	kinds	of	following.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin
You	are	not	becoming	a	follower	of	mine,
No,	not	at	all.
I	am	not	interested	in	creating	followers.
I	certainly	want	to	help	you	to	be	yourself
But	I	don't	want	to	force	you
According	to	a	certain	pattern.
Each	sannyasin	has	to	be	unique	--	remember	it,	Because	god	never	creates	two
individuals	alike,	He	always	creates	unique	individuals.
Hence	a	really	religious	person
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Cannot	be	a	follower	--	drop	the	very	idea.
Humanity	has	suffered	very	much	because
Of	this	whole	stupid	idea	of	following	others.
Learn	to	be	free.	Learn	from	everyone
From	Moses,	from	Mohammed,	from	Jesus	from
Zarathustra,	from	Krishna,	from	Confucius.
Learn	from	the	whole	world.
Remain	available.
Be	a	disciple:	always	open	to	grow
Always	open	to	receive	any	challenge
That	life	gives	to	you.
Respond	totally,	accept	every	challenge.
That's	the	way	of	growth	--	not	following.
Every	man	is	born
With	many	kinds	of	bitternesses,	many	poisons.
Man	 needs	 to	 renew	himself,	 to	 transform	himself	To	 drop	much	 that	 is	 ugly,
much	that	is	bitter.
Life	is	a	great	art.
One	should	not	take	life	for	granted.
Birth	is	not	synonymous	with	life
Birth	is	only	an	opportunity
Then	you	have	to	work	upon	yourself.
There	are	a	thousand	and	one	things
To	be	dropped	greed	is	there,	anger	is	there,
Hatred	is	there,	lust	is	there
And	so	on,	so	forth.
And	unless	these	things	are	dropped
Unless	they	are	removed	from	our	being...
These	are	like	weeds
And	we	are	so	full	of	these	weeds
That	we	cannot	grow	roses	in	our	being.
We	have	to	take	out,	uproot	all	the	weeds
We	have	to	change	the	whole	soil
We	have	to	remove	all	the	stones
We	have	to	prepare	the	ground
Only	then	are	roses	possible.
And	when	roses	grow	in	your	being
Your	life	starts	having	joy
Your	life	starts	having	beauty
Your	life	starts	having	grace.
And	then	you	have	something	to	offer	to	god
Otherwise	what	is	there	to	offer?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
We	have	so	many	ugly	things
Which	cannot	be	offered	to	god.
We	have	to	hide	them
But	by	hiding	them,	nothing	is	changed.
The	more	we	hide	 them,	 the	more	we	repress	 them,	The	deeper	and	deeper	do
those	weeds	go.
Their	roots	become	more	and	more	strengthened
They	get	more	nourished.
Becoming	a	sannyasin	means	a	commitment
That	you	will	try	now	for	the	real	birth
And	you	will	deliberately	drop	many	kinds	of
Stupid	ideas	which	dominate	the	mind.
Mind	is	full	of	stupidities
And	much	has	to	be	done.
Man	is	almost	like	a	raw	diamond.
A	jeweller	can	understand	the	hidden	beauty
Of	the	raw	diamond
Ordinarily	you	will	not	be	able
To	see	any	beauty	in	it,
It	will	look	like	just	an	ordinary	stone
Maybe	a	little	cclourful,	maybe	a	little	shining	But	nothing	very	special.
Before	the	Kohinoor.
The	greatest	diamond	in	the	world,
Was	found	in	Golconda,	in	India,
The	person	who	found	it	in	his	field
Had	it	for	three	years
And	had	no	idea	what	it	was.
He	just	thought	it	was	a	beautiful	stone.
His	children	played	with	it	for	three	years.
He	might	have	lost	it,
The	children	might	have	thrown	it	away,
But	somehow	it	remained	in	the	house.
travelling	sannyasin	had	stayed	for	the	night
And	he	could	not	believe	his	eyes
Because	he	had	once	been	a	jeweller.
He	said,	'What	are	you	doing?
You	can	become	the	richest	man	in	the	world!
I	have	never	come	across	such	a	diamond.
This	is	the	biggest	diamond	ever.'
Then	the	work	started	on	it.
Now	it	is	part	of	the	crown	of	the	British	queen.
The	weight	is	one-third	of	the	original,
So	much	has	been	cut	and	polished.	but	it	has
Become	millions	of	times	more	beautiful	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	that's	how	man	is:
Every	man	is	born	like	a	raw	diamond.
I	can	see	--	I	have	been	a	jeweller!
So	when	I	look	at	you	I	can	see	a	diamond,
A	great	diamond	--	but	you	are	not	aware
Because	you	don't	have	any	idea	what	a
Great	opportunity	has	been	given	to	you
And	what	you	can	do	with	your	life.
You	can	create	such	dance,	such	music
Such	immense	beauty,	such	incredible	ecstasy
Which	is	unimaginable.
But	people	die	without	ever	experiencing
Anything	worthwhile	that
For	the	simple	reason	they	never
Prepare	themselves	for	it.
Life	has	to	be	an	art,	and	one	has	to	work	hard.
Only	then	does	the	transformation	happen.
Once	you	drop	the	ego	you	are	godly.
The	only	barrier	is	the	ego.
Intrinsically	everybody	is	a	god
Potentially	everyone	is	a	god
But	the	ego	is	covering	us.
It	has	to	be	removed.
It	is	a	thick	layer
Of	absolutely	unnecessary	dust
It	has	no	meaning	at	all.
But	we	are	trained	for	it
The	society	prepares	Us	for	it.
It	serves	the	vested	interests.
Society	needs	you	to	be	egoists
Because	unless	you	are	egoists
You	will	not	be	ambitious.
And	if	you	are	not	ambitious
Then	the	whole	economic	structure
The	political	structure	--
All	will	simply	collapse.
They	all	depend	on	ambition.
So	every	child	has	to	be	poisoned
Through	ambition.	And	ambition	means	egos
You	have	to	be	the	first.
You	have	to	be	the	president	of	the	country
The	prime	minister	of	the	country
You	have	to	be	the	richest	man
You	have	to	win	the	Nobel	prize
You	have	to	be	Mr.	Universe
And	you	have	to	be	a	beauty	queen
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
And	all	kinds	of	nonsense!
Only	one	thing	is	not	allowed	you
To	be	yourself,	simply	yourself.
Everything	else	you	can	try
But	never	to	be	just	simply,	ordinarily	yourself.
If	everybody	is	simply	himself
The	whole	economic	structure	and	politics
Will	go	down	the	drain.
Who	would	like	to	be	the	president?	For	what?
It	will	be	impossible	to	find	somebody
To	become	president
Unless	you	make	it	a	punishment,
Somebody	commits	some	crime	and	then
He	has	to	be	president	of	the	country.
Somebody	commits	a	crime
Or	is	found	trying	to	commit	suicides	then	he
Can	be	punished	by	being	prime	minister.
Things	 like	 that..,	 otherwise	 who	 would	 suffer	 All	 kinds	 of	 neuroses	 and
psychoses
And	tensions	and	anguish	and	anxiety?
Who	would	be	so	stupid	as	to	waste	his	life?
The	whole	of	religion	is	a	rebellion	Against	the	structure	of	ego	and	ambition.
Learn	to	drop	the	ego.
The	day	the	ego	disappears	all	is	achieved.
All	that's	worth	achieving
All	that	will	give	you	bliss	and	freedom
All	that	will	make	you	aware
That	you	are	immortal
That	there	is	no	end	and	no	beginning
That	you	are	eternal.
Then	suddenly	life	becomes	a	celebration.
Everybody	is	born	as	a	rock
And	everybody	has	to	become	a	flower.
Everybody	is	born	absolutely	closed
And	everybody	has	to	become	open
To	life,	to	love,	to	god
To	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to	the	sun.
To	be	a	rock	helps	you	to	remain	protected,
It	is	a	kind	of	security	--	one	is	very	safe.
To	be	a	flower	is	dangerous
Because	the	flower	is	so	fragile,	so	delicate.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	dangerous	to	be	a	flower
That's	why	very	few	people	try	to	be	flowers.
They	would	like	to	remain	rocks.
Rocks	live	long.
But	what	kind	of	life	does	a	rock	have?
It	has	no	life.
It	lives	long	because	it	is	already	dead.
It	cannot	die	because	it	is	not	alive.
Don't	be	hard,	don't	be	rocklike.
Become	sort,	vulnerable.
Yes,	it	is	dangerous	to	be	a	flower
But	the	only	way	to	live	is	to	live	dangerously.
That's	the	way	of	sannyas:	to	live	in	danger
To	live	in	insecurity
To	live	in	tremendous	trust
That	whatsoever	happens	is	good.
Even	if	the	flower	lives	-only	one	day
Or	for	only	one	moment,
It	is	far	more	valuable
Than	the	long	lire	of	a	rock.
A	single	moment	of	being	a	flower	and	fragrant	And	dancing	in	the	wind
And	in	the	sun	and	in	the	rain
Is	far	more	valuable
Than	to	be	a	rock	for	eternity
Because	that	single	moment	contains	eternity.
The	rock	is	a	grave,	so	come	out	of	the	rock.
Everybody	is	born	as	a	rock,	remember,
So	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	it.
Everybody	is	born	as	a	rock
But	everybody	is	born	with	the	capacity
And	the	potential	to	be	a	flower.
This	 is-'	 the	 miracle	 of	 life,	 the	 magic	 of	 life	 That	 here	 rocks	 can	 become
flowers.
It	all	depends	on	you,	on	your	courage.
Gather	courage	and	then	all	the	mysteries	of	life	Start	opening	up	for	you.
Remember	always
Bliss	cannot	become	a	goal	of	your	ambitions
It	is	not	an	achievement.
On	the	contrary,	it	showers	on	you	only
When	you	have	dropped	all	idea	of	achievement.
When	the	achieving	mind	is	no	more	there
When	you	have	dropped	all	kinds	of	ambitiousness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Suddenly,	as	a	gift	of	god
The	grace	of	god
Bliss	starts	showering	on	you.
You	cannot	achieve	it
But	you	can	open	up	to	receive	it.
There	is	no	way	to	reach	it	directly
One	has	to	be	very	indirect.
It	is	the	sutbtlest	experience	of	life.
You	cannot	be	aggressive
You	have	to	be	very	feminine.
You	have	to	learn	to	wait,	to	be	patient.
Infinite	patience	is	needed.
If	one	is	in	a	hurry	one	will	miss.
God	is	not	possible	if	you	are	in	a	hurry.
If	you	are	in	a	hurry
Then	it	is	nothing	but	the	ego.
The	ego	is	always	impatient.
It	is	afraid	of	death
That's	why	it	is	impatient.
It	is	constantly	scared
Because	death	can	happen	any	moment.
Death	is	always	there	waiting
It	can	jump	upon	you,	any	moment	--
One	 never	 knows...	 Hence	 time	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 short	 And	 much	 has	 to	 be
attained.
So	be	in	a	hurry,	be	speedy.
That	is	not	the	way	to	attain	bliss.
Relax,	rest	and	trust	that	whenever	you	are	ripe	And	when	the	season	comes	and
your	turn	come.
The	grace	will	shower	on	you.
It	can't	be	otherwise,	it	is	inevitable.
God	is	never	unfair
Existence	is	very	just,	absolutely	just.
But	one	has	to	learn	how	to	welcome.
Just	keep	your	doors	open	and	wait.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about:
Keeping	your	doors	open	with	a	welcoming	heart	Waiting,	trusting,	praying,	but
not	in	a	hurry.
Then	one	day	the	miracle	happens
And	it	always	happens	as	a	gift.
You	can	never	claim	it	as	your	achievement
Because	it	happens	only	when	you	are	not,
There	is	nobody	to	make	any	claim.
The	ego	is	no	more	there	to	claim.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	are	simply	empty,	utterly	void.
Absolutely	no	one	is	there	inside	you.
In	that	very	moment	the	mystery	becomes	available.
That	emptiness	becomes	the	host	for	the	guest.
Your	being	becomes	the	host
And	god	becomes	the	guest.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
25	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004255
ShortTitle:	84POEM23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Anand	means	bliss.	Ingo	means	creativity.
Creativity	is	one	of	the	fundamentals	of	my	sannyas.	A	sannyasin	should	not	be
uncreative	 --	 that	 has	been	 the	 traditional	way.	 In	 all	 the	 religions	 all	 over	 the
world	monks	and	nuns	have	been	very	uncreative.	The	very	idea	of	religion	was
to	renounce	life,	and	if	you	renounce	life,	creativity	is	renounced	automatically.
To	be	creative	means	to	be	in	love	with	life.	You	can	be	creative	only	if	you	love
life	enough	that	you	want	to	enhance	its	beauty,	you	want	to	bring	a	little	more
music	 to	 it,	a	 little	more	poetry	 to	 it,	a	 little	more	dance	 to	 it.	You	love	 life	so
much	that	you	would	like	to	leave	it	a	little	better	than	you	found	it.	But	if	you
are	 against	 life,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 making	 it	 better,	 beautiful,	 rich
prosperous.
You	can	ignore	it,	you	can	neglect	it.	It	is	just	as	if	you	are	staying	in	a	hotel	--
who	 cares	 about	 the	 hotel?	 You	 are	 not	 going	 to	 stay	 there	 forever,	 so	 why
bother?	That	was	the	old	idea	of	all	the	religions:	that	we	are	only	here	for	a	few
days	so	why	bother?	Just	pass	these	days	somehow	--
praying	for	a	better	world,	the	other	world	--	not	for	the	betterment	of	this	world,
not	any	prayer	 to	create	a	paradise	now	and	here.	The	goal	of	 the	old	sannyas
was	beyond	death.
My	sannyas	knows	only	the	present	--	the	now	and	the	here.	Of	course	the	other
shore	is	there,	but	it	will	take	its	own	course.	In	the	course	of	time	it	will	arrive.
And	we	have	to	learn	here	to	be	able	to	live	there.	If	we	are	uncreative	here,	how
can	you	be	creative	in	paradise?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Life	is	a	school	of	learning.
The	old	saints	and	the	old	mahatmas	remain	the	same	--	in	heaven	too!	Even	if
they	reach	heaven	--
and	I	suspect,	I	doubt	very	much	that	they	can!	If	by	some	accident	they	do,	they
will	 start	 renouncing	 paradise	 because	 that's	 all	 that	 they	 are	 accustomed	 to,
that's	all	that	they	have	practised	for	their	whole	life	--	and	not	one	life	but	for
many	lives	they	have	been	practising	and	practising	renunciation.
Even	 in	paradise	 they	will	 find	a	 thousand	and	one	 faults.	That	has	been	 their
way	here,	to	find	faults
--	 not	 to	 try	 to	 make	 life	 a	 little	 better,	 but	 just	 to	 find	 faults	 so	 it	 can	 be
condemned.	They	will	condemn	paradise.	I	don't	think	they	will	ever	be	allowed
in	paradise	--	they	are	not	good	company!
If	they	don't	go	to	hell,	they	must	be	somewhere	in	limbo,	hanging	between	the
two,	which	is	far	worse	--	neither	here	nor	there	because	nobody	wants	to	take
them	in.
One	has	to	love	life	enough	to	beautify	it,	 to	pour	one's	energy	into	it.	Yes,	we
are	here	for	a	few	days,	but	a	few	days	are	more	then	enough.	It	is	not	a	question
of	time,	you	have	to	do	something	in	these	days.
Try	 to	make	 it	a	 little	cleaner.	Try	 to	make	 it	a	 little	healthier,	 try	 to	make	 it	a
little	hygienic,	 try	 to	make	 it	a	 little	happier.	That	very	effort	will	change	you.
That	very	idea	is	what	service	is.
To	be	creative	is	to	really	be	in	the	service	of	God.	And	that	is	the	only	true	way
of	prayer	and	meditation.
If	God	is	a	creator,	then	we	can	participate	with	him	only	when	we	are	creators.
In	our	own	small	way,	painting	or	poetry	or	pottery,	whatsoever	small	thing	we
can	do.	But	while	we	are	creating	it,	we	are	participating	in	the	vast	process	of
creation.	In	those	moments	we	disappear	and	God	is.
Creativity	 certainly	 brings	 peace.	And	 if	 there	 is	 creativity	 and	 there	 is	 peace,
one	starts	feeling	existence	is	full	of	Godliness.	Then	there	 is	no	need	to	go	to
the	church,	or	the	temple,	or	the	mosque.
The	whole	of	life	is	your	temple.
The	whole	earth	is	sacred.
Wherever	you	are,	you	are	on	sacred	ground.
Anand	Tom
One	can	go	into	the	inquiry	of	truth	either	out	of	misery,	or	out	of	bliss.	If	one
goes	into	the	exploration	out	of	misery,	one	has	taken	a	wrong	step	from	the	very
beginning.	 The	miserable	 person	will	 never	 be	 able	 to	 know	 truth	 because	 in
fact,	he	is	not	interested	in	truth.	All	that	he	is	interested	in	is	how	to	get	rid	of
misery,	so	whatsoever	will	help	him	to	get	rid	of	misery	he	will	cling	to	as	truth.
And	lies	are	very	comfortable,	particularly	when	you	are	in	misery,	lies	are	very
consolatory.	 So	 the	 person	who	 is	miserable	 cannot	 reach	 truth...	He	will	 find
many	miseries	surrounding	him	hankering	 to	be	consoled,	 to	be	covered,	 to	be
repressed,	 to	 be	 forgotten.	Hence	 he	will	 quickly	 choose	 any	 lie	 that	 can	 help
him.	Maybe	 the	help	can	only	be	 temporary,	 it	can	be	only	 temporary.	But	 the
miserable	person,	the	drowning	person	cannot	be	bothered	about	whether	the	lie
is	 only	 temporary	 or	 is	 a	 truth	 that	 is	 going	 to	 be	 eternal.	 He	 is	 drowning:
Anything	 that	 can	 save	 him	 right	 now,	 even	 a	 straw,	 he	will	 cling	 to.	 Just	 the
very	hope	 that	 something	 is	 there	 to	 cling	 to,	 that	will	 keep	him	afloat	 a	 little
longer.
That's	 why	millions	 of	 people	 are	 living	 in	 lies.	 For	 them	 god	 is	 a	 lie.	 They
believe	 in	 god	 not	 because	 they	 know,	 but	 because	 they	 are	 in	 misery.	 They
believe	in	after-life	not	because	they	know	but	because	they	are	 in	misery,	and
they	are	afraid	of	death.	They	believe	in	the	immortality	of	the	soul,	not	because
they	know	--	they	know	nothing	of	the	soul,	they	have	never	tasted	anything	of
the	soul.	They	have	never	gone	inwards,	but	 they	believe	in	the	immortality	of
the	soul	because	their	life	is	such	a	failure;	if	there	is	only	one	life	then	when	are
they	going	to	make	it?	This	life	is	gone,	or	almost	gone,	and	they	know	that	this
much	time	is	not	enough	for	them	to	make	any	success	out	of	it.	They	need	more
time,	hence	they	create	theories	of	reincarnation,	of	coming	again	and	again	back
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
into	life,	of	the	soul	going	on,	being	reincarnated	again	and	again.
I	am	not	saying	that	these	things	are	not	true,	but	for	people	these	are	only	lies	--
they	are	believing	in	them.	Every	belief	is	a	lie.	Even	if	you	believe	in	the	truth	it
becomes	a	lie.	Belief	makes	everything	a	lie.	Truth	has	not	to	be	believed,	truth
has	to	be	experienced,	only	then	it	is	true.
Hence	the	first	step	has	to	be	taken	very	carefully.	It	should	not	be	taken	out	of
misery,	it	should	be	taken	out	of	bliss.	That's	why	my	effort	here	is	to	help	you
dance,	sing,	love,	laugh.	Only	then	can	spirituality	have	a	beginning	in	your	life.
It	has	to	be	rooted	in	laughter,	in	joy,	it	has	to	be	rooted	in	your	healthy	rejoicing
in	life.	Rejoice	in	everything	that	surrounds	you:	the	beauty	of	the	sunset	and	the
flowers	and	 the	stars;	 the	beauty	of	a	bird	on	 the	wing,	 lonely,	 far	away	in	 the
sky,	beyond	the	clouds.	Just	watching	it	is	such	a	joy.
Allow	every	possibility	 in	your	 life	 so	 that	you	can	 feel	 a	 little	more	dancing,
singing,	 humming,	 then	 only	 start	 the	 inquiry	 for	 truth.	 First	 clear	 the	 ground
misery.
But	 the	 old	 religions	 have	 depended	 much	 on	 misery	 because	 people	 are	 in
misery,	you	need	not	prepare	any	ground.	They	are	already	available,	 they	are
miserable.	 When	 you	 say,	 "We	 are	 here	 to	 save	 you,	 to	 save	 you	 from	 your
misery,	 and	 Jesus	 is	 the	 saviour	and	Buddha	 is	 the	 saviour,	 and	Krishna	 is	 the
saviour",	 they	are	 ready	 to	 fall	 victims	of	whatsoever	you	 say.	They	want	 any
remedy.	They	are	ill,	they	are	tired,	they	are	weary,	they	want	any	support.	They
are	not	much	concerned	whether	the	support	is	true	or	false:	they	are	ready	to	be
exploited.	But	give	them	any	support	and	they	go	on	moving	from	one	exploiter
to	 another	 exploiter:	 The	 Hindus	 become	 Christians,	 and	 Christians	 become
Hindus.	This	is	sheer	stupidity.	You	are	simply	changing	your	prisons.	The	game
is	the	same,	only	the	name	changes.	The	name-plates	change,	the	inside	content
is	exactly	the	same.	But	it	is	easier	for	the	priests	because	then	there	is	no	work
to	be	done	in	preparation.	People	are	already	miserable,	and	you	start	exploiting
their	misery.
My	work	is	hard	because	the	first	thing	is	that	I	would	like	you	to	be	uprooted
from	 your	 misery,	 then	 only	 can	 my	 work	 start.	 This	 is	 a	 prerequisite,	 an
absolutely	necessary	requisite.	It	cannot	be	avoided.	It	cannot	be	put	aside,	it	has
to	be	fulfilled.	First	you	have	to	become	a	little	happier,	you	have	to	learn	to	be	a
little	more	love-full,	joyful;	your	life	has	to	have	the	color	of	a	little	happiness.
Then	go	into	the	search	for	truth	and	you	will	be	moving	in	the	right	direction,
because	 then	 no	 lie	 can	 ever	 deceive	 you.	You	 are	 no	more	 interested	 in	 lies,
because	 you	 are	 no	more	 interested	 in	 consolation	 and	 comfort.	Now	 you	 are
ready	to	know	the	naked	truth	as	it	is.	And	to	be	a	seeker	of	truth	is	the	greatest
thing	in	life.
Satbodh
One	cannot	 find	 truth	by	mere	 thinking.	Thinking	 is	not	 the	process	 that	 leads
you	 to	 the	 truth.	 It	 leads	only	 to	 inference.	And	 inferences	 are	 just	 inferences,
they	 are	 hypothetical.	 They	may	 be	 true,	 they	may	 not	 be	 true.	 They	 are	 just
conjectures,	not	real	conclusions.	But	the	mind	lives	in	thinking	and	it	goes	on
believing	that	its	conjectures	are	conclusions.	They	are	not	conclusions.
Truth	is	achieved	only	by	awareness.	It	is	not	a	mind	process	at	all,	it	is	a	totally
different	 phenomenon.	 You	 are	 not	 to	 think	 the	 truth,	 you	 have	 to	 stop	 all
thinking	 to	 know	 truth;	 you	 have	 to	 forget	 all	 about	 truth,	 to	 know	 truth.	You
have	 to	 unburden	 yourself	 of	 all	 the	 theories,	 hypothesizes,	 philosophies,
ideologies,	that	you	have	learned.
The	process	of	achieving	the	 truth	 is	a	process	of	unlearning,	 it	 is	a	process	of
unconditioning.
Slowly,	slowly	one	has	to	get	out	of	the	mind,	to	slip	out	of	the	mind;	and	one
has	 to	 become	 just	 a	 pool	 of	 consciousness,	 a	 pure	 awareness.	 Just	 a	 sheer
watchfulness:	doing	nothing,	just	watching,	watching	all	that	is	happening	in	the
outside	world	and	in	the	inside	world.
When	 one	 can	 just	 watch	without	 any	 judgement	 interfering,	 without	 any	 old
ideas	coming	in,	then	truth	is	revealed.	And	the	miracle	is:	it	does	not	come	from
somewhere	else	to	you,	it	does	not	descend	from	above;	it	is	found	within	you	--
it	is	your	intrinsic	nature.	It	is	really	a	great	revelation	to	know	truth	because	you
are	it	and	you	have	never	lost	it	--	even	for	a	single	moment.	You	have	always
been	 it.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 lose	 it,	 because	 it	 is	 your	 nature	 and	 your	 nature
cannot	be	lost.
That's	why	we	call	it	nature.	That	which	cannot	be	lost	is	the	very	definition	of
nature.	That	which	can	be	lost	is	not	nature	but	nurture.
Truth	is	your	nature,	your	very	being,	your	very	existence,	your	very	center.	It	is
through	awareness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	 slowly	slowly	you	 reach	your	own	center.	When	you	have	arrived	at	your
own	 center,	 then	 you	 know	 what	 truth	 is.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 just	 knowledge	 of
something	objective,	 something	 there	 ,	 but	 something	 subjective,	 something	 in
here	 .	 And	 once	 known,	 it	 is	 known	 forever,	 once	 discovered,	 it	 cannot	 be
forgotten.	And	 to	 know	 truth	 is	 to	 be	 liberated,	 truth	 liberates,	 but	 remember:
only	your	own	 truth	 liberates.	Nobody	else's	 truth	can	 liberate	you,	Somebody
else's	truth	will	always	become	a	bondage	to	you.
So	the	real	master	helps	you	to	discover	your	own	truth.	He	does	not	hand	over
to	you	a	theory,	a	dogma,	a	creed.	He	does	not	hand	to	you	anything	at	all.	He
never	gives	you	anything;	on	the	contrary,	he	goes	on	taking	away	all	 that	you
have	been	carrying	with	you	for	many	many	lives.
Slowly	 slowly,	 he	 dismantles	 your	mind,	 he	 cuts	 off	 your	 head.	The	 day	 your
head	disappears	you	have	arrived	home.	The	master	does	not	give	you	the	truth,
but	he	does	take	away	all	the	lies	from	you.	And	once	all	the	lies	are	taken	away,
truth	is	found	within	yourself.	It	was	lying	there,	covered	underneath	the	rubbish
of	thousands	of	lies.
Sannyas	means,	putting	your	head	at	the	feet	of	the	master	and	praying	to	him:
"Please	cut	it	off!"	It	is	a	strange	prayer,	but	that's	exactly	what	it	is!
To	be	a	disciple	is	a	great	art.
One	can	even	say	the	greatest,	because
Its	requirement	is	the	surrender	of	the	ego
Which	is	the	hardest	thing	in	life.
One	can	do	everything	for	the	ego:
One	can	climb	mountains	and	go	to	the	moon.
Everything	is	easy	if	it	is	for	the	ego.
But	to	drop	the	ego	is	really	an	uphill	task
It	goes	against	our	natural	instinct.
But	it	is	the	beginning	of	real	spirituality.
The	first	requirement	for	a	disciple
Is	to	surrender,	to	say	to	the	master
'Now	I	am	no	more,	only	you	are!'
A	total	yes	to	the	master,	an	absolute	trust	--
That's	what	makes	a	disciple.
There	are	many	students	but	very	few	disciples.
And	only	disciples	can	be	transformed
Students	can	only	be	informed.
Becoming	a	sannyasin
Means	you	are	taking	a	great	step
Towards	the	dissolution	of	the	ego.
If	one	consciously	tries	to	drop	it
One	can	drop	it.
Certainly	it	is	difficult
But	it	is	not	impossible.
And	that	is	a	great	challenge	for	the	disciple.
It	has	a	great	excitement	and	ecstasy	too
Because	the	moment	it	is	fulfilled
You	start	blooming	like	a	lotus.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	moment	the	ego	is	surrendered
The	master	and	the	disciple
Are	no	more	separate	entities.
There	starts	transpiring
Something	between	one	heart	and	another	heart
Something	invisible.
Words	become	more	and	more	irrelevant,
Silence	become	more	and	more	significant.
It	is	the	ultimate	love	affair	--
A	love	affair	with	one's	own	death
Because	in	the	beginning
Dropping	the	ego	looks	like	death
But	only	after	that	death	is	resurrection.
When	one	is	born	anew
One	is	born	in	one's	total	reality
One	achieves	the	peak	of	one's	potential.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
26	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004265
ShortTitle:	84POEM24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
God	is	immediately	available
If	we	are	ready	to	disappear	as	an	ego.
The	ego	prevents	him	penetrating	us
The	ego	keeps	him	away	from	us.
Except	for	the	ego
There	is	no	distance	between	you	and	god.
The	ego	is	the	only	barrier,	the	only	wall.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	of	our	creation
And	we	can	dismantle	it	any	moment.
We	have	put	it	together,	brick	by	brick
And	brick	by	brick	we	have	to	dismantle	it.
We	have	to	be	very	conscious
Not	to	feed	the	ego	any	more
Not	to	strengthen	it	any	more
Because	it	is	our	weakness.
The	stronger	the	ego	is,	the	weaker	we	are
Because	god	is	less	and	less	available	to	us.
And	he	is	really	our	strength,	our	nourishment	Our	very	being.
We	are	rooted	in	him,	but	because	of	the	ego
We	are	not	totally	rooted	in	him	--
Only	very	partially;
Maybe	one	root	here	and	one	root	there
But	ninety-nine	per	cent	of	the	roots
Have	come	out	of	the	soil.
That	is	the	misery	of	man:
Man	has	become	an	uprooted	tree.
The	whole	effort	of	religions	is
To	help	you	to	get	rooted	again	in	god.
God	is	our	soil,	is	our	strength
Is	our	life,	is	our	very	being.
But	nothing	can	be	done	directly
Unless	you	remove	the	ego.
So	there	is	no	need	to	worry	about	god
No	need	even	to	think	about	god
No	need	to	believe	in	god.
Do	only	one	thing:
Don't	believe	in	the	ego
And	start	dismantling	it	from	this	very	moment.
As	you	start	dismantling	it
Small	windows	will	start	opening
And	you	will	be	able	to	see	the	sky	beyond.
Soon	you	will	be	surprised	by
How	much	you	were	missing
How	much	light	was	available
Just	knocking	on	the	wall,
How	much	life	was	available.
It	was	just	yours.
It	was	waiting	for	you
But	you	were	hiding	behind	a	wall
Of	your	own	creation.
Dropping	the	ego
Is	the	only	method	to	be	really	alive.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Sannyas	means	precisely	that.
God	is	known
Only	when	you	are	in	deep	peace
In	profound	peace.
Peace	attained	becomes	his	temple
And	he	immediately	enters	into	the	temple.
We	need	not	invite	him,
In	fact	how	can	we	invite	him?
We	don't	know	his	address
We	don't	know	his	name.
In	fact	he	has	no	name,	no	address,	no	form.
But	we	can	do	one	thing
We	can	make	our	being	a	beautiful	temple.
That	is	within	our	capacity.
We	can	make	it	spacious.
We	can	empty	ourselves	totally	of	our	ego
Our	lust,	our	greed,	our	anger.
We	can	empty	ourselves	of	all	that	continuously	Goes	on	accumulating	inside	us.
It	is	all	junk!
Once	we	are	utterly	empty
In	that	purity	of	emptiness,	the	temple	is	ready.
And	immediately,	instantly,
Not	even	a	single	moment	is	lost,
God	enters	into	the	temple.
Whenever	the	temple	is	ready	God	immediately	appears.
Suddenly	you	are	full	of	something	unknown
Something	mysterious,	something	blissful
Something	liberating,	something	transforming
Something	eternal.
That	experience	is	multi-dimensional
Hence	it	is	indescribable.
It	is	so	vast,	no	word	can	adequately	express	it	But	it	can	be	experienced.
My	effort	here	is	not	to	teach	you
Certain	principles,	morality,	ideals,
But	to	teach	you	only	one	thing:
How	to	prepare	the	right	ground
In	which	god	appears	of	his	own	accord.
I	don't	give	you	any	philosophy
But	only	a	simple	technique	to	cleanse	yourself	To	purify	yourself.
Once	you	are	pure	everything	else	follows.
All	the	morality
That	you	have	always	tried	and	failed
Starts	blooming	on	its	own.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
All	those	beautiful	qualities	that	you
Have	always	hankered	for	and	found	impossible
Simply	become	spontaneous.
And	when	those	qualities	are	spontaneous
They	have	a	beauty	of	their	own.
They	are	not	cultivated	and	artificial
They	are	not	planted	from	the	outside.
They	are	welling	up	from	your	own	inner	being.
They	are	like	beautiful	flowers	growing	in	you.
Man	can	become	a	tremendous	flowering.
And	it	is	always	spring
We	just	have	to	be	in	tune
We	just	have	to	be	attuned	with	the	spring
And	immediately	miracles	become	possible.
And	remember
You	are	entitled	to	all	these	miracles
Everyone	is	entitled	to	all	these	miracles!
Very	few	people	are	capable	of	seeing.
The	ordinary	eyes	are	not	real	eyes
Because	the	ordinary	eyes	can	only	see
The	superficial,	the	mundane,	the	ordinary.
We	need	a	different	kind	of	vision.
We	need	different	eyes	which	can	see	deeper
Which	can	see	not	only	the	superficial
But	the	essential
Which	are	capable	of	seeing	the	invisible
The	mysterious,	the	miraculous.
Meditation	is	the	art
Of	creating	those	new	eyes,	those	inner	eyes.
We	cannot	open	those	inner	eyes	right	now
Because	the	inner	world	is	so	full	of
Thoughts,	desires,	memories,	imagination,	dreams	That	there	is	no	space.
Our	inner	eyes	are	too	burdened	with	dust.
All	that	dust	has	to	be	removed.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about:
Removing	the	dust	of	thoughts
From	the	inner	consciousness,
Cleansing	the	inner	consciousness
As	one	cleanses	a	mirror.
Just	a	moment	before
When	the	layer	of	dust	was	there
The	mirror	was	not	a	mirror
Because	it	was	not	mirroring
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	was	not	reflecting	anything.
It	was	non-existential.
Remove	the	dust,	clean	the	mirror	and	suddenly	It	starts	reflecting	that	which	is.
The	process	is	exactly	the	same.
We	have	to	remove	thoughts
We	have	to	remove	the	whole	mind
The	process	of	all	that	mind	implies:
The	past,	the	future,	the	worries
The	projections,	the	ideologies
The	hopes,	the	desires.
They	are	all	different	kinds	of	thoughts
Different	kinds	of	dust
Only	colours	differ,	otherwise	they	are	the	same.
Once	your	mirror	is	clean	you	become	a	seer
And	to	be	a	seer
Is	the	greatest	experience	in	life
Because	then	you	see
That	only	god	exists
And	nothing	else
And	that	realisation	is	liberation.
There	is	no	greater	bliss	than	that
That	is	the	ultimate	ecstasy.
And	unless	it	is	achieved	one	has	to	wander
In	search,	one	has	to	remain	thirsty
And	the	thirst	goes	on	becoming	more	and	more
And	the	desert	seems	to	be	unending
And	there	seems	to	be	no	oasis	at	all.
Once	you	have	known	that	ecstasy
You	have	come	back	home.
Then	there	is	rest	and	relaxation.
Then	each	moment	is	pure	celebration.
Everyone	is	unique;	uniqueness	is	universal.
You	are	nat	unique	compared	to	somebody	else
You	are	as	unique	as	the	other	is.
When	I	use	the	word	'unique'
I	don't	use	it	in	a	comparative	sense
I	am	simply	stating	a	facts
No	comparison	i8	involved.
Everyone	is	so	unique,	so	individual
That	no	two	persons	are	ever	alike.
Not	only	right	now
Is	there	nobody	who	is	like	you,
There	has	never	been	and	there	will	never	be.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	impossible	for	the	simple	reason	that
God	is	not	an	assembly	line;	god	is	a	creator
And	the	creator	never	repeats.
If	you	go	into	the	garden	you	will	not	find
Two	leaves	similar	or	two	flowers	similar.
They	may	appear	similar
If	you	don't	look	at	them	minutely
But	if	you	go	into	details
Each	leaf	has	its	own	individuality
Its	own	authentic	signature.
Respect	yourself
Because	even	god	respects	you.
God	has	tremendous	respect	for	each	individual	But	the	priests	have	taught	you
just	the	opposite.
They	have	taught	you	to	be	condemnors:
Condemn	yourself,	you	are	sinners.
Whatsoever	you	do	is	wrong.
And	whatsoever	you	are	is	wrong.
Nothing	is	wrong	with	you	except	that
You	have	believed	in	all	kinds	of	fools.
Except	that	you	have	not	listened
To	your	own	heart
And	you	have	listened	to	all	kinds	of	people
Who	know	nothing.
Drop	all	that	borrowed	knowledge
Forget	all	about	these	stupid	stories
Of	original	sin
And	forget	all	about	your	being	a	sinner.
Nobody	is	a	sinner
Everybody	is	part	of	god,	an	intrinsic	part.
Everybody	is	divine.
Yes,	a	few	divine	people	are	fast	asleep	--
That	is	their	choice.
And	a	few	people	are	awake	--	that	is	their	choice.
Nothing	is	wrong	even	in	being	asleep
You	just	have	to	suffer	a	few	nightmares.
But	there	is	nothing	much	to	worry	about
Because	those	nightmares	are	just	imaginary.
Sooner	or	later	you	will	wake	up.
And	if	you	are	enjoying	it,	enjoy!
It	is	nobody	else's	business	to	interfere.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	I	don't	interfere	in	your	sleep.
I	go	on	doing	my	thing	and
I	allow	you	to	sleep.
I	cannot	stop	myself	doing	my	thing	s
I	go	on	speaking	and	you	go	on	sleeping!
I	hope	some	day	you	will	listen
Something	may	go	into	your	sleep
Something	may	hit	you,	some	day,	in	some	moment	And	you	may	wake	up!
I	would	love	you	to	wake	up
But	if	you	decide	not	to	wake	up,	you	are
Not	to	be	condemned	and	thrown	into	hell.
You	are	suffering	enough	just	by	being	asleep
There	is	no	need	to	make	you	suffer	more	in	hell.
So	this	i8	the	only	difference
Between	Buddhas	and	the	ordinary	people
Otherwise	they	are	all	alike
Alike	in	the	sense	they	all	have
The	same	potential	to	become	awakened
Not	alike	in	the	sense	of	being	similar	--
They	are	unique.
Remember	your	uniqueness.
Love	yourself,	respect	yourself
Respect	your	own	voice;
Listen	to	it	and	follow	it.
It	is	better	to	go	into	hell
Following	your	own	voice
Than	to	go	to	heaven	following	somebody	else'5
Because	even	that	heaven
Won't	prove	much	of	a	heaven;
You	will	be	just	a	blind	follower.
My	sannyasins	are	not	my	followers.
They	are	in	love	with	me
Just	as	I	am	in	love	with	them.
They	are	my	friends,
And	I	respect	them	as	much	as	I	can.
A	real	master	always	respects	his	disciples.
The	pseudo	master	has	no	respect
For	the	disciples.
In	fact	he	lives	by	condemning	them.
The	more	he	condemns	them
The	more	he	proves	that	you	are	lower
The	more	high	he	feels;
Naturally	the	difference	becomes	greater.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	pseudo	master	is	simply	suffering	from
An	inferiority	complex
Hence	he	tries	to	prove	himself	superior.
But	a	Jesus	or	a	Buddha	or	a	Lao	Tzu
Had	immense	respect	for	others.
You	 respect	yourself	and	you	 respect	others	 too	Love	yourself	and	 love	others
too
And	just	this	simple	change	in	your	attitude
Can	bring	a	radical	revolution.
It	can	transform	your	whole	being.
Veet	Marcella
Warlike	qualities	are	not	good	qualities,
particularly	in	a	woman.
They	 are	 not	 good	 even	 in	 a	 man,	 but	 in	 a	 woman	 warlike	 qualities	 are
absolutely	wrong.
They	don't	fit	with	her	being.
Her	being	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	love.
She	can	only	bloom	as	love.
But	for	centuries,
we	have	appreciated	warlike	qualities;
hence	all	these	names	exist
in	almost	all	languages.
They	have	to	disappear.
We	can	find	beautiful	names.
So	remember	it:
All	that	creates	conflict	in	life
has	to	be	transcended.
That	is	the	way	of	the	sannyasin:
the	way	of	love,	the	way	of	peace.
Only	love	and	peace	can	lead	you	to	god.
The	mind	is	mundane,	the	heart	is	sacred.
The	mind	thinks,	but	never	knows
The	heart	knows,	but	never	thinks.
The	mind	is	blind,	that's	why
It	goes	on	thinking	and	groping	in	the	dark.
But	it	cannot	come
To	any	conclusive	conclusions.
All	its	conclusions	are	only	arbitrary:
A	little	more	thinking	and	they	will	change.
It	is	all	guesswork
And	one	cannot	depend	on	guesswork
One	cannot	risk	one's	life	for	guesswork.
One	has	to	move	from	the	head	to	the	heart
Only	then	does	real	life	begin,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Because	the	heart	simply	sees	what	is	the	case.
There	is	no	question	of	brooding	over	it.
The	heart
Knows	no	process	of	arriving	at	a	conclusion
Because	it	has	eyes	to	see.
When	a	blind	man	wants	to	go	out	of	the	house
He	immediately	starts	thinking,
'Where	is	the	door?
Whom	to	ask?
On	whom	to	depend?
Who	is	reliable?
Somebody	may	play	a	trick	upon	me,
May	make	me	a	laughing	stock.
Someone	may	mislead	me.'
A	thousand	and	one	problems	arise	in	his	mind.
But	the	man	who	has	eyes	doesn't	think	about	it.
He	simply	gets	up	and	goes	out	the	door
Because	he	sees	the	door.
He	does	not	think	even	for	a	single	moment
About	the	door.
That's	exactly	the	situation	of	the	heart.
Sannyas
Is	a	radical	shift	from	the	head	to	the	heart.
And	when	you	start	living	from	the	heart,
Your	life	is	holy.
It	has	tremendous	beauty,	grace,	an	infinite	joy!
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
27	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004275
ShortTitle:	84POEM25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	only	experience	on	the	earth
Which	can	be	called	divine	or	godly
Is	that	of	meditation;	it	is	the	only	experience	That	is	not	of	the	world,	it	is	of	the
beyond
Hence	it	is	the	only	bridge
Between	the	world	and	the	beyond.
It	is	something	that	joins	this	shore
With	the	farther	shore.
Everything	else	is	worldly.
Unless	one	enters	deeply	into	meditation
One	knows	nothing	of	god.
One	may	believe	but	belief	is	a	lie.
One	may	believe	very	staunchly
But	that	does	not	make	much	difference:
Deep	down	doubt	will	always	persist.
You	can	repress	it
In	such	deep	corners	of	your	unconscious
That	you	yourself	will	become	unaware	of	it.
But	still	it	is	there	and	at	any	moment
In	any	situation,	it	can	surface	again.
Hence	god	is	not	a	question	of	belief.
Those	who	believe
Are	simply	deceiving	themselves.
God	has	to	be	experienced.
Prayer	requires	that	you	first	believe	in	god,	Meditation	has	no	such	requirement.
Meditation	is	a	scientific	procedure.
It	simply	says:	Become	more	silent
More	conscious,	more	aware.
No	implication	is	there	that	you	have	to
Believe	in	god,	in	heaven,	in	an	afterlife.
No	belief	is	required,	no	prerequisite.
Just	become	more	quiet	and	calm
More	centred	in	yourself
And	then	slowly	slowly
Glimpses	start	arriving,	windows	start	opening.
And	the	first	glimpse	of	god	is	enough	--
You	are	overwhelmed,	you	are	transformed
A	new	man	is	born.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Meditation	is	both	a	flowering	--
A	flowering	of	your	consciousness
A	flowering	of	your	inner	being	--
And	it	is	also	humbleness	because
In	meditation	the	ego	dies	and	disappears.
What	is	left	is	humbleness.
Meditation	is	a	miracle,
In	fact	the	only	miracle
Because	it	transforms	you	totally	from
An	unconscious	being	into	a	conscious	being
From	machine	to	man	and	from	man	to	superman.
And	because	the	first	thing	that	happens
In	meditation	is	the	death	of	the	ego
Many	things	disappear	from	your	life
Of	their	own	accord:	anger,	greed,	jealousy
Possessiveness	--	they	are	all	tentacles
Of	the	octopus	called	the	ego.
Once	the	ego	is	dead
All	these	different	expressions	of	it	disappear.
Life	becomes	tremendously	humble
And	tremendously	beautiful.
In	humbleness	the	ultimate	descends	in	you
In	humbleness	god	knocks	on	your	door
In	humbleness	you	become	the	host
And	god	becomes	the	guest.
All	that	you	have	to	do
Is	go	deeper	into	meditation,	into	awareness.
Shift	your	energy	from	mind	to	no-mind
From	sound	to	silence
And	the	miracle	will	start	happening.
Man	remains	just	a	rosebush	without	any	roses
If	there	is	no	love.	And	a	rosebush	without	roses	Is	empty,	is	unfulfilled.
Its	essential.	most	important,	significant
Contribution	to	existence	is	missing.
It	is	impotent,	it	is	frigid.
When	 the	 rosebush	 is	 full	 of	 roses	 there	 is	 joy	 There	 is	 dance,	 there	 is
celebration.
And	the	same	happens	to	man.
Man	is	certainly	a	rosebush
Capable	of	millions	of	roses:
Roses	of	consciousness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	they	all	bloom	when	you	are	full	of	love.
It	is	the	climate	of	love
That	functions	like	spring	--	suddenly	one	blooms.
Those	who	live	without	love
Have	not	known	what	Spring	is
They	have	not	known	the	peak	of	their	life.
They	have	dragged,	they	have	vegetated
But	they	have	not	truly	lived.
Remember,	it	is	through	love
That	you	will	bloom,	that	you	will	grow
That	you	will	attain	to	your	glory
And	to	your	splendour.
Never	forget	love,	never	neglect	love
Never	miss	an	opportunity	to	be	loving
Use	every	possible	opportunity	to	be	loving
So	that	slowly	slowly,	you	become	love.
When	you	are	love,	you	are	really	a	rose!
Love	brings	grace.
Love	makes	you	capable
Of	receiving	grace	from	god.
If	you	give	love	to	the	world
God	gives	you	grace.
Love	is	the	price	for	attaining	grace.
Without	giving	love,	you	will	not	attain	to	grace.
Empty	yourself	totally	in	love
And	you	will	be	filled	again	and	again
With	more	and	more	grace.
Suddenly	one	day	you	discover
The	inexhaustible	source.
And	the	more	grace	you	have
The	more	love	you	can	give	to	the	world.
And	the	more	you	give
The	more	god	goes	on	pouring	in	you.
Suddenly	you	become	a	vehicles
God	starts	loving	the	world	through	you.
That's	what	grace	is.
Your	hands	become	god's	hands
Your	eyes	become	god's	eyes
Your	heart	becomes	god's	heart.
You	disappear,	you	are	no	more	--	only	god	is!
That	is	grace,	that	is	beauty,	that	is	freedom	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	is	truth.	All	that	we	can	conceive
And	all	that	which	is	inconceivable
Is	contained	in	it.
It	is	the	most	mysterious	phenomenon.
But	learn	to	love!
Nobleness	is	a	by-product	of	blissfulness
A	natural	consequence.
One	need	not	practise	nobleness.
A	practised	nobleness	is	false,	superficial
It	is	only	a	mannerism,	etiquette
Nothing	much	more	than	that.
It	is	not	even	skin-deep
It	is	just	something	painted	on	your	face.
A	little	hit,	a	little	insult
And	you	will	forget	all	about	your	nobleness.
There	is	another	kind	of	nobleness
That	happens	when	you	are	blissful.
It	comes	as	a	shadow	of	bliss.
The	miserable	person	cannot	be	noble,
He	radiates	misery,	he	radiates	complaint
He	radiates	negativity,	he	radiates	darkness.
All	around	him	there	is	a	black	hole.
You	will	not	find	a	white	aura	around	him.
It	is	impossible
Because	 if	 the	heart	 is	not	dancing,	 from	where	Can	he	get	 that	white	 aura	of
being	noble?
So	my	effort	here	is
Not	to	teach	you	anything	cultivated
But	to	transform	you	from	your	very	roots.
Learn	to	dance,	sing,	enjoy,	love
And	slowly	slowly,	you	will	be	surprised:
You	are	becoming	noble
You	are	becoming	less	miserly,	less	greedy
You	are	becoming	more	kind-hearted
You	are	becoming	more	compassionate
You	have	started	enjoying	sharing
Giving,	just	for	giving's	sake.
And	that's	what	a	..noble	spirit	is.
It	never	harms	anybody,	it	helps
It	never	hurts	anybody,	it	always	soothes.
It	is	a	blessing	to	be	noble,	a	blessing	to	all	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
A	blessing	to	existence	itself.
Sunrise	is	exactly	the	colour	of	sannyas
That's	precisely	the	meaning	of	sannyas.
It	is	a	declaration
That	the	night	is	over:
Prepare	for	the	day
The	sunrise	has	knocked	on	the	door.
Come	out	of	your	sleep.
Don't	go	on	hiding	yourself	under	the	blanket
Any	more,	howsoever	cosy	it	feels
And	howsoever	much	your	mind	says,
'Just	turn	over	a	little	more
Just	a	little	more,	a	few	minutes.'
Don't	listen	to	the	mind	because
Those	few	minutes	will	never	end
The	mind	always	goes	on	postponing.
It	wants	you	to	remain	asleep	because
Mind	can	exist	only	when	you	are	asleep.
When	you	are	awake,	mind	disappears
Just	like	dreams	disappear	when	you	are	awake.
Mind	is	a	dream	phenomenon
Made	of	the	same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.
So	no	more	postponement	--	wake	up!
A	loyal	heart	is	what	is	required.
Sannyas	is	a	commitment,
Not	a	commitment	to	me
But	a	commitment	to	your	own	growth.
A	commitment,	a	decision	that	you	will	make
Every	possible	effort	to	change	yourself.
And	of	course,	a	deeply	loyal	heart
Will	be	needed.
The	cunning	mind	cannot	do	it	because
The	 cunning	 mind	 goes	 on	 changing	 every	 moment	 It	 is	 not	 reliable;	 one
moment	it	is	one	thing	Another	moment	it	is	another	thing.
It	goes	on	changing	its	colours.
You	cannot	make	a	solid	foundation
On	the	basis	of	your	mind
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Because	mind	consists	of	sand
And	to	make	a	sandcastle	is	dangerous,
It	is	going	to	collapse	sooner	or	later.
And	the	danger	is
You	may	be	destroyed	when	it	collapses
Because	you	will	be	living	in	it.
Never	live	in	a	house	made	by	the	mind.
But	the	loyal	heart
Can	become	the	right	foundation.
It	is	like	a	rock,	unchanging.
So	let	your	sannyas	be	a	decision
Of	the	heart,	not	of	the	mind.
I	am	not	interested
In	people	who	become	convinced	intellectually
That	what	I	am	saying	is	right.
They	are	not	the	right	people.
Today	they	are	convinced
Tomorrow	they	may	be	unconvinced	again.
The	mind	is	a	flux.
I	only	trust	people
Who	come	to	me	through	the	heart.
Who	have	a	conviction	of	the	heart
Who	are	in	a	deep	love	affair.
It	has	nothing	to	do	with	intellectuality.
It	is	closer	to	love	than	to	logic
far	closer	to	love.
Once	the	heart	is	ready
Then	nothing	can	prevent	it.
Then	it	goes	on	risking	everything.
It	can	pass	through	all	kinds	of	fire
And	it	will	come	out	of	all	fires	purified,
More	glorious,	more	victorious.
Each	fire	makes	it	more	and	more	pure
And	each	risk	gives	it
A	new	dimension,	a	new	quality.
Sannyas	is	fire
But	that	is	the	only	way	to	purify	the	gold.
Sannyas	is	a	search	for	the	truth.
Not	a	direct	search	for	god
Because	we	don't	know	whether	god	is	or	is	not.
To	start	searching	for	god	means
You	have	already	believed	that	there	is	a	god.
The	search	is	unscientific
From	the	very	beginning,
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	have	taken	something	a	priori	--
That	is	not	the	right	way	to	enquire.
The	right	way	to	enquire	is:
One	should	search	for	truth
Whatsoever	the	truth	is.
Maybe	there	is	no	god	--	 that	may	be	the	truth	Or	maybe	there	is	a	god	--	 that
may	be	the	truth.
Truth	is	vast.
It	can	either	be	the	existence	of	god
Or	it	can	be	the	non-existence	of	god.
Truth	is	bigger	than	god	because
It	can	contain	even	the	non-existence	of	god,
So	it	is	an	open	thing.
Searching	for	truth	needs	no	a	priori	belief.
Seek	and	search	for	the	truth.
Of	course	when	you	find	truth
You	will	find	god	--	but	that	is	another	matter!
That	we	can	leave	for	the	time	being
We	can	put	it	aside,	that	happens	on	its	own.
When	you	have	found	truth
You	have	found	god	too.
But	those	who	start	searching	for	god
From	the	very	very	beginning,
Are	never	going	to	find	truth
And	they	are	never	going	to	find	god	either.
Their	very	first	step	has	gone	wrong.
So	I	am	here	to	help	you	to	enquire
But	not	to	believe
Because	I	trust	so	much	in	truth	that
There	is	no	need	to	believe	--	you	can	enquire	You	can	go	deep	in	exploration
And	you	will	find	it.
The	people	who	preach	belief
Are	the	people	who	are	not	really	trusting.
They	are	afraid	that	if	people	don't	believe
Then	they	will	become	godless
They	will	become	irreligious
They	will	become	immoral.
These	are	cowards	--	they	don't	know	that
God	does	not	exist,	because	you	believe	in	him	God	exists	whether	you	believe
in	him	or	not.
So	why	believe?	Enquire.
If	he	is	there,	you	will	discover	him.
I	know	he	is	there,	but	that	is	my	knowing
And	my	knowing	cannot	be	your	knowing.
And	I	have	stumbled	upon	this	knowing;
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Through	enquiry,	not	through	belief.
So	one	has	to	be	courageous	enough
So	drop	all	beliefs.
Go	utterly	empty	and	naked,	open,	available
With	no	prejudice	for	or	against
And	you	are	bound	to	find	the	truth
Whatsoever	it	is,	x	y	z,
Right	now	it	is	x	y	z;	ultimately	it	is	god.
When	you	have	arrived,	then	it	is	god
Not	before	that.
Anugito
A	sannyasin	is	supposed	to	be	a	song.	The	only	requirement	from	my	side	is	that
you	become	a	song,	rejoice	in	life,	dance	with	the	wind	and	the	sun	and	the	rain.
It	is	sacred	ground	you	are	walking	on	--	it	is	all	divine,	all	around.	Not	to	be	a
song	is	to	be	ungrateful.	Not	to	dance	is	to	be	ungrateful.
All	that	we	can	do	in	thankfulness	to	God	is	to	sing	small	songs,	to	dance	small
dances.
We	can	celebrate	in	our	own	small	way.
So	let	life	become	a	celebration,	a	rejoicing,	an	"Hallelujah!"
[	 Osho	 had	 mentioned	 astrology	 in	 the	 morning	 discourse	 in	 response	 to	 a
sannyasin	who	said	that	an	astrologer	told	him	he	wouldn't	become	enlightened
this	lifetime.
Enlightenment	 is	 unpredictable,	 Osho	 said,	 and	 neither	 the	 stars	 nor	 the
astrologer	are	enlightened	anyway.	And,	he	said,	for	the	fools	who	are	interested
we	 have	 our	 own	 astrologer	 in	 sannyasin,	Kabir,	 so	why	 bother	 going	 further
afield?]
And	now	you	can	help	them	more!	First	talk	about	astrology	and	then	finally	tell
them	to	go	beyond	it.	So	help	them	to	go	beyond.
It	is	good	--	for	whatsoever	reason	they	come.	Don't	be	bothered	by	their	reason,
use	that	opportunity	to	help	them	to	go	beyond.	I	will	be	helping	you!
Today	you	are	becoming	god's	own.
Up	to	now	it	has	been	only	a	name
Now	it	can	be	a	reality.
All	that	is	required	on	your	part
Is	to	drop	the	ego	--	that's	the	only	hindrance	That	keeps	people	away	from	god.
And	the	farther	away	you	are
The	more	miserable	you	are.
My	measuring	a	person's	misery,	the	distance
Between	him	and	god	can	be	inferred.
As	you	come	closer,	misery	starts	disappearing.
When	you	really	become	god's	own
There	is	no	misery	--	all	is	bliss	and	joy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Make	it	a	reality.
It	is	not	difficult,
Just	a	little	courage	is	needed
To	let	the	ego	drop.
And	it	is	absolutely	worthless
Hence	any	intelligent	person	can	do	it.
I	don't	teach	any	philosophy	here
I	only	help	you	to	be	a	little	more	intelligent	Because	once	you	are	a	little	more
sharp
You	can	see	it	for	yourself	--
I	need	not	say	it	to	you.
You	can	see	the	utter	futility	of	the	ego
And	in	that	very	seeing	it	drops.
And	that	is	the	greatest	moment	in	one's	life
Because	from	there	real	life	begins.
Joachim
Everyone	is	appointed	by	God.	Everyone	is	given	a	certain	message	which	has	to
be	 fulfilled,	 although	 everybody	 has	 forgotten	 the	 message.	 Not	 only	 has	 the
message	 been	 forgotten	 we	 have	 even	 forgotten	 the	 message-giver.	 We	 have
forgotten	that	we	are	messengers,	that	we	bring	a	seed	of	great	potential	into	the
world;	 that	 the	world	 needs	 our	 contribution,	 that	 we	 have	 to	 bloom,	 that	 we
have	 to	 release	 our	 fragrance.	 And	 unless	 we	 release	 our	 fragrance	 our	 life
mission	is	unfulfilled.
Once	 this	 is	 understood	 life	 starts	 taking	 on	meaning.	 Then	 it	 is	 no	more	 the
same	 meaningless	 jumble	 of	 accidents.	 It	 starts	 becoming	 a	 rhythm,	 it	 starts
having	a	sense	of	direction.
Sannyas	 is	 to	 give	 you	 a	 sense	 of	 direction,	 a	 togetherness,	 a	 rootedness,	 an
awareness	of	what	you	are	and	what	you	can	be.	It	 is	 immensely	significant	 to
remember	that	sannyas	is	not	a	formality.	It	is	not	just	a	formal	thing	like	being	a
Christian	 -	because	you	were	born	 in	 a	Christian	home;	or	 a	 formal	 thing	 like
being	a	Hindu.
Sannyas	 is	 exactly	 like	when	 Jesus	was	on	 the	earth,	 and	a	 few	people	 started
walking	with	him	started	moving	into	danger	with	him;	or	when	Buddha	was	on
the	 earth	 and	 a	 few	 people	 gathered	 together	 around	 him	 and	 risked	 all!	 The
same	drama	is	being	played	here	again.
You	are	fortunate	to	become	part	of	it.	Feel	blessed.	And	then	slowly	slowly	you
will	start	remembering	what	the	meaning	is	of	being	appointed	by	God,	what	the
meaning	 is	 of	 every	 man	 bringing	 a	 message	 into	 the	 world.	 No	 man	 comes
empty-handed	but	very	few	people	ever	deliver	the	message.	Those	who	do	are
the	buddhas,	the	awakened	ones.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	thousands	of	Buddhas.	Less	than	that	won't	do!
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
28	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004285
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
ShortTitle:	84POEM26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Bliss	is	the	only	proof	that	god	is.
A	miserable	person	can	believe	in	god
But	his	belief	remains	only	a	belief,
Underneath	it	there	is	always	doubt.
It	is	impossible	for	the	miserable
To	believe	in	god.
If	god	is,	then	how	can	there	be	misery?
That's	the	dilemma.
God	seems	to	be	just	an	abstract	idea
And	misery	seems	so	real.
One	can	force	the	belief	upon	oneself.
And	miserable	people	want	something
As	a	support,	as	a	consolation,	as	a	refuge
Hence	they	start	believing	in	god
3ut	basically	they	cannot	trust	that	god	is.
They	don't	have	any	proof.
The	proof	comes	only	when	you	are	blissful.
The	moment	bliss	explodes	in	your	being
You	know	god	is.
And	there	is	no	need	to	believe:
One	 simply	 knows	 god	 is,	 it	 is	 an	 intuitive	 feel	 Your	 whole	 being	 is
overwhelmed	with	the	proof,	Now	it	is	your	experience.
Even	if	the	whole	world	says	there	is	no	god
It	is	not	going	to	make	any	difference	to	you;	You	know	it.
They	can	deny
They	can	go	on	finding	all	kinds	of	arguments
But	how	can	they	prove	that	god	is	not
When	you	have	tasted	something	of	bliss?
Just	as	misery	disproves	god,	bliss	proves	god	And	because	millions	of	people
live	in	misery
Millions	of	people	only	think	they	are	religious.
They	are	not,	they	cannot	be.
Only	very	rarely	will	you	come	across
A	person	who	knows	that	god	is.
So	my	effort	here
Is	not	to	prove,	not	to	argue	for	god
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Not	to	convince	you	that	god	exists
But	to	help	you	to	be	blissful.
God	can	be	put	aside
The	whole	problem	is	irrelevant.
Once	you	start	moving	in	the	direction	of	bliss	-
Which	is	your	potential...
You	are	miserable	because
You	are	doing	something	wrong	with	your	energies	You	are	miserable	because
you	have	not	been	able	To	create	a	harmony	of	your	energies
There	is	a	discord,	a	deep	discord	in	your	being	Hence	the	misery.
Misery	simply	means	you	are	fragmentary
And	all	the	fragments
Are	in	constant	conflict,	in	constant	friction	You	are	falling	apart.
Your	whole	life	is	nothing	but	an	effort
To	go	on	keeping	yourself	together.
The	same	energies	can	become	a	great	harmony.
It	is	only	a	question	of	learning	the	art.
If	you	don't	know	how	to	play
On	some	musical	instrument
You	will	create	only	noise
You	will	disturb	people,	that's	all
You	can	drive	people	mad!
And	the	same	instrument	and	the	same	hands
And	the	same	person
Can	create	such	celestial	music
But	he	has	to	learn	the	art	of	playing
Just	by	being	alive
One	does	not	know	how	to	live
Just	by	being	born
You	don't	know	the	art	of	life.
Meditation	is	the	art	of	life
It	is	the	fundamental	art.
One	who	misses	meditation	misses	all.
Then	he	can	have	everything	of	the	world
But	he	will	never	have	any	experience
Of	peace,	of	bliss,	of	benediction.
And	god	will	remain	just	an	abstract	idea.
Once	you	have	started	playing	rightly
With	your	energies,	creating	an	accord,	a	harmony	A	cosmos	out	of	 this	chaos
that	you	are
Suddenly,	thousands	of	proofs
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
That	god	is	become	available	to	you,
Not	only	that	god	is,	but	that	only	god	is.
Everything	becomes	divine
Everything	becomes	godly.
Let	bliss	be	the	goal	--	forget	all	about	god.
Once	 bliss	 is	 achieved	 god	 is	 experienced	 As	 a	 consequence,	 a	 natural
consequence.
Jesus	says,	'Blessed	are	the	meek
For	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.'
Because	he	said	that	millions	of	people	since
Have	tried	to	be	meek,	to	be	humble
But	their	effort	has	been	wrong
From	the	very	beginning.
First,	they	tried	to	be	meek	so	that	they
Could	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	god.
Meekness	cannot	be	made	a	means.
They	misunderstood	Jesus.
He	was	not	saying,	'Be	meek	so	that
You	can	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	god.'
He	was	saying,	'Blessed	are	the	meek
For	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.'
The	kingdom	of	god	is	not	the	end
And	being	meek	is	not	the	means.
Being	meek	is	an	end	unto	itself;
The	kingdom	of	god	is	its	fragrance.
When	 the	 flower	 opens	 up	 there	 is	 fragrance	 But	 because	 people	 are	 always
listening
Through	a	layer	of	sleep,	they	always	go	on
Misunderstanding	the	Buddhas,	the	awakened	ones.
Many	times	it	happens	here:
I	 say	 that	 if	 you	meditate	with	 a	goal	 in	mind	Your	meditation,	 from	 the	very
beginning
Has	gone	wrong.
If	you	are	trying	to	attain	peace
Through	meditation
You	will	not	even	attain	meditation	itself.
Meditation	has	to	be	done
For	the	sheer	joy	of	doing	it
And	then	peace	follows.
I	am	not	saying	that	peace	does	not	come,
It	comes,	but	it	is	not	a	question	of	your	longing.
If	you	are	longing	for	it
You	are	not	in	meditation,	you	are	in	a	desire.
Now	the	desire	is	for	peace.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
So	people	say	to	me,
'Okay,	then	we	will	not	desire	peace
But	are	you	sure:	if	we	do	meditation
Without	desiring	peace,	will	we	attain	to	it?'
They	are	still	persisting	in	their	stupidity
They	are	again	bringing	the	same	thing	in
From	the	backdoor.
A	person	who	wants
To	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	god
Is	not	a	meek	person,	he	is	not	humble.
Jesus	says,	'Blessed	are	those
Who	are	the	last	in	this	world,	because
They	will	be	the	first	in	my	kingdom	of	god.'
But	if	somebody	wants
To	be	first	in	the	kingdom	of	god
He	has	missed	the	point.	He	can	stand	last
He	can	be	the	very	last	in	the	world
Just	waiting	 for	his	chance	 in	 the	other	world	And	 then	he	will	 show	all	 these
fools
Who	are	standing	in	the	queue	ahead	of	him,
'Now	see	what	happened	--	you	were	presidents
And	prime	ministers	and	this	and	that
And	I	was	just	a	humble	person,	the	very	last.
Now	this	is	my	reward!
I	am	the	first	and	where	are	you?
Now	all	the	Nobel	Prize	winners
Go	and	stand	at	the	back	of	the	queue.'
But	this	is	the	same	game
Played	on	a	different	plane.
The	message	is	tremendously	significant
But	it	is	bound	to	be	misunderstood.
It	 is	bound	 to	be	misunderstood	because	people	Are	not	 listening	 to	 it	 through
meditation
They	are	listening	to	it	through	mind.
Let	your	meekness
Come	out	of	meditation,	out	of	silence	--
Let	it	come	of	its	own	accord
Then	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own.
It	is	the	most	beautiful	experience
Just	to	be	nobody,	just	to	be	utterly	nobody.
When	one	is	utterly	nobody
When	one	has	effaced	oneself,
One	is	just	a	pure	emptiness.
Of	course,	god	enters	into	that	emptiness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
He	is	simply	waiting	for	that	moment
When	you	are	is	empty	of	yourself
So	that	he	can	enter	you
So	that	he	can	abide	in	you.
Become	a	lover,
Not	of	somebody	in	particular
Just	become	a	lover	in	general.
Let	love	become	your	quality
Not	just	a	relationship	with	somebody
Because	whenever	love	becomes	relationship
It	includes	one	but	excludes	the	whole	universe.
It	is	a	very	dangerous	bargain:
Choosing	one	and	excluding	the	whole	universe.
And	the	whole	universe	belongs	to	you
You	belong	to	it.	The	whole	universe
Goes	on	showering	its	love	to	you
And	it	is	very	ungrateful	not	to	respond.
So	love	the	sun,	the	moon,	the	stars
The	trees,	the	rivers,	the	mountains
The	people,	the	animals	--	simply	be	a	lover
And	let	the	whole	be	your	beloved.
That's	exactly	what	makes	a	person	religious.
When	your	love	spreads	all	over	space
When	it	knows	no	boundary
When	nothing	confines	 it,	when	it	 is	unlimited	When	it	 is	not	focussed	on	any
object
But	is	just	a	state	of	being.
Then	love	is	prayer,	then	love	is	meditation
And	then	love	liberates.
The	ordinary	love	binds,	it	creates	a	bondage.
Of	course,	the	chains	are	golden
But	chains	are	chains,	and	golden	chains
Are	far	more	dangerous	than	ordinary	chains
Because	you	become	attached	to	them.
You	think	they	are	very	precious
You	think	they	are	ornaments,	not	chains.
The	ordinary	love	is	a	relationship
The	real	love	is	a	state	of	being.
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	a	lover
A	love	not	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular
But	addressed	to	the	whole.
So	whatsoever	you	touch
You	touch	with	deep	love.
And	whatsoever	you	see,	you	see	with	deep	love.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Wherever	you	are,	you	go	on	radiating	love.
Then	there	is	no	need	to	go
To	any	church,	to	any	temple
Because	the	whole	existence	becomes	your	temple.
And	then	there	is	no	need	to	bother	about
The	Bible	and	the	Koran	and	the	Vedas;
The	whole	existence	becomes	your	Bible.
Then	you	can	read	god's	messages
In	the	flowers,	in	the	song	of	birds.
Everywhere	you	will	come	across	immense	mysteries.
Love	opens	doors	upon	doors,	it	goes	on	opening.
There	is	no	end	to	mysteries.
For	a	real	lover	it	is	an	unending	journey
Tremendously	ecstatic.
Each	moment	is	full	of	bliss	and	benediction.
Prem	Niraj
Love	has	many	qualities	which	are	also	the	qualities	of	a	cloud.	Hence	the	cloud
can	be	used	as	a	metaphor.	The	most	fundamental	quality	of	love	is	that	it	gives
freedom;	it	is	freedom.	If	it	is	not	freedom	then	it	is	not	love;	it	is	something	else
--	beware	of	it!	Something	else	is	masquerading	as	love.	It	may	even	be	hatred
pretending	to	be	love.	It	may	be	jealousy,	possessiveness,	domination,	ego	--	 it
may	be	any	thing,	but	not	 love.	The	criterion	to	be	used	is	freedom;	if	 it	gives
you	freedom,	then	only	is	it	love.
Love	makes	you	free.	The	more	you	love,	the	more	you	are	free.	Ultimately	you
have	the	freedom	of	a	cloud.	The	cloud	is	totally	free,	it	has	no	fixed	form,	it	is
constantly	changing,	it	is	unpredictable.
One	moment	it	looks	like	an	elephant,	another	moment	it	looks	like	a	tiger;	one
never	knows.	One	moment	 it	 is	moving	 towards	 the	east,	another	moment	 it	 is
moving	towards	the	west.	It	is	absolutely	free,	it	is	not	rooted	somewhere.	It	has
no	roots	in	the	earth,	hence	it	has	no	clinging,	it	is	not	attached;	it	is	not	obsessed
with	anything.
Love	is	also	just	like	that:	without	any	roots	without	any	clinging;	floating	like	a
cloud	in	absolute	freedom.
The	cloud	is	full	of	rain:	it	wants	to	share,	it	wants	to	rain.	And	that's	what	love
is	too:	it	is	full	of	joy,	peace,	and	it	wants	to	shower	it.	It	is	full	of	juice	and	it
wants	 to	 rain.	 And	 to	whomsoever	 is	 ready	 to	 receive	 love	 is	 over-willing	 to
give.	It	does	not	feel	that	the	person	who	receives	has	any	obligation	towards	it.
No,	not	at	all.	On	the	contrary,	love	feels	obliged.	that	the	other	helped	it	to	be
unburdened.	The	cloud	feels	obliged	to	the	earth	because	the	earth	helped	it	to	be
unburdened.	 Love	 is	 always	 feeling	 obliged	 to	 everybody.	 And	 love	 never
bothers	much	about	whether	the	other	is	worthy	of	receiving	it	or	not.	These	are
miserly	things,	miserly	attitudes.	Love	is	never	a	miser.
The	 cloud	 never	 bothers	 about	 whether	 the	 earth	 is	 worthy.	 It	 rains	 on	 the
mountains,	 it	 rains	 on	 the	 rocks;	 it	 rains	 everywhere	 and	 anywhere.	 It	 gives
without	any	conditions	attached,	without	any	strings	attached.
And	that's	how	love	is:	it	simply	gives,	it	enjoys	giving.	Whosoever	is	willing	to
receive,	receives	it.
He	need	not	be	worthy,	he	need	not	be	in	any	special	category,	he	need	not	fulfill
any	qualifications.
If	all	 these	things	are	required	then	what	you	are	giving	is	not	love.	It	must	be
something	else,	and	you	have	not	yet	known	what	love	is.	Once	you	know	what
love	 is	you	are	 ready	 to	give;	because	you	know	 the	more	you	give,	 the	more
you	 have	 it.	 The	 more	 you	 go	 on	 showering	 on	 others,	 the	 more	 it	 goes	 on
springing	up	in	your	being.	Once	this	secret	is	known...
This	 is	very	strange	economics.	Ordinary	economics	 is	 totally	different:	 if	you
give	something,	you	lose	it.	If	you	want	to	have	it,	avoid	giving	it.	Collect	it,	be
miserly.	Just	the	opposite	is	the	case	with	love:	if	you	want	to	have	it,	don't	be
miserly;	otherwise	it	will	go	dead,	it	will	become	stale;	it	will	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
stink,	 it	will	die.	Go	on	giving,	 and	 fresh	 sources	will	become	available	Fresh
streams	will	 flow	into	your	being.	The	whole	existence	starts	pouring	 into	you
when	your	giving	is	unconditional,	total.
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#27
Chapter	title:	None
29	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004295
ShortTitle:	84POEM27
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
One	can	become	wise	very	cheaply
Just	by	acquiring	knowledge.
Then	one	only	appears	wise,	one	is	not.
One	is	not	a	man	of	wisdom.
One	may	be	a	wise	guy
But	to	be	a	wise	guy	and	to	be	a	wise	man
Are	totally	different	things.
The	man	who	knows	much
Naturally	starts	dominating	others
Who	don't	know	so	much.
He	becomes	powerful	in	a	way.
The	knowledgeable	people,	the	scholars
The	professors	--	they	are	powerful	people.
They	dominate	because	they	have
A	large	accumulation	of	information.
But	they	are	not	wise.
Their	lives	are	as	full	of	stupidities
As	anybody	else's.
There	is	no	difference	of	quality
They	differ	in	quantity
Somebody	knows	less,	somebody	knows	more.
The	difference	is	of	quantity
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
But	there	is	no	qualitative	change.
The	 great	 professors,	 the	 great	 scholars	 behave	As	 foolishly	 and	 childishly	 in
their	life
As	anybody	else.
You	will	not	find	any	difference	at	all.
Sometimes	they	are	even	more	stupid	because
They	have	not	learned	anything	from	life.
They	 have	 remained	 so	 enclosed	 within	 their	 books	 They	 have	 remained	 so
surrounded
By	an	abstract	world	of	knowledge
That	they	don't	have	any	acquaintance
With	reality	itself.
So	when	it	comes	to	encountering	reality
They	prove	failures,	utter	failures
Even	about	small	things.
They	are	not	very	intelligent	either
They	know	only	that	which	they	know.
If	they	have	to	face	something	new
They	are	completely	at	a	loss	as	to	what	to	do.
If	it	is	something	old	for	which	they	have
Already	acquired	information
They	are	very	wise
But	if	the	situation	is	new
The	challenge	is	new
They	go	completely	empty
Their	mind	stops	working.O
And	life	continuously	changes
It	is	never	the	same.
It	goes	on	bringing	new	challenges	to	you.
It	always	proposes	new	questions
And	your	answers	are	all	old.
Hence	the	so-called	knowledgeable	people
Are	always	lagging	behind	life.
The	more	they	know,	the	more	burdened	they	are.
They	are	carrying	such	a	mountainous	weight
That	they	cannot	dance	with	life
They	cannot	move	with	life	easily.
Slowly	slowly	they	become	almost	immovable
They	lose	all	movement,	all	dynamism.
And	that's	what	death	is.
The	knowledgeable	person	dies	before	his	death.
He	dies	in	his	books
His	books	become	his	graveyard.
Real	wisdom	is	not	cheap,	not	so	cheap.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
It	is	a	question
Of	changing	the	quality	of	your	consciousness
Not	a	question
Of	acquiring	more	and	more	knowledge
But	of	becoming	more	and	more	aware.
This	is	a	totally	different	gestalts
To	acquire	more	knowledge	is
To	be	concerned	with	the	content.
To	become	more	aware	is
To	be	concerned	with	consciousness
Not	with	the	content.
It	is	possible	that	a	man	of	wisdom
May	not	be	knowledgeable	at	all.
Jesus	was	not	very	knowledgeable.
Mohammed	was	not	educated	at	all.
He	could	not	read,	he	could	not	write.
He	had	no	relationship	with	the	world	of	books.
Still,	he	became	one	of	the	wisest	men	on	earth	For	the	simple	reason	that
He	gained	more	and	more	awareness
More	and	more	meditativeness.
A	sannyasin	has	to	become	concerned
With	the	quality	of	life,	not	the	quantity.
How	long	you	live	is	irrelevant
How	deeply	you	live	should	be	the	only	concern	With	what	intensity,	with	what
totality
With	what	awareness,	with	what	love.
And	all	these	energies
Are	released	by	meditation.
Meditation	is	certainly
The	greatest	magical	force	on	the	earth.
It	is	the	only	bridge	between	this	shore
And	the	farther	shore,	the	beyond.
So	put	all	your	energies	into	one	efforts
How	to	be	more	aware.
And	if	one	puts	one's	total	energies	into	awareness	It	is	bound	to	happen	--	it	is
our	birthright.
But	one	should	not	be	half-hearted.
It	can't	happen	half-heartedly
It	happens	only	when
You	are	one	hundred	per	cent	in	it,	into	it
When	nothing	is	being	held	back,
When	you	have	put	all	your	cards	on	the	table
The	trump	card	included.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
When	you	are	not	hiding	anything
When	you	put	yourself	in	totally
It	immediately	happens.
And	that	happening	is	a	great	revolution.
It	transforms	you	from	the	lowest	to	the	highest	From	the	gross	to	the	subtle
From	the	visible	to	the	invisible,
It	takes	you	from	the	mind	to	the	no-mind.
And	to	live	in	the	no-mind	is	to	be	wise.
To	function	out	of	no-mind
Is	to	function	out	of	wisdom.
Then	your	life	has	a	beauty,	a	grace,	a	godliness.
Then	whatsoever	you	do	is	right.
It	can't	be	wrong
It	is	impossible	to	do	wrong	because
You	 are	 so	 full	 of	 light	 and	 so	 full	 of	 insight,	 Your	 vision	 is	 so	 clear	 and
unclouded
That	it	is	impossible	to	do	anything	wrong.
The	right	happens	of	its	own	accord.
There	is	no	need	to	cultivate	any	character.
Just	consciousness	is	enough.
Character	follows	like	a	shadow.
Man	without	meditation	is	very	tiny
Just	a	very	small	particle	of	dust.
But	the	same	man	with	meditation	is	infinite
The	same	man	with	meditation	becomes	oceanic.
He	becomes	the	whole.
We	are	small	because	we	cling	to	the	ego
Our	smallness	is	caused
By	our	clinging	to	the	ego.
The	ego	is	a	very	small	phenomenon,	and	we
Are	such	fools	that	we	go	on	clinging	to	it
Thinking	it	is	something	immensely	valuable.
It	is	the	only	barrier,	it	is	the	only	cause
Preventing	our	life	from	gaining
Significance,	grandeur,	glory.
It	is	a	subtle	wall	surrounding	you
Which	does	not	allow	you	to	have	a	communion
With	the	whole.
Once	the	ego	is	dropped,	you	start	feeling	one	With	the	trees	and	the	moon	and
the	sun
And	the	stars	and	the	people.
Suddenly	all	barriers	disappear
Suddenly	you	are	no	more	a	dewdrop
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Your	boundaries	are	gone.	You	have	become	unbounded.
And	that's	the	experience	of	god.
God	is	not	a	person	whom	you	are	going
To	encounter	some	day	or	meet	some	day.
God	is	an	experience	--
The	experience	of	your	dissolution
Of	your	ego	disappearing.
And	when	your	ego	is	no	more	there
What	is	left?
Just	 a	 pure	 vastness,	 an	 infinite	 nothingness	 is	 But	 that	 nothingness	 is	 not
negative
That	nothingness	is	a	new	kind	of	fullness.
It	is	nothingness	from	the	side	of	the	ego
It	is	fullness	from	the	side	of	the	whole.
It	is	nothingness	from	the	old	vision
But	it	is	a	new	birth,	and	a	new	vision	is	born	And	it	is	overflowing
It	is	overflowing	with	power.
And	this	power	is	eternal
This	power	has	no	beginning,	no	end.
And	once	you	know	that	you	are	one	with	it
You	have	experienced	something
Of	tremendous	value.
Nothing	is	higher	thAn	that
More	valuable	than	that.
You	are	freed	from	all	small	identities
You	are	no	more	a	body	and	no	more	a	mind.
Once	you	drop	the	ego,	all	small	boundaries
Start	disappearing	of	their	own	accord.
Tremendous	bliss	is	yours,	great	ecstasy	is	yours	All	that	you	have	to	lose	is	this
ugly	ego
Which	has	not	given	you	anything.
And	it	cannot	give	you	anything,
It	can	only	create	trouble,	misery,	conflict.
The	ego	is	the	only	hell.
And	to	be	free	of	the	ego	is	to	regain	Paradise	Is	to	regain	innocence.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	one	is	taking	a	step
Towards	this	dissolution	of	the	ego.
I	don't	ask	you	to	renounce	anything
Except	the	ego.
Just	be	a	nobody,	anonymous
With	no	name,	with	no	identity
And	all	is	yours,	the	whole	is	yours!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Then	there	is	no	death.
Once	you	have	gathered	the	courage
To	drop	yourself	into	the	whole
Naturally,	there	is	no	death	possible:
You	have	already	gone
Something	new	has	taken	place.
Time	is	no	more	relevant.
The	whole	process	of	sannyas	is	to
Slowly	slowly	help	you	to	come	out	of	the	ego.
The	world	need	not	be	renounced.
Nothing	else	has	to	be	renounced,
My	sannyasin	only	has	to	renounce
The	ego	and	nothing	else
Because	that	is	the	problem,	not	the	world.
You	can	escape	to	the	mountains
But	the	ego	will	be	with	you.
You	can	renounce	your	family
But	the	ego	will	be	with	you,
Even	more	than	it	was	in	the	world.
Sitting	alone	in	a	mountain	cave
Your	ego	will	have	no	competitors
It	will	start	flourishing,	it	will	have	more	space.
You	will	start	thinking,	'I	am	holy
And	the	whole	world	is	living	in	sin,
Only	I	am	going	to	heaven
And	all	others	are	going	to	hell.'
You	will	start	gaining	more	strength	for	the	ego.
That's	why	the	so-called	religious	people
Are	not	egoless	people.
Your	saints,	your	mahatmas	are	very	egoistic
For	the	simple	reason	that
They	have	renounced	the	world
They	have	renounced	the	comforts	of	the	world	--
Which	are	absolutely	irrelevant	--
And	they	have	not	renounced	the	real	thing	The	real	problem
Which	goes	on,	persists	within	them.
Be	aware	of	it	and	consciously	drop	it.
All	is	attained	once	the	ego	is	gone.
With	the	ego	one	is	a	beggar
Without	the	ego	one	is	an	emperor.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Eighty	Four	Thousand	Poems
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
30	April	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8004305
ShortTitle:	84POEM28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed	on	to	the	computer.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	is	the	real	beginning	of	life.
The	first	birth	is	not	the	beginning	of	life,
The	first	birth	is	only
The	beginning	of	an	opportunity	to	live.
The	first	birth	only	makes	you	potentially	alive	Not	actually	alive.
That	potentiality
Has	to	be	transformed	into	actuality
Then	only	do	you	become	really	alive.
And	meditation	is	the	art
Of	 transforming	the	potential	 into	 the	actual,	Of	 transforming	the	seed	 into	 the
flower.
It	is	through	meditation
That	one	attains	the	second	birth.
With	the	first	birth	the	body	is	born
With	the	second,	the	soul.
And	only	when	we	come	to	know	that	we	are	a	soul	Is	our	life	fulfilled,
Otherwise	it	is	a	sheer	wastage.
The	seed	remained	a	seed,	it	never	sprouted
It	never	became	a	tree,	it	never	flowered.
Nobody	rested	under	its	shade
No	birds	ever	came	to	visit	it
No	winds	danced	around	it.
There	was	no	dialogue	with
The	clouds,	the	sun,	the	moon,	the	stars.
The	seed	cannot	communicate	with	existence.
It	is	closed,	encapsulated	within	itself.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Meditation	opens	you	up.
Meditation	is	nothing	but
Opening	multi-dimensionally	to	all	that	is
To	the	beauty	of	existence
To	the	music	of	the	winds
To	the	freedom	of	the	clouds
To	all	the	mysteries	that	surround	you
To	all	that	is	without	and	within.
When	you	become	open	and	available	 to	 all	 this	For	 the	 first	 time	you	 realise
that
Life	is	not	what	you	used	to	think	it	was.
It	is	immensely	valuable
Each	moment	of	it	is	sacred
And	each	moment	there	is	the	possibility
Of	meeting	the	divine,	of	meeting	the	ultimate.
All	that	is	needed	is	an	opening	on	our	side.
The	divine	is	always	available
But	we	are	not	available.
God	is	always	knocking	on	our	door
But	we	are	deaf.
He	is	standing	in	front	of	us,	but	we	are	blind.
And	when	you	become	aware
That	existence	 is	divine,	 it	 is	not	 just	matter,	You	also	become	aware	 that	 it	 is
immortal
It	is	deathless,	it	is	eternal.
Then	all	fear	disappears.
Life	for	the	first	time	becomes
A	dance	and	a	celebration.
And	when	life	is	a	celebration
I	call	it	religious.
My	sannyasins	have	to	become
Songs	and	dances	and	celebrations.
A	man	without	meditation
Is	a	failure,	an	utter	failure.
Even	though	he	may	be
The	riches	man	in	the	world,	he	is	a	failure.
He	may	be	Alexander	the	Great
He	may	have	conquered	the	whole	world	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
He	is	still	a	failure.
Nothing	succeeds	except	meditation.
Everything	fails,	sooner	or	later.
And	the	sooner	it	fails,	the	better,	because
Then	you	have	time	to	do	something.
You	have	time	to	find	ways	to	be	victorious.
The	unfortunate	ones	are	those
Who	realise	their	failure
When	life	has	slipped	out	of	their	hands.
Alexander	himself	realised	it
But	at	the	last	moment.
He	died	a	very	disappointed,	disillusioned	man.
But	there	was	no	way	out.
Now	nothing	could	be	done.
He	had	been	to	India
He	had	met	many	mystics	here
And	he	had	been	impressed	by	one	mystic	very	much.
His	biographers	remember	that	mystic.
They	call	him	'Dandamis'	--
It	does	not	seem	to	be	exactly	the	name,
It	must	be	some	mispronunciation
Of	an	Indian	name.
But	they	say	Alexander	was
Tremendously	influenced	by	Dandamis.
Dandamis	was	a	naked	fakir
And	Alexander	was	so	impressed
That	he	wanted	Dandamis	to	go	with	him.
He	offered	him	all	luxury,	all	comfort.
He	would	be	a	royal	guest.
But	Dandamis	laughed	and	he	said,
'You	cannot	persuade	me
Because	I	have	found	the	treasure
Which	nobody	can	offer	to	me	any	more.
Nothing	better	can	be	offered	to	me.
What	you	are	talking	about	are	toys.
I	am	finished	with	all	that
And	it	is	better	that	you	also	finish
Otherwise	you	will	repent	later	on.'
Alexander	was	angry	--	he	said,
'I	am	inviting	you	and	if	you	don't	come	with	me	I	can	force	you	to	come.'
Dandamis	said,	'Nobody	can	force	me.
You	can	kill	me	but	you	cannot	force	me
And	remember,	while	killing	me
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
You	will	think	you	are	killing	me,
But	you	will	be	deceived.
You	can	kill	the	body	--
I	am	not	my	body.
Take	out	your	sword	and	cut	off	my	head:
When	my	head	falls	on	the	ground
You	will	see	it	falling
And	I	will	also	see	it	falling	on	the	ground.
You	will	be	a	witness	to	it
I	will	also	be	a	witness	to	it.
It	is	not	me!'
When	he	was	dying
Then	he	remembered	this	man.
But	it	was	too	late.
He	had	never	realised	that	he	was	not	his	body.
The	body	was	dying	and	he	had	always	lived
With	the	idea	that	he	was	the	body.
Now	death	was	too	much	for	him.
And	he	had	seen	this	man	laughing
Inviting	death,	asking	him	to	take	out	his	sword	And	kill	him.
He	said	to	his	people	who	were	around	him,
'I	am	remembering	that	man	--
He	certainly	realised	something
Which	I	have	missed.
I	am	a	failure	and	he	was	victorious.'
It	is	through	meditation	that	one	realises	that,
'I	am	not	the	body,	not	the	mind	either
But	just	a	witness.'
And	that	witness	knows	no	failure,	no	frustration.
That	witness	is	god	himself.
Seek	it	and	remember	Jesus:
Seek,	and	ye	shall	find
Knock,	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you.
Consciousness	has	no	boundaries,
It	is	not	bounded	by	the	body	or	the	mind.
It	is	unbounded
It	is	as	vast	as	the	whole	universe.
But	because	we	have	become	identified	with	the	body	We	are	suffering.
The	root	cause	of	our	suffering	is	that
Such	a	vast	entity	is	being	forced
Into	such	a	small	space.
We	are	imprisoned.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
We	have	to	become	free	of	this	prison.
And	it	is	only	a	question
Of	changing	our	attitude	--	nothing	else.
You	will	remain	in	the	body
The	body	will	remain	there,
Just	your	identifying	changes:
You	are	no	more	identified	with	the	body.
You	start	using	the	body	as	a	vehicle,
Just	as	you	use	a	car.
You	don't	become	your	car.
Just	think	of	the	misery	of	the	man
Who	becomes	his	car.
He	will	immediately	say	that	he	has	gone	mad.
Something	goes	wrong	in	the	engine
And	he	starts	crying	and	weeping
And	he	goes	to	the	doctor	saying,
'Do	something.
Something	seems	to	be	wrong	with	me,'
Because	he	cannot	distinguish
Between	his	car	and	himself.
That's	exactly	the	case:
The	body	is	only	a	vehicle.
Use	it	but	don't	become	identified	with	it.
And	so	is	the	case	with	the	mind.
The	mind	is	only	a	computer:	use	it
But	don't	become	identified	with	it.
Remain	a	witness.
And	the	more	you	are	a	witness
The	more	you	are	free
The	more	you	are	unbounded
The	more	you	start	becoming	oceanic.
Then	even	the	sky	is	not	your	limit.
To	feel	that	unlimitedness	is	to	feel	god.
That's	the	ultimate	goal	of	meditation.
The	secret	of	immortality	is	not	such	a	secret	That	it	cannot	be	discovered.
In	fact	it	is	an	open	secret:
Just	a	little	bit	of	digging	inside	yourself
And	you	can	discover	it.
Just	a	few	layers	of	garbage	have	to	be	removed;	We	call	that	garbage	the	mind.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Thoughts	and	desires	and	memories
Are	crowding	inside
And	because	of	the	crowd
We	cannot	see	our	own	truth.
Once	we	are	able	to	create	a	little	gap
A	little	space
The	truth	is	discovered.
The	truth	is	that	we	are	immortal
The	truth	is	that	we	were	never	born
And	we	will	never	die
That	birth	and	death	are	episodes
In	our	eternal	life.
Thousands	of	times	we	have	taken	birth
And	thousands	of	times	we	have	left	the	body.
It	is	because	of	this	mind
We	go	on	coming	back	again	and	again.
It	is	because	of	the	mind	that
The	wheel	of	birth	and	death	goes	on	moving.
If	we	drop	out	of	the	mind	the	wheel	stops.
And	that's	the	whole	art	of	meditation
How	to	drop	out	of	this	mind	and
How	to	enter	the	space	called	no-mind.
Mind	is	arbitrary.	accidental
No-mind	is	your	real	nature,	your	very	being.
To	discover	it	is	to	discover	the	Buddha	within.
And	once	you	have	tasted
Something	of	your	innermost	core
You	have	tasted	the	sweetest
The-most	delicious	experience	of	life.
There	is	nothing	higher	than	that
Nothing	more	precious	than	that,
[Her	name,	Christa,	 is	a	beautiful	one,	Bhagwan	 tells	a	German	woman	 taking
sannyas.	But	it	has	lost	its	real	meaning	and	had	something	imposed	on	it	which
is	incorrect:	the	dictionaries	say	it	means	a	follower	of	Christ.	That's	not	its	true
meaning.]
A	Christa	means	Christ	himself,	not	a	follower.
It	is	not	a	question	of	following
It	is	a	question	of	becoming
It	is	a	question	of	being	a	Christ.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 used	 to	 say	 again	 and	 again	 That	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last
Christian
Died	on	the	cross	two	thousand	years	ago,
The	first	and	the	last	--	and	he	was	right
Because	only	Christ	was	a	true	Christian.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Others	have	been	only	followers
And	followers	are	imitators
Followers	are	carbon	copies.
Never	be	carbon	copy;	be	your	original	face.
And	that's	the	way	of	being	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha.
These	words	don't	belong	to	any	individual.
Christ	has	nothing	to	do	with	Jesus
Buddha	has	nothing	to	do	with	Gautam.
Gautam	is	one	of	the	Buddhas
And	Jesus	is	one	of	the	Christs.
One	can	call	Jesus	a	Buddha
And	one	can	call	Gautam	the	Christ	--
There	is	no	difference,	no	problem.
Anybody	who	has	realised	himself	is	a	Christ.
Christ	simply	means	the	crowned	one
One	who	has	been	crowned	by	god	himself
One	who	has	come	home,	one	who	has	been
Received	back	into	the	Garden	of	Eden.
Adam	was	expelled.
When	he	returns
Finds	out	his	mistake,	his	error
Remembers	 the	 joys	 and	 the	 beauties	 of	 paradise	 And	 comes	 back,	 he	 is
received,	welcomed.
That	welcome	makes	him	a	Christ.
Everybody	is	an	Adam	and	everybody
Has	the	potential	to	become	a	Christ.
Adam	means	Christ	gone	astray	Christ	means
Adam	has	come	back	home.
Become	a	Christ	--	never	be	a	follower.
That's	the	only	way	to	love
People	like	Christ	and	Buddha.
Followers	don't	love
They	are	not	courageous	enough	to	be	lovers.
They	are	cowards,	they	are	hoping	to	be	saved.
They	want	to	throw	the	responsibility
On	somebody	else.
They	worship	in	order	not	to	change	themselves.
It	is	Christ's	duty	to	save	them.
Their	duty	is	to	go	astray
And	Christ's	duty	is	to	save	them.
What	kind	of	logic	is	this?
Why	should	Christ	save	you?
You	should	save	yourself.
Learn	from	Christ
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Learn	the	art	of	saving	yourself
Learn	the	fact	that	one	man	has	saved	himself
Hence	you	can	also	save	yourself.
This	is	the	way	of	the	lover
Not	the	way	of	the	follower.
[His	name	has	two	meanings,	Bhagwan	tells	Oscar,	an	Italian.
The	Teutonic	meaning	is	divine	spirit,	the	Celtic,	a	leaping,	bounding	warrior.
Just	a	little	change
And	both	names	will	fit	together.
Leaping,	bounding	warrior
Has	to	be	changed	a	little	bit:
Leaping,	bounding	sannyasin!
And	then	there	is	no	problem	--
Then	it	fits	with	divine	spirit.
A	warrior	does	not	fit	with	divine	spirit,
A	warrior	is	basically	an	evil	spirit.
The	soldier	and	the	sannyasin	are	two	poles.
The	soldier	is	the	ugliest	possibility
And	the	sannyasin,	the	most	beautiful.
The	soldier	means	destruction
And	the	sannyasin	means	creativity.
The	soldier	is	violence,	the	sannyasin	is	love.
The	soldier	cannot	be	divine
Only	a	sannyasin	can	be	divine.
So	we	will	have	to	change
The	meaning	of	the	word	a	little	bit.
It	can	be	done	because	no	language
Has	any	absoluteness	about	it.
All	languages	are	arbitrary
So	one	can	play	around!
It	is	just	our	agreement
As	to	what	a	word	should	mean.
For	me,	Oscar	will	means	divine	spirit,
A	leaping,	bounding	sannyasin.
Try	your	best!
[During	the	course	of	his	talking	to	Oscar	Bhagwan	has	registered	that	Oscar	is
minus	one	or	two	teeth.]
[A	chuckle	overrides	his	words	as	he	adds]
And	don't	lose	more	teeth	--	leap	and	bound,	but	carefully!
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Love	is	the	only	thing	that	is	really	precious.
All	else	is	mundane.
Love	is	sacred	because	it	is	through	love
That	one	attains	to	prayer.
It	is	through	love	that	one	creates	the	bridge	Between	oneself	and	god.
It	is	through	love	that	we	become	aware	that
Life	is	tremendously	significant,	meaningful.
Without	love	life	is	empty,	meaningless
In	fact,	absurd.
Without	love	there	is	no	reason	to	live	--
Why?	For	what?
One	of	the	greatest	existential	philosophers,
Marcel,	used	to	say	that
The	most	important	problem	in	life	is	suicide.
Why	not	commit	suicide?
He	used	to	think	that	that	was
The	most	important	thing	to	be	decided.
Existentialists	think	that	it	is	just
Because	of	our	cowardliness	that	we	go	on	living	And	they	are	right
About	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	of	people.
It	is	simply	because	of	cowardliness
That	people	go	on	dragging.
They	have	no	meaning	in	their	life
But	they	are	also	afraid	of	death.
Who	knows?	--	it	may	be	even	worse.
At	least	life	seems	to	be	familiar.
And	we	are	not	alone:
So	many	fools	are	all	around.
The	ship	of	life	is	full	of	fools.
And	there	is	so	much	hustle	and	bustle
And	so	much	occupation	that	one
Tends	to	forget	all	real	problems	of	life.
Small	problems	are	so	many
Daily,	routine	problems	are	so	many	--
How	to	manage	bread	and	butter
And	how	to	manage	the	ordinary	life	--
And	 life's	 ordinary	 challenges	 are	 so	many	 that	 There	 is	 no	 time	 left	 to	 think
about	whether
Life	has	any	meaning	or	not.
That's	why	poor	people
Have	no	problem	as	far	as	meaning	is	concerned.
It	is	only	the	rich	people
Who	start	thinking	about
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
What	the	meaning	of	life	is.
It	is	the	rich	countries
For	whom	the	problem	becomes	really	big.
The	richer	a	country	becomes
The	more	and	more	people	start	thinking
'What	is	the	meaning	of	it	all?'
Hence	I	say	that
Existentialists	are	right.
About	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	of	people.
But	they	are	not	really	right,
Because	that	point	one	per	cent
Has	the	master	key.
Buddhas	are	not	many,
Christs	are	not	many
Krishnas	are	not	many
But	their	life	has	tremendous	significance
Meaning,	overflowing	joy
Their	each	breath	is	a	song
Their	each	moment	is	full	of	splendour
Their	whole	life	is	nothing	but	a	dance.
Their	life	(words	missing)	cannot	be	contained	In	any	song,	in	any	music;
Everything	falls	short.
Their	grace	is	so	infinite
Their	bliss	is	so	vast.
And	this	is	possible	for	everybody,
We	just	have	to	work	for	it.
I	perfectly	agree	with	Marcel:
Suicide	is	one	of	the	greatest	problems
But	only	one;	the	second	problem
Which	is	even	bigger	than	suicide
Is	sannyas.
And	one	has	to	choose	between	the	two:
Either	suicide	or	sannyas.
Suicide	is	simply	stupid.
Sannyas	is	the	art	of	transforming	your	life
From	meaninglessness	into	meaning.
It	gives	dance	to	your	feet
It	changes	your	life
Into	eighty-four	thousand	songs.
Immeasurable	joy,	unaccountable	bliss	is	yours.
Just	a	little	work	is	needed	upon	on	self.
It	is	worth	it	--	that	work	has	to	be	done.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
