From Personality to Individuality
Answers to the Seekers on the Path
Talks given from 30/12/84 pm to 28/01/85 pm
English Discourse series
CHAPTER 1
Man is born with a question mark in his heart
30 December 1984 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT PLACE HAS MYSTICISM IN YOUR RELIGION?
My religion is pure mysticism.
There is nothing else in it.
The other religions have no place for mysticism in them. They cannot have, for the simple reason
that they have answers for every question – bogus answers, without any evidence, with no argument.
But for the gullible humanity they are consoling. They demystify existence.
All knowledge demystifies existence.
I don’t teach you knowledgeability.
On the other hand all the religions do just that: they make you knowledgeable. They have a God
as the creator. They have messengers of God bringing all the answers from the original source,
indubitable, infallible.
These religions could exploit humanity for a simple reason: man feels a kind of inner unease when
there are questions and there is no way to find the answer. Questions are there – man is born with
questions, with a big question mark in his heart – and it is good.
2
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
It is fortunate that man is born with a question mark, otherwise he would be just another species
of animal. Buffaloes have no questions – they accept whatever is, unquestioningly – they are really
faithful, religious. Trees have no questions, birds have no questions; it is only man and man’s
prerogative, his privilege. In the whole of existence he alone is capable of asking a question.
The old religions have been trying to destroy your privilege. They have been forcing you down
to the level of the animals. That’s what they call faith: ”undoubting faith.” They want you to be
buffaloes, donkeys, but not men – because man’s only special quality that defines him as separate
from animalhood is the question mark. Yes, it is a turmoil. Certainly to live without any questions is
peaceful, but that peace is a dead peace, it has no life in it. That silence is the silence of a cemetery,
of the graveyard.
I would prefer man to be in a turmoil, but alive.
I would not like him to become a graveyard. That peace, that silence is at a great cost: you are losing
your life, you are losing your intelligence, you are losing all possibility of discovering an ecstatic way
of life. That question mark is not there without significance. It is not the work of the devil that each
child is born with doubt, not with faith.
Doubt is natural.
Each child is asking a thousand and one questions. The more a child asks the questions, the more
potential he is showing that he will be able to discover something. There are dumb children too –
not literally dumb, but psychologically dumb. Parents like them very much because they don’t create
any trouble, they don’t ask any questions – even a small child can destroy all your knowledgeability.
I am reminded of my own childhood and so many things that will help you to understand the beauty
of the question mark. And unless you understand the question mark as something intrinsic to your
humanity, to your dignity, you will not understand what mysticism is.
Mystifying is not mysticism.
Mystifying is what the priests have been doing.
They have taken your question mark.
They have destroyed the possibility of your exploring the mystery of existence. But they have to give
you some substitute, some lollipop that is mystifying. And that is what all the scriptures have been
doing; their basic methodology has been the same.
For example, in Hinduism the scriptures are written in a very difficult language, Sanskrit. Not a single
Indian speaks it; it is a dead language. And as far as I am concerned, I have tried hard to find out
whether it has ever been alive and I have not found a single piece of evidence. It has always been
dead from the very beginning; it was born dead. It was invented by the priests. People have never
used it, people cannot use it. It is so sophisticated, so grammatical, so mathematical, so phonetical
that people cannot use it.
From Personality to Individuality 3 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
When people use a language, the language starts becoming less grammatical but more alive; less
mathematical but more meaningful. It becomes raw, it is no longer polished and sophisticated – and
it starts growing. Sanskrit has never grown. A dead thing cannot grow. It is exactly where it was five
thousand years before – no growth. Obviously a dead thing cannot grow.
A living language used by people goes on growing. Its words become more and more rounded,
just like stones slipping into the river start becoming round. The continuous flow of the river, the
continuous hitting against other rocks, against other stones, gives them a roundness. This can be
seen; and you can immediately describe, define which languages are dead and which languages
are living.
The living languages will never be perfect – dead languages will be always perfect – because living
languages are used by imperfect, fallible, human beings, and from mouth to mouth they go on
changing. They become more and more usable.
For example, in India English was introduced from the outside. A few words were bound to go into
people’s use – for example, the word station. Now there has never been anything like a station
in India before; it came after the English language had already come. Then the railways were
introduced and of course the word station was there.
But if you move all over India in the villages, you will never find a single Indian – I mean of the
ninety-eight percent of Indians who don’t know English using the word station. It is too difficult, too
sophisticated. Through use, they have made – without anybody actually making it, just by use – they
have come to the word tesan. That is simple. ”Station” seems to be a little difficult, it is a strain, so
”tesan.”
”Report”... now, it came with the English language, the police stations and your having to ”report.”
But go to the villages and you will be surprised: nobody uses the word report, they use the word
rapat. It has become rounded, ”rapat” – the sophistication of ”report,” the difficulty of ”report” is gone.
”Rapat” that seems to be human. And so many words... and they tell a tremendously meaningful
story: when words are used by people then they start taking a shape of their own. By mere usage
they go on changing.
Sanskrit remains static. Hebrew, Arabic, Greek, Latin – they all remain static, far above people’s
heads, far above their hands. Sanskrit was never the language of the people and this was mystifying
– the whole country depended on the priesthood, and in Sanskrit they would be saying pure rubbish.
Once you know it, you will be surprised – what is sacred about it? But chanted in Sanskrit, you don’t
know what it means, you are mystified.
To keep the scriptures sacred it was necessary to keep them secret. They should not reach the
people, people should not be able to read them. Whenever they need, the priest is available, he will
read it. When printing was introduced Hindus were very reluctant for their scriptures to be printed:
what would happen to the mystifying that they had been maintaining for thousands of years?
Hindus have mystified the whole country with the idea that they have all the secrets in their sacred
books – but of those sacred books, ninety-nine percent is simply cow-dung! For Hindus it may be
holy, but for nobody else is it holy. When those sacred books were translated into other languages
From Personality to Individuality 4 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
the mystifying process stopped; Hinduism lost its height, its glory, because then you could read it in
any language – all those scriptures were available.
Mahavira never spoke in Sanskrit, Gautam Buddha never spoke in Sanskrit – for the simple reason
that they were trying to defy the priesthood. They spoke in the language of the people. They were
condemned by the priesthood: ”This is not the right way. You should speak in Sanskrit. And both of
you are perfectly well educated ” – both were sons of great kings – ” you know Sanskrit, so why do
you speak ordinary people’s languages?”
They said, ”For a certain reason: we want people to know that this mystifying has to be exposed.
There is nothing in your scriptures, but because they are in a language which nobody understands,
it is left to the people’s imagination.”
Even the priest may not understand what he is reciting because Sanskrit has to be learned by
memorizing, not by understanding. There is a great difference between the two. Sanskrit has to be
learned by rote, by memory; you have to memorize it. Its whole emphasis is on memory, not on
understanding. There is no need to be bothered what it means; all that you should be concerned
about is how it is chanted.
And of course Sanskrit is a very beautiful language, having the quality of singing. You can memorize
a song more easily than the same length of prose. Poetry is easily memorized; hence, all the
languages which have depended on memory are all poetic, they look like songs, they sound beautiful
Meaning? – you should not ask, because the meaning may be just as stupid as any of today’s
newspapers, perhaps even worse because it is a five-thousand-year-old newspaper.
When a brahmin is chanting it you will be mystified by his chanting; it creates a certain atmosphere
of song. And what is the meaning of what he is chanting? Perhaps the passage he is chanting is
a prayer to God that means: ”Please destroy the crops of my enemy, and let my crops be doubled
over last year’s. Let the milk disappear from my neighbor’s cows and let all that milk come to my
cows.” When you understand the meaning, you will say, ”What nonsense! Where is the sacredness?
Where is the religion? This is religion?” – but the meaning is not to be bothered about.
The Mohammedan, if you listen to him calling from the tower of his mosque... you will be thrilled
with its singsong quality. Arabic is tremendously touching, goes directly to the heart. It is meant to
go there, it is not meant to go to your intellect, your reason. It is meant to touch your feelings, and it
certainly touches them.
So when you hear Arabic you will be thrilled that there must be something immensely beautiful in it.
If just the sound makes you so thrilled and excited, what about the meaning? But please don’t ask
the meaning, because the meaning is going to be so third rate and ugly that you will not even be
able to believe that this kind of crap can be put into such a beautiful language.
Hence it is not to be allowed that the people learn the sacred language, the holy language. It is only
for the priesthood – that is their monopoly.
This is the mystifying. This is a substitute to satisfy you, because they have taken away something
of immense potential – the question mark – which would have made the whole existence a mystery.
From Personality to Individuality 5 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
They had to give something as a substitute, a toy to play with. And they are ready with every kind
of answer. Even before the child has asked, they start stuffing him with answers. Just look at the
process. If the question has not been asked, the answer is irrelevant.
This is what I was going to tell you. In my childhood they started giving me answers... because there
was a special class for Jainism in the Jaina temple and every child had to attend it, one hour every
evening. I refused.
I told my father, ”In the first place I don’t have those questions for which they are supplying answers.
This is stupid. When I have questions I will go and learn their answers and try to find out whether
they are correct or not. Right now I am not even interested in the question. Who created the world?
My foot! – I am not interested. I know one thing for certain: I have not created it.
My father said, ”You are a strange child. All the children from the family are going, from the
neighborhood, everybody is going.”
Jainas tend to live in a neighborhood, a close-knit neighborhood. Minorities are afraid of the majority
so they remain close to each other; it is more protective. So all the children of the neighborhood go
and their temple is in the middle of the neighborhood. That too is for protection, otherwise it will be
burned any day if it is in a Hindu neighborhood or in a Mohammedan neighborhood.
And it will become difficult: if there is a riot you cannot go to your own temple. And there are people
who will not eat without going to the temple. First they have to go to the temple and worship, then
only can they eat. So Jainas live in small sections of the town, city, village, with their temple in the
middle, and surrounding it is their whole community.
”Everybody is going,” my father said.
I said, ”They may have questions, or they are idiots. I am not an idiot, and I don’t have those
questions, so I simply refuse to go. And I know what the teacher goes on teaching the children is
absolute rubbish.”
My father said, ”How can you prove that? You always ask me to prove things; now I ask you, how
can you prove what he says is rubbish?”
I said, ”Come with me.”
He had to go many times to many places; it was just that the arguments had to be concluded. And
when we reached the school, the teacher was teaching that Mahavira had these three qualities:
omnipotence, all-powerful; omniscient, all-knowing; omnipresent, everywhere-present. I said, ”You
have listened, now come with me to the temple.” The class was just by the side of the temple, a
room attached to the temple. I said, ”Now come into the temple.”
He said, ”But what for?”
I said, ”Come, I will give you the proof.”
From Personality to Individuality 6 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
What I had done was on Mahavira’s statue I had just put a laddoo – that is an Indian sweet, a round
sweet, just like a ball – I had put a laddoo on Mahavira’s head, so naturally two rats were sitting on
Mahavira’s head eating the laddoo. I said, This is your omnipotent Mahavira. And I have seen these
rats pissing on his head.”
My father said, ”You are just impossible. Just to prove this you did all that!”
I said, ”What else to do? How else to prove it? Because I cannot find where Mahavira is. This
is a statue. This is the only Mahavira I know and you know and the teacher knows. And he is
omnipresent so he must be present here seeing the rats and what they are doing to him. He could
have driven those rats away and thrown away my laddoo. I was not here. I had gone to pick you up
– I had all the arrangements to make. Now prove to me that this man is omnipresent. And I’m not
bothered at all – he may be. Why do I care?”
But before a child even asks a question, you stuff his head with an answer.
That is a basic and major crime of all the religions.
This is what programming is, conditioning is.
These religions condemn me, that I am conditioning people; I am simply deconditioning people.
The conditioning, they have done: they have already filled your mind with all kinds of answers. I am
simply destroying those answers so you can find your question. They have covered the question
completely, so completely that you have forgotten that you had any question.
In fact you have never asked any questions. No chance has been given to you to be acquainted
with your question, with your questioning intelligence. The religions are so afraid that once you start
questioning-just once – then it is going to be difficult to force answers against your will, because that
questioning intelligence will be raising doubts; it will raise more questions against their answer than
you could have imagined.
So the best way is to commit this basic crime: the child should be caught – the earlier the better –
and he should be spoon-fed theology, dogmatics, doctrines, catechisms. Before he becomes even
aware of the question he knows all the answers.
If you are a Christian how do you know that there is a trinity? – that God the father, the Holy Ghost,
the son, these three make the highest power monopoly, that they dominate the world, that they are
the real dictators – how do you know it? It has been told to you. Perhaps you have forgotten who
told you. It was told to you so early that unless you go deeper than that, further back than that, you
will not be able to find who was this fellow who corrupted your mind.
The virgin birth... if you are not a Christian, you will immediately object: How can a virgin give birth
to a child? But if you are a Christian, you simply don’t question it because before your questioning
arose, the answer was put into you. They have been behaving with you as if you are a computer –
they just go on feeding the answer.
From Personality to Individuality 7 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
And if somebody says anything against Christianity, you are ready to kill or be killed for this rubbish
that you are not even responsible for discovering on your own. And the person who forced it on you
did not himself know either: the same was done to him.
For centuries it goes on and on. Each generation goes on giving all its stupidities and superstitions
to the new generation, thinking that they are helping you to become knowledgeable.
And once you become knowledgeable. the doors of mysticism are closed for you.
Mysticism means looking at existence without any prejudice.
Hence I say no so-called religion can be really mystic – mystifying of course, but never mystic
because they cannot fulfill the basic condition to be a mystic.
You have to drop lal your knowledge, all that you have taken on faith has to be thrown down the
drain.
Nothing is valuable in it, so don’t be worried; it is not a treasure, it is a tragedy. if you can get rid of
it you will feel light, you will feel suddenly unburdened; your eyes fresh like a child’s eyes.
All these layers of knowledge: Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan, Jewish.... All these layers of
knowledge – it does not matter who has committed the crime against you; all the religions are
in the same boat, committing the same crime. And because they are all committing the same crime,
nobody objects.
The whole of humanity is in their grip.
And whenever a person like me objects, obviously he is to be condemned by all, criticized by all – but
not answered. Nobody has ever answered me. from my childhood I have been continually asking.
Nobody has even answered a single question – there are no answers. When you understand it, that
all answers are arbitrary, created by man just to make you feel at ease....
It is just like the mother telling the child who is not ready to sleep alone in the room ”Don’t be
worried, Jesus is with you. You can sleep. You are not alone.” How can the child think that the
mother is deceiving him? – his own mother? Nor does the mother think that she is deceiving; she
believes it. Her mother poisoned her; she is doing the same to her own child. Naturally, what else
can you do?
The child is afraid to be alone, but he has to learn to be alone, to sleep alone. Soon he will be going
to a boarding school, he has to learn to stand on his own. He cannot go on clinging to his mother’s
frock – for how long? She finds a good reason for saying, ”If he starts feeling the presence of Jesus
or God and goes to sleep....”
The child will also feel at ease, less afraid. Nothing has changed – it is the same room, he is alone,
the darkness is there – but now there is a little comfort, that Jesus is looking after him, that God is
looking after him, that God is everywhere. His own mother says so, his father says so, his teacher
says so, his priest says so; everybody cannot be wrong. And God is invisible so you cannot see
Him, but a certain at ease-ness comes to him.
From Personality to Individuality 8 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
That’s what all this knowledge has ben doing to you. It relieves you from enquiring, and enquiry is
troublesome.
In this world you cannot get anything unless you are ready to risk something to get it. And God you
have got so cheap, without even asking. Now what value can this God have? Religion you have got
so cheap.... This religion, this God, are ways of mystifying existence so that your question remains
repressed.
My effort here consists in demystifying.
Perhaps that is why the question, What place mysticism has in my religion? has arisen – because
I am continuously demystifying. The questioner does not understand the difference between
mysticism and mystifying. He thinks they are synonymous, they are not: they are against each
other.
It is mystifying that prevents mysticism from growing. And there is no other way except to destroy
mystifying completely, uproot it completely.
And then there is no need for me to give you any answer. Your question is there, and existence is
there.
Who am I to come between you and existence?
Face existence.
Look at the sunrise, the sunset.
Then you don’t have any answers – you just see what is there: a tremendously beautiful sunset.
You will be overwhelmed. You would love to sing or dance or paint or just lie down there on the grass
and not do anything, just to go on looking. And a certain communion between you and the beauty
of the sunset starts happening.
Something transpires – this is mysticism.
You know nothing – and yet you know.
There is knowledge which does not know at all.
And there is an ignorance which knows everything, because ignorance is innocence.
I can say to you, blessed are the ignorant; but the second part of my sentence cannot be that they
shall inherit the kingdom of God. No, because that will be mystifying. I will say: Blessed are the
ignorant, for theirs is the kingdom of God already, now, here. It is not a question that they shall
inherit sometime, somewhere in some life after death – that is mystifying.
Mysticism is cash.
From Personality to Individuality 9 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
Mystifying is a promissory note.
Nobody knows whether you will be able to cash this promissory note. The government may fail, the
bank may go bankrupt. Only banks can go bankrupt, who else? And this promissory note can be
cashed only after death, that is the condition on it. ”In God we believe... in God we trust.” And the
pope promises you that this much will be given to you after death but it is always after death. They
have been exploiting people with such simple means of exploitation that anybody who has a little bit
of intelligence can see it.
Life is mystery.
Scriptures are mystifying. Scriptures are dead.
And the priesthood lives on these dead scriptures.
A real authentic man lives life, not scriptures.
And by sheer living, intensively, totally, he is surrounded by mystery all over. Each moment is a
mystery. You can taste it, but you can not reduce it to objective knowledge.
That’s the meaning of mystery: you have a certain way of knowing it, but there is no way to reduce
it to knowledge. It never becomes knowledge, it always remains knowing.
You have a sense of knowing, but if somebody insists, ”If you know, then give me the answer,” and
you are a true, honest man, you will say, ”I have a sense of knowing but I also have another sense
that it cannot be reduced to knowledge.”
That’s why Lao Tzu refused to write anything his whole life... for the simple reason that the moment
you write it, it is something else. But this can be detected only by one who has some acquaintance
with mystery.
It is not a question of scholarship: a scholar cannot detect anything wrong in Lao Tzu. Confucius
was a great scholar in Lao Tzu’s time, his contemporary. The world knows Confucius more than Lao
Tzu, naturally: he was a great scholar, a well-known wiseman. Great emperors used to visit him for
advice. The emperor of China, who must have been the greatest emperor of those days – because
China has always been a continent unto itself – appointed Confucius to be his prime minister, so
that he was always available to him for advice.
But when Confucius went to see Lao Tzu, do you know what happened? He came back with almost
a nervous breakdown. Lao Tzu was known at least to those people who were in search. And when
the disciples of Confucius came to know that he was going to Lao Tzu they waited outside – Lao
Tzu was living in a mountain cave.
Confucius did not want anybody else to accompany him because he knew that that man was strange,
unpredictable. How he may behave, what he will do, what he will say, nobody knows. And before
your own disciples... he may cut you to pieces. It is better to go alone first.
So he said to his disciples, you wait outside. Let me go.” And when he came out, he was trembling.
From Personality to Individuality 10 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
The disciples said, what happened?”
He said, ”Just take me home. I am not myself That man is a dragon, never go to that man.”
What had happened there inside the cave? Lao Tzu’s disciples were there, that’s why we know
what happened, otherwise a great meeting would have been missed. Lao Tzu’s disciples were also
very shocked even his disciples, because Confucius was older than Lao Tzu, far more well-known,
respected. Who knew Lao Tzu? – very few people.
And the way Lao Tzu behaved with Confucius was simply outrageous. But not for Lao Tzu. He was
a simple man, neither arrogant nor humble, just a pure human being. And if it hit hard – his purity,
his innocence, and his ordinariness – if it hit hard on Confucius, what could he do?
If you go to a mirror and the mirror shows your face to be ugly, is it the fault of the mirror? You can
do one thing, you can avoid mirrors – never look in a mirror. Or you can manufacture a mirror that
makes you look beautiful. That is possible. There are hundreds of types of mirrors, concave and
convex, and who knows what.... You can manage to look long, and you can manage to look fat; you
can manage to look small, and you can manage to look beautiful.
Perhaps the mirrors you have are deceiving you. Perhaps the manufacturers are creating mirrors to
give you a consolation – that you are so beautiful. Particularly women, standing before the mirror
forget everything else. It is very difficult to take a woman away from the mirror. She goes on looking
in the mirror. It must be something in the mirror, otherwise people are just homely.
Lao Tzu’s disciples said, ”What did you do?”
He said, ”I have not done anything, I simply reflected; it was my response. That idiot thinks he
knows, and he is only a scholar. Now what can I do if I made it clear to him that all scholarship is
rubbish, and told him,’You don’t know anything at all’?” And when you face a man like Lao Tzu you
cannot be dishonest either, at least in front of him.
Confucius remained just like a statue, frozen, because what Lao Tzu was saying was right.
Scholarship is not knowing. You are quoting others, have you anything to say on your own?” And
Confucius had nothing to say on his own. He was a great scholar he could have quoted all the old
ancient scriptures but on his own? He had never thought about it, that anybody was going to ask,
Have you something to say of your own?
And when Lao Tzu looked at him Confucius knew that that man could not be deceived. Confucius
asked him about something. Lao Tzu said, ”No, I don’t know anything.”
Then Confucius asked, ”What happens after death?”
And Lao Tzu was just like a flare, became aflame, and he said, ”Again! Are you going to drop your
stupidity or not? You are alive – can you say what life is? You are alive – can you reduce your
experience of life into objective knowledge and make a statement of what life is? And remember
that you are alive, so you must know.
From Personality to Individuality 11 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
”You don’t know life while you are alive and you are bothering about death! You will have enough
time in your grave. At that time you can meditate on what death is. Right now, live! And don’t live
lukewarm.”
Many people go on living on dimmer switches. They go on dimming, dimming. They don’t die, they
simply go on dimming; they simply fade out. Death happens to only a very few people, those who
have really lived and lived hot. They know the difference between life and death because they have
tasted life, and that experience of life makes them capable of tasting death too. And because they
know life, they can know death. If living, you miss life; dying, you are going to miss death.
”And you are wasting your time; just go out and live!” said Lao Tzu to Confucius. ”And one day you
will be dead. Don’t be worried: I have never heard of anybody living for ever, so one day you will be
dead. Death takes no exceptions – that you are a great scholar or a prime minister. You will die, that
much I can predict. Nothing else is predictable but that much can be predicted easily – that you will
die. And in your grave, silently, meditate on what death is.”
Confucius was trembling. The king also asked him, ”You have been to Lao Tzu – what happened?”
Confucius said, ”All that I was afraid of happened. He made me look so idiotic that even after forty-
eight hours I am still trembling. I am still afraid of that man’s face – I had nightmares for two nights!
That man is following me, and, it seems, will go on following me. And he had some eyes! They go
just like swords into you.” He said, ”One thing I can say to you as your adviser: don’t ever think of
meeting this man. He is a dragon, he is not a man.”
Mysticism is to know life, without knowledge standing in between you and living.
But you go on living a borrowed kind of life, as if somebody else is living. You are like a zombie,
sleepwalking, a somnambulist. And this whole situation has been created by the religions.
The trouble is that people think that the religions have been a great blessing to the world; just the
contrary – they have been the greatest curse to humanity. They destroyed all that was living in you
and replaced it with something dead.
Your question was a living phenomenon.
Your doubt was breathing, beating in your heart.
But they told you, ”Don’t doubt – otherwise you will suffer.”
My father used to tell me, ”I am concerned about you. You use such words against religion, God,
heaven, and other doctrines, that I am concerned; you may suffer for it.”
I told him, ”I am ready, but before that suffering happens, let me live my life, and I will not have any
grudge, I will not complain. In fact, I should be concerned about you, because all this knowledge is
hocuspocus; and you think this boat made of paper is going to take you to the further shore. I tell
you, you will drown.
From Personality to Individuality 12 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
”I am from the very beginning trying to swim – I am not depending on any paper boat. If I drown,
okay, it was my own choice. Nobody else is responsible for it, and I have no complaint. I enjoyed life.
I enjoyed denying all that was bogus and borrowed. I enjoyed being myself And if this is the reward
that existence gives to an authentic man, I take it with grace.
”But what about you, when your boat – made of paper, holy paper, made out of scriptures – is
drowning? You missed your life. You cannot feel grateful, because for what will you feel grateful?
Life, that may have made you feel gratitude, has slipped out of your hands, and now you are drowning
and you don’t know how to swim because you never doubted the boat. I have every chance of
reaching the other shore if I can swim.”
He was a good swimmer himself. And I loved swimming so much that whenever my family wanted to
find me they had to go to the side of the river to find where I was – because I had to be somewhere
in the river. For four to six hours every day I was in the river. Once in a while we both used to go for
a swim. I used to invite him particularly in the rainy season.
And he would say, ”Don’t do that,” because in the rainy season the river was a mountainous river. It
would suddenly become so wide, and so big; otherwise it was a small river.
In the summer you could not conceive how much bigger it became – a hundredfold at least – miles
broad. And the current was so heavy that if I wanted to cross the river – and I have crossed that river
hundreds of times in the rainy season – it would take me at least two to three miles downstream.
Only then would I be able to reach to the other shore. Directly it was impossible. To move directly
from this point straight to the other side was impossible. The current was so strong that crossing it I
would be carried at least three miles down river.
But I said, ”I manage it, and you certainly are a better swimmer, with more strength than me. I am
just a child. You are a strong man, you can make it. Only once he came with me, and that too
because I created a situation that he had to come.
My sister had got married and her husband had come to visit us. He was a wrestler; he was the
university champion. It was a joke in the university, because when I entered the university – that
was his last year, final M.A. – I stayed in his room. So it became a joke because two champions... I
was the university champion in debate, and he was a wrestler.
But everybody was worried about how we were managing because I was continually arguing and
he knew only one argument: fighting. He was accepted by the university and passed all the
examinations, but it was not that he was passing those examinations.... The university wanted
him to remain in the university because he was the all-India champion. Champions are valuable;
they raise the credit of your university.
He knew nothing of what the examinations were about. From the morning, he was doing hours of
exercises; in the evening, more exercises – and he was continuously wrestling with people, and his
teacher. He was certainly a very good wrestler, I have seen him fighting. He finally became our
sannyasin, but unfortunately he died very early. He was not more than fifty-five when he died.
He had come with me from the university and I asked my father, Today, we are both going swimming.
He is also a swimmer as well as a wrestler. You have to come.” He could not say no in front of his
From Personality to Individuality 13 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
son-in-law – that would have looked a little as if he was afraid. And the son-in-law could not say
anything because the father-in-law was coming – an old man. And I was very young and he was an
all-India champion wrestler; so how could he expose that he was afraid?
When he saw the river he said, ”Really, are we going to cross it?”
I said, ”Of course.”
My mother was trying to prevent us; my sister was trying to prevent her husband, but I was all for
it. I said, ”This chance will never come again; let us see what happens. At the most we’ll be taken
three, four miles downstream, we will just have to walk four miles up again.” So when I jumped, they
had to jump. And it was terrible – the current was so strong that my brother-in-law said, ”It would
have been better if I had said that I was afraid before; now to go back is impossible. We are right in
the middle, and I don’t see any hope of reaching to the other side.”
My father said, ”I always knew that one day this boy was going to create some trouble for everybody.”
But I said, ”When we have crossed half, it is proof enough: the other half we can cross because
we have already crossed half” Many times they both agreed to turn back, but I said, ”You are being
absolutely foolish, because to return is still the same distance. And for your whole life you will be
known as a coward. What is the point of returning now? In the same time, with the same energy,
we will reach the other shore. Even if you return, I am going to the other shore.”
That pulled them out of it; they felt, ”If he goes on and reaches the other shore – and he is going to
make it because he has been going across continually – and we turn back now, he will spread the
rumor in the whole city:’Look, this is the all-India wrestling champion, and this is my father, who has
been swimming his whole life. They both turned back from the middle of the river leaving a small
child to go alone to the other side.’
”Now,” they said, whatsoever happens, even if death happens, there is nothing to do but follow him.
He will not turn back.” My father said to my brother-in-law, ”You don’t know him, he is not the type
to go back on anything. He would rather die – and we are both going to die with him! And we have
unnecessarily got ourselves into trouble. I have been avoiding this for years, but just because of
you, I agreed.”
And my brother-in-law said, ”Just because of you, I agreed. He played a trick on both of us.”
But finally we reached the bank and I said, ”Now, what do you say? Just a little courage and a little
readiness to take the risk, and to go into the unknown.... And you were trying to go back, which was
the same distance – but it was known. That shore was known, so you felt that perhaps it was easier
because it was known, and this side was unknown. The unknowability made you afraid, otherwise
what arithmetic is this?”
We reached the other shore. We walked three, four miles up again, but they were not prepared
to swim back because if we wanted to reach the other shore at the same point we started, then
we would have had to go on four miles further. They said, ”Four more miles walking? – and this
experience of almost dying? We are going to catch the boat from here!” – because that was the
From Personality to Individuality 14 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
point from where the boat used to leave to the other shore to take passengers from this side to that
side.
They said, Now whatever you want to do, you can. If you want to go four miles on, you go; we are
not coming. We have decided – we both have decided – that whatsoever happens, if people call us
cowards, okay.”
I said, No, I am not going to spread the rumor about you, and I am not going four miles just to prove
you cowards. This is my usual practice: I walk up again, and then from four miles further up, I swim
across and reach the spot where I have left my clothes. But I will not do that; that will be too much.
”I have already done more than is supposed of a son; I will not do this. But remember one thing: it
is better to be ready to swim rather than to wait for boats which are unreliable; better to rely on your
own hands than to rely on some knowledge which may be just arbitrarily created by clever people.”
Mysticism needs no other qualification except a simple open mind.
You are not a Hindu, you are not a Mohammedan, you are not a Jaina, you are not a Buddhist – you
are simply you.
And then look – life has no answers.
All answers are mystifying.
Life can be lived, can be loved, can be danced, can be drunk, can be tasted.
You can do so many things with life.
Just remove the dimmer switch.
Livva – not a little hot, livva real hot!
And life becomes immediately a mystery.
My religion is pure mysticism.
Question 2
OSHO,
MANY THINGS WHICH ONCE GAVE A PERSON A SENSE OF BELONGING ARE
DISAPPEARING: THE TRIBE, THE FAMILY MARRIAGE, EVEN FRIENDSHIP. WHAT IS
HAPPENING? WHAT WILL HAPPEN NEXT?
IT is something beautiful that is happening, something really great.
Yes, the tribe is disappearing. The family is disappearing, marriage is disappearing, friendship is
disappearing... so far so good – because it leaves you alone to be yourself
From Personality to Individuality 15 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
The tribal man is just a number in the tribe. The tribal man is the most primitive man, the most
unevolved, closer to animals than to man. He lives only as a number in the tribe. It is good that
tribes have disappeared. The disappearance of the tribe created families.
At that stage, the family was a great advantage because the tribe was a big phenomenon; the family
was a small unit. You had more freedom in the family than in the tribe. The tribe was very dictatorial
and very powerful. The head, the chief of the tribe was all-powerful, even enough to kill you. There
are still a few tribes in very undeveloped countries. In India there are a few tribes of aboriginals.
I have been to those tribes. I got myself appointed in Raipur as a professor just because not far from
Raipur is the nearest and the most primitive tribe in India, in Bastar. It is a small state, a tribal state.
People still live naked and eat raw meat. Perhaps these are the people from the time when fire had
not been discovered, and they have carried on the idea of eating raw meat.
They are very simple, innocent; but as far as the tribe, its conventions and its traditions are
concerned, absolutely orthodox. There is no question of anybody rebelling against the tribe. He
will be immediately killed, sacrificed to the god, because anybody going against the tribe means he
is angering the god – and the tribe cannot afford to make the god angry.
The tribe is carrying on the tradition created by the god himself They don’t have scriptures, they
don’t have any written language; so the priest, who is also the chief, has all the powers. And it is
impossible in that tribe to rebel and still remain alive.
You cannot escape, because outside you will not be acceptable at all. They don’t know any language
that is spoken outside their tribe, they are naked.... They put on small wraparound clothes only on
the twenty-sixth of January every year, when a small group of them goes to Delhi, to participate in
the celebrations for Republican Day, when India became a republic.
Just a small group is trained to speak a little Hindi and to use some clothes: ”And don’t be naked
in Delhi, particularly when you are passing before the president and the prime minister and all the
ambassadors and the invited guests from the world. At least at that time you should be properly
dressed.” So a small group is trained. The same group goes every year because nobody wants to
bother with all this.
From Raipur it was so close that I used to visit those people just to see how the tribe has a hold
over its people. It has an absolute hold because it does not leave you in a position to revolt. You
can leave the tribe, but you cannot live outside the tribe. All that you know is the tribal way of living.
If you are caught outside the tribe eating raw meat – they simply kill the animal and start eating it –
you will be immediately taken by the police. Naked, you cannot go outside you – will be immediately
caught.
They don’t know any language, they don’t know any skill. All the skill that they know is useful only in
their tribe. For example, a certain dance, a certain kind of drumming; but that is not used anywhere
else except in their tribe. So nobody can move out of the tribe; mobility is impossible.
And living inside the tribe and against the tribe and its conventions is impossible. The moment the
chief finds out, he has found a sacrifice for the god. Then the whole tribe gathers together, dances
From Personality to Individuality 16 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
and creates so much noise – and a bonfire And the man is pushed into the bonfire as a sacrifice to
the god.
The tribe was a collective mind.
It is still existent in your collective unconscious.
The family was a development at that time because it made you part of a smaller unit, gave you a
little freedom. And your family became protective towards you. Now the family is also disappearing
because something which is protective at one point is bound to become prohibitive at another point.
It is just like when you grow a small plant and you put a protective fence round it. But don’t forget
to remove it when the tree is grown up, otherwise the same fence will not allow the tree to grow.
When you put it there, the tree was thin like a finger; that’s why you put a small fence around it, it
protected it from animals, from children. But when the tree trunk grows wider then the fence that
was protective becomes prohibitive, you have to remove it.
That time has come.
The family is no longer protective.
It is prohibitive.
It was a great step out of the tribe.
Now another step has to be taken:
From the family to the commune.
The commune can give you all the freedom that you need, and all the protection that is needed
without prohibiting you at any point.
So I say it is good that the tribe has disappeared, that the family is disappearing.
Yes, you will miss it because you have become addicted; these are addictions. You will miss the
father, the mother, but that is only a transitory period. When there are communes established
around the world, you will be immensely surprised that you have found so many uncles and so
many aunts, and you have lost only one mother and one father. What a gain!
And having one father and one mother is psychologically dangerous because if the child is a boy, he
starts imitating the father; if a child is a girl, she starts imitating the mother – and great psychological
problems arise.
The girl imitates the mother but she hates the mother, because the girl is a woman; she loves the
father. This is an absolutely, biologically solid, scientifically proved fact: the girl loves the father and
hates the mother. But the girl cannot imitate the father, she is a girl; she has to imitate the mother.
From Personality to Individuality 17 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
The boy loves the mother because he is a man, and she is a woman – and the first woman in his
life. He loves the mother, he hates the father. He is jealous of the father also because the father and
mother are in love; he cannot tolerate it. And small children show it in many ways. If the father and
mother are sleeping in bed, the boy will come and sleep just in the middle of both. It is not just that
he wants both. No, he is separating both: ”Get away!”
The girl is also jealous of the mother. She would like to take the place of the mother and be the
father’s beloved. And this is not only about the child. If the father shows too much love to the
daughter, the mother immediately starts giving him a headache. If the mother is too loving towards
the boy, the father starts feeling left out.
But the father and the mother are fading out: soon they will be gone. But they will leave this whole
psychological mess in the children.
Now the girl will hate her mother her whole life; and anything that appears to be similar to the mother,
she will hate. And strangely enough, she will behave exactly like the mother, so she will hate herself
too. She will see her face in the mirror and she will remember her mother. She will look at her
behavior and she will remember her mother. And the same is going to happen to the boy.
This mess is creating almost fifty percent of the psychological diseases in men and women around
the world.
A commune will have a totally fresh psychological health. This is possible only in a commune,
because the child... of course the child will be born from a mother and will have a father, but that will
not be the only boundary around him. He will be moving in the whole commune and all men of the
age of his father will be his uncles – and an uncle is a nice person. The father is always a little nasty,
just because of his function. He is a powerful man, he has to show the power; he has to discipline
the boy.
The same is true about the mother: she has to discipline the girl. She is afraid of what the girl is
going to be like if she is not forced into a certain ideal which fits with the society – out of love, with
good intentions.... But the uncle is not trying to impose anything.
And when there are so many uncles and so many aunts, one very great phenomenon comes into
existence: you are not carrying a single person’s image in your mind.
The boy carries the mother’s image in his mind: he would like a woman exactly like his mother to be
his wife. Now, where can you find your mother again? So he will fall in love with a woman who has
some similarity, but similarity is not going to work. Strange things people become attracted to: the
color of the hair, the way the woman walks, the color of her eyes, the length of her nose, the cut of
her face. If something is similar... but only something can be similar what about everything else?
So with the similar you fall in love. But you are also falling in love with the whole person, not just
the way she walks. She will cook also, and it’s not going to be your mother’s cooking. Then you will
know that just walking is not going to help. She screams also, she shouts also. She is not behaving
like your mother. She is your wife, why should she behave like your mother? She has not come to
babysit.
From Personality to Individuality 18 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
She has been in search of a husband, and because there was something in you similar to her father
– the length of your nose, the length of your ears – she fell in love with you. Now what to do with your
ears? How long can she go on playing with your ears? And you won’t like it either: ”What nonsense
is this? I am not just ears, I am a whole person!” But the whole person she has no desire for.
This is the trouble that exists, and it is because of a certain reason: every boy has an idea of a
woman, and that woman is his mother; every girl has an idea of a man, and that man is her father.
That’s why all love affairs are bound to fail.
No love affair can succeed, because the basic psychology is against its success.
So the only successful love affair is one which remains only in your mind, but never materializes. The
great lovers of the world: Laila and Majnu, Romeo and Juliet, Shiri and Farhad, Soni and Mahival –
they are great lovers whose story the world has remembered. But if they had got married, finished;
their love story nobody would have ever heard. Because they could not materialize their relationship
into actuality, it only remained in their mind. The society and the parents or something came in
between, and they had to remain apart, separated. The love remained aflame because it was only
in imagination.
In imagination there is no problem. You create your lover the way you want. Now, in your imagination
your lover cannot say, ”No! I am going to smoke” – because it is your imagination. If you want him
to smoke he will smoke; if you don’t want him to smoke, he will not.
But a real husband will smoke even if you say he should not smoke, that it stinks, that if he smokes
you cannot sleep with him in the bed. The more you insist, the more he will resist: ”Go to hell, sleep
anywhere” His cigarette is far more important than you. It is far more significant for him because it
gives him support, help, friendship, company – thousands of things in such a small cigarette. And
what can a woman do? So if there is a choice he will choose the cigarette and leave the woman.
But in your imagination you can manage whatsoever you want.
And so the man goes on managing the woman: in his imagination she does not perspire, needs no
deodorant. In his imagination she never becomes a pain in the neck because imagination cannot
go to the neck, imagination remains in the head. And it is just your painting so whatsoever color you
want to put there, you go on putting. There is no problem. There is no resistance from the painting
like: ”I am not going to take this color,” or, ”I am not going to wear this sari....”
So the only love affairs which are famous in the world are the love affairs which never materialized.
All other love affairs... what happened to them? – nobody bothers about them. In every story, when
the lovers get married the last sentence is: ”Then they lived happily ever after.” It’s strange: every
lover in every story then lives happily ever after? In fact, after that the real story begins Before that,
what was the story was all imagination.
It is good that the family is disappearing.
And with it nations will disappear because the family is the unit of the nation.
From Personality to Individuality 19 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
So I am tremendously happy whenever I see the family disappearing, because I know behind it
will go the nation. With it will go the so-called religions, because it is the family which imposes
religion, nationality, and all kinds of things on you. Once the family is gone, who is going to force
Christianity on you, Hinduism on you; who is going to insist that you are an American, that you are
an Oregonian?
Once the family is gone, much of psychological disease will be gone, much of political insanity will
be gone. You should be happy that they are disappearing.
Marriage was an invention against nature.
It has tortured man long enough, but there was a time when it was needed. It was needed because
there were powerful people and there were weaker people. The powerful people used to collect all
the beautiful women for themselves, and the weaker people remained without wives. Their biology
remained unsatisfied. So marriage had to be invented – it was invented by the weaker men. The
weaker men got together, must have got together some time in the past and must have decided on
it, because when weaker men are together then the stronger man is no longer the stronger. He is
stronger than a single man, but he is not stronger then the whole mass of weak people.
The weak people got together and they said, ”One man, one wife” – because that is the ratio in which
children are born. It was enforced by the weaker man over the stronger people; otherwise it was
bound to be that they would collect all the beautiful women to their harem and the weaker people
would remain sex-starved. That situation was not good. The family helped, and the monogamous
family came into being. It was of great importance that the weaker people were no more sex-starved.
But now the family is no longer needed, now it is phony. It is possible now that the woman can
earn, the man can earn; they need not depend on each other. It is possible for a woman not to have
children. It is possible for a woman to hire another woman to have her children grow in the other
woman’s womb, or she can arrange for a test-tube baby.
Sex and children are no more connected.
You can have sex and it does not mean that you have to suffer children too.
Now the family is absolutely out of date.
The commune has future.
A commune means many independent individuals, not belonging to each other in the old ways of
family, tribe, religion, nation, race – no. Only in one way are they related to each other: that is
they are all independent. They respect your independence, and the same they expect from you: to
respect their independence.
That is the only relationship, the only friendship, the only thing that is the cementing force in a
commune: that we respect each other’s individuality, independence. The other’s way of life, his style
of life is absolutely accepted, respected.
The only condition is that nobody is allowed to interfere with anybody else in any sense.
From Personality to Individuality 20 Osho
CHAPTER 1. MAN IS BORN WITH A QUESTION MARK IN HIS HEART
So it is good that all this dead past is disappearing, and freeing us to create a new man, a new
humanity, a new world.
From Personality to Individuality 21 Osho
CHAPTER 2
To define is to confine – existence has no boundaries
31 December 1984 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHY DO I FEEL THAT IF LIFE IS MEANINGLESS AND EMPTY? IT SEEMS THAT I AM DEATHLY
AFRAID OF BEING ALONE. HOW CAN I GO TOTALLY INTO MY ALONENESS WITH JOY
INSTEAD OF FEAR?
THE word ”meaning” is irrelevant to life.
Life is neither meaningful nor meaningless.
But for centuries man’s mind has been conditioned to believe that life has great meaning. All that
meaning was arbitrary. Hence only in this century, for the first time in the whole history of man, has
the question, ”What is the meaning of life?” become one of the most important, because all old lies
are exposed.
Life was meaningful with a God. Life was meaningful with a life beyond death. Life was meaningful
because the churches, synagogues, temples, mosques, were continuously hammering the idea in
man’s mind.
A certain maturity has come to man, not to all, but to a very small minority.
22
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
I would like you to remember five significant names. First is Soren Kierkegaard. He was the first
man who raised this question and was condemned universally, because even to raise the question
created suspicion in people. Nobody had dared, ever, to ask, What is the meaning of life?
Even the atheists who had denied God, who had denied the afterlife, who had denied the existence
of the soul – even they had never asked what the meaning of life is. They said, Eat, drink and be
merry – that is the meaning of life.” It was clear to them that these joys – ”eat, drink, be merry” –
were what life is all about.
But Soren Kierkegaard went very deeply into the question. He created, unknowingly, a movement:
existentialism. Then followed the four other names: Martin Heidegger, Karl Jaspers, Gabriel Marcel,
and the last but not the least important – in fact the most important – Jean-Paul Sartre. These five
people went on hammering on the whole intelligentsia of the world: that life is meaningless.
Now, anybody who has some kind of intelligence is bound to come across this question, and he has
to find some way to encounter it.
I do not agree with these five great philosophers, but I give them the respect that they deserve. They
were courageous, because once you take meaning out of life, religion disappears, because religion
up to now has been nothing but an effort to give meaning to your life: to fill it so that you don’t feel
empty; to surround you with God and angels so that you don’t feel lonely.... You have not been going
to the church, the synagogue, and the temple without any reason.
For thousands of years man has not been bowing down to the priests without any reason. He
was gaining something. Of course they were exploiting him, but even in their exploitation man was
finding a certain consolation. He was not alone, he was being looked after. Life was not futile, it had
tremendous meaning, spiritual, esoteric, profound... so high and so deep that your intellect could
not comprehend it.
Still the majority of people, ninety-nine percent, are not bothered by the question. How can they be
bothered? They easily find consolation from the dead past. To them it is not a dead past.
I have told you about Bishop Jenkins of England who declared that there was no resurrection, that it
is a myth; that there was no virgin birth, it is an absolute lie, and that there is no need for anybody to
believe in all these mythologies to become a Christian. Of course, there he is not right because he
says, ”I don’t need all these things – I can still believe in God.” I can’t see what reason he can give
for his faith in God.
Christians were not fools to go on believing in absurdities for two thousand years. The reason was,
without those absurdities, you cannot support God the ultimate absurdity. Now, it is like taking your
legs and your hands and your head and everything away and saying I still believe in you. Nothing is
left behind.
All the theologians, from Thomas Aquinas to any modern preacher, understand perfectly well that
God needs support.
Every lie needs support.
From Personality to Individuality 23 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
Only truth can stand on its own feet.
The lie cannot stand on its own feet. It needs borrowed legs, a borrowed head, a borrowed heart –
everything borrowed. If you go on taking things away piece by piece, and then you say in the end
that all these things are not needed, that you still have faith in God.... So for a Christian, according
to Jenkins, these things should not be required as a fundamental part of Christianity. I don’t know
whom he is befooling. Certainly he is befooling himself, because these are the supports, and if you
have taken all the supports, the house will fall down. And he has not given a single reason now for
faith in God.
But I have remembered him again today because a few days ago lightning struck one of the most
beautiful cathedrals in England, York, and almost the majority of the masses believe that it is not a
coincidence: it is God punishing the church for installing a man like Jenkins as a bishop. He was the
fourth in the hierarchy; he had just to pass two people to become the archbishop of England. And it
would not have been difficult to pass these two people. Life is so full of accidents – they may die or
something – one can always hope. And he was not so far away, just close.
But all over England now, it is believed that God has punished the church. But this is a strange
God, and a strange punishment, because Jenkins was not the bishop of this cathedral. This is
strange. Jenkins was two hundred miles away. Your God is such a great shot – He missed him by
two hundred miles! A master archer.
And what has the cathedral of York to do with Jenkins’ statement? Lightning should be on Jenkins
or on the cathedral or church where he was the bishop, or on the archbishop of Canterbury because
he had appointed him. But this cathedral in York is in no way connected.
But people have found a relationship – it is not a coincidence. Then life becomes related to profound
realities, even your small stupidities. Now even if God si there, do you think He will bother about
Bishop Jenkins? And if He does bother then what kind of anger is this? He should at least learn a
little marksmanship. And He must have been doing this for millions of years; so much training....
I am reminded that a king who was a very great lover of archery – and he himself was a master
archer – always wanted to meet anybody who was better than him. But his whole life he could never
find anybody who was better than him. But one day when he was passing through a small village,
he saw on every tree a strange thing – perfect marksmanship, a master far better than him. On
every tree, on the wooden fences, everywhere, he found a round circle with an arrow just exactly in
the middle.
He stopped his chariot and asked, ”Where is this great archer? I would like to honor him. I will take
him to the palace – he should be my master. I have been in search but I have never found anybody
better than me. But this man seems to be a hundred percent accurate. Not even by a minute part of
an inch does he miss; he exactly hits the center.”
He went to a few trees and measured and it was the exact center. He asked somebody from the
village... because people had gathered; the king was there, the golden chariot was there – and what
is he doing? And he asked them, ”Where is this great archer?”
From Personality to Individuality 24 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
They all laughed, they said, ”He is no archer, he is the idiot of this village.” They said, ”You don’t
understand.”
”You are all idiots!” the king said. ”Such a great archer and you call him an idiot?”
They said, ”First, try to understand. He is no archer, he is just a fool. First he shoots the arrow
and then he draws the circle. Of course it is perfectly accurate, the circle he draws afterwards. So
wherever the arrow goes, there he makes the circle. Don’t get worried about him, just go on your
way. He is a complete idiot.
”We have been telling him that this is not the way of archery. First you make the circle and then you
shoot, but he goes on doing it his own way: he shoots first. He says, ’What does it matter which you
do first and which you do second? This way it is always perfect. Your way does not work at all, I
have tried it.’”
Now, God, for millions of years, has been threatening people with lightning, killing people with
lightning. Hinduism believes that lightning is nothing but the arrow of the lord Shiva. So whenever
there is lightning they have to make a sacrifice to Shiva, to pray or do some rituals, because lightning
is the perfect symbol that Shiva is angry, and they have to find the person who has made him angry.
But in the twentieth century, in this last part of the twentieth century, in one of the most educated
and sophisticated countries like England, most of the people believe that it is a punishment sent by
the lord to Bishop Jenkins! If this is God’s archery then I don’t think any man is a lesser archer than
Him. You won’t miss by two hundred miles! Even that idiot who discovered the right way was far
more intelligent than this God.
But why do people go on believing in such things? It is not without reason. The reason is that all
these things are giving meaning to their lives. A God above makes you feel safe, secure. If there
is no God then the whole sky is empty, and you are left alone. You are so tiny, and the emptiness
is so vast. Fear is bound to strike you – just to think of the emptiness of the sky, which is infinite,
because there cannot be any boundary anywhere. The old religions all believed there is a boundary,
but that is absolutely illogical. A boundary means there must be something beyond it, otherwise
how can you make a boundary? Yes, you can make a boundary around your house because of the
neighbor’s house. You can create a fencing around your house because the earth continues beyond
your fencing.
But if you are creating a fencing where the earth ends, and there is nothing else beyond your fencing,
your fencing will fall into the emptiness. How will it be supported from the other side? To create a
boundary, two things are needed; one on this side and one on the other side.
Obviously existence cannot have any boundary.
It is fearful to conceive infinity, the emptiness continuing forever and ever. You will never come to a
point where you can say, ”Now we have reached the end.”
There is no end and there is no beginning.
From Personality to Individuality 25 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
Now, think of a story which has no beginning and no end. It was one of my pastimes.... I have
never been much interested in novels, but once in a while when I had nothing else to read I had
my own way of reading a novel – just from the middle, because that gave it some authenticity. With
no beginning, you have to work out what must have preceded because you start suddenly in the
middle. And I would never go to the end. Again I would stop halfway – halfway through the second
half First I would try to figure out what the beginning could be and what the end could be; then I
would start reading from the beginning.
And I was puzzled that I always managed to figure out the beginning and the end. I never missed,
not only in details but on all the basic points, because it is a man – created thing, and the mind
works in a certain fashion. It has a routine way of working. If this is the middle, created by a human
mind, and if I understand the human mind, I can figure out what the beginning will be and what the
end will be.
Yes, if the book is written by a madman, then certainly I am not be able to figure it out. But madmen
don’t write books. That is very compassionate of them. But in fact if they start writing books, their
books will be far more interesting than the books written by scholars, intellectuals, because the
intellect has a certain pattern of work.
I am not in favor of all these five ”existentialists” – in quotes – because I am not even ready to call
them existentialists. Kierkegaard never really lived, or if you call his life, life, then it was worse than
death. He came out of his house only once a month, and the house was not much, just a small
room. His father, seeing that his son seemed to be a little crazy – continuously reading and writing
– tried to read his books, and threw them away because he could not manage to figure out what
Kierkegaard wanted to say. And he goes on and on about nothing, much ado about nothing.
Kierkegaard never got married. One foolish woman was in love with him... must have been foolish,
because he was an ugly man in the first place, and a strange type, eccentric, who lived in the
darkness of his room. Once a month he had to go out because his father, before he died, had
put money in the post office and made an arrangement that every month Kierkegaard could draw a
certain amount. He knew that Kierkegaard was not going to earn any money; he would simply die
in his room, so his father sold everything and deposited it in the post office. That’s why Kierkegaard
had to go out once every month; the first day of the month he would go out.
He lived in Copenhagen, and the whole town waited because it was a rare opportunity – Kierkegaard
coming out of his room. The children used to follow him to the post office; it was almost a procession.
And he had written a book, EITHER OR, which had just been published and that had become his
nickname in Copenhagen. So the children would be shouting ”either-or” – that was his real name to
them – ”Either-or is going to the post office!”
It was a great insight on the part of the children to name this man Either-or, because he was exactly
that. That’s why he could not marry the woman, because he continued to think: either-or. All the
favorable points for marriage, and all the unfavorable points for marriage all balanced out. He could
not decide. The woman waited for three years, but he said, ”Forgive me, I cannot decide. It is still
either-or.”
Now, this man, who had never loved, who had not a single friend, who had not in any way contacted
From Personality to Individuality 26 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
nature, who never communed in any way with existence.... If he feels life is meaningless, no wonder
– it has to be meaningless. But he is projecting his feeling of meaninglessness on everybody.
And then came these four other so-called existentialists. I am calling them so-called because they
had no communion with existence at all. The only way to have communion with existence is silence;
and they didn’t know the language of silence – how could they commune with existence? So what
were they doing? They were exposing the lie that the religious people have imposed on humanity.
And it was a lie.
The meaning that religious people have given to human life is arbitrary. These people are exposing
the arbitrariness of the religious people’s meaning – but that does not mean that life is meaningless.
It simply means that the meaning that was given to life up to now is found invalid:
God is not the meaning of life.
Life beyond death is not the meaning of life.
Jesus Christ is not the meaning of life. But that does not mean that life has no meaning.
But because you have been thinking that this is the meaning of life, when suddenly it falls apart, you
pick up the polar opposite idea of meaninglessness.
I want you to remember my standpoint.
I am an existentialist. And I say to you that life is neither meaningful nor meaningless. The question
is irrelevant.
Life is just an opportunity, an opening.
It depends what you make of it.
It depends on you what meaning, what color, what song, what poetry, what dance you give to it.
Life is a creative challenge.
And it is good that it hasn’t any fixed meaning, otherwise there would be no challenge. Then it would
be just a ready-made thing: you are born and the meaning of life is given to you and you carry it your
whole life; this is the meaning of your life. No, existence is far more profound than any meaning.
Existence is just a challenge to creativity.
It allows you all the space that you need – and you think it is empty? Just try to use the right words,
because words have a certain context. ”Empty” is a sad word; it seems something is missing,
something that should have been is not there. But why call it empty? Why in the first place expect
that something should be there waiting for you? Who are you? Give it the right name.
It is one of the basic arts of living to call things by their right name, the right word, to make the
right gesture... because even a slightly wrong word brings wrong associations. Now, ”empty”...
From Personality to Individuality 27 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
the very sound of the word reminds you of something futile. No, I give it a different meaning: it is
spaciousness, uncluttered with anything.
Existence is so spacious that it allows you absolute freedom to be whatsoever you want to be,
whatsoever you have the capacity to be.
It allows you an unhindered space to grow and to blossom. It does not impose anything on you.
God imposes things on you. He wants you to be a certain kind of man, having a certain kind of
personality, morality, ethics, etiquette. He wants to put you into a cage. And you think to be caged is
to have found meaning? To be caged is to be dead.
Nietzsche is far truer when he says, ”God is dead and I proclaim to humanity that now man is free.”
He is saying two things: ”God is dead” – that is the least important part of his statement, which has
angered all the religions of the world. The most important part is the second part: ”Hence man is
free.” Just think a little bit about it.
God is equivalent to slavery.
No God is equivalent to freedom.
And freedom is bound to be spacious – don’t call it empty. Yes, it is empty of any hindrance. It
is empty of any structure. It is empty of any guidance. It does not force you to move in a certain
direction, to be someone.
No, life gives you all the space you need, perhaps more space than you need. Space out, rather
than bothering about why life is empty. It is good – this spaciousness without boundaries, with no
guidelines, with no map. You can move like a cloud in the sky: untethered, unforced. Wherever the
wind takes you, wherever you reach, that is the goal.
Ordinarily we have been taught that there should be a goal and then you start reaching towards it;
if you reach then you have succeeded. But really you have missed immense opportunities. In going
for this particular goal you have lost immensely the whole richness of life.
Why does one feel life is meaningless? – because in the first place you expect some meaning to be
there. Who told you that you have to expect some meaning?
This is what I call the wrong that religions have done to man. They have told you there is meaning;
you accepted it – and when you don’t find it, you are frustrated, you feel lost.
So many intelligent people go on committing suicide. The greatest numbers of suicides in any
single profession is in the profession of philosophy. More philosophers commit suicide than any
other profession. Strange! Professors should be wise people, philosophers particularly so. But what
goes wrong? – their expectation of finding meaning. They try hard to find it, and it is not there. It
was never there in the first place.
Other people don’t try to find meaning, that’s why they need not commit suicide: they never feel
frustrated. They know that they have not tried to find it so they feel they are sinners, that something
From Personality to Individuality 28 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
is wrong with them; but they never feel that they have to commit suicide because life is meaningless.
They have not searched; meaning was always there. They have not cared. They have not listened
to the priest, to the wiseguys who are all around, who are giving advice freely – although nobody
takes it.
Advice is the only thing in the world that everybody gives and nobody takes. And everybody knows
it.
These people – Jaspers, Marcel, Heidegger, Sartre, they have moved to the opposite polarity.
Religions say that life is meaningful because God cannot create a meaningless life; it has an intrinsic
meaning, a significance. You have to fulfill it, and you will be rewarded for it. Religions gave this
hope but these people found that there is no God, that nobody has created a meaningful life, that
there is no destiny – man is just driftwood going nowhere. So they moved to the opposite polarity –
life is meaningless.
Just see the point: religions say life is meaningful, and these so-called existentialists have impressed
on the intelligentsia of the world that life is meaningless. But to me they are both making the same
mistake.
I say that meaning is irrelevant to life. Let me explain to you. Now, what is the smell of the color
red? You will say, ”It is irrelevant – smell has nothing to do with color.” And if you start searching for
a certain smell in the color red – because scriptures say, priests say, religions say, and thousands
of years of traditions say that the color red has a certain fragrance – you will find that there is no
fragrance. Color and smell are totally different dimensions; they never meet. Neither has smell any
color, nor has color any smell. That does not mean that color is futile, throw it away.
Life and meaning are totally different.
Meaning is a logical concept, and life has nothing to do with logic.
People who want to live have to put logic aside otherwise you cannot live, logic will come in
everywhere preventing you from living...”either-or.” You will think much, but you will not live much.
And the more you think, the less is the possibility of living.
Living needs a little transcendence from thinking.
Zorba the Greek says to his boss, ”Boss, only one thing is wrong with you – you think too much.” And
he is right; even his boss realizes finally that he is right. The whole day Zorba works hard, labors
– and then he dances and plays some instrument. What is it in Italian... santuri? – or in Greek...
santuri? I think whatever it is, santuri is a good name! Anyway all names are made up. Let’s call it a
santuri.
He plays the santuri, he dances, he goes mad, dancing – and the boss simply sits. One day Zorba
says, ”What are you doing sitting there? There is a full moon, there is the river, the sands are calling,
and the winds are so cool – come along with me.” With very hesitant feet the boss goes with him
because Zorba is dragging him, and Zorba is a very strong man.
From Personality to Individuality 29 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
The boss is just a boss as bosses are supposed to be: a rich man, intellectual, but not strong. That
Zorba just pulls him and starts dancing and playing on his santuri. And the boss also tries a little bit,
but finds it exhilarating – the wind, the moon, the river, the sand, and the mad way Zorba plays his
santuri, and the mad way he dances.... Slowly slowly, he forgets that he is boss and starts dancing.
It takes a little time to slip out of the mind, but he does. It is only for a few moments, but now he too
knows that life has a different taste.
Life is not available to thinking.
Perhaps it is available to dancing, to singing.
One thing is certain, that thinking is the most dry dimension of your life. It is a desert with no oasis.
If you feel life is meaningless, that simply means you don’t know how to live. You don’t know that
meaning has nothing to do with life.
This has to be a fundamental principle:
Life has nothing to do with meaning.
It is not arithmetic.
It is not logic.
It is not philosophy.
Living in itself is such an ecstasy – who cares for meaning? Can’t you visualize experiences which
are intrinsically so joyous that even to ask the question about meaning will look idiotic? Nobody
asks, What is the meaning of love? But these people who are asking, What is the meaning of life?
are bound to ask, What is the meaning of love?
There is one Russian story, a small story. In a village a man, a young man, is called an idiot by
everybody. From his very childhood he has heard that, that he is an idiot. And when so many people
are saying it – his father, his mother, his uncles, the neighbors, and everybody – of course he starts
believing that he must be an idiot. How can so many people be wrong? – and they are all important
people. But when he becomes older and this continues, he becomes an absolutely sealed idiot;
there is no way to get out of it. He tried hard but whatsoever he did was thought to be idiotic.
That is very human. Once a man goes mad he may become normal again but nobody is going to
take him as normal. He may do something normal but you will suspect that there must be something
insane about it. And your suspicion will make him hesitant and his hesitancy wi]l make you suspicion
stronger; then there is a vicious circle. So that man tried in every possible way to look wise, to do
wise things, but whatsoever he did people would always say it was idiotic.
A saint was passing by. He went to the saint in the night when there was nobody about and asked
him, ”Just help me to get out of this locked state. I am sealed in. They don’t let me out; they have
not left any window or door open so that I can jump out. And whatsoever I do, even if it is exactly the
same as they do, still I am an idiot. What should I do?”
From Personality to Individuality 30 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
The saint said, ”Do just one thing. Whenever somebody says,’Look how beautiful the sunset is,’ you
say, ”you idiot, prove it! What is beautiful there? I don’t see any beauty. You prove it.’ If somebody
says,’Look at that beautiful rose flower,’ catch hold of him and tell him,’Prove it! What grounds have
you to call this ordinary flower beautiful? There have been millions of rose flowers. There are
millions, there will be millions in the future; what special thing has this rose flower got? And what
are your fundamental reasons which prove logically that this rose flower is beautiful?’
”If somebody says,’This book of Leo Tolstoy is very beautiful,’ just catch hold of him and ask
him,’Prove where it is beautiful; what is beautiful in it? It is just an ordinary story – just the same
story which has been told millions of times, just the same triangle in every story: either two men and
one woman or two women and one man, but the same triangle. All love stories are triangles. So
what is new in it?”’
The man said, ”That’s right.”
The saint said, ”Don’t miss any chance, because nobody can prove these things; they are
unprovable. And when they cannot prove it, they will look idiotic and they will stop calling you
an idiot. Next time, when I return, just give me the information how things are going.
And next time when the saint was coming back, even before he could meet the old idiot, people of
the village informed him, ”A miracle has happened. We had an idiot in our town; he has become the
wisest man. We would like you to meet him.”
And the saint knew who that ”wisest man” was. He said, ”I would certainly love to see him. In fact I
was hoping to meet him.”
The saint was taken to the idiot and the idiot said, ”You are a miracle-worker, a miracle man. The
trick worked! I simply started calling everyone an idiot, stupid. Somebody would be talking of love,
somebody would be talking of beauty, somebody would be talking of art, painting, sculpture, and my
standpoint was the same:’Prove it!’ And because they could not prove it, they looked idiotic.
And it is a strange thing. I was never hoping to gain this much out of it. All that I wanted was to get
out of that confirmed idiocy. It is strange that now I am no longer an idiot, I have become the most
wise man, and I know I am the same – and you know it too.”
But the saint said, ”Never tell this secret to anybody else. Keep the secret to yourself Do you think
I am a saint? Yes, the secret is between us. This is how I became a saint. This is how you have
become a wiseman.” This is how things go on in the world.
Once you ask, What is the meaning of life? you have asked the wrong question. And obviously
somebody will say, ”this is the meaning of life” – and it cannot be proved. Then one thing is proved
automatically: that life is meaningless. But that is a fallacy. That’s why I say that all these five
existentialists – great names because theirs is the only great philosophical school that has arisen
in these last few decades – have defeated all other philosophical schools with the same trick, the
same one that the idiot used. About any painting they will say, ”Meaningless!” Of any poetry they will
say, ”Meaningless!” And there is no way to prove beauty; either you see it or you don’t see it. There
is no way to prove love; if you have to prove it, you are finished. Can you prove your love?
From Personality to Individuality 31 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
It is good that people take it for granted, at least in the beginning, that they love each other without
asking, ”Do you really love me? Where is love? Prove it first.” Then love would disappear from the
world because nobody can prove it. How can you prove it? At the most you can say, ”You can listen
to my heartbeat.”
And the other person can listen to your heartbeat and say, ”I can hear your heartbeat, but I don’t
hear any love. I don’t hear any song or dance or any bells ringing. It is just a heartbeat.” You can
find a stethoscope and listen to it more accurately, more loudly, so then it becomes really loud, but
you will not find any love there. Love is not a heartbeat.
Then what is love?
Has anybody ever been able to define it?
No, there is no way to define it.
There are things which are indefinable, hence I call my religion pure mysticism, because I accept
things which cannot be explained, which cannot be defined, which can only be lived, which can only
be known by experience. If you try to think about them you are going to miss them.
All these five great philosophers have missed life absolutely because they asked the wrong question,
they accepted the wrong answer, they fought the wrong answer and they moved to the polar
opposite. And remember, if you move from one wrong thing and to oppose it, you go to the polar
opposite, you reach another wrong thing – because only wrong can be the polar opposite of another
wrong, not right.
Life is simply an experience.
Your birth is only the beginning.
You are not born ready-made.
You are born with all dimensions open.
That’s the beauty and dignity of man.
A dog is born as a dog; he will remain a dog. He comes with a certain structure, lifestyle, morality,
religion, philosophy. He brings with him everything ready-made; in fact nature provides him with
everything. He never feels meaningless. He never bothers about meaning – it is only man who
bothers. Hence he thinks he needs a very great philosophical understanding. The dog comes into
the world completed.
Man is born incomplete, open; it is left to him what he is going to become, what he is going to make
out of his life.
This creates problems, but all those problems are challenges to be accepted, faced.
From Personality to Individuality 32 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
You have to be in constant effort for your own growth. Yes, many times you will move in a wrong
direction, but don’t be worried, that’s how we learn-by making mistakes.
My father used to stop me, saying, ”Don’t do that, you are doing it wrong.”
I said, ”One thing should be settled between us: let me find out that it is wrong, and never stop me
when I am going to commit a mistake.”
He said, ”What! You are going to commit a mistake and I am not to stop you?”
I said, ”Yes, because without mistakes I will never learn. And how long are you going to be with me?
Are you going to live for me, on my behalf? I have to live myself So please be kind enough: let me
fall, let me make mistakes, let me go wrong, allow me to see what is right and what is wrong. Yes, I
am groping, but only through this groping will I find out. And that which is found by you is only yours.”
Jesus may have found truth, Buddha may have found truth, but it is all hogwash, just meaningless
to you. You will have to travel the path, many paths, out of which some will take you in the wrong
direction and you will have to return to find the right one. But if you go on searching you are bound
to find, because when you start finding that the path is wrong, you are already starting to feel what
is right. It may not be very clear to you, but the moment you see that something is wrong, side by
side somewhere inside you, you have already achieved a glimpse of the right.
To know something as a lie means that you have got a vague idea of what is truth. So just moving
in wrong directions is not wrong, because it is through that movement that you will slowly, slowly,
crystallize the idea of the right. And once you find what is right then you will jump out of your bathtub
and run naked in the streets shouting, ”Eureka! Eureka! Eureka!”
That’s what happened to Archimedes. He ran into the palace of the king, naked, into the court! –
shouting just one word, ”Eureka! I have found it!”
But the king said, ”Don’t be so excited – at least you should have put some clothes on. Along the
whole street people have gathered and you are standing in the court.”
Then he looked and saw that he was naked. He said, ”in fact, I was in my bathtub, and that’s where
I found it.” A great present had been given to the king which was made of gold. The king had given
him the job of finding some way of telling whether it was pure gold or was there some mixture?
The king said, ”I don’t want you to destroy it and I don’t want you to cut it. I don’t want you to poke
into it to find out whether it is also pure gold inside. Work out a method where you don’t touch it, and
find out whether it is pure gold.” And that’s what he had found while he was in the tub.
The tub was full of water, absolutely full. When he entered the tub he saw water spilling out. As he
lay down in the tub, he saw more water spilling out. And a sudden flash in the mind – he jumped out
of the tub and saw how much water had spilled out, and how much the water level had gone down.
And he saw it was exactly his volume. He had found the way!
From Personality to Individuality 33 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
Now, find some pure gold and put it in water. The bath should be full, then water will spill out
because you have put the gold into the water. Now weigh the water that has overflowed, and then
you know how much water spills out when you add a certain weight of pure gold. Then bring the
king’s present, and put it into the water. You are not destroying it, not touching it. If exactly the same
amount of water spills out as did from the same weight of pure gold, then the present is pure gold.
Otherwise it is impure; some other metal is there.
After the discovery he was so ecstatic that he forgot all about the bathroom, and the clothes, and he
just ran And the king could understand. He said, ”I can understand when someone finds something
on his own, it is so ecstatic.” Just a small thing – he had not found God or nirvana or enlightenment.
No, he had just found a way to decide whether the gold was pure or not. But even that, the flash of
finding something, makes you aware of your own intelligence. The greater the finding, the greater
you feel your intelligence.
When you find what life is by living, then you will not find yourself surrounded by emptiness, you will
be surrounded by space, pure space, which allows you to grow in every direction.
Existence is freedom.
And yes, I agree with Nietzsche: man is free.
Up to now the religions have tried to make man a slave – spiritually, psychologically, but a slave all
the same.
Nietzsche is not right that God is dead, because God has never been there. It was just his emphasis
– I know that he was a man of tremendous insight and could not commit such a mistake. When he
says, ”God is dead,” he does not mean that God was there and is now dead. He wants to emphasize
the fact that there is no God: forget about God and forget about all the mythologies that you have
lived by up to now. From now onwards you are free. Live in freedom, and create yourself
Why be created by God? And anyway God is not capable of creating you. just look: He created Eve
out of a rib from Adam – a great creator! In the first place is He a certified surgeon? I don’t think
that He is an F.R.C.S., and He is doing surgery without anesthesia. Adam was just asleep and He
took out his rib. But when you are stupid then you are going to believe in any stupid thing. And from
the rib how can you create the woman?
I don’t see any way to create a woman from a rib. This is pure crap! – and so insulting to women
that at least women should stop going to all the churches and all the synagogues – because God
has dealt such an insult He cannot be forgiven! Let him apologize. What do these liberation women
go on doing? They should protest before every church, before every synagogue, that no woman will
enter unless that statement from the Bible is removed.
Woman is created from the rib of Adam? Why could He not also create woman the way He has
created Adam? The word Adam means earth, mud. First He made Adam with earth, and then
breathed life into him. Now, when He was making woman, was earth missing? Was all the mud
finished with one Adam? It would have been easier to make the woman also from earth. Why take
a rib from this poor man?
From Personality to Individuality 34 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
And after that, you know what used to happen? I have just heard about it, I don’t know whether it
is true or not. Every night when Adam came home and went to sleep, the first thing Eve would do
was count his ribs, because she was afraid God might create another woman. Every night.... It was
a natural fear because if another rib was missing then Adam would have been in real trouble. But
God never did the same operation again.
Humanity’s past is full of myth, and a myth simply means an invented story to give you a bogus
feeling of meaning.
And man, even very educated people, cultured people.... I had one professor, my colleague in the
university, who was a great follower of these people: Soren Kierkegaard to Jean-Paul Sartre. He
himself thought that he was an existentialist. I asked him, ”Do you really think there is no God?”
He said, ”Yes, there is no God, no Holy Ghost, no Jesus Christ.” He had been a Christian.
I said, ”If I can manage some meeting with one of these three fellows....”
He said, ”What! A meeting! How can you manage a meeting? Nobody has ever seen them. It is all
just superstition.”
I said, ”Okay, come to my house tonight.”
He started becoming a little afraid: ”But what will you do?”
I said, ”That you don’t ask. First let the meeting happen.”
He said, ”With whom?”
I said, ”Don’t be bothered – with whomsoever I can get the appointment. I don’t know yet with whom
I can get the appointment. You come with me tonight. Eat with me, sleep in my house and I will try
my best.”
He said, ”But I am very busy today.”
I said, ”There is no problem, then tomorrow. It is going to happen one day so this busyness without
business won’t help – you are not busy.”
He said, ”That’s right, I am not busy. I was just trying to get out of this.”
I said, ”Why? I am going to make an appointment, and you are trying to get out of it. You deny them,
and having denied them then you say life is meaningless. I will make your life meaningful tonight.”
He said, ”My God! Okay.”
But sitting with me in my car, he would look at me again and again, and he would say, ”With whom
are you going to make...?”
I said, ”Don’t worry, that is my business. And I have done it many times so don’t worry!”
From Personality to Individuality 35 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
But how could the poor man stop worrying? A minute or two minutes would pass, then again he
would say, ”You can just tell me. Are you joking, kidding?”
I said, ”I am a serious man and this is no joke – making an appointment with one of the fellows in
the trinity.”
Eating, he was not there, he was just afraid. And I told him, ”Now I am going to make the
appointment. This is the room for you to sleep in. You rest or you can read. I will be here nearabout
ten tonight.”
He said, ”Where are you going?”
I said, ”I have a place where I can arrange to have a contact.”
He said, ”A place! Are you mad or something?”
I said, ”You just wait. It is only a question of one night and it will be decided.”
I had a friend in the medical college. I went to him; he was a professor, and I told him that I wanted
one skeleton just for the night. He said, ”What are you up to?”
I said, ”Don’t be worried, nobody will be killed and no problem will arise out of it.”
He said, ”It is not permissible for me. They are under my... I have the key. If one skeleton is missing
tomorrow I will be caught.”
I said, ”Before morning it will be back here. It is just that I have to make one appointment with a
man.”
He said, ”What appointment?”
I said, ”Don’t be worried. Just let me finish, don’t waste my time. Just give me a skeleton.”
He said, ”If you insist, take one, but before morning it should be back.”
I said, ”Don’t be worried; perhaps there will be two skeletons. I don’t know what will happen, because
this is just an appointment. A meeting will happen and then after the meeting nobody knows. It is
with the Holy Ghost.”
The medical professor said, ”I am coming with you. It seems there is some risk.”
I said, ”You can come. There is just enjoyment, entertainment – no risk. Come with me” – and he
did.
I was living in a big bungalow so I had given the professor of philosophy a side room which had a
bathroom attached and a small walk-in closet. We reached home. I left the skeleton in the garage.
I knocked on the door; he came, looking afraid. He opened the door and said, ”What about the
appointment?”
From Personality to Individuality 36 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
I said, ”Everything is fixed, the appointment is going to happen. You just rest in your bed and
whenever you hear three knocks you should go into your bathroom.”
He said, ”In the bathroom?”
I said, ”What can I do? I tried my best to tell him that there is a good sitting room, but the Holy Ghost
is the Holy Ghost.”
He said, ”I will meet him in the bathroom if you insist.”
I said, ”I have no objection, and I don’t think you have any objection.”
He said, ”Holy Ghost! – in the bathroom?”
Only in the bathroom was it possible, because from the back there was a door into the bathroom so
I could bring the Holy Ghost in from the back. Otherwise from where to bring it into his room? In
India, just to clean the bathroom, you have to have a door from the outside because the people who
clean the bathrooms cannot go through the inside of your house. That is impossible in India. So I
had kept that door open from the very beginning.
He went to bed and covered himself with the blanket. I put the light off. He said, ”No. Keep the light
on.”
I said, ”Don’t be worried, because when the Holy Ghost comes, the light comes on, he is so
illuminated. Don’t be worried.”
He said, ”But still, keep the light on. And where will you be?”
I said, ”I will be in the next room. If there is any trouble, or if the Holy Ghost does any unholy thing to
you, either you can hide in this closet and lock it from the inside so he cannot do anything to you, or if
you still have any voice left, you can call me – I will come immediately. But my experience, because
this appointment has happened many times before, is that people lose their voice. They want to say
something, they want to scream, but they cannot; they are just choked – just the presence of the
Holy Ghost!”
He said, ”I was an idiot to talk to you about this meaninglessness of life. Perhaps there is meaning.”
I said, ”No need to change your philosophy so soon. First let the meeting happen.”
And the meeting happened. I persuaded him to put the light off because otherwise the Holy Ghost
wouldn’t come. So I put the light off. I brought the skeleton in through the back door and put it in
the right place in the bathroom. Just nearabout twelve – the other professor was also staying with
me in my room – we knocked on his door. I had told him, ”The moment the Holy Ghost knocks on
your door, open the bathroom door and have the meeting. Whatsoever question you have to ask,
you can ask. Everything else is then up to you. With the appointment my work is finished.”
We knocked on his door. He jumped out of his bed and fell on the floor! In the darkness he could not
figure out where he was. He really wanted to get out of the room, but instead he went into the bath
From Personality to Individuality 37 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
room where I had kept the light on. The skeleton was there. He saw it and just fell down and went
unconscious. I called the medical professor and said, ”Now you help – this is the second skeleton!
I’ll remove the first one to my car, and you take care of this man. That’s why I have brought you with
me. You thought it was for some other reason, but a medical doctor is always needed when such
encounters happen. Now look after him!”
He said, ”You are a real trouble. Now I have to look after him, and perhaps he may die or anything
may happen and I will be responsible because I am medically attending him.”
But he did not die. He opened his eyes, looked at the professor, looked at me, closed his eyes again
and said, ”Has... has he gone?” The first thing he asked was, ”Has he gone?”
I said, ”Who?”
He said, ”The Holy Ghost... and I do believe in God the father, the Holy Ghost and Jesus Christ and
I will never say anything about it again.”
I said, ”This is good! I have converted you into a Christian.”
He said, ”My God! What an experience. My wife will not believe it, nobody wi]l believe it. Even I
would not have believed it if I had not seen it. Has he gone?”
I said, ”You can look in the bathroom.”
He opened the bathroom, looked and said, ”Yes, he is gone.” And that man started going to church
and became a very very religious person. The whole university was amazed at what had happened.
I told them, ”It is the result of a great encounter.”
”What encounter?” they asked; and I spread the whole story.
And I told him, ”Don’t be a fool! Come with me to the medical doctor; he can tell you that I brought
the skeleton. There was no Holy Ghost, no appointment. You are simply a coward.”
He said, ”You cannot befool me now – I have seen with my own eyes. Am I to believe my eyes or
your words – or any medical professor? I don’t care what anybody says, from now onwards I am
going to remain a Christian. You cannot destroy my Christianity.”
He is still a Christian, very pious, helping others to be Christians – and all that he had seen was only
a skeleton! I told him – I brought the medical professor and he told him – ”You can come and we will
show you the same skeleton so you can recognize it.”
He said, ”I am not going. You showing anything to me....” He said, ”I don’t trust this man: if he can
manage an encounter, a meeting with the Holy Ghost, he can manage anything. Perhaps the Holy
Ghost is going to be there again, wherever you are both trying to take me. I am not going again,
not before death.” And he crossed himself; each time he would say ”Holy Ghost” he would make the
sign of the cross. Such a conversion!
From Personality to Individuality 38 Osho
CHAPTER 2. TO DEFINE IS TO CONFINE – EXISTENCE HAS NO BOUNDARIES
But people have been living under all kinds of superstitions which may have been founded on some
reason in the past; but that reason they have not been able to understand clearly. It is true that Jesus
did not die on the cross, but it is untrue that there was a resurrection. He was taken down from the
cross and he escaped from Judea. While escaping from Judea, of course he met a few people, and
certainly a few of his disciples. And they all thought that he was back, he was resurrected!
But he escaped from Judea because he knew perfectly well.... That was the suggestion given to
him by Pontius Pilate – because he allowed him to escape. The whole credit goes to that Roman
governor-general of Judea. It is a strange coincidence that Rome became the citadel of Christianity:
it was Rome who crucified Jesus, it was a Roman governor-general who had helped him to escape.
But it was made clear to Jesus that he should not be found inside Judea or nearby because then
Pontius Pilate would be held responsible; so he had to escape as far away as possible.
And Jesus escaped really far away: he died in Kashmir in India. I have been to his grave. He lived a
long life of one hundred and twelve years. But those six hours on the cross were enough: he never
tried again to prove that he was the messiah. And in India nobody would have bothered about him;
messiah means nothing there. There are hundreds of living incarnations of God any time, any day,
any night.
Once I happened to stay in Allahabad. I was attending a Hindu world conference. Somebody by
mistake had invited me thinking that I was a Hindu. They found out, but it was too late. By that time
I had disturbed everything that they were planning: how to convert the whole world into Hinduism.
I was staying with hundreds of other guests in tents by the side of the Ganges, a beautiful place
they had chosen for the conference. In those tents at least five incarnations of God were present. In
India it is so easy. Nobody can object – you can declare yourself an incarnation of God. About that
India is very nice. Who cares? Who bothers? It is your business: if you think you are an incarnation
of God, good; be an incarnation of God. You are not doing any harm to anybody.
But that one experience of Jesus’ was so bad, so horrible, that he dropped the idea of messiah-
hood, and he dropped the idea of solving the problems of the whole of humanity. He had found what
happens if you try to redeem humanity – you are crucified!
But his escaping helped a religion to be born. Now, Christians have no report of what happened
after his resurrection. If he was resurrected, okay. Then what happened? When did he die? Where
did he die? Where is his grave? Why have you not preserved his grave? because that must be the
holiest thing for you. All that they have preserved – Sheela has just informed me – was the foreskin
of Jesus Christ... because he must have been circumcised.
The poor Christians... and even that has been stolen from the Vatican yesterday! Now they have
nothing! It was not much anyway. What can you do with the foreskin? And I don’t think it was
his foreskin; anybody’s would do because foreskins are just foreskins. It is not written on it, ”Jesus
Christ” – but somebody has done a really great job, stealing it
Now the whole of Christianity is shaken because their greatest treasure is lost.
From Personality to Individuality 39 Osho
CHAPTER 3
Beware! I am here to destroy your dreams
1 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
I HAVE HEARD YOU SAY THAT ONLY CHRISTIANS DREAM OF JESUS, AND FOLLOWERS OF
KRISHNA DREAM ONLY OF KRISHNA SANNYASINS ARE DREAMING OF YOU, OSHO. WILL
YOU COMMENT?
DREAMING is a substitute for the real.
It is a mind device to console you.
If you have been fasting, you will dream in the night of a feast because the hunger needs food,
and without food sleep will be difficult. The mind has to provide you some substitute, that’s what
dreaming is. It gives you the feeling that you are no longer hungry; you are eating and you are
eating good food, delicious food, food that you like. Now you can sleep without any trouble. The
mind has drugged the body through the dream.
But a dream is not reality. You can dream of eating but that is not going to nourish you. The mind
can befool the body for the time being but the body is going to suffer. Reality is reality, and you need
real food.
A Christian dreaming of Christ, a Hindu dreaming of Krishna, or a sannyasin dreaming of me –
all are doing the same thing. It makes no difference of whom you are dreaming; that is irrelevant.
40
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
Krishna, Christ, Mahavira or Buddha, Zarathustra... you can dream of anybody. The object of the
dream is irrelevant, what is significant is that you are dreaming.
So the first thing to be remembered is that there must be a certain hunger behind it, which the mind
is trying to fulfill. Read the message clearly: you are not what nature intends you to be; you are
missing something immensely important in you; you are not yet your authentic self The dream of
Christ, Krishna or me is symbolic. It shows that you are groping in the dark: Who are you? Krishna?
Christ? Me? You are none of these people.
So remember that the dream indicates a certain hunger in you. That is the first thing to remember. It
is very significant, because all people are not dreaming of Krishna, Christ and me. Millions of people
are dreaming of money, millions of people are dreaming of power, prestige. Men are dreaming of
women, women are dreaming of men. And the market is vast, you can choose any commodity to
dream about. Somebody is dreaming of becoming the president of a country; somebody is dreaming
that he has become the president of the country.
Chuang Tzu has a beautiful story about this. And he was a man not to tell a story but to act it.
Chuang Tzu is one of the rare beings who have happened on this earth – unique in every way. One
morning he awoke and sat up in his bed, very sad. Nobody had ever seen him sad. He was a man
of laughter, a very non-serious man. Not only non-serious, he was known as the most absurd man
– playing jokes upon himself, upon his people, upon his Master, upon his disciples. This too was a
joke, but everybody was puzzled because he had never been sad; and they asked, ”Why are you
sad?”
He said, ”I am in such trouble but I don’t think any one of you can help me, so what is the point of
telling you?”
They became even more curious. They said, ”Please tell us! Who knows; we may be able to do
something. All together we may be able to find some way. If there is a problem, there must be some
solution. If there is a question, somewhere there must be an answer to it.”
Chuang Tzu said, ”If you insist I will tell you what the problem is. The problem is not a question that
you can find an answer for. It is a riddle which has no answer, and I am caught in the riddle; that’s
why I am sad. Last night I dreamed that I had become a butterfly, flying from this plant to that, from
this flower to that flower. And I completely forgot that I was Chuang Tzu, the famous, great Master:
I was really the butterfly, Chuang Tzu was nowhere at all.”
The disciples said, ”This is not a problem – everybody dreams. We don’t see the riddle.”
Chuang Tzu said, ”Wait a little, I have not told you the whole thing. Now waking up, the problem has
arisen: perhaps now the butterfly has gone to sleep and is dreaming that she is Chuang Tzu. And I
am caught in it: what’s what? Has Chuang Tzu dreamed of a butterfly or is a butterfly dreaming of
Chuang Tzu?”
They were all silent, then they said, ”Perhaps you are right that we cannot help you. Nobody can
help you.”
From Personality to Individuality 41 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
But he had raised a tremendously important question. His question remained unanswered because
I was not there! Naturally, for twenty-five centuries the question has waited for me. It is so simple. If
I had been there I would have hit him really hard and awakened him.
The butterfly had no problem; it was not worried about what happened to Chuang Tzu. It was not
concerned at all with Chuang Tzu – Chuang Tzu is concerned. The butterfly was alone, but you are
not alone. Now you are sitting up in your bed concerned about what is right, what is real; whether
you are Chuang Tzu or the butterfly.... all these things prove that you are not a dream, you are a
reality.
The butterfly was just a dream. In a dream you are asleep. There are no questions, no problems.
You don’t even think that it is a dream: you are it, you are totally identified with it. Now you are
not identified with it. You cannot be a butterfly, that much is certain, because butterflies are not
concerned about such great philosophical problems. It is only the prerogative of man to be puzzled,
to be worried, to be riddled.
You dream of Jesus, Krishna, Zarathustra, Mohammed – why? There must be some hunger in you
which you feel is fulfilled by Jesus. That’s what the Christian has been told: that Christ has arrived,
and you have not yet arrived. Somehow you have to arrive. But you can never be another Christ;
existence never repeats itself. History repeats itself because history belongs to idiotic humanity,
hence it goes on moving in a circle, doing the same stupidities again and again and again. It never
learns.
But existence never repeats itself It always produces only unique pieces, one of a kind, and that is
enough. What is the point of repeating it? It is not an assembly line in a car factory where every
minute a car comes out similar to another car and they go on coming off the assembly line, exactly
the same.
Nature does not manufacture people, things, birds, flowers.... There is no assembly line, there is no
model; it goes on exploring new dimensions. So it is certain that you are feeling starved: Christ is
your food, somebody else’s food is Krishna. These are simply different kinds of disease.
A Hindu has become accustomed to a certain dish. Of course, when he is hungry he cannot dream
of a dish which he knows nothing about. You can dream only about something you know. Can you
dream of something that you don’t know? It is impossible, because a dream is only a repetition.
A dream is not creative; yes a dream can be compositive but never creative. See the difference
between these two words: compositive and creative. It can compose something. For example it can
take the head of Jesus and the body of Krishna and compose something which is both Krishna and
Christ....
That’s what people like Mahatma Gandhi have been doing their whole life: composing – taking
something from the KORAN, something from the BIBLE, something from the GITA, something from
Mahavira, something from Buddha and trying to make something that in India is called khicharee.
In English, the closest term is ”hodge-podge,” but it is nothing to be compared with ”khicharee.”
With the legs of one man, the hands of another man, the hairs of somebody else, the eyes from
somewhere else, you can make khicharee. You can make a composite man having everything –
From Personality to Individuality 42 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
eyes, nose, ears, head, legs, everything – but it will still be dead. By composing, you cannot create
life, you cannot create consciousness. A dream can be a composite. You can see a horse flying –
no horse flies, but there are things that fly: flying saucers, flying planes and flying birds, and it is not
very difficult to compose a horse which flies.
What dream is to man, mythology is to society.
The Mohammedans say that Mohammed never died; but then the problem arises, where has he
gone? It is time, now that he has millions of followers – six hundred million followers – it is time he
came out. Where is he hiding and what is he doing? No, Mohammedans have a myth. A myth is a
dream dreamed by the whole race, a collective dream – but it is composite.
Mohammed used to move from one place to another on a beautiful horse; and Arabian horses are
the most famous horses in the world. Jesus would have looked very poor because he was just
using a donkey. And it is good that Christians have not created the myth that Mohammedans have
created: Mohammed never died, one day he simply flew up with his horse towards God. The horse
has also gone with him into heaven! It is more fortunate to be a horse with Mohammed than to be a
Mohammedan and a man.
And I say it is good that Christians have not dreamed of the same dream, otherwise Jesus would
have gone with his donkey. And in heaven what will these horses and donkeys be doing? – because
there are many donkeys from ancient times already there. All your saints and all your sages... what
are they? Now, this is mythology.
Prophets die, but Mohammedans have to make something special for Mohammed – that he never
dies, he’s alive! Every other prophet has entered heaven after death, Mohammed is the only one
who goes there alive. He not only goes alive, his horse also goes with him. Naturally, the horse had
to fly.
So you will see in the Mohammedan sacred days of Muharram, horses made with wings. Horses
don’t grow wings but one horse has done it. They cannot make the image of Mohammed because
Mohammed is against images; so they simply make the horse with wings, and you have to imagine
Mohammed on it. You will only see a horse made of paper; you have to imagine Mohammed on it –
and there are Mohammedans who do see him.
My village had a big population of Mohammedans, and in my childhood it was still not the way it
turned out later on, that Hindus and Mohammedans started killing each other. It was because of the
same man I told you about – Mirza Allama Iqbal. He is a great poet, there is no doubt about it. I
mentioned his name to you because he had written that poem, ”My country is the best in the whole
world.” Hindostan hamara sare jehan se achchha.
He uses the word Hindostan for India, but later on the same man created the idea of Pakistan.
He was the originator of the idea that Hindus and Mohammedans should separate, that they could
not live together because their religions were different, their cultures were different, their languages
were different, and that there was no need for them to live together, they should separate. Everybody
laughed: the whole idea was Don Quixotic, absolutely absurd, because Hindus and Mohammedans
had lived together for centuries, and there was no problem.
From Personality to Individuality 43 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
But soon, a great politician, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, got hold of the idea of Allama Iqbal. For thirty
years he went on emphasizing, ”We need Pakistan, we cannot live with Hindus” – and he created
Pakistan. India was divided into two – the same India, Hindostan, which was ”the best in the whole
world.” And the same man created the idea and the philosophy of Pakistan. The word Pakistan
means ”holy land.”
Naturally he had to create something better than Hindostan. Hindostan was after all just a country,
but Pakistan was a holy land. And millions of Hindus and Mohammedans were cut to pieces, killed
and butchered. But in my childhood it was not so. Hindus used to go to Mohammedan saints without
any difficulty; Mohammedans used to take advice from Hindu saints with no difficulty.
In Muharram, which is a yearly Mohammedan sacred festival, they make these mementoes...
from past memories, fourteen hundred years old. They cannot make Mohammed’s image, that
is prohibited. We don’t know how he looked. We have some idea of Jesus; perhaps it is not very
true because photography was not available then. Perhaps it is more imaginative than real, because
the people who made the pictures must have tried to do their best, and they must have created the
picture to look like a prophet. Whether the man looked like a prophet or not is questionable.
I know of Jewish sources which say that Jesus was only four foot five inches high. Not only that, he
was very ugly; not only that, he was a hunchback. Perhaps this is just enmity, perhaps there is some
truth in it. Perhaps both are imagination – one of the enemies and one of the friends – and between
the two the real is completely lost.
I am absolutely certain that Buddha never looked like his statues because those statues were made
five hundred years after him – after Buddha had already been dead for five hundred years. After
those five hundred years, Alexander the Great visited India. The image of Buddha is closer to the
face of Alexander the Great than Buddha himself, because the face is Greek, the nose is Greek, the
eyes are Greek. Buddha’s statue does not look like a Hindu statue.
When Hindu sculptors saw Alexander they got the idea, a good model. Alexander was really a
beautiful man. To make Buddha in Alexander’s image was very easy; and there was no proof that
he looked otherwise.
If you see the Buddhist monasteries and temples in China, you will see a different Buddha, because
the Chinese have their own idea of beauty. It may not appeal to you, but that is your problem; it
appeals to them. For example, the nose should not be so pointed and so long, it should be flat.
Nobody in the whole world likes a flat nose, but what to do? Chinese have flat noses, and they are
one fourth of the whole world: out of every four people one is a Chinese.
I have heard of a man who had three sons, and he said, ”Now we have to stop.”
His wife said, ”Why?”
He said, ”The fourth is going to be Chinese. I have read it: out of every four men, the fourth is a
Chinese. From a very reliable source I have read it. I am not going to have any more children. Three
and we stop – we don’t want any Chinese in the house.”
From Personality to Individuality 44 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
If you go to Japan you see a totally different Buddha. If you put a Japanese Buddha and an Indian
Buddha together, you cannot believe these two statues are of the same man. You can stretch your
imagination as far as possible but there seems to be no possibility that these two statues can be of
the same man. The Indian Buddha’s belly is in, his chest is out. The Japanese Buddha is just the
opposite: his chest is in, his belly is really sticking out.
Now, no Indian can accept that this is beauty. Alexander was an athletic personality, well-trained,
well-polished – and athletes have always liked the belly down and the chest forward, just like a lion.
And this Japanese Buddha looks like a strange fellow with such a belly: a laughingstock. And his
head is also Japanese, his face is also Japanese.
Just a few days ago Sheela brought a picture to me. That picture was sent from a sannyasin
from California. California is just next to Oregon in that way.... The sannyasin has been growing
a bump on his forehead. It must be a growth of some kind, perhaps some cancer or something.
But people love.... Even if you have cancer, somebody can say, ”This is not cancer, this is a sign
of enlightenment” – you will be overjoyed. Ramdas has the same kind of growth. So Ramdas has
spread the story in America that when a man becomes a Buddha, awakened, this bump on the
forehead grows. And he has produced a picture from somewhere of a statue of Buddha with a bump
on the head.
I have never seen any statue of Buddha with a bump on his forehead. That picture was my first
experience. And nobody knows whose statue that is. It is only on Ramdas’ authority that it is
Buddha’s statue. It has no similarity to Buddha – Indian, Japanese, Chinese, or Tibetan, all the
countries which have been Buddhist. None of them has any statue which has a bump on the
forehead.
Now either it is a photographic trick or somebody may have made a plaster of Paris statue of Gautam
Buddha with a bump. Then the photograph has been taken, and Ramdas is going around with that
photograph, telling people, ”Look, it also happened to Buddha.” And in California you can believe
anything. This is the most religious land in the whole world: all the saints are born in California.
Now, this sannyasin sends me the picture because the same bump has grown on his forehead, and
he says, ”Osho, does it mean that I have become enlightened? – Ramdas says so.” The picture is
supplied by Ramdas. The sannyasin has the same bump. He sends the pictures of himself from
all sides to show his bump clearly: from above, from this side, from that side, so that there is no
suspicion about his bump. And he is really exhilarated.
And I told Sheela to tell the poor guy to go to a doctor and let it be examined. God forbid that it may
have something to do with cancer. Be quick, and don’t be befooled by people like Ramdas. And
if you can take Ramdas also to the doctor.... As far as I am concerned, if I meet Buddha I will put
him into our medical center. His bump has to be removed even at the cost of his enlightenment. If it
disappears, let it disappear, but this cancer has to be taken care of first. Enlightenment can happen
again. But fools are fools. The sannyasin will be hurt by my answer. He would have loved it if I had
said, ”Yes, you have become enlightened.”
It is a strange world!
Here people want consoling lies.
From Personality to Individuality 45 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
Nobody is ready for the truth.
But we do have some idea of Jesus’ face, something close... of Buddha’s maybe something close.
But about Mohammed we have no idea at all because for fifteen centuries Mohammedans have
persistently destroyed every possible trace of Mohammeds personality.
One of my friends, a Hindu saint, created a temple, a temple of all religions. That was his lifelong
work. A beautiful temple he created, and it was very difficult for him to collect that much money.
It was all made in pure marble, and he made the statues of all the religious people, forgetting
completely that you cannot make the statue of Mohammed. He thought he was doing a great work.
He made Buddha, Mahavira, Lao Tzu, Jesus, Moses, Zarathustra. About them there was no
problem. Even if no actual photograph exists, some kind of description is available. It just needed a
creative artist, imaginative enough to figure it out. And if an artist is really imaginative and creative
he can come close to a photograph.
There exist in all great police departments, artists.... You have to describe the face of the thief that
you saw in the night, disappearing in the darkness. You can’t be certain what kind of man he was,
but you just describe him, and the artist is capable of figuring out, from your description, the picture
of the thief; and he draws the picture. I have seen these pictures, and when these thieves are
caught, they are so similar to their picture that the artist seems to be simply intuitive: he got the idea
from a very meager description.
Even the witness was not certain whether the man had a mustache or not, because in the night
when you are in danger – the man is carrying a gun, and your safe is broken – who bothers whether
the man has a mustache or not? How long? How small? – whether it is an Adolf Hitler cut.... You are
not in a state to think about all these things like what color his eyes are, and in the night.... But you
give any description, whatsoever comes to your mind and the artist figures it out. And I have seen
really impossible things. The artist manages somehow, and through his picture being published in
the newspaper the thief is caught.
So there is a possibility... and this man had great influence on many people. He managed to get
some body to make Mohammed’s statue, but he was not aware that he was going to be in great
trouble. His temple was completely burned, broken, every statue broken, because he had done the
most profane act possible according to the Mohammedans. His whole life’s work was demolished
within hours. There was no temple left at all.
I had seen the temple, and I have also gone to the place after the temple was completely demolished.
There were just ruins: statues broken, pillars half standing, the roof burned. Somehow the man who
made this temple escaped, otherwise they would have killed him also, because this is one of the
greatest crimes against Mohammedanism – to create the image of Mohammed.
But man after all is man, he needs some substitute. So when Mohammedans dream a dream of the
horse with the flying wings, of course they must be seeing somebody sitting on it but they must not
tell it to anybody. That is dangerous. Mohammedans know only one punishment: to just cut off your
head. Beheading is the simplest thing for them to do.
From Personality to Individuality 46 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
You have a hunger. The dream indicates the hunger, but the dream is not going to fulfill it. It is only
indicative. Take the indication, then start getting rid of the dream; its work is fulfilled. Don’t follow
the dream, don’t try to become Christ, Buddha or Zarathustra, no. That was not the meaning of the
dream.
If you start trying to become a Jesus or a Buddha, the most unfortunate thing is that you may
succeed. If you fail there is no harm – most probably you will fail. Two thousand years have passed
and nobody has been able to become a Christ again; that’s enough proof. But that does not mean
that people have not tried.
Millions of people have tried to become a replica, but fortunately they failed. But there is a possibility,
unfortunately, that you may succeed. That means you have gone insane. It means nothing else; it
simply means you have gone insane, you have started believing that you are Christ. Your dream
has taken possession of you so much so that now it is no longer a dream, it has become a reality to
you.
To go insane is to go farthest from yourself.
That’s the meaning of insanity to me.
Sanity means to be closer to yourself, closer and closer. A day comes when you are just at the very
center of your being; then you are the sanest person in the world... when you are just yourself and
nobody else, just pure, authentic, with no shadow of anybody else falling on you.
To be at the center of your being is to be sane.
And to go far away from yourself is to be insane.
Now, if you become Christ, you have reached the farthest point from yourself; or if you become
a Buddha or you become me, you have reached the farthest point from yourself It may be very
satisfying: you will never see mad people frustrated, you will never see mad people committing
suicide. Have you ever heard of it? You will never see a mad person miserable. No, because now
his dream has become his reality. He is as happy as you can think a person can be.
One of my sannyasins, you know him, Narendra – his father had phases: for six months he was
sane and for six months he was insane. It was a fixed period. The strangest thing to his family,
to the doctors, to the whole city, was that when he was insane he was the happiest person in the
world, and the healthiest. And when he was sane, he became miserable, unhealthy, with all kinds of
sicknesses; everything was wrong, he was complaining and grumpy. His family continually prayed,
”If he remains mad the whole year, it will be the greatest blessing” – to him and to the family.
But he had his own routine: six months. When he was insane, his whole family regained balance
because he was not disturbing anybody, and he was enjoying himself in every possible way. I have
seen him doing things – Narendra was very small, but when his father was insane even the smallest
child in the house used to watch the shop.
They had a jeweler’s shop, so there were costly things – gold, silver, diamonds. And when he was
mad he would steal them. It was his own shop! Narendra was so small but he would watch there
From Personality to Individuality 47 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
and he would shout to his mother, ”Come... come quick Ka-Ka has opened the safe!” His mother
would come rushing, and all the children too. He had many children, I think a dozen, and they all
would come running; even the smallest child used to spy on him.
He would be going to the market, and the smallest child, a five-year-old, would be following him. If
I came across them I would say to the child, ”Where are you going?” He would say, ”After Ka-Ka...
because he goes on borrowing things from everywhere and we have to pay.” He would go to the
sweet shop and eat as much as he wanted, and he would invite anybody walking past, strangers,
to join him: ”Come on!” And the child would be forcing him, ”Ka-Ka, you have to come back home,
otherwise I will bring mother right now.”
The only person that he was afraid of even in insanity was his wife. That proved to me another
maxim, that even insanity cannot change the relationship of husband and wife. And he would go on
giving things to anybody. Somebody had to follow him, so all these children did; there was nobody
else, just these twelve children and the wife. He was happy in those six months, and everybody in
the town was happy because he was just a joy to be with, always laughing. He immediately started
becoming fatter, healthier, stronger. And the moment those six months were finished he would
become weak, sick. He would be sitting in the shop – there was no need to spy on him – but he was
miserable.
Insane people are not miserable. So if you are miserable, be happy! – at least you are not insane.
At least you still have some sanity left, hence the misery.
What is misery?
Misery is the feeling that you are not yourself.
It is the gap between you as you are, and you as you feel you should be.
The gap is the misery. The bigger the gap, the more miserable you are. Idiots are not miserable, for
the simple reason that they do not have the intelligence to see the gap.
The most intelligent people in the world are the most miserable, because they can see the gap so
clearly that it is impossible to forget it, to just put it aside. It is always there, whatever they are doing,
the gap is in front of them. And that gap hurts: ”Why can’t I be just myself?”
That’s why I say if unfortunately you succeed in being a Christ or a Krishna or me, it means that you
are no longer part of the sane world, you have become completely mad. Now you cannot distinguish
between the dream and the real – and to forget the distinction between the dream and the real is a
great loss: it is spiritual suicide.
I would have said to Chuang Tzu, ”There is no problem in it, just get up from your bed.” I would have
gathered his disciples and told them to bring icecold water and pour it over the man so he comes to
know that he is not a butterfly. And I know perfectly well that before they started pouring he would
have jumped out of bed, and he would have said, ”Wait! I am Chuang Tzu. I was just playing a joke.”
Only Chuang Tzu can see the distance between the real and the unreal. The butterfly cannot see it
– the butterfly is only a dream.
From Personality to Individuality 48 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
A dream has no intelligence of its own. A dream is just a cloud around you; because of your sleep
you become identified with it. In your waking also, you are not really awake. That’s why you get
identified with so many things.
You become a Hindu; that is an identification. You become a Christian, a Jew; that is an identification
– and that shows that your wakefulness is not there. You are just awake in name only. It is such a
thin layer of wakefulness that it is disturbed by anything, and you fall asleep immediately. A beautiful
woman passes by, and you are asleep. You have gone into a dream of how to get her, of how to
possess her. You have completely forgotten that this is not sleep.
One of Dostoevsky’s novels, CRIME AND PUNISHMENT, has an incident in it. Raskolnikov is the
main character in the novel; he is a student in the university. He lives in a small room in front of
a very palatial building in which an old woman lives – perhaps eighty, or eighty-five or even ninety
years old. In Russia that is not difficult. In Russia you can find people one hundred and fifty years
old at least, even more, sometimes one hundred and eighty, and still working. And not just one or
two, but in thousands, particularly in the Caucasus area, from where Gurdjieff came. A man of one
hundred and fifty, sixty, seventy, is still working in the fields, just like any young man.
Raskolnikov is of a very philosophic type of mind, and he goes on seeing this old woman from his
window. She has so much money, she owns almost half of the buildings of the city. And she has
nobody else, she is alone, and she lives in that big palace. She is so miserly that she has not even
a servant. Her whole business is lending people money at a high rate of interest.
Raskolnikov, just sitting there, sees poor people bringing things, because she will not give money
unless you leave something in her custody. He sees these poor people bringing their things and
getting some money on interest. They know perfectly well, and Raskolnikov knows, that they will
never be able to pay back even the interest, what to say about the original money! And what are
they leaving? – for example they may leave a watch, a clock, some jewelry, something that they had
that is then gone. And the woman used to give only half the value of the item that was left in her
custody.
Raskolnikov becomes angrier and angrier and angrier, looking at this cheat the whole day. And
he starts thinking, what is the purpose of this woman? She has nothing to live for. She has lived
enough and she is still exploiting thousands of people. Why has somebody not killed her? He
starts thinking that there is no crime in killing her; hence the title of Dostoevsky’s book, CRIME AND
PUNISHMENT. He philosophizes about it so much, month by month, year by year, because he is
there watching her, that by and by he starts thinking: Nobody is going to kill her, I have to do it.
And finally, one day he decides: Now, it is enough, I cannot tolerate it. And a necessity has also
arisen so he can go to her, because he has to fill in the examination forms and deposit the fee for his
final postgraduate class – and he has no money. So he goes in the evening. He takes his wristwatch
and waits till everybody has left, and it is getting dark.
The lady is so miserly she will not even use candles. When it gets dark, she closes the door, locks
the door from inside and disappears for the whole night. So before she does that, he enters. She is
just coming down the stairs to lock the door as he comes in and says, ”I am in great difficulty. You
know me, I live in a house just in front of yours. You can keep my wristwatch but you have to give
From Personality to Individuality 49 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
me money right now. Tomorrow morning I have to fill in my examination forms. If I miss tomorrow
my two years are wasted.”
So she says, ”Okay, you come along with me.”
He goes behind her, ready to kill her. He has imagined so many times how to kill her, because it
is not going to take much, she is so old: you just have to press her throat and that will do. He has
imagined it, dreamed it, philosophized about it: that it is not a crime, it is not a sin. In fact you are
preventing a great criminal from doing so many crimes every day against the whole city. You are
a savior! God cannot be so misunderstanding, and when he knows the whole story He will reward
you. Raskolnikov has convinced himself that murdering this woman is not a crime. And anyway she
is going to die any day. Why let her continue to exploit people any more?
He gives her his wristwatch. It is getting darker so she goes close to the window to look at the watch
to see how much it is worth – because she won’t burn a candle. And just by coincidence she has a
heart attack, falls there and dies. And Raskolnikov thinks – because he has lived out this whole idea
of killing her so many times, dreamed it so many times – he believes that he has done it.
He escapes, goes to his room but he knows the police will be coming soon; it is not right to stay here.
He goes to the furthest corner of the city to stay with a friend. But the friend cannot understand,
”Why are you so nervous? What has happened?”
And he says, ”Nothing has happened, I have not done anything. Don’t be suspicious.”
And naturally, the friend says, ”I am not being suspicious, and I am not saying that you have done
anything.”
But Raskolnikov says, ”Yes, you are not saying anything but your eyes show it. Do you think I am
such a stupid guy that I cannot understand what is going on in your mind? Do you think I am a
murderer?”
The man says, ”You are just crazy! Why should you be a murderer?”
Raskolnikov cannot sleep. He wakes up again and again and says to the friend, ”Did you hear
something? I just heard a police whistle.”
The friend says, ”Nobody is here, no police. What would they come here and whistle for?”
Raskolnikov says, ”No, perhaps I dreamed it.” And again: ”Did you hear the knock? I heard boots,
police boots coming towards the house.”
The man says, ”Are you obsessed by the police?”
Raskolnikov says, ”Who is obsessed? You must be obsessed. It is your house, not my house. I have
not done anything in the first place... and people die on their own. It does not necessarily mean that
somebody has killed them.”
From Personality to Individuality 50 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
By the morning he has driven the friend crazy, and finally he himself begs the friend, ”Take me to
the police station because they are all around, they are going to catch me. They must have found
out by now that that old woman has been murdered by being strangled. And they must have found
my wristwatch in her hand, which is a proof enough, because how come that wristwatch was there?
And somebody must have seen me going into her house or coming out of her house. There is no
point.... It is better to surrender.”
He goes to the police station. He tries to convince the police. The police say, ”You are just mad. The
woman has died of a heart attack – the doctor’s report has come.”
Raskolnikov says, ”I... you are trying to convince me? I am the man who has killed her – I confess
to you.”
This is the meaning of crime and punishment: a guilt arises; he starts punishing himself. And the
dream that he had dreamed so many times – now he cannot figure out whether it is a dream or
whether he has really done it. He has not done it but he tortures the police. He goes to the doctor
and says, ”Your report is wrong. I know perfectly well I have killed her, the wristwatch is proof.”
The doctor says, ”The wristwatch is not proof We have examined everything and she died of a heart
attack.” But this man needs punishment. Finally the police decide to put him in the lockup for his
satisfaction. What else to do? As he is locked up, he is at ease.
This is insanity: when a dream becomes a reality, when you cannot make the distinction between
the dream and reality.
And there are millions of people walking, talking, working, and they are not able to make the
distinction between the real and the unreal.
How many superstitions do you go on carrying? What is God other than a superstition? You have not
even dreamed Him; it is not even your dream that you are identified with. Perhaps Jesus dreamed
Him, but he suffered enough for his dream. Now why are you torturing yourself?
But there are people.... I have heard of a man who believed that he was the resurrected Jesus
Christ. His family tried to persuade him, ”Don’t say such a thing to anybody – they will think that you
are mad.”
He said, ”Let them think so, but what I am, I am; and whether I say it or not they are going to find
out, so it is better to declare it. And it is not a shame, it is a glory – and you should all be happy that
I am Jesus Christ.”
They took him to a psychiatrist, saying, ”This poor guy has got the idea that he is Jesus Christ.
Something has to be done.”
The psychiatrist tried many ways, all the tricks that he knew. Nothing worked. How could they work
on a man who is God’s messiah? The psychiatrist, just a poor psychiatrist, what can he do? Can he
deprogram ”Jesus Christ? Impossible! Otherwise there would have been no need to crucify him –
just deprogram him. Just take him to a deprogrammer for the weekend and Jesus Christ is finished
From Personality to Individuality 51 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
– there is no messiah, no son of God. He comes back to the earth: he knows that he is Joseph’s
son, not the son of the Holy Ghost, that he is a carpenter, he should go back to his work – what is
he doing here?
He is not supposed to give sermons on the mountain. He should go to his father’s workshop where
the poor fellow is still making furniture: ”Just cut logs and do things that are needed. Help the old
man. What are you doing here?” Only a deprogramming was needed, but it is difficult to deprogram
people like Jesus Christ. This man, although he was not Jesus Christ, believed it. Finally the
psychiatrist took him before the mirror. He said, ”Just look at yourself in the mirror. Do you look like
Jesus Christ?”
He looked in the mirror. He said, ”Of course. Do you think you look like Jesus Christ? You idiot
Anybody can see it. The mirror cannot lie.”
Then the psychiatrist tries his final way. He takes his paperknife, cuts Jesus Christ’s finger, blood
comes out. He says to him, ”Two thousand years have passed since the crucifixion and nothing has
been heard of Jesus Christ. He must be dead; this is simple arithmetic. He cannot live two thousand
years, nobody has lived that long. The only way is that you may be the dead body of Jesus Christ.
But dead bodies don’t bleed, and blood is coming out of your body. That proves you are alive.”
And Jesus Christ, this so-called Jesus Christ, laughed and said, ”This only proves that dead bodies
do bleed and you did not hear me right in the first place: I am the resurrected Jesus Christ. I have
left death far behind, two thousand years ago.” You cannot convince a madman by cutting his hand
and showing him proof that dead men don’t bleed. The insane man has his own logic. He says,
”That simply proves that dead men do bleed.”
You cannot argue with a madman. Can you argue with a Christian? – a reborn Christian? Can you
argue with Witnesses of Jehovah? – impossible. Can you argue with Hare Krishna people? I have
argued with all these kinds of people. It is impossible.
In the first place they don’t listen to what you are saying. They go on saying what they want to say;
they don’t listen at all to what you are saying – they start reading from the Bible. You can see a film
covering their eyes. You can see their ears are closed. You can feel that the man is asleep, he is not
awake.
But all these religious people are asleep and dreaming a thousand and one things. Those dreams
their scriptures have given them.
I am not here to give you a dream, just the contrary.
I am here to destroy all your dreams.
Even if you meet me in your dream, just cut my head off immediately, then and there. And don’t ask
where to get the sword from. If you can get me in your dream, get a sword from the same place. If
you can dream of me, you can also dream of a sword.
This is what happened. A man was looking for a job. He heard that there was a place available on
the ship that was just going to leave port. He rushed. The captain asked him, ”If the winds are very
strong, and the currents are very strong, and you feel that the ship is sinking, what will you do?”
From Personality to Individuality 52 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
He said, ”I will throw the anchor into the water.”
The captain said, ”That’s right.” Again he said, ”The waves become even stronger and the wind
starts becoming even faster. What will you do then?”
He said, ”I will put down another anchor.”
And the captain said finally, ”Now it is almost impossible to save the boat. The waves are going
higher than the boat and the wind has taken the highest speed. Now what will you do?”
He said, ”I will put down a bigger anchor.”
The captain said, ”But from where are you getting these anchors?”
He said, ”From the same place from where you are getting these waves, and the wind – from the
same place.”
So just remember: never ask me from where to get the sword – from the same place. You know
perfectly well that if you can create me in your dream it won’t be very difficult to find a sword and
just cut off my head. And don’t be bothered if dead men bleed, because I am going to bleed! But it
is only a dream. The sword, me, the blood, all is dream. In the morning you will not find that your
bedsheet is full of blood, and a body is lying down in your room. Don’t freak out! Just throw cold
water on your eyes and everything will be okay.
Dreams are indicative. Your innermost self is telling you that you are not yet what you are meant to
be, that your destiny is still unfulfilled, that your being is still starved. But that’s all that the dream
signifies. The dream is not saying, ”Come follow me. Become a Christ, become a Buddha, become
a Krishna.” No, that will be going against yourself.
Just be yourself, utterly yourself. And don’t be bothered what kind of flower you turn out to be.
It does not matter whether you are a rose or a lotus or a marigold. It does not matter.
What matters is flowering.
Let me repeat: the flower does not matter, what matters is flowering, and the flowering is the same
whether it is a marigold.... The marigold is a poor flower. I don’t know about here, but in India
the marigold is the poorest flower. Just to give him consolation perhaps, we call him mari-gold,
otherwise it is a poor flower. Roses are rich people, lotuses are just super-rich! But it does not
matter.
When the marigold opens up there is the same ecstasy surrounding it as when a rose opens up.
There is no difference in the ecstasy, because the ecstasy comes neither from the color nor from
the fragrance, nor from the size.
No, the ecstasy comes from the phenomenon, the miracle of flowering, opening.
From Personality to Individuality 53 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
The marigold has become a marigold, it was its destiny. The rose has become a rose, it was its
destiny. Both are fulfilled. That fulfillment is exactly equal.
The moment you become yourself you will not be me, you will not be Christ, you will not be Krishna;
you will be yourself. But the ecstasy that surrounds me will surround you. I cannot say for certain
about Jesus, I can only be absolutely certain about myself. I don’t know whether he was really
fulfilled or just a madman. There is no way for me to decide. I cannot say that about Buddha – he
may be awakened, or he may be just a great philosopher philosophizing about awakening, a great
dreamer dreaming about awakening.
Have you not dreamed sometimes that you are awake? I think everyone has sometimes dreamed
that he is awake, and only when he wakes up does he find, ”My God, that was a dream! I thought I
was awake.” You can dream within a dream, within a dream....
For example, you can dream that you are going to your bedroom fully awake. You are going to your
bedroom – in a dream – lying down on the bed, pulling your blanket up, falling asleep and dreaming
that you have gone to see a movie. And you see the movie. In the movie you can see a man who
is asleep and is dreaming – it can go on ad infinitum. You can go on stretching the idea: a dream
within a dream within a dream within a dream – there is no problem in it.
You can dream that you are awake – and there are many people who think they are enlightened...
they think! I have come across such people. One man came to see me when I was in Raipur.
This man was a very famous Hindu sage, Jagatguru Kripaludasji Maharaj. Jagatguru means a
world teacher; Kripaludas, servant of compassion; and Maharaj, the king! He had many, many
followers. Particularly in Raipur, he was the most famous teacher, and people believed that he was
enlightened.
Somebody told me, ”Kripaludas is visiting the town. Wouldn’t you like to come?”
I said, ”Certainly, because I never miss any opportunity.”
I went up to the stage, went close to Kripaludas and gave him the indication that I wanted to say
something in his ear. So he gave his ear to me, and I said, ”I think you are enlightened.”
He said, ”Really?”
I said, ”Really.”
That was all. He enquired about me and the next day he came to visit me, and he said, ”How did
you find out? – because I also think the same, that I am enlightened.”
I said, ”There is no problem in it – you look enlightened.”
He said, ”Absolutely right. Many people have said to me, ’You look enlightened.’”
Then I said to him, ”Please, enlightenment has no certain way of looking. And you are not
enlightened, otherwise you would not have come to me. For what? Just because I said to you,’I
From Personality to Individuality 54 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
think you are enlightened,’ I gave support to your dream. You are dreaming, because you yourself
say that you also think you are enlightened. Nobody who is enlightened thinks that he is enlightened:
he simply is enlightened. What business has thinking to do with enlightenment? Thinking can only
create imagination. Thinking is part of the imaginative process.
”Thinking is dreaming in words, and dreaming is thinking in pictures. That’s the only difference
between the two.”
Dreaming is a primitive kind of thinking. Because the primitive man has no words, he thinks in
pictures.
The same is the case with the child, because the child is a primitive man. Look at any children’s book:
big pictures, strong attractive colors, and few words. ”A big mango” – that the child understands
immediately. And through that mango – because he knows the mango, he knows the taste of the
mango, he knows the smell of the mango – seeing a mango in the picture he is reminded of the
taste, the smell; and through that association, the word underneath, mango, slowly gets into his
mind.
Then as books become of higher grades, the mango goes on becoming smaller and the words
become more, with more descriptions of the mango: what kind of fruit the mango is, what kind of
taste, where it is found. And the mango goes on disappearing, becoming smaller and smaller. And
one day there are no pictures in the book.
Now, you have learned a new way of dreaming: that is through words. But the shift from the mango
to the word mango is a great jump.
But when you are unconscious, fast asleep, again you fall back to your primitive language. Then you
forget about the language that you have learned.
One of my friends was in Germany. He went to Germany when he was only seven or eight years
old. His father was there so he went there, and he lived in Germany for thirty years. He was
educated in the German language, but he was born in Maharashtra; he knew Marathi, that was his
mother tongue, but he had completely forgotten about it. A seven-year-old child – he was not able
to understand Marathi at all, he had never learned to read Marathi. But he had an accident, a car
accident, and became unconscious, and in his unconsciousness he would speak only Marathi.
His brother was called from India because the father had died. They said, ”We cannot understand
what he says, and this man has never used any other language than German.” But the language
that he had learned from his very birth was only in the unconscious mind. That layer of seven years
was there, and it was deeper; German was on top of it. But the top layer was now unconscious. So
the deeper layer started speaking.
Whenever he would become conscious he would forget that had been speaking in Marathi, he would
speak in German; he then couldn’t understand Marathi. His brother would speak in Marathi and he
could not understand. And he was continually going in and out of unconsciousness. He would fall
back again into unconsciousness, and again he would speak in Marathi; back to consciousness, he
would speak German.
From Personality to Individuality 55 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
In your unconscious you are still primitive, and that’s why Sigmund Freud paid more attention to
your unconscious – because your unconscious is more innocent, childlike, primitive. It cannot lie, it
cannot be deceptive; it will simply say whatever is the truth. But the conscious mind is cunning. It
has been made cunning through education, culture, and everything.
One day I was just playing; I must have been four or five years old, not more than that. My father
was shaving his beard when somebody knocked on the door; my father said to me, ”Just go and tell
him, ’My father is not at home.’”
I went out and I said, ”My father is shaving and he says to tell you, ’My father is not at home.’”
The man said, ”What? He is inside?”
I said, ”Yes, but this is what he has told me. I have told you the whole truth.”
The man came in and my father looked at me: What had happened? And the man was very angry,
he said, ”This is something! You had called me to come at this time, and you send a message with
the boy that you have gone out.”
My father asked him, ”But how did you find out that I was in?”
He said, ”This boy has said the whole thing, that ’My father is in. He is shaving his beard, and he
has told me to tell you that he is out.’”
My father looked at me. I could understand; he was saying, ”Just wait! Let this man go, and I will
show you.”
And I told him, ”I am going before this man leaves.”
He said, ”But I have not said anything to you.”
I said, ”I have understood everything!”
I told the man, ”Just stay here. First let me get out, because there is going to be trouble for me.” But
on departing I said to my father, ”You insist with me,’Be truthful....’ So,” I said, ”this is a chance to
be truthful, and to check whether you really mean me to be truthful, or is it just that you’re trying to
teach me cunningness?”
Of course he understood that it was better to keep quiet, not to quarrel with me then, because when
the man was gone, I would have to come home. I came after two or three hours so that he would
cool down or other people would be there and no problem would arise. He was alone. I went in, he
said, ”Don’t be worried – I will never tell you anything like that again. You have to forgive me.” He
was in this way a fair man, otherwise who bothers about a four, five-year old child, and asks – being
a father – ”Forgive me”? And he never said anything like it again his whole life. He knew that with
me he had to be different than with other children.
As you grow up, as the society goes on teaching you to be this way, to behave this way, you start be
coming a hypocrite, and you become identified with your hypocrisy.
From Personality to Individuality 56 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
My function here is to destroy all hypocrisy in you.
To me honesty is not a policy.
Just at supper I was telling Vivek that the man who first made up this maxim, ”Honesty is the best
policy,” must have been a very cunning man. Honesty is not policy; and if it is policy, then it is not
honesty: you are honest because it pays, you will be dishonest if that pays. Honesty is the best
policy if it is paying, but if sometimes it is not paying, then dishonesty of course is the best policy.
The question is, what is going to pay?
And Vivek reminded me that just today she has seen in a book, in one sentence, two words that
were very revealing. She had never joined those words together: policy and politics, politeness and
politics. What is politeness? It is a kind of politics. Both words are derived from the same root. All
three words – policy, politeness, politics – have the same root, they all mean the same thing. But
politeness you think is a nice quality. You would never think of it in terms of politics, but it is politics.
To be polite is a defense measure.
In Europe you shake hands. Why do you shake the right hand? – why not the left? It is really part of
politics. To shake hands is nothing friendly. It is just a gesture that ”My right hand is empty so don’t
be worried. And let me see that your right hand also is empty, that there is not a knife or something
in it.” And when you are shaking right hands you cannot pull your sword out because with the left
hand... unless you happen to be a leftist. It is just a way of giving certainty to the other person, that
you are not going to harm him, and he is giving certainty to you that he is not going to harm you.
Slowly slowly, it became a symbol of greeting each other.
In India, you greet with both hands, but that too is simply showing that both your hands are empty. It
is far better than shaking hands, because who knows about the left hand? Sometimes even the right
hand does not know about the left hand, so it is better to show that both hands are empty; that is far
better, and far more polite also. But you are saying, ”I am completely defenseless. You need not be
wary about me or worried about me. You can relax.” These are symbols that people have learned.
In India if you go to a so-called guru, you have to give him a salute which is uniquely Indian. It is
called satsang dandawat. You have to lie down on the floor with all your limbs touching the floor,
because that is the most defenseless position. Even if the other man wants to kill you, he can kill
you immediately. That’s why it has become the symbol of surrender.
In wartime when prisoners are caught, they are ordered to lie down flat on the ground with their
arms stretched out. Why? They cannot do anything in that position and then you can search them,
and take anything they have. Or else you tell them to stand up with outstretched arms, with their
hands up against the wall, which is the same – vertical or horizontal, it is the same.
In war it seems to be perfectly right, but somehow the same war is going on continuously between
every individual in the society. So a certain culture develops it as a gesture of tremendous respect.
It is not a gesture of respect, it is a gesture of humiliation, that ”I humiliate myself completely. I am
at your disposal. If you want to cut off my head you can. I cannot do anything in such a position.”
And of course the other person feels great, his ego is satisfied.
From Personality to Individuality 57 Osho
CHAPTER 3. BEWARE! I AM HERE TO DESTROY YOUR DREAMS
Our culture, our education, our religion – they all teach us to be hypocrites in such subtle ways that
unless you go deep in search, you will never find out what you have been doing.
Why do you smile when you meet a friend? What is the need? If you are not feeling like smiling,
why do you smile? You have to do it. This is a policy that is paying, because some day you may
need this man’s help, and if you have always been smiling at him, he cannot refuse. If you have
never smiled at him and never even said ”Hi,” then you need not bother even to approach him; he
will throw you out of his house with a ”Go to hell!”
One has to understand all these layers and detach oneself from all of them.
Become a watcher so that you cannot become identified with any dream.
That’s my work; and if you start dreaming about me, you are destroying my whole work. Take the
indication, then drop the dream and then find real food. Just dreaming of a feast is no good. When a
real feast is possible then why be satisfied with a dream feast? When real joy is available, then why
a phony smile? When authentic ecstasy is just close by your hand, perhaps not even that far, then
why be satisfied with being miserable, crying and weeping, feeling empty, feeling worthless? Your
treasure is within you, and you are becoming a beggar.
My effort is to wake you up. Perhaps it will be hard on you in the beginning because you have been
a beggar for so long that you will think I am taking your kingdom. Hence sannyas is difficult.
On the surface I have made it so simple because I know, inside it is so difficult; to make it difficult on
the outside also would be inhuman.
So on the surface I have made it absolutely simple – it cannot be simplified more – because inside
the real work is hard.
But it has to be done. Without doing it you lived without knowing what life is. You existed in a way
which cannot be called living, it can only be called vegetating.
Don’t be vegetables, cabbages, cauliflowers. Yes, these are the two classes of people: cabbages are
uneducated people, cauliflowers are college – educated cabbages; but there is not much difference.
The only thing that makes a difference is: Wake up!
From Personality to Individuality 58 Osho
CHAPTER 4
Jealousy: society’s device to divide and rule
2 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT IS JEALOUSY? DOES OUR JEALOUSY SHOW THAT WE ARE VERY FAR FROM
ALONENESS?
SOCIETY has exploited the individual in so many ways that it is almost impossible to believe.
It has created devices so clever and cunning that it is almost impossible even to detect that they are
devices. These devices are to exploit the individual, to destroy his integrity, to take away from him all
that he has got – without even creating a suspicion in him, even a doubt about what is being done
to him.
Jealousy is one of those tremendously powerful devices.
From the very childhood every society, every culture, every religion teaches everybody comparison.
And the child is bound to learn it. He is just a tabula rasa, a blank paper without any writing; so
whatsoever the parents, the teachers, the priests write on him, he starts believing that is his destiny,
it is his fate.
Man comes into existence with all the doors open, all directions available; all the dimensions are for
him to choose. But before he can choose, before he can be, before he can even feel his being, he is
59
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
spoiled. And spoiled by those who think they love him – crushed, crippled, conditioned with all the
good intentions in the world.
But what can you expect from good intentions?
You are poisoning somebody with good intentions.
I know that you are not aware that you are poisoning them, because you have been poisoned in your
turn and this has been going on since Adam and Eve.
What did God the father do to Adam and Eve? He deserves to be called father; whether He exists
or not does not matter, but He deserves to be called father because He fulfilled all the conditions of
being a father. His orders were to the children, Adam and Eve, His creation, ”You are not to eat from
two trees the tree of knowledge and the tree of eternal life.” And this man you call father?
He is preventing you from the two most important things! Nothing can be more important than the
exploration of your life and its eternity. And without a tremendous enquiry into knowing, into wisdom,
you are not going to figure out what life is, where it is moving.
God prohibits Adam and Eve from the most important things that make you an individual, that give
you self-respect, that confer on you integrity, authenticity, beinghood. He wants you to remain
ignorant forever. He wants you to be unaware of your own life source. Of course, this man is
your father.
And since this great father, all the small fathers have been doing the same.
I cannot forgive God. I can forgive all the other, small fathers; they are poor people. They are doing
to you what has been done to them, they are simply transferring their inheritance. What else can
they do? But I cannot forgive God. He has no father. He cannot find the excuse, ”Because it has
been done to me I am doing it to them. I don’t know any other way.” No, it is His invention.
Because God does not exist the whole burden falls on the heads of the priests, the priesthood.
They have found ways to keep you away from yourself. And if you are away from yourself so many
things are absolutely certain. You will remain miserable forever; from one misery to another misery,
that is going to be your life.
Yes, you will be hoping that tomorrow things will be different, but tomorrow never comes and things
go on getting worse. Yes, they are different, but not better. You are going down the drain every day.
But the hope keeps you alive, otherwise there is nothing to support you in even breathing for a single
moment. Everything is missing, because you are missing. Even if everything is available, what is
the point of it if you are not there?
Jealousy is one of the greatest devices.
Look at it very closely: what does it mean?
Jealousy means to live in comparison.
From Personality to Individuality 60 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
Somebody is higher than you, somebody is lower than you. You are always somewhere on a middle
rung of the ladder. Perhaps the ladder is a circle because nobody finds the end of the ladder.
Everybody is stuck somewhere in the middle, everybody is in the middle. The ladder seems to be a
round wheel.
Somebody is above you – that hurts. That keeps you fighting, struggling, moving by any means
possible, because if you succeed nobody cares whether you have succeeded rightly or wrongly.
Success proves you are right; failure proves that you are wrong. All that matters is success, so any
means will do. The end proves the means right. So you need not bother about means – and nobody
does bother. The whole question is how to climb on up the ladder. But you never come to the end
of it. And whosoever is above you is creating jealousy in you, that he has succeeded and you have
failed.
One would think that spending your whole life passing from one ladder to another ladder, always
finding that somebody is still ahead of you – can’t you simply jump off the ladder? No, you cannot
jump. The society is very cunning, very clever. It has polished, refined its methods over thousands
of years. Why can’t you get out of the circle? – because somebody is below you and that gives you
tremendous satisfaction.
You see the strategy? Somebody is above you; that creates jealousy, misery, suffering, humiliation,
a feeling of worthlessness, that you have not been able to prove your mettle, that you are not man
enough. While others go on moving, you are stuck. It makes you feel just worthless, meaningless,
useless, a burden on the earth and nothing more.
If only this was the case you would have jumped off the ladder and you would have told those people
on the ladder to go wherever they want to go. But you cannot jump because there are people below
you; as far as you can see there are rungs below you and rungs below them. That gives a great
satisfaction, a great feeling that you have passed so many people; you are not absolutely useless.
You have proved that you have some strength of will and you are not a failure; these people under
you are enough to prove it.
You are now in a dilemma:
Whenever you look upwards, a great misery descends on you; whenever you look downwards, a
great satisfaction.
Now, how can you jump off the ladder? – because in jumping off it, you will be jumping from both,
and nobody will be below you. Nobody will be above you, certainly, but nobody will be below you;
and you will be left alone if you jump off.
Here on the ladder you are with everybody else, part of the society, culture, civilization – and it is only
a question of a little more effort. And people go on telling you, ”Bravo, go on! Don’t be depressed,
don’t be pessimistic, remain optimistic. The night is not going to last forever.” They go on saying to
you, ”When the night is darkest, the morning is the closest, so don’t be afraid of the darkness, of
failure.” They will give you a thousand and one examples.
In my middle school I heard for the first time about a Mohammedan conqueror of India, Mahmud
Gaznavi. He attacked India nineteen times and he was defeated eighteen times. When he was
From Personality to Individuality 61 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
defeated the eighteenth time he was hiding in a cave, and he saw a spider trying to weave its net
in the front of the cave. He was just hiding there with nothing to do, so he started looking at the
spider and its efforts. It was raining, and the stones were very slippery. The spider went on falling;
coincidentally he fell eighteen times but he succeeded on the nineteenth.
Mahmud suddenly became optimistic. He had been thinking to stop this foolish effort. Eighteen
times... his whole life he has wasted, thousands of people have been killed to no purpose. He had
been defeated again and again by a single man, Prithviraj Chauhan – who was on the border of
India; he was the ruler of the frontier of India. Mahmud was never able to enter the country because
just on the border he was defeated, and by a single man. It was really too much – he was thinking
to commit suicide, because ”I am no longer able to show my face to my people.”
Mahmud was the king of his own kingdom, there was no need to invade India. But nothing satisfies,
nothing is enough; it is always less than you want, and there is always much more that is available.
He had a small kingdom, and just by its side was this vast country, India. It was immensely rich at
that time – it was called the Golden Bird in those days – because the population was very small,
only twenty million people. Now there are more than seven hundred million people. That was at the
last count; right now there must be nearabout eight hundred million.
It is estimated that by the end of this century there will be one thousand million people; it will be the
biggest country in the world. China will be left behind because China is controlling its birthrate very
carefully. Right now the population is ahead of India, but by the end of the century it is going to be
left behind. At least in one thing India will be the Olympic winner.
When it was a country of only twenty million people, naturally it was rich. There was no reason for
anybody to be poor. So much land, so much gold – there was more of everything than anybody
needed. It attracted invaders, obviously. Continually for three thousand years, India has been
attracting invaders. Now anybody is trying to invade India; in fact the last invaders, the Britishers,
found finally that they had sucked India totally, there was nothing left.
Then it was more of a liability than an empire. You had to take care of so many poor people,
otherwise you were blamed; you had to take care of so many criminals, otherwise you were blamed.
For everything that went wrong the empire was blamed because it was your enforced slavery that
was causing every trouble.
This is not a valid argument. Mahatma Gandhi was very careful to remain always truthful, but about
the basics he was not. It was not true to say to India that it was only because of the British Empire
that all the problems were there. Because now – after’47 and up to’84 – although there has been
no slavery and the country is free, it has fallen far more deeply into misery and suffering.
You will be surprised that since the British left India, the price of things has gone up seven hundred
times. Today if you have seven hundred rupees, it is only worth what one rupee was worth in 1947.
So today, to earn seven hundred rupees – which is a big salary in India – is just like earning one
rupee in 1947. It was not only the British Empire that was responsible for India’s problems; for three
thousand years so many people had been sucking India dry.
Mahmud gained confidence. He said, ”If a small creature like a spider has such tremendous
optimism... am I inferior to this spider? I will try one time more.” And what a coincidence! – on
From Personality to Individuality 62 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
the nineteenth time he succeeded. In fact he succeeded because Prithviraj Chauhan had simply
dropped the idea that this man would have the courage to invade again. Eighteen times defeated...
with what face could he come back again?
So Prithviraj Chauhan simply dropped the idea that there was going to be any invasion. All the
preparations that he had been making continually for the eighteen invasions were dropped. It was
no longer an emergency. Mahmud was the only enemy on the borders of Prithviraj Chauhan’s land
– and he was crushed. Prithviraj Chauhan also thought, ”In such a situation I would have committed
suicide. Any man with just a little bit of self-respect would rather die than be defeated eighteen
times.” So he simply dropped the idea. The army was dispersed, sent back to work, and Mahmud
invaded at a time when he was not expected at all. He won.
This story was told to me in my class by the teacher of history. He said, ”This is the way one should
be. Never be pessimistic. One never knows: if this time you fail, don’t be worried; next time perhaps
you will succeed, tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. But never lose heart; to the last breath go on
struggling.”
I stood up and told my teacher, ”Please forgive me. I think this man Mahmud was an idiot. In the
first place, to invade somebody for no reason....” Those people had not committed any crime, and in
fact they were powerful enough – they had defeated him eighteen times – to have invaded him. But
Prithviraj Chauhan never went beyond his borders. He could have defeated Mahmud, thrown him
out and come back. But he never invaded, otherwise it would have been the simplest thing to do.
If the enemy is defeated then why leave him his kingdom? He could have finished this man Mahmud
in the first attack. He could have taken over his kingdom and there would have been no chance for
Mahmud to attack again. But Prithviraj Chauhan was a man of far superior humanity; Mahmud was
never attacked. Prithviraj Chauhan was told again and again by his prime minister and court people,
The best way is to finish this man and take his kingdom. If you leave him, within two or three years
he will again gather forces and be back, and again we wi]l have to fight. This is strange – why do
you leave him be?”
But Prithviraj Chauhan said, ”Those people of his kingdom have not done any wrong to us nor done
any harm to us. How can I invade them? My army is not to invade countries, it is only for those rare
moments when some fool attacks us. Then it is a defense force.” He was a man of a sophisticated
mind, a man who could see that this was stupid. He said, ”Don’t be worried. This man, sooner or
later, is going to drop the idea.”
I told my teacher, ”Don’t praise Mahmud in front of me and don’t tell me,’He was such a great
optimist and you should be like him.’ I can forgive the spider, nobody expects a spider to have any
intelligence, and I can certainly say that the spider was not counting the number of times that he had
fallen. He may not have even been aware of what was happening.”
Spiders, ants, and those kind of people – you throw them away, and by a strange logic they will
immediately run back towards you. The whole room is available, but from wherever you throw them
they will run back in exactly the same direction. What stubbornness! If they have some intelligence,
at least that direction has to be avoided. It is possible for it to escape anywhere... but strange, you
go on hitting a spider and it will come back again towards you.
From Personality to Individuality 63 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
”That spider was not counting, was not optimistic. This was just Mahmud’s old ego finding some
excuse again, finding some way to go to his people and say,’Don’t be worried – perhaps this time
we will win. And one never knows about tomorrow, so let us try once more.’ But don’t tell me that
this Mahmud was an ideal person. To me he is an ugly man, just a spider. I don’t count him among
human beings. And if this is going to be taught in the history class, then it is not for me. You are
teaching us in a clever way to fight, to destroy, to kill, to put others lower than ourselves.”
Parents go on teaching from one’s very childhood, ”Look at our neighbor’s boy – he has come first
in the school. And what have you been doing for the whole year? Don’t you have any intelligence?”
In the class they will be telling you the same. They will give gold medals to those who come first and
top the whole school or the whole college or the whole university. My parents and my teachers in
the school used to say, ”You can easily be always at the top, but you never take any care about the
examinations, you don’t care about examinations.”
This was my routine, that I would always go to the examination fifteen minutes late. This I followed
my whole career in school, in college, at university; I would go fifteen minutes late. It was well
known. The examiner knew that my seat had to be kept empty; I would be coming, but exactly
fifteen minutes late. And I would leave the examination hall fifteen minutes before everybody else,
before the end. The time allowed was three hours and I could see that the examination could be
managed in two and a half hours; there was no need to waste half an hour more there.
The teacher, who was there looking after the students to see that they were not copying and not
doing some mischief, that somebody was not concealing a book, would say, ”There is no hurry;
there are fifteen minutes left. Why are you finishing?”
I would say, ”I have finished. I began fifteen minutes after the start and I finish fifteen minutes before
the end. And it is going to be this way forever because I don’t see that it needs three hours; in fact
two and a half hours is more than enough. And I have far more important things to do.”
They all said, ”Why don’t you care about the examination?”
I said, ”For the simple reason that I don’t want to be part of a jealous circle. I don’t want to be in the
game of comparison. It does not matter to me whether I pass or whether I fail; it will not make any
difference to me. If I come first, good; if I come last, even better – because to be the first seems to
me a little violent because you have taken somebody’s joy. And to me it is not a joy at all so I am
simply wasting the place; somebody else could have been there who is now second to me, and he
would have immensely enjoyed it. Perhaps in the rest of his life he may not find anything else to
enjoy, and this chance I have destroyed and I am not enjoying it anyway.
”So it will be better if I am last. At least I will have the solace that I have not spoiled anybody’s career,
I have not been violent, pushy; I have not tried to invade somebody else’s space – nobody is behind
me. And because there is nobody behind me, I cannot feel superior.”
And there is the logic, simple logic: if you don’t feel superior, you can’t feel inferior. They both come
together, they both go together. If you drop one, you cannot save the other. If you don’t feel superior
to anybody, how can you feel inferior to anybody? – you simply feel yourself
From Personality to Individuality 64 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
But strange as it was, I almost always managed to be the first. My teachers were amazed, my
parents were amazed: ”This is strange. You never care about the examination. You don’t go regularly
to school even if you go, you are thrown out of the class, and you stand outside the class the whole
day. You disappear from the school any time, any moment. You don’t ask for permission from any
teacher or the principal; you don’t even inform them.”
My simple way was: ”I want to live my life – why should I ask anybody? They can do whatsoever
they want to do. They can punish me, they can fine me, they can report me. I will bring the report to
you, but that is between you and them; I have nothing to do with it. I simply do what I want to do.”
When I was feeling so much like going to the river, I was not going to listen to a fool talking about
some Mahmud who won on the nineteenth try, although he was defeated eighteen times. He was an
ugly man. He didn’t behave with Prithviraj the same way Prithviraj had behaved with him – Prithviraj
never imprisoned him. Eighteen times Prithviraj defeated him but never imprisoned him, because
he said, ”Leave him to his kingdom. Why should we bother to imprison him? It is enough that he got
defeated, that his army is finished. It’s enough punishment.”
But Mahmud was not a man, he was just animalistic. He caught Prithviraj Chauhan; not only that,
he took out both his eyes. Prithviraj was a very beautiful man, and this was Mahmud’s revenge for
being defeated eighteen times: he blinded him.
But Prithviraj Chauhan was a great archer. His court poet, a friend, got imprisoned with him,
knowingly, to help him. When Chauhan and this poet were brought into the court, Mahmud was
sitting in the balcony high above. He was still afraid of this man although he was blind and chained.
What fear! But the man had defeated him eighteen times and thrown him out of the country, not
even bothering to imprison him. Must have been a lion!
And the poet said to Mahmud, ”You don’t know Prithviraj. I would like to tell you that there is none
in the whole world who is such a master of archery as Prithviraj is. Before you kill him, give him a
chance to show his art.”
But Mahmud said, ”Now he is blind, how can he be a great archer? He may have been.”
The poet said, ”Don’t be worried. He is such a great archer that just the sound is enough for him to
hit the target.” And all this talk was going on so that Prithviraj could figure out where Mahmud was
sitting from the sound of his voice. And he killed Mahmud. Mahmud was thinking that he was going
to show his skill in the art of archery but Prithviraj simply killed him from the sound, with an arrow
exactly in the heart.
I was always thinking of all these people – Alexander the Great, Tamerlane, Genghis Khan,
Napoleon Bonaparte. Why are you going to teach innocent children about these people? – to
create in them the desire to be conquerors, to be rich, to be presidents, to be prime ministers –
not to be themselves. Nobody teaches you to be yourself. You can be anybody, but just don’t be
yourself. And they create jealousy. Alexander the Great – what is great in that man? And why
should you go on keeping alive the names of Nadirshah and Tamerlane and Genghis Khan? Just
murderers, the greatest criminals the world has known.
Small criminals you go on putting to death, and the big criminals make your history.
From Personality to Individuality 65 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
I told my history teacher, ”Your history is just a history of crime, and you are trying to make everybody
a criminal. Can’t you find some innocent human beings and talk about them and teach us that these
were the real, authentic people?” But no, history is full of all these other people. All the history of the
whole world needs to be flushed down the toilet, so that we can start from scratch. Then we can be
ourselves – because no comparison will exist.
In the university, when my postgraduate examinations came along, my professor, who loved me
immensely, was very concerned that I used to go fifteen minutes late and I used to leave fifteen
minutes early – that it meant I might miss what was my right. I told him, ”It is not my right to come
first, to top the university, to have the gold medal. If I get the gold medal I will throw it into the
university well immediately, immediately after the convocation, so the vice-chancellor and the whole
procession of deans and professors and students – everybody – can come and see me dropping
the gold medal in the well. I simply don’t like the idea of people being put into categories: lower and
higher, superior and inferior.... If it were in my hands people would simply be educated.”
There is no need for examinations. What is the need of an examination? What have you been doing
for two years – fooling around? What has the teacher been doing for two years? For two years the
teacher has been teaching you, for two years you have been learning; that’s enough. There is no
need for an examination and there is no need to start putting people higher and lower. This is the
beginning of comparison; they come from the university and they know where they are standing on
the ladder.
So my teacher, Doctor S.K. Saxena, used to come to the hostel to pick me up. It was just a two-
minute walk from my hostel to the examination hall, but he would come and pick me up in his car
and force me to enter the examination hall exactly at seven. He would wait outside for three hours
so that I could not get out fifteen minutes early. But I have my ways. First I would meditate for fifteen
minutes, and at the end I would also meditate for fifteen minutes. The examiner said, ”That poor
fellow, your professor, is standing outside for three hours, and you have still managed....”
I said, ”Don’t tell him, because he will unnecessarily feel hurt. There is no need to tell. I will do my
thing. What he wanted to do, he has done. I have not refused; I entered.... He said seven, I said
okay. But how can I drop my whole life’s way? For fifteen minutes I meditate, because this paper
is not worth three hours, it is just for two and a half hours. And I have more important things to do.
Because I cannot go out, meditation is the best that I can do, so I will do that.”
The examiner certainly told Doctor Saxena, ”You are unnecessarily trying to force him. He won’t do
anything that he does not want to do.”
Saxena asked, ”Then what is he doing there?”
The man said, ”He meditates for fifteen minutes. He did not even see the paper for fifteen minutes.
He put it upside down and meditated for fifteen minutes. Then he took his paper, looked at it, and
just fifteen minutes, exactly fifteen minutes before the end he closed his copy and handed it over to
me. He said, ’Now this is the time for my meditation.’”
Saxena said to me, ”You are impossible! Missing half an hour? You will lose the gold medal.”
From Personality to Individuality 66 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
I said, ”Who cares about the gold medal? And if you are so interested you can give me a gold medal.
You want me to have a gold medal on my chest? give me a gold medal! You can manage it, you
have enough money.”
He said, ”You don’t understand; it is not just a question of a gold medal, it is a question of topping
the whole university. It will make your career.”
I said, ”My career is going to be made by a gold medal? Do you think your examination is going to
make my career?”
He said, ”Yes, because if you come first then you can get... I have arranged everything – you will get
a scholarship for a Ph.D. If you don’t come first, you won’t get it.”
I said, ”Finished! So I will not have the scholarship and I will not have the Ph.D. Who cares about
your Ph.D.? What have you got? You have two Ph.D’s, one D.Litt. What have you really got?
You cannot deceive me – you live a frustrated life, you have been defeated twice. You wanted to
be elected dean of the arts faculty, but you could not win. And I know that you have wept over it,
actually wept tears.
”You have fought for election as vice-chancellor, and you could not manage to get even twenty
votes. Out of one thousand professors you got only twenty votes. Who is going to give votes for a
professor of philosophy against a man who is a seasoned politician? He has been chief minister of
the province. You think you can win against that criminal? – impossible! People are so afraid of him,
because there is every possibility that he will again become chief minister and if they don’t vote for
him, then he will take revenge.”
And that’s exactly what happened. This man, Dwarika Prasad Mishra, was chief minister of my state,
Madhya Pradesh. But because he spoke against Jawaharlal Nehru.... There was a conspiracy.
Morarji Desai was chief minister of Bombay state, Dwarika Prasad was chief minister of Madhya
Pradesh; a few chief ministers of other states joined together to revolt against Jawaharlal’s dictatorial
regime. Dwarika Prasad was foolish enough to speak first.
Jawaharlal was so angry that he immediately threw him out. It happened so quickly that Morarji and
others had second thoughts about whether to then go ahead according to the conspiracy plan or just
back out. And they all backed out, so this man alone was caught. But he was of the same quality
as Morarji Desai, just a third-rate gutter politician. He managed, for the time being at least, to be the
vice-chancellor of a university... and wait for the right time.
And he was clever. He immediately managed to become vice-chancellor, managed to become very
closely connected with Indira. Indira was not prime minister at that time but she was the president
of the congress party, which was the ruling party. He became so close to Indira that she started
trusting in him and calling him uncle. And she persuaded her father, Jawaharlal, the prime minister,
to forgive him and take him back. He was forgiven and taken back and became the general secretary
of the all-India congress committee, and again he was back as chief minister of Madhya Pradesh.
He took revenge on those twenty people who had voted for S.K. Saxena. He threw them all out of
the university, because the chief minister is the chancellor of the university; anybody who is the chief
From Personality to Individuality 67 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
minister becomes the chancellor of the university. So as chief minister he became the chancellor
also and threw out all those people.
I asked Doctor Saxena, ”What have you gained from all this trying to go higher? And are you
teaching me to get into the same trap in which you have suffered? If you are really loving towards
me, help me not to get into this trap.”
He said, ”My God! You want even me to go along with you? No – I will fight against him. I will fight
again, and you will see that one day I will become the vice-chancellor.”
I said, ”Even if you become the vice-chancellor, what does it mean? I know you: you will be as
miserable as you are now. First you were a lecturer, you were miserable. You became a reader, you
were miserable. You became a professor, you were miserable. You have now become head of the
philosophy department, you are miserable. I know you. Do you think by your becoming the dean of
the faculty of arts your misery will disappear?
”I know the dean of the faculty also. He is far more miserable than you are because he is just one
step short of becoming the vice-chancellor. You are two steps back, he is one step back. His misery
is more because he is so close. And every time somebody else jumps in from outside, he goes on
missing, and his misery is really intense. You will not be surprised if he gets a heart attack.”
But strangely, because I was not interested in the examinations and I was not interested in the
textbooks, but was interested in the whole world of philosophy – my interest was universal – of
course my answers were far richer than anybody else’s. They could only repeat what was in the
textbook; I could say something which even the examiner was reading for the first time. Otherwise...
I know examiners, I have myself been an examiner for nine years. I never read any copy of any
examinee.
To one intelligent student who was trustworthy, who wouldn’t say anything to anybody, I just said,
”You will get half the money. Just check all these books, and remember nobody is to be failed, so
everybody gets above the thirty-three mark. And nobody gets above sixty percent because I think
nobody is that capable. So these are the limits, thirty-three to sixty. Then you can go on doing it
howsoever you want.” And I knew when I was a student that my professors’ research scholars were
examining the papers.
I said to Doctor Saxena, ”Sometimes things can work in my way too. Just wait.” And certainly
they worked in my way because I was so rich in my answers and so original, because I had
never bothered about the textbooks. Textbooks I avoided because they can get stuck in your mind.
Textbooks I never purchased.
But I have been collecting books from my high school days. You will be surprised that by the time
I was a matriculate I had read thousands of books and collected hundreds of books of my own –
and great masterpieces. I was finished with Kahlil Gibran, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Gorky,
Turgenev – the best as far as writing is concerned. When I was finishing my intermediate I was
finished with Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Bertrand Russell – all the philosophers that I could find in
any library, in any bookshop, or borrow from anybody.
From Personality to Individuality 68 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
In Jabalpur there was one beautiful place where I was an everyday visitor; I would go for at least
one or two hours. It was called the Thieves’ Market. Stolen things were sold there, and I was after
stolen books because so many people were stealing books and selling them and I was getting such
beautiful books. I got Gurdjieff’s first book from that Thieves’ Market, and Ouspensky’s IN SEARCH
OF THE MIRACULOUS from that Thieves’ Market.
The book was fifty rupees; from there I got it for half a rupee, because in the Thieves’ Market, books
are sold by weight. Those people, they don’t bother about whether it is Ouspensky, Plato, or Russell.
Everything is all rubbish; whether you purchase old newspapers or you purchase Socrates, it is the
same price. I had collected in my library thousands of books from the Thieves’ Market. Everybody
used to ask me, ”Are you mad or something? Why do you go continually to the Thieves’ Market? –
because people don’t go there. To be associated with the Thieves’ Market is not good.”
I would say, ”I don’t care. Even if they think that I am a thief, it is okay.”
To me the Thieves’ Market has been the best source – even books which were not in the university
library I have found in the Thieves’ Market. And all those shopkeepers were selling stolen books,
and every kind of stolen thing. In India, in every big city there is a Thieves’ Market. In Bombay there
is a Thieves’ Market where you can find everything at just throw-away prices. But it is risky because
it is stolen property.
I once got into trouble because I purchased three hundred books from one shop, simultaneously,
in one day, because a whole library of somebody’s had been stolen. Just for one hundred and fifty
rupees, three hundred books! I could not leave a single one. I had to borrow money and immediately
rush there, and I told that man, ”No book should go from here.”
Those books had seals with a certain man’s name and address, and finally the police came. I said,
”Yes, these are the books, and I have purchased them from the Thieves’ Market. In the first place
this man is almost ninety years old – he will be dying soon.”
The police inspector said to me, ”What are you arguing about?”
I said, ”I am simply making things clear to you. This man is going to die sooner or later; these
books will be rotten. I can give you these books, but you have to give one hundred and fifty rupees
to somebody, because I have borrowed the money. And in fact you cannot catch me because that
shopkeeper is there; he will be a witness for me that the books were sold to him. Now, he cannot
go on remembering who is selling him old newspapers, and old books; he does not know who has
brought them.
So first you have to go to that man and find the thief If you find the thief get one hundred and fifty
rupees from him or from anywhere you want. These books are here, and they cannot be in a better
situation anywhere else. And that ninety-year-old man won’t be able to read them again, so what is
the fuss?”
The inspector said, ”You sound sane, logical, but these are stolen books... and I cannot go against
the law.”
From Personality to Individuality 69 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
I said, ”You go according to the law. Go to the place from where I have purchased them – and I
have purchased them, I have not stolen them. That shopkeeper has also purchased them, he has
not stolen them. So find the thief.”
He said, ”But on the book there is a seal and the name.”
I said, ”Don’t be worried – next time you come there will be no seal and no name. First you find the
thief, then I am always here, at your service.”
And as he went away I tore one page from each, the first empty page which means nothing, and
I just signed the books. From that day I started signing my books, because it might have come in
handy someday if my books were stolen – at least they had my signature and the date. And because
I had taken out the first page, I would sign on two or three pages inside also, in case my books were
stolen, but they never were.
My professors used to ask me, ”You are reading day and night, but why are you so averse to the
textbooks?”
I said, ”For the simple reason that I don’t want the examiner to see that I am a parrot.” And fortunately
that helped me. I came first in the university and won the gold medal. But I had promised, so I had
to drop the gold medal down the well in front of everybody; the whole university was there, and I
dropped the gold medal. I said to them, ”With this I drop the idea that I am the first in the university,
so that nobody feels inferior to me. I am just nobody.”
The vice-chancellor was present. That evening he called me in and said, ”This is not right. The gold
medal is a prestigious thing; you have topped the whole university. And you have got me in trouble
now because I was to give you the scholarship for a Ph.D. You have thrown away the gold medal in
front of everybody else, and they will say,’That man is strange – why are you giving him a scholarship
for three years?”’
I said, ”Don’t give it to me.”
But he said, ”Just because you did that.... You threw away the gold medal and you told the people
there,’Now I am just nobody; don’t take me as the first in the university. Please don’t be jealous
of me, I am not superior to you. It is just chance. Somebody was bound to be first; it is just a
coincidence that I happen to be the first. But it makes nobody inferior.’ What you said has gone into
my heart and I feel that I will take the risk and give you the scholarship.”
He certainly gave me the scholarship but no professor was ready to guide me, because I wanted to
do research on religion and they each said, ”You will create trouble, and as your guide it will be a
constant fight between the two of us. We know your ideas and we know that perhaps you are right,
but to accept you and to sign the papers that say I have been guiding you means that I am somehow
agreeing with you – and your ideas are outrageous! In private I can agree with you, but not in public.
”And what about the two other examiners who will be there from some other universities? They will
be just shocked because you criticize Krishna, you criticize Rama, you criticize Buddha, you criticize
Jesus. Is there anybody whom you don’t criticize?”
From Personality to Individuality 70 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
I said, ”If I come across somebody I will mention his name, but if I don’t come across anybody, what
can I do? Of course when Galileo discovered that the earth goes around the sun, he had to criticize
everybody without exception – all the scriptures of the world – because nobody had even thought
of it. All religions and all scriptures and all books said that the sun is going round the earth as it
appears to. But appearance is not reality, so how can you be certain?
”It may be possible that as far as religion is concerned I am the first man who is right, because if
Galileo can be the first man, just three hundred years before.... Before Galileo, thousands of years
had passed. If he can be the first man who was right and everybody else before him was wrong,
why do you think I cannot be the first man who is right?”
One of the professors said, ”This is the problem! You find somebody else. I will suggest a few names
go to these professors.”
Philosophy professors were not ready to accept me. They suggested, ”It would be good if the
research could be done under psychology. You will just have to change the subject to psychology of
religion. Do whatsoever you want, just change the title.”
I said, ”I will try.”
The psychologists said, ”If your professors, your own professors of philosophy are not ready to
accept you, why should we take this unnecessary trouble on our heads? You criticize Sigmund
Freud, you criticize Jung and you criticize Adler – and our whole department stands on these three
people, we teach them.”
I said, ”So should I change the subject again? – politics of religion, economics of religion? I am
ready to make up any subject.”
I told the vice-chancellor, ”You find me a guide. Religion has to be there. In front of it, he can
put anything: mathematics of religion, economics of religion, geography of religion any subject I
will manage.” But nobody was ready to accept me so I could not get the scholarship. But I was
immensely happy: these are your professors, your topmost intellectuals, who in private are ready to
accept a certain thing, but in public are afraid. Are they worth being jealous of? Are these people
superior?
And I have no desire to feel anybody is inferior. Yes, it is possible that in one thing you may know
more, somebody may know less. In one dimension you may be talented, in another dimension
somebody else may be talented. That simply shows that people are unique, they have different
qualities. But each individual has his own standing, incomparable. I have never thought of anybody
as inferior; I have never thought of anybody as superior.
I am myself, you are yourself.
Comparison does not arise.
But all children are being forced to compete, compare, and naturally jealousy arises because
somebody succeeds and you are not succeeding. Somebody is getting those things that you are
not getting.
From Personality to Individuality 71 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
I have heard: a Baptist priest and a rabbi lived opposite each other, across the road, and there was
great competition continually going on. Naturally, it is a two-thousand-year-old conflict; it started with
Jesus, and I don’t know with whom it is going to end. I hope it ends with pope the polack. But that’s
just a hope; you cannot be certain about it. For two thousand years they have been in conflict and
this has become more and more personal.
If the priest brings some rose flowers and some plants for his garden, immediately the rabbi will
bring double. One year it happened that the Baptist priest purchased a Lincoln Continental. This
was too much for the rabbi. And just while he was standing on his porch, the priest came out and
poured water on the Lincoln Continental.
The rabbi said, ”What are you doing?”
He said, ”I am giving it its baptism, making it christian.”
He said, ”Okay.”
The next day the rabbi purchased a Cadillac limousine – far costlier, a six-door. Just standing on his
porch he waited for the priest to come out. The priest came out, and the rabbi went inside, brought
out some instruments and started doing something. The priest said, ”What are you doing?”
The rabbi said, ”Circumcising.” He was cutting the exhaust pipe!
Jealousy, competition, it can drive you nuts. If you can baptize, he can circumcise. He is making the
Cadillac a Jew. And I think in America the Cadillac is a Jew, because when I told Sheela to have
a Cadillac for the Foundation, and the Foundation’s president, she said, ”No, you don’t know: the
Cadillac is a Jew.”
I said, ”My God! Cars are also Jews?”
She said, ”Yes, the Cadillac is a Jew, and I cannot have a Cadillac.”
Perhaps cars can be converted.
These people, even though they are priests and rabbis, are just as stupid human beings as anybody
else; and the same is true about their God. There is not much in their God either, because it is their
projection, and a projection is bound to be less than the one who is projecting it.
Another story I am reminded of: a rabbi and a Christian minister are playing golf and each time the
rabbi misses, he says, ”Shit!”
The minister says, ”This is not good for a religious man, and a rabbi at that, a priest! This is not right.
God will get angry.”
But what to do with a habit? – again the rabbi missed and he said, ”Shit!”
The minister was very angry. He said, ”If you say it a third time, I tell you, God will punish you.”
From Personality to Individuality 72 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
And after he missed a third time and said ”Shit!” God really did. A flash of lightning came down and
from the sky was heard ”Shit!” – because the lightning hit the minister! It is a Jewish God – what
else can you expect?
A rabbi, a Jewish God, they cannot be very different: the same projection, the same mind.
Jealousy is not seeing a simple fact – that you have been taught to see yourself as inferior to
someone, as superior to someone. And you have become so unconscious of it that you are
constantly judging people as inferior, as superior, as good, as bad, right, wrong.
Don’t judge.
Everybody is just himself.
Accept him as he is.
But this is possible only if you accept yourself as you are, with no shame, with no feeling of
worthlessness.
The questioner is asking if jealousy means that we have gone too far away from ourselves. Yes. In
comparing, you have gone far away in both directions. In one direction there is an unending line of
people superior to you; in another direction, another line of people inferior to you – and you are in
between.
You have no time to see to yourself. You are constantly struggling to take the place of the man who
is ahead of you, and at the same time pushing down the man who is behind you, because he is
trying to take your place. He is pulling on your leg just as you are pulling On somebody else’s leg. It
is a strange chain in which everybody is pulling on everybody else’s legs – and all are in trouble, all
are being stretched.
When, in India, my back started giving trouble to me, they started giving me traction. I told – them
devaraj was there – ”Do you know from where the word traction comes, and what you are doing to
me?”
He said, ”No. Traction is a perfectly good medical device and it is used everywhere.”
I said, ”It was invented by Christians in the Middle Ages to torture people. It was a Christian device
to torture people! You pull their hands at one end, their legs at the other end, and naturally, if you
want any confession they will have to confess. If you want the woman to accept that she is a witch,
on traction she is going to accept it because there is a point where she sees,’Now my hands are
going to be pulled off my body, my legs are going to be pulled off my body. It is better to say, ”Yes,
I am a witch,” and get finished with this traction.’ But once she has accepted she is a witch she is
going to be burned alive.”
It was a torture device. It was just by coincidence it was found.... One man who was thought to be a
heretic was being given this traction. He had a back pain, and when he was released from traction
he said, ”My God! The back pain has disappeared.” Just by coincidence it was found that it can help
the back pain. Since then it has been medical; before that it was part of the church.
From Personality to Individuality 73 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
But your life you see as a psychological traction; hence you have no time, no energy, no space for
yourself. You are always looking at somebody else, either to feel good....
One Christian priest, Stanley Jones, very famous in his time – now he is dead – was a world-famous
Christian teacher, and of course a great orator, not like the idiot Billy Graham. He was really a great
orator, a profound orator – Billy Graham is just an Oregonian. You should look into it; he must have
been born in Oregon. His face is typical of that retarded....
No, Stanley Jones was really an impressive personality, and known worldwide. He was wandering
around the world giving sermons but he had his headquarters in India: in the Himalayas he had
made a Christian ashram. He used to come to Jabalpur also, where I was a professor.
In one of his sermons, at which I was present, he told a very beautiful anecdote. Not being aware
that a strange person was sitting just in front of him, he said, ”There are two kinds of people. One
always looks at the high skyscrapers of other people, feels miserable because the lawn is always
greener in the neighbor’s garden.”
It is always greener. From faraway things look different; your own lawn does not look so green. Your
own house looks dirty, the other house looks so beautiful. Your wife, when you go in, is continually
quarreling. When you go to meet your neighbor, they are both smiling, but you forget one thing:
when your neighbor comes to you then you are also both smiling. People go on looking at what
other people have and then they start feeling that they are missing it – anything!
Stanley Jones recounts a story. He said, ”I have a lifelong friend who is always hopeful, optimistic.
He really sees a silver lining in every dark cloud. First I used to think that it was only a philosophy, but
the second world war proved conclusively that he meant what he said. It was not just a philosophy,
but his very Christian being.
”After the second world war I went to see him because he had lost one eye, one hand, and one leg
in the war. On the way I was thinking that perhaps he had also lost his positivistic attitude, but to my
amazement he was even more positive than ever. I asked him his secret.
”He said, ’It is simple. It is the very fundamental of Christianity. I thank God that at least I have one
eye, one hand, and one leg – because there are many who have lost both legs, many who have lost
both eyes, many who have lost both hands, and millions who have lost their whole lives. I think of
them and feel fortunate and blessed.’”
Stanley Jones emphasized through this anecdote that this should be every Christian’s approach –
that positive philosophy is the greatest contribution of Jesus Christ.
I stood up and said to him, ”It is impossible to feel fortunate comparing yourself to those who are
in an inferior position – and yet not feel inferior because there are also certainly people who are
in a superior position. It is impossible to divide inferior and superior and just choose one; they are
aspects of the same coin.”
The most amazing part was that the great orator and preacher became very angry, threw down
his notes and went inside the house. While he was leaving I told him, ”This seems to be the real
From Personality to Individuality 74 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
Christian philosophy. But just being angry and escaping is not an argument; and whenever you
come back again to this city, remember, I will be here to remind you of the argument – because you
are leaving it inconclusive.” As it happened, he never came back to Jabalpur.
You will be surprised that comparison is not just to do with money or power, but can be about
anything. In my childhood, just as girls in India had earrings – and now that disease is spreading in
the West too – in my childhood rich people’s boys used to have earrings also. My ears still have the
marks of those old holes. I resisted very much but I was too small, and my parents said, ”It doesn’t
look good that every boy in the neighborhood has golden earrings, and you go out without earrings.
And everybody is saying to our family,’What is the matter, can’t you afford even two gold rings?’ It is
insulting!”
Now, what do earrings have to do...? I said, ”It may be insulting to you but to me it simply seems
that you are destroying my ears. You will make holes in my ears and I will have to suffer the pain.
If God had intended.... If He can make so many things, just two holes in the ears are not much
craftsmanship. Even the Holy Ghost could have done it.”
But they wouldn’t listen, because it was a constant trouble: relatives would come and they would
say, ”What! Your boy has no earrings?” Now earrings had become a necessity – that too is part of
the competitive society. And they forced me; just four people had to keep me down on the bed, and
they pierced both my ears.
I said, ”Okay, I am small and helpless – you can do any nonsense that you want to do, but remember
I am not going to forgive you for it. It is being done against my will, and I am not going to wear your
earrings. Are you going to follow me twenty-four hours a day? Now we will see....” Many times they
put earrings on me and I threw them away. Finally they got tired, and it was costly because they
were gold earrings and I would throw them away. The moment I got the chance I would throw them
away.
Finally they said, ”Leave him alone.”
I said, ”If you had left me alone before, my ears could have been saved. I don’t have any hope of
being saved in life, but my ears would have been saved.”
Competition in everything, strange things.... If you are living in a commune or a community of
hippies, then the dirtier you are, the greater you are. What I mean to explain to you is that it has
nothing to do with money or power or anything in particular. It can be to do with anything, and you
can use it to feel superior or inferior. Now the hippy who never takes a bath is certainly superior to
the other hippies who are not so seasoned and once in a while need a shower. Certainly he is far
superior; he never takes a bath, never cleans his teeth, never uses soap or dirty things like that.
He remains completely natural. Perspiring, he remains natural; smelly, he remains natural. He will
be thought to be somebody higher – you are not that strong. Once in a while you are weak, you
start feeling like taking a bath. But if a hippy takes a bath he tries to hide it.
In India there are such monks. One Hindu monk used to stay in my home; he was a friend of my
father, a childhood friend. My father had a cloth shop, so whenever the monk came, my father would
From Personality to Individuality 75 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
make good clothes for him; if it was winter then winter clothes, woolen clothes. And what would the
monk do? First he would make them dirty; he would rub them against the ground, make them old
and dirty because a monk is not supposed to have beautiful clothes and be up-to-date.
My father would try to use the best that he had in his shop, and I told him, ”You are just wasting them.
That man even makes holes in them and tears them and makes them look old” – because then he
is on a higher stage of monkhood. Those who cannot afford such dirty clothes, old clothes, rags...
they are still interested in clothes. They are still attached to material things. There is competition in
that too: in who has more rotten rags than you.
There are Hindu monks who will not just eat the food that you give them. First they will dip it in
the river to spoil it completely, then mix it all together in their begging bowl so that salty things and
sugary things and everything is mixed; and then they will eat it. That is thought to be austerity. And
those who will not do it are thought to be still far lower, living still for taste and food – they have to
destroy the taste.
Certainly, if you go on in this way – being jealous and competitive of everybody around you – how
can you come to yourself? The world is too big, and there are so many people and you are in
competition with everybody... and you are. Somebody has a beautiful face, somebody has beautiful
hair, somebody has a beautiful, proportionate body, somebody has a great intellect, somebody is a
painter, somebody is a poet.... How are you going to manage? All this, and you alone to compete?
You will drive yourself nuts – and that is what all of humanity has done.
Drop competition, drop jealousy.
It is absolutely pointless.
It is absolutely a cunning device created by the priests so that you can never be yourself – because
that is the only thing all the old religions are afraid of.
If you are yourself you have found contentment, fulfillment, ecstasy.
Who cares about God then? – you ARE God.
You have tasted godliness, and within yourself.
Now you are not even bothered about the emperor; you are not thinking that he is superior to you.
How can he be superior to you? You have tasted something of such tremendous dimensions that
what that poor fellow.... You can feel sorry for him, but you will not feel inferior. Even towards a
beggar... you will not feel that he is inferior, because you know that what you have found he is also
carrying within himself.
There is no qualitative difference between you, the beggar, and the emperor. The only difference is
just on the outside: in the clothes, in the titles, the elephant on which the king is sitting – and the
beggar in his rags. But these are not real differences, not the difference that makes a difference.
Inside yourself you will find a tranquility, a serenity, a silence, a treasure unfathomable.
From Personality to Individuality 76 Osho
CHAPTER 4. JEALOUSY: SOCIETY’S DEVICE TO DIVIDE AND RULE
And in finding it you will know everybody has got it; whether he knows it or not, that’s a different
matter.
Knowing and not knowing – that is the only difference.
But as far as existence is concerned, everybody has all the beauty of the world, of the universe; all
the ecstasy and dance of the universe. Yes, in different ways it will express itself.
There is no need to think that somebody who is expressing it through dance is better than the one
who is expressing it through a song or one who is expressing it through his silence.
What is being expressed is exactly the same ecstasy.
And you will find it only when you have entered your world of aloneness where there is nobody else.
There, you have left the society far behind... because that society has been preventing you. You
have left all the priests, all the religions, all the political parties far behind.
You are now almost nobody.
I say ”almost” because in fact you are, for the first time – but on a totally different plane. You have
never even thought about it, that this can be your very being, so profound and so full and so eternal.
And what are you going to lose by dropping jealousy and competitiveness and comparison?
Nothing.
You have nothing to lose but your chains, and you have to gain the whole kingdom of God which is
within you.
From Personality to Individuality 77 Osho
CHAPTER 5
Sannyas: the odyssey of aloneness – a journey to the center of your
being
3 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
OUR COMMUNE IS NOT LIKE ANY OF THE TRADITIONAL ASHRAMS OR MONASTERIES.
WOULD YOU TALK TO US MORE ABOUT THE FUNCTION OF YOUR COMMUNE?
IT is necessary first to understand the traditional structure of an ashrama, and also of a monastery.
It will give you the background to understand the meaning of my commune.
The ashrama is an Eastern concept based on renouncing society, its comforts, conveniences. An
ashrama is a group of people living together in austerity, self-imposed poverty, starvation in the
name of fasting; torturing the body in order to have control over the physical by the spiritual; doing
all kinds of exercises so that they become able to concentrate on the idea of God if they are Hindus,
or on the idea of the ultimate growth of human consciousness if they are Buddhists and Jainas.
But the goal is far away for all the three – you can call it God, you can call it the Buddha, you can
call it the Jina. They are different words signifying nothing, but pointing towards a further shore, so
far away that you cannot even conceive it. It remains just a vague idea, a cloudy idea in your mind.
For this cloudy idea you have to sacrifice everything that is real, tangible, touchable, which you can
see, which you can feel, which you can live. All that is alive has to be sacrificed for something which
is nothing but a utopia.
78
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
Do you know the exact literal meaning of the word utopia? Its literal meaning is that which never
happens; the hoped for... but which never happens. It can keep you engaged for centuries, and it
has kept millions of people engaged for centuries. And they are still engaged in the same effort:
losing this for something for which they have no evidence, no proof, not even an argument.
The word ashrama is very beautiful, but is used in a very wrong context. Ashrama means a place to
relax. Yes, in the very beginning, five thousand years ago, in the times of the VEDAS, an ashrama
was actually a place of relaxation; it was not ascetic. You will be surprised to know this, because for
five thousand years asceticism has prevailed so strongly that people have completely forgotten how
it used to be in the beginning. It was just the opposite of what it is today.
The rishis, the munis – these two words you have to understand. Rishis means poets of
consciousness. It is only in the East that we have two words for poet: kavi and rishi. Kavi literally
means the poet, but for rishi, in English there is no equivalent.
The rishi is the awakened poet. He still sings, but those songs are not composed by him; they filter
through him, they come from existence. Just as flowers blossom, poems blossom. The poet is a
composer: he plays with the words, with their rhythm, with their sound, and he is capable of creating
meaningful, rhythmic songs.
But it is good not to meet the poet. Take it as a basic policy never to meet the poet because
that will be a disappointment. His poetry is so beautiful but the poet so extra-ordinary. I don’t mean
extraordinary as one word. I am using the word extra to emphasize the word ordinary: extra ordinary.
I don’t know who coined this word extraordinary, because it simply means the last, the very last –
not simply ordinary, but extra ordinary. The people who must have used this word first were thinking
of ”extraordinary” in the sense of being above the ordinary; but extraordinary can mean both. One
thing is certain, the poet is not ordinary: he can be above the ordinary, he can be below the ordinary.
There are many words which have this same ambivalence. For example, psychologists use the word
abnormal. Now, abnormal can mean insane, crackpot, nuts and bolts – anything. But abnormal can
also mean one who is above normal: a Buddha, a Jesus, a Moses, a Zarathustra. Both are abnormal
in the sense that both are not normal, but there are two sides of not being normal. In the same way
the word extraordinary has always been used for those who are above the ordinary. I don’t know,
I have tried to find out why, why it has not been used for those idiots who are below the ordinary.
They are also extraordinary. Why this unfairness?
The original ashrama, the very word ashrama, means time to relax, a place to relax. Shram
means labor, work. Ashram means you have done what was to be done, now it is time to be in
a state of nondoing. You have acted your whole life. When are you going to know the strange and
extraordinary world of inaction? – so totally silent that nothing moves there. It was a beautiful word
and the people who invented it were really doing just that. But it is a five-thousand year old story
which these five thousand years have been destroying continuously.
You will be shocked to hear that the rishi – which can be translated as the seer.... The ordinary poet
is blind, he is groping in darkness; the rishi is one who has eyes. The blind man can also sing songs
of beautiful sunrises, sunsets, flowers, colors, rainbows – yes, the blind man can sing....
From Personality to Individuality 79 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
In fact blind people are good singers for the simple reason that eighty percent of our body’s energy is
used by our eyes, and when a man is blind, that eighty percent of his energy starts being distributed
to the ears, to the nose, to the mouth – into the other four senses which ordinarily have to share only
twenty percent of the energy. With eyes non-existent they enjoy one hundred percent of the energy
amongst themselves. Hence the blind man has a very subtle way of hearing. You cannot hear what
he hears. He remembers through hearing.
I was traveling in a train in the middle of the night and I entered the compartment which was reserved
for me. It was a small, two-couch compartment. One, the upper one, was already occupied, the
lower was reserved for me. As I sat on the lower bunk and gave the money to the porter, and gave
instructions to the servant about when I would like to have tea in the morning, and when I would like
to have my breakfast, I had no idea who was on the upper berth. But the man said, ”Is that not you
there, Osho?”
I looked up, I could not recognize the man. I said, ”Yes, but who are you?”
He said, ”Have you forgotten me? I am Sharnananda.” He was a very famous Hindu sage; but he
was blind. I had met him twelve years before. In those twelve years I must have met millions of
people; it was impossible to remember him. How could he manage to remember me when he was
blind, birthblind?
I said, ”Sharnananda, you are doing a miracle! You can’t see me, yet you recognize me. And I can
see you but I could not recognize you.”
He said, ”It is because of your eyes. I cannot see – I remember through my ears. Your sound, your
way of speaking: those little things become part of my memory. And the meeting with you was so
memorable, and the way you talked.... I could even hear the same way, the same sound, while you
were talking to the servant, to the porter. I immediately recognized you. Nobody else talks like you.
”When you said to the servant,’Don’t wake me up because my morning begins when I wake, so let
the tea wait. When I am awake, I will ring the bell, then you bring the tea.’ The moment you said,’My
morning begins when I wake,’ I said this man cannot be anybody else. I don’t know anybody else in
the whole world whose morning begins when he wakes up – the morning begins when it begins –
but you can say that, only you can say that!”
A seer is one who is not groping in darkness, and just imagining things. Yes, a blind man’s
imagination becomes very powerful because he cannot see; his whole energy is available inwards.
Otherwise, the energy moves outside from the eyes, eyes are the doors opening outwards. When
the eyes are closed, the energy moves inwards.
That’s why meditators close their eyes. It is a simple strategy: close the eyes and you lock the doors;
the energy cannot move out, it moves in. So blind people become very imaginative. They can talk
of color although they have never seen it. They can talk of light although they have never seen it.
But still, howsoever beautiful their imagination, it is untrue, it is not real.
In India we call these people kavis, poets. But don’t go to see them, because the poet will be a very
ordinary person. Just the other day – it has happened so many times I feel it almost a rule to be
From Personality to Individuality 80 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
followed. Just the other day I saw for the first time a film of an Urdu singer, Gulam Ali. He is one of
the topmost Urdu singers in the East, he has his own way and style. There are many singers, but
Gulam Ali stands far above any of them. But I had always heard Gulam Ali on records, I had never
seen him; it had never happened.
We were both moving around the same country but by chance it never happened that we were in
the same city. He wanted to meet me. His disciples.... In India a great musician, a great singer, is
called ustad, maestro. He has disciples just as spiritual masters have disciples, because Eastern
music needs a long discipline. It is not like jazz music that any idiot can start jumping and shouting
and it becomes music; it is not the music of the Beatles. It takes twenty or thirty years of training,
eight hours or ten hours a day. It is a whole life’s work.
Gulam Ali has worked hard and still works hard. It is said that if you don’t practice Eastern music
for three days, people will recognize something is missing. If you don’t practice for two days, only
your disciples will recognize something is missing. And if you don’t practice for one day, only you
are certain to feel that it was not the same thing. Not even a single day has to be missed.
But just the other day somebody from Pakistan sent me a video film of Gulam Ali. And what I
was expecting, happened. His personality is so poor that to connect that beautiful voice with this
man who looks like a clerk in some post office, or a ticket collector in some railway company, or a
conductor in some bus, that type of man....
I had to keep my eyes closed because his face, his eyes, his hands, his gestures – everything was
disturbing. I thought that I should send him a suggestion, ”You should sing behind a curtain. You are
not worth presenting, you destroy your music. The music is almost divine, then you see, standing
behind, a donkey – you cannot connect them.”
The same happened a few days before. I have never seen Mehdi Hasan – another great singer, far
more modern than Gulam Ali. Gulam Ali is very orthodox, his training is orthodox. But Mehdi Hasan
has a very innovative genius. He is trained in orthodox music but he has not kept himself confined
to it. He has improvised new ways, new styles, and he is really a creative man. Gulam Ali is not
a creative man; he recites those songs exactly as they have been recited for thousands of years.
Listening to him you are listening to thousands of years, the whole tradition behind him.
These singers all have what is called gharanas – gharana means family. They don’t belong to the
family of their father and mother, they belong to the family of the master from whom they have
learned. That is their gharana. They are known by the name of their master, their master is known
by his master. Their gharanas are thousands of years old, and each generation teaches to the next
generation exactly the same tone, the same wavelength.
But Mehdi Hasan is ultra-modern, and he has a creative genius which is far more significant. I have
loved him because he has brought a new light, new ways of singing the same old songs. He is so
creative that the whole song seems almost new, reborn, fresh, like a just-opened flower with the
dewdrops still on it.
But what a misery to see him. He is far worse than Gulam Ali! Gulam Ali at least seems to be a
conductor on a bus, but Mehdi Hasan is not even worthy to be conductor. While Gulam Ali does
From Personality to Individuality 81 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
not fit with what he is singing, Mehdi Hasan is exactly contradicting what he is singing. Strange that
the two persons I have seen on the screen, I have not met. This has been my general practice my
whole life in India. I have read poets, heard poets on the radio, but I have not met them because my
early experiences of meeting poets were just shipwrecked.
Maitreyaji is sitting there – he knows one great Indian poet, Ramdharisingh Dinkar. They belong to
the same place, Patna, and they were both friends. He has written some high-flying songs. He has
contributed much to Indian poetry. He was known as the great poet, mahakavi; not just kavi, a poet,
but the great poet. He was the only man known as the great poet.
He used to come to see me, unfortunately. He loved me, I loved him, but I could not like him. Love
is spiritual, you can love anybody, but liking is far more difficult. Whenever he came he would talk of
such stupid things that I told him, ”Dinkar, one expects something poetic from you.”
He said, ”But I am not a poet twenty-four hours a day.”
I said, ”That’s right! But come to me when you are! – otherwise don’t come, because my
acquaintance is with the poet Dinkar, not with you.” Whenever he came, he would talk about politics
– he was a nominated member of parliament – or he would talk about his sickness continually; he
was making me sick! I told him, ”Stop talking about your sicknesses, because people come to me
to ask something of value, and you come to describe your sicknesses.”
But if I prohibited him from talking politics, he would talk of sicknesses. If I prohibited him from talking
of sicknesses, then he would talk about his sons: ”They are destroying my life. Nobody listens to
me. I am going to send them to you.”
I told him, ”You are too much. And you are spoiling my joy for when your book comes out: I cannot
read it without remembering you. In between the lines you are standing there talking about your
diabetes, your politics....”
He would talk about diabetes, and he would ask for sweets! ”these,” he would say, ”I cannot leave.”
He died because he continued to eat things that the doctors were prohibiting. And he knew it; he
would tell me everything that the doctors had prohibited and ask me, ”Osho, can you tell me some
way that I can manage to eat all these things and still the diabetes...?” Maitreyaji knew him perfectly
well.
In Jabalpur there was one famous poetess, Shubhadra Kumari Chauhan. I had read her poetry
from my very childhood; her songs had become so popular because of the freedom struggle – she
was continuously fighting for freedom and revolution – that even small children were reciting them.
Before I was able to read, even then I knew a few of her songs. When I went to the university I
discovered that she had also moved to Jabalpur. That was not her original place; her original place
happened to be near my village. That I discovered later on, that she was from just twenty miles away
from my village and that she had moved to Jabalpur just two years before I moved there.
But seeing that woman, I said, ”My God! Such beautiful poetry, and such an utterly homeless – no,
I mean homely.... I got so distracted by her that I forgot even the word homely! Because she was
worse than that, and I don’t know any other word that is worse than that. ”Ugly” does not look right
From Personality to Individuality 82 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
to use for anybody; it seems to be condemning, and I only want to describe, not to condemn, hence
homely. Homely means, you need not pay any attention; let her pass, let her go.
Then there was another poet, of all-India fame, Bhavani Prasad Tiwari, who was in immense love
with me. I was very young when I started delivering public discourses; I must have been twenty
when I delivered my first public discourse, in 1950. He was the president.
He could not believe it, and he was so overwhelmed that rather than delivering his presidential
address he said, ”Now I don’t want to disturb what this boy has said. I would like you to go home
with what he has said, meditating over it. And I don’t want to give my presidential address – in fact,
he should have presided, and I should have spoken.” And he closed the meeting.
Everybody was in a shock because he was an old man and famous. He took me in his car and
asked me where he could drop me off. That day I became acquainted with him. I said, ”It is a shock
to me. You are certainly a loving person and also an understanding person. I have read your poems
and I have always loved them. They are simple but have the quality of raw diamonds, unpolished.
One needs the eye of a jeweler to see the beauty of an uncut, unpolished, raw diamond just coming
out from the mine – just born.
”I can also say I have always felt, reading your poetry, like when the rainy season first begins in
India, and the clouds start showering, and the earth has a sweet smell of fresh, thirsty earth; and
the smell of that earth getting wet gives you a feeling of thirst being satisfied.
”That’s how I have always felt reading your poetry. But seeing you I am disillusioned” – because the
man had on both sides, inside his mouth, two pans, betel leaves, and the red, blood-like juice of the
betel leaves was dribbling from both sides of his mouth onto his clothes.
That was a chain thing the whole day. All that he was doing was making new pans. He used to carry
a small bag with everything in it. And whenever I saw him he was always – this is the way: tobacco
in his hand, rubbing the tobacco, preparing it, chewing the pan, and the red juice was all around.
I said, ”You have destroyed my whole idea of a poet.” Since then I have avoided poets because I
came to know that they are blind people; once in a while they have a flight of imagination. But five
thousand years ago, in the East, they must have understood that we have to make a distinction
between the poet who is blind, and the poet who has eyes.
A rishi is one who speaks because he sees. His poetry also has a different name; it is called richa
because it comes from a rishi. Richa means poetry coming from the awakened consciousness of a
being.
These people were not ascetics. They had wives, they had children, they had beautiful ashramas
– so beautiful that even kings used to be there for their holidays. Kings used to send their children
to live with the family of a rishi, in an ashrama, because there was nothing more beautiful than an
ashrama.
Ashramas were deep in the forest, in the mountains, near the great rivers of India, and with an
awakened being. He had a wife, he had children. He was just as simple and ordinary as you are –
From Personality to Individuality 83 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
he was not on any power trip. And he was not worried about God, and paradise; he was enjoying
life here.
Even kings were jealous, and they used to come for advice because these people were not just
spiritual guides, they had the eyesight they could use for anything. They were not averse to riches.
All the ashramas were, in the beginning, tremendously rich, because the kings continued to pour in
as much money as possible. And it was not only one king coming to one rishi, because rishis and
their ashramas were not part of any kingdom.
That much respect the East knew; that you could not claim the ashrama of a rishi as part of your
kingdom. So he was independent. Other kings were also coming to him. He was not possessed by
any king who could say, ”You can only advise me. I have given you the land and I have given you
so much money, and so much luxury and so much comfort and protection, so you are only to be my
adviser.” No, such a thing was inconceivable.
If the rishi has accepted all that you have offered, he has obliged you. He could have refused. You
were to be thankful to him that he did not refuse you. You were to be obliged to him that he gave
you the honor to serve him. He was nobody’s possession. His territory was an independent territory.
And in his territory anybody could take refuge, even a criminal. And then he was beyond the powers
of the rulers from whom the criminal had escaped. You could not catch hold of him or bring the
police and the army into the rishi’s campus. That campus was sacred.
It was literally true that there was no comparison between the ancient Eastern ashrama and anything
else, even a palace of a king. On each special occasion, the king would go to receive the blessings.
He would touch the feet of the rishi, because he knew he himself was blind, and that it was good to
be blessed by someone who had eyes, and to be guided. And many times it happened, many wars
were simply avoided because both kings went to the same rishi to ask, ”Our armies are standing
face to face – what to do?”
The rishi would say, ”You ask me what to do? Just take your armies back to your homes! There is
not going to be any fight. While I am still alive your armies are not going to face each other again.”
And that was so. The war was delayed till his death; before, that war could not happen. There was
no question of denying him. He had no political power, no army, but they both knew that he had
eyes, and if he saw that this was going to be blissful for both, then let it be so. ”We are blind. We will
step back.”
But the birth of Buddhism and Jainism, the two other religions in India, created trouble. They
transformed the whole character of the ashrama. Buddhists and Jainas don’t have ashramas –
that’s the first thing to be noted. To destroy the ashrama – because the ashrama was the stronghold
of brahminism, Hinduism – and yet without somebody being a pope, chosen, elected....
No, you cannot elect a Buddha! How can you even think of electing a Buddha? What grounds, what
criteria will you use? Just think of blind people electing someone who has eyes. Now, how can they
determine that he has eyes? They don’t have eyes so they can’t see. Two persons are standing as
candidates, saying ”We have eyes, give us votes.” Do you see the absurdity? Now, blind people will
say, ”How can we decide? We don’t have any eyes so we don’t see whether you are both blind, both
have eyes, or one has eyes and one is blind. We cannot determine in any way.”
From Personality to Individuality 84 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
A Buddha, an awakened human being, has to declare himself. There is no question of anybody
selecting, nominating. Who can select? Who can nominate? Who can elect?
There is a poem sung by this man I referred to, Mehdi Hasan, in which a sentence comes, ”I am a
man with eyes selling glasses in the city of the blind.” When I heard the line, ”I am a man with eyes
selling glasses in the city of the blind,” I said, ”You cannot have eyes; one thing is certain, you don’t
have eyes. Otherwise a man with eyes, selling eye-glasses in the city of the blind simply proves that
he is far more blind than the people to whom he is selling the glasses! Blind people cannot tell who
has eyes and who has not.”
So these rishis were not popes. The pope is an elected person; two hundred cardinals elect him.
All those two hundred cardinals are secretly campaigning for themselves to be elected. It is a secret
thing. For twenty-four hours the doors of a particular place in the Vatican are closed. For twenty-four
hours those two hundred people are inside, just so that the world does not know how the selection
happens, how the person is elected.
And they are all campaigning for themselves, each campaigning for himself, or for somebody who
will help them. And it takes twenty-four hours to find one person. That too is not a unanimous
choice. Sometimes there are two candidates, then a vote has to be taken; sometimes there are
three candidates and none are ready to withdraw. By voting, two hundred fallible cardinals – by
voting – choose one infallible pope... This world is really strange.
That was not the case with the rishis. But Jainism and Buddhism transformed the whole character
of the Eastern way of life. First, to destroy the ashramas they decided that they wouldn’t have any
ashramas. So Jaina monks, Buddhist monks, are wandering monks; they don’t have any ashramas
– because if you have an ashrama there is a possibility that you will start collecting conveniences,
comforts, luxuries. It is very natural.
People will love you, respect you and they will go on giving you things. And you will keep things for
certain seasons: the rains will be coming, and you will need umbrellas so you keep the umbrellas
even in winter when they are not needed. So you will start possessing things. In the rains it will be
difficult to go out, so you will collect food, foodstuff. In winter you will need clothes, woolen clothes,
so you collect woolen clothes.
You cannot avoid possessions – and that was one thing that Jainism and Buddhism both were
determined about: that the monk should not possess anything and the Jaina monk, absolutely
nothing. He was naked, without even a begging bowl, which had always been accepted. Nobody
had even questioned whether a begging bowl was a possession.
But Jainism did not allow even the begging bowl; you had just to eat from your hands. If all the
animals can do without begging bowls – you are men, far more intelligent – you can do it. So they
drink from the hands, they eat from the hands; that is their begging bowl. They were not allowed to
have ashramas because ashramas would become properties, possessions. They had to continually
move. A Jaina monk cannot stay more than three days in a place.
Certainly there is some idea behind it, because I have watched: if you stay in a place, it takes some
time.... For example, the first night you may not be able to sleep at all – a new place, a new house....
From Personality to Individuality 85 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
Nothing is uncomfortable, it’s just the newness. Perhaps you are accustomed to sleeping in a round
bed, and this is a square bed, and that is enough! You are accustomed to sleeping in a square
room, and this is a round room; you almost feel as if you have fallen in a well or something. Even in
your sleep you will wake up many times.
The first night it is very difficult, the second night it is easier, and by the third night you are
comfortable. This is my experience, because I have been traveling for thirty years, staying in strange
places, strange houses. You will not believe it – from the rotten – most house you can imagine to
the best palace in the world I have been a guest.
It was really a problem because I was continually moving about, not staying for even three days. I
am not a Jaina monk; not even three days were available to me. In the morning I was in Calcutta, in
the evening I was in Bombay; by the night I had moved towards Delhi. Mostly I was in trains, planes,
cars, but rarely in houses. In fact I have to confess to you, that I became so accustomed to sleeping
in airconditioned trains that in houses I felt uncomfortable. I felt comfortable only on the train, with
all the noise, the movement, the hustle and bustle of each station, and the passengers coming in
and getting out. All that became part of my comfort.
When I used to sleep in a room, I would wake up a few times, and no station? – because Indian
stations are very noisy: all kinds of things are being sold, even in the middle of the night. The whole
station is agog, alive, and full of people, because except for the airconditioned class, all the classes
are so cramped. The third class, which is the class for everybody, is always overcrowded. You can
see, it is written on the compartment that it is reserved only for thirty people – and you will find sixty,
ninety. How they manage....
Once or twice just to have the experience I have traveled third class. And it really is a great
experience to travel in the third class in India. A compartment made for thirty people, and ninety or
a hundred people are in it.... Not even a single inch anywhere can you move. You cannot go to the
bathroom – in fact in the bathroom also people are stuck. In the first place there is no way to reach
there. Even if you do reach, somehow, treading over people, there is no space in the bathroom; it
is already full. People are traveling even on the roof of the train. They are hanging out of the doors,
the windows.
Once I traveled third class from Gwalior to Delhi, just to enjoy it. Because I had slept, and there was
now no need – and it was night, a full-moon night – I said to myself, ”Enjoy yourself, go third class.”
I had an air-conditioned-class ticket. When the ticket collector looked at my air-conditioned-class
ticket and then looked at me, he thought I was crazy. I said, ”You are right” He handed the ticket
back to me.”
He said, ”This is strange. What are you doing here? Your seat is reserved and it is empty.”
I said, ”Let it be empty. If I get fed up with this experience I will come along.”
He said, ”What experience?”
I said, ”You don’t know what is happening here. If you want, you can stay with me just for one
station.”
From Personality to Individuality 86 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
He stayed and he said, ”Really, it is an experience.”
What was happening was at the station, the lights of the compartment would come on, and as we
left the station behind the lights would go out. And ninety people in that small space... and who is
pulling whose leg? It was such a joy! I enjoyed it like nothing else in my life.
A Hindu monk was sitting by my side. I was hitting his head, and he would tell me, ”Osho, somebody
is hitting me.”
I said, ”In the dark it is very difficult. Remain patient, and if you want to hit, hit anybody! There is no
question of who is hitting who.”
A woman who was sitting in an upper berth... somebody pulled her leg and she fell down. And she
said, ”This is strange – someone is doing this to a woman. Who is this nasty fellow?”
In the darkness nobody could be identified as nasty, and as the next station appeared, everybody
was sitting perfectly correctly. And in the station the lights would come on. If it had been the other
way round things would have been simpler. If the compartment lights had gone out at the station,
there would have been no problem because the station lights were there.
The train was going really crazy, and people were shouting in the darkness, ”Somebody is pulling
on my leg.” And, ”Who is this fellow?” And, ”I will try to find out, but it will be difficult.” ”Please don’t
pull my leg!” – but no answer came. In the third class it is certainly the real India you meet. In the
air-conditioned, it is not part of India.
In saying three days the Indian Jaina monks decided very psychologically, because this is my
experience too – that after the third day you feel at ease. Not to allow you to feel at ease they
decided on three days. There must have been somebody among them who had experienced this. It
is exactly so because I have told a few of my friends to try it, and they all said, ”It is true: after the
third day you start feeling relaxed, at home. The new place is no longer new. It takes that much time
to be acquainted with it, to have a certain rapport.”
Yes, a rapport is needed – even with the walls, the furniture, the people, the food... a certain kind
of acquaintance, and it takes a little time. What they decided was perfectly right – they measured
it perfectly correctly – that the Jaina monk is not to stay more than three days, so no attachment
grows. Because once you start liking a place, that is the beginning of attachment, desire. Then you
would like to stay a little longer, then....
I am reminded of a story. A great Master was dying. He called his chief disciple to his side and
whispered in his ear, ”Remember one thing, never, never allow a cat in the house” – and he died.
”What kind of message...? And for this you called me:’Never allow a cat in the house’?” The chief
disciple enquired from a few old, elderly people, because perhaps there was some meaning in it.
”Perhaps it is a code word, otherwise why should he say that? And he died without giving any
explanation. I was just going to ask, ’Why are you against cats? Your whole life... and this is the
ultimate conclusion of all your discipline, practices, scriptures, scholarship: don’t allow a cat in the
house’”.
From Personality to Individuality 87 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
One old man said, ”I know what the matter is. This is the message given to him by his master
too, because his master got into trouble because of a cat.” The old master had lived outside the
village. He had only two... in English it is difficult to translate because nothing like that exists. You
have underwear, in India they have langots – they are just strips of cloth. It needs a little practice
to put on. It is just a long strip of cloth which you simply wind around yourself and that functions as
underwear, or the onlywear. For a monk that is the onlywear.
He had two onlywears – that is my translation for langots – but the trouble was there were a few rats,
and they used to destroy his onlywear. He asked somebody from the village, ”What to do with these
rats? They are very cunning.”
The man said, ”It is very simple. What we do in the village is just keep a cat. You keep a cat I will
bring you a cat. She will finish off those rats and your onlywear will be saved.”
The old master said, ”This is a simple solution.” The cat was brought. She really did her job, she
finished off the rats, but the problem was the cat was hungry and she needed milk. She was always
sitting in front of the monk, hungry. Cats, when they are hungry, look really poor. She had done her
job, and without saying it she was saying, ”I have done all your business, all the rats are finished,
but I am hungry now.”
So the old master asked again, ”Now what to do? The cat sits in front of me, looking hungrily at
me:’Provide food, otherwise I am going and then rats will come back.’ She does not say all that but
I can see in her eyes that she is threatening me, challenging me. I need some milk.”
The man said, ”Every day you will have to come for the milk, so I will give you my cow. I have many
cows, you can take one.”
He took the cow but his problems went on increasing: now the cow needed grass. He again went
to the town, and the townspeople said, ”You are a strange fellow – problem after problem, problem
after problem. Why don’t you start growing something around your hut? – there is so much land
lying fallow. We will give you seeds; take the seeds and start growing something. It will help you
also; you can eat some of it and the cow can eat some.”
So he, poor man, started sowing some seeds. But this was great trouble: now the crops had to be
cut. And he was a monk; he was not supposed to do all these things. But now one thing was leading
to another. He went to the village and he said, ”This is difficult. Now those crops have to be cut; I
don’t have any instruments, and I will need helpers.”
The people said, ”Listen, we are tired of you. You are worthless; you can’t find any solution for
anything. Do we have to solve everything? It is simple: One woman has become a widow and she is
perfectly capable of taking care of you, your cow, your crops, your kitchen, everything – cat, rats....
She is a perfectly experienced woman.”
”But,” he said, ”I am a monk.”
They said, ”Forget all about that monkhood. What kind of monk are you! You have a cat, you have
a cow, you have a field, a crop – and you think you are a monk! Forget about it. And anyway this
From Personality to Individuality 88 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
marriage is just a bogus marriage; you need not have any kind of relationship with the woman. She
is poor and in difficulty, you are in difficulty; both of you together will be good.”
The man said, ”That’s right. If it is just a legal thing, there’s no harm, because my master never said
anything against that. He said,’Don’t get married but I am not getting married; it is just for show, for
the village, so nobody raises any objection that I am living with a woman. I can say that she is my
wife, but I don’t have to be her husband really, nor does she have to be my wife really.”
He talked to the woman. The woman said, ”I am not interested in a husband – one was enough –
but I am in trouble, you are in trouble; and this is good, we can help each other.”
So they got married. Now things went on growing.... Sometimes he was sick and the woman would
massage his feet. Slowly, slowly, he started liking the woman. A man is, after all, a man; a woman
is, after all, a woman. The woman started liking the man. They were both feeling lonely. In the cold
winter nights they were both waiting for somebody to say, ”It is too cold – why can’t we get close?”
Finally the woman said, ”It is too cold here.”
The monk said, ”It is cold here too.”
The woman said, ”It seems you don’t have any guts.”
He said, ”That’s right. You come here – I don’t have any guts. I am a poor monk, and you are an
experienced woman: you come here. Together it will be warmer.”
Of course it was warmer! That’s where his whole monkhood went down the drain. And when he was
dying he told to his disciples, ”Don’t let any cat stay with you.”
And the old man told the chief disciple, ”Since then, it is traditional on your path that each master
says to the disciple,’Beware of the cat.’ It is very difficult to be aware of the cat – the cat comes in
somehow or other. Life is so strange.
But Jainas and Buddhists have tried to avoid the cats, all kinds of cats: ”Don’t stay longer than three
days. Don’t stay in any family, because the warmth, the coziness of the family, may distract you.
Always stay in the temple which is always cold, never warm.” Jaina monks are not allowed to burn
wood, to have a bonfire in the night as Hindu monks are allowed, because any experience of warmth
is dangerous. And it is violent too because you are killing trees, cutting trees, burning wood; and
in burning wood you may be burning some insects, some flies – anything is possible. So they can’t
have a bonfire, they can’t even have a lamp in the temple.
I used to go to visit Jaina monks sometimes because they invited me, and I would say, ”In the day I
don’t have any time, I can come only at night.” And in the night I became aware that they don’t have
any lamp or any candle – no light. I had to sit with them and to talk with them in darkness. It felt
so strange. I told them, ”But somebody else can put the switch on; I can put it on, you will not have
done anything.”
First they went on refusing, telling me, ”No, that is not right. Light will be there and it is prohibited.”
From Personality to Individuality 89 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
But I was continually hammering on the idea: ”If you don’t do it then there is no harm.” And one
Jaina monk, the head of a big sect, finally agreed for the simple reason that during the day I had
spoken and he had spoken, but he could not use the microphone – electricity! Now there was no
electricity in Mahavira’s time. Of course he had not prohibited it, but he had not said that it should
be used either.
But he was clever enough. He had said, ”Things which are not mentioned are not meant to be
used. Only things which are mentioned are to be used.” So although he had no idea, he was clever
enough to say, ”Many things will be coming later on, which I cannot prohibit because I don’t know
about them.”
I told that to the monk but he said, ”Mahavira has prohibited it.”
When I spoke there were at least twenty thousand people there, and everybody could hear me.
They applauded and they were laughing and they enjoyed it. But when he spoke, who could hear?
– not more than two or three rows in front. Twenty thousand people were just yawning. I said, ”Just
look: this is what your Mahavira has done to you. Now allow me.” I just took the microphone, put it
in front of him and said, ”You simply speak. It is none of your business if someone puts something
somewhere – who are you to prevent me? Just start!”
He got the idea – he thought the idea was good – and the fool started speaking. I condemned him
later on and said, ”You fell into the trap. You saw that I was putting the microphone in front of you, you
knew what it was and you knew that everybody was able to hear you. You cannot befool anymore.
Do you think that you are befooling Mahavira who is omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent? He was
present there watching you doing this. You have fallen.”
But Jainas destroyed ashramas completely and they created the wandering monks. And because of
the wandering monks.... It is a strange thing about the human mind that it is very much impressed
by somebody who goes through austerities. It is a sadistic, masochistic psychology. Why should
you be so respectful to a person who is torturing himself? But strangely, everywhere around the
world, the martyr is honored. If he is starving, fasting for a great cause, you respect him. You will
not respect a man who is feasting for a great cause.
You are not concerned with the cause, remember, otherwise you should respect the feasting also,
because he is feasting for a great cause. You are not concerned with the cause; the cause is only an
explanation, a rationalization. You are interested in the fasting: the man is capable of having control
over his body.
Mahatma Gandhi was the uncrowned king of India for the simple reason that he was able to torture
himself more than anybody else could. For any small reason he would go on a fast ”unto death.”
Every fast was ”unto death,” but within three, four days, it would be broken – there were methods to
break it – and soon there would be a breakfast; everything was arranged.
But people can be deceived very easily.... He goes on a fast, and the whole country prays to God
that he should not die. All the great leaders rush towards his ashram and pray to him to stop but he
won’t listen unless his conditions are accepted – any conditions, undemocratic, dictatorial, idiotic –
any conditions.
From Personality to Individuality 90 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
For example he fasted against Doctor Ambedkar who was the head of the untouchables. Ambedkar
wanted the untouchables to have their own constituencies and their own candidates, otherwise they
would never be represented in any parliament anywhere. Who would give votes to a shoemaker? In
India a shoemaker is untouchable – who is going to give him the vote?
Ambedkar was absolutely right. One fourth of the country is untouchable. They are not allowed in
schools because no other student is prepared to sit with them, no teacher is ready to teach them.
The government says the schools are open, but in reality no student is willing.... If one untouchable
enters, all thirty students leave the class, the teacher leaves the class. Then how are these poor
people – one fourth of the country – going to be represented? They should be given separate
constituencies where only they can stand and only they can vote.
Ambedkar was perfectly logical and perfectly human. But Gandhi went on a fast, saying, ”He is trying
to create a division within the Hindu society.” The division has existed for ten thousand years. That
poor Ambedkar was not creating the division, he was simply saying that one fourth of the people of
the country had been tortured for thousands of years. Now at least give them a chance to advance
themselves. At least let them voice their problems in the parliament, in the assemblies. But Gandhi
said, ”I will not allow it while I am alive. They are part of Hindu society, hence they cannot have a
separate voting system” – and he went on fasting.
For twenty-one days Ambedkar remained reluctant, but every day... the pressure of the whole
country. And he started feeling that if this old man dies then there is going to be great bloodshed.
It was clear – he would be killed immediately, and millions of the untouchables would be killed
everywhere, all over the country: ”It is because of you that Gandhi died.” When the whole arithmetic
of how it would work out was explained to him – ”You figure it out soon, because there is not much
time, he cannot survive more than three days” – Ambedkar hesitated.
He was perfectly right; Gandhi was perfectly wrong. But what to do? Should he take the risk? He
was not worried about his life – if he was killed it was okay – but he was worried about those millions
of poor people who didn’t know anything about what was going on. Their houses would be burned,
their women would be raped, their children would be butchered. And it would be something that had
never happened before.
Finally he had to accept the conditions. He went with the breakfast in his hand to Mahatma Gandhi,
”I accept your conditions. We will not ask for a separate vote or separate candidates. Please accept
this orange juice.” And Gandhi accepted the orange juice.
But this orange juice, this one glass of orange juice, contains millions of people’s blood.
I have met Doctor Ambedkar. He was one of the most intelligent men I have ever met. But I said,
”You proved weak.”
He said, ”You don’t understand: the situation was such that I knew I was right and he was wrong,
but what to do with that stubborn old man? He was going to die, and if he died then I would have
been responsible for his death, and the untouchables would have suffered.”
I said, ”That is not the point. Even an idiot could have suggested a simple thing to you. You should
have gone on a fast unto death. And you are so overweight” He was a fat man, four or five times
From Personality to Individuality 91 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
heavier than Gandhi. ”If you had asked me.... A simple solution: just put another cot by the side
of Mahatma Gandhi, lie down, and fast unto death. Then let them see! I promise you that Gandhi
would have accepted all your conditions within three days.”
Ambedkar said, ”But this idea never occurred to me.”
I said, ”You are a fool if this idea never occurred to you! That was the idea with which that man was
controlling the whole country – and it never occurred to you. The only difficulty would have been to
go on a fast – particularly for a man like you: fat, eating four times a day. Naturally you would not
have been able to manage it. Gandhi has practiced his whole life, he is an experienced faster; and
you may not have ever missed a single breakfast.”
He said, ”That is true.”
I said, ”Otherwise if it had been my problem and he was being so illogical, I would have just lain
down, even if I was going to die, and let him be responsible. He would not have allowed that,
because my death would have taken away all his mahatmahood, all his aura, all his leadership of
the people. He would not have allowed me to die; he would have accepted my conditions.
”But unfortunately I am not an untouchable, and anyway why should I be bothered with you two
idiots? To me both of you are idiots. You have one fourth of the country in your hands and you can’t
do anything; that man has nothing in his hands – but just by fasting.... He has learned a womanly
trick. Yes, I call his whole philosophy a feminine psychology.”
That’s what women do every day. Gandhi must have learned it from his wife. In India women do it
every day. The wife will fast, she won’t eat, she will lie down. And then the husband starts shaking.
He may be right, that is not the point.
Now there is no point of right or wrong; now the point is how to persuade her to eat? Because she
is not eating, the children are not eating – and who is going to do the cooking in the first place? Is
he also going to fast? And the children are weeping, and they want food, and the wife is on a fast
– so you agree. She needs a new sari, you bring it. First you bring the sari, then she goes into the
kitchen. This is an old Indian strategy of all women in India. Gandhi must have learned it from his
wife, and he used it really very cleverly.
But there is some strange side of the human mind which is impressed by anybody who is capable
of torturing himself.
For some strange reason.... I know what the reason is. The reason is your own fear – you cannot do
it. You go to the circus to see a man jumping from sixty feet high, pouring spirit on himself, setting
fire to the spirit. Burning, he drops from sixty feet; he falls into a small pool of water, and you see it
with your breathing stopped. At that moment nobody breathes.
I have watched it – people were watching a poor circus fellow; I was watching the people – was
anybody blinking, anybody breathing? No, nobody blinks an eye, they completely forget. Even an
unconscious process that goes on automatically – you need not blink, your eye blinks; you need not
breathe, your chest breathes. But even the automatic processes of blinking and breathing simply
stop, you are in awe.
From Personality to Individuality 92 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
And there is nothing in it. Those sixty feet are calculated. That man has been practicing continually:
it is calculated that within the sixty foot fall, he is not going to be burned. And it is not kerosene, it is
not petrol, it is pure spirit. Falling in the water, within seconds the fire is gone, and the man comes
up. And he is a hero because you cannot do it. Just a little practice is needed and a calculation of
how long it will take for spirit to burn you: the time limit has to be less than that. And you have to be
able to jump.
I used to love jumping into the river from the hills, from the railway bridge, because the railway bridge
over my river was the highest place from where to jump. But I slowly worked up from small hills to
bigger and bigger hills, until finally I was jumping from the bridge. The bridge was continuously
guarded by the army because it was British Empire days and some revolutionary may have blown
up the bridge. So they would catch me, and I would say, ”I am not going to blow up the bridge. Just
see – I don’t have anything. You have nothing to be worried about. I want this bridge to be here, and
I am happy that you are guarding it because I need it every day.”
Once they said, ”For what do you need it?”
I said, ”You just see” – and I would jump! And they would be standing there in awe. Once they knew
that this boy simply came to jump, they didn’t bother. I told the revolutionaries of my town, ”If any
time you need... I am the best man because the guards don’t even look at me now. They say, ’That
boy is just crazy. One day he is going to kill himself. But it seems that he is growing more and more
accustomed to it. It will be difficult for him to die; this bridge is very small. He needs a bridge at least
four times higher – perhaps that may do it.’”
I told the revolutionaries I knew – they used to visit my house; my uncles were part of their conspiracy
– I said, ”Any time you need to blow up the bridge, I am the best man. Nobody will ever suspect
me, nobody will ever prevent me. I can take your bombs there, leave them wherever you want and
simply jump into the river and swim downstream. Then you can do whatsoever you want to do.”
They said, ”You are not reliable. You may go and give the bombs to the guards; you will show them
where we are hiding, and you will jump certainly and swim down the river.” They never gave me
the bombs. I again and again requested them to. They said, ”We don’t believe you. We know that
you are the best person to reach that bridge because nobody else can reach it; it is continuously
guarded.”
One guard was continuously patrolling up and down, and at both ends there were guard rooms. It
was an important bridge: all the main trains crossed over it. If you blew it up, you would cut one half
of the country from the other. But they never relied on me.
I said, ”You can rely on me, even those guards rely on me.”
They said, ”That’s the fear. They rely on you, we rely on you – and what you will do only you know.”
For any austerity you need only a little practice. Fasting is very simple – just the first five days are
difficult. I have fasted. The first five days are the most difficult, the fifth is the worst; you are almost
ready to break the fast. But if you pass the fifth, you have passed the most dangerous, the most
vulnerable period. From the sixth day your body starts functioning in a new way. It starts eating
From Personality to Individuality 93 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
itself. From the sixth day onwards things become simple. On the fifteenth day, you are absolutely
unconcerned with food; you don’t have any hunger. The body is absorbing its own fat, so hunger
does not arise.
A man who is perfectly healthy can fast for ninety days without dying. Of course he will become
just a skeleton, but for ninety days he can stay alive because a perfectly healthy body goes on
accumulating fat for any emergency. This is an emergency situation so the body has an emergency
system. If food is not coming from the outside, then the body starts eating from the inside. That’s
why you go on losing weight every day.
In the beginning you will lose two pounds per day. Then the body becomes aware that perhaps the
emergency is going to last longer: then you lose one and a half pounds a day. Strange, the body
has its own wisdom. Then you will lose one pound a day, then half a pound a day, because the body
will start trying to save as much as possible, and to live on as little as possible; to keep you alive as
long as it is in the body’s hands.
So it is not something like a miracle, but people get impressed because deep down they feel, ”We
cannot do this.” If somebody is enjoying a feast, you don’t have that feeling, because you can also
enjoy the feast. It is just that you are not invited, that’s why you are feeling angry – even against that
man who is enjoying himself – that he is just a glutton; that he believes only in the philosophy of eat,
drink, and be merry; that he is not a spiritual man. This is jealousy, anger because you have not
been invited. You are also capable of enjoying the feast, but a fast? – you have never tried it.
And in the beginning a fast is not a joy. Five days seem like five months. It seems that the clock no
longer moves, and the hunger goes on growing. It hurts in the stomach; the intestines feel as if they
are shrinking. Your whole body is in a turmoil because it is not getting its daily ration. All the parts
of the body are in a strange situation; they cannot figure out what has happened, why the ration has
been stopped. You have not informed them; you cannot because you don’t know their language,
they don’t know your language.
There is chaos in the body – but only for five days. After that the body automatically moves itself
onto the emergency system; then there is no problem. And all these mahatmas have learned only
that: the strategy of five days. Once you have learned it, then it is not very difficult to last five days.
Jaina and Buddhist monks both impressed the whole of the East so much that the Hindu ashrama,
which was really a beautiful place, became condemned. Those seers, those sages, became
condemned by people: ”These are as materialistic as we are. The real mahatmas and sages are
the Jainas, the Buddhists. These people are nothing compared to them.” Naturally Hinduism had to
change its whole structure.
It is a competitive world: to remain in existence, Hinduism changed the whole style of the ashrama.
The ashrama became ascetic but they still retained the old name, they forgot to change the name.
It is no longer an ashram because there is no relaxation, no rest, no joy, no blissfulness.
Go to an ashrama today and you will find selftorturing people, psychologically sick, masochistic,
suicidal – but egoistic, because all this torture is bringing to them one thing: great respect from the
people. The whole country pays tremendous respect for what they are doing. But the beauty of the
real ashrama has disappeared.
From Personality to Individuality 94 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
The monastery is the Western equivalent of the modern Hindu ashrama, because at the time when
the real Hindu ashramas were in existence, the West was absolutely barbarous: it had no religion,
no culture, no civilization. Your greatest man was born only two thousand years ago. In India it is
difficult to decide this, because Mahavira, who was born twenty-five centuries ago, is the last and
the greatest Jaina tirthankara, the twenty-fourth. Before him twenty-three tirthankaras had passed;
and that must have taken at least ten thousand years if in twenty-five centuries there was only one
tirthankara. And there are relics of cities discovered at Mohanjodro and at Harrapur where Jaina
statues have been found.
Now, a Jaina statue can be immediately recognized – the naked statue – because Jainas are the
only people.... Romans have made naked statues but they are sensuous, sexual, provocative. They
are playboy magazines in marble. You can see that this statue is just a sensuous, sexual statue: all
Roman statues are. The Jaina tirthankara statue is nude but not naked. Yes, it has no clothes, but
it won’t give you any idea, any vague idea of sexuality, of sensuality. No, just the contrary.
The whole structure of the Jaina statue is nonsensuous, non-sexual. The eyes are closed, the hands
are hanging loose on either side. The body is standing. In the ears birds have made small nests,
because the man has been standing for six months in the same position, he has not moved his
head. And he is not going to scare the bird away saying, ”What are you doing? – this is my ear that
you are making a nest in.” Creepers have started moving up his body. It has a beauty of its own.
Creepers, green creepers, have reached up to his neck or up to his head. They have blossomed,
their season has come.
Now, this statue is not the Roman type. It has no parallel in the whole world. This kind of statue has
been found at Mohanjodro, which by very strict and orthodox scientific methods was found to have
existed at least seven thousand years before Jesus Christ was born. So from today, ten thousand
years back is not claiming much.
The Western monastery is a copy of the ashrama that exists in the East now. It had been brought to
the West by Western travelers, Western philosophers. Jesus himself went to Buddhist universities,
Tibetan lamaseries, Ladakh monasteries; Pythagoras traveled deeply into the East – and these
people brought all these ideas to the West. The Western monastery is, in a way, nothing but a
carbon copy of the Eastern ashrama. It has nothing unique to contribute.
My commune is a totally different phenomenon.
It is neither an ashrama, modern or ancient, nor a monastery, Christian or Mohammedan.
My commune is, in the first place, non-ascetic.
It basically tries to destroy all psychological sicknesses in you – in which sado-masochist ideas are
included. It teaches you to be healthy and not to feel guilty for being healthy. It teaches you to be
human, because my experience is that people who have been trying to be divine have not become
divine, but have fallen far lower than humans. They were trying to go up beyond humanity – yes,
they have gone beyond humanity, but below it.
In the monasteries, people are almost animals, because the more you torture yourself, the more you
start losing your intelligence; intelligence needs comfort.
From Personality to Individuality 95 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
Intelligence is a very delicate flower.
Don’t try to grow roses in the desert.
Intelligence is a very delicate flower.
It grows in luxury. It needs a luxurious ground, fertile, creative, full of juice; only then can it blossom.
And without intelligence, what are you?
My effort is first to help your intelligence become a flame, and to help that flame to consume all
that is not your authentic self. You become a fire and you burn everything that is rubbish, thrown by
others onto you.
So first intelligence, and second meditation.
Meditation comes out of intelligence – burning all crap from your being. Then you are pure, alone,
just the way existence wants you to be.
The commune is just a place where people who are interested in this journey, in this odyssey
inwards, live together – helping everybody to be himself allowing everybody enough space, not
interfering in any way, not imposing in any way. If they can support you, good: if support also
becomes a hindrance then they will not even support you, they will withdraw themselves. They
respect your integrity, your individuality, your freedom.
The word commune I have chosen because it is a communion:
A communion of rebellious spirits.
It is not another society, it is not a monastery, an ashram. It is individuals remaining individuals, Still
being together; being alone and still interacting, responding; leaving the other also alone.
Aloneness, to me, is the greatest religious quality.
So we are together but not in any kind of bondage, very loose.
No relationship is binding in my commune.
No relationship is really a relationship, it is only a relating, a process. As long as it goes, good, and
when paths divert, change their course, that too is perfectly good because that’s how, perhaps, your
being is going to grow. One never knows.
We may walk together for a few feet, a few miles, and then depart in gratitude – that it was a joy to
be together.
Now let us celebrate separation.
You helped me, I helped you.
From Personality to Individuality 96 Osho
CHAPTER 5. SANNYAS: THE ODYSSEY OF ALONENESS – A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF YOUR BEING
Now let us help each other to move in the directions that our beings want us to take.
The commune is a totally new phenomenon.
It has nothing to do with anything that has preceded it. The old, ancient ashramas were beautiful
but they were part of the society. They propagated the same structure of the society: the four-caste
system. The untouchable was untouchable. The untouchable could not enter the ancient Hindu
ashram. Only the brahmin could be the seer. That is strange, that only the brahmin could have
eyes. That was a brahmin strategy to remain in power, and they were powerful. But they were good
people, although not revolutionaries... nice, but not rebels.
The rebel is both.
He is a sword and also a song. It depends on the situation. He can become a song or he can
become a sword.
This is a communion of rebels.
We are not supporting any society, any politics, any nation, any race, any religion. We have left all
that far behind.
We have come alone, to be with those who have also come for the same reason – to be alone.
So remember it, that aloneness is something sacred.
You should not trespass on anybody’s aloneness, freedom, individuality.
Commune, love, be together, rejoice, but remember always you are alone.
You are born alone, you will die alone, you have to live alone.
And all those who are here, they are all individuals, alone. They are not following any doctrine, any
dogma, they are simply following their own inner voice. Try to hear it and follow it.
Yes, it is a very still small voice, but once heard, you cannot do anything else but what it says for you
to do.
From Personality to Individuality 97 Osho
CHAPTER 6
Anxiety: Who are you? Anguish: Who am I?
4 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT IS ANGUISH? IS IT JUST ANOTHER NAME FOR ANXIETY?
ANGUISH has something of anxiety in it, but it is not just anxiety. It is much more, much more
profound.
Anxiety means you are concerned with a particular subject, in a state of indecisiveness. You cannot
figure out whether to do a thing or not to do it. What will be the right way to do it? What to choose? –
there are so many ways. You are always standing on a crossroad. All the roads seem to be similar;
certainly leading somewhere, but whether they lead to the goal that you have been aspiring to....
Anxiety is that condition of to do or not to do, to choose this or to choose that. But the object of the
anxiety is clear: that you are indecisive about ways, indecisive about two persons, indecisive about
two jobs.
Anguish has no particular object.
Anguish is felt by very rare people. Anxiety is felt by everybody, it is a common experience. Anguish
is felt only by the genius, by the highest peak of intelligence. It has no particular object; there is
nothing for you to choose between, no ”this or that.” There is no question of choice. Then what is
the problem with anguish?
98
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
You will have to understand a certain phenomenon. There are things in the world – animals, birds,
man... anxiety happens to all... to the trees, to the animals, to the birds, to man. As far as anxiety is
concerned it is universal.
But anguish is felt only by a very few rare men. They are the very cream, the highest peak of
consciousness.
I will try to explain it to you. It is a little difficult to understand but not impossible. A rock is born, a
tree is born, a lion is born, an eagle is born, but they differ from man. The difference is: Their being
precedes their existence.
For example, a rock is there; it is alive, it grows. The Himalayas are still growing – one foot every
year. Somebody should say to it, ”Now it is meaningless, you are already the highest. Don’t take
so much trouble.” It must be a troublesome thing: thousands of miles, thousands of peaks, the work
must be enormous. Even to grow one foot every year is no small thing for the Himalayas. ”And
now there is no need. Howsoever big you become, you will remain only the highest mountain in the
world. You have surpassed all the mountains, you have left them far behind.”
But the Himalayas go on growing, it is a living being. Mountains don’t understand. Man does not
understand, what to say about mountains!
A rock, a tree, a lion, an eagle – their essence precedes their existence. What they are going to be,
they are already programmed for. That is their essence. A rose is going to be a rose. Even before
the flowers have come, you know those flowers are not going to be marigolds. The bush is of a
rose; the essence of the rose is already there – only existence has to happen. The basic program is
already provided by nature, it has just to be manifest.
It will be good to be reminded of a certain discovery in the past decades that happened in the
Soviet Union. Just an amateur photographer, but a very creative genius, using his cameras, studio,
chemicals and photographs, was trying to find different ways to bring something new to photography.
And just by chance he happened to discover one of the greatest discoveries of human history: Kirlian
photography.
He can take a photograph of a rosebud. He has refined his instruments now so much that you put
the rosebud in front of his camera, and he takes a photograph of the flower that the rosebud is going
to be. He catches hold of the essence which is still unmanifest but somehow is manifest because the
camera is catching it. Our eyes are not able to catch it. And when the rose blossoms, it is strange,
but it is exactly the same as the photograph he has taken.
Somehow the rose energy, which later on becomes available to our eyes, was moving in the same
pattern as the flower it was going to be. It was an energy flower, just pure rays of light and color, but
in exactly the same shape, preparing the ground for the manifestation. His camera catches those
rays and gives you a blueprint of the future rose. Perhaps tomorrow or the day after tomorrow it will
be available to your eyes. That means that the rose, before it becomes existent, is already there in
essence. Hence the saying: essence precedes existence.
In the second world war Kirlian photography worked miracles. It is going to help medicine immensely
in the future. It is unfortunate that scientists are also divided according to political lines. What is
From Personality to Individuality 99 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
happening in Soviet Russia is kept secret; what is happening in America is kept secret. This is a
sheer wastage of genius, energy, time – and time is very short.
Before the curtain falls and the drama is finished, it would be better if the scientists of the whole
world themselves declare: We are international.” And we, our commune, will be supplying them with
international passports belonging to no nation. But if the scientists have any courage, they can open
up a totally new dimension and carry the passport – neither Russian, nor American, nor British, nor
Indian – an international passport. Of course many will be caught and imprisoned, but that’s nothing
to be worried about – how long could it go on?
If all the scientists of the world decide, then all the Nobel prize-winners follow; then all the poets,
engineers, doctors, the intelligentsia of the world.... How can you put all these people in jails? What
will you do? What will your idiot politicians do? Without them they will be nothing.
And Rajneeshpuram should be the headquarters. We are ready to issue the international passports.
It will create a revolution. Don’t be bothered by national boundaries. At least someone has to begin
it. Let the poets of all the world meet, let the scientists of the world meet, and pour your energies
into a single pool.
Now, Kirlian photography is still not being used outside the Soviet Union. In the Soviet Union it is
doing miracles. In the second world war it was discovered, and Kirlian was given the job of finding
out – if it works on a rose flower, how does it work on human beings?
A man’s hand has been cut off, because he was damaged in the war. Kirlian takes the photograph,
and strangely enough, the photograph shows a faint energy – hand with all the five fingers intact –
and the hand is missing from the body. It shows just a little fainter than the rest of the body. The
hand is no longer there but the energy that used to move in the hand is still moving. You cannot see
it with your eyes, but a sensitive camera catches it.
Now, this gave the idea that if the energy is still moving, there is a possibility of creating a hand
through which energy can continue to move; then it will be a real hand. It will not be a wooden hand,
a plastic hand, or something, it will be as real as real hands are... because what is the reality of the
hand? Why is it alive? Why is it moving? It is moving because of the energy inside.
And when you become paralyzed, what happens? It is not your hand getting paralyzed, it is the
energy inside which has stopped flowing. The hand is there, the bones are there, the blood is there
– everything is there. What is missing? What is paralysis? The energy is no longer moving, the
energy has stopped for some reason. If we can arrange for energy to move again....
That’s what acupuncture in China has been attempting for five thousand years, to move the energy
again. And acupuncture has succeeded in doing great things: a paralyzed man is no longer
paralyzed. And what they do looks very childish; to the observer it doesn’t look such a great thing.
They just go on putting needles in at certain points in the body. The hand is paralyzed, but they may
not touch the hand at all. They may be pushing their needle in somewhere else, because they know
which part can obstruct the flow of energy in the hand. If that needle removes the blockage, the
energy starts flowing: the hand is back, alive.
From Personality to Individuality 100 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
Another thing that Kirlian photography discovered was that just as a flower can be photographed
before it has even opened its petals, when it is just a bud... Kirlian discovered that among the
healthy people he was photographing, some parts of their body were not the same as other parts,
and he said there was some danger coming.
One man said, ”There is no problem, I am perfectly healthy.” But danger came after six months,
exactly at the same spot. The energy was already preparing the ground, perhaps for a cancerous
growth.
Kirlian photography is the only possibility right now. If we can catch hold of cancer before it
materializes, we can get rid of it. There is no need for any surgery; all that you have to do is
to stop that energy pattern, change that pattern, change the program, and the cancer will never
happen.
In the East it is widely believed – and I have seen it with my own eyes, so it is not a question of belief
for me, I never believe in anything unless I see it – that before a man dies, six months before, he
stops seeing the tip of his nose. His eyes just won’t go down that far to see the tip of his nose; he
cannot see the tip of his own nose. Within exactly six months he is going to die. That is an ancient,
perhaps a ten-thousand-year-old discovery of ayurveda. When the ayurvedic physician comes to
see if the patient is in the last stage, the first thing he wants to know is, ”Please, can you see the tip
of your nose?”
Now, any allopathic doctor seeing this will think this is stupid: ”What has seeing the tip of the nose
to do with his death? He is dying and you are joking, kidding? What are you doing?” The doctor is
not aware of a strange phenomenon: that the eyes slowly stop turning downwards. When the man
dies, they turn completely upwards. If you see a dead man you will see his eyes are completely
upturned; you will see only the whites of the eyes. That’s why in all traditions, all over the world,
the dead man’s eyes are closed immediately – because he may freak out many people who see his
eyes. Just the whites are visible; the black has turned up.
It must have been this experience that gave the idea, ten thousand years ago, that if the eyes
ultimately, in death, turn completely upwards, they must start turning up some time before that –
because life is always a process; nothing happens suddenly. There is nothing like suddenness in
existence. So by and by, watching, they discovered that six months is the time when the eyes start
getting less and less flexible, more and more rigid; more and more turning upwards, less and less
turning downwards. And if the man cannot see the tip of his own nose, the physician suggests to the
family, ”Don’t waste time unnecessarily. Prepare him for death. Help him to die peacefully, silently,
meditatively, with gratitude.”
Only in the East has it been possible to prepare even for death. People don’t prepare even for life.
They come to know that they were alive only when they are dying or perhaps dead. Then suddenly
a shock comes to them: ”My God! What has happened? I was alive and now I am no more alive.
Those eighty years, ninety years have passed and I have not done anything, not felt for a single
moment fulfilled, contented. Not for a single moment could I have said, ’I am blessed.’”
Except for man, everything – every bird, every animal – in existence comes in this way: essence
first, then manifestation. They are programmed by nature; their whole life is not an evolution but an
From Personality to Individuality 101 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
unfolding. All that they are going to become is already in the basic program, and they cannot move
a single inch from the program. It is not in their power to decide whether to be a rose or to be a
marigold. Hence there is no anxiety about this. They are never asked to decide about their essence.
They are never on the crossroads, they are always following a single route. There is nothing for
them to choose about ”being.”
Buffaloes, horses, donkeys, elephants – they don’t feel anxiety within their program. Yes, anger
they can feel if you obstruct them. Destructive they can be, violent they can be if you misbehave
with them. They all have a certain code of conduct. If you just keep to yourself without interfering
with their territorial imperative.... For example, every elephant has its own territory. If you enter his
territory you will be in danger. If you just keep out of the territory, and that territory you don’t know –
but the elephant knows... once you enter his territory you are in danger, you have trespassed.
Anger they can feel. Superior, inferior they can feel. Just go to a tree in which many monkeys
are sitting, and you will be surprised: the boss is sitting on the highest branch, and on the lowest
branches are the servants. The boss has all the beautiful ladies. He may be old, he may not be able
to reproduce any more, but the boss is after all the boss.
The younger generation, many times, kills the old monkey for the simple reason that he is obstructing
them from reaching the ladies, and while he is alive he won’t let anybody approach the ladies. He
has a harem; whether he is in a state to reproduce or not – he does not bother about that. His
kingdom, his chiefhood, depends on how many ladies he has got.
It is from the monkeys that Sigmund Freud got the idea that sometime a younger generation must
have killed some old man who was possessing all the beautiful ladies. The younger people were
getting, of course, angry: ”It is time for this man to die!” But he was not dying, and he was not
allowing them either....
Sigmund Freud’s idea of God is that because the younger people killed the father, they felt guilty....
He was their father, their boss, and they had killed him just for the women. Now, two conclusions –
Sigmund Freud has drawn only one conclusion.... I am surprised how he missed the second, which
was more likely to be drawn by him, but even geniuses are fallible.
Sigmund Freud drew one conclusion: that because of killing the father they felt guilty, and to
compensate for the guilt – just to get rid of it – they started worshipping the relics of the father,
maybe his bones, his dead body that they had buried. They made a small memorial, and they
started worshipping, otherwise his spirit may take revenge, his ghost may take revenge. And they
knew that he was a strict man and very jealous, and that to fool with his ladies.... His ghost can
create trouble for you. So sacrifice something, worship him, ask his forgiveness, and confess your
sin.
Sigmund Freud derived the whole of Christianity, the whole of religion in fact, from the idea that God
the father is really father the God.
First the father was killed, and just to console his ghost they made him God the father. They said,
”You are still our boss; even from here we are under you, we are your servants, your worshippers.
And forgive us, it was foolish of us, but young people are foolish. You are experienced, you know
From Personality to Individuality 102 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
everything; we hope you will forgive us.” This is the way religion must have started – that’s the
conclusion of Freud. There are no historical facts about it but there is every possibility he is right.
The second thing – and I have always wondered how he missed it – was that they had killed the
father for the younger ladies. Now, the second conclusion is so simple: that to give solace to the
father, all religions went against the women. It was the woman for whom they had killed the father!
The connection is so clear, and Sigmund Freud completely missed it. Even a blind man would not
have missed it. It is so clear that they had killed, not for any other reason, only to get hold of the
young ladies which the dirty old monkey was keeping in his possession. But it was because of the
ladies....
So certainly religion should have two sides: one, worship, pray, praise the lord; and two, condemn
the woman. When I first read Freud, I looked in all his books for the second conclusion – which is
more Freudian – but he never comes to it. The first is a farfetched philosophical idea, but the second
is a very clear-cut Freudian concept. But now Freud is dead, all that we can do is supplement it.
I emphasize the fact that because the killing was for the women, all religions are against women. If
it were not for the women, they would not have killed the father. The story of Adam and Eve also
says the same thing: it is because of the woman that man’s fall happened.
Religions can never forgive the woman.
They have been condemning her for centuries.
Freud could have seen clearly both things: the people who believe in God and worship God
disbelieve in the woman and think of her as an agent of the serpent, the devil, as the original
cause of the fall, and have condemned her for it.
The same hierarchy as you will see in the monkeys, you will see in all the animals. But it is
programmed, it is not a question of anxiety. Have you seen two dogs barking and trying to fight,
but before the fight starts somehow it is settled? It never comes to the logical end. So what was all
that shouting and barking, jumping and showing teeth to each other? It was simply that they were
trying to show to each other, ”Look how much stronger I am.” They are very intelligent people. What
is the need to fight? They just show their strength to each other and judge who is the stronger.
Once it is judged which one is stronger, they both agree: the one who comes to understand that he
is weaker turns with his tail between his legs. That is a signal that ”you are stronger” – but there is
no cowardliness in it; it is a simple fact – ”What can I do about it? I am weak, you are stronger; you
bark louder, you jump louder, you look bigger: what is the point of fighting? Why unnecessarily shed
blood?” He simply gives the signal, turns his tail between his legs, and immediately the other is no
longer an enemy. The fight is finished; before it began it is finished.
Seeing dogs... because from my very childhood I have been curious about everything, and in India
there are so many dogs. The municipal committees cannot kill them because it is violent and
immediately there would be trouble from the people: ”You are killing” – so their number goes on
growing. Just as the number of people goes on growing, the number of dogs goes on growing.
Sitting in front of my house in the winter I used to watch the dogs, and this was very striking. Again
From Personality to Individuality 103 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
and again I saw it happen, and I could see the tremendous intelligence of dogs. They are far more
intelligent than man.
Even if you understand that you are weaker than the other person, still you will fight because you
cannot accept that you are weak. You will try; perhaps by some chance... at least nobody will be able
to say to you that you never even tried. You will fight, and you will be beaten. Now, this is absolutely
useless; on your part and on the other man’s part, it is stupid. But you are not programmed, that is
the trouble.
You cannot be decisive, certain. The other man may look bigger, that is a certainty, but a smaller
man may be more sharp, more clever, more cunning, may have known aikido, judo, jujitsu, and
who knows what. The stronger man may not know anything, may be just a heavyweight, not a
heavyweight champion, and the smaller man may throw him off.
We are not programmed. Dogs are programmed and they can read each other’s program easily.
They give all the signs of their program: ”This is what I can do. These are my teeth, you can see
them. This is my bark, this way I jump, this way I will hit. You show YOURSELF.” They both put their
cards on the table. And when you see that one person has all the great cards, what is the point...?
Now it is finished. But man is not made that way; that is the only difference between man and the
whole of existence.
In man, existence precedes essence.
First he is born, and then he starts discovering what he can be. That is anguish.
He has no program, no determined guidelines given from nature, no map to follow. He is just left
as pure existence. He has to work out everything on his own. Life is every moment a challenge,
so every moment he has to choose. Whenever he has to choose there is anxiety – but anxiety is
particular.
Anguish is a general state of the human being. He is in anguish from birth to death because he has
no way of knowing what his destiny is, where he is going to land. Of course, very few people feel
anguish because very few people are so conscious about themselves, their existence, where they
are moving, what they are becoming, what is going to happen. They are too concerned with trivia.
So all human beings experience anxiety.
Trivia creates anxiety.
In a certain job you can get a better salary but it is not respectable. In fact that’s why a better salary
is given, because it is not respectable. In another job which is respectable, the salary is less in the
same proportion. Now, anxiety arises – what to do? You would like both the respect and the higher
salary, but you can’t get both.
Society consists of vested interests.
And they are clever.
From Personality to Individuality 104 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
To be a professor in the university is respectable, but the salary is not much. You can earn more just
being a pimp than you can earn by being a professor. But a pimp, after all, is a pimp. You cannot
manage to be called Professor Pimp. But in fact, linguistically it is not wrong because that is your
profession. You can call yourself Professor Pimp! There are people who call themselves professors,
magicians particularly, who have nothing to do with professors in the universities. Magicians call
themselves professors; they mean by professor, professional magician.
In India there was one very great, world-famous magician, Professor Sarkar, a Bengali gentleman,
perhaps the best-known magician in the world. I asked him, ”I have no questions about your magic,
but I have a question about your professorhood. What is this’professor’? Where do you teach, in
what university? – because I have not heard of a university especially devoted to magic or a college
especially devoted to magic. I have never even heard of any university with a magic department –
so where do you teach?”
He said, ”It has nothing to do with teaching, it is just that traditionally magicians have been using it.
It is our profession, and professor simply means a professional.”
I said, ”That’s a great idea. Then anybody can call himself professor; whatever profession he is in,
he is a professor.” But one thing is certain: by being a pimp you can earn much more than being a
professor. Of course as a professor you will be very respected, but you will remain poor, at the most
middle class. So the choice arises.
And wherever there is choice, there is anxiety.
So everybody, on each step, at every moment of his life is faced with anxiety. Anxiety is a common,
everyday affair.
Anguish is very profound.
Both words come from the same root, hence the question. In anguish there is some anxiety because
you are worried, you are concerned. But the concern is not about any job, any thing, anything in
particular; no, it is a general vague feeling of, What am I?
Gurdjieff stretched the point to its very logical end. I like that man although I may not agree with him
on many points. He has a tremendous insight into things, but he is a victim of a particular logical
disease; that is, stretching something to its very logical end. The trouble is, whenever you stretch
something to its very logical end, you come to something wrong. If you stretch it on one side, you will
come to something wrong; if you stretch it on the opposite side, you will again come to something
wrong.
Extremes are always wrong.
Avoid extremes.
It is far more probable that you will find the truth somewhere exactly in the middle, between the two
opposite extremes.
From Personality to Individuality 105 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
Gurdjieff stretched this idea of anguish to its extreme: he said man has no soul. This is a simple
conclusion. If existence comes first and essence has to be discovered later on, that simply means
that man is born without a soul. The soul is your being, your essence. So you are born only an
empty box, with nothing in it. Naturally, anguish will be felt: you are empty inside, with nothing in
you. Even a rose flower is far richer than you, even a dog is far richer than you. At least he has a
program, a certainty of what he is going to be. He is predictable.
I always imagine that among dogs there must be astrologers, palmists, face readers, mind readers
and all kinds of esoteric people, because there, everything can be read. The future can be told in
detail. But strange is the fact that all those astrologers, palmists, face readers, mind readers, tarot
card readers, I Ching readers – and there are so many areas available – all exist in the world of man.
But actually it’s no wonder – what will they do in the world of the dog, the elephant, and the camel?
No camel is at all in anguish. He perfectly naturally follows the program. He is not worried about
tomorrow. He knows tomorrow he will be a camel, and the day after he will also be a camel. Just as
his forefathers have been camels, he will be a camel. There is no chance to become an elephant or
to be worried or to choose, ”What do I want to be?” There is never a question of to be or not to be.
There are no alternatives open, he has a fixed being. The business of astrologers and palmists is
not going to flourish; they will all go bankrupt if they move from the world of man.
But in the world of men, why do these astrologers and palmists go on flourishing? I have seen them
so many times but they all are doing the same thing. In one place in Kashmir, in Srinagar, a pundit
– a very old scholar who was very famous in Kashmir for his predictions – was brought to me as I
was having a camp in Srinagar. Somebody who was attending the camp knew the old man and told
him, ”Come to see this man and see if you can predict something about him.”
I thought he would be looking at my hands so I said, ”Okay, you can look.”
He said, ”No, I never look at the hands, I look at the feet, at the lines on the feet.” That was a
revelation! I had never heard about it. He said, ”This is something special in Kashmir. The lines in
the feet are far more certain than the lines in the hand.” And he had a certain reason.
He said, ”The lines of the hand go on changing, but the lines of the feet remain almost unchanging,
for the simple reason that the skin of the feet is harder.” It has to be harder, you have to walk on it,
your whole weight is on it. Hands don’t have that hard a skin, they don’t need it. On the softer skin
it is easier for lines to change; on the harder skin it is almost like the lines on a stone. He said, ”We
have a tradition in Kashmir to read the lines of the feet.”
I said, ”Okay, you read the lines of my feet; but one thing you should remember, whatsoever you say
I will not allow to happen. Just the opposite will happen.”
He said, ”It is the first time I have heard this type of statement. People want to know what is going
to happen, and you are saying to me that whatever I say, you will try to do just the opposite.”
I said, ”Certainly, because I want to prove you absolutely wrong.”
All palmistry, all astrology, is just an exploitation of man’s anguish. Because he is in anguish he
wants somehow, some way, somebody to tell him what he is, what he is going to be, what is his
future.
From Personality to Individuality 106 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
It is out of anguish that all these sciences have sprung up. And they have exploited man for
thousands of years, for the simple reason that man is bound sometime or other to be concerned
with what this life is all about: What am I doing here? Is it really meaningful or meaningless? Is it
leading me somewhere or am I moving in a circle? And if it is leading somewhere, am I going in the
right direction or in the wrong direction?
One of my professors, Doctor S.N.L. Shrivastava, used to teach me logic, he was my professor of
logic. And he was very angry with me because he could not tell me not to argue, because in a class
of logic.... I had made it clear from the very beginning that in a class of logic you cannot stop me
from arguing. ”I have really come to learn argument, what else is logic?” – so he could not prevent
me from arguing. And on each point there was trouble. He got so fed up; and the students were
praying to me, ”Because of you it seems there is not going to be any teaching from the textbooks.
From each point it takes weeks to move on; it will take our whole life to finish this book!”
After two months, S.N.L. Shrivastava got so tired that he asked for one month’s leave – he was an
old man. He wanted to go to the hill station just to rest from logic, from argument. By coincidence it
happened... I had no idea that he was going to the hill station. It was a Saturday and I had gone to
a friend’s farm. At the farm he had beautiful mangos, but I told him, ”These are nothing. If you come
to my village you will know for the first time what a mango should be. These are just wild mangos,
small and not so juicy.”
So he said, ”Why not today?”
I said, ”I am always for today,” so we dropped everything and rushed towards the station which was
not very far away. But the train was just leaving, so I jumped in and my friend who was carrying his
suitcase and this and that – he was left behind. And in the compartment was S.N.L. Shrivastava.
He said, ”What! Are you also going to the hill station?”
I was going to my village which was on the way. The hill station was one hundred and fifty miles
farther on from my village. But just to joke with him I said, ”But this train is not going to the hill
station; this is going in the opposite direction. What are you doing here?”
He said, ”Help me” – because he had made up his bed and everything in the first class compartment.
He just made it, and I somehow managed to push him out with his bag. When he was out my friend
came running, and as the train was moving off, he asked Shrivastava, ”Why did you get down? I
missed the train because I could not catch up with my friend; I was carrying all my load, and he went
on ahead – he didn’t have anything. We are going to his house so he has everything that he needs,
but I need clothes and things. But why did you get off?”
S.N.L. Shrivastava said, ”This train is not going to the hill station.”
The boy said, ”What are you saying? This is going to the hill station.”
When after two days I came back, the way S.N.L. Shrivastava looked at me I cannot forget; anytime
I can close my eyes.... He just went on looking. I said, ”Will you say something, or will you go on
just looking?”
From Personality to Individuality 107 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
He said, ”Is there anything to say? I had taken one month’s leave; I had booked a hotel, and with
much difficulty I had persuaded my wife to go – and then you appeared in that compartment. I had
never expected you there. And it is not good what you did to me.
I said, ”What have I done?”
He said, ”You said that train was going in the opposite direction.”
I said, ”That’s exactly what I believed, because I had to return from the next station. I also wanted to
go to the hill station and that train was certainly going in the wrong direction.”
He said, ”Now don’t try to befool me, because I have enquired from the station master, and your
friend himself has told me that the train was going to the hill station.”
I said, ”There seems to be some confusion. Either I was told something wrong... because I asked
another passenger and he said,’This train is not going where you want to go, so get down at the
next station, go back and catch the other train which will be coming soon.’ Perhaps you are right,
perhaps that man was right; but now there is no way to decide.”
He said, ”You are such a pain in the neck! I used to have so many anxieties before; now I have
only anguish. And it is because of you that all my anxieties have disappeared and I have only one
anguish, day and night. Even in the night I dream of you, that you are arguing and creating trouble,
and I am in difficulty answering you.”
That day he used the word ”anguish,” that’s why I remember him. He said, ”You are my anguish.”
I said, ”That’s absolutely wrong.” I said, ”Here the argument begins again. Anguish is something
internal, it cannot be external; if it is external then it is anxiety If I am your anguish, then you are
using the wrong word; I may be your anxiety. Anguish is that, Professor S.N.L. Shrivastava, which
you have to work out within yourself: Who are you? Do you also think you are Doctor S.N.L.
Shrivastava? Do you think you are a Hindu? Do you think you are a man?”
He said, ”If I am not a man, if I am not a Hindu, if I am not Doctor S.N.L. Shrivastava, then who am
I?”
I said, ”That is anguish! You meditate over it. If you find out the answer your anguish will disappear.”
But before his anguish disappeared he threatened to resign from the college. He said, ”Holidays
won’t help; after all, I have to come back again. And even in the hill station I would have been
thinking of this problem that has arisen, and which I don’t know how to solve.” He was an old man,
trained in Aristotelian logic, and I was studying things which were against Aristotle, things of which he
had never heard; so he was in continual trouble. He could not say, ”I don’t know about it” – because
to have accepted in front of people that, ”I don’t know about it,” would have seemed humiliating.
He had to pretend that he knew about it, and then he would get into trouble because he had no
idea of what he was getting into – then he was in my hands. I told the principal of the college,
”This S.N.L. Shrivastava is a well-known and respected professor, has written many books, has big
degrees, honorary degrees, but he is not a man of truth.”
From Personality to Individuality 108 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
The principal said, ”How can you say that? I have never felt that he lies or anything. He is a really
religious man – not only a professor of philosophy but religious also.”
I said, ”I have checked it a hundred times: he lies.”
He said, ”You will have to give me proof.”
I said, ”I am always ready, but that’s the problem: I ask him for proof.... I am perfectly happy – I will
give you proof. You give me any fictitious name of a book which does not exist.”
He said, ”What will that do?”
I said, ”You just write it down.” So he wrote down ”Principia Logica.” Yes, there are books called
PRINCIPIA MATHEMATICA and PRINCIPIA ETHICA, but there is no book like Principia Logica.
But it sounds perfectly right, on the lines of these famous books – PRINCIPIA ETHICA, PRINCIPIA
MATHEMATICA – so there must be a Principia Logica. I said, ”This will do. I will be back soon.”
I went to the class of S.N.L. Shrivastava and I asked him, ”I have read this statement in Principia
Logica; what do you think about it?”
He said, ”Principia Logica? Yes, I don’t exactly remember because I read the book twenty or thirty
years ago.”
I said, ”Just come with me to the principal’s office.”
He said, ”For what?”
I said, ”Just come. He has asked me to bring you to his office.” I took him there and I said, ”Professor
S.N.L. Shrivastava says that he read this book Principia Logica thirty years ago. He remembers
perfectly the name of the book, but he cannot remember the exact quotation that I gave him.”
The principal asked him, ”Shrivastava, have you read this book?”
He said, ”Yes, of course.”
The principal said to me, ”Forgive me – you are right.”
S.N.L. Shrivastava could not understand what was transpiring between me and the principal. He
said, ”What is right? And what is the problem?”
The principal said, ”Nothing. This boy was just proving that you are a perfect liar, and you proved to
be. This was coined by me, this title. There exists no such book, there has never existed any such
book – how did you read it thirty years ago? You have some nerve to say such a thing – and to these
students who have come to study under you. You are blatantly lying.”
S.N.L. Shrivastava resigned, because now he was losing face completely. I went to his home to give
him solace; he said, ”Please, I don’t want your solace.”
From Personality to Individuality 109 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
I said, ”Once in a while I will be coming, whether you want it or not. I know you need it.”
He said, ”Is it ever going to end or do I have to commit suicide? – because now I am saying I don’t
want it, and you say,’You may not want it but you need it. Now you will raise the problem: Is there is
a difference between wanting and needing?”
I told him, ”Yes, needing is something different. You may not be aware of your needs. You may
know about your wants, and your wants may not be necessarily your needs. Looking at somebody’s
beautiful hat you may want it. It may not be your need; your need may be for better shoes. Want
and need are totally different.”
He said, ”Yes, they are totally different, but please don’t come.”
But strange coincidences.... When I became a professor I was appointed to a university where he
was the head of the department of philosophy! As I entered the philosophy department, he said,
”What! What are you here for?”
I said, ”They have appointed me as your assistant.”
He said, ”will you leave me alone or not? When you were a student that was enough. Now you are
a professor – and my assistant!” Again he used the word: ”It seems you are going to remain my
anguish.”
I said, ”S.N.L. Shrivastava, six years have passed but you have not learned anything. Again,
anguish? Call it anxiety. Anxiety has an object, a particular situation; anguish is within you, you
have to look withinwards.”
He said, ”Of course, now sitting in the same staff room I have to look withinwards; otherwise I have
to look at you, and just looking at you, I lose all my sanity. You drove me out of that college. Now
you have come here, and I know we cannot coexist in this staff room. And you are not a person to
leave, so I suppose I will have to ask the government to transfer me somewhere else.
”And you have spoiled my wife’s mind because she says I am simply afraid of you and I am escaping
from every place, wherever you are. She tells me, ’How long can you escape from that man? If he
is determined to follow you, he will.’”
And I had all the qualifications to follow him anywhere, to any university, wherever he was going.
I said, ”If I am determined I can follow you, but I don’t want to be your anxiety, I want you to feel
anguish. Your death is close, you are getting too old; now is not the time for anxiety. Anxieties are
for young people who are choosing alternatives, this and that. But for you... before death comes
solve your basic problem.”
Anguish is, in short, the quest of who you are.
One of India’s greatest seers of this age, Raman Maharishi, had only one message to everyone. He
was a simple man, not a scholar. He left his house when he was seventeen years old – not even
well educated. It was a simple message. To whoever would come to him – and from all over the
world people were coming to him – all that he said was, ”Sit down in a corner, anywhere....”
From Personality to Individuality 110 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
He lived on a hill, Arunachal, and he had told his disciples to make caves in the hills; there were
many caves. ”Go and sit in a cave, and just meditate on, Who am I? All else is just explanations,
experiences, efforts to translate those experiences into language. The only real thing is this
question, Who am I?”
I have come in contact with many people, but I never came in contact with Raman Maharishi; he
died when I was too young. I wanted to go, and I would have reached him, but he was really far
away from my place, nearabout fifteen hundred miles. I asked my father many times, ”That man is
getting old and I am so young. He does not know Hindi, my language; I don’t know his language,
Tamil. Even if somehow I reach there – which is difficult....”
It was almost a three-day journey from my place to Arunachal... changing so many trains. And
with each change of train, the language changes. As you move from the Hindi language territory,
which is the biggest in India, you enter the language of Marathi. As you pass from Marathi, you
enter the state of the Nizam of Hyderabad, where Urdu is the language. As you go further you enter
Telugu-and Malayalam-speaking areas, and finally you reach Raman Maharishi who spoke Tamil.
I said, ”For me to travel it will be... and you are not even supporting me with a ticket. I will have to
travel without a ticket. For a hundred miles I can manage, I have managed. When you won’t give
me a ticket I simply go to the ticket collector and say, ”This is the trouble: my father will not give me
a ticket, but I want to go so I will have to travel without a ticket. But I don’t want to travel like a thief,
so I am informing you.”
And it always happened that the man thought, ”No person who is traveling without a ticket comes to
the ticket collector to inform him.” But the ticket collector would say to me, ”Okay. You sit down, I will
take care. After a hundred miles I will be waiting for you at the gate so I can let you off at the station;
otherwise you may be caught there – if you are not caught on the train. I am the ticket collector on
the train for the next hundred miles; but on the station you may be caught, so I will be there.”
I have traveled many times in my early childhood without a ticket because my father thought that if a
ticket was not given to me how could I go? But soon he learned that I have my ways. He asked me,
”Can you tell me how you manage not to be caught?”
I said, ”I cannot tell you, it is a secret. But I have told my grandfather; you can ask him.”
People around the world are all living in anxiety.
Even if it is told to you – and that’s what Raman was telling to people – ”Go into the anguish....”
I could not manage to see Raman, but I met many people who had been his disciples, later on when
I was traveling. When I went to Arunachal I met his very intimate disciples, who were very old by
then, and I did not find a single person who had understood that man’s message.
It was not a question of language, because they all knew Tamil; it was a question of a totally different
perspective and understanding. Raman had said, ”Look withinwards and find out who you are.” And
what were these people doing when I went there? They had made it a chant! They would sit down,
chanting, ”Who am I? Who am I? Who am I?” – just like any other mantra.
From Personality to Individuality 111 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
There are people who are doing their JAPA, ”Rama, Rama, Rama,” or ”Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna,
Hari Krishna....” At Arunachal they were using this same technology for a totally different thing, which
Raman could not have meant. And I said to his disciples, ”What you are doing is not what he meant.
By repeating,’Who am I?’ do you think somebody is going to answer? You will continue to repeat it
your whole life and no answer will be coming.”
They said, ”On the one hand we are doing what we have understood him to mean. On the other
hand we cannot say you are wrong, because we have been wasting our whole life chanting,’Who
am I? Who am I? Who am I?’ ” – in Tamil of course, in their language – ”but nothing has happened.”
I said, ”You can go on chanting for many more lives; nothing is going to happen. It is not a question
of chanting’Who am I?’ You are not to utter a single word, you have simply to be silent and listen.
At first you will find, just like flies moving around you, thousands of thoughts, desires, dreams –
unrelated, irrelevant, meaningless. You are in a crowd, buzzing. Just keep quiet and sit down in this
bazaar of your mind.”
Bazaar is a beautiful word. English has taken it over from the East, but perhaps they don’t know
that it comes from ”buzzing”: a bazaar is a place which is continuously buzzing. And your mind is
the greatest bazaar there is. In each single mind in such a small skull, you are carrying such a big
bazaar. And you will be surprised to know that so many people reside in you – so many ideas, so
many thoughts, so many desires, so many dreams. Just go on watching and sitting silently in the
middle of the bazaar.
If you start SAYING, ”Who am I?” you have become part of the bazaar, you have started buzzing.
Don’t buzz, don’t be a buzzer; simply be silent. Let the whole bazaar continue; you remain the
center of the cyclone.
Yes, it takes a little patience. It is not predictable at what time the buzzing will stop in you, but one
thing can be said certainly: that it stops sometime or other. It depends on you how much of a bazaar
you have, for how many years you have carried it, for how many lives you have carried it, how much
nourishment you have given to it, and how much patience you have to sit silently in this mad crowd
around you – maddening you, pulling you from every side.
Have you ever been in a madhouse? Just sit there and you will have some taste of your mind. One
madman may start pulling your hand, another madman may start shaving your beard, somebody
may start taking your clothes; they all will become engaged around you. You simply sit silently. How
long can you sit?
One of my sannyasins, Narendra’s father, used to get mad for six months every year. And when he
was mad he was in such great spirits that he would do strange things. He would go on a journey, a
pilgrimage to holy places... anything. One time he went mad and escaped from the house. People
searched but could not find him. Everywhere he was looked for – as far as it was possible. But
he had really taken a very fast train going to Agra. Perhaps he was going to see the Taj Mahal
or whatever; one never knows about mad people. And by the time he reached Agra he was very
hungry; he had no money, so he went into a sweet shop.
In India there is a very tasty soft cake – its name is such that it created trouble for poor Narendra’s
From Personality to Individuality 112 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
father. It is called khaja. Khaja has two meanings: one is ”softness.” The cake is very soft; you just
press it a little and it will fall apart in many pieces. But khaja has another meaning: ”Eat it.”
So Narendra’s father asked, ”What is this.?”
The shopkeeper said, ”Khaja,” so he started eating.
The man said, ”What are you doing?”
He said, ”Eating. You said to.”
A crowd gathered but he was still eating. And he was a strong man; he said, ”If he says,’Khaja,’ I will
finish it – the whole pile that he has in the shop.”
The shopkeeper said, ”This man seems to be mad! I have been selling khaja my whole life, but this
is my first experience of a man who takes the meaning of khaja as’to eat.’ I have never thought of
this possibility.”
And Narendra’s father said, ”You said’Eat it,’ so I am simply eating it.” He was brought to the police
court and they found that he was mad, so he was put in a madhouse in Lahore for six months.
Lahore was so far away – now it is in Pakistan, not even in India – it was the farthest corner of the
country. Narendra’s family remained concerned. We could not get even any hint as to where he
had disappeared, because the court had ordered him to be taken to Lahore. Lahore had one of the
biggest madhouses of India.
Narendra’s father was very friendly to me because I was the only one, perhaps, in the whole town
who appreciated his madness. We used to talk – Narendra, by and by, became acquainted with
me just because of his father – and we used to go to swim together, we used to go to the market.
With him it was a joy because I was not needed for any mischief to happen; he was doing so much
mischief that just to be with him was enough enjoyment.
He told me that after the fourth month.... Up to the fourth month things went perfectly well in the
Lahore madhouse, where there must have been at least three thousand mad people. ”Those four
months,” he said, ”I don’t remember – they went by just as if I was in paradise. But after four months
an accident happened that created trouble.”
He went into the bathroom and found a container which was filled with some kind of soapy substance
to cleanse the toilets and the bathrooms. He was mad, and it looked like milk, so he drank the whole
container. It gave him such diarrhea that for fifteen days doctors tried everything to stop it. Nothing
would work – that chemical was not meant for the human body! And he had drunk the whole
container – not a small dose of it – which was meant to clean all the bathrooms of the madhouse.
But it cleaned his madhouse completely: after fifteen days continual diarrhea, he became sane. A
certain cleansing happened.
But then came the tragic part: the two months. He would go again and again and tell the
superintendent, ”I am no longer mad, and now this is a torture for me. For these four months it
was perfectly okay: they were beating me or I was beating them; it didn’t matter. We were fighting
From Personality to Individuality 113 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
and we were pulling each other and shouting and screaming and biting. Everything was going on –
it was a free-for-all. But now I am not mad.
”This is the difficulty: I cannot hit them – I feel sad for them that they are mad – but they are
continually hitting me, beating me, pulling me down from my bed. Somebody comes and sits on my
chest.... One man shaved half my head, and four other mad people were holding me, so I could not
escape. I asked them again and again,’At least do the full job,’ but that was all that they wanted to do;
then they moved on to another person to shave him. And that madman must have been a barber,
so he was really practiced, and was still practicing his old job, his old habit. Those two months....”
But the superintendent said, ”I cannot do anything. Court orders are orders – they are for six months.
And moreover, everybody says,’I am not mad.’ Whom am I to believe? What proof have you got that
you aren’t mad?”
What proof have you got? If someday you are caught in a madhouse and they ask, ”What proof
have you got that you aren’t mad?” it will be impossible to prove that you aren’t mad. And if they are
determined that you are mad, if they have decided it, whatever proof you give will be a proof of your
madness.
”Those two months,” Narendra’s father said, ”I felt the question for the first time: Who am I?
Sometimes I am mad, sometimes I am not mad, but these are only phases around me. So who
am I? – who gets into madness, who gets out of madness?”
I said to him, ”Those two months have given you a taste of anguish. Don’t forget those moments.
Now you are out, use that anguish for your meditation – try to find out.... Because you may become
mad again and before you become mad at least have something figured out: who you are.” But it
was too much to expect of that poor man, because within a month he was mad again.
But what to say about the whole of humanity?
You are aware of anxiety.
But you are not aware of anguish yet.
In the first place, when you do feel anguish, you will feel in a tremendous turmoil, in a very deep
depression... a fathomless abyss just opening in front of you, and you are falling into it. It is terrible
in the beginning, but only in the beginning.
If you can be patient, just a little patient, and allow whatever is happening, soon you will be aware
of a new quality in your being: All that is happening is around you, it is not happening in you. It is
something without, not within. Even your own mind is something on the outer side.
At the innermost center there is only one thing:
That is witnessing, watching, observing, awareness.
And that’s what I call meditation.
From Personality to Individuality 114 Osho
CHAPTER 6. ANXIETY: WHO ARE YOU? ANGUISH: WHO AM I?
Without anguish you cannot meditate.
You have to pass through the fire of anguish. It will burn much rubbish and leave you cleaner,
fresher.
And your being is not far away. It is there, very close by, but just the buzzing of all the thoughts does
not allow you to hear it, to see it, to feel it.
Anguish is the enquiry into one’s self putting the question mark unto oneself.
You have asked things like, ”Who is God?” and ”Who created the world?”
All those questions are just for retarded minds.
A mature mind has only one question.
Not even two, just a single question: Who am I?
And that too you have not to ask verbally, you have just to be in that state of questioning.
You are not to repeat, ”Who am I?” you have just to be there, watching, looking; not verbally asking,
but existentially asking.
And that existential question is terrible in the beginning, painful in the beginning, but brings all the
blessings in the end.
Gautam the Buddha has said, ”My path in the beginning is bitter, but in the end, very sweet.”
What path? He is not talking about the Buddhist religion; although that’s how the Buddhist monks
will interpret it. He is talking about the path that I am talking to you about – the path that takes you
inwards.
Yes, it is bitter in the beginning but sweet in the end. It is deathlike in the beginning and eternal life
in the end.
And all the blessings of the existence are yours.
You are so blessed that you can bless the whole of existence.
That’s the meaning of the word, Bhagwan: the Blessed One.
The Blessed One is born out of the birth pangs of anguish.
From Personality to Individuality 115 Osho
CHAPTER 7
Conditioning: socially-sanctioned child abuse
5 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
IS J. KRISHNAMURTI ENLIGHTENED?
YES, he is enlightened, but something is missing in his enlightenment. It is like when you arrive
after a long journey at an airport. You have arrived but then suddenly you find your luggage is
missing. With J. Krishnamurti something more serious has happened: the luggage has arrived but
he is missing!
It is a little bit complex but it is not unusual. It has happened many times before but for different
reasons. The reason with Krishnamurti is certainly novel, but the situation is not. There have been
people who were enlightened but they still remained Christians, Hindus, Jainas, Buddhists. To me
it is unbelievable. Once you are enlightened you are finished with all the conditionings of the mind.
Then how can you still be a Christian?
What was your Christianity? It was a coincidence that you were born in a certain family and those
people conditioned your mind in a certain way. They gave you a certain ideology, gave you a certain
religious outlook, gave you a certain theological jargon; and you learned it like a parrot.
I know a child cannot do anything against it, he is helpless; he has to learn whatsoever is being
taught to him. Even without being taught he picks up things from the environment, parents, friends,
neighborhood. He goes with his parents to the church, to the synagogue, to the temple, and he is
116
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
continually imbibing influences. Whether you are directly teaching him or not, he is being conditioned
indirectly.
But parents and teachers don’t take any chances; they don’t leave it just to indirect influences.
They make every effort, directly, to convert the innocent child who comes into the world absolutely
unconditioned – a pure mirror capable of reflecting anything. But the society, the culture, the religion
– they start painting on the mirror.
They can paint a Krishna, they can paint a Christ, they can paint a Moses, they can paint anything.
They can paint Karl Marx, they can paint Christianity, communism, fascism – anything. And the child
is so helplessly dependent he cannot say no. He really has no idea of no.
The child believes and trusts the people who are giving him everything, helping him, supporting him:
the mother, the father, the family... the warmth, the coziness. They are providing all the opportunities
for his growth; they are not to be distrusted. The question does not arise in the mind of the child,
and it is natural that it does not arise.
But because of this natural situation all the religions have committed the greatest crime in the history
of man; and that is, making the child a Christian, a Mohammedan, a Jew, a Hindu, a communist –
without the child’s acceptance, without the child’s readiness, willingness. Of course the child has not
said no, but he has not said yes either. If people are sensitive they will wait for the child’s yes.
If they are really loving they will wait till the child asks them, ”What is this church all about?” They
should make every effort to see that he is not being influenced indirectly; the question of direct
influence should not even arise. He should be left clean, pure, as he is born, till the time when he
picks up some intelligence.
Growth takes a little time.
Just a little patience is needed.
He will ask questions, because everybody is born with a potential for search, enquiry. He will
come up with questions; then too, if you are alert, loving, compassionate towards this young fellow
traveler.... He is not your possession, he has just come through you. You have been only a passage
– never forget that. He does not belong to you, he belongs to the whole existence. You have been
just a path for him to come into this body.
Don’t destroy the child’s natural potentialities.
Don’t divert the child according to your vested interests.
Don’t be political, at least with your own child.
But all over the earth, all the parents, all the teachers, have no idea of what they are doing.
In the name of religion they are committing a sin.
From Personality to Individuality 117 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
Ordinarily I don’t use that word. To me in life there may be mistakes, errors – not sin – because man
is fallible. Man is not born omniscient, knowing all. He is not a born pope – infallible. He will fall
many times, and he will get up again. This is the way he will learn how to walk; this is the way he
will learn how to see, how to enquire.
Yes, many times he will go on a wrong path. Nothing is wrong in that. In going on a wrong path,
you are learning that it is wrong, because when you are moving in a wrong direction you cannot feel
comfortable: that is a natural indication. You will feel uneasy, your stomach cramped; you will feel
tense – because wherever you are going is not the natural way for you. All these are indications to
change the route and know forever that this is not right for you.
But about religion I cannot use very ordinary words like mistake, error – no. Something really heavy
is needed.
So I say the so-called religion is the only sin in the world because it commits a crime against
somebody who is absolutely helpless and in your hands. And it is a crime of tremendous proportions.
So if you become a Hindu, if you become a Christian, if you become a Buddhist, that is
understandable. But when a man becomes enlightened what does it mean? It means really the
undoing of what society, culture, religion, the state, the education system, the parents – all together
in conspiracy against the small child – have done. To undo it is to be enlightened: to regain your
childhood, to regain that freshness, that mirror-like quality of simply reflecting with no judgment.
The mirror simply reflects. When you stand before the mirror, the mirror is not making any judgment
about you – good, bad, beautiful, ugly – no judgment at all. The mirror simply reflects. It does not
get involved in any way.
I remember my own childhood. The moment I became aware of what was happening – it must have
been nearabout the age of four or five – that I was being driven in a certain direction that I had not
chosen, I asked my father, ”Do you think that just by being born a son to you I will have to follow your
religion, your politics; that I will have to become a member of the Lion’s club, that I will have to do
your business? Does it mean that because unfortunately I am born to you, I will have to do all these
things?”
He said, ”Who said to you that you have to become a member of the Lion’s club or that you have to
become a member of the political party of which I am a member? Who said this to you?”
I said, ”There is no need for anybody to say it, for five years continually you have been doing it. Why
have you been taking me to the Jaina temple? Who are you to decide about it? Why have you been
telling me to bow down before Mahavira’s statue, before certain scriptures I know nothing about?”
I was not even able to read at that time. The scriptures were just books like any other books, but
everybody was bowing down to them.
I said, ”You were bowing down and you were encouraging me to bow down, and it looked awkward
for me to stand there when everybody else was showing so much respect. But you had not asked
me; it was not with my consent that you took me to the temple. Just by the side there is a mosque
– my friend is being taken there. Why don’t you take me there? Why don’t my friend’s parents take
him to the Jaina temple?
From Personality to Individuality 118 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
”What else is politics but this? You are giving me certain ideas, filling me with certain attitudes. And
you started so early that I was not even aware of what was happening.” I said, ”From now onwards,
stop it; leave me alone. Now I am capable of saying no. And remember, unless I am capable of
saying no, how can I be capable of saying yes? The capacity to say the one is also the capacity to
say the other; they both come together.
”So don’t be offended by my no. I will say yes, but you will have to wait. Perhaps I may not say yes
to this temple, but to some other temple; not to this book, but to some other book. Nothing can be
predicted right now; I am not a thing, predictable. Tomorrow the chair will still remain a chair, the
table will still remain a table; they are predictable. What to say about the child of a man? – I am not
predictable.”
One drunkard, completely drunk, went to a sweet shop. He gave the shopkeeper one rupee,
purchased sweets for half a rupee and asked for the remaining change. The shopkeeper said,
”I don’t have any change right now. Tomorrow morning, when you pass by, pick it up. Or you can
take your rupee, and tomorrow morning you can give me haU a rupee – whatever pleases you.”
The drunkard said, ”Okay, tomorrow morning I will pick up the change.” But he thought, What if the
shopkeeper changes his address? – the world is so cunning.... I should make some arrangement
so that he cannot change his address without my knowing. So he looked around and he saw a bull
sitting in front of the shop. He said, ”That’s good. The shopkeeper may not be even aware that bull
is sitting there in front of the shop.”
The next morning all that the drunkard remembered was that there was a bull sitting in front of the
shop, and that he had to collect half a rupee from there. He went in search of the bull, obviously,
because that was the only proof that he had. But a bull is not a static thing: the bull was sitting in
front of a barber’s shop.
The drunkard went in, dutched the man by his neck and said, ”You son-of-a-bitch! Just for half a
rupee you change your profession, you change your caste; and just overnight the sweet shop has
disappeared and you have become a barber!”
The man said, ”What are you talking about? Yesterday my shop was closed.”
The drunkard said, ”Great! You can’t deceive me. Look at the bull. Even though I am drunk, I am
not that foolish. I knew there would be some trouble so I made a point of remembering the bull; the
whole night I had to remember it again and again. And the bull is still sitting in exactly the same
position, in front of your shop.”
The barber said, ”Now I understand what the trouble is, because I also saw the bull sitting in front of
the sweet shop last night. You please go there. A bull is not something that remains in one position,
he moves; he has moved! What can I do about it?”
But people go on thinking that the child will remain the same as they are making him. Yes, most
people remain the same because it is comfortable, convenient. Why bother? When all the answers
have been given to you, why be skeptical?
Skepticism is condemned by all the religions.
From Personality to Individuality 119 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
In reality, skepticism is the beginning of a really religious man.
Skepticism means enquiry.
Skepticism means: whatsoever you have told me I cannot accept unless I experience it.
But it is inconvenient. You will have to travel a long way, and you never know whether you will reach
to the point where you find the answer on your own.
Most people, the greater mass, want convenience, comfort, ready-made things, ready-made
answers. It is understandable. It is an ugly fact about human beings, that even for truth they are not
ready to take a little trouble.
Even truth people want cheap.
And because you want truth cheap, there are peddlars who are selling it cheap.
Not only cheap, they are selling it without taking anything from you. Not only that, they are rewarding
you: if you purchase their truth they are going to reward you. The Christians will call you a saint,
the Hindus will call you a mahatma, a sage. Without any effort, without paying anything you gain so
much respectability. All that you have to do is to pretend, to be a hypocrite.
The whole human society is pretending.
What do you know about Christ’s experience?
Without having some taste of it, you are a Christian?
If this is not hypocrisy, then what is hypocrisy?
Knowing nothing about God, you believe in God.
If this is not dishonesty....
Then what else can dishonesty be?
You are not even honest towards God.
An honest, sincere person will start from skepticism. He will enquire. He will put a question mark on
every aspect of conditioning that his parents and his society have burdened him with.
But it is understandable about the general masses; they can be forgiven. But how to forgive a
man who has attained enlightenment? His enlightenment means he has done away with all the
conditions, conditionings, all the programs. He is a deprogrammed man, he is a dehypnotized
man. But for an enlightened man to still say that he is Christian is unforgivable, yet this has been
happening all through history.
Only very rarely have a few people simply declared their aloneness.
From Personality to Individuality 120 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
They have taken a small footpath of their own and they have left the super-highway where everybody
is moving – of course comfortably. And when you leave the super-highway you will have to create a
path just by walking. There is no path ready-made, available to you.
That’s why I say truth is costly.
You will have to pay for it.
When you walk without there being any path, your feet will bleed. Your mind will try to persuade you
to go back to the highway where everybody else is moving, and say, ”Don’t be a fool! Here you can
get lost. There you were with the crowd; it was warmer. And when there were so many people, it
was certain that we were moving in the right direction – so many people cannot be wrong.
”Alone, what guarantee is there that you are going in the right direction? – you don’t have any
evidence. On the highway there are millions of people ahead, millions of people behind, millions of
people with you. What more proof do you need?”
I can understand that the common man would prefer the super-highway. Whether it is Christian,
Hindu, Jaina or Mohammedan doesn’t matter – he has to be with a big crowd. As far as you can
see there are only crowds and more crowds, and that gives you a deep conviction that you must be
on the right path.
I can forgive you. But how can I forgive Saint Francis? He is enlightened and yet he is a Christian
and goes to the Vatican, to the pope to touch his feet! Now, this is sickening: The pope! – who is
not enlightened, who is just an elected person.... Anybody who is cunning enough, clever enough
to campaign for himself can become the pope.
But why did Saint Francis go there? Because all over the whole country people had started
respecting Francis, loving him, accepting what he was saying and that news, coming continually
to the pope, was shocking. A man who has not been sanctified by the pope as a saint is already
being accepted by the people as a saint! The pope was simply bypassed – that could not be
tolerated. This man was sabotaging the whole Catholic system, and no bureaucracy can tolerate
such sabotage.
So according to the church, if he has become enlightened, first he should come to the pope, and
if the pope gives him a certificate that says yes, he is enlightened – if he gives him the sanction of
enlightenment.... That’s the Christian meaning of a saint – sanctioned by the pope.
Become anything else – but never become a Christian saint. A Christian saint simply means,
”sanctioned by the pope.” And particularly now, don’t become a Christian saint, whatsoever the
price you have to pay. Sanctioned by a polack pope! What kind of saint will you be?
But Saint Francis, seeing that the pope was getting angrier, and that messages were coming saying,
”You have to come first to the pope,” went, touched the pope’s feet and prayed with folded hands:
”Bless me, and tell me how I can serve Christ, his church, Christianity and you.” And the pope was
perfectly happy: Francis was sanctioned as a saint.
From Personality to Individuality 121 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
I can understand the pope and his stupidity because nobody expects anything else from a pope.
But what is Saint Francis doing? Something is missing in his enlightenment. He is enlightened but
is still imprisoned in the old conditioning.
Although now he knows, ”I am not the conditioning,” he is not brave enough to jump out of his prison.
On the contrary, he decides to use the prison itself, the conditioning itself, the language given by the
conditioning itself, to bring his message to the people. This is cowardly. And this is why so many
saints in the past in all the religions have lost my respect.
I know that they had come to understand, but their understanding was not fiery enough, it was very
lukewarm. It was not revolutionary, it was orthodox. Perhaps they were common men, and the
fears of the common man were still lingering somewhere back in the shadows and influencing their
actions. Their language, their behavior, their actions, give indications that they were enlightened, but
they also show that they were not able to overthrow their whole conditioning. Perhaps they thought
if they overthrew it they would not be able to communicate with the people, because the people had
the same conditioning.
To think in this way is right for a business man, but it is not right for an enlightened person. Who cares
whether people understand or not? If they understand, it is good for them; if they don’t understand,
”Go to hell!” – that is their business. But why should I go on carrying unnecessary luggage, which I
know is just crap, for your sake?
In this way many enlightened people of the past have lost my respect. I cannot deny that they were
in that space where I would like you all to be: they were in that space, but they remained like buds,
they never opened up like flowers. They were so afraid that they remained buds. They were afraid
to open.
Opening is always risky.
Who knows what is going to happen when you open up?
One thing is certain, your fragrance will be released.
And that can create trouble for you.
An enlightened person’s fragrance is revolution, is rebellion....
Perhaps it is better to remain a closed bud like these people who were not brave enough –
enlightenment was in the wrong hands.
With J. Krishnamurti the situation is totally new. He is enlightened, and he is not orthodox – but he
has gone to the other extreme: he is anti-orthodox. Anti should be underlined.
When I was a student in my final post-graduate year there were two girls in my class. We three
were the only students of religion. You can understand that the man who was the professor was a
religious man; and as you should expect from a religious man, he was very much infatuated with one
of the girls. He was a celibate. He had really been following the Hindu tradition because he wanted
From Personality to Individuality 122 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
to become a monk one day, and he was preparing: practicing yoga, concentration and visualization
exercises, and continually repeating, chanting mantras. But all these things are on one side; biology
is on the other side, and that is far weightier.
Put all your scriptures on the weighing scale – all the scriptures of all your religions – and put biology
on the other side. The biology side will touch the earth and all your scriptures may go to heaven.
They don’t have any weight. They need idiots to function as paperweights, to keep them down on
the earth.
Now this man was in great trouble. One girl was homely; you would not bother about her. In fact she
was a little more than homely. She had a little mustache that she had to shave – what else could
she do? She was a Punjabi, and it happens in Punjab.... Punjabi women are strong, hard workers,
and work almost like men in the fields. I think with so much work and exertion and strength, that
perhaps a mustache and beard start growing – because I again saw it in Shri Aurobindo’s ashram.
In Aurobindo’s ashram everybody had to do certain, very arduous exercises. Most of the population
in his ashrams were young girls sent by their parents – who were followers of Aurobindo – to be
trained there for a spiritual life. But I was surprised that almost all of them were growing little
mustaches. Strange! I said, ”If it happens in an ashrama, then all ashramas should be destroyed.” I
enquired about it from the man who was in charge.
He said, ”I also feel a little awkward because everybody asks that, and I don’t know what is
happening.”
I said, ”Three-hour morning exercises, three-hour evening exercises – these exercises must be
doing it.” And those exercises were almost like in the army! It has something to do with that. Too
much exertion and too much exercise perhaps changes some hormones in the body and the girls
start growing beards and mustaches – because I knew that one girl and she was a little more than
homely. In fact if you just passed by her, you wouldn’t even look at her, and I don’t think anybody
ever looked back again.
But the other girl was a rare beauty. She was from Kashmir, and Kashmir produces perhaps the
most beautiful women on the earth. My celibate professor was wavering and bobbling. And the
greatest trouble for him was that the girl was interested in me, not in him. So he was very angry
with me, because he would try in every possible way to make the girl interested in him, but she was
simply taking no notice of him.
I was not interested in the girl, but the girl was certainly interested in me. She used to come to ask
this, to ask that, to take this book.... And when she came to me it was natural that whatever she
wanted I arranged for her. And that man was burning up!
It came to a climax one day because the girl invited me to her house – she lived in the city – for
dinner, and this celibate, religious professor heard that I had been invited by the girl to her house.
She was the daughter of the collector of the city and she wanted me to be introduced to her parents,
her father and mother. Only she knew her purpose; I was completely out of it.
I told her also, ”I am not interested in any kind of relationship, so you should take note of that first;
don’t unnecessarily waste a dinner. And if you are trying some conspiracy with your parents, I am
From Personality to Individuality 123 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
unaware of it and I am not part of it at all. I can come for dinner – you are inviting me, I will not refuse
it – but that’s all.”
She was shocked. I said, ”You can take your invitation back, there is no problem – I will not be hurt.
In fact I am hurting you.” But this is not the thing that I wanted to emphasize. When the professor
heard about the dinner, and that the girl was going to introduce me to her father and her mother and
family, he cornered me in the library.
I had my own corner. It was a small room which I had chosen inside the library, allotted to me by
special permission from the vice-chancellor so that I need not sit with so many people coming and
going but could have my own place. I wanted to be alone so I used to keep it locked from inside.
My interest in books has been immense. I have read perhaps more than anybody else in the whole
world, because I was not doing anything else except reading. I used to have three or four hours of
sleep, that was all; otherwise I was continually reading.
Somebody knocked on the door. It never used to happen, because I had told all my professors that
even if the university was burning down I was not concerned; they were not to bother me. I had told
the librarian, ”If you want to close the library you can – I will remain here the whole night – but don’t
ever knock on my door. I don’t like that kind of familiarity, not at all.”
Somebody knocked; it was the first time. I thought, ”Who can it be?” I opened the door. The celibate,
red with anger, closed the door behind him and asked me, ”Do you love this girl?”
I said, ”I don’t even hate her.”
He said, ”What do you mean?”
I said, ”Exactly what I say to you: I don’t even hate her; the question of love does not arise. There
is not even a hate relationship between me and her – you are unnecessarily getting red and hot.
You just get out of the room. And as far as the dinner is concerned I have canceled it, so don’t be
worried. But if you want dinner in the house, I can manage it.”
He said, ”No, no, I don’t want any dinner, and particularly not managed by you.” Again he asked,
”But what do you mean: ’I don’t even hate her’?”
I said, ”It is so simple – and you are a professor of religion: can’t you understand a simple thing?
Because love is a relationship, hate is a relationship. Love can become hate any day, and it does –
not any day, every day. Vice versa also is true: hate can become love. It is a little rare but it happens,
because love and hate are just the same energy arranged in a different way. You have the same
sofa, the same chairs, the same table, but you can arrange them in a thousand ways. And people
go on doing that. So I simply said, to cut the whole problem from the very root,’I don’t even hate her,’
so be completely at ease.”
Why did I remember it? I remembered it because of J. Krishnamurti. He hates orthodoxy, he hates
all that has passed in the name of religion. Remember the difference: I criticize it but I don’t hate it.
I don’t even hate it! Krishnamurti has a relationship with it – I don’t have any relationship with it –
and that is where he has missed.
From Personality to Individuality 124 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
He was brought up in a very strange situation – by Theosophists – to be declared a world teacher.
Now, you cannot manufacture a world teacher. World teachers are born, not forced. And world
teachers need not declare themselves world teachers: they are. It is not a question of declaration, it
is a question of recognition on the part of the world; it is none of his business.
Whenever there is a man who has the capacity to attract people from all around the world – intelligent
people, people who are seekers, enquirers, people who are ready to risk and gamble – there is no
need for him to declare, ”I am the world teacher.” The whole world will laugh at such a man. The
world teacher has nothing to do with it; it is for the world to decide.
But what Theosophists were doing was just the opposite: they were trying to create a world teacher.
So of course they were disciplining J. Krishnamurti from the age of nine – now he is ninety. He was
picked up by the Theosophists while he was bathing naked in a river which flows through Adyar in
India – where the headquarters, the world headquarters of the Theosophical movement is. At that
time it was a great movement: thousands of people were interested in it. All that was missing was a
world teacher.
There were very clever people like Leadbeater, Annie Besant, Colonel Olcott, but none of them
had the charisma. To be a Master, one thing is absolutely essential: the person should have some
magical quality, some charisma. Not only his words, but his very being should be capable of pulling
you like a magnet. That was not there.
Annie Besant was a nice lady, but what to do with a nice lady? – there are millions of nice ladies.
Leadbeater was a great writer, but no world teacher has ever been a writer. Not a single world
teacher worth the name has ever written, because the spoken word has a magic about it which the
written word cannot have. The written word can be written by anybody.
Do you think it will make any difference whether Jesus writes it or you write it? Perhaps your
handwriting may be better. But just because Jesus writes it, it won’t have charismatic impact. But
as far as the spoken word is concerned... the word that Jesus speaks has a certain impact. You can
speak the same word but it is not going to have the same impact.
All the Christian missionaries are continually repeating the same words. Jesus has not left much; in
fact a single sermon, the Sermon on the Mount, contains his whole teaching. And he was not an
educated man so he could not use very sophisticated language: it is simple, raw, rough. From a
carpenter’s son, what else can you expect? But its impact must have been tremendous. People are
not crucified for nothing.
If the Jews and the Romans both agreed to crucify this man, you can take it for granted that this
man had something in him which made King Herod tremble on his throne. The high priest of the
Jews, who had all the religious powers in his hands, listening to Jesus immediately understood that
no scholarship could defeat this man.
It is not what he is saying, it is the way he is saying it – or even better – it is his presence, the space
from which he is speaking that brings a certain fragrance with it, a certain quality of penetration
that just goes into your heart. And there is no way to prevent it. Later on, perhaps you may find
a thousand and one arguments against it, but in the presence of the man – whether he is right or
wrong – his impact is absolute. In his presence you cannot doubt him.
From Personality to Individuality 125 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
Now, you cannot create such a person by giving him lessons in oratory, by teaching him better ways
of speaking, expression, language, by making him in every way proficient. But the Theosophists
worked hard on J. Krishnamurti until he was twenty-five, and then they thought, ”Now is the time to
make our declaration – he is ready.” But they had really picked a great man.
They had picked a few other boys also because it was just chance who turned out to be the right
one. So they were training at least half a dozen boys, but Krishnamurti proved, to them, the best.
And of course he was the best – but not for their purposes. For their purposes, from those other
five, anybody would have done.
One of them, Raj Gopal, is still alive. He had been, his whole life, personal secretary to J.
Krishnamurti, but just a few years ago he betrayed him, and really betrayed him badly. Everything –
all powers of attorney, all royalties, all books’ copyrights – everything was in the name of Raj Gopal
so that Krishnamurti need not bother about it.
When Krishnamurti was eighty – ten years ago – Raj Gopal simply took possession of everything:
millions of dollars, all future royalties, books and all the donations that had come during this fifty-year
period. It was a big fortune. He simply denied Krishnamurti, saying, ”I am no longer your secretary.
And you forget about all these things – or if you want to go to the court, you can.”
This man, Raj Gopal would have proved far better for the Theosophical movement and their purpose.
He proved extremely clever, cunning, and of immense patience, really a man of strong will. He waited
long enough to betray Krishnamurti: he must have been carrying the idea for fifty years but nobody
could detect it in him. Even Krishnamurti was completely unsuspicious. How can you believe that a
person who has been serving you for fifty years will suddenly one day cut off your head? – someone
who has not even raised a single question, a single doubt, about you. Raj Gopal would have been
far better for the Theosophists.
J. Krishnamurti certainly was the best, but not for their purposes. That was proved immediately,
because the day he was going to declare himself the world teacher.... They had prepared every
word of his speech, listened to it again and again so that he could repeat it exactly, because it was
going to be a document of historical importance; nobody had done such a thing before.
Six thousand representatives from all over the world had gathered in Holland. One old lady of
the royal family had donated her castle and five thousand acres of land so that it could become
Krishnamurti’s world headquarters. Everything was prepared on a grand scale.
Krishnamurti stood up, and he said, ”I am nobody’s Master and nobody is my disciple. The only
declaration I have to make is that I abandon the movement that has been created around me. I
dissolve the organization called the Star of the East which has been especially made for my work,
and I return the castle and the money, the donations, the land, to their owners.”
Annie Besant was crying; she could not believe her eyes. It was such a shock: ”What has happened?
We have come from all over the world, and the man simply says he is not anybody’s Master and
there is no need for one.” But for anybody who could understand how human psychology functions
it was very much expected.
From Personality to Individuality 126 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
The Theosophists were forcing it on him, and this was the first chance that he had to stand up and
speak in public – he did not want to lose it. Up to then he had been kept in secrecy, and all over
the world rumors were being created that he was being initiated into higher and higher degrees of
spirituality. ”Now he has passed the three-star degree, now he has passed the five-star degree, now
seven stars; now he has attained all nine stars and the time has come.” That’s why the organization
specially created for the world teacher was called the Star of the East, because he was the first man
who attained to the highest peak of consciousness: nine stars.
It seems like a five-star hotel! – a nine-star hotel!
And of course when you fall from a nine-star hotel.... The whole movement was crushed. Not only
was the Star of the East organization dissolved, the shock was so much that Theosophy started
falling apart and withering. Now it is just history.
The problem with Krishnamurti is that now sixtyfive years have passed and still he goes on telling
people: ”Die to the past; live in the moment” – continually. It is an obsession. My understanding
is that he has not been able to die to his past – his past: those years of discipline, and training,
and hypocrisy. Those people who were almost torturing him with yoga discipline – wake up in the
morning at three o’clock, take a cold bath, do all the exercises, repeat all the mantras – they have
left scars in him.
He says to you, ”Die to the past,” but he has not been able to forgive those people who are all dead.
And he has not been able to forget those early years of torture in the name of training, discipline.
It is a strange coincidence that just for the first time today I have seen J. Krishnamurti on the
television screen. One time it happened, I was in Bombay, he was in Bombay, and he wanted
to meet me. One of his chief disciples in India came to me and asked me – he knew me and he
used to listen to me – ”J. Krishnamurti wants to see you.”
I said, ”I have no problem – bring him.”
But he said, ”That is not the Indian way.”
I said, ”Krishnamurti does not believe in Indian or European or American ways.”
He said, ”He may not believe in them but everybody else does.”
I said, ”I am not going to meet everybody else. You say J. Krishnamurti wants to meet me: bring
him. If I wanted to meet him, I would go to him, but I don’t see the need.”
But again and again his emphasis was: ”He is older, you are younger” – I must have been only forty
at the time, and Krishnamurti was almost double my age.
I said, ”That’s perfectly true, but I don’t see any need to meet him. What am I going to say to him? I
have no questions to ask, I have only answers to give. It will look very awkward if I start answering
him when he has not asked anything. He will be expecting a question from me. That is impossible –
I have never asked. I have only answers, so what can I do?
From Personality to Individuality 127 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
”And of course he is enlightened, so what is the need? – at the most we can sit silently together.
So why unnecessarily take me ten or twelve miles?” And in Bombay ten or twelve miles sometimes
means two hours, sometimes three hours. The roads are continuously blocked with all kinds of
vehicles. Bombay is perhaps the only city which must have all models of cars. The ancientmost,
that God used to drive Adam and Eve out of paradise – that too will be in Bombay. There is no other
possibility; it cannot be anywhere else.
I said, ”I am not interested in taking three hours, unnecessarily bothering.... And I have had such
experiences before: it is absolutely futile. You go and ask him; if he wants to ask me something
perhaps I may think about coming just because of his old age. But I have nothing to ask. If he just
wants to see me, then he should take the trouble of coming here.” Of course Krishnamurti was very
angry when he heard it. He gets angry easily. That anger is due to his past; he is angry with the
past.
Just today I saw a B.B.C. interview with Krishnamurti – that was my first acquaintance with how
he looks – and I was simply shattered! Again, it was the same story I was telling you yesterday
– the same story. He has no charisma at all, no impact. I was sorry to see the interview. I know
he is enlightened, but it would have been better if I had not seen his face, his gestures, his eyes,
because you cannot find in anything even a shadow of enlightenment. The luggage has reached –
the passenger has got lost somewhere on the way.
I still say he is enlightened because I have read thousands of enlightened people’s words –
Krishnamurti’s words are far more accurate in describing the experience. And the way he revolted
is perfectly in tune with enlightenment. But there is a difference between revolt and rebellion, a very
delicate difference.
Revolt is a reaction.
Rebellion is not a reaction, it is an action.
Please try to see the difference: reaction is bound to remain concerned with the situation it was the
reaction to. That’s what keeps dragging him backwards. He cannot drop those shadows – which
are nothing but shadows – but he is surrounded by them and he is still reacting to them. While he is
speaking to you, it is not you that he is speaking to: you are just an excuse to condemn those dead
people who have done something wrong to him.
I think he would have become enlightened anyway, if not in this life then in another life. But if he had
been on his own then there would have been a totally different quality to it. Then it would have been
an action, not a reaction. Then it would have been a rebellion.
I am not reacting to anything. Whatever I am saying, I am saying not as a reaction to something
but as my experience. If it goes against something, that is a separate matter; that is a side effect.
For Krishnamurti, what he is saying is the side effect; his original concern remains to destroy those
people and what they did to him. He is ninety years old but those shadows are around him; and
because of those shadows he has not been able to flower into a charismatic being. That’s what I
saw today: he has no charisma at all.
From Personality to Individuality 128 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
Ninety years is a long life. And beginning his career at nine – since the age of nine he has been
in the spiritual world for eighty-one years continually. Perhaps nobody ever before has been in the
spiritual world that long. But eighty-one years... and that magnet is still missing.
He has been speaking all around the world; he must be one of the most prominent speakers in the
whole history of man. Jesus was confined to Judea, Buddha was confined to Bihar, but Krishnamurti
has been roaming around the world for all these years. He has only special places where he speaks,
for example in India: New Delhi, Bombay, Varanasi and Adyar.
I know about his Bombay meetings because I lived for four years in Bombay, and my sannyasins
were going to his meetings and reporting to me. One thing: not more than three thousand people
listen to him in Bombay. In Bombay he has been speaking for his whole life, and he comes only one
time a year, for two or three weeks. In a week he speaks only twice, or at the most thrice; still there
are only three thousand people. And the strangest thing is that you will find almost the same people,
most of them very old because for forty years they have been listening to him – the same old fogeys.
Strange: for forty years you have been listening to this man, and neither he seems to get anywhere
nor you seem to get anywhere. It has become just a habit: it seems that he has to come to Bombay
and you have to listen to him, every year. By and by old people go on dying and a few new people
replace them, but the number has never gone beyond three thousand. The same is the situation in
New Delhi; the same is the situation in Varanasi... because I have been speaking at his school in
Varanasi.
At his school there I asked, ”How many people come here?”
They said, ”Fifteen hundred at the most, but they are always the same people.”
What impact! And this man has made an arduous effort. Jesus, in three years, created the whole
of Christianity – almost the biggest religion in the world, rightly or wrongly. But the day Krishnamurti
dies, soon after – except from your Krishnamurti Lake – his name will disappear. I could see the
reason why, today.
He is not a man who goes within you, bypassing your intellect, so that your intellect may be struggling
but he has already captured your heart – and that is where you are. Intellect may try a little fight,
doubt this and that, but if the heart is captured, the intellect is poor.
The intellect has to follow the heart. Yes, if before something reaches your heart the inte]lect catches
hold of it, then it can spoil the whole thing.
A charismatic personality means a person who can reach directly to your heart without your intellect
being even aware of what is happening, what is transpiring.
By the time the intellect comes to know that the heart is throbbing with some new joy, it is too late.
Intellect cannot undo anything in the heart, that is impossible.
Intellect cannot move backwards. Just as you cannot move backwards in time, intellect cannot move
backwards towards the heart: it is just at the gate.
From Personality to Individuality 129 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
The charismatic personality somehow enters the gate while the watchman is either away or asleep
or is lost in some thoughts.
The moment it hears bells ringing in the heart then the watchman wakes up; but it is too late,
somebody has gone in.
And the watchman cannot go in, there is no way – movement backwards for the intellect is not in the
nature of things. Yes, if intellect can catch you at the gate, then the heart will never come to know.
And it is the heart that transforms you, connects you, creates a golden bridge.
Intellect is a very superficial thing.
Today, seeing Krishnamurti’s interview I could just feel sad for the man. His whole life he has been
working, taking immense trouble, but the result is nil. The reason is not hard to find: he has no
charismatic vibe, he has no aura. He is surrounded by past shadows, he is overshadowed by them.
He is anti-orthodox, anti-tradition, anti-convention; but his whole energy has become involved in this
hatred.
It is a hate relationship with the past, but it is a relationship all the same. He has not been able to cut
himself totally from the past. Perhaps that would have released his energy; it would have opened
his charismatic qualities, but that has not been the case.
The people who become interested in him are mere intellectuals remember, I say mere intellectuals
– who don’t know they have a heart too. These intellectuals become interested in him, but these
intellectuals are not the people who are going to be transformed. They are just sophists, arguers;
and Krishnamurti is unnecessarily wasting his time with these intellectual people of the world.
Remember, I am not saying intelligent people of the world – that is a different category. I am saying
mere intellectuals who love to play with words, logic... it is a kind of gymnastics. And Krishnamurti
just goes on feeding their intellect.
He thinks that he is destroying their orthodoxy, that he is destroying their tradition, that he is
destroying their personality and helping them to discover their individuality. He is wrong, he is not
destroying anything. He is just fulfilling their doubts, supporting their skepticism, making them more
articulate – they can argue against anything. You may be able to argue against everything in the
world, but is your heart for anything, just one single thing?
You can be against everything – that won’t change you.
Are you for something too?
That something is not coming from him.
He just goes on arguing.
And the trouble is – this is why I feel sorry for him – that what he is doing could have been of
tremendous help, but it has not helped anybody. I have not come across a single person – and
From Personality to Individuality 130 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
I have met thousands of Krishnamurti-ites, but not a single one of them is transformed. Yes,
they are very vocal. You cannot argue with them, you cannot defeat them as far as argument
is concerned. Krishnamurti has sharpened their intellect for years and now they are just parrots
repeating Krishnamurti.
This is the paradox of Krishnamurti’s whole life. He wanted them to be individuals on their own, and
what has he succeeded in doing? They are just parrots, intellectual parrots.
This man, Raosaheb Patvardhan, who wanted me to see Krishnamurti, was one of his old
colleagues. He came to know me just in 1965 when I spoke in Poona; he lived in Poona. He is
no longer alive. I asked Raosaheb Patvardhan – he was a very respected man – ”You have been
so close to Krishnamurti all your life, but what is the gain? I don’t want to hear that tradition is bad,
conditioning is bad, and it has to be dropped – I know all that. Put that all aside and just tell me:
what have you gained?”
And that old man, who died just six or seven months afterwards, told me, ”As far as gaining is
concerned, I have never thought about it and nobody ever asked about it.”
But I said, ”Then what is the point? Whether you are for tradition or you are against tradition, either
way you are tethered to tradition. When are you going to open your wings and fly? Somebody is
sitting on a tree because he loves the tree; somebody else is sitting on the same tree because he
hates the tree, and he will not leave the tree unless he destroys it. One goes on watering it, the
other goes on destroying it, but both are confined, tethered, chained to the tree.”
I asked him, ”When are you going to open your wings and fly? The sky is there. You have both
forgotten the sky. And what has the tree to do with it anyway?”
That’s why I remembered the incident of my celibate professor and my saying: ”I don’t even hate
her.”
I don’t hate any religion.
I simply state the fact:
Religions are nothing but crimes against humanity.
But I am not saying it with any hate in me. I have no love for them, I have no hate for them: I simply
state whatsoever is the fact.
So you will find much similarity between what I am saying and what J. Krishnamurti is saying, but
there is a tremendous difference. And the difference is that while I am talking to your intellect, I am
working somewhere else... hence the gaps. Hence the discourse becomes too long! Any idiot can
repeat my discourse in one hour – not me, because I have to do something else too.
So while you are waiting for my words, that is the right time:
You are engaged in your head, waiting.
From Personality to Individuality 131 Osho
CHAPTER 7. CONDITIONING: SOCIALLY-SANCTIONED CHILD ABUSE
And I am stealing your heart.
I am a thief!
From Personality to Individuality 132 Osho
CHAPTER 8
Rajneeshism: womb for transformation
6 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
PLEASE DESCRIBE AN ORTHODOX RAJNEESHEE.
IT is a contradiction in terms, but I will not dispose of the question so easily. I will try to squeeze as
much juice out of it as possible.
Yes, there is some way to define the orthodox Rajneeshee. It is going to be a strange definition
because two terms which are contradictory to each other are used together. But still I feel it is
significant.
The first quality of an orthodox Rajneeshee will be:
He will not be orthodox – in no possible sense, in no direction.
He will be totally committed to the spirit of rebellion.
He will fight against everything that is bad but that still goes on burdening human consciousness;
things which should have been thrown away long ago.
But because of a strange habit of the human mind, many dead things go on keeping their grip on
you; and the more ancient they are, the deeper and stronger is their grip on you. The reason has to
be understood.
133
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
Before anything like education came into existence, there was only one way to learn, and that was
from the people who were experienced. Naturally, the older generation would teach the younger
generation. The older generation had experience, and experience was the only school; there was
no alternative. The younger generation had to accept whatever the older generation was saying;
there was no way to bypass the older generation.
The older generation was the only source of knowledge, hence the older people became respected.
The older they were, the more respected, because the greater was their experience, the longer was
their experience – and it gave them a certain authority.
There was no possible authority to compete with it, the older generation had the whole monopoly.
Because of this situation – and this must have prevailed for thousands of years – the mind has got
the habit, and habits die really hard. And habits which have been accumulated over thousands of
years become engrained. They become a kind of program in you.
I was criticizing Mahatma Gandhi my whole life but no Gandhian replied to my arguments. I cannot
blame them, because there was no argument on their side: whatsoever they would have said would
have looked stupid – and they knew it. In private they had admitted to me, ”What you are saying is
right, but that you are saying it is not right. Just to say something against a man who is worshipped
by millions of people is not right; you are hurting their feelings.”
I said, ”Do you mean I have to lie not to hurt their feelings? Do you mean I have to stop saying
the truth? – and Gandhi’s whole life can be described as a deep search for truth? He entitled his
autobiography, THE STORY OF MY EXPERIMENTS WITH TRUTH... a man who thinks that his
whole life is an experiment with truth. And you are his intimate followers, you have lived with him:
you have got some nerve to tell me that I should not say it even though it is true.”
In public, not a single Gandhian had the courage to accept what I was saying, but they were not
able to find any argument against me either; so they found one thing which in India is tremendously
appealing. All the Gandhians all over the country started saying that I was too young, inexperienced;
that when I became old enough, I would not say such things. Even Morarji Desai....
He thinks himself to be now the only living successor of Mahatma Gandhi, and he enjoys one thing
very much.... Gandhi was called Bapu all over India. Bapu means father, but it is far sweeter than
father, closer to daddy or even dad. If it is to be translated exactly I will have to use Jesus’ word
for father, abba. That is Aramaic, and it has exactly the same meaning as bapu. Bapu is a Gujarati
term. Morarji Desai is also Gujarati; and now he is old enough, ninety, it is time he should be called
Bapu – because that’s what Gandhi was called by the whole country.
Morarji Desai was deputy prime minister when he criticized me, and this was the only criticism that I
was too young. After a few years, when he was no longer in the government, he wanted to meet me.
He wanted me to help him throw Indira Gandhi from power, and he wanted my advice about what
should be done. When I went to see him – it was not like him but now he was in a difficult situation
– he was standing at the gate to receive me. That was not like him – I had seen him before, when
he was in power.
He took me by my hand into his house and made me comfortable. A few of my hairs had started
becoming grey, so he said, ”Last time your hair was not grey.”
From Personality to Individuality 134 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
I said, ”What to do? To prove myself right I am making a tremendous effort to make my hair grey.
Unless my hair is grey, I am wrong.”
He could not understand. I said, ”Let me remind you. You criticized me when you were deputy prime
minister of the country, saying that I was too young. Since then I have been trying to become older.
And I still have the same arguments – more strongly, because now I am more experienced. In a way
you were right, but as far as I can see, the older I become, the sharper my arguments will be. I don’t
see any hope that I can ever accept stupidities – whether they are propounded by Mahatma Gandhi
or by God Himself.”
Morarji Desai was very much embarrassed, and I said to him, ”If age is an argument, then have
you heard my remark? – that ’Morarji Desai has become senile. If he were a little bit younger he
would understand what I am saying. It needs intelligence, and he is senile. And the more senile he
becomes, the more idiotic and stupid will be the ideas that have a grip over his mind.’ ”
But strangely enough, Kaka Kalelkar, Morarji Desai, Vinoba Bhave, Shankarrao Deo – all great
Gandhians in India – used the same argument, that I was young. As if to be young is to commit a
crime, as if to be young is enough to be wrong, and nothing else is needed.
I told Shankarrao Deo, ”How old was Jesus Christ when he was crucified? I am older than him – he
was only thirty-three. According to your argument, all that he said should be just thrown away, it is
just meaningless. What meaning can it have? A man who is just thirty-three, what authority can he
have... so inexperienced?
”But,” I said, ”you may be willing to throw out Jesus Christ because you are not a Christian, so let
me remind you how old Shankara, the greatest Hindu philosopher was. He was also thirty-three
when he died. If age is a determining factor, then Shankara should never be mentioned again – and
Shankara has the greatest hold on the Hindu mind.”
No, when it is in your favor – when the young are just following the old without having any skepticism
– then their youth is not to be even mentioned. Their youth comes to be questioned only when they
are skeptical, when they start raising doubts against the older people.
In ancient times it was impossible... because young people could not give an equal weight to what
they were saying; their experience was so small. Now the whole thing has changed, so much so that
I can say that it has moved one-hundred-and-eighty degrees. Because of the educational systems,
now experience is not the only way to know; in fact it is a very long way to know. By education you
can know by a shortcut. What a man may be able to know in ninety years of his life, you can know
within one year.
Whatever Bertrand Russell has written in a long life of almost one century, you can read within six
months. It actually happened.... Bertrand Russell had a student, Ludwig Wittgenstein, a German,
who went through all the books of Bertrand Russell – which is not difficult. Bertrand Russell has
written everything that occurred in his mind – he was one of the greatest intellects of any time – but
he had to write all that in a long life.
Ludwig Wittgenstein was a young man. He went through all Bertrand Russell’s books because
Russell was going to be his teacher and he wanted to be absolutely acquainted with what went on in
From Personality to Individuality 135 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
the mind of this man. The day he entered Russell’s class he knew much more than Bertrand Russell
knew. Bertrand Russell was ancient; Wittgenstein was very young, but he knew more, because
he knew all that Bertrand Russell had written and much more that others had written; much that
enemies of Bertrand Russell had written. And he found many fallacies and many loopholes in
Bertrand Russell’s writings.
Bertrand Russell was simply shocked, but he was an authentic man, an honest man. He accepted
that: ”Ludwig Wittgenstein, although my student, knows far more than I know because he went
by a shortcut and I had to go by a long route. He went by a shortcut, became acquainted with
everything that I had written, and started arguing against me in such a way that only a tremendously
experienced person could.”
Bertrand Russell was so impressed in his few days’ contact with Ludwig Wittgenstein that he said to
Wittgenstein, ”Don’t waste your time, you have nothing to learn from me. You already know more.”
Wittgenstein used to write a few notes in the class. Bertrand Russell just asked him, ”I would like
to see your notes.” And when he saw those notes he said, ”These notes are so significant that they
should be published.”
But Wittgenstein said, ”I am not writing for publication, I was just noting down any idea that was
coming to me. This book is very raw, it is not a book for publication.”
Bertrand Russell said, ”Publish it as it is, and I am going to write the introduction for it.”
Those notes have been published and they proved revolutionary. They are just fragments, because
they were not written as an essay or an article – just any ideas that came to him. But because
the book, TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS, became so famous – it was only a tract, but
it became so famous that no other book in philosophy is as famous in this century – and was so
profound, it gave an idea to Wittgenstein. He never wrote any other books in a different fashion – it
became his style just to write notes, fragments.
The fame of the book proved that when you write an essay your idea has to be spread all over the
essay and it loses its intensity, its sharpness. It becomes more understandable but less penetrating.
When it is just like a maxim, a bare, naked statement with no decorations around it, it simply hits
deeper, although it will be understood by only very few people – people who have the capacity to
see in the seed the whole tree, which is not yet existent but is only a potentiality.
And a man can see in the seed the whole tree.
Wittgenstein’s statements are just like seeds. You will have to figure them out, what potential they
have. He does not give you any clue, he simply puts the seed in front of you and goes ahead putting
down other seeds. He never tries to connect them; you will have to connect them.
To read Wittgenstein is really an experience. To read anybody else is like having the food chewed
for you and then you eating it. With Wittgenstein, it seems he is simply placing the food in front of
you: you have to chew it, you have to digest it. You have to find out what it means.
From Personality to Individuality 136 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
Ordinarily the philosopher tries to convince you of what he means. He tries to prevent you going
astray from his meaning, and he gives you the whole package with all the details. But he leaves
nothing for you, no homework for you. He is not helping your intelligence; he is, in fact, destroying
you. When you start living on liquid food, soon you will be incapable of digesting solid food. The
liquid food will destroy your capacity to digest the solid food.
But Bertrand Russell didn’t say to Wittgenstein, ”You are too young” – no. And that should be the
attitude of a genuine thinker.
Education has brought in a new methodology. Within days you can read, just sitting in a library, in a
university, all that took Pythagoras his whole life to collect; and it is all available to you. So when a
boy comes home from the university... trouble has arisen in the world. In the past it was always the
father who was right, the grandfather was even more right. Now it is not so; it is now the young man
who is right, because even if the father had been to university, that was thirty years before, and in
thirty years so much has changed.
When I entered the university to study psychology, my professor was an old man, well-studied, but
all that he knew and had studied was half-a-century old. Those names that he used to quote had
been completely forgotten in the world of psychology. Who bothers about Woodworth? And when I
told him, ”Woodworth? Are you mad or something? It was perfectly okay before the first world war,
but two world wars have happened. Have you been asleep or what? – Woodworth is no longer any
authority.” But when my professor was at university Woodworth was the authority. I told him, ”You
should read Assagioli.”
He said, ”Assagioli? Who is this fellow?”
I said, ”If you don’t know Assagioli, resign! – because psychology has passed from Freud to Adler, to
Jung, to Reich; it has come to Assagioli. Assagioli preaches psychosynthesis; Freud was teaching
psychoanalysis, it is just the opposite.” And I told him, ”When I came to study psychology, I did not
come here to study some rotten old stuff which is no longer relevant. You died with Woodworth!
What are you doing here? You don’t know the name of Assagioli? – and if you don’t know about
psychosynthesis you are out of date.”
I told him, ”You remind me of a madman who lives in front of my house. He comes every day to me,
early in the morning when I am just taking tea, for the newspaper. I go on giving him any newspaper
– one month old, two months old – and he takes it joyously and reads it happily. He never bothers
about the date.
”I asked the madman,’You are so interested in newspapers, but one thing is strange about it: you
don’t bother about dates.’ The madman said,’I am interested in news – when it happened, who
cares? And what does it matter that it happened last year or two years before? It happened, that is
enough, and I enjoy it.”’
I told this old professor, ”I will come to your house and sort out all the old stuff you are reading.”
He said, ”No, you should not come to my house, because you will throw everything away. The way
you are talking.... I was really thinking about my reading room, because you will throw away all my
books; they all belong to my student days.”
From Personality to Individuality 137 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
I told him, ”Then you will have to get up to date, otherwise you sit in the class and I start teaching.
If you are not ready to get up to date, then why bother? You sit – at least you will be learning
something. I don’t see that I can learn anything from you. If Woodworth is the end of psychology to
you, then....”
He said, ”I will try my best.” He was a nice man, and he accepted the fact that it was true – that many
professors would be benefited if they could accept that after they leave the university they never
read, they never go to the library. In fact I went to the library and checked: ”How many professors
come to the library?” And I was surprised that the librarian said, ”Professors? The library is meant
for the students – professors don’t come.”
I said, ”This is something weird. Professors have to be acquainted every day with what is happening,
because things are moving so fast, and they are stuck thirty years, forty years back.” In these years
so much progress has happened in knowledge that you cannot compare these thirty years with the
past three thousand years. What has not happened in three thousand years has happened in thirty
years; and what has happened in three years has not happened in the past thirty years.
You can see the fact that now scientific discoveries are not published in book form, they are published
in periodicals as papers, for the simple reason that by the time you finish the book it will be already
out of date. The book will take time, perhaps one year, to write properly in the old format – giving
all notes, footnotes, appendix – and it will take one year or two years to finish it. But by that time
somebody else may have already published papers which are far more profound than your book. So
the scientist today rushes immediately to publish whatsoever he has found, in the smallest paper, in
a periodical. One never knows what is going to happen tomorrow.
So now the younger man knows more than the older. The fresher your knowledge, the better. But
it was not so in the past. It is not yet so in the uneducated countries – for example in India where
only two percent of the people are really well educated. They say eight percent of the people are
educated; but six percent are ”educated” because they can write their signature, nothing else. Even
if we count those, then too ninety-two percent of the people in the villages are uneducated.
In the villages it is still the routine: the father knows; the son has to accept it – and the grandfather
knows even more. The older the person, the more respectable, because he is more wise. It is not
strange that all the religions paint God as a very old, ancient man. Have you ever seen God painted
as a young man in blue jeans? That will not suit Him, it will look insulting, but really that should be
the case today.
The way you have been painting God in the past was okay; at that time the older was the wiser –
naturally you could not paint God as a young man. But now, the older is simply out of date; the
younger, the more up-to-date, is more correct, closer to the truth.
If you want God to be closer to the truth, put Him in blue jeans. It will look a little odd because He
has never been in blue jeans. He may feel a little difficulty, but what to do? – things have changed.
But the mind goes on keeping, somewhere deep inside, the program.
My sannyasin has to be absolutely unorthodox.
From Personality to Individuality 138 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
I will not say anti-orthodox, for the simple reason that if you are anti-orthodox.... Perhaps in
America I should not say anti-orthodox; here they say ”ant-eye-orthodox”! I cannot say that, it is
so ludicrous. ”Sem-eye-automatic weapons”.... These Yankees are doing strange things with a
beautiful language. No, I will continue my own way.
I will not call my people anti-orthodox, because if you are anti – , somehow you are still attached. It
is as an enemy, not as a friend, but there is a relationship. It is not of love but of hate, and hate is a
far more binding relationship than love.
Have you observed that love is very momentary? – comes and goes just like a breeze. It is here, and
you feel so full of love towards someone that you cannot imagine that this love can ever disappear.
In such moments people get romantic, start saying things which are only allowed for mad people or
poets. But that moment is so overwhelming, they start saying, ”I will love you forever!” And it is true
– for the moment. They are not lying, that’s what they are feeling in the moment, that: ”If there are
other lives I cannot conceive of loving anybody else than you.”
Still the person is not lying, he is absolutely honest. He is so full of love that he feels this is how it is
going to be, that life is going to be too short to fulfill this love, to share this love. But he is not aware
that it is just a breeze which comes from one side, from one door, and moves on to the other side,
to the other door, leaving you in the same state as you were before, again back on the earth.
Those wings had suddenly appeared, and you were flying high – ”higher and higher, Osho, higher
and higher.” Those wings... then you look all around. and they are not there. Suddenly you feel
lower and lower, lower and lower. You are not even on plain ground, you are falling into a ditch!
Love is momentary – it fades.
But hate seems to be far stronger.
You fall in love, you fall out of love.
But once you fall in hate....
It is rarely heard that a man has fallen out of hate. He is stuck, glued. Hate has some force, it keeps
you glued to it. Enemies remain enemies for generations.
In my neighborhood – and neighbors are the worst enemies; where else can you find better enemies
than your neighbors? Perhaps it was an afterthought of Jesus Christ’s.... First he said, ”Love your
enemies as yourself.” Then later on he said, ”Love your neighbors as yourself.” That is a second
thought, because neighbors are really the enemies. You don’t have to go far away in search of
enemies, you find them just by your side.
So the family that lived by the side of my house had been my family’s enemy for generations. I was
prohibited from going into their compound, into their garden, and I was not to play with their children
as ”they are our enemies.”
I simply said, ”They may be your enemies. I have not even been friends of theirs, how can I be their
enemy? At least first let me get acquainted.”
From Personality to Individuality 139 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
My father said, ”You should not argue about it. We have been fighting in the courts, we have been
fighting physically... and this has gone on. This enmity is something that has become almost sacred.”
I said, ”I am no longer a part of it. I am going to play with their children and I am going into their
garden, because they have more beautiful mangos than you have. They have such a beautiful....”
There is a special type of well that is made in India.
I don’t know whether it is made in any other country or not. It is an old type. On one side you can
draw water by a bucket with a rope, but on the other side it has steps. It is called a baodi. So if by
chance you don’t have a bucket and a rope, you can go down by the steps and get the water.
Particularly in places by the side of the road in a jungle, they will make a baodi, not a well, because
sometimes a traveler may be thirsty but may not have the means to reach the water, so both
possibilities have to be made available to him. If he can pull the water out, that is best, that is
preferable. The alternative is only for an emergency, because people going close to the water may
dirty it, may start drinking just with their hands. So to go down is not encouraged very much. But I
enjoyed this way because then I could have a good bath in our neighbor’s well.
I said to my father, ”Your well is simply a well, and they have a baodi. Your enmity, you take care
of; your forefathers have taken care of it – I am not interested in it. And they have nice children
and they are good people, why should I be inimical to them? We don’t know in what circumstances
your forefathers and their forefathers became enemies. And what has that to do with us? – we
have never fought. And whenever I have gone there they have always welcomed me joyously, for
the simple reason that they could not believe it:’It has not happened for centuries between the two
families.”’ I was the first to break the barrier.
The neighbors were very happy; they said, ”We wanted to break the barrier, but who should take the
initiative? They would seem to be weak.”
I said, ”I am not coming to you out of any weakness. I cannot understand what kind of intelligence
you and my family have. You don’t even know the names of the people who started this fight.” –
neither my father knew, nor they knew who was the first – and you go on fighting. It has become
almost a religion to you.
”I am not coming out of any weakness, I am coming from strength. I have come to tell you that it
is sheer stupidity to prolong this hatred so long. Nobody prolongs love so long, so why hate? And
moreover I am not interested in you, I am interested in the mangos, in your baodi; and I have to
enter this compound. Whether you are enemies or friends, that is your business.”
I told my father, ”Nobody can prevent me from going there. And they have received me, welcomed
me, and said,’We always wanted to break this thing, but who should take the initiative?’ I think
anybody who has more intelligence should take the initiative, the stupid will lag behind.”
And slowly, slowly, because my family could not force me – they knew the more they forced me, the
more I would be there. I told my father, ”If you insist too much I will start sleeping there, I will start
eating there; and they really have invited me.”
From Personality to Individuality 140 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
He said, ”Okay, I won’t insist on anything, but don’t eat anything offered by them. They are enemies
– they can poison you.”
I said, ”Forget all about it. They are nice people. I know them more than you do or your forefathers
did. I am going there every day, they are so nice. They have not even prevented me from jumping
in their well, just for the simple reason that’this is the first person from the other family to enter our
compound; let him have a bath in the baodi. Don’t prevent him – it doesn’t look good. After so many
generations, the first person has entered, has dared to.’
”And don’t be worried about me being poisoned, because I have already eaten things from them. I
have not told you because I knew this is what you would say. So first I had to eat and see that there
was no poison, and there was nobody interested in poisoning anybody. They don’t prevent me from
taking their mangos and their other fruits, simply for the reason that this is the first person from our
family who has come into their compound. I am going to invite their children into our compound, into
our garden, and I would expect you to be at least gentlemanly.”
And when I started bringing their children, of course my family was nice to them. How can you be
against small children who have never done anything, who have just come into the world?
But hate has a very long life.
Love has a very short life.
Perhaps that’s the way things are.
There are so many roses in the morning, but by the evening their petals have started falling, they
are disappearing. But the rock? It was there in the morning, it will be there in the evening, it will be
there again the next morning. Many roses will come and go and the rock will remain.
Hate is something rocky.
Love is something like a flower.
So I will not say, then, that my people have to be anti-orthodox, anti-traditional, anti-conventional.
No, they have to be unorthodox, unconventional, untraditional.
Unorthodox means you are not related to orthodoxy in any way, positive or negative. You are
indifferent, you couldn’t care less. You are not for, you are not against, you are simply not interested
– because ”for” and ”against” are just different sides of your interest.
So an orthodox Rajneeshee will be unorthodox in every possible way.
His life will be a life of continuous rebellion.
Let me repeat: continuous rebellion.
Rebellion is a continuum.
From Personality to Individuality 141 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
It is something like a river that goes on flowing.
It is not like a water tank.
That’s the difference between revolution and rebellion.
Revolution is like a water tank – the French revolution, the Russion revolution, the Chinese
revolution... Just look at what happened. The Russian revolution happened, but it is not a continuum.
it happened in 1917, then what happened to it? It also died in 1917. Since then there has been no
revolution in Russia.
Since then revolution has become their orthodoxy, since then revolution has become their tradition,
since then revolution has become their status quo. it is not flowing, it is not moving: it is stuck
at 1917. They pay respect to that date every year. They pay homage to the great revolution that
happened in 1917. What kind of revolutionaries are these, who look backwards?
Even God is not so much of a reactionary as the Russian communist is today.
You can see it clearly: God has not given you twe eyes at the back of your head. A right God – right
according to all the orthodoxies – should have really given you eyes behind your head, not in front,
because what use are your eyes in front? You have to see backwards, not forwards.
It happened in India: a man with his friend was going from Jabalpur to Nagpur – it is not very far,
just the distance from here to Portland – on a motorbike. It was cold on the motorbike and the winds
were blowing against them. So the man who was driving the bike had a an idea; he turned his coat
back-to-front because the winds were too cold, and this way was more protective. But they had an
accident, perhaps because of that coat, and he was wearing a helmet...
Somebody was coming from the opposite direction – a sardarji, a Sikh driver. Ninety percent of
drivers in India are Sikh sardar drivers; I don’t know why they have chosen that profession. in the
night, seeing a man sitting on a bike backwards, the sardar lost his nerve. He could not hold his
steering wheel properly, and there was an accident. And that was not the end of the whole thing,
there is still something more – this is just the beginning!
The sardar got out to see what happened. He found this motorcyclist and thought, ”My God! it
seems in the accident his head has gone round the other way.” Sardars are sardars: he forcibly
turned the man’s head according to the direction of the coat. The man was then still alive, but now
no longer. He had tried to somehow get out of the hands of the sardar, but you can’t get out of
the hands of a sardar – they are strong people and absolute idiots – and he wouldn’t listen to the
motorcyclist. he said to him, ”You keep quiet!” The sardar turned the man’s head, and he was quiet
forever.
I reached there at that point – I was coming from Nagpur – and I saw what was happening. I asked
the sardar, ”What is the matter, sardarji?”
He said, ”Strange! First, this man was riding backwards. That created the accident, because I
completely lost my senses. It happened just in a single moment. And then when I got out of my
From Personality to Individuality 142 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
truck to help these people, I saw one man unconscious and this other man... his head must have
been turned around.”
I went to see. I said, ”Sardarji, you have killed the man! It was not his head but his coat that was
turned around. And it is simple: it is so windy and the wind is blowing in this direction. This poor
man must have turned his coat around.”
The sardar said, ”Is that so? Then I should have changed the coat rather than change the direction
of his head... because he was alive and I told him to shut up! And then I tried to tell him,’Now you
can open your mouth, you can speak. Say what you want, where I should take you in my truck; I can
take you. Forgive me that I told you to shut up’ – but he did not speak at all.”
I said, ”Now he is dead. Now don’t bother him anymore! And don’t tell any of this story to anyone;
otherwise you will be caught, because you have done two things – the accident, and the greater
accident that you turned his head around.”
God has given you eyes to look forwards.
And the people who are for tradition or against tradition are always looking backwards.
J. Krishnamurti is anti-orthodox, anti-traditional, anti-conventional. That’s where my differences
with him are: I am unorthodox, untraditional, unconventional. So an orthodox Rajneeshee – and
remember, whenever you write ”orthodox Rajneeshee,” put it in inverted commas because it is a
contradiction in terms – will be a continuous rebellion. Not just a revolution that happens once and
is finished: then it itself becomes a tradition.
Jesus was a revolutionary, but Christianity is not. Buddha was a revolutionary, but Buddhism is not,
because the revolution happened twenty-five centuries past. We have left it far behind.
Now the Christian is as much orthodox as the Jews who crucified Jesus. If Jesus comes again he
is sure to be crucified by the Vatican. This time, of course, the scene will not be in Jerusalem, the
scene will be in the Vatican; but a crucifixion is certain.
It happened: I was staying with a Christian family in Hyderabad. The whole day I was engaged
in meetings and interviews. In the night when I was just going to sleep, my friend, who was much
older than me, said to me, ”The whole day I could not find you and I did not want to disturb your
appointments, but I have a problem. It is late at night and you are going to rest – forgive me – but I
have to tell you.
”My young son was a Jesus freak. Nobody took it seriously, and there was nothing wrong in it, that
he was continuaUy reading the BIBLE and quoting the BIBLE. We thought that it was just a phase
and it would go, but unfortunately now the Jesus freak is no more a Jesus freak, he has become
Jesus Christ!
”For two months now we have been really concerned. Up to being a Jesus freak it was okay: You
read Jesus’ sayings – we are Christians – you worship Jesus.... That too is okay, although it was
getting a little weird because twenty-four hours a day of ”Jesus, Jesus....” We are also Christians;
From Personality to Individuality 143 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
on Sunday we go to church for one hour, and that’s enough. Jesus is satisfied with one hour every
Sunday. You don’t have to devote your whole life to him; there are other things also to be done. And
we cannot do miracles – turn stones into bread, water into wine, so we have to earn our bread and
do other things. One hour is enough, all that we can devote.
”But still we tolerated it, thinking that this phase would pass – just the foolishness of a young man
who has become obsessed with an idea – but now this is not a phase: he has become Jesus Christ.
Now he is no longer quoting Jesus Christ, he simply speaks on his own authority. Now he has
become a laughingstock.
”He is standing on the crossroads declaring that he is Jesus Christ, and people laugh and urchins
throw stones. Now we are really concerned and sad. His whole career is finished, and you cannot
make a career out of being Jesus Christ. Everybody knows what happened to Jesus! – even he
was not able to make a career out of it, so how can my son make a career out of it?
”Who is going to give this man a job? He is a postgraduate, a first-class post-graduate – he could
get a good job – but for Jesus Christ, even if he is a first class, nobody.... The moment they hear that
he thinks he is Jesus Christ they will say,’It will be difficult, because we need an assistant manager,
and Jesus Christ as assistant manager? The place is not worthy of him!’ So what to do?”
I said, ”Tomorrow morning I will have to talk with Jesus Christ – what else to do? Let me meet him.”
I knew the young man – I had stayed in the family before. And I knew that he was a freak, but he had
never bothered me, although I was staying in the family. He knew that if he was a freak, then I was
a double freak! So once and for all I had settled it: ”You remember – with me this BIBLE and this
Jesus Christ won’t do; you better torture others. Moreover, I am a guest in your house, you behave
like a host.” So he had understood it perfectly well, but that was when he was only a freak – now he
was Jesus Christ.
I said to his father, ”First let me be acquainted... what is the situation?” So the next morning, rather
than his father bringing him to me, I went into his room and I said, ”Hello, Jesus Christ.”
He said, ”You said ’Jesus Christ!’”
I said. ”Yes.”
He said, ”But nobody believes me – not my father, not my mother, even my friends have left me.
Since I became Jesus Christ I don’t have any friends.”
I said, ”You can rely upon me. I don’t like freaks, but Jesus Christ.... It is a great idea! You come
with me. Now we can talk, now we are in the same boat.”
He said, ”What do you mean?”
I said, ”Just come. We are in the same boat; you will understand what I mean.” I tried in many ways,
but he was very defensive and very alert that maybe his father was behind me, working through me
and trying to persuade him to come down and just be a Jesus freak: ”Now, this is too much. This is
From Personality to Individuality 144 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
the twentieth century, and it will be difficult.... Even in Jesus’ time is was very difficult, this time it is
going to be more difficult.”
But he wouldn’t listen to anything. Then his father came, and I said to his father, ”I think he IS Jesus
Christ. Now what he needs is crucifixion.”
The young man said, ”What!”
I said, ”Without crucifixion you won’t come to your senses.”
He said, ”Crucifixion!”
The father also was shocked when I said he needed crucifixion, but I said, ”Make arrangements.”
And the young man said, ”Are you serious?”
I said, ”I am always serious; and I told you that if you are a Jesus freak, I am double that. If you are
Jesus Christ, I am double that too. I will see that you are crucified; and until the resurrection I am
going to remain here.”
He just went to his father and he said, ”Forgive me, I am just a Jesus freak. I don’t want to be
crucified because I don’t think I will be able to resurrect. That is too much trouble.”
For two thousand years Christians have been looking backwards; for two thousand five hundred
years Buddhists have been looking backwards. If you look around the world you will see everybody’s
eyes are turned backwards; and do you know, we are always moving forwards. Our legs are going
forwards and our eyes are focused backwards.
Even for a man like J. Krishnamurti it makes no difference: Your eyes still remain focused backwards.
Now you are an enemy; first you were a friend. But to me it makes no difference because your eyes
are still looking backwards.
Hence I prefer the word rebellion – because revolutions have happened but they have always
become static, they freeze too quickly. A new orthodoxy is created, a new convention is created:
new gods, new heaven, new hell – everything is new, but soon it starts becoming old.
Now sixty years have passed since the Russian revolution; more than sixty years, now it is a sixty-
year-old tradition. Marx, Engels and Lenin are their trinity; DAS KAPITAL is their BIBLE, their
KORAN, their GITA.
And strangely this similarity is such that one cannot believe it. Neither the Mohammedan reads the
KORAN... he worships it but does not read it. Who has the time to read the KORAN? And it is good
in a way that he does not read it, because if he reads it he won’t worship it because there is nothing
in it worth worshipping.
You can either worship it or you can understand it. Once you understand it, it is finished; there is
nothing much in it to understand. So the religious priesthood is not interested in your understanding
the KORAN, the BIBLE, the GITA, no: they are interested that you go on worshipping them.
From Personality to Individuality 145 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
This is fossilized revolution.
Yes, those words spoken by Jesus had fire in them.
They were words on fire.
But in the BIBLE do you think you will find fire?
It would have burned the BIBLE long ago.
In the BIBLE you will find a hairlock your mother has been keeping from the days when your father
used to love her and she had cut a few of his hairs. They are in the BIBLE – where else to keep
them? The BIBLE is the safest place; even a thief is not going to steal it.
You will find strange things in BIBLES. Your daughter or your sister may be keeping her love letters
in the BIBLE, because that is the best place. Neither the father opens it nor the mother opens it;
nobody ever opens it. Phone numbers which are very important and secret and which you don’t
want everybody to know – keep them in the BIBLE. The BIBLE is a great safe deposit with no lock.
It goes on gathering dust. You can write your name on any Bible with just your finger, because there
will be enough dust – no need for any ink or any color.
These are revolutions.
Once there was fire.
But now there are only ashes left.
My sannyasin has not to look backwards.
He has not to think of a revolution that happened in the past. No, he has to live the revolution every
day.
And his revolution is never going to stop. That’s why I call it rebellion, just to make the distinction.
His rebellion is something alive.
It is not an incident in history.
It is an explosion in his being.
It has nothing to do with time.
It has something to do with his inner space.
And then it is a continuity.
He lives it. He breathes it.
From Personality to Individuality 146 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
It is his heartbeat.
My sannyasin can never become orthodox: How can a constant rebellion be converted into an
orthodoxy? That’s why you will find my statements so contradictory.
The reason is that I have never read any of my books, so I don’t know what is in them. It helps me
immensely, because then I don’t have to bother about whether I am contradicting myself changing,
saying something else. It keeps me free. If you ask me, then whatsoever I am saying right now is
the truth. Tomorrow will take care of itself I cannot guarantee that this will be the truth for tomorrow
too, because tomorrow.... The whole universe is in a continuous flux.
I am not giving you dead rocks.
I am offering you living flowers.
What it will be like tomorrow neither I nor anyone else can say.
Only tomorrow will bring the revelation.
I have been constantly inconsistent so that you will never be able to make a dogma out of me. You
will simply go nuts if you try. I am leaving something really terrible for scholars. They will not be able
to make any sense out of it. They will go nuts; and they deserve it, they should go nuts. But nobody
can create an orthodoxy out of me, it is impossible.
If Christianity is possible, then of course Jesus is responsible. His words may have been fiery but
they were too consistent; it was too easy to make a dogma out of them. He was not careful enough.
He made such simple statements that anybody could make a catechism out of them.
From my words you can get burned, but you will not be able to find any kind of theology, dogmatism.
You can find a way to live but not a dogma to preach.
You can find a rebellious quality to be imbibed, but you will not find a revolutionary theme to be
organized.
My words are not only on fire.
I am putting gunpowder also here and there, which will go on exploding for centuries. I am putting
more than needed – I never take any chances.
Almost each sentence is going to create trouble for anybody who wants to organize a religion around
me.
Yes, you can have a loose community, a commune. Remember the word loose: everybody
independent, everybody free to live his own way, to interpret me in his own way, to find whatsoever
he wants to find. He can find the way he wants to live – and everybody unto himself.
From Personality to Individuality 147 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
There is no need for somebody to decide what my religion is. I am leaving it open-ended. You can
work out a definition for yourself, but it is only for yourself; and that too you will have to continuously
change. As you understand me more and more, you will have to change it. You cannot go on
holding it like a dead thing in your hand. You will have to change it, and it will go on changing you
simultaneously.
One great Master, Nan In, was on his deathbed. He is one of those people who I can say was
religious, really religious. His whole life is full of incidents, anecdotes, stories, which give a clear
indication of a man of tremendous insight.
He was dying. He had told his disciples, ”I would not like my death to be mourned. because it is
not death, so you will be unnecessarily wasting your tears and crying and weeping. And I will be
laughing from the other shore, because I will see,’These fools! The whole of my life I have wasted,
and they have not understood a simple thing.’
”I would like you to dance and sing and laugh and rejoice, because death is not death. I am
going, leaving this house because it is no longer useful. This body is now more of a trouble than a
convenience; I am just changing it. So there is no need to mourn. You should be happy that your
Master is going into a new life.”
To whatever he said they listened, but their faces were showing that they were all ready to burst into
tears. They were sad – and who would not be sad when a man like Nan In leaves the world? But
Nan In had made arrangements.... He said, ”A few things to be remembered... this is my will.”
In the East it is a tradition, perhaps in the West also, that before you burn or bury a body you wash
the body and put new clothes on it. I know the reason in the East is that he is going on a faraway
journey; maybe there will be some chance to have a bath, or maybe not. And certainly he will need
new clothes, so new clothes are given, a bath is given. This is just a way to say goodbye from this
shore: ”From now onwards we cannot help, you take care of yourself.”
Nan In said, ”Don’t give me a bath because I have just taken one. And I don’t like baths in such a
cold winter; even if I am dead, I don’t want another bath. I have taken one which was necessary.
I have done it myself because I was concerned that if you give me a bath I won’t know how much
water you pour in, how cold, and what else you do. I have taken my bath, so that ritual has not to be
done.
”And don’t change my clothes. You see, I have already changed, because I don’t like clothes which
don’t fit, which are too loose or too tight. You know I am fussy about that, so I have my dress ready
– you can see it is new.” And they saw that he had taken a bath and he did have a new robe.
Nan In said, ”So these two things are not to be done – this is my will – but anything else you want to
do, you do. Don’t weep, don’t cry, don’t mourn. That would not be the right kind of goodbye for me”
– and he died.
And although he had said, ”don’t cry” – but what to do? Tears are not in your hands, just to stop
or... To lose such a man, such a tremendously alive man, disappearing into who knows what. ”And
how much he has given! Now towards whom are we going to look? Questions will be torturing us,
From Personality to Individuality 148 Osho
CHAPTER 8. RAJNEESHISM: WOMB FOR TRANSFORMATION
doubts will be arising and who is going to say,’Don’t be worried, continue: you are on the right track
and the goal is not far away.’ And his voice was enough to bring courage again, strength again. Now
who is going to help?”
They were crying and they were weeping, but they could not manage to do it for long. People like
Nan In are really creative geniuses. When his body was put on the funeral pyre they all started
laughing in spite of themselves; tears were coming to their eyes. It was a strange situation: that man
had hidden in his clothes many things – firecrackers and small bombs!
That’s why he had prevented them from changing his dothes, that’s why he had taken his own bath.
And his dress was specially made with many pockets inside where he was hiding almost a three-hour
celebration. The people were laughing and crying, and the bombs were bursting and firecrackers
were going off – colorful, beautiful, because in Japan they make the best. Nothing can be compared
with Japanese firecrackers, they make them in such artful ways.
What Nan In was continually telling these people appeared in the sky, in writing: ”Beware!” A
firecracker would go up and burst into small, flower – like pieces and they all would fall together
and make the word, ”Beware.”
His disciples were looking at the sky and they forgot completely that it was a funeral; it became a
beautiful exhibition of fireworks! They realized only as the fire died out and the body was consumed
by the fire... only then did they realize that that man had been doing the same thing his whole life.
He had even made arrangements before dying so that after death also his work would continue in
the same way, uninterrupted. Death made no difference: Nan In was still doing the same thing.
In the same way, in each of my words... I am putting enough fire, enough explosives to go on
exploding for centuries!
Nobody can be an ”orthodox Rajneeshee” unless you change the whole meaning of ”orthodox
Rajneeshee” to be according to me, as I described to you.
If by ”orthodox Rajneeshee” you can mean one who is untraditional, unconventional, unorthodox;
rebellious as a continuity, with rebellion as his life... with no tight, regimented, bureaucratic,
hierarchical organization, but just an open commune of friends who are only agreed upon one thing
– that they love this crazy man....
On everything else they can disagree.
Their whole orthodoxy is confined to only one thing:
That they love this crazy man.
From Personality to Individuality 149 Osho
CHAPTER 9
The law of karma: A conspiracy of the priests to manipulate your
mind
7 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT DO YOU HAVE TO SAY ABOUT THE LAW OF KARMA?
I have very little to say about it – but it will still take two and a half hours!
The law of karma, in the first place, is not a law. That word gives it an aroma as if it is something
scientific, like the law of gravitation. It is merely a hope, not a law at all.
It has been hoped for centuries that if you do good you will attain to good results. It is a human hope
in existence which is absolutely neutral. If you look at nature, there are laws – the whole of science
is nothing but discovery of those laws – but science has not come even close to detecting anything
like the law of karma. Yes, it is certain that any action is going to bring certain reactions, but the law
of karma is hoping for much more.
If you simply say any action is bound to produce some reactions, it is possible to have scientific
support for it. But man is hoping for much more. He is asking that a good action inevitably brings a
good consequence with it, and the same with a bad action. Now, there are many things implied in
this.
150
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
First, What is good?
Each society defines good according to itself.
What is good to a Jew is not good to a Jaina; what is good to a Christian is not good to a Confucian.
Not only that, what is good in one culture is bad in another culture.
A law has to be universal. For example, if you heat water to one hundred degrees centigrade, it will
evaporate – in Tibet, in Russia, in America, even in Oregon. In Oregon it will be a little puzzled, but
all the same at one hundred degrees water will evaporate.
A law has to be universal if it is a scientific law. If it is a law created by people themselves, by
creating a constitution, a legal system, then it is nothing to do with science and nothing to do with
existence. Then it is applicable only within the society that creates it. It is arbitrary, artificial. You can
change it – and laws do go on changing. Something that was legal yesterday is illegal today; what
is illegal today, tomorrow may become legal. These are man-made laws.
Certainly the law of karma is neither a scientific law nor part of any legal system. Then what kind of
law is it? It is a hope. A man wandering in immense darkness, groping his way, clings to anything
that gives a little hope, a little light – because what you observe in life itself is something totally
different from the law of karma. A man who is a well-known criminal may succeed and become the
president, the prime minister; or vice versa: he was not a criminal before, but when he becomes the
president or prime minister of a country he becomes a criminal.
Lord Acton’s famous statement I have thought about from every possible angle, and I have found it
always gives some new insight. Acton says: Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
I don’t think so, because I don’t see it happening the way Lord Acton is saying. But Lord Acton was
speaking from his whole life’s experience; he was a politician himself, and what he was saying was
not unfounded.
Still, I dare to disagree with him, because my understanding is that power certainly corrupts, but it
corrupts only a person who was potentially corruptible.
He may not have been known as corrupted before because he had no opportunity, he had no power.
But power itself cannot corrupt a man who has no potential for corruption. So it is not the power that
is corrupting the man; in fact the power is simply revealing the man to you. The power is making
actual what was only potential; it is exposing the person to you and to himself.
If you look in a mirror and you see an ugly face, are you going to say that the mirror corrupts? The
poor mirror simply reflects. If you have an ugly face what can the mirror do about it?
I have heard about a mad woman, who whenever she came across a mirror would immediately
destroy it. She was ugly, but her belief was that mirrors were the reason for her ugliness. If there
were no mirror she would not be ugly. Perfect logic!
In a certain way she is not being absolutely illogical. If she were alone on the earth – no mirror, no
eyes, because eyes are also mirrors – do you think she would be ugly? Alone on the earth without
From Personality to Individuality 151 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
any mirrors, without any eyes to mirror her, she would be just herself, neither beautiful nor ugly.
But she would just be the same. The change that has happened is that now she cannot see her
reflection. Nothing has changed, only the reflectors have been removed.
The same is true about Lord Acton’s famous dictum, ”Power corrupts” – it seems so.
I would like to say that power mirrors.
If you are potentially ready to be corrupted, power gives you the chance. And if you have an absolute
potential – like an Adolf Hitler, a Joseph Stalin, a Mussolini – then what can power do about it?
Power is simply available to you.
You can do much with it.
If you are a corruptible person you will do what you always wanted to do but did not have the power
to do. But if you are not potentially corruptible, then it is impossible for power to corrupt you. You will
use the power, but it will not be corruption, it will be creation.
It will not be destructive:
It will be a blessing to people.
And if you have the potential of being a blessing to people, then absolute power will be an absolute
blessing in the world.
But man’s life has many strange things in it. Only the potentially corruptible person moves towards
power. The potentially good person has no desire for power. The will-to-power is the need of a
corrupted being, because he knows that without power he will not be able to do what he wants to
do.
Adolf Hitler first wanted to be an architect, but all the schools of architecture refused him because
he had no potential as an architect. He could not even draw a straight line. He wanted to become
an artist – if not an architect, then an artist – but no school would accept him. If the school of
architecture was not going to accept him, then.... Art, particularly painting, needs an even greater
caliber, and he had no talent for art. Disappointed everywhere, rejected from everywhere, he started
moving towards power.
Adolf Hitler’s will-to-power was really strong. A man who was not able to become an architect or a
painter became so powerful that the whole destiny of humanity was in his hands. But you will be
surprised to know that the first thing that he did after he became powerful, absolutely powerful, was
to make designs for buildings: architecture. He made the designs for many ugly structures. And
the government had to build them because, although no architect was ready to accept that these
designs were worth even a second look, if they were coming from Adolf Hitler you could not reject
them. Their rejection would mean your death, because that was the only language he knew: Either
you are with me or you are no more.
From Personality to Individuality 152 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
It is one of the blessings of the second world war that all Adolf Hitler’s great buildings were destroyed;
otherwise he would have left those ugly structures behind. But his designs have been found, and
they are enough proof that this man simply had no qualities to conceive buildings.
The moment Adolf Hitler became powerful, in his spare moments he was painting; and of course,
then, everybody had to appreciate his paintings. And none of his paintings were worth calling a
painting; they were just a wastage of canvas and color, without any significance. Not only that, they
were ugly, nauseating. If you had kept his painting in your bedroom, in the night you would have
suffered nightmares.
Power brings into actuality what is hidden in you.
But strangely, the good man has no need to be powerful, because good can manifest without power.
There is no need for good to have power.
Good has its own intrinsic power.
Evil needs some outside power to support it.
Kahlil Gibran has written a beautiful story. This single man has written so many beautiful stories
that there seems to be no comparison to him in the whole history of man. This story is a very small
story, and that is where Kahlil Gibran’s beauty is. He does not write big stories that can be made
into films; his stories are only of a few lines, but penetrating – to the very depths of man.
The story is: God created the world, and He created everything else that was needed. He looked
around and He felt that two things were missing: beauty and ugliness. So the last things He created
were beauty and ugliness. Naturally, He gave beauty beautiful clothes and to ugliness, ugly clothes;
and He dropped them from heaven to come to the earth.
It is a long journey, and by the time they reached the earth they were feeling tired and dusty, so the
first thing they decided to do was to take a bath. It was early morning, the sun was just rising, and
they went to a lake, dropped their clothes on the bank and both jumped in. It was really refreshing
and cool, and they enjoyed it.
Beauty went swimming far into the lake, and when she looked back, she was surprised; ugliness
was missing. She came back and she found that her clothes were missing too. Then beauty
understood what had happened: ugliness has taken her clothes and run away. The story ends:
since then ugliness is hidden in the clothes of beauty, and beauty is compulsorily wearing the clothes
of ugliness. Beauty is running after ugliness, searching for her, but she has not yet been able to find
her.
It is a beautiful story. Ugliness needs something to hide itself behind, to help it pretend – to have a
false mask. Beauty had not thought about it at all; the idea had not even occurred to her that this
was possible, that ugliness would steal her clothes and run away.
The man who has a heart throbbing with goodness, with blessings, feels no need to be the president
or the prime minister. He has no time to waste in this ugly game of power politics. He has enough
From Personality to Individuality 153 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
energy. That, good brings with itself. He will create music, he will compose poetry, he will sculpt
beauty in marble; he will do something for which power is not needed. All that is needed is already
provided for him. That’s the beauty of good, that it is intrinsically powerful.
Let it be very clearly understood: You can be certain that anything that needs power from outside is
not good. It is something intrinsically impotent; it will live on borrowed life.
So in life this strange situation happens: bad people reach good positions, become respectable or
honored, not only in their time but throughout history. It is full of their names.
In history, Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, Kanad, Gautam, Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu – people like
these you will not find even in the footnotes. And Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan, Tamerlane,
Nadirshah, Napoleon Bonaparte, Adolf Hitler – they make up the major portion of history. In fact,
we have to write the whole of history again because all these people have to be completely erased.
Even the memory of them should not be carried on, because even their memory may have evil
effects on people.
A better humanity will not give these names even a place in the footnotes; there is no need. They
were nightmares; it is better they are completely forgotten so they don’t follow you like shadows.
And we have to discover people who have lived on this earth and made it in every way beautiful;
shared their joy, their dance, their music, shared their ecstasies – but lived anonymously. People
have completely forgotten even their names.
People don’t have any idea how many religious people have lived on this earth and are not known.
The reason that you know those few names that are known, is not simply that they were religious –
there are some extra reasons. Just think: If Jesus was not crucified, would you have ever heard his
name? So it is not Jesus – not his qualities, not his goodness – but crucifixion which makes him a
historical figure.
You know Gautam the Buddha, not because he was an enlightened man, but because he was
the son of a very great king. And when the son of such a great king renounces his kingdom, of
course the whole country far and wide buzzes with his name. It is not because he is religious but
because he has renounced such a big kingdom – the same kingdom that you have been aspiring to
and dreaming of perhaps for many lives. And this man has some nerve – he just drops the whole
kingdom without ever looking back.
That’s why you remember Gautam Buddha. Somewhere they have to mention his name because he
was a king who renounced his kingdom. If he had been a poor man’s son then nobody would have
even heard about him. And there have been many whose names are not known at all. Even while
they were alive only a few people came to feel that they had a different kind of presence. Goodness
has its own intrinsic power, and it has its own benefit, blessing. It is not somewhere else in some
other life – that if you do good now, in your other life you will get paid for it. That is a strange kind of
law – and that’s what the law of karma is.
If you are living a poor, miserable, suffering life, the law of karma says it is because in a past life you
committed evil acts – this is the result of them. If somebody is enjoying good health, money, power,
all the joys of life, you need not be jealous of him: he has done good deeds in a past life and now he
is reaping the crop. He has sown the seeds in his past life.
From Personality to Individuality 154 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
But why so much distance between sowing the seeds and reaping the crop? Is it that always in
one life you do good or bad, and in another life comes the result? To me there seems to be some
conspiracy in it. It is not a law, it is a conspiracy, because the priest cannot manage to explain
why somebody is rich when everybody knows that what he is doing is evil – and still he goes on
becoming richer. And we know that somebody is good, but he is starving. So what good is good?
Now, the priesthood is in a difficulty to explain this situation which is occurring everywhere. Good
people will be found in every corner of the earth – poor, starving, suffering. Bad people will be
successful. The cunning – who are ready to cut anybody’s throat, who have cut many people’s
throats, who have been stepping up on people’s heads towards power and riches, who have used
people as if they were things – they have all that should really belong to the good people.
How is the priest going to explain it away? He has found a way: the law of karma. He cannot explain
it herenow so he shifts the whole scene. He makes death come in between your actions and their
results; results will be after death, in the next life. But why? You put your hand in the fire and you
will be burned in the next life? If you put your hand in the fire now, you will be burned now.
So any priest, any monk, anybody coming from the East talking about the law of karma – take him
to the fireplace. Tell him, ”Put your hand in the fire so we can see whether the law of karma works
herenow. Or does it take so much time that it is necessary for death to happen first, and then the
result will follow? Action – death – result? Death has to intervene absolutely?” I know he will not be
ready to put his arm into the fire.
That’s why I said I don’t have much to say about the law of karma, only very little, just two words:
boo boo.
Now I will have to explain to you – it is an Oregonian story. If I am not mistaken, Senator Fatfield had
gone to visit his constituency. This particular place that he was visiting was a reservation for Red
Indians. He used to go there only once in five years, just when the election was coming closer. The
Red Indians had become perfectly aware that he only comes once every five years, promises great
things and then disappears; and those things never happen.
Again he appeared after five years, and again the same game. Red Indians are simple people....
Their chief gathered them all into one place that used to serve as their common meeting place.
Senator Fatfield started the same promises: ”Forgive me for last time. There were so many
difficulties, so many problems, a financial depression, and so many wars, that I could not manage
to make the bridge over the river, the road to your reservation, or good houses for you.” And each
time he said something – ”a bridge” – they would say, ”Boo boo!” and they would rejoice and almost
start dancing. Fatfield was feeling very good, seeing how they appreciate him. They would clap and
shout and scream, ”Boo boo!” and that gave him more incentive and more inspiration.
He gave free rein to his imagination: ”I will make a hospital, a college, a university...” When you are
simply going to promise something and never fulfill it, it does not matter what you promise; you can
promise paradise, you can promise anythng. And actually that is what he did; ”Within five years you
will see this place will be a paradise on earth” – and they all shouted, ”Boo boo!”
Senator Fatfield was very happy, so happy that he said to the chief, ”I would like to go around the
reservation to see if anything else is needed.”
From Personality to Individuality 155 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
The chief said, ”That is okay; just one thing. We Red Indians are absolutely childlike: we use the
whole field like it is an open toilet. So if you are going around – I have no objection – just be careful
not to step in the boo boo.” Now Fatfield understood the meaning of boo boo, but it was too late.
The law of karma is nothing but boo boo. And you understand the meaning now, so there is no
problem.
To me, certainly each action has its result, but not somewhere far away in a future life. the action and
the result are continuous, they are part of one process. Do you think sowing the seed and reaping
the crop are separate? It is one process. What begins in sowing the seed, grows, and one day
the one seed has become thousands of seeds. That’s what you call your crop. It is the same seed
which has exploded into thousands of seeds. No death is intervening, no afterlife is needed; it is a
continuum.
So the one thing to be remembered is: in my vision of life, yes, every action is bound to have
some consequences, but they will not be somewhere else, you will have them here and now. Most
probably you will get them almost simultaneously.
When you are kind to someone, don’t you feel a certain joy? A certain peace? A certain
meaningfulness? Don’t you feel that you are contented with what you have done? There is a
kind of deep satisfaction. Have you ever felt that contentment when you are angry, when you are
boiling with anger, when you hurt somebody, when you are mad with rage? Have you ever felt a
peace, a silence descending in you? No, it is impossible.
You will certainly feel something, but it will be a sadness that you again acted like a fool, that again
you have done the same stupid thing that you decided again and again not to do. You will feel a
tremendous unworthiness in yourself. You will feel that you are not a man but a machine, because
you don’t respond, you react. A man may have done something, and you reacted. That man had
the key in his hands, and you just danced according to his desire; he had power over you.
When somebody abuses you and you start fighting, what does it mean? It means that you don’t
have any capacity not to react.
Gurdjieff’s father was dying. His last words to Gurdjieff are immensely significant; perhaps no father
has ever advised a son with such a great insight. And Gurdjieff was only nine years old, so his
father said, ”I know you may not be able to understand right now what I am saying, but I have no
more time, I have to say it now. But you have time – just remember the words. Whenever you have
enough maturity to understand what these words mean, then act on these words. But don’t forgetl
Remember, it is a simple sentence.”
He told Gurdjieff to repeat the sentence three times, so he could die peacefully. And he said,
”Forgive me because I am not leaving any inheritance to you except this sentence.” And what was
the sentence? – a very simple sentence. He said: ”Remember, if somebody creates anger in you,
tell the person you will come back after twenty-four hours to answer him. For twenty-four hours, wait;
and after twenty-four hours, whatever comes to you, go and do.”
Strange advice, but not strange if you understand. And this simple advice changed Gurdjieff’s whole
life. This single sentence made a man like George Gurdjieff – and that kind of man is created only
From Personality to Individuality 156 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
after centuries. But the old man must have been a man of great insight. He left nothing else; he
said to his son, ”Now you will have to look after yourself. Your mother is dead, I am dying. You will
have to earn your bread. You will have to learn things on your own.” A nine-year-old child... but this
became a great opportunity for Gurdjieff, because he started moving around with nomads.
Gurdjieff was born near the Caucasus in Russia – still there are nomads, wandering tribes. Even
sixty years of communist torture has not been able to settle those nomads, because they consider
wandering to be man’s birthright, and perhaps they are right.
Nomads all over the world believe that it is the woman who has created the house. Man has made it,
but it is the woman who has tethered the man to the house; otherwise, man is basically a wanderer,
he would have liked to move. A tent was enough; a tent, a horse, a bullock cart – that’s enough.
And who bothers to live in the same place year after year? The nomads go on moving – a few days
here, a few days there.
This nine-year-old child having nothing else to do joined a nomad group. Then he started moving
from one group to another. He learned many languages of the nomads, he learned many arts of
the nomads. He learned many exercises which are not available to civilized people any more, but
nomads need them.
For example; it may be very cold and the snow is falling, and to live in a tent.... Nomads know certain
exercises of breathing that change the rhythm of the breath, the temperature of your body increases.
Or if it is too hot, if you are passing through a desert, then change again to a different rhythm... and
your body has an automatic, inbuilt, air-conditioning system.
Gurdjieff learned his first lessons in hypnosis with these nomadic groups. If the wife and the husband
are both going to sell some things in the market, in the village, what to do with the children, the small
children? These nomads have used hypnotism for centuries. They will just draw a ckcle around the
child and tell him, ”Till we return you cannot get out of this circle.”
Now, this has been told for centuries to every child. From the moment he could understand, he has
heard it. He is hypnotized by it. The moment it is uttered, the moment he sees the line being drawn
around him, he simply relaxes inside: there is no way to get out, he can’t get out.
Gurdjieff was very puzzled, because he was ten or twelve years old then: And what nonsense is
this? And each child in every nomad camp is just surrounded by a line, and that’s all. The father and
mother disappear for the whole day to work in the town. By the evening when they come the child is
still inside the circle.
Gurdjieff started wondering how it happened, why it happened, and soon he was able to figure out
that it is just a question of your unconscious accepting the idea. Once your unconscious accepts
the idea, then your body and your conscious mind have no power to go against it.
In his own exercises that he developed later on when he became a Master, Gurdjieff used all these
nomad techniques that he had learned from those strange people – uncivilized, with no language, no
written alphabet, but who knew very primitive methods. And he was surprised to see that hypnotism
works not only on children but on grown men, because those children become young adults; then
too it works. Then they become old, then too it works. It does not change with age.
From Personality to Individuality 157 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
Gurdjieff used to play with the old people, drawing a circle around them, and the old person would
shout, ”Don’t do that, don’t do that,” and before the circle was complete he would jump out. If
the circle was complete then it was impossible, you were caught. And this boy – who could know
whether he would be coming back again or not? When the circle was half completed, something
was open: you could escape. Then you were saved, otherwise you were caught in it. And many
times Gurdjieff succeeded in making the circle complete. Then even the old man would simply sit
down, just like a small child, and would pray to him, ”Break your circle.”
Gurdjieff used that technique in many ways – and many other techniques that he learned from those
people. He used to have an exercise called the ”stop exercise,” and he exhibited it all over the world,
particularly in America and Europe. He would teach dances, strange dances, because nobody knew
those dances that the Caucasian nomads dance... strange instruments and strange dances
They had strange foods that Gurdjieff learned to make. His ashrama near Paris was something
just absolutely out of this world. His kitchen was full of strange things, strange spices that nobody
had ever heard of, and he himself would prepare outlandish foods. He had learned it all from those
nomads. And those foods had a certain effect. Certain foods have certain effects; certain dances
have certain effects; certain drums, instruments, have certain effects.
Gurdjieff had seen that if a certain music is played and people are dancing a particular dance, then
it is possible for them to dance on red-hot, burning coals and still not be burned. The dance is
creating a certain kind of energy in them so that they can escape the law of fire – which is a lower
law. Certainly, if consciousness knows something higher it can escape from lower laws.
All the stories about miracles are nothing but stories about people who have come to know certain
higher laws; naturally, then the lower laws don’t function. Gurdjieff had seen all these things, he
had experienced them when he was a child, and children are very curious. There was no father,
no mother to prevent him from doing anything, so he was experimenting with everything, in every
possible way. And once he was finished with one nomad group, he would simply move to another
because from other groups he had other things to learn. He developed all his exercises from these
nomadic people.
The stop exercise was tremendously significant, perhaps one of the greatest contributions to the
modern world – and the modern world is not even aware of it.
Gurdjieff would tell his disciples to be engaged in all kinds of activities: somebody is digging in the
garden, somebody is cutting wood, somebody is preparing food, somebody is cleaning the floor. All
kinds of activities are going on, with the one condition that when he says ”Stop!” then wherever you
are, in whatsoever posture you are, you stop dead. You are not to be cunning, because then the
whole point of the exercise is lost.
For example, if your mouth is open and you see that Gurdjieff is not there to notice, and you just
close your mouth and rest, you have missed the point. One of your legs was up – you were just
moving – and one leg was down; now suddenly the ”Stop!” call comes. You have to stop, knowing
perfectly well that soon you will fall down; you cannot stand on one foot for long. But that is the
whole point of the exercise: whatever the consequence you simply stop as you are, you just become
a statue.
From Personality to Individuality 158 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
You will be surprised that such a simple exercise gives you so much release of awareness. Neither
Buddha, nor Patanjali, nor Mahavira was aware of it, that such a simple exercise... it is not complex
at all.
When you become just a statue, you are not even allowed to blink an eye; you stay exactly as
you are at the moment you hear the word ”Stop!” It simply means stop and nothing else. You will
be surprised that you suddenly become a frozen statue – and in that state you can see yourself
transparently.
You are constantly engaged in activity – and with the activity of the body, the mind’s activity is
associated. You cannot separate them, so when the body completely stops, of course, immediately
the mind also stops then and there. You can see the body, frozen, as if it is somebody else’s body;
you can see the mind, suddenly unmoving, because it has lost its association with the body in
movement.
It is a simple psychological law of association that was discovered by another Russian, Pavlov.
Gurdjieff knew it long before Pavlov, but he was not interested in psychology so he never worked it
out that way. Pavlov also got the idea from the same nomads, but he moved in a different direction
– he was a psychologist. He started working on the lines of the law of association.
Pavlov would give food to his dog, and while he was giving the food, he would just go on ringing
a bell. Now the bell and the bread had nothing to do with each other, but to the dog they were
becoming associated. Whenever Pavlov gave the dog some bread, he would ring the bell too. After
fifteen days he would simply ring the bell and the dog’s tongue would start hanging out ready for
the bread. Now, somewhere in the dog’s mind, the bell and the bread were no longer two separate
things.
Gurdjieff was doing far higher work. He found a simple way of stopping the mind. In the East people
have been trying for centuries to concentrate the mind, to visualize it, to stop it – and Gurdjieff found
a way through physiology. But it was not his discovery, he had just found what those nomads had
been doing all along.
Gurdjieff would shout ”Stop!” and everybody would freeze. And when the body suddenly freezes,
the mind feels a little weird: What happened? – because the mind has no association with the frozen
body, it is just shocked. They are in cooperation, in a deep harmony, moving together. Now the body
has completely frozen, what is the mind supposed to do? Where can it go?
For a moment there is a complete silence; and even a single moment of complete silence is enough
to give you the taste of meditation.
Gurdjieff had developed dances, and during those dances suddenly he would say ”Stop!” Now, while
dancing you never know in what posture you are going to be. People would simply fall on the floor.
But even if you fall, the exercise continues. If your hand is in an uncomfortable position under your
body, you are not to make it comfortable because that means you have not given a chance for
the mind to stop. You are still listening to the mind. The mind says, ”It is uncomfortable, make it
comfortable.” No, you are not to do anything.
From Personality to Individuality 159 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
In New York when he was giving his demonstration of the dance, Gurdjieff chose a very strange
situation. All the dancers were standing in a line, and at a certain stage in the dance when they
came dancing forwards and were just standing in a queue with the first person just at the edge of
the stage, Gurdjieff said ”Stop!” The first person fell, the second fell, the third fell – the whole line fell
on each other. But there was dead silence, no movement.
One man in the audience just seeing this got his first experience of meditation. He was not doing it,
he was just seeing it. But seeing so many people suddenly stop and then fall, but falling as if frozen,
with no effort on their own to change their position or anything.... It was as if suddenly they had all
become paralyzed.
The man was just sitting in the front row, and without knowing he just stopped, froze in the position
he was in: his eyes stopped blinking, his breath had stopped. Seeing this scene – he had come to
see the dance, but what kind of dance was this? – suddenly he felt a new kind of energy arising
within him. And it was so silent and he was so full of awareness, that he became a disciple. That
very night he reached Gurdjieff and said, ”I can’t wait.”
It was very difficult to be a disciple of Gurdjieff; he made it almost impossible. And he was really
a hard taskmaster. And one can tolerate things if one can see some meaning in them, but with
Gurdjieff the problem was that there was no obvious meaning.
This man’s name was Nicoll. Gurdjieff said, ”It is not so easy to become my disciple.”
Nicoll said, ”It is not so easy to refuse me either. I have come to become a disciple, and I will
become a disciple. You may be a hard Master, I know; I am a hard disciple!” Both men looked into
each other’s eyes and understood that they belonged to the same tribe. This man was not going to
leave.
Nicoll said, ”I am not going. I will be just sitting here my whole life until you accept me as a disciple”
and Nicoll’s case is the only case in which Gurdjieff accepted him without bitching; otherwise, he
used to be so difficult. Even for a man like P.D. Ouspensky, who made Gurdjieff world-famous –
even with him Gurdjieff was difficult.
Ouspensky remembers that they were traveling from New York to San Francisco in a train, and
Gurdjieff started making a nuisance of himself in the middle of the night. He was not drunk, he
had not even drunk water, but he was behaving like a drunkard – moving from one compartment
to another compartment, waking people and throwing people’s things about. And Ouspensky, just
following him, said, ”What are you doing?” – but Gurdjieff wouldn’t listen.
Somebody pulled the train’s emergency chain, ”This man seems to be mad!” – so the ticket-checker
came in and the guard came in. Ouspensky apologized and said, ”He is not mad and he is not
drunk, but what to do? It is very difficult for me to explain what he is doing because I don’t know
myself.” And right in front of the guard and ticket-checker, Gurdjieff threw somebody’s suitcase out
of the window.”
The guard and the ticket-checker said, ”This is too much. Keep him in your compartment and we
will give you the key. Lock it from within, otherwise we will have to throw you both out at the next
station.”
From Personality to Individuality 160 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
Naturally Ouspensky was feeling embarrassed on the one hand and enraged on the other hand –
that this man was creating such a nuisance. He thought, ”I know he is not mad, I know he is not
drunk, but....” Gurdjieff was behaving wildly, shouting in Russian, screaming in Russian, Caucasian
– he knew so many languages – and the moment the door was locked, he sat silently and smiled.
He said to Ouspensky, ”How are you?”
Ouspensky said, ”You are asking ME,’How are you?’! You would have forced them to put you in jail,
and me too – because I couldn’t leave you in such a condition. What was the purpose of all this?”
Gurdjieff said, ”That is for you to understand. I am doing everything for you, and you are asking me
the purpose? The purpose is not to react, not to be embarrassed, not to be enraged. What is the
point of feeling embarrassed? What are you going to get out of it? You are simply losing your cool
and gaining nothing.”
”But,” Ouspensky said, ”You threw that suitcase out of the window. Now what about the man whose
suitcase it is?”
Gurdjieff said, ”Don’t be worried – it was yours!”
Ouspensky looked down and saw that his was missing. What to do with this Master! Ouspensky
writes: ”l felt like getting down at the next station and going back to Europe... because what else
would Gurdjieff do?”
And Gurdjieff said, ”I know what you are thinking – you are thinking of getting down at the next
station. Keep cool!”
”But,” Ouspensky said, ”how can I keep cool now that my suitcase is gone and my clothes are gone?”
Gurdjieff said, ”Don’t be worried – your suitcase was empty. Your clothes I’ve put in my suitcase.
Now just cool down.”
But later, when he was in the Caucasus and Ouspensky was in London, Gurdjieff sent Ouspensky
a telegram: ”Come immediately!” – and when Gurdjieff says ”Immediately,” it means immediately!
Ouspensky was involved in some work, but he had to leave his job, pack immediately, finish
everything and go to the Caucasus. And in those days, when Russia was in revolution, to go
to the Caucasus was dangerous, absolutely dangerous. People were rushing out of Russia to
save their lives, so to enter Russiaand for a well-known person like Ouspensky, well-known as a
mathematician, world famous.... It was also well-known that he was anti-communist, and he was not
for the revolution. Now, to call him back into Russia, and that too, to the faraway Caucasus....
He would have to pass through the whole of Russia to reach to Gurdjieff who was in a small place,
Tiflis, but if Gurdjieff calls.... Ouspensky went. When he arrived there he was really boiling, because
he had passed by burning trains, stations, butchered people and corpses on the platforms. And how
he had managed – he himself could not believe that he was going to reach Gurdjieff, but somehow
he managed to. And what did Gurdjieff say? He said, ”You have come, now you can go: the purpose
is fulfilled. I will see you later on in London.”
From Personality to Individuality 161 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
Now this kind of man.... He has his purpose – there is no doubt about it – but has strange ways of
working. Ouspensky, even Ouspensky, missed. He got so angry that he dropped all his connections
with Gurdjieff after this incident, because this man had pulled him into the very mouth of death for
nothing! But Ouspensky missed the point. If he had gone back as silently as he had come, he may
have become enlightened by the time he reached London – but he missed the point.
A man like Gurdjieff – may not always do something which is apparently meaningful, but it is always
meaningful.
Nicoll became his disciple, and he had to make it through so many strange tasks, strange in every
possible way. No Master before Gurdjieff had tried such strange ways. For example, he would force
you to eat, to go on eating; he would go on forcing you, ”Eat!” – and you could not say no to the
Master. While tears were coming to you he was saying ”Eat!”... and those spices, Caucasian spices
– Indian spices are nothing! Your whole throat was burning, you could feel the fire even in your
stomach, in your intestines, and he was saying ”Eat! Go on eating until I say stop.”
But he had some hidden meaning in it. There is a point for the body.... I said just the other day to
you that a point comes for the body, if you fast, when after five days it changes its system. That is,
the body starts absorbing its own fat, and then there is no more hunger. That is one method which
has been used. This is also a similar method – in the opposite direction.
There is a point beyond which you cannot eat, but the Master says, ”Go on.” He is trying to bring
you to the brink of the capacity of your whole physiology, and you have never touched that. We are
always in the middle. Neither are we fasting, nor are we feasting like Gurdjieff; we are always in
the middle. The body is in a settled routine; hence, the mind is also settled in its way of movement.
Fasting destroys that.
That’s why fasting became so important in all religions. It brings you to a moment after fifteen days
when you simply start forgetting thoughts. Bigger gaps start appearing: for hours there is not a
single thought, and after twenty-one days your mind is empty. It’s strange that when the stomach is
totally empty it creates a synchronicity in the mind – the mind becomes totally empty.
Fasting is not a goal in itself. Only idiots have followed it as a goal in itself It is simply a technique to
bring you to a stage where you can experience a state of no-mind. Once that is experienced, you
can go back to food. Then there is no problem, you know the track. And then, eating normally also
you can go into that state any time you want.
Gurdjieffwas doing just the opposite because that’s what he had learned from the nomads. Those
are a totally different kind of people. They don’t have any scriptures. They don’t have any people
like Buddha, Mahavira, or any others, but they have passed on by word of mouth, from generation
to generation, certain techniques that were given by the father to the son. This technique Gurdjieff
learned from those nomads. They eat too much, and go on eating, and go on eating, and go on
eating. A moment comes when it is not possible to eat anymore – and that is the point when Gurdjieff
would force you to eat.
If you say yes even then, suddenly there is an immediate state of no-mind because you have broken
the whole rhythm of body and mind. Now it is inconceivable for the mind to grasp what is happening.
From Personality to Individuality 162 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
It cannot work any longer in this situation. It has not known it before because – always remember –
mind is exactly like a computer. It is a bio-computer, it functions according to its program. You may
be aware of it, you may not be aware of it, but it functions according to a program. Break the program
somewhere.... And you can break the program only at the ends, only at the boundary, where you
are facing an abyss.
Gurdjieff would force people to drink so much alcohol – and all kinds of alcoholic beverages – that
they would go almost crazy; so drunk that they would forget completely who they were. And he
would go on giving it to them. If they fell he would shake them, sit them up and pour them some
more, because there is a moment when the person has come to a point where his whole body, his
whole consciousness is completely overtaken by the intoxicant. In that moment his unconscious
starts speaking.
Freud took three years, four years, five years of psychoanalysis to do this. Gurdjieff did it in a single
night! Your unconscious would start speaking, would give all the clues about you of which you have
not even been aware. And you would not know that you had given those clues to Gurdjieff – but he
would know. And then he would work according to those clues: what exercises would be right for
you, what dances would be suitable for you, what music was needed for you.
All the clues have been given by your unconscious. You were not aware of it because you were
completely intoxicated. You were not present when he worked on the unconscious and persuaded
it to give all the clues about you. Those were the secrets about you – then he had the keys in his
hands. So if somebody refused, ”Now I cannot drink any more,” he would throw him out. He would
say, ”Then this is not the place for you.”
The law of karma is something psychological: neither legal, nor social, nor moral, but something
psychological. It has not been worked out that way up to now.
Whatever you do contains in itself its consequence.
It does not matter whether you call it good or bad, because what you call it – good or bad – will
depend upon your conditioning.
If you are eating meat, and you are a Mohammedan, or a Christian, or a Jew, there is no question of
”bad.” Others may be doing the same act, but their moral interpretation may be different. If you are
a Jaina or a Buddhist or a brahmin – in the first place you cannot eat meat, and if you are eating it,
you are doing the same act but your interpretation is that you are doing a bad act, a bad action.
Now, a Jaina eating meat, and a Christian eating meat – the acts are the same, but to the Christian
conscience it is good, to the Jaina conscience it is bad. The action is exactly the same but the
consequence will be different, because it is a question of psychology, it is not a question of nature.
Otherwise, the consequences would have been the same.
Both their psychologies are different; both have different minds, different conditionings. The Jaina
will feel guilty, immediately, and will feel a great fear. He will fall into self-condemnation and feel that
he is absolutely unworthy, that he has fallen from grace. Now, this is the consequence, but this is
not the consequence of the act: It is only the consequence of the act through his psychology.
From Personality to Individuality 163 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
The Christian feels nothing bad about it, in fact he is very happy – it was a good treat and he enjoyed
it. And he is now sitting in his resting chair with his cigar in his hand, enjoying himself really relishing
how tasty the food was. Now do you think it was a consequence of the act? No, it is not. It is just a
different psychology.
If you really want to know what the act brings, then you have to drop your psychology; then you will
know the law of karma – not before that. Before that you will know only that law working through
your psychology, and your psychology will change it completely.
To a Jaina, it is a sin and he is going to hell; to the Christian there is no problem. Jesus was eating
meat, Moses was eating meat, and I guess God also must be eating meat, particularly the Jewish,
the Christian and the Mohammedan God. You cannot deprive Him of such nourishing, delicious
food. Or do you think you are going to keep Him vegetarian?
In front of me once lived a doctor, a Bengali doctor, Doctor Datta. Bengalis are not vegetarian. Once
in a while, if I was sick or something – he was very friendly to me and he would come to see me. My
aunt, who used to live with me, would ask him, ”Doctor Datta, anything about food – what he should
eat, what he should not eat?”
And Datta would say, ”No need to worry. You are just grass-eaters. What can be cut from your
diet? – you are dieting continuously. Now, I cannot give you any suggestions. We can diet; we can
become grasseaters just as you are – that will be dieting for us. But for you it will be.... If you diet
then you will be finished; there is nothing else to eat – so don’t bother about it.”
To a Jaina it will be a sheer impossibility to conceive that Jesus can be enlightened: he eats meat,
he drinks wine. And most amazing, he not only drinks wine, he turns water into wine. Now, to a
Jaina the real miracle will be somebody turning all the wine of the world into water. That will be a
real miracle, a religious miracle. You call this a miracle? – turning water into wine? This is a crime!
Your psychologies, unless you drop them.... For example to me, who has no psychology – in
between me and my life there is no mind: I am in direct and immediate touch with my life. If I
eat meat, it is not that it is going to throw me into hell. No, that is stupid.
In the first place there is no hell. In the second place, there is no law of nature that by eating meat
you will go to hell, because if that is the case then all the animals and almost all men will be going
to hell; heaven will be absolutely empty. And because all the animals are eating meat, there is no
possibility for animals to grow towards higher consciousness.
I used to say to Jaina monks, ”You are preaching a stupid thing. You say that animals go on growing,
moving upwards; finally they become man. How can they become man? If meat-eating throws
people into hell, then how can meat-eating animals grow in consciousness and become men? And
if animals, by eating meat, grow and become man, then man by eating meat will grow and become
God. There is no problem, growth is not prevented.
And those Jainas would say to me, ”With you, argument is just impossible. From where do you get
these ideas? We have been reading the scriptures our whole life, and we have been reading that
animals grow and become man, but this idea never occurred to us. Yes, it is true: if they are eating
meat and growing in consciousness then what is wrong in eating meat?”
From Personality to Individuality 164 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
”And particularly,” I said, ”eating the meat of growing animals, who are growing upwards, will be a
great help for evolution.” In fact that’s what Mohammedans say. They have a very strange idea – it’s
this idea that I am telling you. They say that you have to eat animals because only by eating them
do you transform them and make them capable of moving upwards. Because you absorb their body
and their soul, it goes upwards: so release as many animals as you can. And God has made it clear
in the Koran that He made the animals for man to eat. What else, what other authority is needed?
I am not a Jaina or a Jew or a Mohammedan, because I don’t have any psychology. These are all
psychologies created by different religions for their own purposes.
I have dropped all psychology.
I don’t eat meat, because to me the act itself is ugly.
It is not a question that in a future life I will suffer. No, the very act, even the idea that you have to
destroy life just for your taste buds, which are not many – just at the back of your tongue, perhaps
two inches.... If your tongue is cleaned a little deeply with a razor, all your taste will disappear.
It happened in the second world war that a man got shot in his neck. He was saved by medical
science, but his food pipe had to be closed. Now there was trouble, so they made a small hole into
his stomach through his side and fixed a pipe there. He used to put food in it, and it was working
perfectly well, but he was very unhappy because there was no taste. You could put anything in his
pipe, no problem, but he was very angry: ”This is not a solution; there is no taste. Life is meaningless
– without food, more than half your life is finished.”
So finally the doctor decided, ”You do one thing: first chew the food, and then drop it in your pipe,
so you have the taste” – because his tongue was perfectly okay; only his food pipe was closed so
he could not swallow food directly. And the idea worked. That man lived almost twelve years after
this, chewing food. And he enjoyed it more than you do, because he chewed for longer. That was
his only joy, so why chew and just swallow?
Because your swallowing is so close to chewing, you never chew perfectly. If you want to chew
perfectly, you have to chew forty-two times. I have tried, but by twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two....
It becomes so boring – forget about the scientific law – I just swallow it. But if you chew exactly
forty-two times then you have chewed your food perfectly well.
That man may have been chewing even eighty-four times – there was no problem – and then
dropping the food into his pipe. We are also doing that, but our pipe is joined; his pipe was separate.
Twelve years he lived, joyously eating all kinds of delicious food.
But just for those small buds on your tongue, killing, taking anybody’s life is simply unaesthetic. It is
not a question of morality, it is not a question of religion, it is a question of aesthetics: your sense
of beauty, your sense of respect for life. And by not eating meat, you are not going to heaven –
because there is no heaven either.
But to me, just to attain to this aesthetic sensibility is to be in heaven. The man who has no aesthetic
sensibility is below human. He is still an animal – walking on two legs of course, but just walking on
From Personality to Individuality 165 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
two legs instead of four can’t make much difference. Or do you think it can make much difference?
If that is the only difference between human beings and animals – that they walk on four and you
walk on two, that they are horizontal and you are vertical.... Do you think geometry is the difference
between you and animals?
And once you were certainly horizontal like those other animals. That’s why when you sleep you feel
so restful, because you come back to your primitive state, horizontal; and the mind moves into the
collective unconscious, far back when you were also moving on four feet.
Animals, if you look at their faces, you will find graceful. Have you seen any animal in the same
kind of states as you see in man’s changing faces? No, because there is no emotion, no sensibility,
their face remains the same. But your face is continuously changing – you have sensibility. Your
sensibility is the basic quality that differentiates you from animals.
To me, if your aesthetic sense allows you an act, you will feel immensely fulfilled immediately.
I don’t issue any promissory notes to you. All the religions have done that. I am absolutely for cash!
I don’t believe in promissory notes, I believe in cash. My religion is a cash religion.
You act, and out of your action you get the result immediately, connected to it as a continuation;
there is no discontinuity. This is my law of karma.
This is absolutely different from all the philosophies of the law of karma that have been preached
in the past, particularly in the East. But my law of karma has a different dimension: it is aesthetic.
The more your aesthetic sense becomes alive, the more you become full of reverence for life – this
is bound to happen. With sensitivity, you will become so respectful that even to pluck a flower from
a plant will be an ugly act.
One very great painter not much known in the West, although he was a Western man – he lived in
the Himalayas. He was a Russian, Nicholas Roerich, and he belonged to the czar’s family. So while
the revolution was happening and nineteen members of the czar’s family were slaughtered, even a
six-month-old child – sometimes these revolutions can be so ugly – Nicholas Roerich escaped; he
was just a boy at that time.
He lived in the Himalayas. He was a painter, but not a painter for art galleries and marketplaces. He
never sold any of his paintings – not because people were not ready to purchase, but because he
was not willing to sell. He said, ”It is not a commodity, it is me spread on the canvas. How can I sell
it?” He died with all his paintings in his house.
I have been to his house – he was very old at that time – and seeing that he was vegetarian, I asked,
”You are a Russian, why should you be vegetarian?”
He said, ”Because of my paintings. I cannot even destroy a painting, which is not alive. How can
I destroy a living being for my food? And if I can destroy a lion or a tiger, then why not destroy a
man?”
Because human meat will be more digestible, more in tune with you, what is wrong with the
cannibal? Why is everybody against the cannibals? Just because they are eating human beings?
From Personality to Individuality 166 Osho
CHAPTER 9. THE LAW OF KARMA: A CONSPIRACY OF THE PRIESTS TO MANIPULATE YOUR MIND
But cannibals say human meat is very delicious. They say there is nothing so delicious on the earth
as human meat, particularly the meat of small children. If deliciousness and taste are decisive....
And perhaps they may be right, because they have eaten other foods also, and if they are saying it –
and all cannibals agree.... But you can’t think of eating a man. How can you think of eating a tiger?
How can you think of eating a deer? Just if there is no mind given to you by the past, or if you can
put it aside and see directly, you will be simply amazed at what people have been doing.
Vegetarianism should not be anything moral or religious. It is a question of aesthetics: one’s
sensitivity, one’s respect, one’s reverence for life.
To me this is the law of karma. All other interpretations of it are absolutely wrong, just boo boo.
From Personality to Individuality 167 Osho
CHAPTER 10
Christianity: just a nice Jewish boy’s hang-up
8 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
YOU SAY CHRIST WAS THE LAST CHRISTIAN. ARE YOU THE LAST RAJNEESHEE? PLEASE
EXPLAIN.
IT was not me who said that Christ was the last Christian. I was simply quoting Friedrich Nietzsche;
it was Nietzsche who made that statement. In a certain sense Nietzsche is absolutely right, because
in this world no individual is ever repeated.
The uniqueness of the individual is absolute.
Not only in contemporary times is nobody like you; in the whole of eternity there is never going to
be a person like you again. There has never been a person like you before. You are simply you,
incomparable.
Hence I support Nietzsche’s statement in this sense, that the last Christian was crucified two
thousand years ago. But I would like to add something more to it.
First: Jesus was not only the last Christian, he was also the first Christian – the first and the last
Christian.
But this is only one sense of the statement. In other ways I am not in agreement with it, because as
far as the word Christian is concerned – Jesus never even heard the word.
168
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
He was born a Jew, he lived as a Jew; he tried his whole life to prove himself to be a real Jew. In
fact he was crucified because he was trying to prove himself to be a Jewish messiah. He had never
heard the words christ or christian because he knew no Greek, no Latin; he knew only Aramaic and
a little bit of Hebrew. And both languages have the word messiah, but christ is a Greek translation
of the word messiah.
The word christ came into existence after Jesus, after three hundred years had passed; and out of
the word christ comes christian. Slowly people completely forgot that poor Christ had no idea that
he would be called Christ and his followers, Christians.
You will be surprised to know that in India the Hindi word for messiah is masiha, and the word for
christian is masihi. Masihi is far closer to the Aramaic and Hebrew than what the Christians all over
the world go on calling themselves.
Perhaps the Hindi words masiha and masihi came into existence because Jesus, after escaping
from the crucifixion – it was not a resurrection, it was an escape – lived in India for really a long time,
to the age of one hundred and twelve years. His most beloved disciple, Thomas, followed him.
Indian Christianity is the oldest in the whole world. The Vatican is a late development. Jesus
remained in Kashmir completely tired, perhaps finished with humanity and the hope for some better
future for it, because if this was the result – that you crucify a person who works for you and for your
redemption, your salvation.... Of course he was not an idiot: he learned the lesson.
For the remaining time Jesus stayed silent. Yes, a few people came to him on their own. But it was
not a problem because in India there have been so many incarnations of God, and it is an accepted
fact that it is nobody else’s business: if somebody feels he is an incarnation of God, let him be.
What is wrong in it? Somewhere else the same person will be crucified, will be imprisoned; he will
be psychoanalyzed, deprogrammed. All kinds of stupid things will be done to the person because
he thinks he is an incarnation of God, but in India he will be worshipped.
Nobody will object to it. There is no question of objecting, because one thing is certain: that you
cannot judge whether he is or he is not; there are no criteria, no methods to measure. And India has
seen so many people like Jesus that it has come to realize that each one of them was so unique
that you cannot derive any criteria from one which can be applied to another.
Buddha was just himself. No similarity between Buddha and Krishna can be found; everything
in them is just the opposite to each other. But India has lived thousands of years of religious
philosophizing, teaching, arguing. It has attained to a certain liberality of mind as far as religion
is concerned.
India knows that a Krishna can be an incarnation of God, although he lives in a palace with
every luxury; Buddha can be an incarnation of God although he renounces his kingdom, luxuries,
comforts; Mahavira can be an incarnation of God, although he discards even his clothes and lives
naked.
India has seen so many ways of people like Jesus that it has come to one conclusion: leave the
person alone. If you can learn something from him, good; otherwise there is no harm in paying him
From Personality to Individuality 169 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
respect. Perhaps he is right; and if he is wrong, what are you losing? Giving respect, even to a
wrong person, is not bad.
So in Kashmir Jesus was not troubled by anybody. He was not news there. In India such people
are not news. Thomas, he sent to the south of India for a special reason. Northern India is very
sophisticated, and all these great teachers, Buddha, Mahavira, Krishna, Patanjali, Gorakh, Kabir –
it is an unending line – were all born and lived in northern India, for the simple reason that northern
India is Aryan.
South India is non-Aryan, it has negroid blood. Once south India was just part of South Africa; South
Africa has drifted away. Now it is a late discovery in geography that continents go on drifting, they
are still drifting. The drift is very small, one foot in a year, so you cannot feel it. But continents are
continuously drifting, they are not fixed: in thousands of years, of course, much change happens.
It was a great insight of Jesus to send Thomas to South India where it was possible to preach
and spread Jesus’ word. In northern India nobody would have bothered about it. Northern India
was so full of philosophical reasoning, argumentation; was so sophisticated that Thomas, a poor,
uneducated man – who was going to listen to him?
But perhaps South India would be receptive; and it was. The whole state of Kerala is eighty percent
Christian; and it is not a new phenomenon – it was Thomas’ work. Goa is completely Christian –
Thomas’ body is still in Goa.
It reminds me to tell you of one thing: Thomas’ is the only body, outside Tibet, which is still the
same as it was on the day the person died. It has not been preserved by any chemicals, or by any
scientific methods. It is one of the rarest phenomena on the earth. Every year the body is brought
out of the inner chambers of the church for the public to see.
And I have seen the body, and you can see: it is as if the man has just gone to sleep, and not even
died. Yes, he is not breathing, but in two thousand years the body has not deteriorated. Scientists
have tried to find out how it is preserved. There is nothing to find because it is not preserved by
any preservatives; it is through a long training in yoga and certain breathing exercises that have the
capacity to change the inner workings of biochemistry.
For thirty years Thomas practiced yoga. Thomas lived like a Hindu brahmin. If you see a picture
of Thomas you will be surprised. What kind of Christian is this? – his head shaved like a Hindu
brahmin monk, with a small piece of hair on the top of his head left uncut, the choti. He even wore
a thread, yagyopavit, that is only worn by born brahmins. He used only a small piece of cloth just to
cover the lower part of his body, the loincloth as it is called.
If you have seen Mahatma Gandhi’s picture you know the cloth that just covers him from his waist
to his knees – that’s enough. And in the south they use it just as a wraparound; Thomas used just
the wraparound lungi, only up to the knee. And he used the wooden sandals. He looked a perfect
Hindu.
He became vegetarian when he was in India. He tried to learn as much yoga as possible and he
really performed a miracle. He said, ”After my death don’t bury my body and don’t make a grave for
From Personality to Individuality 170 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
me. I have managed to change its inner workings.” It was predicted by Thomas – and that prediction
may come true – that his body would remain preserved till the very end of the world. Two thousand
years have passed and the body is preserved. Only last year, for the first time, was a little sign of
deterioration detected. Perhaps the end of the world is close.
If the man was right about his body, saying not to destroy it, it is going to remain till the very end of
the world – and according to many sources the end of the world is coming closer – his prediction
may also be true.
Only last year, that was 1984, for the first time a little deterioration appeared. Perhaps by the end
of this century the body may have deteriorated completely. Thomas’ prediction is: the day my body
deteriorates completely, that is the end of this world.
Thomas and Jesus both brought to India the word messiah which became masiha. It happens,
when a word changes from one language to another language, it has to be adapted to the whims
of the other language. ”Messiah” will not fit in Hindi; ”masiha” fits. ”Messiah” would have remained
something foreign, but ”masiha” is transformed, is no more foreign; and the Christians have been
called for two thousand years, Masihi.
What I want to point out is that Jesus had no idea, not at all, what a Christian is, what a christ is.
He had never heard those words. In that sense Nietzsche’s statement is not right. In the same
reference I would like to say to you: although I have heard the word Rajneeshee, I am neither the
first nor the last.
I don’t belong to any group, any religion, any organization. Even in your commune I am an outsider,
just a guest – a guest of Rajneeshees.
I am not a Rajneeshee.
A Christian is comparable to a Hindu, to a Jew, to a Buddhist, to a Jaina, to a communist even,
because they all believe in tight organizations. They all believe in one leader, one prophet, one
messiah, one God, one holy book. Nietzsche’s statement cannot be applied to me because as far
as Rajneeshism is concerned there is no God, there is no holy book, there is no messiah.
I am not a messiah.
To be a messiah, first a God is needed.
I have left myself without a leg to stand on by declaring that there is no God. Now I cannot declare
myself a messiah; that possibility is closed. It is God who sends messiahs and messengers – and
now there is nobody.
There is nobody above me and there is nobody below me.
There are only two ways to be superior. Either you are sent from high above, from the great boss, as
Jesus is sent, as Mohammed is sent.... They come from the great boss, with all the powers invested
in them. That is one way to declare yourself superior to others. All are not begotten sons of God, it
is only Jesus. All are not messiahs, it is only Jesus.
From Personality to Individuality 171 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
Jesus is declaring his superiority: you are just sheep; he is the shepherd. He is the only shepherd;
amongst millions of sheep, the only shepherd. I don’t like such company. Millions of sheep and I am
the only shepherd? What kind of company is this? – and you are judged by your company. Even if
you are a shepherd it is not much to brag about, but it is a way to prove yourself superior.
The other way is followed by the Buddhists and the Jainas, because neither of them believe in God,
so that possibility is closed. They have found another possibility, and that is the tirthankara – the
Jaina equivalent to the messiah – who is not sent by God, because there is no God, but who attains
to the same state of cosmic consciousness through millions of lives’ effort. You are millions of lives
behind him, below him. It will take millions of lives for you to be able to reach that state.
That is the other way of declaring superiority – perhaps far better a way, because it is so arduous.
To become a messiah all that you need is a retarded mind, stupid, stubborn – and you can declare
yourself
And to declare yourself the only begotten son of God, what do you need? Just no sense of shame,
that’s all; otherwise such stupid things.... Any intelligent person, even if he is the only begotten son
of God, will try to hide the fact: if somebody hears, what are people going to think about it?
Even if he knows that he is a messenger from God he will not tell anybody. He will deliver
the message and escape because it looks so foolish that you are the son of a poor carpenter,
uneducated, and you have been chosen to be the messenger of God.
God could not find an educated, sophisticated rabbi? – and there were thousands! In fact rabbis are
some of the most scholarly people in the world. God seems to be crazy: He should have chosen
somebody refined, cultured, knowing all the scriptures, but Jesus was not even able to read. And
there were people whose whole life was devoted to study, to thinking, to contemplation – it was a
traditional thing.
Judaism and Hinduism are the only two basic religions in the world. Other religions are
offshoots either of Hinduism or of Judaism, but Judaism and Hinduism remain separate. There
is no connection between them, no communication has happened between them; and both are
tremendously scholarly.
If God chooses Krishna as an incarnation it can be understood. Krishna has that understanding,
wisdom, education – the best that was available was available to him; the most famous teachers
were his teachers. He was trained to be a wise man, and he was a wise man.
And there were so many rabbis commenting on the TORAH; and such intelligent commentaries that
if you look at those commentaries even today you will find them immensely contemporary. Perhaps
they are three thousand years old but so insightful and so beautiful. Small statements in the TORAH
or the TALMUD have been made in the rabbis’ commentaries, so significant that when you see the
statement by itself, you think there is not much in it.
But when you see the commentaries and commentaries upon the commentaries, you become aware
of the immense dimensions opening from that stale statement. There was nothing in it – you could
not have found anything in it – but these commentators have some third eye. They go on looking –
From Personality to Individuality 172 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
something like an X-ray – and they go to the very depth. Perhaps they create the depth: they are
so creative that they bring something significant out of an absolutely insignificant statement. God
should have chosen these people, not a carpenter’s son.
But Jesus proclaimed himself to be the messenger of God. He must have looked like a buffoon. I
can’t help saying it. He used to travel on a donkey declaring himself the only begotten son of God.
The messiah that you have been waiting for for centuries is coming on a donkey!
People must have laughed. In the beginning he was just a laughingstock – yes, it was funny – but
this man went on and on. Soon people started realizing that it was no longer funny, it was becoming
a serious business because Jesus was gathering a few idiots around him who were saying that he
was the messiah.
And there was, as there has always been, a class of people who are rejected by the society: thieves,
prostitutes, gamblers, tax collectors. These people are rejected people; and these were the people
who Jesus collected. It was easy to collect them because they were rejected by the society and
Jesus was rejected by the society. They had found a great messiah – ”so let’s join him.” Not a single
rabbi went with Jesus. This is strange; this has never happened anywhere else.
Buddha was speaking against brahmins, against Hindus, but all his great disciples were brahmins.
It seems sensible because he was appealing to the best in the society. Although he was against
brahmins, the brahmins were the topmost, and out of the brahmins came the greater part of
intelligentsia.
Sariputta was a brahmin, Moggalayan was a brahmin, Mahakashyapa was a brahmin. They all had
come to Buddha, not because they were illiterate idiots, the rejected – gamblers, prostitutes, tax
collectors, thieves – no, but because they were great scholars and they could understand that what
Buddha was saying was right. And they were not nobodies.
When Sariputta came to Buddha, he himself had five hundred disciples of his own coming with him
– all great scholars. He had come first to have a discussion, and Buddha was very happy: what
could be more welcome? But Buddha asked, ”Have you experienced the truth or are you only a
great scholar? – I have heard your name.”
Looking at Buddha for a moment in silence, as if looking in a mirror, utterly naked, Sariputta said, ”I
am a great scholar, but as far as knowing the truth is concerned, I have not known it.”
Buddha said, ”Then it will be very difficult to argue. Argument is possible between two people who
don’t know truth. They can argue till eternity because neither knows. Both are ignorant so they can
go on playing with words and logic and quotations and scriptures, but because neither knows, there
is no possibility of their coming to a conclusion. At the most what can happen is whoever is more
clever and cunning and tricky may defeat the other, and the other will become the follower of the
more cunning or more sophisticated. But is this any decision about truth?
”Or there is a possibility of a meeting of two people who both have realized the truth, but then there
is no way to argue. What is there to argue about? They will sit silently, perhaps they may smile, or
hold each other’s hands, but what is there to say? Looking into each other’s eyes they will see that
From Personality to Individuality 173 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
there is nothing to say – we both know the same things, we are in the same space – so there will be
only silence.
”Or the third possibility is that one knows and one does not know. Then it is going to be very
troublesome because the one who knows cannot translate what he knows into the language of the
ignorant one. And the one who does not know will be unnecessarily wasting his time, his mind,
because he cannot convince the one who knows. The whole world cannot convince the person who
knows, because he knows and you don’t know. You may be all together....”
Buddha said, ”You have come with your five hundred disciples. You don’t know, and it is absolutely
certain that in these five hundred disciples no one knows; otherwise he would not be your disciple,
he would be your Master. You are more scholarly, they are less scholarly. You are older, they are
younger. They are your disciples.
”But how are we going to discuss anything? I am ready, but I know. One thing is certain: You cannot
convert me. The only possibility is that you will be converted, so think twice.” But Sariputta was
already converted. Seeing this man.... And he was intelligent enough, he had defeated many great
scholars.
It was a tradition in India in those days, that scholars would move all over the country defeating
other scholars. Unless a person had defeated all the scholars, he would not be recognized by the
scholarly mob as a wise man. But to stand before a Buddha, before one who knows.... It is not a
question of your scholarship and how many scholars you have defeated.
And Buddha simply said, ”I am ready. If you want to argue I am ready, but what argument is possible?
I have eyes, you don’t have eyes: I cannot explain to you what light is. You cannot have any idea
what light is. You will hear only the word light but the word will not have any meaning for you. It will
be contentless, heard – but not understood.
”So if you are really interested in truth, and not in getting defeated or being victorious... because
that is not my interest. I have arrived. Who cares to defeat anybody? For what? If you are really
interested in truth then just be here and do what I say. You can argue later on when you have come
to know something substantial, existential. Then you can argue.”
But Sariputta was a tremendously intelligent man. He said, ”I know that neither I can argue now,
nor will I be able to argue then. You have finished my argumentation. Now I cannot argue because
I don’t have eyes; then I will not be able to argue because I will have eyes. But I am going to stay.”
He stayed with his five hundred disciples. He said to the disciples, ”Now I am no longer your master.
Here is the man; I will be sitting by his side as his disciple. Please forget me as your master. If you
want to be here, he is your Master.”
Now if a man like Buddha could have said, ”I am a messenger of God,” he would not have been
laughed at. But he didn’t say that because he and Mahavira were contemporaries and both had an
absolute trust in their experience that there is no God. But they found another way.
To me it is the same. Whether you descend from above; then you are special.... They ascend from
below and go on above you, so far away. Millions of lives you will have to work and then you will be
able to reach that state – it is almost impossible.
From Personality to Individuality 174 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
I cannot declare myself a messiah because there is no God.
I cannot declare myself a tirthankara or an avatara, because to me truth is not obtained by arduous
effort in millions of lives.
Truth can be attained instantly, immediately, herenow, because you have it already. So it is not a
question of achieving it; you have not to go somewhere to find it.
You are carrying truth within you all the time.
It is just that you are not awake.
But awakening does not need millions of lives.
Just a good hit on your head and you will be awake – more than awake.
So I don’t see myself superior to you. I don’t see anybody inferior to me; I don’t see anybody superior
to me either – neither Jesus, nor Buddha, nor Mahavira. I don’t see them as superior to me, because
it is such a simple human experience. Why make so much ado about nothing? Somehow even in
Mahavira and Buddha some shadow of the ego is still persisting. They have arrived but they are not
whole. Perhaps a leg is missing, a hand is missing; something is missing, something is left behind.
Pakhtoonistan is a very small country between Pakistan and Afghanistan, almost a part of
Afghanistan. Once it was a part of India; now legally it is part of Pakistan. But the Pakhtoons
don’t want to be part of Pakistan, they want to be part of India; and if that is not possible they want....
Because now, Pakistan is in between. They are Mohammedans but a different race.
The Pakhtoon is a really beautiful man, perhaps the tallest in the whole world, the strongest in the
whole world, and lives longest in the whole world. You will not find a single Pakhtoon who is fat –
they are so proportionate and so tall and so beautiful, as if sculptured by someone like Leonardo da
Vinci. They don’t want to mix with Pakistan, they would rather be together with Afghanistan.
These tribal people have a strange idea. I am reminded of it because I said that it is as if Buddha
has left something behind, as if Mahavira has left something behind. Pakhtoons believe that when
a man dies he should die with his body complete. No part should be missing because God will ask,
”Where is your hand? – because when I sent you into the world you were whole.” So they never allow
any operation, any amputation. They would rather die than have their kidneys taken out, because
they are simple people, primitive people, and their logic is simple: when God asks, ”Where are your
kidneys?...”
A beautiful story happened. In Lahore, a Pakhtoon, in the first world war, got shot in the hand. The
situation was such that if his hand was not cut off, then his whole body would be poisoned. The
decision had to be taken immediately, because even a few moments delay and it would be too late.
The Pakhtoon himself was unconscious, in a coma. His family was somewhere in Pakhtoonistan
and difficult to find, because Pakhtoonistan still has no postal system, no telegraph, no telegrams,
no telephones, no roads.
From Personality to Individuality 175 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
Only one road passes from Pakistan to Afghanistan, and even to pass through that road is
very difficult because Pakhtoon children go on practicing shooting – shooting drivers, shooting
passengers in the buses! They are very primitive and simple people. Where to learn? They don’t
think of making a target – and what is the point when there are so many targets?
When I was traveling in Pakhtoonistan, my driver said, ”I won’t allow you to drive here.”
I said, ”Why? It is such a beautiful country.”
He said, ”You don’t know: drivers are just targets! I won’t allow you. You sit in the other seat, the
passenger’s seat; I will have to drive. I have driven on this road so I know where the danger is and
how to avoid it and what to do. They are continually shooting – just children. From the very childhood
all that they want is a gun.”
So where to find his family to get their consent to cut his hand off? And he is a Pakhtoon: when he
comes back to consciousness and finds that his hand is missing, he is going to create trouble. But
there was no other way. The doctor, who was an Englishman, said, ”I take the responsibility. I know
the man and I will convince him somehow. Cut off his hand.”
When the man came back to consciousness he was really furious. The doctor listened to his anger
then explained to him that the situation was this: ”I have taken the whole responsibility, and look, I
have preserved your hand.” He had kept the hand in a big jar full of spirit. He said, ”I have preserved
it, so when you die we will put your hand with you.”
They are simple people; he understood the logic. He said, ”That’s right. What else could you have
done? That’s perfectly good. So you keep it, because we Pakhtoons are continually traveling.”
They used to travel all over India because from Pakhtoonistan they used to bring dry fruits – the best
grow in Pakhtoonistan – and woolen clothes: blankets, sweaters. These two things they would carry
from Pakhtoonistan to India to sell.
Really, since Pakistan has been divided you don’t see Pakhtoons coming into India. You don’t get
that quality of dried fruits that they used to bring. It was the most superior you could get anywhere.
So he said, ”I am continually traveling. Now, to carry this hand everywhere will look odd. Secondly,
I may forget it. It may get dropped somewhere. It is in a glass thing – it may be broken. You keep it,
and I will tell my family that when I die they should get the hand from you.”
The doctor said, ”That’s perfectly okay.”
But an accident happened: the hospital got burned, and with it, the hand of the Pakhtoon. But the
doctor was not very worried about it because he was being retired and was going back to England,
so far away from Pakhtoonistan that those people could not bother him in any possible way. Who
was the doctor and where had he gone? Where were they going to find him? And they could not go
to England, they were poor people.
But he was afraid that even in England, who knows? – those people are dangerous. They may find
some way... so it is better to keep a hand ready, in case. But he forgot that he had cut off the left
From Personality to Individuality 176 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
hand. He got a right hand from a hospital and kept it preserved in his bedroom so that if some time
somebody came....
The story is that one night somebody knocked on the door. The doctor opened the door and the
Pakhtoon was standing there, furious. The doctor could not believe his eyes. The Pakhtoon didn’t
say anything, he simply showed him his left arm and asked, ”Where is my hand?” – not verbally; he
just showed him his arm: ”Give me my hand.”
The doctor almost had a nervous breakdown. He just got hold of the flask and took it out. At that
moment he realized the mistake, that it was the right hand! And the Pakhtoon seeing it, kicked the
flask over, took the hand and threw it into the room. He said, ”Tomorrow night I will come again. You
find my hand!”
Perhaps the second part of the story is psychological. For the doctor this became a nightmare.
Every night.... The doctor gets into this insane idea that the Pakhtoon has died. Perhaps somebody
from Lahore – a colleague, another doctor – has informed him that the Pakhtoon has died, and to
be aware. Perhaps it is only his own imagination, but he thinks he sees the ghost of the Pakhtoon.
Whatever the case – I don’t believe in ghosts, but you can imagine....
If you can imagine God, why not a ghost? – just a very small creature. If you can see Jesus and
Krishna and Buddha, then there is no problem: you can hallucinate just a poor Pakhtoon. And there
was cause enough – the doctor had broken his word.
Pakhtoons are very truthful. If they give a promise they will fulfill it whatsoever the cost. Even
for a small thing they will risk their life; if they have promised, they will do it. So he was afraid
perhaps because of that. The doctor had lived amongst Pakhtoons in Lahore and he knew what
kind of people they are: even after death.... And particularly in England, ghosts appear more than
anywhere else.
England is somehow very attractive to ghosts. There are proportionately more houses in England
than in any country which are haunted by ghosts. Britain has a certain magnetism for ghosts.
Perhaps that is why British people look so serious, afraid.
Don’t start a conversation with Proper Sagar unless you are properly introduced before. Perhaps
there is also a fear of getting into conversation with a ghost: you don’t know who he is. If somebody
you know introduces you, then it is okay; otherwise who knows who is who? This doctor must have
been a Proper Sagar.
The story is that he died because of this continual nightmare. One morning he was found dead.
He must have thought that the Pakhtoon had pressed on his neck and throat, but actually he was
pressing on his own throat; and in the morning, when he was found, he had killed himself. But he
must have thought, hallucinated, got into the idea and killed himself. He must have died thinking
that the Pakhtoon was killing him! But the idea of the Pakhtoon, that you should be whole when you
go back, is significant.
And Buddha has left something behind: he is still somehow saying to you that he is higher. He
declares that he has attained the highest cosmic consciousness, which nobody had ever attained
before.
From Personality to Individuality 177 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
Now, this is the same game, played more sophisticatedly. But what he is trying to do is the same as
what Jesus is trying to do in saying that, ”I am the only begotten son of God. Nobody was before,
nobody is going to be afterwards; I am the only son.” He is making his place superior forever. Buddha
is doing the same; of course he says that he is coming from millions of lives.
In one life he was an elephant – but then too he was superior. He tells the story that when he was
an elephant the jungle caught fire. The fire was spreading so fast, and the wind was so strong, that
all the animals were running out of the jungle. He was also running, but finding a big shady tree he
stood there just to rest a little in the coolness of the shadow.
As he was just going to move and had lifted up one of his feet, a small rabbit, running in just the same
fear of the fire, also came under the shadow of the tree, and rested there just where the elephant
was going to put his foot. Now, to put his foot down would kill the rabbit, but not to put his foot... how
long could he stand on three feet? And you should understand: an elephant standing on three feet
is a really heavy job, just the one foot up is enoughl
But Buddha said, ”I kept my foot up and saved the life of the rabbit, although because of balancing
that great a load I tumbled and fell sideways and died. But because I had done that good deed, I
was born as a man.”
Now, even while he was an elephant he was a superior elephant, not an ordinary elephant; otherwise
I don’t think any elephant is going to be bothered by a rabbit. In the first place he won’t even see
if the rabbit is there. Elephants are big but their eyes are very small. Have you seen that strange
combination? – such small eyes in such a big animal. Who is creating these designs? A little
proportion is needed. Or do you think the elephant can see the rabbit who is just sitting underneath
his feet? I think it will take long yoga practice for the elephant to look down; it is not easy for an
elephant to look that far down.
Just draw a picture of an elephant – I have drawn one and I have tried in every possible way to
imagine myself as the elephant, but I couldn’t see the rabbit. The foot is there, and the rabbit is
underneath the foot – but such small eyes in such a big body... it is just not possible.
Even in his elephant life Buddha was so non-violent, non-hurting, that he preferred his own death
rather than killing a rabbit. He tells many stories of his past lives, and in every life he is superior.
That superiority continues even into this last life: now he is the suprememost enlightened man.
For you it will take millions of lives – you may not yet be at the stage of the elephant. Would you
be ready to die to save a rabbit? You won’t be even ready to save your wife – particularly your wife,
because married life is such that people say to each other....
One lover was saying to his beloved, ”Without you I will die, I can’t breathe. Without you I can’t see
any meaning in life. Without seeing you, my whole day becomes dark and dismal, but on the days I
see you I am so full of joy that I can see stars even in the daytime.”
Women are more practical; they don’t listen to all this garbage. She knew that he must have learned
this dialogue that he was speaking from some film or somewhere. She said, ”What about tomorrow?
Are you coming tomorrow?”
From Personality to Individuality 178 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
He said, ”If it does not rain – because I don’t have my umbrella repaired yet.” Poetry is one thing, but
when things come to reality then it is a totally different world.
Buddha is trying to prove himself not only higher than YOU.... He tells the story, ”When I became
enlightened all three Hindu gods....” Just like the Christian trinity, Hinduism has the trimurti, the three
faces of God – one body but three faces. It looks almost more logical than the Christian trinity – God
the Father, the Holy Ghost, and Jesus Christ the Son.
This trinity looks a very incomplete family: there is no mother, no brothers, no sisters. And the story
is so old that it must have been a joint family. In those days such a nuclear family – only one son,
and that too without a wife! Great birth control – even the wife is dropped. It doesn’t seem that it can
be real.
The Hindu God seems to have some logic behind it: one body, three faces. Brahma is the creative
face who creates the world; Vishnu is the sustainer, who sustains the world; and Shiva is the
destructive part, who destroys the world. This seems to be more logical, perhaps more scientific
too.
It is a strange thing: science goes on dividing and dividing – molecules have been divided into atoms
and atoms themselves have been divided – and the ultimate division science has arrived at is into
three. One is positive, that can be the creative part; the other is neutral, that can be the sustainer
part; the third is destructive, negative, that can be the third face of the Hindu God.
Sooner or later Hindus are going to brag that this is what their three faces mean – electron, neutron,
proton – that this is the new way of saying the same thing; but it is one body, it is the same electricity,
the same force. What does Buddha manage to do with this? He says, ”When I became enlightened
all three Hindu gods, Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesh – all three came to touch my feet.”
Now, this is even better than Jesus. Jesus after all is just a son. Buddha manages to have all the
three Hindu gods touch his feet, because those three gods say, ”The enlightened being is far higher
than God. We also desire, in some life, to gain the same state of being.”
In Hinduism, gods are not permanent beings. They have a certain period of time in heaven that
they have earned through being good in the world, a certain bank balance of virtue. They will live
in heaven till that bank balance is finished. Once it is finished they are thrown back into the world,
again on the road – in the wheel of life and death. The enlightened being does not go to heaven, he
goes to moksha.
Moksha is above heaven, from where no fall is possible, because it doesn’t happen through virtue
or good deeds, it happens through awareness, total awareness. And once you are totally aware,
how can you fall? So Buddha uses a far more clever strategy to prove himself superior. Mahavira
uses it in the same way. A tirthankara becomes a tirthankara through millions of lives of arduous
austerities; and there are only twenty-four tirthankaras in one cycle of creation.
Only recently has Western physics become aware of such immense spans of time, but Hinduism,
Jainism and Buddhism have been aware of them for a long time. In English you cannot find the
equivalent to many numbers which are available in Indian languages. One cycle is not a small thing
From Personality to Individuality 179 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
but of millions and millions of years. Creation does not begin like Christians say – which looks very
childish – four thousand and four years before Jesus Christ.
Now, the Eastern people will laugh and say, ”Whom are you kidding? Creation happened four
thousand and four years before Christ?” China has been for at least ten thousand years. India has
been, according to Indian scholars, for at least ninety thousand years.
If you don’t believe them it is difficult to argue against their argument because in the RIG VEDA the
Hindus have a description of stars in a certain combination which happened – according to scientific
astronomers – ninety thousand years ago. If that particular combination of stars was known to the
people who were writing the RIG VEDA, it is enough proof that the RIG VEDA is far older than ninety
thousand years.
Even if the RIG VEDA was written later on, at least in the memory of the people that particular
combination of stars was kept in mind – and the RIG VEDA says it happened exactly ninety thousand
years ago. Their book is ninety thousand years old; your creation is only six thousand years old –
from today. So it is very difficult to argue that it is not so. Hindus will laugh and say, ”What are you
talking about?”
Jainas are even more mathematical. In the RIG VEDA, their first tirthankara’s name is mentioned.
That becomes even more complicated a problem because their first tirthankara, Rishabadeva, is
mentioned by name with great respect.
It is very logical: to show so much respect to a person who is against your religion makes one thing
certain – he can’t be contemporary. These are simple, logical ways to think. In the first place, if
somebody is your contemporary, you are full of contempt towards the man – perhaps that is the
meaning of contemporary – you cannot believe in him.
That’s why they could not believe in Jesus Christ. They couldn’t believe in him. When Buddha
was contemporary, Hindus did not recognize him. But five hundred years after he died they had to
recognize him as one of the Hindu incarnations of God because his influence had grown so much.
Now to reject him meant to reject all the Buddhists. That would have been a great loss to the Hindu
priesthood. It was better to absorb them, to keep them under the Hindu fold so that you could go on
exploiting them; otherwise they would move apart.
So for five hundred years Hindus were continually criticizing Buddha, but after five hundred years
they changed their tactics, their strategy. Up to that time they had only ten incarnations of God, and
there was no room to allow for Buddha, but Buddhists wouldn’t agree for any lesser position than
that. So they had to increase the quota! Five hundred years after Buddha, the Hindus changed and
started saying, ”If we have twenty-four avataras... just as Jainas have twentyfour tirthankaras and
Buddhists have twenty-four Buddhas, we also have twenty-four avataras.”
Gautam Buddha was born in a Hindu family, obviously – just like Jesus was born in a Jewish family
– so he was a Hindu, and he died as a Hindu. They reclaimed him and declared him one of the
incarnations of the Hindu God. But for the contemporary Buddha there was nothing but contempt.
It is so common a practice all over the world – that you can respect a man who is dead, and the
longer he is dead, the better. If he is outside the scope of your history then you can respect him very
easily, then there is no problem at all. He is so distant from you, it does not hurt.
From Personality to Individuality 180 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
But somebody sitting by your side declaring himself the only begotten son of God! You cannot
believe this guy – perspiring, stinking – is the only begotten son of God. You feel like kicking him!
The only son of God? You feel angry at him, at God, at everything that this man.... But after two
thousand years have passed nobody is worried; nobody seems to be concerned whether Jesus was
really the son of God.
Christians have accepted it but Jews don’t talk about him. Mohammedans have accepted him
because they have no problem about him. Hindus, Jainas, Buddhists, have no trouble with Jesus.
You cannot convert a single Jaina to Christianity, or a single Buddhist to Christianity, because
Christianity is a far more primitive religion. Those people are far superior in their arguments and
their logic.
Many Christians have become Buddhists; not a single Buddhist becomes Christian. There is nothing
in it to appeal to them. Do you think a Bud&ist will be impressed by the fact that Jesus is the son of
the virgin, Mary? He will simply laugh; he will say, ”You are joking!” What has Christianity got?
One Christian missionary went, with his BIBLE, to see a Zen Master. He started reading the Sermon
on the Mount, of course; that is the best part. In fact that’s all that Christianity is about. He had
read only one or two sentences when the Zen monk said, ”Stop. Whoever the guy was, he was a
bodhisattva” – bodhisattva means in some future life he will become a buddha. ”Be finished! These
sentences are proof enough that in some future life this guy is going to become a buddha. But don’t
be bothered with him, he is not a buddha right now – only a bodhisattva.”
Bodhisattva means essentially a buddha, but everybody is a bodhisattva essentially. You may take
lives to make your essence actual; that depends on you, but you are a buddha. Not only you, the
trees, the birds, even the dogs are essentially bodhisattvas. They may take a little longer, or maybe
some intelligent dog rushes ahead and leaves you behind. It is happening: all intelligent dogs have
come to Oregon. They have made a party – 1000 Friends of Oregon. They are known as watchdogs!
I was wondering why they are called watchdogs. Finally the revelation came to me that they are
dogs, but very intelligent. Most of them are in the legal profession; they have changed themselves
into watchdogs. Even dogs, even watchdogs of Oregon are bodhisattvas. So that Zen Master
was not saying much, but that missionary was overjoyed. And the story was being told all over, in
Christian churches that a Zen Master had accepted Jesus; but the missionary did not understand
the meaning of bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva does not mean buddha. Sattva means essence, potentially; but potentiality may always
remain a potentiality – there is no necessity for a seed to become a tree. A seed may remain just a
seed forever – there are different types of seed. Some seed may choose to sit upon a rock. You can
go on meditating sitting on a rock, but you are not going to become a buddha. On a rock a seed will
remain a seed.
To become a tree the seed has to die into the earth, dissolve itself completely; on its death is the
birth of the tree. Its death is absolutely essential. Here it dies, and on the other side the tree is born,
a small sprout, but alive. The seed was almost dead. I say ”almost” because it had the potential of
life. But a seed can remain a seed – and millions of seeds do remain seeds.
From Personality to Individuality 181 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
So it was nothing much; that Zen Master really joked with the missionary. He said, ”Stop, enough!
Those two lines are enough. Whosoever said it....” He did not even bother to ask who had said it.
He said, ”Whosoever has said it, he is a bodhisattva. Close the book – now talk business.”
I am not the first Rajneeshee or the last Rajneeshee.
I am not a Rajneeshee at all.
I am just an outsider.
You may be Rajneeshees, but don’t drag me into your Big Muddy Ranch. You enjoy the Big Muddy
Ranch – leave me outside.
I am just a guest, because in the first place I don’t want to be crucified – no interest in it at all. I don’t
want to be deified – no interest in it at all.
Whatever I am is so fulfilling that I don’t see any need to be something else. I don’t see anybody
superior to me, I don’t see anybody inferior to me.
In fact both those things exist together. Anybody who thinks somebody is superior must think
somebody else inferior, and vice versa: if you think somebody is inferior to you, you are bound
to think of somebody as superior. It is the same mind; and those two dimensions are not two
dimensions but two polarities of the same thing.
I am simply out of it. I am just not playing that game of being superior and inferior.
If you are really interested in what I am doing and saying and being, then never let ”Rajneeshee”
become something like Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan, no. Never get serious about it. It is just a
word to demarcate.
It is not a creed, a cult, a dogma that you have to fight for, that you have to go on a crusade for. No,
– you need not become Don Quixotes – you are not to convert anybody.
Rajneeshee is simply a name.
Some name is needed, X, Y, Z, anything will do, just to give you a demarcation. You are not Hindus,
you are not Mohammedans, you are not Christians. People are going to ask, ”Then who are you?”
I have never voted. My name is not even on the census reports in India because whenever the
census people came there was a clause which had to be filled out: To which religion do you belong?
I said, ”This is difficult – I don’t belong to any religion.” But they insisted the form had to be filled out
completely, only then was it acceptable. I said, ”Forget about it. Don’t accept it – I don’t care about
it. Your form is your business. Just get lostl I am not going to fill in that clause because that would
be a lie: I don’t belong to any religion.”
But those poor people insisted, You must belong to something. If you are an atheist you can say, ’I
am an atheist.’”
From Personality to Individuality 182 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
But I am not an atheist. I am not obsessed with the idea that there is no God, and I am not after
Him. If there is no God why should I be after Him? And why should I call myself an atheist when
there is no God?
Theism is belief in God.
Atheism is disbelief in God.
My God! – disbelief in God?
I told these people, ”I don’t believe, I don’t disbelieve: I simply have nothing to do with God.”
They said then, ”But you must be doing some prayer.”
I said, ”Never. I have never done any prayer. Why should I do any prayer?” And they were almost
angry at this. Once it happened that they had come to my house and went away very angry. Then
they came to the university, but they did not recognize me because in the house I had been simply
sitting with a lungi on, my body half-naked, and in the college I had on a robe. So they could not
figure out that I was the same person: again they brought out the form.
I said, ”Listen, if you show me this form again I am going to hit you really hard.”
They said, ”Again? but we have never met.”
I said, ”You have forgotten. That guy who was....” Then they looked again and they said, ”Yes, that’s
true. Now we will be continually aware of beards. We may come across you again somewhere.”
I was at that time really strong – one hundred and ninety pounds – and I was running eight miles
every day, morning and evening, whenever I could find time. So that when I said to anybody, ”I will
hit you hard,” they understood it would be hard.
I had enjoyed jumping, running, swimming so much that my family was always worried: ”Will you do
anything else in life or not? And you create such a nuisance for other people.”
I said, ”But I simply do my thing. I don’t get in anybody’s way.” But they had something at hand –
some report had arrived. So they said, ”This is not true. This morning at four o’clock, what business
did you have that you were running backwards? We know there are people who go running, but
BACKWARDS?”
The place where I lived was in the most beautiful area – with big, tall trees and a long row of
bamboos, so it was always shadowy near the bamboos. It was a full moon night, and I was just
doing my exercises by the side of those bamboos. It is more joyous to run backwards because you
are moving into the unknown; you can’t see what might happen. And at four o’clock the street was
almost empty. But there is an Indian belief that ghosts walk backwards....
There was a man who used to live at the corner of the road who had a small tea shop. He used to
get very afraid, but only in the beginning. Then I went to him and told him, ”You need not be afraid:
From Personality to Individuality 183 Osho
CHAPTER 10. CHRISTIANITY: JUST A NICE JEWISH BOY’S HANG-UP
I am a man, I am not a ghost, and every morning you see me; so once and for all be settled about it
and go on sleeping – don’t get disturbed.”
But what happened that day was that the milk man.... They come early in the morning because they
bring milk from nearby villages with two big drums full of milk on a bicycle. The milkman was coming
along the road when suddenly he saw me. He lost his balance and fell from the bicycle. Because
the drums fell and made so much noise, I turned back wondering, What is the matter? I saw the
bicycle, the drums and the milk all over the road. And the man running far away!
I simply forgot that it was not good to follow him. I just wanted to help him and tell him that I was not
a ghost, so I followed him. And because I was always running he could not escape me. When he
saw me coming behind him, he simply fell down, unconscious. And I was trying to tell him....
By that time the man who lived at the corner came and said, ”Look, this is what used to happen to
me. And if he fell from his bicycle, what business was it of yours to follow him?”
I said, ”I was simply trying to help – so that he was sure that I am a man.”
He said, ”Now have you made sure? Now he has almost become a ghost!”
That report had reached my family and that was why they were saying: ”This is not right. You should
not get in people’s way.”
Those census officers said, ”Sir” – because there they were respectful to a university professor. At
my house I was in the garden, digging a hole. There they were very angry with me, thinking me a
gardener or somebody who was just talking absurdities in saying that he could not fill in this line. In
the university they said, ”Sir, one thing please remember: if we come across you again, you remind
us and we will simply leave. We will not say anything.”
So my name does not exist on the Indian voters’ list. I have not voted in my whole life because my
name never appeared on the voters’ list. It was not in the census list even, for the simple reason
that I could not say what my religion was.
You are fortunate, you can say what your religion is. But it is not to be taken seriously.
You are not to fight for it.
You are not to die for it.
You have to live it, enjoy it, relish it.
And please, leave me out of it!
From Personality to Individuality 184 Osho
CHAPTER 11
God – the phantom fuehrer
9 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
ALAN WATTS ONCE DESCRIBED THE UNIVERSE BY SAYING, ”IT IS AS IF GOD IS PLAYING A
GAME.” IF THERE IS NO GOD, WHO IS PLAYING AND WHAT IS THE GAME?
ALAN Watts was a nice guy but that statement he made was stolen from Hindu mythology. That’s
what he was doing his whole life, although to the West it appeared as if he was giving original
insights.
Basically he was trained as a Christian priest and, like every Christian priest, acquired a certain
knowledge about all the religions so that he could prove Christianity to be the best, the highest, the
truest religion.
But Alan Watts – that’s why I say he was a nice guy – seeing the Hindu religion could not say that
the Christian religion was the highest religion that had happened on earth. He was an honest man.
He renounced his priesthood and remained almost a beggar his whole life. But he was tremendously
impressed by Eastern religions – emphatically with the Hindu idea of God playing a game. In
Hinduism it is called leela. That is one of the contributions of Hinduism to world thought.
All other religions believe that God is creating the world; it is a serious affair. Only Hinduism makes
it non-serious. Hinduism says it is just a play, a game of hide-and-seek. It is God who is hiding, it
185
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
is God who is seeking; it is God in men, it is God in women. To Hinduism, existence is made of the
stuff called God, and it is not a creation. The concept of creation has implications which Christianity,
Judaism, and Mohammedanism are incapable of answering.
First: Why in the first place should God create? What is His need? One creates something because
of a certain need. You create a house because you need a shelter. You create because there is a
certain desire to be fulfilled. Is God full of desires? Then what is the difference between man and
God? Is God in need? If even God is in need then there is no possibility of a state where you will be
free of need: need is going to follow you like a shadow wherever you go, and you can never be free
from it – and unless you are free from need, desire, wanting, you are a slave, and you will remain a
slave.
A God who has a certain need to create is a slave.
The implications are very significant. Was it compulsory for Him to create, or was it optional? If
it was compulsory, then God is not all-powerful. Somebody above Him orders Him to create, and
there is no option, He has to do it. Or if you say it was optional, then the question arises, Why does
He choose to create rather than not to create? There must be some reason for choosing to.
What reason can God have to choose creation? Then that reason becomes more important than
God Himself If even God has to follow rationality, then why should you have to bother about God?
You should think about being reasonable, following reason, which even God cannot throw away.
Why did God create at a certain moment, at a certain time?
What was He doing before that?
For eternity He was unemployed. What was that fellow doing all that time?
Sleeping? In a coma? Drunk, or what?
And suddenly one day He starts creating. There is no reason that Christian theology, Mohammedan
religion, or Judaism can supply as to why, at a certain moment, there was this urge to create.
In fact the urge to create is something biological, sexual.
Sexual energy is your creative energy.
Women have not been great painters and poets and sculptors for the simple reason that their desire
to create is immensely fulfilled by bringing up children. To give birth to a child, alive, radiant – what
else can be compared to it? You create a painting; howsoever beautiful, it is a dead thing after all.
You can create music, you can create song.
But what are they compared to a beautiful child?
Just look into the eyes of a child and all your paintings are nothing.
From Personality to Individuality 186 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
The child smiles, and all your songs fall flat on the ground.
The child tries to walk, and the joy when the child feels ”I can walk.”
All your science, all your art, are nothing compared to that joy.
And when the child speaks for the first time, have you seen the ecstasy?
The mother watches from the first moments in her womb when the child starts moving. An
experienced mother, one who has given birth to one or two children, can tell whether the child
is a boy or a girl, because the girl remains quiet and the boy starts kicking very early: he is in a hurry
to get out. The girl remains silent. And that difference continues in childhood, in youth, in old age.
A woman has a certain stability, a centeredness, a grounding, which a man has not. He is always
on the move. Even on holidays he can’t sit silently. He will start fixing the clock which is working
perfectly well. He will take it apart.
There is nothing wrong with the clock – something is wrong with the man! He can’t sit still. He will
open the bonnet of his car, start doing something, and create a mess. And he will be more tired
after the holiday than he ever is after he comes from the office, because for the whole day he cannot
just sit still.
I have heard: a woman hired a nurse to look after her children – she had almost a dozen children.
She said to the nurse, ”Today I will be coming home a little late. These children will create trouble
for you but there is no other way, I have to go. Somebody has died, and they are close relatives. I
may be back late, so forgive me and be patient. And somehow make all of them go to sleep.”
When the woman returned in the middle of the night, she asked, ”Have an the children gone to
sleep?.” The nurse said, ”All of them have gone to sleep; just one was creating so much trouble I
had to beat him.”
The wife said, ”Which one?” – and the nurse showed her.
She said, ”My God! It is my husband!”
”But,” the nurse said, ”he was the most troublesome. The whole day he was doing this and doing
that. I somehow kept hold of the others, but this one was too big in the first place. But then I thought
that if he won’t understand any other language... so I started slapping him. I threw him forcibly onto
the bed, but he would sit back up again and try to escape.”
Man is restless.
And in the mother’s womb, very early on the mother can feel whether it is a boy or a girl. She feels
so contented in giving birth to a child, in helping the child to grow; and that’s why she does not need
any other kind of creativity. Her creative urge is fulfilled.
But man is in trouble: he cannot give birth to a child, he cannot have the child in his womb. He has
to find a substitute, otherwise he will always feel inferior to the woman. And deep down he does feel
that he is inferior.
From Personality to Individuality 187 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
Because of that feeling of inferiority man tries to create paintings, statues, dramas, he writes poetry,
novels, explores the whole scientific world of creativity.
This is all nothing but an effort of man to say to woman, ”I am a creator. You are just an instrument
in the hands of biology – the child is not your creation. Any woman can do that, but any man cannot
become Picasso, or Nijinsky, or Nietzsche, or Dostoevsky. This is creativity.”
This is how man compensates and covers up his inferiority. And this is the way he has followed for
thousands of years; and by and by has convinced himself, and the woman too, that he is superior
to her. And he has not allowed the woman the same freedom to create these things because he
knows perfectly well that woman can be as creative as him.
A woman can create like Picasso and Dostoevsky and Bernard Shaw and Russell; there is no
problem in it. All that she will have to do is drop the idea of being a mother, because it is difficult
to be a mother and to be a Bertrand Russell. There is a conflict of interest. It is difficult to be a
woman, a mother, and at the same time be a Picasso, because Picasso’s paintings demand – just
like a woman – his whole being. His paintings monopolize him. Now, the woman cannot allow that
monopoly.
In fact when the first child is born, a rift starts happening between the husband and wife for the
simple reason that the woman is now monopolized by the child; the father is secondary. From now
onwards he cannot be primary, he cannot have priority. Obviously nature is in support of the child
because he has a future, and the father is going to die sooner rather than later.
Nature is always with the new, with the growing.
Nature is always with the sunrise, never with the sunset. And this is perfectly logical. What is the
point of being with the sunset?
Why does God have to create? Either God is not He but She.... Then God is a woman, and this
whole universe is Her womb. But then you are bringing God down to the same level of biology as
man, as animals, as anybody else....
Or, God is a man but feels somehow inferior to some woman about whom we don’t know anything.
With which woman is He feeling competitive? There must be a woman in His life, and He feels
incompetent, inferior. By creating this whole universe He wants to prove to the woman, ”Look, this
is creation.” But then God is no longer God: He is just as human, as animal as we are.
”Creation” is indefensible.
And what kind of creation has He made? If He is serious – and creation has to be serious – then
this life with so much misery, so much suffering, which finally ends in death and darkness, has no
meaning at all. If He wanted to create, there was no need to create such a miserable existence, full
of anguish, suffering, agony: an existence which is more a curse than a blessing.
One of Dostoevsky’s characters in his greatest work, BROTHERS KARAMAZOV.... It is perhaps
the greatest novel in the whole world, in any language. One of the Karamazovs – there are three
From Personality to Individuality 188 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
brothers, and one of them says, ”If I meet God, all that I want is to return my ticket and for Him to
tell me where the exit is. Everywhere I see the entrance, but where is the exit? And who is He, that
without asking me, produced me, created me? On what authority? – I was not even asked whether
I want to be created; I was not given any alternative.”
This is totalitarian, absolutely dictatorial. God seems to be some magnified Adolf Hitler or Joseph
Stalin. You were not asked, and yet you have to suffer. You were not asked, and you have been
given instincts for which you will suffer here and perhaps hereafter.
The same theologians, the same priests, go on telling you to destroy your instinctive life completely.
God gives instincts to you: he is responsible. If anybody has to suffer in hell it is only He alone;
nobody else is responsible for anything.
A murderer comes with the instinct to murder. A rapist comes with the instinct to rape. Who is
responsible for all this? Yet these religions go on telling you that you are responsible. God is the
creator and you are responsible? – and you were not even asked, What instincts do you want?
If you had chosen to be a rapist, a murderer, then of course it would be your responsibility and you
would have to suffer the consequences. But you simply come with an inbuilt program, so whoever
programs you, only He and nobody else is responsible.
Alan Watts understood very clearly that he could not answer this question which has been raised
in the East again and again. Hinduism has found an answer; at least it appears to be an answer.
Certainly it is better than the idea of creation, but it has its own problems – which Alan Watts was
not aware of because he was not well trained in the Eastern roots of religion. It appealed to him –
the idea of leela, play, seemed to be far better. Life is nothing serious; it is just a game, a play, a
drama.
In a drama you may become a thief; that does not mean that you have become a thief – you just play
the role. In a drama you may become an incarnation of God, Rama, Krishna; that does not mean
that you have become an incarnation of God, but on the stage before the audience it is accepted
without any question. Questioning it would be absolutely foolish: everybody knows that everybody
is playing a role.
Hinduism says that this whole existence is just a drama and God is just playing a game. The word
leela, playfulness, takes away seriousness and its implications. But it brings in new implications:
Why can’t God sit silently? – because the people who teach that God is playing a game also teach,
”Sit silently in meditation.” Why can’t He sit silently in meditation and stop all this nonsense?
But Alan Watts could not ask that question; it may not have occurred to him, but it can occur to me:
What is the point of all this nonsense? All Hindu sages are teaching: Sit silently, unmoving, without
any thought, utterly silent, then only will you taste what religion is. It seems God has never tasted
religion – he is continuously playing.
At least in creation there was one thing; that is, in six days He was finished. On the seventh day,
Sunday, He rested, and we don’t know what happened after that. But the Hindu God has to be
constantly playing. Now, there is a time to play and there is a time to study – or so each child is
being told – and there is a time to sleep.
From Personality to Individuality 189 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
But this mad Hindu God... no time to sleep, no time to study, no time for anything else: just playing
and playing and playing. He seems to be obsessed. And what a big play! – infinite, eternal. And
why should He go on playing? Is He not tired? And the same game....
In my village I had a friend whose father used to go to the ”movie-talkie” every day. The same film
used to continue at least for six or seven days; it didn’t matter, he had to go every day. I asked him,
”It seems a little strange that you go to see the same film for seven days.”
He said, ”Who bothers to watch the film? I really sleep! Once in a while in the seven days I see the
complete film. Sometimes I see the beginning part, sometimes the middle, sometimes the end. And
if someday I am feeling good, then I connect all the parts and see the whole film.”
”But,” I said, ”You can do it in one day.”
He said, ”I don’t want to do it one day. What will I do the remaining six days?” – because in that
small place the movie house was the only entertainment. Where else to go? I could understand the
difficulty of the old man.
But what is God’s difficulty? Why does the same game go on and on? And is He still entertained?
– He must be an idiot. If this is entertainment, even an idiot will start feeling bored: the same type
of people continue being born, the same love affairs, the same children, again and again – and the
wheel goes on moving. The same spokes come up and go down; again they come up and again
they go down. It is the same wheel, the same spokes.
I am not worried about the wheel, I am worried about the man who goes on moving it – for what
purpose? Of course you cannot ask Hindus about the purpose as you can the Christians – not with
the same emphasis, because it is a play. But I still ask: play is okay, if once in a while He plays, it is
understandable, but this continuous play, this repetitive play...? It seems that we are in the hands of
a mad God.
And then these same Hindu sages go on saying that you will suffer the consequences of your acts.
Strange: God is playful and yet we are going to suffer for our acts – which are God’s play! If He wants
me to play the role of a thief, okay, but why should I suffer the consequences? The same people
on the other hand say, ”It is God’s playfulness.” Great! Accepted – but what about the players?
They should be completely freed from any consequences – it is God’s play. You play cards: you get
defeated, or you become victorious – you win, or you lose – but do you think something happens to
the king and the queen and the joker of the cards? Whoever wins or whoever loses does not matter
to them at all; they are just playing cards.
We are just kings, queens, and jokers – mostly jokers.
Why should we suffer?
In Hinduism there cannot be these two things together. That was my constant conflict with Hindu
sages, shankaracharyas, Hindu pandits: if existence is out of playfulness then it is too much to
say that we should be thrown into hellfire. If it is somebody else’s play and He is never thrown
into hellfire, why should we be? Both these concepts put together are absolutely opposed to each
From Personality to Individuality 190 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
other. There is no way to make them complementary. I have tried my best – they cannot be made
complementary.
If it is God’s play, all the consequences are His:
We are just puppets in His hand.
Then the law of karma is simply crap.
With a playful God, what is the meaning of worship?
You can’t be serious....
If God Himself is playful, you have to be playful.
Ramakrishna was right.... There was a low caste woman of Calcutta who was an untouchable, but
who was a queen – Rani Rasmani. She made this beautiful temple of Dakshineshwar, in Calcutta,
on the banks of the Ganges; it is one of the most beautiful shrines.
She had enough money and enough of everything, but no brahmin was ready to worship in her
temple because that temple was made by an untouchable. So that temple had also become
untouchable, and the god in the temple, he had also become untouchable – and these brahmins
are the people who say that it is all playfulness. Even God becomes untouchable because the
temple statue has been purchased by the money of an untouchable.
Rani Rasmani never entered the temple, knowing perfectly well that if she entered the temple then
there would be no possibility of finding a brahmin priest. She never touched anything of the temple.
She used to come just to the boundary of the temple and bow down from there. And it was her
temple – she had poured millions of rupees into it. But no brahmin was ready to enter.
Ramakrishna was a poor brahmin, uneducated. His name at that time was Gadawar. ”Ramakrishna”
was later on, when disciples gathered and started feeling that he had some kind of synthesis of
Ram and Krishna in his being. Hence they started calling him Ramakrishna. But his name then was
Gadawar. He was uneducated: only up to second grade of Bengali was he educated. Where was
he going to find a job? His father died and he had to take care of his mother and his family. He was
in such difficulty that he accepted the offer to become the priest in the temple of Dakshineshwar.
All the brahmins said, ”Once you become the priest of Rani Rasmani, you are boycotted; you are no
longer a brahmin.”
He said, ”I don’t care, it does not matter – I will be worshipping God. Who has purchased the statue,
who has made the temple, is not my concern.”
He became the priest, but soon complaints started coming about him. Rani Rasmani was very
puzzled. What could she do? If she threw him out it would be difficult to find another brahmin.
And after her waiting for a few years, this one courageous young man had come; but now so many
complaints from people....
From Personality to Individuality 191 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
And they were strange complaints about things which could not be accepted, in no way allowed:
that when Ramakrishna brought food to God, first he would eat some himself in front of God. He
would taste the sweet and then offer it to God. Now that was absolutely unheard of.
In the West it would not make much difference. I see people every day placing their roses on the
bonnet of the car as only Westerners can – first they smell it; in the East it is impossible. And it is
out of love; what they are doing is absolutely out of love and respect, there is no question about it.
They smell the rose, they kiss it, and then they put it on the car.
That’s what Ramakrishna was doing in India. But in India, once you have smelled a flower you
cannot offer it to God. Kissing a flower and offering it to God! But he was doing worse still: he was
eating the food. Half of the sweet he would eat and half he would offer to God.
Rasmani had to call Ramakrishna and ask him, ”Don’t you know a simple thing? – that first you have
to offer the food to God? You spoil all the food and then you offer it to God. We would not even offer
it to a guest, and you are offering it to God?”
Ramakrishna said, ”My mother used to do it. She never gave me anything without tasting it
first,’Because,’ she said,’if it is not the right taste I will not give it to you.’ If my mother did it for me, I
think it is perfectly right for me to first taste whether it is worth offering to God or not. Sometimes it
is not worth offering – sometimes too much sugar, sometimes too little sugar; sometimes the taste
is just weird.
”Do you want me to give all these things to God? I cannot do that. I can resign from the post, but I
cannot do such an inhuman act as offering things which I have not tasted. Perhaps something may
be poisonous – the food comes from the market – who knows? I have to be absolutely certain that
nothing wrong goes to God.”
Rasmani was a woman of great understanding. She said, ”I understand. I am a woman and I can
feel your mother’s mind and I can feel you. You continue. It is my temple; and anyway, no other
brahmin is ready to be a priest. And your argument is valid. It is my temple, you are my priest. Your
salary is doubled from today.”
But then there was another problem. Some days he would not open the doors of the temple but
keep it locked. The whole day there was no worship; nobody else could enter – it was locked. Other
times the worship would continue the whole day. He would dance – people would come and go, but
from morning to evening he would be dancing and singing, dancing and singing. And for some days
he would simply lock the temple.
Rasmani asked Ramakrishna, ”This is now new trouble. What are you doing? Worship has to be
done every day; but you need not do it the whole day. Are you trying to do it wholesale? So far you
have done it the whole day for three or four days. There is no need.”
He said, ”No, that is not the point. Sometimes I get angry at God. Then I say, ’Okay, I will see you
tomorrow. Remain locked up!’ So I keep Him locked up. Within three to four days He comes to His
senses; then of course I go and I say, ’How are you? Understood the point? Now behave.’”
Rasmani said, ”You punish God?”
From Personality to Individuality 192 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
He said, ”Of course, if He does not behave rightly. For example, if I pray for hours and no answer
comes from His side, I will not tolerate such a thing. If I have been praying there for hours, the whole
day, and He just remains standing there dead, I will teach Him a lesson: for three or four days, no
food, no worship, and He remains locked up. And then He comes to His senses. When on the fifth
day I open the doors, He is immediately smiling and welcoming, and within just a few minutes He is
ready to answer me.”
Rasmani said, ”Now, it is very difficult to argue with you, but you are exactly the right person, because
if God is playing with the whole world, you have every right to play with Him. Go back to the temple:
your salary is doubled again.”
Slowly, slowly, Ramakrishna’s fame started spreading, that he was a strange priest, and nobody
could stop him because the temple belonged to Rasmani; it was private property and brahmins
could not even enter to see what was happening there. They were dying of curiosity! And that
man’s salary went on increasing; it was now four times what it had been. He had started with twenty
rupees per month; now it was eighty rupees per month.
In those days one rupee was seven hundred times more valuable than the rupee is today. Eighty
rupees was enough for the whole year: clothes, good food, good house – everything comfortable.
Eighty rupees for the whole year... and he was getting eighty rupees per month! There was great
jealousy among brahmins, because even in the best temples they were getting two rupees; five
rupees at the most. And Ramakrishna was doing such strange things.
Finally they sent a non-brahmin representative to Rasmani to say, ”This man should be thrown out
– he is not serious enough.”
But Rasmani said, ”But that is the whole Hindu philosophy – that the existence is playfulness. Why
should he be serious? I am also not serious. That’s why the more complaints come to me, the more
I go on increasing his salary. That has stopped the complaints and now nobody comes to complain
because they know complaints mean his salary will be doubled again.
”I had to stop the complaints somehow, and I have; now nobody is complaining. I enquire myself; I go
round the temple and I enquire of people,’Do you have any complaints against Ramakrishna?’ They
say,’No, he is the right person’ – and they know you can’t find a wronger person than Ramakrishna
as a priest!
”He knows nothing of Sanskrit; he talks in Bengali – and who has heard that God knows Bengali?
And to God he insists, ’You have to reply in Bengali because I don’t understand any other language.’”
Now, this was absolutely playful. But Hindus on the one hand go on saying it is God’s play, and on
the other hand they are very serious people. For each small thing everything will be counted, either
for or against you. On the one hand God is playful, but Hindus don’t allow man to be playful. With
whom is He playing? If He is playing He will need another party also to be playful; or is He playing
football alone, taking both sides? Then He must have scored millions of goals... and there is no
problem because He is alone on the field. But then it seems stupid.
No, to me there is no God.
From Personality to Individuality 193 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
I cut the problem from the very root so there is no question of creation and no question of playfulness.
Alan Watts has simply borrowed the idea from Hinduism. He shocked Christians, but to me it is
nothing: it is just another kind of theology. To him it was new and very revealing, but to me nothing
is very revealing: I know all the theologies. They may give different explanations but basically the
same questions are relevant to all explanations. If you ask why God created the world, you can ask
why does He need to play? Can’t He relax? Just take a hot bath and relax? And just for His play,
so many people are suffering. Is this God’s playfulness? – Adolf Hitler’s gas chambers.... Must be,
because Hindus say, ”Without His will not even a leaf can move.” So how can Adolf Hitler put millions
of Jews in gas chambers? Not without His support... perhaps His playfulness.
But now playfulness becomes more serious than creation.
Millions of Russians simply disappeared in these past sixty years. You cannot even enquire where
they have gone because Stalin never believed in bothering about wasting time with people who were
suspected of being against communism. Just suspicion was enough, and the man disappears. In
the middle of the night the cops come; the man disappears and is never heard of again.
Stalin never believed in putting people in prison, because if you put people in prison, sooner or later
you will have to release them. And how many people can you put in prison? And how many prisons
will you have to create? Economically it is meaningless because you have to feed those people, you
have to clothe those people, you have to take care of their medical needs. For what? And if any day
you release them they are now more confirmed enemies than ever. It would have been better not to
catch them.
Perhaps at that time it was only a suspicion – the man was not really against communism, but now
he certainly would be. So Stalin simply believed in cutting off their heads, in finishing the person
immediately, disposing of him. It was a shortcut, economical, and no trouble for the future.
This is God’s play? The Hindus themselves have been dying of starvation, famine, floods,
earthquakes – all these things happen in India; I think no other country can compete. Every year
something or other... and the country goes down and down. This is God’s play – an earthquake?
Just now in Bhopal a gas plant exploded. Is this God’s play? Three thousand people immediately
died; and it was not an easy death. I have just seen a film on it – it was terrible. Those people
were just like fish thrown onto hot sand. They could not rest: the gas was making them writhe
about, churning something inside them. They died the most terrible death you can conceive; and
one hundred thousand people are still waiting to die in the hospitals.
Is this God’s play? No.
If this is play then what can crime be?
What can sin be?
I reject God completely because God is simply a problem which idiots have invented thinking that
He will solve all your problems.
From Personality to Individuality 194 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
God has become the only problem which cannot be solved. Whatsoever you do with Him, He
remains a question mark – unnecessarily.
I simply want to cut the very root:
There is no God.
There is no creation.
There is no play going on.
Existence is enough unto itself; it does not need any outside agency. It has its own energy, it has its
own intelligence, it has its own life.
Existence needs no hypothetical God.
And God doesn’t help anything.
Remember one fundamental principle of all sane thinking: Don’t bring in a hypothesis which doesn’t
help to solve anything. On the contrary, because of the hypothesis a thousand other problems start
arising. A hypothesis is brought in to solve problems, not to increase them.
God is the most useless hypothesis ever propounded by man. Because of Him there has been
so much trouble, so many crusades, so many butcherings, so many people slaughtered, so many
women raped – in the name of God. Please just flush Him down the toilet.
Forget about God.
Existence is enough unto itself
That’s what I teach.
And then we cannot throw the responsibility on anybody’s head: there is no God, then the whole
responsibility falls on us. That is my hidden desire.
Why am I throwing God down the toilet?
Because I want man to understand that he is responsible. Because man has the highest
consciousness in the whole of existence, you should accept the greatest responsibility. Stars, trees,
animals, birds are far below you; you cannot throw the responsibility on them.
To be conscious means you are mature enough now to accept all responsibility for yourself and for
the existence that surrounds you.
Then the explosion in the gas factory in Bhopal is our responsibility. It was some stupid people
there who were not careful enough; it was carelessness. And I would not like these people to be
punished in hell – no, there is no hell – they should be punished herenow so such an accident does
not happen again. There are thousands of similar factories around the world: if it can happen in
From Personality to Individuality 195 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
one factory it can happen in any factory. And this was only a poisonous gas. Now there are nuclear
plants: just one man’s carelessness and the world can be finished
You have created things which are so dangerous, but you have not created a comparable
consciousness which can be careful about these things.
If you create nuclear weapons... I am not against them because those nuclear weapons can prove
creative, immensely creative. Anything that can be destructive can always be creative – it all
depends on you. The sword in your hand can kill somebody and can also save somebody. The
sword is neutral; it is up to you how you use it.
I am not against atomic, nuclear, and other weapons. Though they are tremendously dangerous in
the hands of man as he is today, but still I say we cannot go back: we cannot dispose of nuclear
weapons. That is impossible, because movement backwards is impossible; we can only go forwards.
Then what has to be done?
All over the world great concern is being shown by politicians, the intelligentsia, and other
humanitarian people that there should be some stop put to it: no more piling up of weapons. Nobody
can stop it, it is impossible, and what they are saying is not the right solution. I don’t agree with it.
I say: Increase man’s awareness in the same proportion as he has increased his dangerous powers,
and there is no problem.
Don’t put a sword in a child’s hand – that’s true – but let the child learn with a wooden sword. Let
him mature, let him become more aware. I am not in favor of disposing of the sword. It cannot be
done in the very nature of things.
In the whole history of man is there any precedent where we have gone back a single step on
anything? It is against the law of existence to go backwards.
So don’t just hit your head against a wall, do something else: Increase man’s consciousness, his
awareness.
A prince was sent to a Zen Master to learn swordsmanship. It is a strange phenomenon, but in
Japan it has become a reality that a Master of consciousness, a Master who teaches meditation,
also teaches swordsmanship. To me it is very significant. That is what is needed.
The prince went to the Master and he said, ”My father has sent me. He is old and he is not going to
live long – maybe one year, two years at the most. He has sent me to you with the urgent message
to prepare me before he dies. He would like to see me with your recommendation saying that I am
ready, because if I am not ready then he cannot die peacefully.
”In every other way I am ready: I have learned archery, swordsmanship and all kinds of things that
are needed in war; I am a master in every dimension. And I went back from the university to my
father to say that I had all these medals and trophies and certificates; I was ready.
”He said, ’No, you are not ready yet, because the basic thing is missing. All that you have brought is
good, maybe it will be of use some day, but first go to this Master to learn meditation, and to combine
From Personality to Individuality 196 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
all your warrior’s training with meditation. Unless meditation is supporting the warrior in you, you are
just an ordinary warrior, and dangerous: I cannot put the kingdom in your hands. I will have to find
somebody else. Go fast, and learn fast.’”
So the prince said, ”I am ready. Whatsoever you say I will do, but be quick.”
The Master said, ”That is the first requirement, that time is not binding. I cannot say how much time
it will take – one year, two years, ten years, fifty years – nothing can be said about it. It all depends
on you, on how quick you learn. I will try my best because I am old, I am also in a hurry. I was not
going to accept another disciple, but if the king sends you – he is my old friend, we both were under
the same Master learning meditation – I cannot refuse you. Your training starts from now.”
The prince asked, ”What do I have to do?”
The old Master said, ”You have not to do anything except just ordinary things: cleaning, cooking,
drawing the water from the well, cutting wood. But remember one thing, I can hit you any time from
behind, so remain alert. Do anything, but remain alert.”
The prince said, ”What kind of training is this? – but my father has sent me to you so it must be
right.” And he was continually being hit. The old man was really a great, skillful man. He would walk
without any noise; you could not hear the sound of his feet, and suddenly from nowhere he would
jump out and hit you hard!
Within fifteen days the prince’s whole body was aching. It was difficult to sleep on one side because
there it was hurting, and it was difficult to sleep on the other side because it was hurting, but he was
happy too because now he had started hearing his Master’s footsteps. Awareness had grown.
Before he was not so conscious, so those footsteps were making a certain noise but it was so small,
so subtle, that it was not in his grasp. Now his awareness, in such conditions, was bound to grow.
He had to be alert, continuously alert: while doing everything he knew that the Master would be
coming. He would be chopping wood, but no other thought would be there other than about the old
man: from where would he appear and how would the prince defend himself?
The old man would try to hit him and the prince would just catch his bamboo staff. Within three
months the old man could not hit the prince a single time in the whole day. The prince was very
happy; he thought, ”This is a great day!” And his body was no longer hurting: in three months of
continual beating his body had become like steel. Now he understood that he had gained a certain
strength that was never in him before.
Now when his hand held a sword, it was not a human hand but one made of steel. He was happy
about his body, the way it had become stronger under his Master’s hits. He was happy that he had
become so alert that even when the old man was far away in the other room, he would be able to
detect it. He would shout from his room, ”Don’t try anything – I am alert”
The Master used to come in from his room. One day the prince listened out for noises from the other
room for twenty-four hours; and the Master could not beat him a single time. The Master called the
prince to him. The prince was very happy, the old man was also very happy; he said, ”Now the
From Personality to Individuality 197 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
second part starts. Up to now I have been hitting you with a bamboo – from tomorrow it will be a
real sword.”
The prince thought, ”A real sword! The bamboo was one thing – I managed somehow and remained
patient – but now a real sword! If I miss even one time I am finished. And this old fellow, if he can hit
me with the bamboo so hard that he has made my whole body like steel, what will he do with a real
sword?”
The old man took out his sword and he said, ”This is my sword, so look at it. Watch it! This is now
going to be after you continually.”
The prince’s awareness arose like a pillar of light. He could feel it, because danger was there and
now it was not a joke: it was a question of life and death.
So the old man started trying to hit him but could not succeed for three months; not even a single
time did he hit him. And the prince’s awareness was going higher every day: he could save himself
immediately. From the back the Master would try to hit.... And all kinds of work the prince was doing.
With closed eyes he would be sitting in meditation: the Master would go to hit him and he would
jump aside and save himself
The Master called him, and he said, ”I am happy. The second part of training is over.” The prince
said, ”I am tremendously grateful and happy. I never thought that there was such a possibility inside
me to be so alert. Not even a small breeze can pass by me without me knowing it. Not even a single
thought can move within me without me knowing it. And I am happy that there is still something to
learn.
”At first I was very hesitant, reluctant, unwilling: I was here just because my father had sent me. But
now I am here because I want to be, and I don’t think of my father and the kingdom or anything else.
All I think of is to bring my consciousness to its highest peak, because the joys that I have known I
was not even aware of, I could not have even dreamed about them. So start the third step.”
The Master said, ”The third step is: while you are sleeping I will be hitting you with the real sword.”
The young man said, ”That is perfectly right – I am ready. I was afraid even of the bamboo; now I
am not afraid of your real sword, not even in my sleep. Lately I have been watching myself sleeping.
Turning, I know I am turning. When sleep comes to my body I know that sleep is descending...
descending... descending, that it has taken over my whole body. But I am just like a flame inside,
not asleep.”
The Master started trying to hit the prince, but the moment he entered the prince’s room, the prince
would wake up. For three months he tried, but he could not strike the prince even once. Then the
Master gave the prince his sword and said, ”Your father will understand, because he knows this is
the sword my Master had given to me. Now you are capable of having a sword because you also
have a higher quality of consciousness. Now the need for the sword is left far behind.”
Increasing man’s consciousness has to be done.
The responsibility is man’s.
From Personality to Individuality 198 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
God has been a very dangerous hypothesis:
It took all responsibility from you.
God was responsible for everything, and you were not responsible for anything at all. He created
everything, He will dissolve everything. He sends His son to save you. You are just a puppet: you
can be saved, you can be created. And what a humiliating way He created you – with mud!
I think it must have happened here, in the Big Muddy Ranch; otherwise from where could He find
so much mud? And why is it called the Big Muddy Ranch? – He must have created man just here.
He created you from mud. Couldn’t He be a little more respectful? He could have created you from
gold, from platinum – something precious. And if He could create from mud He could create from
gold, but He is an old Jew, miserly: from mud!
That is the meaning of humus – humidity mixed with mud: humus. From humus come the words
human, humanity. Adam also means mud, earth – that is Hebrew. You are just playthings in Go*s
hands. Whether He creates you seriously or non-seriously it doesn’t matter: one thing is certain, that
He is the sole proprietor of the whole drama. Where is your responsibility? There is no possibility of
your responsibility if there is a God.
If humanity has become irresponsible it is because of God, not in spite of Him. It is because of Him
and because of all the religions that have been teaching you that God created the world, and God is
compassionate and kind. All rubbish. He is not there at all. And what kindness? What compassion?
He is a creation of the cunning priesthood because without Him they cannot exploit. That is an
absolutely necessary hypothesis for exploiting man.
Drop the idea of God and suddenly you will feel a freedom, a spaciousness, an expansion and a
great responsibility.
There is just nobody above you.
You are the highest peak of creation, of existence, of life.
There is nobody above you.
A sense of great responsibility arises in you.
To me that is what makes you religious.
You start feeling responsible for all the animals, the birds. How can you be violent to them? How
can you go on eating meat? Impossible. You are the highest in consciousness, and this is what you
are doing to poor animals? You cannot afford to do it. With responsibility, your humanity becomes
awake. For the first time you can raise your head and you can stand straight.
Freedom and responsibility come together
And when the joy of freedom and the joy of responsibility meet, it is so great that I have called that
moment, the moment of ecstasy.
From Personality to Individuality 199 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
Then you are so blessed that you can bless the whole existence.
Your very being is a blessing, a continual blessing to everyone far and near, man or animal You
cannot misbehave even with a rock. You will be respectful without any regard to whom it concerns.
Your respectfulness will be simply there, unaddressed. You will be grateful just because so much
freedom, so much responsibility, so much joy, and so much ecstasy, are born to you. How can you
avoid feeling gratitude?
People ask me what, in my religion, will be the place of worship, of devotion, because they think
worship and devotion are impossible without a God.I want to say to you that they are impossible with
a God. The whole idea of God is so ugly that I cannot be devoted to such an idiotic hypothesis. I
cannot worship God, I don’t see any reason to worship Him.
To me devotion is the refined quality of love
It has nothing to do with to whom. It is not a question of to whom it is addressed: Jehovah, God,
Jesus, Buddha. It is not a question of it being addressed.
Devotion is a quality in your heart
You feel full of reverence for everything that is.
You feel a great love for all that is.
It is not a question of whether the person is worthy of it or not... because love is not a business. It is
not a question of whether the other is worthy or not, the question is whether your heart is overflowing
with love or not. If it is overflowing it will reach to those who are worthy, it will reach to those who are
un-worthy.It will not discriminate at all.
The cloud is full, and it showers. Do you think it showers on good people’s forms only, and avoids
bad people’s forms? – that it showers only on good Christians, good Hindus, good Jews, and it
simply does not shower on the form of an atheist? It simply showers because it is so full.
Devotion is overflowing love.
Ordinary love is addressed to somebody. That is the raw quality of love, not yet refined. It needs
some object, and it is in a very small quantity – that’s why lovers are so jealous. There is a reason
behind it which they may not know. They may think jealousy is not good, and of course it is not good;
but why it is not good they don’t know. They think jealousy is not good, but that is not the point. To
have such a small quantity of love energy, that is not good – -and out of that, as a by-product, comes
jealousy.
The woman is afraid her lover may be loving some other woman too. And he has such a small
quantity of love, how can she afford for him to go to some other woman? If he goes to some other
woman then she remains starved, because she knows him and how much love he has. It is not even
enough for herself, so how is she able to have a project of share-a-home? – no.
From Personality to Individuality 200 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
The man is so afraid that if his wife is just laughing with the neighbor, that is enough to make him
boil within, because he knows how little laughter she has. If she is wasting it with the neighbor
then what about him? So if she is happy with the neighbors – laughing, smiling, gossiping – and
when the husband comes home, she is Lying down; she has a headache.... Strangely enough, as
the husband enters the compound, immediately the wife starts having a headache. Just a moment
before she was laughing with the neighbor, but her husband – the very word gives her a headache.
”So he is back again – the same rotten old fellow.”
But the real problem is because both have such a small quantity of love – and both are aware of it.
And you know that if love is given to somebody else then your share is lost. It is like share-a-home,
but you don’t have any home anymore – somebody else is sharing it.
Devotion is love overflowing. Even when there is nobody, it is overflowing – to things, to tables, to
chairs, to walls. It is just overflowing, it is not a question of to whom. And this you have to understand.
It is a fundamental law of my religion:
As awareness grows, simultaneously love grows.
They cannot remain separate, they move together.
If you can grow in love, you will grow in awareness.
If you grow in awareness, you will grow in love.
It is easier to grow in awareness because there are very definite, scientific ways to grow in
awareness. With love it is difficult, because it is a very slippery thing, it slips out of your hand.
Awareness you can hold tight. But don’t be worried: if you are growing in awareness, simultaneously
your love will always keep on the same level as your awareness. This is my experience.
I never say a single thing which is not my experience. I have not ever seen in me a single inch of
difference between awareness and love. Just let your awareness go higher, and love immediately
moves to the same level. They always keep the same level. When awareness is at its peak, love
overflows; and that overflowing love is devotion.
And when love and awareness are there, are you just going to sit and not do anything? Perhaps
once in a while there will be a man like me who will simply sit and do nothing; but most probably
everybody is going to do something. And that something will come out of awareness and love.
I call that act, worship.
Whatever you do – you cook food, you clean a floor, you chop wood – whatever you do, your
awareness and your love is showering. It is worship. No mantra is needed, no prayer is needed, no
God is needed.
In my religion there is a place for devotion.
There is a place for worship.
From Personality to Individuality 201 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
But there is no place for God at all.
I am keeping everything that is essential and discarding everything that is non-essential.
The priesthood was interested in the non-essential because that non-essential could be used for
exploitation.
The essential cannot be used for exploitation.
The essential will destroy the priesthood immediately.
If your awareness grows and your love becomes devotion, one thing is certain: you will not be
a Jew, you will not be a Hindu, you will not be a Mohammedan. Your awareness cannot allow
such stupidities. Your love, your devotion, will not allow you to go to a temple, to a mosque, to a
gurudwara, to a synagogue, to a church, because it is simply idiotic, just Oregonian.
There is no point in going anywhere.
Wherever you are, your devotion is flowing.
Wherever a religious man sits:
There is the temple.
There is the church.
There is the synagogue.
A small, beautiful story.... The founder of Sikhism, Nanak, was one of those beautiful people for
whom I have immense love. He was a simple man. He had just one disciple, and that too because
he loved to sing. All his teachings were delivered in singing, spontaneous singing – not like a poet
composing – and his disciple would play on a simple instrument just to give some music to what the
Master was saying.
Nanak traveled – he is the only Indian teacher who traveled outside India too. Mahavira and Buddha
never went outside their state, Bihar, not even all over India. Shankara went all over India but not
beyond India’s boundaries. Nanak is the only exception; he went to Arabia. He reached Mecca,
where the sacred shrine of the Mohammedans is, the black stone, Kaaba.
The stone is rare. Scientifically, it is a very big stone, perhaps fallen from some star or planet; it is
not of the earth.
Almost every day, twenty-four hours a day, thousands of stones fall. In the night when you see one
and you say, ”A star is falling,” it is not a star; it is just a stone that was floating in the vacuum around
the earth and suddenly comes into the gravitational field of the earth, and then the earth pulls it
down. Thousands of stones fall every day, sometimes very big stones.
From Personality to Individuality 202 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
This stone, in Kaaba, is perhaps the biggest that has fallen. It is not of the earth – that much has
been scientifically determined – that is, it is a meteorite. And how are meteorites created? They
are created when a star dies or a planet dies and falls into fragments. For millions of years those
fragments may go on and on moving in the vacuum till they come to some gravity field; then they are
just pulled downwards. The pull is so tremendous that the falling stone and the air struggle against
each other so the stone burns up. It is just the forced entry the stone makes in the air that makes it
burn.
You see those ”stars” falling; those are not stars, stars are very big. If a star falls onto the earth,
the earth is finished! Our sun is a star. It is sixty thousand times bigger than this earth; and it is a
very mediocre star – there are stars millions of times bigger than our sun. Our earth is a very small
place.
Nanak reached Kaaba. Mohammedans could not believe it because they could see that he was
a great teacher, but when night came he slept, keeping his feet towards the Kaaba. That is very
disrespectful. The keepers came and said to him, ”You being a great teacher, this behavior seems
to be very unlikely. You come from India where people know how to be respectful, and yet you
are keeping your feet towards our sacred stone? You are hurting our feelings. To us this stone
represents God, to us this stone IS God; so please turn your feet in the opposite direction.”
Nanak said, ”I knew you would come, hence my feet are towards the Kaaba. Now you want me
to turn them in the opposite direction?” They said yes. Nanak said, ”You do that – but remember,
YOUR God may be just confined to this stone, MY God is not so confined. Wherever you move my
feet He is there.”
The story – which must be just a story – is that they moved his feet, but wherever they moved his
feet the Kaaba moved. This must be a story because stones, even if they have fallen from the sky,
are after all stones. And man hasn’t that much sensitivity: you can’t expect from a stone that it will
move.
But the story is beautiful. It simply says that wherever you are, if you are full of awareness and
devotion the temple is there, the shrine is there. In fact your overflowing love creates a shrine
around you. You move with it wherever you go.
Bodhidharma was asked, ”If you are thrown into hell, will you resist?”
He laughed and said, ”For what? – because wherever Bodhidharma is, there is the lotus paradise.
I will be immensely happy because my entry into heaven or into hell is exactly the same. I am
Bodhidharma. If I enter into hell, hell will be immediately transformed into a heaven. I would prefer
to go to hell, because otherwise who will transform it?”
My religion has devotion as part of awareness.
The meaning of devotion is of love, not towards a God, but towards all that is.
My religion has worship; but then worship is not a certain chanting of mantras, prayers, Ave Marias....
From Personality to Individuality 203 Osho
CHAPTER 11. GOD – THE PHANTOM FUEHRER
Worship is your creativeness with a heart full of love and a being overflowing with awareness. And
then whatsoever you do is worship.
Or if you happen to be a man like me, lazy, then not – doing is your worship. I have never felt for a
single moment that I am not a worshipper.
My worship is just not to do anything:
Just to sit silently, doing nothing.
And the grass grows by itself... and real grass!
From Personality to Individuality 204 Osho
CHAPTER 12
Death: The ultimate orgasm
10 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
IN OTHER RELIGIONS DEATH IS ALMOST NEVER SPOKEN OF AND WHEN IT IS MENTIONED
THE TONES ARE GRAVE AND FEARFUL. IN YOUR RELIGION, DEATH IS TALKED ABOUT
FREELY AND HAPPILY IS THIS SIGNIFICANT?
IT is certainly one of the most significant things.
It determines whether a religion is authentic or pseudo.
The pseudo-religion knows nothing about death.
In fact it knows nothing about life either, hence the fear, fear of both. It is not possible to be afraid
only of death, because death is not separate from life, death is part of life. It is not the termination of
life, it is an incident in life; life continues. Death happens many times, millions of times; it is a mere
incident. But the pseudo-religions are afraid of both.
The pseudo-religions are afraid of living too.
You should understand that first; only then can you understand why they are afraid of death. They
are all in favor of renouncing life. They are all based on an anti-life attitude: something is wrong in
life, life is born out of the original sin, it is not right that you are living. Adam and Eve were punished
205
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
because they wanted to live, they wanted to know, they wanted to understand, explore, enquire –
this is their original sin. You are the inheritors of Adam and Eve. You are born in sin.
Pseudo-religions cannot support your living. They cannot teach you the art of how to live, and live
intensely and totally. They can only teach you how to escape from life, how to avoid knowing the
truth. You can relate it to the story of the original sin.
The original sin was that Adam and Eve wanted to know what life was all about. They wanted to
taste eternal life. Why just go on living a momentary, temporal existence which can be terminated
any time by anything – a small accident, and you are finished. Is there something more? – or is
this all? This was their original sin. So what will be the original virtue? You can infer it very easily.
The original virtue will be to renounce life. Adam and Eve were trying to know the eternal life; they
wanted to become eternal, like gods.
The pseudo-religions say you should renounce life totally, so you go against Adam and Eve. You
have to go against them if you want to enter into the Garden of Eden again. And you have to
renounce enquiry, doubt, skepticism, because these are the ways of knowing. This story is very
symbolic. It gives you the whole key to all religions.
What Adam and Eve have done the religions have been trying to undo so that you are again
accepted by God, welcomed back into heaven. Religions are afraid of life, are afraid of knowing
– and they are not separate. It is because of this story they appeared to be separate, because in a
story they have to be separate: a tree of eternal life, a tree of knowledge.
But in fact, living is knowing.
Knowing is living.
There is no other way to know, except to live. And there is no other way to live, unless you are aware
of what you are living.
Knowing and living are inseparable.
The knower becomes enlightened, but he also becomes afire with life.
The pseudo-religions teach you to be afraid of life too – you have forgotten it in your question –
they are not only afraid of death. They don’t talk about death; it is thought unmannerly to talk about
death. It is not good etiquette if you are sitting at a dinner table and you start talking about death.
What to say about a dinner table! – even at the grave when people are gathered together to pay
their last homage they don’t talk about death.
It was one of my pastimes in my childhood to follow every funeral procession. My parents were
continually worried: ”You don’t know the man who has died, you have no relationship, no friendship
with him. Why should you bother and waste your time?” – because the Indian funeral takes three,
four or five hours.
First, going out of the city, the procession walking, taking the dead body, and then burning the body
on the funeral pyre.... And you know Indians, they can’t do anything efficiently: the funeral pyre won’t
From Personality to Individuality 206 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
catch fire; it will just live half-heartedly and the man will not burn. And everybody is making all kinds
of effort because they want to get away from there as quickly as possible. But the dead people are
also tricky. They will try their hardest to keep you there as long as possible.
I told my parents, alt is not a question of being related to somebody. I am certainly related with
death, that you cannot deny. It does not matter who dies – it is symbolic to me. One day I will be
dying. I have to know how people behave with the dead, how the dead behave with the living people;
otherwise, how am I going to learn?”
They said, ”You bring strange arguments.”
”But,” I said, ”you have to convince me that death is not related to me, that I am not going to die. If
you can convince me of that, I will stop going; otherwise let me explore.” They could not say to me
that I would not be dying, so I said, ”then just keep quiet. I am not telling you to go. And I enjoy
everything that happens there.”
The first thing I have observed is that nobody talks about death, even there. The funeral pyre is
burning somebody’s father, somebody’s brother, somebody’s uncle, somebody’s friend, somebody’s
enemy: he was related to many people in many ways. He is dead – and they are all engaged in
trivia.
They would be talking about the movies, they would be talking about the politics, they would be
talking about the market; they would be talking about all kinds of things, except death. They would
make small cliques and sit all around the funeral pyre. I would go from one clique to another: nobody
was talking about death. And I know for certain that they were talking about other things to keep
them occupied so that they didn’t see the burning body – because it was their body too.
They could see, if they had a little insight into things, that they are burning there on the funeral pyre
– nobody else. It is only a question of time. Tomorrow somebody else from these people will be
there on the funeral pyre; the day after tomorrow somebody else will be – every day people are
being brought to the funeral pyre. One day I am going to be brought to the funeral pyre, and this is
the treatment that these people will be giving to me. This is their last farewell: they are talking about
prices going up, the rupee devaluating – in front of death. And they are all sitting with their backs
toward the funeral pyre.
They had to come, so they have come, but they never wanted to come. So they want to be there
almost absently present, just to fulfill a social conformity, just to show that they were present. And
that too is to make sure that when they die they will not be taken by the municipal corporation truck.
Because they have participated in so many people’s death, naturally it becomes obligatory for other
people to give them a send-off They know why they are there – they are there because they want
people to be there when they are on the funeral pyre.
But what are these people doing? I asked people whom I knew. Sometimes one of my teachers
was there, talking about stupid things – that somebody is flirting with somebody’s wife.... I said, ”Is
this the time to talk about somebody’s wife and what she is doing? Think about the wife of this man
who has died. Nobody is worried about that, nobody is talking about that.
From Personality to Individuality 207 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
”Think of your wife when you will be dead. With whom will she be flirting? What will she do? Have
you made any arrangements for that? And can’t you see the stupidity? Death is present and you
are trying to avoid it in every possible way.” But all the religions have done that. And these people
are simply representing certain traditions of certain religions.
The religions have first made you afraid of life; they have condemned it: everything that gives a sign
of life in you is a sin. Love is sin, because it is a sign of life. It is life trying to reproduce itself; it is
life’s creativity.
Falling in love – what is it all about? It is life trying to go on and continue. It is a biological effort of
nature to go on producing more bodies so more lives, souls, or whatever name you give to them,
can get new houses, new vehicles.
If biology stops producing bodies, where are you going to get new houses when the old houses
topple down? And old houses cannot be continually renovated. A time comes when renovation
becomes more of a trouble than to demolish the whole house and make a new house. Biology is
trying to provide you with new houses. You fall in love because of a tremendous biological force.
All religions are against biology. Biology means the science of living, life. All religions are trying to
prevent reproduction; their monks, their nuns, should not reproduce. In a way it is a very great crime
against humanity.
It is one thing that somebody has no biological urge, that his urge has moved into higher realms of
creativity. Then it is perfectly okay; he should be allowed to move that way. A poet may not feel like
reproducing children. His poetry is enough, more than enough: he feels fulfilled. His biology has
taken a new way, but his poetry will live, will have its own life. He has poured his life into it, just as
a painter or a musician can pour his life into his music, into his dance, into his painting, and may
not feel any biological urge. But he is not against biology, his energy is simply moving in a higher
dimension. Then I say okay to it.
But what are your monks doing in the monasteries? What are your nuns doing in the nunneries? In
all the religions, they are not creative people at all. They are the most uncreative on the earth for
the simple reason that the only creativity they knew was biology. Below biology there is no creative
possibility; biology is the bottom. You can move upwards but you cannot go downwards.
Once your biological reproduction is prohibited you are just a fossil, a dead person; you have a
posthumous life. You have died already, because the moment your creative energy is prevented you
cannot live. Living means creativity.
Even animals are living more than your monks. Trees are living more than your monks – at least they
produce some flowers, some fruits. What do your monks produce? They simply go on repeating
the BIBLE. It has already been produced. Keep it in the library, keep it in the museum, read it in the
university – but every day, go on repeating it like a parrot. Do you think these people are, in any way,
living?
There are monasteries where once you enter, then you never come out till you are dead. What does
that signify? In fact you died the day you entered that monastery. You are cut off from life. You
From Personality to Individuality 208 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
are not allowed to enjoy food because that is part of life. Religions teach that you should not be
interested in food, in taste.
In India many religions teach how to destroy the taste of the food before you eat it. There are many
traditions in India where the monk will beg and put all kinds of things in one begging bowl, because
he is not allowed to beg from just one house. And even if he begs from just one house, then in
one begging bowl sweet things are there, salty things are there, all kinds of spices are there, rice is
there, all kinds of dahls are there; and they all get mixed up. But that is not enough! First the monk
should go to the river and dip the whole begging bowl in the river – they don’t take any chances –
and then mix everything... and then enjoy it! Have a nice lunch, dinner, or whatever you call it.
In fact, once it happened: I was sitting on the bank of my village river, and a monk whom I knew – he
used to beg from my house too, and he was very friendly with my father, and they used to chitchat –
was doing this horrible thing of dipping his begging bowl.
I said to him, ”Have you ever thought of one thing? The way you enjoy your food, even a buffalo
would refuse it, a donkey would refuse it.”
He said, ”What?”
I said, ”Yes.” And in India if you want to find donkeys, you will find them near the river because the
washermen use donkeys to carry their clothes to the river. Only the washermen use the donkey.
Nobody else even touches the donkey because the washerman is untouchable and his donkey is
untouchable too. So while they are washing clothes their donkeys are just standing on the bank of
the river waiting for the washermen to load them again, and then they will start moving home.
So I said, ”There is a donkey. Just give me your begging bowl; and don’t be worried – if he eats it I
will bring you a full bowl again from my house. If he does not eat it, you have to eat it.
He said, ”I take the challenge.”
I put the begging bowl in front of the donkey and the donkey simply escaped. He escaped for two
reasons: one was the food, the other was me. That was not known to the monk – that any donkey
would have escaped. All the donkeys of my town were afraid of me because whenever I got a
chance I would ride on them – just to harass my whole village. I would go to the marketplace sitting
on a donkey. The whole village used to say, ”this is too much!” And I would say, ”The donkey is a
creation of God, and God cannot create anything bad. And I don’t see what is wrong. He is a poor
fellow, and nice.”
So all the donkeys knew me perfectly well. It became so that even from far away, even at night, if
a donkey was standing there and I was coming towards him, he would just escape. They started
recognizing me. The monk was not aware that there were two reasons for the donkey running away,
but he certainly saw that the donkey refused the food.
I said, ”This is what your religion has been teaching you, to fall below the donkey. Even a donkey
can sense that this is not food, not worth eating.”
From Personality to Individuality 209 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
But everything that gives any hint of life has to be cut from its very roots. The monk should wear
only rags that he collects from streets where people throw them. In India people are very generous
about that, they throw things everywhere. Although the municipal committees have specific places
to throw away things, nobody takes any notice of it. Who bothers to go that far?
It was too difficult for me to explain to my grandmother that throwing all unnecessary things, clothes,
dirt, from the window of the second story onto the street was not right. She said, ”but I am seventy
years old, and for seventy years I have been doing it. Don’t disturb me. I am not going to live much
longer and I can’t change my habits. I can’t go downstairs and go to the municipal place, no. And
in seventy years no problem has arisen so why should it arise for two or three years more? I will
manage.”
I told her, ”Every day a problem arises, but you don’t think it is a problem. Your things sometimes fall
on people and they shout.”
She said, ”That is their problem!”
People go on throwing things, and the monks have to collect clothes this way; and out of small
pieces, any kind of clothes, they will make their robes, clothes. My father used to give new clothes
to sannyasins he liked very much, but they would say, ”We cannot accept new clothes. You can give
us old clothes and first tear them into pieces, and then we will sew them.”
Whom are these people going to deceive? If their God is all-knowing He must know that these are
new clothes made into rags. They put them in the dirt, rub dirt over them, and then they are perfectly
good for them.
Religions have been against life because they know one thing perfectly well, that if you live and live
alertly, you don’t need any religion at all.
Religion becomes a need only when your life is cut. Then you don’t have any way except to be
religious. If this life is cut, then you will start thinking of that life: you have to think about something.
You have to live at least in hope, if not in reality.
To distract your mind and your being from this life to an imaginary life somewhere far away in heaven,
the religions have used the most solid strategy: to condemn this life.
In Jaina scriptures, which are the most condemnatory of all the religions... all religions are
condemnatory but Jainas are superb. Jaina monks continually give sermons: ”What is this body? –
blood, flesh, bones, mucus, feces. What does this body consist of? – all kinds of dirty thingS just
covered with a thin skin.”
This is described in such detail that you will think, Have these people been butchers or what? Or
perhaps they go on tearing apart dead bodies and finding every detail? – because they are not
doctors. Particularly Jainas... it is very rare to find a Jaina doctor. It is only within the last twenty or
thirty years that a few Jainas have become doctors; before that a Jaina would not become a doctor.
Who is going to do this dirty surgery and go into men’s bodies and...? The Jaina will faint, he will
not be able to stand it.
From Personality to Individuality 210 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
They are not physiologists, they are not doctors, they are not butchers, but they have collected all
”dirty” details. For what? To create in your mind an image of dirtiness, so when you fall in love with
a woman you know what you are falling in love with – with all the mucus, all the bones. Just think!
Just take the thin skin away and look at the woman – and you are falling in love with it! This bag –
that is exactly the word they use – a bag, a skin bag. You are a skin bag, she is also a skin bag,
and both are getting deceived by the skin. Just go a little deeper and what will you find? It will be
nauseous. The Jaina monks create a continual sense of nauseousness about each other’s bodies
– about your own body too.
And life is possible only through the body. By their condemning the body so much, life becomes
impossible. And once your whole energy is blocked it cannot move into life. But energy has to move:
it is its intrinsic nature to move. It will find some other way to move. Religions immediately give you
a substitute: love God. He is not a bag of mucus and blood and bones!
I used to ask the monks, particularly the Hindu monks, ”You call human beings’bags of every dirty
thing’; then your incarnations of God, what were they? What about Rama? – no mucus?” Then he
would be as dry as Oregon. He would have died, for the mucus is absolutely necessary. It keeps
your body going. It is a kind of lubricant for your inner mechanism. Yes, once or twice a year you
get a cold and you throw the mucus out. That too is necessary because that old mucus is no longer
useful. It has to be thrown out so that new mucus is created and takes its place, which is just like
changing the oil in your car.
Once in a while, the car has a cold; change the oil, otherwise it will stop. That oil is losing its quality
of being a lubricant. It has been used enough. Were there no bones in Krishna and Rama? Then
their bags would have just collapsed. Without bones, how could they manage to stand? Was there
no blood? Then how can there be semen? – and Rama produced two boys! Great, a miraculous
bag: no mucus, no semen, no blood, no bones – and he produced two children! This is a far bigger
miracle than what the Holy Ghost did with Mary, because at least Mary was a real bag.
But in the story of Rama, Sita is also not an ordinary bag like you. Both bags were spiritual! Inside
they were hollow. Either they were hollow.... I asked these people, ”Either you say they were hollow
inside – hot air inside, what else? – or they were stuffed. There are only the two possibilities.” And
I said to them, ”I would like to be just an ordinary bag, rather than a stuffed bag or a hollow bag
with hot air. I simply refuse; I am perfectly okay as I am.” Stupid ideas, but they have persisted for
thousands of years just to make these people superhuman.
The first time I spoke in Bombay – it must have been 1960 – I was invited by a Jaina committee.
Bombay has the richest Jaina community of India, and the biggest community lives in Bombay.
Their celebration for Mahavira’s birthday is perhaps the best in the whole country. Everywhere they
celebrate it really luxuriously because they are rich people, but Bombay certainly has the climax.
They invite great monks, nuns, scholars, to address them. The first time I spoke in Bombay was
on Mahavira’s birthday. At least twenty to thirty thousand Jainas were present. And a man, a Jaina
monk... he is no longer a monk. He is also in America now, married to a Jaina woman; he escaped.
But at that time he was at the top – the glory of Jaina monks. Chitrabhanu is his name.
From Personality to Individuality 211 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
We had never met before – he had no idea what kind of man I am. Of course he was continually
living in Bombay, which is basically not allowed for a Jaina monk: he can stay only for three days in
one city. So what have the Bombay Jaina monks done? They don’t go.... Once a monk has entered
Bombay he never leaves, because life in Bombay is comfortable, and who wants to go again into
the villages, on mud paths with naked feet? And Bombay has every luxury for them, and every
arrangement is made for them.
What they have done is they have divided Bombay into many cities; each section, each suburb is a
city. From Vileparle they move to Dadar – these are just wards, these are not cities – from Dadar they
move to Marine Drive. Bombay is big; there are so many suburbs and so many different markets. It
is one of the biggest cities in the world. So the monks go on moving: three days in Vileparle, three
days in Dadar, three days in Santa Cruz, three days in Juhu, and three days in Chowpatty – round
and round.
This man, Chitrabhanu, had been in Bombay for fifteen years. He was well respected, most
respected in Bombay. He was the best orator amongst Jaina monks in Bombay, so of course he
spoke first. I was an absolutely unknown young man, and not a monk either. And nobody was even
certain whether I was a Jaina or not.
Just one man was responsible for bringing me to Bombay, and that was a coincidence. This man,
Chiranjilal Badjate, of Wardha, was the chief manager for Jamnalal Bajaj, and Jamnalal Bajaj was
one of the super-rich people in India. This man, Chiranjilal Badjate, was the cause of bringing
Mahatma Gandhi from Gujarat to Wardha in Madhya Pradesh. Gandhi’s ashram was in Sabarmati
near Ahmedabad.
But Chiranjilal Badjate was a unique man, very simple, very loving, and so simple and so loving that
he never thought that two persons could be such opposites. He brought Gandhi to Wardha because
he persuaded Jamnalal Bajaj. Jamnalal Bajaj’s head office was in Wardha in central India, and his
branches were all over India. His son was here last year.
But the cause was Chiranjilal Badjate who, although a poor man, impressed on Jamnalal: ”It will
be a great service to the country if we can bring Gandhi to Wardha, and it will be a great service
to Wardha also, because Wardha will become automatically the capital of India.” And certainly until
freedom came to India, Wardha was the capital of India. Delhi remained the capital for the British
Raj, but for the whole of the Indian freedom fighters, Gandhi was the center, and his ashram was in
Wardha. All trains and all roads for the revolutionaries were going to Wardha.
Chiranjilal Badjate influenced Jamnalal Bajaj, and Jamnalal Bajaj used to respect this old man
because he was really a lovely man. It was impossible not to respect him, although he was only
his manager. He went and asked Gandhi to come to Wardha and told Gandhi, ”This Sabarmati is
not the right place, because for each single pai you have to depend on other people. I will give you
blank checks. Whenever one of your checkbooks is finished, you will immediately get another, and
blank. And it is absolutely up to you: whatsoever money you want, you draw from the bank. You
need not ask me.”
Now Gandhi was also a born businessman and he saw a great opportunity. It was difficult to run
Sabarmati – although it was not much of an ashram, only twenty people were living there. And the
From Personality to Individuality 212 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
way they were provided with food and clothes, any ordinary middle-class man could have run the
whole show. But it was difficult for Gandhi.
Seeing this opportunity – a blank checkbook every month – Gandhi moved to Wardha. It was such
a shock to Gujarat that one of Gujarat’s very famous poets, Nanalal Bhatt, wrote a poem against
Gandhi. He was the poet who had been writing poems in praise of Gandhi, worshipping him like a
god. And in his poem he said, ”The man who was a saint in Sabarmati is just a sinner in Wardha.”
And this was from Nanalal Bhatt, who was a disciple of Gandhi: ”The saint of Sabarmati has fallen
so low, just for money.” The whole of Gujarat was disappointed. But strangely enough Chiranjilal
was also the cause of my going to Bombay.
He met me in a Jaina fair which used to happen every year near Jabalpur. There is a beautiful
temple in the hills, a temple made by a very poor woman who used to grind wheat and earn a little
food for herself by grinding. The whole day she was grinding other people’s wheat and she saved,
during her whole life, enough money to make this temple on the hill.
The temple is small. And in her memory, on top of the temple – the highest peak of the temple is
called a kailas; it is made of gold – instead of a kailas, to respect the woman, people have put her
grinding stone there. It is a primitive type of thing that is used in India. You cannot even call it a
grinding machine, because there is nothing to it, just two stones: one round stone underneath with
another stone on top of it. The upper stone has a handle, and you move that stone on the stone
underneath. You put whatever you want to grind between the two and just go on moving the stone;
those two stones grind it.
Those two stones have been put on the kailas of the temple in memory of the woman, because it
was really a miracle: she was the poorest of the poor, and she managed to make this marble temple.
Although the temple is small, and now many temples have been built around it, it remains the center.
And for thousands of years the fair has continued there in her memory.
I was speaking there and Chiranjilal heard me. When I came out of the crowd towards my car he
was standing there. It was winter – he was standing there with a blanket around himself He threw his
blanket on the ground. I could not understand what he meant. He said, ”Sit down just for a moment.
I would love to sit down with you. I listened to you. What are you doing here? – you are needed all
over India. What you have said, I have not heard before in my whole life, and I have been in contact
with all the great intellectuals and revolutionaries and Mahatmas, because of Mahatma Gandhi.”
Because he was the general manager for Jamnalal, of course without any formalities he became the
general director of Gandhi’s ashram. And Jawaharlal, and Subashchandra, and Maularia Azad – all
the great leaders of India – were their guests, and he was taking care of them because he was the
chief man. Jamnalal was old and too rich to bother about all this; it was Chiranjilal’s responsibility to
take care.
They had made a very big guesthouse where at least five hundred great leaders, thinkers,
philosophers, sages could be accommodated, because continually people were coming there to
meet Mahatma Gandhi. Continually there were conferences: political, religious, literary – all kinds
of gatherings. Because of Gandhi, it was the center there.
From Personality to Individuality 213 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
So Chiranjilal said, ”I know everybody in this country, and nobody speaks like you. What are you
doing here? You have to come to Bombay for this Mahavir Jayanti.”
I said, ”I don’t know anybody there and nobody knows me.”
He said, ”You don’t worry. Everybody knows me and I know everybody; I will arrange it. You have to
promise to come.”
I could not refuse that man. Tears were coming from his eyes just for the reason that nobody knew
about me. And I don’t bother that my words should reach people – what a calamity! To him it was a
calamity. He said, ”I will do everything: what I have not done for Mahatma Gandhi I will do for you.
But just one time let me introduce you in Bombay. From there things begin on the right track.”
I said, ”Okay, I will come; don’t cry.” A crowd had gathered, and it looked so awkward – an old man
crying – so I said, ”I will come.” I gave him the date of my train, but he was an old man with such
thick glasses that I could not feel sure that he was able even to see my face rightly, because the
way he was looking up and down, above the glasses... he was trying to look at me from the side, to
figure me out – what kind of man I was. I said, ”Don’t be worried, I will come. And even if you don’t
recognize me, I will recognize you – don’t worry.”
I went to Bombay and a strange thing happened because of this old man. Somehow he described
everything rightly, but he said I wore a white cap. How did that come to his mind? Perhaps because
all the people that he knew who came to Wardha – everybody was wearing the Gandhi cap, the
white cap. He had seen thousands of people in white caps; perhaps he had forgotten that there
were a few people who didn’t wear the cap at all.
He described me saying that I had a small beard, and I wore white clothes, a long robe; but somehow
he got mixed up and said that I wore a white cap. I was standing at the door of the train, and people
were running here and there. I could see they were looking for me, but I didn’t see that old man.
I was waiting for the old man because if he didn’t recognize me, I would recognize him. But I didn’t
see him: he had fallen sick and could not come, so he had simply described me in a letter And all the
people were looking at my head. Nobody looked at my face; they looked at my head and just went
on. Finally I was the only passenger left and they were the only people there – twenty or twenty-five
people.
Finally I said, ”What is the point now? I alone am left. And I can see that you are looking for
something on my head, but there has never been anything on my head.” They showed me the letter.
I said ”Yes, this man Chiranjilal Badjate – he is the man who created the whole trouble for you and
for me”
They said, ”But he has written, ’a white Gandhi cap,’ and we are puzzled because we found so many
people with Gandhi caps but they didn’t have beards. So we said, ’No, this man is not the one.’ We
found somebody who did, but he was not wearing a long robe. You fitted perfectly but the cap was
missing.”
I said, ”That old man... I was suspicious of his glasses. Perhaps he saw the white cap because he
has been seeing only white caps for almost his whole life. He has been taking care of thousands
From Personality to Individuality 214 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
of Indian revolutionaries who were all white – cap people, so the white cap has become fixed in his
mind. He must have seen it – I don’t suspect his intentions or anything – but where is he?”
They said, ”He has fallen sick. He is very sorry that he has not come, but don’t be worried: he has
talked about you to every man of any importance in Bombay. But we were expecting that you would
be very old because of the way he described you and said,’Nobody speaks like this man.’ We were
not thinking of just a young man, a thirty – year old.”
At that meeting naturally, among those twenty, thirty thousand people nobody knew about me.
Chitrabhanu spoke first and he talked about one of the most significant things about Mahavira, the
only things that can be called a miracle in Mahavira’s life. A snake, a cobra, bites him; Mahavira is
standing naked in meditation and a cobra bites him. Instead of blood, milk comes out of the wounds
on his feet. Jainas have always believed that – there is no problem.
When I stood up I said, ”This man Chitrabhanu seems to be a little nuts.” A few people at that
meeting later on became my sannyasins. They told me, ”We thought that now there is going to be a
riot. Who is this man? He looks like a Mohammedan, with a beard, and the way he is speaking, and
the way he is hitting Chitrabhanu who is the confirmed leader of all the Jaina monks and the Jaina
community...!”
And I really hit him hard, because when I hit I really hit – or I don’t hit; there is no third way. I said
”this man is mad. He will have to explain how milk can come out of the feet, because for milk a
woman needs breasts, a certain physiological arrangement that is in the breasts that transforms her
food, her blood, into milk. Either you have to prove that Mahavira had breasts on his feet, or you
have to accept that he was a bag full of milk; otherwise take your words back.”
There was pin-drop silence. I spoke for thirty minutes, hammering him as much as possible. And I
said, ”This type of stupid people are your leaders. Then who are you? If you accept these kinds of
idiots as leaders, you are certainly far below them. This man is cunning and he is going to deceive
you, because whatever he was saying was simply to buttress your ego. That should not be the way
of a man of truth. A man of truth simply says the truth; whether it hits you, makes you an enemy,
who cares? The man of truth only cares about truth.
”This man was lying; everything that he has said was a lie, although it is written in the scriptures.
Those scriptures were also written by such people, so I don’t take those scriptures as an authority. I
don’t take this man as an authority. He should stand up and answer my questions. He has to prove
what he is saying; otherwise, tomorrow I am going to bring a cobra, and the cobra will bite this man,
and blood should not come out; milk has to come out. He should make arrangements. I give him
twenty-four hours.”
And certainly that man finally deceived those people and escaped to America with a girl from a rich
Jaina family. Now he is a professor in New York and teaches laina philosophy. What Jaina philosophy
does he know? He still goes on pretending that he is a monk. In America nobody bothers to ask,
”How can you be a laina monk?” He still continues to say that he is a Jaina monk, still carries the
symbols of the Jaina monk.
The day he escaped from Bombay he had to leave by the back door because thousands of Jainas
were standing there just to kill him, because no Jaina monk had ever traveled by air before. And
From Personality to Individuality 215 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
secondly, a Jaina monk escaping with a woman is just not heard of at all. It may have happened
some time, but it is not known... and that too, so openly. The police were called because there was
every possibility that if they could have caught him, they would have killed him.
Respect can turn into hatred so easily. It just moved to the other extreme because the reasons for
which they were giving him respect were no longer there – in fact, what he was doing was just the
opposite. And this man who was escaping would pretend all over the world that he was still a Jaina
monk and nobody would ever think that having a woman with him....
They wanted to take away all his Jaina monk symbols: his bowl and other symbols that that particular
sect has. Under police escort he was taken from the back door to the airplane, and since then he
has not gone back to India. He cannot go: they are still waiting for him whenever he comes.
I had asked – and that was my only meeting with him: ”In the twentieth century, you are still asking
people to live against life? And you yourself are not capable of living against life. All your desires
are there as they are bound to be in everybody; it is natural. You have to accept them and accept
that you are repressing them, if you are a man of truth. Or can you say that you have transcended
them? Then I will make the effort to expose you.”
He was getting red-hot with anger. And I showed them, ”Look at his face. This man with so much
anger can be without sex? This man with so much anger, can he be really non-violent? What is his
face saying?” And he tried to kill me three times – while remaining a Jaina monk!
I was coming from Poona and an anonymous friend phoned just as I was getting into the car. He
said, ”Don’t bring Osho by car because on the way Chitrabhanu’s people are there and it may prove
dangerous.” So I had to fly, they had to arrange a special flight. But I told one of my friends to go by
car and see – in the same car in which I was going to travel.
They were there – with pistols, and the road was blocked with big stones. When they saw that I
wasn’t there they just felt embarrassed. But my friend said that the information was correct. This
happened three times. That man was trying to kill me. This was his answer and these people are
non-violent.
Violence goes on accumulating. Whatever you reject in your life you accumulate within yourself
These people are more lustful than ordinary common people, more full of anger than ordinary
people; because ordinary people become angry when they are angry, but it is momentary, it comes
and goes. But these people go on accumulating anger. They are sitting on a volcano; they just need
somebody to hit them at their weak point.
He never spoke with me from another stage. He used to tell the organizers that only one person
could speak, ”Either he speaks or 1. We both cannot speak from the same stage.”
But I told the organizers, ”I would love to speak from the same stage. He can choose. If he feels that
speaking first is dangerous, because speaking after him I criticize him, I am ready to speak first; let
him criticize me. I am ready for any situation. If he wants, he can speak first and then I speak; and
then he can answer – for that I am ready. He can speak twice, I will speak just once; but I know my
once will be more than his twice. I have seen him.”
From Personality to Individuality 216 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
He was sitting there just like a stone, throbbing with anger, trembling, almost shaking. I told the
people, ”Look at his hands.” He was holding a piece of paper and the paper was shaking. I said,
”Look at the paper.” On the paper he was taking notes to speak against me but finally decided that
it was not going to be of any worth because what proof could he give? Nobody before had argued
about it. In twenty-five centuries nobody had asked how it was possible for milk to be coming out of
the feet.
No, followers don’t ask. They are trained not to ask any embarrassing question. They are asked to
believe, because belief is going to pay, and doubt is sin.
But without doubt there is no knowing; there is no possibility of you ever becoming aware, conscious.
And these people are cutting the very roots from where you can become aware and conscious – it
is life, living situations, challenges, opportunities.
But if you simply shrink yourself and withdraw yourself from living, you will never attain to
consciousness.
It is said of a Hindu monk, who for thirty years remained in the Himalayas.... His problem was the
ego. And some sage – I mean some fool – suggested to him, ”Just go into the silent valleys of the
Himalayas, and your ego will cool down. It will take some time, so don’t come back in a hurry unless
you are certain.”
And, of course, if you live in the Himalayas, in a deep, faraway valley where you never come to
encounter another human being, how are you going to know that you have an ego? The ego needs
another ego; then it immediately comes up. If there is no other ego, there is no challenge for it to
come up. It goes fast asleep.
Thirty years is a long time, and the man became convinced that he had no ego. By this time his
fame was spreading down onto the plains, and people had started coming to worship him. And he
was feeling even better: ”I am so egoless.” And certainly when people are touching your feet you
can feel egoless. There is no problem in it because your ego will feel satisfied.
But the problem arose because there was going to be a kumbha, a fair which is the biggest fair in
the world; at least thirty million people gather for it. Nowhere else in the world does such a gathering
happen as happens in Kumbha, the fair in Allahabad, every twelve years.
So the Kumbha was going to happen and people invited that man: ”You are absolutely needed there.
Your being will be a blessing for millions of people who travel from all over the country.”
”Of course,” he said. Now he knew that he had no ego. He came down from the Himalayas to
the plains and when he reached this vast oceanic crowd – you could not see where it begins and
where it ends, and nobody knew him in that crowd – somebody stepped on his feet, and thirty
years disappeared in a flash! He clutched the man by the throat and said, ”I will kill you!” But then
immediately he remembered what he had been trying to do: ”What happened to my thirty years? It
was a sheer wastage – I am still the same man.”
From Personality to Individuality 217 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
You can sit upon a certain thing for thirty lives; it won’t make any difference. The only way to know
who you are, of what your mind consists, is to be amidst life and living in as many possible ways
as you can find, opening all the doors and windows to every side of life so that you can become
aware of who you are within, because each window will open into you and a certain hidden part will
suddenly be exposed.
One story I have loved very much. A man was a very, very angry type, as if all his energy was
converted into anger. And it was not just verbal; he was really a strong man, and every day he was
fighting and beating people for any small thing. One day it was too much; he threw his wife into the
well and killed her. It shocked him.
He loved the woman. And if he could do such a thing to someone whom he loves, what could he do
to others? Now he was repentant and guilty. A Jaina monk was in the city. This man went to him
because he had heard Jaina monks preach non-violence, no anger, ”so perhaps he can teach me
some way.”
The Jaina monk said, ”It is simple: renounce life. Without renunciation you cannot get rid of these
things. In life, every day your anger will be rubbed against others’ anger, your ego will be rubbed
against others’ egos and you will not find even a moment to relax and be silent. So renounce life.
Renouncing life means getting out of all those situations which create trouble so that you can rest at
ease and be silent. And I will give you a mantra to chant. You do the mantra.”
And you can understand it. The angry type of person is very quick in taking any decision. They can
kill. When he killed his wife it was a quick decision, he did not think twice over it. If he had thought
twice, he would not have thrown her into the well.
This type of person doesn’t think twice. He said, ”I am ready right now. Give me the initiation. And I
don’t like these five stages, I simply want to be at the final stage from this moment.”
The Jaina monk was very happy. He was a naked Jaina monk. He was happy because nowadays it
is getting very difficult to find new initiates – there are only twenty-two left. There were thousands in
Mahavira’s time. Mahavira alone used to move with ten thousand naked monks. He, himself used
to move with that company.
Now only twenty-two are left, and when one dies he is not replaced, because it is so arduous.
First you have to pass the five stages, and that takes almost your whole life. You have to go on
renouncing, and this is the ultimate renunciation: you renounce everything, even clothes. Then you
don’t touch anything.
”This man is a rare man,” thought the Jaina monk. He said ”You are a unique person. You want to
be initiated in the fifth stage right now?”
He said, ”Right now” – and he dropped his clothes, the same way he had dropped his wife; there
was no difference. But that Jaina monk could not see the point. It was so simple. If I had been there
I would have said that what he was doing was the same, there was no difference in it. But the Jaina
monk was very happy. He initiated the man and gave him the name Shantinath – Shantinath means
”the lord of silence and peace” – just to remind him that anger had been dropped, violence had been
dropped, and that from that day peace had to be his life, silence had to be his vibe.
From Personality to Individuality 218 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
After twenty years he had become very famous all over the country. A friend from his village came
to see him. He was in New Delhi; he was staying in New Delhi because there the great leaders
and the great scholars and great people from all over the world are available, so he had made it his
place.
Just the same way... Delhi is spread out even further than Bombay. It does not have skyscrapers,
so it is not rising vertically, but horizontally it is spreading – you will need five to six hours to cross
from one corner of the city to another.
Delhi has the worst traffic in the world, with all kinds of vehicles: bullock carts, camel carts,
elephants, horse and carts, bicycle rickshaws, auto-rickshaws, cars, buses. All the centuries are
together on those small streets of old Delhi, which were not made for buses and cars. It takes hours
to cross – you can be stuck anywhere.
You can divide Delhi into many villages very easily, so Shantinath, the Jaina monk, was moving
around, and remaining in Delhi. Ambassadors were coming, and it was greatly satisfying to see
him, because a Jaina monk is really a thing worth seeing. Yes, I say a thing worth seeing: he is an
exhibitionist. In the language of psychology, he is an exhibitionist.
There are a few people who, once in a while, are caught by the police because they exhibit their
nudity to somebody on a street corner – these Jaina monks are exhibiting themselves to crowds of
people. They should be behind bars or in mental institutions. They are perfect exhibitionists, and
Delhi is the best place.
This friend from Shantinath’s village, hearing that his name had become so famous and seeing his
photographs in the newspapers, became very interested. He went to Delhi to see him. He was a
poor man; it was difficult for him to get there but he borrowed money and managed it. He wanted to
see his friend who had become such a great world-famous figure.
As the man entered the temple, Shantinath saw him and immediately recognized him, but it was
below him by then to recognize such an ordinary person, so he pretended he did not recognize him.
The man could see in his eyes that he had recognized him, and that he was trying to pretend. He
went close by and he asked Shantinath, ”Sir, can I ask you your name?”
Shantinath said, ”Don’t you read newspapers? I have never seen such a fool; everybody knows my
name.
He said, ”I am an ignorant person from a faraway village” – and he told him the name of the village.
”I am just a villager, so forgive me, but please tell me your name.”
He said, ”My name is Muni Shantinath Deva.” Muni is the Jaina word for monk.
The man said, ”Shantinath?”
He said, ”Yes! Are you in some doubt?”
And the man said, ”No, I am not in any doubt, I was just thinking....” He said, ”But just one more time
because I forgot: What did you say your name was?”
From Personality to Individuality 219 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
Now Shantinath was enraged. He said, ”You did not hear me? You are really an idiot. My name is
Shantinath Deva!”
He said, ”I will try to remember it. It is so big, and I am such a fool.” He went a few feet away and
then came back and said, ”just one more time.”
Shantinath Deva took his staff and said, ”You wi]l not understand easily. You will understand only
the right language. Come here close to me and I will tell you who I am.”
The man said, ”I have understood – there is no need. I understood from the very beginning, just
as you have understood from the very beginning. You were pretending, I was pretending. But
Shantinath Deva, nothing has changed; only the name is new, your whole personality is the same. I
have simply been asking your name and you have taken your staff in your hand. If there was a well
nearby you would have thrown me into it instead of your wife.”
Nothing changes if you withdraw from life.
Nothing can change.
Life has to be lived to be known.
And if you live life without any inhibition, without any fear....
There is nothing to fear – it is your life.
Life has been given to you to live.
It is a gift of nature to you. It is not a punishment; it is simply a gift from existence.
Rejoice in it, and burn your life’s candle from both ends together.
Live as intensely as possible, and the very taste of life will give you the clue why death is not to be
feared. Once you have known your life, its fire, you will know that there is no death.
This life that one comes to know by intense living is eternal.
The feeling of its eternity arises simultaneously as you live. The deeper, the more intensely you live,
the quicker you feel there is no death.
In my religion death is celebrated because there is no death.
It is only an entry into another life.
We celebrate birth – people think we are celebrating death – because there is no death as such
because nothing dies, only forms change. Life transmigrates from one form into another; and it
should be a moment of rejoicing for all concerned when a person dies, because he is dying only
apparently. From our side it feels he is dying; from the other side he is being born.
From Personality to Individuality 220 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
Yes, he goes out of one house – and we live in this house so we think he is finished – but he enters
another house immediately. Or he may stay a little longer without a house, but there is no death.
Ninety-nine percent of people are instantly born into another form of life. The higher their
consciousness, the higher will be the form; the lower their consciousness, the lower will be the
form. It depends on you, how capable you have become of being aware and responsible. That
much responsibility will be given to you by existence – you deserve it. You have proved yourself
worthy of being given a better gift. You used the last gift so beautifully that you deserve a reward.
And it is all automatic. Nobody is deciding there; otherwise He could be bribed, He could be
persuaded. You could just cling to His feet and say, ”Lord, forgive me. You are a great forgiver,
and I am a sinner and nothing, but forgive me.”
Omar Khayyam says – he is a Sufi mystic – he says, ”Don’t stop me from sinning. Don’t stop me
from drinking. Don’t stop me from going to women, because your stopping me shows that you doubt
God’s compassion. I trust in God’s compassion.” Now, he is saying not to be worried: when you
meet God you just hold His feet; harass Him till He forgives you. And it is a single man’s monopoly.
Nobody is above Him, nobody is going to question Him; He is not answerable to anybody. He will
forgive you.
No. It is not a one-man dictatorship: existence is autonomous.
Here, when you put your hand in the fire and it is burned, it is not that some god decides that you,
somewhere in existence, are putting your hand in the fire and that now you have to be burned; or, if
he sees that you are a saint, then you have to be saved, not burned.... For thousands of years man
has believed that if you are telling the truth, fire will not burn you. In many countries the fire test has
been prevalent – to know whether a man is speaking the truth or untruth.
But it is so easy. I can ask you, ”What is the time on your watch?” and you say, ”Nine:five.” And then
I tell you, ”Put your hand over the candle and we can see whether you are speaking the truth or an
untruth.” Do you think you won’t be burned because it is nine:five? And if you are burned, then what
about other things, other great problems where truth is not so easily decided? – where truth can be
in question?
Here there seems no problem, but perhaps there may be a hidden problem; perhaps your watch
is slow, or fast – it is not nine:five, it is only nine – and you may be burned. Then I can just ask
something else: who is sitting by your side? or how many hands do you have? – even simpler, so
no problem arises. Or simply, how much is two plus two? – and put your hand in the fire....
All these people were so against life that they have forced ugly, inhuman, unscientific things on you
in the name of God, telling you that if you are true then God will save you. But you can check on it:
there is no God and there is nobody who is going to save you; if you put your hand in the fire, you
will be burned. You may be true, you may be untrue; it does not matter at all.
As you come to know life, slowly your awareness grows.
And with awareness growing, you start feeling that you are not the body. You are in the body, but
you are not the body.
From Personality to Individuality 221 Osho
CHAPTER 12. DEATH: THE ULTIMATE ORGASM
With awareness growing still more, you start feeling that you are not the mind either; you are in the
mind, but not the mind.
Slowly you are coming to your very center.
And that center is simply awareness, from where you can watch your mind, your emotions, thoughts,
body, pain, pleasure – everything.
But you are simply a watcher, unidentified with anything else that you are watching.
Now this watcher remains watching even in your sleep. The day you can feel your watcher even in
your sleep, that day you know: now death is nothing but a longer sleep. For the body it is eternal
sleep, but the watcher simply moves forwards, enters into another womb, into another body. And
this movement continues, this transmigration of the soul continues till your watchfulness is absolutely
pure.
When the flame is without any smoke, then you disappear into the universal, into the existential.
Then you are not going into another house; you don’t need any house any more, you have learned
the lesson. That was a school: moving from one house to another was moving from one class to
another. But one day you graduate – you become part of existence.
That’s why we celebrate, because there is no death. Either the man is going into a new house –
a good time to celebrate – or the man is going into the eternal existence. That is the best time to
celebrate, and the last time to celebrate.
And celebrating death will help you to understand that there is nothing in life to be afraid of
If death is a celebration, then what else can be a cause of fear?
And if you can celebrate death, you have attained a maturity.
It is possible only to those who live life as a rejoicing, a constant celebration. Then death is not
the termination, but only a small incident of changing your clothes, your house, your body. But you
remain exactly the same forever – nothing changes in your intrinsic being.
From eternity to eternity you are exactly the same.
From Personality to Individuality 222 Osho
CHAPTER 13
The new man: intellect in harmony with the heart
11 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
HOW CAN WE BELIEVE THAT THE SOUL EXISTS AFTER DEATH AND TRANSMIGRATES TO
ANOTHER FORM OF LIFE, OR DISSOLVES INTO THE UNIVERSE?
I have never asked you to believe in anything.
It is my experience that the soul exists after death, that it transmigrates into other forms of life, and
finally when there is no more to learn, no question to be answered, no search, no desire – when
that ultimate point of absolute contentment, fulfillment, enlightenment arises – then the soul simply
dissolves into existence.
To transmigrate you need to have a desire to live, a desire to be fulfilled; that’s a basic necessity.
It is not you who go on being born again and again; it is your desire that goes on and on, never
being fulfilled. You are simply following your desire like a shadow.
I have not said that you have to believe it. I would, rather, like you to be skeptical about it, to doubt
it, and to enquire into it. I am simply provoking you into an enquiry, not into a faith.
My religion is not a faith.
223
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
It is an enquiry into the ultimate truth.
So whatsoever I say, the basic reason behind it is always to inspire you – not to believe in a dogma,
but to go on in search.
If I say the soul exists after death, it is only a hypothesis for you.
For me this is an experience.
I don’t believe in it:
I know it, and I will tell you how I know it.
When I say that the soul finally dissolves into the universe, it is not a hope for me.
I know it; it has happened.
I am no longer separate from existence.
As far as I am concerned I do not exist at all as an individual entity. I have not been there for many
years. But I am not saying to you to believe it.
Again I am provoking you, challenging you to enquire.
Perhaps I am wrong – I am not an infallible pope, I don’t have any divine authority to impose a belief
on you; I hold no power, and I am not in any way programming you. I am simply trying to create a
longing in you. It is sleeping, dormant. I am trying to wake it up so that you start enquiring.
The people who say to you to believe and to have faith are the people who themselves do not believe
and do not have faith. Because I know what I am saying to you is my experience, I can challenge
you to doubt, to be skeptical, to try in every possible way to prove that it is wrong – because I know
you cannot prove it wrong. The more you try to enquire, the more you will become convinced of the
fact.
I am not saying that you have to become convinced, I am saying you will become convinced. Even
against your own mind, in spite of your whole doubting, skepticism, enquiry, when the truth comes
as a revelation, all doubts, all disbeliefs, simply disappear like shadows You have brought light in,
the shadows start disappearing; they never existed.
So only the man who knows can have the guts to say to you, ”Doubt me, question me.”
There is one question that a sannyasin has asked: ”Osho, before, you used to talk about the
beautiful way of trust, love, the way of the heart. Now your emphasis seems to be more on reason,
questioning, skepticism, intelligence. Has your work changed or is it a new phase of your work?”
No, it is not a new phase, it is just the other side of the first. I was teaching about trust because you
had come from a world which knows nothing of trust. You had come from a world which has trained
From Personality to Individuality 224 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
you intellectually and tried to deny you the existence of your own heart, to deny that feeling is also a
way of knowing.
I was talking about trust so that I could open the new door of the heart. Without opening the door of
the heart I cannot say to you, ”Doubt, be skeptical,” because then I am sending you on a dangerous
path which leads nowhere. It is a little complex but try to understand.
A man who knows nothing about feeling, nothing about trust, who has never experienced anything
like love – his heart has never jumped with joy, danced with joy in someone’s presence – that man
can go on doubting, but he will not find the answer because his doubt will be very shallow. He will
not trust his own doubt. His enquiry will be just so-so. He will not trust his own enquiry – he knows
nothing of trust.
Enquiry will need trust because you will be going into the unknown. It will demand tremendous
trust and courage because you are moving away from the conventional and the traditional; you are
moving away from the crowd. You are going into the open sea, and you don’t know whether the
other, further shore exists at all.
I could not send you into such an enquiry without preparing you to have trust. It will look
contradictory, but what can I do? – this is how life is.
Only a man of great trust is capable of great doubt.
A man of little trust can only doubt a little.
A man of no trust can only pretend that he doubts.
He cannot doubt.
The depth comes through trust – and it is a risk.
Before I send you into the uncharted sea, I have to prepare you for this immense journey on which
you will have to go alone – but I can lead you up to the boat. That’s what I was trying to teach you –
about the beauty of trust, the ecstasy of the way of the heart – so when you go into the open ocean
of reality you will have courage enough to keep on going. Whatever happens you will have trust
enough in yourself
Just see it: if you trust me – how can you trust me if you don’t trust yourself? It is impossible. If
you doubt yourself how can you trust me? It is – you who are going to trust me, and you don’t trust
yourself – how can you trust your trust?
It is absolutely necessary that the heart should be opened before intellect can be transformed into
intelligence. That’s the difference between intellect and intelligence.
Intelligence is intellect in tune with your heart.
The heart knows how to trust.
From Personality to Individuality 225 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
The intellect knows how to seek and search.
There is an old Eastern story: Two beggars used to live outside a village. One was blind and one
had no legs. One day the forest near the village where these beggars used to live caught fire. They
were competitors of course – in the same profession, begging from the same people – and they
were continually angry with each other. They were enemies, not friends.
People in the same profession cannot be friends. It is very difficult because it is a question of
competition, clients – you take away somebody’s client. Beggars label their clients: ”Remember that
this is my man; don’t you bother him.” You don’t know to which beggar you belong, who the beggar
is in whose possession you are, but some beggar on the street has possessed you. He may have
fought and won the battle and now you are his possession.
I used to see a beggar near the university; one day I found him in the market. He was constantly
there, near the university, because young people are more generous; older people slowly become
more miserly, more afraid. Death is coming close by; now money seems to be the only thing that
can help. And if they have money then others may help also; if they don’t have money, even their
own sons, their own daughters, won’t bother about them. Young people can be spendthrifts. They
are young, they can earn; life is there, a long life ahead.
He was a rich beggar because the university students.... In India a student reaches university only
if he comes from a rich family, otherwise it is a struggle. A few poor people also get there but it is
painful, arduous. I was also from a poor family. The whole night I was working as an editor of a
newspaper, and in the day I went to the university. For years I could not sleep more than three or
four hours – whenever I could find time in the day or in the night.
So this beggar was very strong. No other beggar could enter the university street; even entry was
banned. Everybody knew to whom the university belonged – to that beggar! One day suddenly I
saw a young man; the old man was not there. I asked him, ”What happened? Where is the old
man?”
He said, ”He is my father-in-law. He has given the university to me as a gift.” Now, the university did
not know that the ownership had changed, that somebody else was now the owner. The young man
said, ”i have married his girl.”
In India a dowry is given when you marry somebody’s daughter. It is not just that you marry the
daughter: your father-in-law has to give you, if he is very rich, a car, a bungalow; if not very rich then
at least a scooter; if not that, then at least a bicycle. But he has to give something or other – a radio,
a transistor set, a television – and some cash. If he is really rich then he gives you an opportunity to
go abroad, to study, to become a more educated person, a doctor, an engineer – and he will pay for
it.
This beggar’s daughter had got married and as her dowry the young man had been given the whole
university. He said, ”From today this street and this university belong to me. And my father-in-law
has shown me who my clients are.”
I saw the old man in the marketplace so I said to him, ”Great! You have done well in giving a dowry.”
From Personality to Individuality 226 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
”Yes,” he said, ”I had only one daughter and I wanted to do something for my son-in-law. I have
given him the best place to beg. Now I am here trying again to arrange my monopoly in the market.
It is a very tough job here because there are so many beggars, senior ones who have already taken
possession of clients. But there is nothing to be worried about. I will manage; I will throw out a few
beggars from here” – and certainly he did.
So when the forest was on fire those two beggars thought for a moment. They were enemies, not
even on speaking terms, but this was an emergency. The blind man said to the man who had no
legs, ”Now the only way to escape is that you sit on my shoulders; use my legs and I will use your
eyes. That’s the only way we can save ourselves.”
It was immediately understood. There was no problem. The man without legs could not get out; it
was impossible for him to cross the forest – it was all on fire. He would have moved a little bit but
that would not help: an exit, and a very quick exit, was needed. The blind man also was certain that
he could not get out. He did not know where the fire was, where the road was, and where the trees
were burning, and where they were not: a blind man, he would get lost. But both were intelligent
people; they dropped their enmity, became friends and saved their lives.
This is an Eastern fable. And this is about your intellect and your heart. It has nothing to do with
beggars, it has something to do with you. It has nothing to do with the forest on fire, it has something
to do with you – because you are on fire. Each moment you are burning, suffering, in misery,
anguish. Alone your intellect is blind. It has legs, it can run fast, it can move fast, but because it is
blind it cannot choose the right direction in which to go. And it is bound to be continually stumbling,
falling, hurting itself and feeling life meaningless. That’s what the intellectuals of the whole world are
saying: ”Life is meaningless.”
The reason why life seems to them meaningless is that the blind intellect is trying to see the light. It
is impossible.
There is a heart within you which sees, which feels, but which has no legs; it cannot run.
It remains where it is, beating, waiting: someday intellect will understand and will be able to use the
heart’s eyes.
When I say the word trust
I mean the eyes of the heart.
And when I say doubt
I mean the legs of your intellect.
Both together can come out of the fire; there is no problem at all. But remember, the intellect has to
accept the heart above its shoulders. It has to. The heart has no legs, only eyes, and intellect has
to listen to the heart and follow its directions.
In the hands of the heart the intellect becomes intelligent. It is a transformation, a total transformation
of energy. Then the person does not become an intellectual, he simply becomes wise.
From Personality to Individuality 227 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
Wisdom comes through the meeting of the heart and the intellect.
And once you have learned the art of how to create a synchronicity between your heartbeats and
the workings of your intellect, you have the whole secret in your hands, the master key to open all
the mysteries.
I could have taught you doubt, but that would have changed you into intellectuals. I would have
defeated my purpose and I would have destroyed your life. And there is no contradiction in what I
am doing. First I had to teach you the way of the heart because I wanted you to understand that
heart is higher than your intellect. I had to deny intellect completely so you forgot all your doubting
and skepticism that you acquired from your schools, colleges, universities – which know nothing of
the heart, which depend only on the intellect. They create the intelligentsia.
Even their greatest intellectuals, like Bertrand Russell, Jean-Paul Sartre, Martin Heidegger – they
are great intellectuals... but poor, blind; they know nothing. They have immense knowledgeability,
but they know nothing. They have not experienced anything at all, because experience is something
that happens through the heart.
The intellect can take the heart into that space where experience happens.
The intellect cannot experience it.
The experiencer will be the heart.
But the intellect can be a good vehicle.
If the reins are in the hands of the heart, then the horse of intellect is of tremendous beauty. And
this is the harmony which creates a real, authentic seeker.
It was a problem for me: from where to begin? I had to begin somewhere; either I had to begin with
doubt or I had to begin with trust. I contemplated and weighed both for years. And you cannot teach
both together; it will simply confuse people. The best is to teach one first and then the second. Even
then it creates trouble. The question is there, that these two things seem to be contradictory. They
are not.
Is the friendship of the blind beggar and the beggar without legs contradictory? What can be more
harmonious? Two people functioning like one person – what can be more harmonious? Eyes belong
to somebody, legs belong to somebody else; but eyes and legs belonging to two different people are
functioning as if they belong to one person.
I would have loved to start with doubt because that is easier; you are already trained in it. That’s
what J. Krishnamurti has been doing all his life, and has proved an absolute failure. And now there
is no possibility for him to change his way of working. Ninety years of continual teaching of doubt,
skepticism, intellect, reason.... He has worked hard; one feels sad for him, but all that he has been
able to create are doubting Thomases all around the world.
Those doubting Thomases are blind, and perhaps J. Krishnamurti also cannot see clearly. He is not
blind, but his heart is not on top of his intellect; his intellect is sitting on top of his heart. He has not
moved anywhere either: whatever he was saying in 1925 he is saying in 1985 – the same.
From Personality to Individuality 228 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
Just now Sheela was telling me that one of my sannyasins, Deeksha, went to see Krishnamurti in
England. At first he was not ready to see her, but Deeksha is not the type to leave anybody so easily.
She pestered him, and she wouldn’t leave; finally, poor Krishnamurti had to encounter Deeksha.
But the first thing she did, she should not have done. She wanted to take over J. Krishnamurti’s
kitchen – it was a good idea, she is a perfectly good cook – but what she did wrong was that she
mentioned she had been with me. That was not the right certificate to produce. That was not the
right qualification; that was absolutely the wrong qualification, the wrong certificate.
If she had asked me I would have told her how to approach J. Krishnamurti: at least don’t mention
my name, ever, because my working is totally opposite to his. And he immediately gets enraged....
The moment she mentioned my name – you cannot believe that a man like J. Krishnamurti would
say such a thing – he said, ”Yes, Osho was enlightened, but now he is no longer.”
Now this is something great! Nobody has ever heard that somebody who has been enlightened can
also become unenlightened. Nobody can fall from there because there is nothing to fall, nowhere to
fall, nobody to fall; not a single ingredient exists. Where can you fall? The whole universe is in you,
and you are in the whole universe. Where can you fall? – there is no other space. And who can
fall? – because the one who could fall has fallen long ago: it is his fall that makes enlightenment
possible.
A person exists before enlightenment, not after enlightenment.
After enlightenment, enlightenment exists.
No person, no ego, no ”In – so who can fall?
That is one of the impossible things in existence: to fall from enlightenment.
Yes, one man has been doing it, and that is one of my sannyasins, Gunakar; Germans can do
impossible things. He has many times become enlightened. He declares himself enlightened:
he cannot wait. He used to become enlightened and then he would write, trying to show his
enlightenment in the letter – and it was all rubbish.
He wrote to all the government heads of the whole world; he wrote letters to all the members of UNO
declaring his enlightenment. And in those letters it was all rubbish, but he was advising everybody.
I asked him to come so that I could see his enlightenment. He came, very nervous, and as he sat
down in front of me, I said, ”now become unenlightened again!”
So he said, ”If you say so, Osho, then.... In fact I was so impatient: I want to become enlightened.”
I said, ”It is perfectly good that you want to become enlightened, but you need not declare
your enlightenment without becoming enlightened. When you become enlightened, you will be
recognized. I will write a letter to you, you need not write a letter to me. Just wait!”
So he would say, ”Okay, so I am not enlightened.”
From Personality to Individuality 229 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
This has happened three or four times. Since I came to America he has not come here because
he does not want to become unenlightened again. But this is the only case in the whole history of
humanity. Gunakar is unique! Otherwise, once a person becomes enlightened he is no more.
Now, Krishnamurti saying to Deeksha, ”Osho was enlightened; now, since he moved to America,
he is no longer” – that too is strange. Krishnamurti lives in America; his whole life he has lived in
America or in England, but his home base is America. I have been here only three years, and I have
become unenlightened in three years. What to say about him? He has been here his whole life,
almost eighty years – at least twenty-five times longer. He must have become unenlightened! And
how can America make a person unenlightened? Yes, it is possible that if you are a born Oregonian
you may never become enlightened; that is possible, I don’t see much hope. But even Oregon
cannot do this miracle: make an enlightened person unenlightened.
But Krishnamurti is really angry with me. I simply laugh at the poor old fellow. He is nice, but why
does he get so angry? And only with me? There are so many gurus around the world, and he is not
angry with any of them, so why with me?
The reason is very clear, but perhaps not so clear to him. The reason is clear: what he has been
trying to do and has been constantly failing to do, I have managed in a very short period. It is a
professional.... The same profession – either of beggars or of Masters, it makes no difference. He
has no clients, and I have so many clients that I go on chopping and dropping and somehow sorting
out the wrong ones.
He has been looking for people like you, but he cannot find them because of his own strategy. He
has chosen doubt as the first step – that’s where he missed. The first step he missed.
I have chosen trust as the first step.
And once you have felt the taste of trust then doubt is impotent.
Doubt cannot destroy your trust.
Doubt will destroy your beliefs:
They need to be destroyed.
Doubt will destroy all that is not authentic:
That needs to be destroyed.
What doubt cannot destroy is trust.
When doubt comes face to face with authentic trust, then doubt accepts the trust – its eyes, its way
of feeling – as higher than itself It is so dear, there is no other possibility.
Your doubt bows down to your trust, and a friendship happens in you. Your heart is the master, your
intellect becomes the servant.
From Personality to Individuality 230 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
And that’s what I mean by intelligence. It is intelligence which will ultimately become enlightenment.
So I started with trust because I wanted people who can take the risk of trusting, who are confident
enough to take the risk.
Trust is risky, doubt is not risky. Doubt is really trying to defend you; it is a defense measure so that
you are not cheated, you are not exploited, so that somebody does not befool you, you don’t fall
into the hands of a con man. Doubt simply prevents you from being cheated. But if you don’t have
anything, and doubt goes on protecting you, what is the point of it all? It is like a man who goes on
guarding his safe and knows perfectly well that there is nothing in it. Then what are you guarding?
Have a good sleep, because there is nothing! What do you have that can be exploited?
Yes, a man of trust has something:
He has a throbbing, living, feeling heart.
He has a treasure house.
Now doubt can be put on guard.
First I tried to create the treasure in you:
Now I am telling you that you need a guard. You have something to lose, and you should be alert.
There is no contradiction at all. Only for intellectuals will it seem that there is a contradiction; for
intelligent people it will be immediately clear that there is a synchronicity. I may look mad – one day
teaching you trust, another day starting to teach you about doubt – but my madness has a method
in it. It is not just madness, but madness with a method.
I don’t say to you, ”Believe me;” I say to you, ”Take this hypothesis” – and now I can say to you, ”Take
this hypothesis...” because this much trust you have in me. I am not asking for a belief or faith, I am
simply saying, ”I know something which I cannot make you know; I know something which I cannot
even express to you. But I can give you a hypothesis just to begin with, so that you can enquire.”
When I say the soul transmigrates, to me it is an experience: I remember my past lives. I have
transmigrated; there is no question of doubt for me, but I am not saying for you to believe it. What I
am conspiring is to make you interested in this strange enquiry into past lives. If I can know my past
lives – because they are all imprinted in the unconscious, nothing is ever lost – you can descend the
staircase and go into your unconscious, and you can start knowing about your past lives. When you
know, there is no need to believe – because then you know. When you don’t know, never believe,
because if you believe you will never know.
So belief is not needed at any stage of life.
When you are ignorant, belief is not needed; it is very dangerous, because if you start believing then
who is going to enquire?
Belief stops enquiry, kills enquiry.
From Personality to Individuality 231 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
And when you know something, it will be simply foolish to believe in it. What will be the point of
believing? – you know. You don’t believe in the sun, you don’t believe in the roses – you know. You
believe in God because you DON’T know. You believe in the soul because you don’t know.
I am trying to destroy a]l unnecessary hypotheses, so you are not diverted; then you can move into
an enquiry for God. One thing is certain: if God wants to meet you, He will look for you. In this vast
universe you should not be so insane that you can search for God.
Man has reached only up to the moon. That too is not very far; it is the nearest planet. The nearest
star is four light years away. If someday we can invent – it is impossible but just for argument’s sake
– if someday we can invent a vehicle, a rocket, which moves with the same speed as light, then we
will reach the nearest star in four years. That is a one-way journey; the return journey means eight
years. In the first place the problem is the speed, because at the speed of light everything becomes
light. No matter what metal is used, at that speed everything is transformed into light – just as at a
certain speed in air fire is created.
In olden times in India, and even today – in my childhood I have seen it in my village – people who
smoked used to carry two stones, the white stones which are available on the shore of any river.
They would put a little cotton between those two stones and rub the cotton between them; that
rubbing would create fire, the cotton would burn up. That was perhaps the most primitive lighter.
Perhaps they are still doing it. I have not been to my village for many years – they must be still doing
it. Who will bother about a modern lighter? – you need petrol and you need this and you need that.
Those poor people can just get two stones from anywhere, and carry those stones with them. It is
the simplest and cheapest way, and they can create fire anywhere.
I have seen people creating fire by rubbing two bamboos together. In the aboriginal state of Bastar
in India there seems to be perhaps an even more primitive method: by rubbing dry wood together
fire is created. That is how forests catch on fire, because in strong winds trees rub against each
other and their rubbing creates fire. Just the other day I was telling you that meteorites fall from the
sky and burn up. You see a star falling: it is a stone burning because its speed creates great friction
with the air. The friction at that speed creates fire.
Light travels at the ultimate speed. At that speed everything is going to turn into light: the vehicle,
the passengers, everybody. You won’t reach the nearest star in four years. And if we move at the
same speed – the way we have gone to the moon – it will take perhaps thousands of years, one
way; a round trip, thousands more. The people you left behind when you left the earth, you will not
find on your return – nobody at all. In those years all those people have gone; generations have
passed.... When you come back you will not be able to recognize a single face. And the hazards of
such a long journey....
Even the hazards of the journey to the moon were tremendous, anything could have gone wrong;
but it was only a question of a very short time. Still things were going wrong: machines, after all, are
machines. – And there you don’t have a workshop and mechanics, engineers and scientists. They
are all here on the earth with remote controls, and those remote controls sometimes just don’t work.
To depend completely on machines for all those years seems to be impossible.
And one thing more: God is not on that star, because that is the nearest star. If He wants to avoid
man He has so many stars, so far away – stars for which the earth has never existed. Their distance
From Personality to Individuality 232 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
is such that if on the day the earth came into existence their light started traveling towards the earth,
by the time that light reaches the earth, the earth will be gone. The distance is such that your earth’s
few million years of life are not enough for the light to reach here. And there are stars further away
than that.
If God wants to meet you, the only way is for Him to look for you; and He has not bothered at all. It is
man who is bothering about God by looking above. It was good in Jesus’ time to look above because
it was thought that the stars were very close by, just lamps for the night that God has created to give
you some light. The world was very small, the stars were very close. Now we know that they are not
lamps created to give you light, and that there are millions of stars, expanding continuously with the
same speed as light. The universe is an expanding universe.
If God wants to meet you it is up to Him – but I don’t think He is interested.
You unnecessarily get involved in a search for God. All that you will end up with will be your own
hallucination, your own imagination.
That’s why I want to drop all unnecessary hypotheses, so you can focus yourself on the most
necessary hypothesis – and that is your being, your soul.
Please first find yourself, then try to find God; otherwise you will not even be able to introduce
yourself: Who are you? If by chance, by accident, somewhere you come across Him, and He asks,
”Who are you?” you won’t be able to answer Him; you don’t know. Your name will not work, your
religion will not work, your degrees will not work; because you are not your name, you are not your
degrees and you are not your profession. He will not ask, ”Are you a doctor or an engineer or a
plumber?” He will ask, ”Who are you? Engineering may be your education – forget about it! Just tell
me who you are.” And you don’t know. This is the basic question.
I say to you, you are; but don’t believe me, just take it as a hypothesis.
That’s why I needed first your trust, a little trust: the trust that this man is not going to give you a
wrong hypothesis. This much trust – I am not asking much.
Jesus and Krishna asked for total surrender. I am just asking for a very simple thing, a thing that
any scientist will ask of you: ”This is the hypothesis – work on it.” You cannot doubt a hypothesis,
remember, because a hypothesis is not a belief so the question of doubt does not arise.
A hypothesis means something temporarily assumed to help you enquire. And once you find, you
can see whether the hypothesis was right or wrong. You can put your experience against the
hypothesis and judge. And if this hypothesis has given you the experience, then the hypothesis
was right. If the hypothesis just leads you into a desert land, and no oasis ever appears, then drop
that hypothesis – and the sooner the better. Find something better. But I tell you I have found it.
In a Master you need only hypothetical trust, not a total surrender. How can you surrender totally?
I sometimes feel simply surprised that Krishna told Arjuna, ”Surrender to me totally.” Now, if Arjuna
is asking a thousand and one questions about everything, is it possible for him to surrender totally?
From Personality to Individuality 233 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
And for Krishna to ask Arjuna, who is continually doubting everything that Krishna is saying and
raising question upon question – to tell him, ”Just surrender totally to me”....
Do you think it is a child’s game? How can this man surrender? And Arjuna was a great intellectual:
all the questions that he has raised before Krishna are relevant. And all the answers that Krishna
had given to him are just to explain away his question, not to explain. There is no way to explain,
he is simply trying to explain them away. But Arjuna is insistent: Krishna tries to escape from one
question, Arjuna brings another. This goes on and on, and in the middle of it, Krishna suddenly
asks, ”You just surrender to me, and leave everything to me.”
I am surprised by Krishna’s demand, and that too of an intellectual like Arjuna. Can’t he see that this
man is not a gullible type? And even if you can find a gullible type – a man who cannot live totally,
cannot do anything totally, can he be expected to surrender totally? Moreover, can surrender be an
act on the part of the disciple?
One young man used to come to me; he was a very gullible, believing, devotional type. The situation
between me and him was just the reverse of that between Krishna and Arjuna. He would just hold
my legs and sit on the floor; and he would say, ”Accept me. I want to surrender totally to you.”
Once I said, ”You want to surrender totally to me, but I don’t want your surrender! Are you going
to force your surrender upon me? What am I going to do with your surrender? – I don’t need it.
You may need it somewhere else; don’t waste it totally. Save it for some emergency. Somewhere
somebody may demand surrender with a gun, then what will you do? You will say,’I don’t have any
surrender left, I have surrendered all to one person.’ You will be in danger – you keep it.”
He said, ”You are strange. Every master asks,’Surrender.’ And I come to you; I believe in you, and I
want to surrender.”
I said, ”Listen, today you have come to surrender; tomorrow you can come and say,’Give my
surrender back.’ I will unnecessarily have to take care of your surrender so that it is not lost. I
may put it somewhere, and one day you may appear and suddenly ask,’Give my surrender back.”’
He said, ”You are joking.”
I said, ”I am not joking! If you are surrendering, you have the right to take it back. you are the master,
I am not the master. You are surrendering to me – who is the master? It is your act, I am simply
outside your act. I am not doing anything, you are doing it – but tomorrow you can cancel it. You
can find a better master; you can find some fault in me, and you can take your surrender back.”
I said, ”I don’t ask anything from you. I don’t need your surrender, all I need is a hypothetical trust.
Do what I say; it may prove right, it may prove wrong. So there is no need to trust me, just do it with
a’perhaps.’ I have no interest in deceiving you. By your sitting in silence, meditating, I am not going
to gain anything. So let it be clear that I am not going to gain anything by your sitting in silence, by
your becoming enlightened; I am not going to have any share in it.
”So just hypothetically.... And why should I send you in the wrong direction? I have no investment. I
am not a priest, I don’t live on any priesthood. How in the world, for what reason would I misguide
From Personality to Individuality 234 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
you? So just hypothetically, that’s enough. More than that I don’t want, because more than that is
dangerous. Today you say,’I surrender totally,’ and then you think you need not do anything. What
else can you do? – you have done all, you have surrendered totally.”
Krishna is asking Arjuna to ”surrender totally, and I will take care of you.” This is certainly destroying
the other person’s independence, individuality, his freedom to enquire; you are completely killing the
person spiritually. But this has been the way of all the religions. Hence, you see some contradiction
between trust and doubt. There is none.
I have taught you trust and the way of the heart so that your heart is open, available; your eyes are
there. Now I have to train your intellect. Before I leave I have to complete my work. I have to train
your intellect, sharpen it. I have to teach you doubt, because doubt is not a simple thing.
Doubt needs great courage because you will be doubting everything possible. You will be
surrounded by all kinds of doubts. All consoling beliefs will be taken away, beliefs which gave you
a certain confidence, a certain stability, a certain feeling that you belong to a big tradition, a well-
respected religion of holy scriptures, messiahs, representatives of God. You had all these things
surrounding you. They gave you a cozy feeling that you are not alone. I am trying to do just this: cut
away everything that gives you a false, cozy feeling and that keeps you dozing all your life.
Belief is the opium which all the religions have been giving you in good doses.
I am trying to destroy your addiction to the opium.
My whole effort is to leave you alone.
Yes, you will feel fear, you will feel a certain trembling, you will feel all is lost; but this is just in the
beginning. A little patience – it is a passing phase. Soon you will feel a tremendous energy arising
in you which would have never arisen in the crowd, with its beliefs, because there was no need: you
were spoon-fed; there was no need for you to think about your food on your own.
I am taking every consolation, every comfort – I mean spiritually – so you are completely alone in
your being.
And then take the hypothesis:
Meditate, be silent, just watch yourself
Somebody has asked, ”How can we be certain that the watcher is not part of the mind?” It is a
relevant question but only intellectual. It is not out of meditation, because in his question the man is
bringing in three things, of which he is not aware: the mind, the watcher – and who is this third who
is thinking whether the mind and the watcher are one thing? There is a third entity which is raising
the question.
I say to you: the watcher, your watcher, is part of your mind. And not only that, the second watcher
behind it is also part of your mind.
From Personality to Individuality 235 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
When you realize silent watching you don’t see any mind anywhere; all thoughts stop. That is the
beauty and the revolution of the watcher: when you are in a watching state there is nothing to be
watched.
This is the trouble: when there is everything to watch, the watcher is not there; when the watcher
comes in, there is nothing to watch. Only one can exist, both cannot exist together. The presence of
the watcher simply disperses the mind; it is no longer needed. It was just functioning because the
watcher was absent.
Gurdjieff used to tell a story: A very, rich man went on a pilgrimage. He had many servants and
a very, big palace where he lived alone with all these servants. He called all the servants and told
them, ”One by one, by rotation, you have to be on guard. I don’t know how much time I am going
to take, it may be many years; the journey is long, the pilgrimage is hazardous. I may come back, I
may not come back, but the palace, the garden, everything has to be present as it is.”
They said, ”Of course. Whatsoever you say we will do.”
The man went away. Months passed, years passed. By and by the servants started completely
forgetting that they were servants because the master had been gone so long. Man’s memory is not
that long, and there are things which one does not really want to remember. One’s being a slave
and somebody being the master who wants to remember that?
Each servant had to guard the palace in rotation, and when each servant was guarding, he would
pretend that he was the master. Anybody coming to the palace or passing by would ask, ”Whose
palace is this?” The servant would answer, ”It is my palace, my garden. Don’t you like it?”
This was happening with all the guards. Years passed; the guards completely forgot about the
master and that he was going to return. ”By now he must be dead, something must have happened.
And it is good that we got rid of that fellow – now we are the masters.” They declared to the whole
town, ”We are the masters” – and the town had also forgotten the master. It was long before – only
old people remembered that somebody had been there, but it was only very vaguely. When he went,
where he went, and what happened to him, nobody was aware.
But one day, the master appeared; he knocked on the door. The slaves looked at him and suddenly
fell at his feet: ”Master, you are back!”
He said, ”I told you I would come back, even though it may take a long time.”
They said, ”Forgive us, because the city people will say we have committed a crime against you. We
had forgotten you completely, and we enjoyed being the master so much that we declared that we
were the masters – and the city believes that we are the masters.”
Gurdjieff used to tell this story, saying that the same is the case with the watcher. The watcher is
absent; the mind – which is just a slave – is pretending to be the master. And it is not a question
of a few years – for millions of years the master has been absent. Perhaps the master has never
been home; there is no question that he had gone, because once he arrives he never goes. So your
thoughts, and the combination of thoughts which you call your mind, certainly, confidently believe
that they are the master.
From Personality to Individuality 236 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
Just tn, to watch your thoughts.
Remember one thing: Thought itself cannot watch another thought – that is impossible. A thought
cannot become a watcher of another thought; so when in your mind the thought arises, ”I am
watching,” you have missed, because it is a thought. When the watcher is there you will not even
have the idea of ”Aha! Got it!” Lost it! You were just on the verge of getting it and Werner Erhard
entered, and EST finished everything: ”Got it!” Even that much, just two words, is enough; the mind
is back.
It is always the mind that gets it, or does not get it; the watcher simply watches. No idea is formed,
just absolute silence prevails. And in that moment is the seeing, knowing, experiencing – without
any thought. Can’t you experience anything without any thought? You will have to learn, because
mind has been trained for centuries just to think every experience in words.
You see a beautiful roseflower: immediately the mind says, ”How beautiful!” You may not say it
aloud, you are not that insane, but silently you will say, ”How beautiful!” But in saying it, you miss the
experience of the beauty of the flower.
The moment you said, ”How beautiful!” you went far away from the flower. You have already
compared it with your past experiences of the flower. And remember, your past experiences must
have been just like this: they were not experiences because those times also you would have missed
in the same way, by saying, ”How beautiful!” You have always been missing the train!
Standing by the side of a roseflower, just stand there. Can’t you keep for a few seconds just a
watching state of consciousness, with no interference of words – beautiful, ugly, red, yellow? No,
just stand by the side – and it is not difficult; it needs just a little knack, and you can practice it
anytime, doing anything. Just don’t allow words to come in between you and what is happening.
Once this knack is learned... the same is the situation inside. Of course, the inside experience
is inexpressible, and tremendously more vast and profound than the beauty of a roseflower or the
beauty of a sunset; but what you have to do is the same. Just relish it, drown in it, and if for a few
seconds....
It has been counted exactly by one person, and that is Mahavira – and I agree with him because
I have counted it also: it is exactly forty-eight seconds. If you can manage this state of watching
without any word interfering for forty-eight seconds – I am not asking much, not even a whole
minute, twelve seconds less. It is something of a law of existence that within forty-eight seconds
the experience is complete. Then nobody can take it from you, you cannot fall from it. You can come
to America, you can come to Oregon – you cannot fall from it.
I really enjoyed it when Sheela told me that J.Krishnamurti thinks that I have lost my enlightenment.
He must be furious! He cannot be joking, that much is certain. He is not a man to be non-serious,
no; he is continually serious. He must have been serious. But what is troubling him? – he started
with the wrong step. That is not my fault. If you get out of your bed with the wrong foot, what can I
do? It is your bed and your foot, and you go on doing that for eighty years; I have nothing to do with
it!
From Personality to Individuality 237 Osho
CHAPTER 13. THE NEW MAN: INTELLECT IN HARMONY WITH THE HEART
I was also in a dilemma in the beginning, but sometimes things which are not appreciated prove
tremendously helpful. My laziness proved tremendously helpful. I went on sitting on my bed, figuring
out which foot to put down first. I would have waited there my whole life.
For almost seven years I never told anybody, ”I am no longer part of you.” Yes, a few people came
to suspect – those who had the experience. One was Magga Baba, a very poor man, a beggar. He
was the first to take hold of me – with both his hands he shook me – and he said, ”You cannot befool
me!”
I said, ”i have not done anything.”
He said, ”You haven’t done anything, that is true, but you have been someplace which you are
hiding.”
I said, ”That’s true, but please don’t tell anybody because I don’t want any harassment. I will get out
of the bed, but I have not yet decided which foot is the right one to get out with.”
I am a lazy man, bone lazy. My physician, Doctor Devaraj, wants to give me Vitamin D because I
am bone lazy. Calcium is missing he thinks – perhaps! But it has been tremendous; it is good that
it was missing. If I had jumped out of bed, I would have been in the same mess as J. Krishnamurti.
I got out of bed only when I had figured out everything completely. And since that moment I have
been moving with every step calculated.
First I taught you about trust, the heart, feeling, love; and now I am teaching you about doubt,
skepticism, reason, intellect, because I would like you to be a whole man. You can be completely
satisfied with trusting, with the heart, but you will not be a whole man.
I would not call Mira a whole person, I would not call Ramakrishna a whole person. They are
beautiful, but the intellect is missing; it is all heart. It is too much sugar, it creates diabetes. I am
diabetic. Too much of the heart, too much sweetness, and you suffer from diabetes – and I don’t
want any of you to suffer from diabetes. Yes, just living by the heart you will have spiritual diabetes.
Intellect is salty, spicy; it is not all sugar.
I would like you to enjoy the wholeness of your being, when your body, your heart, your intellect all
fall in tune. I have called that the new man – Zorba the Buddha.
From Personality to Individuality 238 Osho
CHAPTER 14
The only hope: the enlightenment of humanity
12 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WOULDN’T IT HAVE BEEN MUCH EASIER FOR YOU TO WORK WITHOUT BEING ASSOCIATED
WITH THE WORD RELIGION? WHAT IS THE SECRET BEHIND YOUR CHOOSING TO DO IT
THIS WAY?
I would have loved not to be associated in any way with the word religion.
The whole history of religion simply stinks. It is ugly, and it shows the degradation of man, his
inhumanity, and all that is evil. And this is not about any one single religion, it is the same story
repeated by all the religions of the world: man exploiting man in the name of God. I still feel uneasy
being associated with the word religion. But there are a few problems: in life sometimes one has to
choose things that one hates.
In my youth I was known in the university as an atheist, irreligious, against all moral systems. That
was my stand, and that is still my stand. I have not changed even an inch; my position is exactly
the same. But being known as an atheist, irreligious, amoral, became a problem. It was difficult to
communicate with people, almost impossible to bridge any kind of relationship with people. In my
communing with people, those words – atheist, irreligious, amoral – functioned like impenetrable
walls. I would have remained so – for me there was no problem – but I saw that it was impossible to
spread my experience, to share.
239
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
The moment people heard that I am an atheist, irreligious, amoral, they were completely closed.
That I don’t believe in any God, that I don’t believe in any heaven and hell was enough for them to
withdraw from me. Even very educated people – because I was a professor in the university, and I
was surrounded by hundreds of professors, research scholars, intelligent, educated people – simply
avoided me because they had no courage to defend what they believed; they had no argument for
themselves.
And I was continually arguing on street corners, in the university, in the PANWALLAH’S shop –
anywhere that I could get hold of somebody. I would hammer religion and try to clean people
completely of all this nonsense. But the total result was that I became like an island; nobody even
wanted to talk with me, because even to say hello to me was dangerous: where would it lead?
Finally I had to change my strategy.
I became aware that, strangely, the people who were interested in the search for truth had got
involved in religions. Because they thought me irreligious, I could not commune with them; and they
were the people who would be really interested to know. They were the people who would be ready
to travel with me to unknown spaces. But they were already involved in some religion, in some sect,
in some philosophy; and just their thinking of me as irreligious, atheistic, became a barrier. And
those were the people that I had to seek out.
There were people who were not involved in religions but they were not seekers at all. They were
just interested in the trivia of life: earning more money, being a great leader – a politician, a prime
minister, a president. Their interests were very mundane. They were no use to me. And they were
also not interested in what I had to offer to them because it was not their interest at all.
The man who wants to become the prime minister of the country is not interested in finding the truth.
If truth and the prime ministership are both presented to him, he will choose the prime ministership.
He will say about truth, ”There is no hurry. We can do that – the whole of eternity is available – but
the opportunity of the prime ministership may or may not come again. It rarely comes, and only to
very very rare people, once in a while. Truth is everybody’s nature, so any day we can find that. First
let us do that which is momentary, temporal, fleeting. This beautiful dream may not happen again.
Reality is not going anywhere, but this dream is fleeting.”
Their interest was in dreaming, imagination. They were not my people, and communication with
them was also impossible because our interests were diametrically opposite. I tried hard but these
people were not interested in religion, not interested in truth, not interested in anything that is
significant.
The people who were interested were either Christians, or Hindus, Mohammedans, Jainas,
Buddhists: they were already following some ideology, some religion. Then it was obvious to me
that I would have to play the game of being religious; there was no other way. Only then could I find
people who were authentic seekers.
I hate the word religion, I have always hated it, but I had to talk about religion. But what I was talking
about under the cover of religion was not the same as people understood by religion. Now, this was
simply a strategy. I was using their words – God, religion, liberation, moksha – and I was giving
them my meaning. In this way I could start finding people; and people started coming to me.
From Personality to Individuality 240 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
It took a few years for me to change my image in people’s eyes. But people only listen to words,
they don’t understand meanings: people only understand what you sag they don’t understand what
is conveyed unsaid. So I used their own weapons against themselves. I commented on religious
books, and gave a meaning that was totally mine.
I would have said the same thing without commenting – it would have been far easier because then
I would have been directly speaking to you. There was no need to drag in Krishna, Mahavira, and
Jesus, and then make them say what they had never said. But such is the stupidity of humanity that
the same thing that I had been saying before, and they were not ready even to hear it.... And now
thousands started gathering around me because I was speaking on Krishna.
Now, what have I to do with Krishna? What has he done for me? What relationship have I got with
Jesus? If I had met him while he was alive I would have said to him, ”You are a fanatic and you
are not in your senses, I cannot say that the people who want to crucify you are absolutely wrong,
because they have no other way to deal with you.”
So this was the only way. When I started speaking on Jesus, Christian colleges and Christian
theological institutes started inviting me to speak, and I was really continually giggling inside,
because those fools thought that this was what Jesus had said. Yes, I used Jesus’ words – one
has just to understand a little game with words and one can make any word mean anything – and
they thought that this was the real message of Jesus.... ”Our own Christian missionaries and priests
have not done so much for Jesus as you have done.”
And I had to keep quiet, knowing that I have nothing to do with Jesus, and that what I was saying
Jesus might not have been able to even understand. He was a poor fellow, absolutely uneducated.
Certainly he had a charismatic personality so it was not difficult to gather a few uneducated people,
fear-oriented and greedy for the joys in heaven. This man was making promises and asking nothing.
So cheap: what was the harm of believing in him? There was no danger, no harm. If there was no
heaven and no God, you were not losing anything. By chance if there were, and this man was the
begotten son of God, then you were gaining so much for nothing: simple arithmetic!
But it is significant that not a single educated, cultured rabbi became Jesus’ disciple, because those
rabbis knew far better expressions, far better ways of philosophizing. And this man knew nothing.
He was not giving a single argument, he was simply stating things which he had heard from others;
and he was a stubborn type of young man.
What I said in the name of Jesus, I had been saying before also, but no Christian community, no
Christian college, no Christian theological institute would have invited me. What to say of invitation?
– if I had wanted to enter they would have closed the doors. That was the situation: I was prohibited
from entering my own city’s central temple, and they had the support of the police so that I should
not be allowed in. So whenever there was a Hindu monk speaking inside, a policeman was on guard
outside to prevent me coming in.
I said, ”But I want to listen to that man.”
The police officer said, ”We know, everybody knows, that when you are there, everybody has to
listen to you. And we have been called here just to prevent you, not anybody else; everybody else is
From Personality to Individuality 241 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
allowed. If you stop coming we would not be bothered because we are unnecessarily standing here
for two or three hours every day. While the discourse session continues I will be standing here just
for you, one person.”
But now the same temple started inviting me. Again the police were there – to prevent overcrowding!
They said to me – one officer who was still there said to me – ”You are something! We were standing
here to keep you out, now we are standing here because too much crowding is dangerous – the
temple is old.”
It had balconies and at least five thousand people could sit inside. But when I used to speak there,
nearabout fifteen thousand people would turn up. So people would go on the balconies which were
usually never used. One day it became so serious that it was almost possible the balconies would
fall down – so many people on the balconies, and it was an old temple. Then naturally they had to
arrange that from the next day only a certain number of people were to be allowed in.
That created trouble. That officer said, ”Now new trouble! You speak for two hours there, but people
start coming two hours earlier, because if they come late they won’t get in.” He said to me, ”But you
are something! You were against God.”
I said in his ear, ”I still am – don’t tell anybody because nobody will believe it. And I will always
remain against God. Before I depart from the world I will expose everything. But you are not to tell
because nobody is going to believe you, and I will flatly deny that I have ever said anything to you.”
He said, ”You are something. You are against God and speaking on God?”
But then I had to find my own ways. I would speak on God and then tell people that godliness was
a far better word. That was a way of disposing of God. But because I was speaking on God, the
people who were involved – who were true seekers being exploited by the religious priesthood –
started becoming interested in me. I found from all the religions, the cream.
There was no other way, because I would not have been able to enter their folds, and they would not
have been able to come to me: just those few words would have been enough to prevent them. And
I could not have blamed them, I would have blamed myself I had to find some way so that I could
approach them. And I found the way; it was very simple. I simply thought, ”Use their words, use
their language, use their scriptures.
”And if you are using somebody else’s gun, that does not mean you cannot put your own cartridges
in it. Let the gun be anybody’s, the cartridges are mine! – because the real work is going to happen
through the cartridges, not the gun. So what harm?” And it was easy, very easy, because I could use
Hindu words and play the same game; I could use Mohammedan words and play the same game; I
could use Christian words and play the same game.
Not only were these people coming to me, but Jaina monks, nuns, Hindu monks, Buddhist monks,
Christian missionaries, priests – all kinds of people started coming to me. And you will not believe
it: you have not seen me laughing because I have laughed so much inside that there was no need. I
have been telling jokes to you, but I have not been laughing because I have been playing a joke my
whole life! What can be more funny? And I managed to befool all those priests and great scholars
so easily.
From Personality to Individuality 242 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
They started coming to me and asking me questions. I just had to be alert in the beginning to use
their vocabulary, and just between the lines, between the words, to go on putting the real stuff in
which I was interested. I learned the art from a fisherman.
I used to sit by the bank of the river for hours because that was the most beautiful place in my village.
The morning was beautiful, the evening was beautiful; and even in the hot summer there were spots
where there were thick trees, just leaning over the river. You could just sit in the river, in the water,
and it was so cool you could forget it was summer.
I was just sitting looking at the morning sun, and fishermen were there. In India they put out a bait
for the fish. Everywhere fishermen put out bait, but in India it has to be non-vegetarian, because the
people who are catching fish and the people who are going to buy fish, both are non-vegetarians.
So the fishermen will cut small insects into pieces which are delicious to the fishes and hook them
to their – what do you call it? Fishing line? – fishing line, and the fishes will come and catch the
insect. And with the insect there is a hook; the hook will catch the fish. The fish will come to get
the insect, but inside the insect the hook has been put, so once she swallows the insect, the fish is
caught by the hook and she can be pulled out immediately.
Looking at this fisherman I thought, ”i have to find some way that I can catch my people. Right now
they are in different camps, nobody is mine.” I was alone: nobody was courageous enough even to
associate with me or to walk with me because people would think that he was also gone, was lost. I
found the bait: use their words.
In the beginning people were really shocked. Those who knew me for years, who knew that I had
always been against God, were really puzzled, absolutely puzzled. One of my teachers, whom I
had tortured for three years continually in my high school because he was a very pious type of man:
praying morning and evening, and continually keeping on his forehead the symbol of his religion....
I was continually harassing him about everything; he was incapable of answering any question.
In fact nobody can answer questions relating to fictions. If the reality is there, some way can be
found and any question can be answered. But if there is no reality at all and you are just feeling high
on something fictitious, you will be afraid even to listen to a question from somebody because that
brings a doubt to your mind.
This teacher lived not very far from my house, so I used to go to torture him there because in class
he would simply say, ”Get out!” before he took the attendance. I would say, ”Please, first take my
attendance; otherwise, I come every day, but at the end of term you will say that my attendance is
not good enough and that I cannot appear in the examinations. So please, first take the attendance.”
He said, ”That I will do – you need not even come.” And he gave me exactly one hundred percent
attendance, but he said, ”First you get out. Before I start my work” – because attendance was the
first thing you get out!”
I used to go to his house, and I would say, ”Here you have to treat me like a god because that is what
scriptures say: ATITHI DEVO BHAVA:’the guest is equal to God.’ Here you cannot tell me to get out;
and English is not allowed at all because it is a religious conversation for which I have come.”
He would keep both his fingers in his ears. His wife would say, ”Why are you so afraid of this boy?”
From Personality to Individuality 243 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
He would say, ”I don’t want to listen to what he wants to say. I cannot throw him from the house, that
is against.... He is right, he is saying’Atithi devo bhava: a guest is God, nothing less; treat him as if
God has come.’ But no scripture says that you cannot put your fingers in your ears. I won’t listen to
a single word from him, because he creates doubts in me. And that’s his whole purpose in coming
here – to create doubt.”
Once his wife said, ”why do you unnecessarily take the trouble to come? – because he does not
listen.”
I said, aBut do you see? Do you think your husband is a religious man?”
She said, ”since you started coming I don’t think that he is a religious man. A man who is afraid of
even listening to anything that goes against his beliefs – what kind of faith is this?”
One day, when I was talking to his wife, he must have taken his fingers out of his ears to listen to
what I was saying. When he heard that his wife was saying that he was not much of a religious man
– ”Perhaps you are right: he is such a coward, and I never knew” – he came running into the house
because I was in the kitchen talking to his wife.
He said, ”Now you are spoiling my wife! Can’t you leave me alone? Now she is saying that I am not
a religious man. You have planted the idea in her mind; she will torture me. From you I can manage
to escape, I can throw you out of the class, but where am I going to throw my wife?”
His wife said, ”Whatsoever the boy says is significant. You have to answer him if you are a real
believer.”
This teacher met me almost twenty years afterwards in a discourse in Bombay. I was speaking
on the most popular Hindu scripture, the SHRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA. He could not believe it:
thousands of people... and I was speaking on BHAGAVAD GITA! And not only thousands of people
but hundreds of sannyasins too. He came to the back and waited there for when I came out.
He said, ”What has happened? You are transformed!” – and he touched my feet.
I said, ”don’t touch them. I am not transformed, I am the same man. And I am very stubborn: I am
going to remain the same man to the last breath. Don’t touch my feet” – but he had already touched
them.
He said, ”You must be joking! If so many sannyasins....” That’s why I had chosen the orange robe,
just to sabotage the whole idea of ancient sannyas. There was now no difference between my
sannyasins and their sannyasins: it was difficult to figure out who was who. And my sannyasins
were increasing every day, in every place all over the country. And when he said that so many sages
were also sitting there, I said, ”None of them is a sage! Keep your eyes open and close your ears.
You should not come here – you are a simple person, this is not for you.”
But he said, ”I have heard you – the whole lecture – and I have been reading the GITA my
whole life, and nobody has ever interpreted Krishna’s words the way you have. I have read many
commentaries, but listening to you I found that all those were third rate.”
From Personality to Individuality 244 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
This was happening again and again. Once I was speaking in a Mohammedan institute in Jabalpur.
One of my Mohammedan teachers had become the principal of this institute; he was not aware that
I was the same person he knew. Somebody told him that they had heard me speaking on Sufis and
that it was something incredible: ”We had not thought about Sufis that way, and our institute will be
honored if he comes.”
In India, or in any other country, if a Mohammedan comes and speaks on the BIBLE you feel very
flattered, your ego is tremendously strengthened. Or if a Mohammedan, a Hindu, a Buddhist, is
speaking on Jesus, praising him and his words.... And particularly in India where Mohammedans
and Hindus are continuously killing each other, if somebody who is not a Mohammedan can speak
on Sufism.... My old teacher was very happy; he invited me to talk.
I was in search of all these invitations because I wanted to find my people, and they were all hiding
in different places.
When my teacher saw me he said, ”I have only heard of miracles, but this is a miracle! You are
speaking on Sufism, on Islam, on the fundamental philosophy of Islam?”
I said, ”To you I will not lie – you are my old teacher. I will be speaking only on my philosophy. Yes, I
have learned the art of throwing in the word Islam to people once in a while. That much I will do.”
He said, ”My God! But now we are caught: people are waiting in the auditorium. And you are the
same mischievous person, you have not changed. Are you kidding or something? – because one
of our trusted teachers who is an authority on Sufism has praised you.,Because of his praise I have
invited you.”
I said, ”He has spoken rightly, and you will also praise what I say. But remember always, I will say
only what I want to say. It does not matter, it is so simple a thing: if a Buddhist calls me I have only
to change a few words, and from Sufism I talk about Zen, not about Sufis. I say the same thing; it is
just that Sufism is changed a little here and there. And I have to be alert – I should not forget about
whom I am speaking, that’s all.”
And I spoke. Of course he had been sitting there very sad, but when he heard me he was so joyous.
He came and hugged me and he said, ”You must have been joking.”
I said, ”I am always joking – don’t take it seriously.”
”You are a Sufi” he said.
I said, ”That’s what people say!”
I was speaking in Amritsar in the Golden Temple which is now creating great trouble in India. This is
the Sikh temple, and because of this temple Indira Gandhi has been assassinated; the whole country
is shaken. I was speaking in this temple. Everywhere, all around the country, people had asked me
thousands of times, ”Why do you grow a beard?” I had become accustomed to the question and I
enjoyed answering in different ways to different people.
From Personality to Individuality 245 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
But in the Golden Temple when I was speaking on Nanak and his message, a very old sardar came
to me, touched my feet and said, ”sadarji, why have you cut your hair?” That was a new question,
asked for the first time. He said, ”Your beard is perfectly okay, but why have you cut your hair? – and
you being such a religious man.”
Only five things are needed to be a Sikh, very simple things; you can manage them, anybody can.
They are called the five K’s because each word starts with K. Kesh means hair, Katar means a knife;
Kachchha means underwear – that I have not been able to figure out. It is the only question I cannot
answer. What philosophy is being taught? Strange, but there must be some reason.
I enquired of the Sikh priests and their high priest, ”Everything is okay – grow your hair and have a
sword or a knife – but this kachchha...? What theological, theosophical, philosophical meaning does
kachchha have?”
They said, ”Nobody has ever asked about it; we just have to follow these five K’s.”
Perhaps in Nanak’s time, when he chose the kachchha, it was a time of continual war between
Mohammedans and Hindus. He changed the whole caliber of Punjab. He gave them almost a new
energy with which to fight, and certainly a martial race was born out of Hindus, who cannot fight, who
don’t want to fight – and they were all Hindus. Perhaps in a fight the Hindu dress is not appropriate.
A loose dhoti, a loose gown – they are comfortable, very comfortable, and in a hot country, very airy;
they remind one of a time when people did not need to work hard. But you cannot give that kind of
dress to soldiers, so Nanak changed the dress: instead of the dhoti he created the salvar, which is a
kind of pajama. But in a war... any time your pajama can go bananas because there is only a small
cord that is holding it up.
Now Neelam is enjoying this because she is a Punjabi. She knows the Punjabis – they are
all bananas! So Nanak must have thought that it was better to give them some underwear
also, because their salvar could drop any moment, and then it would look a real mess and be
embarrassing – a soldier need not stand naked in the field! Something like that must have been
behind it.
This old sardar thought that I was a sardar because nobody who was not a sardar had ever spoken
in the Golden Temple; so it was unprecedented. He was certainly puzzled about why I, such a
religious man, had cut my hair. And I was only thirty at that time.
So I told him, ”There is some reason in it. I don’t feel yet a perfect sardar, and I don’t want to claim
anything that I am not. So I have kept four things but I have been cutting my hair. I will grow my hair
when I am a perfect sardar.”
He said, ”That’s right. It is tremendously significant that a man should think about this, that he should
not pretend to be a perfect sardar. You are a better sardar than us: we think we are perfect because
we have all five things.”
From among these people I found my people. It was not difficult, it was very easy. I was speaking
their language, their religious idioms, quoting their scriptures and giving my message. The intelligent
people there immediately understood and they started gathering around me.
From Personality to Individuality 246 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
All over India I started creating groups of my own people. Now there was no need for me to speak
on Sikhism, Hinduism, Jainism; there was no need, but for ten years I had been continually speaking
on them. Slowly, when I had my own people, I dropped speaking on others. After traveling for twenty
years I stopped traveling also, because there was no need. Now I had my people: if they wanted to
come to me they could come.
So it was an absolute necessity; there was no other way to hook my people. Everybody is already
divided. It is not an open world: somebody is a Christian, somebody is a Hindu, somebody is a
Mohammedan. It is very difficult to find a person who is nobody. I had to find my people from these
closed flocks, but to enter their flock I had to talk their language. Slowly, slowly, I dropped their
language. Proportionately as my message became more and more clear, their language I slowly
dropped.
And after my years of giving sannyas I gave this three-year period, a gap when anybody wanted to
leave me, could leave... because I don’t want to interfere in anybody’s life.
If I can enhance your life, good.
If I cannot enhance you and your being, then it is better that you move away from me.
The people who were with me just because they enjoyed my discourses could not stand silence:
they have left. Of course when somebody leaves he has to find some excuse just to justify himself;
he has to justify himself He cannot just say, ”Because Osho no longer speaks, I am going.” That
would simply show that he was here not for me but only to listen to me. And he could have done that
through a tape recorder, through a video; he could have read the books – that was not the problem.
He was not with me. He was enjoying what I was saying, but it was not his search, it was only his
entertainment.
This gap helped. First I had to find my people; but it is natural when you collect a large mass of
people around you, a few unwanted ones are bound to enter accidentally.
For example Neelam is with me – whether I am speaking or not speaking – but her husband escaped.
He was accidental; a nice person, a loving person, but he was only interested in my speaking. He
used to come from Punjab to Poona to listen to me; he came here too, but he could not find what
he was seeking. It was just an entertainment. But to Neelam it was her life. He simply posed the
question to Neelam: ”You can choose either to be here with Osho or come along with me; I am
going.”
It was hard for Neelam, difficult, but she chose me, dropped her husband and forgot all about her
family life. There she was rich, had her own beautiful house, had her own car, and everything. Here
I see her working hard in the garden, on the road; but she is immensely happy and radiant as she
has never been before. Her husband waited a few months – perhaps she would come, because her
daughter is also here, but her daughter also refused to go.
Her daughter, Priya, chose me, whom she can only see on the drive-by, and dropped her father who
loved her very much. Priya is their only child, but she refused; she would not go. Even if Neelam
went, then too she was going to remain here. Neelam’s husband got married again, to a very rich
From Personality to Individuality 247 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
widow. He was accidental: sooner or later, some way or other, he had to leave. He had just come
following Neelam because he loved her.
So these three years helped: we have dropped all unnecessary baggage – because as you move
higher you have to drop more luggage. On the plains you can carry much luggage, but when you
start moving uphill you will have to decide what is unnecessary and drop it. At a still greater altitude,
a few more things have to be dropped.
When Edmund Hillary reached the peak of Everest he had no luggage at all. He was simply standing
there with nothing, because everything had to be dropped by and by. When he started, there had
been so many things and equipment – this machine and that machine, and oxygen tanks.... He was
a scientific mind so there was all that luggage, with fifty servants carrying it. But by and by, at each
camp something had to be dropped because it was becoming impossible. Just to carry yourself was
enough. Standing on Everest, he was absolutely without luggage; one has to be weightless.
These three years have helped to drop much luggage; hence the difference you will see in my
speaking. You will see many things.... Those who have heard me before and are hearing me now
will feel in a great difficulty – so many shocks.
But now I am simply speaking the truth that is mine, because now I can trust that you will understand,
that you don’t need some via media: Jesus, Mahavira, Buddha, Krishna.
I can talk to you directly, immediately
I don’t need to play a game with words.
So this gap was a discontinuity in a way. The game that I had to play was a necessary evil; otherwise
it would not have been possible to find you. Do you think you would have come to an atheist, an
amoralist, a godless, irreligious person? If you ask yourself that question you will understand why
I had to use religion and religious terminology. I was using it against myself just for you. It was for
your sake that I have been doing that whole number, but now there is no need.
Somebody has asked if people are sending me jokes the way they used to in Poona. They started
sending jokes. I said no, because now I don’t need jokes. I needed jokes at that time because it
was an entertainment. It is no longer entertainment. Just by the way, if a joke comes on its own I
am not averse to it. But now I want to speak spontaneously, directly, immediately, the simple truth
that is mine.
That’s why the lectures have become so long, because to talk on others was tedious for me, to tell
you the truth. I managed to tolerate sixty minutes, seventy minutes, at the most ninety minutes.
With more than that it was possible I may have forgotten on whom I was speaking! I had to keep
questions and notes in front of me so I could remember that this was a Zen series, that this was a
Sufi series, that this was a Hassid series – and I didn’t get mixed up. Teertha was reading the story
and I kept another copy with myself so I didn’t forget the story and get lost, because I could have
easily moved in any direction.
Now there is no problem. I don’t have to remember anybody, I can simply say whatever comes;
hence the lecture has become too long. And people have enquired as to why sometimes I finish
From Personality to Individuality 248 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
abruptly – I never used to do that. That is true. When I was just entertaining you I gave the right
beginning, gave the right middle and gave the right end; rounded, complete. But right now it is all
raw, uncut – unpolished diamonds from the mine itself
So there is no beginning in fact, and there is no end. Abruptly, I start. Not to shock you I have
persuaded Sheela to begin with a question, just to give you the feel that.... Otherwise if I begin
speaking abruptly you will think I have gone completely out of my mind! Nobody is asking and I am
answering!
But that’s actually the case: nobody is asking the questions, most of the questions I have to tell
Sheela to write down. They are not somebody else’s. So poor
Sheela has to write down a question, then ask it; and because it is my own question I don’t need to
keep it in front of me. And I am free to move in any way. Abruptly I am starting, and abruptly I am
stopping – that’s truly existential!
In life things start abruptly, things end abruptly, and you don’t ask why. If somebody suddenly dies in
the middle of the road, you don’t tell him, ”At least you could have waited till you reached the other
side. In the middle of the road – is this a way to die? You could have chosen a weekend. Now
people will have to ask for leave to come. You have raised all kinds of unnecessary problems. Could
you not have waited a little – for Saturday or Sunday?”
But life ends abruptly, there is never a full stop, it is always a semi-colon. Not a single life has ever
ended with a full stop – cannot. Something is always incomplete. Something is always growing and
has not come to its full flowering; something is always on the move, and then there comes the abrupt
end;
Beginnings are abrupt. If you look closely existence is abrupt, sudden – and I want these discourses
to be existential. Yes, I will be stopping anywhere I feel to stop; there is no other consideration. You
can see now clearly why I had to use religious language, and why now I am continually telling you
to flush God down the toilet, to forget all about heaven and hell, and that the law of karma is nothing
but boo-boo.
And I am no longer showing any respect to Jesus, or Buddha, Mahavira, Krishna. I am just treating
them as a headmaster treats his children. If they behave rightly then they will not be punished, that’s
all. If they don’t behave rightly, then I am going to give them real hits that they will never forget.
Now I have no need for any camouflage.
I can stand fully naked, as I am, open to you.
There is no desire anywhere in me to say a single word that I cannot authenticate on my own
authority.
That’s why I am calling my religion godless, religionless.
It looks strange to say a religionless religion, but the word religion in itself is beautiful. People have
used it, abused it – that’s why I said I hate it. The original meaning of the word is really beautiful, but
who cares about the original meanings?
From Personality to Individuality 249 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
The original meaning of the word religion is ”to bring all the parts together, to make it whole.”
As man exists he is many, a crowd. Religion means to put the crowd in such a harmony that
it becomes one individuality, literally so, because individuality literally means indivisibility: that it
cannot be divided, that you are no longer fragments of a jigsaw puzzle, that every fragment is put
where it should be and the puzzle disappears. The puzzle was because fragments were in places
where they are not supposed to be. Where your heart is supposed to be.
It is not there. Where your intellect is supposed to be.
It is not there. Where your emotions are supposed to be.
They are not there. Everything is misplaced; your house is in a chaos.
Religion means to create a cosmos within a chaos.
The word is beautiful, but in its original sense; hence I still use it. But to avoid misuse and the wrong
associations, first I say religionless and then I say religion. All that you have understood about
religion up to now, all that religions have been saying, I am denying in the word religionless. And all
that has to be said and has not been said, I am saying in the word religion.
Those who are in search of truth will understand it, love it, enjoy it, will be nourished by it, because
it is no more intellectual entertainment; it is spiritual nourishment.
I am pouring my heart into you.
And now the time is ripe.
Before it is too late I have to convey all that I have been waiting for years to convey.
A thousand and one things I had to avoid because they would have created immediate trouble. A
thousand and one things I said, because that was the only way to catch hold of my people. But now,
allow me to relax so I can simply say whatsoever comes on its own.
Not even I know what the next sentence or the next word is going to be. That’s why many times I
simply stop in the middle of the sentence. I have to wait. If it comes, it comes; if it does not come,
I look at the clock. Whenever I look at the clock you can understand that I am waiting for the word
and it is not coming.
Vivek was asking me, ”You go on criticizing J. Krishnamurti; Krishnamurti goes on saying things
about you. You must both be giggling inside.” I said, As far as I am concerned, I am certainly
giggling. About Krishnamurti I cannot say that. He is incapable of giggling, absolutely incapable. He
has forgotten to laugh; he is too serious, and as he is becoming older he goes on becoming more
and more serious, I can understand, and I could have been of immense help to him, but he cannot
even tolerate seeing one of my sannyasins; otherwise I can give him one whole commune of mine.
Krishnamurti has been looking for people who can understand him and do what he wants them to
do. Now I have so many communes around the world, I can give one whole commune to him. It will
be a joy to me if he can get a little satisfaction in the last years, perhaps the last days of his life.
From Personality to Individuality 250 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
He is ninety, any time he will pop off. Before he pops off I offer him any commune. If he wants this
commune he can take this commune – I will withdraw. If he can manage my people... it is up to him.
But he could not even manage Deeksha, although she tried hard to convince him: ”I have left Osho,
I am no longer with him.”
He said, ”That is good what you have done, that you have left him, but I won’t allow you in my kitchen
– just get lost!” Why? Deeksha is such a good cook, she would have managed his kitchen perfectly;
and he has not much of a kitchen anyway.
In his school, in Brookwood, where he stays in England, there are not more than a dozen boys and
girls. And these are the problem children; no school accepts them. When parents are tired, fed up,
they send them to Krishnamurti’s school because he allows in anybody who comes. In fact not many
come; I think not more than a dozen. Last time one of my friends visited, there were not more than
eight children of all ages. And Krishnamurti lives there.
For Deeksha this would have been a very small job, but poor Deeksha would have felt good: if she
has missed me, she has at least got hold of J. Krishnamurti. But he does not allow my sannyasins in
his kitchen. He does not want to see any of my sannyasins sitting in front in his discourses. But that
is his problem, that is not my problem. Many of his followers have become my sannyasins, many of
his followers have been my lovers. Many of his lovers, many of his followers have been immensely
interested in me. I don’t see any problem.
So I said to Vivek, ”I giggle – the whole situation is so absurd. Poor Deeksha asking to be allowed
in the kitchen! He should have allowed her. This is just inhuman, to tell her to get lost. As far as
I am concerned I am willing: he can take any of my communes. If he wants people who can risk
everything, then I have got the people.”
But he cannot tolerate, he cannot risk being among my people. He is so enraged because what he
wanted to do he has not been able to do, and I have managed to do it without much doing.
I don’t do anything.
I have told you, I am just a lazybones.
And that’s how I have been my whole life:
I don’t do anything.
But if there is something in me that attracts people who do – and for no reward except that they
are with me, except that they can bathe, be showered, in my presence, in my love.... What other
remuneration have they got? And they are risking their whole life.
I can give him the people he has not been able to find because he moved wrongly. He missed the
train; but I am in the train and I can pull the emergency lever. If he wants me to get down I can get
down and be in his place and he can take my place; there is no problem in it. But that will be a
great problem to him because this world that I have created around me can be managed only by a
non-existent manager like me.
From Personality to Individuality 251 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
He is after people too much. To each single person he will talk for three hours. He is after you too
much – he will drive you nuts. One interview will be enough, you will not ask for a second interview.
And you may ask one thing and he will answer something else – completely, totally different. He is
not listening to your questions, he is full of his own ideology. Your question is just a jumping board
and then he starts throwing his ideology over you. And basically what he is doing is a contradiction:
on the one hand he teaches that there is no need for a guide, no need for a Master; and on the other
hand he continues guiding people.
And what is it all about, that you go around the world, if you are not teaching people? Are you mad
or something? You are teaching people. Perhaps you are teaching them to be against teaching but
that does not matter; it is still teaching. You may be saying that there is no Master, no disciple, but
they start following that that ”Yes, there is no Master, no disciple; but we are Krishnamurti-ites, we
follow you.” You become the Master, they become disciples. You get angry because you put people
in a dilemma.
It is a very complex dilemma. If they really understand you, nobody should come to listen to you.
That should be tried sometime: he comes to speak in Bombay or New Delhi, and he simply sits
there and nobody comes – because there is no Master and there is no disciple, no teaching, no
philosophy, nothing.
So he sits near Jehangir art gallery in Bombay where aU the crows of Bombay gather in the evening
great place he has chosen in Bombay! And those crows must have been religious masters in their
past lives because they are all speaking simultaneously, all the crows, while Krishnamurti teaches.
And he tells people, ”if you are attentive and aware, don’t be bothered by the crows, you just listen
to me.”
But why? They are attentive and aware, and they are listening to the crows and not to you. Why
should they listen to you? And the crows are creating such chaos! That is their place: every day
they are doing that, whether disciples come or not. You come only once in a year for a few days;
you are just an intruder in their territory. But one day nobody should come, then his teaching will
be fulfilled. But will he feel happy? No, he wants more people to come. And that’s what goes on
troubling him.
So I said to Vivek, ”I can giggle because to me he is not a problem; to me nobody is a problem.” But
to him, somehow my existence hurts because this is what he wanted.
Just a few days ago Somendra wrote to one of the sannyasins here. The sannyasin had written to
Somendra, ”I am here in the commune, blissful as I have never been. And I don’t think I want to be
anywhere else; this is the place.” Somendra must have been trying to pull her away, because he is
trying to create a commune in Switzerland.
Seeing by her letter that she is out of reach, he wrote, If you are feeling happy there, then I am
happy. God has given Osho what He wanted. I hope that one day God will give me also what I
want.”
Now, Somendra is naive. Compared to Krishnamurti Somendra is naive. He does not know what
he is writing. He does not know that deep down he is trying to compete with me. God will give him
From Personality to Individuality 252 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
also one day, he hopes. Now, poor Somendra, nobody is preventing him.... I can give him one of
the communes in Switzerland – we have a beautiful commune. Why give it to him? – because there
is no God, I know, and his hope will not be fulfilled; so when I can give him one, why bother God?
Just a single hint from your side, and I give the commune to you, and you do whatsoever you want
to do.
But no, he is hoping that God.... And he thinks it is God who has given me what I wanted. Do you
think God will help me? I don’t think so. God, if He is somewhere, must be trying hard to destroy
everything. He must be entering the governor of Oregon, the attorney-general of Oregon, Senator
Hatfield – or is it Fatfield? God must be getting into all the idiots of Oregon, the 1000 Friends of
Oregon, all the watchdogs. God is barking from everywhere! And Somendra says that He has given
me what I wanted. No, nowhere, in no scripture is it mentioned that God is so generous!
But I am not a god, I am a human being: I can be generous. And with Somendra I have always been
joking. He was one of my patent fools – he could not understand it, he does not even understand
now.
A commune is not created by your effort or Go*s help.
A commune is a spontaneous phenomenon.
I have never asked you to come to me, I have never written letters to you to come to me.
You have found me on your own.
It is your search that has brought you to me.
Now, Somendra is writing to all sannyasins everywhere, ”Come, we are going to create a great
commune.” Nobody seems to be listening, and nobody seems to be coming. This is not the way. In
the first place, he betrayed me. I had immense trust in him, and still I have the same trust. I loved
him as I love you. And it makes no difference whether you are a sannyasin or not. What difference
does it make?
But people who drop sannyas get into a very difficult situation. They cannot come back because
they feel embarrassed: what to say now? – because when they dropped, people were asking
”Why are you dropping sannyas?” Then they were saying many things against me or against the
commune or against the organization. Now, if they want to come back they have closed their doors
on themselves. People will ask, ”What happened? You were speaking against all these things; now
is everything alright again?” With what face...?
But I want to tell all of the sannyasins who want to come back that they will be welcomed with great
joy. It is human once in a while to go astray. It is not something very serious at all, and with me
nothing is serious. You wanted to taste the world as a nonsannyasin – perfectly good. Now you feel
that it was not worth while, and you want to come back. It is your home – come back.
Why should this poor Somendra ask God?... because I know He is not there, nobody is going to
answer. And if he tries to create a commune on his own, he will get into a mess, into trouble, into all
From Personality to Individuality 253 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
kinds of problems. He himself is not yet in a state where he can be of any real help to anybody. He
himself needs help. His creating a commune is just like a blind man collecting other blind men and
saying, ”Come follow me.”
Perhaps a few blind people may start following you, but sooner or later you will find yourself with all
your group in a ditch. One should be absolutely aware: Do you have eyes? Can you see the light?
Do you have that energy that you can share with people? If not, then don’t try such an idiotic act,
because you are playing with people’s lives. You are in darkness, and you will lead those people
into more darkness.
In those days I had to speak in the name of religion, in the name of God. It was compulsory. There
was no alternative: it was not that I had not tried it. I had tried it, but found it simply closes people’s
doors. But I could see a simple way out. Even my father was puzzled, more so than anybody else,
because he knew me from my very childhood – that I am an atheist, a born atheist; that I am against
religion, against the priests.
When I started speaking in religious conferences, he asked me, ”What is happening? Have you
changed?”
I said, ”Not a bit, I have just changed my strategy; otherwise it is difficult to speak in the world Hindu
conference. They won’t allow an atheist on their stage. An amoralist, a godless person, they won’t
allow. But they invited me – and I said everything against religion, in the name of religion.”
The shankaracharya, the head of the Hindu religion, was presiding over the conference. The King
of Nepal – Nepal is the only Hindu kingdom in the world – inaugurated the conference. The
shankaracharya was in great difficulty because what I was saying was absolutely sabotaging the
whole conference. But the way I was presenting it, the people were getting impressed. He became
so angry that he stood up and tried to snatch away the microphone – this old man. While he was
trying to snatch it away, I said, ”Just one minute, and I will be finished.” So just for one minute he
stopped – and in one minute I managed!
I asked the people – there must have been at least one hundred thousand people – I asked them,
”What do you want? He is the president, he can stop me if he wants, and certainly I will stop. But
you are the people who have come here to listen. If you want to listen to me, then you all raise your
hands; and to make it clear raise both your hands.”
Two hundred thousand hands.... I looked at the old fellow and said, ”Now you sit down. You are
no longer president: two hundred thousand hands have canceled you completely. Whom do you
represent? You were president – these people had made you president, now these people have
canceled you. Now I will speak as long as I want to speak” – it would have been impossible
otherwise. And I found hundreds of people from that gathering: Bihar became one of the most
potential sources of my sannyasins.
The same way I was moving around the country going into religious conferences and catching hold
of people. And once I had my own group in that city then I never bothered about their conferences;
then my group was holding its own conferences, its own meetings. But it takes time.
From Personality to Individuality 254 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
Now I am not searching for anybody. I have found the people who are enough for my work to spread
worldwide.
That’s why I want to complete the circle. Now I want to say things which I wanted to say in the
beginning but which were difficult to say because nobody was ready to listen.
Now I have my people – whose hearts are open to absorb me, to take me in.
And before I depart from the body, I would like to pour all that I have in you.
It is almost like lighting one candle by another candle.
You can go on lighting one candle by another candle:
Millions of candles you can light.
The first candle does not lose anything, remember. It is not that it has lost so much light because
now one million candles are burning. No, it has not lost anything, it has gained.
It was a lonely candle in a dark world. Now, millions of candles are showering their light all over the
space.
Their light is the same.
Their flames are different.
Each sannyasin has to be a flame unto himself
But the light of all the sannyasins will be the same:
The light that I want to be spread all over the earth – because that is the only hope. Without it
humanity cannot last more than fifteen years. But if we can create the light I am talking about, if we
can make this whole world afire – and we CAN....
I started the journey alone. People went on coming and joining me; now there are thousands of
sannyasins. And do you see? – I have not been very long on the road, just twenty-five years. And
the difficulties that I have been facing you will not be facing. The problems that I had to face, you will
not be facing. One day, alone, I started. Now my candle is burning in thousands of candles.
Each candle has the same potential:
It can light up millions of candles.
In the coming fifteen years everything will become intense.
The danger will become intense.
The challenge will become intense.
From Personality to Individuality 255 Osho
CHAPTER 14. THE ONLY HOPE: THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF HUMANITY
The possibility of ultimate destruction will become intense.
And the possibility of ultimate transformation will become intense.
In these fifteen years everything is going to take the intense – most form possible because a planet
that has been working for millions of years to create human consciousness has come to a space
where either death or total transformation will be the only alternatives.
Old religions are just dead. They don’t give any option; they are dying with the dying society, and
there is nobody except you.
You should understand the gravity, the significance, the responsibility. There is nobody on the whole
earth like you, nobody who has dropped all rubbish that is old and who is ready to become a new
kind of man. Don’t be worried that you are such a small minority.
The day I started I was alone. Even at that time I did not think that I was a minority, because truth is
never a minority.
Truth is always the whole – not even the majority but the whole, one hundred percent.
My grandfather used to ask me, ”Just alone you are thinking to transform the whole world?”
I said, ”Just with a small candle I can burn the whole forest. An atom bomb is not needed, one just
has to choose the right timing. If the wind is blowing towards the forest then just a single candle –
and the whole forest will be afire. So don’t think that I am alone, and what can I do?”
My grandfather was not alive when I started initiating people into sannyas, otherwise he would have
been immensely happy that what I had said to him has happened. You are not a small minority, don’t
think in those terms.
A single sannyasin – even a single sannyasin – is not a minority, because the truth that burns in him
and the light that he holds in his hands, the torch that he holds in his hand, is enough to create the
whole face of the earth.
And It is going to happen – and not with God’s help, because God’s help has been coming for
thousands of years and you see what has happened.
This time, without God – at least give it a try this time without God, without heaven, without hell,
without all that crap!
Just give a chance to pure humanity, to the ordinary, natural human being.
And I say to you it is going to happen – no God can prevent it.
From Personality to Individuality 256 Osho
CHAPTER 15
Truth said, truth dead
13 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT ARE YOU PREPARING US, YOUR SANNYASINS, FOR?
I am preparing my sannyasins for everything and nothing. The second is more important. The first
is only a preparation for the second.
”Everything” includes everything that is necessary for a person to get to his being, to be fulfilled, to
be contented, to be in that ultimate state where there is no desire, no need; where one is sufficient
unto oneself
That blessed state is the state of nothingness.
Everything that is needed to reach nothingness implies a few fundamentals.
The first fundamental is to be a rebel.
All the religions destroy the potential of rebellion in man. Obviously – because to teach rebellion
means to teach these people to rebel against tradition, against convention, against society, against
religion; and these are their vested interests. Rebellion has to be absolutely slaughtered. But the
moment the spirit of rebellion dies in a man, man lives only a posthumous existence – because the
spirit of rebellion is your real spirit.
257
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
All the religions have taught just the opposite.
They teach you to believe.
I teach you to doubt.
They teach you to have faith.
I teach you to enquire.
They give you everything ready-made. And I am telling you that unless you attain it by your own
effort it is absolutely useless. A God that is handed over to you is worth nothing.
A holy scripture that comes through tradition... to simply imbibe it like a parrot is suicidal. You are
poisoning yourself because the more knowledgeable you become, the less is the possibility for you
to seek, search and find.
Once you get this stupid idea that you know already, the question of enquiry does not arise. The
question of enquiry arises only when you feel that you know nothing.
But no religion lets you know that you know nothing. They go on forcing knowledge, catechisms,
doctrines, dogmas on you. They are stuffing your mind with all kinds of empty words. A word is
always empty unless it contains your experience.
My word cannot be a real nourishment to you. It will be empty – it is only the container. The content?
– there is no way to convey the content. I can pass you the container, the word, but how can I pass
you my experience which is always left behind? The word goes to you and I see an empty, dead
word in your hand. And the thing that I wanted to express, to convey, to transfer, is left behind; it
never leaves my being.
Hence, truth is inexpressible.
Only idiots go on talking about truth.
And those idiots believe that what they are saying is true. They are only saying yakketty-yakketty-
yak, and nothing else. They are chatterboxes, but they can believe that they are transferring
something to you because they themselves don’t have anything other than the word. So they feel
that they have transferred something.
But a man who knows can never feel that it is possible to transfer truth. Yes, he can inspire you to
enquire, but he cannot transfer to you the truth itself.
So the first thing is the spirit of rebellion – which implies doubt, skepticism, enquiry. It needs
tremendous courage because you will be going against all, all those who are in power. The
politicians, the priests, the super-rich, the pedagogues in the universities – they are all in powerful
positions.
From Personality to Individuality 258 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
Your effort to enquire is a declaration against all of them, because they are saying, ”Truth has been
found by Jesus Christ; you need not worry about it. You simply believe in Jesus Christ.”
Now this is as stupid as somebody saying, ”The theory of relativity has been discovered by Albert
Einstein. You need not worry about the theory of relativity – simply have faith in Albert Einstein and
everything is okay.” Do you think by having faith in Albert Einstein you will understand anything about
the theory of relativity? What does your faith in Einstein have to do with the theory of relativity? They
are not related at all to each other.
The same is the case with Jesus, Krishna, Zarathustra, Buddha, Mohammed. It is not possible for
you to know what Jesus knows, just by having faith in Jesus. In the first place, how do you know that
he knows? In the second place, how can you destroy the skepticism which is born in you from your
very birth?
Faith is being taught.
Doubt is your natural capacity.
Existence gives you the quality of doubt and the vested interests destroy that quality and cover it
with beliefs. Beliefs are in their favor, not in your favor.
I am a little bit crazy because I am speaking against my own profession, but I can’t help it. I could
have become a world teacher with millions of followers if I had not been crazy enough to start telling
you the truth. The truth is, all the vested interests are against you: your individuality, your nature,
your potentiality. They have their ideas, their expectations, and they want you to fulfill their ideals.
They want you to become just puppets in their hands. And the more you behave like a puppet, the
more respectable you will be.
One of my professors, S.S. Roy, who is still alive, loved me so much that he used to tell me, ”i am
always worried about you. I know whatsoever you do, you do with sincerity, but in this world sincerity
does not pay. Authenticity is not respected. Rebellion is crushed. And the people who are in power
are powerful enough to crush any individual, because the whole society – the courts, the law, the
government, everything – is in their hands. You are powerless.”
I told him, ”I know that they have a certain power but please don’t say that I am powerless. I also
have a certain power, not of the same category but of a higher category. They can kill me but they
cannot kill my truth. And my truth is more important to me than my life, because my life is going to
end anyway. If it ends in the service of truth then it will have a certain eternity about it, because truth
cannot be killed. You can crucify a Jesus, but how can you crucify this man’s truth? If he had any
truth, that truth is going to live. You can poison Socrates....”
I told Professor S.S. Roy, ”I love you just like my father, and I know how much you love me and
how much you respect me, which is very unexpected – that a professor, well respected all over the
country, should be respecting a student – but I cannot accept your advice. You are giving it with all
good wishes – I am grateful for that. But let me be crucified, let me be poisoned, let every power
be against me; yet I say to you that my experience makes me much more powerful than all those
people. Their power is just temporary: the power that truth gives you is eternal.”
From Personality to Individuality 259 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
He said to me, ”I understand, still I cannot help being concerned about you. I have nightmares about
you – that somebody will shoot you, somebody will crucify you, somebody will poison you.” And all
these efforts have been made; he was perfectly right. Whenever an attempt on my life was made, I
had always informed him, ”One of your nightmares has come true. But I have survived it, so don’t
be worried. Your other nightmares also I will survive.”
To have the spirit of rebellion, all that you need is guts; and you have them. You have simply forgotten
about them. Every individual is born with tremendous courage. Nature is not partial in that it gives
courage to Alexander the Great and does not give you courage; it is not so. As far as nature is
concerned it is absolutely communist. Communists are not communists, but existence is absolutely
communist. It has no categories: it does not make courageous people and cowardly people. No, it
simply creates courageous people. Cowardliness is created by those who want to remain in power
forever. They create the cowards, because only the cowards will not rebel.
And it is very easy: they have found, in thousands of years, aU the tactics. They have become
immensely crafty. They have found every possible way to weaken you, to destroy the very idea of
being a rebel. To make you a coward they have created a hell – which exists nowhere. But from
the very childhood you are programmed that if you do certain things you will suffer in hell. And
sometimes it is so illogical.
Bertrand Russell is right when he says, ”If all the crimes that I have committed, and all the crimes
that I have dreamed about in my whole life are both to be punished, then the cruelest court cannot
send me behind bars for more than four years. And Christianity says that you will suffer eternal hell.”
Now, any idiot can understand that the punishment is too much.
It seems as if God enjoys punishing people, torturing people; otherwise, what crimes are you
committing? Can you commit a crime which deserves eternal hell? Can you think of a crime that
deserves eternal hell? However big the crime may be – you may be Adolf Hitler, you may be Joseph
Stalin, Mao Tse-tung – then too there should be a limit. Even if Adolf Hitler committed millions of
crimes, so what! – eternal hell would not be fair.
And what about ordinary people? You may have lied sometimes; you may have done something
that your religion prohibits. You may have dreamed something which your society will not approve
of You may have escaped, in your dream, with somebody’s wife – only in your dream. But jainism
says your dreams will be punished too because it makes no difference whether you escape with
somebody’s wife or you dreamed it – in the East life itself is nothing but a dream. Both are dreams
– the difference is only of duration.
In the night when you escaped with somebody’s wife the duration was short, perhaps a few minutes,
but the intensity was great. The duration was short but the intensity was great. Those few seconds
you enjoyed, you really enjoyed. And because it was your dream the woman could not be bitchy to
you – unless you love bitchy women; that’s another matter. It is your dream, it will reflect you. If you
dream about bitchy women that simply means that’s what you want, and then naturally that’s what
you deserve.
Jainism says the outer life, of open eyes, is also a dream. It lasts longer, the duration, but its intensity
is not so deep. Its length may be years but it is not deep. So if you put your dream with closed eyes
From Personality to Individuality 260 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
on one side of a scale, and your other dream with open eyes on the other side of the scale, it is
possible they may weigh exactly the same, because one’s length is long but the surface is thin; the
other’s duration is short but the intensity is tremendous. In any case both are dreams, and you will
have to suffer punishment for both.
From your very childhood every religion is creating fear in you. And the other side of the fear is
greed. They are both created simultaneously, they are not two things. On one hand fear is created:
if you do a certain thing you will be punished, and the punish ment is made as exaggerated as
possible.
If you look at the ideas of all the religions about hell, you will be surprised. These scriptures were
written by great saints, and I have always wondered whether these people were saints or some kind
of sadists, because even to imagine all these tortures you need the mind of a sadist. And you must
be somehow enjoying the imagination.
When de Sade, from whose name the sickness sadism comes – de Sade was finally sent to jail. He
was a marquis, so it was very difficult to catch him. He had his own territory, a small kingdom of his
own, and it was difficult to find witnesses against him. Every day he needed a new woman to torture
– and he would get hold of any woman, whoever caught his eye; his people would go and get hold
of the woman.
He had a special chamber – it would be ironical to call it a love chamber, but it was his love chamber.
In his chamber there were hanging, all around the walls, strange instruments that he had created;
he was a very inventive mind. And all those instruments were to torture you. He always used to
keep a bag with him, like a doctor’s bag, in case he was somewhere else and an opportunity arose.
So he had a few special miniature instruments in his bag, portable – a portable hell. The real hell
was in his palace.
Finally, when he was caught and forced to confess, no one could believe that this man could have
thought of so many ways of torturing people. The first thing he would do – the woman had to be
naked and he would beat her. She would scream and cry and run and he would follow her and lash
her till blood started oozing out of her body; only then would he make love.
This man had written in his diary every detail about how his instruments had to be used, how a
certain instrument would force needles under your nails.... And you could not escape; your hands
would be caught in the mechanism, and the needles would go underneath your nails. The more you
screamed and the more you cried, the more he would enjoy it. He would put the woman on a bed of
ice, naked, and make her lie down on it: she would be tied to the bed of ice. Naturally she would try
in every possible way to get out of it – and this was his joy.
When I read about his life and his imprisonment also... because he died in prison. He was put
in prison because he was a dangerous man and it was not possible to change him. During his
imprisonment he started writing novels. As novels they are third-rate, but as far as revealing the
criminal mind is concerned there is no competition with his novels. Nobody has ever been able to
compete, because what he now could not actually do, he was doing in the novels.
When I was reading all these scriptures of religions and the way they have described hell, it seemed
these people who were writing were closer to de Sade. Rather than being called saints, they should
From Personality to Individuality 261 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
be called sadists. They were not doing anything but they were writing. That’s what DE Sade did in
the last part of his life: he enjoyed writing because doing was no longer possible.
These saints could not do these things because if they did then they would not be saints any more.
They were also imprisoned – in respectability. The whole society was worshipping them, and they
could not lose that. So they found a way to write all those things which if there had been a possibility,
an opportunity, they would have done themselves. In fact a sane mind, a healthy mind, will not even
think of these things.
These are all sick people – and religions have all been dominated by sick people.
Here they create hell; and by the side, for themselves and other saints and those who will listen to
their commandments, they have created heaven.
And in heaven there are all kinds of joys. Very strangely, the same things that they condemn here,
that they condemn in your life – the same things are abundantly available in heaven.
There seems to be no logical relationship in it. If something is bad on earth, how is it that it suddenly
becomes good in heaven? Mohammedans condemn alcohol and all alcoholic beverages: anybody
who uses them will fall into hell. But in heaven – if you listen to them, follow them and believe in
them – you will be provided, not with alcohol in bottles, but alcohol in rivers! In heaven don’t ask
for water; in the Mohammedan heaven, whenever you ask for something to drink it means alcohol.
Water is not available: drink really means drink. There are rivers of alcohol – not only drink, have a
bath, swim, drown in it!
It is made available for saints because on earth they were ascetics; they never touched alcohol. A
great reward! For not touching alcohol they drown in alcohol – a great reward! Here they never
looked at a woman, not even in dreams, because God is such a peeping Tom that He goes on
looking into each skull of what you are dreaming, what you are thinking. What kind of God have
these people created? Has He not got anything better to do? And so many millions of people....
And now scientists say at least fifty thousand planets must have life, that is the minimum. More is
possible, but that much is almost certain: fifty thousand planets like this earth, having life. And do
you think only man dreams? Just look at your dog sleeping; look at your cat sleeping, and you can
be certain they are dreaming.
The dog will suddenly open his mouth and catch a fly – but there is no fly – and enjoy it and go back
sleep. He has been dreaming, and he enjoyed it; but the poor dog will never come to know whether
it was a dream or a reality because dogs are not yet in that state of alertness where they can make
a distinction between dream and reality.
Small children cannot either. Very small children will get up in the morning crying, and if you ask
why they will say that they were playing with somebody and that that somebody has suddenly
disappeared. They were having a dream; now they are awake so the dream is no longer there,
but to them there is no difference between dream and reality. It takes a little maturity to make the
distinction.
From Personality to Individuality 262 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
So God must be looking into the heads of the beetles and the buffaloes and the donkeys and the
watchdogs of Oregon and just recording about everybody how much punishment and how much
reward to give. This whole idea is just to make you afraid and greedy. But without God it is very
difficult to manage hell and heaven; a manager is needed, it is such a vast universe.
To manage everybody’s actions and to give everybody the right amount of torture, the right amount
of joy, each according to his acts – the law of karma – a great manager, omnipotent, omniscient,
omnipresent, a god, is an absolute necessity. Otherwise, who is going to preside over hell and
heaven, and who is going to keep the peace? – these people who are in hell will take over heaven
at any moment.
Do you think Adolf Hitler, and Stalin, and Mao Tse-tung, and Napoleon, and Alexander, Nadirshah,
Tamerlane, and Genghis Khan – that these people will remain silent in hell for eternity? They would
have taken over your heaven long ago, because who are your saints? Those poor fellows? – they
would have been driven out and thrown into hen: ”Go! Get out of here!” And if Alexander the Great
comes to heaven, do you think Saint Francis will be able to encounter him? Or when a man like
Nadirshah comes in....
Whenever Nadirshah invaded a country – many times he invaded India – a big army used to march
before him to declare that he was coming. A special method that Nadirshah used was to go on
burning the villages on the way, the towns on the way. That was his declaration that ”Nadirshah is
coming.” There was no need to say anything to anybody: he would just go on putting fire to every
village that he went through and immediately everybody in the whole country knew that Nadirshah
was coming. So many villages would be on fire, and people escaping and dying... and the army
would go on starting fires. No other declaration was needed.
Once a dancing woman whose fame suddenly had reached to Nadirshah.... He was returning from
India and on the way somebody said, ”Just very close bg a few miles away, there is a very beautiful
woman, a great dancer.”
So he said, ”No problem – just bring her. Tonight will be a celebration.”
The woman was caught. She danced till the middle of the night and was rewarded well, because
there was no problem: Nadirshah was looting from all over the country. She could not believe what
he gave her – so many precious ornaments as she had never seen in her life – but she said, ”Please
give me one man also, because with so many precious ornaments.... I don’t know even how much
they are worth; I have never seen such things – and I am not a poor woman. Even kings come to
see me, but you are a king of kings. Nobody has given me so much reward just for one dance. So
send with me at least one soldier, so I feel protected and can reach home.”
He said, ”That is not the way of Nadirshah. Let my army go and burn all the villages on the way
so people know that a dancer from Nadirshah’s camp is coming back home. And don’t be worried
about the darkness, because all the villages will be on fire; you will travel as if you are traveling in
daylight.”
And that’s what he arranged: for seven miles along the road all the villages and forests were put on
fire. The woman could not believe her eyes – that that man created the light of the day in the middle
of the night.
From Personality to Individuality 263 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
Do you think you can manage this type of people? And they are not alone there; they are all together.
Now, poor fellows like Saint Francis and Jesus and Buddha and Mahavira will simply escape seeing
these people. They themselves will ask them, ”Please send us to hell. We don’t want to live here
any more. You are welcome.”
Because of heaven and hell a grand manager is needed, a boss who is so powerful that all these
people are nothing before his power.
Small children are being fed a program. This is feeding them a program; this is changing an alive
mind into a dead computer. The hell which keeps you afraid is there within you, and the heaven
which keeps you greedy is there also. And God is there watching continuously what you are doing,
what you are thinking, what you are dreaming. Is this life or some kind of nightmare? And how can
you be rebellious in such a situation? It is too risky.
One of Krishnamurti’s friends and followers in India is Dada Dharmadhikari. He is also a great
follower and friend of Mahatma Gandhi. And strangely – he is very old – he is also a friend of mine,
but with me the friendship is difficult. His son is the attorney general of the state of Madhya Pradesh
and lived in Jabalpur where I was a professor; they lived just half a mile away from me.
Dada Dharmadhikari goes, whenever he wants to rest or whenever he is sick, to stay with the son;
otherwise he is always on the move. He is one of the great orators of India. He does not believe in
hell and heaven and God; he is a follower of Krishnamurti, and not just new – not like a Californian
follower who changes like fashion changes. The longest time is three years, that is the average for
the Californiac – three years for marriage, then a divorce is needed; three years for a job, then quit
it; three years in the university, then drop out; three years in one place, then one is fed up: then
move. Three years for the Hare Krishna movement, then three years for the Moonies – three years
for everything.
Dada Dharmadhikari is not that type. For fifty years, since the very beginning when Krishnamurti
started, he has been with him, so he is completely programmed by Krishnamurti. That, Krishnamurti-
ites cannot understand. They can understand that Christians are programmed; they can understand
that Hindus are programmed; they can understand everybody else is programmed but Krishnamurti-
ites are not programmed. That’s where they have not understood Krishnamurti and his message.
They are also programmed. The Hindu is repeating what he has been told; they are repeating what
Krishnamurti has told them. Neither the Hindu has experienced nor have they experienced.
I was telling Dada Dharmadhikari again and again, ”Dada” – dada means big brother, it is very
respectful, and he was old enough to be my grandfather. I would ten him, ”Dada, you should
understand one thing, that whatsoever you are saying is again a program. You have been
programmed by Krishnamurti for fifty years. No Hindu is programmed as much because a child
listens for a few years to the parents and then he is on his own. Those few years are enough to spoil
him. What to say about you? Fifty years! You are spoiled for many lives, from your very roots.
He would say, ”But this is not programming, this is understanding. I know that there is no God, no
hell, no heaven – nothing. This is all nonsense and rubbish.”
I said, ”Okay; sometime perhaps, God willing, I may be able to expose you.”
From Personality to Individuality 264 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
One day his son came running to me and said, ”Dada is asking for you. He is very sick” – he had
had a mild heart attack – so I went. I entered the room and he was saying ”Rama, Rama, Rama...”
with dosed eyes – because if they are dying, if they have a heart attack in their old age, Hindus
remember the name of God. Hindus believe that if you die with the name Rama on your lips, then
all your sins are forgiven. These people are very clever: they give you so much fear, and they also
give you tricks to avoid it, because all is in their hands. So if at the last moment, even for one time,
you say ”Rama” and die, that’s enough.
They have a story: a man was dying who was a murderer, a thief; you name anything, any crime,
and he was an expert in it. He was dying. He had a son whose name was Narayana: Narayana is
another name of God. Hindus have one thousand names of God, so it is very difficult to find a name
which is not a name of God.
I insisted to my parents, ”i won’t have any name which is the name of God, so you have to find
something else.” For many years they could not name me. They simply called me ”Rajah”: Rajah
means king, it has nothing to do with God. But that was just for the time being; meanwhile
they searched and found a name. It must be the first time in the whole history of man that my
name, Rajneesh, is used because you will not find it anywhere else. Yes, now there are three or
four children in India whose name is Rajneesh, after me, because their parents are sannyasins;
otherwise, I am the first man to have this name.
It is a created name. You will not find any precedent. I have looked, tried hard, but I have not found
any because it was created, it was artificial. Rajni means night, and Rajneesh means the lord of the
night, the moon. It was my poet – uncle’s creation. I liked it. I said, ”This will do. At least there is no
mention of God in it. It is absolutely purified of religion: no religion in it.
So that man who was a criminal and murderer was dying. He had done every kind of thing and he
was never caught. For sure, he was on the way to hell. But at the last moment he called ”Narayana!”
to his son and died. His son was outside, he came in; by the time his son had reached him, the
man had died. Now the Hindus have the story that the man, because he used God’s name, reached
heaven and was accepted as a respected saint.
How these people have been befooling you is that they give you fear, but they also give you a
provocation: all lusts are fulfilled in heaven. And they also give you very simple methods – just the
name of God on your lips at the last moment, just once. Sometimes it happens that the man dies
unexpectedly. Death never comes with a date, informing you that ”At six o’clock in the evening be
ready, I am coming.” It simply comes, and once it is there you are gone.
Hindus have found a method for that situation too, because millions of people die without the name
of God on their lips. So when they are dead, the brahmin comes, and in the dead man’s ear he
repeats the name of God. Into the dead man’s mouth they pour water from the Ganges, because
the water of the Ganges is as pure as God’s name – but in a dead man’s body who is no longer
there! But these tricks....
Dada Dharmadhikari – a man who is a confirmed atheist, anti-religious, anti-all: hell, heaven, God –
repeating the name of Rama! I told his son, aBe quiet. Let me go close to him.” The room was kept
in darkness so he was not disturbed, so I moved slowly and went close to him. He was repeating,
not knowing that I was there, ”Rama, Rama, Rama....”
From Personality to Individuality 265 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
I said, ”I am here, listening.”
He said, ”Who are you?”
I said, ”The man who wanted to expose you. This is the opportunity! What are you doing? Just a
little heart attack and Krishnamurti is finished! Fifty years just washed away, wiped out.”
He said, ”This is no time for argument. I am dying – please, not at this time.”
But I said, ”When you are dying is the time that I have to keep you straight on the path, because if
you die repeating’Rama, Rama,’ you will die an idiot’s death. I cannot leave you.”
He said, ”wether you leave me or not...” and he closed his eyes and started, ”Rama, Rama, Rama.”
I said, ”What are you doing? The heart attack is over, you are alive. And it was a very mild heart
attack – you will be ashamed of yourself later on.” And the next morning, when he was a little better,
I went to see him. I said, ”What about,’Rama, Rama’?”
He said, ”I am really ashamed. But what happened was that when I heard the doctor whispering to
my son and I heard the words’heart attack’ come in, I said,’Now it is not the time to think whether
God exists or not, or whether there is a hell or a heaven. For my whole life I have been denying Him.
How am I going to face Him, if, by chance, He really is? So there is no harm in it; in the darkness
nobody is there, I can repeat His name. If He is not there I am not losing anything; if He is there I
will say, Forgive me. At the last moment I remembered you’!”
I said, ”what about your fifty years? What about all your arguments? And I have been telling you
again and again that you are like a parrot. It is difficult to change old parrots, but if you recognize
that you are also programmed – that will be good. It does not matter who programs you.”
My work with my sannyasins is of deprograming.
There are, in America, psychologists who call themselves deprogrammers. They are not – they
are reprogrammers. If some parents find their children moving into some religion other than their
own, even parents are known to kidnap their children. Something unknown in the whole history of
man is happening today – parents are kidnaping their own children from the Moonies, from the Hare
Krishna people, and taking them to psychologists who are pretending to be deprogrammers. And
what they actually do is not deprograming, it is reprograming.
They erase the effect and the program of the Moonies; up to that point it’s true they are
deprograming. But then they reprogram the person to Christianity if he belongs to Christian parents,
or to Judaism if he belongs to Jewish parents. This is reprograming These psychologists are in the
service of vested interests. They are criminals.
The child was trying to escape somehow from one prison; of course he was getting into another, but
at least this one was new, something to explore. At least it was not as rotten as the old. The old
was just a dilapidated building ready to fall any time. At least he was moving into a new house. This
was going to be a prison also but more modern, with all the latest developments: television, radio,
electricity, telephone.
From Personality to Individuality 266 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
He was not losing anything: he was neither losing the prison nor was he losing anything else. He
was really gaining some new improvements in the prison system. You reprogram him, you force him
back into the old house which is going to fall any moment, and you call yourself deprogrammers.
Then you charge the parents. You are criminals charging for your crime.
My work is exactly deprograming. I simply deprogram you. Whether you are Hindu or Mohammedan
or Christian or Jesus freaks or Witnesses of Jehovah or Hare Krishna people or Moonies – whatever
your kind and whatever your trademark, it doesn’t matter – I simply deprogram you. And I am not
giving you any program in its place. I am leaving you alone, to yourself
I don’t give you any doctrine that replaces hell, that replaces heaven, that replaces God – no.
I take away everything that you are programmed with and leave you to yourself to seek and search.
Who am I to reprogram you?
So the first thing is: regain the rebellious spirit you were born with – which is not a program, which
is your very being.
The second thing: become an individual.
The society tries to make you a person, never an individual. A person is one who has a personality,
and a personality is a mask. Society teaches you how to sit, how to stand, how to behave, how to
act in certain situations. In every possible way the society is preparing you so that you can fit with
the status quo.
My father, whenever he was angry with me, used to tell me. ”you will always remain a misfit.”
I said, ”To me that is a word of tremendous respect. Yes, I want to remain always a misfit. In every
society, in every place, in every nation, in every country, I want to remain a misfit, because the
moment I fit then I am only a cog in a wheel. Then I am no more.
Personality is the mask that has been given to you to keep your original face hidden. It is the whole
garb that by and by you become identified with. If something remains fixed on your face for years
you will become identified with it, because in the mirror you will see your face, and you will see the
mask. In people’s eyes you will see the mask. People will be telling you how beautiful you look,
how beautiful your eyes are, and you will get identified. There is no way to find out that this is just a
mask, that behind it you are somebody else. This is not what you were meant to be.
Personality is that which society manages to make you.
And individuality is that which society is afraid of:
Personality is created by the society according to its own requirements, but individuality is wild,
natural. It is not to fit into some mechanism; it cannot be made a cog in the wheel.
I want you to be individuals, not persons.
Drop your personality.
From Personality to Individuality 267 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
Drop all the ideas that people have given to you.
Yes, sometimes those ideas are very gratifying. Somebody says, ”How beautiful you are!” Do you
have the courage to ask, ”Please give some proof”
That’s what happened to one of my principals. He wanted me somehow to fit into his college. I was
a misfit and an everyday problem. Almost every day I was brought to him, and he would say, ”This
is strange. I have never seen a single student who has been brought every day, regularly. Are you
never absent?”
I said, ”I cannot afford to be absent – I enjoy it so much.”
He had tried everything on me. He thought perhaps buttressing me would be helpful. Punishing me
did not help, expelling me did not help. I had been expelled from other colleges; it didn’t help. So he
said, ”you are such a beautiful person, so intelligent....”
I said, ”Wait. You will have to give me proof. On what grounds do you think I am beautiful? Give me
proofs. On what grounds do you think I am intelligent? Do you think by saying these things you will
be able to destroy my individuality?” Because people want to be known as beautiful and intelligent,
when somebody says this they accept it; nobody is going to deny it.
I said, ”you cannot play that game with me. As far as I am concerned you are just ugly; and if you
want proofs I can bring proofs. As far as I am concerned you are stupid. If you were intelligent you
would have seen that’with this person this strategy is not going to work.’ You are not intelligent. How
could you believe that you can purchase me so cheaply?”
He was shocked but he said, ”You are right. Perhaps I am not intelligent enough, because I never
thought that you could say to somebody’You are intelligent,’ and he would refuse to accept it and
ask for proofs.”
Say even to an idiot, ”you are great, so intelligent, just full of wisdom,” and even the idiot will not
deny it. Such chances don’t happen every day; rarely does somebody say to you that you are full of
wisdom. Rarely does somebody bother to tell you that you are beautiful. And a principal saying it to
the student.... It was almost a character certificate.
I told him, ”i will not take your character certificate for me, because as far as I am concerned you don’t
have any character. So from a person who has no character what value is a character certificate?
And you know perfectly well that you don’t have any character.”
He knew that what I am saying I meant, because every night I saw his car standing before a
prostitute’s house. I said, ”just think of your car every night where it stands and why it stands
there. You are unintelligent: at least you could park it somewhere else. This much intelligence is
certainly needed in a principal; you can park somewhere else. Why do you park it just in front of a
prostitute’s house? You may not be going to the prostitute but your car would be proof enough.
”I have pictures of your car standing in front of the prostitute’s house and you entering the house,” I
said. ”I am just learning photography.” So I said,” this is something really beautiful; some day it may
From Personality to Individuality 268 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
be of some use. Perhaps one day you want to expel me; I can simply post the picture on all the
boards in the college, and see who is expelled.’
He said, ”You have a picture? Give me back that picture! I am not going to expel you and I am not
going to say anything to you again. Let them complain.
”I said, ”You see what you were trying to do, buttressing my ego? That’s how personality is created.”
Others buttress your ego, say things – that you are so nice – so that you start behaving nicely
because you have to keep up the standard people are expecting of you. They say you are beautiful
and you start looking longer in the mirror and arranging your hair and make-up and everything. You
have to keep up the standard: people think you are beautiful. And you never think for a single
moment that you are being manipulated. Those people are simply pulling your strings, and you are
becoming a puppet.
Anybody can easily be manipulated, you just have to know what kind of personality has been given
to him. Just a little acquaintance, and then you know the strings from where he can be pulled so
that he will dance to your tune. And the whole of society is doing that. People are dancing to the
tune of the politicians.
Personality is your enemy.
It is in the hands of those who are exploiting you, who are destroying you.
You have to throw off the personality. You have to throw away all the ideas that have been implanted
by others in you: that you are this, you are that – no. You have to discover who you are on your
own. It is a little arduous, but tremendously fulfilling. Certainly it is a difficult operation because your
personality has become almost your skin, so tight does it cling to you. You are identified with it so
much that you never think that you are not it.
The first thing is to remember that you are not your personality. Who you are you are not aware
of, because before you could have become aware of it – of your reality, of your original face – the
society had already forced a pattern, a model on you. It had already started cutting and chopping
away anything that was not suitable to it. It started adding arbitrary, artificial things to you, to make
you suitable to the society.
Every society creates its own kind of personality, because every society has a different structure.
In South Africa there is a tribe, still alive, in which when the chief passes by.... You cannot imagine
that this could be an expectation in a society but it is the expectation in that society. And there is
just the opposite too. For example in India, if a very orthodox woman came to see me she would
touch my feet and would then move backwards. She would not show her back to me. No, that is
disrespectful; in India that is not expected of a lady. She will move back, the same way she does in
the temple. She goes in facing the statue, touches the feet, offers whatsoever she has brought, and
then she moves back. She cannot show God her back.
But in this tribe in South Africa, when the chief is passing, every woman has to stand by the side
of the road showing her naked bottoms to the chief! That is respect. Perhaps he will get interested
From Personality to Individuality 269 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
in somebody’s bottoms.... No, I am using a wrong word, bottoms – just bottom is enough. With
numbers I am in trouble! Just thinking of two cheeks I start thinking of bottoms. And the chief
inspects them because if he does not inspect them that is disrespectful to those women. Now, in
that society that is the personality. Every society can be laughed at by another society, but in your
own society you fit, so you don’t see any absurdity.
In the late Middle Ages, even after the late Middle Ages, this system continued: in Europe women
were using a certain – what do you call it? – a certain frock, and underneath was a wire frame
so you could not figure out the figure of the woman. She looked just like a doll, all round, like an
opened-up umbrella. It was an umbrella – type thing, touching the floor. You could not see the feet
of the woman.
Bertrand Russell remembers that in his childhood – and he belonged to a lord’s family. He himself
was LORD Bertrand Russell, but he dropped using that ugly word. He says, ”It was impossible to
see the feet of a woman. And it was enough – if sometimes by chance, a man saw the feet of the
woman, that was enough to make him sexually aroused.”
You cannot believe it, at least not in Rajneeshpuram. A woman can walk by your side naked, and
you won’t look at her again, or you won’t stop even to give her a little respect. That’s the meaning of
the word respect: specting again. Respect does not mean anything else, it simply means specting
again. Here, you may not even be aware whether the person who passed was a man or woman –
nobody cares.
Russell says, ”In my childhood, to see the naked feet of women was enough.” In England it was
thought, up to the beginning of this age, that the queen did not have two separate feet, they were
joined! A queen has to be something special. It was natural to think that, because nobody had
ever seen the queen’s feet. It was a common belief all over England that the queen was not an
ordinary woman: her legs were joined together. It is only now, with the skirt becoming shorter and
shorter, that once in a while the wind plays a joke with royalty, and the bottom is not only seen but
photographed by journalists! Then you know, My God – it is just the same.
In every society, once a certain idea is imposed, it continues for centuries.
You have to understand all that has been imposed on you in order to drop it.
Just understanding is enough to drop it.
You start feeling a separation slowly growing between you and your personality. You start watching
how your personality changes its face. Meeting a poor man, watch your response; meeting a rich
man, watch your response – and you will see there is a difference. From where does the difference
come? Both are persons of equal value; poverty or richness don’t make the man. But you have been
taught that there is a difference, and your personality, without your knowing, immediately changes.
When you are standing before your boss, just be aware of your tail, which will be wagging. Just try
to search for your tail and you will see it is wagging When you are facing your boss, you are always
smiling Why? That is your tail wagging.
From Personality to Individuality 270 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
You have seen dogs. Sometimes when they are suspicious, they do both things: they bark and they
wag their tail. They are in a dilemma, they cannot decide what is the right thing to do: whether this
man has to be thrown out of the compound, or has to be allowed in. In such a difficulty, a logical
difficulty, they do both; so whatsoever happens, it doesn’t matter – one thing can be dropped. If
the master comes out and says hello to the man, the dog immediately stops barking and continues
wagging his tail. Even the dog has got a personality. He knows what has to be done, what is
expected of him.
Watch yourself in different situations. Somebody insults you; what happens to you, what is your
response? You have to pay more attention to your response than to his insult – that is his problem.
Your response is your problem. Do you get enraged? Or are you capable of listening silently to
whatsoever he is saying without any reaction – because that would be the right thing.
First listen to what he is saying. Perhaps he is right. If he calls you a thief, why get angry? If you are
not a thief, you have to correct his misunderstanding. And if you are a thief, either correct yourself
or simply feel grateful to him that he has pointed out something in you. But I don’t see the point of
anger. Either you are a thief or you are not a thief Just watch your response. If you are a thief then
he is simply calling a spade a spade. He is not your enemy. You simply thank him, and say, ”You are
right, and I am really grateful that you pointed it out and made me aware of it. Yes, I am a thief”
Just watch what reaction happens in that man – because he will be puzzled. He will be in the same
position as the dog. He will be puzzled because he was expecting anger from you and you have
shown great understanding. He will be simply shocked. He will not be able to believe that by his
calling you a thief you are not feeling insulted. And if you are not a thief you can simply say, ”You will
have to do a little more homework on it, a little more research. I am not a thief It is up to you – you
can go on believing it – but you are living in a misunderstanding.”
But I don’t see the point of anger. Just watch all your actions and reactions and see that your
problem is your actions, your reactions, your responses. You have nothing to do with the other
person’s actions; that is his problem. Return his problem to him – and this is the way to return it.
Then you are completely clean, you come out of it clean.
This way, slowly your personality slips away, and your original face starts showing up – which has
a tremendous beauty and grace. It has a beauty not of the body, but a beauty which is something
deeper than the body, and a grace which is not attained by years of prayer in churches, in temples.
Suddenly you feel a new color, a new fragrance around you. The moment your original face is
discovered you are on the way towards freedom, authenticity, totality, fearlessness.
This is what I mean by the everything that is needed to reach nothingness.
Everything is the circumference and nothing is the center. Everything, the cyclone; and nothingness,
the center.
But unless all those things happen – a rebellious spirit, individuality, your original face, freedom,
fearlessness, authenticity, totality – you cannot enter inwards.
Society does not want you to go in. Society wants you to go out – the farther out from your center,
the better, because the farther out you are the more useful you are to the society: you can be used
From Personality to Individuality 271 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
as a means. Society cannot use a person who is standing at his center. He is beyond society’s
grasp. And the person who is standing at his center – which is nothingness, pure nothingness, just
space, pure space.
When you look from that purity your eyes are capable of finding the truth everywhere. Your eyes are
capable of finding beauty everywhere. Your eyes are capable of seeing that you were blind before.
And it is not only your eyes, all your senses become tremendously capable. Now you hear, but you
don’t listen. Then, hearing and listening are together. Of course you can hear right now because
you have ears; but listening needs something more. Behind your ears must be a silent awareness.
Right now there is a crowd of thoughts behind your ears; there is no silence, so you only hear.
I say one thing, you hear something else because that crowd is continuously meddling with
everything that you hear. It is changing, editing, adding: it is doing all kinds of things when you
are hearing but not listening.
Listening is possible only when your ears are attended by a silent space – when you are just a
watcher. Then you can hear the greatest music in the smallest things. Just in the wind passing
through the pine trees you can hear the music that no musician can create. You can see beauty in
such simple things – a bird on the wing – that you had never bothered about.
You start smelling in a totally new way. It is not only the eyes that are capable of seeing a person.
You will be surprised to know that when your inner space is available to all your senses, you also
start smelling a person. If a person is unreal, you smell it immediately; if a person is lying, you smell
it immediately. You will be surprised to know that the body smell of each individual is different.
Biologically the body smell has something to do with sexuality. You must have seen animals smelling
each other’s sexual organs. Do you think they are mad? Except man, nobody goes mad. It will look
strange that through smell the dog is trying to find a girlfriend. He is not looking at her face, not
looking at her nose, not looking at her eyes and their color, not looking at her blond hair to see if she
is pure Aryan, Nordic, German – he is smelling her. He knows better than you. Unless the smell
appeals to him, this girl is not for him, because the smell gives the hint of the biological potentiality
of the girl. Her hormonal system is indicated by the smell.
And do you see what man is doing? He is trying in every possible way to hide his true bodily smell
with deodorants, with soaps, with perfumes. What are you doing? You may not be aware, you are
just doing it because everybody else is doing it. You are trying to hide your sexual smell because
you don’t live in a free society like the dog does.
You live in a society which is absolutely a society of slaves. Your husband’s biological smell may not
fit you at all; your smell may not fit your husband at all. Now both of you have to hide the smell. And
if your smell suddenly, on the road, appeals to somebody, and somebody approaches you and tells
you, ”I have fallen in love with your smell” – you will be shocked. ”That man is mad:’Fallen in love
with my smell’?”
No, you have to hide your bodily smell with perfumes, deodorants, all kinds of ways, so nobody on
the road, in the market, in a club, comes close to you and suddenly feels that his and your bodily
From Personality to Individuality 272 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
smells fit. You may not be husband and wife; you may not be even acquainted with each other.
The bodily smell has nothing to do with acquaintance, introduction, religion, caste, husband, wife,
marriage. It knows nothing.
Man has been trying to prevent it because it is dangerous. But even if you don’t prevent it, it is not
very dangerous because your nose is clogged. There is no inner space behind it which can detect,
not only your sexuality, your sexual appeal, but your authenticity, your truthfulness, your honesty.
When all the senses are around the nothingness I am talking about, you feel existence for the first
time, from all the doors, all the windows that open up into existence. But you are absent right now,
so who is going to look through the window? The window may be open but you are not there.
You are asking me what I am trying to do with you, with my sannyasins – nothing less than a
resurrection, a rebirth, so that I can put you on that spot from where society has distracted you.
Once again you can start from that point and go in the direction which is natural to you. And don’t be
afraid. Nature provides you with every guarantee that if you move naturally you will attain the goal,
your destiny. It is not faraway, it is just by your side: you have only to stretch out your hand. But your
hand has to be authentic. It has to be your hand: not your father’s hand, not your mother’s hand.
It happened that a man was caught murdering another man. He was caught red-handed and brought
before the court. There was no problem because he accepted that he had committed the murder.
The judge asked him, ”Would you like an advocate to plead for you?”
He said, ”No, because there is no question: I have committed murder and these people who have
caught me and brought me here are my witnesses. There is no case at all – I have committed
murder. Give me the punishment.”
In his whole life the judge had never seen such an authentic man. He said, ”I feel sorry for you, I feel
bad and guilty that I will be punishing you, but you have to understand that I have to follow the law.
The most I can do is give you the minimum punishment.”
The man said, ”Do whatever you feel right – minimum, maximum, it doesn’t matter – because when
I killed the man I killed with full awareness of the consequences. And these people are just foolish;
they were unnecessarily troubling themselves – I was coming to the court myself to declare that I
had committed murder. Now what is the punishment?”
The judge said, ”I will give you only ten years in jail, although the maximum punishment is death.
This is the minimum; less than that I cannot support.”
The man said, ”It is perfectly right – don’t be unhappy about it. But one thing I want to say: the
murder was done by my hands, not by me. You can imprison my hands but you cannot imprison me.
You have no charge against me. My hands, you can see, are still covered with blood.”
The magistrate thought, This man is really something! But he said, ”Okay, I will sentence both your
hands for ten years, but how can you remain outside the jail when your hands are inside the jail?”
The man said, ”That is not your problem, that’s my problem.”
From Personality to Individuality 273 Osho
CHAPTER 15. TRUTH SAID, TRUTH DEAD
The judge gave the sentence that his hands should be kept in jail for ten years. The man took out
both of his hands, which were artificial, put them on the table before the judge and went out of the
court
The truth is very close by, but your hands have to be true – not artificial hands, not the hands of your
personality, but of your individuality.
My effort is not for anything less than that: Total transformation from the false to the original.
From Personality to Individuality 274 Osho
CHAPTER 16
Superman: the fantasy for the inferior
14 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
ISN’T THE VISION OF THE NEW MAN SOMEHOW SIMILAR TO THE IDEA OF THE SUPERMAN?
THE idea of the new man is not only not similar to the idea of the superman, it is just the very
opposite.
The superman is a continuity with the old man.
The new man is a discontinuity with the old man.
The superman is superior, higher, but still belongs to the same world of the old man. He is better,
strong er, more beautiful, more powerful, more intelligent; but the difference is only of degrees, of
more or less.
The new man is absolutely unrelated to the old man. The superior man, the superman, is a
refinement of the old. The new man is the death of the old man. The new man comes into being
when the old man dies; hence, they cannot be similar at all. They may sound similar to those who
think only intellectually.
I am not an intellectual, neither am I a thinker.
275
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
I see things.
I am a seer.
And in my eyes the superman and the new man are just the very contrary to each other.
The old society, culture, religion, philosophy – they are not against the superman; in fact the
superman is their projection. It is their desire, their hope. They have been working for thousands
of years to produce the superman. And in the name of the superman they have tortured the poor
common man so much: it is almost impossible to believe how much humanity has been sacrificed
in order to bring the superman onto the earth.
What was Adolf Hitler doing? He was fascinated with the idea of superman. He got it from Friedrich
Nietzsche. Now, it is a strange thing to understand that the people who have been interested in
the superman were very inferior kinds of people. Strange, but not irrelevant. It is in fact your
inferiority complex – somehow, deep down, you feel yourself inferior. To forget that inferiority, you
start imagining, projecting, just the opposite of it: the superman.
Nietzsche was in love with a woman, Wagner’s wife. Wagner is one of the great musicians, a great
master as far as music is concerned; and he was tremendously charismatic. He was not only a
maestro of music but his playing had some touch of magic too. That’s what makes a difference. The
same music may be played by many people – it may be the same instrument, the same music, the
same notes, but somebody simply gives wings to it and it goes on soaring higher and higher. It takes
you beyond yourself into unknown spaces.
With somebody else it is just ordinary music. It takes you nowhere; at the most, it is a kind of
entertainment. You have nothing to do so you listen to the music. At least it keeps you occupied in
the same way that smoking keeps somebody occupied or gossiping keeps somebody else occupied.
But when a man like Wagner plays music he gives a new dimension to your being, he opens up new
doors. You start moving into dimensions you have not even dreamed of
Nietzsche was learning music from the master, anc fell in love with the master’s wife, not thinking at
all that he had a very poor personality, in no way to be compared with Vajna... or Vagner. I don’t
know how the Germans say it, so I am using both: one is bound to be right.
Of course Wagner’s wife was not interested; she had not even thought about Nietzsche. He was
ugly looking, not even physically attractive like Wagner – what to say about the spiritual quality of
Wagner and his artistic mastery of music? In the whole history of man there are not many names
which can be compared to Wagner’s, not more than you can count on your fingers. He emerges as
one of the greatest musicians.
The woman had fallen in love not only with the man but with the music which surrounded that man
and the magic that was somewhere absolutely present almost tangible. There was no question of
comparing Nietzsche. When Nietzsche approached her, she simply laughed and she said, ”You
must be a fool! Even if God were standing before me my choice would be Wagner, because I cannot
believe even God can be so charismatic.
From Personality to Individuality 276 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
”When Wagner plays I cannot even believe that I am his wife and so fortunate to be so close to him.
He is so far away and yet so compassionate that he allows me the intimacy. I know that I am not
worthy; it is his compassion. Far more beautiful women are mad about him. Anybody who has any
sensitivity to music and to the charismatic personality of a person is bound to fall in love with him.
”How could you think,” she told Nietzsche, ”that I could even think about you? Simply forget all about
it. You are nowhere in my eyes. And this is disgraceful: you are a student of my husband and he
trusts you, that’s why you are allowed in the house. You are just like a son to him, and I am just like
a mother to you – age does not matter.”
This was such a shock and such an exposure of Nietzsche’s own inferiority that never again in his
life did he approach another woman; he lost his nerve. But after that day he started thinking of a new
race of man: the superman. He wrote against Wagner, he became an enemy. Wagner could not
understand why, because he had no idea of what had transpired between his wife and his disciple;
why Nietzsche had left and gone into the mountains.
Nietzsche took the wound really seriously. It created two things in him: an immense hatred for
women... and not only for women but all the qualities that are womanly. For example, he started
hating compassion, love, sympathy, kindness – these are all womanly qualities. He started hating
Jesus, he started hating Gautam the Buddha for the simple reason that these people were teaching
womanly qualities. Nonviolence is womanly, violence is manly; to be a real man you have to be
violent. His mind became completely perverted from the shock.
Jesus is talking about humbleness and meekness; these are womanly qualities. Jesus has
destroyed man’s manliness. This is womanly, that when somebody hits your face you have to
give him your other cheek. What else can be more womanly? But can you see how things are
associated? One woman, her rejection, caused his rejection of all womankind; and not only of
womankind but also of qualities which have something in them which can be called womanly.
He condemned Gautam Buddha, saying ”It is because of Buddha’that India became cowardly – he
taught India to be womanly.” He said, ”all these saints are not even worth comparing with soldiers.
Even a third-rate soldier is better than a first-rate saint.” Now, the soldier! – and he himself was not
a soldier; he himself was not even tall enough to be accepted in the army. He had tried and was
rejected because he was not tall enough.
There is a possibility that somewhere in his parentage some crossbreeding must have happened:
he was not Nordic German – neither was Adolf Hitler Nordic German. Nordic Germans, if they are
pure blood, are tall, blond, strong people. But neither Nietzsche was strong and tall nor was Adolf
Hitler.
Nietzsche says, ”The only beautiful thing that I remember in my life is when one morning as the
sun was rising I saw a long brigade of soldiers marching on the street. Their naked swords were
shining in the morning sun, almost like lightning. Their boots falling in tune were so musical that I
have never heard any music comparable to it. Their dress, their uniforms – and the harmony and
the early morning sun...!”
People have talked about lotus flowers in the early morning sun, of roses in the early morning sun,
but Nietzsche is the only one in the whole history of man who talks about soldiers in the early
From Personality to Individuality 277 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
morning sun and the beauty of the swords shining and the music of their boots... right, left, right,
left... in harmony – the music! He says, ”I never came across such a beautiful experience again.”
Now he himself was not an athlete, he was not a soldier. I don’t think he would have been able to
hold a sword rightly, or know how to keep hold of it. He was a man who knew how to hold a fountain
pen, not a sword. For his whole life he was simply writing; fighting he had never done. But he started
projecting the idea of the superman.
Nietzsche started condemning the old man without ever thinking that he belonged to the old. It
happens... one can set oneself apart, and put the old man on this side and the superman on that
side; and then you think you are not part of the old man. But because you are creating the idea
of the superman, you start believing yourself that superman is your projection, your idea: you are
giving birth to superman – then of course you belong to the superman. That’s how one tries to forget
one’s inferiority.
Nietzsche never attempted to approach another woman for the simple reason that that may again
have provoked the feeling of inferiority; once was enough. He was a very egoistic type of man; it
is a rare phenomenon. If some woman says, ”I am not in love with you,” that does not mean that
there will not be a woman who will not be able to accept you. And he had qualities of his own; there
was no need to be another Wagner. He was not a musician, but he had his own qualities: he was
a great philosopher. But he forgot all about his qualities and he started comparing himself only with
Wagner. And the insult went so deep....
He influenced many people – all of them, in a certain way, strange. He influenced George Bernard
Shaw – similarly a very egoistic man, a showman. If you read George Bernard Shaw’s books you
will be surprised that the book is small but the preface is big. That has happened for the first time in
the whole history of the world of literature: the preface is big and the book is small! Why? The book
should be enough to explain itself. That’s what art, creativity, means.
The best painters have not titled their paintings, what to say of a preface? They have not even titled
them, for the simple reason that if the painting is not explanatory itself, how can a title help? It
should be left to the person who is seeing the painting to understand it according to his capacity,
understanding, intelligence.
To put a title on the painting means you are worried that your painting is not going to be understood
so you have to give a hint. But to give a title to a painting is to make it small and closed; it is a way of
framing it. By the title, you have framed it. Now you are telling the person this painting only means
this, nothing else. You have taken the multidimensionality of the painting and given it a very small
frame. You have destroyed it.
And Bernard Shaw’s books are not difficult; you don’t need to be a genius to understand them. He
was writing only dramas – those too, not of a very high quality. Anybody with a little bit of intelligence,
even if below mediocrity, would be able to understand them. But perhaps he suffers from some
inferiority himself Perhaps he thinks that nobody is going to understand the drama; perhaps he
himself does not understand it rightly.
He has written it but he is not certain whether he has written that which he wanted to write, whether
he has given it the right expression, the right words. Is it certain that it will not be misunderstood? He
From Personality to Individuality 278 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
is in a confusion – hence, the long preface. And the preface destroys the whole drama because he
tries to explain everything in the preface. When you have understood everything about the drama,
what is left in it?
It is as if somebody tells you the whole story of a movie and then gives you a ticket, saying ”Go, I have
brought a ticket for you.” He has destroyed everything by telling you the whole story; now the ticket
is absolutely useless. You will be simply bored because there is not going to be any excitement. You
know already what is going to happen, you know already the end from the very beginning.
Bernard Shaw does exactly that, and does it so greatly: one-hundred-page, two-hundred-page
prefaces for a twenty-page drama. I don’t think that any psychoanalyst has tried – I have never
come across anything – but Bernard Shaw needs to be psychoanalyzed. Why is he writing this
preface to an ordinary drama? He simply projects himself It seems that if the drama were written by
somebody else he would not understand it, he would need a big introduction. That’s what he was
doing.
George Bernard Shaw was impressed by Nietzsche’s idea of superman; he wrote a drama on
superman too. Strangely enough, he was also rejected by a woman. The name of the woman
was Annie Besant. She was the godmother – is it okay to use ”godmother” as well as ”godfather”?
– of j. Krishnamurti. She was the president of the Theosophical Movement for the whole world. She
was a very beautiful woman with great charisma of her own, very intelligent, and one of the greatest
orators ever. If she had remained in England she would have become prime minister anytime,
because none of the prime ministers of her time had the same charisma, or the art of speaking that
she had.
Bernard Shaw heard her for the first time in a Theosophical conference, and he immediately fell in
love. When he approached Annie Besant she said, ”Please excuse me, I have far bigger things to
do.” And certainly she had far bigger things to do than be the wife of George Bernard Shaw. But
George Bernard Shaw thought that he was the greatest man on the earth: ”And she has far greater
things to do...?” But the wound remained with him.
Annie Besant went on becoming more and more popular. It is simply unbelievable that she became
the president of the Indian National Congress. When India was under the British Raj, a British
woman was accepted by Indian revolutionaries – who were fighting the British Raj – as their
president! You can understand her charisma.
Even the white skin was hated because that represented the rulers, the oppressors. And to accept a
woman who comes from the same country with which you are fighting.... And the people who were
struggling – the Indian National Congress was the party fighting with Britain to get independence
– accepted her as president. She must have had a magic personality. So if she refused Bernard
Shaw, I don’t think that she did any*ling wrong; she certainly had much bigger things to do.
She created the whole Theosophical Movement, for the first time, into a worldwide movement. She
created the idea that a world teacher is going to be born and made the idea worth being believed
by millions of people. It is not so easy. Even Jesus was not able to convince his own people that he
was the messiah. But this woman was saying, ”I am going to introduce to you, at the right moment,
the messiah who is going to save the whole world,” and millions of people believed in her word. And
she was not the messiah, but she had some quality to create trust in people.
From Personality to Individuality 279 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
Bernard Shaw was rejected by Annie Besant, and he carried that wound his whole life; and he
started projecting the idea of the superman.
Adolf Hitler was the second person who became a disciple of Friedrich Nietzsche, and he was in
every way inferior, intellectually. Even to call him mediocre does not feel justified; the word falls
short, he was far below mediocrity. He had no intelligence of any kind; he was absolutely an idiot.
He should have been born in Oregon; it was just an accident that he was born in Germany. Germany
is not the right place for such great idiots.
He was rejected from the school of architecture – he wanted to become an architect. He was rejected
from the arts school – he wanted to become a painter. He was rejected from the army because he
could not prove his mettle in the first world war. He was a coward: he was using every excuse to
hide and keep himself behind, and not go forward and rush towards the enemy. And whenever it
was time to fight, he would fall sick. He would manage to produce a stomachache, a headache,
backache – anything: things which cannot be proved.
Now there is no way to prove whether a headache is there or not. One of my teachers used to
begin his class every day with this ritual: ”First listen to my conditions. I don’t accept a headache,
I don’t accept a stomachache. Things that I cannot find, I don’t accept. Yes, if you have fever, I
accept it because I can check that your temperature is high. So remember, nobody is to ask leave
for things which are unprovable. Even a doctor cannot prove whether there is a headache or not.”
He prevented almost everything because you had to produce a visible disease, only then could you
get out; but I had to find some way around it because this was unacceptable.
He was an old man, so all that I had to do was in the night.... He was old, but very strong and very
particular about exercises, about walking, so he used to get up early, at five o’clock, and in the dark
he would go for a long walk. So I just had to put a few banana peels in front of his door. In the
morning he fell, and had a bad back. I was available immediately because I knew about it.
He said, ”My back is hurting so much.”
I said, ”Don’t mention anything which you cannot prove.”
He said, ”But whether I can prove it or not, I am not able to come to school today.”
”Then,” I said, ”You will have to stop your conditions from tomorrow, because I am going to spread
the whole thing to the whole school, that if a bad back is accepted.... What proof have you got?
Then why not a headache? Why not a stomachache?”
He said, ”I think you have something to do with these banana peels here.”
I said, ”Perhaps you are right, but you cannot prove it, and I believe only in things which can be
proved.”
He said, ”You can at least do me one favor: you can take my application to the principal.”
I said, al will take your application, but remember, from tomorrow you stop those conditions, because
sometimes I have a headache, sometimes I have a stomachache, because I am accustomed to
From Personality to Individuality 280 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
eating all kinds of unripe fruits – when you are stealing from other people’s gardens, you cannot ask
that they should be ripe. And only before they are ripe can you get them; once they are ripe the
people take them. So I suffer from stomachache. ”And certainly from that day he stopped those
conditions. He just looked at me, smiled, and started his class.
The students were simply shocked: ”What has happened to him? What about the conditions?” I
stood up and said, ”I have a lot of pain in my stomach.”
He said, ”You can go.” That was the first time... He told me in the evening when he came to see
my father, ”This is the first time I have given leave to anybody for a stomachache... because these
people are just so imaginative and inventive.” And he told my father, ”Your boy is dangerous.”
I said, Again you are trying to do something which you cannot prove, you are just assuming. I was
simply going for a morning walk and I saw you fall, and I just went to help you to get up. Do you
think it is wrong to help somebody?”
He said, ”No, it is not wrong to help somebody; but who put those banana peels there?”
I said ”That, you have to find out – it is your house. It was just coincidence that I was going for a
morning walk; and my father knows that every day I go for a morning walk.”
My father said, ”That’s true, he goes every day. But it is possible he may have done it. But unless
you prove it, it is no use: we have to prove things to him If argumentatively he wins then, even though
we are right, he is the winner and we are the losers. He has told me the whole story about your bad
back, and that since then you have stopped your two conditions.”
My father had also been his student. He said, ”This is strange, because you never began without
those two conditions.”
My teacher said, ”Never before did I have this kind of student. I had to change my whole plan
because it is dangerous to be in conflict with him; he would have killed me.”
When Adolf Hitler was in the army he continually had headaches, backaches, stomachaches –
any excuse to get into the hospital just so that he did not go on the battlefield. After the first
world war he was rejected by the army. Now, this man was unemployed with no qualifications.
He gathered seventeen other unemployed soldiers who had been rejected by the army, and those
eighteen people created the National Socialist Party – the Nazi Party. Their ideal was: ”We have
to conquer the whole world because that’s God’s mission given to the Nordic Germans, the purest
Aryan race. The mission is to rule the world. The world consists of pygmies.”
Now, Adolf Hitler was a pygmy in every way; in no way can you find anything which has some value.
But he got the idea moving, and the Nordic Germans started feeling that they had a certain mission,
that they were the chosen few of God. Why was he so much against the Jews? One of the reasons
was that the Jews have been saying since Moses that they are the chosen few of God.
Now, there cannot be two races chosen by God; so either the Nordic Germans are the chosen race,
or the Jews. It had to be proved that the Nordic Germans were, so Hitler started killing the Jews.
From Personality to Individuality 281 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
He said, ”The Jews have to be completely erased because they have been pretending that they are
the chosen few – while we are the chosen few and have not been even aware of it.” And it got into
the minds of people. The mind gets such ideas very easily and makes you afire because you are
suffering from so many inferiorities.
Everybody in life comes across boundaries he cannot cross over and feels inferior; comes against
walls, gets hit and has to turn back. Everybody in life some way or other has to face the problem of
inferiority. If somebody gives you the idea that you are the chosen few of God, you are going to buy
it. And Hitler was giving it free, he was not charging you anything – and he was making you the very
top. Nietzsche’s books became Hitler’s bible.
The third man who got impressed was in India: Shri Aurobindo. He was also suffering from a
tremendous inferiority complex. Shri Aurobindo was educated in England. He belonged to a rich
family and was going to become an ICS, a member of the Indian civil service, which was the topmost
bureaucracy in India, created by the Britishers. To be an ICS one had to pass many examinations in
England, and naturally it was very difficult for Indians to pass those examinations. The examinations
were such that Indians were not accustomed to them.
For example, Aurobindo failed only in one subject – horse riding. Indians are not interested in
horseriding; English people are. But Indians are not interested at all in horse riding, nobody thinks
it of some great value; in fact Jainas prohibit it because to ride on a horse is to be violent. Who are
you to ride on the horse? If horses start riding on you would you like the idea? Jainas are averse to
it. And in India nobody is interested the way Britishers are interested in horse riding.
So of course Aurobindo was not a good horse rider compared with British students, but in all other
subjects he passed. One wonders what an ICS officer has to do with horse riding, but you don’t
know the ways of imperialism. The ICS officer had a certain purpose for horse riding. In India, the
moment you saw a white man dressed in army uniform with a gun on a beautiful horse... that was
the symbol of imperialism and its power.
Now, Aurobindo was a Bengali, so I don’t think he could have managed even to ride a donkey –
because donkeys are also very clever. I have been riding on them so I know. You can try it, and you
will find that donkeys have a special trick. They will never walk in the middle of the road; they will
always go to the side and rub you against the walls of the houses. It is impossible to keep them in
the middle of the road: they will simply move either to this side or to that side and rub against the
wall. Of course they will damage your leg and you will have to get down. They are simply saying,
”Get down, get lost!”
Aurobindo was very shocked because he came back having failed, and to be an ICS was his
ambition. Someone with an inferiority complex always has great ambitions; the inferiority complex is
the base of all ambition. Now, to be an ICS officer was the greatest ambition any Indian could have
in the British regime because that was the topmost position you could reach; more than that was
not available to Indians. And rarely, out of thousands of ICS officers, one Indian might succeed in
reaching it, so it was really something superior.
Aurobindo came back frustrated, with great anger, jealousy, rage; and he joined the Indian National
Congress – the party that was trying to throw the British Empire. Just look at the facts. He had
From Personality to Individuality 282 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
gone to join the British Empire, and if only he had succeeded in horse riding he would have been a
supporter of the British Empire; he would have been killing these people whom he was now joining.
Now he wanted to destroy the British Empire. Can you see people’s minds, how they work?
And he was not a non-violent revolutionary, no. He did not believe in Gandhi, he was not a follower of
Gandhi. He was a believer in violence: he wanted the British people to be killed, burned, destroyed.
He was trying to make bombs and he was caught redhanded creating bombs and he suffered a few
years in jail.
It is very interesting to look into people’s lives. If you have an unprejudiced mind then strange facts
start coming up. When Aurobindo was in jail he suddenly became a religious man. From being
thrown out – the ambition that he was trying to fulfill, frustrated – he moved to the opposite extreme:
he wanted to take revenge, but now in the name of revolution. Then, when he was put into jail, he
saw the whole thing, that it is not so easy to overthrow this great empire by simply creating hand
bombs; it is just befooling yourself You may kill one person or two persons or you may destroy one
bridge, but that is not going to destroy the empire; it is not possible. The empire has tremendous
power.
Then how to fulfill the ambition? He had seen he could not succeed in Britain in becoming an ICS
officer; he had seen that he could not become the great leader of the Indian revolution. He turned
to religion. He could become a great saint; at least nobody could prevent him doing that. That is the
cheapest way in the whole world. Who can prevent you? There is no competition either.
Aurobindo became a religious person. He started writing a commentary on the SHRIMAD
BHAGAVAD GITA in jail. When he was released, the first thing he did was to escape from the
British Empire. Pondicherry was not part of British India; it was a small place under the French
empire. It is part of India – now it is part of India – but three hundred years ago, when all European
powers were struggling to capture India, Britain succeeded in capturing the whole of India. France
could only succeed in capturing a small place, Pondicherry, and Spain could succeed in having only
one small place, Goa, and two small islands, Daman and Diu.
Why did Aurobindo escape to Pondicherry? It was just close to Bengal. He was a coward; now he
was afraid to face his revolutionary friends. He could not say to them that now he was no longer a
revolutionary, that he wanted to become a saint – which is the safest way to fulfill your ambition to
become respectable, honorable and great. In Pondicherry he created his ashram.
He was immensely interested in the idea of the superman. In fact he made it his life’s ambition. He
said, ”I am going to bring the superman into myself The superman will descend from heaven into
my body, so I am trying to purify my body so that the superman will descend.”
For thirty years he remained in a closed house, and his followers believed that he was purifying his
body. Now, if you look at his literature you can see perfectly well that for all those thirty years he was
continually writing, because that literature is not spoken, it is written. And the volume of literature
is so big that I suspect he had no time left to purify his body. And what purification? – the body is
pure. What can you do with it? What is wrong with the body? For anything that is wrong you need
medical science to help you. In a closed room how are you going to purify your body?
From Personality to Individuality 283 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
He became fatter and fatter, that’s all. He had been a very lean and thin young man, but just reading
and writing, reading and writing.... And his writing is just the worst possible. One sentence will
continue for almost the whole page. You will forget about the beginning of the sentence by the time
you have reached the end. By the end of the page you will have to go back again to the beginning
to see what words the sentence had started with.
Aurobindo’s books are unreadable, pedantic, verbose. He uses big words because he thinks the
bigger the word, the more unused it is by people, the more mystified they will be. And it happened
– people were mystified. People are very strange: they get impressed by things which they cannot
understand. If they can understand, they don’t get impressed. Simple is their logic: ”If I can
understand it there is nothing in it.” Unless they feel ”I cannot understand it,” they cannot believe
that something higher, something of the beyond, is there. The way he has written is just to mystify.
There is no need to write one paragraph or one page as one sentence. It is simply ridiculous if you
want your word to reach to people. But no, he wanted to mystify.
I have gone through all his books and I have suffered so much. You cannot believe how much I
have suffered through such people. I had gone through all his books simply to see what this man
was trying to do. In those books there is nothing. You dig up a whole mountain and you don’t
find even a rat! But they are big volumes, one thousand pages; and there are big words. And he
was clever enough to make and create big words, for example, ”supramental.” And he would create
categories....
For the superman to arrive, first you have to create the state of supramental, and for that you have to
purify your body. And he declared that he was going to be immortal physically. Up to now Mahavira,
Buddha, Krishna, Christ, Mohammed – they have all said that the soul is eternal. Aurobindo said,
”I am going to prove that only an eternal body can contain an eternal soul. My body is going to live
forever, it is immortal.”
Now this kind of thing is simple nonsense. But there is one thing good about it, about such
statements; you can never prove such statements wrong, because if the man dies, to whom are
you going to prove he is wrong? And if he lives, of course he is immortal. This is the trick behind the
statement, ”I am going to be immortal. I have purified my body, and the superman is descending,
slowly, slowly coming into this body. This body is going to be immortal, and then I will teach my
disciples to be immortal.”
Hundreds of people, hoping to be immortal physically, followed Shri Aurobindo their whole life. The
day he died, one of my friends was in his ashram; he was his follower. I had been telling him again
and again, ”Don’t be a fool! The body cannot be immortal, it is made of mortal things. Perhaps one
can live a little longer, but to live eternally...! You can see the body is continually changing: the child
is becoming a young man, the young man is becoming old, the old man is becoming older. Death
does not come suddenly, it is coming from the very day you were born. Somebody who says his
body is going to be immortal has to prove that his body has stopped changing.
That was my argument to my friend, ”If you can manage to send a message” – because Aurobindo
used to see his disciples only one time a year, and that too was simply darshan. He would not talk,
he would not answer; he would simply sit there and people would pass by him in a line – just for a
moment you could see him. So I said to my friend, ”If somehow you can send a message....” And
there was a way.
From Personality to Individuality 284 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
The woman who was in charge of the ashram was called ”the Mother.” People have completely
forgotten her name, they have forgotten even her profession. She was a film actress who just fell in
love with Shri Aurobindo. She dropped her husband and became a disciple... because the idea of
physical immortality will appeal to women more than to men, obviously.
Women are more physical, more grounded, and have more of a sense of their body. Women, I don’t
think, believe much in the soul, because they cannot see any soul in the mirror. What they cannot
see in the mirror is just stupid men’s idea. And all women know that these men all go on playing
with words and philosophy and religion. The woman is not interested in these things. She is more
interested in the gossip, in juicy things; what is happening in the neighborhood, who has purchased
a new car and who has purchased new clothes and who has made a new house.
They are not worried about God at all. It is not their concern. If they become concerned it is because
of men. Because men are continually worried about God and soul and heaven and hell, the woman
thinks, ”perhaps there is something in it; and if so many men are interested in it, who knows? It is
better at least to keep quiet about it, not to say anything.” But I know every woman feels that all this
is simply jargon.
This French actress became interested in the idea of physical immortality. She was a powerful
woman and really capable of organizing, so Aurobindo had a good organizer at hand – he could
withdraw. He wanted his whole time to write. He was trying to create the whole philosophy of the
superman: all the stages, methodologies to purify the body and the mind, what stages you will
reach, what lights you will see and what colors will appear at what stage. If you read him you will
think, ”perhaps this man is talking sense, because he talks like somebody talking about geography.
Everything on the map he can show you.”
But looking at his books, all I can say to you is that he was a good linguist and knew how to play with
words and language. For thirty years he was in isolation. Nothing was being purified; it was just that
he needed time to study and to write. And his voluminous literature is proof enough – nobody could
produce that much literature if he were not continually working at least twelve or fourteen hours a
day. The sheer volume is proof enough.
So I told my friend, ”send this message to Aurobindo:’If you say you have attained immortality
physically, then one thing can be the proof.... Because if you die then whom are we going to ask?
If you don’t die and you continue not to die, of course you are right – because you are living. But I
have found a criterion of immortality, and the criterion is that your body should not change anymore
– because death is only a change. If you are young, then you should not become old; if your hair is
black it should not grow white. That will be proof enough.’”
But my friend said, ”His hair is grey and he is looking older and older every year. We can feel it more
clearly because we see him only after one year.” When you see a person every day you cannot
detect that he is becoming older. But if you see him after a gap of one year you can immediately
see how much change has happened, how much his hair has gone grey, how much his face has
wrinkled, how much older he is looking.
So I said, ”If he cannot prevent old age, then be certain that he cannot prevent death, because old
age is just a preparation for death.” And that’s what happened: one day Aurobindo died. When he
From Personality to Individuality 285 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
died it was a great shock to his disciples who lived there in his ashram and to his followers who were
all around the earth, because who does not want to be physically immortal?
There are people in America, at least ten of them, whose dead bodies are preserved – those bodies
belong to multi-millionaires – in the hope that within the coming of ten to fifteen years, science will
be able to revive a dead man. So those people have put all their money in a trust – that their bodies
should be preserved exactly as they were when they died. So if, after ten or fifteen years, science
becomes capable of reviving the body, their bodies will be revived.
Do you see man’s ambitions, his poverty, his inferiority, his fear of death, his lust for life?
Even after death they are hoping...! And millions of dollars are being wasted on their bodies because
they have a trust; it is their money. They are being preserved, frozen, completely frozen. And even
if after fifteen years they come back, what are they going to do? They won’t see anybody around
whom they had left. Their wives may have gone, their children may have died. And who will want
them – even if the children are there? Who would like to have them back? Just think: your father
comes after fifteen years of being a ghost; one day he suddenly comes home. You may die just with
the shock of seeing your father standing before you.
And a fifteen-year gap.... People are talking about generation gaps – have you thought about the
gap between dead and the living? If after fifteen years a person comes back to life, he will not
find anything recognizable, everything will be different. Perhaps he will not find the same world at
all; perhaps the third world war will have happened and he may wake up to start the whole game
again... to go in search... where is Eve? And if by chance he finds some Eve, then they both will
have to think twice before they take the jump: should we start that whole thing again? If they have
any intelligence they won’t because once was enough – and what happened to it!
But people are interested in immortality. Aurobindo exploited the idea of the superman; and physical
immortality was his contribution to the idea of the superman. Nietzsche was not thinking of that;
neither Bernard Shaw was thinking of that nor was Adolf Hitler. But Aurobindo, being an Indian,
contributed to the idea. He was not very original because the immortality of the soul has always
been talked about. He simply transferred it to the body: immortality of the body.
When he died, for three days they kept it a secret because the Mother, the organizer of the ashram,
said, ”He cannot die, that is impossible. It must be a certain stage when he is getting out of the body,
and the superman is getting into the body – just the interim stage, the interval.
”Of course if somebody is getting out of a house he has to take his luggage and furniture and
mattresses; and so many things are there to get out of the house. Then the other will bring his own
mattresses, his own furniture. And who knows what kinds of things that superman needs? He will
bring his own paraphernalia. So it is just an interval.” And people are so foolish. That’s why I say,
What kind of humanity have we got that they believed in this? – that it was an interval.
The body was kept in secret, and they were praying and waiting for superman to descend. They
were rejoicing because they were thinking, ”Now it is happening” – and all that was happening was
that the body was deteriorating; it started stinking. Then the Mother became afraid that this is going
to.... So the Mother said, ”It seems it will take a longer time for the superman to descend, so we
From Personality to Individuality 286 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
have to preserve the body inside a marble grave.” You will not believe it: there are still people in
Aurobindo’s ashram who are waiting, thinking that one day he will knock inside the grave and say,
”Now please open up: and superman has arrived.”
The man died; then the Mother started pretending – the same role – that her body has become
immortal. Of course she lived long, almost a century, but if you had seen her face before she died,
you would have thought this face could only be of a ghost: she was just a skeleton, with wrinkled
skin. You could count, even from a photograph, how many bones there were in her neck, and how
many blood vessels in her neck were collapsing. There was no need for any X-ray, just seeing her
was enough. You could have seen everything that was in her – nothing was left.
People started believing that she was immortal, the same people who had been seeing Aurobindo
dying. then she died, and again the same stupidity: three days’ interval, then the stinking body, then
again another Grave – and waiting. And people are still waiting.
The idea of superman is basically rooted in your feeling of inferiority, of fear, of death. But the new
nan has nothing to do with all this.
The new man is the very ordinary man:
Nothing special, nothing superior, supramental.
The new man is the first man who recognizes that it is enough to be human.
There is no need to be a superman.
There is no need to become gods and goddesses
It is so fulfilling just to be an ordinary human being.
I declare to you:
There is nothing above human consciousness.
Everything that is possible is within you.
You are not to become special, superior.
You have to become absolutely simple, ordinary just nobodies.
One day I had a small meeting with Sheela anc the group that works with her, and Hasya, John anc
their group. They were somehow feeling that they were not joining together and somehow the gap
was increasing. I had called a meeting of all; I also called Hanya. Hanya is neither of this group
nor of that. She is a simple woman, and I had especially called her t see the reaction of a simple
nobody.
What I expected happened: she freaked out. She could not understand. What politics? Why should
these people be quarreling or arguing or creating. gap? They are both working for me – all are
From Personality to Individuality 287 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
working for me. But I wanted to see the reaction of someone who has no political mind, no kind of
division, who is simply in love with what I am doing; someone who has no ambitions, has no ideas
to make into a reality She freaked out – that was expected.
Sheela told me that Hanya is very much disturbed and wants to leave. I said there is nothing to be
worried about; I knew that’s what was going to hap pen. I was expecting it, that she would not be
able to understand. Sheela and her group understood, Hasya and her group understood, and the
gap has been dropped. The only person who was at a loss was Hanya.
I would like you all to be like Hanya – so simple, so innocent, that you cannot even understand what
politics is, why people go on fighting, quarreling. For what? It is such a small life – we cannot be
certain even of tomorrow – and we are wasting it for some great ideals in the future; and we start
fighting about those ideals.
There was a case in an Indian court: two friends were brought into the court. The whole court knew
they were great friends but suddenly they started beating each other. The police came; the friends
were caught and taken to the court. The police asked, ”Why are you fighting?” One said to the other,
”You say it,” and the other said, ”You say it” – and both felt embarrassed.
The judge said, ”This is enough. You simply have to answer: What was the reason? Why were you
fighting? Why were you creating a nuisance in the village? And you were so angry and violent you
could have killed. You both have to say what the reason was.”
They both said, ”We feel very embarrassed to say it, but now if you force us, we have to.” One said,
”I was just telling my friend – we were both sitting by the side of the riverbank, on the sand – I was
saying to my friend that I was going to purchase a buffalo, and he said,’Nothing doing. You are not
going to purchase a buffalo, I won’t allow it.’
”I said,’This is something,”’ the man said. ”’Who are you to prevent me? I am purchasing the buffalo
with my own money; I am not asking you to give me money. Who are you to decide it?’
”Then my friend said, ‘I have told you this is not going to happen just because by the side of your
field is my farm. If your buffalo enters my farm, I am telling you, I will kill the buffalo. I don’t want any
nuisance around my farm.’
”I said,’You will kill my buffalo? Let us see.’ My friend drew his farm on the sand with his finger and
said,’This is my farm; now I will see. Bring your buffalo in’ – so with my finger I drew my buffalo
coming....”
And that was the point when they started beating each other; and that’s why they were feeling
embarrassed, because there was no buffalo, no field, and they were almost on the verge of killing
each other!
The whole politics of the world is like that. Why are people fighting in the name of religion, in the
name of a political ideology: socialism, communism, democracy, fascism? – just words, just fingers
drawing lines on the sand. What are your maps but lines drawn by fingers on the sand? If I say I am
coming into your land without a passport, without a visa, immediately your whole army and national
guard are ready to kill me. Just on the map: I cannot even say it – it is a criminal act.
From Personality to Individuality 288 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
Strange: the earth has no boundaries, but you cannot get into Russia, you cannot get into America.
Although I have been here for four years, I am not here. Rajneeshpuram has been here for four
years; there are seven thousand people living here – enjoying, dancing, doing all kinds of things that
should be done, and should not be done. But for the government there is no such thing. You don’t
exist!
Your city is really unique in the whole history of humanity. There have been cities and there have
been no cities; but an illegal city? – never heard before. It is a city, but illegal. It is not recognized
that you are. Ignored, you don’t exist.
I am here, and I am going to be here. There is no way to send me back... because I have my own
arrangements. I persuaded the Indian government to reject me, so where are you going to send
me? You can only deport me to India. India I persuaded beforehand; they are not going to accept
me at all. Now I am stuck here in the Big Muddy Ranch. There is no way, no crane to get me out.
But these fools are in power. They have removed from Wasco County city project even the name
of Rajneeshpuram. In the Wasco County files Rajneeshpuram does not exist. If seven thousand
people suddenly disappear, the Oregon government will not be able even to say that they have
disappeared, because then they will have first to accept that we were here – and we are not here!
But in a way it is perfectly good. If we are not in Oregon, then of course we are not in America. This
seems to be the new birth of a new nation. Soon we will have to make our own constitution and
declare our independence. What else to do? And we are big enough to be a nation. Just the other
day Sheela showed me the list of all the nations who accept and respect patents made in America.
Vatican City is also one of the countries listed, and Vatican City is only eight square miles. We are
too big – we are almost a continent compared to Vatican City. We can do it.
These lines are just drawn on the sand. The wind comes and all the lines are erased. And the wind
of the new man is going to erase all these lines.
The new man will be simply man – not American, not Russian, not Indian; neither Hindu, nor
Mohammedan, nor Christian; neither democrat nor republican, nor liberal, nor independent. All
these nonsense words will not exist for the new man.
The new man will be simply man.
And I repeat again:
I don’t accept anything higher than man.
I am talking about the ordinary, simple man.
There is nothing higher than that.
The idea of getting higher than that arises out of inferiority. I would like you to be just like Hanya:
ordinary, no politics. But I will tell Hanya there is no need to go anywhere. This is your place, and
you are the type of person I want all my sannyasins to be.
From Personality to Individuality 289 Osho
CHAPTER 16. SUPERMAN: THE FANTASY FOR THE INFERIOR
Superman is just rubbish.
The new man is the birth, for the first time, of man without any ideology, without any ideals – just the
way Adam and Eve entered the world.
Was Adam communist, fascist, socialist?
Was he Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian?
Was he superior or inferior?
He was simply what he was:
There was no question of superiority or inferiority.
I want you to be again Adam and Eve, to go back your authentic nature, to your original face.
From Personality to Individuality 290 Osho
CHAPTER 17
Holy Scriptures: wholly Bullshit
15 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MADNESS AND ENLIGHTENMENT?
THERE is a great difference and also a great similarity. The similarity has to be understood first,
because without understanding it, it will be difficult to understand the difference.
Both are beyond the mind – madness and enlightenment.
Madness is below the mind.
Enlightenment is above the mind.
But both are out of the mind.
Hence, you have the expression for a madman ”out of his mind.” The same expression can be used
for the enlightened person; he is also out of his mind.
Mind functions logically, rationally, intellectually. Neither madness nor enlightenment function
intellectually. They are similar: madness has fallen below reason, and enlightenment has gone
above reason, but both are irrational; hence, sometimes in the East a madman is misunderstood as
being an enlightened man. These similarities are there.
291
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
And in the West, once in a while – it is not an everyday phenomenon, but once in a while – an
enlightened person has been understood as being mad, because the West understands only one
thing: if you are out of your mind, you are mad. It has no category for above the mind; it has only
one category – below the mind.
In the East the misunderstanding happens because for centuries the East has known people who
are out of their mind and at the same time above the mind; hence, they are similar to madmen. For
the Eastern masses it creates a confusion, it creates a problem. They have decided it is better to
misunderstand a madman as being an enlightened man than to misunderstand an enlightened man
as being a madman – because what are you losing by misunderstanding a madman as being an
enlightened man? You are not losing anything. But by misunderstanding an enlightened man as
being a madman you are certainly losing a tremendous opportunity. But the misunderstanding is
possible because of the similarities.
I have come across a few madmen who were thought to be enlightened. One man was just thirty
or thirty-five miles away from Jabalpur. Nobody knew his name – he was very old. He used to
keep a bell in his hand and – nobody knows for what reasons – sometimes he would ring the bell,
sometimes he would not ring the bell. Because of the bell he was called Tuntunpal Baba: the bell
made the sound tuntun, and nobody knew his real name.
He never talked intelligibly; he uttered sounds but not words. He remained sitting in one place and
never moved from that place. In his village people had known him for sixty years. There were old
people who knew that when they were very young this man had come, and since that time he had
been sitting on a cot in the porch of the house of the landlord, the richest man in the village. He had
not moved from the cot, and for sixty years all that they had heard from him was his bell.
I went many times to see him, at different times, to figure him out. He used to drink tea continually;
that was almost his only food. He would drink half the cup and then offer the other half to anybody
who was there to see him. This was thought to be prasad, a gift, and people enjoyed this gift because
it was very rare. Hundreds of people were seeing him every day; only to a few people would he offer
the cup. But always first he would drink from the cup itself, then the remaining he would offer. But
people thought he was enlightened, so something that he had tasted was blessed.
The more I watched the man, the more I was convinced that he was simply mad; and not totally mad
either, because his madness had a certain consistency. It was not without any purpose that he was
ringing his bell; it was always to attract the attention of people. Slowly people started understanding
that he needed something, perhaps a cup of tea – that was the most needed thing – so immediately
they would bring tea.
Those who had been serving him for years had even started understanding the language of his bell:
how many times he rings when he wants tea; how many times he rings when he wants the crowd to
leave him alone, how many times when he wants people to be allowed to see him, how many times
when he wants to go to sleep. It was a language, a code language, that his disciples who lived with
him knew.
Now this man was not totally mad, although certainly a little insane. And as I watched him I found
that he was half-paralyzed too, because when I saw him sipping the tea it was always from one side
From Personality to Individuality 292 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
of his mouth; the other side never moved. One day, when he was alone, I took his bell from his hand
and put it in his other hand. The bell fell, because the other hand was paralyzed. Now it was clear
why he was not moving from the cot; it was nothing to do with any austerity.
People thought that it was some ascetic practice; perhaps he had taken a vow that he would remain
sitting in the same posture for so many years, or his whole life. But it was simply that he was
paralyzed. In fact, that seems to be the clear reason why he was not able to utter intelligible sounds:
half of his mouth was paralyzed. With half of your mouth you can make sounds, but to make words
is very difficult, almost impossible. You may try but the other will only hear some unintelligible
gibberish.
But gibberish has been thought to be one of the methods used by enlightened people. You will be
surprised to know that the word, the English word, gibberish, is not English, it is Arabic; and it comes
from an enlightened man, Jabbar. Jabbar was certainly an enlightened man, but he spoke so fast
that his words would run over each other. It was impossible to make any sense out of what he said
because there were no full stops, no commas, no indication of where the sentence began and where
it ended. Jabbar simply did not believe in all these mannerisms.
It is because of Jabbar that people started calling his language gibberish, but by and by the word
gibberish became completely disassociated from Jabbar. Nobody would think that the English word
gibberish is from a Sufi word and has come from a man who was enlightened. Gibberish, in the
East, is thought to be a way of enlightened people. They are saying to you: Nothing can be said
through words. You will have to understand something besides the words.
But mad people also do the same. And this man Tuntunpal Baba was simply paralyzed, retarded;
you could see it from his face. As I went again and again to him and he became more and more
familiar to me, and I became familiar to him, we started some kind of communication. I started using
his bell, and I made a few code signals with the bell.
I tried writing, asking him, ”What is your name?” and I would ring the bell two times. I knew that
he could read because he looked at the slate on which I had written, ”What is your name?” and his
eyes had the flash showing that he could read. I made the signal three times and wrote on the slate:
”I understand that you can read.” He looked at it and smiled with half his face. I put the pen in his
hand and made the sign of ringing the bell two times, and he wrote his name, Tuntunpal Baba.
I said, ”This is not right – you can’t deceive me that you are enlightened. You have deceived
thousands of people for sixty years, but this is not good; you have not gained anything out of it.
Those poor people from the villages have lived with the belief that they are under the guidance,
under the blessings, of an enlightened man. This is criminal. And on the other hand you could have
been cured, because there is not much of a problem; paralysis can be cured.”
I could see the flash in his eyes that he understood that he had made a mistake. If paralysis could be
cured.... It was because of paralysis that perhaps half of his brain also had gone numb and created
the madness. He wrote on the slate: ”Is it possible that I can be cured?”
I said, ”Perhaps now it is too late. For sixty years you have been paralyzed, your brain has been
numb for sixty years; I don’t think that after sixty years of paralysis the brain cells can be alive, can
From Personality to Individuality 293 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
function again. And now, what is the point? You must be nearabout ninety, ninety-five, or a hundred:
what is the point now? Now it is better you remain enlightened – at least people are happy. And
you are not feeling in an inferior state – that you are paralyzed, that you cannot speak, that half your
brain is not functioning.”
So I said to him, ”I am not going to say anything to anybody. I will keep your secret. You remain
enlightened; it is doing good both to you and to people. People need somebody: they are in constant
search to follow somebody. At least you cannot indoctrinate them, you cannot give rubbish to their
minds. In a way you are innocent. You have not done anything. You have simply offered gifts,
whatsoever you had.
”You don’t have anything other than that tea” that was all that he was using, that was all his food.
”And you are feeling in good spirits. Thousands of people gather, and on particular festival days the
village becomes a big city. People are enjoying, you are enjoying – I am not going to disturb the
game. I simply wanted to find out if it is possible that something which is not enlightenment can be
misunderstood as being enlightenment. That is proved by you. And I am grateful to you that you
were sincere with me; you did not hide anything.”
A tear came into one of his eyes – the other eye was paralyzed – a tear of thankfulness. I continued
to go to see him once in a while; it was not far away. Whenever I had time, once in a while, I would
go; and he started loving me. Perhaps I was the only person who has sat on his cot. With one of his
hands he would pull me up and make me sit by his side on his cot.
People would touch my feet also, and I would say, ”You are already mistaken; now you are again
making a mistake. At least don’t commit this mistake.” But they never understood me when I said,
”You are already mistaken. At least don’t commit the same mistake again.”
A madman sometimes can have glimpses which the rational man cannot have because the madman
has stepped out of the mechanism of mind; of course on the wrong side, from the back door, but still
he is out of the mind. Even from the back door he can have some glimpses which are not available
to the people who never come out of the house. Certainly he is not so fortunate as to have come
from the front door: that needs tremendous effort.
Madness is a disease. It happens to you – you don’t have to make an effort to be mad. It is a
sickness and it is curable. Enlightenment happens through tremendous awareness and arduous
effort.
Enlightenment is the supreme health.
You should understand the word health carefully. It is not only physiologically meaningful. Of course
physiologically it is meaningful, but not only physiologically; it has a far higher meaning too. Health
means healing the wounds. It comes from the root which means healing. If your physiology needs
some healing then medicine is offered. If your spirituality needs some healing, then meditation is
offered. Strangely, health comes from the same root from which comes the word wholeness.
Health means the body is whole, nothing is missing. And from wholeness comes the word holy: the
spirit is whole, nothing is missing. Similarly, the word medicine and the word meditation come from
From Personality to Individuality 294 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
the same root – that which cures. Medicine cures wounds in your physiology, and meditation cures
wounds in your spiritual existence, in your ultimate being.
The madman, if in the hands of enlightened people, can achieve enlightenment faster than your
so-called sane people. In the East there has been a longstanding tradition... in this century one
man revived it again – his name was Meher Baba. He went all over India seeking and searching for
mad people. In all the madhouses, anywhere that he heard there was a madman, he would go. He
traveled all over India his whole life, searching for mad people.
His disciples asked him, ”Why are you wasting your time with mad people when sane people are
available to work upon, and they want your time?”
Meher Baba said, ”You don’t understand. To bring a sane person out of his sanity is very difficult.
But to bring out a madman is very easy because in a way he is already out, but from the back door.
He has tasted something of the outside; we have only to show him the right door and say, ”Please
don’t go out from the wrong door, go from the right door. Being out is perfectly right, but choose the
right door.” And Meher Baba turned many mad people into enlightened people.
It is a strange world. Here, really great things are never rewarded. Nobody has bothered about
Meher Baba. Mother Teresa will get a Nobel prize because she looks after poor orphan children,
and nobody thought of giving a Nobel prize to Meher Baba who really did a miraculous job – and he
was the on]y man, after centuries.
Sufis call the madman masta; masta means intoxicated. The madman and the enlightened man
both have to pass through a certain stage, that is, getting out of reason, out of their mind. They have
to cross the same boundary: by the wrong door or right door, they both cross the same boundary,
and while they are crossing the boundary they both become mastas – intoxicated.
But the enlightened person soon regains his balance because he has made the effort to get out of
the mind; he is prepared to get out of the mind, he is ready to get out of the mind. The madman has
got out of his mind unprepared. He was not ready. He has simply fallen out of his mind – it is an
accident. Enlightenment is never an accident.
But both the madman and the enlightened man pass through a certain state called masta, the
intoxicated, where they both behave similarly; hence, the necessity of a Master has been absolutely
accepted. When one gets into the state of masta, then only a Master can take one out of that
intoxicated state – because that intoxicated state itself is immensely beautiful.
You must have seen mad people very happy. You can’t find a madman unhappy. That does not
happen at all; a madman and suffering, they don’t coexist. A madman is always enjoying. Perhaps
he has nothing to enjoy, but he is enjoying. It does not matter whether he has something to enjoy
or not, but he is always happy. To be unhappy you need reason, thinking, worrying. Now he is
incapable of worrying and thinking. He cannot be bothered with tomorrow; he has no tomorrow and
he has no memories of yesterday. The madman also exists herenow – that is the similarity. But he
is not aware that he is herenow – that is the difference.
The enlightened man also is always blissful. I am using a different word just so you don’t get
confused. The madman is always happy. But there is a possibility he can be cured; then he will
From Personality to Individuality 295 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
become unhappy, then he will start worrying. He will worry more than you because he will see that
he had gone mad: now he will worry about madness. When he was mad he had no worry at all, he
could not care less. Now he will worry that he had gone mad and he will worry that tomorrow it can
happen again because it has happened.
I had one friend who was a doctor. His father was a very miserly person, rich but very miserly, and
he had a very tight hold on the family. He was a politician; his name was Shri Nath Batt. He was
a Gujarati, and he had a very beautiful jeweler’s shop. He was the president of the local Indian
National Congress, the party that was fighting for India’s freedom against the British Raj. His son,
whose name was Shyam, and I were friends from our very childhood. I hated Shyam’s father more
than Shyam hated him, because he was such a miser Of course his son could not do anything about
it but I said, ”Don’t be worried; I will do something about it” – and I did.
It was an everyday phenomenon during the British Raj that there were continual processions against
the government, strikes against government – and Shri Nath Batt was the leader. There were the
two slogans. One slogan was: Bharatmata zindabad – ”Long live Mother India.” Zindabad means
long live. And: British Raj murdabad, means ”British Raj die quickly, as soon as possible.”
What I did... I would start the slogan, ”British Raj,” and people would repeat ”Murdabad” – ”die soon.”
Three or four times I would say, ”British Raj,” and the fifth time I would say, ”Shri Nath Batt.” Because
people were continuously saying ”Murdabad,” they would say ”Murdabad.”
Shri Nath Batt called me to his home and he said, ”You are tricky; you always used my name after
’British Raj,’ never after ’Bharatmata.’ If you had used my name after ’Bharatmata’ they would have
said ’Zindabad’ long live.’ But you are mischievous.”
I said, ”No, I was not doing it knowingly.”
He said, ”Next time....”
I said, ”One thing you have to promise: you have to drop your miserliness towards my friend, your
boy, Shyam. If you promise me that then your name will come after ’Bharatmata,’ I promise you
that; otherwise your name will always come exactly in the middle of ’British Raj.’ Five times it will
be,’British Raj,’ and then you; then again five times,’British Raj,’ so people get mixed up.” And I was
always on the mike.
So he said, ”Okay, it is a pact: I will not be miserly.” But he was miserly – it was very difficult for
him not to be. Shyam became a doctor and I became a professor. Once Shyam became a doctor
his father wouldn’t allow him to join medical services. Shyam wanted to join medical services; he
wanted to get away somehow from his father and his family, but his father wouldn’t let him go.
Shri Nath Batt opened a shop for Shyam just by his shop so he could keep an eye on Shyam. He
put a compounder of his choice, who was his man, and a nurse of his choice, in that shop. They
had to keep an eye out to see that no money went anywhere, and every evening all the money that
Doctor Shyam had earned went to Shri Nath Batt.
Shyam got married, and one day his wife sent a telegram that she was very sick, and that it would be
helpful if Shyam came because he understood her more than any other doctor, although the doctors
were doing their best.
From Personality to Individuality 296 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
She was at her father’s place because she was pregnant. In India it is a tradition that the first
child is born at the house of the wife’s parents, because your mother will take more care than your
mother-in-law, of course. A mother-in-law is only a mother-in-law. There is no mother – it is only
law. So this is traditional, for at least the first child. By the second child the woman will be capable
of understanding many things on her own, but the first child... she is completely unaware about the
pain and the trouble.
So Doctor Shyam told his father, ”This telegram has come and my wife is sick.” Now, from my village,
Nagpur is not very far away. In those days it was two rupees for a one-way ticket, and at the most it
was a ten-hour journey. So two rupees to go and two rupees to come back meant four rupees; and
perhaps his wife was seriously sick so Shyam would spend something there. It meant nearabout
fifty rupees would be gone – and fifty rupees would give Shri Nath Batt a heart attack.
Shri Nath Batt simply said, ”In Nagpur there are better doctors than you” – Nagpur was the capital,
in those days, of central India. ”And there is a medical college with every kind of facility. So what
are you going to do there? You have been a student in Nagpur, your professors are there: send a
telegram to any one of your famous professors, to some gynecologist, and he will take care of her
”There is no need to go, and I am not going to spend money unnecessarily. Fifty rupees, and who
knows? – there you may spend more. And how many days will you be away? The fifty or sixty
rupees that you earn here every day also has to be taken into account. If you are there for one week
causing me such a loss – and for no reason at all, because it is simple: I will send a telegram. Just
give me the name of your professor in the medical college.”
But Shyam was very much attached to his wife – he escaped. He tried to travel without a ticket, and
because he was without a ticket he was nervous. For the first time in his life he was traveling without
a ticket – and he, a doctor, a well-educated person. If he were caught it would be really shameful.
He was so worried about his wife, about his father – what would happen the next morning when he
found that Shyam had escaped – about the ticket....
He was standing just by the door because it was so crowded – in India, trains are very crowded.
Particularly in those days they were even more crowded; now there are more trains. So he was just
standing there, holding onto the bars on the door as a handle, with such worry in his mind about
whether he would be able to see his wife or not – because she was not the type of woman who,
knowing his father, would call him unless it were absolutely necessary.
While Shyam was in this tension and worry and the crowd, somebody pushed him, and he fell out
of the train. Physically he was not harmed, but psychologically he went out of his mind accidentally.
This is what I mean by falling out of the mind. Suddenly he crossed over the line of the mind. With
too much worry, tension, fear, nervousness, the mind was as if in a cyclone. And then this shock of
falling from the fastest – moving train.... He simply slipped out of his mind.
He was brought home. People recognized that he was a doctor and by chance I happened to be
in the village. I heard about the accident and I went to see him: he could not even recognize me,
and he had forgotten his language. There was no harm to the body at all – small bruises here and
there, nothing to be worried about – but he just looked vacant, empty. That’s the way the enlightened
person looks. If you look in his eyes they are empty, vacant. You may get afraid.
From Personality to Individuality 297 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
Shyam was in such a shock, not knowing what had happened – but not worried, smiling. I had not
seen him smiling for years, because of his father; nobody could smile in his house. There were five
sons, five daughters-in-law and many grandchildren, but Shri Nath Batt was such a Tamerlane that it
was impossible for anybody to smile, because even a smile means an unnecessary waste. Preserve
everything!
It was Sigmund Freud’s insight that the people who suffer from constipation are miserly people. They
preserve everything, they can’t allow anything to go out. Naturally, how could Shri Nath Batt allow
anybody to smile? But now he could not do anything: Shyam was out of his mind. He laughed, he
smiled – I had never seen him so happy.
He remained mad, and for the first three years he really enjoyed it because no patients came to him
anymore. Who would go to a madman? He would sit in his dispensary every day absolutely ready
with his stethoscope and bag, and nobody would come except me, once in a while. He wouldn’t
recognize me, but it was a joy to be with him, just to laugh and enjoy. And he would try his doctoring
on me.
I said, ”Okay, you can, because you cannot find anybody; just no injections, because if your father
comes to know that you are giving injections free, then he will create trouble for me. You can do a
check, and you can do any kind of work that you want to do – I can lie down.” I would lie down and
he would take a cardiogram and all that, but he wouldn’t recognize me. I would say, ”Shyam...?” and
he would listen as if I were calling somebody else; he had forgotten his own name too. Those three
years were really of great happiness.
His wife was in a terrible mess, but I told her, ”One thing you should see: with Shri Nath Batt alive
there was no chance to be happy. But this man, by accident, by God’s grace, has slipped out of his
mind. Don’t feel sorry for him. Can’t you see? Yes, he is mad, but what is wrong with it? – he is
happy. He was sane but unhappy and miserable. Now he goes into the market and purchases the
best clothes possible because he does not have to pay – Shri Nath Batt will have to pay!”
His father used to tell me, ”You are spoiling him. First, he is mad; then you take him to the market,
and people come to me with their bills; I have to pay. Please leave him.”
I said, ”This is not possible. Everybody has left him; now I am the only person. And I am immensely
happy that he became mad because in this house you are all mad except him; you are all in misery.
He is happy, so what is wrong with being mad? And if he had not gone out of his mind by accident
then I would have tried my way, but he had to go out of his mind. And now that he has slipped out,
let him enjoy it But remember, once he gets back into his mind I am going to help him to get out
again – of course from the right door.”
But that Shri Nath Batt was really a dangerous miser. He was afraid that I could do something, and
that perhaps my association was encouraging Shyam to remain mad, because I used to take him to
the hotels, to the restaurants, and I told him, ”You enjoy yourself Don’t be worried about money –
whatsoever you want is yours.”
And he said, ”Is it so?”
I said, ”Just enjoy!”
From Personality to Individuality 298 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
He wouldn’t enjoy himself alone; he would ask anybody, say to any stranger, ”Come on!” The whole
town was happy, the shopkeepers were happy, but Shri Nath Batt was really enraged. After three
years he forced Shyam into a mental home just so that I could not.... And he made it a point to the
authorities in the madhouse that I should not be allowed in. My name and my photo he gave to the
authorities saying, ”This man should not be allowed to meet my son. Anybody else is allowed, but
this photo you have to remember.”
When I went to see him, the officer showed me the photo and the statement that the father had
given. He said, ”I am sorry, I cannot help if his father does not want you to see him. He has given us
a written statement, and this photo so that we recognize you and don’t allow you in. Otherwise you
may come in some other name.”
I told him the whole story. I said, ”First listen to — the story, and if you are a man at all you should
throw t this letter and this photograph. What proof has he got that he has given you a letter? And
the reason why he does not want me to see his son is that he would prefer him to remain mad rather
than become sane and start understanding me and what I want him to do.” I told him the whole story.
The man could not believe that Shyam’s father could be so cruel. He didn’t say anything; he simply
tore up the photograph and the letter and threw them in the bin, in the wastepaper basket, and told
me, ”Come in – you are always welcome.” So I saw Shyam: he was so happy there, in the madhouse
with almost three hundred mad people. He was in rags, unclean – perhaps he had not taken a bath
for a few days, he was stinking – but immensely happy. He was not able to recognize me.
Then I moved from Jabalpur. Shyam is still in a madhouse, and perhaps his whole life he will be
in a madhouse, but he is in a better position than any sane man. I saw those three hundred mad
people – many times I went to see him – they were all happy. One thing is sure: a madman is never
in anguish. Why should he be? – he has no problems.
Just see the point: even if you fall below the mind you are happy. It is the mind that is causing you
all kinds of misery, suffering, jealousies, hatred, anger, violence, greed; and they all go on making
you more and more a pain to yourself You start hurting all over, everybody is hurting all over. Even
to fall below the mind – which is falling below humanity, because that is the only difference between
you and the animals.... A madman is really back in the world of animals. He has dropped out of
evolution. He has gone back; he has turned his back on Charles Darwin. He has said, ”Goodbye.
Goodbye to your evolution!” He has simply fallen back to a subhuman level.
Animals are not happy, but they are not unhappy. Have you seen any animal unhappy? Yes, you
will not see them happy – they cannot be happy because they don’t know what unhappiness is. But
when a man falls from the human level to the subhuman level, he becomes happy because he knows
what unhappiness is. So he is not exactly the same animal that he was before he became man. He
is a totally different kind of animal; a happy animal. There is no happy buffalo, no happy donkey,
no happy monkey, no happy Yankee. Animals are not happy because they don’t know unhappiness.
But a madman is just happy for no reason at all.
That gives tremendous proof of what I have been teaching you, that if you can get out of the mind –
but not by an accident, not by a shock – you will be blissful.
From Personality to Individuality 299 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
It is possible, more than possible – perhaps unfortunately it is going to happen – that in communist
countries they will start giving people electric shocks to bring their suffering down to the subhuman
level; then they will be happy. And the shock will be given in a certain scientific way so that they will
not be mad either. They will be functionally sane, like a computer – but just functionally sane, like a
mechanism with no soul. They cannot rebel. They will be very happy, and if they are happy why will
they rebel? There will be no question of revolution; they will exist like robots.
There are many experiments going on in Russia and in China to make it possible that a man remains
reasonable enough to be able to function in society, in the office, and yet is free of all worry, of all
tension, all problems: he is happy. This will be the greatest crime against humanity; but there are
scientists who are working on those lines. Even in America the famous psychologist, Delgado, is
doing the same thing in a different way; and he has succeeded, he has shown his experiments to
be absolutely successful.
He puts electrodes into your head.... One of the most strange things about your skull is that inside
it there is no sensitivity. Even if a stone is put inside your skull and the skull is closed, you will not
feel the stone because there is no sensitivity. The inside of the skull is absolutely insensitive, for a
certain reason: it has the most precious instrument in your body. And the brain is such a complicated
mechanism, with ten billion cells working, that if your skull were sensitive you would not be able to
live, there would be so much noise coming inside your head. And if something goes wrong – some
cell dies, some part becomes unfunctioning – you would become aware of all these things, which
would drive you nuts.
And it is such a complex mechanism that many things can go wrong. Even if nothing is wrong,
already half of your brain is not functioning anyway. Fifty percent of your brain is absolutely in a
state of paralysis. perhaps that is the part of the mind that starts functioning when you become
enlightened. The enlightened man can use his mind more efficiently than the greatest intellectual
can, for the simple reason that he is outside the mind and has an overall view; and perhaps the half of
the brain that is not functioning in normal human beings starts functioning when your consciousness
goes beyond your normal reason, as you transcend your rationality. The other part functions only
with your transcendence.
This is the experience of all those who have become enlightened. And when I say this, I say it on
my own authority. I would not believe it if Buddha ad said it: perhaps he was Lying, perhaps he was
misguided; perhaps he was not Lying but was not right.?perhaps there was no intention to lie; but
he could be confused, he could make a mistake. But I know t from my own experience, because it is
such a tremendous change that you cannot miss it. It is almost Is if half of your body was paralyzed,
then one day suddenly you feel you are no more paralyzed; both your sides are functioning. Can
you miss it? If a person who has been paralyzed suddenly finds he is not paralyzed, can he miss it?
There is no possibility of missing it.
I know perfectly well the moment before enlightenment happened to me, and the moment after, with
absolute certainty, knew that something within my mind – which I was not even aware existed – had
stirred and had started functioning. Since then there has been no problem for me. Since then I have
existed without a problem, without a worry, without any tension.
All these qualities come from the other part of the mind which is not functioning. And when the
whole mind functions and you are out of it, you are the master. The mind is the best servant you can
From Personality to Individuality 300 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
find, and the worst master you can find. But ordinarily the mind is the master – and that too, only
half of it. The master... and half paralyzed! When you become the master, the mind is the servant
and fully healthy, fully recovered.
Delgado put small electrodes, very small electrodes, into the head. In the mind there are seven
hundred centers – exactly the same number as acupuncture had discovered five thousand years ago
in China. Acupuncture has discovered seven hundred centers on the body; those seven hundred
centers on the body are connected with the seven hundred centers in the mind. So it looks strange
– acupuncture’s way of treating a patient is very strange.
You have a headache and they may push their needles into your knee. You will say, ”What are you
doing? I have a headache and you are bothering about my knee.” They will say, ”Don’t interfere; we
know what we are doing.”
They have found, over these five thousand years, which center in the body is connected with a
corresponding center in the head. And strangely enough, by pushing a needle into your knee or
your thigh, your headache disappears. There is a current of electricity – now it is called scientifically
bio-electricity – which is a very mild current of electricity but still is electricity. And sometimes very
subtle things work miracles.
You have so much electricity always running in your body that you can put a five watt bulb in your
hand and it can light up. It ordinarily does not happen, otherwise you would start giving shocks to
people. But once it happened that a woman, somehow a freak of nature, started giving shocks
to people. First her husband got shocked; he escaped from the house, screaming. Then the
neighbors tried, but just to shake hands was enough. Then doctors were called in, and it was
found that somehow her body electricity, which moves in a circle, had freaked out; somewhere her
inner mechanism had gone wrong.
And actually it was tried: a five watt bulb was put in that woman’s hand – and it lit up! Now, it is a
scientifically established fact that subtle currents of electricity are continuously moving in the body,
just like the blood. Each center is connected with other centers in the body. The real thing happens
always inside the skull, but it immediately reaches the body.
In the second world war, one man’s leg was cut off – it was so damaged that there was no other
way, and it was so terrible a pain that the man would regain consciousness, but the moment he felt
the pain he would become unconscious again; it was unbearable. Consciousness could not exist
with the pain; he could bear that pain only in unconsciousness. There was no need to give him any
drugs, just the pain was enough to force him to go into unconsciousness. So they had to cut off his
leg. But the strange thing was that when he became conscious again he was still complaining about
the pain in the leg. He was covered with a blanket so he had no idea that the leg had been removed.
The doctors said, ”It is impossible.”
He said, ”I am suffering, and you say ’impossible’?” Most of the pain was concentrated in his toe: he
said, ”My toe is hurting so much.”
The doctor said, ”Just look,” and he uncovered his body: the leg was gone, the toe was gone. They
brought his leg from the lab and said, ”This is your toe and this is your leg. Now how can your toe
give you pain? You are just hallucinating, imagining.”
From Personality to Individuality 301 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
The man said, ”I can see you have cut off my leg. I can see the leg, and that it is my leg – I know it
is, I realize it, I recognize it – and that is the toe that is hurting. But it is hurting here.”
This was the first case to give the indication that the toe is connected to some brain center. The
brain center was still vibrating in the same way it was vibrating while the leg was still connected. You
have disconnected the leg but the center connected with the leg is still vibrating in the same way.
That started great research work on how to get to the centers of the head – because perhaps the leg
could have been saved if they had stopped the vibration of the particular center in the head. Then
even if the toe were damaged, the man would not have felt any pain, because every experience
happens in the head although it may be coming from any part of the body.
This research finally ended up in Delgado’s hands, and he managed to find all seven hundred
centers in the mind. Now, he puts an electrode in a particular center in the mind – for example,
your happiness center – and he has a remote control with himself He just puts an electrode there
and whenever he wants you to be happy he just pushes a button – it is a remote control, no wire
is connected to you so you cannot see anything – and you start laughing, enjoying, giggling as if
somebody is tickling you. You don’t see anybody – what is happening? And the man may be miles
away but he can still control you.
Delgado showed his experiment first in Spain with a bull. He had put an electrode into the bull’s
head and he went into the field. Spaniards are strange people. They enjoy a bullfight just as the
Americans enjoy football. Strange people I simply wonder.... There are a few idiots running with a
ball, a few idiots returning the ball, and millions of idiots jumping up and down and fighting! It seems
to be that Charles Darwin is not right: man has not evolved, he is still a monkey. Now, a man fighting
a bull, putting a man in danger of death....
Delgado proved that the bull can be controlled; there is no problem. The strongest bull was given to
him and he put an electrode inside it. He waved the red flag, and the bull came rushing – just like
J. Krishnamurti seeing orange. Jiddu Krishnamurti – that is his full name; Jiddu Krishnamurti. ”J.
Krishnamurti” saves him from some trouble because ”Jiddu Krishnamurti.... jiddu means stubborn;
he is stubborn.
The bull came rushing towards Delgado who was standing there waving a red flag. When he was
just one foot away and ready to push his horns into Delgado, Delgado pushed a button of the remote
control in his pocket and the bull stopped so suddenly that the millions of people who were watching
it could not believe it: what happened to the bull? He just stopped, frozen, as if he were practicing
George Gurdjieff’s ”Stop” exercise. He remained like a statue, he would not move.
Delgado said, ”We can control every man...” and there is a possibility, sooner or later, that totalitarian
governments are going to do it. Perhaps they have already started, because in Russia you cannot
give birth to a child in your home – that is illegal – every child has to be born in a government
hospital.
Now, when the child is just born is the best time to put an electrode into his skull. The skull is very
soft and the centers are very alive; if they grow with the electrode there, the electrode will become
almost part of the brain. The child will never suspect throughout his whole life that everything that
he is doing is manipulated from the switchboard in the central office of the communist party.
From Personality to Individuality 302 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
It can make you happy, it can make you unhappy; it can make you rebellious, it can make you
obedient. Obviously, they don’t want any disobedience; they don’t want any revolution, any rebellion,
any doubt. Naturally, only those buttons will be used which make you a slave – but a very happy
slave. They have reduced you to a robot.
The madman falls out of the mind, but he is better than a robot because the robot is controlled from
the outside; somebody else has the remote controls. The controls can be given to you too; that too
is a possibility. You can be given a small switchboard: if you are feeling angry and you don’t want to
feel angry, you just push the anti-anger button and you are no longer angry.
Now, what is the need of Buddha teaching forty years, and people still get angry, and Jesus teaching
people to be humble – and nobody is humble? But with a Delgado switchboard things are very
simple. You can have your own switchboard. You can push the button and have any kind of
enjoyment that you want, any kind of hallucination, any kind of dream that you want.
I doubt that these remote controls will be given to people; they will be in the hands of the government.
To me, this is more dangerous than nuclear weapons – which can kill you, but at least you will die as
a human being, with dignity. But this is worse than death – that from the White House they make you
happy. On Christmas day, a slightly bigger dose, and the whole country goes bananas! Everybody
will think this must be the work of jesus or his father or the Holy Ghost.
A madman is far better – at least nobody is in control of him. But he also is not in control of himself
The enlightened man is out of his mind but he has full control of his mind. And he does not need
a switchboard – just his awareness is enough. If you observe anything minutely, you will have a
little experience of the enlightened man – not the full experience but a little taste, just a tongue-tip
taste. If you observe your anger minutely, anger disappears. You are feeling a sexual urge: watch it
closely, and soon it disappears.
If just by your watching, things evaporate, what to say about the man who is continually above the
mind, simply aware of the whole mind? Then all those ugly things that you would like to drop simply
evaporate. And remember, they all have energy. Anger is energy. When anger evaporates, the
energy which is left behind turns into compassion. It is the same energy. Through observation the
anger has left – that was the mode, the form surrounding the energy – but the energy remains. Now,
the energy of anger, without anger, is compassion. When sex disappears the tremendous energy of
love is left behind. Each ugly thing in your mind, disappearing, leaves a great treasure behind.
The enlightened man has no need to drop anything and has no need to practice anything. All that
is wrong drops of its own accord because it cannot stand up to his awareness, and all that is good
evolves of its own accord because awareness is nourishment for it.
The madman can be helped very easily because he has tasted something out of the mind, but he
needs to be shown the right door.
In a better world our madhouses will not only be trying to make those people sane – that is
meaningless – our madhouses will be trying to help those people to use that opportunity to move
through the right door. A madman going into a madhouse will come out enlightened – not just the
same old self again, miserable, suffering.
From Personality to Individuality 303 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
So, to me, madness has immense significance. It can become a way towards enlightenment. It
should be used as a means. Yes, there is a tremendous difference between the two. The madman
is only happy, and not knowing why; the enlightened man is blissful, and knowing perfectly well why.
He cannot be cured because he is not sick; he is incurable.
My father used to tell me, ”You are incurable.”
I said, ”You are right, because I am not sick. You are curable because you are sick.”
He used to say that because he could not convince me about certain things he wanted me to do. For
example, he wanted me to get married. Naturally, when I came back from the university he wanted
me to get married. But he had no courage to say anything to me, or ask, ”What about marriage?”
because he knew already that it was going to become a great argument and there would be difficulty.
He thought, ”It is better not to hear ’no’ directly from him, because once he says ’no’ then there is
no way to change it into ’yes.’ So I will keep at least one possibility open: I have not asked him yet, I
will let others ask first.”
He asked one of his friends who was a supreme court advocate – and he asked him because he
was known all over the country. It was known that he had never been defeated in any case in his
whole life, he had always been victorious. So my father said to him, he gave him a challenge: ”Here
is a case – my boy: you have to convince him about marriage.”
The advocate said, ”That is a simple matter. I will come tomorrow.”
My father said, ”My friend is coming and he wants to meet you.”
I said, ”I know why he wants to meet me – let him come!”
My father said, ”How do you know?”
I said, ”Don’t be worried. It is something to do with marriage.” It was that time he told me, ”You are
incurable. How did you manage to know?”
I said, ”It is simple guesswork – no need to be a prophet. Why would you bring that idiot to me? You
have never brought him before. I have just come from university, finished with university, and I knew
from the very beginning that the first thing when I got back home would be the question of marriage.
I have just arrived home and tomorrow he is coming. Let him come!”
The advocate came. He started arguing the way he must be arguing in the supreme court. I said,
”You understand one thing first: if you convince me about marriage I will get married, I will be
absolutely ready. Convinced, there is no problem. But if I convince you that it is wrong, then are you
going to divorce your wife or not? This should be settled, otherwise it is an unbalanced case: only
I am the loser. What is at stake? You put your wife, I am putting my life. You are not putting much
more than me. I am putting my life – you put your wife.”
He said, ”Then I will have to think about it.
From Personality to Individuality 304 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
I said, ”No, no need to think about it. Don’t be such a coward. I leave it to you because I believe
you are a just man, a fair man. I have always called you my uncle, and I trust you just as I trust my
father. So I am not asking for a judge: I leave it to you to make the judgment about whether I am
victorious or defeated. Your judgment I will accept.”
He said, ”Still, wait. You are putting me into difficulties. You are making me judge also; that is tricky
because you are challenging my fairness. You are also saying,’I have have been calling you my uncle
and I trust you,’ so you are challenging my integrity. And the real thing is that I have never thought
about it, about marriage, because this has never been a case in my life – to convince somebody
about marriage. And because you have put it that way, perhaps you are right... because my wife is
such a pain in the neck!
”You may convince me; in fact, inside I am already convinced that if I had not got into this trouble
it would have been far better. So there is a possibility you may bring my own inner conviction up.
To be truthful with you, don’t bother about marriage, because it is really a trouble. Drop this thing
completely. I will try to console your father, to get him to leave you alone.”
My father said to him, ”I told you before that you may have been victorious in all your cases but my
son is incurable, he is simply impossible.”
The advocate said, ”You are right, because even before starting the argument I was defeated. We
had not argued. In fact he managed to have me tell him, ’Don’t get married.’ He reminded me about
my wife, and he knows everything about me and my wife, so I could not cheat him and could not lie
in front of him. He knows everything. And he had said,’I put my life on one side, you put your wife
on the other side.’ In fact I would have liked to lose the case, but my wife and my children and my
whole family... it is too much. You forget about this boy – leave him alone.”
If you can see the total aspect of anything, no problem arises. The problems arise because you see
only one aspect and you don’t see the other aspects. A bird’s eye view is needed; and that is where
the enlightened man is different from the madman. The madman has no vision, he has fallen into
darkness; he is blind.
The enlightened man has risen into light and he has nothing but eyes, opening into all dimensions.
He can see anything from all possible viewpoints simultaneously; hence, his answer is immediate.
He has not to think about the answer: even before the question arises, the answer is there, because
his vision is clear.
He can see far and wide. His whole life is transparent.
He has gone above the mechanical mind into a non-mechanical consciousness.
You can destroy the brain, then the mind will be finished; but you cannot destroy consciousness
because it is not dependent on the brain or the brain system You can destroy the body, you can
destroy the brain, but if you have been able to free your consciousness from both, you know you are
intact, untouched; not even a dent has been made on you.
Mansoor could laugh even on the cross. A man in the crowd asked, ”Why are you laughing?”
From Personality to Individuality 305 Osho
CHAPTER 17. HOLY SCRIPTURES: WHOLLY BULLSHIT
He said, ”I am laughing because they are crucifying somebody else, but they think it is me. I am
just as much a watcher as you all are. You are watching Al-Hillaj Mansoor being crucified; I am
also watching – we are all watchers. But these people who are crucifying Al-Hillaj Mansoor, they
think they are crucifying me. That’s why I am laughing – at how blind mankind is. They are killing
somebody else thinking that he is me.”
An enlightened man can laugh even while dying.
Even death is just a laughing matter, because his experience proves that he is above time, above
changes, above forms, that he is universal, that he is part of the whole continent of consciousness.
Even death is just a coming back home.
The second question? My hands are not tired yet!
Question 2
OSHO,
ARE THE HOLY SCRIPTURES JUST USELESS? AND ARE THEY HOLY OR NOT?
THE holy scriptures are not just useless, they are absolutely harmful. If they were just useless
there would be no need to be concerned with them. They are positively harmful. They are
preventing people from becoming religious because they make people knowledgeable, and people
start thinking that knowledgeability is wisdom, it is enlightenment. Because they know about great
words, theological doctrines, dogmas, philosophies, naturally they think, What else is there to know?
You have crammed the whole BIBLE or GITA or KORAN; then what else is there? And by cramming
the KORAN, the GITA, or the BIBLE, you have not gained anything.
So the holy scriptures are not just useless. If they were useless there would be no harm: they could
be preserved in libraries where many other useless books are preserved. I have read so many
useless books – but they have to be preserved. They are useless only, they are not harmful.
But about holy scriptures I cannot say that they should be preserved. They should be completely
destroyed. As far as you are concerned, at least within you, you should make a bonfire of all
holy scriptures, because unless you burn all that nonsense you will never be able to know your
innocence, you will never be able to know the beauty of your ignorance. And out of that innocent
ignorance arises knowing. It is not out of knowledge that knowing comes.
Knowledge hinders knowing because it pretends to be knowing.
Ignorance is sincere, honest. It has no pretensions about it: it simply is ignorance.
And because it is honest, true, sincere, it opens you, makes you available to know; makes you
capable of seeing. Your eyes are no more covered with knowledge, thick garbage.
No, the holy scriptures are not just useless, they are positively harmful.
And you ask me: are they holy? Yes, they are one hundred percent holy: fifty percent holy cow dung
fifty percent holy bullshit!
From Personality to Individuality 306 Osho
CHAPTER 18
The good shepherd – the butcher’s friend
16 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
ARE YOU ESPECIALLY AGAINST CHRISTIANITY?
I hate to favor Christianity with any special attention but unfortunately it deserves it. It is the ugliest
manifestation of religion on the earth, for many reasons.
The first: Christianity is the only well-organized religion.
The more a religion is well-organized, the less is the possibility of its being a religion.
Truth, by its very nature, cannot be organized.
To organize truth, or to kill it, mean the same thing.
Truth is alive when organization is only functional, loose. Christianity’s organization is very tight,
bureaucratic, hierarchical. Because of this kind of organization, it has become more a game of
power politics than the flowering of religious qualities.
In the past two thousand years Christianity has done more harm to humanity than any other religion.
Mohammedanism has tried to compete with it but has not been successful. It came very close but
Christianity still remains on the top. It has slaughtered people, burned people alive. In the name of
307
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
God, truth, religion, it has been killing and slaughtering people – for their own sake, for their own
good.
And when the murderer is murdering you for your own good, then he has no feeling of guilt at all. On
the contrary, he feels he has done a good job. He has done some service to humanity, to God, to
all the great values of love, truth, freedom. He feels excited. He feels that he is now a better human
being. When crimes are being used for people to feel better human beings, that is the worst that
can happen to anybody. Now he will be doing evil, thinking it is good. He will be destroying good,
thinking it is good.
This is the worst kind of indoctrination that Christianity has put into people’s minds. The idea of the
crusade, of a religious war, is a great contribution of Christianity. Mohammedanism learned it from
Christianity; they cannot claim to be the originators of the idea. They call it jehad, holy war, but they
came five hundred years later than Jesus. Christianity had already created in people’s minds the
idea that a war too can be religious.
Now, war as such is irreligious.
There cannot be anything like a crusade, a jehad, a holy war.
If you call war holy, then what is left to be called unholy?
This is a strategy to destroy people’s thinking. The moment they think of crusade, they don’t think
there is anything wrong: they are fighting for God against the devil. And there is no God and no devil
– you are simply fighting and killing people. And what business is it of yours anyway? If God cannot
destroy the devil, do you think you can? If God is impotent and cannot destroy the devil, then can
this polack pope do it? Can these Christians do it? Can Jesus do it? And for eternity God has lived
with the devil.
Even now the forces of evil are far more powerful than the forces of good, for the simple reason that
the forces of good are also in the hands of the forces of evil.
Calling war religious, holy, is the cause of war – because the first world war happened in the Christian
context, the second world war happened in the Christian context, and the third world war is going to
happen in the Christian context.
There are other religions also, but why did these two great wars happen in the Christian context?
Christianity cannot save itself from taking the responsibility. Once you create the idea that war can
be holy then you cannot monopolize the idea.
Adolf Hitler was saying to his people, ”This war is holy”; it was a crusade. He was simply using
Christianity’s contribution. He was a Christian, and he believed himself to be the reincarnation of
the prophet, Elijah. He thought himself equal to Jesus Christ, perhaps better, because what Jesus
could not do, he was trying to do. All that Jesus succeeded in doing was getting crucified. Adolf
Hitler was almost successful. If he had succeeded – which was ninety-nine percent possible, just by
one percent he missed – then the whole world would have been purified of all that is Jewish, of all
that is non-Christian. What would have remained?
From Personality to Individuality 308 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
And do you know? – Adolf Hitler was blessed by the German archbishop, who told him, ”You are
going to win because Christ is with you and God is with you.” And the same fools were blessing
Winston Churchill, saying, ”God is with you and Christ is with you – you are sure to win.” The same
fools, even bigger ones, were in the Vatican, because the Vatican is just part of Rome, and Mussolini
was being blessed by the pope – a representative, an infallible representative, of Jesus Christ.
One can think the German archbishop is not infallible, the archbishop of England is not infallible –
we can forgive them, fallible people – what about the pope, who for centuries has been claimed by
the Christians to be infallible? Now, this infallible pope blesses Mussolini for victory because ”he is
fighting for Jesus Christ and God” – and Mussolini and Adolf Hitler are one party. Together they are
trying to win the whole world.
Perhaps the pope was hoping that if Mussolini wins then Christianity will have a chance to become
the universal religion. They have been trying for two thousand years to make Christianity the
universal religion, to destroy all other religions. It is not only that Christianity has contributed to
the idea of war....
In Jainism there is no question of holy war.
Every war is unholy.
You may be fighting in the name of religion, but fighting itself is irreligious.
Buddhism has no idea of any holy war; hence, Jainism and Buddhism have never contributed to
any single war – and their history is very long. Jainism at least for ten thousand years has been in
existence and has not had a single war, holy or unholy. Buddhism is also older than Christianity, five
hundred years older, and has as big a membership as Christianity – because except India, the whole
of Asia is Buddhist – but not a single war. There has not been a single instance of any Buddhist
priest blessing any kind of war.
Wars have been there; politicians have been there in those countries too. They have been fighting –
Japan and China have been fighting and both are Buddhist – but neither Japanese Buddhist priests
nor Chinese Buddhist priests were in any way involved, not even by giving a blessing. These people
show a little bit of courage. And the pope seems to be absolutely hocus-pocus. He has no guts.
In India, a few years back, China attacked India. For the first time in the whole history of India, a
Jaina acharya, head of one of the Jaina sects, blessed the government, the Indian government. His
name is Acharya Tulsi.
I had to fight against him, criticizing him; I went all over the country telling people, ”this man should
be defrocked and removed from his headship because he has committed a crime for which, in ten
thousand years, no single Jaina priest has ever been blamed. This man is a politician – this man is
not religious.”
I talked to Acharya Tulsi and I told him, ”If you had any sense of dignity you would resign from
the headship, because you have acted like a politician. What business was it of yours? Who has
asked you to bless India against China? For a religious man, political boundaries should not mean
From Personality to Individuality 309 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
anything. India is yours, China is yours; and if they are fighting, let them fight. You should rather pray
that this war stops, that some wisdom comes to these fools – both parties. That would be religious.”
And I told him, ”You are acting more like a Christian pope than like a Jaina priest.”
He was angry with me, but he had no substantial argument. I said, ”Anger is not an answer to me; it
is simply an acceptance of defeat. And why do you go on hanging about in the capital, in New Delhi?
Has this whole, vast country no interest for you? You should go out to people, and you are simply
remaining in New Delhi.” There was only one reason for that: in New Delhi he had rich supporters.
Jainas are rich people, and those rich people have power over politicians. Even a man like Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi’s father, who was a very powerful man – even he had to come to
see Acharya Tulsi, because those Jainas could give donations to his party, in milE lions, and they
were pressuring him to come.
Of course, the head priest of their religion could not come to the prime minister. So Jawaharlal
Nehru had to go to him, just because those people were the people who would be supporting him in
the next election; otherwise in the next election they would all turn to the opposite parties. And what
did Acharya Tulsi do? He was going to do the same to me but I prevented him. The Jaina acharya,
the head, or the Jaina monk, is above humanity, he is a superman, so when you greet him in the t
Indian way of saluting, you do namaskar before him with both your hands folded. He will not answer
your namaskar in the same way, as is expected from everybody else: he will just bless you with one
hand. Now, Jawaharlal had no idea of what Acharya Tulsi was doing continually. He went up to him,
and just as simple etiquette he did namaskar. Acharya Tulsi put his hand over Jawaharlal’s head,
and the photographer who is always there with Acharya Tulsi immediately took a photograph!
A calendar was immediately published and all over India was distributed free – a beautiful colored
calendar of Acharya Tulsi blessing Jawaharlal, with Jawaharlal standing with bowed down head and
folded hands. I saw that calendar, and I could also see in the calendar the embarrassment on
Jawaharlal’s face and the joy on Acharya Tulsi’s face. But poor Jawaharlal could not do anything
– it all happened so quickly. The photograph had been taken and it would have looked odd to say
something.
The same people, when I was passing through New Delhi, pestered me, saying, ”You have to come
to see Acharya Tulsi.”
I said, ”If he wants to see me he should come. Why should I go to him? I have no desire to see
him.” Then they pestered my host. He was an old man, and he loved me so much that he said to
me, ”They are really anxious for you to meet him, and what is the harm?”
I said, ”You don’t really know me, and you have never seen me encountering such people. Don’t
say anything to me later on!” – because he was also a Jaina. ”I am willing to come, but what will
transpire there only God knows, and there is no God. In fact, nobody knows.” When we say God
knows, it means nobody knows... just a nice way of saying nobody knows.
He said, ”Nothing wrong will happen. Come.”
I said, ”You don’t know. I am not saying that something is expected from that person. No, I am
saying that anything that happens will come from me.” But he could not understand, so we went.
From Personality to Individuality 310 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
All Acharya Tulsi’s rich disciples were there, and he was sitting on a high pedestal. But I did not do
the namaskar – I had seen that calendar before – I just held my hand over his head. Now he was
embarrassed; what to do? And I told the photographer, ”Go on, you are not to stop. You do your
job.”
I went to the photographer’s studio; of course I could not get that negative. He said, ”What to
do? What you did was really a great thing! I hate this man. But you did the right thing – nobody
has done that yet. And this is his whole strategy. All politicians, presidents, prime ministers,
ministers, governors, ambassadors from other countries, are brought to him and told, ‘his is the
way to approach him.’ So those poor fellows approach him that way, and then he blesses them with
the photographer there.” The photographer said, ”Someone did the right thing for the first time; and
Acharya Tulsi was in such a confusion about what to do.”
Now, when I was giving him my blessing he could not give me a blessing: he was in shock! And
when I told the photographer, he took the photograph. ”But,” he said, ”before I left they took the reel;
they forced me to give them the reel. They said,’That photograph is not to go out.”’
But I told Acharya Tulsi, ”what are you doing here in New Delhi? All this show business is political.
And blessing India shows simply that you are not a man who joins the universal consciousness, you
live within boundaries.” But this is the only instance of Jaina involvement in politics, and no Hindu
shankaracharya has ever blessed a war.
Now, Christianity deserves all the credit for making war, the most ugly thing in human life, holy.
And then behind the name of a crusade you can do everything: rape women, burn people alive, kill
innocent children, old people – anything. This is a blanket term, a cover: a holy war, a crusade.
But what actually happens behind it? All atomic weapons, nuclear weapons, are produced in the
Christian context.
It is not that the world lacks intelligence. If China can produce Confucius, Lao Tzu, Chuang
Tzu, Mencius, Lieh Tzu, there is no reason why China cannot produce an Albert Einstein, a Lord
Rutherford. There is no reason at all, because Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu, Lao Tzu, Mencius, Confucius
– any of them is a thousand fold wiser than Jesus or Moses. They are simply pygmies compared to
these people. If such geniuses can be created by China, then there is no reason why China cannot
create atomic scientists. And do you know, China was the first in creating the printing press? In
China the printing press has been in existence for three thousand years.
In India, if they can produce a man like Patanjali, who single-handedly has produced the whole
system of yoga; if they could produce Gautam the Buddha, Mahavira the Jaina, Shankara,
Nagarjuna – great philosophers; there is no one comparable from the West, not a single person
can be held up in comparison to Gautam Buddha. And it is not only philosophers. If you compare
Patanjali of five thousand years ago with any physiologist of today, you will find that the physiologist
knows nothing compared to Patanjali.
Three thousand years ago in India, Sushrut, a great physician and surgeon, existed. In his books
he describes the most intricate surgery that is possible only today – even brain surgery, and with all
the instruments. If these people could produce that. what was missing? Why were they not trying
to produce atom bombs? India produced mathematics, without which no science is possible. That’s
From Personality to Individuality 311 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
why in all the languages you still follow the Indian digital system, because it was produced first in
India: the numbers one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
In Sanskrit nine is nava, eight is asth, seven is Sanskrit sapt, six is Sanskrit cha, three is Sanskrit
thri, English two is Sanskrit dwa which became twa in Latin, and from twa turned to two. All these
numbers in all the languages come from Sanskrit.
Seven thousand years ago they created the basis of mathematics, but they never used their
mathematical understanding for destructive purposes. They used it for creative purposes because
no religion there was giving them the incentive to war. All religions were saying war is ugly – about
that there was no dispute – and those countries were not going to support any program, any project,
any research, which was going to lead them into war.
The first astronomical book was written in India four thousand years ago. Those people were far
ahead of the West. Four thousand years ago the West did not even have a single name to mention.
The greatest names in the West are not more then twenty-five centuries old. Perhaps with Socrates
your greatest name happens, but Socrates was three or four thousand years later. What he said
had already been said and what he thought he was contributing to thought was not new. Of course,
to him it was new because he was unaware that somewhere people had already talked about this
and had gone very deep into it.
I am saying this to make it clear to you that it is Christianity which is responsible for giving science
the incentive to war. If Christianity had created an atmosphere of non-violence, and had not called
war holy, then we would have avoided these two world wars; and without those two, certainly the
third could not happen. Those two are absolutely necessary steps for the third; they have led you
already towards the third. You are geared for it, and there is no possibility to come back, to turn
back.
Not only has science been corrupted by Christianity, Christianity itself has given birth to strange
ideologies, either directly, or as a reaction. In both ways it is responsible. Poverty has existed in the
world for thousands of years, but communism is a Christian contribution. And don’t be misguided by
the fact that Karl Marx was a Jew, because Jesus was also a Jew. If a Jew can create Christianity....
The context of Karl Marx is Christian, it is not Jewish. The idea was given by Jesus Christ. The
moment he said, ”blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the kingdom of God,” he sowed the seed
of communism.
Nobody has said it so straight, because to say it so straight you need a crazy man like me – who can
call a spade not only a spade but a fucking spade! What is there in just calling a spade a spade?
Once Jesus created the idea that ”Blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the kingdom of God,”
it was child’s play to change it to the more practical and pragmatic communism. What Marx says in
essence is, ”blessed are the poor for theirs is the earth.” He is simply changing some spiritual jargon
into practical politics.
”Kingdom of God” – who knows whether it exists or not? But why waste this opportunity when you
can have the kingdom of earth? The whole of communism is based on that single statement of
Jesus. It is just a little turn, throwing away the esoteric nonsense and bringing practical politics into
From Personality to Individuality 312 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
it. Yes, blessed are the poor because theirs is the whole kingdom of this earth – that’s what Karl
Marx is saying.
Strange, that nowhere else – in the context of Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Sikhism, Taoism or
Confucianism – does communism appear; it appears only in the context of Christianity. It is not
just accidental, because you can see fascism also appears in the context of Christianity. Socialism,
Fabian socialism, Nazism – all are Christian children, kids of Jesus Christ. Either directly influenced
by him... because he is the man who says, ”in my kingdom of God a camel can pass through the
eye of a needle but a rich man cannot enter through the gates.”
What do you think about this man? Is he not a communist? If he is not a communist then who
is? Even Karl Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin or Mao Tse-tung, have not made that strong a statement:
A rich man cannot enter into the kingdom of God. And you see the comparison he makes? It is
possible for a camel – this is impossible – to pass through the eye of a needle. He says even that
is possible, but the entrance of a rich man into the kingdom of God is impossible. If it is impossible
there, why leave them here? – make it impossible here too. That’s what Marx did.
In fact what theoretically Jesus provided, Marx gave a practical turn. But the original theoretician
was Jesus. Karl Marx may not have even recognized it, but in no other context is communism
possible. In no other context is Adolf Hitler possible. In India if you want to declare yourself a man
of God, you cannot be an Adolf Hitler. You cannot even participate in politics, you cannot even be a
voter. You cannot destroy millions of Jews, or millions of people belonging to other religions and still
claim that you are a reincarnation of an ancient prophet, Elijah.
In India there have been thousands of people declaring that they are incarnations, that they are
prophets, tirthankaras, but they have to prove it by their lives too. Maybe they are phony, most of
them are – but even then, nobody can be an Adolf Hitler and still say that he is a prophet, that he is
a religious man.
I received a threatening letter from somewhere in America. I had never thought about it, that there
is, in America, a Nazi party. The president of the American Nazi party wrote a letter to me saying,
”We have been hearing you speak against Adolf Hitler – that hurts our religious feeling.” I am rarely
amazed but I was amazed: their religious feeling! ”Because to us Adolf Hitler is the prophet Elijah,
and we hope that you will not hurt our religious feeling in future.”
I told Sheela, ”Now I am especially going to hurt them more. I was not aware of that, that religious
feelings are hurt by speaking about or criticizing Adolf Hitler.” You cannot think of this happening in
India or China or Japan – impossible But in a Christian context it is possible: not only possible, it
has already happened.
And if Hitler had won the war, all these Americans and all these Russians and all these British people
would be worshipping him as God. He would have been proclaimed as having overcome the world
and changed the whole of humanity into Christianity. And he would have changed it; he had the
power.
What power did poor Jesus have? – he could not save himself But Adolf Hitler winning the war
would have certainly changed the whole world into Christianity. But that Christianity would not have
From Personality to Individuality 313 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
been the Christianity of Jesus Christ; it would have been the Christianity of Adolf Hitler. The BIBLE
would not have been the holy book any more. Hitler’s autobiography, MY STRUGGLE – what do you
call it, Prasad, MEIN KAMPF? Okay – that would have been the holy book.
Christianity has exploited more people than any other religion. Just two or three days ago Sheela
brought me three pieces of information. One was that Mother Teresa has praised the government
of Oregon because they sent a trivial gift of some food packages to the hungry people of Ethiopia
Mother Teresa knows I am here. Not only does she know I am here; because I am here she accepted
an invitation from a small group who are trying to create a commune against me near The Dalles.
It is difficult – how to create a commune against me? So they have brought Gandhi’s – Mahatma
Gandhi’s – grandson from India. Good ideal He will be the center of the commune, and it will be a
Gandhian commune. Mother Teresa was going to inaugurate it, and they must have told her what
the purpose of this commune is. The whole purpose is.... There is this whole world, and Mahatma
Gandhi’s grandson finds Wasco County in which to open a commune. For Gandhi there is as much
land available as they want in India; the government is Gandhian, everything is in Gandhian hands.
They can have as many funds as needed – millions are given to them every year.
In India there is not a single commune of Gandhi’s. Even his own old ashramas are empty, nobody
lives there. Now they are just on exhibition, memorials. A few servants are kept to preserve them
for visitors to see, for tourist purposes. Do you think it can be just a coincidence that they come to
Wasco County? And do you know who is supporting them? The man who lives on the other side of
our river – he is giving them the whole money! He purchased this place near The Dalles also just to
create some commune against us, but he could not find enough people. And even the grandson of
Gandhi was not courageous enough to come so close.
Mother Teresa was willing to come to open it, but in the end she refused because what happened
was that the people of The Dalles became against them, just as they are against us, thinking that
these Indians are simply trying to take over Wasco County. They could not understand the purpose
of those people, and the people could not say directly that they have come just to destroy my
commune. So the people in The Dalles simply thought that this is just another trouble.
Mother Teresa had come to Washington; she was just going to fly up and do the opening ceremony.
But from Washington she turned back. She said, ”I have some urgent work,” because, finding that
the people of The Dalles – Christians – were against it, she would not take an unnecessary risk.
But praising Oregon’s government for a small meaningless gift that they have sent to Ethiopia! If
she had not praised them, nobody would have even known that Oregon had sent anything, because
it was not something big – millions of dollars or anything. Some powdered milk and goods have
reached Ethiopia from all over the world, but she chooses only Oregon to praise. She wants the
Oregon government to have some rapport with her so she can influence them against me. But she
need not be worried; they are already against me. Whatever more is needed I am doing. I never
take anybody’s help.
The second bit of news Sheela brought to me was that in the 1983 fiscal year a Christian
organization, I.C.A. – International Christian Aid – collected thirty-four million dollars to help Ethiopia.
On television and in newspapers they advertised widely all over the world, and thirty-four million
From Personality to Individuality 314 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
dollars they collected. Not a single cent has reached Ethiopia: the whole of the money simply
disappeared!
The president of I.C.A. was asked, ”what happened to the money? Thirty-four million dollars and
nothing has reached Ethiopia?” They said, ”Our policy is not to give to the government; we send
the support from independent agencies, so we have sent the whole money through an independent
agency in France, an association of doctors called ’Doctors without Borders.’”
When the president of ”doctors without Borders” was asked, he said, aWe have received not a single
cent, and we don’t know who these people are.” This is what Christianity has been doing down the
ages in the name of the poor, in the name of the orphans, in the name of hungry people.
In’84, they collected nearabout fifty-five million dollars again, and nothing is known what happened
to those fifty-five million dollars either.
And the third piece of news was just hilarious. The Olympics that happened in L.A. just a few months
ago was organized by a Christian association, again to help the hungry people of Ethiopia. Ethiopia
is great! They should remain always hungry – they help so many people. They should be kept
always hungry. And of course, all the money that was going to be earned by the Olympics was
going to Ethiopia. Nobody knows how much money was collected – it must have been billions of
dollars – but the whole of the money has simply disappeared!
And the great idea those people had! They had collected the whole of the money – all kinds of
bills, small, big – the way you collect wheat or other foodstuffs, in big metal cans, just like we collect
our own food here. It was so much money that small safes wouldn’t do: it was collected in big, the
largest possible, metal containers. And after the Olympics, when the containers were opened, the
money was missing.
The newspaper cutting Sheela brought had a comment at the end: ”Perhaps hungry rats have eaten
it. What else?” So it has reached hungry people somehow – if not in Ethiopia, then hungry rats here.
But I don’t think rats are interested in eating money; and even if they eat it, they won’t eat it so totally
that not even a fragment of it is left. The containers were absolutely clean. The hungry rats seem
to be very hygienic: they must have eaten the money and then cleaned up. Now, it is thought that
perhaps a second Olympics should be arranged because those Ethiopian hungry people are still
hungry.
These Christian associations and churches are serving people so desperately. They don’t ask you
whether you want to be served or not, they simply go on serving you. They remind me of the man I
have told you about, the opium addict barber in front of my house, Natthu Kaka.
In India it is almost a tradition, in barber’s shops or hotels or tea shops, to keep all kinds of papers,
newspapers, magazines. So people come to look at a magazine and a newspaper, and by the way
when they are there they will drink tea, or eat a samosa or something; while they are there reading
they will have something. So Natthu Kaka used to have papers, and sometimes people would come.
It would always be only the strangers, because nobody who knew him would even come close to
him. A stranger, maybe somebody from outside the city, an agent from some company, an insurance
company or some pharmaceutical company, would enter his shop – and he had a beautiful place –
From Personality to Individuality 315 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
and they would start reading the magazines. Then Natthu Kaka would start shaving them, without
even asking them. He always started from the head, and by the time the man was aware, a corner
of his head would be clean and he would say, ”What are you doing!”
Natthu Kaka would say, ”Don’t be worried. If you don’t want to pay, don’t pay; at the most, if you don’t
want to pay, don’t pay.” But now the man could not go half-shaved – that would be more ridiculous –
so he would say, ”What kind of man are you?”
Natthu Kaka would say, ”There is no problem. It is just that having nobody else, I go on practicing
on anybody. And it is not necessary for you to pay: if you want to pay, you can pay; if you don’t want
to pay it is okay. Just for my practice....”
I had seen it happen so many times that I told Natthu Kaka, ”You are almost a Christian.”
He said, ”What do you mean? I am a Hindu.”
I said, ”No, you are not a Hindu, you are a Christian; you don’t even ask people whether they want
to be shaved or not, you just start shaving.”
Christians have been trying to save the world – but who has given you the authority to save anybody?
Even if you save without asking for payment, who has given you the authority? No, they have the
authority from Jesus, and Jesus had the authority from God himself I have thought many times: if
Jesus had entered Natthu Kaka’s salon, Natthu Kaka would have shaved him free, and then Jesus
would have understood that it is not right to save somebody without asking him.
I am not paying special attention to Christianity, but it deserves it. It has done so much harm, so
much nuisance. It is impossible to believe that people still go on keeping it alive. The churches
should be demolished, the Vatican should be completely removed. There is no need of these
people. Whatever they have done they have done wrong. Other religions have also done wrong, but
proportionately they are nothing compared to Christianity.
It has been exploiting the poverty of people to convert them to Christianity. Yes, Buddhism has
converted people, but not because people were hungry and you provided them food, and because
you provided them food they started feeling obliged to you. If you provide them clothes, if you provide
them other facilities – education for their children, hospitals for their sick people – naturally they feel
obliged. And then you start asking them, ”what has Hinduism done for you? What has Buddhism
done for you?”
Naturally, Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism have never opened a hospital, a school; they have never
done any such service. This is the only argument. And those people are so obliged that they feel
certainly no other religion has been of any help to them, and they become Christians. This is not
an honest way, this is bribing people. This is not conversion, this is buying people because they are
poor. You are taking advantage of their poverty.
Buddhism has converted millions of people, but that was through Buddhism’s intelligence. The
conversion happened at the top. You will see that difference. Buddhism converted kings, emperors,
masters, great writers, poets and painters; and because the king of the society became Buddhist,
From Personality to Individuality 316 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
seeing that the intelligent people, even the emperor, had become Buddhist, others followed.
Buddhists argued in the courts of emperors. If the emperor was a follower of some religion, the
Buddhists argued, and they were ready, if they were defeated in argument, to be converted to the
religion the emperor followed. But if the Buddhists won, then the emperor and his whole court had
to be converted to Buddhism. This is honest, intelligible, rational procedure.
Jainas have converted emperors. Their first effort was to change the cream, the highest strata,
because that makes it simple: then the people who follow those people naturally understand that
if their topmost intelligentsia are becoming Jainas that means their religion is not able to argue for
its doctrines, its standpoint. Never before Christianity has this been done – converting the lowest
strata. But you can see the difference. When the highest strata of the society was converted, the
whole society followed.
When the Chinese emperor, Wu, and his court were converted to Buddhism, just because the court
had the topmost intellectuals of the country and they were all defeated one by one – they could not
answer – the whole of China was converted. They were Confucians, they were Taoists, but they
were converted; they could not answer the Buddhist monk. The emperor had simply to surrender –
this seems to be a human, intelligent way – and then the whole country followed automatically.
The emperor goes to the feet of the Buddha, his court goes to the feet of the Buddha; the
emperor’s son and daughter become monks and nuns of a Buddhist order. The whole country
simply understands that what they have been following up to now, these people they were following,
have proved wrong. Something better has arrived – something more sophisticated, something more
logical and rational. It changed the whole society.
In India or in China, or anywhere, Christians have approached the lowest strata. But that does not
change the whole society, remember, because who bothers about those beggars you change? They
are not leaders, they are not the intelligentsia of the society; they are not even capable enough to
earn food for themselves. They are just retarded.
To be poor is not just accidental. You need to have certain qualifications to be poor, just as you
need certain qualifications to be rich. Even if you inherit riches and you don’t have such qualities,
then within two or three generations you will be poor. It is possible that your father had the qualities
to create money; he created the money and you simply inherited, and you don’t have any qualities
to create money. Remember, either you create, or whatsoever you have will be gone soon. You
cannot remain static; either you grow upwards or you fall downwards – you cannot remain in the
same position. So you can see: the people who are rich, by the fourth generation may be poor.
And it is not necessary that a poor man remains poor. Very poor people have risen to the highest
possibilities of richness. You need a certain caliber, a certain quality. To me, just as a painter is
born, a poet is born, a sculptor is born, a dancer is born, so a rich man is also born. Whether he
is born in a rich house or a poor house does not matter: he will be rich, he will find ways. Even in
countries like India where society is so stratified that mobility is almost impossible, there are people
who have been able to move.
The man who wrote India’s constitution after freedom, Doctor Babasaheb Ambedkar, was a sudra,
an untouchable. By his sheer effort and stubbornness he fought in every possible way and attained
From Personality to Individuality 317 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
to the best legal qualifications possible in his time. He became one of the best legal experts in the
whole world.
The Hindu society has followed a constitution written five thousand years ago by a brahmin
intellectual, Manu. He was certainly one of the geniuses, so much so that his name, Manu, became
almost equivalent to intelligence. Hence in India and in English also, the word man comes from
Manu. The Hindi word for man is manushya; that comes from Manu. The word for mind is man;
that comes from Manu. He proved to be such a great giant that his name became equivalent to
intelligence, to humanity. Now, the English word human, if you derive it from the Latin simply means
mud, humus. It is better to derive it from Manu, then it means intelligence; and certainly It does
come from Manu.
Manu wrote the Hindu code of life, the constitution that has been followed by Hindus for five thousand
years without fail, without any change. Manu would have never thought, or dreamed even, that
one day the next constitution would be written by an untouchable. Manu does not allow, in his
constitution, for an untouchable sudra – the lowest, the fourth class —Of the society – he does not
allow him even to read. He is prohibited from reading because there is no need for him to read or
to write. His work is either to make shoes, or to clean the latrines, clean the roads,,l and things like
that. They don’t need great intelligence, qualifications, university degrees, and Manu had prohibited
them from getting them. And even if they somehow managed to read they were absolutely prohibited
from reading religious scriptures. The sentence was nothing less than the death penalty. And many
untouchables have been killed because they were tryIng to understand the scriptures.
Ambedkar was a sudra, but he tried hard – he wouldn’t listen to anybody. He was ready to do
anything, or to die; these were the only alternatives. And he proved himself a great giant: in every
class, in every examination, he was always on top. And it was impossible to refuse him entry into a
further class; it was impossible to refuse him a scholarship, because others were lagging far behind,
there was no way. He got all the scholarships possible.
He went to England on a scholarship, and in England he also came top in his examinations. When
India became free, they could not find another person who was a better expert as far as law is
concerned than Ambedkar. This is really a good slap on Manu’s face, that Ambedkar wrote the
constitution of India – a good hit to all the brahmins.
He was the chairman of the constituent assembly. Brahmins were only members; he was the
chairman, and whatsoever he said became the law because he was a man who could not be refuted
on legal grounds. That was impossible.
I was saying that even in a society like India where stratification has gone so deep that mobility is
not allowed.... It is not like America or Europe where you can move from one profession to another
profession without any difficulty. A fisherman can become a cloth merchant, a cloth merchant can
become a university professor, a university professor can become a shoemaker, or whatsoever he
wants to. There is no problem, it is up to you what you want to do.
But in India that is not so. The profession is passed down from generation to generation; you inherit
it. Your father was a shoemaker, his father was a shoemaker. From the very beginning... perhaps
Adam was a shoemaker. And your children will be shoemakers; there is no question about it. But
even in such a society if a man has guts he can rise to any height.
From Personality to Individuality 318 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
Kabir was even worse than a sudra because he was abandoned by his parents, perhaps both the
mother and father. He was just an illegitimate child like Jesus. Perhaps illegitimate children have a
certain quality of religiousness, because Kabir is in no way inferior to Jesus; perhaps he may prove
superior. He was left on the bank of the Ganges by his mother or his father – nobody knows. Nobody
knows to what caste he belonged; nobody knows whether he was Hindu or Mohammedan.
But he was a man of immense courage and quality, because being an illegitimate child in India, it
is very difficult even to exist. Being an illegitimate child, his caste is not known, his religion was not
known. He might have been a Mohammedan, and perhaps he was a Mohammedan, because Kabir
is not a Hindu name. He was found by a Hindu monk, Ramananda.
Ramananda had just gone to take his morning bath, early, when it was still dark, and he stumbled
over a child. He brought the child back with him to his ashram. Many people tried to persuade him
that it was not good: ”we don’t know the child’s caste, but you are a brahmin and your disciples are
brahmins; it will create unnecessary scandal and trouble for you.”
He said, ”That doesn’t matter. This poor child, where can I leave him? If it creates any scandal it is
perfectly okay. What does it matter to me? If people don’t come to me, so far so good.” Ramananda
was a courageous man. People stopped coming to him and disciples left him because he was
keeping somebody – nobody knew who he was. All kinds of rumors started going around: ”Perhaps
he is his own child,” or ”Why is he so interested that he is ready to destroy his career? He was
becoming famous all over the country as one of the greatest masters; now he is spoiling all his
career.”
To non-religious people, religion also appears as a career. Only to a religious person is religion not
a career. It is not a profession; it is your way of life, it is your very life, your very being. Careers and
professions are very mundane and outside things.
Religion is your very heart.
Ramananda did not bother about what people were saying; he brought up Kabir. Kabir was not very
small when he was found. He could say his name and speak a few words, but he had no knowledge
of his father’s name or his mother’s name. He said if he saw them he would recognize them, but
he did not know their name. Perhaps they were from some other place and they had left him in
Varanasi hoping that some compassionate person may pick him up. And by chance Kabir found a
really compassionate guide.
Ramananda, in the last stage of his life, said, ” have not lost anything. A]l those disciples and
scholars were not worth a single Kabir. I have lost a great following, I became condemned, but it
was worth it.” Kabir proved to be a real diamond; and still everybody knew he was an illegitimate
child. He did not know his father or his mother, he did not know what religion he belonged to – and
he did not care at all.
The maulvi is the Mohammedan priest who gives the morning call from the tower near the mosque.
Kabir says, ”Is your God deaf that you have to go up a tower and from the tower you have to shout?”
And that really is the qualification necessary for a maulvi, that he can shout. In those days there
were no loud speakers or things like that – one had to be a loud speaker and shout from the tower.
Kabir asks, ”Is your God deaf?”
From Personality to Individuality 319 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
He has criticized Hindus, he has criticized Mohammedans, but still Mohammedans followed him,
Hindus followed him. Strangely, because he had no religion, all the religions were open to him,
anybody could follow him. But that people followed such a man certainly means that he had a great
charisma.
Kabir lived his whole life in Varanasi.
Now, Varanasi, for Hindus is the most sacred place on the whole earth, and it certainly is the oldest
city in the world. You cannot find a single Indian scripture, howsoever old it is, where Varanasi is not
mentioned. It has always been there it seems. And if you go to Varanasi you can feel its ancientness;
it is almost an eternal city.
Its roads are so small that cars cannot move, buses are out of the question; not even an auto-
rickshaw can be used. They are so small that only a man-pulled rickshaw can pass through those
streets. And when two man-pulled rickshaws are passing each other it is almost a miracle to see
that they have not got stuck to each other.
The roads are so small and the houses so ancient. Their doors are so small because in old times
doors were made small and steps were made big so thieves could not escape easily. If somebody
is running away, the small door and big steps will stop him. You cannot run; you have to be very
careful. The windows are small too – you cannot get out of them or inside through them.
Kabir lived his whole life in Varanasi. Hindus believe that if you die in Varanasi you will be born in
heaven – just a simple panacea. All religions have to find some simple thing, because there are
aesthetic practices but they will be followed only by a few idiots; anybody who has a little intelligence
is not going to follow them. To those unintelligent people you have to give some recipe, very simple.
So if you just die in Varanasi, that’s enough, because from Varanasi you cannot go anywhere else:
the route directly goes to heaven.
So people come to die in Varanasi. In Varanasi you will find old people, old women, widows, almost
on the verge of death. You will not find that kind of; crowd anywhere else in the world. They have all
come to die: they are certain now that there is not much time left, so they come to die in Varanasi.
But when he was sick and old, and was just on the verge of death, Kabir asked his disciples to move!
him from Varanasi and take him to Magahar. Magahar is a poor village, a very small village on the
other side of Varanasi. I don’t know how it came about, but the story is that if you die in Magahar,
the road directly goes to hell. Perhaps just parallel to Varanasi you have to manage a road to hell
too. And Magahar is just on the other side of Ganges; on this side is Varanasi. Kabir said, ”I want to
go to Magahar.”
His disciples said, ”Are you mad? You must be!”
He said, ”I have always been mad; but I cannot die in Varanasi, because if I die in Varanasi and
reach heaven then what credit is it to me? The whole credit goes to Varanasi. I am going to die in
Magahar and I am going to see how they can take me to hell. I am going to die in Magahar AND I
am going to heaven; otherwise I am going to create hell there.”
From Personality to Individuality 320 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
And he insisted on moving; he forced his disciples and finally they had to take him in a boat to
Magahar on the other side. He died there – the only man who ever came to die in Magahar in the
whole of history. His samadhi is in Magahar, and on it is written: ”I am going to heaven directly from
Magahar.”
You will be surprised that after he died in Magahar, the story that people who die in Magahar go
directly hell disappeared, because nobody could think, could, conceive, that Kabir could go to hell.
This was his last, act of compassion towards the people of Magahar.
Those poor people, they would not have been able to change the story; but Kabir, dying in Magahar,
stopped the whole trouble about Magahar. Since then nobody says that if you die in Magahar you
will go to hell, because what about the samadhi of Kabir? People go to worship there every year.
There is a great fair; almost the whole of Varanasi goes to the other side to pay respect to Magahar
and to Kabir. Magahar has now become a holy place just because Kabir decided to die there.
When he was in Varanasi, Kabir was asked to preside over the great council of Hindus which once
in while meets to decide matters about scriptures and commentaries. He was illiterate, he had never
read any scripture, but he was asked many times to preside. He said, ”I don’t know scriptures. I
don’t have any idea what is right and what is wrong, and how scriptures should be commented or
not commented on; and what commentary will be in tune with tradition. ”I have no idea.”
They said, ”You need not have. Just your presence makes us feel wise.... Just your presence, just
your being there. You need not say a single word, but we know that because you are there we are
not going to take any wrong decisions.” This is impossible to believe, but in Varanasi it can happen.
And the man was such....
So I say it is a quality in you: if you persist in Being poor, you have a certain qualification for it. A
story is told in India.... What I am saying, that you born with a qualification to be poor or rich, was the
belief of a certain king. His prime minister did not agree. He said, ”I don’t think that it is something to
do with quality. Now, a poor man’s son – what can he do? He has to work from his very childhood,
he cannot even play. There is no question of reading or studying; there is no time. By the time he is
six years old he is already taking the cows to the jungle or to the river. Whatsoever he can do, he
starts working – carrying wood.... He has no time, no space, no possibility.... No school will admit
him, no brahmin will teach him.”
All the teachers in India used to be brahmins; even today, almost ninety percent of teachers in India
are brahmins. Traditionally that is their profession, to teach. And of course they are far more trained
than anybody else because from their very childhood the atmosphere has been of teaching. Their
father has been teaching, their grandfather has been teaching; it has come to them as inheritance.
They are more articulate than anybody else.
The prime minister said, ”A brahmin’s son, without any qualification, becomes a teacher or becomes
a priest. Your son will become the king – he will not have to prove his qualifications. And,” the prime
minister said, ”I will suggest an experiment. A beggar passes along the bridge in front of our palace”
– there was a river, and a beautiful bridge along which a beggar in the early morning would pass.
For his whole life he had been begging. And you say he could have become rich. Does he have a
certain qualification to be poor and a beggar?”
From Personality to Individuality 321 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
The king said, ”I still believe he does. Tomorrow we will see.” The next day the king brought out a
big jar full of golden coins, at least enough for seven generations of beggars. This beggar was the
first man to pass by, so naturally it was put in the middle of the bridge: a golden jar, shining in the
sun, open, with gold coins in it. No possibility was left that he would miss it; just in the middle of the
bridge he was bound to see it. That was the place where he used to sit sometimes, but he always
used to pass by that place; wherever he sat on the bridge, he was bound to pass that place.
The king and the prime minister and a few other friends were waiting on the other side to see what
would happen. And strange to say, the beggar came onto the bridge, closed his eyes, and, walking
past the golden jar without seeing it, reached the other side!
Even the king was puzzled. This was not expected. He had thought that his argument was going to
be finished, that the prime minister had won. The jar was so visible, so shiny, that even a blind man
would be able to find it; at least he would stumble upon it, put 1 in the place it was. But that man
simply walked slowly f by with closed eyes. And because his eyes were dosed he had to hold the
handrail of the bridge, so he did not even stumble upon the jar.
They all caught hold of him; he opened his eyes. They asked him, ”what is the matter with your
eyes? We have never seen you walking across the bridge with closed eyes.”
The beggar said, ”just as I was coming an idea came to me that if I become blind in my old age –
because my eyes are getting old and I cannot see rightly – will I be able to pass over this bridge and
get t to the other side and sit there, even if I am blind? I thought it is better to try before; otherwise
I should change and live on the other side, because if I get blind.... So I closed my eyes, and I am
happy that I managed to cross the bridge perfectly safely. So even if I become blind there is no
problem.”
The king said to the prime minister, ”So what do you say now?”
The prime minister said, ”Now there is nothing to say – you have won the argument. This man has
the qualification.”
The poor have been there always; but to exploit their poverty to increase your population is sheer
politics – ugly, mean. Politics is a game of numbers. How many Christians you have in the world
– that is your power. The more Christians there are, the more power is in the hands of Christian
priests, the priesthood.
Nobody is interested in saving anybody, but just in increasing the population. What Christianity has
been doing is continually issuing orders from the Vatican against birth control, saying it is sin to use
birth control methods; it is sin to believe in abortion or to propagate abortion, or to make it legal.
Do you think they are interested in the unborn children? They are not interested, they have nothing
to do with those unborn children. They pursue their interest knowing perfectly well that if abortion is
not practiced, if birth control methods are not practiced, then this whole humanity is going to commit
a global suicide. And it is not so far away that you cannot see the situation. Within just fifteen years
the world population will be such that it will be impossible to survive. Either you will have to go into
a third world war – which will be a safer method. People will die more quickly, more easily, more
From Personality to Individuality 322 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
comfortably with nuclear weapons than with hunger, because hunger can keep you alive for ninety
days, and those ninety days will be really a torture.
I know about hunger in India. Mothers have sold their children just for one rupee. Mothers have
eaten their own children. You cannot conceive where hunger can lead you. And you cannot blame
those people: when somebody has been hungry for thirty days and their child is continually crying
and weeping and asking for miLk and food, and you cannot provide any milk, any food – you yourself
are hungry and the child Is a nuisance twenty-four hours a day – what to do? A person is not in a
sane state.
The mother just out of compassion may kill the child; and when she has killed it, she may see the
possibility of eating it. Then at least her hunger is taken care of. It is almost impossible to believe
that a mother can eat her own child, but it has been happening in countries like India and Ethiopia.
But just now, a few days ago, the Vatican has come out with a long message to humanity – one
hundred and thirty-nine pages: ”Abortion is sin. Birth control is sin.”
Now, nowhere in the BIBLE is abortion sin. Nowhere in the BIBLE is birth control sin, because no
birth control was needed. Out of ten children, nine were going to die. That was the proportion, and
that was the proportion in India just thirty or forty years ago: out of ten children, only one would
survive. That was perfectly okay. Then the population was not too great, not too heavy on the
resources of the earth Now, even in India – not to say anything about developed countries – even in
India, out of ten children, only one dies.
So on one hand medical science goes on helping people to survive and Christianity goes on opening
hospitals and distributing medicines, and Mother Teresa is there to praise you and the pope is going
to bless you.... There are all kinds of associations – they are even worried about Russia. There
is, in America, a Christian association called ”Underground Evangelism,” which works in communist
countries to distribute BIBLES freely and to distribute these stupid ideas that abortion is sin and birth
control is sin.
Somehow Russia is not starving; they are not rich but they are not starving. Please, at least leave
them alone. And it is because of birth control that they are not starving. If birth control is prohibited,
if abortion is prohibited, Russia will be in the same position as Ethiopia Then Mother Teresa will be
very happy. Then underground evangelists will come overground – a great opportunity to convert
people to Christianity.
Now, from where does this polack pope get the idea that it is sin? – because it is not in the BIBLE, it
is not in any old scriptures. Has he got a new message from God? Some amendment to the BIBLE?
Should these one hundred and thirty pages be added to the BIBLE as the fifth gospel? What does
he want? And who is he to decide that birth control is sin?
The pope says once a child is conceived, if abortion happens then, that child dies. That can be
under stood, but at what point can the child be counted as alive? At one week can you say he is
alive, he is a human being? At two weeks, three weeks? At what point does he become a human
being? You have to decide at what point the child is a human being, because in the beginning he
looks just like a fish, he even has a tail – and you are eating fish and animals without any trouble!
From Personality to Individuality 323 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
In his last stages the child looks like a monkey. That was the reason why Charles Darwin came to
the conclusion he did. He had collected all kinds of arguments; one argument, the most important
one, was that in the last stages the child looks like a monkey. He even has a small tail, which falls
off before his birth. And you will be surprised to know that you always have the place in your body
where the tail would have been – the joining point, the point where tail would fit, is still there. The
tail is not there, but the point where the tail would fit is still there.
Charles Darwin missed just one thing, he missed, coming to Oregon; otherwise he would have
seen real monkeys who have not evolved, and the comparison would have been very easy. But
Oregon is such a mysterious place. In my whole life I had never heard the name. Perhaps Charles
Darwin also never heard the name. He left it to me to come to Oregon and see the pillar stage of
humanity. It is really a place worth, studying. It should be turned into a zoo so anybody who wants
to study undeveloped parts of humanity, can go around Oregon and study them. That will be a great
contribution to human knowledge.
I have been seeing on television Oregonian people’s anger and rage against me and my people –
who have not done any harm to them, who are not at all concerned with them. And we are so far
away from them that there is no question.... They are not even our neighbors, so we don’t have to
love those neighbors or hate those neighbors. And this Christian idea loving your neighbors is not a
very good idea.
I used to live in Raipur. I lived there only for six months just through the mistake of government
bureaucracy. I was to be appointed to Jabalpur but some idiot wrote Raipur instead of Jabalpur.
And I saw it happen, because I was there, in the capital. So I told the education minister, ”Give the
letter to me, hand to hand, and I will go immediately. Why bother about sending it by post? – I am
here.” I looked at the letter – Raipur? But I said, ”There is no harm; for a few months let us be in
Raipur. I will be absolutely useless there because the college is a Sanskrit college and I have no
qualifications for that college. So I will enjoy myself as long as I am there – there is no work for me.”
So I went there. The principal said, ”But your qualifications are for a philosophy department, and we
don’t have any philosophy department. This is a Sanskrit college. There is a linguistic department,
but you don’t have any qualification for it.”
I said, ”I know. But what to do with bureaucracy? They have given me a holiday, so don’t create
trouble. They have sent me, and this is given to me directly by the education minister”
When I said ”education minister,” the principal thought it better to accept me, perhaps I was related
to the education minister or something – because never before had anybody come with an order
delivered directly. It is the formality that the order go through the post. It was so unusual,
unprecedented, that he told me, ”Can you wait in the common room, just for a few minutes, and
I will call you.”
I said, ”But remember, I am going to remain here, otherwise I will call the education minister
immediately.” And I knew what he was going to do. His clerk was in his room and after five minutes
he called me. The principal had phoned the education minister to say, ”This order has not reached
us by post. Somebody can just arrange a false, bogus order and come. Moreover he is not qualified
for this college at all, so what are we to do?”
From Personality to Individuality 324 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
The education minister said, ”First accept him, and then we will see where to send him, because I
don’t know what has happened. I was not aware that something had gone wrong, so we will see.”
The clerk told me in the evening that the principal had phoned the education minister to confirm my
post. Next day I gave that principal a good beating.
I said, ”Now I have to phone him too, to tell him that you are trying to disobey his order. And you
deceived me: you told me to sit there, and you phoned the education minister. He is my friend, and
if anybody is to go from this college it will be you; you will have to go. I can immediately arrange for
you to be transferred through the same bureaucracy who sent me here. I know the clerk who has
done this – you will be transferred.”
He said, ”Don’t create trouble. I was just checking to be sure that I am not in trouble later on. You
be happily here.”
I said, ”No more asking from the department!”
So for six months neither the department bothered, nor the principal bothered to do anything. And I
was not at all interested in making a fuss about it: it was going perfectly well. I lived in the campus
in the Sanskrit college, but for almost the whole day I remained in my quarters. Once in a while
sometimes I would go to the library or just chitchat with the professors and come back again. There
was nothing else for me to do.
One of my neighbors was very much disturbed by my presence there. I felt it – he looked annoyed.
One day I asked him, ”What is the matter? Whenever I come home you look annoyed and irritated.”
He said, ”I will not hide the fact from you: I am in love with my neighbor.”
I said, ”This is perfectly Christian, and Jesus will help you. Don’t be worried about it.”
He said, ”You don’t understand – it is my neighbor’s wife.”
I said, ”I think we should never talk about it. When Jesus said,’Love thy neighbor as thyself,’ he
should have added,’but please remember, not his wife.’ But to me it is perfectly good, because his
wife is also a neighbor. There is no harm in it; you need not be worried about me. You can go on
doing whatsoever you want to do – take it for granted that I am absent. But,”I said this day I have
come to understand a new thing that Jesus forgot to mention. An amendment is needed to say that
it does not mean the neighbor’s wife.”
That kind of amendment I can understand; but what the pope is suggesting about birth control and
abortion is absolutely foolish. You cannot decide what time the child becomes a human being. And
if it can be decided, it has to be decided by physiologists, medical people.
But what is wrong in birth control? – because then no conception happens. And if he says that
too is wrong because you are preventing a conception from happening, then he has to also declare
that each time you make love, if conception does not happen, then you are committing a sin. You
follow my idea? Because whether you use birth control methods or not, every time you make love,
conception does not happen. All those times that conception does not happen, remember, will be
counted as sin. He is asking you why the conception did not happen. It has to happen.
From Personality to Individuality 325 Osho
CHAPTER 18. THE GOOD SHEPHERD – THE BUTCHER’S FRIEND
His whole interest is in bringing many more children into the world, many more orphans into the
world. Make it so overcrowded, so poor, that Christianity can become the universal religion. That
has been their ambition for two thousand years. It has to be exposed. This ambition is inhuman;
and if I have been criticizing Christianity it is not without reason
The most important thing is that I am speaking within a Christian context. If I were speaking in a
Hindu context, I would not be criticizing Christianity, I would be criticizing Hinduism, or in a Buddhist
context I would be criticizing Buddhism. It would be useless to criticize Christianity in a Buddhist
context because those people would love it.
I am a person who impresses people and creates enemies, not friends – that is not my policy. I
would love the whole world to be my enemy. But all these people are so cowardly that they cannot
honestly even accept that they are enemies. Every day dozens of letters are received; they are
praying for me, that God should forgive me. These fools! They should pray to me that I should
forgive God and them. Why should God forgive me? If there is going to be any trouble I am ready to
take it.
One thing is certain: whether God forgives me or not, I am not going to forgive Him. So they should
pray to me, not to God. They don’t understand what they are saying. They go on writing letters, ”We
pray to God that He should forgive you for what you are saying.”
There is no God.
I am speaking against nobody.
That s why I am enjoying it, because if there was a God do you think I would enjoy it? It would be
trouble
It is sheer enjoyment – no trouble at all.
From Personality to Individuality 326 Osho
CHAPTER 19
Hell hath no fury like a Christian scorned
17 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
TODAY, I OVERHEARD TWO BIBLE-BASHING A CHRISTIANS IN HEATED DEBATE WITH TWO
SANNYASINS. I HEARD AND FELT FROM THE CHRISTIANS ANGER, NARROW-MINDEDNESS,
AN ACUTE INABILITY TO LISTEN, AND AN UTTER LACK OF HUMOR. WHAT DID JESUS DO
TO DESERVE SUCH FOLLOWERS?
IT is an absolute necessity to be retarded if you want to be a Christian.
Any religion, any ideology, that is based only on belief, faith, is bound to cripple your intelligence.
A belief system is nothing but poison to your capacity to understand.
Good words are used to hide ugly things.
These Bible-bashing Christians are not doing anything unexpected. For two thousand years they
have been doing the same thing. They are full of anger if you are not ready to follow them; they are
full of love if you are ready to follow them. Their love is conditional, and any love that is conditional
carries with it hate, anger, cruelty – everything that is against love. They give you the choice: either
you follow them, or you will have to be a victim of their anger, hatred, cruelty.
Right now they can only be angry, but in the past they have killed millions of people, burned people
alive. This anger is nothing. Now it is difficult for them to show their real face totally, but still
327
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
something of it comes out even though they try to hide it. You cannot hide a few things; for example,
you cannot hide your love. You cannot hide your anger either.
Christians are absolutely unable to listen to anything that goes against them. That’s why I say
retardedness is a categorical necessity.
Only the open mind can be ready to listen to something that goes against it.
The closed mind can listen only to that which supports it.
The closed mind has only one dimension open, that is: everything that supports it is allowed in,
welcomed in. All other dimensions are kept closed because there is fear. Things may enter you
which may shake up your belief system, disturb your so-called peace of mind; they may sabotage
your faith. No person who is a believer can afford to be open.
You can be open to all kinds of thoughts, because I am not giving you any belief system.
I am simply helping you to open up in all the dimensions, even if you feel that they are going against
your ideas that you have held up to now. Even then, in fact more so, you will be available to them
because this is a chance, an opportunity, to judge whether whatsoever you have been thinking is
right or not. It is a golden moment when you are encountered by something contrary to your ideas,
thoughts, which up to now you have been thinking are rational. But if they are really rational then
what is the fear?
It is fear that keeps these people closed.
They can’t hear you – they are afraid to hear.
And their anger is really their fear upside down.
It is only a person who is full of fear who becomes immediately angry. If he does not become angry
then you will be able to see his fear. Anger is a cover-up. By being angry he is trying to make you
afraid: before you get any idea of his fear, he is trying to make you afraid. Do you see the simple
psychology of it? He does not want you to know that he is afraid. The only way is to make you afraid;
then he is completely at ease. You are afraid, he is not afraid – and there is nothing to be afraid of
in a man who is afraid.
Their anger is an effort to deceive themselves.
It has nothing to do with you.
And these people.... You ask me what Jesus has done to deserve these people. You ask me a
wrong question. In fact, whatever Jesus has done, he deserves only these people. The problem is
not these people. The problem is the people who have some intelligence and still are Christians.
That is a miracle: having intelligence and yet being a Christian.
Perhaps these intellectuals who are still Christians are schizophrenic: their one part is intelligent and
their other part is Christian. And they never meet, there is no communion between these two parts.
From Personality to Individuality 328 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
When these Christians are in their lab as a scientist they function not as a Christian, remember, they
function as an intelligent being.
But when they are out of the lab and praying in a church, don’t think that they are the same people.
They are not the scientists, not the discoverers, they are not the intellectuals any more. They are just
as retarded as these Bible-bashing Christians – no difference. Perhaps they are even more closed.
They have a Berlin wall within their being, dividing themselves in two.
Galileo discovered that the earth moves around the sun. But he was a believing Christian, and when
the pope told him that because it went against the HOLY BIBLE he had to change it, Galileo said, ”Of
course. Whatever you say is my joy to do.” And now you can see how a person can be schizophrenic.
He touched the feet, kissed the feet of the pope – Galileo, a man of tremendous intelligence! And
this pope was just a third-rate mind who had never done anything intelligent. You would not have
even known that he ever existed; it is only because of Galileo that his name is remembered. That’s
all that he has done to be remembered.
But Galileo touching his feet, kissing his feet, asking his forgiveness.... And then he said, ”I am going
to do it. I will change that statement and I will correct it exactly according to the BIBLE: I will write
that the sun goes around the earth. But beloved master, I can change the text, but neither the earth
will listen to me, nor will the sun: the earth will still go around the sun.”
Do you see the schizophrenia? Galileo’s one side is kissing the feet of the pope. His other side
reminds the pope that he can change his statement – that is not difficult, it is his book. Whatsoever
Galileo wants to write, he can write. But what about the earth? What about all his experiments?
What about his discovery which proved that the earth goes around the sun, not vice versa? In that
one simple statement, Galileo’s split personality is clear. Perhaps the dividing wall was very thin.
Perhaps there was a little corner where both sides used to meet, just like neighbors taLking from the
windows, the balconies, over the fences.
And that’s what he did. He changed the statement, put a star on it, and in the footnote with the star
he wrote, This is what I believe as a Christian. But as far as reality is concerned, the earth goes
around the sun. About that I cannot do anything because I am just an ordinary man. It is not within
my powers.” That footnote – from where does it come? And the change of statement – from where
does it come? There are two persons certainly in Galileo, but he is not capable of seeing this split.
Every believer is bound to be split.
There is no way to avoid it because the moment you believe in something you have decided not to
listen to reason any longer.
But it is reason which finds facts, realities, indubitable truths.
So what are you going to do? Either you destroy your rationality completely – that’s why these
people, these Bible-bashing Christians, shout and go on talking; they won’t even give you a chance
to speak. You may be speaking – they go on reading from the BIBLE and flipping the pages.
They don’t care whether you are listening, whether you are questioning something, whether you are
asking something, whether you are saying something, no. This whole thing shows their fear that
From Personality to Individuality 329 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
if they really listen to you, they know what they have repressed in themselves: By their belief they
have repressed their own reason, and your reason can call up their reason.
There is a certain synchronicity.... This law has to be understood, the law of synchronicity. This
is the only contribution of Carl Gustav Jung to the modern world. It is something that is not yet
scientifically verifiable, but still it can be understood quite reasonably.
For example, sometimes seeing a stranger, for no visible reason you suddenly feel a tremendous
surge of lovingness, or hatred, or anger, or compassion. It seems to be that something between you
and him has transpired without any physical traces being behind it. Perhaps it was just in the vibe. It
means that one man’s energy is quite capable of arousing a similar type of energy in the other man,
so that they both start vibrating in the same climate of feeling.
Carl Gustav Jung came upon it very accidentally. He had two old grandfather clocks. They both
stood by the same wall and they always kept the same time. They were very old and they were not
expected to have such accuracy. Jung changed the time of one clock to be half an hour slow, and
the other to be half an hour fast. But within twenty-four hours they had come back to exactly the
same time. It was mysterious and puzzling, but he thought that perhaps subtle vibrations from both
clocks helped them to come to a synchronicity.
That accidental discovery Jung tried on human beings, and it proved really to be a profound
revelation. He showed that there is a certain law which is not yet known to science – perhaps
we’re not yet capable of finding instruments subtle enough to check it, but it is perfectly reasonable
and there are hundreds of facts which will prove it. For example, if you are very loving towards a
person, you need not even say to him that ”I love you” – because in fact that is needed only when
you do not love. That statement, ”I love you,” is required by a husband, by a wife, at least three, four
times a day – the more the better.
I have told you that a goldsmith used to live in front of my house. He was a little eccentric – that is
far better than being retarded – and an absolutely harmless person. But he used to get into fights
with his wife once in a while. That too is common... nothing abnormal about it. What was abnormal
and eccentric was that they would fight right in the shop with the doors open, and a crowd would
gather there.
And their fighting was not just verbal, it was physical. He would hit the wife and the wife would hit
him, because she had learned that there was no other way with this man: unless you hit him hard
he was not going to stop. He would catch hold of her hair, and she would catch hold of his hair, and
they would be standing there, with a crowd of hundreds of people gathered around. And what I used
to do was phone the police, because the police station was not far away.
I would simply phone from my house saying, ”A great drama is happening here. There are hundreds
of people, and if this thing goes any further there may be a murder or something. Come immediately.”
They were not far away, just one furlong from my house. So the inspector and the police constables
would come running. And when they came, they would catch hold of these people holding each
other’s hair and hitting each other.
Immediately the goldsmith would start smiling and say, ”There is no problem – we were just having
From Personality to Individuality 330 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
a conversation.” That was the only eccentric point worth listening to again and again: ”We were just
having a conversation, just a family conversation. There is no problem.”
He would immediately be angry with the people who were standing outside: ”What are you fools
doing here? Don’t you have wives? Don’t you have family conversations? It was simply a dialogue
that became a little physical, that’s all.” And he would tell the inspector, ”you need not be worried –
and I know who has phoned you because it happens again and again.”
The inspector would say, ”Who phoned is not important; what is important is that you are making a
public spectacle. If it is a family dialogue at least you can close your doors and have the dialogue –
and as physically as you want. It is your wife and you are her husband. She does not seem to be
afraid of you at all, she hits you far better than you hit her, so we are not worried about her, that you
can do any harm to her. But by collecting a whole crowd it becomes a public affair; then we have
to interfere. Next time we find you in this public family conversation, I am going to put both of you
behind bars.”
Once when they had gone and the crowd had left I asked, ”goldsmithji, everything was perfectly
good, just.... You call it a dialogue? Have you heard the name of Martin Buber?”
He said, ”no.”
I said, ”You should read Martin Buber – or it would be better if Martin Buber comes and studies
you, because he is continually after dialogues. His whole life’s work is to convince people that they
should have dialogue. He may not have even thought that the dialogue can be physical. You are
very existential. He thought only of verbal dialogue, but you are realistic, pragmatic, practical.”
The goldsmith said, ”i know you support me, and you are the person who phoned, because only you
have a phone here in this whole neighborhood. And whenever the police come you are missing; the
whole crowd is there but you are not. That is enough proof And after the crowd has gone, you come
and support me.”
I said, I certainly support you because I want people to be more physical, more grounded. This
Martin Buber knows nothing about dialogue. He thinks of just talking, yakkety-yakkety-yak-that is
not a dialogue. This is real dialogue: you make it from a fiction into a fact.”
These Christians have been in such a dialogue for two thousand years. They are far more dangerous
than this poor goldsmith because no bloodshed ever happened with him; it was just a mock fight.
But Christians have killed millions of people, and that was their way of making conversation. They
were telling you, ”We can prove our belief by killing you.”
Now, by killing somebody you simply prove that you are a brute, primitive. It does not prove that you
are right, that what you are saying is true. It simply proves that whatsoever you are, you are just not
yet out of the jungle. You should not even utter the word truth; it is not right from your mouth. And
from the Christians, Mohammedans learned the art of conversation, dialogue.
I asked Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, when he was prime minister in India, ”Can you allow me to have
my commune in Kashmir?” – because Kashmir is the most beautiful place, not only in India but
From Personality to Individuality 331 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
perhaps in the whole world. When Babar, the first invader who remained behind to rule India....
Other invaders came and went away; that had been routine for thousands of years. Invaders would
come and loot the country. They would take the beautiful women, they would kill and burn people,
and they would go away with all their loot – the gold, the diamonds, and everything that they could
get.
Babar was the first man who decided not to leave. He said, ”This is foolish, to come once in a while
and loot these people and go away. It is better to remain here and rule these people and go on
exploiting them. Why, what is the need to go back?”
When he entered Kashmir... the first words that he uttered have become very famous. On his horse,
looking back from a very high hill top at the beauty of the Kashmir valley, Babar said, ”I have never
believed in paradise, but if there is any paradise it is here.” And certainly Kashmir is paradise.
I asked Jawaharlal, ”Kashmir has enough land – it is all mountains – you can give me a place.”
He said, ”I can give you a place but I am afraid, because ninety percent of people in Kashmir are
Mohammedans. You will be killed, you cannot remain alive there. The little bit I know about you is
enough to convince me that you will be killed, and I am not letting you settle in Kashmir because I
would not like you to be killed. Mohammedans will not be able to stand you even for a single day.”
From Christians, Mohammedans have learned that it is the sword that decides who is right. Might is
right! So if you are powerful, you are right. If you are not powerful, if you don’t have a sword or a gun
in your hands, then your belief system is wrong. But this was given by Christians to Mohammedans.
Mohammedans accept Jesus as one of the great prophets. Their only quarrel with the Christians
is on a very small point, which is negligible. But even that negligible point has caused a constant
fifteen-century struggle between Mohammedans and Christians. You will be simply surprised – and
then you will not think that I am exaggerating when I say that these people’s basic qualification is
retardedness.
The negligible point is that Mohammedans don’t believe that Jesus had a virgin birth – and perhaps
they are right. They say his father was not his father, that much is certain; somebody else fathered
him. The Holy Ghost they don’t recognize, they believe that this is just garbage. And it looks like
garbage. It seems to be a cover-up story. It seems Mary became pregnant by somebody, and then
to make it mysterious, the Holy Ghost was introduced.
Mohammedans accept Jesus as a great prophet of God, but they name him Jesus ibn Mariam –
Jesus the son of Mary. And that is the problem, these three words: Jesus ibn Mariam – Jesus, the
son of Mariam, because Mohammedans always use the father’s name with their name. If he were
the son of joseph they would have called him Jesus ibn Joseph; that would have been his full name.
But because he is not joseph s son-that much Christians agree-he is the only person in the whole of
history of whom the Mohammedans say the mother’s name has to be used instead of the father’s!
We certainly cannot say Jesus ibn Holy Ghost!
This is the only difference, otherwise they agree on everything. But this simple, negligible,
absurd, irrelevant thing has caused thousands of wars, crusades, jehads – holy wars – amongst
From Personality to Individuality 332 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
Mohammedans and Christians. Now, both need to be absolutely retarded. What business is it of
Mohammedans to be bothered in the first place, whether Jesus is bin Mariam, or bin Joseph? All
three can go to hell! What business is it of Mohammedans?
And Christians cannot prove anything about the Holy Ghost without any evidence, any eyewitness
who has seen the Holy Ghost coming to Mary. Even Mary was not aware of when she was made
pregnant. The Holy Ghost must have used some instruments which mankind has not yet discovered.
Perhaps it was an injection, artificial insemination, but even then she would have awakened while
being given an injection. Perhaps it was with chloroform.... But then Christians have to provide all
these facts: in some way they have to make an arrangement to explain how Jesus got into Mary’s
womb.
You ask me why, what poor Jesus has done to deserve such stupid idiots as his followers. You
are asking without understanding Jesus. Jesus, and only Jesus, is responsible for all these idiots –
nobody else. It is not that he has done anything wrong, but his whole life and his approach towards
life is appealing only to retarded people.
For his whole life Charles Darwin was looking for the missing link. By the missing link, he means that
when monkeys became man it could not have been that a monkey jumped and became a man; there
must have been a link in between, where he was half monkey and half man. Evolution happens as
a process, not as a leap or jump – that you jump from monkey and become man, no. But what is the
missing link?
If I had had the opportunity to meet Charles Darwin – now there seems to be no hope – he was
also a very sincere Christian, and I would have suggested to him that Christians are the missing
link. Where are you looking? You can go to any church: if any intelligent man is found there, then he
has to be immediately put into a psychiatric ward; the remaining ones are the missing link. Monkeys
have not just jumped and become men, first they become Christians; without becoming Christians
there is no way.
Jesus gives no logic to whatever he is saying. When Buddha says something, he gives logic to it,
it is absolutely rational. And he is ready for a dialogue – not for a physical dialogue, he is ready to
argue with you. He welcomes argument, and if you can rationally convince him, he is willing to follow
you. That has been the tradition in the East.
I am reminded of a beautiful story of Shankara’s life. Shankara is one of the most intellectual, rational
persons you can find. In the West only Kant can be compared to Shankara, but not totally. He falls
a little short because Shankara was one thousand years before Kant, and still his arguments are far
more refined than Kant’s. Shankara traveled all over India challenging everybody, whoever wanted
to argue with him. The only condition was: ”If you defeat me, I follow you; if I defeat you, you follow
me.” It was not like boxing, otherwise Muhammad Ali would have forced Shankara to follow him –
and Muhammad Ali is a religious man. And I am now going to hurt a few people’s religious feelings.
Muhammad Ali goes once in a while to Mecca, to do hajj. Hajj is the Mohammedan’s holy pilgrimage,
and Mohammed has said at least once in a life every Mohammedan has to do hajj. If you miss hajj
you will not be allowed into paradise. So truth is not important, love is not important, compassion is
not important; what is important is a pilgrimage to Mecca. And you can do everything else you want,
From Personality to Individuality 333 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
but you should do hajj. Once a person does hajj he is called hajji. And that is a title that makes his
paradise a certainty; all hajjis go to paradise. So even poor Mohammedans....
In my village I have seen such poor Mohammedans collecting money, eating only one time a day so
that at least once in their whole life... because it will need their life’s savings. And I have seen people
selling their houses, their land, borrowing money and remaining always in debt because they could
not even pay the interest – there was no question of paying the original money. And they have taken
it at such high interest; nobody is going to give it to them at a low interest because everybody knows
the money is never coming back. And there is every possibility that this man may die because hajj,
in the old days, was almost a suicidal pilgrimage. Now it is a little better, but not much better.
So at such a high interest, perhaps twenty-five percent per month, they have sold themselves for
their whole lives, they have become slaves. Their house is gone, their land is gone, and whatsoever
they earn they have to give in interest; but people will take this risk because without becoming a hajji
there is no hope.
Do you think these people have any intelligence? And who is responsible for this? – nobody but
Mohammed, because he made it a rule. Rather than telling his people to be truthful, to be honest,
to be sincere, to be open, to be intelligent, he requires them to do a pilgrimage.
And there is nothing in Arabia but desert, suffering, heat, sickness, because millions of people every
year gather at a certain period – their holy days, Ramadan – for one month, and there are no hygienic
arrangements, no hospitals. Nobody bothers about what they are eating, what arrangements are
made by the government for their toilets, for their bathrooms – nothing, no question arises. Millions
of people are coming from all over the world, and thousands die every year just in the pilgrimage,
either going or coming back.
But Mohammed made it the one absolute necessity. And what logic does he provide? There is no
logic in it, because this place that they worship is far older than Mohammed. It used to be a temple
with three hundred and sixty-five beautiful statues. It was one of the most beautiful temples in the
world, with these three hundred and sixty-five statues of God – one statue for every day of the year.
So one statue was worshipped on one day, the next day the next statue, around the year. It was
a round circle of beautiful statues and in the middle was this stone, a black stone which they call
kaaba.
Mohammed destroyed all those beautiful statues which were pieces of art perhaps ten thousand
years old: a great historical evidence of art, that it was not only Michelangelo.... Ten thousand years
before him there were people as skillful as Michelangelo. Mohammed destroyed all those statues
because he was against statues. He said, ”There cannot be any statue of God. God should not be
given a form.”
But what right have you... if somebody wants to give God a form, and a beautiful form, who are you?
What right have you to destroy somebody else’s statue? But religious fanaticism.... Mohammed was
thinking that he was helping those people, by destroying their statues, to come closer to God. He
was removing the statues, the forms, so that they could know the formless God. But he saved the
black stone which was in the middle of the temple, and now they are worshipping that stone as God.
And Mohammed started the worship!
From Personality to Individuality 334 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
These people cannot even see what they are saying, and what they are doing to others, and what
they are doing to their own people. Mohammed taught those people to come to kaaba at least once
in a lifetime: unless you do it you are going to fall into eternal hell. And Mohammed told people that
you have to convert people at the point of the sword. When so much easier methods are available,
why bother about convincing, arguing?
When just a sword put on your chest is enough to convert you to the right path, then why bother about
arguing? So Mohammedans have been converting people at the point of the sword. But that was not
the case in the Eastern religions. These three religions, Judaism, Christianity, Mohammedanism,
are sister religions. Moses started the game and he is responsible for all these three kids.
Shankara went around the country arguing. He came to a place called Mandala – I have been to
Mandala many times. It is just a two-hour drive from Jabalpur, situated in a very beautiful place.
Narmada, one of the holy rivers of the Hindus, falls in one thousand streams. The mountain is such
that the river is divided into one thousand, exactly one thousand, streams. It is a beautiful scene.
The story is that there was one monster who had one thousand hands. Narmada is the only river
in India which is virgin, other rivers are married. This Sahasrabahu – one thousand arms.... That is
the meaning of the name: Sahasra means one thousand, bahu means arms – sahasrabahu means
a one-thousand-armed man. He said, ”I am going to marry this girl. She cannot escape me. I have
got one thousand hands; where is she going to escape?”
So he tried to catch hold of the river with his one thousand hands. But to destroy the virginity of
a woman, according to Hindus, is the greatest sin possible. Christians would have rewarded him,
given him some place in their trinity: another holy ghost. But Hindus have punished him – at least in
the story it is so; he turned into a stone. And really the whole mountain does look as if the Narmada
is falling through one thousand hands.
So Mandala has been an ancient place of pilgrimage and has always been a seat of great Hindu
scholars. One Hindu scholar had in his youth moved around just like Shankara; Mandan Mishra was
his name. Mandala was called after his name, Mandan, because he lived there. He was so famous
that the name of the place was changed and called after him.
When he was young he had moved all around the country and defeated all the scholars and
philosophers. He was old when Shankara was young, just thirty years of age – he died when
Shankara was thirty-three. After defeating everybody Shankara was a little reluctant to go and
challenge Mandan Mishra because Mandan was so old. But without defeating Mandan he could not
declare that he had conquered the whole country and convinced everybody that what he was saying
was true. Reluctantly he went.
Outside the town, at the we]l, a few women were drawing water. Shankara asked them, ”can you tell
me where the house of Mandan Mishra is?”
And all those women giggled and laughed, and they said, ”You need not ask. You just go into the
town and you will find it, because even the parrots in front of his house recite the VEDAS. You need
not ask anybody, you just go. The very atmosphere around his house will tell you that you have
come close to Mandan Mishra.”
From Personality to Individuality 335 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
Shankara was a little afraid – he had never heard of parrots reciting the whole of the VEDAS. And
in the end he went and he saw with his own eyes a row of parrots in the mango trees reciting the
VEDAS in perfect Sanskrit. He thought, ”this man seems to be difficult. But there is no way to avoid
it.” He went in, touched the feet of the old man with respect, and challenged him.
Mandan said, ”I am too old, but if you feel that it is necessary, then I am ready. But I feel a little
reluctant myself arguing with a young man. You are too young, and I am too old, too experienced
and I have won all over the country. You should think twice. Right now you have not been defeated
by anybody, but those are the people I defeated in my youth, myself; so think twice.”
Shankara said, ”I never think twice. I first take the jump and then think. Are you ready or not? If you
are not ready then you will have to become my follower.’
Mandan said, ”There is no problem for me; I enjoy a dialogue, I enjoy discussing – and with a man
like you it is really joyful. Even to be defeated is a great blessing. To have found someone who has
more intelligence than you is not a disgrace. But,” Mandan said, ”one thing has to be decided. You
will have to find somebody who can preside; otherwise the decision will be very difficult.”
Shankara had heard that Mandan’s wife was as great an intellectual as Mandan himself In fact, in
Mandan’s youth they had a six-month-long discussion, and only then was Mandan able to defeat
the woman. But the woman had, from the very beginning, put this condition: ”If I am defeated then
you will have to marry me. If you are defeated then certainly I am going to marry you because....”
Mandan saw that he was in a dilemma in every way; he was caught. And he could not refuse a
woman, that would be too unmannerly; you cannot refuse a woman. So he fought.
And the woman was really a giant; it took six months, and I suspect she got defeated by her own
doing. And I have reasons to suspect it, because anyway she was going to marry him. It would look
ugly to be victorious and then to marry a man who has been defeated – that would not be nice – and
to have a defeated husband.... So my feeling has always been that Bharti – her name was Bharti –
must have arranged it. Six months was enough to prove her mettle. All over the country, for even
six days nobody had been able to withstand Mandan. If she could withstand six months, she must
have turned the whole of Mandan’s blood to perspiration.
And she must have got herself defeated. Why I suspect it is because of this second debate between
Shankara and Mandan. Shankara said, ”I would like your wife to preside.”
Bharti said, ”I have no problem, if you choose me knowing perfectly well that I am the wife of Mandan
Mishra.”
Shankara said, ”That I know, but I know also that you are a great intellectual, that you were the
only one who almost defeated Mandan. And I cannot conceive of you – being Mandan’s wife, and
yourself an independent intellectual in your own right – as being unfair I accept you. Whatsoever
you decide will be, without complaint, accepted.”
The debate again lasted six months. Finally Mandan was defeated. Shankara asked Bharti’s
opinion.
From Personality to Individuality 336 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
Bharti said, ”Mandan is defeated but you are not victorious yet.” This was the climate of intelligence.
She said, ”Mandan is defeated but you are not victorious yet because 1, being his wife, according to
Hindu scriptures am half of his being. So you have only done with one half of Mandan Mishra. The
other half is still here. Now you will have to discuss with me.”
Shankara was tired enough. Six months with Mandan had been such a difficult job that many times
he had thought that he was going to lose. And then immediately to begin another debate.... And he
knew the woman had kept this Mandan in debate for six months; now what was going to happen?
But that woman was really intelligent. She said, ”I am not interested in theology – I am a woman – so
forget all about your BRAHMASUTRAS of Badarayana; SHRIMAD BHAGAVADGITA, VEDAS; I am
not interested in them, my interest is in Vatsyayana’s KAMASUTRAS” – the first book on sexology
in the whole world.
Now, Shankara was a bachelor, thirty years old. He said, ”Vatsyayana? – but I have not even read
him.”
Bharti said, ”You can ask for time to study.”
But he said, ”Just study won’t help, because I don’t have any practical knowledge.”
Bharti said, ”I can give you as much time as you want. You can get married, you can have practical
knowledge. But till you defeat me in sexology, on matters concerning sex and its subtleties, you
have no right to declare yourself victorious. Mandan is defeated, Mandan has to be your follower;
he can help you. He is old, he is my husband and he knows everything about sex. He can help you
now he is your follower. But half of his being still has to be conquered.”
Now, Shankara’s disciples must have invented the rest of the story because it seems contrived.
Up to then it was perfectly right, historical. Shankara asked for six months’ leave, and in those six
months he entered the body of a king who had just died – because he could not have experience
of sex through his own body, he was a celibate monk. And the woman had put him in such a spot
– either he had to accept defeat and become a follower of Bharti.... That would be stupid: Mandan,
his follower, and he himself, Bharti’s follower.
I don’t think it is true – Shankara must have experienced sex through his own body. Now let Hindus
and their religious feelings be hurt; what can I do? I cannot believe any nonsense that he entered a
just – dead king and used the king’s body and left his own body in a cave – I have been to the cave
also – with his disciples. They had to protect the body till he returned, so continuously, twenty-four
hours a day, they were guarding the body, taking care of the body. And for six months he lived in the
king’s body having all kinds of sexual experiences with his many queens.
And after six months he entered his own body; the king died. Shankara went back to Mandan for the
debate – and Bharti simply laughed. She said, ”I was just joking. When my husband is defeated, I
am defeated. His life is my life, his death is my death, his pleasure is my pleasure, and his pain is
my pain. His defeat is my defeat – you need not argue.”
Shankara said, ”My God! Then why did you put me to such trouble?”
From Personality to Individuality 337 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
But to me this seems to be just the same kind of story as the virgin Mary or as Buddha being born
standing. The mother was standing; Buddha came out of the mother’s womb standing, he fell on
the earth standing. The first thing he did was, he took seven steps and declared: ”I am the greatest
enlightened one who has ever come on the earth.” Now, all these hocus-pocus stories – but these
are the things which make these religions juicy, so even retarded people can enjoy a little bit.
Jesus gives no argument at all. He never confronted any rabbi; that would have been the right
course. The question is what Jesus did to deserve such followers. He did everything. He created
chaos in the great temple of the Jews by throwing the money-changers out of the temple, upturning
their tables. This is not the way of a man who says, ”god is love,” who says, ”love your neighbor as
yourself,” who says, ”love your enemy as yourself” but I don’t think he loved his enemies as himself
And he was not only throwing out these people, who were there for centuries.... And they were
playing an essential part; without them millions of poor Jews would have been in tremendous
difficulty. It was a beautiful institution. It was created to help poor Jews: they could take loans
from the temple at a very minimal interest so that they were not in the hands of local exploiters who
would take the maximum interest out of them. And they would never have been able to pay back the
original money because the interest was so much; they would have been slaves for their whole lives
without being slaves. And this was a great institution.
I don’t think it was wrong. It was perfectly right that the temple provided the poor people with money
at the minimum rate. And the temple had so much money. It was perfectly right, in every way ethical
to help the poor people because the money was also coming from the same people. But the way
the Christians present it is wrong, it is not right. The institution was perfectly right, and Jesus was
just creating a nuisance there.
He should have gone to the high priest, argued about it, told him, ”This institution of taking interest
from the poor is not right,” convinced him, ”give it to them without interest.” But no, he behaved
violently; he was an angry man. And this behavior is not an argument, it is just the dialogue of
my goldsmithji. You are not proving that you are right by throwing those moneychangers out of the
temple. And you are not destroying the system: they will be back, soon they were back. And soon
the whole Jewish system was angry with this man. If they had to crucify him I think perhaps they
had no other choice; this man was so arrogant.
I have thought about all those people who have been crucified, poisoned, killed – for example,
Socrates. I find him absolutely right, and the people who poisoned him and decided to kill him,
absolutely wrong. They were not able to answer any of his arguments. They were not capable,
nobody was capable, of as much intelligence as Socrates; those were ordinary pygmies. But it was
a ”democracy”....
Up to now there has never been any democracy.
Democracy has yet to come in the world; it has not entered it yet.
It has always been a mobocracy ca]led a democracy.
In the name of democracy the jurors, who were not even worthy to polish the shoes of Socrates,
decided by voting – and it was not a great margin, just by one vote: fifty-one were in favor of
From Personality to Individuality 338 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
poisoning him, forty-nine were against. They had nothing against him except meaningless words:
”He spoils the minds of people.”
Just the same complaint they have against me, that I spoil people’s minds. I simply spoil their
retardedness and help their mind to be free from their retardedness – and that was what Socrates
was doing.
Socrates had never done anything that you could say was done out of arrogance, or out of anger, or
out of jealousy. He was not standing for any public post, he was not interested in any power politics.
He was not a man of anger at all.
The story is that his wife – she must have been really a monster, but sometimes it happens that such
nice people as Socrates get such monster women. It is strange, but perhaps there is some balance.
Perhaps only Socrates could stand that woman; no other man I think could have lived with her for
even a single day. She used to beat Socrates and he would simply sit.
If his disciples asked, Socrates would say, ”It is her problem; she is angry. What can I do? It is
her problem – she is suffering, and out of her suffering and anger she is throwing tantrums. I just
happen to be sitting nearby so she is hitting me. But it is her problem, it is none of my concern.”
One day when he was teaching his disciples, she came in angry – because that was one thing that
she was very angry about, that he was always teaching truth, freedom, and never giving enough
time to her. All kinds of people were coming from faraway places; and with them, strangers, he was
wasting his time – strangers, who were of no interest. She was sitting there, boiling: she was his
wife and he did not give that much attention to her.
This is a common complaint of all the women of the whole world: that the husband goes on playing
chess with somebody, with more interest, goes on smoking a cigar with so much joy, reads his paper
the first thing in the morning; and the wife is shouting, and he does not even listen to what she is
saying. He says, ”Okay, okay,” for anything. He comes to bed and immediately starts snoring. And
with strangers....
So Socrates’ wife came with boiling hot water – she was preparing for tea, but Socrates did not get
up from this discussion, and the discussion was going on longer and longer, and the time for tea had
already passed; it was lunchtime by then – she came in great anger and poured the whole kettle
of hot water on Socrates’ head. Half of his face was burned and remained always scarred. But he
continued.
All the people who were there were shocked. They had completely forgotten the matter they were
discussing – and Socrates continued. They asked, ”Can you still remember what we were talking
about?”
He said, ”Yes – because this is her problem, this is not my problem.” Now, this man has no anger in
him, no arrogance, no desire to prove that he is a superman; there is not even a mention that he is
more than an ordinary human being.
Jesus is arrogant; naturally, he gets arrogant followers. He is the model. His utterances are not
those of a humble man. Although he says, ”Be humble, be meek,” it seems all this teaching is for
From Personality to Individuality 339 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
others – he is not humble. A humble man will not say, ”I am the only begotten son of God.” What
can be more egoistic?
A humble man will not insist that he is the messiah, sent by God, for whom you have been waiting.
When nobody is agreeing to it, drop the idea. It is up to them: if they don’t want the messiah, if they
don’t want to receive the message, what can you do? You are just a postman; and if the man says, ”I
don’t want to receive this envelope, you take it back,” what can the postman do? But he was a very
arrogant postman. He insisted on delivering the message; whether you wanted it or not, whether
you accepted him or not, he would deliver it.
I have thought many times that perhaps the Jews were forced by Jesus’ arrogance and anger, and
his continuously harassing them to accept that he was the messiah, to ask for his crucifixion. I don’t
think that it was just their fault; most of the responsibility falls on Jesus’ arrogance.
In India we have seen Buddha speaking against the VEDAS, but ready to welcome any argument.
Jesus makes only statements, there is no question of argument; he is the messiah and he has
brought the message.
In the whole of the four gospels there is not a single argument for anything. And I can visualize
the contemporary scene there in Jerusalem. He must have looked like a buffoon, moving with that
company – at least I would not have moved around with that company he was with. All those
twelve apostles are just Oregonians. I don’t see any spark in those twelve people: not a single
intelligent man, not a single rabbi, not a single scholar, not a single professor – nobody who had
some sharpness of mind was amongst those people that were following him.
So it is not just today – even when Jesus was here only idiots were around him. Only Judas was a
little educated. The others were all uneducated: fishermen, farmers, woodcutters, carpenters – all
were from the very lowest strata of society. And it is not that Jerusalem was lacking, Jerusalem was
throbbing with intelligence at that time. It was their peak hour: there were great rabbis and great
scholars and great, intelligent people.
Jesus should have converted them. Then you would not have found these Bible-thrashing – or is
it bashing? – bashing.... Thrashing is also good. You would not have these idiots who are angry,
cannot understand, are not able even to listen.
And Christianity got the major portion of humanity under it for the simple reason that the majority of
people are retarded. To be a follower of Bodhidharma you need tremendous qualities; to understand
Nagarjuna you will have to rise to your ultimate potential of understanding. But for Jesus nothing is
needed. All that he is asking is: ”Have belief in me, have faith in me, and that’s all you have to do.
The remainder is for me to do, and that will be done on the judgment day. I will choose and sort out
my sheep and tell my father that these people have to be saved and the remaining ones are to be
thrown into hell.”
Now, do you think any intelligent person is going to follow such ideas, with no logic, no reason?
Since that time he has been collecting these people, Jesus freaks, Witnesses of Jehovah. I have
met, in India, all these kinds of strange people, but for all of them Jesus is responsible because he
behaved wrongly. He did not follow what he was saying. If he had been humble, meek, if he had
From Personality to Individuality 340 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
been available to argument, ready to listen – but no, he was an absolute fanatic. Whatever he says
is truth; no other evidence is needed. He is the son of God, that’s enough. The son of God cannot
tell lies. He has been sent by God – but he should have at least taken a certificate from God to show
people.
On what grounds can a person say that ”I am the son of God”? And do you think that any intelligent
person is going to believe it? No. Socrates’ poisoning I sincerely feel was a crime against evolution.
Mansoor’s crucifixion I certainly feel was a crime against man’s growing potentialities. But with
Jesus I don’t feel the same, because he was responsible for whatsoever happened to him. And he
is responsible for what kind of people have been collecting around him.
And these idiots around the world go on purchasing Jesus’ ideas like hot cakes – or would it be
more correct to say, like hot dogs? I was thinking of suggesting to my Magdalena people to make
something like vegetarian hot watchdogs. They are really going to sell – vegetarian hot watchdogs,
not ordinary dogs.
The stupid and the imbecile, the retarded – they have all become Christians, and we have to help
them come out of their prisons. They are imprisoned. And the people who become Christians by
their own desire – it is okay. If they feel they want to be, that’s perfectly right, but nobody should be
forced by birth to be a Christian, or a Hindu, or a Mohammedan. Nobody should be forced by birth.
For a political election you ask that a person be adult, at least twenty-one years of age – to decide
about politics, which is a third-rate matter. And to decide about religion, which is the ultimate concern
of man, you don’t give any chance for the person to grow, to learn, to remain open and available to
all kinds of winds, and then choose. A religion has to be chosen, it cannot be inherited. Even if it
takes your whole life, it is worth it because it is your ultimate concern.
So anything that has been given to you by birth is ugly, whether it is Christianity, or Hinduism, or
Jainism or Buddhism; anything that is given to you by birth, drop it.
Search for yourself
Be adult, come of age.
Only then, perhaps, will we be able to free people from their imprisonments.
And if all the intelligent people are outside the cages, I have every certainty that many retarded
people will start having second thoughts. They won’t be Bible-bashing or Bible-thrashing Christians.
They won’t be angry if something against them is proposed. They will not be ready immediately to
cut off your head or shoot you, if you are saying something against their ideology.
A religious person remains open to the very last moment, to his death; to the very last breath he is
open.
That is a basic and absolute quality for a religious man: to remain always open – because who
knows, tomorrow a few other facts may encounter you and you will have to change your whole idea
of existence, of life.
From Personality to Individuality 341 Osho
CHAPTER 19. HELL HATH NO FURY LIKE A CHRISTIAN SCORNED
Nobody knows what tomorrow is going to reveal.
The revelations are not in the BIBLE or in the KORAN.
The revelations are in life.
And every moment is a revelation if you are open.
But if you are closed then you are dead. The day you become closed, you become dead.
There are dead Christians, there are dead Hindus, there are dead Mohammedans; the earth is so
full of dead people – but they are walking, talking, teaching, converting, doing all kinds of things. But
as I see it, rarely is there a living being amongst them, very rarely somebody who is still alive.
I call that man alive who is always open, who never closes the windows and the doors of his being,
because tomorrow is unpredictable.
All that we can say is: ”Up to now this is my experience; tomorrow will take care of itself”
From Personality to Individuality 342 Osho
CHAPTER 20
Fear of hell, greed for heaven, the saviors soft sell
18 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
IS IT WRONG TO TRY TO SAVE SOMEBODY? IS IT NOT PART OF COMPASSION?
COMPASSION is a very delicate affair. It certainly has some place in making an effort to save
others, but there are many conditions which have to be fulfilled first.
The first condition is that you are saved; otherwise, in the name of saving others you will be simply
destroying them. And in the effort of saving others you will be missing the opportunity to save
yourself Only a person who has come home himself can be of any help to somebody. A blind man
cannot help blind people. You must have your eyes opened; you must have seen light yourself before
you start telling others what it is.
Compassion certainly includes the idea of saving others, but not against their will. If somebody does
not want to be saved, you are not to force him; not at the point of a sword do you have to save him.
That is not saving. That simply shows that in the name of saving you are trying to dominate people.
In Raipur there is an old, very ancient pond. Because of its ancientness it is called budha talub –
old, aged, pond, and it belongs to the part of Raipur which is the ancientmost part. That part is also
called budha padu – ancient part, very old; budha means old man. And the pond is certainly very
beautiful in its oldness; all the old stone steps are covered with thick moss.
343
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
I used to go there just to sit because nobody goes there. The pond has become dirty; thick moss
floats on the water and the water is almost green. The pond has not been cleaned for years, so
nobody goes there. And there are other ponds in other places, so there is no need; the water is not
used any more. And because it was such a silent place I used to go there every evening to sit and
see the sunset.
One day when I was sitting there a man suddenly fell into the pond and started shouting, ”help!
Help!” I had not seen him when he came by, or how he slipped. Anybody could have slipped, those
steps were so slippery with moss. I jumped in to help that man and I pulled him out somehow. He
was very angry.
He said to me, ”Why did you do that?”
I said, ”This is strange! You were asking for help.”
He said, ”Yes, I was asking for help because I became so afraid, but really I wanted to commit
suicide – and you prevented me. I would not have shouted if I had any idea that somebody else was
present here; nobody comes here. What are you doing here?”
I said, ”This is strange, but when you started shouting,’Help! Help!’ I thought you were drowning. I
have unnecessarily become wet in this muddy pond and you are now angry.”
He said, ”Yes, I am certainly angry because that shout was just out of fear. I was not meaning to be
saved.”
So do you know what I did? I simply pushed him back in. What else to do? And he started shouting
again, ”Help! Help!”
And I said, ”Now I am not going to help. I have helped twice: the first time by getting you out; the
second, by pushing you back in. Now do whatsoever you want.”
He said, ”What kind of man are you?” And he was drowning – coming up and going down, and
crying, ”Help!”
I said, ”Not against your will.
He said, ”I am saying HELP” – but I simply sat there.
I said, ”You try yourself” He was not far away from the bank because I had just pulled him out, he
was just close, so it was perfectly clear that he would manage. And he did manage. He got a little
water inside him but he came out and said, ”You are a strange man.”
I said, ”I am a strange man? You are a strange man! First I saved you; you were angry. Then I
helped you by throwing you back in; you were angry again, and started crying out for help.”
He said, ”Yes, when I get into water I become afraid of death, but really I want to commit suicide.”
From Personality to Individuality 344 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
I said, ”Then you come at some other time because at this time I am always here, and if you start
shouting’Help!’ then it looks very strange not to help. But I cannot help you against your will.
Compassion cannot allow you even to do good to the other person if he is not ready for it.
Compassion gives total freedom, respect and dignity to the other person.
All these people who have been trying to save others are just a by-product of Christianity and its
conditioning.
In Buddhism there is no place for saving anybody. Buddha says, ”I can show you the way, but you
will have to walk. I cannot walk for you. And if you don’t want to walk, who am I to force you to
walk? At the most I can say I have walked the path, and the beauties of the path I can describe, but
I cannot force you in any way. That will not be compassion, that will be cruelty. If it is your pleasure
to go some other way, then all my blessings are with you. Even if you are going to hell, my blessings
are with you.”
Mahavira has taken a very clear stand: ”Nobody has ever been saved by anybody else. It is by its
very nature not possible, because if somebody can save you, then somebody can unsave you also.
Then your being saved is not something in your possession, it is given by somebody. It is just like
somebody can give you money and somebody else can steal it – you are not the master of it. And
at least your self-realization, your enlightenment, must be something of which you are the master,
which nobody can deprive you of.
”It is simple logic: if somebody can give it to you, then somebody can deprive you of it; there is no
problem in it. If you can be forced to be enlightened, you can be forced to be unenlightened.”
Mahavira is very clear, and I agree with him, that at least one ultimate thing should be left to
the individual. And enlightenment is the ultimate experience. It should not be borrowed, given,
purchased, forced; otherwise it won’t be the real thing.
It is the Christian stupidity that has spread the idea; no other religion before Christianity had ever
thought of saving somebody. If you know the way, you know the joys of the way; you can sing the
song, you can dance the dance. If somebody feels like moving with you, being a fellow traveler, not
a follower, then he is welcome. But there is no enforcement and you are not obliging him.
These are the beautiful points which have arisen in the Eastern consciousness over thousands of
years, that even if you show the way, you give the details of the path and you give the discipline,
you don’t make the other person feel obliged to you. You are not doing it for him; it is just your own
experience which wants to be shared. He is obliging you by hearing you, by giving you a chance to
share your experience. He is helping you to be unburdened of the fragrance that you are carrying
– and you want to be unburdened; you have to be thankful to the person – the question of saving
does not arise.
But after Christianity it became an almost universal phenomenon. After Christianity came
Mohammedanism, and of course they went to the very logical end: either you have to be ready
to be saved or be ready to die. They don’t give you any other choice, because they believe that if
From Personality to Individuality 345 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
you go on living unsaved you may commit sins and you will suffer in hell. By killing you they are at
least taking away all the opportunities of falling into hell.
And to be killed by a savior is almost to be saved. That’s what Mohammedans have been saying,
that if you kill somebody in order to save him, he is saved; God will look after it. He is saved and
you are accumulating more virtue in saving so many people. Mohammedans have killed millions of
people in the East. And the strange thing is that they believed they were doing the right thing. And
whenever somebody does a wrong thing believing that it is right, then it is more dangerous. You
cannot persuade him otherwise, he does not give you a chance to be persuaded. In India I tried in
every possible way to approach Mohammedan scholars, but they are unapproachable. They don’t
want to discuss any religious matter with somebody who is not a Mohammedan.
They have a word of condemnation for the person who is not a Mohammedan. Just as Christians call
him a heretic, Mohammedans call him kaffir – which is even worse than heretic. Kaffir comes from a
word, kufr; kufr means sin, a sinner. Kaffir means a sinner: anybody who is not a Mohammedan is a
sinner. There are no other categories, only two categories. Either you are a Mohammedan, then you
are a saint.... Just by being a Mohammedan you are a saint, you are saved, because you believe in
one God, one prophet – mohammed – and one holy book, the KORAN. These three things believed
is enough for you to be a saint. And those who are not Mohammedans are all kaffirs, sinners.
It is a strange fact that India has the greatest population of Mohammedans – even today, after
Pakistan was divided from India. Before the division, certainly India was the biggest Mohammedan
country in the world. With Pakistan, it was hoped that now Mohammedans were going to have
their own country. They got a great portion of the country, according to their population, but all
the Mohammedans did not move to Pakistan. All the Hindus in Pakistan were killed, so Pakistan
is purely a Mohammedan country. But the Mohammedans who did not move to Pakistan and who
remain in India are still more in numbers than in any other country in the world, Pakistan included.
India, although a Hindu country, has the biggest number of Mohammedans. Still it is impossible to
communicate. I have tried my best, but if you are not a Mohammedan then how can you understand?
There is no question of any dialogue: you are a kaffir.
I had a professor as my colleague in the university, who loved me very much. He was a
Mohammedan. I asked him, ”Farid, can’t you manage...?” Because Jabalpur is one of the big centers
of Mohammedans and it has great scholars. One very famous scholar, Burhanuddin, was there. He
was old, and famous all over India and outside India also as a scholar of Mohammedanism. I asked
Farid, ”Find some way for me to have a dialogue with him.”
He said, ”Ft is really difficult – unless you can pretend to be a Mohammedan.”
I said, ”That too is very difficult, because then you have to teach me a few basic things of
Mohammedanism – their prayer and what they do. And moreover that Burhanuddin knows me –
we have spoken many times from the same platform – so it will be very difficult for me to act. I can
try, there is no harm. At the most we may get caught and we can laugh at the whole thing.”
He said, ”You can laugh, but my position will be very bad. They will kill me because you are a
Mohammedan and you are supporting a kaffir, and deceiving one of your great masters.” But he was
From Personality to Individuality 346 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
willing to do it. He started teaching me the language, Urdu. It was difficult to learn because it is just
absolutely the opposite of any language that is born of Sanskrit. An Urdu book starts from the back
and the sentence starts from the right corner and goes towards the left.
It is so difficult to get adjusted: it is just upside down, the whole thing. You have to open the book
from the end; that is the beginning. And then the sentence starts from the right and moves towards
the left. And because of the way the Urdu language is written a perfect way has not yet been found
to print it or type it. The way it is written is not scientific at all; most of it has to be guessed. So
those who are accustomed to read it, they can read it because they can guess what it will be. But
for somebody who is learning, it is very difficult to guess.
But for six months I tried. I learned enough so that I could deceive somebody into thinking that I was
not very educated, but a little bit. I learned their prayers; Farid managed to get a wig for me and cut
my beard like the Mohammedans cut theirs. And their beard is so strange that even when I think of
it again now my stomach starts churning. But I went through it; they cut my mustache off completely
and left just my beard.
I said, ”my God” If you had told me before then I would not have wasted these six months!” In a way
they were right, because I know that a mustache is such a difficult thing – particularly a mustache
like mine which is not trimmed but is wild. I don’t allow Mukta to trim it. It is difficult even to drink tea
or to drink fruit juice because half of it will remain on the mustache. So Mohammedans have found
a way: they cut off the mustache, they shave the mustache, and they keep the beard. But that looks
so ugly.
But I said, ”Okay, we will do it. Now, for a few days I will not leave my house. Just give me a wig and
let me see Burhanuddin.” It certainly changed my face completely when Farid cut my beard like the
Mohammedans’ – very thin along the jawline and just a little bit of beard on the chin – like Lenin’s, a
little less. Without a mustache and with a wig I looked different.
We went there, but the old man detected something about my eyes. He said, ”I have seen those
eyes somewhere.”
I said, ”My God! Farid, where could Maulana” – Maulana means master; he was known as Maulana
Burhanuddin – ”have seen me? – because I have never been to this city.”
Farid was trembling, he was having a nervous breakdown: we had never thought about the eyes.
That old man continued to look, and he said, ”I suspect something.”
I said, ”Farid, he suspects something.” Farid just fell at his feet and he said, ”There is no need to
suspect – you know this man. And forgive me, I was just trying to help him because he wanted to
have a dialogue with you.”
But he said, ”First tell me who he is, because as far as I can remember, I have known the man and
I have seen him many times. You have just cut off his mustache.”
I said; ’Now it is better, Farid, that you tell the whole thing, that not only have you cut off my
mustache....” I took off the wig and I said, ”Look at the wig.”
From Personality to Individuality 347 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
The moment I was without the wig, Burhanuddin immediately recognized me, and he said, ”YOU!
I said, ”What else to do? You know me perfectly but you will not have a personal talk with me. Do
you think that just being a Mohammedan is enough to be a saint? And what sin have I committed?
”Certainly I am not a Mohammedan, but Mohammed himself was not a Mohammedan when he was
born. Was he a kaffir, a sinner? And can you tell me who converted Mohammed to Islam? He
was never converted. Just as Jesus remained a Jew, Mohammed remained a pagan all his life;
Mohammedanism is something that started after his death. So if Mohammed, a kaffir, can become
the messenger of God, can’t I discuss the message?”
Burhanuddin said, ”This is what I was afraid of That s why we don’t encourage any dialogue between
Mohammedans and non-Mohammedans.”
I said, ”That simply shows your weakness. What is the fear? I am opening myself to you, to be
saved by you. Save me – and if you cannot save me then let me try to save you.”
But that man simply turned towards Farid and said, ”Take him away – I don’t want to talk any more.
And you have to come tomorrow to see me.”
And Farid was punished, beaten. I could not believe it: he was a professor at the university, a well-
known scholar who was a guide to many research students working on Mohammedanism, on Urdu
literature, the KORAN. Burhanuddin had a few hooligans there – they gave Farid a good beating.
He showed me his body; all over his body were signatures of the Mohammedan attitude.
He said, ”I told you before, that if something goes wrong.... They have only beaten me because I
am a well-known person – if I were somebody else they would have killed me.”
From Christianity the stupidity has moved to Mohammedanism. But except for these two religions
no religion believes that you can save anybody; and in fact those other religions know more about
compassion than these two religions. This idea of being a savior is simply illogical. Try to understand
it.
You have been living for many lives; you have been doing things on your own. Now it is your
responsibility to undo all that. How can I undo it? I have not done it, I have never been a partner with
you in doing it. You have lived an absolutely free, individual life for many lives, and according to that
you have grown and come to this stage where you are. This is not accidental, this is the growth of a
long, long process. Now to undo that process you will have to take great responsibility on yourself I
can show you the way I have undone my process. Certainly, the same method will help you to undo
your process – perhaps with a little modification here and there. That you have to work out.
You can work it out with me, but that is going to be a dialogue, not dictation. I cannot dictate to
you, aDo this,” and give you a simple panacea so that you will be saved: ”believe in me and you are
saved.” Then not believing in me would be the only problem. Do you think that is the only problem,
not believing in me? If that is the only problem then certainly in believing in me the problem is solved,
you are saved. But that is not the problem. In your believing in me, your anger will still remain anger,
your greed will still remain greed, your jealousy will still remain jealousy.
From Personality to Individuality 348 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
Believing in me or Jesus or Mohammed is not going to change anything.
Do you think people who believe in Jesus are different in any way from people who don’t believe
in Jesus, who believe in Mohammed, who believe in somebody else? No, they are not different.
Deep down they are the same people, with the same jealousy, with the same arrogance, the same
egoism, same violence. Everything is the same, all the garbage is the same.
Believing changes nothing at all, so how can you be saved? The whole idea is idiotic.
Mahavira and Buddha are far more sophisticated than Jesus and Mohammed. One of my arguments
with Jaina monks began with this same question. Mahavira says: ”Nobody can save anybody except
himself. Everybody has to save himself.” Buddha says: ”Be a light unto yourself” That was his last
message before he died.
When Buddha was dying his closest disciple, Ananda, started crying. Thousands of disciples were
there, at least ten thousand disciples were there. They were all ready to burst into tears, but they
were holding back their tears somehow because Buddha would not like it: ”At least while he is going
beyond our reach let him go feeling that his disciples have followed his message.”
But Ananda could not contain himself. It was difficult for everybody, but for Ananda it was more
difficult because for at least sixty years he had been like a shadow to Buddha, serving him in every
possible way without asking anything in return. It was just a sheer joy to serve him and to sit silently
while he was talking to others, answering others. Ananda would never interrupt. It is very difficult to
find such a devoted person.
He was Buddha’s elder brother, his cousin-brother; he was older than Buddha. Before he was
initiated into sannyas Ananda had asked Buddha three things. He said, ”After being initiated I will be
your disciple; whatsoever you say there is no question, I have to do it, and I will do it. But right now
I am still your elder brother, so as an elder brother promise me three things and then initiate me,
because after that I will never be able to ask anything.” He asked three things, but he never used a
single promise.
One was: ”you will not say to me,’Ananda, you go somewhere else to spread the word.’ I am going
to remain with you to serve you. You have to promise me.” The second was: ”Even if in the middle
of the night I bring somebody who needs your help, you cannot refuse them. Anybody whom I bring
to you, you have to help; whether you are tired after the whole day’s work or not, it doesn’t matter. If
I bring somebody to you, you have to help him, you cannot refuse.”
And the third was: ”If I ask a question, you cannot tell me, as you tell others,’Be silent for two years,
three years, meditate, and then I will answer.’ No, you will have to answer immediately.” As his
younger brother, Buddha promised Ananda that these three things would be granted to him.
But Ananda was a rare man; otherwise, Buddha would have hesitated to accept these conditions,
because initiation cannot be given in a conditional way. He could have simply said, ”If you put
conditions on me then initiation is not possible” – because many other times a few other people
had come with conditions and he had refused them; but to Ananda he gave the promise. That is
unprecedented in the whole history of initiation. But I can understand why he did it; he knew Ananda
From Personality to Individuality 349 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
from his childhood – he was not a man to take advantage of anything. Buddha knew that Ananda
would never use those promises – he could be given them.
And Ananda never used them. He never asked a single question, he never brought a single person;
and of course, Buddha never told him to go away. If Buddha had said to, Ananda would have
gone-he would not have even mentioned the promise-but Buddha never asked him.
This man could not contain himself: sixty years was so long to be together. He had been just like
a shadow-and now he was left alone. Tears came to his eyes. Buddha opened his eyes to look, to
have a last look at his disciples. Seeing tears in Ananda’s eyes he said, ”Ananda, be a light unto
yourself I was not your light, and I was not your savior. My death makes no difference. In fact, now
you will have to understand what I have been telling you for sixty years: don’t remain in any illusion
that just because you are serving me and you are being with me devotedly – it is very difficult to find
such a devotion – still that is not going to save you.”
You have to go through a transformation.
And that only you can do.
It is such an inner work that even the Master cannot reach there.
Except for you, nobody can reach there.
And this is the beauty of the human soul:
It is absolutely unavailable to anybody.
Your center is so protected by existence:
Nobody can even touch it.
The question of saving somebody does not arise. Yes, the man of compassion tries his best to
explain to you the way, to explain to you how it has happened to him. But that is simply sharing his
story with you. Perhaps out of that story you can get some hints for yourself, but that is up to you.
In these twenty-five centuries since Mahavira and Buddha, Buddhism has completely disappeared
from India because Buddhist monks could not compromise with Hinduism in any way. And I think
that it is perfectly right: there is no need to compromise with anybody. Rather than compromising
they preferred either to be killed, burned, or to leave the country. So a very strange thing happened:
Buddhism was born in India, Buddha was born in India, and yet in India there are no Buddhists.
And there was a time when the whole of India was afire with Buddhism. Either they had to die...
but not a single Buddhist is known to have been converted, it is impossible. If you have understood
something how can somebody else convert you?
They left the country and spread all over Asia, so the whole of Asia turned to Buddhism. Except for
India the whole continent is Buddhist. Buddhists from all over Asia come to India to pay homage
to the place where Buddha had become enlightened. The temple that was made as a memorial
From Personality to Individuality 350 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
for Buddha’s enlightenment has a brahmin priest because Buddhists disappeared from India so
totally that even to find a priest.... For the memorial temple of Buddha’s enlightenment there was no
Buddhist available. And a brahmin... Buddha’s whole revolution is against brahminism.
But brahmins are professional priests. You can tell them anything, you pay for it, and they will be
the priest – it doesn’t matter. And to them it really doesn’t matter because Hinduism has thirty-three
million gods. When you can worship thirty-three million gods, one or two more makes no difference.
And they are not getting involved in your religion: just purely as professionals they perform the
worship.
I have talked with this brahmin priest who is worshipping in Buddha’s temple, just as a heritage. For
centuries his family has been worshipping there; they are almost the owners of the place. I asked
him, ”Are you influenced in any way by Buddha?”
He said, ”The question does not arise – we are professional priests. Somebody is a professional
doctor, somebody is a professional engineer; that does not mean that becomes his religion. My
religion is Hinduism and I go to the Hindu temple to worship for myself. This is simply a paid job.
I am being paid; and I go on receiving many gifts because visitors come from all the Buddhist
countries – Sri Lanka, Japan, Vietnam, Indonesia, Indo-China, China, Korea, Taipei, the whole of
Asia. So many gifts go on coming to me, it is a really profitable job, but I am a brahmin and I am
against Buddhism.”
Buddhists disappeared because they did not compromise, and Jainism remained a small stream
because it did compromise. It was one of the questions of debate for me all over India when meeting
Jaina monks or meeting them on a stage in some conference. They would all say, ”Mahavira was
born to redeem the whole of mankind from sin.”
I said, ”This is absolutely wrong – you are just put ting Mahavira’s name in place of Jesus Christ. It
is a Christian influence, it is not at all in tune with Mahavira. He was not born to redeem the whole
world, and if he was, the proof is there that the world is not redeemed. Nor has Jesus’ crucifixion
redeemed the world. Nobody has been able to redeem the world – it is nobody’s business to. If
you can redeem yourself, that is more than enough. And if you can spread a little bit of light and
fragrance around you, you are fortunate and blessed.”
Saving somebody is really a thankless job – you know, the way I saved the man in that ancient pond
in Raipur. He was shouting, ”Help! Help!” but he could not believe it when I pushed him back. When
he came out he said, ”The first time it was okay because I was shouting,’Help! Help!’ – but I was
just standing there and you pushed me?”
I said, ”I was simply undoing what I had done, because it was wrong, against your will. If you want
to commit suicide all my blessings are with you. If just a little push is needed, I am not so miserly
that I won’t give it to you.”
It happened when I was a student that I had a friend who was in love with a Bengali girl. He was
not a Bengali, but he was really a fanatic lover. He almost transformed himself into a Bengali; he
even started speaking Hindi the way Bengalis speak. It was impossible to detect that he was not a
Bengali because he was speaking Bengali very perfectly. That can be understood; but he started
speaking Hindi which was his mother tongue, the way Bengalis speak it – and Bengalis destroy it!
From Personality to Individuality 351 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
He learned that too just to influence that girl and her parents, to show that although he was not a
born Bengali, he was almost a Bengali. He started dressing himself the Bengali way and he started
carrying an umbrella, which Bengalis always do – I don’t know why. If it is raining it is okay, if it is hot
it is okay; but no matter whether it is raining or not, hot or not, cold or not, an umbrella is always with
them. It is a multipurpose thing: to drive dogs away, to beat somebody or to fight with somebody. It
has many purposes and is always handy. It has just become part of the Bengali personality – so he
started carrying an umbrella.
I said, ”Thakur” – he was by caste a Thakur.
He said, ”You are my friend, but don’t call me Thakur, call me’Thakoor’ the way Bengalis say it”the
”u” in Thakur becomes ”o”: Thakoor – ”otherwise our friendship is finished.”
I said, ”I am not a Bengali and it looks so foolish to call you Thakoor; I will be unnecessarily wasting
my breath. Thakur is perfectly good.”
But the family refused him, because Bengalis are very arrogant in that matter. They are just like
French people in Europe. They think their language is the best and their culture is the best. Even if
a Frenchman understands English he won’t speak it, he will speak in French. He cannot fall down
so low and just speak English. Bengalis do the same: they can speak Hindi but they won’t.
I have been visiting Calcutta hundreds of times but only Hindi-speaking people would come to listen
to me. Even in Calcutta – which is the capital for Bengalis – not a single Bengali would turn up for a
meeting. I had a few friends who would come to see me, and I asked them, ”Why don’t you come to
the meetings?
They said, ”Unless you start speaking in Bengali, no Bengali is going to come.”
You will be surprised that in Calcutta they call everybody who is outside Bengal an Indian. They are
Bengalis, and everybody, except them, is an Indian. That was strange to know. For the first time I
came to know in Bengal that I am Indian and they are Bengalis.
So the family refused Thakur. They said, ”You may speak Bengali, you may even speak Hindi the
way Bengalis speak, you may carry an umbrella; you have managed everything well....” The boy
started eating fish and rice, because that is the most important food for Bengalis – rice and fish. He
would not eat any other sweets than Bengali sweets. He was really a Majnu, a Farhad, a Romeo –
that kind of person.
But the family refused him, they said, ”We won’t accept you.” But he was not going to take any no
from them. He closed himself in his room and his family all tried to persuade him to open the door.
He said, ”I am not going to open the door. I am going to die in this room unless you go and persuade
that family. Either I have to marry their daughter or I am going to die.”
Now the family said, ”How can we persuade them? Those people don’t even consider themselves
Indians. You have become almost a Bengali.”
From Personality to Individuality 352 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
”If they have refused you,” the father said, ”they will not even talk to me because that’s far below
them. Bengalis have culture, they have great poets and great scientists and everything great. They
won’t listen to me.”
Still, he went – what else to do? Thakur was his only son, and he was being so foolish that he
wouldn’t open the door. The father went. He was a well-known doctor, but the family said, ”We
are sorry, but we cannot give our daughter to an Indian family. You will not be able to give her the
comforts, the food, the culture, that she is accustomed to, so it is not going to happen. Just persuade
your son.”
The trouble was that the girl was not interested, otherwise I would have managed something. I told
the boy, ”It is not a problem of being a Bengali or a non-bengali. I would have managed something
if the girl was interested in you, but she is not interested at all; otherwise you could have eloped. I
would have managed it.”
I had done it two or three times in my life. I had even arranged for my own brother to elope with a
girl, because my younger brother fell in love with the daughter of the landlord of the house where I
used to live.
My landlord was furious, but I said, ”Don’t be worried; I will persuade my brother when he comes
next” – because he was studying in the engineering college, so he came whenever he had time; the
engineering college was almost ten miles away from the place – ”whenever he comes I will explain
things to him. Don’t be worried.”
Meanwhile I asked his daughter, ”what do you want? If you are really willing then tomorrow you both
escape – I will arrange everything. He is madly in love with you but the question is, are you in love
with him?”
She said, ”I am more madly in love with him than he is with me.”
So I said, ”Then it is perfect.” I arranged a magistrate, but he was not willing to perform the marriage
in Jabalpur because the legal procedure is that one month’s notice has to be posted on the court
board:”such and such persons are going to be married. If anybody has any objection....”
But one month is a long time; if her father came to know.... I said, ”Do one thing. Post it, back-date
it one month tonight. Who will prove that it was not there for one month? On your notice board there
are hundreds of notices. Just paste it in a corner. It should be there – back-dated.”
He said, ”You don’t know law or anything.”
I said, ”You have to do it. It is not a question of law, it is a question of love. You have to do it! And I
have never asked anything of you – and I am not asking for myself. But my young brother and this
girl will both suffer their whole life. They will suffer anyway but let them suffer together! If they want
that then it is my duty to help – you just help too.”
He said okay. In the night he placed a back-dated notice on the board, but he was very afraid that
something might go wrong, even in the morning – the court did not open till then. He said, ”What I
From Personality to Individuality 353 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
will do is this: I will go to a village nearby where I go occasionally for tours as a magistrate. So you
send your brother and the girl there – nobody will be able to prevent them.”
So he went away, thirty or forty miles, and stayed in a guesthouse. I drove my brother and his
girlfriend there and got them married – the magistrate signed and sealed everything. But his fear
was right, because some clerk of his court found that back-dated note. The clerk knew the girl’s
father, so he immediately phoned and said, ”Do you know your girl is going to be married? Today is
the last day to register any objections, and the magistrate is not here, he has gone on tour.”
The father came running from his shop. I was missing, and the girl was missing. They went around
the whole town; their whole family was searching to find where we had gone. By the evening we
returned. I went to Delhi; I said to my brother, ”I am not coming home for a few days. Go to my
father’s house in the village, don’t go to the girl’s father. Go to my father’s house; I will phone my
father and tell him, ’I have got one of your sons married and I am sending him and his wife to you,
so receive them well at the station.’”
My father said, ”You are just a trouble, because you have already done it without asking me. Now I
can’t do anything about it – I will go to the station and receive them.”
I said, ”Give them a good reception, because the girl’s father is not going to give any reception. And
I will not be there because I don’t want to be seen with them; otherwise... he is my landlord and he
will throw me out and make me leave the house.”
After three days I came back. The landlord looked at me and he said, ”Where have you been?”
I said, ”I went to New Delhi.”
He said, ”Yes, I see you must have gone, but what happened to my daughter?”
I said, ”I don’t know. What happened to your daughter? I am not your daughter’s guardian.”
So he said, ”You don’t know anything?”
I said, ”No, I don’t.”
He said, ”They got married!”
I said, ”This is news to me. Who married them?” Then I persuaded him: ”If they have got married
then why make an unnecessary fuss about it? Give them a good reception. They are already
married – you cannot do anything. Legally she is adult, he is adult; you cannot do anything legally.
And you have showed me the one month’s notice: what were you doing for one month? And now,
when they have got married, you think about it? Be a little cool. This will be unnecessarily a scandal
for your family. Why make it a scandal? Give them a good reception and say that this is with our
wishes that they have got married.”
He said, ”It seems right; there is no point in doing otherwise.”
From Personality to Individuality 354 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
So I arranged it; I arranged that my father give a good reception to them. I organized things with the
landlord and then I phoned my father, ”Now you can bring the marriage procession to Jabalpur: her
father is willing to give a good reception.”
So I told Thakur, ”I have been arranging marriages – there is no problem – but the girl simply hates
you, it is not just that she does not love you. Even if she were not in love I would have persuaded
her, talked to her; at least she could feel compassion for you”because for six years continually he
had been trying to become a Bengali, and he had become one. ”But the girl simply hates you; she
says it is impossible!”
But he would not open the door and he was threatening, ”If you do anything I have poison inside.”
He did have poison because he had got poison from his father’s dispensary. ”I will drink it if you
force me or if you try to break down the doors.”
The father said to me, ”Now do something.”
I went to the door. I said, ”Listen, Thakoor.”
He said, ”So it is you?” – because he understood, nobody else would call him Thakoor.
I said, ”Yes, it is I.”
He said, ”I want to commit suicide.”
I said, ”I will arrange it – just come out with me. Here it will be difficult: even if you take the poison
you are not going to die immediately. Your father is a doctor; the door can be broken down and you
can be saved from the poison. It is not such a great thing. I found out from your father that that
poison can kill, but it will take at least eighteen to twenty-fours hours for the man to die. Meanwhile
the poison can be got out or an antidote can be given. So you see, it is simply foolish. Just come
with me; my car is waiting outside, just come with me.”
He came out and I took him home. I said, ”The best place to die is by the marble rocks. It is one
of the most beautiful places in the world.” For two continuous miles the Narmada flows between two
mountains of white marble. On the full-moon night it is an absolute dreamland: you can’t believe
that things can be so beautiful. So I said to him, ”This is good; although it is not full-moon night it is
very close. In just two days time it will be full moon. If you can wait for two days, good; otherwise
still it is good light. And you are going to die so what does it matter whether it is a full-moon night or
a no-moon night?
”I will drive you early in the morning – because that is the best time. In the night there are people
and you may be saved, because when the moon is there many people go for picnics or for boating,
so it is full. But in the morning there is nobody. It is a night place. In the day there is no beauty – if
you see it in the day you will not believe it is the same place that you saw in the night... a millionfold
difference.”
I had actually requested the governor, who was my friend, ”Close this place during the day. Nobody
should be allowed to enter to see the marble rocks then because it destroys the beauty of the marble
rocks. It should be open only when the moon is there, only for a few nights.”
From Personality to Individuality 355 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
He agreed but he said, ”there is no law like that And the Narmada is a holy river for Hindus: it
will cause trouble if we prevent people. They will say they are going to take a bath – and this is a
religious thing, so don’t get me into trouble.”
I told Thakur, ”Five o’clock will be the right time, so I am fixing the alarm for four o’clock. It takes
one hour to get from here to the marble rocks.” So in my room, on a table between our beds, I put
the clock. Thakur was tossing and turning; I said, ”what is the matter? You don’t feel like sleeping?
– because this is the last night. Have a good sleep. You will never be able to sleep again, so just
sleep.”
He said, ”Are you my friend?”
I said, ”Yes, certainly, Thakoor, I am your friend.”
He said, ”You are so interested in my suicide and you are making every arrangement: I wonder
whether you are my friend or my enemy.”
I said, ”I am just your friend. You want to die – I am ready to help. If you want to live, I am ready
to help. A friend is really known when a crucial moment comes, and this is such a moment. You
are going to die – at least I can help you.” I brought the car to the porch, and I said, ”In the morning
somebody may get up late, so it is better if I go to the gas station to fin it up now; in the morning,
at four o’clock, it may be difficult. We may not find the petrol pump owner, and some problem may
arise, so I am making every arrangement.”
The more arrangements I made, the more he became afraid of suicide. And at four o’clock when the
alarm went off he immediately put his hand on the clock. I caught his hand there and I said, ”This is
not good, because then we will be late.”
He said, ”But I am feeling too sleepy.”
I said, ”You can sleep in the car – don’t be worried. And it only takes a few seconds, you have just
to jump; if you cannot jump I can push you. And nobody can come alive out from the waterfall in
the marble rocks; nobody ever has. Many people have committed suicide there; it is a special place.
During examination times there are constables on duty twenty-four hours a day, because nobody
can come back alive.
”The waterfall is big and it falls onto rocks; so when you take a jump the waterfall takes you down
deep, perhaps a hundred feet or a hundred and fifty feet down, and then there are rocks all around.
You may be smashed on the rocks – nobody who has jumped there has ever come back alive.” So
I said, ”Don’t be worried: it is sure, guaranteed; there is no problem. Just have a good sleep in the
car now.”
He sat in the car very reluctantly. On the way he said, ”Are you really going to the marble rocks?”
I said, ”We decided on it.”
He said, ”Just take me to my home. I don’t want to get married to that girl. To hell with that girl! I
became a Bengali for her, and now I am going to commit suicide!”
From Personality to Individuality 356 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
I said, ”This is strange – you wasted my whole night and all the arrangements I have made. Don’t
change your mind – keep to your word.”
He said, ”You are saying that! It is my life and you are preparing for my death.”
I said, ”If you want I can leave you at your house, but remember, never mention suicide again.”
He said, ”That I understand. I will certainly not mention suicide to you, nobody should mention it to
you: you are dangerous.”
I said, ”I am simply helpful.”
He is still alive. He got married to another girl and he has children. The last time I went to Jabalpur
in’69, he said, ”If I had followed you and committed suicide it would have been better.”
I said, ”I am still ready. You should not mention it to me because if you still want to, there is no
problem.”
He said, ”No, I don’t mean it. I am simply saying that getting married and having children and a job
– it is worse than death.”
I said, ”If it is worse, I am still ready to help you.”
There are people who are living a life which is worse than death, but they are not courageous
enough even to commit suicide. And for transformation more courage is needed than for suicide.
For suicide, only a few moments of courage are needed. Just for a few moments you have to keep
hold of yourself, and then take a jump or shoot yourself It is just a question of moments. Any coward
can be brave enough for a single moment.
But transformation is a lifelong process – it is not a question of saving yourself for a few moments
This is the reason why people got interested in religions like Christianity, because Christianity sells
the idea so cheap. You have not to do anything: no transformation – the word transformation does
not even appear in the whole BIBLE – no meditation. The word is not Christian or Jewish. All that
you need to do is to believe in the messiah and go every Sunday to church. They can talk about
anything, because who listens to these boring preachers there? And because they are boring they
cannot conceive that there is a possibility of listening to somebody with deep intimacy and love.
I saw on television a panel of three priests: one rabbi and two Christians. They discussed many
things about me and about my commune – all rumors, there was nothing true in it. One thing they
discussed was: ”Osho has started speaking and He will be speaking every day now. Won’t people
get bored?”
Three priests... of course that is their experience. They don’t speak every day for three hours
continually. They speak only once a week, and not for three hours; otherwise people would kill
them. All the three priests are concerned that my people will get bored. They don’t know me, they
don’t know my people.
From Personality to Individuality 357 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
I have been speaking for thirty years continually, and I have not seen a single person sitting in front
of me, bored. That is impossible, because whatever I am saying is not borrowed. I am opening my
heart before you, and you are getting bored? That is impossible. I reveal myself to you, and you get
bored? That is impossible. But what those three priests were saying had a certain relevance in their
experience and so they all agreed that people would get bored.
The rabbi even suggested, ”We should also start something like this, approaching people – because
we have dropped that – talking about truth.” They don’t do that any more because there is no need.
Nobody wants to hear, nobody is interested in their God. Even they are not interested.
I have heard that three rabbis were discussing whose synagogue was the most modern. One said,
”In my synagogue women are even allowed to sit side by side with men. Even girlfriends and
boyfriends, those who are not married to each other, are allowed to sit together – even people sitting
with others’ wives, who I know are committing adultery. But my synagogue is ultra-modern and we
move with the times
The second one said, ”This is nothing, because in my synagogue there is no preaching, no prayer;
but a beautiful dinner is served and everybody enjoys it more than the sermon. The real question is
enjoyment. With a sermon people get bored. You mention the TORAH, you mention the TALMUD,
and they start thinking, How to escape from here? But just because of a delicious dinner everybody
from the congregation comes.”
The third one said, ”This is nothing – my synagogue remains closed on Jewish holidays.”
These people have nothing to do with truth; nothing to do with transformation, nothing to do with
your personality: they are simply part of a business. These are firms of long, traditional standing.
They are all doing business. The question is, whose customer are you? That’s what they mean by
saving: ”Why are you being saved by somebody else? We can save you in a less costly way, more
cheaply, in a more ultra-modern way. We can even keep the synagogues closed on jewish holidays.
What more do you want?” They are offering you everything – just be saved by them.
That reminds me again of Natthu Kaka. I was a regular visitor to his salon. I had no beard at that
time – I was a child – and no mustache, so there was no fear, but I had to use a scarf because I had
long hair, and if Natthu Kaka was in the mood he might start cutting. And once he had cut your hair
you could not do anything. And he was such a nice man, he would say, ”Why be worried? – you
need not pay.” It was, every day, a problem that he had shaved somebody without asking him, and
now the man was angry.
Particularly in India, people shave if they become sannyasins; that means they are dying in a
ritualistic way. When a person dies, he is shaved; it is just symbolic. Just as when a person dies
he is shaved, in the same way when somebody becomes a traditional sannyasin he is shaved. Or if
your father dies, traditionally all the sons will be shaved; but now they have found a little more liberal
way – only the eldest son has to be shaved. So to shave somebody’s complete head without asking
him.... And Natthu Kakka was really a craftsman: with just one hand half of your skull was shaved
dean. Now there was no way except to let him shave your whole head, because with it only half
shaven you would look more of an idiot than with it totally shaven.
From Personality to Individuality 358 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
So it was every day a question of a fight: people would get angry and would be ready to.... And
I enjoyed the scene. Natthu Kaka’s shop was just in front of my father’s shop so whenever there
was something happening I would immediately go there. But I kept my scarf in Natthu Kaka’s place
itself because sometimes I might be coming by and just see some great thing happening there –
somebody ready to hit Natthu Kaka, and him saying, ”You are getting unnecessarily upset. I am an
old man, an opium addict. I don’t know whom I am shaving and what is happening – it is all mixed
up. Somehow you got into my hands, and it is just an old habit to shave people, sol did it.
So I used to keep my scarf there: the first thing I would do is put on my scarf One day he shaved a
man who was a kind of political leader. Of course the man was very angry and he said, ”You have
to be punished for this. I am going to the police, I am going to the court.”
I was there. I said, ”There is no need to be angry, and even by going to the police and to the court
your hair will not be replaced. This poor man is not even asking money from you. And as far as
your hair is concerned....” This man was an educated man, and I used to have discussions with him.
So I told him, ”You remember the Zen haiku: ’Sitting silently, doing nothing, and the grass grows by
itself’? Why be so worried? Just take out ’grass’ and put in ’hair.’”
That day an idea came to me. I made a small board and put it in Natthu Kaka’s shop. Natthu Kaka
is dead but perhaps still there in his shop will be the board on which I wrote the haiku, with a note:
”If Natthu Kaka shaves somebody, don’t get angry with him; he is just an old savior. And if he has
shaved you, please meditate on this haiku:’Sitting silently, doing nothing, the hair grows by itself’
The hair will grow – don’t be worried.”
Perhaps that board is still there, or perhaps the shop is finished, because his sons were not
interested in doing business with him. They were trying to find employment, because, they said,
”With this old man we will lose business because we are not opium addicts. People forgive him
because everybody comes running from all the shops around here saying, ’Don’t be angry – he is a
nice fellow.’”
When last I went to my village – that was in’70 – he was still alive but very old. I went to see him and
he said, ”Since you have left for your studies, nobody comes regularly the way you used to come,
and nobody is there to help this old opium addict. I go on doing my thing – I can’t help it.” He would
sometimes catch hold of children and shave them, and then their fathers would come and say, ”What
have you done?” And his only answer was, ”I don’t ask for any money, can’t I even practice? Where
am I supposed to practice? No customers are coming and I am sitting without doing anything.”
In 1970 he told me, ”You are the only person who can help me” – because in my childhood there was
no legal prohibition on opium or any drugs; everything was available in the market. Only the person
who was selling needed a license that cost five rupees per year; the people who were purchasing
were not required to have any license or anything. But in 1970 when I went there, things had
changed. All drugs were prohibited; and the old addicts, like Natthu Kaka, were given licenses so
that they could get a little quantity every day. He was very angry.
He said, ”Only you can help, because I know how many people are opium addicts in the whole
country. If you lead us, and if all the opium addicts become united, we can turn over this government.”
I said, ”Great, Natthu! You want me to become the leader of the opium addicts?”
From Personality to Individuality 359 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
He said, ”I don’t know anybody who would be as understanding as you.”
I said, ”The idea is good, but to collect all opium addicts and to persuade them to make a party
and overturn the government is a very difficult job. I would have to do everything alone. Your opium
addicts would create trouble rather than be any help! Just drop this political act – this is not for opium
addicts.”
He said, ”Think about it, because you go around the country: you can just tell all the opium addicts
that this is simply unjust. I have lived my whole life with opium and I have not harmed anybody –
except that once in a while I shave people, but I don’t take any money. I have not done any crime;
in fact I don’t have any energy to do any crime, I am just enjoying my opium. My opium has made
me so simple and so innocent that people come and milk my cow and I go on seeing what they are
doing, but only later on I remember that it was my cow, that they were milking my cow and they have
taken the milk.
”I have not committed any crime; on the contrary people have been committing crimes against me.
They take soap from my shop, they take mirrors from my shop – and I am sitting there! But I am
enjoying my own world. So I don’t see what is the point in prohibiting opium. You can prohibit any
other drug – I am not concerned – but opium simply makes a man a gentleman.”
I said, ”It is true, Natthu Kaka, but it will be very difficult. I will TRY....” And I actually told Indira
Gandhi the whole story.
She laughed, and she said, ”He is, in a way, right, that opium addicts don’t create any trouble.”
Opium simply makes them hallucinate, and opium is a drug which makes you very happy, it never
makes you depressed; all other drugs have that possibility. Sometimes if your mood is depressed
and you take LSD, that will depress you more; if your mood is happy and you take LSD, it will raise
your happiness. It depends on your mood: the drug only exaggerates your mood.
Opium does not work that way. It simply relaxes you and helps you to hallucinate beautiful things,
nice things. It never gives you any nightmares, because this Natthu Kaka and his friends – I have
talked to all of them – never had any nightmares with opium.
So Indira told me, ”What he is saying is right, but to collect these opium addicts will be difficult for
you; and to overturn the government with their support – it will be really a revolution if it becomes
possible.”
This idea of saving is deeply insulting and humiliating to people.
The moment you say, ”I would like to save you,” you are reducing that person to a subhuman being:
You are a savior and he is just to be saved.
It is ugly, it is just sick.
It is not compassion.
Compassion shares.
From Personality to Individuality 360 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
And if somebody is available and open he absorbs it.
But the credit never goes to you; you cannot claim, ”I have saved you.”
The person saves himself:
That’s the only way, there is no other way.
The second question?
Question 2
OSHO,
I HAVE HEARD YOU SAY THAT YOU ARE NOT HERE TO INSPIRE ANYBODY HOWEVER,
THE FACT IS THAT I COME AWAY FROM YOUR RECENT DISCOURSES TOTALLY AFIRE AND
IGNITED BY WHATEVER IT IS THAT HAPPENS BETWEEN YOU AND US. PLEASE COMMENT.
YES, I am not here to inspire.
But you are here to be inspired.
These are two different things.
If you get inspired the credit goes to you. It is not me who is inspiring you, it is you who are open to
me. If you bring your candle close to me and it becomes lighted, is it my flame that is responsible
or is it you coming closer to me, bringing your unlighted candle? I don’t move a single inch towards
your candle, because that I consider a trespass.
I open myself completely to you.
I make my candle available to you.
You can bring your candle.
It is just as when a thirsty man comes to the well:
If he drinks and his thirst is quenched, all credit goes to him. In fact the well feels grateful, thankful
to him because as more water is taken out of the well, fresh water goes on flowing into the well. If
people stop drinking from the well and drawing water from the well, the water dies. Its inner sources
become closed; soon the well becomes poisonous.
If a man of enlightenment remains closed – which is impossible, I am just saying it for argument’s
sake – if a man of enlightenment remains closed he will destroy his enlightenment. But it is
impossible. Enlightenment becomes enlightenment only because he opens up. And he goes on
opening – there is no end to his opening.
All that he is, is only a presence. That’s why I say I don’t do anything. I am just here for you to do
something. You can come close to me. That’s what happens when I am talking to you: unawares,
From Personality to Individuality 361 Osho
CHAPTER 20. FEAR OF HELL, GREED FOR HEAVEN, THE SAVIORS SOFT SELL
you start moving closer to me. Your physical bodies remain where they are – and leave them there!
– but you start moving towards me. Perhaps you will understand what I am saying, because I can
see – when somebody starts moving towards me, I can see – the body is left behind and the person
has come very close to me. It is in that moment you feel afire, ignited. But the whole credit always
goes to you.
I am not the savior.
And I do not want ever to be known, by that ugly word, savior.
I am just a presence.
You can save yourself
You can burn your candles from my fire and my fire will not lose anything.
Yes, you will gain eternity.
You will gain ultimate bliss.
From Personality to Individuality 362 Osho
CHAPTER 21
Priest and politicians: from genesis to genocide
19 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
ALL THE OTHER MASTERS SEEM LIKE PYGMIES. WHAT IS YOUR SECRET?
THEY ARE pygmies. It is not a question that they seem like pygmies, they are in fact so – for the
simple reason that religion is now having its birth.
The so-called masters of the past are just like primitive scientists who discovered fire, who created
the spinning wheel, who invented the bullock cart. Yes, they were of great importance, but you
cannot compare them with Albert Einstein.
Albert Einstein comes when science has taken roots and has grown mature. It was not possible
two thousand years ago to get into the secrets of atomic energy. Yes, there have been people who
have talked about atoms; in India Mahavira talked about atoms, but don’t be deceived by the word.
By atom, he simply meant the last divisible part of a thing: you cannot divide it any more. And it
was simply a logical ideahe was not sitting in a lab and dividing things. But it is simple: everything
consists of smaller parts. The smallest part he called an atom.
Greek philosophers, nearabout the same time, talked about atoms in the same way, saying that if
you go on dividing a thing you will come to a point where you cannot divide it any more. Not because
they had divided anything – they had no instruments to come to the division where the atom exists
– but because logically, intellectually, there is no problem in it. It is conceivable.
363
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
In Greek thought and in Indian thought, Masters have come up with the idea of the atom. But when
Albert Einstein talks about the atom it is not just an intellectually conceivable thing, he has seen the
division. He has seen the molecule splitting; not only that, he has found that the atom itself is not
indivisible, it too is divisible into electrons. And nobody can say now that electrons are indivisible.
That certainty is not possible any more. In the eighteenth century the molecule was indivisible; then
it was divided. Then the atom became indivisible; then it was divided. Now with what face can
anybody say that electrons are indivisible? Only tomorrow knows.
But what we talk about today is experimental, not intellectual. And compared to Albert Einstein, the
ancient philosophers talking about atoms are bound to look like pygmies. It is not their fault; it is not
Albert Einstein’s glory either – just the time factor. In these twenty-five centuries things have moved
with a tremendous speed in every direction. Those people were working with primitive words, ideas,
instruments. We are in a better situation, a greater opportunity is available to us.
As far as religion is concerned, it is a little more complicated. It is easy to understand scientifically
that what Mahavira is saying is just ordinary compared to Albert Einstein. In religion it seems to be
a little complex, complicated, because we have accepted the idea that these religions – Hinduism,
Mohammedanism, Christianity, Judaism, Jainism – are religions. There is the basic fallacy.
They are only pseudo-religions. They are only preparing the way for religion to come. But of course
they could not be aware of it, that they were only preparing a way. They have prepared the way;
hence it is possible for a man like me to say things which were not possible for them. Of course they
are there in my statements; they have worked for centuries to create this moment. This time is not
out of nowhere, it stands on the shoulders of the past.
Of course you are standing on your father’s shoulders. He is standing on his father’s shoulders. You
can see further away than your father, than your grandfather. The farther back you go, the more the
vision becomes limited, more narrow and more narrow still. You are standing on a height.
So remember that when the true religion is born it is very much indebted to the pygmies because it is
standing on their shoulders. Without them it is not possible. Don’t forget it, that you are standing so
tall and you can see so far away just because underneath your feet the whole of history is supporting
you.
But it always happens that whenever somebody finds something, the human tendency is to
exaggerate. A little finding, a small truth, becomes exaggerated. And because it is truth nobody can
deny it absolutely. If you have a little imagination – and these Masters are mostly very imaginative
people.... They had found little fragments of truth – but don’t forget the tendency of the mind: it is
never satisfied with a fragment, it wants the whole. That’s the natural instinct in the mind, to search
for the whole. If it cannot &d it, then at least it can imagine it. So that little fragment which has been
found is surrounded by imagination, and it is made complete.
All these people – Jesus, Moses, Mahavira, Zarathustra, Lao Tzu – had come to a certain aspect of
truth, but they could not resist the temptation to complete it by imagination.
That temptation is a great temptation. It is just like you remember three lines of poetry, then it
becomes a strain on the mind; the fourth line is missing. You start trying to find it; you know it must
From Personality to Individuality 364 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
be somewhere in your memory. Three lines are there – where is the fourth? You become tense
about the fourth, and the more tense you become, the less is the possibility to remember it, because
a tense mind loses the capacity to remember.
A relaxed mind can easily remember; things from the unconscious can surface more easily because
the mind is relaxed. If the mind is tense, it is so narrow that it does not allow anything from the
unconscious to pass through it. It becomes the eye of the needle – and things in the unconscious
are like camels, not like rich men.
I have been thinking hard; I can imagine a rich man passing through the eye of a needle, but I cannot
imagine a camel passing through the eye of a needle. A rich man, howsoever rich, is still a man; a
camel, howsoever poor, is still a camel. It is impossible for the poor camel. The rich man at least is
a man: he may find a way to pass through the eye of a needle or may &d a way to bypass it. There
is no need to pass through it, he can bypass it. But the poor camel cannot bypass it, he does not
have that intelligence. He will go on struggling to pass through the eye of the needle. It is absolutely
impossible for him to pass; in fact it is impossible for him even to find the eye of the needle, or to find
the needle – where is the needle?
Small fragments of the truth have been found, but the mind has a great urge for completion, things
should be completed. To leave anything incomplete makes you tense. Once it is complete you feel
relaxed. But if there is no way to find truth in its wholeness, then mind has another faculty – the
dream faculty – which helps you. It is of great importance. It is a survival measure, so when you
cannot find something in reality, the dream faculty of your mind provides you what is missing. It gives
you ideas to put around, to figure out the puzzle. And because you have a small fragment of truth,
you can logically fight for your system. That’s how all religious systems have arisen.
Somewhere there is something true in all the religious systems, but the system has grown so big
that the truth is lost completely. It was a tiny fragment in the very beginning, then the mind started
creating a system around it. As there are more questions, the mind has to create more answers.
Slowly the system becomes so big that the truth for which it was created is almost killed.
You know perfectly well that skeletons of animals have been found which must have been at least ten
or twelve times bigger than elephants. The whole earth was full of those mammoth animals. What
happened to all of them? Where did they suddenly disappear? You cannot think that somebody
killed them. They were too huge, and there were no hunters available – man was not yet on the
earth. And those animals were the biggest, most powerful beings around. Your tigers and lions
were nothing, your elephants were nothing before them; they were at least twelve times bigger
than your elephant. Your crocodiles were nothing; there were crocodiles twelve times bigger than
elephants. What happened? There were many species – and suddenly they all disappeared. What
happened?
Scientists have been in great trouble to figure it out because their sudden disappearance makes
no sense. But slowly they found one thing which is very important to understand: those animals
disappeared because they became too big. It became impossible for them to carry their own burden.
The body was created to keep their souls alive, but the body became so big that even to carry it was
not possible for them. They died because of their size.
From Personality to Individuality 365 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
They could not move; and when they could not move then where to find food? Because of their
heaviness of legs, their heaviness of body, they simply started falling down. They had life, but now
life was such a small fragment, and the system that was created to protect that life became so
huge....
The same has happened to religions. Fragments of truth have been found. Then to protect that
fragment, systems have been created – -very articulate, very sophisticated. But then those systems
started growing on their own.
Now, Mahavira has no control over preventing a system.... One day he dies, but the system goes
on growing; the system takes on its own life. Now, Jesus was not even aware that there was going
to be Christianity – -and such a huge system! The biggest organization on earth is that of which
Jesus was not even aware. Something, a very small fragment of truth, is bound to be there. Even in
the biggest lie there is some truth, because the lie cannot move on its own; it has no legs. It has to
borrow legs from truth. That’s why every lie tries to prove, ”I am true.”
Truth needs no evidence. But the lie needs a thousand and one pieces of evidence, and still it is a
lie.
There is an ancient story: when truth and lie were sent to earth, the first night when they went to
bed, the lie was very embarrassed because she had no legs. But a lie after all is a lie – -cunning,
clever. Truth was sleeping – -snoring, relaxed: that’s the way of truth. The lie cut off the legs of truth,
and since then she has been running on those stolen legs. Now, truth tries to catch hold of her and
get his legs back, but without legs how can truth catch hold of the lie?
Truth is truth, but feels helpless. And the lie, although it is a lie, feels tremendously powerful. And I
don’t see any way truth will be able to get his legs back. In the first place, how is he going to catch
hold of the lie? She is always ahead of him, far ahead.
All the scriptures of the world say that in the end truth is always victorious. Whenever I have read
this I have said, ”Yes, in the end, but never before that. Before that, the lie is going to be victorious.”
In the end... and when is it going to be the end? And what is the point in being victorious in the
end, when all is finished? All the way along the lie was victorious, and in the end, when there is
nowhere to move, the lie may give the legs back with a ”Thank you. You can take your legs and
do whatsoever you want.” Her purpose is fulfilled. The truth remains without legs for the whole way,
embarrassed, knowing that it is truth but it still cannot race and be victorious against the lie.
Every lie at least has some truth: those legs, those two legs. If you look closely at any lie you
will always find a fragment of truth without which it cannot stand. And if you look at any truth, you
will always find it surrounded by lies, because without those lies it cannot feel complete; something
remains missing.
The first book in the whole history of mankind which accepts this truth was written by P.D.
Ouspensky, on the philosophy of George Gurdjieff. The name of the book is IN SEARCH OF THE
MIRACULOUS; the subtitle is FRAGMENTS OF AN UNKNOWN TEACHING. But Ouspensky must
have had tremendous courage. If you read the book you will think there was no need to put that
subtitle: it is a complete system.
From Personality to Individuality 366 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
Why did Ouspensky put that subtitle? If you remove that subtitle you will never be able to think that
these are fragments of an unknown teaching, because he is making the teaching known; and reading
it you will find it is a complete system, nothing appears to be missing. But why did Ouspensky add
a subtitle? He was really a very sincere man.
The subtitle says many things. If you don’t understand the subtitle – -and I don’t think anybody reads
subtitles; there is no need. You read the title, you read the book. And in most cases subtitles are
useless, but not in this case – -the subtitle has tremendous significance. First, it says these are only
fragments. Ouspensky, being a great mathematician, was absolutely unimaginative. You can see
the point.
A poet is imaginative, has to be, otherwise he cannot be a poet. Now, all the VEDAS of the Hindus,
the UPANISHADAS of the Hindus, the DHAMMAPADA of Buddha, the KORAN of Mohammed, are
all poetic. The UPANISHADAS are pure poetry. Jesus was not even speaking in poetry but prose,
yet his prose is very poetic. There are poems which are not poetic and there is prose which is poetic.
Just the form is of prose; otherwise it is full of poetry. Hence, the modern poetry has dropped the
old form – -now you can write poetry in prose.
That is a great revolution. Up to now, the form was thought to be the poetry, not the substance.
For the first time, in the modern age, we have changed the whole idea: the form has nothing to do
with poetry, but the substance has. The form may be of prose or poetry, that is irrelevant: it is the
substance which makes it poetic.
Jesus’ statements are very poetic – -the ”Sermon on the Mount” is pure poetry. But with poetry the
danger is that it is imagination. It is beautiful, impressive, appealing, touching to the heart, but it is
not rational. It can be absolutely irrational, it can be superstitious, yet it will appeal to you; hence all
the old religions have used poetry. The whole SHRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA is pure poetry.
It is not a coincidence that all great scriptures are written in poetic form. There is a fundamental
reason. What they wanted to say was a very small, fragmentary truth. To say it, as it was, would not
have appealed.
It is just as if you bring a leg of a chair, and you say, ”This is a chair.” The chair is supposed to be
sat upon, but the people are going to ask, ”How can one sit on this leg? You must be kidding. Just
show us: sit on it, and we can see what happens.” Just the leg of a chair is not going to prove that it
is a chair. So you have to substitute with your imagination, and give them an idea of the whole chair
on which you can put your real chair leg. But an imaginative chair is needed.
All these people were poetic. There must have been people who had discovered fragments of truth
but they were not poetic; hence they remained silent. It is not that only these few people have
attained some realization of truth; many more have attained, but they were not poetic people, not
imaginative people. And they felt embarrassed to bring out a small piece of something and to brag
about it.
One of the great philosophers of this age, perhaps the greatest, Ludwig Wittgenstein, says in one of
his aphorisms: ”Things that cannot be spoken of, should not be spoken of” He is not denying that
there are things of which you cannot speak – there are – but he says, ”If you come across things
which cannot be spoken of, please remain silent, don’t speak.”
From Personality to Individuality 367 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
In the first place you will be committing a crime against the truth because the moment it is spoken,
it is no more the same.
And if you insist on speaking about it then you will have to substitute much with imagination. And
the imagination will go on growing, because it needs no search for you to go on adding to a system
with your imagination.
Truth needs tremendous search and risk.
It is going into the unknown.
Ouspensky’s subtitle was FRAGMENTS OF AN UNKNOWN TEACHING. He is a mathematician
– he cannot substitute anything with imagination. That is against his conscience, the conscience
of a mathematician. The poet has no such conscience; otherwise he cannot create poetry. The
mathematician needs such a conscience; otherwise his mathematics will be just of no value He
has to stick to truth, howsoever incomplete it is He has to drop the temptation of completing it with
imagination. That’s why Ouspensky says ”fragments.” He cannot say that this is a whole system,
although by reading the book you cannot detect why he is calling it fragments.
One of my professors was in tremendous love with Gurdjieff’s and Ouspensky’s teachings. IN
SEARCH OF THE MIRACULOUS was his BIBLE, KORAN, GITA – you can call it anything. He
always kept it on his table – I don’t know how many times he had read it. And he was continually
writing on the margins. The whole book was lined, double underlined, with notes on the fragments;
anywhere there was space, there were notes.
I asked him, ”Can you give me some substantial evidence why Ouspensky calls his book fragments?”
He looked at me and said, ”I have read the book dozens of times, but strangely, I never
bothered about the subtitle.” That was the only place where he had not underlined! I said, ”First
underline’fragments,’ and write down a note underneath it too:’Why?’ You have read it dozens of
times: can you support the subtitle? Is it only fragments?”
He said, ”I have been reading it as a system, and it is a system.”
I said, ”It is not a system, but you cannot detect that because you don’t know what is truth and what
is not truth. You have no experience; you are just a professor, a scholar. And you have destroyed
the whole book by writing notes on it. This book is not for writing notes, this book is to be practiced.
What have you practiced out of this book?”
He said, ”Practiced? I have been studying it for at least twenty years.”
I said, ”You can study it for two hundred years, that won’t help. This is the reason why he is saying
that these are fragments. So beware; if you start practicing it, you will still need a Master, because
between two fragments there is something missing that you cannot even figure out. How can you
figure it out? If you don’t know the truth then how can you find what is missing?”
Ouspensky is very truthful and sincere in saying that these are only fragments, and fragments also
of an unknown teaching, because he says, ”I cannot declare that they are my knowing, I have only
From Personality to Individuality 368 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
heard them from a man, and I don’t know whether he knows or not. One thing, I can certainly feel
that he has some sources from where he got them.”
Gurdjieff was continually talking about how he had been to Sufi schools and had traveled in India
widely, to be with Masters. Not only that, he had been to Tibet – in a disguise, because it was very
difficult to enter the palace of Lhasa, the Dalai Lama’s palace, where all the ancient scriptures are
collected. The palace is just on the top story, and there are seven basements underneath it. It is
a whole mountain carved into basements: seven basements underneath, which are full of ancient
scriptures.
How to enter Lhasa? First, how to enter Tibet was a problem. Secondly, even if you managed
by bribing the British officers in India – because they were the people to prevent anybody entering
Tibet. Britain never wanted anybody to enter Tibet. Britain kept Tibet as a buffer land between India
and China, and it was perfectly sane politics to keep a country as a buffer land.
China is a big country. It had never invaded India, they had always been friends; and India has never
invaded anybody, so the question did not arise. But China had been invading Mongolia, Korea and
other countries. It had never invaded India simply because it was Buddha’s land, and it is ugly to
invade one’s own Master’s land. Because of that idea, India remained uninvaded by China while
even small tribes were invading and making empires in India. China could have overrun India any
time without any difficulty.
Britain was keeping Tibet as a buffer state so that before China could enter India, first it would have
to enter Tibet. And if fighting happened, it should happen in Tibet: Britain should fight in Tibet
rather than in India. That’s sane politics, to fight in somebody else’s country, because then the other
country is destroyed, its people are destroyed. You use it as a battlefield; only your army is involved,
your people are not involved.
The Indian politicians, after the freedom struggle, did not have such insight, obviously, because they
had no experience. For two thousand years India had been in slavery, so it had no experience;
they dropped that buffer state. And strangely enough, as India dropped the buffer state of Tibet and
made it completely independent – because it was an independent country; Britain was controlling
its foreign policy and its borders, but in everything interior it was free. Tibet had no interest in the
outside in any way because it had no contact with the outside world – no railways, no cars, no roads.
It was absolutely unconnected with the outside world. The only airstrip, which was in Lhasa, was
owned by Britain. That was for Britain to send its officers or army or anything – or to offer to the
Dalai Lama, just as a friendly gesture, if he sometime needed it.
India removed all those armies that were surrounding Tibet, and made Tibet completely
independent. It was good, nice, but not politics. China immediately invaded Tibet, and once Tibet
was invaded, China was on the borders of India. Then China, for the first time in the whole of history,
invaded India.
The Dalai Lama had to be approached in some way, and not only approached: Gurdjieff had to
become so intimate with him that he could manage to enter the underground libraries and have
some understanding of many things of which he had fragments, but incomplete.
From Personality to Individuality 369 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
He managed it through Russia, because through Russia also Tibet can be reached. He entered
Tibet with a slightly changed name, Dorjeb, not Gurdjieff. The record is still maintained with the
name Dorjeb. And he entered with a certificate from the Russian czar that said, ”We are sending
Dorjeb to be a tutor for the young Dalai Lama.” The Dalai Lama was very young, he was eleven, and
he needed to be taught about the outside world.
For Gurdjieff it was a double role. He told the czar that he would function as an agent for him, to give
him all the information that they needed. And his own purpose was to know about their religious
practices. The czar was not interested in the religion. He said, ”That is your business, you can take
care of that, but information has to come to us.” With the czar’s letter he entered Lhasa and became
the teacher of the Dalai Lama.
As the teacher, of course he was given quarters in the Lhasa palace, and was as respected as a
teacher of the Dalai Lama should be. He tried all possible ways, and found methods and people
who could help him to read Tibetan and translate it.
Gurdjieff really worked hard in Tibet, India, Egypt, and the Caucasus to find all the people who were
alive and had some experience of truth. But what he found were all fragments. He was trying to
create a system out of them, and he did create one. But he was neither a poet nor a scientist. He
was not a writer, he was not an orator; he had no time for all these things. His whole life he had
been searching for people who know, finding how to approach them and how to persuade them that
they should tell their truth, what they have found.
Gurdjieff has written three books – only one was published in his lifetime – and his writing is a
nightmare. I don’t think anybody who is not as mad as I am is going to read his book, ALL AND
EVERYTHING. Yes, it is all and everything! But one thousand pages of ALL AND EVERYTHING....
He himself was suspicious about whether anybody could understand it or not. And how long he
took! He took years to write it, and his way of writing was also strange.
He would be sitting in a cafe in Paris, where people were coming and going. That was really a
method. If you sit in the Himalayas and you write something, that’s nothing; it doesn’t show that
you are writing with full awareness. You may have fallen asleep and gone on writing; you may
be dreaming and writing – because there is no disturbance. So all the writing Gurdjieff did was
in different cafes in Paris where much was going on: music, dance, customers coming, shouting,
talking... everything was going on. And cafes, particularly in Paris, are meeting places of artists and
poets, who are all argumentative. He was sitting in the middle of such a crowd, writing ALL AND
EVERYTHING.
It was a method on Gurdjieff’s part. His disciples said, ”You can find a better place – you have a
beautiful place outside Paris.” His commune was in a beautiful place. ”there, in silence, you can write.
You come from the commune to sit in these crowded cafes where nobody has ever written books
before; at least religious books have never been written in such circumstances.” But he insisted on
writing there. And his writing was such that he would write one chapter, then his disciples would
read it. One disciple would read, and Gurdjieff would watch the other disciples: what impact was it
having? How much deeper...? No book has been written this way.
If they were understanding it too easily, then Gurdjieff had to change it because that meant, ”If these
idiots can understand it, then it is not worth printing.” It took him twenty or thirty years, working
From Personality to Individuality 370 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
continually; again he would write the chapter, again it would be read. Again somebody would be
yawning, somebody would be sleeping, and he would have to change it. If it created yawning, if it
created sleep, then what was the point of writing it? Again and again, hundreds of times, a single
chapter was rewritten, and the disciples were tired of reading the same chapter again and again.
In this way he wrote one thousand pages, but still he was not sure that anybody was going to get
it, its meaning. So he told the publisher, ”The first hundred pages should be cut and the remaining
nine hundred pages should remain uncut, with a note: ”you can read a hundred pages. If you still
feel ready to go ahead, then you can cut the remaining pages; otherwise you can return the book
and take your money back” – just a sample of a hundred pages.
It is a well-known fact that almost all the books that were sold came back. Not even a hundred
pages could people read. And the publisher was at a loss, but there was no question: the money
was given by Gurdjieff, so there was no question, it was his publication. He said, ”This is nothing to
do with you. Whatever your service charge is, you can have it, but this is how my book is going to
be. Unless a person reads a hundred pages, he is not qualified to have it. After reading a hundred
pages, if he is ready to open the rest... once you open the remaining nine hundred pages, even a
single page, then the book cannot be returned.”
And he was costing the book with no reason – no rhyme, no reason. There was no price printed on
it: the price varied according to the customer. That was a great idea of Gurdjieff’s. From one person
he would ask one thousand dollars; to somebody else he would give it free. It was according to the
customer – the price was not to be according to the book.
That man always had some good ideas. From a man who is really into the book you should not ask
for money. The book has to be given as a gift; he deserves it. And from somebody who has too
much money, and is going to waste it anyhow in Monte Carlo or in some other gambling place, why
not ask ten thousand dollars? And there are people who will purchase it only if it is ten thousand
dollars; otherwise it is below them – it is not worthwhile.
His disciples were continually asking, ”Books have prices; you can fix any price. But this seems to
be strange, that you are sitting in the bookshop, and you judge the customer. Are you selling the
book or purchasing the customer?” And the book is really written in such a way.... No other book
has ever been written like that – and I hope no other book is ever written again that way.
Gurdjieff makes strange words, mixing many languages. He knew many languages, nomadic
languages which don’t have alphabets even. You cannot find dictionaries of them because those
languages don’t have any dictionary, they don’t have any alphabet. They are only dialect, not
languages; they are only spoken. And one word does not mean one language: one word means
two or three languages joined together. And a long word may run a full sentence – one word! He is
really taxing you as much as he can – your patience, your intelligence – but if you can go through
the whole book it is really paying: slowly you start getting the knack of his almost impossible words.
When you come across them again and again in different places you can start feeling a certain
meaning. You may not be able to say what it is but you start having a sense of it. And if you go
through the whole book you are absolutely certain what it is about although you cannot say, because
it is only a feeling that it has left within you. His whole effort is somehow to bypass your intellect.
From Personality to Individuality 371 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
Intellectually, you cannot move even one paragraph into it. your intellect will say, ”Stop! This is
nonsense.” And it is nonsense as far as intellect is concerned.
But this book was not written when Ouspensky wrote FRAGMENTS, it was written when Ouspensky
was no longer with Gurdjieff. He had left him, because he could not understand so many things
in Gurdjieff And he was a mathematician: he wanted to understand things very mathematically,
methodologically. And Gurdjieff was just absurd. You could not connect any two of his actions, you
could not connect any two of his statements. Today he says something; tomorrow he may simply
deny it, saying, ”I never said it” – and you risk your whole life because he said it!
Ouspensky got fed up. But he loved the man, so although he left Gurdjieff, what he did was divide
Gurdjieff in two: the Gurdjieff with whom he was, and the Gurdjieff with whom he wasn’t. The
Gurdjieff with whom he was not, he was against; and the Gurdjieff with whom he was – he was his
Master. So Ouspensky remembers him as ”G”; he never writes the full name because the full name
will give you a misunderstanding – you may think he is talking about the whole Gurdjieff – so he
simply talks about ”G.” ”G” means Gurdjieff when Ouspensky was with him.
Certainly Gurdjieff had fragments. He tried hard to make a system out of them, but he was not the
man – poetic, imaginative – to create the system. So although he wrote three books, only one was
published in his lifetime. The next, MEETINGS WITH REMARKABLE MEN, was published after his
death. And he had certainly met remarkable people, unknown to history; they will always remain
unknown to history. They were remarkable because they had found some fragment of truth, but they
were not able to speak about it or explain it. You could be with them and find a way somehow to
understand it.
What Gurdjieff used to say was, ”There are people who have found the truth. They cannot say it,
they cannot show it to you; you have to be with them to steal it.” Actually he said, ”Unless you are
capable of stealing, there is no way. Those people – they know it, and you can see that they know
it, but they don’t have the language, they don’t have the concepts, they don’t have the words. And
perhaps that’s why their truth is so pure, worth stealing.”
Once a person has language, words, imagination, poetry, he can make a system around his truth.
And then the system goes on growing, it takes on its own life – that’s how all theologies have grown
up – and you cannot find out where the truth has gone. It was such a small fragment anyway in the
beginning, and now the mountain of theology on top of it.... You cannot figure it out, where it is.
The second reason why Ouspensky used the subtitle, FRAGMENTS OF AN UNKNOWN
TEACHING, was because it was not from one man. Gurdjieff had collected fragments from almost
all over the East; it was not from one source. Gurdjieff was a great collector, and he must have been
a thief because he has stolen authentic fragments. But to fit all of them together was an almost
impossible job. That was possible only for a man who knew the whole truth; then he could put all
those pieces of jigsaw puzzle in their right places. Gurdjieff carried all those pieces of the jigsaw
puzzle his whole life....
The third book has been published just a few years ago. That’s how he wanted it: first, one book
while he was alive; then the second book when he was dead; then the third book when he was
completely forgotten. But even in all those three books he has not been able to give you the system;
From Personality to Individuality 372 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
it still remains fragments – pieces of immense beauty, but not a necklace. They have not fallen into
the hands of a jeweler who can cut them, give them shape, give them right proportions, and who
can create a rhythm in all those fragments so that they become a single, organic whole. The books
remain fragmentary, parts of an unknown teaching. Many people have got lost through them; many
people have gone insane through them.
Gurdjieff worked hard his whole life. But this century has two great failures: George Gurdjieff and
Jiddhu Krishnamurti. Both men of immense caliber and quality, but both total failures.
You are asking me, what is my secret.
There is no secret.
Or you can say this is my open secret:
That I need not create a system.
Truth, to me, has not been a fragment, it has not come to me as a fragment.
Truth has revealed itself to me as a total, organic unity.
I have not added anything to it. I have not edited out anything from it. And because I am not a
theologian, I am not interested in making a theology; hence I can give it to you in simple words, in
ordinary language, without any trouble.
My open secret is that I am not bringing in big words and theories and dogmas so that you have to
be very intellectual and very sharp, no.
All that you have to be is just as ordinary as I am.
All those people who have been claiming to be messiahs, avataras, paigambaras, tirthankaras, prove
only one thing: they had a small fragment but they knew that they still had an inferiority complex.
That small fragment cannot destroy your inferiority complex. Unless you know the truth in its totality,
your inferiority complex remains. So they had a fragment and they bragged about the fragment. And
they had an inferiority complex still, so they projected some superiority; they are the only begotten
son of God, they are the messiah, they are the messengers, they are the reincarnations of God – or
things like that.
All those claims simply indicate an inferiority complex deep down.
Anybody who tries to prove that he is superior to others, superior to everybody, is suffering, is sick.
They were all sick with an inferiority complex. They could not say, not a single one of them was able
to say, ”I am just a human being as you are, and this is my secret.”
I am the first who is saying to you that I am just a human being as you are – absolutely ordinary.
If you can drop your desire to be superior, if you can accept your humanity just as it is, with no
desire to change it – if you are not trying to improve upon yourself – with that desire dropping, your
From Personality to Individuality 373 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
inferiority complex will disappear. Improving upon yourself is just like trying to pull yourself up by
holding your legs. You may try to jump; maybe for a second you will be in the air, but next moment
you will be flat on the earth, deeper in the Big Muddy Ranch, from where even to get out is very
difficult. It is better not to jump.
Because I have no projection of superiority, I have no sickness of inferiority.
And truth is everybody’s birthright.
It is not something that only a few people are entitled to get: you are born with it.
Just because you go on running after other things, you don’t have time to look.
There is an ancient story. One man had gone for a morning walk. It was dark, and by the side of
the village pond he stumbled on something; it was a bag. He was curious to know what was in it, so
he sat down, opened the bag and put his hand inside – it was full of stones. He was waiting for the
sunrise, because that was his routine: at sunrise he would take his bath, then he would go home.
Having nothing else to do, he started throwing those stones in the pond, and enjoyed the plop, plop,
sound; in the silence of the morning after each plop it became even more silent.
By the time the sun was rising, he was just going to throw the last stone. But in the sunlight he
was amazed; it was a diamond! You can understand his misery, his anguish. He had thrown away
thousands of diamonds. Such big ones – now he remembered the weight. And what an idiot he
was! A crowd gathered – he was in tears. They asked, ”What is the matter?”
He said, ”This is the matter,” and he showed them the diamond. Nobody had seen such a big
diamond, so shiny in the morning sun. They said, ”So you should be happy that you have found this
diamond.”
He said, ”You don’t know the whole story. You might be happy if you found this; I cannot be because
I found a whole bag full of bigger diamonds than this. And I am such a fool – I went on throwing
them, just like a child.”
A famous jeweler was also in the crowd. He came up close and started laughing. The man said,
”Why are you laughing?”
He said, ”this is not a diamond – you are unnecessarily getting into misery! This is just an ordinary
stone, a shiny stone but not worth anything.” The tears disappeared and the man was okay; now he
threw away that stone also. If it was just a stone what could you do with it?
The jeweler moved on. Another man followed him – because he also knew something of jewelry,
though not much – and he took hold of the famous jeweler. He said, ”I am just a learner, but I could
see it was a diamond. You are a master jeweler, but you said that it was not a diamond.”
The jeweler said, ”I know it was a diamond, but that was the only way to get that man out of anguish;
otherwise his whole life would be ruined. Just to save one diamond do you want me to ruin his whole
life? Yes, it was a rare diamond. I have never seen such a big diamond in my whole life, but that
From Personality to Individuality 374 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
poor man’s life is far more important. If I had said it was a diamond, that man would have lived his
whole life in terrible anguish because he had lost so many diamonds. Now he will be happy. It was
worth it to have him throw that diamond away. He will go laughing. He will tell the story to people,
laughing, enjoying it.”
I am a jeweler in just the opposite story; you all have stones and you are clinging to those stones.
Unless you throw them away, unless your hands are empty and your being is empty – empty of all
desiring, of getting this, getting that, reaching there, becoming that....
When you are utterly empty, at that moment you are ordinary.
And to me, to be ordinary is the greatest thing that can happen to a man.
Everything else is worthless.
But I am not telling you to throw those stones knowing that they are diamonds; they are not
diamonds. That man was a really courageous man; he took the word of the jeweler – although
the jeweler was lying, but lying for his sake. He was open to the jeweler’s suggestion that he had
just a shiny stone of no value: he threw it.
You are carrying real stones, not even shiny stones, dirty stones full of crap – perhaps just dry crap,
not even stones. They are centuries old, but you are clinging to them and you won’t leave them. If I
somehow manage to have you drop them from your left hand, you take them up with the right. And
you are such a split personality that your left hand knows not what your right hand is doing; your
right hand knows not what your left hand is doing. You drop it from one window and immediately
bring it inside through another window.
My secret is simple, but you are complex, not simple.
I am ordinary, you are not – that is the trouble.
You are extraordinary. Whether you say it or not, is not the point: deep down you know you
are extraordinary. It is very difficult to find a person who deep down does not know that he is
extraordinary. He is made in the image of God, and you are telling him that he is ordinary?
These people – these messiahs and messengers – have all been telling you they are extraordinary,
and that you can also be extraordinary because you have the potential to grow. You have the
potential to be on the right path, to have faith in the right holy book, in the right prophet. Of course,
who is right they decide; you cannot decide it. How can you, in your darkness and blindness, decide?
So they decide what is right – you simply follow it. And they are showing you the way of becoming
extraordinary.
What is it all about – getting to heaven?
There is a question somebody has asked – not a question, in fact, but a statement. I had said, a few
days ago, that Christians don’t have any idea what happened to Christ after resurrection. I repeat
it again: they don’t have any idea. Now I make it even more clear – they don’t have any idea what
From Personality to Individuality 375 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
happened before resurrection and what happened after resurrection. They don’t have any idea what
Jesus was. He was just a fanatic Jew – nothing more, nothing less.
But somebody says that after nine days, after resurrection, angels came from heaven and they took
him away to heaven. The statement must be from some Christian... he has not written his name.
Now, this man may be a sannyasin, but from one door I help him to throw something, and he brings
it back inside again from the other door: ”After nine days angels came and took him up...” and why
didn’t these foolish angels turn up when Jesus was crucified? That was the time to come, the real
moment of the show, when thousands of people were there and they had all gathered to see the
miracle. That time God was missing, angels were missing, the Holy Ghost was missing; they all
disappeared at the right moment. Only in need do you know whether a friend is indeed a friend or
not.
When Jesus was crying and asking, ”Father, have you forgotten me, have you forsaken me?n really,
he was left in a limbo. If there is any God, and if God had sent him, then this God is not a God
you can trust, not a God who keeps His promises. When Jesus was being crucified, and the final
moment of proving had come – because this was the proof, that when he was crucified God would
immediately save him. Perhaps the cross would change into a throne of gold. If God was behind the
game, then at such a moment where was He, what was He doing?... and the people were laughing
and making jokes about poor Jesus.
Never has a man been made such a laughingstock as he was. They had put a crown on his head
and written on the cross, ”King of the Jews,” because he used to call himself the King of the Jews.
And he would say that he owns the kingdom of God, and that anybody who was with him, he would
allow in the kingdom of God. Of course, it was his father’s, and he was the only begotten son, the
only inheritor. If Nietzsche is right and God is dead, then by now Jesus must have inherited the
kingdom of God – who else?
But nobody turned up. The poor man cried – he was asking for water because he was thirsty, it was
hot – but no angel came. At least a little cloud might have showered; anything was possible. There
was no need for an angel to appear, just a cloud might have showered. But nothing happened when
it was time, when it was needed.
And after nine days, before whom was he taken to heaven? Have you got any eyewitnesses? And
why after nine days? And as least he should have been taken before eyewitnesses, particularly
before the Jews who have crucified him. They should have seen that they had committed a mistake.
And if God’s idea of sending His son to the world was to redeem humanity, then stealing him away
without anybody knowing does not seem to be the right thing to do. But they had to invent some
story because once he is resurrected then what to do with him? – because someday he has to die
again. And they don’t have any record of when he died, where he died. I have the record. I have
seen his grave, where he died, where he lived.
There was no resurrection. In fact crucifixion never happened, it was sabotaged. After six hours he
was brought down from the cross, because the next day was the sabbath of the jews. On that day
nothing could be done, not even a crucifixion; naturally he had to be brought down. This was the
conspiracy between a very rich lover of Jesus and Pontius Pilate.
From Personality to Individuality 376 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
Pontius Pilate also wanted to save the poor man because Jesus was a little eccentric, fanatic –
accepted – but he was harmless. If somebody goes about on his donkey shouting, ”I am the only
begotten son,” I think it is free entertainment; no need to make much fuss about it. At the most you
can put on some entertainment tax. That too you cannot put on the man; you can put entertainment
tax on those people who are enjoying it. Anybody who enjoys this man should have to pay a certain
fee to the temple of the Jews. And that would have been perfectly alright.
If I were the high priest this is what I would have done. I would have persuaded jesus, ”Always stay
in front of the temple and we can collect entertainment tax. Go on doing your show. Do at least
three shows – a matinee show, a first show and a second show. And if you want a little portion of
the income that will be given to you – but you are doing such a great job, such a circus!
I don’t think that you have to crucify circus people. He was absolutely harmless. Pontius Pilate was
in favor of him. He had given many warnings to the high priest, ”Why are you unnecessarily after this
man?” But the high priest and all the rabbis and their council were stubborn: they could not tolerate
him. He was pretending to be their messiah; he was making a mockery of their messiah. They said,
”We cannot tolerate him, he has to be crucified.” And Pontius Pilate was afraid for his own post.
This is how politics goes: Pontius Pilate was the viceroy from the Roman Empire. The Roman
Empire had sent him there as a representative of the empire to rule over the Jews. He was afraid that
if the Jews – particularly the high priest and the council of rabbis – reported against him because they
were telling him to crucify a Jew and he wouldn’t.... This was a religious question, and the agreement
was that their religion would not be interfered with. He was afraid that he may be recalled. And he
had remained so long out of Rome that going back now he would be nobody. In fact he was a very
powerful man, that’s why he was sent out. This is how politics works.
Pontius Pilate was from the royal family, and he was so powerful that King Herod was afraid that he
could become a competitor. Herod was old, his son was very young. Soon he would die and his
small, young son would be on the throne: this Pontius Pilate was so powerful a politician, he might
grab the throne. So to avoid this a great post was given to him: he became viceroy in judea.
A similar thing happened with Lord Mountbatten just in this century. He was of the royal family and
in his youth he was a playboy, so he was creating scandal upon scandal. The family was in trouble,
because being of the royal family, he was defaming the whole family; if he continued to do this....
Then too he was really a very royal figure – powerful, tall, beautiful. He would have really looked
a king if he was chosen. He might create some trouble, he was already creating too much trouble:
it was better to send him away. He was sent to Burma as a viceroy, far away from England, to do
whatsoever he wanted to do in Burma. No scandal would reach England because even the post
used to take three months. So there was nothing to be worried about, and who would bother about
what Mountbatten was doing in Burma?
They arranged his marriage to a woman who was really ugly. She had some kind of disease which
causes leathery skin; her skin was leathery – just like leather, not like skin. She was really ugly. How
did they manage to have that poor playboy married to that woman? Perhaps the playboy himself got
caught in it. Playboys get caught in such things because they are continually moving, but once in
while they are caught in such a situation where they have to get married. So he had to marry that
woman.
From Personality to Individuality 377 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
They sent the woman with him to take care that he did not create any scandal, and naturally he
couldn’t because he was viceroy there. It was impossible for him to mix with common people or
even to talk or misbehave in any way. And when he had finished his post in Burma and came back
to England, they immediately sent him to India. They kept him continually out of England. Churchill
was very much for it, that he should remain out, he should not be in the country – he would create
trouble.
Now Lord Mountbatten is dead, but while he was alive the queen was continually troubled by him,
because he became the guide of the prince of Wales. The prince of Wales, who was his nephew,
followed him rather than his father or his mother, and his parents were very much concerned that
this man was going to soil the future king of England. If he had missed the chance to be king, he
would do it through the prince of Wales. They must have felt great relief when he died in an accident
– actually, he was killed.
Pontius Pilate, who was a tremendously powerful politician, was sent to Judea. He was afraid that
by now people must have forgotten him – people’s memories are very short. For fifteen years he
had been in Judea; now who would remember him? In fifteen years, many other powerful politicians
must have made their way up. And now the boy was no longer a boy, he was the king – Herod
was dead. Herod’s son was now in power, and Pontius Pilate did not know any longer what was
happening in the capital. And here he was happy – now he was all-powerful and almost a king. So
he was afraid. He had to listen to the priest, but deep down he wanted Jesus to be released.
He made one last effort. There were three people to be crucified. Every sabbath there was the
opportunity – if the high priest chose – for one person to be forgiven. Pontius Pilate was hoping that
– those two who were murderers certainly deserved the death penalty but Jesus had not committed
any crime – the Jews would ask for Jesus to be released. But the Jews didn’t ask for Jesus to be
released. Murderers are just murderers – there was nothing much to do about itbut this man was
dangerous because he was mocking their idea of the messiah, mocking the idea of God, creating
this stupid story that he was the only begotten son, that he was not born of a human being, that he
was born out of the Holy Ghost. He was playing with their whole theology.
They asked that one murderer – Barabbas or something was the name – be released. If they wanted
it, then Barabbas had to be released. And do you know what Pontius Pilate did? He did something
which Sigmund Freud would have been shocked to know. He went in and he washed his hands. It
was Sigmund Freud who, two thousand years after Pontius Pilate, discovered that whenever a man
feels guilty he washes his hands, for no reason; they aren’t dirty. There was no reason at all for
Pontius Pilate to wash his hands – he was not going to take his lunch or dinner, nothing like that.
There was no reason at all why he should wash his hands.
From the platform, from outside where they asked for one murderer to be released, sad, Pontius
Pilate came into his room and washed his hands. Perhaps he did it absolutely unconsciously –
because I don’t think he would have managed to read Sigmund Freud. That seems to be a little too
much. Nine days after the resurrection angels may come, but Pontius Pilate reading Sigmund Freud
seems to be a little too much!
It was Sigmund Freuds finding that people, when they are just sitting and washing their hands without
water, just trying to wash their hands, are feeling guilty about something. Certainly they are feeling
From Personality to Individuality 378 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
that something is pricking their conscience, and they are trying to wash it away without knowing it.
You can see many people sitting just making the gestures of washing; no water, no soap, but still
they are washing something. And they are not aware what they are doing with their hands. You must
know that your right hand is connected with the left side of your brain; your left hand is connected
with the right side of your brain. So your hands are continually expressing what is going on in your
brain.
I have heard: two Jews were walking on the road on a cold winter morning. It was very cold, but one
was talking continually, and asking the other again and again, ”Why are you silent?”
The other man said, ”you go on talking.” But how long can one man talk if you don’t even say yes,
no, at least ja, ja? You have to say something... but that man remained completely silent.
Finally the other man said, ”What is the matter with you?”
He said, ”Nothing is the matter with me, but I can’t take my hands out of my pockets, it is too cold.”
Jews particularly cannot talk without their hands. You can look at me: I cannot talk without my
hands. That certainly shows that I am a Jew; if not in this life then in some past life I must have been
a Jew. I cannot keep my hands in my pockets – I don’t have any pockets, so whatsoever happens I
can always talk!
Pontius Pilate, then, accepted the conspiracy from a rich disciple, who said, ”Give him a crucifixion
as late as possible, because by the evening he will be brought down. And then for three days he will
be kept with us, and we will help him escape.”
In the Jewish crucifixion it takes a long time for a person to die, at least twenty-four hours; but if the
man is strong, forty-eight hours, because very little blood goes on oozing from the hands and the
feet. And if the man is strong enough and has enough blood, he can survive. Six hours is nothing,
nobody has ever died within six hours.
So they tried to postpone as much as possible. Only in the afternoon did they put Jesus on the
cross. And after six hours, when the sun was setting, he was brought down: he was perfectly alive.
And there is evidence in the BIBLE that when they were taking him down, one Roman soldier poked
his spear into his side and blood came out. Blood does not come out of a dead man. That is clear
evidence that Jesus was perfectly alive. And in the night, everything was arranged: he escaped.
And of course he had to escape as far away as possible. From Judea to Kashmir is as far away as
possible. And why Kashmir? – because in Kashmir a lost tribe of Jews had already settled. Moses
had gone in search of the lost tribe and died in Kashmir. Kashmir is Jewish; although now they have
been forcibly converted into Mohammedans, Kashmir is Jewish. You can see by their faces and
their noses it is Jewish. So although Jesus was going out of Judea, it seems very reasonable that
he would like to live in a place where his people were living. They would understand his language,
they would understand him, and they wouldn’t have the same bigoted mind that Judea had because
they were the lost ones, and they were really the rebels.
They had not got lost on the way; they had really escaped from the torture that was going on for
forty years continually, in the search for Israel. This Israel has tortured so many people, and still it is
From Personality to Individuality 379 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
going on. From Egypt to Israel it took forty years – desert, all along the way. One third of the people
survived, two thirds died on the way. These were the few people, the rebellious type, who saw that
this seemed to be just a mad effort. ”Where is Israel? Nobody has heard of it. And when are we
going to reach? People are continually dying: by the time we reach nobody will be left. It is better to
escape. Let the others go to Israel – we will find some other place.”
They moved in the other direction, just the opposite, and they really found a better place than Israel.
Kashmir would have been really a great finding if Moses had been with them. Moses did reach there
and find them, but then he was too old so he could not make the return journey. And they were not
ready to leave; they had found such a beautiful place that they were not interested in any Israel or
anything. Moses died there.
Jesus had known about it. While he was traveling in Egypt and India perhaps he visited Kashmir,
visited the samadhi of Moses. He knew about Kashmir; he escaped from Israel to Kashmir. His
grave is just by the side of Moses’. It describes everything – his personality, his name. It was his
Hebrew name of course because he never knew that he was going to be called Jesus; he was
Joshua. So nobody can say that grave is new, because it calls him Joshua and states that a young
man called Joshua arrived here and lived here until the age of one hundred and twelve years with
his disciples.
The place where Jesus lived, Pahalgam, is named after him, because he used to call himself the
shepherd. In Kashmiri, Pahalgam means village of the shepherd. Pahal means shepherd, gam
means the village – it is named after him. Just as it will be difficult after two thousand years to
find Rajneeshpuram in Oregon, it is difficult to find Pahalgam in Kashmir after two thousand years,
because no other trace is left. But the very name... Moses’ grave is also there.
The people who guard the graves – you can see from their faces and everything that they are Jewish.
And those are the only two graves in the whole of India which are facing towards Israel. Hindus burn
their dead, so the question of making a grave does not arise. Mohammedans make graves, but
their graves are facing towards Mecca. These are the only two graves which are not facing towards
Mecca; they are facing towards Israel.
So Jesus was not taken up by angels after nine days. He was taken up by his disciples that very
night and put into the cave, and then they escaped as fast as possible.
But, somehow or other, all religious people want their religion to be painted with esoteric, mysterious,
unbelievable things. That is a basic thing: something unbelievable is needed, only then does your
belief have some meaning. If everything is believable then your belief has no meaning. Belief has to
pass the fire test of believing in something unbelievable. So all religions create unbelievable things
around their prophets. They are the test: if you have faith then you will believe in them. And if you
can believe in any kind of nonsense then there is no fear of you from the priesthood, from the church,
from the whole mammoth theological building that has arisen out of a fragment of truth.
I have nothing about me which is unbelievable, I have nothing about me which is mysterious, I have
nothing about me which is secret. This is my open secret.
I am just a human being, and I want to declare to humanity that there is nothing above human
consciousness.
From Personality to Individuality 380 Osho
CHAPTER 21. PRIEST AND POLITICIANS: FROM GENESIS TO GENOCIDE
You need not search for anything else.
All that you need is to look into your own consciousness as deeply as possible.
Just find yourself and you have found everything.
There is no other God, there is no other heaven.
There is nothing except your flame of life.
And it is in everyone the same.
If I have any appeal to you, that has totally different grounds, because I am not asking you to believe
in any mystery, in any unbelievable thing.
If any trust arises in you, that means whatever I am saying, or whatever I am, has touched you.
And I don’t want to bypass your intelligence. I want to approach you in both ways: I want to approach
your heart by my presence and I want to approach your intelligence by my words.
In this way I am not leaving any chances for you to escape from yourself.
Old religions appeal only to your feeling.
Atheists appeal only to your reason.
I appeal to your totality.
And seeing that an ordinary man like me can be fulfilled, can be contented, can be in total bliss,
is enough for you to become aflame; enough guarantee for you that if it can happen to me, it can
happen to you. You don’t have anything less than me. I don’t have anything more than you.
From Personality to Individuality 381 Osho
CHAPTER 22
Countdown to catastrophe: global suicide, or sannyas
20 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHY DO YOU THINK THAT NOW IS THE RIGHT TIME FOR THE AUTHENTIC RELIGION TO BE
BORN?
I do not think. Thinking has fallen away a long time ago. Chronologically the distance is not much,
only three decades, but metaphysically the distance is as big as possible. If I look backwards it is so
distant – millions of years. Perhaps the reason why I feel so much distance is in the very nature of
the gap between thinking and the state of no-thinking. The gap is unbridgeable.
I am reminded of one thing at this point. The day I died as a person, as an ego, and the explosion
happened, and only a presence was left with no ego functioning at the center of it, just pure space,
I became aware, only the next morning, of a very strange thing. The next morning when I went to
the bathroom, I saw in the mirror – I was only twenty-one years old – that the hairs on my chest had
become white. Something on me had become suddenly ancient.
I looked in the mirror, into my own eyes, and I could see those were not the eyes that I used to have,
because thoughts had disappeared, my eyes were utterly vacant... something like a bottomless
abyss. I am only fifty-four but it seems I am almost ancient. Deep inside I feel just like a child, just
born, as fresh as the dewdrops in the early morning sun. But in the body I feel as if I have lived
many lives together in one life.
382
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
I do not think – there is no need for me to think.
Either I know something or I don’t.
Thinking is a state in between the two:
You don’t know and you are trying to know.
That’s what thinking is all about. It is a groping in darkness for something; you are not exactly aware
of what it is. Neither are you aware why you are groping for it, nor are you aware what you are going
to do when you find it.
This is an experience of thousands of people: they work hard, think hard, try hard to find something,
to figure out something, and finally, unfortunately, they succeed. I say unfortunately because it
would have been fortunate if they had not succeeded. Then the effort, the excitement of finding,
of the search, of the groping would have continued. They would have felt that they had a certain
meaning in their life: They are thinkers, seekers, searchers. That’s why I say unfortunately, once in
a while, a few people succeed in finding, because then they are in the same position as when a dog
starts barking at your car and runs after you, chases you.
It is difficult for the poor dog. Even if the dog is a watchdog of Oregon, it makes no difference; dogs
are after all, dogs. You can give them fancy names, ”watchdogs,” you can let them make a political
party, ”1000 Friends of Oregon” – that does not make any difference to their doggishness: dogs
chase cars.
I have seen it many times – my car being chased. Not here, because in Rajneeshpuram we don’t
have dogs, we have only human beings; we are finished with dogs, watchdogs, all kinds of dogs.
But when I was a professor in the university I had to drive to the university and back home, and once
in a while a dog would start chasing the car. I was puzzled. What was he going to get even if he
caught the car? What was he going to do? Once in a while I would stop the car just to look at the
dog, and I have seen a dog in such an embarrassed condition: he would be standing by the side of
the car not knowing what to do now.
This happens to people who are thinkers, philosophers, seekers: they are seeking truth but they
don’t know what truth means. They have no idea what they are seeking, and why they are seeking.
And if by chance they stumble upon truth, how are they going to recognize it? They have never seen
it before; recognition is impossible.
I have met many people in India who thought that they had seen God, and they were worshipped
like great saints, sages, seers – they have seen God! I have asked these people, ”I don’t bother
about God at all, my simple question is, ”How did you recognize that He was God? I don’t doubt
that you have seen God, you must have seen Him. I never suspect anybody’s intentions – I take it
for granted that you have seen God. My question is not with your seeing my question is how did you
recognize that this was God? – because you had not seen Him before.”
And they were just in the same position as the dog standing by the side of my car, embarrassed,
just looking at me with great anger – why had I stopped? – because I had destroyed all his joy of
From Personality to Individuality 383 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
chasing, of reaching somewhere, of finding something. These sages looked at me with the same
anger.
I said, ”There is no need to be angry. I am asking a simple question. I am not doubting your
experience, I am not saying anything against God; I am simply saying that the word recognition
cannot be applied. Recognition means cognizing again: you have seen something before, now you
are seeing it again; only then can you recognize. Otherwise, you can see that you had an experience,
but what it was you cannot give a name, a label. Perhaps you may describe what happened to you
in the experience, but you cannot say that you have seen God.”
Thinking is a process between not knowing and an effort to know.
I do not think – I know it.
And why do I know it, that this is the ripe time for the birth of an authentic religion? That I can explain
to you. You will have to go with me a little deeply into the roots of the religious phenomenon itself
Religion only has any validity because of death.
If there were no death, nobody would have bothered about religion at all. It is not life that inspires
you to be religious, no – it is death. Death makes you search for something which will be alive in
spite of death.
Just think of a world where death does not exist, where nobody dies. The question, ”What happens
after death?” will be meaningless, the question of heaven and hell will be meaningless. And when
you are eternal, what God can be more than you? Now He is eternal life, and you are a momentary
phenomenon, a soap bubble; within a moment you will be gone – hence the fear. And the fear
creates the search. You want to know what this death is, and you want to know whether something
remains after it or not. Those who say that nothing remains after it are not religious. They don’t go
to any temple, they don’t go to any church, they don’t have any holy scripture.
In India there existed a great movement, the Charvakas. That was the movement of atheists.
Nothing parallel to it has happened anywhere in the world. Yes, there have been individual atheists
like Epicurus, Diderot, Karl Marx, Lenin; but these are individual atheists. The Charvakas were a
movement and the name of the man who founded the movement is Acharya Brihaspati.
India is, in many ways, rare. Even though Brihaspati founded the movement for atheism, still he
is respected as a great acharya, a great Master, even by those whom he was destroying at their
very roots. This you cannot find happening anywhere else. India has a great respect for all kinds of
seekers – even if a seeker says that there is nothing to seek; and that’s what the Charvakas were
all about, the whole movement.
Brihaspati said, ”There is nothing more than this life; eat, drink, and be merry. All religions are
invented by the greedy priests to exploit you in the name of God, in the name of an afterlife.” And he
describes the priests the best way they can be described. He describes them as dogs with hanging
tongues, ready, wagging their tails, asking for food.
From Personality to Individuality 384 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
That’s why I say India is a rare country: even Brihaspati is accepted as an acharya. Whatsoever
he says is debated, confuted, argued about, but that does not mean disrespect to the person. Of
course he is a founder of a movement, and what he is saying needs to be argued about – but you
need not kill him, or crucify him. He is challenging you: ”All your religion is bogus; it is just because
of the fear of death. And nobody has returned after death to say that he is still alive, so you don’t
have any evidence at all. Death simply annihilates everything.”
Karl Marx said, after five thousand years, what the Charvakas had been saying in India for that long
a time. Of course Marx uses a more scientific terminology. He says, ”Man’s consciousness is an
epiphenomenon – it is not a reality but only a by-product.”
Marx says that it is just like when a clock moves and has a certain life because it moves, but you
know that there is no soul in it; you know that its movement is mechanical. It is arranged in such
a way that it can be automatic, that while one part is unwinding, the other part is winding. So
when one part is unwound, the other part is ready to run the clock because it is wound. And the
same goes on: those two parts, one unwinding, the other winding. The whole function is just a
mechanical phenomenon. That’s why he calls it an epiphenomenon: not a true phenomenon but
only a by-product.
So it is with man’s consciousness, Marx says. It is just a combination of certain physical
mechanisms, chemical combinations; and out of this whole bio-mechanical system, man speaks,
man thinks, man tries to be somebody – even starts looking for truth, for God. But all these are just
by-products.
Once you take all the chemicals out of man – and this is scientifically proved, that a man can be
changed into a woman just by a change of hormones. Strange! If the man can be changed into
a woman just by injecting hormones, then his manhood was nothing but hormonal. If a woman
can become a man just by changing her hormones, her womanhood was nothing special; it was
hormonal, a chemical by-product.
There are hormones which can be taken out of you and then you cannot be angry. Then saying,
Don’t be angry, drop your anger.... And for centuries and centuries man has been preached to
from every pulpit, from every religious preacher: ”You have to drop anger.” But how can a man drop
anger? – those chemicals are there. First you have to take those chemicals out.
That’s what Marx is saying. Just take those chemicals out and then tell the man to be angry – and
he cannot be angry. Just take all his sexual chemistry out of him and then tell him to be sexual; it
will be as difficult for him to be sexual as it is now for him to be celibate. And just by sermonizing you
are not going to change his chemistry, because your sermons have nothing to do with chemistry.
His chemistry remains his chemistry, his physiology remains his physiology: your sermon just goes
into his memory system. That is a computer, that collects things, that’s all.
Do you think a computer can be a celibate or a playboy? A computer can be neither. But you can
program the computer for celibacy, feed it all great teachings about celibacy, and the computer will
be able to repeat them. You can feed the computer all great romantic ideas, great love affairs, and
the computer will be able to repeat them. But the computer cannot become a Romeo or Majnu.
Perhaps one day it may be possible that you make a feminine computer. That means you feed the
From Personality to Individuality 385 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
computer the information that ”you are a woman, a very beautiful woman,” and you feed another
computer the information that ”you are a man, a very great man; all the women around are mad
after you.”
Perhaps, if you can manage to feed two computers in this way, they may fall in love. But you will
know that this is all nonsense. The one computer will repeat what you have told it – the woman,
very shy, saying no and meaning yes. The other computer may repeat great dialogues like the great
lovers of history – the great Majnu, Romeo, Farhad or Mahival; these are the great lovers of history.
You may not even prompt the computer; once you have fed in the information, he will repeat the
dialogue. And this is exactly what your mind goes on doing, there is no difference.
It is a very strange discovery, that the mind functions absolutely as a computer. And they have
experimented with the mind by touching certain centers with electrodes. And strangely enough as
you touch a certain spot the man starts saying certain things. You take the electrode off, the man
stops. You put the electrode back and the man starts from the very beginning again – the same! He
is just like a gramophone record.
And the unwinding process seems to be automatic: the moment you take the electrode off, it
unwinds, it goes back; it goes back to the beginning. You put on the electrode: strange, the man
starts speaking. It is beyond his control, he cannot stop himself He will say the whole thing, unless
you remove the electrode. Once you remove it, he simply closes his mouth, but within a second his
mind is back into its old position, ready to repeat it again – a thousand times! The man will repeat
the same dialogue; you just have to touch the same point.
So all your sermons go in this computer. They don’t touch your physiology, they don’t touch your
chemistry. Hence Marx says, ”Consciousness is just a by-product.” Brihaspati uses a language that
was available to him five thousand years ago, but means exactly the same as Marx.
In India people are in the habit of chewing pan – a certain leaf with a few things put into it. And
when they chew it the mixture of all those things makes their lips red. It seems to be an out-of-date
method of lipstick, but it is more than lipstick. Lipstick tastes terrible, but lovers have to pass through
so many fire tests! They have to taste somebody’s lipstick too – and not only taste it, they have to
enjoy it. But in love and in hate everything is justified.
Pan leaves are far better, they really taste good. And pan is used after food in India, so it takes away
any food taste left in your mouth. It cleanses your mouth, and keeps your mouth fragrant. Brihaspati
takes the example of the pan leaf. He says, ”Neither the pan leaf nor any of the ingredients that are
put into it is red. But the combination, when you chew it, creates the color red. This red color has no
existence of its own, it is a by-product.”
Naturally, five thousand years ago, when there was no computer, no other mechanism, he had found
a good example. Put all those four, five things separate, and nothing is red, no constituent in itself
is red. Then from where does redness come? Does it descend from heaven? No, it is just a by-
product; from the combination of those four, five things, redness comes as a by-product. If you
remove those five things, you can’t expect that the redness will remain behind; no, it will disappear.
So when a man dies, everything subsides; there is no soul left.
From Personality to Individuality 386 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
Brihaspati must have been a man of guts. None of his books have survived; perhaps they have
been destroyed, burned. All that has survived is the criticism in the books of other people who are
criticizing Brihaspati. Of course, to criticize him they have to quote him.
Their quotations are not very reliable, because – and this is a more or less universal phenomenon
– critics first try to distort the teaching which they are going to criticize. Then it becomes easy to
criticize because they have already managed the quotation in such a way – taken it out of reference,
out of context, changed a few words here and there – that it becomes more vulnerable to their
criticism. But still something of it must be from the original man. And I can detect almost precisely
what has been added and what is exactly Brihaspati’s own saying, because I am also the same type
of man.
If Brihaspati meets with me, he may not be able to agree and go all the way with me, but I will agree
and go all the way with him. I will go a little further. He stops, but the point where he stops is on my
path. I can go with him the whole way, his way; of course he is going to stop at a certain point. I will
agree with him totally, but he cannot agree totally with me, he will agree partially. Hence I am in a
better position to appreciate and to conceive what this man was saying – because I have followed
the same route.
The critics quote him as stating ”Rinam kritva ghritam pivet”: ”Even if you have to borrow money,
borrow it, but drink ghee.” Ghee is refined butter. Only in India do they have refined butter; otherwise
the whole world is making do with butter. But Indians have reached a higher stage than butter, that
is ghee. You cannot go higher than ghee, ghee is the ultimate, nothing can go beyond it. That shows
India’s tendency: they will go to the very end. The people who have starved only on bread and butter
don’t have the tendency to go to the very completion of a thing. Butter is just half way there, it is not
the last stage; ghee is the last stage.
And in India ghee is loved immensely because India is a vegetarian country. All delicious food is
invented by vegetarians. Non-vegetarians don’t invent delicious food for the simple reason that what
they are eating is delicious enough. But a vegetarian cannot just go on eating vegetables, boiled
vegetables. Only once in a while someone – a man like me – can manage it, but a whole country
cannot.
I can manage it because when I am eating in the evening I don’t remember about the morning; I
have forgotten all about it. I go on eating the same thing for many years, morning and evening. Vivek
gets tired, fed up, angry. She is not even eating it, but just serving me every day, twice, the same
thing.... I can understand her trouble. You don’t know the difficulties of living with an enlightened
man. It is terrible! Just think: for ten years she has been giving me the same food.
And I can see she is tired, bored: the same food...! But you can ask her, she has never seen me
bored or tired – I am excited every meal. Sometimes I think I must be mad; there is nothing to be
excited about – she will be bringing the same things again!
And my physician, Devaraj – you can’t find a more miserly physician in the whole world! He goes
on measuring everything. He won’t even let me have one pound weight more or less, no. He keeps
a record of how much ghee.... A little more ghee means half a pound per week my weight will
increase: he will not allow it. And I am not allowed in the kitchen anyway – he manages it. And he
goes on analyzing every vegetable, every food: how much vitamin, and how much....
From Personality to Individuality 387 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
I used to weigh one hundred and ninety pounds: just because of his great work, now I am only one
hundred and twenty-seven pounds. Just the other day my mother was saying, ”One hundred and
twenty-seven pounds? You used to weigh that much when you were a child!”
I said, ”But what to do? I am absolutely helpless about it.” My cook won’t listen to me, she listens to
Devaraj; Vivek won’t listen to me, she listens to Devaraj. I am simply nobody! I have just to finish
the final act. They do everything, I have just to do the final act. But I am still excited.
In India they have invented thousands of kinds of delicacies, but all the delicacies are deeply fried in
ghee. In certain areas of India, for example, in Rajasthan.... When I used to go to Rajasthan it was
a problem, because in Rajasthan they pour ghee on everything. First they deeply fry everything,
then they come with ghee and they pour ghee on top of everything. Unless the whole Indian tali, the
plate – it is four times bigger than your plates – unless the whole tali is full of ghee and things are
floating, they have not served the guest well.
Whenever I was invited to Rajasthan I used to write to them, ”I can come, but please don’t treat me
like a guest; I cannot digest that much ghee. So unless you promise me that my tali will remain dry,
and things will not be floating in ghee, I am not coming.” And in India the tradition is that whatsoever
is given to you in your tali, you have to eat it all, you have to finish it, you are not supposed to leave
it. Leaving anything is unmannerly; it means you did not like the food.
So what to do with all that ghee? In Rajasthan they simply drink it! Only in Rajasthan could I
understand this Charvaka, this Acharya Brihaspati, and why he said, ”Rinam kritva ghritam pivet.”
Ghritam means ”ghee”; rinam kritva means ”borrow money”; ghritam pivet means ”and drink ghee.”
Before I went to Rajasthan I never thought that anybody could drink ghee, but in Rajasthan that’s
how they do it. In the morning they will bring milk, and they pour ghee into the milk. I said, ”Are
you mad or something? – because the milk already has butter, already has ghee in it, and you are
pouring more ghee on top of it.
So when Brihaspati says it, he actually means it. And in Rajasthan, which is a desert, perhaps
people can absorb that much ghee. It is so hot, and ghee brings an inner cooling to the body. The
Vitamin A gives you a certain protection against heat, and ghee is pure Vitamin A. The cooler the
place, the less you can absorb ghee; the hotter the place, the more you can absorb ghee – and
India is a hot country. So I can imagine that he was right.
And the next question you will ask, you are bound to ask, is, If you are continuously borrowing, how
are you going to pay it back? And Brihaspati says, ”Don’t be worried about paying it back, you need
not pay. There are so many people: you need not borrow from one person again and again, just go
on finding other people. And it is a small life: once dead, nobody will be asking you to repay them.
There is nobody left, neither you nor the person who had lent the money to you; all is finished. So
whether you do good deeds or bad deeds does not matter. All that matters is: doing bad deeds,
don’t get caught! Stealing is not bad, being caught is bad.”
Brihaspati is absolutely logical: if there is nothing after death, then whether you were a saint or a
sinner, what does it matter? Both will end in the same dust ”dust unto dust” – and you will not be able
to make any distinction between the dust of a saint and the dust of a sinner. It is said of Brihaspati
that he used to take his disciples to the Indian parallel of a cemetery, the place where funerals take
From Personality to Individuality 388 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
place. Saints are burned there, sinners are burned there, murderers are burned there. He would
take his disciples and ask them, ”Can you make any distinction? So many piles of ashes are there
– which one belongs to a saint and which one belongs to a sinner?” Dust is simply dust.
I used to have a friend who was a real follower of Acharya Brihaspati – not knowingly. He was not
aware, he had not even heard the name of Brihaspati I told him, ”You are really a follower of Acharya
Brihaspati.
He said, ”Who is this?”
I said, ”You don’t be worried about it, that is not your business, but the way you are living is exactly
as he has prescribed.”
This man was well educated. He had a Ph.D. from Delhi university and could have been on any
good post; he had all the qualifications. He had a beautiful personality, very impressive. He needed
that impressive personality, some charisma around him, because he lived by borrowing. He would
go on moving from one place to another place because he said, ”The world is so large, and there
are millions of people hoarding money unnecessarily. If I can manage to unburden them a little bit, I
don’t think that I am committing any sin.”
And he was capable of persuading people to give him money. He was a good card player, really
the best I have seen. He was a good chess player, a very good hand reader, a palmist; he had
accumulated enough astrological knowledge to befool anybody. All these things helped him to find
friends anywhere. If he was in the train, just sitting by your side, within five minutes you would be
giving money to him. Within five minutes, his just sitting by your side was enough. He would look at
your hand and say, ”My God! You are still not married?” You would be immediately impressed, and
you would say, ”Do you know how to read palms?”
He would say, ”That’s all I know,” and would start saying things about your past life, and about your
future, and soon you were impressed by him, his personality. He had long hair and a beautiful beard;
he looked like jesus Christ, he was a tall man, very educated, and could talk in many languages
because he was traveling all over India. He knew Bengali, he knew Gujarati, he knew Hindi, he
knew English, he knew Urdu. He was able to persuade many kinds of people within minutes; and if
you started talking to him, you were finished, your pockets would soon be empty.
And he had so many friends; anybody would like to be his friend, he was such a charming person.
He used, once in a while, to stay with me, although he could never manage to borrow money from
me because I had no money at all. In fact what used to happen – I used to borrow money from him.
He would say, ”This is too much, that’s why I don’t come to you so often. But once in a while I start
missing you. Just going on cheating the fools, I start missing you – the one person I cannot cheat.
”But I come only to you when I have enough money because I know you don’t have any money. You
will take me to a hotel and order everything and then the bill will come, and you will say, ’Daya’” –
his name was Daya – ”’pay the bill!’ So when I have enough money, then I gather courage to come
to you. And I cannot influence you because you know all my tricks, and all the things that I manage
to predict about people.”
But I said, ”How long are you going to do this?”
From Personality to Individuality 389 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
He said, ”How long am I going to live? Forty years I have lived; at the most I will live forty more. If
I could manage for half my life, it is simple logic, simple arithmetic that I am going to manage the
other half even better, because every day I am becoming more and more experienced about more
and more people, and I am gaining friends everywhere.”
And certainly if he had played chess with somebody and you saw him, then you would like to play
chess with him, even if you knew that he was going to borrow money. In the middle of the game,
when no chess player wants to stop – even if the house is on fire, no real chess player wants to
stop in the middle – in the middle he would say, ”Ten rupees? – because I am in immense need;
otherwise, I cannot play the game.” And you had to give it to him because you had to finish the game,
the game was coming to such a beautiful turn.
He would always ask at the point when you were going to win. You had just managed for hours, and
at the moment when you were taking the critical step he would say, ”Wait! I need ten rupees first.” If
you had played cards with him, you would never find such a good player, so intelligent.
So he said to me, ”I am going to manage.” I saw him last in’69. I was in Calcutta and he was there
just by accident. I was getting out of the train, and people had come to receive me. I have traveled all
over India, and in every place the people who received me with great love and respect used to come
with garlands of flowers, roses, mogra, chameli – all beautiful and fragrant flowers. But strangely,
only in Calcutta were they always coming with the most fragrant flower, nargis. It is not a beautiful
flower, but it is so fragrant.
I have never smelt anything so strong – just one flower and the whole room would be vibrant with its
fragrance. It is not beautiful, so poets have not paid much attention to it. It is a simple white flower,
very homely – looking, nothing exotic, nothing – what do you call it? – fantastic. One of the great
Urdu poets, Mirza Ghalib, has said about the nargis, with great compassion, that ”The nargis cries
and weeps for centuries for its ugliness. Only then, once in a while, somebody of intelligence comes
and recognizes its beauty.”
But certainly in Calcutta – I have been to Calcutta hundreds of times – they were always coming
with nargis garlands. Just one garland is enough for the whole house, and they would come with
dozens of garlands and just go on putting them on – I would be covered up to my eyes.
At that time, Daya was going to catch the train I was getting out of He saw me and just told his porter,
”Now I am not going.” He came to me and said, ”i am coming with you. So many garlands.... You
may not have any money but the people who are with you do.”
I said, ”But you have got a ticket and you were just getting....”
And he said, ”Forget all about the ticket. I cannot leave these people.”
And it was true, those were all the richest people of Bengal, particularly Calcutta. I tried to persuade
him, but he said no. So I had to introduce him, knowing perfectly well that he would cheat everybody.
I received a letter from him in 1975 saying, ”The group you gave me in Calcutta is the best in the
whole country. Mostly now I live in Calcutta, changing from one person to another.”
From Personality to Individuality 390 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
And Calcutta is so big that when you move from one person to another, it is a rare possibility that
you may accidentally meet again. It is too big a place, the biggest city in the whole world. So just
to thank me, after six years he wrote the letter: ”Calcutta seems to be just a treasure. And now
you need not be worried about my future. For these few years that are left – who knows, twenty,
twenty-five, or maybe not even that much – Calcutta alone will do.”
Eat, drink and be merry: this is what Acharya Brihaspati had said to his followers. He created a great
movement. He was not religious, you can’t find anybody more anti-religious than him; but this is what
I respect about India, that they accepted him as an acharya. Acharya means a master. Certainly he
was a master, and to create a movement and to gather followers for such a rotten philosophy, one
needs a really great, sharp intelligence.
I can agree with him, but he is only the Zorba. For the other part, Zorba the Buddha... he will
stop at Zorba, he cannot go the remaining part with me. That’s why I said I can understand him
perfectly well, better than he can understand himself, because I have a better perspective, and a
bigger perspective. I can understand Buddha, which he cannot understand. I can understand the
Zorba, Brihaspati, which Buddha cannot understand. But this is nothing to do with thinking; it is my
seeing. If you think, then Zorba the Buddha is a contradiction. In thinking you cannot manage to put
them together.
Sri Lanka is a Buddhist country. The ambassador of Sri Lanka in America wrote a letter to me: ”I
appeal to you not to name your hotels ’Zorba the Buddha.’ It hurts our religious feelings.”
I told Sheela to write to him: ”It hurts the followers of Zorba too, because this is a great insult to the
followers of Zorba. He was against the Buddha. What am I supposed to do? – because I am both,
Zorba and the Buddha. And my hotels or restaurants or discos have nothing to do with you and your
Buddha. Can’t you see ’ZORBA the Buddha?’ Is that the name of your Buddha? Your Buddha’s
name is Gautam the Buddha. This is a totally different Buddha.” I told Sheela to explain, ”This is our
Buddha, who is first Zorba, and then Buddha: both together. Neither you have to be disturbed nor
does any atheist have to be disturbed.”
Atheists have been disturbed. In India, the son-in-law of Amrit Dange – the Indian communist party’s
president – has written a thesis against me because I am confusing people’s minds. It is difficult
to figure out whether I am atheist or theist, whether I am a religious man or an anti-religious man.
Through the whole of his thesis he tries to figure who I am – and finds that it is impossible, and that
I am simply a confuser.
Amrit Dange, the president of the Indian communist party and one of the oldest communists in the
world, was part of the international communist party at the time of the Russian revolution, he was one
of the members along with Lenin and Trotsky. Just by chance we were in the same compartment,
traveling.
He said to me, ”Have you seen? – my son-in-law has written a book about you. For three years
he has been studying you. You have created so much literature that it is going to be impossible to
do research on you. He was going mad, day and night. And you seem to be impossible: it is not
only that you contradict yourself one time, you contradict again, and you contradict again. Finally it
became impossible to find what you mean, because.... And that’s the conclusion that he reached.”
From Personality to Individuality 391 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
I said, ”You throw the book out of the train. He is a fool, tell him. Why did he waste three years? Life
is so short and you are a communist: Rinam kritva ghritam pivet – borrow ghee, drink ghee. Why
waste time with a madman like me?” – and I took the book from his hand and threw it out of the
window.
He said, ”This is too much!”
I said, ”You can pull the emergency cord. What purpose has the red cord always hanging there?
Pull the cord.” But by that time we were miles away from the book, and it was midnight.
Amrit Dange said, ”There is no point in pulling the cord – and even if I pull the cord, we have come
miles, and it is midnight – where are we going to find the book? And there is no need to be worried:
my son-in-law has all the books. They are not being sold because people say that either....” There
was a clear-cut division in India – either somebody was for me, or somebody was against me. Those
who were for me were reading my books; they wouldn’t waste their time with his thesis. And those
who were against me did not want even to hear my name – what to say about the book.
So he said, ”We have all the books. Perhaps you are right; he is a fool. Three years he has wasted,
and he has published it with his own money. No publisher was ready to publish it,’Because,’ they
said,’the country is clearly divided; there are no neutral people available, so who is going to purchase
the book?’ He published it with his own money and now he is sitting on the whole lot.”
I said, ”You can go on distributing this way, the way you distributed it to me. Distribute it. Let people
read it even if they cannot get any substance out of it – because he has not been able in three years
to find out what I mean. Nobody is going to find out, because I am not stating logical, philosophical
maxims. I am a whole presence. I can absorb Zorba without any difficulty, and I can absorb Buddha
without any difficulty.”
In fact, to me, unless both are absorbed with the same joy, with the same respect, you cannot be
truly religious. And that’s what I mean by authentic religion.
Authentic religion will not be theistic or atheistic.
Authentic religion will not be materialistic or spiritualistic.
Authentic religion will be wholistic. It will not divide life into compartments, it will destroy all the
compartments of sinners and saints, heaven and hell.
Again I remember Mirza Ghalib. He is really a very insightful poet. In one of his songs he says to
God, ”Will it not be good if we can withdraw the fence between hell and heaven.... Just a little more
space for a morning walk: what is the harm?” Now this man I say is insightful. He is saying to God,
”Just withdraw this fence, it looks ugly. And what is wrong with just a little more space for a morning
walk? Let heaven and hell meet.”
But religious people would not like heaven and hell to meet. They would not like Zorba and Buddha
to meet, because if Zorba and Buddha meet then all the religions disappear. And that is my meaning
of the authentic religion.
From Personality to Individuality 392 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
All the religions up to now I call pseudo.
They only appear to be religious, but they are not religious because they don’t have courage enough
to be whole, they are only a part. But what will you do with the other part, which is intrinsic to you?
And I say it is not my thought – I feel it, see it, know it. It is exactly like when a woman is pregnant
– she knows. It is not a thinking that she is pregnant: she can feel the movement of the child in her
womb, she can feel another life growing within her.
To you I say religion is going to take birth, but to me it is totally different.
I am pregnant with the authentic religion.
Yes, let me repeat: I am pregnant with the authentic religion.
I can see its movement within me, around me, in those who are close to me. They have become
almost part of me, because I am not a person, I am a presence.
The presence can surround you like a fragrance.
You are drowned in it without knowing.
My sannyasins are drowned in me.
They are dyed in my color, my fragrance.
To me the religion is already moving, kicking.
And why do I say that this is the right time? Just go back a little. I told you it is death that created the
pseudo-religions; the fear of death created the pseudo-religions. Now, for the first time, the world is
coming close to a global death; hence I say that this is the ripe time for an authentic religion to be
born.
Up to now it was only an individual death; the society continued, the world continued. Yes, people
came and went away – old people disappearing, young children coming up – but the continuity was
there, life was always there. Yes, individual life has been a problem, but only the individual was
concerned about it.
The priest was capable of exploiting the individual very easily. He is so weak and so small, so
limited, and he knows that he is going to die – he has to seek the priest’s help to find something
to cling to which is undying, eternal, which will take him beyond death. And the priest has been
promising that. But it was never a problem that the whole society was confronted with.
Today, now, the whole of humanity is confronted with the problem. Such a crisis has never happened
before; hence pseudo-religions, pygmy religions, were enough. Small doses were needed for
individuals. For the first time we are close to the death of the whole of humanity – not only the
whole of humanity but the whole of life as such. Death encountering life in its totality makes the time
right for a total religion to be born.
From Personality to Individuality 393 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
Sheela brought a news cutting a few days ago. It was a declaration from the American government
that ”even if the Soviet Union is capable of destroying all our atomic reservoirs, nuclear reservoirs, all
our bases on the land – just for argument’s sake – even if the Soviet Union is capable of destroying
all our nuclear ability on the land, sea and air, we will still have our submarines which are hidden,
twenty-four submarines. Each submarine is loaded with nuclear weapons and missiles. Each
submarine can send one missile towards the Soviet Union every thirty seconds, and has enough
stock for twenty-four hours.”
Just visualize the destructive force: every thirty seconds one nuclear weapon will move towards the
Soviet Union, and for twenty-four hours continually nuclear weapons will be simply showering on
the Soviet Union. In fact, one submarine has enough nuclear weapons to destroy every large and
medium-sized Soviet city. If all land bases, ships and the air force are destroyed – which is only
for argument’s sake, because to destroy all these bases is not simple; the question is only of ten
minutes. Whoever attacks first has only ten minutes left; within ten minutes the other will be ready
to counterattack.
In ten minutes neither America can destroy all the Soviet Union’s nuclear bases which are hidden
and underground and not known to the public.... Perhaps the places that are known are bogus.
When you find a notice declaring, ”Entry is closed for army reasons,” those boards may be just
bogus, to deceive the enemy, to deceive his agents; the real places will not have boards. So neither
the Soviet Union has the capacity to destroy all the American bases within ten minutes, nor does
America have the capacity to destroy all Soviet bases in that time. And how much have the Soviet
and American bases accumulated, apart from the submarines which have now for the first time been
declared?
Both countries have so much nuclear power that it can destroy the earth seven hundred times.
Never before has humanity faced death on such a great scale. Nothing can be greater than that;
now you cannot increase this destructive power any more. You are already sitting on a volcano
which can destroy humanity within minutes. Hence, I say this is the right time and right reason.
If man wants life to continue, then Hinduism will not be of any help because it was not created for
such a crisis; nor will Christianity be of any help, nor will Mohammedanism be of any help – swords
are no longer of any use – nor will Buddhism be of any use. Sermons will not do, austerities will not
help, fasting is not going to change the situation. Something absolutely new is needed because the
situation is absolutely new.
Hence I say this is the right time for the birth of an authentic religion.
This will be just religiousness.
And it has to be wholistic: so comprehensive that it can contain all and every possibility, so
comprehensive that no human being is rejected from it, so comprehensive that saints and sinners
can sit side by side without any barrier.
In jainism they have a story that when Mahavira used to move around, his influence was such that
lions and cows would drink together in a river or in a pond. That seems to be just a lie, a fiction. But
From Personality to Individuality 394 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
what are they saying? They are saying that when a man of nonviolence like Mahavira is present,
then violence disappears, even from animals. The lion who would immediately grab hold of the cow
is drinking water and the cow is drinking water with the lion, unafraidthere is no problem because
Mahavira is there, nearby. His influence is enough to make the lion non-violent, to make the cow
brave enough to stand with the lion.
But Mahavira’s own son-in-law betrayed him. He was Mahavira’s disciple too, but he wanted
Mahavira to make him his successor. Naturally he would have thought that as he is Mahavira’s
son-in-law.... And Mahavira had only one daughter, no son, no other daughter. Naturally – he was
almost his son – he should inherit whatever Mahavira has: if not the kingdom, then all his influence
and followers. And it was not less than a kingdom, it was bigger than a kingdom, because many
kings were his followers, many kingdoms were just at his feet.
The son-in-law was just harassing him continually, ”You declare me your successor.” Finally Mahavira
said, ”It is not possible. I am not going to declare anybody my successor because I am the last
tirthankara now for the whole of this creation. Only in the next creation – when the whole universe is
destroyed and again a new universe starts – will there be another tirthankara, and for that, somebody
has already earned enough virtue.” That was his chief disciple, Gautam Ganadhar.
That is the Jainas’ mythology, that the last tirthankara’s chief disciple will be the first tirthankara in
the next cycle of existence. That’s how they connect: each cycle remains connected with the past
twenty-four tirthankaras through that one chain. Mahavira said, ”It is already declared: he is my
chief disciple and he is going to be the first tirthankara – and that too will be millions of years later. I
cannot declare you my successor”
Mahavira’s son-in-law went against him, he betrayed him. He took five hundred disciples of Mahavira
with him. Lions are losing their violence, cows are losing their cowardliness – and Mahavira’s own
son-in-law has not dropped ambition, jealousy, competition, the whole power number! And he not
only left, he had enough influence that five hundred other disciples went with him; he had a clique.
Now seeing this situation, I cannot think that cows and lions were drinking water together, unless
they were trained circus lions and cows; then it is a different matter. Prepared for the same occasion,
for an exhibition – that is another matter. Or perhaps it was only a lion’s skin and inside there was a
man. That happens once in a while. Hunters use that method.
I have heard... two hunters were doing it. One hunter was sitting on top of a tree from where he
would shoot the lion. A cow had to be underneath the tree, tied to the tree, so she could not escape;
then the lion would attack the cow, and the lion could be shot from the top of the tree. But they had
not been able to find a cow. Because they could not find a cow, they tried this old method. They
had the whole skin of a cow, so one man dressed himself in the skin and stood there. There was no
need to tie him because he was a hunter, but he said, ”Be aware, don’t let the lion attack me. If he
attacks, then even if you kill him I am gone.”
The other hunter said, ”Don’t be worried,” and he kept his eyes on the lion... because a lion was
there, far away, watching the cow. So he was pointing his gun towards the lion – and meanwhile,
what happened? A bull came by and that created a whole nuisance, because he started making
love to the cow! The man jumped out of the skin and said, ”To hell with your lion and your hunting.
From Personality to Individuality 395 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
We had never thought of this possibility. Now shoot this bull!” So perhaps for some show purposes...
otherwise, I don’t think that Jaina story about Mahavira and the lions and cows drinking together
was true.
So no old religion is capable of facing the challenge that is coming closer every day.
The second news was about the man in charge of arms control talks, from the American side. He is
a topmost boss, a mediator between the Soviet Union and America to bring some kind of dialogue
and some solution. Some journalists asked that man’s small son, showing him the map of the world,
”Can you recognize the countries? – because your father is continually moving from this country to
that country.”
He said, ”I can recognize them” – and he recognized every country except the Soviet Union.
The journalist asked, ”Why have you left out that country? – it is so big.”
The boy said, ”My father said that only bad guys live in that country.”
So the journalists approached the man and asked him what he thought. He said, ”There is no
possibility, there is no hope of any dialogue. Those people are simply continually Lying. You cannot
have a nice conversation with the Soviet leaders.”
Now, if your mediators have such ideas, that it is impossible, hopeless, and that those people are all
Lying... as if these people are all telling the truth! Nobody is telling the truth; neither they are telling
the truth, nor are you telling the truth. Both are Lying, and both know it. But such is the stupidity of
man And this man is in charge of mediation, and a similar kind of man must be there, in the Soviet
Union, in charge of mediation.
This man is teaching his son that ”Only bad guys live in that whole country, you should not even
think about that country” – what was the purpose of it? It simply shows the man’s mind.
These politicians cannot solve the problem. And religions don’t have methods, strategies, because
they were invented long ago – they were not prepared for this crisis.
A totally new vision... and the time is absolutely ripe. In fact, it is already late, because time is
running fast, and these fools are accumulating more and more nuclear weapons, piling them up.
And war is pointless, absolutely pointless. By the end of this century either we prevail over the
earth, or... there is nobody else to prevail.
Either Zorba the Buddha takes over, and the Mohammedans, the Christians, the Hindus, forget
all their nonsense and start being more human, not superhuman.... Either they forget about hell
and heaven and start thinking about this earth or this earth is going to be destroyed. And before
anything goes wrong we need thousands of intelligent people around the earth who are capable of
being simply religious: without following a dogma, without being part of any nation, without having
any membership in any congregation – just purely human, natural, ordinary.
If we can release intelligence – and we will have to release it because this is not the time for ifs and
buts; it is a question of the survival of the whole of humanity. All its creativity, thousands of years of
evolution, are going to be finished by a few foolish politicians?
From Personality to Individuality 396 Osho
CHAPTER 22. COUNTDOWN TO CATASTROPHE: GLOBAL SUICIDE, OR SANNYAS
Is nobody going to create a conscious energy?
That’s what an authentic religion is:
A conscious force around the world, against all kinds of stupidities – of religion, of race, of blood, of
color, of caste, of nation. All are stupidities.
The time has come when the earth should be one.
That’s the only way to save it from destruction.
There is no need for negotiation between the Soviet Union and America. There should be no Soviet
Union and no America! What is the need? Each city should be a self-sufficient unit in itself
Only once, and only for a short while, a little democracy has existed in the world, and that was in
Greece in the time of Socrates. Just a little democracy existed, but it was a democracy of city-
states: every city was a state unto itself Then it was direct democracy. You were not choosing
representatives, you were directly involved in the functioning of the whole government.
The world needs smaller communes – not big, huge, monstrous cities, just small units, communes,
so small that they can be direct democracies.
And the map of the world should be one.
There should be no passports, no visas, no questions about anybody’s movement.
Movement should be a birthright:
The whole earth is ours!
It is a tremendous job, but it has to be done. It will have to be done because there is no other
alternative.
It is suicide or sannyas.
We have to propagate the idea to everyone who has ears to hear and eyes to see, and any
intelligence to understand the clear-cut alternative: you create a new kind of religiousness that
has never existed before – earthly, physical; not against the spirit but in tune with the spiritual.
That’s what I mean by Zorba the Buddha.
That is my name for the new man.
From Personality to Individuality 397 Osho
CHAPTER 23
Bored to death? – you’re on the trail to transformation
21 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHAT IS BOREDOM? ARE YOU NEVER BORED WITH LIFE?
IT is one of the most significant questions to be asked, because it is only man’s privilege to be
bored. No other animal has the capacity. Why has man the capacity to be bored? It is a by-product
of intelligence. Nothing is wrong about it. Only idiots are not bored – or the enlightened ones, but
they are few and far between. The major part of humanity between these two poles of idiots and the
enlightened ones feels more or less bored.
Boredom means that you are intelligent enough to see that life is meaningless, that it is just futile to
go on living: nothing comes out of it. Life is an effort to make your signature on water – not even on
sand, because on sand it may remain for a while before the wind comes and destroys it. It is writing
on water, and it disappears as it appears – immediately, instantly – and nothing is left behind, not
even smoke.
How many millions of people have lived on the earth? What have they left behind? They were
also people like you. They were doing everything that you are doing, thinking all kinds of thoughts,
dreams, ideals. And they made every effort to be creative, to be fulfilled, to be contented. But what
is left? Whether they had been or not makes no difference. If there had been not a single human
being before us it would not make any difference. What difference are you going to make? And if
you cannot make any difference then your life is uncreative.
398
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
Creativity means making a difference by your being here, leaving the earth not exactly the same
as you had found it; your imprints will always remain there. You may be gone, but what you have
created will go on influencing generations after generations.
Every man who has ever lived has thought about his life: What does it signify? Is it just vegetating?
No animal is bored because no animal is bothered about meaning, no animal is concerned about
creativity. A buffalo chewing grass is as contented as any Gautam the Buddha. She is not aware of
her contentment – that is the difference. But she is perfectly contented: no tomorrow, no yesterday,
no problems. Just watch a buffalo chewing grass and you can see the difference between man and
animals....
A man may be sitting on a golden throne – that does not make any difference – or he may be
a beggar, but they both are immensely concerned about why they are here, for what? Is it just
accidental, or is there some destiny to it? This question remains unanswered, hence the boredom.
You cannot find contentment, blissfulness or meaning in anything. You see every day passing by
and you know that death is coming closer, closer, closer, and life is not yielding anything. Your hands
are empty.
Strangely, when a child is born he is born with closed hands, as if he is bringing something into life.
When a man dies, he dies with open hands – all is lost. There is nothing to hold in his fist, there is
no need for a fist. No man has ever died with fists closed, and no child has ever been born with fists
open.
It is significant. Physiologically it has different meanings. The child is not yet capable, not strong
enough to open his hands. Physiologically they are not actually fists, it is because the child simply
cannot open his hands. Physiologically that is the explanation, that he cannot open his hands yet.
He needs a little strength, then he can open his hands.
And the dying man – his whole body becomes relaxed. Death is the ultimate relaxant. For the whole
of his life he was tense; now, life is leaving the body. The body was not tense, it was the life in it
– the intelligence, the mind – that was making it tense. Now, the fist is a tense state of the hands.
When life leaves the body, even if you are making a fist, it is bound to happen that your fist will open
up, because now there is no more energy to keep the fist closed. The child had no energy to open
it up, the old man has no more energy to keep it closed. It needs strength to keep it closed – that is
a physiological explanation. But the metaphor is beautiful, and I am mentioning it as a metaphor.
Every child is born with the idea that there is going to be something great.
Every child comes with hope, ambition, desire, and a confidence that all this is going to materialize;
that his dreams are not going to remain dreams, they will become realities. To me, that is the
metaphor of his closed fist.
He is coming with a treasure, with a secret.
He is not coming without a message – he is coming with a message to be fulfilled. He is coming
with a destiny.
From Personality to Individuality 399 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
Hence children are not bored. They may cry, they may weep, they may laugh, they may smile, but
you cannot find babies bored. They have not yet felt that life is not what it is supposed to be. They
have not experienced life as made with the same stuff as dreams It needs a little growth, a little
experience. And the more intelligent a child is, the sooner he becomes bored. The stupid ones
take a longer time, obviously, because to see the meaninglessness of life you need a very sharp
intelligence.
You ask me, do I ever feel bored? Not now, but I don’t think any one of you has felt as much
boredom as I felt for the first twenty-one years of my life Perhaps I finished the quota – there is a
limit to everything!
My parents were puzzled. I never participated in any games. If I make a joke of football today, it is
not new; I have been making jokes of all games as long as I can remember. I have never participated
in any game, in any play. My teachers were concerned, my parents were concerned: 4What kind of
a child are you? And what do you go on doing? Go out and play.”
I said to them, ”Every parent is telling his children to come in and study – and you all go on forcing
me to go out and play. Who is strange? Am I strange or are you strange? I don’t see any point in
playing, I L don’t see any outcome in it. It is just wasting time. Those who have time, they can waste
itI don’t have much time.”
Since the day my maternal grandfather died, death became a constant companion to me. I was
only seven years old when he died. He died on my lap. My maternal grandfather and my maternal
grandmother used to live in a faraway village and I used to live with them. They had no other child
than my mother. My mother was very young when I was born, but she had the whole responsibility
of her husband’s family because my father’s mother died when 1 was only two years old. My father’s
brothers and sisters were too small, too young; my mother was also very young, but she had to take
care of the whole family. So my maternal grandfather and mother decided that it would be better if I
lived with them. I could have more freedom and they could take more care of me. My mother would
be a little less burdened, so she could take care of her husband’s family now she was the oldest –
although she was just a young girl.
The village was not very far away, only sixteen miles, but there was no road, no train. When
my grandfather fell sick, and the only physician in the village said, ”It is beyond me – take him
immediately to some hospital,” We took him in a bullock cart, because there was no other way.
Those sixteen miles looked like thousands of miles, because he was dying.
I could see his pulse was slowing down, he was becoming unable to open his eyes; he started
breathing in a very strange way, he stopped speaking. I saw death coming closer and closer. He
was in my lap because my grandmother was in so much misery and suffering that she was constantly
crying.
I told her, ”You should think of me! I am only a child – now I am to take care of the dying man and to
take care of you. And you had brought me to take care of! This seems strange. At least don’t cry,
because if you cry then how can I stop myself from crying? I am not crying just so you can stop.” But
she was not in her senses. I was continuously watching in every possible way to see whether the
man was still alive or gone, and I saw him slowly, slowly, slowly drowning. By the time we reached
my father’s place he was dead.
From Personality to Individuality 400 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
After that, death became a constant companion to me. That day I also died, because one thing
became certain, that whether you live seven years or seventyyears – he was seventy years – what
does it matter, you have to die.
My grandfather was a rare man. I could not conceive him telling a lie, breaking a promise, even
judging somebody as bad.
I remember one night.... In the village there was no police station, no police, nothing. My grandfather
was the richest man in the village. I used to sleep with him in his bed. One night a thief entered
the house. My grandfather saw the thief crossing the fencing and entering; my grandfather started
telling me a story. The thief had entered the house and was sitting in the corner – my grandfather
started telling me a story, and it seems the thief also became interested in what he was saying.
My grandfather had the habit, just like Taru, of chewing pan, the betel leaf, continually. His bag was
always with him, a very beautiful bag, and he was continually making his pan. This night he began
to chew the pan and spit on the thief who was sitting in the corner! The thief could not escape either,
L because he would be caught, and he could not say, ”You are destroying an my clothes.”
Finally it was too much and the thief said, ”Nana – because I used to call my grandfather nana;
nana means maternal grandfather, and because of me the old man had become nana to the whole
village; everybody started calling him nana. So the thief said, ”Nana, it is too much. I am enjoying
your story but I cannot enjoy your pan. Please stop! You will spoil my whole dress!”
My grandfather said, ”Tomorrow you can come and take new clothes from me – because I have
been deliberately spitting on you. It is not good of me, I should not have done it.”
”But,” the man said, ”I am a thief, and you know I had come to steal.”
My grandfather said, ”That is your business, whether you are a thief or not, but tomorrow you come
and take new clothes” – because my grandfather had a shop, a multi-purpose shop. In small villages
there are only multi-purpose shops; in the one shop you get clothes, sweets, shoes, umbrellas –
everything is available. There was no other shop, he had the only shop for everything the village
needed – medicines....
Next day the thief came, and I told him, ”You seem to have some nerve! You have come with your
whole shirt and dhoti spoiled by the red of the pan.”
He said, ”What else to do? I am a poor man, I cannot afford another dress. Nana has promised me
– and he is a man of his word.”
I said, ”Are you certain? He can collect the neighborhood and have you caught because you entered
with the intention of stealing. You have admitted it, otherwise what are you doing here? And he has
left all these marks on you as proof”
He said, ”Don’t create doubt in me. I know your nana: even if I had stolen – I have not stolen
anything because I had no chance – he would never tell anybody.” And he went in and got a new
dress. I told my nana, ”This seems to be going a little too far. Don’t let him be caught, okay, don’t
judge him as a thief – but you are rewarding him.”
From Personality to Individuality 401 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
He said, ”No, I am not rewarding him. I spoiled his clothes; I am simply replacing what I have spoiled.
And he has not stolen. Intentions are just intentions. And even if he had stolen, what is wrong in it?
In this whole village everybody is poor, only I am rich; so if they take something away, it belongs to
them. From where have I got all my riches? – from these poor people. They work for me; they work
in my farm, they work in my garden. Everything that I have... I don’t produce anything – I don’t go to
work in the field, to cut the crop or anything; all these people do it. So if once in a while somebody
steals, they are stealing their own things; I am not concerned in it.
He told me, ”Don’t think about that man as a thief. That is not your business. And we enjoyed it, it
was such great entertainment.” I said, ”That is true, that we both enjoyed seeing him.”
The thief went on slipping into the corner, but the further into the corner he went, the more he was
caught. He wanted to escape from the juice of the betel leaf, but he could not get out because that
corner was just close to my grandfather’s bed. It was dark there, so in the beginning he was thinking
that it was just accidental; but then he started slipping away and the spit started following him into
the corner. Then finally he thought, ”It is not accidental; that old man is spitting like a good shot. And
the story he is telling is just to make me aware that he is awake: it will not be easy to steal anything.”
So finally he had to declare himself He said, ”I am here, and suffering. Now stop and let me go!”
My grandfather was such a good man and always nice and helpful to everybody; whoever came to
him, he was helping. He would give money to people. If they had come for a loan, and they wanted
to put something down as mortgage, he never accepted it. He said, ”I don’t know – tomorrow I may
die, then who will give you this mortgage back? You take the money. If you can manage to give it
back, good. If you cannot manage, nothing to be worried about – I have enough.”
He never took those people’s signatures as proof that they had taken money. I told him, ”You should
have their signatures as proof that they have been lent money.”
He said, ”It is not a loan, it is their money. They may be thinking it is a loan, but I am not thinking
of it as a loan. So if they return it, good; if they don’t return it, there is no loss because I was never
expecting them to. And they are so poor; how are they going to return it?”
Such a good man, a beautiful man, simply died. What was the meaning of his life? That became
a tortuous question to me – what was the meaning? What had he attained? For seventy years he
lived the life of a good man; but what was the point of it all? It simply ended... not even a trace was
left behind. His death made me immensely serious.
I was serious even before his death. By the age of four I started thinking of problems that people
somehow manage to go on postponing to the very end. I don’t believe in postponing. I started
asking questions to my maternal grandfather and he would say, ”These questions! Your whole life is
there – there is no hurry – and you are too young.”
I said, ”I have seen young boys dying in the village: they had not asked these questions, they have
died without finding the answer. Can you guarantee me that I will not die tomorrow or the day after
tomorrow? Can you give me a guarantee that I will die only after I have found the answer?”
He said, ”I cannot guarantee that, because death is not in my hands, nor is life in my hands.”
From Personality to Individuality 402 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
”Then,” I said, ”You should not suggest to me any postponement. I want the answer now. If you
know, then say that you know and give me the answer. If you don’t know, then don’t feel awkward in
accepting your ignorance.”
Soon he realized that with me there was no alter native. Either you had to say yes.... But it was
not easy then; then you had to go into deeper details about it – and you could not deceive me. He
started accepting his ignorance, that he didn’t know.
I said, ”You are very old, soon you will be dying What have you been doing for your whole life? At
the moment of death you will have only ignorance in your hands and nothing else. And these are
vital questions – I am not asking you any trivia.
”You go to the temple. I ask you why you go to the temple – have you found anything in the temple?
You have been going your whole life, and you try to persuade me to come along with you to the
temple.” The temple was made by him. One day he accepted that the truth is ”Because I have made
the temple. If even I don’t go there, then who is going to go there? But before you I accept it, that it
is futile. I have been going there my whole life and I have not gained anything.”
Then I said, ”Try something else. Don’t die with the question – die with the answer.” But he died with
the question.
The last time he spoke to me, almost ten hours before he died, he opened his eyes and he said,
”You were right: postponing is not right. I am dying with all the questions with me. So remember,
whatever I was suggesting to you was wrong. You were right, don’t postpone. If a question arises,
try to find the answer as quickly as possible.”
There are a thousand and one questions that every child asks you. And just because you are such
a coward that you cannot accept your ignorance, you go on giving him bogus answers. He asks you,
”Who created the world?” and you answer him, without knowing anything about God, ”God created
the world” – without even feeling ashamed, with no change on your face.
You answer as if you know, but you don’t know; you are deceiving. And you are deceiving not only
the child, you are also deceiving yourself It works both ways. If you succeed in deceiving the child,
you have succeeded in deceiving yourself into thinking that perhaps you know. And again and again
telling people that God created the world, you will start believing in your own lie. Then certainly you
will not feel so bored.
Lies are very interesting because they are your inventions. The search for truth goes through much
boredom. It is not an entertainment.
Somebody has asked the question: ”Why are people so disinterested in the discovery of truth?” It is
not far to go to seek the answer. Even to raise the question about truth means you have to become
serious. It means you are leaving the world of entertainment, of circuses, movies, carnivals, football
matches, behind. You are leaving all that world which keeps people occupied, and you are moving
in the opposite direction to entertainment: that is boredom.
Why are people engaged in all these entertainments? Simply to avoid being bored. Just watch
yourself left alone for one day in the house. You start doing bizarre things. You will turn the radio on,
From Personality to Individuality 403 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
then put it off, then turn the TV on – not that you are really interested, but what else to do? When
you are just left alone, boredom starts descending on you. You will start phoning friends, ”Would
you like to come to my place, or I can come to your place, or we can meet in Zorba the Buddha.” He
is bored, you are bored. Two bored people – it is interesting – start entertaining each other.
As far as I can see, this is absolutely against arithmetic. I don’t know much arithmetic. From the
very beginning in my school I heard about these three R’s. ”The whole of education consists of three
R’s,” one of my teachers said: ”reading, writing,’rithmetic.”
I said, ”Whom are you trying to befool?...’rithmetic! Just to manage to make it the three R’s you
are changing arithmetic into ’rithmetic.” I told him, ”Education consists only of two R’s: reading and
writing. Arithmetic I don’t take into account.”
I have never been at ease with that ’rithmetic, but this much I can understand: that two bored persons
meeting together will make the boredom double. That’s what happens in marriages all around the
world. Everybody knows both were alone and were feeling bored. They started entertaining each
other, and immediately they fell into the fallacy that in their being together life would be interesting,
there would be some juice in it. But that is possible only when you meet the girl or the boy on the
sea beach... waiting twenty-three hours for one hour. Stolen kisses are sweet; otherwise how can
kisses be sweet? It is stealing that makes them sweet.
I don’t see that kisses can be sweet, particularly French kisses. If French kisses were sweet, every
Frenchman would be suffering from diabetes – so much sugar! But there is no sugar at all so
diabetic people can kiss without any fear. But stolen, there is sweetness... that you are creating a
small world of your own.
But meeting once in a while, you are both prepared, you are both ready. You have taken a shower,
she has taken a shower, and for at least three hours she has been before the mirror and used all
kinds of perfumes and deodorants, and lipstuff and whatnot. And then you meet for a few minutes
or an hour. Of course you both are far away; only your personalities, the masks.... She has come
with painted smiles and you have come with painted smiles.
The strangest thing is that you know that you are not what you are pretending to be, she knows
she is not what she is pretending to be – but both believe that the other is exactly what the other is
pretending to be. This is something unbelievable. And then naturally they want to live together: if
one hour is so sweet, if one hour is so miraculous that all boredom disappears, they start imagining
how beautiful it will be to be together twenty-four hours a day.
The fallacy has continued all through history, and I don’t see any possibility that it is going to stop
even in the future. If it stops it will be very significant, meaningfuland it will give you a chance to
understand boredom.
By understanding boredom, you can go beyond it. By avoiding it, you remain trapped in it.
Marriage is a way to avoid it, just as there are so many other ways. But when you are together
twenty-four hours a day, how long can you pretend? Pretending needs tremendous effort and
energy. Oneday, two days, three days, and the honeymoon is over: your mask starts slipping.
And you don’t care anymore even if it slips and falls down, because the girl’s mask is also slipping.
From Personality to Individuality 404 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
I have heard: a man got married to a woman and they went on their honeymoon. The man said,
”Before we go to bed this is my old habit – to put the light.” It is such a deep-rooted habit that I cannot
go to bed unless I put the light off.”
The woman said, ”This is strange! You can go to bed; I am coming from the bathroom and I will put
the light off.”
He said, ”Then I will wait outside the bed.”
But the woman insisted, ”Unless you go to bed... This is my habit; I will go into the bathroom
andcome out only if you have gone to bed.”
The man said, ”This is strange: from the very beginning there is a conflict of habits.” Then he said,
”Now there is no point.... The truth is that I don’t have real legs, so I cannot undress in the light.”
The woman said, ”Then it is okay – because I don’t have breasts. You can undress in the light, I can
undress in the light. I was afraid that you may discover that I don’t have any breasts.”
The man said, ”My God! I was afraid that you would discover that my legs are false.”
But the marriage is already on the rocks. The honeymoon has not even started – the light is still on!
Every honeymoon, more or less, in different ways, ends in the same way. Once you have known the
woman, her physiology, her topography, once she has known you – your great lovemaking, huffing
and puffing and perspiring and stinking – now you know you are going to bore each other as much....
Before, at least you were alone and bored; now you are bored and somebody else is also there to
bore you.
Then husband and wife go on living ”happily ever after.” That’s how every story ends, how every film
ends: ”after that they lived happily ever after.” After that, they did not live at all! They simply died.
Every day they died more and more.
But man’s stupidity is such that he won’t see the exact problem. You will think, ”This woman failed
me,” ”This man failed me.” ”Perhaps we are not meant for each other” – as if there is some woman
who is meant for you or some man who is meant for you. Forgive me, there is no woman, just
nobody is meant for you.
You are born alone, and you have to accept your aloneness. The sooner you do, the better.
But aloneness is boredom, because there is no entertainment, nothing interesting. Yes, for twenty-
one years I was bored to death. Not only was I bored, I was boring everybody whom I could catch
hold of. My father would immediately start looking into his books... I would see that he was sitting,
not looking into a book; as I entered he would start looking at it. Once I said, ”Why are you trying to
look busy without business? I have seen you – you were just sitting. There is no customer, and you
were not looking m the books. Why did you start looking in the books?”
He said, ”Can’t I even allow myself to be engaged in something to avoid you? Go somewhere else!
You must be bringing some problems. I have my own troubles – you take care of your own problems.”
From Personality to Individuality 405 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
My teachers would not allow me to raise my hand, because that was.... I don’t know how it happens
in other countries, but in India if you want to ask a question you have to raise your hand. My practice
was that before the teacher entered the class my hand was up. He would not have even got seated
and my hand would be up. He would say, ”This is something! At least let me sit down. Is there some
emergency?”
I would say, ”Everything is an emergency. Why should I waste time? And when you start teaching,
you force me to keep my hand down because you are teaching and I should not disturb you.”
Teachers would immediately start writing on the board so they could keep their back towards me,
but I was not so easily put off. Just the other day we were talking about Bible-bashing: I was
book-bashing. I would go on hitting the book till they had to turn around.
I would say, ”You cannot escape this way. My hand is up and I have a question” – and I had all kinds
of questions. My teacher would say, for example, ”This question does not belong to my subject.”
I would say, ”It is not a question of subject. Life cannot be divided into subjects. Your school
curriculum may be divided, but life is undivided. When I go in the history class I am the same
person, when I go m the geography class I am the same person; with the same problems I go
into every class. So I don’t bother about what subject you are teaching, I am concerned with my
question. And my question is not only my question, it is yours too – and that’s what is freaking you
out.”
And they were simple questions like, ”What is the meaning of your life? Why are you living? Now,
those teachers would say, ”What do you want – that we should commit suicide?”
I would say, ”I have no objection, but before you commit suicide you will have to tell me: Why are
you committing suicide? What are you going to gain out of it? That question you will have to answer.
So suicide is not going to help, the question will remain the same: Why are you living? Why are you
dying? And if you can’t answer such a simple question such as why you are living, then what else is
there?
”You try to teach me history, about Alexander the Great, and you don’t know anything about yourself
even about your life? You want to teach me about religion, about Krishna and Rama – and you don’t
know anything about the living principle in you, from where you got it. Are you aware of the source,
and where you are going?”
Once you are skeptical then everything can become the object of immensely important questions.
And when you are surrounded by questions and no answer is coming from anywhere, you feel
betrayed by existence, betrayed by your parents, betrayed by your teachers, betrayed by your priest
– because there is no answer and yet you go on living: committing suicide is a crime.
It is a strange world. Just the other day, a news cutting was brought to me... a man died near the
White House in Washington. Hungry, cold, frozen, he was found just by the wall of the White House.
When they found the dead body in the morning, they searched him and it was found that that man
was a second world war veteran. Can you believe this? – they gave him all the respect that is given
to a war veteran.
From Personality to Individuality 406 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
Alive, he was hungry, with no clothes to cover him from the cold: nobody cared. Dead, with great
respect, with all military respect, he was given the salute. What kind of world are we living in? A
living person has no means to live, and a dead person is given great honor.
In the same way it is so funny that all over the world suicide is one of the greatest crimes. Strange:
you don’t help people to find the meaning of their lives, and you force them to live – because to drop
out of living, to just return the ticket and say, ”I want to get out of this train of life, I am no longer
interested,” is to commit a crime.
And the thing becomes still funnier. If you are caught committing suicide, then you will be sentenced
to death! We are living with such intelligent people all around – the great law-makers, constitution
makers.
That’s exactly what this man was going to do – die. Now, what is the need of all this hullabaloo? –
catching hold of him, then for months keeping him in prison... and a court trial with the advocates
fighting each other like cats and dogs, the great magistrate sitting seriously deciding. And after
that the man is sentenced to death When the man, the poor man, was doing it himself without any
expense to the government, to the nation, to anybody, that was crime!
Why is suicide a crime? From a very early age I have been thinking: Why is suicide a crime? It is
a crime because it gives the idea to everybody else also, that life is not worth living: that man did
well. You are not courageous enough, you are cowardly – you cannot commit suicide. How to hide
this cowardliness? Of course! – you can make a law that he has committed a crime. And this kind
of crime has to be prevented; otherwise many more people will start committing it.
They are really trying to repress in everybody’s mind the idea of dropping out of life. It is a well-
known, well-established fact that anybody with a little intelligence thinks in his life – at least one time
certainly, that is the minimum – of committing suicide. Why? Because life seems to be just boredom.
Marriage has failed. Religion has failed. Politics leads nowhere. You can have all the money in the
world, still you are as poor as you were before.
Boredom is something very fundamental.
It is part of not accepting your aloneness.
It is part of not being able to enjoy your aloneness.
You have been taught by the society to escape, to go on running, not to look back; but boredom
follows you like a shadow.
Boredom is your shadow.
Where are you going to escape?
You can’t escape from it.
Perhaps for a few moments you can drown it in alcohol, but the next morning it will come back,
worse than it was before. Then you call it a hangover. You suffer the hangover; still again you are
From Personality to Individuality 407 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
going to drink, knowing perfectly well that the hangover is coming. But at least for a few hours you
are absent. Drunkards are not bored. You can go into any pub and see the drunkards. They are
utterly happy and enjoying, shouting, screaming and beating, doing all kinds of thingsbut they are
radiant. You will not see them miserable, sitting in a corner philosophically like Rodin’s statue of THE
THINKER, with the hand supporting the chin, and half-closed eyes.
THE THINKER has a posture – the very posture shows that sadness. Rodin’s statue of THE
THINKER has exactly caught the mood of boredom. He is so bored, he has no energy even to
open his eyes and look around. Inside, questions upon questions are standing in a row, an endless
row.
One marriage fails; people start getting divorces and then search for another woman. I have heard
about one Californiac – yes, I use the word Californiac, because that kind of people you can find
only in California. Whoever gave the name California to this part of the world must have in mind the
idea of Californiac. One Californiac married eight times – nothing surprising in America.
In India of course wives go on praying to find the same husband in the next life. I have always felt
so sorry for the poor husband: if these prayers are heard...! Every year there is a particular day in
India: the married woman fasts on the day, and after fasting she prays. That is purification... and
then the prayer, that she should get the same husband life after life.
I feel sorry for the poor husband, because if these prayers are heard what is going to happen to
him? And I feel very strange about the women: are they aware of what they are asking? You want
this dodo life after life? One life is not enough? But it is just tradition. In fact every day the wives are
a pain in the neck of the dodos – and the same dodo goes on doing the same to them.
Everybody in this instance follows Jesus Christ: ”Do unto others whatever you want to be done to
you by them.” The husband is doing to the wife what he must want done to him; the wife is doing
what she must want to be done to her. All are Christians in that way; particularly married couples
are all Christians – whatever religion they belong to.
This man married eight times, and each time he found that somehow he ended up with the same
type of woman. He must have been a slightly alert man. He watched, and thought that this was
strange. But this is not strange, it is simple psychology. You fall in love with a woman. You have
certain ideas about beauty, form, aesthetics; and that woman fits into your formula of who is going to
be the right wife for you – as if right wives exist or right husbands exist! All are wrong, because the
whole institution of marriage is idiotic. So there is no right husband, no right wife – unless somebody
like me manages the marriage of two people.
For example, I know one couple who would have been the right couple: Morarji Desai, ex-prime
minister of India, and Mother Teresa. I can say with absolute certainty that if they were married they
would be the perfect couple of the whole of history. But it is very difficult to find such a couple. It
took fifty years for me to discover this one couple.
Because you choose a woman, you forget that you have a certain formula, unconsciously working.
Why do you suddenly choose a particular woman? – there are so many women in the world. It is
because this woman fits with your idea of a right wife. Now, you divorce after three months because
From Personality to Individuality 408 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
although you found that her nose fits with the formula, her hair color fits with the formula, her body
fits with the formula, she is not only a combination of hair, eyes, nose; these are nothing. She is an
individual, hidden from you completely. So you have only seen the outer side of the woman, and
you don’t know her inner depths, where she really is. And she has only seen your outer form.
It is just like seeing a fence, and deciding this is the right house: you have only seen the fence
around the house, not even the walls of the house – what to say about the inner chambers? And
what if there are scorpions or snakes, witches and devils? One never knows what is there; just the
fence fits. But you can’t live outside the fence. You get married just to go inside the house, and when
you enter each other’s house it is terrible – because you have chosen each other out of boredom,
not out of joy.
You have chosen, not to share something but to get something. The woman has also chosen to get
something because she is empty. Now two beggars are choosing each other thinking that the other
is an emperor. Once you come closer, dreams are broken. You can divorce the woman, but how are
you going to choose another woman? Again, by the old formula that you know, that is fixed in your
unconscious; perhaps you are not aware of it. The old formula will find the same kind of woman
again; you cannot find anybody else. It is almost like marrying the same woman. And that’s what
happened, that’s why I was going to tell the story.
The Californiac married eight women. When he married the eighth woman he found after two days
that once before also he had married her. It took two days for him to discover it. They were all similar
types but this one looked like an exact replica. And the woman was not yet aware that it was the
same man; only when he told her did she become aware. He said, ”My God! What have we done?
Let’s be together for two or three months and then divorce.”
Wherever divorce has come as a fashion you are bound to find that you will always choose the same
type. And the woman, on the other side, is going to choose the same type of man.
I have lost psychological track of all memories. Factually I can describe them but I cannot relive
them.
My life is absolutely lonely.
This is strange to say because I have lived thirty-five years of my life in crowds. But I am alone in
the crowd.
You are there, but I am alone.
Even in the crowd I am not in any way different than when I am sitting in my room alone. My
aloneness persists; it is incorruptible. I live in just one room almost the whole day.
My life is as much a routine as possible. Everything that creates boredom I have meticulously
arranged around myself I have not allowed anything that may help me to escape from my aloneness.
In the morning exactly at a certain time I get up. And do you know what I do first thing? Even Vivek
does not know. The first thing is, I pinch myself to see whether I am still here or it is finished. Only
after pinching myself and being certain do I push the button for Vivek to bring my tea. Because what
From Personality to Individuality 409 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
is the point of pushing the button if I am not here? She will unnecessarily get up and prepare the
tea and bring it – and that is not right.
So first I make certain that I am still here. Then the second thing I do – I push the button for her to
bring my tea. And what is my tea? No milk, no sugar, just hot water with tea leaves. But I enjoy it
because it is the purest taste of tea. Sugar and milk destroy the purity of tea completely.
Everything is set up exactly the same every day. I have half an hour in my bathroom, then half an
hour in my swimming pool. It must be the hottest swimming pool in the world: ninety-nine degrees
fahrenheit. It is just cooking yourself completely. Twenty minutes in it and you are cooked well. And
I don’t have a small swimming pool, it is olympic size. You know I am a man of very simple tastes –
I am satisfied with the best of anything: satisfied simply, but with the best of anything.
Sheela was asking me, ”What are you going to do with the olympic size?”
I said, ”That is not the point, what I am going to
[ do with the olympic size. The size has to be olympic; I cannot step into a smaller size swimming
pool.”
Half an hour in that hot water, then back for half an hour under an ice-cold shower. You cannot have
that ice-cold shower for more than two minutes. But after ninety-nine degrees of hot water it is a
tremendously beautiful experience to be under ice-cold water The change from hot to the opposite,
to very cold, is again a deeper pinching. The first was on the body, this is on the soul. Then I am
perfectly certain that I am here and going to prevail, at least for today.
Vivek brings my breakfast, which is really a great breakfast – just a glass of juice, the same. It would
be the same for everybody else, but not for me because I don’t compare. Yesterday is gone and
tomorrow has not come yet – I don’t compare it. Vivek was asking me today, ”Are you really excited
with the same food every day?” – because yesterday I said I was excited. She was asking, ”Are you
really excited?”
I said, ”I am always excited with the same juice, the same food, because the problem arises only
when you start comparing. When you start thinking that for ten years you have been having the
same juice, then there arises the fear, ”What are you doing?”
But I am not bored. I have dropped comparison. I don’t carry any psychological memory with me. I
go on dropping it moment to moment, and then I can enjoy the same thing for the whole of eternity.
She must have been worried because of what I said. She must have talked with my personal
physician, Devaraj, and said, ”Should we change Osho’s complete menu?”
I said, ”No, I am not going to allow you to change it. I am so settled with it that a change may create
some trouble.” And I am not bored with it. It is difficult to believe, but I have learned one thing:
If you can enjoy your aloneness then you can enjoy anything.
From Personality to Individuality 410 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
And if you cannot enjoy your aloneness, you cannot enjoy anything. That is an absolutely
fundamental principle.
I had a friend who was a school inspector. One day he came to me very excited and said, ”Just
listen. Can you believe this?”
I said, ”Just settle down – don’t be so excited. What has happened? I never see you excited. You
are always bored with the same routine: going again and again to the same schools, to the same
classes and the same questions. What has happened? Something extraordinary?”
He said, ”You will not believe it! I went to a school....” First I have to explain to you the story, otherwise
you won’t follow him.
Sita’s father – Sita is Rama’s wife – Sita’s father had declared that ”Whosoever breaks the bow of
Shiva” that Shiva himself had given to Sita’s father as a gift ”my daughter will put a garland on his
neck.” That was called swayamvara in India: the girl choosing her husband by a certain device. This
was the device, and the device was really difficult. Shiva’s bow was so heavy that to break it by hand
was almost impossible. It was difficult even to pick it up with your hands from the platform on which
it was Lying. Princes after princes, kings after kings came. Finally Rama came: he broke Shiva’s
bow and married Sita.
This story was given to the students of a class to prepare for the next day; and that was the day, by
accident, that my friend happened to visit the school. When he entered this class, the teacher was
just asking the students, ”Tell me, who broke Shiva’s bow?” A boy, very afraid and nervous, raised
his hand. The teacher was surprised – this was the last boy he would have imagined would answer.
He had never answered anything, but now he was raising his hand. The principal was there, and
the inspector of schools was there, so he said, ”Okay,” but he was afraid that the boy would mess up
the whole thing. The boy stood up and said, ”Sir, I have not broken it. And moreover, yesterday I did
not even come to school.” Now, he had really messed up the whole thing. The teacher was boiling:
what would the inspector think, what would the principal think?
But before he could say anything or do anything, the principal said, ”As far as I’m concerned, this
boy seems to be mischievous: I think he has broken it.” The inspector was at a loss. What to do
now? This was becoming absolutely mad! He went to the chairman of the school committee to tell
him what was going on. And the chairman said, ”Don’t be worried. I will just tell the carpenter and
he will fix it. Children are children and furniture gets broken – it is nothing to be worried about.”
I said, ”But you should have enjoyed it – it was such a beautiful experience! But you don’t seem to
have enjoyed it; you have become worried about it.”
He said, ”Worried? It is a great concern. What is going on? Even the headmaster says,’I suspect
that this is the culprit – his face shows it.’ And the chairman said, ’Don’t be worried, I will tell the
carpenter and he will fix it. This is an everyday affair. These children are children.”’
And my friend said, ”This is not the whole story. When I came home I told my wife, and my wife
said,’Will you come to your senses or not? In our house so many things are broken, and nobody
bothers. I have been telling you the chair is broken, the lamp is broken – and you are worrying about
Shiva’s bow? What business is it of yours?’
From Personality to Individuality 411 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
”So I have come to you, to tell you that this is the state of affairs,” my friend said.
I said, ”I think this is a very beautiful state of affairs – just go and enjoy it! Don’t get worried about
it. The beauty of the story could not have been as good if the boy simply answered factually, that
Rama broke the bow. What would there have been in that? But the boy was original.”
He said, ”My God, you say that the boy was original?”
I said, ”I think everybody was original because they all managed to find some new idea. They were
not repeating old things.”
To repeat old things becomes boring. The ways to get out of it are two: either don’t repeat old
thingswhich is impossible, because life consists of small things. You will have to brush your teeth
every day. How many original ways can you find? I don’t see that you can find many. As far as my
dentist is concerned there is only one right way. Wrong ways you can find, but the right way is only
one. If you start getting bored with that then every morning you will start bored.
Enjoy it, don’t compare. What is there is compare? If you don’t compare, it is no longer repetition; if
you compare, it is repetition.
You will have to take a shower – and it is going to be the same. You will put on your clothes and you
will do your work – it is all going to be the same, more or less. If you try to do everything new in
order to be creative you will simply go crazy.
This story of Shiva’s bow reminds me of another, that happened in front of me in my own village.
It was the same story. Rama’s life is played all over India every year, and this part is in it. Ravana
was a competitor of Rama, and he was a mighty man. He was also as much a devotee of Shiva
as Sita’s father, perhaps a greater devotee. So there was great fear that he might break the bow.
Neither Sita’s father wanted that – because Ravana was a monstrous man with ten heads – nor did
Sita. She was afraid that he might succeed – everybody was afraid – so a conspiracy was created.
The moment Ravana was to stand up and go towards the bow, a man would come running in and
say, ”Your kingdom is on fire.” Sri Lanka was Ravana’s kingdom, and the story is that his capital in
Sri Lanka was all made of gold. Of course if his kingdom was on fire then he would drop the idea
of breaking the bow. He already had many wives, and he was not particularly interested in Sita: the
only thing was the challenge to break the bow. He was interested in breaking the bow; Sita or no
Sita was not the problem, Ravana had many beautiful wives. So he dropped the idea and rushed
towards Sri Lanka. Meanwhile Rama broke the bow and got married to Sita. This is the scene and
then the story goes on.
What happened in my village when this scene came, and the man came running and said, ”ravana,
your kingdom is on fire,” was that the man playing Ravana said, ”Let it be!”
Nearabout twenty thousand people, many of whom were asleep, just woke up! The whole crowd
was awake: What has happened?
Ravana said, ”let it be – this time I’m going to break Shiva’s bow. Every year the same, the same,
the same:’Your kingdom is on fire’ – and nothing is on fire.” And he broke the bow. It was nothing, it
From Personality to Individuality 412 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
was just a bamboo bow. He simply broke it in many pieces and threw all the pieces away, and told
the father of Sita, ”Where is the girl? Bring her!”
It was a great shock, but really original. And he declared to the people, ”now you go home because
the story is finished” – because that was the point of the whole story. Rama gets married to Sita,
then Ravana finds out that it was a conspiracy, that his kingdom is not on fire – it is just a trick to get
him out of the way and to give time to Ramaso Ravana steals Sita just to take revenge. Then the
whole story goes on: he steals Sita, then Rama fights and gets Sita back....
But he finished the whole story. He said, ”It is finished. You can go home, and from tomorrow there
will be no Ram Leela. For this year I have done it.” Later on it was found that the problem was that
he had had a quarrel with the man who was managing the show. After the show they all used to get
sweets and fruits, which people were bringing to offer to Rama. All the actors used to get them, and
the day before, this man got a little smaller proportion. He was angry and he said, ”Today I want
double.”
The manager said, ”No, nothing doing. If I give you double then everybody else will ask for double.”
He said, ”Then mind! If something goes wrong I am not responsible.”
The manager said, ”What can go wrong?” He had never conceived that this man could do this.
I went backstage, and I really appreciated the man. I said, ”You did something original. Every year
somebody needs to do something original.”
The manager said, ”You are supporting him! We are going to give him to the police because he has
destroyed the whole thing. Now tomorrow from where are we going to start the story? Tickets have
been sold; and people will ask for their money back if the story is finished. It was just the opening
day! We are going to give him to the police.”
I said, ”No, that is not right – he is such an original person. Tomorrow find somebody else to play
the role – just release him from the role – and start again from the very beginning.”
But the manager said, ”How to start? – because he has broken the bow.”
I said, ”Simple, just open the show tomorrow. Declare that the show will be on and that it will be the
first show. When the curtain opens, Janaka, the father of Sita, will declare, ’Yesterday, through the
mistake of my servants, the real bow of Shiva was left In the palace. The bow that got broken was
just a bow which children play with. Today, the real bow is here and the show starts.’”
The manager said, ”That good – that will do.”
So the show started next day. People were laughing t because again it was a bamboo bow and if
somebody wanted to break it, he could. But that Ravana was taken out, there was somebody else
playing the role.; The story continued, and the people fell asleep and snored.
But in life you cannot be original every moment. But what can be done... what has happened to me
is: since the moment I started enjoying just being myself, all psychological memory started falling
From Personality to Individuality 413 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
like dust every day; and anything – because it is not compared with the past – is new, is original. I
see you: I never feel that these are the same people, not for a single moment, because twenty-four
hours have passed; you have all grown twenty-four hours older. So much water has gone down the
Ganges, it is no more the same water. So much life has flowed through you, you are not the same
person. Yes, the same face is similar, but not exactly the same.
Gautam Buddha used to say, ”Life is just like a flame. You light a candle in the evening, and the
whole night the candle burns. You can see that the flame is almost the same, but it is not the
same flame. The flame is becoming smoke continually, and new flame is coming out. The old is
disappearing and the new is appearing, but the disappearance of the old and the appearance of the
new is so quick that you cannot see the gap between the two. That’s why you think it is the same
flame.
”In the morning when you blow out the candle, never think you are blowing out the same candle you
had kindled in the evening. It is not. In these twelve hours the flame has been continually changing:
it is a flux.”
So is life, so is everything – continuously changing, moving.
Nothing is the same, nothing can remain the same for two consecutive moments.
Once you understand that.... But that under standing has to be first experienced in your own life
flame. When you see that your own life flame is a flux, a continuity of movement, a continuum, then
everything around it is always new – similar, but new.
The moment you can feel your newness, and everything’s newness around you, boredom
disappears.
Animals are not bored, idiots are not bored, because they don’t have the intelligence to see.
Enlightened people are not bored because they can see the totality of their own being – that it
is a constant newness, that dust does not gather there, that the mirror remains clean and everything
that reflects in your consciousness is always new.
The tree outside the house will not be the same in the morning. Please don’t behave with the tree
as if it is just the same. New leaves have come out, old leaves have fallen; new flowers may have
blossomed, old flowers may have disappeared.
Change is the only permanent phenomenon in existence.
There is nothing else permanent except change.
So what is there to be bored about?
But it has not to be just an intellectual understanding:
It has to arise from your experience of being a flame.
You are actually a flame which goes on changing.
From Personality to Individuality 414 Osho
CHAPTER 23. BORED TO DEATH? – YOU’RE ON THE TRAIL TO TRANSFORMATION
Every second something new is coming into the flame and something old is becoming smoke.
Once your aloneness becomes a constant newness then whatever you do is creative, is original, is
new. And you cannot manage in any way to feel bored.
I have tried to feel bored at least one time more, to see how it was, but I have to confess I could not
succeed. I have tried every way, but everything is so new – what can you do? From where to bring
in something old? There is nothing old ever – all is new forever.
But let this understanding arise from your innermost experience of aloneness.
From Personality to Individuality 415 Osho
CHAPTER 24
Infallibility: just a popedream
22 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHY ARE YOU AGAINST THE CHRISTIAN POPE? ISN’T THE POPE INFALLIBLE? WHY DO YOU
CALL HIM, AGAIN AND AGAIN, ”POPE THE POLACK”?
I am not against anyone in the whole world, for the simple reason that I have no vested interest in
anything at all, not even in my own life.
My purpose is fulfilled.
If I die this very moment, there will be no complaint, because I will not be leaving anything
incomplete.
Enmity arises when somebody hinders you in your ambition. But I don’t have any ambition. I don’t
want to be the pope.
There will be cardinals all around the earth who are against the pope because they all want to be
pope. He himself was a cardinal and must have been ambitious to be the pope. He must have
prayed to God, about the pope he hoped to succeed, ”Let this old guy die soon.” And he did die
really very soon: he was only pope for ten or twelve months.
It is something worth noticing. Down through all the centuries popes have been dying like flies. It
seems that once you become a pope the whole existence is against you. I think it must be because
416
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
of all these cardinals and bishops and ministers and priests; they are all hoping one day to become
the pope, that is their only ambition. They all must be praying, ”God, call this man back home.” And
although there is no God, so many prayers cannot go unheard. You will be surprised-without God,
how can prayers be heard? There is no need for God. Just so many people desiring your death can
create enough energy to kill you.
So even though there is no God – Buddha has no God in his religion, but he says to his sannyasins,
”After each prayer, never forget to distribute your virtue.” It is worth understanding. He says, ”When
you pray or meditate you attain to a certain virtue, a purity, a compassion, a certain quality of love,
a spiritual fragrance. Don’t hold it, immediately disperse it. Give it back to the universe from where
it has come to you.” So the last thing in every meditation, according to Buddha, is: ”Whatsoever my
meditation has given to me – the bliss, the joy – I give it back to the whole universe.”
There is no God, no distributing agency. But there is no need: your wishing it is enough. Existence
is not dead; it is alive, it is overflowing with life. It may not have ears to hear you, it may not have any
understanding of your language, but it has life energy to feel you, to absorb your deeply – felt prayer.
I am reminded of one thing.
In India, for thousands of years, the snake has been worshipped. There are snake charmers all over
India who play a certain tune on a special kind of flute, and snakes start coming out of their holes
almost intoxicated with the tune. They dance in front of the snake charmer who is playing on his
flute.
When Britishers came into India for the first time, they could not believe it, because they had come
with the idea – scientists had found – that snakes don’t have any ears. But what to make of this?
If they don’t have any ears – and certainly they don’t have any ears, in their physiology ears are
missing – but they are hearing music; not only hearing it, they are dancing to the tune of it. And
not just one snake, all the snakes are affected by certain tunes, and they all dance according to the
tune. And they have no ears!
It was reported back to England: ”How can we say that they don’t have any ears? – because
certainly they hear the music. Not only do they hear, they under stand; not only do they understand,
they follow it.” It took long research to find out how, because certainly they don’t have any ears.
The scientists were puzzled: without ears you cannot hear. But it was a solid a fact – and it was
happening all over India, no just in one place.
Every year in India there is a month when spring comes; in that month there is a day devoted to the
snake. It is the most beautiful time: the flowers, the fragrance, and the air – everything is vibrant with
youth, beauty, color. One day is devoted to the snake. Nobody kills the snake because the snake is
thought to be almost divine, and they are given milk, they are worshipped, and they dance all over
the country. Ir each village you will find places with tents, crowd gathered, snakes dancing.
Finally the scientists discovered that the snake has no ears but that its whole skin is sensitive to
sound. It has no specific organ for hearing, but the vibrations of music touching its skin give it a
certain feel, and it starts moving, dancing, swaying. It is not hearing – or I would like to put it in a
different way: it is hearing with its whole body.
From Personality to Individuality 417 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
This is a stupid thing to say – that the snake is not hearing because it has no ears like you. The
reality is that you have only very small ears, and the snake’s ears are spread all over the body. That
would be a more scientific and logical way of saying it: that it hears with its whole body. Naturally it
hears far better than you, far deeper than you.
It risks its life, because coming out of the holes is dangerous, but it is not afraid. When the music
calls it, then there is no fear in it. Then amidst the crowds it comes, moving; and remember, because
it is not afraid, it never attacks. And on this particular day it has never been heard that any snake
attacked anybody. Even cobras, the very dangerous snakes, are dancing in the marketplaces. They
are wild people; but anger and fear are connected. If they are afraid then immediately they can
strike back. But they are not afraid. They have forgotten all fear, anger – everything. They are in a
self-forgetfulness, so intoxicated with the music that they risk their life.
In the same way existence hears. It has no ears; it has no personality, no eyes, no hands. That’s why
I say there is no God. But I don’t say there is no godliness. In fact I deny God because I want you to
understand godliness. Because of God, people have completely forgotten the reality of godliness. It
is a quality spread all over existence. Don’t expect God to be in your own image – that He has ears,
and eyes, and nose, and mouth. Don’t be stupid.
This whole existence is alive.
And this aliveness I call godliness, divinity:
No person, but only a presence which is overflowing.
Gautam Buddha is right when he says, ”When you attain to some peace, some silence, some joy,
distribute it.” There is an arithmetic in it, because the more you distribute it, the more you become
capable of getting it. People are very miserly.
It is reported that one man came to Buddha and said, ”I follow all your teachings and I try my best
to do everything, but one condition is troublesome. Can I make just a small exception?”
Buddha said, ”Tell me what the exception is.”
He said, ”I can distribute my virtue to the whole universe but not to my neighbor. So you have to
give me permission to let my joy be distributed to the whole universe except my neighbor. That guy,
if I have any chance, I will kill.”
Buddha said, ”How can you distribute to the whole universe if you are excluding your own neighbor?
No, this exception cannot be allowed. You will have to include your neighbor too; otherwise you are
not really distributing. You have not understood the fundamentals of it.”
It is said about a Buddhist nun who had a golden statue of Buddha – and in Buddhist temples in
Japan and in China, there are hundreds of statues.... People loved that man, Gautam Buddha,
so immensely, that there is one mountain in China which has a temple with ten thousand Buddha
statues. The whole mountain has been carved into statues. The whole mountain has become a
temple. Ten thousand Buddhas!
From Personality to Individuality 418 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
Now, this nun was traveling as Buddhist monks and nuns travel, from one place to another. She had
her golden Buddha, and in the morning she would pray to Buddha and she would burn fragrance in
prayer. But she was very miserly so she was very much concerned because the fragrance went with
the wind; it reached other Buddhas who were also in the temple. And that was her problem, that
these Buddhas.... sometimes her golden Buddha missed completely; the wind took the fragrance to
other Buddhas.
The nun was very inventive. She found a bamboo, a hollow bamboo, and she made a certain
wooden pot, covered, with a hole for the bamboo. She would burn the fragrance inside the pot,
cover it and put the other end of the bamboo to the golden Buddha’s nose. Just a poor human mind!
She was very happy because now the fragrance was going just to her Bud&a; and all those Buddhas
– who knows who has made them? And she thought, ”Anyway they are not mine.” But it created
trouble: soon her Buddha’s face became black. She was very puzzled. She asked the chief monk
of the monastery where she was staying what to do.
The monk could not believe it. He said, ”What have you done to your golden Buddha? Such a
beautiful statue and you have destroyed the face. What have you done?”
She said, ”Now I have to tell you the whole thing; this is how it happened. Now that the smoke goes
directly to his nose it has made his whole face black.”
The master of that monastery must have been a man of understanding. He said, ”This is bound
to happen. When you start possessing even a Buddha, what else can you dispossess? A nun is
supposed to have no possessions – and you are not even able to let your Buddha be free. You
are not even able to understand that all these statues are of the same Buddha, so wherever the
fragrance reaches, it is reaching to Buddha.
”And even if it doesn’t reach these statues, even if it reaches outside to the stones, they are hidden
Bud&as... because someday some sculptor comes and chops and hammers the rock and just takes
out a few unnecessary pieces clinging to it, and the Buddha who was hiding in the stone appears
again. So even if your fragrance goes to a stone outside – to the milestone – then too it is reaching
a hidden Buddha. So don’t be worried: wherever it goes, it goes to him. Otherwise this is not the
blackened face of your Buddha, this is your face blackened.”
Buddha has no God, but he wants you to share your joy immediately. Don’t hold onto it even for
a single moment. It will reach, it will vibrate into the existence. Hence, each single man becoming
enlightened takes the whole universe a little higher than it was before. This is the only contribution
that you can make.
All your contributions – good paintings, good statues, poetry – are not real contributions because
they don’t help human consciousness to go higher, and that is the only richness in existence. But a
single human being becoming enlightened may not do anythinghe may not create a statue, he may
not be a painter, he may not be a poet, a singer – it doesn’t matter: he has already contributed. The
greatest gift he has given to the world without anybody even knowing about it: he has raised you
higher than you were.
The whole evolution of consciousness has depended on only a few people; others are beneficiaries.
They have not done anything to be what they are, where they are.
From Personality to Individuality 419 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
What have you done to be a conscious human being? I don’t think that you can remember that
you have done anything to be a conscious human being, but you are a conscious human being.
Of course your consciousness is very small, a very momentary phenomenon; you can become
unconscious in a second. Somebody hits your face, slaps you, and your consciousness disappears;
you become unconscious. Then whatever you do, you are doing it in unconsciousness. Later on,
when consciousness comes back and you cool down, you may repent; you may feel this was not
right. Who did it?
Many murderers in the courts all over the world have appealed on the grounds that they have not
committed the murder. No magistrate, no court or jury has listened to them. But I say to you that
almost ninety-nine percent of them are telling the thruth – they have not done it. While they did it
they were absolutely unconscious. Now, something a man does in unconsciousness he cannot be
held responsible for when he is conscious. If a man, completely drunk, kills somebody, then the
court accepts it, that you cannot make him responsible: he was drunk, he was not in his senses.
But what is anger? It is far more intoxicating than any alcohol can be. What is jealousy? What
is hatred? They are far more addictive. You can be easily taken out of your drug addiction; any
institution like Alcoholics Anonymous can help you. But to make you unaddicted to your jealousy,
to your ambition, to your competitiveness, to your anger, rage, your potentiality for violence, no
Alcoholics Anonymous can be of any help. But a few, a very few people, enlightened people, have
simply pushed you upwards. They have distributed themselves. They are not hoarders – they cannot
be.
In the same way the reverse also happens. My feeling about why popes die so quickly is that so
many cardinals, so many bishops – and they are in thousands all around the world; I think monks,
Catholic priests, bishops, cardinals, in all, number almost one million. Now, one million people
continually praying – of course to a God who does not exist.... But this prayer itself, this desire, this
ambition to become the pope is enough to kill the poor man. So almost within one year, two years,
three years, the pope dies.
I am not in any way concerned with the pope – he is not in my way. I am going nowhere, so nobody
can be in my way. I am simply sitting in my room: there is no possibility of the pope crossing my
way.
Yes, the American government still categorizes me as a tourist. That is strange. A man who is
sitting in his room the whole day for four years is a tourist! Compared to me, all the Yankees are
tourists. But I go to the bathroom, I go to the swimming pool, I come to this meeting room – if this
is considered tourism, certainly I am a tourist. I am not a resident, it is so obvious, I am touring so
much: the whole day touring and touring. I can understand their viewpoint, why they categorize me
as a tourist after four years of my sitting in my chair.
The pope – you ask me, why am I against him? I am not against him, but it may have appeared to
you that I am against him. The reason is that I simply state whatever is the fact, with no enmity, with
no desire to harm anybody. But if the fact is such that somebody is exposed, then the responsibility
is the fact’s, not mine. Just not to hurt somebody I cannot lie.
I have been criticizing the pope for the simple reason that such people are the greatest frauds on
the earth. Their God is a fraud, their messiah is a fraud; and they are representatives of these two
From Personality to Individuality 420 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
frauds. They are representing someone who has no existence at all. And they are representing
Jesus Christ, who is mentally sick. Now, what can I do about it if somebody is mentally sick?
However politely you say it – you can make it sweet: ”Darling, you are mentally sick” – the fact
remains a fact.
It will be a great day in human growth when these people are taken for exactly what they are, and
they should be treated accordingly.
You ask me: is the pope not infallible? Just the idea of infallibility is idiotic. Nobody has ever been
infallible. Even the enlightened person is not infallible.
Of course if he falls, he falls in an enlightened way – that is a different thing – but he is not infallible.
And if he is enlightened he will accept the fact, because who can know more clearly than he that
existence is so mysterious, so vast – no beginning, no end, unbounded. To say that you are infallible
– does it mean that you have understood the whole mystery, you have demystified existence?now
there is no question that you cannot answer? – now all your answers are going to be exactly factual,
true?
The enlightened person knows that in his own being now there is no darkness.
Hence, he is called enlightened.
He is full of light and he is full of blissfulness.
All anguish has disappeared.
He has found what everybody is looking for, knowingly or unknowingly.
He has arrived.
The feeling of arrival, that now there is nowhere to go, this contentment....
But it has nothing to do with infallibility.
Buddha committed mistakes, Mahavira committed mistakes; and I am sitting before you – in coming
to Oregon, do you think I have not committed a mistake? I am proof enough that being enlightened
does not mean you are infallible. You can fall into the Big Muddy Ranch. And now it is so difficult to
get out of it. The more you try to get out of it, the more you are going into the mud.
This is so clear that there is no need for me to quote what mistakes Buddha committed, what
mistakes Mahavira committed: I have committed mistakes, and I go on committing them; but that
does not endanger my enlightenment. It has nothing to do with it.
I make the best possible use of my mistakes. That’s what we are doing in the Big Muddy Ranch –
trying! – that’s why I say, trying, in an enlightened way, to make something good out of it. If we have
fallen into it, it may be our mistake, but it is fortunate for the Big Muddy Ranch, so let’s make the
best of it. And we are trying hard to make the best of it.
From Personality to Individuality 421 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
But all these people have been claiming infallibility. I am, in many ways, a crackpot. I should not be
saying such things – that I commit mistakes. This is not in tune with my profession; it is against it.
That’s why people of my profession hate me, because they say, ”These things you should not say.
Even if you come to know that you have committed a mistake, try to cover it. Try to make it appear
as if it is not a mistake.
That’s what they have been doing for centuries. But I cannot do it. I am simply helpless: I cannot
deceive. These people have been doing that. Mahavira was claiming that he was omniscient,
omnipotent, omnipresent. Now this is sheer nonsense. He had no idea even that when he died
his followers would be immediately divided into two sects; otherwise he would have made some
arrangement, or at least told them, ”Be aware, this is going to happen. Don’t let it happen.
He had no idea that this was going to happen. And it was so apparent that even an unenlightened
person who had a little bit of intelligence could see it already happening when Mahavira was alive. I
will have to explain it to you.
Mahavira is the twenty-fourth messiah of the Jainas. Before him, two hundred and fifty years before,
was the twenty-third messiah; the gap was only of two hundred and fifty years. The name of the
twenty-third messiah was Parshvanath. He used to wear white robes, and his followers used to wear
white robes.
When Mahavira declared himself to be the twentyfourth in the line, there were seven other
competitors who also declared themselves. Gautam Buddha had also competed in the beginning-
because Jainism was an established firm, and if you can get an established firm.... For ten thousand
years it had existed, and had gone deep into the soil. It had tremendous power – roots, money,
people. Buddha was hesitant to start a new business from the very scratch. First he tried to
compete with Mahavira. If he could be accepted as the twenty-fourth tirthankara, then things would
be comfortable and more easy.
This is simple, pure economics. Rather than opening a new shop, with no credibility, with no past....
Where are you going to get customers? Customers are already divided; they have their chosen
shops. Who is going to come to you? So seven other people of the same caliber tried hard, but
Mahavira was really a difficult guy: it was impossible to defeat him in any competition, particularly as
far as asceticism was concerned. I don’t think, among his contemporaries, or afterwards or before
him, there was anybody who could have competed with him.
He easily used to fast for one month or two months. In his twelve-year period of spiritual sadhana, it
is said he ate only for one year: one year out of twelve. Not solidly for one year, then an eleven-year
fast, no: a three-month fast, then a few days of eating; a four-month fast, then a few days of eating;
a one month fast, then one day of eating. The average in twelve days came to one day of eating and
eleven days of not eating. Now, none of the seven competitors were capable of doing this.
And Mahavira was living naked. None of the seven were capable of doing that either. He had really
a beautiful body. Only such a beautiful man could afford to be naked. Clothes are helpful to you
in many ways. It is not only the climate that they protect you from; they do many more significant
things. They keep your whole body covered. They let people know only your face, so your beauty
or ugliness is judged only by your face – and your face is just a small part of your whole body. The
whole body has its own beauty, its own proportion, its own radiance.
From Personality to Individuality 422 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
Mahavira certainly had a body which you could exhibit, which was worth exhibitingso solid, almost
as if cut out of marble rock. He defeated all these seven, and the Jaina community accepted him as
the twenty-fourth tirthankara. But the twenty-third tirthankara and his disciples and the whole Jaina
community were still under his influence although Mahavira was the first tirthankara in twenty-four
tirthankaras who was naked....
Now, how people go on distorting history. It is strange: even religious people do the same as did
Stalin in Russia. When he came to power he changed the whole history of the revolution. Pictures
of Trotsky disappeared from everywhere, and the names of Trotsky, Kamenev, Zinovyev – all the
important people who were the leaders of the revolution. Stalin was not an important person in the
revolution; he was not a leader or an organizer and he had no qualities of an orator.
Trotsky was one of the greatest orators ever. Lenin was a great organizer, he was not a great orator.
But Lenin and Trotsky compensated for each other: Lenin organized the revolution, and Trotsky went
on igniting inspiring, making people afire. He really knew how to put words on fire. So naturally in
every picture he is by the side of Lenin; he was the second man in the revolution. After Lenin he
was going to be the chief of the country.
Stalin was only party secretary. His work was in the office and in the files. In public, nobody knew
him; and he had no qualifications to be known in public. He could not address a public meeting: he
could not write any impressive document, pamphlet, book. He was a bureaucrat. Sitting in his office
as the general secretary of the communist party, he could issue orders, move files or not move files.
But his work was behind walls – nobody knew him.
After the revolution he changed the whole history. All those names which were important were
immediately erased. Books were burned; new histories were written in which Stalin was the
second man to Lenin Photographers were asked to do every possible trick to replace Trotsky’s
photo with Stalin’s photo. In group photographs Trotsky disappeared and Stalin appeared – just trick
photography.
For forty years Stalin was in power. Of course, whatsoever he wanted to be was the history. One
can accept a politician doing such a thing, but that’s exactly what has always happened in religion
too.
Mahavira was naked, so Mahavira’s followers finally made the other twenty-three tirthankaras also
naked; now, they were not alive to protest, ”What are you doing?” In Jaina temples you will find
twenty-four statues all naked. They are all replicas of Mahavira, they look exactly the same as
Mahavira. But the people who knew Parshvanath and who had followed him – and he was a man
of such charismatic power that after two hundred and fifty years, he was also, in a certain sense,
alive.... So immediately, because of Mahavira’s nakedness, Jainism started falling into two parties,
when Mahavira was still alive.
The people who were initiated by Mahavira became naked, and the people who had followed Jainism
traditionally, yet who had accepted Mahavira as the twenty-fourth tirthankara, remained in the white-
robed clothes; their monks remained white-robed. It was so clear that after Mahavira there was
going to be trouble between the white-robed followers – they are called shvetambaras: shvetambara
means white-robed ones and the naked ones. They are called digambaras – the people for whom
From Personality to Individuality 423 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
only the sky is the clothing: no other clothing between the sky and the body. That is the meaning
of the word digambara. Dig means the sky; the sky is the only clothing for them, nothing more than
that.
It was so clear throughout Mahavira’s whole life that the traditional Jainas were white-robed, that his
followers were naked, and that soon there would be a fight. They were still quarreling, Mahavira’s
followers saying, ”If you are followers of Mahavira, you should drop clothes.” But the shvetambaras
said, ”We are followers of twenty-three tirthankaras who were all white-robed. We have accepted
Mahavira in spite of his nakedness, not because of his nakedness – in spite of his nakedness,
because he proved far more solid, integrated and centered than all the other competitors. Nobody
was even close to him, they were far behind.”
Now, anybody who has a little intelligence can see that after Mahavira, these people were going to
cut each other’s necks, and for twenty-five centuries that is what has been happening.
I visited a place near Indore, where I used to go often. I had a great following in Indore. This place,
Devas, is small. I used to pass from Bhopal to Indore; Devas is just on the way, and there is a very
beautiful Jaina temple. But unfortunately, for twenty years it has been locked with three locks: one
from the digambaras, one from the shvetambaras, and one from the government. For twenty years
the case has been in the high court – to whom does it belong?
If you look at these small things you can understand what kind of stupid people have been posing
as religious. It was the only temple in the town so both the communities used to go there to worship,
but they could not worship together. When the shvetambaras worshipped they put clothes on
Mahaviras statue. And the digambaras of course cannot worship him with the clothes on; they
would immediately throw the clothes away. And nobody asks Mahavira what he wants. Perhaps
some negotiation might be possible: they could just give him some underwear – a halfway solution.
Why be in a bother? And he is not going to object – he is just a stone – so put some underwear on
him and both can just worship together.
But that is not the only problem. Digambaras worship a statue of Mahavira with closed eyes; that is
even more troublesome. The shvetambaras worship a statue of him with open, half-open eyes. Now
there is no way to decide whether Mahavira meditated with closed eyes or half-open eyes – because
both are right methods – but on the stone Mahavira in the temple the eyes are closed because the
temple was made by the digambaras. So what the shvetambaras did is that they had false eyes and
they pasted those false eyes, half-open, on the statue. Great idea! And after worship they took off
the eyes and the clothes.
But sometimes it used to happen that a digambara would be worshipping and a shvetambara
would come in and put the false eyes on the statue. Immediately there would be a fight. Finally
the government decided, ”You divide the time of your worship: up to twelve in the morning, the
digambaras; after twelve, the shvetambaras – otherwise it is difficult. And what can the court decide?
It is for you people to decide. Otherwise have two statues or make two temples; but continually
fighting, quarreling, beating each other – this doesn’t look good.” But even that idea didn’t work.
You know if you check everybody’s watches, you will find that somebody’s is five minutes slow,
somebody’s is five minutes fast. And when people want to fight.... The shvetambaras would be
From Personality to Individuality 424 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
worshipping and the digambaras would enter: ”Get out – it is twelve!” But on the shvetambaras’
watches, five minutes were still to go. The digambaras would say, ”Not on our watches – it is twelve.”
When you are just bent upon fighting, then whose watch is right?
Finally the court decided that the temple should be locked so there would be no more nuisance in
the town – so the court locked it. But those followers could not be left behind – who is the court to
lock up their temple? So the shvetambaras have their lock, bigger than the court’s; the digambaras
have an even bigger lock, bigger than the shvetambaras’. Now there are three locks on that temple,
and Mahavira has been imprisoned for twenty years!
And I asked those people – one day when I was passing I stopped near the temple and asked one
Jaina whom I knew, ”What are you doing to Mahavira? Is this attitude a religious quality?”
But he said, ”Whatsoever happens, we will not allow anybody to spoil the real image of Mahavira; he
is naked and has closed eyes.” And when he was talking to me, immediately another man came up
and he said, ”What did you say?” He was a shvetambara, and he said, ”Mahavira has white clothes
and open eyes.”
Mahavira saw it happening already in front of him, but didn’t do anything – and he thinks, says,
that he is omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent: all the qualities of God. Because in Jainism God
does not exist, necessarily the whole burden of all those qualities falls upon the next fellow, the
tirthankara, because he replaces God. He takes the robe of God and the role of God.
Buddha makes jokes about Mahavira: ”He begs before a house where nobody has lived for years
– and he is omniscient, all-knowing! And when Jainas say all-knowing, it means past, present and
future the whole of time. Whatever has happened, is happening and will happen, he knows. But he
does not know that the house is empty, nobody is there; and he is standing in front of the house with
his hands spread, waiting for somebody to come.
Jaina monks are not allowed to ask; that is below their dignity. Egoism enters in so many ways:
”below their dignity.” They will not ask. You have to ask them, ”Will you be kind enough to accept our
food?”
Mahavira is standing before a house where there is nobody, so he cannot know even about the
present, the immediate present – what to say about the past and the future. But it was a problem for
Buddha’s followers to discuss with Jainas – their Buddha was not omnipresent, not omnipotent, not
omniscient; so Jainas would say, ”What kind of Master have you got?” So they invented a new idea
Buddha invented a new idea.
But nobody accepts the simple truth. Neither Mahavira had the courage – although they call him
the great warrior; Mahavira means the great warrior. Howsoever great a warrior he was, he did not
have the guts to simply say, ”I don’t have all these qualities. I am enlightened; that is one thing. I
know myself; that is one thing. I am fulfilled; that is one thing. What does that have to do with being
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent?” No, he could not manage to do that because the twenty-
three tirthankaras before him had claimed those three qualities. If he disclaimed them, he would not
be the twenty-fourth, and immediately he would fall in the eyes of the Jainas.
From Personality to Individuality 425 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
Buddha also did not have the courage. He was joking against Mahavira but he invented a new idea.
He said, ”An enlightened person is not necessarily always omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent; but
if he wants, then he can move his light into any section: it is just like a torch. If he moves it towards
the future then he knows the whole future. He is not omnipotent twenty-four hours a day, but if he
wants to know about the future he is capable; if he wants to know about the past, he has to turn his
torch.”
Again this is not true. Buddha has committed so many mistakes that I don’t think any such torch
was there. About the past of course you cannot argue – there are no records to be compared with
whatever he said. But things that he said about the future have not turned out that way.
Buddha thought India would become totally Buddhist. And anybody could see at that time, while
Buddha was alive, that his influence was spreading so stronglyHinduism has never been afraid of
anybody as they were of Buddha. They were not afraid of Mahavira. Mahavira had defeated Buddha
in a certain competition, but that competition was decided on by the Jainas. And Jainas are ascetics,
masochistic: the more you torture yourself the more spiritual you are. Other people could not torture
themselves as much as Mahavira was capable of torturing himself
Mahavira used to meditate standingsitting was too comfortable. If he sees my chair... I am just
heading for hell. He would be sitting naked on the bare ground or on a stone, because he could not
use any carpet, any mattress, no; even that would be comfortable. So he used to meditate standing,
with closed eyes. I feel digambaras are right; about his nakedness, they are right and about his
closed eyes they are right, because not a single statue has been found in the whole history of
Mahavira with half-open eyes – it is enough proof. And the statues are naked. It is such an historical
fact, reported by all the religions of India, that shvetambaras cannot deny it.
So what they say – this is how cunningness, politics, everything is present in the name of religion
– they say that he was given by the gods.... There is no God, remember, but there are gods; that’s
a totally different category. There are gods which are close to what, in Christianity, you call angels.
There are many of them, heaven is full of gods, and hell is full of devils. The enlightened man goes
to a third place; not to heaven but above heaven, to moksha – from where nobody falls back again.
But the gods will fall back; they are just using their bank account as long as it lasts. They have
earned virtue in their life, have done good deeds and good actions, so they are born in heaven as
gods.
Heaven is some kind of holiday resort. When you have had enough you can take leave for two
months and go to a holiday resort, to Switzerland or somewhere, and enjoy yourself and just relax.
Heaven is a religious holiday resort. The people who are born in heaven are called gods. They are
below the tirthankara, they are below the enlightened person. Mahavira and Buddha both accepted
gods.
Buddha said, ”The whole of India is going to become part of my dhamma, my religion.” But that has
not happened, just the opposite: in India there are no Buddhists at all. The whole of Asia is Buddhist
– which Buddha did not even mention. At least he should have mentioned China, a bigger country
than India; and Japan, which has developed Buddhism to its ultimate peak. But he had no idea.
Where was his torch? Once in a while he should have used the torch and looked around: he would
have discovered that Tibet was to become a Buddhist country; the whole country would be almost
a monastery.
From Personality to Individuality 426 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
Now it is a tradition in Tibet that every family has to give at least one son to the monastery.
Most probably it is the eldest son who is given to the monastery as a monk, as an offering to religion.
So every family has a monk in the monastery, and every family desires that some day – when they
are old and are of no use in the world – they will move to the monastery. The whole country of Tibet
is a big monastery, secluded from the whole world.
Buddha never turned his torch towards Tibet. He never turned his torch towards Japan, where Zen
Buddhism has flowered, where Buddhism has come to real maturity, where Buddha’s ideas have
been refined and refined for century after century so that now Zen Buddhism is just pure fragrance.
But he had no idea of Japan.
All that Buddha talks about is India, and by India also I suspect that he meant only Bihar, because he
had never gone anywhere else. The state from which Maitreya comes is called Bihar; bihar means
tour, tourist. Buddha toured only in that area – that’s why its name became Bihar. Bihar means
Buddha’s tour area. I don’t think that he had any idea about the rest of India. He must have been
thinking only of Bihar; that was the India he knew.
But all that he has said has gone wrong. He thought that he was creating a vegetarian religion but all
the Buddhists are non-vegetarian. Strange – all Buddha’s followers are meat-eaters. For his whole
life Buddha was teaching people to drop non-vegetarian food because it is insensate, ugly, inhuman,
gross, and will pull your consciousness down to lower states; it won’t make you light enough to fly
to higher states of consciousness. All the Buddhists are meat-eaters for the simple reason that in
India Buddhism was uprooted; Buddhist monks escaped all over Asia – and the whole of Asia was
non-vegetarian.
Buddhists were in a difficulty. They could not convince people to drop their meat-eating and
just live on vegetables. They did not have the influence or the charisma of Buddha, so just the
reverse happened: rather than converting China into a vegetarian country, the monks became non-
vegetarian because they could not get food. Buddha said, ”Never ask for food from a non-vegetarian
home,” but there were no vegetarian homes; where were they going to get food? And they were not
ready to die. If they were ready to die, why should they have escaped and taken the trouble of
crossing the Himalayas?
In those days... even today, crossing the Himalayas by foot is a superhuman task; two thousand
years ago it would have been almost an impossibility, but they had to choose between death and
life. At least there was a chance they might cross over the Himalayas; and many succeeded. Many
died on the way but many succeeded in entering Tibet, many succeeded in entering China; but there
they had to compromise. For their life they had escaped; now for their life they had to compromise.
They did not talk about vegetarian food; they simply dropped that idea completely because it would
create a trouble. All Buddhists are meat-eaters today. And Buddha could not turn his torch and see?
There is no such torch.
I have told you nobody speaks against his own profession, but I am simply eccentric. I am not
against the pope; I am simply for the truth, for the fact. If it goes against anybody I couldn’t care
less.
From Personality to Individuality 427 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
You ask me: isn’t the pope infallible? One thing is certain: except for this pope, no pope has been
infallible; down the centuries all popes were fallible. But perhaps this pope may be infallible, because
the idea of infallibility is possible only for an idiotic mind. Only an idiot can claim, ”I am infallible,”
so about this pope I cannot say. He may really be thinking that he is infallible – he belongs to that
category. Now you will think I am against him. I am not against him, I am really supporting him. I
am saying he may be infallible, because idiots are.
And you asked me: why do you go on calling him again and again, pope the polack? What do you
want? Should I call him pope the Oregonian? That is too much. I am a generous man but not that
generous. He is a polack – what can I do about it? In fact all polacks are infallible, so it is nothing
special about him – all polacks. Poland is full of infallible people.
It reminds me about a story... I love it. In a small school, in the Bible class, the teacher, who was
also the priest, explained to the children about the great dogma of Christianity, the dogma of the
trinity: God the father, the Holy Ghost, and Jesus Christ, the son. And then he told the students,
”You have understood the idea; now you all draw a picture, according to your imagination, of how
these three people are, how they look to you.”
So all the students started drawing pictures. All the pictures were strange – they were bound to be
strange, because how can the Holy Ghost be drawn? Yes, about God the father they have heard
that He has a long beard, so they drew Him as almost just a head with a beard. For the Holy Ghost
somebody drew a zigzag line, like a whirlwind. And about Jesus they knew that he was a nice fellow
so they tried to make a nice picture.
Just one small boy created a problem. The teacher looked at his picture; he had done a really
beautiful picture. He had made an airplane with four windows. From one window God the father
was looking out, from another window the Holy Ghost was looking out, from the third window Jesus
Christ was looking out. The priest asked, ”This is all okay, but who is this fourth?” – because there
was a face at the fourth window.
The small boy said, ”Pontius, the pilot... otherwise the other three would crash.”
I like it; rather than Pontius Pilate, Pontius the pilot is far more fitting. And the boy really had great
imaginative power.
You don’t have even that much imagination, that when I say pope the polack.... I insist on calling him
pope the polack because I want you to continually remember that this is the first time that the right
person has become a pope. Up to now only wrong people used to reach that post. For the first time
in history the right person has reached the post; that s why he is not going to die so soon. He is not
dying – he has already passed the average limit. Let all those idiots around the world pray for his
death – he is not going to die – he is a solid polack! He is getting healthier than he was before, and
doing great works.
No, I am not against him; I am not against anybody. Even if I want to be against anybody, I cannot
be. When I first read Jesus’ statement, ”Love your enemies,” I was shocked, because if Jesus was
really enlightened, he could not have enemies in the first place, so whom are you going to love? And
to love your enemies the basic requirement is first to create your enemies, then love them. Such
unnecessary trouble! Why create enemies?
From Personality to Individuality 428 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
First, creating is a terrible effort, and then loving is even more terrible. It is so difficult even to love
your friends. Love is such a messy and greasy affair that perhaps only Italians can manage it,
nobody else. Love your enemies”.... I wondered. First I would have to create enemies, then I would
have to love them.
Then I came upon his statement: ”Love thy neighbor.” That too is very difficult because I don’t have
any neighbors. People can sit close to me, even touching my body – still nobody is my neighbor.
Only another enlightened man can be my neighbor, because between him and me there will be no
wall, no fence, no division. It is very difficult for me to find a neighbor, and even if I succeed in finding
a neighbor there will be no need to love him. He will be overflowing with love itself; he will not be in
need of love.
Two enlightened people have very rarely met. Only one instance is reported in the whole of history,
and that was a meeting between Kabir and Farid. I have come across no other instance and if I
have not come across one, then you can be certain nobody can come across one, because I have
searched every nook and corner possible.
Kabir was old and had moved to Magahar from Varanasi. Farid was on a pilgrimage, and just on the
way was Kabir’s ashram. Farid’s disciples asked him, ”It would be a great joy for us if you meet, sit
together, and talk about something. We would be just overwhelmed listening to you two enlightened
people.”
Kabir’s disciples said, ”We have heard that Farid is passing by with his disciples. We should invite
him here. This is not good, that he should pass along the road and we don’t invite him in. And it
would be a great opportunity for us poor people to see you both together – two flames. And even if
you only discuss a little bit, talk a little bit, for us it is going to be an unexpected blessing.”
Kabir said, ”If you say so, invite him.”
Farid said, ”If you say so, we will go.”
Farid set out towards the ashram but Kabir was coming; on the way they met. They hugged each
other and they laughed loudly. The disciples were a little shocked: they were not expecting that they
would laugh so loudly. They had neither heard Kabir laugh before, nor had they heard Farid laugh
before like this – almost madly. They looked at each other, the disciples of both: What was going
on?
Holding hands, Kabir and Farid went in. They sat together and for two days they remained there.
Not a single word was uttered. Yes, once in a while they giggled. And after two days, Kabir came
half the way to give Farid a send-off. They again hugged each other, laughed loudly and departed,
not saying a single word, not even ”good-bye.”
For two days the disciples were just boiling, waiting for these two days to be over, because to start
quarreling with your own Master, in front of the Master, to ask him, ”What are you doing?” didn’t
seem good. So they waited. But as Kabir and Farid departed, the disciples of both took hold of
their Masters, and they asked the same question: ”What happened? Why didn’t you speak a single
word?” Farid’s disciples said, ”When Kabir was not here you went on pouring strange words, strange
From Personality to Individuality 429 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
things, strange ideas, on our heads. We might have understood, we might not have understood, but
you didn’t care; you just went on. Most of the time what you say goes above our heads. When there
was a man of your quality, caliber, status, why were you silent?”
They both said the same thing to their disciples: ”Whosoever spoke would have proved that he is not
enlightened yet, because what is there to say? Speech is possible in three conditions. Two ignorant
people can have a really great conversation; such a great conversation cannot happen otherwise.
The more ignorant both are, the greater their conversation, the more juicy.
The second possibility is that one is enlightened and the other is unenlightened. Then there can
be a certain conversation, but mostly it is a monologue The enlightened person will speak, and the
unenlightened, at the most, can ask a question; but it is not conversation in the true sense. What
can the unenlightened contribute? All that he can do is raise a question – that is his contribution.
The answer is going to come from the enlightened one.
The third situation is: two enlightened people. They cannot speak. They know, but they know that
whatever they know cannot be put into words.
The disciples asked, ”Then why did you laugh?”
Kabir and Farid said, ”We laughed at you” Kabir said, ”I used to think that only I have all these idiots
– I saw that Farid has also. I laughed; and he laughed because he must have thought that not only
are these idiots torturing him, they are torturing me too. So we both laughed.”
The answer was even more shocking, that this was the reason that they had loudly exploded in
laughter Then the disciples asked, ”Why, once in a while, did you giggle?”
Farid said, ”I was just looking at your boiling! You were just getting ready to kill me once these two
days were finished. That’s why I giggled, and I think that’s why Kabir giggled, because his disciples
were also getting hot.”
Those two days looked like two years because those two people were simply sitting silently; and
because of them, just out of respect, all the disciples were sitting silently. But they were just keeping
silent, they were not really silent. Inside there was a great turmoil: what was the matter? What was
going on? Why were their Masters giggling?
Farid and Kabir said, ”Whenever we saw that you were getting to a point where you would explode,
we giggled. That helped you to cool down.” Then the disciples remembered that was true: whenever
they were really getting too angry, that was the time when their Masters giggled.
Of course a certain type of invisible relationship starts growing between the Master and the disciple.
If the disciple is angry, if the disciple is sad, if the disciple is in a negative mood, it reaches the Master
without your saying anything. And the Master responds in whatever way the situation demands.
Perhaps he may not respond at all, if that is what is required; he may simply ignore it. Or he may
take much note of it and make much fuss about it. It a]l depends on the situation, and every situation
is unique.
From Personality to Individuality 430 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
I have no neighbors so I cannot love neighbors. I thank God – who does not exist, but for these
purposes His name can be used; there is no harm in it – that I don’t have any neighbors.
Those two days were good, but what about Farid and Kabir being together for two years? Then they
would have really got into trouble. Those disciples could manage to control themselves for two days,
but do you think for two years they would have been able to manage – listening to this giggle once
in a while, or laughter, and then silence? Either they would have escaped from the place, thinking,
”These two people are mad and we are going mad with them,” or they would have started quarreling
with their Master.
But it was not that Farid wanted to meet Kabir nor was it that Kabir wanted to meet Farid. It was
the disciples who wanted the meeting, and the Masters both thought, ”There is no harm in it. Why
unnecessarily say no to them? It will be a good experience for them.” If they had not asked, Kabir
would not have asked Farid and Farid would not have gone to Kabir, for the simple reason that there
was no point: they were almost the same. You don’t go to meet yourself, or do you? You don’t invite
yourself to lunch or dinner, or do you? There is no point at all.
I am not against anybody – there is no reason to be – but I am all for truth. Whether it goes against
my profession or not, I don’t care. In fact I am not a professional enlightened man: I am simply
enlightened. Those were professional people. I feel ashamed that all these people – Mahavira,
Buddha, Sanjay Vilethiputta, Ajit Keshkambal, Makhkhali Gosal – all these people were behaving
like politicians, trying to be the tirthankara because the credibility of that religion was ancient. It was
an establishment, well organized.
To start something from scratch needs courage.
And I am doing exactly that – starting things from the very first scratch.
I don’t want any borrowed credibility from any religion, from any establishment, from any organisation
I want simply to do my thing in my own way with my own people.
It is a hard task, and there are a thousand and one difficulties which could have been avoided if I
were part of an establishment; but then I would have been dead, not alive.
To me, the day Mahavira was accepted by the Jainas as their twenty-fourth tirthankara, he died; after
that he was not alive, because he was only fulfilling a certain role that is expected of a tirthankara,
doing everything exactly as a tirthankara should. This was not real life, it was not authentic. Up to
then, before he became a tirthankara, Mahavira was living his own way, he was moving about on
his own. But to compete is to go wrong. Then, to be nominated and then to be victorious – as if you
can nominate and elect somebody for enlightenment! The unenlightened masses, unenlightened
people, are choosing who is the tirthankara – this is simply absurd.
I have told Jainas in India many times when speaking to them: ”If you say to me that you are ready
to accept me as your twenty-fifth tirthankara I will simply spit on your face. You and your twenty-fifth
tirthankara can both go to hell. Why should I be the twenty-fifth when I can be first?”
From Personality to Individuality 431 Osho
CHAPTER 24. INFALLIBILITY: JUST A POPEDREAM
I don’t see the point of Mahavira fighting to be the twenty-fourth, the twenty-fourth in the line! And
for that all these people were also candidates.
I am perfectly happy in just being the first and the last.
I am not making a place for a second, because then there will be competition and there will be
trouble. And how are you going to decide?
So my shop opens with me and closes with me!
From Personality to Individuality 432 Osho
CHAPTER 25
My day: the juice, the whole juice, and nothing but the juice
23 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
YOU GOT AS FAR AS BREAKFAST. TO COMPLETE OUR RELIGIOUS HISTORICAL RECORDS,
COULD YOU TELL US WHAT GOES BEYOND THE JUICE?
THERE is nothing that goes beyond the juice.
The seers of the UPANISHADS have described the ultimate reality as the ”juice” – raso vai saha.
This is the only definition which comes close to what I call godliness.
Raso vai saha means ”that which is nothing but juice”:
No person, no personality, but only a taste, a feel.
So if you ask me for anything that goes beyond the juice, it is very difficult for me to answer because
juice is the last, the ultimate, the beyond itself – nothing goes beyond it. And as far as my breakfast
juice is concerned I don’t allow anything to go beyond even that.
You will have to understand it. First, for your religious and historical records: after juice – and
remember, ”after” does not mean ”beyond”; ”after” simply means chronologically after, timewise, but
not beyond. After juice I listen to a few songs, poetry, music, that I have been listening to for almost
thirty years. Those who have lived with me have always been puzzled....
433
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
When I was a student my friends were puzzled – they were the same records. I had an old-style
gramophone and a collection of records. When I started playing my records they would escape from
their rooms, which were on either side, and they couldn’t help but hear.
They complained to the vice-chancellor. I was called and I explained to him, ”Hearing has two
dimensions. One is horizontal. You hear a song; if it is new, you are interested because you don’t
know what is coming next, what turn it will take. But if you have heard it once, then horizontally it
loses meaning. Horizontally there is no excitement: you know perfectly well what is going to come
next. And when you know it already, how can you be excited?”
The horizontal meaning is finished in just experiencing anything for the first time. But I have
discovered that there is a vertical meaning too – to everything in life. The songs, the music, that
I have heard for thirty years and still listen to, now have no horizontal meaning for me. I know every
nook and corner, every nuance – as far as the horizontal lines are concerned they have become
almost irrelevant. And when I hear them, a strange thing happens: physically I almost fall asleep,
but I continue to hear. And in this state, the words which have been heard thousands of times are
no longer significant, but something deeper than the words starts opening up.
The song is not in the words: it is something around the word, between the words, between the
lines, but never in the word itself. If it is authentic poetry then there will be a depth where words are
lost: you dive into the meaning itself, the pure meaning. It is more sound and silence. The word is
left far behind; the word becomes almost transparent.
In the East it was discovered thousands of years ago. In English you have one word for reading,
”study.” For ”reading,” in Sanskrit we have two words – adhyayan, which means study, and path,
which is not translatable. Path means reading something again and again, not to understand what it
means linguistically – that you can understand by reading one time, or two times; you need not read
it thousands of times. And if you cannot understand it reading it five or ten times, then you are not
capable of understanding it in reading it a thousand times either. You will still be you.
No, that is not the purpose of reading it a thousand times. The purpose is how to go farther than the
word. The only way is to repeat the words so many times that they become absolutely meaningless,
irrelevant. And when it becomes irrelevant, only then the vertical dimension opens; you start falling
into its depth.
But that is possible only with authentic poetry or authentic music, not with ordinary music or ordinary
poetry which is composed by the mind. That is nothing but a play with words; there is nothing
to be conveyed. The man has no experience, no juice to pour into those words so those words
can become carriers of a message. He knows how to manage a certain rhythm in words, and he
composes a song. It is a composition, it is not a creation.
But when a song is created, it means it is not composed by the mind but has arisen out of a certain
experience of rhythm, harmony; and you try to express it through the words, because words can
reach the other – the pure juice is not transferable. It is as if you write a love letter, and you tie it to
a stone and throw the stone through the window of the woman you love.
Your letter cannot be thrown: it won’t reach the window, it is so light; but the stone is heavy. The
stone is not the message. The message is on that small piece of paper which is attached, tied with a
From Personality to Individuality 434 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
string to the heavy stone. But if you fall in love with an idiotic woman – which is more possible – the
woman may throw the letter away. What message can it have – just a piece of paper? And she may
think that the stone, the heavier part, must be the message. And that’s what goes on happening with
songs and poetry, and music: you go on holding and collecting the stones, and you go on throwing
away the letters.
So after my breakfast, for two or three hours I listen to my chosen songs. I know them perhaps more
than the people who wrote them and the people who sang them. I am far more acquainted with
them because I have heard them thousands of times. Every day I enter a new depth. It is almost a
state of deep silence; and because of the silence, my body relaxes and goes to sleep – I am awake.
With the body, the words are connected; with me, the meaning. But this too is another experience
of juice.
Sometimes, very rarely, I listen to instrumental music. Many people have asked me, ”If you are not
interested in the words, then instrumental music should be more to your liking.” But it is not the case.
Instrumental music is beautiful, but because it has no words it has no dimensionality. The words give
the song a horizontal dimension which makes it possible to dive vertically. The instrumental music
is simple. It is horizontal, but because there are no words, the moment you drop the horizontal
dimension you are in a desert without any oasis. It is beautiful, horizontally.
The songs are beautiful only when you enter the vertical dimension, but that is possible only by
creating the polar opposite. The word is the polar opposite of silence. If words are not there, you
cannot create silence. The instrumental music is sound, there is no silence. It is sound arranged in
a harmonious way but it cannot have that polarity of word and wordlessness.
So after breakfast I enjoy something which is again juice, but not material, immaterial... as if you
have a taste without eating anything. There is no physical counterpart to it – just taste without
anything tasty on your taste buds.
At eleven I take my lunch. Vivek still cannot believe that I am excited, but what to do? Whether you
believe it or not I am excited. I myself cannot believe it. So I can understand that nobody will be able
to believe it when I myself cannot believe it. I know exactly what she is going to bring, everything is
predictable; three small quantities of vegetables, boiled, without salt, without any kind of spices.
They have become experts in making everything tasteless. You cannot defeat them in that. And
certainly they must be wondering: they go on giving this tasteless food to me, but I never complain.
I have always appreciated it, because it has given me an opportunity which they don’t know about.
When you are eating delicious food, with spices and all kinds of things, made to be tasty, perfumed,
you are losing something that you don’t know. You are destroying your taste buds. They are not
meant for such strong things; they are very small, and very delicate.
I discovered the real taste of things only when I started following Devaraj’s recipes. He has changed
my dining room into a hospital. But I love it. Now you can put me into any hospital and they will not
be able to do any harm to me.
Three vegetables, almost the same; four slices of bread just toasted and without any butter; and a
cup of Indian sauce, chutney – that’s all. But in my whole life I have never been so satisfied with my
From Personality to Individuality 435 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
food as I am now. In India there are thousands of kinds of food Perhaps there is no other country
which has so many different varieties of food: each province has its own varieties. I have moved
all over India, and I have eaten all kinds of foods. Every state has its own tremendous findings –
perhaps it has taken thousands of years for them to develop certain delicacies – but all their food,
howsoever tasty, is not good, healthwise.
My weight was good so I used to look very healthy. But I discovered it only late, that just to look
healthy s not health. Now I am healthy – but my mother comes, and she says every time she
comes.... I remind her, ”You have told this to me every time you have come:’What have you done to
your health?”’ and she thinks that I am wearing this long and loose robe just to deceive her.
I say, ”I am not trying to deceive.”
She says, ”But I can see your hands on the video. You may be able to deceive others but you cannot
deceive me. I have seen you from your very child]hood, and you had such a beautiful body.” And I
can see tears coming into her eyes looking at my food. And don’t allow her... because she has been
trying persistently for years to bring something, just a little.
I say, ”No, nothing doing. My doctor does not allow it. I can take only what he prescribes, I cannot
take anything else.” But again and again – and I know why, because she saw me in 1960 when I
was one hundred and ninety pounds, and I had a body.... Just yesterday I was talking of Mahavira;
I could have competed with Mahavira without any difficulty. Actually, people used to say that my
body... because I used to sit almost half-naked. Just a small wraparound lungi, even in winter, in
the coldest places, even in New Delhi. My host in New Delhi used to say, ”You are the only person
I have seen in New Delhi who is sitting in just a wraparound lungi, with half the body naked and the
fan on full. How do you manage it?”
People used to say that my body looked as if cut out of marble. It used to look like that because I
was exercising so much: eight miles in the morning I was going for a walk, eight miles in the evening
– at least for twenty years, sixteen miles per day. If you add it all up I think it will come to nearabout
three times around the earth or more.
I have hated milk from my very childhood, but because everybody loved my body, and my family
insisted that without milk you cannot remain the way you are, I had been drinking milk against my
will. That is the only thing in my life that I have done against my will. And the only way I could
manage it was to stop breathing and take the whole glass in a single gulp so that I didn’t smell it,
because I can’t stand it. I have tried all kinds of milks, but I can’t stand the smell.
My feeling has been always – and I told my family” – Jainas should stop using all milk products
because milk is just like meat. It is not vegetarian, it is animal food; and it has a double violence
in it. From where does the milk come? It is the mother’s mechanism, biological mechanism, that
transforms her blood into milk. You are really drinking white blood.”
My grandmother used to close her ears, ”Don’t say such words because then I will not be able to
drink it. I will remember’white blood.’ Never do such things to an old woman like me.”
Now, Jainas cannot live without milk because that is their only vital food ingredient; otherwise,
everything is just vegetable. So they eat all kinds of milk products – butter, ghee, curd – and all
From Personality to Individuality 436 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
kinds of sweets made of milk. But I had a strong feeling from the very beginning that this was just
blood. That’s why it increases your blood so quickly, and that’s why the child needs only milk; that’s
enough, that is all his food. The mother’s milk provides the child all necessary food; nothing else is
needed – and those are the days of its growth. So milk is a whole food.
On the one hand I had a strong hatred for milk because it is non-vegetarian; secondly, you are
depriving the child of the cow or the buffalo. That milk is not for you. The cow has her own kids, and
the milk has come to her breasts for those kids, not for you.
You will be surprised that in a country like India which pretends to be non-violent, they kill the cow’s
kids because the cow will give milk first to the kids; otherwise she will try and kick you and your
bucket and.... Naturally the mother wants her child to be taken care of first. Who are you? Sitting on
a small stool with a bucket and trying to milk the cow – who are you? And the milk is not meant for
you.
The cow has no way to know that you have purchased her. She does not understand money and t
purchasing or anything, but she understands one thing, that her own child is standing there deprived.
So what do the Indians do? – they kill the child, stuff it, and keep the dead stuffed child close to the
cow’s breasts so she goes on believing that the kid is there. The kid is dead, it is stuffed – all his
bones and everything have been taken out – just to deceive the cow.
And these people believe that they are religious people, non-violent, believing in truth. They are
even deceiving a poor cow. And the cow they call ”mother cow”; in India the cow is worshipped
like a mother. But what strange people: you worship your mother and you kill your brother? And
particularly if the child is a male child, then certainly he has to be killed. If it is a female child then she
is going to become a cow, so somehow she has to be preserved, but a male child can be killed. But
if the cow is your mother, then the bull is bound to be your father, and you are committing patricide!
– killing bulls. And the purpose of this is just to deceive their ”mother,” whom they worship, for whom
they create great political movements. They create riots if somebody kills a cow and continually they
are asking the government to stop cow slaughter absolutely.
And what they go on doing is so ugly you cannot believe it. When I saw it for the first time in
Calcutta, it was the worst thing I had ever seen. Hindus who call the cow the mother, and who are
ready to be killed or to kill anybody to save the mother, do something which everybody in the world
has to understand to appreciate how people can be hypocrites. They push a bamboo stick into the
cow’s vagina when they are milking her. Pushing this bamboo stick in her vagina forces her to give
more milk, almost double the quantity. These people call the cow mother and are fighting for her so
that cow slaughter should be stopped – and this is what they are doing to their mother: pushing a
bamboo in her vagina just to get the double quantity of milk.
When first I saw it with my own eyes, it became even difficult for me to drink milk with open eyes. But
Devaraj has been of great help. He has dropped all milk products – milk, butter, ghee, everything –
from my food, and I feel really clean. Of course, I have lost weight, but what purpose is weight? I
don’t look cut out of marble but there is no need to look cut out of marble – there are enough marble
statues.
For the first time in my life I am feeling at ease with food. In India it was impossible because
everybody was harassing me: ”If you drop milk then there is nothing in the food. If you drop curd
From Personality to Individuality 437 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
then there is nothing in the food. If you don’t take butter then you will lose weight.” But that weight
was causing me all kinds of difficulties. Right now all of my difficulties have disappeared.
My breathing is no longer a trouble, and as my weight has been coming down my back has been
getting better. Strangely, since the weight has come below one hundred and thirty pounds, my back
is absolutely right. There is no strain at all; otherwise once in a while I used to feel the strain in a
certain position. Now in no position am I feeling the strain.
And in my eating the same food every day my taste buds have discovered their sensitivity. I am
tasting more than I have ever tasted, although there is nothing much to taste; but whatsoever there
is, is immensely gratifying. I would like you to understand it – that all spices are deceivers. They are
strong enough to force the buds to feel their presence, but the stronger the spices, the duller become
your taste buds. When there are no spices, then your taste buds come to their natural sensitivity.
Now, these are two different things: having something delicious because it is in the food, and
enjoying something delicious because your taste buds are more alive and more sensitive. The
second should be the case. That is why it is so difficult for anybody to understand what I can be
excited about. I am excited about my taste buds, not the food. Food has lost meaning; a new
meaning has arisen. And I feel that this should be the approach, the right approach. Then just
boiled vegetables are so delicious, just bread without butter is so sweet, that one cannot imagine;
one can only experience it.
After my lunch I go to sleep. This is something that I have followed my whole life. Two hours sleep in
the middle of the day gives me two days out of one day, two mornings, two evenings; it doubles the
joy of life. And sleep, according to Patanjali, is very close to samadhi. The only difference is that in
samadhi your body is asleep but your consciousness is awake Now to me, both sleep and samadhi
are the same My consciousness is awake twenty-four hours a day Whether my body is awake or
asleep makes no difference to my consciousness.
But to give the body a total relaxation – even sitting on a comfortable chair like this is not total
relaxation for the body because of the gravitation. If you have a comfortable chair, then your back is
being pulled by gravitation separately. It is for this reason that Hindus have been practicing the lotus
posture.
The lotus posture was basically invented to reduce the effect of gravitation on your body. That is the
minimum gravitation on your body, in a lotus posture. Less than that is not possible because in a
lotus posture your spine is erect, your legs are in a line, so you are just like a cross upside down:
with the legs in a straight line horizontally and another straight line up the middle of your spine. Now
this position has the least possibility for gravitation to pull your body.
A few days ago I was talking to you about J. Krishnamurti – that I saw him on a television interview,
and I felt very sorry for him. Vivek thought that perhaps – because he was sitting on a straight –
backed wooden chair with his hands underneath him, she thought perhaps he suffers from a certain
disease in which your hands start trembling. So Vivek thought that he was afraid to show his hands,
and that was why he was sitting on them.
That is not the case. You should have looked at the chair. You can’t find a more uncomfortable
chair than he has found: a straight-backed wooden chair, with no armrests. He was trying the lotus
From Personality to Individuality 438 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
posture on the chair, because in England to sit in a lotus posture will not look right – and he is very
fussy about being right, mannerly.
When he goes to India he uses Indian dress and in England he uses blue jeans. But to find a
solution – he has to sit on the chair – he has arranged the kind of chair which was used for children
in old-time schools. Now it has changed: children ask for more comfortable chairs. But the more
comfortable chair is more taxing on the body. The comfort is apparent; the taxing on the body is
indirect. The best way is to sleep: then you are horizontal, and the gravitation is equal all over your
body.
Why does your sleep give you so much rest, relaxation, rejuvenation? – for the simple reason that
man has come from the animals, who are horizontal. All the animals are enjoying a relaxed state
because of their horizontal backbone: the backbone and the ground are parallel so the gravitation
is equal on each part of the backbone. Man, for good or bad, nobody knows – because there is
nobody who is omniscient, so nobody knows – decided at some time to stand on two legs. It helped
in many ways, but it harmed also in many ways.
It is difficult to know whether it was more harmful or more helpful. It freed the two hands so man could
do many more things than animals could do: art, science – everything became possible because
two hands became free. Animals cannot do anything – painting, or sculpture or music – because
those two hands are not free. Man, standing erect on his two legs, suddenly found his two hands
were absolutely free: something had to be done. The question was very urgent: what to do with the
hands?
And man started doing all kinds of things with the hands. From the bullock cart to nuclear weapons
– it is nothing but a by-product of man standing erect. If he had remained on all fours there would
have been no trouble, no war, no problem; but there would not have been any mind either. The mind
developed only because man stood on two feet.
Man standing on two feet created two things: it freed the hands and, because he was standing
erect, less blood was reaching the brain. That was the greatest thing that happened, because in
animals, blood is flowing equally throughout their body: their tail and their head are on an equal level
so the blood is circulating equally. Because the blood is circulating equally, they cannot grow the
very delicate tissues in the brain which are needed for thinking.
Man’s brain has ten billion small cells which will be killed if he walks on all fours. That’s why the
yogis in India who have been standing on their heads have never created anything. They became
just idiots, for the simple reason that if you stand on your head, so much blood is rushing towards
the head that it will destroy all your finer tissues.
So if you look at the whole history of the yogis – yes, they will be more quiet because there is no
mind to create a disturbance. They will look more calm and cool, obviously, because the disturber is
killed. They win not get so easily angry or become violent, for the simple reason that it takes them
a longer time to think what is happening: have I been insulted? It is that the brain tissues are gone,
and very few tissues here and there are left.
I am against the headstand. Yes, if you stand on your head for not more than three seconds, that’s
okay that will be helpful, because three seconds cannot destroy anything but simply gives a quick
From Personality to Individuality 439 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
shower to the whole brain. Then jump back on your feet. Not more than three seconds – that’s my
calculation, because I have tried it on many people, but not on myself.
In my university there was a department of yoga. Of course the head of the department was an
absolute dodo. I used to go there and he used to ask me, ”Why do you come here? You are not
enrolled and I never see you doing any exercises.”
I said, ”I don’t come here to do yoga or to participate in exercises.”
”Then,” he said, ”what do you come here for?”
I said, ”To me these are all guinea pigs.”
He said, ”What do you mean? – these are yoga students.” Even professors were learning yoga
there.
I said, ”Yes, to me these are all guinea pigs. And you are the head of the department.”
I watched, and I found a few people ready to answer my questions about what was happening. And
I discovered this fact: that people can only stand on their heads for three seconds; more than that
is absolutely harmful. But no yoga scripture mentions three seconds. They say, ”The longer you
stand, the better.” Of course their purpose is different. The longer you stand on your head, the less
you will be disturbed in the world, naturally, because for disturbance – even to be aware that there
are so many problems – intelligence is needed.
For a yogi, all problems disappear; not because he has transcended problems, but because he has
destroyed the very mechanism through which he was going to become aware of the problems.
I am not for destroying the mind.
I am for transcending the mind.
Mind transcended is always there:
In fact, more clear, dean, more strong, energetic. Because it is not used, it is full of energy.
So whenever a person who has transcended the mind wants to use the mind, naturally he is a
genius. In whatsoever dimension he wants to use his mind, he will be a genius. Geniuses will look
like pygmies before him because they have tired minds, and he has a mind reserved, rarely used,
not tired.
The transcendental consciousness is able to see things, to know things.
It does not need the help of the mind.
The mind is needed only when the transcendental consciousness wants to convey something to you
– a song, a message; only then is the mind used.
From Personality to Individuality 440 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
The yogi has fallen into a stupid trap; and this head of the department, this dodo proved really a dodo
I was traveling from Bina to Gwalior – I had gone to speak at a college, and while I was speaking in
the college, the driver of my car went somewhere and got drunk. And there was only three hours to
catch t the train. First it was very difficult to find the driver, and he had taken the key and everything;
otherwise I would have driven myself. The owner of the car rushed everywhere; he said, ”He must
have got drunk, so we have to look in some drinking place.” So they showed us the place and there
he was found completely drunk.
I said, ”But do you think we will ever arrive? This man will take us all to heaven.” He was completely
oblivious of anything. I had to find the key in his t pocket. But all this time wasted – although I went
at my speed.... But in India there is no trouble because there is nobody to prevent you and give you
a ticket. But on Indian roads it is not possible to really go beyond seventy; seventy is the most that
you and the car can tolerate.
The owner was jumping up and down behind saying, ”Slow down! I think the driver would have been
better. What are you doing? And you are not drunk! Just look at the road. At this speed... it is better
to arrive late than never to arrive at all.” That is written on Indian roads by the government: ”Better
late than never.” So he was telling me, ”Read it! It is written everywhere: Better late than never.”
I said, ”I have to catch the train” – but we missed, only by minutes. As we arrived outside the station,
the train moved out of the platform. The next train was a janata train. Janata train means a third-
class train: the whole train is third class. You don’t have any airconditioned class, first class, second
class; the whole train is third class.
There was no other way, so I climbed in somehow. The owner of the car and a few of his friends
who had come forced me in, forced my things in, and what did I see? – that dodo, that head of the
department of yoga had just entered before me. And what he did was simply jump on the upper seat
and fall asleep in front of me. He just closed his eyes and stretched out his legs to cover the whole
seat.
I said, ”This is something! You have just entered in front of me; I am just coming behind you – and
you are asleep.” I said, ”Okay, you remain asleep.” His porter was bringing his things. I said, ”Put
them outside. He is fast asleep. You can take all his things.
Now he became afraid. The train was going to leave, and I wouldn’t allow the porter in. The porter
said, ”But these things are his – the yogi who is sleeping on top.
I said, ”I am giving all these things to you. He is fast asleep. Certainly he must be coming from a
great distance. These things can’t be his.”
He said, ”No, he has just entered and I am carrying his things.”
I said, ”If he wants to take the things, he will have to get down and take his things from the platform.”
He tried his yogic patience to the very last moment, and when the guard gave the whistle, then he
jumped down to pick up his things. I went up to the top seat and was fast asleep; although I don’t
snore, that day I snored too. It was worth seeing: he came in and he had to travel standing.
After a few minutes he said, ”There is no need to snore – you can simply sleep.”
From Personality to Individuality 441 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
I said, ”Thank you. I was trying my hardest but it was too difficult: I don’t know how to snore. But
you proved a perfect dodo. You were trying to take the whole seat, and just in front of me. If you had
asked me I would have given you the whole seat, or the best thing would have been to share it – we
both could sit. But what you did, only a man who stands on his head for hours could do. So now
stand.”
So he had to stand for six hours up to Gwalior. When I got down, I said, ”Now you can sleep, and
remember me. This does not look good, at least for a yogi. The way you behaved simply proved
what I have been telling you in the university, that you are a dodo.”
After that he wouldn’t allow me in his department. He told the peon of the department, ”This student
is not to be allowed in.”
But I was not interested; I was interested only in the headstand, and I had worked it out that three
seconds is the maximum. The less the better: one second is even better. So just a quick flush of
blood makes all your brain cells vibrate, gives them a little more life. But if you are just pouring blood
on them for hours, they will die. They are very delicate.
Man, by standing on two legs, allowed his brain to have less blood moving through it. Less movement
of blood in the brain gave the space and the possibility for the brain to develop. But in your standing,
sitting, your brain is continuously working. When you are sleeping the gravitational pull is similar,
the blood movement is similar and quieter, not like standing on your head. Then it is just like a
waterfall on your inner brain. When you are sleeping, the movement of blood becomes slowed and
the gravitational pull is equal; you are back in the animal world. That’s why in the morning you will
feel fresh, younger, sharper, more compassionate.
I have watched it in India: beggars never beg at evening time. I was wondering why. They always
come to beg in the morning. I asked a few beggars with whom I had become friendly, ”Why do you
always go begging in the morning, why not in the evening?”
They said, ”It is clear: in the morning people are kinder, more compassionate. By evening they are
tired, irritated, angry; you cannot manage to get anything out of them.”
I have wondered... even beggars use psychology. They have been using it for centuries because
they have always been begging in the morning. People don’t look into things; otherwise, they would
be surprised how many people know how many things. A beggar knows something tremendously
important – that in the morning it is possible to exploit you because you are clean, refreshed, not
irritated, not angry. It is difficult for you to say no. By the evening it is impossible for you to say yes
to a beggar.
So for two hours in the day I enjoy a small night, and I make my room completely dark. Many
times I forget: when I get up at quarter to two it takes a little while for me to figure it out, whether
it is morning or afternoon, and sometimes Vivek has to come to wake me because I have simply
forgotten completely that it is afternoon. So I have told her, ”You can wait up to quarter to two; longer
than that you should not wait. That means I am not clear whether it is morning or evening... and
people must be waiting for the drive-by, so you wake me.”
Then again, a cup of tea – the same, because it is again morning. Then I go to see you all.
From Personality to Individuality 442 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
It is enough for me just to see you happy, dancing, singing, enjoying.
That’s what I want the whole world to be:
Just always in a dancing and singing mood.
People who come just as spectators cannot believe it. The journalists cannot believe that people
can be so happy, so joyful; they think that you are putting it on. And I cannot say that journalists are
misrepresenting it knowingly. They have seen the whole world; there is no joy anywhere. How can
they believe that so many people can be joyous, and for nothing, because what have we got?
One journalist, a woman from NEWSWEEK, was here. She told Sheela, ”This is all a put-up
business – these people are just pretending.” Sheela told me... so I sent a message to the woman,
”You remain here for seven days. For seven days, twenty-four hours a day, people cannot continue
a put-up business. And these people are working twelve hours, fourteen hours a day, seven days a
week. You try! – work fourteen hours a day, seven days a week, then pretend.... If you can do that,
then you can write about how this is a put-up job.”
The woman understood that this was true. Seven days she stayed; of course she did not work, but
she said, ”I can understand that working fourteen hours – it is impossible to pretend.” Seven days
she stayed, and she apologized; but she said to Sheela, ”Now what I am writing my bosses are not
going to accept. They will say,’You are hypnotized.’”
She left, and that’s what happened: the bosses said, ”You should not have stayed there that long.
That man played a trick upon you. He challenged you to remain seven days, and hypnotized you.”
But she said, ”he has not even seen me, we have not met.”
But the boss said, ”Your article is proof enough that you are hypnotized: not a single negative
statement in it, no criticism. I cannot publish this article. You will have to change it.” The magazine
is owned by a Christian association. The woman had to change it and write things which she knew
were wrong.
This is a strange world. People are miserable, misery has become their natural quality. Here, once
in a while, somebody becomes miserable; there, once in a while, somebody smiles. But that is a
great difference.
And just seeing you happy is all that I am here for.
Nothing else is expected from you.
No Master has ever expected less than I expect from you:
Just that you should be joyous, that you should treat miseries and sufferings as being below you.
The whole world is ready to be miserable and suffer without you. Do you think the world is going to
miss your misery, suffering? Don’t be worried about that.
From Personality to Individuality 443 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
You can enjoy, you can rejoice.
Jesus says to his disciples, again and again, rejoice! But I don’t see his disciples rejoicing. Nor do
I see him rejoicing. Have you seen a picture of Jesus smiling? Laughing would be too much, even
smiling won t suit. With the cross, how are you going to manage I a smile? And if somebody smiles
on the cross, then people will think this is certainly a put-up job! If without crosses they are not
allowing people to rejoice, then smiling on the cross – this man is a great actor! No, it won’t fit with
the philosophy of Crossianity: sad, long faced, burdened with the whole history of the world, telling
his disciples, ”Rejoice!”
I wonder: not a single disciple asked Jesus, ”Master, at least once, you rejoice.” The master is
always serious, and of course the disciples do what the master does, not what he says – they are
not that stupid. You are serious, and you are telling them to rejoice? You will be sitting by the side of
God, His only begotten son, and these fools rejoicing will fall into hell.
I cannot think of anybody in heaven rejoicing; or I do you think that in heaven people are rejoicing?
The way God is being painted by all the religions – serious, deadly serious... it is impossible for God
to smile. Have you seen any picture of God smiling? The idea has not happened; I am mentioning
it for the first time. Millions of painters – but not a single painter thought, ”Let this poor fellow smile
once. What harm is there if in one picture God smiles or bursts out laughing?” No, it is difficult, very
difficult.
I have just received the news from England that a rabbi has been expelled by the managing
committee of Jews in England because he told a dirty joke in his sermon. He must be reading
my books. But I was curious to know what the joke was – it must have been a serious affair: he has
been expelled. He is no longer a rabbi, he cannot preach in the synagogue; so what was the dirty
joke? And I feel sorry to tell you that r when I heard the joke I could not believe that this was a dirty
joke. The joke was not even much of a joke. It is very simple and very short
The rabbi was initiating a boy and he told the boy, ”When you grow older, you will be learning a bit
of this, a bit of that, and a bit of the other....” That; was the joke! A dirty joke? – ”a bit of the other”?
These are the religious people – will they allow you to laugh? To rejoice? And I wondered then,
what are my jokes; this is a dirty joke then certainly my jokes are not dirty. If this is the criterion of a
dirty joke, then I have never told a single dirty joke; it is absolutely proved, if this kind of joke is dirty.
And for this joke a rabbi has been expelled! – poor fellow.
And the very idea of telling a joke must have come to him by reading my books, because all the
rabbis, all the priests, all the monks are reading my books. They cannot, in any way, remain out of
my influence. They will be trying to hide it in the BIBLE, in the GITA, in the TALMUD. They may not
be reading it directly, but they are all reading it.
There was some other news today. One man, a very famous tax expert, Nani Palkhiwala – in India
he is the topmost tax expert, and he was an ambassador in America. He has always been against
me – so much so that he will not take any of the cases concerned with me, or my people or the
Foundation. That’s absolutely absurd. You may be against my philosophy, but that does not mean
that you cannot fight a case; that is your professional job. It was not only that he was not willing to
take any of my cases, he was telling other top legal people not to take any of my cases. Now he
From Personality to Individuality 444 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
has been defeated in the election, and he has given a statement which certainly has come from my
books, because I am the only person who has been using this word.
I have said many times that I am against democracy because democracy is nothing but a mobocracy.
I am in favor of a higher system, which I call a meritocracy – people of merit. And I call that system,
meritocracy.
Now Nani Palkhiwala has been defeated, his statement is: ”I am in favor of a meritocracy – we have
been dominated by mediocre people long enough.” Now, he was one of the mediocre people who
were in power! He has completely forgotten about whom he is talking. He was in power, and now
that he is defeated he is saying, ”So the people who were in power, or who are in power now, are all
mediocre. A meritocracy is needed.”
I would like to ask Nani Palkhiwala, ”Doctor Rajendra Prasad, Doctor Radhakrishnan,
Doctor Zakirhussain, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Lalbahadur Shastri, Jaiprakash Narayan, Doctor
Rammanohar Lohia, Acharya J.B. Krishani, and Indira Gandhi – are these people of merit, according
to you, or not?” Secondly, does he consider that Mediocraji – bhai Desai must be, according to him,
a man of merit? – because as prime minister he chose Nani Palkhiwala to be India’s ambassador
to the U.S.A. And I wonder why he remained silent for all these forty years without talking about a
meritocracy?
Now that he is nobody, suddenly all politicians have become mediocre. And he was appointed
ambassador to America by one of the most mediocre persons in the whole world. What does it
prove? He should have refused to be appointed by a mediocre person; but then he was wagging
his tail like a dog. One thing is certain, that he is far below even a mediocre person. Perhaps Nani
Palkhiwala thinks that he will be chosen because he has some merit. He is just a mediocre person.
To become a tax expert one does not need merit. In fact only mediocre people will be interested in
taxes and tax laws. People of merit have much more beautiful things to do.
Another defeated person is the ex-prime minister of India, Charan Singh. After the defeat he said,
”All politicians should be shot, including me, including Charan Singh.” This he should have done
when he was the prime minister. Now he cannot do anything, he is defeated. ”All politicians should
be shot,” including him – but why suddenly? And just a few days before he was fighting the election
to become a politician. If he had been victorious, do you think he would have made this statement
or do you think if Nani Palkhiwala had been victorious he would have given his statement?
I quite agree with this great idea of ex-prime minister Charan Singh’s, that all politicians should be
shot, including him. But my humble suggestion is, ”Please practice what you preach. Just shoot
Morarji Desai and yourself, and you will have made history. You two are the worst politicians in
contemporary India. But be quick; otherwise, Morarji Desai will not let you make history. He can
shoot you and himself and take this great opportunity from your hands.”
This world is full of very strange people and they think everybody is only the way they are. If they
see you all dancing and singing, certainly it seems to be a put-up job. And what do they think of
themselves? We are putting it on for them? Do they think that when they are not here we become
long faced and start crying and weeping to compensate? These idiots should come sometime,
suddenly – drop in by parachute.
From Personality to Individuality 445 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
The woman from NEWSWEEK was very disturbed because whatsoever she had seen in seven
days, she had written. She called from New York, ”When Sheela comes this way, my boss will be
in Chicago and I will be in Chicago. If Sheela passes by and can spare one day – because I am in
difficulty. My boss simply thinks that I need to be deprogramed. So if Sheela meets him it would be
good.”
I said to Sheela, ”It will be good: meet him and try to hypnotize him – see what you can do.” And
what actually happened? The boss wouldn’t look at Sheela He didn’t give himself any chance to be
hypnotized he would look sideways, here and there, but not towards Sheela.
I see many times people standing in the line, spectators who come for drive-by. They don’t look
at me. I feel like stopping my car and opening my window, but I feel if they get hypnotized then I
will be found a culprit, so it is better that I pass on and don’t bother about them. They are looking
somewhere else... and they have come to see me! What is happening? – I am seeing them, and
they are avoiding me.
Coming back from the drive-by, which I enjoy immensely... because my attitude towards life is this:
tomorrow perhaps I may not be able to see you dancing again, so every day I see it as if I am seeing
it for the first time and the last time. Vivek looks a little puzzled: how can I go on enjoying every day
the same people dancing and beating drums out of tune, and doing all kinds of things? How do I go
on enjoying it every day? I don’t look at her for the simple reason that she may feel awkward. I don’t
look at her, not even a single time: she may feel awkward because she is seeing me enjoying the
same scene again every day.
But to me it is a question of tremendous importance. Perhaps tomorrow I may not be able to see
you again; then the last time I see you, I should see you as fully as possible, as totally as possible.
And because I never compare, the question does not arise that you are the same people singing the
same song, playing on the same drums. And I know, I will make arrangements so that even when I
am not there, my car will pass at the exact time for you to dance and sing and play. Wherever I am,
I will enjoy it. It is a promise.
So you will not miss my car at least, even if I am not there. Vivek will be there; and people already
think perhaps she is driving the car. Sheela had to clear up this rumor in front of the commune –
that it is not so, because the rumor was coming again and again, and when it became too much....
One day a radio reporter was following the car, giving a commentary to his radio station which was
released immediately. He was giving the commentary like you listen to the commentary on a football
match: ”now Osho has come, people are dancing, singing, jumping. There is all kinds of music, all
kinds of tunes are being played... and now Osho has even let go of the steering wheel – that too was
in the commentary – ”and He is beating time with the dancers and singers. Now it is a wonder how
the car is....” Then Sheela came to me; she said, ”this was the radio commentary. It was relayed all
over America.”
And then the rumor started coming to her: ”Is it true that Osho is not driving, Vivek is?” The pedals
and gears are on Vivek’s side, and only a pseudo-steering wheel is in front of me so I can let go of
it and there is no problem! In fact, it can be arranged that way. My garage director, Avesh, is a great
mechanic. He can manage it that way so that Vivek will be sitting still on the passenger’s seat with
the gears and the pedals, and a certain small device for steering with the hand. And my steering
wheel will remain free the way it is when I’m not holding it.
From Personality to Individuality 446 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
But I would like you still to enjoy drive-by the same way, to dance the same way, even more so,
because when I am not there you have to ”put it on” – even better!
Life is so simple and so beautiful.
If you can remember that tomorrow is not certain, then it is intense too.
Coming back I again listen to music. Then I again repeat the same routine: going to the bath, going
to the swimming pool, going to the chilled shower. Then the supper, the same. Why you call it
supper, I don’t know, because it is the same as lunch. At least as far as I am concerned, a different
word is not needed; it is just the same as lunch. And as far as dinner is concerned, I don’t know the
meaning of it because I have never had any dinner – just the same lunch, exactly the same.
My kitchen people have invented something new, a patty made out of dahl. It is really delicious, and
perhaps my kitchen is the only place where it is made because it is not made in India. My kitchen
has dozens of recipes for patties but I have chosen only two: one for the morning, and one for the
evening. But I end up my lunch with a glass of juice the same as in the morning, because I will not
allow anything to go beyond the juice. I end my supper, so-called supper, with a glass of juice and
then I am excitedly waiting for Sheela to bring the questions.
You will not be as excited to meet me as I am to meet you. I don’t know what I am going to say.
That’s why many things I go on missing. That’s why I forgot yesterday after breakfast – I must have
gone somewhere else, because it is not a prepared speech. I am simply speaking as if to myself
– the way you think. I don’t think, so there is no question of preparing: I simply start speaking.
Speaking without thinking, it is bound to be a little bizarre.
Just yesterday I left Mahavira standing; I just moved on somewhere else. I forgot about it. Just now
I remembered, because this is not India; it is freezing cold and the naked Mahavira I left standing
yesterday and completely forgot about him. He must be getting angry by now. Howsoever non-
violent he is, he must be getting angry because too long in Oregon, in the freezing cold, below zero
centigrade.... But what can I do? I have no fixed track. I don’t move on rails like trains. I move like a
river, unpredictable even to myself.
Let me finish poor Mahavira and give him leave; otherwise I am again going off the track. I was
telling you that Mahavira was standing with closed eyes. A man came to him with his cows and
asked him, ”As you are standing here, please just keep an eye on my cows; they are grazing. And
I will be back soon.” He didn’t even bother that this man was standing with closed eyes. He didn’t
even bother that he had not said yes or no – he was silent for twelve years.
The man went away; he had some urgent business to do, and when he came back the cows had
moved further into the jungle. He found Mahavira still standing there, so he said, ”Mister, where are
my cows?” Mahavira didn’t speak, and the man was mad. He said, ”It seems that you are a thief
You have stolen my cows, and here you are trying to stand with closed eyes and naked, as if you
are some great saint. First tell me, where are my cows?”
But Mahavira did not even open his eyes, so the man said, ”Are you deaf or are you pretending that
you are deaf? I will show you.” That man was very angry: all his cows were lost and Mahavira was
From Personality to Individuality 447 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
doing nothing, just standing there; he could not even keep an eye on them. The man was so angry
that it is said that he took two pieces of wood and hammered them into both of Mahavira’s ears:
”Now you will be really deaf!” Still Mahavira remained standing just the same; perhaps he remained
deaf his whole life after that.
But there is no need of ears for a Master; all that he needs is a tongue, and that was there. In fact,
my experience is that people like me, by and by, become deaf. They don’t have any use of the ears.
That’s why I go on listening to music, because I don’t want to become deaf. Some work for the
ears... otherwise your ears are being used but what about my ears?
I go on forgetting like that, in many places, for the simple reason that.... I don’t think anybody has
spoken really spontaneously the way I am speaking. And I was not aware that my spontaneity would
have such a tremendous effect on people. I am not an orator; I have never been trained for oratory.
I am just talking the way I talk when you see me personally; I don t see any difference.
But one man who was the first to introduce me to the West, Aubrey Menen.... He is an Anglo-lndian
journalist, but he lives in England – a very famous journalist, one of the topmost. He was the first
man to introduce me to the West. He wrote the first book which mentioned me. The book’s name is
THE NEW MYSTICS. Not only did he mention me, he has my picture on the cover.
I could not believe what he had written about me. He wrote that he has heard the greatest orators of
this century – Winston Churchill, Adolf Hitler, Jawaharlal Nehru, President Kennedy – he has listened
to all these people, sitting very closely, in the front row, because he was a top journalist. And he says
that he was never influenced by anybody the way he was influenced by me. He not only compares
me with these people – Adolf Hitler, President Kennedy, Winston Churchill, and Jawaharlal Nehru –
but he believes me to be the best orator that he has come across. It was a surprise because I am
not an orator at all.
I could not believe my eyes. I said, ”What is this man talking about? Adolf Hitler was a great orator,
Kennedy was a great orator, Jawaharlal was a great orator, Winston Churchill was a great orator;
and he is comparing me, who is not an orator at all, with them? What has impressed him?”
He says, ”What has impressed me is that I could see simply that this man is absolutely unprepared.
He does not know what he is going to say next, but somehow even, thing falls in line. His sentences
are small, conversational, as if he is talking man to man, not to a crowd.” When you are talking to a
crowd, you are talking to the walls: you are not human in your talk.
Winston Churchill said that when he started talking and became an orator, he was very nervous.
Later he said, truthfully, he was still nenous when he stood on the podium; he still felt the same first
nervousness he had felt sixty years before. But the same trick always helped. And what was his
trick? This must be the trick of many great orators. He says, ”the first thing that I repeat in my mind
is that all these people are idiots; you need not be afraid of them. And once I settle it in my mind
that these are all idiots, then I start speaking. Who is afraid of idiots? And then one word leads to
another and then gathers momentum; then one is just going like a computer.”
All your great orators are just repeating speeches already written by their secretaries. Jawaharlal’s
secretary, told me that all his speeches were written by him. Not only has he told me, he has written
From Personality to Individuality 448 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
in his memoirs that all those great speeches that Jawaharlal was famous for were written by him.
And before going, Jawaharlal would have a look at the speech, and figure out how he was going to
manage it.
But with me it is a totally different matter. You are not idiots. I am speaking to people who are
potentially enlightened beings; I am speaking with immense respect and love. And I have never felt
any kind of nervousness because I am not an orator, I am just conversing with you. Hence, many
times it is bound to happen: I will tell only half a story, and then, wherever the wind blows, my cloud
starts moving. I have never made any effort that things should be otherwise.
I want to remain absolutely spontaneous.
And I want you also to hear me spontaneously.
In the same way I don’t know what I am going to say, you should also be in that emptiness where
you don’t know what you are going to hear.
Then there is a possibility of a transmission of something which is not in the words but follows the
words like a shadow or an aroma.
Then the word will be there; you will hear the word, but the fragrance, the shadow, will enter your
being and will stir your heart.
My whole effort is not to convince your intellect:
It is to have a little love affair with your heart.
These are heart-to-heart talks, not oratory:
Not great lectures, but just simple, human talks.
So forgive me, I am going to remain the same way but you can always remind me that I have left
something out in the middle. I can always complete it. I would love to complete it but what can I do?
There is so much to say – and nothing to say.
You can understand my problem: so much to say that even if I go on for lives it will still be there –
and nothing to say, because that which I want to give to you is not something which can be said.
I am living in this dilemma but trying for some middle way; and I have the feeling I have found the
middle way.
I have heard a story: when God created man of course He was an amateur. He baked the man too
much – a negro came out. God said,”Jesus! What happened to this man?
The negro said, ”You cooked me too much.”
So God tried the next man. That’s how mind works, from one extreme to the other: he was afraid to
cook him too much. So half-cooked, a European came out. God said, ”What is happening?”
From Personality to Individuality 449 Osho
CHAPTER 25. MY DAY: THE JUICE, THE WHOLE JUICE, AND NOTHING BUT THE JUICE
The man said, ”I was just on the way to being cooked and you pulled me out.”
God tried a third time. Of course now He was experienced and trying to find the middle way. And it
is said He found the middle way – the Indian.
After the discourse I do some work with Sheela, anything concerned with sannyasins’ spiritual
growth. And nearabout ten o’clock I take my last glass of juice and go into sleep or samadhi,
which are both the same to me. Now you can see that I don’t have anything beyond the juice.
The juice is the last and ultimate thing: Raso vai saha, that which is nothing but juice. In the Sanskrit
sutra they do not use the pronoun ”he”; instead they use ”that.” It is quite clear that they are referring
to existence itself and not to a non-existent God.
From Personality to Individuality 450 Osho
CHAPTER 26
Only one sin – to forget your being. Only one virtue – to remember it
24 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
COULD YOU SAY SOMETHING TO US ABOUT BLISS?
I have been blissed out myself for almost thirty-three years. That is exactly the time Jesus lived on
earth. Shankara also lived only thirty-three years, Vivekananda too. For the length of the whole life
of Jesus I have been blissed out. And this seems to be the right time to ask me what bliss is. It is
almost impossible to answer, but remember I am saying ”almost”.
The ”almost” depends on two things. First: if you are available, open, relaxed, with no idea of what
bliss is, just a pure enquiry without any prejudice, without any mind; if your heart is available without
any conditions from your side – then perhaps the almost impossible can become possible.
Secondly – and this is an even more difficult thing.... it is as if a person has been dead for thirty-three
years. Logically you can ask him, ”What is death? – because you have been experiencing death
for thirty-three years – how long will you take to define it?” The dead man cannot answer; he is not
there.
I am also not here – I am a dead man.
This is the nature of bliss.
451
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
As it enters in you, you are no more there.
Both cannot exist together. The coexistence of the ego and bliss is absolutely impossible; only one
can exist. It is like darkness and light. You cannot manage some kind of coexistence between
darkness and light.
In the East we have the story that darkness appeared before God with tears in her eyes and
complained against the sun: ”I have not done anything against your sun. I am not even acquainted
with him, we have never met; still he goes on harassing me. Wherever I go he reaches me sooner
or later, and I am constantly on the run. Now I am really tired, and I want you to do something about
it. Why is he after me?”
God called the sun and asked him, ”Why are you after darkness? What wrong has she done to
you?”
The sun said, ”Who is darkness? I have never met her. I would like to be introduced.”
God looked around to where darkness had been standing but nobody was there. Since then God
has been trying to arrange some kind of meeting, a roundtable conference, some kind of mediation,
negotiation. But although all the religions say that God is allpowerful, in this case He has failed. He
has not been able to bring the light, the sun, in front of darkness; only one appears at a time.
The reason is very simple: darkness has no existence of its own. It is only the absence of light. When
the light is present, how can its absence also be there? That absence is possible only when light is
absent. This case is going to remain eternally on file, undecided. This story is really significant. It
says something about you and bliss.
The ego is nothing but the absence of blissfulness.
The more egoistic a person is, the more in anguish, in suffering, in misery, in darkness he is. His life
is nothing but hell.
There is no other hell than to live in the ego.
There is no other heaven than to come out of the ego.
In coming out of the ego you come out of suffering, misery, anguish – that whole company. And
when there is no ego, what remains is blissfulness.
I close my eyes – it is there.
I open my eyes – it is there.
I walk – it walks with me.
I sleep – it sleeps with me:
I am no longer separate from it.
From Personality to Individuality 452 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
There is a beautiful statement of one of the great Masters, Kabir. He says, ”O my beloved, seeking
and searching, seeking and searching, I have lost myself The drop has dropped into the ocean; now
where am I going to find myself? I was just a drop.” After he had written this in the early morning, his
disciples, who used to gather then, asked him what he had been writing. Kabir said, ”I have written
something, but I am not quite satisfied.”
Let me repeat his words, they have a beauty of their own:
HERAT HERAT HE SAKHI RAHYA KABIR HERAI
BUND SAMANI SAMUND MEN SO KAT HERI JAI.
”O my beloved friend, a great difficulty has arisen. I was searching, searching, seeking and seeking,
and in all this search I forgot to take care of myself. I am lost, lost just as when a dewdrop falls into
the ocean. The dewdrop finds the ocean, but at the cost of losing itself”
”But I’m not satisfied,” Kabir said. ”So just wait. Something is still not right.” And he changed it – just
a little change, a little difference, but what a difference it makes!
HERAT HERAT HE SAKHI RAHYA KABIR HERAI.
”O my beloved, seeking and searching, Kabir is lost. The ocean has fallen into the dewdrop, now
where am I going to find my dewdrop?”
Both ways are true, but the second way is truer than true. It has come very close to the ultimate
expression of bliss. It is a finding, but very risky – on the condition of losing your self
Ordinarily, in the dictionaries you will find bliss defined as happiness, pleasure, joy. Linguistically they
all appear to have a similar meaning; existentially it is not so. And you will have to understand the
subtle nuances and differences; only then you may be able to catch some hold of the phenomenon
called bliss.
Remember, you cannot hold bliss in your fist.
You can hold bliss only in your open hand.
Bliss is just like a breeze:
Your fist will miss it.
Your open hand may have a little dance with it, a little love affair with it.
Let us start from the lowest because that will be easier to understand, that’s where man biologically
is born. Pleasure is physical.
A great Sufi poet, Omar Khayyam, has the right definition of pleasure. He was not defining pleasure,
he was writing a beautiful poem but, unknowingly, he has come very close to defining pleasure. He
From Personality to Individuality 453 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
says: a cold winter night, having a good dinner... sitting by the fireside on your coziest chair, with a
book of poetry in your lap, and a beautiful woman dancing and singing with a musical instrument....
The warmth, the beauty, the good, delicious food, and a great book of poetry in your lap; the music....
You are alone together in the cold night and the warmth of the fire.... This is pleasure.
Physically you are healthy. You enjoy your food. You enjoy your lover, your beloved. You enjoy
friends, or music, or painting – all this is physical. Nothing is wrong with it; as far as my religion is
concerned I am all for pleasure. Of course, I don’t stop there, I only start from there.
All the other, old religions are against pleasure; and that’s where they have missed, because if you
miss the first step, please don’t hope that you will be able to reach the highest step. The first rung of
the ladder is as essential as the last: they are both part of the same ladder. I have no condemnation
of the first rung on the ladder, because without it the whole ladder will disappear.
I am all for pleasure, but I would like you to be reminded that there are higher things than pleasure.
Happiness is higher than pleasure.
It is not physical, it is more psychological. You may be hungry, you may be cold, freezing, and
suddenly a friend knocks on your door. You forget your hunger and your cold, you simply give him
a hug. It is something higher than the body can give to you; it is in your psychology. A friend whom
you have not seen for a long time.... You forget your body – a tremendous happiness arises in you.
Animals have only pleasure, and most human beings are still animals. Most of them don’t know of
happiness. There are people who have never loved. Remember, sex is pleasure, love is happiness.
Don’t get confused between the two. Love can exist without sex; sex can exist without love. They
can exist together too but there is no necessity for them to exist together.
Sex is given by nature; it is an inbuilt program in your biology. Love is not an inbuilt program; that’s
why so many people go on missing it. It has to be evolved. You have to learn it, it is an art. You
have to understand one thing, that nature and biology have no need of love; sex is enough for life to
continue. Reproduction is the end of sex, and biology is interested only in reproducing.
Love is a luxury.
It has no biological function.
Unless you start learning something that goes beyond your body, which is not a need of the body –
the body can exist without it – you will never be able to know what love is. Experiencing poetry, the
depth of music or the beauty of a sunrise or a sunset.... No animal bothers about sunset or sunrise.
You should not be deceived by the birds in the morning chattering all around. It is not a song of
happiness to welcome the sun, no. It is just the overflowing energy after the whole night’s peaceful,
relaxed state.
You don’t get up so rejuvenated because you don’t sleep well. Your mind goes on thinking and
dreaming and projecting; your mind goes on keeping your body tense. Just watch somebody’s face
while he is sleeping, and you will be wondering what he is doing. Sometimes his face becomes
From Personality to Individuality 454 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
very tense, sometimes tension lines appear on his forehead, sometimes he is gnashing his teeth,
sometimes he starts making some sounds. Perhaps he is saying something but in sleep it becomes
gibberish; you cannot figure out what he is saying. But so much is going on.
Just the other morning Vivek showed me one of the white peacocks which always comes near my
sitting room and sleeps on a treetop. That is his religious practice every night; it may be raining, it
may be snowing – it doesn’t matter. And the place where he sits seems to be so risky that he could
fall any moment, but he is so relaxed, almost one with the tree. Now, after these ten hours, twelve
hours of almost going to the very source of his life in sleep, if he starts dancing by the morning it is
no wonder.
It has nothing to do with the sun or the flowers, it has something to do with his inner energy which is
overflowing. The birds are chirping, chitchatting – it is simply aliveness. But remember, animals or
birds cannot have a taste of happiness; that is man’s prerogative.
One thing to be remembered: pleasure has its counterpart – pain; happiness has its counterpart –
unhappiness. And you cannot have only one without having the other too; they are inseparable. If
you have pleasure, in the same amount be ready for pain. It is not possible to have ninety percent
pleasure and ten percent pain. Nature does not function that way. It is very fair; it is always fifty-fifty,
equally balanced.
That’s why many people, particularly the religious people, monks, saints, sages.... Have you ever
thought about it, why they start renouncing pleasure? You may not have wondered.... They are not
renouncing pleasure, they are renouncing pain. But without renouncing pleasure there is no way to
renounce pain – that is the difficulty. If it were possible to save pleasure and renounce pain, I don’t
think any saint would be so idiotic as to renounce pleasure.
They have to renounce pleasure because they have known that if you welcome pleasure, just behind
the pleasure there is pain. It is almost like on a door: on one side is written ”push,” on the other side
is written ”pull.” It is the same door. Of course, if on one side it says ”push,” then on the other side it
has to say ”pull.” It is the same phenomenon: on one side it is pleasure – pull – and you want to pull
it as much as possible; on the other side is pain, and you want to push it as far away as possible.
But once you have chosen pleasure – and of course nobody chooses pain, except a few masochists.
But even a masochist, by choosing pain, has to choose pleasure. A masochist is one who tortures
himself and enjoys it: he has chosen pain. He is torturing himself, I but you can see in his eyes he
is enjoying it. You cant not divide the two – they are not two, just two sides of the same energy.
In the same way happiness is joined with unhappiness. Everybody wants to be happy, and you will
find everybody unhappy. The more you want happiness, the more you are inviting unhappiness.
The American constitution has a very stupid idea in it. It says that the pursuit of happiness is man’s
birthright. The people who were writing this constitution had no idea what they were writing. If the
pursuit of happiness is the birthright of mankind, then what about unhappiness? Whose birthright is
unhappiness? These people were not at all aware that if you ask for happiness, you have asked for
unhappiness at the same time; whether you know it or not does not matter.
From Personality to Individuality 455 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
If a certain painting makes you happy, the meeting of a friend makes you happy, a certain song
makes you feel happy.... But how long can you remain with the friend? In the meeting there is the
departure; in life there is death. How long can you be happy with a song? Soon you will start getting
bored by it, you will become fed up with it.
You can see it happening in every synagogue, in every church, in every temple, in every mosque:
people are almost asleep. A few old fellows are even snoring, because they have heard the sermon
so many times; just the very repetition of it brings boredom, and boredom brings sleep. This is
a psychological mechanism. That’s why all the methods that are suggested to people who are
suffering from sleeplessness are really nothing but methods to get bored.
They are told, ”Count from one to a hundred, and then count backwards: one hundred, ninety-
nine, ninety-eight, ninety-seven; count backwards; then from one to a hundred, and then count back
again.” Naturally you will get bored within five minutes. And a few con people have sold this method
as if they are giving you something of religious value – for example, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. What
he calls transcendental meditation is nothing but transcendental boredom.
If you repeat any name continually for ten or twenty minutes you are bound to fall asleep. Of course
it is a little different from your ordinary sleep: it is hypnos. Hypnos is deliberate sleep, not natural but
created by a certain strategy, a certain mechanism – repeating Ave Maria, Ave Maria, Ave Maria,
and fast. You have to repeat it fast so there is no gap between two Ave Marias; otherwise, some
thought may enter and disturb your whole procedure, so you have to go really fast.
That’s why Maharishi Mahesh Yogi does not give his mantra, the secret, openly to everybody. No, it
has to be given in private. The reason is that for a Christian it has to be Ave Maria, for a Hindu it has
to be Rama or Krishna, for a Mohammedan it has to be something else, for a Jew something else.
Publicly you cannot declare the mantra because Ave Maria will not appeal to a Hindu; he will not be
ready to waste ten minutes on Ave Maria.
To a Christian, Rama, Rama does not make much sense – except for a few hippies. Everything
makes sense for a few days and then it turns out to be nonsense. Hippies are constantly on the
move. They are permanent seekers. They are not interested in finding, just moving, being on the
move. Krishna is not meaningful to a Jew. A certain meaning, a certain conditioning from your
childhood is needed to help you; otherwise the word which you are repeating will remain only on
the surface of your mind. It won’t get to your unconscious, and it is the unconscious which brings
hypnos. So repeating a certain word....
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi was visiting Jabalpur when I was a professor there. I sent one of my students
to take initiation from him, and I said, ”Tell him that you are an atheist, that you don’t believe in God,
because I want to see what mantra he gives to you.” Generally no atheist will go: in his whole life
Mahesh Yogi would not have come across an atheist asking for a mantra. This boy was a very
serious type, and I told him, ”Remain very serious and follow the whole procedure. Whatsoever
money is demanded, give it. You have to take flowers and a piece of Silk cloth to offer.”
So he went prepared. He touched Maharishi’s feet – inside of course saying, ”Go to hell, you son-
of-a-bitch,” but on the surface staying very serious. And when he touched Mahesh Yogi’s feet, and
put down the flowers and the silken piece of cloth, with folded hands he asked, ”Please initiate me.”
From Personality to Individuality 456 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
Mahesh Yogi said, ”Okay. You seem to be really a seeker. What is your religion?”
The student said, ”That is the difficulty. I am an atheist, I don’t believe in God.”
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi said, ”This is the first time I have come across an atheist. I am at a loss as
to what mantra to give you, because for an atheist all mantras are useless.”
You cannot give him the name of Jesus: he does not believe in God, how can he believe in God’s
son? You cannot give him the name of Krishna: he does not believe in God, how can he believe in
the incarnation of God?
Mahesh Yogi said to him, ”Please come back tomorrow.”
The boy came to me and he said that this had happened: ”Mahesh Yogi thought for a few minutes
and he said to come tomorrow.”
I said, ”He deceived you. You rush right now, ask for your money back, your flowers, your everything,
because tonight he is leaving.” So he rushed back. The people outside Mahesh Yogi’s camp tried to
prevent him, saying, ”This is not the time for initiation.
He said, ”l don’t care. I have not come for initiation; I have come to take back my things that I left
here this morning”and he was a strong young man, so he forced his way in and entered Mahesh
Yogi’s room.
Mahesh Yogi looked at him and said, aBut I told you to come tomorrow.”
The student said, ”And tonight you are leaving. Your luggage is packed. Whom am I going to see
tomorrow? Now please give me my money back. Where is my handkerchief and where are my
flowers?” And Mahesh Yogi had to find the student’s money and things, and he gave them back to
him.
These people are exploiting the whole world. What they are giving is just a simple method of
hypnosis, autohypnosis. Anything will do; it has nothing to do with God’s name. And nonsense –
sound will do. You just repeat it fast and get bored, and a certain sleep – for which a different name
has been used, hypnos, because there are no dreams in it – will descend on you. That’s why after
you wake up from transcendental boredom you will feel very fresh. But that’s how everybody feels
after hypnosis, exactly the same, because there are no dreams, no disturbance: you have tired the
mind so much.
In India it is a known fact that if you say to a child, ”Sit down in the corner and don’t disturb me, we
are doing something important,” he is not going to sit down. In India the usual method is to tell the
child, Go and do twelve rounds of the house.” After the twelfth round he is bound to sit down at least
for half an hour and not bother anybody.
The same is the case with the mind. If you just sit and try to be silent you will find more thoughts
are coming to you than ever because usually they never find you so available. They are always
standing in a queue waiting for their number to come up, and you are so late with your appointments
From Personality to Individuality 457 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
that a few thoughts may be left standing there for years. But thoughts are stubborn, they can wait.
For years they can wait; someday they will sneak in. So when you are sitting in meditation, prayer,
contemplation, you are giving an opportunity to all the thoughts, desires, dreams which had not been
able to attract your attention before.
Now you are available, so immediately there is a rush hour in the mind. Suddenly so many things
out of nowhere start appearing. But if you are repeating a certain word, a certain name, then you
don’t give thoughts any chance. And if you are repeating words so fast that between two words there
is no gap, then you give a chance for the mind to be bored with the same thing. And this boredom
brings a different quality of sleep – hypnos, which is very refreshing, healthy. Nothing is wrong with
it; all that is wrong is using it to cheat people and exploit people by giving them hypnos as something
spiritual. It is nothing spiritual.
Mind is capable of experiencing happiness, but the more dimensions of happiness are open to you,
the more dimensions of unhappiness are also open to you. It is not something to be surprised about
that people like Jean-Paul Sartre feel more anguish than so-called ordinary human beings. Sartre
certainly is a genius. His mind had more dimensions open to happiness; obviously he has opened
the door to unhappiness too.
And one thing to remember about the relationship between happiness and time: Happiness is so
beautiful, so juicy, so groovy, that you feel time is passing very fast. The watch, the clock, have no
idea that you are happy or unhappy – they are moving at the usual speed; but when you are happy
you feel time flying by because you would like to have as much of it as possible. You would like it to
remain forever. You are clinging to it. You fear that it is going to slip out of your hands. In all this, the
time has passed and suddenly you see that that great moment is no longer there.
So when happiness is there, it is momentary; when unhappiness is there you don’t want it, it is an
uninvited guest. You want to throw it back, but you are incapable of throwing it away. Time will
seem to be moving slower, as if all the watches are conspiring against you. When you are happy
they move fast; when you are unhappy they suddenly become lazy, lousy. No, they are not doing
anything to you.
Albert Einstein was asked again and again, ”What is your theory of relativity?” Now, his theory of
relativity is a very complex phenomenon. He cannot just answer. You will have to go through a long
process of education in higher mathematics and neo-physics, then you may be able to understand it
a little bit. It is said that there were only twelve persons alive in Albert Einstein’s time who understood
his theory of relativity.
But he was bound to be asked. People had heard of the theory of relativity, and if Einstein happened
to be somewhere, everybody would ask about it – so he had found an answer. The answer was that
if you are sitting with your belovedone situationor you are sitting on a hotplate, burning hot, red-hot –
another situation – will you feel time passing with the same speed? Obviously to the man sitting on
a red-hot plate, one minute will look like one century; and being with his beloved, even one century
will look like one moment. Einstein said, ”This is what my theory of relativity is. More than that you
will not be able to understand, but this is enough to get the idea.”
Time is relative to your mind, so much so that it can be said that time and mind are almost one
phenomenon.
From Personality to Individuality 458 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
Now I can talk about bliss. Bliss has no counterpart to it. That is the first thing to understand.
Pleasure has pain, happiness has unhappiness, but bliss has nothing as a counterpart; it is an
organic whole. Gautam the Buddha used to say, ”If you taste the ocean from anywhere, it is salty.”
So is the case with the bliss: you can taste it from any corner, from any space, from any direction –
-it is just blissfulness. There is nothing opposite to it.
Bliss is the only experience in life which has no polar opposite to it. That’s why, once you are blissful,
you cannot fall back. There is no way to be unblissful again. I have tried but nothing succeeds.
In Japan they have the statue of Bodhidharma – in Japanese his name has changed to Daruma.
There is a doll called a Daruma doll, which was made according to a statement of Bodhidharma’s.
He said, ”What ever you do, you cannot put me upside down; I will always be upside up, downside
down.”
This statement gave an idea to a toymaker to make a doll. It is heavy at the bottom, so you throw the
doll any way and it always returns to sit in the lotus posture. You push it, throw it, hit it, do whatever
you can do, but it represents Bodhidharma – it always settles in a lotus posture.
So is the case with bliss: whatever you do to it, whatever happens around you, it is absolutely the
same, unchanging.
Bliss has some quality of pleasure in it, it has some quality of happiness in it; but it is much more.
And the plus is that you feel absolutely fulfilled, contented, with no desire, no expectation. This very
moment you are where everybody wants to be, and there is a tremendous feeling that more than this
is not possible; there is no way. It is just as there can be nothing bigger than the sky; it is unbounded.
It is inconceivable to the mind, because the mind can only conceive limited things. Here you can
feel how limited the mind is. It cannot even conceive something unlimited.
The sky is there, without boundaries. You cannot come to a point where you can say, ”Here is the
boundary.” Just think about it. How can you say, ”Here is the boundary?” – because a boundary
means that something must be beyond the boundary. Two things are needed, absolutely needed, to
make a boundary. If there is nothing beyond, then nothing is making a boundary; then there is no
boundary, you will have to go into nothing. But you can never come to a point where you will find a
board: ”Here ends the universe.” It ends nowhere, it begins nowhere. The same is the experience
of bliss.
Bliss is within you, without you.
Bliss is in life, it is in death.
It is when you are healthy, it is when you are sick.
It is when you are young, it is when you are old.
Nothing makes any difference to bliss.
Bliss is simply transcendental to all that exists in the universe.
From Personality to Individuality 459 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
And because it is universal, everywhere – within you, within mehowsoever difficult it may be to
explain it, to experience it is not so difficult. Let me repeat my statement because that may look a
little crazy:
To explain bliss is more difficult than to experience it.
How can you explain what beauty is? What do you think, in these thousands of years, hundreds of
poets, philosophers, thinkers, and painters have been trying to do? They have been trying to find
the definition of beauty. They have created many beautiful things, but beauty remains undefined.
One man in this century did a really arduous job. His name is G.E. Moore – one of the great
philosophers of this century. He devoted his whole life to a single question: What is good? He was
a moral thinker, and morality is impossible if you cannot even define what is good. Then how can
you say what is bad? How can you say what is right and what is wrong, and how can you say what
is sin and what is virtue? The basic thing has to be first tackled, and this is: What is good?
His whole life’s experience G.E. Moore has written in a big volume. The name of the book is
PRINCIPIA ETHICA. He had chosen the name before he started the book; otherwise, I don’t think
he would have given it that name, PRINCIPIA ETHICA. He was thinking he was going to find the
basic principle of ethics, but after his whole life’s research work, where he ends is really sad. He
ends the book with the statement: ”Good is indefinable.”
You go through his book, which is very arduous, complicated, with arguments for and against –
he has covered the whole history of moral philosophy, but finally he says, ”Excuse me, good is
indefinable, because good is a simple quality like yellow. If somebody asks you to define yellow,
what can you do? I was simply stupid to have wasted my time.”
What is yellow? You will say yellow is yellow, but that is not a definition, yet you know what yellow
is, don’t you? I know what bliss is, but please don’t ask me what it is. If you cannot answer what
yellow is – such a mundane and third-rate question – then it is difficult to define what beauty is, what
good is. But perhaps a man like Michelangelo may create a statue, and tell you, ”See, feel, touch
it – this is beauty.” Although you may not necessarily be satisfied, Michelangelo at least can create
something objective.
A Picasso may create a painting; a Rabindranath Tagore may write a poem and say, ”Somewhere
here in this poem, between the words, between the lines, there is beauty. Just try to find it – just
dive into it.” They can at least give you something objective. It may not be sufficient to define it – it
is not, and they know it – but at least working in their dimension gives them an opportunity to create
something.
But my world is subjective. I cannot paint, I cannot write poetry, I cannot make a song, I cannot
create or compose music about bliss. There is no way to express bliss through something objective,
because bliss is a subjective experience, it is not a thing. You cannot observe it; it cannot be placed
in front of you as an object. But there has been only one way, and that is to be in close proximity to
a person who has experienced it.
That’s what the meaning of the whole phenomenon of Master and disciplehood is. The Master has
bliss, the disciple has bliss.
From Personality to Individuality 460 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
But the Master knows that he has bliss, and the disciple does not know that he has it.
As far as having bliss is concerned, there is no difference. The difference is only that the Master’s
eyes are open and the disciple’s eyes are closed.
Being in close proximity to the Master, in some unexpected movement you may have a taste of it,
just like a breeze passing through you and the feel of the coolness; or just suddenly a fragrance
passing by you which you cannot catch hold of. By the time you try to catch hold of it, it is already
gone; and fragrances are not to be caught in your fist.
This is the whole function of my commune, to answer this question: What is bliss?
I am inviting you to be here, to be with me, because there is only one possibility: that just by your
being here, a synchronicity may happen. It has happened before, it can happen again. And you
have to remember, there is no other way for it to happen. It happens only in this way.
Let me try to explain to you something about synchronicity, because that is the fundamental law
about bliss.
Have you ever experienced that you are sad, miserable; then a few friends come, and they are
gossiping, talking – and you remember only later on, ”My God, what happened to my misery and my
suffering?” You got completely lost in gossiping and forgot about your misery. Those people were
laughing and enjoying and joking, and something of their energy started to trigger something in you.
In Indian classical music this is an ancient, established fact, that you can place a sitar – an Indian
musical instrument – in an empty room, in one corner, and on the other side, just facing that sitar,
let a master sitarist play. And you will be surprised: if the master is really a maestro, the other sitar
sitting there in the corner starts vibrating with the same tune. This is synchronicity. An invisible vibe
of the music that is being played by the master slowly starts moving in the room. It is just like when
you throw a stone in a silent lake, and ripples arise and go on spreading to the farther and farther
shores.
In the same way every note of the master is creating a ripple in the air around him, and those ripples
are going farther away. While passing the other sitar they will strike its wires. But the master has to
be a very refined sitarist, because those wires on the other sitar need a very delicate touch – then
they start slowly vibrating. Great masters have played it, showed it, exhibited it.
The Moghul Emperor of India, Akbar, was very interested when he heard about this, and he had one
of the greatest musicians, Tansen, in his court, so he asked Tansen about it. Tansen said, ”I am a
great musician, but this is beyond me. My master can do it.”
Akbar said, ”Is there somebody who can play better than you?” – because so many musicians had
come to try to defeat Tansen. This was a constant thing, to want to become a member of the group
Akbar had created, called ”The Nine Jewels”: nine master minds, one for each dimension of life.
Tansen was one of them.
Tansen said, ”Yes, there is only one man, my master.”
From Personality to Individuality 461 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
Akbar said, ”I would like to invite him. We will give him the greatest welcome ever given to anybody,
but I would like to listen to him.”
Tansen said, ”That’s why I have never mentioned his name to you. I sing, I play the music, because
I am full of desires, expectations. You have given me so much, but the desires are unending: I still
go on playing because I want to get something. My master has got it. He plays because he has got
something that he has to play and spread. I play because I want to get something. I am a beggar –
he is a master. He will not come to the court; only beggars like me can come to court.
”For what will he come? You will have to go to him – the thirsty go to the well – if you are interested.
That’s why I have never mentioned his name, because mentioning his name will mean you will ask
me to call him; and then it will look uncourteous, unmannerly, to refuse you. But I am helpless.
”He is an old beggar in the eyes of the world. He lives just near your palace, not far away, by the
side of the Yamuna river. He has a small hut there – you will have to go to him. And you cannot just
demand of him, ’Play!’ When he is playing you can listen – hiding, because seeing us he may stop
just to welcome us, to receive us. But every day at three o’clock in the morning he plays, so we have
to go and hide out side the hut. And you can take my sitar there, out side the hut, and watch.”
Tansen and Akbar both went, took the sitar there, sat outside and waited for the time. Exactly at
three o’clock Tansen’s master started playing. His name was Haridas. Perhaps India has never
produced any other musician of his quality. The moment he started playing, the sitar outside started
vibrating with exactly the same tune.
In Indian classical music there are ragas – particular music to be played at particular times of the day,
throughout twenty-four hours. For the morning there is one raga, for the evening there is another.
They have worked for thousands of years to find for each period of time what tune will be fitting for
it, so that the raga can be absorbed by it. Indian classical music is not like jazz music. No Eastern
musician will accept jazz as music at all: ”This is simply a crazy crowd jumping about.” Of course
they are making sound, but just to make sounds is not to make music. They have found that each
period of time is vulnerable to a certain music.
At three o’clock, early in the morning, Akbar saw with his own eyes the other sitar vibrating, replying,
as if the master were playing on both – as if some invisible fingers had reached out to the sitar
waiting outside. For the first time Akbar started weeping. Tears came into his eyes, just out of joy.
They went home slowly. They remained silent all the way, but when Akbar was entering his palace,
and Tansen was taking leave to go to his house, Akbar said, ”Tansen, I used to think that nobody
could play better than you, but I am sorry to say that you are nowhere near your master. Why are you
wasting your time in my court? – you should be with your master. If even a dead musical instrument
is receptive to that man’s music, what is impossible between you and him? – miracles are possible.
Just forget this court, forget me. And he is an old man – you be with him; just sit by his side and let
his energy flow in you, let his music make you afire.” This is the law of synchronicity.
With the Master, the disciple is joined by the law synchronicity.
Every disciple is not a disciple unless the law of synchronicity starts functioning, unless something
invisible transpires between you and the Master.
From Personality to Individuality 462 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
The Master is full of bliss, he is showering all that L he has – because in the world of bliss the more
you give, the more you have.
Ordinary economics is not applicable there. In ordinary economics, the more you give, the less you
have. Something of a higher economics, totally different and opposite, functions: the more you give,
the more you have.
The Master is showering.
Whether you get drenched with it or not is up to you, because you may be holding an umbrella. Your
umbrella may get drenched, but umbrellas don’t feel bliss. You will remain dry, and you will go on
asking, ”What is the definition of bliss? What is bliss?”
Just close your umbrellas, put them aside. Better be utterly nude so nothing prevents – I mean
spiritually be nude – so there is no barrier. When there is no barrier you will discover there has
always been a bridge underneath the barrier.
I can help you to experience bliss.
And when I can help you to experience it, why bother about the definition?
And even if I define bliss, it won’t make any sense to you. I can define it, but the definition will be
simply words: ”Bliss is ecstasy.” But then you will ask, ”What is ecstasy?” – and that will lead to an
infinite regression. I will go on saying A is B, B is C, C is D, and the whole round: Z is A, and A is
B.... No, a definition is not going to help at all.
The world of religion is not the world of definitions.
The world of religion is the world of experiences.
That’s the difference between a teacher and a Master.
A teacher gives you definitions, explains the scriptures to you.
The Master allows you to go with him into the unknown.
He does not give you definitions, scriptures:
He gives you a push.
He throws you into the bottomless abyss of existence.
All my words are just ”pushes.”
They have nothing to do with answering your questions.
I want you to experience.
From Personality to Individuality 463 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
And bliss is such an experience that it makes you dumb.
You know it, you feel it, you are it. But you cannot say what it is.
It is indefinable verbally, but existentially it is transferable.
Yes, I can give it to you.
My hands are not empty, they are full of it.
But you have to be empty to receive it.
I remember the famous story about Nan In. One university professor of philosophy went to see Nan
In, a great Master. The professor was full of questions all the way from his university to the hill where
Nan In used to live in a temple. He was just brooding and brooding. There were so many questions,
what to ask? The professor had heard so much about Nan In, and one rarely meets such a man.
He went in.
The first thing Nan In said to him was, ”please come in, but leave the crowd outside.”
The professor looked all around; there was nobody. Crowd? – he was alone. Nan In said, ”Don’t
look here and there, look within: the crowd is there. It has been there all the way.”
The professor was almost shocked. But a professor, after all, is a professor. He said, ”You are right.
It is a crowd, but I am a professor; I deal with this crowd. This iS my profession, so excuse me, I
cannot leave the crowd outside. It is going to be with me, but it will sit here silently. Don’t take any
notice of it.
Nan In said, ”But you are tired and you are perspiring. Sit, cool down, and meanwhile I will prepare
a cup of tea for you.” Nan In prepared a cup of tea, brought it in, gave the empty cup and saucer to
the professor, and poured the tea from his kettle into the cup. The professor was watching: the cup
was getting fuller and fuller and fuller. It was absolutely full and Nan In was still pouring tea.
The tea started running out of the cup into the saucer. The professor tried hard to be patient because
he had said the crowd would sit silently, but the crowd was there and it was saying, ”This man is
just nuts! Is this the way?” And the Japanese are very particular about tea; it is part of their culture
and etiquette – this is never done. But Nan In went on pouring. When the saucer was also full and
the tea was just going to spill over the professor’s clothes, the professor said, ”Wait! What are you
doing? The cup is full. it cannot hold a single drop more.”
Nan In said, ”You have understood rightly. Can you give me a little space in you? Can you have just
a drop of me in you? You are overfull, just like this cup and saucer. But you are a sensible man; you
understand that by pouring more tea in, it will be simply spilled. But have you observed how much
tea is spilling from your skull? My whole hut is becoming wet. When you come here next time, bring
an empty cup; then I am willing to share whatsoever I have. But you are so full that it is useless: I
cannot get into you from anywhere. I am looking from all sides – you are overcrowded. There is no
space, not a single inch.”
From Personality to Individuality 464 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
This is what the art of being a disciple is:
Becoming an empty cup and allowing the Master, so that he can pour all that is within him.
The Master is not going to become poorer because he shared his bliss with you. It is a treasure that
goes on growing. But it is one of the most difficult things in the world to allow and welcome bliss
within you, because before that, you have to be ready. You have to clean yourself; and nothing less
than emptiness will be accepted as cleanliness.
In the West they say, ”Cleanliness is next to godliness.”
There is no God so there is no question about that.
But I say, ”Cleanliness is just next to emptiness.”
In fact, cleanliness is another name for inner emptiness.
Throw out all the rotten furniture and rags.
And what kind of things you have collected!
I used to live with a man... he was very rich, but very miserly also, so miserly. He was alone – no
children, no wife. He never married for the simple reason that it was too expensive. He said, ”I have
seen all my friends: once they got married they lost all that they had. A woman is too expensive, I
cannot afford one. And one thing follows another: a woman comes, then children come, and they
will destroy everything that I have been collecting.”
And he really was a collector. One day I was going for a morning walk and he said, ”Can I also come
with you?”
I said, ”You can come with me but what will you do? – because there is no earning in the morning
walk.” He always did only those things which were economically useful. I said, ”There is no economic
use of a morning walk. You will be wasting your time – do something else.”
He said, ”No. It’s just that you go every day and you look so happy, and when you come back you
look so happy. I thought perhaps there is something in it, so for just one day....”
I said, ”Okay, you can come. Perhaps you can find something.” And he found something. What did
he find? – the handle of a bicycle! Somebody had thrown it on the side of the road. He immediately
picked it up. I said, ”What are you doing?”
He said, ”You don’t know: I have two wheels which I collected this way. You will see with your
own eyes, one day, the whole bicycle.” And actually he managed it one day. It took years for him,
but one day he showed me; he said, ”Come on, I have to show you something.” Yes, there was a
bicycle – with no tires, no tube, just two wheels, crooked; no chain, no mudguards and no seat. The
handlebars were there, and he had found one carrier.
From Personality to Individuality 465 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
He said, ”Nothing much is missing, the cycle is almost complete. I just have to get a seat, tire and
tube, and a chain, and I will have a brand-new cycle.”
I said, ”This is better than brand-new, this is unique!”
In his house such things were all over the place. It was difficult to walk into his house without
stumbling into something unique, antique, which he had not purchased but simply collected. He had
at least ten houses, and he was collecting so much rent, but he was living the life of the poorest
man. He used to walk everywhere – he was waiting for the cycle to be ready.
I said, ”In this life, perhaps in the next life.... And I hope you manage to be born again in the
same house, because you are leaving so many things here. According to Hinduism, when you are
attached to so many things your soul is pulled back to the place you are attached to.”
He said, ”No, in this life. I am not a pessimist. You seem to be a pessimist – I am optimistic, hopeful.”
In 1969 I visited his house for the last time. He had added a few more things to the bicycle. I said,
”How much is missing?”
He said, ”Very little, just a tire and a tube; but it is very difficult to find a tire and tube.”
I said, ”You do one thing: at least purchase a tire and a tube. You have managed to find everything
else.”
He said, ”That is too expensive, particularly nowadays; prices have gone up so. I will find them; if I
could find the rest... I am an optimist.”
I said, ”Good, you be an optimist and collect them.”
He wouldn’t even allow me to throw out anything. I had to throw things out when he was not in
the house; otherwise he would immediately grab them and say, ”Don’t throw that – one never knows
what use it may have. Right now I am not clear what it will do, but it may fit somewhere in something.”
You can laugh about this man, you can feel sad for him, but this is the situation of every man as
far as the mind is concerned. What have you collected? It is all garbage, simply crap. And when I
say throw it, empty your mind, I am not telling you to throw your diamonds and your rubies and your
emeralds, no. You don’t have any of those precious stones. You have only rotten rubbish: words, all
borrowed, and not a single word representing your authentic experience about anything.
What do you know about love?
What do you know about beauty?
What do you know about goodness?
What do you know about grace, gratitude?
What do you know about yourself, who you are?
From Personality to Individuality 466 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
Nothing!
And you know everything about the whole world, the whole geography of the world, the whole
history of the world. All kinds of idiots in history – Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadirshah, Alexander
the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte, Ivan the Terrible – are all there.
My professor of history.... I was not a student of history. That was my practice in the university,
that I never attended my own subject, because that I knew far better than the people who were
teaching, and the library was available. So I used to attend other people’s classes. History was
not my subject. This professor was so much involved in history that you could ask him any absurd
question and there was immediately an answer.
You could ask, ”How old was Socrates when he got married?” Now is that a question that somebody
can answer immediately? But he was that type of man. You could ask such a question as, ”At what
place, by whom, on what date, was the first bullet shot? – and immediately, the answer! He was a
computer.
When I entered his class one day, he said, ”I have told you again and again that this is not your
subject, but you go on insisting on coming.”
I said, ”This is not your subject either.”
He said, ”What do you mean? I am head of the department of history, and this is not my subject?”
I said, ”No, this is not your subject. Answer a single question: Who are you? What does it matter
when Socrates got married? Monday, Sunday, Tuesday – any day will do. In seven days, some day
he must have got married. And what did he get out of that marriage? A woman called Xanthippe
who was just like her name – really difficult.” I don’t know how to pronounce it. It does not look Greek
– ”Xanthippe” – it looks like something from far away, some eastern Fiji island... Xanthippe? And
she tortured him his whole life.
I said, ”And you are worrying about when he got married. I am worried why he got married at all!
This is not my subject, this is not your subject either. My subject is your subject.”
He said, ”What is your subject?”
I said, ”My own subjectivity is my subject. History can be an object but it can never be a subject.
There is only one subject, your subjectivity. And unless you know it, all your knowing is bullshit.”
Don’t ask me, ”What is bliss?”
Ask me, ”How can I be a participant in it?”
Ask the right question.
I have given you the right answer. I don’t care whether your question is right or wrong – I always
give the right answer.
From Personality to Individuality 467 Osho
CHAPTER 26. ONLY ONE SIN – TO FORGET YOUR BEING. ONLY ONE VIRTUE – TO REMEMBER IT
You were asking about a definition. That is verbal.
Bliss is existential.
Bliss is a taste, a feel, and so overwhelming and so intense, that once you have got it you cannot
believe how you have been missing it all along: ”i cannot figure it out because it is simply there.
It was always there; how did I manage to miss it for so many lives?” Once you get it, that is the
problem that arises: how have you been missing it?
Bliss is just sitting at the very center of your being, ready to be remembered.
Bliss has not to be found, but only to be remembered.
This word ”remember” is quite significant. Remember simply means: make it a part of your being
again. Remember does not mean recall; no, it simply means making something a part of your
being again. It is there, it is just that you have completely forgotten it. Remember: where have you
forgotten it? – where have you put it?
So in the sense of remembering, the word is beautiful. In the sense of re-membering – making it
again an essential part of you – it is again significant.
In the same reference I would like you to understand the original word for sin. The root from where
it comes means forgetfulness. This is just strange: sin means forgetfulness.
Then the whole of religion has only one meaning:
Remembering.
There is only one sin – to forget your being.
And there is only one virtue – to remember it.
And the moment you know who you are, instantly, immediately, all the bliss of the whole existence is
yours. You are so full of bliss that you can bless everybody, the whole existence, without exhausting
it ever.
From Personality to Individuality 468 Osho
CHAPTER 27
Seek and ye shall miss; relax and ye shall find
25 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
IT SEEMS THAT YOU WERE GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE AMERICAN CONSTITUTION’S IDEA
OF THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS AS A BIRTHRIGHT, BUT YOU FORGOT ABOUT IT. PLEASE
CAN YOU TAKE IT UP AGAIN?
IT reminds me of a story. Three old men were sitting in a park. One was seventy-five, the second
was eighty, and the third was eighty-five. The first one said, ”It seems I am getting old, because now
to me the greatest pleasure is a good motion in the morning.” He said, ”I can say it is better than
sexual orgasm.”
The other two old fellows laughed. The oldest one said, ”Your idea of orgasm will shock and surprise
even people like Wilhelm Reich, Sigmund Freud and Havelock Ellis. My son, you are not getting old,
you are simply getting original.”
But the second man was silent and serious, think ing about something. He said, ”Perhaps he is
right. I also feel as if I’m getting older. For three nights continually I have not made love to my wife.”
The youngest of the three was really shocked. He said ”What! For three days you have not made
love to your wife?”
But the oldest still laughed loudly and he said, ”Don’t take him seriously – you don’t know what he
means by love. It is just like your orgasm. Before he goes to sleep he presses his wife’s hand; that
469
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
is his love-making. I have told him, ’Don’t make much ado about nothing; it is not love. Even if you
have not made it for three days there is no harm.’”
And he said, ”But you both talking about getting old makes me think that I am getting older; and
certainly I am eighty-five. This morning when I was just starting to make love to my wife, she said
’What! What are you going to do?’
”And I said, ’Is it something that has to be explained to you? I was just going to make love.’
”And my wife said, ’You have made that nasty thing twice in the night.’
”But I had completely forgotten! It seems I am getting older.”
Your question reminded me of that story, and the story reminds me about the poor rabbi in England.
I feel sorry for him but I also feel jealous: I would have loved to be in his place and expelled. That
expulsion from being a rabbi is such an excitement. But nobody can expel me – I don’t belong to
any establishment.
I don’t belong to my own religion, so nobody can expel me. That’s one joy I am going to miss.
But I should not forget the question. In fact it is not forgetfulness; I simply drift away. I am not getting
older, I will never get older. Yes, I will go on growing up, but growing up is not being old. To the very
last breath I will remain as fresh and young as I have always been. But drifting is a totally different
phenomenon.
With each statement I am standing at a crossroads.
I can move into any direction from that statement. don’t have any idea to which road I am going to
be attracted. I leave it completely to existence to take me wherever it wants. And again on each
step is a crossroad. The people who are orators and speakers have decided their route. They know
what they are going to talk about, where they are going to begin, at is going to be the middle, where
they are going to end, and what is their purpose.
In the first place I have no purpose.
I am not utilitarian.
I simply enjoy sharing myself and my experiences with you, without any purpose.
You will not find another man on the earth so busy without business as I am. There is no business,
but have been busy my whole life. I enjoy it; hence, I have no particular direction predetermined,
mentally decided.
So the question of forgetting does not arise at all. Yes, you are not aware of those crossroads that I
am continuously coming upon. If I have to choose, then you will not see that anything is missed, but
it will be something artificial.
I don’t decide.
From Personality to Individuality 470 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
I simply go on with the current, wherever it leads.
To move into the unknown is a tremendous joy.
Here I go again! – I have to come back to the question. Let us first finish it. Yes, I was going
to talk about his stupid idea in the American constitution that man as a birthright for the pursuit of
happiness. I call it stupid because nobody can be in pursuit of happiness. And if you are in pursuit
of happiness one thing is certain: you are not going to get it.
Happiness is always a by-product.
It is not the result of a direct pursuit.
It happens when you are not even thinking of it – what to say of pursuit? It happens suddenly, out of
nowhere. You were doing something totally different.
You may be chopping wood. Certainly it is not the pursuit of happiness – chopping wood – but in the
early morning sun, when it is still cool, the noise of your axe falling on the wood... pieces of wood
being thrown all around, making a noise and then leaving a silence behind.... You start perspiring,
and the cool breeze makes you feel even cooler than before. Suddenly there is happiness, a joy
uncontainable. But you were simply chopping wood; and chopping wood has not to be mentioned
as a birthright in the constitution, because then, how many things are you going to include?
I cannot forget one day.... There are a few things which make no logical sense and have no relevance
but somehow remain hanging in your memory. You cannot understand for what reason they are there
because millions of things have happened far more irnportant, far more significant, and they have
all disappeared. But a few insignificant things – you cannot find any reason why, but they have
remained; they have left a trace behind.
One such thing I remember. I was coming home from school – my school was almost one mile away
from home. Just half way there was a huge bo tree. I had passed that bo tree every day at least four
times: going to school, then in the middle of the day coming home for lunch, then going to school
again, then coming back home. So many thousands of times I had passed that tree, but that day
something happened.
It was a hot day, and as I came close to the tree, I was perspiring. I passed under the tree; and
it was so cool that without having any deliberate thought I stopped for a while, not knowing why. I
simply went close to the tree trunk, sat there and felt the tree trunk. I cannot explain what happened
but I felt so immensely happy, as if something was transpiring between me and the tree. Just the
coolness could not be the cause, because many times when I had been perspiring, I had passed
through the coolness of the tree. I had also stopped before, but never before had I gone and touched
the tree and sat there as if meeting an old friend.
That moment has remained shining like a star. So much has happened in my life, but I don’t see that
moment diminishing in any way: it is still there. Whenever I look back it is still there. Neither that day
was I clearly aware what had happened nor can I say today – but something had happened. And
from that day there was a certain relatedness with the tree which I had not felt before, even with any
From Personality to Individuality 471 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
human being. I became more intimate with that tree than with any body else in the whole world. It
became a routine thing to me: whenever I passed the tree, I would sit for a few seconds or a few
minutes and just feel the tree. I can still see – something went on growing between us.
The day I left school and moved to another city to join the university, I took leave of my father, of my
mother, of my uncles and my whole family. I was not the type who easily cries or weeps. Even when
I was punished badly, the blood might be oozing from my hands, but tears would not come to my
eyes.
My father used to say, ”Do you have tears in your eyes or not?”
I said, ”You can make my hands bleed but you cannot force me to cry and weep. And why should I?
– because whatsoever you are doing is absolutely right. I have done something, knowing well that
this is going to be the consequence. I never lie, so there is no way to escape from the punishment.
What is the point of tears?”
But when I went to the tree to say goodbye, I started crying. That is the only time that I remember in
my whole life; otherwise tears were absolutely unknown to me. In my childhood one of my sisters,
whom I had loved more than any other of my brothers and sisters, died. And in India you have
brothers and sisters by the dozen. I used to tease my father, ”How did you miss making the dozen
whole? – because you have only eleven children. You should be a little mathematical, just one child
more.”
And he said, ”You are my son but you even try to joke with me.”
I said, ”I am not joking; I am simply saying that it is so easy to tell somebody ”one dozen” – and
exactly that is what I have been doing. If anybody asks me how many children you have, I say, ”one
dozen.” It is simpler. You have made it unnecessarily complicated: eleven! Either you should have
stopped at ten – that seems to be complete – or twelve; that too is complete. But eleven? – what
kind of number is that?”
Out of these ten sisters and brothers, I loved most one of my sisters who died when I was very
young. I must have been five years old and she must have been three years old. But even then I
had not cried. I was surprised and shocked. Everybody was crying and they all thought that I was
in shock because I loved my sister the most. In my whole family everybody knew it, that I loved her
the most, and she loved me the most. They thought perhaps it was just because of the shock that
tears were not coming, but that was not the case.
When my maternal grandfather died I did not weep – and he had brought me up. He was almost
closer to me than my father because during the early seven years of my lifeand those are the very
vulnerable timeshe was close to me. He died in my lap. My grandmother was just losing all control
– weeping, uttering words and sentences unrelated to each other. They had lived their whole life
together, and they had only one child, my mother. Once she was married they had lived alone and
shared each other’s aloneness. My grandmother must have been feeling really lost: her whole world
was my grandfather. And to me he was not just a maternal grandfather.
It is very difficult for me to define what he was to me. He used to call me Rajah – Rajah means the
king – and for those seven years he managed to have me live like a king. On my birthday he used to
From Personality to Individuality 472 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
bring an elephant from a nearby town.... Elephants in India, in those days, were kept either by kings
– because it is very costly, the maintenance, the food and the service that the elephant requires –
or by saints.
Two types of people used to have them. The saints could have elephants because they had so
many followers. Just as the followers looked after the saint, they looked after the elephant. Nearby
there was a saint who had an elephant, so for my birthday my maternal grandfather used to bring
the elephant. He would put me on the elephant with two bags, one on either side, full of silver coins.
At that time the rupee was pure silver; notes had not arrived in India. Notes are not something new;
in China they have existed for three thousand years. China in many ways has been far ahead of
the rest of the world. Marco Polo, when he came back from China, brought printed notes, printed
currency. Still he was not believed. He was called to the pope and told, ”Don’t try to create fictions
and stupid stories. Who can believe that a piece of paper can be used as money?
The pope tossed a gold coin; it fell on the floor with a great sound, and he said, ”This is money.” He
burned the note saying, ”It is all your fiction.”
In my childhood, in India, notes had not appeared; pure silver was still used for the rupee. My
grandfather would fill two bags, big bags, hanging on either side, with silver coins, and I would go
around the village throwing the silver coins. That’s how he used to celebrate my birthday. Once I
started, he would come in his bullock cart behind me with more rupees, and he would go on telling
me, ”Don’t be miserly – I am keeping enough. You cannot throw more than I have. Go on throwing!”
Naturally, the whole village followed the elephant. It was not a big village either, not more than two
or three hundred people in the whole village, so I would go around the village, the only street in the
village. He managed in every possible way to give me the idea that I belonged to some royal family.
He loved me so much that it was impossible for me to fall sick. Now, you have no power over
sickness but you can manage not to say anything about it. He would get in such a panic: if I had just
a slight headache, he would get in such a panic that he would take his horse and ride to the closest
doctor and bring the doctor back. It was so much trouble, more than the headache was, so I would
simply remain silent, not saying anything about it. Even when he died in my lap there were no tears.
Even I suspected that perhaps I didn’t have tear glands.
But on that day, taking leave of the bo tree, I wept for the first and the last time. It remains a very
lighted spot. And when I was crying I had an absolute certainty that there were tears in the eyes
of the tree too, although I could not see the eyes, and I could not see the tears. But I could feel –
when I touched the tree I could feel the sadness, and I could feel a blessing, a goodbye. And it was
certainly my last meeting, because when I came back after one year, for some stupid reason the
tree had been cut down and removed.
The stupid reason was that they were making a small memorial pillar, and that was the most beautiful
spot in the middle of the city. It was for an idiot who was rich enough to win all the elections and
become the president of the municipal committee. He had been president for at least thirty-five
years – the longest time anybody had been president in the town. Everybody was happy with his
presidency because he was such an idiot; you could do anything and he was not going to create
any interference.
From Personality to Individuality 473 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
You could make your house just in the middle of the street; he would not bother, you just had
to vote for him. So the whole town was happy with him because everybody had such freedom.
The municipal committee, the members, the clerks and the head clerks – all were happy with him.
Everybody wanted him to remain eternally the president; but even idiots have to die, fortunately. But
his death was unfortunate because they looked for a place to make a memorial for him, and they
destroyed the bo tree. Now his marble stone stands there instead of a living bo tree.
I do not forget things, but there are so many things to be said; and language is one-dimensional. It
is linear – you can go only in one line – and experience is multidimensional, it moves in thousands
of lines. The problem with so-called orators is what to say. My problem is what not to say, because
there is so much waiting to be said, knocking from all sides and asking, ”Let me in.” So I drift away...
but don’t be shy in reminding me.
The pursuit of happiness is an impossible thing.
If you look at your own experience and find moments when you were happy – which are bound to
be very rare: perhaps in a life of seventy years you may have seven moments which you can claim
as moments of happiness. But if you had even a single moment of happiness, one thing is certain
without any exception – it had happened when you were not looking for it.
Try to look for happiness, and be certain you will miss it.
I disagree with Jesus Christ on many points, even on points which look very innocent, and it looks
as if I am very unkind. Jesus says: ”Seek, and ye shall find. Ask, and it shall be given to you. Knock,
and the doors shall be opened unto you.” I cannot agree.
The fools who wrote the American constitution were certainly influenced by Jesus Christof course,
they were all Christians. When they said ”the pursuit of happiness,” they must have consciously or
unconsciously had in mind the statement of Jesus: ”Seek and ye shall find.”
But I say to you:
Seek, and be certain you shall never find it.
Seek not, and it is there.
Just stop seeking, and you have found it – because seeking means an effort of the mind, and non-
seeking means a state of relaxation. And happiness is possible only when you are relaxed.
A seeker is not relaxed. How can he be relaxed? He cannot afford relaxation. You will be surprised
if you look around the world: you will find people in very poor countries more contented. Yes,
even in Ethiopia where they are dying of starvation, you will find people who are dying but there is
no suffering or anguish. The greatest number of unhappy people you will find in America. This is
strange. Here, the pursuit of happiness is your birthright. It is not mentioned in any other constitution
of the world....
Here I go again... because just now I remembered that the other day I was talking to you about my
professor of history. Ask any question and he would answer. But I started looking.... Certainly he
From Personality to Individuality 474 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
was a bookworm. I had known the word but I met the person for the first time. I told him, ”I was
wondering what kind of a person a bookworm is, but you solved my problem: you are a bookworm.
But I don’t like to be defeated in anything.”
He said, ”What do you mean?”
I said, ”I will find out from where you are gathering all this knowledge.”
He laughed because he thought it was impossible. But I started looking in their history department
library, at every book. I looked in the townhall library, which was a very old library and the biggest
in the whole state. Finally I found a small book, LITTLE-KNOWN FACTS ABOUT WELL-KNOWN
PEOPLE. That was the book that had all the information, such as ”What age was Socrates when he
got married?” It was a collection of little-known facts about well-known people. So I said ”Okay”.
I went next day to his class and I just gave him the book. He looked at me; he called me close to
him and he said, ”Meet me after the class, and keep this book in your bag. Don’t wave it about and
don’t let anybody see it. First meet me, then whatever you want to do, you do.”
After the class he said, ”You are a strange fellow!. This is the book on which I have been managing
my whole scholarship. Where did you get it? I stole it from the department of history so nobody
could find it, and it is no longer available in the market – it is an old book. Where did you find it?”
I said, ”That’s not the problem. I was going to find it even if it took my whole life. If you are a
bookworm, I am a bigger bookworm. Now, remember never to answer anything from this book;
otherwise I am going to open the secret to the whole university.”
He said, ”I will not do anything – just keep this secret to yourself. And whatever favor you want from
me I am willing to do. You are welcome to my class, I will never prevent you. Or if there is anything
else you want.... But just don’t bring this book with you.”
I said, ”I will not bring it; but this is a very poor kind of scholarship. You have been living on this small
book, this is your whole wisdom. And as you have stolen the book from your own department” –
which was not difficult, it was his own department and was his own library” – there was no problem
for you to take it away.
”But do you think there are not libraries in the world somewhere or other which have this book? –
because I could not believe that you had any way to &d all these meaningless details; there must
be some collection. I didn’t think that they had been collected from thousands of books, because
even in the biggest history books you cannot find at what age Socrates was married, because it is
not a historical thing; in no way does it have any historical importance. I saw that book because I
borrowed it from the townhall library.”
I told him, ”The townhall library continues to write me letters, saying, ’Please return the book.’ I go
on telling them whatever its price, I am ready to give it to them. They say, ’It is a rare book – there is
no question of price.’”
”But I told them, ’When something is lost, whether it is rare or not rare, what can you do? I will try
to find it. If I can find it somewhere I will give it to you. If I cannot, I am ready to give you the price
From Personality to Individuality 475 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
of the book and any fine for losing it. What else can I do?’” Finally I had to pay the price of the book
and the fine.
But because Rajneeshpuram is a unique city, an illegal city, a library cannot be made here. The per
mission... the city does not exist at all, so from whom to get the permission in a city which does not
exist?
There are one hundred and fifty thousand books lying in the warehouses here, rare books. But
strange are the ways of politicians. Just a few days ago I heard the federal government of America
wrote a letter saying that the city had been given federal funds, but now it has been informed by the
state of Oregon that the city does not exist, ”so you please return the federal funds.”
I enquired how much federal funds they had given Two hundred and fifty dollars! Great America!
If the city does not exist, who is going to return the funds? And to whom are you addressing the
letter? And in the first place who informed you that it is a city? The state must have informed you
that this city. is incorporated; that is why you started giving the funds. Now the same state informs
you that the city does not exist.
You ask for the money from the state, and great federal funds, two hundred and fifty dollars, have
disappeared!
And this is just the opinion of the attorney general of Oregon, that the city is illegal – just the opinion
of a single individual which is under consideration in the court. Until the court decides whether his
opinion is right or wrong, everything should remain as it was till the litigation is over. And it is not
going to be over.
My sannyasins will fight it till the very end of civilization. Only twenty years are left. It is not a problem
to fight a case for twenty years, it is so easy. And until it is decided and there is no further way to
appeal, it is a city. And no single individual has the right, just by his opinion, to make it illegal, or to
make it disappear.
But the attorney general is spreading his opinion that the city does not exist to other agencies,
federal and state. He was pressuring the police department, saying, ”Cut Rajneeshpuram’s police
from the state police. The city does not exist, so what is the need for a police force there?”
It is only his opinion. Unless the court decides that it is not constituted, not incorporated legally.... It
has been incorporated legally by the court; it has remained for two years a legal city. The government
has been giving it funds for two years, and the same attorney general was there for two years. It
took him two years to decide whether the city is legal or illegal? And he allowed his own government
to give funds; he allowed the federal government to give funds. He allowed the police force to make
the Rajneeshpuram police force part of it.
Now, just because he wants to become the next governor, he wants all the Oregonian voters in
his favor – my sannyasins are doing a great deal of good to many people.... Now this is the only
fact about Oregon which is decisive: if anybody is in favor of us, he is going to lose the election.
Anybody who is against this commune and doing anything legal, illegal, moral, immoral, to harm us
– the whole of Oregon is for him.
From Personality to Individuality 476 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Now this man has nothing against sannyasins. He has not even the guts to come here and see
whether the city exists or not. He should come and see with his own eyes. He has not the guts. He
has not even the guts to appear on the same television program with Sheela. Such cowards!
But that’s how the political mind works. The attorney general is making arrangements for the election
for governor that is coming in one and a half years. At least for one and a half years he is going to
be continuously harassing the city, saying that ”You are not legal” – although it does not make any
difference. Who wants to be legal? Only illegal people want to be legal, constitutional. When you
are not a criminal you don’t think of the law at all; only criminals think of law.
I have never thought in my whole life what it is to be legal because I was never doing any illegal
thing.
The attorney general knows perfectly well that he will be defeated, but all he wants is the case to be
postponed, prolonged till the governorship happens; then he knows he will withdraw the case. He
should not be allowed to withdraw so easily. But that’s the politician’s mind: just to go on prolonging,
postponing; and that’s what he is doing. The date goes on being postponed; he has to go on
postponing it.
It makes no difference; in fact it is perfectly good if it is postponed for twenty years. When everything
is finished, we will be the only people left around. Then we can make for the first time a sane
constitution.
This American constitution is absolutely insane: ”pursuit of happiness”? – nobody has ever
succeeded in it, and those who have tried have become very unhappy and miserable in their life.
When I was a student at my university, I used to go on a particular street which was very silent, with
no traffic, because it was used as a dead end after just one and a half miles. There were several
beautiful bungalows for professors but they were few and far between. It was a silent place with
huge trees on both sides.
I used to go down that street only when it was raining because even when the rain stopped, on both
sides it continued to rain because of those huge trees: water went on dripping from their leaves.
So one could be certain that if it were raining it was not going to stop just because it stopped in the
middle; you could always depend on the trees. I loved very much to go there while it was raining.
The last bungalow was the bungalow of the professor of physics. His wife, his daughter, and his son
had
dals, so that we can hear from half a mirains this strange fellow comes without an umbrella – and
for no reason, because there was a dead end, and from there I had to go back. So whenever it was
raining they were all waiting on their verandah thinking that I was bound to appear; and infallibly I
used to appear.
They were saying to the professor of physics, ”A strange student with long hair, a beard and wooden
sandals, so that we can hear from half a mile away that he is coming – he comes for no reason at
all, and only when it rains; otherwise he never comes down this road. He comes to the very end and
stands there – we don’t know what he does there – and then he goes back.”
From Personality to Individuality 477 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
The professor said, ”Are you certain he uses wooden sandals?”
They said yes.
Then he said, ”I know him, because there is only one student who uses wooden sandals, so I will
find him.”
He enquired of my professor, the head of my department, ”What type of person is this young man?”
My professor said, ”Certainly he is a type, a strange type. We have not been able yet to categorize
him – but he is not normal.”
The professor of physics, Professor Shrivastava, was a professor here, in America. When I was in
Poona somebody coming from America had brought the news that he met Professor Shrivastava in
Hanard where he was teaching. He said he sent his regards to me and that he remembered me,
and remembered me coming to his house when it was raining. The whole story he told to the person
who became a sannyasin – an American.
Hearing that I am abnormal, Professor Shrivastava said, ”Abnormal?”
My professor said, ”Not below normal, above normal. That is his definition: he counts all these
people as abnormal – Buddha, Jesus, Lao Tzu, Confucius, all are abnormal – and we cannot argue
with him. But he belongs to the same type of people.”
Professor Shrivastava became even more interested. He wanted me to be introduced to him. My
professor, Professor Saxena, said, ”Why are you getting into unnecessary trouble? Everybody here
is trying somehow to have him pass the university courses so that he goes somewhere else.”
But Shrivastava said, ”I am interested, my wife is interested, my children are interested. They all
want to see him and meet him.”
So I was introduced to him and we became very friendly. He was an old man, but he loved the idea
when I explained to him: ”It is such a joy to be just under the sky when the whole sky becomes a
shower on you. I feel so happy that it is indescribable.”
He became so influenced that he said, ”Then one day I am also going to come with you. Are you
really sure that you feel happiness?”
I said, ”I am absolutely sure, there is no question about it; otherwise, why should I bother, every time
it rains, to come down your street?”
He said very confidentially, leaning close to my ear, ”In happiness I am also interested.”
I said, ”Then it is a little difficult. You can come with me but I cannot assure you or guarantee you
anything. Happiness happens to me but I am not in search of it: that is such a great difference. You
will be continually looking around thinking, ’It has not come yet. Where is it? When is it going to
come?’ You have to forget the whole idea of happiness,” I told him.
From Personality to Individuality 478 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Professor Shrivastava said, ”This is a strange condition. I am coming only to have some experience
of happiness, and you make a strange condition from the very beginning. This is tricky – that I have
to forget the whole idea of happiness.”
”But,” I said, ”that’s how it works.”
He said, ”Okay, I will try.
I said, ”No, trying is not the thing; you have simply to forget about it.”
He said, ”Okay, I will forget about it.”
He came with me. I looked again and again at his face. He was feeling really miserable; and more
miserable than ever, because all the professors, their wives, and their children, were looking from
the windows: ”This young man has got hold of that old fool also. Why is he walking in the rain? He
may get sick – pneumonia, double pneumonia, or something. That young man is healthy enough,
he can manage, but why this old fool?”
When we reached the end, hearing my sandals, his family came running out to see. And when they
saw, when his wife saw that her husband was also standing with me at the end of the road, which
faces a very deep abyss, they could not believe their eyes. What had happened? Had I convinced
him to look for something there in the valley, or what? They all came out. Of course they had their
umbrellas and raincoats; they all came over, and they said, ”Daddy, what are you looking for?”
Professor Shrivastava said, ”Don’t say anything. It has not happened up to now, and if you mention
it, he will say, ’The condition is broken.’”
I said, ”It is already broken. I have been watching you all the way: you were miserable, more than
you have ever been, and you are a miserable person – I have seen you.”
Professors are miserable types. That suits their profession. It makes them look serious, sober, very
deep in their thinking. Professionally, it is helpful
I said, ”I watched the whole way: you were so miserable.”
He said, ”I was trying hard not to remember happiness, but what to do? – the idea went on coming.
That made me more miserable, the thought that I was going to lose it because the condition was not
fulfilled.”
I said, ”Not only have you lost it, you disturbed my happiness, because even to keep company with
the wrong person is not good. The proverb is right: You are known by your company. For the first
time happiness has not descended on me – because of you.
He said to his wife, ”Listen! Instead of me complaining to him, he is complaining to me that his
happiness has been missed.” His wife said, ”Whatsoever it is, you both come inside and have a cup
of tea. He has come for the first time and we always wanted to invite him, but we thought we didn’t
know who he was, what type of man – mad or sane. But he is not mad, that is certain.”
From Personality to Individuality 479 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Professor Shrivastava said, ”He is mad, and he made a fool of me because tomorrow the whole
university will be asking,’What were you doing walking in the rain? – you had your car.’”
I had told him, ”Leave your car at the department so when we come back we can take your car
home. By sitting inside the car, happiness is not going to happen – it only comes with the rain.”
The next day the whole university was talking about Professor Shrivastava I told him, ”The best thing
is to say that it worked, you became happy; other wise they will think you are a fool.”
He said, ”That’s a good idea – and he spread the idea, ”What he says is absolutely right – it works.”
He told me, ”A few other professors are getting ready, so what to do now? You are creating trouble
for me. Your professor was right, that it would have been better not to be introduced to you. First you
made a fool of me, then you told me to say that it happened. And I saw the logic of it, that if I say it
didn’t happen others would say,’You are a fool. Happiness happens with the rainanybody can get it.’
So I thought it is better to say,’Yes, it happened, and if you want to check, you can come.’ Many are
ready.”
I said, ”Let them be ready. It is going to work in the same way. Let all of them come!”
He said, ”They will kill me.”
I said, ”Don’t be worried: the whole responsibility is on me. I will convince them also that it happens.”
And that’s what happened. Six professors stood before the abyss, and they told Professor
Shrivastava, ”To us it has not happened.”
And Professor Shrivastava said, ”To me also it has not happened. It happens only to him, because
the first condition is unfulfillable: don’t ask for it, don’t seek it. But you don’t ask, if you don’t seek,
why in the first place should you bother to walk in the mud and the rain and get sick? For what? But
just as I told you that it happened, you also have to say it happened; otherwise, you will be thought
a fool.”
Those six looked at each other and they said, ”We; are caught in this mess. This is going to be
trouble some because if we say that it happened then other people.... Your master teaching you the
art of happiness is going to turn the whole university to walking in the rain!”
This is the trouble. Happiness happens. Perhaps that’s why you call it happiness because it
happens. You cannot manage it, you cannot manufacture it, you cannot arrange it.
Happiness is something which is beyond your effort, beyond you.
But in just digging a hole in your garden, if you are totally absorbed in it – if the whole world is
forgotten, including you – it is there.
Happiness is always with you.
It has nothing to do with rain, it has nothing to do with chopping wood, it has nothing to do with
digging a hole in the garden:
From Personality to Individuality 480 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Happiness has nothing to do with anything.
It is just the unexpectant, relaxed, at ease state of your being with existence. And it is there; it does
not come and go. It is always there, just like your breathing, your heartbeat, the blood circulating in
your body.
Happiness is always there, but if you seek it you will find unhappiness, because by seeking you will
miss happiness. That’s what unhappiness is: missing happiness. So with pursuit, unhappiness has
a certain relationship, a partnership. If you pursue you will find unhappiness. And the American
constitution has given the idea to the whole American people: Pursue.
And they are pursuing desperately – in money, in power, in religion – and they are running all over
the world looking for somebody to teach them how to find happiness. And the real thing is to just
come back home; forget all about it. Do something else which has nothing to do with happiness.
Paint. You need not learn painting. Can’t you throw color on a canvas? Any child can do it. Just
throw colors on a canvas and you may be surprised: you are not a painter, but something beautiful....
Just the colors themselves have become mixed in a certain way and have created something. You
cannot name it.
Modern paintings are without titles, and the ultra modern paintings are without frames because
existence has no frame. You look from your window, you see the sky, framed, but the frame is in
your window, not in the sky; the sky has no frame. So there are ultra modern painters who don’t
paint on a canvas; they paint on the walls of the houses, on the floors, on the ceiling. Strange places
– people have never done that before, but I can see their insight.
They are not interested in making a painting; they are more interested in getting involved in the very
act of painting. It is not for sale. How can you sell your ceiling? And who is going to buy it? But
while they are so absorbed, from some unknown corner something starts slipping into their being.
They start feeling joyous for no reason at all.
That’s why I condemn the word pursuit. About anybody – and these people who made the American
constitution are big shots; perhaps it was Jefferson – but about anybody who wrote this word pursuit,
I can say without knowing his name, without knowing anything about him, that he must have been
an utterly miserable man. He had not known happiness ever. He had been pursuing it; hence, he
tried to give to every American the same birthright that he has claimed. And nobody has criticized it
in three hundred years; nobody criticized a simple thing.
A poet, a painter, a singer, a dancer, yes, once in a while attain to happiness. But one thing is always
there: whenever happiness comes they are not there. The pursuer is not there, the pursuit is not
there.
Nijinsky, one of the most significant dancers of our world, of the whole of history.... As far as I am
concerned, I consider him the best dancer that humanity has produced. He was a miracle when
he used to dance. Once in a while he would take such a big leap that it was against gravitation; it
was not possible, scientifically it was impossible. That huge, high leap was absolutely impossible:
gravitation wouldn’t allow it. Even the people who compete in Olympic long jumps are nothing
compared to Nijinsky when he used to jump.
From Personality to Individuality 481 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Even more miraculous was his coming back: he came back like a feather – slowly. That was even
more against gravitation, because gravitation would pull the weight of a human body suddenly,
quickly. You would fall with a thump, you might get a few fractures.
But he used to come down just the way a dead leaf falls from the tree: coming slowly, lazily, in no
hurry, because there is nowhere to reach. Or even better, featherlike, because a leaf comes a little
faster The feather of a bird is light-weight, very light-weight, it comes dancing. In the same way
Nijinsky used to come back down. And there was not even a sound when he would come back to
the platform on which he was dancing.
He was asked again and again, ”How do you do it?”
He said, ”I don’t do it. I have tried to do it, but whenever I have tried, it has not happened. The more
I have tried, the more it was clear to me that it is not something which I can manage. Slowly, slowly
I became aware that it happens when I don’t try, when I am not even thinking of it. When I am not
even there, suddenly I find it is there, it is happening. And by the time I am back to figure out how it
happened, it is no more there, already gone, and I am back on the floor.”
Now, this man knows happiness cannot be pursued. If Nijinsky was also on the board making the
constitution of America, he would have objected and said that pursuit is absolutely the wrong word.
Simply happiness is everybody’s birthright, not its pursuit. It is not like a hunter pursuing game: then
you would run for your whole life, chasing shadows, never arriving anywhere. Your whole life would
go in sheer wastage.
But the American mind has got the idea, so in every sphere – politics, business, religion – they are
pursuing. The Americans are always on the go, and going fast, because when you are going then
why not go fast? And don’t ask where you are going – because nobody knows. One thing is certain,
they are going with full speed, with all the speed that they can maintain, all that they can manage.
What more is needed? You are going, you are going with full speed: you are fulfilling your birthright.
So Americans are passing from one woman to another woman, to another woman, to another
woman; from one man, to another man, to another man; from one business to another business,
from one job to another job – in the pursuit of happiness. And strangely, it always looks as if it is
there and somebody else is enjoying it, so you start pursuing it. When you reach there it is not there.
The grass beyond your fence is always greener, but don’t jump the fence to see actually whether it
is so. Enjoy it! If it is greener on the other side of the fence, enjoy it. Why destroy things by jumping
the fence and finding out that it is worse than your own grass?
It happened that a man was trying to sell his house for many years. He had made it really beautiful.
He had put a lot of money into it, had hired the best architects; everything was the best that he could
find. He was in pursuit of happiness. The house was built, a beautiful mansion, all marble. For a few
days he looked in the house for happiness to come, but the marble was cold; the house was dead.
It was a beautiful house but dead, with no warmth.
Then he started thinking of selling it: it had been an absolute loss. He contacted an agent, a real
estate agent. The agent said, ”We will sell it, but first we have to place a good advertisement in the
topmost newspapers and magazines, with a picture, because it is such a beautiful house.”
From Personality to Individuality 482 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
The man said, ”That’s good, do it, but I want to get rid of it. The next day he read in the newspaper
that there was a very beautiful house for sale. It looked just as if poetry had been written in marble or
a song had become frozen in marble, with big lawns and beautiful trees – old, ancient trees, which
you cannot grow in a day. The description was so beautiful!
Of course only the phone number of the agent was given, so the man immediately phoned him:
”Whatsoever the price, settle it for me. I have been in search of such a house my whole life.”
The agent said, ”I will settle it; there is no problem. I am coming right now to you. Negotiations can
easily be done.”
And when the agent came the man could not believe it, because he was the same agent. The man
said, ”Where is this house?”
And the agent said, ”You phoned me?”
The man said, ”It was your phone number?”
The agent said, ”Of course! I described your house. So many phone calls were coming but you
disturbed them. Couldn’t you figure out that it was your house?.”
He said, ”My God! This house?”
You can fall in love with your own wife if somebody else describes her. It depends on the description.
But people are running after everything: perhaps this will give them what they have been missing.
Nothing can help. You can live in a palace but you will be as miserable, perhaps more than you were
in an old hut. In the old hut at least there was a consolation that you were miserable because you
were in an old, rotten hut. There was an excuse; you could have explained away your miserliness,
your misery, your suffering. And there was also a hope that someday you would be able to manage
a better house – if not a palace, then at least a good, beautiful, small house of your own.
It is hope that is keeping people alive, and it is their excuses and explanations which keep them
trying again and again. It has become the philosophy of America to try again and again and again.
But there are a few things which are not within the area of trying, which happen only when you are
completely finished with trying. You simply sit down and you say, ”Enough is enough – I am not
going to try.” That’s how enlightenment happened to Gautam Buddha.
He must have been the first American, because he was in pursuit of happiness. Because of the
pursuit, he dropped his kingdom. He is a pioneer in many things; he is the first dropout. Your hippies
have not dropped much. To drop something, first you have to have it. He had it, and he had it more
than any man ever had it. When he was born the astrologers said, ”He should be kept absolutely
unaware of misery, pain, old age, sickness, death and sannyasins.”
He was the child of an old, aged kingan only child, born when his father was very old. The king
asked, ”Why does he have to be kept unaware of all these things?”
From Personality to Individuality 483 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
The astrologers said, ”This man is going to either be a Buddha, an awakened one, an enlightened
one.... But for his enlightenment he will renounce the kingdom, the palace, the familyeverything.
He will go in pursuit of truth, of bliss. Or he can become a chakavartin, a world emperor.” That is a
special category that only exists in India: chakravartin. Chakravartin means one who rules over the
whole world without any competitor. Alexander the Great was trying to become a chakravartin but
could not.
Up to now only mythologically in ancient Indian literature are there chakravartins; they are not
historical figures. Many have tried to become chakravartins – one wonders for what. Even if you
have the whole world you will be the same – perhaps in a worse condition because you will be
worried about all the problems of the world, and you will be responsible for all the problems of the
world. At least right now you are only responsible for your own misery; it is a very tiny thing. Just
multiply it by billions! What are you going to gain?
But the astrologers said, ”Either he is going to become a chakravartin, a world emperor – he will rule
over the world.... But it all depends on you. If you can protect him from knowing that life consists of
misery, suffering, pain, sickness, old age, death; and also from knowing that there are people who
are searching for something higher than life – the sannyasins... you have to protect him.”
The king said, ”It will not be difficult” – and he arranged it. He made three palaces for three different
seasons. In India, seasons used to be very clear-cut. Every year, on the same day, at the same
time, summer would begin; on the same day, at the same time, the summer would end. The rainy
season, the winter – everything was clear-cut. Even in my childhood it was clear-cut. It was only
after the atomic explosions around the world that the Indian climate became uncertain. The whole
atmosphere is shaken.
So the king made three beautiful palaces in three different places: for summer, a place on a high
hill, on a beautiful lake; in the rains, in a place where it did not rain too much, just enough to enjoy
– not to create a Big Muddy Ranch, just showers; and one for winter, a place where it was always
warm and cozy. And Buddha was surrounded by all the beautiful women from the kingdom. So no
desire remained unfulfilled: he had the best of food, hundreds of servants, huge gardens.
The king was so particular that his son should not even see any dry leaf, any pale leaf, any flower
which was withering away, that he had them removed in the night. The gardeners worked the whole
night to make the garden absolutely young and fresh. Otherwise the idea that things get old, that
flowers die, might provoke, might trigger some anxiety in Buddha: then what about man?
Nobody who was sick was allowed to be seen by him. He had not seen anybody dead or sick or old,
up to the age of twenty-nine. He was kept in such seclusion and in such luxury – music, women,
wine – he was drowned in them. And the king was satisfied that now Buddha was married – he had
found one of the most beautiful women, he had fallen in love – now there was no fear.
They used to have a youth festival every year, and it was the custom that the prince who was going
to succeed the king should inaugurate the youth festival. The roads were cleared; old and sick
people were removed from where Buddha’s chariot was going to pass.
The story is beautiful. From here it becomes mythological, but still it is significant.
From Personality to Individuality 484 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
The story is that Indira, who was the chief of all the gods, became worried that a man who was
capable of becoming an enlightened one was being distracted completely. Something had to be
done; existence should not be allowed to miss an enlightened being. So it is said that Indira took
a few gods with him to earth. The street was cleared, it was impossible for any man to enter there;
only gods could enter. That’s why they had to create the mythology – because gods are invisible
and they can become visible any moment.
First, a god, sick and feverish, passed by the chariot. If the street had been full of traffic perhaps
Buddha would have missed seeing him. But the street was empty, the houses were empty; there
were no other vehicles, only his golden chariot.
Buddha saw this man trembling, and he asked his charioteer, ”What has happened to this man?”
Now, the man who was driving the chariot was in a dilemma because the orders of the king were
that Buddha should not know that anybody is sick. This man was so sick that it seemed as if he was
going to fall down there and die. But Indira was helpful. He forced the charioteer to tell the truth
– ”because ultimately your commitment is not towards that old idiot, your commitment is towards
truth. Don’t miss this point, because this man is going to become an enlightened one, and you will
be immensely blessed because you are becoming the cause of triggering the process. Don’t miss it
– you may not find it again in millions of lives.”
Of course it was clear. The charioteer said to Buddha, ”I am not supposed to say this, but how can I
lie to you? The truth is that all sick people have been removed. I wonder from where this sick man
has entered, because everywhere there are guards and the army. Nobody is allowed to enter the
path where the chariot is moving. This man is sick.”
Bud&a said, ”What is sickness?”
The charioteer explained that sickness is something we are born with, that we are carrying all kinds
of sickness in the body. If sometimes, in a certain situation, a weakness, a sickness, which you are
carrying within you gets support from outside, you get an infection: you are sick.
Then an old man appeared, another god, almost a hunchback, so old that Buddha could not believe
his eyes: ”What has happened to this man?”
The charioteer said, ”This is what happens after many sicknesses: this man has become old.”
And then, a dead body – another god posing as a dead body – came by with four gods carrying him.
Buddha asked, ”What is happening?”
The charioteer said, ”This man is at the last stage. After that old man, this is what happens.”
Buddha said, ”Stop the chariot here and answer me truthfully. Is all this going to happen to me too?”
And at that moment he saw a sannyasin, another god, just pretending, like you – wearing orange
robes and everything – a neo-sannyasin. Buddha said, ”And what kind of a stage is this? – a shaven
head, a staff in his hand, a begging bowl.”
From Personality to Individuality 485 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
The charioteer said, ”This is not a stage after the other; this is a type of man who has become
aware of life’s misery, suffering, anguish, sickness, old age, death. He has dropped out of life and is
in search of truth, in search of finding something which is immortal: the deathless, the truth.”
Buddha said, ”Return to the house. I have become sick, sick unto death. I have become old, old
even though to all appearances I am young. But what does it matter if old age is only a few years
ahead of me? – soon it is going to be walking by my side. And I don’t want to be like that dead man.
Although I am alive for all ordinary purposes, I died with that dead man. Death is going to come; it
is only a question of time, of sooner or later. It can come tomorrow; anyway, someday it is going to
happen.
”Tonight keep the chariot ready. I am going to be the last type of man: I am renouncing. I have
not found happiness here. I will seek it, I will pursue it I will do everything that is needed to find
happiness.”
And for six years Buddha did everything that anybody can do. He went to all kinds of teachers,
masters, scholars, wise men, sages, saints. And India is so full of these people that you need not
seek and search; you simply move anywhere and you meet them. They are all over the place. If you
don’t seek them, they will seek you. And particularly in Buddha’s time it was really at a peak. The
whole country was agog with only one thing: how to find something which transcends death.
But after six years’ tremendous effort – austerities, fasting and yoga postures – nothing happened.
And one day.... I have been to that place and to that river; Niranjana is the name of the river, a small
river near Bodh Gaya, where Buddha became enlightened. That’s why the name of the city has
become Bodh Gaya: the place where awakening happened.
Niranjana is a small river, not very deep. Buddha was fasting and doing austerities and torturing
himself in every way, and he had become so weak that when he went for a bath in the Niranjana
he could not cross the river. The river was small, but he was so weak that only somehow could he
manage, by holding a root of a tree which was hanging by the side of the bank, to keep himself there;
otherwise the river would take him away. While he was hanging onto the root, the idea happened
to him that these sages say, Existence is like an ocean. That’s what in India is called bhavasagar –
ocean of existence.
Buddha thought, ”If existence is an ocean, then whatever I am doing is not right, because if I can’t
cross this poor river, Niranjana, how am I going tc cross the ocean of existence? Whatever I have
been doing I have simply wasted my time, my life, my energy, my body....” Somehow he managed to
come out of the river, sat under the tree and dropped all effort.
That evening – it was a full moon night – for the first time in six years he slept well, because there
was nothing to do the next day, nowhere to go: no practice no exercise. The next day there was no
need even to get up in brahmamuhurt, in the early morning before sunrise. The next day he could
have as much sleep as he wanted. For the first time he felt a total freedom from all effort, seeking,
search, pursuit.
Of course he slept in a tremendously relaxed way, and in the morning, as he opened his eyes, the
last star was disappearing. It is said, with the last star disappearing, Buddha disappeared too. The
From Personality to Individuality 486 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
whole night’s rest, peace, no future, no goal, nothing to be done.... For the first time he was not an
American. Lying down, in no hurry even to get up, he simply saw that all those six years looked like
a nightmare. But it was past. The star disappeared, and here Buddha disappeared.
This was the experience of bliss, or truth; of transcendence, of all that you have been seeking but
you have been missing because you have been seeking. Even Buddhists have not been able to
understand the significance of this story. This is the most important story in Gautam Buddha’s life.
Nothing else is comparable to it.
But you will be surprised.... I am not a Buddhist – I don’t agree with Buddha on a thousand and one
thingsbut I am the first man in twenty-five centuries who has put emphasis on this story and made
it the central focus, because this is where Buddha’s awakening happened. But Buddhist priests and
monks cannot even relate this story, because if they relate this story, what is their purpose? What
are they doing? What are they teaching? – what exercises? what prayers?
Naturally, if you tell this story, that it happened when Buddha stopped doing all kinds of religious
nonsense, then people will say, ”Then why are you teaching us to do religious nonsense – just to
drop it someday? So if we have to drop it finally, why begin in the first place?”
It will be difficult to convince the priests; their whole business and their whole profession will be
destroyed.
One Buddhist monk, the most famous in India, Bhadant Anand Koshalayan, lives in Nagpur. I was
in Nagpur and he came to see me. He said, ”I have come to see you only to say one thing: I have
been reading your books, and you are not a Buddhist, but you bring out things from Buddha’s life
which for twenty-five centuries no Buddhist scholar, no Buddhist priest, no Buddhist commentator,
has ever bothered about. How do you manage it?” He repeated a story which he had read in one of
my books. He said, ”In my whole life I have never heard this story; nobody tells it. And I myself have
been an ordained monk for almost thirty years. I read it for the first time – in your book.”
I said, ”Don’t be worried. Does it appeal to you?”
He said, ”But the thing is whether it is historical or not.”
I said, ”Even if it is not historical, does it appeal to you?”
He said, ”You are changing the subject.”
I said, ”I am not changing the subject. If you start on about history then you will be in great trouble:
you will have to prove everything historically, and in Buddha’s life there are thousands of things which
you cannot prove historically. Can you prove historically that Indira came down and arranged the
whole thing, the whole scene, and befooled Buddha? Is that historical?”
He said, ”No, that is difficult to prove.”
I said, ”Then don’t bother about history – take it on my authority. If you meet Buddha you can ask
him; only he can say because it is not reported. The reporters were priests, and this story they have
not reported at all.”
From Personality to Individuality 487 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
I told him, ”Just forget whether it is historical, reported or not reported; just look at the fact and
whether it makes any sense to you.”
He said, ”It makes great sense, but do you mean to say I have to drop all my practices?”
I said, ”Of course, if you have found truth by your practices, continue. If you have not found it, then
try what I am saying.”
He was at least a man sincere and honest. He said, ”I have not found anything by my practice – in
fact, that’s why I came to ask you.”
I said, ”When I say that this is what happened, write it down in any book, and read it; then it is
written. If you believe in the written word it is written in my book. But that is not the problem. The
problem is: are you courageous enough to drop that which has not given you anything? And thirty
years are enough. Buddha dropped everything after six years; you have gone five times longer. Do
you think you are being more intelligent than Buddha?”
He said, ”I was told by my friends that it would be better not to meet you, and perhaps they were
right, because now I will live in a dilemma: to drop it or not to drop it? Because after thirty years’
practice, it becomes so close; you become addicted to it.
I said, ”Think it over. Be in a dilemma. Perhaps some day the understanding will dawn on you.”
But I could see that although he was a sincere man, honest, he was not courageous. Whenever I
went to Nagpur I enquired, ”What is Bhadant Anand Koshalayan doing?” I had told my host to keep
an eye on the Buddhist monk, so he would say, ”He is doing the same, continuing the same.”
The last time I saw Bhadant Anand Koshalayan was in’65. Just by chance we met on the plane
going from Bombay to Delhi. He was trying to avoid me trying to look as if he had not seen me. But
I wen up and just sat by his side. It was not my seat, it was somebody else’s seat. When they came
up I said ”Forgive me – just take my seat. I need only five o seven minutes, then I will go.” I went
on nudging Bhadant Anand Koshalayan with my elbow, and he went on moving away. But I went on
again and again
Finally he said, ”What are you doing?”
I said, ”What are you doing? Do you think you can escape in this way? And from whom are you
escaping? From me or from yourself? You have see the truth of what I have said in the storynow
accept that you are not courageous enough to follow it.
He said, ”Yes, I am not courageous enough. Bu the story is right, whether it is written in any scripture
or not.”
Buddhists have dropped it; they have not co]lected it for the simple reason that the priesthood need
some form of livelihood. They are parasites, and the can live only as parasites if they can show you
how to do it – how to pursue, how to find, how to seek the ”how” is important. But I am telling you it
is not at all important; it is the only hindrance.
From Personality to Individuality 488 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Drop the ”how” and just be.
Just be, for no reason.
And happiness starts showering on you like flower showering.
Here there are not such trees, but in India there are trees called madhukamini. If you sit under the
tree flowers shower like rain. In the morning you find under the tree a whole carpet, a complete
carpet of the flowers. The whole night the madhukamir showers: it blossoms in the night, showers
in the night and by the morning all the flowers are on the ground. And it is so fragrant that from half
a mile you can become aware that somewhere the madhukamini is flowering.
In my house, when I was in school.... Of course I had made my house a jungle. That’s what I
have been doing all my life. I had planted a madhukamini just in the middle compound, in the inner
courtyard of the house. When I went to the university, I knew it.... My father was just like Mukta.
And it is strange, they were friends too. He could not understand Mukta’s language, Mukta could not
understand his language, but they were great friends. Even going to school I had to ten my mother,
my aunts and everybody, ”Watch my father and see that he does not start pruning my tree.”
Sometimes I had to take his scissors with me to school. My master said, ”What? Now you are
bringing such instruments... are you going to kill somebody? – because with garden scissors you
could cut somebody’s neck. For what have you brought this? What is the purpose? Just keep it
outside, and you remain outside.”
I said, ”I have not brought it for any purpose; it is just to protect my poor tree, because when I am in
school my father goes on pruning. He seems to be a born Englishman.”
When I went to the university they removed all the trees, but even my father did not dare to touch
the madhukamini, because when I left, I told all of them, ”You can cut the whole garden if you want,
and I know you will, because every day you are harassing me:’Here we need one bathroom more
– remove your trees. Here we need to extend the kitchen: there are more children in the house,
people are getting married, their wives are coming, and more rooms are needed. You have made it
a jungle.’”
But I was adamant and said, ”No. Once I am gone, it is okay: you can do whatsoever you want.”
The day I left I told them, ”Remember, everybody, that whatsoever you want to do, do with all the
trees, but my madhukamini – nobody touches it. If I come back and find that my madhukamini is
missing I will not enter the house again for the rest of my life.” Only with this threat could I save my
madhukamini.
But in 1970, when I said, ”I will not be coming again,” they cut it down because now there was no
point in keeping it; the threat was no longer relevant.
The madhukamini is such a beautiful tree. To sit underneath it and just to feel its flowers falling all
over you... and they continue the whole night. When it flowers, it flowers in thousands of flowers.
Bliss also showers exactly like that.
From Personality to Individuality 489 Osho
CHAPTER 27. SEEK AND YE SHALL MISS; RELAX AND YE SHALL FIND
Truth also showers exactly like that.
You just have to be sitting, doing nothing, waiting – not waiting for Godot, just waiting; not for anything
in particular but simply waiting, in a state of awaiting, and it happens.
And because it happens, it is perfectly right to call it happiness.
From Personality to Individuality 490 Osho
CHAPTER 28
Knowledge is information; knowing is transformation
26 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
YOU SAID THAT YOU DON’T KNOW WHO YOU ARE. DON’T YOU REALLY? DO WE NEVER
KNOW WHO WE ARE?
I know that I do not know who I am.
My knowing is not knowledge and my knowing is not ignorance. It is a little bit complex, but not
difficult to understand.
Knowledge is always borrowed.
It is not your own; you are simply repeating like a parrot. You don’t know what it means, you don’t
know all its implications; you don’t know from where it arises, you don’t know whether it is true or
just fictitious.
I have heard that the wife of Mulla Nasruddin purchased a parrot. She was very interested in finding
a really good parrot, and when she found one she was immensely delighted. But for some strange
reason the pet shopkeeper was reluctant to sell the parrot to her. She was surprised. She said, ”You
have it for sale and whatsoever the price is I am ready to pay. Why are you reluctant?”
He said, ”There are so many other beautiful parrots, even more knowledgeable than this. Why are
you so particular about this parrot?”
491
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
She said, ”That I don’t know, but somehow, to me, he looks the most cute. He is beautiful, healthy,
colorful – and the way he speaks! It is difficult to figure out whether it is a human voice or a parrot
speaking.”
Although the shopkeeper was reluctant, the woman was persistent, and finally she purchased the
parrot. As she was departing he told her, ”I should make you alert of the fact that the reason I was
reluctant to sell him is that the parrot comes from a very bad place; he was owned by a prostitute.
He speaks vulgar language and he uses expressions which you may feel offended by.”
She said, ”Don’t be worried. I need such a parrot for my husband. My husband uses such vulgar
language, such bad expressions, that this is good: the parrot will be really the answer to him.”
The shopkeeper could not say anything more. Nasruddin’s wife went home and she covered the
parrot with a cloth so that when Nasruddin came she could give him a surprise and a shock.
Nasruddin came home by evening; and it was really a surprise and a shock – not for Nasruddin
but for Nasruddin’s wife, because even from behind the cloth the parrot recognized Nasruddin
immediately. He said, ”Hello, Mulla Nasruddin. You are really great: every day new girls, new
women!”
Now the parrot could not think of the implications, but the wife was immensely shocked that the
parrot knew Nasruddin: that meant Nasruddin was going to the prostitute. The parrot was saying,
”You are great! Every day new women, new girls. You know how to enjoy life!”
Knowledge is exactly like that. The Christian priest repeating the BIBLE has no understanding of
what he is repeating.
Just the other day some information came to me: the attorney general of Oregon has declared
Rajneeshpuram illegal. The reason that he has given is that here in Rajneeshpuram, religion and
state are mixed.
Now, in the first place, our religion has nothing to do with any religion that has ever existed on the
earth. It is just a legal necessity that we have to declare that we are a religion; otherwise, you
cannot find such an irreligious commune in the whole world. What religion is there? – no God, no
Holy Ghost, no Jesus Christ, no pope, no prayer, nobody concerned at all about death. Everybody
is so much involved with life, who has time?
In fact, even if death comes to my people, she will have to wait. My people are so involved in living
that even death will have to consider.... She can take people easily who have been dead for thirty,
forty or fifty years. It is not a problem for death, there is no need to be concerned; they just have
to be carried away. They have lived posthumous lives long enough. Perhaps death is too busy –
must be. This planet and fifty thousand other planets have life; and no religion has said that there
are even associates, deputies, of death. Death is alone. Poor death needs a great bureaucracy, and
she is doing the whole job all alone. So of course many people die when they are nearabout thirty
years of age, and then they have to wait for forty, fifty years or sixty years, when their number comes
up.
What can death do? She has not yet cleaned out the old pending files, and you go on dying.
From Personality to Individuality 492 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
But with my people death will be surprised.
These are living people:
So involved in life that they have not even bothered about death. She will have second thoughts
before she can take you. She may think, ”It is better to let me first finish the pending job, which is
unending. These people can be taken later on; let them live a little more.”
What kind of religion is this?
I have called it a religionless religion.
I have called it religiousness.
But they don’t have any category for religiousness; they don’t have any category for a religionless
religion because nothing like this has ever happened. But all governments and all bureaucracies go
on clinging to old-fashioned ideas. It takes a long time for them to absorb anything new, and by the
time they absorb it it is already out-of-date.
For my immigration there is only one category that can be applicable to me, and that is religion. I
tried to explain that my religion is not a noun, it is a verb, but the officer was looking at me with
vacant eyes. What was I saying? – that my religion is not a noun but a verb? Who has ever heard
of that?
But I said, ”You need not be puzzled or worried Just so as not to disturb you I will fit into the category
But in fact if governments and bureaucracies were sensitive enough, aware enough of the latest
developments, then you would have made a different category for me, for a man who is simply
religious – neither Christian, nor Hindu, nor Mohammedan. And to be religious you need not believe
in God, in afterlife; you need not believe at all. To be religious all that you need is to live life so
abundantly that you can taste existence itself.”
When I say ”knowing,” I mean tasting, smelling, hearing, feeling, living – but not knowledgeability.
Knowledgeability to me is a sin.
Knowing is the greatest ecstasy you can attain
But the ultimate surprise of knowing comes when you turn in upon yourself.
You can be in a state of knowing with the sunrise, with the sunset, with stars, flowers, birds, animals,
people. You can be in a state of knowing, and it is tremendously beautiful, immensely fulfilling.
But the ultimate point, the omega point arrives when you turn your knowing upon yourself.
Then you are moving in a direction you have never moved, you are traveling on a path you have
never traveled.
From Personality to Individuality 493 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
Knowledge is divided into three parts: the knower, the known, and that which relates them –
knowledge. Knowing also consists of three parts, but there is a difference: the knower, the known
– but now the relationship is not of knowledge, it is of knowing. Knowledge was borrowed. The
knower was a fact, the known was a fact, but knowledge was borrowed. Knowing is your own. So
knowledge only gives you a feeling of relatedness.
It is like marriage – and marriage is a mirage.
Marriage simply gives you the illusory feeling that you are related. In fact, you are two intimate
enemies living together – or better to say, fighting together, harassing each other, nagging, doing all
kinds of things which are not friendly. It is a strange relationship. There is no love flowing. Who has
ever heard of a husband loving his wife or a wife loving her husband? Yes, pretending, but loving?
It seems to be impossible between husband and wife.
Marriage is the death of love.
Knowledge is like marriage. You are not really related to the known, but only in a delusion.
It happened once that there was a certain painting hanging in the house of an old lady. She was very
old, and when she died the house was sold. The new owners looked at the painting and could not
figure out what it was: it looked almost stupid. It was a Picasso. If you don’t have that intelligence
then the painting will look stupid, as if made by some madman. So they took out the painting and
threw it in the basement.
One day a friend came and he asked what happened to the Picasso. ”I was in this house when the
old lady was here. I was just passing, and I remembered the painting. The house is sold, but the
painting was far costlier than the house. What happened to the painting?”
The owner did not answer. He rushed into the basement, brought the painting back, cleaned it, and
said, ”I am happy that you came. We thought this was something stupid. This is a Picasso?”
The man said, ”This is more costly than the house that you have purchased.”
Again the painting was put back on the wall. In fact, the man threw a big party for his friends to
see the painting of Picasso. But one of his friends turned out to be an expert critic of paintings. He
said, ”This is not an original; you have been befooled. Yes, it is a copy of Picasso’s painting, but it
is not an original. The people who sold you the house were not fools: if it were authentic it would
mean millions of dollars, and the painting would have been removed before the house was sold.
This painting is bogus.”
The man threw the painting back in the basement. Now what kind of relationship was happening
between this man and the painting? This I call knowledge. He has no relationship. Somebody says,
”It is a Picasso”: the painting is put up on the wall and a party is thrown. Somebody says, ”It is a
fake”: the painting is thrown back into the basement. If some day Picasso comes and says, ”It is not
a fake” – and Picasso was capable of saying this – then the painting would be back again in its old,
respectable place.
From Personality to Individuality 494 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
It is a known fact that once Picasso said of one of his own paintings, ”It is a fake.” It was sold for
millions of dollars; and when the man who purchased it heard from Picasso that it was a fake....
Picasso’s girlfriend – he never had any wife, he always had girlfriends, changing as life changes, as
everything changes – the girlfriend said, aBut I have seen you painting this with my own eyes; I was
present.”
Picasso said, ”That is right. You were present, I painted it in front of you, but it is a fake.”
The owner said, ”Are you mad or something? If you painted it, then how can it be fake?”
Picasso said, ”Because I painted the same painting before. So what does it matter who painted it
the second time? It is secondhand, it is not a true Picasso. I painted it before and it is already in
the art gallery. This was just because somebody wanted to purchase something and I had no other
painting and no other idea at that time. So I simply painted an old idea. I had the sketch. What does
it matter whether I copy it or somebody else copies it?”
Vice versa has never happened, but I can guarantee – understanding Picasso the way I understand
him – he may have said a fake painting was authentic if it was really great art. What does it matter
who painted it? If a painting painted by Picasso himself can be fake, then why can’t a painting
painted by somebody else and signed ”Picasso” be authentic, if it is really an original piece of work?
But what about this man? He was going crazy: somebody says the painting is authentic, somebody
says it is fake; and each time his relationship with the painting changes.
What is your relationship with God?
It is knowledge.
An atheist comes and proves there is no God, and the relationship disappears. A theist comes with
better logic – because it is not a question of whether God exists or not, the question is whose logic
is better, who is more logical, more argumentative, more authoritative – and convinces you there is
a God. Again there is a relationship. Are you going to depend on such a relationship?
Knowledge can be changed any moment by anybody:
lt has no roots in you.
Knowing, nobody can change, not even God.
In India there is a story about a very unique man, Eknath. He was a worshipper and devotee of
Krishna. For twenty-four hours a day he had only one thing in his mind, and that was Krishna. He
was a Maharashtrian. His name for Krishna is Vithoba; in Maharashtra the name for Krishna is
Vithoba. It was not far away from our commune place in Poona, where Eknath lived – just a nearby
village.
His mother was sick, old, almost on the verge of death, and he was massaging her feet. The story
is.... It is a story, remember, I’m not talking about history; I am simply telling you a beautiful story.
From Personality to Individuality 495 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
Vithoba, that is, Krishna, was very concerned because his devotee was really in deep pain. He had
lost his father, he had lost his brother, he had lost his sister. The only person left was his mother,
and now her time had come. Vithoba thought, ”Now I am his only relative; twenty-four hours a day
he is thinking of me. It is time to go and console him and tell him, ’Don’t be worried – I have come.
Your mother is going but your Vithoba is here.’”
So Vithoba came. The door was open because Eknath’s house was so poor that there was no need
to lock the doors, there was nothing that could be stolen. Vithoba entered, stood behind Eknath and
said, ”Eknath, won’t you look at me? I am Vithoba. You have been continually praying and chanting
and calling me. But now the time has come – I had to come.”
There was not even a small mattress or a rug or a carpet or a chair to be given to Vithoba. Eknath
had only one earthen brick, the type houses are made of in India; he used to keep his lamp on it.
He used that brick to keep the lamp a little higher so he could see his mother better. He was so
absorbed in massaging his mother’s feet that he took the lamp off the brick, pushed the brick towards
Vithoba without turning back, and said to him, ”Stand on the brick till I am finished with massaging
my mother.”
The story is really beautiful. The whole night passed: Vithoba turned into a stone – because he
had been standing the whole night on a brick. A temple exists now in the place of Eknath’s house.
The statue of Vithoba is still standing on a brick. That is the most important temple in the whole
of Maharashtra. Every year thousands of pilgrims from all over Maharashtra travel to the temple of
Vithoba.
But it has been a great problem for the scholars: ”Why did Eknath treat his own god in this way?”
They don’t have any answer. At least he could have looked at him, at least he could have said,
”Please sit down on the brick.” I have talked with many Maharashtrian scholars who are followers of
Eknath; they don’t have any answer. I said, ”It is so simple. The story may be bogus, and I know that
it is bogus. There is no Vithoba; nobody ever comes, whether you keep your door open or locked.
But one thing is certain: Eknath was really an authentic man. When he was doing one thing, he was
doing it totally. When God comes he says, ”Stand there, don’t bother me till I am finished with my
work.”
To me this is the implication in my saying that if death comes to my sannyasins she will have to wait.
My sannyasins can say to her, ”Wait, I am too busy living.”
Your relationship with life or with anything should be of knowing, it should not be of knowledge –
borrowed.
So when I say, ”I know,” my word ”know” indicates knowing, not knowledge. And in the same
statement I am contradicting it; I am saying, I know that I know not who I am.” When knowing
turns towards oneself the greatest problem arises, because now the knower and the known and the
knowing all become one. You are the knower, you are the known, and you are the knowing.
If you say, ”I know myself” it will not be right, because then you will be dividing the knower, the
knowledge and the known; and it is an indivisible, organic phenomenon. So you cannot say, ”I
know myself” That’s why I said, ”When I say,’I do not know myself’ I don’t mean ignorance.” It is not
knowledge; is not ordinary knowing.
From Personality to Individuality 496 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
You know the beauty of a sunset, you know the beauty of a face, you know the beauty of music. Even
though it is knowing, still those three are there; very deeply related, almost one, but only almost –
not organically one.
When your awareness turns upon itself it is not knowledge, certainly.
It is not the ordinary knowing either.
It is not ignorance, certainly, because you know.
But it is such a unique knowing that in this knowing you become innocent:
Innocent of all idea of knowing, knowledge, ignorance.
All those words disappear.
You are simply there.
It is an experience, and such an experience that cannot be described by any word which has its
opposite.
”Ignorance” cannot describe it, because knowledge its opposite. ”Knowledge” cannot describe it,
because ignorance is its opposite. ”Knowing” cannot describe because unknowing is its opposite.
Then what can scribe it? Only a contradiction – I repeat, only a contradiction – can indicate it. You
will have to use contradiction for the simple reason that the contradiction kills itself and leaves no
trace behind. And hat’s what I mean by innocence.
When I say I know that I know not, I am trying through language to help you have a little glimpse of
what happens when contradictions meet. I am saying both I know and I know not. They will cross
each other, kill each other, destroy each other. And what will remain? Just an innocent awareness.
Ignorance is not innocent. Ignorance feels inferiority; the ego hurts. Knowing is not innocent.
Knowing buttresses the ego; it gives you a feeling of superiority. I am putting superiority and
inferiority together. They cancel each other, and the very cancelation of each other leaves you
alone and innocent.
It is just like the child when he opens his eyes for the first time. He sees everything that is there: the
painting on the wall, the clock on the wall, different colors around him. But do you think he knows
that this is a painting, that this color is red; that this is a clock, that it shows time? He is seeing, but
his seeing is absolutely innocent. He is seeing better than you, remember, because his eyes are so
fresh.
The impact of colors on your eyes is not the same. For the child it is his original experience. If he
sees your color of red.... He has never seen it before. He has no idea how to judge what it is – good,
bad, beautiful, ugly. He cannot judge, he simply sees it. His eyes are unclouded by any prejudice.
His eyes have no dust, no layers of dust.
From Personality to Individuality 497 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
As you grow old your eyes start gathering dust, your mind starts gathering layers of dust. Everything
becomes hidden behind so many layers of dust that you lose your original seeing, your original
listening, your original taste, your original smell, your original touch. All are covered.
But the child, as he opens his eyes, knows – but he does not know that he knows. The same state
happens again when your awareness turns upon yourself. You know, but now no word is enough to
justify any expression about this knowing.
Socrates is right. I agree with that old man or many points. I also disagree with him, but on this
point I agree one hundred percent. He says, ”There is’ knowledge which knows nothing, and there
is an ignorance which knows all.” I would not like to use the word ignorance because that has an
association in our mind. The association is that ignorance means you do not know. If you can
change the association the I can use the word ignorance. If you can understand by ignorance a
new kind of knowing where the trinity disappears and there is one organic whole.... The knower, the
known, the knowledge, all are one; hence there is nobody to declare anything.
Those who have known have always said that the know not.
It is only the idiots who say they know.
The really wise is innocent of all knowledge.
He has come to a point where knowledge is left far behind; and of course the ignorance which was
the polar opposite of knowledge is also left far behind Now, what word to use? I could use the word
innocence – ”I am innocent of myself” – but it would be linguistically wrong. But I don’t care about
language anyway. I go on using language in my own way.
I am innocent of myself.
That means: I know that I do not know myself.
But don’t ask the pandits of language. In a way this is bound to happen when you are describing
experiences which are not usual. You have to us unusual ways. Silence would be the right answer
it, but will you be able to understand silence? Hence, I have chosen something very close to silence
and yet expressible – innocence.
Innocence transcends both knowledge and ignorance.
To make way for innocence I use knowledge and ignorance together in the same sentence so they
can destroy each other and can leave you unscratched unburdened by any of them.
You ask me, will it ever be possible for you to know yourself? Only in the same way as it has been
possible for me; in no other way. If you are ready to become innocent, if you are ready to drop
your knowledge and your ignorance.... You will be surprised to know that to drop knowledge is very
difficult, but to drop ignorance is even more difficult.
You may never have thought about it. Of course, to drop knowledge is difficult because that’s all you
have, that’s all you can brag about; and I am saying to drop it, to erase all that you have accumulated.
From Personality to Individuality 498 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
You have been accumulating it as if it is a great treasure. And you have been told continually by
everyone that the more you know, the more powerful you will be What is the secret of the priest?
Why is he powerful? – because he knows, or at least pretends to know, things which you are not
courageous enough to pretend to know. He knows God, he knows all about heaven.
In Indian temples I have seen maps of heaven and hell, and where God lives – an aerial view! –
and where tirthankaras live. These maps are hundreds of years old: the older they are, the more
valuable. I have asked the Jaina monks, ”Do you know where Timbuktu is?”
”Timbuktu? We have never heard of Timbuktu.”
I have asked them, ”Do you know Kustuntuniar?”that is Hindi for Constantinople.
”Kustuntunia? A very strange name. We have never heard of it.”
I said, ”You don’t even know the geography of this small planet but you know where heaven is and
you know where hell is and the exact location of God’s house? – even the architecture of God’s
house. And the houses surrounding Him are all tirthankaras’ houses. Where is Jesus Christ?
Hazrat Mohammed? Moses? Zarathustra?”
And they will say, ”You ask strange questions! These people are not in heaven, they cannot be.” And
they have a map of hell. I have asked, from my very childhood, ”Where is this hell?” and they all say
– Hindus, Jainas, Buddhists – ”Just under the earth.” That’s where we are sitting right now: in hell.
According to them, America is exactly the place where hell is. According to them the earth is not
round, it is a flat thing like a chapati. On top is the earth and below the chapati is hell. But below the
chapati is America, and at the very center, Oregon.
When Sheela started looking for a place to have this commune happen, and she phoned from
Oregon, I really giggled. If my Jaina saints knew where I was going to end up! According to them,
still, hell is under the earth. But it is a very strange world because it is round; so right now they are
under us. It is very difficult to decide who is in hell. Now Sheela is in New Delhi. It is very difficult to
decide whether her Master is in hell or the secretary is in hell, at this very moment.
These idiots have made maps; and of course for centuries it has been believed that they know about
these things. They even know the details of the map: they know the roads, they know how many
gates you have to pass.... This is exploiting your innocence, making you feel guilty of ignorance:
”You don’t know – we are the knowers. You have to listen to us and follow us. We know the right
path, the right god, the right heaven.”
And all the religions are doing the same thing. I have looked into all these people’s scriptures. They
are all pretending absolute knowledge, and they are simply talking absolute lies, because they all
cannot be right. Their descriptions are absolutely different. The heaven of the Christians is totally
different from the heaven of the Hindus, so either there are many heavens, many hells, for different
religious people different strategies of torturing and different ways of entertainment.... Because in
heaven what will you do for eternity? Have you ever thought about it?
From Personality to Individuality 499 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
Just think: in the Christian heaven, what are the angels doing for eternity? Just playing on their
guitars – ”alleluia, alleluia, alleluia” – for eternity? Yes, in the afternoon for the drive – by it is okay,
but for eternity! This is too much. And it is not entertainment, it is torture. I think people in hell may
be enjoying more variety of things because really juicy people are all in hell. Only dry bones are in
heaven.
Since I have experienced that there is no heaven and hell, I am freed from a nightmare. In my
childhood I was more afraid of heaven than of hell. And my father used to say to me, ”You are simply
nuts! We are afraid of hell; you are afraid of heaven. And all the great sages have been fools, you
think.”
I said, ”I don’t know whether they were fools or not. One thing I know is that all juicy people are
in hell; that you have to concede. The gamblers, the drunkards, the playboys, the call girls, all
the circuses and carnivals – everything seems to be there in hell. Please just tell me what is in
your heaven? Only those long faces, saints, completely dry of humor. Not even a newspaper is
published because there is nothing happening – what to publish in the newspaper? There is no
gossip, no restaurant....”
My father said, ”Please keep these ideas to yourself because you are corrupting me.” And finally I
did corrupt him: I made him a sannyasin. But from the very childhood he was afraid that I would
corrupt him, because he had no answers. He would go to the sages and the saints; they also didn’t
have any answer. They said, ”This is a strange boy. These questions are never asked.”
I said, ”Whether they are asked or not, I am asking them. Please answer me. What entertainments
are available? A football match, the Olympics? What is available there in heaven? And if nothing is
available then what are your saints doing? And for eternity? They must be dying to be born again,
but they cannot be: once you are enlightened, no entertainment again!”
I used to come to Bombay, before I settled in Bombay, almost two or three times per month because
the headquarters were in Bombay, the whole work was there. There I had the greatest following;
and the most intelligent people in India of course are in Bombay. Slowly thousands of people started
knowing me. One day one of my sannyasins – at that time I had not started sannyas but now he is
a sannyasin.... He used to drive me about, and just jokingly – he did not mean it, but he was not
fully aware of me – just before a bistro he stopped the car and said, ”Osho, would you like to come
in and have an ice cream?”
Ice cream I used to love. To tell you the truth I still love it, although there is no way to find it anywhere.
I said, ”That’s a great idea!” Then he became afraid. He had been joking. He had said it thinking
that a religious man would say no to going into a bistro, where an almost naked woman was doing a
striptease dance. He said, ”Are you sure?”
I said, ”Absolutely! Just open the door – because this is my last life. After this life there is no bistro
for me and no ice cream: I don’t want to miss the last chance.” He waited for a few seconds. I said,
”For what are you waiting?”
He said, ”But if somebody sees you there, and recognizes you there....”
I said, ”That is my problem.”
From Personality to Individuality 500 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
He said, ”No, it is not your problem – they will kill me, they will say ’It is you who took him; otherwise
how could he find that bistro? You were supposed to take him home from the meeting place, not to
a bistro.’”
I said, ”Don’t be worried. I will protect you and say that I insisted, that seeing the signboard, ’Bistro,’
I said, ’What is this? – I want to know.’”
He said, ”Then it is okay. But, Osho, you are creating a very troubled state for me.”
I said, ”Don’t be worried – just come on.”
I had to enter first, then he followed me; he had to follow. It was an air-conditioned place, but he was
perspiring.
I said, ”Harshad” – Harshad was his name – ”your name means rejoice. What a fool – rejoice!”
And what he was afraid of happened. The manager of the bistro had heard me: he came and fell at
my feet. Harshad was just going into a nervous breakdown. Everything stopped; even the striptease
dancer stopped – everything was frozen. When the manager fell at my feet, other customers who
had no idea who I was started coming to touch my feet and the striptease girl came down from the
stage. I said, ”Harshad, it seems even in this life it is not going to be possible.” I told the manager,
”At least bring my ice cream.”
He said, ”Will you accept one?”
I said, ”Accept? I am ordering one: I like tutti-frutti.” I was eating my ice cream and the whole crowd
was standing around me. I said, ”What are you doing? Do your business!” And Harshad was hiding
behind the crowd because if the manager saw him....
As I finished my ice cream he came and just grabbed me. He told me, ”Osho, out! I will never drive
you again if you do such a thing.”
I said, ”But what have I done? I have not created any problem for anyone. You had asked me,’Would
you like some ice cream?’ so I ordered one. And in all this hullaballoo they have not asked for the
bill. Go and pay it.
He said, ”I am not going inside again. I cannot go alone; if you come ahead of me....”
I said, ”Then don’t bother, because nobody is thinking of the bill right now. We enjoyed them, they
enjoyed us, and it is balanced. There is nothing much to be worried about. But where have you
been hiding? I had to eat two long glasses full of ice cream because the manager had brought the
best, the biggest glasses. Where were you? I had to eat two glasses, and two glasses that size are
a little too much.”
He continued to drive me, but whenever there was a bistro or anything, he would go so fast. I would
say, ”Harshad, a bistro!” and he would say, ”Never again!”
From Personality to Individuality 501 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
People came to know somehow and he had a good beating from everybody. In Bombay, in those
days there were many old people who were followers of mine, very respected people: somebody
was an ex-mayor, somebody was ex-sheriff, somebody was a minister. I told everybody, ”Nobody
is to harass Harshad; he has been punished enough.” He had perspired and begun trembling, but I
simply enjoyed it; the whole scene was so fabulous. And for the striptease girl this was an absolutely
new act. She may never have done it before and will never have to do it again.
In heaven there seems to be something worthwhile. But for centuries these people have been
claiming knowledge about heaven and hell; and once you get trapped in their net of knowledge, you
are finished. Then you are no more alive. Then their knowledge makes you feel ignorant, inferior,
guilty, a sinner. Even eating ice cream you feel you are committing a sin. It is strange, because in
no religious scripture is it written that ice cream is sin.
But the religions are against enjoying anything. So whether it is written or not.... Many things will
be coming in the future which are not yet available. Of course these so-called omniscient saints
and messiahs, they had no idea of even ice cream – what to say about atom bombs and nuclear
weapons? But they have given a basic criterion: anything that can be enjoyed is sin, it is against
God. To be happy is to be against God; to be blissful is really to be His arch-enemy.
I am a blissful man.
If there is a God – and I know there is nobody anywhere. If I have not found Him in meand I have
looked into every nook and corner of my consciousness – then He is not anywhere else. He cannot
be. He cannot be in any consciousness, because the nature of consciousness is the same. And
consciousness is the highest flowering in existence; if He is not even in this highest flowering, where
can He be? And there is nothing beyond consciousness.
The moment you know the unknowable, the mysterious, the innocent consciousness pure of all
thought, ideas, scriptures, religions, you know nothing and you know all.
You know nothing because knowing is left far behind, it was a burden. You are unburdened – it was
just dust gathered on the mirror of your being. The mirror is clean now, so clean and so alone that
it does not mirror anything. It is simply there, not mirroring anything because there is nothing else.
Just think of a mirror in absolute aloneness. What will be the situation of the mirror? It will still be a
mirror, but not reflecting anything. That’s what happens when you turn upon yourself
Consciousness is there, awareness is there; in fact for the first time it is there in its totality. And there
is nothing to think, nothing to reflect, nothing to know. In this sense you have become innocent. But
in another sense – because now nothing is left for you to know – you know all. The taste of your
own consciousness is the taste of all consciousness, it is not different.
But the priesthood cannot live on my attitudes and approaches. The priesthood will die out. It needs
to die out, it is absolutely unnecessary. They have filled you with knowledge, and with it has come
the idea of ignorance. They have filled you with such strange ideals that if you follow them you are
finished, if you don’t follow them you are finished. The ideals that they have given you are unnatural.
If you try to follow them you have to go against your nature; you have to cripple yourself destroy
yourself And if you follow your nature, you feel guilty, a sinner. And then great fear arises – hell is
waiting for you. Don’t be worried: there is no heaven, no hell.
From Personality to Individuality 502 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
All that is significant is your pure awareness.
Then wherever you are is paradise.
I can challenge God to throw me into hell, with no problem, with no fear, because I will manage
to have a commune there. And it would be really a great’ commune because such colorful people
would be there.
But I have drifted far away.... I was telling you about this attorney general who says that we
have mixed state and religion here. Just the other day I got the information that from the federal
government of America two sermons, ready-made sermons, have been sent to thousands of
Christian churches, institutions, schools, hospitals, orphanages – but only to Catholic Christians.
Those two sermons have been prepared by the federal government to indoctrinate people,
particularly orphans. And in that they have even improved upon Jesus.
When I heard that, I felt a little sorry for Jesus, because what will his situation be? There are many
statements in those sermons; one statement is really striking. It is for orphans, that they should pray
to God: ”We are blessed that you made us helpless orphans so that you are our only help and only
hope.” The whole message is: ”Blessed are the orphans for they shall inherit the kingdom of God.”
I was puzzled. Jesus had said, ”Blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the kingdom of God.” Now
there is going to be great trouble. Who is going to inherit the kingdom of God, the orphans or the
poor? The American government has found even the poorest of the poor: the orphans. Now the
poor people will look almost super-rich. They cannot pass through the needle’s eye any longer. No,
only orphans can enter.
Now what is Jesus going to do, because these people, in following Jesus’ idea, have created trouble
for him, competition. There are not a few orphans in the world; in a way, one day or other, everybody
becomes an orphan. One day your father dies, one day your mother dies – you are an orphan. What
else is an orphan? And there may be orphans who are billionaires.
I was really troubled about what poor Jesus is going to do, because anybody who has lost his
parents is an orphan, and everybody is going to lose his parents sooner or later. It is only a question
of when you are going to become an orphan; you are potentially an orphan, the whole world is an
orphan. Then I started thinking, My God! If the whole world is going to inherit the kingdom of God,
what about the poor? Who will listen to those poor? When the orphans are just marching ahead –
”Blessed are the orphans” – the poor no longer have any chance.
Isn’t this the state interfering in religion? If the attorney general has any of the dignity of a human
being he should declare the whole of America illegal! What business is it of the government to write
sermons for the priests to use to indoctrinate the minds of orphans? And it is very partial: it is sent
only to the Catholic institutions. Jews are also living here, people of other religions are also living
here – and most of all, the greatest majority, Rajneeshees, are living here. We have not been sent
those sermons. This government, and the people who run such governments – are they in their
right senses?
There was other news. A poisonous gas which was being prepared and preserved in millions of
barrels for the third world war is out-of-date. Now a better killer, another poisonous gas, has been
found, so all those millions of barrels have to be disposed of. Where to dispose of them?
From Personality to Individuality 503 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
Now they are being disposed of in America in deserted places, underground. But how long do
you think you can go on doing that? Soon many of your atom bombs will be out-of-date; they are
already out-of-date. Soon, many of your nuclear weapons will be out-of-date. Where are you going
to dispose of all this that you have created? – either in the ocean or in the earth, but in both ways it
is going to backfire. Perhaps there will be no need for a third world war: Russia will be in the same
position; they will have to dispose of out-of-date weapons.
You cannot go on accumulating garbage which is of no use now because you have better things.
Russia has better, so you have to create better; then you create better and Russia has to dispose
of its old stock. These governments are interfering in people’s lives, in the whole of humanity’s life –
and yet they are legal.
Here there is no sermon. Certainly my talks cannot be called sermons. You can call them anti-
sermons – no, ant-eye-sermons. What religion do they think is here which is interfering with the
state? And what state is there? In the first place we are not a religion defined by any dictionary in
the whole world. We will have to create our own dictionary, our own definitions.
And what state is there? Just a city council, which has to take care of the roads, of cleanliness, of
the houses, of the hospital. How is religion going to interfere with the roads? I have tried hard but
cannot figure it out: how to mix religion with roads? How to mix religion with houses? How to mix
religion with hospitals, with medicines, with injections? They should give us some clue as to how
they do it. No religious priest goes to the hospital to bore the patients there.
There is nobody orphaned here because we don’t believe in the family. My people are the only
people who are immune to orphanhood; they cannot become orphans. We don’t believe in the
family, we believe in the commune – and the commune never dies; you will always have your uncles
and your aunts. People will be coming and going, but the commune.... And the commune is our
family.
When the father dies, the Indian custom is that the eldest son should put fire to the body when it is
placed on the funeral pyre. When my father died, I was asked – Laxmi asked me – ”What to do? –
because Indian sannyasins are saying that Osho has to put fire to the body.”
I said, ”But he was my disciple. A long time ago he used to be my father, I used to be his son; but
that has changed. And in this commune nobody is father, nobody is mother; here are only uncles
and aunts. We have dropped the idea, the whole idea of daddy and mummy!”
I proceed logically. I may look mad to you, but I have my methods. I dropped God because that is
the great daddy. Now I will knock off the smaller daddies. I have to knock off somebody or other.
The great daddy is no longer there, the great mom is no longer there; now, finish with the smaller
ones also.
The Jewish God says, ”I am not nice, I am not your uncle. I am a very jealous and angry God.” I have
kept this sentence very close to my heart for the simple reason that it says, ”I am not your uncle.” I
want to create a commune – and I am creating it – where only uncles and aunts exist. That finishes
the very root of all religious nonsense. God is nothing but your dad magnified a millionfold.
From Personality to Individuality 504 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
There are religions who believe in the mother goddess: they have magnified the mother. But these
are just enlargement photographs. You can burn them very easily; and when you burn them then
you will have to come to your real dad, your real mom. I am not saying to burn them alive. I am
saying that as far as your psychology is concerned, there should be no place for your dad or for your
mom.
It is not being disrespectful towards them. Basically you hate them. There is no boy who has not
hated his father, and if you dig deep you will find that hatred still. There is no girl who has not hated
her mother.
Every boy has been in a love affair with his mother – of course, it was not actually possible. But every
boy loves his mother and hates his father because he is the competitor. Every girl loves her father
and hates her mother because she is a competitor and more powerful. The girl wants to monopolize
the father, the boy wants to monopolize the mother.
One of my young sannyasins, who is just two-and-a-half years old, has been hearing my tapes,
and his father and mother talking about them. He seems to be a really intelligent person. He is
Dutch. He went to Sheela because he wanted an appointment with me; in Dutch he asked for an
appointment and somebody translated it. Sheela said, ”It is difficult.”
He took up the phone angrily, not knowing how to phone, or whether I have a phone or not, or what
my number is. He just said, ”Osho!” and in Dutch he started to make an appointment. His mother
wrote me a letter a few days ago: ”What to do with your young sannyasin, because he says, ’I want
to make love to you just as my father makes love to you.”’ They must be making love in front of him
– and that’s perfectly right, that’s how it should be. That’s how the child should learn one of the most
significant things in life. He will not ever feel guilty, and he will not hide it as if he is doing something
wrong. So they must be making love in front of the child.
And the child must have heard this idea so he said to his mother, ”Osho says that every boy loves
the mother. I love you, and I want to make love exactly as my father does.” His mother sent me a
letter: ”What to do now? You are creating such troubles. First you suggested the idea that children
should be allowed to be there when the parents are making love, so we allowed him. Now he wants
to make love to me; and he is very persistent, and very stubborn!”
But whether any child says it or not, it is there in every child’s mind. If the child is a boy, the mother
is the object of love; if the child is a girl, the father is the object of love. And while this remains inside
you, you will never be able to love somebody. No woman can be a replica of your mother. Existence
does not create the same carbon copies again and again. Any woman that you meet is going to be
different from your mother, and that is the trouble. Because she is different and you don’t find your
mother in her, trouble arises.
And from her side the woman finds you are not the person she really wants; you are not her father.
Something may have been similar to her father in you and something similar to your mother in her
which attracted you, so you got together. But that something – very small – which was similar will
soon be shattered with your whole personalities coming together.
Unless you are free from your mother and father.... It is not being against them; it is really becoming
mature. One day the child leaves the mother’s womb. That does not mean that he is disrespectful
From Personality to Individuality 505 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
to the mother, that he has to remain in the womb for his whole life: he would kill the mother. Coming
out of the womb does not mean disrespect. One day he stops drinking milk from her breast. That
does not mean that he is turning his back on her, that he no longer cares about her. He is becoming
independent. No, that’s how it should be: these are outer bondages that he is breaking.
But inner bondages continue to the very last. Inner bondages have also to be broken. And the
strangest experience is: the moment you are finished with your inner world, with mom and dad, for
the first time you can respect them and love them as human beings. You can feel sad and sorry for
them because they have missed everything. What have they got?
They came into life but they have not experienced life; and death is approaching or has already taken
them. They died before they were born. They are dying before their birth seems to be possible. You
may feel compassionate, you may feel loving, you may feel sad for them; you may do something to
help them, but this is possible only when you are completely free.
I don’t have any sermons to be sent to the orphans because I don’t have orphans here. The word is
ugly. When there are so many people to be loving to you, why should you be an orphan? The whole
commune can father you and mother you – why should you be orphans?
A society which creates orphans is basically wrong because it is based on a very small unit, the
family. The unit is so small that sooner or later everybody is going to become an orphan. The unit
should be so big that whatsoever happens, nobody ever becomes an orphan.
I am taking your God away from you. I am taking your mothers and fathers away from you.
How can I mix religion?
I am taking all religion out of you – the religion that you have been acquainted with.
In courts you have to take the oath in the name of God, or by putting your hand on the BIBLE. And
these courts are not mixing religion with law? Even courts – which are supposed to be protecting
legality and law – are doing such illegal things, and the governments go on using every possible way
to exploit religion.
This polack pope has been in office for just two years, but in two years he has had two dozen round-
the-world tours. There is a joke now in the Vatican: ”We have heard God is everywhere, but our
pope has already been there before.” One journalist, who has been accompanying him on all these
tours, became so fed up with the whole strategy and exploitation in the name of religion that he has
written an article against the pope going around the world so much. In two years the pope has been
around the world twenty-four times; he is taking almost one round trip every month. He was just
getting ready to go when the article appeared.
In his article the journalist says, ”Jesus never went anywhere. The poor fellow simply went to
Jerusalem and was crucified! That’s how he was received by the powerful. And his representative,
the pope, goes around the world and is received by the powerful everywhere, with red carpets
and roses. There seems to be something strange: Jesus was received with crucifixion, and his
salesman, the salesman’s salesman, is being received with so much glamor. All these redcarpet
welcomes! It is not in tune with Jesus.” That’s what the journalist wrote.
From Personality to Individuality 506 Osho
CHAPTER 28. KNOWLEDGE IS INFORMATION; KNOWING IS TRANSFORMATION
Because he wrote this article he has been dropped from the coming world tour of the pope; that
journalist cannot go with the pope. On these twenty-four tours he was there, but now, because he
has spoken the truth for the first time....
You speak the truth and you are in trouble.
Our whole trouble, our whole commune’s trouble, is simple. Those people write on their dollar: We
trust in God. On the dollar! Who is mixing religion with state? You are mixing religion even with the
dirty dollar! In front of the Supreme Court it is written: We trust in God. If someday I happen to be in
the Supreme Court – it is very possible, I may manage it – then I am going to ask them, ”Where is
God? And on what authority have you written this? And if at the very gate there is a lie, you cannot
ask me to take the oath for truth. Rather, ask me to take the oath to only speak lies and not truth”
– because the greatest lie is there, just at the gate of the Supreme Court. On every dollar bill is the
great lie: We trust in God.
These people go on mixing religion in every way; but they are legal, right. I don’t have any way to
mix my religion with anything, it is so unmixable. This is the only legal city in the whole world. If
mixing religion makes a city illegal then all the cities of the world are illegal because everywhere
religion is mixed. This is the only place where religion is not mixed at all.
Religion, in fact, does not exist here at all.
What exists is a totally different thing:
Religiousness.
And that is a fragrance.
You cannot name it.
You cannot make a holy scripture out of it.
I know that I do not know myself but this is what is meant by ”knowing thyself” This experience of
coming to utter innocence is what Socrates means by ”knowing thyself.”
But all words are dangerous. You have to be very alert and careful when you are using words;
hence, I used the words:
I am innocent of myself.
From Personality to Individuality 507 Osho
CHAPTER 29
Belief – just a blind man’s bluff
27 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
IS THE THEORY OF REINCARNATION NOT TRUE?
I do not deal in theories. I am a simple man, not a theoretician.
A theoretician is a great thinker. He knows nothing about reality, but he goes on creating theories
about it. His whole life he goes around and around. That’s the actual meaning of the word about. A
theory is always about and about; and the truth, the reality, is just at the center, it is never around.
But the theoretician is skilled in beating around the bush.
The moment you ask me, ”Is the theory of reincarnation not true?” your question says many things
to me. First: you want my support for your belief.
Belief is always in need of support.
Truth is never in need of any support:
It is enough unto itself.
Truth needs no evidence, no witnesses.
508
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
Even if the whole world is against the man of truth, he will not care at all – because truth is not
something that depends on the number of people who support it. A single man may be right, and
the whole world may be wrong. Truth is not something political, that you have to vote for it.
Your question is indicative that you believe in the theory of reincarnation. Belief is always shaky,
afraid, because deep down you are aware that you don’t know: it may be right, it may not be. You
would like somebody in whom you have some kind of trust to support your theory, your belief. From
that space comes your question.
You love me, you trust me. If I can say to you, yes, it is true, then it is as if a blood transfusion is
given to somebody who has lost too much blood: your theory, your belief starts appearing stronger,
more stable. You don’t know but at least somebody who knows is supporting it, and you trust that
somebody; he cannot lie.
I don’t want you to trust me in that way.
Give your love to me but don’t trust me.
The moment you start trusting somebody else, you stop enquiring on your own. And I would not
like you to stop your own individual enquiry. Loving is perfectly good because you are sharing
something, but in the name of trust you are really deceiving yourself.
For thousands of years this is how man has been deceived and exploited. I want to destroy that
whole strategy at its very roots.
Trust only your own experience.
It does not matter whether I say yes or no.
What matters is whether you have experienced it or not.
That is going to be decisive, that is going to transform your life.
There are three religions – Judaism, Christianity, Mohammedanism – which have taken a negative
stand on the theory of reincarnation. They say it is not true. This is a negative belief Remember that
belief can be either negative or positive, but it does not change its nature. This is a negative belief.
These three religions are under the influence of a negative belief that there is no reincarnation.
Parallel to these three there are three religions – Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism – which have taken
a positive attitude. They say yes, reincarnation is a reality. But that is also a belief a positive belief.
My approach is a third one which has not been tried up to now, and which I say is the right approach.
I say to you: accept the theory as hypothetical, neither saying yes nor saying no. Accepting it as
hypothetical means, ”I am ready to enquire into it with no prejudice, positive or negative. I am ready
to go into it without any preconceived idea, to see what is the truth.”
Religions have not used the word hypothesis at all. Either you are a believer or you are a non-
believer. The non-believer is also a believer, only negatively. They are not qualitatively different,
From Personality to Individuality 509 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
they are the same type of people. And what happens when you take a negative belief or a positive
belief is that your mind has already decided; before knowing, before experiencing, you have already
decided what the truth is. This I call insincere, dishonest. And once you accept something negatively
or positively, it is a capacity of the mind to create the hallucination of your belief.
You can see it. In Mohammedans, in Christians, in Jews, you will not find children born who
remember their past lives. But in Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism you will always find, almost every
day, somewhere, some child who remembers his past lives. People have tried to see whether his
remembrance has any facts behind it or if it is just imagination. And so many cases have been found
in which the facts were clearly in support of it.
For example, I myself was deeply involved with such a case. A girl born in Katni – a small city eighty
miles away from Jabalpur – remembered that she had been the wife of a certain man who lived in
Jabalpur who owned a garage: his name, his age, where his house was, and where his garage was.
Now this man, Ramakant Parakh was his name, lived just four or five houses away from me. That’s
how I became involved in the whole thing.
One day he came running to me. He said, ”A phone call has come from Katni that a girl remembers
that she was my wife. My wife has certainly died, and the dates coincide exactly with the date the
girl was born. In the evening she was born, and in the morning my wife had died. She remembers
my name, she remembers my job, my house, my work. What do you think? What should I do?”
I said, ”Just come along with me. We will go to Katni. It is not far away, it is just a two-hour drive, and
it is better to go without announcing ourselves. You are not to say that you are Ramakant Parakh; I
will say I am Ramakant Parakh, and that I own the garage.”
I said to them, ”I am Ramakant Parakh,” and immediately the girl recognized me as her husband.
Then I told the parents, ”Don’t try to take advantage of a belief in Hinduism. I am not Ramakant
Parakh; I don’t own any garage. I don’t have any wife, so the question of her death does not arise.
This man is Ramakant Parakh. His wife has died, and you must have known when. Please tell
me exactly the truth; otherwise I am going to the police. And you will be in trouble because your
daughter has recognized me. She knows nothing about who Ramakant Parakh is. It is not even
certain that this is Ramakant Parakh; only I am saying so. So don’t think that you can change your
mind in the police station and say that this man is Ramakant Parakh. You tell me exactly what you
were trying to do.”
Her father became very much afraid and told the whole story of how he had prepared the girl. One
of his friends had suggested this name, and the date, because he knew Ramakant Parakh. He was
going to bring the photo of Ramakant Parakh, and then we were going to Jabalpur with the girl, with
the media people, so she could recognize the house. My friend was going to give us all information
because he knows everything about Ramakant Parakh – his wife, his house, his garage. Then the
girl was to go inside the house and find things that she used to keep. Then she was going to go and
find the garage, and show the car that she used to love.
”Please forgive me,” he said. ”We were just creating a business.” In India, once a reincarnation is
established, then the girl becomes almost a goddess, and people start worshipping her, bringing
money, and bringing sweets and fruits: it is a great business. And he was a brahmin, and the thing
would be managed perfectly well.
From Personality to Individuality 510 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
If this man, Ramakant, had not come to a wrong man like me, he would have been befooled perfectly.
Once the girl had seen the picture, then she would have found the man in a crowd of hundreds of
people. And behind the whole thing was a friend of Rarnakant’s himself I said, ”What was he going
to gain?”
The man said, ”Half-half, fifty-fifty.”
In India it happens almost every day, in one place, in another place, that there is a child who
remembers; and immediately you have a business without any investment or publicity. And no
Hindu, no Buddhist, no Jaina is going to enquire into it really because they are afraid their theory
may prove wrong. They are ready to support it.
You will be surprised that when I exposed it and gave a statement to the newspapers that this was
all a bogus thing, the brahmins and the Jainas approached me, their leaders approached me; they
knew me perfectly well. They said, ”You should not have done that. What does it matter if that poor
brahmin gets a little money out of this? That is not important. The important thing is our theory, our
philosophy. Just to expose a single case of fraud does not mean that the theory is wrong.”
I said, ”Yes, it does not mean that, so why are you worried? You can still believe in your theory, and
if I find anybody else, I am going to expose him too. That too does not mean... hundreds of people
can be exposed and still it does not destroy the theory. Perhaps all these people are frauds; that
does not mean that reincarnation is wrong. But why have you come to me if it does not mean that
reincarnation is wrong? I am not saying it is wrong; all that I have said was that this man was trying to
exploit the superstition, the belief of the whole country.” Now you cannot do that in a Mohammedan
country. You cannot even think of it.
One young boy – perhaps Vivek was there – was brought to Woodlands where I used to live in
Bombay. He was not more than nine years old, and he was giving sermons on the SHRIMAD
BHAGAVADGITA, the UPANISHADS. I was giving talks on Mahavira in Patkar hall in Bombay. There
the father of the boy and the boy himself had come to listen to me. Listening to me, the father thought
that if he brought the boy to me, and if I gave him some support, then in Bombay also his boy could
be a celebrity.
And the boy was an instant success everywhere, naturally, because you cannot expect that a nine-
year old boy can even understand the GITA, or the UPANISHADS; and he was quoting from them
in pure Sanskrit, commenting on them. So he was introduced to me there, after the meeting, and I
told them to come to my place.
I told the father, ”In a way you have come to the wrong person. I can see you have destroyed
this small boy’s whole mind. This is nothing but a deep experiment in hypnotism. You have been
hypnotizing the boy and repeating the shlokas. And in a hypnotic state the age does not matter:
whatsoever is repeated by the hypnotist is simply recorded; it is not a question of memorizing it.
So you have been repeating to this boy, when he is under hypnosis, all these sutras, all these
commentaries; nothing is new in them” – because when they came I told the boy to sit on the sofa
and start one of his sermons.
He said, ”Which one? The one-hour, the thirty-minute one or the ten-minute one?”
From Personality to Individuality 511 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
I said, ”The ten-minute one.”
He immediately sat in a lotus posture – he looked beautiful, a very nice child – and he started a
ten-minute sermon. I listened to him, and I told his father, ”Not a single word is original. It has all
been written before. You have been repeating it to the boy while he has been in hypnotic sleep, and
you have prepared him.” The boy was after all a boy, so when I asked him to start, he asked ”Which
one?” His father had prepared him because sometimes there was time only for ten minutes in a big
conference, so he used the ten-minute sermon; the thirty-minute if they had more time, and if they
had the full time, then the sixty-minute.
I said to the boy, ”Can you give me a sermon of only three minutes?”
He said, ”Three minutes? But I don’t know a three-minute sermon. I know only three sermons:
ten minutes, thirty minutes, and sixty minutes. I don’t know any other.” He repeated, in a beautiful
way – and it looked great coming from a nine-year-old child – Upanishadic sutras, their meaning,
commentaries.
But I told the father, ”What you have done is good business; you are doing good business, but you
are destroying this child’s intelligence. His whole life he will be a zombie. Withdraw all that you have
forced into his mind. Hypnotize him and tell him to forget all that you have taught him.”
The father was in shock. He said, ”It is strange: how could you discover it so quickly? I have
been traveling around the whole world; I earned thousands of rupees, and respect, and publicity
everywhere. He has even been invited by the president of India so the president could listen to the
boy’s sermon in the president’s house. And when the president was listening then all the M.P.’s and
the ministers and others were bound to be present. The president himself garlanded him and gave
him a gold medal. And you are shattering the whole thing.
”I said, ”I am shattering the whole thing because I am not concerned with your business, I am
concerned with this child’s whole life. He is an intelligent child, more intelligent than average. He
has a great future, a destiny of his own. Do you want him just to go on doing ten-minute, thirty-minute
and sixty-minute sermons? And do you remember what happens to such children?”
In India so many girls and boys, when they are small, are worshipped. Naturally, hearing from a
nine-year-old child such beautiful discourses impresses people. But these children are not going to
remain nine years old always. The same sermon when the child is thirty will look idiotic. Who is
going to listen?
”Can you tell me where all these children disappear to? Every year you will hear somewhere some
child expounding great theories. Then what happens when they grow up? Then nobody bothers
about them because what they are saying is not a miracle for a thirty-year-old man to say. It may be
a mirade for a six-year-old child, a five-year-old child. Your child will also go the same way.
”But for thirty years, remaining in a kind of zombie state, repeating something which has been taught
under hypnosis, is dangerous. It is keeping him addicted to a certain drug. And if for thirty years he
has been in that drugged state, he will come out mediocre, stupid. And what do you want to prove
through it? Reincarnation? – that this is a proof of reincarnation?”
From Personality to Individuality 512 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
A nine-year-old child is not capable of understanding or memorizing such long passages. So they
say it is from his past life when he was a scholar, a great scholar, and still that memory persists, that
memory is revived. This proves reincarnation, they say. So it is a double business: for his sermons
he is earning money and for his reincarnation he is earning.
I said, ”Go back home” – he was from Ujjain” – and get this child back to normal. Don’t exploit your
own child.”
I knew he was not going to do it, although he said, ”I will try.”
I said, ”I don’t believe that you will try – you have so much invested in the whole thing.” And he did
not stop it. I went on enquiring from my friends in Ujjain: the show is going on. To every fair and
every religious conference the child is brought. It continues, and he is earning a lot of money.
But you cannot do that in a Christian country, in ”Jewish community, in a Mohammedan land,
because they have accepted that this kind of thing is absolutely unreal.
As far as I am concerned, reincarnation is a reality
It is my own experience.
But what is truth to me becomes theory to you.
That is the difficulty.
And I don’t want my truth to be your theory.
I want it to be a truth for you also.
That’s why I said:
I don’t deal in theories, in beliefs.
My profession is truth.
That reminds me of Socrates, who used for the first time ”profession” for truth; otherwise you don’t
use the word profession for truth. When he was sentenced to death by the court they gave him a
few alternatives because he was a man of such superior intelligence; even those who were against
him were not happy that he should be killed. He was the pride of Athens. Without Socrates what
would Athens be? They gave him some alternatives. They said, ”If you stop speaking the truth, if
you completely stop teach ing people, you can be saved.”
Socrates said, ”That is impossible. It is my profession to speak the truth and to teach the truth. This
is not an alternative. I would rather be dead than drop my profession. At least nobody will be able
to say that Socrates was a coward: just to save his life he sold his truth.”
They said, ”Then the second alternative is that you leave Athens.” Greece, in those days, was
divided into city democracies; each city was an independent democracy. ”So if you go beyond the
From Personality to Individuality 513 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
boundaries of Athens, we have no problem. You can have your school anywhere. Your students can
go there, and you can continue your profession.”
Socrates said, ”Do you want me to face another trial somewhere else? One is enough. And if
Athens, which is the pinnacle of Greek civilization, is not able to understand me and absorb me,
who is going to understand me and absorb me? And what will Athens be without me? I will miss
Athens, Athens will miss me. No, that is not going to be my way. I have made Athens what Athens
is.”
And he was really right. He had not made the buildings and the roads, but if Athens still lives in the
memory of man, it is because of Socrates and his disciples. Plato was his disciple, Aristotle was
Plato’s disciple; and these three men are the very cream of the Athenian culture, civilization, genius.
Plato and Aristotle don’t come anywhere near Socrates; the Master is really incomparable. Plato
is a great philosopher, and in the history of philosophy Plato is more important, because Socrates
never wrote anything.
This is something to be understood: the people who have known truth have chosen to speak rather
than to write. All over the world – it cannot be just coincidence – in all the centuries, all over the
world, they have chosen to speak. There is some fundamental significance in it. They all know the
word cannot convey the truth, but the spoken word at least can have something alive in it.
The gesture of the Master, the eyes of the Master – something of the Master is bound to be moving
with the word, like an aroma, a fragrance which you cannot catch hold of, you cannot pinpoint. But
the spoken word has a totally different dimension than the written word. The same word written is
just a corpse of the same man who was alive.
The written word is like a corpse, and the spoken word is throbbing with life – at least for the moment
when somebody is there to listen to it. Between the listener and the speaker, for a moment, there is
an alive vibration. The word is not alone: the gesture, the eyes, the voice, the depth from where it is
coming.... On a flat piece of paper where will you find the depth? In ink where will you find the eyes,
the gestures, the sound? It will be just dead. It will be the same word but the fire will not be in it. It
will be a candle without flame. But the candle is not important; what is important is the alive flame.
But historians have missed, for the simple reason that Plato’s books are available, the evidence
is there; Aristotle’s books are there, the evidence is there. The spoken word was alive, lived and
danced, and disappeared. Socrates is remembered only because Plato mentions him and records
his dialogues. How much is Socrates in it and how much is Plato is difficult to say because there is
no way to judge; there is nothing which Socrates has left. But I know perfectly well because there
have been other disciples of Socrates who also wrote notes, and all those notes are different.
Plato’s are the most famous because he was really a great writer. The other disciples were simply
taking notes, class notes. But I have looked into those class notes, and I can say with certainty that
ninety percent in Plato is his imagination. He is imaginative and creative. Something of Socrates is
there but it is very difficult to find where: it is mixed too much with Plato. But Plato is important.
Socrates is almost mythological. There are many people who think that Socrates never existed, that
he was just a character in Plato’s dialogues. In the same way Gurdjieff used to say that Jesus never
existed; he was only part of a drama which was played every year in Jerusalem.
From Personality to Individuality 514 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
It is difficult to prove that Jesus was really a historical person because except for those four gospels
– which were written by his own disciples – there is no reference to Jesus in any Jewish literature, no
reference in any contemporary scripture, on any stones, on buildings, nowhere at all in any Roman
records. If a man is crucified, at least there must be a record that a man is crucified. And if you are
going to crucify a man like Jesus, at least you owe him a record. But no record is there. And the
poor four disciples – none of them is of the quality of Plato. Nor is Jesus of the quality of Socrates.
Socrates is a giant, a Himalayan giant. His every word is immensely meaningful. He said, ”I am
not going to leave Athens. Without me, what will Athens be? You kill me – that will make Athens
immortal.” And those idiots could not understand what he was saying. He was speaking the truth: it
is because Socrates was poisoned in Athens by Athenian people that Athens has become immortal.
But I remembered him because he was the first man who used the word profession for truth: ”I am
not going to leave my profession.” In fact, even if he had wanted to he could not have left it.
It is not within the capacity of a man who has arrived to stop the process of spreading what he has
attained.
I say: to me, reincarnation is a truth. But I am not telling you to believe in my experience, because
by believing it is not going to become your experience, nor is it going to help you in any way to
experience it; on the contrary it will be a hindrance for you to experience it. If you believe in what I
say then there is no need to enquire.
Religious truth, subjective truth, is different from obJective truth, scientific truth.
Albert Einstein finds out a certain truth about physics. Now, everybody need not go through the
whole enquiry again – that would be stupid. What Albert Einstein had to work on for years, you can
do in hours. It depends on your intelligence; you may even get hold of it within minutes. There is no
need for you to search.
Edison worked for three years to make the first electric bulb. Now, if everyone is going to work
for three years to produce one electric bulb, it would be stupid. Bulbs are available in the market.
Nobody ever thinks that there was a concentrated enquiry for three years.... And Edison was working
sixteen hours a day, eighteen hours a day, late in the night. I am reminded of the last night when he
discovered it.
You can understand his ecstasy: three years of arduous work and finally the bulb is there. The light
has come on. He was sitting there, dazed; he could not believe it. Although he had been working for
three years, hoping that someday he was going to find the right clue.... If this due failed, he would
try another: he went on trying, went on trying. His disciples got fed up and left him; only his wife
remained with him. She loved the poor man and she felt sorry for him. She used to suggest to him,
”Stop this nonsense. You are so capable of making so many things.”
Edison has discovered the greatest number of things in the whole history of man – he has one
thousand discoveries to his name. His wife was saying, ”Wasting your whole life doesn’t seem
rational. In three years you could have worked on many more things. Three years are just gone and
you are becoming old: in three years you look as if you have aged thirty years.” But she remained
with him.
From Personality to Individuality 515 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
That last night, the night when he discovered it – he discovered it nearabout twelve – Edison was
so dazed with his own discovery, in such ecstasy, that it was three o’clock in the morning when his
wife shouted, ”Will you put that light out” – she had no idea what light was there – ”and come to bed,
or...!”
Then he realized it was three o’ clock. He rushed to his wife and said, ”First, come and see the light.”
She said, ”Put the light out!”she was thinking of the lamp that he used to work by.
Edison said, ”It is not the lamp that I used to turn on and off; it is the light that I have been working
on for three years – and you say to me,’Put the light out’! Just for a moment come and see that it
has happened.”
You don’t have to work for three years just to make a light bulb. You don’t have to work for years
to make a radio. No, in science it is objective truth. Once the principles of something are known,
then anybody can make it in a very short period. In fact there is no need to make it, it is being
manufactured.
But the subjective truth cannot be manufactured – although the priests have tried exactly that. What
are their holy scriptures? – they have tried to manufacture truth. They have tried to put truth into
words. They have tried to sell the holy books: ”You have the BIBLE and what more did Jesus have?
Just keep those four gospels close to your heart, and that’s enough.”
Jesus of course had them a little closer to his heart, behind his ribs; your BIBLE will be just in front
of the ribs – but a difference of a few inches does not make much difference. Or if you are really a
Jesus freak, you can have an operation and have the BIBLE sewed to your heart, your lungs, and
declare yourself Jesus Christ – because these are the words he had in his heart; you have them
now. That’s what thousands of Christian priests are doing around the world, these Bible-bashing
Christians. One feels a little sorry for poor Jesus. And what are they doing to his BIBLE? Bashing!
And why they are bashing it?
One of my vice-chancellors was a great law expert – Doctor Harisingh Gaud. He was a world
authority. I don’t think there has been another man again of his caliber and fame in the world of
law. He had one office in Peking, another in New Delhi, and another in London, and he was just
continually moving from this office to that office. He was fighting cases in China, in India, in England,
and in other countries. Wherever there was some case that was impossible to deal with, he was the
man.
He used to say in his law classes, which I used to attend.... I was not a law student, but he loved
me, and he even waited for me. If sometimes I was late he would say to his students, ”Just wait:
one of my students is on the way. He will be coming because I can hear his wooden sandals. He is
coming in just a few minutes.”
And his students were really angry; they said, ”He is not even enrolled in the law department and
you pay him more respect than you even bother to pay us.”
He said, ”You will not understand it – you just try to understand law. But that young man is trying
something totally different, that you cannot understand. He is continually trying to find out if law is
nothing but an extension of logic. And I am interested in his enquiry; I want to wait for him.”
From Personality to Individuality 516 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
He used to say to his students, ”When you have a case which is absolutely favorable – the facts are
with you, the case is going to be won by you absolutely – then be very humble before the court, very
polite, just suggestive. Bring out all the facts, but don’t be aggressive; there is no need, the facts are
enough.
”But when you don’t have a case which you are sure to win and you are hesitant – it is a fifty-fifty
chance – then don’t be humble, don’t be meek. Bring as many law books as you can bring into
the court, with quotations from laws and from other cases and other precedents. Facts you don’t
have, so you have to create a great smoke of words, and laws, and precedents, and clauses, and
amendments. You have to create so much legal jargon that the facts are completely hidden behind
the cloud.
”But if you are one hundred percent certain that you are going to lose the case, because all the facts
are against you, all the witnesses are against you – your client has been caught red-handed – then
be aggressive, violent. Throw the law books, bash the books and beat the table. Be a nuisance –
less than that won’t do. You don’t have any chance unless you are so violent and so aggressive,
throwing the books and laws around and bashing them, that you create a confusion. Perhaps that
may help.
”Just confuse the court, and let the court know.... If a man is so assertive and so violent and so
certain, then there must be something in it, that he is so bravely facing them; otherwise.... So create
the suspicion, the doubt, and take advantage of the doubt.”
These Bible-bashing people are simply trying to be assertive, aggressive. Facts are not in their favor;
facts are never in your favor when you believe in something. Only when you experience something
is there no need to be so aggressive. Then you can talk with a sense of humor.
Then you need not throw out a rabbi because of a very healthy and hygienic clean joke. And it
is more puzzling that the council of the rabbis.... I could have understood it if the Catholics had
expelled some bishop or cardinal or even the pope, but I don’t understand the rabbis because they
have the most beautiful jokes in the world. There is no comparison; they have the best sense of
humor. But England is such a dump! – even Jewish rabbis have lost their sense of humor
Just a few days ago a bishop was expelled. Perhaps the Jews are trying to compete – now a rabbi
has to be expelled. Nobody wants to be behind anybody else: If you can do that, we can also do it.
But that bishop was certainly responsible for saying something which is destructive to Christianity. I
am not saying that he should be expelled, but what he said was certainly dangerous to Christianity.
I would have supported him if I were the archbishop, and I would have told all other bishops to follow
him.
He should not be expelled; he should be exalted, praised, because at least once in two thousand
years, one bishop has spoken the truth – half the truth, not the full truth. But even to speak half
the truth needs courage. But this poor rabbi has done nothing at all! And this is really a shame,
that a rabbi should be expelled for telling a joke. Jews have survived just because of their sense
of humor. There was nothing else to support them. They lost their country, they lost everything; in
every country they were persecuted, killed, murdered. But they have certainly proved that they have
some mettle, that you cannot destroy them.
From Personality to Individuality 517 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
And what has been their power? As far as I can see their power has been their sense of humor.
Even in the greatest misery they could joke and laugh. I can see, even in gas chambers, before the
switch was turned on the Jews must have been joking. And it was a beautiful scene, worth joking
about. This Adolf Hitler was mad, but he did some really humorous things.
Before sending anybody to the gas chamber he used to shave them completely. Most of the rabbis
had beards; they were shaved of all their hair. Strange; why was he against hair? They were forced
to be naked, and then they were told that they were going to have a shower. The gas chamber was
known as ”the great shower.” Of course, nobody returned from the great shower, so nobody could
say what happened inside. But every day the people who went were told, ”Now you take a shower.”
So, naked and completely shaved, thousands of Jews, including hundreds of rabbis, went inside.
What do you think they would have been doing there? Before the switch was turned on and they
all evaporated, they must have been joking and laughing. They could survive in a very antagonistic
world for the simple reason that they never lost their sense of humor. Howsoever great the misery
and the anguish, they were able to laugh.
This is the first case in the whole history of Judaism where a rabbi has been expelled for telling a
joke which is not dirty at all. In fact no joke is dirty. The jokes which are called dirty are called dirty
because first you think sex is dirty. It is a corollary: because sex is dirty, any joke that has something
to do with sex becomes dirty. Now, it is very strange: you are born out of sex, and you are not dirty.
According to Christians, you are. You are born out of original sin; that is their way of saying utterly
dirty, ultimately dirty. There is no way to clean you – even dry cleaning won’t help.
Dry cleaning reminds me that one man was washing his cat with soap. The cat was trying to run
away, and he was forcing her to keep still. Somebody passing by looked in and said, ”What are
you doing? Such an old-fashioned fellow! This way the cat will make the whole house and all your
clothes wet. These days you can get a dry cleaner.”
He said, ”That’s a good idea. I’ll use a dry cleaner.”
Next day the passerby met him and said, ”How are things going?”
He said, ”Things are really bad – the cat died.”
The man said, ”The cat died? What happened?”
He said, ”She was fine after the dry cleaning, but the tumble-dryer finished her.” He had gone
ultramodern: he bought a dry-cleaner and a drying machine!
Once you have accepted that sex is dirty then there is no way to have anything clean in the world,
because everything arises out of the same sexual energy. Then the birds calling their mates are
dirty – expel them from existence. The peacocks dancing to attract the female – expel them, they
are being really dirty fellows. And what a dirty trick to spread your tail so colorfully. The poor female
is bound to be attracted to these really dirty fellows doing their tricks. If you expel sex from the world,
life is expelled.
From Personality to Individuality 518 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
No joke is dirty. By expelling that rabbi, the council of the rabbis in England has proved only one
thing: that they are dirty old fellows. It shows their mind.
A psychoanalyst was checking a patient. He drew a line on the paper and asked, ”Just look,
concentrate on the line. What does it remind you of?”
He said, ”Of a beautiful woman.”
The psychiatrist said, ”We are on the right track.” He drew a triangle and again he asked, ”Now
concentrate.”
The patient said, ”There is no need to concentrate – it reminds me of a very beautiful woman.”
The psychiatrist said, ”Strange.” He drew a round circle, and he said, ”Now...?”
The psychiatrist was shocked because the patient said, ”Your mind is full of sex and nothing else –
continually drawing naked women, this way, that way, this way. Can’t you draw anything else?” That
fellow thinks that the psychiatrist’s mind is so full of sex!
These rabbis and their council – they must have been really sex-obsessed.
All these people have been telling you what is right, what is wrong, what is true, what is untrue; and
you have been believing them. This believing has brought the whole of humanity to this mess. My
effort is to completely stop the process of believing. You are not to believe in me. If I say that this is
the truth that I have experienced, all that you have to do is to take it as a hypothesis and try it.
There are ways to remember your past lives, simple methods to remember your past lives. There is
no need to believe. We have the rebirthing process – just go a little deeper. When you have reached
to the point of birth, the same process has to be followed You will come to the point of impregnation.
Continue the same process and you will come to your death in the past life. Go on, and you will be
surprised that all that has happened to you in millions of lives is still contained in the deep reservoirs
of your memory. In your collective unconscious nothing has ever been missed out.
Even when you are not paying attention to some thing, your collective unconscious is collecting it.
Now they call it subliminal memory, and they are using it in a few countries. In some countries it
has been banned, but nobody knows... because even if you ban it, it can be used: you go to see
a movie, and in the movie they can use subliminal advertisements. Just in between two frames, a
dozen times during the film, the word ”Coca-Cola” appears, but it comes and goes so fast that you
can’t see it with your eyes; you don’t see it.
If you have seen a movie you will know how the movie film functions. All the pictures are still. For
example, I raise my hand: in the film there will be hundreds of pictures – one position, another
position, another position. Just raising this hand means hundreds of still pictures of different
positions, and they are moving so fast that you don’t see them as separate, static pictures. The
pictures move so fast that you can see the hand moving, but not the still pictures of different postures
of the hand.
From Personality to Individuality 519 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
If you wind the film slowly you will be able to see. Just in the gap in between two pictures of the
hands moving – and they are moving so fast that you cannot see the gap – is put ”Coca-Cola,”
perhaps twelve times in the whole film. You will not be able to remember that you have seen it, but
that day outside the movie house sales of Coca-Cola will be doubled, trebled.
There is an average for how much is sold every day, but on that day treble the number is sold. What
happened? Your unconscious mind goes on collecting even those things which your eyes are not
seeing, your ears are not hearing, your body is not feeling.
You will be surprised. If you are hypnotized and you are asked what happened on the first of
January 1971, from the very early morning when you got up, to the end when you went to bed
again, consciously you will say, ”The first of January’71? – I don’t remember.” Who remembers the
first of January’71, unless something very important happened: your mother died, your father died,
you got divorced from your wife or something. Ordinarily, if it was a usual day you cannot remember
it, but if you are put into hypnosis – and it is a very simple affair to put you into hypnosis.
You just have to be told to look at any shining thing, hanging above your head, to relax your body,
and go on looking at it without blinking your eyes. And the person who is hypnotizing you will go
on saying, ”You are falling asleep. Your eyes are becoming heavy, heavy, heavy, heavier, heavier.”
And you will start feeling your lids becoming heavier, but you have to keep them open as long as
you can. You are not to close them, he is not telling you to close them. You have been instructed to
keep them open to the very last. So you are trying hard, and the eyes go on becoming heavier and
heavier, and you start feeling that the body is becoming numb.
The hypnotist goes on saying, ”Your whole body is numb. You cannot even move your hand if you
want, you cannot move your leg if you want: your body has become almost a stone,” and your eyes
are just about to close. You make a last effort, just as a drowning man makes his last effort for help,
and then drowns and is gone. You can see that now you cannot keep your eyes open, they are really
heavy; stones are hanging from your eyelids.
This takes not more than three minutes; you fall asleep. But the difference between ordinary sleep
and hypnosis is that in ordinary sleep you are oblivious of everything around you. In hypnosis, you
are available to the hypnotist and oblivious of everything else. If somebody else says something,
you won’t listen; even if he calls your name, you won’t answer. But if the hypnotist even whispers
something, you will hear it.
The hypnotist can tell you, ”Please go back to 1971, the first of January. What happened in the
morning, from when you got up?” And you will start relating everything. It can be recorded: ”When
I got up, the first thing was that I was missing my shoes for the bathroom. In the bathroom I was
holding the brush and it fell on the floor” – such things which have no significance. What you ate for
breakfast, what you did after that – you will go into absolute detail, up to the time when you went to
bed again.
You can be awakened by just the reverse process: ”Now the time is over, and your body is becoming
lighter, and your eyes are becoming less heavy, less heavy, less heavy, and now you can open your
eyes.” And you will not remember that you have related all the incidents of the first of January 1971.
But if they are shown to you, you will recognize them: ”Yes, this did happen, but how did you get to
know about it?” You will not be aware that you yourself have given the whole thing.
From Personality to Individuality 520 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
Hypnosis is one of the great dimensions which has not yet been explored. And there is nothing
wrong in it, but all the religions have been against it. Religions are strange: they are against
everything that can lead you to some truth. They have created this atmosphere all around the earth
that hypnosis is something wrong. It is a condemnation if somebody says, ”You are hypnotized.” It is
a humiliation: hypnotized? – me?
But you will be surprised that only very intelligent people can be hypnotized. Mediocre people are
very difficult to hypnotize, and idiots, impossible. That is a simple criterion; if you try it on three
people you can find who the idiot is. Now this is a scientifically established fact, that idiots cannot
be hypnotized, for the simple reason – first, you tell them to look at the shiny object and they will
look somewhere else. You tell them to keep their eyes open; they will keep them closed. For an idiot
everything is possible. You tell them to lie down; they will stand up. Hypnosis is impossible because
they don’t have any intelligence to grasp the idea, and it all depends on them.
A wrong notion is rumored around the world, that it is the power of the hypnotist. Absolutely wrong:
the hypnotist has no power. There is nothing like hypnotic power – that it is the hypnotist’s power that
makes you hypnotized. That is not true, not at all, scientifically. It is your intelligence cooperating
with the directions given by the hypnotist, which can be given by a tape recorder. The hypnotist is
not needed at all. You can’t say, ”This tape recorder has hypnotic power.” The hypnotist is simply
repeating certain suggestions. If you are cooperating with him intelligently the sleep will come to
you.
I used to live with one of my cousin-brothers. He had one strange habit: it was difficult for him to
leave anything. I had found him a beautiful job, and he was working in a third-rate place; the salary
was not good and the work was too much. But that was his habit, that he could not leave anything
that he was doing. I tried to tell him, ”You are just foolish. Here you will be a boss. You will have three
times the salary, a good office. You will be a boss: only your signature will be needed a few times in
the day, and that’s all. And here you are just a third-rate clerk: the whole day writing, copying, and
doing overtime every day.”
But he said, ”I like the people here. My friends are here, and everybody knows me. In a new place”
– he was very nervous – ”in a new place, new people....”
I said, ”I will come with you. I will introduce you to everybody.” No way. Then I said, ”I’d better try
hypnosis on you,” because I had tried hypnosis on him before. And he was a very intelligent person
who always came first in all his examinations – he is now a professor.
I was continually experimenting on him – he was a good medium for hypnosis – and everything
that I suggested, he did. Even post-hypnotic suggestions, minute to minute, he had followed. For
example, one time I had told him in hypnosis, ”Tomorrow at exactly twelve o’ clock when the tower”
– the tower was very near to us – ”when the tower clock strikes twelve, you will kiss your pillow.” And
I took him out of his hypnosis.
The next day, from eleven forty-five I was standing near his bed so he could not go to it. He had no
idea what was going on, but he wanted to go there. I was standing there so he couldn’t. Then I took
his pillow and went out into the garden. He came following me, not knowing what was happening,
and exactly when the clock struck twelve, he jumped, took the pillow, kissed it and became so
ashamed that he ran away.
From Personality to Individuality 521 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
I said, ”What are you doing?”
He said, ”I myself don’t know. I have never kissed my pillow – I tell you truly! Why should I kiss the
pillow? But for a few moments I was not thinking of anything else but the pillow; I was worried. And
why are you carrying my pillow in the garden? I have never seen you carrying my pillow. And I feel
so ashamed; I am sorry that I had to pull the pillow from you, and did such a stupid act, kissing the
pillow.”
I said, ”It’s nothing to be worried about. This was a post-hypnotic suggestion. You were simply
following instructions. You were unable to prevent it, it was unconscious.” You will be puzzled that
when I tried hypnosis to persuade him to change his job – he was afraid, because I had been
trying for two, three days to persuade him without hypnosis and he was reluctant. So he went into
hypnosis, but the moment I said to him, ”You change your job from the old office which is rotten,” he
just sat up immediately.
He said, ”No!”
I said, ”But you were in hypnosis.”
He said, ”I was, but this one thing kept coming to me, that you are going to say something to me
about my job.” That much he remembered even in his hypnosis, that if his job was mentioned he
would come out immediately.
So it is not the power of the hypnotist, it is the intelligence and the cooperation – because he was
uncooperative on one point, but ninety-nine percent he listened to me, did whatever I said.
You can say, ”Just sit down. A cow is standing there; milk the cow,” and the person will sit there
and start milking the cow which is not there. You can say anything and the person will do it – but
against his will there is no way. So people who think you can be hypnotized against your will are
absolutely wrong. It is not a power in the hands of the hypnotist, it is your power. If you allow the
hypnotist to suggest to you and you cooperate.... If you resist, you cannot be hypnotized. So very
great intelligence is needed, trust is needed. Only intelligent and trusting people can be hypnotized.
Hypnosis is one of the ignored, rejected dimensions of life. This can help you reveal all your past
lives so quickly that there is no problem in it – you need not believe in them; first go into hypnosis.
And in hypnosis you can be given a post-hypnotic suggestion that now the hypnotist will not be
needed. Instead, you count from one to one hundred, and by the time you reach one hundred you
will fall into hypnosis on your own.
And whatsoever you want to happen in your hypnosis you have to remind yourself of before you
start counting from one to a hundred. You just say, ”I want to go into my past life,” and start counting
from one to a hundred, and you will fall asleep. And the second thing that you have to say is, ”After
ten minutes or fifteen minutes I will come out again on my own.” Because there is no hypnotist, you
are doing it on your own. But a hypnotist is very helpful; he can easily break the ice, make the
road, and give you the key. Anything will work: ”Repeat your own name three times and you will be
hypnotized.”
From Personality to Individuality 522 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
So my suggestion is, don’t ask me whether the theory of reincarnation is true or not. To me it is
true, to you it is not – not yet. Don’t take any position, negative or positive. Just remain open to the
hypothesis. Explore. If you can go into your own past lives, that’s enough proof that everybody has
a long, long past. And that gives another insight: if there are past lives, that means there are going
to be future lives; this life is only just in the middle. Of course, to enter future lives is not possible
because the future has not happened yet. But to enter the past is absolutely easy because it has
already happened; the memory is there and the record is there. It is just that you have forgotten the
way to the record room where it is recorded.
Take it as a hypothesis.
With me everything is a hypothesis.
If you can trust me only this much, that you are ready to explore, enquire, that will do.
I have no doctrines to teach you, but only methods for you to find out the truth by yourself.
Any truth that is not found by you is not truth.
Truth is truth only when you have found it.
That is an essential quality of the truth, that it has been found by you, that it is authentically yours,
that you can say on your own authority that it is so.
But don’t become authoritative.
Do you see the difference between the two words? I say on my own authority that reincarnation
is true, but I am not authoritative. If I say that you have to believe it, that it is true, then I am
authoritative. The authority is simply my experience. To be authoritative means I want to enforce it
on you and make it a belief for you.
My religion has no doctrines, no tenets, no theories. It is a strange religion. No such thing has
happened before, but that’s the beauty of it. It leaves you totally free.
If I can give you only freedom I have given you everything.
If I can help you to be free from all the nonsense that others have tied around you, that is more than
can be expected.
Once you are free, then all dimensions are there, open; you can travel on your own. And to travel
on your own is so beautiful.
Have you watched little children? When they start walking, if you want to hold their hand they are
not willing. You are trying to be helpful, you are afraid the child may fall, but you don’t understand
the child’s ecstasy. You are destroying his ecstasy by holding his hand. He would rather fall but be
on his own. And what is the harm if he falls once, twice, thrice? – he will learn how not to fall. Simply
watch so that he does not move into some danger. Otherwise, if he is falling just on the plain ground
From Personality to Individuality 523 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
and not into an abyss, there is no need to be worried. Let him learn, because it is better he falls and
learns how not to fall. Then your watching will not be needed; then he can be left alone even by the
side of an abyss.
In my childhood I used to have one strange game, invented by myself – very dangerous. I would
challenge the neighborhood children to walk on a plank of wood that was just lying there. Our new
house was being built, and there were many planks of wood; this was a long, flat plank. I would tell
the children to walk on it, and they would; there was no problem. I would say, ”You can walk on it?
Then I will put it across two balconies.” Then I would say, ”Now walk on it. It is the same plank: you
walked on it when it was on the floor. There is no difference, except that now it is high above.”
And they would say, ”We cannot walk on it.”
But I said, ”What is the difference? It is the same plank which you have walked along many times,
and you did not fall.” I would show them, I would walk on it. And my mother used to run out when she
saw me on the plank again. I would tell her with my finger, ”Keep quiet, because if you say anything
I may fall,” so she would stand there not even breathing.
I would walk the plank and she would go crazy and scream and say, ”What is this?”
I told my mother, ”This is a game that I have invented, and this is the game I am going to play my
whole life.”
She said, ”What! Your whole life, this game?”
I said, ”This is the game. Later on I may call it a different name, but this is the game.” And I am still
playing the same game. Awareness – that’s all you need. On the ground you can walk very easily
because you know there is no fear of falling. It is the same plank, the same size, the same breadth,
but the fear has arisen that you can fall. But if you are alert you can walk on it; there is no problem.
Just be alert, then you can walk on any hypothesis and there is no danger of falling into belief.
Remain alert. Use any hypothesis. You are bound to find some truth, and any truth is good because
it is an aspect of the whole truth; from that you can move and find the whole truth.
Just catch the tail of the elephant, that is enough: you have found the elephant. It may take a little
time to discover the rest – the elephant is big – but the whole problem is to catch hold of the right
tail. Belief is not the right thing.
And I will not support any kind of belief, positive or negative.
I support only hypotheses.
The second question?
Question 2
OSHO,
From Personality to Individuality 524 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
YOU HAVE SAID THAT ONE CANNOT PULL THE LEG’S OF A MAN OF AWARENESS. WERE
YOU JUST PULLING OUR LEG?
YES, that is true: one cannot pull the leg of a man of awareness. But the second part is a little
complex, because the man of awareness will not want to pull your leg. He pulls your head up. That
expression – pulling somebody’s head up – is not in any language, but that is the work of the man
of awareness.
In this life everybody is pulling everybody’s legs to pull you down so they go up. The man of
awareness is far above you. It is very difficult for him to reach your leg – and particularly in the
Big Muddy Ranch. He will have to dive deep into the mud to find your leg. No man of awareness is
going to do that.
But he will pull something, he will not leave you alone. He will pull your head up, and that’s the only
way when somebody is deep in the mud. This big, muddy ranch is really very representative of the
whole world, because everybody is in mud, deep in the mud, going down and down. Even to find
your head is so difficult, what to say about your leg – unless you are standing on your head! Then
perhaps you will have to be pulled by your leg, but that is very rare. People don’t do headstands in
mud.
That kind of practice happens – I am reminded of a story. It is sometime in the future when Morarji
Desai dies. He was hoping to go to heaven of course, but the devil welcomed him into hell. Morarji
Desai said, ”What! I am the ex-prime minister, Morarji Desai, don’t you know?”
The devil said, ”We know you well. We have been waiting for you a long time, but you went on
drinking your urine, and you stink so much that death went many times to take you away, but went
away – just the stink was too much. But finally we had to force death, telling him,’Now something
has to be done. This man has lived too long.’ And you can choose... you are a very great politician,
leader, celebrity, so this much of a favor I can do. We have three sections in hell, you can choose.”
In the first one Morarji Desai looked: people were being thrown into fire. And although they were
being thrown into fire, they were burning but they were not dying; it was tremendously painful. They
were being pulled out again and thrown back again. He said, ”No, this is not the place.”
The second one he saw was a little better than the first, but not for him. Strange, so many insects he
had never seen before were passing through people’s bodies, making holes, going in and coming
out from another hole. Each man’s body was nothing but holes because those insects went on
coming in, going out, coming in, going out. Morarji Desai said, ”No, this is not the place for me. I
would like to see the third.”
The third one he saw he felt at ease with, because it was not much trouble compared to those other
two. And he was also a little bit accustomed to this place: it was full of shit and urine. Fifty percent
he was acquainted with, fifty percent he would learn, what else to do? – these were the three places.
One thing was good, it was only up to the knees, and people were standing in it and drinking coffee.
Morarji Desai said, ”This is perfectly good – this will do.”
As he entered the devil shouted, ”Now the coffee break is over.” So everybody finished his coffee.
”Now be in the headstand.” Then Morarji Desai understood that this was not at all so easy.
From Personality to Individuality 525 Osho
CHAPTER 29. BELIEF – JUST A BLIND MAN’S BLUFF
So only in that third kind of hell are people standing on their heads. In the world people are deep in
mud but still standing on their feet. The enlightened person pulls you by your head, up. There is no
expression like that because languages are not made by men of enlightenment; they are made by
unconscious people, for unconscious people, for unconscious purposes.
For the enlightened... no language exists in the world which is made by enlightened people, for
enlightened people, for the purpose of enlightenment That’s the difficulty; that’s why they all feel
that truth cannot be expressed. There is no language which has been made by people who know
the truth. In fact, there have never been so many people knowing truth that there was any need to
create a language. It happens rarely, once in a while, that somebody is enlightened; of what use is
language? To whom is he going to talk the enlightened language?
But my problem is that I am trying to pull your head up, so on the way I go on making up my own
phrases, creating my own language, my own words. Somehow, if the message reaches you, even
a little bit of it, that will be enough. Because even a little bit of fire is enough to put the whole jungle
on fire. Your whole life can be aflame by just a little flame jumping into you.
From Personality to Individuality 526 Osho
CHAPTER 30
The only authentic democracy: the dictatorship of the enlightened
ones
28 January 1985 pm in Lao Tzu Grove
Question 1
OSHO,
WHY ARE YOU AGAINST COMMUNISM?
I am against communism, but for a very strange reason. The strange reason is that it is not
communism at all. The word communism is derived from ”commune”; but communism is not
commune-ism. It has no base in the idea of the commune – on the contrary, it is simply anti-
capitalism. Its name gives you the false notion of something positive, but in fact it is only a negative
approach: it is anti-capitalism. And my understanding is that anything that is basically negative
cannot help man’s evolution in any way.
It is because of this fact that atheism has not been of any help to man’s evolution, his consciousness,
his growth. It is just pure negativity. Just saying that there is no God, and basing your whole
philosophy on the belief in no – God, is sheer stupidity. Life needs something positive. In fact
it needs something so positive that it can absorb its negative also, so powerfully positive that the
negative need not remain out of it or against it; it can be absorbed.
Jesus says, ”Man cannot live by bread alone.” I cannot agree with him, because mostly man lives by
bread alone; most human beings have lived by bread alone. I know what his implication was. I am
not against his implication, I am against his statement. The implication is that man needs something
527
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
more than the physical, something more than the bodily, something higher, transcendental, without
which man can vegetate but cannot live. I support the implication, but Jesus’ statement is very poor.
Why did I mention the statement? I wanted to make a similar statement but one with tremendous
meaning.
I say unto you:
Man cannot live by the negative alone.
And communism is only a negative philosophy, like atheism.
Just think:
How can you grow with noes surrounding you?
Growth needs the staircase of yes.
No is dead; it is equivalent to death.
Death is the ultimate no.
Life is the ultimate yes. Life needs the base of some yes-philosophy.
Communism has nothing to offer. It is very strange, but worth understanding, that all kinds of
perverse ideas are by-products of Judaism – for example Christianity, which is a negative philosophy.
The cross is a symbol of its negativity. You can make it of gold, but a cross is a cross. Just by making
it of gold you cannot make it a yes; it remains a no.
Christianity has said no to everything in life that is joyful, that you can rejoice in. It is anti-life. It
is rooted in death, and its whole world starts after your death. Your life is worthless unless it is
sacrificed for the life that is going to come after death.
You see the perversion? Is real life after death or before death? And if life continues after death,
then why should you be against life now? – because the same life will continue, perhaps on a wider
scale, a bigger scale, a higher scale, but the same life will be there. And if you are against this life,
how can you be for that life? It is going to be a continuity, an enlargement.
Christianity is the first perversion that came out of Judaism. The second perversion that came out
of Judaism is Freudian psychoanalysis. Freud was a Jew just as Jesus was a Jew, but there is a
difference between the two. Jesus was trying to prove himself the messiah of the Jews. He was
a little gullible and innocent, perhaps unaware of the fact that messiahs are only in the future or in
the past, but never in the present. You can accept them when they are dead, you can accept them
when they are not born, but you cannot accept them when they are your contemporaries. For your
contemporaries you have nothing but contempt; perhaps that is the root of the word contemporary.
And Jesus was just trying to be accepted as a messiah while alive. Freud was more sophisticated,
more intellectual, more cultured. His approach was not that of proving himself a Jewish messiah
From Personality to Individuality 528 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
– he knew what had happened to Jesus – he tried just the opposite. It is a logical understanding:
Jesus failed by trying something, now try just the opposite.
Judaism is very much against sex. All the religions are against sex, so it is nothing unique to
Judaism. But other religions are against sex just in their theories; practically, they understand the
nature of man and the weakness of man. For example, Hinduism teaches you to go beyond sex but
does not condemn sex itself. On the contrary, it gives you methods and techniques so you can use
the sex energy itself to go into a nonsexual dimension. Hinduism is not against sex but you should
not be left in the imprisonment of sex. There is no need to be against it; it is better to use it as a
stepping-stone. Why hit your head against the stone? That is not going to destroy the stone, it will
only break your skull. But Jews have been doing exactly that.
The Old Testament says that God was so angry with two beautiful cities, Gomorrah and Sodom, that
He destroyed them completely. What were they doing? They were enjoying sex in all its possible
dimensions – that was their crime. Only Hassids have a beautiful story about the destruction of
Gomorrah and Sodom, but that story is not acceptable to orthodox Judaism, it is not part of orthodox
Judaism.
Judaism has given only one beautiful thing to the world, and that is Hassidism. But Jews are against
the Hassids. They think of them as not equal to themselves, they are fallen Jews. But I have looked
into the orthodox mind of Jews and into the Hassidic mind: if I am to decide who has fallen then I
will say the orthodox Jews have fallen so far that there is no further to fall. They have reached the
very bottom.
Hassidism is a beautiful flowering – the only thing that has come out of Judaism which can be
preserved in an authentic religion. But they are a rejected people.
Hassids have a beautiful story about Gomorrah and Sodom which neither the Old Testament nor
any other orthodox source reports, so certainly it is a Hassidic creation, an invention, imagination.
But I love the story and I would like you to remember it.
The story is that God decides, in Jewish anger, to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah. A Hassid saint
reaches God and asks Him, ”If in Sodom there are one hundred good people and one hundred
thousand bad people, and you are going to destroy the whole city, have you considered the fact that
one hundred good people will also be destroyed?”
God has second thoughts. He says, ”That I have not thought about – but you will have to prove that
there are one hundred good people.”
The Hassid said, ”Wait. I may not be able to find one hundred people, but think: if there are only
ten good people in the whole city, is it right and godly to destroy the whole city? Won’t you be
supportive of those ten people who are good, even in that terrible place which you are going to
destroy completely?”
God said, ”I will have to think. Yes, it makes no difference whether there are one hundred or ten
good people – but you will have to find ten people.”
From Personality to Individuality 529 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
The Hassid said, ”Wait a little – just one question more. If there is only one person who is good,
what do you think: isn’t one good person’s goodness far more valuable than one hundred thousand
people’s badness? Badness is a negative quality; it has no value. You should not pay that much
attention to it; otherwise it makes it valuable. That one good person is more weighty.”
God said, ”Your logic is right. Whether there are one hundred good people, ten good people or one
good person, I will stand up for the good. But you will have to prove that there is one good person.”
The Hassid said, ”I am here, present. There is no need for me to go anywhere. That’s why I was
reducing the number – because I may not be able to find a hundred people, I may not be able to find
ten people. And how to judge? From the moment I became good I forgot the idea of judgment. To
me everybody is good. I cannot see badness in someone, because badness is just a shadow; it is
not a person’s true self He may have acted badly but that does not make his being bad. One action
can be bad, two actions can be bad, three actions can be bad, one hundred actions can be bad; but
still, the being is as pure as ever.
”The being can come out of its actions. It can drop its actions, it can drop its past, and from this very
moment the man can become a saint. Nobody can prevent him. How can you judge? There is no
way to judge. That’s why I was reducing the number. It is not that there are not good people; in fact,
I have lived in both cities and I have found only good people.”
The moment you are good, your judgment drops and you stop judging people – because judgment
depends on actions, and action is a very superficial thing It is as if you are judging the ocean by the
ripples This will be absolutely absurd – to judge the ocean just by the ripples on the surface. Actions
are just drawings on water: you have not yet finished them and they have disappeared. And being
is beyond your actions; it is always transcendental to what you do. The question is, what are you?
The Hassid said, ”And now I see only what people are. Sometimes a person who is immensely
beautiful, good, saintly, may have to act in a way that looks bad, that may go against convention.
You cannot judge him by the act itself That’s why I was reducing the number.
Now I am here. I live in both these towns: half the year in Sodom and half the year in Gomorrah.
Are you ready to destroy me?”
And the Hassidic story is that God decided not to destroy the cities. But this is a Hassidic story,
and the Hassids are the only good people to have come out of Judaism. Naturally they are rejected
because they reject all your nonsense. They will not accept the Old Testament story that God
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. They say, ”Our saint was there and he saved it. He saved both
the cities; and he saved, in fact, the whole of humanity, because if Gomorrah and Sodom are worth
saving then there is not a single human being who is worth destroying.
Freud had the same tendency as Jesus had – to be a prophet – which is extremely Jewish; it is some
kind of racial disease. This fellow Moses is responsible. He created the whole game of prophets
and messiahs, and created the idea in poor people’s minds – which are feeble anyway; they get
some idea and they start thinking that it is so. Freud was very much a messiah, but he knew that if
he declared that he was a messiah – he was a coward also. He was not as fanatically courageous
as Jesus. So what he did, rather than proposing himself for crucifixion, he tried to create something
absolutely new and become the originator of a new religion.
From Personality to Individuality 530 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
Psychoanalysis, to Freud, was a religion, and he was the founder-prophet, the father-figure. Through
psychoanalysis what he did was just go against the whole Jewish antagonism to sex. That was his
way of saying to the Jews, ”I have nothing to do with you – no need to prepare a cross for me. I am
doing something absolutely different, in fact just the opposite to what you have been doing for four
thousand years.”
But in his unconscious Freud carried the idea of being the prophet. And he was very much afraid,
his whole life, that somebody was going to become a Judas. Only prophets are afraid of Judases,
otherwise there is no need.... For example, I am not afraid: if you all turn into Judases, so far so
good; there is no harm in it. Because I am not posing as a messiah, how can you betray me?
Judas could betray because it seems he must have got fed up with this man continually pretending
to be the only son of God, the ultimate word, the messiah for whom you have been waiting and who
is going to redeem the whole world. Anybody would get bored with such a fellow. My feeling is
that out of boredom he simply accepted thirty silver coins from the high priest and sold Jesus. He
didn’t even consider him more valuable than thirty silver coins. He really wanted to get rid of all this
nightmare that he had to suffer with this man.
You don’t know, because you have not lived with a prophet: he is always right, you are always wrong.
Whatsoever he says is the very word of God. There is no question of why. He is not here to give you
any reason, he simply dictates commandments to you. Do or die, but don’t ask why.
Judas was the only educated person in the company Jesus kept – more educated than Jesus.
Jesus was uneducated, absolutely. Judas was the only person who could be thought to have some
intelligence. He must have got fed up; there is a limit to how much one can bear, tolerate. Finally he
delivered the prophet to the Jews.
But I am not a prophet.
You cannot sell me.
I have never dictated to you to do anything.
I have never commanded you to follow me.
I have never pretended that I am somebody specially sent from above to deliver a message to you.
I am nobody’s postman:
I am simply doing my own thing.
Right or wrong, I am simply doing my own thing. If you feel that it is enjoyable, you are welcome. If
you feel it is not worth your while, you are welcome to drop it again. There is no problem in it. It is
not enforced on you.
Freud wanted to be a prophet. His whole life is proof of it. He was expelling psychiatrists,
psychoanalysts and psychologists, just as religions and political parties expel some people; anybody
From Personality to Individuality 531 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
suspect has to be immediately expelled. What was the suspicion? Freud was suspicious that he
would be betrayed. But what can be betrayed if you have not brought the ultimate truth? Someone
can, at the most, do his own thing. You are doing your own thing; he is free to do his own thing. But
Freud went on expelling people and just keeping the very few who were absolutely devoted. A total
surrender was needed.
That is the approach of a prophet. Either you are for him or you are his enemy. He does not accept
any third category of”l am not interested.” He does not accept any third category. There were only
two types of people: those who were for Freud and those who were against Freud. Those who were
not for were included in the second category; there is no third category at all.
Freud did exactly the opposite to what Jesus was doing for exactly the same purpose for which
Jesus was doing it. He created psychoanalysis. It was not possible for anybody else in the whole
world to create psychoanalysis. Whenever it was to be created it was going to be created by a Jew.
These things are not accidental.
There was so much of an ”anti” attitude about sex, and Christianity carried it to its logical end
because they wanted to prove that they are far superior to the Jews. Jews themselves rejected
their ultimate flowering, the messiah, and Christians accepted the messiah as the founder of a new
religion. Naturally, there was great competition. Christianity went even more against sex and life
than Judaism.
Sigmund Freud took revenge on both, because Christianity is nothing but a Jewish branch. It has
all the stupidities of Judaism in it and has added a few more of its own. Freud declared that all the
problems of man can be solved by psychoanalysis. Now, this is one of the tendencies of prophets.
They always have the panacea – one single remedy for all kinds of sicknesses. This is not a scientific
attitude.
Each sickness needs individual attention, it needs its own remedy. There is not a single cause that is
creating all the troubles of the world, there are millions of causes. Yes, there are a few causes which
are very central, and if they can be destroyed those millions of others may disappear, but there is
not a single cause. All the religions have been doing that, saying that there is a single cause.
Christianity says that the cause is the original sin: it is just that man has to undo what Adam and Eve
did and everything will be absolutely as it should be. Jainism thinks that violence is the only cause.
If everybody becomes non-violent there will be no problem. In the same way all the other religions
propose a remedy, a prophet, a holy book, a God.
Sigmund Freud’s religion is psychoanalysis. It is against Judaism and Christianity. Christianity
should not be thought separate from Judaism. It was created by a Jew, it is a Jewish firm; and in
fact the Jews should claim that the Vatican belongs to them and throw out this pope and all these
bishops. Jesus was of their blood, and all these people – Catholics and Protestants and so many
kinds of Christians, all offshoots of a single illiterate Jewish mind – are exploiting their invention.
Freud simply went against them, thinking that this would not be thought something Jewish – but
it was Jewish. He was brought up in the climate of anti-life, anti-sex, anti-enjoyment. That’s why
Hassids are not appreciated by the Jews, because they are life-affirmative; that is the trouble. They
From Personality to Individuality 532 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
enjoy life, they dance, they sing; and that seems to be just not religion at all – dancing and singing.
Even old Hassids dance so beautifully, and they love life tremendously. But this is not acceptable.
Freud found that all problems have arisen out of the repression of sex. So anything you brought
to Freud, hc would reduce it to some sexual problem. Sexual problems were the origin of every
sickness – mental, physical, social, economic – it made no difference. One sometimes wonders:
when a person starts thinking of himself as a prophet, does he lose all reason, rationality and
intelligence?
For example, if a man who is mad after money goes to Sigmund Freud, Freud will say that this man
is obsessed with money. What is the remedy, and what, do you think, can be the cause? Repression
of sex! On the surface you cannot see the connection: he is after money and you are talking about
sex? He never cared about sex – but that only proves that what Sigmund Freud is saying is right.
Because his sexual energy has been repressed, now it is coming up in the ambition for money:
money can purchase sex, as much as you want.
The rich people will go to the synagogue, to the church, to the temple, will listen to all kinds of
sermons against sex; and these are the very people who are creating prostitution around the world
In India it used to be a tradition that the most beautiful girl in any town or city had no chance of
marriage. To be beautiful was dangerous; and to be the most beautiful meant to be a prostitute. This
was a tradition. Of course they made it as beautiful as they could. They used to have competitions
– just as you have competitions for Miss America, for Miss Universe, perhaps even for Miss Oregon.
No, I don’t think there is any Miss Oregon, or can be – impossible. They used to have that kind of
competition in India in the past, and the most beautiful girl chosen was declared nagarvadhu.
Nagarvadhu means wife of the whole city. She was respected like a goddess, but in fact she was
only a prostitute; everybody could behave with her as with his wife. Of course she was beyond the
reach of the poor, beyond the reach of the middle class, even beyond the reach of the higher middle
class. She was only within the reach of the super-rich – the king, the princes, the lords – because
her price was so much just for a single night that although she was called the wife of the city, she
was really the wife of a dozen chosen people.
These people were all great donators to Gautam Buddha and Vardhamana Mahavira. They were
making temples, on the one hand – statues, caravanserais for people to stay in, and putting trees by
the side of streets for thousands of miles so that travelers could have shadow in the hot sun. They
were doing all kinds of virtuous acts and yet they were creating nagarvadhus, wives of the whole
city. Prostitution they turned into a beautiful affair – the woman was proud.
They did another thing: they created another institution for those who could not afford the highest
sex symbol of their society. They should not be left completely out of it, otherwise they could be
dangerous. So they created another institution. The parents of beautiful girls were given the idea
that if you give your beautiful daughter to the temple, you will earn great virtue, you will be born in
heaven. These girls donated to the temple were called devabalas, divine girls.
India has its own flavor. To use a word like call girl does not suit the Indian mind, rather, ”divine girl.”
And what was her purpose? Her purpose was to serve anybody who wanted to be served, and the
From Personality to Individuality 533 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
money should go to the temple. The girl was only a prostitute, and even, temple had hundreds of
prostitutes. All the money was coming to the temple so the priests were happy. The poor people
were happy because for a small donation they could manage to get beautiful women. And the
women were not feeling in any way insulted: they were divine girls; they were not ordinary women,
they were special.
And a third institution was created for the priests. Of course they deserved something special
because they had been helping the rich, the king, the queen, the poor – everybody. They deserved
some reward – and you will be surprised what their reward was. Their reward was that any newly-
married bride had to spend her first night with the priest, because first she had to be purified by the
priest and the god; only then was she pure.
And because it was traditional and conventional, there was no problem in it; everybody was happy.
The husband was also happy that his wife had first been offered to God. Of course God Himself is not
there – there is always some representative, the priest, the pope or anybody – but a representative is
as good as God. The woman was happy that she had been accepted by God, by His representative.
So on the surface Hinduism continued to talk against sex; but it was more human in a way:
underground it allowed even, kind of sex possible, in many ways.
But Judaism has been sincerely against it, against enjoying life in any way. Freud simply started
knocking the whole anti-sexual, anti-life attitude. But again, his is a ”no” philosophy. Jesus gives a
”no” philosophy: that you have to be redeemed from life. An absolute no has to be said to this life.
Sigmund Freud also bases his philosophy on a negative attitude: just drop your sexual repression
and all problems are solved. I don’t see it, because there are tribes in the world who have no sexual
repression and have the most complex problems: poverty, sickness, no scientific development, no
intellectual growth no evolution of consciousness. You will be surprised that the societies that have
not repressed sex in some way, have remained backward.
The societies that have suppressed sex have evolved; they are the most civilized and cultured
societies. Strange? If Freud is accepted then the whole culture, the whole civilization will revert
to being aboriginals. But they have all the problems – more than you have. They have very
fundamental problems: no food, no clothes, and no intelligence either to produce food and clothes
and mechanisms or anything.
What Freud is propounding is not transcendence of sex; he is throwing you back into the
undeveloped, barbaric condition where sex will be freely available. But without bread what are
you going to do with sex? Without clothes, without medicines, without any kind of human culture,
what are you going to do with sex? Yes, you can go on reproducing children, but you won’t have
enough to feed them: you don’t have enough to feed yourself.
If Freud is accepted totally, the whole civilization will die. His attitude is just against the Jewish idea
of repressing sex and against Christianity, but it is not going to help humanity. He is a reactionary.
He has not thought about the whole implication of it. Why have people who have not repressed sex
not progressed? That should have been one of the most significant questions to be asked.
From Personality to Individuality 534 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
The people who have repressed sex half the way have only progressed half the way. It is very
strange, the proportion is exactly the same: the more sex is repressed, the more society develops.
It becomes more intelligent, more inventive and more scientific.
Do you think any aboriginal tribe can produce a Sigmund Freud, that Red Indians can produce a
Sigmund Freud? It is impossible even to conceive. Sigmund Freud can be only produced in a
Christian-Jewish context, in that reference, because there he has hit upon a master key, that is, your
repression of sex. But it is not giving you any positive foundation. It may remove repression but it is
not giving you any idea of transcendence. But he proved one thing, that he was a prophet, that his
idea was very original.
He created a great movement around the world. That is the second destructive by-product of
Judaism. First is Jesus, second is Freud, and third is Karl Marx. Why is Karl Marx against
capitalism? It is not that he is against capitalism; he is a poor Jew and is full of jealousy against
those who are rich. That is a Jewish trend, very characteristic.
In India I was surprised – because I was looking for a parallel. Jainas are the Jews in India as far as
riches are concerned. You cannot find a single Jaina beggar. The Jainas are super-rich, or upper
middle class; at the worst, middle class. Once in a while you will find a poor Jaina – not a beggar,
but poor. These poor Jainas were the first to be attracted to communism. I was surprised to find this
fact.
One of my faraway relatives is a very famous communist leader, Comrade Bhagchand. I asked him,
”Have you considered the fact that it is not that you want to destroy capitalism, it is simply that you
are a poor Jaina and you have so much jealousy in you against the rich Jainas?” But man is so
clever in making philosophies of things.
Three generations in Marx’s family had been poor. He himself remained unemployed and poor his
whole life. It is very strange: he was dependent on a rich friend, but writing against capitalism. The
rich friend, Friedrich Engels, was a capitalist who owned factories. He had been feeding Karl Marx
and his family his whole life, and Marx never worked for a single day; he earned not a single cent.
Engels must have been a man of great compassion. He could see the man had genius and needed
support.
Although he was writing against capitalism, Marx was a great logician: he convinced Engels also
that capitalism is the whole cause of all the problems in the world: ”If we can destroy capitalism and
distribute the wealth equally to people, all problems will disappear.”
Karl Marx is basically a jealous Jew rationalizing his jealousy into beautiful jargon. The remedy
that he proposes is fallacious. Firstly, if you distribute the wealth of those who are rich to the poor,
what will be the result? The poor will not become rich, the rich will only become poor: you will be
distributing poverty. Yes, people will not feel jealous any more because they will all be equally poor.
I am against poverty, hence I am against communism.
I want people to be equally rich, not equally poor.
From Personality to Individuality 535 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
But for that a totally different approach is needed. It is not a question of distribution of wealth –
because there is not much wealth to distribute. How many people are there who are rich? – two
percent in India.
Now, the wealth of two percent distributed to ninety-eight percent poor people is just like a spoonful
of sugar thrown into the ocean to make it sweet. You are simply losing one spoonful of sugar
unnecessarily. At least it could have given one man one cup of tea – even that is gone. Not that
others are gaining anything, but they will all enjoy the idea: ”Now nobody is drinking tea, we are all
equal.” Otherwise this man was drinking tea and everybody was jealous.
The people who have created wealth have a certain talent for creating it. You should use their talent;
you should make it an art to be taught to everybody. They are not to be punished because they have
created wealth.
In an aboriginal society, a primitive society, of which a few fragments are still alive here and there
on the earth, nobody is poor and nobody is rich; of course there is no jealousy. Everybody owns
nothing, everybody equally owns nothing; but nobody is producing wealth.
In fact the people who are producing wealth are creating an urge in others also to create wealth.
Don’t destroy these people – use these people as symbols. They have a certain art of creating
wealth – make that art available to everybody, educate everybody. You teach economics in the
universities; it would be far better if you taught the art of becoming rich – because by teaching
economics you don’t help them to know the art of becoming rich. They win gold medals in the
universities and then they disappear.
When I was a professor I asked one of my vice-chancellors, ”Have you ever thought about what
happens to your gold medallists? They should shine in the society everywhere. What is the purpose
of your gold medal? A man who stood first in the whole university disappears and is never heard
about again. What happens to him? That shows simply the poverty of your gold medal and the
poverty of all your education. Even if he topped your whole educational system, what has he
gained?”
I have asked professors of economics, ”You have been teaching economics for twenty or thirty years
– how rich have you become?”
They said, ”But what has that to do with teaching economics?”
I said, ”Economics should be the science of becoming rich. You are just a poor professor, and if in
thirty years of teaching you have not been able to find some secret of creating riches, what about
your students? Have any of them become rich?” No, economics is not concerned about that; it is
concerned about absolutely theoretical questions which have nothing to do with practical life.
Marx’s idea is the distribution of wealth. Why? The reason he proposes is psychologically wrong,
absolutely wrong. His reason is that every man is equal. That is psychologically absurd. What to
say about all men, the whole humanity – not even two individuals are equal. Each individual is so
unique, he cannot be equal to any other individual.
By saying that all human beings are equal Karl Marx is destroying the uniqueness of the individual.
From Personality to Individuality 536 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
That’s why I am against him and his whole philosophy – because I stand for the uniqueness of the
individual.
I am not saying that somebody is superior to you and somebody is inferior to you. Remember it! I
am simply saying that you are not comparable to anybody:
You are you and the other is the other.
You don’t compare a rose with a lotus, you simply say that they are two different things. Two different
individuals, although they are both human beings, are unique individuals – incomparable.
Marx gives this idiotic idea – and it has been purchased by everybody all over the world: communists,
anti-communists, everybody has purchased it; even the capitalists have purchased the idea that all
men are equal. Why has nobody criticized it and fought it?for the simple reason that it looks very
humanitarian. My God! Has something to be true or untrue – does its validity have to be judged by
logic or by humanitarianism? Then any lie which appears to be humanistic has to be accepted. And
upon that lie – that all men are equal – the whole structure of communism has been raised.
Now, you know, it is such a simple thing to understand – that every individual has different degrees
of intelligence and different dimensions of creativity. Everybody cannot be a poet, everybody cannot
be a scientist, everybody cannot be a painter; and it is good that everybody cannot be, otherwise life
would lose all joy. The joy is in the uniqueness of the individual – that he is so unique, unrepeatable,
irreplaceable, that once he is gone his place is going to remain empty forever. Nobody can fulfill his
place; the way he was fulfilling it, only he could do it.
Marx takes away, in a very cunning way, the whole dignity of the individual. And I call it really cunning
because he gives the idea of equality of all human beings. In such a beautiful idea of equality you
will not be able to detect what he has taken away from you. He has made you just a cog in the
wheel, replaceable. He has put you on the assembly line in a factory which produces cars: just the
same car goes on being assembled on an automatic assembly line.
Ford produces one car every minute. Every minute, for twenty-four hours, a similar car goes on
coming out of the assembly line. But man is not an assembled mechanism; you cannot take him
apart and assemble him again. It would have been very helpful in a way if we could take a man
apart – clean his insides and everything, replace a few bulbs here and there, a few fuses which have
gone out, a few nuts and bolts which have got loose or too tight – and then assemble him again with
a new battery.
It would have been really good; but it would also be the greatest calamity that can happen. Then
man disappears; then he is only a robot running on a battery. It is simple: if he breaks his hand
there is no trouble, spare parts are always available. He just goes to any workshop, and his hand
is changed; he gets a brand-new hand – no problem. Only once in a while he may have a problem
when he is telling some woman, ”I love you,” and then he goes ”Grrrr, grrr, grrrr... my battery is
running out... just call the mechanic....” Only once in a while will he go ”Grrrr, grrrr” – he won’t be
able to speak, the battery is running out.
Or you may be supplied with a small meter which goes on showing you on your wrist what is going
down, what is going up, what is needed now: if you need a little more petrol, or water, or the oil has
to be changed. It will be simpler – but you will not be human, you will be robots.
From Personality to Individuality 537 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
Marx, by making you equal, is proposing a philosophy which ultimately is bound to make you robots
– that is the Marxist philosophy’s logical conclusion.
Only robots can be equal.
Man’s dignity is in his uniqueness.
But let me repeat – because there is every possibility that I will be misunderstood – I am not saying
that somebody is superior to you and somebody is inferior to you. I am simply saying that the very
idea of comparison is invalid; you are just yourself. I cannot call you unequal, I cannot call you equal.
Do you follow me? I cannot call you unequal.
That is the criticism communists have been throwing upon me – that I am telling people that people
are unequal. That is absolutely unjust to me. I am not saying people are unequal, I am saying they
are not equal; that implies they are not unequal either. The very idea of comparison is invalid. Man
is unique. Man is not just a member of the society, a part of the society. He is an individual, an
independent whole in himself and it is not right....
Just think of it in this way and you will see it completely clearly: if somebody says that everybody
has to be writing poetry, then even if some people are writing better poetry than you, their poetry
has to be distributed on an equal basis with yours. Everybody has to be equally a poet, equally a
musician.
You can see the absurdity, that if Yehudi Menuhin has to be made equal to you, you won’t gain
anything, and that poor fellow will lose everything. You cannot be Yehudi Menuhin. He has a certain
genius that is born with him, that is in his very chemistry, in his very physiology, in his very being.
You don’t have that chemistry, that physiology, that being. His parents were different, his parents’
parents were different.
You cannot have his quality distributed, that is impossible. And that will destroy all the beautiful
flowers in human life. But you don’t think that way. You think Yehudi Menuhin is just himself; there
is no question of somebody else taking his qualities, dividing and distributing them. But you don’t
understand that in exactly the same way there are people who have a certain talent to be rich.
Everybody is not Henry Ford, cannot be; and there is no need. One Henry Ford has created enough
traffic No need for more! If there are many Henry Fords then do you know what will be the result?
The result will be that walking will be faster than driving. It is already becoming so. In cities like New
York, Bombay, Tokyo and Calcutta, a distance you can cover by walking within ten minutes to fifteen
minutes will take you one and a half hours in a car.
I used to stay in Calcutta with one of the most significant, talented, rich men – Sahu Shantiprasad.
Now he is dead. The auditorium where I used to give my talks and his house were only a ten-minute
walk apart, but in his limousine it was unpredictable. If my lecture was going to be from seven-thirty,
he would start panicking from five, telling me to get ready.
I said, ”You are just mad! The lecture will start at seven-thirty and it is only a ten-minute walk. If we
walk it will take ten minutes.”
From Personality to Individuality 538 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
But he said, ”We are not going to walk. And traffic in Calcutta is so chaotic that you never know....
We have to leave here at least one and a half hours before.”
And sometimes it used to happen that we were still late, but sometimes we were too early and then
we would just sit in the car. I said, ”This is so stupid, Sahu Shantiprasad.”
But he said, ”I cannot allow you to walk – you are my guest.”
I said, ”That’s true, I am your guest, but I have to sit in your car for four hours coming and going. This
is strange, because in four hours I can reach Bombay or Delhi, but I only reach this poor auditorium!”
If there are many Henry Fords it will become a more difficult world than it is right now. No, nature
produces enough people for any particular purpose. Nature has a very deep balancing power.
For example, when children are born, if a hundred girls are born today, then one hundred and ten
boys will be born. About that data I was simply surprised. Why one hundred girls and one hundred
and ten boys? Is nature also male chauvinistic? No, it is not that: nature is simply a balancing
power. Ten boys die before a marriageable age. Girls are more resistant to diseases; boys are
weaker as far as resistance to sickness is concerned. They may have muscular power – that is a
different power – but as far as resistance to disease, sickness and death is concerned, they are less
powerful than women.
So one hundred girls will suffice for one hundred and ten boys, because ten boys will be missing
by the time they reach the marriageable age, something which nature is balancing from the very
beginning. Otherwise there will be ninety boys and one hundred girls. Those ten girls will be in
difficulty, and will create so much difficulty for the ninety boys that you cannot conceive.... It will be a
chaos.
Those ten girls without husbands, without boyfriends – do you think they are just going to sit and
meditate? They will start grabbing hold of somebody else’s husband, and then it is going to be a
chaos. To avoid that chaos nature has to be alert from the very beginning to supply ten boys more,
because they will be missing at the right time.
If nature is as balancing as that, it was balancing other things also, till man started to interfere
with it. For centuries the population of the world had remained the same. It was only man who
started interfering with nature – through medicine, through new inventions to increase man’s life.
Now you have created a trouble in the world. Nature was keeping the balance: people were born
but enough people were dying. It was almost always equal. What you have done is that you have
prevented death, but you are not allowed to prevent birth. Now the pope goes on issuing sermons
that abortions should be made illegal.
Just the other day I heard there was a demonstration of seventy thousand people in the capital
demanding that abortion should not be legal, it should be declared illegal. And when President
Reagan – just look at these politicians! – was governor of California he had signed the bill
for legalization of abortion, because in California there was a great movement, an upsurge for
legalization of abortion. Then he signed the bill. And now he inaugurates this procession that
wants the constitution amended, and abortion declared illegal again because it is against religion
and against life.
From Personality to Individuality 539 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
Reagan inaugurated that protest because now all the orthodox people in the country, particularly
the orthodox Christians, Catholics and Jews – all orthodox people – are with this movement. When
declaring that procession inaugurated, Reagan said, ”In my whole life I have committed only one
mistake, and that was when I was governor of California and I signed that bill. That was the only
mistake that I have committed.”
Politicians can change their face very easily. Wherever the crowd is going, they jump ahead of it.
They cannot lose, so they have to be very alert. I have said many times that the political leaders
are followers of their followers. The great politician is one who knows where the followers are going
and keeps himself ahead of them. Wherever they are going does not matter; he should just remain
ahead of them so they always know that he is the leader. He should keep his every sense alert,
otherwise someday he will look back – and all the followers will have moved somewhere else; he
will be standing alone.
Now, he will run and find the followers, and immediately be ahead of them. Here he was ahead of
them because they were for legalization of abortion; now he is against it because they are against
it. What can he do? – he has to be the leader in every case. His business is to be the leader – it
does not matter what the cause is. And what do you want? That doesn’t matter; all that matters is
that he is ahead of you.
Now, all these people – Catholics, Hindus, Mohammedans, Jews – all are against abortion. If they
are against abortion then they should be a little logical about it, then they should be against saving
people’s lives too; then there will be a balance. But nobody protests.
There are people in the hospitals unnecessarily harassing the doctors and the nurses. Their legs
are hanging up in one direction and their hands are hanging up in some other direction. Another
person needs the continual attendance of a doctor and a nurse and so many medicines. And he is
on oxygen: if you just turn his oxygen off he will be gone. Why are you keeping him alive? What is
the purpose of his being alive? Why are you torturing him? But the doctors have been taught that
”Your purpose is to save life.” That was taught by Hippocrates two thousand years ago when death
was rampant.
Now these fools go on taking the oath of Hippocrates; every medical student takes the oath of
Hippocrates: ”My whole life I will try to save life.” But things have changed. When Hippocrates said
that, out of ten children, nine children were dying before they became two years of age; out of ten
children only one was surviving. Of course the man was saying something meaningful when he told
them to try to save life, but now the state is just the reverse. Even in countries like India, out of
ten children only one is dying. At that time nine were dying and one remained alive; now nine are
remaining alive and only one dies – and every effort is being made to save that one too.
One can understand trying to save a child; but why are you saving old people who have lived, lived
enough, suffered, enjoyed, did all kinds of things, good and bad? Now it is time; let them go. But
the doctors cannot let them go because it is illegal. They cannot put them off oxygen, so you go on
saving the dying or almost-dead people.
No pope issues a commandment that these people should be allowed freedom from their bodies.
And what of their bodies is left? Somebody’s legs are missing, somebody’s hands are missing;
From Personality to Individuality 540 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
somebody’s heart is not working so a battery is working instead of the heart; somebody’s lungs are
not working; somebody’s kidneys are not working, so mechanical kidneys are doing the work of the
kidneys. But what is the purpose of these people? What will they do even if you continue to keep
them going this way?
Yes, at the most they keep a few people employed, that’s all. But what kind of a creative life are they
going to have? And what joy can they have in all that is being done to them? Continual injections
are being given to them. They cannot sleep, then sleeping pills are given to them. They cannot
wake up, then activators are forced into their blood so they have to wake up. But for what reason? –
the Hippocratic oath? Let Hippocrates go to hell! He had no idea what his oath was going to bring
about.
There should be some movement so that when people have lived enough and they desire to be freed
from their bodies, then hospitals should provide a convenient, pleasant death. It is absolutely sane
that every hospital should have a special ward with all facilities so that death becomes a pleasant
experience, enjoyable.
Instead of medicines a meditator should be there to teach the dying man how to meditate, because
now medicine is not needed, meditation is needed – how to relax and peacefully disappear from this
body. Every hospital needs meditators – they are essential – just as it needs doctors. Up to now
meditators were not needed because there was only one function: to save life. Now the function is
doubled: to help people die. Every university should have a department where meditation is taught
so that people themselves are ready. When the time comes to die, they are fully ready to die with
joy, with celebration.
But suicide is a crime. This will be considered suicide and I will be considered to be teaching people
illegal things. But in an illegal city what else can I do? I can say only what is absolutely right; whether
it is legal or illegal I don’t care a bit. My concern is with truth, not with law. The truth is that you have
unbalanced life, nature. Please give back its balance. Either you have to stop saving children, and
abortions should remain legal, birth control methods should be used widely – in fact it should be a
crime not to use them. If somebody is caught not using them he should be jailed.
But it is a strange world: produce more children and you will have less income tax. A great world!
The government is supporting you to have more children. What kind of logic is there? If I am to make
the law, I will say the more children you have, the more income tax; with each child it is doubled.
Have as many as you want but the income tax goes on being doubled each time, so even the rich
cannot afford them, what to say about the poor and the middle class. Then only will they think of
birth control; otherwise they are not going to.
Look at the Red Indians. Why should they use birth control? – because each child born brings more
money from the government. Just to keep them silent.... It is their country and everybody else is a
foreigner here except the Red Indians. Not only am I a tourist here, everybody is except the Red
Indians. Ronald Reagan included, all are tourists. They may have been touring for three hundred
years, I have been touring only for three years – that does not matter, that does not change anything:
tourists are tourists. How long you have been touring....
In fact old tourists should be deported, they have toured enough! New tourists should be welcomed.
This seems to be logical: you have toured for three hundred years – so many generations – what
From Personality to Individuality 541 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
more are you doing here? Tour somewhere else. And we are going to bring new tourists here –
vacate!
They want to bring a bill in the parliament against me because they cannot find any other way to
deport me. They have been trying for three years. A whole department, a whole floor in the INS
building in Portland, is just working on my case; nobody else is allowed there. And I tell them: even
if you work three hundred years you cannot find anything to deport me for. And I have been only
touring for three years, and only in my home. Deport old tourists!
But what is being done to the Red Indians just to prevent them from starting to claim their rights is
inhuman. On the surface it looks humanitarian – that each Red Indian is given a certain amount of
money every month. Naturally they produce as many children as possible, because each child is an
economic benefit, each child brings more money. And why are they being given money without any
work? A very criminal idea is behind it.
If a person has no work and enough money, what is he going to do then? He will drink; he will take
marijuana, hashish, opium. What else does he have to do? He has enough money and no work, no
education; he has to pass his time somehow, so he hallucinates. All the Red Indians have become
drug addicts; the money is really given for them to become drug addicts. Of course it is not said so
– it is a ”humanitarian” job.
They are poor people, but there are other poor people also; you don’t give them anything. They are
asking for employment; you don’t even give them employment. They want work; you don’t have work
for them. They want bread; you produce bullets. Why Red Indians? Just to keep them drugged so
they don’t start making a chaos and start saying that this land belongs to them: ”Everybody out!”
Strange, the host has been kept in reservations – those reservations are just prisons without walls
– and the guests have become the owners of the country. Now they decide who should enter the
country and who should not enter the country. Great idea!
I am reminded of a story. A Sufi fakir was in his hut with his wife, just getting ready to go to sleep.
The hut was very small. Somebody knocked on the door – it was raining, and the Sufi said to his
wife, ”Open the door. Somebody is outside and it is raining.”
The wife said, ”But there is no space – only enough for us two to sleep. There is not enough space
here.”
The Sufi said, ”There is always space, just the heart is needed. Open the door, I say to you, open
the door.”
When the husband said that, the wife reluctantly opened the door. A man came in. The wife then
asked the husband, ”What shall we do?”
He said, ”Nothing is a problem. Two can sleep, three can sit. For sitting there is enough space, so
we will sit and gossip. That traveler may have something to say to us, many stories to tell – we will
enjoy the night!”
Just then somebody knocked on the door. The guest was sitting by the side of the door so the fakir
said, ”Please open the door, somebody is outside.”
From Personality to Individuality 542 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
The guest said, ”But there is not enough space; it is already crowded. Let him go.”
The fakir said, ”No. That was the argument of my wife about you too:’Let him go.’ If we had not
opened the door you would have had to travel in the rain through the forest. It is a dangerous night
– I don’t think you would have survived or reached to town alive. Open the door!” The guest opened
the door, but very reluctantly.
This is how the human mind functions. He could not even think that he was just a guest, he was not
the owner. The man, the second man, came in, and the guest said to the fakir, ”Now what are you
going to do?”
He said, ”We three were sitting comfortably, we four will sit a little uncomfortably. Just come closer –
make space for the fourth one.” They sat closely together; now it was completely packed. And then
there was a strange knock on the door; it didn’t seem to be coming from a human hand. The fakir
said, ”I know who is there – just open the door.”
The new guest was now seated close to the door. He said, ”No, I am not going to open the door.
There is no space, we are overcrowded. I am the person closest to the door and I will not allow
anybody to open it. Where is the space?”
The fakir said, ”You should understand one thing clearly: I am the owner; I allowed you in but I can
throw you out. We were sitting comfortably at ease; because of you we are sitting uncomfortably.
Now we will be standing. Let him come in – nobody can be turned out while there is any space. I
am saying we can stand; we will not sit, and so space will be created.”
What could the guest do? – he had to open the door. And they were all surprised: a donkey
entered.... The guests said to the fakir, ”Is this donkey also going to be here?”
He said, ”If you can be here.... Who are you? He is my old friend, we are old acquaintances; he
often comes when it rains. You have never come before – I can throw you out, but not him. And he
is a poor animal. You may find some way to save yourself, but where can he go? Let him stand just
in the middle of all of us. We will stand around the donkey and he can stand in the middle. We can
enjoy ourselves talking, and once in a while he will join in also.”
He said, ”Remember one thing: this is a poor man’s hut, not a king’s palace. In a king’s palace there
is no space. Although the palace is big there is no space because the heart is not there. Here space
is very limited, but the heart is unlimited.”
The Red Indians are the owners of this land, but they have been put into reservations and forests.
Those are prisons without walls – and very subtle prisons because the prisoners are paid money.
They gamble, they fight, they drink, and they kill each other. They are very rowdy people because
what else can they do? And money goes on being poured on them: more children, more money. So
they go on producing more children and getting more money and getting more drunk. It is really a
crime. It has nothing to do with humanity or humanitarian ideals.
And these people who have simply taken over their land, they are deciding whether new guests
should enter or not. It is strange. Who are they to decide? Who has given them the authority to
From Personality to Individuality 543 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
decide? This land is not theirs. Somebody is Italian, somebody is French, somebody is English,
somebody is Greek, somebody is German, somebody is Spanish – they should all go back to their
lands.
We are the only people who are landless, because we don’t belong to any country. We don’t call any
country our motherland or our fatherland – we don’t believe in dads and mums. The whole world
is ours – we don’t claim small things. And movement is man’s birthright: he can move anywhere
he wants, he is not doing any crime by moving. But if anybody has to go, then it should be the old
tourists.
Now the old tourists are trying to bring a bill against me in parliament. I am going to speak to
parliament, they should remember, and just alone I am going to tell them, ”You are all deported,
because you have toured enough – simple logic! New people should come in. And we promise that
when more new people come we will deport ourselves, there is no problem. But let us at least tour
enough.”
The mind that Karl Marx had was certainly very talented. He created a worldwide movement –
certainly he outdid Jesus. This is just Jewish competition. It is nobody’s business really, just Jews
competing. Freud created a worldwide movement for psychoanalysis, but Marx is on the top. Almost
half the world is communist now – but not rich, very poor.
You can see it in Germany. Just beyond the wall is the communist world. Of the same Berlin which
was destroyed in the second world war, half has remained free and democratic, and half has been
taken over by the communists. The half that has remained independent, free and capitalist, is rich:
skyscrapers, beautiful roads, everything. It is as if the second world war has never happened. In the
free West Berlin, the second world war has not left even a trace; in fact the war has done something
really good because all the old, dilapidated, rotten things finished and everything is fresh and new.
West Berlin is now the most modern, youngest and freshest city in the whole world.
And on the other side it is dark and dismal, as if the second world war just ended yesterday; people
are living in dilapidated barracks. It is a beautiful contrast to see what communism can do and what
capitalism can do. Not a single skyscraper has arisen on the communist part, not a single new
building, not a single new road, no new factory – no creativity. Yes, they have distributed the wealth
– they have made the rich poor. And now the poor are not in a position to create wealth again.
The whole of Russia is poor, the whole of China is poor. Yes, one thing is missing; there are no rich
people. Communism is based on a fallacious idea: the equality of man. Man is not equal.
The second idea is significant; but my interpretation of it is right, not what Marx said. The second
idea says, ”Equal opportunity for all.” That’s how it should be – equal opportunity for all, but
remembering that everybody is unique, so everybody is going to use the equal opportunity to be
very different from each other. The ultimate result is going to be individuals so different from each
other that you cannot conceive.
According to Marx equal opportunity means they will be all equal: equally wealthy, equally intelligent,
equally healthy. That is sheer nonsense, because your parents were not my parents; you have
different genes and different programs in your body. Now, there is no way to change the genes, the
program – and small things make a difference.
From Personality to Individuality 544 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
So equal opportunity is a good idea and we should try it as far as humanly practical. But you should
not be fanatic about it, because if you want perfect equality of opportunity then you are an idiot; that
is not possible.
Just let me give you simple examples: if you are the eldest son in the family, then the youngest son
in the family cannot have the same opportunity as the eldest, there is no way. Because you were the
first to come, of course you received your mother and your father’s love more because you were a
novelty; then other children started coming and it was not anything new. The second boy was born,
but he is going to be second. The eldest son in all the cultures is going to inherit the father’s money.
Why? It is not accidental: he got more love than anybody else, and he was the first to come.
Then the last son will also have a different status because he will be the smallest, favored by all,
protected by all, all the brothers, the whole family. But the middle ones, they are nowhere: neither on
this pole nor on that pole. They will not get the same attention as the first and the last. The last will
become the favorite child of the family because now no more are coming; the last guest has come.
How can you give all equal opportunities? Either you will have to arrange births simultaneously so
that a mother gives birth to twelve children simultaneously – equal opportunity.
But from the very beginning there is no equal opportunity. When a woman gets pregnant, neither
she nor her husband are aware that there has been a car race; nobody is aware. When the sperms
travel towards the egg it is just as in any race: they all stand in one line waiting for the third whistle,
and then they run.
The mother’s cell, the egg in the mother’s womb, is waiting and the cells from the father’s body, as
they explode into the mother’s body, start a great race – millions of sperms trying to reach the egg
first. Whosoever reaches is the winner; all others will die. It is a question of life and death. It is no
ordinary race in which you are only defeated and next time.... There is no next time – only a single
opportunity for millions of alive cells. Only one makes it, because this is how it works. The mother’s
egg has a natural capacity so that once one male sperm has entered it, it closes. The others go on
knocking around but within two hours they will all be dead.
There are losses all the way. And the way is not so small as you think, because for those small cells
it is close to two miles, proportionately. If they were of your proportions then the passage would be
two miles. And a great job they do, a marathon race! Of course, the strongest reaches.
Sometimes it happens that two reach at the same time – that’s why twins are born – or three reach.
Even nine children have been known to be born, because nine may have reached simultaneously;
then they all enter the door because they are all entering at the same time. After they enter the doors
close. But it rarely happens that nine reach. One guy is clever enough that somehow he manages
to reach first.
They all start almost at the same time, but from there, from the very impregnation, opportunities are
different. Nobody knows those who have died, what kind of people they were. Somebody may have
been an Albert Einstein, somebody a Ravi Shankar, somebody a Michelangelo. Nobody knows
about those poor people who simply died in the first race and were not given any other chance.
From Personality to Individuality 545 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
And then small things in the life of the child.... You cannot make them equal. For example, when
Napoleon Bonaparte was six months old, his nurse, who was taking care of him, had just left him for
a moment and a wild cat jumped onto Napoleon, put both his paws on his chest, and looked into his
eyes. Immediately the nurse came back and chased the cat away, but Napoleon, for his whole life,
remained afraid of cats. He was not afraid of lions, he could have wrestled bare-handed with a lion
– there was no problem about it – but before a cat he simply became a nervous wreck.
Napoleon was defeated only once – his whole life was a life of victory. Just once he was defeated,
by a British general who knew about his weakness. The general had gone with seventy cats ahead
of him; seeing seventy cats, Napoleon lost all nerve, he forgot all about what to do and what not to
do. It was not a victory by the general, it was a victory by the cats.
How can you manage to give equal opportunities to all? Now, if such a small incident can prove so
fatal.... Napoleon was a brave warrior before anybody, but nothing before a cat. The English general
does not count at all, but he became victorious just by using a little psychology, just knowing about
Napoleon s weakness – that when he saw a cat he could not think, he simply became frozen. And
when Napoleon was in that nervous state, of course his whole army was at a loss; they had lost the
man who was their life, their light and their guide.
Now, how can you manage equal opportunity for all children of the world? That’s absolutely
impossible. So don’t try to take the communist idea to its logical end – then it becomes absurd.
Yes, with my interpretation – and my interpretation is that everybody should be given opportunities
to be educated, opportunities to get food, opportunities to get clothes, opportunities to do anything
that a person wants to do. There should be no discrimination about it: opportunity should be given
to everybody according to his talent and everybody according to his potentiality.
But that is not happening in communism. In the name of equal opportunities everybody is forced to
remain at the lowest denominator, because only there can you keep them equal. If you want them
to be equal on a higher level, then you need more riches, more wealth – and that is missing.
In the sixty years since the Russian Revolution, the Russians have not been able to produce
any wealth to make Russia rich. Equal opportunity is available, but what do you do with equal
opportunity? You need people who can use these opportunities; and they don’t need similar
opportunities, they need different opportunities, equally different opportunities.
I am against communism because it is only a negative philosophy. I am all for commune-ism.
That should be the right word: commune-ism.
A commune is respectful of every individual’s uniqueness, repectful of every individual’s talent, and
tries to help his talent grow, help him grow towards his potential.
I want communes all over the world, so that slowly nations can disappear, and there are only
communes:
Living, small units of humanity, totally, joyously helping everybody to be himself.
From Personality to Individuality 546 Osho
CHAPTER 30. THE ONLY AUTHENTIC DEMOCRACY: THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE ENLIGHTENED ONES
Marx proposes the dictatorship of the proletariat, the dictatorship of the poor. That is stupid. They
are poor, and if they are in power they will make everybody poor. What else can they do?
I propose the dictatorship of the enlightened ones. Nobody has proposed it up to now. And
sometimes out of my crazy mind.... This idea I have carried my whole life – dictatorship of the
enlightened ones, because if it is of enlightened ones it cannot be dictatorship. It is a contradiction
in terms. The enlightened person cannot be a dictator like Joseph Stalin or Adolf Hitler.
Yes, the enlightened person can dictate to you, but out of his love, not out of his power – he has no
power – out of his insight, because he has eyes to see and to feel the potential of people.
His dictates can only be thought of as suggestions, advice, guidelines.
Only in the dictatorship of the enlightened ones is there a possibility of a real, authentic democracy
and also the real flowering of commune-ism:
Equality by distributing riches, not poverty; destroying poverty from the very roots, and raising
everybody upwards to be rich.
My commune-ism is a higher state of capitalism.
Marx’s communism is against capitalism:
From Personality to Individuality 547 Osho
